

-- 1 of 1450 --



-- 2 of 1450 --

Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia

-- 3 of 1450 --

Veterinary Anesthesia
and Analgesia
The Sixth Edition of Lumb and Jones
Edited by
Leigh Lamont, DVM, MS, DACVAA
Department of Companion Animals, Atlantic Veterinary College, University of Prince Edward Island
Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, Canada
Kurt Grimm, DVM, MS, PhD, DACVAA, DACVCP
Veterinary Specialists Services, PC
Conifer, Colorado, USA
Sheilah Robertson, BVMS (Hons), CertVA, PhD, DACVAA,
DECVAA, DACAW, DECAWBM (AWSEL), FRCVS
Lap of Love Veterinary Hospice Inc.
Lutz, Florida, USA
Lydia Love, DVM, DACVAA
Department of Molecular Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State University
Raleigh, North Carolina, USA
Carrie Schroeder, DVM, DACVAA
Department of Surgical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Wisconsin
Madison, Wisconsin, USA

-- 4 of 1450 --

Copyright © 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written
permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood
Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 750-4470, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be
addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at
http://www.wiley.com/go/permission.
Trademarks: Wiley and the Wiley logo are trademarks or registered trademarks of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and/or its affiliates in the United States and other
countries and may not be used without written permission. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. is not
associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations
or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or
fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained
herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Further, readers should be aware that websites listed in
this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read. Neither the publisher nor authors shall be liable for any
loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at
(800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be available in electronic formats. For more
information about Wiley products, visit our web site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data applied for
[HB ISBN: 9781119830276]
Cover Design: Wiley
Front Cover Images: Tortoise: Courtesy of Carrie Schroeder, Cow: © Clara Bastian/Getty Images, Dog & Horse: Courtesy of Leigh Lamont, Cat: Courtesy of
Sheilah Robertson, Piglet: © Byrdyak/Getty Images, Cockatoo: © tracielouise/Getty Images,
Back Cover Images: Cat: Courtesy of Sheilah Robertson, Goat: © michelangeloop/Getty Images, Dog: Courtesy of Kurt Grimm, Horse: Courtesy of Carrie
Schroeder, Cat: Courtesy of Lydia Love, Rabbit: © Brina Bunt/Getty Images, Dog: Courtesy of Sheilah Robertson
Set in 9/11pt Minionpro by Straive, Pondicherry, India

-- 5 of 1450 --

Dedication
The sixth edition of this text is dedicated to the many people who support and make up the specialty of veterinary anesthesia and analgesia
and, specifically, the membership of the American College of Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia. Without their contributions and guidance,
this book would not be possible, and without their participation in disseminating and implementing the knowledge contained in this book,
it would be without purpose.

-- 6 of 1450 --

vii
List of Contributors, ix
Foreword, xiii
Preface, xiv
About the Companion Website, xv
Section 1: General Topics
1 Overview, History, and Current Issues in Veterinary
Anesthesia and Analgesia, 3
William J. Tranquilli, Kurt A. Grimm and Leigh A. Lamont
2 Anesthetic Risk and Informed Consent, 10
Dave C. Brodbelt, Derek Flaherty and Glenn R. Pettifer
3 Introduction to Patient Safety, 24
Matt McMillan and Daniel S.J. Pang
4 Safety Considerations for Laser and Radiographic Procedures
and Magnetic Resonance Imaging, 40
Julie A. Smith and Carrie Davis
5 Anesthetic Emergencies, Resuscitation, and Adverse Events, 54
Erik H. Hofmeister
6 Anesthesia Equipment, 74
Craig A.E. Mosley
7 Infection Prevention and Control in Anesthesia, 142
Raphaël Vézina Audette and Stephen D. Cole
8 Euthanasia and Humane Killing, 152
Robert E. Meyer
Section 2: Patient Monitoring
9 Biomedical Engineering, 169
Catherine M. Creighton and Nadja Johnson Bressan
10 Anesthetic Depth Monitoring and Electroencephalography, 176
Christopher L. Norkus
11 Electrocardiography, 187
Kyle J. Bartholomew
12 Blood Pressure Monitoring, 197
Odette O
13 Cardiac Output Measurement, 210
Alessio Vigani
14 Monitoring Ventilation, 220
Jessica D. Briley, Kate M. Bailey and Lydia Love
15 Monitoring Oxygenation, 231
Chiara Adami
16 Anesthetic Gas Monitoring, 240
Rebecca C. Reader
17 Perioperative Thermoregulation and Heat Balance, 246
Kurt A. Grimm
18 Point- of-Care Ultrasound in Anesthesia, 254
Søren R. Boysen and Daniel S.J. Pang
Section 3: Pharmacology
19 General Pharmacology of Anesthetic and Analgesic Drugs, 283
Ted Whittem, Thierry Beths and Sébastien H. Bauquier
20 Anticholinergics, 314
Phillip Lerche
21 Adrenergic Agents, 319
Jo C. Murrell
22 Sedatives and Tranquilizers, 333
Catherine M. Creighton and Leigh A. Lamont
23 Opioids, 355
Bradley T. Simon and Ignacio Lizarraga
24 Non- Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs, 398
Mark G. Papich
25 Anesthetic and Analgesic Adjunctive Drugs, 420
Daniel S.J. Pang
26 Neuromuscular Blockade, 448
Manuel Martin-Flores
27 Injectable Anesthetics, 462
Stephanie M. Hamilton
28 Inhalation Anesthetics, 489
Eugene P. Steffey, Robert J. Brosnan and Khursheed R. Mama
29 Local Anesthetics, 526
Eva Rioja Garcia
Section 4: Body Fluids and Fluid Therapy
30 Acid–Base Physiology, 555
Peter D. Constable and William W. Muir
31 Treatment of Coagulation and Platelet Disorders, 574
Benjamin M. Brainard
32 Clinical Pharmacology and Administration of Fluid,
Electrolyte, and Blood Component Solutions, 580
Amandeep S. Chohan and Elizabeth B. Davidow
Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic
Management
33 Cardiovascular Physiology, 615
William W. Muir
Contents

-- 7 of 1450 --

viii 	Contents
34 Anesthesia for Cardiopulmonary Bypass, 667
Khursheed R. Mama
35 Cardiac Pacemakers and Anesthesia, 674
Barret J. Bulmer
36 Pathophysiology and Anesthetic Management of Patients
with Cardiovascular Disease, 680
Sandra Z. Perkowski and Mark A. Oyama
37 Respiratory Physiology and Pathophysiology, 697
Carolyn L. Kerr and Francisco J. Teixeira-Neto
38 Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic
Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease, 750
Francisco J. Teixeira-Neto and Carolyn L. Kerr
39 Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management
of Patients with Neurologic Disease, 822
Tatiana H. Ferreira and Starr Cameron
40 Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management
of Patients with Hepatic Disease, 847
Vaidehi V. Paranjape and Fernando Garcia-Pereira
41 Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management
of Patients with Gastrointestinal Disease, 862
Jennifer G. Adams
42 Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management
of Patients with Endocrine Disease, 891
Renata S. Costa, Teela Jones and Thomas K. Graves
43 Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management
of Patients with Renal Disease, 922
Stuart C. Clark-Price and Julie R. Fischer
44 Anesthetic Considerations for Renal Replacement
Therapy, 944
Rebecca A. Johnson
45 Anesthetic Considerations During Pregnancy and for
the Newborn, 955
Marc R. Raffe and Elizabeth Goudie-DeAngelis
Section 6: Nociception and Pain
46 Physiology and Pathophysiology of Pain, 971
Kate L. White
47 Recognition and Quantification of Acute and Chronic Pain, 996
Jo C. Murrell
48 Clinical Management and Pharmacologic
Treatment of Pain, 1010
Carolyn M. McKune
49 Non- Pharmacologic Management of Pain, 1023
Bonnie D. Wright
Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia
and Analgesia
50 Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Dogs and Cats, 1029
Peter J. Pascoe and Bruno H. Pypendop
51 Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Community
Medicine Settings, 1041
Emily McCobb
52 Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Horses, 1048
Lori A. Bidwell
53 Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Ruminants
and Swine, 1052
HuiChu Lin
54 Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Laboratory
Animals, 1065
Henri G.M.J. Bertrand and Aurélie A. Thomas
55 Comparative Immobilization and Anesthesia – Free-Ranging
Terrestrial Mammals, 1077
Nigel Caulkett and Jon M. Arnemo
56 Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Marine
Mammals, 1091
Julie A. Balko and James E. Bailey
57 Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Reptiles,
Amphibians, and Fishes, 1110
Sathya K. Chinnadurai and Cornelia I. Mosley
58 Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Birds, 1127
John W. Ludders and David Sanchez-Migallon Guzman
Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia
for Domestic Species
59 Dogs and Cats, 1157
Carolina H. Riccó Pereira and Phillip Lerche
60 Canine and Feline Local Anesthetic and Analgesic
Techniques, 1166
Raphaël Vézina Audette, Alexander C.S. Thomson, Ciara A. Barr,
Luis Campoy, Matt Read and Santiago Peralta
61 Horses, 1205
Regula Bettschart-Wolfensberger
62 Horses with Colic, 1217
Ludovica Chiavaccini and Lauren R. Duffee
63 Equine Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques, 1235
Rachael E. Carpenter and Christopher R. Byron
64 Ruminants, 1262
Chiara E. Hampton and Thomas W. Riebold
65 Swine, 1285
Lais M. Malavasi
66 Ruminant and Swine Local Anesthetic and Analgesic
Techniques, 1301
Alexander Valverde
Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia
for Selected Patients
67 Ophthalmic Patients, 1327
Vaidehi V. Paranjape and Luisito S. Pablo
68 Neonatal and Pediatric Patients, 1348
Emily McCobb and Sheilah A. Robertson
69 Aging Patients, 1354
Sheilah A. Robertson and Kirk A. Muñoz
70 Cancer Patients, 1363
Timothy M. Fan and Stephanie Keating
71 Osteoarthritis Patients, 1377
Steven C. Budsberg and Whitney D. Hinson
Index, 1390

-- 8 of 1450 --

ix
Chiara Adami, DMV, PhD, DACVAA, DECVAA, FRCVS
Department of Veterinary Medicine, Cambridge Veterinary School
University of Cambridge
Madingley Road, Cambridge, UK
Jennifer G. Adams, DVM, DACVIM (LAIM), DACVAA
Hull, Georgia, USA
Jon M. Arnemo, DVM, PhD, DECZM
Inland Norway University of Applied Sciences
Campus Evenstad, Norway and
Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences
Umeå, Sweden
James E. Bailey, DVM, MS, DACVAA
Innovative Veterinary Medicine, Inc.
Ponte Vedra, Florida, USA
Kate M. Bailey, DVM, DACVAA
United Veterinary Care and
College of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State University (Adjunct)
Raleigh, North Carolina, USA
Julie A. Balko, VMD, DACVAA
Department of Molecular Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, North Carolina, USA
Ciara A. Barr, VMD, DACVAA
Department of Clinical Sciences and Advanced Medicine
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
Kyle J. Bartholomew, DVM, DACVAA
Department of Surgical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine
University of Wisconsin
Madison, Wisconsin, USA
Sébastien H. Bauquier, DMV, IPSAV, MANZCVS, DACVAA, PhD
Melbourne Veterinary School, University of Melbourne
Werribee, Victoria, Australia and
Southpaws Specialty, Emergency and Referral Hospital
Malvern East, Victoria, Australia
Henri G.M.J. Bertrand, DVM, PhD, CertLAM,
DECLAM, MRCVS
Agenda Veterinary Services
Kingston Upon Hull
East Riding of Yorkshire, UK
Thierry Beths, DVM, Cert VA, CVA, MSc, MRCVS, PhD
Melbourne Veterinary School, University of Melbourne and
Greencross Veterinary Hospital
Werribee, Victoria, Australia
Regula Bettschart-Wolfensberger, Prof. Dr. med. vet.,
PhD, DECVAA
Department of Diagnostics and Clinical Sciences, Vetsuisse Faculty
University of Zürich
Zürich, Switzerland
Lori A. Bidwell, DVM, DACVAA
East-West Equine Sports Medicine
Lexington, Kentucky, USA
Søren R. Boysen, DVM, DACVECC
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Calgary
Calgary, Alberta, Canada
Benjamin M. Brainard, VMD, DACVAA, DACVECC
Department of Small Animal Medicine and Surgery
College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Georgia
Athens, Georgia, USA
Jessica D. Briley, DVM, DACVAA
Department of Molecular Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, North Carolina, USA
Dave C. Brodbelt, MA, VetMB, PhD, DVA, DECVAA, FRCVS
Veterinary Epidemiology, Economics and Public Health Group
Department of Pathobiology and Population Sciences, Royal Veterinary College
Hatfield, Herts, UK
Robert J. Brosnan, DVM, PhD, DACVAA
Department of Surgical and Radiological Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine
University of California–Davis
Davis, California, USA
Steven C. Budsberg, DVM, MS, DACVS
Department of Small Animal Medicine and Surgery
College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Georgia
Athens, Georgia, USA
Barret J. Bulmer, DVM, MS, DACVIM (Cardiology)
Tufts Veterinary Emergency Treatment and Specialties
Walpole, Massachusetts, USA
Christopher R. Byron, DVM, MS, DACVS
Department of Large Animal Clinical Sciences
Virginia-Maryland College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Tech University
Blacksburg, Virginia, USA
Starr Cameron, BVetMed, MS, DACVIM (Neurology)
Department of Medical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine
University of Wisconsin
Madison, Wisconsin, USA
List of Contributors

-- 9 of 1450 --

x 	List of Contributors
Luis Campoy, LV, CertVA, DECVAA, MRCVS
Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine
Cornell University
Ithaca, New York, USA
Rachael E. Carpenter, DVM
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Virginia-Maryland College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Tech University
Blacksburg, Virginia, USA
Nigel Caulkett, DVM, MVetSc, DACVAA
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Calgary
Calgary, Alberta, Canada
Ludovica Chiavaccini, DVM, DES, MS, DACVAA
Department of Comparative, Diagnostic and Population Medicine
College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Florida
Gainesville, Florida, USA
Sathya K. Chinnadurai, DVM, MS, DACZM, DACVAA, DACAW
Chicago Zoological Society/Brookfield Zoo
Brookfield, Illinois, USA
Amandeep S. Chohan, BVSc & AH, MVSc, MS, DACVAA
Department of Surgical and Radiological Sciences
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California–Davis
Davis, California, USA
Stuart C. Clark- Price, DVM, MS, EMBA, DACVIM (LAIM), DACVAA
Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine
Auburn University
Auburn, Alabama, USA
Stephen D. Cole, VMD, MS, DACVM (Bacteriology/Mycology,
Immunology, Virology)
Clinical Infectious Disease Laboratory, Department of Pathobiology
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
Peter D. Constable, BVSc, MS, PhD
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign
Urbana, Illinois, USA
Catherine M. Creighton, DVM, MSc, DACVAA
Department of Companion Animals, Atlantic Veterinary College
University of Prince Edward Island
Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, Canada
Elizabeth B. Davidow, DVM, DACVECC
Timberline Veterinary Emergency and Specialty
Seattle, Washington, USA
Carrie Davis, DVM, DACVAA
MedVet Dallas Emergency Veterinary and Specialty Care
Dallas, Texas, USA
Lauren R. Duffee, VMD, DACVAA, CVA
Massachusetts Veterinary Referral Hospital
Woburn, Massachusetts, USA
Timothy M. Fan, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (SAIM, Oncology)
Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign
Urbana, Illinois, USA
Tatiana H. Ferreira, DVM, MSc, PhD, DACVAA
Department of Surgical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine
University of Wisconsin
Madison, Wisconsin, USA
Julie R. Fischer, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM)
Veterinary Specialty Hospital of North County (Ethos Veterinary Health)
San Marcos, California, USA
Derek Flaherty, BVMS, DVA, DECVAA, MRCA, FRCVS
Southern Counties Veterinary Specialists
Ringwood, Hampshire, UK
Fernando Garcia-Pereira, DVM, MS, DACVAA
Pet Urgent Response and Emergency
Jacksonville, Florida, USA
Thomas K. Graves, DVM, MS, PhD, DACVIM (SAIM)
Professor and Dean Emeritus, College of Veterinary Medicine
Midwestern University
Glendale, Arizona, USA
Elizabeth Goudie-DeAngelis, DVM, MS, DACVAA
Tristate Veterinary Anesthesia, PLLC
White Plains, New York, USA
Kurt A. Grimm, DVM, MS, PhD, DACVAA, DACVCP
Veterinary Specialist Services, PC
Conifer, Colorado, USA
Stephanie M. Hamilton, DVM, MSc, DACVAA
Department of Companion Animals, Atlantic Veterinary College
University of Prince Edward Island
Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, Canada
Chiara E. Hampton, DVM, MS, DACVAA
Large Animal Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Tennessee
Knoxville, Tennessee, USA
Whitney D. Hinson, DVM, MS, DACVS (SA)
Department of Small Animal Medicine and Surgery
College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Georgia
Athens, Georgia, USA
Erik H. Hofmeister, DVM, DACVAA, DECVAA, MA, MS
Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine
Auburn University
Auburn, Alabama, USA
Rebecca A. Johnson, DVM, MS, PhD, DACVAA
Department of Surgical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine
University of Wisconsin
Madison, Wisconsin, USA
Nadja Johnson Bressan, PhD
Faculty of Sustainable Design Engineering, University of Prince Edward Island
Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, Canada
Teela Jones, DVM, MVetSc, DACVAA
Summit Veterinary Referral Center
Tacoma, Washington, USA

-- 10 of 1450 --

List of Contributors 	xi
Stephanie Keating, DVM, DVSc, DACVAA
Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign
Urbana, Illinois, USA
Carolyn L. Kerr, DVM, DVSc, PhD, MScCH(HPTE), DACVAA
Department of Clinical Studies, Ontario Veterinary College
University of Guelph
Guelph, Ontario, Canada
Leigh A. Lamont, DVM, MS, DACVAA
Department of Companion Animals, Atlantic Veterinary College
University of Prince Edward Island
Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, Canada
Phillip Lerche, BVSc, PhD, DACVAA
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine
The Ohio State University
Columbus, Ohio, USA
HuiChu Lin, DVM, MS, DACVAA
Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine
Auburn University
Auburn, Alabama, USA
Ignacio Lizarraga, MVZ, MVSc, PhD
AgResearch Limited
Grasslands Research Centre
Palmerston North, New Zealand
Lydia Love, DVM, DACVAA
Department of Molecular Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, North Carolina, USA
John W. Ludders, DVM, DACVAA
Emeritus Professor, Department of Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University
Ithaca, New York, USA
Matt McMillan, BVM&S, DECVAA, MRCVS
The Ralph Veterinary Referral Centre
Marlow, Buckinghamshire, UK
Lais M. Malavasi, DVM, MS, PhD
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine
Washington State University
Pullman, Washington, USA
Khursheed R. Mama, DVM, DACVAA
Department of Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University
Fort Collins, Colorado, USA
Manuel Martin- Flores, MV, DACVAA
Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine
Cornell University
Ithaca, New York, USA
Emily McCobb, DVM, MS, DACVAA
Department of Clinical Sciences, Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine
Tufts University
North Grafton, Massachusetts, USA
Carolyn M. McKune, DVM, DACVAA
Mythos Veterinary, LLC
Gainesville, Florida, USA
Robert E. Meyer, DVM, DACVAA
Professor Emeritus, Department of Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine, Mississippi State University
Mississippi State, Mississippi, USA
Cornelia I. Mosley, DrMedVet, DACVAA, CVA
Elanco Animal Health
Mississauga, Ontario, Canada
Craig A.E. Mosley, DVM, MSc, DACVAA
VCA Canada, 404 Veterinary Emergency and Referral Hospital
Newmarket, Ontario, Canada
William W. Muir, DVM, PhD, DACVAA, DACVECC
Gillespie College of Veterinary Medicine (LMU-CVM)
Lincoln Memorial University
Harrogate, Tennessee, USA
Jo C. Murrell, BVSc (Hons), PhD, DECVAA, MRCVS
Bristol Veterinary Specialists
Severn Beach, Bristol, UK
Kirk A. Muñoz, DVM (Hons), MRCVS, MSc, DACVAA, cVMA
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine
The Ohio State University
Columbus, Ohio, USA
Christopher L. Norkus, DVM, DACVAA, CVPP, DACVECC
Allegheny Veterinary Emergency Trauma and Specialty (AVETS) Center
Monroeville, Pennsylvania, USA
Odette O, DVM, DACVAA
SAGE Veterinary Centers, a member of Ethos Animal Health
Dublin, California, USA
Mark A. Oyama, DVM, MSCE, DACVIM (Cardiology)
Department of Clinical Sciences and Advanced Medicine
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
Luisito S. Pablo, DVM, MS, DACVAA
Department of Comparative, Diagnostic, and Population Medicine
College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Florida
Gainesville, Florida, USA
Daniel S.J. Pang, BVSc, MSc, PhD, DACVAA, DECVAA, FRCVS
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Calgary
Calgary, Alberta, Canada and
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Université de Montréal
Saint-Hyacinthe, Québec, Canada
Mark G. Papich, DVM, MS, DACVCP
Department of Molecular Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, North Carolina, USA
Peter J. Pascoe, BVSc, DVA, DACVAA, DECVAA, FRCVS
Emeritus Professor, Department of Surgical and Radiological Sciences
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California–Davis
Davis, California, USA
Santiago Peralta, DVM, DAVDC, FF-AVDC-OMFS
Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine
Cornell University
Ithaca, New York, USA

-- 11 of 1450 --

xii 	List of Contributors
Sandra Z. Perkowski, VMD, PhD, CVMA, DACVAA
BluePearl Specialty and Emergency Pet Hospital
Malvern, Pennsylvania, USA
Glenn R. Pettifer, BA (Hons), BSc, DVM, DVSc
College of Dental Hygienists of Ontario
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Vaidehi V. Paranjape, BVSc & AH, MVSc, MS, DACVAA
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Virginia-Maryland College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Tech University
Blacksburg, Virginia, USA
Bruno H. Pypendop, DrMedVet, DrVetSci, DACVAA
Department of Surgical and Radiological Sciences
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California–Davis
Davis, California, USA
Marc R. Raffe, DVM, MS, MBA, DACVAA, DACVECC
Veterinary Anesthesia and Critical Care Associates, LLC
St. Paul, Minnesota, USA
Matt Read, DVM, MVSc, DACVAA
MedVet Columbus
Worthington, Ohio, USA
Rebecca C. Reader, BA, DVM, DACVAA
MSPCA/Angell Animal Medical Center
Boston, Massachusetts, USA
Carolina H. Riccó Pereira, MV, MS, DACVAA
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine
The Ohio State University
Columbus, Ohio, USA
Thomas W. Riebold, DVM, DACVAA
Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine
Oregon State University
Corvallis, Oregon, USA
Eva Rioja Garcia, Lic Vet, DVSc, PhD, DACVAA, DECVAA, MRCVS
Optivet Referrals
Havant, Hampshire, UK
Sheilah A. Robertson, BVMS (Hons), CertVA, PhD, DACVAA,
DECVAA, DACAW, DECAWBM (AWSEL), FRCVS
Lap of Love Veterinary Hospice Inc.
Lutz, Florida, USA
Renata Sampaio Costa, DVM, MPhil, GradDipEd,
MANZCVS, DACVAA
Section of Anaesthesia and Analgesia, School of Veterinary Medicine
Murdoch University
Murdoch, Western Australia, Australia
David Sanchez-Migallon Guzman, LV, MS, DECZM
(Avian, Small Mammal), DACZM
Department of Medicine and Epidemiology
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California–Davis
Davis, California, USA
Carrie A. Schroeder, DVM, DACVAA
Department of Surgical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine
University of Wisconsin
Madison, Wisconsin, USA
Bradley T. Simon, DVM, MSc, DACVAA
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University
College Station, Texas, USA and
Veterinary Dentistry Specialists
Katy, Texas, USA
Julie A. Smith, DVM, DACVAA
MedVet Vancouver Emergency Veterinary and Specialty Care
Vancouver, Washington, USA
Eugene P. Steffey, VMD, PhD DACVAA, DECVAA (retired)
Emeritus Professor, Department of Surgical and Radiological Sciences
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California–Davis
Davis, California, USA
Francisco J. Teixeira-Neto, MV, MSc, PhD, TEAV CBAV
Faculdade de Medicina Veterinária e Zootecnia
Universidade Estadual Paulista (UNESP)
Botucatu, Brazil
Aurelie A. Thomas, DVM, PhD, DECAWBM (AWSEL), MRCVS
Clinical Pharmacology and Safety Sciences
AstraZeneca
Cambridge, UK
Alexander C.S. Thomson, DVM, DACVAA
City University of Hong Kong Veterinary Medical Centre
Hong Kong SAR, China
William J. Tranquilli, BS(Ed), DVM, MS, DACVAA
Professor Emeritus, Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine
College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign
Urbana, Illinois, USA
Alexander Valverde, DVM, DVSc, DACVAA
Department of Clinical Studies, Ontario Veterinary College
University of Guelph
Guelph, Ontario, Canada
Raphaël Vézina Audette, DVM, MSc, CVA, DACVAA
Portland Veterinary Emergency and Specialty Care
Portland, Maine, USA
Alessio Vigani, DVM, PhD, DACVAA, DACVECC, DECVECC
Department of Small Animals, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
University of Zürich
Zürich, Switzerland
Kate L. White, MA, VetMB, PhD, DVA, DECVAA, FRCVS
School of Veterinary Medicine and Science
University of Nottingham
Nottingham, UK
Ted Whittem, BVSc, PhD, DACVCP, FANZCVS, GAICD
College of Public Health, Medical and Veterinary Sciences
James Cook University
Townsville, Queensland, Australia
Bonnie D. Wright, DVM, DACVAA
MistralVet
Johnstown, Colorado, USA

-- 12 of 1450 --

xiii
Foreword
The extensively referenced content, important additions, and timely
revisions of the sixth edition of Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia
provide an impressive documentation of the basic and applied clini-
cal science essential to the safe delivery of animal anesthesia and
pain management. As such, this text continues to be the most com-
prehensive source of information for students, scientists, practi-
tioners, and specialists alike. The sixth edition, once again,
successfully chronicles the vital role that anesthesia and analgesia
play in modern-day veterinary medicine.
As a previous editor of the third, fourth, and fifth editions of
this text, and in memory of the three signees who penned the fore-
word to the fifth edition, Dr. William Lumb, Dr. Wynn Jones, and
Dr. John Thurmon, I wish to acknowledge the efforts of the
contributors, 104 in all, with special thanks to Dr. Lamont,
Dr. Grimm, Dr. Robertson, Dr. Love, and Dr. Schroeder for
assuming the editorship of such a large endeavor. Now, in the
third decade of the 21st century, the publication of Veterinary
Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of Lumb and Jones
continues to highlight the importance, significance, and necessity
of continually improving animal anesthesia and analgesia. With
their combined efforts, the contributing authors and editors have
admirably upheld this text’s long-standing reputation as an indis-
pensable resource in advancing and improving animal care and
the human animal bond.
William J. Tranquilli

-- 13 of 1450 --

xiv
The first edition of Veterinary Anesthesia was published in 1973,
and the second edition followed in 1984. The third through fifth
editions (Lumb and Jones’ Veterinary Anesthesia, Lumb and Jones’
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia, and Veterinary Anesthesia and
Analgesia, the Fifth Edition of Lumb and Jones) followed in 1996,
2007, and 2015, respectively. Now, in its 51st year, a sixth edition of
this text is available with both editorial and content contributions
from many new participants.
The sixth edition represents a generational change within the
specialty of anesthesia and analgesia. Most of the early members of
the Association of Veterinary Anaesthetists (AVA), the American
College of Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia (ACVAA), and the
European College of Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia
(ECVAA) have retired from clinical practice, and some are unfortu-
nately no longer with us. However, as the membership of these spe-
cialty organizations continues to grow, and the demand for trained
board-certified specialists in veterinary anesthesia and analgesia
continues to outpace the supply, it is truly an exciting time to be a
veterinary anesthesiologist. It is for those joining our specialty that
this book is written, and we have intentionally tried to incorporate
as many new voices as possible in the writing and editing of this
text. It is our hope that the new generation will pick up the baton of
advancing veterinary anesthesia, and continue to develop new
ideas, disseminate new information, and carry on traditions such as
Lumb and Jones.
We would like to personally thank our families and co-workers
for allowing us the time necessary to complete this work, and the
staff at Wiley for their ongoing support and encouragement.
Leigh A. Lamont
Kurt A. Grimm
Sheilah A. Robertson
Lydia Love
Carrie A. Schroeder
Preface

-- 14 of 1450 --

xv
Don’t forget to visit the companion website for this book:
www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
There you will find valuable materials, including:
• Videos
About the Companion Website

-- 15 of 1450 --



-- 16 of 1450 --

SECTION 1
General Topics

-- 17 of 1450 --



-- 18 of 1450 --

3
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The S ixth Edition of L umb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Overview
Veterinary anesthesia continues to evolve as a science and specialty
within the veterinary profession. The major drivers of change are
advances in medical technology, development of evidence-based
guidelines for patient care, and socioeconomic and demographic
changes in countries where animals serve evolving roles. One thing
that remains certain is that veterinary anesthesiologists will con-
tinue to be advocates for patient safety, humane care, and quality of
life and serve as frontline educators for best practices in anesthesia,
analgesia, and pain management.
Proper use of anesthetics, sedatives, and analgesics can alleviate
pain, create amnesia, and produce muscle relaxation essential for
safe and humane patient care [1]. Important uses include facilitation
of immobilization for various diagnostic, surgical, and therapeutic
procedures; safe transportation of wild and exotic animals; and
euthanasia and the humane slaughter of food animals. Anesthesia,
sedation, and analgesic drug administration are not without signifi-
cant patient risk and are not recommended for trivial reasons. The
continued development of better techniques and drugs along
with continuing efforts to educate veterinary care providers has
minimized the overall risk of anesthesia and pain alleviation in an
ever-increasing and more sophisticated patient care environment.
Any discussion with the animal-owning public, such as that occurring
with owners when obtaining informed consent, requires the use of
proper terminology and clear communication to convey the issues
central to the safe delivery of veterinary anesthesia and pain therapy.
Terminology
The term anesthesia, derived from the Greek term anaisthaesia,
meaning “insensibility,” is used to describe the loss of sensation to
the entire body or a specific portion of it. Anesthesia is induced by
drugs that depress the activity of nervous tissue locally, regionally,
or within the central nervous system (CNS). From a pharmacologi-
cal viewpoint, there has been a significant redefining of the term
general anesthesia [2], and both central nervous stimulants and
depressants can be useful general anesthetics [3].
Management of pain in patients involves the use of drugs
that are often called analgesics. The term is derived from an, which
implies “negative” or “without,” and alges(is), meaning “pain” [4].
Clinical management of pain often results in varying degrees of
effectiveness that represent states of hypoalgesia or decreased
sensation of pain. It is important to understand that the adminis-
tration of an analgesic drug does not necessarily create the state of
analgesia.
The diverse uses for anesthesia (as it relates to immobilization,
muscle relaxation, and antinociception) and the requirements
peculiar to species, age, and disease state necessitate the use of a
variety of drugs, drug combinations, and methods. Throughout this
text and elsewhere, various terms are used to describe the effects of
anesthetic drugs, pain-inhibiting drugs, and various techniques and
routes of administration. Commonly used terms are defined below,
and the reader is referred to other chapters for more details where
appropriate.
1 Overview, History, and Current Issues
in Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia
William J. Tranquilli1
, Kurt A. Grimm2 and Leigh A. Lamont3
1 Professor Emeritus, Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign,
Urbana, Illinois, USA
2 Veterinary Specialists Services, PC, Conifer, Colorado, USA
3 Department of Companion Animals, Atlantic Veterinary College, University of Prince Edward Island, Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island,
Canada
Chapter contents
Overview, 3
Terminology, 3
History of veterinary anesthesia, 4
Early milestones, 5
Conceptualizing depth of anesthesia, 5
Evolution of veterinary anesthesia as a specialty, 6
Anesthesiologist defined, 7
Current issues in veterinary anesthesia and analgesia, 7
Environmental impact of anesthesia, 7
Impact of the opioid epidemic on veterinary anesthesia, 8
Emerging role of technology, 8
References, 9

-- 19 of 1450 --

4 	Section 1: General Topics
Analgesia is the absence of pain in response to stimulation, which
would normally be painful. The term is generally reserved for
describing lack of pain in a conscious patient [5].
Acupuncture is a system of therapy using long, fine needles to
induce hypoalgesia. Additional modalities of acupuncture point
stimulation have been utilized, including mechanical and electrical
stimulation. See Chapter 49.
Balanced anesthesia is achieved by the simultaneous use of mul-
tiple drugs and techniques. Different drugs contribute variably to
specific components of the anesthetic state: amnesia, antinocicep-
tion, muscle relaxation, and alteration of autonomic reflexes.
Dissociative anesthesia is induced by drugs (e.g., ketamine) that
dissociate the thalamocortic and limbic systems. This form of
anesthesia is characterized by a cataleptoid state, in which eyes
remain open and swallowing reflexes remain intact. Skeletal muscle
hypertonus persists unless a strong sedative or peripheral or central
muscle relaxant is co-administered. See Chapter 27.
Electronarcosis, electroanesthesia, or electrosleep refers to the pas-
sage of electrical currents through the cerebrum to induce deep
narcosis. Even though there have been successful studies, this form
of anesthesia has never gained popularity and is rarely used in vet-
erinary practice. Electronarcosis should not be confused with the
inhumane practice of electroimmobilization.
General anesthesia is drug-induced unconsciousness that is
characterized by controlled but reversible depression of the CNS
and perception. In this state, the patient is not arousable by noxious
stimulation. Sensory, motor, and autonomic reflex functions are
attenuated to varying degrees, depending upon the specific drug(s)
and technique(s) used.
Hypnosis is a condition of artificially induced sleep, or a trance
resembling sleep, resulting from moderate depression of the CNS
from which the patient is readily aroused.
Hypothermia refers to a decrease in body temperature, induced
either locally or generally, to supplement insensitivity and decrease
anesthetic drug requirements and reduce metabolic needs. It is pri-
marily used in neonates or in patients undergoing cardiovascular
surgery. See Chapter 34.
Inhalation or inhalant anesthesia refers to the practice of admin-
istering anesthetic gases or vapors via inhalation in combination
with oxygen. See Chapter 28.
Injectable anesthesia refers to the practice of administering anes-
thetic solutions via intravenous, intramuscular, or subcutaneous
injection. Other injectable routes include intraperitoneal and
intrathoracic but, except for some laboratory animal species, these
are not generally recommended. See Chapters 27 and 54.
Local and regional analgesia/anesthesia refers to loss of sensation,
notably pain, in a particular area or region of the body, usually
defined by the pattern of innervation of the affected nerve(s).
Anesthetic drug may be applied topically or injected locally into or
around the surgical site (variably referred to as “field block,”
“incisional block,” or “infiltrative block”), perineurally around
peripheral nerve(s), between fascial planes, or neuraxially (into the
epidural or subarachnoid space). See Chapters 60, 63, and 66.
Narcosis is a drug-induced state of deep sleep from which the
patient cannot be easily aroused. Narcosis may or may not be
accompanied by antinociception, depending on the techniques and
drugs used.
Nociception is the neural (physiologic) process of encoding
noxious stimuli [5] that underlies the conscious perception of pain.
Nociception does not require consciousness and can continue
unabated during general anesthesia if techniques that interrupt or
inhibit the transduction, transmission, and modulation of nocicep-
tive stimuli are not utilized.
Oral (enteral) or rectal administration routes may be used to
administer certain anesthetic or analgesic agents. There is often a
greater degree of interspecies and interindividual variability in the
dose–response relationship of orally administered drugs due to
differences in absorption and first-pass hepatic metabolism.
Pain is an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associ-
ated with, or resembling that associated with, actual or potential
tissue damage [5]. See Chapter 46.
Sedation is a state characterized by CNS depression accompanied
by drowsiness and some degree of centrally induced relaxation. The
patient is generally unaware of its surroundings but can become
aroused and is responsive to noxious stimulation. Sedatives are not
recommended to immobilize a patient when painful stimuli are
likely to occur (e.g., surgery). See Chapter 22.
Surgical general anesthesia is the state/plane of anesthesia that
provides unconsciousness, amnesia, muscle relaxation, and hypoal-
gesia sufficient for painless surgery.
Total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA), partial intravenous anes-
thesia (PIVA), and targeted controlled infusion (TCI) describe
anesthetic techniques that utilize intravenous infusion of one or
more drugs to produce a suitable anesthetic state. Automated infu-
sion systems are available that allow the input of patient parameters
and pharmacokinetic information for specific drugs and allow the
anesthesiologist to target a predetermined plasma drug concentra-
tion (TCI).
Tranquilization results in behavioral change wherein anxiety is
relieved and the patient becomes relaxed but remains aware of its
surroundings. Tranquilizers are drugs that result in tranquilization
when administered; however, many prefer to use the term “anxio-
lytic” or “anti-anxiety” when describing drugs that decrease anxiety
and induce relaxation. See Chapter 22.
Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS, TNS, or TES)
is a technique that induces local analgesia by low-intensity,
high-frequency electrical stimulation of the skin through surface
electrodes. TENS has many similarities to electroacupuncture.
See Chapter 49.
Twilight anesthesia is a state of heavy sedation where the patient
is still conscious, but cooperative, and has limited or no recall
(amnesia). This technique is popular for outpatient anesthesia in
human medicine for diagnostic procedures and for minor surgical
procedures when combined with local anesthetics and additional
analgesic drugs. Twilight anesthesia is a term in common use by lay-
people to connote heavy sedation and does not refer to a specific
anesthetic procedure or technique.
History of veterinary anesthesia
While there are accounts in both ancient western and eastern
historical texts chronicling various drugs and techniques used to
achieve insensibility in humans and animals, little appears in the
formal literature until the 19th century. Not surprisingly, the history
of human and veterinary anesthesia is tightly interwoven, and the
early timeline includes contributions from chemists, physicians,
dentists, and veterinarians alike. Other authors have chronicled the
early history and evolution of veterinary anesthesia at various
points over the past 65 years, and a number of interesting reviews
are available elsewhere for readers looking for more detail [6–14].
By taking the time to reflect on the history of our specialty, we are
better able to appreciate its continued evolution.

-- 20 of 1450 --

Chapter 1: Overview, History, and Current Issues in Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia 	5
Early milestones
In 1800, Humphrey Davy administered nitrous oxide to a guinea
pig and suggested that it may have anesthetic properties. Twenty-
four years later, Henry Hickman demonstrated that pain associated
with surgery in dogs could be alleviated by inhaling a mixture of
nitrous oxide and carbon dioxide. He reasoned that the latter
increased the rate and depth of breathing, thus enhancing the effects
of nitrous oxide. Much later, in the early 1990s, studies confirmed
that unconsciousness could be induced in 30–40 seconds in piglets
breathing carbon dioxide (50%) in oxygen (50%) [15].
It was not until 1842 that diethyl ether was used for human
anesthesia, and within a year of William Morton’s famous public
demonstration of “etherization” at Massachusetts General Hospital
in 1846, others began using ether to produce unconsciousness
in animals. The Boston physician, Charles Thomas Jackson, was
among the first to publish his findings about the use of ether in
animals in 1853 [16]. In 1844, a dentist from Connecticut named
Horace Wells rediscovered the anesthetic properties of nitrous
oxide and recognized its potential for dental practice. While his work
was neglected for a number of years, nitrous oxide was ultimately
introduced to human anesthesia in 1862.
Chloroform was discovered by Justus Liebig in 1831, and in 1847,
Marie Jean Pierre Flourens used it to induce anesthesia in animals.
Around this time, British physician George H. Dadd had immi-
grated to the United States and begun practicing veterinary medi-
cine where he routinely employed general anesthesia in his animal
patients. He was one of the first veterinarians in the United States to
advocate for the humane treatment of animals, including the use of
anesthesia in veterinary surgery, and he vigorously promoted the
application of sound scientific principles to the practice of veteri-
nary medicine [17].
In 1875, Oré published the first monograph on intravenous
anesthesia using chloral hydrate and, three years later, Humbert
described its use in horses. Pirogoff was the first to attempt rectal
anesthesia with chloral hydrate in 1847, and intraperitoneal injec-
tion was first described in 1892 in France. Thus, by the end of the
19th century, various routes of anesthetic administration had been
identified, and rudimentary investigations into the safety and effi-
cacy of multiple anesthetics had been undertaken.
After the initial isolation of cocaine by Albert Niemann in
Germany in 1860, Anrep suggested the possibility of using cocaine
as a local anesthetic in 1878. In 1884, Koller used cocaine for local
anesthesia of the eye, and Halsted described cocaine regional anes-
thesia a year later. Its use was subsequently popularized by Frederick
Hobday, an English veterinarian. In 1885, James Leonard Corning
was credited for using cocaine for spinal anesthesia in dogs. From
his description, however, it would appear that he induced epidural
anesthesia. In 1898, August Bier induced true spinal anesthesia in
animals and then in himself and an assistant [18].
While local infiltration was first popularized by Reclus in 1890
and Schleich in 1892, conduction regional anesthesia had been
earlier introduced by Halsted and Hall in New York in 1884. These
techniques increased in popularity with the discovery of local
anesthetics less toxic than cocaine. Local anesthetics were used by
Cuille and Sendrail in 1901 in France to induce subarachnoid anes-
thesia in horses, cattle, and dogs. That same year, Cathelin reported
epidural anesthesia in dogs, but it remained for Retzgen, Benesch,
and Brook to utilize this technique in larger species during the
1920s. Although paralumbar anesthesia was employed in humans
by Sellheim in 1909, it was not until the 1940s that Farquharson
and Formston applied this technique in cattle. Despite all these
promising advances in the latter half of the 19th century, and pre-
sumably due in large part to many unfavorable side effects, general
anesthesia was not broadly adopted by the veterinary profession
until well into the 20th century. Unfortunately, a “heavy hand,”
without analgesia/anesthesia or even sedation, was the stock-in-
trade of many “large animal” practicing veterinarians well into the
latter half of the 20th century.
Although diethyl ether and chloroform were utilized in pets in
the early part of the 20th century, general anesthesia was not widely
accepted until the discovery of barbiturates in the late 1920s, in
particular, the introduction of pentobarbital in 1930 and thiopental
in 1934. Because of rough, prolonged recoveries, the acceptance of
barbiturate general anesthesia in larger species was delayed until
phenothiazines were introduced by Charpentier in France in 1950.
General anesthesia of large farm animals was further advanced
by the discovery of fluorinated hydrocarbons and the development
of “large animal” inhalant anesthetic equipment. Since the 1970s,
the introduction of newer classes of drugs together with techniques
for their safe co-administration (e.g., phenothiazines, benzodiaz-
epines, α2 - adrenergic receptor agonists, opioids, guaifenesin, and
dissociatives) has further advanced the safety and utility of anesthe-
sia for both large and small animal species [8].
The modern era of veterinary anesthesia began during the last
three decades of the 20th century facilitated by the establishment of
anesthesia specialty colleges within North America and Europe.
Stated organizational missions were the improvement of patient
safety and the development of new techniques and knowledge par-
alleling the advances made in human anesthesia. These organiza-
tions promoted new drug development and techniques with clinical
utility in a variety of species and individual patient pathologies.
In addition, an emphasis on patient monitoring for improved safety
led to the adaptation of technologies such as pulse oximetry, cap-
nography, and blood pressure measurement, which are now consid-
ered standard. The veterinary anesthesiologist’s value as a member
of the patient care team has led to their increased presence in pri-
vate veterinary practice. The need for more sophisticated approaches
to anesthesia care continues to grow with an increasing patient
age demographic and medical and surgical advances. This demand
will continue to expand the anesthesiologist’s importance beyond
the traditional roles of university instructor and pharmaceutical
researcher. Demand has also been bolstered by the veterinary
profession’s quest to improve patient quality of life through better
pain management. Many anesthesiologists have become leaders
in pain management through their continued research and the cre-
ation of evidence-based species-specific pain assessment scales and
therapeutic guidelines.
Conceptualizing depth of anesthesia
During the early years of ether administration to human and veteri-
nary patients alike, the assessment of anesthetic depth was a learned
skill, appreciated most fully by individuals with much experience
and the courage to learn from trial and error. John Snow was the
first physician to attempt to classify the depth of anesthesia based
on observation of the patient [19]. Teaching new anesthetists how
much anesthetic to administer required close oversight by an expe-
rienced individual.
Dr. Arthur Guedel, a physician from Indianapolis, Indiana,
serving in the First World War, was tasked with training orderlies
and nurses to administer diethyl ether to wounded soldiers. To
facilitate this, he developed guidelines summarized on a wall chart
that could be used by anesthetists to gauge the depth of anesthesia.

-- 21 of 1450 --

6 	Section 1: General Topics
While Guedel’s original observations were made in human patients
anesthetized with ether, they were subsequently adapted for use
with newer inhalant anesthetics. Modern anesthetic techniques
seldom utilize inhalants alone, and the incorporation of other drugs
(notably antimuscarinics and dissociative anesthetics) greatly influ-
ences the reflexive and autonomic responses, making Guedel’s
classification less relevant. Greater reliance on the monitoring of
physiologic parameters, such as blood pressure, respiration, and
neuromuscular tone evolved over time, and the use of processed
electroencephalographic (EEG) signals (i.e., “depth-of- anesthesia”
devices) has become increasingly common in human anesthesia.
Nevertheless, despite the incorporation of new monitoring modali-
ties, the anesthetist should continue to have a solid understanding
of changing physical signs with anesthetic depth. Thus, Guedel’s
early observational classification will likely continue to have some
relevancy. For more information on the physical signs relating to
anesthetic depth, as well as EEG-derived indices of CNS activity, the
reader is referred to Chapter 10.
Evolution of veterinary anesthesia as a specialty
In North America, during the late 1960s and early 1970s, a small
group of physician anesthesiologists made it possible for a number
of future diplomates of the American College of Veterinary
Anesthesiologists (ACVA), now the American College of Veterinary
Anesthesia and Analgesia (ACVAA), to participate in their training
programs and to learn about the development of new anesthetic
drugs and techniques. Among these physicians were Robert Dripps,
University of Pennsylvania; Arthur Keats, Baylor University; Mort
Shulman and Max Sadolv, University of Illinois; and Edmond I.
Eger, University of California Medical College. During this same
period, E. Wynn Jones (Oklahoma State University) and William
Lumb (Colorado State University) were making significant contri-
butions to the field of veterinary anesthesiology. Jerry Gillespie had
made significant contributions through his work on the respiratory
function of anesthetized horses and William Muir was reporting on
the cardiopulmonary effects of anesthetic drugs in various species.
Even though there were many dedicated faculty within North
American veterinary colleges and research laboratories, it was not
until 1970 that a major effort was made to organize a stand-alone
specialty. Initially, the American Society of Veterinary Anesthesia
(ASVA) was established, and membership was open to all individ-
uals working in the veterinary profession who had an interest in
veterinary anesthesiology. In 1970, the first organizational meeting
was held in conjunction with the American Veterinary Medical
Association (AVMA) to coordinate the efforts and interests of all
those wishing to develop the specialty of veterinary anesthesiology.
Their primary goal was to improve anesthetic techniques and to
disseminate knowledge whenever and wherever possible. Charles
Short was elected the first President of the new society. Of major
emphasis was the selection of individuals to speak at the ASVA and
other scientific and educational meetings. As the ASVA developed,
publication of original research and review articles seemed in order.
Bruce Heath accepted editorial responsibilities for manuscripts
submitted for the ASVA journal. In 1971, John Thurmon chaired
the Ad Hoc Committee to establish the ACVA. Based on guidelines
defined by the AVMA for new specialty colleges, the Ad Hoc
Committee defined the requirements for ACVA founding charter
diplomates, which included 10 years of active service in the spe-
cialty, significant publication in the discipline, intensive training,
and either being a recognized head of an anesthesiology program or
spending the majority of one’s professional time devoted to anesthe-
sia or a closely related subject area. Seven members of the ASVA
were found to meet these qualifications and became the founding
diplomates of the ACVA.
Between 1970 and 1975, the constitution and bylaws were drafted
and formalized. In 1975, the AVMA Council on Education recom-
mended preliminary approval of the ACVA, and it was confirmed
by the AVMA House of Delegates that same year. Of importance
throughout this process were the insights and efforts of William
Lumb and E. Wynn Jones. They greatly assisted in the establish-
ment of the ACVA because of their sincere interest in the sound
principles of veterinary anesthesiology. During this same period,
several didactic texts had been published further establishing anes-
thesia as a stand-alone discipline within veterinary medicine. The
first edition of this text, Lumb and Jones’ Veterinary Anesthesia, was
published in 1973, Clinical Veterinary Anesthesia, edited by Charles
Short, was published in 1974, and the Textbook of Veterinary
Anesthesia, edited by Larry Soma, was published in 1971.
During the late 1970s, many of the founding diplomates estab-
lished residency training programs in their respective veterinary
colleges. From 1975 to 1980, the ACVA developed continuing edu-
cation programs, programs in self-improvement, and guidelines for
testing and certification of new diplomates. Along with residency
training programs, anesthesiology faculty positions were created in
a number of universities across North America. In 1980, an effort
headed by the then president Eugene Steffey sought and achieved
the full accreditation of the ACVA by the AVMA.
During the past 50 years, a number of organizations outside
North America have promoted and contributed greatly to the
advancement of veterinary anesthesia. They include the Association
of Veterinary Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland (AVA) and
the Veterinary Anesthesia and Surgery Association in Japan. These
associations, along with the ACVA, were instrumental in organizing
the first International Congress of Veterinary Anesthesiology with
its stated objective of globally advancing the field of veterinary anes-
thesiology. The first International Congress was held in Cambridge,
England, in 1982 and has been held continually on a triannual basis
around the world and on nearly every continent.
During the latter decades of the 20th century, anesthesiologists in
the United Kingdom had established the Association of Veterinary
Anaesthetists and awarded the Diploma of Veterinary Anaesthesia
to those with advanced specialty training. Later, interest in board
specialization became increasingly evident in the United Kingdom
and many European countries, resulting in the establishment of
the European College of Veterinary Anaesthesiologists (ECVA).
In order to better recognize the central role anesthesiologists have
in providing and advancing pain management, both the ECVA and
the ACVA sought and were granted approval to incorporate the
word “analgesia” into their names. Thus, the colleges were renamed
the European College of Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia
(ECVAA) and the American College of Veterinary Anesthesia and
Analgesia (ACVAA). Currently, a number of veterinary anesthesi-
ologists are boarded by both the ACVAA and the ECVAA. Both the
organizations recognize the legitimacy of either credential, allowing
residency training programs supervised by ACVAA Diplomates to
qualify candidates to sit the ECVAA Board Examination and vice
versa. Interested readers are referred elsewhere for further informa-
tion concerning the early history of both veterinary [6–14] and
human [20–22] anesthesia.

-- 22 of 1450 --

Chapter 1: Overview, History, and Current Issues in Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia 	7
The establishment of the ACVAA and the ECVAA helped to
advance veterinary anesthesia and pain management on a global
scale through promotion of quality research and dissemination of
knowledge via scientific meetings and peer-reviewed publications.
The ACVAA and the AVA have their own official scientific publication,
the Journal of Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia, which also
serves as the official publication of the ECVAA and the International
Veterinary Academy of Pain Management (IVAPM).
During the early 2000s, in an effort to improve outreach to
practitioners interested in humane care and to increase pain man-
agement awareness, the IVAPM was initially conceived at an
annual Veterinary Midwest Anesthesia and Analgesia Conference
Scientific Meeting. The IVAPM’s stated mission was to advance the
multidisciplinary approach to pain management and was supported
by an ongoing academic–pharmaceutical industry partnership, the
Companion Animal Pain Management Consortium, led by ACVAA
Diplomates Charles Short, William Tranquilli, and James Gaynor.
The first president-elect of the IVAPM was the then current president
of the ACVA, Peter Hellyer. In 2017, the North American Veterinary
Anesthesia Society (NAVAS) was incorporated to improve ACVAA
Diplomate continuing education outreach in coordination with
private and public partners that share a common goal of advancing
quality anesthesia and analgesia care. Alleviating animal pain
and suffering is an increasingly important and defining issue for
21st century veterinary medicine. Today, anesthesiologists, practi-
tioners, veterinary technicians, research and industry veterinarians,
and animal scientists alike are working collaboratively through
organizations such as the ACVAA, ECVAA, IVAPM, AVA, AVTAA
(Academy of Veterinary Technicians in Anesthesia and Analgesia),
and NAVAS to improve our knowledge and coordinate educational
programs.
Anesthesiologist defined
A boarded anesthesiologist is a veterinarian who has been certified
by either the ACVAA or ECVAA. The term anesthetist has more
variable meaning because in some European countries, an anes-
thetist is equivalent to an anesthesiologist. In North America,
however, anesthetist refers to a person who administers anesthetics
but is not a physician or veterinarian (board-certified or otherwise).
A veterinary anesthesiologist has completed a rigorous training
program under the supervision of either ACVAA or ECVAA
Diplomates and has passed a veterinary certifying anesthesia and
analgesia specialty examination (i.e., either the ACVAA or ECVAA
Certifying Board Examination). Board-certified anesthesiologists
are considered experts at assessment and mitigation of anesthetic
risks, delivery of anesthetic and analgesic drugs, maintenance and
monitoring of physiologic well-being in anesthetized patients, and
provision of the highest levels of perioperative patient care, includ-
ing pain management, across a wide array of species and medical
circumstances [23].
Current issues in veterinary anesthesia
and analgesia
Environmental impact of anesthesia
Concerns about potential adverse effects associated with the use
of anesthetic drugs fall into three general categories: (1) patient-
experienced adverse drug reactions (ADRs); (2) occupational expo-
sure experienced by anesthesia care providers; and (3) environmental
impacts of inhalation anesthetics.
Regarding the first category, while the definition of an ADR
remains largely unchanged over the past 50 years, the classification
systems and nomenclature used to describe such reactions change
frequently. Specific patient-experienced ADRs are discussed in
other areas of this text, and reviews of ADRs as they relate to
anesthesia are available elsewhere [24,25]. Regarding the second
category of adverse effects, anesthesia care providers may be
sporadically and acutely exposed to both injectable and inhalant
anesthetics via accidental needle penetration or drug spillage. This
highlights the importance of staff training and implementation of
health and safety standard operating procedures to minimize the
risk of exposure in the first place and reduce negative outcomes in
the event an exposure occurs. In addition, chronic workplace expo-
sure to low levels of inhalant anesthetic agents (waste anesthetic
gases) has been a concern since their use began. Although studied
repeatedly, questions still exist about the relative risk of inhalant
anesthetic toxicity and their potential to cause infertility, miscarriage,
cancer, and other chronic health problems. Part of the difficulty in
determining safe levels of exposure is related to the apparently low
incidence of adverse effects and the potentially long lag period
between exposure and expression of toxicity. Usually, the question
is approached through large epidemiological studies of healthcare
providers that are administering anesthetics. This introduces many
confounders such as provider age, agents in use, co-existing health
problems, and measurement of actual provider exposure, which
may make interpretation and generalization of results problematic.
Further information on occupational exposure to waste anesthetic
gases is available in Chapter 28.
The third type of anesthetic adverse effect is environmental.
Historically, drug development and clinical use of anesthetic agents
did not consider the resources consumed to produce drugs or their
ultimate fate once eliminated by the patient. Nitrous oxide and
the chlorine- or bromine-containing halogenated inhalants (i.e.,
isoflurane and halothane) are both greenhouse gases and ozone
depleters [26]. While the other halogenated agents that lack chlorine
or bromine (i.e., sevoflurane and desflurane) do not catalytically
destroy ozone, they remain important greenhouse gases as trace
amounts in the atmosphere absorb and reduce outgoing infrared
thermal energy and contribute to global warming [27]. Of the
inhalant anesthetics in clinical use, desflurane is responsible for
the largest greenhouse gas emissions during its atmospheric lifecycle.
On a MAC-hour basis, desflurane’s emissions are approximately
15 times that of isoflurane and 20 times that of sevoflurane.
The concurrent use of nitrous oxide to facilitate delivery of inhalant
anesthetics further increases emissions. Further information on the
environmental impact of inhalation anesthetics is available in
Chapter 28.
As the most widely used injectable anesthetic, propofol’s impact
on greenhouse gas emissions is much smaller, by nearly four orders
of magnitude, than that of desflurane or nitrous oxide. Greenhouse
gas emissions associated with propofol and many other injectable
anesthetic drugs are primarily related to the production and
consumption of fossil fuels needed to manufacture and deliver the
drugs [28]. Although the contribution of volatile anesthetics to total
greenhouse gas emissions remains relatively small (0.1%) compared
to that of carbon dioxide (82%), it is still important to consider the
long-term, cumulative impact of inhaled anesthetics on climate
change and pursue strategies to minimize the introduction of these
agents into the environment [27]. Increasingly, anesthesia profes-
sional organizations as well as governmental and intergovernmental

-- 23 of 1450 --

8 	Section 1: General Topics
bodies are moving from knowledge to action to address environ-
mental stewardship and greenhouse gas mitigation [29].
Impact of the opioid epidemic on veterinary
anesthesia
According to the United States Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, the number of drug overdose deaths in the United
States increased by nearly 30% from 2019 to 2020 and has quintu-
pled since 1999 [30]. Three waves of opioid overdose deaths are
recognized. The first wave began in the late 1990s corresponding
with the development of extended-release formulations of potent
opioid medications (e.g., Oxycontin® and Vicodin®) coupled with
aggressive marketing to physicians and significant increases in
opioid prescribing activity. The second wave began in 2010 and was
associated with a rapid increase in overdose deaths involving the
illicit opioid, heroin. The third wave began in 2013 with significant
increases in deaths involving synthetic opioids, particularly those
involving illicitly manufactured fentanyl. In the United States and
elsewhere, the market for illicit fentanyl continues to change and
the drug is now commonly found in combination with heroin,
counterfeit pills, cocaine, and other drugs particularly relevant to
veterinarians including xylazine and ketamine.
As licensed prescribers of controlled substances, veterinarians
have an important role to play in combating the opioid epidemic. As
researchers, policymakers, and public health professionals struggle
to identify and implement strategies to mitigate misuse and abuse of
opioids, veterinarians are increasingly feeling the impacts of this
public health crisis [31,32]. Despite the overuse and abuse of opioids
in humans, veterinarians paradoxically have found themselves fac-
ing shortages of opioids for legitimate clinical use. Reasons for this
are not always readily apparent but may be related to institution of
production limits by some regulatory bodies on opioids approved
for humans, as well as tightening of bureaucratic regulations.
In addition to drug shortages, veterinarians are confronting
increasing and rapidly evolving legal restrictions and require-
ments around the management of controlled drugs. In the United
States, for example, numerous states now mandate continuing edu-
cation relating to opioids for veterinarians applying for or renewing
licensure. Media reports involving drug-seeking individuals turn-
ing to veterinary practices have resulted in increased scrutiny on
the profession [33], and a number of jurisdictions have introduced
legislation requiring veterinarians to participate in prescription
drug monitoring programs (PDMPs) [34]. The AVMA has expressed
support for veterinary continuing education programs addressing
the judicious use, compliance, security, and prescribing of opioids,
but it does not support mandatory controlled drug electronic
prescribing systems or veterinary practitioner participation in
PDMPs [35].
In a concerning new development, xylazine has been increas-
ingly identified as an adulterant in illicit preparations of heroin
and fentanyl in the United States and Canada. This trend has
more recently expanded to other jurisdictions including the United
Kingdom and Europe. As xylazine’s effects are obviously not
reversed by opioid antagonists, and because α2 - adrenergic receptor
antagonists have not been available to first responders, illicit xyla-
zine is implicated as a cause of increased overdose deaths [36,37].
The United States federal government has recently identified
the combination of illicit fentanyl and xylazine as an “emerging
threat” [38] and has proposed federal legislation to combat diver-
sion of xylazine from veterinary sources. This may have significant
implications, especially for those veterinarians in large animal
practice. More information is available elsewhere on these regulatory
changes within the United States, as well as the position statement
from the AVMA, which supports the legislation while highlighting
the need for continued veterinary access to this critically important
drug [39].
Finally, veterinarians are also impacted by diversion of controlled
drugs both by individuals working within a veterinary practice as
well as those not affiliated with the practice (e.g., drug-seeking
clients and outright drug theft). “Vet shopping” refers to the practice
of soliciting multiple veterinarians under false pretenses to obtain
prescriptions for controlled drugs [31,34]. In general, the best way
for veterinarians to protect themselves, their staff, and their clients
is to: (1) remain up-to- date and follow all regulations (both regional
and federal) regarding the prescription of controlled substances in
their jurisdiction; (2) exercise extreme caution when prescribing
and dispensing opioids to clients for at-home pain medication and
provide education on safe storage and disposal of their pet’s medica-
tions; (3) embrace opioid-sparing techniques for in-hospital pain
management where appropriate; (4) recognize the signs of opioid
intoxication in pets and know how to treat it; and (5) recognize the
signs of opioid abuse in clients and colleagues [40]. Additional
resources to assist veterinarians in navigating the opioid epidemic
are available from a number of national veterinary organizations
such as the AVMA [41]. Further information on the opioid crisis is
available in Chapter 23.
Emerging role of technology
The role of technology in human healthcare has expanded expo-
nentially over the last two decades beginning with the transition to
electronic health records and spawning the development of an
entirely new subspecialty within anesthesia known as “anesthesia
informatics.” Collaboration between motivated anesthesiologists and
software developers resulted in commercial Anesthesia Information
Management Systems (AIMS) that are now used in both commu-
nity hospitals and referral centers [42]. The ongoing need to adapt
and 	optimize 	these 	sophisticated 	systems 	means 	that
“anesthesiologist-informaticists” will likely play an increasing role
in 	electronic 	anesthesia records, perioperative computerized
decision-making support, and virtual patient care [43].
In veterinary medicine, the transition from paper to electronic
management systems is underway and software has now evolved
from primarily practice management tools (i.e., scheduling,
inventory, billing, etc.) to capturing most aspects of the patient’s
medical record. While veterinary-specific anesthetic monitoring
technology has made considerable advances, technology to capture
and record that information has, until recently, lagged behind [42].
Several veterinary-specific anesthesia electronic medical record
(AEMR) applications are available including the SurgiVet™
Advisor® Veterinary Data Logger (Smiths Medical), the SmartFlow®
Patient Workflow Anesthetic Sheet (IDEXX Laboratories), and
the Veterinary Digital Anesthesia Record, VetDAR® (Dimple Hill
Software). Further information about each of these products, as
well as the advantages and disadvantages of AEMRs more generally,
is available elsewhere [42,44]. As these applications become more
widely used in primary care veterinary practice, new opportunities
for veterinary anesthesiologists to expand their scope of practice
have emerged through both synchronous and asynchronous tele-
consulting services. In the near future, it seems likely that an alter-
native care model may evolve whereby veterinary anesthesiologists
are able to remotely monitor patients and consult from afar using
cloud-based technologies [44].

-- 24 of 1450 --

Chapter 1: Overview, History, and Current Issues in Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia 	9
Another emerging technology in veterinary anesthesia involves
the use of simulation as an education and training tool. While simu-
lation has been used in pre-clinical medical training for decades,
development of applications for veterinary medicine, specifically
anesthesia, is more recent. At least one veterinary simulation
program is commercially available (Stage III Veterinary Education
Simulation software, WholeLogic Inc.), and it is reportedly used by
several veterinary medical colleges as part of their anesthesia
curriculum [45]. A number of recent publications indicate that
veterinary anesthesia simulation-based training has the potential
to enhance cognitive and affective outcomes and better prepare
students for patient care experiences [46–48].
References
1 Short CE. The management of animal pain: where have we been, where are we now,
and where are we going? Vet J 2003; 165: 101–103.
2 Heavner JE. Veterinary anesthesia update. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1983; 182: 30.
3 Winters WD, Ferrer AT, Guzman-Flores C. The cataleptic state induced by
ketamine: a review of the neuropharmacology of anesthesia. Neuropharmacology
1972; 11: 303–315.
4 Askitopoulou H, Ramoutsaki IA, Konsolaki E. Analgesia and anesthesia: etymology
and literary history of related Greek words. Anesth Analg 2000; 91(2): 486–491.
5 International Association for the Study of Pain. IASP Terminology. https://
www.iasp-pain.org/resources/terminology (accessed June 2023).
6 Hall LW. Anesthesiology. In: Brandly CA, Jungherr EL, eds. Advances in Veterinary
Science, 3rd edn. New York, NY: Academic Press, 1957; 1–32.
7 Smithcors JF. The early use of anaesthesia in veterinary practice. Brit Vet J 1957;
113: 284–291.
8 Stevenson DE. The evolution of veterinary anaesthesia. Brit Vet J 1963; 119: 477–483.
9 Wright JG. Anaesthesia in animals: a review. Vet Rec 1964; 76: 710–713.
10 Westhues M, Fritsch R. Introduction: history of general anaesthesia. In:
Westhues M, Fritsch R, eds. Animal Anaesthesia, 1st English edn. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott, 1965; xiii–xxi.
11 Smithcors JF. History of veterinary anesthesia. In: Soma LR, ed. Textbook of
Veterinary Aanesthesia, 1st edn. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins, 1971; 1–23.
12 Weaver BMQ. The history of veterinary anesthesia. Vet Hist 1988; 5: 43–57.
13 Jones RS. A history of veterinary anaesthesia. An Vet Murcia 2002; 18: 7–15.
14 Steffey E. A history of veterinary anesthesia. In: Eger E II, Saidman L, Westhorpe R,
eds. The Wondrous Story of Anesthesia. New York, NY: Springer, 2014.
15 Thurmon JC, Benson GJ. Anesthesia in ruminants and swine. In: Howard JL, ed.
Current Veterinary Therapy, vol. 3. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 1993; 58–76.
16 Jackson CT. Etherization of Animals. Report of the Commissioner of Patients for the
Year of 1853. Washington, DC: Beverly Tucker, Senate Printer, 1853; 59.
17 Dadd GH. The Modern Horse Doctor. Boston, MA: JP Jewett, 1854.
18 Keys TE. The development of anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1942; 3: 11–23.
19 Snow J. On the Inhalation of the Vapor of Ether in Surgical Operations. London, UK:
Churchill, 1847.
20 Clark AJ. Aspects of the history of anesthetics. Br Med J 1938; ii: 1029.
21 Lee JA. A Synopsis of Anesthesia, 4th edn. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins, 1959.
22 Miller RD. Anesthesia, 2nd edn. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone, 1986.
23 American College of Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia. website. https://acvaa.org
(accessed June 2023).
24 Patton K, Borshoff DC. Adverse drug reactions. Anaesthesia 2018; 73(Suppl 1):
76–84.
25 Cook TM, Harper NJN, Farmer L, et al. Anaesthesia, surgery, and life-threatening
allergic reactions: protocol and methods of the 6th National Audit Project (NAP6)
of the Royal College of Anaesthetists. Br J Anaesth 2018; 121(1): 124–133.
26 Langbein T, Sonntag H, Trapp D, et al. Volatile anaesthetics and the atmosphere:
atmospheric lifetimes and atmospheric effects of halothane, enflurane, isoflurane,
desflurane and sevoflurane. Br J Anaesth 1999; 82(1): 66–73.
27 Varughese S, Ahmed R. Environmental and occupational considerations of
anesthesia: a narrative review and update. Anesth Analg 2021; 133(4): 826–835.
28 Sherman J, Le C, Lamers V, et al. Life cycle greenhouse gas emissions of anesthetic
drugs. Anesth Analg 2012; 114(5): 1086–1090.
29 Devlin- Hegedus JA, McGain F, Harris RD, et al. Action guidance for addressing
pollution from inhalational anaesthetics. Anaesthesia 2022; 77(9): 1023–1029.
30 United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Understanding
the Opioid Overdose Epidemic. https://www.cdc.gov/opioids/basics/epidemic.html
(accessed June 2023).
31 Mason DS, Tenney L, Hellyer PW, et al. Prescription opioid epidemic: do veterinar-
ians have a dog in the fight? Am J Public Health 2018; 108(9): 1162–1163.
32 Kogan L, Hellyer P, Rishniw M, et al. The US opioid epidemic and its impact on US
general practice veterinarians. Front Vet Sci 2019; 6: 222.
33 Hendricks B, Rudisill T, Pesarsick J, et al. Prescription drug monitoring program
policy reform: human and veterinary practitioner prescribing in West Virginia,
2008–2020. J Public Health Policy 2021; 42(2): 249–257.
34 Anand A, Hosanagar A. Drug misuse in the veterinary setting: an under-recognized
avenue. Curr Psychiatry Rep 2021; 23(2): 3.
35 The American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA). The Veterinary Profession’s
Role in Addressing the Opioid Epidemic. https://www.avma.org/resources-tools/
avma-policies/veterinary-professions-role-addressing-opioid-epidemic (accessed
June 2023).
36 Ball NS, Knable BM, Relich TA, et al. Xylazine poisoning: a systematic review.
Clin Toxicol (Phila) 2022; 60(8): 892–901.
37 Ayub S, Parnia S, Poddar K, et al. Xylazine in the opioid epidemic: a systematic
review of case reports and clinical implications. Cureus 2023; 15(3): e36864.
38 United States Federal Government White House Briefing. Biden-Harris
Administration Designates Fentanyl Combined with Xylazine as an Emerging Threat
to the United States. https://www.whitehouse.gov/ondcp/briefing-room/2023/04/12/
biden-harris-administration-designates-fentanyl-combined-with-xylazine-as-an-
emerging-threat- to- the-united-states (accessed June 2023).
39 The American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA). AVMA Endorses US
Federal Legislation to Address Illicit Xylazine. https://www.avma.org/blog/avma-
endorses-federal-legislation-address-illicit-xylazine (accessed June 2023).
40 United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The Opioid Epidemic: What
Veterinarians Need to Know. https://www.fda.gov/animal-veterinary/resources-you/
opioid-epidemic-what- veterinarians-need-know (accessed June 2023).
41 The American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA). Webinars to Help
Veterinarians Navigate Opioid Epidemic. https://www.avma.org/news/avma-
webinars-help-veterinarians-navigate-opioid- epidemic (accessed June 2023).
42 Riebold T. Anesthetic records. In: Cooley KG, Johnson RA, eds. Veterinary
Anesthetic and Monitoring Equipment, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, 2018;
323–333.
43 Lee R, Hitt J, Hobika GG, et al. The case for the anesthesiologist-informaticist.
JMIR Perioper Med 2022; 5(1): e32738.
44 Mitek A. Anesthesiologists in the ether: technology and telemedicine in anesthesi-
ology. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2022; 52(5): 1099–1107.
45 WholeLogic Inc. Stage III Veterinary Education Simulation website. https://
wholelogic.com (accessed June 2023).
46 Jones JL, Rinehart J, Spiegel JJ, et al. Teaching tip: development of veterinary
anesthesia simulations for pre-clinical training: design, implementation, and
evaluation based on student perspectives. J Vet Med Educ 2018; 45(2): 232–240.
47 Jones JL, Rinehart J, Englar RE. The effect of simulation training in anesthesia on
student operational performance and patient safety. J Vet Med Educ 2019; 46(2):
205–213.
48 Noyes JA, Keegan RD, Carbonneau KJ, et al. Evaluating a multimodal clinical anes-
thesia course integrated into an existing veterinary curriculum. Simul Healthc 2021;
16(3): 177–184.

-- 25 of 1450 --

10
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: T he Sixth E dition of Lumb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Assessing anesthetic risk
Perioperative assessment of anesthetic risk is a valuable exercise in
order to minimize complications and optimize anesthetic safety.
A number of studies have been published in relation to anesthetic
morbidity and mortality in both small and large animals. Based on
this evidence, improved recognition of the risks of anesthesia and
those patients that require the greatest care and preoperative man-
agement could help improve standards of veterinary anesthesia and
patient outcome. For more information on related topics, the reader
is referred to Chapters 3 and 5.
Preoperative patient risk assessment
Patient health assessment
The preoperative assessment of an animal’s health status is valuable
to acknowledge preanesthetic risks, to identify management pri-
orities, and to advise clients appropriately prior to anesthesia and
surgery. Health status has been consistently reported to be associated
with anesthetic death in humans and in the spectrum of species
commonly seen in veterinary anesthesia. Increased American Society
of Anesthesiologists (ASA) physical status grade [1,2] (see Table 2.1)
has been associated with an increased risk of death in a number of
anesthetic studies in small animals [3–14], horses [15–18], and
humans [19–39].
Anesthetic agents cause cardiopulmonary depression, and the
presence of concurrent pathology involving the major body sys-
tems is likely to predispose to greater anesthetic-induced physio-
logic disturbance [40]. Pre-existing cardiopulmonary pathology
is particularly relevant in the immediate preoperative period,
as anesthetic-related mortality is likely to involve respiratory or
cardiovascular compromise, and most anesthetics depress one or
both systems at clinical levels of anesthesia [40].
Hematologic and biochemical abnormalities may also be a sig-
nificant consideration. In particular, anemia will reduce oxygen-
carrying capacity and predispose to hypoxia, and hypoproteinemia
has been theorized to increase the response of the patient to highly
protein- bound drugs and result in relative overdose [40]. Renal
disease is also important, particularly if dehydration or uremia is
present, as under these conditions, the renal system will have a
lower tolerance to anesthesia and the patient may be more sensitive
to some anesthetics and perioperative drugs such as non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory agents. Neurologic disease may be relevant
with respect to the occurrence of postoperative seizures, increased
sensitivity to anesthetics, and when cardiopulmonary function
is affected, e.g., medullary pathology can depress ventilation and
cardiovascular function. Additionally, liver and endocrine disease
may influence the response to anesthesia, with diabetes mellitus
and potential intraoperative cellular changes in glucose concen-
trations being particularly relevant [41].
Hence, some form of physical health status assessment is an
important preanesthetic consideration. Most frequently, ASA
grade [1,2] has been utilized for this purpose, and there is some
evidence that this can identify patients at increased risk of mortality
until 24–72 h postanesthesia [42]. However, the repeatability and
agreement between observers of such scoring systems have been
questioned, and evidence suggests that interobserver agreement in
ASA health status classification is poor in veterinary anesthesia [43].
Other assessment systems exist in human medicine, including
the Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation (APACHE),
2 Anesthetic Risk and Informed Consent
Dave C. Brodbelt1 , Derek Flaherty2 and Glenn R. Pettifer3
1 Veterinary Epidemiology, Economics and Public Health Group, Department of Pathobiology and Population Sciences, Royal Veterinary College,
Hatfield, Herts, UK
2 Southern Counties Veterinary Specialists, Ringwood, Hampshire, UK
3 College of Dental Hygienists of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Chapter contents
Assessing anesthetic risk, 10
Preoperative patient risk assessment, 10
Morbidity and mortality, 13
Small animal anesthesia morbidity, 13
Large animal anesthesia morbidity, 14
Small animal anesthetic mortality, 14
Large animal anesthetic mortality, 18
Informed consent, 20
References, 21

-- 26 of 1450 --

Chapter 2: Anesthetic Risk and Informed Consent 	11
the Physiological and Operative Severity Score for the enUmeration
of Mortality and Morbidity (POSSUM), and, in pediatric practice,
the Neurological, Airway, Respiratory, Cardiovascular and Other
(NARCO) score, and all were observed to predict perioperative
risk [44–46]. However, these systems are complex, require more
time to complete, and have yet to be evaluated for agreement
between observers in a veterinary context. Hence, at present, there
appears to be little consensus as to the optimal method of patient
health status assessment for consistent and efficient classification
across observers, and caution should be exercised in overinterpret-
ing individual health status assessments. Nonetheless, there is a
body of evidence that highlights that sicker patients are more likely
to die perioperatively, and therefore, some form of preoperative
patient assessment would be advisable to distinguish sick from
healthy patients, to identify those at greater risk, and to manage
patients appropriately in order to try to minimize risk prior to,
during, and after anesthesia.
Preanesthetic blood testing
Given the fact that organ dysfunction and various pathologic
conditions such as anemia or hypoproteinemia may contribute to
increased anesthetic morbidity or mortality, it would seem sensible
to make every effort to detect these prior to general anesthesia.
For this reason, routine preanesthetic blood screening is commonly
recommended by many veterinary practitioners and, indeed, some
anesthesia specialists. However, although there is no doubt that
prior biochemical and hematologic analyses are of definite value in
certain patient groups, the question remains as to whether their use
can be justified for every patient, in particular healthy animals
undergoing elective procedures.
An internet search for “Preanesthetic blood screening in animals”
(www.google.com, accessed July 2022) returned over 18 million
hits, of which a substantial proportion appeared to be veterinary
practices each detailing their reasons and prices for carrying out
such a procedure; interestingly, the search term returned virtually
no scientific papers relating to the practice. In addition, as with
much information to be found on the internet, many of the relevant
web pages providing advice on the subject were written by people
with no apparent scientific background or credentials for discussing
such a topic, with the majority of these being pet owner discussion
forums. Although there may be no genuine scientific or clinical
background behind these types of discussion groups, they almost
certainly help perpetuate the need for ubiquitous preanesthetic
blood testing, but given that many veterinary professionals also
recommend its routine use, it obviously cannot all be dependent
on owner perceptions. So, is there actually a sound rationale upon
which the need for preanesthetic biochemical and hematologic
sampling is based?
There are numerous studies in human anesthesia now question-
ing the necessity for preanesthetic laboratory testing in healthy
patients [47–49], with each of these demonstrating that, for subjects
with no demonstrable abnormalities on the basis of history and
clinical examination, there appears to be no reduction in perianes-
thetic complications if prior blood sampling has been carried out.
The United Kingdom (UK) National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence (NICE) gathers evidence from a variety of sources and
then produces recommendations for human clinicians for various
medical and surgical interventions. In terms of preanesthetic blood
testing, NICE subdivides its recommendations based on both the
age of the patient and the grade of surgery the subject is undergoing
(minor, intermediate, or major/complex). Based on this system,
NICE does not recommend preanesthetic biochemical or hemato-
logical screening for ASA 1 or 2 human patients undergoing minor
or intermediate grades of surgery, although assessment of renal
function should be considered in ASA 2 subjects having interme-
diate surgery if they have some predisposition to development of
possible acute kidney injury; in other words, unless the patient is
sick, preanesthetic blood tests would only be recommended for
humans undergoing major/complex surgery. Unsurprisingly, NICE
does suggest considering preanesthetic blood screening for ASA
3–5 patients undergoing intermediate or major procedures [50].
As a result of the NICE recommendations, the guidelines
of the Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
(AAGBI) [51] for human anesthesia conclude: “Routine preopera-
tive investigations are expensive, labor intensive, and of questionable
value, especially as they may contribute to morbidity or cause
additional delays due to spurious results.”
Aside from the issue of erroneous results impacting on the
efficiency of case throughput, it is also important to remember that
the reference ranges established for most laboratory tests incorpo-
rate only approximately 95% of the population, i.e., around one in
20 animals that are perfectly healthy will return laboratory results
that are outside a “normal” range, which may then lead to further
unnecessary investigations being carried out, in addition to delaying
the planned procedure; the more tests that are run, the greater the
likelihood of this occurring. Hence, it is important to carefully
interpret test results obtained and to view them as part of the overall
assessment of the patient.
The AAGBI also takes the view that history and examination
performed by appropriately trained and competent personnel
remain the most efficient and accurate way of initially detecting sig-
nificant morbidity: “Thus, it is important that, where preanesthetic
blood screening is carried out, it is seen as an adjunct to a full clinical
examination, rather than an alternative.” While this is undoubtedly
the case in both veterinary and human anesthesia, the results from
human studies relating to preanesthetic blood screening of healthy
patients may not be directly applicable to animals. This is because
the majority of humans are both cognitive and verbal and are able
to self-report health issues. Veterinary clinicians, on the other hand,
obtain the relevant health information by proxy (from the owner),
which may mean that important details are not identified. Thus, it
is possible that a higher incidence of abnormalities may be detected
Table 2.1 Classification of physical statusa.
Category Physical status 	Possible examples of this category
1 	Normal healthy patients 	No discernible disease, e.g., animals
scheduled for elective ovariohysterectomy,
or castration
2 	Patients with mild systemic
disease
Skin tumor, fracture without shock,
uncomplicated hernia, or compensated
cardiac disease (e.g., stage B1 mitral
valve disease)
3 	Patients with severe
systemic disease
Moderate anemia or hypovolemia,
moderate renal or hepatic dysfunction
4 	Patients with severe
systemic disease that is a
constant threat to life
Sepsis, marked hyperkalemia (e.g., urinary
obstruction), end-stage organ disease
(e.g., renal, hepatic, or cardiac), marked
hypovolemia, or severe anemia
5 	Moribund patients not
expected to survive 24 h
without the operation
Massive trauma
a This classification is the same as that adopted by the American Society of Anesthesiologists.

-- 27 of 1450 --

12 	Section 1: General Topics
on preanesthetic screening of animals than has been reported
for humans.
Given that the consensus opinion from human anesthesia seems
to be that preanesthetic blood sampling appears to be justifiable
only in sicker patients, and that healthy individuals undergoing
elective procedures do not benefit from this practice, what recom-
mendations should be put in place for veterinary anesthesia? There
appear to be only a small number of studies relating to the validity
of routine preanesthetic blood screening in animals [52]. Toews
and Campbell [53] performed a complete blood count in 102 horses
undergoing cryptorchidectomy and then determined whether any
abnormalities detected impacted on the risk of surgical complica-
tions. They found that 55 animals had results outside the reference
range for at least one hematologic parameter, but there was no
correlation between those demonstrating abnormal values and the
likelihood of either intra- or postoperative surgical complications,
nor did these abnormalities dictate alterations in patient management.
Alef et al. [54] analyzed results from over 1500 dogs undergoing
anesthesia at the University of Leipzig and reported that if no
potential issues were identified in either the animal’s history
or clinical examination, “the changes revealed by preoperative
screening were usually of little clinical relevance and did not prompt
major changes to the anesthetic technique.” They concluded that
preanesthetic blood screening is, therefore, unlikely to yield addi-
tional important information in most cases. However, the same
study also documented that of those dogs where the history and
clinical examination would not normally have resulted in preanes-
thetic laboratory testing being performed at their institution
(equivalent to 84% of the dogs recruited), 8% demonstrated bio-
chemical or hematologic abnormalities that would have reclassified
them as a higher ASA status, even if this may not necessarily have
altered the anesthetic protocol. In addition, they also identified that
surgery would have been postponed due to the laboratory findings
in 0.8% of these dogs where preanesthetic blood screening would not
usually have been performed, while 1.5% would have received
additional preanesthetic therapy. Although the authors concluded
that only 0.2% of dogs in the study would have required an altera-
tion to their proposed anesthetic protocol based on the biochemical
or hematologic results, the implication that undiagnosed pathology
may be detected prior to anesthesia using “routine” screening may
have implications for whether the owner decides to proceed with
anesthesia/surgery and may also alter the expected prognosis for
the animal. Thus, from this study, despite the fact that preanesthetic
biochemical and hematologic testing may not necessarily alter how
the subsequent anesthetic would actually be performed in most
animals, it may, in reality, be the deciding factor as to whether the
procedure goes ahead. Davies and Kawaguchi [55] conducted a ret-
rospective study of almost 800 dogs and cats of varying ASA status
which underwent preanesthetic blood screening at a UK veterinary
group practice and showed that 97% of cats and 95% of dogs had
at least one result from the screening panel that was outside the
reference interval (although not necessarily clinically significant).
Almost 1% of cases had problems identified by the preanesthetic
blood results that were not evident from the history or physical
examination, while 4% of dogs and 9% of cats had their anesthetic
protocol altered based on abnormalities in the blood work, although
these cases were being anesthetized by first opinion practitioners
rather than specialist anesthesiologists. A more recent study by
Mitchell et al. [52], which presented five Diplomates of the American
College of Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia with the medical
records from 100 randomly selected previously presented cases,
subsequently followed by the relevant results from preanesthetic
blood screening tests for these animals, resulted in a change in the
proposed anesthetic protocol in 79% of patients, based on abnormali-
ties in the blood results. Of note is that 64% of changes were made
by only one of the anesthesiologists, which suggests that there may
be significant variability in whether alterations in certain preanes-
thetic tests are considered clinically relevant even between specialists.
While it is often said that “old age is not a disease,” it might be
intuitive to assume that older patients may require more intensive
preanesthetic screening compared to those who are younger.
However, with the exception of recommending a preanesthetic
electrocardiogram (ECG) in patients greater than 65 years old
undergoing major/complex surgery, NICE does not differentiate
the requirements for preanesthetic assessment based on age alone,
i.e., they do not suggest blood testing older patients of ASA 1 or 2
undergoing minor or intermediate procedures unless there are
certain comorbidities (e.g., diabetes mellitus and cardiovascular or
renal disease). In animals, Joubert [56] assessed whether hemato-
logic and biochemical analyses were of value in geriatric dogs
(> 7 years of age) presented for anesthesia. Of the 101 dogs recruited
to the study, 30 new diagnoses (e.g., neoplasia and hyperadrenocor-
ticism) were made on the basis of the blood sample, with 13 animals
not undergoing general anesthesia as a result of the new diagnosis.
However, similar to the conclusions of the study by Alef et al. [54],
Joubert [56] suggested that although preanesthetic screening had
revealed the presence of subclinical disease in almost 30% of the
dogs in the study, and that screening of geriatric patients is impor-
tant, “the value of screening before anesthesia is perhaps more
questionable in terms of anesthetic practice, but it is an appropriate
time to perform such an evaluation.” In other words, although pre-
anesthetic blood testing may be of value in uncovering undiagnosed
pathology in geriatric patients, there was little evidence that what
was detected would actually impact either how the subsequent
anesthetic was managed, or the overall outcome from it. However,
this study did identify that over 10% of the dogs had their anesthe-
sia canceled due solely to the findings of the preanesthetic blood
screening, which is obviously of significance.
Interestingly, and somewhat in contrast to the previous studies,
work within the Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Small
Animal Fatalities (CEPSAF) highlighted a reduction in risk when
preoperative blood work was performed in higher ASA grade
patients. CEPSAF was a multicenter study undertaken in the UK
between 2002 and 2004 and involved over 100 practices and data
from approximately 200,000 dogs and cats [7]. When analyzing risk
factors for anesthetic death in sick dogs (ASA grade 3–5), having a
preoperative blood test was associated with reduced odds of death,
particularly in ASA grade 4–5 dogs [57]. This association was not
detected in the overall analyses where ASA grade 1–5 dogs were
considered together or in cats but does suggest that preoperative
biochemistry and hematology are most likely to be merited in the
sicker animals that are anesthetized.
Thus, based on the evidence from human anesthesia, and from a
smaller number of published veterinary studies, there would appear
to be negligible benefit to apparently healthy animals (ASA 1 or 2,
regardless of age) of biochemical or hematologic screening prior to
anesthesia in terms of either anesthetic risk reduction or alteration
of the anesthetic protocol; however, given that a significant percent-
age of animals may have the procedure canceled based on the
results of these tests (due either to a worsened prognosis or the need
for further treatment prior to anesthesia), this may counterbalance
the preceding argument. Overall, the requirement for preanesthetic

-- 28 of 1450 --

Chapter 2: Anesthetic Risk and Informed Consent 	13
blood screening in healthy animals is likely to remain a contentious
issue, with valid arguments both for and against.
The situation in animals that are ASA 3 or greater, however, is
probably more clear-cut with the published veterinary studies
providing some justification that preanesthetic screening may be of
value in terms of potentially altering anesthetic management and
outcome.
Aside from the impact (or lack thereof) that preanesthetic
screening may have on the subsequent conduct of anesthesia and
ultimate outcome for veterinary patients, there is perhaps another
factor that may require consideration, namely that of potential liti-
gation. It seems that an increasing number of clients are willing
(sometimes overly so) to point the finger of blame at the veterinar-
ian when things go wrong in relation to anesthesia, even when in
many cases this may be completely unjustified. Hence, the genuine
reason why many veterinary practices carry out routine preanes-
thetic screening may have more to do with covering one’s back
rather than providing the ability to alter anesthetic management
suitably if abnormalities are actually detected. It is impossible to say
what the legal system may make of a healthy animal undergoing an
elective procedure that dies during anesthesia where no preopera-
tive blood sampling had been performed, but based on the recom-
mendations from human anesthesia and the lack of evidence of any
benefit in the few veterinary studies that have been carried out, it
would appear difficult for them to state that preanesthetic biochem-
ical or hematologic screening is a basic standard of care. Given that
there is a more limited evidence base for sicker animals, it may be
considered wise to perform preanesthetic screening in patients of
ASA 3 or above, from both standard of care and litigation points
of view.
Morbidity and mortality
Non- fatal complications tend to occur more frequently than mortal
events, although they have been less often documented in the
veterinary literature. Reported small animal morbidity risks range
from 2% to 10% [4,5,10,58]. Work in small and large animal anesthe-
sia has acknowledged the difficulty of ensuring consistent detection
and recording of morbid events in the practice setting [3,4,59,60].
Small animal practice standards of monitoring of anesthesia can be
superficial [61–63] and, unless a given complication results in obvi-
ous patient disturbance, it may go unnoticed. Hence, in considering
morbid complications, only major events, most likely to be consist-
ently observed, that could contribute substantial physiologic distur-
bance and that could have the greatest impact on a patient (other
than death) will be discussed here.
Small animal anesthesia morbidity
Small animal anesthesia morbidity studies have most frequently
been veterinary teaching hospital based, with a few primary
practice-based studies also reporting major non-fatal complica-
tions [3–5,10,58,62,64]. Conditions consistently described include
respiratory, cardiovascular, renal, gastrointestinal, thermoregula-
tory, and neurologic complications.
Respiratory complications were observed in 0.54% of dog and
0.34% of cat anesthetics in a study of practitioners in Ontario,
Canada, and included respiratory depression or apnea, respiratory
distress, and difficulty with intubation (although the definitions of
these were not stated) [4]. In a veterinary teaching hospital setting,
similar respiratory complications were observed, but more often.
Hypoventilation and hypercapnia (defined as a partial pressure of
arterial carbon dioxide or end-tidal carbon dioxide > 55 mmHg)
were reported in 1.3% and 0.15% of dogs and cats undergoing
anesthesia, respectively. Hypoxemia (partial pressure of arterial
oxygen < 60 mmHg or hemoglobin arterial oxygen saturation < 90%)
was reported in 0.5% of dogs, and occasionally, airway compromise
was also noted [58]. In a Spanish veterinary school hospital,
hypoventilation (defined as minute ventilation < 100 mL/kg/min)
was observed in over 60% and hypoxemia (defined as SpO2 < 90%)
in 16% of anesthetized dogs [65].
Cardiovascular compromise in small animals included the devel-
opment of cardiac arrhythmias, notably bradycardia in 0.62% and
0.14% of dog and cat anesthetics in a primary practice setting,
respectively, although bradycardia was classified as < 60 beats/min
and irregular or < 50 beats/min and regular for both dogs and
cats [4]. In contrast, in a teaching hospital setting, the most fre-
quently recorded cardiovascular complications were hypotension
(defined as systolic arterial pressure < 80 mmHg or mean arterial
pressure < 60 mmHg and observed in 7% and 8.5% of dogs and cats,
respectively), and cardiac arrhythmias (2.5% and 1.8% of dog and
cats, respectively) [58]. Hosgood and Scholl [5,10] reported similar
levels of arrhythmias in a teaching hospital environment, with
4% of dogs and 3.6% of cats exhibiting cardiac arrhythmias. The
arrhythmias recorded included premature ventricular contractions,
sick sinus syndrome, second-degree atrioventricular block, and
ventricular tachycardia. Bradycardia (heart rate < 50 beats/min)
was reported in approximately 36% and hypotension (mean arte-
rial blood pressure < 60 mmHg, or systolic arterial blood pressure
< 90 mmHg) in nearly 38% of dogs anesthetized at a veterinary
school hospital in Spain [65].
Regurgitation was the most frequently documented periopera-
tive gastrointestinal complication. The risk of regurgitation in dogs
without pre-existing predisposing disease has been reported in
some studies to be between 0.42% and 0.74% [66–68], whereas
another report documented a substantially greater risk of regurgita-
tion (5.5%) [69]. In a more recent study of geriatric dogs undergo-
ing anesthesia, the risk of postoperative regurgitation was estimated
to be 1.9% [70]. The variation in frequency across these studies
likely reflects differences in procedures performed, premedication
and anesthetic drugs and doses used, and the dog populations stud-
ied. The risk of gastroesophageal reflux, which may result in sub-
stantial esophageal mucosa injury, has been reported at a much
higher level of 16–17% and even up to 27–60%, again depending on
the animals studied and anesthetic drugs administered, suggesting
that the risk of mucosal injury may be much greater than the pro-
portion of patients where regurgitation is observed [66,67,69,71,72].
Hypothermia, when temperature is monitored, is a particularly
common complication. In a veterinary teaching hospital study, 85%
of dogs had a temperature recorded perioperatively of less than
37.3 °C and 51% of cats had a body temperature less than 35.0 °C
during or after anesthesia [5,10]. Work in a veterinary university
hospital in Spain highlighted perioperative hypothermia in over
70% of cats and 32% of dogs (body temperature < 36.5 °C) [64,73],
and in a recent intervention study, perioperative hypothermia
(body temperature < 36.0 °C) was observed in 36% of dogs and cats
under routine perioperative management [74].
Poor recoveries have also been documented, often recorded as
prolonged return to consciousness, and these were seen in 0.14–0.18%
of dog and cat anesthetics in one study [4]. A smaller number of
dogs and cats exhibited complications including excitement in
recovery, collapse, prolonged hypothermia, reduced consciousness
after an apparently normal recovery, and renal failure [4].

-- 29 of 1450 --

14 	Section 1: General Topics
Further, occasional case reports of perioperative blindness have
been published, but there are limited data on the frequency of this
complication relative to the number of animals anesthetized [75,76].
Interestingly, the use of a mouth gag was reported in 16 of 20 cats
observed with postanesthetic cortical blindness, although data relating
to a comparative proportion of cats where the use of a mouth gag was
observed but that had no evidence of blindness were not available, lim-
iting the ability to conclude an association between the use of a gag or a
procedure and the development of blindness [76]. Feline cortical blind-
ness and possible etiology are discussed in more detail in Chapter 50.
Large animal anesthesia morbidity
A range of non-fatal complications has been reported, although
information on their frequency in general equine populations is
limited. Cardiovascular compromise, as reported in small animal
anesthesia, is a major consideration in equine anesthesia. Hypotension
and brady- and tachyarrhythmias have been described. In particular,
second-degree atrioventricular block, atrial fibrillation, and ventricular
premature contractions have all been reported [77]. Respiratory mor-
bid complications have centered on hypoventilation, hypercapnia,
and hypoxemia, and these have frequently been reported as potential
complications of equine anesthesia [77,78]. In a more recent single-
center study undertaken in France in 2019, cardiovascular and respira-
tory complications remained important perioperative considerations,
representing 36% of all non-fatal complications [18].
In contrast to small animals, horses appear to demonstrate a
wider range of postoperative complications, including fractures and
soft tissue injury, myopathy, neuropathy, and myelopathy, with
many resulting in death or euthanasia [77]. There are limited data
on the frequency of these events in larger multicenter studies when
non-fatal, although evidence of these complications resulting in
mortality highlights their importance. Fractures have been reported
intermittently and have often resulted in euthanasia. In the
Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Equine Fatalities (CEPEF),
a multicenter prospective study of complications in equine anesthe-
sia, fractures were estimated to be the cause of 25% of anesthetic
deaths, myopathy 7%, and central nervous system complications
5.5% [60]. Similarly, in a single-center study in Kentucky in the
United States (US), fractures were the cause of 19% of deaths or
reason for euthanasia, and neuropathy and myopathy were the
cause of 7% [79]. In the French single-center study, neuromuscular
complications were the most common non-fatal event, accounting
for 47% of non-fatal complications, and included evidence of neu-
ropathy, myopathy, and wounds [18].
Other complications reported included postanesthetic colic,
which in a multicenter study in the UK was estimated at approxi-
mately 5% of all anesthetized horses [80]. Two single-center studies
reported that a similar number of horses (approximately 8–10%)
developed colic within 7 days of general anesthesia [81,82], while in
another single-center study, the incidence of postanesthetic colic
for adult horses anesthetized for elective, non-abdominal proce-
dures was estimated at 2.5% [83].
Small animal anesthetic mortality
Risk of anesthetic death
Mortality, in contrast to morbidity, has been reported extensively in
the veterinary literature. In small animal anesthesia, the risk of
death has been documented over the last 75 years [84], and trends
in the reduction of risk over time have been reported (see Table 2.2).
Referral-center- and university-based studies have generally
reported higher death risks, potentially due to the nature of their
patients and procedures, whereas practice-based studies tended to
reflect healthier populations and simpler procedures. Direct com-
parison of risks of death between studies has been limited by a
number of factors, including variations in study case definitions,
study populations, and procedures performed.
Initial institution-based studies from the US documented a wide
range of relatively high risks of mortality. An early study at the
Angell Memorial Animal Hospital in Boston, Massachusetts pub-
lished risks of anesthetic death of 0.26% in dogs, 0.36% in cats, and
5% in other species [85]. Colorado State University reported higher
risks of 1.08% in dogs and 1.79% in cats between 1955 and 1957 [86],
and the Wheatridge Animal Hospital in Colorado reported anes-
thetic death risks of 0.23% in dogs and 0.40% in cats between 1960
and 1969 [86]. At a similar time, the University of Missouri
Veterinary Hospital reported mortality risks of 0.8% in dogs and
0.53% in cats [86]. More recent referral-center studies have reported
lower risks of mortality, suggesting that outcomes have improved.
Further work at Colorado State University documented risks of
0.43% in dogs and 0.26% in cats between 1979 and 1981 and 0.43%
in dogs and 0.35% in cats between 1993 and 1994 [58,87]. Louisiana
State University reported higher risks of perioperative death of
1.49% of dogs and 5.80% of cats at their institution between 1995
and 1996, although this related to all deaths, not just anesthetic-
related mortality [5,10]. Work at the Royal Veterinary College in the
UK reported an anesthetic-related mortality risk of 0.58% in dogs
Table 2.2 Summary risks of anesthetic death in dogs and cats published in primary
practice, referral practice, and institutional studies.
Location [Reference] 	Year(s) 	Institution or
practice
Risk of anesthetic
death (%)
Dog 	Cat
Angell Memorial AH,
Boston, US [85]
1946–50 	Institution 	0.26 	0.36
CSU, Colorado, US [86] 1955–57 	Institution 	1.08 	1.79
Wheatridge AH,
Colorado, US [86]
1960–69 	Institution 	0.23 	0.40
Univ. Missouri VH,
Missouri, US [86]
1968–69 	Institution 	0.8 	0.53
CSU, Colorado, US [87] 1979–81 	Institution 	0.43 	0.26
CSU, Colorado, US [58] 1993–94 	Institution 	0.43 	0.35
LSU, Louisiana, USa [5,10] 1995–96 	Institution 	1.49 	5.80
RVC, London, UK [6] 	1999–2002 Institution 	0.58 	–
Scotland, UK [90] 	1975 	Primary practice 	– 	0.31
Vermont, US [91] 	1989 	Primary practice 	0.11 	0.06
UK [3] 	1984–86 	Primary practice 	0.23 	0.29
Ontario, Canada [4] 	1993 	Primary practice 	0.11 	0.10
Finland [92] 	1993 	Primary practice 	0.13 in small animals
South Africa [62] 	1999 	Primary practice 	0.08 in dogs and cats
UK [7] 	2002–04 	Primary practice 	0.17 	0.24
Spain [11] 	2007–08 	Primary practice 	1.39 in dogs and cats
France [12] 	2008–10 	Referral practice 	1.35 in dogs and cats
France [88] 	2010–2011 Referral practice 	0.8 in dogs and cats
Japan [89] 	2010–2011 Referral practice 	0.65 	–
US [13] 	2010–2013 Primary practice 	0.05 	0.11
UK [14] 	2010–2013 Primary practice 	0.10 	–
US [93] 	2010–2016 Primary practice
(spay-neuter clinic)
0.009 	0.05
CSU, Colorado State University; AH, Animal Hospital; VH, Veterinary Hospital; LSU, Louisiana
State University; RVC, Royal Veterinary College; US, United States; UK, United Kingdom.
a All reported perioperative deaths, not just anesthetic-related mortality.

-- 30 of 1450 --

Chapter 2: Anesthetic Risk and Informed Consent 	15
between 1999 and 2002 [6]. A subsequent single-center referral
practice study in France estimated the risk of anesthetic death in
dogs and cats combined at 1.4% between 2008 and 2010 [12],
decreasing to 0.8% between 2010 and 2011 [88]. Consistent with
the later dates of this work, a referral practice study from Japan esti-
mated the risk between 2010 and 2011 at 0.65% in dogs [89]. Based
on the more recent work described above, the risk of anesthetic-
related death in the referral setting would appear to be of the order
of 0.25–0.60% in dogs and cats.
Work undertaken in small animal primary practice has generally
documented lower risks of mortality than referral and veterinary uni-
versity hospital–based studies. An early practice-based study evaluated
feline mortality in Scotland and published a risk of death of 0.31% in
cats [90]. This was followed by a further survey of small animal anes-
thetic practice, undertaken in Vermont in the US, which reported the
risk of death to be 0.11% and 0.06% in dogs and cats, respectively [91].
A similar study was undertaken in Finland in 1993 and reported a risk
of death of 0.13% in small animals in general [92]. A retrospective
study evaluated mortality in a South African practice population in
1999 and estimated a mortality risk of 0.08% in dogs and cats [62]. A
private veterinary clinic in France reported an overall risk of anesthetic
death of 1.35% but only 0.12% for healthy patients (ASA 1–2) [12]. The
health status of the patients anesthetized in these studies was not
always recorded, although it was likely to reflect relatively healthy ani-
mals consistent with the generally lower risks reported.
The first prospective multicenter cohort study of small animal
practice complications was undertaken between 1984 and 1986 in the
UK [3]. Fifty-three practices were recruited, 41,881 anesthetics were
recorded, and anesthetic risks of death of 0.23% in dogs and 0.29% in
cats were reported. For healthy patients (ASA grades 1–2; Table 2.1),
the risk of death risk was 0.12% in dogs and 0.18% in cats, whereas in
ill patients (ASA grades 3–5; Table 2.1), over 3% of dogs and cats died
perioperatively. Perioperative deaths in healthy patients (ASA 1–2),
occurring during or shortly after surgery, were considered primarily
due to anesthesia unless an obvious surgical cause was present,
whereas in sick patients (ASA 3–5), all deaths independent of cause
were reported. This was followed by a further prospective multi-
center cohort study of anesthetic mortality in small animal veterinary
practices in Ontario, Canada [4]. During the 6-month study period,
8087 dogs and 8702 cats were anesthetized and 0.11% of dogs and
0.10% of cats had cardiac arrests and died. For healthy animals (ASA
1–2), the risks were 0.067% in dogs and 0.048% in cats, whereas for
sick patients (ASA 3–5), 0.46% of dogs and 0.92% of cats died of a
cardiac arrest. Only perioperative deaths within an unspecified
follow-up period resulting from cardiac arrest were included.
The largest multicenter, small-animal- practice- based study, the
Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Small Animal Fatalities
(CEPSAF), was undertaken in the UK between 2002 and 2004, and
98,036 anesthetics and sedations were recorded in dogs and 79,178 in
cats, across 117 participating centers [7]. Anesthetic- and sedation-
related death was defined as perioperative death within 48 h of
termination of the procedure, except where death was due solely to
inoperable surgical or pre-existing medical conditions (i.e., anes-
thesia and sedation could not be reasonably excluded from contrib-
uting to the death). The risk of anesthetic and sedation-related
death was approximately 0.17% in dogs and 0.24% in cats (Tables 2.2
and 2.3). In healthy patients (ASA 1–2), the risks were 0.05% and
0.11% in dogs and cats, respectively, whereas in sick patients (ASA
3–5), over 1% of dogs and cats died.
Other small animal species were also evaluated within CEPSAF.
Rabbits were the third most commonly anesthetized species
in practice, but the risk of anesthetic-related death was substantially
higher, with 0.73% of healthy rabbits and 7.37% of sick rabbits
dying. The risks in other small animal species were also high,
between 1% and 4% (Table 2.3). These risks are comparable to sub-
sequent work. In a single-center study in the UK based on 185 rab-
bits being anesthetized between 2009 and 2016, the risk of death
was 4.8% [94]. Similarly, one of the few studies to evaluate the risk
of anesthetic death in birds reported an anesthetic-related risk of
3.9% [95].
Subsequently, a further prospective study was undertaken within
39 Spanish veterinary clinics between 2007 and 2008 and recorded
data from 2012 anesthetics. Anesthetic death was defined as periop-
erative death within 24 h of the procedure, and a risk of death of
1.29% overall was reported, with risks in healthy dogs and cats of
0.33% and in sick animals 4.06% [11]. Two further multicenter pri-
mary practice studies have followed, one in the US and one in the
UK, that evaluated the risk of death between 2010 and 2013. Both
studies utilized electronic health record data from participating
practices. The US study, reporting on 822 practices within a large
corporate group, defined anesthetic death as death where anesthesia
could not be reasonably ruled out as contributing to the death [13].
They estimated the risks of death within 7 days of anesthesia from
an anesthetized population of just over 4 million dogs and 1 million
cats at 0.05% and 0.11%, respectively. In the UK study, anesthetic
death was defined similarly to the previous study, and from a popu-
lation of over 150,000 dogs, the risk within 48 h was 0.10% [14]. For
neuter procedures, the UK study estimated a risk of anesthetic
death, in just under 90,000 dogs, at 0.006% within 48 h of the pro-
cedure. This was comparable to a subsequent single-center high-
volume clinic in the US which neutered over 40,000 dogs and 70,000
cats between 2010 and 2016 and reported risks of anesthetic death
at 0.009% in dogs and 0.05% in cats [93].
In summary, estimates of anesthetic death risks in primary prac-
tice are of the order of 0.05–0.25%, although in some circumstances,
this may be higher, with the risk in healthy dogs and cats being
approximately 0.05–0.20% and in sick dogs and cats 1–4%
[3,4,7,11,12,62,91]. Cats appeared to be at greater risk of death than
dogs in some work [3,7], and rabbits and other companion animal
species appeared to be at even higher risk where studied [7,94,95].
In referral institutions, mortality ranged from 0.30% to 0.60% in
dogs and cats [5–7,10,58].
Causes of anesthetic death
The physiologic cause of many anesthetic deaths may be multifacto-
rial, although cardiovascular and respiratory complications represent
the primary causes of many perioperative deaths reported.
Table 2.3 Anesthetic- and sedation-related risk of death in small animals in CEPSAF.
Species 	Number of
anesthetic- and
sedation-related
deaths
Number of
anesthetized
and sedated
patients
Risk of anesthetic-
related death (%)
(95% confidence
interval, %)
Dog 	163 	98,036 	0.17 (0.14–0.19)
Cat 	189 	79,178 	0.24 (0.20–0.27)
Rabbit 	114 	8209 	1.39 (1.14–1.64)
Guinea Pig 	49 	1288 	3.80 (2.76–4.85)
Hamsters 	9 	246 	3.66 (1.69–6.83)
Chinchilla 	11 	334 	3.29 (1.38–5.21)
Rat 	8 	398 	2.01 (0.87–3.92)
CEPSAF, Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Small Animal Fatalities.
Source: Adapted from Brodbelt et al. [7].

-- 31 of 1450 --

16 	Section 1: General Topics
Other causes reported include gastrointestinal, neurological, and
hepatic- or renal-related deaths. Cardiac arrest has been reported to
result from cardiac arrhythmias associated with increased circulat-
ing catecholamines, myocardial hypoxia, specific anesthetic agents,
pre-existing pathology, specific procedures (e.g., vagal traction and
enucleation), and myocardial depression due to relative anesthetic
overdose [40,96]. Between 30% and 70% of deaths resulted from
relative anesthetic overdose and myocardial depression, cardiac
arrhythmias or circulatory failure, and hypovolemia in a number
of studies [3–5,62,87]. Halothane, ether, and thiobarbiturate anes-
thesia were frequently associated with anesthetic overdose in earlier
work [3,91]. Dogs more frequently had cardiovascular complications
than cats in one study, and high-risk patients were the most likely
patients to die from circulatory failure, often when hypovolemic [3].
Respiratory complications represented the other main cause of
anesthetic-related death. Respiratory complications were an under-
lying cause of death in 30–40% of dogs and about 40–50% of
cats [3,4,87]. Problems related to endotracheal intubation and
respiratory obstruction represented the majority of feline respira-
tory causes of death [3,4]. In dogs, complications with endotracheal
intubation and respiratory failure were equally reported, although
in brachycephalic dogs, respiratory obstruction was the principal
cause of respiratory complications [3,4,91].
In small animal anesthesia, causes other than respiratory and
cardiovascular complications have infrequently been reported, but
have included postoperative renal failure, iliac thrombosis in cats,
aspiration of gastric contents, anaphylactic reactions, failure to regain
consciousness, and unknown causes [3,4,62,91]. The unknown
causes, often arising when patients were not being closely watched,
represented approximately 5–20% of patients.
Timing of death
The timing of anesthetic deaths has varied, with more recent studies
increasingly highlighting the postoperative period. Albrecht and
Blakely [85] reported in an early study only one death during induc-
tion and one during recovery, with the remainder of the deaths
occurring during maintenance of anesthesia. In contrast, work at
Colorado State University in the 1950s reported that of 36 dog and
cat deaths, 17% occurred during induction, 22% during mainte-
nance, and interestingly the majority (61%) during recovery [86].
However, later work at Colorado (1979–1981) reported mostly
intraoperative deaths [87], and work there in the 1990s reported
that only approximately 25% of dogs and cats died during recovery,
with the rest dying during anesthesia [58]. Other referral institutions
reported differing high-risk periods; Hosgood and Scholl [5,10]
documented that 9 of 14 (61%) deaths in dogs and 4 of 7 (57%) in
cats occurred postoperatively, and more recently, a multicenter
referral practice study from Japan reported that over 80% of deaths
occurred postoperatively [89].
In the primary practice setting, only the larger studies quantified
the timing of fatalities. Clarke and Hall [3] reported deaths occur-
ring principally during anesthesia. In dogs, 22% died on induction
of anesthesia, 55% during maintenance, and 18% in recovery,
whereas in cats, 30% died during induction, 39% during anesthesia,
and 31% during recovery. Similarly, in the study in Ontario,
Canada [4], most dogs and cats died during anesthesia (6/9 dogs
and 7/8 cats) and only 33% and 13% of dogs and cats, respectively,
died postoperatively (3/9 dogs and 1/8 cats). More recently, CEPSAF
highlighted the postoperative period as the most common time for
dogs, cats, and rabbits to die [7]. Over 60% of cats and rabbits and
nearly 50% of dogs died during this time period (see Table 2.4).
Notably, most of these postoperative deaths occurred within 3 h of
termination of the procedure, suggesting that increased vigilance,
particularly in the early postoperative period, could reduce the risk
of death. Subsequent to this study, work in Spain further high-
lighted the postoperative period with over 75% of dogs dying after
anesthesia in this multipractice study [11].
These findings are supported by the most recent large-scale
primary practice studies from the US and the UK. The US study
reporting on over 4 million dog and 1 million cat anesthetic events
identified over 50% of cat and 70% of dog deaths occurred either
soon after anesthesia or after discharge [13]. In the UK study from
a population of 150,000 dogs undergoing anesthetic events, of the
218 deaths recorded, more than 75% died after anesthesia [14].
Similarly, in a US study from a high-volume neutering practice,
over 60% of cat deaths (21/34) and 100% of dog deaths (4/4)
occurred postoperatively [93]. Hence, the postoperative period is
increasingly recognized as a high-risk time and close monitoring
and patient management until full recovery is recommended.
Risk factors for anesthetic death
Early institution-based studies suggested contributory factors
without providing in-depth analysis of risk factors [85,86]. The use
of specific drugs was associated with higher mortality in dogs
and cats, and trauma patients, neutering procedures, certain breeds
including brachycephalic, terrier, and spaniel breeds in dogs were
frequently represented among the fatalities [85–87]. Old age and
poor health status were associated with increased odds of mortality
in dogs and poor health status only in cats in a subsequent referral-
based study [5,10]. Work at the Royal Veterinary College also
reported poor health status as increasing odds and additionally
premedication with acepromazine being associated with reduced
odds of death in dogs [6]. Although they identified important risk
factors, all of these studies were single-center referral studies with
small sample sizes and limited abilities to detect more than a small
number of major risk factors.
Early practice-based work was also limited in its ability to evalu-
ate risk factors. Dodman [90] identified a trend to reduced risk with
thiopental (thiopentone)–halothane anesthesia relative to other drugs
in feline anesthetic practice at that time. In a later study, Dodman
and Lamb [91] identified high risk with xylazine administration
and for brachycephalic breeds, although in both of these studies,
quantification of risk factors was limited. Clarke and Hall identified
a number of risk factors for anesthetic death in healthy dogs
Table 2.4 Timing of death in dogs, cats, and rabbits in CEPSAF.
Timing of death 	Dogs 	Cats 	Rabbits
After premedication 	1 (1%) 	2 (1%) 	0
Induction of anesthesia 	9 (6%) 	14 (8%) 	6 (6%)
Maintenance of anesthesia 	68 (46%) 	53 (30%) 	29 (30%)
Postoperative deatha 	70 (47%) 	106 (61%) 	62 (64%)
0–3 h postoperative 	31 	66 	26
3–6 h postoperative 	11 	9 	7
6–12 h postoperative 	12 	7 	13
12–24 h postoperative 	13 	12 	9
24–48 h postoperative 	3 	10 	3
Unknown time 	0 	2 	4
Totalb 	148 (100%) 	175 (100%) 	97 (100%)
CEPSAF, Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Small Animal Fatalities.
a Postoperative deaths were additionally categorized by time after anesthesia. Shown
as number (% of cases).
b Only deaths where detailed information on time of death was available were included here.
Source: Brodbelt et al. [7], with permission of Elsevier.

-- 32 of 1450 --

Chapter 2: Anesthetic Risk and Informed Consent 	17
and cats [3]. Higher risks were seen with administration of the
α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist xylazine and reduced risk with pre-
medication with atropine or acepromazine. In cats, endotracheal
intubation, induction of anesthesia with a volatile agent, thiopental,
methohexital (methohexitone), ketamine, halothane, ether, and
nitrous oxide use were also associated with higher risks of death and
administration of alfaxalone–alfadolone (Saffan®) with lower risks,
although statistical comparisons were not made. In dogs, Pekingese
were the most commonly reported breed to die. Administration of
xylazine was associated with higher risk of death, whereas halo-
thane and thiopental use was associated with lower death risks. The
Ontario study identified similar risk factors with xylazine adminis-
tration and sick patients (ASA 3–5) being at increased odds of
cardiac arrest in dogs, whereas in cats, sick patients (ASA 3–5) were
at greater risk, while the presence of a technician monitoring anes-
thesia reduced the risk [4]. A study at a single center in France also
highlighted increased risk with poor health status [12], and this was
supported by a multicenter study in Spain [11].
More recently, in CEPSAF, within larger study populations, a
number of risk factors were evaluated within multivariable regres-
sion models for cats and dogs [8,9]. In cats, increasing ASA grade,
procedural urgency, major versus minor intended procedures,
increasing age, extremes of weight, endotracheal intubation, and
the use of fluid therapy were associated with increased odds of
anesthetic- and sedation-related death (Table 2.5) [8]. Pulse and
pulse oximetry monitoring were associated with a reduction in
odds. In dogs, poorer health status (based on ASA grade), greater
procedural urgency, major versus minor intended procedures, old
age, and low weight were associated with anesthetic-related death.
Additionally, increasing duration of the procedure and the anesthetic
induction and maintenance combination used were associated with
increased odds of anesthetic-related death. Maintenance with halo-
thane after induction of anesthesia with an injectable anesthetic
agent and dogs undergoing total inhalational anesthesia were both
associated with an approximately sixfold increase in odds compared
with isoflurane maintenance after induction of anesthesia with an
injectable anesthetic agent [9].
The association between patient health status (ASA grade) and
anesthetic-related death was repeatedly documented in many of
the studies described above [3–12,14] and has been reviewed within
a systematic review [42]. Pre-existing pathology may reduce the
therapeutic index of administered anesthetics, predispose to cardi-
opulmonary depression, and depress other physiologic functions
significantly. Additionally, in CEPSAF, procedural urgency was
associated with increased odds of death [8,9]. This finding was sup-
ported by a later multicenter primary practice study, where non-
elective and urgent procedures were at a substantially elevated
risk [13]. Interestingly, in the US practice study, lack of evidence
of a preanesthetic physical examination was associated with sub-
stantially increased odds in dogs [13]. Hence, greater attention to
preoperative assessment and stabilization of the patient prior to the
procedure could substantially reduce fatalities.
Increased risk with increasing age, independent of patient physical
status (ASA grade), have been identified as an important risk factor,
but not all small animal studies have reported this [5,8,9]. The most
recent US and UK primary practice studies did, however, support this
finding, and in particular, in the recent UK study, dogs over 9 years
were more than 12 times more likely to die than those between 0.5 and
1.5 years of age [13,14]. Old patients may be more susceptible to the
depressant effects of anesthetics, to hypothermia via impaired ther-
moregulatory mechanisms, and to prolonged recovery due to tenden-
cies to reduced metabolic function and hypothermia [97–99].
Increased odds of death reported for small dogs and cats in
CEPSAF [8,9] were consistent with work in pediatric anesthesia [100].
Smaller patients could be more prone to drug overdose, to hypother-
mia, and to perioperative management difficulties (e.g., intravenous
catheter placement and endotracheal intubation). Increased risk
with increasing weight seen in cats within CEPSAF likely reflected,
Table 2.5 Multivariable model of risk factors for anesthetic- and sedation-related death in cats in CEPSAF.
Risk factor 	Categories 	Odds ratioa 	95% Confidence interval (%) 	P value
Health status (ASA gradeb) 	ASA 4–5 versus ASA 3 versus ASA 1–2 (trendc) 	3.2 	2.0–5.0 	< 0.001
Urgency of procedure 	Emergent versus urgent versus scheduled (trendc) 	1.6 	1.0–2.5 	0.050
Intended procedure 	Minor procedure 	1
Major procedure 	2.7 	1.4–5.4 	0.005
Age 	0–0.5 years 	0.4 	0.1–2.4 	0.058
0.5–5 years 	1
5–12 years 	1.7 	0.9–3.0
12 years and older 	2.1 	1.1–3.9
Weight 	0–2 kg 	15.7 	2.9–83.6
2–6 kg 	1
6 kg and above 	2.8 	1.1–7.4
Unknown 	1.1 	0.2–5.5 	0.002
Endotracheal (ET) intubation 	No ET tube 	1
ET tube 	1.9 	1.0–3.7 	0.042
Pulse assessment and use of
pulse oximeter
None 	1
Pulse assessed only 	0.3 	0.2–0.6
Pulse oximeter used only 	0.2 	0.1–0.5
Pulse and pulse oximeter 	0.2 	0.1–0.4 	< 0.001
Perioperative intravenous (IV)
fluid administration
No fluids given 	1
IV catheter used only 	0.7 	0.2–2.5
IV fluids given 	3.9 	2.2–7.1 	< 0.001
CEPSAF, Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Small Animal Fatalities; ASA, American Society of Anesthesiologists.
a Odds ratios greater than 1.0 indicate increased odds whereas odds ratios less than 1.0 indicate reduced odds of anesthetic-related death.
b ASA grade definitions: ASA 1–2, healthy/moderate disease only; ASA 3, severe disease limiting activity; ASA 4–5, life-threatening disease.
c Trend represents the odds ratio for a one-category increase in the risk factor.
Source: Adapted from Brodbelt et al. [8].

-- 33 of 1450 --

18 	Section 1: General Topics
at least in part, risks associated with obesity, and this was supported
by the recent US practice study where increased body weight was
associated with increased odds of death [8,13].
The association of breed with anesthetic death for dogs was
inconclusive in CEPSAF. There was a tendency toward a breed
association in CEPSAF, but after adjusting for weight, this associa-
tion dropped out. This suggested that a major aspect of the risk
associated with breed could be related to animal size [9]. In earlier
work, increased complications were observed with brachycephalic
and terrier breeds, though the ability to demonstrate statistical
associations was limited due to small study sample sizes [3,4,86].
The more recent UK study did explore breed as a risk factor. In the
latter, only Rottweilers and West Highland White terriers were
identified as at increased risk of death compared to crossbred
dogs [14]. However, evaluating breed as a risk factor remains
challenging due to most studies having limited power to evaluate
individual breed types. A recent US study evaluated perioperative
complications for a group of brachycephalic compared to non-
brachycephalic dogs and identified increased risk of both intraop-
erative and postoperative complications, though no deaths were
reported [101]. A subsequent US university hospital study explored
further the risks of anesthetic death in brachycephalic and non-
brachycephalic breeds and identified anesthetic death risks of
3.9% (9 deaths), 0.9% (2 deaths), and 0% in English Bulldogs,
other brachycephalic dogs, and non-brachycephalic dogs, respec-
tively [102]. The study suggested an increased risk in Bulldogs but
was underpowered to identify a statistical difference. Nonetheless,
given the increasing evidence of perioperative complications and
predisposition to specific pathology types, caution with the anes-
thesia of these breeds may be advisable.
Increasing risk for patients presenting for major procedures, as
documented in CEPSAF [8,9], was consistent with work in equine
anesthesia [16,60]. This association was supported by the more
recent UK primary practice study, where less complex surgery, neu-
ter surgery in particular, was associated with lower risk [14]. More
complex and invasive procedures were likely to impose greater
stress on patient physiology, and when assessing patient risk prior
to anesthesia, assessment of the procedure’s complexity should be
considered. Increasing duration, in addition to type of procedure,
was associated with increased risk in dogs in CEPSAF [9]. More
recently, longer duration was also associated with increased hospi-
talization cost in a single-center institutional study and in another
single-center study, increased risk of gastroesophageal reflux,
suggesting complication rates are likely to be higher for longer
procedures [72,103]. Longer procedures could expose the patient to
extended periods of physiologic compromise, increased hypother-
mia and fluid loss, slower recovery, and could be expected to predis-
pose to greater risk to a range of complications [40]. The previously
unreported association of increased risk of death associated with
fluid therapy administration in cats in CEPSAF was surprising [8].
Although this may have reflected in part residual confounding, a
component of the increased odds may have been related to exces-
sive administration of fluids and fluid overload. Careful fluid
administration and monitoring are recommended in cats, although
further work is needed to confirm this observation.
The reduction in odds of anesthetic-related death with pulse and
pulse oximetry monitoring in cats in CEPSAF has not been reported
previously in small animals [8]. Theoretical analyses in human
anesthesia support these findings and have suggested that pulse
oximetry would have detected 40–82% of reported perioperative
incidents, and when combined with capnography, this increases to
88–93% [104–106]. Further, the recent US primary practice study
identified the lack of use of pulse oximetry as a risk factor for anes-
thetic death in cats [13]. These associations suggest that some form
of assessment of cardiovascular function (pulse quality and rate)
and respiratory function (oxygen saturation and end-tidal CO2
)
may be important in minimizing mortality.
The role of specific anesthetic drugs in anesthetic death has been
evaluated in a number of small animal studies. The premedication
administered was a risk factor in a number of studies in dogs and
cats [3,4,6]. Early work had identified acepromazine as being
associated with reduced odds of death [3,6] and major morbid
complications [4], compared with no premedication, whereas
the α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist xylazine was associated with
increased odds of death [3,4]. In CEPSAF, although there were
trends to reduced odds with the administration of acepromazine,
after adjustment for major confounders, this was not a major factor
in dogs or cats. Further, when evaluating premedication with the
α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist medetomidine, no increased odds of
death was detected [8,9]. Xylazine has been found to reduce the
threshold to catecholamine-induced arrhythmias under halothane
anesthesia [107,108] whereas medetomidine did not [109]. This
difference, combined with a greater awareness of the physiologic
effects and a better understanding of the optimal method of admin-
istration of α2 -adrenergic receptor agonists, may be the basis of a
lack of increased risk with medetomidine compared with aceprom-
azine observed in CEPSAF.
The specific induction agent used did not appear important in
CEPSAF, in contrast to the tendency for increased risk with the
use of thiopental and ketamine and lower risk with alfaxalone–
alfadolone (Saffan®) in cats and thiopental in dogs in the previous
UK study [3,8,9]. The lack of a consistent difference in risks with
different induction agents likely reflects that the effect of induction
agent was small. The maintenance agent used, however, was rele-
vant to dogs in CEPSAF, and isoflurane appeared to be associated
with reduced odds compared with halothane after induction of
anesthesia with an injectable anesthetic agent. This is supported by
clinical studies indicating that, although isoflurane induces greater
respiratory depression and vasodilation than halothane, it is associ-
ated with less direct myocardial depression and less sensitization
of the heart to catecholamine-induced arrhythmias, and on balance
would appear to cause less overall cardiovascular depression
[110–119]. Further work evaluating the risks with other inhala-
tional agents would be merited.
In summary, several studies have critically evaluated risk factors
for death [3–14]. Commonly reported risk factors for death
included poor health status, old age, poor monitoring, endotracheal
intubation in cats, and possible breed associations in dogs [4–6,
8–10,13,14]. Additionally, CEPSAF and subsequent studies identified
a number of further risk factors including major procedures, urgent
and non-elective anesthesia, and longer duration procedures as
being associated with increased risk; while in cats, the monitoring
of anesthesia with pulse oximetry was associated with reduced odds
of death [8,9,13,14]. Awareness of these risk factors can aid veteri-
narians in preoperatively identifying those patients at greatest risk
of mortality and instituting appropriate perioperative management
practices to reduce mortality.
Large animal anesthetic mortality
Risk of anesthetic death
Work in large animals has concentrated on equine anesthetic com-
plications. Earlier studies focused principally on referral institution

-- 34 of 1450 --

Chapter 2: Anesthetic Risk and Informed Consent 	19
populations, and death risks were most frequently divided into
elective and emergency populations, with the latter principally
representing acute abdominal or colic surgery. Mitchell [120]
conducted a retrospective study at the Royal (Dick) Vet School in
the UK between 1962 and 1968; 473 horses were anesthetized, and
seven deaths occurred (1.47%). Short, at the University of Missouri
in the US, reported a smaller retrospective study of 125 horses anes-
thetized, with no deaths [86]. Heath reported an overall single clinic
perioperative equine mortality risk, between 1968 and 1970, at
Colorado State University of 4.35% (13 deaths out of 295 anesthet-
ics) [86]. The anesthetic death risk decreased to 1.69% when only
anesthetic-related deaths were considered. In a follow-up study at
Colorado State University, a reduced overall death risk of 1.18% was
reported [87]. Many of these fatalities were due to horses undergo-
ing emergency gastrointestinal surgery that were high-risk patients,
and all of these studies were limited by their small sample size and
could only reflect approximate estimates of the frequency of death.
Tevick [121] retrospectively identified a single clinic equine peri-
operative mortality risk of 2.70% over a 17-year period, but this was
reduced to 0.8% when due to anesthesia alone. The majority of
these deaths occurred within 24 h of anesthesia. Gastrointestinal
surgery represented the major operation type in those that died, and
the majority of these patients were deemed high-risk cases. Further
single- center reports concentrated on specific hospital populations.
Evaluating horses undergoing colic surgery, Trim et al. [122]
conducted a single clinic retrospective survey and found a periop-
erative death risk of 12.5% within 3 days of anesthesia and 20%
within 16 days. In contrast, Young and Taylor excluded gastroin-
testinal surgery and reported a lower single clinic death risk over a
7-year period of 0.68% [123,124]. Subsequently, the Liverpool
Veterinary School in the UK reported mortality risks for both elec-
tive and emergency procedures in a retrospective single clinic
study [125,126]. Of 2276 anesthetics, 1279 were classified as elective
and 995 as emergency procedures. Horses were followed until
discharged. Of the elective cases, eight died where anesthesia and
surgery contributed to the death (0.63%), whereas one (0.078%)
died solely due to anesthesia [125]. For non-colic emergencies, the
surgical/anesthetic death risk was 2%, and for colic surgeries, it was
4.35% [126]. The overall surgical/anesthetic death risk for elective
and emergency procedures was 2%. Subsequent to this, Bidwell
et al. [79] reported reduced risks at another single center in
Kentucky in the US. Of 17,961 horses anesthetized at the clinic
between 1997 and 2001, 0.12% died with deaths classified as directly
related to anesthesia and 0.24% died or were euthanized within
7 days. Two more recent single-center studies, one from France and
one from the UK, reported updated risks of death. In the French
study, based on 1161 horses anesthetized between 2012 and 2016,
the overall anesthesia mortality rate was 1.4%, and for non-colic
procedures, it was 0.96%, while in the UK study based on 1416 horses
anesthetized between 2010 and 2013, anesthesia-related mortality
was 1.1% for all cases, 0.9% for elective cases, and 1.6% for colic
surgery [17,18]. These estimates were generally lower than earlier
work, though were likely to reflect, at least in part, differences in
populations studied and duration of procedures (most procedures
were less than 1 h). All of these reports were single-center studies,
the precision of some of their estimates was likely to be limited
by their sample sizes, and the risks were highly specific to the popu-
lations anesthetized.
The first prospective multicenter perioperative cohort study of
equine anesthesia, the Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative
Equine Fatalities (CEPEF), was undertaken in the UK between
1991 and 1997 [59,60]. Of a total of 41,824 horses anesthetized,
39,025 were alive and 785 were dead 7 days postoperatively, giving
a death risk of 1.89% [60]. When emergency abdominal surgery
and delivery of foals were excluded, the death risk decreased to
0.90% [60]. This was followed by CEPEF 3, a randomized con-
trolled trial of 8242 horses comparing isoflurane with halothane
anesthesia [16]. Although representing maintenance of anesthesia
with inhalation agents only, they reported similar risks to their pre-
vious work. An overall death risk of 1.61% was reported in horses,
but when colic and other emergency surgery were excluded, a risk
of approximately 0.9% was reported. In both of these studies,
perioperative death was defined as unexpected death or euthanasia
for perioperative complications within 7 days of anesthesia.
Subsequent to these studies, a further phase, CEPEF 4, conducted
via internet-based data collection, has been undertaken, and based
on data from 8656 procedures, the study reported a reduced overall
mortality risk of 1.0%; 3.4% for colic surgery and 0.6% for non-
colic procedures [127].
In summary, overall anesthetic death risks of approximately
1.0–1.5%, decreasing among non-emergency horses to approxi-
mately 0.9–0.6, have been reported [16,17,59,60,79,123–125,127].
Emergency anesthetics had a death risk of nearer 3.5% or
above [59,60,122,126].
Causes of anesthetic death
In equine anesthesia, cardiac arrest and cardiovascular collapse
were major causes of death, resulting in 20–50% of all reported
deaths [59,60,121,123–127]. Respiratory complications, in contrast,
were infrequently reported. Although Tevik [121] did not distinguish
respiratory from cardiovascular causes, which when combined
accounted for all ten anesthetic deaths described, other studies have
reported less than 25% of all deaths as resulting from respiratory
compromise [59,60,123–126]. Johnston et al. [59,60] documented
that only 4% of deaths resulted from respiratory problems.
Non-cardiopulmonary causes have been reported as the cause
of death or euthanasia in up to 77% of all equine fatalities
[16,59,60,121,123–126]. Johnston et al. [59,60] attributed death in
55% of all cases to fractures on recovery, postoperative myopathy,
and abdominal complications such as sepsis and colitis. Young and
Taylor [124] reported deaths due to postoperative myopathy and
fractures in seven of nine deaths, whereas Bidwell et al. [79]
reported fractures and myopathy as the basis of over 50% of anes-
thetic deaths at their center. More recent single-center studies have
supported this, with myopathy and fractures representing 50–70%
of anesthetic deaths [18]. Following on from CEPEF 1 and 2, CEPEF
4 reported just over 42% of non-colic anesthetic deaths were due to
fractures on recovery and spinal cord malacia [127]. Rarely have
horses been reported to be found dead or dying of unknown cause,
perhaps because horses are more closely observed on recovery than
many small animal patients. Johnston et al. classified only 5% of
equine fatalities as found dead [60].
Timing of anesthetic death
Consistent with work in small animals, recent work in equine anes-
thesia has also highlighted the postoperative period as a major
period of risk. Johnston et al. [59,60] reported over 44% of deaths as
postoperative events. Young and Taylor [124] reported postopera-
tive fatalities in seven of nine deaths. In another single clinic study,
over 50% of 22 deaths classified as related to anesthesia occurred
postoperatively [79]. In the two recent single-center studies of 14
and 16 anesthetic deaths reported, 88 to 100% were seen to occur

-- 35 of 1450 --

20 	Section 1: General Topics
during recovery [17,18]. Similarly, in CEPEF 4, of 35 non-colic
anesthetic deaths reported, over 85% occurred postoperatively [127].
Hence, although intraoperative concerns remain important, close
attention to the postoperative period is also merited in equine
anesthesia.
Risk factors for anesthetic death
A number of single-center retrospective studies identified risk
factors associated with perioperative complications in horses. In
studies undertaken at Colorado State University, anesthetic overdose
was considered a major cause of death or euthanasia, and many
fatalities were associated with emergency gastrointestinal surgery
and high-risk status [86,87]. Tevick [121] identified gastrointestinal
surgery as the principal operation type in those horses that died,
and the majority of these were deemed high-risk cases. Among
horses undergoing acute emergency abdominal surgery, long dura-
tion of anesthesia and intraoperative hypotension were associated
with increased risk of death in a further single-center retrospective
study [122]. When factors were evaluated in non-colic horses,
similar risk factors were identified [123,124].
Intraoperative fluids and inotropic support were associated with
reduced risk of fatal myopathy, whereas long procedures and old
age were associated with increased risk of death or myopathy.
Subsequent work evaluated both elective and emergency proce-
dures in a further retrospective single clinic study [125,126]. High
ASA grade in the elective cases (e.g., elective exploratory laparotomy
for colic) was associated with increased risk of death, and among
emergency patients, acute abdominal surgery (i.e., colic surgery)
was associated with increased risk.
The prospective multicenter cohort undertaken by Johnston
et al. [59,60] evaluated risk factors more thoroughly in a large popu-
lation of anesthetized horses. They identified anesthesia of preg-
nant mares, foals, horses undergoing abdominal surgery, orthopedic
cases requiring internal fixation, long operation time, positioning
in dorsal recumbency, lack of sedation, and the use of xylazine as a
premedicant with increased risk. Acepromazine premedication and
total intravenous anesthesia were associated with reduced risk. The
subsequent phase of the work, a randomized clinical trial of isoflu-
rane and halothane for maintenance of anesthesia, reported similar
findings [16]. In general, no difference in outcome between the two
inhalant anesthetics was found, but in horses aged 2–5 years, isoflu-
rane was associated with reduced odds. In both treatment groups,
increased risk was seen with orthopedic and emergency abdominal
surgery, whereas reduced risk occurred with monitoring of blood
pressure, and with ear, nose, and throat, and urogenital surgery.
The CEPEF multicenter work has been uniquely powered and
able to quantify specific risk factors and drug associations [16,59,60],
but the patterns are similar to those reported in the other equine
studies. Subsequent work has also highlighted similar trends,
though has been based on smaller sample sizes limiting detailed
risk factor analyses. Dugdale et al. in the UK [17] reported univari-
able associations of ASA physical status, dorsal recumbency, anes-
thetic maintenance agent, colic surgery, and duration as all being
associated with mortality. Similarly, Laurenza [18] in their single-
center French study, identified, in a multivariable model, ASA
physical status and procedure as associated with mortality and
additionally horse weight, surgeon experience, and the use of dobu-
tamine as statistically significant risk factors.
The work in equine anesthesia indicates risk factors similar to
those published in other species. In particular, emergency,
abdominal, and orthopedic surgery, longer operations, and poor
health status were commonly reported factors associated with
death. In addition, risks associated with specific anesthetic agents
have been addressed with CEPEF 1 and 2, in particular highlighting
a number of associations. Further work is merited to build on these
in the multicenter setting.
Informed consent
Informed client consent is the ethical and legal foundation upon
which healthcare professionals deliver care and service. In addition
to furnishing the anesthesia provider with information that informs
available risk management strategies that may be assigned to treat-
ments or interventions, knowledge and communication of perian-
esthetic risk is an essential component in the process of informed
owner consent. In conversation with the anesthesia provider, an
owner presented with an evidence-informed assessment of the sig-
nificant risks associated with a proposed procedure for their animal
is guided to a point of decision-making where they can consent to
accept the risk or refuse consent because of perceived unmitigable
risk. This process of obtaining informed owner consent or refusal
involves a conversation between the owner and the anesthesia
provider centering on a discussion of relevant and significant risks.
At a time where information of varied credibility is readily accessi-
ble by the public, animal owners can seek out anesthesia care with
existing conceptions of anesthesia-related risk. The possibility of
such preconceptions indicates the heightened need for a discussion
of risk with the client.
The legal underpinnings of an informed consent conversation
generally require that consent be obtained from the owner of an
animal that is being treated, an authorized representative of the
owner, a valid substitute decision-maker, someone who holds a
valid power of attorney for property, a representative of an organi-
zation that is legally qualified to make treatment decisions for the
animal, or, at the very least, someone who the care provider deter-
mines is acting in the interest of the animal. How these elements are
defined and enacted will vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction.
In conjunction with determining whether an individual is legally
qualified to make the necessary treatment decisions, before entering
into an informed consent conversation, the care provider will also
need to formulate an opinion about the decision-maker’s capacity
to make an informed decision based on such factors as cognitive
ability or health literacy.
Included in an informed consent discussion will be an acknowl-
edgment of the extra-label use of drugs, if any. The process of
veterinary anesthesia frequently involves the extra-label use
of drugs of which the client should be informed. In many cases,
the extra-label use of a drug is associated with low-level risk, and
consent for such use of each drug is impractical. Rather, a blanket
acknowledgment and brief discussion of the well-documented,
low-level risk of extra-label use of these drugs can be made. In
instances where extra-label use is not associated with significant
precedence and the unknown risks may be more significant,
informed consent for the specific use of this particular drug should
be obtained.
With the expansion of multicentric clinical research in veterinary
medicine, clinical anesthesia providers may be faced with the
additional task of gathering informed consent from clients whose
animals are candidates for enrollment in clinical investigations.
In this realm, in addition to providing the owner with the ability to
provide, refuse, or withdraw consent at any time, the informed
consent conversation must be structured so that the owner’s agency

-- 36 of 1450 --

Chapter 2: Anesthetic Risk and Informed Consent 	21
in providing consent is maintained and hierarchical imbalances
that reduce an owner’s agency are minimized [128].
Clients and animal owners operate under varied perceptions
regarding the role of the veterinary anesthesiologist in the delivery
of anesthesia care. Hence, an informed consent discussion should
include an outline of the roles of the various individuals who will be
involved in the delivery of anesthesia during a particular procedure.
It may be that a certified anesthesia specialist (Diploma in
Veterinary Anaesthesia [DVA], Diplomate of the European College
of Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia [DECVAA], or Diplomate
of the American College of Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia
[DACVAA]) is involved in the prescribing of a suitable anesthesia
protocol and supervises the subsequent delivery of anesthesia care.
Specific delivery of that care may be delegated to a non-veterinarian
who may be a certified technician or nurse specialist or generalist.
Models for the delivery of anesthesia care are numerous. Proper
informed client consent will include a discussion that leads to client
understanding and acceptance of the model employed. In this, the
client holds the very reasonable expectation of knowing who will be
providing the anesthesia care and monitoring. Informed consent
documentation can be as simple as the notation in the case record
of the elements of the process that were discussed with the client. In
cases where the associated risks of the procedure are more substan-
tial, a prepared consent form may assist in structuring the informed
consent conversation in a systematic way that affords consideration
of all of the attendant, significant risks. Although the use of a signed
consent form may serve to highlight the existence of real and sub-
stantial risk, the use of such a form does not negate the need for a
frank and informed discussion with an owner in a manner that not
only involves the one-way transfer of information to the client but
also creates the space necessary for a provider–client dialogue in
which the client is provided with the opportunity to ask questions
and receive and understand the answers to those questions. This
dialogue is central to the process of informed consent.
In summary, much improvement in small and large animal anes-
thesia has occurred over the last 50 years. Risks have reduced and
standards of care have improved substantially, and a clearer under-
standing of factors associated with these complications has aided
further improvements. Additionally, the successful communication
of these risks to owners and clients is central to the professional
provision of safe anesthesia and the maintenance of realistic owner
expectations. Ongoing evaluation of risks and risk factors is merited
to sustain and further improve veterinary anesthesia.
References
1 Anon. New classification of physical status. Anesthesiology 1963; 24: 111.
2 American Society of Anesthesiologist ASA. ASA Physical Status Classification. Park Ridge,
IL: American Society of Anesthesiologists (last amended December 13, 2020).
3 Clarke KW, Hall LW. A survey of anaesthesia in small animal practice: AVA/BSAVA
report. J Vet Anaesth 1990; 17: 4–10.
4 Dyson DH, Maxie MG, Schnurr D. Morbidity and mortality associated with anes-
thetic management in small animal veterinary practice in Ontario. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 1998; 34(4): 325–335.
5 Hosgood G, Scholl DT. Evaluation of age as a risk factor for perianesthetic morbidity
and mortality in the dog. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 1998; 8(3): 222–236.
6 Brodbelt DC, Hammond RA, Tuminaro D, et al. Risk factors for anaesthetic-related
death in referred dogs. Vet Rec 2006; 158(16): 563–564.
7 Brodbelt DC, Blissitt KJ, Hammond RA, et al. The risk of death: the Confidential
Enquiry into Perioperative Small Animal Fatalities (CEPSAF). Vet Anaesth Analg
2008; 35(5): 365–373.
8 Brodbelt DC, Pfeifer DU, Young L, et al. Risk factors for anaesthetic-related death in
cats: results from the Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Small Animal
Fatalities (CEPSAF). Br J Anaesth 2007; 99(5): 617–623.
9 Brodbelt DC, Pfeiffer DU, Young LE, et al. Results of the confidential enquiry into
perioperative small animal fatalities regarding risk factors for anesthetic-related
death in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008; 233(7): 1096–1104.
10 Hosgood G, Scholl DT. Evaluation of age and American Society of Anesthesiologists
(ASA) physical status as risk factors for perianesthetic morbidity and mortality in
the cat. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2002; 12(1): 9–15.
11 Gil L, Redondo JI. Canine anaesthetic death in Spain: a multicentre prospective
cohort study of 2012 cases. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40(6): e57–e67.
12 Bille C, Auvigne V, Libermann S, et al. Risk of anaesthetic mortality in dogs and
cats: an observational cohort study of 3546 cases. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39(1):
59–68.
13 Matthews NS, Mohn TJ, Yang M, et al. Factors associated with anesthetic-related
death in dogs and cats in primary care veterinary hospitals. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2017; 250(6): 655–665.
14 Shoop-Worrall SJ, O’Neill DG, Viscasillas J, et al. Mortality related to general anaes-
thesia and sedation in dogs under UK primary veterinary care. Vet Anaesth Analg
2022; 49(5): 433–442.
15 Eastment JK, Johnston GM, Taylor PM, et al. Is isoflurane safer than halothane in
equine anesthesia? Results from a multicentre randomised controlled trial.
Proceedings of the Society of Veterinary Epidemiology and Preventative Medicine,
Cambridge, UK, 4th April, 2002.
16 Johnston GM, Eastment JK, Taylor PM, et al. Is isoflurane safer than halothane in
equine anaesthesia? Results from a prospective multicentre randomised controlled
trial. Equine Vet J 2004; 36(1): 64–71.
17 Dugdale AH, Obhrai J, Cripps PJ. Twenty years later: a single-centre, repeat retro-
spective analysis of equine perioperative mortality and investigation of recovery
quality. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43(2): 171–178.
18 Laurenza C, Ansart L, Portier K. Risk factors of anesthesia-related mortality and
morbidity in one equine hospital: a retrospective study on 1,161 cases undergoing
elective or emergency surgeries. Front Vet Sci 2019; 6: 514.
19 Marx GF, Mateo CV, Orkin LR. Computer analysis of postanesthetic deaths.
Anesthesiology 1973; 39(1): 54–58.
20 Hovi-Viander M. Death associated with anaesthesia in Finland. Br J Anaesth 1980;
52(5): 483–489.
21 Lunn JN, Mushin WW. Mortality associated with anaesthesia. Anaesthesia 1982;
37(8): 856.
22 Pottecher T, Tiret L, Desmonts JM, et al. Cardiac arrest related to anaesthesia: a
prospective survey in France (1978–1982). Eur J Anaesthesiol 1984; 1(4): 305–318.
23 Tiret L, Desmonts JM, Hatton F, et al. Complications associated with anaesthesia—a
prospective survey in France. Can Anaesth Soc J 1986; 33(3 Pt 1): 336–344.
24 Buck N, Devlin HB, Lunn JN. The Report of a Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative
Deaths 1987. London, UK: Nuffield Provincial Hospitals Trust, The King’s Fund,
1988.
25 Cohen MM, Duncan PG, Tate RB. Does anesthesia contribute to operative
mortality? J Am Med Assoc 1988; 260(19): 2859–2863.
26 Forrest JB, Cahalan MK, Rehder K, et al. Multicenter study of general anesthesia. II.
Results. Anesthesiology 1990; 72(2): 262–268.
27 NCEPOD. NCEPOD and perioperative deaths of children. Lancet 1990; 335(8704):
1498–1500.
28 Pedersen T, Eliasen K, Henriksen E. A prospective study of mortality associated
with anaesthesia and surgery: risk indicators of mortality in hospital. Acta
Anaesthesiol Scand 1990; 34(3): 176–182.
29 Forrest JB, Rehder K, Cahalan MK, et al. Multicenter study of general anesthesia.
III. Predictors of severe perioperative adverse outcomes. Anesthesiology 1992;
76(1): 3–15.
30 Pedersen T. Complications and death following anaesthesia. A prospective study
with special reference to the influence of patient-, anaesthesia-, and surgery-related
risk factors. Dan Med Bull 1994; 41(3): 319–331.
31 Warden JC, Borton CL, Horan BF. Mortality associated with anaesthesia in
New South Wales, 1984–1990. Med J Aust 1994; 161(10): 585–593.
32 Tikkanen J, Hovi-Viander M. Death associated with anaesthesia and surgery in
Finland in 1986 compared to 1975. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1995; 39(2): 262–267.
33 McKenzie AG. Mortality associated with anaesthesia at Zimbabwean teaching
hospitals. S Afr Med J 1996; 86(4): 338–342.
34 Warden JC, Horan BF. Deaths attributed to anaesthesia in New South Wales,
1984–1990. Anaesth Intensive Care 1996; 24(1): 66–73.
35 Wolters U, Wolf T, Stutzer H, et al. ASA classification and perioperative variables as
predictors of postoperative outcome. Br J Anaesth 1996; 77(2): 217–222.
36 Biboulet P, Aubus P, Dubourdieu J, et al. Fatal and non fatal cardiac arrest related to
anesthesia. Can J Anaesth 2001; 48(4): 326–332.
37 Morita K, Kawashima Y, Irita K, et al. Perioperative mortality and morbidity in
1999 with a special reference to age in 466 certified training hospitals of Japanese
Society of Anesthesiologists-report of Committee on Operating Room Safety of
Japanese Society of Anesthesiologists. Masui 2001; 50(8): 909–921.

-- 37 of 1450 --

22 	Section 1: General Topics
38 Donati A, Ruzzi M, Adrario E, et al. A new and feasible model for predicting
operative risk. Br J Anaesth 2004; 93(3): 393–399.
39 Hopkins TJ, Raghunathan K, Barbeito A, et al. Associations between ASA Physical
Status and postoperative mortality at 48 h: a contemporary dataset analysis
compared to a historical cohort. Perioper Med (Lond) 2016; 5: 29.
40 Clarke KW, Hall LW, Trim CM. Veterinary Anaesthesia. 11th edn. London, UK:
WB Saunders, 2014; 561.
41 Johnson CB. Endocrine disease. In: Seymour C, Gleed RD, eds. Manual of Small
Animal Anaesthesia and Analgesia. Cheltenham, UK: BSAVA, 1999; 223–230.
42 Portier K, Ida KK. The ASA Physical Status Classification: what is the evidence for
recommending its use in veterinary anesthesia? A systematic review. Front Vet Sci
2018; 5: 204.
43 McMillan M, Brearley J. Assessment of the variation in American Society of
Anesthesiologists [corrected] Physical Status Classification assignment in small
animal anaesthesia. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40(3): 229–236.
44 Knaus WA, Draper EA, Wagner DP, et al. APACHE II: a severity of disease classifi-
cation system. Crit Care Med 1985; 13(10): 818–829.
45 Neary WD, Heather BP, Earnshaw JJ. The Physiological and Operative Severity
Score for the enUmeration of Mortality and morbidity (POSSUM). Br J Surg 2003;
90(2): 157–165.
46 Malviya S, Voepel-Lewis T, Chiravuri SD, et al. Does an objective system-based
approach improve assessment of perioperative risk in children? A preliminary
evaluation of the ’NARCO’. Br J Anaesth 2011; 106(3): 352–358.
47 Schein OD, Katz J, Bass EB, et al. The value of routine preoperative medical testing
before cataract surgery. Study of Medical Testing for Cataract Surgery. N Engl J Med
2000; 342(3): 168–175.
48 Chung F, Yuan H, Yin L, et al. Elimination of preoperative testing in ambulatory
surgery. Anesth Analg 2009; 108(2): 467–475.
49 Benarroch-Gampel J, Sheffield KM, Duncan CB, et al. Preoperative laboratory test-
ing in patients undergoing elective, low-risk ambulatory surgery. Ann Surg 2012;
256(3): 518–528.
50 National Guideline Centre (UK). Preoperative Tests (Update): Routine Preoperative
Tests for Elective Surgery. London, UK: National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence (NICE), April 2016.
51 Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland (AAGBI) Safety Guideline
2. Pre-Operative Assessment and Patient Preparation: The Role of the Anaesthetist.
London, UK: AAGBI, January 2010.
52 Mitchell K, Barletta M, Quandt J, et al. Effect of routine pre-anesthetic laboratory
screening on pre-operative anesthesia-related decision-making in healthy dogs.
Can Vet J 2018; 59(7): 773–778.
53 Toews AR, Campbell JR. Influence of preoperative complete blood cell counts on
surgical outcomes in healthy horses: 102 cases (1986–1996). J Am Vet Med Assoc
1997; 211(7): 887–888.
54 Alef M, von Praun F, Oechtering G. Is routine pre-anaesthetic haematological and
biochemical screening justified in dogs? Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35(2):
132–140.
55 Davies M, Kawaguchi S. Pregeneral anaesthetic blood screening of dogs and cats
attending a UK practice. Vet Rec 2014; 174(20): 506.
56 Joubert KE. Pre-anaesthetic screening of geriatric dogs. J S Afr Vet Assoc 2007;
78(1): 31–35.
57 Brodbelt DC. The Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Small Animal Fatalities.
London, UK: London University, 2006.
58 Gaynor JS, Dunlop CI, Wagner AE, et al. Complications and mortality associated
with anesthesia in dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1999; 35(1): 13–17.
59 Johnston GM, Taylor PM, Holmes MA, et al. Confidential Enquiry of
Perioperative Equine Fatalities (CEPEF-1): preliminary results. Equine Vet J 1995;
27(3): 193–200.
60 Johnston GM, Eastment JK, Wood JLN, et al. Confidential Enquiry of Perioperative
Equine Fatalities (CEPEF): mortality results of Phases 1 and 2. Vet Anaesth Analg
2002; 29(4): 159–170.
61 Wagner AE, Hellyer PW. Survey of anesthesia techniques and concerns in private
veterinary practice. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000; 217(11): 1652–1657.
62 Joubert KE. Routine veterinary anaesthetic management practice in South Africa.
J S Afr Vet Assoc 2000; 71(3): 166–172.
63 Nicholson A, Watson A. Survey on small animal anaesthesia. Aust Vet J 2001; 79(9):
613–619.
64 Redondo JI, Suesta P, Serra I, et al. Retrospective study of the prevalence of postan-
aesthetic hypothermia in dogs. Vet Rec 2012; 171(15): 374.
65 Redondo JI, Rubio M, Soler G, et al. Normal values and incidence of cardiorespira-
tory complications in dogs during general anaesthesia. A review of 1281 cases. J Vet
Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med 2007; 54(9): 470–477.
66 Galatos AD, Raptopoulos D. Gastro-oesophageal reflux during anaesthesia in the
dog: the effect of age, positioning and type of surgical procedure. Vet Rec 1995;
137(20): 513–516.
67 Galatos AD, Raptopoulos D. Gastro-oesophageal reflux during anaesthesia
in the dog: the effect of preoperative fasting and premedication. Vet Rec
1995; 137(19): 479–483.
68 Lamata C, Loughton V, Jones M, et al. The risk of passive regurgitation during gen-
eral anaesthesia in a population of referred dogs in the UK. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012;
39(3): 266–274.
69 Wilson DV, Evans AT, Miller R. Effects of preanesthetic administration of mor-
phine on gastroesophageal reflux and regurgitation during anesthesia in dogs. Am J
Vet Res 2005; 66(3): 386–390.
70 Moyer AL, McKee TS, Bergman PJ, et al. Low incidence of postoperative nausea,
vomiting, regurgitation, and aspiration pneumonia in geriatric dogs receiving
maropitant, famotidine, and fentanyl as part of an anesthesia protocol. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2021; 260(S1): S46–S51.
71 Wilson DV, Boruta DT, Evans AT. Influence of halothane, isoflurane, and sevoflu-
rane on gastroesophageal reflux during anesthesia in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2006;
67(11): 1821–1825.
72 Torrente C, Vigueras I, Manzanilla EG, et al. Prevalence of and risk factors for intra-
operative gastroesophageal reflux and postanesthetic vomiting and diarrhea in
dogs undergoing general anesthesia. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2017;
27(4): 397–408.
73 Redondo JI, Suesta P, Gil L, et al. Retrospective study of the prevalence of postan-
aesthetic hypothermia in cats. Vet Rec 2012; 170(8): 206.
74 Rodriguez-Diaz JM, Hayes GM, Boesch J, et al. Decreased incidence of periop-
erative inadvertent hypothermia and faster anesthesia recovery with increased
environmental temperature: a nonrandomized controlled study. Vet Surg 2020;
49(2): 256–264.
75 Jurk IR, Thibodeau MS, Whitney K, et al. Acute vision loss after general anesthesia
in a cat. Vet Ophthalmol 2001; 4(2): 155–158.
76 Stiles J, Weil AB, Packer RA, et al. Post- anesthetic cortical blindness in cats: twenty
cases. Vet J 2012; 193(2): 367–373.
77 Wagner AE. Complications in equine anesthesia. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract
2008; 24(3): 735–752.
78 Taylor PM, Clarke KW. Handbook of Equine Anaesthesia. Edinburgh, UK:
WB Saunders Company Ltd, 1999.
79 Bidwell LA, Bramlage LR, Rood WA. Equine perioperative fatalities associated with
general anaesthesia at a private practice-a retrospective case series. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2007; 34(1): 23–30.
80 Senior JM, Pinchbeck GL, Allister R, et al. Post anaesthetic colic in horses: a
preventable complication? Equine Vet J 2006; 38(5): 479–484.
81 Nelson BB, Lordan EE, Hassel DM. Risk factors associated with gastrointestinal
dysfunction in horses undergoing elective procedures under general anaesthesia.
Equine Vet J Suppl 2013; 45: 8–14.
82 Jago RC, Corletto F, Wright IM. Peri-anaesthetic complications in an equine referral
hospital: risk factors for post anaesthetic colic. Equine Vet J 2015; 47(6): 635–640.
83 Bailey PA, Hague BA, Davis M, et al. Incidence of post-anesthetic colic in non-fasted
adult equine patients. Can Vet J 2016; 57(12): 1263–1266.
84 Jones RS. Comparative mortality in anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth 2001; 87(6): 813–815.
85 Albrecht DT, Blakely CL. Anesthetic mortality: a five-year survey of the records of
the Angell Memorial Animal Hospital. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1951; 119(897): 429–433.
86 Lumb WV, Jones EW. Veterinary Anesthesia. Philadelphia, PA: Lea and Febiger, 1973.
87 Lumb WV, Jones EW. Veterinary Anesthesia, 2nd edn. Philadelphia, PA: Lea and
Febiger, 1984.
88 Bille C, Auvigne V, Bomassi E, et al. An evidence-based medicine approach to small
animal anaesthetic mortality in a referral practice: the influence of initiating three
recommendations on subsequent anaesthetic deaths. Vet Anaesth Analg 2014;
41(3): 249–258.
89 Itami T, Aida H, Asakawa M, et al. Association between preoperative characteristics
and risk of anaesthesia-related death in dogs in small-animal referral hospitals in
Japan. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(3): 461–472.
90 Dodman NH. Feline anaesthesia survey. J Small Anim Pract 1977; 18(10): 653–658.
91 Dodman NH, Lamb LA. Survey of small animal anesthetic practice in Vermont.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1992; 28: 439–444.
92 Rintasalo J, Vainio O. A survey on anaesthetic practice in Finnish veterinary clinics.
Suomen Elainlaakarilehti 1995; 101(9): 541–544.
93 Levy JK, Bard KM, Tucker SJ, et al. Perioperative mortality in cats and dogs under-
going spay or castration at a high-volume clinic. Vet J 2017; 224:11–15.
94 Lee HW, Machin H, Adami C. Peri-anaesthetic mortality and nonfatal gastrointes-
tinal complications in pet rabbits: a retrospective study on 210 cases. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2018; 45(4): 520–528.
95 Dobbs P, Moittié S, Liptovszky M. Avian anaesthesia related mortality and the asso-
ciated risk factors in a UK zoological collection. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(6):
922–929.
96 Hall LW, Taylor PM. Anaesthesia of the Cat, 1st edn. London, UK: Bailliere
Tindall, 1994.

-- 38 of 1450 --

Chapter 2: Anesthetic Risk and Informed Consent 	23
97 Meyer RE. Geriatric patients. In: Seymour C, Gleed RD, eds. Manual of Small Animal
Anaesthesia and Analgesia, 2nd edn. Cheltenham, UK: BSAVA, 1999; 253–256.
98 Waterman AE. Maintenance of body temperature during anaesthesia. J Vet
Anaesth 1981; 9: 73–85.
99 Dhupa N. Hypothermia in dogs and cats. Compend Contin Educ Vet 1995;
17(1): 61–68.
100 Campling EA, Devlin HB, Lunn JN. The Report of the National Confidential
Enquiry into Perioperative Deaths 1989. London, UK: Nuffield Provincial Hospitals
Trust, The King’s Fund, 1990.
101 Gruenheid M, Aarnes TK, McLoughlin MA, et al. Risk of anesthesia-related com-
plications in brachycephalic dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2018; 253(3): 301–306.
102 Oda A, Wang WH, Hampton AK, et al. Perianesthetic mortality in English
Bulldogs: a retrospective analysis in 2010–2017. BMC Vet Res 2022; 18(1): 198.
103 Smith MD, Barletta M, Young CN, et al. Retrospective study of intra-anesthetic pre-
dictors of prolonged hospitalization, increased cost of care and mortality for canine
patients at a veterinary teaching hospital. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(6): 1321–1331.
104 Webb RK, Van der Walt JH, Runciman WB, et al. The Australian Incident
Monitoring Study. Which monitor? An analysis of 2000 incident reports. Anaesth
Intensive Care 1993; 21(5): 529–542.
105 Tinker JH, Dull DL, Caplan RA, et al. Role of monitoring devices in prevention of
anesthetic mishaps: a closed claims analysis. Anesthesiology 1989; 71(4): 541–546.
106 Eichhorn JH, Cooper JB, Cullen DJ, et al. Standards for patient monitoring during
anesthesia at Harvard Medical School. J Am Med Assoc 1986; 256(8):1017–1020.
107 Muir WW, Werner LL, Hamlin RL. Effects of xylazine and acetylpromazine upon
induced ventricular fibrillation in dogs anesthetised with thiamylal and halo-
thane. Am J Vet Res 1975; 36(9): 1299–1303.
108 Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, Benson GJ, et al. Alterations in the Arrhythmogenic
Dose of Epinephrine (ADE) following xylazine administration to halothane-
anesthetised dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1986; 9(2): 198–203.
109 Pettifer GR, Dyson DH, McDonnell WN. An evaluation of the influence of
medetomidine hydrochloride and atipamizole hydrochloride on the arrhythmo-
genic dose of epinephrine in dogs during halothane anaesthesia. Can J Vet Res
1996; 60(1): 1–6.
110 Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, Benson GJ. Alterations in epinephrine-induced
arrhythmias after xylazine and subsequent yohimbine administration in
isoflurane-anesthetised dogs. Am J Vet Res 1988; 49(7): 1072–1075.
111 Hellebrekers LJ. Comparison of isoflurane and halothane as inhalation anaesthet-
ics in the dog. Vet Q 1986; 8(3): 183–188.
112 Lemke KA, Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, et al. Alterations in the arrhythmogenic
dose of epinephrine following xylazine or medetomidine administration to
isoflurane-anesthetised dogs. Am J Vet Res 1993; 54(12): 2139–2145.
113 Hikasa Y, Okabe C, Takase K, et al. Ventricular arrhythmogenic dose of
adrenaline during sevoflurane, isoflurane and halothane anaesthesia either with
or without ketamine or thiopentone in cats. Res Vet Sci 1996; 60(2): 134–137.
114 Hikasa Y, Ohe N, Takase K, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of sevoflurane in cats:
comparison with isoflurane, halothane and enflurane. Res Vet Sci 1997; 63(3):
205–210.
115 Steffey EP, Howland MA. Isoflurane potency in the dog and cat. Am J Vet Res 1977;
38(11): 1833–1836.
116 Steffey EP, Gillespie JR, Berry JD, et al. Circulatory effects of halothane and
halothane-nitrous oxide anesthesia in the dog: spontaneous ventilation.
Am J Vet Res 1975; 36(2): 197–200.
117 Joas TA, Stevens WC. Comparison of the arrhythmic dose of epinephrine during
forane, halothane and fluroxene anesthesia in dogs. Anesthesiology 1971; 35(1):
48–53.
118 Hodgson DS, Dunlop CI, Chapman PL, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of
anesthesia induced and maintained with isoflurane in cats. Am J Vet Res
1998; 59(2): 182–185.
119 Grandy JL, Hodgson DS, Dunlop CI, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of halothane
anesthesia in cats. Am J Vet Res 1989; 50(10): 1729–1732.
120 Mitchell B. Equine anaesthesia: an assessment of techniques used in clinical
practice. Equine Vet J 1969; 1(6): 261–275.
121 Tevik A. The role of anesthesia in surgical mortality. Nordisk Vetinarmedecin 1983;
35(4): 175–179.
122 Trim CM, Adams JG, Cowgill LM, et al. A retrospective survey of anaesthesia in
horses with colic. Equine Vet J Suppl 1989; 7: 84–90.
123 Young SS, Taylor PM. Factors leading to serious anaesthetic-related problems in
equine anaesthesia. J Vet Anaesth 1990; 17: 59.
124 Young SS, Taylor PM. Factors influencing the outcome of equine anaesthesia:
a review of 1,314 cases. Equine Vet J 1993; 25(2): 147–151.
125 Mee AM, Cripps PJ, Jones RS. A retrospective study of mortality associated
with general anaesthesia in horses: elective procedures. Vet Rec 1998; 142(11):
275–276.
126 Mee AM, Cripps PJ, Jones RS. A retrospective study of mortality associated with
general anaesthesia in horses: emergency procedures. Vet Rec 1998; 142(12):
307–309.
127 Gozalo- Marcilla M, Bettschart-Wolfensberger R, Johnston M, et al. data collec-
tion for the fourth multicentre Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Equine
Fatalities (CEPEF4) Study: new technology and preliminary results. Animals
(Basel) 2021; 11(9): 2549.
128 Moore SA, O’Kell A, Borghese H, et al. A CTSA One Health Alliance guidance on
institutional review of veterinary clinical studies. BMC Vet Res 2021; 17(1): 83.

-- 39 of 1450 --

Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of Lumb and Jones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
24
Introduction
Not all harm to patients comes from illness and injury, some comes
through healthcare itself. The World Health Organization (WHO)
defines patient safety as “the reduction of risk of unnecessary harm
associated with healthcare to an acceptable minimum” [1]. In this
definition, “harm” encompasses a range of undesirable outcomes
for the patient including disease, injury, pain, suffering, disability,
and death [2]. “Unnecessary” implies that this harm was preventa-
ble, suggesting that it was iatrogenic in origin, caused by error, acci-
dent, or neglect rather than being “necessary” to treat the disease
(e.g., trauma caused by surgery). Patient safety focuses on the pre-
vention of error and accidental injury in healthcare.
Anesthesiologists have always been leaders in patient safety, per-
haps because anesthesia itself has little to no therapeutic value and
due to the immediacy of consequences of an error in anesthetic
care [3]. These factors tend to make anesthetists risk averse and
safety conscious. This chapter introduces patient safety science with
special emphasis on safety during the perianesthetic period.
Nomenclature and terminology
The terminology around patient safety can be imprecise, compro-
mising understanding of the subject and the literature [1]. Although
there is no universally recognized nomenclature for safety in veteri-
nary medicine, the WHO’s World Alliance for Patient Safety devel-
oped a set of key terms which we have adapted and expanded for
veterinary purposes and will use throughout this chapter for clarity
and consistency (Box 3.1).
The risk of harm from healthcare
The most cited estimate of deaths from human healthcare-
associated harm is the Institute of Medicine 2000 report “To Err is
Human: Building a Safer Healthcare System” that describes an
incidence of 44,000–98,000 deaths annually in the United States
(US) [4]. This is now considered a gross underestimation with more
recent studies estimating that between 200,000 and 400,000 patients
a year die from preventable healthcare-associated harm in the US
3 Introduction to Patient Safety
Matt McMillan1 and Daniel S.J. Pang2
1 The Ralph Veterinary Referral Centre, Marlow, Buckinghamshire, UK
2 Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada and
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Université de Montréal, Saint-Hyacinthe, Québec, Canada
Chapter contents
Introduction, 24
Nomenclature and terminology, 24
The risk of harm from healthcare, 24
Why things go wrong: Human error and the system, 25
The “process” of anesthesia, 26
Reason’s Swiss cheese model, 27
Human factors, 27
Non-technical skills, 27
Organizational culture, 27
Blame and no-blame cultures, 28
Just culture, 28
Learning culture, 28
Safety I versus Safety II, 28
Assessing organizational safety culture, 28
Data gathering techniques, 28
Incident reporting systems, 29
Interviews, 29
Morbidity and mortality conferences, 29
Analysis techniques, 30
Root cause analysis, 30
Human Factors analysis techniques, 30
Patient safety evidence in anesthesia, 30
Patient safety interventions, 33
Checklists, 33
Other cognitive aids, 34
Communication tools: briefings, debriefings, and patient hand-offs, 35
Simulation- based training, 36
Engineering solutions, 36
Methods for reducing medication error, 36
Assessment of patient safety interventions, 37
Useful resources, 37
References, 37

-- 40 of 1450 --

Chapter 3: Introduction to Patient Safety 	25
alone [5,6]. This makes healthcare the third leading cause of death
in the US, behind heart disease and cancer [5]. The risk of serious
non-fatal healthcare-associated harm has been estimated to be
between 10- and 20-fold greater [6].
In veterinary medicine, information on the incidence of veteri-
nary healthcare-associated harm is limited. There are some clues in
studies investigating perianesthetic fatality. In 1990, Clarke and
Hall suggested that 70% of anesthetic deaths had an element of
error and that many animals died while not under “close supervi-
sion” [7]. In a large prospective study of small animal anesthetics in
2008, Brodbelt et al. reported that a significant proportion of veteri-
nary patients did not receive basic monitoring, and the risk of death
was four to five times greater when an animal’s pulses were not
monitored [8]. Many of the reported deaths were in healthy ani-
mals, suggesting that they could have been preventable through the
implementation of simple monitoring techniques.
Looking beyond fatality, safety incidents in veterinary anesthesia
occur regularly; studies suggest a rate of between 3.7% and 5.1% in
4140 and 3379 anesthetics, respectively [9,10]. Common safety inci-
dents reported by Hofmeister et al. included medication error (wrong
drug, wrong dose, wrong route, and inaccurate labeling), adjustable
pressure-limiting (APL) (i.e., pop-off) valves left closed, airway
complications (including esophageal intubation), and intravenous
catheter failures [9]. One case of a wrong site locoregional anesthetic
technique and another of wrong site arterial catheter placement were
also reported. McMillan et al. cited medication error, equipment fail-
ure, oxygen pipeline failure, and APL valve mismanagement as the
most commonly reported safety incidents [10]. The minority of these
incidents (6.3%) were near misses, 20.7% were no harm incidents,
and the remainder were harmful incidents (73.0%).
In a wider view of veterinary healthcare, Wallis et al. analyzed
safety incidents reported over a 3-year period in three veterinary
hospitals [11]. Safety incidents occurred in 0.4–0.8% of hospital vis-
its with approximately 54% being medication errors. Medication
errors involved “wrong dose” (57.8%), “wrong drug” (18%), “wrong
time” (12.2%), “wrong route” (5.8%), and “wrong patient” (3.8%),
although 	the 	exact 	proportions 	varied 	between 	hospitals.
Communication errors made up 30% of incidents and involved a
mixture of source (missing information/incomplete information),
transmission (illegible handwriting, inappropriate manner for trans-
mitting information), and receiver (information forgotten or incor-
rectly interpreted). Other insights can be identified from examining
professional litigation cases and closed claims analysis. Oxtoby et al.
retrospectively reviewed records of claims made to a veterinary
indemnity insurer in the United Kingdom [12]. Identifiable errors
were present in 45% of records with the leading causes being cogni-
tive limitation (55%), lack of technical skill or knowledge (15%), and
communication (5%). Each of these studies is likely to only reflect a
small fraction of the actual incidence of veterinary patient safety
incidents and healthcare-associated harm [13].
Why things go wrong: Human error
and the system
Discussion of patient safety must include the thorny issues of human
error and human performance. Human error can be identified in
incident investigations in all walks of life, including healthcare. It
would be simple to assume that people are the problem that needs to
be fixed. However, human error cannot be eliminated [4].
Modern views of safety consider that human error is a conse-
quence of the conditions in which an accident occurred, not a cause
of the incident. It is inevitable that accident investigations will find
fault with human performance since humans are at the sharp end of
processes in most industries, that is, people perform or control the
task(s), make the decisions, and form the last line of defense.
However, human performance is influenced by working conditions
and is, therefore, systematically linked to the features of the tasks,
tools, and environment of their work. Describing human error
Box 3.1 Common definitions based upon the list of preferred terms and definitions for key concepts adapted from the WHO’s International Classification for
Patient Safety.
Patient safety: the reduction of risk of unnecessary harm associated with
healthcare to an acceptable minimum
Healthcare-associated harm: harm arising from or associated with plans or
actions taken during the provision of healthcare rather than an underlying
disease or injury
Patient safety incident: an event, hazard, or circumstance that could have
resulted or did result in unnecessary harm to a patient
Event: something that happens to or involves a patient
Hazard: a circumstance, agent, or action with the potential to
cause harm
Circumstance: a situation or factor that may influence an event, agent, or
person
Near miss: an incident that did not reach the patient
No harm incident: an incident that reached the patient but did not result in
discernible harm
Harmful incident (accident; adverse event): an incident that resulted in
harm to a patient
Error: failure to carry out a planned action as intended or application of an
incorrect plan. Includes slips, lapses, and mistakes
Slip: a memory failure, includes omitting planned items, losing place in a
process, and forgetting intentions
Lapse: a failure of attention, includes omission, intrusion, reversal,
misordering, and mistiming e.g., forgetting to open an adjustable
pressure-limiting valve
Mistake: a rule- or knowledge-based error. Rule- based mistakes include the
misapplication of a good rule or the application of a bad rule. Knowledge-
based mistakes are many and varied
Violation: deliberate deviation from an operating procedure, standard, or
rule. These can be routine, exceptional, or sabotage
Contributing factor: a circumstance, action, or influence that is thought to
have played a part in the origin or development of an incident or to increase
the risk of an incident
Mitigating factor: an action or circumstance that prevents or moderates the
progression of an incident toward harming a patient
*System: a set of interdependent elements interacting to achieve a common
goal. In medicine, it relates to a healthcare organization’s operational
methods, processes, or infrastructure
Source: Adapted from Runciman et al. [1].
*Adapted from other sources.

-- 41 of 1450 --

26 	Section 1: General Topics
helps us to understand how and why it occurs. The psychologist
James Reason developed a taxonomy that remains the foundation
for describing types of human error today (Fig. 3.1) [14].
The “process” of anesthesia
Understanding human error requires us to learn about system vul-
nerabilities, resource constraints, pressures, and contradictions and
understand how processes fail or succeed. There are several ele-
ments that make healthcare, in particular, anesthesia, susceptible to,
and the people working within these areas prone to, error. Anesthesia
requires the administration of rapidly acting drugs with significant
physiological effects, the monitoring of patients in a vulnerable
physiological state using advanced electronics, and the performance
of highly technical procedures in a dynamic, unpredictable environ-
ment characterized by intense time pressure and high stakes. This
situation may be further compounded by a concurrent teaching
requirement. Gaba [15] and Reason [16] have discussed these fac-
tors at length, and their findings are summarized in Box 3.2.
Models for the development of safety incidents in high-risk,
complex industrial activities such as nuclear power have been
adapted to model anesthetic processes. “Normal Accident Theory,”
as described by Perrow in 1984, outlines two system attributes that
commonly contribute to accidents: (1) the complexity of interac-
tions between system components and (2) the tightness of coupling
between these components [17].
A task or process is said to have complex interactions if there are
many alternative and interrelated subtasks at any point in its com-
pletion. The more complex a system’s interactions, the more likely it
is that something will go wrong as the consequence of interactions
cannot always be predicted. Gaba et al. subsequently expanded on
Perrow’s theory to outline how three different types of complexity
(intrinsic, uncertainty, and proliferation) contribute to incidents in
anesthesia [18].
Intrinsic complexity occurs due to the interconnected action of a
multitude of individual agents within a system or process. The body
can be considered an intrinsically complex system; huge numbers
of cells and organs interact in a multitude of intricate ways, using a
vast array of signals. In such a system, altering one component can
have a knock-on effect on other components, with dynamic and
unpredictable consequences.
Uncertainty complexity occurs when cause and effect relation-
ships are not always clear and are difficult to predict. Anesthesia is
easily achieved by drug administration; however, the pharmaco-
logical, physiological, and pathophysiological interactions that
occur are often poorly understood. In addition, devices used for
measurement and monitoring the effect of these interactions can be
imprecise and inaccurate, often have low signal-to-noise ratios, and
are prone to error. Prediction of drug effects is based upon our
knowledge of what a drug does in the general population, but the
effect on a given individual cannot be predicted with certainty.
Nor are we able to measure all affected parameters or predict all
potential consequences; we only ever have a partial picture of what
is happening.
Unsafe
acts
Unintended
Intended
Slip
Lapse
Mistake
Violation
Basic error types
Attentional
failures
Memory
failures
Rule-based
Knowledge-based
Routine
Exceptional
Sabotage
Figure 3.1 Reason’s taxonomy of human error (1991). Source: Adapted from Reason [14]. See Box 3.1 for current definitions.
Box 3.2 The characteristics of work for the anesthesiologist
• Uncertain, dynamic environments
• Multiple sources of concurrent information (i.e., many data streams)
• Shifting, ill-defined, or competing goals
• The need to maintain an up to date “mental model” of an often rapidly
changing situation
• Reliance upon indirect or inferred indications
• Ill-structured problems
• Actions having immediate and multiple consequences
• Moments of intense time stress interleaved with long periods of
routine activity
• Sophisticated technologies with many redundancies
• Complex and sometimes confusing human–machine interfaces
• High stakes (e.g., life and death)
• Multiple players with differing priorities (e.g., surgeon, internist, and
anesthetist)
• A working environment highly influenced by group norms (including
expected behaviors and hierarchies) and organizational culture
Source: Adapted from Gaba [15]; Reason [16].

-- 42 of 1450 --

Chapter 3: Introduction to Patient Safety 	27
Finally, if a process involves many components and tasks, this can
cause proliferation complexity. Although a process and individual
steps within it may be simple, the components and tasks may be
interconnected in a complex fashion. For example, they may have to
be performed in a precise order or at specific times for the process
to succeed. Such proliferation is what can lead to lapses such as fail-
ing to open an APL valve in a breathing system following a machine
leak check. The task is simple, but, because it is one task of many
which need to be performed before anesthesia, it is easily forgotten.
As more and more components are added to a system, the chance of
one of them being missed, or failing, increases. Indeed, anesthetists
typically add proliferation complexity to a case to help combat
uncertainty; using multiple electronic monitoring devices, each of
which has a risk of error, imprecision, and failure [18].
Coupling refers to the way components in a system are linked. In
tightly coupled systems, the change in state or function of one compo-
nent directly affects other components within a short period of time.
Tightly coupled systems result in more accidents because even minor
errors can become problematic before they can be corrected. In
loosely coupled systems, there is redundancy or temporal lag built in
the system allowing components to function normally despite changes
in other components. The interaction of numerous homeostatic
mechanisms means that physiology is inherently loosely coupled.
Body systems have intrinsic buffers, which allow normal functioning
in a variety of conditions; for example, renal blood flow and glomeru-
lar filtration rate are kept stable through a range of perfusion pres-
sures. However, the redundancy and buffer mechanisms responsible
for this loose coupling are hindered by the anesthetic process making
components more tightly coupled. This has the effect of transferring
responsibility for monitoring and maintaining an adequate state of
health to the anesthetist, aided by technology and pharmaceuticals.
Reason’s Swiss cheese model
The psychologist James Reason considers complex systems to con-
tain fundamental elements that must work together harmoniously if
efficient and safe operations are to occur [14]. This requires certain
preconditions to be met, such as well-maintained and functional
equipment, and individuals with appropriate training, skills, and
experience. Hazards are prevented from causing harm by a series of
barriers, safeguards, and defenses. Some rely on people, while others
are engineered into the system (e.g., alarms). In an ideal world, each
layer would be intact; however, in reality, each has unintended weak-
nesses. These failings degrade the integrity of the system leading to
vulnerabilities within different layers like holes in a slice of Swiss
cheese. Unlike in Swiss cheese, these holes are continually opening,
shutting, and shifting their location as conditions in the system
change. The presence of holes in any single “slice” does not normally
cause an incident or bad outcome. However, when the holes within
these layers momentarily align, they allow an error to proceed
through the layers of a system to reach the patient (Fig. 3.2).
Human factors
Human Factors (HF), sometimes referred to as “ergonomics,” is a
scientific discipline concerned with understanding interactions
between people and the other elements of a system. Applying HF
approaches in healthcare can enhance the way it is delivered and
received. HF views people as a vital component of any system and
that their abilities and limitations must be considered when
attempting to improve system performance. The basic principle of
HF is to analyze tasks, systems, or processes to understand the limi-
tations put upon the humans within them. In essence, this can be
achieved through asking: Can this team/person reliably and safely
perform these tasks, with this training and information, using this
equipment, in this environment, with these constraints and pres-
sures, to the required standard? Through understanding human
limitations and how humans process information, workplaces,
tasks, and equipment can be designed and engineered to allow for
variability in human performance, making it easier for frontline
workers to do their job safely and effectively.
Non-technical skills
One area that the HF approach has highlighted is the importance of
non-technical skills. These are skills individuals use to perform
their work that lie outside of the traditional medical competencies
of knowledge and technical skills. Non-technical skills are cogni-
tive, social, and personal management skills necessary for an indi-
vidual to perform a role, task, or job safely and effectively [20]. They
include situation awareness, decision-making, task management,
teamwork, leadership, communication, and the management of
stress and fatigue.
Until recently, little attention has been given to these competen-
cies in medical professions. One of the early proponents of non-
technical skills in anesthesiology were Howard et al., who developed
an “Anesthesia Crisis Resource Management (ACRM)” training
course with the aim of introducing anesthesiologists to principles of
dynamic decision-making, human performance, and the develop-
ment of countermeasures aimed at combating and reducing
error [21]. More recently, the “Anaesthetists’ Non-Technical Skills
(ANTS)” behavioral marker system was developed following col-
laboration between anesthesiologists and psychologists [20]. Task
analysis was used to define the critical non-technical skills required
for a safely functioning anesthetist, and an assessment scale was
developed for ANTS training and observations in operating rooms
or simulation settings (Table 3.1). Such training and observation
rarely occur in the veterinary sector, but it is likely that non-
technical skills are similarly important for veterinary anesthesia.
Organizational culture
Organizational culture is the collective beliefs, perceptions, and val-
ues shared between individuals in a workplace and how these are
manifested in their work. Organizational culture sets the tone of the
workplace by affecting the conditions, pressures, constraints, and
expectations put upon individuals and the tasks they perform.
Organizational
influences	Unsafe
supervision
Preconditions
for unsafe acts
Unsafe acts
Incident
Figure 3.2 Reason’s Swiss cheese model of incident causation. Additional
terms in this figure are described in the Human Factors analysis section
(Fig. 3.4 and Table 3.6). Source: Adapted from Pang [19].

-- 43 of 1450 --

28 	Section 1: General Topics
Informally, culture represents “how things are done around here.”
Safety culture is those aspects of organizational culture that affect
increasing or decreasing risk. Safety culture can be thought of as a
“leading indicator” in the assessment of patient safety, as opposed to
a “lagging indicator” (e.g., morbidity and mortality). Several organ-
izational culture types are widely discussed in the literature and
warrant examination.
Blame and no-blame cultures
A blame culture is one where incidents are blamed on individuals
making errors despite those individuals having little or no control
over the conditions in which the error occurred [22]. It leads to
norms and attitudes characterized by an unwillingness to take risks
or accept responsibility for mistakes because of a fear of criticism or
repercussions. Blame culture cultivates distrust and fear, with peo-
ple tending to blame each other to avoid being blamed themselves.
This can result in few new ideas and a lack of personal initiative
because people do not want to risk being wrong. Safety incidents
tend to stay unreported, and investigations tend to be brief, finding
culpability in frontline workers. Such cultures tend to evolve in
hierarchical, rule-, and compliance- based systems but where the
work is highly variable, such as healthcare.
A no-blame culture is in essence the opposite: a culture in which
individuals are not held accountable for their actions. This should
encourage people to report errors and provide an environment
where innovation is encouraged [23]. However, a no-blame culture
is neither feasible nor desirable. Most people desire some level of
accountability when a safety incident occurs, and individuals
should take ownership of their decisions and actions and be
accountable for being part of any solution [23].
Just culture
A just culture is one in which individuals are not punished for
human errors if their actions, decisions, or omissions were appro-
priate to their experience and training, but where negligence, will-
ful violations, and destructive acts are not tolerated [24]. Unlike a
no-blame culture, there is accountability; individuals are accounta-
ble for reporting incidents and organizations are accountable for
implementing appropriate corrective actions to improve the system
and reduce the risk of recurrence of incidents [23].
If staff members perceive that their reports are treated fairly
and lead to positive change, and that people who willfully violate
safety rules and take unnecessary risks are held accountable,
the willingness to report will increase. This encourages reporting
and investigation of incidents and improves safety.
Learning culture
Learning culture is concerned with the sustainability of learning
from failure through the reporting and analysis of errors and inci-
dents and the implementation of systems level interventions. It
requires an atmosphere of psychological safety, that is, a supportive
work environment in which team members believe that they can
question existing practices, express their concerns, or dissent, and
admit mistakes without suffering ridicule or punishment [25]. It
requires open communication between all levels of staff within an
organization, a flattening of hierarchy, and transparency in incident
management.
Senge [26] has described five disciplines which together make a
learning culture: (1) self-mastery, (2) shared mental models, (3)
shared vision, (4) team learning, and (5) systems thinking [27]. Self-
mastery involves realistic thinking about one’s abilities. Shared men-
tal models require team members to have a common understanding
of the task being performed and of the involved teamwork, whereas a
shared vision means all team members are working toward the same
goal. Team learning represents a situation where all team members
are continuously learning from each other and their successes and
failures. Systems thinking, on the other hand, is an attempt to
understand the way the system works and how this influences the
behavior and performance of individuals working within it.
Safety I versus Safety II
Modern views of safety consider that people bring the innovation,
creativity, flexibility, and resilience required for processes to suc-
ceed in systems with huge variation [28]. People can adjust what
they do to match the conditions in which they work [28]. It can be
argued that everyday performance variability provides the adapta-
tions that are needed to respond to varying conditions and is the
reason why systems are generally successful. Humans can conse-
quently be seen as a resource necessary for system flexibility and
resilience rather than a cause of the problem. Safety I can be viewed
as the approach to safety, which concentrates on avoiding things
going wrong. Safety II focuses on how things go right under varying
conditions, exploring all possible outcomes to understand how
flexibility in a system allows success. This concept is still in its
infancy within medicine; however, it may give a better overall view
of performance within the healthcare system [29].
Assessing organizational safety culture
Assessing safety culture can reveal potential issues in communication,
teamwork, resources, and management strategies, delineating areas for
targeted improvement efforts. Several validated measurement scales
have been developed to assess safety culture in human healthcare
organizations. One of these, the “Safety Attitudes Questionnaire” [30],
has been modified for use in veterinary medicine. The resultant
“Nottingham Veterinary Safety Culture Survey” was developed for
use in veterinary practices within the United Kingdom and was
subsequently further adapted for use in the US [31,32].
Data gathering techniques
Improving safety relies on the accurate identification of risks to
safety. Data can be gathered using numerous techniques with the
most common being incident reporting systems, interviews, and
Table 3.1 Anesthetist non-technical skills.
Category 	Elements
Task management 	Planning and preparing
Prioritizing
Providing and maintaining standards
Identifying and utilizing resources
Team working 	Coordinating tasks with team members
Exchanging information
Using authority and assertiveness
Assessing capabilities
Supporting others
Situation awareness 	Gathering information
Recognizing and understanding
Anticipating
Decision-making 	Identifying options
Balancing risks and selecting options
Re-evaluating
Source: Adapted from Flin et al. [20].

-- 44 of 1450 --

Chapter 3: Introduction to Patient Safety 	29
morbidity and mortality conferences (M&MCs). To generate the
best possible account of the incident, it is common to use more than
one approach.
Incident reporting systems
One of the main sources of information about patient safety has come
from the systematic collection and analysis of incident reports.
Moreover, incident reporting is central to the development of a
learning culture, wherein errors are discussed, and systems analysis is
applied to improve outcomes. There is also considerable value in
reporting near misses and no harm incidents since they are harbingers
of potential patient harm. To capture a range of different perspectives
and build a more complete picture of an incident, information should
be collected from all involved. Often, it is more junior team members
(e.g., interns), animal health technicians, and support staff who are
most exposed to weaknesses and flaws within a system.
Early reporting is important. As time passes after an incident,
memories fade, bias creeps in, and an incident may never be reported
as caregivers move on to other tasks. In the view of the authors,
reporting should be completed within 12–48 h of an incident occur-
ring, with harmful incidents reported toward the shorter end of this
range (by the end of the workday is a good rule of thumb).
Information collected on incidents should focus on creating an
account of events, describing the “5 Ws”: “Who” (was involved),
“What” (happened), “When” (the incident happened), “Where” (it
happened), and “Why” (and how it happened).
Existing reporting systems in human medicine are effectively
voluntary, with perhaps the exception of harmful incidents when
there is a stronger expectation of reporting. While voluntary report-
ing systems have their drawbacks, they can be highly effective when
properly designed and administered. Importantly, the success of
any system is predicated upon its acceptance and use by caregivers.
Several concepts to voluntary reporting system design facilitate
their adoption and usefulness for incident analysis. These are confi-
dentiality, ease of use, accessibility, independent analysis, and
release of findings [33,34].
Confidentiality means individuals should be able to report inci-
dents without the risk of personal or professional consequences [35].
Confidentiality should not be confused with anonymity. While
anonymity confers further protection to those reporting, it removes
the ability to follow up a report with the individual involved. To
fully understand a reported incident, particularly when attempting
to collate multiple reports of the same incident or simply to clarify
circumstances, some degree of follow-up is often necessary. Also,
under the protection of anonymity, there may be the tendency to
use reporting systems as a means of personal attack or to vent frus-
trations with aspects of the system (e.g., supervisors and adminis-
tration) drawing focus away from a more complete report of the
incident.
Reporting systems must be easy to use, including clear language,
use of checkboxes for some data entry, automatic field population,
minimal mandatory fields, and a section for a narrative description
of events. The latter is important in gathering an account of the
incident [36]. The use of open questions encourages descriptions
from the reporter’s perspective.
Reporting systems must be easily accessible to all healthcare
workers. Online reporting systems should be easy to find and pref-
erably accessed through a “single click,” from computers in and out
of the hospital network. There remains an argument for offering a
paper-based system in combination with a secure drop-off box for
staff members that do not have private access to computers.
To reduce bias, reports should be analyzed by independent inves-
tigators not involved in the incident. Releasing the findings of
investigations, as well as a general report of types and outcomes of
incidents reported, “closes the loop,” building faith in the system.
This demonstrates that reports are taken seriously and acted upon
and allows caregivers to be involved in any changes introduced by
providing a period for comment. When an incident reveals signifi-
cant system weaknesses that are likely to cause further incidents, it
is critical that this information can be shared quickly and widely
using multiple means (e.g., team meetings, email alerts, website
notifications, and notice boards).
Voluntary reporting systems are limited by the quality of material
collected and the extent to which they are representative of all inci-
dents. Material collected is largely determined by the design of the
reporting system. It is widely recognized that voluntary reports
underestimate the true incidence of safety incidents [13]. However,
if users understand the role and importance of submitting reports,
the types of incidents to report, in combination with a reporting
system that is easy to access and use, and can do so without fear of
repercussion, uptake is likely to be improved. Education can be pro-
vided (e.g., as part of orientation for new employees) and reinforced
within the system (e.g., regularly releasing findings emphasizes the
value of reporting). There are a huge number of incident reporting
systems in medicine with one of the first being the “Australian
Incident Monitoring System (AIMS)” [36]. There are far fewer inci-
dent reporting systems in veterinary medicine, most being devel-
oped using digital forms and cloud-based software [11,37].
Interviews
A senior member of the clinical team who was not involved with the
incident may interview individuals involved in an incident. The pri-
mary advantage to one-on- one interviews is the opportunity to
elicit responses without the potential for pressure from discussing
an incident in a group environment. However, this advantage is
countered by several important disadvantages including the inher-
ent power dynamic of the interview process and the potential to
create significant bias through the format and scope of the ques-
tioning. The use of structured or semi-structured interview tech-
niques, such as critical incident technique, and the use of open,
non-accusatory language can help reduce this bias.
Morbidity and mortality conferences
Morbidity and mortality conferences (M&MCs) can promote learn-
ing from incidents and drive improvements in patient safety [38].
However, despite being in existence for well over 50 years, it is
unclear to what extent they take place in veterinary medicine [39].
Conceptually, M&MCs can serve as a forum for collaborative review
and investigation of incidents without fear of negative personal or
professional consequences. When done well, M&MCs represent an
opportunity to improve patient safety and maximize learning from
an incident through open reflection and discussion [40–44].
In human medicine, M&MCs have successfully driven improved
outcomes in patient care and management, including improving
safety culture and care quality and reducing mortality and malprac-
tice claims [45]. For M&MCs to fulfill their potential, key consid-
erations are case selection, duration and frequency, roles of
moderator and presenter, presentation format, incident analysis
technique, and outcome and follow-up.
All cases of mortality resulting from error or potential error
should be reviewed through an M&MC. In larger clinics/hospitals,
where the number of cases presenting exceeds the capacity to

-- 45 of 1450 --

30 	Section 1: General Topics
review cases in a timely manner, it may be necessary to screen and
select cases for M&MCs. This can be based on the number of sys-
temic factors implicated, the number of future patients that may
benefit, and educational value. Screening can be performed as part
of the voluntary reporting system process.
Duration of M&MCs varies widely, from 20 to over 60 min, prob-
ably reflecting time available in many instances, as well as case com-
plexity [40–42]. Similarly, the frequency of M&MCs is variable
though once monthly is commonly reported in the literature [38].
There is a case to be made for having a regular schedule to empha-
size that M&MCs are a normal and accepted part of clinical govern-
ance, rather than special events reflecting personal failings. Cases
selected for M&MCs should be presented as soon as possible as a
timely acknowledgment of the incident and to maximize the likeli-
hood of collecting all pertinent information.
Moderators set the tone of M&MCs and must be familiar with
the M&MC format, have a good understanding of analysis tech-
niques, have sufficient experience and expertise to guide the pre-
senter and audience, and be respected by the attendees [40,46,47].
Cases should be presented by someone directly involved as they are
best placed to present the events and answer questions. The pre-
senter can be a senior or junior team member. It is helpful to have
senior members intermittently present to show their investment in
the process and to demonstrate to junior/new team members the
expected format and standard. Involvement of junior members as
presenters is invaluable as an educational tool for critical evaluation
of case management and in maintaining a just and learning culture.
Audiences for M&MCs should reflect the personnel of the clinic
(i.e., all members of staff should be invited). Attendance by senior
team members shows support for the process and helps create a
positive, productive discussion [39]. A multidisciplinary audience
can enrich the discussion by bringing different perspectives and
disseminate lessons learned more widely [39].
Standardized presentation formats help ensure that information
is presented in a systematic, organized way, minimizing the risk of
bias [39,41,42,48]. One such model is the “Situation, Background,
Assessment, Recommendation (SBAR)” format (Table 3.2), a struc-
tured method for efficiently transferring information [41,42]. This
method has been effectively used when information is being passed
between personnel who occupy different positions in a hierarchy
(e.g., senior clinician and intern) [49,50].
Analysis techniques
Analysis of patient safety incidents has three goals: to explain what
happened, identify the roles and contributions of associated fac-
tors, and identify means to prevent similar incidents. Historically,
the focus on investigating a safety incident begins and ends with
what happened, with limited consideration of why it happened.
This rarely brings effective change into the system and invariably
results in the person(s) closest to the event shouldering the
responsibility and blame. Modern investigation analysis tech-
niques have moved away from a person-based (“blame and shame”)
approach to a structured-system-based (Human Factors) approach.
While there are numerous analytical frameworks available, those
used in human healthcare are largely based on the work of the
psychologist, James Reason [14].
Root cause analysis
Root cause analysis (RCA) is a generic term used to describe a
range of techniques which aim to identify problems and then work
toward establishing the problem’s root cause(s). A common mis-
conception of RCA springs from the word “cause” appearing as
singular, leading to the belief that a problem results from a single
cause, whereas multiple causes are almost always involved, par-
ticularly in healthcare [51]. The simplest RCA method is the “five
whys” technique, which involves asking “why?” five times, with
each question following on from the previous answer to identify
root causes of a problem. However, this technique promotes linear
thinking, in that other contributing factors may be overlooked.
Consequently, such techniques have now been replaced with more
structured techniques, which ensure that the entire system is con-
sidered within the analysis.
Human Factors analysis techniques
Modern incident analysis techniques involve investigating the
role of the entire system in the evolution of an incident. The
“London Protocol” is a model of healthcare incident evolution
based upon Reason’s accident model and Human Factors
approaches (Fig. 3.3) [52,53]. Reason’s “unsafe acts” are termed
“care delivery problems” and are affected by contributory factors,
which can be classified into patient, task, individual team, work
environment, and organizational/cultural levels. The framework
provides a systematic and conceptually driven approach to accident
investigation and to risk assessment in healthcare.
Another system commonly used for incident analysis in health-
care is the “Human Factors Analysis and Classification System
(HFACS)” (Fig. 3.4). This system, based on Reason’s model and
developed for the investigation of aviation accidents [54], has been
adapted to the healthcare setting [51,55]. Used correctly, this
approach is believed to have the “potential to identify actionable
systemic causes of error, focus specific performance improvement
efforts, and ultimately improve patient safety” [51].
A fishbone diagram can be used as a visual representation of an
analysis and an accessible entry into a system-based approach for
incident investigation (Fig. 3.5) [34,38,56].
Patient safety evidence in anesthesia
Cooper et al.’s study of anesthetic “mishaps” was the first to really
examine the causes of anesthetic safety incidents beyond the patient
and inherent risk of anesthetic drugs [57]. Through structured
interviews, it was established that human error was involved in 82%
of the 359 investigated incidents, but many other associated factors
Table 3.2 Situation, Background, Assessment, Recommendations (SBAR) format
for morbidity and mortality conferences (M&MCs).
SBAR component 	Elements
Situation: brief statement of
problem
Diagnosis at admission, statement of procedure,
and patient safety incident
Background: clinical
information pertinent to
adverse event
History, indication for procedure, diagnostic studies,
procedural details timeline of care, description of
incident (recognition, management, outcome)
Assessment and analysis:
evaluation of adverse event
(what and why)
What: sequence of events
Why: analysis, using preferred methodology*
Review of the literature:
evidence-based practice
Relevant literature
Recommendations: prevention
of recurrence
Identify how event could have been prevented or
better managed
Identify learning outcomes and recommendations
Source: Adapted from Pang et al. [38].
* See text for different analysis methods.

-- 46 of 1450 --

Accident
Violations
Unsafe acts
Errors
Slips
Lapses
Mistakes
Organization
culture
management
Work
environment
Team
Individual
Task/technology
Patient
Contributing factors
Error and violation
producing
conditions
Latent error
Care delivery
problems
Active failures
Figure 3.3 Vincent’s model of accident causation in healthcare. Source: Adapted from Vincent et al. [52].
Resource
management
Inadequate
supervision
Organizational
climate
Organizational
process
Unsafe
supervision
Planned
inappropriate
operations
Failure to
correct known
problem
Supervisory
violations
Preconditions for
unsafe acts
Environmental
factors
Physical
environment
Technological
environment
Conditions of
operators
Personal
factors
Crew resource
management
Personal
readiness
Adverse
mental states
Adverse
physiological
states
Physical/
mental
limitations
Unsafe
acts
Errors
Skill-based
errors
Decision
errors
Personal
errors 	Routine
Violations
Exceptional
Organizational
influences
Figure 3.4 Human Factors Analysis and Classification System components. Source: Adapted from Pang [19].

-- 47 of 1450 --

32 	Section 1: General Topics
were also identified (Table 3.3). Interestingly, many of the incidents
were considered “representative of the kinds of error that residents
are considered prone to commit in the training process” and “that
most of the errors and associated outcomes could be averted by a
more structured approach to preparing residents for the environ-
ments into which they are often suddenly immersed.”
The first “Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Deaths”
reviewed just over half a million anesthetics and reported 4034
perioperative deaths within 30 days of surgery, 410 of which were
considered associated with anesthetic management [58]. The
factors identified by the investigators in these cases are shown in
Table 3.4. It is noteworthy that lack of knowledge (15.1%) was
identified less often than the failure to apply knowledge (75.1%),
and the organizational factor (24.9%), such as lack of appropriate
staffing levels, was the third most common factor identified.
Runciman et al. published analysis of the first 2000 incidents to
be reported through the “Australian Incident Monitoring System
(AIMS)” (Table 3.5) [59]. Factors associated with the wider system
were identified as contributing to 26% of incidents, and this
increased to 81% if human behavior was included in the system.
Interestingly, the system was considered a mitigating factor in 56%
of incidents, and systems-based corrective strategies were suggested
as solutions in 65%.
Neuhaus et al. applied the HFACS to 50 anesthetic incidents
reported to a single center’s incident reporting system. Investigations
revealed 81 unsafe acts, 113 preconditions for unsafe acts,
39 instances of unsafe leadership, and 22 organizational influ-
ences [54]. Errors were identified 64 times and most commonly
these were decision-based errors, followed by skills-based errors
and, less commonly, perceptual-based errors. There were also 17
violations identified, most of which were considered as exceptional.
A mean of 5.1 factors from the HFACS were identified as contribut-
ing to each incident (Table 3.6).
Data from veterinary anesthesia literature are limited. From
163 voluntary reported safety incidents analyzed using the London
Protocol, individual factors were identified in 123 (70.7%), team
factors in 108 (62.1%), organizational and management factors
in 94 (54.0%), task and technology factors in 80 (46.0%), work
environmental factors in 53 (30.5%), and animal and owner factors
Personnel:
Unclear communication
between teams
Overlap and exchange of
clinical duties during the day
Lack of familiarity with
equipment (see Equipment)
Procedure:
No apparent contribution of
surgical factors
Equipment:
Equipment design (APL valve
placement)
Equipment location
Room layout
Environment:
No apparent contribution (see
Equipment)
Organization:
Actual/perceived pressure to not
monopolize machine in prep area;
predisposed to not taking time to
check OR machine before transfer?
Patient:
Change in species and size from
large dog to small cat;
predisposed to error by
requirement to switch
breathing system?
Incident:
APL valve closed
Figure 3.5 Example of a fishbone diagram made during an investigation of a closed APL valve. Source: Pang et al. [56], with permission of John Wiley & Sons.
Table 3.3 Factors involved in 359 anesthetic “mishaps” as identified through
the critical incident technique.
Contributing factor 	Relative frequency
Inadequate total experience 	21.4%
Inadequate familiarity with equipment/device 	12.5%
Poor communication with team, lab, etc. 	7.5%
Haste 	7.2%
Inattention/carelessness 	7.2%
Fatigue 	6.7%
Excessive dependency on other personnel 	6.7%
Failure to perform a normal check 	6.1%
Training or experience – other factors 	6.1%
Supervisor not present enough 	5.0%
Environment or colleagues – other factors 	5.0%
Visual field restricted 	4.7%
Mental or physical – other factors 	4.5%
Inadequate familiarity with surgical procedure 	3.9%
Distraction 	3.6%
Poor labeling of controls, drugs, etc. 	3.3%
Supervision – other factors 	3.3%
Situation precluded normal precautions 	2.8%
Inadequate familiarity with anesthetic technique 	2.8%
Teaching activity under way 	2.5%
Apprehension 	2.2%
Emergency case 	1.7%
Demanding or difficult case 	1.7%
Boredom 	1.4%
Nature of activity/other factors 	1.4%
Insufficient preparation 	0.8%
Slow procedure 	0.8%
Other 	0.8%
Source: Adapted from Cooper et al. [57].
Table 3.4 Factors identified as being associated with anesthetic deaths in the
Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Deaths.
Contributing factor 	Relative frequency
Failure to apply knowledge 	75.1%
Lack of care 	30.0%
Failure of organization 	24.9%
Lack of experience 	23.7%
Lack of knowledge 	15.1%
Drug effect 	9.5%
Failure of equipment 	1.7%
Other 	2.7%
Source: Adapted from Buck et al. [58].

-- 48 of 1450 --

Chapter 3: Introduction to Patient Safety 	33
in 36 (20.7%) incidents [10]. Importantly, factors from team, work
environmental, and organizational and management categories
were identified concurrently in 89.4% of incidents where individual
factors were involved. The 14 most commonly identified contribut-
ing factors are reported in Table 3.7.
Patient safety interventions
Patient safety interventions should be aimed at specific system
weaknesses identified during analysis of incidents and processes.
There are, however, several general patient safety interventions,
which have become universally accepted, such as cognitive aids
(including checklists and algorithms), communication tools,
simulation-based training, and engineering solutions.
Checklists
Checklists are an organized list of action items or criteria that a user can
record as present/absent as each item is considered or completed [60].
Fundamentally, the purpose of a checklist is to reduce error and
improve performance [60]. A checklist achieves this by reinforcing
accepted safety practices and fostering communication and teamwork,
reducing the risk of error, and improving patient outcomes [61–64].
Much of the literature on checklists use comes from aviation,
reflecting its early acknowledgment of the relationships between
humans and complex systems. In aviation, checklists are a standard
part of flight protocol; not completing checklists, or completing a
checklist from memory, are considered violations [65]. By compari-
son, the widespread use of checklists is relatively recent in medicine
but has been shown to be highly effective. This is exemplified by
two well-known examples: the “Keystone Intensive Care Unit (ICU)
Project” and the “Surgical Safety Checklist (SSC)” [61,62]. In the
“Keystone ICU Project,” catheter-related bloodstream infec-
tions were reduced from a mean baseline rate of 7.7 infections
per 1000 catheter days to 1.4 infections per 1000 catheter days at
16–18 months after the introduction of a simple five-point check-
list. These improvements were sustained over 5 years of follow-up,
with estimated savings of $2–3 billion annually, and prevention of
30,000–60,000 deaths [62,63]. The introduction of the “SSC” in a
diverse patient population from eight hospitals in eight countries,
representing both high- and low-income settings, reduced mortality
within 30 days of non-cardiac surgery from 1.5% to 0.8% and the
overall complication rate (including surgical site infections, sepsis,
and pneumonia, among others) from 11.0% to 7.0% [61]. The posi-
tive outcomes from this study led to its adoption by the WHO, its
use in over 120 countries, representing 90% of the world’s popula-
tion, and over 230 million surgeries per year. The checklist
comprises three sections: “sign in” (before induction of anesthesia),
“time out” (before skin incision), and “sign out” (before patient
leaves operating room), with five to seven checklist items per
section [66]. The mechanisms underlying the improvements achieved
were “likely multifactorial,” reflecting both systems and behavioral
changes [61]. These can be described in terms of technical and
adaptive (cultural) aspects. Technical aspects encompass education
and evaluation, and adaptive aspects encompass engagement and
execution [62,63,66,67]. All must be considered for a checklist to be
successful in design and implementation [63].
Table 3.7 The 14 most common contributing factors identified following the systems
analysis of 163 veterinary anesthesia patient safety incidents.
Systems category 	Contributing factor 	Relative frequency (%)
Patient and owner 	Animal condition 	30%
Task and technology 	Failure to follow SOP 	51%
Equipment check 	28%
Individual 	Decision-making 	65%
Experience 	44%
Health, stress, fatigue 	28%
Task management 	24%
Team 	Supervision 	48%
Written communication 	38%
Verbal communication 	33%
Work environmental 	Distraction 	42%
Organizational 	Staffing level 	53%
Poor scheduling 	32%
Culture and priorities 	28%
Source: Adapted from McMillan and Lehnus [10].
Table 3.5 Contributing factors identified in the first 2000 incidents reported to the
Australian Incident Monitoring System (AIMS).
Contributing factor 	Relative frequency
Error of judgment 	16%
Failure to check equipment 	13%
Fault of technique 	13%
Other factors 	13%
Other equipment problem 	13%
Inattention 	12%
Haste 	12%
Inexperience 	11%
Communication problem 	9%
Inadequate pre-operative assessment 	7%
Monitor problem 	6%
Inadequate pre- operative preparation 	4%
Unfamiliar environment or equipment 	4%
Inadequate assistance 	3%
Fatigue 	3%
Drug label 	3%
Other stress 	2%
Lack of facility 	2%
Staff change 	1%
Illness 	1%
Source: Adapted from Runciman et al. [59].
Table 3.6 Contributing factors identified in 50 anesthetic incidents through
the application of the Human Factors Analysis Classification System (HFACS).
HFACS category 	HFACS contributing factor 	Relative frequency (%)
Organizational
influences
Resource management 	6%
Organizational climate 	20%
Organizational process 	18%
Supervision 	Inadequate leadership 	8%
Inappropriate planned operation 	44%
Failure to correct problem 	14%
Leadership violation 	12%
Preconditions for
unsafe acts
Physical environment 	22%
Technical environment 	52%
Operator mental state 	18%
Operator physiological state 	4%
Operator chronic performance
limitation
8%
Communication, coordination,
planning
64%
Fitness for duty 	0%
Unsafe acts 	Error, skills-based 	36%
Error, decision-based 	82%
Error, perceptual 	10%
Violation, routine 	12%
Violation, exceptional 	22%
Source: Adapted from Neuhaus et al. [54].

-- 49 of 1450 --

34 	Section 1: General Topics
The WHO encourages SSC modification by local teams, pro-
vided that safety steps are not removed, and checklist modification
is supported by the finding that meaningful improvements can
be achieved without completing all of the original 19 checklist
items [61]. Table 3.8 outlines modification considerations.
It is important to recognize that the SSC has not been universally
successful. A major reason for failures when attempting to adopt
checklists is underestimating the importance of adaptive compo-
nents while focusing on technical components [67–70]. Of these,
technical barriers are generally easier to overcome and may include
provision of key equipment to facilitate checklist item completion
and recognizing that checklists can be modified to reflect local con-
ditions (e.g., redundancy with other safety checks). Cultural barri-
ers are common in human medicine, with evidence that they exist
in veterinary medicine [60,67,69,70]. There can be a tendency to
feel that checklists infringe on clinical judgment and autonomy,
reflect weakness by not relying on memory to perform tasks, and
reflect a lack of knowledge or skill [60,67]. There can also be reluc-
tance to accept direction to adopt checklists without discussion
from administrators or those less actively involved in clinical prac-
tice [67,70]. Recognizing and addressing these potential barriers
was an important part of the success of the “Keystone ICU Project”
and the “SSC.” Unfortunately, steps taken to overcome these barri-
ers were not emphasized in the SSC report, which probably explains
some of the challenges encountered by others in attempting its
adoption [60,69]. Specific instructions on how to introduce and
implement the WHO SSC have been published [66].
While it appears that versions of the SSC are in use in veterinary
medicine, published reports are limited and results mixed [69,71].
Contrasting the reports of Bergström et al. [71] and Menoud
et al. [69] is instructive in the context of technical and adaptive
(cultural) barriers. In both cases, the WHO SSC was adapted for
local use; however, the methods underlying adaptation were not
described by Bergström et al., while a Delphi method was used by
the anesthesia team in Menoud et al. The length of the resulting
checklist was comparable in each case (23 and 24 items). In the
Bergström et al. study, checklist use was restricted to surgical proce-
dures whereas in the Menoud et al. study, the checklist could be
used for any anesthetic procedure. Bergström et al. provided oral
instruction and practical training in checklist use over a 2-week
period before implementation with a specified individual responsi-
ble for checklist completion. By contrast, Menoud et al. reported
that an investigator was available to assist users but did not describe
a formal instruction or training process. Bergström et al. focused on
outcome measures as a marker of checklist impact, finding a greater
number of complications in the pre-checklist group (52 complica-
tions identified in 300 dogs and cats) compared with the post-
checklist group (15 complications identified in 220 dogs and cats).
No process audit to track checklist use or compliance was reported.
Menoud et al. performed two process audits by direct observation
of procedures. The first (n = 69 anesthetized cases) found that the
checklist was used in 32% of cases, not printed for use in 41% of
cases, and printed but not used in 27% of cases. The second audit
(n = 64 anesthetized cases) found that the checklist was printed for
all cases and used in 45%, with no significant difference in use
between audits. Menoud et al. concluded that difficulties faced in
checklist use reflected a failure to designate someone responsible
for managing the checklist, a lack of printed copies of the checklist,
and attempting to apply the checklist to cases that underwent anes-
thesia but not surgery. Overall, they described the situation as one
in which “users did not feel involved” and identified that introduc-
tion of the checklist could have been better managed [69].
An “Anaesthetic Safety Checklist” was produced by the
Association of Veterinary Anaesthetists in 2014 and is freely
available through the association website [72]. Fig. 3.6 shows the
checklist used during the spay-neuter teaching laboratory at the
University of Calgary. Hofmeister et al. quantified the incidence of
APL valves unintentionally closed and esophageal intubations over
approximately 1 year [9]. A focused checklist (added as checkboxes
on the anesthesia record) was designed to address these two items,
which resulted in a decrease in incidence for both over the subse-
quent year: APL valve closures from 20 to 5 occurrences; and
esophageal intubations from 16 to 4 occurrences [9].
Other cognitive aids
There are many other cognitive aids that can be used to improve
human performance and safety. Evidence for their use in settings
outside of medicine is compelling and has led to much interest
especially in acute medicine, surgery, and anesthesia [73]. Their use
in emergency situations has perhaps received the most attention as
it appears that failure to adhere to best clinical practice often occurs
when time for decision-making is limited [74]. Many cognitive aids
have been developed for emergency situations ranging from single-
treatment algorithms and drug charts to large sets of checklists and
cognitive aids grouped together in a “crisis manual.”
Some of the earliest cognitive aids developed and put to wide-
spread use were cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) algorithms. In
CPR, adherence to Advanced Cardiovascular Life Support protocols
is associated with increased patient survival, whereas non-compliance
and omissions of indicated steps are associated with decreased sur-
vival [75]. Error rates during CPR may be halved by using cognitive
aids, at least in a high-fidelity simulator setting, suggesting that the
use of cognitive aids may have significant effects on outcomes [76].
The Reassessment Campaign on Veterinary Resuscitation
(RECOVER) developed a set of consensus guidelines for veterinary
CPR alongside cognitive aids encompassing a CPR algorithm, a
post- cardiac arrest care algorithm, and a quick reference chart of
CPR drugs and doses [77]. Little evidence has been published as to
the success of these guidelines to date; however, it appears the
guidelines have changed CPR practices [78], although they still vary
Table 3.8 Considerations when modifying the World Health Organization’s Surgical
Safety Checklist (SSC).
Focused 	Keep the checklist concise, focused on critical items and those not
checked by other means. Limit of five to nine items per checklist section.
Brief 	No more than 1 min to complete each section. Longer checklists
risk impeding the flow of care.
Actionable 	Each listed item must link to a specific, unambiguous action to avoid
confusion as to what should be done.
Verbal 	Promoting verbal interactions among team members is a core
component. The checklist is likely to be less successful if limited to a
written instrument.
Collaborative 	Considered modifications should be collaborative, involving
representatives from groups involved in its use. This contributes to
promoting “ownership” of the checklist.
Tested 	Any modified checklist should be tested in a limited setting before
wider adoption. Testing may include, a simulation, over single day,
and by a single team.
Integrated 	The checklist is not intended to be comprehensive and modification
to integrate into existing safety processes is encouraged provided
brevity and simplicity are not sacrificed. Integration could reflect
specific procedure requirements.
Source: Adapted from WHO [66].

-- 50 of 1450 --

Chapter 3: Introduction to Patient Safety 	35
considerably [79]. One study of 141 dogs suffering cardiac arrest
demonstrated that dogs resuscitated using the RECOVER guide-
lines and cognitive aids had better outcomes than dogs resuscitated
using traditional CPR procedures, with improved return to sponta-
neous circulation (43% versus 17%) and higher survival rates (5%
versus 0%) [80].
Several crisis manuals have now been developed for use in
human anesthesia and surgery. Based upon information from the
“Australian Incident Monitoring System (AIMS),” Runciman et al.
developed a set of 24 crisis algorithms for managing anesthetic cri-
ses [81]. It is claimed that 60% of 4000 incidents reported to AIMS
would be addressed in 40–60 s using the manual [81]. In a pilot trial
of a surgical crisis manual developed by collaboration between
medical and aviation experts, two surgical teams were exposed to
eight crisis simulations, four with and four without the check-
list [82]. Manual use led to a sixfold reduction in failure to perform
critical steps and tasks [82]. Later, 17 operating room teams were
exposed to 106 surgical crisis simulations. All teams performed bet-
ter when using the manual and there was almost a 75% reduction in
omissions of critical steps during crisis management [83].
Communication tools: briefings, debriefings,
and patient hand-offs
Communication is a significant component of perioperative check-
lists such as the WHO SSC, and in many organizations, the surgical
“time-out” has developed into a miniature pre-procedural briefing.
A recent study including over 8000 surgical procedures investigated
outcomes before and after the introduction of a structured intraop-
erative briefing and found that mortality, unplanned re-operations,
and prolonged hospital stays were all reduced [84].
A point of weakness for transfer of critical patient-related infor-
mation is during hand-offs (handovers) [85,86]. Hand-offs occur
whenever a transfer and acceptance of patient care responsibility
between two caregivers or teams is required, for example, when a
patient is moved from the operating theater to the recovery suite
or ward. Effective hand-offs require passing safety-critical and
patient-specific information from one caregiver to another and are
key in facilitating the continuity and safety of the patient’s care.
Unstable recovering patients, competing demands upon caregivers,
multitasking, and time limitations make postanesthetic hand-offs
particularly vulnerable to error [86]. Such errors lead to fragmented
postoperative care, delays in treatment and diagnosis, and cause
significant patient harm [86]. A systematic review of the literature
identified broad strategies to reduce risk around postanesthetic
hand-offs which are summarized in Box 3.3 [85].
Numerous standardized postanesthetic hand-off communica-
tion tools have been suggested and studied in the literature.
Currently, the system with the most evidence is “IPASS,” which was
developed from descriptions of best practice hand-off techniques
cited in the literature [87,88]. The IPASS technique involves five
Box 3.3 Strategies for safe and effective postoperative handovers
consistently identified in the literature.
• Prepare monitor, alarms, equipment, and fluids before patient arrival
• Complete urgent care tasks before the verbal handover
• Set aside time for handover communication. Avoid performing other
tasks during this time and, conversely, limit conversations while
performing tasks
• Use the “sterile cockpit”: only patient-specific conversation or urgent
clinical interruptions can occur during the handover
• All relevant members of the operating room and postoperative
receiving teams should be present during the handover
• Only one care provider should speak at a time, with minimal
distractions and interruptions
• Provide an opportunity to ask questions and voice concerns
• Document the handover
• Use supporting documentation, e.g., lab test results, anesthesia chart
• Use structured checklists to guide communication and ensure
completeness of information. Use forms or reference cards as reminders
• Use protocols to standardize processes
• Provide formal team or handover training
Source: Adapted from Segall et al. [85].
Figure 3.6 Pre-induction checklist in use at the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Calgary. Source: Dr. Daniel Pang, with permission.

-- 51 of 1450 --

36 	Section 1: General Topics
discussion points: I: Illness severity; P: Patient summary; A: Action
list; S: Situation awareness and contingency planning; and S: Synthesis
by receiver (Table 3.9). The largest assessment of IPASS covered
over 10000 hospital admissions in nine hospitals. Through imple-
mentation of the IPASS system, there were significant decreases in
medical errors (23%) and preventable adverse events (30%) [89].
Other systems for standardized hand-off communication exist and
include the “Situation, Background, Assessment, Recommendation
(SBAR)” and “Post-Anesthesia Team Handover (PATH).” Both
these systems have been shown to improve hand-offs and reduce
safety incidents; however, good-quality evidence on their overall
effect on outcomes is limited [90,91].
Simulation- based training
Simulation is an immersive and interactive educational tool used to
replace or amplify real experiences. It provides an opportunity for
individuals to be trained together in a supportive learning environ-
ment where they can perform clinical tasks and processes without
the risk of harming patients. Anesthesia was one of the first medical
specialties to embrace simulation-based training and its role in the
education of anesthetists in human medicine grows from year to
year. The most obvious use for simulation in training is learning
and improving the performance of technical skills. If well designed,
with robust assessment and feedback mechanisms, technical skill
training in simulation suites is highly effective and leads to large
and sustainable improvements in skill acquisition and hastens the
transition from novice to expert [92].
However, greater safety improvements can perhaps be made
through simulations designed to encourage the development of
non-technical skills, highlighting how aspects of work, such as
teamwork and communication, can affect individual performance
and outcomes. It may also help develop these skills in individuals
and teams and lead to improved performance and clinical out-
comes [92,93]. One of the first simulation-based training methods
developed in anesthesia was the “Anesthesia Crisis Resource
Management (ACRM)” course [21]. A catalog of 62 anesthetic
critical incidents formed the basis of simulations designed to
test a participant’s dynamic decision-making and teamworking.
Participants performed a pre- and post-ARCM course test on
aspects of crisis management and the management of critical inci-
dents. Residents scored considerably higher after participation in
the course, though there was no improvement in the scores of
experienced anesthetists. A review of the impact of crisis resource
management simulation-based training in interdisciplinary teams
found positive outcomes in all but two of the 12 studies included [94].
Significant improvements were documented in team behaviors in
the workplace, including teamwork, staff attitudes toward patient
safety, situational awareness, and workload management. A subset
of these studies demonstrated sustained reductions in adverse
patient outcomes [94].
Simulation training methods such as “Patient Safety Medical Team
Training Program” and the “Team Strategies and Tools to Enhance
Performance and Patient Safety (TeamSTEPPS®)” allow hospitals and
organizations to provide standardized simulation-based training
packages, which have been demonstrated to significantly improve
outcomes including surgical morbidity and mortality [92]. More
specifically, for anesthesia, the “Vital Anaesthesia Simulation
Training” course has been demonstrated to improve non-technical
skills scores of anesthetists in low-income human hospital settings [95].
Simulation-based training is also recommended for situations such
as CPR and weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass [92].
A 2022 review investigating the effectiveness of veterinary simu-
lators versus traditional instruction concluded simulators can be
effective to improve knowledge- and technical-skill-based out-
comes but did not identify any evidence investigating the effect of
simulators on non-technical skills or clinical outcomes [96]. Despite
the development some years ago of a high-fidelity veterinary simu-
lator, little evidence has been published on the effect this has had on
trainee performance [97]. Simulation does not appear to play any
part in veterinary residency training programs currently, despite
significant evidence from human medicine suggesting benefit.
Engineering solutions
Mechanisms that force users to perform tasks in a certain way or
link easily forgotten tasks with tasks highly likely to be completed
can be used to reduce error. For example, to limit the risk of deliver-
ing a hypoxic gas mixture, nitrous oxide and oxygen flowmeters can
be physically linked, meaning that if oxygen flow rate was reduced,
the nitrous oxide flow would also decrease, maintaining a mini-
mum ratio of gases. Another solution is to tightly couple tasks, for
example, when throat packs/gauzes are placed in orofacial surgery
or dentistry, tying the throat pack to endotracheal tube can ensure
that the pack will be removed at the time of extubation if not done
beforehand.
Methods for reducing medication error
Medication errors can occur at any point of the medication man-
agement process, which involves prescribing, transcribing, dispens-
ing, administering, and monitoring. Systematic countermeasures
have been recommended to decrease the number of drug errors in
anesthesia; however, surprisingly, few have been well studied.
Recommendations include reading the labels of any drug ampule or
syringe carefully before a drug is drawn up or injected; the stand-
ardization and optimization of legibility and contents of medication
labels; always labeling syringes; formal standardized organization of
drug drawers and workspaces; and checking of labels by a second
person (double-checking) before a drug is drawn up or adminis-
tered [98,99]. Although such interventions would appear foolproof,
medication errors still occur regularly, and evidence for each of
these recommendations is weak. For example, there is insufficient
evidence that the implementation of double-checking is associated
with lower rates of medication error or reduced harm [100]. Indeed,
in busy modern clinical settings, whether double-checking policies
warrant the considerable resource investments required to enforce
them has yet to be determined [101]. In the veterinary sector,
Hofmeister et al. introduced a read-out- loud protocol before
Table 3.9 Elements of the IPASS mnemonic hand-off system.
I Illness severity 	Stable, unstable, etc.
P Patient summary 	Summary statement
Events leading up to admission
Hospital course
Ongoing assessment
Plan
A Action list 	“To do” list
Timeline of actions and who needs to perform them
S Situation awareness and
contingency planning
What’s going on now
Plan for what might happen in the future
S Synthesis by receiver 	Receiver summarizes what was heard
Queries any unclear information/asks questions
Restates key actions/“to do” task
Source: Adapted from Starmer et al. [87].

-- 52 of 1450 --

Chapter 3: Introduction to Patient Safety 	37
administering medication under anesthesia, and although the inci-
dence of medication error rate reduced from 1.2% of anesthetics to
0.7%, it is notable that the risk was not eliminated [9]. Whether or
not this improvement was sustained has also not been reported.
Drug labeling and color coding is another commonly used method
to reduce the chance of drug error, and an international standard
exists for labeling syringes used during anesthesia: ISO 26825 [102].
However, a substantial proportion of errors occur after labe-
ling [102]. The conclusion that can be made from this is that medi-
cation errors will continue to occur, probably because routine
violations of policies intended to reduce medication errors are
required to help manage the pressures inherent in clinical work (“to
get work done”). Nonetheless, the listed methods are considered
best practice and are, therefore, recommended.
Assessment of patient safety interventions
While it is tempting to suppose that any intervention or control
measure aimed at improving patient safety should work, it must not
be assumed that they will automatically result in improvement. In
fact, it is not only possible for control measures to fail to improve
patient safety, but any improvement may be unsustainable and may
even lead to migrating risk to other parts of the process, or the
introduction of obstacles to effective performance [103]. To evalu-
ate the impact of introduced changes, a system for monitoring, such
as clinical audit, is needed.
Clinical audit facilitates an objective evaluation of performance,
including assessing the impact of introduced changes against
explicit criteria, with the goal of achieving improvement in service
or care [104,105]. In human medicine, clinical audit is widely rec-
ognized as a standard of care [62,106,107]. The procedure of clini-
cal audit involves measuring an outcome (outcome audit) or process
(process audit), comparing findings to available current evidence or
“best practice,” and then implementing changes to improve the
quality of care [107,108]. Importantly, the audit process is cyclical
and does not end once changes are introduced but continues to
evaluate the impact of these changes. Clinical audits are more likely
to be successful if they are focused and if simple changes can be
introduced. Doing this does not guarantee a favorable outcome but
makes it easier to understand the impact on a system, reasons for
failure, and plan future steps.
Several models of clinical audit are available; all of them are cyclical
in nature emphasizing that clinical audit should seek to drive continu-
ous improvement. For example, the “Model for Improvement” [107,108]
employs three preparatory questions linked to the four phases of the
“Plan,” “Do,” “Study,” “Act” (PDSA) cycle (Fig. 3.7).
Useful resources
• The Joint Commission (US) – https://www.jointcommission.org/
resources/patient-safety-topics/
• Veterans Affairs (US) – https://www.patientsafety.va.gov
• National Health Service (UK) – https://www.england.nhs.uk/
patient-safety/the-nhs- patient-safety-strategy/
• Institute for Safe Medication Practices (Canada) – https://www.
ismp-canada.org/index.htm
• Canadian Patient Safety Institute – https://www.patientsafety
institute.ca/en/toolsresources/Pages/default.aspx\
• WHO patient safety – https://www.who.int/teams/integrated-
health-services/patient- safety/research/safe-surgery
• Association of Veterinary Anaesthetists checklist – https://ava.eu.
com/resources/checklists/
• TeamSTEPPS 	– 	https://www.ahrq.gov/teamstepps/instructor/
index.html
• Anesthesia Patient Safety Foundation – https://www.apsf.org
References
1 Runciman W, Hibbert P, Thomson R, et al. Towards an international classification
for patient safety: key concepts and terms. Int J Qual Health Care 2009; 21(1):
18–26.
2 Catchpole K, Bell MD, Johnson S. Safety in anaesthesia: a study of 12606 reported
incidents from the UK National Reporting and Learning System. Anaesthesia 2008;
63(4): 340–346.
3 Gaba DM. Anaesthesiology as a model for patient safety in health care. BMJ 2000;
320(7237): 785–788.
4 Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Quality of Health Care in America. In:
Kohn LT, Corrigan JM, Donaldson MS, eds. To Err is Human: building a Safer
Health System. Washington, DC: National Academies Press (US), 2000.
5 Makary MA, Daniel M. Medical error-the third leading cause of death in the US.
BMJ 2016; 353: i2139.
6 James JT. A new evidence-based estimate of patient harms associated with hospital
care. J Patient Saf 2013; 9(3): 122–128.
7 Clarke KW, Hall LW. A survey of anaesthesia in small animal practice: AVA/BSAVA
report. Vet Anaesth Analg 1990; 17: 4–10.
8 Brodbelt DC, Blissitt KJ, Hammond RA, et al. The risk of death: the confidential
enquiry into perioperative small animal fatalities. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35(5):
365–373.
9 Hofmeister EH, Quandt J, Braun C, et al. Development implementation and impact
of simple patient safety interventions in a university teaching hospital. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2014; 41(3): 243–248.
10 McMillan MW, Lehnus KS. Systems analysis of voluntary reported anaesthetic
safety incidents occurring in a university teaching hospital. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018;
45(1): 3–12.
11 Wallis J, Fletcher D, Bentley A, et al. Medical errors cause harm in veterinary hos-
pitals. Front Vet Sci 2019; 6: 12.
12 Oxtoby C, Ferguson E, White K, et al. We need to talk about error: causes and types
of error in veterinary practice. Vet Rec 2015; 177(17): 438.
13 Garrouste-Orgeas M, Philippart F, Bruel C, et al. Overview of medical errors and
adverse events. Ann Intensive Care 2012; 2(1): 2.
14 Reason J. Human Error. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1991.
15 Gaba DM. Human error in dynamic medical domains. In: Bogner MS, ed. Human
Error in Medicine. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1994.
16 Reason J. Safety in the operating theatre – Part 2: human error and organisational
failure. Qual Saf Health Care 2005; 14(1): 56–60.
17 Perrow C. Normal Accidents: Living with High-Risk Technologies. New York, NY:
Basic Books, 1984.
ASK:
What are we trying to accomplish?
How will we know that a change is an improvement?
What change can we make that will result in improvement?
DO
- Collect data
- Monitor progress
- Provide feedback
STUDY
- Discuss data
- Assess data
- Interpret data
PLAN
- Statement aim
- Define improvement
- Decide quantifiable
change
ACT
- Continued
action
Figure 3.7 Preparatory questions and clinical audit cycle. Source: Adapted
from Langley et al. [109].

-- 53 of 1450 --

38 	Section 1: General Topics
18 Gaba DM, Maxwell M, DeAnda A. Anesthetic mishaps: breaking the chain of
accident evolution. Anesthesiology 1987; 66(5): 670–676.
19 Pang D. Accident and error management. In: Clark-Price S, Mama K, eds.
Equine Anesthesia and Co-Existing Disease. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell, 2022:
352–384.
20 Flin R, Patey R, Glavin R, et al. Anaesthetists’ non-technical skills. Br J Anaesth
2010; 105(1): 38–44.
21 Howard SK, Gaba DM, Fish KJ, et al. Anesthesia crisis resource management
training: teaching anesthesiologists to handle critical incidents. Aviat Space Environ
Med 1992; 63(9): 763–770.
22 Khatri N, Brown GD, Hicks LL. From a blame culture to a just culture in health
care. Health Care Manage Rev 2009; 34(4): 312–322.
23 Dekker SWA. Just culture: who gets to draw the line? Cogn Tech Work 2009; 11(3):
177–185.
24 Eurocontrol Performance Review Commission. Report on Legal and Cultural Issues
in Relation to ATM Safety Occurrence Reporting in Europe: Outcome of a Survey
Conducted by the Performance Review Unit in 2005–2006. Brussels, Belgium:
Eurocontrol, 2006.
25 Tucker AL, Nembhard IM, Edmondson AC. Implementing new practices: an
empirical study of organizational learning in hospital intensive care units. Manage
Sci 2007; 53(6): 894–907.
26 Senge PM. The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the Learning Organization.
New York, NY: Doubleday, 1990.
27 Stinson L, Pearson D, Lucas B. Developing a learning culture: twelve tips for
individuals, teams and organizations. Med Teach 2006; 28(4): 309–312.
28 Hollnagel E. Safety I and safety II. The Past and Future of Safety Management. Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2014.
29 Hollnagel E, Wears RL, Braithwaite J. From Safety-I to Safety-II: A White Paper. The
Resilient Health Care Net. Published simultaneously by the University of Southern.
Denmark, University of Florida, USA, and Macquarie University, Australia, 2015.
30 Sexton JB, Helmreich RL, Neilands TB, et al. The safety attitudes questionnaire:
psychometric properties, benchmarking data, and emerging research. BMC Health
Serv Res 2006; 6: 44.
31 Oxtoby C, Mossop L, White K, et al. Safety culture: the Nottingham Veterinary
Safety Culture Survey (NVSCS). Vet Rec 2017; 180(19): 472.
32 Love LC, Hedgpeth MW, Robertson JB, et al. Assessment of safety culture at a vet-
erinary teaching hospital in the United States. Front Vet Sci 2021; 8: 638764.
33 Dutton RP. Improving safety through incident reporting. Curr Anesth Rep 2014;
4: 181–190.
34 Ludders JW, McMillan M. Errors in Veterinary Anesthesia, 1st edn. Ames, IA:
Wiley-Blackwell, 2017.
35 Cooper JB. Is voluntary reporting of critical events effective for quality assurance?
Anesthesiology 1996; 85(5): 961–964.
36 Runciman WB. Lessons from the Australian Patient Safety Foundation: setting up a
national patient safety surveillance system – is this the right model? Qual Saf Health
Care 2002; 11(3): 246–251.
37 Schortz L, Mossop L, Bergström A, et al. Type and impact of clinical incidents iden-
tified by a voluntary reporting system covering 130 small animal practices in main-
land Europe. Vet Rec 2022; 191(2): e1629.
38 Pang DSJ, Rouseau-Blass F, Pang JM. Morbidity and mortality conferences: a mini
review and illustrated application in veterinary medicine. Front Vet Sci 2018; 5: 43.
39 Orlander JD, Barber TW, Fincke BG. The morbidity and mortality conference: the
delicate nature of learning from error. Acad Med 2002; 77(10): 1001–1006.
40 Calder LA, Kwok ESH, Cwinn AA, et al. Enhancing the quality of morbidity and
mortality rounds: the Ottawa M&M model. Acad Emerg Med 2014; 21(3): 314–321.
41 Mitchell EL, Lee DY, Arora S, et al. SBAR M&M: a feasible reliable and valid tool to
assess the quality of surgical morbidity and mortality conference presentations. Am
J Surg 2012; 203(1): 26–31.
42 Mitchell EL, Lee DY, Arora S, et al. Improving the quality of the surgical morbidity
and mortality conference: a prospective intervention study. Acad Med 2013; 88(6):
824–830.
43 Nimptsch U, Mansky T. Quality measurement combined with peer review improved
German in-hospital mortality rates for four diseases. Health Aff (Millwood) 2013;
32(9): 1616–1623.
44 Szekendi MK, Barnard C, Creamer J, et al. Using patient safety morbidity and mor-
tality conferences to promote transparency and a culture of safety. Jt Comm J Qual
Patient Saf 2010; 36(1): 3–9.
45 Kirschenbaum L, Kurtz S, Astiz M. Improved clinical outcomes combining house
staff self-assessment with an audit-based quality improvement program. J Gen
Intern Med 2010; 25(10): 1078–1082.
46 Joseph CW, Garrubba ML, Melder AM. Informing best practice for conducting
morbidity and mortality reviews: a literature review. Aust Health Rev 2018; 42(3):
248–257.
47 Prince JM, Vallabhaneni R, Zenati MS, et al. Increased interactive format for
Morbidity & Mortality conference improves educational value and enhances confi-
dence. J Surg Educ 2007; 64(5): 266–272.
48 Aboumatar HJ, Blackledge CG, Dickson C, et al. A descriptive study of morbidity
and mortality conferences and their conformity to medical incident analysis mod-
els: results of the morbidity and mortality conference improvement study, phase 1.
Am J Med Qual 2007; 22(4): 232–238.
49 De Meester K, Verspuy M, Monsieurs KG, et al. SBAR improves nurse-physician
communication and reduces unexpected death: a pre and post intervention study.
Resuscitation 2013; 84(9): 1192–1196.
50 Leonard M, Graham S, Bonacum D. The human factor: the critical importance of
effective teamwork and communication in providing safe care. Qual Saf Health
Care 2004; 13(Suppl 1): i85–i90.
51 Diller T, Helmrich G, Dunning S, et al. The Human Factors Analysis Classification
System (HFACS) applied to health care. Am J Med Qual 2014; 29(3): 181–190.
52 Vincent C, Taylor-Adams S, Stanhope N. Framework for analysing risk and safety
in clinical medicine. BMJ 1998; 316(7138): 1154–1157.
53 Vincent C, Taylor-Adams S, Chapman EJ, et al. How to investigate and analyse
clinical incidents: clinical risk unit and association of litigation and risk manage-
ment protocol. BMJ 2000; 320(7237): 777–781.
54 Neuhaus C, Huck M, Hofmann G, et al. Applying the human factors analysis and
classification system to critical incident reports in anaesthesiology. Acta
Anaesthesiol Scand 2018; 62(10): 1403–1411.
55 El- Bardissi AW, Wiegmann DA, Dearani JA, et al. Application of the human factors
analysis and classification system methodology to the cardiovascular surgery oper-
ating room. Ann Thorac Surg 2007; 83(4): 1412–1419.
56 Pang J, Yates E, Pang DSJ. A closed ‘pop-off ’ valve and patient safety incident: a
human factors approach to understanding error. Vet Rec Case Rep 2021; 9(4): e189.
57 Cooper JB, Newbower RS, Long CD, et al. Preventable anesthesia mishaps: a study
of human factors. Anesthesiology 1978; 49(6): 399–406.
58 Buck N, Devlin HB, Lunn JN. The Report of a Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative
Deaths 1987. London, UK: Nuffield Provincial Hospitals Trust, The King’s Fund, 1988.
59 Runciman WB, Webb RK, Lee R, et al. The Australian Incident Monitoring Study.
System failure: an analysis of 2000 incident reports. Anaesth Intensive Care 1993;
21(5): 684–695.
60 Hales BM, Pronovost PJ. The checklist – a tool for error management and perfor-
mance improvement. J Crit Care 2006; 21(3): 231–235.
61 Haynes AB, Weiser TG, Berry WR, et al. A surgical safety checklist to reduce mor-
bidity and mortality in a global population. N Engl J Med 2009; 360(5): 491–499.
62 Pronovost P, Needham D, Berenholtz S, et al. An intervention to decrease catheter-
related bloodstream infections in the ICU. N Engl J Med 2006; 355(26): 2725–2732.
63 Pronovost P. Interventions to decrease catheter-related bloodstream infections in
the ICU: the Keystone Intensive Care Unit Project. Am J Infect Control 2008; 36(10):
S171e1–e5.
64 Sexton JB, Thomas EJ, Helmreich RL. Error stress and teamwork in medicine and
aviation: cross sectional surveys. BMJ 2000; 320(7237): 745–749.
65 Helmreich RL. On error management: lessons from aviation. BMJ 2000; 320(7237):
781–785.
66 World Health Organization (WHO) Surgical Safety Checklist (SSC) – Implementation
Manual 2009. https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241598590 (accessed
March 2022.)
67 Bosk CL, Dixon-Woods M, Goeschel CA, et al. Reality check for checklists. Lancet
2009; 374(9688): 444–445.
68 Haynes AB, Weiser TG, Berry WR, et al. Safe Surgery Saves Lives Study Group.
Changes in safety attitude and relationship to decreased postoperative morbidity
and mortality following implementation of a checklist-based surgical safety inter-
vention. BMJ Qual Saf 2011; 20(1): 102–107.
69 Menoud G, Axiak Flammer S, Spadavecchia C, et al. Development and implemen-
tation of a perianesthetic safety checklist in a veterinary university small animal
teaching hospital. Front Vet Sci 2018; 5: 60.
70 Pickering SP, Robertson ER, Griffin D, et al. Compliance and use of the World Health
Organization checklist in UK operating theatres. Br J Surg 2013; 100(2): 1664–1670.
71 Bergström A, Dimopoulou M, Eldh M. Reduction of surgical complications in dogs
and cats by the use of a surgical safety checklist. Vet Surg 2016; 45(5): 571–576.
72 Association of Veterinary Anaesthetists (AVA) Anaesthetic Safety Checklist.
https://ava.eu.com/resources/checklists/ (accessed March 2022).
73 Marshall S. The use of cognitive aids during emergencies in anesthesia: a review of
the literature. Anesth Analg 2013; 117(5): 1162–1171.
74 Hepner DL, Arriaga AF, Cooper JB, et al. Operating room crisis checklists and
emergency manuals. Anesthesiology 2017; 127(2): 384–392.
75 McEvoy MD, Field LC, Moore HE, et al. The effect of adherence to ACLS protocols
on survival of event in the setting of in-hospital cardiac arrest. Resuscitation 2014;
85(1): 82–87.

-- 54 of 1450 --

Chapter 3: Introduction to Patient Safety 	39
76 Hall C, Robertson D, Rolfe M, et al. Do cognitive aids reduce error rates in resusci-
tation team performance? Trial of Emergency Medicine Protocols in Simulation
Training (TEMPIST) in Australia. Hum Resour Health 2020; 18(1): 1.
77 Fletcher DJ, Boller M, Brainard BM, et al. RECOVER evidence and knowledge
gap analysis on veterinary CPR. Part 7: clinical guidelines. J Vet Emerg Crit Care
(San Antonio) 2012; 22(Suppl 1): S102–S131.
78 Donaldson L, Stevenson MA, Fletcher DJ, et al. Differences in the clinical practice
of small animal CPR before and after the release of the RECOVER guidelines:
results from two electronic surveys (2008 and 2017) in the United States and
Canada. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2020; 30(6): 615–631.
79 Gillespie Í, Fletcher DJ, Stevenson MA, et al. The compliance of current small
animal CPR practice with RECOVER guidelines: an internet-based survey. Front
Vet Sci 2019; 6: 181.
80 Kawase K, Ujiie H, Takaki M, et al. Clinical outcome of canine cardiopulmonary
resuscitation following the RECOVER clinical guidelines at a Japanese night-time
animal hospital. J Vet Med Sci 2018; 80(3): 518–525.
81 Runciman WB, Kluger MT, Morris RW, et al. Crisis management during anaesthe-
sia: the development of an anaesthetic crisis management manual. Qual Saf Health
Care 2005; 14(3): e1.
82 Ziewacz JE, Arriaga AF, Bader AM, et al. Crisis checklists for the operating room:
development and pilot testing. J Am Coll Surg 2011; 213(2): 212–217.e10.
83 Arriaga AF, Bader AM, Wong JM, et al. Simulation-based trial of surgical-crisis
checklists. N Engl J Med 2013; 368(3): 246–253.
84 Tschan F, Keller S, Semmer NK, et al. Effects of structured intraoperative briefings
on patient outcomes: multicentre before-and-after study. Br J Surg 2021; 109(1):
136–144.
85 Segall N, Bonifacio AS, Schroeder RA, et al. Can we make postoperative patient
handovers safer? A systematic review of the literature. Anesth Analg 2012; 115(1):
102–115.
86 Abraham J, Meng A, Tripathy S, et al. Systematic review and meta-analysis of inter-
ventions for operating room to intensive care unit handoffs. BMJ Qual Saf 2021;
30(6): 513–524.
87 Starmer AJ, Spector ND, Srivastava R, et al. I- PASS, a mnemonic to standardize
verbal handoffs. Pediatrics 2012; 129(2): 201–204.
88 Shahian D. I-PASS handover system: a decade of evidence demands action. BMJ
Qual Saf 2021; 30(10): 769–774.
89 Starmer AJ, O’Toole JK, Rosenbluth G, et al. Development implementation and
dissemination of the I-PASS handoff curriculum: A multisite educational interven-
tion to improve patient handoffs. Acad Med 2014; 89(6): 876–884.
90 Müller M, Jürgens J, Redaèlli M, et al. Impact of the communication and patient
hand-off tool SBAR on patient safety: a systematic review. BMJ Open 2018; 8(8):
e022202.
91 Jaulin F, Lopes T, Martin F. Standardised handover process with checklist improves
quality and safety of care in the postanaesthesia care unit: the Postanaesthesia Team
Handover trial. Br J Anaesth 2021; 127(6): 962–970.
92 Higham H, Baxendale B. To err is human: use of simulation to enhance training
and patient safety in anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth 2017; 119(suppl 1): i106–i114.
93 Rall M, Dieckmann P. Simulation and patient safety: the use of simulation to enhance
patient safety on a systems level. Curr Anaesth Crit Care 2005; 16(5): 273–281.
94 Fung L, Boet S, Bould MD, et al. Impact of crisis resource management simulation-
based training for interprofessional and interdisciplinary teams: a systematic
review. J Interprof Care 2015; 29(5): 433–444.
95 Mossenson AI, Bailey JG, Whynot S, et al. Qualities of effective vital anaesthesia
simulation training facilitators delivering simulation-based education in resource-
limited settings. Anesth Analg 2021; 133(1): 215–225.
96 Noyes JA, Carbonneau KJ, Matthew SM. Comparative effectiveness of training
with simulators versus traditional instruction in veterinary education: meta-
analysis and systematic review. J Vet Med Educ 2022; 49(1): 25–38.
97 Fletcher DJ, Militello R, Schoeffler GL, et al. Development and evaluation of a
high-fidelity canine patient simulator for veterinary clinical training. J Vet Med
Educ 2012; 39(1): 7–12.
98 Jensen LS, Merry AF, Webster CS, et al. Evidence-based strategies for preventing
drug administration errors during anaesthesia. Anaesthesia 2004; 59(5): 493–504.
99 Merry AF, Anderson BJ. Medication errors – new approaches to prevention.
Paediatri Anaesth 2011; 21(7): 743–753.
100 Koyama AK, Maddox CS, Li L, et al. Effectiveness of double checking to reduce
medication administration errors: a systematic review. BMJ Qual Saf 2020; 29(7):
595–603.
101 Westbrook JI, Li L, Raban MZ, et al. Associations between double-checking
and medication administration errors: a direct observational study of paediatric
inpatients. BMJ Qual Saf 2021; 30(4): 320–330.
102 Merry AF, Shipp DH, Lowinger JS. The contribution of labelling to safe medica-
tion administration in anaesthetic practice. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2011;
25(2): 145–159.
103 Peerally MF, Carr S, Waring J, et al. The problem with root cause analysis. BMJ
Qual Saf 2017; 26(5): 417–422.
104 Mosedale P. Introducing clinical audit to veterinary practice. In Pract 1998; 20:
40–42.
105 Rose N, Toews L, Pang DS. A systematic review of clinical audit in companion
animal veterinary medicine. BMC Vet Res 2016; 12: 40.
106 Patel NK, Sarraf KM, Joseph S, et al. Implementing the National Hip Fracture
Database: an audit of care. Injury 2013; 44(12): 1934–1939.
107 Colvin JR, Peden CJ. Raising the Standard: A Compendium of Audit Recipes
for Continuous Quality Improvement in Anaesthesia, 3rd edn. London, UK:
The Royal College of Anaesthetists, 2012.
108 Burgess R. New Principles of Best Practice in Clinical Audit, 2nd edn. Abingdon,
UK: Radcliffe Publishing, 2011.
109 Langley GJ, Moen RD, Nolan KM, et al. The Improvement Guide. A Practical
Approach to Enhancing Organizational Performance, 2nd edn. San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass, 2009.

-- 55 of 1450 --

Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of Lumb and Jones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
40
Introduction
Anesthesia is often required for patients undergoing procedures
that incorporate the use of devices that could present a danger to
the patient or the anesthetist. This chapter will focus on how to
ensure a safe environment for both the anesthetist and the patient
during the use of lasers and for diagnostic imaging procedures
using radiation or high-strength magnetic fields.
Laser
The word “laser” is an acronym for Light Amplification by
Stimulated Emission of Radiation. Surgical lasers produce an
intense beam of pulsed or continuous invisible infrared light
(radiation) that can be hazardous [1–3]. Laser devices are classi-
fied and labeled by the manufacturer according to their potential
to cause biological damage. The classifications range from Class 1,
the safest, to Class 4, the most hazardous. Wavelength, output
power, and tissue exposure time are parameters used to categorize
lasers and determine which precautions are necessary [4]. The
most common lasers utilized in veterinary procedures have high
emission levels and are listed in Class 3b or Class 4. The American
National Standards Institute’s Z136.3 document provides guid-
ance for the safe operation of lasers in healthcare facilities,
including veterinary hospitals [5–6]. The primary hazard associ-
ated with Class 3b and Class 4 lasers is related to accidental expo-
sure to laser emissions.
Laser beam hazard and safety
Exposure may occur directly from the laser beam, or when the beam
is reflected from a polished surface, metal instruments, or other
objects. Reflected laser beams are unaltered and contain the same
energy as the direct beam. Backscattering can also occur as the
energy partially reflects on impact with tissue. The energy reflected
in backscatter is less than the direct or reflected beam but may still
have a damaging effect on staff and equipment. The Nd:YAG and the
Argon laser are known to produce significant backscatter. The parts
of the body at greatest risk are the eyes and skin.
The eye is extremely sensitive to laser radiation and can be per-
manently damaged from direct, diffuse, or reflected beams. Even
brief or partial exposures can instantaneously damage the cornea,
lens, or retina [1–3]. The extent of ocular damage is determined by
the laser irradiance, exposure duration, and beam size. Infrared
radiation is invisible; therefore, it is possible for eye damage to
occur without awareness that an exposure has occurred. Since the
eye cannot detect the invisible beam, it does not respond with a
blink reflex or by averting the eye from the beam. Laser-induced
4 Safety Considerations for Laser
and Radiographic Procedures and Magnetic
Resonance Imaging
Julie A. Smith1 and Carrie Davis2
1 MedVet Vancouver Emergency Veterinary and Specialty Care, Vancouver, Washington, USA
2 MedVet Dallas Emergency Veterinary and Specialty Care, Dallas, Texas, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 40
Laser, 40
Laser beam hazard and safety, 40
Laser fire hazard and safety, 41
Anesthetic considerations for laser surgery, 41
Non-beam hazards and safety, 42
Radiography, 42
Ionizing radiation hazards and safety, 42
Anesthetic considerations for radiography, 43
Remote facilities, 45
Magnetic resonance imaging, 46
Strong static magnetic field, 46
Gradient magnetic fields, 49
Radiofrequency fields, 49
Cryogens, 49
Anesthetic management considerations, 50
Sedation versus general anesthesia, 50
Patient monitoring, 51
Standing equine MRI, 52
Gadolinium-based contrast agents, 52
Emergency procedures, 52
Personnel considerations, 52
References, 52

-- 56 of 1450 --

Chapter 4: Safety Considerations for Laser and Radiographic Procedures and Magnetic Resonance Imaging 	41
eye injury can occur in one or both eyes and may be temporary or
permanent [3].
All persons within the operating area are at risk of eye injury, so
it is critical for the anesthesia provider to take precautions and to
use protective eyewear (Box 4.1). The United States Occupational
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) requires the use of eye
protection for personnel in the presence of lasers that may result in
eye injury [1]. Protective eyewear styles look similar but are not all
the same. Options are based on the type of laser in use and rated for
the specified wavelength range. Eyewear is also rated for its optical
density, which is its ability to reduce the beam power. The optical
density protection level is unique to each laser (Table 4.1) and will
be recommended by the manufacturer in the laser operation man-
ual. The wavelength and optical density for which the protective
eyewear is rated can be found imprinted directly on the glasses
(Fig. 4.1). It is important to observe warning signs in areas where
lasers are in use and not enter without eye protection to prevent
inadvertent exposure.
Eye protection is also important for the patient. The patient’s eyes
should be protected from direct or scattered laser beam by making
sure that the eyelids are closed or protected by drapes. Pet eye pro-
tection goggles are available in a variety of sizes that are suitable for
use with lasers classified as OD 6+ with wavelengths between 800
and 1100 nm.
Skin damage from exposure to the direct laser beam is possible
for personnel who are very close to the procedure site. The severity
of skin damage depends on the total energy deposited and penetra-
tion depth of the laser beam. Injuries range from a mild erythema-
tous reaction to a severe burn. Drapes are effective protection for
patients, and skin protection is usually not necessary for personnel
in the laser use area because the energy density decreases rapidly
beyond the focal point [2,3].
Laser fire hazard and safety
The direct or reflected beam of a high-emission Class 3b or Class
4 laser can ignite combustible materials and is a fire risk. Devastating
operating room fires and combustion of the endotracheal tube
(ETT) leading to fire in the trachea and lower airways are described
in human medicine [7,8]. There is a single report documenting fire
occurring during laser surgery in veterinary patients. It describes
the ignition of the area around the face mask during inhalation
anesthesia in two pet rodents, a mouse and a hamster, during cuta-
neous mass removal with a diode laser. The fire resulted in life-
threatening burns on the face, head, and upper body of both
rodents. Only one animal survived [9].
Anesthetic considerations for laser surgery
General anesthesia with inhalant anesthetics and high concentra-
tions of oxygen are commonly used for immobilization during laser
procedures. Anesthesia may be delivered through an ETT or by face
mask depending on the species and situation. Lasers are frequently
utilized for procedures in the oral cavity and close to the airway in
veterinary patients where intubation is necessary to ensure proper
ventilatory support [10,11]. Commonly used ETTs made of polyvi-
nyl chloride (PVC), red rubber, and silicone are combustible [7,12].
The intense heat of the laser can burn through the ETT in seconds
and cause a fire when the beam encounters the oxygen-enriched gas
inside the tube [13].
Metal, copper-shielded, and insulated ETTs designed for use
with laser procedures are commercially available and are the stand-
ard of care in human anesthesia care. However, these tubes are
expensive, bulky, and not universally safe for all types of lasers, nor
are they available in sizes suitable for horses or very small
patients [7,14].
A latex red rubber ETT, tightly wrapped with spirally overlap-
ping loops of self-adhesive non-reflective aluminum or copper tape,
was reported as safe or safer than commercially available stainless
Table 4.1 Most common surgical lasers used in veterinary medicine. Common types
of lasers used in veterinary procedures are listed along with their wavelengths
and optical density number necessary for proper eye protection.
Laser type 	Wavelength (nanometers) 	Optical density (OD) number
Carbon dioxide 	10,600 	6+
Nd:YAG 	1064 	6+
Ho:YAG 	2100 	4+
Diode laser 	810, 980 	5+
KTP 	532 	6+
Argon 	488, 514 	6+
Source: Adapted from OSHA [1].
Figure 4.1 Protective eyewear performance characteristics are
recommended by the manufacturer in the laser operation manual. The
optical density (OD) and wavelength (nm) for which the protective
eyewear is rated is imprinted directly on the glasses. Source: Dr. Kendall
Taney, DAVDC, Center for Veterinary Dentistry and Oral Surgery,
Gaithersburg, MD, with permission.
Box 4.1 Guidelines for eye protection during laser use.
• ALWAYS wear appropriate protective eyewear (glasses or goggles)
whenever lasers are in use.
• Prescription eyewear, sunglasses, or contact lenses DO NOT protect eyes
from laser beam.
• The wavelength number on protective eyewear should match the laser
being used.
• Optical density (OD) number on protective eyewear should match, or be
greater than, manufacturer recommendations for laser in use.
• Eye protection should fit snugly around the nose and have side and top
guards.
• NEVER look directly at the laser or into the laser output port even when
wearing eye protection.
• Protect glasses/goggles by returning them to their case or cover when
not in use. Scratched, cracked, discolored, or loose lenses may allow
injury to the eye.
Source: OSHA [1]; Lasers in Veterinary Practice [3].

-- 57 of 1450 --

42 	Section 1: General Topics
steel or insulated ETTs for use with CO2 and Nd-YAG lasers [7,14–
18]. Wrapping the ETT increases the external diameter and makes
the surface potentially more irritating to delicate tracheal tissue.
Tape can come loose from the wrapped ETT, and it is necessary to
carefully examine the tube following extubation to ensure that none
of the tape came off in the trachea [2,7,11,14,16]. A simple and
effective method for protecting the ETT from combustion is to
cover it with a thick layer of saline-soaked sponges [7,19]. Keep the
sponges moist throughout the procedure to dissipate heat from any
inadvertent exposure from the laser beam. Count sponges before
and after placement to ensure that all sponges have been removed
from the oropharynx prior to recovery.
The ETT cuff and pilot tubing are also susceptible to damage
during laser surgery [2,7]. Inadvertent deflation of the cuff will
allow leakage of high oxygen concentration and anesthetic gases
into the oral cavity and around the head of the patient. Fire may
result if the enriched oxygen gas contacts the laser beam.
Protecting the pilot tube with saline-soaked gauze sponges and
using saline instead of air to fill the cuff will dissipate heat and
maintain patency of the cuff. Adding a dye, such as new methyl-
ene blue, to the saline used to inflate the cuff may indicate if the
pilot tube is compromised [2,7,19].
When the use of a face mask to deliver inhalant anesthesia in
high concentrations of oxygen cannot be avoided, efforts should be
made to fit the mask tightly around the face or head of the patient,
use the lowest flow rates possible, and provide a physical barrier to
prevent oxygen-enriched gases from encountering the laser beam.
The risk of fire hazard during laser procedures can be minimized
by choosing injectable anesthesia techniques, allowing spontaneous
ventilation with room air or, in the case of laryngeal surgery, placing
the ETT nasotracheally or through a tracheostomy [2,10,11].
Inspired oxygen concentrations may be lowered by mixing with
medical gas if available. Nitrous oxide should be avoided. It may be
necessary to remove the ETT and the oxygen source temporarily at
several points during a procedure to facilitate safe access to the
laryngeal area. To further reduce risk, avoid the use of flammable
antiseptic solutions, drying agents, oil-based lubricants or oint-
ments, or flammable plastics whenever lasers are being used [2,7,20].
Fig. 4.2 is a crisis checklist of emergent measures if an airway or
operating room fire occurs. Emergency procedures should be
determined in advance and practiced by all potential participants.
Non-beam hazards and safety
Laser–tissue interactions produce a plume of smoke that may con-
tain bacterial and viral particles as small as 0.1–0.3 μm and poten-
tially toxic gases, some of which may be carcinogens. Bronchospasm
from bronchial irritation, alveolar edema, interstitial pneumonia,
and diffuse pulmonary atelectasis are potential consequences of
inhaled laser smoke [2,3].
Air evacuation systems are used to reduce pollution of the work-
space and prevent inhalation and alveolar exposure of personnel in
the laser-designated area. Laser filtration surgical face masks are
available for added protection. Standard surgical masks alone do
not provide adequate protection during laser procedures [3].
Patients who are intubated and connected to an anesthesia machine
are not at risk for inhaling laser smoke. However, precautions
should be taken for non-intubated patients to prevent inhalation
exposure and potential pulmonary injury.
Radiography
Plain radiography, contrast studies, fluoroscopy, computed tomog-
raphy (CT), and radiation therapy (RT) all incorporate the use of
ionizing radiation.
Ionizing radiation hazards and safety
Ionizing radiation exposure is potentially hazardous and causes
injury at the cellular level by transferring high levels of energy into
Call for help. Communicate with team.
Activate fire alarm.
Retrieve fire extinguisher.
Airway fire 	Non-airway fire
Disconnect breathing circuit
Remove the damaged endotracheal tube
Stop flow of oxygen ± nitrous oxide
Flush airway with saline or water
Suction the airway to remove any debris
Reintubate with a clean endotracheal tube
Consider bronchoscopy to assess airway injury
Stop flow of medical gases
• Avoid nitrous oxide
• Reduce FIO2to a minimum
Ventilate with room air/self-inflating bag
Remove drapes and other flammable material from patient
Extinguish fire
• Saline-soaked gauze
• Fire extinguisher if equipment fire
Evacuate if fire not easily extinguished
Assess patient for injury
Figure 4.2 Crisis checklist in the event of an airway or operating room fire during laser surgery.

-- 58 of 1450 --

Chapter 4: Safety Considerations for Laser and Radiographic Procedures and Magnetic Resonance Imaging 	43
atoms and molecules such as DNA, RNA, and other cellular pro-
teins, damaging chemical bonds, and altering the electrical charge
to create free radicals or ions [21–24].
Sensitivity to ionizing radiation is highest in the most actively
replicating cells of the skin, bone marrow, small intestine, and
reproductive cells. Developing embryos are particularly sensitive to
the effects of ionizing radiation. Slow growing nerve and muscle
cells are the most resistant to radiation damage [21–24].
Effects from the exposure to ionizing radiation may appear
promptly or be delayed, depending on the type and duration of
exposure. Effects resulting from chronic exposure to low levels of
radiation are most relevant to veterinary anesthesia providers.
Chronic radiation exposure is associated with an increased inci-
dence of cataracts, squamous cell carcinoma, leukemia, and prema-
ture aging [21–25].
Regulations require that personnel limit the level of radiation
exposure to “as low as reasonably achievable” (ALARA). This can
be achieved by increasing distance from the source, using shielding,
and minimizing the number of images and length of time of
procedures.
The primary source of personnel occupational exposure is from
X-rays that bounce off or scatter from objects in the path of the
primary beam. The patient is the major source of scatter radiation.
The amount of potential exposure from scatter radiation is directly
related to the proximity of personnel to the source of the ionizing
radiation and decreases rapidly with increased separation from the
source. The best way to reduce exposure is to temporarily leave the
radiology suite and view the patient from the doorway or through
leaded glass when the machine is in use. When leaving the room is
not possible, standing at least 3 feet away from the patient during
X-ray use and wearing a protective lead apron are advised [22,25].
An anesthesia provider may not be able to move away from the
patient when involved with positioning patients for radiographs or
during fluoroscopy and other special procedures. When this is the
case, avoid direct beam exposure and avoid leaning over the patient
during imaging. When in close proximity to the source of radiation,
protective attire should include a lead apron, thyroid shield, and
gloves. A wrap-around lead apron is recommended for situations
that may result in a high level of radiation exposure such as fluoros-
copy to provide additional protection. Consider wearing protective
goggles if a lot of time is spent in the radiology suite. It is important
to note that lead-lined protective apparel is not designed to provide
protection from direct beam exposure [22].
The risk of potential radiation exposure is increased with CT
and RT due to higher levels of radiation involved in the proce-
dures. During these procedures, it is safest for the anesthetist to
leave the side of the patient and stand behind a portable barrier,
move into the control room, or leave the room altogether. It is
important to monitor cumulative radiation exposure by wearing a
radiation exposure badge or dosimeter [22,23,25]. Each individ-
ual is provided with their own personal badge to wear at all times
during participation in radiographic procedures, and badges
should not be worn outside of the radiology suite. It is recom-
mended that radiation badges be positioned at the neckline on the
outside of the protective lead apron. Radiation levels are evaluated
at scheduled intervals.
Pregnant workers should avoid exposure to radiation as much as
possible, especially during the first 16 weeks of pregnancy, when the
most rapid cell division occurs. It is important to inform manage-
ment as soon as pregnancy is suspected so that arrangements can be
made to only assign the anesthetist to situations that do not involve
radiation. Incorporating the safety precautions of decreasing time
of exposure, increasing distance from the source, and using shield-
ing as much as possible will reduce exposure. Wearing two aprons
or adding a flap to protect the fetus will increase protection. A sepa-
rate radiation dosimeter, worn at the waistline under the apron(s),
is recommended to monitor fetal exposure. Self-reading dosimeters
are available that provide real-time measurements to further assure
protection. The gestational radiation limit is 10% of the normal
limit for radiation workers.
Anesthetic considerations for radiography
Radiology suites are rarely designed with the provision of anesthe-
sia in mind. Therefore, in order to provide optimal anesthesia sup-
port for every patient during radiology procedures, communication
with radiology personnel is critical. It is important to understand
the procedure being done, the contrast agents to be administered,
the route and rate of contrast administration, and the estimated
duration of the procedure. The signalment and temperament of the
patient, the underlying disease process, accessibility of positioning
devices, familiarity with the procedure being done, anesthetic drug
and equipment availability, and amount of assistance are all factors
to consider.
Standard radiographs may be obtained easily with positioning
devices without chemical restraint when the patient is cooperative.
However, not all patients are cooperative and sedation will facilitate
good positioning and reduce the need for repeat X-ray exposure for
both patients and personnel. Longer duration procedures or those
that may be invasive or painful (e.g., certain contrast studies and
fluoroscopy) are best done using sedation or general anesthesia.
The anesthetist must ensure access to the patient for monitoring
and provision of thermoregulatory support, both of which must be
achieved without interfering with the imaging procedure or risking
radiation exposure.
Patients immobilized for radiographic procedures, even when
not intubated or under general anesthesia, should be monitored
closely and continuously. Monitoring should, at the very least, con-
sist of direct observation of respiratory rate and effort, evaluation of
mucous membrane color, palpation of pulse quality and rate, and
the use of pulse oximetry and non-invasive blood pressure. Select
monitors with easy-to- read screens, large numbers, and visual
alarms that can be easily seen in a dimly lit radiology suite from
behind a screen or through an observation window. A source of
supplemental oxygen should be available at all times. Be prepared to
supplement sedation, intubate, support ventilation, induce general
anesthesia, or perform rescue procedures when necessary. Position
the anesthesia machine and monitors, so they can be easily observed
from outside the room or with a video camera. Controlled ventila-
tion is advisable for ensuring adequate ventilation and consistent
inhalant anesthesia delivery in patients during procedures such as
fluoroscopy, CT, and RT when the anesthetist must leave the room.
CT uses high levels of radiation to obtain cross-sectional images
and requires a motionless subject for best results. The imaging time
varies depending on the type of CT being used (i.e., 1-slice versus
64-slice). While the actual imaging time may be short, the time to
position the patient and evaluate the study can be much longer.
Patients experiencing pain may not be willing to lie still or allow
positioning with sedation alone. Even slight movement during the
scan can result in motion artifacts that interfere with the quality of
the images and their diagnostic value. If this occurs, the scan will
have to be repeated, which increases the overall anesthesia time and
the amount of radiation exposure for the patient.

-- 59 of 1450 --

44 	Section 1: General Topics
The radio- opaque stripe in most commonly used ETTs that
makes the tube clearly visible on radiographs causes an artifact on
CT images. These artifacts may interfere with the diagnostic value
of images of the neck and head (Fig. 4.3). ETTs without the X-ray
opaque stripe are available and should be considered when the ETT
will be in the area being imaged. Additionally, armored ETTs (rein-
forced by metal coils) should be avoided if the tube will be included
in the imaging area to avoid artifact and the need for repeated
scanning.
During CT imaging, the presence of metal objects, such as
electrocardiogram (ECG) clips and lead wires, in the scan field can
lead to severe streaking artifacts that can obscure or simulate pathol-
ogy. To avoid interfering with image acquisition, keep ECG leads,
other monitoring cables, and any metal-containing item outside the
anatomic scan field whenever possible. Valuable cardiac rhythm
information is obtainable even when ECG leads are placed at non-
traditional sites, such as the paws, ears, neck, etc. It may be necessary
to disconnect one of the ECG leads temporarily in order to avoid
creating artifacts on the images. Collars, halters, horseshoes, nail
fragments, or other metal objects should be removed from the
patient if they are included in the area being imaged.
During CT examination, the patient table will move in and out of
the bore of the scanner. The anesthesia delivery hoses must be long
enough to move with the patient during imaging without becoming
kinked or disconnected. Monitoring cables and fluid administra-
tion lines should be positioned so that they will not get caught
under the moving table or disconnected from the patient.
Thoracic CT imaging, particularly of the lungs, is best done
immediately 	following 	induction 	to 	minimize 	atelectasis.
Maintaining the patient in sternal recumbency may decrease posi-
tional atelectasis [personal communication: Ian D. Robertson,
College of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State University].
Some thoracic studies may require apnea or breath-hold maneuvers
to alleviate motion from chest expansion during ventilation. A brief
period of apnea may be induced with hypnotic agents (propofol or
alfaxalone) or by hyperventilation. Some facilities employ jet venti-
lation combined with total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) to avoid
respiratory motion. If lung aeration is required, the anesthetist can
manually hold the lungs in inspiration during scanning or perform
an alveolar recruitment maneuver. In this situation, the anesthetist
should wear a protective apron, thyroid shield, and goggles while
tucked behind a mobile shield. Alternatively, an anesthetic machine
equipped with a positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) valve or a
closed adjustable pressure-limiting (pop-off) valve with oxygen flow
turned off may allow the anesthetist to temporarily depart the scan-
ning room. Caution is advised with this method and strict, constant
attentiveness is necessary to avoid catastrophic barotrauma.
RT uses a high dose of ionizing radiation delivered precisely by a
direct beam into tumor tissue. The total treatment dose is divided
into multiple sessions that are spread out over days or weeks.
Patients must be motionless and positioned exactly the same for
each treatment to prevent damage to surrounding healthy tissue. A
variety of devices are used to aid in positioning patients depending
on the location of the area being imaged. Certain positioning
devices may interfere with anesthetic and monitoring equipment or
influence placement of the intravenous (IV) catheter. Effective and
safe anesthetic patient management depends on familiarity with the
procedure and the specific device being used. All personnel must
leave the room for several minutes during treatment. Patients can
be observed from outside the room using a video camera(s), prefer-
ably with sound, positioned to provide a clear view of the patient
monitor, the anesthesia machine, and the patient. The treatment
session can be paused if patient movement or problems are detected.
General anesthesia is recommended for horses and other large
animals during selected radiographic studies and CT scanning to
provide the necessary immobility to obtain diagnostic images
quickly and safely. Inadequately immobilized large animals may
cause damage to the equipment or injury to themselves. Ropes and
positioning pads should be available, and physical effort is required
to move the table and patient. Horses with neurologic disease may
present a higher risk to staff and themselves, particularly during
induction and recovery.
Standing sedated CT of the equine head or distal limbs is an
option at some facilities. Although the risk of general anesthesia is
eliminated, a sedated neurologic or orthopedically unsound horse
may fall and injure itself, staff, or equipment. Consequently, non-
slip flooring is advised, and the handler should have an escape route
planned. Additionally, a handler may remain horse-side and that
individual should be positioned as far as possible from the radiation
source behind a mobile shield and wear an apron, thyroid shield,
and goggles. Sandbags, a rope halter, and a V-shaped trough to aid
positioning, in addition to ear plugs and a blindfold to limit patient
stimulation, may permit the assistant more distance from the radia-
tion source.
Radiographic myelography of equids presents several challenges
for the anesthetist in addition to radiation safety techniques. The
study should be performed quickly to reduce recumbency time and
limit time-dependent reabsorption and dilution of contrast media
that may limit the study’s diagnostic value. Horses presenting for
myelography may have neurologic deficits, including ataxia, result-
ing in additional danger to the animal and staff throughout induc-
tion and recovery. Adverse reactions associated with anesthesia or
myelographic technique that present danger to staff and patient,
Figure 4.3 Cross-sectional CT image of a dog’s neck and trachea showing
artifact created by the radio-opaque markers embedded in the wall of
many common endotracheal tubes. The artifacts are the white lines
radiating outward from the markers in the tube wall situated within the
trachea.

-- 60 of 1450 --

Chapter 4: Safety Considerations for Laser and Radiographic Procedures and Magnetic Resonance Imaging 	45
such as generalized or focal seizures, may occur during the proce-
dure or at recovery. The anesthetist should be prepared to provide
medical management or to re-anesthetize patients when indicated.
Multiple position changes of equine patients require manpower and
efficient coordination with all services involved. When spinal com-
pression is suspected, careful manipulation of the patient is crucial
to avoid exacerbation of any dynamic component to the compres-
sion. Constant vigilance to protect the eye, IV catheter, fluid line,
anesthetic, and monitoring equipment while ensuring ETT safety
and patency are essential. Positional changes and disconnection of
the breathing circuit may result in personnel exposure to inhalant
anesthetic. Attention to limb positioning and padding and support
are essential. Radiolucent cushions should be available to aid neck
positioning for image acquisitions to avoid repeat imaging.
Inadequate padding under the patient when placed on the floor or
myelogram table may increase the risk of developing myopathy or
peripheral neuropathy.
Radiocontrast agents
Radiocontrast agents are used to improve the visibility of certain
structures during radiography and CT. The most common contrast
agents used for radiographic procedures are iodine- and barium-
based preparations [26]. Barium compounds, used for gastrointesti-
nal studies and given orally, do not usually require general anesthesia
in companion animals, but it may be necessary for uncooperative,
untamed, or exotic species. Prevention of barium aspiration is a
critical part of anesthesia management during gastrointestinal stud-
ies, as it can cause serious health effects, ranging from pneumonia to
death [26]. Protection of the airway with an appropriately sized ETT
and inflated cuff and thorough inspection of the back of the mouth
prior to extubation for any signs of barium regurgitation are impor-
tant. If aspiration of barium is suspected, a thoracic radiograph will
be able to identify barium in the lower airways and pulmonary
parenchyma. The ETT should not be removed until the patient is
awake enough to swallow and cough. Consideration can be given to
leaving air in the ETT cuff during extubation in case of unobserved
leakage of barium into the trachea proximal to the inflated cuff,
though this must be weighed against the risk of potential laryngeal
damage.
Iodine-based solutions can be administered orally, intravenously,
intraluminally, or into the subarachnoid space. Adverse side effects
are infrequent and depend on the site of administration and the
type of contrast media used. Contrast reactions are related to the
osmolality, molecular size, and complexity of the agent used. Effects
range from minor physiological alterations to bronchospasm, renal
insufficiency, and life-threatening anaphylaxis [26].
Contrast induced nephropathy is a poorly understood condition
that is increasingly reported in people with pre-existing renal insuf-
ficiency and diabetes [26,27]. Studies in dehydrated dogs have
shown reductions in renal blood flow and glomerular filtration rate
following parenteral administration of hypertonic contrast media.
Prior to administration of contrast agents, evaluate renal and hydra-
tion status, correct hypotension, and communicate any abnormali-
ties to the radiologist to prevent possible renal impairment [personal
communication: Ian D. Robertson, College of Veterinary Medicine,
North Carolina State University]. Reduction in renal function due to
contrast agents can usually be reversed with correction of hypoten-
sion and rehydration [27].
Myelography is a contrast study using plain radiography or CT
scanning, consisting of a subarachnoid injection of a water-soluble,
non-ionic contrast media either in either the lumbar area or
cerebellomedullary cistern. This is an invasive and stimulating pro-
cedure, and the patient must be adequately anesthetized prior to the
insertion of the needle. Patient movement can result in spinal cord
damage or a non-diagnostic study. Side effects following subarach-
noid injection depend on the agent selected, the site of administra-
tion, and needle placement. They include tachycardia, bradycardia,
vomiting, seizures, and cardiac arrest [28,29]. Asystole that
responded to anticholinergic administration was reported in one
dog immediately after a cisternal injection of iohexol during a mye-
logram [30]. Postmyelographic side effects have become less fre-
quent with the development of newer contrast agents. If an adverse
reaction occurs, treatment is palliative and supportive. In addition
to ensuring an adequate airway and providing oxygen and hemody-
namic support, the anesthetist may need to manage anaphylaxis
and bronchospasm with antihistamines, epinephrine, glucocorti-
coids, bronchodilators, vasopressors, or anticholinergics.
Extravasation of contrast agents may lead to local tissue damage.
The severity of the effects caused by perivascular injection depends
on the osmolality of the contrast agent and the volume injected and
can range from mild swelling and erythema to ulceration and necro-
sis [26]. Some radiographic studies require the rapid injection of the
contrast agent by hand injection or using a rapid injector pump at
flow rates of 0.5–5 mL/s. Large volumes of contrast can be injected
subcutaneously if the catheter is not properly placed. Box 4.2 lists
steps to reduce the risk of extravasation as well as methods to treat
accidental perivascular delivery of a contrast agent.
Remote facilities
Radiology facilities are often separated from the anesthesia induc-
tion area, sometimes on a different floor or in a separate building.
Advance planning for transportation to and from the facility,
including consideration of monitoring and anesthesia maintenance
during transfer, is critical for patient safety. In addition to diligent
planning, practice drills for emergent situations in sites distant from
the anesthesia area are recommended. In facilities where a rapid
return to the anesthesia or intensive care area is not practical, rescue
drugs and equipment will need to be transported with the patient or
in place in the radiology suite.
Box 4.2 Prevention and treatment of perivascular injection of
radiocontrast agents.
Prevention
• Always inject contrast agents through an intravenous catheter.
• Use the largest bore catheter possible (> 20 gauge is best).
• Do not use peripheral central venous catheters for power injection.
• Check catheter patency prior to injection.
• Warm contrast media to decrease viscosity and resistance to injection.
• Inspect the area around the catheter immediately following injection.
Treatment
• Early recognition of catheter failure is the best way to prevent serious
side effects.
• Apply a cold compress to areas of perivascular injection.
• Infiltrate the area with saline to dilute radiocontrast agent and aid with
absorption.
• With extravasation of large volumes, hyaluronidase may be added to
further increase absorption.
• Provide symptomatic therapy.
Source: ACR [26]; Belzunegui et al. [31]; Wang et al. [32]; Miles et al. [33].

-- 61 of 1450 --

46 	Section 1: General Topics
Magnetic resonance imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) utilizes a powerful static mag-
netic field, several weaker, rapidly changing, gradient magnetic
fields, and high- frequency electromagnetic (radiofrequency [RF])
waves. The image is generated when protons strongly aligned to the
static magnetic field are perturbed by RF pulses, releasing energy as
they relax back into alignment. The energy released is detected by
the scanner and transformed into an image.
Strong static magnetic field
The main component of an MRI system is the magnet. MRI systems
are classified by the basic shape (e.g., open or closed) and the way the
magnetic field is generated (e.g., by permanent magnet material or
by currents in superconducting coils) [34]. The magnetic field is
measured in tesla (T) units. Permanent magnets have low field
strengths, less than 1.0 T, and have an open configuration.
Superconducting magnets have high field strengths and a closed
cylindrical shape (Fig. 4.4). The clinically functional strengths are
1.0 T, 1.5 T, and 3.0 T. Stronger systems, 4.0 T, 7.0 T, and 9.4 T, are
being evaluated for practical safety and health implications [34–42].
Higher strengths are used for MRI research. The RF transmitter/
receiver used to transfer energy into the tissue and capture the
energy released from the tissue is called an “RF coil.” The most com-
mon types are body and local or surface coils. The body coil is part
of the scanner, whereas surface coils are placed over or wrapped
around the body part being scanned (Fig. 4.5).
The resonance energy emitted from the patient is very weak, and
any other sources of RF noise cause artifacts and interfere with the
acquisition of clear images. Suites designed for MRI acquisition are
shielded from external sources of RF energy by lining the walls with
copper sheeting or by a metal Faraday cage around the scanner. A
safety line is typically marked around the magnet indicating the “5-
gauss line,” which is the point at which the stagnant magnetic field
strength is higher than 5 gauss or 0.5 mT. Beyond the 5-gauss line,
all ferromagnetic objects are strictly prohibited (Fig. 4.6). Electrical
devices produce RF waves and must be kept outside the 5-gauss line
and the MRI room unless they are internally shielded and have
been tested and designated as MRI safe or MRI conditional (see
below). Penetration panels containing waveguides that filter stray
RF can be built into the shielding to allow the passage of plastic
anesthetic delivery hoses, sampling tubing, fiber-optic pulse
oximetry cables, and non-conducting materials into the MRI room
(Fig. 4.7) [42–44].
The MRI environment presents hazards for both staff and
patients, including ferromagnetic projectiles due to the displace-
ment force of the static electromagnetic field, high-level acoustic
noise, and systemic and localized heating. The magnetic field is
always present (i.e., always “on”) even when not scanning a patient.
The field extends outside the bore of the magnet in all directions
and is one of the major hazards of the magnetic resonance (MR)
scanner. The extent of this “fringe” or stray field depends on the
strength and shielding of the magnet. The magnet vendor provides
each facility with a map of the fringe fields for onsite safety (Fig. 4.6).
This invisible field is weakest at the outside edge and increases in
strength as it approaches the scanner. It is critical to be familiar with
the location of the 5-gauss line, as the magnetic strength increases
(A) 	(B)
Figure 4.4 A. Low- field 0.2-T, open style magnet. B. High-field 1.5- T, closed style magnet.
Figure 4.5 Dog positioned under radiofrequency transmitter/receiver coils
for imaging of the head and neck prior to being moved into the bore of the
MRI scanner.

-- 62 of 1450 --

Chapter 4: Safety Considerations for Laser and Radiographic Procedures and Magnetic Resonance Imaging 	47
rapidly beyond this point, causing accidents and medical device
malfunction. The 5-gauss line designates the perimeter of the MRI
safety zone, inside which access is restricted to MRI safety trained
personnel, MRI safety screened patients, and MRI designated safe
or conditional devices (Box 4.3). The closer to the magnet, the
stronger the attraction to ferromagnetic objects, causing them to
become projectiles and causing serious injury to anyone in their
path. The “missile” or “projectile” effect is the most significant haz-
ard to personnel and patients when working in a magnetic environ-
ment. The larger the object, the faster it will be pulled into the
magnet and the more difficult it is to remove. Removal may require
interruption of the magnetic field and lead to expensive restoration
of the magnetic field, costly equipment damage, and loss of reve-
nue [42–44]. All ferromagnetic objects must be removed from
(A)
(B)
Room
10
13 	9
4
6
8
5
1
2
3
7
Equipment 	Electric 	Work room
Contrrol
room
Isocenter
of magnet
MRI gallery
Holding
Exam
room
5’–6”
7’–6”
26’–0”
12’–4”
5 mT 3 mT 1 mT
0.5 mT
0.2 mT
0.15 mT
0.05 mT
10’–3”
20’–1”
Mechanical equipment
exclusion zone
40 mT
20 mT
10 mT
5 mT
3 mT
2 mT
1 mT
0.5 mT
0.1 mT
1800
Figure 4.6 The magnetic field extends outside the bore of the magnet and is always present. The extent of this “fringe” or stray field depends on the
strength and shielding of the magnet. A. A detailed map of fringe fields for a 1.5-T high-field magnet. Access is restricted inside the 5-gauss (0.5 mT) line,
which, in this facility, actually extends beyond the wall of the room in one area. The fringe fields extend the same distance in all directions, above and
below the magnet room. B. Diagram of fringe fields for a 0.2-T low-field magnet.

-- 63 of 1450 --

48 	Section 1: General Topics
(A) 	(B)
Figure 4.7 A. A low- field magnet inside a metal Faraday cage. B. Waveguide radiofrequency filters in one of the panels of the same Faraday cage.
Non-compatible equipment (the anesthesia machine, pulse oximeter, and fluid pump) is kept outside the 5-gauss line and the magnet room and
compatible hoses and cables are passed through the waveguide to the patient.
Box 4.3 Safety screening guidelines for access to the MRI safety zone.
Personnel
• Inform ALL personnel that the MAGNET IS ALWAYS ON.
• Provide an MRI safety course for all anesthesia personnel. Make
it mandatory and verify compliance.
• Restrict access to the MRI safety zone to individuals who have
completed the MRI safety course.
• Be prepared for an anesthetic emergency. Establish and practice
an emergency action plan.
• Routinely update and review safety information and emergency
procedures.
• Screen any personnel who will be providing patient care in the
MRI suite for insulin pump, pacemaker, aneurysm clip, ocular
metal, hearing aid, cochlear implant, metal piercings, recent
surgery, etc.
• Pregnant personnel are not at risk in the MRI safety zone but
should not remain in the MRI room during imaging.
• Be vigilant to prevent any ferromagnetic objects from being
inadvertently brought into the MRI safety zone (stethoscopes,
laryngoscopes, medical instruments, clippers, oxygen tanks, etc.).
Equipment
• Only equipment labeled conditional for the strength of the
magnet in use should be taken into the MRI safety zone. Any
other equipment must be tested and labeled as safe by the
designated Safety Officer, MR technologist, and/or magnet
engineer prior to entering the area.
• MRI- unsafe equipment located close to the MRI safety zone must
be conspicuously labeled “unsafe for MRI” to prevent inadvertent
transfer into the scan room.
• Screen any equipment that leaves the MRI area when it returns,
as ferromagnetic items may have been placed on it.
• Ferromagnetic devices used inside the MRI safety zone must be
positioned outside the 5-gauss line and physically secured with
plastic or rope ties, non-magnetic bolts, or a weighted base
system. Conspicuously label the device “unsafe for MRI” and
mark the position of the 5-gauss line on the floor.
Patient
• Prior to entering the MRI safety zone, obtain a complete history and carefully
screen patients for the presence of metal implants. Pacemakers, microchips,
orthopedic implants, bullets or shrapnel, gold beads, ingested gravel or other
metallic/magnetic substances in the gastrointestinal tract may pose a hazard for
the patient or interfere with image acquisition.
• Remove collars, harnesses, halters, nose rings, hair clips, and any other items
containing metal.
• Determine if the patient is ambulatory. Have a plan for getting large non-
ambulatory patients into the facility/induction area.
• Transdermal patches (fentanyl and others) may contain aluminum that can heat up
and cause skin irritation or burns. If the patch is located in the region being
scanned, consider removing the patch prior to imaging and replacing it following
the scan.
• Have available a non- ferromagnetic gurney, stretcher, or table to transport heavy
patients into the MRI safety zone.
• Carefully inspect any attached medical devices for metal parts or needles (urine
collection systems, triple lumen catheters, infusion pumps, etc.).
• Remove towels, blankets, and other items from around the patient before entering
the MRI safety zone. Ferromagnetic items may be hidden under blankets and
become missiles when they get close to the magnet.
Equine checklist
• Remove shoes and clean all feet. Cover or wrap feet not being imaged.
• Verify the region to be imaged. When imaging feet, radiograph before taking into
the MRI safety zone to ensure that there are no metal pieces in the hoof.
• Confirm availability of MRI- safe table and scan time.
• Review table orientation and pad configuration prior to anesthesia.
• Place urinary catheter prior to entering the MRI Safety Zone to prevent contamination
of and potential damage to the MRI scanner.
• Coordinate MRI safety trained personnel to assist with moving the patient into the
MRI safety zone, to assist with positioning, and later to assist with moving the
patient into recovery.
• Designate a system to identify MRI safety trained personnel (hats, shirts, etc.) to
prevent inadvertent inclusion of an untrained volunteer.
• Keep scan time as short as possible (not to exceed 90 min).

-- 64 of 1450 --

Chapter 4: Safety Considerations for Laser and Radiographic Procedures and Magnetic Resonance Imaging 	49
personnel entering the MRI suite, including badges, phones, and
hair pins, as well as from patients (e.g., horseshoes).
In the bore of the magnet, where the magnetic field is the strong-
est, implanted, non-spherical, metallic objects such as aneurysm
clips will torque or rotate as they attempt to align with the magnetic
field. The induced rotation may cause the object to move in such a
way as to tear vital structures [42–45]. Other implanted materials
such as microchips, intravascular coils and stents, and vascular
clamps can be safely imaged 6 weeks following placement once
adequate scarring has occurred [42]. Personnel and patients should
be screened for ferromagnetic implants by the appointed Magnetic
Resonance Safety Officer or healthcare professional.
Transdermal patches (e.g., fentanyl and others) can contain alu-
minum or other metallic substances that could cause skin burns if
exposed to an RF field. Second-degree burns have been reported in
humans due to transdermal patches [42]. A warning about this haz-
ard was issued by the United States Food and Drug Administration
(FDA), and removal of transdermal patches prior to imaging is
recommended [46,47].
Medical devices are tested and labeled safe, conditional, or unsafe
for use in a strong magnetic field using the American Society for
Testing and Materials International classifications and icons [42]:
MRI Safe: Items made from materials considered safe in an MRI
environment, such as glass, plastic, silicone, etc. and devices that
have been tested and are considered safe for the patient and the
individuals working in specific MR environments.
MRI Conditional: Depending on the specific MR environment,
objects may or may not be safe for the patient or personnel work-
ing with them. There are eight subcategories in this classification.
MRI safety of a particular device or implant can be found at the
manufacturer’s website or at www.mrisafety.com.
MRI Unsafe: Magnetic or metallic items known to pose hazards in
all MRI environments to a patient or other individual. There are
two subcategories in this classification depending on the type
and degree of risk. It should be noted that the default magnetic
field used to categorize devices is 1.5 T.
No substantial or harmful biological effects have been reported
in patients or MRI technologists following short-term exposures to
static magnetic fields up to 9.4 T [42], although transient symptoms
such as vertigo or nausea are sometimes reported. Anesthesia is
required to provide the necessary immobility for veterinary patients
during MRI, and it is often the same individual providing anesthe-
sia support, leading to repeated and prolonged exposure to static
magnetic fields. There are no current studies regarding prolonged,
chronic exposure to date. The use of MRI during interventional
procedures and surgery in humans is becoming more common,
leading to increased exposure for the patient, anesthetist, surgeon,
and other hospital personnel [48]. Until more evidence is available
regarding these effects, personnel providing anesthesia should take
precautions to limit the overall time in the MRI room.
Gradient magnetic fields
Gradients, or time-varying magnetic fields, are created by weaker
magnets located within the primary magnet. Gradients are switched
on and off many times per second producing variations in the mag-
netic field that allow image slices to be formed. Gradient switching
induces electrical currents, and conscious human patients have
reported nerve stimulation or tingling during sequences using gra-
dients. Safety standards have been installed in MR systems to pro-
tect patients from any potential hazard or injury [42].
Gradient switching is also the source of the “clanging” noise
heard during MRI. The level of acoustic noise depends on the scan
sequence and magnet strength. Noise levels range from 103–115
decibels (dB) for a 1.5-T magnet and 126–131 dB for a 3.0-T sys-
tem [42,48]. The FDA and The International Electrotechnical
Commission limit permissible sound levels to 99 dB with hearing
protection in place. The OSHA and the Department of Health in
the United Kingdom recommend a maximum noise exposure of 85
dB over an 8-h period [42,49]. To prevent temporary or permanent
hearing damage from exposure to high noise levels, personnel in
the MRI room during scanning should wear hearing protection.
The best protection is provided by disposable or reusable ear plugs
with a noise reduction rating (NRR) of 30–33 dB or close-fitting
headphones with NRR ratings from 20–30 dB. Optimal protection
depends on how the ear plugs fit. Combining ear plugs and head-
phones will improve protection by 5–10 dB [42].
While hearing protection was not traditionally used for veteri-
nary patients during MR imaging, it is becoming more common
and is routine at the authors’ facility. The increased noise levels in
the stronger magnets and extended scan times in clinical and
research settings are reasons to consider using methods to reduce
noise exposure [50]. Noise reduction may also allow lighter planes
of anesthesia [51]. Isoflurane anesthesia has a protective effect on
noise-induced hearing loss in mice [52,53]. Testing the hearing of
veterinary patients during and after MR imaging to assess effective-
ness of hearing protection devices is problematic, and there are cur-
rently no published studies on this subject. Hearing protection is
commercially available for dogs and cats and has been tested to be
safe during MRI [54], but the level of noise reduction has not been
determined.
Radiofrequency fields
Radiofrequency (RF) radiation is pulsed into tissue, eliciting the
release of energy or a resonance signal from tissue for image con-
struction. The majority of the RF energy is transformed into heat
within the patient’s tissues and can elevate body temperature [42,49],
especially in large dogs and when scan times are long. The stronger
the magnet, the more RF energy is required (3.0 T > 1.5 T). The
specific absorption rate (SAR) of the RF radiation is measured
throughout the scan to prevent systemic thermal overload. The
SAR is strictly limited by the MR scanner software based on guide-
lines established by the FDA and is calculated based on the weight
of the patient. When potential overheating is detected, imaging will
be interrupted by the system to allow more time between sequences
and limit SAR [42,49].
Most MRI-related imaging injury reports in humans are related to
RF burns resulting from the electrical currents induced in conductive
materials such as ECG cables used during imaging. Cables placed
against a patient’s bare skin or that are looped can create a voltage
strong enough to cause a burn that may require skin grafting [42,55].
To prevent the possibility of burns, take care to make sure that all
cables run straight, do not contain loops, and are in parallel to the
bore of the magnet. Insulate cables from areas of non-haired skin and
only use MRI conditional devices tested for the strength of magnet.
Cryogens
Superconducting high-field- strength magnets generate a large
amount of energy and heat and must be encased in supercooled
liquefied gas or cryogens, usually liquid helium. If the system mal-
functions and the temperature of the helium rises, enormous pres-
sures can build up and cause an explosion called a “boiling liquid
expanding vapor explosion” (BLEVE) or “quench.” When this hap-
pens, the magnetic field is lost. Rooms designed for MRI are
equipped with large vent pipes for the evacuation of the helium

-- 65 of 1450 --

50 	Section 1: General Topics
vapor if a quench occurs. A quench rarely happens spontaneously
but can be manually triggered in the event of a fire in the magnet
room or other life-threatening situation requiring termination of
the magnetic field, such as someone being crushed against the MRI
scanner by a large ferromagnetic object [56].
If the vent pipe fails to contain the helium vapor, a cloud of vapor
will enter the MRI room. This vapor is still very cold and can cause
frostbite and asphyxiation due to displacement of oxygen in the
room. In the event of a quench, the room should be evacuated imme-
diately. As the magnet could have a high-voltage electrical charge,
care should be taken to avoid any physical contact with it when exit-
ing. The patient should not be moved until the air in the room has
returned to normal. Emergency and rescue personnel should not
rush into the room as the magnetic field takes time to dissipate.
Anesthesia providers should become familiar with and adhere to the
quench protocol in place for the facility where they are working.
Anesthetic management considerations
For MR imaging, patients are placed on a long table, positioned in
devices to prevent motion, covered with RF coils and insulating
blankets, and then moved into the center of the bore of the MRI
scanner (Fig. 4.5). Patients are difficult to visualize, and access is
limited, especially in smaller patients. Like most anesthetic man-
agement, planning is key to success, particularly when anesthetiz-
ing a horse for MRI. Designation of staff roles throughout
preparation and positioning due to the physical effort required and
time-sensitive nature of equine recumbency is necessary to produce
high- quality images in a safe and efficient manner.
The region being evaluated is imaged in different planes using
sequences that are adjusted and repeated to optimize tissue visuali-
zation. These images are compared and used to localize lesions.
Patients must be in the exact same position for every sequence.
Positioning devices, such as sandbags or foam cushions, are used to
support the patient and prevent leaning or moving out of position.
Horses’ limbs may be supported with wood stands and pads with
their feet tied and, depending on the area of interest, pulled tightly
and secured to the wall to aid positioning and prevent motion.
Moldable bean bags and other types of positioning devices are used
in patients when RT or imaging of the same region is planned, so
that the exact same position can be replicated. These devices may
interfere with monitoring or IV access, so it is critical to be familiar
with the scan being performed and the equipment that will be used
so that plans can be made in advance to place IV catheters and
monitoring leads where they will be the most accessible during
imaging. Urinary catheters are recommended in all horses that are
visible and accessible for easy troubleshooting to prevent cata-
strophic urine leakage into the MRI unit or a safety hazard to per-
sonnel due to urine spillage on the floor. Additional extension lines
and injection ports may be required for easy administration of flu-
ids, contrast agents, and any other medications during scanning.
The table can be moved out of the bore for injections, but it is best
to not move the table or patient until the scan is complete.
A routine MRI scan can take 20–60 min depending on the
strength of the magnet, the region being imaged, and the pathology
discovered. It may be necessary to add additional image sequences
or even another scan region that could double the overall anesthesia
time. Plan ahead for this possibility and have additional sedatives,
anesthetic agents, fluids, oxygen tanks, and other medications avail-
able. This is particularly critical when the MRI room is located out-
side the main anesthesia area, in a separate building, adjacent
trailer, or other remote location. Large animal patients may have to
be transported some distance from the induction area, and later
back to the recovery area, so additional sedatives or injectable anes-
thetics may be required during transport.
Many small animal patients needing an MRI are non-ambulatory
and require transport to and from the MRI suite. The safest option
is a magnet-safe gurney or stretcher that can be used for transport
from the holding area into the MRI safety zone. MRI-safe gurneys
that are designed for humans work well, especially for large breed
dogs or other patients up to 150 kg in weight. Heavy patients can be
transferred directly onto the MRI table, which aids in keeping their
spines supported during repositioning and requires fewer person-
nel to move them. Some magnets are equipped with a detachable
table for transporting patients into and out of the room. Moving
heavy, non-ambulatory patients into small MRI facilities, such as
those located in trailers, requires additional personnel and an MRI-
safe stretcher or other method.
Sedation versus general anesthesia
Regardless of whether sedation or general anesthesia is chosen,
comprehensive vital sign monitoring is essential for adequate
patient care during scanning. The authors recommend intubation
with the ability to control ventilation to not only maintain a stable
plane of anesthesia but prevent respiratory motion rendering non-
diagnostic images. However, light or no sedation at all may be pre-
ferred for obtunded yet stable patients for short scans. Monitoring
can be more challenging when the patient is not intubated or not
anesthetized, and the vibration and loud noises may cause unex-
pected arousal, necessitating additional imaging and prolonging the
process. It is recommended that someone stay in the magnet room
to visually monitor sedated patients during scanning to observe res-
pirations and palpate pulses as electronic monitors may be unrelia-
ble. Be prepared to intubate and support ventilation or switch to
general anesthesia in the event there is respiratory depression or
compromise, if the patient will not lie still, or if scanning time is
extended. Additional ETTs, a resuscitation bag (e.g., Ambu® bag),
and an oxygen source should be immediately available (see below).
General anesthesia, either injectable or inhalant, provides more
reliable immobility and vital sign monitoring. Injectable protocols
allow intubation for the provision of oxygen and ventilatory sup-
port, as well as the use of capnography. TIVA administered by
repeated IV bolus injections or continuous infusion may be indi-
cated for certain patient conditions or when an MRI-safe anesthe-
sia machine and vaporizer are not available. Anesthetic infusions
can be administered using a magnet-safe fluid or syringe pump or
an inline fluid regulator. The infusion rate should be closely moni-
tored when inline regulators are used for the delivery of anesthetic
agents to prevent potentially fatal overdoses [57]. When MRI-safe
equipment is not available, tubing can be passed through a wave-
guide to the patient from a pump located outside the MRI room
(Fig. 4.7). Make sure the catheter is patent and secure, along with
any connections, and the line is long enough before moving the
patient into the bore of the magnet. Disconnection or a non-patent
catheter will result in arousal, motion, and potential injury to the
patient and the scanner.
A light plane of anesthesia is usually adequate to prevent move-
ment during the scan. However, if the patient is too light and
moves before the scan is completed, the sequence will have to be
repeated, increasing anesthesia time. Even small amounts of body
motion due to respiratory effort can interfere with some sequences.
Controlled ventilation, manual or mechanical, can minimize this
motion. Some sensitive, short (30–45 s) sequences are run using
the “breath-hold/apnea” technique to eliminate all respiratory
motion. Adequate anesthetic depth and monitoring are essential

-- 66 of 1450 --

Chapter 4: Safety Considerations for Laser and Radiographic Procedures and Magnetic Resonance Imaging 	51
in equine patients to prevent catastrophic damage to MRI equipment
and the patient if the animal becomes light and thrashes within
the bore.
Receiver coils plug into connections located in the MRI table.
Precautions should be taken to protect these connections from
any organic fluids (urine, blood, or feces) as well as leakage from
the IV catheter to prevent a short circuit and the need for costly
replacement (Fig. 4.8).
Inhalation anesthesia requires equipment and an oxygen source
that is MRI conditional for the specific magnet strength being
used. Oxygen can be piped into the room or MRI-safe aluminum
tanks can be used. Non-compatible anesthesia machines can be
used outside the room with long hoses passed through waveguides
or, if used inside the MR room, positioned outside the 5-gauss line
and secured to the wall or floor to prevent movement toward the
magnet. Delivery hoses need to be long enough to reach the
patient when they are moved inside the bore of the magnet and to
accommodate any additional movement of the table. Coaxial
delivery systems are commercially available up to 108 inches in
length, or corrugated tubing can be cut to the desired length and
attached to a Y-piece. Extra-long delivery hoses should be kept out
of traffic areas to prevent disconnection, kinking, or obstruction
of the tubing [57]. The pilot tube of the ETT may contain a small
amount of metal that will cause an artifact on the images if it is in
the scan field.
Ventilators can improve patient management and image quality
by providing ventilatory support, a consistent plane of anesthesia,
and control of respiratory motion. The ability to control ventilation
is especially important for patients with pre-existing respiratory
depression and those with suspected elevated intracranial pressure
who require careful control of carbon dioxide concentrations.
To prevent potential hazards, the MRI-compatible anesthesia
machine should be dedicated for use in the MRI room and remain
within the MRI safety zone at all times. Metallic objects or other
MRI-unsafe items may be placed on anesthetic machines when out
of the area and accidentally brought into the room when the
machine is returned. An additional anesthesia machine, conspicu-
ously labeled MRI-unsafe, can be kept outside the MRI safety zone
for induction, recovery, transport, and/or rescue procedures.
Patient monitoring
The monitoring standard and capability in an MRI facility should
be comparable to the surgical suite or any other area where general
anesthesia is performed. Ordinary monitoring equipment and
accessories are not designed for use in the MRI environment as the
RF fields can adversely affect their operation. The dangers associ-
ated with using monitors and/or monitoring probes and cables not
confirmed safe for use inside the 5-gauss line include possible pro-
jectile hazard, patient burns, and degradation of the images.
Available MRI-safe vital sign monitors are designed for use in
humans but are easily adaptable for use in veterinary patients.
Compared to standard monitoring systems, they are quite expen-
sive. There are increasing numbers of affordable, refurbished MRI-
safe monitors available for purchase due to constant upgrading of
human systems. It should not be assumed that a monitor is safe for
use with a 1.5-T magnet will be safe with a 3.0-T magnet. The anes-
thetist should check with the manufacturer before taking equip-
ment into a new magnetic environment and be familiar with the
location of the 5-gauss line.
Some MRI-safe monitoring systems are composed of a main
monitor station with one or more wireless remote units so that
anesthesia providers can monitor the patient when in the room as
well as when outside the MRI room. If there is only one main moni-
tor, the anesthetist may have to stay in the room for the entire
procedure or the monitor can be positioned such that it can be visu-
alized through a window or door or via a camera from outside the
magnet room. Horses should be monitored constantly and directly
to prevent disastrous consequences associated with sudden arousal.
Monitors that are not safe for use in the MRI environment can be
located outside the MRI safety zone with MRI-safe cables passed
through waveguides to the patient. Long cables should be posi-
tioned outside of the work area to prevent damage, disconnection,
or personnel injury. As gradient noise makes it difficult to hear
alarms, monitors that have large, easy-to- see, colored flashing
alarms are recommended. The alarm volume can be set to high, and
the unit placed in a location where it can be easily visualized.
Gradient magnetic fields and radiofrequencies can interfere with
the ECG, making it unreadable during many sequences. Newer
MRI- safe monitoring systems have filters to help eliminate the
interference. The appearance of the T wave or ST segment of the
ECG complex may be elevated due to superimposed voltages gen-
erated by aortic blood flow in a magnetic field [56]. Voltages and
currents generated during scanning can cause thermal injuries in
tissues that contact conducting cables. There are reports of burns
requiring skin grafts that resulted from a non-insulated ECG cable
and a non- compatible pulse oximeter probe in people [49]. Burns
can be prevented by keeping the cables away from the patient and
making sure the cables are parallel to the bore of the magnet, do not
overlap, or contain any loops. Newer monitors designed for MRI
use have short wireless ECG cables to eliminate this hazard.
Carbon graphite ECG electrodes are recommended for use dur-
ing MRI. Graphite patches work best with direct skin contact so
shaving is required in most veterinary patients. When a dysrhyth-
mia is suspected, the scan can be stopped so that the rhythm can be
evaluated.
Fiber-optic pulse oximetry is MRI safe and is available in a
variety of probe styles. The use of hard-wired pulse oximeters in the
magnetic environment will result in unreliable readings, image
degradation, and possibly patient burn injuries [49].
Capnography with sidestream sampling technology and extra-
long sampling lines connected to a monitor inside or outside the
magnet room is utilized during MR imaging.
Figure 4.8 Location of a radiofrequency coil connection in the MRI table
adjacent to the IV catheter in a dog anesthetized and positioned for an
MRI scan. Such connections should be protected with absorbent,
water-proof pads to prevent fluid damage.

-- 67 of 1450 --

52 	Section 1: General Topics
Both invasive and non- invasive arterial blood pressure monitor-
ing can be used during MR imaging. Non-invasive oscillometric
blood pressure is available on MRI-safe monitoring systems, and
the air-filled hoses are not hazardous. When monitoring arterial
blood pressure invasively using an arterial catheter and transducer,
keep the transducer outside the bore of the magnet to reduce vibra-
tion interference.
Hypothermia is a concern as MRI rooms can be very cold. Heat
loss during scanning can be minimized by covering or wrapping the
patient with fleece blankets or insulating material and requesting
the MRI technologist to turn off the fan inside the bore of the mag-
net. External heat sources may be cautiously used, such as warmed
fluid or rice bags, as long as they are insulated from direct contact
with the patient. Snap or click instant heat sources are MRI safe, but
there is a small metal button inside that will cause an artifact on the
images if it is in the area being scanned. These devices should be
used with caution as they get extremely hot immediately after acti-
vation and can cause serious burns if they are in direct contact with
the patient. There are no commercially available electrical warming
systems specifically designed for use in an MRI room. Circulating
hot water blankets have been used safely but must be approved by
the safety officer before they can be taken into the room. The water
in the blanket will be visible on the scan if it is in the region being
imaged and will create an artifact. If this is a concern, the blanket
can be removed for certain sequences.
Hyperthermia may also be a concern during prolonged imaging
in high-field- strength magnets, especially in large patients. Body
temperature fluctuations can be assessed during MRI using a digital
thermometer, a fiber-optic temperature probe, or a modified stand-
ard esophageal temperature probe. Skin surface temperature tech-
nology is unreliable in both human and veterinary patients [42,58].
Standing equine MRI
Standing, sedated low-field MRI (0.27 T) is available for horses.
Despite the low field strength, the same safety precautions are
advised as with high-field MRI; however, shoes need only be
removed from the foot that is being imaged and the halter may
remain in place. Standing MRI eliminates the need for and risks of
general anesthesia but requires motionless imaging, challenging the
anesthetist to appropriately titrate sedation and analgesia to main-
tain a steady, securely standing patient and avoid non-diagnostic
images or injury. Furthermore, local blocks administered to the limb
being imaged in an effort to assist weight bearing may induce arti-
fact and contribute to non-diagnostic images. The authors advise
consulting with radiology prior to making such decisions. Equipment
for MRI should be protected by a handler at the head of the horse to
avoid damage to the coil and floor level MRI unit secondary to horse
hooves or urination. Monitoring should be employed at the same
standard as any standing sedated procedure including, at a mini-
mum, monitoring of heart rate, rhythm, and respiration.
Gadolinium-based contrast agents
Gadolinium-based contrast agents (GBCAs) are used to enhance
the visibility of pathology for MRI studies. Gadolinium is a para-
magnetic metal that is highly toxic in its natural state as it blocks
physiologic pathways that rely on calcium. When gadolinium is
chelated with a large organic molecule to form a stable complex, it
is considered safe. The chelated compound has improved water
solubility and is excreted predominantly unchanged by the kid-
neys [59]. The most common adverse effects observed in dogs and
cats receiving a gadolinium chelate are bradycardia, tachycardia,
hypotension, and hypertension [60–62]. Mild to severe anaphylac-
toid reactions have been reported in dogs. Dogs with a history of
atopy may be more likely to have an adverse reaction [63]. An ana-
phylactoid reaction may be difficult to detect during MR imaging
due to limited patient access and the effects of anesthesia. After
administration of a GBCA, the patient should be closely monitored
for any sudden changes in hemodynamic status or other signs of
anaphylaxis. In people with acute kidney injury or advanced
chronic kidney disease, administration of certain GBCAs for MR
imaging has been linked to a rare but life-threatening skin disorder
called “nephrogenic systemic fibrosis” or “nephrogenic fibrosing
dermatopathy” [64]. While this condition has not been reported in
animals, it may be best to avoid administering GBCAs to patients
with significant renal impairment. While GBCAs are typically
administered IV, they can be administered intramuscularly if IV
access is unavailable. Contrast enhanced MRI is not commonly per-
formed in horses.
Emergency procedures
Patients in the bore of the magnet are difficult to access during an
emergency. An emergency plan specific to the facility being used
should be designed in advance and practiced periodically. In the
case of an emergency, support staff and emergency personnel should
not run into the MRI room. Designate an area outside the MRI
safety zone where patient assessment and rescue procedures can be
conducted. The designated area should ideally have an anesthesia
machine, patient monitor, emergency drugs, additional IV catheters
and fluids, ETTs, laryngoscope, suction, and other relevant supplies.
In the event of a cardiopulmonary arrest or other serious adverse
event, the anesthetist should call for assistance, discontinue anesthe-
sia, and signal to the technologist to stop the scan and move the table
out of the bore of the magnet. The anesthetist can then assess the
patient and initiate CPR, if indicated, while moving the patient from
the MRI room to the predesignated area for resuscitation.
Personnel considerations
Powerful, invisible hazards make working in an MRI environment
extremely hazardous. Prior to entering the MRI area, personnel
must be carefully screened and made familiar with the safety guide-
lines associated with working in an MRI environment to prevent
serious and life-threatening accidents. There are no reports of MR-
related accidents in the veterinary literature though in human medi-
cine accidents tend to be underreported [43]. Careful planning and
continuous communication between all involved personnel is vital
to ensure a safe work environment and a successful anesthetic event.
References
1 United States Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA) Technical Manual (OTM), Section III, Chapter 6. www.osha.gov/dts/osta/
otm/otm_iii/otm_iii_6.html (accessed August 2023).
2 Hermens JM, Bennett MJ, Hirshman CA. Anesthesia for laser surgery. Anesth Analg
1983; 62: 218–229.
3 Lasers in Veterinary Practice: Safe Use Guidelines. Version 2. Vancouver, BC: British
Columbia Centre for Disease Control, 2011.
4 Laser Standards and Classifications. Rockwell Laser Industries. www.rli.com/
resources/articles/classification.aspx (accessed August 2023).
5 American National Standards Institute (ANSI). Safe Use of Lasers in Health Care.
ANSI Z136.3. Orlando, FL: Laser Institute of America, 2011.
6 Burns K. Laser guidelines encompass veterinarians. JAVMA 2012; 240(7): 779.
7 Dorsh JA, Dorsch SE. Operating room fires and personnel injuries related to sources
of ignition. In: Dorsch JA, Dorsch SE, eds. Understanding Anesthesia Equipment,
5th edn. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins, 2008: 907–928.

-- 68 of 1450 --

Chapter 4: Safety Considerations for Laser and Radiographic Procedures and Magnetic Resonance Imaging 	53
8 Stouffer DJ. Fires during surgery: two fatal incidents in Los Angeles. J Burn Care
Rehabil 1992; 13: 456–457.
9 Collarile T, DiGirolamo N, Nardini G, et al. Fire ignition during laser surgery in pet
rodents. BMC Vet Res 2012; 8: 177.
10 Driessen B, Zarucco L, Nann LE, et al. Hazards associated with laser surgery in the
airway of the horse: implications for the anesthetic management. In: Steffey EP, ed.
Recent Advances in Anesthetic Management of Large Domestic Animals. Ithaca, NY:
International Veterinary Information Service, 2003. www.ivis.org
11 Quandt JE. Airway management. In: Greene SA, ed. Veterinary Anesthesia and Pain
Management Secrets. Philadelphia, PA: Hanley and Belfus, 2002: 1–13.
12 Lai HC, Juang SE, Liu TJ, et al. Fires of endotracheal tubes of three different materi-
als during carbon dioxide laser surgery. Acta Anaesthesiol Sin 2002; 40(1): 47–51.
13 Steinberg TA. Combustion testing of non-metallic materials in ambient and
oxygen-enriched atmospheres. In: Royals WT, Chou TC, Steinberg TA, eds.
Flammability and Sensitivity of Materials in Oxygen-Enriched Atmospheres, vol. 8.
West Conshohocken, PA: American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM),
1997: 370–384.
14 Dorsh JA, Dorsch SE. Tracheal tubes and associated equipment. In: Dorsch JA,
Dorsch SE, eds. Understanding Anesthesia Equipment, 5th edn. Baltimore, MD:
Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins, 2008: 561–628.
15 Mitchel B, Sosis MB. What is the safest endotracheal tube for Nd-YAG laser
surgery? A comparative study. Anesth Analg 1989; 69: 8024.
16 Sosis MB, Braverman B. Evaluation of foil coverings for protecting plastic endotra-
cheal tubes from the potassium-titanyl-phosphate laser. Anesth Analg 1993; 77(3):
589–591.
17 Mitchel B, Sosis MB, Braverman B, et al. Evaluation of a new laser-resistant
fabric and copper foil-wrapped endotracheal tube. Laryngoscope 1996; 106(7):
842–844.
18 Fried MP, Mallampati SR, Liu FC, et al. Laser resistant stainless steel endotracheal
tube: experimental and clinical evaluation. Lasers Surg Med 1991; 11(3): 301–306.
19 Sosis MB. Saline soaked pledgets prevent carbon dioxide laser-induced endotra-
cheal tube cuff ignition. J Clin Anesth 1995; 7(5): 395–397.
20 American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) Task Force on Operating Room Fires.
Practice advisory for the prevention and management of operating room fires. An
updated report. Anesthesiology 2013; 118(2): 271–290.
21 National Research Council (NRC); Committee to Assess Health Risks from
Exposure to Low Levels of Ionizing Radiation. Health Risks from Exposure to Low
Levels of Ionizing Radiation. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2006.
22 California Veterinary Medical Board. Radiation Safety Relating to Veterinary
Medicine and Animal Health Technology in California. Sacramento, CA: California
Veterinary Medical Board, 2012.
23 Radiation Protection Guidance for Hospital Staff. Stanford, CA: Environmental
Health and Safety, Stanford University, 2012.
24 Australian Radiation Protection and Nuclear Safety Agency (ARPANSA). Radiation
Protection in Veterinary Medicine. Code of Practice and Safety Guide, Radiation
Protection Series Pub. No. 17. Yallambie, Australia: Australian Radiation Protection
and Nuclear Safety Agency, 2009.
25 Marcus A. Glowing risk: anesthesiologists’ exposure to radiation on the job.
Anesthesiology News 2009; 35(10): 1–5.
26 American College of Radiology (ACR); Committee on Drugs and Contrast Media.
ACR Manual on Contrast Media, Version 9. Reston, VA: American College of
Radiology, 2013.
27 Katzberg RW. Contrast medium-induced nephrotoxicity: which pathway?
Radiology 2005; 235: 752–755.
28 Paithanpagare YM, Tank PH, Mankad MY, et al. Myelography in dogs. Vet World
2008; 1(5): 152–154.
29 Roux FA, Deschamps JY. Inadvertent intrathecal administration of ionic contrast
medium to a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2007; 48(5): 414–417.
30 Carroll GL, Keene BW, Forrest LJ. Asystole associated with iohexol myelography in
a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1997; 38(4): 284–287.
31 Belzunegui T, Louis CJ, Torrededia L, et al. Extravasation of radiographic contrast
material and compartment syndrome in the hand: a case report. Scand J Trauma
Resus Emerg Med 2011; 19: 9.
32 Wang CL, Cohan RH, Ellis JH, et al. Frequency, management and outcome of
extravasation of nonionic iodinated contrast medium in 69,657 intravenous injec-
tions. Radiology 2007; 243(1): 80–87.
33 Miles SG, Rasmussen JF, Litwiller T, et al. Safe use of an intravenous power injector
for CT: experience and protocol. Radiology 1990; 176(1): 69–70.
34 Overweg J. MRI Main Field Magnets. Hamburg, Germany: Philips Research. www.
mri- q.com/uploads/3/4/5/7/34572113/main_field_magnets_ismrm2006.pdf
(accessed August 2023).
35 Schenck JF, Dumoulin CL, Redington RW, et al. Human exposure to 4.0-Tesla mag-
netic fields in a whole-body scanner. Med Phys 1992; 19(4): 1089–1098.
36 Theysohn JM, Maderwald S, Kraff O, et al. Subjective acceptance of 7 Tesla MRI for
human imaging. MAGMA 2008; 21(1–2): 63–72.
37 van Nierop LE, Slottje P, Kingma H, et al. MRI-related static magnetic stray fields
and postural body sway: a double-blind randomized crossover study. Magn Reson
Med 2013; 70(1): 232–240.
38 van Nierop LE, Slottje P, van Zandvoort MJ, et al. Effects of magnetic stray fields
from a 7 Tesla MRI scanner on neurocognition: a double-blind randomised crosso-
ver study. Occup Environ Med 2012; 69(10): 759–766.
39 Elbel GK, Kalisch R, Czisch M, et al. Design and importance of continuous physi-
ologic monitoring for fMRI in rats at 7T and first results with the novel anesthetic
sevoflurane. In: Proceedings of the 8th International Society for Magnetic Resonance
in Medicine. 2000; 2: 928.
40 Okada T, Fujimoto K, Fushimi Y, et al. Neuroimaging at 7 Tesla: a pictorial narrative
review. Quant Imaging Med Surg 2022; 12(6): 3406–3435.
41 Schmierer K, Parkes HG, So PW, et al. High field (9.4 Tesla) magnetic resonance
imaging of cortical grey matter lesions in multiple sclerosis. Brain 2010; 133(Pt 3):
858–867.
42 Shellock FG. Reference Manual for Magnetic Resonance Safety, Implants, and
Devices. Los Angeles, CA: Biomedical Research Publishing Group, 2013.
43 Kanal E, Barkovich AJ, Bell C, et al. ACR guidance document on MR safe practices:
2013. J Magn Reson Imaging 2013; 37: 501–530.
44 Capizzani R. Magnetic Resonance Imaging Hazards and Safety Guidelines. Strategic
Outcomes Practice, Technical Advisory Bulletin, 2009. www.koppdevelopment.
com/articels/Willis%20MRI_Safety.pdf (accessed August 2023).
45 Klucznik RP. Placement of a ferromagnetic intracerebral aneurysm clip in a mag-
netic field with a fatal outcome. Radiology 1993; 187: 855–856.
46 Kuehn BM. FDA warning: remove drug patches before MRI to prevent burns to
skin. JAMA 2009; 301(13): 1328.
47 JAVMA News. Some metal-backed drug patches lack warning about MRI burn
risk. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2009; 235(1): 16.
48 Hattori Y, Fukatsu H, Ishigaki T. Measurement and evaluation of the acoustic noise
of a 3 Tesla MR scanner. Nagoya J Med Sci 2007; 69: 23–28.
49 Jerrolds J, Keene S. MRI safety at 3T versus 1.5T. Internet J World Health Soc Polit
[Internet] 2009; 6(1). www.koppdevelopment.com/articels/MRI%20Safety%20
at%203T%20VS%201-5T.pdf (accessed August 2023).
50 Lauer AM, El-Sharkawy AM, Kraitchman DL, et al. MRI acoustic noise can harm
experimental and companion animals. J Magn Reson Imaging 2012; 36(3): 743–747.
51 Oguriu M, Orhan ME, Cinar S, et al. Effect of headphones on sevoflurane require-
ment for MRI. Pediatr Radiol 2012; 42: 1432–1436.
52 Chung JW, Ahn JH, Kim JY, et al. The effect of isoflurane, halothane and pentobar-
bital on noise-induced hearing loss in mice. Anesth Analg 2007; 6: 1404–1408.
53 Kim JU, Lee HJ, Kang HH, et al. Protective effect of isoflurane anaesthesia on
noise-induced hearing loss in mice. Laryngoscope 2005; 115: 1996–1999.
54 Baker M. Evaluation of MR safety of a set of canine ear defenders (MuttMuffs®) at
1T. Radiography 2013; 19(4): 339–342.
55 Medical Device Safety Reports. Thermal injuries and patient monitoring during
MRI studies. Health Devices 1991; 20(9): 362–363.
56 Menon DK, Peden CJ, Hall AS, et al. Magnetic resonance for the anaesthetist. Part I:
physical principles, applications, safety aspects. Anaesthesia 1992; 47(3): 240–255.
57 Kempen PM. Stand nearby in the MRI. Anesthesia Patient Safety Foundation (APSF).
Newsletter 2005; 20(2): 32–36. www.apsf.org/article/stand-near- by- in-the-mri
(accessed August 2023).
58 Nasr VG, Schumann R, Bonney I, et al. Performance validation of a modified mag-
netic resonance imaging-compatible temperature probe in children. Anesth Analg
2012; 114(6): 1230–1234.
59 Hao D, Ai T, Goerner F, et al. MRI contrast agents: basic chemistry and safety.
J Magn Reson Imaging 2012; 36(5): 1060–1071.
60 Pollard RE, Puchalski SM, Pascoe PJ. Hemodynamic and serum biochemical altera-
tions associated with intravenous administration of three types of contrast media in
anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 2008; 69(10): 1268–1273.
61 Pollard RE, Puchalski SM, Pascoe PJ. Hemodynamic and serum biochemical altera-
tions associated with intravenous administration of three types of contrast media in
anesthetized cats. Am J Vet Res 2008; 69(10): 1274–1278.
62 Mair AR, Woolley J, Martinez M. Cardiovascular effects of intravenous gadolinium
administration to anaesthetized dogs undergoing magnetic resonance imaging. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2010; 37(4): 337–341.
63 Girard NM, Leece EA. Suspected anaphylactoid reaction following intravenous
administration of a gadolinium-based contrast agent in three dogs undergoing
magnetic resonance imaging. Vet Anaesth Analg 2010; 37(4): 352–356.
64 Woolen SA, Shankar PR, Gagnier JJ, et al. Risk of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis in
patients with stage 4 or 5 chronic kidney disease receiving a group II gadolinium-
based contrast agent: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Intern Med
2020; 180(2): 223–230.

-- 69 of 1450 --

54
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: T he S ixth Edition of L umb and J ones	. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
An adverse event during anesthesia is defined as an event that may
result in patient harm and may be due to the effects of anesthetic
drugs, the patient’s condition, the diagnostic or therapeutic proce-
dure being conducted, or human error. These events are often
emergencies due to the narrow therapeutic margins of drugs used
to induce anesthesia, the co-opting of normal homeostatic mecha-
nisms, and the manipulation of highly sensitive key organ systems
such as the circulatory, respiratory, and neurologic systems. Rapid
intervention is often needed before such an event leads to an
adverse patient outcome.
Rates of adverse events differ among species, country, and across
published studies. For example, the risk of death across species
ranges from 1 in 2000 for dogs to 1 in 29 for birds [1,2]. The time-
frame of what constitutes an anesthetic-related adverse event varies,
ranging from an occurrence during anesthesia to any event
occurring within seven days of anesthesia. Further information is
available in Chapter 2.
The consequences of adverse events range from minimal to
substantial. For example, a short episode of myoclonus during anes-
thesia is unlikely to affect a patient’s long-term welfare, whereas
gastroesophageal reflux leading to esophageal stricture will have
significant negative effects on patient well-being. Death is often con-
sidered to be the worst possible outcome, although significant mor-
bidity and suffering may arguably be worse in some cases.
Adverse events can be categorized according to a variety of crite-
ria. These include the frequency or rate of occurrence, the severity
of consequences to the patient, the organ system involved, and/or
the causative circumstances. It is impractical to use frequency and
severity to categorize adverse events as they are not always known
in veterinary medicine. Organ system designations may not capture
all adverse events, such as drug overdose or machine error.
5 Anesthetic Emergencies, Resuscitation,
and Adverse Events
Erik H. Hofmeister
Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 54
Cardiopulmonary arrest, 55
Basic life support, 55
Advanced life support, 58
Monitoring, 59
Cardiovascular complications, 60
Hypotension, 60
Hemorrhage, 60
Cardiac dysrhythmias, 61
Anaphylaxis, 61
Respiratory complications, 61
Respiratory depression and apnea, 61
Hypoxemia, 62
Airway obstruction, 62
Bronchospasm, 63
Accidental extubation, 63
Iatrogenic tracheal injury, 64
Acute or undiagnosed pneumothorax, 64
Pulmonary aspiration, 64
Volutrauma and barotrauma, 65
Wooden chest syndrome, 65
Airway fire, 65
Anesthetic drug-related complications, 65
Medical error resulting in overdose, 65
Patient arousal, 66
Anesthetic equipment-related complications, 66
Adjustable pressure-limiting valve closure or malfunction, 66
Oxygen supply failure, 67
Breathing system malfunction, 67
Vaporizer-related complications, 67
Other complications, 67
Gastroesophageal reflux and regurgitation, 67
Ruminal tympany, 67
Cerebral herniation, 67
Hyperkalemia, 68
Hypo- or hyperthermia, 68
Myoclonus, 68
Postanesthetic complications, 68
Personnel injury, 70
Post-critical event debriefing, 70
References, 71

-- 70 of 1450 --

Chapter 5: Anesthetic Emergencies, Resuscitation, and Adverse Events 	55
Therefore, a causative circumstances framework will be used in
this chapter, broadly considering that cardiovascular or respiratory
events may be caused by a wide variety of circumstances.
The anesthetist should be prepared to rapidly identify and man-
age adverse events. A lack of awareness of any of these complications
will almost certainly impair identification of the problem. Typically,
when faced with a problem, people use cognitive shortcuts to deter-
mine if the scenario matches a pattern they have seen previously [3].
If it is not a pattern with which they are familiar, higher order
cognitive processing, which is complex and time-consuming, must
be employed. Because of the rapid intervention required for many
anesthetic emergencies, familiarity with them so that pattern recog-
nition can be employed in problem-solving is essential. Awareness
of these events and understanding how to identify and manage them
is a requirement for developing expertise in veterinary anesthesia.
Cardiopulmonary arrest
Cardiopulmonary arrest (CPA) describes the acute cessation of
cardiac mechanical function with concurrent apnea [4] resulting in
termination of oxygen delivery to tissues and death if not addressed
rapidly. A variety of pathologic arrhythmias are associated with CPA,
with treatment varying among them. The goal of cardiopulmonary
resuscitation (CPR) is to provide effective blood flow to the heart and
brain to facilitate return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC). CPR
involves basic life support (BLS), which encompasses the initial steps
taken in the face of CPA, and advanced life support (ALS), which
involves drug therapy and more elaborate and specific treatments
and monitoring during CPR. Postresuscitation care is an essential
component of CPR, as merely succeeding to achieve ROSC does not
guarantee successful patient discharge from the hospital [5].
CPR has overwhelmingly poor outcomes in both human and vet-
erinary medicine. Reported rates of initial ROSC in dogs and cats
are 17–58% and 21–57%, respectively [5–7]. Unfortunately, after
CPR, the overall survival-to-discharge rates drop to 4–7% in dogs,
3–19% in cats, and 1.2% in exotic species [5–8] for all cases. The
rates of ROSC and discharge are unknown in horses, although
anecdotally the prognosis for foals is better than adult horses [9].
Successful ROSC and discharge after CPA in adult horses are suffi-
ciently rare to warrant publication as case reports [10].
The prognosis for anesthetized small animals is notably higher,
with 25–50% of patients having CPA under anesthesia surviving
to discharge [5,6]. This difference may be due to the fact that CPA
under anesthesia may be precipitated by human errors, rather
than the severity of patient disease [11]. In addition, anesthetized
patients usually have venous access established, are intubated and
breathing enriched oxygen rather than room air, and are being
monitored continuously, facilitating more rapid recognition of
CPA [6].
In spite of the grave prognosis for CPR after CPA, one study
reported that veterinary clients believe the rate of discharge after CPA
to be 39% and do not believe that there is a difference in discharge
rate between patients who suffer CPA while under anesthesia versus
those not under anesthesia [12]. Most clients indicated that they
want to discuss CPR with their veterinarian, and most want the vet-
erinarian to make the decision to resuscitate [12]. This may explain
why the euthanasia rate following ROSC is so high [7], as clients
may not appreciate the low chance of discharge, the costs associated,
or had an opportunity to discuss CPA/CPR with their veterinarian
in advance. Given the risk of arrest during anesthesia, the likelihood
of successful discharge, and client misinformation, it behooves the
anesthesia team to communicate with the client about CPA before
anesthetizing a patient.
Increased time from CPA to initiating CPR and duration of CPR
decreases the likelihood of ROSC [5,6]. To ensure the highest
chance of success, hospital staff should be prepared and trained to
respond to the crisis quickly and efficiently. Training has been shown
to improve adoption of activities that benefit CPR efforts [13].
During treatment of an arrest, the veterinarian in charge will usually
take a central role coordinating the resuscitation procedures
(i.e., running the code). It is important that the anesthesia team is
well trained in current CPR procedures [14]. Regardless of initial
training, there is always time-related decay of skills. Refresher train-
ing and mock CPR simulation every 6 months are recommended [4].
The necessary emergency drugs and equipment should be organized
in one place (e.g., crash cart) and should be adequately stocked,
regularly audited, and placed in a readily accessible area. This
should include supplies for venous access, airway management, and
initial pharmacological therapy. It is also wise to have a surgical kit
for emergency thoracotomy, tracheostomy, and venous dissection
available. Equipment failures during CPR were commonly cited as
a deficiency in one veterinary study [15]. Therefore, regular testing
and resupply of the crash cart should be conducted.
In 2012, the Reassessment Campaign on Veterinary Resuscitation
(RECOVER) was organized to develop comprehensive, evidence-
based CPR guidelines for veterinary medicine. It was a collaborative
initiative involving Diplomates of the American College of Veterinary
Anesthesia and Analgesia (ACVAA) and the American College
of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care (ACVECC) who
systematically evaluated the published evidence relevant to small
animal CPR and generated CPR guidelines (Fig. 5.1) [16,17].
Implementation of the RECOVER guidelines has been associated
with an improved outcome in one study [18] but not in another [7].
Regardless, all hospital staff involved in CPR, particularly anesthe-
sia and emergency staff, should be aware of these guidelines. One
study indicated that, while specialists are aware of the guidelines,
many general practitioners are not [19]. This suggests an education
gap, which should be closed through the veterinary education
curriculum and continuing education programs.
Basic life support
Basic life support (BLS) is the foundation for all modern CPR. It
consists of recognition of CPA, initiation of chest compressions,
management of the airway, and assisted ventilation [20]. Studies
have shown that the quality of BLS performed is directly related to
ROSC and survival rate; thus, early and sustained chest compres-
sions are recommended [20]. When multiple trained rescuers are
available, initiation of chest compressions and efforts to secure
the airway can occur simultaneously, and subsequent ventilation
can be delivered concurrent with chest compressions.
Chest compressions
Chest compressions should begin as soon as possible to facilitate
effective blood flow to the heart and brain. Quality compressions
with effective recoil are essential to optimize blood flow [20]. Chest
compressions should be performed continuously without interrup-
tion by each resuscitator until a change in personnel is indicated to
maintain compression quality.
A compression rate of at least 100 per minute should be sus-
tained. Use of a mental metronome (such as a song with a beat per
minute rhythm of 100) improves the accuracy of chest compression
rates in veterinary students [21] and could be a valuable aid in CPR

-- 71 of 1450 --

56 	Section 1: General Topics
Figure 5.1 RECOVER CPR Algorithm. This algorithm summarizes clinical guidelines most relevant to the patient presenting acutely in CPA.
The box surrounded by the gray dashed line contains, in order, the initial BLS and ALS actions to be taken when a patient is diagnosed with CPA:
(1) administration of chest compressions, (2) ventilation support, (3) initiation of ECG and PET
CO2 monitoring, (4) obtaining vascular access for drug
administration, and (5) administration of reversal agents if any anesthetic/sedative agents have been administered. The algorithm then enters a loop of
2-min cycles of CPR with brief pauses between to rotate compressors, to evaluate the patient for signs of ROSC, and to evaluate the ECG for a rhythm
diagnosis. Patients in PEA or asystole should be treated with vasopressors and, potentially, anticholinergic drugs. These drugs should be administered no
more often than every other cycle of CPR. Patients in VF or pulseless VT should be electrically defibrillated if a defibrillator is available or mechanically
defibrillated with a precordial thump if an electrical defibrillator is not available. Immediately after defibrillation, another 2-min cycle of BLS should be
started immediately. BLS, basic life support; CPA, cardiopulmonary arrest; CPR, cardiopulmonary resuscitation; C:V, compression-to- ventilation ratio;
ETCO2
, end-tidal carbon dioxide; PEA, pulseless electrical activity; ROSC, return of spontaneous circulation; VF, ventricular fibrillation; VT, ventricular
tachycardia. Source: Fletcher et al. [17], with permission.

-- 72 of 1450 --

Chapter 5: Anesthetic Emergencies, Resuscitation, and Adverse Events 	57
team training. Myocardial blood flow is determined by the coronary
perfusion pressure (C o
PP), defined as the difference between aortic
diastolic and right atrial diastolic pressures:
C PP 	ADP RADP	o
where ADP is aortic diastolic pressure and RADP is right atrial
diastolic pressure. Cerebral blood flow correlates with cerebral
perfusion pressure (CE PP):
C PP 	MAP ICP	E
where MAP is the mean arterial pressure and ICP is intracranial
pressure. Therefore, interventions that increase diastolic or mean
arterial pressures or decrease RADP and/or ICP are beneficial to
patients undergoing CPR.
Cerebral blood flow in healthy animals is maintained at a fairly
constant level when cerebral perfusion pressure is between 50 and
150 mmHg. During cardiac arrest, autoregulation of cerebral perfu-
sion is disrupted and cerebral blood flow becomes linearly related
to perfusion pressure. Optimizing the patient’s hemodynamic status
during CPR is essential to minimize the risk of adverse cardiac and
neurologic outcomes [22]. Chest compressions in animals should
be performed by compressing the chest by one-third to one- half of
its width, with a greater depth of compression being associated with
improved aortic pressures [20]. An appropriate chest compression
technique also improves the pressure gradient between the aorta in
diastole and the right atrium, which augments coronary perfusion
and increases the probability of ROSC [20].
There are two theories that explain the mechanism of forward
blood flow with chest compressions: the thoracic pump theory and
the cardiac pump theory. The thoracic pump describes movement of
blood out of the thoracic cavity due to changes in intrathoracic
pressure (IttP). This mechanism is thought to be important in
animals with a body weight over 15 kg [20]. The cardiac pump
describes movement of blood out of the heart due to direct,
mechanical compression of the heart by the thoracic wall [20]. After
release of the compression, both the thoracic cavity and the heart
itself recoil (i.e., chest recoil) during the decompression phase.
The decompression phase is critical to successful ROSC as this is
when the heart fills with blood, which facilitates effective stroke
volume [20]. If the chest is not allowed to recoil fully, IttP remains
positive, which decreases venous return to the heart and, hence,
stroke volume [20].
As noted above, continuous administration of chest compres-
sions with minimal interruption is essential. Even short pauses to
evaluate the electrocardiogram (ECG), for example, decrease the
aortic pressure and reduce the likelihood of successful ROSC. CPR
should be performed in a 2-min cycle, with a resuscitator doing
chest compressions for the full 2 min before exchanging with a dif-
ferent resuscitator. Performing high-quality chest compressions is
fatiguing, requiring regular exchange of resuscitators to maintain
compression effectiveness [20]. If the same resuscitator performs
chest compressions for an extended period of time (e.g., 5 min), the
number of correct chest compressions delivered has been shown to
decrease [20].
In cats and small dogs, two-handed compression over the
heart or one-handed compression around the base of the heart
may be used. In larger dogs, two-handed compression over the
heart (for keel-chested dogs) or over the widest part of the thorax
(for round-chested dogs) is recommended [4]. Two-handed com-
pression can also be used in foals. In adult horses, using the knees
or sitting intermittently on the thorax may be used [10]. Chest com-
pressions, as well as other manipulations associated with CPR, can
cause pulmonary hemorrhage and liver fractures [23]. After ROSC,
the patient should be evaluated for trauma, including ultrasound of
the thoracic and abdominal cavity, and any damage appropriately
addressed.
If multiple rescuers are present, interposed abdominal compres-
sion (IAC)-CPR can be performed where conventional chest com-
pressions are combined with abdominal compressions delivered
during the relaxation phase. While interposed abdominal compres-
sion has been shown to improve venous return and hemodynamic
values in animal CPR models [20], in an actual clinical setting,
it has been associated with a lower likelihood of success [24].
Attempting to synchronize abdominal and chest compressions
while maintaining a fast compression rate may actually impair chest
compressions, and this may explain why the beneficial effects in the
laboratory do not translate to clinical CPA cases.
Open-chest CPR is recommended in cases where closed-chest
CPR is ineffective or in cases of elevated IttP such as pleural space
disease, pericardial disease, severe abdominal distension, or flail
chest. With closed-chest compressions, the cardiac output generated
is only 20–30% of normal. Performing a thoracotomy for open-
chest CPR will not only increase cardiac output but also provides an
opportunity to occlude the descending aorta, which redirects blood
flow to essential organs (i.e., brain and heart). Concern about infec-
tion risk is often cited as a cause for delay in initiating open-chest
CPR, but one human study found this risk to be very low [25]. The
exact surgical approach through the thoracic wall does not need to
be perfect, as either the fourth or fifth intercostal space has been
found to be acceptable in dogs [26].
Breathing
Securing the airway and providing adequate ventilation is essential
during CPR [20]. The most expedient technique for accomplishing
this is usually via orotracheal intubation. If prompt orotracheal
intubation is not possible (e.g., for out-of-hospital arrest), ventila-
tion via a face mask or mouth-to-nose can be performed; however,
these techniques are associated with significantly lower PaO2 values
and higher PaCO2 values than those achieved with orotracheal
intubation [27]. In people, even experienced personnel have
only an 82% first-time intubation success rate during CPR [28].
Intubation should be confirmed by direct laryngoscopy or, if
impractical, by auscultation of air movement in the lungs, obser-
vation of chest wall movement, or condensation within the
endotracheal tube [29].
After the airway has been secured, the patient should be venti-
lated manually with the maximal available inspired oxygen concen-
tration (i.e., F I
O2
~1.0). Although current guidelines suggest a
ventilation rate of 10 breaths/min without interruption of chest
compressions [20], a ventilation rate as low as one breath every
30 compressions (i.e., 3 breaths/min) is effective at maintaining
oxygen and carbon dioxide at appropriate levels while minimizing
detrimental effects on compression mechanics [30]. A full breath
should be delivered in approximately 1 s with a 10 mL/kg tidal
volume. A prolonged inspiratory time subjects the patient to a
high IttP for an extended period, which decreases venous return,
increases right ventricular afterload, and decreases left ventricular
distensibility [31].

-- 73 of 1450 --

58 	Section 1: General Topics
Advanced life support
Advanced life support (ALS) involves drug therapy, more elaborate
and specific treatments (e.g., correction of electrolyte disturbances),
and defibrillation when indicated [32].
Pharmacologic therapy
Pharmacologic therapy has been shown to improve outcomes in
CPA (Table 5.1). Some drugs are indicated in most instances of CPA
(e.g., epinephrine), whereas the decision to administer others
depends on patient-specific factors (e.g., administering calcium to a
patient with profound hypocalcemia). Drugs should be given by
the route that facilitates the most rapid delivery to the heart.
The order of preference for drug administration routes in CPR is:
(1) central venous line, (2) forelimb intravenous catheter, (3) any
other peripheral intravenous catheter, (4) intraosseous catheter,
and (5) intratracheal delivery (for epinephrine, vasopressin, or atro-
pine only). If epinephrine, atropine, or vasopressin is given by the
intratracheal route, the dose should be increased (by 10-fold in the
case of epinephrine), and it should be delivered via a long catheter
(e.g., red rubber) advanced to the level of the carina [32].
Vasopressors are widely employed during veterinary CPA events
to increase aortic pressures by increasing systemic vascular resist-
ance and directing more of the intravascular volume from the
peripheral circulation to the central compartment [32]. Both epi-
nephrine and vasopressin are reasonable choices for all types of car-
diac arrest. At the correct dosage, epinephrine exerts its critical
vasoconstrictor effects by acting on vascular α-adrenergic receptors.
Epinephrine’s β-adrenergic effects (i.e., inotropy and chronotropy)
are less important and may actually lead to detrimental increases
in myocardial oxygen consumption once ROSC is achieved [32].
Vasopressin is a non-catecholamine vasopressor that acts on V 1
receptors 	in 	peripheral 	vessels 	while 	decreasing 	cellular
hyperpolarization and increasing intracellular calcium concentration.
In a study in dogs, similar outcomes were obtained with vasopressin
and epinephrine [33]. A high dose (0.1 mg/kg) of epinephrine is no
longer recommended for CPR.
For animals with high vagal tone (e.g., vomiting, ileus) and sub-
sequent bradycardia/asystole, the use of atropine is reasonable [32].
Evidence supporting atropine’s routine use in CPR is sparse, but, as
it has not been associated with worse outcomes, such use is consid-
ered acceptable.
Although now-outdated recommendations did not support the
routine use of corticosteroids, a systematic review in people provides
evidence for the value of steroids in CPR [34]. This is consistent
with a study in veterinary medicine, which documented a beneficial
effect of steroids [5]. Potential beneficial effects of corticosteroids in
CPA may be a result of counteracting relative adrenal insufficiency
in patients with longstanding critical disease [35], counteracting
impairment of adrenal function as a result of CPA, exerting
anti-inflammatory effects, improving cardiovascular function, or
blunting a catecholamine surge [34].
Lidocaine administration may be associated with vasodilation
and a reduction in cardiac output. In pulseless ventricular tachycar-
dia (VT) and ventricular fibrillation (VF), early and rapid defibril-
lation is advised. In dogs with shock-resistant VT or VF, amiodarone
is preferred over lidocaine, although hypotension and anaphylactic
reactions have been reported in this species following amiodarone
administration [32].
The routine use of sodium bicarbonate during CPR is not recom-
mended [32]. Bicarbonate administration may cause paradoxical
cerebral acidosis, hyperosmolarity, and decreased catecholamine
effectiveness. Bicarbonate use may be considered in prolonged CPA
(i.e., greater than 10–15 min) or for CPA due to severe hyperkalemia
or severe metabolic acidosis.
The routine use of calcium during CPR is not recommended [32].
The use of calcium may be considered for CPA due to calcium
channel blocker overdose, severe hypocalcemia, or severe hyper-
kalemia. Calcium administration may cause cellular apoptosis with
impaired neurological outcome and myocardial damage.
Fluid therapy is essential if CPA was caused by hypovolemia
or hemorrhage. However, in euvolemic patients, aggressive fluid
therapy may be detrimental due to decreased tissue blood flow
caused by compromised tissue perfusion pressures [36]. In one study
in euvolemic dogs with induced CPA, 11 mL/kg of either Lactated
Ringer’s solution or whole blood increased cardiac output but
decreased both coronary and cerebral perfusion because of the
disproportionate increase in RADP compared to ADP [37].
Defibrillation
In the face of ventricular fibrillation (VF), chest compressions
should be initiated to circulate oxygenated blood to the myocar-
dium before attempting electrical conversion with defibrillation. A
hypoxic myocardium is unlikely to be successfully defibrillated.
It is particularly important to initiate chest compressions before
defibrillation if there is a delay between identification of CPA and
administration of defibrillation. Immediately after a defibrillation
attempt, chest compressions should be resumed for another full
CPR cycle. Electrical defibrillation should start at 2–5 J/kg.
If unsuccessful, a 2-min cycle of CPR should proceed; then,
defibrillation attempted with a 50% increase in energy. This cycle,
with concomitant increases in energy, continues until the rhythm
changes (e.g., asystole develops) or ROSC is achieved.
Table 5.1 Pharmacotherapy during cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR).
Drug 	Dose regimen 	Comments
Epinephrine 	0.01 mg/kg IV every 3–5 min 	Use acceptable in most cases of CPA;
causes peripheral vasoconstriction
and increased aortic pressure
Vasopressin 	0.8 IU/kg IV every 5 min 	Use acceptable in most cases of CPA;
causes peripheral vasoconstriction
and increased aortic pressure
Corticosteroid 	1 mg/kg IV prednisone
equivalent
Use acceptable in most cases of
CPA
Atropine 	0.05 mg/kg IV every 5 min 	Routine use is not recommended
but is acceptable
Lidocaine 	2 mg/kg IV 	Routine use is not recommended
but may be used in shock-resistant
VT or VF
Amiodarone 	5 mg/kg IV 	Routine use is not recommended
but may be used in shock-resistant
VT or VF
Sodium
bicarbonate
1 mEq/kg IV 	Routine use is not recommended
but may be used in prolonged CPA
or CPA due to severe hyperkalemia
or severe metabolic acidosis
Calcium
gluconate
50 mg/kg IV 	Routine use is not recommended
but may be used in CPA due to
calcium channel blocker overdose,
severe hypocalcemia, or severe
hyperkalemia
IV, intravenous; VT, ventricular tachycardia; VF, ventricular fibrillation; CPA,
cardiopulmonary arrest.

-- 74 of 1450 --

Chapter 5: Anesthetic Emergencies, Resuscitation, and Adverse Events 	59
Anesthesia-related CPA and CPR
If anesthesia-related CPA is due to drug overdose, reversal agents
should be administered if available. Agents such as naloxone,
flumazenil, and atipamezole should be administered in the case of
opioid, benzodiazepine, or α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist overdose,
respectively. All inhalant anesthetics cause myocardial depression,
and their use should be terminated during CPR. Lipid rescue may
be considered in animals with CPA due to local anesthetic overdose
(see Chapter 29). If CPA occurs during an abdominal surgery, con-
sideration should be given to performing open-chest CPR by
accessing the heart through the diaphragm.
Adjunctive CPR techniques and devices
Several devices have been invented and tested to improve cardiac
output during CPR. There are adjunctive CPR devices that actively
decompress the chest during the expansion phase after delivery of a
compression, devices that automate chest compressions, and
devices that increase negative IttP during chest recoil to facilitate
venous return (i.e., the impedance threshold device or ITD).
Although the ITD has been shown to be beneficial in improving
carotid blood flow and coronary perfusion in dogs undergoing
CPR [22], there is currently no compelling evidence that any of
these devices improve outcomes in people or animals [38].
Monitoring
Accurate and rapid identification of patients experiencing CPA is
essential to ensure prompt initiation of CPR efforts, which directly
impacts outcome. Monitoring the effectiveness of CPR efforts dur-
ing CPR is critical to ensure that hemodynamic and respiratory
goals are being met. Monitoring also provides important patient
prognostic information and should guide postresuscitation plan-
ning and care.
Identifying CPA
Animals often experience agonal gasps or apnea as a prelude to
CPA [5]. Other indications include collapse, a fixed gaze, lack of a
palpable pulse, loss of an audible signal from a Doppler device
( usually in an anesthetized patient), a rapid decrease in end-tidal
carbon dioxide tension (PET
CO2
) (in an anesthetized, intubated
patient), observation of a characteristic arrhythmia on ECG,
hypoventilation, and/or seizures. If CPA is suspected, the patient
should be rapidly evaluated by auscultation of heart sounds. Seeking
a peripheral pulse via palpation or placement of a Doppler probe
delays the start of treatment and is not recommended to identify
CPA [29].
The loss of sound from a preplaced Doppler device may precede
CPA and should be investigated immediately [29]. Valuable time to
initiate CPR efforts should not, however, be lost by checking
the Doppler device or readjusting the probe. Other causes of a lost
Doppler signal (e.g., a closed adjustable pressure-limiting [APL] valve)
should also be investigated. In anesthetized, intubated patients, a
rapid decrease in PET
CO2 can indicate a precipitous drop in cardiac
output preceding cardiac arrest [29]. Observation of an abrupt
decline in PET
CO2 should be taken as a strong indicator of actual or
impending CPA, and the patient should be assessed immediately.
Monitoring during CPR
Once BLS steps have been initiated, ECG leads should be attached
to identify if a treatable arrhythmia (e.g., bradycardia, ventricular
fibrillation) is present. Continued ECG monitoring is warranted as
patients may transition to a treatable arrhythmia during CPR
efforts. The ECG can be checked during the change-over in person-
nel performing compressions every 2 min. Ceasing chest compres-
sions more regularly to check the ECG rhythm is not
recommended [29]. PET
CO2 monitoring should be instituted as
it has a proven association with CPR outcomes [39]. PET
CO2 is a
non-invasive surrogate for cerebral perfusion pressure and values ≥
18 mmHg between 3 and 8 min after starting CPR is a sensitive
predictor for ROSC [39]. If CPR efforts are not generating adequate
PET
CO2 values, changes may need to be made (e.g., change person-
nel performing chest compressions and/or convert to thoracotomy
for open-chest CPR).
Continued monitoring of ventilation parameters should include
ensuring thoracic wall movements are occurring, respiratory rate is
not exceeding 10 breaths/min, inspiratory time is 1 s, and inspira-
tory pressure is not excessive [29]. The respiratory rate, in particu-
lar, is often higher than is recommended even with experienced
personnel. Venous blood gas monitoring can be used to inform the
likelihood of ROSC and provide information about tissue perfusion
and electrolytes (e.g., hypocalcemia), which may require targeted
treatment.
During and after CPR, oxygenation goals are to maintain a PaO 2
of 80–100 mmHg or a saturation of 94–98%. Long-term hyperox-
emia (i.e., PaO 2 > 100 mmHg) is undesirable as it can cause
oxygen free-radical formation. After ROSC, hypoventilation is a
common complication due to respiratory muscle weakness or poor
responsiveness of the brainstem to CO2 levels. A target PaCO2 of
32–40 mmHg is desired and can be achieved with mechanical
ventilation if the patient is not able to adequately ventilate
spontaneously.
Postresuscitation care
Following ROSC, numerous body systems suffer injury secondary
to interrupted blood flow and subsequent ischemia-reperfusion
injury [40]. This constellation of problems is referred to as “postcar-
diac arrest syndrome” and includes damage to the brain, kidneys,
and heart, as well as derangements of coagulation. Following the
development of postcardiac arrest syndrome, other large-system
inflammatory conditions, such as systemic inflammatory response
syndrome (SIRS) and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
can develop. Ischemia-reperfusion in the brain leads to mitochon-
drial dysfunction, excitotoxicity, altered phospholipids, oxidative
stress, increased lactate, endoplasmic reticulum stress, and inflam-
mation [41]. Mortality (i.e., second arrest) is very common in the
first 24 h after resuscitation [6].
Postcardiac arrest care should be intensive with diligent patient
monitoring. Continuous or serial monitoring of the ECG, arterial
oxygenation (SpO 2
), body temperature, blood glucose, and systemic
blood pressure should be instituted, as well as serial physical exami-
nations and assessment of neurologic status [29]. Therapeutic proto-
cols are based on hemodynamic optimization, cerebral protection,
and therapeutic hypothermia [40].
Hemodynamic optimization aims to maintain blood pressure
and, therefore, cerebral perfusion pressure. Numerous studies have
found an association between arterial blood pressure and outcome
in people [42–44]; however, the “optimal” blood pressure following
ROSC has not been clearly defined. Targeting a mean arterial
blood pressure (MAP) in the range of 70–80 mmHg with the use of
inotropes and vasopressors seems to be associated with improved
outcomes.
Cerebral protection can be facilitated by the use of a variety
of pharmacologic interventions. Corticosteroids seem to offer

-- 75 of 1450 --

60 	Section 1: General Topics
some benefit, potentially due to relative adrenal insufficiency
following CPA [41]. Numerous other interventions that target spe-
cific pathways of cerebral ischemia-reperfusion-induced dysfunc-
tion are being investigated, but evidence supporting their clinical
use is lacking. Mannitol is often used to minimize cerebral edema
following ROSC, but the evidence for its use is not particularly
compelling. Therapeutic hypothermia has been used in people for
decades, and there is strong evidence for its routine inclusion in
postresuscitation care [45]. Beneficial effects of therapeutic hypo-
thermia include reductions in cerebral oxygen requirement, brain
metabolic demand, excitatory neurotransmitters, inflammatory
cytokines, and free radicals, along with inhibition of neuronal cell
apoptosis [41]. Potential complications include patient discomfort,
longer tissue healing time, and coagulopathy. It appears that early
application of even mild hypothermia (e.g., 36 °C/97 °F) is benefi-
cial in the postresuscitation period and avoidance of hyperthermia
is associated with improved survival in people.
Cardiovascular complications
The anesthetic complications involving the cardiovascular system
discussed below are obviously not mutually exclusive and may
occur alongside, or as a result of, many of the other complications
presented in this chapter.
Hypotension
Hypotension has been reported to occur in 7–59% of anesthetized
small animal patients [46–48]. The incidence in other species is also
high, at 79% for rabbits [49] and 55% for horses [50]. While this
complication occurs commonly in anesthetized animals, especially
those anesthetized with inhalant agents, effective anticipation,
recognition, and management means that it infrequently develops
into a true anesthetic emergency. Pre-existing conditions associated
with hemodynamic instability, surgical manipulations (e.g., com-
pression of the vena cava), and various drugs can all precipitate or
exacerbate significant hypotension and may present challenges for
the anesthetist.
The adverse effects of hypotension are related to both its severity
and duration. Relatively mild hypotension may be tolerated for
some time, whereas profound hypotension for even 15 min may
result in clinically significant morbidity. Classically, it is believed
that maintaining a MAP over 60 mmHg maintains visceral organ
perfusion [51,52], a MAP over 70 mmHg maintains muscle perfu-
sion in large animals (e.g., adult horses) [53], and a diastolic arterial
pressure (DAP) over 40 mmHg maintains myocardial perfusion [54].
Consciousness typically requires a systolic arterial pressure (SAP)
over 50 mmHg [55].
Blood pressure is directly dependent on cardiac output and sys-
temic vascular resistance (SVR). Cardiac output, in turn, depends
on heart rate and stroke volume with the major determinants of
stroke volume being preload, contractility, and afterload.
Therefore, hypotension results from alterations to, or abnormali-
ties of, any of these five variables (i.e., preload, contractility, after-
load, heart rate, and SVR), and management of hypotension is
directed at manipulating one or more of these. Continuous moni-
toring of blood pressure is indicated in any patient undergoing
general anesthesia. Direct arterial blood pressure monitoring is
indicated in all large animal cases anesthetized with inhalant
anesthetics as well as any patients with the potential for hemody-
namic instability during anesthesia. Monitoring blood pressure
has been associated with a lower risk of cardiac-related mortality
in horses [56].
A simple flowchart outlining the clinical approach to hypoten-
sion is presented in Fig. 5.2. Note that other considerations, such as
pre-existing cardiac disease, concurrent drug administration, blood
volume status, and concurrent non-cardiac disease may affect this
simple approach. Further information is provided in Chapters 12,
32, 33, and 36.
Hemorrhage
Acute blood loss has two significant impacts on oxygen delivery to
tissues: decreased preload and decreased hemoglobin concentra-
tion. Hemorrhage prior to or during anesthesia increases the risk of
hemodynamic instability. Patients who have suffered hemorrhage
prior to anesthesia should be stabilized if at all possible before the
start of anesthesia. Those with severe ongoing hemorrhage requir-
ing immediate surgical intervention should be aggressively treated
during the preanesthetic period and throughout the maintenance
phase of anesthesia.
In dogs undergoing anesthesia and surgery, the volume of hem-
orrhage has been associated with increased cost of care, with each
mL of blood loss contributing $2 to the cost [57]. In dogs undergo-
ing thoracic surgery, intraoperative blood product use (presumably
due to hemorrhage) was associated with a 4.4-fold increase in the
likelihood of postanesthetic death [58]. Similarly, in dogs undergo-
ing emergency abdominal surgery, blood product use increased the
risk of death by sevenfold [59]. These studies support the practice of
hemodynamic stabilization prior to anesthesia whenever possible
and highlight the negative impacts of acute intraoperative hemor-
rhage on patient outcomes.
The indications for treating hemorrhage include absolute
blood volume loss, increased base excess or lactate, and changes
in cardiovascular parameters associated with hemorrhage includ-
ing relative increases in heart rate and decreases in systolic blood
pressure (i.e., the shock index; HR/SAP). For absolute blood
Concurrent tachycardia
Light anesthetic plane
Hypotension resolved
Administer fluid bolus
Patient hypotensive
Deep anesthetic plane
Concurrent bradycardia
Administer fluid bolus
Patient normotensive
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Administer antimuscarinic
Decrease maintenance drug
No
Yes
No
No
No
Decrease maintenance drug
No
Administer
inotrope or vasopressor
+/– colloid
+/– further adjustments to
anesthetic protocol to ↓
maintenance drug
Figure 5.2 Clinical approach to hypotension. Note that other
considerations, such as pre-existing cardiac disease, concurrent drug
administration, blood volume status, and concurrent non-cardiac disease,
may affect this generic approach.

-- 76 of 1450 --

Chapter 5: Anesthetic Emergencies, Resuscitation, and Adverse Events 	61
volume loss, treatment is recommended once estimated blood
loss approaches 20% of total blood volume, or approximately
17 mL/kg in the dog [60]. Direct observation of intraoperative
blood loss during the surgical procedure facilitates estimation of
the volume lost and should be closely monitored. A base excess >
6.6 or a lactate > 5.0 mmol/L may indicate the need for treatment.
In the awake dog, a shock index (HR/SAP) > 1.0 may be a more
sensitive and specific indicator of 18% blood volume loss than
heart rate or blood pressure alone [61]. General anesthesia may
complicate interpretation of variables typically associated with
the need to treat hemorrhage. For example, inhalant-induced
hypotension and concurrent tachycardia due to intense surgical
stimulation may make clinical decision-making more challeng-
ing. Volume replacement may consist of crystalloids, colloids,
and/or blood products, and should be initiated as early as possi-
ble after recognition of blood loss. Further information is availa-
ble in Chapter 32.
Cardiac dysrhythmias
The incidence of clinically significant cardiac dysrhythmias in
healthy dogs under anesthesia is as high as 18% [62]. Cardiac dys-
rhythmias have the potential to decrease cardiac output by affecting
diastolic filling (and hence venous return), contractility, and/or
heart rate. They also have the potential to increase myocardial work
by increasing heart rate above physiologic levels. Many arrhythmias
occur in the absence of cardiac disease and may be precipitated
by anesthesia, but most are clinically insignificant. However, the
appearance of some arrhythmias under anesthesia may be more
serious and warrant prompt recognition and intervention
(e.g., atrial fibrillation and third-degree atrioventricular block).
Specific treatment of an arrhythmia is generally undertaken if car-
diac output is adversely affected or if increased myocardial work is
putting excessive stress on the heart. Impacts on cardiac output are
typically inferred based on arterial blood pressure measurement,
although clinical signs such as syncope in a conscious patient may
also indicate insufficient cardiac output. Increases in myocardial
work caused by a tachyarrhythmia may be particularly problematic
in patients with diastolic cardiac dysfunction (e.g., hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy). Treatment is aimed at correcting the underlying
cause of the arrhythmia (e.g., placement of a pacemaker in a patient
with third-degree atrioventricular block) and/or pharmacologic
manipulation of cardiac conduction. Further information is availa-
ble in Chapters 11, 35, and 36.
Anaphylaxis
While uncommon, anaphylactic or anaphylactoid reactions may
occur in the perianesthetic period and constitute adverse events.
True anaphylaxis is a type I hypersensitivity reaction caused by rapid
immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated interactions. Anaphylactoid
reactions mimic anaphylaxis but are not caused by IgE. Both types
of reactions cause release of substances by mast cells and basophils,
primarily histamine. This results in a variety of effects, including
pruritus, urticaria, hypotension, tachycardia, bronchospasm, and
vomiting and diarrhea. Anaphylactic reactions can be caused by the
patient encountering an antigen, which triggers anaphylaxis or by
pharmacologic substances. Topical cleansing agents, antibiotics,
radiographic contrast agents, and atracurium are common culprits
in an anesthetic setting. In addition to symptomatic treatment to
support cardiorespiratory function, epinephrine can be given IM at
0.01 mg/kg.
Respiratory complications
Many of the respiratory complications discussed below overlap and
have cause-and- effect relationships with one another. For example,
hypoxemia is a common sequela to many of the complications
listed but general considerations for hypoxemia are also presented
in its own section.
Respiratory depression and apnea
Respiratory depression (i.e., hypoventilation) is defined as inade-
quate CO2 elimination that is detected as an increase in the partial
pressure of arterial carbon dioxide (PaCO 2 ) or end-tidal carbon
dioxide (PET
CO2 ). It is important to recognize that significant
hypoventilation may occur in the face of a “normal” respiratory rate
with few other associated clinical signs; thus, the only way to relia-
bly identify hypoventilation is to measure CO 2
. Although hypoven-
tilation (i.e., PET
CO2 > 45 mmHg) is relatively common, severe
hypoventilation (i.e., PET
CO2 > 60 mmHg) is relatively uncommon
with one large-scale retrospective canine study reporting it in ~ 9%
of patients [47]. Apnea refers to the complete absence of breathing
and is the extreme endpoint on the spectrum of respiratory depres-
sion. While it can occur at any point during the perianesthetic
period, apnea immediately following induction of anesthesia is
common, depending on the anesthetic protocol and administration
technique, with reported incidence rates in dogs as high as 75% [63].
Respiratory depression/apnea as an anesthetic complication spans a
continuum ranging from mild hypercapnia, which may require no
intervention, to apnea which requires immediate endotracheal
intubation (if not already done) and ventilatory support.
In addition to the direct effects of hypercapnia (e.g., respiratory
acidosis, tachycardia, etc.), hypoventilation induces indirect effects
including the potential for hypoxemia and impaired uptake of
inhalant anesthetics. Acidosis can disrupt enzyme systems, decreas-
ing cardiac contractility, and reducing the effectiveness of certain
drugs (e.g., inotropes) [64,65]. Hypercapnia can also precipitate
arrhythmias, hypertension, hypoxemia, narcosis, and vasodilation
with subsequent hypotension and increased intracranial pressure
(ICP) [66].
The risk of hypoventilation producing hypoxemia depends
on the inspired oxygen concentration (F I
O2 ). With an F I
O 2 of 1.0,
PET
CO2 would need to be > 500 mmHg to lower PaO2 below
60 mmHg. This scenario is not clinically likely. However, with an
FI
O2 of 0.21 (i.e., a patient breathing room air), hypoventilation
resulting in a PET
CO2 of ~70 mmHg will cause hypoxemia. Profound
hypercapnia exerts a MAC-sparing effect starting at ~ 94 mmHg
and linearly decreases MAC until it reaches 240 mmHg, at which
point CO2 achieves anesthesia alone [66].
By extension, the time to onset of hypoxemia due to apnea is also
dependent on F I
O2
. In dogs preoxygenated with 88% oxygen for
3 min and then induced with propofol (causing subsequent apnea),
SpO 2 values remained above 90% for an average of almost 5 min,
compared with dogs without preoxygenation where SpO2 values fell
below 90% by 70 s [67]. Thus, provision of enriched oxygen imme-
diately before induction of anesthesia will delay the onset of hypox-
emia due to apnea or profound hypoventilation compared to
inspiration of room air.
Inhalant anesthetics move down a series of partial pressure gra-
dients from the anesthetic circuit to the alveoli and back for uptake
and elimination. During apnea or profoundly decreased ventila-
tion, uptake and elimination of the inhalant anesthetic may be
impaired [68]. This is particularly relevant shortly after induction,
when the combined effects of premedications, induction agents,

-- 77 of 1450 --

62 	Section 1: General Topics
and rising inhalant concentrations predispose to respiratory depres-
sion and apnea at the exact time when respiration is most crucial for
inhalant uptake.
Indications to treat respiratory depression and apnea depend
on the clinical scenario. In most cases, where a patient is breath-
ing spontaneously but P ET CO 2 is elevated, it is appropriate to
first assess anesthetic depth and decrease the inhalant anesthetic
concentration, if possible, as this often resolves hypercapnia.
Mild to moderate elevations in P ET CO 2 are often not treated with
positive-pressure ventilation and some clinicians rely on modest
hypercapnia to support blood pressure and cardiac output. If a
patient is apneic and/or hypoxemic and/or not ventilating suffi-
ciently for inhalant uptake and maintenance of an appropriate
plane of anesthesia, positive-pressure ventilation is indicated. In
certain high-risk patients (e.g., those with increased ICP), or if
hypercapnia is severe or associated with other adverse effects (e.g.,
arrhythmia, tachycardia), positive-pressure ventilation is war-
ranted. Further information is available in Chapters 14, 15, 37,
and 38.
Hypoxemia
Hypoxemia refers to inadequate oxygen levels in arterial blood and
often occurs without noticeable cyanosis. It is a common sequela to
many of the other airway-related, pulmonary, or equipment-related
complications discussed in this chapter and poses significant risks
to the patient if unrecognized. Adverse effects associated with
hypoxemia include lactic acidosis, pathologic arrhythmias, and car-
diac, muscular, renal, and neurologic damage that may culminate in
cardiac arrest. Certain species (e.g., horses), breeds (e.g., brachyce-
phalic dogs), and patients with pre-existing disease conditions are
predisposed to development of hypoxemia during anesthesia. In
general, the risk of hypoxemia is much greater in anesthetized ani-
mals that are breathing room air versus those that are intubated and
breathing enriched oxygen; however, routine monitoring of oxy-
genation is recommended for all patients. Detection of hypoxemia
is via arterial blood gas analysis (decreased PaO2
) or, most com-
monly, via pulse oximetry (decreased SpO2
). Monitoring will facili-
tate early detection, investigation, and treatment, which will vary
depending on the underlying cause and clinical scenario. Therapies
may include increasing the F I
O 2 , securing/clearing the airway,
instituting various ventilation strategies, addressing an underlying
condition, etc. Further information is available in Chapters 14, 15,
37, and 38.
Airway obstruction
Complete obstruction of the upper airway is an anesthetic emer-
gency and, if not promptly addressed, may result in hypoxemia
and subsequent cardiac arrest. Partial airway obstruction may also
lead to serious adverse effects depending on how much of the air-
way lumen is occluded. Negative-pressure pulmonary edema may
occur as a result of upper airway obstruction. This often manifests
as foamy discharge from the airway and should be treated with
diuretics and oxygen supplementation. There are a number of sce-
narios associated with airway obstruction that may occur at vari-
ous clinical time points including at induction (i.e., a difficult or
failed intubation), during maintenance, or at recovery. Being
aware of different airway obstruction scenarios and associated
risk factors will ensure the anesthetist is well prepared to prevent
obstruction in the first place or to rapidly recognize it and inter-
vene if it occurs.
Induction
The inability to successfully secure the airway at the outset of
anesthesia, most often via endotracheal intubation, can result in a
catastrophic emergency if not dealt with promptly. There is a great
deal of jargon used in the human literature to describe these
scenarios with terms like “difficult airway,” “failed airway,” “cannot
intubate/cannot ventilate” (CICV), “cannot intubate/cannot oxygen-
ate” (CICO), and “complete ventilation failure” (CVF) all in use. In
some cases, a difficult intubation is anticipated, so a plan to manage
the case can be made in advance. In other cases, a difficult intuba-
tion may arise unexpectedly, so having a variety of equipment and
supplies immediately available is crucial.
In general, cats are considered to be more challenging to intubate
than dogs and, like swine, they are prone to laryngospasm particu-
larly in response to glottic stimulation. Consequently, it is common
practice to prophylactically administer topical lidocaine to the
arytenoid cartilages prior to attempting intubation to prevent
laryngospasm. This should be done at least 45 s before stimulating
the airway [69]. For cats, or other species where even routine intuba-
tion may be challenging (e.g., pigs, camelids, rabbits, and mice), it is
important to have a range of endotracheal tubes, laryngoscopes,
and other intubation aids readily available.
Conditions that predispose to difficult intubation include ana-
tomic pathology (e.g., abnormalities associated with brachycephalic
airway syndrome including elongated soft palate, and laryngeal
collapse), oropharyngeal, laryngeal, tracheal, or retrobulbar masses
(e.g., neoplasia, abscess, and foreign body), and any pathology
limiting opening of the mouth (e.g., fractures, temporomandibular
disease, oral pain, and other head and neck trauma). It is essential
that patients at risk of a difficult intubation are thoroughly assessed
prior to anesthesia and an airway management plan crafted. Such
patients should be preoxygenated with 100% oxygen delivered by
face mask (i.e., not “flow-by”) for at least 5 min to prevent or delay
the onset of hypoxemia [70]. Multiple options to facilitate intubation
should be prepared, including laryngoscopes, a video laryngoscope
if available, devices for manipulating oral structures (e.g., cotton
tipped applicators, tongue depressors, etc.), a stylet, a bougie, supra-
glottic airway devices if available (e.g., laryngeal mask, v-gel), sup-
plies to perform alternative airway approaches (e.g., pharyngostomy,
retrograde intubation) and/or emergency surgical access (e.g., tra-
cheostomy, cricothyrotomy), and a method to provide oxygen if
intubation is not successful. The patient’s neck should be clipped
and prepared in the event surgical airway access becomes necessary.
If orotracheal intubation cannot be attained, oxygen can be sup-
plied via needle tracheostomy by percutaneously introducing a nee-
dle into the trachea via the cricothyroid cartilage and connecting it
to an oxygen supply. If the patient’s oral aperture is too small to
visualize the arytenoids, it may be possible to expand it by layering
tongue depressors horizontally between the incisors to sequentially
enlarge it. In some cases, induction drugs that are less likely to
cause significant respiratory depression and apnea (e.g., ketamine,
tiletamine–zolazepam) may be preferred over drugs which are
more likely to induce apnea (e.g., propofol, alfaxalone). Use of a
laryngeal mask airway or another blind insertion airway device
may be preferable to endotracheal intubation in cases where the
arytenoids cannot be visualized [71].
When a difficult intubation arises unexpectedly during
anesthetic induction and the patient has not been preoxygenated,
oxygen should be supplied by flow-by or, if the patient is breathing
spontaneously, by face mask to maintain hemoglobin saturation.
It may be prudent to recover spontaneously breathing patients

-- 78 of 1450 --

Chapter 5: Anesthetic Emergencies, Resuscitation, and Adverse Events 	63
(assuming oxygenation remains adequate), re- evaluate the patient,
and create a different anesthetic and airway management plan. If
the patient is apneic, every effort should be made to rapidly intubate
the trachea. The most experienced individual should attempt intu-
bation and additional personnel should be summoned to collect the
supplies outlined above for a difficult intubation. The decision to
transition to emergency surgical airway access should be based on
procedural and patient status criteria [72]. Multiple unsuccessful
attempts at orotracheal intubation by an experienced veterinarian
in a patient that is rapidly desaturating and/or apneic should signal
the need to immediately proceed with a surgical approach.
Maintenance
Airway obstruction in an intubated patient during the maintenance
phase of anesthesia may arise if the endotracheal tube becomes
occluded or compressed. Potential causes include foreign material
(e.g., mucus plugs, especially with small diameter endotracheal
tubes), kinking of the endotracheal tube, overinflation of the cuff
leading to compression of the tube lumen, asymmetric cuff inflation
leading to obstruction of the bevel end of the tube, and external
compression or obstruction between the tube and the breathing sys-
tem. Procedures which hyperflex the atlanto-occipital joint (e.g., cer-
ebral spinal fluid collection and ocular procedures) are particularly
prone to causing a kinked endotracheal tube [73]. Obstruction of the
endotracheal tube may be identified by observation of increased res-
piratory effort, thoracic excursions without effective air movement
(e.g., breathing bag not moving), or by changes to or loss of the cap-
nographic waveform. Attempts to provide positive-pressure ventila-
tion are met with resistance and the patient’s thoracic movement
does not match the pressure being delivered. Spirometry may be
helpful to diagnose an occluded endotracheal tube [74]. Recognition
of an occluded endotracheal tube requires prompt intervention.
Patient positioning should be checked and modified to address a
kinked tube, cuff inflation should be evaluated, and other external
compressions or obstructions removed. If the tube is potentially
occluded with mucus, a stylet or catheter can be introduced to clear
the lumen. If that fails to resolve the obstruction, the endotracheal
tube may need to be exchanged.
Inadvertent endobronchial intubation (i.e., advancement of the
endotracheal tube beyond the thoracic inlet and into a mainstem
bronchus) is possible if tube length is excessive. This may occur
with initial tube placement at induction, or when a tube that was
correctly placed initially moves distally, most often with changes in
patient positioning. Endobronchial intubation results in atelectasis
and impaired oxygenation in the non-intubated lung. Healthy
patients are usually able to compensate for this if the F I
O2 is ~ 1.0
and hypoxemia may not result. Mechanical ventilation may predis-
pose to volutrauma in the intubated lung. This complication is best
prevented by determining the correct endotracheal tube length for
the patient, cutting it to the correct size, and confirming correct
placement by auscultating breath sounds on both sides of the chest.
Recovery
If airway obstruction occurs after extubation, it may make reintuba-
tion difficult or impossible. Using a delayed extubation technique,
where the patient is extubated only once they are lifting their head
and have regained normal muscle tone, may decrease the likelihood
of obstruction occurring after extubation in certain high-risk
patients (e.g., brachycephalic dogs). Patients with a potentially com-
promised airway should be carefully monitored after extubation
and preparations should be in place to reintubate in the face of
respiratory difficulties. If the patient appears stable and the airway
remains patent after extubation, placement in a high FI
O2 environ-
ment for several hours may help reduce the work of breathing,
ensure adequate alveolar oxygen concentrations, and improve the
chance of a successful recovery.
In cats, their small size and susceptibility to laryngospasm
may increase the risk of airway trauma during intubation, which
may manifest as airway obstruction at recovery. Similarly, in horses,
laryngospasm/laryngeal dysfunction associated with intubation
may also precipitate acute, catastrophic airway obstruction at recov-
ery. In addition to partial airway obstruction due to nasopharyngeal
congestion (routinely treated with topical phenylephrine), complete
airway obstruction may occur in horses due to physical blockade of
the nostrils (e.g., in the corner of a recovery stall). In cases of com-
plete airway obstruction, the horse may thrash violently as hypox-
emia causes significant distress. Unconsciousness may result, and
negative-pressure pulmonary edema may occur [75]. Orotracheal
intubation may not be successful in such cases, and an emergency
tracheostomy is indicated if an airway cannot be rapidly established.
Bronchospasm
Bronchospasm may result from airway irritation or stimulation
(e.g., endotracheal intubation in at-risk patients), anaphylactic
reactions, underlying disease (e.g., asthma), or drugs (e.g., non-
selective β- adrenergic blockers). In general, anesthetic maintenance
with isoflurane or sevoflurane is usually well tolerated in patients
with reactive airways as these agents promote bronchial relaxation.
Bronchospasm narrows the small airways and increases resist-
ance to ventilation. In the most severe cases, this may progress to
apnea and acute desaturation. In patients with pre-existing risk fac-
tors, bronchospasm should be suspected if a change in pulmonary
resistance is noted (e.g., it becomes more difficult to provide
positive-pressure ventilation), with or without an accompanying
decrease in SpO 2
. Changes to the capnographic waveform (i.e., the
characteristic “shark fin” or “saw tooth” pattern) indicating uneven
alveolar emptying, as well as increased peak airway pressures dur-
ing mechanical ventilation, are typically observed. In some patients,
wheezes may be appreciated on thoracic auscultation. Examination
of pressure–volume loops created by spirometry will aid the diag-
nosis of changes in resistance and compliance. In the event of a
change in pulmonary resistance, acute airway obstruction or pneu-
mothorax should also be considered as rule-outs and investigated.
Any underlying conditions that may precipitate bronchospasm
should be treated if possible (e.g., epinephrine administration for
an anaphylactic reaction). Symptomatic treatment of bronchos-
pasm involves administration of bronchodilators (e.g., aminophyl-
line, terbutaline, and albuterol) and positive-pressure ventilation
with 100% oxygen.
Accidental extubation
Unexpected intraoperative extubation is particularly problematic
if the patient was difficult to intubate initially, if patient positioning
is not conducive to reintubation, and when extubation is not
immediately recognized due to surgical drape coverings or other
obstructions. An unexpected extubation means the airway is
unprotected and the patient is not receiving oxygen or inhalant
anesthesia. Creation of an oxygen-rich pocket under the surgical
drapes due to an unexpected and unobserved extubation can
precipitate a fire [76].
Determining if extubation has happened can be challenging if it
is unobserved. Routine, continuous use of capnography is the best

-- 79 of 1450 --

64 	Section 1: General Topics
tool to detect accidental extubation as the patient’s capnographic
waveform will be lost with complete tube displacement or modified
with partial displacement. Failure to observe breathing bag excur-
sions or one-way valve movements (in a rebreathing circuit), a
sudden decrease in resistance when providing positive-pressure
ventilation, and/or detection of inhalant agent odor may indicate
that an extubation has occurred. If the patient is being maintained
with an inhalant agent and extubation is not promptly recognized,
decreases in SpO2 may be noted and anesthetic depth will lighten,
potentially resulting in patient movement.
If patient movement is noted, restraint and deepening of the anes-
thetic plane with a rapid-acting injectable agent is required prior to
attempting reintubation. Assistance is typically required, and addi-
tional injectable drugs should be available if reintubation is challeng-
ing. If extubation is recognized promptly, it may be possible to
reintubate the patient without interrupting the ongoing procedure. If,
however, intubation is not possible with the patient in the current
position, the procedure may need to be paused and the patient re-
positioned. A bougie (endotracheal tube introducer) may be particu-
larly useful for intubation in unusual positions, as it is often easier to
introduce into the airway than an endotracheal tube. In the event that
a patient with a difficult airway becomes unexpectedly extubated, a
rapid transition to surgical airway access (e.g., a tracheostomy) is
essential if orotracheal intubation cannot be quickly achieved.
Iatrogenic tracheal injury
A tracheal tear can occur when excessive force or torque is applied
to the trachea or larynx. Cats are particularly sensitive to tracheal
tears sustained during anesthesia [77–79]. Overinflation of the
endotracheal tube cuff, changing body position with the patient’s
endotracheal tube connected to the anesthetic circuit, and forceful
intubation are the most common causes of tracheal tears. Clinical
signs associated with a tracheal tear include subcutaneous emphy-
sema in the cervical region (which may be substantial), pneumo-
mediastinum, and/or pneumothorax. If a tracheal tear is suspected
under anesthesia, the patient should be managed without positive-
pressure ventilation and pneumothorax may need to be treated via
thoracocentesis. If possible, the procedure should be stopped so the
patient can recover from anesthesia. Tracheostomy or bronchos-
copy may be performed to confirm the diagnosis, although a tear is
not always visible. Most tracheal tears typically heal without any
active surgical intervention.
Acute or undiagnosed pneumothorax
While other types of pleural space disease (e.g., pleural effusion)
may have adverse impacts under anesthesia, acute pneumothorax
may manifest unexpectedly and has the potential to be life-
threatening, especially if it develops into tension pneumothorax.
Pneumothorax may arise because of a procedure (e.g., cranial
abdominal or diaphragmatic surgery), excessive airway pressure
(e.g., closed APL valve or incorrect ventilator settings), trauma to
the airways, or the presence of abnormal pulmonary structures
(e.g., bullae) [80]. The diagnosis is one of exclusion, as initial
changes in vital signs (cardiorespiratory decompensation and dif-
ficulty with ventilation) are non-specific, and other causes of such
changes (e.g., airway obstruction, bronchospasm, and endobron-
chial intubation) occur more commonly and must be ruled out.
Increased pulmonary resistance is not a reliable indicator of pneu-
mothorax [80]. It may be difficult to appreciate local clinical signs
(e.g., diminished breath sounds) in the anesthetized patient without
full access to the thorax, and other diagnostics (e.g., thoracic
radiography) may not be available intraoperatively. If the patient’s
condition warrants immediate intervention, bilateral thoracocente-
sis should be performed even if the diagnosis has not been con-
firmed. Discontinuing positive-pressure ventilation may be
warranted if there is suspicion that the air entered the thoracic cav-
ity from the airways (e.g., ruptured pulmonary bulla) with or with-
out progression to a tension pneumothorax.
Pulmonary aspiration
Aspiration of foreign material, most often gastric contents, into the
trachea and lungs can precipitate airway obstruction, bronchos-
pasm, and/or pneumonia. In rare cases, the endotracheal tube itself
may be aspirated, for example, in a horse recovering with the tube
in place, or in a small animal patient that bites the tube prior to
extubation and inhales part of it. This clearly constitutes an anes-
thetic emergency and requires immediate intervention to clear the
airway. In small animal patients, the risk of endotracheal tube aspi-
ration can be minimized by recovering patients slowly in a con-
trolled environment. If they do regain consciousness suddenly and
begin biting the endotracheal tube, the mouth should be held closed
until extubation is possible. If recovering a horse with the endotra-
cheal tube in place, ensuring the tube is well secured and interven-
ing to extubate in the event the tube is displaced from the interdental
space will prevent it being bitten. Alternatively, maintaining the
airway with a nasotracheal tube in recovery will prevent any risk of
the tube being bitten.
Brachycephalic patients, patients with laryngeal dysfunction
(e.g., laryngeal paralysis), esophageal dysfunction (e.g., megaesoph-
agus), neurologic disease, and those undergoing upper airway
surgeries may be at higher risk for developing aspiration pneumo-
nia [81]. Regurgitation of gastric contents during or after anesthesia
puts the patient at a higher risk for developing pneumonia [81].
Development of aspiration pneumonia may progress to respiratory
failure resulting in death or, due to expense of treatment and/or poor
prognosis, euthanasia may be elected [82]. In dogs, a large-scale ret-
rospective multicenter study reported the incidence of postanes-
thetic aspiration pneumonia to range between 0.04% and
0.26% [81]. The rate is unknown in cats, but in one study, 40% of
the cats diagnosed with aspiration pneumonia had undergone
recent anesthesia [83].
Diagnosis of pulmonary aspiration may be made if regurgitated
material is visualized in the oropharynx and the airway is unpro-
tected. Even in anesthetized patients that are intubated, regurgi-
tated fluid may pass by an inadequately inflated endotracheal tube
cuff and enter the lungs, and this may not be recognized until days
later when pneumonia develops [81]. Aspiration pneumonia is typ-
ically diagnosed on the basis of thoracic radiographs and physical
examination.
Ensuring that the oropharynx is cleared of debris and that there
are no small objects near the patient’s mouth during recovery will
reduce the risk of aspiration. If there is concern that fluid may
remain in the trachea proximal to an inflated endotracheal tube
cuff, extubation is sometimes performed with the cuff partially
inflated to remove excess fluid. One study involving canine cadavers
found that extubation with an inflated high-pressure low-volume
endotracheal tube cuff reduced but did not completely eliminate
intratracheal fluid [84]. This study did not evaluate potential
adverse effects of this practice such as damage to the tracheal wall
or larynx.
Reducing the risk of regurgitation and postanesthetic aspiration
pneumonia is possible, but complicated. In the study by Ovbey

-- 80 of 1450 --

Chapter 5: Anesthetic Emergencies, Resuscitation, and Adverse Events 	65
et al., the incidence of aspiration pneumonia in dogs varied consid-
erably depending on the institution [81]. It was speculated that this
may be related to different anesthetic practices, but it was unclear
what those differences were. In another study involving dogs under-
going anesthesia for radiation treatment, procedural changes
including decreasing the use of anticholinergics and pure μ-opioid
receptor agonists, minimizing changes in body position, prophylac-
tically treating nausea, maintaining the endotracheal tube cuff
inflated until immediately before extubation, and improved aseptic
handling of equipment used for endotracheal intubation reduced
the incidence of postanesthetic aspiration pneumonia from 13% to
1.3% [85]. Thus, taking steps to reduce the risk of gastroesophageal
reflux (GER) and regurgitation seems warranted, particularly in
high-risk patients.
Volutrauma and barotrauma
Pulmonary volutrauma and/or barotrauma may occur as a result of
equipment maloperation (i.e., a closed APL valve as discussed in
the equipment section) or associated with positive-pressure ventila-
tion (in humans, this is often referred to as “ventilator-associated
lung injury” or “ventilator-induced lung injury”). Excessively high
airway pressures (barotrauma) and/or volume overexpansion
(volutrauma) can directly damage the lung leading to extra-alveolar
air accumulation (potentially pneumothorax) as well as pulmonary
edema and hemorrhage. The consequences of damage induced by
positive-pressure ventilation may not be appreciated during the
course of anesthesia as it takes time for the inflammatory response
to develop in the lower airways. Frank hemorrhage or fluid within
the endotracheal tube, changes to pulmonary compliance or resist-
ance, and evidence of ventilation–perfusion mismatch may be
observed. If pulmonary damage due to positive-pressure ventilation
is suspected, adjustments to the ventilation strategy should be made
with relatively low peak inspiratory pressure indicated in these
cases [86]. Barotrauma and volutrauma are best prevented by avoid-
ing excessive airway pressures and volumes in the first place. In
patients with atelectasis, a recruitment maneuver with addition of
positive end-expired pressure (PEEP) may be preferable to avoid
delivering large volumes and pressures over a long period of time.
In patients with chronic atelectasis (e.g., a congenital pericardial-
peritoneal diaphragmatic hernia or other chronic pleural space
disease), even modest increases in positive airway pressure may
precipitate re-expansion pulmonary edema and hypoxemia. This is
a rare phenomenon in people [87], and the incidence in animals is
unknown. Shear forces exerted by positive-pressure ventilation are
thought to initiate an inflammatory response that increases vascular
permeability and causes microvascular damage resulting in edema.
Every effort should be made to prevent re-expansion pulmonary
edema in patients with chronic lung collapse by using relatively
low inspiratory pressures and volumes and allowing the lung to
re- expand gradually over time. If re-expansion pulmonary edema
occurs, it can be treated with diuretics, oxygen supplementation,
and supportive care.
Wooden chest syndrome
Chest wall rigidity (wooden chest syndrome) is observed when a
patient’s intercostal muscles and diaphragm become rigid, signifi-
cantly impairing ventilation. The phenomenon is associated with
the use of fentanyl and its analogues and has been reported in peo-
ple [88]. There are no reports of wooden chest syndrome in the
veterinary literature, although it has been noted anecdotally in dogs
receiving fentanyl. Clinical signs are consistent with a rigid thoracic
cavity including failure of the chest wall to expand, higher than
expected inspiratory airway pressures, and ventilatory failure in
patients breathing spontaneously or being mechanically ventilated.
In the face of these clinical events, it is important to distinguish pos-
sible chest wall rigidity due to fentanyl from more common causes
of inability to ventilate or abrupt changes to thoracic compliance,
such as bronchospasm, acute airway obstruction, and pneumotho-
rax. If these more common causes are ruled out, chest wall rigidity
due to fentanyl may be considered, and a neuromuscular blocking
agent may be administered to decrease skeletal muscle tone and
facilitate positive-pressure ventilation [88]. Reversal with naloxone
alone does not resolve chest wall rigidity in people, although chang-
ing to a different opioid for continued surgery may be warranted.
Airway fire
Airway fire is a rarely reported but devastating complication in
human anesthesia and, despite the increasing use of laser therapy
in veterinary medicine there are very few reports in the veterinary
literature [89]. Heat, fuel, and an oxidizer can occur together in the
operating room, so it is important to be careful when cautery or
laser energy is used around the endotracheal tube or other source of
oxygen [90]. In patients that are not intubated (e.g., small exotics),
care must be taken to ensure that an oxygen-rich environment does
not occur in proximity to an ignition source [76].
The risk of a fire can be minimized by using an endotracheal
tube not made of hydrocarbons (e.g., steel), ensuring that the cuff
is properly inflated, filling the cuff with dye-colored water (to visu-
alize if it has been damaged during the procedure), using less than
100% oxygen (i.e., an FI
O2 of 33% by mixing with medical air),
avoiding nitrous oxide, and packing the area around the surgical
site with wet gauze. Simply wrapping an endotracheal tube in reflec-
tive foil may be insufficient to protect it from laser energy. In the
event of a fire, it should be extinguished as quickly as possible using
water, a fire extinguisher or, if neither of those are available, suffoca-
tion. The source of oxygen should be discontinued and physically
removed from the fire. Extubation of the patient is not always the
correct course of action but is recommended if the patient does not
have a difficult airway that would complicate reintubation. In the
event of a larger fire, the oxygen source should be removed entirely
(e.g., the oxygen supply line shut down) and personnel evacuated.
Additional information is available in Chapter 4.
Anesthetic drug- related complications
Medical error resulting in overdose
Medical errors present a significant problem in human medicine
and are estimated to be the third leading cause of death in the
United States [91]. In one veterinary teaching hospital, drug errors
were the most common type of error reported [92]. The events that
lead to a drug error are complex and are examined in Chapter 3.
Drugs may be inadvertently given at the wrong dose, to the wrong
patient, by the wrong route, at the wrong time, or the wrong drug
may be given [92]. In the face of a drug error, the most immediate
step is to try to withdraw as much drug as possible from the patient
(i.e., for intravenously administered drugs, aspirate any drug
remaining in the catheter). The next step is to determine if the over-
dose constitutes a risk to the patient and, if so, take steps to mini-
mize patient harm.
Certain drugs used in veterinary anesthesia (e.g., opioids, benzo-
diazepines, α2 -adrenergic receptor agonists, and dissociatives)
have relatively wide therapeutic margins and, depending on the

-- 81 of 1450 --

66 	Section 1: General Topics
magnitude of the overdose, may not constitute a threat to patient
safety. Other drugs (e.g., propofol and bupivacaine) have narrower
therapeutic margins, and overdose may have more serious adverse
consequences. The patient’s physiologic parameters should be
evaluated and monitored following an overdose to determine if
there is any clinically relevant impairment. If not, the procedure
may proceed cautiously. If the patient is adversely affected by the
drug overdose, administration of a specific antagonist is warranted
if one is available. For local anesthetic toxicity, a lipid emulsion
provides a depot for the drug to enter and minimizes systemic
local anesthetic effects [93]. Overdose with a non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drug may be treated with plasmapheresis [94].
Excessive sedation caused by acepromazine may be managed with
doxapram [95]. Further information about specific anesthetic, anal-
gesic, and antagonist drugs is available in the relevant pharmacol-
ogy chapters. Symptomatic support, including maintenance of body
temperature, fluid administration, and cardiorespiratory support,
may be necessary to give the patient time to clear the drug. The
patient’s status should be evaluated after treatment and, if possible,
a delay in the procedure may be necessary if the patient’s status is
still unknown or unstable.
Patient arousal
Acute arousal is usually the result of human error (i.e., underdosing,
inattention, judgment errors, or other knowledge gaps related to
injectable drugs, inhalant agents, or anesthetic machine operation)
and requires immediate intervention. Patient arousal and movement
can result in injury to personnel, injury to the patient, prolongation of
the procedure for which the patient was anesthetized, and damage to
equipment. Significant movement in anesthetized large animals (e.g.,
adult horses) can have potentially devastating consequences.
Underdosing during inhalant anesthesia may arise due to an inade-
quate fresh gas flow rate (e.g., flowmeter not turned on, compressed
gas cylinder empty, and oxygen supply line disconnected), a vaporizer
that is empty or not turned on, a tubing disconnection, and/or inef-
fective ventilation. In the face of movement during inhalant
anesthesia, the patient should be restrained and then rapidly
reanesthetized. Administration of an injectable agent is typically used
for this purpose, but in some cases, delivery of a high oxygen flow rate
and vaporizer setting may be employed. Once the patient’s anesthetic
plane has been stabilized, a thorough investigation into the cause of
acute arousal must be undertaken, including evaluation of the anes-
thetic machine, and corrective action taken to prevent re-occurrence.
Anesthetic equipment-related complications
The reader is directed to Chapter 6 for further details about equip-
ment function.
Adjustable pressure-limiting valve closure or
malfunction
Occlusion of the adjustable pressure-limiting (APL) (i.e., pop-off)
valve or exhaust tubing can result in a buildup of pressure within
the anesthetic circuit and is a common anesthetic-related adverse
incident [96]. An activated charcoal canister (e.g., F/air canister)
placed on the ground preventing outflow of gases can also cause
pressure to build up. Once the volume capacity of the breathing sys-
tem has been reached (i.e., once the elastic limits of the breathing
bag are exceeded), pressure in the breathing circuit climbs rapidly.
This increasing pressure may result in airway injury (i.e., volu-
trauma, pneumothorax), and compromised venous return decreases
cardiac output and may precipitate cardiovascular collapse and
arrest if not addressed in time. Loss of a palpable peripheral pulse
may be appreciated as the pressure in the breathing circuit is build-
ing. If excessive pressure has accumulated, it must be rapidly
relieved by opening the APL valve or, if occlusion or dysfunction of
the valve is suspected, disconnecting the circuit at any location.
Prevention of inadvertent APL valve closure can be minimized by
confirming its function and status during preanesthetic testing of
the breathing circuit, having a second individual routinely pressure-
check the circuit [96], using an APL valve with a momentary clo-
sure function either built-in or added to facilitate manual
intermittent positive-pressure ventilation (Fig. 5.3A), and incorpo-
rating a pressure-relief valve in the anesthetic circuit (Fig. 5.3B).
(A) 	(B)
Figure 5.3 A. Addition of a momentary closure valve adjacent to a standard adjustable pressure-limiting (APL) valve in a small animal breathing circuit.
This momentary closure function facilitates intermittent positive-pressure ventilation while minimizing the risk of the APL valve being inadvertently left
closed. B. Addition of a pressure-relief valve to a standard small animal breathing circuit. This device will vent excess gases into the environment at a
preset pressure in the event the APL valve is left closed and prevent pressure being transferred to the patient’s airway. Source: Dr. Erik Hofmeister, with
permission.

-- 82 of 1450 --

Chapter 5: Anesthetic Emergencies, Resuscitation, and Adverse Events 	67
Oxygen supply failure
An empty oxygen tank or failure of the oxygen supply line results
in no fresh gas flow to carry inhalant anesthetic to the patient
and, potentially, a hypoxic mix of inspiratory gases. Failure of the
flowmeter indicator to register gas flow, patient arousal and
movement during inhalant anesthesia, and decreases in hemo-
globin saturation (SpO 2 ) may all indicate an oxygen supply prob-
lem. It is important to realize that the flowmeter may initially
register some oxygen flow if an oxygen tank was turned on to
pressurize the line between the tank and flowmeter and then sub-
sequently turned off. Therefore, the amount of oxygen remaining
in the tank should always be confirmed by observing the tank
pressure gauge prior to use. In the event of oxygen supply failure,
with no readily available remedy (e.g., all available oxygen tanks
empty), anesthesia may be maintained with total intravenous
anesthesia, with the understanding that an F I O 2 of 0.21 may pre-
dispose to hypoxemia.
Breathing system malfunction
A variety of accidents can occur involving the anesthetic breathing
system. The carbon dioxide absorbent may be exhausted but the
canister may not show an obvious color change due to channeling
of gases through the interior of the cylinder. The inner tube in a
coaxial breathing circuit (e.g., Bain or F-piece) may become twisted
and occlude inspiratory flow [97]. In-circuit filters may become
saturated with moisture and cause an obstruction [98]. A tear
may occur in coaxial circuits leading to rebreathing of CO2 [99].
One- way valves may become stuck or warped in rebreathing
circuits, resulting in rebreathing of CO2
. When the anesthetist is
faced with a confounding problem that could possibly be related to
the anesthetic machine, changing machines and breathing circuits
may be warranted until a thorough investigation of the original
machine can be undertaken.
Vaporizer-related complications
In addition to the vaporizer being empty or not turned on which
will lead to underdosing and patient arousal, the vaporizer may be
filled with the incorrect anesthetic agent, may be tipped, or may not
be secured to the manifold properly. Each vaporizer is designed to
function with a specific inhalant anesthetic, as the saturated vapor
pressure (SVP) of each inhalant is unique. Filling an isoflurane
vaporizer (SVP 240 mmHg) with sevoflurane (SVP 160 mmHg)
will result in underdosing, and filling a sevoflurane vaporizer with
isoflurane will result in overdosing. If a vaporizer is tipped from the
horizontal plane (e.g., if a machine falls over), the channel may fill
with inhalant, resulting in a substantial overdose of the inhalant
agent. If the vaporizer is not secured to the manifold, the circuit
may pass a leak test but a leak will exist between the flowmeter and
the common gas outlet. Use of an anesthetic agent analyzer to meas-
ure inspired inhalant concentrations may facilitate diagnosis of a
vaporizer malfunction.
Other complications
Gastroesophageal reflux and regurgitation
Gastroesophageal reflux (GER) is the phenomenon of fluid passively
moving from the stomach into the esophagus and, potentially, into
the oropharynx. It is estimated to happen in a significant number of
dogs under anesthesia with a reported incidence rate as high as
88% in one study [100]. GER also occurs in cats, though less often
than in dogs, with rates up to 33% in one study [101]. Esophageal
reflux is a risk factor for aspiration and can cause esophageal
stricture formation [102,103]. Regurgitation into the oropharynx is
associated with a fourfold increased risk of developing pneumonia
after anesthesia [81]. While the exact incidence of esophageal
stricture formation postanesthesia is unknown it appears to be rare.
However, it is a potentially catastrophic adverse anesthetic event,
which can have a significant impact on the patient’s and client’s
quality of life [102,103].
Once GER has occurred, there are several treatment approaches
to minimize potential damage to the esophagus. Although none of
the treatments have documented an impact on the development
of esophagitis, esophageal strictures, or aspiration pneumonia, it is
expected that removing as much refluxate as possible and neutral-
izing any acidic or basic elements in the refluxate would minimize
damage to the esophagus. In anesthetized dogs with persistent
acidic esophageal pH despite repeated cycles of suctioning, lavaging
with tap water, and further suctioning, the instillation of 20 mL of
4.2% sodium bicarbonate into the distal esophagus was effective in
increasing esophageal pH [104]. A subsequent study indicated that
the lavage with water may be an unnecessary step and suggested
sole treatment with 4.2% sodium bicarbonate at 0.6 mL/kg after
suctioning was sufficient [105]. Further information on GER is
available in Chapters 2 and 41.
Ruminal tympany
In ruminants, distension of the rumen (i.e., bloat) due to inability of
gas to escape through the esophagus may complicate anesthesia and
increase the risk of regurgitation. Development of bloat compresses
the diaphragm, decreases functional residual capacity, and causes
respiratory compromise. Significant bloat may limit venous return
and impair cardiac output. Appropriate fasting (i.e., 24–48 h)
reduces the risk of bloat in adult ruminants. Passing a stomach tube
via the esophagus into the rumen will help prevent bloat in patients
that have not been fasted. In the event that bloat develops during a
procedure, a stomach tube can be passed to relieve the pressure.
If a stomach tube cannot be passed, possibly due to excess pressure
at the cardiac sphincter, transcutaneous decompression (similar to
trocharization in dogs with gastric dilatation-volvulus) can be
performed. Further information is available in Chapters 53 and 64.
Cerebral herniation
Cerebral herniation describes the displacement of brain structures
across anatomical boundaries within the calvarium (e.g., brainstem
protruding through the foramen magnum). During anesthesia,
abrupt increases in intracranial pressure (ICP) precipitated by
intubation, hypercapnia, hypertension, hypoxemia, jugular occlu-
sion, changes in head elevation, and/or exacerbation of intracranial
disease (e.g., hemorrhage, swelling) increase the risk of cerebral
herniation in at-risk patients. Cerebral herniation may stimulate a
Cushing reflex, apnea, cardiovascular collapse, and/or failure to
recover from anesthesia. A Cushing reflex manifests as an acute
increase in arterial blood pressure and a reflex bradycardia in an
attempt to maintain cerebral perfusion in the face of an increased
ICP [106]. In at-risk patients, the risk of cerebral herniation may be
reduced by maintaining PaCO2 (or PET
CO2
) in the low normal range
(e.g., 32 mmHg), keeping the head elevated, avoiding jugular occlu-
sion and hypoxemia, and potentially considering propofol rather
than an inhalant for maintenance of anesthesia [107]. If cerebral

-- 83 of 1450 --

68 	Section 1: General Topics
herniation is suspected, the patient can be hyperventilated (target
PET
CO2 of 25 mmHg), and mannitol (0.5–1 g/kg IV over 10 min)
and/or hypertonic saline (2–4 mL/kg IV over 10 min) can be
administered. Prednisone (1 mg/kg IV) may help reduce inflamma-
tion. Patients with acute cerebral herniation have a grave prognosis
and failure to recover from anesthesia is not an unexpected out-
come. Further information is available in Chapter 39.
Hyperkalemia
Development of acute hyperkalemia during general anesthesia in
a patient with normal serum potassium prior to anesthesia is a
rare but potentially life-threatening complication. In dogs and cats,
while there have been reports of intraoperative hyperkalemia, and a
definitive cause has not been identified, dexmedetomidine use has
been implicated as a risk factor [108,109]. Horses diagnosed with or
suspected to have hyperkalemic periodic paralysis may be at an
increased risk of developing hyperkalemia under anesthesia [110].
Hyperkalemia may be identified by changes to the ECG, notably
bradycardia (which is often resistant to treatment with antimus-
carinics), absent P waves, and tented T waves [108,109]. Horses
may exhibit muscle fasciculations [110]. Typical treatments for
hyperkalemia that reduce the risk of fatal arrhythmias (e.g., calcium
gluconate) and lower serum potassium concentrations (e.g., insulin,
dextrose, and sodium bicarbonate) are indicated [109]. Hyperkalemia
identified prior to anesthesia (e.g., due to urethral obstruction or
uroperitoneum) should be corrected before induction of anesthesia
if at all possible. Further information is available in Chapter 43.
Hypo- or hyperthermia
Hypothermia is a common event under anesthesia in dogs and cats,
affecting up to 89% of dogs [111,112] and 98% of cats [113]. Dogs
and cats with an American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) status
of III or more are at increased risk of developing intraoperative hypo-
thermia [114]. Other risk factors identified in dogs include body
weight < 6 kg, receiving an α2
-adrenergic receptor agonist, receiving
an opioid, having an anesthetic episode lasting > 1 h, having surgery
for an orthopedic or neurologic condition, or undergoing an
MRI [112]. A variety of strategies have been investigated to minimize
intraoperative hypothermia, and the reader is directed to Chapter 17
for more information. Once hypothermia develops, active warming
strategies (e.g., forced warm air and resistive polymer heating) are
indicated although there is a lag period between implementation of
active warming and changes to core temperature [115].
Hyperthermia during general anesthesia is much less common
than hypothermia, affecting only 3–9% of dogs [111,112] and 1% of
cats [113]. Hyperthermia during anesthetic maintenance is often
iatrogenic, due to excessive warming, particularly in small patients.
Postanesthetic hyperthermia has been documented in up to 47% of
cats within 24 h [116]. It is associated largely with opioid adminis-
tration [117], although cats receiving only medetomidine and
either ketamine or propofol can also develop hyperthermia [118].
Postanesthetic hyperthermia in cats is typically self-limiting [117];
however, if the temperature is excessively high, naloxone 0.01 mg/kg
IM or IV can be administered. Body temperature often rapidly
returns to normal following opioid reversal. Further information is
available in Chapter 17.
Malignant hyperthermia
The phenomenon of malignant hyperthermia is characterized by a
rapid increase in body temperature caused by skeletal muscle con-
traction. This contraction is caused by an abnormal, excessive
influx of calcium from the sarcoplasmic reticulum due to a defective
calcium channel, most commonly the ryanodine receptor (RyR1).
This abnormal influx is most commonly induced by anesthetic
drugs, notably halogenated inhalant anesthetic agents (not gases
such as nitrous oxide and xenon) and succinylcholine. Other trig-
gers, such as stress and exercise, may rarely precipitate malignant
hyperthermia. While malignant hyperthermia is extremely rare
overall and is less common with modern inhalant anesthet-
ics [119], it has been documented in dogs [120], cats [121], and
horses [122] using isoflurane or sevoflurane. Pigs are the most
commonly affected species and have been used as an animal model
for the disease for decades [123]. Further information about malig-
nant hyperthermia in pigs is available in Chapters 53 and 65.
Clinical signs of malignant hyperthermia vary by species and can
manifest from induction through to recovery. Typically, evidence of
a hypermetabolic syndrome predominates, particularly increased
PET
CO2
, heart rate, arrhythmias, and body temperature [120].
Muscle rigidity, changes to skin color due to vasodilation, metabolic
acidosis, hyperkalemia, rhabdomyolysis, sweating, and dissemi-
nated intravascular coagulation can also occur [123]. Because the
treatment for malignant hyperthermia is specific to that diagnosis, it
is important to distinguish it from other hypermetabolic causes,
such as hyperthermia [124], sepsis/endotoxemia [120], or thyrotoxi-
cosis [125]. Any patient exhibiting an abrupt increase in PET
CO2 or
body temperature should be considered for malignant hyperther-
mia. If suspected, inhalant anesthetics should be discontinued, the
patient changed to a “clean” machine and circuit without recent
inhalant exposure, and anesthesia maintained with an injectable
protocol (e.g., propofol infusion). The specific treatment for malig-
nant hyperthermia is the calcium channel blocker dantrolene at
2 mg/kg IV with additional doses as required up to 10 mg/kg IV.
Because dantrolene is rarely available at most veterinary hospitals,
symptomatic treatment and other calcium channel blockers may be
used but are rarely successful [120–122]. Symptomatic treatment
may include administration of sympatholytics (e.g., β-adrenergic
blockers), insulin and dextrose to treat hyperkalemia, procainamide,
neuromuscular blocking agents, hyperventilation, active cooling,
and fluid support. Lidocaine and exogenous calcium administration
may worsen the outcome [120]. Without acute dantrolene treat-
ment, malignant hyperthermia is typically fatal [120–122].
Myoclonus
Myoclonus is the rhythmic contraction of skeletal muscles and can
range from a small single-muscle tick to a whole-body contraction
that resembles a seizure. In people, the electroencephalogram
(EEG) of patients experiencing anesthesia drug-related myoclonus
is not typical of seizure activity; therefore, myoclonus appears to be
distinct from a seizure [126]. Myoclonus has been reported
in dogs administered etomidate [127], epidural morphine [128],
propofol [129], and ketamine [130]. Administering additional
drugs, such as propofol or benzodiazepines, does not reliably
stop the myoclonus [127,129], but pretreatment with an opioid or
benzodiazepine may reduce the incidence [127,131]. Myoclonus
occurring after induction typically subsides if no additional
treatment is given and does not seem to be associated with adverse
clinical effects for the patient [130].
Postanesthetic complications
Prolonged anesthetic recovery
The time to recover from anesthesia depends on the species,
the drugs used and their route of administration, the duration of

-- 84 of 1450 --

Chapter 5: Anesthetic Emergencies, Resuscitation, and Adverse Events 	69
anesthesia, and patient characteristics [132,133]. In small animal
patients, the time from termination of inhalant anesthesia to extu-
bation of the patient is usually expected to be less than 30 min [134].
In equine patients in a university teaching hospital setting, the
time from inhalant anesthesia termination to standing is typically
expected to be less than 60 min [133]. If the patient’s recovery
exceeds these times (or those defined by the institution), it may be
considered prolonged. A prolonged recovery may indicate physio-
logic disturbances, which must be corrected and is, therefore, a
potential anesthetic emergency.
Common differential diagnoses for a prolonged recovery include
hypothermia, hypotension, hemorrhage, hepatic incompetence,
renal dysfunction, hypoglycemia, neurologic disease, hypocalcemia,
and drug overdose. The potential for prolonged anesthetic recovery
should be anticipated in patients where preanesthetic patient
evaluation indicates hepatic incompetence (e.g., liver failure), renal
dysfunction, and/or neurologic disease and their anesthetic proto-
cols should be adjusted accordingly. In patients experiencing a
prolonged recovery that was not expected, their physiologic status
should be thoroughly evaluated, specifically temperature, blood
glucose, ionized calcium, blood pressure, and packed cell volume
if hemorrhage from a surgical procedure (e.g., postoperative ovari-
ohysterectomy) is a possibility. Any physiologic derangements
should be corrected. If no physiologic abnormalities are identified,
a relative drug overdose should be considered, even if the drug dose
was apparently appropriate for the patient. Opioids may be reversed
with low-dose naloxone (0.01 mg/kg IV) and benzodiazepines with
flumazenil (0.01 mg/kg IV). α2
- Adrenergic receptor agonists may
be reversed with atipamezole, tolazoline, or yohimbine. Excessive
sedation due to acepromazine may be treated with doxapram
(1.25 mg/kg IV). In exceptional circumstances, recovery from
inhalant anesthesia may be expedited with doxapram [135] or phys-
ostigmine [136]. If drug effects have been reversed and recovery
still has not progressed, persistent neurologic dysfunction, possibly
due to intraoperative hypotension, hypoperfusion, and hypoxia,
should be considered. Administration of corticosteroids, mannitol,
and/or hypertonic saline may be indicated if there is concern for
increased ICP secondary to the patient’s disease or suspected
cerebral hypoxia.
Patient injury during recovery
Injuries may be incurred by patients during recovery from anesthe-
sia. In small animals, thrashing body motions may cause trauma to
the head and limbs, necessitating further medical care (e.g., wound
care, fracture repair, and dental extraction). In horses, fractures sus-
tained during recovery account for up to 64% of all anesthesia-
related fatalities [137]. In addition to appropriate analgesia, sedation
prior to recovery, particularly in patients expected to be anxious or
aggressive, may help minimize the risk of injury. In an emergency
situation where an animal is thrashing and may injure itself, serious
consideration must also be given to the risk of injury to personnel.
In a survey, up to 43% of equine hospitals reported injury to
personnel in recovery, and most respondents felt those assisting
with equine recovery were at greater risk of personal injury [138].
In small animal patients experiencing violent recoveries, the use of
physical restraint aids where possible (e.g., leash, wooden board,
and rabies pole) should be considered to minimize the risk to
personnel and facilitate administration of injectable IM sedation
(e.g., dexmedetomidine, ketamine, and/or tiletamine–zolazepam).
In adult equine cases, there is little a single individual can do for the
thrashing patient in recovery. Often the anesthetist must wait until
the patient becomes calm enough to approach and handle and this
may be due to exhaustion or asphyxiation and loss of conscious-
ness. Once the equine patient can be handled, sedation and analge-
sia may be warranted. If the equine patient is unconscious due to
airway obstruction, a tracheostomy should be rapidly performed
and drugs readied to maintain the patient in an anesthetized or
sedated state until an airway is re-established and the patient is
stabilized.
Postanesthetic blindness
Postanesthetic blindness can occur due to decreases in cerebral
perfusion during anesthesia or occlusion of the maxillary artery,
particularly in cats. Cats suffering from hypoxia due to cardiac
arrest or profound hypotension can develop cortical blindness [139].
Blindness may also be caused by decreased maxillary artery blood
flow due to mouth gag placement for dental, oral, or endoscopic
procedures [140,141]. Cortical blindness may be permanent, or
vision may return with time [140]. Avoiding the use of spring-
loaded mouth gags and minimizing any gag opening to 30 mm or
less should prevent occlusion of the maxillary artery in cats [142].
As blindness is diagnosed after the hypoxic event has already
occurred and the patient has recovered from anesthesia, therapeutic
intervention is not possible and prevention remains the best course
of action.
Postanesthetic neuropathy, rhabdomyolysis, or
myelomalacia
Large animals, particularly horses, undergoing general anesthesia
may experience complications related to nerve, muscle or, rarely,
spinal cord damage that become apparent during recovery. Further
information on these complications is available in the Chapters 52
and 61.
Rhabdomyolysis (i.e., postanesthetic myopathy) in horses
occurs due to decreased perfusion of large muscles and subse-
quent reperfusion injury combined with increased muscle com-
partment pressure [143]. It can result in lameness, poor recovery
quality, fracture, death, euthanasia, renal failure due to myoglobi-
nuria, and/or failure to recover from anesthesia [137,144].
Postoperative rhabdomyolysis is one of the most common causes
of morbidity and mortality associated with anesthesia in the
horse, accounting for 7% of deaths [144] and 31% of non-fatal
complications [56]. Prolonged duration of anesthesia, hypoten-
sion, and lateral recumbency are risk factors for the development
of rhabdomyolysis [56]. The risk of developing rhabdomyolysis
can be reduced by minimizing the duration of anesthesia, mainte-
nance of MAP > 70 mmHg, provision of IV fluids, ensuring ade-
quate padding and positioning, and avoiding excess strain on
muscles [145]. Horses that develop rhabdomyolysis may have dif-
ficulty standing in recovery, exhibit lameness once standing, have
swollen or hard muscles, and display signs of pain such as shaking,
sweating, tachycardia, and/or tachypnea [146]. If rhabdomyolysis
is suspected, the presence of myoglobinuria and/or a significantly
elevated creatine kinase will support the diagnosis. Treatment in
the acute phase is supportive and consists of appropriate analgesia
(e.g., α2 -adrenergic receptor agonists, butorphanol, lidocaine
infusion), aggressive fluid support, anti-inflammatory drugs (e.g.,
flunixin meglumine or corticosteroids), and physical therapy such
as massage or water cooling.

-- 85 of 1450 --

70 	Section 1: General Topics
Postanesthetic neuropathy in horses occurs due to pressure on
peripheral nerves, which causes varying degrees of impairment.
Although it is rarely reported to cause fatality, it may co-occur
with rhabdomyolysis, which may mask the influence of neuro-
pathy [147]. Neuropathy may impact recovery quality and post-
operative 	morbidity, 	leading 	to 	prolonged 	recovery 	or
euthanasia [148,149]. Facial nerve injury may result from the
halter exerting pressure on superficial nerves which manifests as
facial asymmetry [150]. Distal limb peripheral nerve injury can
result from direct pressure exerted by poorly positioned poles or
other pressure points and may lead to inability to extend the
hoof. Radial nerve paralysis can occur in laterally recumbent
horses and lead to a dropped shoulder and inability to extend the
hoof [151]. Obturator nerve injury impacting anesthetic recov-
ery 	associated 	with 	parturition 	and 	dystocia 	has 	been
reported [147]. Bilateral femoral nerve paralysis has been associ-
ated with caudal extension of the hindlimbs in dorsally recum-
bent horses, but unilateral and bilateral pelvic limb neuropathies
have been reported with various body positions in both depend-
ent and non-dependent limbs [148,149,152]. The diagnosis of
neuropathy is often made by exclusion of other possible causes
of prolonged or difficult recovery, particularly rhabdomyoly-
sis [149]. Steps to minimize the risk of neuropathy are similar to
those taken to minimize the risk of rhabdomyolysis and include
sufficient padding, avoiding pressure points, maintaining ade-
quate blood flow, minimizing anesthesia duration, and pulling
the dependent forelimb forward in laterally recumbent horses to
minimize pressure on the radial nerve [149]. If neuropathy
occurs, there are few options for acute treatment beyond anti-
inflammatory drugs and physical therapy. Physical means of
support (e.g., a sling, supporting bandages) may be necessary if
the horse is unable to stand without assistance. The degree of
damage is unknown at the time of injury and can range from
neuropraxia (temporary loss of nerve conduction), to axonot-
mesis (significant axonal damage), to neurotmesis (complete
transection of the nerve) [151]. Because the prognosis is depend-
ent on the time required to recover nerve function, re-
examination is warranted to assess the patient’s progress [150].
Patients that have rapid resolution of signs likely had a mild
injury (neuropraxia), whereas those that have permanent loss of
function likely had complete disruption of the nerve fiber
(neurotmesis) [148].
Myelomalacia is a softening of the spinal cord, which leads to
catastrophic failure of spinal conducting pathways, resulting in
paralysis. It is a rare but devastating complication in horses
undergoing anesthesia [153]. Horses developing myelomalacia
will be unable to stand in recovery, may adopt a dog-sitting pos-
ture due to paraplegia, and will lack anal tone and hind limb
function [153]. The absence of anal tone, tail tone, and with-
drawal reflexes help to distinguish it from bilateral femoral
nerve paralysis. Myelomalacia most commonly occurs in horses
that were in dorsal recumbency during anesthesia and seems to
happen more commonly in draft breeds (e.g., Fresian, Morgan,
and Percheron) [153]. Other risk factors have not been identi-
fied. There is no known prevention for the development of mye-
lomalacia, and treatment has been unrewarding with a 100%
fatality rate [153]. Any horse that has abnormal hind limb func-
tion following anesthesia should be assessed for the possibility of
myelomalacia, and it should be distinguished from rhabdomy-
olysis and neuropathy, both of which may have more favorable
outcomes.
Personnel injury
Injury to personnel around an anesthetic event can result in a crisis,
which compounds or complicates patient welfare. If personnel are
injured, resources need to be diverted to caring for them, which
makes it more challenging to care for patients effectively. Injured
personnel are also unable to care for their patients, so personnel
safety should always be paramount in any veterinary setting. The
breadth of patient types encountered in anesthetic practice means
that the anesthetist may be faced with aggressive, wild, and/or ven-
omous species, which can all pose a significant threat to human
safety. Veterinary technicians working with more than six different
species reported a twofold greater risk of injury than those working
with less than four species [154]. Animals account for the majority
of accidents veterinarians encounter, up to 66% [155,156].
Veterinary staff members tend to underestimate the risk of injury
relative to an expert panel, indicating that risks exist which staff do
not perceive as such (e.g., handling an animal in recovery) [156].
Bites from dogs accounted for 35% of the injuries associated with
anesthetic procedures [157]. In one study, no survey respondents
who reported being bitten in the previous year had been engaged in
anesthesia activities, whereas 4% of those who did not report being
bitten were engaged in an anesthesia procedure, suggesting that
anesthesia activities may be safer than other activities [158]. This
may be due to the ability of veterinary anesthesia staff to use seda-
tives, which contributes to a lower overall injury risk compared
with non-veterinary workers such as groomers [159].
Risk to personnel should always be assessed, particularly in cir-
cumstances where control of the environment is limited. This is
essential in field situations or in situations where the setting is sub-
optimal (e.g., managing a horse recumbent in a trailer). A plan
should be prepared so that every individual knows their role, what
the steps of the anesthesia event will include and in what order, and
what to do if a problem occurs. Use of remote immobilization is often
preferred if an animal cannot be approached safely. Aggressive or
dangerous patients limited to a confined space (e.g., stall, corral,
or carrier) may be sedated with a blowgun, a spring-loaded syringe
pole, or a CO 2
- powered pistol. Drug combinations involving
α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists (e.g., dexmedetomidine, detomi-
dine, romifidine, or xylazine) and dissociatives (e.g., ketamine or
tiletamine) are typically used for pharmacologic restraint in domes-
tic species, and ultrapotent opioids are often used in non-domestic
species. Animals that can be physically restrained (i.e., squeeze
cage, rabies pole, or capture net) may be able to be injected by hand.
In the event of an injury to personnel, it is the anesthetist’s role to
ensure continued personnel safety and patient management. An
individual should be designated to care for the injured person so
that the anesthetist can supervise management of the patient and
environment. Once the injured person is receiving care, avoiding
further personnel injury should be the most important priority. In
some cases, this priority may have to temporarily supersede patient
welfare (e.g., releasing a thrashing cat to avoid being bitten or leaving
an enclosed space with a horse having a difficult recovery). Once
personnel safety has been established, the patient should be attended
to, and appropriate care provided. Sedation of the patient may be
required to avoid further injury to personnel or the animal.
Post- critical event debriefing
Anesthetic emergencies often occur rapidly, threaten patient well-
being and survival, and depend on the intervention of the anesthe-
sia team for a successful outcome. All of these variables can place

-- 86 of 1450 --

Chapter 5: Anesthetic Emergencies, Resuscitation, and Adverse Events 	71
significant emotional strain on care providers. This may manifest as
stress, burnout, anxiety, a feeling of helplessness, and/or depres-
sion [160]. In one study in human medical care providers, almost
half of those who answered a trauma screening questionnaire
reported one to five symptoms of psychological trauma [160].
Providers who did not have a debriefing event reported a higher
incidence of post-traumatic stress disorder symptoms than those
who did have a debriefing [160].
One study in veterinary medicine documented that debriefing
occurred in ~ 60% of CPR events [15]. Most survey respondents
indicated that a post-event debriefing tool improved team perfor-
mance. The most commonly cited points for improvement included
equipment issues, need for clinical standards, and medication
errors being made. Applications of checklists, training, and proper
organization and preparation of equipment should be considered
for any anesthetic emergency that is likely to arise [14,15,96].
References
1 Matthews NS, Mohn TJ, Yang M, et al. Factors associated with anesthetic-related
death in dogs and cats in primary care veterinary hospitals. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2017; 250(6): 655–665.
2 Seamon AB, Hofmeister EH, Divers SJ. Outcome following inhalation anesthesia in
birds at a veterinary referral hospital: 352 cases (2004–2014). J Am Vet Med Assoc
2017; 251(7): 814–817.
3 Reason J. Human Error, 1st edn. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1990.
4 Boller M, Fletcher DJ. Update on cardiopulmonary resuscitation in small animals.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2020; 50(6): 1183–1202.
5 Hofmeister EH, Brainard BM, Egger CM, et al. Prognostic indicators for dogs and
cats with cardiopulmonary arrest treated by cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscita-
tion at a university teaching hospital. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2009; 235(1): 50–57.
6 McIntyre RL, Hopper K, Epstein SE. Assessment of cardiopulmonary resuscitation
in 121 dogs and 30 cats at a university teaching hospital (2009–2012). J Vet Emerg
Crit Care 2014; 24(6): 693–704.
7 Hoehne SN, Hopper K, Epstein SE. Prospective evaluation of cardiopulmonary
resuscitation performed in dogs and cats according to the RECOVER guidelines.
Part 2: patient outcomes and CPR practice since guideline implementation.
Front Vet Sci 2019; 6: 439.
8 Onuma M, Kondo H, Ono S, et al. Retrospective investigation of cardiopulmo-
nary resuscitation outcome in 146 exotic animals. J Vet Med Sci 2017; 79(9):
1611–1614.
9 Jokisalo JM, Corley KT. CPR in the neonatal foal: has RECOVER changed our
approach? Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 2014; 30(2): 301–316.
10 Conde Ruiz C, Junot S. Successful cardiopulmonary resuscitation in a sevoflurane
anaesthetized horse that suffered cardiac arrest at recovery. Front Vet Sci 2018; 5: 138.
11 Hofmeister EH, Reed RA, Barletta M, et al. Critical incident technique analysis
applied to perianesthetic cardiac arrests at a university teaching hospital.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45(3): 345–350.
12 Oberholtzer JA, Hofmeister EH. Perception of small animal cardiopulmonary
resuscitation of owners presenting to a small animal teaching clinic including a
large first opinion service. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2020; 30(4): 411–417.
13 Holmes AC, Clark L. Changes in adherence to cardiopulmonary resuscitation
guidelines in a single referral center from January 2009 to June 2013 and assessment
of factors contributing to the observed changes. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2015; 25(6):
801–804.
14 McMichael M, Herring J, Fletcher DJ, et al. RECOVER evidence and knowledge
gap analysis on veterinary CPR. Part 2: preparedness and prevention. J Vet Emerg
Crit Care 2012; 22(Suppl 1): S13–S25.
15 Timothy CL, Brown AJ, Thomas EK. Implementation of a postarrest debriefing tool
in a veterinary university hospital. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2021; 31(6): 718–726.
16 Boller M, Fletcher DJ. RECOVER evidence and knowledge gap analysis on veteri-
nary CPR. Part 1: evidence analysis and consensus process: collaborative path
toward small animal CPR guidelines. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2012; 22(Suppl 1):
S4–S12.
17 Fletcher DJ, Boller M, Brainard BM, et al. RECOVER evidence and knowledge gap
analysis on veterinary CPR. Part 7: clinical guidelines. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2012;
22(Suppl 1): S102–S131.
18 Kawase K, Ujiie H, Takaki M, et al. Clinical outcome of canine cardiopulmonary
resuscitation following the RECOVER clinical guidelines at a Japanese nighttime
animal hospital. J Vet Med Sci 2018; 80(3): 518–525.
19 Gillespie Í, Fletcher DJ, Stevenson MA, et al. The compliance of current small
animal CPR practice with RECOVER guidelines: an internet-based survey. Front
Vet Sci 2019; 6: 181.
20 Hopper K, Epstein SE, Fletcher DJ, et al. RECOVER evidence and knowledge gap
analysis on veterinary CPR. Part 3: basic life support. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2012;
22(Suppl 1): S26–S43.
21 Kneba EJ, Humm KR. The use of mental metronomes during simulated cardiopul-
monary resuscitation training. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2020; 30(1): 92–96.
22 Buckley GJ, Shih A, Garcia-Pereira FL, et al. The effect of using an impedance
threshold device on hemodynamic parameters during cardiopulmonary resuscita-
tion in dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2012; 22(4): 435–440.
23 Quesada J, Londoño L, Buckley GJ, et al. Retrospective study of gross and histo-
pathologic lesions associated with closed chest cardiopulmonary resuscitation in
dogs. J Small Anim Pract 2021; 62(9): 750–755.
24 Hofmeister EH, Brainard BM, Egger CM, et al. Additional variables identified as
significant return of spontaneous circulation in cardiac arrest and resuscitation.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2013; 243(4): 480.
25 Anthi A, Tzelepis GE, Alivizatos P, et al. Unexpected cardiac arrest after cardiac
surgery: incidence, predisposing causes, and outcome of open chest cardiopulmo-
nary resuscitation. Chest 1998; 113(1): 15–19.
26 Warang AM, Mann FA, Middleton JR, et al. Comparison of left fourth and fifth
intercostal space thoracotomy for open-chest cardiopulmonary resuscitation in
dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2021; 31(3): 331–339.
27 Hopper K, Rezende ML, Borchers A, et al. Efficacy of manual ventilation tech-
niques during cardiopulmonary resuscitation in dogs. Front Vet Sci 2018; 5: 239.
28 Kim SY, Park SO, Kim JW, et al. How much experience do rescuers require to
achieve successful tracheal intubation during cardiopulmonary resuscitation?
Resuscitation 2018; 133: 187–192.
29 Brainard BM, Boller M, Fletcher DJ, et al. RECOVER evidence and knowledge
gap analysis on veterinary CPR. Part 5: monitoring. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2012;
22(Suppl 1): S65–S84.
30 Cha KC, Kim YW, Kim TH, et al. Comparison between 30:1 and 30:2 compression-
to- ventilation ratios for cardiopulmonary resuscitation: are two ventilations
necessary? Acad Emerg Med 2015; 22(11): 1261–1266.
31 Cournand A, Motley HL. Physiological studies of the effects of intermittent positive
pressure breathing on cardiac output in man. Am J Physiol 1948; 152(1):162–174.
32 Rozanski EA, Rush JE, Buckley GJ, et al. RECOVER evidence and knowledge gap
analysis on veterinary CPR. Part 4: advanced life support. J Vet Emerg Crit Care
2012; 22(Suppl 1): S44–S64.
33 Buckley GJ, Rozanski EA, Rush JE. Randomized, blinded comparison of epineph-
rine and vasopressin for treatment of naturally occurring cardiopulmonary arrest
in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2011; 25(6): 1334–1340.
34 Wongtanasarasin W, Krintratun S. Clinical benefits of corticosteroid administra-
tion during adult cardiopulmonary resuscitation: a systemic review and meta-
analysis. World J Crit Care Med 2021; 10(5): 290–300.
35 Creedon JM. Controversies surrounding critical illness-related corticosteroid
insufficiency in animals. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2015; 25(1): 107–112.
36 Fletcher DJ, Boller M. Fluid therapy during cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Front
Vet Sci 2021; 7: 625361.
37 Voorhees WD III, Ralston SH, Kougias C, et al. Fluid loading with whole blood or
ringer’s lactate solution during CPR in dogs. Resuscitation 1987; 15(2): 113–123.
38 Panchal AR, Bartos JA, Cabañas JG, et al. Part 3: adult basic and advanced life support:
2020 American Heart Association guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and
emergency cardiovascular care. Circulation 2020; 142(16 Suppl 2): S366–S468.
39 Hogen T, Cole SG, Drobatz KJ. Evaluation of end-tidal carbon dioxide as a predic-
tor of return of spontaneous circulation in dogs and cats undergoing cardiopulmo-
nary resuscitation. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2018; 28(5): 398–407.
40 Smarick SD, Haskins SC, Boller M, et al. RECOVER evidence and knowledge gap
analysis on veterinary CPR. Part 6: post-cardiac arrest care. J Vet Emerg Crit Care
2012; 22(Suppl 1): S85–S101.
41 Choudhary RC, Shoaib M, Sohnen S, et al. Pharmacological approach for neuro-
protection after cardiac arrest–a narrative review of current therapies and future
neuroprotective cocktail. Front Med 2021; 8: 636651.
42 Ai HB, Jiang EL, Yu JH, et al. Mean arterial pressure is associated with the neuro-
logical function in patients who survived after cardiopulmonary resuscitation: a
retrospective cohort study. Clin Cardiol 2020; 43(11): 1286–1293.
43 Ameloot K, Meex I, Genbrugge C, et al. Hemodynamic targets during therapeutic
hypothermia after cardiac arrest: a prospective observational study. Resuscitation
2015; 91: 56–62.
44 Annoni F, Dell’Anna AM, Franchi F, et al. The impact of diastolic blood pressure
values on the neurological outcome of cardiac arrest patients. Resuscitation 2018;
130: 167–173.
45 Tahsili-Fahadan P, Farrokh S, Geocadin RG. Hypothermia and brain inflammation
after cardiac arrest. Brain Circ 2018; 4(1): 1–13.

-- 87 of 1450 --

72 	Section 1: General Topics
46 Gaynor JS, Dunlop CI, Wagner AE, et al. Complications and mortality associated
with anesthesia in dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1999; 35(1): 13–17.
47 Redondo JI, Rubio M, Soler G, et al. Normal values and incidence of cardiorespira-
tory complications in dogs during general anaesthesia. A review of 1281 cases. J Vet
Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med 2007; 54(9): 470–477.
48 Dixon A, Fauber AE. Effect of anesthesia-associated hypotension on neurologic
outcome in dogs undergoing hemilaminectomy because of acute, severe thora-
columbar intervertebral disk herniation: 56 cases (2007–2013). J Am Vet Med Assoc
2017; 250(4): 417–423.
49 Harvey L, Knowles T, Murison PJ. Comparison of direct and Doppler arterial blood
pressure measurements in rabbits during isoflurane anaesthesia. Vet Anaesth Analg
2012; 39(2): 174–184.
50 Donaldson LL. Retrospective assessment of dobutamine therapy for hypotension in
anesthetized horses. Vet Surg 1988; 17(1): 53–57.
51 Bromage PR. Effect of induced vascular hypotension on the liver; alterations in
appearance and consistence. Lancet 1952; 2(6723): 10–12.
52 Langård O, Holdaas H, Eide I, et al. Conditions for humoral alpha-adrenoceptor
stimulation of renin release in anaesthetized dogs. Scand J Clin Lab Invest 1981;
41(6): 527–534.
53 Richey MT, Holland MS, McGrath CJ, et al. Equine post-anesthetic lameness. A ret-
rospective study. Vet Surg 1990; 19(5): 392–397.
54 Bellamy RF. Diastolic coronary artery pressure-flow relations in the dog. Circ Res
1978; 43(1): 92–101.
55 Wayne HH. Syncope. Physiological considerations and an analysis of the clinical
characteristics in 510 patients. Am J Med 1961; 30: 418–438.
56 Johnston GM, Eastment JK, Taylor PM, et al. Is isoflurane safer than halothane in
equine anaesthesia? Results from a prospective multicentre randomised controlled
trial. Equine Vet J 2004; 36(1): 64–71.
57 Smith MD, Barletta M, Young CN, et al. Retrospective study of intra-anesthetic predic-
tors of prolonged hospitalization, increased cost of care and mortality for canine
patients at a veterinary teaching hospital. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(6): 1321–1331.
58 Robinson R, Chang YM, Seymour CJ, et al. Predictors of outcome in dogs undergo-
ing thoracic surgery (2002–2011). Vet Anaesth Analg 2014; 41(3): 259–268.
59 Fages A, Soler C, Fernández- Salesa N, et al. Perioperative outcome in dogs
undergoing emergency abdominal surgery: a retrospective study on 82 cases
(2018–2020). Vet Sci 2021; 8(10): 209.
60 Edwards T, Parker J, Palmer L, et al. Transfusion for the Military Working Dog.
https://jts.amedd.army.mil/assets/docs/cpgs/Transfusion_in_Military_Working_
Dog_10_Dec_2019_ID77.pdf (accessed August 2022).
61 McGowan EE, Marryott K, Drobatz KJ, et al. Evaluation of the use of shock index
in identifying acute blood loss in healthy blood donor dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care
2017; 27(5): 524–531.
62 Duerr FM, Carr AP, Duke T, et al. Prevalence of perioperative arrhythmias in
50 young, healthy dogs. Can Vet J 2007; 48(2): 169–177.
63 Bigby SE, Beths T, Bauquier S, et al. Postinduction apnoea in dogs premedicated
with acepromazine or dexmedetomidine and anaesthetized with alfaxalone or
propofol. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(5): 1007–1015.
64 Walley KR, Lewis TH, Wood LD. Acute respiratory acidosis decreases left ventricular
contractility but increases cardiac output in dogs. Circ Res 1990; 67(3): 628–635.
65 Hagiya K, Takahashi H, Isaka Y, et al. Influence of acidosis on cardiotonic effects of
colforsin and epinephrine: a dose-response study. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2013;
27(5): 925–932.
66 Eisle JH, Eger EI II, Muallem M. Narcotic properties of carbon dioxide in the dog.
Anesthesiology 1967; 28: 856–865.
67 McNally EM, Robertson SA, Pablo LS. Comparison of time to desaturation between
preoxygenated and nonpreoxygenated dogs following sedation with acepromazine
maleate and morphine and induction of anesthesia with propofol. Am J Vet Res
2009; 70(11): 1333–1338.
68 Lin CY. Uptake of anaesthetic gases and vapours. Anaesth Intensive Care 1994;
22(4): 363–373.
69 Jones TL, Boyer K, Chapman K, et al. Evaluation of the time to desensitization of
the larynx of cats following topical lidocaine application. J Feline Med Surg 2021;
23(6): 563–567.
70 Ambros B, Carrozzo MV, Jones T. Desaturation times between dogs preoxygenated
via face mask or flow-by technique before induction of anesthesia. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2018; 45(4): 452–458.
71 James T, Lane M, Crowe D, et al. A blind insertion airway device in dogs as an
alternative to traditional endotracheal intubation. Vet J 2015; 203(2): 187–191.
72 Hardjo S, Goodwin W, Haworth MD, et al. A proposed guideline for performance
of emergency surgical airways in small animals: analysis of five unsuccessfully
managed cannot intubate, cannot oxygenate cases. Vet Sci 2022; 9(2): 39.
73 Campoy L, Hughes JM, McAllister H, et al. Kinking of endotracheal tubes during
maxima flexion of the atlanto-occipital joint in dogs. J Small Anim Pract 2003;
44(1): 3–7.
74 Calice I, Moens Y. Modern spirometry supports anesthetic management in small
animal clinical practice: a case series. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2016; 52(5): 305–311.
75 Tute AS, Wilkins PA, Gleed RD, et al. Negative pressure pulmonary edema as a
post-anesthetic complication associated with upper airway obstruction in a horse.
Vet Surg 1996; 25(6): 519–523.
76 Barker SJ, Polson JS. Fire in the operating room: a case report and laboratory
study. Anesth Analg 2001; 93(4): 960–965.
77 Bauer MD, Clark-Price SC, McFadden MS. Anesthesia case of the month.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2009; 234(12): 1539–1541.
78 Hardie EM, Spodnick GJ, Gilson SD, et al. Tracheal rupture in cats: 16 cases
(1983–1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1999; 214(4): 508–512.
79 Mitchell SL, McCarthy R, Rudloff E, et al. Tracheal rupture associated with intuba-
tion in cats: 20 cases (1996–1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000; 216(10): 1592–1595.
80 Harvey L, Murison PJ, Fews D, et al. Fatal post-anaesthetic pneumothorax in a
dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 2010; 37(1): 83–84.
81 Ovbey DH, Wilson DV, Bednarski RM, et al. Prevalence and risk factors for canine
post-anesthetic aspiration pneumonia (1999–2009): a multicenter study. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2014; 41(2): 127–136.
82 Posner LP, Mariani CL, Swanson C, et al. Perianesthetic morbidity and mortality
in dogs undergoing cervical and thoracolumbar spinal surgery. Vet Anaesth Analg
2014; 41(2): 137–144.
83 Levy N, Ballegeer E, Koenigshof A. Clinical and radiographic findings in cats with
aspiration pneumonia: retrospective evaluation of 28 cases. J Small Anim Pract
2019; 60(6): 356–360.
84 Vance A, Hofmeister EH, Laas C, et al. The effects of extubation with an inflated
versus deflated endotracheal tube cuff on endotracheal fluid volume in the dog.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38(3): 203–207.
85 Baetge C, Cummings KJ, Deveau M. Reduced risk of pneumonia after changes in
anesthetic procedures for dogs receiving repeated anesthesia for radiation treat-
ment. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2019; 60(2): 241–245.
86 Serpa Neto A, Schultz MJ, Gama de Abreu M. Intraoperative ventilation strategies
to prevent postoperative pulmonary complications: systematic review, meta-
analysis, and trial sequential analysis. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2015; 29(3):
331–340.
87 Echevarria C, Twomey D, Dunning J, et al. Does re-expansion pulmonary oedema
exist? Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg 2008; 7(3): 485–489.
88 Pergolizzi JV Jr, Webster LR, Vortsman E, et al. Wooden Chest syndrome: the atypical
pharmacology of fentanyl overdose. J Clin Pharm Ther 2021; 46(6): 1505–1508.
89 Collarile T, Di Girolamo N, Nardini G, et al. Fire ignition during laser surgery in
pet rodents. BMC Vet Res 2012; 8: 177.
90 Akhtar N, Ansar F, Baig MS, et al. Airway fires during surgery: management and
prevention. J Anaesthesiol Clin Pharmacol 2016; 32(1): 109–111.
91 Makary MA, Daniel M. Medical error-the third leading cause of death in the US.
BMJ 2016; 353: i2139.
92 Wallis J, Fletcher D, Bentley A, et al. Medical errors cause harm in veterinary hos-
pitals. Front Vet Sci 2019; 6: 12.
93 Fettiplace MR, McCabe DJ. Lipid emulsion improves survival in animal models of
local anesthetic toxicity: a meta-analysis. Clin Toxicol 2017; 55(7): 617–623.
94 Rosenthal MG, Labato MA. Use of therapeutic plasma exchange to treat
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug overdose in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2019;
33(2): 596–602.
95 Zapata M, Hofmeister EH. Refinement of the dose of doxapram to counteract the
sedative effects of acepromazine in dogs. J Small Anim Pract 2013; 54(8): 405–408.
96 Hofmeister EH, Quandt J, Braun C, et al. Development, implementation and
impact of simple patient safety interventions in a university teaching hospital.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2014; 41(3): 243–248.
97 Quandt JE. Anesthesia case of the month. Severe twist in the inner tube of the
coaxial breathing circuit, resulting in obstruction of the inspiratory limb of
the circuit. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2005; 227(12): 1902–1904.
98 McNally E. Anesthesia case of the month. Expiratory obstruction. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2009; 234(10): 1267–1269.
99 Carter JE, Nordaune JL, Pienschke EC, et al. Anesthesia case of the month.
Capnogram obtained from a 5-month-old 4.4-kg (9.68-lb) sexually intact female
Yorkshire Terrier mix undergoing elective ovariohysterectomy. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2012; 241(11): 1441–1443.
100 Lambertini C, Pietra M, Galiazzo G, et al. Incidence of gastroesophageal reflux in
dogs undergoing orthopaedic surgery or endoscopic evaluation of the upper
gastrointestinal tract. Vet Sci 2020; 7(4): 144.
101 Garcia RS, Belafsky PC, Della Maggiore A, et al. Prevalence of gastroesophageal
reflux in cats during anesthesia and effect of omeprazole on gastric pH. J Vet
Intern Med 2017; 31(3): 734–742.
102 Bissett SA, Davis J, Subler K, et al. Risk factors and outcome of bougienage for
treatment of benign esophageal strictures in dogs and cats: 28 cases (1995–2004).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2009; 235(7): 844–850.

-- 88 of 1450 --

Chapter 5: Anesthetic Emergencies, Resuscitation, and Adverse Events 	73
103 Adami C, Di Palma S, Gendron K, et al. Severe esophageal injuries occurring after
general anesthesia in two cats: case report and literature review. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 2011; 47(6): 436–442.
104 Wilson DV, Evans AT. The effect of topical treatment on esophageal pH during
acid reflux in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2007; 34(5): 339–343.
105 Allison A, Italiano M, Robinson R. Comparison of two topical treatments of
gastro-oesophageal regurgitation in dogs during general anaesthesia. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2020; 47(5): 672–675.
106 Her J, Yanke AB, Gerken K, et al. Retrospective evaluation of the relationship
between admission variables and brain herniation in dogs (2010–2019): 54 cases.
J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2022; 32(1): 50–57.
107 Chui J, Mariappan R, Mehta J, et al. Comparison of propofol and volatile agents for
maintenance of anesthesia during elective craniotomy procedures: systematic
review and meta-analysis. Can J Anaesth 2014; 61(4): 347–356.
108 Jones SJ, Mama KR, Brock NK, et al. Hyperkalemia during general anesthesia in
two Greyhounds. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2019; 254(11): 1329–1334.
109 Tissotti T, Sanchez A, Nickell J, et al. Retrospective evaluation of acute hyper-
kalemia of unknown origin during general anesthesia in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg
2023; 50(2): 129–135.
110 Pang DS, Panizzi L, Paterson JM. Successful treatment of hyperkalaemic periodic
paralysis in a horse during isoflurane anaesthesia. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011;
38(2): 113–120.
111 Redondo JI, Suesta P, Serra I, et al. Retrospective study of the prevalence of
postanaesthetic hypothermia in dogs. Vet Rec 2012; 171(15): 374.
112 Clark-Price SC, Fischer BL, Kirwin KL, et al. Multicenter study to investigate
factors associated with change in rectal temperature during anesthesia in dogs.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2021; 258(1): 64–71.
113 Redondo JI, Suesta P, Gil L, et al. Retrospective study of the prevalence of postan-
aesthetic hypothermia in cats. Vet Rec 2012; 170(8): 206.
114 Portier K, Ida KK. The ASA physical status classification: what is the evidence for
recommending its use in veterinary anesthesia? A systematic review. Front Vet Sci
2018; 5: 204.
115 Rodriguez-Diaz JM, Hayes GM, Boesch J, et al. Decreased incidence of periop-
erative inadvertent hypothermia and faster anesthesia recovery with increased
environmental temperature: a nonrandomized controlled study. Vet Surg 2020;
49(2): 256–264.
116 Niedfeldt RL, Robertson SA. Postanesthetic hyperthermia in cats: a retrospective
comparison between hydromorphone and buprenorphine. Vet Anaesth Analg
2006; 33(6): 381–389.
117 Posner LP, Pavuk AA, Rokshar JL, et al. Effects of opioids and anesthetic drugs on
body temperature in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2010; 37(1): 35–43.
118 Posner LP, Gleed RD, Erb HN, et al. Post-anesthetic hyperthermia in cats.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2007; 34(1): 40–47.
119 Wedel DJ, Gammel SA, Milde JH, et al. Delayed onset of malignant hyperthermia
induced by isoflurane and desflurane compared with halothane in susceptible
swine. Anesthesiology 1993; 78(6): 1138–1144.
120 Chohan AS, Greene SA. Anesthesia case of the month. Malignant hyperthermia.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2011; 239(7): 936–940.
121 Thomson SM, Burton CA, Armitage-Chan EA. Intra-operative hyperthermia in a
cat with a fatal outcome. Vet Anaesth Analg 2014; 41(3): 290–296.
122 Aleman M, Nieto JE, Magdesian KG. Malignant hyperthermia associated with
ryanodine receptor 1 (C7360G) mutation in Quarter Horses. J Vet Intern Med
2009; 23(2): 329–334.
123 Rosenberg H, Pollock N, Schiemann A, et al. Malignant hyperthermia: a review.
Orphanet J Rare Dis 2015; 10: 93.
124 Hofmeister EH, Hernandez-Divers SJ. Anesthesia case of the month. Tachycardia.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2005; 227(5): 718–720.
125 Merkle JE, Boudreaux B, Langohr I, et al. Thyroid storm in a dog secondary to
thyroid carcinoma. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2021; 31(3): 428–431.
126 Doenicke AW, Roizen MF, Kugler J, et al. Reducing myoclonus after etomidate.
Anesthesiology 1999; 90(1): 113–119.
127 Muir WW III, Mason DE. Side effects of etomidate in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1989; 194(10): 1430–1434.
128 Iff I, Valeskini K, Mosing M. Severe pruritus and myoclonus following intrathecal
morphine administration in a dog. Can Vet J 2012; 53(9): 983–986.
129 Cattai A, Rabozzi R, Natale V, et al. The incidence of spontaneous movements
(myoclonus) in dogs undergoing total intravenous anaesthesia with propofol.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2015; 42(1): 93–98.
130 Hellyer PW, Freeman LC, Hubbell JA. Induction of anesthesia with diazepam-
ketamine and midazolam-ketamine in greyhounds. Vet Surg 1991; 20(2): 143–147.
131 Jones TL, Calbay R, da Cunha AF, et al. Descriptive assessment of adverse events
associated with midazolam-etomidate versus saline-etomidate in healthy hydro-
morphone premedicated dogs. J Small Anim Pract 2021; 62(6): 437–441.
132 Kleine S, Hofmeister E, Egan K. Multivariable analysis of anesthetic factors associ-
ated with time to extubation in dogs. Res Vet Sci 2014; 97(3): 592–596.
133 Voulgaris DA, Hofmeister EH. Multivariate analysis of factors associated with
post-anesthetic times to standing in isoflurane- anesthetized horses: 381 cases.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36(5): 414–420.
134 Bennett RC, Fancy SP, Walsh CM, et al. Comparison of sevoflurane and isoflurane
in dogs anaesthetised for clinical surgical or diagnostic procedures. J Small Anim
Pract 2008; 49(8): 392–397.
135 Robertson GS, MacGregor DM, Jones CJ. Evaluation of doxapram for arousal
from general anaesthesia in outpatients. Br J Anaesth 1977; 49(2): 133–140.
136 Wiese AJ, Brosnan RJ, Barter LS. Effects of acetylcholinesterase inhibition on
quality of recovery from isoflurane-induced anesthesia in horses. Am J Vet Res
2014; 75(3): 223–230.
137 Dugdale AH, Taylor PM. Equine anaesthesia-associated mortality: where are we
now? Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43(3): 242–255.
138 de Miguel Garcia C, Campoy L, Parry S, et al. Questionnaire on the process of
recovering horses from general anesthesia and associated personnel injury in
equine practice. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(2): 223–229.
139 Jurk IR, Thibodeau MS, Whitney K, et al. Acute vision loss after general anesthesia
in a cat. Vet Ophthalmol 2001; 4(2): 155–158.
140 Stiles J, Weil AB, Packer RA, et al. Post-anesthetic cortical blindness in cats: twenty
cases. Vet J 2012; 193(2): 367–373.
141 Barton- Lamb AL, Martin-Flores M, Scrivani PV, et al. Evaluation of maxillary
arterial blood flow in anesthetized cats with the mouth closed and open.
Vet J 2013; 196(3): 325–331.
142 Martin-Flores M, Scrivani PV, Loew E, et al. Maximal and submaximal mouth
opening with mouth gags in cats: implications for maxillary artery blood flow.
Vet J 2014; 200(1): 60–64.
143 Raisis AL. Skeletal muscle blood flow in anaesthetized horses. Part II: effects of
anaesthetics and vasoactive agents. Vet Anaesth Analg 2005; 32(6): 331–337.
144 Johnston GM, Eastment JK, Wood J, et al. The confidential enquiry into periop-
erative equine fatalities (CEPEF): mortality results of Phases 1 and 2. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2002; 29(4): 159–170.
145 Duke T, Filzek U, Read MR, et al. Clinical observations surrounding an increased
incidence of postanesthetic myopathy in halothane-anesthetized horses.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2006; 33(2): 122–127.
146 Trim CM, Mason J. Post-anaesthetic forelimb lameness in horses. Equine Vet J
1973; 5(2): 71–76.
147 Bidwell LA, Bramlage LR, Rood WA. Equine perioperative fatalities associated
with general anaesthesia at a private practice--a retrospective case series. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2007; 34(1): 23–30.
148 Dyson S, Taylor P, Whitwell K. Femoral nerve paralysis after general anaesthesia.
Equine Vet J 1988; 20(5): 376–380.
149 Mirra A, Klopfenstein Bregger MD, Levionnois OL. Suspicion of postanesthetic
femoral paralysis of the non-dependent limb in a horse. Front Vet Sci 2018;
5: 12.
150 Boorman S, Scherrer NM, Stefanovski D, et al. Facial nerve paralysis in 64 equids:
clinical variables, diagnosis, and outcome. J Vet Intern Med 2020; 34(3): 1308–1320.
151 Emond AL, Bertoni L, Seignour M, et al. Peripheral neuropathy of a forelimb in
horses: 27 cases (2000–2013). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2016; 249(10): 1187–1195.
152 Moreno KL, Scallan EM, Friedeck WO, et al. Transient pelvic limb neuropathy
following proximal metatarsal and tarsal magnetic resonance imaging in seven
horses. Equine Vet J 2020; 52(3): 359–363.
153 Ragle C, Baetge C, Yiannikouris S, et al. Development of equine post anaesthetic
myelopathy: thirty cases (1979–2010). Equine Vet Educ 2011; 23(12): 630–635.
154 Nordgren LD, Gerberich SG, Alexander BH, et al. Evaluation of factors associated
with work-related injuries to veterinary technicians certified in Minnesota. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 2014; 245(4): 425–433.
155 Nienhaus A, Skudlik C, Seidler A. Work-related accidents and occupational dis-
eases in veterinarians and their staff. Int Arch Occup Environ Health 2005; 78(3):
230–238.
156 Weaver DR, Newman LS, Lezotte DC, et al. Perceptions regarding workplace haz-
ards at a veterinary teaching hospital. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2010; 237(1): 93–100.
157 Lucas M, Day L, Shirangi A, et al. Significant injuries in Australian veterinarians
and use of safety precautions. Occup Med (Lond) 2009; 59(5): 327–333.
158 Drobatz KJ, Smith G. Evaluation of risk factors for bite wounds inflicted on car-
egivers by dogs and cats in a veterinary teaching hospital. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2003; 223(3): 312–316.
159 Fowler H, Adams D, Bonauto D, et al. Work- related injuries to animal care work-
ers, Washington 2007–2011. Am J Ind Med 2016; 59(3): 236–244.
160 Spencer SA, Nolan JP, Osborn M, et al. The presence of psychological trauma
symptoms in resuscitation providers and an exploration of debriefing practices.
Resuscitation 2019; 142: 175–181.

-- 89 of 1450 --

74
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of Lumb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
The delivery and maintenance of safe anesthesia have become
increasingly dependent upon mechanical and electrical equipment.
It is necessary for the anesthetist to have a thorough understanding
of equipment function and common failures as well as potential
patient and personnel risks before use for routine patient care.
Anesthesia equipment includes various airway support products,
oxygen delivery devices, anesthetic machines, scavenge systems,
ventilators, and many configurations of patient monitors and other
support products. The products available to the veterinary
anesthetist include nearly any human-patient product that can be
adapted for use in veterinary anesthesia, regularly produced items
specifically for the veterinary market, and many limited-production
and/or custom products that may only be occasionally available.
There are several excellent textbooks devoted to describing in great
detail the anesthetic equipment available for use in human anesthe-
sia [1–3] and, although not entirely applicable to veterinary anes-
thesia, much of the equipment used is the same (i.e., vaporizers,
laryngoscopes, endotracheal tubes, some anesthetic machines) or is
a modification of human products. As such, it would be impossible
6 Anesthesia Equipment
Craig A.E. Mosley
VCA Canada, 404 Veterinary Emergency and Referral Hospital, Newmarket, Ontario, Canada
Chapter contents
Introduction, 74
Safety and design, 75
Introduction to airway management and support equipment, 75
Endotracheal tubes, lung isolation devices, supraglottic airway devices,
laryngoscopes, intubation aids, and techniques, 75
Endotracheal tubes, 75
Endotracheal tubes for isolating one lung, 78
Supraglottic airway devices, 82
Laryngoscopes, 83
Intubation aids and techniques, 84
Nasotracheal intubation, 84
Wire- or tube- guided techniques, 84
Endoscope-guided technique, 85
Endotracheal tube exchangers, 86
Retrograde intubation, 86
Tracheostomy, 86
Lateral pharyngotomy, 87
Techniques of oxygen administration, 87
Mask delivery, 87
Nasal insufflation, 89
Tracheal insufflation, 90
Oxygen cages, 90
Oxygen toxicity, 91
Introduction to anesthetic machines and breathing circuits, 91
Medical gas supply, 91
Medical gas safety, 92
Pressure-reducing valve (regulator), 94
Pressure gauges, 94
The modern anesthetic machine, 94
Gas flow within the anesthetic machine, 94
Flowmeters, 96
Vaporizers, 97
Descriptions of vaporizers common in veterinary medicine, 99
Maintenance of vaporizers, 103
Use of the wrong anesthetic in an agent-specific vaporizer, 103
Oxygen flush valve, 104
Common gas outlet, 104
Breathing systems, 105
Rebreathing (circle) system, 106
Non-rebreathing systems, 111
Waste gas scavenge system, 112
Routine anesthesia machine checkout procedure, 113
Anesthesia ventilators, 113
Classification, 114
Introduction to single- and dual-circuit ventilators, 117
Single-circuit piston-driven ventilators, 117
Single-circuit compressed gas-powered ventilators, 118
Dual-circuit ventilators, 119
Control of ventilator driving gas, 122
Factors that affect delivered tidal volume, 122
Alarms, 122
Proper ventilator setup and monitoring, 123
Selected ventilator models, 123
Respiratory assist devices, 139
Manual resuscitators, 139
Demand valves, 139
Acknowledgment, 139
References, 140

-- 90 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	75
to discuss all of the anesthetic-related equipment and products
available today in a single chapter. More recently, a veterinary-
specific anesthetic equipment textbook has been published which
details the anesthetic and monitoring equipment frequently used in
veterinary medicine [4]. This chapter intends to provide the reader
with the operating principles and a practical working overview of
common anesthetic-related products (i.e., endotracheal tubes, intu-
bating aids, etc.), the anesthetic machine, vaporizers, breathing cir-
cuits, and ventilators. In addition, there are products that have been
designed specifically for veterinary use, which are described in
more detail here.
Safety and design
Since at least 1976, human anesthetic breathing circuits (i.e., circle
system) and anesthesia machines sold in North America must
meet both mandated and voluntary regulations established by the
United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) (Medical
Device Amendments-1976, Good Manufacturing Practices-1978,
and Mandatory Device reporting-1984) and organizations such as
the International Organization for Standardization (ISO 5358-
198a), American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM F1850),
and the Canadian Standards Association (CSA). Many of these
standards are currently under re-review with updates anticipated.
Anesthetic machines designed for veterinary use are not required
to meet any specific design or safety standards beyond those asso-
ciated with basic hazards to the operator (i.e., electrical safety
requirements). Safety features are often added on an ad hoc basis
and there are no requirements for demonstrating equipment effi-
cacy. Ideally, some safety features, such as airway pressure alarms,
should be integral to the design of the anesthetic machine. The
inclusion of some of these safety systems on anesthetic machines
may help eliminate preventable anesthetic accidents. However,
until safety and design standards are adopted by the manufacturers
of veterinary anesthetic equipment, there will remain equipment
options of varying quality, efficacy, and safety available for deliver-
ing inhalant anesthetics to veterinary patients. Ancillary and sup-
port equipment for veterinary patients, including patient monitors
and ventilators, are similarly devoid of required efficacy and safety
testing. Fortunately, most reputable manufacturers and distribu-
tors readily provide the specifications, accuracy, and any available
efficacy data for their designs. Regardless of the presence of stand-
ards, it will always be incumbent upon the veterinary anesthetist to
understand thoroughly the function, principles of operation, and
use of all anesthetic-related pieces of equipment and to ensure that
the machine or piece of equipment is designed suitably well to
accomplish its functions safely.
Introduction to airway management
and support equipment
Airway management and support are vital for the safe delivery of
anesthesia. Most, if not all, anesthetics cause respiratory depression
at doses suitable for anesthesia. In addition, relaxation and/or loss
of airway reflexes make the patient more prone to upper airway
obstruction. Both of these factors put the anesthetized patient at
higher risk for the development of hypoxia. Additionally, the inhal-
ant anesthetics require delivery to the lungs while minimizing envi-
ronmental and personnel exposure to waste anesthetic gases. For
these reasons, airway management and support are critical aspects
of properly performed inhalant general anesthesia.
Endotracheal tubes, lung isolation devices,
supraglottic airway devices, laryngoscopes,
intubation aids, and techniques
Endotracheal tubes
Endotracheal tubes are commonly used to maintain an airway in
anesthetized patients. Supraglottic airway devices (SGADs) have
also been evaluated in a number of domestic species and may be
suitable alternatives in some instances [5–9]. A properly placed
endotracheal tube or SGAD with a properly inflated cuff provides a
patent airway, facilitates positive-pressure ventilation, protects the
lungs from aspiration of fluids, and prevents contamination of the
work environment with waste anesthetic gases. Occasionally, it is
desirable to limit airway management to one lung field (i.e., thora-
coscopy), and specially designed equipment is available to accom-
plish this task in dogs.
There are many styles and types of endotracheal tubes available
that can be used in veterinary medicine. Most are manufactured for
humans but can also be used in most small animal patients. There
are some veterinary-specific products available for patients requir-
ing tube sizes larger and smaller than those available for human use.
Endotracheal tubes manufactured for human patients must have
various markings and abbreviations directly on the tube describing
the tube’s characteristics as well as interval markings to measure the
depth of insertion. The markings may include the manufacturer,
internal diameter (ID), outer diameter (OD), and length of the tube,
as well as codes indicating tissue toxicity or implantation testing
(e.g., F29) (Fig. 6.1). There is no requirement for similar markings
on tubes manufactured solely for veterinary use, but it is common
for them to minimally list tube diameters and lengths. Endotracheal
tubes are often sized according to their internal diameters. For
example, a size 6.0 endotracheal tube refers to a tube with an inter-
nal diameter of 6 mm. Some tubes manufactured specifically for the
veterinary market have their sizes indicated using the French gauge/
catheter scale, and this should, but may not always, reflect the inter-
nal size of the tube. The outer diameter for any given tube size may
vary depending upon the construction of the tube. Endotracheal
tubes having thicker walls will have greater differences between the
internal and outer diameters. This can become important when
selecting tubes for very small patients. Very thick-walled tubes will
effectively reduce the internal airway diameter compared with a
thin-walled tube as ultimately, the size of the endotracheal tube that
can be placed in a patient is limited by the outer diameter of the
tube and not the inner diameter. However, very thin-walled soft
tubes are susceptible to obstruction by external compression or
kinking (Fig. 6.2).
Common endotracheal tube materials include polyvinyl chlo-
ride, silicone, or red rubber. Clear endotracheal tubes are generally
preferred so that they can be inspected visually for the presence of
mucus or blood intraoperatively, or debris within the tube lumen
after cleaning. Generally, the largest size of an endotracheal tube
that will fit without causing trauma in the patient’s trachea should
be used. Although various “rules-of-thumb” for selecting tube size
exist, it is probably easiest to estimate the most appropriate tube size
by palpating the individual patient’s cervical trachea. The tube
should not extend distally beyond the thoracic inlet and ideally
should not extend rostrally beyond the patient’s incisors, as any
additional tube length extending beyond the patient’s incisors will
increase mechanical deadspace. If the endotracheal tube is too long,
and further insertion would lead to the possibility of endobronchial
intubation, the machine end can be cut, and the endotracheal tube
connector reinserted.

-- 91 of 1450 --

76 	Section 1: General Topics
The most commonly used type of endotracheal tube in both large
and small animals is the cuffed Murphy-type tube shown in Fig. 6.1.
Cole- type and guarded (spiral embedded, armored) tubes are also
occasionally used in veterinary medicine. Cole tubes are uncuffed
and have a smaller diameter at the patient (distal) end relative to
the machine (proximal) end. The distal smaller diameter portion
of the tube is inserted into the trachea to a point where the shoulder
contacts the larynx, forming a seal. However, Cole tubes will not
produce the same degree of airway security as a standard cuffed
tube and are normally used only in very small patients for short-
term intubation (see Fig. 6.3). Guarded tubes incorporate a metal or
nylon spiral-wound reinforcing wire into the endotracheal tube
wall that helps prevent tube collapse and occlusion (Fig. 6.4).
Guarded tubes are useful in situations where the tube is likely to be
compressed or kinked, such as procedures requiring extreme flexion
of the head and neck (e.g., cervical cerebrospinal fluid collection
and ophthalmic procedures) or those that involve compression of
the trachea (e.g., tracheal retraction during the ventral approach to
the cervical spinal cord).
The machine end of the tube contains the endotracheal tube con-
nector. The most proximal portion of the connector used for small
Radiopaque marker line
ID 7.0
	14
	16
	18
	20
	22
24
26
	28 cm	
Oral*nasal
	Murphy eye
Patient end
(Distal end)
Characteristics of common endotracheal tubes
(A)
(B)
F-29
Machine end (Proximal end)
Pilot balloon
Adapter
	15 mm OD
Figure 6.1 A. Most endotracheal tubes have common design features as shown here; however, the specific design and materials can vary among the
various manufacturers. B. Tubes can be made of silicone, polyvinyl chloride, and red rubber (top to bottom). Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.
Figure 6.2 Very thin-walled endotracheal tubes are prone to occlusion
from external compression or twisting. Continual evaluation of the
endotracheal tube for patency is required when thin pliable walled
endotracheal tubes are used. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 92 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	77
animals and human patients is a uniform size (15 mm OD) facilitat-
ing universal connection to all standard anesthetic circuits. Tubes
designed for use in large animals typically have larger connectors,
which include metal-type and funnel-type connectors. The distal
(patient) end of the connector varies in size according to the diam-
eter of the endotracheal tube. Endotracheal tube adapters may also
incorporate gas sampling ports (Fig. 6.5). These are particularly
useful in small patients where minimizing equipment deadspace
can be important and may improve the accuracy of gas sampling in
smaller patients where non-rebreathing systems are often used.
Endotracheal tubes designed for large animals are normally
manufactured with a silicone funnel adapter attached (Fig. 6.6) that
is designed to fit over the large animal Y-piece (54 mm OD). There
are also stainless-steel Bivona endotracheal tube adapters (22 OD)
that are designed to fit the Bivona insert sometimes found on large
animal Y-pieces.
The patient (distal) end of the endotracheal tube is normally bev-
eled. Murphy-type tubes have a hole in the endotracheal tube wall
opposite the bevel, referred to as a “Murphy eye” or “Murphy hole”
(see Fig. 6.1A). The purpose of the hole is to provide an alternative
route for gas flow should the beveled opening become occluded.
Endotracheal tubes that lack a Murphy eye are referred to as Magill-
type tubes. Most endotracheal tube sizes can be found without an
inflatable cuff, although the use of cuffed tubes provides a more
reliable airway. Tubes lacking cuffs tend to be very small diameter
tubes where the addition of a cuff may not be possible or will limit
the maximum diameter tube that can be used in a patient. The cuff
is located on the machine-end side of the Murphy eye for cuffed
tubes, and can be a low-volume, high-pressure or high-volume,
low- pressure design (Fig. 6.7). In general, high-volume, low-
pressure cuffs are preferred to minimize the risk of ischemic tra-
cheal injury that may result from excessive cuff pressure against the
tracheal wall. When a properly fitting endotracheal tube with a
high-volume, low-pressure cuff is used, the pressure exerted by the
cuff on the tracheal wall is similar to the intracuff pressure. This
allows for a better estimation of the pressure on the tracheal wall
exerted by the cuff. When using a low-volume, high-pressure cuffed
endotracheal tube, the intracuff pressure does not reflect the pres-
sure on the tracheal wall but rather the pressure created by the elas-
tic recoil of the cuff, making estimates of pressure exerted by the
cuff on the tracheal wall difficult. Tracheal wall pressures exceeding
48 cmH2
O may impede capillary blood flow, potentially causing
ischemic tracheal damage, and pressure below 18 mmHg may
increase the risk of aspiration [10]. There are also several cases of
tracheal rupture or disruption reported in veterinary medicine
leading to pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, and/or subcuta-
neous emphysema [11].
A reliable method for ensuring that cuff pressures are within the
recommended range is to use a cuff monitor to inflate high-
volume, low-pressure cuffs. A cuff monitor is essentially a low-
pressure manometer similar to those used for Doppler blood
pressure measurement that is attached to the pilot balloon of the
cuff and provides a measure of intracuff pressure. As noted above,
these devices are only useful when using appropriately sized high-
volume, low-pressure cuffs. If high-pressure cuffs are used or if the
endotracheal tube is markedly undersized for the patient, the
measured cuff pressure may not accurately reflect the pressure
exerted on the tracheal wall. Other commercially available cuff
inflation guides are available for the human market and can be
adapted to veterinary use (Fig. 6.8). Alternatively, it is more com-
mon to use a leak test or the minimal occlusive volume (MOV)
Figure 6.3 Cole endotracheal tube demonstrating the tapered shoulder
used to position the tube in the larynx forming a seal. Note that the tube
does not have a cuff or pilot balloon.
(A)
(B)
Figure 6.4 A. Guarded endotracheal tube with a metal or nylon spiral
reinforcing wire. B. This spiral wire prevents collapse if the tube is bent or
folded. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.
Figure 6.5 Two endotracheal tube adapters that incorporate a gas sampling
port. Note the internal diameter (volume) of the pediatric design on the
right. This type of design can help improve the accuracy of side-stream
end-tidal gas sampling in smaller patients. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with
permission.

-- 93 of 1450 --

78 	Section 1: General Topics
technique, performed by inflating the cuff until a leak is no longer
audible while maintaining airway pressures of 20–30 cmH 2 O.
Recently two commercially available syringe devices specifically
designed for endotracheal tube cuff inflation have been evaluated
for use in veterinary medicine that may help reduce the incidence
of improperly inflated cuffs compared to MOV [12]. The pilot bal-
loon used for inflating the endotracheal tube cuff is connected to
the cuff via a channel incorporated into the endotracheal tube and
normally includes a syringe-activated self-sealing valve system.
However, there are also valveless pilot balloons that do not self-seal
and require occlusion using either a clamp or plug.
An uncuffed self-sealing endotracheal tube (Safe-Seal™, Innovative
Animal Products, Rochester, MN, USA, 55901) has been introduced
into the veterinary market. The tube is designed with a series of flexible
circumferential flanges at the patient end of the endotracheal tube that
deform to the contours of the trachea, forming a seal against the tra-
cheal wall eliminating the need to inflate a cuff (Fig. 6.9). There are
currently no independent research studies evaluating the effectiveness
of this tube for use in veterinary anesthesia. It is available with only a
limited number of internal tube diameters and differs from a conven-
tional endotracheal tube in that it has no Murphy eye or inflatable cuff.
Endotracheal tubes for isolating one lung
In addition to the endotracheal tubes described above, there are
tubes specially designed for isolating or ventilating one lung.
Indications for the use of these tubes include improving surgical
conditions for various thoracic procedures (i.e., thoracoscopy), the
control of contamination or hemorrhage, and use in circumstances
where unilateral pathology exists. There are generally three meth-
ods of isolating or ventilating a single lung: a double-lumen tube
(DLT), a bronchial blocker, or by using a long, standard endotra-
cheal tube as an endobronchial tube.
Figure 6.7 The upper endotracheal tube has a high-volume, low-pressure
cuff, whereas the lower endotracheal tube shows an example of a
low- volume, high-pressure cuff. Note the bulkiness that can be associated
with the high-volume, low-pressure cuff compared with the low-volume,
high- pressure cuff. The bulkiness associated with some cuffs can limit the
endotracheal tube size, which can be problematic in very small patients.
However, high-volume, low-pressure cuffs may help reduce tracheal
damage resulting from cuff overinflation. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with
permission.
Figure 6.8 Examples of endotracheal tube inflation guides or pressure
monitoring devices. These devices can be used to evaluate intracuff
pressures and may help avoid tracheal injury secondary to excessive
tracheal wall pressures. Several styles are available. Source: Dr. Craig
Mosley, with permission.
Figure 6.6 Two endotracheal tubes used for large animal anesthesia. These tubes are typically silicone and are commonly manufactured with a silicone
funnel adapter that is compatible with the Y-piece of most large animal anesthetic breathing circuits. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 94 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	79
Endobronchial intubation for single lung ventilation or isolation
is probably the least desirable option as it provides less direct con-
trol for making changes in the non-intubated lung. However, it does
not require specialized equipment, apart from a sufficiently long
endotracheal tube, and is relatively easy to perform. Endobronchial
intubation has been used in dogs successfully and may be an alter-
native when DLTs and bronchial blockers are not available [13,14].
DLTs tend to be the preferred option in human medicine. All
commercially available DLTs have been designed specifically for
human patients and have been adapted for use in dogs. There have
been several types evaluated in a range of dog sizes and breeds [15–
18]. DLTs consist of two single-lumen tubes bonded together and
are available as right- or left-sided tubes (Fig. 6.10), where right and
left designate which mainstem bronchus the tube is designed to fit.
Most DLTs are designed with an angled distal tip to facilitate place-
ment into either the right or left bronchus. The three most com-
monly available styles of DLTs are the Robertshaw, Carlens, and
White. The tubes have two elliptical cuffs: one occludes the trachea
and the other occludes the bronchus (Fig. 6.11). The bronchial cuff
and pilot balloon are normally colored blue for differentiation from
the tracheal cuff.
The bronchial cuffs of right-sided tubes vary in shape and design
in order to facilitate ventilation of the upper right lung lobe in
humans. The use of right-sided tubes can introduce greater place-
ment uncertainty and failures when used in dogs as the right cranial
lung lobe bronchus of the dog branches more proximally than in
humans; consequently, the bronchial cuff may occlude the bron-
chus or failure to completely isolate the hemithorax may occur. In
general, left-sided tubes are most often used and can be used effec-
tively for both right- and left-sided procedures. Even if proximal
clamping or transection of the left mainstem bronchus is required,
the left-sided tube can simply be withdrawn into the trachea so the
distal bronchial portion of the tube does not interfere with clamp-
ing. The internal lumen of the tracheal portion of the tube is oval or
D-shaped, and the sizes are designated using the French scale, rang-
ing from 26 to 41 Fr. The reduced lumen size will increase resist-
ance to breathing compared to an appropriately sized standard
single lumen tube, but this is overcome by the frequent use of inter-
mittent positive-pressure ventilation (IPPV) in these cases. DLTs
allow the anesthetist to ventilate each lung field independently of
the other or both lung fields together without replacing or moving
the tube, but it does require disconnection and reconnection of the
anesthetic circuit to the appropriate endotracheal tube adapter
(bronchial or tracheal) or both by using a Y-piece adapter (Fig. 6.12).
The ability to ventilate selectively either or both lung fields is a
distinct advantage over bronchial blocking systems or endobron-
chial intubation when surgical conditions require operating on
both sides of the chest. However, the available sizes typically limit
Figure 6.10 An example of a left-sided Robertshaw double-lumen endotracheal tube. DLTs can be used to ventilate selectively one or both lung fields in
appropriately sized dogs. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.
(A) 	(B)
Figure 6.9 A. Example of a self-sealing endotracheal tube that lacks an
inflatable cuff and instead relies on a series of soft flexible flanges to
provide airway security. B. Lateral radiograph illustrating placement of a
self- sealing endotracheal tube. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 95 of 1450 --

80 	Section 1: General Topics
the use of DLTs to dogs between 5 and 20 kg. Some DLTs (Carlens
and White) also incorporate a carinal hook designed to aid in the
proper placement of the tube and prevent movement after position-
ing. In veterinary patients, this modification may actually hinder
rather than facilitate correct tube placement [15]. Additional care
should also be taken when placing DLTs with a carinal hook to
ensure that it does not catch on any tissues or structures when
introducing the tube into the trachea. For this reason, the
Robertshaw left-sided DLT is probably the most versatile type for
use in dogs. In veterinary patients, the correct placement of a DLT
is generally confirmed by direct visualization using a small-
diameter bronchoscope. A thoracoscopic-assisted technique has
also been described [15]. Correct and complete placement is fur-
ther confirmed by ventilating both the right and left lung fields
while auscultating for lung sounds. Correct and complete place-
ment should ventilate all intended lung fields (i.e., right or left)
without ventilating any lung fields on the contralateral side.
Although blind placement is possible using some tubes, it is associ-
ated with a relatively high failure to achieve correct and complete
tube placement [15]. Small movements of the tube and/or the
patient may disrupt correct and complete placement and occasion-
ally bronchial cuffs will prolapse into the trachea, leading to com-
plete airway obstruction. Vigilance is required by the anesthetist to
recognize and correct any positional problems should they occur
(e.g., deflation of bronchial cuff).
Bronchial blockers represent another system for facilitating one-
lung isolation or ventilation in dogs (Fig. 6.13) [14,16,19–22]. In
human anesthesia, they are often used when patient size precludes
the use of a DLT or when anatomic abnormalities or differences are
present that may preclude optimal tube fit. The fact that they are
very adaptable for use over a wider range of patient sizes and are not
as anatomically specific as DLTs are distinct advantages of using
(A)
(B)
Figure 6.12 Double- lumen tubes (DLTs) can be used to ventilate (or
collapse) each lung field independently or can ventilate both lung fields
simultaneously. A. Adapter configuration required for independent lung
field ventilation (or collapse). B. Use of a Y-adapter to facilitate
simultaneous ventilation of both lung fields. Note the blue pilot balloon
cuff and the blue tubing corresponding to the bronchial portion of the
tube. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.
Figure 6.13 An example of a bronchial blocking system commonly used in
veterinary medicine. The system consists of a bronchial blocker (balloon-
tipped catheter) and a swivel adapter allowing for coaxial placement of the
blocker. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.
Figure 6.11 A closer image demonstrating the distal end of a left-sided
Robertshaw double-lumen endotracheal tube. Note the angle of the distal
end of the tube and the two cuffs. The more distal blue cuff is the bronchial
cuff. This tube is designed to facilitate placement into the left mainstem
bronchus. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 96 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	81
bronchial blockers in veterinary anesthesia. However, independent
lung ventilation is not possible without withdrawing and replacing
the bronchial blocker in the contralateral bronchus.
Bronchial blockers are essentially long catheters, tipped with an
elliptical or round inflatable cuff or balloon (Fig. 6.14). The cuffs
and pilot balloons of most purpose-designed bronchial blockers are
blue to differentiate them from those of the endotracheal tube.
Foley or balloon-type catheters used as bronchial blockers obvi-
ously do not follow this color scheme. Bronchial blockers can be
used coaxially or in parallel with a standard endotracheal tube.
Various swivel adapters are supplied with commercially available
bronchial blockers to facilitate coaxial use. The swivel adapters con-
nect to the endotracheal tube adapter and have ports for passing the
bronchial blocker, a bronchoscope, and a connector for the anes-
thetic circuit (Fig. 6.15).
The ports are designed in a way to prevent leakage and to secure
the bronchial blocker once it is in place. There is also a commer-
cially available human coaxial product (Univent® tube, Teleflex Inc.,
Limerick, PA, USA) that incorporates the bronchial blocker in a
channel running in the lumen of the endotracheal tube. However,
the length of the bronchial blocker is limited and may not be suffi-
ciently long for larger patients. A balloon catheter (Fogarty or Foley
catheter) can also be used as a bronchial blocker placed in parallel
with the endotracheal tube or coaxially with a custom adapter solu-
tion (see Fig. 6.14).
Bronchial blockers require fiber-optic-assisted direct visualiza-
tion for correct placement. One of the unique features of bron-
chial blockers over DLTs is that they can be used to isolate a single
lung lobe in addition to the entire hemithorax. The bronchial
blocker can be directed into the bronchus to be blocked by directly
manipulating the proximal portion of the bronchial blocker or by
placing a guide wire into the bronchus to be blocked and sliding
the bronchial blocker over the guide wire. One bronchial blocker
(Ardnt Endobronchial Blocker™, Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN,
USA) has a small wire loop exiting the distal end of the blocker
(Fig. 6.16). The loop can be used to facilitate placement by sliding
the loop over the end of the bronchoscope. Once correct place-
ment has been achieved, the balloon or cuff can be inflated, pre-
cluding ventilation of that lung region. The lung is then allowed to
collapse by opening the bronchial blocker catheter channel. The
open channel can be used for continuous positive airway pressure
(CPAP) application, oxygen insufflation, and/or suctioning. The
placement of the bronchial blocker in the right bronchus can be
challenging owing to the proximal branching of the cranial lung
lobe. Prolapse of a bronchial blocker into the trachea can lead to
complete airway obstruction; this is most likely to occur when
placed proximally in the bronchus and/or if the tube and bron-
chial blocker assembly are withdrawn inadvertently when moving
or manipulating the patient.
Another bronchial blocker (Rüsch® EZ-Blocker® endobronchial
blocker, Teleflex Inc., Limerick, PA, USA) consists of paired of
“bonded” blockers in a single tube that bifurcate at the distal tip
(Fig 6.17). This design can ease placement by allowing the
Figure 6.14 The yellow (or outermost) catheter with the obvious pilot
balloon is specifically designed for use as a bronchial blocker. The inner
shorter catheter is a balloon-tipped Foley catheter. Although Foley
catheters are not designed for use as bronchial blockers, they have been
placed alongside endotracheal tubes and used successfully for bronchial
blockade, but they are not as simple to use or place as a purpose-designed
bronchial blocker. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.
Figure 6.15 An example of the airway adapter supplied with the Arndt
Endobronchial Blocker™ (Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA). The
adapter is placed between the endotracheal tube adapter and the breathing
circuit. The port to the right attaches to the endotracheal tube adapter; the
ports moving clockwise include the bronchial port (with an annular
compression fitting), a bronchoscope port, and the patient circuit port.
Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.
Figure 6.16 The distal end of an Arndt Endobronchial Blocker™ (Cook
Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA) showing the wire loop used to facilitate
proper placement using a bronchoscope. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with
permission.

-- 97 of 1450 --

82 	Section 1: General Topics
bifurcation to more intuitively straddle the carina with a blocker tip
in both the right and left mainstem bronchus allowing for right or
left blockade. However, the EZ-Blocker® cannot be used to isolate
single lung lobes and, similar to other techniques, it remains diffi-
cult to collapse the right hemithorax due to the proximal branching
of the right cranial lung lobe [21,22].
Supraglottic airway devices
Supraglottic airway devices (SGADs), also commonly referred to as
“laryngeal mask airways” (LMAs), are becoming increasingly popu-
lar for veterinary use. There are a large number of products availa-
ble that were designed for humans that have been adapted for
veterinary use. However, these products have been optimized
(A) 	(B)
(C)
Figure 6.17 A. The Rüsch® EZ-Blocker® is a dual-lumen endobronchial blocker. B. Proximal end showing two inflatable cuffs/pilot balloons. C. Integrated
distal bifurcation that can conveniently straddle the patient’s carina when placed. The system comes with a multiport adapter that connects between the
patient endotracheal tube and anesthetic breathing circuit. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 98 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	83
specifically for the orolaryngeal/pharyngeal anatomy of humans
and may not conform well to the varied anatomy, patient size, spe-
cies, and breeds commonly encountered in veterinary medicine.
Appropriate use of these products is important as inappropriate
SGAD and/or patient selection may lead to placement difficulties/
failures, damage to tissues of the oropharyngeal region, and/or
improper protection and patency of the airway. There are several
veterinary-specific SGADs that have been introduced (dog, cat, and
rabbit v-gel®, Docsinnovent Ltd, London, UK) designed for use in
dogs, cats, and rabbits (Fig. 6.18).
SGADs represent an alternative to endotracheal intubation for
maintenance of a patent airway and there is some evidence that they
may be simpler and faster to place than endotracheal tubes in some
species [5,23,24]. There is also some evidence that less anesthetic is
required for the placement of an SGAD compared with an endotra-
cheal tube [25]. SGADs do not require the use of a laryngoscope for
placement and do not enter the larynx or trachea. A typical device
consists of a tube, similar to an endotracheal tube, connected to an
elliptical mask that has an inflatable outer edge. When placed and
inflated correctly, they form a seal around the glottis. The criteria
for correct SGAD placement have been described for various spe-
cies and should be reviewed prior to using these devices. Properly
placed and inflated SGADs are not associated with greater leakage
of anesthetic gases compared with endotracheal tubes and positive-
pressure ventilation using an SGAD has been successfully per-
formed and evaluated in several veterinary species [5–9,26–28].
The use of SGADs is relatively uncommon in veterinary medicine
but as their use increases and further large prospective studies are
completed, additional advantages and disadvantages related to rela-
tively rare events (e.g., gastroesophageal reflux and subsequent
aspiration, significant post-extubation airway irritation) may be
detected.
Laryngoscopes
Laryngoscopes consist of a handle and lighted blade and are used
to aid tracheal intubation and oropharyngeal evaluation during
intubation. Unfortunately, laryngoscopes are often considered an
optional piece of anesthetic-related equipment, but their proper use
can be vital for successful intubation in some patients (e.g., brachy-
cephalics and patients with laryngeal/oral trauma). Regardless of
the absolute need for laryngoscope-assisted intubation, their use is
recommended for all intubations to ensure that the anesthetist
maintains the motor skills and coordination to use a laryngoscope
properly while permitting a cursory oropharyngeal evaluation.
There are several styles and types of laryngoscopes and blades
available. Some laryngoscopes have a fixed blade (i.e., one blade type
and size) and may be made of plastic, whereas others are designed
for use with multiple blade sizes and styles of blades and are made of
stainless steel. Because there is such a range of patient sizes and dif-
ferent oral cavity configurations in veterinary medicine, the option
to use multiple blades is a significant advantage when selecting a
laryngoscope. The handle may also vary in size and, although this
rarely impacts the functional use of the laryngoscope, a smaller han-
dle may be more comfortable and easier to manipulate for some
anesthetists, particularly when used for intubating very small
patients. The handles are usually specific for either fiber-optic or
bulb-in-blade illumination, although there are some handles that
can accept either type of blade illumination system. There is no clear
advantage of one lighting system over the other.
There are two main types of blades that are used in veterinary
medicine, the MacIntosh and the Miller blade. Both come in a wide
range of sizes (000–5). The MacIntosh is a curved blade with a
prominent vertical flange, whereas the Miller is a straight blade
with a less prominent vertical flange; both are suitable for intuba-
tion of most patients and the decision to use one over the other is
often determined by personal preference (Fig. 6.19). However, the
prominent flange of the MacIntosh blade can potentially interfere
with laryngeal visualization when used for intubating veterinary
patients (see below). In addition to the standard-sized blades avail-
able in human medicine, extremely long (~300 mm) Miller-style
blades (useful for intubating swine, camelids, sheep, and goats) are
also available.
Interestingly, the majority of human-designed laryngoscope
blades and endotracheal tubes are designed for the anesthetist to
use their right hand to pass the endotracheal tube while their left
hand holds the laryngoscope. The endotracheal tube bevel faces the
left when viewing the tube from the concave aspect and the laryn-
goscope blade flange is normally on the right side of the blade when
(A)
(B)
Figure 6.18 Veterinary-specific laryngeal masks (v-gel®) designed for use
in A. cats and B. rabbits. These masks can be used as alternatives to
tracheal intubation and may be easier to place than endotracheal tubes in
some species. Source: Docsinnovent Ltd, London, UK; reproduced with
permission.

-- 99 of 1450 --

84 	Section 1: General Topics
viewing the blade from the top. This configuration provides opti-
mal visualization of the larynx when intubating a patient in the
supine position (dorsal recumbency) where the laryngoscope is
held with the blade in a downward position (inverted) and the
endotracheal tube is held with the concave surface directed
upwards. However, most veterinary patients are intubated in sternal
recumbency where the flange of the laryngoscope, when held in the
left hand, can obscure visualization and the bevel of the endotra-
cheal tube will do little to improve visualization when held in the
right hand. There are left-handed MacIntosh blades available that
may be more appropriate for routine intubation in veterinary spe-
cies as these blades place the flange on the left side of the blade,
improving visualization of the laryngeal area when the laryngo-
scope is held in the left hand in an upright position. Since the Miller
blade’s flange is far less prominent, there is no real need for a left-
handed design.
Intubation aids and techniques
Orotracheal intubation of most veterinary patients does not require
any special equipment beyond the use of a laryngoscope and a
familiarity with normal patient anatomy. However, there are cir-
cumstances and situations resulting from anatomic features, pathol-
ogy, or trauma that make oral endotracheal intubation difficult or
impossible. It is important that the veterinary anesthetist be famil-
iar with and prepared to use alternative techniques to obtain a
patent airway. The following sections present some of the options
available, the associated equipment required, and descriptions of
the techniques in general terms. For more specific details, the
reader should consult species-specific chapters in this book or other
species-specific veterinary anesthesia references [29].
Nasotracheal intubation
Nasotracheal intubation is a useful technique for procedures involv-
ing the oral cavity where a standard orotracheal tube may preclude
or limit optimal surgical or diagnostic access or it can be used for
procedures in sedated conscious animals that will not tolerate an
orotracheal tube but require oxygen supplementation and support.
Nasotracheal intubation can also be safely used for the adminis-
tration of inhalant anesthetics for inducing anesthesia in some ani-
mals (foals and calves) [30,31]. The technique for nasotracheal
intubation has been described in foals, calves, horses, camelids, rab-
bits, and a kangaroo but has certainly been performed and not
reported in many other animal species [30–34].
The characteristics of an ideal nasotracheal tube include a tube
with minimal curvature and a suitable length to extend distally
beyond the larynx. The tube should be made of inert material (e.g.,
silicone rubber) and have relatively thin walls for maximum inter-
nal diameter, although this may increase the risk of tube compres-
sion or kinking. Low-volume, high-pressure cuffs are typically less
bulky and may be less traumatic during placement, but high-
volume, low-pressure cuffs may be best for longer periods of anes-
thesia. Tube size will be dependent upon species and patient size
but will often be smaller than an appropriately sized orotracheal
tube. The smaller internal diameter can increase resistance to gas
flow and may be a problem for some spontaneously breathing
patients.
Nasotracheal intubation involves passage of a properly sized
endotracheal tube through the nostril, nasal meatus, and larynx,
and into the trachea. Lidocaine-containing gel can facilitate place-
ment and provide lubrication for the tube. It should be applied to
the nostril and rostral portion of the nasal passage before advancing
the tube in awake or sedated animals. A sterile water-soluble lubri-
cant without lidocaine is appropriate for anesthetized patients. The
tube should be passed gently and may require some rotation and
redirection in order to facilitate passage between nasal conchae.
Nasal hemorrhage or other tissue damage occasionally occurs dur-
ing this procedure, particularly if excessive force or an excessively
large tube is used relative to the nasal passages or if the tube is
passed into the incorrect nasal meatus. In general, the patient’s head
and neck should be extended to facilitate passage of the tube from
the nasopharynx into the trachea. However, species differences may
necessitate alternative positioning or further manipulation of the
head, neck, and laryngeal positions.
Air should move freely through a correctly placed tube during
spontaneous ventilation. Confirmation of correct tube placement
can be readily, and initially, assessed by using a bulb syringe adapted
to the end of the nasotracheal tube. Once the tube is in place, the
bulb can be squeezed and attached to the tube; if it readily expands,
this suggests the tube is an airway, and if the bulb fails to expand, it
is likely that the tube has entered the esophagus (Fig. 6.20). Further
confirmation of correct tube placement using auscultation of lung
sounds during manual ventilation and/or capnography waveform
appearance should be used for definitive confirmation.
Extubation following nasotracheal intubation should be done
carefully. After deflation of the cuff, the tube should be withdrawn
slowly and deliberately, with the patient’s head restrained to avoid
any sudden, jerky motions. Rapid, rough extubation may cause
nasal hemorrhage.
Wire- or tube-guided techniques
Wire- or tube-guided techniques are sometimes used when direct
visualization of the laryngeal opening is not possible or obscured.
This is commonly a result of species-specific anatomic features
(e.g., rabbits and brachycephalic breeds) and patient size relative to
available equipment. For example, the laryngoscope may be too
small to be effective in a cow, and manual palpation and guide tube
placement using a small-diameter tube is frequently used to facili-
tate passage of the desired endotracheal tube; in very small patients,
the presence of both the laryngoscope and the endotracheal tube
may obscure visualization and a thin wire can be initially placed to
facilitate intubation [35].
Figure 6.19 Laryngoscope handle with Miller (upper) and Macintosh
(lower) blades. Note the more prominent vertical flange on the MacIntosh
blade. This flange may impair visualization of the larynx when intubating a
patient in sternal recumbency using the right hand. Source: Dr. Craig
Mosley, with permission.

-- 100 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	85
In some patients, trauma or other pathological conditions (naso-
pharyngeal polyp or mass) may obscure the laryngeal opening with
only a small portion visible. In these circumstances, the placement
of a small-diameter tube or a wire can be used as a guide for place-
ment of a properly sized endotracheal tube (Fig. 6.21). The tech-
nique involves using a guide (wire or tube) with a smaller outer
diameter than the internal diameter of the intended endotracheal
tube. It should also be sufficiently long to allow complete intubation
(about half the distance from the cricoid cartilage to the thoracic
inlet) while still allowing the tube to be placed over the guide leav-
ing a portion of the guide available for the operator to hold while
advancing the tube (Fig. 6.22). The tube or wire should be blunt-
ended so as not to damage the trachea or associated structures. The
wire guides associated with some intravenous catheters (e.g.,
multiple-lumen jugular catheters) are blunt-ended and make excel-
lent wire guides for some small patients. The guide is first appropri-
ately placed and then the endotracheal tube is fed over the guide
and through the laryngeal opening blindly; occasionally, slight rota-
tion of the tube is required, and passing the tube through the larynx
during inspiration when the arytenoids are fully abducted helps
facilitate smooth passage. The guide is then removed, and the tube
secured into place.
Endoscope-guided technique
Laryngoscopy with a flexible or rigid endoscope can be useful for
assisting intubation in patients with abnormal anatomy or disease
processes involving the pharynx, head, or neck. It is also often used
in patients that can be challenging to intubate using direct visuali-
zation (e.g., pygmy rabbits and other small mammals). Depending
Figure 6.20 A suction bulb adapted to the end of an endotracheal tube can
be used for the rapid assessment of correct endotracheal intubation. The
bulb is deflated and attached to the tube using an appropriately sized
adapter. If the endotracheal tube is in the trachea, the bulb should
immediately reinflate. If the endotracheal tube is in the esophagus, the bulb
will not generally reinflate. This technique provides a rapid assessment of
proper intubation when direct visualization is not possible (i.e.,
nasotracheal intubation) but should always be used in conjunction with
additional methods of confirming proper endotracheal intubation (i.e.,
observation of capnography waveform or auscultation of lung sounds
during manual ventilation). Source: Dr. Thomas Riebold, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA;
reproduced with permission of Dr. Riebold.
Figure 6.21 Examples of various guide wires and tube combinations used for guided endotracheal intubation. A wire or tube guide that is smaller
and typically easier to place than the appropriately sized endotracheal tube is first placed in the trachea. The endotracheal tube is then fed over the
guide, normally without further visualization. Once endotracheal intubation has been achieved, the guide is removed. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with
permission.

-- 101 of 1450 --

86 	Section 1: General Topics
on the species and the specific conditions, the endoscope can be
placed inside the endotracheal tube to guide intubation directly or
passed orally beside the endotracheal tube to guide correct place-
ment visually. Rabbits and other small mammals are frequently
intubated using this technique [36]. When appropriate, endoscopes
can also be used to facilitate nasotracheal intubation. This tech-
nique can be particularly advantageous in horses (and other large
animals) with abnormal oropharyngeal, laryngeal, and/or nasal
anatomy where direct visualization using a laryngoscope is virtually
impossible without specialized custom equipment.
Endotracheal tube exchangers
Changing endotracheal tubes during a surgical or diagnostic proce-
dure in an anesthetized animal is occasionally required due to a fail-
ing cuff or when an alternative tube size or length is required.
Patients that are positioned and draped for surgery are generally not
situated “normally” for intubation. Changing the tube using a wire-
or tube-guided technique may be the easiest and most efficient way
to accomplish the procedure. However, in many instances, using
good technique and a high-quality laryngoscope will allow for intu-
bation using direct visualization.
Depending on the size of the patient, standard commercially
available human tube exchangers can be used. Alternatively, any
tubing or wire of sufficient diameter and length can be used; for
example, stomach tubes and catheter wire guides. To change
endotracheal tubes, the guide (tube or wire) is inserted through
the original endotracheal tube to the area of the midcervical tra-
chea. It should be noted that if the patient is being maintained
under anesthesia using an inhalant anesthetic, it should be dis-
continued during tube exchange. Depending on the duration
required to exchange the tube, the patient’s anesthetic depth may
become very light, and additional intravenous anesthetic and a
means to administer it should be readily available. Next, the
endotracheal tube cuff is deflated, and the endotracheal tube is
pulled over the guide without removing the guide from the tra-
chea. Then, the new endotracheal tube is maneuvered through
the larynx and into the trachea by using the guide to direct its
passage. The cuff of the new tube is inflated to protect the airway,
and the new tube is secured in the manner appropriate for the
specific species.
Retrograde intubation
If direct visualization of at least a portion of the glottis is impossi-
ble, retrograde intubation may be performed. Retrograde intuba-
tion has been evaluated as an alternative technique for endotracheal
intubation in South America camelids and mice [38,39], and a
cadaveric study has been performed in rabbits [40]. The technique
essentially involves passing a needle through the skin of the ventral
neck and into the trachea between upper tracheal rings. In human
patients, the needle is passed through the cricothyroid membrane.
A guidewire is then maneuvered through the needle rostrally into
the larynx, pharynx, and oral cavity until it can be used as a guide
for passage of an endotracheal tube (Fig. 6.23). The endotracheal
tube is then fed over the guidewire and manipulated into the lar-
ynx. After the tip of the endotracheal tube is within the larynx, the
needle and the guide tube are removed, and the endotracheal tube
is manipulated into its final position with the cuffed end near the
thoracic inlet. The cuff should be located caudal to the puncture
site of the hypodermic needle to avoid forcing gases subcutane-
ously or into the mediastinum during positive-pressure ventila-
tion. Subcutaneous emphysema and pneumothorax are possible
complications with this technique.
Tracheostomy
A temporary tracheostomy can be performed for airway manage-
ment during anesthesia. However, as it is invasive, it is typically
reserved for those patients where oro- or nasotracheal intubation is
not possible even with guided assistance, owing to anatomy, pathol-
ogy, or surgical procedures. Occasionally a tracheostomy may be
recommended to facilitate a surgical procedure involving the oro-
pharynx although, if appropriate, a pharyngostomy tube may be a
more desirable alternative in these cases. Tracheostomy tube place-
ment may also be used when there is a reasonable expectation that
the patient will require an ongoing tracheostomy following the
anesthetic procedure (e.g., incomplete resection of laryngeal tumor,
brachycephalic airway surgery) [41,42]. Occasionally patients may
present to anesthesia with an emergency tracheostomy already
present as the result of acute upper airway obstruction.
Canine
urinary
catheter
Endotracheal tube
Larynx
Figure 6.22 Diagram illustrating the passage of an endotracheal tube into
the trachea of a dog using a guide device (urinary catheter). Source:
Hartsfield [37], with permission.
Canine urinary catheter
Hypodermic needle
Trachea	Endotracheal tube
Larynx
Figure 6.23 Illustration of intubation using a retrograde guide device in a
dog. Catheter guide wires or other blunt-ended wires are optimal for this
procedure owing to their small diameter. This technique should be
reserved for cases that cannot be intubated by other methods.
Source: Hartsfield [37], with permission.

-- 102 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	87
Intubation via a tracheostomy is relatively simple to perform but
may be complicated in patients with very small-diameter tracheas
or those with very thickened and calcified tracheal rings (e.g., some
brachycephalics). A standard endotracheal tube or tracheostomy
tube can be used for intubation; however, care should be taken
when using a standard-length endotracheal tube as endobronchial
intubation can easily result. Tracheostomy tubes are generally short
with a pronounced curvature in the tube and an inner stylet to ease
placement (Fig. 6.24). The curvature also allows the tube to be
secured flatly to the patient’s neck and tubes are normally fitted
with a standard 15 mm endotracheal tube adapter, inflatable cuffs,
and pilot balloons, although many of the smaller-sized tubes will be
uncuffed. Some tracheostomy tubes also have an inner removable
cannula to facilitate cleaning and longer-term maintenance of tra-
cheostomy tubes in patients. Care of the tube is very important.
Neglected tubes that are not cleaned regularly can be obstructed by
mucus that dries within the lumen of the tube.
Tracheostomy has been associated with infection, granulomas,
tracheal stricture, cartilage damage, hemorrhage, pneumothorax,
subcutaneous emphysema, tracheocutaneous or tracheoesophageal
fistula, aspiration, dysphagia, and tracheal malacia; hence tracheos-
tomy should not be considered an innocuous procedure. The spe-
cific techniques, indications, and outcomes have been reviewed in
cattle, horses, dogs, and cats [43–47].
Lateral pharyngotomy
A lateral pharyngotomy is an alternative to a tracheostomy and is
suitable for facilitating surgical procedures of the mandible, max-
illa, or oral cavity (Fig. 6.25). The use of a pharyngotomy provides
improved visualization within the operative field during oro-
pharyngeal surgery and normal dental occlusion to aid in the
proper reduction of mandibular or maxillary fractures. It is also a
potentially less invasive alternative to a tracheostomy when oral or
nasal airway management is undesirable or unfeasible for facilitat-
ing a surgical procedure.
This technique has been described in detail elsewhere [48]. The
basics of tube placement involve passage of a correctly sized, cuffed
endotracheal tube and making a routine skin incision caudal to the
angle of the mandible. Then, hemostats are bluntly passed through
the skin incision into the caudal part of the pharynx. After the
endotracheal tube adapter has been removed, the adapter end of the
tube is grasped and pulled from the pharynx, through the subcuta-
neous tissue, and through the skin incision. The endotracheal tube
adapter is replaced, and the tube is reconnected to the breathing
system for maintenance. A correctly placed tube should be secured
to the skin with several sutures and/or tape.
Techniques of oxygen administration
Supplemental oxygen is used in anesthetized and critically ill
patients to increase the partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood
(PaO2
) and to promote the delivery of oxygen to the tissues. When
a patient is breathing room air, values for PaO2 that are less than
80 mmHg indicate the potential for hypoxemia. Any patient in res-
piratory distress or those likely to experience hypoxia in the perian-
esthetic period (e.g., brachycephalic breeds) should be provided
supplemental oxygen. If the PaO2 decreases to less than 60 mmHg,
the need for supplemental oxygen is indicated. It is also important
to recall that both hemoglobin and tissue perfusion play fundamen-
tal roles in ensuring sufficient delivery of oxygen to tissues and
when indicated red blood cell transfusions and/or cardiovascular
support may be required in addition to providing supplemental
oxygen to prevent cellular hypoxia.
The fraction of oxygen in inspired gases (FI
O2
) plays a significant
role in establishing the PaO2
. As a rule, the PaO2 value should be
approximately five times the F I
O2 value if there are no major abnor-
malities in the matching of pulmonary ventilation and perfusion.
Supplemental oxygen can be an effective way of correcting hypox-
emia in animals with diffusion abnormalities, ventilation-perfusion
mismatching, and/or hypoventilation. In addition to oxygen sup-
plementation, the specific underlying condition(s) contributing to
hypoxemia should be addressed when possible. Supplemental oxy-
gen may not significantly improve PaO2 in patients with substantial
right to left vascular shunts (pulmonary or cardiac shunts).
Several techniques can be used to administer oxygen to anesthe-
tized and ill patients. The effectiveness of oxygen supplementation
is assessed by evaluation of the patient’s clinical responses (e.g.,
improvement in mucous membrane color and character of ventila-
tion), by measuring the FI
O2
, and by monitoring of PaO2 , arterial
oxygen saturation (SaO2
), and saturation of peripheral oxygen
(SpO 2
). Although PaO 2 and SaO 2 data are reliable, they require peri-
odic arterial blood sampling and the use of a blood gas analyzer.
The SpO2 can be conveniently measured by pulse oximetry. Pulse
oximetry is a practical method for non-invasive, moment-to-
moment estimation of the saturation of hemoglobin with oxygen in
anesthetized, recovering, and ill patients [49–56]. Various tech-
niques for supplementing oxygen to patients are outlined below and
Table 6.1 summarizes the approximate FI
O2 obtained using each of
the commonly available techniques in dogs and cats.
Mask delivery
Masks for delivery of oxygen to veterinary patients are useful for
preoxygenation immediately before induction of anesthesia and for
conscious patients experiencing respiratory distress. The use of
masks for oxygenation requires constant attention, and some
patients will not accept a mask unless they are sedated. Both factors
limit the effectiveness of masks in conscious patients. Indeed, some
patients object to a mask so vigorously that the increase in oxygen
consumption associated with restraint may nullify the benefits of a
greater F I
O2
. If the oxygen mask is attached to an anesthetic breath-
ing circuit, the circuit should be flushed in order to reduce
Figure 6.24 An example of a cuffed tracheostomy tube with an inner stylet
to ease placement. Some tubes are also designed with a removal inner tube
to facilitate cleaning of the tube. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 103 of 1450 --

88 	Section 1: General Topics
anesthetic odors and potentially improve compliance, but this is
variably useful.
The flow rates generally recommended for increasing F I
O2 when
using masks are variable among species. For example, flow rates
of 10–15 L/min of supplemental oxygen have been recommended
to increase the inspired oxygen concentration to approximately
35–60% in adult horses, although supporting studies are lacking,
and nasal and tracheal insufflation represent better, more practical
options in larger patients. Flow rates for smaller patients, including
dogs and cats, usually range from 2 to 8 L/min to produce inspired
oxygen concentrations of 30–60% [57], although specific support-
ing studies are lacking. There is also increasing interest in the use of
high-flow oxygen therapy in veterinary medicine [58]. With a tight-
fitting mask, higher flow rates of oxygen tend to produce greater
FI
O2 values and less rebreathing of expired carbon dioxide.
Tight-fitting masks should be used with a breathing system
(anesthetic circuit or manual resuscitation bag) with a reservoir that
can meet the patient’s tidal volume demands or with a vented or
valved mask allowing entrainment of air from outside the mask. As
an example, a dog with a tidal volume of 300 mL and an inspiratory
time of 1 s has a peak inspiratory gas flow of approximately 18 L/
min, which exceeds the practical flow rate for oxygen during mask-
ing. High inspiratory flow rates can be accommodated if the mask
is attached to an anesthetic breathing system with a reservoir bag or
a mask fitted to a manual resuscitation bag. In addition, an appro-
priate breathing system has an overflow that prevents the buildup of
excessive pressure with a tight-fitting mask. Alternatively, a loose-
fitting mask that allows room air to be entrained can be used, but
entrained room air will reduce inspired F I
O2 associated with sup-
plemental oxygen delivery.
(A)
(B) 	(C)
Figure 6.25 An endotracheal tube placed by external pharyngostomy in a dog to facilitate oropharyngeal surgery. A. The machine end of the endotracheal
tube is grasped via the pharyngostomy incision. B. The machine end of the endotracheal tube is exteriorized and sutured to the surrounding tissues.
C. Completed tube placement distal to the left mandibular ramus demonstrating ability to assess proper dental occlusion in orofacial surgeries.
Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.
Table 6.1 Approximate FI
O2 values obtained from various oxygen supplementation
techniques for dogs and catsa.
Technique 	Approximate FI O 2 obtainable (%) Flow rate
Flow by oxygen 	25–40 	0.5–5 L/min
Face mask 	35–60 	2–8 L/min
Nasal insufflation 	30–70 	100–150 mL/kg/min
Tracheal insufflation 	40–60 	50 mL/kg/min
Oxygen cages 	25–50 	Variable
a These values are not applicable for all veterinary species during all circumstances and
will be flow rate and respiratory character (rate and depth) dependent.

-- 104 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	89
Face masks for oxygen supplementation in veterinary patients
are readily available (Fig. 6.26). Most consist of a clear plastic cone
fitted with a black rubber diaphragm that can improve fit and seal-
ing around a patient’s face. Unless they are sedated or otherwise
minimally responsive, most conscious patients rarely accept snug-
fitting face masks. Although face masks designed specifically for
very small patients are available (Fig. 6.27), it is not uncommon to
use a plastic syringe case, latex glove, and endotracheal tube adapter
to “custom” design a face mask (Fig. 6.28). Traffic cones have been
adapted and fitted to pigs for delivery of inhalant anesthetics.
Nasal insufflation
Insufflation involves the delivery of oxygen into the patient’s airway
at relatively high flow rates; the patient inspires oxygen and room
air, the relative proportions of each being determined primarily by
the oxygen flow rate and the rate of gas flow during inspiration.
Insufflation can be accomplished by a variety of methods. For
horses recovering from anesthesia, oxygen may be delivered from a
flowmeter through a delivery tube and into an appropriately sized
insufflation tube in the horse’s nasal cavity or trachea. Appropriately
sized endotracheal tubes or large animal stomach tubes are often
used as nasal tubes. Intact stomach tubes are sufficiently long that
they may also be used for tracheal insufflation if advanced through
the nasal cavity and into the trachea. For most conscious patients,
oxygen is insufflated through a nasal catheter, the tip of which is
positioned in the nasopharynx. The catheter is usually made of soft
rubber, and the tube should have several fenestrations to minimize
jetting lesions from developing in the nasopharyngeal mucosa. For
awake patients, instilling 2% lidocaine (or lidocaine gel) or 0.5%
proparacaine into the nasal passage with the patient’s head and neck
extended and held upward may facilitate passage of the tube.
Placement involves insertion of a suitable-sized insufflation cathe-
ter into the nasal passage and the nasopharynx, the distance being
approximately the same as from the tip of the nose to the medial
canthus of the eye. Specifically designed nasal insufflation catheters
(with multiple fenestrations) are available or they can be made from
feeding tubes or other soft non-reactive tubing and adapted to the
Figure 6.26 Commercial face masks are available in many styles and sizes.
A face mask should be chosen to minimize the potential for rebreathing of
exhaled gases (i.e., snug fitting), especially when used with the rubber
diaphragm in place. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.
(A) 	(B)
Figure 6.27 Commercial face masks designed specifically for use with very small patients. A. The masks are available with two sizes of interchangeable
diaphragms. B. Use of the face mask in a small avian patient. Source: Advanced Anesthesia Specialists, Phoenix, AZ, USA; with permission.
Figure 6.28 Face masks can be fashioned from syringe cases and rubber
gloves are often made for use in very small patients. Source: Dr. Craig
Mosley, with permission.

-- 105 of 1450 --

90 	Section 1: General Topics
oxygen delivery line. The external portion of the catheter is secured
to the patient’s head with tissue adhesive, tape, and/or sutures or
staples. A flexible length of tubing supplies oxygen from a flowme-
ter and allows the patient some freedom for movement in a cage or
stall. Changing the catheter to the opposite nasal passage every
1–2 days has been recommended to prevent pressure necrosis, jet
lesions, and accumulation of mucus [59]. Humidification of the
oxygen is also advisable if the need for insufflation will be for more
than a short period of time.
The flow-rate requirements for oxygen during insufflation vary
depending on a number of factors, with the patient’s ventilation
character and the desired F I
O 2 being two of the most important.
Following anesthesia, adult horses require a minimum of 15 L/min
of oxygen flow to improve the PaO 2 in arterial blood, and propor-
tionally lower flows (e.g., 5 L/min) are suitable for smaller horses,
foals, and calves [60–63]. In small animals, flow rates of 1–7 L/
min are typically used for the administration of nasal oxygen.
Approximate flow rates for dogs and cats to achieve rather specific
ranges of F I
O 2 have been suggested but monitoring of SpO 2 or
PaO 2 should ultimately guide flow rate adjustment [64]. In dogs,
various flow rates of 100% oxygen administered intranasally were
studied, and flow rates of 50, 100, 150, and 200 mL/kg/min pro-
duced inspired oxygen concentrations measured at the tracheal
bifurcation of 28, 37, 40, and 47, respectively [59]. To prevent
mucosal drying with prolonged insufflation, oxygen should be
flowed through a bubble-type humidifier. Frequently, bilateral
nasal insufflation catheters are placed and can be expected to
improve the maximum achievable F I
O 2 , achieving up to 80% at
200 mL/kg/min [65].
Tracheal insufflation
Tracheal insufflation can be achieved via nasotracheal or transtracheal
oxygen administration. These techniques are useful for patients suf-
fering from conditions causing upper airway obstruction.
Nasotracheal insufflation is achieved by passing a catheter
through the nares into the trachea. In conscious animals, this pro-
cess is normally performed after instilling a topical local anes-
thetic (lidocaine, proparacaine) into the nose and using a lubricant
containing a local anesthetic (lidocaine gel). To facilitate tube
placement into the trachea rather than the esophagus, the neck
should be extended. Conscious patients will frequently cough as
the catheter enters the larynx; coughing can be reduced by instill-
ing a small amount of topical lidocaine through the nasotracheal
tube on to the laryngeal area. Proper nasotracheal tube placement
can be assessed by demonstrating a lack of negative pressure when
air is evacuated from the tube/catheter. Air can be evacuated by
attaching an appropriately sized syringe or compressed suction
bulb to the catheter. If negative pressure is detected while evacuat-
ing air from the tube, this suggests that the tube is not in the tra-
chea and may have been swallowed by the patient and is in the
esophagus. Two-view radiographs may also be used to help con-
firm proper tube placement.
A transtracheal catheter can be placed percutaneously into the
trachea through the cricothyroid membrane or between tracheal
rings near the larynx and can be used to insufflate oxygen in a com-
promised patient. Intratracheal administration of 100% oxygen has
been evaluated in dogs, and flow rates of 10, 25, 50, 100, 150, 200,
and 250 mL/kg/min produced inspired oxygen concentrations at
the tracheal bifurcation of 25, 32, 47, 67, 70, 78, and 86%, respec-
tively [64]. The technique for tracheal insufflation has been
described for small animals [64]. The catheter should be placed
aseptically, be of the over-the-needle type, be relatively large bore,
have several smooth fenestrations to prevent jet lesions, and ulti-
mately be positioned with the tip near the carina. Oxygen should be
humidified, and flow rates should approximate those used for nasal
insufflation.
Oxygen cages
Oxygen cages (Fig. 6.29) specifically designed for small animals are
commercially available, but expensive. These cages regulate oxygen
flow, control humidity and temperature, and eliminate carbon diox-
ide from exhaled gases. Most oxygen cages are capable of producing
oxygen concentrations between 30 and 60% but the flow rates
required can be as high as 15 L/min [66]. However, there is consid-
erable variability in design and efficacy among many commercially
available products. There is also considerable variation in the time
required to obtain the desired oxygen concentration, usually
30–45 min [66]. Factors that will influence this lag time include
internal volume of the cage, air tightness of the cage, and how often
the cage is opened. For small animals, flow rates of oxygen, cage
temperature, and cage humidity have been recommended to be less
than 10 L/min (but this will depend greatly on overall efficiency of
the cage), approximately 22 °C, and 40–50%, respectively [67].
Oxygen concentrations of 30–40% generally are adequate for
patients with moderate pulmonary disease [68]. Oxygen cages are
not practical for horses or larger animals and, even in smaller ani-
mals, the effectiveness of an oxygen cage diminishes as body size
increases. Smaller patients can be managed easily in oxygen cages,
but temperature and humidity are more difficult to control with
larger dogs. A major disadvantage of an oxygen cage is that the ani-
mal must be removed from the cage (or the doors opened) for
examination and treatment, requiring the patient to breathe room
air or oxygen by mask during this period.
Prior to purchasing an oxygen cage, it is important to understand
fully its operation and oxygen requirements. Significant amounts of
oxygen can be consumed by oxygen cages that are poorly sealed and
during frequent openings of the cage for patient treatments and
management. In these circumstances, the oxygen consumption
required can quickly deplete a hospital’s oxygen reserves.
Figure 6.29 Commercial oxygen cages are available that can precisely
control the oxygen concentration within the cage and remove exhaled CO 2
.
Many frequently also incorporate humidity and temperature controls
(heating and cooling). Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 106 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	91
Comparatively, oxygen cages are a relatively inefficient method
of oxygen supplementation but can be extremely useful for
managing specific patients. Oxygen cages are best reserved for
short- term immediate supplementation of oxygen to smaller
patients in respiratory distress. Clinically, some dogs and cats with
serious ventilatory compromise respond very well to an oxygen-
enriched environment as initial therapy; the increase in FI
O2 is
associated with decreased ventilatory effort, and the patient stabi-
lizes and becomes more manageable prior to further examination
and treatment. Nasal insufflation is a far more effective and efficient
method of oxygen supplementation in most circumstances, par-
ticularly those requiring longer-term supplementation, even for
smaller dogs and cats.
Oxygen toxicity
Oxygen toxicity develops with prolonged exposure to high oxy-
gen concentrations, leading to deterioration of pulmonary func-
tion. Initial effects are endothelial damage, destruction of alveolar
cells, and increasing microvascular permeability, leading to
edema, hemorrhage, and congestion [57]. Later stages of toxicity
are associated with alveolar type II and fibroblast proliferation
resulting in fibrosis [57]. The length of time that a patient’s PaO 2
is elevated may be more predictive of oxygen toxicity than the
duration of exposure to a high F I O 2 [69]. There is significant spe-
cies and individual variability in susceptibility to oxygen toxic-
ity [69]. In veterinary patients, the following guidelines are
recommended: (1) use a PaO 2 of 70 mmHg as an endpoint of O 2
therapy; (2) use the lowest F I O 2 possible to achieve a PaO 2 of
70 mmHg; and (3) do not use an F I O 2 greater than 0.6 for longer
than 24 h if possible [57].
Introduction anesthetic machines
and breathing circuits
Inhalant anesthesia forms the foundation of most modern anes-
thetic protocols in veterinary medicine. The administration of
potent inhaled anesthetics requires specific delivery techniques.
The anesthetic machine permits the delivery of a precise yet varia-
ble combination of inhalant anesthetic and oxygen. The basic com-
ponents and functions of all anesthetic machines are similar but
significant design differences exist among them. Machines can be
very simple, for example, those used for mobile applications, to very
complex anesthetic workstations with built-in ventilators, moni-
tors, and safety systems (Fig. 6.30). Regardless of the complexity of
the design, all anesthetic machines share common components:
(1) a source of oxygen, (2) a regulator for oxygen (this may be part
of the gas supply system), (3) a flowmeter for oxygen, and (4) a
vaporizer. If additional gases are used (e.g., nitrous oxide), there will
also be a source, regulator, and flowmeter for each gas that generally
parallels the path of oxygen with some exceptions (e.g., oxygen
flush valve). The basic anesthetic machine is then used in conjunc-
tion with a breathing circuit and anesthetic waste gas scavenge sys-
tem for delivery of anesthetic to and from the patient.
Medical gas supply
Anesthetic machines ideally have two gas supplies, one from small,
high-pressure tanks attached directly to the machine and a second
source often originating from a hospital’s central pipeline supply.
The small tanks mounted directly to the anesthesia machine are
normally intended to be used as back-up or reserve gas sources
should the pipeline malfunction or for working in an area without
(A) 	(B)
Figure 6.30 Anesthetic machines for veterinary use can vary considerably in their complexity and sophistication. A. Complete veterinary anesthetic
workstation for large animal use. B. Portable anesthetic system for field use. Both systems provide all the components necessary for the controlled delivery of
inhalant anesthetics. Source: part A., Hallowell EMC, Pittsfield, MA, USA; reproduced with permission. Source: Part B., Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 107 of 1450 --

92 	Section 1: General Topics
access to the pipeline. Oxygen is by far the most commonly used
medical gas during veterinary anesthesia, with nitrous oxide being
used in conjunction with oxygen as an adjunct carrier gas for inhal-
ants much less frequently. Most medical gases are normally stored
under high pressure in gas cylinders of various sizes or in low-
pressure insulated cryogenic liquid bulk tanks. The characteristics
(e.g., working pressure) and capacity of the gas cylinders vary with
the type of gas they contain (see Table 6.2). Alternatively, oxygen
concentrators can be used to supply a hospital with its oxygen
requirements in circumstances where obtaining and storing tanks is
inconvenient, impossible, or prohibitively expensive (e.g., remote
communities). Most oxygen concentrators use a system of absorb-
ing nitrogen from air to produce gas with an oxygen concentration
between 90 and 96%. Small, integrated, single-machine oxygen
concentrating units have been made available in the veterinary
market (Pureline™, Supera Anesthesia Innovations, Clackamas, OR,
USA) (Fig. 6.31).
Most modern veterinary facilities will have some form of central
gas supply and pipeline distribution system delivering medical
gases to various work sites. The complexity of these systems can
vary significantly, from a small bank of large (G or H) cylinders and
a regulator to more complex systems consisting of multiple large
liquid oxygen tanks, automatic manifolds, regulators, alarms, and
banks of large high-pressure cylinders for back up (Fig. 6.32). The
size and complexity of the gas distribution system will depend upon
the gas needs, the area of required gas distribution, and the number
of work sites required. Proper installation of large gas distribution
systems is essential for safety and efficacy. All gas installations
should be installed and properly evaluated by those with expertise
in this area prior to using them to deliver gas to patients.
Medical gas safety
There are several international (ASTM), national, and local docu-
ments related to the safe use, transport, and storage of pressurized
gases. There are also standards surrounding the installation of med-
ical gas piping systems and some of these provisions have been
incorporated into hospital accreditation requirements in veterinary
medicine. However, the specific guidelines can vary significantly
among jurisdictions and regions. There have been several well-
documented medical accidents related to the inappropriate use of
medical gases in humans, but the incidence of such accidents seems
to be decreasing [70,71]. The reduction of such accidents is likely
due in large part to better monitoring and maintenance of gas deliv-
ery systems. Consequently, there are several safety systems that
have been developed to help reduce and eliminate these problems.
For example, all anesthetic equipment has a gas-specific non-
interchangeable connector that is part of the base unit (anesthetic
machine, ventilator). These connectors, diameter index safety sys-
tem (DISS), pin index safety system (PISS), and quick connector are
described below.
Color coding
Gas cylinders and gas lines are commonly color-coded to avoid
improper use, but color-coding systems can vary among coun-
tries. For example, oxygen is colored white in Canada and green in
Table 6.2 Characteristics of medical gas cylinders.
Size 	Gas 	Gas symbol 	Color code (US) 	Color code
(ISO)
Capacity and pressure
(at 70 °F)
Empty cylinder
weight (pounds)
E 	Oxygen 	O2 	Green 	White 	660 L
1900 psi
14
E 	Nitrous oxide 	N 2
O 	Blue 	Blue 	1590 L
745 psi
14
G 	Nitrous oxide 	N2
O 	Blue 	Blue 	13,800 L
745 psi
97
H 	Oxygen 	O2 	Green 	White 	6900 L
2200 psi
119
H 	Nitrous oxide 	N 2
O 	Blue 	Blue 	15,800 L
745 psi
119
ISO, International Organization for Standardization; psi, pounds per square inch.
Source: Adapted from Dorsch and Dorsch [2].
Figure 6.31 Small, quiet, portable oxygen concentrators are becoming
increasingly available as an alternative to using refillable compressed gas
tanks. This figure depicts an anesthesia machine with a built-in oxygen
concentrator. The oxygen concentrator is located in the case on the bottom
of the machine. Source: Supera Anesthesia Innovations, Clackamas, OR,
USA; reproduced with permission.

-- 108 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	93
the United States. In addition to color coding, all tanks have a
labeling scheme consisting of various shaped labels, key words,
and colors that are all used to identify hazards associated with the
gas they contain. Most tanks originating from gas supply facilities
normally have perforated tags (full, in use, empty) to track the
cylinder’s use status.
Diameter index safety system
The diameter index safety system (DISS) is a non-interchangeable
gas-specific threaded connection system (Fig. 6.33). DISS is the gas
connection used almost universally by all equipment and cylinder
manufactures for the connection of medical gases.
Quick connectors
There are many proprietary (manufacturer-specific) quick-connect
systems that have been developed. These are standardized within a
manufacturer but are not generally compatible with the quick-
connect systems of another manufacturer (Fig. 6.34). These systems
facilitate rapid connecting and disconnecting of gas hoses and may
be useful in situations where frequent connects and disconnects are
required (e.g., multipurpose work areas).
Pin index safety system
The pin index safety system (PISS) uses gas-specific pin patterns
that only allow connections between the appropriate cylinder yokes
and small gas cylinders (E size). The PISS is commonly found on
the yokes mounted on anesthesia machines and some cylinder-
specific regulators/flowmeters (Fig. 6.35).
(A) 	(B)
Figure 6.32 Bulk oxygen requirements for larger hospitals are frequently met using either A. large liquid oxygen tanks or B. banks of compressed gas
tanks. Both of these systems are normally designed with a backup supply should the main supply fail or become depleted. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with
permission.
Figure 6.33 The diameter index safety system (DISS) uses a gas-specific
non-interchangeable thread pattern to avoid incorrect gas delivery. Gases
are also color-coded as apparent in the figure. Source: Dr. Thomas Riebold,
College of Veterinary Medicine, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR,
USA; reproduced with permission of Dr. Riebold.
Figure 6.34 Proprietary quick-connect gas couplings are available to ease
frequent connecting and disconnecting of gas lines. These systems, such as
the Ohmeda system pictured here, are manufacturer-specific and are
incompatible among various manufacturers. Source: Dr. Thomas Riebold,
College of Veterinary Medicine, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR,
USA; reproduced with permission of Dr. Riebold.

-- 109 of 1450 --

94 	Section 1: General Topics
Pressure- reducing valve (regulator)
The pressure-reducing valve (regulator) is a key component
required to bring the high pressures of gas cylinders down to a more
reasonable and safe working pressure (i.e., 40–55 psi). Regulators
also reduce or prevent fluctuations in pressure as the tank empties.
Regulators are normally found wherever a high-pressure gas
cylinder is in use (e.g., gas pipelines, cylinder connected directly
to machine) (see Fig. 6.36). The regulators used for pipelines are
normally adjustable whereas those on most anesthesia machines
are set by the manufacturer. The ASTM standard requires that
regulators on anesthesia machines be set to use pipeline gases pref-
erentially before using gas from the backup cylinder on the anesthe-
sia machine. However, since neither pipeline systems nor veterinary
anesthesia machines are required to meet ASTM standards, it is not
uncommon for machines to draw from the reserve or backup tank
preferentially rather than the pipeline. This problem can be avoided
by ensuring that the pipeline pressure is set approximately 5 psi
higher than the anesthesia machine’s regulator for the reserve oxy-
gen cylinder.
Pressure gauges
Pressure gauges are commonly used to measure cylinder pressures,
pipeline pressures, anesthetic machine working pressures, and pres-
sures within the breathing system. Cylinder, pipeline, and anes-
thetic machine working pressures are normally expressed in pounds
per square inch (psi) or kilopascals (kPa), whereas the pressures
within the breathing system of the anesthetic machine are normally
expressed in centimeters of water (cmH2
O) (Fig. 6.37). The gauge
measuring the pressure of the breathing system is often also referred
to as a “pressure manometer.” The information provided by these
gauges is vital for safe operation of anesthesia equipment.
The modern anesthetic machine
Gas flow within the anesthetic machine
The basic anesthesia delivery apparatus is made up from a series of
parts that work collectively to deliver inhalant anesthetics safely
and support breathing. These components include: the carrier gas
delivery system (normally oxygen), the vaporizer, the breathing
circuit, and the waste gas scavenge system. Perhaps the simplest
way to describe an anesthetic machine is to describe the compo-
nents in order of the flow of gas through the machine, from source
to patient. However, prior to describing these components, it is
important to recognize that the pressures of gas vary at different
locations in an anesthesia machine and knowledge of these pres-
sures facilitates the evaluation and safe operation of these machines.
There are high-, intermediate-, and low-pressure areas. The high-
pressure area accepts gases at cylinder pressure and reduces and
regulates the pressure; this area includes gas cylinders, hanger
yokes, yoke blocks, high-pressure hoses, pressure gauges, and reg-
ulators, with the pressure being as high as 2200 psi. The
intermediate-pressure area accepts gases from the central pipeline
or from the regulators on the anesthesia machine and conducts
them to the flush valve and flowmeters; this area includes pipeline
(A) 	(B)
Figure 6.35 The pin index safety system (PISS) uses a series of gas-specific pin positions on the yolk that correspond to similarly positioned pin receiver
ports on the tank. A. The PISS typical of the cylinder yolk of an anesthesia machine. B. The PISS being used on a combination regulator/flowmeter for the
delivery of oxygen. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.
Figure 6.36 Pressure- reducing valves/regulators are used to decrease the
pressure of the gas in a compressed gas cylinder down to a lower pressure,
sometimes referred to as the “working pressure,” normally 40–55psi. These
valves maintain a constant pressure delivery from the gas supply and help
prevent fluctuations associated with gas depletion and use. Source: Dr.
Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 110 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	95
inlets, power outlets for ventilators, conduits from pipeline inlets
to flowmeters, and conduits from regulators to flowmeters, the
flowmeter assembly, and the oxygen-flush apparatus. The pressure
usually ranges from 40 to 55 psi. The low-pressure area consists of
the conduits and components between the flowmeter and the com-
mon gas outlet; this area includes vaporizers, piping from the flow-
meters to the vaporizer, conduit from the vaporizer to the common
gas outlet, and the breathing system. The pressure in the low-
pressure area is close to ambient pressure. Pressures within the
low-pressure area can vary depending upon how the system is
being used (e.g., positive-pressure ventilation) but should
generally never exceed 30 cmH 2 O as these pressures are transmit-
ted directly to the patient’s lungs (see Fig. 6.38).
Occasionally in veterinary medicine, multiple medical gases
(e.g., oxygen, air, and nitrous oxide) are used with the anesthetic
machine. However, 100% oxygen is normally the only gas used to
deliver anesthesia and power anesthetic equipment (e.g., ventila-
tors) in veterinary medicine. If the reader plans to use multiple
gases for delivering anesthesia, it is their responsibility to under-
stand fully the implications of the usage (indications and contrain-
dications) and to ensure that the anesthetic equipment is properly
designed and monitored to prevent the possibility of delivering a
(A) 	(B)
Figure 6.37 Pressure gauges are used to measure pressure in gas cylinders, anesthetic machines, and breathing systems. A. Pressure gauge associated with
a compressed oxygen tank, measured in pounds per square inch (psi). B. Pressure gauge found commonly on most anesthetic breathing circuits. Note that
the pressure in the breathing circuit is measured in cmH 2
O. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.
Basic anesthesia machine
Precision vaporizer
Common gas
outlet
Flow meter for oxygen
Regulator for
oxygen cylinder 	Common
gas inlet
Cylinder valve
Oxygen cylinder
Oxygen flush
valve
Inspiratory one-way valve
Adjustable pressure limiting or pop-off valve
Expiratory one-way valve
Expiratory
breathing
tube
Patient
Reservoir bag
Carbon dioxide
absorbent cannister
Inspiratory
breathing tube
Y-Piece
Circle system
Cylinder pressure gauge
Corrugated tubing to
the scavenge system
Figure 6.38 Diagram of the basic anesthetic machine and circle breathing system. The exact positions of the various components and specific features
can vary markedly among manufacturers. Source: Dr. Kath Klassen, Douglas College, New Westminster, BC, Canada; reproduced with permission
of Dr. Klassen.

-- 111 of 1450 --

96 	Section 1: General Topics
hypoxic gas mixture to the patient. All human machines must have
a proportioning system associated with the oxygen flow and oxygen
concentration monitors to ensure that a hypoxic gas mixture cannot
be delivered; this is not generally the case with veterinary anesthesia
machines.
The flow of gas within an anesthetic machine may take multiple
routes once it enters the intermediate pressure areas of the machine.
Minimally, gas must be delivered to the flowmeter, where it is then
directed to the vaporizer and subsequently to the patient. However,
in addition to this route of movement, there may be several more
routes available for gas distribution in the anesthesia machine.
Normally, on most anesthesia machines intermediate pressure gas is
also diverted to a fresh gas flush valve that bypasses the flowmeter
and vaporizer and delivers fresh gas directly to the breathing circuit.
There are circumstances where flush valves may not be present or
are unavailable on veterinary anesthesia machines. Additionally, gas
from the intermediate pressure area may be diverted to one or more
auxiliary oxygen outlets that may be used as the driving gas for a
built-in or external ventilator or an external oxygen flowmeter.
Flowmeters
Flowmeters control the rate of gas delivery to the low-pressure area
of the anesthetic machine and determine the fresh gas flow (FGF)
to the anesthetic circuit. There must be a separate flowmeter for
each gas type used with the anesthetic machine (Fig. 6.39). The type
of breathing system used, the volume of the breathing circuit, and
the size of the patient are all factors that influence the FGF rate.
There are several flowmeter designs available, but most are based
on a tapered gas tube with a movable float. The gas normally flows
into the bottom of the tube and out at the top. The tube is narrower
at the bottom and wider at the top, so as the float moves up the tube
more gas can flow around the float, producing higher flow rates
(Fig. 6.40) The amount of gas entering the tube is controlled by a
flow-control knob that adjusts a needle valve. A float indicates the
gas flow on a calibrated scale. The gas flow rates are normally
expressed in mL/min or L/min. The spatial distance between verti-
cal markings on the flowmeter does not necessarily correspond to
equal changes in flow rate. In other words, the distance between 0
and 1000 mL as measured vertically on the flowmeter may not be
the same as the vertical distance between 1000 and 2000 mL. This is
similar to the spatial separation of the percentages found on many
vaporizers where there is a greater spatial allocation on the dial for
normal working percentages than for those rarely used. Some anes-
thetic machines may also have two flowmeters for the same gas
placed in series for allowing even greater precision at lower gas flow
rates (Fig. 6.41).
Flowmeters are gas-specific and calibrated at 760 mmHg and
20 °C; accuracy may be affected if they are used under conditions
significantly different from calibration, although this is rarely sig-
nificant for routine clinical use. Flowmeters are also calibrated as
a unit (flow tube, scale, and float) and therefore if any one of these
fail it is best to replace the whole unit. Gasket, flow-control dial/
knob, and/or washer replacement or repair are unlikely to affect
accuracy but should only be performed by individuals familiar
with flowmeter design and operation. The flow-control knob on
contemporary human anesthesia machines must conform to
ASTM standards. For example, the oxygen flow-control knob
must be uniquely shaped, and it must be on the right-most side of
the flowmeter bank downstream of all other gases. These design
considerations are important for minimizing the accidental deliv-
ery of hypoxic gas mixtures.
Figure 6.39 Two flowmeters arranged in parallel on an anesthetic machine
with nitrous oxide (blue) on the left and oxygen (green) on the right.
Flowmeters on human anesthesia machines must conform to specific
positioning (i.e., oxygen right-most flowmeter) and control-knob
dimension (i.e., oxygen is furled and protrudes out furthest); this is not the
case for flowmeters on anesthetic machines designed solely for veterinary
use. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.
Out
Single-taper
flowmeter
Double-taper
flowmeter
Out
In 	In
Figure 6.40 Diagram of a flowmeter illustrating gas flow from bottom to
top with single and double tapers. As the flow indicator (bobbin, ball, or
spindle) rises, flow increases because the orifice size increases. The double
taper allows increased accuracy at the lower end of the tube while
accurately metering higher flows from the top. Source: Hartsfield [72];
reproduced with permission.

-- 112 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	97
Vaporizers
Vaporizers change liquid anesthetic into vapor and meter the
amount of vapor leaving the vaporizer. Most modern vaporizers
are agent-specific, concentration-calibrated, variable-bypass, flow-
over with wick, out-of-circuit, and high-resistance (or plenum)
vaporizers that are compensated for temperature, flow, and
back-pressure. Non-precision, low-resistance, in-circuit vaporizers
are rarely found in veterinary medicine and, without accurate
inspired inhalant concentration monitoring, these vaporizers
would seem to pose unnecessary risks during anesthesia.
Consequently, their use is discouraged unless used in conjunction
with inhalant anesthetic agent monitoring. Most modern vaporiz-
ers work by splitting the carrier gas to flow into the vaporizing
chamber (where it picks up anesthetic vapor) or to the bypass
channel where it does not (Fig. 6.42). The ratio of the amount of
gas that picks up inhalant to the gas that bypasses the inhalant,
along with the vapor pressure of the volatile anesthetic, will deter-
mine the final concentration of the gas leaving the vaporizer. The
output from the vaporizer is expressed as a concentration (e.g., vol-
ume percent) of vapor in the gas leaving the vaporizer.
Temperature, flow, and pressure are all factors that can poten-
tially alter vaporizer output. The mechanisms for temperature,
flow, and pressure compensation vary among vaporizer manufac-
turers and models. In general, most modern precision compensated
vaporizers will maintain consistent output at flows between 0.5 and
10 L/min, temperatures between 15 and 35 °C, and pressure changes
associated with positive-pressure ventilation and the use of the
flush valve.
Temperature compensation
Temperature compensation is achieved by using materials for
vaporizer construction that supply and conduct heat efficiently,
promoting greater thermostability. In addition, most vaporizers
have mechanical, and a few have electrical circuit-driven, thermo-
compensation systems. These vaporizers compensate for tempera-
ture changes by altering the splitting ratio so that a greater or lesser
amount of gas is conducted through the vaporizing chamber as the
temperature changes during use. In mechanical systems, as the
vaporizer cools, the thermal element restricts gas flow to the bypass
chamber, causing more carrier gas to enter the vaporizing chamber.
The opposite will occur if the vaporizer becomes too warm. The
exact thermocompensation systems vary among manufacturers
but the thermal element is normally a heat-sensitive metal(s) that
will reliably expand and contract when subjected to temperature
changes.
Flow rate compensation
Changes in gas flow rate through the vaporizer can potentially lead
to changes in the output. For example, if the flow is excessively high,
complete saturation of the gas moving through the vaporizing
chamber may not occur, leading to a reduction in output. Flow rate
compensation is achieved by ensuring reliable and consistent satu-
ration of all gas flowing through the vaporization chamber by using
a series of wicks, baffles, and spiral tracks to facilitate liquid gas
vaporization. These techniques are used to increase the surface area
of the carrier gas–liquid interface, ensuring that all the gas exiting
the vaporization chamber is fully saturated. All properly function-
ing modern vaporizers have very predictable outputs within a clini-
cally useful range of gas flow rates (0.5–10 L/min).
Back-pressure compensation
Back-pressure on the vaporizer can occur during intermittent
positive-pressure ventilation (IPPV) or with the use of the flush
valve, and this effect can increase vaporizer output if compensation
mechanisms are not in place. There are a number of ways in which
the effects of back-pressure are minimized in modern vaporizers.
One is to reduce the size of the vaporizing chamber relative to the
bypass chamber. Another option is to use a long, spiral, or small-
diameter tube connecting the vaporizer chamber to the bypass
channel. Both will reduce the amount of pressurized gas reaching
the vaporizing chamber. The use of one-way check valves immedi-
ately upstream from the vaporizer can also prevent the effects of
back-pressure and they are incorporated into some machines. One-
way check valves are also sometimes used downstream of the flush
valve (upstream of the vaporizer) to prevent back-pressure associ-
ated with use of the flush valve.
Operational considerations
There are many vaporizers available for use in veterinary
anesthesia, but most are based on three main styles of vaporizers:
the Ohmeda Tec, the Dräger Vapor, and the Penlon Sigma series.
Bypass channel
Fresh gas flow
(from flowmeter)
Vapor containing gas
(to common gas outlet)
Vaporizing chamber
Figure 6.42 Schematic of a generic variable-bypass vaporizer
demonstrating the splitting of the fresh gas flow to the vaporizing chamber
and bypass channel. The splitting ratio and vapor pressure of the volatile
anesthetic will determine the final percent output from the vaporizer.
Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.
Figure 6.41 An example of multiple flowmeters being used on a single
anesthetic machine designed for human use. Note the positioning of the
flowmeters and shape of the control knobs. Also note that the nitrous oxide
and oxygen flowmeters are dual-stage flowmeters in series allowing for
increased precision of gas delivery. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 113 of 1450 --

98 	Section 1: General Topics
The primary differences among vaporizer series include capacity
of the vaporization chamber (larger chambers allow longer times
between fillings, particularly useful for large animal applications),
susceptibility to alterations in output due to tipping (rarely a con-
sideration under normal circumstances), and mounting options.
All are very accurate and well designed; the use of one over another
is often more about personal preference and availability than
performance differences.
Most vaporizers are mechanical devices requiring no external
power to function normally. However, due to the unique vapor
properties of desflurane, this agent requires a specially designed
electronic heated vaporizer to ensure consistent output. Despite the
need for external power, most desflurane vaporizers function much
like standard variable-bypass vaporizers, although technically they
are classified as measured-flow vaporizers (see the description of the
Tec 6 vaporizer below). There are also electronic vaporizers available
for use in both humans (Aladin™ and Aladin2™ cassette vaporizer,
GE Healthcare) and veterinary anesthesia (Vetland EX3000
Electronic Vaporization System). These vaporizers function as
variable-bypass vaporizers but the splitting ratio of the carrier gas is
determined electronically rather than mechanically. Since the sys-
tem is electronic, various manufacturers and user alarm settings can
be incorporated. For example, the vaporizer may alert the user if
unusually high concentrations of anesthetic are being delivered from
the vaporizer or if the vaporizer setting has not been altered within a
specified time period, potentially avoiding inadvertent anesthetic
overdose (e.g., the vaporizer output is momentarily increased and
the user forgets to reduce the setting). Although electronic systems
arguably provide additional information that may be valuable to the
anesthetist, they may also be more prone to problems and damage
related to the fact they rely on properly operating electronics to
function. More recently, target-controlled inhalation anesthesia, also
called “end-tidal-driven anesthetic delivery,” has become available in
some countries on newer anesthetic machines (e.g., Aisys CS2,
Anesthesia Delivery System with Et Control, GE Healthcare). These
systems allow the anesthetist to select a target end-tidal inhalant
concentration and use the sampled end-tidal readings and computer
processing to effectively optimize vaporizer output and FGF to
achieve efficient inhalant delivery with minimal waste anesthetic gas
(i.e., closed FGF rates) and oxygen use. These systems help the user
safely and easily utilize low FGF rates; thereby, reducing costs, waste,
and environmental contamination [73,74].
Vaporizers can be filled using a standard screw-capped filler port
or an agent-specific keyed filler port. Keyed filler ports are intended
to prevent inadvertent filling of a vaporizer with the wrong anes-
thetic agent (Fig. 6.43). Most modern vaporizers are extremely
dependable and durable, requiring very little routine maintenance
and care. However, maintenance and care should be performed
according to the manufacturer’s recommendations and only by a
qualified technician.
Vaporizers are generally mounted on what is referred to as the
“back bar,” which simply refers to the rail or mounting system used to
hold vaporizers on the machine. Most veterinary vaporizers use cage-
mount systems for securing the vaporizer to the back bar; this system
uses 23 mm taper push fittings (inlet and outlet, female and male) to
attach the vaporizer to the gas delivery system, and the vaporizer is
bolted directly to the back bar (Fig. 6.44). The tapered fittings are
often referred to as “vaporizer caps,” “adapters,” or “elbows.”
There are also several proprietary mounting bracket systems that
allow vaporizers to be easily removed; for example, the GE
Healthcare Ohmeda Selectatec and the Dräger Interlock, with the
former being significantly more popular. The Selectatec mount
consists of two vertically situated male valve ports, with an acces-
sory pin and locking recess located between the inlet and outlet
ports (Fig. 6.45). Selectatec-compatible vaporizers have two female
ports with a recessed assembly to receive the accessory pin. The
(A) 	(B)
Figure 6.43 Many vaporizers are filled using agent-specific filler keys represented by the four fillers located on the left in A. The keys are indexed to both
the bottle and vaporizer (B.) and prevent inadvertent filling of a vaporizer with the wrong anesthetic agent. There are also many vaporizers that are not
equipped with a keyed filler port and instead use a standard screw-topped filler port. Filling of these vaporizers is best performed using an inhalant-
specific filler spout (second right-most in A.). These are indexed to a specific agent bottle but not the vaporizer. Source: part A., Dr. Thomas Riebold,
College of Veterinary Medicine, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA; reproduced with permission of Dr. Riebold. Source: part B., Dr. Craig
Mosley, with permission.

-- 114 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	99
vaporizer is lowered on to the male valve ports and then locked into
place using the locking knob located on the top of the vaporizer.
The O-rings on the male valve ports ensure a gas-tight seal between
the vaporizer and the Selectatec mount. Loss or deformation of
these rings can lead to leaks between the vaporizer and the mount.
The vaporizer cannot be turned on unless it is locked in place on the
mount. When the vaporizer is turned on (Tec 4, 5, 6, 7), a retracta-
ble spindle depresses the ball valve in the male valve ports, allowing
gas to flow from the vaporizer to the anesthetic machine. Tec 4 and
above vaporizer models also incorporate a safety interlock system
(vaporizer exclusion/isolation) that uses a horizontal push rod sys-
tem that ensures that only one vaporizer can be used at a time when
multiple vaporizers are mounted in series on a Selectatec mount.
The Dräger Interlock mount system is very similar to the Selectatec
mount and also includes a safety interlink system; however, the
dimensions are unique, meaning that each system can only be used
with a vaporizer compatible with the individual mounting system.
Most vaporizers are available in models compatible with the
Selectatec mounting system.
Descriptions of vaporizers common in veterinary
medicine
The vaporizers described here are those most commonly used in
veterinary anesthesia. Earlier vaporizers no longer being manufac-
tured may still be in use and some have been described in earlier
editions of this book and elsewhere [75,76].
Ohmeda/Datex-Ohmeda/GE Healthcare Tec vaporizers
Tec vaporizers specifically designed for halothane or isoflurane
vaporization, particularly the Fluotec Mark 3 and Isotec 3, are
commonly used in veterinary anesthesia and are described in more
detail below. They are considered reliable and are temperature,
flow, and back-pressure compensated under normal operating
conditions. The Fluotec Mark 3 predecessor, the Fluotec Mark 2, is
no longer being manufactured but may still be available as used
equipment and may still be found in some veterinary practices [75].
It was associated with relatively poor performance characteristics
and replacement with more accurate and reliable units should
be considered. Tec 4, 5, 6, and 7 vaporizers have superseded the
Tec 3 vaporizers for use with contemporary human anesthesia
machines [2]. The Tec 4 was only available for the delivery of iso-
flurane and the Tec 6 is a desflurane-specific model (Fig. 6.46). The
Tec 5 series is available for delivery of enflurane, halothane, isoflu-
rane, and sevoflurane and has been replaced by the more recent
Tec 7 series of vaporizers (Fig. 6.47). These vaporizers are
Figure 6.44 An example of a typical cagemount vaporizer with tapered
push fittings for delivery of gas to and from the vaporizer. Source: Dr. Craig
Mosley, with permission.
Figure 6.45 A Selectatec mounting bar for Tec-style vaporizers. This
mounting system is convenient for quick placement and removal of
vaporizers. The vertical male ports deliver gas to and from the vaporizer;
the pin between the two ports is the locking system used to mount the
vaporizer The vaporizer must be locked in place before the control dial can
be turned on. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.
Figure 6.46 A machine mounted with several of the Ohmeda/Datex-
Ohmeda Tec series of vaporizers. From the left: the Tec 4, Tec 5, and Tec 6
vaporizers. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 115 of 1450 --

100 	Section 1: General Topics
becoming increasingly common for use in veterinary anesthesia
and various publications and specific operating manuals offer
information about their use and performance [1].
Tec 3 vaporizers
These vaporizers are classified as variable-bypass, flow-over
with 	wick, 	automatic 	thermocompensation, 	agent-specific,
high-resistance, and back-pressure compensated [68]. The Tec
3 model includes the Fluotec Mark 3, the Pentec Mark 2, and the
Isotec 3 vaporizers (Fig. 6.48). As the Fluotec and Pentec were spe-
cific for halothane and methoxyflurane, respectively, and these
inhalants are no longer marketed, it is unlikely that these vaporiz-
ers have clinical applicability in veterinary practice today. The Tec
3 (Isotec 3) vaporizer is temperature compensated with a bimetal-
lic, temperature-sensitive element associated with the vaporization
chamber. Output from the Tec 3 vaporizer is nearly linear over the
range of concentrations and flow rates that would typically be
selected for veterinary patients (250 mL/min–6 L/min). Back-
pressure compensation is accomplished in the internal design of
the vaporizer with a long tube leading to the vaporization chamber,
an expansion area in the tube, and exclusion of wicks from the area
of the vaporization chamber near the inlet [76].
Tec 4 and 5 vaporizers
These vaporizers are classified as variable-bypass, flow-over
with 	wick, 	automatic 	thermocompensation, 	agent-specific,
high-resistance, and back-pressure compensated [76]. The vapor-
izer’s main design features over earlier models are associated with
its obligatory use with a Selectatec mounting system. The Tec
4 was the earliest version of these vaporizers and was only availa-
ble for isoflurane delivery (Fig. 6.49). The Tec 5 is available for the
delivery of enflurane, halothane, isoflurane, and sevoflurane and
Figure 6.47 A Datex- Ohmeda/GE Healthcare Tec 7 isoflurane-specific
vaporizer. The Tec 7 series is the latest variable-bypass plenum vaporizer
series offered by Datex-Ohmeda/GE Healthcare. Source: Dr. Thomas
Riebold, College of Veterinary Medicine, Oregon State University,
Corvallis, OR, USA; reproduced with permission of Dr. Riebold.
Figure 6.48 An example of a Tec 3 style isoflurane-specific vaporizer.
This style of vaporizer is very common in many veterinary practices.
Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.
Figure 6.49 The Ohmeda Tec 4 (IsoTec) was the first vaporizer designed
for use with the Selectatec mounting system and was only available for the
delivery of isoflurane. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 116 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	101
can be found in either a key- or funnel-filled configuration
(Fig. 6.50). When the dial is turned to “0” and the flowmeter is
activated, all of the gas bypasses the vaporizer through the
Selectatec mount rather than passing through the vaporizer’s
bypass channel. Only when the vaporizer is turned from “0” will
the gas enter the vaporizer. Temperature compensation is accom-
plished through a bimetallic strip located in the bypass channel; as
the temperature decreases, less gas is allowed through the bypass
channel so that relatively more gas passes through the vaporizing
chamber. Tec 5 vaporizers also feature a safety interlock system
(vaporizer isolation/exclusion system), activated when multiple
vaporizers are mounted in series.
Tec 6
The Tec 6 vaporizer is designed for use only with desflurane
(Fig. 6.51). Owing to its relatively low potency and low boiling point
(near room temperature), desflurane liquid requires heating to
ensure complete and stable vaporization of the liquid and accurate
vaporizer output. The vaporizer is classified as a measured-flow
vaporizer, 	automatic 	thermocompensation, 	agent-specific,
high-resistance (see below), and back-pressure compensated. The
vaporizer uses electronics to indicate its operational status, the level
of agent, to control the pressure balance (between the diluent/
bypass gas and the vaporized inhalant), to heat the liquid desflu-
rane, and to charge the backup battery. The vaporizer can only be
turned on once the electronics determine it to be operable. The
heaters in the agent sump heat the desflurane to 39 °C, producing
saturated desflurane at a vapor pressure of approximately
1500 mmHg in the reservoir.
When the vaporizer is turned on, the valve is opened and the
pressurized vapor moves to a pressure regulator that reduces the
pressure to that normally found in a high-resistance (plenum)
vaporizer (10–20 cmH2 O). The desflurane vapor then moves to a
variable restrictor controlled by the concentration selection dial,
where it is added to the carrier gas leaving the vaporizer. The fresh
gas (carrier gas) flow into the vaporizer passes through a fixed
restrictor that increases its pressure to that normally found in a
high-resistance (plenum) vaporizer. Two independent pressure
sensors in the pathway detect pressure changes and instruct the
pressure regulator to change the desflurane pressure (and flow) pro-
portionately so as to maintain the set vapor concentration. For
example, if the FGF rate is increased, the pressure created by the
carrier gas moving through the fixed restrictor will increase. This
will then instruct the desflurane pressure (and flow) to increase
proportionately, maintaining the vaporizer output despite changes
in carrier gas flow. If the readings from the two sensors are not simi-
lar, the vaporizer will shut off the vaporizing chamber, initiating an
alarm. The filler port accepts only the specific filler nozzle associ-
ated with the desflurane bottle.
Dräger vapor vaporizers: Vapor 19.1
Dräger Vapor 19.1 series vaporizers are commonly found in vet-
erinary medicine. An interlock-compatible model is also availa-
ble, the Vapor 19.3 series. The Vapor 19.1 probably first became
popular in veterinary anesthesia for large animal applications
(Fig. 6.52). The Vapor 19.1 had a significantly larger inhalant res-
ervoir capacity relative to the standard Tec 3 and 4 vaporizers
commonly used at the time (although extended capacity Tec
3 models were also produced). The larger inhalant reservoir is
well suited to the increased inhalant demands associated with
Figure 6.50 The Tec 5 series of vaporizers included enflurane-, halothane-,
isoflurane-, and sevoflurane-specific models. The Tec 5 model also
incorporated an interlock safety system that prevents multiple vaporizers
from being turned on when mounted in series. Source: Dr. Thomas
Riebold, College of Veterinary Medicine, Oregon State University,
Corvallis, OR, USA; reproduced with permission of Dr. Riebold.
Figure 6.51 The Datex-Ohmeda Tec 6 vaporizer is a desflurane-specific
model incorporating a heated vaporizing chamber. The Tec 6 Plus from
Datex-Ohmeda/GE Healthcare is the latest available in this vaporizer
series. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 117 of 1450 --

102 	Section 1: General Topics
large animal inhalant anesthesia and reduced the likelihood of
needing to refill the vaporizer in the middle of a case. The Vapor
19.1 series vaporizers are classified as variable-bypass, flow-over
with wick, automatic thermocompensation, high-resistance,
agent-specific, and pressure compensated [76]. Specific vaporiz-
ers are available for sevoflurane, isoflurane, enflurane, and halo-
thane administration. Temperature compensation is automatic
with a temperature compensator. The temperature compensator
makes use of the thermal characteristics of two different materials
to expand or contract the bypass channel, decreasing or increas-
ing the amount of gas passing through the vaporization chamber.
Pressure compensation is accomplished by the presence of a long
spiral inlet tube to the vaporization chamber [2]. This vaporizer is
accurate from 0.3 to 15 L/min of FGF at the lower settings on the
control dial, but complete saturation may not occur at higher set-
tings with higher flows. The vaporizer is designed for operation
(temperature compensation) in the range 10–40 °C [2]. Dräger
also produces desflurane-specific vaporizers, the D Vapor and the
DIVA, which are additional examples of measure flow vaporizers,
similar to the Tec 6.
Penlon Sigma Delta vaporizers
Penlon Sigma Delta vaporizers are another type of vaporizer occa-
sionally used in veterinary medicine. The Sigma Delta vaporizer
(Fig. 6.53) is classified as variable-bypass, flow-over with wick,
temperature compensated, high-resistance, agent-specific, and
vaporizer-out-of-circuit (VOC) [76]. Specific vaporizers are avail-
able for sevoflurane, isoflurane, enflurane, and halothane admin-
istration. Penlon also produces a desflurane vaporizer, the Sigma
Alpha. Temperature compensation is through a thermostat in the
bypass channel. The operating temperature is between 15 and
35 °C and the temperature-compensating mechanism reacts
slowly, requiring 1–2 h to compensate for changes in room
temperature. This vaporizer is accurate from 0.2 to 15 L/min of
FGF at all dial settings, with only slightly decreased output at
lower settings and slightly increased output at higher settings
when using very low flow rates.
Ohio calibrated vaporizer
This vaporizer (Fig. 6.54) has been available for veterinary use
and was commonly employed on human anesthesia machines for
many years. It is no longer being manufactured but is still readily
found being redistributed through veterinary equipment compa-
nies. It is classified as variable-bypass, flow-over with wick,
automatically temperature compensated, agent-specific, VOC, and
high-resistance [76]. Specific units were manufactured for isoflu-
rane, halothane, and sevoflurane administration. These vaporizers
were designed for accuracy at FGFs between 0.3 and 10 L/min, and
temperature compensation occurs between 16 and 32 °C. Tilting
these vaporizers up to 20° while in use or up to 45° when not in use
does not cause problems. Greater tipping of the vaporizer may
cause delivery of high concentrations. Between paper wicks, the
vaporizer has plastic spacers that may react with enflurane or iso-
flurane to cause discoloration of the liquid anesthetic, apparently
without significant consequences [76].
Measured-flow vaporizers
Verni-Trol and Copper Kettles are flowmeter-controlled vaporizers
that were once popular for use in anesthesia of human patients [76].
Although these vaporizers are no longer being manufactured, are
not covered by the ASTM standards for anesthesia equipment, and
are rarely found in clinical use (or otherwise), a description of
their operation may be instructive for those wanting an alternative
explanation of vaporizer function. Historically they are also impor-
tant as they were the first devices to permit precise vaporization of
liquid anesthetics and served as the precursors to today’s modern
variable-bypass vaporizers.
Figure 6.52 Isoflurane and sevoflurane Dräger Vapor 19.1 vaporizers
mounted on a large animal anesthesia machine. These vaporizers probably
first became popular for use in veterinary medicine for providing large
animal anesthesia owing to their relatively large inhalant reservoir,
requiring less filling during a case. Source: Dr. Thomas Riebold, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA;
reproduced with permission of Dr. Riebold.
Figure 6.53 A sevoflurane-specific Penlon Sigma Delta vaporizer. The
Sigma Delta is also available for the delivery of enflurane, halothane, and
isoflurane. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 118 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	103
These 	flowmeter-controlled 	vaporizers 	are 	classified 	as
measured-flow, bubble-through, high-resistance, VOC, tempera-
ture compensated (thermally stable with manual flow adjustments
based on temperature of the liquid anesthetic), and multipurpose.
They have been classified as saturation vaporizers. These vaporiz-
ers are constructed of copper (Copper Kettle) or silicon bronze
(Verni-Trol) for thermostability. Back-pressure compensation
mechanisms are present on later production models and can be
fitted on older models (e.g., check valves). Since these vaporizers
are multipurpose or universal, they can accurately vaporize halo-
thane, isoflurane, sevoflurane, or methoxyflurane, and should be
clearly labeled for the agent in use.
With measured-flow vaporizers, manual adjustments of flow
rates are required to account for variations in total gas flow, day-
to-day changes in temperature, and changes in liquid temperature
during use, especially with high FGF rates. In most cases, a calcu-
lator wheel is supplied with each vaporizer for determining proper
flow rates. The user selects the total FGF, the desired % output,
and the temperature of the inhalant, and the calculator will deter-
mine the flowrate through the vaporizer to achieve the desired
output. Anesthesia machines with measured-flow vaporizers have
two oxygen flowmeters. One flowmeter routes all of its oxygen
through the vaporization chamber, where it is fully saturated with
anesthetic; the other flowmeter supplies oxygen that bypasses the
vaporizer and supplies oxygen to meet the patient’s requirements.
By manually altering the ratio of gas going to the vaporizer to that
bypassing the vaporizer, precise concentrations of anesthetic
could be delivered to the patient. Both gas sources combine at a
mixing valve to achieve the proper anesthetic concentration
before gases enter the breathing system. Modern agent-specific
variable-bypass vaporizers simply eliminated the need to deter-
mine and adjust these ratios manually. Further details concerning
the use of measured-flow vaporizers can be found in earlier edi-
tions of this book [75].
Maintenance of vaporizers
Vaporizers are generally extremely robust and reliable but
do require maintenance. In general, the best policy is to fol-
low the manufacturer’s guidelines for care and servicing.
Recommendations vary but, regardless of the maintenance
schedule, servicing should be performed on a vaporizer if, based
on the responses of patients, the dialed anesthetic concentration is
suspected to be erroneous, or if any of the components of the
vaporizer function improperly (e.g., the control dial is difficult
to adjust). Servicing as recommended by the manufacturer
often includes an evaluation of operation, cleaning, changing of
filters, replacement of worn parts, and recalibration. Halothane
and methoxyflurane contain preservatives (thymol and butylated
hydroxytoluene, respectively) that are not highly volatile and
therefore collect in the vaporization chambers and on the wicks,
potentially affecting anesthetic output. These vaporizers should
be periodically drained to remove most of these preservatives.
Vaporizers should not be overfilled or tipped significantly once
filled. They should also be drained before removal from the anes-
thesia machine for service. In the past, flushing a vaporizer with
diethyl ether to dissolve preservatives that collect within it has
been recommended. Owing to the flammability and explosiveness
of diethyl ether, and the common use of 100% oxygen as a carrier
gas, this is no longer recommended. Flushing the vaporizer does
not eliminate the need for regular service by a certified vaporizer
technician.
Use of the wrong anesthetic in an agent-specific
vaporizer
Using an agent- specific vaporizer for an anesthetic for which the
vaporizer is not calibrated is problematic, especially if the introduc-
tion of an anesthetic is unintentional (i.e., the operator does not
realize the mistake). Lower than indicated anesthetic output is
expected if an anesthetic with a lower vapor pressure is placed in a
vaporizer designed for a drug with a higher vapor pressure (e.g.,
sevoflurane used in an isoflurane vaporizer). Conversely, a highly
volatile anesthetic used in an agent-specific vaporizer designed for
a drug with a lower vapor pressure is likely to produce a high,
potentially lethal concentration. The differential potencies of the
drugs in question would be expected to affect the depth of anesthe-
sia in either situation.
During the introduction of isoflurane into veterinary anesthe-
sia, it was commonly administered with agent-specific halothane
vaporizers that were relabeled, but not recalibrated for isoflurane.
Because the vapor pressures of halothane and isoflurane are simi-
lar (e.g., 243 and 240 mmHg at 20 °C, respectively), the output was
not expected to differ greatly from the control-dial setting. Indeed,
halothane vaporizers produce concentrations of isoflurane that
are reasonably close to the dial setting for halothane [77].
Nevertheless, current manufacturer recommendations are against
the use of isoflurane in halothane-specific vaporizers and vice
versa [78]. Depending on the vaporizer and conditions of opera-
tion, isoflurane in a halothane vaporizer may produce 25–50%
more vapor than expected, and halothane in an isoflurane-specific
vaporizer usually delivers a concentration that is lower than
expected [78]. If isoflurane is to be used in an agent-specific halo-
thane vaporizer, the vaporizer should be serviced and completely
recalibrated for isoflurane. Complete calibration implies that the
vaporizer has been tested for accuracy with an anesthetic-gas ana-
lyzer at various carrier gas flow rates and various temperatures to
assure reliable function.
Figure 6.54 An isoflurane-specific Ohio vaporizer. It has also been
manufactured for the delivery of halothane and sevoflurane. Source:
Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 119 of 1450 --

104 	Section 1: General Topics
Oxygen flush valve
Oxygen flush valves are found on most, but not all, veterinary anes-
thetic machines. There is no convention regarding location, size, or
design of the flush valve in veterinary medicine and they vary dra-
matically (e.g., button, toggle, or switch) (Fig. 6.55). Flush valves on
human anesthetic machines must be a recessed button type and
easily accessible on the front of the machine. Flush valves are
designed to rapidly deliver large volumes of non-anesthetic-
containing gas to the patient breathing circuit in emergency situa-
tions. The flow originates downstream of the regulator within the
intermediate pressure area of the anesthetic machine (~50 psi) and
bypasses the flowmeter and vaporizer, delivering gas at rates rang-
ing between 35 and 75 L/min to the patient circuit. To avoid over-
pressuring the patient circuit, the flush valve should not be used, or
be used very cautiously, with non-rebreathing circuits, circuits
attached to mechanical ventilators, and circuits with very low
volumes (e.g., pediatric circle systems) as pressures within the
breathing circuit may temporarily rise, creating dangerously high
pressures to the patient’s lungs. The adjustable pressure-limiting
(APL) valve should be fully open at all times to help prevent over-
pressurizing the breathing circuit.
Common gas outlet
The common gas outlet leads from the anesthetic machine to the
breathing circuit (Fig. 6.56). Gas reaching the common gas outlet has
traveled from the gas supply (cylinder or pipeline), through the regu-
lator, flowmeter, and vaporizer. The gas flowing from the common
gas outlet normally delivers the anesthetic and carrier gas(es) to
the patient circuit at the concentration and flow rate determined by
the vaporizer setting and flowmeter flow rate. However, the concen-
tration of inhalant gas from the common gas outlet is not usually
equivalent to the gas concentration inhaled by the patient when using
(A) 	(B)
Figure 6.55 Examples of various flush valve buttons on anesthetic machines. A. The oxygen flush button is recessed in a protective collar to prevent
inadvertent activation if bumped. B. Many oxygen flush buttons are relatively small and are unprotected from accidental activation. Source: Dr. Craig
Mosley, with permission.
(A) 	(B)
Figure 6.56 Common gas outlets deliver gas from the anesthetic machine to the patient breathing circuit. A. Push-type taper connections are common in
veterinary medicine. B. Locking common gas outlets is standard on human anesthesia machines. Locking systems will help prevent inadvertent
disconnection of the gas supply from the machine to the breathing circuit. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 120 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	105
rebreathing circuits, particularly when using low flow rates, due to
dilution of incoming gases with those already in the patient circuit.
The exact configuration of the common gas outlet varies among
manufacturers, but it is normally a taper 15 mm ID port. Human
anesthesia machines must have a locking mechanism in place to pre-
vent inadvertent disconnection from the machine (Fig. 6.56), but this
is not a requirement in veterinary medicine. However, at least one
company designs their fresh gas outlet with a quick-connect system
to prevent inadvertent disconnections (Fig. 6.57).
Breathing systems
Although some parts of the breathing system are built into anesthe-
sia machines (e.g., the circle system carbon dioxide absorbent can-
ister), breathing systems are considered separately from the actual
anesthesia machine (i.e., components upstream of the fresh gas out-
let). This is a convenient way to discuss breathing systems in veteri-
nary medicine as on any single anesthetic machine the breathing
system may be frequently changed depending upon the needs of
the patient or the circumstances in which anesthetic is delivered
(Fig. 6.58). The primary purposes of the breathing system are to
direct oxygen to the patient, deliver anesthetic gas to the patient,
remove carbon dioxide from inhaled breaths (or prevent significant
rebreathing of carbon dioxide), and provide a means of controlling/
supporting ventilation.
Breathing systems have been classified using numerous schemes
with little uniformity or consensus of nomenclature (i.e., open,
semi-open, and semi-closed). For this reason, it is suggested that
these terms be abandoned and rather a description of the flow rates
and breathing system (e.g., circle system and Mapleson D system)
are all that is needed. For clarity, it is easiest to classify the breathing
circuits into one of two groups: those designed for rebreathing of
exhaled gases that contain a means to absorb carbon dioxide
(rebreathing or partial rebreathing system) and those designed to
be used under circumstances of minimal to no rebreathing that do
not contain a means to absorb carbon dioxide (non-rebreathing
systems). Some have argued that this classification is somewhat of a
misnomer since, depending upon the specific system used and the
FGF rates used, a rebreathing system may have minimal rebreath-
ing occurring (i.e., excessively high FGFs) or a non-rebreathing sys-
tem may not completely prevent rebreathing (i.e., inadequate/low
FGF). To help circumvent this debate, it has been suggested that in
addition to describing the design of the breathing circuit, the FGF
Figure 6.57 A quick-connect/disconnect system used for the common gas
outlet on a machine designed for veterinary use can be a safety feature
preventing inadvertent disconnections between the patient circuit and the
anesthesia machine. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.
Figure 6.58 An example of an anesthetic machine mounted with both circle (left) and Bain (right) breathing circuits. Changing gas flow between the
circuits is achieved through use of a switch handle located on the lower right front of the machine. There is no obvious common gas outlet on this
machine as it is integrated into the breathing circuit toggle switch. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 121 of 1450 --

106 	Section 1: General Topics
rate should be provided to describe fully how the system is being
used [79]. The FGF rate should be expressed in mL/kg/min in vet-
erinary medicine owing to the vast range of patient sizes encoun-
tered. Additionally, the degree of rebreathing with breathing circuits
can be affected by other factors such as the equipment deadspace
and the patient’s respiratory pattern. Breathing systems have inten-
tionally been designed to function as rebreathing (contain means to
absorb carbon dioxide) or non-rebreathing systems (no means to
absorb carbon dioxide) and should be used in the manner for which
they were originally intended. Another way to classify or describe
breathing systems is by their means of preventing CO2 rebreathing.
A non-rebreathing system is entirely flow dependent for the pre-
vention of rebreathing of CO2 , whereas a rebreathing system is flow
independent, in that regardless of the FGF rate there should be no
rebreathing as long as all components of the system (one-way
valves, CO2 absorber) are functioning properly.
Rebreathing (circle) system
The circle system is the most commonly used rebreathing system
and will be the only one described here, although other types of
rebreathing systems have been used (e.g., to-and-fro). Descriptions
of these rarely used systems can be found in earlier editions of this
book [75]. The circle system is designed to produce a unidirectional
flow of gas through the system and has a means of absorbing carbon
dioxide from exhaled gases and its ability to remove CO 2 is inde-
pendent of the FGF rate. The components of the circle system
include a fresh gas inlet, inspiratory one-way valve, breathing tubes,
expiratory one-way valve, APL valve, reservoir bag, and carbon
dioxide absorber (see Fig. 6.38).
The FGFs used with a circle system determine the amount of
rebreathing; full rebreathing (closed), partial rebreathing (semi-
closed or low flow), and minimal rebreathing. Historically, many
terms have been applied to describe the amount of rebreathing, but
there is no universally accepted standard or description of these
terms. However, it has been suggested by several authors that the
use of the terms “open,” “semi-open,” and “semi-closed” should be
dropped to avoid confusion [80].
Full (complete) rebreathing system
This describes a circle system using flow rates equal to, or nearing,
the metabolic oxygen consumption of the patient, between 3 and
14 mL/kg/min. This is sometimes also described as a closed system,
but it may be best to avoid using such terms to avoid confusion.
Note that in a “closed system,” the APL is not normally closed, as it
could create a potentially dangerous situation (increasing pressure
within the patient circuit) should FGF rates exceed metabolic oxy-
gen requirements.
Partial rebreathing system
This generally describes a circle system using a flow rate greater than
metabolic oxygen consumption (e.g., 20 mL/kg/min) but less than
that required to prevent rebreathing. Since this is a very large range,
it is often divided arbitrarily into low flow (20–50 mL/kg/min), mid
(“so-so”) flow (50–100 mL/kg/min), and high flow (100–200 mL/kg/
min), although this is not a universally accepted description.
Non-(minimal) rebreathing system
This describes a circle system using flow rates greater than 200 mL/
kg/min (flow rates that would normally not be used in most cir-
cumstances). Such unusually high flow rates may result when circle
systems are used for maintenance of anesthesia in very small
patients (< 5 kg) with flow rates of 1000 mL/min or greater.
Frequently in veterinary medicine, it is suggested that flow rates
below 1000 mL/min should not be used. Although this recommen-
dation may be clinically useful for preventing some anesthetic
delivery errors, most modern anesthetic systems (i.e., vaporizers)
continue to function optimally down to flow rates of 200–500 mL/
min. With the availability of low-volume, low-deadspace pediatric
and neonatal circle systems, coupled with improved patient moni-
toring (pulse oximetry and end-tidal carbon dioxide), it is common
to use circle systems with partial rebreathing flow rates
(i.e., < 1000 mL/min) in small patients (< 5 kg).
It is most economical in terms of both oxygen and inhalant anes-
thetic use to employ low flow rates when possible. Lower flow rates
are also associated with less environmental contamination by halo-
genated hydrocarbons (all commonly available inhaled anesthetics)
and marginally improved maintenance of body temperature.
However, lower flow rates are also associated with decreased anes-
thetic gas delivery (unless higher vaporizer settings are utilized).
Additionally, when low carrier gas flows are used (relative to the
volume of the circuit), the time required to change the anesthetic
concentration within the circuit significantly increases.
Most inhalant anesthetics are delivered initially using relatively
high FGF rates (e.g., 50–100 mL/kg/min for dogs) to facilitate rapid
increases in the inspired inhalant concentration within the breath-
ing system and to replace the anesthetic vapor that is dissolving into
patient tissues during the initial uptake period of inhalant anesthe-
sia delivery. The flow rates are then decreased (e.g., to 20–50 mL/
kg/min for dogs) after the initial uptake period (e.g., the first
10–20 min) to economize on gas use and waste. The initial and
maintenance recommended flow rates (mL/kg/min) often used
clinically tend to be much higher in smaller patients (e.g., cats) rela-
tive to larger patients (e.g., horses). Using higher flow rates ensures
that the patient’s inspired gas concentration is more reflective of the
concentration of anesthetic gas delivered from the vaporizer. This is
in contrast to using low FGF rates, where the inspired patient anes-
thetic concentration will not necessarily reflect the vaporizer con-
centration of gas until nearing equilibration. The use of anesthetic
agent analyzers to monitor inspired and expired anesthetic partial
pressures greatly facilitates decision-making with respect to vapor-
izer settings and timing changes in gas flows when using lower car-
rier gas flows. The interaction between the vaporizer output, circuit
volume, patient size, and flow rate is often an unfamiliar and diffi-
cult concept to grasp. Equating anesthetic delivery to a constant rate
infusion of an intravenous drug is perhaps a more familiar com-
parison for understanding inhalant anesthetic delivery.
The configuration and features of available circle systems vary
somewhat depending upon the manufacturer, but in general,
a common pattern of gas flow is followed through the fresh gas
inlet, the inspiratory one-way valve, the inspiratory and expiratory
breathing tubes (into and out of patient), the expiratory one-way
valve, the APL valve, the reservoir bag, and the carbon dioxide
absorbing canister back to the fresh gas inlet (Fig. 6.59). Some circle
systems may also have additional incorporated features such as
a switch to automatically engage the mechanical ventilator and
oxygen sensor ports (Fig. 6.60).
Fresh gas inlet
The fresh gas inlet is the site of gas delivery to the circle system from
the common gas outlet of the anesthetic machine. The fresh gas
inlet is normally found after the carbon dioxide absorber and before
the inspiratory one-way valve.

-- 122 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	107
Inspiratory one-way valve
During inspiration, the inspiratory one-way valve opens, allowing
gas to move from the fresh gas inlet and reservoir bag past through
the one-way inspiratory valve into the inspiratory limb of the
breathing circuit. These valves normally consist of a clear dome (for
direct visualization of valve function), a light-weight valve, and a
valve housing (valve seat and valve guides). The valves are nor-
mally accessible for cleaning and repair through a removable cover.
During expiration, the inspiratory valve is closed, preventing
exhaled gas from entering the inspiratory limb of the breathing cir-
cuit, and forcing it into the expiratory limb of the breathing circuit.
At least one system (Matrx® circle system, Midmark Animal Health,
Versailles, OH, USA) also incorporates a negative-pressure relief
valve, providing an alternative path of gas flow (room air) to the
patient should the inspiratory valve become stuck in the closed
position (Fig. 6.61).
Breathing circuit tubing
The most basic breathing circuit is made up of a corrugated
plastic or rubber inspiratory and expiratory limbs. The corrugated
tubing helps prevent kinking and allows for some expansion if the
breathing circuit is subjected to compression or traction. The two
breathing limbs are connected via a Y-piece that connects to the
endotracheal tube or facemask. There are also various coaxial
designs that place the inspiratory limb within the expiratory limb of
the breathing circuit. Coaxial systems reduce the bulk associated
with the breathing system and (at least theoretically) facilitate
warming the inspired gases by the expired gases. The Universal
F-circuit (a coaxial breathing system) is designed to function
with standard circle systems (e.g., 22 mm OD connectors of the
circle system). Most breathing circuits are adapted for use with all
circle systems as the fitting diameters are standardized. However,
there is a proprietary coaxial circuit available that utilizes non-
standard-sized circle system connectors requiring the use of a
proprietary circle system (Moduflex Coaxial Breathing Circuit,
Dispomed, Joliette, QC, Canada). There are also several sizes of
breathing circuits available that vary in length, diameter, volume,
and the amount of deadspace to meet various anesthetic require-
ments. Pediatric and neonatal rebreathing circuits are normally
low-volume and low-deadspace systems, allowing them to function
optimally in small patients (i.e., those with small tidal volumes)
(Fig. 6.62).
Figure 6.60 An example of a circle breathing system on an anesthetic
machine with a built-in ventilator that uses a switch to engage the
ventilator circuit. This can minimize the potential for misconnections,
disconnections, or kinked hoses during ventilator set up. Source: Dr. Craig
Mosley, with permission.
Figure 6.59 Examples of various circle rebreathing circuits used in veterinary medicine. The degree of integration into the anesthetic machine and added
details vary markedly among manufacturers but the essential features and functions are similar. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 123 of 1450 --

108 	Section 1: General Topics
Expiratory one-way valve
The expiratory one-way valve functions together with the inspira-
tory one-way valve, closing upon inspiration and opening during
expiration. This valve helps direct gas into the expiratory limb of
the breathing system, through the expiratory valve, and into the res-
ervoir bag.
Reservoir bag
The reservoir bag is also referred to as a “breathing bag” or
“rebreathing bag”. The purpose of the reservoir bag is to provide a
compliant reservoir of gas that can rapidly change volume with the
patient’s expiration and inspiration. It is commonly recommended
that the reservoir bag has a volume that is approximately 5–10 times
the patient’s normal tidal volume (10–20 mL/kg) or roughly equiva-
lent to the patient’s minute volume. Ultimately, the reservoir bag
should be large enough to provide a reasonably sized reservoir of
gas but not so large that it becomes difficult to observe movements
of the bag associated with breathing. In addition, a very large reser-
voir bag will contribute to the overall functional volume of the
rebreathing system (i.e., circle system), contributing to slower rates
of change in anesthetic concentration within the breathing system
when the vaporizer output is altered. This would not be the case
when using a non-rebreathing system.
Adjustable pressure-limiting valve
The APL valve is also commonly referred to as the “overflow,”
“pop- off,” or “pressure relief valve.” The APL valve is a safety valve
allowing excess gas to escape from the patient circuit. If the valve is
functioning properly, gas should escape if system pressures exceed
1–3 cmH2 O. Normally, it should be left fully open at all times unless
positive-pressure ventilation is being used, and then it should be
immediately reopened when ventilation ceases to prevent excessive
pressure from building in the patient circuit. The APL valve is par-
tially closed in some instances to prevent collapse of the reservoir
bag due to the negative pressure/vacuum from the scavenge system.
Although this can remedy the situation, it is strongly discouraged as
it can lead to partial or full closure of the valve, leading to excessive
pressure building up in the patient circuit. If the reservoir bag
continually collapses under normal use, this indicates the need
to adjust the central vacuum/scavenge system and or the need to
incorporate a properly functioning scavenge interface to offset this
effect.
Several manufacturers market products that allow intermittent
closure of the APL system. These devices allow temporary closure
of outflow to the scavenge system when a button or the valve itself
Figure 6.61 Examples of negative-pressure relief valves that are incorporated into some circle systems. Should the inspiratory valve become occluded or
stuck, the negative-pressure relief valve is activated, allowing the patient in inhale air from the room.
Figure 6.62 The Y-piece of three different-sized circle system circuits
demonstrating the difference in deadspace. Circle system circuits are
commonly available in neonatal/pediatric and adult configurations
(middle and right, respectively). The system on the left is a veterinary-
specific circuit designed specifically for very small patients and has
minimal deadspace associated with its use. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley,
with permission.

-- 124 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	109
is depressed. These momentary closure systems are built directly
into some APL valves or can be added to currently used APL
valves (Fig. 6.63). These are extremely valuable additions to the
APL valve system and help to prevent excessive pressure associ-
ated with an inadvertently closed APL valve that can lead to
patient barotrauma or death. They also greatly facilitate the ease
and safety of manual IPPV.
Carbon dioxide absorber
The carbon dioxide absorber contains the chemical absorbent for
removing carbon dioxide from exhaled gases. There are many types
(dual canister, disposable, etc.) and sizes of carbon dioxide absorb-
ers available (Fig. 6.64). All contain some type of screen to prevent
absorbent granules from entering the breathing circuit and most
contain a baffling system to prevent channeling of gases within the
absorber canister. However, despite the screens, the absorbent gran-
ules and/or dust will occasionally enter the breathing circuit. This is
probably most commonly encountered in large animal systems,
where relatively high peak flows of gas (associated with inspiration
and expiration) are more common. Gas flow patterns within canis-
ters vary considerably, but canister design normally attempts to
ensure optimal and efficient absorbent use.
It is frequently suggested in veterinary medicine that the absorber
canister must be twice the patient’s tidal volume to ensure complete
absorption of carbon dioxide, but there seems to be little evidence to
support this statement. Most large animal machine canisters rarely
(C)
(A) 	(B)
Figure 6.63 A. An example of a momentary closure valve built into the adjustable pressure-limiting (APL) valve. B. Momentary closure valve that can be
added to any standard APL valve. C. Demonstration of the use of a momentary occlusion valve to deliver a breath to a patient. Source: part A., Supera
Anesthesia Innovations, Clackamas, OR, USA; with permission. Source: Parts B. and C., Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 125 of 1450 --

110 	Section 1: General Topics
have a volume equal to twice the patient’s tidal volume and may in
fact have a volume less than the patient’s tidal volume. Moreover,
many carbon dioxide absorbers used in human anesthetic machines
have volumes less than the patient’s tidal volume. Smaller canisters
are often preferred to ensure more frequent changing of the
absorbent, lessening the likelihood that toxic byproducts will be
produced by desiccated absorbent. However, the relative efficiency
of absorption (i.e., the carbon dioxide load absorbed when an absor-
bent appears exhausted) may improve with larger carbon dioxide
absorbers [4]. Smaller carbon dioxide absorbers will reduce the
internal volume of the breathing circuit, leading to vaporizer con-
centration changes being reflected more rapidly in the inspired gas
concentration, but will require more frequent absorbent changes.
Carbon dioxide absorbents
The basic chemistry of carbon dioxide (CO2
) absorbents relies on
an exothermic reaction combining CO 2 with calcium hydroxide
(Ca(OH) 2
) to form calcium carbonate (CaCO3
) and water (H2
O).
Strong bases such as the metal hydroxides, sodium hydroxide
(NaOH), potassium hydroxide (KOH), and barium hydroxide
(BaOH), are added as catalysts to enhance the speed of the reaction
and to increase the capacity to absorb CO 2
. Absorbent brands are
largely distinguished by the type and relative concentrations
(3–20%) of strong bases (metal hydroxides) added to the Ca(OH) 2
.
There is also at least one absorbent, Amsorb® Plus (Armstrong
Medical, Londonderry, UK) that contains no strong base.
The general chemical reaction when the strong base NaOH is
present as the catalyst is as follows.
CO 	H O 	H CO	2 	2 	2 	3	�	 	(6.1)
H CO 	NaOH 	Na CO 	H O + energy	2 	3 	2 	3 	2	2 	2 	(6.2)
Na CO 	Ca OH 	CaCO 	2NaOH	2 	3 	2 	3 	(6.3)
The general chemical reaction when no strong base (metal
hydroxide) is added. The general chemical reaction when no strong
base (metal hydroxide) is added is as follows:
CO 	H O 	H CO	2 	2 	2 	3	�	 	(6.1)
H CO 	Ca OH 	CaCO 	2H O 	energy	2 	3 	2 	3 	2 	(6.4)
It is important to note that moisture is essential to the reaction
allowing gaseous CO2 to form carbonic acid (H2
CO3
) (eqn 6.1) so
that it can react with Ca(OH)2
.
With the introduction of sevoflurane and desflurane in the early
1990s, it was discovered that both of these agents had the capacity
to interact with CO 2 absorbents. Sevoflurane was found to interact
and produce compound A, which was shown to be nephrotoxic
in rats. Although compound A from sevoflurane use was never,
and has never, been reported to cause a clinical problem in
humans [81,82], many labels have nonetheless adopted the recom-
mendation to maintain a minimum FGF of 2 L/min, thereby mak-
ing its use in low-flow anesthesia unfeasible as per label guidelines.
Desflurane was found to produce unacceptably high carbon mon-
oxide (CO) concentrations, particularly in the presence of desic-
cated absorbents, so the general recommendation made was to use
fresh absorbents (i.e., change them often) and use flow rates greater
than 2–3 L/min [83,84]. Again, this makes using desflurane in a
low-flow environment controversial. Further study identified that
absorbents containing only Ca(OH) 2 were not associated with sig-
nificant compound A or CO production leading to speculation
that it is the added catalyst or strong base that leads to the produc-
tion of undesirable byproducts [85]. However, the absorptive
capacity of Ca(OH) 2 only absorbents (Amsorb®, Armstrong
Medical, Londonberry, UK) was found to be 15–50% lower than
those containing a strong base [85,86]. However, by adding small
amounts of calcium chloride (2.0–3.5%) and calcium sulfate (0.6–
1.5%) to the formulation, these limitations have been largely over-
come by helping to increase CO 2 absorptive capacity and speeding
the absorptive reaction [87]. Many current absorbents are either
strong base free (Amsorb® Plus, Armstrong Medical, Londonberry,
UK) with no risk for the production of toxic byproducts or they
limit the amount of strong base (typically NaOH) to less than 3%
to minimize the potential for the production of toxic byproducts.
However, it appears that optimally those with concentrations of
NaOH less than 2% (Sodasorb® LF, Molecular Products, Louisville,
CO, USA; Drägersorb Free and Drägersorb 800, Dräger Medical,
Lubeck, Germany; Medisorb, CareFusion, Helsinki, Finland) are
preferred to avoid risks associated with compound A and CO pro-
duction. The use of KOH and BaOH as catalysts seems increas-
ingly uncommon in most commercially available products. There
is also a newer product using solid absorbent technology
(SpiraLith® Ca, Micropore Inc, Elkton, USA), where the Ca(OH) 2
is embedded on a solid polymer producing a non-granular dust-
free product. However, this product is only available for use with
modern human anesthetic machines with swappable absorbent
canisters.
When in continuous use, the absorbents may appear exhausted
(i.e., indicator color change) before the absorption capacity of the
granules is exceeded. Granules normally turn from white to purple
or pink as they become exhausted depending upon the indicator
used. Ethyl violet (purple) and phenolphthalein (red) are pH-
sensitive indicators commonly added to the granules to help iden-
tify absorbent exhaustion. The color change should not be used as
the only indicator of absorbent exhaustion. It is common for absor-
bent that has changed color to turn back to white if allowed to stand
unused for several hours. Fresh absorbent is normally easily crum-
bled under pressure, whereas used absorbent becomes hard (cal-
cium carbonate). Additionally, since the reaction of carbon dioxide
absorption produces heat and moisture, the activity of the absor-
bent may be evaluated by looking for evidence of both heat and
moisture development within the canister. Also, where available,
capnography can be used to detect absorbent exhaustion. The rate
Figure 6.64 Three different absorber canisters. The canister on the far
left is a bulk flow-through type canister where the exhaled gas from the
patient circuit enters one side (i.e., top) of the canister and exits the other
(i.e., bottom) upon inspiration. The two canisters on the right utilize a
conducting tube to direct the exhaled or inhaled gases in a predictable
pattern through the canister. Gas must enter and exit the canister from the
same opening (i.e., the top) through different paths. Source: Dr. Craig
Mosley, with permission.

-- 126 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	111
of absorbent exhaustion will be determined by the size of the patient
(CO2 production) and the rate of FGF (mL/kg/min). Absorbent
exhaustion will occur faster in larger patients and when low FGF
rates are used. The absorbent canister should be filled carefully to
avoid overfilling, packing granules in the canister, and spilling gran-
ules into the breathing system.
Non-rebreathing systems
Non-rebreathing systems are characterized by the absence of unidi-
rectional valves and a carbon dioxide absorber. Rather than relying
on carbon dioxide absorption for removal of CO2
, these systems
depend on high FGF rates to flush CO2 from the circuit, dependent
on the FGF rate. Non-rebreathing systems are normally reserved for
patients under 10 kg as they are far less economical in larger patients
owing to the use of high FGF rates required to prevent rebreathing of
CO2
. Recommended flow rates to minimize the rebreathing of
expired CO2 range from 130 to 300 mL/kg/min, although values as
high as 600 mL/kg/min have been recommended. The wide range of
recommended flow rates is the result of the fact that in addition to
the FGF rate, the patient’s intrinsic respiratory pattern will influence
if rebreathing occurs (discussed later).
Non-rebreathing systems have historically been recommended,
somewhat arbitrarily, for use in all patients less than 5 kg, citing
lower resistance during breathing, less equipment deadspace, and
smaller total circuit volume. However, by using newer pediatric,
neonatal, and small patient-specific rebreathing circuits, many of
the advantages normally associated with non-rebreathing systems
are negated and it is possible to maintain patients less than 5 kg
safely using rebreathing systems provided that the patient’s tidal
volume is adequate to actuate the unidirectional valves. Small
patient-specific circuits generally have no more, and in some cases
less, deadspace and total volume than standard non-rebreathing
systems (Fig. 6.62). Resistance to breathing is often cited as a reason
for selecting non-rebreathing systems over circle systems, as the
valves and carbon dioxide absorbent can increase the work of
breathing. This is a highly over used and simplified concept as the
relationship of resistance to work of breathing is complex and mul-
tifactorial with inspiratory/expiratory rates, FGFs, and endotra-
cheal tube diameter and length all playing roles in the overall
resistance to a patient breathing. Many studies make resistance
claims simply by measuring the resistance of a given breathing sys-
tem at the circuit adapter but in reality patients are not inspiring
directly from the circuit but rather the distal end of the endotra-
cheal tube attached to the circuit. In practice, it is actually the size of
the endotracheal tube that is the major factor in determining resist-
ance to breathing [88]. Hence, the resistance to breathing argument
for selecting a non-rebreathing system over a rebreathing is largely
unfounded and unsubstantiated.
There is no generally accepted or agreed upon minimum patient
size for using a rebreathing system among anesthesiologists. The
minimum patient size generally ranges between 3 and 7 kg, although
individual anesthetists may choose patient sizes outside this range
depending upon equipment, monitoring available (e.g., capnogra-
phy for evaluation of rebreathing), and intended ventilation mode
(spontaneous versus controlled).
Although the Mapleson system for classification of anesthetic
breathing circuits was once popular, it has little relevance for today’s
commonly used non-rebreathing circuits, and diagrams are
included here only for reference (Fig. 6.65 and Table 6.3). Although
there are often three or more non-rebreathing systems commonly
described for use in veterinary medicine in North America, all are
nearly functionally identical and based on two of the six historically
described Mapleson systems: D and F (see Fig. 6.66).
The non-rebreathing system includes a fresh gas-conducting
hose, patient connection, exhalation-conducting tubing (normally
corrugated), excess gas venting system, and a reservoir bag. All
commonly used systems have the FGF entering near the patient
connection and rely on the fresh gas inflow (flow dependent) to
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
(E)
(F)
Figure 6.65 Diagrams of each of the historically described Mapleson
breathing systems (A through F). Refer to Table 6.3 for characteristics of
each system. Source: Rayburn [89]; reproduced with permission of the
American Society of Anesthesiologists.
Table 6.3 Characteristics of the Mapleson breathing systems.
Class 	Fresh gas inlet 	Overflow location 	Presence of a reservoir 	Corrugated tubing 	Example system
A 	Near the reservoir 	Near the patient 	Yes 	Yes 	Magill
B 	Near the patient 	Near the patient 	Yes 	Yes 	a
C 	Near the patient 	Near the patient 	Yes 	No 	a
D 	Near the patient 	Away from the patientb 	Yes 	Yes 	a
MDc 	Near the patient 	Away from the patient 	Yes 	Yes 	Bain
E 	Near the patient 	Away from the patient 	No 	Yes 	T-piece
F 	Near the patient 	Away from the patientb 	Yes 	Yes 	Jackson-Rees
a No system in this classification is commonly used in veterinary anesthesia.
b The overflow may be located between the reservoir and the corrugated tubing of the system.
c MD, modified Mapleson D system.

-- 127 of 1450 --

112 	Section 1: General Topics
displace the CO 2
- containing expired breath down a variable length
of conducting tubing toward the reservoir bag and ultimately into
the scavenge system. High FGFs are necessary to help minimize the
rebreathing of expired gases.
During the expiratory pause, the high FGF from the fresh gas-
conducting tube pushes the exhaled gas from the previous expira-
tion down the exhalation-conducting tube away from the patient
toward the reservoir bag. When the patient inspires, it inspires gas
coming from both the fresh gas-conducting tube and the exhalation-
conducting tube. Under normal circumstances (i.e., patient with a
normal respiratory pattern and inspiratory flow rate), the majority
of the inspired breath normally comes from the exhalation-
conducting tube. In some circumstances (i.e., patients with unusual
respiratory patterns), a patient may rebreathe exhaled gases despite
seemingly sufficient FGFs. For example, a patient breathing rapidly
may not have an expiratory pause of sufficient duration for CO 2 to
be washed distal enough from the patient end of the tube to prevent
rebreathing, particularly if a sufficiently large breath is taken. End-
tidal carbon dioxide monitoring can be useful in determining if
adequate FGFs are being used to minimize rebreathing.
The Bain and the Modified Jackson-Rees systems are probably
the names most commonly applied to non-rebreathing systems, but
they do not adequately describe the systems as they are frequently
used in veterinary medicine. Neither system is a specifically defined
system in that they are not always reliably configured in the same
manner. Based on the historical descriptions of these circuits, the
Bain circuit (based on a Mapleson D system) would have an APL
valve proximal to the reservoir bag, whereas the Modified Jackson-
Rees (based on a Mapleson F system) would have a pinch or stop-
cock valve located distal to the reservoir bag. However, both
breathing systems can be adapted for use with a mounting block
and various reservoir bag and venting system combinations, mak-
ing strict classification nearly impossible. Essentially, the main dif-
ference between how the two systems function clinically is that one
is a coaxial design (Bain) and the other is not (Modified Jackson-
Rees). Perhaps a less confusing and consistent way to classify the
commonly used non-rebreathing circuits in veterinary medicine
would be based on the configuration of the conducting tubing (i.e.,
coaxial or non-coaxial), location of scavenge system (i.e., proximal
or distal to the reservoir bag), and method of scavenging (APL
valve, pinch valve, or stopcock type valve).
The coaxial design of the Bain system reduces the overall bulk
and provides a method to potentially warm the cold-inspired gases.
Mounting blocks are convenient methods for arranging non-
rebreathing systems by providing fixed connection points for the
breathing circuit, reservoir bag, and scavenge tubing (Fig. 6.67).
The use of a mounting block minimizes the potential for miscon-
nections, disconnections, or kinked hoses. The fixed positioning
relative to the anesthetic machine also allows the anesthetist to
assess readily the integrity of all connections.
Non-rebreathing systems used without a mounting block can be
placed anywhere in the anesthetic work area and run the risk of
being covered by drapes hanging off surgical tables or being pulled
or caught by moving legs or equipment in the operating room, all
increasing the possibility of anesthetic complications. Most mount-
ing blocks also have a pressure manometer built into the system,
which is an invaluable addition enabling the user to monitor and
assess changes in airway pressure. Most non-rebreathing systems
sold to veterinarians are not configured with a pressure manometer
as part of the standard system, which, along with high FGFs and
relatively small circuit volumes, exposes patients to the potential for
accidental barotrauma. One solution to overcome this problem if a
mounting block with manometer is not available is to purchase dis-
posable pressure manometers designed for use with a resuscitation
bag. These can be easily placed within all non-rebreathing systems,
used many times over, and are an inexpensive method of evaluating
airway pressures (Fig. 6.68). Alternatively, high patient pressure
alarms are available that can be inserted into the system between
the patient and the valve used to isolate the breathing system from
the scavenge system.
Waste gas scavenge system
The scavenge system directs waste gases from the anesthetic breath-
ing circuit out of the immediate workspace and into the atmos-
phere. Ideally, the scavenge system includes the APL valve, an
interface, and a waste gas elimination system (Fig. 6.69), although it
is important to note that these components may not be found as
part of all scavenge systems. Many systems in use consist of a hose
connected to the APL valve (or other breathing circuit outlet) to a
vent leading outside the immediate work area. The waste gas elimi-
nation system may be either an active or a passive system. A passive
system does not use negative pressure (e.g., it opens to atmospheric
pressure), whereas an active system uses a slight vacuum. The type
of waste gas elimination system will determine the need and type of
waste gas interface required. Passive waste gas systems may use an
activated charcoal canister to absorb halogenated anesthetics or
they may divert the waste anesthetic gases through a short conduit
outside the work environment directly to the atmosphere.
Negative-pressure scavenge (vacuum) systems are increasingly
being used in veterinary medicine. They may be part of a surgical
vacuum (suction) system, stand-alone vacuum, fan/blower system,
or other design since there are no specific standards regarding these
systems. All negative-pressure scavenge systems require some type
of scavenge interface to operate properly and prevent the patient
airway from experiencing a vacuum. Ideally, waste gas scavenge
interfaces should have means of managing both excessive positive
and negative pressure, a reservoir system to accommodate rapid
changes in waste gas delivery to the scavenge system, and a means
of inactivating any halogenated gas that escapes the scavenge sys-
tem (Fig. 6.70). Most scavenge interfaces fail to meet all these speci-
fications under all the variable circumstances encountered during
use (e.g., high negative-pressure scavenge systems, pressure altera-
tions within the vacuum system, and marked alterations in the rate
of waste gases exhausted to the scavenge system), but most perform
adequately under normal operating conditions.
Low negative-pressure scavenge systems (blower or fan systems)
work well with most scavenge interfaces. These systems are often
dedicated to waste gas scavenge and may be centrally located or
located at the machine itself. These are often blower- or fan-driven
systems that do not maintain a steady evacuation rate (negative
pressure) at all times and in all locations. Several factors, such as the
number of sites they serve, the diameter of vacuum conduit, the
distance from the blower or fan, and the number of sites being used,
can affect evacuation rates at any given location. Higher-negative-
pressure scavenge systems are most commonly found in larger
facilities with centrally located medical vacuum systems and the
active scavenge system works off the same negative-pressure system
as used for medical suction. Although it is often seen as more con-
venient and cost-effective to use the same vacuum system for all
functions in the hospital, there are some unique challenges associ-
ated with this type of installation. Since these systems are under a

-- 128 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	113
significant amount of negative pressure relative to that needed for
scavenging, they require adjustable scavenge interfaces to regulate
the level of suction at the scavenge interface and frequent minor
adjustments to prevent the collapse of the reservoir bag of the
breathing system. Regardless of the type of scavenge system used,
canisters of activated charcoal should be available for situations
where other modes of waste anesthetic gas scavenge are not availa-
ble (e.g., when moving patients attached to the anesthetic machine,
or when working in areas without scavenging facilities).
Routine anesthesia machine checkout procedure
Routine evaluation of the anesthetic machine and associated
systems prior to and throughout the anesthetic period should be
part of every anesthetist’s standard operating procedures (SOP).
Historically, equipment failures appear to have been a relatively
common cause of anesthetic-related morbidity and mortality [2].
However, with improvements in technology and monitoring and
the adoption of universal safety standards for human anesthetic
equipment, complications related to equipment malfunctions have
been reduced. Preanesthetic equipment checkout recommenda-
tions for human anesthetic equipment have been developed in
conjunction with regulatory, industry, and anesthesia personnel
and have been published in many countries. Unfortunately, there
is no generally recognized standard for preanesthetic checkout
recommendations in veterinary medicine. However, an excellent
checklist for veterinary anesthetists developed by Hartsfield has
been proposed that is based on the United States FDA’s Center for
Devices and Radiological Health “Anesthesia Apparatus Checkout
Recommendations” [75,90]. Table 6.4 presents a modified summary
of the checklist proposed by Hartsfield.
Anesthesia ventilators
The anesthesia ventilator is designed to provide patient ventilation
in the perianesthetic period. Most anesthesia ventilators lack the
sophistication of control and function found in intensive care unit
Fresh gas flow
Fresh gas flow
Fresh gas flow
Bain with Bain mount and APL valve
(Mapleson D type configuration-coaxial)
Bain with pinch valve distal to bag
(Mapleson F type configuration-coaxial)
Modified Jackson-Rees with relief valve proximal to bag
(Mapleson D type configuration-non-coaxial)
Modified Jackson-Rees with pinch valve distal to bag
(Mapleson F type configuration-non-coaxial)
To scavenge system
To scavenge system
To scavenge system
Fresh gas flow	To scavenge system
(D)
(C)
(B)
(A)
Figure 6.66 Diagrams of the Mapleson-type systems used most commonly as the foundation for modern non-rebreathing systems. Most modern
non-rebreathing systems are modifications of the Mapleson classification and can no longer be strictly classified as one type or the other. For example, the
Bain circuit is a coaxial system based on the Mapleson D classification, but it can be configured with the exhaust gas exiting prior to the reservoir bag as
shown in A. (like Mapleson D), or after the reservoir bag as shown in B. (like Mapleson F). The Jackson-Rees circuit is a non-coaxial system that can be
configured similarly with the exhaust gas exiting before the reservoir bag as shown in C. (like Mapleson D), or after the reservoir bag as shown in D. (like
Mapleson F). Source: Dr. Kath Klassen, Douglas College, New Westminster, Canada; reproduced with permission of Dr. Klassen.

-- 129 of 1450 --

114 	Section 1: General Topics
(ICU) ventilators and work best when used to ventilate patients
with relatively normal lung function and simple ventilation needs.
However, some human- and veterinary-specific anesthesia ventila-
tors now offer features and performance rivaling those of a basic
ICU ventilator. In North America, anesthesia ventilators designed
for use in humans are subject to a series of international and
national standards, whereas ventilators designed for the veterinary
market are under no obligation to meet any similar design stand-
ards. Once again this makes it imperative that the veterinary anes-
thetist not only fully understands the physiological and practical
implications of ventilator use but is also intimately familiar with the
design, function, and troubleshooting of any ventilator used.
Classification
Ventilators are variably classified by a number of different criteria
describing their design and control. Unfortunately, there are several
inconsistencies in the use of the terminology and their definitions.
There is also no generally accepted consensus as to how to classify
anesthesia ventilators and some ventilators simply cannot be ade-
quately described using current classification schemes. For exam-
ple, some modern human anesthesia ventilators are sophisticated
processor-controlled machines capable of multiple ventilation
modes and deliver similar performance to ICU ventilators, hence
they are not easily classified using current criteria. The most com-
monly used criteria used to describe or classify ventilators include
the major control variable, the type of power source, the drive
mechanism, the cycling mechanism, and the type of bellows.
Major control variable
Most ventilators are described as pressure- or volume-controlled
ventilators. This refers to the target, preset, or limiting variable
used to determine the tidal volume delivered by the ventilator. In a
Figure 6.67 A mounting block (sometimes also referred to as a “Bain
mount” although not exclusive for use with Bain circuits only) provides
fixed connection points for the non-rebreathing circuit, the reservoir bag,
and scavenge tubing. Most also incorporate an adjustable pressure-limiting
(APL) valve and pressure gauge. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.
Figure 6.68 An example of a disposable resuscitation bag manometer that can
be adapted for use with most non-rebreathing systems. The presence of the
manometer will allow the anesthetist to evaluate better the airway pressures
within the breathing system. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.
Figure 6.69 An adjustable scavenge interface with both positive- and
negative-pressure relief functions. These types of interfaces work well with
active scavenge systems. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 130 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	115
volume-limited ventilator, the tidal volume is predetermined and
will be delivered regardless of the associated pressures required to
do so. This is not a precisely accurate statement as many ventilators
(anesthetic machines/circuits) have built-in pressure relief or alarm
systems that will activate and limit the volume delivered if exces-
sively high airway pressures are reached. Additionally, changes in
circuit and patient compliance will alter the actual tidal volume
delivered to the patient compared with the apparent tidal volume
set on the ventilator (see the later section, Factors that affect deliv-
ered tidal volume). This effect is normally negligible, as sustained
significant changes in system or patient respiratory compliance are
unlikely during a routine case. With a pressure-limited ventilator, a
peak inspiratory pressure preset is used to limit the tidal volume
delivered to the patient. The delivered volume can be affected by
changes in patient respiratory or circuit compliance/resistance,
inspiratory flow rates, leaks, inspiratory time, and the location of
the pressure sensor.
Power source
The power source typically refers to what is required to operate
a mechanical ventilator. It may be compressed gas, electricity, or
both. Although not generally accepted, it may be more useful to
classify ventilators based on what actually powers positive-pressure
ventilation: compressed gas or an electronically controlled piston.
Although historically many ventilators did not contain sophisticated
microprocessors requiring electricity and required only compressed
gas to function, most modern ventilators have some electrical com-
ponents regardless of what actually produces positive-pressure ven-
tilation. The drive mechanism normally refers more specifically to
how positive-pressure ventilation is actually produced.
Drive mechanism/circuit
Either compressed gas or an electronically driven mechanical
device, such as a piston, can drive ventilators. Ventilators using
compressed gas for power are normally referred to as “dual-circuit
ventilators,” as they have two gas circuits, one containing gas to
power the ventilator and the other containing gas being delivered to
the patient. Ventilators that do not use gas to power ventilation are
referred to as “single-circuit ventilators.” There is also at least one
commercially available ventilator design that uses compressed gas
as its power source but contains neither a bellows nor a piston and
is technically a single-circuit ventilator, the Penlon Nuffield 200
(Penlon Ltd, Abingdon, UK). However, this ventilator can also be
combined with a bellows canister system (“bag in a box”), creating
Hose to vacuum
evacuation system
Positive
pressure
relief valve
Patient circuit waste gas from
circle APL or ventilator spill valve
Scavenge inlet
Scavenge interface
Scavenge system reservoir bag
Needle valve or flow meter
to control vacuum in high
flow vacuum systems; not
found on all interfaces
Cannister containing activated charcoal
Negative
pressure
relief valve
Connection for scavenge reservoir bag or
inhalant absorbent (charcoal cannister)
Additional scavenge inlet
normally used for connecting
the scavenge from the
ventilator. Should be capped
when not being used. Not
found on all interfaces and
exact position varies.
Figure 6.70 Diagram of a scavenge interface. The exact configurations of commercially available scavenge interfaces vary considerably and may not
contain all the components shown. Source: Dr. Kath Klassen, Douglas College, New Westminster, Canada; reproduced with permission of Dr. Klassen.

-- 131 of 1450 --

116 	Section 1: General Topics
a dual- circuit ventilator. The lack of physical barrier in this design
can potentially allow mixing of gas from the circuit used to power
the ventilator with gas from the patient circuit. However, the clini-
cal significance of mixing is minimal provided that FGF rates are
suitable to ensure non-rebreathing. Any mixing between ventilator
driving gas and patient circuit gas should only involve the exhaled
patient gas being moved through the breathing circuit destined for
evacuation and collection into the scavenge system.
Cycling mechanism
“Cycling mechanism” is a term that is used to describe how a ven-
tilator cycles from inspiration to expiration and back. It is probably
also the term used most inconsistently. The cycling in most venti-
lators is determined by a timing mechanism, although in at least
one commonly used ventilator (Bird Mark series ventilators), pres-
sure rather than time can be used to cycle the ventilator. An elec-
tronic microprocessor or a fluid logic unit can control the timing
Table 6.4 Ensuring that all equipment is properly functioning is a crucial step that should be performed prior to initiating anesthesia. The proposed equipment checkout
recommendations are based on the United States FDA’s Center for Devices and Radiological Health “Anesthesia Apparatus Checkout Recommendations.”
Veterinary Anesthesia Apparatus Checkout Recommendations*
This anesthesia checkout list does not replace the experience of a knowledgeable operator continuously monitoring the anesthetic equipment. All parts of the anesthesia
machine and breathing system should be present, properly functioning, free of defects, and correctly connected. This checklist includes the assessment of automated ventilators
and patient monitors if they are present.
High-pressure system
Central gas supplies (oxygen, nitrous oxide, and air) should be adequate in quantity and pressure. The central pipeline pressure should not fluctuate and should remain at its
preset level (normally about 50 psi) when flowmeters on the anesthesia machine are adjusted to a 3–5 L/min flow rate.
Portable gas supplies (oxygen cylinders on the anesthesia machine) should be adequate in quantity and pressure. These cylinders should be evaluated for leaks. With the
flowmeter off and the cylinder valve open, there should be no audible leaks or decrease in cylinder pressure over time (i.e., 10 min).
Low-pressure system
Test the flowmeters of each gas. With the flow control off, the float should rest on the bottom of the glass tube. Adjust the flowmeter throughout its full range, the float should
move smoothly with no sticking or erratic movements.
Vaporizers should be filled, filler caps tightened, and the control dial in the off position. The inlet and outlet connections should be in place and secure.
Leak test the low-pressure system.
a. Attach a “suction bulb” to the common gas outlet.
b. Squeeze the bulb until fully collapsed.
c. Verify the bulb stays fully collapsed for at least 10 s.
d. Open each vaporizer one at a time, if more than two vaporizers, and repeat steps (b) and (c) with each vaporizer.
Scavenge system
Ensure proper connection between the scavenge system and the APL valve.
Adjust the waste gas vacuum flow, if possible, to meet the needs of the individual case.
With the APL fully open and the patient port occluded.
a. Allow the scavenge reservoir back to fully collapse and verify that the circuit pressure gauge reads about zero.
b. With the oxygen flush valve activated, allow the scavenge reservoir bag to distend fully and then verify that the circuit pressure gauge reads less than 10 cmH2
O.
If the scavenge system involves a charcoal canister, the quality of the charcoal absorbent should be assessed.
Breathing system
Rebreathing (circle) system
Ensure the selected circuit and reservoir bag size are appropriate for the patient.
Check the breathing system is complete, undamaged, and unobstructed.
Verify that the carbon dioxide absorbent is adequate.
Perform a leak test of the breathing system.
a. Set all gas flows to zero (or minimum).
b. Close the APL valve and occlude the Y-piece.
c. Pressurize the breathing system using the flush valve to a pressure of about 30 cmH2
O.
d. Ensure the pressure remains fixed for at least 10 s. Alternatively, the leak rate required to maintain at 30 cmH2
O should be less than 300 mL/min.
e. Open the APL and ensure the pressure decreases appropriately.
Non-rebreathing system
Ensure the selected circuit and reservoir bag size are appropriate for the patient.
Check the breathing system is complete, undamaged, and unobstructed.
Perform a leak test of the breathing system.
a. Set all gas flows to zero (or minimum).
b. Close the APL valve and occlude the patient port.
c. Pressurize the breathing system using the flush valve to a pressure of about 30 cmH2
O. If there is no pressure gauge associated with the breathing system, the reservoir bag
should remain fully distended with no loss of pressure.
d. For Bain systems (coaxial Mapleson D), the integrity of the inner tube should be evaluated. With the flowmeter set to 1 L/min, the inner tube should be briefly occluded, and
the float of the flowmeter should fall to near zero.
e. Open the APL valve and ensure the pressure decreases appropriately.
Ventilator
Place a second reservoir bag on the patient circuit, appropriate for the size of the patient.
Set the appropriate ventilator parameters for the patient.
Connect the ventilator as directed by the manufacturer and fill the bellows and reservoir bag using the flush valve.
Turn the ventilator on and ensure adequate tidal volumes are delivered and that during expiration the bellows fill completely.
Check for the proper action of the unidirectional valves of the circle, if applicable.
Manipulate ventilation parameters to ensure all are functioning normally.
Turn off the ventilator and disconnect as directed by the manufacturer.
Monitors
Ensure all cables and connectors are present.
Ensure all alarms are appropriately set.
* Owing to the significant variability and lack of standards among veterinary anesthesia equipment, not all checkout procedures will apply to all anesthetic machines.

-- 132 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	117
mechanism. Electronic timing mechanisms dominate current
ventilators, although some fluid logic control systems are still pro-
duced. Before the advent of readily available microprocessors and
electronics, fluid logic control was popular and can be found on
many older ventilators still in use today (e.g., Air-Shields, Ohio
V5A, and Metomatic). Electronic microprocessor units essentially
open and close valves allowing gas to drive the ventilator or, in the
case of a piston design, they activate movement of the piston. Fluid
logic units work through use of compressed gas, normally at a con-
stant pressure, to activate timing valves for inspiration and expira-
tion. The amount of gas needed to activate these timing valves and
hence inspiratory and expiratory times can be altered by increasing
or decreasing the flow of gas into the timing valve, producing
shorter or longer activation times. Ultimately, these valves are
opened and closed by changes in gas pressure within the timing
valves and it is likely this fact that has led to some confusion and
misuse of terminology. Although pressure changes are used to acti-
vate the inspiratory and expiratory timers, these ventilators are
strictly still time cycled with pressure being used to produce pre-
dictable fluid timers. The term “pressure cycled” should be
reserved for those ventilators where pressure within the patient
circuit is responsible for cycling the ventilator. The Bird Mark
series of ventilators can be pressure cycled. The timing for inspira-
tion in these ventilators is a function of the duration of time
required to attain a specific pressure within the patient circuit dur-
ing positive-pressure ventilation. The cycling duration can be
modified by gas flow rates driving the ventilator and changes in
patient lung compliance. When using these ventilators, the inspira-
tion will continue until a specific pressure threshold is achieved
regardless of the time required to achieve the pressure. The term
“volume cycled” has been applied to anesthesia ventilators; how-
ever, timing mechanisms are generally the foundation of these ven-
tilators and the term “volume cycled” should be reserved for
describing a specific mode of ventilation normally possible only
using an ICU-type ventilator and some advanced anesthesia venti-
lators equipped with spirometry and microprocessors capable of
compensating for tidal volume changes caused by changes in lung
and circuit compliance. The use of the terms “pressure cycled” and
“volume cycled” should not be confused with the terms “pressure
limited” and “volume limited,” which are used to describe the prin-
cipal factors that limit the tidal volume delivered to a patient. In
essence, all time-cycled ventilators are volume limited, and only
pressure-cycled ventilators are pressure-limited.
Bellows
If a ventilator has a bellows, they can be classified as ascending or
descending. This terminology refers to the direction of the bellows
during expiration and often creates confusion. The terms “stand-
ing” and “hanging” are perhaps more intuitive and are used to
describe the ascending and descending bellows configuration,
respectively. This then refers to the position of the bellows during
the expiratory pause or prior to the initiation of ventilation.
Introduction to single- and dual- circuit ventilators
Most anesthesia ventilators used in veterinary medicine are elec-
tronically time-cycled ventilators and can be classified as either a
dual-circuit gas-driven ventilator or single-circuit piston-driven
ventilator. However, there are at least two compressed gas-powered
ventilators that can be used as both dual- and single-circuit ventila-
tors, depending upon how they are configured. They will be dis-
cussed separately later (see Single-circuit compressed gas-powered
ventilators). It is important to note that the use of the term “single-
circuit ventilator” by itself can be misleading. Historically, it has
been used to describe ventilators using two gases (ventilator driving
gas and patient circuit gas) that operate within a single circuit (i.e.,
there is no physical barrier between the gases). In this situation,
there is the possibility of ventilator driving gas mixing with gas in
the patient circuit. It is therefore more descriptive to include the
terms “piston-driven” or “compressed gas–driven” when using the
term “single circuit” to describe veterinary ventilators.
The anesthesia ventilator normally replaces the reservoir bag
and APL valve of the anesthesia machine with a bellows (or piston
chamber) and spill valve (i.e., dump or relief valve), respectively,
but even here, there are exceptions in ventilator design and use.
One manufacturer’s design does not replace the reservoir bag and
APL valve of the anesthetic machine but instead it is simply added
to the patient circuit (Merlin, Vetronic Services, Abbotskerswell,
Devon, UK).
Single-circuit piston-driven ventilators
Piston-driven ventilators use electronically controlled pistons to
compress gas in the breathing circuit. The use of an electronically
controlled piston eliminates the need for a second circuit (i.e., the
driving gas), and this typically enables the ventilator to deliver tidal
volumes more precisely since it will not be influenced by the pres-
ence of a compressible driving gas. Piston-driven ventilators are
also more efficient in terms of gas use since additional gas is not
required to drive the ventilator and they are normally controlled by
sophisticated electronics that can provide more advanced modes of
ventilation and cycling options. Electrical power is used to raise and
lower the piston using a servomotor and ball screw assembly (linear
actuator). Piston-driven ventilators can offer the user a very wide
range of sophisticated ventilation options typically unavailable
using common dual-circuit ventilators.
Each piston-driven ventilator is unique in its specific design, but
most will share some of the following features: a cylinder, piston,
linear actuator, rolling diaphragms, and positive/negative-pressure
relief valves. The exact configuration of each component and mech-
anism for facilitating expiration and spontaneous breathing will
vary among manufacturers. The Tafonius large animal anesthetic
workstation ventilator (Hallowell EMC, Pittsfield, MA, USA) is a
veterinary-specific piston-driven ventilator and will be used as an
example for describing the operation of a piston-driven anesthetic
ventilator. Descriptions of other piston-driven ventilators designed
for human use such as the Dräger Apollo, Divan, or Fabius GS ven-
tilator are available elsewhere [91].
There are two rolling diaphragms that seal the piston of the
Tafonius ventilator to prevent mixing of ambient and patient circuit
gas (Fig. 6.71). The lower diaphragm seals the breathing gas below
the piston in the breathing system. The upper diaphragm seals the
upper side of the lower diaphragm from ambient air, creating a
space between the two diaphragms. A vacuum is applied to this
space that holds the two diaphragms tightly against the piston and
cylinder walls. As the piston is actuated, it moves downward and
the space below the lower diaphragm decreases, forcing gas into the
patient’s lungs; at the end of inspiration the patient exhales and
the piston rises. During controlled ventilation, the piston drives the
inspiration according to the ventilator settings. When the patient
expires, the piston moves in response to the measured airway pres-
sure, measured at the patient Y-piece. When the airway pressure
increases by 0.5 cmH2
O, the piston is moved up enough to bring the
airway pressure back to zero. This correction is made every 5 ms

-- 133 of 1450 --

118 	Section 1: General Topics
(200 times/s). This ensures that, unless desired, there is no resist-
ance to exhalation (i.e., positive end-expiratory pressure [PEEP]).
Most standard standing bellows will have mandatory PEEP
(2–4 cmH2
O) due to the design of the ventilator spill valve that is
required to compensate for the weight of the bellows. During spon-
taneous breathing, the piston moves both upwards (expiration) and
downwards (inspiration) in response to changes in measured air-
way pressure, ensuring that the airway pressure is maintained near
zero. Expiration will occur as noted above, while conversely during
inspiration when the airway pressure decreases by 0.5 cmH2 O, the
piston will move down enough to bring the airway pressure back to
zero. Electronic positive and negative relief valves are located at the
scavenge manifold to protect against excessive positive or negative
pressure within the patient circuit.
Single-circuit compressed gas- powered ventilators
There are at least two compressed gas-powered ventilators available
in veterinary anesthesia that can be configured as single-circuit ven-
tilators: Bird Mark series ventilators and Penlon Nuffield 200 venti-
lators (Fig. 6.72). When used as a single-circuit ventilator, there is no
physical barrier between the gas that drives ventilation and the gas in
the patient circuit. However, these ventilators do have two separate
Lower rolling
diaphragm
Vacuum holds
silicon rolling
diaphragm
firmly against
cylinder and
piston walls
Upper rolling
diaphragm
Expiratory
gas flow
	Inspiratory
gas flow
Linear actuator
Piston
Absorber pan
Lower respiratory
chamber
(Patient circuit gas)
Figure 6.71 Configuration of a piston-driven ventilator (Tafonius rolling diaphragm system) during inspiration (left) and expiration (right),
demonstrating various features and general principles of operation. Source: Hallowell EMC, Pittsfield, MA, USA; modified with permission.
(A) 	(B)
Figure 6.72 Examples of compressed gas-powered ventilators. A. Bird respirator. B. Penlon Nuffield 200 ventilator. They can be used as single- and
dual-circuit ventilators, although the latter configuration is by far the most commonly used and most intuitive configuration. The patient valve, located on
the bottom of the Penlon Nuffield ventilator, acts as a connection point for the ventilator drive gas controlled by the control unit, the conducting hose to
the patient circuit (black corrugated tube), and the spill valve to the scavenge. Drive gas is delivered to this valve during inspiration pushing gas toward the
patient. During expiration, the valve opens allowing excess gas to spill into the scavenge system. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 134 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	119
gas “circuits,” the ventilator driving gas and the patient circuit gas,
hence the use of the term “single circuit” is slightly misleading. The
patient gas and the ventilator driving gas simply move within (or
share) the same continuous circuit, with no physical barrier between
the ventilator drive gas and the patient gas. Hence, they operate
within a single physically uninterrupted gas circuit. It is important to
note that the Bird Mark respirator and Penlon Nuffield 200 are com-
monly used as dual-circuit ventilators by combining them with bel-
lows in a canister (“bag in a box”), as described later. A gas-powered
single-circuit ventilator should only be used with non-rebreathing
flow rates (and non-rebreathing circuits Mapleson D or F) to prevent
contamination of the patient circuit with ventilator drive gas. As
non-rebreathing flow rates are required, these types of ventilator
configurations are best suited for use in smaller patients, although it
is possible to ventilate larger patients requiring tidal volumes of
approximately 1000 mL, but the efficiency of gas (oxygen and inhal-
ant) consumption required is markedly reduced.
The Penlon Nuffield 200 ventilator is marketed and described as
a single-circuit ventilator (see Fig. 6.72B). The ventilator is con-
nected to the bag mount of the circuit by a long, corrugated tube
that acts as a “reservoir,” replacing the reservoir bag. The ventilator
drive gas moves “to and from” the patient through this tube. The
patient’s exhaled gases will also move through this tube and will be
scavenged from a so-called “patient” valve. The patient valve acts as
a spill valve, allowing all excess gas – the drive gas from the ventila-
tor, exhaled gas from the patient, and any excess FGF – to leave the
system. The ventilator drive gas and the patient gas move within
the same circuit without any physical separation, hence the term
“single circuit.” During inspiration, the patient valve closes, forcing
the ventilatordriving gas into the “reservoir” tube, compressing the
circuit gas back toward the patient, leading to inspiration. During
the expiratory pause, the patient valve opens, allowing the ventila-
tor driving gas to exit the system immediately as the pressure within
the circuit drops back to zero. This gas is followed by the exhaled
gas of the patient being pushed away from the patient as a result of
the non-rebreathing FGF being delivered to the patient circuit. The
FGF rate must be sufficiently high to prevent rebreathing of expired
gases (i.e., a volume of fresh gas greater than or matching the
patient’s tidal volume must be delivered to the circuit during each
respiratory cycle in order to minimize rebreathing of CO2
). The
tidal volume is created by the combined effect of the volume of
drive gas delivered by the ventilator and the volume of FGF entering
the circuit during inspiration.
Dual- circuit ventilators
Dual-circuit ventilators have a physical separation between the
ventilator driving gas and the patient circuit gas. Dual-circuit venti-
lators comprises the bellows assembly and the control mechanism
for the drive gas. The control mechanism is normally an electronic
microprocessor in most modern ventilators, but some older ventila-
tors used fluid logic units to control the drive gas. The bellows
assembly replaces the reservoir bag and APL valve and comprises
the following components: bellows, housing, housing exhaust valve,
spill valve, and ventilator hose connection (Fig. 6.73).
The primary circuit is continuous with the patient circuit and
consists of the bellows and the spill valve. The second circuit con-
tains the driving gas used to compress the bellows. The breathing
circuit and the driving gas circuit are not connected or continuous;
the bellows acts as a compliant barrier between these two circuits.
Drive gas is allowed into the bellows housing for a specific period of
time and delivered at a specified rate; during this time, the housing
exhaust valve is closed, causing compression of the bellows and
closing the spill valve. This forces gas inside the bellows to move
toward the patient’s lungs, expanding the chest. During expiration,
the driving gas is discontinued (the housing pressure and conse-
quently the patient circuit pressure drop) and the gas in the bellows
housing is allowed to escape from an exhaust valve, allowing the
patient to exhale passively into the bellows. The spill valve reopens,
allowing excess FGF from the patient circuit to escape, preventing
pressure from building up within the patient circuit. Although there
are specific design differences in the way these functions are accom-
plished among dual-circuit ventilators, the general principles are
similar.
Bellows configuration
The bellows is an accordion-like device attached to either the top or
bottom of the bellows assembly. Anesthesia ventilators can be con-
figured with ascending (standing) or descending (hanging) bellows
(Fig. 6.74). The terms “ascending” and “descending” refer to the
direction in which the bellows moves during exhalation and have
been used historically to describe the orientation of the bellows.
However, it is becoming increasingly common to replace these
terms with “standing” (ascending) or “hanging” (descending) to
describe the position of the bellows during the expiratory pause;
this is often considered a more intuitive description of the configu-
ration of the bellows. The vast majority of modern ventilators use a
standing (ascending) bellows configuration where the bellows
moves toward the base of the ventilator during inspiration and
expand upward during exhalation. The tidal volume may be set by
adjusting the inspiratory time and/or flow rate, or by a plate or
other limiting device that limits the upward excursion of the bel-
lows (see Fig. 6.73).
The spill valves on ventilators with standing bellows normally
pose slight resistance (2–4 cmH 2 O) to opening, thus creating
slight PEEP in the system. This is to counteract the tendency of
the bellows to collapse due to their weight and elastic nature. In
the case of very large and heavy bellows, this may have the effect
of producing a clinically relevant amount of PEEP. In some cases,
this may be considered desirable, but at least one manufacturer
has developed a method to overcome this PEEP effect by provid-
ing the option of applying a slight vacuum to the interior of the
bellows housing. A desirable feature of the standing bellows con-
figuration is that should a leak occur in the breathing system, the
bellows will fail to expand fully and progressively collapse during
the expiratory pause. A leak can be readily detected by an obser-
vant anesthetist.
The hanging (descending) bellows is attached to the top of the
ventilator assembly and is compressed upwards during inspiration.
During exhalation, the bellows descends passively, facilitated by a
weight placed in the dependent portion of the bellows. As the bel-
lows descends, it can cause a slight negative pressure in the bellows
and breathing system. If a leak or disconnection develops in the
breathing system, the weight of the bellows will cause the bellow to
expand normally, drawing extraneous gases into the breathing sys-
tem through the leak or a negative-pressure relief valve. During the
subsequent inspiration, not only will the gas in the breathing cir-
cuit be diluted by the non-anesthetic-containing gases, but all or
some of the inspiration will be lost through the leak. Leaks (par-
ticularly large leaks) in the breathing system are not as readily
identified by visually assessing the bellows using this type of venti-
lator configuration compared with the standing configuration,
hence its infrequent use in modern designs. However, it is possible

-- 135 of 1450 --

120 	Section 1: General Topics
to detect small leaks that are made more significant by high pres-
sure. For example, a small leak between the endotracheal tube cuff
and the trachea of the patient will become much more significant
as the airway pressures associated with IPPV rise; this will direct
some of the tidal volume intended for the patient into the room.
Upon exhalation, a volume of gas inadequate to replace the volume
lost from the bellows during inspiration will be expelled from the
animal’s lungs. The bellows will then attempt to fall but will do so
more slowly if the rate of aspiration of room air through a small
leak (and volume contributed to the system via the FGF) is less
than that required for the bellows to fall normally. The result will
be a bellows that falls very slowly or does not fall completely before
the next inspiration occurs. This effect is most commonly recog-
nized during ventilation of large patients where the leak is often
relatively small (and is increased with positive pressure), the tidal
volume is relatively large, and the FGFs are low relative to the
patient’s tidal volume.
There is at least one unique dual-circuit ventilator (Anesthesia
WorkStation, Hallowell EMC, Pittsfield, MA, USA) designed spe-
cifically for patients requiring tidal volumes of less than 100 mL
that replaces the bellows with a floating disc (Fig. 6.75). The float-
ing disc separates the patient breathing circuit and driving gas
circuit. In this configuration, the driving gas and the patient circuit
do not come into contact with one another, but they do move
back and forth across the same surface of the ventilation tube.
This configuration requires very precise machining of both the
ventilation tube and the floating disc to ensure that gas remains
separated within their respective circuits and that the disc moves
freely without significant resistance.
Bellows housing
A housing made of clear plastic that allows observation of bellows
movement by the anesthetist surrounds the bellows. The housing is
sealed and can be pressurized during ventilator cycling, causing
compression of the bellows. A scale is normally present on the side
of the bellows indicating the approximate tidal volume delivered.
However, this volume is usually not precisely equivalent to the
actual tidal volume received by the patient (see Factors Affecting
Tidal Volume below).
Exhaust valve
The exhaust valve allows communication between the inside of the
bellows housing and the external atmosphere on pneumatically
driven ventilators (i.e., those that use compressed gases to compress
Ventilator bellows housing
Patient circuit spill valve - replaces
the APL of the system. Valve closed
by pressure created by compression
of the bellows by driving gas and
opens when compression is
discontinued.
Patient gas circuit -
connects to rebreathing
bag port of circle system
Driving gas circuit
Tidal volume limiting plate -
used to adjust tidal volume;
not found on all ventilators
Ventilator driving gas exhaust
valve-may exhaust to room
air. Valve closed by driving
gas flow and opens when flow
stops.
Bellows
Patient circuit waste gas -
connects to scavenge interface
Figure 6.73 Schematic diagram of a generic dual-circuit ventilator demonstrating the gas flows within the ventilator during inspiration and expiration.
Note that the exact position and design of the various components vary among manufacturers. Source: Dr. Kath Klassen, Douglas College, New
Westminster, Canada; reproduced with permission of Dr. Klassen.

-- 136 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	121
the bellows). During inspiration, the exhaust valve is closed, allow-
ing the driving gas to build pressure within the housing. During
exhalation, the exhaust valve opens (and driving gas delivery stops),
allowing the pressure to drop and the bellows to re-expand. Piston-
driven ventilators have no need for an exhaust valve.
Spill valve
The spill valve replaces the function of the anesthetic machine’s
APL valve (which is still present but closed or otherwise isolated
during mechanical ventilation) and is sometimes also referred to as
a “vent valve,” “dump valve,” “overflow valve,” “expired gas outlet,”
“pop-off valve,” “relief valve,” or “pressure relief valve.” The valve is
used to direct excess fresh gas from the breathing circuit into the
scavenge system during the expiratory pause. During the ventila-
tor’s inspiratory cycle, the valve is closed to prevent escape of gas
into the scavenge system and allow positive pressure to develop in
the breathing circuit. This is similar to closing the APL valve in
order to deliver a manual breath using the reservoir bag. With a
standing bellows configuration, the spill valve normally has a mini-
mal opening pressure of between 2 and 4 cmH 2
O to offset the
downward force created by the weight of the bellows. This allows
the bellows to fill completely during exhalation. The spill valve is
normally controlled pneumatically in ventilators using gas to com-
press the bellows, but in the case of piston-driven ventilators, it may
be opened and closed electronically.
Ventilator hose connection
The ventilator hose connection is a standard-sized outlet (22 mm
male conical fitting) normally found on the back of the ventilator
bellows assembly. A length of standard-sized corrugated tubing is
used between the ventilator hose connection and the machine’s fit-
ting that normally holds the reservoir bag. On anesthetic machines
with built-in ventilators, this connection is often accomplished
through the use of a switch or dial that automatically reconfigures
(A) 	(B)
Figure 6.74 A. The Ohio V5A anesthesia ventilator is
an example of a descending or hanging bellows
configuration. A weight is used in the most dependent
portion of the bellows to facilitate descent of the
bellows during exhalation; this may also lead to a
failure to recognize a disconnection or leak as the
bellows will appear to move appropriately regardless of
whether it is connected to a patient. B. The bellows of
the Mallard 2800 large animal anesthesia ventilator is
an example of an ascending or standing bellows
configuration. Standing or ascending bellows normally
produces slight positive pressure during the expiratory
pause. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.
Figure 6.75 The Hallowell Anesthesia WorkStation (AWS) is a ventilator
and circle breathing system designed specifically for very small animal
patients (those between 150 g and 7 kg). The system features a unique
ventilator that utilizes a floating puck, rather than a bellows, to separate the
ventilator drive gas from the patient breathing circuit. The circle system is
also optimized for very small patients with a low volume (circuit and
absorbent canister) and a nearly zero deadspace Y-piece. Source: Hallowell
EMC, Pittsfield, MA, USA; reproduced with permission.

-- 137 of 1450 --

122 	Section 1: General Topics
the breathing system to the ventilator while isolating the APL valve,
thereby minimizing the potential for misconnections, disconnec-
tions, or kinked hoses.
Control of ventilator driving gas
The driving gas supplied to the ventilator is normally under inter-
mediate pressure (40–55 psi) and is delivered at a specified flow rate
for a specific period of time to produce a volume of gas sufficient to
compress the bellows and ventilate the patient’s lungs. The driving
gas is typically 100% oxygen and is used because it is usually readily
available and to minimize the potential for reducing the oxygen
concentration of the breathing circuit should a leak develop between
the two ventilator circuits (breathing and driving gas circuit).
The driving gas flow to the ventilator is normally controlled elec-
tronically with dials labeled to adjust three fundamental variables:
the duration of time driving gas is allowed into the bellows housing
(inspiratory time), the rate at which the driving gas flows into the
bellows housing (inspiratory flow rate), and the pause between inha-
lations (expiratory time). By manipulating these three variables, the
more commonly described variables, respiratory frequency (f ), tidal
volume (Vt
), and the inspiratory-to-expiratory ratio (I:E), can be
controlled. Fluid logic-controlled ventilators are slightly less intui-
tive to operate but essentially, through manipulations related to pres-
sure thresholds, flow rates, and time, the same variables can be
controlled.
Factors that affect delivered tidal volume
Unless mechanisms for compensation are built into the anesthesia
ventilator, various factors can affect the actual tidal volume deliv-
ered to the patient. Under most circumstances, and by using proper
monitoring and setup procedures, these factors are insignificant.
Fresh gas flow
Although many modern human anesthesia ventilators compensate
for changes in FGF, most veterinary ventilators do not. The elec-
tronics of most veterinary anesthesia ventilators are designed to
deliver a set amount of driving gas regardless of the actual compres-
sion of the bellows. During inspiration, the FGF will continue into
the patient circuit, contributing to the patient’s actual tidal volume.
Increasing the FGF or prolonging the inspiratory time will lead to
larger tidal volumes. Although this effect may be insignificant in
most patients, it can become significant in very small patients
where a FGF of 1000 mL/min will contribute roughly 17 mL/s of gas
to the patient’s tidal volume during inspiration.
Compliance and compression volumes
Changes in compliance of the breathing system can be accompa-
nied by changes in the tidal volume of gas delivered to the patient.
Increases in the compliance of a breathing system can be accompa-
nied by decreases in the patient tidal volume, as more of the deliv-
ered gas volume is expended expanding the breathing components.
In addition, changes in airway pressures associated with ventilation
and/or changes in lung compliance may alter the actual tidal vol-
ume of gas that the patient receives as gas volume is compressible
when subjected to increasing pressures.
Leaks
Leaks within the system (e.g., around the endotracheal tube) will
impact the delivered tidal volume, as some gas will escape through
these leaks, leading to a reduction in the delivered tidal volume.
Although side-stream airway gas monitors are not considered leaks,
they do aspirate a small volume of gas from the breathing system
(50–250 mL/min or 0.8–4 mL/s) that may marginally reduce tidal
volume unless the gas is reintroduced as it leaves the monitor. This
effect is normally negligible but may be significant in patients
requiring extremely small tidal volumes (i.e., < 50 mL).
Alarms
There are no standard alarm configurations for veterinary anesthe-
sia ventilators. Some of the more commonly found alarms are
described below.
Low driving gas pressure alarm
This alarm is sometimes also referred to as the “low-pressure alarm”
and will detect when the driving gas pressure falls below a preset
value (i.e., 35 psi). A drop in driving gas pressure below a certain
level may lead to a decrease in delivered tidal volume.
Airway pressure alarms
Both high and low airway pressure alarms are available on some
ventilators. These are important to help protect a patient from baro-
trauma (high airway pressure) and help detect leaks or disconnects
(low airway pressure). The alarm settings may be preset by the
manufacturer or adjusted by the user. Occasionally, preset alarms
are not compatible with the ventilation requirements in some
patients. For example, a minimum airway pressure alarm set at
6 cmH2 O may exceed the maximum airway pressures used when
ventilating very small patients with extremely compliant chests
(e.g., kittens, puppies, reptiles, and birds).
Determinants of tidal volume
One of the principal risks associated with mechanical ventilation
is inadvertent volutrauma or barotrauma to the patient’s lungs if
ventilator settings are improperly set. Fortunately, most of these
errors are unlikely to be catastrophic as the vigilant anesthetist
should, at minimum, immediately recognize such errors, or bet-
ter, adopt the standard use of high airway pressure alarms on all
anesthetic machines. The tidal volume on most pneumatically
driven ventilators is limited (or determined) by the flow rate of
gas entering the bellows housing and the duration of time that this
gas is allowed to enter the bellows. Some ventilators will also use
mechanical limiting devices to restrict movement of the bellows,
thus effectively limiting the tidal volume that can be delivered
regardless of changes in inspiratory flow rate and times (Mallard
2400V, Mallard Medical, Redding, CA, USA, and Dräger Large
Animal Ventilator). One common recommendation when initiat-
ing mechanical ventilation in a patient is to start with low tidal
volume settings and increase these based on monitored parame-
ters once the ventilation is initiated. This is an especially impor-
tant consideration if no mechanical volume-limiting device is
present on the ventilator.
Tidal volume on most ventilators is controlled by dials variously
labeled inspiratory flow rate, tidal volume, or minute volume and
will be impacted by inspiratory time, I:E ratio, and respiratory rate.
It is important to review the settings prior to the initiation of ven-
tilation and to be fully aware of how changes in any one parameter
may affect others. For example, if the respiratory rate is reduced on
some ventilators, the inspiratory time will automatically be
increased to reflect the new respiratory rate and to preserve the
preset I:E ratio, leading to an increase in tidal volume (i.e., the
inspiratory flow rate remains the same but the duration of inspira-
tion increases).

-- 138 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	123
Proper ventilator setup and monitoring
Prior to using an anesthesia ventilator, it is important for the anes-
thetist to clearly determine the desired ventilator settings. Typical
settings used for small and large animal patients are listed in
Table 6.5. The anesthetist should have a solid understanding of the
indications, contraindications, and physiology of IPPV prior to
initiating ventilation. In addition, the anesthetist should ensure
that they are familiar with all the features and proper operation of
the ventilator they are using by reviewing the manufacturer’s
instructions. Improper use of positive-pressure ventilation equip-
ment can lead to unnecessary morbidity and mortality. The fol-
lowing steps are intended as a general overview of ventilator setup
and may not be applicable for all ventilators, patients, and
circumstances.
1 Ensure power is available to the ventilator; most ventilators will
require a source of compressed gas and an electrical supply.
2 Connect the scavenge hose from the ventilator to a scavenge sys-
tem. Many scavenge interfaces have two scavenging ports, one
for the anesthetic machine and the other for a ventilator.
3 Empty the reservoir bag into the scavenge system, remove the
reservoir bag, and connect the ventilator breathing hose to the
reservoir bag mount. Close the APL valve. Some machines
with built-in ventilators do not require removal of the reser-
voir bag and closure of the APL valve; instead, a switch or dial
is used to isolate the reservoir bag and APL valve from the
ventilator.
4 Allow the bellows to fill. This can be facilitated by momentarily
increasing the FGF rate. The flush valve should not be used for this
purpose unless the FGF cannot be suitably increased to fill the bel-
lows in a relatively rapid fashion (e.g., large animal ventilator).
5 Initiate ventilation based on the predetermined ventilation
parameters. It is generally best to start with tidal volumes at the
lower end of the typical range to avoid barotrauma or volu-
trauma. Under all circumstances, it is vital to immediately, and
then routinely, evaluate the peak airway pressures and other
monitored parameters (e.g., end-tidal CO2
, arterial blood gas
analysis, and arterial blood pressure) to assess the adequacy of
ventilator settings.
Selected ventilator models
Although not all-inclusive, the following discussion describes ven-
tilators that are appropriate for veterinary patients. Some of these
ventilators were designed specifically to support anesthetized vet-
erinary patients, whereas others were designed for human use but
are applicable to veterinary patients or can be modified for veteri-
nary use. The classification, principles of operation, and other
points about the general function of each ventilator are included.
Before operating a ventilator, the user should consult the operating
manuals and follow all pre-use evaluation procedures recom-
mended by the manufacturer.
Dräger Small Animal Ventilator
This ventilator was marketed as an optional component for the
Dräger Narkovet 2 Anesthesia Machine and was available on a
mobile stand (universal pole) specifically designed for the ventila-
tor. Currently, the ventilator is not being manufactured, but these
ventilators remain in use for veterinary anesthesia. The small ani-
mal ventilator (SAV) is classified as double-circuit, time-cycled,
with an ascending (standing) bellows; it is pneumatically powered
and has fluidic circuitry. The pressure of the driving gas should be
between 40 and 60 psi. The controls include a power (“on–off ”)
switch, a tidal volume adjustment rod to set the attached plate
within the bellows housing to the selected tidal volume (200–
1600 mL), a frequency control knob (10–30 breaths/min), and an
inspiratory flow knob to control the rate of flow into the bellows
housing to deliver the breath. The inspiratory flow knob is normally
set so that the bellows is fully compressed at the end of the inspira-
tory phase; however, the bellows should not be deformed at the end
of inspiration. Deformation of the bellows at the end of inspiration
may indicate an increase in tidal volume by as much as 100 mL. The
inspiratory flow control setting affects the peak inspiratory pressure
that is achieved and the inspiratory time. Higher inspiratory flows
produce shorter inspiratory times and tend to produce higher peak
inspiratory pressures. The ratio of inspiratory to expiratory time
phase is preset to 1:2. The ventilator spill valve behind the bellows
chamber compensates for the continuous entry of fresh gases into
the breathing system. Because the ventilator uses an ascending bel-
lows, the effect of gravity on the bellows maintains a PEEP of
approximately 2 cmH 2
O.
Before using the ventilator, the proper connections to the gas sup-
ply and scavenge system should be made, and the appropriate pre-
use checkout procedures should be performed for all equipment.
Assuming the anesthesia machine, breathing system, and ventilator
are functional, the following is a reasonable step-by-step approach to
the operation of this ventilator with a circle breathing system:
1 The tidal volume adjustment rod is set appropriately for the
patient.
2 Corrugated tubing from the ventilator’s breathing-hose terminal
is connected to the circle system’s reservoir bag mount.
3 The circle system’s APL valve (adjustable pressure-limiting or
pop-off valve) is closed.
4 The frequency of ventilation is adjusted to approximate the
desired number of breaths per minute.
5 The ventilator’s power switch is turned on.
6 The inspiratory flow control knob is adjusted to produce the
desired inspiratory time to deliver the preset tidal volume.
7 The frequency of ventilation and inspiratory flow may need to be
readjusted to achieve the desired rate of breathing and inspira-
tory time.
Engler ADS 1000 and 2000 Veterinary Anesthesia Delivery
System and critical care ventilator
This microprocessor-controlled ventilator is marketed for use with
a vaporizer or for patients not requiring an inhalant anesthetic (e.g.,
critical care patients). The ventilator–anesthesia system functions
as a non-rebreathing circuit (unidirectional circuit), does not incor-
porate a bellows assembly or piston canister, and does not include a
Table 6.5 Guideline parameters for initiating intermittent positive-pressure ventilation
in small animal patients and horsesa.
Patient 	Respiratory rate
(breaths/min)
Tidal volume
(mL/kg)
Inspiratory
pressure (cmH 2
O)
I:E ratio
Small animal 	10–15 	10–20 	10–15 	1:2
Equine 	6–8 	10–20 	10–25 	1:3–1:4
a It is important to recognize that these are only guidelines and that specific settings
can vary significantly among patients depending upon patient factors, such as breed,
body condition, and disease. Additionally, ventilator limitations may influence the
specific parameters attainable (e.g., minimum inspiratory flow limits). Ultimately, the
adequacy of ventilation is best evaluated individually in each patient using
capnography and/or blood gas analysis.

-- 139 of 1450 --

124 	Section 1: General Topics
canister for chemical absorbent to eliminate carbon dioxide. It is
not intended for connection to another breathing system.
This ventilator fits into the single-circuit class and is powered
electrically and pneumatically. However, it is different in its func-
tion from both piston-driven and compressed gas-powered single-
circuit ventilators. The ventilator only delivers gas intermittently to
the patient (i.e., during inspiration) and, if used with a vaporizer,
the ventilation drive gas moves through the vaporizer. In most
other ventilation systems, gas flow to the vaporizer is independent
of drive gas flow delivered by the ventilator and continuous. There
is no possibility for rebreathing and the gas flow is unidirectional.
According to the operating manual, the ventilator must be supplied
with oxygen at a pressure of 50 (normal mode) or 5 (laboratory/
low-flow mode) psi for the display to report the minute volume per
kilogram of body weight accurately. When in laboratory mode, only
tidal volume is reported. When used in normal mode, the ventila-
tor’s microprocessor will determine (estimate) the values for the
various ventilatory parameters to be provided based on the patient’s
body weight. However, it is important to note that the preselected
values may not optimally ventilate all patients and manual adjust-
ments of ventilator parameters based on blood gas analysis and/or
end-tidal CO2 values should be used to ensure proper patient venti-
lation. The manufacturer’s specifications suggest the ADS 2000 is
capable of ventilating patients weighing less than 1 kg and as much
as 68 kg. The ventilator is also capable of operating in an assist ven-
tilation mode, delivering a breath each time the patient attempts to
inspire spontaneously. The sensitivity of this feature is manually
controlled by the user. The Engler ADS 2000 features updated elec-
tronics and microprocessors but is functionally the same as the
Engler ADS 1000.
This ventilator acts as a non-rebreathing circuit, leading to
excessive oxygen and inhalant anesthetic consumption when
used in larger patients, particularly those over 10 kg. It is also
important to note that the gas flow rates required to produce the
tidal volumes required for larger patients may fall outside the rec-
ommended flow rates (200 mL/min to 15 L/min) for most vapor-
izers. For example, to produce a tidal volume of 600 mL using a
2-s inspiratory time will require the ventilator to deliver gas at a
rate of 300 mL/s or 18 L/min to achieve the desired tidal volume.
There is also some concern about the accuracy of vaporizer out-
put resulting from the intermittent nature of carrier gas delivery
to the vaporizer. When using this ventilator with a vaporizer, it is
probably best to ensure that ventilator flow rates fall within those
recommended by the vaporizer manufacturer to ensure accurate
output.
The front panel of the ventilator has the following controls and
components: power switch, mask-mode switch, set-run switch,
weight-selection buttons, fill-hold button, breath button, display for
various ventilatory parameters with adjustments for these parame-
ters below the display, two ports for attachment of corrugated
breathing tubes, and a gas sampling input port (this port was absent
on earlier ADS 1000 models).
Before attempting to use the ventilator, the operator should read
the manual supplied by the manufacturer and be very familiar with
how ventilatory parameters can be modified manually, as the preset
values may not be optimal for individual patients. The following is
a summary of the manufacturer’s guidelines for operating the ven-
tilator, but is not intended to replace or supplant the manual sup-
plied for the ventilator:
1 Connect the green oxygen hose on the back of the ventilator to an
oxygen source (50 or 5 psi).
2 Attach the circle system tubes to the breathing-circuit ports on
the front of the ventilator.
3 Connect the scavenge-out port on the back of the ventilator to
the hospital scavenge system.
4 Connect the electric cord to an electric outlet.
5 Attach the vaporizer connectors to the appropriate ports on the
back of the ventilator.
6 Attach the gas sampling line to the appropriate circuit adapter
and gas sampling port on the ventilator.
7 Allow the ventilator to complete the self-diagnostic test described
in the operator’s manual. The test will help to determine failure of
the safety pop-off valve, inadequate oxygen supply, and the pres-
ence of leaks.
8 After diagnostics are complete, the mask function should be off,
and the set-run switch should be in the set position. The display
will then show settings for a 20 kg patient (flow rate of 24 L/min,
9 breaths/min, peak inspiratory pressure of 15 cmH 2
O, and the
assist mode in the off position).
9 Using the weight-up or weight-down button, enter the correct
weight of the patient in kilograms into the display, and the venti-
lator will automatically set the ventilatory parameters based on
the patient’s weight. Ventilation will be completely controlled
(the default setting for assist is off).
Once these steps have been completed, the patient should be
anesthetized and intubated with a cuffed endotracheal tube. The
Y-piece connecting the breathing tubes should be attached to the
endotracheal tube connector and the vaporizer should be set appro-
priately. The ventilator’s set-run switch should be set to run.
Controlled ventilation should begin.
Vetronics SAV03 and SAV04 small animal ventilator
(exotic animal ventilator)
This microprocessor-controlled and pressure-cycled ventilator
was designed for use in small animals (Fig 6.76). The manufacturer
recommends its use in patients no larger than 12 kg, though it is
most ideally suited for patients less than 5 kg due to the high
oxygen flow rates and volumes of inhalant anesthetic required to
operate it. The SAV04 is functionally the same as the SAV03 with
upgraded alarms (e.g., patient disconnect, overpressure, apnea,
valve disconnect, or failure).
This ventilator would be classified as a single-circuit, pressure-
cycled, electronically powered ventilator with no bellows or piston.
Technically, the tidal volume is driven/created pneumatically using
the anesthetic machine’s FGF and controlled electronically. In
essence, the ventilator acts as a mechanical thumb, momentarily
occluding the exhaust port causing the FGF to raise pressure within
the patient circuit initiating inspiration. The ventilator consists of a
control unit for setting respiratory parameters and a valve block/
assembly unit that is inserted into the patient circuit. The valve
block acts as part of the breathing circuit and functions as a non-
rebreathing system (T-piece arrangement). There are three configu-
rations described by the manufacturer: standard configuration,
extension kit configuration (moves the valve block away from the
patient’s endotracheal tube), and low deadspace configuration.
Regardless of the configuration, the functional aspects of the unit
remain basically the same.
The valve unit contains a solenoid that opens and closes the
exhaust port of the valve block (T-piece) based on the pressure set-
tings designated by the user. The control unit has the following con-
trols: power switch, IPPV (on/off) switch, target pressure dial, and
expiratory time dial. The LED screen will display values for target

-- 140 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	125
pressure, airway pressure, IPPV status (on/off), alarm notifications,
the set expiratory time, measured inspiratory time, and measured
respiratory rate. The ventilation characteristics will be determined
by the user settings for target airway pressure and expiratory time.
The ventilator tidal volume is determined by the target airway pres-
sure, while the inspiratory time and respiratory rate will be largely
influenced by the FGF rate and the set expiratory time. In other
words, a shorter set expiratory time will tend to increase respiratory
rate as will a higher FGF rate (reducing the time required to reach
target pressure). The ventilatory cycle operates in the following
manner: the control unit occludes the exhaust port to initiate inspi-
ration; inspiration will continue until the target pressure is reached
as measured by a sensor in the valve block/assembly; once this pres-
sure is obtained, exhalation is initiated by opening the exhaust port
allowing the exhaled and ongoing FGF to escape the patient circuit;
once the set expiratory time is reached, the inspiratory cycle is again
initiated. It is important to note that this ventilator relies solely on
the FGF rate from the anesthetic machine to create a tidal volume.
For example, if the target tidal volume is 50 mL and the desired
inspiratory time is 2 s, a FGF rate of 25 mL/s or 1.5 L/min will be
required. Due to its inability to effectively ventilate larger patients
and its mode of limiting tidal volume (pressure), this ventilator is
most often used by those working with birds, reptiles, and other
small mammals. Despite the manufacturer’s recommendations that
it can be used in patients weighing up to 12 kg, it is probably most
suitable for use in patients less than 5 kg, as the high FGFs required
make it very inefficient in terms of oxygen and inhalant anesthetic
use in larger patients.
Before attempting to use the ventilator, the operator should care-
fully read the manual supplied by the manufacturer and be very famil-
iar with the concept of occlusion-initiated ventilation (i.e., using the
machine FGF to achieve a tidal volume), as this is an unusual means of
achieving ventilation. The following is a summary of the manufac-
turer’s guidelines for operating the ventilator, but is not intended to
replace or supplant the manual supplied for the ventilator:
1 Connect the power supply and valve unit to the ventilator control
assembly.
2 Set IPPV to off.
3 Set the target airway pressure and expiratory time based on the
individual needs of the patient.
4 Assemble the breathing system in the desired configuration:
standard, extended, or low deadspace. Note that a hose from the
common gas outlet is required to connect to the inlet port of the
valve block with a reservoir bag and scavenge on the exhaust
port; the patient’s endotracheal tube or extension tubing will be
connected to the patient port of the valve block.
(B)
(A) 	(C)
Figure 6.76 A. The Vetronics SAV04 small animal ventilator is unique in that it uses a valve to occlude the patient circuit exhaust port functionally closing
the circuit allowing the machine’s fresh gas flow to build pressure initiating inspiration in the patient. Due to the limitations of using fresh gas flow rate to
create tidal volume, it is best reserved for use in patients less than 5 kg. B. The ventilator control unit. C. The valve block which is connected within a
modified non-rebreathing patient circuit. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 141 of 1450 --

126 	Section 1: General Topics
5 Set IPPV to on and carefully evaluate the adequacy of ventilation.
Recall the complex interactions among FGF rate, expiratory
time, desired tidal volume, and target airway pressure.
6 If required, adjust target pressure, expiratory time, and/or FGF
rate to obtain optimal ventilation.
Hallowell EMC 2000, 2002 and 2002 PRO, and Matrx/
Midmark 3000/3002 PRO anesthesia ventilators
These ventilators (Fig. 6.77) were designed for use with standard small
animal anesthesia machines and breathing systems (rebreathing/
circle and non-rebreathing circuits). The connections to the
breathing system, scavenge system, and driving gas are located on
the back of the unit. The Matrx 3000 model (now the Midmark
3002 PRO) is basically the Hallowell EMC 2002 PRO model venti-
lator produced for Matrx/Midmark. The 2002 PRO model has
essentially replaced the 2002 and 2000 models, but many of these
earlier models are still in use. The primary difference between the
three models is changes made to the volume control valve. The
initial model 2000 had a single valve adjustment for all tidal
volumes, this made fine adjustments for smaller patients more
difficult due to the limited sensitivity of the control dial. The
2002 model added a fine volume control dial that had much greater
sensitivity when adjusting tidal volumes in small patients, while
still retaining the original volume control dial for adjusting tidal
volume in larger patients. The 2002 PRO further refined volume
control with a dual control system that allows for very fine tidal
volume adjustments with the first couple of turns of the volume
dial with the remainder producing flow changes more suitable for
larger tidal volumes. In other words, the volume dial acts as a two-
stage volume adjustment with small tidal volumes and fine adjust-
ments at the lower volume settings, and more course adjustments
in the larger tidal volume range. This ventilator is classified as
double-circuit and time-cycled with an ascending (standing) bel-
lows and is electrically powered. The ventilator is pneumatically
driven and electronically controlled by an electrically activated
solenoid valve that allows gas pressure to be supplied to the volume
control during the inspiratory phase of the ventilatory cycle. The
ventilator’s power switch is incorporated into the respiratory-rate
control. The pressure of the driving-gas supply (either oxygen,
nitrogen, or compressed conditioned air) should be regulated
between 30 and 60 psi. High pressure is necessary only for high
inspiratory flow rates in larger patients.
The control modules of the EMC 2000, 2002, and 2002 PRO
model ventilators have the following adjustable components: the
on–off switch, a respiratory rate control knob, a volume control
knob (was labeled inspiratory flow on most Model 2002 ventila-
tors), an inspiratory hold push button, and a maximum working
pressure limit (MWPL) selector. The 2002 model also has a fine
inspiratory flow adjustment dial (see Fig. 6.77). The ratio of inspira-
tory to expiratory time phase is preset at 1:2. However, this ventila-
tor is available with an optional adjustable I:E ratio in the range of
1:1.5–1:4, enabling users greater flexibility in selecting ventilatory
parameters. The inspiratory flow control is a variable orifice-
metering valve that regulates the driving-gas flow. The inspiratory
flow control is used to set tidal volume. It regulates the inspiratory
flow rate directly, and a higher inspiratory flow rate at any given
respiratory rate will produce a greater tidal volume. The inspiratory
hold push button interrupts the ventilatory cycle and prevents dis-
charge of gas from the bellows housing until the button is released
or the MWPL is reached. The MWPL is measured in the patient
circuit using a coupling placed in the patient circuit extending to a
pressure transducer in the ventilator. The MWPL can be set between
10 and 60 cmH2 O. If the MWPL is reached at any time, the inspira-
tory phase of ventilation is terminated, an alarm sounds, and exha-
lation is allowed. Low breathing system pressure will be detected if
the pressure at the end of inspiration is less than 5 cmH2
O; a red
warning light will illuminate and an alarm will sound, indicating
the possibility of a disconnection of the patient circuit from the
ventilator.
Three sizes of interchangeable bellows and bellows housings are
available to enable various sizes of patients to be ventilated effec-
tively (Fig. 6.78). With the proper bellows, the manufacturer indi-
cates that tidal volumes as small as 20 mL and as large as 3 L can be
delivered and that the patient can effectively breathe spontaneously
from the bellows when the ventilator is not in operation. The venti-
lator spill valve compensates for the continuous entry of fresh gas
into the breathing system, and the resistance of the spill valve cre-
ates a PEEP of 2–3 cmH 2
O.
Before using the ventilator, connections to the gas supply and
scavenge system should be made and the appropriate pre-use
checkout procedures followed. Assuming proper functioning of the
anesthesia machine, breathing system, and ventilator, the following
is a reasonable operational approach for this ventilator with a circle
breathing system:
1 The MWPL selector is set to the desired maximum pressure
(safety limit), and the pressure coupler is connected to the breath-
ing system according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
Figure 6.77 The Hallowell 2002 ventilator features a fine inspiratory flow
dial, improving its ability to deliver more precise tidal volumes. It is also
available with or without an adjustable I:E ratio. Source: Hallowell EMC,
Pittsfield, MA, USA; reproduced with permission.

-- 142 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	127
2 Corrugated tubing from the ventilator’s breathing system con-
nector is attached to the circle system’s reservoir bag mount, and
the ventilator is attached to the scavenge system.
3 The circle system’s pop-off (APL) valve is closed.
4 The ventilator’s volume control is adjusted to the minimum
setting.
5 The ventilator’s power-rate switch is turned on and the desired
frequency of ventilation is set.
6 The volume control knob (inspiratory flow on Model 2002) is
adjusted to produce a flow of gas during inspiration that pro-
duces the desired tidal volume and/or peak inspiratory pressure.
Mallard Medical Model 2400V anesthesia ventilator
This ventilator was originally designed to allow continuous
mechanical ventilation of anesthetized pediatric and adult human
patients. It is sold to veterinarians as a stand-alone unit for use with
a breathing system and anesthesia machine (Fig. 6.79). Classified as
a double-circuit ventilator, it has electric power and is pneumati-
cally driven. The ventilator is controlled by a microprocessor, and
the manufacturer describes the ventilator as electronically time
cycled and volume limited. The tidal volume is selected by limiting
the upward expansion of the bellows by use of a bellows expansion
limiting device. Tidal volume is adjusted by moving a cylinder and
plate within the bellows housing to coincide with the desired setting
in milliliters. The cylinder within the bellows housing is secured by
a control knob (nut) located on the top center of the housing. This
ventilator employs an ascending (standing) bellows. The bellows is
pneumatically driven, and the ventilator operates at a driving gas
pressure of 50 ± 10 psi.
The controls are positioned on a console, which is located
below the bellows housing. A master on-standby-off switch is pre-
sent in the right lower corner of the console’s front panel; the
standby mode allows preselection of respiratory rate and inspira-
tory time (see Fig. 6.79). The I:E ratio is computed from these
settings and displayed digitally on LED displays before mechani-
cal ventilation is initiated. Respiratory rate and inspiratory time
are controlled by ten-turn potentiometers to allow selection of
2–80 breaths/min (respiratory rate) and 0.1–3.0 s (inspiratory
time), respectively. The I:E ratio display shows the relationship of
inspiratory time to expiratory time, giving inspiratory time a
value of 1. A black control knob located in the lower left portion
of the front panel allows adjustment of inspiratory flow rate (10–
100 L/min), and a display gauge near the control knob indicates
whether the flow being used is low, medium, or high. The flow
rate is normally adjusted to ensure complete compression of the
bellows at the end of inspiration. If the flow rate is set higher than
Figure 6.79 The Mallard 2400V anesthesia ventilator. The ventilator can be
volume limited through the use of an adjustable bellows limiting device, or
alternatively, the volume can be limited through changes in the driving gas
flow rate. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.
Figure 6.78 Many ventilators are available with different sizes of interchangeable bellows. This feature is convenient when ventilating patients requiring
markedly different tidal volumes, but the bellows does not generally change the overall function of the ventilator (i.e., a small bellows does not mean that
smaller tidal volumes can be achieved with the ventilator, it simply provides more precision in estimating tidal volume from movement of the bellows; the
minimum tidal volume will be determined by the inspiratory flow rate and inspiratory time). Source: Hallowell EMC, Pittsfield, MA, USA; reproduced
with permission.

-- 143 of 1450 --

128 	Section 1: General Topics
needed, it will produce a rapid time to peak inspiration volume
and an inspiratory hold. A green push button is located in the
front center portion of the control console; this button activates
inspiration as long as the button is pushed in. This button can be
used to maintain mechanical ventilation in the event of a power
failure and can be used to sigh the patient.
Two sizes of bellows are available: the adult bellows provides
tidal volumes, ranging from 200 to 2200 mL, and the pediatric bel-
lows from 50 to 300 mL. An exhalation valve assembly is located
on the back of the control console. This valve is closed pneumati-
cally during the inspiratory phase of ventilation and opens auto-
matically during the expiratory phase. Excess gas from the patient
circuit also exits through this valve to prevent the buildup of
pressure. The post (19 mm) of this valve should be attached to
a scavenge system for elimination of waste gases from the work-
ing environment. With an ascending bellows, PEEP (usually
2–3 cmH 2 O) will be present. In addition, PEEP of up to 20 cmH 2 O
can be added to the system with the control knob of the optional
PEEP valve. Also, an adjustable overpressure spill valve within the
console is preset to 80 cmH 2 O, and this limits the maximum
pressure that can be developed in the patient breathing circuit.
Externally, this pressure can be adjusted from 20 to 100 cmH 2 O.
This ventilator has audible alarms if the ventilator fails to cycle or
if an electric power failure occurs. In addition, the LED displays
will indicate selection of an inverse I:E ratio, failure of the ventila-
tor to cycle, and low supply-gas pressure (< 30 psi).
Before using the ventilator, the proper connections to the gas
supply and scavenge system should be made, and the appropriate
pre-use checkout procedures should be performed. Assuming
proper functioning of the anesthesia machine, breathing system,
and ventilator, the following is a reasonable operational approach
for this ventilator with a circle breathing system:
1 Prior to clinical applications, refer to the operating manual for
instructions and conduct performance verification procedures.
2 Select the appropriate control settings for the tidal volume by
limiting the upward expansion of the bellows.
3 Place the master switch in the standby mode and dial the desired
settings for the respiratory rate and the inspiratory time, based
on the patient’s needs.
4 Set the inspiratory flow control to the desired rate of flow, low,
medium, or high, depending on the needs of the patient.
5 Connect the corrugated tubing from the ventilator’s bellows to
the circle system’s reservoir bag mount and attach the ventilator
to the scavenge system.
6 Close the circle system’s pop-off (APL) valve.
7 Set the master switch to the on position.
8 The ventilator should cycle according to the selected settings,
and only minor adjustments should be necessary (e.g., slight
alterations of inspiratory time).
Ohio V5A ventilator
This ventilator is shown in Fig. 6.74A. This unit was produced for
human use and is capable of delivering tidal volumes in the range
20–1400 mL. This ventilator is no longer produced but is still avail-
able. The Metomatic, a small animal-specific model, produced by
Ohio Medical Products, is also no longer produced, although it
may still be found in some veterinary practices and has been
described elsewhere [75]. The Metomatic and the V5A are very
similar in overall design, although the Metomatic offered an assist
mode for ventilation and could be set to limit the tidal volume
based on pressure. Arguably the Metomatic offered more features
for precisely controlling ventilation but is perhaps less intuitive
for those less familiar with IPPV. The V5A is classified as a double-
circuit and time-cycled ventilator with fluidic circuitry and a
descending (hanging) bellows. The ventilator is powered and
driven pneumatically and will function properly with an oxygen
supply pressure to 40–75 psi.
Controls for this ventilator are as follows: power (on–off) switch,
inspiratory flow rate control, expiratory time control, and a manual
inspiration button. There is also a dial on the side of the ventilator
canister used to control tidal volume by limiting descent of the bel-
lows (Fig. 6.80). The power switch controls a valve that supplies
pneumatic power to the ventilator. The tidal volume control dial
adjusts the bellows from 0 to 1400 mL (20–300 mL pediatric bel-
lows). The inspiratory flow rate control regulates the rate of delivery
of gas to the ventilator canister compressing the bellows during
inspiration and is adjustable from 6 to 100 L/min. It should be set to
deliver the complete tidal volume from the bellows over a reasona-
ble period of time, normally 1–2 s. The expiratory time control
adjusts the time between the end of one inspiratory phase of respira-
tion and the beginning of the next and can be varied from 1 to 10 s;
essentially, it is a setting for respiratory rate, although rate is influenced
to some extent by other controls (e.g., inspiratory time). The man-
ual inspiration push button allows the initiation of inspiration at
any point during the respiratory cycle by depressing and immedi-
ately releasing the button. If the push button is depressed and held,
inspiration will be initiated, and the bellows will remain at the
Figure 6.80 The tidal volume delivered to a patient using a “hanging”
bellows ventilator is often controlled by using an adjustable dial that limits
the descent of the bellows. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 144 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	129
end- inspiratory position until the button is released. The ventilator
is also equipped with a low airway pressure alarm. This is a useful
feature as a leak is not easily detected through observation of the
ventilator bellows in a descending/hanging configuration. The ven-
tilator provides a spill valve (pop-off valve) to allow the escape of
excess gases that are delivered to the patient circuit. Generally, the
pressure in the patient circuit returns to zero at the end of expira-
tion, since a descending bellows is employed.
Before using the ventilator, the proper connections to the gas
supply and scavenge system should be made, and the appropriate
pre-use checkout procedures should be performed. Assuming that
the anesthesia machine, breathing system, and ventilator are func-
tional, the following is a step-by-step approach to the operation of
the ventilator with a circle breathing system:
1 Select the desired tidal volume.
2 Set the inspiratory flow rate control to a mid-range setting. After
the ventilator is in use, this control will be reset to deliver the
tidal volume in approximately 1–2 s.
3 Set the expiratory time control to a mid-range setting. This con-
trol should be reset to allow the appropriate frequency of ventila-
tion and desired I:E ratio after the ventilator is in use.
4 Connect the corrugated tube from the ventilator’s bellows to the
circle system’s reservoir bag port.
5 Close the pop-off (APL) valve of the breathing system.
6 Turn the power switch on.
7 Observe the character and rate of ventilation and refine the
adjustments of the various controls. Usually, inspiratory flow rate
is adjusted first, followed by frequency or expiratory time.
Ohmeda 7000 and 7800 series electronic anesthesia
ventilators
The Ohmeda 7000 and 7800 series ventilators are double-circuit
human anesthesia ventilators with a pneumatically driven ascending/
standing bellows (Fig. 6.81). The 7000 ventilator is electronically
controlled with a preset minute volume, whereas the 7800 is elec-
tronically controlled with a preset tidal volume, which may be a
specific advantage (as discussed below).
Both ventilators can be fitted with either an adult or a pediatric
bellows, and they have been used extensively in human anesthe-
sia [1,91]. These ventilators are available to purchase used and are
readily applicable to small animal anesthesia. The scale on the bel-
lows housing ranges from 100 to 1600 mL on the adult bellows and
from 0 to 300 mL on the pediatric bellows. The bellows assembly
exhaust port is 19 mm OD, the connection to the anesthesia
machine is 22 mm, and there is a high-pressure (50 psi) DISS fitting
for an oxygen line for the driving gas circuit. The driving gas supply
is oxygen at 50 psi, which is reduced to 38 psi by a precision regula-
tor within the ventilator. During the expiratory phase, gas from the
patient circuit (flow from the anesthesia machine) enters the bel-
lows. The ventilator spill opens when the bellows is fully distended
and a pressure of 2.5 cmH2
O has been exceeded; excess gas from the
patient circuit is vented into the scavenge system. The controls and
specific details of each model series are discussed separately below.
The 7000 series control module (see Fig. 6.81A) has six controls,
namely the minute volume dial (2–30 L/min with the adult bellows
and 2–12 L/min with the pediatric bellows), the respiratory rate dial
(6–40 breaths/min), the I:E ratio dial (1:1–1:3), power (on–off)
(A) 	(B)
Figure 6.81 A. An Ohmeda 7000 series stand-alone ventilator. B. A built-in Ohmeda 7800 series (Model 7810 shown) showing the control panel. The
Ohmeda 7800 provides greater functionality with built-in adjustable alarm parameters. Both of these ventilators are designed for use in humans but work
well for most veterinary patients. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 145 of 1450 --

130 	Section 1: General Topics
switch, the sigh switch (to provide a “sigh” equal to 150% of the tidal
volume once every 64 breaths), and a manual cycle button (used to
initiate inspiration manually only during the expiratory phase). The
controls for ventilation (minute volume, respiratory rate, and I:E
ratio) are not interactive. If minute volume is increased and the rate
held constant, the tidal volume will increase. Hence changing the
minute volume is normally used to change the patient’s tidal vol-
ume, although it is important to recognize that changing the res-
piratory rate can also change the tidal volume. If the respiratory rate
is decreased while the minute volume is held constant, the tidal vol-
ume will increase. Inappropriate use of any ventilator without
proper regard for how changes in one parameter may affect ancil-
lary variables can be potentially dangerous for the patient (i.e.,
cause volutrauma or barotrauma).
The 7800 series represents an evolution of the 7000 series provid-
ing additional functionality, built-in alarms, and more intuitive
control (see Fig. 6.81B). The respiratory parameters and the inspired
oxygen concentration are displayed on a liquid crystal screen. There
is a ventilation (on–off) toggle switch, alarm silence button (silences
alarms for 30 s), tidal volume dial (50–1500 mL), respiratory rate
dial (2–100 breaths/min), an inspiratory flow dial (10–100 L/min),
an inspiratory pressure limit dial (20–100 cmH 2
O; sustained alarm
is 50% of set limit), an inspiratory pause switch (25% of inspiratory
time), and a main power (on–off) toggle switch. There are also
input plugins for an oxygen sensor (measuring percent inspired
oxygen) and spirometer (measuring actual volume exhaled). There
are three sets of toggle wheels for alarm settings: low minute venti-
lation, low oxygen concentration, and high oxygen concentration.
The controls for ventilation (tidal volume, respiratory rate, and
inspiratory flow rate) are not interactive. However, unlike the 7000
series, only changes to the tidal volume dial will result in changes in
the tidal volume being delivered to the patient, which makes it less
likely that an inadvertently large tidal volume will be delivered.
Changing each of the ventilation controls (tidal volume, respiratory
rate, and inspiratory flow rate) will alter its associated ventilator
variable but will only lead to ancillary changes in the I:E ratio rather
than delivered tidal volume. Normally, the ventilator is set by select-
ing the desired tidal volume and respiratory rate, with the inspira-
tory flow rate being used to select an appropriate I:E ratio.
The manufacturer recommends a bellows assembly leak test.
With the ventilator attached to a circle breathing system with the
breathing system’s APL valve closed, the Y-piece occluded, all FGF
off, and the bellows filled from the anesthesia machine’s oxygen
flush valve, the bellows should drop no more than 100 mL/min. If a
significant leak is present, the ventilator should not be used until
the leak has been sealed. If the anesthesia machine, breathing sys-
tem, and ventilator are all in proper working order, as indicated by
pre-use checkout procedures, the following guidelines are appropri-
ate for use of the ventilator:
1 Properly connect the electric and pneumatic power sources for
the ventilator.
2 For 7000 series ventilators, set the desired values for minute vol-
ume, respiratory rate (frequency), and I:E ratio. For 7800 series
ventilators, set the desired values for tidal volume, respiratory
rate, and I:E ratio (normally done by adjusting inspiratory flow
rate). The alarm settings should be appropriately set.
3 Make the appropriate connections from the ventilator bellows to
the circle system’s reservoir bag port and to the scavenge system.
4 Close the pop-off (APL) valve of the circle system.
5 Make sure that the bellows is completely filled with oxygen-
anesthetic mixture.
6 Switch the power control to on.
7 Make final adjustments to minute volume and respiratory rate to
meet the needs of the patient.
ICU Medical (formerly Smith Medical/Surgivet) SAV 2500
This ventilator (Fig. 6.82) was designed for use with standard small
animal anesthesia machines and breathing systems (circle and non-
rebreathing circuits). This ventilator is classified as double-circuit
and time cycled with an ascending (standing) bellows; it is pneu-
matically driven and electrically controlled. The pressure of the
driving gas supply (oxygen, nitrogen, or compressed conditioned
air) should be regulated between 50 and 55 psi.
The control module for the SAV 2500 ventilator has the following
adjustable components located on the front of the ventilator control
unit: the on–off switch, inspiratory time dial, breaths per minute,
and inspiratory flow. A transport breath button (pneumatic man-
ual) and an adjustable pressure relief valve are located on the back
of the base or control unit. The on–off switch initiates IPPV, the
inspiratory time dial adjusts the time allowed for inspiration, and
the breaths per minute dial is used to set the number of respiratory
cycles that the ventilator will deliver over time. An appropriate I:E
ratio is obtained by adjusting the inspiratory time relative to the
number of breaths per minute. The inspiratory flow determines
the rate at which gas is delivered to the bellows housing during the
inspiratory time and hence the compression of the bellows; it is
essentially used to set the tidal volume. However, like many other
ventilators, these dials are independent of one another, and changes
in one will independently affect various respiratory parameters.
Figure 6.82 The Surgivet SAV 2500 showing the various control dials used
to set respiratory parameters. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 146 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	131
For example, increasing inspiratory time or inspiratory flow rate
will both increase tidal volume. Adjusting the breaths per minute
will not alter tidal volume but will affect the I:E ratio. Changes
should be made carefully with all ventilators and an immediate
reassessment of ventilator parameters (tidal volume, peak airway
pressures, and I:E ratio) should be made following all adjustments.
The transport button is pneumatically operated and can be used
to ventilate a patient should electrical power be interrupted or tem-
porarily unavailable. When the button is depressed, it delivers gas
into the bellows housing, compressing the bellows until the button
is released or when it exceeds the pressure relief valve limits. This
button can be activated at any point during the ventilator cycle,
making it possible to deliver “stacked” breaths (potentially leading
to the delivery of an excessively large breath). The adjustable pres-
sure relief valve adapted between the driving gas port of the control
unit and the bellows housing limits the maximum pressure that
can be generated by the driving gas helping to eliminate the possi-
bility of patient barotrauma. The valve when closed will open
at 60 cmH2
O (±5 cmH2
O) but can be adjusted to open at incremen-
tally lower pressures down to almost 0 cmH 2
O. Three sizes of inter-
changeable bellows (300, 1500, and 3000 mL) are available to
facilitate ventilation in various sizes of patients. The ventilator spill
valve compensates for the continuous entry of fresh gas into the
breathing system, and the resistance of the spill valve creates a PEEP
of 2–3 cmH 2 O. An MRI-compatible ventilator model (SAV 2550) is
also available, but it differs considerably from the SAV 2500 and is
not discussed here.
Before using the ventilator, connections to the gas supply and
scavenge system should be made, and the appropriate pre-use
checkout procedures followed. Assuming proper functioning of the
anesthesia machine, breathing system, and ventilator, the following
is a reasonable operational approach for this ventilator with a circle
breathing system:
1 The adjustable pressure relief valve can be set to open at the
desired level. Although this is not absolutely necessary, setting it
to a reasonable opening pressure (30–40 cmH2
O) can help mini-
mize the risk of accidental ventilator-induced barotrauma.
2 Corrugated tubing from the ventilator’s breathing system con-
nector is attached to the circle system’s reservoir bag mount, and
the ventilator is attached to the scavenge system.
3 The circle system’s pop-off (APL) valve is closed.
4 The ventilator’s breaths per minute dial is set to the desired
frequency.
5 The ventilator’s inspiratory time is set. When the dial is turned to
the 12 o’clock position (marked by an asterisk), the inspiratory
time will be approximately 1 s.
6 The inspiratory flow dial should be set to a low setting initially to
avoid delivering an inadvertently large tidal volume to the patient
and the ventilator should be switched on. The inspiratory flow
control dial is adjusted to produce a flow of gas during inspira-
tion that produces the desired tidal volume and/or peak inspira-
tory pressure.
7 Make final adjustments to inspiratory flow rate, inspiratory time,
and breaths per minute to meet the needs of the patient.
Penlon AV-S ventilator
The Penlon AV-S (Fig. 6.83) is a ventilator designed for human use
that has recently seen uptake in some veterinary markets. This is
probably owing to its ability to function both as a stand-alone and
built-in ventilator, with integrated anesthesia ventilators becoming
increasingly common in many modern anesthetic workstations.
This ventilator is classified as double-circuit, volume or pressure
cycled, with an ascending (standing) bellows; it is pneumatically
driven and electrically controlled. The Penlon AV-S is a fully fea-
tured anesthetic ventilator that can be cycled by either volume or
pressure providing the anesthetist with greater flexibility compared
to many standard anesthetic ventilators, which normally only offer
a single cycling mode (volume or pressure). The ventilator has
options to include spirometry and a circuit oxygen monitor and can
be configured with multiple ventilation assist modes (e.g., synchro-
nized intermittent mandatory ventilation, pressure supported, and
synchronized mandatory minute ventilation). The spirometry units
are frequently incorporated into the design of human anesthetic
machines using this ventilator but when buying it as a stand-alone
unit they need to be connected externally to the inspiratory and
expiratory limb of the circle system (Fig. 6.84). Due to the over-
whelming number of features, ventilation modes, and waveform
display options, a complete description of its features is beyond the
scope of this text.
The control module for the AV-S consists of an intuitive touch
screen, a multifunction dial/button, and several shortcut buttons
(e.g., feature menus, alarm mute, and power on/off). The spirome-
try and oxygen sensors are situated within the patient breathing
system and connect back to the main control unit. With the spirom-
etry module active, the display provides the user feedback regard-
ing set versus measured tidal volume and can display multiple
Figure 6.83 The Penlon AV-S is a full-featured anesthetic ventilator that
can be cycled by either volume or pressure. It also has options to include
spirometry and a circuit oxygen monitor and multiple ventilation modes
not found on most traditional anesthetic ventilators (e.g., synchronized
intermittent mandatory ventilation, pressure supported, and synchronized
mandatory minute ventilation). Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 147 of 1450 --

132 	Section 1: General Topics
waveforms (e.g., pressure versus time, volume versus time, and
pressure versus volume). The maximum and mean airway pressures
are also displayed. In addition to the multiple ventilation modes
already mentioned, the ventilator can also provide PEEP during
ventilation. The ventilator has preconfigured (or user defined)
default adult and pediatric ventilation settings. The standard oper-
ating modes are standby, spontaneous ventilation, volume-cycled
ventilation, and pressure-cycled ventilation; each of the operating
modes is associated with a specific set of features and user display
information. Depending upon the method chosen for cycling (pres-
sure versus volume), various parameters are made available for
adjustment by the user. The Penlon AV-S can be used with both
rebreathing and non-rebreathing systems; however, it is easiest to
use without spirometry on non-rebreathing systems, since the
spirometry sensors are normally connected to the inspiratory and
expiratory limbs of a circle system. While this does limit some of
the functionality and features of the ventilator, it can nonetheless
perform adequately under non-rebreathing conditions.
Before using the ventilator, it is imperative that the user has read
and understands the information in the manufacturer’s user guide.
Although the ventilator is intuitively safe and relatively straightfor-
ward to use for those familiar with both pressure and volume-cycled
ventilation, it is important the user familiarizes themselves with the
numerous options and features should issues or questions arise dur-
ing operation. Prior to using the ventilator, connections to the gas
supply and scavenge system should be made and the appropriate
pre-use checkout procedures followed. Assuming proper function-
ing of the anesthesia machine, breathing system, and ventilator, the
following is a reasonable operational approach for this ventilator
with a circle breathing system in volume-cycled mode:
1 Leave the ventilator in standby mode while setting ventilation
parameters; the patient can still breathe normally in this mode,
but no values will be reported or measured.
2 Connect the ventilator’s breathing system tubing to the circle
system’s reservoir bag mount.
3 The circle system’s pop-off (APL) valve is closed.
4 Set the target tidal volume (10–20 mL/kg), respiratory rate (10–
15 breaths/min), and I:E ratio (1:2) and PEEP, if desired.
5 Set the pressure limit value, this will be the maximum airway
pressure the ventilator will allow to be produced.
6 A similar process is followed for pressure-cycled ventilation but
rather than setting a target tidal volume, a target airway pressure
is set.
Vetronics Merlin small animal ventilator
The Merlin is a computer-controlled SAV designed specifically for
small animal practice (Fig. 6.85). It is capable of delivering tidal vol-
umes from 1 to 800 mL. The Merlin differs from most other com-
monly used veterinary ventilators in that it is piston-driven and can
be computer-controlled. The ventilator is classified as single-circuit
and electronically time, pressure, or volume cycled with a piston
drive mechanism using a ventilator chamber; it is electrically pow-
ered and driven, and computer-controlled. The actual ventilation
delivery system works similarly to a large syringe controlled pre-
cisely by a computer or microprocessor. The ventilator is capable of
providing both controlled and assisted modes of ventilation. The
ventilator can be configured for use with both rebreathing and non-
rebreathing systems and does not require a separate gas supply, it
only uses gas from the patient circuit and the electronically con-
trolled piston to produce ventilation. In order to function properly
when used with a non-rebreathing circuit, it is necessary to ensure
that anesthetic machine FGF rates slightly exceed the minute venti-
lation delivered by the ventilator.
The ventilator control panel includes (see Fig. 6.85) flow rate/
volume control (0.1–25 L/min or 1–800 mL), inspiratory time
control (0.1–9.1 s), expiratory time control (0.1–9.1 s), maximum
(A) 	(B)
Figure 6.84 The spirometry module and oxygen monitor used with the Penlon AV-S ventilator require external connection within the patient circuit.
A. The spirometry units are connected to their respective inspiratory and expiratory limbs of the circle. B. The oxygen sensor can be placed in any
convenient location that is continuous with the patient circuit. The external location of the spirometry modules makes them prone to damage, so extra
care must be taken not to break or disconnect them. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 148 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	133
airway pressure (1–60 cmH 2
O), assist threshold (−1 to −10 cmH 2
O),
ventilate mode switch (run-stop), and tidal volume set switch (vol-
ume or flow rate). Through the use of the various controls, the ven-
tilator can be set to deliver a tidal volume limited by volume, time,
or pressure variables. The volume-limited control mode is generally
the easiest and most intuitive for most anesthetists. However, the
ability to use it as a pressure-limited ventilator and in assist mode
may be useful under specific circumstances. The front panel also
contains a liquid crystal display screen that shows the following:
tidal volume, minute volume, I:E ratio, respiratory rate, measured
airway pressure, measured system compliance, and causes of alarm
conditions. There are also two pressure monitors that show airway
pressures in the inspiratory and expiratory limbs of the anesthetic
circuit. There are four standard 22 mm stainless-steel tapered fit-
tings to connect the breathing system to the ventilator labeled
gas-in, gas-out, patient gas delivery, and patient gas exhaust. A non-
return one-way valve must also be placed in the inspiratory limb to
ensure unidirectional gas flow.
It is important to be completely familiar with the operation and
limitations of any piece of anesthetic equipment prior to using it
with a patient. If the anesthesia machine, breathing system, and
ventilator are all in proper working order as indicated by pre-use
checkout procedures and the ventilator is being used in volume-
limited control mode, the following guidelines are appropriate for
use of the ventilator:
1 Properly connect the electric power sources for the ventilator.
2 Ensure the ventilator is in stop mode, tidal volume is in volume
mode, and the assist setting is off.
3 Set the desired tidal volume (10–20 mL/kg), inspiratory time
(1–2 s), expiratory time (1–4 s), and maximum airway pressure
(20–30 cmH 2 O). It is not necessary to set the assist threshold
unless this mode is being used.
4 Make the appropriate connections from the ventilator to the
anesthetic machine and patient as described by the manufac-
turer. This includes placement of the one-way non-return valve
on the patient inspiratory limb. The reservoir bag should remain
in place and the adjustable pressure-limiting (APL) valve (pop-
off valve) should NOT be closed.
5 Switch the ventilator to run mode.
6 Make final adjustments to tidal volume, inspiratory time, and
expiratory time to meet the needs of the patient.
Dräger Large Animal Anesthesia Ventilator
This ventilator was included as a part of the Narkovet-E Large
Animal Anesthesia Machine; the entire system is called the
“Narkovet-E Large Animal Anesthesia Control Center.” The venti-
lator was not marketed as a stand-alone unit for large animal anes-
thesia. Although they are no longer being manufactured, some of
these ventilator–anesthesia machine combinations remain in use in
veterinary hospitals. The ventilator is powered pneumatically, gen-
erally at a pressure of 50 psi. It is classed as double-circuit, tidal
volume preset, time cycled, and pneumatically driven with a
descending/hanging bellows, and it uses fluidic circuitry. The con-
trols include an on–off switch, a tidal volume control with a scale of
4–15 L on the bellows housing, a frequency control (6–18 breaths/
min), and a flow control knob that determines inspiratory flow (a
combination of flow and maximum pressure being delivered to the
bellows compartment); the manufacturer recommends that the
flow setting be adjusted so that the bellows always reaches the upper
stop. The I:E ratio of 1:2 is preset.
Before using the ventilator, the proper connections to the gas
supply and scavenge system should be made, and the appropriate
pre-use checkout procedures should be performed. The instruction
manual for ventilators includes a standard pre-use check for the
ventilator. The following is a logical approach to the operation of
the ventilator with a circle breathing system:
1 Connect the compressed gas supply hose to the ventilator.
2 Adjust the tidal volume control to the appropriate setting for the
patient and ensure that the self-locking mechanism is engaged
to prevent inadvertent movement of the bellows stop plate
during use.
3 Attach the corrugated breathing hose from the bellows to the
reservoir bag port of the circle system.
4 Close the pop-off (APL) valve on the circle system.
5 Turn the power switch on.
6 Adjust the frequency control knob to the desired respiratory
rate.
7 Adjust the flow control knob so that the bellows reaches the
upper stop at end inspiration. If the bellows does not return to its
original position during expiration (usually indicative of a leak
in the patient circuit), the bellows can be filled by using a higher
flow from the oxygen flowmeter, and the leak should be
corrected.
Figure 6.85 The front of the Merlin small animal ventilator showing its various control dials and connection points to the breathing circuit. It is important
to note that for proper operation, a one-way valve must always be in place on the “To Patient” port. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 149 of 1450 --

134 	Section 1: General Topics
Narkovet-E Electronic Large Animal Control Center
This is a combination of Dräger’s Narkovet E-2 Large Animal
Anesthesia System (anesthesia machine and circle breathing sys-
tem) with a Dräger AV-E ventilator (Fig. 6.86). The ventilator is not
available as a stand-alone unit for large animals and is no longer
being manufactured by Dräger, but machines are still in use. There
is also at least one manufacturer (Vetland Medical, Louisville, KY,
USA) that uses a reconfigured Dräger AV-E ventilator as part of its
large animal workstation (LAS-4000). The ventilator is classified as
double-circuit, tidal volume preset, and time cycled, with a descend-
ing bellows. The ventilator is electronically controlled and pneu-
matically driven. It is powered electrically and pneumatically
(40–60 psi with oxygen, but air is an option). The controls include
an on–off switch, a self-locking knob located below the bellows
assembly to control the tidal volume (4–15 L), a thumbwheel
controller-indicator switch to adjust the respiratory rate (frequency
control from 1 to 30 breaths/min), a flow control setting to deter-
mine the inspiratory flow rate, and the I:E control (a thumbwheel
indicator-controller to adjust the I:E ratio in increments of 0.5 from
1:1 to 1:4.5). The manufacturer recommends that the flow control
knob be adjusted so that the bellows always reaches the upper stop
of inspiration. The ventilator provides for controlled ventilation;
assisted ventilation is not an option.
Before using the ventilator, the proper connections to the gas
supply and scavenge system should be made, and the appropriate
pre-use checkout procedures should be performed. The instruction
manual for the ventilator includes a standard pre-use checklist. The
following is a step-by- step approach to the operation of the ventila-
tor with a circle breathing system:
1 Connect the gas supply (oxygen hose) to the anesthesia machine
and ventilator.
2 Adjust the tidal volume control to the appropriate setting for the
patient and ensure that the self-locking mechanism is engaged to
prevent inadvertent movement of the bellows stop plate.
3 Select the desired frequency of ventilation.
4 Select the desired I:E ratio.
5 Attach the corrugated breathing hose from the bellows to the res-
ervoir bag port of the circle system.
6 Close the pop-off (APL) valve on the circle system.
7 Turn the power supply switch on.
8 Adjust the flow control knob so that the bellows reaches the
upper stop at end inspiration. If the bellows does not return to its
original location during expiration, it can be filled by increasing
the flow from the oxygen flowmeter.
Mallard Medical Rachel Model 2800 series anesthesia
ventilator
This ventilator (Fig. 6.87) is a microprocessor-based, electronic
control system used to control ventilation in large animals being
maintained on circle breathing systems. The 2800 series has been
upgraded since its initial introduction. The earlier Models 2800A
and 2800B of the series are still widely used in veterinary practice;
the most recent Model 2800C features updated electronics and dis-
play and an optional air flowmeter for controlling F I
O2
, and the bel-
lows is reduced from 21 to 18 L, but it retains all the performance of
the earlier models and is functionally very similar. The ventilator is
currently available as part of a complete large animal anesthetic
machine and circle system breathing circuit. The stand for the ven-
tilator and the bellows is designed for the attachment of a circle
breathing system and two vaporizers for inhalant anesthetics, and it
has shelves to accommodate physiological monitoring devices. The
ventilator is classified as dual-circuit and time-cycled, and it is
pneumatically driven and electronically controlled with an ascend-
ing (standing) bellows configuration.
Most of the functional considerations for the Model 2800C are
similar to those for the Model 2400V used for small animal applica-
tions. The control console for the 2800C is located above the bel-
lows housing instead of below the housing as it is in the 2400V, and
LED displays are employed as they are in the 2400V. The ventilator
is controlled by a microprocessor, but the pneumatics have been
modified for generation of greater inspiratory flow rates, which are
adjustable from 10 to 600 L/min. The control dials include flow rate
(10–660 L/min), inspiratory time, and respiratory rate (2–15
breaths/min), as well as a power switch (off-on- standby) and a
manual ventilation button. The tidal volume is controlled by adjust-
ing the flow rate dial until the desired tidal volume is obtained (read
from the bellows canister) and the I:E ratio is calculated based on
the selected inspiratory time and respiratory rate. The manual ven-
tilation button will deliver the selected flow rate to compress the
bellows as long as it is depressed and will operate even in circum-
stances where power is unavailable. The bellows (18 or 21 L) is
standing and ascends during expiration. Like other ventilators with
standing bellows, the Model 2800C produces PEEP. This is a result
of the above atmospheric pressure required to activate (open) the
Figure 6.86 The Dräger Narkovet-E Electronic Large Animal Control
Center: the bellows and bellows housing with markings for tidal volume
(4–15 L), the corrugated breathing hose from the bellows to the circle
system (behind the bellows housing), and the self-locking knob or wheel
(bottom center) for selection of tidal volume. The controls are located
above the bellows on the left. Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 150 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	135
spill valve(s) in order to offset the effect of gravity due to the weight
of the bellows. The spill valves of the 2800C are unique in that they
are a pair of spring-activated valves located on the top of the bellows
and are activated to open only once the bellows reaches maximum
ascension and the pin in the top of the spill valves is depressed,
opening the valves (Fig. 6.88). The gas exiting the spill valves is
then exhausted into a hollow cylinder located at the top of the bel-
lows housing and removed. The pressure to activate the spill valves,
resulting in PEEP, is between 4 and 6 cmH2
O. The amount of PEEP
can also be controlled by a pneumatic vacuum pump on the 2800C;
the pump creates negative pressure between the bellows and the
bellows housing during the expiratory phase of ventilation and
functions to reduce the level of PEEP according to the adjustments
made by the operator. An ambient end-expiratory pressure may be
achieved, although activation of this function is rarely needed and
indeed the PEEP provided by the ventilator may even be beneficial.
The patient is often allowed to breathe spontaneously through the
bellows, even if the ventilator is off or in standby mode as the work
of breathing is not significantly increased; this avoids the need to
use a reservoir bag and disconnect and reconnect should ventila-
tion be required. The hosing from the bellows to the circle system
can be removed, facilitating drainage of moisture from the machine.
There is also a “holding” assembly located on the top of the bellows
that can be used to hold the bellows fully inflated when not in use
to facilitate drying of the bellows. An MRI-compatible model is also
available.
Before using the ventilator, the proper connections to the gas and
electric power supplies and the scavenge system should be made,
and the appropriate pre-use checkout procedures should be per-
formed for all equipment. The following is a reasonable operational
approach for the Model 2800C ventilator with a circle breathing
system:
1 Place the master switch in the standby mode and dial the desired
settings for respiratory rate and inspiratory time, according to the
patient’s needs.
2 Set the inspiratory flow control to the desired rate of flow – low,
medium, or high – depending on the patient’s needs; it is gener-
ally best to start at the low or medium rate to ensure excessive
tidal volumes are not inadvertently administered.
3 Connect the corrugated tubing from the ventilator’s bellows to
the circle system’s reservoir bag mount and the ventilator exhala-
tion port to the scavenge system. Close the circle system’s pop-off
(APL) valve and release the ventilator’s bellows. Ensure that the
bellows is fully inflated and positioned at zero. Under normal use
circumstances, the ventilator often remains continuously con-
nected to the breathing circuit for convenience during a case as
the patient can breathe through the bellows in this standing/
ascending configuration without any additional effort.
4 Turn the master switch on, and inspiration should begin.
5 If the bellows does not return to zero, this may suggest a leak in
the system; the bellows can be filled by turning up the flowmeter
or alternatively by using the flush valve, and the leak should be
(A) 	(B)
Figure 6.87 The Mallard 2800 large animal anesthetic machine and ventilator is available with an optional small animal circuit and ventilator, mounted on
the top left of the machine (shown in A.). The ventilator uses the same control system as the large animal ventilator. The Mallard 2800 is also available in
many custom configurations as shown in B. Source: Part A., Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission. Source: Part B., Dr. Ron E. Mandsager, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Oregon State University, Veterinary Teaching Hospital, Corvallis, OR, USA; reproduced with permission of Dr. Mandsager.

-- 151 of 1450 --

136 	Section 1: General Topics
identified and corrected. If the flush valve is used to fill the
bellows, the anesthetic concentration in the breathing circuit will
be reduced.
6 The flow rate, inspiratory time, and respiratory rate can then be
further adjusted to produce the appropriate ventilator parame-
ters for the patient.
7 Finally, if desired, the PEEP control can be adjusted to set the
desired end-expiratory pressure.
Hallowell Tafonius and Tafonius Junior
The Tafonius ventilator is a microprocessor/computer-controlled
large animal ventilator designed specifically for large animal
practice (Fig. 6.89). The Tafonius ventilator differs from most other
commonly used veterinary ventilators in that it is piston-driven and
can be computer-controlled, allowing for precise and customizable
control of ventilator patterns and modes of ventilation. The ventila-
tor is classified as single-circuit and electronically timed, volume
cycled with a piston drive mechanism using a ventilator chamber; it
is electrically powered and driven, and microprocessor/computer
controlled. The ventilator is available in several configurations; the
Tafonius is a complete anesthetic workstation (including a circle
anesthetic system, complete patient monitoring module, ventilator,
and integrated computer controller), while the Tafonius Junior
version is available as a stand-alone microprocessor/computer-
controlled ventilator or can be purchased with the Hallowell
designed circle breathing system. Both of the latter versions lack the
integrated computer controller and patient monitoring module
found on the Tafonius.
The actual ventilation delivery system works similarly to a large
syringe controlled precisely by a computer or microprocessor. A
more detailed description of the piston drive mechanism can be
found above. It is important to note that similar to other ventilators,
the patient can breathe spontaneously while connected to the venti-
lator. The piston in the ventilator will move instantaneously as
required to maintain an airway pressure near 0 cmH 2
O at the
patient circuit Y-piece. Although a reservoir bag attachment is pro-
vided, it is not necessary to use it if spontaneous ventilation is
desired in the patient. As the ventilator requires electronic power to
operate, there is an integrated battery and battery monitoring sys-
tem should a power failure occur.
The ventilator is capable of providing both controlled and assisted
modes of ventilation. Control of the ventilator is accomplished via
the ventilator’s auxiliary computer/microprocessor (Tafonius and
Tafonius Junior) or via the integrated computer running the Tafonius
system software found on the standard (complete) Tafonius anes-
thetic workstation. With appropriate programming, the integrated
computer and Tafonius software could be used to customize ventila-
tor control to produce nearly limitless breathing patterns. Primary
ventilator control is achieved by altering the following parameters:
tidal volume (0.1–20 L), respiratory rate (1–20 breaths/min), inspira-
tory time (0.5–4.0 s), and MWPL (10–80 cmH2
O). The microproces-
sor will automatically determine expiratory time and inspiratory flow
rate based on these preset parameters within the limits of the equip-
ment (maximum inspiratory flow rate is 900 L/min and minimum
expiratory time is 0.5 s). Other ventilation controls include user-
defined assist mode and CPAP/PEEP. There is also a dump valve but-
ton that functions as an electronic pop-off or spill valve found on
conventional ventilators and a buffer volume button used to deter-
mine the size of the “virtual” reservoir bag. A detailed operational
description of this ventilator is beyond the scope of this discussion as
it will depend on the specific ventilator configuration being used
(Tafonius or Tafonius Junior) and whether the ventilator is being con-
trolled using the auxiliary ventilator control panel or the integrated
computer system running the Tafonius software. However, ease of
use of the ventilator is very comparable to that of other ventilators.
Before using the ventilator, the proper connections to the gas and
electric power supplies and the scavenge system should be made. It
is necessary for the Tafonius ventilators to perform an automatic
start-up checkout procedure that calibrates the pressure transduc-
ers, initializes the piston, and leak tests the machine. The results of
this self-test will be displayed on the auxiliary control screen and/or
the integrated computer.
ICU Medical (formerly Surgivet) DHV1000 large animal
ventilator
This large animal-specific ventilator can be purchased as a stand-
alone ventilator compatible for use with any standard large animal
anesthesia machine or purchased as part of a complete anesthesia
workstation (LDS 3000 Large Animal Anesthesia Machine) (Fig. 6.90).
The ventilator is classified as dual-circuit, tidal volume preset/limited,
and time cycled and is pneumatically driven and electronically
controlled with a descending/hanging bellows configuration.
The controls on the control module include power switch
(on–off), respiratory rate dial, inspiratory time dial, flow dial
Figure 6.88 The ventilator spill valves of the Mallard Model 2800 are
situated on the top of the bellows (spindle-shaped stainless-steel fixtures on
top of the bellows) within the ventilator canister. When the bellows reaches
full ascent, a pin in the top of the spill valve is depressed, allowing excess
gas flow to escape. Note the stainless-steel cylinder (above the spill valves)
in the top of the bellows housing into which the excess gas is evacuated.
Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 152 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	137
(inspiratory gas flow), and a manual ventilation button. There is
also a turn wheel located on the side of the control module used to
adjust the maximum descent of the bellows.
Before using the ventilator, the proper connections to the gas
supply and scavenge system should be made, and the appropriate
pre-use checkout procedures should be performed. The instruction
manual for the ventilator includes a standard pre-use checklist. The
following is a step-by- step approach to the operation of the ventila-
tor with a circle breathing system:
1 Connect the gas supply (oxygen hose) to the anesthesia machine
and ventilator.
2 Adjust the tidal volume control wheel to the appropriate setting
for the patient.
3 Select the desired respiratory rate.
4 Select the desired inspiratory time.
5 Attach the corrugated breathing hose from the bellows to the res-
ervoir bag port of the circle system.
6 Close the pop-off (APL) valve on the circle system.
7 Turn the power supply switch on.
8 Adjust the flow control knob so that the bellows reaches the
upper stop at end inspiration.
9 The flow rate, inspiratory time, and respiratory rate can then be
further adjusted to produce the appropriate ventilator parame-
ters for the patient.
Bird Mark respirator-driven ventilators
The Bird Mark 7 respirator was one of the first systems used to drive
and control both small and large animal ventilators (so-called “bag-
in- a- barrel” ventilators) and is still being used today (Fig. 6.91). The
(A) 	(B)
Figure 6.89 A. The Tafonius and B. the Tafonuis Junior are microprocessors/computer-controlled piston-driven large animal ventilators. The ventilator is
available in a stand-alone configuration (Tafonius Junior) or with an integrated large animal anesthetic machine and patient monitoring system
(Tafonius). Source: Hallowell EMC, Pittsfield, MA, USA; reproduced with permission.
Figure 6.90 The ICU Medical (formerly Surgivet) DHV 1000 large animal
ventilator can be purchased alone or as part of a complete large animal
workstation as shown here. In this configuration, the ventilator unit is
mounted on the machine cart below the large animal circle. Source: Smith
Medical, Norwell, MA, USA; reproduced with permission.

-- 153 of 1450 --

138 	Section 1: General Topics
Bird Mark 7 was originally developed as a single-circuit respirator
for humans and was not designed principally as an anesthetic ven-
tilator; however, by applying the respirator function to a bag or bel-
lows in a “box or barrel,” a dual-circuit ventilator is created.
Uniquely, Bird respirator-driven ventilators can be used in con-
trol, assist, or assist-control modes and have the capability of limit-
ing tidal volume based on airway pressure. This differs from most
contemporary ventilators that only offer control modes of ventila-
tion and tend to limit tidal volume based on the volume of gas
delivered. Bird Mark 7 respirators are used to control and drive
both JD Medical’s LAV-2000 and LAV-3000 series large animal ven-
tilators. Although other Bird respirator-driven ventilators are not
discussed here, the general principles of operation are similar,
although the design details may vary significantly.
The JD Medical LAV-3000 is a stand-alone ventilator that can be
used with any large animal anesthetic machine and the LAV-2000 is
an integrated ventilator and anesthesia machine available in several
predesigned and custom configurations. The LAVC-2000 and
LAVC- 3000 systems can be converted to a 5 L system for use in foals
by adding a 5000 mL bellows and a canister (bellows housing)
insert. A modified Mark 7 respirator drives the bellows in the ven-
tilator system. When the system is operating, the Bird ventilator
supplies gas to pressurize the space between the bellows and the
bellows housing (canister) to force the bellows in an upward motion
delivering gases from the bellows, through the interface hose, to the
breathing system. The LAVC-2000 and LAVC-3000 are classified as
dual- circuit, pressure limited, and time cycled, and are pneumati-
cally controlled and driven with a descending/hanging bellows
configuration.
The controls on a Bird Mark 7 (Fig 6.92) include inspiratory
pressure, inspiratory flow rate, expiratory time (apnea control),
and inspiratory sensitivity. In addition, a manometer, a hand
timer (push–pull mechanism) used to manually initiate/end res-
piration, and a DISS connector for the source of pneumatic power
are features of the ventilator. With the modified Bird Mark 7,
inspiratory pressure can be varied from 5 to 65 cm H 2 O, inspira-
tory sensitivity from −0.5 to −5 cm H 2 O, expiratory time from 5
to 15 s, and inspiratory flow from 0 to over 450 L/min. The pneu-
matic power source should be delivered to the inlet of the ventila-
tor at 50 psi. The bellows can deliver a tidal volume of up to 20 L.
Inspiration can be started or stopped by the use of a hand timer.
The Bird Mark 7 is a pressure-cycled ventilator unless the push–
pull manual cycling rod is pulled out, which causes the ventilator
to be time cycled.
Before using the Model LAV-3000 ventilator for controlling ven-
tilation during anesthesia, the power supply and scavenge system
should be connected, and the appropriate pre-use checkout proce-
dures should be performed for all equipment. The following is a
reasonable operational approach for the ventilator with a circle
breathing system in the control mode:
1 Set the inspiratory sensitivity control to a high setting to mini-
mize the possibility of patient-initiated ventilation.
2 Set the inspiratory pressure control to the range 20–30 cmH2
O
and readjust the setting to achieve the desired tidal volume after
steps 5 and 6 have been completed.
3 Connect the corrugated hose (interface hose) from the bellows to
the reservoir bag port of the circle system.
4 Close the pop-off (APL) valve of the circle system. Then, the bel-
lows may need to be filled by increasing the flow of oxygen to the
patient circuit (oxygen flowmeter on the anesthesia machine).
5 Turn the inspiratory flow control on to start the ventilator and
set the flow control to deliver a tidal volume in approximately
1.5–3.0 s.
6 Set the expiratory time control to establish a respiratory rate
appropriate for the patient, often 7–10 breaths/min.
Figure 6.91 An example of a Bird Mark 7 respirator being used as the
controller of a large animal anesthesia ventilator. Source: Dr. Thomas
Riebold, College of Veterinary Medicine, Oregon State University,
Corvallis, OR, USA; reproduced with permission of Dr. Riebold.
Figure 6.92 A Bird Mark 7 respirator showing the various controls used to
control a ventilator. Source: Dr. Thomas Riebold, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA; reproduced with
permission of Dr. Riebold.

-- 154 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	139
7 For final settings, the operator should understand that there
are interactions between the controls on a Bird ventilator
(e.g., changing inspiratory flow may affect respiratory rate and
vice versa).
Respiratory assist devices
Several types and brands of respiratory assist devices are available.
Some are completely manual in operation (resuscitation bags with
one-way valves) and some use compressed gas (oxygen) to assist
ventilation (demand valves). The mechanics of these devices have
been reviewed [2].
Manual resuscitators
A manual resuscitator is appropriate for the application of IPPV to
small veterinary patients. Several brands of resuscitators are availa-
ble. The basic components of a manual resuscitator are a compress-
ible self-expanding bag, a bag refill valve, and a non-rebreathing
valve. Some resuscitators can be attached to a source of oxygen to
enrich the oxygen content of inspired gases (Fig. 6.93). Manual
resuscitators can be fitted with a reservoir to serve as a source of
oxygen when the oxygen flow to the resuscitator does not meet the
filling demands of the resuscitator.
Demand valves
A demand valve can be used to deliver IPPV (Fig. 6.94). The
demand valve is set to deliver oxygen when the patient begins to
inspire (creating slight negative pressure, activating gas delivery)
until exhalation starts or until a certain preset pressure is reached.
Expiration is passive through the valve outlet. The outlet may be
restrictive to expiration in large patients. The device can be discon-
nected from the endotracheal tube after inspiration to decrease the
resistance to exhalation. A demand valve can be triggered manually
to deliver oxygen to the patient as long as the activation button is
held down or until the preset pressure limit is reached. Alternately
compressing and releasing the control button allows application of
IPPV. A demand valve with the capacity for a high inspiratory flow
rate is most desirable for use in large animals; demand valves gener-
ating low inspiratory flows will cause an excessively long inspiratory
time in patients requiring a large tidal volume.
Demand valves are available from various manufacturers. Most
will deliver a maximum flow rate of approximately 160 L/min at
50 psi, though they are also available low-flow models (40 L/min), so
it is best to confirm prior to purchase. The high-flow models are
most suitable for large animal veterinary applications. The Hudson
demand valve has been described for use in horses but is no longer
readily available [92]. It delivers approximately 200 L/min if the oxy-
gen supply pressure is 50 psi and more than 275 L/min if the supply
pressure is 80 psi. Demand valves are normally designed to accept a
standard endotracheal tube connector (15 mm OD) and a standard
face mask (22 mm OD), although various adapters are available in
veterinary medicine for large animal endotracheal tube adapters
(funnel-type and stainless-steel 22 mm OD adapters) (Fig. 6.95).
Acknowledgment
The author and editors wish to thank Dr. Sandee Hartsfield for
allowing use of some of his material from previous editions of this
text in the preparation of this chapter. Portions of this chapter have
also been reproduced in the text, Veterinary Anesthetic and
Monitoring Equipment.
Figure 6.93 An example of a resuscitation bag suitable for use in
veterinary medicine. This bag also has an expandable reservoir (left
of image) to serve as a reservoir of enriched gas if being used with
supplemental oxygen. However, it is important to note that resuscitation
bags do not require supplemental gas delivery for use. Source: Dr. Craig
Mosley, with permission.
Figure 6.95 Demand valves are normally designed to fit standard
endotracheal tube adapters. Large animal-specific adapters are normally
required for use with the funnel-type (shown), or 22 mm OD stainless-
steel adapters normally associated with large animal endotracheal tubes.
Source: Dr. Craig Mosley, with permission.
Figure 6.94 A demand valve is an oxygen delivery system that can be used
to perform manual intermittent positive-pressure ventilation. Source: Dr.
Craig Mosley, with permission.

-- 155 of 1450 --

140 	Section 1: General Topics
References
1 Dorsch JA, Dorsch SE. A Practical Approach to Anesthesia Equipment. Philadelphia,
PA: Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins Health, 2010.
2 Dorsch JA, Dorsch SE. Understanding Anesthesia Equipment, 5th edn. New York,
NY: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2008.
3 Davey AJ, Diba A. Ward’s Anaesthetic Equipment, 6th edn. Philadelphia, PA:
Saunders, 2012.
4 Cooley KG, Johnson RA. Veterinary Anesthetic and Monitoring Equipment,
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell, 2018.
5 Fulkerson PJ, Gustafson SB. Use of laryngeal mask airway compared to endotra-
cheal tube with positive-pressure ventilation in anesthetized swine. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2007; 34: 284–288.
6 Wenger S, Müllhaupt D, Ohlerth S, et al. Experimental evaluation of four airway
devices in anaesthetized New Zealand White rabbits. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44:
529–537.
7 Prasse SA, Schrack J, Wenger S, et al. Clinical evaluation of the v-gel supraglottic
airway device in comparison with a classical laryngeal mask and endotracheal intu-
bation in cats during spontaneous and controlled mechanical ventilation. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2016; 43: 55–62.
8 Wiederstein I, Moens YP. Guidelines and criteria for the placement of laryngeal
mask airways in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35: 374–382.
9 Huckins GL, Doss GA, Ferreira TH. Evaluation of supraglottic airway device use
during inhalation anesthesia in healthy African pygmy hedgehogs (Atelerix albiven-
tris). Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48: 517–523.
10 Stewart SL, Secrest JA, Norwood BR, et al. A comparison of endotracheal tube cuff
pressures using estimation techniques and direct intracuff measurement. AANA J
2003; 71: 443–447.
11 Mitchell SL, McCarthy R, Rudloff E, et al. Tracheal rupture associated with intuba-
tion in cats: 20 cases (1996–1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000; 216: 1592–1595.
12 Hung WC, Ko JC, Weil AB, et al. Evaluation of endotracheal tube cuff pressure and
the use of the three cuff inflation syringe devices in dogs. Front Vet Sci 2020; 6: 39.
13 Jackson J, Richter KP, Launer DP. Thoracoscopic partial pericardiectomy in 13
dogs. J Vet Intern Med 1999; 13: 529–533.
14 Radlinsky MG, Mason DE, Biller DS, et al. Thoracoscopic visualization and ligation
of the thoracic duct in dogs. Vet Surg 2002; 31: 138–146.
15 Mayhew PD, Culp WT, Pascoe PJ, et al. Evaluation of blind thoracoscopic-assisted
placement of three double-lumen endobronchial tube designs for one-lung ventila-
tion in dogs. Vet Surg 2012; 41: 664–670.
16 Cantwell SL, Duke T, Walsh PJ, et al. One-lung versus two-lung ventilation in the
closed-chest anesthetized dog: a comparison of cardiopulmonary parameters.
Vet Surg 2000; 29: 365–373.
17 Adami C, Axiak S, Rytz U, et al. Alternating one lung ventilation using a double
lumen endobronchial tube and providing CPAP to the non-ventilated lung in a dog.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38: 70–76.
18 Mayhew KN, Mayhew PD, Sorrell-Raschi L, et al. Thoracoscopic subphrenic peri-
cardectomy using double-lumen endobronchial intubation for alternating one-lung
ventilation. Vet Surg 2009; 38: 961–966.
19 Bauquier SH, Culp WT, Lin RC, et al. One-lung ventilation using a wire-guided
endobronchial blocker for thoracoscopic pericardial fenestration in a dog. Can Vet
J 2010; 51: 1135–1138.
20 Lansdowne JL, Monnet E, Twedt DC, et al. Thoracoscopic lung lobectomy for treat-
ment of lung tumors in dogs. Vet Surg 2005; 34: 530–535.
21 Wang WH, Bernal SD, Mirra A, et al. Use of an “EZ-blocker” to facilitate thoraco-
scopic surgery in two dogs. Vet Rec Case Rep 2017; 5: e000449.
22 Mayhew PD, Chohan A, Hardy BT, et al. Cadaveric evaluation of fluoroscopy-
assisted placement of one-lung ventilation devices for video assisted thoracoscopic
surgery in dogs. Vet Surg 2020; 49(Suppl 1): 93–101.
23 Smith JC, Robertson LD, Auhll A, et al. Endotracheal tubes versus laryngeal mask
airways in rabbit inhalation anesthesia: ease of use and waste gas emissions.
Contemp Top Lab Anim Sci 2004; 43: 22–25.
24 van Oostrom H, Krauss MW, Sap R. A comparison between the v-gel supraglottic
airway device and the cuffed endotracheal tube for airway management in sponta-
neously breathing cats during isoflurane anaesthesia. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40:
265–271.
25 Wiederstein I, Auer U, Moens Y. Laryngeal mask airway insertion requires less propo-
fol than endotracheal intubation in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2006; 33: 201–206.
26 Bateman L, Ludders JW, Gleed RD, et al. Comparison between facemask and laryn-
geal mask airway in rabbits during isoflurane anesthesia. Vet Anaesth Analg 2005;
32: 280–288.
27 Johnson JA, Atkins AL, Heard DJ. Application of the laryngeal mask airway for anes-
thesia in three chimpanzees and one gibbon. J Zoo Wildl Med 2010; 41: 535–537.
28 Cerveny SN, D’Agostino JJ, Davis MR, et al. Comparison of laryngeal mask airway
use with endotracheal intubation during anesthesia of western lowland gorillas
(Gorilla gorilla gorilla). J Zoo Wildl Med 2012; 43: 759–767.
29 West G, Heard DJ, Caulkett N. Zoo Animal and Wildlife Immobilization and
Anesthesia. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing, 2007; 718.
30 Read MR, Read EK, Duke T, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects and induction and
recovery characteristics of isoflurane and sevoflurane in foals. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2002; 221: 393–398.
31 Quandt JE, Robinson EP. Nasotracheal intubation in calves. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1996; 209: 967–968.
32 Bauquier SH, Golder FJ. Extended anaesthesia and nasotracheal intubation of a red
kangaroo (Macropus rufus). Aust Vet J 2010; 88: 449–450.
33 Riebold TW, Engel HN, Grubb TL, et al. Orotracheal and nasotracheal intubation
in llamas. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1994; 204: 779–783.
34 Stephens Devalle JM. Successful management of rabbit anesthesia through the use
of nasotracheal intubation. J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2009; 48: 166–170.
35 Hamacher J, Arras M, Bootz F, et al. Microscopic wire guide-based orotracheal
mouse intubation: description, evaluation and comparison with transillumination.
Lab Anim 2008; 42: 222–230.
36 Johnson DH. Endoscopic intubation of exotic companion mammals. Vet Clin North
Am Exot Anim Pract 2010; 13: 273–289.
37 Hartsfield SM. Alternate methods of endotracheal intubation in small animals
with emphasis on patients with oropharyngeal pathology. Tex Vet Med J 1985;
47: 25.
38 Byers SR, Cary JA, Farnsworth KD. Comparison of endotracheal intubation
techniques in llamas. Can Vet J 2009; 50: 745–749.
39 Zhao X, Wu N, Zhou J, et al. A technique for retrograde intubation in mice. Lab
Anim 2006; 35: 39–42.
40 Corleta O, Habazettl H, Kreimeier U, et al. Modified retrograde orotracheal intuba-
tion techniques for airway access in rabbits. Eur Surg Res 1992; 24: 129–132.
41 Worth DB, Grimes JA, Jiménez DA, et al. Risk factors for temporary tracheostomy
tube placement following surgery to alleviate signs of brachycephalic obstructive
airway syndrome in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2018; 253: 1158–1163.
42 Stordalen MB, Silveira F, Fenner JVH, et al. Outcome of temporary tracheostomy
tube placement following surgery for brachycephalic obstructive airway syndrome
in 42 dogs. J Small Anim Pract 2020; 61: 292–299.
43 Chesen AB, Rakestraw PC. Indications for and short- and long-term outcome of
permanent tracheostomy performed in standing horses: 82 cases (1995–2005).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008; 232: 1352–1356.
44 Hedlund CS. Tracheostomy. Probl Vet Med 1991; 3: 198–209.
45 McClure SR, Taylor TS, Honnas CM, et al. Permanent tracheostomy in standing
horses: technique and results. Vet Surg 1995; 24: 231–234.
46 Nichols S. Tracheotomy and tracheostomy tube placement in cattle. Vet Clin North
Am Food Anim Pract 2008; 24: 307–317.
47 Nicholson I, Baines S. Complications associated with temporary tracheostomy
tubes in 42 dogs (1998 to 2007). J Small Anim Pract 2012; 53: 108–114.
48 Smith MM. Pharyngostomy endotracheal tube. J Vet Dent 2004; 21: 191–194.
49 Huss BT, Anderson MA, Branson KR, et al. Evaluation of pulse oximeter probes
and probe placement in healthy dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1995; 31: 9–14.
50 Jacobson JD, Miller MW, Matthews NS, et al. Evaluation of accuracy of pulse
oximetry in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1992; 53: 537–540.
51 Chaffin MK, Matthews NS, Cohen ND, et al. Evaluation of pulse oximetry in anaes-
thetised foals using multiple combinations of transducer type and transducer
attachment site. Equine Vet J 1996; 28: 437–445.
52 Koenig J, McDonell W, Valverde A. Accuracy of pulse oximetry and capnography in
healthy and compromised horses during spontaneous and controlled ventilation.
Can J Vet Res 2003; 67: 169–174.
53 Matthews NS, Hartsfield SM, Sanders EA, et al. Evaluation of pulse oximetry in
horses surgically treated for colic. Equine Vet J 1994; 26: 114–116.
54 Nishimura R, Kim H, Matsunaga S, et al. Evaluation of pulse oximetry in anesthe-
tized dogs. J Vet Med Sci 1991; 53: 1117–1118.
55 Quinn CT, Raisis AL, Musk GC. Evaluation of Masimo signal extraction technol-
ogy pulse oximetry in anaesthetized pregnant sheep. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40:
149–156.
56 Wong DM, Alcott CJ, Wang C, et al. Agreement between arterial partial pressure of
carbon dioxide and saturation of hemoglobin with oxygen values obtained by direct
arterial blood measurements versus noninvasive methods in conscious healthy and
ill foals. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2011; 239: 1341–1347.
57 Manning AM. Oxygen therapy and toxicity. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
2002; 32: 1005–1020.
58 Hopper K, Powell LL. Advanced oxygen therapy for the small animal patient –
high-flow oxygen therapy and mechanical ventilation. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 2022; 52: 689–705.
59 Fitzpatrick RK, Crowe DT. Nasal oxygen administration in dogs and cats: experi-
mental and clinical investigations. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1986; 22: 293–300.
60 Wilson DV, Schott HC, Robinson NE, et al. Response to nasopharyngeal oxygen
administration in horses with lung disease. Equine Vet J 2006; 38: 219–223.

-- 156 of 1450 --

Chapter 6: Anesthesia Equipment 	141
61 Stewart JH, Rose RJ, Barko AM. Response to oxygen administration in foals: effect
of age, duration and method of administration on arterial blood gas values. Equine
Vet J 1984; 16: 329–331.
62 Rose RJ, Hodgson DR, Leadon DP, et al. Effect of intranasal oxygen administration
on arterial blood gas and acid base parameters in spontaneously delivered, term
induced and induced premature foals. Res Vet Sci 1983; 34: 159–162.
63 Bleul UT, Bircher BM, Kahn WK. Effect of intranasal oxygen administration on
blood gas variables and outcome in neonatal calves with respiratory distress syn-
drome: 20 cases (2004–2006). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008; 233: 289–293.
64 Mann FA, Wagner-Mann C, Allert JA, et al. Comparison of intranasal and intratra-
cheal oxygen administration in healthy awake dogs. Am J Vet Res 1992; 53: 856–860.
65 Dunphy ED, Mann FA, Dodam JR, et al. Comparison of unilateral versus bilateral
nasal catheters for oxygen administration in dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2002; 12:
213–294.
66 Crowe DT. Oxygen therapy. In: Bonagura JD, Twedt DC, Hawkins EC, eds. Kirk’s
Current Veterinary Therapy XIV. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2009; 596–602.
67 Court MH. Respiratory support of the critically ill small animal patient. In:
Murtaugh RJ, Kaplan PM, eds. Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Medicine.
St. Louis, MO: Mosby, 1992; 575.
68 Fairman NB. Evaluation of pulse oximetry as a continuous monitoring technique in
critically ill dogs in the small animal intensive care unit. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 1992;
2: 50–56.
69 Lumb AB. Hyperoxia and oxygen toxicity. In: Lumb AB, ed. Nunn’s Applied
Respiratory Physiology, 7th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone Elsevier, 2010;
377–390.
70 Caplan RA, Vistica MF, Posner KL, et al. Adverse anesthetic outcomes arising from
gas delivery equipment: a closed claims analysis. Anesthesiology 1997; 87: 741–748.
71 Mehta SP, Eisenkraft JB, Posner KL, et al. Patient injuries from anesthesia gas deliv-
ery equipment: a closed claims update. Anesthesiology 2013; 119: 788–795.
72 Hartsfield SM. Machines and breathing systems for administration of inhalation
anesthetics. In: Short CE, ed. Principles and Practices of Veterinary Anesthesia.
Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1987: 395.
73 Singaravelu S, Barclay P. Automated control of end-tidal inhalation anaesthetic
concentration using the GE Aisys Carestation™. Br J Anaesth 2013; 110: 561–566.
74 Tay S, Weinberg L, Peyton P, et al. Financial and environmental costs of manual
versus automated control of end-tidal gas concentrations. Anaesth Intensive Care
2013; 41: 95–101.
75 Hartsfield SM. Anesthetic machines and breathing systems. In: Tranquilli WJ,
Thurmon JC, Grimm KA, eds. Lumb and Jones’ Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia,
4th edn. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing, 2007; 453–494.
76 Dorsch JA, Dorsch SE. Understanding Anesthesia Equipment, 4th edn. Baltimore,
MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999.
77 Steffey EP, Woliner MJ, Howland D. Accuracy of isoflurane delivery by halothane-
specific vaporizers. Am J Vet Res 1983; 44: 1072–1078.
78 Dorsch JA, Dorsch SE. Understanding Anesthesia Equipment: Construction, Care,
and Complications, 3rd edn. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins, 1994.
79 Hamilton WK. Nomenclature of inhalation anesthetic systems. Anesthesiology
1964; 25: 3–5.
80 Dorsch JA, Dorsch SE. The breathing system: general principles, common compo-
nents, and classifications. In: Dorsch JA, Dorsch SE, eds. Understanding Anesthesia
Equipment, 5th edn. New York, NY: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2008; 191–208.
81 Baum JA, Woehlck HJ. Interaction of inhalational anaesthetics with CO2 absor-
bents. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2003: 17: 63–76.
82 Feldman JM, Hendrickx J, Kennedy RR. Carbon dioxide absorption during inhala-
tion anesthesia: a modern practice. Anesth Analg 2021: 132: 993–1002.
83 Fang ZX, Eger EI II, Laster MJ, et al. Carbon monoxide production from degrada-
tion of desflurane, enflurane, isoflurane, halothane, and sevoflurane by soda lime
and Baralyme. Anesth Analg 1995; 80: 1187–1193.
84 Kharasch ED, Powers KM, Artru AA. Comparison of Amsorb, sodalime, and
Baralyme degradation of volatile anesthetics and formation of carbon monoxide
and compound A in swine in vivo. Anesthesiology 2002; 96: 172–182.
85 Murray JM, Renfrew CW, Bedi A, et al. Amsorb: a new carbon dioxide absorbent
for use in anesthetic breathing systems. Anesthesiology 1999; 95: 750–755.
86 Higuchi H, Adachi Y, Arimura S, et al. The carbon dioxide absorption capacity of
Amsorb is half that of soda lime. Anesth Analg 2001; 93: 221–225.
87 Kobayashi S, Bito H, Morita K, et al. Amsorb Plus and Drägersorb Free, two new-
generation carbon dioxide absorbents that produce a low compound A concentra-
tion while providing sufficient CO2 absorption capacity in simulated sevoflurane
anesthesia. J Anesth 2004; 18: 277–281.
88 Shandro J. Resistance to gas flow in the “new” anaesthesia circuits: a comparative
study. Can Anaesth Soc J 1981; 29: 387–390.
89 Rayburn RL. Pediatric anesthesia circuits. Annual Refresher Course Lecture 117.
Washington, DC, 1981.
90 Hartsfield SM. Anesthesia equipment. In: Carroll GL, ed. Small Animal Anesthesia
and Analgesia. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing, 2008; 3–24.
91 Dorsch JA, Dorsch SE. Anesthesia ventilators. In: Dorsch JA, Dorsch SE, eds.
Understanding Anesthetic Equipment, 5th edn. New York, NY: Lippincott Williams
& Wilkins, 2008; 310–372.
92 Riebold TW, Evans AT, Robinson NE. Evaluation of the demand valve for resuscita-
tion of horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1980; 176: 623–626.

-- 157 of 1450 --

142
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: T he S ixth Edition of Lumb and J ones	. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
Veterinary patients that undergo anesthesia face a genuine risk of
infection, even when well-established preventative measures are
precisely executed. Postoperative infections in domestic animals
(dogs, cats, and horses) may manifest in various ways ranging
from skin and soft tissue infections involving the surgical site, to
osteomyelitis, pneumonia, urinary tract infection, and catheter-
associated complications. Postoperative infections often result
from a combination of several factors, including patient immuno-
suppression, disease, concomitant drug administration, breach of
aseptic technique, prolonged procedures, prolonged recumbency,
insufficient infection prevention measures, and postoperative sur-
gical site management. The use of antimicrobial drugs periopera-
tively can impact host susceptibility to nosocomial infections but
must be weighed against the risks of antibiotic resistance. This
chapter explores the relationship between general anesthesia and
perioperative infections and discusses the vital role anesthetists
play in the prevention of nosocomial infections.
Postoperative infections
Skin and soft tissue infections at incision sites are the most common
postsurgical infections among all veterinary species. Mild infec-
tions are easily managed but severe infections can progress to
abscessation, cellulitis, and systemic disease or compromise surgical
wounds leading to dehiscence. Bacteria of the genus Staphylococcus
are the most common bacteria associated with incisional infec-
tions [1,2]. Staphylococcus pseudintermedius, which is part of the
normal skin and oral cavity flora of dogs and cats, is the most com-
mon species associated with small animal incisional infections.
Infection caused by this organism may originate from the patient
itself or contaminated fomites. In contrast, Staphylococcus aureus
is not considered normal flora of most dogs and cats (although it is
more common in cats than dogs) and infections caused by S. aureus
are most likely from an anthropogenic source (e.g., surgeon,
anesthetist, and care staff) as it commonly constitutes a part of the
cutaneous and respiratory flora in humans [3]. In horses, methicillin-
resistant S. aureus (MRSA) postsurgical infection is much more
common as a result of horse-adapted strains [4]. Enteric organisms
(i.e., Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae) have been reported
to be more common in incisional infections following abdominal
surgery [5]. Rates of postsurgical infection vary between procedures,
facilities, and surgeons. Table 7.1 illustrates the variability of reported
rates among common procedures for dogs, cats, and horses. Surgical
wounds can be characterized as clean, clean-contaminated, contam-
inated, or dirty (infected) (see Box 7.1 for definitions). Infection
rates for procedures characterized as clean may be lower than those
characterized as contaminated or dirty.
7 Infection Prevention and Control
in Anesthesia
Raphaël Vézina Audette1 and Stephen D. Cole2
1 Portland Veterinary Emergency and Specialty Care, Portland, Maine, USA
2 Clinical Infectious Disease Laboratory, Department of Pathobiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 142
Postoperative infections, 142
Infection control and prevention, 143
Important tools and steps for perianesthetic infection control, 143
Perioperative checklists, 143
Hand hygiene, 144
Attire, 144
Reprocessing of anesthetic and surgical equipment, 144
Laryngoscopes and mouth rinse plungers, 145
Endotracheal tubes, 145
Monitoring equipment, 145
Intravenous catheters, 146
Breathing circuits and ventilators, 146
Preparation of the surgical site and maintenance of the sterile field, 146
Risk factors associated with postoperative infections, 146
Patient-specific risk factors, 146
Iatrogenic factors, 147
Environmental factors, 147
Patient care and drug administration considerations, 147
Bandages and dressings, 147
Lubricants, 148
Anesthetics and analgesics, 148
References, 149

-- 158 of 1450 --

Chapter 7: Infection Prevention and Control in Anesthesia 	143
Infection control and prevention
All veterinarians must practice infection prevention to uphold
their professional oath to protect animal health and welfare
and to promote public health. The American Animal Hospital
Association (AAHA) has described a hierarchy of controls for
veterinary facilities, and this is shown in an adapted illustration
(Fig. 7.1) [18]. The hierarchy ranks the following types of control
(from most to least effective): elimination controls, engineering
controls, administrative controls, and personal protective equip-
ment (PPE). Elimination controls are the most effective, but
often the most difficult to implement. Elimination controls
remove or prevent the entry of a threat of infection (i.e., a pathogen)
completely. Engineering controls are aspects of hospital design
and setup that remove hazards or improve compliance with infection
prevention procedures. Administrative controls are the policies
and procedures focused on infection prevention. PPE includes
the use of specialized attire or equipment to limit the spread of
pathogens and is considered the least effective of these controls
because it is the most dependent on human factors such as compli-
ance and education. However, PPE is still a critical piece of an
infection prevention program, but it cannot be the sole tool.
Specific examples of controls relevant to the veterinary anesthesia
team are highlighted in Fig. 7.1.
The success of an infection control program is dependent on the
people participating in it. It is critical that veterinary anesthetists
are champions of a facility’s efforts to implement and use infection
prevention strategies. Beyond the delivery of anesthesia and analge-
sia and ensuring a safe recovery from anesthesia, the anesthesia
team is concerned with preoperative patient evaluation, including
the identification of factors that may impact patient outcomes. It
is fundamental to have a thorough understanding of factors that
may influence patient safety and anesthetic risk, including nosoco-
mial infections, so that risks can be mitigated, and patient safety
improved [19]. Training is key to success but should not stand alone
without some form of audit and feedback. For example, personnel
responsible for reprocessing equipment should be trained at least
annually with updates on procedures conducted when necessary.
A review process should also be in place. Audit and feedback should
never be punitive but viewed as an opportunity to demonstrate pro-
ficiency and identify areas for improvement.
Important tools and steps for perianesthetic
infection control
Perioperative checklists
The preoperative patient preparation area and operating rooms
(ORs) are high-task- density environments where omission of any
critical steps risks severely compromising patient outcomes.
Successfully getting a patient through surgery requires the meticu-
lous orchestration of completion of each task in the correct fashion
and order. Carrying out a wide variety of procedures, each with
specific steps that must be remembered and executed properly,
Table 7.1 Wound classifications and associated infection rates in dogs and horses.
Procedure 	Wound
classification
Dogs 	Horses 	References
Ovariohysterectomy 	Clean 	1.3–5.7% 	NA 	[6]
Castration 	Clean 	2.0–3.4% 	2.2–3.6% 	[6–8]
Enterotomy or
gastrotomy
Clean-
contaminated
7.0–19.9% 	19–40.4% 	[5,9–11]
Orthopedic surgery 	Clean 	5.4–6.6% 	3.7–14.2% 	[12–15]
Cystotomy 	Clean-
contaminated
0.0–3.0% 	NA 	[16,17]
Box 7.1 Wound classification descriptions.
Clean: incision must not enter the respiratory, gastrointestinal, or
urogenital tracts and there must not be a break in sterile technique. No
inflammation or infection should be present at the surgical site
(e.g., splenectomy and tibial plateau leveling osteotomy).
Clean-contaminated: incision is made into the respiratory,
gastrointestinal, or urogenital tract with no inflammation or infection
present (e.g., intestinal foreign body removal and cystotomy).
Contaminated: break in sterile technique during the procedure OR
gastrointestinal tract spillage is present OR an incision is made into a site
where acute, non-purulent inflammation is present. Traumatic wounds
between 12 and 24 h typically fall into this category.
Dirty (infected): viscera perforated prior to or during the procedure
OR when acute purulent inflammation is present during the operation.
Prolonged traumatic wounds or wounds contaminated with feces or
environmental debris often fall into this category (e.g., laparotomy for
septic peritonitis and ovariohysterectomy for pyometra).
Elimination
Engineering
Administrative
PPE
Not admitting animals
with contagious infectious
disease to the facility
Surgical suites kept
under positive pressure
Established training and
SOPS for reprocessing
of equipment
Non-sterile gowns, booties,
gloves, bouffants, and surgical
masks worn by anesthetists
in the surgical suite
Figure 7.1 Hierarchy of infection controls. PPE, personal protective equipment; SOP, standard operating procedures.

-- 159 of 1450 --

144 	Section 1: General Topics
is paramount to ensure patient safety. Observance of evidence-
based perioperative guidelines, particularly antimicrobial use, has
been described in veterinary medicine albeit in a limited number of
publications [20,21]. The use of surgical checklists in human hospi-
tals has been adopted globally and has contributed to a significant
improvement in perioperative outcomes [22]. In veterinary medi-
cine, the implementation of surgical checklists has also been stud-
ied, specifically relating to critical outcomes, including infection
and mortality. In one study carried out in a private practice referral
center, the implementation of a surgical checklist reduced the risk
of incisional infections in dogs undergoing exploratory laparotomy
for gastrointestinal foreign body obstructions [11]. Another study
from a different academic institution determined that surgical
checklist implementation decreased surgical complications such as
missed perioperative antibiotic doses and operations at the wrong
surgical site, decreased the rate of unexpected return to the OR, and
improved implementation of safety measures; however, it did not
affect morbidity or mortality rates or the incidence of incisional
infections during the study [23].
Hand hygiene
Frequent hand hygiene is the single most important action that an
individual can take to protect their patients’ and their own health.
Wearing gloves is never a substitute for hand hygiene. For hands
without visible soiling, the use of alcohol-based hand sanitizers is
considered an effective approach. Important exceptions include
when working with patients known to be infected with non-
enveloped viruses (e.g., canine parvovirus and equine rotavirus),
fungal pathogens (e.g., dermatophytes), or spore-forming bacteria
(e.g., Clostridium spp.). Handwashing with soap and water is the
best strategy in cases of these pathogens or for people with visibly
soiled hands. Box 7.2 describes best practices for the execution of
hand hygiene. Auditing of hand hygiene practices allows for the
identification of barriers to implementing hand hygiene (e.g., too
few hand sanitizer stations) and it has been shown to be effective at
improving compliance in veterinary facilities. For anesthetists that
do not work within the sterile field, the use of routine hand hygiene
strategies in combination with clean, non-sterile gloves for most
procedures suffices. Handwashing or disinfection should always
be performed before and after putting on gloves. Specialized and
extensive hand hygiene, colloquially described as “scrubbing in,”
should be performed by all surgeons and other professionals whose
hands will enter a sterile field during a surgical procedure.
Attire
Outside of the surgical suite the anesthetist should wear clean scrubs
in patient care areas. Long hair should be tied back, and stethoscopes
and lanyards should not dangle as they can act as fomites. Personnel
should change into and out of scrubs when entering and leaving the
facility, respectively, and always change when visibly soiled. Clean
laboratory coats or water-resistant aprons are appropriate for pro-
tecting scrubs when performing procedures where extensive direct
contact with animals (e.g., during physical restraint or when clipping
hair) or biological materials will occur. Laboratory coats should
never be worn outside of the hospital or inside a surgical suite. It is
best practice to have work-dedicated footwear. In cases of animals
with zoonotic or highly transmissible diseases, additional PPE
including coveralls, gowns, face shields/masks, and shoe covers
(“booties”) should be considered on a case-by-case basis.
Inside the surgical suite, additional PPE is needed in addition
to clean scrubs. For individuals not entering the sterile field,
bouffant/surgical caps, face masks, non-sterile gowns, non-sterile
gloves, and shoe covers have all been recommended. Surgeons
and others entering the sterile field should use sterile gowns and
gloves; in some cases, two pairs of gloves are worn (“double
gloved”). Protective eyewear should be used particularly for
contaminated and dirty (infected) wounds and for procedures
involving irrigation.
Reprocessing of anesthetic and surgical equipment
Sterilization and disinfection are both processes used to allow for
the safe reuse of medical devices and equipment (also known as
“reprocessing”). Cleaning refers to the act of removing visible soil-
age from the surface of an object and is a critical first step that must
be completed prior to disinfection or sterilization. Disinfection
reduces or eliminates most (if not all) pathogenic microbes on the
surfaces of inanimate objects with the important exception of bac-
terial or fungal spores. Sterilization, however, kills all microbial life,
including spores. Whether a device needs to be cleaned and either
disinfected or sterilized prior to reuse is based on the Spaulding
classification system, which classifies devices as critical, semicriti-
cal, or noncritical [24]. Table 7.2 defines these classifications and
Box 7.2 Considerations for specific hand hygiene techniques.
Alcohol-based hand sanitizer
• Only use if hands are not visibly soiled.
• Use enough to cover all surfaces of hands.
• Hands should remain wet for approximately 20 s if an adequate
amount was used.
• Commonly missed sites include between fingers, thumbs, and
fingertips.
Handwashing with soap and water
• Should be performed for specific pathogens of concern or for visibly
dirty hands.
• Wet hands, removing as much debris as possible prior to application of
soap.
• Apply soap and lather hands, including backs of hands and under
fingernails.
• Scrub hands for at least 20 s.
• Rinse hands under clean running water.
• Dry hands with a clean towel or air dry.
Table 7.2 Spaulding’s classification of medical devices.
Class 	Definition 	Example(s) 	Sterilization
versus
disinfection
Critical 	Devices that contact or enter
sterile tissues or bloodstream
Surgical instruments
(i.e., forceps and
scalpels), implants,
biopsy tools
Sterilization
Semicritical Devices that come into contact
with mucous membranes but
do not enter sterile tissues or
the blood stream
Laryngoscope
blades, endoscopes
Sterilization
or high-level
disinfection
Noncritical 	Devices that come into contact
with patient skin but not
mucous membranes. Some
devices that may not come in
direct contact with patients
may also require disinfection
between patients
Laryngoscope
handles,
stethoscopes, blood
pressure cuffs
Low- to
intermediate-
level
disinfection

-- 160 of 1450 --

Chapter 7: Infection Prevention and Control in Anesthesia 	145
provides examples of devices used by anesthetists or surgeons.
Reprocessing instructions for medical devices can be found within
the manufacturer’s instructions for use (MIFU).
Disinfection is primarily achieved with the use of liquid chemicals
called “disinfectants.” Disinfectants can be further categorized as
low-level (kills vegetative bacteria, some viruses, and some fungi),
intermediate-level (kills vegetative bacteria, most viruses, and most
fungi and mycobacteria), or high-level (kills all microbial life, except
for large numbers of spores). Some high-level disinfectants (e.g., 2%
glutaraldehyde) can be considered chemical sterilants if used with
prolonged exposure times (3–12 h). The efficacy of disinfectants is
dependent on the removal of all organic materials prior to use along
with appropriate wet contact time and proper dilution (if required).
The MIFU should always be followed exactly when using a disinfect-
ant and any deviation may lead to incomplete efficacy. Certain
devices such as thermometers and ultrasound probes can be used
with specially designed plastic covers, which may decrease their
need for high-level disinfection following use. Some facilities desig-
nate certain devices (i.e., thermometers) that would need frequent
disinfection for use with a single patient throughout their stay before
discarding or sending home with the patient.
Sterilization is achieved by the use of an autoclave (steam with
high heat under pressure), dry heat sterilizer, or ethylene oxide gas.
Hydrogen peroxide liquid plasma and chemical sterilants may also
be used. Sterility assurance monitoring (SAM) should be performed
to ensure adequate processes are in place. A good SAM program
always includes adequate documentation of results. SAM should
include a multimodal approach to testing that includes biological
indicator testing, chemical indicator testing, and mechanical moni-
toring. Biological indicator tests are the only tests that assure steri-
lization by assessing the killing of spore-forming organisms (e.g.,
Bacillus spp. or Geobacillus spp.) and are typically performed
weekly. Chemical indicator testing involves chemical changes when
the correct physical conditions are met that lead to a color change in
an indicator (e.g., lead carbonate to lead (II) oxide). Chemical indi-
cator tests should be included for each package of instruments to be
sterilized (external indicators such as autoclave tape can also be
used). Mechanical monitoring should follow guidelines from the
sterilizer’s manufacturer but often includes checking a variety of
parameters on instrument gauges, screens, or printouts. Chemical
indicator testing and mechanical monitoring do not ensure sterili-
zation was achieved, but they can be used to detect procedural
errors such as incorrect packaging or overloading. Common rea-
sons for failure of sterilization include incorrect operation, incor-
rect settings, improper loading or overloading, and excessive
packing. Certain medical devices are labeled as “single-use,” which
implies they cannot be reused [24].
Laryngoscopes and mouth rinse plungers
Laryngoscopes are considered an essential instrument to perform
safe and atraumatic orotracheal intubation in cats and dogs [25].
Laryngoscopes, because they are expected to encounter a patient’s
mucosal surface, are considered semicritical devices according to
Spaulding’s classification and thus require, at a minimum, high-
level disinfection between uses in different patients. Though no
reports of hospital-acquired infections involving laryngoscopes
exist in companion animals, disinfection protocols should be fol-
lowed. Anecdotal reports of an epidemic of respiratory infectious
disease in horses associated with the use of a mouth rinse plunger
to flush the mouth prior to orotracheal intubation illustrate the
necessity to ensure high-level decontamination in semicritical items.
In one North American study, respiratory pathogens such as equine
herpes virus 1 and 4 (EHV-1, EHV-4), equine influenza virus (EIV),
equine rhinitis B virus (ERBV), and/or MRSA were detected in 22%
of healthy horses presented for routine dental care [26]. These path-
ogens can be reasonably expected to contaminate the tip-of- mouth
rinse plungers or bite blocks and orotracheal tubes.
Endotracheal tubes
Endotracheal tubes (ETTs) and laryngeal masks offer ways to
maintain airway patency in veterinary patients during general
anesthesia or deep sedation. Additionally, they are indispensable
for the protection of a patient’s airways against the potentially lethal
risk of aspiration pneumonia. In 2018, an outbreak of carbapenem-
resistant E. coli was linked to reuse of ETTs at a veterinary teaching
hospital [27]. Most commercially available ETTs are labeled as
single-use only. In the context of veterinary anesthesia, it may not
be economically feasible to use a new ETT for each patient at all
facilities. However, since ETTs encounter a patient’s mucosal sur-
face, they are deemed semicritical devices according to Spaulding’s
classification, and thus require high-level disinfection. While these
devices are widely reused in the veterinary field [28], best practices
for sterilization or disinfection have not been established. Crawford
and Weese studied the efficacy of various disinfection strategies for
ETTs against in vitro inoculated Streptococcus zooepidemicus and
Bordetella bronchiseptica [29]. Although soaking in chlorhexidine
gluconate or accelerated hydrogen peroxide solutions significantly
reduced growth on direct and enrichment cultures compared to
water or triclosan-containing soap solutions, high-level disinfec-
tion was not achieved with either method. A recent study evaluated
the efficacy of four different protocols for ETT disinfection and
found no difference in bacterial growth following cleaning of the
ETT with either a water scrub, detergent scrub, detergent scrub
and chlorhexidine gluconate soak, or detergent scrub and bleach
soak all of which yielded significant bacterial growth [28].
Reprocessing single-use items may affect the integrity and efficacy
of the device. For example, a study of ETT sterilization demon-
strated that the physical integrity of the ETT cuff may become
compromised following glutaraldehyde or ethylene oxide steriliza-
tion. If a facility chooses to reuse ETTs or other single-use devices
against the MIFU, then they must include these factors in their risk
assessment for the patient.
Monitoring equipment
Minimum standard monitoring equipment for patients under gen-
eral anesthesia in veterinary medicine includes electrocardiography
(ECG), pulse oximetry, capnography, and temperature probes [25].
Many different configurations exist for each instrument and the
anatomical site on which they are used on patients will dictate the
need for levels of disinfection or sterilization. For example, though
rarely used in everyday practice, intravascular thermistors for
measurement of core body temperature would be considered a crit-
ical device and thus require sterilization before use, whereas esoph-
ageal thermometers are considered semicritical and may only
require high-level decontamination between patients. If rectal ther-
mometers are in use, appropriate hygiene measures such as the use
of plastic sleeves and high-level disinfection between patients are
recommended. For this reason, instruments that do not represent
an increased level of invasiveness may be preferred; for example,
surface ECG monitors require low-level decontamination of leads
applied to intact skin, compared to esophageal ECG leads, which
require a higher level of decontamination.

-- 161 of 1450 --

146 	Section 1: General Topics
Intravenous catheters
Catheters used for vascular cannulation are considered critical
items. As such, they must only be used when sterile. Prior to the
placement of vascular catheters, sterile preparation of the placement
site by removing hair with clippers followed by the use of an antisep-
tic solution can prevent infectious complications [30,31]. For place-
ment of peripheral intravenous (IV) catheters, a clean technique
may suffice as long as appropriate hand hygiene is observed [32].
The current trend in human medicine is to remove IV catheters
only when clinical signs of inflammation are observed. Commonly
reported risk factors for infectious catheter complications in humans
include the type of catheter used, blood sampling through the cath-
eter, the type of IV infusate administered, the duration the catheter
was in place, and the catheter location. A recent prospective study
evaluated these proposed risk factors in cats and dogs in a private
referral practice intensive care unit and did not identify any of them
as being associated with an increased risk of a positive bacterial cul-
ture from the catheter tip [33]. In cats and dogs, one study suggested
that a dwell time greater than 72 h was not associated with an
increased risk of IV catheter contamination [34], whereas others
reported increased rates of infections after a period of as little as 36
h [35]. An association between lack of experience and risk of cathe-
ter infection has been reported in dogs [36]. Concurrent corticoster-
oid therapy and the presence of phlebitis were also positively
associated with a positive catheter tip culture [36].
Breathing circuits and ventilators
A prospective evaluation of microbial contamination of anesthesia
breathing circuits used in the context of canine anesthesia demon-
strated that in the absence of a biofilm, the environmental contami-
nants that colonize the breathing circuits are likely of low
pathogenicity and short viability [37]. Evidence from simulation
experiments supports the notion that anesthesia machines can be
contaminated by bacterial pathogens, and that heat and moisture
exchange filters can effectively prevent bacterial contamina-
tion [38]. Further, they demonstrated that volatile anesthetics (hal-
othane) and carbon dioxide absorbents (soda lime) did not provide
any demonstrable bactericidal action. Uncertainty remains about
whether viral pathogens can contaminate an anesthesia breathing
circuit after use in a sick animal shedding respiratory viruses, which
would then be transferred to subsequent patients. Factors involved
in the potential transfer of pathogens from corrugated tubing to a
patient’s airways are ill-defined. Bacterial filters may not be efficient
against viral pathogens and, as such, it is recommended to discard
breathing circuits when a risk for viral cross-contamination exists.
Preparation of the surgical site and maintenance
of the sterile field
As part of the presurgical evaluation, close attention should be paid
to the skin. If there is evidence of cutaneous infections (e.g., bacte-
rial pyoderma and dermatophytosis) therapy should be initiated
and the surgery rescheduled after clinical resolution. For emergent
surgeries, antimicrobial therapy should encompass the suspected
pathogens. A swab for bacterial culture and susceptibility can be
collected for submission prior to antibiotic administration to guide
postoperative care.
Skin cannot be sterilized or disinfected but antiseptic chemicals
can be used to decrease the overall microbial burden of the skin.
While protocols may vary, the effective and efficient preparation of
the surgical site is a critical part of the aseptic technique. It has been
demonstrated that prolonged time from clipping to incision is
associated with an increased incidence of postsurgical infec-
tion [39,40]. After induction of anesthesia, hair on the surgery site
should be clipped with electric clippers leaving a sufficient border
around the intended incision site. Use of a size 10 blade over a size
40 blade has been advocated as it results in less irritation and lower
numbers of colony-forming units (CFUs) [31]. Shaving should not
be done as it is traumatic to the skin and is associated with higher
rates of infection. Care should be used to avoid cross-contamination
of patients with clipper blades. The next step after clipping is to
remove gross organic material from the skin (cleaning) with a sur-
gical scrub containing a detergent. Gauze swabs are used to scrub
the skin in a concentric pattern away from the intended surgical
site. Following an initial scrub, surgical sites are then rinsed with
70% alcohol, which doubles as an additional bacterial kill and
removes the detergent. The final step is to use a surgical antiseptic
(e.g., chlorhexidine gluconate or povidone-iodine). Box 7.3 addresses
the preparation of the epidural injection site.
Proper use of antiseptic solutions is more important than which
type of solution is used. The MIFU should always be followed for
appropriate dilution and contact time. Chlorhexidine gluconate may
provide several advantages over povidone-iodine because it has longer
residual activity and a shorter required contact time [41]. It is impor-
tant to note that diluted antiseptics can become contaminated with
environmental organisms such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa and
Serratia marcescens, which can ultimately lead to severe incisional
infections. Solutions should be made fresh from concentrates for each
patient and discarded once used.
Risk factors associated with postoperative
infections
Patient- specific risk factors
Patient- specific factors associated with increased risks of incisional
infections have been investigated in veterinary patients. Conflicting
reports in the literature stem from high variability in methods used
to study perioperative infection risks and, at times, a lack of agree-
ment between authors on basic definitions of surgical site complica-
tions. Despite these challenges, several studies have highlighted the
role of specific patient-related factors in the development of inci-
sional infections. The classification of surgical wounds based on the
degree of contamination correlates well with the development of
incisional infections, but alone, its predictive value for the develop-
ment of incisional infections is only of moderate value highlighting
the multifactorial nature of perioperative infection risk and the
need to account for other patient-related factors [6].
Box 7.3 Recommended steps for preparation of an epidural injection site.
• After induction of anesthesia, clip the surgery site with electric clippers
fitted with a disinfected size 10 blade, leaving a sufficient border
around the intended puncture site.
• After clipping, examine the skin overlying the lumbosacral junction for
evidence of pyoderma or suspicious neoplastic lesions, as these would
constitute contraindications for epidural injections.
• Wearing examination gloves, remove gross organic material from the
skin (cleaning) with a surgical scrub containing a detergent (chlorhex-
idine scrub) and gauze swabs to scrub the skin in a concentric pattern
moving away from the intended epidural puncture site.
• Rinse the site with 70% alcohol to remove the detergent. Alcohol-
soaked cotton balls should be avoided as they can leave microscopic
fibers that may be dragged into the epidural space with the needle.

-- 162 of 1450 --

Chapter 7: Infection Prevention and Control in Anesthesia 	147
The immune system can be compromised by a number of con-
current diseases. In cats and dogs, hypothyroidism, hyperthyroid-
ism, hyperadrenocorticism, and diabetes mellitus have all been
associated with an increased risk of developing incisional infec-
tions [42,43]. Stress also notably affects the immune system and
may adversely impact wound healing [44,45]. Whether direct
immunosuppression or glucocorticoid-induced hyperglycemia or a
combination of both factors is responsible is unknown, as both have
independently been implicated as risk factors for incisional infec-
tions [46]. The American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) status
of patients undergoing surgery is associated with an increased risk
of incisional infections [6]. Other patient-specific factors have been
implicated in the development of infection and/or inflammatory
surgical site complications such as obesity [6,47–49]. According to
a multi-institution retrospective study, higher body mass index may
increase the risk for the development of incisional complications in
horses following emergency ventral midline celiotomy [50].
Veterinary patients often engage in behaviors that promote inci-
sional infections such as licking their wounds, defecating in cages or
stalls, and rubbing or scratching painful body parts. Adequate pro-
tection of a surgical site by means of appropriate perioperative anti-
biotherapy, topical antibiotic ointments and bandages, hand hygiene,
use of single-use gloves during patient care, and e-collars may be
relevant considerations to help reduce incisional infections [46,51],
though they are no substitute for adequate husbandry practices and
thorough pain control. It is the role of the anesthetist to discuss the
presence of risk factors with the other members of a pet’s healthcare
team and ensure that owners can make informed decisions while
consenting to elective surgeries and anesthesia. In the context of
elective procedures, the opportunity to treat endocrinopathies and
thus reduce the ASA status of a patient must be considered in light of
the potential increase in perioperative morbidity and costs [46,52].
Iatrogenic factors
Human factors are considered important contributors to the develop-
ment of perioperative infections; for example, a statistically signifi-
cant association between the number of people present in an OR and
the development of surgical site complications has been reported [6].
Since this variable was correlated with ASA status, it is unknown
whether the number of people in an OR is causally related to inci-
sional infections or whether it is merely reflective of the increased
task density and need for more staff to care for sicker animals. Human
traffic in and out of an operating suite can contribute to environmen-
tal contamination and should be kept to a minimum [53].
Surgical duration has been described as a strong predictor of inci-
sional infections [6,13,54]. A retrospective study assessing risk fac-
tors associated with incisional infections in dogs undergoing tibial
tuberosity advancement surgery suggests that the duration of sur-
gery and anesthesia significantly increases the risk of infection [13],
describing that for every minute increase in surgery and anesthesia
time, the likelihood of developing an incisional infection increased
by seven and four percent, respectively. A prospective clinical study
on 100 client-owned dogs investigated associations between multi-
ple perioperative factors and incisional infections and found no
association between surgical duration, among many other factors,
and the incidence of perioperative infections [1,27]. Their results
conflict with other studies that found a relationship between inci-
sional infections and duration of anesthesia and surgery. Further, the
authors found that despite a high frequency of intraoperative bacte-
rial contamination, incisional infection rates remain remarkably
low. Whether increased incisional infections rates seen with longer
surgical duration are directly related to time or are also confounded
by other factors, such as a surgeon’s experience level or the complex-
ity of a procedure, remains unclear. For example, increasing surgeon
experience has been associated with lower levels of inflammatory
C-reactive protein but not cortisol in bitches undergoing ovariohys-
terectomy, suggesting that novice surgeons may lack the tissue han-
dling skills to limit surgery-induced tissue inflammation but that the
surgical stress response occurs regardless [55].
Environmental factors
Pathogens may become airborne in the operative room and may
lead to contamination of surgical fields and potentially be a source of
nosocomial infections [56]. Surgical site infections have multifacto-
rial etiologies and poor OR air quality may be one of many factors to
consider. OR personnel are considered the primary source of air-
borne bacteria [57]. Contamination of ORs with pathogenic bacteria
originating from ventilation ducts and air handling systems leading
to incisional infections has been reported [58]. Although laminar
airflow systems have been promoted for use in operating theaters,
the ideal ventilation design in ORs remains a subject of contro-
versy [59–61]. It is likely that the nature of the filtration technology
employed itself would be of greater significance than the mode of
ventilation in optimizing OR air quality [62]. It is reasonable to
assume that factors that increase air contamination such as increased
number of personnel in the OR, traffic through the OR door, disrup-
tion of the positive pressure environment, and suboptimal ventila-
tion may increase the risks of surgical field contamination. Items
present in the OR, including forced warm air devices, may disrupt
air flow if misused [63] and possibly lead to increased risks of inci-
sional infections [64], though there is currently no evidence that
forced-air warming devices are associated with an increased risk of
incisional infections [65,66]. The benefit of maintaining normother-
mia or at least preventing severe hypothermia likely outweighs the
potential risk associated with the use of forced-air warmers. Due to
the association between intraoperative hypothermia and wound
infections, it has been proposed that maintaining an OR tempera-
ture at 24 °C (75 °F) may be beneficial [67].
Outside of the surgical suite, working surfaces in veterinary hos-
pitals represent a reservoir for microorganisms if disinfection pro-
tocols are not observed or if surgical wounds are not adequately
protected [51]. Gurneys, and surgical and radiology tables fre-
quently encounter patients and surgical sites and have been impli-
cated in the transmission of methicillin-resistant S. pseudintermedius
(MRSP) in companion animals [68,69]. A prospective clinical trial
evaluating intraoperative surgeon and patient bacterial contamina-
tion during clean orthopedic surgeries and the relationship with
surgical site infection in dogs found no relationship between surgi-
cal site infection and either surgeon or patient bacterial contamina-
tion [1]. The authors suggest that many surgical site infections are
likely contracted postoperatively as intraoperative bacterial isolates
were of low pathogenicity compared to those obtained from gur-
neys or radiology tables.
Patient care and drug administration
considerations
Bandages and dressings
The protective value of bandages and dressings likely varies between
procedures. While one might expect the presence of wound dress-
ings and bandages to help protect against wound infections by
providing a physical barrier against contaminated hospital surfaces,

-- 163 of 1450 --

148 	Section 1: General Topics
results of a prospective evaluation of wound dressings on incisional
infection rates in dogs undergoing a clean orthopedic surgical pro-
cedure with implants (tibial plateau leveling osteotomy [TPLO])
demonstrated no advantage over control dogs with no dress-
ings [49]. The use of antibacterial agents such as silver-based dress-
ings or dialkylcarbamoylchloride (DACC)-coated postoperative
dressings may provide additional protection [70,71], but veterinary
studies evaluating their efficacy are lacking. In horses, the risk of
infection after celiotomy for treatment of colic is lower for incisions
covered with sterile towels or polyhexamethylene biguanide-
impregnated dressings secured with sutures than when incisions
were covered with gauze secured with iodine-impregnated adhesive
drapes [72]. Whether the use of topical antibiotics applied to surgi-
cal wounds in clean and clean-contaminated surgeries reduces the
risk of infection warrants further studies in veterinary medicine.
This particular practice appears to yield no benefit in humans
according to a recent systemic review and meta-analysis [73].
Lubricants
Anesthetics and opioids disrupt lacrimal function and ophthalmic
lubricants are often used to prevent corneal ulcers perioperatively.
In dogs, evidence suggests that corneal abrasions and ulcers still
occur in roughly 20% and 0.5% of cases under general anesthesia,
respectively [74]. In horses, 17.6% of cases developed corneal abra-
sions after undergoing anesthesia [75]. The potential for contami-
nation of multidose formulations of ophthalmic products used by
the ophthalmology service of a teaching veterinary hospital was
evaluated and no significant bacterial contamination was found,
suggesting that when used for up to two weeks and stored according
to the manufacturer’s recommendations, these products were safe
and unlikely to cause ophthalmic infections [76]. Scarabelli et al.
later found that in equine practice, ophthalmic preparations were
rarely contaminated with bacteria (5.8%) and cross-contamination
was never observed. They also found no incidence of corneal ulcers,
but corneal abrasions were present in 17.6% of horses studied [75].
Anesthetics and analgesics
Opioids
Surgical pain associated with tissue inflammation and negative affec-
tive states have profound adverse impacts on the immune system.
The activation of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis and the
production and release of neuroendocrine factors, including catecho-
lamines and cortisol represent the underlying mechanism for the
adverse immunomodulatory effects of pain. Though opioids have
profound analgesic effects, recent preclinical studies have provided
somewhat incriminating yet mixed evidence toward immunomodu-
latory effects of opioids on both the innate and the adaptive branches
of the immune system. Cellular players of the immune system such as
natural killer cells, macrophages, lymphocytes, and granulocytes all
express μ-opioid receptors on their surface, and activation of the
downstream intracellular signaling cascade that results from the
receptor’s interaction with μ-opioid agonists may lead to impaired
immune function [77]. Putative immunosuppressive effects of opi-
oids may affect clinical outcomes as suggested by studies in human
patients treated with opioids preoperatively showing a greater risk for
incisional infections following surgery [78,79].
Propofol
Propofol is a phenol derivative hypnotic agent and is available as a
lipid- based emulsion that does not contain antimicrobials or pre-
servatives. It is frequently administered as an IV injection for the
induction of anesthesia or as an infusion for the maintenance of
general anesthesia. In its original form, propofol can sustain rapid
bacterial growth and according to the United States Center for
Disease Control and Prevention has been linked to iatrogenic
bacterial infections, including sepsis and incisional infections.
Contamination of stopcocks on IV lines where propofol is injected
has also been demonstrated [80]. A retrospective investigation of
the association between propofol and postoperative wound infec-
tion rates determined that small animal patients (cats and dogs)
induced with preservative-free propofol had an increased risk com-
pared to patients in which general anesthesia was induced with dif-
ferent drugs [81]. Although formulations that contain preservatives
are now readily available to veterinary practitioners, there remains
a risk of contamination if appropriate hygiene and time-stamping
measures are not observed to prevent contamination. Tomihari
compared the effects of propofol and isoflurane in dogs anesthe-
tized for a period of 2 h without undergoing surgery to tease out the
potential immunosuppressive effect of surgery. This study reported
that propofol had a lesser impact than inhaled anesthetics on both
cellular and humoral immune systems [82]. Lymphocyte popula-
tions decreased less following propofol anesthesia compared to
isoflurane anesthesia, and cytokine mRNA expression was less
influenced by propofol than it was by inhaled anesthetics. Another
study investigating risk factors associated with incisional infections
in canine patients undergoing a lateral fabellotibial suture for cranial
cruciate ligament rupture reported that induction with propofol
posed a significant risk [48].
Volatile anesthetics
Maintenance of general anesthesia with inhaled anesthetics was
found to inhibit the cytotoxic activity of natural killer cells in
dogs [83]. Further, maintenance of anesthesia with isoflurane leads
to a greater decrease in lymphocyte counts than total intravenous
anesthesia (TIVA) with propofol [82]. Simeonova et al. compared the
effects of inhaled anesthesia and epidural anesthesia on peripheral
blood mononuclear cells and found that both anesthetic techniques
induced a significant yet transient reduction in circulating lympho-
cytes in dogs [84]. Whether inhaled anesthetics are associated
with a worsening of perioperative outcomes compared with TIVA or
locoregional techniques remains to be determined. The impact of
anesthetic techniques on clinical outcomes is multifactorial and
interplay between a myriad of cellular receptors targeted by com-
mon anesthetics complicates the interpretation of currently available
clinical data. Large-scale prospective controlled clinical trials are
necessary to elucidate the contributions of individual components of
anesthetic and analgesic regimens to clinical outcomes.
Locoregional and neuraxial anesthesia
Great care must be taken to limit the risk of infections associated
with locoregional anesthesia techniques. Neuraxial blocks require
that preservative-free drugs be used to avoid potential catastrophic
neurotoxic effects on the spinal cord. It is advisable to ensure opti-
mal hand hygiene and use a sterile technique, including aseptic skin
preparation and the use of sterile gloves while performing epidural
injections or placement of epidural catheters to minimize the risks
of discospondylitis or epidural abscess formation [85]. Locoregional
anesthesia techniques have been shown to block the surgical stress
response in veterinary patients. Despite this beneficial effect, lido-
caine epidural anesthesia in dogs has not shown an improved sur-
vival of peripheral blood mononuclear cells compared to dogs
anesthetized with halothane, suggesting that epidural anesthesia

-- 164 of 1450 --

Chapter 7: Infection Prevention and Control in Anesthesia 	149
has similar adverse immunoinhibitory effects as volatile anesthet-
ics [84]. The use of epidural catheters for the provision of postop-
erative analgesia in the canine outpatient setting was reported to be
associated with minor self-limiting complications such as urinary
retention and fecal incontinence, and no evidence of infection was
reported [86]. The use of ultrasound guidance to perform locore-
gional blocks adds a consideration for the potential for ultrasound
probes to act as fomites.
Antimicrobials
Judicious antimicrobial prescribing practices can limit the emer-
gence of antimicrobial resistance, which is among the most complex
and urgent problems in veterinary medicine and public health.
Antimicrobials should not be used in lieu of the infection prevention
strategies and antisepsis techniques described throughout this chap-
ter. Therapeutic use of antimicrobials is obviously indicated when
performing surgery in the presence of infection (e.g., pyometra and
septic abdomen). Antimicrobials can also be used prophylactically
for contaminated procedures (e.g., wound repair) or clean-
contaminated procedures (e.g., enterotomy). Given the low risk of
incisional infections for clean procedures performed on healthy ani-
mals, the use of prophylactic administration of an antimicrobial is
often discouraged, except in cases where indwelling medical devices
will be used (e.g., implants). However, recent studies do not support
postoperative antimicrobial therapy in clean orthopedic surgeries in
dogs [13], including TPLO procedures [87,88]. The decision to pre-
scribe antimicrobials prophylactically, perioperatively, and/or post-
operatively should account for the overall health status of the patient,
concurrent medications, and the extent of wound contamination
(clean versus dirty or contaminated). For instance, a canine retro-
spective study described a very low incidence of major postoperative
incisional infections (0.6%) in dogs undergoing hemilaminectomies
without concurrent use of perioperative antibiotics [89]. However,
minor complications occurred in 9.1% of cases that did not require
treatment. Further, 30% of cases enrolled were excluded from the
study, due in part to postoperative suspected or confirmed urinary
tract infections, scrotal and preputial dermatitis, and suspected aspi-
ration pneumonia.
In patients where antimicrobial prophylaxis is deemed necessary,
treatment should be initiated before surgery and, in the name of
antimicrobial stewardship, the duration should be as short as pos-
sible [20]. The goal of surgical prophylaxis is to reach bactericidal
concentrations of an antimicrobial at the surgical site prior to con-
tamination with bacteria. The selection of which antimicrobial to
use during a procedure (either prophylactically or therapeutically)
is multifactorial, but it should always be effective, and ideally bacte-
ricidal, against the confirmed, suspected, or most likely bacteria to
be encountered. For example, if surgical wounds are made only in
the skin, then a drug targeting Staphylococcus (e.g., cefazolin) would
be a rational choice. Special consideration should be made for dogs
with a history of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus spp. infection
as this organism is resistant to all veterinary beta-lactams. It has
been suggested that for a procedure where the gastrointestinal tract
is entered, broad-spectrum antimicrobials targeting anaerobes and
gram-negative bacteria (e.g., cefoxitin and amikacin/ampicillin)
may increase the odds of therapeutic success. Antimicrobials
should not be highly protein-bound (e.g., cefovecin) given their low
tissue concentrations compared to weakly bound drugs (e.g., cefa-
zolin). Most antimicrobials complete their distribution into tissues
within 30–60 min of administration; therefore, doses of most anti-
microbials used prophylactically should be administered in the
period immediately prior to initiating the surgery [90,91]. For time-
dependent drugs (e.g., beta-lactams), the rate at which an antimi-
crobial is eliminated (most commonly by the kidney) is the most
important factor for the administration of subsequent doses.
Cefazolin, which is commonly used perioperatively in small com-
panion animal medicine, has a relatively short elimination half-life
of 1 h in dogs and should be re-dosed during procedures lasting
longer than 2 h. Although recommendations vary slightly, a com-
mon regimen for prophylactic cefazolin in dogs is to give an initial
dose of 20–22 mg/kg approximately 30–60 min before the proce-
dure starts and then re-dose every 90–120 min until the procedure
ends [90,91].
References
1 Andrade N, Schmiedt CW, Cornell K, et al. Survey of intraoperative bacterial
contamination in dogs undergoing elective orthopedic surgery. Vet Surg 2016;
45(2): 214–222.
2 Gallagher AD, Mertens WD. Implant removal rate from infection after tibial
plateau leveling osteotomy in dogs. Vet Surg 2012; 41(6): 705–711.
3 Hanselman BA, Kruth SA, Rousseau J, et al. Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus colonization in veterinary personnel. Emerg Infect Dis 2006; 12(12):
1933–1938.
4 Cuny C, Witte W. MRSA in equine hospitals and its significance for infections in
humans. Vet Microbiol 2017; 200: 59–64.
5 Williams RW, Cole S, Holt DE. Microorganisms associated with incisional infec-
tions after gastrointestinal surgery in dogs and cats. Vet Surg 2020; 49(7):
1301–1306.
6 Eugster S, Schawalder P, Gaschen F, et al. A prospective study of postoperative sur-
gical site infections in dogs and cats. Vet Surg 2004; 33(5): 542–550.
7 Hodgson C, Pinchbeck G. A prospective multicentre survey of complications asso-
ciated with equine castration to facilitate clinical audit. Equine Vet J 2019; 51(4):
435–439.
8 Kilcoyne I, Watson JL, Kass PH, et al. Incidence, management, and outcome of
complications of castration in equids: 324 cases (1998–2008). J Am Vet Med Assoc
2013; 242(6): 820–825.
9 Isgren CM, Salem SE, Archer DC, et al. Risk factors for surgical site infection fol-
lowing laparotomy: effect of season and perioperative variables and reporting of
bacterial isolates in 287 horses. Equine Vet J 2017; 49(1): 39–44.
10 Costa-Farré C, Prades M, Ribera T, et al. Does intraoperative low arterial partial
pressure of oxygen increase the risk of surgical site infection following emergency
exploratory laparotomy in horses? Vet J 2014; 200(1): 175–180.
11 Launcelott ZA, Lustgarten J, Sung J, et al. Effects of a surgical checklist on decreas-
ing incisional infections following foreign body removal from the gastrointestinal
tract in dogs. Can Vet J 2019; 60(1): 67–72.
12 Fitzpatrick N, Solano MA. Predictive variables for complications after TPLO with
stifle inspection by arthrotomy in 1000 consecutive dogs. Vet Surg 2010; 39(4):
460–474.
13 Yap FW, Calvo I, Smith KD, et al. Perioperative risk factors for surgical site infection
in tibial tuberosity advancement: 224 stifles. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2015;
28(3): 199–206.
14 Curtiss AL, Stefanovski D, Richardson DW. Surgical site infection associated with
equine orthopedic internal fixation: 155 cases (2008–2016). Vet Surg 2019; 48(5):
685–693.
15 Daniels A, Pezzanite LM, Griffenhagen GM, et al. Evaluation of factors associated
with surgical site infection in equine proximal interphalangeal joint arthrodesis:
54 cases (2010–2019). Vet Med Sci 2022; 8(4): 1478–1488.
16 Appel S, Otto SJ, Weese JS. Cystotomy practices and complications among general
small animal practitioners in Ontario, Canada. Can Vet J 2012; 53(3): 303–310.
17 Grant DC, Harper TA, Werre SR. Frequency of incomplete urolith removal, com-
plications, and diagnostic imaging following cystotomy for removal of uroliths
from the lower urinary tract in dogs: 128 cases (1994–2006). J Am Vet Med Assoc
2010; 236(7): 763–766.
18 Stull JW, Bjorvik E, Bub J, et al. 2018 AAHA Infection control, prevention, and
biosecurity guidelines. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2018; 54(6): 297–326.
19 Sharma A, Fernandez PG, Rowlands JP, et al. Perioperative infection transmission:
the role of the anesthesia provider in infection control and healthcare-associated
infections. Curr Anesthesiol Rep 2020; 10(3): 233–241.
20 Weese JS, Halling KB. Perioperative administration of antimicrobials associated
with elective surgery for cranial cruciate ligament rupture in dogs: 83 cases
(2003–2005). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2006; 229(1): 92–95.

-- 165 of 1450 --

150 	Section 1: General Topics
21 Dallap Schaer BL, Linton JK, Aceto H. Antimicrobial use in horses undergoing
colic surgery. J Vet Intern Med 2012; 26(6): 1449–1456.
22 Fudickar A, Horle K, Wiltfang J, et al. The effect of the WHO Surgical Safety
Checklist on complication rate and communication. Dtsch Arztebl Int 2012;
109(42): 695–701.
23 Thieman Mankin KM, Jeffery ND, Kerwin SC. The impact of a surgical checklist on
surgical outcomes in an academic institution. Vet Surg 2021; 50(4): 848–857.
24 Josephs-Spaulding J, Singh OV. Medical device sterilization and reprocessing in the
era of multidrug-resistant (MDR) bacteria: issues and regulatory concepts. Front
Med Technol 2020; 2: 587352.
25 Grubb T, Sager J, Gaynor JS, et al. 2020 AAHA Anesthesia and monitoring guide-
lines for dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2020; 56(2): 59–82.
26 Pusterla N, Rice M, Henry T, et al. Investigation of the shedding of selected respira-
tory pathogens in healthy horses presented for routine dental care. J Vet Dent 2020;
37(2): 88–93.
27 Lavigne SH, Cole SD, Daidone C, et al. Risk factors for the acquisition of a blaNDM-5
Carbapenem-resistant Escherichia coli in a veterinary hospital. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 2021; 57(3).
28 Marquis CR, Gull T, Dodam J, et al. Comparison of four endotracheal tube cleaning
protocols in anesthetized dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2023; 261(3): 336–341.
29 Crawford S, Weese JS. Efficacy of endotracheal tube disinfection strategies for
elimination of Streptococcus zooepidemicus and Bordetella bronchiseptica. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2015; 247(9): 1033–1036.
30 Burrows CF. Inadequate skin preparation as a cause of intravenous catheter-related
infection in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1982; 180(7): 747–749.
31 Messiaen Y, MacLellan JD, Pelsue DH. Evaluation of the number of colony forming
units on the skin of dogs after clipping the hair with two sizes of clipper blades.
Am J Vet Res 2019; 80(9): 862–867.
32 Hughes D, Beal MW. Emergency vascular access. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 2000; 30(3): 491–507.
33 Marsh-Ng ML, Burney DP, Garcia J. Surveillance of infections associated with
intravenous catheters in dogs and cats in an intensive care unit. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 2007; 43(1): 13–20.
34 Mathews KA, Brooks MJ, Vaillant AE. A prospective study of intravenous catheter
contamination. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 1996; 6(1): 33–43.
35 Crisi PE, De Santis F, Aste G, et al. Inflammatory, mechanical and infectious com-
plications associated with peripheral intravenous catheters in dogs and cats: a risk
factor analysis. Vet Sci 2022; 9(3): 118.
36 Guzman Ramos PJ, Fernandez Perez C, Ayllon Santiago T, et al. Incidence of and
associated factors for bacterial colonization of intravenous catheters removed from
dogs in response to clinical complications. J Vet Intern Med 2018; 32(3): 1084–1091.
37 Pelligand L, Hammond R, Rycroft A. An investigation of the bacterial contamina-
tion of small animal breathing systems during routine use. Vet Anaesth Analg 2007;
34(3): 190–199.
38 Leijten DT, Rejger VS, Mouton RP. Bacterial contamination and the effect of filters
in anaesthetic circuits in a simulated patient model. J Hosp Infect 1992; 21(1):
51–60.
39 Brown DC, Conzemius MG, Shofer F, et al. Epidemiologic evaluation of postopera-
tive wound infections in dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1997; 210(9):
1302–1306.
40 Mayhew PD, Freeman L, Kwan T, et al. Comparison of surgical site infection rates
in clean and clean-contaminated wounds in dogs and cats after minimally invasive
versus open surgery: 179 cases (2007–2008). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2012; 240(2):
193–198.
41 Kulkarni AP, Awode RM. A prospective randomised trial to compare the efficacy of
povidone- iodine 10% and chlorhexidine 2% for skin disinfection. Indian J Anaesth
2013; 57(3): 270–275.
42 Nicholson M, Beal M, Shofer F, et al. Epidemiologic evaluation of postoperative
wound infection in clean-contaminated wounds: a retrospective study of 239 dogs
and cats. Vet Surg 2002; 31(6): 577–581.
43 Sappenfield E, Jamieson DJ, Kourtis AP. Pregnancy and susceptibility to infectious
diseases. Infect Dis Obstet Gynecol 2013; 2013: 752852.
44 Godbout JP, Glaser R. Stress-induced immune dysregulation: implications for
wound healing, infectious disease and cancer. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol 2006;
1(4): 421–427.
45 Hekman JP, Karas AZ, Sharp CR. Psychogenic stress in hospitalized dogs: Cross
species comparisons, implications for health care, and the challenges of evaluation.
Animals (Basel) 2014; 4(2): 331–347.
46 Espinel-Ruperez J, Martin-Rios MD, Salazar V, et al. Incidence of surgical site infec-
tion in dogs undergoing soft tissue surgery: risk factors and economic impact. Vet
Rec Open 2019; 6(1): e000233.
47 Spare P, Ljungvall I, Ljungvall K, et al. Evaluation of postoperative complications
after mastectomy performed without perioperative antimicrobial prophylaxis in
dogs. Acta Vet Scand 2021; 63(1): 35.
48 Cox T, Maddox TW, Pettitt R, et al. Investigation of variables associated with surgi-
cal site infection following the management of canine cranial cruciate ligament
rupture with a lateral fabellotibial suture. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2020; 33(6):
409–416.
49 Giannetto JJ, Aktay SA. Prospective evaluation of surgical wound dressings and the
incidence of surgical site infections in dogs undergoing a tibial plateau levelling
osteotomy. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2019; 32(1): 18–25.
50 Hill JA, Tyma JF, Hayes GM, et al. Higher body mass index may increase the risk for
the development of incisional complications in horses following emergency ventral
midline celiotomy. Equine Vet J 2020; 52(6): 799–804.
51 Stine SL, Odum SM, Mertens WD. Protocol changes to reduce implant-associated
infection rate after tibial plateau leveling osteotomy: 703 dogs, 811 TPLO
(2006–2014). Vet Surg 2018; 47(4): 481–489.
52 Nicoll C, Singh A, Weese JS. Economic impact of tibial plateau leveling osteotomy
surgical site infection in dogs. Vet Surg 2014; 43(8): 899–902.
53 Alexander JW, Van Sweringen H, Vanoss K, et al. Surveillance of bacterial coloniza-
tion in operating rooms. Surg Infect (Larchmt) 2013; 14(4): 345–351.
54 Stetter J, Boge GS, Grönlund U, et al. Risk factors for surgical site infection associ-
ated with clean surgical procedures in dogs. Res Vet Sci 2021; 136: 616–621.
55 Michelsen J, Heller J, Wills F, et al. Effect of surgeon experience on postoperative
plasma cortisol and C-reactive protein concentrations after ovariohysterectomy in
the dog: a randomised trial. Aust Vet J 2012; 90(12): 474–478.
56 Harper TA, Bridgewater S, Brown L, et al. Bioaerosol sampling for airborne bacteria
in a small animal veterinary teaching hospital. Infect Ecol Epidemiol 2013; 3.
57 Sadrizadeh S, Aganovic A, Bogdan A, et al. A systematic review of operating room
ventilation. J Build Eng 2021; 40: 102693.
58 Fox BC, Chamberlin L, Kulich P, et al. Heavy contamination of operating room air
by Penicillium species: identification of the source and attempts at decontamina-
tion. Am J Infect Control 1990; 18(5): 300–306.
59 Bischoff P, Kubilay NZ, Allegranzi B, et al. Effect of laminar airflow ventilation on
surgical site infections: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Infect Dis
2017; 17(5): 553–561.
60 Surial B, Atkinson A, Kulpmann R, et al. Better operating room ventilation as deter-
mined by a novel ventilation index is associated with lower rates of surgical site
infections. Ann Surg 2022; 276(5): e353–e360.
61 Aganovic A, Cao G, Fecer T, et al. Ventilation design conditions associated with
airborne bacteria levels within the wound area during surgical procedures: a sys-
tematic review. J Hosp Infect 2021; 113: 85–95.
62 Dai R, Liu S, Li Q, et al. A systematic review and meta-analysis of indoor bioaero-
sols in hospitals: the influence of heating, ventilation, and air conditioning. PLoS
One 2021; 16(12): e0259996.
63 Dasari KB, Albrecht M, Harper M. Effect of forced-air warming on the perfor-
mance of operating theatre laminar flow ventilation. Anaesthesia 2012; 67(3):
244–249.
64 Lange VR. Forced air contamination risk in the OR. Ann Med Surg (Lond) 2022; 73:
102976.
65 Ackermann W, Fan Q, Parekh AJ, et al. Forced-air warming and resistive heating
devices. Updated perspectives on safety and surgical site infections. Front Surg
2018; 5: 64.
66 Wood AM, Moss C, Keenan A, et al. Infection control hazards associated with the use
of forced-air warming in operating theatres. J Hosp Infect 2014; 88(3): 132–140.
67 Rodriguez-Diaz JM, Hayes GM, Boesch J, et al. Decreased incidence of periop-
erative inadvertent hypothermia and faster anesthesia recovery with increased
environmental temperature: a nonrandomized controlled study. Vet Surg 2020;
49(2): 256–264.
68 van Duijkeren E, Kamphuis M, van der Mije IC, et al. Transmission of methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus pseudintermedius between infected dogs and cats and con-
tact pets, humans and the environment in households and veterinary clinics. Vet
Microbiol 2011; 150(3–4): 338–343.
69 Shoen HRC, Rose SJ, Ramsey SA, et al. Analysis of Staphylococcus infections in a
veterinary teaching hospital from 2012 to 2015. Comp Immunol Microbiol Infect Dis
2019; 66: 101332.
70 Totty JP, Hitchman LH, Cai PL, et al. A pilot feasibility randomised clinical trial
comparing dialkylcarbamoylchloride-coated dressings versus standard care for the
primary prevention of surgical site infection. Int Wound J 2019; 16(4): 883–890.
71 Lawrie K, Waldauf P, Balaz P, et al. Silver-based dressings in the prevention of the
incisional surgical site infection: a prospective multicenter observational controlled
trial. Surg Infect (Larchmt) 2022; 23(7): 682–690.
72 Kilcoyne I, Dechant JE, Kass PH, et al. Evaluation of the risk of incisional infection
in horses following application of protective dressings after exploratory celiotomy
for treatment of colic. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2019; 254(12): 1441–1447.
73 Chen PJ, Hua YM, Toh HS, et al. Topical antibiotic prophylaxis for surgical wound
infections in clean and clean-contaminated surgery: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. BJS Open 2021; 5(6): zrab125.

-- 166 of 1450 --

Chapter 7: Infection Prevention and Control in Anesthesia 	151
74 Dawson C, Sanchez RF. A prospective study of the prevalence of corneal surface
disease in dogs receiving prophylactic topical lubrication under general anesthesia.
Vet Ophthalmol 2016; 19(2): 124–129.
75 Scarabelli S, Timofte D, Malalana F, et al. Corneal abrasion and microbial contami-
nation in horses following general anaesthesia for non-ocular surgery. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2018; 45(3): 278–284.
76 Betbeze CM, Stiles J, Krohne SG. Assessment of bacterial contamination of three
multidose ophthalmic solutions. Vet Ophthalmol 2007; 10(2): 81–83.
77 Perry JA, Douglas H. Immunomodulatory effects of surgery, pain, and opioids in
cancer patients. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2019; 49(6): 981–991.
78 Inagi T, Suzuki M, Osumi M, et al. Remifentanil-based anaesthesia increases
the incidence of postoperative surgical site infection. J Hosp Infect 2015; 89(1):
61–68.
79 Hassan Z, Nisiewicz MJ, Ueland W, et al. Preoperative opioid use and incidence of
surgical site infection after repair of ventral and incisional hernias. Surgery 2020;
168(5): 921–925.
80 Cole DC, Baslanti TO, Gravenstein NL, et al. Leaving more than your fingerprint
on the intravenous line: a prospective study on propofol anesthesia and implica-
tions of stopcock contamination. Anesth Analg 2015; 120(4): 861–867.
81 Heldmann E, Brown DC, Shofer F. The association of propofol usage with postop-
erative wound infection rate in clean wounds: a retrospective study. Vet Surg 1999;
28(4): 256–259.
82 Tomihari M, Nishihara A, Shimada T, et al. A comparison of the immunological
effects of propofol and isoflurane for maintenance of anesthesia in healthy dogs.
J Vet Med Sci 2015; 77(10): 1227–1233.
83 Miyata T, Kodama T, Honma R, et al. Influence of general anesthesia with isoflu-
rane following propofol-induction on natural killer cell cytotoxic activities of
peripheral blood lymphocytes in dogs. J Vet Med Sci 2013; 75(7): 917–921.
84 Simeonova GP, Slavov E, Usunov R, et al. Increased apoptosis of peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) during general and epidural anaesthesia in dogs. Vet
Res Commun 2008; 32(8): 619–626.
85 Remedios AM, Wagner R, Caulkett NA, et al. Epidural abscess and discospondy-
litis in a dog after administration of a lumbosacral epidural analgesic. Can Vet J
1996; 37(2): 106–107.
86 Phillips LR, McAbee KP, Stephenson N, et al. Evaluation of complications and fea-
sibility of indwelling epidural catheter use for postoperative pain control in dogs in
the home environment. N Z Vet J 2015; 63(2): 86–91.
87 Budsberg SC, Torres BT, Sandberg GS. Efficacy of postoperative antibiotic use after
tibial plateau leveling osteotomy in dogs: a systematic review. Vet Surg 2021; 50(4):
729–739.
88 Spencer DD, Daye RM. A prospective, randomized, double-blinded, placebo-
controlled clinical study on postoperative antibiotherapy in 150 arthroscopy-assisted
tibial plateau leveling osteotomies in dogs. Vet Surg 2018; 47(8): E79–E87.
89 Dyall BAR, Schmökel HG. Surgical site infection rate after hemilaminectomy and
laminectomy in dogs without perioperative antibiotic therapy. Vet Comp Orthop
Traumatol 2018; 31(3): 202–213.
90 Boothe DM, Boothe HW, Jr. Antimicrobial considerations in the perioperative
patient. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2015; 45(3): 585–608.
91 Howe LM, Boothe HW, Jr. Antimicrobial use in the surgical patient. Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 2006; 36(5): 1049–1060, vi.

-- 167 of 1450 --

152
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The S ixth Edition of Lumb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
Anesthesiology and the intentional killing of animals at first glance
seem to have diametrically opposed goals. The former is concerned
with maintaining life, whereas the latter takes it; indeed, the act of
performing euthanasia can be both physically and emotionally dif-
ficult for animal workers, caretakers, and veterinarians because of
this perceived conflict [1,2]. However, the humane treatment of
animals has increasingly become a subject of public debate and dis-
cussion, and a conservative and humane approach to the inten-
tional killing of any creature is warranted, justifiable, and expected
by society. As veterinarians, we take an oath on entry to the profes-
sion “… to use my scientific knowledge and skills for the benefit of
society through the protection of animal health and welfare, the
prevention and relief of animal suffering, the conservation of live-
stock resources …” [3]; further, we are reminded that our moral
duty is to the welfare of animals under our care [4,5]. Therefore,
whether for welfare concerns, food and fiber production, or in
response to natural or man-made disasters, our duty as compas-
sionate veterinarians is to minimize or eliminate animal pain, anxi-
ety, and distress. Viewed in this context, veterinary anesthetists and
anesthesiologists are uniquely positioned to contribute meaning-
fully to matters pertaining to the humane taking of animal life.
Determining the humaneness of euthanasia, slaughter, or depop-
ulation methods can be difficult because as humans we can never
fully know or understand the subjective experiences of animals
during loss of consciousness. This problem has vexed veterinary
medicine since 1847 when, after administering the then newly
described ether anesthetic to dogs and cats, the eminent British vet-
erinarian Edward Mayhew concluded [6]:
The results of these trials are not calculated to inspire any very sanguine
hopes. We cannot tell whether the cries emitted are evidence of pain or
not; but they are suggestive of agony to the listener, and, without testi-
mony to the contrary, must be regarded as evidence of suffering. The
process, therefore, is not calculated to attain the object for which in vet-
erinary practice it would be most generally employed, namely, to relieve
the owner from the impression that his animal was subjected to torture.
In another light, it is not likely to be of much practical utility.
One of the defining characteristics in humans undergoing
anesthesia is feeling as if one is having an “out-of-body experience,”
suggesting a disconnection between one’s sense of self and one’s
awareness of time and space [7]. Although we cannot know for
certain the subjective experiences of animals, one can speculate that
similar feelings of disorientation may contribute to apparent signs
of animal distress observed during anesthesia. Fortunately, the
development of anesthesia methods for animals continued despite
Dr. Mayhew’s initial misgivings.
Determining the humaneness of killing methods depends on
our ability to assess pain and consciousness within the contexts of
method and application. Events such as vocalization, paddling,
or convulsions are often interpreted as unequivocal evidence of
animal suffering. Although unpleasant to observe, such events have
much less effect on animal welfare when they occur after loss of
consciousness.
8 Euthanasia and Humane Killing
Robert E. Meyer
Professor Emeritus, Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Mississippi State University, Mississippi, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 152
Terminology, 153
Euthanasia, 153
Humane slaughter, 153
Depopulation, 154
Pain and consciousness, 154
Mechanisms of action, 155
Evaluating animal distress, 156
Choice of killing method relative to onset of unconsciousness, 158
Fetal sentience and euthanasia, 160
Low atmospheric pressure stunning, 160
Foam depopulation, 161
Agent purity and euthanasia, 161
Euthanasia in the clinical setting, 162
References, 162

-- 168 of 1450 --

Chapter 8: Euthanasia and Humane Killing 	153
The purpose of this chapter is to review the mechanisms and
methods used for the intentional taking of animal life, including
during the fetal stage, within the contexts of pain perception and
consciousness. Recently described novel methods of low atmos-
pheric pressure stunning and foam depopulation for poultry are
described, in addition to considerations on agent purity require-
ments for humane killing. For a more detailed overview of eutha-
nasia, including recommendations and procedures for specific
species, readers are strongly encouraged to consult the most
recent guidelines issued by the American Veterinary Medical
Association (AVMA) [8], the Canadian Council on Animal Care
(CCAC) [9], and the World Organisation for Animal Health
(WOAH, formerly OIE) [10].
Terminology
A notable update in the 2020 AVMA Euthanasia Guidelines is the
clarification of the difference between sedation and anesthesia.
Sedation is defined as “a state of CNS depression in which the
animal is awake but calm, and with sufficient stimuli may be
aroused.” General anesthesia is defined as “a method used to pro-
duce unconsciousness.” Anesthetized animals are not arousable by
noxious stimuli. This distinction is important in that several com-
mon techniques (e.g., placement of intraosseous cannulas, intraor-
gan or intracardiac injections, intrathecal lidocaine, and use of
saturated potassium (K +
) or magnesium (Mg +
) solutions) are con-
sidered acceptable only when performed on anesthetized or fully
unconscious animals.
Euthanasia
Euthanasia (derived from the Greek eu + thanatos, or “good death”)
generally refers to the goal of ending the life of an individual animal
in a way that minimizes or eliminates pain and distress. Currently,
the term is applied to situations where death is induced in a manner,
that is, (1) in accord with an animal’s interests and/or because it is a
matter of welfare (humane disposition); and (2) where humane
techniques are applied to induce the most rapid, painless, and
distress-free death possible. Hence, for an act of intentional killing
to be considered euthanasia, both humane disposition and humane
techniques must be considered together [8]. Euthanasia is not a
substitute for poor veterinary care and should never be considered
as the “easy way out” or as a means to justify questionable manage-
ment decisions. Rather, euthanasia provides a humane and respon-
sible solution to improve animal welfare by alleviating animal
suffering.
There is debate as to whether the term euthanasia appropriately
describes the killing of some animals at the end of biological experi-
ments and of unwanted shelter animals; extensive discussion
regarding these issues can be found in papers by McMillan [11] and
Pavlovik et al. [12]. For a more extensive review of the moral and
ethical considerations of euthanasia, including the decision pro-
cesses, the reader is directed to the 2020 AVMA Guidelines on
Euthanasia [8].
Within the 2020 AVMA Euthanasia Guidelines, methods are clas-
sified as Acceptable, Acceptable with Conditions, and Unacceptable;
similar terminology is applied to euthanasia methods throughout
this chapter:
• Acceptable methods are those that consistently produce a humane
death when used alone or as the sole means of producing death.
• Acceptable with Conditions methods are those techniques that
may require certain conditions to be met to produce humane
death consistently, may have greater potential for operator error
or to be a safety hazard, are not well documented in the scientific
literature, or may require a secondary method to ensure death.
Methods “acceptable with conditions” are equivalent to “acceptable
methods” when all criteria for application of a method can be met.
• Unacceptable methods and techniques are those deemed inhu-
mane under any conditions or pose a substantial risk to the
human applying the technique. Examples include, but are not
necessarily limited to:
◦ Certain anesthetic agents and adjuncts, such as chloral hydrate,
chloroform, diethyl ether, neuromuscular blocking agents in
conscious vertebrate animals (includes nicotine; also magne-
sium sulfate (MgSO4
), potassium chloride (KCl), and all depo-
larizing and non-depolarizing curariform agents).
◦ Certain chemicals, such as cyanide, formaldehyde, household
products and solvents, cleaning products and disinfectants,
pesticides, and strychnine.
◦ Certain physical methods, such as air embolism, burning,
rapid decompression, drowning, exsanguination, hypother-
mia, manually applied blunt force trauma to the head (excep-
tions apply), non-penetrating captive bolts (exceptions apply),
rapid freezing (exceptions apply), smothering, and thoracic
compression.
• Adjunctive methods are procedures and practices that should not
be used as a sole or primary method, but which can be used in
conjunction with acceptable methods to bring about humane
death following initial loss of consciousness. Examples include,
but are not necessarily limited to:
◦ Exsanguination, pithing, intravenous or intracardiac MgSO4 or
KCl, or creating a pneumothorax.
The following criteria were used in the 2020 AVMA Guidelines
on Euthanasia to evaluate methods used to take the life of animals
intentionally:
• Ability to induce loss of consciousness and death with a minimum
of pain and distress.
• Time required to induce loss of consciousness.
• Reliability.
• Safety of personnel.
• Irreversibility.
• Compatibility with intended animal use and purpose.
• Documented emotional effect on observers or operators.
• Compatibility with subsequent evaluation, examination, or use of
tissue.
• Drug availability and human abuse potential.
• Compatibility with species, age, and health status.
• Ability to maintain equipment in proper working order.
• Safety for predators or scavengers should the carcass be consumed.
• Legal requirements.
• Environmental impacts of the method or carcass disposition.
Humane slaughter
Humane slaughter refers to processes and methods employed to
intentionally kill animals raised for food, fur, or fiber produc-
tion [13,14]. The term applies both to individual animals killed on-
farm and to commercial production processes. From a welfare
perspective, the term is inclusive of the transport and handling of
an animal, the methods employed to induce unconsciousness, the
period until unconsciousness is verified, and the time of death
when the animal is ready for entry into the food chain. This means
that efforts must be made to minimize and, where possible, elimi-
nate distress, pain, suffering, or anxiety associated with the entire

-- 169 of 1450 --

154 	Section 1: General Topics
process of bringing that animal to slaughter. Although some
humane slaughter methods may employ euthanasia techniques, not
all humane slaughter methods meet the criteria required to be con-
sidered euthanasia.
In addition to animal welfare concerns, important considerations
with regard to humane slaughter processes include public health
and safety, food safety and quality, environmental and economic
sustainability, production adequacy and sustainability, occupa-
tional health and impact on the labor force, international animal
welfare and trade standards, and religious and cultural aspects.
In the United States, methods for humane slaughter are federally
codified for cattle, calves, horses, mules, sheep, and swine by the
1958 Humane Slaughter (HS) Act and the 1978 Humane Methods
of Livestock Slaughter Act (Pub. L. 85-765; 7 USC 1901 et seq.)
(Pub. L. 85-765, Sec. 1, Aug. 27, 1958, 72 Stat. 862; Pub. L. 85-765,
§2, Aug. 27, 1958, 72 Stat. 862; Pub. L. 95-445, §5(a), Oct. 10, 1978,
92 Stat. 1069) [15]. Although methods for the humane slaughter of
poultry, fish, and rabbits are not specifically included in the 1958
and 1978 Acts, similar considerations should be applied to these
species [13,14].
Depopulation
Depopulation is defined as the rapid destruction of large numbers of
animals in response to emergencies, such as the control of cata-
strophic infectious diseases, or exigent situations caused by natural
or man-made disasters [16]. As defined by the AVMA in the 2019
Guidelines, the term applies to methods by which large numbers of
animals must be destroyed quickly and efficiently with as much
consideration given to the welfare of the animals as practicable, but
where the circumstances and tasks facing those performing the
depopulation are understood to be extenuating [16].
The AVMA classification of depopulation methods differs from
terminology used for euthanasia; methods are classified as Preferred,
Permitted in Constrained Circumstances, and Not Recommended.
• Preferred methods are recommended preferentially when cir-
cumstances allow implementation.
• Permitted in constrained circumstances methods are to be utilized
ONLY when circumstances constrain the ability to reasonably
implement a preferred method.
• Not recommended methods are to be utilized ONLY when the cir-
cumstances preclude the reasonable implementation of any of the
preferred methods or those permitted in constrained circum-
stances AND when the risk of doing nothing is deemed likely to
have a reasonable chance of resulting in significantly more ani-
mal suffering than the proposed depopulation technique.
Depopulation is especially problematic from a welfare standpoint
owing to several factors, including the sheer number of animals
potentially involved, the need for rapid and decisive responses to
limit disease spread or economic damage, and the potential for
extenuating circumstances limiting availability or deployment of
supplies, equipment, and personnel. This combination of factors
can lead to consideration of expedient solutions of questionable
humaneness. For example, in large confinement production facili-
ties, loss of system ventilation, whether by intentional or accidental
means, will eventually result in animal death; a process called
“Ventilation Shutdown Plus” has been described for both swine
and poultry depopulation [17,18]. Although application of mass
depopulation methods may result in the same ultimate outcome, it
is our duty as compassionate veterinarians to develop and employ
methods that minimize animal suffering under these adverse
circumstances. As with humane slaughter methods, depopulation
may employ euthanasia techniques, but not all depopulation meth-
ods may meet the criteria to be considered euthanasia.
Further, application of any recommended killing method must
be performed in accord with applicable national, regional, or local
laws governing drug acquisition and storage, occupational safety,
and methods used for euthanasia and disposal of animals, with
special attention to individual species requirements where possible.
If drugs have been used, careful consideration must be given to
appropriate carcass disposal and steps should be taken to avoid
environmental contamination or harm to other animals [8].
Selection of the most appropriate killing method for a particular
situation will depend on several factors, including the species and
number of animals involved, available means for animal handling
and restraint, the skill and proficiency of personnel, and the meth-
ods and equipment available. Information in the scientific literature
and available from practical experience focuses primarily on
domesticated animals, but the same general considerations can be
applied to all species. Inevitably, there will be less-than-perfect situ-
ations in which “acceptable/preferred” methods or “acceptable with
conditions/permitted in constrained circumstances” methods may
not be possible; judgments on the suitability of the best method or
agent under the circumstances will be necessary. It should be noted
that any useful and potentially humane killing method can become
inhumane through poor technique, improper application, or lack of
strict adherence to specified conditions and contingencies.
Pain and consciousness
Euthanasia, humane slaughter, and depopulation methods ini-
tially produce unconsciousness through three basic mechanisms:
(1) direct depression of neurons necessary for life functions;
(2) hypoxia; and (3) physical disruption of brain activity. Death
follows as the circulatory and respiratory centers fail, or as hypoxia
or reduced pH renders intracellular processes non-functional.
However, loss of consciousness occurs at substantially different
rates, such that the suitability of any particular agent or method
depends on whether an animal experiences pain or distress prior to
loss of consciousness.
Pain is defined as a conscious perception. Pain is subjective in
the sense that individuals can differ in their perceptions of inten-
sity and also in their physical and behavioral responses. The
International Association for the Study of Pain (IASP) describes
pain as “an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated
with, or resembling that associated with, actual or potential tissue
damage.” This most recent IASP definition also includes contextual
notes, several of which are relevant to this discussion: (1) pain is
always a personal experience that is influenced to varying degrees
by biological, psychological, and social factors; (2) pain and nocic-
eption are different phenomena; pain cannot be inferred solely
from activity in sensory neurons; and (3) verbal description is only
one of several behaviors to express pain; inability to communicate
does not negate the possibility that a human or a nonhuman animal
experiences pain [19].
Based on mammalian models, the perception of pain requires
nerve impulses from peripheral nociceptors to reach an awake,
functioning cerebral cortex and associated subcortical brain struc-
tures. Impulses from peripheral nociceptors are conducted by
primary afferent fibers to either the spinal cord or the brainstem
and two general sets of neural networks. Reflex withdrawal and
flexion in response to nociceptive input are mediated at the spinal
level, while ascending nociceptive pathways carry impulses to the

-- 170 of 1450 --

Chapter 8: Euthanasia and Humane Killing 	155
reticular formation, hypothalamus, thalamus, and cerebral cortex
(somatosensory cortex and limbic system) for conscious sensory
processing and spatial localization. This distinction is important, in
that movements observed in response to nociception can be due to
spinally mediated reflex activity (unconscious), cerebral cortical
and subcortical processing (conscious), or a combination of the
two. Consequently, the choice of specific killing agent or method is
less critical if it is to be used on an animal that is already anesthe-
tized or rendered unconscious, provided that the animal does not
regain consciousness prior to death.
Although the perception of pain requires a conscious experience,
defining consciousness, and therefore the ability to perceive pain,
across many species is difficult. Amnesia, defined as loss of memory
function in which old memories cannot be remembered or new
memories cannot be formed, is a defining characteristic of anesthe-
sia, in that with sufficient quantities, all anesthetics are capable of
producing a state of amnesia where new memories cannot be
formed [7]. Unconsciousness, defined as loss of individual aware-
ness, occurs when the brain’s ability to integrate information is
blocked or disrupted. Anesthetics produce unconsciousness either
by preventing integration (blocking interactions among specialized
brain regions) or by reducing information (shrinking the number of
activity patterns available to cortical networks) received by the cer-
ebral cortex or equivalent structure or structures. Further, the
abrupt loss of consciousness that occurs at a critical concentration
of anesthetic implies that the integrated workings of the intercon-
nected neural states underlying consciousness may collapse
nonlinearly [20,21].
In humans, onset of anesthetic-induced unconsciousness has been
functionally defined by loss of appropriate response to verbal com-
mand; in animals, loss of consciousness is functionally defined by
loss of the righting reflex (LORR), also called “loss of position”
(LOP) [22–24]. This definition, introduced with the discovery of
general anesthesia over 160 years ago, is still useful because it is an
easily observable, integrated whole-animal response that is applica-
ble to a wide variety of species. Although surrogate measures of
brain activity such as an electroencephalogram or functional mag-
netic resonance imaging (fMRI) are often applied in this context,
these methods cannot yet provide definitive answers as to onset of
either human or animal unconsciousness; limitations of these
methods for this purpose are reviewed later in the section evaluat-
ing animal distress. The usefulness of LORR/LOP as an easily
observable proxy for loss of animal consciousness has been rein-
forced in studies where a reduction in alpha:delta (α:δ) brain wave
ratios was found to coincide with LOP in chickens [25,26].
Vocalization or physical movement observed during application
of humane killing methods is often interpreted as unequivocal evi-
dence of consciousness. While purposeful escape behaviors should
not be observed during the transition to unconsciousness, human
and animal studies confirm that amnesia is produced and conscious
awareness is blocked at less than half the anesthetic concentration
required to abolish physical movement [23]. Once consciousness is
lost, subsequent activities such as seizures, vocalization, reflex
struggling, breath holding, and tachypnea can be attributed to the
“excitement” phase or anesthesia stage 2 which, by definition, lasts
from loss of consciousness to the onset of a regular breathing pat-
tern [27,28]. Hence, vocalization and non-purposeful movements
observed following LORR/LOP are not necessarily signs of con-
scious perception by an animal.
Previously, it was thought that finfish, amphibians, reptiles, and
invertebrates lacked the anatomic structures necessary to perceive
pain as we understand it in birds and mammals. However, most
invertebrates respond to noxious stimuli and many have endoge-
nous opioids [29], and there is increasing taxa-specific evidence of
the efficacy of analgesics to minimize the impact of noxious stimuli
on amphibians and reptiles [30,31]. Suggestions that fish responses
to pain merely represent simple reflexes [32] have been refuted by
studies demonstrating differing forebrain and midbrain electrical
activity in response to nociceptor stimulation [33,34]; further, fin-
fish exhibit learning and memory consolidation when taught to
avoid noxious stimuli [35]. Based on the above considerations, kill-
ing methods that “result in rapid loss of consciousness” and “mini-
mize pain and distress” should be strived for, even in those species
where it is difficult to determine that these criteria have been met.
Mechanisms of action
Physical methods (e.g., gunshot, captive bolt, cerebral electrocu-
tion, blunt force trauma, and maceration) produce instantaneous
unconsciousness by destroying, or rendering non-functional, brain
regions responsible for cortical integration; death quickly follows
when the midbrain centers controlling respiration and cardiac
activity fail. Signs of effective stun and onset of unconsciousness
have been reviewed in the context of slaughter. In cattle, sheep, and
pigs, signs include immediate collapse (LORR/LOP) and a several-
second period of tetanic spasm, followed by slow hind limb move-
ments of increasing frequency [36–40]. However, there is significant
species variability in this response. The corneal reflex will be absent.
Signs of effective electrocution are loss of righting reflex, loss of
eye blink and moving object tracking, extension of the limbs, opis-
thotonos, downward rotation of the eyeballs, and tonic (rigid)
spasm changing to clonic (paddling) spasm, with eventual muscle
flaccidity. The corneal reflex will be absent. Although generalized
seizures may be observed following effective application of physical
methods, these most often follow loss of consciousness. Physical
methods are inexpensive, humane, and painless if performed prop-
erly, and leave no drug residues in the carcass. Furthermore, ani-
mals presumably experience less fear and anxiety with methods that
require little preparatory handling. However, as noted in the sec-
tion, choice of killing method relative to onset of unconsciousness,
physical methods usually require more direct physical proximity
with the animals to be euthanized, which can be both offensive and
upsetting for the operator. Physical disruption methods are often
followed by adjunctive methods such as exsanguination or pithing
to ensure death.
Decapitation and cervical dislocation as physical methods of
humane killing require separate comments. Electrical activity in the
brain can persist for up to 30 s following these methods [41–44];
interpretation of the significance of this activity is controver-
sial [45]. As discussed in the section evaluating animal distress,
brain electrical activity cannot yet provide definitive answers as to
the precise onset of unconsciousness. Other studies [46–50] indi-
cate such activity does not imply the ability to perceive pain and
conclude that loss of consciousness develops rapidly.
Anesthetics and carbon dioxide (CO2
) inhalation initially pro-
duce loss of consciousness through direct depression of the cortical
neural system; death subsequently occurs due to respiratory or car-
diovascular failure associated with agent overdose. Acute hypercap-
nia (defined as > 5% atmospheric CO 2
) rapidly reduces intracellular
pH, producing unconsciousness and a reversible anesthetic state
characterized by reduction of both basal and evoked neural activi-
ties [51–54] and inhibits central N-methyl-D- aspartate (NMDA)

-- 171 of 1450 --

156 	Section 1: General Topics
receptors [55]. In contrast to inert gas killing methods, exposure
to CO2 does not rely on the induction of hypoxia to cause
unconsciousness and death and can kill over a wide range of
concentrations [56].
Hypoxia is commonly achieved by displacing oxygen; this can be
achieved through exposure to high concentrations of inert gases,
such as nitrogen (N) or argon (Ar). To be effective, O 2 levels of < 2%
must be achieved and maintained, as re-establishment of a concen-
tration of O 2 of 6% or greater prior to death will allow immediate
recovery [56–59]. Carbon monoxide (CO) binds avidly to hemo-
globin and produces hypoxemia by blocking uptake of oxygen
within red blood cells. Exsanguination is another method of induc-
ing hypoxemia, albeit indirectly, to ensure death in already uncon-
scious or moribund animals. Low atmospheric pressure stunning of
poultry (LAPS) represents a refinement in producing hypoxia (see
the section low atmospheric pressure stunning). Whether a
hypoxia-based method is classified as stunning or killing depends
on the amount of time the animal remains in the modified atmos-
phere; killing methods eliminate the concern that animals may
regain consciousness. Hypoxia-based methods are not appropriate
for those species or stages of development that are tolerant to pro-
longed periods of hypoxemia.
Nitrous oxide (N2
O) is not a potent anesthetic in animals. The
effective dose for N 2
O is above 100 vol %; therefore, it cannot be
used alone in any species at normal atmospheric pressure without
producing hypoxia prior to respiratory or cardiac arrest. In humans,
the minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) (defined as the
median effective dose preventing purposeful movement; see
Chapter 28) for N 2
O is 104%; its potency in other species is less than
half that in humans (i.e., approximately 200%). By comparison, the
MAC for isoflurane is approximately 1.4%. Up to 70% N 2
O can be
added to an inhaled fluorocarbon anesthetic-oxygen vapor to speed
the onset of unconsciousness through the “second gas effect.”
However, owing to its reduced potency in animals, N2
O will only
reduce the fluorocarbon anesthetic MAC by 20–30%, or about half
that expected in humans [60]. The combination of CO2 with N2
O,
administered at a displacement rate of 20 and 60% of the chamber
volume per minute, produced LORR in C57Bl/6 and CD1 mice
10.3% faster than CO 2 alone (N 2
O–CO2
, 96.7 ± 7.9 (mean ± SD) s;
CO 2
, 108.7 ± 9.4 (mean ± SD) s), and may represent a refinement
over the use of CO 2 alone [61].
A gradual displacement rate between 30 and 70% of the con-
tainer volume per minute is currently recommended for adminis-
tration of CO2 for euthanasia [8]. The build-up, or wash-in, of gases
within enclosed spaces, is an exponential process dependent on
chamber volume and gas displacement rate, such that time to loss of
consciousness, and eventually death, will be a function of the time
constant for that container [62]. The time constant can be calcu-
lated as the chamber volume divided by the gas displacement
rate [62]. When starting from a gas concentration near zero, one
time constant is required to reach a washed-in gas concentration of
63% such that a gas volume displacement rate of 20%/min repre-
sents a time constant of 5 min (1 divided by 0.2). Thus, applying any
vapor or gas at a displacement rate of 20% of the container volume
per minute will result in an exponential rise to 63% of the wash-in
gas concentration within 5 min for a container of any size [62,63].
The application of inhaled gases into enclosed spaces can be fur-
ther refined to meet specific inflow rates, delivery points, and opti-
mal gas concentration profiles through use of computational fluid
dynamic (CFD) modeling. Gas distribution and temperature within
containers can be modeled in three dimensions using CFD software
running inside desktop computer-aided design (CAD) systems.
CFD simulation has proved to be a very powerful tool for modeling
transient gas concentrations during gas wash-in and wash-out. It has
further reduced the need for time- and labor-intensive experimental
testing of many design alternatives for on-farm depopulation methods
without the need for extensive experimental testing [64].
Loss of consciousness, as LORR/LOP, should always precede loss
of muscle movement. However, as with the physical killing meth-
ods, some animals may exhibit motor activity or convulsions fol-
lowing loss of consciousness with anesthetics or with hypoxia-based
methods. Indeed, anesthesia, coma, and generalized seizures all
represent a loss of consciousness where both arousal and awareness
in humans are low or absent [65]. Characteristic signs of effective
neural depression are similar to those observed with physical meth-
ods or with deep levels of anesthesia, including LORR/LOP, loss of
eye blink and corneal reflexes, and muscle flaccidity. Inhaled and
hypoxia-based methods require a number of conditions and con-
tingencies for their proper and appropriate use, such that they are
currently classified as “acceptable with conditions” in the 2020
AVMA Guidelines [8].
Agents and methods that prevent movement through muscle
paralysis without inhibiting or disrupting the cerebral cortex or
equivalent structures (e.g., succinylcholine, strychnine, curare, nic-
otine, and potassium or magnesium salts) are not acceptable as sole
agents for humane killing of vertebrates because they result in con-
scious perception of distress and pain prior to death. In contrast,
magnesium salts are considered to be acceptable as the sole agent
for euthanasia in many invertebrates owing to the absence of evi-
dence for cerebral activity in some members of these taxa [66,67];
further, there is evidence that the magnesium ion acts centrally to
suppress neural activity of cephalopods [68]. Magnesium chloride
is effective on moon jellyfish and sea stars without the adverse side
effects noted with KCl and MgSO4 [69,70].
In summary, the cerebral cortex or equivalent structure(s) and
associated subcortical structures must be functional for conscious
perception of pain to occur. If the cerebral cortex is non-functional
because of neuronal depression, hypoxia, or physical disruption,
pain is not experienced. Although distressing to observers, reflex
motor activity or physical signs occurring following loss of con-
sciousness, as defined by LORR/LOP, is not perceived by the animal
as pain or distress. Given that we are limited to applying humane
killing methods based on these three basic mechanisms, efforts
should be directed toward education of involved personnel and
toward achieving technical proficiency and refinement in the appli-
cation of currently approved methods [71].
Evaluating animal distress
Stress and the resulting responses have been divided into three
phases [72]. Eustress results when harmless stimuli initiate adaptive
responses that are beneficial to the animal. Neutral stress results
when the animal’s response to stimuli causes neither harmful nor
beneficial effects to the animal. Distress results when an animal’s
response to stimuli interferes with its well-being and comfort [73].
Distress may be created by the conditions prior to application of
stunning or killing methods (e.g., transport conditions, environ-
ment, or restraint), or by the conditions under which methods are
applied (e.g., gradual gas/vapor displacement or immersion) [74].
Simply placing Sprague–Dawley rats into an unfamiliar exposure
chamber containing room air produces arousal, if not distress [75].
Pigs are social animals and prefer not to be isolated from one

-- 172 of 1450 --

Chapter 8: Euthanasia and Humane Killing 	157
another; consequently, moving them to the CO2 stunning box in
groups, rather than lining them up single file as needed for electric
stunning, improves voluntary forward movement, reduces han-
dling stress, and reduces electric prod use [76]. While gradual-fill
inhaled methods may be less stressful than more rapid displace-
ments for certain species in some circumstances [77], this may not
be true for all species under all circumstances [8]. Distress may
manifest behaviorally (e.g., overt escape behaviors, approach-
avoidance preferences (aversion)), or physiologically (e.g., changes
in heart rate, sympathetic nervous system activity, hypothalamic–
pituitary axis activity), such that a “one size fits all” approach cannot
be easily applied to evaluate killing methods or determine specific
species applications.
Both sympathetic nervous system (SNS) and hypothalamic–pitui-
tary–adrenal axis (HPAA) activation are well accepted as stress
response markers. However, it has been suggested that responses to
systemic stressors associated with immediate survival, such as
hypoxia and hypercapnia, are likely directly relayed from brainstem
nuclei and are not associated with higher-order CNS processing and
conscious experiences [78]. Marked increases in circulating catecho-
lamines, glucagon, insulin, lactate, and free fatty acids have been
reported in porcine experimental models where brain death is
induced following induction of general anesthesia [79–81]. Forslid
and Augustinsson reported that concentrations of norepinephrine
and lactate increased 1 min after exposure of pigs to CO2 [82].
Borovsky et al. found an increase in norepinephrine in rats following
30 s of exposure to 100% CO2 [83]. Similarly, Reed et al. exposed rats
to 20–25 s of CO2
, which was sufficient to render them recumbent,
unconscious, and unresponsive, and observed tenfold increases in
vasopressin and oxytocin concentrations [84]. Hypothalamic
vasopressin-containing neurons are similarly activated in response
to CO2 exposure in both awake and anesthetized rats [85]. In pigs
undergoing euthanasia with physical methods resulting in immedi-
ate unconsciousness (e.g., captive bolt; two-point electrocution) or
inhaled methods where onset of unconsciousness is delayed (CO2
;
70% N2
–30% CO2
), cortisol levels were observed to be similar,
whereas plasma norepinephrine and lactate were similarly increased
in all groups [86]; although all gases and mixtures induced open-
mouthed breathing prior to loss of righting reflex, the mean latency
to onset of open-mouth breathing and subsequent loss of righting
reflex was substantially longer with 70% N2
–30% CO2 than with CO2
alone. The fact that levels of stress hormones observed were similar
with both physical and inhaled methods illustrates the difficulty in
differentiating conscious from unconscious distress where inter-
pretation is complicated by continued exposure during the period
between loss of consciousness and death.
Behavioral assessment (e.g., purposeful escape behaviors; open-
mouth breathing) and aversion testing have been used to subjec-
tively evaluate inhaled killing methods in several species; these
methods have recently been reviewed [8]. Aversion, defined as a
desire to avoid or retreat from a stimulus, is usually determined
using approach-avoidance studies, where the strength of avoidance
to a particular situation or condition is determined by the animal’s
choice to forego a desirable reward. This quantitative feature makes
aversion a powerful tool for behavior studies. However, it is impor-
tant to note that although aversion is a measure of preference and
may imply unpleasantness, aversion itself does not necessarily indi-
cate pain or distress; further, approach-avoidance tests fail to distin-
guish adequately between aversion and distress, which is the
inability to respond appropriately (either behaviorally or physiolog-
ically) to a stressor [74]. In addition, agents identified as being less
aversive (e.g., Ar or N 2 gas mixtures) can still produce overt and
extended signs of behavioral distress (e.g., open-mouth breathing)
prior to loss of consciousness under certain conditions of adminis-
tration (e.g., gradual displacement application) [86].
Measurements of brain electrical function, such as the electroen-
cephalogram (EEG), bispectral analysis (BIS™), and visual and audi-
tory evoked potentials, have been used to quantify the unconscious
state. In humans, the issue is intraoperative awareness under anes-
thesia; in animals, the problem is procedural humaneness relative
to onset of unconsciousness. The problem is even more complex in
animals where we cannot question them directly and must infer
from their actions and responses [87].
Brain electrical activity is acknowledged to be limited for this
purpose, especially when trying to conflate electrical activity with a
complex process such as consciousness. EEG is not a direct measure
of consciousness – it measures brain electrical activity, and while
that activity changes with levels of consciousness, EEG cannot pro-
vide definitive answers as to onset of unconsciousness using the
current state of the art. Although consciousness must vanish at
some level between behavioral unresponsiveness and the induction
of a flat EEG (indicating the cessation of the brain’s electrical activity
and brain death), current EEG-based brain function monitors are
limited in their ability to indicate directly the presence or absence of
unconsciousness, especially around the transition point [20,88];
also, it is not always clear which EEG patterns are indicators of
activation by stress or pain [89]. A 2012 editorial in a human
anesthesiology journal neatly sums up the issues [90]:
The electroencephalogram has been the Holy Grail of anesthetic depth
monitoring for more than half a century but has fallen on hard times
lately, largely because the focus of the dialog changed from electroen-
cephalogram as a monitor of “depth” to one of intraoperative aware-
ness … consciousness and intraoperative awareness are neurobiologically
exceedingly complex phenomena. This makes these states difficult to
capture or evaluate with electroencephalography, no matter the parame-
ter or sophistication of the processing algorithm. Recent studies examin-
ing the efficacy of the electroencephalogram bispectral index for
minimizing the risk of intraoperative awareness confirm as much.
Although loss of visual evoked potentials (VEPs) is associated
with brain death, visual cortex neurons remain responsive to flash
stimulation under desflurane anesthesia [91], and reduction in
flash- induced gamma (γ) oscillations in rat visual cortex is not a
unitary correlate of anesthetic-induced unconsciousness [92].
Large interindividual variations in auditory evoked potentials
(AEPs) and BIS analysis make it impossible to discriminate subtle
changes in clinical state of consciousness in real time during propo-
fol anesthesia [93].
Similarly, blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) MRI is a multi-
factorial surrogate for cerebral blood flow or cerebral blood vol-
ume, both of which are actual measures of neural activity. Although
a BOLD MRI response is generally a good surrogate measure of
neuronal activity, it is based on hemodynamic changes, which may
not reflect actual neural activity patterns, especially during anesthe-
sia or under pharmacological challenge; rather, observed effects
may be directly due to drug effects, or indirectly through changes in
autonomic activity, blood pressure, cardiac output, or respira-
tion [94,95]. In contrast, imaging of cerebral blood flow using posi-
tron emission tomography (PET) has been used in human
volunteers during manipulation of consciousness with anesthetics
combined with response to verbal command [21]; application of
this method to explore the transition between the conscious and
unconsciousness state in animals will be difficult.

-- 173 of 1450 --

158 	Section 1: General Topics
Choice of killing method relative to onset
of unconsciousness
The suitability of any particular agent or method for humane killing
depends largely on whether distress and/or pain are experienced
prior to loss of consciousness. While a “gentle” death that takes
longer is generally preferable to a rapid but more distressing
death [89], in some species and under some circumstances, the
most humane and pragmatic option may require the use of less-
than-ideal agents or conditions resulting in rapid unconsciousness
with few or no outward signs of distress [8]. Any perceived distress
or discomfort associated with a specific killing method occurring
prior to loss of consciousness must therefore be weighed against
adverse welfare that may occur due to handling or restraining
procedures [56].
People are disturbed less by the euthanasia process when they
feel distanced from the physical act of euthanasia or when animals
exhibit little or no movement. As noted previously, reflex and con-
vulsive motor activities can be particularly unsettling, such that
choice of stunning or killing method is substantially influenced by
the perceptions and preferences of those individuals to whom the
task has been charged. For example, laboratory technicians reported
they felt more comfortable using inhaled methods, where they were
more dissociated from the animals’ death than directly killing the
animal with cervical dislocation [96]. Focus groups of North
Carolina swine farm managers preferred methods “where you give
a shot and the animal goes to sleep,” even when those methods pro-
longed time to death, over captive bolt and blunt force cranial
trauma [97]. Injectable and inhaled killing methods can provide
that distance, which may partially explain their widespread usage
for this purpose.
Killing methods where unconsciousness is delayed have the
potential to affect animal welfare adversely. With inhalational
methods, onset of unconsciousness relies on a critical concentra-
tion of gases or vapors within the alveoli and blood for effect; simi-
larly, onset of unconsciousness following administration of
injectable agents is dependent on achieving an effective concentra-
tion at the site of action. This depends on the properties of the agent
and route of administration; loss of consciousness can be relatively
quick following direct injection into the circulatory system whereas
injectable agent administration by non-intravenous routes can
delay the process. Accordingly, both inhaled methods and non-
intravenous administration of barbiturate acid derivatives are cur-
rently classified as “acceptable with conditions” [8].
Interestingly, more than 40% of human children aged 2–10 years
display distress behaviors during sevoflurane induction, with 17%
displaying significant distress and more than 30% physically resist-
ing during induction [98]. Fear in children undergoing anesthesia
may be due to odor, feel of the mask, or a true phobia of the
mask [99]. That anesthetic agents can produce distress and aversion
in humans, raises concerns for their use in animals, in that the
United States Government Principles for the Utilization and Care of
Vertebrate Animals Used in Testing, Research, and Training state:
“Unless the contrary is established, investigators should consider
that procedures that cause pain or distress in human beings may
cause pain or distress in other animals” [100]. Despite evidence of
distress and aversion, anesthesia continues to be clinically adminis-
tered to both humans and animals because the benefits associated
with use greatly outweigh any distress and/or aversion the agents
themselves may cause.
An intravenous (IV) overdose of a barbiturate acid derivative,
such as pentobarbital or secobarbital, is currently recommended for
euthanasia of companion animals [8]. These agents are no longer
commonly used veterinary anesthetics, and few veterinarians today
have had clinical experience of using them outside the context of
euthanasia. Onset of unconsciousness with IV administration of
pentobarbital or secobarbital usually occurs within 30–60 s [101];
however, maximal depth of anesthesia may not be attained for
1 min or longer [102]. It is important to understand that overdoses
of these agents are utilized to ensure death and do not result in
faster induction times. Pentobarbital inductions are quiet in most
cases; however, struggling, excitement, and/or vocalization are
occasionally observed, with the recommendation to hold the ani-
mal firmly as the head begins to fall to help avoid provoking an
excitement phase during induction [103]. The 2020 AVMA
Guidelines state “pre-euthanasia sedation or general anesthesia
should be provided whenever practicable” [8].
Non-intravenous administration of barbiturates is currently cate-
gorized as “acceptable with conditions” when IV access would be
distressful, dangerous, or impractical due to animal size or behavio-
ral considerations [8]. Administration by the intraperitoneal (IP)
route is noted to produce a slow induction of anesthesia with excite-
ment and vocalization, unpredictable levels of anesthesia, and dam-
age to viscera in both dogs and cats [103]. In adult male Crl:CD(BR)
rats, IP administration of 40 and 50 mg/kg pentobarbital produced
loss of righting in 4.7 ± 1.4 and 3.5 ± 1.4 min, respectively (mean ±
SEM) [104]; similar findings were reported in male and female
Wistar U:WU(Cpb) rats [105]. Cats from an animal shelter adminis-
tered 346.6 mg/kg pentobarbital and 17.7 mg/kg lidocaine intrahe-
patically while conscious showed incoordination in 27 s and
recumbency in 67 s [106]. Although time to loss of consciousness in
cats receiving IP pentobarbital was not reported, incoordination and
recumbency were stated to be “significantly prolonged,” with 25% of
cats in the IP group and 9% of cats in the intrahepatic group showing
at least 30 s of what was characterized as anesthesia Stage 1 and 2
excitement [106]. As both pentobarbital and secobarbital are highly
alkaline, with a pH of ~ 10, IP administration is associated with sig-
nificant peritoneal irritation and pain, evidenced by upregulation in
spinal c-fos expression following administration of pentobarbital,
even with the addition of the local anesthetic lidocaine [107].
When a gas or vapor is first introduced into a large air-filled con-
fined space using gradual displacement methods, animals are not
immediately exposed to conditions known to be aversive or painful.
Time between onset of signs of distress and LOP with inhaled
methods depends on the agent and displacement rate. Generally,
loss of consciousness will be more rapid if animals are initially
exposed to a high concentration of an inhaled agent. For example,
the mean induction time for neonatal pigs is 90 s when exposed to
5% isoflurane [108] and 120 s for 5% halothane [109]. For many
agents and species, however, forced exposure to high inhalant con-
centrations can be aversive and distressing, such that gradual expo-
sure may be the most pragmatic and humane option.
Flecknell et al. reported violent struggling accompanied by apnea
and bradycardia in rabbits administered isoflurane, halothane, and
sevoflurane by mask or induction chamber, and concluded that
these agents were aversive and should be avoided whenever possi-
ble [110]. Leach et al. found inhaled anesthetic vapors to be associ-
ated with some degree of aversion in laboratory rodents, with
increasing aversion noted as concentration increased; halothane
was least aversive for rats, and halothane and enflurane were least
aversive for mice [111–113]. Makowska and Weary also reported
halothane and isoflurane to be aversive to male Wistar rats, but less
so than CO2 [114].

-- 174 of 1450 --

Chapter 8: Euthanasia and Humane Killing 	159
Carbon monoxide is reported to be aversive to laboratory rats,
but not as aversive as CO2 [115]. Carbon monoxide produces LOP
at a concentration of approximately 5% in male Wistar rats; how-
ever, mean time to LOP varies with CO displacement rate (104 s at
3% volume displacement rate; 64 s at 6% volume displacement rate;
53 s at 7% volume displacement rate) [115]; for comparison, a 10%
CO atmosphere could be achieved within 30 s with administration
of 100% CO at a volume displacement rate equivalent to 20% of the
chamber volume per minute.
Aversion to the inert gases argon (Ar) and nitrogen (N 2
) depends
largely on species and conditions of administration [8]. Hypoxia
resulting from exposure to these gases is aversive to rats, mice, and
mink. In contrast, these gases appear not to be directly aversive to
poultry, and the resulting hypoxia appears to be non-aversive or
only mildly aversive. Similarly, Ar or N2 gas mixtures do not appear
to be directly aversive to pigs and seem to reduce, but not eliminate,
behavioral responses to hypoxia [59]. However, based on the wash-
in and wash-out exponential functions, gradual displacement
administration of inert gases results in prolonged exposure to
hypoxic conditions and can produce overt signs of behavioral dis-
tress, such as open-mouth breathing, for an extended period prior
to loss of consciousness in laboratory rodents [75,77], pigs [86], and
poultry [116]. Nitrogen-containing high-expansion foams are
effective in purging air from containers and create stable anoxic
conditions. Poultry immersed in high-expansion N2
- filled foam
rapidly become ataxic, with loss of posture and vigorous wing flap-
ping characteristic of anoxic death [117]. Pigs avoid putting their
heads and snouts into the foam when foam levels become high and
demonstrate escape attempts through the test box lid when foam
covers their heads [118].
Distress during CO2 exposure has been examined using behavio-
ral assessment and aversion testing [8]. Variability in behavioral
responses to CO2 has been reported for rats and mice [74,77,119–
125], pigs [57,59,126–129], and poultry [130–139]. Although signs
of distress have been reported in animals in some studies, other
researchers have not consistently observed these effects. This may
be due to variations in gas administration and exposure methods,
handling issues, types of behaviors assessed, and animal species and
strains tested. Fossorial (burrowing) species appear to be more
resistant to hypoxia and hypercarbia than terrestrial-dwelling spe-
cies, making it difficult to generalize [140].
Using preference and approach-avoidance testing, rats, and
mice show aversion to CO 2 concentrations sufficient to induce
unconsciousness [112,113] and are willing to forego a palatable
food reward to avoid exposure to CO 2 concentrations of approxi-
mately 15% and higher [114,141] after up to 24 h of food depriva-
tion [142]. Mink will avoid a chamber containing a desirable novel
object when it contains 100% CO 2 [143]. In contrast to other spe-
cies, a large proportion of chickens and turkeys will enter a cham-
ber containing moderate concentrations of CO 2 (60%) to gain
access to food or social contact [135,137,139]. Following incapaci-
tation and prior to loss of consciousness, birds in these studies
show behaviors such as open-beak breathing and head shaking;
these behaviors, however, may not be associated with distress
because birds do not withdraw from CO 2 when these behaviors
occur [133]. Exposure to CO 2 concentrations up to 30% does not
appear to be aversive to pigs, as Duroc and Large White pigs, when
given a choice, will tolerate 30% CO 2 to gain access to a food
reward [57,127]. Hence it appears that birds and pigs are more
willing than rodents and mink to tolerate CO 2 at concentrations
sufficient to induce LORR/LOP.
Carbon dioxide exposure using gradual fill methods is less likely
to cause pain due to nociceptor activation by carbonic acid prior
to onset of unconsciousness, such that a CO2 displacement rate
between 30 and 70% of the chamber volume per minute is currently
recommended for euthanasia [8,9]. When administered at these
rates, unconsciousness occurs prior to exposure to CO2 levels
known to produce nociceptor stimulation [74,77]. In humans, rats,
and cats, nociceptors begin to respond at CO 2 concentrations of
approximately 40% [144–147]. Humans report that discomfort
begins between 30 and 50% CO2 and intensifies to overt pain with
higher concentrations [148–150]. In rodents, distress begins at
approximately 15% CO2 concentration and lasts to onset of uncon-
sciousness approximately 30 s later. Unconsciousness occurs
within 106 s at a CO 2 concentration of approximately 30% with a
CO2 displacement rate equivalent to 17–20% of the chamber vol-
ume [125,141,150,151]. A slower 10%/min displacement increases
time to onset of unconsciousness to 156 s at a CO2 concentration of
21% [77]. When CO 2 is administered to neonatal pigs at 20% of the
chamber volume per minute, unconsciousness (loss of righting
reflex) occurs within 80 ± 15 s (mean ± SEM) at a CO2 concentra-
tion of approximately 22% [86]. The CO2 concentrations required
to produce LOP for broilers, layers, turkeys, and ducks are 19.0,
19.9, 19.3, and 23.8%, respectively [131].
Genetics may play a role in CO2 response variability. Panic disor-
der in humans is genetically linked to enhanced sensitivity to
CO2 [152]. The fear network, comprising the hippocampus, the
medial prefrontal cortex, and the amygdala and its brainstem pro-
jections, appears to be abnormally sensitive to CO2 in these
patients [153]. The genetic background of some pigs, especially
excitable lines such as the Hampshire and German Landrace, has
been associated with animals that react poorly to CO2 stunning,
whereas calmer genetic lines combining the Yorkshire or Dutch
Landrace conformations show much milder reactions [154]. Given
a choice, Duroc and Large White pigs will tolerate 30% CO2 to gain
access to a food reward but will forego the reward to avoid exposure
to 90% CO 2 , even after a 24-h period of food deprivation [57,127].
A shock with an electric prod, however, is more aversive to Landrace
× Large White pigs than inhaling 60 or 90% CO 2
, with pigs inhaling
60% CO2 willing to re-enter the crate containing CO 2 [126].
Jongman et al. linked variation in pig responses to CO 2 with pre-
stunning lairage issues and animal handling [155]. Until further
research is conducted, one can conclude that exposure to high levels
of CO 2 may be humane for certain genetic lines of pigs and stressful
for others [154].
Studies have found regions of the mouse amygdala associated
with fear behavior to contain acid-sensing ion channels (ASIC) sen-
sitive to elevated CO2 [156]. Fear behaviors and aversion in response
to CO 2 exposure were reduced in mice in which the ASIC receptors
were eliminated or inhibited, suggesting that aversive responses to
CO 2 in rodents, and potentially other species, are mediated in part
by an innate fear response. Further studies defining the presence of
ASIC and their role in CO 2
- induced fear in other rodent strains,
and also other animal species, are warranted.
The practice of immersion in a container prefilled with 100%
CO2 is now considered “unacceptable” for euthanasia [8,9].
However, a distinction must be made between immersion, where
conscious animals are placed directly into a high concentration of a
gas or vapor within a container, and commercial controlled atmos-
phere stunning (CAS) processes as employed for the stunning of
poultry and swine. Unlike immersion, animals experience their
introduction into CAS atmospheres gradually; this can be through

-- 175 of 1450 --

160 	Section 1: General Topics
physical transport at a controlled rate into a contained stunning
atmosphere gradient, through controlled introduction of stunning
gases into an enclosed space, or by controlled reduction of atmos-
pheric pressure to produce hypoxia. Sequential combinations (so-
called “two-step” or “multi-phase” processes) may utilize one gas or
a gas mixture to induce unconsciousness prior to exposure to a dif-
ferent gas mixture or higher gas concentration. Animal transport or
introduction rate may be slow or relatively quick, depending on the
process, gases utilized, and the specific species. Further, denser than
air gases such as CO2 layer into defined gradients within an enclosed
space [157]. Thus, animals are not immediately exposed to condi-
tions known to be aversive or painful with CAS. The design of com-
mercial CAS systems is described in the 2016 AVMA Humane
Slaughter guidelines and has been reviewed by Grandin and
Cockram [14].
Uncertainty exists as to the usefulness and feasibility of substitut-
ing inhaled anesthetic agents for CO2 with respect to animal welfare
and human health and safety [8,85]; in these types of studies, per-
ception bias is a possible confounder [158]. Inhaled halocarbon
anesthetics have been proposed as alternatives to CO 2 for rodent
euthanasia [89,114,115,159] and the Canadian Council on Animal
Care (CCAC) has adopted this position when feasible [9]. However,
inhaled anesthetics are known to produce varying degrees of aver-
sion in rodents [111–114,159–162]; inhaled anesthetics are noted
to produce aversion, distress, and escape behaviors during anes-
thetic induction in other animal species [110] and humans [98,99].
Isoflurane anesthesia administered prior to CO2 euthanasia increased
adverse behavioral signs of distress and c-fos expression in the brains
of female CD1 mice [74]. Consistent with the principles governing
wash-in and wash-out of gases within closed containers, five of ten
isoflurane-anesthetized mice showed signs of recovery of conscious-
ness when CO2 was added to the container [74]. Premedication with
acepromazine or midazolam prior to exposure to CO2 administered
at a 20%/min displacement rate did not significantly alter observed
behaviors but did induce significantly higher c-fos expression [74].
Premedication with 20 mg/kg zolazepam–tiletamine in cream cheese
produced mild sedation and reduced the aversiveness of CO 2
euthanasia in mice [163]. Large amounts of inhaled anesthetics are
absorbed and significant amounts remain in the body for days, even
after apparent recovery [164], making these agents unsuitable for
euthanasia of food-producing animals.
Fetal sentience and euthanasia
Fetal sentience during euthanasia of pregnant animals and ovario-
hysterectomy of pregnant dogs and cats has been extensively
reviewed by Mellor et al. [165–168] and White [169]. Concerns
about fetal suffering during humane slaughter of pregnant animals
or ovariohysterectomy of pregnant dogs and cats may arise, at least
in part, because of observation of fetal body and respiratory move-
ments. However, these movements are a part of normal fetal physi-
ology in utero and should not, in and of themselves, be a cause for
welfare concerns. Although the term “fetal distress” has been used
in the past, it is not meant to indicate or imply conscious emotional
distress, awareness, or conscious suffering and is currently consid-
ered to be imprecise and non-specific in this context [169].
In an extensive review of fetal physiology and pain perception,
Mellor and Diesch [165] asserted that “an animal must be both sen-
tient and conscious for suffering to occur”; in other words, the ani-
mal must have adequate neural development for sensory perception
or sentience and must also be in an awake conscious state. All
mammalian embryos or fetuses studied to date remain in an uncon-
scious state throughout pregnancy and birth [166]. This occurs in
some species due to exceptional neurological immaturity (e.g., cer-
tain marsupials) or moderate neurological immaturity (e.g., cats,
dogs, rabbits, rats, and mice). In those species which are neurologi-
cally mature at birth (e.g., cattle, deer, goats, sheep, horses, and
guinea pigs), initial neurological immaturity is combined with in
utero neuro-inhibitors. These neuro-inhibitors are unique to prena-
tal life and include adenosine (a potent promoter of sleep and/or
unconsciousness), allopregnanolone and pregnanolone (neuroac-
tive steroids with well-established anesthetic, sedative/hypnotic,
and analgesic effects, synthesized by the fetal brain), and prosta-
glandin-D2 (a potent sleep-inducing agent, synthesized by the fetal
brain). Consciousness occurs within minutes or hours following
birth in these species largely due to the combined effect of decreas-
ing neuro-inhibition and the onset of strong neuro-activation.
Further, an isoelectric EEG, which is incompatible with conscious-
ness, rapidly appears after cessation of placental oxygen supply.
Thus, embryos and fetuses cannot consciously experience sensa-
tions or feelings such as breathlessness or pain, and cannot suffer
while dying in utero after the death of the dam, whatever the cause
of her death. A rather similar, but qualified, conclusion has been
drawn in avian species where EEG activity suggestive of the poten-
tial for pain perception may not occur until > 80% incubation in
avian species [8,170].
Low atmospheric pressure stunning
Low atmospheric pressure stunning (LAPS) is a method for stun-
ning poultry prior to humane slaughter. LAPS was added to the EU
Directive 2018/723 (amendment to 1099/2009) in May 2018 and is
listed in the USDA Food Safety and Inspection Service New
Technology Table (07-NT- 0289- N- A, August 2021; www.fsis.usda.
gov/sites/default/files/media_file/2020-09/new-technologies-table.
pdf, accessed May 2022). Unconsciousness occurs following a con-
trolled and gradual reduction of barometric pressure due to
hypoxia [171–173]. A significant advantage of LAPS over electrical
stunning and “live-dump” controlled atmosphere stunning (CAS)
using gas is elimination of welfare issues associated with dumping
live birds onto the conveyor line and eliminating the need to handle
live birds manually.
Rapid decompression is currently deemed “unacceptable” for
euthanasia [8]. LAPS is not rapid decompression, but rather nega-
tive atmospheric pressure applied gradually over time, typically
over 1 min in broilers, which results in an acute hypoxic state not
unlike being in an unpressurized airplane at altitude. Maximum
observed negative pressure during commercial broiler LAPS cor-
responds to an estimated atmospheric pressure of 160 mmHg and
inspired partial pressure of oxygen of 33 mmHg [173]. Thus, LAPS
PO2 at maximum negative pressure is equivalent to a 4% dry oxygen
atmosphere at sea level (33 mmHg/760 mmHg). For comparison,
the atmospheric pressure (PB
) on top of Mount Everest (elevation
approximately 29,000 feet) is 225 mmHg and the PO 2 is 47 mmHg;
at 40,000 feet, PB is 141 mmHg and PO2 is 30 mmHg.
Rapid decompression can cause both pain and distress through
expansion of gases present in enclosed spaces [174]. In the case of
birds, however, gases are unlikely to be trapped in the lungs or
abdomen during LAPS and are therefore unlikely to become a
source of abdominal distention, due to the unique anatomic struc-
ture of the avian respiratory system. Avian lungs are open at both
ends, rigid, attached to the ribs, and do not change in size during

-- 176 of 1450 --

Chapter 8: Euthanasia and Humane Killing 	161
ventilation. Attached to the lungs are nine air sacs that fill all spaces
within the thoracic and abdominal cavities. Because birds lack a
diaphragm, they move air in and out during sternal movement
using the intercostal and abdominal muscles; air movement is
simultaneous and continuous with no passive or relaxed period.
Hence, it is unlikely that significant amounts of gas can be trapped
within the avian lungs or abdomen unless the trachea is blocked for
some reason [175]. In contrast to reports of hemorrhagic lesions in
the lungs, brain, and heart of animals undergoing rapid decompres-
sion, no such lesions were observed in birds undergoing LAPS [172].
Corticosterone concentrations in LAPS stunned broilers were
nearly half the levels observed in electrically stunned birds [172].
During commercial operation, birds undergoing LAPS remain
within palletized shipping cages. Following the LAPS cycle, the pal-
letized cages containing unconscious birds are moved to the dump-
ing station and moved by conveyor belt to the shackling area prior
to entry to the processing line. LAPS target pressures for broilers are
achieved within 1 min from the start of the LAPS cycle and main-
tained for 4 min and 40 s to assure that recovery to consciousness
does not occur prior to exsanguination [172]. Time to first coordi-
nated animal movement was 58.7 ± 3.0 s (mean ± SEM), with
“light-headedness” (defined as time from first head movement to
first wing flap) noted within 69.3 ± 6.4 s; LOP occurred within 64.9
± 6.1 s (mean ± SEM). Wing and leg paddling was infrequent, last-
ing 15.1 ± 1.1 s (mean ± SEM) following LOP. Neither mandibula-
tion (movements of the beak as if the bird was responding to
sensations in the mouth) nor deep open-bill breathing was observed
in LAPS birds; bill breathing and mandibulation are commonly
reported during controlled atmosphere stunning with various gas
mixtures [176]. Based on EEG studies, increasing slow (δ) wave
activity consistent with a gradual loss of consciousness occurs
within 10 s of the start of the LAPS cycle, peaking between 30 and
40 s and coincident with LOP and first brief movements [177]. The
same group also determined that heart rate decreases over time
during LAPS, implying minimal additional SNS stimulation, and
concluded that LAPS is a humane approach that can potentially
improve the welfare of poultry at slaughter by inducing uncon-
sciousness without distress, eliminating live shackling, and ensur-
ing that every bird is adequately stunned before exsanguination [177].
LAPS is currently considered a humane method of euthanasia of
male layer chicks [178,179].
LAPS has been proposed as a more humane alternative to CO2
stunning in pigs [180] and for euthanasia of mice [181]. While con-
sidered a promising euthanasia method for mice, it is not consid-
ered a humane alternative to CO 2 for preslaughter stunning of
swine [182].
Foam depopulation
Foam depopulation methods were initially developed as an alterna-
tive to modified atmosphere depopulation methods for floor-raised
poultry [183]. Advantages of foam over other depopulation meth-
ods include reduced overall time required to depopulate farms,
reduced number of workers required and their potential exposure
to zoonotic diseases, less physical activity while wearing personal
protective equipment, suppression of airborne particulates,
enhancement of carcass disposal using in-house composting, and
greater flexibility of use in various style poultry houses, including
those structurally damaged [184].
Foam depopulation uses medium- or high-expansion foam-
generating equipment to create a blanket of water-based foam to
cover the animals. Most current foam depopulation equipment uses
compressed or ambient air to create the bubbles. Immersion in the
foam produces rapid airway blockage and occlusion, resulting in
death by suffocation. Water-based foam requires less time to death
than CO2 gas, with similar pretreatment and post-mortem corticos-
terone levels [183]. Based on cessation of EEG activity, water-based
foam was as consistent as CO2 gas, and more consistent than a 70%
Ar–30% CO 2 gas mix [185]; EEG cessation time with ambient air-
foam was not statistically different from that for CO2
- filled
foam [183]. Foam is also an effective depopulation tool for chukar
partridges, quail, ducks, and turkeys [186].
Water-based foam depopulation for poultry was conditionally
approved in 2006 by the United States Department of Agriculture
Animal and Plant Health Service (USDA APHIS). The use of foam
is not an AVMA-approved method of euthanasia [8], but the AVMA
has issued policy statements indicating that it “supports the use of
water-based foam as a method of mass depopulation in accord with
the conditions and performance standards outlined by the USDA
APHIS” [16]. The use of foam is conditionally approved for situa-
tions in which animals are: (1) infected with a potentially zoonotic
disease; (2) experiencing an outbreak of a rapidly spreading infec-
tious disease that cannot be easily contained; or (3) housed in struc-
turally unsound buildings.
Raj et al. [187] raised animal welfare concerns because water-
based foam filled with ambient air produces airway occlusion, a
form of suffocation; they proposed increasing bubble size as a
means to reduce airway occlusion in addition to incorporating an
inert gas in the foam to produce unconsciousness prior to death.
Gerritzen et al. evaluated responses of broilers, ducks, and turkeys
to CO 2 - filled foam and N 2 - filled foam [188]. Exposure of poultry to
CO 2
- filled foam resulted in an earlier induction of a transitional
state of the EEG than when exposed to N 2
-filled foam; the effect of
CO 2 on consciousness started before the birds were submerged.
After submersion, there was no difference in reduction of conscious
state between CO 2
- and N 2
- filled foam, and it was concluded that
the anoxic effects of both gas-filled foams were comparable and
acceptable, with the warning that birds submerged under the lead-
ing edge of the foam with a height less than 80 cm are likely to be at
risk of compromised welfare in the event of technical failure of the
foam system. High-expansion nitrogen-filled foam is currently
being investigated as a means to perform pig and poultry welfare
culls [16,188–190].
Agent purity and euthanasia
The Office for Laboratory Animal Welfare (OLAW) and the USDA
provide guidance on the use of nonpharmaceutical-grade sub-
stances. Both OLAW and USDA agree that pharmaceutical-grade
chemicals and other substances, when available, must be used to
avoid toxicity or side-effects that may threaten the health and wel-
fare of vertebrate animals or interfere with the interpretation of
research results. However, the decision to use nonpharmaceutical-
grade substances rests with the Institutional Animal Care
Committee [191]. OLAW, together with USDA and the International
Association for the Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory
Animal Care (AAALAC), offers guidance on this issue [192].
Basically, the highest-grade-equivalent chemical reagent should be
used if no equivalent veterinary or human drug is available for
experimental use.
In the case of inhaled gases, industrial or food grades may be
of similar or higher purity than medical grades. The federal

-- 177 of 1450 --

162 	Section 1: General Topics
government technical and USP specifications for CO2 are detailed
in BB-C- 101D [193]. Grade A CO 2 is defined by BB-C- 101D as
conforming to the requirements of the United States Pharmacopeia/
National Formulary (USP/NF), whereas Grade B CO2 is defined as
having purity of no less than 99.5 vol %. Grade A gases are manu-
factured under certified Good Manufacturing Practices (cGMP) as
defined by federal statute 21 CFR 211.84 and meet the applicable
specifications of the USP/NF, which include a certificate of analysis,
validated analytical procedures, lot number assignment, traceabil-
ity, and recall procedures [194]. Industrial-grade gases generally do
not have these cGMP attributes. Users wishing to substitute Grade
B or industrial-grade gases will need to confirm with their gas sup-
plier that product purity is equivalent to or greater than the corre-
sponding medical or Grade A product.
Euthanasia in the clinical setting
Barbiturates and barbituric acid derivatives (e.g., sodium pentobar-
bital, secobarbital, and pentobarbital combination products),
administered IV, are considered acceptable for euthanasia of con-
scious animals [8]. These agents can preferably be administered fol-
lowing sedation or general anesthesia or administered as the sole
agent. With the exception of intramuscular delivery of select inject-
able anesthetics (e.g., an α2 - adrenergic receptor agonist combined
with ketamine), the subcutaneous, intramuscular, intrapulmonary,
and intrathecal routes of administration are unacceptable for
administration of injectable euthanasia agents in awake and con-
scious animals because of the limited information available regard-
ing their effectiveness and the high probability of pain associated
with injection [8].
When IV access would be distressful, dangerous, or impractical
(e.g., small patient sizes such as puppies, kittens, small dogs and
cats, rodents, non-domestic species, or behavioral considerations
for some small exotic mammals and feral domestic animals), barbi-
turates may be conditionally administered intraperitoneal (e.g.,
sodium pentobarbital, secobarbital; not pentobarbital combination
products as these have only been approved for IV and intracardiac
administration). Administration by the IP route has potential for
peritoneal irritation and pain and, as noted previously, results in
delayed loss of consciousness; hence this route is considered
“acceptable with conditions” by the AVMA [8]. In unconscious or
anesthetized animals, intra-organ injections (e.g., intraosseous,
intracardiac, intrahepatic, intrasplenic, and intrarenal) may be used
as an alternative. Intra-organ injections may speed the rate of barbi-
turate uptake over standard IP injections and, when an owner is
present, this approach may be preferred over the IP route [8].
Apparent resistance to pentobarbital or delay of expected effect is
sometimes seen clinically. Reduced venous return (e.g., dehydra-
tion, hemorrhage, and sepsis) or low cardiac output (e.g., heart fail-
ure) will predictably delay circulation time and subsequent onset of
injectable agents. Animals treated for epilepsy are anecdotally
reported to be more resistant to pentobarbital; this may be due to
down-regulation of GABA receptors and upregulation of NMDA
receptors [195].
Proper carcass disposal is important. Animals euthanized with
barbiturates create risks for scavengers and other animals that may
consume portions of the animal’s remains [196,197]. Pentobarbital
is resistant to chemical breakdown and may still be detectable 1 year
after composting [198]. Lead poisoning due to exposed or poorly
buried carcasses of gunshot animals is a serious issue for
scavengers [197].
Intrathecal lidocaine has been proposed as a humane euthanasia
method for horses, sheep, and goats [199] and produces brain death
prior to cardiac death in horses [200]. The method poses a low risk
for toxicity of carnivores and scavengers [201].
Injectable anesthetic overdose (e.g., combination of ketamine and
an α2
-adrenergic receptor agonist given IV, IP, or IM, or propofol
given IV) is acceptable for euthanasia when animal size, restraint
requirements, or other circumstances indicate that these drugs are
the best option. Assurance of death is paramount and may require a
second step (e.g., a barbiturate, or additional doses of the anesthetic),
or use of an acceptable adjunctive method (e.g., gunshot; penetrat-
ing captive bolt; exsanguination; potassium chloride, 1–2 mmol/kg,
75–150 mg/kg, or 1–2 mEq/kg, administered IV or IC) [8].
Potassium chloride or a saturated magnesium sulfate solution can
only be used adjunctively to euthanize unconscious animals (defined
as unresponsive to noxious stimuli) or under general anesthesia [8].
Production shortages in 2021 led to a dilemma for those prac-
tices needing pentobarbital for animal euthanasia. The background
to the shortage and the responses by veterinary medical groups,
laboratory research institutions, and the animal sheltering industry
was documented by Cooney and Titcomb [202]. An alternative
method to conserve pentobarbital by combining induction of a
deep state of general anesthesia followed by one-half the usual
amount of pentobarbital was advocated by the AVMA [203].
Alternatives to barbiturates for euthanasia include T-61 and
Tributame™. T-61 is acceptable as an agent of euthanasia, provided
that it is administered appropriately by trained individuals. Slow IV
injection is necessary to avoid muscular paralysis prior to uncon-
sciousness. Administration of T-61 by routes other than IV is unac-
ceptable [8]. T-61 is not currently being manufactured in the United
States but is obtainable from Canada. Tributame™, although not cur-
rently in production in the United States, is also an acceptable eutha-
nasia drug for dogs provided that it is administered IV by an
appropriately trained individual at recommended dosages and
proper injection rates. If barbiturates are not available, its extra-label
use in cats may be considered; however, adverse reactions, such as
agonal breathing, have been reported and the current United States
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved Tributame™ label
recommends against its use in cats. Routes of Tributame™ adminis-
tration other than IV injection are not acceptable [8].
References
1 Arluke A. Trapped in a guilt cage. New Sci Publ 1992; 134(1815): 33–35.
2 Whiting TL, Marion CR. Perpetration-induced traumatic stress – a risk for veteri-
narians involved in the destruction of healthy animals. Can Vet J 2011; 52(7):
794–796.
3 American Veterinary Medical Association. Veterinarian’s Oath. www.avma.org/
resources-tools/avma-policies/veterinarians-oath (accessed April 2022).
4 Rollin BE. The use and abuse of Aesculapian authority in veterinary medicine. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 2002; 220(8): 1144–1149.
5 Rollin BE. Euthanasia and the quality of life. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2006; 228(7):
1014–1016.
6 Carter HE. Historical cases. J Small Anim Pract 1984; 25(1): 31–35.
7 Alkire MT. General anesthesia. In: Banks WP, ed. Encyclopedia of Consciousness.
Oxford, UK: Elsevier/Academic Press, 2009: 296–313.
8 American Veterinary Medical Association. AVMA Guidelines for the Euthanasia of
Animals: 2020 Edition. www.avma.org/sites/default/files/2020-02/Guidelines-on-
Euthanasia-2020.pdf (accessed April 2022).
9 Canadian Council on Animal Care. CCAC Guidelines on: Euthanasia of Animals
Used in Science, 2010. www.ccac.ca/Documents/Standards/Guidelines/Euthanasia.
pdf (accessed April 2022).
10 World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH founded as OIE). Development of
Animal Welfare Standards. www.woah.org/en/what-we-do/animal-health-and-welfare/
animal-welfare/development-of-animal-welfare-standards (accessed April 2022).

-- 178 of 1450 --

Chapter 8: Euthanasia and Humane Killing 	163
11 McMillan FD. Rethinking euthanasia: death as an unintentional outcome. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2001; 219(9): 1204–1206.
12 Pavlovic D, Spassov A, Lehmann C. Euthanasia: in defense of a good, ancient word.
J Clinic Res Bioeth 2011; 2: 1000105.
13 Leary SL, American Veterinary Medical Association. AVMA Guidelines for the
Humane Slaughter: 2016 Edition. www.avma.org/KB/Resources/Reference/Animal
Welfare/Documents/Humane- Slaughter- Guidelines.pdf ?utm_source=email-
optin&utm_medium=aw-focus-1608&utm_campaign=humane-endings&utm_
term=link&utm_content=humane-slaughter-guidelines (accessed April 2022).
14 Grandin T, Cockram M, eds. The Slaughter of Farmed Animals: Practical Ways of
Enhancing Animal Welfare. Boston, MA: CABI, 2020.
15 United States Code. 7 USC Chapter 48 – Humane Methods of Livestock Slaughter.
www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/USCODE-2017-title7/html/USCODE-2017-title7-
chap48-sec1901.htm (accessed April 2022).
16 Leary SL, American Veterinary Medical Association. AVMA Guidelines for the
Depopulation of Animals: 2019 Edition. www.avma.org/sites/default/files/resources/
AVMA-Guidelines-for-the- Depopulation-of-Animals.pdf (accessed April 2022).
17 Baysinger A, Senn M, Gebhardt J, et al. A case study of ventilation shutdown with
the addition of high temperature and humidity for depopulation of pigs. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2021; 259(4): 415–424.
18 Eberle-Krish KN, Martin MP, Malheiros RD, et al. Evaluation of ventilation
shutdown in a multi-level caged system. J Appl Poult Res 2018; 27(4): 555–563.
19 International Association for the Study of Pain. IASP Terms. www.iasp-pain.org/
resources/terminology (accessed April 2022).
20 Alkire MT, Hudetz AG, Tononi G. Consciousness and anesthesia. Science 2008;
322(5903): 876–880.
21 Långsjö JW, Alkire MT, Kaskinoro K, et al. Returning from oblivion: imaging the
neural core of consciousness. J Neurosci 2012; 32(14): 4935–4943.
22 Hendrickx JF, Eger EI II, Sonner JM, et al. Is synergy the rule? A review of anes-
thetic interactions producing hypnosis and immobility. Anesth Analg 2008; 107(2):
494–506.
23 Antognini JF, Barter L, Carstens E. Overview: movement as an index of anesthetic
depth in humans and experimental animals. Comp Med 2005; 55(5): 413–418.
24 Zeller W, Mettler D, Schatzmann U. Untersuchungen zur Betäubung des
Schlachtgeflügels mit Kohlendioxid. Fleischwirtschaft 1988; 68: 1308–1312 (as cited
in Raj ABM, Gregory NG. Effect of rate of induction of carbon dioxide anaesthesia
on the time of onset of unconsciousness and convulsions. Res Vet Sci 1990; 49(3):
360–363).
25 McKeegan DEF, Sparks NHC, Sandilands V, et al. Physiological responses of laying
hens during whole-house killing with carbon dioxide. Br Poult Sci 2011; 52(6):
645–657.
26 Benson ER, Alphin RL, Rankin MK, et al. Evaluation of EEG based determination
of unconsciousness vs. loss of posture in broilers. Res Vet Sci 2012; 93(2): 960–964.
27 Tranquilli WJ, Grimm KA. Introduction: use, definitions, history, concepts, classi-
fication, and considerations for general anesthesia. In: Grimm KA, Lamont LA,
Tranquilli WJ, et al., eds. Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia, 5th edn. Ames, IA:
John Wiley and Sons, 2015: 3–10.
28 Erhardt W, Ring C, Kraft H, et al. CO2 stunning of swine for slaughter from the
anesthesiological viewpoint. Dtsch Tierarztl Wochenschr 1989; 96(3): 92–99.
29 Dyakonova VE. Role of opioid peptides in behavior of invertebrates. J Evol Biochem
Physiol 2001; 37(4): 335–347.
30 Sladky KK, Kinney ME, Johnson SM. Analgesic efficacy of butorphanol and
morphine in bearded dragons and corn snakes. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008; 233(2):
267–273.
31 Baker BB, Sladky KK, Johnson SM. Evaluation of the analgesic effects of oral and
subcutaneous tramadol administration in red eared slider turtles. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2011; 238(2): 220–227.
32 Rose JD. The neurobehavioral nature of fishes and the question of awareness and
pain. Rev Fish Sci 2002; 10: 1–38.
33 Nordgreen J, Horsberg TE, Ranheim B, et al. Somatosensory evoked potentials in
the telencephalon of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) following galvanic stimulation
of the tail. J Comp Physiol A Neuroethol Sens Neural Behav Physiol 2007; 193(12):
1235–1242.
34 Dunlop R, Laming P. Mechanoreceptive and nociceptive responses in the central
nervous system of goldfish (Carassius auratus) and trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss).
J Pain 2005; 6(9): 561–568.
35 Braithwaite VA. Cognitive ability in fish. Fish Physiol 2006; 24: 1–37.
36 Verhoeven MTW, Gerritzen MA, Hellebrekers LJ, et al. Indicators used in livestock
to assess unconsciousness after stunning: a review. Animals 2015; 9(2): 320–330.
37 Verhoeven MTW, Gerritzen MA, Kluivers-Poodt M, et al. Validation of behav-
ioural indicators used to assess unconsciousness in sheep. Res Vet Sci 2015; 101:
144–153.
38 Verhoeven M, Gerritzen M, Velarde A, et al. Time to loss of consciousness and its
relation to behavior in slaughter pigs during stunning with 80 or 95% carbon diox-
ide. Front Vet Sci 2016; 3: 38.
39 Terlouw C, Bourguet C, Deiss V. Consciousness, unconsciousness and death in the
context of slaughter. Part I. Neurobiological mechanisms underlying stunning and
killing. Meat Sci 2016; 118: 133–146.
40 Terlouw C, Bourguet C, Deiss V. Consciousness, unconsciousness and death in the
context of slaughter. Part II. Evaluation methods. Meat Sci 2016; 118: 147–156.
41 Cartner SC, Barlow SC, Ness TJ. Loss of cortical function in mice after decapitation,
cervical dislocation, potassium chloride injection, and CO2 inhalation. Comp Med
2007; 57(6): 570–573.
42 Close B, Banister K, Baumans V, et al. Recommendations for euthanasia of experi-
mental animals: Part 1. DGXI of the European Commission. Lab Anim 1996; 30(4):
293–316.
43 Close B, Banister K, Baumans V, et al. Recommendations for euthanasia of experimental
animals: Part 2. DGXI of the European Commission. Lab Anim 1997; 31(1): 1–32.
44 Gregory NG, Wotton SB. Effect of slaughter on the spontaneous and evoked activity
of the brain. Br Poult Sci 1986; 27(2): 195–205.
45 Bates G. Humane issues surrounding decapitation reconsidered. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2010; 237(9): 1024–1026.
46 Holson RR. Euthanasia by decapitation: evidence that this technique produces
prompt, painless unconsciousness in laboratory rodents. Neurotoxicol Teratol 1992;
14(4): 253–257.
47 Derr RF. Pain perception in decapitated rat brain. Life Sci 1991; 49(19): 1399–1402.
48 Vanderwolf CH, Buzak DP, Cain RK, et al. Neocortical and hippocampal electrical
activity following decapitation in the rat. Brain Res 1988; 451(1–2): 340–344.
49 Mikeska JA, Klemm WR. EEG evaluation of humaneness of asphyxia and decapita-
tion euthanasia of the laboratory rat. Lab Anim Sci 1975; 25(2): 175–179.
50 van Rijn CM, Krijnen H, Menting-Hermeling S, et al. Decapitation in rats: latency
to unconsciousness and the ‘wave of death’. PLoS ONE 2011; 6(1): e16514
51 Martoft L, Lomholt L, Kolthoff C, et al. Effects of CO2 anaesthesia on central nerv-
ous system activity in swine. Lab Anim 2002; 36(2): 115–126.
52 Raj ABM, Johnson SP, Wotton SB, et al. Welfare implications of gas stunning pigs:
3. the time to loss of somatosensory evoked potentials and spontaneous electrocor-
ticogram of pigs during exposure to gases. Vet J 1997; 153(3): 329–339.
53 Ring C, Erhardt W, Kraft H, et al. CO2 anaesthesia of slaughter pigs. Fleischwirtschaft
1988; 68(11): 1304–1307.
54 Forslid A. Transient neocortical, hippocampal, and amygdaloid EEG silence
induced by one minute inhalation of high CO 2 concentration in swine. Acta Physiol
Scand 1987; 130(1): 1–10.
55 Brosnan RJ, Pham TL. Carbon dioxide negatively modulates N-methyl-D-aspartate
receptors. Br J Anaesth 2008; 101(5): 673–679.
56 Raj M. Humane killing of nonhuman animals for disease control purposes. J Appl
Anim Welf Sci 2008; 11(2): 112–124.
57 Raj ABM, Gregory NG. Welfare implications of the gas stunning of pigs: 1.
Determination of aversion to the initial inhalation of carbon dioxide or argon.
Anim Welf 1995; 4(4): 273–280.
58 Raj ABM. Behaviour of pigs exposed to mixtures of gases and the time required to
stun and kill them: welfare implications. Vet Rec 1999; 144(7): 165–168.
59 Dalmau A, Rodriguez P, Llonch P, et al. Stunning pigs with different gas mixtures:
aversion in pigs. Anim Welf 2010; 19(3): 325–333.
60 Steffey EP, Mama KR. Inhalation anesthetics. In: Grimm KA, Lamont LA, Tranquilli
WJ, et al., eds. Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia, 5th edn. Ames, IA: John Wiley
and Sons, 2015: 311–312.
61 Thomas AA, Flecknell PA, Golledge HD. Combining nitrous oxide with carbon
dioxide decreases the time to loss of consciousness during euthanasia in mice –
refinement of animal welfare? PLoS ONE 2012; 7(3): e32290.
62 Meyer RE, Morrow WEM. Carbon dioxide for emergency on-farm euthanasia of
swine. J Swine Health Prod 2005; 13(4): 210–217.
63 Meyer RE. Principles of carbon dioxide displacement. Lab Anim 2008; 37(6):
241–242.
64 Stikeleather L, Morrow W, Meyer R, et al. Evaluation of CO2 application require-
ments for on-farm mass depopulation of swine in a disease emergency. Agriculture
2013; 3(4): 599–612.
65 Cavanna AE, Shah S, Eddy CM, et al. Consciousness: a neurological perspective.
Behav Neurol 2011; 24(1): 107–116.
66 Reilly JS. Euthanasia of Animals Used for Scientific Purposes. Adelaide, SA: Australia
and New Zealand Council for the Care of Animals in Research and Teaching,
Department of Environmental Biology, Adelaide University, 2001.
67 Murray MJ. Euthanasia. In: Lewbart GA, ed. Invertebrate Medicine. Ames, IA:
Blackwell Publishing, 2006: 303–304.
68 Messenger JB, Nixon M, Ryan KP. Magnesium chloride as an anaesthetic for cepha-
lopods. Comp Biochem Physiol C Comp Pharmacol Toxicol 1985; 82(1): 203–205.
69 Doerr M, Stoskopf MK. Evaluation of euthanasia of Moon Jellyfish (Aurelia Aurita)
using simple salt solutions. J Zoo Wildl Med 2019; 50(1): 123–126.
70 Wahltinez SJ, Kroll KJ, Nunamaker EA, et al. Practical euthanasia method for com-
mon sea stars (Asterias rubens) that allows for high-quality RNA sampling. Animals
2021; 11(7): 1847.

-- 179 of 1450 --

164 	Section 1: General Topics
71 Meyer RE, Morrow WEM. Euthanasia. In: Rollin BE, Benson GJ, eds. Improving the
Well-being of Farm Animals: Maximizing Welfare and Minimizing Pain and
Suffering. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing, 2004: 351–362.
72 Breazile JE, Kitchell RL. Euthanasia for laboratory animals. Fed Proc 1969; 28(4):
1577–1579.
73 McMillan FD. Comfort as the primary goal in veterinary medical practice. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 1998; 212(9): 1370–1374.
74 Valentine H, Williams WO, Maurer KJ. Sedation or inhalant anesthesia before
euthanasia with CO2 does not reduce behavioral or physiologic signs of pain and
stress in mice. J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2012; 51(1): 50–57.
75 Sharp J, Azar T, Lawson D. Comparison of carbon dioxide, argon, and nitrogen for
inducing unconsciousness or euthanasia of rats. J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2006;
45(2): 21–25.
76 Barton-Gade P, Christensen L. Transportation and pre-stun handling: CO2 -
systems. In: Proceedings of the Veterinary Congress, Helsinki, Finland, November
19-27th, 2002: 19–27.
77 Burkholder TH, Niel L, Weed JL, et al. Comparison of carbon dioxide and argon
euthanasia: effects on behavior, heart rate, and respiratory lesions in rats. J Am
Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2010; 49(4): 448–453.
78 Herman JP, Cullinan WE. Neurocircuitry of stress: central control of the
hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenocortical axis. Trends Neurosci 1997; 20(2): 78–84.
79 Barklin A, Larsson A, Vestergaard C, et al. Does brain death induce a pro-
inflammatory response at the organ level in a porcine model? Acta Anaesthesiol
Scand 2008; 52(5): 621–627.
80 Chiari P, Hadour G, Michel P, et al. Biphasic response after brain death induction:
prominent part of catecholamines release in this phenomenon. J Heart Lung
Transplant 2000; 19(7): 675–682.
81 Licker M, Schweizer A, Hohn L, et al. Haemodynamic and metabolic changes
induced by repeated episodes of hypoxia in pigs. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1998;
42(8): 957–965.
82 Forslid A, Augustinsson O. Acidosis, hypoxia and stress hormone release in response to
one minute inhalation of 80% CO2 in swine. Acta Physiol Scand 1988; 132(2): 222–231.
83 Borovsky V, Herman M, Dunphy G, et al. CO2 asphyxia increases plasma norepi-
nephrine in rats via sympathetic nerves. Am J Physiol 1998; 274(1): R19–R22.
84 Reed B, Varon J, Chait BT, et al. Carbon dioxide-induced anesthesia results in a rapid
increase in plasma levels of vasopressin. Endocrinology 2009; 150(6): 2934–2939.
85 Kc P, Haxhiu MA, Trouth CO, et al. CO2
- induced c-Fos expression in hypothalamic
vasopressin containing neurons. Resp Physiol 2002; 129(3): 289–296.
86 Meyer RE, Whitley JT, Morrow WE, et al. Effect of physical and inhaled euthanasia
methods on hormonal measures of stress in pigs. J Swine Health Prod 2013; 21(5):
261–269.
87 Meyer RE. Physiologic measures of animal stress during transitional states of con-
sciousness. Animals 2015; 5(3): 702–716.
88 Mashour GA, Orser BA, Avidan MS. Intraoperative awareness – from neurobiology
to clinical practice. Anesthesiology 2011; 114(5): 1218–1233.
89 Hawkins P, Playle L, Golledge H, et al. Newcastle consensus meeting on carbon
dioxide euthanasia of laboratory animals. Anim Technol Welf 2006; 5(3): 125.
90 Crosby G, Culley D. Processed electroencephalogram and depth of anesthesia: win-
dow to nowhere or into the brain? Anesthesiology 2012; 116(2): 235–237.
91 Hudetz AG, Vizuete JA, Imas OA. Desflurane selectively suppresses long latency cor-
tical neuronal response to flash in the rat. Anesthesiology 2009; 111(2): 231–239.
92 Imas OA, Ropella KM, Ward BD, et al. Volatile anesthetics enhance flash-induced
gamma oscillations in rat visual cortex. Anesthesiology 2005; 102(5): 937–947.
93 Barr G, Anderson RE, Jakobsson JG. A study of bispectral analysis and auditory
evoked potential indices during propofol-induced hypnosis in volunteers: the effect
of an episode of wakefulness on explicit and implicit memory. Anaesthesia 2001;
56(9): 888–893.
94 Baudelet C, Gallez B. Effect of anesthesia on the signal intensity in tumors using
BOLD-MRI: comparison with flow measurements by laser Doppler flowmetry and
oxygen measurements by luminescence-based probes. Magn Reson Imaging 2004;
2297: 905–912.
95 Steward CA, Marsden CA, Prior MJW, et al. Methodological considerations in rat
brain BOLD contrast pharmacological MRI. Psychopharmacology 2005; 180(4):
687–704.
96 Arluke A. Uneasiness among laboratory technicians. Occup Med 1999; 14(2):
305–316.
97 Matthis JS. Selected Employee Attributes and Perceptions Regarding Methods and
Animal Welfare Concerns Associated with Swine Euthanasia. Dissertation submitted
to the Graduate Faculty of North Carolina State University in partial fulfillment of
the requirements for the degree of Doctor of Education, Occupational Education,
Raleigh, NC, 2004.
98 Chorney JM, Kain ZN. Behavioral analysis of children’s response to induction of
anesthesia. Anesth Analg 2009; 109(5): 1434–1440.
99 Przybylo HJ, Tarbell SE, Stevenson GW. Mask fear in children presenting for anes-
thesia: aversion, phobia, or both? Paediatr Anaesth 2005; 15(5): 366–370.
100 National Institutes of Health, Office of Laboratory Animal Welfare. Interagency
Research Animal Committee. US Government Principles for the Utilization and
Care of Vertebrate Animals Used in Testing, Research and Training, 2015. https://
olaw.nih.gov/policies-laws/gov- principles.htm (accessed April 20, 2022).
101 Branson KR. Injectable and alternative anesthetic techniques. In: Tranquilli WJ,
Thurmon JC, Grimm KA, eds. Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia, 4th edn.
Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing, 2007: 273–299.
102 Price HL. The pharmacodynamics of thiobarbiturates. In: Soma LR, ed. Textbook
of Veterinary Anesthesiology. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins, 1971:
105–110.
103 Hall LW, Clarke KW. Anaesthesia of the dog. In: Hall LW, Clarke KW, eds.
Veterinary Anaesthesia, 8th edn. London, UK: Baillière Tindall, 1983: 305–340.
104 Field KJ, While WJ, Lang CM. Anaesthetic effects of chloral hydrate, pentobarbi-
tone and urethane in adult male rats. Lab Anim 1993; 27(3): 258–269.
105 Haberham ZL, van den Brom WE, Venker-van Haagen AJ, et al. EEG evaluation
of reflex testing as assessment of depth of pentobarbital anaesthesia in the rat. Lab
Anim 1999; 33(1): 47–57.
106 Grier RL, Schaffer CB. Evaluation of intraperitoneal and intrahepatic administra-
tion of a euthanasia agent in animal shelter cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1990;
197(12): 1611–1615.
107 Svendsen O, Kok L, Lauritzen B. Nociception after intraperitoneal injection of a
sodium pentobarbitone formulation with and without lidocaine in rats quantified
by expression of neuronal c-Fos in the spinal cord – a preliminary study. Lab Anim
2007; 41(2): 197–203.
108 Walker B, Jäggin N, Doherr M, et al. Inhalation anaesthesia for castration of new-
born piglets: experiences with isoflurane and isoflurane/NO. J Vet Med A Physiol
Pathol Clin Med 2004; 51(3): 150–154.
109 Jäggin N, Kohler I, Blum J, et al. Die Kastration von neugeborenen Ferkeln unter
Halothananästhesie. Prakt Tierarzt 2001; 8(12): 1054–1061.
110 Flecknell PA, Roughan JV, Hedenqvist P. Induction of anaesthesia with sevoflu-
rane and isoflurane in the rabbit. Lab Anim 1999; 33(1): 41–46.
111 Leach MC, Bowell VA, Allan TF, et al. Measurement of aversion to determine
humane methods of anaesthesia and euthanasia. Anim Welf 2004; 13(S1):
S77–S86.
112 Leach MC, Bowell VA, Allan TF, et al. Aversion to gaseous euthanasia agents in
rats and mice. Comp Med 2002; 52(3): 249–257.
113 Leach MC, Bowell VA, Allan TF, et al. Degrees of aversion shown by rats and mice
to different concentrations of inhalational anaesthetics. Vet Rec 2002; 150(26):
808–815.
114 Makowska LJ, Weary DM. Rat aversion to induction with inhaled anaesthetics.
Appl Anim Behav Sci 2009; 119(3–4): 229–235.
115 Makowska IJ, Weary DM. Rat aversion to carbon monoxide. Appl Anim Behav Sci
2009; 121(2): 148–151.
116 Webster AB, Collett SR. A mobile modified-atmosphere killing system for small
flock depopulation. J Appl Poult Res 2012; 21(1): 131–144.
117 McKeegan DEF, Reimert HGM, Hindle VA, et al. Physiological and behavioral
responses of poultry exposed to gas-filled high expansion foam. Poult Sci 2013;
92(5): 1145–1154.
118 Lindahl C, Sindhøj E, Brattlund Hellgren R, et al. Responses of pigs to stunning
with nitrogen filled high-expansion foam. Animals 2020; 10(12): 2210.
119 Niel L, Weary DM. Behavioural responses of rats to gradual-fill carbon dioxide
euthanasia and reduced oxygen concentrations. Appl Anim Behav Sci 2006;
100(3–4): 295–308.
120 Hackbarth H, Kuppers N, Bohnet W. Euthanasia of rats with carbon dioxide –
animal welfare aspects. Lab Anim 2000; 34(1): 91–96.
121 Smith W, Harrap SB. Behavioural and cardiovascular responses of rats to euthana-
sia using carbon dioxide gas. Lab Anim 1997; 31(4): 337–346.
122 Coenen AML, Drinkenburg W, Hoenderken R, et al. Carbon dioxide euthanasia
in rats: oxygen supplementation minimizes signs of agitation and asphyxia. Lab
Anim 1995; 29(3): 262–268.
123 Blackshaw JK, Fenwick DC, Beattie AW, et al. The behavior of chickens, mice and
rats during euthanasia with chloroform, carbon dioxide and ether. Lab Anim 1988;
22(1): 67–75.
124 Britt DP. The humaneness of carbon dioxide as an agent of euthanasia for labora-
tory rodents. In: Euthanasia of Unwanted, Injured or Diseased Animals or for
Educational or Scientific Purposes. Proceedings of a Symposium Organized by
Universities Federation for Animal Welfare in Association with Humane Slaughter
Association, Zoological Society of London, 19th September 1986. Potters Bar:
Universities Federation for Animal Welfare, 1987: 19–31.
125 Hornett TD, Haynes AR. Comparison of carbon dioxide/air mixture and nitro-
gen/air mixture for the euthanasia of rodents. Design of a system for inhalation
euthanasia. Anim Technol 1984; 35: 93–99.
126 Jongman EC, Barnett JL, Hemsworth PH. The aversiveness of carbon dioxide
stunning in pigs and a comparison of the CO2 stunner crate vs. the V-restrainer.
Appl Anim Behav Sci 2000; 67(1–2): 67–76.

-- 180 of 1450 --

Chapter 8: Euthanasia and Humane Killing 	165
127 Raj ABM, Gregory NG. Welfare implications of the gas stunning of pigs 2. Stress
of induction of anaesthesia. Anim Welf 1996; 5(1): 71–78.
128 Troeger K, Woltersdorf W. Gas anesthesia of slaughter pigs. 1. Stunning experi-
ments under laboratory conditions with fat pigs of known halothane reaction
type – meat quality, animal protection. Fleischwirtschaft 1991; 71(2): 1063–1068.
129 Dodman NH. Observations on use of Wernberg dip-lift carbon dioxide apparatus
for pre-slaughter anesthesia of pigs. Br Vet J 1977; 133(1): 71–80.
130 Gerritzen M, Lambooij B, Reimert H, et al. A note on behaviour of poultry
exposed to increasing carbon dioxide concentrations. Appl Anim Behav Sci 2007;
108(1–2): 179–185.
131 Gerritzen MS, Lambooij E, Reimert HG, et al. Susceptibility of duck and turkey to
severe hypercapnic hypoxia. Poult Sci 2006; 85(6): 1055–1061.
132 McKeegan DEF, McIntyre JA, Demmers TGM, et al. Physiological and behav-
ioural responses of broilers to controlled atmosphere stunning: implications for
welfare. Anim Welf 2007; 16(4): 409–426.
133 McKeegan DEF, McIntyre J, Demmers TGM, et al. Behavioural responses of
broiler chickens during acute exposure to gaseous stimulation. Appl Anim Behav
Sci 2006; 99(3–4): 271–286.
134 Webster AB, Fletcher DL. Reaction of laying hens and broilers to different
gases used for stunning poultry. Poult Sci 2001; 80(9): 1371–1377.
135 Webster AB, Fletcher DL. Assessment of the aversion of hens to different
gas atmospheres using an approach-avoidance test. Appl Anim Behav Sci 2004;
88(3–4): 275–287.
136 Abeyesinghe SM, McKeegan DEF, McLeman MA, et al. Controlled atmosphere
stunning of broiler chickens. I. Effects on behaviour, physiology and meat quality
in a pilot scale system at a processing plant. Br Poult Sci 2007; 48(4): 406–423.
137 Gerritzen MA, Lambooij E, Hillebrand SJW, et al. Behavioral responses of broilers
to different gaseous atmospheres. Poult Sci 2000; 79(6): 928–933.
138 Lambooij E, Gerritzen MA, Engel B, et al. Behavioural responses during exposure
of broiler chickens to different gas mixtures. Appl Anim Behav Sci 1999; 62(2–3):
255–265.
139 Raj ABM. Aversive reactions of turkeys to argon, carbon dioxide and a mixture of
carbon dioxide and argon. Vet Rec 1996; 138(24): 592–593.
140 Sprenger RJ, Kim AB, Dzal YA, et al. Comparison of the CO2 ventilatory response
through development in three rodent species: effect of fossoriality. Respir Physiol
Neurobiol 2019; 264: 19–27.
141 Niel L, Weary DM. Rats avoid exposure to carbon dioxide and argon. Appl Anim
Behav Sci 2007; 107(1–2): 100–109.
142 Kirkden RD, Niel L, Stewart SA, et al. Gas killing of rats: the effect of supplemental
oxygen on aversion to carbon dioxide. Anim Welf 2008; 17(1): 79–87.
143 Cooper J, Mason G, Raj M. Determination of the aversion of farmed mink
(Mustela vison) to carbon dioxide. Vet Rec 1998; 143(13): 359–361.
144 Chen XJ, Gallar J, Pozo MA, et al. CO2 stimulation of the cornea – a comparison
between human sensation and nerve activity in polymodal nociceptive afferents of
the cat. Eur J Neurosci 1995; 7(6): 1154–1163.
145 Peppel P, Anton F. Responses of rat medullary dorsal horn neurons following
intranasal noxious chemical stimulation – effects of stimulus intensity, duration
and interstimulus interval. J Neurophysiol 1993; 70(6): 2260–2275.
146 Thurauf N, Hummel T, Kettenmann B, et al. Nociceptive and reflexive responses
recorded from the human nasal mucosa. Brain Res 1993; 629(2): 293–299.
147 Anton F, Peppel P, Euchner I, et al. Noxious chemical stimulation – responses of
rat trigeminal brain stem neurons to CO2 pulses applied to the nasal mucosa.
Neurosci Lett 1991; 123(2): 208–211.
148 Feng YW, Simpson TL. Nociceptive sensation and sensitivity evoked from human cornea
and conjunctiva stimulated by CO2
. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2003; 44(2): 529–532.
149 Thurauf N, Gunther M, Pauli E, et al. Sensitivity of the negative mucosal potential
to the trigeminal target stimulus CO 2 . Brain Res 2002; 942(1–2): 79–86.
150 Danneman PJ, Stein S, Walshaw SO. Humane and practical implications of using
carbon dioxide mixed with oxygen for anesthesia or euthanasia of rats. Lab Anim
Sci 1997; 47(4): 376–385.
151 Hewett TA, Kovacs MS, Artwohl JE, et al. A comparison of euthanasia methods in
rats, using carbon dioxide in prefilled and fixed flow-rate filled chambers. Lab
Anim Sci 1993; 43(6): 579–582.
152 Battaglia M, Ogliari A, Harris J, et al. A genetic study of the acute anxious response
to carbon dioxide stimulation in man. J Psychiatr Res 2007; 41(11): 906–917.
153 Nardi AE, Freire RC, Zin WA. Panic disorder and control of breathing. Respir
Physiol Neurobiol 2009; 167(1): 133–143.
154 Grandin T, Cockram M, eds. The Slaughter of Farmed Animals: Practical Ways of
Enhancing Animal Welfare. Boston, MA: CABI, 2020: 226–239.
155 Jongman EC, Woodhouse R, Rice M, et al. Pre-slaughter factors linked to varia-
tion in responses to carbon dioxide gas stunning in pig abattoirs. Animal 2021;
15(2): 100134.
156 Ziemann AE, Allen JE, Dahdaleh NS, et al. The amygdala is a chemosensor that
detects carbon dioxide and acidosis to elicit fear behavior. Cell 2009; 139(5):
1012–1021.
157 Dalmau A, Llonch P, Rodriguez P, et al. Stunning pigs with different gas mixtures:
gas stability. Anim Welf 2010; 19(3): 315–323.
158 Baker BA, Hickman DL. Bias in rating of rodent distress during anesthesia induc-
tion for anesthesia compared with euthanasia. J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2018;
57(2): 143–156.
159 Wong D, Makowska IJ, Weary DM. Rat aversion to isoflurane versus carbon
dioxide. Biol Lett 2013; 9(1): 20121000.
160 Frost K, Shah M, Leung VSY, et al. Aversion to desflurane and isoflurane in
Sprague–Dawley rats (Rattus Norvegicus). Animals 2020; 10(6): 950.
161 Guedes SR, Valentim AM, Antunes LM. Mice aversion to sevoflurane, isoflurane
and carbon dioxide using an approach-avoidance task. Appl Anim Behav Sci 2017;
189: 91–97.
162 Kulkarni S, Hickman D. Isoflurane and carbon dioxide elicit similar behavioral
responses in rats. Animals 2020; 10(8): 1431.
163 Rodriguez-Sanchez R, Barnaby E, Améndola L, et al. Voluntary oral ingestion of a
sedative prior to euthanasia with CO2 : behavioural responses of mice. Animals
2021; 11(10): 2879.
164 Lockwood G. Theoretical context-sensitive elimination times for inhalational
anaesthetics. Br J Anaesth 2010; 104(5): 648–655.
165 Mellor DJ, Diesch TJ. Onset of sentience: the potential for suffering in fetal and
newborn farm animals. Appl Anim Behav Sci 2006; 100(1–2): 48–57.
166 Mellor DJ. Galloping colts, fetal feelings, and reassuring regulations: putting
animal- welfare science into practice. J Vet Med Educ 2010; 37(1): 94–100.
167 Mellor DJ, Diesch TJ, Johnson CB. Should mammalian fetuses be excluded from
regulations protecting animals during experiments? Proceedings of the 7th World
Congress on Alternatives and Animal Use in the Life Sciences, 2009. ALTEX 2010;
27(Special Issue): 199–202.
168 Mellor DJ, Diesch TJ, Johnson CB. When do mammalian young become sentient?
Proceedings of the 7th World Congress on Alternatives and Animal Use in the Life
Sciences, 2009. ALTEX 2010; 27(Special Issue): 275–280.
169 White SC. Prevention of fetal suffering during ovariohysterectomy of pregnant
animals. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2012; 240(10): 1160–1163.
170 Mellor DJ, Diesch TJ. Birth and hatching: key events in the onset of awareness in
the lamb and chick. N Z Vet J 2007; 55(5): 51–60.
171 Purswell JL, Thaxton JP, Branton SL. Identifying process variables for a low atmos-
pheric pressure stunning–killing system. J Appl Poult Res 2007; 16(4): 509–513.
172 Vizzier- Thaxton Y, Christensen KD, Schilling MW, et al. A new humane method
of stunning broilers using low atmospheric pressure. J Appl Poult Res 2010; 19(4):
341–348.
173 More S, Bicout D, Bøtner A, et al. Low atmospheric pressure system for stunning
broiler chickens. EFSA J 2017; 15(12): e05056.
174 Booth NH. Effect of rapid decompression and associated hypoxic phenomena in
euthanasia of animals: a review. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1978; 173(3): 308–314.
175 Fedde MR. Relationship of structure and function of the avian respiratory system
to disease susceptibility. Poult Sci 1998; 77(8): 1130–1138.
176 Coenen AML, Lankhaar J, Lowe JC, et al. Remote monitoring of electroencepha-
logram, electrocardiogram, and behavior during controlled atmosphere stunning
in broilers: implications for welfare. Poult Sci 2009; 88(1): 10–19.
177 McKeegan DE, Sandercock DA, Gerritzen MA. Physiological responses to low
atmospheric pressure stunning and the implications for welfare. Poult Sci 2013;
92(4): 858–868.
178 Wang X, Zhao D, Milby AC, et al. Evaluation of euthanasia methods on behavioral
and physiological responses of newly hatched male layer chicks. Animals 2021;
11(6): 1802.
179 Gurung S, White D, Archer G, et al. Evaluation of alternative euthanasia methods
of neonatal chickens. Animals 2018; 8(3): 37.
180 Bouwsema JA, Lines JA. Could low atmospheric pressure stunning (LAPS) be
suitable for pig slaughter? A review of available information. Anim Welf 2019;
28(4): 421–432.
181 Clarkson JM, McKeegan DEF, Sparrey J, et al. Determining candidate hypobaric
hypoxia profiles for humane killing of laboratory mice. Front Vet Sci 2022; 9: 834478.
182 McKeegan DEF, Martin J, Baxter EM. LAPS in pigs is not a humane alternative to
stunning with carbon dioxide. Meat Hyg 2020; 180: 20–22.
183 Benson E, Malone GW, Alphin RL, et al. Foam- based mass emergency depopula-
tion of floor-reared meat-type poultry operations. Poult Sci 2007; 86(2): 219–224.
184 Malone B, Benson E, Alphin B, et al. Methods of mass depopulation for poultry
flocks with highly infectious disease. In: Proceedings to ANECA Symposium on
Emerging Diseases, Queretaro, Mexico, November 2007.
185 Alphin RL, Rankin MK, Johnson KJ, et al. Comparison of water-based foam and
inert-gas mass emergency depopulation methods. Avian Dis 2010; 54(1 suppl):
757–762.
186 Benson ER, Alphin RL, Dawson MD, et al. Use of water-based foam to depopulate
ducks and other species. Poult Sci 2009; 88(5): 904–910.
187 Raj ABM, Smith C, Hickman G. Novel method for killing poultry in houses with
dry foam created using nitrogen. Vet Rec 2008; 162(22): 722–723.

-- 181 of 1450 --

166 	Section 1: General Topics
188 Gerritzen MA, Reimert HGM, Hindle VA, et al. Welfare Assessment of Gas-Filled
Foam as an Agent for Killing Poultry, Wageningen UR Livestock Research Report
399, 2010. www.library.wur.nl/WebQuery/wurpubs/403154 (accessed June 6, 2022).
189 McKeegan DEF, Reimert HGM, Hindle VA, et al. Physiological and behavioral
responses of poultry exposed to gas-filled high expansion foam. Poult Sci 2013;
92(5): 1145–1154.
190 Lorbach JN, Campler MR, Youngblood B, et al. Comparison of gaseous and water-
based medium-expansion foam depopulation methods in cull sows. Animals
2021; (11): 3179.
191 National Institutes of Health, Office of Laboratory Animal Welfare. Frequently Asked
Questions (FAQs): PHS Policy on Humane Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. https://
olaw.nih.gov/faqs#/guidance/faqs?anchor=question50361 (accessed June 2022).
192 National Institutes of Health, Office of Laboratory Animal Welfare. Regulatory
Considerations for Using Pharmaceutical Products in Research Involving
Laboratory 	Animals. 	https://olaw.nih.gov/education/educational-resources/
webinar-2015- 06- 04.htm (accessed June 2022).
193 General Services Administration. Metric BB-C-101D, Federal Specification
Carbon Dioxide (CO2
): Technical and USP. www.everyspec.com/FED_SPECS/B/
BB-C- 101D_31791/(accessed April 2022).
194 Linde. VERISEQ® Pharmaceutical Grade Gases. Carbon Dioxide, 2022. http://hiq.
linde- gas.com/en/images/VERISEQ_CarbonDioxide_tcm899- 92234.pdf
(accessed April 2022).
195 Sánchez Fernández I, Goodkin HP, Scott RC. Pathophysiology of convulsive status
epilepticus. Seizure 2019; 68: 16–21.
196 Kaiser AM, McFarland W, Siemion RS, et al. Secondary pentobarbital poisoning
in two dogs: a cautionary tale. J Vet Diagn Invest 2010; 22(4): 632–634.
197 Kelly TR, Johnson CK. Lead exposure in free-flying turkey vultures is associated
with big game hunting in California. PLoS ONE 2011; 6(4): e15350.
198 Payne J, Farris R, Parker G, et al. Quantification of sodium pentobarbital residues
from equine mortality compost piles. J Anim Sci 2015; 93(4): 1824–1829.
199 Zolhavarieh SM, Nourian AR, Sadeghi-nasab A. A new method for on-farm eutha-
nasia with animal welfare considerations. Iran J Vet Surg 2011; 6(12): 55–64.
200 Aleman M, Davis E, Williams DC, et al. Electrophysiologic study of a method
of euthanasia using intrathecal lidocaine hydrochloride administered during
intravenous anesthesia in horses. J Vet Intern Med 2015; 29(6): 1676–1682.
201 Aleman M, Davis E, Knych H, et al. Drug residues after intravenous anesthesia
and intrathecal lidocaine hydrochloride euthanasia in horses. J Vet Intern Med
2016; 30(4): 1322–1326.
202 Cooney K, Titcombe L. Lessons and recommendations from a pentobarbital
shortage: US and Canada 2021. Animals 2022; 12(3): 365.
203 Conserving Pentobarbital in Times of Shortage. An Option to Consider for
Small Companion Animals. American Veterinary Medical Association, 2021.
www.avma.org/blog/conserving-pentobarbital-times-shortage (accessed April
2022).

-- 182 of 1450 --

SECTION 2
Patient Monitoring

-- 183 of 1450 --



-- 184 of 1450 --

169
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: T he Sixth Edition of L umb and J ones	. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
Collaboration between veterinarians and biomedical engineers is
becoming increasingly common and serves to advance the field of
veterinary medicine in general, and veterinary anesthesiology in
particular. Veterinarians and biomedical engineers have similar sci-
entific knowledge, and their skill sets tend to complement each
other. This chapter provides a brief introduction to the discipline of
biomedical engineering and highlights ways in which biomedical
engineers have contributed to and continue to facilitate progress in
veterinary anesthesia.
History of biomedical engineering
Biomedical engineering is a specialized field that applies engineering
and physics theories to improve human health by producing tools,
devices, and processes [1]. The field of biomedical engineering is not
new; in fact, the first mention of a biomedical device in the historical
record appears in 950 BC. The Greville Chester toe, a prosthetic big
toe made of wood and leather, was found in a mummy in Egypt in
1800 [2]. The development of the field of biomedical engineering
intensified between World War I and II when researchers across
the globe started experimenting with biophysics and biomedical
applications. The Oswalt Institute for Physics in Medicine in Frankfurt,
Germany, was the first laboratory to offer formal training in biomedical
engineering in 1921. The first North American biomedical engi-
neering program, the Drexel-Presbyterian Hospital Program at the
University of Pennsylvania, was established in 1959 as a master’s
degree for engineers to obtain knowledge of medical science and for
life scientists to gain knowledge of physical science [3–5].
A number of scientists have played key roles in laying the
foundation of what would later become biomedical engineering.
One of these was Luigi Galvani, an Italian physician and physicist
in the 18th century [6]. At that time, Galvani practiced surgery
and became interested in the therapeutic application of electricity,
known as “medical electricity.” This field of research explored the
effects of electricity on the human body and the use of electricity for
treating diseases. Galvani’s experiments with dead frog limbs that
were exposed and connected to metal wires inserted across the ver-
tebral canal tested the hypothesis that body movements were gener-
ated and controlled by a particular type of force. Galvani named this
force “animal electricity.” He hypothesized that the brain secreted “a
fluid” flowing through the nerves, stimulating the muscle fibers [7].
Galvani’s experiments laid the groundwork for the field of electro-
physiology and formed the foundation for electromagnetic treat-
ments currently used in medicine.
In the 19th century, a Dutch engineer named Alexander Muirhead
connected a Thomson siphon recorder (designed to record transat-
lantic signals) to a patient’s wrist and, for the first time, recorded
cardiac electrical activity at St. Bartholomew’s Hospital in London.
The idea of converting an electrical signal into variations of a physi-
cal quantity was the fundamental principle utilized by Willem
Einthoven in 1903 when he invented the electrocardiogram.
Einthoven measured the electrical variance between leads to draw a
projection of the heart dipole potential [8,9].
9 Biomedical Engineering
Catherine M. Creighton1 and Nadja Johnson Bressan2
1 Department of Companion Animals, Atlantic Veterinary College, University of Prince Edward Island, Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island,
Canada
2 Faculty of Sustainable Design Engineering, University of Prince Edward Island, Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, Canada
Chapter contents
Introduction, 169
History of biomedical engineering, 169
Subdisciplines of biomedical engineering, 170
Biomedical instrumentation systems, 170
Biomedical data, 171
Biomedical data and time series analysis, 171
Biomedical engineering milestones in anesthesia, 172
Stethoscopes, 172
Endotracheal tubes, laryngoscopes, and inhalant anesthetic delivery, 172
Anesthetic conserving device, 172
Pulse oximetry, 172
Evolution of monitoring equipment and guidelines, 173
Contemporary biomedical engineering applications in anesthesia, 173
Drug delivery systems, 173
Ultrasound-guided nerve blocks, 173
Models and simulators in anesthesia, 174
Biomedical engineering in veterinary medicine, 174
References, 174

-- 185 of 1450 --

170 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
The interdisciplinary nature of biomedical engineering is the
signature of this scientific field that merges concepts, theories,
and methods of engineering, physics, and biological science to
solve challenges in human medicine. Shortly after World War II,
this novel field brought together physicians, biologists, physicists,
and engineers with common interests to share knowledge and
ideas. This organization evolved over time and was formalized as
the Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBS), which
is now the world’s largest international society of biomedical
engineers.
Subdisciplines of biomedical engineering
This cooperation between engineering and medical disciplines to
develop knowledge, interventions, procedures, processes, and tech-
nologies has resulted in the creation of a wide range of subdisci-
plines within biomedical engineering including the following:
Bioinformatics utilizes computational methods and resources to
develop methods to understand biological data, and acquire,
store, analyze, and disseminate biological knowledge. The pro-
cess of analyzing and interpreting biological data is referred to as
“computational biology” [10].
Bioinstrumentation employs electronics, computer sciences, and
physics to develop devices and tools to measure, evaluate, and
treat biological systems [11].
Biomechanics applies principles of physics and mechanics to bio-
logical systems to understand the forces impacting system func-
tionality within their environments [12]. A clinical example of
this subdiscipline is the biomechanical analysis of the aorta for
the estimation of vascular pathologies [13].
Biomechatronics uses principles of mechatronics engineering,
namely the synergistic combination of electronics, mechanics,
control systems, and informatics to interact, enhance, or apply to
human biology [14]. The pacemaker is an example of electronics,
mechanics, and control applied to the human body.
Biomimetics utilizes the principles of nature and natural behaviors
to design and apply concepts that may benefit science, engineer-
ing, and medicine [15]. Swarm robotics is an example of this dis-
cipline that is based on the behavior of flocks of birds or schools
of fish applied to robots to solve challenges in agriculture,
defense, construction, or environmental monitoring [16].
Bionanotechnology employs near-atomic scale technology to pro-
duce new structures, materials, and devices relevant to medical or
biological challenges. Bionanotechnology has been used for drug
delivery for the past 30 years, revolutionizing fabrication and
manufacturing, and improving efficiency and therapeutics [17].
Clinical engineering utilizes medical technology to optimize health-
care delivery [18].
Bioprocess applies chemical and biological principles to design and
develop equipment and processes for manufacturing [19].
A novel bioprocess application is space bioprocess engineering,
which creates and manages biologically driven technologies that
support human life during space missions [20].
Neuroengineering utilizes engineering techniques to understand,
repair, replace, or enhance neural systems [21]. An example of
this discipline is deep brain stimulation (DBS), which is the
application of a pacemaker that stimulates areas of the brain to
treat different conditions ranging from Parkinson’s disease to
severe depression [22].
Rehabilitation engineering uses engineering principles to design and
develop technological solutions to assist individuals with disabil-
ities and aid the recovery of physical and cognitive functions lost
due to injury or disease [23]. An example of this is
electromyographical-based adaptive assist- as-needed controllers
for patients who are recovering after a stroke [24].
Tissue engineering uses engineering, material, and biochemical
methods to restore, maintain, improve, or replace different types
of biological tissues [25].
Biomedical instrumentation systems
Historically, the development of sensors and devices was the ori-
gin of the collaboration between engineering and medicine, with
the invention of sensors, transducers, devices, machines, and sys-
tems. The main challenge originally faced by scientists was to
understand the biomedical data acquired by their instruments.
Due to the complexity of biomedical data, sensors and transduc-
ers used in medical fields are not used as stand-alone components,
as they would be in industry. To solve this challenge, biomedical
sensors, and transducers were incorporated into instrumentation
systems to accomplish the goal of measuring the target signal.
An instrumentation system was defined by Eren and Fung as a
“collection of instruments used to measure, monitor, and control
a process” [26] (Fig. 9.1).
A biomedical instrumentation system (BIS) (Fig. 9.2) introduces
additional components that a traditional instrumentation system
does not have, such as “calibration.” Calibration is a component
that adjusts all the other system components according to the
patient, environmental conditions, and health status, thereby
establishing a certain linearity between output and input. A funda-
mental component of a BIS is the control or feedback component,
collecting physiological data and stimulating a response from the
“measurand.” An example of biofeedback would be a ventilator
that fires to replicate a particular respiratory pattern in response to
readings of pulse oximetry and end-tidal carbon dioxide. Another
important component of a BIS is the “bioelectric amplifier.” Due to
the small amplitudes and low frequencies of biological signals (in
the order of mV to μV and mA to nA), any bioelectric potential
to be measured and recorded in the body must be amplified.
Bioelectrical amplifiers increase the physiological or neural electri-
cal signal from its source to a greater output signal to be sampled
by diverse sources [27].
Sensor
Data
acquisition
system
Analog
signal
conditioning
Data
storage
and display
Digital
signal
processing
Parameter
to be
measured
Figure 9.1 Basic components of an instrumentation system in engineering.

-- 186 of 1450 --

Chapter 9: Biomedical Engineering 	171
Biomedical data
After collecting data through a BIS, the next logical step is to clean
and structure the data before analysis. An implicit step that is often
overlooked, however, involves assessing and understanding the
structure and behavior of the data. This step is fundamental if the
data set is to be correctly analyzed and generate useful information.
Some biological data present linear behavior, with a constant rate
of change, such as the amount of guanine and cytosine in each DNA
molecule [28]. Most physiological and neurological data, on the
other hand, present complex nonlinear dynamic systems behavior.
Nonlinear systems are characterized by the relationship between vari-
ables where the increment change in one variable reflects a nonpro-
portional change in another variable, while the complexity of the
system can be explained as the concomitant interaction among several
variables within the system. Examples of complex nonlinear dynamic
systems include heart rate variability, the electrocardiogram, the elec-
troencephalogram, and pulmonary oxygen uptake dynamics.
Quantifying this behavior in physiological, neurological, and
pathological data has been used for detection, diagnosis, treatment,
and proactive monitoring with the goal of improving treatment and
patient outcomes [29]. Another characteristic of this type of data is its
structure; because biomedical data is collected over time it is charac-
terized as a “time series.” In contrast to discrete data points, a time
series is a collection of points over time, with underlying behavior
and patterns. The challenges in analyzing this data reside in the pres-
ence of noise, quantization of effects, the lengths of the available “good”
data, tuning or calibration parameters, and health status [30].
Biomedical data and time series analysis
To analyze a time series biomedical data set, specialized algorithms
have been developed that enable measurement of the complexity of
the time series through automation of parameters, machine learn-
ing techniques, and artificial intelligence methods. Before deciding
on the analysis methodology, one must understand what patterns to
explore, and this requires an understanding of the four main com-
ponents of a time series [31]:
1 Trend – shows the tendency of the data to increase or decrease.
“Trend” refers to the average, long-term, and smooth tendency of
the data. A time series over several hours can present different
trends at different periods.
2 Seasonal – the data variation due to predetermined patterns.
3 Cyclical – the repetitive movement of the data over time defining
the seasonal patterns.
4 Irregular – the movement of the data that cannot be explained by
cyclical movements. Often it presents different sampling rates
between sequences. This component provides information on
non-seasonal patterns.
Identifying the components of the data set supports design of the
algorithm to analyze the data; knowing if the data is stationary or
non- stationary guides the scientist to determine what method to
use to measure its performance, accuracy, and precision. A station-
ary time series is characterized by a constant mean and variance,
while a non-stationary time series presents statistical properties
depending on time.
Once the physiological, neurological, and pathological data has
been reviewed and characterized based on time series and complex-
ity, then analysis methodology can be explored such as autoregres-
sive integrated moving average (ARIMA) models, seasonal
autoregressive integrated moving average (SARIMA) models, vec-
tor autoregression (VAR) models, and beyond. Choosing the
method to analyze the biomedical time series is intrinsically related
to the type of signal (physiological, neurological, and pathological),
its energy source (electrical, mechanical, frequency, image, and
sound), and the period to be considered.
Using the right metrics to evaluate the performance, accuracy,
and precision of the model is as relevant as the method used to ana-
lyze the time series. However, just like the methodology for time
series analysis, there are numerous choices to measure the perfor-
mance of the data. Several of the most common performance meas-
ures utilized by biomedical engineers are presented below:
1 R-Squared – compares the stationary part of the model to a
simple mean model. A high value of R2 suggests that the model’s
variance is similar to the true values, and a low R2 suggests the
values are not related. Defined by:
R SS
SS
2 	1 	res
tot
2 Mean Absolute Error (MAE) – represents the average of the abso-
lute difference between estimated and true values. The lower the
Energy source
mechanical
electrical
light
infrared
ultrasound
Measurand
Calibration
Alarm
Display
Data
storage
Data
transmission
Data recording
Pre-
amplifier
Sensor or
transducer
Control
system
Signal
processing
Figure 9.2 Diagrammatic representation of a biomedical instrumentation system (BIS). Biomedical instrumentation systems are more complex and
introduce additional components including (1) calibration to adjust other system components according to patient and environmental factors; (2) a
control or feedback system to collect physiologic data and stimulate a response from the patient (“measurand”); and (3) bioelectric amplification to increase
the signal from its source to produce a greater output.

-- 187 of 1450 --

172 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
MAE value, the better the model; a value of zero indicates that
the forecast is error-free. Defined by:
MAE y 	x
n
i
n
i 	i	1
3 Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) – represents the propor-
tion of the average absolute difference between projected and
true values divided by the true value. Like MAE, the lower the
value, the better the model. Defined by:
MAPE n
A 	F
A
t
n 	t 	t
t
100 1
4 Mean Squared Error (MSE) – represents the average of the error
squares. This measure penalizes large errors or outliers more
than minor errors due to the square term. The closer MSE is to
zero, the better. Defined by:
2
1
1 	ˆ	n
i 	i 	i	MSE 	Y 	Y
n
5 Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) – represents the square root of
mean square error. This is an extension of MSE. This statistic is
likewise always positive, with lower values indicating higher per-
formance. Defined by:
2
1
1 	ˆ	n
i 	i 	i	RMSE 	Y 	Y
n
Understanding the biomedical data collected, structuring it in
time series, and modeling and analyzing the performance enables
the researcher to successfully implement evidence-based practices.
However, it is vital that future predictions prioritize the contextual-
ization in which the data is immersed and quantify the impact of
this context in signal analyses.
Biomedical engineering milestones
in anesthesia
The word “anesthesia” has been used since ancient Greek times,
appearing in the Hippocratic collection of medical texts to describe
a loss of consciousness and sensation [32]. Pain is also well described
throughout ancient and modern historical texts and was generally
accepted as a necessary component of disease or injury treatment.
Following the first public demonstration of the use of ether vapor to
relieve surgical pain in 1846 [33,34], the use of ether and chloro-
form spread rapidly as did reports of anesthetic deaths and ques-
tions of safety. In 1848, a 15-year- old girl suffered cardiac arrest
during chloroform anesthesia for removal of a toenail [35], tragi-
cally highlighting the potential risks associated with anesthesia.
Advances in asepsis along with the discovery of new drugs and
techniques spearheaded rapid expansion in the fields of anesthesia
and analgesia, an increased appreciation of patient safety (discussed
further in Chapter 3), and the development of new equipment and
monitoring techniques. Biomedical engineering has played a cru-
cial role in fostering anesthesia safety culture and the following sec-
tion highlights a few selected examples of important milestones.
Stethoscopes
Development of anesthesia-related equipment is usually driven by a
need to better obtain accurate patient information. Breath sounds
were initially auscultated simply by placing an ear on the person’s
thorax, until it was discovered in 1816 that a rolled piece of paper
placed on the chest wall resulted in much clearer, more audible
breath and heart sounds [36]. The first binaural stethoscope was
invented in 1851, and today many variations exist. Recent advances
in stethoscope technology have been made through collaboration
of physicians with biomedical engineers; in 1999, Dr. Richard
Deslauriers from the University of Toronto worked with engineers
from the Bose Corporation to design and produce a recording
stethoscope capable of blocking out external sounds. More recently,
biomedical engineers and physicians have been designing and test-
ing a possible stethoscope replacement: a foam pad that can simul-
taneously auscultate 14 chest wall locations with very good accuracy,
being able to identify specific lung sounds such as crackles and
high- or low-pitched wheezes. In 2022, a paper was published in
The Lancet, describing a deep learning system applied to single-
lead ECGs obtained using an ECG-enabled stethoscope [37]. This
work would not have been possible without collaboration between
physicians and biomedical engineers.
Endotracheal tubes, laryngoscopes, and inhalant
anesthetic delivery
The use of endotracheal tubes began not long after the introduction
of ether and chloroform as inhaled anesthetics [34]. The use of
endotracheal tubes prompted the development of a handheld laryn-
goscope. Equipment designed to deliver inhalant anesthetics and
remove carbon dioxide followed. This necessitated supplementa-
tion with additional gases such as air, oxygen, or nitrous oxide [38].
These gases required compression, storage, and transport, which
needed to be cost-effective and safe, stimulating the development of
new technologies. Between 1939 and 1960, John Henry Blease, an
English engineer by trade without formal training, collaborated
with anesthetists to improve anesthetic machines, eventually receiv-
ing 19 patents for his work [39]. This collaborative work added
manifold technology, valves, temperature compensation, one-way
valves, and an oxygen flowmeter to anesthetic machines, while also
enabling carbon dioxide absorption. Their anesthetic machine,
called the “all-purpose Alfo-Blease,” was commercially available by
1944. In 1945, Blease designed a pulmonary ventilator which his
anesthetist collaborators successfully tested on patients. One anes-
thetist recorded pneumographs to show that Blease’s ventilator
could produce a respiratory pattern very similar to spontaneous
respiration, while patients were anesthetized with cyclopropane.
Anesthetic conserving device
More recently, physicians and biomedical engineers worked
together to design the anesthetic conserving device (AnaConDa®,
Sedana Medical, Danderyd, Sweden) to deliver isoflurane or sevo-
flurane using any non-rebreathing mechanical ventilator [40]. As of
2017, over 2,300,000 AnaConDa’s have been used in hospitals,
mostly to sedate mechanically ventilated patients in intensive care
units. The device replaces the heat and moisture exchanger of the
ventilator circuit, fitting between the Y-piece and the endotracheal
tube. The AnaConDa reduces drug use and sedation costs by allow-
ing reuse of 90% of administered drugs while also humidifying the
fresh gas flow provided to the patient.
Pulse oximetry
The use of pulse oximetry is vital to ensure the safety of sedated and
anesthetized patients. Oximetry, the measurement of oxygen satu-
ration, can be traced back to Johann Lambert who, in 1760, formu-
lated the law stating that absorbance of a material sample is directly
proportional to its thickness [41]. A polymath who was interested

-- 188 of 1450 --

Chapter 9: Biomedical Engineering 	173
in mathematics, physics, philosophy, astronomy, and map projec-
tions, Lambert might very well have been a biomedical engineer
today. A Japanese bioengineer named Takuo Aoyagi was an integral
part of the development of the first commercial pulse oximeter in
1974. Aoyagi realized that the pulsatile nature of blood flow through
tissues could allow oxygen saturation to be measured. The Nellcor
Company was founded in 1981 by an anesthesiologist and two engi-
neers. In 1983, they introduced the Nellcor N-100 at the American
Society of Anesthesiology (ASA) annual meeting and in a publica-
tion in the journal Anesthesiology describing the reliability of pulse
oximetry. Pulse oximeters became so widely used that the ASA
adopted pulse oximetry as a monitoring standard in 1986. A review
paper published in 1989 evaluating closed malpractice claims found
that when pulse oximetry and capnometry were used together, 93%
of preventable anesthetic mishaps may have been averted [42].
Evolution of monitoring equipment
and guidelines
As the use of anesthesia and sedation became more widespread and
was performed on higher-risk patients, monitoring became more
important to ensure patient safety. Minimum technical standards
for monitoring anesthetized or sedated human patients were estab-
lished by the ASA in 1985 and are periodically updated [43–45].
These guidelines include recommendations for supervision by
an anesthetist during sedation or anesthesia, specific monitoring
required for sedation, anesthesia, and transport of patients, the use
of an anesthetic record with integration into the hospital’s elec-
tronic health record system, and availability of additional equip-
ment as needed. Minimum monitoring required in all cases includes
pulse oximetry (SpO 2 ) with plethysmography, non-invasive blood
pressure (NIBP), electrocardiography (ECG), and temperature [44].
If anesthesia is induced, monitoring of inspired and expired oxygen
as well as waveform capnography is added. Other monitoring, such
as inspired and end-tidal inhalant concentration, spirometry, neu-
romuscular activity, and processed electroencephalography (EEG)
are recommended depending on circumstances. In veterinary anes-
thesia, similar guidelines exist for monitoring dogs, cats, and horses
during anesthesia, and updates are published periodically [46,47].
The most recent recommendations for monitoring dogs and cats
include the use of human senses to monitor the cardiorespiratory
systems, as well as the use of SpO2
, end- tidal carbon dioxide
(PET
CO2
), NIBP, ECG, and body temperature. Monitoring guide-
lines for horses during inhalant anesthesia are similar, with the
additional recommendations of invasive blood pressure monitoring
and periodic analysis of arterial blood gases.
In human medicine, the institution of these guidelines and the
resulting advancements in the field of anesthesia patient monitor-
ing are partly responsible for a reduction of anesthesia-related mor-
tality from 1 in 3000 in 1985 to 1 in 300,000 in 1996 [43]. As of
2021, anesthesia-related mortality in human ASA I and II patients
is so low that it has not been quantified, but is estimated to be 1 in
400,000 or less. In veterinary medicine, large-scale studies are chal-
lenging, and retrospective studies determining overall mortality
rates in healthy and ill populations are infrequent. Despite the con-
siderable advances in anesthetic monitoring and the establishment
of monitoring guidelines, it is not immediately apparent that
anesthesia-related mortality rates have decreased significantly in
dogs, cats, and horses. Current overall mortality rates in these spe-
cies are 0.17%, 0.24%, and 1.1%, respectively [48–50]. It seems that
as comprehensive perianesthetic monitoring of patients continues
to advance through improved monitoring equipment and training
of personnel, overall mortality rates in veterinary medicine should
decline as they have in human medicine. Much of the monitoring
equipment used in veterinary medicine is human-specific and has
been adapted for veterinary use. Biomedical engineers are the logi-
cal resource for veterinarians to collaborate with to design and
manufacture purpose-built, economically viable equipment for vet-
erinary medicine, with the goal of improving anesthetic safety.
Commonly used monitoring equipment is typically user-friendly
and designed to be used by healthcare workers who do not have
specialized training in engineering. In human medicine, anesthe-
tists are accustomed to recognizing a gap in their ability to monitor
a specific body system or identifying a piece of anesthesia equip-
ment that is lacking, and asking how this can be rectified. Veterinary
anesthetists, on the other hand, are more often reaching out to their
biomedical engineer colleagues to help design and test equipment
with a specific veterinary purpose or application.
Contemporary biomedical engineering
applications in anesthesia
A thorough review of contemporary biomedical engineering appli-
cations in clinical anesthesia is beyond the scope of this chapter.
The following are just a few select examples with relevance to both
human and veterinary anesthesia.
Drug delivery systems
Intravenous drugs have historically been administered as a bolus
using a handheld syringe and needle or by constant rate infusion
using a syringe pump. Target-controlled infusions (TCI) provide
automatic adjustments to the infusion rate to maintain a specific
plasma concentration of drug [51,52]. When using a TCI device,
the clinician enters a desired target concentration, and the com-
puter calculates the amount of drug required to achieve the pro-
grammed concentration and directs the syringe pump to administer
the calculated boluses and infusion rates. TCI systems consist of a
syringe pump connected to a computer that has been programmed
with a model of the specific drug’s pharmacokinetics as well as the
patient’s characteristics. This programming allows the computer
to calculate tissue drug concentrations almost continuously and
determine the required infusion rates to achieve the desired target
concentration. The clinician can rapidly change the desired tar-
get concentration, as dictated by the clinical situation. Many
anesthetists are not adept at computer programming and modeling,
whereas most biomedical engineers are. This represents another
example of the potential for members of these two specialties
to work together to improve the delivery of anesthesia in the
perioperative period.
Ultrasound- guided nerve blocks
Multimodal analgesia is achieved by using combinations of
analgesic drugs to target multiple nociceptive receptors and trans-
mission pathways and provides superior analgesia while reducing
the incidence of side effects [53]. Regional anesthesia is often a
component of multimodal analgesia. For regional anesthesia to be
effective, local anesthetic drug must be deposited near the target
nerve. Nerves may be located by palpation of landmarks and
blind needle insertion, use of an electrical nerve stimulator, use of
ultrasound guidance, or by a combination of techniques [54,55]
(see Chapter 60). Ultrasound guidance allows direct visualization
of the needle tip as it is placed close to the target nerve, increasing

-- 189 of 1450 --

174 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
the chance of a successful block while minimizing the chance of
iatrogenic damage to the nerve or other structures.
Clinicians who intend to use ultrasound to perform regional
techniques need to become proficient in using the ultrasound probe
and machine, and in interpreting the two-dimensional image pro-
vided. Three- dimensional ultrasound has been evaluated and may
allow more accurate needle placement and better visualization of
local anesthetic spread [56].
A robotic-assisted ultrasound-guided system called “Magellan”
has been developed for performing regional anesthesia [57]. The
Magellan system is composed of a joystick, a robotic arm, and a
software control system. With the Magellan system, once the nerve
is located using ultrasound, the anesthetist performs the block
using the joystick located in a separate control center equipped with
enhanced video imaging of the nerve block site. A single study of
sciatic nerve blocks performed in 13 patients showed a 100% suc-
cess rate with a total procedure time of 3–4 min.
Models and simulators in anesthesia
Models are used in anesthesia to help understand the complex physi-
ologic and pharmacologic processes involved [58]. Computer-based
modeling allows in-depth study of a topic with reduced reliance on
animals, contributing to the principle of “reduction, replacement,
refinement.” In 1969, an article was published in the Journal of the
American Medical Association discussing “Sim One,” a computer-
controlled manikin designed to help teach manual skills to medical
students, interns, and residents [59]. This model was designed to
resemble a living human, with realistic respiration and the ability to
be mechanically ventilated, palpable peripheral pulses, and appro-
priate responses to the administration of anesthetic and vasopressor
drugs. The authors suggested that using simulators in the training of
healthcare workers would shorten effective education time, save fac-
ulty time, and produce more skilled graduates.
Veterinary anesthesia educators have also been working to
reduce the use of live animals in teaching, recognizing ethical and
safety concerns associated with live animal use in preclinical labo-
ratories. At the same time, student learning and knowledge need to
be sufficient for students to be successful in clinical rotations and
after graduation. Using models in place of live animals in pre-
clinical anesthesia labs allows veterinary students to learn critical
anesthesia-related skills and build confidence without risk to a live
patient [60]. Veterinary anesthesia simulators facilitate student
learning by using real anesthesia machines and monitors, thereby
creating realistic veterinary anesthesia environments. Simulator
design focuses on anesthesia administration and patient monitoring
during clinical scenarios, requiring students to interpret data, and
provide interventions as they apply knowledge and problem-solving
skills. Training models facilitate practice of a range of clinical skills
including catheter placement, induction, endotracheal intubation,
drug and fluid administration, ventilation, and maintenance of
and recovery from anesthesia. Anesthesia monitoring equipment is
linked with the simulator, allowing students to see changes in physi-
ologic parameters of their “patient” in real-time. The immediate
“patient” response to student inputs provides an interactive element
that enhances student learning and understanding. Scenario con-
tent incorporates routine anesthesia skills and events, including
commonly encountered complications; scenarios are designed to
be specific to individual course content and learning outcomes.
Simulations are followed by a debrief facilitated by anesthesia
faculty to provide students with opportunities to reflect on their
performance and to ask questions.
Models are also used in research settings to model pulmonary
gas exchange or test and evaluate new equipment without the need
for animal testing [61]. Modeling in research is typically done by a
multidisciplinary team, to take advantage of each team member’s
area of expertise [58]. Biomedical engineers are a logical choice
when veterinarians are looking for research collaborators in this
realm as they are well suited to design models or simulations and
are accustomed to working with other specialists.
Biomedical engineering in veterinary
medicine
Though inhaled ether was used in domestic animals soon after it was
introduced in people, it was not until many years later that the specialty
of veterinary anesthesia was formally recognized with the foundation
of the Association of Veterinary Anaesthetists [62], and the American
College of Veterinary Anesthesiologists (see Chapter 1). Collaboration
with other specialist veterinarians as well as with experts outside the
field of veterinary medicine is an important way in which advances in
anesthesia and analgesia are made. An example of this collaboration is
the new and evolving field of “veterinary medicine engineering” which
implements engineering technology to solve equipment and moni-
toring challenges that exist in veterinary medicine. In fact, a textbook
dedicated to this topic, An Introduction to Veterinary Medicine
Engineering, was published in 2023 that highlights the potential for
collaborative design and application of technology to improve
animal welfare and advance science [63].
References
1 Dow JW. The Bio-medical engineer. Ire Trans Bio Med Electronics BME 1961; 8(4):
223–225.
2 Finch JL, Heath GH, David AR, et al. Biomechanical assessment of two artificial
big toe restorations from ancient Egypt and their significance to the history of
prosthetics. Am Acad Orthotists Prosthetists 2012; 24(4): 181–191.
3 He B, Baird R, Butera R, et al. Grand challenges in interfacing engineering with life
sciences and medicine. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 2013; 60(3): 589–598.
4 Karagozoglu B. Biomedical engineering: education, research and challenges. In:
Proceedings of the International Conference on Technological Advances in Electrical,
Electronics and Computer Engineering (TAEECE). Konya, Turkey: IEEE, 2013: 430–436.
5 Valentinuzzi M. Why Study the history of BME, science, and technology?
IEEE Pulse 2011; 2(1): 45–47.
6 Bresadola M. Medicine and science in the life of Luigi Galvani (1737–1798).
Brain Res Bull 1998; 46(5): 367–380.
7 Piccolino M. Animal electricity and the birth of electrophysiology: the legacy of
Luigi Galvani. Brain Res Bull 1998; 46(5): 381–407.
8 Xiong Z, Nash MP, Cheng E, et al. ECG signal classification for the detection of
cardiac arrhythmias using a convolutional recurrent neural network. Physiol Meas
2018; 39(9): 094006.
9 Feher J. Diffusion. In: Quantitative Human Physiology, 2nd edn. London, UK:
Elsevier, 2017: 75–86.
10 Gauthier J, Vincent AT, Charette SJ, et al. A brief history of bioinformatics.
Brief Bioinform 2019; 20(6): 1981–1996.
11 Yamakoshi K. In the spotlight: bioinstrumentation. IEEE Rev Biomed Eng 2009;
2: 2–5.
12 Innocenti B. Biomechanics: a fundamental tool with a long history (and even longer
future!). Muscles Ligaments Tendons J 2018; 7(4): 491–492.
13 Bäck M, Gasser TC, Michel JB, et al. Biomechanical factors in the biology of aortic
wall and aortic valve diseases. Cardiovasc Res 2013; 99(2): 232–241.
14 Li Z, Yang C, Burdet E. Guest editorial: an overview of biomedical robotics and
bio-mechatronics systems and applications. IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybern Syst 2016;
46(7): 869–874.
15 Bhushan B. Biomimetics: lessons from nature – an overview. Philos Trans A Math
Phys Eng Sci 2009; 367(1893): 1445–1486.
16 Tan Y, Zheng Z. Research advance in swarm robotics. Def Technol 2013; 9(1):
18–39.
17 Park K. Nanotechnology: what it can do for drug delivery. J Control Release 2007;
120(1–2): 1–3.

-- 190 of 1450 --

Chapter 9: Biomedical Engineering 	175
18 Grimes SL. The future of clinical engineering: the challenge of change. IEEE Eng
Med Biol Mag 2003; 22(2): 91–99.
19 Abt V, Barz T, Cruz-Bournazou MN, et al. Model- based tools for optimal experi-
ments in bioprocess engineering. Curr Opin Chem Eng 2018; 22: 244–252.
20 Berliner AJ, Lipsky I, Ho D, et al. Space bioprocess engineering on the horizon.
Comms Eng 2022; 1(13). www.nature.com/articles/s44172-022-00012-9 (accessed
August 2023).
21 Prochazka A. Neurophysiology and neural engineering: a review. J Neurophysiol
2017; 118(2): 1292–1309.
22 Montgomery EB Jr., Gale JT. Mechanisms of action of deep brain stimulation
(DBS). Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2008; 32(3): 388–407.
23 Cooper RA, Cooper R. Rehabilitation Engineering: a perspective on the past
40-years and thoughts for the future. Med Eng Phys 2019; 72: 3–12.
24 Arantes AR, Bressan N, McGibbon C. A comprehensive analysis of a novel real-
time adaptive assist-as- needed controller for robot-assisted rehabilitation for stroke
patients. Res Sq [Preprint] 2021. doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-139605/v1
25 Ikada Y. Challenges in tissue engineering. J R Soc Interface 2006; 3(10): 589–601.
26 Eren H, Fung C. Instrumentation systems. In: Electrical Engineering, vol. II.
Abu Dhabi, UAE: UNESCO Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems, 2003.
27 Zhou G, Wang Y, Cui L. Biomedical sensor, device and measurement systems
[Internet]. Advances in Bioengineering. InTech, 2015. doi.org/10.5772/59941
28 Oprzeska-Zingrebe EA. Molecular dynamics simulations for the study of interac-
tion between non-canonical DNA structures and biochemically relevant co-solutes.
Dissertation, 2023. doi.org/10.18419/opus-13417
29 Sterman JD. Learning in and about complex systems. Syst Dyn Rev 1994; 10(2–3):
291–330.
30 Kuntzelman K, Jack Rhodes L, Harrington LN, et al. A practical comparison of
algorithms for the measurement of multiscale entropy in neural time series data.
Brain Cogn 2018; 123: 126–135.
31 Danilov DL. Principal components in time series forecast. J Comput Graph Stat
1997; 6(1): 112–121.
32 Astyrakaki E, Papaioannou A, Askitopoulou H. References to anesthesia, pain, and
analgesia in the Hippocratic Collection. Anesth Analg 2010; 110(1): 188–194.
33 Chaturvedi R, Gogna RL Retd. Ether day: an intriguing history. Med J Armed Forces
India 2011; 67(4): 306–308.
34 Robinson DH, Toledo AH. Historical development of modern anesthesia. J Invest
Surg 2012; 25(3): 141–149.
35 Methangkool E, Cole DJ, Cannesson M. Progress in patient safety in anesthesia.
JAMA 2020; 324(24): 2485–2486.
36 Choudry M, Stead TS, Mangal RK, et al. The history and evolution of the stetho-
scope. Cureus 2022; 14(8): e28171.
37 Bachtiger P, Petri CF, Scott FE, et al. Point-of- care screening for heart failure with
reduced ejection fraction using artificial intelligence during ECG-enabled stetho-
scope examination in London, UK: a prospective, observational, multicentre study.
Lancet Digit Health 2022; 4(2): e117–e125.
38 Strätling MWM. The history of “modern” anesthesia technology – A critical reap-
praisal: Part I: key criteria of “modern” anesthesia: technology and professionalism
definitions, backgrounds and a short introduction to a changing evidence-base.
J Anesth Hist 2020; 6(3): 101–109.
39 McKenzie AG. The inventions of John Blease. Br J Anaesth 2000; 85(6): 928–935.
40 Farrell R, Oomen G, Carey P. A technical review of the history, development and
performance of the anaesthetic conserving device “AnaConDa” for delivering vola-
tile anaesthetic in intensive and post-operative critical care. J Clin Monit Comput
2018; 32(4): 595–604.
41 Van Meter A, Williams U, Zavala A, et al. Beat to beat: a measured look at the
history of pulse oximetry. J Anesth Hist 2017; 3(1): 24–26.
42 Tinker JH, Dull DL, Caplan RA, et al. Role of monitoring devices in prevention of
anesthetic mishaps: a closed claims analysis. Anesthesiology 1989; 71(4): 541–546.
43 Pandya AN, Majid SZ, Desai MS. The origins, evolution, and spread of anesthesia
monitoring standards: from Boston to across the world. Anesth Analg 2021; 132(3):
890–898.
44 Klein AA, Meek T, Allcock E, et al. Recommendations for standards of monitor-
ing during anaesthesia and recovery 2021: guideline from the Association of
Anaesthetists. Anaesthesia 2021; 76(9): 1212–1223.
45 Deng Y, Navarro JC, Markan S. Advances in anesthesia monitoring. Oral Maxillofac
Surg Clin North Am 2019; 31(4): 611–619.
46 Grubb T, Sager J, Gaynor JS, et al. 2020 AAHA Anesthesia and Monitoring
Guidelines for dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2020; 56(2): 59–82.
47 Martinez EA, Wagner AE, Driessen B, et al. Guidelines for Anesthesia in Horses.
American College of Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia (ACVAA) Equine
Standards Committee. www.acvaa.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Guidelines-
for- Anesthesia-in- Horses.pdf (accessed August 2023).
48 Brodbelt DC, Pfeiffer DU, Young LE, et al. Results of the confidential enquiry into
perioperative small animal fatalities regarding risk factors for anesthetic-related
death in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008; 233(7): 1096–1104.
49 Brodbelt D. Feline anesthetic deaths in veterinary practice. Top Companion Anim
Med 2010; 25(4): 189–194.
50 Dugdale AH, Obhrai J, Cripps PJ. Twenty years later: a single-centre, repeat
retrospective analysis of equine perioperative mortality and investigation of
recovery quality. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43(2): 171–178.
51 van den Nieuwenhuyzen MC, Engbers FH, Vuyk J, et al. Target-controlled infusion
systems: role in anaesthesia and analgesia. Clin Pharmacokinet 2000; 38(2):
181–190.
52 Struys MM, De Smet T, Glen JI, et al. The history of target-controlled infusion.
Anesth Analg 2016; 122(1): 56–69.
53 Beverly A, Kaye AD, Ljungqvist O, et al. Essential elements of multimodal analgesia
in enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) guidelines. Anesthesiol Clin 2017; 35(2):
e115–e143.
54 Mariano ER, Marshall ZJ, Urman RD, et al. Ultrasound and its evolution in periop-
erative regional anesthesia and analgesia. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2014;
28(1): 29–39.
55 Comolli J, d’Ovidio D, Adami C, et al. Technological advances in exotic pet anes-
thesia and analgesia. Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract 2019; 22(3): 419–439.
56 Sen S, Ge M, Prabhakar A, et al. Recent technological advancements in regional
anesthesia. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2019; 33(4): 499–505.
57 Hemmerling TM, Taddei R, Wehbe M, et al. Technical communication: first robotic
ultrasound-guided nerve blocks in humans using the Magellan system. Anesth
Analg 2013; 116(2): 491–494.
58 Beneken JE, van Oostrom JH. Modeling in anesthesia. J Clin Monit Comput 1998;
14(1): 57–67.
59 Denson JS, Abrahamson S. A computer-controlled patient simulator. JAMA 1969;
208(3): 504–508.
60 Jones JL, Rinehart J, Spiegel JJ, et al. Teaching tip: development of veterinary anes-
thesia simulations for pre-clinical training: design, implementation, and evaluation
based on student perspectives. J Vet Med Educ 2018; 45(2): 232–240.
61 Loughlin PJ, Bowes WA, Westenskow DR. An oil-based model of inhalation
anesthetic uptake and elimination. Anesthesiology 1989; 71(2): 278–282.
62 Jones RS. Association of Veterinary Anaesthetists – the beginnings. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2014; 41(5): 443–444.
63 Bressan NJ, Creighton CM. An Introduction to Veterinary Medicine Engineering.
Cham, Switzerland: Springer Nature, 2023.

-- 191 of 1450 --

176
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of L umb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
Consciousness can be defined as explicit awareness. Awareness
implies that the brain is in an aroused state and that the patient
has perceptual qualities of an experience. Within the central nervous
system, the brain stem, pons, thalamic nuclei, and cortex with their
connecting neural pathways are the anatomic sites that contribute
to the state of consciousness (Fig. 10.1). The American Society of
Anesthesiologists (ASA) currently defines general anesthesia as
“a drug-induced loss of consciousness during which patients are
not arousable, even by painful stimulation” [1]. In effect, general
anesthesia is thought to be a medically induced, reversible loss of
consciousness. The traditional goals of successful general anesthesia
include reversible unconsciousness, amnesia, analgesia, skeletal
muscle relaxation resulting in immobility, and autonomic stability
to maintain physiologic homeostasis. These goals are correlated
with distinct sites within the central nervous system (CNS). For
example, amnesia is associated with the limbic system, uncon-
sciousness is associated with the interaction between the cerebral
cortex and the thalamus, and immobility and analgesia are associ-
ated with the spinal cord [2].
Anesthetic depth is defined as the drug-induced probability of
nonresponse to stimulation, calibrated against the strength of the
stimulus and the difficulty of suppressing the response. Clinically,
anesthetic depth is seen as the degree to which the CNS, predomi-
nantly the cortex, is depressed by a general anesthetic agent. Broadly
speaking, this depends on the concentration of anesthetic agents
within the brain, the magnitude of environmental stimulation
(i.e., degree of surgical stimulus), and concurrent CNS depressant
effects such as hypothermia, hypercarbia, or hypotension.
One of the current challenges in modern medicine is monitoring
the depth of general anesthesia. This, along with measuring uncon-
sciousness and recognizing awareness, is especially challenging
in nonverbal veterinary species. Accurate assessment of the depth
of anesthesia contributes to tailoring drug administration to the
individual patient. Patient underdosing resulting in inadequate
general anesthesia depth may lead to arousal or movement of the
patient, which could be dangerous or even deadly to veterinary staff
(e.g., horses kicking and large carnivores biting), exaggerated auto-
nomic responses (e.g., arrhythmias, tachycardia, and hypertension),
and intraoperative awareness with recall. Presently in humans, the
incidence of perianesthetic awareness is approximately 0.1%, with
this number increasing in cardiac surgery, cesarean section, and
high-risk patients [3–7]. The incidence of perianesthetic awareness
in veterinary species remains unknown. Patient overdosing resulting
in excessive general anesthetic depth may result in prolonged patient
recovery, increased postanesthetic complications, and patient death.
Minimum alveolar concentration
Effect-site concentration is the concentration of a drug at the site of
its biological activity; for example, the brain with general anesthetics.
Effect-site concentration is proportional to the pharmacological
10 Anesthetic Depth Monitoring
and Electroencephalography
Christopher L. Norkus
Allegheny Veterinary Emergency Trauma and Specialty (AVETS) Center, Monroeville, Pennsylvania, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 176
Minimum alveolar concentration, 176
Physical signs of anesthetic depth, 177
Stage 1, 178
Stage 2, 178
Stage 3, 179
Stage 4, 179
Electrophysiologic monitoring, 179
Depth-of- anesthesia devices, 180
The Bispectral Index™
, 180
Spectral entropy, 182
Patient state index, 183
Cerebral state monitor, 183
Narcotrend® index, 183
Index of consciousness, 183
Auditory evoked potentials, 183
Clinical utility of depth-of-anesthesia devices, 184
References, 184

-- 192 of 1450 --

Chapter 10: Anesthetic Depth Monitoring and Electroencephalography 	177
effect, whereas measurement of solely plasma concentration may
not be. Unfortunately, rapidly measuring effect-site concentration
within the clinical anesthesia setting is not feasible at this time.
In 1965, Eger introduced the concept of minimum alveolar concen-
tration (MAC), and it has since been used as the standard measure
of potency for volatile anesthetic agents. It is defined as the concen-
tration of inhaled anesthetic within the alveoli at which 50% of
subjects do not move in response to a noxious stimulus. In humans,
this noxious stimulus is considered a surgical incision; however, in
animals, this is often a noxious but non-surgical stimulus such as tail
clamp. MAC creates a unifying principle for inhaled anesthetics as
inhaled concentration can be associated with a given response
and is reproducible across various anesthetic agents. For example,
administration of 0.25 MAC (MAC-amnesia) will produce amnesia
in humans, whereas 0.3–0.5 MAC (MAC-awake) of a volatile anes-
thetic agent is needed to produce unconsciousness or return to
awakening [8–10]. The end- tidal concentration of inhaled anes-
thetic agents at which 50% of patients can be intubated smoothly is
known as “MAC for endotracheal intubation” (MAC-EI).
Administration of 1 MAC (MAC) of a volatile anesthetic pre-
vents movement in response to a surgical or otherwise noxious
stimulus in 50% of subjects. Considering normal distribution, MAC
represents only a single point on the dose-response curve and can
be seen as equivalent to a median effective dose (ED 50
). Therefore,
an individual patient may require more or less inhalant anesthetic
than MAC. Assuming a standard deviation of MAC to be 10% and
following the properties of a normal distribution, immobility would
be expected to be achieved in 68% of patients at 1.1 MAC, 95%
of patients at 1.2 MAC, and 99.7% at 1.3 MAC [10]. Administration
of 1.5 MAC (MAC-BAR) of a volatile anesthetic blunts autonomic
responses to surgical incision in 50% of human patients. The auto-
nomic responses commonly used to define MAC-BAR include
changes in pupil dilation, heart rate, and blood pressure [9].
Clinically, these multiples of MAC may be useful to roughly
gauge anesthetic depth and titrate anesthetics. For example, the use
of MAC may result in an inadequate or light plane of general
anesthesia, while 1.5 MAC would represent a deep plane of general
anesthesia for many patients. There are, however, numerous limita-
tions to relying solely on this approach. Numerous factors can alter
MAC. MAC can be increased in the face of hyperthermia, hyper-
thyroidism, young age, and concurrent medications that raise circu-
lating central catecholamines (e.g., ephedrine, monoamine oxidase
inhibitors, and amphetamine intoxication). MAC can be reduced
by factors such as hypothermia, severe hypotension, advanced age,
concurrent use of other CNS depressants (e.g., opioids, dexme-
detomidine, and ketamine), pregnancy, and severe hypoxemia.
Additional pharmacogenetic factors such as red hair in humans
have been shown to alter MAC as well as anesthetic recovery
time [11,12]. MAC values vary widely between species, and it is
quite possible that similar genotypic or phenotypic differences exist
across different animal breeds and species.
The degree of noxious stimulus in question may also be variable
and, depending on the procedure, may extend beyond a single
skin incision, which defines MAC. Predicting end-tidal inhalant
concentration may be impossible without the use of anesthetic
gas monitoring equipment, which is often not available outside of
veterinary specialty or academic practice settings. Lastly and most
notably, volatile anesthetic concentrations are measured as expired
end-tidal concentrations, which may not accurately reflect what
anesthetic concentration reaches the brain. Similarly, with the use
of total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA), target-controlled infusions
(TCI) can be utilized to predict plasma concentrations. These
approaches predict drug concentration and not necessarily drug
effect. As a result, MAC, its multiples, and plasma concentrations
should not be relied upon to be the sole determinant of anesthetic
depth.
Physical signs of anesthetic depth
Physician Dr. Arthur Guedel served in the United States Army
during the First World War and was stationed in France where he
was responsible for overseeing up to six hospitals at one time.
Frontal lobe 	Parietal lobe
Temporo-parieto-occipital junction
Posterior
cingulate
cortex
Pons
Medulla
Temporal lobe
Cerebellum
Occipital lobe
Cortex
Anterior
cingulate
cortex
Thalamus
Figure 10.1 Key regions in the central nervous system that contribute to a patient’s state of consciousness. Source: Dr. Christopher Norkus with
illustration by Kyna Kozak, with permission.

-- 193 of 1450 --

178 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
As part of this oversight, he was tasked to train orderlies and nurses
to administer diethyl ether to wounded soldiers returning from the
battlefield. Guedel developed guidelines using a wall chart that
could be used by anesthetists to gauge the depth of anesthesia
(Fig. 10.2) [13]. While Guedel’s original observations were made in
human patients anesthetized with diethyl ether, they were subse-
quently adapted for use with other hypnotic agents and ultimately
applied for use in animals.
Guedel described four progressive stages of anesthesia beginning
at its initial administration and ending at near death. Within stage 3
(surgical anesthesia), sub-classifications of light, medium, and deep
anesthesia planes were described. These planes of anesthesia repre-
sented the progressive CNS depression that could be observed
while a patient was within a surgical depth of anesthesia. Modern
balanced anesthetic and multimodal analgesia techniques utilize
numerous agents, which may confound Guedel’s classification sys-
tem, originally developed for use with the single agent diethyl ether.
For example, the use of anticholinergics might result in alterations
to patient heart rate, while the use of a dissociative agent such as
ketamine might impact eyeball position, ocular reflexes, and general
muscle tone. This has necessitated a greater reliance on additional
patient monitoring parameters, including blood pressure, respira-
tion, and neuromuscular tone, and created a continued interest in
depth-of- anesthesia devices based upon electroencephalographic
monitoring of CNS activity. Nevertheless, despite the incorporation
of many new monitoring modalities in practice, the veterinary
anesthetist should continue to have a strong understanding of
the correlation of changing physical signs and their relationship to
anesthetic depth progression.
Stage 1
Stage 1 is considered the stage of voluntary movement and is
defined as lasting from initial drug administration to loss of
patient consciousness. Some analgesia may be present in the deeper
phases of this stage. Excited, apprehensive animals may struggle.
Respirations may become irregular, or increase, and the patient may
voluntarily hold their breath for brief periods. A catecholamine
release results in a strong, rapid heartbeat, increased patient
blood pressure, and pupillary dilation. Cardiac arrhythmias may be
observed during this stage. Salivation is frequent in some species,
and urination or defecation may occasionally occur. Muscle tone
remains and patients retain a normal eye position and palpebral
and corneal reflex. Patients during this phase retain a pedal reflex
and react strongly to surgical manipulation. With the approach of
stage 2, animals become progressively ataxic, lose their ability to
stand or right themselves, and assume lateral recumbency.
Stage 2
Stage 2 is considered the stage of delirium or involuntary move-
ment. It is commonly clinically referred to as the “excitement phase.”
By definition, this stage lasts from loss of consciousness to the onset
of a regular pattern of breathing. Patients may exhibit breath-
holding, tachypnea, and hyperventilation. They may retain muscle
tone. Continued catecholamine release causes an increased heart
Respiration
Response
to skin
incision
Pupils
no
premed-
ication
Eye
reflexes
Ocular
movements
Tear
secretion
Laryngeal
and
pharyngeal
reflexes
Muscular
tone
Normal
Tense
and
struggling
Glottic
Normal
	Voluntary
control
Eyelash
Eyelid
Conjunctiva
Cornea
Pupillary
Light
reflex
Inter-
costal
Diaphragm
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
(Plane I)
Stage 3
(Plane II)
Stage 3
(Plane III)
Stage 3
(Plane IV)
Stage 4
Swallowing
Retching
Vomiting
Figure 10.2 Characteristics of the stages of general anesthesia. Source: Dr. Christopher Norkus with illustration by Kyna Kozak, with permission.

-- 194 of 1450 --

Chapter 10: Anesthetic Depth Monitoring and Electroencephalography 	179
rate and increased blood pressure. Arrhythmias may occur and the
patient’s pupils remain dilated. Palpebral and corneal reflexes remain
brisk. Nystagmus commonly occurs in horses. During this stage,
animals may briefly vocalize. In some species, especially ruminants
and cats, salivation may occur. In some species, including dogs,
cats, and goats, vomiting may be seen. The larynx of cats and pigs
is very sensitive at this stage, and premature stimulation with an
endotracheal tube may easily result in laryngospasm. Patients dur-
ing this phase retain a pedal reflex and react strongly to surgical
manipulation.
Stage 3
Stage 3 is considered the stage of surgical anesthesia. It is character-
ized by unconsciousness with progressive depression of reflexes.
This stage is the targeted anesthetic level for procedures requiring
general anesthesia. Muscle relaxation develops and ventilation
becomes slow and regular. Vomiting and swallowing reflexes are
lost. In humans, this stage has been further divided into planes I–IV
for finer differentiation. Others have suggested the simpler classifi-
cation of light (plane I), medium (plane II), and deep (plane III)
planes are more appropriate.
Light anesthesia persists until eyeball movement ceases. Medium
anesthesia is characterized by progressive intercostal paralysis, and
deep anesthesia by diaphragmatic respiration. A medium depth of
anesthesia has traditionally been considered a light to medium
plane of surgical anesthesia (stage 3, plane II), characterized by
stable respiration and pulse rate, abolished laryngeal reflexes, an
absent palpebral reflex, a strong corneal reflex, and adequate muscle
relaxation with absent response to surgical stimulation. Deep surgical
anesthesia (stage 3, plane III) is characterized by decreased inter-
costal muscle function and tidal volume, increased respiration rate,
profound muscle relaxation, diaphragmatic breathing, a weak corneal
reflex, and a centered and dilated pupil.
Patients in stage 3 have their heart rates return to normal ranges
and may experience progressive bradycardia. Blood pressure nor-
malizes and begins to decrease as anesthetic depth is deepened.
The frequency of arrhythmias decreases. Patients in light planes of
anesthesia may react to surgical manipulation and have a pedal
reflex, while these traits are lost in medium-to- deeper planes. In
general, patients will progressively lose jaw tone and limb muscle
tone, although this can vary depending on species and patient age.
For example, young dogs may have minimal jaw tone even at light
anesthesia planes, while other species such as ruminants and swine
may maintain a high degree of jaw tone even at deep planes. Eyeball
position will also vary depending on the species. In dogs and cats,
for example, the globe will rotate to a ventromedial orientation. In
other species such as horses, however, the globe will remain cen-
trally oriented. In ruminants, the globe may rotate ventrally in light
and medium anesthesia planes showing only the sclera and then
returning centrally during deep anesthesia planes.
Stage 4
Stage 4 is that of extreme CNS depression and overdose. In this
phase, cardiopulmonary function fails. The patient may exhibit
marked hypotension, weak pulses, bradycardia or transient tachy-
cardia, prolonged capillary refill time, and other cardiac arrhyth-
mias. Patients will hypoventilate and respiration itself may cease or
become irregular. Pupils will acutely dilate. All reflexes are blunted,
and muscle tone is absent. The corneal reflex ceases. In dogs and
cats, the eyeball position will rotate to a central position. In this
stage, death quickly occurs unless immediate resuscitative steps are
taken, including lessening the patient’s anesthesia depth.
Electrophysiologic monitoring
Electroencephalography is the recording of spontaneous electrical
brain activity from scalp electrodes [14–16]. Traditionally,
these electrodes are placed at standard positions according to
the International 10–20 system [14,16,17]. The electrical signals
obtained from the surface of the scalp represent the summation of
neuronal activity within the cerebral cortex, and result from excita-
tory and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (PSPs) in large pyrami-
dal neurons located in the lower layers, such as layer V, of the
cerebral cortex [14,18–20]. The EEG amplitude and frequency
are influenced by afferent inputs from sensory-specific thalamic
nuclei serving as gates between peripheral receptors and the cortex,
and by epicenters within the cerebral cortex [21].
In 1934, Hans Berger proposed that the appearance of α waves
in the EEG may represent cerebrocortical events associated with
consciousness in the awake man [22]. It is believed that EEG
activity associated with consciousness is generated from pacemaker
neurons within the ascending reticular activating system (ARAS),
and then mediated and modulated through thalamic connec-
tions [19,21,23–25]. These pacemaker neurons oscillate in the
frequency range of 8–12 Hz and synchronize the excitability of cells
in the thalamocortical pathways. Small cerebrocortical areas appear
to also act as epicenters from which α activity spreads through
cortical neuronal networks, generating the α rhythm that dominates
the resting EEG. In the awake state, consciousness is maintained by
a circulating activity among the ARAS, intralaminar nuclei, and
the cerebral cortex [21]. Additional sensory stimulation will cause
cortical arousal that is characterized by the desynchronization of
α oscillators with the appearance of a faster rhythm in the β frequency
range (12–25 Hz) [21,25–28]. The term “desynchronization” is
characterized by a shift in the EEG pattern from high-voltage,
slow-wave activity to low-voltage, fast-wave activity [19,23,29].
As early as 1937, Gibbs and colleagues reported that anesthetic
agents altered electroencephalogram (EEG) activity from low-voltage
fast waves to high-voltage slow waves and proposed that the EEG
could be used clinically to measure the effects of anesthesia [30].
In 1959, Martin and colleagues first described hypnotic general
anesthetics as producing a biphasic EEG effect [31]. They observed
that during light anesthesia, there was EEG desynchronization,
which changed to progressive synchronization, slowing, and
increased amplitude as anesthesia deepened (Fig. 10.3A–C). With
further increases in anesthetic depth, the EEG displayed burst
suppression and lengthening periods of EEG silence (Fig. 10.3D).
Furthermore, a topographic distributional change from occipital
lobe dominance to frontal lobe dominance was observed.
More specifically, the EEG frequency bands utilized for assessment
of anesthetic depth are the δ (0–4 Hz), θ (4–8 Hz), α (8–13 Hz), and
β (13–30 Hz) bands [32,33]. During induction and maintenance of
anesthesia, there is a progressive decrease in EEG frequency content
characterized by a shift from a low-voltage, fast-wave pattern
to a high-voltage, slow-wave pattern [34–37]. As anesthetic depth
increases, the predominant EEG pattern is characterized by a
decrease in β activity and a concomitant increase in both α and
δ activity [38]. As anesthesia deepens further, EEG activity in the
θ and δ frequency bands appears initially in centroposterior
regions with subsequent anterior spread [39]. Lastly, very deep

-- 195 of 1450 --

180 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
levels of general anesthesia are first indicated by flat periods
interspersed with periods of α and β activity, known as a “burst
suppression pattern,” followed by a complete loss of electrical
discharge known as “isoelectricity” or “electrical silence” [35,36,40].
Upon reducing the dose of the anesthetic agent, these patterns
reverse, and lighter levels of anesthesia are indicated again by a
decrease in amplitude and an increase in frequency content.
Depth- of-anesthesia devices
Today we recognize the EEG as a continuous non-invasive indicator
of cerebral cortical function in awake and unconscious patients
alike. The EEG is thought to be a potential measure of anesthetic
depth because it represents cortical electrical activity derived from
summated inhibitory and excitatory postsynaptic activity resulting
from subcortical events, including those that pass through subcor-
tical thalamic nuclei. Additionally, the degree of measured EEG
activity is associated with cerebral blood flow and metabolism,
which can be altered by anesthetic drugs and surgical stimulation.
Noxious stimulation during inadequate anesthesia ascends the
reticular activating system (RAS) of the brainstem and results in
EEG activation. These EEG changes vary with individual anesthet-
ics and with the nature of the noxious stimulation. Clinical assess-
ment of raw EEG signals to assess anesthetic depth is challenging
to learn, subjective to interpret, and influenced by confounders
such as electrical interferences. For these reasons, computer analysis
techniques have been utilized to distill the EEG into a condensed,
easy-to- interpret format known as the “processed” EEG which,
in turn, may be useful in assessing general trends in clinical
anesthetic depth.
Shortly before the turn of the last century, Aspect Medical
Systems undertook research efforts to develop the EEG as a general
measurement of anesthetic depth and developed the first depth-of-
anesthesia device. Their original EEG monitor, known as the
“Bispectral Index™” (BIS™) monitoring system, quantitates the effect
of hypnotic anesthetics on the human brain. Several other competi-
tors have manufactured similar depth-of-anesthesia devices over the
past three decades based upon this general technology. While the
details of each company’s algorithms often remain proprietary, these
devices and their development share several common principles.
These devices present a continuous EEG parameter, or index, that
usually ranges from an awake non-anesthetic drug-influenced state
(value of 100) to isoelectricity or electrical silence (value of 0).
These devices then use multiple EEG signal-processing approaches
to capture incremental information. Clinically relevant data (e.g.,
response to verbal commands, plasma drug concentration, and
recall) is then gathered from a large population of human subjects,
and advanced multivariate statistical analysis is used to correlate the
index value with the clinically relevant measure. Cumulatively,
these monitoring devices generally display progressively decreasing
index values from 100 to 0, which reflect a progressive increase
in anesthetic depth and provide a framework for the titration of
anesthetic agents.
The Bispectral Index™
The Bispectral Index (BIS™) is a proprietary EEG parameter devel-
oped by Aspect Medical Systems. The United States Food and
Drug Administration approved the commercial use of the device
to monitor the effect of anesthetics on the brain in 1996. A self-
adhesive index sensor is placed on the patient’s forehead. This
sensor then obtains live raw EEG signals and transmits them to a
BIS monitor via an interface cable. The BIS monitor then displays
real-time EEG as well as a dimensionless BIS value for interpreta-
tion. In humans, BIS values between 40 and 60 represent adequate
general anesthesia for surgery with values below 40 representing a
deep or over-anesthetized state (Fig. 10.4).
In humans, however, numerous limitations influence the reliabil-
ity of the BIS. The BIS appears strongly influenced by the anesthetic
technique. Certain anesthetics such as ketamine and nitrous oxide
may actually increase BIS values [41,42]. The BIS may also be influ-
enced by patient age. In children under 6 months of age, emergence
and recovery measures were unaffected by BIS titration; children
between the ages of 6 months and 3 years also showed no differences
in anesthetic use or recovery measures when BIS was compared to
standard practice monitoring [43]. This may be due to differences in
brain maturation and synapse formation resulting in differences
in the EEG in this population. Hypothermic human patients show
a wide variation in BIS values as body temperature decreases.
Specifically, BIS appears to decrease by 1.12 units for each degree
Celsius reduction in body temperature [44]. Interference with other
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
Figure 10.3 During induction and maintenance of anesthesia, there is a progressive decrease in EEG frequency content slowing, which will be
characterized by a shift from a low-voltage, fast-wave pattern to a high-voltage, slow- wave pattern (A–C). Deep levels of general anesthesia are indicated
by flat periods interspersed with a burst suppression pattern, followed by a complete loss of electrical discharge known as isoelectricity or electrical silence
(D). Source: Dr. Christopher Norkus with illustration by Kyna Kozak, with permission.

-- 196 of 1450 --

Chapter 10: Anesthetic Depth Monitoring and Electroencephalography 	181
medical devices such as electrosurgical cautery can cause EEG
artifacts and thereby influence BIS reliability [45]. Lastly, neuro-
logic impairment can markedly alter the ability of the BIS to acutely
monitor the depth of anesthesia. Patients within this population
generally have lower pre-existing BIS values [46].
The BIS has been evaluated in veterinary anesthesiology with
conflicting results and interpretations of clinical utility (Fig. 10.5).
Bleijenberg et al. evaluated 65 dogs undergoing anesthesia for
surgery. Individual BIS values measured at light and surgical levels
of anesthesia overlapped considerably. The authors concluded that
BIS values and clinical depth of anesthesia had low specificity,
sensitivity, and predictive values, and thus the use of BIS as a sole
method to determine anesthetic depth in dogs was imprudent [47].
Campagnol et al. evaluated the correlation between BIS and
end- tidal isoflurane concentration and also compared the use of
three different BIS sensor positions in dogs. They proposed that
frontal-temporal sensor positioning provided a better correlation
with isoflurane depth of anesthesia in dogs compared to the other
sensor configurations tested [48]. Additionally, their work suggested
that BIS values might not reflect changes in depth of isoflurane
anesthesia in the absence of noxious stimulation [48]. Previous
work also identified that the use of subdermal needle electrodes was
a reliable and practical alternative to the use of patch electrodes for
the measurement of BIS in dogs [49]. The work of Ubiali et al.
Small
amplitude
fast
frequency
wave
100
80
60
40
20
0
Large
amplitude
slow
frequency
wave
Awake
Moderate sedation
General anesthesia
BIS = 90
BIS = 70
BIS = 50
Deep anesthesia
BIS = 30
Isoelectric EEG 	BIS = 10
Isoelectric EEG
Microvolts
BIS index range
50
50
0
Figure 10.4 Bispectral Index™ aids the anesthetist by providing a numeral value between 0 (indicating EEG suppression) to 100 (fully conscious).
Source: Dr. Christopher Norkus with illustration by Kyna Kozak, with permission.

-- 197 of 1450 --

182 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
in dogs evaluating BIS during propofol infusion suggested that BIS
values for humans should not be considered for classifying anes-
thetic and hypnotic depths in dogs [50]. Van Soens et al. concluded
that BIS was of limited use in titrating sedation and anesthesia
during transcranial magnetic stimulation in dogs [51].
Other work in dogs has shown a correlation between BIS and the
expired anesthetic fraction in halothane, isoflurane, and sevoflurane-
anesthetized dogs [52]. An increase in propofol infusion rates
appears to decrease BIS in dogs [53]. Like humans, other anesthetic
agents appear to have variable effects on BIS in dogs. For example,
the use of morphine–lidocaine–ketamine and dexmedetomidine–
morphine–lidocaine–ketamine constant rate infusions increased
BIS values in six healthy dogs anesthetized with isoflurane [54].
Morphine did not cause clinically significant changes in the BIS of
unstimulated dogs during isoflurane anesthesia [55]. Atracurium
also appeared to have minimal clinical effect on the BIS in anesthe-
tized dogs [56]. BIS levels appear to be lower in puppies than in
adults at the same alveolar concentration of sevoflurane [57]. Lastly,
in 31 dogs with altered levels of consciousness, Saenubol et al.
identified a significant correlation between modified Glasgow coma
scale (MGCS) scores and BIS values, suggesting that BIS values
could also be used as an alternative to MGCS monitoring in the
veterinary intensive care unit, and like in humans with neurologic
disease, might be influenced by other CNS factors beyond anesthetic
depth [58].
Less data is available in other animal species. Values of BIS are
inversely and linearly related to end-tidal sevoflurane and isoflu-
rane concentrations in anesthetized cats [59,60]. In horses, BIS
values were measured at multiple stages of sevoflurane anesthesia
in five thoroughbred horses anesthetized with guaifenesin and
thiopental following premedication with xylazine. BIS values were
lower during anesthesia than in awake or sedated horses; however,
no significant difference between BIS values was recorded at end-
tidal sevoflurane concentrations of 2.8% and 3.5% [61]. During the
recovery phase, the BIS values gradually increased over time but did
not significantly increase until the horses showed movement [61].
Haga et al. identified that BIS was an imprecise indicator of CNS
depression in isoflurane-anesthetized horses undergoing castra-
tion [62]. Belda et al. found that BIS approximated the level of
unconsciousness in halothane and sevoflurane-anesthetized horses;
however, it did not predict intraoperative movement, which would
be a major shortcoming associated with BIS monitoring in this
species [63]. Yamashita et al. also identified that BIS did not
indicate the degree of CNS depression during propofol anesthesia
in horses [64]. BIS monitoring has additionally been evaluated in
numerous other species, including goats, sheep, pigs, cows, elk,
rabbits, dolphins, alpacas, and chickens [65–73].
Spectral entropy
In chemistry, entropy is used as a measure of how the energy
of atoms and molecules becomes more spread out in a process.
For example, as a substance changes from a solid to a liquid, the
mobility and potential for interactions among atoms increases and,
consequently, so does its entropy. Mathematician Claude E. Shannon
applied these concepts in 1948 to information theory and proposed
that entropy could describe the complexity, irregularity, or unpre-
dictability of a signal [74]. For example, a pure sinusoidal wave
would have no entropy because of its regular and predictable nature,
whereas a wave containing hugely variable frequencies would have
a high entropy. As EEGs exhibit chaotic and non-linear behavior,
it followed that entropy could be applied to their interpretation.
The GE Healthcare Entropy ™ Module was released in 2003 as an
index of anesthetic depth and is available as part of some Datex
multiparameter monitors. The device uses a similar self-adhesive
frontotemporal sensor as the BIS which connects to a monitor via
an interface cable. In humans, facial electromyography (EMG) has
a frequency range (> 20 Hz) that overlaps with that of the EEG
(0.8–32 Hz). The facial EMG changes with levels of consciousness
Monitor
Adapter
BIS sensor
Cable
Patient
BIS monitor
Figure 10.5 Bispectral Index™ usage in the dog. A self-adhesive index sensor is placed on the patient’s forehead in the frontal–temporal position.
This sensor then obtains live raw EEG signals and transmits them to a BIS™ monitor via an interface cable. The BIS monitor then displaces real-time
EEG as well as a dimensionless BIS value for interpretation. Source: Dr. Christopher Norkus with illustration by Kyna Kozak, with permission.

-- 198 of 1450 --

Chapter 10: Anesthetic Depth Monitoring and Electroencephalography 	183
and the use of neuromuscular blocking agents. The device assesses
two indices: State Entropy (SE) and Response Entropy (RE). SE is
computed from the EEG in the 0.8–32 Hz range and is thought to
encompass mainly the hypnotic elements of the EEG. RE, on the
other hand, is computed from EEG signals in the 0.8–47 Hz range,
which includes elements from the facial EMG. When EMG activity
is low, SE and RE should be identical. However, with arousal and an
increase in facial EMG, RE should increase [75].
Data in humans would suggest that the GE Healthcare Entropy
Module produces results comparable to that of BIS when tested
with intravenous and inhaled anesthetics [76–78]. The monitor dis-
plays the SE, RE, a raw EEG, as well as other monitored variables.
The displayed SE range is 0 (no EEG activity) to 91 (full awake) and
the RE range is 0–100. Numbers close to 100 mean that the patient
is conscious, and numbers close to 0 denote very deep anesthesia.
The manufacturer recommends that an SE between 40 and 60 is
appropriate for general anesthesia and that values outside this range
may require a dosing adjustment. In horses undergoing isoflurane
and medetomidine general anesthesia, SE values of 27.4 ± 4.8 and
RE values of 35.1 ± 7.1 were present during a surgical plane of
anesthesia. There appeared to be a poor correlation between this
technique and BIS [79]. Morgaz et al. evaluated entropy in
sevoflurane-anesthetized dogs. Their work concluded that RE and
RE-SE differences were not adequate indicators of antinociception,
and SE and RE were unable to detect deep planes of anesthesia in
dogs, although they were able to distinguish the awake and uncon-
scious states [80].
Patient state index
The patient state index (PSI) uses time, frequency, phase informa-
tion, and spatial information from the EEG to assess anesthetic
depth via a multivariate algorithm [81]. A self-adhesive five-lead
bilateral frontotemporal sensor is used. A PSI value of 25–50 is con-
sidered adequate for surgical anesthesia in humans. The index is
shown as the current value as well as the patient’s trend, which
is color-coded to indicate whether the anesthetic depth is “too
light,” “too deep,” or “just right.” Data investigating or validating the
use of PSI in veterinary species is lacking.
Cerebral state monitor
The cerebral state monitor (CSM) is a handheld portable device
that analyses the frequency content of the EEG signal. The energy
of the EEG is evaluated in specific frequency bands. These are used
to define two energy ratios called alpha (α) and beta (β). Both of
these show a shift in energy content from the higher to the lower
frequencies during anesthesia. The relationship between these
quantities is also analyzed as a separate parameter (β-α). Lastly, the
monitor evaluates the amount of instantaneous burst suppression
(BS) in each 30-s period of the EEG. This measurement quantifies
the amount of “silent” or “flat” EEG periods characteristic of the
deepest levels of hypnosis. These four parameters are used as input
to a fuzzy logic classifier system that calculates the cerebral state
index (CSI). The CSI ranges from 0 (no EEG activity) to 100 (awake
state). Values between 40 and 60 are considered adequate for surgi-
cal anesthesia in humans. Bollen and Saxtorph evaluated CSM in
dogs sedated with medetomidine undergoing dental scaling.
Undisturbed sedated dogs had a median CSI value of 43. During
dental scaling, CSI values increased to awake ranges with a median
value of 99. The authors concluded CSM to be a promising method
for monitoring the degree of sedation and hypnosis [82]. In other
work in dogs, while increasing doses of propofol showed a
correlation to CSI, no correlation was found between clinical depth
of anesthesia during propofol induction [83,84]. Bollen et al. found
good agreement between depth of anesthesia and CSI in propofol–
fentanyl-infused pigs [85].
Narcotrend® index
In 1937, Loomis and colleagues categorized the EEG during sleep
into characteristic patterns, which were assigned stages ranging
from A to E [86]. The Narcotrend® monitor by MonitorTechnik was
developed by anesthesiologists and engineers at the University
Medical School of Hannover in Germany. The system takes raw
EEG and, after artifact detection, uses a multivariate statistical algo-
rithm to categorize patients into six stages, ranging from A (awake)
to F (isoelectricity/burst suppression), and 14 substages to facilitate
greater precision in monitoring anesthesia depth [87]. In humans,
the Narcotrend index appears to correlate well with BIS analysis.
Narcotrend stages D or E appear equivalent to BIS values between
65 and 40, indicating appropriate surgical anesthetic depth. The
Narcotrend monitor is unique in that it uses standard electrocardi-
ography electrodes rather than a proprietary electrode sensor.
Limited data is available on the use of the Narcotrend index in
veterinary anesthesia. In cats, the Narcotrend index correlated to
increasing isoflurane MAC multiples, but its reliability decreased
with the addition of dexmedetomidine [88].
Index of consciousness
The index of consciousness (IoC) is a depth-of-anesthesia device
derived from a combination of symbolic dynamics, β-ratio, and EEG
suppression rate [89]. IoC ranges from 0 to 99, where 99 indicates
an awake patient, 80 is associated with sedation, the range 40–60 is
defined as the state recommended for surgical anesthesia, and
0 indicates isoelectric EEG. IoC shows a considerable time delay
before the correct index is displayed, which may limit the device’s
clinical utility [89].
Auditory evoked potentials
Auditory evoked potentials (AEPs) are electrical potentials evoked
in the auditory pathway in response to sound stimuli [90]. To gen-
erate an AEP, an auditory stimulus is repeatedly delivered to a
patient, and the EEG periods that immediately follow each stimulus
are averaged. This eliminates the non-stimulus–related portions of
the EEG and retains the specific evoked potential periods. These
potentials are then divided into several sections based on the ana-
tomical area of their origin and the time elapsed since the auditory
stimulus. The middle latency auditory evoked potential (MLAEP),
40 and 60 ms after stimulation, represents neural activity within the
thalamus and primary auditory cortex and has been used in humans
to reflect the degree of CNS depression in response to anesthetics,
and therefore general anesthetic depth [90]. One such newer device
is the aepEXplus™ made by Medical Device Management, Essex,
UK. These devices produce a dimensionless index known as the
“A-line autoregressive index” (AAI) between 0 and 100 with which
depth of anesthesia can be gauged.
In humans, AEP monitoring appears to correlate well with other
depth-of-anesthetic devices and may be preferred over BIS when
ketamine is used [91]. The use of AEP has also been evaluated
in animal species. AEPs were found to correlate with end-tidal
isoflurane concentrations and the administration of thiopental in
dogs [92,93]. Additional work in dogs premedicated with ace-
promazine and morphine and anesthetized with thiopental and
halothane found that indices generated from AEP also showed a

-- 199 of 1450 --

184 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
good correlation with anesthetic depth assessed by a trained
anesthetist [94]. Other work in dogs found that AEPs were not
statistically correlated with magnetic motor evoked potentials in
dogs undergoing transcranial magnetic stimulation and were of
limited use in titrating anesthesia in this population [51]. AEPs
were also not found to be effective in monitoring anesthetic depth
in sevoflurane-anesthetized dogs [95].
Clinical utility of depth-of-anesthesia devices
The depth-of- anesthesia devices previously discussed primarily
aim to measure the effect of injectable and inhaled hypnotic agents
on the EEG. However, numerous drugs are often administered to
patients as part of a balanced anesthesia technique and to achieve
multimodal analgesia. Not all agents impact the EEG in the same
way. Many drugs such as midazolam, dexmedetomidine, propofol,
etomidate, thiopental, isoflurane, sevoflurane, and desflurane are
thought to decrease BIS and other depth-of-anesthesia device indices
in humans. However, low concentrations of opioids, the use of neu-
romuscular blocking agents, and nitrous oxide, do not appear to
consistently change the BIS response during propofol or inhaled
anesthesia. As discussed earlier in the chapter, agents such as keta-
mine and nitrous oxide may even increase BIS depending on
dose [24,41]. Other agents administered during the perianesthetic
period that affect the sympathetic nervous system may further
influence depth-of-anesthesia devices. Administration of esmolol
has been shown to markedly decrease BIS in propofol and alfentanil-
infused humans, while sympathomimetics such as epinephrine
increase arousal and BIS values [96,97]. These drug idiosyncrasies
can easily create an inaccurate assessment of anesthetic depth and
necessitate careful individual patient interpretation. Other factors
such as patient age, hypothermia, pre-existing neurologic disease, and
electrical interference from nearby medical devices may further
influence and confound depth-of-anesthesia devices [43–45].
Is there a clear benefit to using depth-of- anesthesia devices? A
2017 systematic review and meta-analysis in humans found that the
use of BIS monitoring reduced time to extubation, to attain orienta-
tion in time and place, and to discharge from both the operating
room and postanesthetic care unit. The risk of nausea and vomiting
after surgery also was reduced by 12%. A 3% reduction in the risk of
cognitive impairment postoperatively at 3 months and a 6% reduc-
tion in the risk of postoperative delirium were also identified.
Additionally, the risk of intraoperative recall was also reduced by
1% [98]. Despite these benefits, a 2004 meta-analysis also identified
that the cost savings from reduced drug costs and time in the early
recovery period were offset by the cost of the depth-of-anesthesia
device itself and the cost of the monitoring electrodes [99].
The routine application of depth-of-anesthesia devices in animals
is questionable since their algorithms are based on data collected in
humans. March and Muir reviewed the use of BIS in animal species
and suggested that interspecies differences in the EEG features
associated with different hypnotic and amnesic states may affect the
correlation between BIS values and depth of anesthesia [100]. To
further complicate the picture, there currently is no consensus in
human or veterinary anesthesiology on how to validate depth-of-
anesthesia devices or even how best to determine depth of anesthesia.
The absence of such “gold standards” limits the present-day anesthe-
siologist’s ability to compare or judge future technologies [101]. In
2014, Schneider et al. performed a “head-to- head” comparison
in humans between electroencephalogram-based monitoring (BIS),
standard parameter-based monitoring (heart rate, blood pressure,
end- tidal anesthetic concentration, and propofol concentration), or
both strategies together, which were used to calculate an anesthesia
multimodal index of consciousness (AMIC) [102]. Their work
concluded that the use of the AMIC, including integration of
both standard monitoring and electroencephalographic parameters
more precisely reflected the depth-of-anesthesia compared to BIS
or standard monitoring alone. Ultimately, if depth-of- anesthesia
devices are to be used in veterinary anesthesia, they should be used
cautiously and only in combination with other modalities such as
Guedel’s physical signs of anesthetic depth, inhalant anesthetic
concentrations, and injectable drug plasma concentrations, and not
used as the sole mechanism of determining anesthetic depth.
References
1 American Society of Anesthesiologists Committee on Quality Management
and Departmental Administration. Continuum of depth of sedation: definition
of general anesthesia and levels of sedation/analgesia. Position statement last
amended on October 23, 2019. www.asahq.org/standards-and-practice-parameters/
statement-on-continuum-of-depth-of-sedation-definition-of-general-anesthesia-
and-levels-of-sedation-analgesia (accessed June 2023).
2 Mashour GA. Integrating the science of consciousness and anesthesia. Anesth Analg
2006; 103: 975–982.
3 Sandin RH, Enlund G, Samuelsson P, et al. Awareness during anaesthesia: a
prospective study. Lancet 2000; 355: 707–711.
4 Myles PS, Leslie K, McNeil J, et al. Bispectral Index monitoring to prevent aware-
ness during anesthesia: the B-Aware randomized controlled trial. Lancet 2004; 363:
1757–1763.
5 Sebel PS, Bowdle TA, Ghoneim MM, et al. The incidence of awareness during anes-
thesia: a multicenter United States study. Anesth Analg 2004; 99: 833–839.
6 Rungreungvanich M, Lekprasert V, Sirinan C, et al. An analysis of intraoperative
recall of awareness in Thai Anesthesia Incidents Study (Thai Study). J Med Assoc
Thai 2005; 88: S95–S101.
7 Ghoneim MM, Block RI. Learning and memory during general anaesthesia, an
update. Anaesthesiology 1997; 87: 387.
8 Chortkoff B, Eger EI, Crankshaw DP, et al. Concentrations of desflurane and
propofol that suppress response to command in humans. Anest Analg 1995; 81:
737–743.
9 Eger EI. Age, minimum alveolar anesthetic concentration, and minimum alveolar
anesthetic concentration-awake. Anesth Analg 2001; 93(4): 947–953.
10 Aranake A, Mashour GA, Avidan MS. Minimum alveolar concentration: ongoing
relevance and clinical utility. Anaesthesia 2013; 68(5): 512–522.
11 Sessler DI. Red hair and anesthetic requirement. Can J Anesth 2015; 62: 333–337.
12 Liem EB, Lin CM, Suleman MI, et al. Anesthetic requirement is increased in red-
heads. Anesthesiology 2004; 101(2): 279–283.
13 Guedel AE. Third stage ether anesthesia: a sub-classification regarding the signifi-
cance of the position and movements of the eyeball. Pa Med J 1921; 24: 375–380.
14 Gugino LD, Aglio LS, Yli-Hankala A. Monitoring the electroencephalogram during
bypass procedures. Semin Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2004; 8: 61–83.
15 Angel A. Central neuronal pathways and the process of anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth
1993; 71: 148–163.
16 Noachtar S, Binnie C, Ebersole J, et al. A glossary of terms most commonly used by
clinical electroencephalographers and proposal for the report form for the EEG
findings. Klin Neurophysiol 2004; 35: 5–21.
17 Jasper HH. Report of the committee on methods of clinical examination in electro-
encephalography. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 1957; 10: 370–375.
18 Tooley MA, Grant LJ, Davies AR. A microprocessor based instrument for the spec-
tral analysis of the EEG in anaesthesia. Clin Phys Physiol Meas 1984; 5: 303–311.
19 Prince DA, Shanzer S. Effects of anesthetic upon the EEG response to reticular
stimulation. Patterns of slow synchrony. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 1966;
21: 578–588.
20 Rampil IJ. A primer for EEG signal processing in anesthesia. Anesthesiology
1998; 89: 980–1002.
21 John ER, Prichep LS. The anesthetic cascade: a theory of how anesthesia suppresses
consciousness. Anesthesiology 2005; 102: 447–471.
22 Berger H. Über das elektroenzephalogramm des menschen. Achte mitteilung.
Arch Psychiat 1934; 101: 452–469.
23 Moruzzi G, Magoun HW. Brain stem reticular formation and activation of the EEG.
Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 1949; 1: 455–473.
24 Arduini A, Arduini MG. Effect of drugs and metabolic alterations on brainstem
arousal mechanism. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1954; 110: 76–85.

-- 200 of 1450 --

Chapter 10: Anesthetic Depth Monitoring and Electroencephalography 	185
25 Skinner JE, Lindsley DB. Electrophysiological and behavioral effects of blockade of
the nonspecific thalamo-cortical system. Brain Res 1967; 6: 95–118.
26 Hughes JR, John ER. Conventional and quantitative electroencephalography in
psychiatry. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 1999; 11: 190–208.
27 John ER. A field theory of consciousness. Conscious Cogn 2001; 10: 184–213.
28 John ER, Prichep LS, Knox W, et al. Invariant reversible QEEG effects of anesthetics.
Conscious Cogn 2001; 10: 165–183.
29 Kaada BR, Thomas F, Alnaes E, et al. EEG synchronization induced by high fre-
quency midbrain reticular stimulation in anesthetized cats. Electroencephalogr Clin
Neurophysiol 1967; 22: 220–230.
30 Gibbs FA, Gibbs EL, Lennox WG. Effect on the electroencephalogram of certain
drugs which influence nervous activity. Arch Intern Med (Chic) 1937; 60(1):
154–166.
31 Martin JT, Faulconer A, Bickford RG. Electroencephalography in anesthesiology.
Anesthesiology 1959; 20(3): 359–376.
32 Kaieda R, Todd MM, Warner DS. The effects of anesthetics and PaCO2 on the
cerebrovascular, metabolic, and electroencephalographic responses to nitrous
oxide in the rabbit. Anesth Analg 1989; 68: 135–143.
33 Schwender D, Daunderer M, Mulzer S, et al. Spectral edge frequency of the electro-
encephalogram to monitor ‘depth’ of anaesthesia with isoflurane or propofol.
Br J Anaesth 1996; 77: 179–184.
34 Eger EI II, Stevens WC, Cromwell TH. The electroencephalogram in man anesthe-
tized with forane. Anesthesiology 1971; 35: 504–508.
35 Kiersey DK, Bickford RG, Faulconer A Jr. Electro-encephalographic patterns pro-
duced by thiopental sodium during surgical operations: description and classifica-
tion. Br J Anaesth 1951; 23: 141–152.
36 Clark DL, Rosner BS. Neurophysiologic effects of general anesthetics. I. The
electroencephalogram and sensory evoked responses in man. Anesthesiology
1973; 38: 564–582.
37 Keifer JC, Baghdoyan HA, Lydic R. Pontine cholinergic mechanisms modulate the
cortical electroencephalographic spindles of halothane anesthesia. Anesthesiology
1996; 84: 945–954.
38 Feshchenko VA, Veselis RA, Reinsel RA. Propofol-induced alpha rhythm.
Neuropsychobiology 2004; 50: 257–266.
39 Gugino LD, Chabot RJ, Prichep LS, et al. Quantitative EEG changes associated with
loss and return of consciousness in healthy adult volunteers anaesthetized with
propofol or sevoflurane. Br J Anaesth 2001; 87: 421–428.
40 Newberg LA, Milde JH, Michenfelder JD. The cerebral metabolic effects of isoflu-
rane at and above concentrations that suppress cortical electrical activity.
Anesthesiology 1983; 59: 23–28.
41 Hans P, Dewandre PY, Brichant JF, et al. Comparative effects of ketamine on
Bispectral Index and spectral entropy of the electroencephalogram under sevoflu-
rane anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth 2005; 94(3): 336–340.
42 Mishra RK, Mahajan C, Prabhakar H, et al. Effect of nitrous oxide on Bispectral
Index values at equi-minimum alveolar concentrations of sevoflurane and desflu-
rane. Indian J Anaesth 2017; 61(6): 482–485.
43 Bannister CF, Brosius KK, Sigl JC, et al. The effect of Bispectral Index monitoring
on anesthetic use and recovery in children anesthetized with sevoflurane in nitrous
oxide. Anesth Analg 2001; 92(4): 877–881.
44 Doi M, Gajraj RJ, Mantzaridis H, et al. Effects of cardiopulmonary bypass and
hypothermia on electroencephalographic variables. Anaesthesia 1997; 52(11):
1048–1055.
45 Chan MT, Ho SS, Gin T. Performance of the Bispectral Index during electrocautery.
J Neurosurg Anesthesiol 2012; 24(1): 9–13.
46 Johansen J, Sebel P. Develop and clinical application of electroencephalographic
bispectrum monitoring. Anesthesiology 2000; 93: 1336–1344.
47 Bleijenberg EH, van Oostrom H, Akkerdaas LC, et al. Bispectral Index and the clini-
cally evaluated anaesthetic depth in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38(6): 536–543.
48 Campagnol D, Teixeira Neto FJ, Monteiro ER, et al. Use of Bispectral Index to mon-
itor depth of anesthesia in isoflurane-anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 2007; 68(12):
1300–1307.
49 Greene SA, Benson GJ, Tranquilli WJ, et al. Relationship of canine Bispectral Index
to multiples of sevoflurane minimal alveolar concentration, using patch or subder-
mal electrodes. Comp Med 2002; 52(5): 424–428.
50 Ubiali MLC, Meirelles GP, Vilani JM, et al. Evaluation of the anesthetic depth and
Bispectral Index during propofol sequential target-controlled infusion in dogs. Vet
World 2022; 15(3): 537–542.
51 Van Soens I, Struys MM, Polis IE, et al. Effects of sedative and hypnotic drug
combinations on transcranial magnetic motor evoked potential, Bispectral Index
and ARX-derived auditory evoked potential index in dogs. Vet J 2009; 181(2):
163–170.
52 de Mattos-Junior E, Ito KC, Conti-Patara A, et al. Bispectral monitoring in dogs
subjected to ovariohysterectomy and anesthetized with halothane, isoflurane or
sevoflurane. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38(5): 475–483.
53 Lopes PC, Nunes N, Paula DP, et al. Bispectral Index in dogs at three intravenous
infusion rates of propofol. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35(3): 228–231.
54 Ebner LS, Lerche P, Bednarski RM, et al. Effect of dexmedetomidine, morphine–
lidocaine–ketamine, and dexmedetomidine–morphine–lidocaine–ketamine con-
stant rate infusions on the minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane and
Bispectral Index in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2013; 74(7): 963–970.
55 Henao-Guerrero PN, McMurphy R, Kukanich B, et al. Effect of morphine on the
Bispectral Index during isoflurane anesthesia in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009;
36(2): 133–143.
56 Belda E, Laredo FG, Lucas X, et al. The effects of atracurium on Bispectral Index
(BIS) values in dogs anaesthetized with isoflurane. Vet J 2012; 192(2): 189–192.
57 Morgaz J, Granados MM, Domínguez JM, et al. Relationship of Bispectral Index to
hemodynamic variables and alveolar concentration multiples of sevoflurane in
puppies. Res Vet Sci 2009; 86(3): 508–513.
58 Saenubol P, Akatvipat A, Pleumsamran A, et al. Correlation between Bispectral
Index value and modified Glasgow coma scale score in dogs with altered level of
consciousness. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2021; 31(1): 52–58.
59 Lamont LA, Greene SA, Grimm KA, et al. Relationship of Bispectral Index to mini-
mum alveolar concentration multiples of sevoflurane in cats. Am J Vet Res 2004;
65(1): 93–98.
60 March PA, Muir WW. Use of the Bispectral Index as a monitor of anesthetic depth
in cats anesthetized with isoflurane. Am J Vet Res 2003; 64(12): 1534–1541.
61 Tokushige H, Kakizaki M, Ode H, et al. Validation of the Bispectral Index as an
indicator of anesthetic depth in Thoroughbred horses anesthetized with sevoflu-
rane. J Equine Sci 2016; 27(4): 169–173.
62 Haga HA, Dolvik NI. Evaluation of the Bispectral Index as an indicator of degree of
central nervous system depression in isoflurane-anesthetized horses. Am J Vet Res
2002; 63(3): 438–442.
63 Belda E, Blissitt KJ, Duncan JC, et al. The Bispectral Index during recovery
from halothane and sevoflurane anaesthesia in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg
2010; 37(1): 25–34.
64 Yamashita K, Akashi N, Kataymaa Y, et al. Evaluation of Bispectral Index (BIS) as
an indicator of central nervous system depression in horses anesthetized with
propofol. J Vet Med Sci 2009; 71(11): 1465–1471.
65 Antognini JF, Wang XW, Carstens E. Isoflurane anaesthetic depth in goats moni-
tored using the Bispectral Index of the electroencephalogram. Vet Res Commun
2000; 24(6): 361–370.
66 Martín-Cancho MF, Lima JR, Luis L, et al. Bispectral Index, spectral edge frequency
95%, and median frequency recorded for various concentrations of isoflurane and
sevoflurane in pigs. Am J Vet Res 2003; 64(7): 866–873.
67 Deschk M, Wagatsuma JT, Araújo MA, et al. Continuous infusion of propofol
in calves: Bispectral Index and hemodynamic effects. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43(3):
309–315.
68 Martín- Cancho MF, Lima JR, Luis L, et al. Relationship of Bispectral Index values,
haemodynamic changes and recovery times during sevoflurane or propofol anaes-
thesia in rabbits. Lab Anim 2006; 40(1): 28–42.
69 Howard RS, Finneran JJ, Ridgway SH. Bispectral Index monitoring of unihemi-
spheric effects in dolphins. Anesth Analg 2006; 103(3): 626–632.
70 Garcia-Pereira FL, Greene SA, Keegan RD, et al. Effects of intravenous butorphanol
on cardiopulmonary function in isoflurane-anesthetized alpacas. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2007; 34(4): 269–274.
71 Martin- Jurado O, Vogt R, Kutter AP, et al. Effect of inhalation of isoflurane at end-
tidal concentrations greater than, equal to, and less than the minimum anesthetic
concentration on Bispectral Index in chickens. Am J Vet Res 2008; 69(10):
1254–1261.
72 Litscher G. Ten years evidence-based high-tech acupuncture. Part 3: a short review
of animal experiments. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med 2010; 7(2): 151–155.
73 Kreeger TJ, Huizenga M, Hansen C, et al. Sufentanil and xylazine immobilization of
Rocky Mountain elk. J Wildl Dis 2011; 47(3): 638–642.
74 Shannon CE. A mathematical theory of communication. Bell Syst Tech J 1948; 27:
379–423, 623–656.
75 Viertiö-Oja H, Maja V, Särkelä M, et al. Description of the Entropy algorithm as
applied in the Datex-Ohmeda S/5 Entropy Module. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2004;
48(2): 154–161.
76 Ellerkmann RK, Soehle M, Alves TM, et al. Spectral entropy and Bispectral Index
as measures of the electroencephalographic effects of propofol. Anesth Analg 2006;
102(5): 1456–1462.
77 Ellerkmann RK, Liermann VM, Alves TM, et al. Spectral entropy and Bispectral
Index as measures of the electroencephalographic effects of sevoflurane.
Anesthesiology 2004; 101(6): 1275–1282.
78 Vakkuri A, Yli-Hankala A, Talja P, et al. Time-frequency balanced spectral entropy
as a measure of anesthetic drug effect in central nervous system during sevoflu-
rane, propofol, and thiopental anesthesia. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2004; 48(2):
145–153.

-- 201 of 1450 --

186 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
79 Navarrete-Calvo R, Morgaz J, Gómez- Villamandos RJ, et al. Comparison of
Bispectral Index and spectral entropy during isoflurane and medetomidine general
anaesthesia in horses. Equine Vet J 2020; 52(5): 678–684.
80 Morgaz J, Granados MM, Domínguez JM, et al. Evaluation of spectral entropy
to measure anaesthetic depth and antinociception in sevoflurane-anaesthetised
Beagle dogs. Vet J 2011; 188(3): 352–355.
81 Drover D, Ortega HR. Patient state index. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2006;
20(1):121–128.
82 Bollen, PJ, Saxtorph, H. Cerebral state monitoring in Beagle dogs sedated with
medetomidine. Vet Anaesth Analg 2006; 33: 237–240.
83 Ribeiro LM, Ferreira DA, Bressan NM, et al. Brain monitoring in dogs using the
cerebral state index during the induction of anesthesia via target-controlled infu-
sion of propofol. Res Vet Sci 2008; 85: 227–232.
84 Ribeiro LM, Ferreira DA, Bras S, et al. Correlation between clinical signs of depth
of anaesthesia and cerebral state index responses in dogs during induction of anaes-
thesia with propofol. Res Vet Sci 2009; 87: 287–291.
85 Bollen PJ, Nielsen BJ, Toft P. Influence of endotoxin-induced sepsis on the require-
ments of propofol–fentanyl infusion rate in pigs. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol 2007;
101(3): 192–196.
86 Loomis, AL, Harvey EN, Hobart GA. Cerebral states during sleep, as studied by
human brain potentials. J Exper Psych 1937; 21(2): 127–144.
87 Schultz B, Grouven U, Schultz A. Automatic classification algorithms of the EEG
monitor Narcotrend for routinely recorded EEG data from general anaesthesia: a
validation study. Biomed Tech 2002; 47: 9–13.
88 Raue JF, Tünsmeyer J, Kästner SBR. Effects of isoflurane, remifentanil and
dexmedetomidine on selected EEG parameters derived from a Narcotrend Monitor
before and after nociceptive stimulation at different MAC multiples in cats.
BMC Vet Res 2020; 16(1): 332.
89 Kreuzer M, Zanner R, Pilge S, et al. Time delay of monitors of the hypnotic compo-
nent of anesthesia: analysis of state entropy and index of consciousness. Anesth
Analg 2012; 115(2): 315–319.
90 Kurita T, Doi M, Katoh T, et al. Auditory evoked potential index predicts the depth
of sedation and movement in response to skin incision during sevoflurane anesthesia.
Anesthesiology 2001; 95(2): 364–370.
91 Matsushita S, Oda S, Otaki K, et al. Change in auditory evoked potential index and
Bispectral Index during induction of anesthesia with anesthetic drugs. J Clin Monit
Comput 2015 Oct; 29(5): 621–626.
92 Pypendop B, Poncelet L, Verstegen J. Use of midlatency auditory-evoked poten-
tials as indicator of unconsciousness in the dog: characterisation of the effects of
acepromazine-thiopentone, medetomidine-thiopentone and medetomidine-
butorphanol-midazolam combinations. Res Vet Sci 1999; 67(1): 35–39.
93 Joubert KE. Does the A- line ARX- lndex provide a reasonable assessment of anaes-
thetic depth in dogs undergoing routine surgery? J S Afr Vet Assoc 2004; 75(3):
110–115.
94 Joubert KE. Preliminary assessment of the AAI Index during isoflurane anaesthesia
in dogs undergoing clinical procedures. J S Afr Vet Assoc 2009; 80(3): 185–187.
95 Murrell JC, de Groot HN, Psatha E, et al. Investigation of changes in the middle
latency auditory evoked potential during anesthesia with sevoflurane in dogs.
Am J Vet Res 2005; 66(7): 1156–1161.
96 Johansen JW. Esmolol promotes electroencephalographic burst suppression
during propofol/alfentanil anesthesia. Anesth Analg 2001; 93(6): 1526–1531.
97 Andrzejowski J, Sleigh JW, Johnson IA, et al. The effect of intravenous epinephrine
on the Bispectral Index and sedation. Anaesthesia 2000; 55(8): 761–763.
98 Oliveira CR, Bernardo WM, Nunes VM. Benefit of general anesthesia monitored
by Bispectral Index compared with monitoring guided only by clinical parame-
ters. Systematic review and meta-analysis. Braz J Anesthesiol 2017; 67(1): 72–84.
99 Liu SS. Effects of Bispectral Index monitoring on ambulatory anesthesia: a meta-
analysis of randomized controlled trials and a cost analysis. Anesthesiology
2004; 101(2): 311–315.
100 March PA, Muir WW. Bispectral analysis of the electroencephalogram: a review of
its development and use in anesthesia. Vet Anaesth Analg 2005; 32: 241–255.
101 Heyse B, Van Ooteghem B, Wyler B, et al. Comparison of contemporary EEG
derived depth of anesthesia monitors with a 5 step validation process. Acta
Anaesthesiol Belg 2009; 60(1): 19–33.
102 Schneider G, Jordan D, Schwarz G, et al. European Multicenter EEGAEP Anesthesia
Monitoring Study Group and Research Group Knowledge-based Signal Processing.
Monitoring depth of anesthesia utilizing a combination of electroencephalographic
and standard measures. Anesthesiology 2014; 120(4): 819–828.

-- 202 of 1450 --

187
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of L umb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
An electrocardiogram (ECG) is the graphical representation of the
cardiac electrical activity recorded over time. The ECG allows the
anesthetist to evaluate the heart rate and rhythm and, when evalu-
ated in combination with blood pressure and other indicators of
tissue perfusion and cardiac output, allows for an assessment of the
cardiovascular status of the patient. Many disease states may lead to
the development of arrhythmias (e.g., electrolyte disturbances, dis-
eases of splanchnic viscera, paraneoplastic diseases, etc.), and some
anesthetic drugs can increase the risk of spontaneous arrhythmias
in otherwise healthy animals [1–4]. Due to the widespread availa-
bility of this technology, ECG monitoring should be considered for
any patient undergoing anesthesia, even for short-duration or rou-
tine procedures.
A normal ECG is easily recognizable and represents the electrical
activity of the heart. However, to understand why and how an
abnormal rhythm may develop, it is important to understand the
basic physics behind the ECG as well as the minor species differ-
ences. It is also important to understand the limitations of an ECG
and how to differentiate common artifacts from true arrhythmias.
Electrical potentials and the lead system
There are many different systems available that can obtain an ECG;
the underlying principles remain fairly constant between machines.
Understanding the basics of electrocardiography requires integration
of multiple concepts including generation of the cardiac action
potential, the equivalent dipole theory, and the lead system. The
cardiac action potential is covered in detail elsewhere (see Chapter 33).
What follows is a brief description of the equivalent dipole theory,
cardiac vectors, and the lead system.
The equivalent dipole theory states that the heart can be approxi-
mated to a dipole (i.e., it is equivalent to a dipole when measured);
the force that is generated has a direction and magnitude and can be
represented as a vector [5,6]. A dipole is a pair of electrical charges
of equal and opposite polarity that are separated by a distance. The
electrical potential generated can be measured with a galvanometer,
which consists of two exploring electrodes placed on each side of
the system. The electrical potential measured by the galvanometer
is dependent on the intensity of the electrical force generated, the
distance the electrodes from the dipole, and the position of the elec-
trodes relative to the orientation of the dipole. Depolarization of
the myocardium generates electrical forces of varying magnitudes
and directions; this electrical activity can be thought of as vectors of
electrical activation. Electrical activity occurring simultaneously
creates a summation vector. The magnitude of these vectors is
detected on the body surface, depending on the site of the exploring
electrode and the direction of the vector. The electrode placed on a
line parallel to the direction of the vector will be able to record the
maximum amplitude of that activity [6].
When several exploring electrodes are attached on the surface of
the patient, it is possible to record the magnitude and direction of
11 Electrocardiography
Kyle J. Bartholomew
Department of Surgical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 187
Electrical potentials and the lead system, 187
Einthoven’s triangle, 188
Bipolar, unipolar, and precordial leads, 188
The ECG complex, 189
Evaluating an ECG, 190
Heart rate calculation, 190
Rhythm evaluation, 191
Mean electrical axis, 191
Species- specific variations, 192
Canine, 192
Feline, 192
Equine, 192
ECG equipment, 194
Artifacts and filters, 194
Effect of anesthesia, 195
References, 195

-- 203 of 1450 --

188 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
these cardiac vectors. The ECG records the electric potential
(in mV, on the y axis) over time (in seconds, on the x axis) between
a point on the body surface and an indifferent (or reference) elec-
trode or between two recording electrodes. The lines joining these
electrodes form what we refer to as “leads” along which the cardiac
vectors are measured [6]. Leads may be defined as unipolar or bipo-
lar. If the potential is recorded between an electrode on the body
surface (exploring electrode) and an indifferent (or reference) elec-
trode, the leads are unipolar. If the difference is recorded between
two recording electrodes, the leads are bipolar.
The voltage change recorded by the leads is displayed graphically.
Each electrical wave is defined by its amplitude, polarity, and
duration. When the cardiac depolarization vector is parallel to the
lead, the wave is of maximum amplitude; a depolarization vector
perpendicular to the lead produces a wave of minimal amplitude.
Typically, a vector directed toward the positive electrode is repre-
sented as a positive wave and a vector directed toward the negative
electrode is represented as a negative wave.
Einthoven’s triangle
Due to the directionality of an ECG, the direction of electrical activ-
ity can be “seen” from different directions depending on the leads
used. A diagnostic ECG may be capable of up to 12 viewpoints in
two planes: frontal and transverse. Clinically, the frontal plane is
most commonly used.
Electrodes placed on the right forelimb, left forelimb, and left
hindlimb make up an arrangement known as “Einthoven’s triangle,”
named after Willem Einthoven, a Dutch doctor who is credited
with developing the first apparatus utilized to detect electrical
activity of the heart. The three potential differences created by this
arrangement are called leads I, II, and III (Fig. 11.1). It has been
suggested that this naming convention is largely historical, based
on Einthoven’s original description, rather than any intrinsic
meaning [7].
Bipolar, unipolar, and precordial leads
Leads I, II, and III are referred to as the “standard bipolar leads”
because they measure between two points of the electrodes
(Fig. 11.1). Lead I measures the potential difference between the
right and left forelimb with the left considered positive. Lead II, the
most common lead used clinically, is between the right forelimb
and left hindlimb with the hindlimb considered positive. Lead III is
between the left forelimb and left hindlimb with the hindlimb
considered positive [7].
As bipolar leads (and lead II specifically) are the primary leads
utilized in perianesthetic monitoring, they will be the focus of the
rest of the chapter; however, the other diagnostic leads are briefly
discussed below. Because a lead is, by nature, the potential difference
between two points, the theoretical number of leads that could exist
is nearly limitless. Cardiologists commonly use other lead systems,
such as the modified orthogonal lead system, and the descriptions
provided below should by no means be considered exhaustive,
only a summary of common configurations that may be used in the
perianesthetic period [6].
The unipolar leads are created by comparing the three electrodes
to a reference voltage created by the monitor, known as “Wilson’s
central terminal.” The signal between the three electrodes and
the reference (Wilson’s central terminal) are known as aVL
(left forelimb), aVR (right forelimb), and aVF (left hindlimb). These
are also known as the “augmented limb leads,” and they allow for a
slightly different angle of evaluation in the frontal plane [7].
The unipolar precordial leads are based on a similar concept: six
additional electrodes can be placed on the thorax near the heart and
are compared to a reference electrode (Wilson’s central terminal).
(A) 	(B)
Lead I
Lead
II
Lead
III
+
+	+
–
– 	–
(–)
(–) 	(–)
(+)	(+)
(+)	Lead I
Lead
II
Lead
III
Figure 11.1 A. Einthoven’s Triangle, the basic schematic
for the modern bipolar lead system. B. Standard bipolar
lead placement in a dog, used on most small domestic
species; the white lead (RA) is placed on the right
forelimb, the black lead (LA) is placed on the left
forelimb, and the red lead (LL) is placed on the left
hindlimb. Source: Dr. Kyle Bartholomew, with
permission.

-- 204 of 1450 --

Chapter 11: Electrocardiography 	189
These leads (V1–V6) provide information in the transverse plane
rather than the frontal plane like other leads. The precordial system
is used with some frequency in human patients; however, it is less
commonly used in veterinary medicine during the perianesthetic
period.
In small animals, a multilead ECG may be used to generate
targeted information about chamber enlargement, and lead II is
used predominantly to monitor patients intraoperatively. In horses,
however, it has been suggested that a multilead ECG is of less value
because of the extensive branching of the Purkinje system in the
ventricles. In these cases, a single-lead system is typically sufficient
to optimize the signal along the direction of the maximal deflection
of the electrical impulse generated within the heart. To accomplish
this, the electrodes are placed parallel to this impulse in what is
often referred to as the “base-apex lead” (Fig. 11.2) [8]. Although
there is some debate as to whether the base-apex lead is the most
effective lead for diagnostic evaluation of the horse, it is currently
the most well established [9]. It has also been suggested that the
base-apex lead arrangement accentuates the P wave of the equine
ECG [10]. This arrangement historically uses the lead I setting with
the negative (–) electrode (right forelimb/RA/white) placed over
the jugular furrow or near the manubrium. The positive (+) electrode
(left forelimb/LL/black) may be placed over the left apex of the
heart, on the left side of the chest at the level of the olecranon or at
the xiphoid. The ground electrode (left hindlimb/LL/red) may be
attached to either side of the neck. Some portable ECG monitors
utilize only two electrodes, which can be used to generate a single
lead; the lead that is generated (I, II, or III) depends on where the
electrodes are placed.
It is also important to note that many systems available in North
America use a standard color-coding system of right forelimb
or RA (white), left forelimb or LA (black), and left hindlimb or
LL (red). This color scheme is not always the same as that used
internationally [11].
The ECG complex
The ECG complex is a representation of the electrical activity
occurring in the myocardium during a single cardiac cycle, from
cell depolarization at the beginning of the cycle to the cell repolari-
zation at the end of the cycle. Different terminology may be used by
different sources to discuss these concepts, but terms used here
are wave, segment, and interval. A “wave” represents an electrical
event in the myocardium and is represented as a deflection above
or below baseline. A segment is a line joining two waves, and an
interval is the time (or graphical distance) between two events.
The primary deflections in an ECG are the P wave, the Q, R, and
S waves (often referred to as the “QRS complex”), and the T wave
(Fig. 11.3) [12].
In a normal heart, the cardiac cycle begins at the sinoatrial (SA)
node, a small group of cells located in the right atrium that act as the
dominant pacemaker of the heart. This event is not represented by
a wave on the ECG due to the small number of cells that make up
the SA node and, therefore, the very small amount of voltage
this event produces. However, immediately following SA node acti-
vation, a wave of depolarization travels across the atria facilitated by
the atrial conduction system, including Bachmann’s bundle [13].
The depolarization of the atria is represented by the P wave on the
ECG. As the wave of depolarization sweeps across the atria, it
eventually reaches the atrioventricular (AV) node. The wave of
depolarization propagates through the AV node and along the
R
S
Ta
Q T U
P
Figure 11.3 An example of the classic ECG recording; the P wave represents
atrial depolarization and the QRS complex represents ventricular
depolarization. The T wave represents ventricular repolarization. The blue
dotted structures are rarely appreciated, the U wave is theorized to
originate from late repolarization of the mid-myocardial cells or Purkinje
cells and may be seen in patients who are bradycardic or suffering from
hypokalemia; the Ta wave represents atrial repolarization and is rarely
seen because its occurrence during the QRS complex obscures it.
Source: Dr. Kyle Bartholomew, with permission.
Figure 11.2 Base- apex lead arrangement in a horse: bipolar lead I is used
with the right forelimb (RA/white) electrode placed over the jugular furrow,
the left forelimb (LA/black) electrode placed on the left side of the chest
just caudal to the forelimb, and ground electrode (left hindlimb/LL/red) is
attached to either side of the neck. Source: Dr. Kyle Bartholomew, with
permission.

-- 205 of 1450 --

190 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
bundle of His before following the right and left bundle branches
and, finally, through the Purkinje network on its way to the contrac-
tile cardiac myocytes. The time it takes for the wave of depolariza-
tion to propagate from the atria through the ventricular conduction
system is represented by the PQ (also referred to as PR) interval
and is defined as the time from the onset of the P wave to the onset
of the QRS complex [12]. The extensive Purkinje network spreads
the impulse to the contractile cardiac myocytes starting at the apex
of the heart and begins the formation of the QRS complex (i.e., the
three waves representing ventricular depolarization: Q, R, and S).
It should be noted that most individuals refer to the complex
that represents ventricular depolarization as the QRS, regardless
of whether the complex contains a distinct Q, R, and S wave.
Mechanical contraction of the myocardium follows electrical depo-
larization. After depolarization, repolarization of the ventricles
follows to reestablish the cellular electrical potential that allows for
the next electrical depolarization and mechanical contraction. The
electrical repolarization of the ventricle is represented as the T wave
on the ECG. The atria also experience repolarization which is
sometimes represented as the Ta wave on the ECG; however, this
wave normally occurs during the depolarization of the ventricles
(i.e., the QRS complex) and, therefore, is obscured due to the larger
electrical potential of ventricular depolarization. The ST segment,
defined as the segment between the end of the QRS complex
(sometimes referred to as the J point) and the T wave, corresponds
to ventricular systole during which the membrane potential of
ventricular myocytes is equal and is, therefore, normally represented
as a horizontal line [12]. The J wave and U wave are two underap-
preciated waves that may represent early and late ventricular repo-
larization, respectively. In humans, the J wave may be appreciated
in a normal heart but can also appear as result of hypothermia,
hypercalcemia, or myocardial ischemia [14,15]. The U wave, theo-
rized to originate from repolarization of the mid-myocardial cells
(M cells) or Purkinje cells, may be seen in patients who are brady-
cardic or suffer from hypokalemia [15].
The line that occurs between the end of the T wave and the
beginning of the next P wave is generally called “baseline” or the
“isoelectric line” and is associated with the absence of electrical
activity. This becomes important when considering the pauses that
occur during a single cardiac depolarization and the time between
the cardiac cycles.
Evaluating an ECG
Evaluation of an ECG during anesthesia can give valuable informa-
tion about the patient’s heart rate and can lead to early recognition
of dysrhythmias that could become pathologic if left untreated.
However, perianesthetic ECG interpretation may come with
limitations, such as patient positioning, limited sites for electrode
placement, and operating room artifacts. Therefore, ECG tracings
recorded as part of continuous anesthetic monitoring may not
meet all the recommendations for standardization associated with
a fully diagnostic ECG. Regardless, there is still crucially important
information that may be obtained from perianesthetic ECG
monitoring.
When evaluating the ECG, it is important to note that the horizon-
tal axis of an ECG printout (also referred to as a strip or tracing)
is time in seconds while the vertical axis is voltage, displayed in
millivolts (mV). It is also important to note the underlying paper
or sweep speed, the rate at which the ECG paper or screen travels
while the ECG is being traced, commonly 25 mm/s or 50 mm/s.
At a faster paper speed (50 mm/s), each small box (1 mm) on the
horizontal axis represents 0.02 s and the ECG complex will appear
wider. At a slower speed (25 mm/s), each small box represents 0.04 s,
and the ECG complex will appear narrower comparatively.
Heart rate calculation
The ECG can be used as a source for determining the patient’s heart
rate; however, it can be susceptible to artifact and interference,
which may make automated heart rate calculation by the monitor
less accurate. There are multiple methods available to manually cal-
culate a heart rate from a printed ECG. The simplest, albeit least
accurate, way to calculate the heart rate is to determine the number
of R waves within 3 s and multiply by 20 to obtain beats per minute
(Fig. 11.4) [16].
A more useful method, especially in patients with an irregular
rhythm, is calculation of an “instantaneous” heart rate using only
one R-R interval, defined as the distance between two sequential
R waves of the QRS complex. This method requires knowledge of
the underlying paper or sweep speed. The R-R interval can be
counted in terms of small boxes (mm); the number of boxes counted
can then be multiplied by s/mm (0.02 for 50 mm/s paper speed
and 0.04 for 25 mm/s paper speed) to obtain the amount of time
(seconds) per beat. To convert this into beats per minute, simply
divide 60 (s/min) by the number of seconds per beat. For example,
an R- R interval that was counted to be 18 small boxes at a paper
speed of 25 mm/s would be:
18 	0 04 	0 72	mm 	mm/s 	s per R-R interval and	. 	. 	;
60 	0 72 	83 3	s/ 	s per interval 	beats/	min 	. 	. 	min
The instantaneous heart rate would be 83 beats/min. An alternative,
and arguably easier method, is to divide the number of mm
per minute by the number of mm between beats (R-R interval) to
obtain beats per minute (Fig. 11.4). For a 25-mm/s paper speed,
R-R Interval
Figure 11.4 At the commonly used paper speed of 25 mm/s, 1 mm (small red outlined box) equals 0.04 s. At this speed, the blue line (75 mm) represents
roughly 3 s (3/0.04 = 75) or roughly the length of a ballpoint pen. The number of complexes that occur during this period can be multiplied by 20 to
roughly estimate the beats per minute (3 s × 20 = 60 s). The number of complexes that occur under the blue line is 4, so in this example, the heart rate
would be approximately 80 beats/min (4 × 20 = 80). Another method of determining heart rate, particularly useful in patients with irregular rhythms like
the one seen here, is to count the R-R interval in millimeters and divide this number into 1500 (where 1500 is the number of mm per minute at 25 mm/s
paper speed). In this example, the R-R interval is ~18 mm and (1500/18 = 83.3); therefore, the heart rate is estimated to be 83 beats/min. This second
method is often referred to as the “instantaneous heart rate” method. Source: Dr. Kyle Bartholomew, with permission.

-- 206 of 1450 --

Chapter 11: Electrocardiography 	191
there are 1500 mm/min, and for 50 mm/s, there are 3000 mm/min.
In the previous example, this would mean:
1500 	18 	83 3	mm/ 	mm R-R interval 	beats/	min 	. 	min
Rhythm evaluation
There are many approaches to systematically evaluate an ECG, but
many of them follow the same general pattern: evaluate the heart
rate, recognize the presence of all the normal waves that make up
the ECG complex, and evaluate if there are any beats that do not
belong. A simplified algorithm can be found in Box 11.1 and is
described below. An algorithm such as this is not meant to diagnose
a specific condition; rather, it is to be used to help guide localization
of where an issue might be arising. For example, if the QRS mor-
phology is abnormal, one should consider that ventricular conduc-
tion may be abnormal, but it is up to the user to determine what the
specific problem is and how to appropriately act.
First, determine heart rate as previously described. Then, deter-
mine if the ventricular and atrial rates match. Normally, there is a
fixed interval between the P waves and QRS complexes (PQ interval);
however, in some cases, the ventricular rate (R-R interval) may not
match the atrial rate (P-P interval), and a separate heart rate assess-
ment may be needed for atrial and ventricular rates in some circum-
stances. Next, assess if every P wave has an associated QRS omplex.
Normally, there is a fixed relationship of one P wave preceding
every QRS complex, while ectopic (or abnormal) QRS complexes
often originate without a preceding atrial depolarization. Premature
complexes occur before the next anticipated sinus beat, while
escape complexes generally occur significantly later than the next
expected sinus beat. Next, determine if every QRS complex has an
associated P wave. In normal sinus rhythm and sinus arrhythmia,
there will be a P wave preceding every QRS complex, and the inter-
val between the P waves and QRS complexes will be consistent.
However, in some instances, the electrical impulse is blocked at
the AV node or His–Purkinje system, preventing propagation and
depolarization of the ventricles (e.g., AV block). Finally, determine
if the QRS complexes appear supraventricular or ventricular. In dogs
and cats, if the electrical impulse originates from the sinus node,
atrial myocardium, or AV node, the QRS complex will generally
be tall, upright, and narrow, otherwise referred to as “supraven-
tricular” [16]. If the electrical impulse originates from the ventricle,
the QRS complex will be wide and abnormal in appearance
(sometimes used synonymously with the term “ventricular”) because
it does not utilize the normal His–Purkinje system [17–19].
Systematic assessment of the ECG by this method will allow for a
rapid and accurate diagnosis of heart rate and rhythm. A dysrhyth-
mia (also often referred to as arrhythmia) denotes an irregularity
in the cardiac rhythm. In-depth discussions of the diagnosis of
dysrhythmias along with underlying mechanisms and treatments
are covered elsewhere [13]. In short, dysrhythmias are often charac-
terized by the anatomic place of origin, rate, and/or regularity.
Supraventricular arrhythmias arise from the atria or AV node, while
ventricular arrhythmias arise from the ventricles. When dysrhyth-
mias originate from the AV node, they are sometimes more specifi-
cally classified as junctional. When further characterized by rate, slow
rates are referred to as bradyarrhythmias (e.g., sinus bradycardia,
AV block, and sinus arrest), while rapid rates are referred to as
tachyarrhythmias (e.g., sinus tachycardia, ventricular tachycardia,
and supraventricular tachycardia). Common arrhythmias that
occur at normal rates are respiratory sinus arrhythmia, and acceler-
ated idioventricular rhythm. Dysrhythmias may also be classified
according to their regularity. For example, fibrillation is an irregu-
lar, chaotic rhythm (e.g., atrial fibrillation), while tachycardia is a
regular (non-irregular) rhythm [17]. Once the rate and rhythm are
characterized, further decisions on alterations of anesthetic man-
agement or treatment course can be made as needed.
Mean electrical axis
The mean electrical axis (MEA) refers to the direction and orien-
tation of ventricular depolarization and refers solely to the QRS
complex. It may be thought of as the average vector of ventricular
depolarization. Even though MEA can be measured in any plane,
its characterization for ventricular evaluation occurs mainly in the
frontal plane using a hexaxial reference system, a graphical arrange-
ment of the three bipolar and three unipolar leads together [12].
The MEA may be determined to identify the presence of ventricular
dilatation or hypertrophy and to detect intraventricular conduction
defects. For example, in a normal heart, the left ventricle is the domi-
nant ventricle; therefore, the normal MEA is generally to the left.
However, if there is significant right ventricular hypertrophy, the
MEA will be shifted to the right.
It is important to note that MEA is not only related to the mass
that is being depolarized but also to the timing of the myocardial
depolarization. Variations in MEA can occur due to abnormalities
in the direction, magnitude, and timing of myocardial depolariza-
tion and may indicate hypertrophy of cardiac tissue or a conduction
disturbance [12].
In describing the MEA, a degree system is used with 0° directed
to the left, 90° directed down, and 180° directed to the right
(Fig. 11.5). The MEA in the normal dog lies between 40° and 100°;
in the cat, the MEA is more variable, from 0° to 160°. The MEA is
typically determined by using the six standard ECG leads (three
bipolar and three unipolar) and may be calculated by several
different methods. First, if there is a lead with an isoelectric QRS
complex (i.e., the deflection of the R and S complexes are equiva-
lent), the MEA lies on the axis perpendicular to the isoelectric lead.
If the net QRS amplitude is positive on that perpendicular lead
(i.e., the deflection of the R complex is greater than that of the S),
then the MEA points toward the positive pole. If the net QRS ampli-
tude is negative on that perpendicular lead (i.e., the deflection if the
R complex is less than that of the S), then the MEA points toward
the negative pole. A slightly more cumbersome but more accurate
method involves plotting the net amplitude of the QRS complex of
leads I and aVF and the intersection will provide the vector equal to
the MEA. The MEA can also be estimated (i.e., right versus left)
simply by assessing the net deflection in lead I. If the net deflection
of the QRS in lead I is positive, then the MEA lies to the left, and if
the net deflection of the QRS in lead I is negative, then the MEA lies
to the right [17].
Box 11.1 Systematic approach for ECG evaluation.
1 Determine heart rate
2 Determine if the ventricular and atrial rates match
The P- P interval and R-R interval normally match
3 Determine if every P wave has an associated QRS complex
All P waves are normally followed by a QRS complex
4 Determine if every QRS complex has an associated P wave
All QRS complexes are normally preceded by a P wave
5 Determine if the QRS complexes appear supraventricular or ventricular
In dogs and cats, supraventricular complexes are tall, upright, and
narrow while ventricular complexes are wide and abnormal

-- 207 of 1450 --

192 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
Regardless of technique, it is important to note that consistency
in technique may be important. For instance, there have been discus-
sions comparing calculation of MEA using both the base-apex lead
and alternative lead positioning systems in equine patients [9,20].
Although the focus of these studies has been on which system is the
most clinically useful for determination of abnormalities, one thing
is made clear by these investigations – the methodology used to
determine the MEA can significantly change the established nor-
mal. Care must be taken to ensure comparisons are made between
measurements obtained using the same standards [9,17,20].
Species- specific variations
There is an obvious difference in the morphology of the QRS
complex between certain species that can be appreciated by even
the most novice observer (Fig. 11.6). In some veterinary species, the
normal QRS complex has a largely positive deflection from baseline
in lead II. These include dogs, cats, primates, rats, and many other
domestic mammals. In other veterinary species, namely horses,
pigs, and ruminants, the QRS complex has a largely negative deflec-
tion in lead II, as well as in the more commonly used base-apex lead
for horses. The basis for this was initially suggested by Hamlin and
Smith in 1965 who proposed that species in their first category
(category A; dogs, cats, and primates) had three “fronts” or vectors
of depolarization during the classic QRS complex, while species in
their second category (category B; horses, pigs, and ruminants) had
only two fronts of depolarization (Fig. 11.7). In category B species,
more general penetration of the Purkinje fibers into the epicardium
results in a single burst of depolarization and simultaneous excita-
tion of the majority of the mass in both ventricles [21]. In compari-
son, Purkinje fibers in category A species are distributed mainly in
the subendocardial layer, leading to the classically recognized
pattern of ventricular depolarization [21].
More deeply penetrating and diffuse Purkinje fiber distribution,
similar to category B species, have also been recognized in other
species including whales, dolphins, and birds [22]. It is important
for anesthetists to be aware that these differences exist to avoid
mistaking a normal QRS complex in a category B species with an
ectopic ventricular beat in a category A species, as this could impact
clinical case management. For example, avian species commonly
have negatively deflected QRS complexes and rates exceeding
200–300 beats/min; this morphology may appear similar to ventric-
ular tachycardia in other species, which could lead to misdiagnosis
that would significantly change anesthetic management of the
patient (Fig. 11.6D).
Canine
The normal heart rate of an adult dog is between 60 and 160 beats/
min and, in addition to a normal sinus rhythm, healthy adult dogs
may have a prominent respiratory sinus arrhythmia that is charac-
terized by cyclic variations in heart rate approximately synchronous
with the phase of respiration and the accompanying fluctuations in
vagal tone [23,24]. The rate appears to accelerate during inspiration
and decelerate during expiration, and the effect begins to diminish
at higher heart rates. In dogs, the parasympathetic nervous system
has pronounced effects on the modulation of heart rate [25]. It has
been hypothesized that an increase in heart rate during inspiration
increases cardiac output and, therefore, pulmonary perfusion dur-
ing a period with increased lung volume, and this subsequently
improves ventilation–perfusion ratios [26].
Normal P wave morphology and timing may vary from cycle to
cycle in some dogs; this cyclic variation is a characteristic often
referred to as a “wandering pacemaker” and is due to changes in
the site of impulse origin within the sinus node and/or changes
in the exit pathway from the sinus node [24].
Feline
The normal heart rate of cats can vary significantly from roughly
120–240 beats/min, although, anecdotally, it is uncommon to
identify a cat with a heart rate near the lower end of the range in
a hospital setting. Unlike dogs, respiratory sinus arrhythmia is
uncommon in healthy adult cats in a hospital setting, but it has been
recognized when recordings of heart rate and rhythm were gener-
ated remotely in cats at home [24,27].
Feline ECGs can be difficult to interpret due to their high heart
rates and the low voltage of their ECG complexes detected by the
surface electrodes (Fig. 11.6A). Lower voltage potentials lead to
smaller amplitudes on an ECG, and this increases the likelihood
of artifacts and interference, which complicates interpretation. This
complication applies to most small animals including small mam-
mals and birds.
Equine
Much like the dog, the underlying heart rate and rhythm of horses
are heavily influenced by parasympathetic tone at rest. Cardiac
arrhythmias due to high vagal tone (e.g., sinus arrhythmia, sinus
block, sinus arrest, sinus bradycardia, wandering pacemaker,
aVF
Lead III
–60°
–30°
0°
30°
60°
90°
120°
150°
180°
–150°
–120°
–90°	Lead II
Lead I
Cat 0°–160°
Dog 40°–100°
Cat 0°–160°
aVL	aVR
Figure 11.5 Mean electrical axis (MEA) is typically determined in the
frontal plane by combining the three bipolar and three unipolar leads.
There are many techniques for calculating MEA that range in accuracy and
clinical usefulness. A classic way to determine MEA involves summation of
net deflections of the QRS complex from different leads. Lead I can be used
to quickly determine if the MEA lies to the left or right: if the net
deflection of the QRS complex is positive in lead I, the MEA lies to the left;
if the net deflection of the QRS complex is negative in lead I, the MEA lies
to the right. The normal MEA is 40–100° in dogs and 0–160° in cats.
Deviations in MEA can be caused by chamber enlargement or conduction
disturbances. Source: Dr. Kyle Bartholomew, with permission.

-- 208 of 1450 --

(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
Figure 11.6 ECGs from four domestic species: A. feline, B. canine, C. equine, and D. avian. Note that the equine QRS complex morphology is largely
negative in lead II and that the avian complex morphology is negative and wide, making it possible for individuals unfamiliar with ECG morphology in
these patients to incorrectly assume that they are experiencing an inappropriate ventricular rhythm. Source: Dr. Kyle Bartholomew, with permission.
–	–
+
Wave 3
Wave 1
Wave 1
QRS
(A) 	(B)
QRS
Wave 2
Wave 2
Wave 2
Wave 1
Wave 1
Wave 2
Wave 3
+
Lead II 	Lead II
Figure 11.7 Schematic representations of sagittal heart views based on Hamlin and Smith’s explanation of the differences between two categories (A and B)
of ventricular myocardial depolarization and resulting variations in QRS complex morphology [21]. A. Species belonging to category A (e.g., dogs, cats,
and primates) generally exhibit three “fronts” or waves of depolarization (represented by the three colored waves) resulting from largely subendocardial
Purkinje fiber distribution. B. Species belonging to category B (e.g., horses, ruminants, and pigs) undergo depolarization in two waves (represented by
two colored waves) resulting from Purkinje fibers penetrating the epicardium. Thus, distinctive differences in QRS morphologies in Lead II are noted in
these different categories. Source: Dr. Kyle Bartholomew, with permission.

-- 209 of 1450 --

194 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
(A) 	(C)	(B)
Figure 11.8 Available ECG machines vary in shape, size, and complexity. A. Standalone ECG machine complete with electrode clips, a monitor, and a
printer. B. Portable ECG machines with small screens to monitor the ECG which are also capable of transmitting data wirelessly to larger more centralized
monitors. C. Methods to attach ECG electrodes to patients for monitoring include clips, electrode-compatible adhesive pads, and needles. Specialized
needles with built in ECG compatibility are available; alternatively, hypodermic needles can be inserted into the patient’s skin, clipped onto electrodes and
covered with rubber caps for personnel safety. Source: Dr. Kyle Bartholomew, with permission.
first-degree AV block, and second-degree AV block) may be found
in resting, healthy horses and, in many cases, are considered normal
and generally do not require therapy [28].
As mentioned earlier, there are differing opinions regarding
the optimal technique for performing equine electrocardiography.
The most common methodology among veterinary anesthetists
in North America appears to be the base-apex lead system;
however, utilization of the Dubois lead positioning system has
been suggested [9]. This includes a 12-lead rather than two-lead
system and is thought to compensate for the limitations of using
the frontal plane in horses. As opposed to humans, for whom the
majority of the lead placement systems have been developed,
the orientation of the long axis (and axis of depolarization) of the
equine heart tends to be perpendicular to the spine as opposed to
parallel to it [20].
ECG equipment
The most basic modern ECG machines consist of electrodes, a
screen to display waveforms, and a microprocessor to make evalua-
tions, calculations, and adjustments; some may also have a printer
to create physical copies of the ECG (Fig. 11.8). ECG machines can
vary significantly in their sophistication, ranging between 2 and 10
electrodes capable of many different leads. As the ECG is a graphi-
cal representation of voltage over time, many monitors allow altera-
tion of the scale on both the x axis (time, mm per second) and the y
axis (voltage, mV). Common time intervals are 25 and 50 mm/s.
Some monitors will automatically scale the y axis (voltage) to opti-
mize the image; increasing the scale may allow the user to evaluate
the waveform but will also make artifacts more prominent. For
example, the ECG complex of a cat often appears significantly
smaller than that of dog due to the smaller voltage detected by the
ECG surface electrodes (Fig. 11.6A) [17].
Small, portable, single-lead ECG monitors are also available
(Fig. 11.8B). These units often have just two electrodes and, while
they are not as useful for diagnostic purposes, they can be useful for
monitoring sedated or anesthetized patients in remote locations or
areas in which larger equipment may be impractical. Cardiac telem-
etry monitors can also be used to monitor the ECG of a patient
from a short distance such as a cage or stall without the need for
cables connected to the display. Smartphone-based ECG monitoring
units have also been used with success for monitoring of patients
outside the hospital setting [29].
ECG electrode cables also come with a variety of different
attachments for attaching to a patient (Fig. 11.8C). Metal “alligator”
clips are often less desirable during prolonged sedation or anesthe-
sia because they can cause discomfort or focal tissue ischemia and
often require alcohol or electrode gel to improve the ECG signal.
Care should be taken when applying alcohol to ECG electrodes on
the skin of a patient immediately prior to defibrillation due to the
risk of combustion [30]. Alternatives include adhesive ECG pads
that can be placed on any non-haired or shaved skin surface; these
are less likely to cause tissue damage but may still cause skin irrita-
tion upon removal. Another alternative for very small animals is the
use of small-gauge needles placed through the skin as an anchor
point for metal ECG clips. Hypodermic needles are often used, and
metal clips may be attached to the needle after it is passed through
the skin; the ends of the needle can be covered with rubber or
the needle cap to reduce the likelihood of an inadvertent needle
puncture. Commercially available specialized ECG needles are also
available.
Artifacts and filters
The ECG is designed to detect very subtle changes in the electrical
potential between two points on the body. This means that the ECG
is also predisposed to outside influence in the form of “artifacts” or

-- 210 of 1450 --

Chapter 11: Electrocardiography 	195
electrical noise; these can occur in both the low- and high-frequency
ranges [11]. Almost all the modern ECG monitors have filters built
into their design to remove these artifacts prior to displaying them
on the screen or printout. Modern ECG machines employ what is
referred to as a “bandpass filter,” a filter that allows signal frequen-
cies within a specific range to be displayed while removing electrical
activity above and below this frequency. Bandpass filters have two
components: the low-pass filter and the high-pass filter. The low-pass
filter (or high-frequency filter) allows signals with a lower frequency
than the cutoff frequency to be transmitted, while those with a higher
frequency are attenuated. A high-pass filter (or low-frequency filter)
does the opposite, attenuating signals with frequencies lower than
the cutoff value.
Examples of low-frequency artifacts include respiration or
patient movement. Some monitors not designed for use in veteri-
nary medicine have a low-frequency filter setting of 0.5 Hz
(30 beats/min), and some horses and reptiles may have heart rates
that reasonably fall below this threshold, creating challenges in
monitor interpretation [11,31].
High-frequency artifacts can be caused by muscle fasciculations,
shivering, and, importantly, 60-cycle (Hz) electromagnetic interfer-
ence from electrical equipment in the perioperative area. Most
modern ECG machines include an additional notch filter to specifi-
cally attenuate artifacts within the 60-Hz frequency range. This may
help limit the interference from surrounding electrical equipment.
Types of electrical equipment that can commonly lead to artifacts
include MRIs, flexible bronchoscopes or endoscopes, nerve stimu-
lators, and, in some situations, cell phones [11].
Electrosurgery units are another potential source of ECG
artifacts (Fig. 11.9). Electrosurgery units based on the concept of
creating heat using a flow of electrical current through a small area
of tissue can lead to changes in the ECG waveform that can be both
overt and subtle [32,33]. Care must be taken to ensure that the
patient is properly grounded, as there have been incidences of
burns associated with electrosurgery units and ECG electrodes
where grounding has been inadequate [34]. There is at least one
documented case of severe esophageal burns caused by an esopha-
geal ECG probe in a dog where grounding became inadequate
during surgery [35].
Effect of anesthesia
The ECG is a useful diagnostic tool for monitoring patients
undergoing sedation and anesthesia. It is especially important for
patients with comorbidities that put them at risk for development
of dysrhythmias, as well as for healthy patients whose risk of dys-
rhythmias may increase with anesthetic medications. Dysrhythmias
may occur under anesthesia in the absence of underlying cardiac
disease. In a study of 50 healthy young dogs undergoing elective
procedures, 26 out of 50 had at least one instance of second-degree
AV block, 22 out of 50 had ventricular premature contractions, and
2 out of 50 experienced ventricular tachycardia perioperatively;
however, some of these dogs were anesthetized with halothane,
which is known to sensitize the heart to certain arrhythmias
[36–38]. In a study of 49 healthy cats without structural heart dis-
ease undergoing inhalant anesthesia with isoflurane or sevoflurane,
5 cats had at least one ventricular premature complex throughout
the anesthetic period [4]. It has been suggested that healthy horses
without underlying cardiac disease may have a prevalence of dys-
rhythmias as great as 25%, even when awake [28], with some of the
most common arrhythmias being first and second-degree AV block.
Horses undergoing inhalant anesthesia for colic and non-colic
procedures had high incidences of arrhythmias postoperatively,
exceeding 75% in both groups [39]. The causes of these cardiac
rhythm disturbances under anesthesia are addressed elsewhere,
but an understanding of the equipment used, the common artifacts
encountered, and the species differences that occur can help the
anesthetist differentiate a normal ECG from a life-threatening
dysrhythmia and allow appropriate intervention and educated
decision-making regarding patient care.
References
1 Kamibayashi T, Hayashi Y, Sumikawa K, et al. Enhancement by propofol of
epinephrine-induced arrhythmias in dogs. Anesthesiology 1991; 75: 1035–1040.
2 Hubbell JA, Muir WW, Bednarski RM, et al. Change of inhalation anesthetic agents
for management of ventricular premature depolarizations in anesthetized cats and
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1984; 185: 643–646.
3 Alibhai HI, Clarke KW, Lee YH, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of combinations of
medetomidine hydrochloride and atropine sulphate in dogs. Vet Rec 1996; 138:11–13.
4 Maney J, Durham H, Cavanaugh S, et al. Incidence of ventricular arrhythmias in
healthy cats under general anesthesia: a pilot study. Vet Anaesth Analg 2019; 46:
831 e11.
5 Geselowitz DB. Dipole theory in electrocardiography. Am J Cardiol 1964; 14:
301–306.
6 Santilli RN, Moïse S, Pariaut R, et al. Principles of electrocardiography. In: Santilli
RN, Moïse S, Pariaut R, et al., eds. Electrocardiography of the Dog and Cat: Diagnosis
of Arrhythmias, 2nd edn. Milano, Italy: Edra S.p.A, 2018: 37–51.
7 Middleton B, Phillips J, Thomas R, et al. Electrocardiography, pacing and difibrilla-
tion. In: Middleton B, Phillips J, Thomas R, Stacey S, eds. Physics in Anaesthesia.
Oxfordshire, UK: Scion Publishing Ltd, 2012: 253–268.
8 Kimberly M, McGurrin J. Investigation of cardiac arrythmias. In: Sprayberry KA,
Robinson NE, eds. Robinson’s Current Therapy in Equine Medicine, 7th edn.
Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders, 2015: 506–509.
Figure 11.9 An example of ECG interference caused by electrocautery during surgery. Note the tall and rapid deviations from baseline, without disruption
of the regular underlying current. Below the ECG is an arterial pressure tracing from the same dog, showing consistent pulsatile blood flow that would be
unlikely to occur in the face of significant ectopy. Source: Dr. Kyle Bartholomew, with permission.

-- 211 of 1450 --

196 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
9 da Costa CF, Samesima N, Pastore CA. Cardiac mean electrical axis in thorough-
breds – standardization by the Dubois lead positioning system. PLoS One 2017; 12:
e0169619.
10 Schwarzwald CC, Bonagura JD, Muir WW. The cardiovascular system. In: Muir
WW, Hubbell JAE, eds. Equine Anesthesia: Monitoring and Emergency Therapy, 2nd
edn. St Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2009: 37–100.
11 Schroeder B, Mark, J, Barbeito A. Cardiovascular monitoring. In: Gropper MA,
Miller RD, Eriksson LI, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 9th edn. Philadelphia, PA:
Elsevier Health Sciences, 2019: 1146–1193.
12 Santilli RN, Moïse S, Pariaut R, et al. Formation and interpretation of the electrocar-
diographic waves. In: Santilli RN, Moïse S, Pariaut R, et al., eds. Electrocardiography
of the Dog and Cat: Diagnosis of Arrhythmias, 2nd edn. Milan, Italy: Edra S.p.A,
2018: 52–89.
13 Dolber PC, Spach MS. Structure of canine Bachmann’s bundle related to propaga-
tion of excitation. Am J Physiol 1989; 257: H1446–H1457.
14 Shinde R, Shinde S, Makhale C, et al. Occurrence of “J waves” in 12-lead ECG as a
marker of acute ischemia and their cellular basis. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 2007;
30: 817–819.
15 Hlaing T, DiMino T, Kowey PR, et al. ECG repolarization waves: their genesis and
clinical implications. Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol 2005; 10: 211–223.
16 Santilli RN, Moïse S, Pariaut R, et al. Supraventricular beats and rhythms. In:
Santilli RN, Moïse S, Pariaut R, et al., eds. Electrocardiography of the Dog and Cat:
Diagnosis of Arrhythmias, 2nd edn. Milan, Italy: Edra S.p.A, 2018: 145–159.
17 Tilley LP, Smith FWK. Electrocardiography. In: Tilly LP, Smith FWK, Oyama MA,
Sleeper MM, eds. Manual of Canine and Feline Cardiology, 4th edn. St Louis, MO:
Saunders Elsevier, 2008: 49–77.
18 Bulmer B. Interpreting ECGs with confidence: part 1. NAVC Clinician’s Brief 2012:
32–35.
19 Willlis R. Electrocardiography. In: Willis R, Oliveira P, Mavropoulou A, eds. Guide
to Canine and Feline Electrocardiography. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2018:
35–56.
20 Hesselkilde EM, Isaksen JL, Petersen BV, et al. A novel approach for obtaining
12- lead electrocardiograms in horses. J Vet Intern Med 2021; 35: 521–531.
21 Hamlin RL, Smith CR. Categorization of common domestic mammals based upon
their ventricular activation process. Ann NY Acad Sci 1965; 127: 195–203.
22 Ohkawa SI. Distribution of Purkinje cells in hearts of human and various animals.
J Arrhythm 2008; 24:177–179.
23 Hamlin RL, Smith CR, Smetzer DL. Sinus arrhythmia in the dog. Am J Physiol 1966;
210: 321–328.
24 Santilli RN, Moïse S, Pariaut R, et al. Normal sinus rhythms. In: Santilli RN, Moïse
S, Pariaut R, et al., eds. Electrocardiography of the Dog and Cat: Diagnosis of
Arrhythmias, 2nd edn. Milan, Italy: Edra S.p.A, 2018: 90–100.
25 Mace SE, Levy MN. Autonomic nervous control of heart rate: sympathetic-
parasympathetic interactions and age related differences. Cardiovasc Res 1983; 17:
547–552.
26 Hayano J, Yasuma F, Okada A, et al. Respiratory sinus arrhythmia: a phenomenon
improving pulmonary gas exchange and circulatory efficiency. Circulation 1996;
94: 842–847.
27 Ware WA. Twenty-four-hour ambulatory electrocardiography in normal cats.
J Vet Intern Med 1999; 13: 175–180.
28 McGuirk SM, Muir WW. Diagnosis and treatment of cardiac arrhythmias. Vet Clin
North Am Equine Pract 1985; 1: 353–370.
29 Vezzosi T, Tognetti R, Buralli C, et al. Home monitoring of heart rate and heart
rhythm with a smartphone-based ECG in dogs. Vet Rec 2019; 184: 96.
30 Cole SG, Drobatz KJ. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation. In: Tilly LP, Smith FWK,
Oyama MA, Sleeper MM, eds. Manual of Canine and Feline Cardiography, 4th edn.
St Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2008: 333–341.
31 Van Steenkiste G, van Loon G, Crevecoeur G. Transfer learning in ECG classifica-
tion from human to horse using a novel parallel neural network architecture.
Sci Rep 2020; 10: 1–2.
32 Naik BN, Luthra A, Dwivedi A, et al. Artifactual ECG changes induced by electro-
cautery in a patient with coronary artery disease. J Electrocardiol 2017; 50: 531–533.
33 Knight BP, Pelosi F, Michaud GF, et al. Clinical consequences of electrocardiographic
artifact mimicking ventricular tachycardia. N Engl J Med 1999; 341: 1270–1274.
34 Finlay B, Couchie D, Boyce L, et al. Electrosurgery burns resulting from use of
miniature ECG electrodes. Anesthesiology 1974; 41: 263–272.
35 Burgess RC, Freeman LJ, Jennings RN, et al. An alternative pathway electrosurgical
unit injury in a dog. Vet Surg 2011; 40: 509–514.
36 Duerr FM, Carr AP, Duke T, et al. Prevalence of perioperative arrhythmias in
50 young, healthy dogs. Can Vet J 2007; 48: 169–177.
37 Day TK, Muir WW. Effects of halothane, enflurane, and isoflurane on supraven-
tricular and ventricular rate in dogs with complete atrioventricular block. Vet Surg
1994; 23: 206–212.
38 Hashimoto K, Hashimoto K. The mechanism of sensitization of the ventricle to
epinephrine by halothane. Am Heart J 1972; 83: 652–658.
39 Morgan RA, Raftery AG, Cripps P, et al. The prevalence and nature of cardiac
arrhythmias in horses following general anaesthesia and surgery. Acta Vet Scand
2011; 53: 1–8.

-- 212 of 1450 --

197
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: T he S ixth E dition of L umb and J ones	. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
Blood pressure (BP) is a vital sign that is relatively easy to measure
in most veterinary patients. Perfusion of organs and tissues is vital
in delivering oxygen and nutrients as well as removing metabolic
byproducts. While the measurement of BP does not directly meas-
ure perfusion, pressure is required to bring blood to tissues and
vital organs including the heart, brain, and kidneys. Trauma and
surgical interventions may cause hemodynamic shifts, while the
administration of sedation and general anesthesia results in altera-
tions in cardiac function and vasomotor tone, thereby affecting BP
(Box 12.1). BP monitoring should be a part of the care and manage-
ment of all patients undergoing sedation and anesthesia, as outlined
in both the American Animal Hospital Association and American
College of Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia monitoring
guidelines [1,2].
Blood pressure determinants and definitions
BP measurement is traditionally expressed as a series of three values:
systolic arterial pressure (SAP), diastolic arterial pressure (DAP),
and mean arterial pressure (MAP), each with their own importance
in patient assessment. SAP is the pressure exerted by blood against
the arterial walls during systole of the cardiac cycle. DAP represents
the amount of pressure that blood exerts on the arterial walls during
cardiac relaxation (diastole). MAP is of great importance in anes-
thetized patients, as it determines perfusion pressure in the tissues
and is directly influenced by cardiac output (CO) and systemic vas-
cular resistance (SVR). Conversely, pulse pressure (PP) is simply
the difference between SAP and DAP and does not indicate appro-
priate tissue perfusion. Since most sedative and anesthetic agents
affect vasomotor tone, digital pulse palpation should not be used as
a substitute for accurate measurement of BP in anesthetized patients.
Mean arterial pressure
MAP represents the area under the arterial pressure/time curve
divided by the cardiac cycle duration. Modern invasive blood pres-
sure measurement systems accurately calculate MAP based on anal-
ysis of the arterial waveform, while most non-invasive oscillometric
systems measure MAP as the greatest cuff pressure amplitude vari-
ation. In addition, MAP may be roughly estimated by the following
formula, though this equation has a number of limitations:
MAP 	DAP 	/ 	SAP 	DAP	1 3
Factors that influence MAP include CO and SVR:
MAP 	CO SVR
Cardiac output
CO is a product of heart rate (HR) and stroke volume (SV):
CO 	HR SV
12 Blood Pressure Monitoring
Odette O
SAGE Veterinary Centers, a member of Ethos Animal Health, Dublin, California, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 197
Blood pressure determinants and definitions, 197
Mean arterial pressure, 197
Normal ranges of blood pressure, 198
Autoregulation of blood pressure, 198
Invasive blood pressure measurement, 199
Components for invasive blood pressure measurement, 200
Physics of invasive blood pressure monitoring systems, 201
Arterial catheter placement and maintenance, 202
Non-invasive blood pressure measurement, 202
Doppler ultrasonographic blood pressure measurement, 202
Oscillometric blood pressure measurement, 203
High- definition oscillometric blood pressure measurement, 204
Central venous pressure measurement, 204
Indices of fluid responsiveness, 205
Pulse pressure variation and systolic pressure variation, 205
Plethysmography variability index, 207
Plethysmography and photoplethysmography, 207
Continued challenges with blood pressure measurement, 207
References, 208

-- 213 of 1450 --

198 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
A more in-depth discussion of CO may be found in elsewhere in
this text (Chapter 33). Briefly, HR is influenced by chronotropy,
lusitropy, and dromotropy, whereas SV is influenced by volume
(inotropy, preload, and total blood volume) in addition to afterload.
Chronotropy defines the physiologic timing of HR. Lusitropy is
the period of cardiac relaxation that occurs during diastole when
cardiac myocytes have a decreased level of cytosolic calcium, as
opposed to inotropy when increased calcium uptake causes posi-
tive contractile effects in the cardiac myocytes. Dromotropy is the
actual conduction of an impulse, usually through the AV node,
which in turn influences HR.
Systemic vascular resistance
SVR, also known as “total peripheral resistance,” is influenced by
vascular size (1/∞) and blood viscosity and is defined by the
amount of force that the vasculature system exerts on circulating
blood, excluding pulmonary circulation. SVR influences BP via
three factors: vessel length, vessel diameter, and the viscosity of the
blood [3]. Alterations in vessel diameter have an enormous effect on
vessel flow, as defined by the Hagen–Poiseuille equation, whereby a
reduction of vessel diameter by 1/2 decreases flow to only 1/16th of
the original flow:
P 	Q L	8 	4	
n 	r	/
where ∆P is the pressure difference between the two ends of the
vessel, Q is the volumetric flow rate, L is the length of vessel, η is the
dynamic viscosity, r4 is the vessel radius to the fourth power, and 8/π
is a constant of proportionality.
Normal ranges of blood pressure
A consensus statement by the American College of Veterinary
Internal Medicine (ACVIM) details guidelines for the identifica-
tion, evaluation, and management of systemic hypertension in dogs
and cats [4]. This statement cites difficulty in determining a single
value or range acceptable for all cats and dogs and that normal
ranges of BP will vary by species and patient factors, including tem-
perament, age, breed, body condition, and sex. Measurement tech-
nique and location will also affect the values obtained. Numerous
studies have attempted to investigate and define normal ranges of
BP in various species with variable results. In general, prehypertension
is defined as SAP 140–150 mmHg, hypertension that may lead to
potential target organ damage as SAP > 160–179 mmHg, and severe
hypertension as SAP > 180 mmHg.
Difficulties in defining a universally acceptable range of BP
emphasize the importance of obtaining baseline BP values in
patients prior to an anesthetic event, especially if concerns exist for
target organ damage and/or underlying risk factors are identified
(Box 12.2).
Hypotension-related morbidity and mortality is difficult to
determine and most likely depends on a number of individual
factors. In a study of over 30,000 humans undergoing non-cardiac
surgery, hypotension (defined as MAP < 55 mmHg) for as little as
1–5 min was associated with increased risk of acute kidney
injury [5]. While large-scale trials in veterinary medicine are lack-
ing, the importance of maintaining perfusion during anesthesia
should nonetheless be prioritized. For instance, use of excessive lev-
els of inhalant leads to a significant decrease in SVR and a relative
hypovolemia [6]. Hypotension is one of the most common compli-
cations of anesthesia and can have serious consequences if left
unmanaged [1]. In horses, postanesthetic myopathy is a complex
and potentially fatal consequence of inadequate tissue perfusion
pressure during anesthesia. Multiple studies in horses have demon-
strated increased risk of complications when MAP < 60 mmHg [7,8];
as such, common practice is to ensure that MAP is greater than
70 mmHg at all times [9]. Current information indicates that,
although maintenance of MAP is important, maintaining global
perfusion without increasing SVR should be prioritized, and vaso-
active support agents should be selected accordingly [10].
Autoregulation of blood pressure
The ability of organs to maintain a relatively constant blood flow
despite changes in perfusion pressure is known as “autoregulation.”
Organs perform this task intrinsically via three main mecha-
nisms [11]. Metabolic regulation of blood flow occurs when changes
in metabolism result in the release of vasodilatory substances such as
adenosine, carbon dioxide, and lactic acid. An example of such meta-
bolic regulation would be the vasodilation that occurs in muscle beds
in response to hypoxia. Myogenic (pressure-dependent) mechanisms
autoregulate blood flow via smooth muscle-lined vessels; increased
pressure within the vessels leads to vasoconstriction, and decreased
pressure is followed by vasodilation in smaller arteries and arterioles.
Myogenic regulation of blood flow is observed in renal tissues. Shear-
stress-dependent (endothelial) mechanisms regulate blood flow via
the endothelial release of vasoactive factors such as nitric oxide and
prostacyclin, causing vasodilation of smooth muscle-lined vessels, as
well as endothelin, which modulates vasoconstriction [12]. Such
regulation may be observed in brain and cardiac tissue.
Organs that demonstrate the greatest ability for autoregulation
of blood flow include the brain, heart, and kidneys. The brain
maintains autoregulation largely by metabolic means along with
myogenic and endothelial responses. Recall that cerebral perfusion
pressure (CPP) is the difference between MAP and intracranial
pressure (ICP); it is critical to maintain constant CPP and cerebral
blood flow (see Chapter 39). In humans, cerebral perfusion is
Box 12.2 Patient factors that lead to an increased risk of secondary hypertension.
Common canine comorbidities
Renal disease
Hyperadrenocorticism
Diabetes mellitus
Pheochromocytoma
Drugs
Glucocorticoids
Mineralocorticoids
Erythropoiesis-stimulating
agents
Phenylpropanolamine
Toceranib phosphate
Common feline comorbidities
Renal disease
Hyperthyroidism
Box 12.1 Common causes of perianesthetic hypotension.
Hypovolemia
Ongoing losses
Incurred losses
Shock
Septic shock
Hypovolemic shock
Sedative/anesthetic drugs
Patient positioning
Use of positive-pressure ventilation
Epidural anesthesia with local anesthetics

-- 214 of 1450 --

Chapter 12: Blood Pressure Monitoring 	199
autoregulated within an MAP range of 60–160 mmHg, where, in
the dog, autoregulation of cerebral perfusion has been reported to
occur with the MAP range of 70–140 mmHg [13,14]. In the kid-
neys, autoregulation of blood flow protects them from injury due to
fluctuations of arterial BP and maintains the perfusion necessary
to meet metabolic needs. Myogenic mechanisms of autoregulation
allow for maintenance of constant renal blood flow (RBF) within
the MAP range of 90–150 mmHg in rats, 70–130 mmHg in humans,
and 40–100 mmHg in dogs [15,16]. Interestingly, RBF and glomer-
ular filtration rate are maintained independently of renal perfusion
pressure (RPP) via intrarenal autoregulatory mechanisms in the
defined range of 80–180 mmHg in humans [17]. This safeguard is
provided by a combination of myogenic and tubuloglomerular
feedback that buffers transmission of changes in RPP to the capil-
laries of the glomeruli, protecting them from potential barotrauma
while preserving renal function.
During anesthetic events, the maintenance of systemic BP within
ranges of autoregulation ensures consistent blood flow to the vital
organs, including the kidneys, heart, and brain. Various studies in
differing species and physiologic states demonstrate slight differ-
ences in ranges, so one recommended approach is to maintain BP
within 20% of measured baseline BP taken prior to arrival in the
operating room [18].
Invasive blood pressure measurement
Invasive blood pressure (IBP) monitoring is considered the gold
standard for BP measurement in anesthetized veterinary patients
and allows for continuous, beat-by- beat assessment of BP and pulse
waveform analysis. As this technique requires catheterization of an
artery (thus the name “invasive”), it also facilitates sampling for
arterial blood gas analysis. The term “direct” BP measurement is
sometimes also used to describe this method; however, almost all
IBP systems incorporate a transducer (see below) to convert the
kinetic energy produced by changes in arterial pressure into electri-
cal energy. SAP and DAP are directly measured with this technique,
and MAP is calculated as the area under the arterial waveform over
the cardiac cycle (Fig. 12.1). Careful setup and specialized equip-
ment are needed to obtain the graphical display of the arterial pres-
sure waveform and the numeric values; accuracy relies upon factors
including the arterial catheter, the saline-filled tubing connecting
the catheter to the transducer, the transducer itself, and the electri-
cal components.
Patients where IBP monitoring should be considered for perio-
perative care include those where continuous monitoring of BP
and/or repeated arterial blood gas/electrolyte sampling is necessary.
These include high-risk surgical and critically ill patients with
anticipated rapid changes in hemodynamic status. Patients with
comorbidities such as cardiac, pulmonary, or renal disease, signifi-
cant risk of hemorrhage, and/or those receiving vasoactive sub-
stances (e.g., inotropes, vasopressors) should also be considered for
IBP monitoring.
Disadvantages of this technique include the cost or availability of
advanced monitoring equipment and the need to catheterize a
peripheral artery as well as potential risk of local pain, hemorrhage,
hematoma formation, infection at the catheterization site, embo-
lism, or ischemia/thrombosis (Fig. 12.2). A retrospective study
examining the catheterization sites of 267 dogs and cats found loss
of palpable pulse postoperatively in 22.3% of animals without
evidence of associated tissue ischemia [19]. Care should always be
Systolic
arterial
pressure
(Ps)
Pulse
pressure
(PP)
Diastolic
pressure
(Pd)
Pm = Pd + 1/ 3 (Ps – Pd)
=120 mmHg
= 40 mmHg
= 80 mmHg
Pm
Pm
Systole 	Diastole
Cardiac cycle time
Aorta 	Brachial 	Radial
Decreasing Pd
Site of arterial waveform
Femoral 	Dorsal pedal
120
(A)
(B)
100
Pressure (mmHg)
80
60
Increasing Ps
Figure 12.1 A. Mean arterial pressure (Pm
) represents the area under the arterial blood pressure curve divided by the duration of the cardiac cycle. It can
be estimated by adding one-third of the difference between the systolic arterial pressure (Ps
) and diastolic arterial pressure (Pd ) to Pd
. Ps minus Pd is the
pulse pressure (PP). B. Ps increases and Pm and Pd decrease with decreasing arterial diameter.

-- 215 of 1450 --

200 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
taken to avoid potential complications. Arterial catheters should be
clearly labeled to avoid inadvertent administration of drugs and/or
other substances into this catheter. Postoperative care and manage-
ment of arterial catheters in hemodynamically stable patients
include the recommendation for its removal as soon as possible
with the placement of a temporary pressure wrap. For additional
blood gas sampling, the push–pull technique has been described
from venous catheters in order to minimize blood loss, which is
an especially important consideration for very small patients. This
method was described using 20 gauge catheters placed in the
cephalic vein of dogs. An empty 3-mL syringe was used to aspirate
1.2 mL of blood from the intravenous (IV) catheter, then this blood
was immediately pushed back into the catheter. This process is
repeated three times. Finally, a new empty syringe is used to draw
1 mL of blood for immediate analysis. The IV catheter was then
flushed with approximately 1 mL of saline [20]. It is important to
note that this technique was utilized in venous catheters and has not
been assessed in arterial catheters.
Components for invasive blood pressure
measurement
While the use of an aneroid manometer alone has been
described [21], standard IBP components typically include (1) an
intra-arterial catheter, (2) fluid-filled, non-compliant tubing, (3) a
pressure transducer, and (4) signal conditioning and monitoring
software. For peripheral arterial catheterization, a standard over-
the-needle catheter that is kink-resistant, biologically inert, and
incompressible is used most often. The saline-filled tubing forms a
continuous, non-compressible column of fluid producing “hydrau-
lic coupling” between the arterial circulation and the transducer. In
the clinical setting, most modern disposable IBP transducers are
resistive devices that convert the mechanical (kinetic) energy aris-
ing from arterial pressure changes to changes in electrical resistance
and ultimately an output voltage. Ohm’s law provides a useful
framework for understanding how this system works:
R 	P / I
where R is the resistance (measured in ohms, Ω), P is the potential
or voltage (measured in volts, V), and I is the current (measured in
amperes, A). An ohm (Ω) is the basic unit of electrical resistance
and, as defined by Ohm’s law, a resistance of 1 Ω allows 1 A of cur-
rent to flow under the influence of 1 V of potential. Resistance-type
transducers are based on the principle that resistance of a wire
(i.e., resistor) changes when it is subjected to “strain.” Resistance
increases as the wire is put under tension (i.e., as it is stretched and
becomes longer and thinner) and decreases as it is subjected to
compression (i.e., as it becomes shorter and wider) [22].
Most modern commercial BP transducers utilize four strain
gauges (resistors) that are bonded to a movable diaphragm and
arranged in a Wheatstone bridge circuit. Mechanical pressure
variations associated with arterial pulsations physically deform the
diaphragm, which creates tension in two of the strain gauges
and simultaneous compression of the other two. These strain
changes lead to variations in electrical resistance and, because the
Wheatstone bridge is very sensitive to small changes in resistance,
the bridge becomes unbalanced, and the potential difference
(i.e., voltage) generated is proportional to the pressure applied [23].
The resulting raw electrical signal output from the galvanometer is
processed, amplified, and converted to values that are displayed
graphically and numerically by the monitor [24]. The Wheatstone
bridge also compensates for any temperature changes as all four
strain gauges are affected equally.
Transducer setup and priming of pressure tubing
The transducer must be connected to the arterial catheter via a
length of non-compliant pressure tubing primed with normal saline
to create a continuous non-compressible fluid column. For most
accurate results, the length of tubing and the number of stopcocks
should be minimized. In most cases, the tubing packaged with
commercial transducers is appropriate. Transducers may be con-
nected to a pressurized bag of saline (with or without heparin
added) to facilitate continuous flush of the catheter, or they may be
intermittently flushed to maintain patency (see arterial catheter
maintenance below).
Leveling the transducer
It is convention to place the arterial BP transducer at the level of
the aortic root or base of the right atrium (RA) to ensure a com-
mon reference standard and accurate interpretation of IBP
(A) 	(B)
Figure 12.2 A. Hemorrhage from displaced injection cap on a 22 gauge arterial catheter. The patient became tachycardic (> 180 bpm) and hypotensive
(MAP < 60 mmHg). B. Blood loss was estimated to be 350 mL before disconnection was identified. Source: Dr. Odette O, with permission.

-- 216 of 1450 --

Chapter 12: Blood Pressure Monitoring 	201
measurements (Fig. 12.3). Positioning the transducer below that
level results in artifactually high pressures, whereas positioning
it above that level results in artifactually low pressures. For every
10 cm that the transducer is positioned below the RA, the system
will reportedly add 7.4 mmHg to displayed pressures, and vice
versa [25].
Zeroing the transducer
While the processes of zeroing and leveling the IBP transducer
tend to occur together in most clinical scenarios, they are actually
different processes. Zeroing exposes the transducer to atmospheric
pressure via an open air–fluid interface while leveling (as described
above) assigns this zero-reference point to a specific position rela-
tive to the patient’s body (i.e., the RA).
To zero the transducer, thus eliminating the effects of atmos-
pheric pressure, the stopcock is turned “off ” to the patient, the system
is opened to atmospheric pressure (i.e., the non-vented cap from
the stopcock is temporarily removed after opening it to room air),
and the monitor’s zeroing function is activated. Once the system has
been zeroed, the stopcock can then be turned off to the atmosphere
and an arterial waveform should appear on the monitor [25]. While
zeroing does not necessarily have to be performed with the trans-
ducer positioned at the level of the patient’s RA (as atmospheric
pressure does not vary with these modest positional changes), reze-
roing should be performed sporadically (i.e., several times per day)
as both the transducer and atmospheric pressure will gradually drift
away from the calibration point over time.
Physics of invasive blood pressure monitoring
systems
Natural frequency and resonance
The IBP monitoring system (i.e., catheter, fluid-filled tubing, trans-
ducer, and electronics) is characterized as an underdamped,
second-order dynamic system [24]. The fluid column between the
artery and the transducer can be described as a simple harmonic
oscillator that, when displaced by a heartbeat, begins to oscillate. In
a frictionless system, the oscillations would continue indefinitely at
the system’s natural frequency; however, in a clinical patient, friction
causes the system to oscillate briefly after a single displacement (i.e.,
one heartbeat) and then come to rest. This is analogous to a tennis
ball dropped from a height that bounces several times before com-
ing to rest on the ground [24].
The complex arterial pressure waveform is composed of one fun-
damental waveform (the first harmonic), which is equal to the pulse
rate, and numerous other higher frequency/lower amplitude wave-
forms (second harmonic, third harmonic, etc.) that are multiples of
the fundamental frequency. The IBP waveform is ultimately created
by Fourier analysis, which sums the various sine waves of differing
amplitudes and frequencies into a single complex waveform.
If the natural frequency of the IBP system (i.e., the frequency at
which it freely oscillates) is close to the frequency of any of the har-
monics, the system will resonate leading to amplification of the sig-
nal and falsely wide and tall waveform peaks. Consequently, the IBP
system should have the highest possible natural frequency (prefer-
ably above the eighth harmonic frequency) to minimize resonance
distortion, especially in patients with faster HRs and steeper systolic
upstrokes. As an example, a cat with a HR of 180 beats per minute
(bpm) (i.e., 3 Hz) would require a system with a natural frequency
greater than 24 Hz. A number of variables influence natural fre-
quency including the radius and length of the tubing, the elasticity
of the system, and the density of the fluid. By (1) shortening
the length of the pressure tubing, (2) increasing the diameter of the
pressure tubing, (3) using non-compliant pressure tubing, and (4)
using a low-density fluid to fill the system (i.e., saline), the system’s
elasticity is decreased and its natural frequency is increased [24].
Conversely, the presence of air bubbles in the system will increase
elasticity and decrease the natural frequency.
Dynamic response testing and damping
The dynamic response of the IBP system to pulse pressure oscilla-
tions from the cardiac cycle is determined by the balance of natural
frequency (discussed earlier) and damping of the system. Damping
is defined as the frictional forces that oppose the oscillations and
result in decreased wave amplitude. It is described by the damping
coefficient and, like natural frequency, is influenced by the diameter
and length of the catheter and tubing. A damping coefficient of
approximately 0.7 is considered optimal [24]. Over- and under-
damping will affect the waveform and accurate measurement of IBP
(Fig. 12.4). A dynamic pressure response test or “fast flush test” can
be used to help identify damping issues. To perform this test, high
pressure (> 300 mmHg) is rapidly introduced to the catheter from
the continuous flush device for 1–2 s and then abruptly stopped. A
square waveform is produced and information is derived by observ-
ing the oscillation pattern as the pressure returns to baseline
(Fig. 12.5). Upon termination of the flush, the waveform should
return to baseline within one to two oscillations, neither being
Figure 12.3 Invasive blood pressure setup. The transducer is positioned at
the level of the right atrium and zeroed to atmospheric pressure. Note the
open-ended (red) injection caps, which aid in maintenance of hygiene.
Source: Dr. Odette O, with permission.

-- 217 of 1450 --

202 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
greater than 1/3 the height of the previous oscillation. A waveform
with a dicrotic notch should return thereafter. Absence of this fea-
ture indicates an overdamped waveform. The presence of many
oscillations after the square wave indicated underdamping [26]. A
smaller gauge catheter has a higher damping coefficient and is more
likely to be overdamped than a larger gauge catheter. Other factors
leading to an overdamped BP waveform include air bubbles, cath-
eter obstruction (i.e., clot or kinking of catheter), pressure tubing
that is overly compliant or long, and/or the use of too many stop-
cocks. Overdamping causes an underestimation of SAP, while DAP
may either be accurate or overestimated [26]. Underdamping
results in an overestimation of SAP and underestimation of DAP.
MAP is the parameter least affected by system damping [25]. Recent
literature recommends the use of IBP MAP instead of SAP in
humans for interventional decisions while in the perioperative
period [27].
Arterial catheter placement and maintenance
Common sites for arterial cannulation in small animals include
the dorsal pedal/metatarsal, palmar digital/metacarpal, radial, and
coccygeal arteries; the femoral, brachial, and lingual arteries may
also be used. In large animals, common sites include the auricular
artery in cattle and branches of the facial or metatarsal artery in
equids. The location of catheter placement affects values obtained
(Fig. 12.1B), so different peripheral sites should not be used inter-
changeably for comparative results in patients [28–31].
Catheter size varies from 24 to 22 gauge in very small patients,
22 to 20 gauge in medium and large dogs, and 20 to 18 gauge in
large animals. Special care should always be taken to minimize the
risk of intravascular catheter infections and guidelines in both
human and veterinary medicine include staff education and training,
hand hygiene, use of aseptic technique, and proper skin preparation
as well as daily care after placement [32,33]. Indwelling arterial
catheters require constant or intermittent flushing to remain patent.
Heparinized saline is often used at various concentrations, but cau-
tion should be used in very small patients due to the risk of clinical
effects with doses starting at 150 U/kg [34]. Recent studies have
shown 0.9% sodium chloride to be as effective as heparinized saline
for maintaining catheter patency [35,36].
Non-invasive blood pressure measurement
Doppler ultrasonographic blood pressure
measurement
Doppler ultrasonography is an indirect, non-invasive method of
measuring BP (NIBP). The equipment necessary for this technique
includes a non- directional transcutaneous Doppler unit, probe,
sphygmomanometer, inflatable cuffs of various sizes, and ultrasonic
coupling gel (Fig. 12.6). A small 8.0–9.9 MHz ultrasound probe is
placed over a shaved peripheral artery with ultrasonic coupling gel.
The probe contains piezoelectric crystals, traditionally composed of
quartz and more recently of polarized ceramics. A 10-mm beam
of ultrasound wave contacts the artery at about 15° from perpen-
dicular [37]. The waves generated from contact of the ceramics with
pulsatile red blood cells within the peripheral artery result in defor-
mation of the piezoelectric elements. As defined by the piezoelectric
effect, deformation converts mechanical energy into electrical energy
to receive the wave; then, realignment of the ceramics changes elec-
trical energy back to mechanical energy, thereby creating sound
waves; in other words, movement of red blood cells results in a
Normal
waveform
Overdamped
waveform
Underdamped
waveform
Figure 12.4 Normal, overdamped, and underdamped arterial pressure
waveforms.
Overdamped
Normal
Underdamped
Amplitude reduction ratio =
height of ½ cycle (mm)/height of
previous ½ cycle (peak to trough
or trough to peak)
Resonant frequency = duration of 1 complete
cycle (s) (peak to peak or trough to trough)
Figure 12.5 Dynamic pressure response test. A dynamic pressure response
test is used to determine the resonant frequency and amplitude reduction
ratio of a measuring system. A high pressure is applied to the measuring
system while it is attached to the patient (usually with the continuous flush
device). Sudden release of this pressure results in return of oscillations
while the waveform returns to baseline. In a system with optimal damping,
one to two positive and one to two negative oscillations should be observed
before the waveform returns to baseline.
Figure 12.6 Parks Doppler unit. Source: Dr. Carrie Schroeder, with
permission.

-- 218 of 1450 --

Chapter 12: Blood Pressure Monitoring 	203
change in pitch of the reflected sound waves [38]. Flat probes are
designed to be taped into place for repeated use, while other shapes
may be used for periodic pulse amplification. An amplifier connected
to this probe intensifies the audible sound via a built-in speaker or
headphones [37].
Common peripheral arteries used for Doppler BP measure-
ment include the palmar metacarpal, plantar metatarsal, dorsal
pedal, and coccygeal. An inflatable cuff is placed proximal to the
Doppler probe. The cuff should have a width measuring approxi-
mately 30–40% of the circumference of the limb; alternatively, the
measurement guide provided by the manufacturer may be used. A
sphygmomanometer is then attached and rapidly inflated until
occlusion of the artery occurs, as demonstrated by loss of the
audible signal, and then inflated an additional 20–30 mmHg. The
cuff is then deflated slowly until a return of the audible signal
(known as “Korotkoff sounds”) occurs. The sphygmomanometer
pressure correlating to return of the first Korotkoff sound is
widely accepted as SAP in most species. While changes in the
character of the Korotkoff sounds may be appreciated as the cuff
is deflated, DAP is not reliably estimated by this method, so calcu-
lation of MAP is not possible using this method of BP measure-
ment. In cats, Doppler NIBP measurement tends to underestimate
BP when compared to invasive femoral artery measurements,
with Doppler SAP +14 mmHg more closely representing invasive
femoral SAP values [39]. Nonetheless, it should be noted that in
dogs < 5 kg, Doppler BP most closely reflects SAP and was found
to be highly specific in predicting hypotension in anesthetized
small dogs [40].
The advantages of Doppler NIBP measurement include that it is
non-invasive, inexpensive, portable, provides real-time audible
pulse sounds, and is easy to use in a variety of species. Disadvantages
of this technique include that the cuff must be inflated manually,
only a single value is provided for BP, and that electrical interfer-
ence from other equipment (e.g., electrocautery) may result in
excessive noise.
Oscillometric blood pressure measurement
Oscillometric BP measurement technology has been commercially
available since the 1970s and remains popular today. The reasons
for its popularity across a variety of species include ease of use,
minimal equipment requirements, and automation. With many
device options on the market, a multiorganizational universal
standard for validation of this equipment for use in human patients
was set in 2018 [41].
In general, this is a counterpressure measurement technique
whereby the arterial pulse produces changes in the volume of a
limb, which can be transmitted to and detected as changes in pres-
sure within a cuff encircling the limb. An inflatable cuff is placed
over the artery of a limb or the tail and attached with tubing to a
monitor containing a microprocessor and pressure sensor (trans-
ducer) and, in some monitors, an amplifier and filter. The tongue
has also recently been reported for use in canine patients, with MAP
meeting ACVIM and American Association for Medical Instruments
criteria for a wide range of pressures. However, it should be noted
that SAP accuracy and precision was poor, only meeting ACVIM
criteria during states of hypotension [42]. Identical to Doppler NIBP
measurement, the cuff should have a width measuring approximately
30–40% of the circumference of the limb or the measurement guide
provided by the manufacturer should be used (Fig. 12.7).
Oscillometric devices inflate the cuff to a pressure approximately
20–30 mmHg above that needed to obstruct blood flow and
then slowly deflate it using either continuous linear or nonlinear
(step-deflation) methods. Automatic cuff deflation allows for the
gradual return of arterial blood flow and the corresponding changes
in cuff pressure amplitudes (i.e., oscillations) persist until inflation
pressure is released and blood flow returns to normal. The monitor
records this series of cuff pressure amplitudes (i.e., absent, increas-
ing to a maximum, then decreasing until absent) and analyses them.
Microprocessors with various proprietary empirical algorithms
then determine values for SAP, MAP, and DAP. All oscillometric
NIBP monitors make use of these proprietary algorithms, making
comparison between monitors from different manufacturers a chal-
lenge. There are no current regulatory standards governing how
these systems obtain cuff pressure amplitudes and determine BP.
The result is that accuracy, validation as compared to IBP, agree-
ment among monitors, as well as repeatability remains a challenge
in human and veterinary medicine alike. In addition, there are also
no current reliable instruments to test the accuracy of these various
algorithms or their performance, leaving the consumer to rely heav-
ily on the manufacturers for quality assurance and on publications
that attempt to establish formulas to illuminate details [43,44].
The MAP is considered the most valid pressure value provided
by oscillometric NIBP systems, with SAP and DAP being calcu-
lated via manufacturer-specific proprietary algorithms [43]. Three
Figure 12.7 Blood pressure cuff width should be 30–40% of the limb circumference for accurate measurement. To use the range guidance, roll the edge of
the cuff around the limb, where the index line falls within the range guide when secured onto the limb of use. Source: Dr. Odette O, with permission.

-- 219 of 1450 --

204 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
of the most popular empirical techniques include the maximum
amplitude, derivative, and fixed-ratio algorithms. The maximum
amplitude algorithm compares cuff pressure amplitudes to deter-
mine the point of maximal (peak) oscillations, which is measured as
the MAP. There are various published methods for determining
SAP and DAP based on the ratio of oscillation amplitudes, and
different investigators have proposed different set points or ratios
for SAP and DAP [43,45]. To add to this confusion, there is at least
one study that has called into question the widely held assertion
that the formula for the maximum amplitude algorithm represents
MAP. Instead, they suggest that this algorithm actually estimates a
weighted average of SAP and DAP where weighting is determined
by arterial compliance curve widths [44]. Regarding the other
techniques, the derivative algorithm estimates DAP and SAP from
the slope of the oscillogram, while with the fixed-ratio algorithm
estimates DAP and SAP as population-based fractions of their peak
values. This last algorithm is prone to amplifying error, resulting in
inaccurate BP measurements [44].
SunTech Medical, Inc. created the NIBP technology that is incor-
porated into many of the commonly used veterinary multiparameter
monitors today, including the Digicare, DRE Veterinary, Midmark,
Nonin, Smiths Medical (Surgivet), and Vmed Technology, in
addition to human-based products such as the Masimo Root®.
This manufacturer also produces a veterinary-specific line of
standalone NIBP monitors reported to function at pulse rates of
25–300 bpm in small animals and 15–150 bpm in horses. These
monitors measure SAP, MAP, and DAP at ranges of 40–265, 27–222,
and 20–200 mmHg, respectively. The system uses a default inflation
pressure of 180 mmHg, with subsequent inflations set at SAP
+30 mmHg with a minimum inflation pressure of 120 mmHg.
These monitors use nonlinear (stepwise) deflation for increased
tolerance to motion and MAP determination based on their pro-
prietary maximum amplitude and SAP and DAP calculation algo-
rithms. The veterinary models also have reference ranges, changes
in gain based on differing pulse volumes based on patient size, and
internal manufacturer validation designed from specific animal
populations, including small animals and horses [personal commu-
nication: P. Matsumura, SunTech Medical; September 7, 2021]
Limitations to accurate performance of the oscillometric method
of BP measurement include situations of reduced blood flow, poor
cuff sizing, patient movement/shivering, extremes of patient size,
severe hypotension/hypertension, and cardiac arrhythmias. The une-
ven pulse waveforms created by arrhythmias result in an inaccurate
MAP and subsequent SAP/DAP determinations. Oscillometric
NIBP measurement is also intermittent, with lag time varying based
on user settings.
High-definition oscillometric blood pressure
measurement
High-definition oscillometry (HDO) is a non-invasive means of BP
measurement that uses an HDO device with a 32-bit processor in
conjunction with a computer or tablet, enabling real-time visualiza-
tion of the pulse waveform during cuff inflation/deflation and
assessment of validation through recognition of artifacts [46]. Gain
is a feature unique to HDO. The system can optimize gain (amplify
signal) and deflation rates to read low BPs and complete readings
often within 8–15 s. The HDO permits a scan bandwidth of
16,000 Hz compared to an input of 50/60 Hz used in standard oscil-
lometric devices. The system in units such as the HDO Vet MD
PRO utilizes linear deflation and a veterinary-specific algorithm
that enables measurement of SAP, MAP, and DAP. Coccygeal
artery assessment is recommended, so tail base cuff placement is
necessary, though the antebrachium can also be used in patients
where coccygeal access is not possible. Software enables in-depth
pulse wave analysis for users to assess functional parameters includ-
ing SV, SVR, and SV variance. In anesthetized canine patients,
HDO BP measurement has been shown to meet ACVIM consensus
panel validation criteria for MAP and DAP but not SAP, where it
was found to be unreliable in hypotensive dogs [47]. In awake cats,
this BP technique met the criteria for SAP, but underestimated
DAP [48].
Central venous pressure measurement
Central venous pressure (CVP) measures the hydrostatic pressure
of the intrathoracic vena cava, as a close reflection of right atrial
pressure (RAP) [49]. Traditionally, this modality has been consid-
ered an indirect indicator of intravascular volume and fluid
responsiveness in veterinary patients. Although alternative means
of measurement of CO, perfusion, and volume status exist, CVP
measurement is still utilized in veterinary medicine due to its prac-
ticality, low cost, and relative ease of use. Lack of consistent and
repeatable reference ranges for CVP across species, however, intro-
duces challenges when it comes to interpretation of these values in
veterinary medicine. CVP is actually a measure of intravascular
pressure in relation to atmospheric pressure, whereas true RAP and
right ventricular (RV) pressure (used as surrogates of left ventricu-
lar (LV) end-diastolic volume and cardiac preload) are transmural
pressures. The complex relationship between CVP, CO, and the
vascular system further complicates interpretation, despite values
themselves being relatively easy to obtain [50]. In addition, the non-
linear nature of the Frank–Starling curve along with factors causing
changes in cardiac and pulmonary compliance results in circum-
stances where pressure does not correlate well with volume status [51].
Consequently, CVP has fallen out of favor in human medicine in a
number of situations, including guidance of fluid resuscitation in
septic shock [52], while others still encourage its use with a clear
understanding of the caveats [53]. Current veterinary publications
on this topic remain inconclusive.
CVP should not be used as a single static measurement to make
clinical decisions. Instead, it should be considered as part of a clini-
cal picture, in conjunction with repeated readings and assessments
of trends in the individual patient of interest, along with use of clini-
cal values such as HR, arterial BP, lactate trends, and pulse quality
for assessing patient hydration and perfusion status. In horses,
increased lactate in combination with decreased CVP was noted in
subjects experiencing blood loss despite insignificant changes in
HR and venous blood gas values [54].
Patients that present with concerns related to their volume status
and/or overhydration are potential candidates for CVP measure-
ment as part of an overall clinical assessment. These patients may
include high-risk anesthesia patients with shock or ongoing hemor-
rhage requiring large volume resuscitation and those with signifi-
cant renal or cardiac disease. Catheterization of the vena cava is
necessary for the measurement of CVP. The external jugular vein
is most often used in veterinary medicine, due to its size, easy acces-
sibility, and ability to maintain hygiene. Radiographic confirmation
of correct placement should verify that the tip of the catheter is
located at the entry to the RA. A catheter originating in the lateral
saphenous vein (dogs) or medial saphenous vein (cats) may also be
used; however, the catheter must be advanced into the thoracic vena
cava at the level of the RA for accurate CVP measurement. It should

-- 220 of 1450 --

Chapter 12: Blood Pressure Monitoring 	205
be noted that peripheral venous pressure was poorly correlated
with CVP in dogs and cats with stable cardiovascular status [55].
Various central line kits, both veterinary and non-veterinary, are
commercially available. The use of prepackaged kits permits sterile
placement of these catheters using the modified Seldinger tech-
nique and has been found to increase procedural quality through
decreased technical errors and time required [56]. With appropriate
care, these catheters may safely remain in place for multiple days.
The normal reference range for CVP is 0–10 centimeters of water
(cmH2
O), more commonly 0–5 cmH2
O [49]. Depending on the
technique used for measurement, millimeters of mercury (mmHg)
can be converted to cmH 2
O using a conversion factor of 1.36
(i.e., 1 mmHg = 1.36 cmH2
O). In the absence of other complicating
factors, patients demonstrating negative values should be assessed
for hypovolemia, while those in the range of 0–5 cmH2
O may be
considered euvolemic, and those with values trending beyond
7–10 cmH2
O may be at increased risk for hypervolemia. These
values are more helpful when considering the response to fluid
challenges, rather than single-point determinations about volume
status since many factors alter interpretation. For instance, the
absence of a decrease in CVP that is normally observed during
inspiration in fluid responsive patients (known as “Kussmaul’s sign”)
may indicate concern for fluid intolerance [49,51].
Two methods may be utilized for the measurement of CVP.
Readings should be performed in a consistent manner with the
patient in the same body position for all measurements, the system
leveled at the RA, and values taken at end-expiration. Historically, a
water column setup was used, reflecting the common units used for
CVP measurement, cmH2
O. This system offers the advantages of
being low cost and requiring minimal equipment (i.e., a central line
kit, ruler, IV pole, non-compliant tubing, three-way stopcock, and
fluids). However, challenges with this setup include the need to
manually level the zero point of the water manometer at the level of
patient’s RA and the lack of a waveform for analysis. Alternatively,
an electronic pressure transducer system may be used to measure
CVP. The setup is identical to that used for IBP measurement,
as described previously. Benefits to use of this system include
constant, real-time monitoring, and the production of a waveform
for analysis (Fig. 12.8). Values from these electronic systems
may be expressed in mmHg, depending on the manufacturer and
monitor settings.
The decision to perform CVP monitoring should be made with a
risk/benefit analysis. Aside from the limitations in accurately
assessing vascular volume status and fluid responsiveness, there has
been much controversy regarding its ability to predict morbidity
and mortality in human medicine and its use and interpretation in
veterinary medicine should be viewed with caution [51–53]. Highly
skilled personnel are needed for both placement and maintenance
of a central line as well as interpretation of the results. Potential
immediate risks associated with jugular catheter placement are car-
diac arrhythmias (most commonly atrial or ventricular premature
contractions if a guide wire or catheter is advanced into the heart),
hemorrhage, hematoma, air embolus, thrombus, pneumomediasti-
num, pneumothorax, hemothorax, tracheal trauma, and inadvertent
carotid artery puncture [57]. Longer-term concerns include catheter-
associated infection, recurrent laryngeal nerve damage, and jugular
vein stenosis or occlusion. Contraindications to this approach
include patients with concerns for increased intracranial pressure
(ICP), coagulopathies, and those at increased risk of thromboem-
bolic events. As such, current recommendations in veterinary med-
icine are to use CVP trends for additional data to assess patient
needs, but central venous access should not be undertaken solely
for this purpose [58].
Indices of fluid responsiveness
Pulse pressure variation and systolic pressure
variation
The circulatory effects in dogs provided intermittent positive-
pressure ventilation (IPPV) were first measured almost 60 years ago,
with the cause of these effects attributed to the effect of intrathoracic
pressure on venous return [59]. Since then, many studies have
noted the variation in the arterial pressure waveform during IPPV
and demonstrated that in mechanically ventilated patients, under
certain circumstances, this physical sign can be an accurate predic-
tor of fluid responsiveness. Pulse pressure variation (PPV) is a
ECG
CVP
Ventricular
pressure
A wave
C wave
V wave
X descent
A wave
Y descent
Figure 12.8 Central venous pressure (CVP) tracing and
waveform. Note the features of the CVP waveform
throughout the cardiac cycle: A wave represents right
atrial contraction, seen after ECG P wave but prior to
QRS; C wave reflects the tricuspid valve being pushed
up into the atrium during ventricular contraction
(note: this wave may or may not be evident); X descent
reflects right atrial relaxation; V wave reflects rapid
atrial filling with plateau; and Y descent reflects
ventricular relaxation and early ventricular filling.

-- 221 of 1450 --

206 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
measure of the difference between systolic and diastolic pressures
during IPPV inspiratory and expiratory phases.
In-depth reviews of the physiologic changes that occur during
mechanical ventilation may be found elsewhere [60]. In short,
increased pleural pressure due to positive-pressure ventilation com-
presses the vena cava and increases RAP, resulting in decreased
venous return. In turn, decreased RA preload decreases RV output
and pulmonary artery blood flow. Finally, LV filling and, thereby,
output are decreased. Three additional mechanisms may cause res-
piratory variation via alteration of LV SV during the inspiratory
phase of IPPV: (1) RV ejection is impeded by increased RV after-
load resulting from increases in alveolar pressure that exceed
increases in pleural pressure; (2) the increase in alveolar pressure
relative to pleural pressure also sends blood from the alveolar capil-
laries toward the left side of the heart, resulting in increased LV
preload; and (3) LV afterload is decreased via the reduction in tho-
racic blood volume resulting from increased systolic extracardiac
pressure along with decreased systolic intracardiac pressure from
the positive pleural pressure. In summary, during the IPPV inspira-
tory phase, RV preload is decreased, while RV afterload is increased;
and LV preload is increased, while LV afterload is decreased. The
RV output decrease is then translated a few beats later to the left
heart. The main determinant of respiratory variation in PP is the
variation in LV SV.
In general, hypovolemic patients demonstrate greater respiratory
variations in SV and arterial pressure for four main reasons: (1) the
vena cava is more collapsible during hypovolemia; (2) an under-
filled RA during hypovolemia will be more sensitive to the trans-
mission of pleural pressure during inspiration; (3) the effect of
inspiration on RV afterload is more significant during hypovolemia
where West’s zone 1 (pulmonary arterial pressure < alveolar pres-
sure) and/or West’s zone II (pulmonary venous pressure < alveolar
pressure) conditions are likely met; and (4) during hypovolemia,
both left and right ventricles are more likely functioning on the
steep portion of the Frank–Starling curve where there is a greater
sensitivity to preload changes than if operating on the flatter por-
tion of the curve (Fig. 12.9).
Thus, during hypovolemic conditions, patients demonstrate
greater respiratory variation in PP. When these waveforms are dis-
played on patient-side monitors, they can be a valuable tool in
assessing fluid responsiveness during IPPV. Waveform variation
requires quantification for true utility since monitors variably
record arterial waveform at differing speeds and scales. Analysis of
these waveforms has been described by various methods including
systolic pressure variation (SPV), which is the difference between
maximum and minimum SAP over a single respiratory cycle.
Assessment of systolic reference pressure at the end-expiratory
pause then allows differentiation between inspiratory increase and
expiratory decrease. When PPV was first described in critically ill
patients in 1978, SPV > 10 mmHg was observed in hypovolemic
patients with SPV < 10 mmHg seen in normo- and hypervolemic
patients [61]. Alternatively, there is a different calculation with the
aim of monitoring changes in LV SV where respiratory variation in
arterial PP is quantified by determining the difference between
maximum and minimum PPs during one mechanical breath with
the mean of the two values expressed as a percentage [62]:
PP 	PP 	PP 	PP 	PP	% 	max 	min 	max 	min	100 	2
Since the inspiratory increase in LV SV itself has minimal
effect on respiratory variation, another proposed method uses
PP measured at the end-expiratory pause as the reference PP to
measure the expiratory decrease in arterial PP [63].
The clinical usefulness of PPV includes the ability to provide a
dynamic assessment of fluid volume status and cardiac preload, and
prediction of hemodynamic response to volume expansion. In
human medicine, PPV fluid response has only been validated spe-
cifically in mechanically ventilated deeply sedated or anesthetized
patients, so careful application is warranted.
In patients receiving positive-pressure ventilation while IBP is
being measured, PPV may be utilized using a capable monitor to
predict volume responsiveness. SV depends on preload, afterload,
and cardiac contractility and, as this parameter is dynamic, fluid
responsiveness is defined by the rising portion of the Frank–Starling
curve (Fig. 12.9) [64]. Preload contributes to CO (i.e., increases
in preload result in increased SV) up to maximum point in fluid
responsive patients. Fluid responsiveness decreases significantly in
patients on the plateau portion of the curve (i.e., further increases
in preload are not associated with proportional increases in SV).
In summary, patients demonstrating greater PPV during positive-
pressure ventilation are considered preload/fluid responsive, while
High PPV
Low PPV
Preload responsiveness
Stroke volume
A 	B
Cardiac preload
Preload unresponsiveness
Figure 12.9 Frank-Starling relationship, preload responsiveness, and pulse
pressure variation (PPV). When the heart is operating on the steep part of
the Frank-Starling relationship (top), an increase in cardiac preload
(from A to B) results in an increase in stroke volume (preload or fluid
responsiveness). When the heart is operating on the plateau of the
Frank-Starling relationship (bottom), the same increase in cardiac preload
(from A to B) does not result in a significant increase in stroke volume
(preload or fluid unresponsiveness). While cardiac preload itself (however
it is measured) cannot predict fluid responsiveness/unresponsiveness,
PPV is a valuable tool to predict a patient’s response to fluid therapy.
Source: Teboul et al. [64], reprinted with permission of the American
Thoracic Society.

-- 222 of 1450 --

Chapter 12: Blood Pressure Monitoring 	207
those showing only minimal PPV are less likely to increase SV in
response to fluid therapy. A meta-analysis of the effectiveness of
using dynamic parameters such as PPV for providing goal-directed
fluid therapy in human surgical patients found that this approach
decreased postoperative morbidity and decreased intensive care
unit length of stay [65].
PPV has been found to be useful in predicting fluid responsive-
ness in isoflurane-anesthetized, mechanically ventilated dogs
[66–68]. In one study, SPV was found to be even more accurate than
PPV in predicting fluid responsiveness in mechanically ventilated
isoflurane-anesthetized dogs and may provide another useful tool
in assessing fluid responsiveness using an automated algorithm [69].
Overall, PPV values > 7–16% predict fluid responsiveness in canine
patients under inhalant anesthesia receiving IPPV [66,68,70,71]. In
veterinary medicine, the usefulness of PPV for assessing fluid status
has also been examined in a number of other species including
horses [72], pigs [73–75], and rabbits [76,77].
It should be noted that many factors influence PPV and SPV,
including current volume status, resuscitation fluid type and
volume, ventilator settings, chest wall compliance, intra-abdominal
pressure, venous vasomotor tone, and the presence of cardiac
abnormalities making direct comparisons from these studies diffi-
cult. Nevertheless, a number of veterinary studies have shown the
utility in using this clinical tool to help predict fluid responsive-
ness [58] and encourage the use of this parameter to guide fluid
therapy over previous conventional methods [78].
Other methods described with some success in measuring
respiratory variation on LV SV include computerized pulse contour
analysis using a modified Wesseling algorithm and Doppler meas-
urement of aortic blood flow. It should be noted that the plethysmo-
graphic waveform from a pulse oximeter has been shown to have
some correlation with arterial pressure variations in mechanically
ventilated patients but has been associated with inaccuracies in
several publications (see below).
Plethysmography variability index
The plethysmography (or pleth) variability index (PVI) is an
algorithm built into specific pulse oximeters that has been shown
to be effective in predicting fluid responsiveness in anesthetized,
mechanically ventilated canine patients [66,67,79]. During IPPV,
RV SV is minimal at end-inspiration due to the reduction in venous
return during this phase. As a result, LV preload and SV subsequently
decrease and are minimal at end-expiration. Changes in the pulse
waveform amplitude during the respiratory cycle are detected and
measured during mechanical ventilation. The magnitude of this
variation is proportional to the likelihood that a patient will increase
SV when their preload is augmented via a fluid bolus [64]. With
this non-invasive, dynamic index, larger variations in waveform
amplitude predict preload dependence and, thus, greater fluid
responsiveness. PVI and PPV were found to be considerably more
accurate than CVP in predicting fluid responsiveness in mechani-
cally ventilated, isoflurane-anesthetized canines [66]. Depending
on the study, PVI values greater than or equal to approximately 13%
may indicate fluid responsiveness.
Plethysmography and photoplethysmography
Pulse oximeters with a plethysmographic display may be utilized
to estimate BP in veterinary patients with the use of an inflatable
occlusive cuff [80]. The method described uses a pulse oximeter
probe placed distally on the tongue of a canine subject with an
occlusive cuff placed proximally. The cuff is inflated slowly until
the plethysmographic pulsatile waveform disappears. The highest
value maintaining a visible waveform is an estimation of SAP.
Several factors including patient size, vasoconstriction, and compro-
mised CO limit the accuracy and utility of this method. However,
it may be useful for monitoring trends of SAP under certain
circumstances.
Photoplethysmography (PPG) is a specific monitoring method
that provides information including HR, SpO2 , and NIBP devel-
oped using principles of infrared light emitted from an LED source
on a small probe passing through a tissue bed where the light is
altered by blood flow. PPG alone may estimate BP via blood volume
pulsations in peripheral tissue beds without use of an inflatable cuff.
PPG does not measure actual BP; rather, units utilize a micropro-
cessor that employs an algorithm based on waveform analysis and
theoretical models to estimate BP [81].
To date, veterinary-specific monitors are not widely available in
North America, limiting this technique to patient sizes where
human-based probes may be utilized, most commonly a finger
probe. In addition to its use on the lingual site, the use of PPG on
the tail and metacarpus has been reported in dogs and on the digit
of cats (with limitations) [82]. Technology using PPG in combina-
tion with oscillometry to measure BP indirectly has become available
in veterinary medicine in Japan, using the BP100D Fukuda ME.
This device has demonstrated close correlation with invasive tech-
niques in cats [83].
For humans, wearable devices have been examined using the
PPG method as a cuffless, continuous means of non-invasive BP
measurement. The most common site of measurement is the finger,
but other locations that have been assessed include the toes,
forehead, and wrist. Future functionality of this technology may
increase in veterinary medicine as use increases in humans at
various anatomical sites, making sensors of shapes and different
sizes more readily available. However, the overall accuracy of this
methodology still warrants further investigation [84].
Increasingly, technology is integrated into patient-side monitors
that use PPG with waveform assessment parameters. PPG technology
may be used to estimate arterial waveform and fluid responsiveness
in humans [85]. Despite the questions that remain regarding the
accuracy of plethysmography and PPG for BP estimation itself,
important patient information is still provided by perfusion wave-
forms that are generated.
Continued challenges with blood pressure
measurement
Acceptable BP values under anesthesia depend on multiple patient
factors, including age, species, comorbidities, and level of con-
sciousness. Even when an acceptable range is established, validating
BP measurements across different species, anatomic locations, and
methodologies introduces additional challenges. Countless publi-
cations in veterinary medicine compare values obtained in different
species, during different patient states (e.g., conscious versus anes-
thetized), using different monitors, all with varying reliability. Even
with the gold standard of IBP, values may differ significantly within
the same patient based on the site selected. It is important to keep in
mind that all methods have inherent limitations, and translation of
data across sites, species, conditions, and technologies is not recom-
mended. Values obtained by any method should be interpreted in
the context of the overall clinical picture for an individual patient
with the goal of optimizing management.

-- 223 of 1450 --

208 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
References
1 Grubb T, Sager J, Gaynor JS, et al. 2020 AAHA anesthesia and monitoring guide-
lines for dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2020; 56(2): 59–82.
2 American College of Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia. Guidelines and Position
Statement Documents: Small Animal Monitoring Guidelines. www.acvaa.org/
veterinarians/guidelines (accessed December 2022).
3 Trammel JE, Sapra A. Physiology, systemic vascular resistance. In: StatPearls
[Internet]. Treasure Island, FL: StatPearls Publishing LLC, 2022.
4 Acierno MJ, Brown S, Coleman AE, et al. ACVIM consensus statement: guidelines
for the identification, evaluation, and management of systemic hypertension in
dogs and cats. J Vet Intern Med 2018; 32(6): 1803–1822.
5 Walsh M, Devereaux PJ, Garg AX, et al. Relationship between intraoperative mean
arterial pressure and clinical outcomes after noncardiac surgery: toward an empirical
definition of hypotension. Anesthesiology 2013; 119(3): 507–515.
6 Portier K, Ida KK. Editorial: anesthetic risk and complications in veterinary
medicine. Front Vet Sci 2020; 7: 397.
7 Grandy JL, Steffey EP, Hodgson DS, et al. Arterial hypotension and the develop-
ment of postanesthetic myopathy in halothane-anesthetized horses. Am J Vet Res
1987; 48(2): 192–197.
8 Lindsay WA, Robinson GM, Brunson DB, et al. Induction of equine postanesthetic
myositis after halothane-induced hypotension. Am J Vet Res 1989; 50(3): 404–410.
9 Duke T, Filzek U, Read MR, et al. Clinical observations surrounding an increased
incidence of postanesthetic myopathy in halothane-anesthetized horses. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2006; 33(2): 122–127.
10 Raisis AL. Skeletal muscle blood flow in anaesthetized horses. Part II: effects of
anaesthetics and vasoactive agents. Vet Anaesth Analg 2005; 32(6): 331–337.
11 Carlson BE, Arciero JC, Secomb TW. Theoretical model of blood flow autoregula-
tion: roles of myogenic, shear-dependent, and metabolic responses. Am J Physiol
Heart Circ Physiol 2008; 295(4): H1572–H1579.
12 Koller A, Sun D, Kaley G. Role of shear stress and endothelial prostaglandins in
flow- and viscosity-induced dilation of arterioles in vitro. Circ Res 1993; 72(6):
1276–1284.
13 Armstead WM. Cerebral blood flow autoregulation and dysautoregulation.
Anesthesiol Clin 2016; 34(3): 465–477.
14 Rothe CF, Nash FD, Thompson DE. Patterns in autoregulation of renal blood flow
in the dog. Am J Physiol 1971 Jun; 220(6): 1621–1626.
15 Burke M, Pabbidi MR, Farley J, et al. Molecular mechanisms of renal blood flow
autoregulation. Curr Vasc Pharmacol 2014; 12(6): 845–858.
16 Berthold H, Münter K, Just A, et al. Contribution of endothelin to renal vascular
tone and autoregulation in the conscious dog. Am J Physiol 1999; 276(3):
F417–F424.
17 Carlström M, Wilcox CS, Arendshorst WJ. Renal autoregulation in health and
disease. Physiol Rev 2015; 95(2): 405–511.
18 Ard JL, Kendale S. Searching for a baseline blood pressure: a comparison of blood
pressure at three different care points. J Clin Neurosci 2016; 34: 59–62.
19 Trim CM, Hofmeister EH, Quandt JE, et al. A survey of the use of arterial catheters
in anesthetized dogs and cats: 267 cases. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2017;
27(1): 89–95.
20 Barr CA, Gianotti G, Graffeo CE, et al. Effect of blood collection by the push-pull
technique from an indwelling catheter versus direct venipuncture on venous blood
gas values before and after administration of alfaxalone or propofol in dogs.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2017; 251(10): 1166–1174.
21 Tao KM, Sokha S, Yuan HB. Sphygmomanometer for invasive blood pressure
monitoring in a medical mission. Anesthesiology 2019; 130(2): 312.
22 Davis PD. Electricity. In: Davis PD, Kenny GNC, eds. Basic Physics and Measurement
in Anesthesia, 5th edn. Edinburgh, UK: Butterworth-Heinemann, 2003: 149.
23 Davis PD.Blood pressure measurement. In: Davis PD, Kenny GNC, eds. Basic Physics
and Measurement in Anesthesia, 5th edn. Edinburgh, UK: Butterworth-Heinemann,
2003: 187.
24 Moxham IM. Physics of invasive blood pressure monitoring. S Afr J Anaesth Analg
2014; 9(1): 33–38.
25 Saugel B, Kouz K, Meidert AS, et al. How to measure blood pressure using an arte-
rial catheter: a systematic 5-step approach. Crit Care 2020; 24(1): 172.
26 Gardner RM. Direct blood pressure measurement-- dynamic response require-
ments. Anesthesiology 1981; 54(3): 227–236.
27 Lam S, Liu H, Jian Z, et al. Intraoperative invasive blood pressure monitoring and
the potential pitfalls of invasively measured systolic blood pressure. Cureus 2021;
13(8): e17610.
28 Monteiro ER, Campagnol D, Bajotto GC, et al. Effects of 8 hemodynamic condi-
tions on direct blood pressure values obtained simultaneously from the carotid,
femoral and dorsal pedal arteries in dogs. J Vet Cardiol 2013; 15(4): 263–270.
29 Acierno MJ, Domingues ME, Ramos SJ, et al. Comparison of directly measured
arterial blood pressure at various anatomic locations in anesthetized dogs.
Am J Vet Res 2015; 76(3): 266–271.
30 Wilson KA, Raisis AL, Drynan EA, et al. Agreement between invasive blood pres-
sure measured centrally and peripherally in anaesthetized horses. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2018; 45(4): 467–476.
31 Wilson KAT, Raisis AL, Drynan EA, et al. Agreement between invasive blood pres-
sures measured in three peripheral arteries in anaesthetized horses under clinical
conditions. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45(3): 338–344.
32 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Summary of Recommendations:
Guidelines for the Prevention of Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections
(Edited 2017). www.cdc.gov/infectioncontrol/guidelines/bsi/recommendations.html
(accessed December 2022).
33 American Animal Hospital Association. AAHA Guidelines, Protocols: Placement
and Maintenance of Peripheral Intravenous Catheters to Prevent Infection.
www.aaha.org/aaha- guidelines/infection- control- configuration/protocols/
intravenous- catheter- placement-and-maintenance2 (accessed December 2022).
34 Helmond SE, Polzin DJ, Armstrong PJ, et al. Treatment of immune-mediated
hemolytic anemia with individually adjusted heparin dosing in dogs. J Vet Intern
Med 2010; 24(3): 597–605.
35 Vose J, Odunayo A, Price JM, et al. Comparison of heparinized saline and 0.9%
sodium chloride for maintaining central venous catheter patency in healthy dogs.
Peer J 2019; 7: e7072.
36 Sasaki K, Paredes GP, Shiga T. Heparinized saline solution vs. saline solution
(0.9% sodium chloride) for the maintenance of dorsal pedal arterial catheter patency
in dogs undergoing general anesthesia: a pilot study. Front Vet Sci 2020; 7: 428.
37 811-B Doppler Flow Detector Operating / Service Manual. Parks Medical
Electronics, Inc. Aloha, OR, USA. www.parksmed.com/products/non-directional-
dopplers (accessed December 2022).
38 Jiao P, Egbe K-JI, Xie Y, et al. Piezoelectric sensing techniques in structural health
monitoring: a state-of-the-art review. Sensors 2020; 20(13): 3730.
39 Grandy JL, Dunlop CI, Hodgson DS, et al. Evaluation of the Doppler ultrasonic
method of measuring systolic arterial blood pressure in cats. Am J Vet Res 1992;
53(7): 1166–1169.
40 Kennedy MJ, Barletta M. Agreement between Doppler and invasive blood pressure
monitoring in anesthetized dogs weighing <5 kg. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2015;
51(5): 300–305.
41 Stergiou GS, Alpert B, Mieke S, et al. A universal standard for the validation of
blood pressure measuring devices: Association for the Advancement of Medical
Instrumentation/European Society of Hypertension/International Organization for
Standardization (AAMI/ESH/ISO) collaboration statement. J Hypertens 2018;
36(3): 472–478.
42 Kim D, Kim H, Shin D, et al. Evaluation of the tongue for oscillometric measure-
ment of arterial pressure in anesthetized Beagle dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2022;
49(2): 149–155.
43 Jilek J, Fukushima T. Oscillometric blood pressure measurement: the methodology,
some observations, and suggestions. Biomed Instrum Technol 2005; 39(3): 237–241.
44 Chandrasekhar A, Yavarimanesh M, Hahn JO, et al. Formulas to explain popular
oscillometric blood pressure estimation algorithms. Front Physiol 2019; 10: 1415.
45 Geddes LA. Characterization of the oscillometric method for measuring indirect
blood pressure. Ann Biomed Eng 1982; 10: 271–280.
46 HDO Vet BP Monitor Specifications. www.vethdo.com (accessed December 2022).
47 Seliškar A, Zrimšek P, Sredenšek J, et al. Comparison of high definition oscillomet-
ric and Doppler ultrasound devices with invasive blood pressure in anaesthetized
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40(1): 21–27.
48 Martel E, Egner B, Brown SA, et al. Comparison of high-definition oscillometry – a
non- invasive technology for arterial blood pressure measurement – with a direct
invasive method using radio-telemetry in awake healthy cats. J Feline Med Surg
2013; 15(12): 1104–1113.
49 de Laforcade AM, Rozanski EA. Central venous pressure and arterial blood pres-
sure measurements. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2001; 31(6):
1163–1174.
50 Reems MM, Aumann M. Central venous pressure: principles, measurement, and
interpretation. Compend Contin Educ Vet 2012; 34: E1–E10.
51 Hutchinson KM, Shaw SP. A review of central venous pressure and its reliability as
a hemodynamic monitoring tool in veterinary medicine. Top Companion Anim
Med 2016; 31(3): 109–121.
52 Sasai T, Tokioka H, Fukushima T, et al. Reliability of central venous pressure to
assess left ventricular preload for fluid resuscitation in patients with septic shock.
J Intensive Care 2014; 2(1): 58.
53 De Backer D, Vincent JL. Should we measure the central venous pressure to guide
fluid management? Ten answers to 10 questions. Crit Care 2018; 22(1): 43.
54 Magdesian KG, Fielding CL, Rhodes DM, et al. Changes in central venous pressure
and blood lactate concentration in response to acute blood loss in horses. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2006; 229(9): 1458–1462.
55 Chow RS, Kass PH, Haskins SC. Evaluation of peripheral and central venous
pressure in awake dogs and cats. Am J Vet Res 2006; 67(12): 1987–1991.

-- 224 of 1450 --

Chapter 12: Blood Pressure Monitoring 	209
56 Fenik Y, Celebi N, Wagner R, et al. Prepackaged central line kits reduce procedural
mistakes during central line insertion: a randomized controlled prospective trial.
BMC Med Educ 2013; 13: 60.
57 Kornbau C, Lee KC, Hughes GD, et al. Central line complications. Int J Crit Illn
Inj Sci 2015; 5(3): 170–178.
58 Boysen SR, Gommeren K. Assessment of volume status and fluid responsiveness in
small animals. Front Vet Sci 2021; 8: 630643.
59 Morgan BC, Martin WE, Hornbein TF, et al. Hemodynamic effects of intermittent
positive pressure ventilation. Anesthesiology 1966; 27: 584–590.
60 Michard F. Changes in arterial pressure during mechanical ventilation.
Anesthesiology 2005; 103(2): 419–428.
61 Rick JJ, Burke SS. Respirator [sic] paradox. South Med J 1978; 71: 1376–1378.
62 Michard F, Chemla D, Richard C, et al. Clinical use of respiratory changes in arte-
rial pulse pressure to monitor the hemodynamic effects of PEEP. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med 1999; 159: 935–939.
63 Morelot-Panzini C, Lefort Y, Derenne JP, et al. Simplified method to measure
respiratory-related changes in arterial pulse pressure in patients receiving mechani-
cal ventilation. Chest 2003; 124: 665–670.
64 Teboul JL, Monnet X, Chemla D, et al. Arterial pulse pressure variation with
mechanical ventilation. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2019; 199(1): 22–31.
65 Benes J, Giglio M, Brienza N, et al. The effects of goal-directed fluid therapy based
on dynamic parameters on post-surgical outcome: a meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. Crit Care 2014; 18(5): 584.
66 Sano H, Seo J, Wightman P, et al. Evaluation of pulse pressure variation and pleth
variability index to predict fluid responsiveness in mechanically ventilated
isoflurane-anesthetized dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2018; 28(4):
301–309.
67 Klein AV, Teixeira-Neto FJ, Garofalo NA, et al. Changes in pulse pressure variation
and plethysmographic variability index caused by hypotension-inducing hemor-
rhage followed by volume replacement in isoflurane-anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res
2016; 77(3): 280–287.
68 Fantoni DT, Ida KK, Gimenes AM, et al. Pulse pressure variation as a guide for
volume expansion in dogs undergoing orthopedic surgery. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017;
44(4): 710–718.
69 Dalmagro TL, Teixeira-Neto FJ, Celeita-Rodríguez N, et al. Comparison between
pulse pressure variation and systolic pressure variation measured from a peripheral
artery for accurately predicting fluid responsiveness in mechanically ventilated
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(4): 501–508.
70 Endo Y, Tamura J, Ishizuka T, et al. Stroke volume variation (SVV) and pulse pressure
variation (PPV) as indicators of fluid responsiveness in sevoflurane anesthetized
mechanically ventilated euvolemic dogs. J Vet Med Sci 2017; 79(8): 1437–1445.
71 Celeita-Rodríguez N, Teixeira-Neto FJ, Garofalo NA, et al. Comparison of the
diagnostic accuracy of dynamic and static preload indexes to predict fluid
responsiveness in mechanically ventilated, isoflurane anesthetized dogs. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2019; 46(3): 276–288.
72 Fielding CL, Stolba DN. Pulse pressure variation and systolic pressure variation in
horses undergoing general anesthesia. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2012;
22(3): 372–375.
73 Behem CR, Graessler MF, Friedheim T, et al. The use of pulse pressure variation for
predicting impairment of microcirculatory blood flow. Sci Rep 2021; 11(1): 9215.
74 Oshiro AH, Otsuki DA, Hamaji MW, et al. Pulse pressure variation and stroke
volume variation under different inhaled concentrations of isoflurane, sevoflurane
and desflurane in pigs undergoing hemorrhage. Clinics (Sao Paulo) 2015; 70(12):
804–809.
75 Jacques D, Bendjelid K, Duperret S, et al. Pulse pressure variation and stroke
volume variation during increased intra-abdominal pressure: an experimental
study. Crit Care 2011; 15(1): R33.
76 Westphal GA, Gonçalves AR, Bedin A, et al. Vasodilation increases pulse pressure
variation, mimicking hypovolemic status in rabbits. Clinics (Sao Paulo) 2010; 65(2):
189–194.
77 Fonseca EB, Otsuki DA, Fantoni DT, et al. Comparative study of pressure- and
volume-controlled ventilation on pulse pressure variation in a model of hypovolae-
mia in rabbits. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2008; 25(5): 388–394.
78 Araos J, Kenny JS, Rousseau-Blass F, et al. Dynamic prediction of fluid responsive-
ness during positive pressure ventilation: a review of the physiology underlying
heart-lung interactions and a critical interpretation. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020;
47(1): 3–14.
79 Endo Y, Kawase K, Miyasho T, et al. Plethysmography variability index for predic-
tion of fluid responsiveness during graded haemorrhage and transfusion in
sevoflurane-anaesthetized mechanically ventilated dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017;
44(6): 1303–1312.
80 Dyson DH. Indirect measurement of blood pressure using a pulse oximeter in iso-
flurane anesthetized dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2007; 17: 135–142.
81 Xing X, Ma Z, Zhang M, et al. An unobtrusive and calibration-free blood pressure
estimation method using photoplethysmography and biometrics. Sci Rep 2019;
9: 8611.
82 Cugmas B, Štruc E, Spigulis J. Photoplethysmography in dogs and cats: a selection
of alternative measurement sites for a pet monitor. Physiol Meas 2019; 40(1):
01NT02.
83 Heishima Y, Hori Y, Chikazawa S, et al. Indirect arterial blood pressure measure-
ment in healthy anesthetized cats using a device that combines oscillometry with
photoplethysmography. J Vet Med Sci 2016; 78(7): 1179–1182.
84 Hosanee M, Chan G, Welykholowa K, et al. Cuffless single-site photoplethysmog-
raphy for blood pressure monitoring. J Clin Med 2020; 9(3): 723.
85 Bartels K, Thiele RH. Advances in photoplethysmography: beyond arterial oxygen
saturation. Can J Anaesth 2015; 62(12): 1313–1328.

-- 225 of 1450 --

210
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of Lumb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
Cardiac output is the volume of blood ejected from each of the ven-
tricles per minute, usually reported in L/min, and is the product of
the heart rate and stroke volume. Cardiac index is the cardiac out-
put referenced to the body surface area or body weight of the patient
and is expressed in L/min/m2 or L/min/kg, respectively (Table 13.1).
Cardiac output is determined by five primary variables: heart rate,
rhythm, preload, contractility, and afterload [1].
Cardiac output summarizes in one single value the contribution
of the cardiovascular system to global oxygen delivery from the
heart to the body. It, therefore, appears reasonable to monitor car-
diac output in the assessment of cardiovascular insufficiency in any
critical patient undergoing anesthesia. Unfortunately, no definitive
studies have shown that the determination of cardiac output or its
changes in response to therapy is superior to standard hemody-
namic monitoring in terms of outcome [2]. In fact, there is lack of
evidence of improved outcomes in acutely ill patients with use of
any specific monitoring device, not only cardiac output moni-
tors [3]. Moreover, cardiac output should not be evaluated as a sole
variable in a clinical setting. For instance, if metabolic rate is
increased or blood flow distribution is abnormal in septic patients,
they often have a normal or even increased cardiac output and may
still be in circulatory failure [4].
This raises the question: why do we measure cardiac output?
There is clear evidence that persistence of a low cardiac output state
has significant detrimental effects on organ perfusion and oxygena-
tion [5]. In critically ill human patients, a low cardiac output with
sustained unresponsiveness to therapy has been associated with a
high mortality rate [6]. Thus, at least in some specific patients, the
measurement of cardiac output may represent a supplemental aid to
assess the adequacy of therapy and to guide targeted therapeutic
interventions (e.g., goal-directed fluid therapy) [2]. More specifi-
cally, in a hypotensive patient, whenever the clinical signs are diffi-
cult to interpret or the cause of hypotension is not obvious and
likely multifactorial (including anesthetic drug effects), the use of
cardiac output monitoring should be considered. In this regard,
estimation of cardiac output is a useful tool for patient management
during anesthesia.
Measuring cardiac output is advantageous in monitoring
anesthetic-related hemodynamic changes as well as assessing effec-
tiveness of resuscitation in trauma and critically ill patients [7].
Monitoring the extent of the relative changes in cardiac output, for
example, following fluid resuscitation in hypovolemic patients,
allows the anesthetist to assess the effectiveness of the intervention
and to separate fluid responders from non-responders [8–10]. In
different scenarios, following patient trends in cardiac output rather
than blood pressure, such as during dobutamine or a nitroprusside
infusion, gives more meaningful information as to the hemody-
namic response to therapy [11].
Importantly, the determination of absolute values of cardiac out-
put is often less important than following trends. The assessment of
relative changes in cardiac output following challenge of the cardio-
vascular system with fluid loading or medications is referred to as
“functional cardiac output monitoring” [12]. Once it is determined
that assessing cardiac output may be indicated for a given circum-
stance, then it is also important that its measurement is accurate
enough to identify clinically relevant changes in response to ther-
apy. An acute increase in cardiac output of 20–25% is usually
13 Cardiac Output Measurement
Alessio Vigani
Department of Small Animals, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland
Chapter contents
Introduction, 210
Basic principles of cardiac output monitoring, 211
History of cardiac output measurement, 211
Techniques of determination of cardiac output, 212
The Fick principle, 212
Pulmonary artery catheter thermodilution, 212
Transpulmonary thermodilution and ultrasound indicator dilution, 214
Lithium dilution, 214
Arterial waveform analysis, 215
Echocardiography and echo-Doppler, 215
Thoracic bioimpedance and bioreactance, 216
Standard capnography as indicator of cardiac output, 217
References, 217

-- 226 of 1450 --

Chapter 13: Cardiac Output Measurement 	211
accepted as a clinically relevant positive response because such a
change corresponds to the limit of accuracy of current measuring
techniques [13].
The ideal cardiac output monitoring technique would provide
accurate, interpretable, and reproducible measurements, be user-
friendly, and be readily available. The ideal device should also be
safe for the patient, operator independent, provide a rapid response
time, and be cost effective. Ultimately, the results obtained should
be clinically relevant to guide therapy. To be useful in the manage-
ment of hemodynamically unstable patients, the technique should
allow cardiac output to be measured rapidly and repetitively [14].
At present, there is no available device that meets all these criteria.
Basic principles of cardiac output monitoring
Veterinary anesthesiologists now have an increasing number of
techniques and measuring devices available to assess cardiac out-
put. Each technique has its own strengths and limitations [15,16].
As for the selection of monitoring systems for any other physiologic
parameter, the following general principles can serve as guidelines
to determine the most suitable cardiac output monitoring tech-
nique for use in a particular setting.
No hemodynamic monitoring technique can improve outcome
by itself and estimating cardiac output is not an exception. Three
fundamental conditions must be met for hemodynamic monitoring
to positively affect outcome: (1) the results obtained must be of
clinical relevance to the patient; (2) the obtained data must be suf-
ficiently accurate and precise to trigger a therapeutic intervention;
and (3) the therapeutic intervention must improve outcome. If the
information obtained is inaccurate, or interpreted or applied incor-
rectly, the resultant intervention is unlikely to improve the patient’s
condition and may potentially be detrimental [3,13].
The choice of monitoring system depends on the patient (species
and size) and often on the devices and expertise available at a spe-
cific hospital or institution. The expertise and familiarity of the
operator represents a critical factor in obtaining reliable results with
many cardiac output monitoring devices. A typical example of high
operator dependency is represented by echocardiography com-
pared to other automatic devices that consistently produce results
with low interoperator variability [13].
As with any other monitored parameter, it is critical to integrate
cardiac output data with other physiologic variables from multiple
sources. The patient’s blood pressure is important complementary
information. A low cardiac output in a hypotensive patient will
likely indicate hypovolemia or decreased cardiac function, whereas
a high cardiac output in a hypotensive patient would suggest
decreased systemic vascular resistance [12].
In the clinical setting, cardiac output is estimated, not meas-
ured [16]. The only technique that allows its user to directly meas-
ure cardiac output is electromagnetic flowmetry, which requires the
surgical implantation of a flow probe circumferentially on the main
pulmonary artery. This technique is considered the gold standard
in the research setting, but it is, for obvious reasons, impractical for
clinical applications [17]. All values from bedside techniques are
estimates of cardiac output based on assumptions and algorithms.
Because of this estimation, comparison of results from different
techniques often produces relatively poor agreement and signifi-
cant bias [16]. In humans, the invasive pulmonary artery catheter
(PAC) thermodilution technique is generally considered as the “ref-
erence” standard for clinical purposes but has its own limita-
tions [8]. A measurement obtained by a less invasive technique may
be preferable if it can be obtained more rapidly and easily, even if it
is slightly less accurate. In veterinary medicine, an example of this is
the utilization of the lithium dilution cardiac output technique as a
suitable reference method in horses for comparison of other cardiac
output monitoring devices [15,18–20].
Non-invasiveness of the technique should not be the priority.
Although obviously preferable, being non-invasive is not always
possible and may even be counterproductive. For instance, the real
advantage of echocardiography over other cardiac output tech-
niques is not its non-invasiveness but the peculiarity of providing a
direct evaluation of cardiac function [21,22]. A completely non-
invasive technique such as bioimpedance, despite reliability in
healthy human individuals, has proved inconsistent when applied
to critically ill patients or when used in other species [13,23].
History of cardiac output measurement
The first technique for calculation of cardiac output was described
by Adolph Fick in 1870. Fick described the calculation of cardiac
output from the measurement of the oxygen content of arterial and
mixed venous blood as well as oxygen consumption [24]. The Fick
technique requires catheterization of the pulmonary artery for
mixed venous blood sampling. This was first performed experi-
mentally in live dogs in 1886 by Grehant and Quinquaud [25], and
then by Zuntz and Hagemann in a horse in 1898 [26]. Its clinical use
in humans did not occur for almost another 50 years. Measurement
of oxygen consumption has always represented a significant chal-
lenge, and this remains a major limitation of the Fick technique [27].
For this reason, the use of estimates of oxygen consumption was
introduced, and the method was referred to as the “modified Fick
technique.” The Fick technique became the standard for the meas-
urement of cardiac output until the development of dye dilution
techniques.
The dye dilution technique of cardiac output determination is
based on the independent work of Stewart and Hamilton in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries [28]. The equation they
derived allowed for the estimation of cardiac output by knowing the
amount of an injected indicator and calculating the area under its
dilution curve measured downstream. Dye dilution techniques
were repeatedly shown to be as reliable as the Fick technique and of
better suitability in the clinical setting [29–31]. Thus, dye dilution
rapidly became the “accepted method of reference” for cardiac out-
put measurement [32].
Thermodilution, first described by Fegler in 1954, uses heat as an
indicator and relies on the same principles of dye dilution [33]. The
landmark article on right heart catheterization with a balloon-
tipped catheter by Swan et al. in 1970 [34] finally set the stage for
Table 13.1 Examples of typical cardiac output indices reported in veterinary species.
Species 	Stroke volume
index (mL/kg/beat)
Heart rate
(beats/min)
Cardiac index
(mL/min/kg)
Cat 	0.90–1.0 	180 	160–180
Cattle 	0.7–0.8 	60 	35–50
Dog 	1.6–1.9 	120 	190–230
Goat 	1.1–1.3 	80 	85–100
Horse 	2.6–3.0 	45 	115–135
Mouse 	1.5–1.8 	400 	600–720
Rabbit 	0.4–0.6 	250 	100–150
Rat 	1–1.2 	300 	300–360
Sheep 	0.7–0.9 	80 	55–70
Swine 	1.2–1.4 	100 	120–140

-- 227 of 1450 --

212 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
the widespread clinical use of cardiac output monitoring [35]. Since
then, the accuracy of thermodilution-based cardiac output meas-
urements has been assessed by hundreds of studies. Interestingly, all
of these studies share a common major limitation – the lack of a
gold standard for comparison. Over time, PAC-based thermodilu-
tion showed good agreement with direct Fick calculations and dye
dilution techniques in a wide range of clinical conditions, and this,
combined with the relative ease of insertion of PACs in humans, has
made this technique the clinical “gold standard” for comparison for
all new cardiac output monitors [32,36,37].
Despite the widespread use of PAC thermodilution, many
studies have questioned the effectiveness and safety of this
technology [38–43]. This has driven the recent interest in the
development of alternative technologies that can measure cardiac
output less invasively [44–46].
Techniques of determination
of cardiac output
The development and validation of new technologies to measure
cardiac output has potential applications in both veterinary clinical
and research settings. Many of the techniques described in this
chapter are currently in use or will eventually be suitable for use in
veterinary medicine.
The Fick principle
Cardiac output can be elegantly estimated by using the Fick princi-
ple. The technique is based on the law of conservation of mass [27].
The principle states that over a given time period, the quantity of O2
or CO2 entering or leaving the lungs is equal to the quantity of the
gas taken up or expelled by the blood flowing in the pulmonary
circulation. In mathematical terms, the Fick principle-derived
cardiac output equals the patient’s oxygen uptake (VO2
) divided by
the difference between arterial and mixed venous oxygen content
(CaO 2 – CvO2
) [47]:
Cardiac output VO
CaO 	CvO
2
2 	2
This relationship is true only in the absence of any cardiopulmo-
nary shunting [47]. Determining cardiac output using the “direct
Fick method” requires catheterization of both a peripheral artery
and the main pulmonary artery for arterial and mixed venous blood
sampling, respectively [27]. The measurement of VO 2 also requires
accurate collection and analysis of exhaled gases or determination
via closed-circuit techniques. The measurement of VO2 is the most
problematic step of the direct Fick method that has ultimately lim-
ited its use for clinical purposes [47].
Indirect techniques based on the Fick principle (also known as
the “partial rebreathing technique”) have been developed to elimi-
nate the need for pulmonary artery catheterization and invasive
blood gas sampling. The technique utilizes elimination of carbon
dioxide (CO 2 ) rather than uptake of oxygen [48] and involves inter-
mittent periods of partial rebreathing to allow minimally invasive
estimation of arterial and mixed venous CO 2 content. The monitor
consists of a carbon dioxide sensor, a disposable airflow sensor con-
nected to a closed loop system, and a pulse oximeter. Arterial and
mixed venous CO 2 content is estimated from measurements of end-
tidal CO2 partial pressure (PET
CO2
) during normal breathing and
rebreathing maneuvers. VCO 2 is calculated from minute ventilation
and its carbon dioxide content. The arterial carbon dioxide content
(CaCO 2 ) is estimated from end-tidal carbon dioxide during periods
of ventilation. Intermittent phases of partial rebreathing allow
estimation of mixed venous CO 2 partial pressure (PvCO2 ), from
which CO2 content (CvCO2
) is calculated. As the patient rebreathes,
the level of PET
CO2 rises to a plateau corresponding to the partial
pressure of CO 2 in the blood entering the lungs (or mixed venous
blood). At this equilibrium point, the CO 2 elimination from the
lungs approaches zero, and the partial pressure of CO2 in the end-
pulmonary capillary blood (mixed venous blood) can be assumed
equal to PET
CO2 [49].
Each cardiac output determination requires about 4 min. Every
3 min, a rebreathing valve that prevents normal volumes of CO2
from being eliminated is activated, and the patient’s inhaled and
exhaled gases are diverted through the loop for 50 s [48]. As a result,
the elimination of CO2 drops and the concentration of CO2 in the
pulmonary artery increases. It is assumed that cardiac output
remains unchanged under normal (N) and rebreathing conditions
(R). To compensate for the presence of shunted blood, cardiopulmo-
nary shunting is estimated by use of pulse oximetry and FiO2 [49].
The general equation that forms the basis of this technique is:
Cardiac output VCO N 	VCO R
CvCO N CaCO N 	CvCO R 	CaCO R
2 	2
2 	2 	2 	2
where VCO2
, CvCO2
, and CaCO2 are CO2 consumption, mixed
venous CO2 content, and arterial CO 2 content, respectively.
Because the diffusion rate of carbon dioxide is 20 times higher
than that of oxygen, it is assumed that no difference in venous CO2
(CvCO2 ) will occur, whether under normal or rebreathing condi-
tions. Hence, the above equation is simplified as:
Cardiac output VCO N 	VCO R
CaCO N CaCO R
2 	2
2 	2
The partial CO 2 rebreathing (indirect Fick) technique for cardiac
output estimation has shown sufficient reliability for clinical appli-
cation in adult and pediatric human patients [50–52]; however, its
accuracy in critical patients has been questioned [53]. One such
device (the NICO® monitor, Novametrix Medical Systems) has been
tested in veterinary species including dogs and horses, but more
modern technologies are available [53–55]. The need for endotra-
cheal intubation and mechanical ventilation limits the use of this
device to the intraoperative period. Furthermore, the need for con-
stant CO2 elimination precludes use during spontaneous breathing
in small animals due to tidal volume variability [55]. In validation
studies in humans and in dogs, a tidal volume of 12 mL/kg pro-
duced cardiac output determinations that correlated well with
measurements obtained by both thermodilution and lithium dilu-
tion techniques [55,56].
Pulmonary artery catheter thermodilution
The traditional intermittent thermodilution technique uses a bolus
of ice-cold sterile saline as an indicator that is injected into the right
atrium via a PAC (Swan-Ganz catheter). The change over time in
temperature of the blood in the main pulmonary artery is then used
to calculate cardiac output [36].
A saline bolus of known volume and temperature is injected into
the right atrium via the proximal port of a Swan-Ganz cathe-
ter [57,58]. The saline solution can be cooled in ice or injected at
room temperature and can be administered in a volume of either

-- 228 of 1450 --

Chapter 13: Cardiac Output Measurement 	213
5 or 10 mL. As a general rule, higher volumes and lower tempera-
tures produce the most accurate results. The saline mixes with the
blood as it passes through the right ventricle and the pulmonary
artery, thus decreasing the temperature of the blood. The blood tem-
perature changes are detected by a thermistor at the distal end of the
catheter, which lies within the main pulmonary artery, and a com-
puter acquires the thermodilution curve over time (Fig. 13.1) [33].
The cardiac output computer then calculates flow (cardiac output
from the right ventricle) using the acquired blood temperature
information, and the starting temperature and volume of the injected
saline bolus. The injection is normally repeated at least twice and the
measurements averaged. Because cardiac output changes during the
respiratory cycle, it is important to inject the saline during a consist-
ent phase of respiration; conventionally, this is done at the end of
expiration [37].
As with all of the indicator-dilution methods, the measurement
of thermodilution cardiac output is based on the Stewart–Hamilton
equation:
Cardiac output Volume of indicator 	Temp 	Temp	patient 	indicator
Temp dt
The denominator in the formula is a mathematical integration
defined by the integral sign ∫, while ΔTemp is the gradient in tem-
perature and represents the integral in the function. dt indicates
that time (t) is the variable of integration. The domain of the
integration is from t = 0 to t = ∞. The function is then defined as
the area under the curve bounded by the graph of ΔTemp, the time
axis, and the vertical lines t = 0 and x = ∞. The temperature curve
does not actually return to baseline because of recirculation;
the computer accounts for this in the calculation of the area
under the curve by extrapolating the projected return to baseline
of the temperature.
Cardiac output is inversely proportional to ∫ΔTemp dt; therefore,
when cardiac output is high, the indicator crosses the temperature
sensor quickly, producing a small area under the ΔTemp curve.
Conversely, when cardiac output is low, the bolus of cold saline dif-
fuses in the right ventricle and pulmonary artery over a relatively
long time, causing the area under the temperature versus time curve
to be larger (Fig. 13.2).
A modification of the original Swan-Ganz catheter includes a
proximal thermal coil to warm blood in the cranial vena cava. The
changes in blood temperature are then detected at the PAC’s distal
end using a thermistor. This method allows the continuous estima-
tion of cardiac output, with the displayed values representing the
average value of repeated determinations over the previous
10 min [58,59]. The use of averaged values of cardiac output cor-
rects the inaccuracy of thermodilution associated with possible
arrhythmias. The main disadvantage of this method is not being
able to produce real-time values, thus limiting its usefulness in rap-
idly recognizing cardiac output changes in hemodynamically
unstable patients.
Pulmonary artery catheterization allows simultaneous meas-
urements of other hemodynamic parameters in addition to car-
diac output, including pulmonary artery pressures, right-sided
and left-sided filling pressures, and mixed venous oxygen satura-
tion (SvO 2 ) [37].
There are some important sources of error with thermodilution
measurements that must be considered. If the volume injected is
lower than that entered into the computer, the detected area under
the curve (AUC) will be artificially small and the calculated cardiac
output will be falsely high. Further, if the temperature of the injected
saline is colder than expected (e.g., using iced rather than room
temperature saline), the temperature change will be artificially large
and the estimated cardiac output will be erroneously low [38].
Significant complications have been associated with the use of
PACs, and several reports have described the intrinsic risk of mor-
bidity and mortality [39–43]. The “PAC Man” study in human
patients recorded complications in 10% of insertions. The most
common complications were arrhythmias, heart block, rupture of
the right heart or pulmonary artery, thromboembolism, pulmonary
infarction, valvular damage, and endocarditis. Similar endocardial
and valvular lesions were also described in horses following PAC
placement [60]. Therefore, the use of the PAC should be restricted
only to selected patients where the benefit of its use may substan-
tially outweigh the risks. Current recommendations in humans
limit the use of PACs to patients with severe right ventricular failure
Temperature
Baseline
temperature
Extrapolated
temperature
curve
Area under
the curve
Actual
temperature
Time
Figure 13.1 Graphical representation of the dilution curve for pulmonary
artery catheter (PAC) thermodilution-derived cardiac output.
Normal cardiac output
AUC
AUC
AUC
(A)
(B)
(C)
High cardiac output
Low cardiac output
Figure 13.2 Graphical representation of cardiac output thermodilution
curves. A. Normal cardiac output. B. High cardiac output. C. Low cardiac
output. Note the inverse relationship between the area under the curve
(AUC) and cardiac output.

-- 229 of 1450 --

214 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
and those requiring intensive monitoring of pulmonary vascular
resistance during vasodilator therapy. Moreover, the use of PACs
and PAC thermodilution necessitate appropriate training as place-
ment errors and misinterpretation of data are common.
In veterinary patients, there is limited experience with clinical
use of PACs and PAC thermodilution, and the technique has been
largely limited to research settings [61–64]. This is mainly due to
the invasiveness and the difficulty of placing and maintaining the
catheter in the appropriate location. In addition, the PACs available
on the market are specifically sized and designed for use in humans
and, as such, are often inadequate for direct use in other species due
to morphological differences. In small dogs (less than 5 kg) and
cats, for example, a standard PAC designed for adult human use
advanced into the main pulmonary artery would likely have the
proximal port located in the jugular vein. The injection of the indi-
cator in this location, rather than in the right atrium, will create loss
and delayed mixing with significant error in the estimation of car-
diac output. The opposite scenario occurs in horses where adult
human PACs are too short. The proximal opening would then be
located in the right ventricle, instead of its proper place in the right
atrium, significantly altering the estimation of cardiac output.
However, pediatric human PACS and custom-designed PACs of
appropriate size for various veterinary species have been used for
research purposes.
Transpulmonary thermodilution and ultrasound
indicator dilution
The basic principles of PAC thermodilution also apply to newer car-
diac output monitoring systems that do not require the use of an
actual pulmonary arterial catheter. Examples of these systems are
the PiCCO® (Pulsion Medical Systems) and COstatus® (Transonic;
no longer commercially available) that allow cardiac output to be
estimated using central venous and arterial catheters only [65,66].
The Stewart–Hamilton equation is still the basis for estimating car-
diac output using these systems. The PiCCO® system is based on
transpulmonary thermodilution for cardiac output determination
and requires dedicated femoral artery access for measurements.
PiCCO® estimates cardiac output using central venous injections of
ice-cold intravenous fluid as an indicator and measuring the
changes over time in temperature by an arterial thermistor-tipped
catheter placed in the femoral artery [65].
The COstatus® monitor is no longer manufactured but is a sys-
tem that is still utilized in the scientific literature [66]. This moni-
tor estimates cardiac output by using ultrasound technology to
measure changes in the ultrasound velocity of blood following an
injection of a small saline bolus (0.5–1 mL/kg) warmed to body
temperature (37 °C). To obtain measurements, a roller pump cir-
culates blood through a disposable extracorporeal arteriovenous
(AV) loop interposed between the peripheral arterial catheter and
the distal lumen of the central venous catheter. Two reusable sen-
sors that measure changes in blood ultrasound velocity and blood
flow in the AV loop are clamped onto the arterial and venous limbs
of the loop. The venous sensor detects the injection of saline and
records the time and volume of injection. The arterial sensor then
measures the changes in concentration of saline in the blood as
a dilution and records the indicator travel time through the
cardiopulmonary system. Stroke volume is then derived from the
dilution curves obtained [67].
The agreement of cardiac output values measured using transpul-
monary and ultrasound indicator-dilution techniques with those
measured using PAC thermodilution was shown to be adequate for
clinical use in humans [68–71]. Moreover, both technologies pro-
vide volumetric variables in addition to cardiac output, such as
global end-diastolic volume and measurements of extravascular
lung water. These variables have been utilized as indicators of fluid
responsiveness with promising results [72,73].
PiCCO® and COstatus® appear significantly more practical and
user-friendly than PAC thermodilution. In addition, they do not
require any specific customization for use in veterinary species.
COstatus® has been shown to be accurate and safe in very small
patients [70]. All of these factors may allow a wider use of these
systems in veterinary medicine, especially in small animals, when
compared to PAC thermodilution [74,75].
Lithium dilution
The lithium dilution technique is an example of dye dilution cardiac
output monitoring, based on intravascular injection of a minute
amount of an isotonic lithium chloride (0.002–0.004 mmol/kg) solu-
tion used as an indicator [76]. These lithium doses are too small to
exert any pharmacological or toxic effects. The lithium concentra-
tion in the blood is derived by a lithium-selective electrode con-
nected to a peripheral arterial catheter. An advantage of the lithium
indicator-dilution cardiac output technique is that no central venous
line is necessary for the injection of the indicator, which can be given
via a regular peripheral line [77]. The lithium concentration over
time curve is recorded by withdrawing blood (4.5 mL/min) through
a special disposable sensor, attached to the patient’s arterial line. The
voltage signal across the lithium-selective membrane is converted to
a lithium concentration by a computer. Cardiac output is then calcu-
lated according to the following equation [76]:
Cardiac output LiCl
AUC 	PCV
60
1
In this equation, LiCl is the lithium chloride dose expressed in
mmol, AUC is the area under the primary dilution curve, and PCV
is the packed cell volume. A correction for PCV is necessary to
transform plasma flow into total blood flow because lithium is dis-
tributed only in the plasma. The lithium dilution technique has
been shown to be at least as accurate as PAC thermodilution, but
with the advantages of being simple to set up and operate. In addi-
tion, the system conveniently uses catheters likely to be already in
place in a critically ill patient. The system requires some familiarity
to set up but is relatively quick and user-friendly. Similar to ther-
modilution, the lithium dilution technique performs poorly in the
presence of tachyarrhythmias [76].
The LiDCO™ system (Masimo Corporation) has now become
widely used in veterinary medicine in both clinical and research
settings. Good agreement with PAC thermodilution was demon-
strated in dogs, cats, and horses, with the advantage of being less
invasive, less expensive, and more user-friendly [78–81]. In pigs,
lithium dilution performed even better than PAC thermodilution
when compared to electromagnetic flowmetry. In this study, car-
diac output measured by lithium dilution, using a central venous
catheter for injection, showed better agreement with electromag-
netic flowmetry than PAC thermodilution [82]. Notably, although
correlation studies of the LiDCO™ system with electromagnetic
flowmetry (direct measurement of cardiac output) are lacking in
many veterinary species, LiDCO™ is often arbitrarily used in
research settings as a reference for comparison of other cardiac out-
put monitoring systems [15,18–20,83,84]. This approach may
potentially lead to inaccurate conclusions.

-- 230 of 1450 --

Chapter 13: Cardiac Output Measurement 	215
The main disadvantage of lithium dilution is the blood loss
associated with withdrawal of arterial blood for the determination
of lithium concentration. Although the loss associated with a single
measurement is minimal, sampling-induced reductions in blood
volume should be considered when multiple determinations are
made in small animal patients.
Arterial waveform analysis
Arterial pressure waveform analysis allows the continuous determi-
nation of cardiac output [85]. In addition to the intermittent dilu-
tion cardiac output measurement discussed above, the PiCCO® and
LiDCO™ systems are also integrated with arterial pressure wave-
form analysis functions [59,86]. PiCCO® uses arterial pulse contour
analysis, whereas LiDCO™ uses pulse power analysis for the beat-
to- beat estimation of cardiac output [87]. Both methods require
calibration before measurement of cardiac output based on the
assumption that stroke volume is equal to the sum of systolic and
diastolic flows, which are proportional to systolic and diastolic
areas in the arterial pressure waveform (Fig. 13.3). The PiCCO® sys-
tem uses transpulmonary thermodilution for the calibration proce-
dure, whereas LiDCO™ is calibrated using lithium dilution [88].
Repeated calibrations of the arterial pulse contour analysis systems
are required in order to obtain adequate estimations of cardiac out-
put. Recalibration is also needed whenever there is a change in
vasomotor tone or any other significant change in the patient’s clin-
ical condition [89,90].
Other cardiac output devices based on arterial waveform analy-
sis, such as the FloTrac (Edwards Lifesciences), are available. These
devices reportedly do not require baseline calibration and calculate
SV empirically [91]. However, the accuracy and precision of these
methods have been questioned by many investigators [90,92].
Moreover, arterial pulse contour analysis is highly prone to techni-
cal difficulties related to damping and resonance within the meas-
urement system [93]. For these reasons, further investigation of
arterial waveform analysis techniques in different species and
clinical scenarios is needed to define indications and recommen-
dations for clinical use.
Echocardiography and echo-Doppler
Cardiac output can be determined with echocardiography using
non-Doppler or Doppler-based methods [94,95]. A great advantage
of echocardiography over other monitoring techniques is the large
amount of hemodynamic information obtained beyond just cardiac
output. Cardiac contractility and chamber filling can be rapidly
assessed, and valves and pericardium can be directly visualized [21].
Non-Doppler techniques are based on approximate volumetric
reconstructions of the left ventricular chamber. The most common
method is based on Simpson’s rule, wherein the left ventricle is
divided into a series of disks stacked from base to apex. Two orthog-
onal planes are needed to construct the disks, and left ventricular
volume is calculated by summing the approximated volumes of the
individual disks. SV is calculated by determining the difference in
volume between diastole and systole [94]. The time-consuming
nature of the non-Doppler technique can make cardiac output esti-
mation inadequate for a rapid assessment in emergency situations.
Difficulty with endocardial border definition also can produce
largely inaccurate results. For these reasons, non-Doppler tech-
niques are rarely used for clinical purposes.
When an ultrasound beam is directed along the aorta, part of the
ultrasound signal is reflected back by red blood cells moving at a dif-
ferent frequency. The resultant shift in the signal’s frequency, referred
to as the “Doppler effect,” is used to determine the flow velocity. This
represents the basic principle behind echo-Doppler cardiac output
determination. Echo-Doppler cardiac output monitoring may be
performed either transthoracically or transesophageally [96,97].
The determination of cardiac output begins with measurement
of the cross-sectional area (CSA) of the left ventricular outflow tract
(LVOT). The reason for choosing this location is that the cross sec-
tion of the LVOT is essentially a circle and its area can be easily
determined as πr2 . CSA can also be more accurately measured by
tracing the boundary of the LVOT (Fig. 13.4A).
Following the CSA determination, a sample volume for pulsed
wave Doppler is placed at the location where area was determined.
In small animals, the subcostal echocardiographic view is recom-
mended for this assessment. Subcostal views of the heart can be
obtained with the patient in right- or left-sided recumbency and are
relatively easy to obtain. These views usually are three- or four-
chambered (left ventricle, portions of the right ventricle or atrium,
portions of the left atrium, and LVOT with aorta) and allow the
operator to obtain near perfect parallel alignment of the Doppler
cursor with the LVOT. The pulsed wave Doppler window can be
placed just below the aortic valve plane, and this view provides
good flow tracings and accurate measurements. A profile of velocity
over time is generated by this Doppler interrogation using the fol-
lowing formula:
V f c
f i
d
cos	2
where V is the erythrocyte velocity, fd is the Doppler shift, c repre-
sents the velocity of the ultrasound wave, fi is the ultrasound fre-
quency, and θ is the angle at which the ultrasound waves penetrate
the vessel.
The tracing of the boundary of the velocity profile allows for the
determination of its integral over time. The velocity time integral
SV = k × Pmd (A systole/Adiastole +1)
Pmd (end-systolic mean distending pressure)
Time
Pressure
Asystole
Adiastole
Figure 13.3 Arterial waveform analysis. Components of the arterial
waveform used in the “area under the curve” method. Stroke volume
(SV) is the sum of systolic and diastolic flows, which are proportional to
their respective areas (Asystole and Adiastole
) under the arterial pressure curve.
Pmd is the increment in mean arterial pressure at the end of systole and is
used for calculating diastolic flow; k is the calibration factor and is
measured by calibrating against a known stroke volume, for example using
transpulmonary thermodilution. Once k is known, beat-to- beat
stroke volume can be calculated.

-- 231 of 1450 --

216 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
(VTI) essentially represents the distance that blood travels during
one beat and is referred to as “stroke distance.” Multiplying VTI by
the cross-sectional area (CSA) of the LVOT yields SV; this multi-
plied by heart rate (HR) determines cardiac output (Fig. 13.4B):
Cardiac output 	HR CSA VTI
This technique requires knowledge and skills to avoid pitfalls
and to recognize inaccurate results [98]. Overall, Doppler-based
cardiac output determination appears to be an acceptable alterna-
tive to thermodilution for clinical purposes, if performed cor-
rectly [99,100]. Important factors that can significantly affect
accuracy are image quality, sample site, angle of insonation, the
velocity signal-to- noise ratio, the possibility of measuring the diam-
eter of the LVOT, and the shape of the aortic valve.
A described complication associated with the use of esophageal
probes is esophageal injury. Transesophageal echocardiography
probes are large and generate a certain degree of heat and, thus, are
not suited for continuous cardiac output assessment; additionally,
small patient size may limit probe placement [101,102].
In the past, echocardiography instrumentation and expertise
were rarely available to veterinary anesthesiologists and were solely
the domain of veterinary cardiologists. With the increasing availa-
bility of portable patient-side ultrasonography and point-of-care
ultrasound, such limitations no longer exist (see Chapter 18). There
is significant evidence supporting the accuracy and practical appli-
cability of echocardiography for cardiac output determination in
many veterinary species, which will likely result in a wider array of
use for clinical purposes [103–106].
Thoracic bioimpedance and bioreactance
Bioimpedance uses changes in conductivity of a high-frequency,
low-magnitude alternating current passing across the thorax to
derive SV [107]. The changes in electrical conductivity are pro-
duced by variations in intrathoracic blood flow during each cardiac
cycle. A series of ECG-type electrodes are placed on the thorax
and neck. A small, non-painful current is passed between the
electrodes and the changes in voltage, also termed “bioimpedance,”
is measured. The value of bioimpedance is converted to SV using
mathematical algorithms. Several patented algorithms based
on different mathematical models of the thorax have been
described [108,109]. Stroke volume (SV) is generally calculated
using the following formula:
Stroke volume d
d
L
Z
Z
t VET
2
0
2
max
where ρ is the resistivity of blood, L is the mean distance between the
inner electrodes (the thoracic length), VET is the ventricular ejec-
tion time, (dZ/dt)max is the maximum value of the first derivative
during systole, and Z0 is the basal thoracic impedance. Bioimpedance
provides real-time estimation of SV and cardiac output, along with
measures of thoracic fluid content, left ventricular ejection time, sys-
temic vascular resistance, and left cardiac work index [108].
Bioreactance has been developed from the bioimpedance tech-
nique but measures changes in frequency of electrical currents,
rather than voltage, potentially making it less prone to noise-
derived errors [110]. Both techniques are non-invasive and can be
applied quickly. However, the biggest concern with these techniques
is the accuracy and precision of the measurements. Physiological
studies in healthy humans showed good reliability of the results, but
this was not consistent in critically ill patients, particularly in the
presence of pulmonary edema and/or pleural effusion. In addition,
electrical interference may also occur from other anesthesia moni-
toring devices connected to the patient [111–113].
Little or no evidence exists on the accuracy and reliability of
these techniques in veterinary species [114,115]. Therefore, bioim-
pedance and bioreactance cardiac output determination should not
be considered as a valid and reproducible method at present. A
shortcoming of both bioimpedance and bioreactance mathematical
models is the approximation of the shape of the chest as a cylinder
or a cone for stroke volume determination. These represent over-
simplifications of the electrical events occurring inside the thorax
during the cardiac cycle and are sources of technique inaccuracy. It
seems unlikely that the algorithms designed for human patients
would be sufficiently accurate for use in various veterinary species.
(A)
(B)
Figure 13.4 Transthoracic echo-Doppler estimation of cardiac output in a
27-kg dog. A. Short axis view for determination of cross-sectional area
(CSA) of the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT). The dotted white line
represents the tracing of the boundary of the LVOT. LA, left atrium. B.
Transhepatic view of the LVOT. A pulsed wave Doppler window is placed
just below the aortic valve plane to obtain flow tracings and calculation of
the velocity time integral (VTI) of the LVOT. HR, heart rate. Cardiac
output is calculated as the product of the VTI times CSA times HR. This
patient’s estimated cardiac output is 5.792 L/min.

-- 232 of 1450 --

Chapter 13: Cardiac Output Measurement 	217
Standard capnography as an indicator of cardiac
output
A simple and practical indicator of cardiac output in any anesthe-
tized patient is end-tidal carbon dioxide (PET
CO2
) measured by cap-
nography. PET
CO2 is determined by CO2 production (VCO2 ),
alveolar ventilation, and pulmonary perfusion. Assuming stable
conditions of patient minute ventilation and body temperature, and
in absence of airway obstruction or extra-metabolic sources of CO 2
(e.g., laparoscopic surgery or sodium bicarbonate administration),
a sudden change in PET
CO2 has been shown to reflect a proportional
alteration in cardiac output [116,117]. Studies on preload optimiza-
tion have demonstrated that percentage changes in PET
CO2 induced
by intravascular volume expansion linearly reflect percentage
increases in cardiac output [118].
In practical terms, the simultaneous decrease in systemic blood
pressure and PET
CO2 in an anesthetized patient (with constant min-
ute ventilation) may reflect a primary reduction in cardiac output.
In such conditions, if sinus rhythm and normal HR are confirmed,
therapeutic interventions should focus on optimization of preload
and myocardial contractility to support SV.
In contrast, a decrease in blood pressure with no reduction in
PET
CO2 suggests a decrease in systemic vascular resistances rather
than a decrease in cardiac output, indicating that vasopressor ther-
apy is the most appropriate intervention to correct the
hypotension.
In clinical scenarios of drastically decreased blood flow such as
hemorrhagic shock or impending cardiac arrest, the correlation
between changes in PET
CO2 and cardiac output is no longer linear.
In cases where oxygen consumption becomes supply dependent
(critical O2 delivery), the drop in PET
CO2 is also accompanied by a
decrease in VCO2 . In dogs, it was demonstrated that the relation-
ship between percentage changes in PET
CO2 and cardiac output
during hemorrhagic shock is best determined by the following log-
arithmic function:
y 	x	3 3617 	31 854	. 	ln 	.
where y represents cardiac index (mL/min/kg) and x represents
PET
CO2 (mmHg). This implies that the greatest decrease in PET
CO2
occurs at the lowest cardiac output [119].
References
1 Hall JE, Hall ME. Cardiac output, venous return, and their regulation. In: Hall JE,
Hall ME, eds. Guyton and Hall Textbook of Medical Physiology, 14th edn.
Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier, 2021: 245–258.
2 Della Rocca G, Pompei L. Goal-directed therapy in anesthesia: any clinical impact
or just a fashion? Minerva Anestesiol 2011; 77(5): 545–553.
3 Ospina- Tascon GA, Cordioli RL, Vincent JL. What type of monitoring has been
shown to improve outcomes in acutely ill patients? Intensive Care Med 2008; 34:
800–820.
4 Kehlet H, Bundgaard-Nielsen M. Goal-directed perioperative fluid management:
why, when, and how? Anesthesiol 2009; 110: 453–455.
5 Pinsky MR. Why measure cardiac output? Crit Care 2003; 7(2): 114–116.
6 Pinsky MR. Hemodynamic evaluation and monitoring in the ICU. Chest 2007; 132:
2020–2029.
7 Bilovski RN, Rivers EP, Horst HM. Targeted resuscitation strategies after injury.
Curr Opin Crit Care 2004; 10: 529–538.
8 Monnet X, Lai C. Which haemodynamic monitoring should we choose for criti-
cally ill patients with acute circulatory failure? Curr Opin Crit Care 2023; 29(3):
275–280.
9 Rex S, Brose S, Metzelder S, et al. Prediction of fluid responsiveness in patients dur-
ing cardiac surgery. Br J Anaesth 2004; 93: 782–788.
10 Reuter DA, Geopfert MS, Goresch T, et al. Assessing fluid responsiveness during
open chest conditions. Br J Anaesth 2005; 94: 318–323.
11 García X, Mateu L, Maynar J, et al. Estimating cardiac output. Utility in the clinical
practice. Available invasive and non-invasive monitoring. Med Intensiva 2011;
35(9): 552–561.
12 Pinsky MR, Payen D. Functional hemodynamic monitoring. Crit Care 2005; 9:
566–572.
13 Vincent JL, Rhodes A, Perel A, et al. Clinical review: update on hemodynamic
monitoring – a consensus of 16. Critical Care 2011; 15: 229.
14 Geerts BF, Aarts LP, Jansen JR. Methods in pharmacology: measurement of cardiac
output. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2011; 71(3): 316–330.
15 Corley KTT, Donaldson LL, Durando MM, et al. Cardiac output technologies with
special reference to the horse. J Vet Intern Med 2003; 17: 262–272.
16 Pugsley J, Lerner AB. Cardiac output monitoring: is there a gold standard and how do
the newer technologies compare? Semin Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2010; 14: 274–282.
17 Tabrizchi R, Iida N. Electromagnetic blood flow measurements. In: Moore J,
Zouridakis G, eds. Biomedical Technology and Devices Handbook. New York, NY:
CRC Press LLC, 2003.
18 Shih A, Giguère S, Sanchez LC, et al. Determination of cardiac output in neonatal
foals by ultrasound velocity dilution and its comparison to the lithium dilution
method. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2009; 19(5): 438–443.
19 Valverde A, Giguère S, Morey TE, et al. Comparison of noninvasive cardiac output
measured by use of partial carbon dioxide rebreathing or the lithium dilution
method in anesthetized foals. Am J Vet Res 2007; 68(2): 141–147.
20 Shih AC. Cardiac monitoring in horses. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 2019;
35(1): 205–215.
21 Mantovani MM, Fantoni DR, Gimenes AM, et al. Clinical monitoring of cardiac
output assessed by transoesophageal echocardiography in anaesthetized dogs: a
comparison with the thermodilution technique. BMC Vet Res 2017; 13(1): 325.
22 Rozental O, Thalappillil R, White RS, et al. To Swan or not to Swan: indications, alter-
natives, and future directions. J Cardiothoracic Vasc Anesth 2021; 35(2): 600–615.
23 Silver MA, Cianci P, Brennan S, et al. Evaluation of impedance cardiography as an
alternative to pulmonary artery catheterization in critically ill patients. Congest
Heart Fail 2004; 10: 17–21.
24 Fick A. Ueber die Messung des Blutquantums in den Herzventrikeln. Sitzber Physik
Med Ges Wurzburg 1870; 36(2): 290–291.
25 Grehant H, Quinquaud CE. Recherches experimentales sur la mesure du volume de
sang qui traverse les poumons en un temps donne. Compt Rend Sci Soc Biol 1886;
30: 159.
26 Zuntz N, Hagemann O. Untersuchungen uber den Stoffwechsel des Pferdes bei Ruhe
und Arbeit. Landwirtschaftl Jahrb Z Wiss Land-wirtschaft 1898; 27(3): 1–450.
27 Laszlo G. Respiratory measurements of cardiac output: from elegant idea to useful
test. J Appl Physiol 2004; 96: 428–437.
28 Stewart GN. Researches on the circulation time and on the influences which affect
it. IV. The output of the heart. Physiol 1897; 22: 159–183.
29 Hamilton WF, Riley RL, Attyah AM, et al. Comparison of the Fick and dye injection
methods of measuring the cardiac output in man. Amer J Physiol 1948; 153: 309.
30 Werko L, Lagexlof H, Bucht H, et al. Comparison of Fick and Hamilton methods
for determination of cardiac output in man. Scand J Clin Lab Invest 1949; 1: 109.
31 Miller DE, Gleason WL, McIntosh HD. A comparison of the cardiac output deter-
mination by the Fick method and dye dilution method using indocyanine green
dye and a cuvette densitometer. J Lab Clin Med 1962; 59: 345.
32 Venkataraman K, De Guzman MF, Khan AH. Cardiac output measurement: a com-
parison of direct Fick, dye dilution and thermodilution methods in stable and
acutely ill patients. J Nation Med Assoc 1976; 68(4): 281–284.
33 Fegler G. Measurement of cardiac output in anesthetized animals by a thermodilu-
tion method. Quart J Exp Physiol 1954; 39: 153.
34 Swan HJ, Ganz W, Forrester J, et al. Catheterization of the heart in man with use of
a flow-directed balloon-tipped catheter. N Engl J Med 1970; 283: 447–453.
35 Ganz W, Donoso R, Marcus HS, et al. A new technique for measurement of cardiac
output by thermodilution in man. Am J Cardiol 1971; 27: 392–396.
36 Weisel RD, Berger RL, Hectman HB. Measurement of cardiac output by thermodi-
lution. N Engl J Med 1975; 292: 682.
37 Reuter DA, Huang C, Edrich T, et al. Cardiac output monitoring using indicator-dilution
techniques: basics, limits, and perspectives. Anesth Analg 2010; 110(3): 799–811.
38 Tournadre JP, Chassard D, Muchada R. Overestimation of low cardiac output meas-
ured by thermodilution. Brit J Anaesth 1997; 79: 514–516.
39 Harvey S, Harrison DA, Singer M, et al. Assessment of the clinical effectiveness of
pulmonary artery catheters in management of patients in intensive care (PAC
Man): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2005; 366: 472–477.
40 Shah MR, Hasselblad V, Stevenson LW, et al. Impact of the pulmonary artery cath-
eter in critically ill patients: meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. JAMA 2005;
294(13): 1664–1670.
41 Coonors AF Jr., Speroff T, Dawson NV, et al. The effectiveness of right heart cath-
eterization in the initial care of critically ill patients, SUPPORT Investigators. JAMA
1996; 276: 889–897.

-- 233 of 1450 --

218 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
42 Polanczyk CA, Rohde LE, Goldman L, et al. Right heart catheterization and cardiac
complications in patients undergoing noncardiac surgery. J Am Med Assoc 2001;
286: 309–314.
43 Elliott CG, Zimmerman GA, Clemmer TP. Complications of pulmonary artery
catheterization in the care of critically ill patients. A prospective study. Chest 1979;
76: 647–652.
44 Cholley BP, Payen D. Noninvasive technique for measurements of cardiac output.
Curr Opin Crit Care 2005; 11: 424–429.
45 Parmley CL, Pousman RM. Noninvasive cardiac output monitoring. Curr Opin
Anaesthesiol 2002; 15: 675–680.
46 Botero M, Labato EB. Advances in noninvasive cardiac output monitoring: an
update. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anaesth 2001; 15: 631–640.
47 Haryadi DG, Orr JA, Kuck K, et al. Partial CO2 rebreathing indirect Fick technique
for non-invasive measurement of cardiac output. J Clin Monit Comput 2000; 16(5–
6): 361–374.
48 Jaffe MB. Partial CO2 rebreathing cardiac output – operating principles of the
NICO system. J Clin Monit Comput 1999; 15: 387–401.
49 Haryadi DG, Orr JA, Kuck K, et al. Partial CO2 rebreathing indirect Fick technique
for non-invasive measurement of cardiac output. J Clin Monit Comput 2000; 16:
361–374.
50 van Heerden PV, Baker S, Lim SI, et al. Clinical evaluation of the Non-Invasive
Cardiac Output (NICO) monitor in the intensive care unit. Anaesth Intensive Care
2000; 28: 427–430.
51 Levy RJ, Chivacci RM, Nicolson SC, et al. An evaluation of a noninvasive cardiac
output measurement using partial carbon dioxide rebreathing in children. Anesth
Analg 2004; 99: 1642–1647.
52 Nilsson LB, Eldrup N, Berthelsen PG. Lack of agreement between thermodilution
and carbon dioxide-rebreathing cardiac output. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2001; 45:
680–685.
53 Giguère S, Bucki E, Adin DB, et al. Cardiac output measurement by partial carbon
dioxide rebreathing, 2-dimensional echocardiography, and lithium-dilution
method in anesthetized neonatal foals. J Vet Intern Med 2005; 19(5): 737–743.
54 Gedeon A, Krill P, Kristensen J, et al. Noninvasive cardiac output determined with a
new method based on gas exchange measurements and carbon dioxide rebreathing:
a study in animals/pigs. J Clin Monit 1992; 8(4): 267–278.
55 Gunkel CI, Valverde A, Morey TE, et al. Comparison of non-invasive cardiac
output measurement by partial carbon dioxide rebreathing with the lithium
dilution method in anesthetized dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2004; 14(3): 187–195.
56 Berton C, Cholley B. Equipment review: new techniques for cardiac output
measurement – oesophageal Doppler, Fick principle using carbon dioxide and
pulse contour analysis. Crit Care 2002; 6: 216–221.
57 Forrester JS, Ganz W, Diamond G, et al. Thermodilution cardiac output determination
with a single flow directed catheter. Am Heart J 1972; 83: 306.
58 Mathews L, Singh RK. Swan Ganz catheter in haemodynamic monitoring. J Anaesth
Clin Pharmacol 2006; 22: 335–345.
59 Della Rocca G, Costa MG, Pompei L, et al. Continuous and intermittent cardiac
output measurement: pulmonary artery catheter versus aortic transpulmonary
technique. Br J Anaesth 2002; 88: 350–356.
60 Schlipf JW, Dunlop CI, Getzy DM, et al. Lesions associated with cardiac catheteri-
zation and thermodilution cardiac output determination in horses. In: Proceedings
of the 5th International Congress of Veterinary Anesthesia, 1994: 71–72.
61 Muir WW, Skarda RT, Milne DW. Estimation of cardiac output in the horse by
thermodilution techniques. Am J Vet Res 1976; 37: 697–700.
62 Mizuno Y, Aida H, Hara H, et al. Comparison of methods of cardiac output meas-
urements determined by dye dilution, pulsed Doppler echocardiography and ther-
modilution in horses. J Vet Med Sci 1994; 56: 1–5.
63 Hendriks FFA, Schipperheyn JJ, Quanjer PH. Thermal dilution measurement of car-
diac output in dogs using an analog computer. Basic Res Cardiol 1978; 73: 459–468.
64 Dyson DH, McDonell WN, Horne JA. Accuracy of thermodilution measurement of
cardiac output in low flows applicable to feline and small canine patients. Can J
Comp Med 1984; 48: 425–427.
65 Messina A, Alicino V, Cecconi M. Transpulmonary thermodilution. Curr Opin Crit
Care 2023; 29(3): 223–230.
66 Paranjape VV, Shih AC, Garcia-Pereira FL, et al. Transpulmonary ultrasound dilu-
tion is an acceptable technique for cardiac output measurement in anesthetized
pigs. Am J Vet Res 2022; 83(6): ajvr.21.11.0189.
67 de Boode WP, van Heijst AF, Hopman JC, et al. Application of the ultrasound dilu-
tion technology for cardiac output measurement: cerebral and systemic hemody-
namic consequences in a juvenile animal model. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2010; 11(5):
616–623.
68 Della Rocca G, Costa MG, Coccia C, et al. Cardiac output monitoring: aortic
transpulmonary thermodilution and pulse contour analysis agree with standard
thermodilution methods in patients undergoing lung transplantation. Can J
Anaesth 2003; 50: 707–711.
69 Sakka SG, Reinhart K, Meier-Hellmann A. Comparison of pulmonary artery and
arterial thermodilution cardiac output in critically ill patients. Intensive Care Med
1999; 25: 843–846.
70 de Boode WP, van Heijst AF, Hopman JC, et al. Cardiac output measurement using
an ultrasound dilution method: a validation study in ventilated piglets. Pediatr Crit
Care Med 2010; 11(1): 103–108.
71 Ballestero Y, Urbano J, López-Herce J, et al. Pulmonary arterial thermodilution,
femoral arterial thermodilution and bioreactance cardiac output monitoring in a
pediatric hemorrhagic hypovolemic shock model. Resusc 2012; 83: 125–129.
72 Vigani A, Shih A, Queiroz P, et al. Quantitative response of volumetric variables
measured by a new ultrasound dilution method in a juvenile model of hemorrhagic
shock and resuscitation. Resusc 2012; 83(8): 1031–1037.
73 Paranjape VV, Henao-Guerrero N, Menciotti G, et al. Volumetric evaluation of
fluid responsiveness using a modified passive leg raise maneuver during experi-
mental induction and correction of hypovolemia in anesthetized dogs. Vet Anaesh
Analg 2023; 50(3): 211–219.
74 Shih A, Maisenbacher HW, Bandt C, et al. Assessment of cardiac output measure-
ment in dogs by transpulmonary pulse contour analysis. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2011;
21(4): 321–327.
75 Shih A, Giguère S, Vigani A, et al. Determination of cardiac output by ultrasound
velocity dilution in normovolemia and hypovolemia in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg
2011; 38(4): 279–285.
76 Linton RA, Band DM, Haire KM. A new method in measuring cardiac output in
man using lithium dilution. Br J Anaesth 1993; 71: 262–266.
77 Mason DJ, O’Grady M, Woods JP, et al. Comparison of a central and a peripheral
(cephalic vein) injection site for the measurement of cardiac output using the
lithium-dilution cardiac output technique in anesthetized dogs. Can J Vet Res 2002;
66(3): 207–210.
78 Mason DJ, O’Grady M, Woods JP, et al. Assessment of lithium dilution cardiac out-
put as a technique for measurement of cardiac output in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2001;
62(8): 1255–1261.
79 Beaulieu KE, Kerr CL, McDonell WN. Evaluation of a lithium dilution cardiac out-
put technique as a method for measurement of cardiac output in anesthetized cats.
Am J Vet Res 2005; 66(9): 1639–1645.
80 Linton RA, Young LE, Marlin DJ, et al. Cardiac output measured by lithium dilu-
tion, thermodilution, and transesophageal Doppler echocardiography in anesthe-
tized horses. Am J Vet Res 2000; 61(7): 731–737.
81 Corley KT, Donaldson LL, Furr MO. Comparison of lithium dilution and ther-
modilution cardiac output measurements in anaesthetised neonatal foals. Equine
Vet J 2002; 34(6): 598–601.
82 Kurita T, Morita K, Kato S, et al. Comparison of the accuracy of the lithium dilution
technique with the thermodilution technique for measurement of cardiac output.
Br J Anaesth 1997; 79: 770–775.
83 Corley KT, Donaldson LL, Furr MO. Comparison of lithium dilution and ther-
modilution cardiac output measurements in anaesthetised neonatal foals. Equine
Vet J 2002; 34(6): 598–601.
84 Schauvliege S, Van den Eede A, Duchateau L, et al. Comparison between lithium
dilution and pulse contour analysis techniques for cardiac output measurement in
isoflurane anaesthetized ponies: influence of different inotropic drugs. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2009; 36(3):197–208.
85 Saugel B, Kouz K, Scheeren TWL, et al. Cardiac output estimation using pulse wave
analysis – physiology, algorithms, and technologies: a narrative review. Br J Anaesth
2021; 126(1): 67–76.
86 Jonas MM, Tanser SJ. Lithium dilution measurement of cardiac output and arterial
pulse waveform analysis: an indicator dilution calibrated beat-by- beat system for
continuous estimation of cardiac output. Curr Opin Crit Care 2002; 8(3): 257–261.
87 Thiele RH, Durieux ME. Arterial waveform analysis for the anesthesiologist: past,
present, and future concepts. Anesth Analg 2011; 113(4): 766–776.
88 Ambrisko TD, Coppens P, Kabes R, et al. Lithium dilution, pulse power analysis,
and continuous thermodilution cardiac output measurements compared with
bolus thermodilution in anaesthetized ponies. Br J Anaesth 2012; 109(6): 864–869.
89 Rhodes A, Sunderland R. Arterial pulse power analysis, the LiDCO™ plus system.
In: Pinsky MR, Pyen D, eds. Functional Hemodynamics. Berlin: Springer Verlag,
2005: 183–192.
90 Takei T, Kumagai M, Suzuki M, et al. Accuracy of cardiac output measured by
fourth-generation FloTrac and LiDCOrapid, and their characteristics regarding
systemic vascular resistance in patients undergoing cardiac surgery. J Cardiothorac
Vasc Anesth 2023; 37(7): 1143–1151.
91 Manecke GR Jr., Auger WR. Cardiac output determination from the arterial pres-
sure wave: clinical testing of novel algorithm that does not require calibration.
J Cardiothorac Vasc Anaesth 2007; 21: 3–7.
92 Compton FD, Zukunft B, Hoffmann C, et al. Performance of a minimally invasive
uncalibrated cardiac output monitoring system (Flotrac/Vigileo) in haemodynami-
cally unstable patients. Br J Anaesth 2008; 100(4): 451–456.

-- 234 of 1450 --

Chapter 13: Cardiac Output Measurement 	219
93 Singer M, Allen MJ, Webb AR, et al. Effects of alterations in left ventricular filling,
contractility and systemic vascular resistance on the ascending aortic blood veloc-
ity waveform of normal subjects. Crit Care Med 1991; 19: 1138–1145.
94 Uehara Y, Koga M, Takahashi M. Determination of cardiac output by echocardi-
ography. J Vet Med Sci 1995; 57(3): 401–407.
95 Madan AK, UyBarreta VV, Aliabadi-Wahle S, et al. Esophageal Doppler ultra-
sound monitor versus pulmonary artery catheter in the hemodynamic manage-
ment of critically ill surgical patients. J Trauma 1999; 46: 607–612.
96 Josephs SA. The use of current hemodynamic monitors and echocardiography in
resuscitation of the critically ill or injured patient. Int Anesthesiol Clin 2007; 45(3):
31–59.
97 Gouveia V, Marcelino P, Reuter DA. The role of transesophageal echocardiogra-
phy in the intraoperative period. Curr Cardiol Rev 2011; 7(3): 184–196.
98 Lefrant JY, Bruelle P, Aya AG, et al. Training is required to improve the reliability
of esophageal Doppler to measure cardiac output in critically ill patients. Intensive
Care Med 1998; 24: 347–352.
99 Chew MS, Poelaert J. Accuracy and repeatability of pediatric cardiac output meas-
urement using Doppler: 20-year review of literature. Intensive Care Med 2003; 29:
1889–1894.
100 Perrino AC Jr., Harris SN, Luther MA. Intraoperative determination of cardiac
output using multiplane transesophageal echocardiography: a comparison to
thermodilution. Anesthesiology 1998; 89: 350–357.
101 Urbanowicz JH, Kernoff RS, Oppenheim G, et al. Transesophageal echocardiogra-
phy and its potential for esophageal damage. Anesthesiol 1990; 72(1): 40–43.
102 Stoner CH, Saunders AB, Heseltine JC, et al. Prospective evaluation of complica-
tions associated with transesophageal echocardiography in dogs with congenital
heart disease. J Vet Int Med 2022; 36(2): 406–416.
103 Blissit KJ, Young LE, Jones RS, et al. Measurement of cardiac output in standing horses
by Doppler echocardiography and thermodilution. Equine vet J 1997; 29(1): 18–25.
104 Young LE, Blissit KJ, Bartram DH, et al. Measurement of cardiac output by
transoesophageal Doppler echocardiography in anaesthetized horses: comparison
with thermodilution. Br J Anaesth 1996; 77: 773–780.
105 Lopes PC, Sousa MG, Camacho AA, et al. Comparison between two methods for
cardiac output measurement in propofol-anesthetized dogs: thermodilution and
Doppler. Vet Anaesth Analg 2010; 37(5): 401–408.
106 Haskings EM, Eissa M, Allard RV, et al. Point-of-care ultrasound use in emergencies:
what every anaesthetist should know. Anesthesia 2023; 78(1): 105–118.
107 Kubicek WG, Karnegis JN, Patterson RP, et al. Development and evaluation of an
impedance cardiac output system. Aerosp Med 1966; 37: 1208–1212.
108 Bernstein DP. Continuous non-invasive real time monitoring of stroke volume
and cardiac output by thoracic electrical bioimpedance. Crit Care Med 1986; 14:
898–903.
109 Van De Water JM, Miller TW. Impedance cardiography: the next vital sign tech-
nology. Chest 2003; 123: 2028–2033.
110 Heerdt PM, Wagner CL, DeMais M, et al. Noninvasive cardiac output monitoring
with bioreactance as an alternative to invasive instrumentation for preclinical
drug evaluation in beagles. J Pharm Toxicol Meth 2011; 64: 111–118.
111 Albert N, Hail M, Li J, et al. Equivalence of bioimpedance and thermodilution
methods in measuring cardiac output in patients with advanced, decompensated
chronic heart failure hospitalized in critical care. J Am J Crit Care 2004; 13:
469–479.
112 Sagemam WS, Riffenburgh RH, Spiess BD. Equivalence of bioimpedance and
thermodilution in measuring cardiac index after cardiac surgery. J Cardiothorac
Vasc Anaesth 2002; 1691: 8–14.
113 Yung GL, Fedullo PF, Kinninger K, et al. Comparison of impedance cardiography
to direct Fick and thermodilution cardiac output determination in pulmonary
arterial hypertension. Congest Heart Fail 2004; 10: 7–10.
114 Tibballs J, Hochmann M, Osborne A, et al. Accuracy of the BoMED NCCOM3
bioimpedance cardiac output monitor during induced hypotension: an experi-
mental study in dogs. Anaesth Intensive Care 1992; 20(3): 326–331.
115 Yamashita K, Ueyama Y, Miyoshi K, et al. Minimally invasive determination of
cardiac output by transthoracic bioimpedance, partial carbon dioxide rebreathing,
and transesophageal Doppler echocardiography in beagle dogs. J Vet Med Sci
2007; 69(1): 43–47.
116 Shibutani K, Muraoka M, Shirasaki S, et al. Do changes in end-tidal
pCO2 quantitatively reflect changes in cardiac output? Anesth Analg 1994;
79: 829–833.
117 Wahba RW, Tessler MJ, Kleiman SJ. Changes in pCO2 with acute changes in
cardiac index. Can J Anaesth 1996; 43: 243–245.
118 Lakhal K, Nay MA, Kamel T, et al. Change in end-tidal carbon dioxide outper-
forms other surrogates for change in cardiac output during fluid challenge.
Br J Anaesth 2017; 118(3): 355–362.
119 Dubin A, Murias G, Estenssoro E, et al. End- tidal CO2 pressure determinants
during hemorrhagic shock. Intensive Care Med 2000; 26(11): 1619–1623.

-- 235 of 1450 --

220
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth E dition of L umb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
Since William Thomas Green Morton’s demonstration of ether use
in 1846, the delivery of anesthesia and the monitoring of anesthe-
tized patients have undergone significant transformation [1].
Today, vigilant perianesthetic care necessitates the assessment of
cardiovascular, ventilatory, and metabolic status. Among these,
monitoring ventilation plays a role in providing crucial patient- and
equipment-related information. During anesthesia, the patient’s
ability to maintain proper ventilation may be compromised by
anesthetic and analgesic drugs, muscle relaxation, and changes in
respiratory drive. Monitoring ventilation allows assessment of
carbon dioxide production, delivery to the lungs, and elimination
via gas exchange, thereby preventing complications and ensuring
patient well-being [2,3]. It is imperative for an anesthetist to under-
stand the physiologic principles of ventilation and various assess-
ment methods to ensure patient safety and optimize anesthesia
delivery.
Physiology of aerobic respiration
Although occasionally used interchangeably, ventilation and respi-
ration can be viewed as two separate physiologic functions.
Ventilation refers to the movement of gases, specifically oxygen and
carbon dioxide (CO 2 ), in and out of the alveoli in the lungs.
Respiration refers to the cellular utilization of oxygen in the process
of generating energy in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
In aerobic respiration, glycolysis of carbohydrates occurs in the
cytoplasm in the presence of oxygen. Pyruvate moves into
mitochondria and enters the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle after
conversion to acetyl-CoA (Fig. 14.1). The final step in aerobic res-
piration is oxidative phosphorylation, including the electron trans-
port chain and the process of chemiosmosis.
This series of reactions generates ATP, which is the primary
source of energy for cells. For efficient aerobic respiration to occur,
there must be an adequate supply of glucose and oxygen-rich blood
to the mitochondria in the tissues. Carbon dioxide is generated as a
by-product of aerobic respiration. The partial pressure of carbon
dioxide (PCO2
) is highest within the mitochondria, from which it
passes through the cytoplasm to the blood, and then is carried to the
lungs for excretion. Carriage of CO2 within the blood occurs primar-
ily as bicarbonate, as a dissociation product from the buffering of
CO2 with water to form carbonic acid, and, to a lesser extent, as car-
bamino compounds bound to hemoglobin and plasma proteins or
dissolved gas (see Chapter 37). Once delivered to the lungs, alveolar
ventilation allows for gas exchange between the alveoli and circula-
tion resulting in the acquisition of oxygen and expiration of CO2
.
Alveolar CO2 (PA
CO2
) is directly proportional to the amount of CO2
produced by metabolism (VCO2
) and subsequently delivered to the
lungs and inversely proportional to alveolar ventilation (VA
):
P CO VCO
V
A
A
2
2 0 863	.
The constant 0.863 accounts for dissimilar units. Given the rela-
tionship between ventilation and perfusion, monitoring CO2 in the
respiratory gases provides the anesthetist with important informa-
tion about metabolism, cardiac output, and ventilation.
14 Monitoring Ventilation
Jessica D. Briley1 , Kate M. Bailey2 and Lydia Love1
1 Department of Molecular Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA
2 United Veterinary Care, and College of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State University (Adjunct), Raleigh, North Carolina, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 220
Physiology of aerobic respiration, 220
Carbon dioxide and acid–base implications, 221
Importance of monitoring ventilation, 221
Monitoring standards, 221
Physical methods of monitoring ventilation, 222
Apnea monitors, 222
Quantitative monitoring of carbon dioxide, 222
Methods of carbon dioxide measurement, 223
Time-based capnography, 224
The normal capnogram, 224
Abnormal capnograms, 225
Specific clinical indications and uses of time-based capnography, 225
Species considerations, 227
Volumetric capnography, 228
References, 228

-- 236 of 1450 --

Chapter 14: Monitoring Ventilation 	221
Carbon dioxide and acid–base implications
Carbon dioxide and its equilibration between the intracellular and
extracellular environments are critical to acid–base homeostasis
and can provide valuable information about respiratory status and
compensatory mechanisms. The concentration of CO 2 in the blood
is directly related to the regulation of pH. Increased levels of CO2
result in higher carbonic acid (H 2 CO3 ) formation and thus the gen-
eration of H + ions, leading to a decrease in blood pH (acidemia) and
a compensatory increase in blood bicarbonate (HCO3
-) concentra-
tion. Conversely, decreased CO 2 levels reduce carbonic acid forma-
tion, resulting in an increase in blood pH (alkalemia) and
compensatory decrease in blood HCO3
-. Respiratory alkalemia
(hypocapnia) and acidemia (hypercapnia) result in rapid equilibra-
tion between the extra- and intracellular fluids, causing more dra-
matic shifts in pH during these conditions when compared to
metabolic acidemia or alkalemia [5].
There are many potential physiologic consequences of hypercap-
nic acidemia including catecholamine release (may lead to tachyar-
rhythmias), increased cardiac output, electrolyte shifts (e.g.,
hyperkalemia), rightward shift of the oxygen–hemoglobin dissocia-
tion curve, and cerebral vasodilation [6–8]. In the face of severe
hypercapnia (> 80 mmHg), central nervous system signs including
narcosis and coma can occur [9,10]. When decreases in the arterial
partial pressure of CO2 (PaCO2
) result in pH greater than 7.6, the
physiologic consequences may include cerebral and myocardial
vasoconstriction with resulting decreases in blood flow, decreased
cardiac output, leftward shift of the oxygen–hemoglobin dissocia-
tion curve, hypokalemia, and predisposition to arrhythmias [11].
Importance of monitoring ventilation
Perianesthetic mortality trends appear to be decreasing in veteri-
nary patients over time, though remain significantly higher than in
humans [12–23]. Given the wide array of physiologic consequences
of ventilatory derangements, early detection of respiratory events
through advanced monitoring, including capnography, allows for
timely intervention and enhanced patient safety throughout the
perioperative period [24–27].
Monitoring standards
The American College of Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia
(ACVAA) published its stance on anesthetic monitoring of small
animal patients in 2009 [28]. Within those recommendations, mul-
tiple ventilation monitoring techniques are mentioned, including
subjective measurements, such as visualization of chest wall expan-
sion or movement of an attached reservoir bag, and thoracic auscul-
tation via external or esophageal stethoscope, or the use of an audible
respiratory monitor. These techniques indicate a binary endpoint
(i.e., absence or presence) and do not allow for objective measure-
ments, as they do not provide a carbon dioxide value. Partial
Pyruvate dehydrogenase
Acetyl CoA
1. Citrate synthase
NADH
Malate
dehydrogenase
Aspartate
aminotransferase	7. Fumarase
6. Succinate
dehydrogenase
NAD +
NAD +
NADH
NADH
GDP
FAD
FADH2
H2O
GTP
CO 2
CO2
CO2
4. α-Ketoglutarate
dehydrogenase
5. Succinyl CoA
synthetase
2. Aconitase
3. Isocitrate
dehydrogenase
NAD+
Beta-oxidation
Fumarate 	α-Ketoglutarate
Isocitrate
Citrate	Oxaloacetate
Pyruvate
Malate
Fatty acids
Succinyl CoA	Succinate
Figure 14.1 The tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle is the foundation of cellular energy generation. In the cytoplasm, glycolysis of carbohydrates creates
pyruvate. Pyruvate enters the TCA cycle in the mitochondrial matrix after conversion to acetyl-Coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) by pyruvate dehydrogenase
(PDH). Each oxidative step in the TCA cycle reduces a coenzyme (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide [NADH] or flavin adenine dinucleotide [FADH 2
]).
These reduced coenzymes participate in the electron transport chain, creating the majority of ATP production. FAD, flavin adenine dinucleotide; FADH 2
,
flavin adenine dinucleotide (reduced); GDP, guanosine diphosphate; GTP, guanosine triphosphate; NAD +
, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; NADH,
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (reduced). Source: Borkum [4], with permission.

-- 237 of 1450 --

222 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
pressure of end-tidal carbon dioxide (PET
CO2
) with a capnograph or
blood gas analysis to obtain PaCO2 or partial pressure of venous car-
bon dioxide (PvCO2
) are the major objective monitoring methods
for ventilation. The use of spirometry is mentioned for measurement
of tidal volume and investigation of respiratory mechanics, and
while this is an objective measurement, it does not provide partial
pressure of carbon dioxide. The subjective measurements are con-
sidered essential or required by the ACVAA. Capnography is recom-
mended, and blood gas analysis recommended as needed on a
patient-specific basis. The Small Animal Monitoring Guidelines are
in the process of being updated as of 2023.
The American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) has dictated
since 1989 that any procedure in which endotracheal intubation or
laryngeal mask airway is used requires the use of capnometry, cap-
nography, or mass spectroscopy to quantify expired carbon dioxide.
The requirement for quantitative monitoring of carbon dioxide was
extended to sedated patients in 2010 [29]. It is recommended that
alarms associated with abnormal carbon dioxide are audible in the
operating room. A closed claims analysis at the end of the last cen-
tury determined that of respiratory events, including inadequate
ventilation, esophageal intubation, and difficult airway, 72% could
have been prevented using better respiratory monitoring, and spe-
cifically, that the combination of pulse oximetry and capnography
could have prevented > 90% of claims for inadequate ventilation and
esophageal intubation [2].
The value of capnography in veterinary anesthesia and critical
care settings is such that its use should be encouraged in primary
care practice settings and an expectation in a specialty or tertiary
care setting.
Physical methods of monitoring ventilation
The most accessible methods to monitor ventilation are the subjec-
tive assessment of breathing by visualization and auscultation of all
lung fields and the trachea with a stethoscope. These methods
should be included in every preanesthetic assessment, should
accompany other monitoring techniques throughout the anesthetic
event, including the recovery period, and should be utilized diag-
nostically in the event of a respiratory complication. Additionally,
auscultation of lung sounds bilaterally directly after intubation is a
highly recommended technique to confirm appropriate endotra-
cheal tube (ETT) placement and aid in early diagnosis of endobron-
chial or esophageal intubation.
The lung sounds, as well as respiratory rate, effort, and quality, can
indicate various causes for a change in ventilation. For example, a
patient with a fixed airway obstruction will tend toward a decreased
respiratory rate with a longer inspiratory phase. A patient with an
alveolar disease or pleural space disease will often experience an
increase in respiratory effort and could have increased (e.g., crackles
in pneumonia) or decreased (e.g., absence due to pleural fluid) lung
sounds. Respiratory disease may negatively impact ventilation; anes-
thetic management requirements of specific respiratory conditions
vary and are discussed in Chapter 38.
Apnea monitors
Apnea monitors are simple respiratory monitoring tools that have
been used historically in veterinary medicine and persist in some
practice settings. Apnea monitors attach to the circuit between the
distal end of the ETT and the patient end of the breathing circuit.
The major information gained from an apnea monitor is the
presence of inhalation/exhalation and a respiratory rate. Their
design can be as simple as a low-profile plastic attachment that cre-
ates a “whistle” noise during the breathing cycle. They also come in
a more sophisticated design with a circuit attachment and separate
digital display that alerts the user with an audible and visual respira-
tory “beep” with each breath, displays the time between breaths,
and provides an alarm that is triggered by a preset apnea duration
(Fig. 14.2). Most models are equipped with battery power, making
them highly portable. These monitors give a binary response (i.e.,
movement of gas or not) but do not provide any information about
the effectiveness of respiratory efforts. In addition, like any adapter
between the ETT and the breathing circuit, they add mechanical
deadspace.
Quantitative monitoring of carbon dioxide
The use of quantified carbon dioxide as a monitoring tool in gen-
eral anesthesia has multiple merits and can be accomplished in sev-
eral forms (Table 14.1). In addition to the ability to provide
information about metabolism, lung perfusion, and adequacy of
ventilation, detection of carbon dioxide in respiratory gases can
indicate integrity of the ETT and breathing circuit. Continuous CO 2
monitoring provides real-time data and allows for immediate detec-
tion of changes in ventilation and prompt intervention. It is primar-
ily used to confirm ventilatory status (including respiratory rate,
PET
CO2
, and inhaled CO2 [PI
CO2 ]). Importantly, capnometry/cap-
nography is the most reliable primary method for identifying
whether an endotracheal tube is correctly placed within the airway
instead of the esophagus.
Figure 14.2 A digital apnea alert device attached to the endotracheal tube.
The red circle highlights the airway adapter, which is connected to the
digital display. An audible signal indicates air flow across the sensor with
each breath and the apnea alarm can be adjusted to be 10–60 s in duration.
Source: Thomas and Lerche [30].
Table 14.1 Definitions associated with the various forms of carbon dioxide
measurement during ventilation.
Capnometry 	The measurement of the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in
respiratory gas
Capnometer 	A diagnostic tool that measures the partial pressure of carbon
dioxide in respiratory gas
Capnogram 	A cyclical waveform of respiratory gas carbon dioxide plotted
against time or expired volume
Capnography 	The continuous analysis and recording of the measurement of the
partial pressure of carbon dioxide in respiratory gases over time or
expired volume
Capnograph 	The instrument that analyzes CO2 in respiratory gases and displays
a capnogram

-- 238 of 1450 --

Chapter 14: Monitoring Ventilation 	223
Capnometry/capnography can also be instrumental in detecting
life threatening cardiorespiratory complications. For example, the
rapid decline in PET
CO2 as detected by a capnograph may be the first
and only reliable indicator of cardiopulmonary arrest in the anesthe-
tized patient, as detailed below.
Methods of carbon dioxide measurement
Like other forms of patient monitoring in veterinary medicine, the
implementation of CO2 measurement requires equipment that
meets specific criteria to ensure its regular use and effectiveness. It
is important for monitoring equipment to be affordable and readily
available. Cost-effective options enable wider accessibility, allowing
veterinary professionals to incorporate CO 2 monitoring into their
standard protocols. Equipment should be easy to use and should
not require extensive training or complex setup procedures.
Additionally, lightweight, portable, and durable equipment offers
flexibility for the rigors of daily use and enables monitoring in dif-
ferent areas of the veterinary hospital or during transport. In the
case of monitoring ventilation, equipment should be ideal for the
properties of CO 2 and be able to distinguish it among other gases
that are present with minimal interference.
Blood gas analysis
The gold standard for determination of PaCO 2 is arterial blood
gas analysis. An arterial sample is obtained either via puncture or
from an indwelling catheter into a preheparinized syringe. Air
bubbles are expelled, and the sample should be analyzed within
30 min or stored on ice. Both laboratory-based and patient-side
blood gas analyzers are available that utilize a glass electrode cov-
ered with a CO 2 permeable membrane (the Severinghaus elec-
trode) to ascertain CO 2 concentrations. Carbon dioxide from
the blood sample diffuses across the membrane into a bicarbonate
solution. Carbonic acid is created and devolves into H + and
HCO 3
– . The generation of H + ions, and therefore pH, is logarith-
mically related to the concentration of CO 2 in the sample, creating
a voltage difference between the glass electrode and the reference
electrode [31].
Disadvantages of arterial blood gas analysis include intermittent
sampling and the need to puncture an artery. In addition, the
required equipment may not be available in all veterinary clinical
settings.
Chemical detection (colorimetry)
Chemical detection is based on the principle that when CO 2 is
combined with water, carbonic acid is formed, which then disso-
ciates into hydrogen ions and bicarbonate. In turn, the pH is
decreased, and this change acts as a surrogate marker for detec-
tion of CO 2 when using a pH-sensitive indicator. These devices
typically house a color changing, pH-sensitive indicator within a
clear window, which can be connected to standard endotracheal
tube and breathing circuit components. For each device, a chart
will reference which color change correlates with a range of CO 2
measurements. Though the measurements are not precise, they
have proven to be successful at detection of endotracheal intuba-
tion, prediction of return of spontaneous circulation in resuscita-
tion, and monitoring of ventilation for many hours where
quantitative methods are not available [32–34]. Advantages for
this type of device include its light weight and low cost.
Disadvantages include generation of semiquantitative results,
conditional interpretation of color change, short-term usability,
and added resistance to flow.
Infrared spectroscopy
The widely used technology that possesses a majority of the
aforementioned qualities is infrared (IR) spectroscopy. IR spectros-
copy involves the analysis of the interaction between IR radiation
and asymmetric, polyatomic molecules at distinct spectra.
Homogeneous molecules, such as oxygen, do not absorb IR radia-
tion, and techniques for oxygen measurement are discussed in
Chapter 15. IR radiation consists of a range of wavelengths that fall
between the visible and microwave regions of the electromagnetic
spectrum. When a sample is exposed to IR radiation, the molecules
within the sample absorb energy at specific frequencies that are
characteristic of the chemical bonds present. The wavelength at
which CO2 has the strongest absorption band is approximately
4.3 μm, which allows reasonable discrimination from other
molecules that also absorb IR radiation and are commonly found
in an expired breath (i.e., inhalant anesthetics). Notably, two
molecules with IR absorption bands close to CO 2 that may cause
cross-interference are water vapor and nitrous oxide (N2 O).
Once the absorption of IR radiation by CO2 in a sample of expired
breath is measured, the principles of the Beer–Lambert law are
applied:
A 	lc
where A is the absorbance, ɛ is the molecular absorption coefficient,
l is the length of the optical path, and c is the molecular concentra-
tion. Absorption of IR radiation at the specified wavelength is pro-
portional to the concentration of the molecule (CO 2 ) being
measured. When the absorbance is compared to a known standard,
the amount of CO2 present in respiratory gases can be quantified as
a partial pressure (representative of the number of molecules pre-
sent) or converted to a percent concentration (expressed as a pro-
portion of the total).
The essential elements for IR spectroscopy include: a source of IR
radiation, a sample cell, and a photodetector [35]. IR capnographs
may use an optical filter to transmit only the desired wavelength
(nondispersive) or may separate the wavelengths spatially with
prisms or diffraction (dispersive). Nondispersive IR spectroscopy is
most commonly in use as it is more efficient.
Infrared radiation source
In general, IR radiation sources may be considered broad- or
narrowband. One example of a broadband source is a heated ele-
ment known as a “blackbody emitter.” In this case, filters are uti-
lized to eliminate IR that is outside the desired range, and the
constant source is mechanically chopped by a spinning wheel.
The spinning wheel alternately blocks and allows the IR radia-
tion to pass through to the sample or detector. This chopping
action creates a time-varying signal, which is important for sep-
arating the desired IR signal from any background noise or
interference. Multigas analyzers employ several specific narrow-
band filters to allow for the measurement of halogenated agents
along with CO 2 and may also include integrated technology for
measurement of oxygen.
An example of a narrowband IR source is laser-based molecular
correlation spectroscopy, or Microstream technology. This uses a
unique approach to emit a band of IR radiation that is highly precise
for CO2
. In Microstream technology, a glass electrode that contains
several gases, including nitrogen and CO2
, is exposed to a radio fre-
quency voltage. Consequently, the nitrogen molecules experience
excitation and their interaction with CO2 causes excitation of those
molecules. When CO2 returns to its resting state, it emits radiation,

-- 239 of 1450 --

224 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
which is used as the narrow spectrum IR source. This IR source
is then electronically modulated in order to allow sampling
every 25 ms.
Ultimately, the IR light is transmitted through the sample cham-
ber, and the filtered and modulated signal reaches a detector where
the intensity is measured, processed, and directed to the user inter-
face where it is displayed.
Problems with infrared spectroscopy
The IR absorption band for CO 2 lies between two strong water
vapor absorption bands, and water vapor can interfere with CO 2
measurement in several ways. When exhaled breath passes through
the respiratory system, it picks up water vapor, which can signifi-
cantly contribute to the total gas volume. Water vapor can condense
at the sample cell, where it will absorb IR radiation, leading to a
falsely increased CO 2 reading. Heating of sensors, water traps,
absorbent filters, and specialized permeable (e.g., Nafion) tubing
are a few solutions utilized to limit this interference. In sidestream/
diverting monitors (see below), the cooling of the sampled gas will
affect the concentration of water vapor and lead to slight overesti-
mation of PET
CO2 [36]. Water vapor and secretions can also cause
full or partial occlusion of sampling lines leading to altered meas-
urements or even no measurement at all.
Another phenomenon known as “collision broadening” causes
apparent increases in CO2 due to the molecular interaction with
gases such as N2
O and O2
, which can result in widened absorption
spectra.
Mainstream capnometry/capnography
Mainstream (non-diverting) CO2 devices utilize IR technology with
the sensor placed between the patient and the breathing system.
The sample cell (cuvette) functions as the airway adapter and the IR
source and detector are all housed within the sensor. The transmit-
ted signal may be displayed directly on the sensor housing, or a
cable may be used to connect to an external monitor. Advantages to
mainstream devices include rapid response times, higher accuracy
with small tidal volumes and faster respiratory rates, no need to
separately scavenge sampled gases, and no waste of inhalant agents.
Disadvantages to mainstream devices include added weight and
mechanical deadspace to airway with limited adaptability, suscepti-
bility to damage, and secretions on the windows of the cuvette caus-
ing interference with readings. Many of the noted disadvantages to
mainstream technology are historical and have been minimized
with contemporary solid-state technology [35,37].
Sidestream capnometry/capnography
Sidestream (diverting) CO 2 devices use a variety of airway adapters
attached to a long sampling line to connect to the sample cell
housed within a distant monitor. Samples are constantly aspirated
at variable rates (typically 50–200 mL/min). A combination of
water permeable tubing, filters, and water traps may be used to limit
water vapor contamination. Advantages to sidestream devices
include the lightweight nature of the ETT adapter, potential to min-
imize deadspace by connecting sampling tubing directly to a spe-
cialized ETT adapter, the protected status of the sensor within the
monitor housing, and the ability to monitor PET
CO2 in non-
intubated patients with nasal catheters. Disadvantages include delay
time (based on sampling rate), the need for rerouting of sampled
gas (scavenged or returned to circuit), and the potential for issues
with the sampling line or water trap devices (e.g., leaks, kinks, or
occlusions) [38].
Raman spectroscopy
Historically, another form of spectroscopy has been used that takes
advantage of the phenomenon called “Raman scatter.” In this tech-
nology, a high-intensity argon laser is applied to a gas sample. The
laser causes excitation of the molecules within the sample, creating
an altered energy state. When the molecules return to their stable
state, energy is emitted in a signature specific to that molecule,
known as “Raman scatter radiation.” It provides a fingerprint-like
spectrum that represents the specific vibrational and rotational
modes of the molecules present. This technology is not currently
used in clinical settings for capnometry as smaller, lighter, and less
expensive technology has prevailed [39].
Mass spectrometry
Mass spectrometry measures components of a gas mixture based on
their mass and charge. A sample is drawn into a vacuum chamber
where it is exposed to an electron beam. The ionized fragments are
then accelerated by an electrical field and separated by a magnetic
field. Detectors are then able to measure individual components of
the sample. While mass spectrometry remains a valuable analytical
tool for research and specialized applications, the size, complexity,
and cost limitations make it impractical for routine patient moni-
toring in clinical settings. More accessible and cost-effective tech-
nologies are currently preferred for continuous patient monitoring,
especially in veterinary medicine [40,41].
Transcutaneous measurement
Transcutaneous measurement of carbon dioxide (P TC CO 2 ) is a
non-invasive method used to measure CO 2 by placing heated elec-
trochemical sensors on the skin. The technique relies on the prin-
ciple that CO 2 can diffuse through the skin, allowing its
measurement at the skin surface. As in arterial blood gas analysis,
a Severinghaus electrode is used to assess CO 2 concentrations.
While P TC CO 2 measurement could be particularly useful in situa-
tions involving non-intubated patients, or where frequent blood
sampling is impractical or stressful, there remain many limita-
tions to its use in veterinary clinical practice. In rabbits, it was
demonstrated that P TC CO 2 was able to reasonably approximate
PaCO 2 [42]. However, in cats [43], sheep [44], and dogs [44,45],
P TC CO 2 consistently overestimates PaCO 2 and cannot be used as a
reliable surrogate. Development of optical detection technology
may offer an alternative to electrochemical-based means in the
future [46].
Time-based capnography
A capnogram wave is most commonly plotted as CO 2 partial pres-
sure in millimeters of mercury (mmHg) against time. In this for-
mat, there are four phases to the capnogram, one that represents
inhalation and three that represent phases of exhalation. Of note,
there is still disagreement within the literature as to the correct
labeling system in phase number for the capnogram. While the
numbering system might vary, the actual phase of inhalation or
exhalation represented by the component of the graphical image
remains the same.
The normal capnogram
A normal time capnogram, as described below, is shown in Fig. 14.3.
Phase 0 = inspiratory phase or inspiratory downstroke.
Represented by a rapid downswing in expiratory CO2 partial

-- 240 of 1450 --

Chapter 14: Monitoring Ventilation 	225
pressure. In a normal waveform, the CO2 partial pressure rapidly
reaches zero.
Phase I = respiratory baseline. It marks the start of expiration and
represents emptying of anatomic deadspace, which is CO2 free.
Phase II = expiratory upstroke. Continued exhalation of a mixture
of alveolar gas and deadspace gas from the conducting airways.
The expired CO2 partial pressure rapidly increases.
Phase III = the alveolar plateau. Continued exhalation of alveolar
gas creates a gradually elevating line due to uneven alveolar emp-
tying. The peak of the plateau represents the PET
CO2 at the end of
the exhaled tidal volume.
Alpha (α) angle = the transition from phase II to III. In normal
states, this angle should be approximately 100°. The α angle rep-
resents the transition from airway gas to alveolar gas.
Beta (β) angle = the transition from phase III to phase 0. In normal
states, it should be approximately 90°. It is at this point in the
capnogram waveform that a PET
CO2 value is measured.
Abnormal capnograms
In the process of critically evaluating a capnogram waveform, there
are multiple pieces of information to gather, all of which lead to a
clinical picture of respiratory status: (1) respiratory rate and con-
sistency of rate; (2) PET
CO2 value; and (3) waveform appearance. A
change in respiratory rate or a change in the consistency of the res-
piratory rate provides information related to anesthetic depth, noci-
ceptive signaling, or brainstem status or pathology, among other
states. Capnography is a powerful tool in helping to estimate, with
good accuracy in healthy patients, the PaCO2
; however, PET
CO2
typically underestimates PaCO2 by approximately 1–7 mmHg in
small animals, and this underestimation may be greater in large ani-
mals during general anesthesia. This is due to two major factors: the
presence of a constant anatomic deadspace and the concentration
gradient of CO 2 between the pulmonary capillary and alveolus.
There are abnormal states that can lead to a larger gradient between
PaCO2 and PET
CO2
, and those will be discussed briefly later [47,48].
As a surrogate of PaCO2
, PET
CO2 reliably provides information on
the status of metabolism, pulmonary perfusion (and therefore car-
diac output), and ventilation, as described above. In addition, a
change in PET
CO2 can provide information about the integrity and
function of anesthesia equipment, including the breathing circuit
and ETT, and, when combined with interpretation of the capnogram
waveform, can provide a targeted focus for intervention. Examples
of waveforms commonly encountered in veterinary clinical practice
are presented in Fig. 14.4.
Specific clinical indications and uses of time-based
capnography
The continuous and real-time measurement of PET
CO2 provides
important insight into respiratory and metabolic status. While cap-
nography is always useful for monitoring clinical status, it is also a
critical tool in certain disease processes and case presentations.
Differential diagnosis of hypoxemia
A major strength of the quantitative measurement of P ET
CO 2 is the
ability to detect clinical situations that may lead to hypoxemia as
well as to focus the differential diagnosis for hypoxemia when it
has occurred. For example, a capnogram with an obtuse α angle
(“shark swimming to the left”) indicates an obstruction to exhala-
tion that could be due to upper airway (partial endotracheal tube
obstruction or kinking) or lower airway (severe bronchospasm)
issues (Fig. 14.4B). Another example is the absence of a waveform
that could indicate apnea, esophageal intubation, complete airway
obstruction, or disconnection of the patient from the anesthesia
circuit. A capnogram with an elevated baseline can point to
rebreathing of carbon dioxide, which indicates equipment issues
with clearance of exhaled CO 2 , including a dysfunctional one-way
valve in the breathing circuit, an exhausted carbon dioxide absor-
bent canister, a significant amount of mechanical deadspace, or
insufficient oxygen flow rate in a non-rebreathing circuit, many of
which could lead to a hypoxemic gas mixture if left unattended
(Fig. 14.4D).
Intracranial disease
In patients at risk for elevated intracranial pressure, it is crucial that
cerebral blood flow is maintained in a normal range. Carbon diox-
ide partial pressure has a significant and linear effect on cerebral
vascular reactivity and tone, causing cerebral vasodilation as local
CO2 partial pressure increases, and cerebral vasoconstriction as it
decreases [49]. In these patients, identification of a normal arterial
to expired carbon dioxide [P(a-et)CO 2
] gradient via blood gas
analysis, followed by continuous monitoring of capnography, is
imperative. Maintenance of PaCO2 at or slightly below a normal
partial pressure (35–40 mmHg) will significantly reduce the likeli-
hood of brain herniation, an irreversible and devastating patient
outcome [50]. Information related to anesthetic management of
patients with intracranial disease is available in Chapter 39.
Acid–base derangements
In patients that are suffering from diseases that predispose them to
acidemia, the close monitoring and maintenance of PaCO2 is
imperative to focused care. An increase in PaCO2 causes a decrease
in pH as discussed earlier, and therefore, hypoventilation precipi-
tated by anesthesia may add to a pre-existing metabolic acidemia.
Additionally, many patients that have a chronic metabolic acid–base
disorder will have enlisted respiratory compensation as a mecha-
nism to maintain favorable physiologic status. As a non-invasive
estimate of PaCO2
, PET
CO2 can be utilized to avoid compounding
an acid–base abnormality.
Hyper- and hypokalemia
An increase in CO2 leads to an increase in H+ concentration in the
blood. Hydrogen ions are exchanged across the cell membrane for
potassium ions (K+
) in the cell to maintain electroneutrality, leading
to an increase in serum K+ concentrations. The result is a precipitous
increase in K+ in the blood, which can have multiple negative conse-
quences that will quickly and significantly affect patient outcome,
I
II
III
0
Inspiration
Time
CO 2
Expiration
0
40
α 	β
Figure 14.3 The normal time-based capnogram. Expiration is divided into
phases I (CO2
- free deadspace gas), II (a mixture of deadspace and alveolar
gas), and III (alveolar gas) and inspiration is represented by phase 0. The α
angle represents the transition to CO 2
-rich alveolar gas and the β angle
marks the transition to inspiration.

-- 241 of 1450 --

226 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
including cardiac arrhythmias, hypotension, and cardiopulmonary
arrest. Maintenance of PaCO2 at the patient’s established normal
level is important in patients that are at a risk for becoming hyper-
kalemic and hyperventilation can be considered if hyperkalemia
develops during anesthesia. Commonly, diseases that cause hyper-
kalemia also cause metabolic acidemia, and these two problems
should be considered simultaneously during creation of the anes-
thetic management plan. Hyperventilation, on the other hand, leads
to hypokalemia, which can also precipitate arrhythmias as well as
muscle weakness [51–53].
Difficult airway and lower airway disease
During routine, emergent, and difficult endotracheal intubation
scenarios, capnography can be an important tool for verifying cor-
rect placement of the ETT. Confirmation that the ETT is properly
positioned in the trachea rather than the esophagus will reduce the
risk of complications related to misplacement [2]. Furthermore,
changes in the capnogram, as outlined in the capnogram section
above, may indicate developing or worsening airway obstruction
and can demonstrate response to interventions (e.g., bronchodila-
tor therapy).
40
0
Time
CO2 40
Time
0
CO2
(A) 	(B)
(C) 	(D)
(E)
40
0
CO2
40
0
CO2
40
0
CO2
(F)
40
0
CO2
(G)
40
0
CO2
Time 	Time
Time 	Time
Time
Figure 14.4 Variations in the normal capnogram. A. A normally shaped capnogram with an elevated plateau is indicative of hypoventilation.
B. Obstruction to exhalation results in an obtuse α angle and may be due to upper airway (e.g., a kinked endotracheal tube) or lower airway
(e.g., bronchoconstriction) issues C. A rapid reduction in the alveolar plateau to near zero in the absence of a change in ventilation indicates poor
pulmonary perfusion or cardiovascular collapse. D. Properly functioning anesthetic equipment will prevent the rebreathing of CO 2 which is indicated by a
capnogram with a baseline that does not return to zero. E. An obtuse β angle indicates dilution of PET
CO2 with CO 2 free gas and may be due to a high
sampling rate, a leak around the endotracheal tube cuff, or high fresh gas flows in a non-rebreathing circuit. F. Spontaneous ventilatory efforts during
mechanical ventilation are indicated by interruptions in the normal capnogram waveform. When a decrease in CO 2 concentrations is noted during phase
III, it is traditionally known as a “curare cleft.” G. Cardiogenic oscillations included an obtuse β angle accompanied by oscillations in the downstroke.
Occurring more frequently at slow respiratory rates, these are thought to be due to mixing of inspired and expired gas in the trachea due to the mechanical
activity of the nearby heart.

-- 242 of 1450 --

Chapter 14: Monitoring Ventilation 	227
Cardiopulmonary arrest
The capnograph is arguably the most useful monitor during cardio-
pulmonary arrest (CPA) and resuscitation, as it reflects pulmonary
perfusion, and therefore cardiac output, in real time. It is non-
invasive, easy to connect, and does not require any adjustment.
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) scenarios result in a degree
of patient movement that creates significant artifacts for almost all
other monitoring equipment, while the capnograph suffers little to
no artifact due to thoracic compressions [54,55].
The PET
CO2 is related to cardiac output both in normal scenarios
and during a CPR event. It can help to determine the quality of
ongoing chest compressions or internal cardiac massage because the
amount of blood returning to the lungs will largely determine the
amount of CO2 delivered to the lungs. For the same reason, capnog-
raphy will be the first monitor to reliably convey if the patient has
experienced cessation of blood flow and therefore CPA, and it is also
extremely useful in identifying return of spontaneous circulation
(ROSC) quickly. Finally, capnography is a powerful prognostic tool
during the CPR event. Hofmeister et al. found that in instances
where PET
CO2 was measured during CPR, dogs experiencing sus-
tained PET
CO2 > 15 mmHg during a CPR event had an 86% chance
of ROSC, while patients who did not sustain a PET
CO2 > 15 mmHg
had a 94% chance of non-survival [56].
Cardiac output measurement
As mentioned above, PET
CO2 is directly related to cardiac output
due to the fact that the cardiovascular system is circular, and there-
fore, almost the entire cardiac output passes through the lungs. This
means the PET
CO2 sampled at the end of the endotracheal tube is
correlated with cardiac output if metabolism and ventilation are
held constant. Due to this correlation, PET
CO2 can be used to effec-
tively measure trends in cardiac output, if not the exact value. It can
be argued that clinically, knowing trends in cardiac output as
opposed to the exact amount is more valuable, because the relative
change in cardiac output in response to intervention might change
patient outcome.
The relationship between carbon dioxide and cardiac output can
be used to non-invasively measure cardiac output via the indirect
Fick method. This is based on the Fick principle, which states that the
quantity of gas (oxygen or CO2
) delivered to or taken away from the
lungs is equal to the amount of gas absorbed by the pulmonary circu-
lation or diffused from circulation to the alveoli and respiratory bron-
chioles. While the Fick principle-derived cardiac output measurement
method relies on oxygen uptake by the patient, which can be difficult
to measure, the indirect Fick method relies on partial rebreathing of
carbon dioxide. The Non-Invasive Cardiac Output (NICO®) monitor
is a piece of equipment that creates periods of partial rebreathing to
estimate arterial and mixed venous CO2 partial pressures based on
PET
CO2 [57]. It is attached to the circuit in between the endotracheal
tube and the circle system. Unfortunately, this monitor can only be
used for patients with a tidal volume of 200 mL or more [58,59].
Cardiac output monitoring is covered in detail in Chapter 13.
Nasal catheter
The use of CO2 measurement for veterinary patients can be critical
in patients that are not intubated and where continuous blood sam-
pling is not ideal. Use of a nasal catheter for the measurement of
PET
CO2 has been investigated in dogs and foals [60–62], and dis-
plays reasonable correlation with paired CO2 values. While correla-
tion is better for those patients who are not simultaneously receiving
oxygen therapy through the catheter, correlation was acceptable in
both scenarios. More importantly, these results were clinically rele-
vant and indicate that nasal catheters might be used to measure
PET
CO2 non-invasively in patients pre- and postoperatively and in
critical care settings.
Species considerations
While mammalian respiratory anatomy and function share similarities
across species, there are variations that reflect adaptations to size, envi-
ronment, and physiological needs. Furthermore, the adaptations of
non-mammalian species warrant consideration, but do not preclude
the use of capnography in these animals. It is important to remember
that the rationale for use of non-invasive PET
CO2 monitoring in veteri-
nary medicine is the assumption that it will correlate closely with
PaCO2 and, therefore, be a good surrogate for ventilatory adequacy.
Dogs and cats
There is reasonable evidence in anesthetized dogs with a closed
chest that PET
CO2 correlates well with PaCO 2 in a variety of differ-
ent ventilation modes [63–66]. However, during thoracotomy,
PET
CO2 was found not to be a reliable indicator of PaCO2 and, thus,
adequacy of ventilation [66]. There is little published information
examining the differences in PET
CO2 and PaCO2 in cats. In one
study that included six ventilated cats, the authors found that
PET
CO2 was generally lower than PaCO 2 and was a good predictor
of hypoventilation, but direct arterial sampling for the measure-
ment of PaCO2 was still recommended [67].
Horses
Measurement of PET
CO2 in horses is primarily focused on side-
stream monitoring in anesthetized horses, but it has been shown
that there is a relatively small difference in P(a-et)CO2 in horses
that are standing and healthy [68]. In anesthetized and recumbent
horses and ponies, there can be significant changes in ventilation–
perfusion (V/Q) matching resulting in wide variation in P(a-et)
CO2
, although differences are improved when controlled ventila-
tion is instituted compared to spontaneous ventilation [69–74].
Capnometry has significant limitations in the anesthetized horse
unless it is paired with blood gas analysis.
Birds and reptiles
The significant anatomic and physiologic differences in non-
mammalian respiratory systems are discussed elsewhere (Chapters 57
and 58). Notably, in birds, gas flow is unidirectional and gas
exchange occurs through a cross-current mechanism. This adapta-
tion can result in a negative P(a-et)CO 2 gradient. In mechanically
ventilated African Gray Parrots (Psittacus erithacus), a strong
correlation was found between PET
CO2 and PaCO2
, with PET
CO2
consistently overestimating PaCO 2 by about 5 mmHg [75]. In anes-
thetized raptors, correlation between PET
CO2 and PaCO 2 was seen,
but agreement varied with high, low, and normal PET
CO2 val-
ues [76]. During air sac insufflation in chickens, PET
CO2 often
exceeded PaCO 2 , but there was not a strong correlation between the
two [77]. Finally, a study in anesthetized Amazon parrots (Amazona
ventralis) also found that PET
CO2 overestimated PaCO 2 during
spontaneous ventilation, but this difference reversed over time with
mechanical ventilation [78].
In reptiles, the adaptation of intracardiac shunting may have a sig-
nificant impact on the interpretation of capnometry. In a study of
anesthetized and ventilated green iguanas (Iguana iguana), differ-
ences in the P(a-et)CO2 gradient were relatively minimal, but as
time passed, this difference significantly increased [79].

-- 243 of 1450 --

228 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
Volumetric capnography
Volumetric capnography (VCap) plots exhaled CO2 against expired
volume, allowing for the determination of physiologic deadspace
(the sum of anatomic and alveolar deadspace), effective alveolar
tidal volume, and volume of CO2 eliminated per breath [80]
(Fig. 14.5). Volumetric capnograms have a similar waveform as
time-based capnograms, excluding the inspiratory segment. Phase I
of the volume capnogram starts at zero as the first gas exhaled is
from airway (anatomic) deadspace and is free of CO2
. The slope at
phase II rises sharply as a mixture of gas from the anatomic dead-
space and alveoli is exhaled. The slope at phase III is determined by
the distribution of ventilation and perfusion within the alveoli and
usually escalates until the end of the breath. The area under the
curve of this capnogram is the amount of carbon dioxide exhaled
within a tidal volume. The point-of-care ability to ascertain dead-
space and investigate V/Q abnormalities provides valuable informa-
tion about the effectiveness of ventilation. It can better focus
treatment of hypoxemia or impending hypoxemia, revealing
whether the problem is primarily a ventilation or a deadspace
issue [81–83]. Due to its ability to quantify pulmonary perfusion,
and therefore cardiac output, this is a useful non-invasive tool for
anesthetized patients [84]. To date, the use of Vcap in veterinary spe-
cies of interest has been mostly limited to research settings [85–87].
References
1 Chaturvedi R, Gogna RL. Ether day: an intriguing history. Med J Armed Forces India
2011; 67(4): 306–308.
2 Caplan RA, Posner KL, Ward RJ, et al. Adverse respiratory events in anesthesia: a
closed claims analysis. Anesthesiology 1990; 72(5): 828–833.
3 Gelb AW, Morris WW, Johnson W, et al. World Health Organization-World
Federation of Societies of Anaesthesiologists (WHO-WFSA) international standards
for a safe practice of anesthesia. Can J Anesth 2018; 65(6): 698–708.
4 Borkum JM. The tricarboxylic acid cycle as a central regulator of the rate of
aging: implications for metabolic interventions. Adv Biol (Weinh) 2023; 7(7):
e2300095.
5 Cohen JJ, Brackett NC Jr., Schwartz WB. The nature of the carbon dioxide titration
curve in the normal dog. J Clin Invest 1964; 43(5): 777–786.
6 Cullen DJ, Eger EI. Cardiovascular effects of carbon dioxide in man. Anesthesiology
1974; 41(4): 345–348.
7 Grubb RL, Raichle ME, Eichling JO, et al. The effects of changes in PaCO2 cerebral
blood volume, blood flow, and vascular mean transit time. Stroke 1974; 5(5):
630–639.
8 Yoon S, Zuccarello M, Rapoport R. pCO2 and pH regulation of cerebral blood flow.
Front Physiol 2012; 3: 365.
9 Brosnan RJ, Eger EI, Laster MJ, et al. Anesthetic properties of carbon dioxide in the
rat. Anesth Analg 2007; 105(1): 103–106.
10 van der Schrier R, van Velzen M, Roozekrans M, et al. Carbon dioxide tolerability
and toxicity in rat and man: a translational study. Front Toxicol 2022: 4.
11 Laffey JG, Kavanagh BP. Hypocapnia. N Engl J Med 2002; 347(1): 43–53.
12 Bidwell LA, Bramlage LR, Rood WA. Equine perioperative fatalities associated with
general anaesthesia at a private practice – a retrospective case series. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2007; 34(1): 23–30.
13 Brodbelt DC, Blissitt KJ, Hammond RA, et al. The risk of death: the confidential
enquiry into perioperative small animal fatalities. Vet Anaesth Analgesia 2008;
35(5): 365–373.
14 Dugdale AH, Taylor PM. Equine anaesthesia-associated mortality: where are we
now? Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43(3): 242–255.
15 Laurenza C, Ansart Lè, Portier K. Risk factors of anesthesia-related mortality and
morbidity in one equine hospital: a retrospective study on 1,161 cases undergoing
elective or emergency surgeries. Front Vet Sci 2020; 6: 514.
16 Deutsch J, Taylor PM. Mortality and morbidity in equine anaesthesia. Equine Vet
Educ 2022; 34(3): 152–168.
17 Morrison JA, Spofford N, Yang M, et al. Development and implementation of vet-
erinary anesthesia medical quality standards for primary care. Vet Anaesth Analg
2022; 49(3): 233–242.
18 Shoop-Worrall SJ, O’Neill DG, Viscasillas J, et al. Mortality related to general anaes-
thesia and sedation in dogs under UK primary veterinary care. Vet Anaesth Analg
2022; 49(5): 433–442.
19 Steen J, Romano M, Portela DA, et al. A single-cohort retrospective analysis of fac-
tors associated with morbidity and mortality in 193 anesthetized domestic goats.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2023; 50(3): 245–254.
Anatomic deadspace
Alveolar tidal volume
Phase I:
Anatomic
deadspace
Phase II: Transition
between anatomic
and alveolar gas
Phase III: Alveolar gas
Start
expiration
Volume (mL)
PCO
2 (mmHg)
V CO2
End-tidal PCO2
Alveolar PCO2
A
B
C
D
E PaCO2
Line 1
Line 2
Line 3
Figure 14.5 Volumetric capnography. The capnogram displays the expired CO 2 as a function of volume; the analyzer resets itself after each inspiration and
inspiratory PCO 2 is not visible. Expiration begins at the black dot in the lower left-hand corner of the figure (A) and the first gas exhaled is that of airway
deadspace (phase I). The sloping line of phase II (Line 1) represents a mixture of airway deadspace and alveolar gases. The phase III plateau (Line 1)
represents alveolar gases and often continues to escalate until the end of the breath. End-tidal PCO 2 is the highest PCO 2 at the end of the breath (D).
PaCO 2 (measured separately) is usually 3–6 mmHg higher than PET
CO2
. The horizontal dashed line (Line 2) at the level of PaCO2 is the theoretical PET
CO2
(E) if there were no airway or alveolar deadspace. Airway deadspace can be estimated as the expired volume at which the PCO 2 is half-way between zero
(at the beginning of phase II) and the shoulder of the plateau (at the end of phase II) (B). The area under the curve of Line 1 represents the volume of
carbon dioxide expelled during that breath (VCO2
), derived from integrating volume and CO 2 over time. The area above the curve of Line 1, to the left of
the mid- phase II vertical line (B), and below Line 2 represents airway deadspace. The area above the curve and to the right of the mid-phase II vertical line
(B), and below Line 2 represents alveolar deadspace (high V/Q) and atelectasis (0 V/Q). Mixed-expired PCO 2 (PME
CO2
) is calculated as VCO2
/tidal volume.
Average alveolar PCO2 (Pav alveolar
CO2
) is the PCO2 on the horizontal axis of Line 1, midway between the phase II vertical line and the endpoint of the breath
(C). Physiologic deadspace (%) is calculated by the Bohr equation (PaCO2 – PME
CO2
)/(PaCO2 – PI
CO2
), where PI
CO2 = inspired PCO2
. Airway deadspace
(%) can be calculated as either (Pav alveolar
CO2 – PME
CO2
)/(Pav alveolar
CO2 – PI
CO2
) or (PET
CO2 – PME
CO2
)/(PET
CO2 – PI
CO2
). Alveolar deadspace (%) is calculated
as physiologic deadspace – airway deadspace. Physiologic, airway, and alveolar deadspaces (mL) are calculated as physiologic, airway, or alveolar
deadspace (%) × tidal volume.

-- 244 of 1450 --

Chapter 14: Monitoring Ventilation 	229
20 Li G, Warner M, Lang BH, et al. Epidemiology of anesthesia-related mortality in the
United States, 1999–2005. Anesthesiology 2009; 110(4): 759–765.
21 Gottschalk A, Van Aken H, Zenz M, et al. Is anesthesia dangerous? Dtsch Arztebl Int
2011; 108(27): 469–474.
22 Pollard RJ, Hopkins T, Smith CT, et al. Perianesthetic and anesthesia-related mortal-
ity in a southeastern United States population: a longitudinal review of a prospec-
tively collected quality assurance data base. Anesth Analg 2018; 127(3): 730–735.
23 Lim G. What is new in obstetric anesthesia in 2020: a focus on research priorities
for maternal morbidity, mortality, and postpartum health. Int J Obst Anesth 2022;
51: 103568.
24 Saunders R, Struys MMRF, Pollock RF, et al. Patient safety during procedural seda-
tion using capnography monitoring: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ
Open 2017; 7(6): e013402.
25 Wollner E, Nourian MM, Booth W, et al. Impact of capnography on patient safety
in high- and low-income settings: a scoping review. Br J Anaesth 2020; 125(1):
e88–e103.
26 Khanna AK, Bergese SD, Jungquist CR, et al. Prediction of opioid-induced respira-
tory depression on inpatient wards using continuous capnography and oximetry:
an international prospective, observational trial. Anesth Analg 2020; 131(4):
1012–1024.
27 Stites M, Surprise J, McNiel J, et al. Continuous capnography reduces the incidence
of opioid-induced respiratory rescue by hospital rapid resuscitation team. J Patient
Saf 2021; 17(6): e557–e561.
28 American College of Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia (ACVAA).
Recommendations for Monitoring Anesthetized Veterinary Patients, 2009.
www.acvaa.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Small-Animal-Monitoring-Guidlines.
pdf (accessed July 2023).
29 American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA). Standards for Basic Anesthetic
Monitoring, 2020. www.asahq.org/standards-and- practice-parameters/standards-
for-basic-anesthetic-monitoring (accessed July 2023).
30 Thomas J, Lerche P. Anesthetic monitoring. In: Thomas J, Lerche P, eds. Anesthesia
and Analgesia for Veterinary Technicians, 5th edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2017: 195.
31 Severinghaus JW, Freeman Bradley A. Electrodes for blood pO2 and pCO2 determi-
nation. J Appl Physiol 1958; 13(3): 515–520.
32 Hayden SR, Sciammarella J, Viccellio P, et al. Colorimetric end-tidal CO2 detector
for verification of endotracheal tube placement in out-of-hospital cardiac arrest.
Acad Emerg Med 1995; 2(6): 499–502.
33 Nakatani K, Yukioka H, Fujimori M, et al. Utility of colorimetric end-tidal carbon
dioxide detector for monitoring during prehospital cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
Am J Emerg Med 1999; 17(2): 203–206.
34 Sakles JC, Ross C, Kovacs G. Preventing unrecognized esophageal intubation in the
emergency department. J Am Coll Emerg Physicians Open 2023; 4(3): e12951.
35 Jaffe MB. Respiratory gas analysis-technical aspects. Anesth Analg 2018; 126(3):
839–845.
36 Fletcher R, Werner O, Nordström L, et al. Sources of error and their correction in
the measurement of carbon dioxide elimination using the Siemens-Elema CO 2
Analyzer. Br J Anaesth 1983; 55(2): 177–185.
37 Neto FJT, Carregaro AB, Mannarino R, et al. Comparison of a sidestream capno-
graph and a mainstream capnograph in mechanically ventilated dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2002; 221(11): 1582–1585.
38 Weingarten M. Respiratory monitoring of carbon dioxide and oxygen: a ten-year
perspective. J Clin Monit 1990; 6(3): 217–225.
39 Lockwood GG, Landon MJ, Chakrabarti MK, et al. The Ohmeda Rascal II. A new
gas analyser for anaesthetic use. Anaesthesia 1994; 49(1): 44–53.
40 Grévisse P, Delcambre Y, Picart P, et al. Turning the mass-spectrometer into an easy
to handle clinical instrument for routine multipatient surveillance of respiratory
and anesthetic gases during anesthesia. Acta Anaesthesiol Belg 1987; 38(1): 37–43.
41 Turner PG, Dugdale A, Young IS, et al. Portable mass spectrometry for measurement
of anaesthetic agents and methane in respiratory gases. Vet J 2008; 177(1): 36–44.
42 Barter LS, Hopper K. Transcutaneous monitor approximates PaCO(2
) but not
PaO(2 ) in anesthetized rabbits. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38(6): 568–575.
43 Mann FA, Wagner-Mann C, Branson KR. Transcutaneous oxygen and carbon diox-
ide monitoring in normal cats. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 1997; 7(2): 99–109.
44 Vogt R, Rohling R, Kästner S. Evaluation of a combined transcutaneous carbon
dioxide pressure and pulse oximetry sensor in adult sheep and dogs. Am J Vet Res
2007; 68(3): 265–270.
45 Holowaychuk MK, Fujita H, Bersenas AME. Evaluation of a transcutaneous blood
gas monitoring system in critically ill dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2014; 24(5):
545–553.
46 Eberhard P. The design, use, and results of transcutaneous carbon dioxide analysis:
current and future directions. Anesth Analg 2007; 105(6 Suppl): S48–S52.
47 Choudhury M, Kiran U, Choudhary SK, et al. Arterial-to-end-tidal carbon dioxide
tension difference in children with congenital heart disease. J Cardiothorac Vasc
Anesth 2006; 20(2): 196–201.
48 Heneghan CPH, Scallan MJH, Branthwaite MA. End-tidal carbon dioxide during
thoracotomy. Anaesthesia 1981; 36(11): 1017–1021.
49 Carr JMJR, Caldwell HG, Ainslie PN. Cerebral blood flow, cerebrovascular reactivity
and their influence on ventilatory sensitivity. Exp Physiol 2021; 106(7): 1425–1448.
50 Greene SA. Anesthesia for patients with neurologic disease. Top Companion Anim
Med 2010; 25(2): 83–86.
51 Edwards R, Winnie AP, Ramamurthy S. Acute hypocapneic hypokalemia: an iatro-
genic anesthetic complication. Anesth Analg 1977; 56(6): 786–792.
52 Hassan H, Gjessing J, Tomlin PJ. Hypercapnia and hyperkalaemia. Anaesthesia
1979; 34(9): 897–899.
53 Muir WW III, Wagner AE, Buchanan C. Effects of acute hyperventilation on serum
potassium in the dog. Vet Surg 1990; 19(1): 83–87.
54 Fletcher DJ, Boller M, Brainard BM, et al. RECOVER evidence and knowledge gap
analysis on veterinary CPR. Part 7: clinical guidelines. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2012;
22(Suppl 1): S102–S131.
55 Hamrick JL, Hamrick JT, Lee JK, et al. Efficacy of chest compressions directed by
end-tidal CO2 feedback in a pediatric resuscitation model of basic life support. J Am
Heart Assoc 2014; 3(2): e000450.
56 Hofmeister EH, Brainard BM, Egger CM, et al. Prognostic indicators for dogs and
cats with cardiopulmonary arrest treated by cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscita-
tion at a university teaching hospital. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2009; 235(1): 50–57.
57 Haryadi DG, Orr JA, Kuck K, et al. Partial CO2 rebreathing indirect Fick technique
for non-invasive measurement of cardiac output. J Clin Monit Comput 2000;
16(5–6): 361–374.
58 Van Heerden PV, Baker S, Lim SI, et al. Clinical evaluation of the Non-Invasive
Cardiac Output (NICO) monitor in the intensive care unit. Anaesth Intensive Care
2000; 28(4): 427–430.
59 Giguère S, Bucki E, Adin DB, et al. Cardiac output measurement by partial carbon
dioxide rebreathing, 2-dimensional echocardiography, and lithium-dilution
method in anesthetized neonatal foals. J Vet Intern Med 2005; 19(5): 737–743.
60 Kelmer E, Scanson LC, Reed A, et al. Agreement between values for arterial and
end-tidal partial pressures of carbon dioxide in spontaneously breathing, critically
ill dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2009; 235(11): 1314–1318.
61 Wong DM, Alcott CJ, Wang C, et al. Agreement between arterial partial pressure of
carbon dioxide and saturation of hemoglobin with oxygen values obtained by direct
arterial blood measurements versus noninvasive methods in conscious healthy and
ill foals. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2011; 239(10): 1341–1347.
62 Pang D, Hethey J, Caulkett NA, et al. Partial pressure of end-tidal CO 2 sampled via
an intranasal catheter as a substitute for partial pressure of arterial CO 2 in dogs.
J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2007; 17(2): 143–148.
63 Williams HM. Alveolar-arterial oxygen pressure gradient in normal dogs.
Am J Physiol 1953; 173(1): 77–81.
64 Hightower CE, Kiorpes AL, Butler HC, et al. End-tidal partial pressure of CO2 as an
estimate of arterial partial pressure of CO2 during various ventilatory regimens in
halothane- anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 1980; 41(4): 610–612.
65 Grosenbaugh DA, Muir WW III. Accuracy of noninvasive oxyhemoglobin satura-
tion, end-tidal carbon dioxide concentration, and blood pressure monitoring dur-
ing experimentally induced hypoxemia, hypotension, or hypertension in
anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 1998; 59(2): 205–212.
66 Wagner AE, Gaynor JS, Dunlop CI, et al. Monitoring adequacy of ventilation by cap-
nometry during thoracotomy in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1998; 212(3): 377–379.
67 Hendricks JC, King LG. Practicality, usefulness, and limits of end-tidal carbon dioxide
monitoring in critical small animal patients. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 1994; 4(1): 29–39.
68 Littlejohn A, Mitchell B. Acid–base and blood gas studies in horses. I. A compari-
son of capillary and arterial blood samples for the estimation of acid–base values in
horses. Res Vet Sci 1969; 10(3): 260–262.
69 Meyer RE, Short CE. Arterial to end-tidal CO2 tension and alveolar dead space in
halothane- or isoflurane-anesthetized ponies. Am J Vet Res 1985; 46(3): 597–599.
70 Cribb PH. Capnographic monitoring during anesthesia with controlled ventilation
in the horse. Vet Surg 1988; 17(1): 48–52.
71 Geiser DR, Rohrbach BW. Use of end-tidal CO2 tension to predict arterial CO2 values
in isoflurane-anesthetized equine neonates. Am J Vet Res 1992; 53(9): 1617–1621.
72 Neto FJ, Luna SP, Massone F, et al. The effect of changing the mode of ventilation on the
arterial-to-end-tidal CO2 difference and physiological dead space in laterally and dor-
sally recumbent horses during halothane anesthesia. Vet Surg 2000; 29(2): 200–205.
73 Koenig J, McDonell W, Valverde A. Accuracy of pulse oximetry and capnography in
healthy and compromised horses during spontaneous and controlled ventilation.
Can J Vet Res 2003; 67(3): 169–174.
74 Mosing M, Böhm SH, Rasis A, et al. Physiologic factors influencing the arterial-to-
end-tidal CO2 difference and the alveolar dead space fraction in spontaneously
breathing anesthetised horses. Front Vet Sci 2018; 5: 58.
75 Edling TM, Degernes LA, Flammer K, et al. Capnographic monitoring of anesthe-
tized African grey parrots receiving intermittent positive pressure ventilation.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2001; 219(12): 1714–1718.

-- 245 of 1450 --

230 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
76 Desmarchelier M, Rondenay Y, Fitzgerald G, et al. Monitoring of the ventilatory
status of anesthetized birds of prey by using end-tidal carbon dioxide measured
with a Microstream capnometer. J Zoo Wildl Med 2007; 38(1): 1–6.
77 Paré M, Ludders JW, Erb HN. Association of partial pressure of carbon dioxide in
expired gas and arterial blood at three different ventilation states in apneic chickens
(Gallus domesticus) during air sac insufflation anesthesia. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013;
40(3): 245–256.
78 Pettifer GR, Cornick-Seahorn J, Smith JA, et al. The comparative cardiopulmonary
effects of spontaneous and controlled ventilation by using the Hallowell EMC
Anesthesia WorkStation in Hispaniolan Amazon Parrots (Amazona ventralis).
J Avian Med Surg 2002; 16(4): 268–276.
79 Hernandez-Divers SM, Schumacher J, Stahl S, et al. Comparison of isoflurane and
sevoflurane anesthesia after premedication with butorphanol in the green iguana
(Iguana iguana). J Zoo Wildl Med 2005; 36(2): 169–175.
80 Tusman G, Sipmann FS, Böhm SH. Rationale of dead space measurement by volu-
metric capnography. Anesth Analg 2012; 114(4): 866–874.
81 Verscheure S, Massion PB, Verschuren F, et al. Volumetric capnography: lessons
from the past and current clinical applications. Crit Care 2016; 20(1): 184.
82 Sacks M, Mosing M. Volumetric capnography to diagnose venous air embolism in
an anaesthetised horse. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(1): 189–190.
83 Zhang L, Jin K, Sun F, et al. Assessment of a new volumetric capnography-derived
parameter to reflect compression quality and to predict return of spontaneous cir-
culation during cardiopulmonary resuscitation in a porcine model. J Clin Monit
Comput 2022; 36(1): 199–207.
84 Kremeier P, Böhm SH, Tusman G. Clinical use of volumetric capnography in
mechanically ventilated patients. J Clin Monit Comput 2020; 34(1): 7–16.
85 Bumbacher S, Schramel JP, Mosing M. Evaluation of three tidal volumes (10, 12 and
15 mL kg(-1)) in dogs for controlled mechanical ventilation assessed by volumetric
capnography: a randomized clinical trial. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(4): 775–784.
86 Mosing M, Auer U, MacFarlane P, et al. Regional ventilation distribution and dead
space in anaesthetized horses treated with and without continuous positive airway
pressure: novel insights by electrical impedance tomography and volumetric cap-
nography. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45(1): 31–40.
87 Portela DA, Di Franco C, Chiavaccini L, et al. Effect of end-inspiratory pause on
airway and physiological dead space in anesthetized horses. Vet Anaesth Analg
2023; 50(4): 363–371.

-- 246 of 1450 --

231
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The S ixth E dition of L umb and J ones	. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
The goal of physiologic monitoring during anesthesia is to ensure
an adequate oxygen supply to maintain mitochondrial aerobic
metabolism and, ultimately, cellular function. Several techniques
have been developed to monitor oxygenation for clinical and
research purposes. Currently, there is no gold standard technique
for monitoring oxygenation that combines quick response time,
suitability for in vivo assessment, ease of use, inexpensiveness, and
ability to evaluate local and regional tissue oxygenation. The avail-
able techniques provide information reflecting the status of the
whole body, making them unsuitable to detect regional and local
alterations until they are well established and may have resulted in
irreversible organ damage. On the other hand, many techniques
that specifically investigate oxygen concentrations at the cellular
level are only applicable in vitro, on prepared isolated tissues, or are
poorly applicable to the clinical setting due to cost of the equip-
ment, difficulty of use, and limited experience in veterinary patients.
This chapter describes the techniques available for real-time
monitoring of tissue oxygenation and metabolism in living animals,
with a focus on the technical aspects, clinical use, and limitations.
Hypoxia versus hypoxemia
Although the terms hypoxia and hypoxemia are often used inter-
changeably, they are not the same (Table 15.1). Hypoxia is a condi-
tion in which the supply of oxygen to tissues fails to ensure normal
cellular metabolism, whereas hypoxemia describes a state of low
arterial oxygen tension (interchangeably referred to as “oxygen par-
tial pressure”). Hypoxemia is a frequent cause of tissue hypoxia, but
it is not the only one, with other major causes being anemia, histo-
toxicity, and reduced forward blood flow. The causes of hypoxemia
are classified in various ways in the literature and include low
inspired oxygen partial pressure, hypoventilation, and venous
admixture. Venous admixture represents all the ways venous blood
can move from the right to the left side of the circulation without
being oxygenated, including low ventilation–perfusion (V/Q)
ratios, anatomic or physiologic shunt, and diffusion impairment.
Some authors will also include reduced venous oxygen content sec-
ondary to either low cardiac output or high oxygen extraction by
the tissues (e.g., seizures) [1].
Alveolar gas equation
The alveolar gas equation allows the calculation of the expected
partial pressure of oxygen in alveoli (PA
O2
) and, subsequently, the
evaluation of pulmonary gas exchange. It is commonly written as
P O 	mmHg 	FO 	P 	P 	PaCO /R	A 	I 	B 	H O	2 	2 	2 	2
where FI
O2 is the fraction of inspired oxygen (21% in room air),
PB – PH2O is the estimated barometric pressure minus the partial
pressure of water in fully humidified inspired gas, PaCO 2 is the
partial pressure of carbon dioxide in arterial blood, and R is the
15 Monitoring Oxygenation
Chiara Adami
Department of Veterinary Medicine, Cambridge Veterinary School, University of Cambridge, Madingley Road, Cambridge, UK
Chapter contents
Introduction, 231
Hypoxia versus hypoxemia, 231
Alveolar gas equation, 232
Oxygen content, delivery, and consumption, 232
Oxygen content, 232
Oxygen delivery, 232
Oxygen consumption, 232
Oxygen extraction ratio, 232
Visual assessment of oxygenation, 232
Measuring oxygen partial pressure, 232
Arterial blood gas analysis, 232
Transcutaneous measurement of blood gases, 233
Measuring hemoglobin saturation with oxygen, 233
CO-oximetry, 234
Pulse oximetry, 234
Inspired and expired oxygen concentrations, 236
Near-infrared and Raman spectroscopy, 237
Other techniques, 238
Continuous laser Doppler flowmetry, 238
Mitochondrial redox state, 238
References, 238

-- 247 of 1450 --

232 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
respiratory quotient. The respiratory quotient is an expression of
the ratio of CO2 elimination over O2 uptake, and it varies slightly
with diet and metabolic state but is typically estimated at 0.8.
Knowledge of the expected PA
O2 in comparison to the measured
arterial partial pressure of oxygen (PaO 2
) allows for the evaluation
of pulmonary gas exchange.
Oxygen content, delivery, and consumption
The following equations are fundamental in the evaluation of
oxygen transport and utilization.
Oxygen content
Oxygen content of arterial blood (CaO2
) is the total amount of
oxygen in arterial blood and is calculated as follows:
CaO 	mL/dL 	Hb SaO 	PaO	2 	2 	2	1 34 	0 0031	. 	.
where Hb is the total hemoglobin concentration and SaO 2 is the
arterial saturation of hemoglobin with oxygen (see discussion of
functional versus fractional oxygen saturation below). The first
term of the equation represents the amount of oxygen bound to
hemoglobin, and the second term characterizes the quantity of
oxygen dissolved in plasma. The vast majority of the oxygen in
blood is carried by hemoglobin (~98%), whereas only a small
amount is dissolved (~2%).
Oxygen delivery
Oxygen delivery ( DO2
) is the amount of oxygen delivered to the
tissues each minute and is calculated as follows:
DO 	mL/minute 	CO CaO	2 	2
where CO is cardiac output in L/min. It is important to note that
adequate oxygen delivery is dependent on adequate cardiac output,
hemoglobin concentration, and PaO2 . This calculation does not
consider abnormal hemoglobin species such as methemoglobin or
carboxyhemoglobin.
Oxygen consumption
Oxygen consumption ( VO2 ) is the amount of oxygen used for met-
abolic processes per minute and is calculated via the Fick equation:
VO 	mL/ 	CO C a 	v O	2 	2	min
where C(a–v)O2 is the difference between systemic arterial and
mixed venous (i.e., pulmonary arterial) oxygen content. If both DO2
and VO2 are known, the oxygen extraction ratio can be calculated.
Oxygen extraction ratio
The oxygen extraction ratio (O 2
ER) is simply VO2 divided by DO2
:
O ER 	VO /DO	2 	2 	2
 	 	.
Causes of increased O 2
ER include anything that increases oxygen
consumption (e.g., seizures, hyperthermia, and sepsis) or decreases
oxygen delivery (including hypoxemia and anemia). A low O 2
ER is
usually due to decreased oxygen consumption as caused by anes-
thesia, mechanical ventilation, and hypothermia. A major factor
limiting routine clinical use of O 2
ER is that it requires measurement
of mixed venous O2 via a pulmonary arterial catheter.
Visual assessment of oxygenation
Gray to blue mucous membrane discoloration (cyanosis) indicates
the presence of deoxygenated blood in the observed tissue. The
detection of cyanosis may be unreliable as a measure of tissue oxy-
genation, however, as it depends upon both the visual acuity of the
observer and the local concentration of deoxygenated hemoglobin;
moreover, it may be affected by lighting conditions [2]. A minimal
concentration of deoxygenated hemoglobin (5 g/dL) is required to
cause a degree of cyanosis sufficient to be detected visually [3].
Therefore, an anemic animal might be hypoxemic without showing
cyanosis because the decreased hemoglobin concentration would
be saturated with oxygen even in the presence of considerably
reduced partial pressures of oxygen in the blood. Drug-induced
peripheral vasoconstriction (e.g., as caused by α2
- adrenergic recep-
tor agonists) can cause peripheral cyanosis. When peripheral blood
flow slows down due to vasoconstriction, oxygen can diffuse into
the tissues over a longer time (i.e., oxygen extraction increases),
leaving more deoxygenated hemoglobin in the capillary bed [4].
Measuring oxygen partial pressure
The partial pressure of oxygen (PO2
) can be measured in a liquid
(e.g., blood), a gas (e.g., inspired gas), or at the skin using technol-
ogy based on the polarographic Clark electrode, which is composed
of a silver anode, a platinum cathode, and a gas-permeable mem-
brane through which oxygen molecules can diffuse freely. When a
polarizing voltage is applied to the cathode, a current that is propor-
tional to the partial pressure of oxygen is generated between the
anode and the cathode, where oxygen is reduced. The following
information focuses on the measurement of PO2 in arterial blood,
mixed venous blood, or diffusing through the skin. Measurement of
oxygen in inspired and expired gas will be discussed in a separate
section later in this chapter.
Arterial blood gas analysis
Analysis of arterial blood gases includes the measurement of partial
pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the arterial blood,
reported in North America in mmHg. Partial pressures are often
misinterpreted as a measure of how much oxygen and carbon diox-
ide are in the blood; however, instead, they indicate the pressure
exerted by the dissolved, unbound molecules of each gas against the
measuring electrode. The only parameter that quantifies the amount
of oxygen in the blood, expressed as mL/dL, is the CaO2
, which is
calculated from both SaO 2 and PaO 2 values as outlined above.
Table 15.1 Comparison of the causes of tissue hypoxia (low oxygen concentrations in
tissues) with causes of hypoxemia (low oxygen partial pressure in arterial blood).
Causes of hypoxia 	Causes of hypoxemia
Hypoxemic hypoxia
Low arterial oxygen tension
Anemic hypoxia
Low hemoglobin concentration
Stagnant/ischemic hypoxia
Decreased perfusion
Histotoxic hypoxia
Inability of mitochondria to utilize delivered
oxygen
Decreased inspired oxygen partial
pressure
Hypoventilation
Venous admixture
Areas of low V/Q
Physiologic or anatomic shunt
Diffusion impairment
Venous admixture includes the various ways blood can move from the right to the left
side of circulation without being oxygenated. V, ventilation; Q, perfusion. Areas of
high V/Q do not cause venous admixture.

-- 248 of 1450 --

Chapter 15: Monitoring Oxygenation 	233
Arterial oxygen saturation of hemoglobin is a function of PaO 2
, and
their relationship is expressed by the oxygen–hemoglobin dissocia-
tion curve. Arterial blood gas analysis remains the most popular
method for advanced monitoring of oxygenation in animals, with
PaO 2
, SaO 2
, and the calculated alveolar–arterial (A-a) gradient used
clinically to assess oxygenation. The A-a gradient is the measured
arterial PO2 (PaO2 ) subtracted from the PA
O2
, calculated from the
alveolar gas equation. A normal A-a gradient is less than 20 mmHg.
As the A-a gradient widens during oxygen supplementation, the
ratio of PaO2 to fractional inspired oxygen (PaO 2
/FI
O2
), also known
as the “Horowitz index,” may be calculated instead. At sea level, the
normal PaO 2
/FI
O2 ratio is approximately 400–500; values below 400
suggest the presence of gas exchange abnormalities. The PaO2
/FI
O2
ratio is a widely used clinical indicator of pulmonary function; nev-
ertheless, its reliability is controversial. The main disadvantages of
using the PaO2 /FI
O2 ratio to guide clinical decisions are its depend-
ence on barometric pressure and its inability to distinguish alveolar
hypoventilation from other causes of hypoxemia, such as V/Q mis-
match and shunt [5,6]. Moreover, the PaO 2
/FI
O2 ratio does not
indicate CaO 2 , which depends on hemoglobin concentration, nor
does it provide information on oxygen delivery to tissues [5,6].
The biggest limitation of arterial blood gas analysis is its inability
to detect regional or local changes in tissue oxygenation. The non-
continuous nature of monitoring and the costs associated with
repeated testing also represent clinically relevant limitations. In
addition, arterial blood gas analysis requires anaerobic sampling
and either immediate analysis or special handling.
There are no unanimous guidelines with respect to the frequency
of arterial blood sampling and analysis for proper monitoring of the
oxygenation status in animals. In human patients undergoing thora-
coscopy, it takes only 5, 10, or 20 min for the arterial partial pressure
of oxygen to change by 10%, 20%, or 40% of its initial value, respec-
tively [7]. This finding may suggest that frequent sampling would be
necessary for prompt detection of severe changes in blood oxygena-
tion in animals with compromised respiratory function. Another
potential disadvantage of monitoring oxygenation through arterial
blood gas analysis is the need for placing an indwelling arterial cath-
eter to facilitate frequent blood sampling. Although this procedure is
usually performed in animals with no or minor complications,
hematoma formation, hemorrhage, vasculitis, and thrombus forma-
tion are possible sequelae. Moreover, obtaining arterial samples can
be technically challenging in very small animals, and frequent blood
sampling from small patients may result in iatrogenic anemia.
Mixed venous oxygen partial pressure
Mixed venous blood refers to blood in the pulmonary artery and is
representative of venous blood from all organs and tissues. The par-
tial pressure of oxygen in mixed venous blood (PvO2 ) reflects meta-
bolic activity and oxygen consumption. The normal PvO2 while
breathing room air is around 40 mmHg, corresponding to a satura-
tion of around 70% (see discussion of mixed venous O 2 saturation
below). The PvO2 can be used to calculate mixed venous O 2 con-
tent, VO2
, and O2
ER; however, the measurement of PvO2 requires
placement of a pulmonary arterial catheter. This procedure is rarely
performed in veterinary patients and has fallen out of favor in criti-
cally ill human patients [8].
Transcutaneous measurement of blood gases
Transcutaneous blood gas monitoring systems are commercially
available and have been used in dogs, sheep, mice, rats, and cats [9–
12]. Blood gases diffusing through the skin can be detected and
quantified by a sensor applied to the body surface. The digital sen-
sors used to measure transcutaneous gases incorporate a Clark elec-
trode for PO2 measurement and a Severinghaus-type sensor to
detect PCO 2
. There are models that incorporate pulse oximetry
instead of the Clark electrode [13]. The PCO 2 is measured from the
pH of an electrolyte solution separated from the skin by a mem-
brane that is highly permeable to CO 2
; the changes in pH of the
electrolyte solution are proportional to the logarithm of the changes
in PCO2
. The sensor must be heated to 41 °C/105.8 °F prior to use
to enhance local blood perfusion and CO 2 diffusion though the
intact skin.
The main advantage of transcutaneous monitoring is that this
technique is suitable for continuous and non-invasive monitoring
of oxygenation and ventilation. It provides real-time information
on partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide, enabling clini-
cians to detect changes in respiratory status more quickly than with
intermittent blood gas analysis. Moreover, its use avoids the draw-
backs and costs associated with frequent arterial blood sample col-
lection and analysis.
Transcutaneous blood gas monitoring is widely used in human
medicine, especially in neonatal patients, to obtain non-invasive
and continuous blood gas measurements during mechanical venti-
lation or procedures potentially resulting in impaired gas exchange,
such as bronchoscopy and bronchial lavage [14]. Other applications
include monitoring of respiratory function associated with sleep
apnea or other conditions potentially resulting in hypoxemia and
hypercapnia [15]. In the veterinary literature, however, information
pertaining to transcutaneous blood gas monitoring is limited and
seems to suggest that transcutaneous measurement of PCO2 lacks
accuracy [10–12,16–19]. In dogs, transcutaneous PCO2 overesti-
mated PaCO 2 by more than 10 mmHg; moreover, quick changes in
PaCO 2 caused by alterations of the breathing pattern were detected
by transcutaneous monitoring with a 6-min delay [12]. It was,
therefore, concluded that, while transcutaneous PCO 2 monitoring
might be useful for detecting changes or trends in PaCO2
, it was not
sufficiently accurate to be used as a valid surrogate of PaCO2 . Very
similar conclusions were drawn from a study conducted in rats,
whereas in mice a good correlation was established between trans-
cutaneous PCO2 and PaCO2 [10,11]. An experimental study con-
ducted on anesthetized dogs demonstrated that decreases in cardiac
output caused by iatrogenic hemorrhage resulted in less accurate
PCO2 readings; however, correlation with PaO2 values improved
after fluid resuscitation [16]. In critically ill dogs, the level of agree-
ment between transcutaneous and arterial readings was lower than
that reported in human patients, and the transcutaneous monitor
consistently overestimated both PaO2 and PaCO2 [19]. In a slightly
different application, some studies report the use of transcutaneous
PCO2 to evaluate skin graft viability in experimental dogs [17,18].
One study investigated the use of transcutaneous oxygen monitor-
ing in Louisiana pine snakes [20].
Measuring hemoglobin saturation
with oxygen
The percentage of hemoglobin saturated with oxygen is measured
clinically either by CO-oximetry or pulse oximetry. It is important
to note that these methodologies report slightly different values.
A CO-oximeter can measure all forms of hemoglobin, including
the abnormal forms that cannot bind oxygen: carboxyhemoglobin
(COHb), methemoglobin (MetHb), and sulfhemoglobin (SulfHb).
Consequently, CO-oximeters report the fractional hemoglobin

-- 249 of 1450 --

234 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
saturation (FO 2
Hb), that is, the percent of total hemoglobin that is
saturated by oxygen:
FO Hb 	O Hb/O Hb HHb COHb MetHb SulfHb	2 	2 	2
where O 2
Hb represents hemoglobin bound to oxygen and HHb is
reduced or deoxygenated hemoglobin. Pulse oximeters, on the
other hand, generally cannot measure abnormal hemoglobins and,
therefore, report functional hemoglobin saturation (SO2
), that is, the
fraction of effective hemoglobin that is saturated by oxygen:
SO 	O Hb/O Hb HHb	2 	2 	2 	.
In most patients, FO 2
Hb and SO 2 will be very similar, with the SO 2
slightly higher as small amounts of COHb and MetHb exist in nor-
mal individuals. When significant concentrations of abnormal Hb
exist, the FO2
Hb is the correct parameter to use in the calculation of
CaO2 and DO2
.
Historically, the direct measurement of hemoglobin saturation
with oxygen in blood was accomplished via the volumetric or man-
ometric methods in which the volume of gas or the pressure exerted
by that gas was directly measured. Modern methodology incorpo-
rates spectrophotometers that detect the absorbance of light by the
molecules of interest. Moreover, pulse oximeters non-invasively
measure hemoglobin saturation with oxygen using spectrophotom-
etry. The following discussion will address both invasive and non-
invasive techniques for SO2 measurement.
CO-oximetry
CO- oximetry (also known as “hemoximetry”) reports total Hb,
saturation of arterial or venous Hb by oxygen, as well as concentra-
tions of abnormal hemoglobins. CO-oximeters utilize spectropho-
tometry with multiple wavelengths of light. A blood sample placed
in the machine is heated and hemolyzed. Light is fractionated and
filtered, with specific wavelengths directed through the blood sam-
ple and onto photodiode sensors. According to the Beer–Lambert
law, the absorbance of light of a specific wavelength is logarithmi-
cally related to the concentration of molecules in a solution that will
absorb that wavelength. Most modern blood gas analyzers now
have an integrated CO-oximeter such that the reported saturation is
measured (i.e., FO 2 Hb). Some older analyzers, however, do not have
this capability, and the reported saturation may be calculated based
on the measured PO 2 using an idealized oxygen–hemoglobin
dissociation curve. If the resulting estimated saturation is used in
various calculations of oxygenation (e.g., CaO 2 or DO2
), clinically
important error may be introduced.
Arterial hemoglobin saturation
Direct measurement of arterial hemoglobin saturation with oxygen
(FaO2
Hb) is achieved with CO-oximetric analysis of a properly
handled arterial blood sample. As described above, the CO-
oximetric FaO 2
Hb is the proportion of total hemoglobin that is oxy-
genated, as all species of hemoglobins are investigated.
Mixed venous hemoglobin saturation
Mixed venous oxygen saturation (SvO2
), that is the saturation by
oxygen of hemoglobin as measured in the pulmonary artery, can be
used to assess the adequacy of systemic oxygen delivery versus
consumption. While breathing room air, SvO2 in the healthy patient
is expected to be between 65% and 80%. A low SvO2 indicates
that DO2 is not meeting metabolic oxygen demands, helping to
guide clinical decision-making in critically ill patients. Continuous
measurement of SvO2 can be achieved with a fiberoptic catheter
equipped with a CO-oximeter [21]. However, as previously men-
tioned, placement of pulmonary arterial catheters has fallen out of
routine use in human medicine and is rarely performed in veteri-
nary clinical practice. Blood obtained from the cranial vena cava
may be used as a reasonable clinical surrogate of mixed venous
blood to assess central venous oxygen saturation (ScvO 2 ) [22–24].
Jugular venous saturation (SjvO2
) is used mostly to monitor
brain oxygenation. Venous samples can be obtained through an
indwelling jugular catheter and analyzed intermittently; alterna-
tively, for continuous monitoring of SjvO 2 , the use of specific fiber-
optic jugular catheters equipped with an oximeter is required.
Measured SjvO 2 is used to assess the balance between cerebral
oxygen delivery and cerebral oxygen demand and is therefore used
as an indirect marker of the cerebral metabolic rate of oxygen
(CMRO 2
). The therapeutic target for this purpose is generally to
maintain SjvO2 values greater than 50%. Increased oxygen supply or
decreased oxygen demand will increase SjvO2
, whereas decreased
supply and increased demand will have the opposite effect. Clinical
scenarios that cause decreased SjvO 2 include generalized hypox-
emia, local or systemic hypoperfusion, and increased cerebral
metabolism or oxygen extraction resulting from conditions such as
pyrexia and seizures [21,25]. In contrast, increased SjvO2 may result
from reduced cerebral metabolism, alteration in oxygen diffusion
or extraction due to neuronal infarction or inflammation, or cere-
bral hyperemia.
The arteriovenous difference in oxygen (AVDO 2 ) can be extrap-
olated from SaO 2 and SjvO2
. It is postulated that, while SjvO2 is
accepted as a measure of oxygen delivery, AVDO 2 may better repre-
sent cerebral extraction of oxygen [26]. As a measure of oxygen
extraction, low AVDO 2 may suggest the presence of neuronal
infarction, with resulting metabolic derangement and mitochon-
drial injury.
On a balance of risk and benefit, SjvO 2 monitoring is considered
a safe and valuable tool. However, it has several limitations. First, it
relies on several assumptions, including static SaO2 , hemoglobin
concentration, and hemoglobin dissociation over time. Second, it
cannot be used to detect focal brain ischemia as the gained informa-
tion rather reflects the generalized brain perfusion and oxygenation
status. Finally, although placement and maintenance of central
venous catheters is a relatively simple procedure in dogs and has
been associated with a low incidence of life-threatening seque-
lae [27], puncture of the carotid artery, hematoma formation, infec-
tion, thrombosis, and raised intracranial pressure remain possible
complications in animals as well as in humans. Pitfalls of measure-
ments may result from positional changes of the head, micro-
thrombi formation at tip of the catheter, and the necessity for
frequent calibrations whenever fiberoptic catheters are used [21].
Pulse oximetry
Pulse oximetry is based on the principle that O2
Hb and HHb hemo-
globin differentially absorb red and near-infrared light, with O 2
Hb
absorbing greater amounts of near-infrared light and lower amounts
of red light than does HHb. This is consistent with clinical observa-
tion, as well-oxygenated blood, with its higher concentration of
O 2
Hb, appears bright red to the eye because it scatters more red
light than does HHb. Traditional pulse oximeters emit two wave-
lengths of light, red light (at 660 nm), and near-infrared light (at
940 nm) from light-emitting diodes located in one arm of the
probe [28]. The light that is transmitted through the tissues is then
detected by a photodiode on the opposite arm of the probe

-- 250 of 1450 --

Chapter 15: Monitoring Oxygenation 	235
(transmittance). In the case of reflectance probes, the sensing diode
is placed next to the transmitting diode. The relative amount of red
and infrared light absorbed are used to determine the proportion of
hemoglobin bound to oxygen (SpO2
), based on the Beer–Lambert
law which logarithmically correlates the concentration of a sub-
stance with the absorbance of transmitted light of a certain wave-
length (Fig. 15.1). The signal is divided into an AC component
(representative of greater light absorption during pulsatile arterial
flow) and a DC component (the baseline light absorption by venous
blood and tissue) (Fig. 15.2). The pulse oximeter analyzes the
absorption of light by measuring the increase in light absorption
due to the increase in arterial blood volume during systole, calculat-
ing an optical density ratio (R) using the following equation:
R AC/DC 	nm
AC/DC 	nm
660
940
A manufacturer-specific algorithm is used to correlate R to
SpO2
, which is expressed on the screen as a percentage. Many pulse
oximeters display the photoplethysmograph, a waveform indicating
the change in light absorption over time indicative of peripheral pul-
satile blood flow. Useful information on the patient’s cardiovascular
performance can be gained from plethysmogram analysis [29].
COHb
MetHb
O 2Hb
HHb
	Absorption (extinction)
coefficient
Wavelength (nm)
10
1
0.1
0.01
600 640 680 720 760 800 840 880 920 960
Red 	Near-IR
Figure 15.1 Absorption spectra for O 2 Hb, HHb, COHb, and MetHb
species. The absorption (extinction) coefficient of the four different
Hb species is plotted as a function of the wavelength of the incident
light. Note that COHb and O 2 Hb absorb red light similarly (black arrow).
In addition, red light absorbance of MetHb and HHb are nearly
identical (white arrow), and that MetHb absorbs red and near-infrared
light equally well. O 2 Hb, oxyhemoglobin; HHb, deoxyhemoglobin;
COHb, carboxyhemoglobin; MetHb; methemoglobin.
Source: Chan et al. [32], with permission of Elsevier.
(A)
Relative volumes of the non-	
pulsatile (“DC”) and pulsatile
	(“AC”) tissue compartments
Arterial Blood
Venous & Capillary Blood, Stationary Tissues
Time
Change in red light absorbance
Change in infrared light absorbance
aVR ×2
25 mm/s
Cardiac cycle
(B)
AC
systole
diastole
DC	DC
AC
artery 	capillary
or vein
DC
(C)
Red
IR
Ared-Ac /Ared-DC
AIR-AC/A IR-DC
Red
IR
Red:Infrared
Modulation ratio (R)
70 	80 	90
SpO2 (%)
100
systole &
	diastole
Figure 15.2 Schematic diagram of light absorbance by a pulse oximeter. A. In a patient with good cardiac function, the onset of cardiac systole (as denoted
by the onset of the QRS complex) coincides with the increase in arterial blood volume. The amount of red and infrared (IR) light absorbed in the arterial
compartment also rises and falls with systole and diastole, respectively, due to these changes in blood volume. The component that increases with systole
is also known as the “pulsatile” or “alternating current” (AC) compartment and the component that does not change with the cardiac cycle is known as the
“non- pulsatile” or “direct current” (DC) compartment. B. A cross-sectional diagram of an artery and a vein displaying the pulsatile (AC) and non-pulsatile
(DC) compartments of the blood vessels. Note that only the artery has a pulsatile (AC) component. C. Diagram of a calibration (standard) curve of the
Red:IR Modulation Ratio in relation to the SpO2
. Increased red light absorbance (increased R) is associated with increased deoxyhemoglobin, that is,
lower SpO2
. Source: Chan et al. [32], with permission of Elsevier.

-- 251 of 1450 --

236 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
Pulse width correlates with the systemic vascular resistance,
whereas systolic amplitude has been related to stroke volume and
was found to be directly proportional to local vascular distensibility
over a wide range of cardiac output values. Moreover, the position
of the dicrotic notch is used as an indicator of systemic vascular
resistance [30,31]. The plethysmographic variability index is a non-
invasive dynamic indicator of fluid responsiveness based on heart–
lung interactions over the respiratory cycle that some pulse
oximeters display, and it is described in more detail in Chapter 12.
Many of its features, particularly ease of use, non-invasiveness,
and the continuous nature of monitoring, have made pulse oxime-
try very popular in veterinary practice, and it has been a standard of
basic anesthetic care in people since the 1980s. Despite its wide-
spread use, however, several studies indicate that many general
practitioners do not know the basic principles behind pulse oxime-
try technology, a knowledge that is fundamental to appreciate its
limitations and to recognize erroneous readings [32,33].
In anesthetized animals, erroneous SpO 2 readings are commonly
caused by poor peripheral perfusion, resulting from vasoactive
drugs, hypotension, and hypothermia. Dysrhythmias, arterial com-
pression caused by the sphygmomanometer cuff, and peripheral
vascular disease can also affect the quality of pulse oximetry wave
tracings [34–36]. Additionally, venous pulsations may result in
falsely low SpO2 readings because they cause venous O 2
Hb satura-
tion to be added to the signals coming from arterial blood [37].
Excessive movement becomes an issue mostly in non-anesthetized
animals that require frequent or continuous assessment of their
respiratory function. Another important limitation of pulse oxime-
try is that the PaO 2 is estimated from SpO 2 values based on the
assumption that the relationship between the two variables is
consistent with that described by the equation for the oxyhemo-
globin dissociation curve. However, this may not be the case in
anesthetized animals, in which alterations in pH, temperature, and
partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PCO2
) are expected to shift the
curve [38]. One study performed in critically ill dogs concluded
that pulse oximetry sensitivity for the detection of hypoxemia was
poor and that SpO2 was not a clinically suitable surrogate for PaO 2
,
although the correlation between measured and predicted (based
on SpO 2
) PaO 2 values was higher in anesthetized and mechanically
ventilated dogs compared to awake dogs [39]. Another group
reported delayed detection of hypoxemia, defined as SpO 2 lower
than 90%, following endotracheal tube cuff herniation in two
dogs [40]. Finally, pulse oximetry may be a late indicator of respira-
tory impairment during oxygen supplementation, providing a false
sense of security as SpO2 as detected by pulse oximetry may remain
within normal ranges despite a declining PaO2 [41,42]. This is due
to the sigmoid shape of the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve,
wherein saturation is nearly complete at PaO2 values as low as
90–100 mmHg and increasing the PaO2 above this level will no
longer affect the SpO 2
. Therefore, when SpO 2 is ≥ 97%, the PaO 2
could be anywhere between 90 and 600 mmHg [43,44].
Within the last couple of decades, more sophisticated, multi-
wavelength pulse oximeter devices have become commercially
available [45,46]. Besides providing non-invasive and continuous
readings of SpO 2 , pulse CO-oximetry allows the detection of
COHb and MetHb, as well as evaluation of derived variables,
including hemoglobin concentration, perfusion index, plethys-
mogram variability index, oxygen reserve index (ORI), non-
invasive FO 2 Hb, and CaO 2 [47]. One study conducted in dogs
compared values of SpO 2 , CaO 2 , and hemoglobin concentration
obtained from a pulse CO-oximeter with those measured
invasively using a spectrophotometric-based blood gas analyzer
and found that calibration of the device using a measured
hemoglobin concentration was necessary to improve the accu-
racy and precision of pulse CO-oximetry when used to monitor
hemoglobin [48]. In anesthetized pregnant sheep, Masimo pulse
CO-oximetry was a useful and reliable tool for monitoring
SpO 2 during phases of clinically significant cardiovascular and
respiratory dysfunction [49]. The ORI is useful to assess the
oxygenation status during oxygen supplementation and states of
moderate hyperoxia (PaO 2 of approximately 100–200 mmHg),
which represents a significant limitation for traditional pulse
oximetry. 	As 	mentioned 	previously, 	supplemental 	oxygen
administration increases the PaO 2 to values ranging from 100
to 600 mmHg, while SpO 2 reaches a maximum of 100% at a PaO 2
around 100 mmHg. Simultaneously, the venous oxygen saturation
(SvO 2 ) will progressively increase until the PaO 2 reaches about
200 mmHg, and it will stabilize at about 80%. The simultaneous
evaluation of changes in PaO 2 , SpO 2 , and SvO 2 over time is the
basis for the ORI calculation, which results in a number ranging
between 0 and 1 [44]. Decreases in ORI to near 0.24 may provide
advanced indication of declining PaO 2 when SpO 2 is still
> 98% [50].
Inspired and expired oxygen concentrations
Measurement of inspired oxygen concentrations in the anesthetic
circuit, accompanied by a low concentration alarm, is required
standard monitoring in human anesthesia care as it allows the
detection of delivery of hypoxic gas mixtures. It is less commonly
performed in veterinary anesthesia, however, due to associated
expense and lack of training. Inspired and expired oxygen concen-
trations can be measured with paramagnetic, polarographic, and
electrochemical oxygen analysis [51,52]. Infrared analysis cannot
be used because oxygen is a nonpolar molecule. Most current oxy-
gen analyzers employ paramagnetic analysis, which relies on the
fact that unpaired electrons in the outer shell of an oxygen atom
cause it to be attracted to the strongest part of an inhomogeneous
magnetic field, whereas all other common respiratory gases move
to the weakest part of it. Sampling and reference chambers sepa-
rated by a pressure transducer are subjected to a switched electro-
magnetic field, and the resulting pressure difference is converted to
a voltage that is directly proportional to the concentration of oxy-
gen in the sample gas. Most of the commercially available paramag-
netic analyzers are accurate and not affected by anesthetic gases,
although the response time is limited by the maximal gas flow rate
through the measuring cell [53].
Polarographic oxygen analysis, as described earlier in this chap-
ter, is based on a modified, battery-powered Clark-type elec-
trode [51]. Traditional electrochemical oxygen analyzers are based
on the galvanic cell. Briefly, the oxygen sensor is composed of a
membrane, a cathode, and an anode surrounded by an electrolyte
solution. Oxygen diffuses through both the anode and membrane
and reaches the cathode, where it is reduced, generating a current
that is proportional to its partial pressure. While traditional electro-
chemical analyzers respond slowly to changes in oxygen and, there-
fore, are not suitable for measuring end-tidal oxygen concentrations,
novel electrochemical imaging systems with integrated microelec-
trode arrays seem to offer an attractive means of measuring oxygen
consumption rate in real time [52].
Measuring inspired and end-tidal oxygen concentrations may be
used to estimate the level of oxygenation in the body and the

-- 252 of 1450 --

Chapter 15: Monitoring Oxygenation 	237
effectiveness of ventilation. While a 4–5% difference between
inspired and expired oxygen concentrations is considered normal,
one study conducted in pigs found that a difference greater than 5%
after having reached a steady state is a sensitive indicator of
hypoventilation [54]. In this study, the decrease in oxygen end-tidal
concentrations was promptly followed by a decrease in PaO 2
,
whereas changes in SpO 2 were not detectable until ventilation was
decreased to 37% of the initial value. Moreover, studies conducted
in humans determined that the difference between inspired and
expired volumes of oxygen can be used as an estimate of the patient’s
oxygen consumption [55,56]. Low end-tidal oxygen levels are use-
ful indicators of hypoventilation and low inspired oxygen concen-
trations can alert the anesthetist to inadequate fresh gas flow
delivery and oxygen supply malfunctions [57].
Near- infrared and Raman spectroscopy
Near-infrared and Raman spectroscopy are used in human medi-
cine for non-invasive continuous monitoring of regional tissue
perfusion and oxygenation, and several studies demonstrate ben-
efit in monitoring cerebral, intestinal, and renal perfusion to
detect tissue ischemia and hypoxia [58,59]. These technologies
share with pulse oximetry its basic principles, as both techniques
are based on the differential light absorption of oxygenated and
deoxygenated hemoglobin [60,61]. However, while pulse oxime-
try can only provide readings of the percentage of oxyhemo-
globin in pulsatile blood, spectroscopy is capable of measuring
oxyhemoglobin in non-pulsatile environments, such as the
peripheral microcirculatory system. The “optical window” of
near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) includes wavelengths of 650–
950 nm. Light below 650 nm is too strongly absorbed by hemo-
globin, whereas light above 950 nm is mostly absorbed by water.
On the contrary, light in the near-infrared optical window can
propagate relatively deeply, usually a few centimeters, into bio-
logical tissue, as absorption from water, hemoglobin, collagen,
and proteins is negligible at these wavelengths. Instruments spe-
cifically developed for brain functional analysis use two (usually
780 and 830 nm) or more wavelengths [59,61–63]. Raman spec-
troscopy relies on the detection of a shift in frequency of light
inelastically scattered following the excitation of a molecule of
interest [64]. The fundamental differences between NIRS and
Raman techniques lie in the nature of the molecular transitions
taking place (change in molecular polarizability for Raman and
dipole moment change for NIRS), in the type of monochromatic
light used (within the near-infrared range for Raman and within
the infrared range for NIRS), and in the strength of absorbance
and transmittance (weaker for Raman compared to NIRS) [65].
Investigation into Raman spectroscopy for monitoring tissue
oxygenation is mostly preclinical in nature, and no literature sur-
rounding their use in veterinary patients exists.
Practical use of NIRS devices requires the user to switch on the
light source, direct the emitted light into the tissue to be analyzed,
and then measure the reflectance re-emerging from that tissue, a
few centimeters distant from the light source. Engineering sophisti-
cation has led to the development of miniaturized spectrometers,
making notable impact on the applicability of NIRS to the human
clinical setting. There are a wide variety of commercially available
devices in the market, with system complexity ranging from few
sources and detectors, suitable to imaging small areas, to systems
covering wider regions of the body. The sources and detectors can
be placed directly onto the skin (Fig. 15.3) or, alternatively, the light
can be guided to the target tissues through a system composed of
optical fibers and receiving probes, to be applied to the area of inter-
est. To reduce the running costs, most devices employ reusable sen-
sors that can be disinfected.
Variables measured by NIRS include local or regional hemo-
globin oxygen saturation and the oxygenation/deoxygenation
hemoglobin ratio, but also the oxygenated/deoxygenated myoglo-
bin ratio in skeletal muscle [63]. Spectroscopy has been used to
study a range of diverse conditions, including epilepsy, metabolic
myopathy, and diabetes mellitus [63,66,67]. The most common
clinical and experimental application of NIRS in humans remains
the analysis of brain function and cerebral blood flow. Local cere-
bral blood flow typically increases as a result of enhanced neural
activity; because blood flow increases more than cerebral oxygen
extraction, during phases of increased cerebral metabolism, there
is a localized rise in oxygen levels and, therefore, in oxygenated
hemoglobin. Consequently, the ratio of oxygenated/deoxygenated
hemoglobin is used to estimate neural activity [68].
The first report on the use of spectroscopy to assess oxygenation
was conducted in cats [60]. Several more recent studies investi-
gated the use of NIRS in both clinical and experimental dogs [69–
75]. One study found that, in Chihuahuas, changes in cerebral
oxygenation levels were associated with the administration of
anesthetics [75]. Another investigation reported the use of near-
infrared technology to monitor myocardial oxygenation during
ischemic preconditioning [69], while other investigators used
spectroscopy for monitoring of skin, subcutaneous tissue, and
skeletal muscle oxygenation status [71,74]. In a study of dogs
presented for acute hemorrhage, NIRS was able to differentiate
those in a clinically determined state of shock from those without
shock [76]; moreover, lower tissue oxygen saturation as deter-
mined by NIRS was associated with more severe shock in a
different population of dogs [77].
Figure 15.3 Near- infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) monitoring device placed
on the forelimb of a dog. Source: Dr. Noah Pavlisko, with permission.

-- 253 of 1450 --

238 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
Other techniques
Other techniques have been reported that may provide insight into
hypoxia and oxygen debt. Currently, these methodologies are
largely experimental in nature.
Continuous laser Doppler flowmetry
Laser Doppler flowmetry is based on light–tissue interaction and
measures the amount of Doppler-shifted laser light reflected at a
superficial level to determine microcirculatory flux of erythrocytes.
Although it cannot be used to calculate absolute blood flow, the
potential applications of this non-invasive and relatively inexpensive
technique include qualitative evaluation of cutaneous, renal, and
ocular/retinal blood flow, as well as assessment of the microcircula-
tory status of any potentially unhealthy tissues during intestinal,
orthopedic, or plastic surgeries [78–80]. In humans, a correlation
was demonstrated between decreased cutaneous microcirculatory
flow and symptoms of ischemia of the lower extremities [81].
While laser Doppler flowmetry may be a useful measure to eval-
uate regional and local blood flow, its usefulness as a method to
assess regional tissue oxygenation is debatable and relies on the
assumption that systemic hypoxemia can be excluded. Another
limitation is the potential for inaccurate readings in case of
increased blood viscosity or administration of vasoactive drugs
such as norepinephrine [82].
Mitochondrial redox state
The two pyridine nucleotides, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NAD) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP),
play a critical role in defining mitochondrial energy producing
pathways. Ultimately, adenosine triphosphate (ATP) production is
coupled to the energy released by the reduction of oxygen to water
using electrons carried by the reduced form of NAD (NADH). The
primary role of NADP is that of an electron donor in anabolic path-
ways, and most of this nucleotide is kept in a significantly reduced
state in the cellular system. In contrast, NAD acts as an electron
acceptor in catabolic pathways, which requires the NAD pool to be
maintained in an oxidized state and the reduced/oxidized NAD
ratio to be kept low. Impaired microvascular oxygen supply reduces
oxidative phosphorylation and causes an increase in cellular
NADH, which can be monitored and used as a reliable indicator of
oxygen tissue supply and consumption.
Mitochondrial redox state assessment is mostly applied
in vitro for the assessment of oxygenation in isolated tissues and
cells [83,84]. Nevertheless, in the literature, there are examples of
in vivo applications on various animal models [85–87]. Tissue con-
centrations of NADH have been monitored by high-resolution flu-
orescence microscopy in rat livers following hemorrhagic shock
and resuscitation, suggesting that this parameter appropriately
reflects the relation between local oxygen supply and demand in
hepatic tissue in vivo [85]. Moreover, intracellular measurements of
NADH concentrations by two-photon microscopy were used
in vivo to monitor cerebral hypoxia and neuronal necrosis in rats
after traumatic brain injury and hemorrhagic shock [87].
References
1 Bishop MJ, Cheney FW. Effects of pulmonary blood flow and mixed venous O2
tension on gas exchange in dogs. Anesthesiology 1983; 58(2): 130–135.
2 Kelman GR, Nunn JF. Clinical recognition of hypoxaemia under fluorescent lamps.
Lancet 1966; 1(7452): 1400–1403.
3 Martin L, Khalil H. How much reduced hemoglobin is necessary to generate central
cyanosis? Chest 1990; 97(1): 182–185.
4 Sinclair MD. A review of the physiological effects of alpha2-agonists related to the
clinical use of medetomidine in small animal practice. Can Vet J 2003; 44(11):
885–897.
5 Gattinoni L, Busana M, Camporota L. Standardised PaO2 /FiO2 ratio in COVID-19:
added value or risky assumptions? Eur J Intern Med 2021; 92: 31–33.
6 Rice TW, Wheeler AP, Bernard GR, et al. National Institutes of Health, National
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute ARDS Network. Comparison of the SpO2
/FIO2
ratio and the PaO2 /FIO2 ratio in patients with acute lung injury or ARDS. Chest
2007; 132(2): 410–417.
7 Ganter MT, Schneider U, Heinzelmann M, et al. How often should we perform
arterial blood gas analysis during thoracoscopic surgery? J Clin Anesth 2007; 19(8):
569–575.
8 De Backer D, Vincent JL. The pulmonary artery catheter: is it still alive? Curr Opin
Crit Care 2018; 24(3): 204–208.
9 Schlaefke ME, Schaefer T, Kronberg H, et al. Transcutaneous monitoring as trigger
for therapy of hypoxemia during sleep. Adv Exp Med Biol 1987; 220: 95–100.
10 Stout RW, Cho DY, Gaunt SD, et al. Transcutaneous blood gas monitoring in the rat.
Comp Med 2001; 51(6): 524–533.
11 Sahbaie P, Modanlou S, Gharagozlou P, et al. Transcutaneous blood gas CO2 monitor-
ing of induced ventilatory depression in mice. Anesth Analg 2006; 103(3): 620–625.
12 Vogt R, Rohling R, Kästner S. Evaluation of a combined transcutaneous carbon
dioxide pressure and pulse oximetry sensor in adult sheep and dogs. Am J Vet Res
2007; 68(3): 265–270.
13 Rohling R, Biro P. Clinical investigation of a new combined pulse oximetry and
carbon dioxide tension sensor in adult anaesthesia. J Clin Monit Comput 1999; 15:
23–27.
14 Sankaran D, Zeinali L, Iqbal S, et al. Non- invasive carbon dioxide monitoring in
neonates: methods, benefits, and pitfalls. J Perinatol 2021; 41(11): 2580–2589.
15 Sandberg KL, Brynjarsson H, Hjalmarson O. Transcutaneous blood gas monitoring
during neonatal intensive care. Acta Paediatr 2011; 100(5): 676–679.
16 Tremper KK, Waxman K, Shoemaker WC. Effects of hypoxia and shock on trans-
cutaneous PO2 values in dogs. Crit Care Med 1979; 7(12): 526–531.
17 Rochat MC, Pope ER, Payne JT, et al. Transcutaneous oxygen monitoring for pre-
dicting skin viability in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1993; 54(3): 468–475.
18 Rochat MC, Payne JT, Pope ER, et al. Evaluation of skin viability in dogs, using
transcutaneous carbon dioxide and sensor current monitoring. Am J Vet Res 1993;
54(3): 476–480.
19 Holowaychuk MK, Fujita H, Bersenas AM. Evaluation of a transcutaneous blood
gas monitoring system in critically ill dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2014; 24(5):
545–553.
20 Cushing AC, Smith CK, Ramsay EC, et al. Transcutaneous oxygen monitoring in
Louisiana pine snakes (Pituophis ruthveni). J Zoo Wildl Med 2020; 50(4): 874–878.
21 Macmillan CS, Andrews PJ. Cerebrovenous oxygen saturation monitoring: practical
considerations and clinical relevance. Intensive Care Med 2000; 26: 1028–1036.
22 Hayes GM, Mathews K, Boston S, et al. Low central venous oxygen saturation is
associated with increased mortality in critically ill dogs. J Small Anim Pract 2011;
52(8): 433–440.
23 Young BC, Prittie JE, Fox P, et al. Decreased central venous oxygen saturation
despite normalization of heart rate and blood pressure post shock resuscitation in
sick dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2014; 24(2): 154–161.
24 Walton RAL, Hansen B. Comparison of venous hemoglobin saturation measure-
ments obtained by in vivo oximetry and calculated from blood gas analysis in criti-
cally ill dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2021; 31(5): 578–584.
25 Rohlwink UK, Figaji AA. Methods of monitoring brain oxygenation. Childs Nerv
Syst 2010; 26(4): 453–464.
26 Stocchetti N, Canavesi K, Magnoni S, et al. Arterio-jugular difference of oxygen
content and outcome after head injury. Anesth Analg 2004; 99: 230–234.
27 Reminga CL, Silverstein DC, Drobatz KJ, et al. Evaluation of the placement and
maintenance of central venous jugular catheters in critically ill dogs and cats. J Vet
Emerg Crit Care 2018; 28(3): 232–243.
28 Yoshiya I, Shimada Y, Tanaka K. Spectrophotometric monitoring of arterial oxygen
saturation in the fingertip. Med Biol Eng Comput 1980; 18: 27–32.
29 Elgendi M. On the analysis of fingertip photoplethysmogram signals. Curr Cardiol
Rev 2012; 8(1): 14–25.
30 Dorlas J, Nijboer J. Photo-electric plethysmography as a monitoring device in
anaesthesia. Application and interpretation. Br J Anaesth 1985; 57: 524–530.
31 Murray W, Foster P. The peripheral pulse wave: information overlooked. J Clin
Monit Comput 1996; 12: 365–377.
32 Chan ED, Chan MM, Chan MM. Pulse oximetry: understanding its basic principles
facilitates appreciation of its limitations. Respir Med 2013; 107(6): 789–799.
33 Stoneham MD, Saville GM, Wilson IH. Knowledge about pulse oximetry among
medical and nursing staff. Lancet 1994; 344: 1339–1342.
34 Ralston AC, Webb RK, Runciman WB. Potential errors in pulse oximetry. I. Pulse
oximeter evaluation. Anaesthesia 1991; 46(3): 202–206.

-- 254 of 1450 --

Chapter 15: Monitoring Oxygenation 	239
35 Webb RK, Ralston AC, Runciman WB. Potential errors in pulse oximetry. II. Effects
of changes in saturation and signal quality. Anaesthesia 1991; 46(3): 207–212.
36 Thawley V, Waddell LS. Pulse oximetry and capnometry. Top Companion Anim
Med 2013; 28(3): 124–128.
37 Mardirossian G, Schneider RE. Limitations of pulse oximetry. Anesth Prog 1992;
39(6): 194–196.
38 Dempsey JA. With haemoglobin as with politics – should we shift right or left? J
Physiol 2020; 598(8): 1419–1420.
39 Farrell KS, Hopper K, Cagle LA, et al. Evaluation of pulse oximetry as a surrogate
for PaO2 in awake dogs breathing room air and anesthetized dogs on mechanical
ventilation. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2019; 29(6): 622–629.
40 Bergadano A, Moens Y, Schatzmann U. Two cases of intraoperative herniation of
the endotracheal tube cuff. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd 2004; 146(12): 565–569.
41 Nitzan M, Romem A, Koppel R. Pulse oximetry: fundamentals and technology
update. Med Devices (Auckl) 2014; 8(7): 231–239.
42 Pertzov B, Brachfeld E, Unterman A, et al. Significant delay in the detection of desatu-
ration between finger transmittance and earlobe reflectance oximetry probes during
fiberoptic bronchoscopy: analysis of 104 cases. Lung 2019; 197(1): 67–72.
43 Martin ML. PaO2 , SaO2 and Oxygen content. In: Percy C, ed. All You Really Need to
Know to Interpret Arterial Blood Gases, 2nd edn. Philadelphia: Lippincott Willliams
& Wilkins, 1999: 68–82.
44 Scheeren TWL, Belda FJ, Perel A. The oxygen reserve index (ORI): a new tool to
monitor oxygen therapy. J Clin Monit Comput 2018; 32(3): 379–389.
45 Goldman JM, Petterson MT, Kopotic RJ, et al. Masimo signal extraction pulse oxi-
metry. J Clin Monit Comput 2000; 16(7): 475–483.
46 Hiscock R, Kumar D, Simmons SW. Systematic review and meta-analysis of method
comparison studies of Masimo pulse co-oximeters (Radical-7™ or Pronto-7™) and
HemoCue® absorption spectrometers (B-Hemoglobin or 201+) with laboratory hae-
moglobin estimation. Anaesth Intensive Care 2015; 43(3): 341–350.
47 Feiner JR, Bickler PE, Mannheimer PD. Accuracy of methemoglobin detection by
pulse CO-oximetry during hypoxia. Anesth Analg 2010; 111(1): 143–148.
48 Tayari H, Flaherty D, Yamaoka TT, et al. Assessment of pulse CO-oximetry
technology after in vivo adjustment in anaesthetized dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg
2021; 48(3): 297–304.
49 Quinn CT, Raisis AL, Musk GC. Evaluation of Masimo signal extraction technol-
ogy pulse oximetry in anaesthetized pregnant sheep. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40(2):
149–156.
50 Fleming NW, Singh A, Lee L, et al. Oxygen reserve index: utility as an early warning
for desaturation in high-risk surgical patients. Anesth Analg 2021; 132(3): 770–776.
51 Burton GW. Measurement of inspired and expired oxygen and carbon dioxide. Brit
J Anaesth 1969; 41: 723.
52 Tedjo W, Obeidat Y, Catandi G, et al. Real-time analysis of oxygen gradient in
oocyte respiration using a high-density microelectrode array. Biosensors (Basel)
2021; 11(8): 256.
53 Hendrickx JF, van Zundert AA, de Wolf AM. Influence of the reference gas of para-
magnetic oxygen analyzers on nitrogen concentrations during closed-circuit anes-
thesia. J Clin Monit Comput 1998; 14(6): 381–384.
54 Linko K, Paloheimo M. Inspiratory end-tidal oxygen content difference: a sensitive
indicator of hypoventilation. Crit Care Med 1989; 17(4): 345–348.
55 Barnard JP, Sleigh JW. Breath-by- breath analysis of oxygen uptake using the Datex
Ultima. Br J Anaesth 1995; 74(2): 155–158.
56 Hill RW. Determination of oxygen consumption by use of the paramagnetic oxygen
analyzer. J Appl Physiol 1972; 33(2): 261–263.
57 Linko K, Paloheimo M. Monitoring of the inspired and end-tidal oxygen, carbon
dioxide, and nitrous oxide concentrations: clinical applications during anesthesia
and recovery. J Clin Monit 1989; 5(3): 149–156.
58 Naulaers G, Meyns B, Miserez M, et al. Measurement of the liver tissue oxygenation
by near-infrared spectroscopy. Intensive Care Med 2005; 31(1): 138–141.
59 Sakudo A. Near-infrared spectroscopy for medical applications: current status and
future perspectives. Clin Chim Acta 2016; 455: 181–188.
60 Jobsis FF. Noninvasive, infrared monitoring of cerebral and myocardial oxygen suf-
ficiency and circulatory parameters. Science 1977; 198: 1264–1267.
61 Marin T, Moore J. Understanding near-infrared spectroscopy. Adv Neonatal Care
2011; 11(6): 382–388.
62 Scholkmann F, Kleiser S, Metz AJ, et al. A review on continuous wave functional
near-infrared spectroscopy and imaging instrumentation and methodology.
Neuroimage 2014; 85(1): 6–27.
63 Watanabe E, Nagahori Y, Mayanagi Y. Focus diagnosis of epilepsy using near-
infrared spectroscopy. Epilepsia 2002; 43(9): 50–55.
64 Stevens AR, Stickland CA, Harris G, et al. Raman spectroscopy as a neuromonitor-
ing tool in traumatic brain injury: a systematic review and clinical perspectives.
Cells 2022: 11(7): 1227.
65 Wartewig S. IR and Raman Spectroscopy: Fundamental Processing. Weinheim,
Germany: Wiley-VCH, 2003.
66 Bank W, Chance B. An oxidative defect in metabolic myopathies: diagnosis by non-
invasive tissue oximetry. Ann Neurol 1994; 36(6): 830–837.
67 Scheuermann-Freestone M, Madsen PL, Manners D, et al. Abnormal cardiac and
skeletal muscle energy metabolism in patients with type 2 diabetes. Circulation
2003; 107(24): 3040–3046.
68 Fox PT, Raichle ME. Focal physiological uncoupling of cerebral blood flow and
oxidative metabolism during somatosensory stimulation in human subjects. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 1986; 83(4): 1140–1144.
69 Kawasuji M, Ikeda M, Sakakibara N, et al. Near infrared monitoring of myocardial
oxygenation during ischemic preconditioning. Ann Thorac Surg 2000; 69(6):
1806–1810.
70 Hall K, Greg B. Measurement of tissue oxygen saturation levels using portable near-
infrared spectroscopy in clinically healthy dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2008; 18:
594–600.
71 Engbers S, Boysen SR, Engbers J, et al. A comparison of tissue oxygen saturation
measurements by 2 different near-infrared spectroscopy monitors in 21 healthy
dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2014; 24(5): 536–544.
72 Pavlisko ND, Henao-Guerrero N, Killos MB, et al. Evaluation of tissue oxygen satu-
ration with near-infrared spectroscopy during experimental acute hemorrhagic
shock and resuscitation in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2014; 75(1): 48–53.
73 Pavlisko ND, Killos M, Henao-Guerrero N, et al. Evaluation of tissue hemoglobin
saturation (StO2) using near-infrared spectroscopy during hypoxemia and hyper-
oxemia in Beagle dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43(1):18–26.
74 Cugmas B, Plavec T, Bregar M, et al. Detection of canine skin and subcutaneous
tumors by visible and near-infrared diffuse reflectance spectroscopy. J Biomed Opt
2015; 20(3):037003.
75 Hiwatashi K, Doi K, Mizuno R, et al. Examiner’s finger-mounted near-infrared
spectroscopy is feasible to analyze cerebral and skeletal muscle oxygenation in
conscious Chihuahuas. J Biomed Opt 2017; 22(2): 26006.
76 Gray SL, Hall KE, Powell LL, et al. Tissue oxygen saturation in dogs with acute
hemorrhage. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2018; 28(5): 408–414.
77 Berg AN, Conzemius MG, Evans RB, et al. Evaluation of tissue oxygen saturation in
naturally occurring canine shock patients. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2019; 29(2):
149–153.
78 Schabauer AM, Rooke TW. Cutaneous laser Doppler flowmetry: applications and
findings. Mayo Clin Proc 1994; 69(6): 564–574.
79 Riva CE, Geiser M, Petrig BL. Ocular blood flow assessment using continuous laser
Doppler flowmetry. Acta Ophthalmol 2010; 88(6): 622–629.
80 Kouadio AA, Jordana F, Koffi NJ, et al. The use of laser Doppler flowmetry to evalu-
ate oral soft tissue blood flow in humans: a review. Arch Oral Biol 2018; 86: 58–71.
81 Kvemebo K, Slasgsvold CE, Stranden E, et al. Laser Doppler flowmetry in evaluation
of lower limb resting skin circulation: a study in healthy controls and atheroscle-
rotic patients. Scand J Clin Lab Invest 1988; 48: 621–626.
82 Rajan V, Varghese B, van Leeuwen TG, et al. Review of methodological develop-
ments in laser Doppler flowmetry. Lasers Med Sci 2009; 24(2): 269–283.
83 Blacker TS, Duchen MR. Investigating mitochondrial redox state using NADH and
NADPH autofluorescence. Free Radic Biol Med 2016; 100: 53–65.
84 Grossini E, Concina D, Rinaldi C, et al. Association between plasma redox state/
mitochondria function and a flu-like syndrome/COVID-19 in the elderly admitted
to a long-term care unit. Front Physiol 2021; 12: 707587.
85 Vollmar B, Burkhardt M, Minor T, et al. High-resolution microscopic determina-
tion of hepatic NADH fluorescence for in vivo monitoring of tissue oxygenation
during hemorrhagic shock and resuscitation. Microvasc Res 1997; 54(2): 164–173.
86 Burger N, Logan A, Prime TA, et al. A sensitive mass spectrometric assay for mito-
chondrial CoQ pool redox state in vivo. Free Radic Biol Med 2020; 147: 37–47.
87 Bragin DE, Bragina OA, Berliba L, et al. Addition of drag-reducing polymers to col-
loid resuscitation fluid enhances cerebral microcirculation and tissue oxygenation
after traumatic brain injury complicated by hemorrhagic shock. Adv Exp Med Biol
2021; 1269: 283–288.

-- 255 of 1450 --

240
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The S ixth E dition of L umb and J ones	. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction to respiratory gas monitoring
The ability to monitor anesthetic gases is incorporated into many
multiparameter physiologic monitors. Respiratory gases of interest
to the anesthesiologist include oxygen, carbon dioxide, and the
volatile inhaled anesthetics. Information obtained from respiratory
gas monitoring can be used as a teaching tool, to aid in the deter-
mination of minimum alveolar concentrations (MAC) in research
settings, and to assist in monitoring patient anesthetic depth and
safety. This chapter will discuss principles and technologies associ-
ated with the monitoring of volatile anesthetic agents; information
pertaining to the monitoring of carbon dioxide and oxygen gas is
discussed in Chapters 14 and 15, respectively.
Units of measurement
Respiratory gas monitors may report data as partial pressure, which
is an absolute term, or volume percent (vol %), which is a ratio, and
understanding the difference between these two values is impor-
tant. Respired gases consist of molecules in constant motion. These
molecules strike the walls of the respiratory tract or anesthesia
delivery system and exert pressure against those walls. At a given
temperature, the pressure exerted is proportional to the number of
molecules present; that is, the greater the number of molecules pre-
sent, the greater the pressure exerted [1,2].
Partial pressure
Dalton’s law of partial pressure states that the total pressure exerted
by a mixture of gases is equal to the arithmetic sum of the partial
pressures of each gas in the mixture [1]. At sea level, the total sum
of all gases in an anesthesia system is equal to 760 mmHg (i.e., the
pressure is equivalent to the surrounding atmospheric pressure) [2].
With this information, it is possible to calculate the partial pres-
sures of each gas in the mixture. For example, for a patient admin-
istered 2% isoflurane in 100% oxygen, the partial pressure of each
respiratory gas is as follows:
Partial pressure oxygen 	mmHg 	mmHg	0 98 760 	744 8	. 	.
Partial pressure isoflurane 	mmHg 	mmHg	0 02 760 	15 2	. 	.
Thus, partial pressure quantifies the number of molecules of
gas that are present in absolute terms, such as millimeters of mer-
cury (mmHg). This method is used in infrared (IR) analysis of res-
piratory gases [2]. As described in detail below, gas molecules with
two or more dissimilar atoms (carbon dioxide and inhaled anes-
thetics) absorb distinct wavelengths of IR radiation. In accordance
with the Beer–Lambert law, the greater the number of molecules
of gas present, the more radiation of that wavelength that will be
absorbed [1]. Because the total amount of radiation of a specific
wavelength that is absorbed is determined by the number of mole-
cules present, and each molecule contributes to the total pressure
of the system, IR analyzers can measure and report the partial
pressure of the gas in question [2].
Volume percent
Volume percent (vol %) separates the molecular components of a
gas mixture into individual portions, and is expressed as a ratio, or
proportion of the gases in the mixture [2]. Using the previous
example, two molecules of isoflurane would be present in a sample
16 Anesthetic Gas Monitoring
Rebecca C. Reader
MSPCA/Angell Animal Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction to respiratory gas monitoring, 240
Units of measurement, 240
Partial pressure, 240
Volume percent, 240
Monitors, 241
Gas sampling systems, 241
Technologies used for respiratory gas analysis, 241
Infrared analysis, 242
Historical technologies used for respiratory gas analysis, 243
Mass spectrometry, 243
Raman spectroscopy, 243
Applications of volatile agent monitoring, 244
References, 244

-- 256 of 1450 --

Chapter 16: Anesthetic Gas Monitoring 	241
containing 100 molecules, and isoflurane would represent 2% of
the gas sample. This would be expressed as 2 vol %, or as a frac-
tional concentration (0.02). This type of analysis is used with mass
spectrometry. If the absolute pressure reading of the system is
known, such as 760 mmHg at sea level, it is possible to convert the
proportions to readings in mmHg:
Isoflurane vol 	vol 	mmHg 	mmHg	% 	% 	. 	.	2 	0 02 760 	15 2
Oxygen vol 	vol 	mmHg 	mmHg	% 	% 	. 	.	98 	0 98 760 	744 8
Monitors
Gas sampling systems
Monitors equipped to analyze respiratory gases must place the gas
to be analyzed within proximity of the analyzer. This can be accom-
plished by bringing the sampled gas to the analyzer or by placing
the analyzer in the path of the gas. Monitors that place the analyzer
in the path of the gas are called mainstream or non-diverting moni-
tors, as no gas is removed from the circuit for analysis. Monitors
that sample gas from the airway and bring it to the analyzer are
called sidestream or diverting monitors.
Anesthesia providers must be able to rapidly respond to changes
in respiratory gas composition. As a result, it is important to under-
stand the total response time of each sampling system. The total
response time is typically sigmoid in shape (Fig. 16.1) and is made
up of the system’s transit time and rise time [2]. The transit time (or
lag time) accounts for the delay that occurs as the gas sample travels
to the analyzer. Transit time applies only to sidestream monitors, as
there is no delay for the sample to reach the analyzer in mainstream
monitors [2]. The response time of sidestream systems depends
heavily on the inner diameter and length of the sampling line as
well as the gas sampling rate. Rise time refers to the time it takes an
analyzer to react to a change in gas concentration, and is generally
defined as the time it takes the analyzer to move from 10% to 90%
of a sudden change in concentration [2]. For example, if an analyzer
detected a change in carbon dioxide concentration from 0 mmHg
to 50 mmHg, the rise time would be the time it took the monitor to
report a change from 5 mmHg (10% of a 50 mmHg increase) to
45 mmHg (90% of the total increase).
Until recently, the only respiratory gases that could be analyzed
using mainstream systems were carbon dioxide (using IR technol-
ogy) and oxygen (using a fuel cell). However, mainstream multi-
gas analysis is now available for carbon dioxide, oxygen, and
potent volatile inhalant anesthetics [2,3]. Mainstream multigas
analyzers require a special airway adapter that uses a miniaturized
spinning filter wheel placed in the breathing system near the
patient’s airway. The adapters are designed to be lightweight and
add only a small amount of deadspace to the patient circuit.
Because the analyzer is located within the circuit, data is displayed
in real time with minimal delay due to transit time for gas to reach
the analyzer. Despite the lightweight design, when used with small
patients, traditional mainstream adapters can be bulky, adding
weight to the end of the endotracheal tube and contributing to
mechanical deadspace. Some of the newer mainstream analyzers
address this issue using “solid-state” design, which relies on elec-
tronic components instead of a spinning filter wheel, making the
adapters more compact and less prone to breaking. Mainstream
multigas monitors are also subject to interference from water
vapor, secretions, and blood [2,4].
Sidestream monitors continuously aspirate gas from the breath-
ing circuit and pump it through tubing to an analyzer within the
main unit of the monitor [4]. Sampled gas must first pass through
a filter or water trap prior to entering the analyzer. The sampling
flow rates for these monitors range between 50 and 200 mL/min
depending on the monitor and settings selected by the user.
Sidestream analyzers have the advantage that all respiratory
gases of interest can be measured simultaneously. Because the
analyzer is located distant from the patient, the analyzer can be
any size allowing for more versatility in monitoring capabilities.
Disadvantages of sidestream analyzers typically involve problems
with the sampling line, such as kinking or becoming clogged with
secretions or water, or failure of the pump itself. There is also a
short delay between sample collection and data display (typically
< 3 s) as the respiratory gas is transported to the main unit of the
monitor [2,4].
Erroneous readings can occur with sidestream monitors. Water
droplets or respiratory secretions may be aspirated into the sample
tubing, decreasing the accuracy of the system. At higher respiratory
rates or with long sampling lines, several breaths from the patient
may be present in the line, resulting in a lack of clear separation
between breaths and a summation of data [2]. In small patients,
if the fresh gas flow rates exceed the patient expiratory flow rate
the sample obtained will be artificially low due to dilution with
fresh gas. In very small patients, there is also the potential for the
sampling flow rate of the monitor to exceed the patient’s fresh gas
flow rate, creating the potential for negative pressures within the
breathing system [2].
Technologies used for respiratory gas analysis
There are many different manufacturers of anesthetic gas monitors,
yet all rely on just a few technologies to perform respiratory gas
analysis. The most common technology in use today relies on IR
analysis to measure multiple gases such as carbon dioxide, nitrous
oxide, and potent inhaled anesthetics.
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Lag
time Time
Total system
response time
Instrument response to step change input = 100%
	Rise
time
Figure 16.1 Total response time for a sidestream respiratory gas sampling
system. The transit (lag) time reflects the delay that occurs as the gas
sample travels to the analyzer and is generally defined as the time required
to achieve 10% of the final gas concentration. Rise time refers to the time it
takes an analyzer to react to a change in gas concentration and is typically
defined as the time required to move from 10% to 90% after a sudden
change in concentration. Source: Reproduced from Jaffe et al. [2], with
permission of Elsevier.

-- 257 of 1450 --

242 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
Infrared analysis
Infrared (IR) spectroscopy is a measure of the vibrational frequency of
atoms within a heteroatomic molecule. Molecules vibrate in multiple
ways, with each distinct motion called a vibration “mode.” Molecules
with two atoms vibrate simply by moving closer together and farther
apart. Molecules with three or more atoms can vibrate in more com-
plex patterns. Molecules with more complex vibration modes are
more likely to interact with electromagnetic radiation [1,2]. The IR
spectrum consists of wavelengths between 0.40 μm and 40 μm.
Asymmetrical molecules, including volatile anesthetics and nitrous
oxide, absorb IR energy when their atoms rotate or vibrate asym-
metrically. In contrast, nonpolar molecules such as oxygen do not
absorb IR energy. Carbon dioxide is symmetrical and nonpolar but
has three different vibration modes and develops a dipole moment
when stretched and is therefore capable of absorbing IR energy [1].
The Beer–Lambert law states that when a light beam passes
through a mixture containing a substance, which absorbs light at
that wavelength, the intensity of the transmitted light decreases lin-
early with an increase in the concentration of the substance [1]. IR
analyzers rely on the Beer–Lambert law to correlate the amount of
IR energy absorbed with the number of molecules of gas present in
a sample. The greater the number of molecules of gas present, the
more radiation of that wavelength that will be absorbed resulting in
decreased intensity of the transmitted light [1].
IR analyzers can be classified as dispersive or non-dispersive. A
dispersive monitor passes IR radiation through a gas sample and
then separates the radiation into component wavelengths. The
component wavelengths are then ordered sequentially, and a plot of
absorbance versus wavelength is constructed. The respiratory gas
mixture to be analyzed will absorb one or more components of the
radiation spectrum emitted. As long as the gases in the mixture
have distinct absorption peaks, the composition of the mixture can
be analyzed and quantified based on the amount of absorbance
measured for each wavelength [2].
Non-dispersive monitors filter the radiation emitted and allow
only bands of a specific wavelength to pass through the gas mixture.
The wavelengths allowed to pass through the filter correspond to
the absorption peak of the gas of interest. Most respiratory gas
monitors in use today are non-dispersive and agent-specific, meas-
uring each agent with a unique set of wavelengths selected by filters
on the chopper wheel [2]. In doing so, it is possible for most analyz-
ers to identify and quantify individual components in a mixture of
gases. For example, carbon dioxide molecules have a peak absorp-
tion between 4.2 and 4.4 μm and nitrous oxide molecules absorb
strongly between 4.4 and 4.6 μm. The potent volatile anesthetic
agents absorb strongly at 3.3 μm and between 8 and 12 μm. Monitors
that filter wavelengths between 3 and 5 μm and 8 and 12 μm can
identify and quantify the amount of carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide,
and volatile anesthetic in a respiratory gas mixture.
Basic components of an infrared analyzer
The basic components of an IR analyzer include a source of radia-
tion, a narrow-band filter, a sample cell, and a detector that gener-
ates an output signal [2,4]. IR analyzers continuously focus IR light
on a spinning chopper wheel. The source of IR radiation is a heated
element called a “blackbody radiator,” which absorbs all thermal
energy and does not reflect light, thus appearing black [2,4]. As the
radiator absorbs energy, it heats up and reemits that energy in the
form of electromagnetic radiation. The blackbody radiator emits a
broad IR spectrum, and the filters on the spinning chopper wheel in
non-dispersive units are selected to allow only radiation of wave-
lengths that correspond to the peak absorption of the desired gas to
pass through. The gas sample is pumped through the sampling
chamber, and the filtered light is passed through the sampling
chamber as well as a reference chamber. The light then hits a photo-
sensitive detector, and the change in light levels hitting the detector
produces an electric current (Fig. 16.2).
The detector can be made of a radiation-sensitive solid-state
material, such as lead selenide; or a Luft cell, which is a chamber
filled with gas that expands as the IR radiation enters the chamber
and is absorbed [2,4]. The intensity of radiation reaching the detec-
tor is inversely related to the concentration of gas being measured
(according to the Beer–Lambert law as previously described). The
signal processor then converts the measured electrical currents
from the detector to display the partial pressure of the gas.
Advantages of infrared analysis
IR analyzers are capable of measuring carbon dioxide, nitrous
oxide, and the commonly used potent inhaled anesthetics. Most
newer models can be incorporated into multiparameter monitors
and are capable of detecting and quantifying anesthetic agents in
a mixture of respiratory gases [5]. Additionally, many models are
capable of measuring inspired and expired concentrations of
gas [4]. IR analyzers do not alter anesthetic agents and the sampled
gas can be returned to the breathing system for waste gas scav-
enging [4]. Most IR analyzers are highly accurate but tend to
underestimate inspired concentrations and overestimate expired
concentrations at high respiratory rates [6].
Gas inlet Gas outlet
Infrared
detector
Filter wheel
+ optical filter
Host
interface
Signal
processing
Measurement
chamber
Light
source
Figure 16.2 Diagram of an infrared analyzer with multiple filters on a spinning chopper wheel. Source: Reproduced from Jaffe et al. [2], with permission
of Elsevier.

-- 258 of 1450 --

Chapter 16: Anesthetic Gas Monitoring 	243
Disadvantages of infrared analysis
One main disadvantage of IR analysis is that the concentrations of
nonpolar molecules such as oxygen and nitrogen cannot be meas-
ured [4]. Erroneous readings may result due to cross-interference,
or the overlapping of absorption bands of some gases such as car-
bon dioxide and nitrous oxide. As mentioned previously, carbon
dioxide molecules have a peak absorption between 4.2 and 4.4 μm
and nitrous oxide molecules absorb strongly between 4.4 and 4.6
μm. The close absorption bands of these two gases may cause some
analyzers to be inaccurate when high concentrations of nitrous
oxide are present [2]. The use of narrow-band sources or narrow-
band filters can reduce the impact of cross-interference [2].
Similarly, methane absorbs IR light at a wavelength of 3.3 μm,
which overlaps with many of the volatile inhaled anesthetic agents.
This can cause erroneously high readings of anesthetic agent con-
centrations with short IR wavelength analyzers (3.3 μm only),
particularly in animals with a large intestinal fermentation com-
partment such as horses [7,8]. The impact of methane on meas-
ured end-tidal anesthetic concentrations is increased with the use
of low fresh gas flow rates (due to the concentration of exhaled
gases within the circuit), and in animals subjected to shorter fast-
ing times (due to greater methane production from the gastroin-
testinal tract) [7]. As a result, it is recommended that the use of
short IR wavelength analyzers be avoided in species that produce
and excrete significant amounts of methane, particularly when
accuracy is important [7].
Erroneous readings may also be caused by collision broadening, a
phenomenon where the dipole moment of the gas to be analyzed is
changed by collisions with other molecules in the gas mixture.
Variations in the dipole moment result in the IR absorption band
for that molecule being broadened, thus altering the absorption
measurement for that molecule. For example, 10% nitrous oxide
will result in a 1.0% increase in the measured carbon dioxide due to
collision broadening. Many gas analyzers in use today automatically
compensate for the effect of collision broadening if they measure
the concentration of interfering gases [2].
Finally, since modern IR analyzers are non-dispersive and agent-
specific, measuring each agent with a unique set of wavelengths
selected by filters on the chopper wheel, it can be difficult to add
new volatile agents for analysis as they come into use [2].
Historical technologies used for respiratory
gas analysis
The majority of commercially available multigas anesthetic moni-
tors use IR technology due to a variety of technical and economic
reasons, including the ability to identify multiple agents, patient-
side use, and lower cost. Occasionally, other technologies may be
encountered in certain clinical settings, on the secondhand market,
and in research environments.
Mass spectrometry
Mass spectrometry was one of the earliest forms of respiratory gas
analysis, first used in human critical care in the 1970s followed by
clinical use in anesthesia through the 1990s. A mass spectrometer
is a machine that weighs charged atoms and molecules based on
how far they travel when ionized in a vacuum and deflected by an
electric or magnetic charge [9]. The mass spectrometer draws the
sample gas into a low-pressure chamber. The gas sample is then
passed into a second chamber at a pressure nearing that of a vac-
uum. In this second chamber, the molecules are ionized and then
accelerated toward a cathode plate. A magnet or electromagnet
then separates the ions based on mass and charge [9]. The mass
spectrometer determines the composition of a respiratory
gas sample by comparing how far the components travel
against known values.
Traditionally, mass spectrometers are very large pieces of equip-
ment and do not fit inside individual operating rooms. Instead, a
central mass spectrometer is located in a remote room and con-
nected to a monitor on top of the anesthesia machine with a sam-
pling line. As a result, there is a significant time delay in receiving
data updates on the operating room monitor, making these units
clinically unwieldy. Mass spectrometers are also very complicated
machines requiring a lot of downtime and are expensive to produce
and maintain [9]. A portable unit has been described for use in
horses but does not appear to be clinically available [8]. Interestingly,
mass spectrometry has been used to quantify exhaled propofol
concentrations, correlating to anesthetic depth [10]. At least one
clinically available unit is currently marketed in Europe and is in
human clinical trials in the United States (Edmon® – Exhaled Drug
Monitor, B. Braun) [11].
Raman spectroscopy
Raman spectroscopy uses light to create molecular vibrations and
then analyzes light scattering to gain more information about a gas
sample. The majority of the time, when light photons collide with a
gas molecule they bounce off and their wavelength remains
unchanged (Rayleigh scattering). Occasionally, photons lose energy
to the molecule they strike, which alters the wavelength of the light.
This alteration in wavelength is called the “Raman effect.” Raman
spectroscopy measures the difference in energy of scattered light to
create a fingerprint for molecules, which is then used as a reference
to analyze respiratory gas composition [2,12].
The components of a Raman spectrometer include a light source
(laser), an optic filter, a spectrograph, and a computer analyzer. The
laser focuses light molecules of the same wavelength on the gas
sample to be analyzed. The optic filter only allows photons of
Raman scattered wavelengths to pass through. The spectrograph
then acts as a prism and guides photons in different directions
based on wavelength. The detector then quantifies the Raman
scattered light based on both wavelength and intensity of light,
which is directly proportional to the number of photons of that
wavelength [12]. Each molecule exhibits a specific change in energy
(wavelength) in Raman scattered light, creating a unique finger-
print for that molecule [2].
Raman spectroscopy came into use in clinical anesthesia in the
late 1980s, replacing mass spectrometry. Raman spectroscopy can
be used to analyze carbon dioxide, oxygen, nitrogen, and potent
volatile anesthetics. Monoatomic gases such as helium, xenon, and
argon, which lack intramolecular bonds, do not exhibit Raman
activity [2]. Raman spectrometers perform all the same functions as
a mass spectrometer but in a much smaller machine, allowing for
analyzers to be located within each individual operating room.
Raman spectrometers also have a fast response time, can perform
multigas analysis, and analysis does not result in degradation of the
molecule under examination [9]. The Ohmeda Rascal II was a com-
monly used multigas analyzer that utilized Raman scattering to
measure oxygen, nitrogen, carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide, and the
volatile anesthetic agents (halothane, enflurane, isoflurane, sevoflu-
rane, and desflurane) [13]. The Rascal II was compact, user friendly,
and accurate over a wide range of respiratory gas concentra-
tions [13]. Raman spectroscopy is no longer in use today as IR gas

-- 259 of 1450 --

244 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
monitoring technology is less expensive to buy and maintain [2,12],
although given the Rascal II’s widespread use, one may still come
across it in some settings.
Photoacoustic spectrometry
Photoacoustic spectrometry works much like IR analysis as
described earlier [2]. An IR source emits a beam through a spinning
chopper wheel that filters specific wavelengths of light correspond-
ing to the desired gas to be analyzed. The light is absorbed by the
gas sample, and when the excited molecules relax to the ground
state the generation of thermal energy produces a sound wave with
the same frequency [14]. A microphone converts gas vibration fre-
quencies into electrical signals that are used to determine gas
concentrations.
Photoacoustic spectrometry has the advantage over IR analysis
in that a simple microphone detector can be used to measure the
IR-absorbing gases [2] and no optical sensor is required [8]. The
main drawback of photoacoustic spectrometry is that the device is
sensitive to interference from loud noises and vibration [2].
Piezoelectric analysis
Piezoelectric analysis utilizes lipid-coated vibrating crystals to
measure volatile anesthetic agents. When the crystals are exposed
to a volatile anesthetic agent, the vapor is absorbed into the lipid
coating. The resultant increase in mass of the lipid changes the
vibration frequency of the crystal. Piezoelectric systems have two
circuits: one with an uncoated reference crystal and one coated
crystal. The difference in the electric signal generated from the two
crystals is proportional to the concentration of vapor present in the
gas sample [4].
The presence of water vapor and nitrous oxide may affect the
accuracy of piezoelectric systems, but even so the accuracy of these
systems is better than 0.1%. These systems have a fast response time
and are capable of measuring both inspired and expired concentra-
tions of respiratory gases. There is no need for waste gas scavenging
with piezoelectric systems because the analysis does not alter anes-
thetic agents and the sampled gas can be returned to the breathing
system [4].
Piezoelectric technology only has the capability to monitor a sin-
gle agent at a time [9], and cannot measure oxygen, carbon dioxide,
nitrogen, or nitrous oxide. Additionally, piezoelectric monitors
cannot discriminate between agents – the agent to be analyzed must
be selected on the monitor prior to use. If the wrong agent is
selected, the results can be extremely inaccurate [2,9].
Refractometry
A refractometer shines beams of monochromatic light through two
chambers, one containing the sample gas to be analyzed and the
other containing air [4]. Vapor slows the velocity of light, so the por-
tion of light passing through the chamber containing the sample gas
will be delayed [4]. The beams are then recombined and form a pat-
tern of light and dark bands [9]. The nature of these bands depends
on the refractive index and concentration of the components in the
gas sample [9], with refractivity being a nonlinear function of the
partial pressure of the gas [4]. The position of the bands is viewed
through an eyepiece, superimposed against a scale that indicates the
vapor concentration [4]. In order to use this device, the refractivity
number of the gas being analyzed must be known [4,5]. These moni-
tors are impractical for breath-by-breath analysis and are more fre-
quently used in research, to calibrate vaporizer output, or to measure
environmental gas exposure [6,9,15].
Applications of volatile agent monitoring
Respiratory anesthetic gas monitoring has applications in both
research and clinical settings. End-tidal inhalant partial pressure
closely approximates alveolar inhalant partial pressure. With mod-
ern inhalant anesthetics of low solubility, these partial pressures
quickly equilibrate with those of the central nervous system, reflect-
ing the amount of drug delivered to the effect site. End-tidal inhal-
ant monitoring is frequently used in research settings to determine
the MAC of volatile anesthetics in different species [6]. Strictly
speaking, the definition of MAC includes “concentration at sea
level” and is therefore actually reflective of partial pressure rather
than concentration.
There are also several clinical applications for respiratory anes-
thetic gas analysis, including monitoring the uptake and elimina-
tion of inhalant anesthetics by the patient, facilitating a safer, more
targeted use of the vaporizer to reach desired end-tidal inhalant
concentrations and therefore anesthetic depth. Comparing end-
tidal agent concentrations to established MAC values may prevent
accidental awareness under anesthesia, particularly in patients who
have been administered a neuromuscular blocking agent [2]. A
patient who has reached 75% of the MAC value for that agent may
not yet be at a surgical plane of anesthesia but is very unlikely to
experience awareness [16]. Of course, monitoring end-tidal agent
concentrations should not be used as a replacement for other means
of assessing anesthetic depth and the entire clinical picture should
be evaluated. Respiratory anesthetic gas monitoring can also allow
the anesthetist to titrate fresh gas flow and vaporizer settings more
precisely. For example, one might use a high fresh gas flow rate at
the beginning of anesthesia to ensure that the anesthetic gas con-
centration changes rapidly. Once the desired end-tidal concentra-
tion is achieved, the vaporizer and fresh gas flow can be adjusted to
maintain the concentration at a steady level. The reverse can be
done in recovery; the fresh gas flow rate may be increased to reduce
the anesthetic gas concentrations in the system. This may also be
useful for teaching purposes, demonstrating the relationship
between agent concentration and the fresh gas flow rate [2]. In
addition, respiratory gas monitors may detect the presence of incor-
rect or mixed anesthetic agents in a vaporizer, as well as contami-
nants. High- or low-concentration alarms may warn of vaporizer
malfunction and can be used to potentially indicate the presence
of an empty vaporizer (although this would be a very late method
for recognizing the need to refill the vaporizer) or failure of the
operator to turn on the vaporizer [2].
Respiratory anesthetic gas monitors can also be used to verify
the calibration of vaporizers in use, a practice that is recom-
mended at least once yearly or any time the vaporizer is discon-
nected from the anesthesia machine or otherwise jostled, tipped,
or disturbed [2].
References
1 Pisano A. Light, air pollution and pulse oximetry: the Beer–Lambert Law. In: Pisano,
A, ed. Physics for Anesthesiologists: from Daily Life to the Operating Room. Cham,
Switzerland: Springer International, 2017: 117–125.
2 Jaffe MB, Eisenkraft JB, Orr J. Respiratory gas monitoring. In: Ehrenwerth J,
Eisenkraft JB, Berry JM, eds. Anesthesia Equipment: Principles and Applications, 3rd
edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Health Sciences, 2021: 218–236.
3 Berggren M, Hosseini N, Nillson K, et al. Improved response time with a new
miniaturized mainstream multigas monitor. J Clin Monit Comput 2009; 23:
355–61.
4 Dorsch JA, Dorsch SE. Gas monitoring. In: Dorsch JA, Dorsch SE, eds. Understanding
Anesthesia Equipment, 5th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer, Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins, 2008.

-- 260 of 1450 --

Chapter 16: Anesthetic Gas Monitoring 	245
5 Cheam EWS, Lockwood GG. The use of a portable refractometer to measure
desflurane. Anaesthesia 1995; 50(7): 607–610.
6 Rudolff AS, Moens YP, Driessen B, et al. Comparison of an infrared anaesthetic
agent analyser (Datex-Ohmeda) with refractometry for measurement of isoflurane,
sevoflurane and desflurane concentrations. Vet Anaesth Analg 2014; 41(4): 386–392.
7 Dujardin CL, Gootjes P, Moens Y. Isoflurane measurement error using short wave-
length infrared techniques in horses: influence of fresh gas flow and pre-anaesthetic
food deprivation. Vet Anaesth Analg 2005; 32(2): 101–106.
8 Turner PG, Dugdale A, Young IS, et al. Portable mass spectrometry for measurement
of anaesthetic agents and methane in respiratory gases. Vet J 2008; 177(1): 36–44.
9 Langton JA, Hutton A. Respiratory gas analysis. Contin Edu Anaesth Crit Care &
Pain 2009; 9(1): 19–23.
10 Hornuss C, Praun S, Villinger J, et al. Real-time monitoring of propofol in expired
air in humans undergoing total intravenous anesthesia. Anesthesiology 2007;
106(4): 665–674.
11 United States National Library of Science, ClinicalTrials.gov. Comparison Between
Propofol Concentration in Exhaled Breath and Blood Plasma Using the Exhaled
Drug Monitor “Edmon” (ProDect). www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04586998
(accessed April 2022).
12 Mulvaney SP, Keating CD. Raman spectroscopy. Anal Chem 2000; 72(12):
145–158.
13 Lockwood GG, Landon MJ, Chakrabarti MK, et al. The Ohmeda Rascall II. A new
gas analyser for anaesthetic use. Anaesthesia 1994; 49(1): 44–53.
14 Patimisco P, Scamarcio G, Tittel FK, et al. Quartz-enhanced photoacoustic spec-
troscopy: a review. Sensors 2014; 14(4): 6165–6206.
15 Ambrisko TD, Klide AM. Comparison of use of an infrared anesthetic gas monitor
and refractometry for measurement of anesthetic agent concentrations. Am J Vet
Res 2011; 72(10): 1299–1304.
16 Eger EI. Age, minimum alveolar anesthetic concentration, and minimum alveolar
anesthetic concentration-awake. Anesth Analg 2001; 93(4): 947–953.

-- 261 of 1450 --

17
246
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The S ixth E dition of L umb and J ones	. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
Perianesthetic hypothermia, and less commonly hyperthermia, occurs
in almost all patients undergoing anesthesia. Despite the common
occurrence of body temperature changes, few anesthetists understand
the complex patterns of heat transfer and the multitude of factors
which influence the rate and extent to which it occurs. This chapter
will address these factors, the techniques used to limit heat loss, and
the impact of hypo- and hyperthermia on patient morbidity.
Thermodynamics
Thermodynamics is the study of the transfer of heat and work
between systems. In biology, the thermodynamic laws can be
applied to explain many phenomena, but of interest to the anesthe-
tist is the analysis of the transfer of body heat, clinically measured as
core body temperature, to the external environment. The reverse
(e.g., heat transfer from the external environment to the patient) is
also of interest since an understanding of the process will allow a
safe and effective means of maintaining or increasing patient tem-
perature during the perianesthetic period. The heat transfer and
storage properties of materials which contact the patient are also
important since they often present hazards in the form of potential
sources of burns. Fortunately, a detailed knowledge of the applica-
tion of the laws of thermodynamics is not necessary to understand
heat balance; however, a general understanding of conservation of
energy (the first law of thermodynamics) and the heat flow to estab-
lish an equilibrium between systems (the second law of thermody-
namics) will be useful.
Thermoregulation
An organism possesses heat energy which is conveniently measured
as body temperature. The total amount of heat energy is a function
of the temperature and the mass of the patient, just as kinetic energy
is a function of the velocity (speed) of an object and its mass. In
most domestic mammalian species, the amount of heat energy
(temperature) is relatively constant (homeothermic) despite con-
tinual metabolic heat production, and environmental heat gain and
losses. The amount of body heat can be described using the terms
normothermia (euthermia), hypothermia, and hyperthermia, which
refer to normal, decreased, and increased amounts of body heat,
respectively. Hyperthermia is an increase in temperature, but usu-
ally occurs in response to increased environmental temperature or
altered thermoregulation. Pyrexia (i.e., fever) is similar in that it is
an abnormal increase in temperature but it is due to an increase in
the set-point, often related to immune response to pathogens.
Hypothermia is the opposite condition and is most commonly
associated with heat loss in excess to metabolic production or
decreased thermoregulatory set-point, which delays shivering or
other homeostatic mechanisms.
Measured temperature values corresponding to these different
states depend on the species since the normal ranges of core body
temperature can vary. Additionally, temperature can fluctuate with
the time of day (or time of year for hibernating animals), hormonal
influences, and activity levels, although these variations are usually
minor compared to the changes induced by anesthesia. Additionally,
some species (especially amphibians, reptiles, and some fish) are
normally 	subject 	to 	significant 	environmental 	temperature
17 Perioperative Thermoregulation
and Heat Balance
Kurt A. Grimm
Veterinary Specialists Services, PC, Conifer, Colorado, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 246
Thermodynamics, 246
Thermoregulation, 246
Core-to- periphery gradient, 247
Mechanisms of heat transfer, 247
Active patient warming, 249
Forced warm air units, 250
Circulating warm water systems, 250
Resistive polymer electric heating, 250
Hyperthermia, 250
Clinical significance of hypothermia, 251
Perianesthetic management of hypothermia, 251
References, 252

-- 262 of 1450 --

Chapter 17: Perioperative Thermoregulation and Heat Balance 	247
influences (poikilothermic), and definition of normal body tem-
perature becomes problematic. Interestingly, the naked mole rat is
the only known mammal to exhibit poikilothermic responses to
environmental temperature changes as an adult [1].
Body temperature is sensed by temperature-responsive cells
throughout the body. There are distinct populations of peripheral
nerve endings (receptors) in the skin, which discharge when their
thermal thresholds are reached. Most receptors appear to utilize
ion channels that belong to the transient receptor potential (TRP)
family of cation channels [2]. There are also visceral receptors
which are found generally in the brain (especially the anterior
hypothalamus and preoptic area), spinal cord, and abdominal
structures such as the gastrointestinal tract and urinary blad-
der [2]. The afferent input to the central nervous system (CNS) is
carried by different nerve fiber types (e.g., Aδ and C fibers)
depending on whether the input is cold, hot, or noxious. These
signals traverse ascending tracts of the spinal cord and eventually
reach the hypothalamus where the signals are integrated and
responses issued. Since local temperature can vary depending on
the tissue type and metabolic activity, the thermal input to the
CNS is a summary of multiple core and peripheral sensors. This
“averaging” of temperature allows the body to maintain a narrow
thermal set-point, which is associated with an interthreshold
range (temperature variation where no compensatory responses
[e.g., shivering, sweating, vasoconstriction, or vasodilation] occur)
of approximately ± 0.2 °C (Fig. 17.1). Anesthetic drugs can alter
thermoregulatory thresholds for compensatory responses, which
is why perioperative patients often fail to shiver even though they
are mildly hypothermic. The increase in the interthreshold range
(approximate increased range of 3.5 °C) caused by drugs such as
opioids, sedatives, and anesthetics is to some degree drug- and
dose-dependent and reduces the patient’s ability to tightly regulate
core body temperature.
Core- to- periphery gradient
It is important to understand that body heat is not uniformly
distributed throughout the organism. For example, the core body
temperature is often several degrees (2–4 °C) higher than skin
temperature (Fig. 17.2) [3]. There is also significant longitudinal
variation in temperature in the limbs, with the core-to- skin differ-
ence being greater the further the measurement is made from the
trunk. This temperature gradient is maintained by the autonomic
nervous system through mechanisms which regulate peripheral
blood flow [4].
The majority of heat transfer between the core and periphery
occurs via blood-borne convection (with some due to tissue-to-
tissue conduction). Factors which influence the distribution of
blood include arteriovenous anastomoses, cutaneous vasoconstric-
tion or dilation, and countercurrent vascular heat exchange [3].
Sweating (in those species which possess this capability) and envi-
ronmental temperature will also modify the redistribution of
heat [3]. Additional mechanisms exist such as panting or shivering
which can modify heat loss and gain, although these mechanisms
more directly affect the core temperature rather than the skin-to-
core temperature gradient.
Interestingly, in humans about 95% of metabolically generated
heat is lost to the environment via transfer across the skin with only
about 5% lost through the respiratory tract. This implies that heat
conservation devices such as airway heat exchangers will have min-
imal influence on the rate of change of core temperature during
anesthesia [5–7]. Since human skin and hair density is significantly
different from that of many domestic species, the importance of
cutaneous heat loss may vary, but in general it remains a major
mechanism contributing to perianesthetic hypothermia.
The reason why it is important to understand the skin-to-core
temperature gradient is that it helps explain why anesthetized
patients undergo a rapid decrease in body temperature following
administration of anesthetic drugs, especially those which cause
profound peripheral vasodilation (e.g., acepromazine and inhalant
anesthetics). Drugs which cause less peripheral vasodilation often
result in a less rapid decrease in temperature (e.g., total intrave-
nous anesthesia with propofol or following premedication with
dexmedetomidine) [8,9].
Most of the clinical research into anesthesia-associated body tem-
perature change has been performed with human subjects. It should
be remembered that body size, and more specifically the surface
area-to-mass ratio (alternatively the core-to-peripheral compart-
ment ratio) can greatly influence the rate of change of core body
temperature. The typical pattern of perianesthetic hypothermia has
been described as having three phases: an initial rapid hypothermic
phase, the linear decrease, and the plateau phase (Fig. 17.3)
Mechanisms of heat transfer
Heat energy that has reached the patient’s body surface is trans-
ferred to the environment via four main mechanisms: radiation,
conduction, convection, and evaporation. Radiation of heat is the
electromagnetic (photon) transfer of infrared and far-infrared
energy between surfaces [10]. It does not depend upon the tem-
perature of the air around the patient, but does depend on the emis-
sivity of the involved surfaces and their temperature difference (in
°K) raised to the fourth power. Emissivity is an object’s capacity to
exchange heat, with a value of 1.0 being a perfect absorber of heat
and 0 being a perfect reflector. Human skin has been described as
Vasoconstriction
Sweating or panting
Sweating or panting
Vasodilation
Vasodilation
Non-shivering
thermogenesis
Shivering
Vasoconstriction
Non-shivering
thermogenesis
Shivering
Normal
Anesthesia
33° 	35° 	37° 	39° 	41° C
33° 	35° 	37° 	39° 	41° C
Figure 17.1 Thermoregulation is tightly controlled in healthy,
unmedicated individuals. Many drugs used during the perianesthetic
period (e.g., opioids and inhalant anesthetics) can alter the range over
which compensatory responses to altered environmental and core body
temperature occur.

-- 263 of 1450 --

248 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
having an emissivity of 0.95 (regardless of pigmentation) for infra-
red light [3]. Radiation has been identified as the most important
mechanism resulting in heat loss and perianesthetic hypother-
mia [3] and of note, it is not significantly inhibited by common
methods used to limit patient hypothermia (e.g., cloth blankets,
circulating water blankets, and forced warm air heaters).
Conduction and convection share a common theme in that heat
energy flows from a warmer to a cooler surface. Conduction is usu-
ally direct transfer between two adjacent surfaces, whereas convec-
tion is facilitated via an intermediary (e.g., moving air or flowing
liquid). Transfer of heat via conduction is proportional to the differ-
ence between two surface temperatures and can be inhibited by
placing insulation between them. With convection, the movement
of air (“wind chill”) increases heat loss proportional to the square
root of the air velocity. The use of an air-trapping sheet or blanket
around the patient will limit airflow and thus reduce the effects of
convection by about 30% [11,12]. Adding additional layers does lit-
tle to reduce heat loss from convection, emphasizing the impor-
tance of decreasing airflow rather than focusing on the insulating
capability of the cover. Using towels, pads, or circulating water blan-
kets underneath the patient will act as a layer of insulation and limit
direct transfer of heat via conduction.
One important species difference to consider when interpreting
studies of heat loss in domestic mammals compared to human sub-
jects is the insulating effect of fur on conduction and convection.
Convection is generally regarded as the second most important
cause of intraoperative heat loss in humans, but can become the
most important in environments with high airflow.
Evaporation of liquids from the skin or body cavity surface
results in patient heat loss due to the “donation” of heat energy
required to vaporize the liquid. It is recognized that heat loss is
greater with surgeries requiring large incisions and exposure of
Vasoconstricted
Skin 29–33 °C 	Skin 33–35 °C
Periphery
29–33 °C
Periphery
34–36 °C
Core 38.5 °C 	Core 36 °C
Anesthesia 	Vasodilated
Figure 17.2 A temperature gradient normally exists between the skin surface and the body’s core. The gradient is maintained by physiologic mechanisms
such as peripheral vasoconstriction and altered blood flow distribution. Many anesthetics which cause indiscriminate vasodilation result in mixing of core
and peripheral blood, leading to a lessening of the gradient and ultimately a decrease in core body temperature.
33.5
34.0
34.5
35.0
35.5
36.0
36.5
37.0
37.5
38.0
38.5
0 	0.5 	1 	1.5 	2 	2.5 	3
Elapsed time (h)
Body temperature (°C)
Temperature change during anesthesia
Figure 17.3 The hypothetical pattern of body temperature decrease during general anesthesia of a canine patient with minimal or no external heat
support. During the first hour, core temperature usually decreases 1–1.5 °C. A second slower phase follows which represents less influence of core-skin
blood redistribution and more dependence on environmental heat loss. Eventually, patients reach a psuedoequilibrium with the environment, and heat
loss is minimal. Patients with a greater surface area-to-mass ratio (e.g., cats or small dogs) will experience faster changes while larger patients (e.g., horses)
will experience slower changes. Use of supplemental heat sources in the perioperative period will tend to slow the rate of decrease in body temperature
and elevate the minimum temperature reached. The surgical or diagnostic procedure being performed can also modify the rate of heat loss.

-- 264 of 1450 --

Chapter 17: Perioperative Thermoregulation and Heat Balance 	249
internal surfaces than with small incisions or non-invasive proce-
dures. Evaporative losses can reach 50% of the total heat loss for
smaller animal patients (rabbits) with large surgical fields [13], but
are estimated to be less relative to skin loss with larger animals
(swine) [14]. Another source of evaporative heat loss is associated
with use of water- or alcohol-based solutions to prepare the surgical
site. Heat loss has been suggested to be less with water-based solu-
tions than with alcohol [15]. However, recent studies in cats and
dogs have found little or no difference in temperature outcomes
related to surgical preparation solutions [16,17]. Relative to other
sources of heat loss, evaporative losses due to surgical site prepara-
tion tend to be small but, in some scenarios, may be significant.
Decreased core body temperature has long been associated with
the intravenous administration of fluid therapy. The magnitude of
this effect is a function of the temperature of the fluids being
administered and their volume relative to the patient’s body mass.
When fluids are introduced at less than blood temperature, heat
energy is transferred to the solution to increase the temperature
until it reaches equilibrium with the patient’s blood. Warming intra-
venous fluid can minimize this source of heat loss, but a medical
fluid warming device should be used to avoid accidental overheat-
ing, which could result in blood protein and enzyme damage. Many
commercial devices limit fluid temperature to 104 °F (40 °C), which
is approximate to the blood temperature of a febrile patient.
Important limitations of fluid warmers include the rate of fluid flow
and distance they can be positioned from the patient. Many fluid
warmers have a specified range of fluid flow rates where the fluid
they output will be at or near the indicated temperature. If flow
rates are too high, there is inadequate time to absorb heat and reach
equilibrium with the warmer surface resulting in cooler than indi-
cated fluid. If flow rates are too low, the fluid loses significant heat
to room air on its way to the patient [18]. Long fluid lines posi-
tioned between the warmer and the patient will have a similar
effect. Under clinical conditions, the amount of perianesthetic heat
loss prevented by warming intravenous fluids is minor relative to
other routes [19,20].
Active patient warming
Although patient heat loss cannot be completely prevented during
anesthesia, several methods have succeeded in replacing heat losses
or limiting their magnitude. The first phase of heat loss is the result
primarily of the transfer of core heat to the periphery due to vasodi-
lation (see Fig. 17.2). This phase is nearly impossible to prevent by
application of an external heat source after induction. The most
effective strategy is prewarming the skin and peripheral tissues to
minimize the thermal gradient between the skin and the core so
that once blood flow increases to the periphery, the heat energy
required to re-establish equilibrium is minimal [21]. This strategy is
employed on some human patients but has obvious limitations in
veterinary patients. It is often impossible to restrain the patient to
apply a warming device, but some species can be placed into warm
ambient environments prior to induction. A major downside to this
approach is that the patient will often respond by attempting to
maintain a normal core temperature by panting, sweating, or other
compensatory mechanisms.
Once anesthesia is induced, the focus is on limiting heat loss and
maximizing safe heat supplementation. The use of blankets over the
patient can reduce convective losses by approximately 30%, and
placing insulation or circulating warm water blankets under all
points where the patient contacts the surgery table or positioning
devices will reduce conductive losses. However, the mainstay of
limiting perianesthetic hypothermia is application of an external
heat source (forced air unit, circulating warm water blanket, or
resistive foam electrical unit).
Numerous methods to supply supplemental heat have been tried
over the years by veterinarians during hospitalization or recovery
from anesthesia. These have included using electric heating coils
(e.g., farrowing heat pads), containers filled with warm water (e.g.,
latex gloves, bleach bottles, and IV fluid bags), and bags filled with
various cereal grains which can be microwaved [22,23]. None of
these methods should be used during anesthesia due to the relatively
high potential for causing skin burns to patients [24]. Conscious
patients are able to sense impending thermal injury and will usually
move away from a dangerous heat source. They also alter their body
position frequently to limit the exposure of one area to pressure or
heat. These innate protective mechanisms are abolished by general
anesthesia, placing responsibility for protecting the patient from
burns on the anesthetist. A complicating factor is peripheral blood
flow to the skin, since lower blood flow allows accumulation of heat
energy at the skin surface, increasing the risk of thermal injury. Since
the previously mentioned methods of heat supplementation were
not designed for use in anesthetized patients, they can be hazardous.
Their main limitation is the heat content of solids and liquids is great
enough that if left in contact with skin for a prolonged period, there
can be enough heat transfer to cause a burn.
Forced air units circumvent this problem because the heat con-
tent of air is low (unless a hair dryer is used instead of a patient
warmer). By using large volumes of warm air (containing relatively
little heat energy), the risk of injury is less. However, if an object
made of metal, water, or plastic is in contact with both the warmed
air and skin, there is a potential to concentrate the heat energy and
cause a burn, especially if an appropriate forced warm air blanket is
not used to distribute the airflow.
The use of circulating warm water blankets reduces the risk of
thermal injury by limiting the water temperature and distributing
the water flow to areas of the pad which are not under significant
pressure. Pressure points created by patient contact with the under-
lying table or positioning devices can create local areas of relative
skin hypoperfusion. This local decrease in blood flow allows heat to
accumulate in the hypoperfused tissue, increasing the risk of a burn.
Inexpensive electric heating pads do not redistribute heat deliv-
ery away from areas of pressure and hypoperfusion which is why
they should never be used on anesthetized or recovering patients.
Resistive foam electric heating pads are available and designed for
use in anesthetized patients. However, failure of the system design
can allow patients to receive dangerous levels of heat energy under
certain circumstances. Systems designed for anesthetized patients
will be discussed in more detail below.
It should be apparent that the efficiency of heat transfer is directly
related to the proportion of body surface which can be exposed to the
external heat source. Also important is the surface area-to-mass ratio
of the area being warmed. Heat loss (and gain) is usually greatest in
areas with a large blood flow and low mass such as the limbs. The use
of insulation (e.g., bubble wrap) around legs has been suggested to
slow heat loss while application of heat to the limbs versus the trunk
has been shown to result in more effective warming [25]. While den-
tistry patients may have 80–90% of their body surface covered,
abdominal and thoracic surgery patients are often only covered 50%
or less due to the need for surgical access. This fact, coupled with
increased evaporative losses due to large incisions and body cavity
exposure, can result in significant hypothermia in small patients.

-- 265 of 1450 --

250 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
Forced warm air units
Many different models of forced warm air heating units are availa-
ble. These are distinctly different from other sources of forced warm
air which may have historically been used on veterinary patients
such as hair dryers. The heat output of the unit is a function of the
air temperature and the airflow volume at the hose end. However,
the efficacy of the system to warm patients is mainly a function of
the design of the blanket [26]. Important considerations are that the
blanket should have minimal temperature differences between the
warmest and coolest areas and that the effectiveness is a function of
the temperature difference between the patient and the blanket.
Patient coverage by the blanket is also a critical factor. With this
knowledge, it would seem ill-advised to save money by making
blankets out of items such as pillowcases. Additionally, the use of a
blanket is important for even distribution of heat. “Hosing” patients
(aiming the blanket-end of the hose toward the patient) is ineffi-
cient and may result in overheating of plastic, metal, or other objects
in direct contact with the patient’s skin. Forced air warming units
and their blankets are engineered as a system and when utilized as
such can be effective [27,28].
Circulating warm water systems
One of the older systems designed for use with anesthetized patients
consists of a water reservoir/heater/pump unit and a replaceable
blanket/pad [29]. Key features of the pump are the incorporation of
electrical safety features, since water and electricity are in close
proximity, and the ability to limit the temperature of the water
delivered to the patient (usually around 104 °F [40 °C]). Most units
can be attached to several sizes and shapes of blankets and have
internal features to warn of low water levels. Blankets are available
in many sizes and shapes which is useful to maximize the body con-
tact area. Water circulates through the blanket in channels formed
between the plastic layers. Occlusion of some of the channels by
patient pressure results in shunting of flow around that area, reduc-
ing the risk of heat accumulation at pressure points.
While circulating warm water systems are generally less expen-
sive than other systems designed for anesthetized patients, there are
some drawbacks. Usually, the blanket is placed between the patient
and the table. If more patient coverage is desired, additional blan-
kets or units are needed. Also, failure or leakage of a blanket can
result in drenching of the patient, causing significantly increased
heat loss due to evaporation during transport and recovery. While
circulating water blankets are more effective than no external heat
support, they are usually less effective than forced warm air
units [30]. Many anesthetists choose to use a circulating warm
water blanket under the patient in combination with a forced warm
air unit placed over or around the patient.
Resistive polymer electric heating
Resistive polymer heating systems (e.g., HotDog Patient Warming
System, Augustine Biomedical + Design, Eden Prairie, MN;
Inditherm, Inditherm plc, Rotherham, UK) differ from forced air
and circulating warm water in that they are conductive rather than
convective heat delivery devices. The major concern limiting the
use of electric heating pads during anesthesia and recovery has
been (and remains) the concern for thermal injury. Commercial
systems typically incorporate spot sensors for monitoring patient/
pad interface area temperature and provide alarms and electrical
cutoffs if temperatures are out of the specified ranges. However, the
sensors are not uniformly distributed and patient positioning may
decrease their effectiveness. Additionally, if a foreign substance
such as surgical irrigation fluid or urine is introduced between the
pad and the patient the thermal conductivity of the system may
increase and cause dangerous conditions leading to burns.
Pad construction consists of several layers composed of the poly-
mer, padding, waterproofing, and a protective layer. The integrity of
the pad construction appears to be important since moisture inside
the pad can alter function and heat delivery characteristics of the
system and has been associated with thermal injury to patients.
Most systems include “pad expiration” dates in an attempt to
encourage replacement of older pads in order to limit the risk of
burns from damaged pad surfaces. However, variables other than
age can influence the risk of damage such as heavy use, caustic or
erosive cleaning agents, accidental puncture by sharp instruments
or claws, and general environmental conditions. Regular pad
inspection is encouraged to limit the risk of patient injury.
Advantages of this system include less concern for surgical site
contamination due to airflow (forced warm air systems) [31], lower
disposable costs (forced warm air and circulating warm water sys-
tems), quiet solid-state functioning, and a simple direct current
electrical cord connection between the pad and the controller unit.
Potential downsides to the system include a relatively large initial
purchase price and concern for thermal injury when the pad is
damaged without obvious external signs. Many users (especially for
dental procedures) wrap the pad around the patient, but a safer
approach may be to place the pad over the patient to limit pressure
points. The effectiveness of resistive polymer heating has been com-
pared to forced warm air and other methods. Generally, the resis-
tive polymer system is similar or somewhat more effective [32–36].
However, the major limitation with heat transfer and patient tem-
perature maintenance remains the amount of body surface which
can contact the pad.
Hyperthermia
Hyperthermia is rare during anesthesia. When it does occur, it is
usually due to iatrogenic causes (e.g., too much heat gain from
warming devices), large heavy-coated animals undergoing diagnos-
tic procedures associated with little heat loss (e.g., a Newfoundland
dog undergoing magnetic resonance imaging), or metabolic
derangement or disease (e.g., malignant hyperthermia or suspected
serotonin syndrome). When recognized, hyperthermia should be
evaluated as to the clinical significance and a differential list of
causes should be formulated. Transient mild hyperthermia (up to
104 °F [40 °C]) is seldom a risk to the patient and usually responds
to remedying the suspected cause (turn off or turn down the heat
support). If hyperthermia is associated with other signs of hyper-
metabolism (increased end-tidal CO2
, metabolic acidosis, and
hypoxia), malignant hyperthermia or some variant of hypermeta-
bolic disease should be suspected and treated aggressively.
Malignant hyperthermia has been reported in several species,
including humans, cats, dogs, horses, and swine [37–48]. Similar
hypermetabolic syndromes have also been reported during capture
of free-ranging wildlife.
A confounding factor in diagnosing the cause of hyperthermia,
especially in cats, is the association of opioid administration with
perianesthetic hyperthermia [49,50]. This effect appears to be
related to opioid-altered thermoregulation in the CNS. Most other
companion animal species experience hypothermia perianestheti-
cally following opioid administration, although there appear to be
exceptions (e.g., Greyhounds) [38]. More detailed species-specific
discussions of malignant hyperthermia appear elsewhere in this text.

-- 266 of 1450 --

Chapter 17: Perioperative Thermoregulation and Heat Balance 	251
Clinical significance of hypothermia
The first obstacle to a meaningful discussion of the significance of
anesthetic- related hypothermia is defining at what patient tempera-
ture hypothermia occurs. Strictly speaking, it would be at any tem-
perature below the patient’s normal temperature. However, practical
experience tells us that mild hypothermia is seldom associated with
significant long-term complications; therefore, many choose to
define mild hypothermia as a body temperature between the
patient’s normal euthermic temperature and approximately 96.8 °F
(36 °C), the temperature below which risk of complications is
thought to increase in most species. It should be apparent that
decreasing body temperature is a continuum and the risk of adverse
outcomes is usually multifactorial. Therefore, defining at what tem-
perature hypothermia is significant depends on the individual
patient and comorbidities present. In general, it can be assumed
that the risk of adverse outcomes increases as body temperature
decreases, but accurately predicting the breakpoints at which an
individual patient will have complications is impossible.
Anesthesia-related hypothermia in veterinary medicine is very
common. Usually, larger animals (equine and bovine species) will
experience some degree of hypothermia, but the magnitude is usu-
ally small due to the large body mass-to- surface ratio, and poten-
tially the high frequency of use of vasoconstricting α2
-adrenergic
receptor agonists as preanesthetics. Even though hypothermia may
be classified as mild, there are several studies which have associated
hypothermia in horses with longer times to standing [28,51].
Smaller species, including dogs and cats, often have mild-to-
moderate hypothermia, even when supplemental heat sources are
used. However, the reported incidence varies greatly depending on
what temperature is used to define its onset [52–56].
The incidence and magnitude of hypothermia are highly corre-
lated with several non-temperature-dependent risk factors for pos-
tanesthetic complications, including anesthetic duration, American
Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) status, patient size, patient age,
surgical site, and reason for surgery [57,58]. Common complica-
tions usually attributed to hypothermia include increased risk of
anesthetic overdose [59], prolonged recovery from anesthesia [60],
postoperative wound infection, impairment of coagulation [61,62],
increased shivering and discomfort during recovery, increased
blood viscosity, and cardiac complications, including arrhythmias
and arrest [63]. While in vitro measures of coagulation and platelet
function are temperature dependent and generally are impaired by
hypothermia-associated temperatures, in vivo effects of hypother-
mia on coagulation can be variable depending on many patient and
surgical factors.
Cardiac arrest is the most extreme example of increased mortal-
ity from hypothermia but does not usually occur until core tem-
perature is below approximately 70 °F (20–23 °C) [63]. Other
cardiovascular complications can occur at much higher body tem-
peratures (e.g., hypotension, myocardial ischemia, and arrhythmias
due to increased oxygen demands secondary to shivering in recov-
ery), but are of greater concern in patients with pre-existing cardiac
disease than in normal healthy patients.
Postoperative wound infections have been demonstrated to be
more common when mild hypothermia occurs during anesthe-
sia [64], but others have found little difference when studying the
rate of infection in clean wounds and instead suggest surgery time
is more important [65]. Proposed mechanisms include decreased
peripheral tissue blood flow during recovery and decreased func-
tion of T cells and neutrophils [64]. However, other factors, espe-
cially surgery time, surgery location, underlying health of the
patient, and anesthesia-associated hypoxemia (relatively common
in horses), should also be considered since these also correlate with
wound infection rates [66–68]. Controlled hypothermia can be pro-
tective for some patients. The decreased rate of cellular metabolism
associated with hypothermia may be protective in some conditions
such as neurologic disease [69–71], myocardial ischemia [63], and
tissue hypoxia [72].
Perianesthetic management of hypothermia
No formal guidelines exist for the management of body tempera-
ture during anesthesia of veterinary patients. However, body tem-
perature monitoring in the perioperative period is recommended in
the American College of Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia
Monitoring Guidelines so that “patients do not encounter serious
deviations from normal body temperature” [73]. It should be appre-
ciated that monitoring patient temperature does not alter heat bal-
ance changes associated with anesthesia. Application of appropriate
external heat sources can alter, but seldom prevents, changes in
temperature during the operative period unless patients can be in
contact with the source over a large portion of their skin surface
area and for a sufficient time to absorb adequate heat energy.
Management of patient temperature is a series of compromises
made between the anesthetist, surgeon, and other personnel
involved in the perioperative care of the patient. All anesthetists
would like to have their patients wake up euthermic if possible since
feeling cold can be uncomfortable. However, surgical, patient trans-
port, and recovery logistics are often at odds with maintenance of
euthermia. For example, dentistry patients can often be warmed by
covering 80–90% of their skin surface area, and may be extubated at
or near normal body temperature. However, a surgeon cannot gain
access to the abdomen for an exploratory laparotomy with heating
devices draped over the caudal half of the patient, so a significant
decrease in heat transfer is mandated by surgical needs. Additionally,
surgeons often expose abdominal contents during laparotomy, fur-
ther decreasing patient heat balance through increased losses.
Operating room temperature could be increased to minimize the
temperature differential between the patient and environment but
most surgeons prioritize their own comfort and keep operating
room temperatures cool. Even with the limitations imposed by sur-
gical needs, reasonable efforts should be made to apply effective
means of heat supplementation to anesthetized patients, especially
if the surgery is invasive or anesthesia time longer than a few
minutes.
Since the majority (in some cases over 90%) of heat loss occurs
through radiation, conduction, and convection of heat from the
skin, focus should be placed on limiting these losses. Placing
patients on insulating pads will slow conductive losses into the sur-
gery table. Placing warming devices specifically designed for anes-
thetized patients over as much skin surface as reasonably possible
will decrease the skin-to- environment temperature gradient and
further slow or reverse loss. Placing one layer of material over or
around the patient can limit air circulation and slow convective
loss. Some have used radiant heat lamps over the patient to limit or
reverse radiant heat loss (a significant proportion of overall loss)
but this is not common practice and may be difficult to control.
Other methods of patient warming or heat loss prevention have
been studied. In general, they are effective at addressing the
intended mechanism, but often those mechanisms are relatively
minor and do not have a major impact on overall heat loss. These
include use of fluid warmers, airway humidifiers, and heaters [74],

-- 267 of 1450 --

252 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
and additional insulation or blanket layers (e.g., bubble wrap on the
feet). When considering the utility of these techniques, there should
be thoughtful discussion about their effectiveness and potential to
complicate or delay the anesthetic and surgical procedure.
Significant hypothermia in patients arriving in recovery is com-
mon, especially in small animal species after surgeries lasting
30 min or longer. The drugs used for premedication and anesthesia
can significantly influence the observed body temperature decrease
since vasoconstrictors (e.g., α2 - adrenergic receptor agonists) tend
to limit cutaneous blood flow and heat transfer while vasodilators
(e.g., acepromazine and inhalant anesthetics) tend to increase
both [8,9]. While the amount of vasoconstriction or vasodilation
can modify the rate at which heat is lost, they can also modify the
rate at which externally applied supplemental heat sources can
warm a patient in recovery. It can be more difficult to raise body
temperature in an animal with profound peripheral vasoconstric-
tion (due to normal response to hypothermia or pharmacologically
induced). In some cases, it may be reasonable to administer an
antagonist to the drugs responsible for delaying patient warming
(e.g., α2
- adrenergic receptor antagonists or opioid antagonists) to
help restore cutaneous blood flow and central thermoregulatory
responses. However, this is not frequently done following major
surgery due to the loss of sedative and analgesic actions following
reversal. Additionally, rapid increases in oxygen demands will fol-
low onset of shivering. If the patient cannot increase oxygen deliv-
ery (diminished cardiovascular function or anemia) or has marginal
blood oxygenation (respiratory disease), rapid tissue hypoxia may
follow.
While hypothermia has been associated with several postopera-
tive complications (e.g., increased wound infections, decreased
coagulation and hemostasis, etc.), it seldom represents a true anes-
thetic emergency, even when severe. Therefore, personnel should
initially focus on critical parameters such as cardiovascular func-
tion (heart rate, blood pressure, and cardiac output) and pulmonary
function (end-tidal CO2
, oxyhemoglobin saturation, and airway
management) before addressing patient rewarming when patients
present to recovery. Once the patient’s vital functions are being
monitored and supported, heat support can be applied. During the
early recovery period when patients are unconscious or heavily
sedated, the same concerns exist as during anesthesia with respect
to placing heat sources not designed for anesthetized patients near
or on the patient.
References
1 Daly TJ, Williams LA, Buffenstein R. Catecholaminergic innervation of interscapu-
lar brown adipose tissue in the naked mole-rat (Heterocephalus glaber). J Anat 1997;
190: 321–326.
2 Morrison SF, Nakamura K. Central neural pathways for thermoregulation. Front
Biosci 2011; 16: 74–104.
3 Sessler DI. Perioperative heat balance. Anesthesiology 2000; 92(2): 578–596.
4 Kurz A, Sessler DI, Christensen R, et al. Thermoregulatory vasoconstriction and
perianesthetic heat transfer. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand Suppl 1996; 109: 30–33.
5 Raffe MR, Martin FB. Effect of inspired air heat and humidification on anestheticin-
duced hypothermia in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1983; 44(3): 455–458.
6 Hofmeister EH, Brainard BM, Braun C, et al. Effect of a heat and moisture exchanger
on heat loss in isoflurane-anesthetized dogs undergoing single-limb orthopedic pro-
cedures. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2011; 239(12): 1561–1565.
7 Goldberg ME, Epstein R, Rosenblum F, et al. Do heated humidifiers and heat and
moisture exchangers prevent temperature drop during lower abdominal surgery?
J Clin Anesth 1992; 4(1): 16–20.
8 Vainionpää M, Salla K, Restitutti F, et al. Thermographic imaging of superficial tem-
perature in dogs sedated with medetomidine and butorphanol with and without
MK-467 (L- 659’066). Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40(2): 142–148.
9 Khenissi L, Covey-Crump G, Knowles TG, et al. Do heat and moisture exchangers
in the anaesthesia breathing circuit preserve body temperature in dogs undergoing
anaesthesia for magnetic resonance imaging? Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(3):
452–460.
10 Zarndt BS, Buchta JN, Garver LS, et al. Use of a far-infrared active warming
device in guinea pigs (Cavia porcellus). J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2015; 54(6):
779–782.
11 Onozawa E, Azakami D, Seki S, et al. Effect of an insulation device in preventing
hypothermia during magnetic resonance imaging examinations for dogs and cats
under general anesthesia. Animals (Basel) 2021; 11(8): 2378.
12 Sessler DI, McGuire J, Sessler AM. Perioperative thermal insulation. Anesthesiology
1991; 74(5):875–879.
13 Roe CF. Effect of bowel exposure on body temperature during surgical operations.
Am J Surg 1971; 122(1): 13–15.
14 English MJ, Papenberg R, Farias E, et al. Heat loss in an animal experimental model.
J Trauma 1991; 31(1): 36–38.
15 Sessler DI, Sessler AM, Hudson S, Moayeri A. Heat loss during surgical skin
preparation. Anesthesiology 1993; 78(6): 1055–1064.
16 Isaza D, DiGangi BA, Isaza N, et al. Impact of surgical preparatory rinses with iso-
propyl alcohol or water on perioperative body temperature in pediatric female dogs
and cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(2): 198–204.
17 Kreisler RE, Douglas ML, Harder KN. Comparison of the effect of isopropyl alcohol
and chlorhexidine solution rinses on body temperature of female cats undergoing
sterilization surgery. J Feline Med Surg 2021; 23(10): 875–882.
18 Jourdan G, Didier C, Chotard E, et al. Heated intravenous fluids alone fail to
prevent hypothermia in cats under general anaesthesia. J Feline Med Surg 2017;
19(12): 1249–1253.
19 Atayde IB, Franco LG, Silva MAM, et al. Fluid Heating System (SAF): effects on
clinical and biochemistry parameters in dogs submitted to inhalatory anesthesia.
Acta Cirúrgica Bras Soc Bras Para Desenvolv Pesqui Em Cir 2009; 24(2): 144–149.
20 Chiang V, Hopper K, Mellema MS. In vitro evaluation of the efficacy of a veterinary
dry heat fluid warmer. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2011; 21(6): 639–647.
21 Rufiange M, Leung VSY, Simpson K, et al. Pre-warming following premedication
limits hypothermia before and during anesthesia in Sprague–Dawley rats (Rattus
norvegicus). Can J Vet Res 2021; 85(2): 106–111.
22 Dyson D, Stoate C. Combating hypothermia, including recommendations for the
use of oat bags. Can Vet J 1997; 38(8): 517–518.
23 Jirapaet K, Jirapaet V. Assessment of cereal-grain warming pad as a heat source for
newborn transport. J Med Assoc Thail Chotmaihet Thangphaet 2005; 88(Suppl 8):
S203–S210.
24 Dunlop CI, Daunt DA, Haskins SC. Thermal burns in four dogs during anesthesia.
Vet Surg 1989; 18(3): 242–246.
25 Cabell LW, Perkowski SZ, Gregor T, et al. The effects of active peripheral skin
warming on perioperative hypothermia in dogs. Vet Surg 1997; 26(2): 79–85.
26 Bräuer A, Quintel M. Forced-air warming: technology, physical background and
practical aspects. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2009; 22(6): 769–774.
27 Machon RG, Raffe MR, Robinson EP. Warming with a forced air warming blanket
minimizes anesthetic-induced hypothermia in cats. Vet Surg 1999; 28(4): 301–310.
28 Tomasic M. Temporal changes in core body temperature in anesthetized adult
horses. Am J Vet Res 1999; 60(5): 556–562.
29 Evans AT, Sawyer DC, Krahwinkel DJ. Effect of a warm-water blanket on develop-
ment of hypothermia during small animal surgery. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1973;
163(2): 147–148.
30 Clark-Price SC, Dossin O, Jones KR, et al. Comparison of three different methods
to prevent heat loss in healthy dogs undergoing 90 minutes of general anesthesia.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40(3): 280–284.
31 Dasari KB, Albrecht M, Harper M. Effect of forced-air warming on the perfor-
mance of operating theatre laminar flow ventilation. Anaesthesia 2012; 67(3):
244–249.
32 Kibanda JO, Gurney M. Comparison of two methods for the management of intra-
operative hypothermia in dogs. Vet Rec 2012; 170(15): 392.
33 HotDog Patient Warming. www.vetwarming.com (accessed April 2022).
34 Brandt S, Oguz R, Hüttner H, et al. Resistive-polymer versus forced-air warming:
comparable efficacy in orthopedic patients. Anesth Analg 2010; 110(3): 834–838.
35 Kimberger O, Held C, Stadelmann K, et al. Resistive polymer versus forced-air
warming: comparable heat transfer and core rewarming rates in volunteers. Anesth
Analg 2008; 107(5): 1621–1626.
36 Hasegawa K, Negishi C, Nakagawa F, et al. The efficacy of carbon-fiber resistive-
heating in prevention of core hypothermia during major abdominal surgery. Masui
2003; 52(6): 636–641.
37 Chohan AS, Greene SA. Anesthesia case of the month. Malignant hyperthermia.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2011; 239(7): 936–940.
38 Court MH. Anesthesia of the sighthound. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 1999; 14(1):
38–43.

-- 268 of 1450 --

Chapter 17: Perioperative Thermoregulation and Heat Balance 	253
39 Roberts MC, Mickelson JR, Patterson EE, et al. Autosomal dominant canine malig-
nant hyperthermia is caused by a mutation in the gene encoding the skeletal muscle
calcium release channel (RYR1). Anesthesiology 2001; 95(3): 716–725.
40 Cosgrove SB, Eisele PH, Martucci RW, et al. Evaluation of greyhound susceptibility
to malignant hyperthermia using halothane-succinylcholine anesthesia and
caffeine-halothane muscle contractures. Lab Anim Sci 1992; 42(5): 482–485.
41 Cornick JL, Seahorn TL, Hartsfield SM. Hyperthermia during isoflurane anaesthe-
sia in a horse with suspected hyperkalaemic periodic paralysis. Equine Vet J 1994;
26(6): 511–514.
42 De Jong RH, Heavner JE, Amory DW. Malignant hyperpyrexia in the cat.
Anesthesiology 1974; 41(6): 608–609.
43 Otto K. Malignant hyperthermia as a complication of anesthesia in the dog.
Tierärztl Prax 1992; 20(5): 519–522.
44 Kirmayer AH, Klide AM, Purvance JE. Malignant hyperthermia in a dog: case
report and review of the syndrome. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1984; 185(9): 978–982.
45 Bagshaw RJ, Cox RH, Knight DH, et al. Malignant hyperthermia in a Greyhound. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 1978; 172(1): 61–62.
46 Klein L, Ailes N, Fackelman GE, et al. Postanesthetic equine myopathy suggestive
of malignant hyperthermia. A case report. Vet Surg 1989; 18(6): 479–482.
47 Bellah JR, Robertson SA, Buergelt CD, et al. Suspected malignant hyperthermia
after halothane anesthesia in a cat. Vet Surg 1989; 18(6): 483–488.
48 Adami C, Axiak S, Raith K, et al. Unusual perianesthetic malignant hyperthermia
in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2012; 240(4): 450–453.
49 Posner LP, Gleed RD, Erb HN, et al. Post-anesthetic hyperthermia in cats.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2007; 34(1): 40–47.
50 Niedfeldt RL, Robertson SA. Postanesthetic hyperthermia in cats: a retrospective
comparison between hydromorphone and buprenorphine. Vet Anaesth Analg 2006;
33(6): 381–389.
51 Voulgaris DA, Hofmeister EH. Multivariate analysis of factors associated with pos-
tanesthetic times to standing in isoflurane-anesthetized horses: 381 cases. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2009; 36(5): 414–420.
52 Waterman A. Accidental hypothermia during anaesthesia in dogs and cats. Vet Rec
1975; 96(14): 308–313.
53 Redondo JI, Suesta P, Gil L, et al. Retrospective study of the prevalence of postan-
aesthetic hypothermia in cats. Vet Rec 2012; 170(8): 206.
54 Redondo JI, Suesta P, Serra I, et al. Retrospective study of the prevalence of postan-
aesthetic hypothermia in dogs. Vet Rec 2012; 171(15): 374.
55 Redondo JI, Rubio M, Soler G, et al. Normal values and incidence of cardiorespira-
tory complications in dogs during general anaesthesia. A review of 1281 cases. J Vet
Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med 2007; 54(9): 470–477.
56 Kennedy KC, Tamburello KR, Hardie RJ. Peri-operative morbidity associated with
ovariohysterectomy performed as part of a third-year veterinary surgical-training
program. J Vet Med Educ 2011; 38(4): 408–413.
57 Brodbelt DC, Pfeiffer DU, Young LE, et al. Results of the confidential enquiry into
perioperative small animal fatalities regarding risk factors for anesthetic-related
death in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008; 233(7): 1096–1104.
58 Brodbelt DC, Blissitt KJ, Hammond RA, et al. The risk of death: the confidential
enquiry into perioperative small animal fatalities. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35(5):
365–373.
59 Regan MJ, Eger EI II. Effect of hypothermia in dogs on anesthetizing and apneic
doses of inhalation agents. Determination of the anesthetic index (Apnea/MAC).
Anesthesiology 1967; 28(4): 689–700.
60 Pottie RG, Dart CM, Perkins NR, et al. Effect of hypothermia on recovery from
general anaesthesia in the dog. Aust Vet J 2007; 85(4): 158–162.
61 Park KH, Lee KH, Kim H. Effect of hypothermia on coagulatory function and sur-
vival in Sprague–Dawley rats exposed to uncontrolled haemorrhagic shock. Injury
2013; 44(1): 91–96.
62 Taggart R, Austin B, Hans E, et al. In vitro evaluation of the effect of hypothermia
on coagulation in dogs via thromboelastography. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2012; 22(2):
219–224.
63 Fujiki M, Misumi K, Sakamoto H, et al. Circulatory arrest under hypothermic
anesthesia using abdominal cavity cooling. J Vet Med Sci 1998; 60(11): 1237–1242.
64 Putzu M, Casati A, Berti M, et al. Clinical complications, monitoring and
management of perioperative mild hypothermia: anesthesiological features. Acta
BioMedica Atenei Parm 2007; 78(3): 163–169.
65 Beal MW, Brown DC, Shofer FS. The effects of perioperative hypothermia and the
duration of anesthesia on postoperative wound infection rate in clean wounds: a
retrospective study. Vet Surg 2000; 29(2): 123–127.
66 Sturgeon C, Lamport AI, Lloyd DH, et al. Bacterial contamination of suction tips
used during surgical procedures performed on dogs and cats. Am J Vet Res 2000;
61(7): 779–783.
67 Brown DC, Conzemius MG, Shofer F, et al. Epidemiologic evaluation of
postoperative wound infections in dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1997; 210(9):
1302–1306.
68 Nicholson M, Beal M, Shofer F, et al. Epidemiologic evaluation of postoperative
wound infection in clean-contaminated wounds: a retrospective study of 239 dogs
and cats. Vet Surg 2002; 31(6): 577–581.
69 Steen PA, Newberg L, Milde JH, et al. Hypothermia and barbiturates: individual
and combined effects on canine cerebral oxygen consumption. Anesthesiology 1983;
58(6): 527–532.
70 Wass CT, Lanier WL, Hofer RE, et al. Temperature changes of > or = 1 degree C
alter functional neurologic outcome and histopathology in a canine model of
complete cerebral ischemia. Anesthesiology 1995; 83(2): 325–335.
71 Michenfelder JD, Milde JH. The relationship among canine brain temperature, metab-
olism, and function during hypothermia. Anesthesiology 1991; 75(1): 130–136.
72 Ohta S, Yukioka T, Wada T, et al. Effect of mild hypothermia on the coefficient of
oxygen delivery in hypoxemic dogs. J Appl Physiol 1995; 78(6): 2095–2099.
73 ACVAA Small Animal Monitoring Guidelines. www.acvaa.org (accessed April
2022).
74 Kelly CK, Hodgson DS, McMurphy RM. Effect of anesthetic breathing circuit type
on thermal loss in cats during inhalation anesthesia for ovariohysterectomy. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 2012; 240(11): 1296–1299.

-- 269 of 1450 --

Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of Lumb and Jones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
254
Introduction
In 2004, publication of the abdominal-focused assessment with
sonography for trauma (FAST) exam in dogs suffering motor vehic-
ular injury [1] was the first work in small animals to become more
broadly known as point-of- care ultrasound (POCUS). Although the
terms POCUS and FAST are often used interchangeably, they are
not synonymous. FAST exams in both human and veterinary medi-
cine were developed to, and still primarily focus on, the search for
free fluid in body cavities and pneumothorax [1–6]. By contrast,
POCUS is broader in scope; it incorporates all clinically driven real-
time assessments that can be answered within minutes using ultra-
sonography [4,5]. More specifically, POCUS is defined as the
acquisition, interpretation, and immediate clinical integration of
ultrasonographic imaging performed patient-side by an attending
clinician, not by a radiologist or cardiologist, with the goal of
answering a focused question or series of questions rather than
assessing all structures of an organ(s) [5]. To this end, it is best
applied as a problem-based assessment based on Bayes’ theorem of
pretest probabilities, which enables the clinician to gather key
pieces of information in real time to help narrow or determine a
diagnosis, streamline care, guide ongoing management, and reduce
cognitive errors [7,8]. The concept of POCUS as a focused (“lim-
ited” or “goal-directed”) exam [9,10] is in contrast to sonography
performed by an imaging specialist/cardiologist (Table 18.1).
Finally, POCUS provides relevant information that is otherwise
unattainable on physical examination alone and is therefore com-
plementary to triage, physical examination, and other point-of- care
diagnostic and clinical tests or findings; it does not replace them.
Evidence in human medicine supports that POCUS can result in
improved clinical decision-making [11,12], and when combined
with other clinical findings, confirms the suspected clinical
diagnosis in up to 50% of cases and supports a change in the initial
diagnosis in 23% of cases [13].
Perioperative POCUS
With the exception of ultrasound-guided regional anesthesia and
vascular access, POCUS is in its infancy in veterinary anesthesia.
In contrast, POCUS is widely used in human anesthesia to answer
specific questions in daily patient management, narrow differen-
tial diagnoses, and improve the safety of routine procedures [14–
20] (Table 18.2). When compared to traditional assessment
techniques, human studies suggest anesthesiologist-performed
POCUS improves diagnostic accuracy of new pathologies as well
as assessing the severity of known pathologies [21], and impacts
perioperative management decisions [21–23]. Currently, periop-
erative POCUS (P-POCUS) is most widely used for cardiovascu-
lar evaluation [16,22,24,25], pulmonary/airway [23,26–28], and
abdominal/gastric [29,30] examinations, although it can be used
to augment almost all aspects of the physical exam (Table 18.2).
18 Point-of- Care Ultrasound in Anesthesia
Søren R. Boysen1 and Daniel S.J. Pang2
1 Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada
2 Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada and Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Université de Montréal,
Saint- Hyacinthe, Québec, Canada
Chapter contents
Introduction, 254
Perioperative POCUS, 254
General applications of POCUS, 255
Application of P-POCUS, 255
Equipment and patient preparation, 256
Airway assessment, 256
Endotracheal tube placement, 256
Pleural space and lung ultrasound, 256
Machine settings for PLUS, 257
Normal PLUS findings, 257
Abnormal PLUS findings, 261
Abdominal point-of- care ultrasound, 269
Gastric volume, 269
Urinary bladder volume, 271
Cardiac POCUS, 271
Cardiac POCUS windows and views, 272
Interpretation and integration of cardiac POCUS findings, 273
POCUS in cardiopulmonary resuscitation, 275
POCUS and monitoring fluid therapy, 277
Limitations, 277
References, 277

-- 270 of 1450 --

Chapter 18: Point-of-Care Ultrasound in Anesthesia 	255
With growing evidence demonstrating the efficacy of anesthetist-
performed POCUS, its uptake by human anesthesiology training
programs is increasing. A 2017 survey reported 100% (13/13) of
academic anesthesiology programs surveyed had some POCUS
training as part of their residency training and 70–77% believed
POCUS should be expanded beyond ultrasound-guided vascular
access and nerve blocks, which are currently part of the National
Curriculum for Canadian Anesthesia Residency [31]. Additional
POCUS applications that respondents felt should be included in
anesthesiology residency programs included lung ultrasound and
vena cava assessment in 12, abdominal ultrasound in 8, gastric
ultrasound in 4, airway ultrasound in 3, and optic nerve sheath
diameter in 1 out of the 13 academic anesthesiology programs
surveyed [31].
General applications of POCUS
The application of POCUS varies depending on the clinical setting
(Fig. 18.1) [34]: (1) triage POCUS uses the minimum number of
views possible to identify the most immediate life-threatening and
critical conditions; (2) serial POCUS is applied to monitor progres-
sion or resolution of pathology and response to therapy; (3) systemic
or multiorgan POCUS is performed in more stable patients (with or
without specialist assistance) to detect asymptomatic conditions,
new developments, and/or to ensure sonographically detectable
problems have not arisen before undertaking procedures, anesthe-
sia, or discharge/service transfer; and (4) interventional POCUS is
used to reduce complications of procedures where applicable
(Fig. 18.1). Which POCUS examination(s) to choose will also
depend on the pretest probability of a problem being present [7,8].
Though it is rapid, repeatable, and associated with minimal risk,
POCUS should never be completed at the risk of compromising
patient safety. The decision to apply POCUS should always be dic-
tated by the context of the clinical setting encountered. Only if the
patient is sufficiently stable should multiorgan, systemic POCUS be
performed. In unstable patients, the objective is to identify immedi-
ately life-threatening conditions with the minimum number of
sonographic views possible, stabilize the patient, reassess the patient,
and then decide if, and what, further point-of-care diagnostics,
including POCUS are required.
Application of P-POCUS
Use of POCUS is an active field of research, with new applications
identified regularly; however, applications employed should be
determined by an individual sonographer’s proficiency. The
American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) recently introduced
a POCUS certification program with three primary applications
(cardiac, lung, and abdominal ultrasound) and six secondary
applications (airway, musculoskeletal/soft tissue, ocular, renal/
Table 18.2 Common point-of-care applications in human anesthesiology [4,32,33],
which should be applicable to veterinary medicine, although veterinary research is
lacking for most applications.
Target system 	Diagnostic applications
Airway 	Endotracheal tube placement
Pleural space and lung
ultrasound (PLUS)
Pleural space pathology
a. Pneumothorax
b. Pleural effusion
Alveolar–interstitial syndromes (AIS)
I. Increased B-lines
a. Increased extravascular lung water (EVLW; i.e., “wet”
lung causes)
i. Cardiogenic edema
ii. Fluid overload
iii. Non- cardiogenic pulmonary edema
iv. Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
v. Aspiration pneumonia
vi. Contusions/hemorrhage
b. Non-EVLW causes of increased B-lines (i.e., “dry”
lung causes)
i. Fibrosis/amyloidosis
ii. Inflammatory cell infiltrates
iii. Neoplastic cell infiltrates
II. Lung consolidation
a. Shred
b. Nodule
c. Wedge
d. Translobar
Atelectasis (can result in both increased B-lines and
consolidation)
Bilateral versus unilateral lung ventilation
Abdominal 	Intra-abdominal free fluid (particularly useful when sudden
clinical deterioration and hypotension occur)
Gastric content and volume
Inferior vena cava assessment for vascular volume status
Bladder volume
Cardiac 	Pericardial effusion
Left atrial size
Volume assessment
Ventricular ± valvular function
Cardiac arrest 	Reversible causes of arrest
Presence of intrinsic cardiac activity
Hemodynamics and
resuscitation
Volume status and response to fluid boluses
Eye 	Intracranial hypertension, optic nerve sheath swelling
Ultrasound-guided
interventions
Thoracocentesis, abdominocentesis, pericardiocentesis,
cystocentesis, fine needle aspiration
Locoregional anesthesia 	Nerve blocks
Vascular 	Aortic dissection (not common in veterinary patients)
Carotid artery
Physical examination
assistance
Evaluation of:
Trauma patients
Abnormal pulmonary auscultation
Respiratory distress
Suspected volume overload and hypovolemia
Hemodynamic instability/collapse/hypotension
Decreased mentation
Cardiac arrhythmias
Pulsus paradoxus
Cardiac murmurs
Table 18.1 Comparison of formal and point-of-care ultrasound.
Formal ultrasound 	Point- of- care ultrasound
Consultative; assessing all organs,
anatomy, and structures
Focused on key structures to answer specific
clinical questions (often binary choice)
Often performed with nonspecific
findings and when multiple or an
open-ended list of differential
diagnoses are possible
Often performed when specific signs are
present and a high pretest probability of a
specific diagnosis (es) is likely (Bayes’
theorem)
Requires years of training 	Requires minimal experience
Often takes > 30–60 min 	Performed in < 5–10 min
Usually performed by specialists
(cardiologists, radiologists)
Often performed by non-specialists
(emergency clinicians, general
practitioners)
Patients often stable 	Patients often unstable
Patient taken to the machine 	Machine taken to the patient
Patient scanned in lateral or dorsal
recumbency
Patient scanned in the position they are
most comfortable, rarely if ever dorsal
recumbency
Fur is typically clipped 	Fur is rarely clipped
Gel preferred as the coupling agent 	Uses alcohol ± gel as the coupling agent

-- 271 of 1450 --

256 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
genitourinary, transcranial Doppler, and deep venous thrombosis)
[4,32,33,35]. In principle, these suggested primary and secondary
applications in human anesthesiology are applicable in veterinary
anesthesia (Table 18.2). However, in veterinary medicine Doppler
is not routinely used, musculoskeletal and soft tissue POCUS have
not been studied, and optic nerve sheath diameter (ONSD) is only
just starting to be investigated in small animals. A case series in
dogs suffering trauma reports monitoring ONSD values serially in
two dogs [36], and reference intervals have been reported in dogs
and cats [37–40]. A single study in cats (n = 57) suggests an ONSD
of 1–1.4 mm indicates the absence of intracranial hypertension
(ICH), while a value > 1.5 mm is suggestive of ICH (based on seven
cats with suspected ICH) [38]. These three POCUS applications
will not be covered in this chapter, and nerve blocks and vascular
access are addressed elsewhere in this textbook.
Equipment and patient preparation
An advantage of POCUS is the ability to bring the ultrasound
machine to the patient, limiting interference with patient care and
comfort. Although some authors prefer to restrain patients in a
specific position to perform POCUS and FAST exams [3,41,42],
there is minimal evidence to support this practice and increasing
evidence that restraining cats and dogs in a particular position can
increase patient anxiety and stress [43]. The authors advocate per-
forming POCUS in the position in which the patient is most com-
fortable. Given patient position may be dictated by surgical or other
procedures in anesthetized animals, it is particularly important that
anesthesiologists become familiar performing POCUS with ani-
mals in different positions. However, sonographers must be aware
that localization of some sonographically identifiable pathology
will change with patient positioning (e.g., fluid falls and gas rises).
Where the probe is situated on the patient should be modified to
ensure the location of positionally dependent pathology is assessed.
Although certain sonographic examinations are facilitated by spe-
cific ultrasound probes, in general, a 5 mHz (larger dogs) to 7 mHz
(smaller dogs and cats) micro-convex probe and B-mode imaging
are used for nearly all POCUS applications [1–3,42]. For vascular
access and ultrasound-guided nerve blocks, a linear probe is gener-
ally preferred over a micro-convex probe, though the latter can still
be used. To maintain efficiency, fur is not clipped but parted to pro-
vide access to the skin, and alcohol is used as the coupling agent,
with or without gel [2,41]. In unstable patients where time is criti-
cal, the authors use only alcohol as the coupling agent. Caution is
advised in some situations, as alcohol may cause radiographic arti-
fact and poses a fire hazard if electrocautery, defibrillators, or laser
devices are used following its application. In more stable patients,
gel can be added to the probe head in addition to applying alcohol
to the patient if image quality is suboptimal. Alternatively, fur can
be clipped and ultrasound gel applied as the sole coupling agent at
the probe–skin interface, particularly if image quality remains
suboptimal [1].
Airway assessment
Assessment of the airway typically involves assessment of the
cervical region for evaluation of correct endotracheal (ET) tube
placement.
Endotracheal tube placement
A recent meta-analysis in human medicine documented a pooled
sensitivity of 0.93 (95% CI: 0.86–0.96) and specificity of 0.97 (95%
CI: 0.95–0.98) for identification of esophageal intubation using
POCUS [44]. Although there is a lack of research in veterinary
medicine, a small cadaveric study in dogs (n = 6) demonstrated
sensitivity of 62–75% and specificity 38–62.5% for identification of
esophageal intubation when the probe was placed on the ventral
neck just caudal to the larynx near the jugular furrow, depending
on the experience of the operator [45]. ET intubation is recognized
by identifying the presence of only one hyperechoic curved line
with distal reverberation artifact, created by the presence of air
inside a correctly placed ET tube (Fig. 18.2). Esophageal intubation
is recognized by the presence of two hyperechoic curved lines with
distal reverberation artifact, created by the presence of air inside
the trachea and air contained within an esophageally placed ET
tube [45] (Fig. 18.2).
Pleural space and lung ultrasound
Pleural space and lung ultrasound (PLUS) is broadly used to search
for: (1) two pleural space pathologies (pneumothorax and pleural
effusion); (2) alveolar–interstitial syndromes (AIS) through identi-
fication of two abnormal sonographic lung findings (increased
B-lines and lung consolidations; see abnormal PLUS findings
M
i
n
i
m
a
l
windows
M o n i t o
r
M
u
l
t
i
p
l
e
w
i
n
d
o
w
s
T
r
e
a
t
t
o
s
c
r
e
e
n
t
o
d
i
a
g
nose
T
r
i
a
g
e
I
n
t
e
r
v
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
P O
C
U
S
S
y
s
t
e
m
i
c
P
O
C
U
S
P
O
C
U
S
S e r i a l
P
O
C
U
S
U
n
s
t
a
ble
P
a
t
h
o
l
o
g
y
P
O
C
U
S
S
t
a
b
l
e
a b n o r
m
a
l
i
t
i
e
s
P
r
e
s
e
n
t
H
	i
s
t
o
	r
y
,
i
n
i
t
i
a
l
c
l
i
n
i
c
a
l
e
x
a
m
,
o
t
h
e
r
d
i
a
g
n
o
s
t
i
c
fi
	n
	d
	i
n
	g
	s
Patient
Figure 18.1 POCUS is patient centered and targeted. It is also integrative
and has four general applications, which vary depending on the targeted
objectives of the scan, the pretest probability of a problem being present
(based on history, initial clinical exam, and other diagnostic findings), and
the clinical setting encountered: (1) triage POCUS uses the minimum
number of windows possible to identify the most immediate life-
threatening and critical conditions; (2) serial POCUS is applied to monitor
progression or resolution of any pathology, and response to therapy;
(3) systemic or multiorgan POCUS uses multiple windows in more stable
patients (with or without specialist assistance) to detect asymptomatic
conditions, new developments, and/or to ensure sonographically detectable
problems have not arisen prior to undertaking procedures, anesthesia, or
discharge/service transfer; and (4) therapeutic POCUS is used to reduce
complications of interventions where applicable. POCUS, point-of- care
ultrasound. Source: Dr. Søren Boysen, with permission.

-- 272 of 1450 --

Chapter 18: Point-of-Care Ultrasound in Anesthesia 	257
below); and (3) to assess for evidence of endobronchial intubation
(Table 18.2). Numerous pleura, pleural space, and lung ultrasound
protocols have been described in human and veterinary medicine,
all of which assess different percentages of pleura and lung surface
area transthoracically, with or without inclusion of the subxiphoid
window and assessment of the abdominal curtain sign (ACS) (see
below for definitions) [36,42,46–51]. With the exception of thoracic
FAST, which only assesses a single transthoracic lung site over each
hemithorax, all veterinary protocols scan multiple lung regions
bilaterally [36,42,46–49]. In human medicine, evidence suggests
lung ultrasound protocols that evaluate more lung sites (12–28 sites
versus 4–6 sites) have a higher sensitivity and specificity for detect-
ing pathology, but take longer to perform [50,52]. The clinician
must therefore balance the risk of missing pathology against the
time required to perform sonographic examination. Including the
subxiphoid window and ACS may identify pathology in dogs other-
wise missed with traditional transthoracic protocols [1,42,46], and
assessment of the ACS may allow earlier identification of pleural
effusion in humans [51]. The lack of research comparing veterinary
protocols makes translation of results between studies, and estab-
lishment of cutoff values to detect pleura and lung pathology, chal-
lenging. Where applicable, a summation of findings of veterinary
studies published has been used to provide guidelines to differenti-
ate normal from abnormal PLUS findings. Fortunately, understand-
ing normal sonographic anatomy and physiology of the pleura,
pleural space, and lung, factors that change normal findings, and
where to look for pathology, should allow the operator to choose
the most appropriate protocol within the clinical setting encoun-
tered. As a rule of thumb, conditions resulting in marked dyspnea
are likely to be diffuse in nature [48,53], and PLUS should be lim-
ited to the minimal number of windows and shortest time possible
to identify pathology (Figs. 18.1 and 18.3). Once stable, or in less
dyspneic animals, more comprehensive scanning protocols can be
used, particularly when very localized or focal pleura and lung
pathology is suspected (e.g., isolated lung nodules). Depending on
the clinical setting encountered, the authors currently use the PLUS
protocol outlined in Fig. 18.3 to scan the dorsal, middle, and ventral
thirds of the thorax, focusing on different sites depending on the
pleural space and lung pathologies suspected (Video 18.1).
Machine settings for PLUS
To perform PLUS, adjust the machine depth setting (according to
body condition) so the field of view in the ultrasound image extends
to approximately 4–6 cm and the pleural line (P-line) is visible at the
junction between the proximal and middle thirds of the window/
field of view. Adjust the gain to maximize appearance of the
thoracic wall, while also allowing any far-field image artifact to be
visible (Fig. 18.4).
Normal PLUS findings
To help differentiate normal from abnormal PLUS findings, oper-
ators should become familiar with several PLUS lines and signs
that can be identified in healthy animals and know how these lines
and signs change in animals with suspected pathology. These
include the BAT sign, P-line, lung sliding, lung pulse, A-lines,
B-lines, and the ACS.
BAT sign
The BAT sign (i.e., gator sign) refers to the characteristic appear-
ance of the P-line and adjacent ribs [42,54]. It is identified when the
probe is positioned over lung, between and perpendicular to the
ribs, with the indicator marker directed cranially (Fig. 18.4). If
placed between and parallel to the ribs, only the P-line is seen,
which is not interrupted by the ribs [54].
Using the BAT mnemonic – “ultrasound beams do not traverse
Bone or Air with the probe Transverse to the ribs” – helps sonogra-
phers identify key anatomic structures and understand what is
being visualized, as follows:
• Ultrasound beams cannot transmit beyond the proximal rib
surface (PRS), which creates rib shadowing beneath the
ribs. If rib shadows are identified, they can be traced proxi-
mally until they end at convex hyperechoic lines (PRS, “wings of
the bat”).
• Ultrasound beams cannot transmit beyond a soft tissue–air
interface (99% of ultrasound beams are reflected from soft tissue–
air/gas interfaces), which is present where parietal pleura
(inside lining of the chest wall) contacts the visceral pleura
(lung surface) and air-filled lung [55,56]. If the skin and soft
Figure 18.2 Labeled still ultrasound images of tracheal versus esophageal intubation. Right: Tracheal intubation where only one circular gas-filled structure
(intubated trachea) with distal shadowing is visible. Left: With esophageal intubation, a second gas-filled structure with distal shadowing (air-filled
endotracheal tube within the lumen of the esophagus) becomes visible in addition to the gas-filled trachea. Source: Dr. Søren Boysen, with permission.

-- 273 of 1450 --

258 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
tissue structures of the chest wall are identified, they can be
traced distally to where a horizontal concave hyperechoic line is
visible just below the ribs and joining the rib shadows (the
P-line, “body of the bat”).
• If the BAT sign is identified, the proximal ribs and P-line are the
last true structures the ultrasound beam encounters in healthy
animals: everything beyond the PRS and P-line is artifact. Most
pleura and lung pathology creates sonographically visible abnor-
malities originating from the P-line.
Pleural line
The pleural line (P-line) is the bright white line below the soft tissue
structures of the thoracic wall (Fig. 18.4), and is either comprised of
the parietal and visceral pleura when the lung apposes the chest
wall, or is composed of only the parietal pleura when the lung is
separated from the chest wall [54,57,58].
• The lung can be separated from the chest wall by space-occupying
pathologies (pneumothorax, pleural effusion, diaphragmatic her-
nia, and pleural masses) [58].
(A) 	(B)
(C) 	(D)
Figure 18.3 Schematic images of pleura and lung ultrasound (PLUS) to assess for pneumothorax, lung pathology, and pleural effusion using
sonographically defined landmarks and lung borders with patients in a sternal or standing position. A. Combined comprehensive PLUS protocol often
used in more stable patients to assess the pleura, pleural space, and lungs bilaterally. The subxiphoid site is also included (red highlighted probe) to
assess the caudal lung and pleural space regions not otherwise accessible transthoracically. B. Abbreviated pleural space protocol to rapidly assess the
abdominal curtain sign (ACS) and most gravity-independent sites for pneumothorax in respiratory-compromised patients. In the sternal or standing
patient (shown), with the probe situated perpendicular to the ribs (probe indicator marker directed cranially), slide caudally from the starting point
(just behind the front limb) until the ACS is identified, followed by sweeping the probe dorsally along the ACS until the hypaxial muscles are
encountered (loss of the pleural line; curved red arrow). The probe is then swept ventrally off the hypaxial muscles until the pleural line reappears (the
most gravity-independent site; short red arrow). If the patient is in lateral recumbency (not shown), the widest non-gravity region of the thorax and
ACS are assessed. C. Abbreviated lung scanning protocol to rapidly assess multiple lung surface regions in the dorsal, middle, and ventral thirds of the
thorax with the probe orientated perpendicular to the ribs using an S-shaped pattern (blue arrow) in respiratory-compromised patients. Lung
pathology tends to be less affected by position than pleural space pathology, and the same lung ultrasound protocol can be used regardless of patient
position, however, given some lung pathology can concentrate locally or regionally (e.g., aspiration pneumonia and positional atelectasis) different
regions of the lung can be emphasized. At the pericardio-diaphragmatic (PD) window (yellow asterisk), the probe can be turned parallel to the ribs
(see image D) or maintained in a perpendicular orientation to scan the ventral lung surfaces. Time permitting, the subxiphoid site can also be assessed
(not shown). D. Abbreviated pleural space and lung ultrasound protocol to rapidly assess the most gravity-dependent pleural sites for pleural effusion
and ventral lung pathology in respiratory-compromised patients. Identifying the PD window (red arrow) with the probe situated perpendicular to the
ribs helps differentiate pleural and pericardial effusion. In the sternal or standing patient, the probe can be turned parallel to the ribs at the PD
window (with the probe indicator marker directed dorsally) and slid ventrally until the sternal muscles fill 1/3 to 1/2 of the ultrasound image. This
allows the most ventral pleural regions to be assessed for the presence of smaller volume pleural effusion. With the probe maintained in parallel
orientation to the ribs, it can be slid both dorsally and ventrally within each intercostal space (yellow arrows) to assess both the ventral lung regions
and the most ventral pleural space regions, respectively, from the ACS caudally to the thoracic inlet cranially. If the patient is in lateral recumbency,
the widest gravity-dependent region of the thorax should be assessed for pleural effusion (not shown). Time permitting the subxiphoid site can also be
included (not shown) (Video 18.1). Source: Adapted from Boysen et al. [46].

-- 274 of 1450 --

Chapter 18: Point-of-Care Ultrasound in Anesthesia 	259
• When the lung is separated from the chest wall by pleural
effusion, the lung surface (visceral pleura) will be visible (fluid
transmits ultrasound). The lung surface is not visible with pneu-
mothorax (air inhibits the transmission of ultrasound beams).
• All pleural space pathology originates at the P-line.
• All sonographically detectable lung pathology originates from
the lung surface (visceral pleura), which will be the P-line when
lung is apposed to the chest wall, and distal to the P-line when
the lung is visibly separated from the chest wall (e.g., pleural
effusion).
Lung sliding (the glide sign)
Lung sliding is the to-and- fro shimmer that is visible at the P-line as
a result of the visceral pleura sliding along the parietal pleura dur-
ing lung inflation and deflation that occurs with the respiratory
cycle [54,57,58] (Video 18.2).
• Two criteria must be met for lung sliding to be visible: (1) the two
pleura must be in apposition; (2) the patient must actively respire
to cause the visceral pleura to slide across the parietal pleura [58].
• When visible, lung sliding makes space-occupying pleural space
pathology very unlikely, particularly pneumothorax (100% speci-
ficity, negative predictive value 100%) [59,60], at the site the
probe is positioned on the thorax [54,57,58].
• Lung sliding is lost when the pleura are separated or adhered to
one another [54,58].
• Making the P-line appear “grainier” helps visualize lung sliding.
This can be achieved by changing the angle the ultrasound beam
strikes the P-line (from perpendicular), placing the probe over a
single rib, decreasing the depth setting, and/or decreasing the
gain setting. If the depth and gain are decreased to visualize lung
sliding, they should be re-adjusted (increased) to look for B-lines,
the curtain sign, and lung consolidations (see below).
• Lung sliding can be difficult to identify in patients with rapid
shallow breathing patterns that result in minimal movement
of the lung across the chest wall (e.g., tachypnea/hyperpnea,
panting).
• Diagnostic sensitivity/specificity is improved by keeping the
probe steady and only interpreting lung sliding when the patient
is not moving (movement creates a false positive).
Lung pulse
The lung pulse refers to rhythmic movement of the visceral pleura,
which is visible at the P-line, when cardiac vibrations transmit
through motionless lung (as occurs in the lung bypassed during
endobronchial intubation, see below) (Video 18.3). It confirms that
the parietal and visceral pleura are in apposition to one another.
Figure 18.4 Labeled and unlabeled still and overlaid schematic images of the “BAT sign” and A-lines. The proximal rib surface (PRS) of two adjacent ribs
forms the wings of the bat while the pleural line (P-line) forms the body of the bat when the probe is situated perpendicular to the ribs. The gain is
adjusted based on the appearance of the thoracic wall (region above the pleural line) while also allowing A-lines to be visualized in the far field of the
image. The depth is at 7 cm to allow far-field A-lines and B- lines (not shown) to be appreciated. The depth could be decreased in this example to put the
pleural line at the junction between the proximal and middle thirds of the ultrasound image, which will make lung sliding easier to identify in real time.
SQ, subcutaneous tissues; IC, intercostal muscles; PRS, proximal rib surface. Source: Dr. Søren Boysen, with permission.

-- 275 of 1450 --

260 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
Therefore, the lung pulse has significant clinical implications as it
can help rule out pneumothorax (see pneumothorax below) and
may suggest endobronchial intubation or an obstructive bronchial
foreign body when assessed in conjunction with lung sliding (see
endobronchial intubation below) [61]. Note that the lung pulse is
typically lost when lung sliding is present (lung sliding dominates
the lung pulse), and when the visceral pleura are separated from the
parietal pleura (e.g., pneumothorax, pleural effusion, and other
space-occupying pleural space pathology) [58,61]. The lung pulse
becomes more difficult to visualize in well-aerated lung tissue and in
lung regions located distal to the heart [57,58]. In healthy dogs and
cats, it is possible to identify the lung pulse during the respiratory
pause between respirations, particularly when the probe is situated
over the thorax and lung in proximity to the heart (Video 18.3).
A-lines
A- lines are a type of reverberation artifact appearing as hyperechoic
(white) horizontal lines that run parallel and equidistant from the
skin to the P-line below a soft tissue-to- air interface [54–58,59]
(Fig. 18.4). They are created by the reflection of the ultrasound
beam between two highly reflective surfaces: (1) the ultrasound
probe and (2) the soft tissue–air interface at the P-line.
• The “A” in A-lines stands for air. A-lines are visible below the soft
tissue–air interface created when air-filled lung contacts the
chest wall, and when free gas occupies the pleural space (pneu-
mothorax). It only requires a 2–3 mm depth of aerated lung to
create a soft tissue–air interface. Therefore, lung pathology
located more than 2–3 mm below the surface of aerated lung
cannot be seen and only reverberation artifact and A-lines will
be visualized [62].
• Although visualizing A-lines alone does not differentiate pneu-
mothorax from air-filled lung, the combined identification of
A- lines and lung sliding is a normal finding in healthy animals
and suggests the lung surface, and likely underlying parenchymal
lung tissue, is normal at that probe location, thus ruling out
pneumothorax.
B-lines
B-lines (Fig. 18.5) are a type of sonographic lung surface artifact that
occur when there is decreased aerated lung (increased lung density)
at the lung periphery (Video 18.4). Depending on the quantity iden-
tified at a single probe window and over an entire hemithorax,
they may be a normal finding or may be representative of alveolar–
interstitial pathology [63,64] (see increased B-lines below). In healthy
individuals, they are believed to result from normal interlobar septa
and/or regions with microatelectasis at the lung periphery [65].
They are defined by the following five criteria [54–56,58]: (1) verti-
cal white/hyperechoic projections; (2) originating from the lung sur-
face; (3) extending through the far field without fading; (4) swinging
to-and-fro with lung sliding; and (5) often obliterating A-lines if pre-
sent. If lung is in contact with the chest wall, B-lines originate at the
P-line. Although 10–50% of healthy cats and dogs have isolated
B-lines identified on PLUS, the majority of sonographically scanna-
ble lung surface will not contain B-lines [42,47,49,66–68]. If present,
it is more common to see a single B-line at one to two locations on
either hemithorax, or two B-lines at a single location when scanning
the lung surfaces. Although rare, three B-lines have been reported at
a single sonographic window of healthy cats and dogs [47,66]; how-
ever, the presence of three B-lines is rare and should not occur at
multiple lung locations over the same hemithorax [47,66]. Finding
more than two positive sites on either hemithorax, regardless of the
number of B-lines at each site, should raise concern for underlying
lung pathology [69]. Due to the variation in number of B-lines
reported with different lung protocols in healthy animals, and the
small number of studies in healthy dogs and cats reported to date,
the clinical context must be considered when deciding if identified
B-lines represent a normal finding or if lung pathology is likely (see
increased B-lines below).
Abdominal curtain sign
The abdominal curtain sign (ACS) is a normal sonographic artifact
of healthy animals that orientates the operator to the area of the
thorax being viewed (caudolateral lung margin) and can be used to
Rib shadow
Rib shadow
Pleural line
S k i n
s
u
r
f
a
c
e
B line
RS RS
Figure 18.5 Schematic and still image of a single B-line originating at the lung surface from the pleural line when the lung is in contact with the chest
wall. A single B-line can be a normal finding, although interpretation should always be within clinical context. RS, rib shadow; B, B-line; P, pleural line.
Source: Dr. Søren Boysen, with permission.

-- 276 of 1450 --

Chapter 18: Point-of-Care Ultrasound in Anesthesia 	261
identify pleural space (pneumothorax and pleural effusion) and lung
(consolidation) pathology [51,58,70]. It is defined as the sharply
demarcated vertical edge artifact that occurs along the caudolateral
lung margins where air-filled lung overlies the diaphragm and soft
tissues of the abdomen at the costophrenic recess [46,51,54,70]. The
ACS is created by the combination of two factors: (1) the acoustic
impedance mismatch between gas (air-filled lung) and adjacent soft
tissue (abdominal structures) that casts the characteristic sharp ver-
tical artifact at the interface between the two; and (2) the anatomical
relationship of the thorax with the abdomen, resulting in the costo-
phrenic recess covering parts of the cranial abdomen and the dia-
phragm, which abuts against air-filled lung cranially in healthy
patients [46,51,54,58,70].
• When the ultrasound probe is positioned over both air-filled lung
and soft tissue structures of the abdomen with the marker of the
probe directed cranially, the cranial half of the image (lung) will
not allow the ultrasound beam to extend past the P-line (A-lines
often seen), while the caudal half of the image (soft tissue struc-
tures) transmits the beam, permitting soft tissue structures at that
probe location to be visualized [58] (Fig. 18.6).
• During inspiration, the ACS and abdominal contents move cau-
dally, and during expiration, the ACS and abdominal contents
move cranially, in a synchronous manner [51,54,70] (Video 18.5).
Do not confuse movement of the ACS with lung sliding (Fig. 18.7).
Abnormal PLUS findings
Ultrasound can only be used to interpret characteristics at the
surface of a soft tissue–air interface because air/gas is a strong ultra-
sound beam reflector, making it difficult to visualize structures
below the soft tissue–air interface. Therefore, pathology lying deep
to the lung surface cannot be visualized. Fortunately, most (> 90%)
alveolar–interstitial pathology (e.g., pulmonary edema, contusions,
aspiration pneumonia, and fibrosis) results in B-lines and/or lung
consolidations that are detectable at the lung surface with sonogra-
phy [56,70] (Table 18.3).
Endobronchial tube placement
In human medicine, lung ultrasound has been used to diagnose
endobronchial intubation with the advantage of being a rapid
modality, compared to confirmation with thoracic radiography [61].
In humans, bronchial intubations occur in 5–15% of intended tra-
cheal intubations in both pre-hospital and in-patient settings [71–75],
and 6–25% of cases go unrecognized [71,76–78]. The consequences
of single-lung intubation include suboptimal ventilation/oxygenation
and barotrauma, which may result in pneumothorax and unilateral
pulmonary edema [61,79]. The application of intended one-lung
ventilation in small animals is well-established for the management
of various underlying pathologies [80–83]. Although there are sev-
eral techniques reported to confirm correct placement of one-lung
devices in dogs and cats [82,84], the use of PLUS to assess bilateral
versus unilateral lung intubation has not been studied, despite first
being reported in human medicine in 2003 [61,85]. One-lung venti-
lation can be confirmed through detection of a lung pulse and the
absence of lung sliding on the non-intubated side of the thorax. This
contrasts with the presence of lung sliding (with or without a lung
pulse) on the contralateral, intubated, side of the thorax (Fig.18.8).
One-lung intubation is associated with atelectasis, which makes the
lung pulse easier to visualize [57,58,61]. In contrast, endobronchial
intubation is unlikely when bilateral lung sliding is present during
respiration.
Air artifact
 
GB
GB
P
Liver
(A) 	(C)	(B)
Figure 18.6 Radiographic, schematic, and still images of the location and sonographic appearance of a normal abdominal curtain sign (ACS) artifact.
A. Thoracic radiograph of a dog showing the probe location to identify the ACS. The dotted red arrow represents the division where air-filled lung (left of
arrow) overlies the soft tissue abdominal structures (right of arrow) at the costophrenic recess. The dotted white arrow shows the diaphragm curving away
from the chest wall, which is not visible due to overlying air-filled lung. B. Schematic image showing ultrasonographic image with the probe positioned as
shown in A. C. Still ultrasound image showing the normal vertical edge artifact (yellow arrows) of the ACS. P, pleural line; GB, gallbladder. Source: Dr.
Søren Boysen, with permission.

-- 277 of 1450 --

262 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
Pneumothorax
Human studies demonstrate a sensitivity and specificity of 87%
and 97%, respectively, with lung ultrasound, and 28% and 100%,
respectively, with thoracic radiography for identification of pneu-
mothorax [86]. The clinical accuracy of ultrasound to diagnose
pneumothorax in companion animals is unclear and determina-
tion of sensitivity and specificity is hindered by a failure to com-
pare findings with accepted reference standards, and/or by the
inclusion of only small case numbers [6,36,42,46,58,87–89]. For
example, recent studies comparing the veterinary bedside lung ultra-
sound exam (VetBLUE) or TFAST protocols to computed tomogra-
phy (CT) correctly identified pneumothorax in 3/7, 3/6, and 1/6
cases, respectively [6,87,89]. A well-controlled experimental study
that induced small-volume pneumothorax (2–10 mL/kg of air) in
dogs under anesthesia (n = 9) suggests lung ultrasound is more
sensitive (89% versus 67%) and equally specific (89%) to radiographs
compared with CT when multiple lung ultrasound criteria are com-
bined to diagnose pneumothorax in dogs; however, translation of
these findings to patients with naturally occurring and larger-volume
pneumothorax in the clinical setting has not been performed [88].
There is even less information available regarding lung ultrasound to
diagnose pneumothorax in cats, with only two small clinical studies
that were combined with findings from dogs, neither of which
reported any cats with confirmed pneumothorax [87,89]. The accu-
racy of ultrasound to diagnose pneumothorax likely depends on the
experience of the sonographer, underlying pathology, patient posi-
tioning, scanning protocol, and criteria used to diagnose pneumo-
thorax [36,42,78,87,89]. If the pleura is in contact, pneumothorax is
ruled out. The following sonographic findings confirm the pleura is
in apposition below the probe (Fig. 18.9): (1) detection of lung sliding
and/or a lung pulse, and (2) detection of B-lines and/or lung con-
solidation (see below) arising from the P-line [58,88].
The absence of all these signs should prompt consideration of a
pneumothorax (Video 18.6); however, lung sliding is not always
easy to detect, the lung pulse may be lost with aerated lung or may
not be visible distal to the heart, and B-lines and lung consolidation
are often not seen in healthy animals. In human medicine the
(A) 	(C)	(B)
Figure 18.7 Ultrasound still images. A. Labeled ultrasound still images. B. and C. Schematic images showing the normal movement of the abdominal
curtain sign during inspiration (bottom row) and expiration (top row). The ultrasound probe was positioned over the right paralumbar region at the level
of the right kidney, over the liver, between the 11th and 12th intercostal spaces, and incorporates the air/soft tissue interface between the abdomen and the
thorax, which appears as a vertical edge (abdominal curtain sign). The position of the abdominal curtain sign (white arrowhead) and abdominal contents
(yellow arrowhead) at end-expiration are shown. During inspiration, the vertical edge of the curtain sign (vertical dotted white line) and the abdominal
contents move caudally (white and yellow arrows, respectively). Although the curtain sign may move more than the abdominal contents, the two move in
the same direction during the same phases of respiration. Dashed lines represent vertical edges (air/soft tissue interface). Solid line represents center of
image; R, rib; RS, rib shadow; P, pleural line; A, A-line; L, liver; RK, right kidney; Arrow shows direction of movement of the vertical edge during
inspiration (also see Video 18.5). Source: Boysen et al. [46], with permission from Frontiers Media S.A. / CC BY 4.0.
Table 18.3 Causes of diffuse and localized B-lines along with common history
and clinical findings.
Multiple diffuse bilateral B-lines 	Focal /unilateral/localized B-lines
Interstitial pneumonia or pneumonitis (e.g.,
lymphocytic interstitial pneumonitis,
eosinophilic pneumonia, and drug reactions)
Pulmonary edema – cardiogenic or
non-cardiogenic: heart murmur common
with cardiogenic causes, may have history of
seizures, chewing an electrical cord, upper
airway obstruction, or smoke inhalation
Diffuse parenchymal lung disease (e.g.,
pulmonary fibrosis)
Acute respiratory distress syndrome: may
have spared lung regions
Focal pneumonia/pneumonitis,
particularly aspiration: often a
history of vomiting
Pulmonary contusions: often a
history of trauma
Atelectasis: often a history of
prolonged recumbency and/or
anesthesia
Pleural disease: interpret B-lines
cautiously when pleural effusion is
present as compression atelectasis
can result in B-lines
Neoplasia: often associated with
sonographic areas of focal lung
consolidation, particularly nodules

-- 278 of 1450 --

Chapter 18: Point-of-Care Ultrasound in Anesthesia 	263
Non-ventilated lung: No air
movement with respirations
Parietal and visceral pleura: In contact with one another
Lung sliding: Absent with PPV, may be visible if breathing
around ET tube during spontaneous respirations
Lung pulse: Continually visible and often pronounced due
to atelectasis
Ventilated lung: Air
movement with respirations
Parietal and visceral pleura: In contact with one another
Lung sliding: Present with PPV and spontaneous
respirations
Lung pulse: Maybe or may not be detectable between
respirations and is often lost during active lung slliding
	Diaphragm
Figure 18.8 Schematic image depicting one-lung intubation and a comparison of the two hemithoraces with regards to the sonographic identification of
the lung pulse and lung sliding during spontaneous and positive-pressure ventilation (PPV). ET, endotracheal. Source: Dr. Søren Boysen, with permission.
Partial pneumothorax: Some lung remains
in contact with the chest wall below the
region of pneumothorax
Parietal and visceral pleura: Separated by air
(pneumothorax)
Lung sliding: Absent
Lung pulse: Absent
B-line/consolidation: Not visible even if present
Lung point
Parietal and visceral pleura: In contact
Lung sliding: Present with respirations
Lung pulse: Visible between respirations
B-lines/consolidation: Visible if present
Abdominal curtain sign: Normal
B-lines/consolidation: Visible if present
Lung pulse: Visible between respiration
Lung sliding: Present with respiration
Parietal and visceral pleura: In contact
Abdominal curtain sign: Abnormal; double and
asynchronous 	Diaphragm
No pneumothorax: The lung is in contact
with the chest wall
Figure 18.9 Schematic image of the sonographic finding on either side of the chest when a moderate unilateral pneumothorax is present (pneumothorax
shown in black). Each arrow represents different sonographic findings when the probe is placed over an area where there is a pneumothorax, and where
there is lung in contact with the chest wall. The location of the abdominal curtain sign (ACS) is also shown. A pneumothorax will often result in an
abnormal ACS due to free pleural gas interacting with the costophrenic recess when it displaces the lung lobe cranially. With massive pneumothorax
where lung fails to recontact the chest wall, there will not be a lung point and there will be an absence of B-lines/consolidation, lung pulse, and lung
sliding over the entire hemithorax. Source: Dr. Søren Boysen, with permission.

-- 279 of 1450 --

264 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
positive predictive value of absent lung sliding for the detection
of pneumothorax is 87% in the general population, falls to 56%
in the critically ill, and to 27% in patients with respiratory fail-
ure [51,59,90,91]. If the history and clinical exam are supportive,
thoracocentesis is indicated when lung sliding, lung pulse, and lung
pathology are not visible, particularly when assessed at locations
where free pleural gas is likely to accumulate (widest part of the
thorax with a patient in lateral recumbency, caudodorsal site with a
patient in sternal recumbency or standing). If the patient is suffi-
ciently stable, the operator may increase the likelihood of diagnos-
ing pneumothorax by finding the lung point (Video 18.7) and/or an
abnormal ACS (Video 18.8) [46,58,88]. The lung point is the loca-
tion within the thorax where the lung re-contacts the parietal pleura
and creates an intermittent or partial glide sign within a section of
the ultrasound image when the patient breathes [58,54]. The lung
point is located by moving the probe from an area with no per-
ceived lung sliding toward the hilus, where lung sliding reappears
within a region of the ultrasound window [54,58]. In the standing
or sternal patient, the probe is often moved from the caudodorsal
lung regions toward the elbow. The lung point will not be seen if the
lung fails to recontact the chest wall (massive/complete pneumo-
thorax), and has an overall sensitivity of 66%, and a specificity of
100% in human patients [54]. An experimental study of anesthe-
tized dogs demonstrated a sensitivity of 20% and 40% and specific-
ity of 100% for the lung point to diagnose pneumothorax with
volumes of 2 and 10 mL/kg of pleural air, respectively [88].
Abnormalities of the ACS identified with pneumothorax include
asynchronous and double curtain signs [46]. The asynchronous cur-
tain sign is defined as the cranial movement of the vertical edge
artifact (created by free pleural gas versus air-filled lung overlying
the diaphragm and soft tissue structures of the abdomen at the
costophrenic recess) with concomitant caudal movement of
abdominal contents during the inspiratory phase of the respiratory
cycle, with the opposite movements occurring during expiration
(Fig. 18.10; Video 18.8). This creates the appearance of the curtain
sign and abdominal contents moving toward each other on inspira-
tion and away from each other on expiration, the opposite of what
is expected with a normal ACS.
The double curtain sign is defined as two parallel vertical abdomi-
nal edge artifacts visible in Figure 18.11 and Video 18.8. Of note, all
three types of ACS (normal, double, and asynchronous) have been
identified over each hemithorax in dogs with pneumothorax, with
normal ACS visible in the ventral third of the thorax. However, these
abnormal ACSs have only been described in dogs with mild to mod-
erate degrees of pneumothorax, and extrapolation of these findings
to larger-volume pneumothorax is unknown [46]. The accuracy of
an abnormal ACS was not reported, and only six dogs have been
investigated, suggesting further research regarding the use/presence
of an abnormal ACS to diagnose pneumothorax is needed [46].
Pleural effusion
In human medicine, ultrasound has a sensitivity and specificity of
92–100% and 88–100% for the detection of pleural effusion, respec-
tively, when compared to CT [34]. Similar to pneumothorax, the
accuracy of diagnosing pleural effusion using POCUS in veterinary
patients is variable and limited by a lack of controlled, prospective
studies and small sample sizes [6,45,89]. Recent studies comparing
VetBLUE and TFAST protocols to CT correctly identified pleural
effusion in 2/3 and 3/6 cases, respectively [87,89]. Pleural effusion
appears as hypoechoic accumulations between the thoracic wall,
Figure 18.10 Still images and schematic of an asynchronous curtain sign at end-expiration (top row) and end-inspiration (bottom row). The ultrasound
probe was positioned over the right paralumbar region just below the right kidney, over the liver, between the 9th and 10th intercostal spaces, and
incorporates the air/soft tissue interface between the abdomen and the thorax, which appears as a vertical edge (curtain sign). During inspiration, the
vertical edge of the curtain sign moves in the opposite direction (cranially) of the abdominal contents (caudally). Dashed lines represent vertical edges
(air/soft tissue interface). Solid line represents center of image. P, pleural line; A, A-line; L, liver; asterisk “*”, hepatic vessel. Solid arrow shows direction of
movement of the vertical edge during inspiration. Dashed arrow shows direction of movement of the abdominal contents during inspiration. Length of
arrow represents degree of movement relative to the image above (also see Video 18.8). Source: Boysen et al. [46], with permission from Frontiers Media
S.A. / CC BY 4.0.

-- 280 of 1450 --

Chapter 18: Point-of-Care Ultrasound in Anesthesia 	265
diaphragm, and lung surfaces. Its appearance varies with the cellu-
larity and quantity of the effusion, probe location, patient position-
ing, and the presence of adhesions. In dogs and cats, pleural effusion
is generally identified via transthoracic and subxiphoid windows.
Locating the pericardio-diaphragmatic (PD) window transthoraci-
cally helps differentiate pleural effusion from pericardial effusion.
The PD window is identified when the probe is positioned such that
the heart and ACS or diaphragm are visible within the same sono-
graphic window (Fig. 18.12).
With smaller volume effusions, fluid occupies the costophrenic
angle/recess, causing minimal compressive atelectasis of the sur-
rounding lung tissue. In this scenario, the dynamic motion of the
air-filled lung expanding across the pleural effusion and soft tissue
abdominal structures is still seen; however, the ACS does not over-
lap the costophrenic recess as much as in the absence of effu-
sion [51,54]. The diaphragm can be seen curving away from the
chest wall due to the presence of pleural effusion accumulating
within the costophrenic recess [51,54]. As the quantity of effusion
increases, the lung progressively covers less and less of the costo-
phrenic recess, even uncovering it on inspiration, and the lungs
may become atelectatic, appearing as floating tissue-like structures
(termed the “jellyfish” sign in human medicine) [54,70,91]. In con-
trast to pleural effusion, pericardial effusion is contained and
curves away from the diaphragm following the contour of the
heart. To identify very small to scant volumes of pleural effusion
that might not cause respiratory distress, but might be diagnosti-
cally important to sample and analyze, the most ventral pleural
regions between the sternal muscles and the lung should be
assessed from the diaphragm to the thoracic inlet, with the patient
in a sternal or standing position (Fig. 18.13) [46]. The ventral pleu-
ral regions can be identified by placing the probe parallel to the
ribs in the ventral third of the thorax and sliding the probe ventrally
until the sternal muscles become visible within the ultrasound
image (Fig. 18.13).
PTX
PTX
PTX
PTX
PTX
PL
PL
PL
Liver
RS	RS
RS
RS 	RS
RS
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
Figure 18.11 Still images and schematic of a double curtain sign at end-expiration (top row), mid-inspiration (middle row), and end-inspiration
(bottom row). The ultrasound probe is located over the liver, about halfway up the thorax, between the 7th and 8th intercostal spaces, over the air/soft
tissue interface between the abdomen and the thorax. During inspiration, two vertical edges of the curtain sign are visible in the same sonographic
window. The asterisk “*” represents a region where the probe is situated over the diaphragm and associated underlying soft tissue structures at the
costophrenic recess. Dashed lines represent vertical edges (air/soft tissue interface). Solid line represents center of image. R, rib; RS, rib shadow; P, pleural
line; A, A-line; L, liver. Arrows show movement of the vertical edges in opposite directions during inspiration in this example. Length of arrow represents
degree of movement relative to the image above (also see Video 18.8). Source: Boysen et al. [46], with permission from Frontiers Media S.A. / CC BY 4.0.

-- 281 of 1450 --

266 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
Increased B-lines
If > 3 B-lines are visible in a single sonographic window, alveolar
interstitial syndrome (AIS) should be considered (Fig. 18.14)
(Video 18.9). B-lines are a sensitive marker of injury and appear
concurrent with loss of lung aeration; in some instances, before gas
exchange deterioration [92]. B-lines are an early and sensitive find-
ing of increased lung density [53,92–95]. In cases of pulmonary
edema, their presence or absence may guide fluid administra-
tion [96,97]. It has been proposed that their appearance warrants
fluid caution or restriction, particularly if serial monitoring is per-
formed in patients receiving IV fluids. In contrast, B-lines disap-
pear with successful treatment of pulmonary edema. Monitoring
B-lines serially for progression or resolution may also help deter-
mine if B-lines are a normal variation or if true pathology is present.
Pleural line
Pleural line
Pericardial
effusion
PE
Lung 	Liver
PE
LV
Liver
MT
RV
Rib shadow
Rib shadow
Rib shadow
Rib shadow
R
i
b
	R
i
b
Ri
b
R
i
b
	R
i
b
D
i
a
p
h
r
a
g
m
RV
LV
MT
Figure 18.12 Photograph, still, and schematic images of the location, normal appearance, and abnormal findings identified at the pericardio-
diaphragmatic (PD) window. (Top) Photograph of a dog demonstrating the location of the probe to find the PD window. (2nd row) Still (left) and
schematic image (right) showing the normal appearance of the PD window when the heart and diaphragm are visible within the same image. (3rd row)
Still (left) and schematic image (right) of pleural effusion. (4th row) Still (left) and schematic image (right) of pericardial effusion, which is easily
differentiated from pleural effusion at this location. PE, pleural effusion; MT, mediastinal triangle; LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle. Source: Dr. Søren
Boysen, with permission.

-- 282 of 1450 --

Chapter 18: Point-of-Care Ultrasound in Anesthesia 	267
Pleural line
A lines
(A) 	(B)
(C) 	(D)
Sternal muscles
Dorsal 	Ventral
S
k 	i n
s
u
r
f
a
c
e
Lateral chest
wall
Figure 18.13 Schematic and still ultrasound images of the lung, pleura, and sternal muscle interfaces. A–C. Schematic, labeled still, and unlabeled still
ultrasound image of a healthy patient. D. Labeled still image of pleural effusion (PLE) located ventrally between the sternal muscles and lung. Source:
Dr. Søren Boysen, with permission.
B line
B line
B line
	B line
	B line
	B line
B line
B line
Figure 18.14 Increased to coalescing B-lines. Note the absence of ribs above the pleural line and the absence of rib shadows because the probe is
orientated parallel and between two ribs. The finding of > 3 B-lines in any sonographic window is considered abnormal. Source: Dr. Søren Boysen, with
permission.

-- 283 of 1450 --

268 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
Multiple individual to coalescing B-lines (> 3 per sonographic win-
dow, or > 2 positive sites on a hemithorax) should raise suspicion of
increased lung density at the lung periphery [47,49,66], often
referred to as “wet lung” [47,89]. “Wet lung” is, however, a misno-
mer; although increased extravascular lung water (EVLW) is the
most common cause of increased B-lines, any process that increases
lung density, including atelectasis, fibrosis, collagen, neoplastic
cells, and inflammatory cells [54,64,92] can result in increased
B-lines. Given atelectasis occurs in recumbent animals and patients
undergoing general anesthesia, knowing the cause of increased
B-lines is important, as therapy differs depending on the cause.
History, concurrent diagnostic testing, and mapping the entire
PLUS profile by scanning multiple lung regions bilaterally help
determine the underlying cause (Table 18.4).
Lung consolidation
Healthy lung comprises roughly 85–95 % air and 5–15 % non-aerated
tissue [55,59,62,63,98]. A change in the ratio of aerated to non-
aerated lung within 1–3 mm of the lung surface results in specific
abnormal lung ultrasound findings, mainly increased B-lines and
lung consolidation. When there is sufficient air within the lung tissue
at its periphery (>10% lung aeration), the soft tissue–air interface at
the P-line is maintained and the ultrasound beam is reflected from
the lung surface, rendering the lung invisible [62]. In this situation, it
is only possible to visualize lung pathology through interpretation of
lung surface artifacts such as increased B-lines [55,59,62,63,98].
When the ratio of aerated to non-aerated lung tissue directly below
the visceral pleura falls below 5–10% (i.e., 90% consolidation), the
acoustic impedance between the thoracic wall and lung is decreased
to a point the lung ultrasound beam is no longer reflected from the
lung surface, but is instead transmitted through the underlying lung
tissue [97]. Similar to causes of increased B-lines, lung consolidation
can occur as a result of atelectasis, hemorrhage, bronchopneumonia,
thromboembolism, lung lobe torsion, neoplasia, and inflammatory
conditions such as pulmonary contusions and acute lung injury.
Unlike B-lines, which can occasionally be normal and will increase
with even mild increases in lung density, consolidation is always
abnormal and only occurs when pathology is severe enough that
the ultrasound beam can traverse lung tissue. Consolidation can be
translobar (traversing the entire lung lobe from one surface to the
other), or partial (partial thickness, where the consolidated region
within the lobe encounters air-filled lung distal to the consolidated
region) [59,70]. Although many pathologies can result in consoli-
dation, most will result in three common ultrasonographic appear-
ances (Table 18.5):
1 “Shred” sign – Partial lung consolidation. This occurs when there
is a focal area of consolidated lung in apposition to underlying
(deeper) air-filled lung. The boundary between consolidated and
aerated lung appears “shredded” (fractal/shredded border).
Often seen with inflammatory lung pathology (e.g., acute lung
injury and aspiration pneumonia).
2 “Nodule” sign – Partial lung consolidation. Differs from the
shred sign in that the distal border between the consolidation
and aerated lung is often well-defined, smooth, and circular. The
differential diagnoses for nodule signs are similar to those for
Table 18.4 Sonographic findings seen with different pleural space and lung
pathologies which, when mapped over the entire hemithorax, create pleural space
and lung ultrasound (PLUS) profiles.
Pulmonary pathology 	PLUS profile findings
(often combined with CVC and cardiac findings)
Pneumothorax 	Absent lung sliding, lung pulse, B-lines, consolidation
Lung point (often difficult to sonographically identify)
Abnormal curtain signs (asynchronous/double)
A-lines visible (parietal pleura reflection)
Pleural effusion 	Absent lung sliding
Visible separation of the parietal and visceral pleura (may
need to extend depth if large pleural effusion is present)
± B-lines and consolidations arising from the lung
surface, deep to pleural effusion
± “Jellyfish” sign
Pneumonia 	Shred signs, translobar signs
Thickened irregular pleura
Subpleural consolidation
Unilateral or bilateral B-lines
Possible small-volume pleural effusion
Reduced lung sliding due to consolidations in severe cases
Dynamic air bronchograms
± Static air bronchograms
± Fluid bronchograms
Cardiogenic pulmonary
edema and fluid overload
Widespread and bilateral B-lines
Coalescing B-lines with increasing severity
Normal lung sliding
Possible bilateral effusion depending on the severity
and species (e.g., more common in cats)
*Enlarged left atrium present (LA:Ao often > 2:1)
*CVC may be enlarged if right heart also affected
Note: the absence of B-lines in the dyspneic patient
rules out cardiogenic pulmonary edema – search for
other causes of respiratory distress
Acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS)
Bilateral or unilateral B-lines
Normal lung sliding
Shred signs, translobar signs
Mixed pattern with spared regions
Feline asthma 	A-lines visible
Reduced lung sliding with overinflation
± B-lines and consolidation, particularly if right middle
lung lobe affected
Pulmonary embolism (PE) 	Normal lung sliding
± Wedge sign
*Right ventricular enlargement and a distended CVC
may be seen with massive/submassive PE
Atelectasis 	Partial and translobar consolidation
B-lines often visible
± Static air bronchograms
Absence of dynamic bronchograms
Reduced lung volume – easy to detect with compressive
atelectasis secondary to pleural effusion
CVC, caudal vena cava; LA:Ao, left atrial to aortic root ratio; PE, pulmonary embolism
Table 18.5 Classification of lung consolidation and common differential diagnoses.
Partial
consolidation
Ultrasound appearance 	Differential diagnoses
Shred 	Appears as if “chunks” removed
from the lung creating echo-poor
areas; junction from consolidated
lung to aerated lung very irregular,
hyperechoic, serrated, and blurred,
creating a “shred-like” appearance
similar to a “torn” or shredded
piece of paper
Pneumonia
Hemorrhage
Inflammatory-associated
increases in extravascular
lung water (e.g., ARDS)
Thromboembolic disease
Neoplasia
Nodule 	Smooth hypoechoic or moderately
echogenic region; well delineated,
often has semicircular, oval, to
circular deep boundary
Fungal
Primary or metastatic
neoplasia
Abscesses
Wedge 	Wedge-shaped and often well
delineated
Pulmonary
thromboembolism
Not specific and may result
from other pathologies
causing shred signs

-- 284 of 1450 --

Chapter 18: Point-of-Care Ultrasound in Anesthesia 	269
radiographic nodules, with neoplasia and fungal disease being
the more common causes.
3 “Hepatization” – Translobar lung consolidation. The entire width
of lung lobe is filled with fluid, cells, or tissue, and/or contains no
air (complete atelectasis), which creates a “tissue-like” pattern.
The term “hepatization” is often used as the lung takes on a simi-
lar sonographic appearance to liver.
The “wedge” sign is reported in the human literature and is often
associated with pulmonary thromboembolism when identified in
patients with concurrent deep vein thrombosis. The wedge sign and
its significance have not been well documented in small animals.
Air bronchograms
The sonographic appearance of lung consolidation, particularly
shred and translobar consolidation, varies depending on whether
the smaller airways contain air (air bronchogram, Fig. 18.15,
Video 18.10) or are fluid-filled (fluid bronchogram, Fig. 18.15,
Video 18.10) [99,100]. Air bronchograms appear as punctate or
linear hyperechoic foci visible between the hyperechoic walls of
bronchi [99,100]. Fluid bronchograms can be difficult to differenti-
ate from pulmonary vessels, although some may have air visible in
addition to fluid, which helps confirm their presence. Doppler
imaging, in conjunction with breath holding, is used in human
medicine to differentiate vessels and fluid bronchograms.
In veterinary patients, differentiation of the two is challenging as
it can be difficult to obtain optimal views. It is possible to find
mixed fluid and air bronchograms within the same consolidated
region of lung or in different regions of the same lung lobe. In
human medicine, air bronchograms help classify the type of con-
solidation and possibly the underlying cause. When bronchioles
within consolidated lung remain patent, communicating with the
large airways, changes in air movement (> 1 mm) with tidal volume
can create visible movement of air within smaller airways [99,100].
This movement of air within the small airways creates a “shimmer-
ing” referred to as a “dynamic air bronchogram,” and appears simi-
lar to the shimmer of lung sliding (Video 18.10). Dynamic air
bronchograms are most often seen with pneumonia and inflamma-
tory causes of lung consolidation. In contrast, static air broncho-
grams are often seen with atelectasis but can also be seen with
inflammatory causes of lung consolidation, including acute
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and aspiration pneumonia.
A complete lack of air bronchograms is suggestive of complete
atelectasis, although severe pneumonia or lobar hemorrhage
cannot be excluded.
Abdominal point-of- care ultrasound
Veterinary abdominal point-of- care ultrasound (APOCUS) has
expanded from the original FAST scan in trauma patients and
searching for free abdominal fluid to become a clinical tool for the
management and diagnosis of any patient with suspected abdomi-
nal pathology [1–3,101–112] (Table 18.6). Basic ultrasound knowl-
edge of abdominal organ anatomy is essential; however, a detailed
assessment of organs should be performed by a radiologist if
abnormal parenchymal organ structure is detected [113–117]. Most
veterinary APOCUS questions can be answered by assessing five
windows of the abdomen, which is the authors’ preferred general
APOCUS approach (5-point APOCUS, Fig. 18.16). To answer
questions rapidly, but thoroughly, at least two sonographic planes
(short and long axis), with fanning and rocking probe movements
should be performed at each window [1,2,87]. It is important to
remember that APOCUS windows and regions assessed should be
adapted based on the clinical setting encountered. For example,
patient positioning can impact where some pathologies accumulate
(fluid falls and gas rises), and APOCUS should be performed and
adapted to patient positioning in order to maximize the chances of
detecting pathology. The specific goal-directed questions and key
organs to assess at each window are listed in Table 18.6 and
illustrated in Fig. 18.16.
In human anesthesia, APOCUS has been used to look for free
abdominal fluid, particularly in patients with sudden clinical dete-
rioration, such as hypotension [116–118], to stratify patients at risk
for pulmonary aspiration (through gastric volume assessment), and
to monitor urinary bladder volume.
Gastric volume
Gastric APOCUS is applied in humans as a limited examination to
assess gastric content (empty, anechoic “clear” fluid, hyperechoic
“thick” fluid/solid), and volume, with the ultimate goal of assessing
pulmonary aspiration risk [119–121]. The findings from gastric
Trans-lobar
consolidation
Air bronchograms 	Fluid bronchograms
Absent lung sliding 	Fluid
Bronchograms
Figure 18.15 Schematic and still image of air bronchograms. White punctate and linear structures within consolidated lung represent bronchi that still
contain air (air bronchograms) and black punctate and linear structures represent fluid filling the bronchi (fluid bronchograms). Note that lung sliding
tends to be lost with consolidated lung as the soft tissue–air interface is lost. The still image shows mixed fluid and air bronchograms in the same
pathologic lung region. Source: Dr. Søren Boysen, with permission.

-- 285 of 1450 --

270 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
Table 18.6 Clinically driven questions that can be answered in small animals with a 5- point abdominal POCUS (APOCUS) exam, scanning through multiple planes in both
short- and long-axis orientations at each window.
APOCUS
window
Clinically driven question(s)
to answer
Interpretation 	Clinical significance
All five sites 	Pneumoperitoneum 	Reverberation artifact not originating within
the lumen of the gastrointestinal tract,
enhanced peritoneal strip sign if free gas
contacts the peritoneal lining; be sure to assess
the most gravity-independent sites.
Pneumoperitoneum in patients who have not undergone
laparotomy is abnormal and hollow organ rupture should be
ruled out. Free gas reverberation artifact often obliterates
structures below it.
Free abdominal fluid 	Free fluid appears as dark (anechoic or
hypoechoic) triangles/sharp angles between
organs and structures; be sure to thoroughly
evaluate each site considering patient position
and where fluid will accumulate.
Obtain fluid samples for in-house analysis (cytology,
refractometer, parameters of sepsis or uroabdomen), which
may dictate immediate interventions (surgery, antibiotics,
transfusion, etc.). Consider sample submission to reference
laboratory (cytology, culture) if indicated.
Subxiphoid 	Gallbladder halo sign 	Thickening of the normally very thin gallbladder
wall that forms a classic striated white, black,
white pattern due to edema of the gallbladder
wall.
Nonspecific findings but in the unstable patient often seen
with anaphylaxis, increased right atrial pressures (heart failure,
pericardial effusion, fluid overload), and sepsis.
Caudal vena cava (CVC) size
and index
Assess for the cardiac pulse, overall size at
end-expiration, as well as the change in
diameter during the respiratory cycle.
A small CVC that fully collapses, or that changes more than
50% is often the result of hypovolemia. A distended CVC that
loses the cardiac pulse and changes less than 25% suggests
increased right atrial pressures, including fluid overload.
Pericardial effusion 	Identified beyond the diaphragm as contained
anechoic fluid that curves away from the
diaphragm and around the apex of the heart.
Confirms pericardial effusion and differentiates it from pleural
effusion.
Pleural effusion 	Results in loss of mirror image artifact and
appears as uncontained anechoic fluid that
tracks along the diaphragm.
Confirms pleural effusion and differentiates it from pericardial
effusion, although centesis and fluid analysis are required to
determine the fluid type.
Caudal lung pathology 	B-lines and lung consolidation can be detected
(if present) in the caudal lung lobes, which are
not accessible transthoracically.
See increased B-lines and consolidations.
Gastric motility 	Peristaltic movement of ingesta within the
lumen or propagation of a wave along the
serosal surface.
Often assessed along with the duodenum and residual gastric
contents to detect generalized ileus and decide the need for
gastric suctioning and/or prokinetics. The mean number of
peristaltic contractions of the stomach and proximal
duodenum is 4–5 contractions per minute, although this
decreases with fasting.
Cardiac activity during
cardiopulmonary resuscitation
(CPR)
Assess the cardiac muscle for activity during the
10-s window when changing compressors –
can detect ventricular fibrillations.
Presence or absence of sonographic cardiac activity during
CPR is a strong predictor of outcome in human patients.
Umbilical 	Splenic lesions/masses 	Can detect splenic lesions through changes in
echogenicity and structure.
The accuracy of APOCUS to detect splenic masses by
non-specialists has not been assessed, and it is often not
possible to sonographically determine if splenic lesions are
malignant or benign using ultrasonography.
Right paralumbar 	Retroperitoneal injury 	Anechoic angles and triangles, or an anechoic
rim surrounding the kidney, but not free in the
abdominal space.
APOCUS only assesses a small, focused site of the
retroperitoneal space surrounding the kidney and pathology
can be missed.
Renal pelvic dilation 	Often easiest to assess in short-axis orientation. 	Shows good diagnostic accuracy for ureteral obstruction in
azotemic cats, although overlap with pyelonephritis exists.
Duodenal motility 	Normal motility is 3–5 contractions/min,
although this decreases with fasting.
Absence of duodenal and gastric motility, in conjunction with
residual gastric volume suggests generalized ileus. The
presence of luminal content in the absence of gastrointestinal
motility is a stronger indicator of ileus.
Left paralumbar 	Retroperitoneal injury 	Anechoic angles and triangles, or an anechoic
rim surrounding the kidney, but not free in the
abdominal space.
APOCUS only assesses a focused site of the retroperitoneal
space surrounding the kidney and pathology can be missed.
Renal pelvic dilation 	Often easiest to assess in short-axis orientation. 	Shows good diagnostic accuracy for ureteral obstruction in
azotemic cats, although overlap with pyelonephritis exists.
Urinary bladder/
pelvic
Urinary bladder volume 	Uses the formula for the calculation of the
volume of a sphere: measurements in cm and
answer in mL: L × W × D × 0.52.
More accurate when the urinary bladder is round, the probe is
perpendicular to the urinary bladder at the widest diameter.
Measuring the depth in long and short axes should be similar
if the widest diameter is obtained in both planes. Although
not 100% accurate, a lack of change in bladder volume
despite appropriate IV fluid in a well-hydrated patient could
be indicative of anuria or oliguria.
Pyometra 	Contained fluid-filled structures dorsal to the
urinary bladder with thicker walls than the
large intestine.
Accuracy of APOCUS by non-specialists has not been studied.
Aortic thromboembolism in
cats
Hypoechoic structures within the vessel lumen
that can be confirmed with Doppler.
Accuracy of APOCUS by non-specialists has not been studied.

-- 286 of 1450 --

Chapter 18: Point-of-Care Ultrasound in Anesthesia 	271
APOCUS may help guide airway and/or anesthetic management in
the acute care setting to reduce the risk of aspiration [19]. An empty
stomach identified on APOCUS carries a low aspiration risk.
In contrast, thick fluid content and particulate fluid of solid
gastric content are associated with an increased risk of aspiration.
In humans, a sonographically determined gastric volume of
< 1.5 mL/kg is normal in fasted patients (baseline gastric secretions)
and associated with a low aspiration risk. Conversely, volumes
> 1.5 mL/kg are uncommon in fasted individuals, and suggest
incomplete gastric emptying and possibly higher aspiration risk.
Although a strict gastric volume threshold associated with aspiration
risk is controversial, clinical data strongly suggest that volumes of
up to 1.5 mL/kg are normal and safe in fasted humans [122–124].
A semiquantitative three-point grading system has also been
developed in human anesthesiology to differentiate low from
high gastric volume states and the risk of aspiration pneumonia
[122–124]. Although gastrointestinal motility and emptying have
been evaluated and used as a point-of- care assessment in small ani-
mals, the role of gastric POCUS to stratify aspiration risk in animals
is unclear [103,125–128].
Urinary bladder volume
Urinary bladder volume calculation, and estimation of urine pro-
duction, can help diagnose postoperative urinary retention and
reduce postoperative urinary catheterization in human anesthesiol-
ogy departments [129,130]. Sonographic urinary bladder volume
estimation has been reported in veterinary medicine using both 2D
and 3D ultrasound. A recent canine study suggests the formula L ×
W × D × 0.52 may be the most accurate of the urinary volume for-
mulas studied [131–133]. Urinary bladder volume calculation and a
potential role in peri- and postoperative patient management of
veterinary patients have not been reported despite the calculation
of urinary bladder volume being easy to perform.
Cardiac POCUS
With cardiac POCUS (CPOCUS), the sonographer uses a specific
imaging protocol (e.g., right parasternal short-axis left atrial to
aortic root [LA:Ao] ratio) to answer a specific question or series
of questions by interpreting views of one or a few preselected tar-
gets, with responses typically binary (present or absent). Although
CPOCUS is less sensitive and specific than comprehensive echo-
cardiography, it provides valuable information to supplement
physiologic data and physical examination findings [134–137].
The American Society of Echocardiography has established
guidelines for CPOCUS use by acute care providers [138,139]. In
human anesthesiology, CPOCUS is useful for the acute assess-
ment of gross cardiovascular function, assessment of causes of
hemodynamic instability, and cardiac assessment during cardiac
arrest [140–142]. It can also accurately detect a state of low car-
diac preload and facilitates rapid, goal-directed fluid resuscita-
tion [143,144]. More specifically, CPOCUS is used to qualitatively
evaluate the size of the cardiac chambers, the thickness of the
walls, ventricular function, intracardiac volume status, and the
presence of pericardial effusion or air emboli [134,140,145,146].
Although clinical studies are lacking, most of these variables have
also been evaluated with CPOCUS in companion animals
(Table 18.7).
In addition, CPOCUS compliments PLUS in the evaluation of
patients with respiratory distress (i.e., the finding of diffuse bilater-
ally increased B-lines should prompt CPOCUS evaluation to con-
firm or rule out cardiac causes of pulmonary edema). In contrast,
the absence of B-lines in a patient with respiratory distress essen-
tially rules out cardiac causes, and other respiratory pathologies
should be considered. Finally, it is important to realize that
CPOCUS has limited applications in human patients with congeni-
tal heart disease and subtle chronic pathology as it focuses on the
identification of acute conditions (pericardial effusion and
At all five sites, is there:
• Effusion Y/N?
• Free gas Y/N?
Is there:
• Gallbladder well edema Y/N?
• Gastric ileus +/– fluid distention Y/N?
• Pericardial effusion Y/N?
• CPR cardiac activity Y/N?
• Pleural effusion Y/N?
• CVC changed – OK to give a fluid bolus?
Is there:
• Generalized ileus Y/N (duodenum)?
• Renal pelvic dilation Y/N?
Is there:
A splenic mass Y/N?
Is there:
• Urine production Y/N?
• Pyometra Y/N?
• Is there: renal pelvic dilation Y/N?
Right paralumber
Umbilical
Urinary bladder
Subxiphoid
Vivian Leung
	Left paralumber
Figure 18.16 5- point abdominal point-of-care ultrasound (APOCUS) exam and the binary questions that have been evaluated at each site in small
animals. The APOCUS exam should be completed in the position the patient is most comfortable (left lateral recumbency shown in this image).
Depending on the question to answer and patient status, the probe is rocked and fanned through 45 degrees in both the short- and long-axis planes at all
five sites. Consider the pretest probability of the pathology in question and then modify the protocol to increase the chance of detecting the specific
pathology based on how the patient is positioned and where pathology is likely to accumulate (gas rises, fluid falls). CPR, cardiopulmonary resuscitation;
CVC, caudal vena cava. Source: Dr. Vivian Leung, with permission.

-- 287 of 1450 --

272 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
hypovolemia) and assessment of global myocardial function rather
than detailed structural diagnostics or measurements [147]. This
may limit its application in veterinary anesthesiology to identify the
cause and significance of preanesthetic cardiac murmurs identified
on physical examination, although research in this area is lacking. If
left atrial (LA) enlargement, valve thickening, or subtle changes in
wall thickness or contractility are noted, echocardiography per-
formed by a cardiologist is recommended. Applications of veteri-
nary CPOCUS are presented in Table 18.7.
Extensive quantitative calculations are not a goal of CPOCUS.
When time and training allow, simple calculations can be per-
formed, but are not necessary. In human and veterinary studies,
a good correlation between visually estimated (qualitative) and
formally measured (quantitative) cardiac parameters has been
reported [148–151]. Although a phased array transducer is advan-
tageous in obtaining echocardiographic images, CPOCUS is often
performed using a micro-convex curvilinear transducer. Although
M-mode recordings allow quantitative measurement of cardiac
dimensions and analysis of motion patterns, most CPOCUS ques-
tions can be answered using B-mode alone.
Cardiac POCUS windows and views
CPOCUS incorporates right parasternal short-axis (Fig. 18.17) and
long-axis views, the subxiphoid view, and occasionally, left-sided
views. Acquiring all views is often unnecessary. For example, the
LA:Ao ratio can still have diagnostic value, even if it is the only view
obtained [151–153]. Furthermore, although left-sided views can be
helpful in some situations (e.g., identification of intracardiac
thrombi in cats), they are not required to answer most CPOCUS
questions [154].
Right parasternal short-axis views
There are three key right parasternal short-axis views that can
answer most CPOCUS questions (Fig. 18.18) [152,154,155]:
a. “Mushroom view” (Fig. 18.18A): A common view for estimating
volume status and contractility at the left midventricular/papil-
lary muscle region just below the mitral valve.
b. “Fish mouth view” (Fig. 18.18B): Obtained at the level of the
mitral valve and serves as a landmark to obtain other views.
Confidently identifying this view provides the reference point
above (dorsal) and below (ventral) from which the two key views
used to answer most CPOCUS questions can be found: the
Mercedes and whale view, and the mushroom view, respectively.
c. “Mercedes and the whale view” (Fig. 18.18C): Allows assessment
of the LA:Ao ratio.
Reference intervals vary slightly depending on where measure-
ments are made, if the pulmonary artery is included, the ultra-
sound beam angle of insonation (i.e., the angle at which the
ultrasound beam strikes the target organ or structure of interest,
which may vary in laterally recumbent versus standing patients),
and by the operator’s skill level. In general, a normal LA:Ao ratio
should be between 1–1.5 in cats and dogs [155–157]. There is a
gray zone regarding LA:Ao ratio enlargement, with values ranging
up to 1.7 in cats.
Table 18.7 Cardiac POCUS windows, structures of interest, clinically driven (often binary response) questions to answer, and suggested guidelines for interpretation of findings.
Cardiac POCUS
window
Anatomic structures assessed 	Clinically driven question(s) to
answer/physiology to assess
Clinical interpretation/most common causes
Right parasternal
short-axis views
Mushroom view 	Papillary muscles just ventral to the mitral valve:
assess left ventricular chamber size, contractility,
and wall thickness.
Less commonly, right ventricular size and
ventricular septal flattening are assessed. Left
ventricular contractility is reported to be
30–50% in dogs and 40–60% in cats.
1. Is the lumen enlarged with thin
walls?
2. Is the lumen small with thick
walls?
3. Is contractility increased or
decreased?
4. Is the interventricular septum flat/
deviated into the right ventricle?
Consider dilated cardiomyopathy if contractions are
weak with an enlarged left atrium; consider volume
overload if the heart is hyperkinetic with an enlarged
left atrium.
Consider hypertrophic cardiomyopathy if the left
atrium is also enlarged; consider pseudohypertrophy
if the left atrium is normal to small.
Increased contractility can be seen with iatrogenic
volume overload and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Fish mouth view 	Mitral valve 	Not applicable 	Landmark to identify correct mushroom and LA:Ao
windows
Mercedes and the
whale view
Heart base: left atrial to aortic root ratio
(LA:Ao). Normal LA:Ao ratios should generally
be between 1–1.5 in cats and dogs (slightly
higher in cats). Can fit 2.5 aortic diameters into
the left atrium of healthy cats.
1. Is the left atrium enlarged?
2. Is the left atrium small?
Congestive heart failure causing respiratory distress
(increased B-lines) usually has an LA:Ao ≥ 2:1 in cats
and dogs. Iatrogenic volume overload can also cause
an enlarged left atrium.
Hypovolemia should be suspected when the LA:Ao ≤ 1.
Right parasternal
long-axis view
A subjective RV:LV ratio of > 1 is pathologic.
Subxiphoid view 	Pericardial space: effusion appears
sonographically as an anechoic space adjacent
to cardiac structures.
Sensitivity and specificity for detection of a
pericardial effusion are high regardless of
patient position.
To avoid missing loculated pericardial effusion,
multiple acoustic windows should be assessed.
Pericardial effusion appears as a circular accumulation
of fluid adjacent to and surrounding the cardiac
chambers, with the pericardial sac often being
visualized as a hyperechoic (white) line on the side of
the anechoic effusion opposite the cardiac structures.
Be sure to extend the depth to visualize the entire
heart. If it is unclear whether anechoic fluid
accumulation is pericardial or pleural in origin assess
the pericardio-diaphragmatic (PD) windows;
parasternal transthoracic windows found on both the
right and left side of the thorax (see PLUS).
Pericardial effusion may be detected between the
diaphragm and cardiac apex via the subxiphoid view
LA:Ao, left atrial to aortic root ratio; RV:LV, right ventricular to left ventricular ratio.

-- 288 of 1450 --

Chapter 18: Point-of-Care Ultrasound in Anesthesia 	273
Right parasternal long-axis views
The four-chamber view is arguably the most common right par-
asternal long-axis view assessed during CPOCUS (Fig. 18.19). With
this view the sonographer can subjectively evaluate the size of all
cardiac chambers [152,158]; left atrium (LA), left ventricle (LV),
right atrium (RA), and right ventricle (RV). The RA and the LA
should be of similar size (1:1 ratio). The interatrial septum should
lie in a relatively neutral position and not bulge into either atrium.
The RV internal chamber diameter is approximately one-third that
of the LV internal diameter. The free wall of the RV equals one-
third to one- half the thickness of the LV free wall. The interven-
tricular septum and the LV free wall are normally similar in
thickness. Interpretation of changes in chamber size, wall thickness,
and contractility in the right parasternal long-axis views are similar
to changes in the right parasternal short-axis views.
The four-chamber view may be more sensitive for diagnosing
cardiac tamponade compared to the short-axis views. Tamponade
appears as a compression of the RA-free wall into the atrium, inter-
mittently reducing atrial chamber size (RA wall compressed
inwards during systole; Fig. 18.20). However, it should be kept in
mind that tamponade is a clinical diagnosis and the finding of
shock in a patient with identifiable pericardial effusion should
prompt an increased index of suspicion for tamponade.
Subxiphoid view
The subxiphoid view provides a useful acoustic window into the cau-
dal thorax, which can identify pericardial and/or pleural effusion and
assess caudal lung regions not accessible transthoracically [1,159]. The
caudal vena cava (CVC) can also be evaluated at this site (see below).
Interpretation and integration of cardiac POCUS
findings
All CPOCUS findings should be interpreted in light of clinical
examination and other POCUS findings.
Left atrial to aortic root ratio (LA:Ao)
Most patients presenting with respiratory distress secondary to con-
gestive heart failure have LA:Ao ratios ≥ 2, well above upper refer-
ence limits [151,154,159]. If the LA is enlarged, it suggests increased
LA volume and/or pressure, which is often associated with left-sided
congestive heart failure or iatrogenic fluid overload. Alternatively, in
cats (not yet studied in dogs), if > 3 times the area of the aorta can
subjectively fit within the LA, the LA should be considered enlarged
(Fig. 18.21) [152]. Using both of these methods in cats is a good way
to help confirm if the LA is truly enlarged [154]. A small LA:Ao
(≤1:1) suggests pseudohypertrophy. Pseudohypertrophy results
from hypovolemia and decreased ventricular filling, which causes
decreased LA and LV chamber size, and the appearance of a thick-
ened interventricular septum and ventricular free wall [160,161].
This resolves with restoration of effective circulating volume.
Left ventricular lumen size and function
The subjective identification of an enlarged LV lumen may suggest
volume overload or conditions causing myocardial dysfunction
(e.g., dilated cardiomyopathy) [154,155,158]. Both volume overload
and dilated cardiomyopathy can cause an enlarged LA and increased
B-lines on lung ultrasound. Assessing LV contractility is important
for differentiating the two conditions (see below). The subjective
finding of a decreased LV lumen size with thickened ventricular
Figure 18.17 Radiographic, schematic, and still images of the different right parasternal short-axis views starting at the apex of the left ventricle and
moving toward the heart base through the papillary muscle level, mitral valve, and finally the left atrial to aortic root (La:Ao). The corresponding cardiac
still images are labeled: “left apex,” “mushroom,” “fish mouth,” and “La:Ao,” also referred to as the “Mercedes and the whale.” The heart base image above
the left atrial to aortic root is not shown in this figure. LA, left atrium; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle; PA, pulmonary artery; LV, left ventricle; MV,
mitral valve. Source: Dr. Søren Boysen, with permission.

-- 289 of 1450 --

274 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
(A) 	(B)
(C) 	(D)
Figure 18.18 Two-dimensional short-axis view, right parasternal window showing still images of the three key views used to answer most cardiac POCUS
questions. A. Mushroom view, often the first view obtained, which is located at the midventricular level where the papillary muscles are visible (white
arrows). B. Fish mouth view, identified by slowly fanning the transducer dorsally from the mushroom view directing the ultrasound beams toward the
base of the heart until the mitral valve (MV) becomes apparent within the left ventricular lumen (LV). C. Mercedes and the whale view, obtained by
fanning the ultrasound beam toward the base of the heart from the mushroom/fish mouth view. Image contains a short-axis view of the left atrium-to-
aortic root ratio (La:Ao). (La, “whale”) and aortic root (Ao, “Mercedes”). D. Still image demonstrating the objective measurement of the La:Ao (yellow
dotted arrows), although this measurement is often made subjectively during cardiac POCUS. IVS, interventricular septum; RV, right ventricle.
Source: Lindsey Strang, RVT, VTS (ECC), with permission.
Figure 18.19 Two-dimensional long-axis view, right parasternal window
four-chamber view of the heart showing the left ventricle (LV), left atrium
(LA), right atrium (RA), and right ventricle (RV). Source: Lindsey Strang,
RVT, VTS (ECC), with permission.
Figure 18.20 Tamponade secondary to pericardial effusion. The right
atrium is collapsed and concave (white arrows). Source: Lindsey Strang,
RVT, VTS (ECC), with permission.

-- 290 of 1450 --

Chapter 18: Point-of-Care Ultrasound in Anesthesia 	275
walls may suggest pseudohypertrophy secondary to volume deple-
tion or true myocardial hypertrophy. To help differentiate pseudo-
hypertrophy from hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, LA size should be
evaluated: LA size is normal to small in patients with pseudohyper-
trophy and often enlarged in patients with cardiomyopathy. A loss
of the visible ventricular chamber during systole, known as “ven-
tricular chamber obliteration,” may reflect severe hypovolemia due
to markedly decreased ventricular filling pressures and potential
impending cardiovascular collapse [33]. In the absence of systemic
disease (e.g., hyperthyroidism, systemic hypertension, subaortic
stenosis, and acromegaly), increased LV wall thickness is often
associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in cats but may also
be seen with pseudohypertrophy in both dogs and cats.
Ventricular contractility can be subjectively assessed by estimat-
ing the relative change in size of the LV lumen during diastole and
systole, which should be roughly 30–50% in dogs and 40–60% in
cats. With practice, and by scanning healthy animals, a subjec-
tive evaluation of ventricular contraction is usually sufficient to
determine if contractile abnormalities are present [154,158].
Hyperdynamic/increased contractile states can occur in hyperv-
olemic patients (provided there is no concurrent myocardial dys-
function), high sympathetic drive states (e.g., stress), and in patients
that have decreased afterload (e.g., arterial vasodilation) without
myocardial dysfunction [33,134]. Decreased contractility can be
seen with hypovolemia in the absence of myocardial dysfunction
(due to decreased myocardial stretch), conditions associated with
poor myocardial contractility (e.g., dilated cardiomyopathy or
sepsis), and cases with increased afterload (e.g., severe arterial
vasoconstriction) [33,134].
Flattening of the interventricular septum combined with an
enlarged RV chamber, and/or increased RV wall thickness suggests
increased RV pressures or volume [134,154]. These presentations
arguably take more skill to identify and interpret. If this triad of
right heart findings is present, causes of pulmonary arterial hyper-
tension should be considered (e.g., heartworm disease), chronic
bronchopulmonary disease (e.g., dynamic airway disease/obstruc-
tion, chronic bronchitis, or pulmonary fibrosis), and pulmonary
thromboembolism [154].
Caudal vena cava assessment at the subxiphoid window
Although controversial in human medicine, the inferior vena cava
(IVC) diameter and collapsibility index are often used in the clinical
setting as a means of assessing volume status [33,134]. In dogs and
cats, the CVC diameter (CVCd) and caudal vena cava collapsibility
index (CVCCI) have been described at several POCUS windows,
including the subxiphoid site (Fig. 18.22) [162,163]. This change in
size of the CVC between inspiration and expiration is referred to as
“CVC collapsibility” and is calculated as the CVCCI. The CVCCI
expresses the change (%) in the diameter of the CVC during the
respiratory cycle:
CVCCI 	CVCd 	CVCd 	CVCd	max 	min/ 	max
Although small animal research is limited, a small clinical study
(n = 27) in spontaneously breathing dogs with compromised hemo-
dynamics or tissue hypoperfusion suggested that CVCCI can accu-
rately predict fluid responsiveness, although the authors also
concluded that further research is necessary to assess generaliza-
bility of their results to a larger population [164]. An enlarged or
distended CVC with less than a 20% change in the CVCCI suggests
increased RA pressures, which may be secondary to hypervolemia,
congestive heart disease, or cardiac tamponade (Fig. 18.22).
Assessment of other cardiac POCUS findings should differentiate
causes of an enlarged CVC (see above). In contrast, a thin col-
lapsed CVC with no change in the CVCCI, or a change in the
CVCCI of more than 50%, is suggestive of hypovolemia (Fig. 18.22).
If increased RA pressures are suspected based on CVC assessment,
other clinical parameters and POCUS examinations should be
evaluated to determine the cause, particularly assessment of PLUS
for lung edema and pleural effusion, as well as CPOCUS for
volume status.
POCUS in cardiopulmonary resuscitation
CPOCUS may be helpful during cardiopulmonary resuscitation
(CPR) to identify reversible causes of arrest and determine if
mechanical cardiac activity is present, provided it does not inter-
fere with CPR efforts [134,165]. With adequate training, images
can be acquired during the 10-s pauses allotted for pulse checks
Figure 18.21 Still ultrasound images of a normal-sized left atrium (left) and a much-enlarged left atrium (right). In cats, the number of aortic areas that
can fit within the left atrium can be used to subjectively decide if the left atrium is enlarged. The image on the left cannot fit more than 2.5 left aortic areas
within the left atrium, while is possible to fit more than seven aortic areas within the left atrium in the image on the right. Source: Dr. Søren Boysen, with
permission.

-- 291 of 1450 --

276 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
and to change CPR providers [165]. Given the portability of ultra-
sound, CPOCUS has been recommended as part of the code
response in humans [165]. CPOCUS can predict survivability to
hospital admission in patients presenting without a pulse. The sub-
xiphoid view in humans has been used to detect cardiac activity
during CPR. Any non-fibrillating motion in humans is associated
with greater survival to hospital admission (23.5% versus 1.9%,
respectively) [166]. The presence of cardiac motion on ultrasound
has been shown to be the most important predictor of survivability
when trauma patients present in pulseless electrical activity (PEA)
(odds ratio 33.9) [167]. Although not reported in the veterinary
literature, anecdotal evidence suggests the subxiphoid view can be
used to assess the heart during active CPR in dogs and cats
(Video 18.11). During human CPR, CPOCUS has been used to
evaluate for cardiac standstill when deciding to stop CPR [134,165].
CPOCUS can also help guide early post-arrest management by
allowing rapid assessment of reversible causes of arrest, including
pericardial tamponade, hypovolemia, cardiogenic shock, RV fail-
ure (air emboli), and pneumothorax [134,168–170]. On return of
spontaneous circulation following cardiac arrest, CPOCUS has
been used to qualitatively assess LV systolic recovery over
time [33,165]. However, the reasons for arrest identified on
POCUS must be distinguished from non-arrest–related find-
ings [171]. For example, visualized peritoneal fluid could be
ascites, not acute hemorrhage; a pericardial effusion could be pre-
sent without tamponade physiology; and right heart dilation may
accumulate over the course of CPR without the presence of a mas-
sive pulmonary embolism [170,172,173]. Treatment of an errone-
ous diagnosis suggested by POCUS may result in iatrogenic injury
or delayed identification of the true cause [171].
End expiration 	End inspiration
End expiration
Liver 	Liver
Liver 	Liver
GB 	GB
CVC 	CVC
CVC
Euvolemia
Hypovolemia
CVC
GB
End inspiration
GB
CVC
CVC
CVC
End inspiration	End expiration
CVC 	CVC
GB	GB
Liver 	Liver	Increased right atrial pressures
(A)
(B)
(C)
Figure 18.22 Schematic ultrasound images at end-expiration and end-inspiration, and still ultrasound images at end-inspiration. A. A euvolemic patient
with a normal caudal vena cava (CVC). B. A hypovolemic patient with a “flat” CVC and subjectively narrow collapsibility index. Although a large CVC
collapsibility index is suggestive of hypovolemia if the CVC is close to collapsed and very “flat,” the change from flat to fully collapsed can be difficult to
appreciate creating the impression of a small CVC collapsibility index. C. A patient with increased right atrial pressures and a “fat” CVC with almost no
collapsibility index (in this case due to pericardial effusion (not visible). Also note there is gallbladder (GB) wall edema (halo sign) in this example, which
is very common in patients with pericardial effusion. Source: Dr. Søren Boysen, with permission.

-- 292 of 1450 --

Chapter 18: Point-of-Care Ultrasound in Anesthesia 	277
POCUS and monitoring fluid therapy
A combination of POCUS findings can be used to assess a patient’s
volume status and monitor response to fluid therapy (Fig. 18.23).
Patients with a history of aggressive fluid therapy and combined
CPOCUS findings of a hyperkinetic heart (increased fractional
shortening), an enlarged LA, distended CVC, and increased B-lines
on PLUS should prompt consideration of fluid overload. Because
PLUS provides dynamic information, the change in B-line count
can be used to monitor for the development of pulmonary edema
secondary to fluid therapy, and the effectiveness of decongestive
therapy in patients with congestive heart failure or fluid overload.
PLUS provides a way to evaluate for lung congestion in patients
before visible signs of congestion become apparent on physical
examination [174]. Therefore, establishing a baseline PLUS profile,
along with other baseline POCUS evaluations, particularly CVC
respiratory variation, LA size, LV size, ventricular wall thickness,
gallbladder wall thickness, and cavitary effusions in patients receiv-
ing intravenous fluid therapy is reasonable and allows serial evalua-
tion over time.
Limitations
POCUS favors specificity over sensitivity, such that unambiguous
findings provide information useful for patient care, while a negative
POCUS exam does not exclude pathology, and any uncertainty or
incidental findings outside the scope of POCUS should prompt con-
sultation with an imaging specialist or cardiologist. Intraoperative
access to the patient and patient positioning under anesthesia may
limit the clinician’s ability to obtain usable quality images that allow
interpretation. Obese patients, very small patients, and patients with
open body cavities may be difficult to image. Interpretation of
POCUS examinations in patients with complex chronic heart dis-
ease and parenchymal organ changes is limited and should be
approached with caution. There is a learning curve to POCUS and
sonographers should know their limitations; some skills are easier to
acquire than others. States of hypovolemia or severe dehydration
may limit detection of effusion, and repeat POCUS examinations
following fluid therapy are warranted. Finally, a lack of adequate
training in indications, image acquisition, and interpretation may
limit integration of POCUS into anesthesia practice.
References
1 Boysen SR, Rozanski EA, Tidwell AS, et al. Evaluation of a focused assessment with
sonography for trauma protocol to detect free abdominal fluid in dogs involved in
motor vehicle accidents. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2004; 225(8): 1198–1204.
2 McMurray J, Boysen SR, Chalhoub S. Focused assessment with sonography for tri-
age in non-trauma dogs and cats in the emergency and critical care setting. J Vet
Emerg Crit Care 2016; (1): 64–73.
3 Lisciandro GR, Lagutchik MS, Mann KA, et al. Evaluation of an abdominal fluid
scoring system determined using abdominal focused assessment with sonography
for trauma in 101 dogs with motor vehicle trauma. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2009;
19(5): 426–437.
4 Meineri M, Bryson GL, Arellano R, et al. Core point-of- care ultrasound curricu-
lum: what does every anesthesiologist need to know? Can J Anaesth 2018; 65(4):
417–426.
5 Díaz-Gómez JL, Mayo PH, Koenig SJ. Point-of-care ultrasonography. N Engl J Med
2021; 385(17): 1593–1602.
6 Sepuya RG, Dozeman ET, Prittie JE, et al. Comparing diagnostic findings and cost
of whole body computed tomography to traditional diagnostic imaging in pol-
ytrauma patients. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2022; 32(3): 334–340.
7 Shokoohi H, Duggan NM, Adhikari S, et al. Point-of- care ultrasound stewardship.
J Am Coll Emerg Physicians Open 2020; 1(6): 1326–1331.
8 Tanael M. Users’ guide to point-of- care ultrasonography. J Am Coll Emerg
Physicians Open 2020; 1(6): 1777.
9 Moore CL, Copel JA. Point-of- care ultrasonography. N Engl J Med 2011; 364(8):
749–757.
10 Ramsingh D, Bronshteyn YS, Haskins S, et al. Perioperative point-of- care ultra-
sound: from concept to application. Anesthesiology 2020; 132(4): 908–916.
11 Patel MD, Horrow MM, Kamaya A, et al. Mapping the ultrasound landscape to
define point-of- care ultrasound and diagnostic ultrasound: a proposal from the
society of radiologists in ultrasound and ACR commission on ultrasound. J Am
Coll Radiol 2021; 18(1 Pt A): 42–52.
12 Riishede M, Laursen CB, Teglbjærg LS, et al. Diagnostic value of whole-body-
focused ultrasonography in high-acuity patients in the emergency department: a
prospective single-center cross-sectional study. Ultrasound J 2019; 11(1): 11.
CVC collapsed
left atrium and LV lumen small 	CVC and heart normal
Dry lungs 	Increased B-lines
Fluid challenge
Consider crystalloid – may help and
unlikely to harm
Give crystalloid
Consider dynamic fluid
responsiveness test Fluid restrict
Hold crystalloid until further work up
Vasopressors if indicated
CVC distended
left atrium and LV lumen large
Figure 18.23 Point- of-care ultrasound fluid resuscitation guide. Adapted to veterinary medicine by the authors based on human point-of- care ultrasound
fluid resuscitation guidelines [175]. LV, left ventricle; CVC, caudal vena cava. Source: Dr. Søren Boysen, with permission.

-- 293 of 1450 --

278 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
13 Baker DE, Nolting L, Brown HA. Impact of point-of-care ultrasound on the diag-
nosis and treatment of patients in rural Uganda. Trop Doct 2021; 51: 291–296.
14 Chan VW, Perlas A, Rawson R, et al. Ultrasound-guided supraclavicular brachial
plexus block. Anesth Analg 2003; 97: 1514–1517.
15 Asheim P, Mostad U, Aadahl P. Ultrasound-guided central venous cannulation in
infants and children. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2002; 46: 390–392.
16 Adler AC, Greeley WJ, Conlin F, et al. Perioperative anesthesiology ultrasono-
graphic evaluation (PAUSE): a guided approach to perioperative bedside ultra-
sound. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2016; 30: 521–529.
17 Bøtker MT, Vang ML, Grofte T, et al. Routine pre-operative focused ultrasonogra-
phy by anesthesiologists in patients undergoing urgent surgical procedures. Acta
Anaesthesiol Scand 2014; 58: 807–814.
18 Das SK, Choupoo NS, Haldar R, et al. Transtracheal ultrasound for verification of
endotracheal tube placement: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Can J Anesth
2015; 62: 413–423.
19 Perlas A, Mitsakakis N, Liu L, et al. Validation of a mathematical model for ultra-
sound assessment of gastric volume by gastroscopic examination. Anesth Analg
2013; 116: 357–363.
20 Ursprung E, Oren-Grinberg A. Point-of- care ultrasound in the perioperative
period. Int Anesthesiol Clin 2016; 54: 1–21.
21 Ramsingh D, Runyon A, Gatling J, et al. Improved diagnostic accuracy of pathology
with the implementation of a perioperative point-of-care ultrasound service: qual-
ity improvement initiative. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2020; 45: 95–101.
22 Cowie B. Three years’ experience of focused cardiovascular ultrasound in the peri-
operative period. Anaesthesia 2011; 66: 268–273.
23 Ramsingh D, Rinehart J, Kain Z, et al. Impact assessment of perioperative point-of-care
ultrasound training on anesthesiology residents. Anesthesiology 2015; 123: 670–682.
24 Canty DJ, Royse CF, Kilpatrick D, et al. The impact of focused transthoracic echo-
cardiography in the pre-operative clinic. Anaesthesia 2012; 67: 618–625.
25 Zimmerman JM, Coker BJ. The nuts and bolts of performing focused cardiovascu-
lar ultrasound (focus). Anesth Analg 2017; 124: 753–60.
26 Díaz- Gómez JL, Perez-Protto S, Hargrave J, et al. Impact of a focused transthoracic
echocardiography training course for rescue applications among anesthesiology
and critical care medicine practitioners: a prospective study. J Cardiothorac Vasc
Anesth 2015; 29:576–581.
27 Ford JW, Heiberg J, Brennan AP, et al. A pilot assessment of 3 point-of-care strategies
for diagnosis of perioperative lung pathology. Anesth Analg 2017; 124: 734–742.
28 Yao W, Zhou Y, Wang B, et al. Can mandibular condylar mobility sonography meas-
urements predict difficult laryngoscopy? Anesth Analg 2017; 124: 800–806.
29 Haskins SC, Desai NA, Fields KG, et al. Diagnosis of intraabdominal fluid extravasa-
tion after hip arthroscopy with point-of-care ultrasonography can identify patients
at an increased risk for postoperative pain. Anesth Analg 2017; 124: 791–799.
30 Perlas A, Van de Putte P, Van Houwe P, et al. I-AIM framework for point-of- care
gastric ultrasound. Br J Anaesth 2016; 116: 7–11.
31 Mok D, Schwarz SK, Rondi K. Point-of-care ultrasonography in Canadian anesthe-
siology residency programs: a national survey of program directors. Can J Anesth
2017; 64: 1023–1026.
32 Meineri M, Arellano R, Bryson G, et al. Canadian recommendations for training
and performance in basic perioperative point-of-care ultrasound: recommenda-
tions from a consensus of Canadian anesthesiology academic centres. Can J
Anaesth 2021; 68(3): 376–386.
33 Adler AC, Brown KA, Conlin FT, et al. Cardiac and lung point-of- care ultrasound
in pediatric anesthesia and critical care medicine: uses, pitfalls, and future direc-
tions to optimize pediatric care. Paediatr Anaesth 2019; 29(8): 790–798.
34 Soni NJ, Lucas BP. Diagnostic point-of-care ultrasound for hospitalists. J Hosp Med
2015; 10(2): 120–124.
35 Heinz ER, Vincent A. Point-of- care ultrasound for the trauma anesthesiologist.
Curr Anesthesiol Rep 2022; 20: 1–9.
36 Armenise A, Boysen RS, Rudloff E, et al. Veterinary-focused assessment with
sonography for trauma-airway, breathing, circulation, disability and exposure: a
prospective observational study in 64 canine trauma patients. J Small Anim Pract
2019; 60(3): 173–182.
37 Dupanloup A, Osinchuk S. Relationship between the ratio of optic nerve sheath
diameter to eyeball transverse diameter and morphological characteristics of dogs.
Am J Vet Res 2021; 82(8): 667–675.
38 Evangelisti MA, Carta G, Burrai GP, et al. Repeatability of ultrasound examination
of the optic nerve sheath diameter in the adult cat: comparison between healthy cats
and cats suffering from presumed intracranial hypertension. J Feline Med Surg
2020; 22(10): 959–965.
39 Smith JJ, Fletcher DJ, Cooley SD, et al. Transpalpebral ultrasonographic measure-
ment of the optic nerve sheath diameter in healthy dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2018;
28(1): 31–38.
40 Lee HC, Choi HJ, Choi MC, et al. Ultrasonographic measurement of optic nerve
sheath diameter in normal dogs. J Vet Sci 2003; 4(3): 265–268.
41 Lisciandro GR. Abdominal and thoracic focused assessment with sonography for
trauma, triage, and monitoring in small animals. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2011; 21(2):
104–122.
42 Lisciandro GR, Lagutchik MS, Mann T, et al. Evaluation of a thoracic focused
assessment with sonography for trauma (TFAST) protocol to detect pneumothorax
and concurrent thoracic injury in 145 traumatized dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2008;
18: 258–269.
43 Lloyd JKF. Minimising stress for patients in the veterinary hospital: why it is impor-
tant and what can be done about it. Vet Sci 2017; 4(2): 22.
44 Chou EH, Dickman E, Tsou PY, et al. Ultrasonography for confirmation of endotra-
cheal tube placement: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Resuscitation 2015;
90: 97–103.
45 Herreria-Bustillo VJ, Kuo KW, Burke PJ, et al. A pilot study evaluating the use of
cervical ultrasound to confirm endotracheal intubation in dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit
Care 2016; 26(5): 654–658.
46 Boysen S, McMurray J, Gommeren K. Abnormal curtain signs identified with a
novel lung ultrasound protocol in six dogs with pneumothorax. Front Vet Sci 2019;
6: 291.
47 Lisciandro GR, Fosgate GT, Fulton RM. Frequency and number of ultrasound lung
rockets (B-lines) using a regionally based lung ultrasound examination named vet
BLUE (veterinary bedside lung ultrasound exam) in dogs with radiographically
normal lung findings. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2014; 55(3): 315–322.
48 Vezzosi T, Mannucci T, Pistoresi A, et al. Assessment of lung ultrasound B-lines in
dogs with different stages of chronic valvular heart disease. J Vet Intern Med 2017;
31(3): 700–704.
49 Rademacher N, Pariaut R, Pate J, et al. Transthoracic lung ultrasound in normal
dogs and dogs with cardiogenic pulmonary edema: a pilot study. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 2014; 55(4): 447–452.
50 Buessler A, Chouihed T, Duarte K, et al. Accuracy of several lung ultrasound meth-
ods for the diagnosis of acute heart failure in the ED: a multicenter prospective
study. Chest 2020; 157(1): 99–110.
51 Lee FCY. The curtain sign in lung ultrasound. J Med Ultrasound 2017; 25:
101–104.
52 Kok B, Schuit F, Lieveld A, et al. Comparing lung ultrasound: extensive versus short
in COVID-19 (CLUES): a multicentre, observational study at the emergency
department. BMJ Open 2021; 11(9): e048795.
53 Ward JL, Lisciandro GR, Ware WA, et al. Ultrasonography findings in dogs with
various underlying causes of cough. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2019; 255(5): 574–583.
54 Bhoil R, Ahluwalia A, Chopra R, et al. Signs and lines in lung ultrasound.
J Ultrasound 2021; 21: e225–e233.
55 Miller A. Practical approach to lung ultrasound. BJA Educ 2016; 16: 39–45.
56 Lichtenstein DA. Lung ultrasound in the critically ill. Ann Intensive Care 2014; 4(1): 1.
57 Husain LF, Hagopian L, Wayman D, et al. Sonographic diagnosis of pneumothorax.
J Emerg Trauma Shock 2012; 5(1): 76–81.
58 Boysen SR. Lung ultrasonography for pneumothorax in dogs and cats. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 2021; 51(6): 1153–1167.
59 Lichtenstein DA, Mezière GA. Relevance of lung ultrasound in the diagnosis of
acute respiratory failure: the BLUE protocol. Chest 2008; 134: 117–125.
60 Lichtenstein D, Menu Y. A bedside ultrasound sign ruling out pneumothorax in the
critically ill: lung sliding. Chest 1995; 108: 1345–1348.
61 Alerhand S, Tsung JW. Unmasking the lung pulse for detection of endobronchial
intubation. J Ultrasound Med 2020; 39(11): 2105–2109.
62 Soldati G, Sher S, Testa A. Lung and ultrasound: time to “reflect.” Eur Rev Med
Pharmacol Sci 2011; 15(2): 223–227.
63 Picano E, Pellikka PA. Ultrasound of extravascular lung water: a new standard for
pulmonary congestion. Eur Heart J 2016; 37(27): 2097–2104.
64 Yu X, Zhai Z, Zhao Y, et al. Performance of lung ultrasound in detecting peri-
operative atelectasis after general anesthesia. Ultrasound Med Biol 2016; 42(12):
2775–2784.
65 Goffi A, Kruisselbrink R, Volpicelli G. The sound of air: point-of- care lung ultra-
sound in perioperative medicine. Can J Anaesth 2018; 65(4): 399–416.
66 Rigot M, Boysen S, Masseau I, et al. Evaluation of B-lines with two point-of-care
lung ultrasound protocols in cats with radiographically normal lungs. In press.
67 Lisciandro GR, Fulton RM, Fosgate GT, et al. Frequency and number of B-lines
using a regionally based lung ultrasound examination in cats with radiographically
normal lungs compared to cats with left-sided congestive heart failure. J Vet Emerg
Crit Care 2017; 27(5): 499–505.
68 Martins A, Gouveia D, Cardoso A, et al. Incidence of Z, I and B-lines detected with
point of care ultrasound in healthy shelter dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2019; 29:
S17–S39.
69 Volpicelli G, Elbarbary M, Blaivas M, et al. International Liaison Committee on
Lung Ultrasound (ILC-LUS) for International Consensus Conference on Lung
Ultrasound (ICC-LUS). International evidence-based recommendations for point-
of- care lung ultrasound. Intensive Care Med 2012; 38(4): 577–591.

-- 294 of 1450 --

Chapter 18: Point-of-Care Ultrasound in Anesthesia 	279
70 Lee FCY. Lung ultrasound – a primary survey of the acutely dyspneic patient. J Int
Care 2016; 4: 57.
71 Bissinger U, Lenz G, Kuhn W. Unrecognized endobronchial intubation of emer-
gency patients. Ann Emerg Med 1989; 18: 853–855.
72 Kollef MH, Legare EJ, Damiano M. Endotracheal tube misplacement: incidence,
risk factors, and impact of a quality improvement program. South Med J 1994; 87:
248–254.
73 Geisser W, Maybauer DM, Wolff H, et al. Radiological validation of tracheal tube
insertion depth in out-of-hospital and in-hospital emergency patients. Anaesthesia
2009; 64: 973–977.
74 Wirtz DD, Ortiz C, Newman DH, et al. Unrecognized misplacement of endotra-
cheal tubes by ground prehospital providers. Prehosp Emerg Care 2007; 11:
213–218.
75 Timmermann A, Russo SG, Eich C, et al. The out-of-hospital esophageal and endo-
bronchial intubations performed by emergency physicians. Anesth Analg 2007; 104:
619–623.
76 Jones JH, Murphy MP, Dickson RL, et al. Emergency physician–verified out-
of-hospital intubation: miss rates by paramedics. Acad Emerg Med 2004; 11:
707–709.
77 Katz SH, Falk JL. Misplaced endotracheal tubes by paramedics in an urban emer-
gency medical services system. Ann Emerg Med 2001; 37: 32–37.
78 Jemmett ME, Kendal KM, Fourre MW, et al. Unrecognized misplacement of
endotracheal tubes in a mixed urban to rural emergency medical services setting.
Acad Emerg Med 2003; 10: 961–965.
79 Kramer MR, Melzer E, Sprung CL. Unilateral pulmonary edema after intubation of
the right mainstem bronchus. Crit Care Med 1989; 17: 472–474.
80 Mosing M, Iff I, Moens Y. Endoscopic removal of a bronchial carcinoma in a dog
using one-lung ventilation. Vet Surg 2008; 37(3): 222–225.
81 Adami C, Axiak S, Rytz U, et al. Alternating one lung ventilation using a double
lumen endobronchial tube and providing CPAP to the non-ventilated lung in a dog.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38(1): 70–76.
82 Mayhew PD, Culp WT, Pascoe PJ, et al. Evaluation of blind thoracoscopic-assisted
placement of three double-lumen endobronchial tube designs for one-lung ventila-
tion in dogs. Vet Surg 2012; 41(6): 664–670.
83 Marvel SJ, Hafez A, Monnet E. Thoracoscopic treatment of persistent right aortic
arch in dogs with and without one lung ventilation. Vet Surg 2022; 51(Suppl 1):
O107–O117.
84 Mayhew PD, Chohan A, Hardy BT, et al. Cadaveric evaluation of fluoroscopy-
assisted placement of one-lung ventilation devices for video-assisted thoracoscopic
surgery in dogs. Vet Surg 2020; 49(Suppl 1): O93–O101.
85 Lichtenstein DA, Lascols N, Prin S, et al. The “lung pulse”: an early ultrasound sign
of complete atelectasis. Intensive Care Med 2003; 29: 2187–2192.
86 Wilkerson RG, Stone MB. Sensitivity of bedside ultrasound and supine anteropos-
terior chest radiographs for the identification of pneumothorax after blunt trauma.
Acad Emerg Med 2010; 17(1): 11–17.
87 Walters AM, O’Brien MA, Selmic LE, et al. Evaluation of the agreement between
focused assessment with sonography for trauma (AFAST/TFAST) and computed
tomography in dogs and cats with recent trauma. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2018; 28(5):
429–435.
88 Hwang TS, Yoon YM, Jung DI, et al. Usefulness of transthoracic lung ultrasound for
the diagnosis of mild pneumothorax. J Vet Sci 2018; 19(5): 660–666.
89 Cole L, Pivetta M, Humm K. Diagnostic accuracy of a lung ultrasound protocol
(Vet BLUE) for detection of pleural fluid, pneumothorax and lung pathology in
dogs and cats. J Small Anim Pract 2021; 62(3): 178–186.
90 Soldati G, Testa A, Sher S, et al. Occult traumatic pneumothorax: diagnostic accuracy
of lung ultrasonography in the emergency department. Chest 2008, 133: 204–211.
91 Lichtenstein DA. Pleural effusion and introduction to the lung ultrasound tech-
nique. In: Lichtenstein DA, ed. General Ultrasound in the Critically Ill. Berlin,
Germany: Springer-Verlag, 2005: 96–104.
92 Acosta CM, Maidana GA, Jacovitti D, et al. Accuracy of transthoracic lung ultra-
sound for diagnosing anesthesia-induced atelectasis in children. Anesthesiology
2014; 120: 1370–1379.
93 Dicker SA, Lisciandro GR, Newell SM, et al. Diagnosis of pulmonary contusions
with point-of-care lung ultrasonography and thoracic radiography compared to
thoracic computed tomography in dogs with motor vehicle trauma: 29 cases (2017–
2018). J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2020; 30(6): 638–646.
94 Rodrigues JN, Giraud L, Billen F, et al. Comparison of lung ultrasound, chest radio-
graphs, C-reactive protein, and clinical findings in dogs treated for aspiration pneu-
monia. J Vet Inter Med 2022; 36(2): 743–752.
95 Łobaczewski A, Czopowicz M, Moroz A, et al. Lung ultrasound for imaging of
B-lines in dogs and cats-a prospective study investigating agreement between three
types of transducers and the accuracy in diagnosing cardiogenic pulmonary edema,
pneumonia and lung neoplasia. Animals (Basel) 2021; 11(11): 3279.
96 Murphy SD, Ward JL, Viall AK, et al. Utility of point-of-care lung ultrasound for moni-
toring cardiogenic pulmonary edema in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2021; 35(1): 68–77.
97 Cereda M, Xin Y, Goffi A, et al. Imaging the injured lung: mechanisms of action
and clinical use. Anesthesiology 2019; 131(3): 716–749.
98 Lichtenstein DA. Current misconceptions in lung ultrasound: a short guide for
experts. Chest 2019; 156(1): 21–25.
99 Sperandeo M, Filabozzi P, Varriale A, et al. Role of thoracic ultrasound in the
assessment of pleural and pulmonary diseases. J Ultrasound 2008; 11(2): 39–46.
100 Dietrich CF, Mathis G, Cui XW, et al. Ultrasound of the pleurae and lungs.
Ultrasound Med Biol 2015; 41(2): 351–365.
101 Lamb CR, Dirrig H, Cortellini S. Comparison of ultrasonographic findings in cats
with and without azotaemia. J Feline Med Surg 2018; 20(10): 948–954.
102 Quantz JE, Miles MS, Reed AL, et al. Elevation of alanine transaminase and gall-
bladder wall abnormalities as biomarkers of anaphylaxis in canine hypersensitivity
patients. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2009; 19(6): 536–544.
103 Sanderson JJ, Boysen SR, McMurray JM, et al. The effect of fasting on gastrointes-
tinal motility in healthy dogs as assessed by sonography. J Vet Emerg Crit Care
2017; 27(6): 645–650.
104 Cole LP, Mantis P, Humm K. Ultrasonographic findings in cats with acute kidney
injury: a retrospective study. J Feline Med Surg 2019; 21(6): 475–480.
105 Lamb CR, Cortellini S, Halfacree Z. Ultrasonography in the diagnosis and man-
agement of cats with ureteral obstruction. J Feline Med Surg 2018; 20(1): 15–22.
106 Kim SY, Park KT, Yeon SC, et al. Accuracy of sonographic diagnosis of pneumop-
eritoneum using the enhanced peritoneal stripe sign in Beagle dogs. J Vet Sci 2014;
15(2): 195–198.
107 Turner K, Boyd C, Stander N, et al. Clinical characteristics of two-hundred thirty-
two dogs (2006–2018) treated for suspected anaphylaxis in Perth, Western
Australia. Aust Vet J 2021; 99(12): 505–512.
108 Cole L, Humm K, Dirrig H. Focused ultrasound examination of canine and feline
emergency urinary tract disorders. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2021;
51(6): 1233–1248.
109 Fulton RM. Focused ultrasound of the fetus, female and male reproductive tracts,
pregnancy, and dystocia in dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
2021; 51(6): 1249–1265.
110 Mays E, Phillips K. Focused ultrasound of vascular system in dogs and
cats-thromboembolic disease. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2021; 51(6):
1267–1282.
111 Birkbeck R, Greensmith T, Humm K. Haemoabdomen due to suspected ana-
phylaxis in four dogs. Vet Rec Case Rep 2019; 7(1): e000734.
112 Caldwell DJ, Petras KE, Mattison BL. Spontaneous hemoperitoneum and anaphy-
lactic shock associated with Hymenoptera envenomation in a dog. J Vet Emerg
Crit Care 2018; 28(5): 476–482.
113 Akgür FM, Aktuğ T, Olguner M, et al. Prospective study investigating routine
usage of ultrasonography as the initial diagnostic modality for the evaluation of
children sustaining blunt abdominal trauma. J Trauma 1997; 42: 626–628.
114 Kameda T, Taniguchi N. Overview of point-of- care abdominal ultrasound in
emergency and critical care. J Intensive Care 2016; 4: 53.
115 Marin JR, Abo AM, Arroyo AC, et al. Pediatric emergency medicine point-of- care
ultrasound: summary of the evidence. Crit Ultrasound J 2016; 8: 16.
116 Singh Y, Tissot C, Fraga MV, et al. International evidence-based guidelines on
Point of Care Ultrasound (POCUS) for critically ill neonates and children issued
by the POCUS Working Group of the European Society of Paediatric and
Neonatal Intensive Care (ESPNIC). Crit Care 2020; 24(1): 65.
117 McGahan JP, Richards J, Gillen M. The focused abdominal sonography for trauma
scan: pearls and pitfalls. J Ultrasound Med 2002; 21: 789–800.
118 Pereira BM, Pereira RG, Wise R, et al. The role of point-of-care ultrasound in
intra-abdominal hypertension management. Anestezjologia Intensywna Terapia
2017; 49: 373–381.
119 Perlas A, Davis L, Khan M, et al. Gastric sonography in the fasted surgical patient:
a prospective descriptive study. Anesth Analg 2011; 113: 93–97.
120 Bouvet L, Mazoit JX, Chassard D, et al. Clinical assessment of the ultrasono-
graphic measurement of antral area for estimating preoperative gastric content
and volume. Anesthesiology 2011; 114: 1086–1092.
121 Van de Putte P. Bedside gastric ultrasonography to guide anesthetic management
in a nonfasted emergency patient. J Clin Anesth 2013; 25: 165–166.
122 Hutchinson A, Maltby JR, Reid CR. Gastric fluid volume and pH in elective
inpatients. Part I: coffee or orange juice versus overnight fast. Can J Anaesth 1988;
35: 12–15.
123 Agarwal A, Chari P, Singh H. Fluid deprivation before operation: the effect of a
small drink. Anesthesia 1989; 44: 632–634.
124 Maltby JR, Lewis P, Martin A, et al. Gastric fluid volume and pH in elective
patients following unrestricted oral fluid until three hours before surgery. Can J
Anaesth 1991; 38: 425–429.
125 Penninck DG, Nyland TG, Fisher PE, et al. Ultrasonography of the normal canine
gastrointestinal tract. Vet Radiol 1989; 30(6): 272–276.
126 Choi M, Seo M, Jung J, et al. Evaluation of canine gastric motility with ultrasonog-
raphy. J Vet Med Sci 2002; 64(1): 17–21.

-- 295 of 1450 --

280 	Section 2: Patient Monitoring
127 Tsukamoto A, Ohno K, Tsukagoshi T, et al. Real-time ultrasonographic evaluation of
canine gastric motility in the postprandial state. J Vet Med Sci 2011; 73(9): 1133–1138.
128 Rutherford S, Gaschen F, Husnik R, et al. Ultrasonographic evaluation of the
effects of azithromycin on antral motility and gastric emptying in healthy cats. J
Vet Intern Med 2022; 36(2): 508–514.
129 Ozturk NK, Kavakli AS. Use of bladder volume measurement assessed with ultra-
sound to predict postoperative urinary retention. North Clin Istanb 2017; 3(3):
209–216.
130 Møller T, Engedal MS, Plum LM, et al. Reduced need for urinary bladder cathe-
terization in the postanesthesia care unit after implementation of an evidence-
based protocol: a prospective cohort comparison study. Eur Urol Open Sci 2021;
26: 27–34.
131 Kendall A, Keenihan E, Kern ZT, et al. Three-dimensional bladder ultrasound for
estimation of urine volume in dogs compared with traditional 2-dimensional
ultrasound methods. J Vet Intern Med 2020; 34(6): 2460–2467.
132 Atalan G, Barr FJ, Holt PE. Frequency of urination and ultrasonographic estimation
of residual urine in normal and dysuric dogs. Res Vet Sci 1999; 67(3): 295–299.
133 Lisciandro GR, Fosgate GT. Use of urinary bladder measurements from a point-
of-care cysto-colic ultrasonographic view to estimate urinary bladder volume in
dogs and cats. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2017; 27(6): 713–717.
134 Via G, Hussain A, Wells M, et al. International Liaison Committee on Focused
Cardiac UltraSound (ILC-FoCUS); International Conference on Focused Cardiac
UltraSound (IC-FoCUS). International evidence-based recommendations for
focused cardiac ultrasound. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2014; 27: 683.
135 Martin LD, Howell EE, Ziegelstein RC, et al. Hand-carried ultrasound performed
by hospitalists: does it improve the cardiac physical examination? Am J Med 2009;
122: 35–41.
136 Kobal SL, Trento L, Baharami S, et al. Comparison of effectiveness of hand-carried
ultrasound to bedside cardiovascular physical examination. Am J Cardiol 2005;
96: 1002–1006.
137 McKiernan CA, Lieberman SA. Circulatory shock in children. Pediatr Rev 2016;
26: 451–460.
138 Spencer KT, Kimura BJ, Korcarz CE, et al. Focused cardiac ultrasound: recom-
mendations from the American Society of Echocardiography. J Am Soc
Echocardiogr 2013; 26: 567–581.
139 Labovitz AJ, Noble VE, Bierig M, et al. Focused cardiac ultrasound in the emer-
gent setting: a consensus statement of the American Society of Echocardiography
and American College of Emergency Physicians. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2010; 23:
1225–1230.
140 Marin JR, Lewiss RE. Point-of- care ultrasonography by pediatric emergency med-
icine physicians. Pediatr Emerg Care 2015; 31: 525.
141 Sicari R, Galderisi M, Voigt JU, et al. The use of pocket-size imaging devices: a
position statement of the European Association of Echocardiography. Eur J
Echocardiogr 2011; 12: 85–87.
142 Riera A, Weeks B, Emerson BL, et al. Evaluation of a focused cardiac ultrasound proto-
col in a pediatric emergency department. Pediatr Emerg Care 2021; 37(4): 191–198.
143 EL-Nawawy AA, Abdelmohsen AM, Hassouna HM. Role of echocardiography in
reducing shock reversal time in pediatric septic shock: a randomized controlled
trial. J Pediatr (Rio J) 2018; 94: 31–39.
144 Arnal LE, Stein F. Pediatric septic shock: why has mortality decreased? The utility
of goal-directed therapy. Semin Pediatr Infect Dis 2003; 14: 165–172.
145 Longjohn M, Wan J, Joshi V, et al. Point-of- care echocardiography by pediatric
emergency physicians. Pediatr Emerg Care 2011; 27: 693–696.
146 Zimmerman JM, Coker BJ. The nuts and bolts of performing Focused
Cardiovascular Ultrasound (FoCUS). Anesth Analg 2017; 124: 753–760.
147 Lai WW, Geva T, Shirali GS, et al.; Task Force of the Pediatric Council of the American
Society of Echocardiography; Pediatric Council of the American Society of
Echocardiography. Guidelines and standards for performance of a pediatric echocar-
diogram: a report from the Task Force of the Pediatric Council of the American
Society of Echocardiography. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2006; 19: 1413–1430.
148 Rich S, Sheikh A, Gallastegui J, et al. Determination of left ventricular ejection
fraction by visual estimation during real-time two-dimensional echocardiogra-
phy. Am Heart J 1982; 104: 603–606.
149 Hope MD, de la Pena E, Yang PC, et al. A visual approach for the accurate deter-
mination of echocardiographic left ventricular ejection fraction by medical stu-
dents. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2003; 16: 824–831.
150 Mark DG, Ku BS, Carr BG, et al. Directed bedside transthoracic echocardiogra-
phy: preferred cardiac window for left ventricular ejection fraction estimation in
critically ill patients. Am J Emerg Med 2007; 25: 894–900.
151 Ward JL, Lisciandro GR, Ware WA, et al. Evaluation of point-of- care thoracic
ultrasound and NT-proBNP for the diagnosis of congestive heart failure in cats
with respiratory distress. J Vet Intern Med 2018; 32(5): 1530–1540.
152 Loughran KA, Rush JE, Rozanski EA, et al. The use of focused cardiac ultrasound
to screen for occult heart disease in asymptomatic cats. J Vet Intern Med 2019; 33:
1892–1901.
153 Janson CO, Hezzell MJ, Oyama MA, et al. Focused cardiac ultrasound and point
of-care NT-proBNP assay in the emergency room for differentiation of cardiac
and noncardiac causes of respiratory distress in cats. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2020;
30(4): 376–383.
154 Loughran K. Focused cardiac ultrasonography in cats. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 2021; 51(6): 1183–1202.
155 Darnis E, Merveille AC, Desquilbet L, et al. Interobserver agreement between
non- cardiologist veterinarians and a cardiologist after a 6-hour training course for
echographic evaluation of basic echocardiographic parameters and caudal vena
cava diameter in 15 healthy beagles. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2019; 29(5): 495–504.
156 Ware W. Cardiovascular Disease in Small Animal Medicine, 1st edn. London:
Manson Publishing Ltd, 2011.
157 Boon JA. Two Dimensional and M-Mode Echocardiography for the Small Animal
Practitioner. Jackson, WY: Teton NewMedia, 2002.
158 DeFrancesco TC, Ward JL. Focused canine cardiac ultrasound. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 2021; 51(6): 1203–1216.
159 Lisciandro GR. The use of the diaphragmatico-hepatic (DH) views of the abdomi-
nal and thoracic focused assessment with sonography for triage (AFAST/TFAST)
examinations for the detection of pericardial effusion in 24 dogs (2011–2012). J
Vet Emerg Crit Care 2016; 26(1): 125–131.
160 Campbell FE, Kittleson MD. The effect of hydration status on the echocardio-
graphic measurements of normal cats. J Vet Intern Med 2007; 21(5): 1008–1015.
161 Durkan SD, Rush J, Rozanski E, et al. Echocardiographic findings in dogs with
hypovolemia. Abstract J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2005; 15(s1): S1–S13.
162 Hultman TM, Boysen SR, Owen R, et al. Ultrasonographically derived caudal vena
cava parameters acquired in a standing position and lateral recumbency in healthy,
lightly sedated cats: a pilot study. J Feline Med Surg 2022; 24(10): 1039–1045.
163 Darnis E, Boysen S, Merveille AC, et al. Establishment of reference values of the
caudal vena cava by fast-ultrasonography through different views in healthy dogs.
J Vet Intern Med 2018; 32(4): 1308–1318.
164 Donati PA, Guevara JM, Ardiles V, et al. Caudal vena cava collapsibility index as a
tool to predict fluid responsiveness in dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2020; 30(6):
677–686.
165 Boretsky KR, Kantor DB, DiNardo JA, et al. Focused cardiac ultrasound in the
pediatric perioperative setting. Anesth Analg 2019; 129(4): 925–932.
166 Cureton EL, Yeung LY, Kwan RO, et al. The heart of the matter: utility of ultra-
sound of cardiac activity during traumatic arrest. J Trauma Acute Care Surg 2012;
73(1): 102–110.
167 Tayal VS, Kline JA. Emergency echocardiography to detect pericardial effusion in
patients in PEA and near-PEA states. Resuscitation 2003; 59: 315–318.
168 Chardoli M, Heidari F, Rabiee H, et al. Echocardiography integrated ACLS proto-
col versus conventional cardiopulmonary resuscitation in patients with pulseless
electrical activity cardiac arrest. Chin J Traumatol 2012; 15: 284–287.
169 Tran A, Fernando SM, Rochwerg B, et al. Pre-arrest and intra-arrest prognostic
factors associated with survival following traumatic out-of-hospital cardiac
arrest – a systematic review and meta-analysis. Resuscitation 2020; 153: 119–135.
170 Blanco P, Volpicelli G. Common pitfalls in point-of- care ultrasound: a practical
guide for emergency and critical care physicians. Crit Ultrasound J 2016; 8(1): 15.
171 Reynolds JC, Nicholson T, O’Neil B, et al. Advanced Life Support Task Force at
the International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation ILCOR. Diagnostic test
accuracy of point-of-care ultrasound during cardiopulmonary resuscitation to
indicate the etiology of cardiac arrest: a systematic review. Resuscitation 2022;
172: 54–63.
172 Querellou E, Leyral J, Brun C, et al. In and out-of- hospital cardiac arrest and ech-
ography: a review. Ann Fr Anesth Reanim 2009; 28: 769–778.
173 Aagaard R, Granfeldt A, Bøtker MT, et al. The right ventricle is dilated during
resuscitation from cardiac arrest caused by hypovolemia: a porcine ultrasound
study. Crit Care Med 2017; 45: e963–e970.
174 Mallamaci F, Benedetto FA, Tripepi R, et al. Detection of pulmonary congestion
by chest ultrasound in dialysis patients. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging 2010; 3(6):
586–594.
175 Lee CW, Kory PD, Arntfield RT. Development of a fluid resuscitation protocol
using inferior vena cava and lung ultrasound. J Crit Care 2016; 31(1): 96–100.

-- 296 of 1450 --

SECTION 3
Pharmacology

-- 297 of 1450 --



-- 298 of 1450 --

Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of Lumb and Jones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
283
Introduction
Anesthesia and pain management are two branches of veterinary
clinical medicine that inarguably are inextricably intertwined with
clinical pharmacology. A thorough, deep, and workable under-
standing of the principles of clinical pharmacology is fundamental
to successful clinical practice in these disciplines. The primary
objective of this chapter is to introduce these fundamental pharma-
cological concepts as they relate to the practice of anesthesia, and to
do so in sufficient detail to provide the basis for which sound clini-
cal decisions can be made, even when specific evidence to support
the decision is unavailable or unknown. This chapter also strives to
provide the nascent anesthetic scientist with an elementary under-
standing of some of the commonly used research methods and tools
for pharmacokinetic research in veterinary clinical pharmacology.
Classical receptor theory
To allow communication between organs and between cells, the
body uses messengers or signals. The role of the biological receptors
is to convert signals into different forms of stimuli that will induce a
reaction from the cell or organ. The French scientist Claude Bernard
(1813–1878) was the first to demonstrate the existence of circulating
messengers allowing communication between different parts of the
body [1]. This discovery was the prelude to the receptor theory.
A receptor is a component of a cell, usually a protein or glycopro-
tein, which interacts with the signaling messenger substance.
Classically, the signaling messenger substance is called a “ligand.”
Ligands can be, for example, hormones or drugs. The combination
of a drug–ligand with its receptor induces pharmacological effects;
the initial effect is called the “action” of the drug, whereas
19 General Pharmacology of Anesthetic
and Analgesic Drugs
Ted Whittem1
, Thierry Beths2 and Sébastien H. Bauquier3
1 College of Public Health, Medical and Veterinary Sciences, James Cook University, Townsville, Queensland, Australia
2 Melbourne Veterinary School, University of Melbourne, and Greencross Veterinary Hospital, Werribee, Victoria, Australia
3 Melbourne Veterinary School, University of Melbourne, Werribee, Victoria, Australia, and Southpaws Specialty, Emergency and Referral
Hospital, Malvern East, Victoria, Australia
Chapter contents
Introduction, 283
Classical receptor theory, 283
Affinity and activity of a ligand, 284
Selectivity and specificity of a ligand, 284
Assessment of the ligand–receptor interaction, 284
Receptor agonists and antagonists: definition and examples, 284
Receptor state theory, 285
Receptor structure, 285
Sodium ion channels, 285
GABA receptors, 286
AMPA and NMDA receptors, 286
G-protein receptors – second messengers, 287
Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 – SARS-CoV- 2 receptors, 287
Clinical evaluation of drug effects, 287
Efficacy, potency, and concentration–response relationship, 288
Effective dose, lethal dose, toxic dose, and therapeutic index, 288
Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, 290
Fundamentals of pharmacodynamics, 290
Fundamentals of pharmacokinetics, 290
Half-life of elimination, 291
Apparent volume of distribution, 291
Total body clearance, 292
Hepatic clearance, 292
Renal clearance, 294
Absorption, 294
Bioavailability, 294
Pharmacokinetics of inhalant anesthetic agents, 294
Linear and nonlinear pharmacokinetics, 295
Experiments in pharmacokinetics, 295
Preparation for the study, 295
Experimental design and conduct, 296
Data analysis – compartmental models, 296
Data analysis – noncompartmental models, 298
Data analysis in more complex models, 299
Constant rate therapy, 299
Intermittent boluses, 299
Continuous rate infusion, 299
Drug interactions, 305
Physicochemical interactions, 305
Pharmacokinetic interactions, 305
Pharmacodynamic interactions, 306
Adverse drug reactions, 307
Drug metabolism, 307
Phase I biotransformation, 308
Phase II biotransformation or conjugation, 308
Transport of metabolites (Phase III biotransformation), 308
Isomers and stereoisomers, 309
The effect of formulation, 309
References, 309

-- 299 of 1450 --

284 	Section 3: Pharmacology
succeeding effects are called drug “effects” [2]. The relationship
between a ligand and its receptor follows the law of mass-action:
L 	R 	LR
K
K
a
d
(19.1)
where
K K	
a
d
LR
L R
1
where Ka is the rate constant of association of the ligand with the
receptor, Kd is the rate constant of dissociation of the ligand with
the receptor, [L] is the concentration of unbound ligand, [R] is the
concentration of unbound receptor, and [LR] is the concentration
of bound receptors.
Affinity and activity of a ligand
The affinity describes the relationship between a particular receptor
and its ligand: from eqn 19.1, if the amount of ligand administered
is just enough to occupy 50% of the receptors, then
LR 	R R
L R 	L
	a 	a
yields 	yields
	K 	K 1 (19.2)
A high Ka (and a low Kd
) implies that at equilibrium the number of
unbound ligand molecules is low, showing a high affinity of the
ligand for the receptor. Conversely, a low Ka (and a high Kd
) indi-
cates a poor affinity of the ligand for the receptor. However, a ligand
can have a strong affinity to a receptor without producing an effect.
The activity will describe the ability of a ligand to induce an action.
For example, the mu (μ) and kappa (κ) opioid receptors are the
main opioid receptors involved in opioid-modulation of pain.
Buprenorphine is classified as a partial μ-opioid receptor agonist.
It has a high affinity for the μ-opioid receptor and as a consequence
its effects, although moderate, are difficult to antagonize [3].
Butorphanol is classified as an agonist–antagonist opioid [2]. It pro-
duces its effect by activating κ-opioid receptors and also binds to
μ-opioid receptors. However, even though butorphanol has a strong
affinity for μ-opioid receptors, it is unable to activate them and will
cause no action from the association with those receptors.
Selectivity and specificity of a ligand
The selectivity of a ligand determines its capacity to produce a
particular effect. A highly selective drug will only produce one
effect through activity at only one class or subclass of receptor.
Dopamine is a catecholamine that produces different cardiovas-
cular effects at different doses; when given at a relatively low dose
it will increase myocardial contractility (β-adrenergic receptor-
mediated); however, when the dose is increased, dopamine will
induce some peripheral vasoconstriction (α-adrenergic receptor-
mediated). This lack of selectivity occurs because dopamine acts
as a ligand at different subclasses of adrenergic receptors with
varying affinity. In contrast, dobutamine is a more selective cat-
echolamine (β-adrenergic receptor-mediated only) and its main
effect will be to increase myocardial contractility without induc-
ing major peripheral vasoconstriction [4].
The specificity of a ligand describes its capacity to associate with
only one specific type of receptor. The effects of a highly specific
ligand can be numerous but are due to only one type of receptor–
ligand interaction. For example, atropine associates with one
specific type of receptor even though these receptors are present in
different tissues and the effects are diverse [5]. In comparison,
inhalant anesthetics will interact with several different receptors to
induce their broad effect, unconsciousness [6].
Assessment of the ligand–receptor interaction
It can be difficult to directly assess the interaction of a receptor with
its ligand by observing the number of bound or unbound receptors
or even by looking at drug action. As a consequence, investigators
often measure the effects of the drugs to try to quantify the receptor
occupancy. The effect of the drug is proportional to the concentra-
tion of ligand molecules available to bind, which is a function of the
dose and method of administration of the ligand, physicochemical
and pharmacokinetic properties of the ligand, and location of the
receptor. Delays from dosing to onset of pharmacological effects are
common and are often referred to as the “lag-time.” The delays can
be due to the relative difficulty of a ligand reaching the receptor
(pharmacokinetics) or can be due to post-transduction delay (phar-
macodynamics). For example, glucocorticoid receptors are nuclear
receptors, which, when not bound to a ligand such as cortisol or
another glucocorticoid, are located in the cytosol. Once activated
by ligand binding, the glucocorticoid receptor–drug complex is
actively transported into the nucleus where it induces the transcrip-
tion of genes coding for anti-inflammatory proteins and inhibits the
transcription of genes usually upregulated by inflammatory media-
tors [7]. In this case, the onset of activity is post-transduction and
the long lag-time explains why glucocorticoids fail to show good
results as emergency drugs.
Receptor agonists and antagonists: definition
and examples
The term “agonist” comes from the Greek agōnistēs meaning “con-
testant” or “champion.” An agonist ligand is a ligand that binds to
the receptor and usually activates it the same way that endogenous
molecules would. An agonist ligand can be a full agonist, fully acti-
vating the receptor, or a partial agonist that does not fully activate
the receptor and therefore produces a less intense maximum effect
(see below). It is unknown why some molecules work as full ago-
nists and others work as partial agonists; however, the beginning of
the explanation involves the receptor state concept (see below). For
example, morphine and buprenorphine are full μ-opioid receptor
agonists and partial μ-opioid receptor agonists, respectively.
Accordingly, morphine can provide better analgesic effects than
buprenorphine, even though buprenorphine’s affinity for μ-opioid
receptors is higher than that of morphine.
A ligand can also be classified as a neutral antagonist. In this case,
the ligand will bind to the receptor but will be unable to activate it.
No action following the association of the ligand with the receptor
will be seen. This association is usually competitive but can also be
noncompetitive. The competitive inhibition of the receptor can be
overcome by administering a large enough amount of an agonist
ligand, whereas the same action will have no effect if the inhibition
is noncompetitive.
Reverse agonists are ligands that will activate the receptor but
will induce opposite effects compared to the agonist ligands.
Another way to see it is to consider that a receptor has a baseline
agonist effect that is not nil, and the administration of the reverse
agonist will decrease the baseline effect. The explanation of this
phenomenon is based on the receptor state theory discussed below.
If the agonist effect is to provide analgesia, the reverse agonist effect
will be to increase the sensation of pain.

-- 300 of 1450 --

Chapter 19: General Pharmacology of Anesthetic and Analgesic Drugs 	285
Flumazenil and Ro 19-4063 are examples of competitive neutral
antagonist and reverse agonist, respectively. Mandema et al. studied
the averaged concentration-EEG effect relationships of all individ-
ual rats that had received an intravenous bolus administration of
midazolam, flumazenil, or Ro 19-4603. Midazolam was followed by
a positive effect, whereas flumazenil and Ro 19-4063 were followed
by neutral and negative effects, respectively [8].
Confusion between neutral antagonist and reverse agonist can
occur when the baseline agonist effect is minimal. Also, the classifi-
cation of agonist, partial agonist, neutral antagonist, and reverse
agonist applies to a ligand in relation to a particular receptor, and
the overall effect of a drug may be different from the effect expected
from its action on a particular receptor. Although naloxone is a
well-known opioid receptor antagonist, low doses of naloxone can
induce analgesic effects. The mechanism by which an opioid antag-
onist can enhance the opioid agonist effect is unknown, although it
could be explained by its effects on: increasing the release of endog-
enous ligands, upregulation of postsynaptic receptors, inhibiting
counteraction by G s proteins, uncoupling of filament A, and attenu-
ating the increase in the expression of glial fibrillary acidic protein
(GFAP) [9].
Receptor state theory
The classic receptor theory implies that the receptor is by default in
a nonactivated form and needs an agonist ligand in order to be acti-
vated. Although the nonactivated receptor form represents most of
the receptors, experiments have shown that without the presence of
an agonist ligand, some receptors can exist in their activated form.
The role of the ligand would then be not to activate the receptor but
to stabilize the receptor’s activated form. The two major implica-
tions of this theory are the existence of a baseline agonist effect for
the receptor and the differentiation between antagonist drugs and
inverse agonist drugs.
Receptor structure
Receptors are mainly multiprotein entities and so have four levels of
structure. The primary structure is a linear sequence of amino
acids, the secondary structure is a regular local substructure (α-
helix or β-sheets), the tertiary structure is the three-dimensional
structure of a single peptide molecule, and the quaternary structure
is the combination of the multiple tertiary structures of different
proteins linked together. All these levels of structure are of particu-
lar importance, as a ligand will have to fit with these four levels of
structure to be able to associate with and activate the receptor.
The aim of this chapter is to illustrate the study of receptor struc-
tures using a few examples only of receptors that have a particular
importance in the field of anesthesia. The discussion will be limited
to some ion channels, G-protein receptors, and the angiotensin-
converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor.
Sodium ion channels
One key role of the sodium channel is to allow the genesis of action
potentials [10]. Indeed, sodium channels are voltage-gated ion
channels that conduct the sodium cation into the cell, generating an
action potential. When the membrane potential equals the resting
potential of the cell, the channels are closed. However, as the mem-
brane potential increases, the conformation of the central pore of
the channel changes, increasing sodium permeability and allowing
influx of sodium ions and consequently initiating or propagating an
action potential. This change of conformation is made possible
by the presence of particular transmembrane-spanning segments
(α- helices) called “voltage sensors.”
The sodium channel is comprised of three peptide subunits: one
α glycoprotein subunit and two accessory β subunits [10] (Fig. 19.1).
The α subunit is composed of four homologous domains and each
domain contains six transmembrane-spanning segments. The pri-
mary structure of one of these segments includes a high number of
positively charged amino acids, and when the membrane potential
N
β
β
β
N
1 	3 	5
4 	6	2
DI
(A) 	(B)
DII
C
Intracellular
Extracellular
Phospholipid
membrane
C
DIII 	DIV
Na+
α
α
Figure 19.1 Structure of the sodium channel. A. Schematic of a sodium channel composed of one α subunit and two accessory β subunits. B. Schematic of
the α glycoprotein subunit showing the four homologous domains (DI–DIV) containing six membrane-spanning segments numbered 1–6. The primary
structure of segment 4 includes positively charged amino acids placed at every fourth position. When the membrane potential increases, the positively
charged segments move toward the extracellular side of the membrane, changing the conformation of the channel, and allowing more sodium cations to
enter the cell.

-- 301 of 1450 --

286 	Section 3: Pharmacology
increases, the positively charged segments move toward the extra-
cellular side of the membrane changing the conformation of the
channel. Although their mechanism of action is not completely
understood, the local anesthetics work by blocking these channels,
thus preventing the formation of action potentials.
GABA receptors
Activated by the neurotransmitter ligand γ-aminobutyric acid
(GABA), the neuro-inhibitory GABA receptors (GABAA and
GABA B
) are mainly present in the central nervous system in mam-
mals. The GABAA (fast response) receptors are anion channels,
whereas the GABAB (slow response) receptors are G-protein-
coupled receptors. Of this ligand’s receptor types, only the GABAA
receptor will be addressed in this chapter.
GABAA receptors
The GABAA receptors are ligand-gated anion channels that allow
the passage of chloride anions into the cell. The hyperpolarization
of the neuron following activation of the receptor inhibits subse-
quent depolarization of the neuron, reducing central nervous
system activity. GABA is the main agonist of this receptor. Most of
the drugs used in anesthesia that bind to the GABAA receptor do
not directly activate the receptor but induce an allosteric change
(i.e., change of the quaternary structure) of the conformation of the
receptor and are called “allosteric modulators.” Barbiturates, benzo-
diazepines, propofol, etomidate, alfaxalone, inhalant anesthetics,
and ethanol are examples of ligands that increase the efficiency of
the receptor, allowing greater hyperpolarization of the neuron and
are thus called “positive allosteric modulators” [11]. The benzodi-
azepine reversal agent flumazenil decreases the efficiency of the
receptor and is therefore a negative allosteric modulator.
The GABAA receptor is a heteropentamer (five subunits) compris-
ing α, β, and γ subunits, with many combinations of those subunits
being possible [11]. Agonist and antagonist ligands and allosteric
modulators bind to specific sites of these subunits as illustrated in
Figure 19.2A. Also, each subunit has four transmembrane-spanning
(α-helix) segments creating the chloride channel (Fig. 19.2B).
AMPA and NMDA receptors
The α-aminohydroxymethylisoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) and
N- methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors are both cation channels.
Their endogenous agonist is glutamate [12] and they usually co-exist
on the same postsynaptic membranes. Their interaction is thought
to be one key element of central sensitization.
AMPA receptors
The AMPA receptor is a ligand-gated ionotropic receptor. This cat-
ion channel allows the entrance of Na+ into the cell and the exit of
K+ from the cell. The AMPA receptor is composed of four subunits,
with each subunit having four membrane-spanning segments,
which create the cation channel [12]. Like the GABA A receptor, the
association with an agonist ligand induces a conformational change
allowing the channel to open. The amount of glutamate being
released in the synapse will dictate the amount of cation transfer,
and consequently the degree of depolarization of the postsynaptic
neuron induced by the AMPA receptor–ligand interaction.
NMDA receptors
The NMDA receptor is both a ligand-gated and voltage-gated iono-
tropic receptor [12] (Fig. 19.3). This cation channel allows the
entrance of Na + and Ca 2+ into the cell, and the exit of K + out of the
cell. In contrast to the AMPA receptor, a molecule of Mg2+ keeps the
channel closed until a strong enough depolarization of the postsyn-
aptic membrane occurs. Although weak activation of the AMPA
receptor is not enough to activate the NMDA receptor, multiple or
stronger activations of the AMPA receptor will induce a strong
enough depolarization of the postsynaptic membrane to release the
Mg 2+ from inside the channel of the NMDA receptor.
Glutamate and aspartate are the main endogenous agonists for
the NMDA receptor and glycine is a co-agonist required to
β
β	γ
N
1 	2 	3 4
C
GABA
CI –
Inhalant anesthetics
and ethanol
Critical amino acids
1 glycoprotein subunit
Benzodiazepine
Propofol and alfaxalone
α
α
Intracellular
Extracellular
Phospholipid
membrane
(A) 	(B)
Figure 19.2 Structure of the GABAA receptor. A. Schematic of a GABAA receptor composed of two α, two β, and one γ subunits showing the binding site
of the agonist GABA and of the allosteric modulators: benzodiazepines, inhalant anesthetics, ethanol, propofol, and alfaxalone. B. Schematic of one
glycoprotein subunit showing the four membrane-spanning segments numbered 1–4.

-- 302 of 1450 --

Chapter 19: General Pharmacology of Anesthetic and Analgesic Drugs 	287
efficiently open the channel. NMDA is a partial agonist and
amantidine, gabapentin, ketamine and phencyclidine derivatives,
ethanol, xenon, nitrous oxide, and some opioids (methadone and
tramadol) are NMDA receptor antagonists. Magnesium, sodium,
calcium, potassium, zinc, and copper are modulators of the NMDA
receptor.
G-protein receptors – second messengers
To transduce extracellular signals, some transmembrane receptors
use intermediaries such as guanine nucleotide-binding proteins
(G- proteins). A series of intracellular biochemical events (or sec-
ond messengers) is initiated by the receptor–ligand interaction and
ultimately leads to the observation of the clinical effect. Guanosine
triphosphate (GTP) supplies the energy required by such complex
G-protein receptors. These receptors are some of the most common
and important receptors. The β-adrenergic receptor will be discussed
as an example of a G-protein-coupled receptor.
β-Adrenergic receptors
There are three types of β-adrenergic receptors: β1 found in the car-
diac sarcolemma, β2 found in the bronchial and vascular smooth
muscle, and β3 found in adipose tissue. The β-adrenergic receptors
are linked to the adenylate cyclase (AC) enzyme system through the
G-proteins and are activated by the endogenous β-adrenergic
receptor agonists, epinephrine, and norepinephrine. The stimula-
tory G-protein (Gs or Gαs
), linked to the β-adrenergic receptor, is
composed of α, β, and γ subunits and is located on the intracellular
side of the cellular membrane. By default, the α subunit is associated
with guanosine diphosphate (GDP), and the protein is considered
switched off. However, interaction of the β-adrenergic receptor
with norepinephrine or epinephrine changes its conformation
allowing GTP to replace the GDP on the α-subunit, and the protein
is switched on. The associated AC is stimulated, inducing the pro-
duction of cyclic AMP (cAMP), which in turn activates protein
kinase A (PKA) and numerous downstream enzymes (Fig. 19.4).
The AC can also be inhibited by the inhibitory G-proteins (Gi or
Gαi
), which have a similar mechanism of activation to Gs
. Indeed,
Gi is linked to a β2
- adrenergic receptor and is a likely mechanism of
modulation.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 – SARS-CoV-2
receptors
Most anesthesiologists are familiar with angiotensin-converting
enzyme (ACE), which has an important role in blood pressure home-
ostasis through conversion of angiotensin I to angiotensin II – a potent
vasoconstrictor within the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system
(RAAS). However, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) plays a
key balancing role in this system principally through generation of the
vasodilator angiotensin-(1–7) from angiotensin II. More recently, the
human ACE2 has been identified as an entry receptor for SARS-
CoV-2 [13]. ACE2 is abundantly present in the lung and small intesti-
nal epithelia and in most organs’ arterial and venous endothelial cells
and arterial smooth muscle cells [14]. It is a transmembrane mono-
carboxypeptidase zinc-containing metalloprotease receptor that binds
to the spike proteins of SARS-CoV-2 and blocks it in place when the
virus comes in contact with the respiratory epithelium [13,15].
Furthermore, cell surface proteases and lysosomal proteases will both
activate SARS-CoV-2 entry [13]. The protease cuts the SARS-CoV-2
spike protein at a specific location, allowing the spike protein to
remodel and insert itself into the epithelium cell’s membrane. The
spike protein then pulls the cell and virus membranes toward each
other. After fusion, the viral RNA is transferred into the host cell.
Clinical evaluation of drug effects
To study pharmacodynamics, or the effects of a drug on the whole
body, one can evaluate the efficacy, potency, concentration–response
relationship, effective dose, lethal dose, and the therapeutic index.
Although one general pharmacological principle remains – the more
drug, the more effects (with effects being measured either within an
Intracellular
Extracellular
1
2
3 	4
Phospholipid
membrane
1 glycoprotein subunit	Glutamate
Glycine
(A) 	(B)
N
	Polyamine
(regulator)
NR2	NR1
H +
Zn2+
Mg 2+
Na+/Ca 2+
K +
Ketamine 	C
Figure 19.3 Structure of the NMDA receptor. A. Schematic of an NMDA receptor composed of four subunits (two NR1 subunits and two NR2 subunits)
showing the binding site of the agonist glutamate, the co-agonist glycine, the antagonist ketamine, and the modulators zinc and copper. Other axillary
subunits have also been described. B. Schematic of one glycoprotein subunit showing the four membrane-spanning segments numbered 1–4. It should be
noted that segment numbered 2 does not cross the membrane but kinks back on itself toward the intracellular side of the membrane.

-- 303 of 1450 --

288 	Section 3: Pharmacology
individual or within a population) – the occurrences of U-shaped
(or inverted U-shaped) dose–response curves are widely and inde-
pendently observed phenomena [16]. “Hormesis” defines dose–
response relationships characterized by stimulatory effects at low
doses and inhibitory effects at higher doses, resulting in an inverted
U-shaped dose–response curve. Naloxone is one example of this
hormetic response (see above paragraph on receptor agonist and
antagonist), and all receptors assessed to date display dose–response
relationships with identifiable mechanisms regulated by agonist
concentration gradients [16].
Efficacy, potency, and concentration–response
relationship
Earlier in the chapter, it was described how the association of a
ligand with a receptor follows the laws of mass-action (eqn 19.1).
The total concentration of receptors [RT
] is equal to the sum of [LR]
plus [R], and if [R] is replaced by [RT
] – [LR] in eqn 19.1, the rela-
tionship becomes:
1
Kd 	T
LR
L 	R 	R (19.3)
which rearranges to:
LR
R
L
L	T 	d	K (19.4)
Also, knowing that the maximum efficacy (E max ) represents the
maximal pharmacological effect of a drug or a ligand, and that
the pharmacological effect (E) of the drug is directly propor-
tional to the percentage of activated receptors [17], then eqn 19.4
becomes:
E
E
L
L E E 	L
L	d
yields
d	max
max
K 	K (19.5)
This equation indicates a sigmoid relationship between the loga-
rithm of the concentration of ligand and the effect (concentration–
response relationship) and that in the absence of ligand, the effect
approaches nil. However, the receptor state theory implies the
existence of a baseline agonist effect (E 0
) of the receptor, and this
baseline effect is taken into consideration in Hill’s equation:
E E 	E 	L
L	d
max 	0
K (19.6)
The concentration–response relationship is usually illustrated
showing the effect as a function of the ligand’s concentration (or
other measure of exposure). The term “potency” characterizes the
concentration of drug needed to obtain a pharmacological effect
that equals 50% of Emax
, that is, the EC50
. The lower the EC50
, the less
drug that is needed to achieve the required effect and the higher the
potency of the drug (Fig. 19.5).
Effective dose, lethal dose, toxic dose,
and therapeutic index
The effective dose (ED50
) corresponds to the dose of drug necessary
to induce the desired effect in 50% of the animals to which it is
administered. Similarly, the lethal dose (LD50
) corresponds to the
dose of drug necessary to induce death in 50% of the animals to
which the drug is administered. In most human trials, the lethal
dose is not established, and is replaced by the toxic dose (TD 50
). The
TD 50 corresponds to the dose of drug necessary to induce toxic
effects in 50% of the patients to whom it is administered. The thera-
peutic index is the ratio LD50
/ED50 or TD50
/ED50
. The higher the
therapeutic index, the safer the drug is considered to be. However,
the therapeutic index does not take into consideration the slope of
the concentration–response curve. Two drugs, A and B, with the
same therapeutic index and given at ED90 (the effective dose in 90%
of the population) can induce a significantly different prevalence of
side effects, and therefore the therapeutic index is not useful as a
measure of a drug’s clinical safety (Fig. 19.6).
α 	α
β
γ
N
GTP
GTP
G-Protein
coupling domain
1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 	9 	10 	11 	12
C
ATP
C
Intracellular
Extracellular
Phospholipid
membrane
cAMP	GDP	GDP
GP 	AC	βAR
N
Figure 19.4 Illustration of the association between the β-adrenergic receptor (βAR), G-proteins (GP), and adenylate cyclase (AC). The βAR and AC
glycoproteins are showing 7 and 12 membrane-spanning segments, respectively. The GP is composed of α, β, and γ subunits and is located on the
intracellular side of the cellular membrane. The conformation of the βAR and the GP are closely linked together. When an agonist ligand binds to the βAR
and changes its conformation, the α subunit of the GP also changes conformation, allowing a GTP (guanosine triphosphate) to bind instead of a GDP
(guanosine diphosphate). The α subunit of the GP is switched on and will stimulate the AC, inducing the production of cAMP (cyclic AMP) from ATP
(adenosine triphosphate).

-- 304 of 1450 --

Chapter 19: General Pharmacology of Anesthetic and Analgesic Drugs 	289
Effect 	Effect
Drug concentration
(logarithmic scale)
Drug concentration
(logarithmic scale)
Buprenorphine 	Buprenorphine
Morphine 	Morphine	Emax M
EC 50 B 	EC50 M
Emax B
(A) 	(B)
Figure 19.5 Illustration of the concentration–response relationships of the two opioids morphine and buprenorphine, the considered measured effect
being analgesia. A. The maximal analgesic effect of buprenorphine (E max B
) is lower than that of morphine (Emax M
). Indeed, morphine is a full μ-opioid
receptor agonist, whereas buprenorphine is a partial μ-opioid receptor agonist. B. The concentration of drug needed to obtain a pharmacological effect
that equals 50% of the maximal effect is lower for buprenorphine (EC 50 B
) than for morphine (EC50 M
).
(A)
Percentage of animals
responding to drug A
Percentage of animals
responding to drug B
100
90
50
100
90
50
EC 50 	EC90 	TD50
Desired
Effect
Side
Effect
Desired
Effect
Side
Effect
Drug dose
(logarithmic scale)
Drug dose
(logarithmic scale)	(B)
EC50 	EC90 TD50
Figure 19.6 Illustration of the limitation of the therapeutic index to establish the safety profile of a drug. Drugs A and B have the same therapeutic index
(ED 50
/TD50
, the ratio of the effective dose in 50% of the population to the toxic dose in 50% of the population) but different dose–response curve slopes.
A. The EC90 (effective dose in 90% of the population) of drug A is significantly different from the TD50
, implying that most of the population will benefit
from drug A without encountering side effects. B. The EC 90 of drug B is similar to the TD50
, implying that a large part of the population that benefits from
drug B will encounter toxic effects.

-- 305 of 1450 --

290 	Section 3: Pharmacology
It is fundamental to recognize that variability between the sensi-
tivity of individuals to drug effects results in a range of doses that
may be effective or toxic in some individuals, and not in others. It
is less self-evident, but equally important, to recognize that
between-occasion variability in response to a fixed dose exists
within an individual. The sum of between-individual and between-
occasion variability causes uncertainty in the dose–response corre-
lation, necessitating attention to the individual response on each
occasion of drug administration.
Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
When drugs are administered to animals two interactions are initi-
ated. The animal’s body initiates its actions on the drug; absorption,
distribution, metabolism, and elimination (ADME). These pro-
cesses are described by the discipline called “pharmacokinetics.” At
the same time, the drug initiates its actions on the body and this
process is described by the discipline called “pharmacodynamics.”
Fundamentals of pharmacodynamics
As discussed above, the interaction of free drug with its receptor
stimulates the effect response by the organism. The association
between receptor–drug concentration and response can differ
between drugs, receptor systems, and occasions. As discussed
above, the effect response is regarded as directly proportional to the
ratio of the receptor–drug concentration and the total receptor con-
centration [17]. Experimental description of the effect response
helps us to illustrate and understand the nature and extent of drug
responses.
One of the purposes of drug effect response modeling is to allow
one to make predictions of the outcome from clinical use of the
drug. Consequently, a good pharmacodynamic model is one that
closely describes the data and allows the development and evalua-
tion of hypotheses about the drug’s effect response at doses not
directly tested. Several routine approaches are made to describe
pharmacodynamic effect response data mathematically.
Where the effect response being measured is induced by a drug–
receptor complex between 20 and 80% of maximal binding capacity
at a single receptor class, then the effect response is often approxi-
mately log-linear in relation to drug concentration. Therefore, in
the absence of a maximal effect being achieved, where E is the effect
response measure, C is the drug concentration, and E 0 is a constant
which represents baseline activity, the effect response measure can
be approximated by a straight line:
E 	E	m 	C	ln 	0 	(19.7)
In single receptor systems where a maximal response is measured
so that the effect response measure approaches an asymptote, the
shape of the response curve may be described in the same form as
for receptor binding (eqn 19.5). Where E max is the maximum achiev-
able response and EC 50 is the concentration at which a response is
achieved that equals 50% of the E max
, the effect response can some-
times be described as:
E E
EC
maxC
C	50
(19.8)
Sometimes, the relationship between drug concentration and
effect response reflects changes in the sensitivity of the signaling
pathway to the presence of the drug. This may be a function of
biological processes such as receptor tachyphylaxis or may be
unrelated to known processes. These cases are not well approxi-
mated by the E max model shown above, but can often be better
described by the following related equation, where h (the Hill coef-
ficient) modifies the steepness of the effect response curve:
E E
EC
maxC
C
h
h 	h
50
(19.9)
when h = 1, this equation reduces to the standard E max model of
eqn 19.8. For example, the dose–response curves illustrated in
Fig. 19.6A versus Fig. 19.6B are examples of curves with the same
Emax and EC50 but with different slopes, hence they would have dif-
fering values for h.
More complex models are needed for drugs, which achieve the
measured effect response through multiple signaling pathways, and
for effect responses, which are not objectively measured on continu-
ous distributions. During the 1950s, Robins and Rall formulated the
“free hormone hypothesis,” which is now generally accepted to be
true both for hormones and for drugs [18]. Robins and Rall pre-
sented a convincing argument that, where a hormone (or drug) is
present in protein-bound and unbound (or free) forms in equilib-
rium, the activity of the drug or hormone at its site of action is pro-
portional to the concentration of the free drug or free hormone in
the plasma, irrespective of the total drug or hormone concentration.
Based on the assumption that free drugs can diffuse readily to their
sites of action, or that there are alternative facilitated or active pro-
cesses that assist drugs to reach their site of action, the free hormone
hypothesis allows the linkage of the plasma concentration to the
drug’s effect response. Consequently, to examine the degree, extent,
and duration of drug effect, a drug’s pharmacokinetics is usually suf-
ficiently described by its disposition in blood, plasma, or serum.
Fundamentals of pharmacokinetics
Most pharmacokinetic processes within mammalian bodies occur as
saturable processes (Michaelis-Menton kinetics): the speed at which a
process occurs has an upper limit, which can be reached, at least in
theory. However, we can simplify the mathematics for pharmacoki-
netics by assuming that processes occur either at constant rates (zero-
order) or at rates constant in proportion to the concentration of
administered drug (first-order). This simplification is usually accept-
able because usually, the concentration range of drugs used is narrow.
Zero-order processes are those in which the change of drug
concentration in a body fluid such as plasma or urine occurs at a
constant rate, irrespective of the concentration of the drug present
in that body fluid. Since this process is constant, the formula for a
straight line can be used to describe the plasma drug disposition
curve. Consequently, the equation for a zero-order elimination has
the following form:
C t 	C 	k t	0 	0 	(19.10)
where C(t) is the concentration of the drug in the sample at any
time t and the zero-order elimination rate (k0
) is the slope of the
curve when concentration is plotted as a function of time and is
called the “zero-order rate equation.” This is the equation for a
straight line, that is, y = b + mx, where y is the concentration in the
sample, C(0) is the y-intercept when x = 0, and x is time.
Sometimes, drug delivery devices or formulations are designed
purposefully to achieve zero-order delivery (constant rate delivery)
to maintain a constant effect of the drug for a prolonged period.
Constant rate delivery is discussed later in this chapter.

-- 306 of 1450 --

Chapter 19: General Pharmacology of Anesthetic and Analgesic Drugs 	291
In contrast to zero-order processes, a first-order process is one
where the rate of change in concentration of drug in a body fluid is
proportional to the concentration of the drug in that fluid at that
time. In this case, to describe the plasma drug disposition curve, an
exponential function is appropriate, conforming to a straight line
on a semi- logarithmic plot:
ln 	ln	C t 	C 	k t	0 	el 	(19.11)
where ln(C) is the natural logarithm of the concentration of drug
in the sample at any time t and the first-order elimination rate
constant (kel
) is the slope. This reduces to
C t 	C 	k t	
0 e el 	(19.12)
which is called the “first-order rate equation.” Many drugs used in
anesthesia and analgesia adhere to first-order pharmacokinetics
with respect to their elimination from the body, and there are
several drugs which are absorbed or eliminated by zero-order
processes (Fig. 19.7).
Half- life of elimination
The plasma elimination half-life of a drug is the time interval
needed for the plasma concentration to be reduced to 50% (half) of
its initial value [19].
Drugs eliminated by zero-order kinetics have half-lives, which
are a function of the initial plasma concentration of the drug at the
beginning of the time interval. Therefore, plasma half-life is not
constant for these drugs and consequently is of no clinical value.
In contrast, drugs eliminated by first-order kinetics have plasma
elimination half-lives, which are fixed at a constant rate per unit
time. The half-life is inversely proportional to the rate of elimina-
tion (kel
) as derived in the following sequence from the first-order
rate equation:
1
2 0 	0 	1 2	
C 	C 	k t	
e el / 	(19.13)
1
2
1 2
	e elk t / 	(19.14)
ln 	/
1
2 1 2	k tel 	(19.15)
0 693 	1 2	. 	/	k tel 	(19.16)
t k
1 2
0 693
/
.
el
(19.17)
Superficially, the concept of elimination half-life appears easy to
understand. However, this is a hybrid parameter and is influenced
by many factors. Both metabolism and elimination commonly
affect the elimination half-life of a drug. Some factors that affect the
rate of metabolism of a drug include the species, the age, the gender,
the bodyweight, disease states (especially cardiac, renal, and hepatic
diseases), and drug interactions.
The time one must wait after administering a drug or changing
a drug dose rate before attaining a new steady-state plasma
concentration, or before attaining complete elimination of a drug,
is a function solely of the half-life of that drug. If the fraction of
drug that is eliminated is FE from the first-order rate equation, we
can derive:
FE 	e k t	
1 	el	
(19.18)
For practical purposes in clinical veterinary practice, approximately
4–5 half-lives must pass before a change in dose achieves a new
steady-state plasma concentration (at about 97% of total). Similarly,
approximately 4–5 half-lives must pass after cessation of adminis-
tration before all drug is effectively eliminated.
Apparent volume of distribution
The mass of drug in the body at any time is proportional to the
concentration measured in the sample space (often the plasma) at
any time and can be expressed as the following equality:
X 	CV	B 	d 	(19.19)
where XB is the mass of drug in the body and Vd is the proportional-
ity constant. This proportionality constant Vd is known as the
“apparent volume of distribution” [20]. The reason that the word
“apparent” is used in the parameter is, although it has units of vol-
ume, it does not actually represent any particular physiological or
anatomical space and cannot be attributed to any such space from
any simple physiological or pharmacokinetic analysis.
It is clear that each sample space will have its own volume param-
eter, so in complex models, each “compartment” will have an indi-
vidual volume, for example, the volume of the circulation is often
referred to as the volume of the “central compartment” (Vc
). The
sum of all volumes, central and peripheral, is often referred to as the
“volume of distribution at steady state” (Vdss
). Understanding and
having an estimate for volume parameters facilitates dose calcula-
tions, for example:
loading dose 	desired c	C 	V 	(19.20)
Just as there are several different volume parameters, there are
also different methods to calculate them. It is important to under-
stand that estimates of a volume parameter might be differently
derived and therefore have different absolute values.
Particular volume parameters are better suited to particular uses;
for example, the apparent volume of the central compartment (Vc
)
is usually used for calculating loading doses for rapidly acting or
toxic drugs such as an induction dose of an anesthetic, whereas the
apparent volume of distribution at steady state (Vdss ) is often used
for calculating constant rate infusions (CRIs) or repeated analgesic
Concentration of drug
Rate of elimination
First-order kinetics
Zero-order kinetics
Figure 19.7 For most drugs, the elimination processes obey saturable
kinetics, but at the concentrations used clinically most drugs approximate
linear “first-order” pharmacokinetics because the elimination processes are
not approaching saturation.

-- 307 of 1450 --

292 	Section 3: Pharmacology
drug dosing regimens (see discussion below in the section on
Constant rate therapy).
Within a species, the apparent volume of distribution varies from
individual to individual. Individual factors which affect the volume of
distribution include the state of hydration, the age and gender of the
animal, the bodyweight and body composition (fat, muscle, and water
ratios), the protein content of serum especially for protein-bound
drugs, the presence of plasma expanders such as lipids after a meal,
and drug interactions (rarely, due to competition for binding sites).
Total body clearance
Total body clearance is defined as the volume of blood from which
drug is completely removed, per unit of time. It is commonly
referred to simply as “clearance” (Cl) and the units for clearance are
volume per time (e.g., mL/min or L/h) often normalized by body
weight (e.g., mL/min/kg). Cl is a measure of the efficiency of drug
elimination and is often directly compared or contrasted with car-
diac output (CO) in the species under examination.
As Cl describes the relationship between the rate of excretion of a
drug and its plasma concentration, if XE is the mass of drug elimi-
nated from the body and equals −XB if no further dose is adminis-
tered, it can be described algebraically as follows:
Cl
X
t
C
d
d
B
(19.21)
Cl X k
C
B el 	(19.22)
However, we have already seen that XB = CVd (eqn 19.19). Therefore,
in this simplified example:
Cl 	k V	el d 	(19.23)
Cl can thereby be understood as a function of both the volume of
distribution and the concentration of drug present in the sample
space. While this is demonstrated to be true for total body Cl, it is
useful to foresee that this can be extrapolated to clearance from indi-
vidual compartments in complicated multi-compartment systems.
Total body Cl is the sum of the clearance achieved by all mecha-
nisms. Although some anesthetic drugs are cleared by the lungs, the
most important two components are usually attributed to hepatic
and renal clearance. Thus, total body Cl can be defined as follows:
Cl 	Cl 	Cl 	Cl	Total body 	H 	R 	other 	(19.24)
where ClH and ClR are the clearances due to hepatic and renal mech-
anisms, respectively. Total body Cl is a very important pharmacoki-
netic parameter and must be comprehensively understood [21].
Hepatic clearance
Consider the flow diagram in Fig. 19.8, where QH is the rate of
organ blood flow through the liver, CA is the concentration of drug
in the arterial blood, CV is the concentration of drug in the venous
blood, and QH
(CA – CV ) is the rate of elimination by the liver.
Then, since
Cl
X
t
C
d
d
E
(19.25)
Cl C
H
A
rate of elimination (19.26)
Cl Q 	C 	C
C
H
H 	A 	V
A
(19.27)
Now, since the fraction of drug removed from the blood on each
pass of the blood through the liver is the extraction ratio (ER), it can
be seen that:
ER C 	C
C
A 	V
A
(19.28)
and hence by substitution:
Cl 	Q ER	H 	H 	(19.29)
Because most body systems and processes are saturable, the liver
in each individual animal has a maximum capacity for removing a
drug from the blood when there are no blood flow constraints.
This capacity for drug elimination by the combination of bio-
transformation and by excretion in the bile is a function of liver
mass and of the amount and activity of the enzymes of drug
metabolism that are present in that individual’s hepatocytes. This
maximum capacity for drug removal from the blood is the intrin-
sic ability of the liver to remove drug; the innate capacity of the
liver to clear drug is known as its “intrinsic clearance” (ClI ). An
understanding of the concept of ClI allows us to redefine the ER in
terms of ClI :
ER Cl
Q 	Cl
I
H 	I
(19.30)
Therefore, by substitution:
Cl Q Cl
Q 	Cl
H
H I
H 	I
(19.31)
A corollary to the free hormone hypothesis is that the availabil-
ity of a hormone or drug for binding to receptors or to enzymes
of biotransformation is proportional to the free concentration. If
fu is the fraction of drug not bound to plasma proteins (i.e., the
free fraction) and ClI′ is the ClI for free drug only, it can be
seen that:
Cl 	fu Cl	I 	I 	(19.32)
For each drug in each individual, a relationship will exist between
the intrinsic hepatic clearance and that animal’s particular hepatic
blood flow. This relationship between drugs is likely to be a con-
tinuum from one extreme, where ClI is very much less than hepatic
blood flow to the other extreme, where hepatic ClI is very much
greater than hepatic blood flow.
If ClI is very much less than hepatic blood flow, then ClI is not a
significant contributor to the denominator in eqn 19.31 above.
CA 	CV
Liver	QH 	QH
QH (CA–CV)
elimination
Figure 19.8 Hepatic clearance of drugs is estimated from hepatic blood
flow (QH
) and the concentration difference between the drug in the hepatic
blood inflow (CA
) and outflow (CV ).

-- 308 of 1450 --

Chapter 19: General Pharmacology of Anesthetic and Analgesic Drugs 	293
Therefore, in this special case, where ClI is much less than hepatic
blood flow, by cancellation it can be seen that:
Cl 	Cl	H 	I 	(19.33)
Since intrinsic hepatic clearance is the product of the fraction
unbound (fu) and the ClI for free drug only, it is clear that in this
special case, hepatic clearance is proportional to the fraction of
drug unbound [22]. It is with drugs for which this special set of
conditions is true that alterations to plasma protein binding of the
drug can significantly affect the rate of that drug’s excretion.
Similarly, for these drugs, induction of hepatic enzymes for bio-
transformation can have a large effect on their elimination rate, as
discussed further below in this chapter.
Now let us consider the alternate case where the intrinsic hepatic
clearance is very much greater than hepatic blood flow. In this case,
it is the contribution of hepatic blood flow to the denominator of
eqn 19.31 that is insignificant. Consequently, in this alternate spe-
cial case:
Cl 	Q	H 	H 	(19.34)
For drugs that conform to this set of special conditions, it is clear
that alterations in hepatic blood flow will profoundly influence
the rate of hepatic clearance. The elimination of such drugs will be
dependent upon factors such as CO and normal structure and
function of hepatic blood vessels. Anesthesiologists understand
that many of the drugs used have significant effects on CO and
regional blood flow and that surgical procedures and pathology
can also lead to marked changes in hepatic blood flow. Therefore,
the rate of elimination of many common anesthetic drugs can
differ from that predicted due to changes in hepatic blood flow
induced by the animal’s pathophysiology or by the procedure
itself.
It can be seen in Example 1 (Box 19.1) that doubling the intrinsic
hepatic clearance for a high ClI drug resulted in an increase in the
rate of hepatic clearance by a factor of only 1.09, whereas in Example
2 (Box 19.2) the doubling of the intrinsic hepatic clearance rate for
a low intrinsic hepatic clearance drug has resulted in a doubling of
its hepatic clearance.
Since the ClI is the product of the fu and the ClI for the unbound
fraction (ClI′), an increase in ClI′ can be caused either by increasing
the displacement of the drug from binding sites and hence increas-
ing the fu, or by inducing the activity or expression of enzymes of
metabolism through enzyme induction. In the former case, chang-
ing the plasma protein binding would result in a change in the vol-
ume of distribution of the drug, whereas in the latter case, a change
in the expression of enzymes on metabolism would result in a
change in the excretion rate constant for the drug.
It is also notable that drugs with a high intrinsic hepatic clearance
have consequently high ERs and therefore they have a low bioavail-
ability (F) when administered by the oral route:
F 	ER	1 	(19.35)
This is known as the “first-pass effect” and is clinically a very real
effect with some drugs when they are administered orally. The
first- pass effect explains why certain drugs require markedly
different dose rates when administered by oral versus parenteral
routes (e.g., opioids).
In clinical anesthesiology, drug interactions are thought to cause
alterations in hepatic clearance. Although there is little published
evidence that such interactions are clinical realities, the clinician
should be aware of which drugs have intrinsically high hepatic
clearance and which drugs have intrinsically low hepatic clearance
in order to correctly anticipate the need to adjust dose rates in cases
where multiple drug protocols are being used. An additional point
to consider is that many drugs have multiple mechanisms involved
in the establishment of their plasma concentrations (e.g., hepatic
biotransformation and redistribution as with propofol); therefore,
the clinical impact of changes in hepatic clearance may not be as
great as predicted.
Box 19.1 Example 1: high hepatic clearance drugs.
This example illustrates what the effect would be of doubling the intrinsic
hepatic clearance rate of a drug where hepatic clearance is very much
greater than hepatic blood flow.
ClI >> QH
, e.g., propranolol
ClI 	L /	7 0. 	min
QH 	L /	1 5. 	min
ER 7 7 1 5
0 82
/ 	.
.
Cl 	Q 	ER	H 	H
L /
1 5 0 82
1 23
. 	.
. 	min
After enzyme induction:
ClI 	L /	14 0. 	min
QH 	L	1 5. 	/min
ER 14 14 1 5
0 9
/ 	.
.
Cl 	Q 	ER	H 	H
L/
1 5 0 9
1 35
. 	.
. 	min
Box 19.2 Example 2: low hepatic clearance drugs.
This example illustrates what the effect would be of doubling the intrinsic
hepatic clearance rate of a drug where hepatic clearance is very much less
than hepatic blood flow.
ClI << QH
, e.g., theophylline
ClI 	L	0 1. /min
QH 	L /	1 5. 	min
ER 0 1 0 1 1 5
0 06
. / 	. 	.
.
Cl 	Q 	ER	H 	H
L
1 5 0 06
0 094
. 	.
. 	/min
After enzyme induction:
ClI 	L /	0 2. 	min
QH 	L /	1 5. 	min
ER 0 2 0 2 1 5
0 12
. / 	. 	.
.
Cl 	Q 	ER	H 	H
L
1 5 0 12
0 18
. 	.
. 	/min

-- 309 of 1450 --

294 	Section 3: Pharmacology
Renal clearance
Renal clearance defines the relationship between the rate of change
of the amount of drug in the urine and the plasma drug concentra-
tion. Algebraically, this can be expressed as follows:
Cl
X
t
C
R
u	d
d 	(19.36)
where ClR is the renal clearance, Xu is the amount of drug in the
urine, and C is the plasma concentration. It is important to note
that the clearance of drug from the plasma by the kidneys is
achieved by the summation of renal filtration and active renal tubu-
lar secretion of drug into the urinary ultrafiltrate. Renal clearance is
diminished from this sum by any tubular resorption of drug that
might occur. Where RF is the rate of renal filtration, RS is the rate of
renal secretion, and RR is the rate of renal resorption:
Cl RF
C
RS
C
RR
C	
R 	(19.37)
It should be noted that drugs bound to plasma proteins cannot be
filtered because of the size-exclusion capability of the glomerulus.
Therefore, the rate of renal filtration is a function of the glomerular
filtration rate (GFR) and the plasma concentration of unbound
drug. Where Cu is the concentration of unbound drug in the plasma:
RF 	GFR Cu 	(19.38)
Since
fu C
C
u 	(19.39)
RF 	GFR 	fu C 	(19.40)
Therefore, in the absence of renal secretion or resorption:
Cl GFR 	fu C
C
R 	(19.41)
Cl 	GFR 	fu	R 	(19.42)
It is obvious that if the fraction unbound is fu = 1 (i.e., if no
drug is bound to plasma proteins) then the renal clearance of the
drug equals the GFR. For practical purposes, this is accepted as
true for the endogenous metabolite of muscle creatinine, for the
inert carbohydrate xenobiotic inulin, and for the radiographic
contrast agent iohexol, which allows their use for measuring renal
filtration rate.
If renal clearance is greater than the product of the fu and the
GFR, then renal secretion must be occurring. If renal clearance is
less than the product of fu and the GFR, then renal resorption must
be occurring.
Absorption
It is usually accepted that drugs formulated for standard delivery
methods are absorbed by concentration-dependent processes that
are linear (i.e., first-order processes). When drugs are administered
by routes other than intravenously, the rate of absorption across
membranes, which are barriers to entry is proportional to the dif-
ference in concentration across the membrane, the area of the
membrane, and its permeability to the drug. Surface area can be
manipulated, for example, by giving a dose in aliquots to multiple
sites. The concentration of drug in the formulation will partially
determine the steepness of the diffusion gradient for drug absorp-
tion (e.g., transdermal fentanyl solution). The concentration of the
drug in the formulation may be altered by dilution prior to admin-
istration or after injection due to water movement as a function of
an osmotic gradient. The rates of lymph and blood flow, CO, and
factors controlling local blood flow can alter the concentration gra-
dient. The proximity of an administration to impermeable bounda-
ries such as fascial planes and fat is an important determinant of the
rate of drug absorption and is to some extent controllable by appro-
priate choice of injection site. These factors can result in unexpected
inefficacy or toxicity with high-potency drugs because of changes
in the rate and extent of drug absorption.
A special case is that of constant rate intravenous infusions, and
some transdermal patch delivery devices. In these cases, the admin-
istration of drug is achieved at a constant rate per unit time (i.e., it
is zero-order). For zero-order delivery when elimination is first-
order, the following equation approximates the predicted plasma
concentration:
C t k
V k 	k t
0
1	d el 	e el
(19.43)
Now, since as time approaches infinity, e-kelt approaches zero, so
under this assumption the concentration at steady state (Css
):
C k
V k
ss
d el
0 	(19.44)
But we have seen earlier that
Cl 	k V	el d 	(19.45)
Hence, by substitution and rearrangement we can determine that
for a drug of known total body Cl, to maintain a target steady-state
plasma concentration, the zero-order infusion rate (k0
) must equal
the elimination rate and can be calculated:
k 	C Cl	0 	ss 	elimination rate 	(19.46)
Bioavailability
The bioavailability (F) of a drug is the fraction of the dose given,
which finds its way into the systemic circulation [23]. It should be
noted that this is not necessarily equal to the fraction of the dose
which is absorbed, since a drug might be absorbed (e.g., across the
gastrointestinal lumen) but removed by metabolism from the portal
blood by the liver or from the pulmonary blood by the lungs, before
reaching the systemic circulation. Similarly, for topically applied
drugs, the skin is an organ of drug metabolism and might biotrans-
form a drug already absorbed before it reaches the circulation.
The bioavailability of a drug administered by a given route is cal-
culated by comparing the total drug exposure of the dose compared
to that achieved when the same dose is delivered intravenously.
However, drugs administered by any route may be incompletely
delivered to the systemic circulation. Even for simple intravenous
injections, a drug may have bioavailability less than 100% if it is
metabolized or excreted by the lungs.
Pharmacokinetics of inhalant anesthetic agents
The absorption, disposition, and fate of inhalant agents, like any
agent administered to an animal, adhere to the principles of

-- 310 of 1450 --

Chapter 19: General Pharmacology of Anesthetic and Analgesic Drugs 	295
pharmacokinetics. However, both absorption and elimination of
inhalational agents are mostly through the lungs and are therefore
influenced by all the factors acting on their alveolar partial pressure
(PA
). The role of the lungs causes inhalant agents to behave differ-
ently from injectable agents, seemingly counterintuitive for the cli-
nician who is more familiar with IV pharmacokinetics. While the
speed of induction will be proportional to the CO for the intrave-
nous hypnotic agents, it will be inversely proportional for the inhal-
ant due to the effect of the high CO on PA . Similarly, an increase in
blood solubility of the inhalant agent, will drive more drug from the
alveoli into the blood, resulting in a decrease in the PA and conse-
quently in a decrease in the speed of induction. These factors are
discussed in detail in Chapter 28.
Linear and nonlinear pharmacokinetics
When the behavior of a drug in the body obeys the principle of
superposition, the pharmacokinetics are said to conform to a linear
pharmacokinetic model. The principle of superposition states that
the response to any combination of inputs must equal the sum of
the responses when input separately. For pharmacokinetics, the
input is the dose, and the response is the sample’s drug concentra-
tion. The clinical effect of linear pharmacokinetics is that plasma
drug concentrations achieved after changes in drug dose are pre-
dictable because, for example, the doubling of the dose would
achieve twice the peak plasma concentration [24]. In contrast to
drugs with zero-order pharmacokinetics, drugs that display first-
order pharmacokinetics are usually approximated well by linear
pharmacokinetic models.
Generally, having linear pharmacokinetics indicates that a drug
behaves predictably; for example, in a stochastic system, each mol-
ecule of the drug introduced to the body moves through the system
independently of all other molecules of the same drug introduced
to the system, as well as any daughter molecules produced through
metabolism [25]. Exceptions do occur and warrant careful clinical
use. For example, the non-steroidal anti- inflammatory (NSAID)
and analgesic drug phenylbutazone, in both the dog and the horse,
appears to have linear pharmacokinetics because it has log-linear
plasma drug concentration decay after any chosen dose. However,
the primary metabolite oxphenbutazone interferes with its parent
moiety’s metabolism, hence this is a non-stochastic system. The
result is that the elimination half-life is dose-dependent and there-
fore the pharmacokinetics of phenylbutazone in these species are
nonlinear [26–28].
The application of clinical pharmacokinetics depends on the
assumptions of linearity and superposition, assumptions which are
violated for many drugs used in anesthesia and pain management.
Nonlinearity may be due to changes wrought by the drug on its own
absorption, distribution, metabolism, or elimination. Changes can
be either immediate or delayed. It is no great challenge to identify
examples of drugs used in the practice of anesthesia and analgesia,
which create non-stochastic pharmacokinetics.
Experiments in pharmacokinetics
Background knowledge of the pharmacokinetics of a drug is
necessary to enable the proper use of that drug in clinical cases.
Therefore, with new drugs, or with older drugs used in new appli-
cations, it is important to adequately describe their pharmacoki-
netics in the target population. Systematic planning and execution
of pharmacokinetic experiments (Box 19.3) will ensure informa-
tive results.
Preparation for the study
To plan the study properly, it is necessary to have a reasonable predic-
tion of its outcome. Therefore, carrying out a pilot study is the foun-
dation of a well-planned pharmacokinetic experiment. Predictions
are needed of the approximate target plasma concentration, the likely
elimination rate constant, the probability of linear pharmacokinetics,
and the likelihood that the formulation might markedly affect the
pharmacokinetics.
The approximate target plasma concentration needs to be known
so that the analytical assay can be planned, developed, and validated.
The assay must be capable of accurately measuring concentrations at
least tenfold lower than the minimum effective concentration. It is
important to have a validated assay prior to initiation of sample col-
lection. Assay validation parameters that are minimally required
include: the inter- and intra-day coefficients of variation at low and
high concentrations, measures of linearity of the standard curve or
curves (or statistical evaluation of nonlinear standard curves),
robustness of the assay, especially between laboratory technicians
and equipment (if different technicians and equipment are likely to
be used), the stability of stock and standard solutions at storage tem-
peratures, the stability of samples at −80 and possibly −20 °C and
the extent of analyte recovery through the sample preparation pro-
cess [29]. The minimum acceptable sample volume must be known,
derived from the intersection of the analyte recovery and the
expected minimum target concentration.
Traditionally, an assay’s lower limit of quantification (LLOQ) was
also defined, to address the loss of analytical precision at low con-
centrations: both drug regulators and analytical chemists still adhere
to this tradition. All methods for setting an LLOQ are arbitrary, hav-
ing been selected using criteria with no formal justification [30].
Furthermore, it has been clearly demonstrated that discarding data
below an arbitrary LLOQ can mislead parameter estimation [31,32].
Therefore, pharmacokineticists in human and veterinary sciences
have developed methods to incorporate all data [32–34]. The use of
data below LLOQ is widely applied in nonlinear mixed effects
(NLME) modeling, which is also called “population pharmacokinet-
ics” (POP-PK) (see below) [35] as it is unbiased and minimizes
information loss. It is wise to ensure that the analyst and the phar-
macokineticist for a project consult on this issue.
The likely elimination rate constant, or elimination half-life,
informs the experimental design. An accepted rule of thumb is that
Box 19.3 Example 3: steps for planning and conducting pharmacokinetic
experiments.
1 Conduct a pilot study OR choose a suitable PK model and determine
parameter estimates from the literature with or without the use of
inter-species allometry.
2 Determine the target plasma concentration.
3 Develop and validate the analytical assay.
4 Choose the dosing strategy: doses, frequency, formulation, routes of
administration.
5 Choose the sampling strategy: sample space, sample frequency and
volume, sample processing, and storage.
6 Choose the study design: consult a statistician if needed.
7 Conduct the study.
8 Analyze the results.
9 Review the results for plausibility and repeat steps 8 and 9 as many
times as needed, changing methodology as needed to establish
robustness of estimates.
10 Return to step 4 and repeat if your assumptions for step 1 were not
realistic.

-- 311 of 1450 --

296 	Section 3: Pharmacology
it is not possible to accurately predict the half-life of a drug unless
several samples are collected over at least 2 to 3 half-lives. If sample
collection is not sufficiently frequent and prolonged, or if the assay
used is not sufficiently sensitive then the experiment can be com-
promised by this lack of planning. Where pilot data in the target
species are unavailable, it is reasonable to use allometric scaling
from data in other species in order to get suitable estimates for
experimental design. Methods that can be used for this allometry
are available [36] and there are examples of the use of such methods
for pharmacokinetic studies in veterinary medicine [37].
Many drugs for anesthesia are quite lipophilic. Their lack of
water 	solubility 	increases 	the 	need 	for 	biotransformation.
Biotransformation processes are often saturable. Furthermore,
most anesthetic drugs have been demonstrated to affect CO and
regional tissue blood flow. Therefore, it is common that anesthetic
drugs have nonlinear pharmacokinetics. The external validity of the
planned experiment, that is, the ability to extrapolate its results to
novel clinical situations, requires the experiment to demonstrate
whether the drug behaves with linear pharmacokinetics. The sim-
plest way to address this question in the first instance is to perform
the experiment at multiple doses [38].
While the pharmacokinetics of an active moiety can be markedly
influenced by the formulation excipients, this is generally not true
for intravenous preparations. If the study is planned to evaluate a
formulation that is to be administered by a route other than intrave-
nous, then attention to the effect of formulation is needed. In order
to completely describe the new formulation’s pharmacokinetics, it is
necessary to have access to the pharmacokinetics of the active moi-
ety after intravenous administration. If these data are not available,
then the study should be planned to include both the intravenous
and the intended routes of administration.
Experimental design and conduct
The background understanding gained from the preparation for the
study will determine the optimum study design. Study types that
are commonly used include the naive pooled data set, the standard
two-stage approach, a pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic (PK-
PD) study, or a POP-PK approach [39]. The study type will influ-
ence the chosen experimental design. The naive pooled study type
is the least desirable. In this study type, all the data from all the
animals are pooled together for data analysis. Taking this approach
loses the opportunity to develop an understanding of differences
between animals within the population or of the variance within a
population. Although suboptimal, naive pooled studies are some-
times necessary when each individual animal is only able to be sam-
pled on one or two occasions. This restriction occurs when the
sample volume is large relative to the circulating blood volume,
where the act of sampling is likely to alter the pharmacokinetics at
subsequent time points, or where the species to be evaluated is dif-
ficult to capture, handle, or restrain. Before planning a study of this
type, the researcher should consider whether a population approach
is possible, since if it is possible then it is likely to result in more
useful outcomes.
Historically in veterinary science, the most frequently used study
type is the standard two-stage (STS) approach. This approach is
now falling out of favor, with most focus being placed on POP-PK
approaches (see below). Usually, for an STS approach, a cohort is
enrolled of similar individuals from the target population. After
dosing, each individual is sampled at the same time points and on
multiple occasions. After a suitable washout period, generally
accepted to be longer than five half-lives of the drug, the cohort can
be dosed again and similarly sampled so as to evaluate either the
dose proportionality or the effect of a chosen manipulation on the
drug’s pharmacokinetics. Typical manipulations include changes in
dose, presence or absence of concomitant medications, or modeled
disease states. The data from each individual are analyzed indepen-
dently and the resulting predicted variables are used to generate
estimates for the mean variables in the population. Routine statisti-
cal comparisons can be made between the results before and after
the manipulation. These statistical comparisons are enhanced by
careful choice of experimental design, paying attention to randomi-
zation, balance, bias elimination, masking, and a priori decisions
for statistical evaluation of the resulting data. Typically, these study
designs lend themselves to statistical evaluation using general linear
models with factors for dose, sequence, animal, period, sequence
plus animal interactions, and other manipulations.
The PK-PD type of study is an embellishment of the STS
approach. In PK-PD studies, data are collected to measure the drug
concentration, and usually, at the same time points, samples or
measurements are also taken to assess one or more effects of the
drug. Ideally, the targeted effect outcome can be evaluated using a
rigorous and objective measure. Alternatively, a surrogate variable
can be used. Surrogate variables used for evaluation of efficacy
include biological markers such as intermediate enzyme activities
or second messenger concentrations. Once again, the data from
each animal are analyzed independently and then combined to gen-
erate estimates for the population variables, but the nature of the
data analysis differs in complexity from PK-only studies. Typically,
PK-PD studies are used to evaluate the correlation between dose
and effect, to better predict ideal doses, and to gain a better under-
standing of the drug effect on pathophysiologic processes. The data
need to support the determination of the pharmacokinetic and sta-
tistical models as in an STS analysis, plus the superimposition of a
model for the relationship between drug concentration and effi-
cacy. Therefore, it is necessary to have “rich” data (i.e., a large num-
ber of sample time points per animal) in order to accurately estimate
a larger number of variables.
The POP-PK approach is an excellent type of study to evaluate
the pharmacokinetics of a drug in clinical cases. For this study type,
a small number of samples, usually from 2–5, is taken from each
case at times convenient for that case; preferably, animals are sam-
pled at different times from one individual to another. In addition,
data are collected from each case which describe covariates that are
hypothesized to have potential to affect the pharmacokinetics of the
drug. Generally, it is expected that 30–50 cases are needed to ade-
quately describe the effect of each covariate. It is necessary to have
access to a previous study, which adequately describes a suitable
model for the pharmacokinetics of the drug. Alternatively, a small
number of individual cases should be sampled sufficiently fre-
quently to adequately describe the drug’s pharmacokinetics. Often,
the population modeling is performed on a subset of the available
data and the resulting model is validated using the data that were
excluded from model development. The POP-PK approach allows
identification of those factors within the clinical population, which
might markedly alter the pharmacokinetics, and hence also alter
the efficacy or toxicity of the drug. Such knowledge allows for an
appropriate evidence-based adaptation of clinical dosing regimens
based on individual animal characteristics.
Data analysis – compartmental models
The availability of off-the-shelf pharmacokinetic analysis software,
including purpose-written programs and spreadsheet plug-ins has

-- 312 of 1450 --

Chapter 19: General Pharmacology of Anesthetic and Analgesic Drugs 	297
all but eliminated the potential barrier (or energy of activation)
needed to initiate pharmacokinetic data analysis. These programs
allow the researcher to enter time and concentration data and, with-
out further intellectual input, to obtain tables of pharmacokinetic
variable estimates. The temptation to take this approach can result
in the rejection of manuscripts from peer-reviewed publications. A
skilled and systematic approach to the review, evaluation, and then
analysis of pharmacokinetic data is necessary, since within this
mathematical discipline, it is necessary to make subjective decisions
and evaluate the legitimacy of assumptions. Evaluation of pharma-
cokinetic data requires the researcher to determine both the ideal
pharmacokinetic structural model and the ideal statistical model
needed to describe the data adequately.
Classical pharmacokinetic models include the one-, two-, and
three- compartment mammillary models with first-order elimina-
tion only from the central compartment and administration only to
the central compartment. Alternatively, noncompartmental mode-
ling (sometimes erroneously referred to as “model-independent
analysis”) is often used. The purpose of any of these modeling
approaches is to evaluate the data so as to derive estimates of phar-
macokinetic variables. These estimates may then be used to predict
outcomes. The accuracy of the predictions will depend on external
validity of the modeling approach taken.
For one-, two- , and three-compartmental models, when plotted
on semi-logarithmic axes, the data appear to draw one, two, or three
straight lines, respectively. Referring to the first-order rate equation
discussed earlier (eqn 19.12), a common representation of these
models is as follows, with i as the number of compartments and ki
the slopes of the ith straight portion of the plasma concentration
versus time curve. At this time, it is useful to begin to consider that
all experiments include some imprecision, or variability, repre-
sented by ϵ:
C t 	A
i
i
k ti	
e 	(19.47)
For compartmental analysis of data, a typical first step is to plot the
time and concentration data on semi-logarithmic axes. Working
with the example of intravenous administration of alfaxalone to a
Greyhound dog [40], the first step is to check that the data can be
described by a single straight line. If so, that suggests that a one-
compartment model is appropriate. In this case (Fig. 19.9), it is clear
that a single straight line does not adequately describe these data.
The line does not “fit to” the data and the residuals; in other words,
the differences between the measured concentration C(t) and the
concentration predicted for each time point are not randomly dis-
tributed around zero. Accordingly, for these data, we would choose
to evaluate them next in a two-compartment model. This example
shows that it is necessary to review each animal’s data graphically in
order to direct the modeling software toward an acceptable solu-
tion. Whether a correct choice has been made is subsequently con-
firmed by statistically comparing the output of the model parameters
for a one- versus a two- (or more) compartment model, often using
Akaike’s Information Criterion (AIC) as the test statistic [41]. The
process of fitting the best model to the data is iterative. We choose
an objective criterion, such as the sum of the squares of the errors
(SSE), and iterate in search for the solution that minimizes this
criterion.
Having chosen the pharmacokinetic model for this example as:
C t 	A 	A	k t 	k t
1 	2
1 	2
	e 	e 	(19.48)
we now must estimate the model’s variables Ai and ki. It should be
noted that it is possible to parameterize compartmental models for
intercepts and rates as described above using the first-order rate
equation, or using the inter-compartmental rate micro-constants,
or in terms of clearance and volume. Some authorities prefer the
latter approach [42].
Some computer software requires manual input of initial esti-
mates for model variables and some packages derive their own ini-
tial estimates. The choice of initial estimates can markedly affect the
outcome of the model fitting. It is good practice to test your model
for robustness to variation in the initial estimates. If different initial
estimates yield different results, then the pharmacokinetic model or
the statistical model may be unsuited to the data.
It is still premature to make the statistical comparison between
models, because first a statistical model must be chosen for this pro-
cess. The statistical model needs to describe the relationship between
the dependent variable (usually, the plasma concentration) and the
distribution of its estimates around the mean value (i.e., variance). A
variety of variance models are used in pharmacokinetic analyses.
Frequently, the SSE is not weighted if the distribution of the residuals
is homoscedastic. If, however, an examination of residuals has a pat-
tern or a nonrandom distribution and there is confidence that the
pharmacokinetic model is sound, then the model for variance
should be changed. The variance model can markedly impact the
resulting parameter estimates. For example, the same alfaxalone data
can be compared with the residuals unweighted or weighted.
For these data, the residuals are evenly scattered with the
weighted SSE model, derived in this case by summing the products
of each squared error and the reciprocal of its corresponding meas-
ured drug concentration (i.e., 1/y) (Fig. 19.10). Having chosen the
pharmacokinetic model and the model for variance, the next step in
data analysis is to repeat the pharmacokinetic modeling for all ani-
mals, using the same chosen statistical model, and then statistically
compare the fits using a test such as AIC. Note that the variance
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.10
1.00
10.00
0 	60 	120 	180 	240
Alfaxalone concentration (mg/L)
Time (min)
–1
–0.5
0
0.5
1.5
1
2
2.5
3.0
3.5
0 	5 	10 	15
Residual
Alfaxalone concentration (mg/L)
Figure 19.9 Plasma concentration versus time on semi-logarithmic axes
and residuals versus concentration, after intravenous administration of
2 mg/kg alfaxalone to a Greyhound dog, showing failure to be approximated
by a single straight line. Source: Adapted from Pasloske et al. [40].

-- 313 of 1450 --

298 	Section 3: Pharmacology
model must be unchanged in order to evaluate the best-fitting phar-
macokinetic structural model. Finally, one must review the model
and evaluate its deficiencies. If necessary, the process must be
repeated from the beginning to correct errors in experimental
design, data collection, analysis, or interpretation [43].
Software for pharmacokinetic model fitting usually offers options
to choose the mathematical approach, the “size” of the steps, and
the number of iterations. Making the wrong decisions can result in
inaccurate or imprecise parameter estimates. The three main math-
ematical approaches are those which directly compare the minimiz-
ing criterion either using random iterations to vary the parameter
estimates (e.g., Monte Carlo) or using a simple step-wise approach
(e.g., simplex), or “gradient” methods, which use either first- or
second-order derivatives of the minimizing criterion (e.g., Gauss–
Newton and Marquardt) [44]. Monte Carlo and simplex methods
are robust to poor initial parameter estimates but tend to be slow
and computer-intensive. With Monte Carlo approaches, care should
be taken not to restrict the number of iterations greatly. For simplex
methods, one should start with large step sizes and gradually reduce
the step size through several runs of the minimization process, to
avoid finding false solutions. The gradient methods tend to require
good initial estimates in order to proceed, but they have high relia-
bility at quickly finding the best solution, if they have had a good
starting point. Data are often analyzed first with a simplex method,
then the results of that analysis can be used as the initial estimates
for a gradient method.
Data analysis – noncompartmental models
After planning and conducting a pharmacokinetic experiment for a
compartmental modeling approach as described above, it is possi-
ble to analyze the data using a noncompartmental approach. This
approach has the advantage of being applicable to both stochastic
and non-stochastic pharmacokinetics and results in the calculation
of volumes of distribution, clearance, and mean time parameters.
Generally, mean time parameters describe the average total time
spent by molecules in a kinetic space after introduction to the kinetic
space. The kinetic space is defined by the experimental design, where
the samples are derived from the sample space and may represent
homogeneous or heterogeneous kinetic spaces. A homogenous
kinetic space is analogous to a single compartment in a compartmen-
tal model, whereas a heterogeneous kinetic space is likened to a
grouping of multiple independent compartments of a complex com-
partmental model. This is an important concept to understand when
interpreting the meaning of mean time parameters [25].
The mathematics routinely used for the noncompartmental
approach [45] are simpler than for compartmental modeling,
although their derivation and hence ease of understanding are more
opaque. It is important to note that many of the frequently used
formulas rely on the same underlying assumption of linear pharma-
cokinetics [25]. The two most important calculated variables used
for parameter estimation in noncompartmental analyses are the
area under the concentration versus time curve from the time of
introduction of the dose (t = 0) until infinity [AUC(0–∞)], and the
area under the first moment of the concentration versus time curve
from the time of dosing (t = 0) until infinity [AUMC(0–∞)]. These
are usually calculated from the data using the linear or log-linear
trapezoidal methods (Box 19.4) [46].
Box 19.4 Example 4: the linear trapezoidal rule.
The area under the plasma concentration versus time curve can be
estimated using the linear trapezoidal rule using the equation:
AUC 0
1
1
2 1
t
n 	C t 	C t t 	t C n
kkel
The accuracy of this estimate depends upon the frequency and choice of
sample time points, the lower limit of quantification of the assay, the
terminal slope of the elimination curve (kel
), and the dimension of the
excluded initial and estimated final triangles. Subtle changes to the
equation are needed for non-intravenous data.
Source: Gibaldi and Perrier [45].
(A) 	(B) 	(C)
0.01
0.10
1.00
10.00
100.00
0.00 	60.00 	120.00 180.00 240.00
–0.15
–0.1
–0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0 	2 	4 	6 	8 	10 	12
Weighted Residual
0.01
0.10
1.00
10.00
100.00
0.00 	60.00 	120.00 180.00 240.00
–0.35
–0.3
–0.25
–0.2
–0.15
–0.1
–0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0 	2 	4 	6 	8 	10 	12
Weighted residual
0.01
0.10
1.00
10.00
100.00
0.00 	60.00 	120.00 180.00 240.00
–2
–1.5
–1
–0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
0 	2 	4 	6 	8 	10 	12
Weighted residual
Figure 19.10 Plasma concentration versus time on semi-logarithmic axes and residuals versus concentration, after intravenous administration of 2 mg/kg
alfaxalone to a Greyhound dog, fitted using a two-compartment model, showing the effect of changing the variance models on the distribution of
residuals: weight[var(y)] = 1/yz, where A. z = 0, B. z = 1, and C. z = 2. Source: Adapted from Pasloske et al. [40].

-- 314 of 1450 --

Chapter 19: General Pharmacology of Anesthetic and Analgesic Drugs 	299
Errors in estimation of these variables result in misleading phar-
macokinetic parameter estimates. The most common error in esti-
mating AUC and AUMC is failing to define the pharmacokinetic
curve for an adequate time period, resulting in a large portion of the
total area being under the portion of the curve that is after the last
quantified time point, that is, the portion of the curve which is
extrapolated. As a rule of thumb, if the percent of the total area that
was extrapolated is greater than 20%, then the experimental design
is inadequate for this approach to data analysis. Parts of the experi-
mental design that need to be re-evaluated in this case are the dura-
tion and frequency of sampling and the sensitivity of the assay.
Noncompartmental modeling can provide the same useful phar-
macokinetic parameters that are used for dose calculation and for
understanding the need for alterations to pharmacokinetics in dis-
eased animals. There are differences of opinion as to whether the
added complexity in data analysis for compartmental modeling
provides great benefit over the arithmetically simpler noncompart-
mental approaches for generation of pharmacokinetic variable
estimates.
Data analysis in more complex models
The examples discussed above are conveniently simple. However,
there are many variations from these simple modeling approaches
that can become necessary to describe data adequately. The com-
partmental models introduced above are used with an implicit
understanding of their many assumptions. The implications of
these assumptions are especially troubling to anesthesiologists. The
most troubling of these assumptions is that there is assumed to be
instantaneous mixing of the drug after introduction to a large,
homogenous central compartment. Pharmacokinetic studies rarely
include sample collection at less than 2 min after an intravenous
dose because it has been demonstrated that complete mixing of a
rapid intravenous bolus dose in the dog is delayed for approxi-
mately 1 min [47]. For intravenous general anesthesia, many of the
important pharmacodynamic events are well underway or com-
pleted within 2 min, but the simple compartmental and noncom-
partmental models do not assist us to understand the rapid
pharmacokinetics changes that drive these events. Physiologically
based pharmacokinetic models (PBPK) make allowances for indi-
vidual organ and tissue blood flow as a proportion of CO.
Appropriate PBPK study designs allow determination of the ER for
each organ of interest and the drug clearance achieved by that organ
and estimation of organ or tissue drug concentration.
For example, the evaluation of propofol administration using
PBPK models led to a better understanding of the effect of slow
intravenous administration on the duration of anesthesia, markedly
altering anesthetic practice and ultimately improving the quality of
transition to a volatile anesthetic [48,49]. Finally, PBPK models
allow understanding of the effect of drug recirculation on the arte-
rial and venous drug concentrations, an understanding that is fun-
damental to modern intravenous anesthesia [47,50].
For drugs where there are multiple points of drug input, such as
complex formulations with nonlinear absorption, data analysis that
uses a deconvolution approach may be needed: the intravenous
pharmacokinetics can be defined independently in each individual,
and then progress to modeling of the absorption phases.
Delayed absorption or distribution can result in a lag between
dosing and changes in concentration, or between appearance of
drug in the sample space and its distribution to the site of action.
This is frequently exemplified by NSAIDs. Modeling NSAIDs in
PK-PD can require inclusion of lag-times in the models [51].
Using POP-PK allows the estimation of large numbers of model
parameters and more careful characterization of the sources of
variance. Purpose-written software with capabilities such as
convolution and deconvolution, parametric and non-parametric
nonlinear mixed effects modeling for data analysis is available but
requires targeted training in its use. Pharmacokineticists with
deep expertise in understanding and implementing such data
analyses are increasingly turning to more code-driven advanced
statistical software.
Constant rate therapy
Constant rate therapy is used when maintenance of a specific
plasma concentration and its consequent effect is desired.
Constant rate therapy is usually achieved intravenously, although
constant rate release devices and systems are also available such as
patches and slow-release injectable agents [52]. To produce a sus-
tained drug plasma concentration, a constant rate of absorption is
required. For simplicity, we will consider that such devices behave
similarly to a constant rate IV infusion. To provide constant rate
therapy and maintain constant plasma concentration using intra-
venous administration, two techniques are usually described [53]:
intermittent bolus injection and continuous infusion. The aim of
both these techniques is to administer drug at a rate equal to its
clearance.
Intermittent boluses
Intermittent IV bolus administration is a very simple technique.
The only equipment needed consists of an IV catheter and a syringe
containing the agents (anesthetic, analgesic, etc.). After injection of
the loading dose, the effect can be maintained by repeated injec-
tions. After each injection, the plasma drug concentration reaches a
peak and then starts decreasing as a function of distribution and
clearance. This decrease of plasma drug concentration will cause
decreasing drug concentration at the effect site and reach a point
where the effect will not be adequate (e.g., patient waking up and
breakthrough pain), and a new bolus will be necessary for the
desired effect to be re-established. With intermittent IV bolus
administration, the drug plasma concentration tends to oscillate
between peaks of relative excess and troughs of ineffective amounts
(Fig. 19.11). In addition to the very poor consistency in the targeted
effect, this technique can result in the administration of a large total
drug dose and consequently can cause a slower and longer recovery
from the effect [53,54].
Continuous rate infusion
By eliminating the peaks and troughs in plasma concentration that
occur with the intermittent boluses technique, continuous infusion
results in a better quality of effect and a decrease in the total drug
dose delivered [53,54]. The cheapest but least accurate way to main-
tain a continuous infusion is to use a bag containing the chosen
agent(s) and an administration set [53,55]. The flow rate can be
adjusted by varying the radius of the infusion tubing using a “regu-
lating” clamp (Fig. 19.12). The infusion rate can be calculated
knowing the volume of each drop (e.g., 20 vs. 60 drops/mL), and
counting the drip rate. In this system, the speed of infusion is
gravity-dependent and depends also on the diameter and length of
the connecting tube, the size of the drops, the size of the cannula,
the viscosity of the agent, the height of the fluid, and the venous
pressure of the patient. As the fluid decreases in the bag, the infu-
sion rate decreases and needs readjusting.

-- 315 of 1450 --

300 	Section 3: Pharmacology
Infusion pumps and syringe drivers allow a more controlled
continuous, accurate, and safer infusion [53,55]. Larger volume
infusions will be accurately administered using an infusion pump
while a syringe driver is more appropriate for smaller volumes at
slower rates.
Potential hazards with infusion pumps and syringe drivers
include a too rapid rate of infusion (administration set not properly
clamped), failure of power (main and battery), infusion of air, and
continued infusion, although cannula has become extravascular.
Modern infusion devices are able to detect some of these faults,
such as air in the system and line blockage. In addition, with syringe
drivers, the clinician should also be aware that the position of the
device is important. If positioned higher than the patient’s heart,
siphoning may occur due to the weight of the liquid [53], which will
result in a larger volume of drug being administered than was pro-
grammed. To avoid this, the device must have protection against the
syringe plunger moving faster than its motor-drive. Conversely, a
syringe driver that is positioned lower than the vascular access port
can result in less agent being infused than programmed, owing both
to the back pressure from the venous bed and to the weight of the
liquid. To avoid these hazards, infusion sets should incorporate a
one-way valve system. Further, if the syringe driver is positioned
vertically, the outlet should be placed downwards to avoid infusing
bubbles formed by gas coming out of solution.
When choosing an infusion pump or a syringe driver, the clini-
cian should consider the following: versatility (choice of bolus or
infusion mode, internal calculator for choice of dosing scheme,
choice of infusion rates, and possibility for using differently sized
syringes, even from different manufacturers), lightweight, clear
display of drug administered and infusion rate, a simple protocol
for initiation or change of infusion rates, a digital interface for
recordkeeping or external automated control, and alarms for tub-
ing disconnect, high pressure, and the presence of bubbles in the
tubing [53,56].
Continuous rate infusion can be classified as being either non-
pharmacokinetic or pharmacokinetic dependent.
Non-pharmacokinetic-dependent infusion systems –
constant rate infusion and rate-controlled infusion
When using a constant rate infusion (CRI), the clinician decides
empirically on an infusion rate and maintains that rate for the whole
procedure. Unfortunately, with such a system, the plasma drug
concentration that is achieved is not controlled. Administration
via CRI is not appropriate for drugs with relatively long elimina-
tion half-lives because the plasma drug concentration will be
low at the beginning of the procedure and may not provide an
adequate effect. Over time, as the mass of drug accumulates in
the animal and the concentration increases, a more adequate
effect is achieved. If the procedure is prolonged, the plasma drug
concentration may reach the point at which undesired side
effects occur (Fig. 19.13). To avoid the initial lack of effect, a load-
ing dose may be administered immediately prior to beginning
the CRI (Fig. 19.14). Unfortunately, in prolonged CRI therapy,
monitoring for undesired clinical effects is the only practical
approach available to alert the clinician to drug accumulation.
Despite these shortcomings, CRI is a useful technique in some
clinical settings, for example, the administration of morphine to
dogs for analgesia or of ketamine in the triple drip anesthesia
technique in horses.
To minimize drug accumulation and the consequent adverse
effects, the clinician can change the drug infusion rate according
to the observed needs of the patient. This technique (rate-
controlled infusion [RCI]) can provide a much smoother anesthe-
sia with lower total drug used, but frequent adjustments might
sometimes be necessary to fine-tune the infusion to the patient’s
needs.
Excessive anesthetic level
10000
9000
8000
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
0 	15 	30 	45 	60 	75 	90 	105 	120
Concentration (ng/mL)
Time (min)
Propofol predicted concentrations
Insufficient anesthetic level
Adequate anesthetic level
Figure 19.11 Simulated plasma concentration of propofol in the dog following repeated bolus (4 mg/kg) injections over time. Propofol is injected every
15 minutes. The shaded area represents the targeted effect area.
A
B
Figure 19.12 “Regulating” clamp used to modify the radius of the infusion
tubing. The wheel (A) allows modification of the radius of the infusion
tubing (B), allowing the speed of the infusion to be varied.

-- 316 of 1450 --

Chapter 19: General Pharmacology of Anesthetic and Analgesic Drugs 	301
Pharmacokinetic-dependent infusion systems
Knowing a specific agent’s pharmacokinetics and its effective
plasma concentration allows development of an infusion scheme,
which targets the desired plasma drug concentration. The tech-
niques for PK-dependent infusion can be either manually con-
trolled using an RCI or a stepped infusion, or electronically
controlled with the help of a computer adjusting the speed of infu-
sion, that is, target-controlled infusion (TCI). The more reliant the
technique is on pre-existing PK data, the more the achieved plasma
drug concentration will depend on the quality and relevance of the
PK model used and the similarities of the patient and the experi-
mental subjects used for initial data collection. Therefore, devia-
tions from the conditions in which the PK data were obtained may
result in unexpected plasma drug concentrations. Deviations that
should be considered include different species, breed, gender, age,
disease state, and concurrent medications.
To maintain a constant targeted plasma drug concentration, that
is, a steady-state plasma drug concentration (Css
), the amount of
drug infused must equal the amount of drug being eliminated. This
can be expressed by the following equation:
maintenance rate 	elimination rate 	(19.49)
Assuming first-order elimination, the mass of drug eliminated
per unit time (the elimination rate) will depend on the plasma drug
concentration at steady state (Css
) of the agent and the Cl (see
eqn 19.46). Therefore, the necessary maintenance infusion rate (k0
)
will depend on both the targeted drug plasma concentration at
4000
Concentration (ng/mL)
	Infusion rate (
μg/kg/min)
Time (min)
Propofol predicted concentrations
3600
3200
2800
2400
2000
1600
1200
800
400
0
2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
0 	15 	30 	45 	60 	75 	90 	105 	120 	135 	150 	165 	195 	210 	225 	240	180
Figure 19.13 Simulated plasma concentration of propofol in the dog during a constant rate infusion over time, derived using the PK simulator PK-SIM
(Specialised Data Systems, Jenkintown, PA, USA) and PK parameters of propofol. The blue line represents the predicted plasma concentration. The green
line represents the infusion rate (200 μg/kg/min). The infusion rate can be based on empirical data or, as in this case, on pharmacokinetic data. Source:
Adapted from Beths [55].
4000
Concentration (ng/mL)
	Infusion rate (
μg/kg/min)
Time (min)
Propofol predicted concentrations
3600
3200
2800
2400
2000
1600
1200
800
400
0
2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
0 	15 	30 	45 	60 	75 	90 	105 	120 	135 	150 	165 	195 	210 	225 	240	180
Figure 19.14 Simulated plasma concentration of propofol in the dog after a bolus injection followed by a constant rate infusion over time, derived using
the PK simulator PK-SIM (Specialised Data Systems, Jenkintown, PA, USA) and PK parameters of propofol. The blue line represents the predicted plasma
concentration. The green line represents the loading dose (2 mg/kg) and the following infusion rate (200 μg/kg/min). The bolus or loading dose and the
infusion rate can be based on empirical data or, as in this case, on pharmacokinetic data. Source: Adapted from Beths [55].

-- 317 of 1450 --

302 	Section 3: Pharmacology
steady state (Css
) and the drug’s total body Cl. As observed with the
non-PK dependent CRI (Fig. 19.13), it will take about 4 to 5 times
the elimination half-life for the plasma drug concentration to
approach its accumulation plateau. Of course, if an estimate of the Vc
is available, a loading dose can also be calculated and administered
before the start of the CRI to reach effective plasma concentration
more rapidly (Fig. 19.14). The clinician must realize that although an
effective targeted plasma concentration has been reached, it will still
take 4–5 half-lives before reaching Css (Fig. 19.15).
To calculate the loading dose, there are two possible methods:
either calculating the dose to fill the central compartment (Vc
) or
calculating the dose to fill the total distribution volume at steady
state (Vss
). With the first method using Vc only, the plasma drug con-
centration obtained will be low while with the second method (Vss
),
there will be an overshoot and an initial increased risk of side effects.
These simple approaches of applied PK are not always suitable
for anesthesia or analgesia and more complex infusion strategies
can better achieve the desired initial blood concentration. Ideal
infusion schemes can be predicted using known PK parameters and
a computer simulation program. The stepped infusion [57–59] con-
sists of a series of CRIs aimed at reaching the targeted plasma drug
concentration as rapidly as possible while neither under- nor over-
shooting (Fig. 19.16). Usually, using a small number of infusion
steps helps to ensure a practical series.
With a stepped infusion, a fast initial infusion is administered to
fill the Vc
, followed by a maintenance infusion, which will be deter-
mined by the desired target or central compartment drug concen-
tration and the drug’s rate of clearance [58]. Unfortunately, like the
CRI system, the stepped infusion system is very rigid and difficult
to adapt to the clinical situation [53,60]. A low target will result in
4000
Concentration (ng/mL)
	Infusion rate (
μg/kg/min)
Time (min)
Propofol predicted concentrations
3600
3200
2800
2400
2000
1600
1200
800
400
0
2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
0 	15
A
B
C
30 	45 	60 	75 	90 	105 	120 	135 	150 	165 	195 	210 	225 	240	180
Figure 19.15 Simulated plasma concentration of propofol in the dog during a constant rate infusion over time (A) or preceded by a bolus of 2 mg/kg (B)
and 4 mg/kg (C), derived using the PK simulator PK-SIM (Specialised Data Systems, Jenkintown, PA, USA) and PK parameters of propofol. The blue line
represents the predicted plasma concentration. The green line represents the loading doses (2 and 4 mg/kg) and the following infusion rate (200 μg/kg/
min). This graph shows that 3–4 half-lives are still necessary to reach the steady-state concentration (Css
), without a loading dose preceding the CRI. The
bolus or loading dose and the infusion rate can be based on empirical data or, as in this case, on pharmacokinetic data. Source: Adapted from Beths [55].
Medetomidine predicted concentrations
2.0
0.36
0.32
0.28
0.24
0.20
0.16
0.12
0.08
0.04
0.00
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0 	15 	30 	45 	60 	75 	90 	105 	120
Concentration (ng/mL)
Time (min)
Infusion rate (
μg/kg/min)
Figure 19.16 Five-step infusion (green line) of medetomidine in the dog with a target blood concentration of 1.7 ng/mL and the predicted plasma
concentration of medetomidine (blue line), derived using the PK simulator PK-SIM (Specialised Data Systems, Jenkintown, PA, USA).

-- 318 of 1450 --

Chapter 19: General Pharmacology of Anesthetic and Analgesic Drugs 	303
inadequate anesthesia while a high target will result in increased
side effects (hypotension, apnea, and delayed recovery).
In 1968, Kruger-Thiemer described an infusion scheme known
as “BET” – for Bolus (loading dose), Elimination (steady-state
rate of infusion according to drug’s elimination), and Transfer
(exponentially decreasing rate to match the redistribution of
drug from the central compartment to peripheral sites) [57]. In
1981, by interfacing a computer with an infusion pump,
Schwilden demonstrated the clinical application of the BET infu-
sion scheme [61]. The first drugs to be administered by this sys-
tem were etomidate and alfentanil in 1983 [62]. The development
of new pumps, computer systems, and infusion rate control algo-
rithms to enable the anesthetist to vary the target plasma drug
concentration followed [63]. The first TCI system was described
by Schuttler et al. in 1988 [64]. It was only 8 years later, in 1996,
that the first commercial TCI system for use with propofol in
humans was launched [65,66].
The fundamental principles and development of the TCI system
were described by Gray and Kenny [67] and Glen [66]. Succinctly, a
TCI system is a computer programmed with a set of PK parameters
(specific for a species and a drug) and coupled with a syringe driver.
The computer pump control algorithm calculates the infusion rate
that is necessary to achieve a blood target concentration. Once the
target blood concentration is achieved, the computer will control
the pump to maintain the blood target concentration.
The speed of infusion is calculated as follows:
infusion rate 	e 	e	t c	C V k 	k 	k	k t 	k t
10 	12
21
13
31 	(19.50)
where Ct is the targeted concentration, Vc is the volume of the
central compartment, t is the time, and k10
, k12
, k21
, k13
, and k31 are
the micro-constants describing the movement of the agent between
the different compartments of the three-compartment model [68].
To begin, a bolus is calculated (Ct × Vc
) and administered. As
illustrated by the equation, if the target is kept constant, the infu-
sion rate will exponentially decrease over time to match the cumu-
lative characteristic of the agent [69]. At any point, the clinician can
choose to modify the target. An increase in target concentration
will result in injection of a calculated bolus dose using the same
equation as above (Vc × Ct
), but where Ct is the difference between
the current C and the new Ct
. It will then be followed by an expo-
nentially decreasing infusion rate, which will be higher than the
original infusion rate. Following a decrease in target concentration,
the infusion will cease until the new target, as predicted by the com-
puter, is reached. Thereafter, an exponentially decreasing infusion
rate will resume, at a lower rate than previously [69]. Examples of
these schemes are illustrated in Figs. 19.17 and 19.18.
The accuracy of a TCI system is dependent upon the PK variables
that have been used to program the device. Consequently, the sys-
tem must be validated before general use in clinical practice. The
evaluation of the predictive performance of a TCI system is carried
out by comparing the drug concentrations predicted by the system
with the measured drug concentrations either in venous or arterial
blood samples taken at various time points during anesthesia, over
a range of target concentrations, according to a methodology which
has been used by many authors [70–80]. This methodology is based
on the calculation of the percentage prediction error (PE%) as the
difference between measured and predicted values expressed as a
percentage of the predicted value [74]:
PE% measured concentration predicted concentration
predictedd concentration 100
(19.51)
Using values of PE% derived at each measurement point, a number
of indices of performance in an individual subject are calculated.
The median prediction error (MDPE%), provides a measure of bias
to indicate whether measured concentrations are systematically
above or below targeted values. The median absolute prediction
error (MDAPE%) measures inaccuracy and gives information on
the typical size of the difference between measured and targeted
concentrations [78,81].
MDPE 	PE 	j 	N	ij 	i	% 	median 	, 	, 	,	1 	(19.52)
where Ni is the number of |PE| values obtained for the ith subject, and
MDAPE 	PE 	j 	N	ij 	i	% 	, 	, 	,	1 	(19.53)
5000
4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
0 	15 	30 	45 	60
Time (min)
Infusion rate (
μg/kg/min)
Concentration (ng/mL)
Propofol predicted concentrations
75 	90 	105 	120
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
Figure 19.17 Simulated plasma concentration of propofol in the dog during a target-controlled infusion (TCI) over time, derived using the PK simulator
PK- SIM (Specialised Data Systems, Jenkintown, PA, USA) and PK parameters of propofol. The blue line represents the plasma concentration with a
propofol target of 4000 ng/mL. The green line represents the exponentially decreasing infusion rate. Source: Adapted from Beths [55].

-- 319 of 1450 --

304 	Section 3: Pharmacology
Two other indices are wobble and divergence, both of which
reflect time-related changes. Wobble measures the total intra-
individual variability in performance error, and divergence
describes any systematic time-related changes in measured concen-
trations away from or toward the targeted concentration. A positive
value indicates a widening of the gap between the predicted and
measured concentrations over time, while a negative value indicates
that the measured concentrations converge on the predicted values.
Information regarding how those can be calculated can be found
elsewhere [73,78,81].
Although no reference values are reported for divergence or
wobble, it has been suggested that the performance of a TCI system
is clinically acceptable if the bias (MDPE%) is not greater than ±10–
20% and the inaccuracy (MDAPE%) falls between 15% and
40% [69,73,76,82]. In veterinary medicine, such systems have been
developed and validated for propofol in the dog [71,83], for alfenta-
nil, propofol, and alfaxalone in the cat [84–88], for lidocaine, alfen-
tanil, and detomidine in the horse [86,89,90], and for propofol in
rabbits [91].
Context-sensitive half-time
Knowledge of the PK of an agent combined with a computer-
driven infusion pump allows for a more precise infusion and easier
titration to effect, which could result in quicker recovery. In fact,
after cessation of the infusion, the duration of drug effect is more
dependent on the PK of the agent than the method of administra-
tion [92]. Moreover, for most of the agents, the time to recovery
increases with the duration of the infusion. This dependence com-
prises the concept of context-sensitive half-time (CSHT), wherein
the context is the variation of the duration of the infusion [93,94].
The CSHT is the time from the end of the infusion necessary for
the plasma’s drug concentration to decrease by 50%. For most
anesthetic agents, after a bolus injection, the duration of their clini-
cal effect is mostly dependent on redistribution of the drug from
the brain to other tissues. After infusion, however, the explanation
of the mechanism for recovery from anesthesia varies [94]. Because
most anesthetic drugs behave according to multiple compartmen-
tal pharmacokinetics, different explanations are needed for differ-
ent durations of infusion. For short-term infusions, the CSHT will
be quite dependent on redistribution (e.g., a short period of thio-
pental administration). For moderate infusion times, the CSHT
will depend on both the drug’s distribution and elimination. For
long infusions where the peripheral compartments (tissues) are
saturated, the CSHT will approach the true elimination half-life of
the drug (t1/2 ) [94].
The CSHTs for some drugs in cats have been described
(Fig. 19.19). Drugs vary in their sensitivity to context; fentanyl is
very context-sensitive, while remifentanil is context insensitive [95].
Regarding alfaxalone, although the infusion rate seems to have little
effect on a 50% decrease in plasma concentration (CSHT), recovery
from alfaxalone anesthesia may necessitate a decrease of the plasma
concentration by 85–95%. In this case, the duration of alfaxalone
infusion has a much more pronounced effect [87]. This is not spe-
cific to alfaxalone and other agents will be context sensitive for
effect needing a decrease by 85–95% of the plasma concentration.
The CSHT is interesting in the clinical setting mostly if it corre-
sponds to the dissipation of a specific observable drug effect (i.e.,
recovery of spontaneous breathing, recovery of the swallowing
reflex, etc.). As this desired clinical effect can occur earlier or later
than the 50% decrease in the concentration of the drug, investiga-
tors often provide the times needed for 20%, 50% (CSHT), and 80%
decrements in drug concentration. The clinician is usually more
interested in the drug concentration at the effect site than in the
plasma [96].
A more general term, which was first described in humans
for the recovery from opioids, is the context-sensitive effect-site
“decrement” time in which the decrease in concentration is mod-
eled specifically for the compartment of the effect site [68,97].
5000
4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
0 	15 	30 	45 	60
Time (min)
Infusion rate (
μg/kg/min)
Concentration (ng/mL)
Propofol predicted concentrations
75 	90 	105 	120
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
Figure 19.18 Simulated plasma concentration of propofol in the dog during a target-controlled infusion (TCI) over time, derived using the PK simulator
PK-SIM (Specialised Data Systems, Jenkintown, PA, USA) and PK parameters of propofol. This graph simulates anesthesia where the clinician, 30 minutes
after targeting a propofol plasma concentration (blue line) of 4000 ng/mL, decided to decrease the level of anesthesia with a new propofol plasma
concentration of 2000 ng/mL. Then 45 minutes later, the anesthesia is deepened by the change to a new propofol plasma concentration (4000 ng/mL). The
green line represents the exponentially decreasing infusion rate for the different plasma concentrations. Note that the infusion stopped at time 30 minutes,
allowing the propofol plasma concentration to decrease from 4000 to 2000 ng/mL. Note the bolus injection given at 75 minutes when the propofol plasma
concentration was once again changed to 4000 ng/mL. Source: Adapted from Beths [55].

-- 320 of 1450 --

Chapter 19: General Pharmacology of Anesthetic and Analgesic Drugs 	305
This parameter allows the clinician to better determine when to
stop an infusion (to enable awakening at the end of a surgery). To
achieve this, the clinician needs to remember the decrease in con-
centration necessary for the recovery (percentage), the duration of
the infusion (context), and the context-sensitive effect-site decre-
ment time required for the necessary decrease [68].
In 2000, Struys et al. [98] compared a TCI system targeting
plasma concentration versus a TCI system targeting the effect-site
concentration. They concluded that targeting the effect-site com-
partment resulted in less variability and greater predictability in the
time to loss of consciousness. They also observed that when target-
ing the effect site, the onset of drug effect was quicker and without
adverse hemodynamic consequences. An effect-site PK parameter
(ke0
) has been incorporated into human TCI systems to reflect the
passage of the drug from the blood to the effect site [99]. The ke0
can be determined during an integrated PK/PD study [100].
Unfortunately, with this method, the ke0 value will be specific for
this set of PK parameters and will result in poor predictions of the
time course of drug effect if one wanted to use it with a different set
of PK parameters [99,101]. To be able to link the ke0 from an inte-
grated PK/PD study to PK parameters determined in another study,
Minto et al. in 2003 introduced the time of maximum effect-site
concentration (tpeak ) [100]. Knowing the tpeak for a specific agent, the
investigator can calculate the value of ke0 that accurately predicts
tpeak when using the set of parameters of interest. With simulations
for thiopentone, remifentanil, and propofol, Minto et al. showed
that the ke0 determined through the tpeak method better approxi-
mated the time course of drug effect than the simple transfer of a ke0
value from one set of PK parameters to another. In 2008, Bras et al.
using the tpeak method, determined the ke0 for propofol (0.7320 min−1
)
and incorporated it to the TCI PK model from Beths et al. [71,102].
The usefulness of integrated PK/PD incorporating effect-site rate
constants and time of maximum effect-site concentration has not
yet been explored extensively in veterinary anesthesiology.
Drug interactions
Combinations of drugs may occasionally result in drug–drug inter-
actions, which can be synergistic, antagonistic, or additive [103].
These interactions can be explained by three mechanisms: physico-
chemical, PK, and PD.
Physicochemical interactions
Physicochemical interactions usually occur when two incompatible
drugs are mixed together in vitro (e.g., pH difference). The interac-
tion can take several forms, including changes in physical stability
of complex formulations, changes in solubility with precipitation,
changes in chemical stability of active or excipient ingredients,
adsorption onto delivery device surfaces, and chelation or chemical
reactions such as reduction or oxidation. These in vitro interactions
may be inconsistent between different formulations of the same
active ingredients, so clinicians should not assume a combination,
which is proven acceptable with particular brands of products will
necessarily be equally acceptable with alternate product brands.
Unless specific data are available as evidence that a particular com-
bination is without interaction, in vitro mixtures should be avoided.
Commonly known incompatibilities are tabulated in former edi-
tions of this book and are listed in most common formularies.
Pharmacokinetic interactions
Interactions during the different PK phases of absorption, distribu-
tion, elimination, or biotransformation are each possible. Some
such interactions are used as a deliberate mechanism to alter drug
action or duration, for example, the inclusion of epinephrine in for-
mulations of lidocaine delays the systemic absorption of the lido-
caine, prolonging its local action. Although drug interactions in
distribution can occur as a function of their interaction at cell mem-
brane transporters in peripheral tissues, these interactions are not
described as having clinical relevance in anesthesia and analgesia.
Alterations to plasma protein binding by competition between
drugs for the same binding site were thought to be of clinical impor-
tance [104] but a more thorough understanding of clearance, as
discussed above, has led to an understanding that displacement of
drugs from protein binding does not markedly alter the unbound
fraction in circulation, and therefore affects elimination rate more
than efficacy [22]. Consequently, there is a need for many clinicians
to “unlearn” the dogma that has been taught, of the potential for
clinical toxicity from drug interactions through displacement from
0
10
20
30 	Fentanyl
Alfentanil
Surfentanil
Remifentanil
Alfaxalone
Time post-infusion
(minutes)
40
50
60 Context-sensitive half-time
0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5
Infusion time (hours)
6 	7 	8 	9 	10
Figure 19.19 Context-sensitive half-time (CSHT) in cats for four opioids and alfaxalone after a bolus and infusion of different duration (0.5–10 hours).
For the four opioids CSHT determination, cats were under isoflurane anesthesia. Source: Adapted from Pypendop et al. [87]; Pypendop [95].

-- 321 of 1450 --

306 	Section 3: Pharmacology
plasma protein binding sites by competition between concomi-
tantly administered drugs.
Drug–drug interactions during biotransformation are generally
more frequent [103] and can be of clinical significance depending
on the hepatic ClI for each drug, as discussed earlier in this chapter.
Hepatic drug metabolism can be studied in vitro or in vivo. In vitro
studies on PK interactions are both time- and cost-effective. They
offer the opportunity to investigate specific biotransformation
pathways under strictly controlled conditions and to investigate the
ability of a drug to alter the metabolism of other drugs. For these
reasons, in vitro studies form part of the screening processes used
by pharmaceutical companies in the selection of new drugs [105–
107]. However, both in vitro and in vivo evidence for drug–drug
interactions in metabolism should be interpreted with care, as there
is a growing understanding of the extent of genetic polymorphism
among individuals or breeds of the same species (e.g., reduced
hepatic metabolism of butorphanol in certain dog breeds) and its
impact on drug metabolism and toxicity [108,109]. The well-
described sensitivity of the rough collies to ivermectin has been
attributed to a frame-shift mutation within the multidrug resistance
(MDR1) gene, which has now been discovered within several other
related breeds of dogs [110–112]. However, the clinical relevance of
this mutation in canine anesthesia has not been demonstrated.
Further, it is not possible to extrapolate drug metabolism evidence
between species as major differences exist in metabolic pathways
and enzyme activities [113,114].
Elimination or clearance of a drug is also subject to drug–drug
interactions. While inhibition of clearance would result in a rise of
the drug concentration, possibly to toxic levels, increases in clear-
ance would result in a decrease of the drug blood concentration and
possibly lack of efficacy and/or therapeutic failure. Both the inhibi-
tion and the induction of drug clearance can affect either the
cytochrome P450 isoenzymes (CYPs) (see Phase I metabolism) or
the transporters (see Phase III metabolism). Clinically important
interactions affecting elimination or clearance are rare.
In addition to those two types of clearance alteration, other
causes have been described. Pharmacokinetic interaction can be
mediated physiologically. For example, it has been well-documented
that during CRI or TCI with drugs of high intrinsic hepatic clear-
ance, increases in CO will result in decreases in plasma drug con-
centration, and consequent changes to efficacy and vice versa. This
alteration in hepatic clearance related to change in CO has been
demonstrated with propofol in humans, sheep, and pigs and likely
occurs with many anesthetics and analgesics [48,115–119].
Pharmacodynamic interactions
Pharmacodynamic interactions result in the modification of the
response of the body to one or more concomitantly administered
drugs. These modifications can be due to mechanisms such as the
alteration of the receptor sensitivity or affinity to one agent by the
other. Alternatively, the production of additive or inhibitory effects
can occur either through action at different effect sites or by actions
through alternative receptor mechanisms. Interactions through PD
mechanisms are common clinical realities, such as the sparing
effect of opioids or α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists on the mini-
mum alveolar concentration (MAC) values of inhalant agents or on
propofol infusion doses. However, when considering clinically
important drug–drug interrelationships, it is worth noting that
interindividual PD variability frequently ranges between 300 and
400% and interindividual variance of PK can be in the order of
70–80% [120,121]. This interindividual PK and PD variability
makes it difficult to identify an unexpected clinical occurrence as
an unwanted drug interaction rather than simply a function of
interindividual variability.
There are two major types of studies developed to assess PD
interactions, either isobolographic analyses or response surface
modeling techniques. Knowledge from studies using these methods
permits dosing decisions designed to maximize or minimize an
interaction. Interactions are often deleterious to clinical case man-
agement, but can also be beneficial (e.g., optimizing speed of induc-
tion of anesthesia, increasing hemodynamic stability at induction
and during maintenance of anesthesia, decreasing time to awaken-
ing, optimizing spontaneous respiration, and minimizing the level
of postoperative pain) [120,122,123].
Isobolographic analyses
Isobolographic studies evaluate the effects of different concentra-
tions of two agents on a specific effect, such as loss of consciousness.
Different dosing pair combinations resulting in the same effect are
evaluated. An isobole can be constructed by drawing a line through
those “iso-effective” combinations. A straight line called the “line of
additivity” or “additive interaction” is drawn between the two con-
centrations for each single agent associated with the same effect
(Fig. 19.20). Synergism is usually associated with a concave-up-
shaped isobole, while infra-additivity is associated with a concave-
down-shaped isobole. One of the main problems with this system is
that the information is only in two dimensions and only gives the
information for a specific effect level (i.e., EC50 or EC95
) [122].
Response surface analyses
To describe a more complete set of effect levels (EC 01
–EC99
), a
response surface is constructed using three-dimensional graphs
that incorporate all the available isoboles for different levels of the
effect (Fig. 19.21). In such a system, every single combination of the
two drugs are points on a surface, the height of which is the drug
effect of interest [124]. Different mathematical approaches have
been described to produce the response surface [125,126]. It has
been proposed that while the mathematical approach of Minto et al.
is appropriate for the analysis of unimodal endpoints (loss of con-
sciousness, return of consciousness), Bol et al.’s approach was better
suited to analyze multimodal endpoint (adequacy of anesthesia
which includes hypnotic and analgesic components) [127]. If one is
studying the interaction between drugs that on their own do not
produce the studied effect, other models have been proposed such
as the Reduced Greco, Fixed C50O Hierarchical, and Scaled C50O
CA
CB
Drug A (mg/mL)
Drug B (mg/mL)
Figure 19.20 Example of an isobole for two agents, A and B, when given
alone (CA and CB) and when given in combination to induce an effect
such as endotracheal intubation. The isobole can take different shapes
depending on the nature of the interaction between the two agents.

-- 322 of 1450 --

Chapter 19: General Pharmacology of Anesthetic and Analgesic Drugs 	307
Hierarchical models [128]. To determine the optimal response,
these models can be used in combination with PK data [129]. In
humans, PK-PD modeling of propofol and different opioids has
been used to maximize the use of both agents [123]. The PK-PD
modeling determines the various optimal propofol-opioid concen-
trations associated with intraoperative adequacy of anesthesia and
the most rapid return to consciousness thereafter. As expected, the
optimal propofol concentration changes with both the opioid used
and the length of infusion [120,123].
Adverse drug reactions
”Adverse drug reactions” (ADRs) and “adverse drug events” (ADEs)
are collective terms which are each used to describe events that
include both undesired effects and inefficacy, relative to the
expected effects after drug administration [130,131]. Evaluation of
ADEs divides them into several categories, although the categories
are not exclusive: dose-related, non-dose- related, dose- and time-
related, time-related, withdrawal, and unexpected inefficacy.
Population variability in drug-response blurs the boundary
between ADEs that are non-dose- related (unexpected events) and
dose-related (inefficacy and toxicity). Toxic events can occur at
unexpectedly low doses in sensitive individuals. Apparent ineffi-
cacy can occur at labeled doses, when the labeled dose is established
using population parameters such as the effective dose for a propor-
tion of the population. For example, in some regulatory territories,
the labeled dose of alfaxalone is its ED90 [132].
Drugs that induce physiological adaptation, receptor down regu-
lation or tachyphylaxis, and enzyme induction or inhibition can
result in time-related undesired effects. These effects can be either
direct or caused by drug interactions, as previously discussed.
Developing tolerance can result in the onset of inefficacy, or upon
their withdrawal unexpected ADEs can occur because of the
unmasking of the adapted physiological changes. Although such
ADEs are rarely recognized in veterinary medicine, some drugs fre-
quently used possess characteristics that lead to these time-related
ADEs (e.g., adrenergic receptor agonists such as clenbuterol [133]
and opiate analgesics) [134].
Voluntary reports of ADEs submitted through voluntary report-
ing schemes are likely to underestimate the true number of ADEs
that occur. Despite this likely underreporting large numbers of
ADEs are reported each year. Within the drug classes of relevance
to the practice of anesthesia and analgesia, the NSAIDs are the
category of drugs about which ADEs are most frequently
reported [131]. Relative to the number of doses used, voluntary
reports of ADEs for anesthetic induction agents such as propofol,
ketamine, and alfaxalone are relatively rare [135].
Regulatory agencies and drug manufacturers endeavor to
assess each ADE and assign a causal probability classification. A
commonly used causality classification is a categorical system that
is subjectively based: certain, probable, possible, unlikely, and
unassessable [130]. Some regulatory jurisdictions use a flowchart
scoring system [136]. Drug products that receive a high number of
“certain” or “probable” assessments are occasionally subject to
regulatory review. For example, a high number of ADEs to an
injectable propofol formulation in Australia in 2004 [137] resulted
in a regulatory review with subsequent mandatory label changes
warning of ADEs.
Drug metabolism
Metabolism of administered xenobiotics can result in their activa-
tion from ineffective prodrugs, transformation or modification of
the extent or nature of their activity or can result in their detoxifica-
tion and facilitate their excretion. Metabolism of drugs, or biotrans-
formation, is classically described as occurring in two phases. A
xenobiotic may be metabolized by either or both of these phases
depending on the physicochemical properties of the drug and the
species of animal. Phase I biotransformations aim to convert fat-
soluble (lipophilic) compounds into water-soluble (hydrophilic)
compounds ready for immediate renal clearance, or to add chemi-
cally reactive sites to a relatively chemically inert molecule so as
to allow further biotransformation. Secondary biotransformation
processes can be either further Phase I reactions or may be conjuga-
tion reactions. In general, conjugation reactions attach the exoge-
nous compound covalently to a substrate, which both increases
the molecular weight and the water solubility of the complex.
Conjugation reactions collectively are called “Phase II reactions.”
The chemical reactions associated with Phases I and II are reported
in Table 19.1 [138–157].
The water-soluble compounds formed during Phases I and II
metabolism need to be transported out of the cells prior to excre-
tion. Some excretion processes are also transcellular, requiring
2
1
0
1
2
3
	Drug A
Drug B
Effect
Figure 19.21 Modeling of a response (effect) surface between two
hypothetical agents, Drug A and Drug B. Source: Adapted from Minto and
Vuyk [122].
Table 19.1 Chemical reactions usually associated with Phase I and Phase II
metabolism.
Phase I 	Phase II
Oxidation – involving CYP 	Glucuronidation
Oxidation – other 	Glycosidation
Reduction 	Sulfation
Hydrolysis 	Methylation
Hydration 	Acetylation
Others: 	Amino acid conjugation
Isomerization 	Glutathione conjugation
Ring cyclization 	Condensation
Dimerization 	Fatty acid conjugation
Transamidation
Decarboxylation
Dethioacetylation
N- Carboxylation
CYP, Cytochrome P450.
Source: Adapted from Gibson and Skett [105].

-- 323 of 1450 --

308 	Section 3: Pharmacology
further transport across biological membranes. These transcellular
transport processes have recently been labeled as a “third phase” or
Phase III of the drug metabolism process [158]. Factors described
as affecting drug metabolism include species, gender, genetics, age,
hormone and disease status, drug–drug interactions, diet, and envi-
ronment (i.e., nearly everything!) [159,160].
Phase I biotransformation
The bulk of the Phase I biotransformation reactions are performed
by a family of enzymes called the cytochrome P450 isoenzymes
(CYPs) which are found mostly in the liver, but also in the gastroin-
testinal tract, skin, brain, lung, kidney, and other tissues [161]. The
CYPs are principally located on the endoplasmic reticulum of the
metabolically active cells and are mainly responsible for oxidation,
reduction, hydrolysis, and hydration reactions, which prepare
xenobiotics for Phase II conjugation reactions.
The CYPs are hemoproteins that exhibit a spectral absorbance
maximum at 450 nm when reduced and complexed with carbon
monoxide. The general reaction catalyzed by the CYPs can be writ-
ten as follows:
NADPH H 	O 	RH 	NADP 	H O ROH	CYP
2
450
2 	(19.54)
where RH represents an oxidizable drug substrate and ROH its
hydroxylated metabolite.
The CYP isoenzymes are a superfamily with a modern classifica-
tion and nomenclature derived from gene cloning and sequenc-
ing [162]. The superfamily is divided into families which are
themselves divided into subfamilies, depending on the percentage
of their genome the CYPs have in common. The enzyme families
are described by an Arabic number, the subfamilies by a capital let-
ter, and a final Arabic number denotes individual enzymes. Many
CYPs have been screened and identified in humans, mice, rats, and
monkeys, and several are now known in dogs, including CYP 1A1,
1A2, 2B11,2E, 2C21, 2C41, 2D15, 3A12, and 3A26 [163,164]. In
dogs, CYP 2B11 has been recognized as being responsible for
propofol hydroxylation and also for the breed differences seen in
propofol metabolism [165,166], whereas CYP3A seems to be the
main contributor to medetomidine metabolism [150].
Induction and inhibition of drug metabolism can lead to
drug–drug interactions. The CYP enzymes are most commonly
responsible for the metabolism-based interactions [103] the phar-
macokinetics of which have been discussed above in this chapter
under hepatic clearance. Induction of enzyme activity results from
several factors: increased synthesis, decreased degradation, activa-
tion of pre-existing components, or a combination of those three
processes [105]. In dogs, phenobarbital increases the activity of
CYPs 2B11, 2C21, and 3A26, rifampin induces CYP 3A26, and
omeprazole induces CYP 1A2 [163]. In the rat, ketamine has been
shown to induce propofol metabolism [167]. Four facts are of
importance for the clinician to remember regarding enzyme induc-
tion: (1) induction is usually a slow process (days to weeks), (2) the
effect on drug concentration can alter treatment outcomes, (3) clin-
ical relevance is mostly confined to drugs with low intrinsic hepatic
clearance, and (4) the process is usually reversible [168].
An inhibitor will result in a decrease in metabolic enzyme activ-
ity. Four main processes have been described, which cause CYP
inhibition: competitive inhibition, noncompetitive inhibition,
uncompetitive inhibition, and mechanism-based inhibition [169].
Inhibition of a biotransformation enzyme is mostly reversible in
nature, but occasionally can be irreversible and lead to permanent
loss of enzyme activity until new enzymes are synthetized [105].
Unlike induction, CYP inhibition is usually an immediate response.
The clinical consequences of enzyme inhibition are usually higher
plasma drug concentrations and/or prolonged elimination half-life,
increasing the risk for accumulation and toxic effects. Table 19.2
contains a non- exhaustive list of veterinary anesthesia-related
agents, which can inhibit CYP isoenzymes.
Phase II biotransformation or conjugation
During this phase, endogenous and xenobiotic metabolites will be
conjugated resulting in products of higher molecular weight and
usually less activity than their substrates. The products of conju-
gation are excreted either by the bile, if they are of high molecular
weight, or in the urine, if they are both of low molecular weight
and high water solubility [162]. Although this phase is generally
seen as enhancing the detoxification effect, in some cases, the
conjugation may result in activated metabolites and increased
toxicity [161].
Different mechanisms are involved in conjugation: glucuronida-
tion, sulfation, methylation, acetylation, amino acid conjugation,
glutathione conjugation, and fatty acid conjugation. Glucuronidation
is quantitatively the most important form of conjugation for drugs
and endogenous compounds in most species and can occur with
alcohols, phenols, hydroxylamines, carboxylic acids, and so on.
Glutathione is regarded as a protective compound in the body for
the removal of potentially toxic electrophilic compounds such as
epoxides, haloalkanes, nitroalkanes, alkenes, and aromatic halo-
and nitro-compounds. Sulfation is a major metabolic pathway for
phenols [170]. The enzymes that facilitate conjugation reactions
belong to a superfamily of enzymes and include sulfotransferases
(SULT), UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGT), and glutathione
S- transferases (GST) [161].
Transport of metabolites (Phase III
biotransformation)
Drug transporters can be found in numerous tissues (intestine,
liver, kidney, and brain) and are involved in absorption, distribu-
tion, and excretion. They are usually transmembrane transporters,
which may aid drug and drug–metabolite movement and they
include P-glycoprotein (P-gp), organic anion transporting polypep-
tide 2 (OATP2), and multidrug resistance-associated protein
(MRP). The MRP and the P-gp are called “ATP-binding cassette
(ABC) transporters” as they utilize the energy from ATP to trans-
port substrates across the cell membrane [161]. In the liver, these
Table 19.2 Non-exhaustive list of anesthesia-related agents with CYP inhibitory
activity in different species.
Drug 	Species 	Reference
Propofol 	Human 	[138–147]
Rat 	[148]
Hamster 	[138,141]
Pig
Medetomidine 	Dog 	[149–151]
Rat 	[149,151]
Fish 	[152,153]
Dexmedetomidine 	Human 	[154–156]
Dog 	[149]
Rat 	[149,157]
Levomedetomidine 	Human 	[155]
Dog 	[149]
Rat 	[149,157]
Atipamezole 	Dog 	[151]

-- 324 of 1450 --

Chapter 19: General Pharmacology of Anesthetic and Analgesic Drugs 	309
transporters are found on the canalicular membrane where they are
involved in the biliary excretion of both parents’ drugs and their
metabolite, and the transporters are also found on the sinusoidal
membrane where they are responsible for the uptake of drugs from
the blood into the hepatocytes [171]. In the kidneys, the organic
anion and cation transport systems are found on brush border and
basolateral membranes of the tubular epithelial cells and are respon-
sible for the secretion of drugs into the urine [161,171].
Just as for the CYPs, transporter activity can be increased or
decreased and can play a role in drug absorption as well as drug
elimination. For example, in humans, fruit juices are well-known
inhibitors of organic anion transporters and result in reduced oral
drug bioavailability. Also in humans, the hepatic and/or renal excre-
tion of digoxin is altered by verapamil and quinidine, which are
potent inhibitors of P-gp. The inhibition of P-gp results in increased
plasma concentration of the cardiac glycoside [171–173].
Isomers and stereoisomers
Although labeled simply with the active drug’s pharmacopeial
name, many of the drug products commonly used contain more
than one form of the active molecule. Drug molecules often are
carbon-based entities, the majority of which have multiple struc-
tural molecular forms, called “isomers.” Isomers can be either con-
stitutional isomers or stereoisomers. Constitutional isomers are
those with the same number and type of atoms, but where the con-
nectivity between the atoms differs (e.g., propane versus cyclopro-
pane). Stereoisomers occur either because of the inflexibility of
carbon–carbon double bonds (cis-trans isomers), or because a car-
bon molecule may have four different covalently bonded moieties,
thus creating one or more chirally active centers (enantiomers and
diastereomers).
Constitutional isomers pose little practical clinical problem, as
drug products rarely contain mixtures of such isomers. Similarly,
because cis-trans isomers usually have major differences in affinity
for drug receptors or metabolizing enzymes, products rarely have
more than a minor contamination of the less active isomer. In con-
trast to non- chiral isomers, chirally active stereoisomers pose a
major consideration for clinical pharmacology, pharmacokinetics,
and anesthesia. There are two types of chiral stereoisomers, enanti-
omers and diastereomers. Enantiomers are chirally active stereoiso-
mers, which have planar symmetry, that is, one form is the mirror
image of the other. Where a molecule has two chirally active cent-
ers, there is a possibility of four isomers. Two of the possible pair-
ings result in symmetry and are stereoisomers, but the other four
pairing permutations do not have planar symmetry and are called
“diastereomers.” Products which contain a mixture of enantiomers
are called “racemic mixtures.”
For stereoisomers, there are two naming conventions, which do
not necessarily align with one another. The R–S system of naming
involves a deliberate orientation of the molecule in space, then
reading the direction of descending atomic mass; clockwise is R,
where R is from the Latin rectus = straight, and anticlockwise is S,
where S is from the Latin sinister = left. Alternatively, if polarized
light rotates to the right when passed through a solution of an enan-
tiomer, then the enantiomer is designated as the dextrorotatory (+)
isomer, while the image is its levorotatory (−) isomer. Many of the
drugs used in anesthesia have chiral isomers and are marketed as
racemic mixtures (e.g., thiopental, ketamine, carprofen, and keto-
profen). The mammalian body is a very chiral environment and
enantiomers can have markedly different efficacy, potency, safety,
and pharmacokinetics [174–178]. Sometimes these differences are
exemplified or altered by unequal binding to albumin [179,180].
Further, for some drugs, the mammalian isomerase enzymes can
convert isomers between forms, but for other enantiomers such
enzyme isomerization is not achieved [181].
As techniques for manufacture of purified enantiomers become
cheaper, products are likely to be marketed as pure enantiomers or
non-racemic mixtures. These products may have different efficacy
and toxicity profiles from their racemic look-alikes, and may
require attention to different dosing regimens, (e.g., medetomidine
versus dexmedetomidine).
The effect of formulation
Most of the drug products we commonly use are not labeled with
information about their contents, other than the name and concen-
tration of the active molecule. The drug products usually contain a
far greater mass of other “ingredients” called “excipients.” The
excipients can have marked effects on drug efficacy and safety.
An example of formulation effects is illustrative of the need for
clinical attention to formulation. The white-colored propofol is for-
mulated as a stabilized emulsion using oil and emulsifiers to pro-
vide a useful formulation that maintains its physical stability for a
suitable shelf life. However, aqueous solutions are preferred for
intravenous use and therefore efforts have been made to formulate
an aqueous solution of propofol. Several successful approaches have
resulted in formulations, which appear initially to have similar
properties to the pioneer milky emulsion [182,183]. However,
aqueous microemulsion formulations have been marketed in sev-
eral countries in which the solubilization was achieved using vari-
ous polyethoxylated detergents. These aqueous preparations have
resulted in reported ADRs such as anaphylaxis and increased pain
on injection [184,185].
Just as isomerization can result in more than one form of the
active drug’s molecule, other variations of form for the active ingre-
dient can markedly alter a drug’s pharmacokinetics. Many oral
drugs are dosed as compressed tablets. The active drug in the tablet
may be the drug’s free base or may be an ionic or organic salt. The
drug may be in a dry amorphous form or may be crystals. Different
salts and different crystal shapes can have markedly different solu-
bilities causing large changes in bioavailability.
The preparation of a consistently performing, effective, and sta-
ble formulation is a high-level pharmaceutical skill. In most major
global territories, the manufacturers of products are regulated by
governing authorities, providing users with assurance that the
product will perform as labeled. In contrast, the adoption of prod-
ucts sourced from unlicensed manufacturers, such as compound-
ing pharmacies, may be problematic. Unlicensed manufacturers are
of unknown skill and their processes and products are not evalu-
ated, reviewed, or approved. In human and veterinary medicine,
there are numerous examples of morbidity and mortality that are
directly attributable to poor knowledge, lack of skill, or unsatisfac-
tory processes of and by compounding pharmacies [186–188].
References
1 Bernard C. Analyse physiologique des proprietes des sytemes musculaire et nerveux au
moyen du curare. Compte Rendu des Siances de l’Academie des Sciences 1856; 43: 825.
2 Adams HR. Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 8th edn. Ames, IA: Iowa State
University Press, 2001: 1201.
3 Heit HA, Gourlay DL. Buprenorphine: new tricks with an old molecule for pain man-
agement. Clin J Pain 2008; 24(2): 93–97.
4 Povoa P, Carneiro AH. Adrenergic support in septic shock: a critical review. Hosp Pract
(1995) 2010; 38(1): 62–73.

-- 325 of 1450 --

310 	Section 3: Pharmacology
5 Goodman LS, Gilman A, Brunton LL. Goodman & Gilman’s Manual of Pharmacology
and Therapeutics. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Medical, 2008: 1219.
6 Sonner JM, Antognini JF, Dutton RC, et al. Inhaled anesthetics and immobility:
mechanisms, mysteries, and minimum alveolar anesthetic concentration. Anesth
Analg 2003; 97(3): 718–740.
7 Barnes PJ. Glucocorticosteroids: current and future directions. Br J Pharmacol 2011;
163(1): 29–43.
8 Mandema JW, Kuck MT, Danhof M. Differences in intrinsic efficacy of benzodiaz-
epines are reflected in their concentration-EEG effect relationship. British J Pharmacol
1992; 105(1): 164–170.
9 Taylor R, Pergolizzi JV, Porreca F, et al. Opioid antagonists for pain. Expert Opin
Investig Drugs 2013; 22(4): 517–525.
10 Yu FH, Catterall WA. Overview of the voltage-gated sodium channel family. Genome
Biol 2003; 4(3): 207.
11 Johnston GA. GABAA receptor pharmacology. Pharmacol Ther 1996; 69(3):
173–198.
12 Traynelis SF, Wollmuth LP, McBain CJ, et al. Glutamate receptor ion channels: struc-
ture, regulation, and function. Pharmacol Rev 2010; 62(3): 405–496.
13 Shang J, Wan Y, Luo C, et al. Cell entry mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2020; 117(21): 11727–11734.
14 Hamming I, Timens W, Bulthuis ML, et al. Tissue distribution of ACE2 protein, the
functional receptor for SARS coronavirus. A first step in understanding SARS patho-
genesis. J Pathol 2004; 203(2): 631–637.
15 Lubbe L, Cozier Gyles E, Oosthuizen D, et al. ACE2 and ACE: structure-based
insights into mechanism, regulation and receptor recognition by SARS-CoV. Clin Sci
(London) 2020; 134(21): 2851–2871.
16 Calabrese EJ, Baldwin LA. U-shaped dose-responses in biology, toxicology, and pub-
lic health. Annu Rev Public Health 2001; 22: 15–33.
17 Ariens EJ. Affinity and intrinsic activity in the theory of competitive inhibition. I.
Problems and theory. Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther 1954; 99(1): 32–49.
18 Robbins J, Rall JE. The interaction of thyroid hormones and protein in biological
fluids. Recent Prog Horm Res 1957; 13: 161–202.
19 Toutain PL, Bousquet-Melou A. Plasma terminal half-life. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2004;
27(6): 427–439.
20 Toutain PL, Bousquet-Melou A. Volumes of distribution. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2004;
27(6): 441–453.
21 Toutain PL, Bousquet-Melou A. Plasma clearance. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2004; 27(6):
415–425.
22 Toutain PL, Bousquet-Melou A. Free drug fraction vs free drug concentration: a mat-
ter of frequent confusion. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2002; 25(6): 460–463.
23 Toutain PL, Bousquet-Melou A. Bioavailability and its assessment. J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 2004; 27(6): 455–466.
24 Thron CD. Linearity and superposition in pharmacokinetics. Pharmacol Rev 1974;
26(1): 3.
25 Veng-Pedersen P. Mean time parameters in pharmacokinetics. Definition, computa-
tion and clinical implications (Part 1). Clin Pharmacokinet 1989; 17(5): 345–366.
26 Dayton PG, Cucinell SA, Weiss M, et al. Dose-dependence of drug plasma level
decline in dogs. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1967; 158(2): 305–316.
27 Maylin GA. Disposition of phenylbutazone in the horse. In: Proceedings of the 20th
Convention of the Association of American Equine Practitioners. Association of
American Equine Practitioners; 1974.
28 Lees P, Taylor JBO, Higgins AJ, et al. Phenylbutazone and oxyphenbutazone distribu-
tion into tissue fluids in the horse. J Vet Pharmacol Therap 1986; 9: 204–212.
29 Ng LL. Reviewer Guidance: Validation of Chromatographic Methods Washington
DC: Food and Drug Administration: Center for Drug Evaluation and Research; 1994.
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/Guidances/UCM134409.pdf
30 Woodward A, Whittem T. The lower limit of quantification in pharmacokinetic anal-
yses. J Vet Pharmacol Therap 2019; 42(6): 585–587.
31 Beal SL. Ways to fit a PK model with some data below the quantification limit. J
Pharmacokinet Pharmacodyn 2001; 28(5): 481–504.
32 Keizer RJ, Jansen RS, Rosing H, et al. Incorporation of concentration data below the
limit of quantification in population pharmacokinetic analyses. Pharmacol Res
Perspect 2015; 3(2): e00131.
33 Henri J, Jacques AM, Sanders P, et al. The present and future of withdrawal period
calculations for milk in the European Union: dealing with data below the limit of
quantification. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2017; 40(2): 116–122.
34 Jelliffe RW, Schumitzky A, Bayard D, et al. Describing assay precision-reciprocal of
variance is correct, not CV percent: its use should significantly improve laboratory
performance. Ther Drug Monit 2015; 37(3): 389–394.
35 Yang S, Roger J. Evaluations of Bayesian and maximum likelihood methods in PK
models with below-quantification-limit data. Pharm Stat 2010; 9(4): 313–330.
36 Mordenti J. Man versus beast: pharmacokinetic scaling in mammals. J Pharm Sci
1986; 75(11): 1028–1040.
37 Fiakpui NN, Hogan DF, Whittem T, et al. Dose determination of fondaparinux in
healthy cats. Am J Vet Res 2012; 73(4): 556–561.
38 Committee for Veterinary Medicinal Products. Guidelines for the Conduct of
Pharmacokinetic Studies in Target Animal Species. London, UK: European Agency for
the Evaluation of Medicinal Products, 2000.
39 Sheiner LB. The population approach to pharmacokinetic data analysis: rationale and
standard data analysis methods. Drug Metabol Rev 1984; 15(1–2): 153–171.
40 Pasloske K, Sauer B, Perkins N, et al. Plasma pharmacokinetics of alfaxalone in both
premedicated and unpremedicated Greyhound dogs after single, intravenous admin-
istration of Alfaxan at a clinical dose. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2009; 32(5): 510–513.
41 Yamaoka K, Nakagawa T, Uno T. Application of Akaike’s Information Criterion (AIC)
in the evaluation of linear pharmacokinetic equations. J Pharmacokin Biopharm 1978;
6(2): 165–175.
42 Sheiner LB, Beal SL. Evaluation of methods for estimating population pharmacoki-
netic parameters. III. Monoexponential model: routine clinical pharmacokinetic
data. J Pharmacokin Biopharm 1983; 11: 303–319.
43 Sheiner LB. Analysis of pharmacokinetic data using parametric models–1: regression
models. J Pharmacokin Biopharm 1984; 12(1): 93–117.
44 Sheiner LB. Analysis of pharmacokinetic data using parametric models. II. Point esti-
mates of an individual’s parameters. J Pharmacokin Biopharm 1985; 13(5): 515–540.
45 Gibaldi M, Perrier D. Noncompartmental analysis based on statistical moment the-
ory. In: Swarback J, ed. Pharmacokinetics, 2nd edn. New York, NY: Marcel Dekker,
1982: 409–417.
46 Purves RD. Optimum numerical integration methods for estimating area-under-the-
curve (AUC) and area-under-the-moment-curve (AUMC). J Pharmacokin Biopharm
1992; 20: 211–226.
47 Avram MJ, Krejcie TC, Niemann CU, et al. Isoflurane alters the recirculatory pharma-
cokinetics of physiologic markers. Anesthesiology 2000; 92(6): 1757–1768.
48 Upton RN, Ludbrook GL. A model of the kinetics and dynamics of induction of
anaesthesia in sheep: variable estimation for thiopental and comparison with propo-
fol. Br J Anaesth 1999; 82(6): 890–899.
49 Upton RN, Ludbrook GL. A physiological model of induction of anaesthesia with
propofol in sheep. 1. Structure and estimation of variables. Br J Anaesth 1997; 79(4):
497–504.
50 Krejcie TC, Avram MJ. Recirculatory pharmacokinetic modeling: what goes around,
comes around. Anesth Analg 2012; 115(2): 223–226.
51 Giraudel JM, Diquelou A, Laroute V, et al. Pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic
modelling of NSAIDs in a model of reversible inflammation in the cat. Br J Pharmacol
2005; 146(5): 642–653.
52 Rowland M, Tozer TN. Constant-rate therapy. In: Troy DB, ed. Clinical
Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics: Concepts and Applications, 4th edn.
Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2011: 259–292.
53 Smith I, White PF. Intravenous anaesthesia delivery and monitoring systems. In:
Hahn CEW, Adams AP, eds. Total Intravenous Anaesthesia. London, UK: BMJ Books,
1998: 98–127.
54 Padfield NL. Administration of intravenous anaesthesia/total intravenous
anaesthesia. In: Tait M, ed. Total Intravenous Anaesthesia, 1st edn. London, UK:
Butterworth Heinemann, 2000: 66–86.
55 Beths T. Total intravenous techniques for anaesthesia. In Pract 2007; 29(7): 410–414.
56 Glass PS, Jacobs JR, Quill TJ. Intravenous drug delivery systems. In: Fragen RJ, ed.
Drug Infusions in Anesthesiology. New York, NY: Raven Press, 1991: 23–62.
57 Kruger-Thiemer E. Continuous intravenous infusion and multicompartment accu-
mulation. Eur J Pharmacol 1968; 4(3): 317–324.
58 Wagner JG. A safe method for rapidly achieving plasma concentration plateaus. Clin
Pharmacol Ther 1974; 16(4): 691–700.
59 Miller DR. Intravenous infusion anaesthesia and delivery devices. Can J Anaesth
1994; 41(7): 639–651.
60 Gepts E. Pharmacokinetic concepts for TCI anaesthesia. Anaesthesia 1998; 53(Suppl
1): 4–12.
61 Schwilden H. A general method for calculating the dosage scheme in linear pharma-
cokinetics. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1981; 20(5): 379–386.
62 Schuttler J, Schwilden H, Stoekel H. Pharmacokinetics as applied to total intravenous
anaesthesia. Practical implications. Anaesthesia 1983; 38(Suppl): 53–56.
63 Alvis JM, Reves JG, Govier AV, et al. Computer-assisted continuous infusions of fen-
tanyl during cardiac anesthesia: comparison with a manual method. Anesthesiology
1985; 63(1): 41–49.
64 Schuttler J, Kloos S, Schwilden H, et al. Total intravenous anaesthesia with propofol
and alfentanil by computer-assisted infusion. Anaesthesia 1988; 43(Suppl): 2–7.
65 Milne SE, Kenny GN. Target controlled infusions. Curr Anaesth Crit Care 1998; 9: 4.
66 Glen JB. The development and future of target controlled infusion. Adv Exp Med Biol
2003; 523: 123–133.
67 Gray JM, Kenny GN. Development of the technology for ’Diprifusor’ TCI systems.
Anaesthesia 1998; 53(Suppl 1): 22–27.
68 Glass SA, Shafer SL, Reves JG. Intravenous drug delivery systems. In: Krehling E, ed.
Miller’s Anesthesia, vol. 1. Philadelphia, PA: Churchill Livingstone Elsevier, 2009: 825.
69 Egan TD. Target-controlled drug delivery: progress toward an intravenous “vaporizer”
and automated anesthetic administration. Anesthesiology 2003; 99(5): 1214–1219.

-- 326 of 1450 --

Chapter 19: General Pharmacology of Anesthetic and Analgesic Drugs 	311
70 Short TG, Lim TA, Tam YH. Prospective evaluation of pharmacokinetic model-
controlled infusion of propofol in adult patients. Br J Anaesth 1996; 76(2): 313–315.
71 Beths T, Glen JB, Reid J, et al. Evaluation and optimisation of a target-controlled infu-
sion system for administering propofol to dogs as part of a total intravenous anaes-
thetic technique during dental surgery. Vet Rec 2001; 148(7): 198–203.
72 Oei-Lim VL, White M, Kalkman CJ, et al. Pharmacokinetics of propofol during con-
scious sedation using target-controlled infusion in anxious patients undergoing den-
tal treatment. Br J Anaesth 1998; 80(3): 324–331.
73 Swinhoe CF, Peacock JE, Glen JB, et al. Evaluation of the predictive performance of a
‘Diprifusor’ TCI system. Anaesthesia 1998; 53(Suppl 1): 61–67.
74 Varvel JR. Measuring the predictive performance of computer-controlled infusion
pumps. J Pharmacokinet Biopharm 2002; 20(1): 31.
75 Slepchenko G, Simon N, Goubaux B, et al. Performance of target-controlled sufentanil
infusion in obese patients. Anesthesiology 2003; 98(1): 65–73.
76 Li YH, Xu JH, Yang JJ, et al. Predictive performance of ‘Diprifusor’ TCI system
in patients during upper abdominal surgery under propofol/fentanyl anesthesia.
J Zhejiang Univ Sci B 2005; 6(1): 43–48.
77 Ko YP, Hsu YW, Hsu K, et al. Simulation analysis of the performance of target-
controlled infusion of propofol in Chinese patients. Acta Anaesthesiol Taiwan 2007;
45(3): 141–147.
78 Coetzee JF, Glen JB, Wium CA, et al. Pharmacokinetic model selection for target
controlled infusions of propofol. Assessment of three parameter sets. Anesthesiology
1995; 82(6): 1328–1345.
79 Vuyk J, Engbers FH, Burm AG, et al. Performance of computer-controlled infusion of
propofol: an evaluation of five pharmacokinetic parameter sets. Anesth Analg 1995;
81(6): 1275–1282.
80 Glen JB. The development of ’Diprifusor’: a TCI system for propofol. Anaesthesia
1998; 53(Suppl 1): 13–21.
81 Varvel JR, Donoho DL, Shafer SL. Measuring the predictive performance of computer-
controlled infusion pumps. J Pharmacokinet Biopharm 1992; 20(1): 63–94.
82 Glass PS. Pharmacokinetic basis of intravenous drug delivery. Baill Clin Anaesth
1991; 5(3): 40.
83 Cattai A, Bizzotto R, Cagnardi P, et al. A pharmacokinetic model optimized by covari-
ates for propofol target-controlled infusion in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2019; 46(5):
568–578.
84 Ilkiw JE, Pascoe PJ, Fisher LD. Effect of alfentanil on the minimum alveolar concen-
tration of isoflurane in cats. Am J Vet Res 1997; 58(11): 1274–1279.
85 Pypendop BH, Ilkiw JE. Assessment of the hemodynamic effects of lidocaine admin-
istered IV in isoflurane-anesthetized cats. Am J Vet Res 2005; 66(4): 661–668.
86 Pypendop BH, Ilkiw JE, Robertson SA. Effects of intravenous administration of lido-
caine on the thermal threshold in cats. Am J Vet Res 2006; 67(1): 16–20.
87 Pypendop BH, Ranasinghe MG, Pasloske K. Pharmacokinetics of alfaxalone infu-
sions, context-sensitive half-time and recovery times in male neutered cats. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2018; 45(5): 630–639.
88 Cattai A, Pilla T, Cagnardi P, et al. Evaluation and optimisation of propofol pharma-
cokinetic parameters in cats for target-controlled infusion. Vet Rec 2016; 178(20): 503.
89 Pascoe PJ, Steffey EP, Black WD, et al. Evaluation of the effect of alfentanil on the
minimum alveolar concentration of halothane in horses. Am J Vet Res 1993; 54(8):
1327–1332.
90 Daunt DA, Dunlop CI, Chapman PL, et al. Cardiopulmonary and behavioral
responses to computer-driven infusion of detomidine in standing horses. Am J Vet
Res 1993; 54(12): 2075–2082.
91 Chen JY, Yi M, Yao SL, et al. Propofol target-controlled infusion modeling in rabbits:
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic analysis. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technolog
Med Sci 2016; 36(3): 428–433.
92 Shafer SL, Varvel JR. Pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and rational opioid
selection. Anesthesiology 1991; 74(1): 53–63.
93 Lagneau F, Tod M, Marty J. Clinical applications of intravenous anaesthetics pharma-
cology: the example of hypnotics and opioids. Ann Fr Anesth Reanim 2004; 23(10):
986–997.
94 Bailey JM. Context-sensitive half-times: what are they and how valuable are they in
anaesthesiology? Clin pharmacokinet 2002; 41(11): 793–799.
95 Pypendop BH. Context-sensitive half-times of fentanyl, alfentanil, sufentanil, and
remifentanil in cats anesthetized with isoflurane obtained by pharmacokinetic
simulation. Presented at the 11th World Congress of Veterinary Anaesthesiology,
Cape Town, 2013.
96 Engbers F. Basic pharmacokinetic principles for intravenous anaesthesia. In: Vuyk J,
Schraag S, eds. Advances in Modelling and Clinical Applications of Intravenous
Anaesthesia. Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology. New York, NY: Kluwer
Academic/Plenum Publishers, 2003: 3–18.
97 Youngs EJ, Shafer SL. Pharmacokinetic parameters relevant to recovery from opioids.
Anesthesiology 1994; 81(4): 833–842.
98 Struys MM, De Smet T, Depoorter B, et al. Comparison of plasma compartment ver-
sus two methods for effect compartment-controlled target-controlled infusion for
propofol. Anesthesiology 2000; 92(2): 399–406.
99 Wakeling HG, Zimmerman JB, Howell S, et al. Targeting effect compartment or
central compartment concentration of propofol: what predicts loss of conscious-
ness? Anesthesiology 1999; 90(1): 92–97.
100 Minto CF, Schnider TW, Gregg KM, et al. Using the time of maximum effect site
concentration 	to 	combine 	pharmacokinetics 	and 	pharmacodynamics.
Anesthesiology 2003; 99(2): 324–333.
101 Gentry WB, Krejcie TC, Henthorn TK, et al. Effect of infusion rate on thiopental
dose–response relationships. Assessment of a pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic
model. Anesthesiology 1994; 81(2): 316–324.
102 Bras S, Bressan N, Ribeiro L, et al. A step towards effect-site target-controlled infu-
sion with propofol in dogs: a k(e0) for propofol. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2009; 32(2):
182–188.
103 Benet LZ, Kroetz DL, Sheiner LB. Pharmacokinetics. In: Molinoff PB, Ruddon RW,
eds. Goodman and Gilman’s The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, 9th edn.
New York, NY: The McGraw-Hill Company, 1996: 3–28.
104 Aarons L. Kinetics of drug–drug interactions. Pharmacol Ther 1981; 14(3):
321–344.
105 Gibson GG, Skett P. Induction and inhibition of drug metabolism. In: Gibson GG,
Skett P, eds. Introduction to Drug Metabolism, 3rd edn. Cheltenham, UK: Nelson
Thornes, 2001: 87–118.
106 Lin JH, Lu AY. Inhibition and induction of cytochrome P450 and the clinical impli-
cations. Clin Pharmacokinet 1998; 35(5): 361–390.
107 Venkatakrishnan K, von Moltke LL, Obach RS, et al. Drug metabolism and drug
interactions: application and clinical value of in vitro models. Curr Drug Metab
2003; 4(5): 423–459.
108 Funk-Keenan J, Sacco J, Wong YY, et al. Evaluation of polymorphisms in the sul-
fonamide detoxification genes CYB5A and CYB5R3 in dogs with sulfonamide
hypersensitivity. J Vet Intern Med 2012; 26(5): 1126–1133.
109 Paulson SK, Engel L, Reitz B, et al. Evidence for polymorphism in the canine metab-
olism of the cyclooxygenase 2 inhibitor, celecoxib. Drug Metab Dispos 1999; 27(10):
1133–1142.
110 Gramer I, Leidolf R, Doring B, et al. Breed distribution of the nt230 (del4)
MDR1 mutation in dogs. Vet J 2011; 189(1): 67–71.
111 Geyer J, Doring B, Godoy JR, et al. Frequency of the nt230 (del4) MDR1 mutation
in Collies and related dog breeds in Germany. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2005; 28(6):
545–551.
112 Mealey KL, Bentjen SA, Gay JM, et al. Ivermectin sensitivity in collies is associated
with a deletion mutation of the mdr1 gene. Pharmacogenetics 2001; 11(8):
727–733.
113 Fink-Gremmels J. Implications of hepatic cytochrome P450-related biotransforma-
tion processes in veterinary sciences. Eur J Pharmacol 2008; 585(2–3): 502–509.
114 Sharer JE, Shipley LA, Vandenbranden MR, et al. Comparisons of phase I and phase
II in vitro hepatic enzyme activities of human, dog, rhesus monkey, and cynomolgus
monkey. Drug Metab Dispos 1995; 23(11): 1231–1241.
115 Takizawa D, Hiraoka H, Nakamura K, et al. Influence of the prone position on
propofol pharmacokinetics. Anaesthesia 2004; 59(12): 1250–1251.
116 Takizawa D, Nishikawa K, Sato E, et al. A dopamine infusion decreases propofol
concentration during epidural blockade under general anesthesia. Can J Anaesth
2005; 52(5): 463–466.
117 Takizawa E, Ito N, Ishizeki J, et al. The effect of positive end-expiratory pressure
ventilation on propofol concentrations during general anesthesia in humans.
Fundam Clin Pharmacol 2006; 20(5): 489–492.
118 Myburgh JA, Upton RN, Grant C, et al. Epinephrine, norepinephrine and dopamine
infusions decrease propofol concentrations during continuous propofol infusion in
an ovine model. Intensive Care Med 2001; 27(1): 276–282.
119 Kurita T, Morita K, Kazama T, et al. Influence of cardiac output on plasma propofol
concentrations during constant infusion in swine. Anesthesiology 2002; 96(6):
1498–1503.
120 Lichtenbelt BJ, Mertens M, Vuyk J. Strategies to optimise propofol-opioid anaesthe-
sia. Clin Pharmacokinet 2004; 43(9): 577–593.
121 Vuyk J. TCI: supplementation and drug interactions. Anaesthesia 1998; 53(Suppl 1):
35–41.
122 Minto C, Vuyk J. Response surface modelling of drug interactions. Adv Exp Med
Biol 2003; 523: 35–43.
123 Vuyk J. Clinical interpretation of pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic propofol-
opioid interactions. Acta Anaesthesiol Belg 2001; 52(4): 445–551.
124 Short TG, Ho TY, Minto CF, et al. Efficient trial design for eliciting a
pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic model-based response surface describing the
interaction between two intravenous anesthetic drugs. Anesthesiology 2002; 96(2):
400–408.
125 Minto CF, Schnider TW, Short TG, et al. Response surface model for anesthetic drug
interactions. Anesthesiology 2000; 92(6): 1603–1616.
126 Bol CJ, Vogelaar JP, Tang JP, et al. Quantification of pharmacodynamic interactions
between dexmedetomidine and midazolam in the rat. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2000;
294(1): 347–355.

-- 327 of 1450 --

312 	Section 3: Pharmacology
127 Mertens MJ, Olofsen E, Engbers FH, et al. Propofol reduces perioperative remifenta-
nil requirements in a synergistic manner: response surface modeling of periopera-
tive remifentanil-propofol interactions. Anesthesiology 2003; 99(2): 347–359.
128 Heyse B, Proost JH, Schumacher PM, et al. Sevoflurane remifentanil interaction:
comparison of different response surface models. Anesthesiology 2012; 116(2):
311–323.
129 Manyam SC, Gupta DK, Johnson KB, et al. Opioid-volatile anesthetic synergy: a
response surface model with remifentanil and sevoflurane as prototypes.
Anesthesiology 2006; 105(2): 267–278.
130 Edwards IR, Aronson JK. Adverse drug reactions: definitions, diagnosis, and man-
agement. Lancet 2000; 356(9237): 1255–1259.
131 Hampshire VA, Doddy FM, Post LO, et al. Adverse drug event reports at the United
States Food and Drug Administration Center for Veterinary Medicine. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2004; 225(4): 533–536.
132 Emmerich I, Ungemach F. Neue Arzneimittel für Kleintiere 2008. Tierärztliche
Praxis Kleintiere 2009; 6(2009).
133 Thompson JA, Eades SC, Chapman AM, et al. Effects of clenbuterol administration
on serum biochemical, histologic, and echocardiographic measurements of muscle
injury in exercising horses. Am J Vet Res 2012; 73(6): 875–883.
134 Stanton-Hicks M, Wüst HJ, Koch U, et al. Experimental tachyphylaxis: development
of a continuous epidural dog model. In: Wüst H, Stanton-Hicks M, eds. New Aspects
in Regional Anesthesia, 4th edn. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 1986: 32–38.
135 APVMA. Report of Adverse Experiences for Veterinary Medicines and Agricultural
Chemicals, Calendar Year 2009. Canberra, Australia: Australian Pesticides and
Veterinary Medicines Authority, 2010.
136 Kramer MS, Leventhal JM, Hutchinson TA, et al. An algorithm for the operational
assessment of adverse drug reactions: I. background, description, and instructions
for use. J Am Med Assoc 1979; 242(7): 623–632.
137 APVMA. Report of Adverse Experiences, 2004 Calendar Year, Veterinary Medicines.
Canberra, Australia: Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority, 2005.
138 Janicki PK, James MF, Erskine WA. Propofol inhibits enzymatic degradation of
alfentanil and sufentanil by isolated liver microsomes in vitro. Br J Anaesth 1992;
68(3): 311–312.
139 Chen TL, Ueng TH, Chen SH, et al. Human cytochrome P450 mono-oxygenase
system is suppressed by propofol. Br J Anaesth 1995; 74(5): 558–562.
140 McKillop D, Wild MJ, Butters CJ, et al. Effects of propofol on human hepatic micro-
somal cytochrome P450 activities. Xenobiotica 1998; 28(9): 845–853.
141 Lejus C, Fautrel A, Malledant Y, et al. Inhibition of cytochrome P450 2E1 by propo-
fol in human and porcine liver microsomes. Biochem Pharmacol 2002; 64(7):
1151–1156.
142 Inomata S, Nagashima A, Osaka Y, et al. Propofol inhibits lidocaine metabolism in
human and rat liver microsomes. J Anesth 2003; 17(4): 246–250.
143 Yang LQ, Yu WF, Cao YF, et al. Potential inhibition of cytochrome P450 3A4 by
propofol in human primary hepatocytes. World J Gastroenterol 2003; 9(9):
1959–1962.
144 Osaka Y, Inomata S, Tanaka E, et al. Effect of propofol on ropivacaine metabolism in
human liver microsomes. J Anesth 2006; 20(1): 60–63.
145 Baker MT, Chadam MV, Ronnenberg WC. Inhibitory effects of propofol on
cytochrome P450 activities in rat hepatic microsomes. Anesth Analg 1993; 76(4):
817–821.
146 Gemayel J, Geloen A, Mion F. Propofol-induced cytochrome P450 inhibition: an
in vitro and in vivo study in rats. Life Sci 2001; 68(26): 2957–2965.
147 Yamazaki H, Shimizu M, Nagashima T, et al. Rat cytochrome P450 2C11 in liver
microsomes involved in oxidation of anesthetic agent propofol and deactivated by
prior treatment with propofol. Drug Metab Dispos 2006; 34(11): 1803–1805.
148 Chen TL, Wang MJ, Huang CH, et al. Difference between in vivo and in vitro effects
of propofol on defluorination and metabolic activities of hamster hepatic
cytochrome P450-dependent mono-oxygenases. Br J Anaesth 1995; 75(4):
462–466.
149 Beths T, Glen JB, Reid J, et al. The inhibitory effect of medetomidine and its enanti-
omers on canine and rat liver microsomal propofol metabolism ’in vitro’. Presented
at the World Congress of Veterinary Anaesthesiology, University of Tennessee,
September 2003.
150 Duhamel MC, Troncy E, Beaudry F. Metabolic stability and determination of
cytochrome P450 isoenzymes’ contribution to the metabolism of medetomidine in
dog liver microsomes. Biomed Chromatogr 2010; 24(8): 868–877.
151 Baratta MT, Zaya MJ, White JA, et al. Canine CYP2B11 metabolizes and is inhibited
by anesthetic agents often co-administered in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2010;
33(1): 50–55.
152 Lennquist A, Celander MC, Forlin L. Effects of medetomidine on hepatic EROD
activity in three species of fish. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 2008; 69(1): 74–79.
153 Lennquist A, Hilvarsson A, Forlin L. Responses in fish exposed to medetomidine, a
new antifouling agent. Mar Environ Res 2010; 69(Suppl): S43–S45.
154 Kharasch ED, Hill HF, Eddy AC. Influence of dexmedetomidine and clonidine on
human liver microsomal alfentanil metabolism. Anesthesiology 1991; 75(3):
520–524.
155 Kharasch ED, Herrmann S, Labroo R. Ketamine as a probe for medetomidine stere-
oisomer inhibition of human liver microsomal drug metabolism. Anesthesiology
1992; 77(6): 1208–1214.
156 Rodrigues AD, Roberts EM. The in vitro interaction of dexmedetomidine with
human liver microsomal cytochrome P4502D6 (CYP2D6). Drug Metab Dispos
1997; 25(5): 651–655.
157 Pelkonen O, Puurunen J, Arvela P, et al. Comparative effects of medetomidine enan-
tiomers on in vitro and in vivo microsomal drug metabolism. Pharmacol Toxicol
1991; 69(3): 189–194.
158 Coleman MD. Drug biotransformational systems – origins and aims. In: Coleman
MD, ed. Human Drug Metabolism, 2nd edn. Chichester, UK: Wiley-Blackwell, 2010:
13–22.
159 Gibson GG, Skett P. Factors affecting drug metabolism: internal factors. In: Gibson
GG, Skett P, eds. Introduction to Drug Metabolism, 3rd edn. Cheltenham, UK:
Nelson Thornes, 2001: 119–45.
160 Gibson GG, Skett P. Factors affecting drug metabolism: external factors. In: Gibson
GG, Skett P, eds. Introduction to Drug Metabolism, 3rd edn. Cheltenham, UK:
Nelson Thornes, 2001: 146–170.
161 Xu C, Li CY, Kong AN. Induction of phase I, II and III drug metabolism/transport
by xenobiotics. Arch Pharm Res 2005; 28(3): 249–268.
162 Chang GW, Kam PC. The physiological and pharmacological roles of cytochrome
P450 isoenzymes. Anaesthesia 1999; 54(1): 42–50.
163 Trepanier LA. Cytochrome P450 and its role in veterinary drug interactions. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2006; 36(5): 975–985.
164 Martignoni M, Groothuis GM, de Kanter R. Species differences between mouse, rat,
dog, monkey and human CYP-mediated drug metabolism, inhibition and induc-
tion. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol 2006; 2(6): 875–894.
165 Court MH, Hay-Kraus BL, Hill DW, et al. Propofol hydroxylation by dog liver
microsomes: assay development and dog breed differences. Drug Metab Dispos
1999; 27(11): 1293–1299.
166 Hay Kraus BL, Greenblatt DJ, Venkatakrishnan K, et al. Evidence for propofol
hydroxylation by cytochrome P4502B11 in canine liver microsomes: breed and gen-
der differences. Xenobiotica 2000; 30(6): 575–588.
167 Chan WH, Chen TL, Chen RM, et al. Propofol metabolism is enhanced after repeti-
tive ketamine administration in rats: the role of cytochrome P-450 2B induction. Br
J Anaesth 2006; 97(3): 351–358.
168 Coleman MD. Induction of cytochrome P450 systems. In: Coleman MD, ed. Human
Drug Metabolism, 2nd edn. Chichester, UK: Wiley-Blackwell, 2010: 65–92.
169 Coleman MD. Cytochrome P450 inhibition. In: Coleman MD, ed. Human Drug
Metabolism, 2nd edn. Chichester, UK: Wiley-Blackwell, 2010: 93–124.
170 Gibson GG, Skett P. Pathways of drug metabolism. In: Gibson GG, Skett P, eds.
Introduction to Drug Metabolism, 3rd edn. Cheltenham, UK: Nelson Thornes, 2001:
1–36.
171 Mizuno N, Niwa T, Yotsumoto Y, et al. Impact of drug transporter studies on drug
discovery and development. Pharmacol Rev 2003; 55(3): 425–461.
172 Hedman A, Angelin B, Arvidsson A, et al. Interactions in the renal and biliary elimi-
nation of digoxin: stereoselective difference between quinine and quinidine. Clin
Pharmacol Ther 1990; 47(1): 20–26.
173 Hedman A, Angelin B, Arvidsson A, et al. Digoxin-verapamil interaction: reduction
of biliary but not renal digoxin clearance in humans. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1991;
49(3): 256–262.
174 Mather LE, Duke CC, Ladd LA, et al. Direct cardiac effects of coronary site-directed
thiopental and its enantiomers: a comparison to propofol in conscious sheep.
Anesthesiology 2004; 101(2): 354–364.
175 Larenza MP, Knobloch M, Landoni MF, et al. Stereoselective pharmacokinetics of
ketamine and norketamine after racemic ketamine or S-ketamine administration in
Shetland ponies sedated with xylazine. Vet J 2008; 177(3): 432–435.
176 Larenza MP, Ringer SK, Kutter AP, et al. Evaluation of anesthesia recovery quality
after low-dose racemic or S-ketamine infusions during anesthesia with isoflurane in
horses. Am J Vet Res 2009; 70(6): 710–718.
177 Lipscomb VJ, AliAbadi FS, Lees P, et al. Clinical efficacy and pharmacokinetics of
carprofen in the treatment of dogs with osteoarthritis. Vet Rec. 2002; 150(22):
684–689.
178 Arifah AK, Landoni MF, Frean SP, et al. Pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics
of ketoprofen enantiomers in sheep. Am J Vet Res 2001; 62(1): 77–86.
179 Lapicque F, Muller N, Payan E, et al. Protein binding and stereoselectivity of non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Clin Pharmacokinet 1993; 25(2): 115–123.
180 Rahman MH, Maruyama T, Okada T, et al. Study of interaction of carprofen and its
enantiomers with human serum albumin-II. Stereoselective site-to-site displace-
ment of carprofen by ibuprofen. Biochem Pharmacol 1993; 46(10): 1733–1740.

-- 328 of 1450 --

Chapter 19: General Pharmacology of Anesthetic and Analgesic Drugs 	313
181 Jamali F, Lovlin R, Aberg G. Bi-directional chiral inversion of ketoprofen in
CD-1 mice. Chirality 1997; 9(1): 29–31.
182 McIntosh 	MP, 	Rajewski 	RA. 	Comparative 	canine 	pharmacokinetics-
pharmacodynamics of fospropofol disodium injection, propofol emulsion, and
cyclodextrin-enabled propofol solution following bolus parenteral administration. J
Pharm Sci 2012; 101(9): 3547–3552.
183 Trapani G, Latrofa A, Franco M, et al. Inclusion complexation of propofol with
2-hydroxypropyl-beta-cyclodextrin. Physicochemical, nuclear magnetic resonance spec-
troscopic studies, and anesthetic properties in rat. J Pharm Sci 1998; 87(4): 514–518.
184 Lee SJ, Kim SI, Jung BI, et al. Suspected anaphylactic reaction associated with micro-
emulsion propofol during anesthesia induction. J Korean Med Sci 2012; 27(7):
827–829.
185 Jung JA, Choi BM, Cho SH, et al. Effectiveness, safety, and pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic characteristics of microemulsion propofol in patients undergo-
ing elective surgery under total intravenous anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth 2010; 104(5):
563–576.
186 Desta B, Maldonado G, Reid H, et al. Acute selenium toxicosis in polo ponies. J Vet
Diagn Invest 2011; 23(3): 623–628.
187 Kairuz TE, Gargiulo D, Bunt C, et al. Quality, safety and efficacy in the ‘off-label’ use
of medicines. Curr Drug Saf 2007; 2: 89–95.
188 Gershman MD, Kennedy DJ, Noble-Wang J, et al. Multistate outbreak of
Pseudomonas fluorescens bloodstream infection after exposure to contaminated
heparinized saline flush prepared by a compounding pharmacy. Clin Infect Dis 2008;
47(11): 1372–1379.

-- 329 of 1450 --

314
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: T he Sixth E dition of L umb and J ones	. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
Anticholinergic drugs are commonly used in veterinary anesthesia to
treat and/or prevent anesthetic and preanesthetic bradycardia, decrease
airway and salivary secretions, dilate the pupil, block vagally mediated
reflexes (viscerovagal, oculocardiac, and Branham), and block the
effects of parasympathomimetic drugs. Historically, inhalant anes-
thetics such as diethyl ether produced profound parasympathetic
effects that resulted in hypersalivation and bradycardia. As such,
anticholinergics were consistently used preoperatively to counteract
these unwanted adverse effects. Modern inhalant anesthetics have
lesser effects on the autonomic nervous system, making the indis-
criminate use of anticholinergic drugs less popular. The administra-
tion of an anticholinergic drug as part of a patient’s premedication
should be based on a thorough knowledge of the drug’s benefits and
risks, taking into account the drugs to be co-administered, the patient’s
species, age, and disease status, and the procedure being performed.
History
Plants such as deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna) (Fig. 20.1),
henbane (Hyoscyamus niger), mandrake (Mandragora officinalis),
and Datura species contain naturally occurring tropane alkaloids
(atropine, hyoscyamine, and scopolamine) in concentrations that
are potentially toxic to most species. For example, ingesting
3–5 nightshade berries may prove lethal to a person. Despite this
risk, extracts from these plants have been used since ancient times
for their anesthetic, mydriatic, antidiarrheal, and analgesic properties.
In the 1830s, atropine was isolated from deadly nightshade, and in
the 1880s hyoscine was isolated from henbane. These break-
throughs paved the way for a clearer understanding of how the
autonomic nervous system functions and the eventual discovery of
the neurotransmitter acetylcholine [1,2]. The anticholinergic prep-
arations used in modern veterinary anesthesia have a relatively high
margin of safety by comparison.
General pharmacology
Modern anticholinergics exert their effects by competitively antago-
nizing acetylcholine at postganglionic muscarinic cholinergic recep-
tors in the parasympathetic nervous system. This has led some to
prefer the use of the term antimuscarinics to differentiate the drugs
that only act as antagonists at muscarinic receptors from some natu-
rally occurring compounds that can non-specifically antagonize
both muscarinic and nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Muscarinic
receptors have five subtypes, classified as M1
–M5
, based on the order
in which they were cloned [3]. Intracellular signaling by activation of
the different subtypes occurs via coupling to multiple G-proteins,
with single receptor subtypes being capable of activating more than
one G-protein in the same cell [4]. The muscarinic receptors can be
placed into two groups based on the primary G-protein to which
they couple: M1
, M3
, and M5 couple with G q/11
-type proteins and have
an excitatory action. M2 and M4 couple with Gi/o
-type proteins which
are inhibitory. There is also evidence that M1
, M2
, and M3 receptors
can cause actions via non-G-protein mechanisms, such as protein
kinase [5]. In addition to being able to activate different G-proteins,
the muscarinic receptor subtypes show a tissue-specific anatomic
distribution, and physiologic response (Table 20.1) [6–10].
Atropine and glycopyrrolate, the anticholinergics most com-
monly used in veterinary anesthesia, are relatively unselective in
their binding to muscarinic receptor subtypes. Different tissue
types, however, appear to have different responses to clinically
administered doses of these drugs (Table 20.2) [11]. Receptors in
20 Anticholinergics
Phillip Lerche
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 314
History, 314
General pharmacology, 314
Specific anticholinergic drugs, 316
B Atropine, 316
Glycopyrrolate, 317
Drug combinations, 317
References, 317

-- 330 of 1450 --

Chapter 20: Anticholinergics 	315
salivary, cardiac, and bronchial tissues are more sensitive than those
in the urinary and gastrointestinal tracts.
Anticholinergic effects in the heart are mediated by pre- and
postsynaptic M 2 receptors located in the sinoatrial and atrioven-
tricular nodes and also in the atrial myocardium. Systemic anticho-
linergic drug administration typically leads to an increase in
sinus rate, acceleration of atrioventricular nodal conduction, and
increased atrial contractility. The increase in heart rate may result
in tachycardia and tachydysrhythmias, which may be unwanted,
particularly if these changes result in decreased cardiac output
(CO) or significantly increased myocardial oxygen consumption.
Routine use of anticholinergics should be avoided in patients with
hypertrophic or restrictive forms of cardiomyopathy.
Sometimes, worsening of bradycardia may occur immediately
following anticholinergic administration. This paradoxical effect
has been postulated to be due to more rapid blockade of presynaptic
M1 receptors that inhibit the negative feedback mechanism, resulting
in a transient increase in acetylcholine release and further slowing
of the heart rate [12]. When this occurs in the clinical setting,
waiting a few minutes or repeating the dose of anticholinergic
administered will typically induce blockade of postsynaptic M2
receptors, resulting in the desired increase in heart rate.
Bronchodilation and reduced airway secretions via M2 and M3
receptor antagonism can decrease airway resistance and the likelihood
of airway obstruction, but can contribute to hypoventilation and, the-
oretically, decreased arterial oxygen tension as a result of increased
anatomic deadspace. This is unlikely to be clinically relevant when
a patient is breathing 100% oxygen. Additionally, in many species,
the viscosity of the airway secretions increases as the volume is
decreased following anticholinergic administration, potentially
offsetting any benefit with respect to reducing airway secretions.
In the eye, cholinergic fibers originating from cranial nerve III
innervate the circular muscles (sphincter pupillae) of the iris that con-
trol pupil diameter, and also the ciliary muscle that controls the shape
of the lens, facilitating accommodation. Topical application of anticho-
linergic drugs to the cornea blocks the action of acetylcholine at both
of these sites and results in mydriasis and cycloplegia. This has been
well documented for atropine in numerous species, including sheep,
goats, cats, and horses [13–17], and for glycopyrrolate in rabbits [18].
Topical application of anticholinergic drugs has also been shown to
acutely increase intraocular pressure (IOP) caused by drainage angle
closure in cats [15], but not in sheep and horses [13,17]. These mixed
findings have led some to suggest that this route of administration
should be avoided in patients with pre-existing elevations of IOP or
those predisposed to developing angle-closure glaucoma.
The potential to induce mydriatic and cycloplegic effects with
systemic (i.e., either intravenous [IV] or intramuscular [IM])
administration of anticholinergics is lower than with topical admin-
istration and is probably drug and dose-dependent. Scopolamine, a
drug rarely used in veterinary medicine, appears to have the most
potent ocular effects when administered systemically, followed by
atropine and finally glycopyrrolate. There are few data for any
species to suggest that systemic administration of atropine or glyco-
pyrrolate at clinically relevant doses for the treatment of reflex or
drug-induced bradycardia would cause adverse effects in patients
with glaucoma. Both drugs can, however, decrease tear production,
resulting in corneal drying [19,20].
Anticholinergics that cross the blood–brain barrier, such as sco-
polamine and atropine, also have the potential to induce sedation
and prolong anesthetic recovery when administered systemically
via M1 receptor antagonism. In the case of atropine, however, its
Figure 20.1 Deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna) plant with berries.
Table 20.1 Muscarinic receptor subtypes, cellular response, tissue location, and
physiologic responses in mammals.
Receptor 	Cellular
response
Tissue location 	Physiologic response
M1 	Stimulation 	CNS 	Modulation of memory and
learning
Analgesia
Cardiovascular 	↑ Heart rate
↑ Inotropy
Modulates vascular tone
Gastrointestinal 	↑ H+ secretion in stomach
↑ Salivation
M 2 	Inhibition 	Lungs 	Bronchoconstriction
Cardiovascular 	Bradycardia, atrioventricular block
↓ Inotropy
Vasodilation
M 3 	Stimulation 	CNS 	Insulin homeostasis
Emesis
Ocular 	Mydriasis
Airway smooth
muscle
Bronchoconstriction
↑ Secretions
Gastrointestinal 	↑ H+ secretion in stomach
↑ Salivation
↑ Peristalsis
M 4 	Inhibition 	CNS 	Dopamine regulation
Locomotion modulation
Heart 	Modulates high-voltage-activated
Ca2+ channels
Modulates K + channels
M5 	Stimulation 	CNS 	Specific action not fully elucidated
CNS, central nervous system; H +, hydrogen ions.
Table 20.2 Comparison of clinical effects of systemically administered atropine
and glycopyrrolate.
Drug 	Antisialagogue
effects
Heart rate
increase
Smooth muscle
relaxation
Ocular
effects
Atropine 	+ 	+ + + 	+ + 	++
Glycopyrrolate 	+ + 	+ 	+ + 	0

-- 331 of 1450 --

316 	Section 3: Pharmacology
sedative potential is negligible when clinically relevant doses are
administered.
Anticholinergics (M 3 ) are effective antisialogogues in monogas-
trics. In ruminants, however, salivation is not inhibited completely;
rather, the saliva becomes more viscous to the point where the
thickened, ropy saliva may pose a risk of causing airway obstruction.
Routine anticholinergic use is therefore not recommended in rumi-
nants, with the exception of treating intraoperative bradycardia.
Although the dose of an anticholinergic required to decrease
gastrointestinal motility via blockade of M 3 receptors is higher than
that required to treat bradycardia, there is some risk of gastrointes-
tinal ileus following administration. This may lead to symptoms of
colic in horses, hence the routine use of anticholinergics is generally
avoided in this species [21]. As with ruminants, anticholinergic use
in horses should be reserved for treating intraoperative bradycardia.
In monogastrics, anticholinergics have been shown to decrease lower
esophageal sphincter function, which may lead to an increased risk
of gastroesophageal reflux and associated complications such as
aspiration pneumonia, esophagitis, and esophageal stricture [22].
Specific anticholinergic drugs
Atropine
Pharmacology
Atropine 	is 	a 	racemic 	mixture 	of 	S(–)-hyoscyamine 	and
R(+)-hyoscyamine, with the S(–) isomer (previously designated as
levo or l-) being responsible for the majority of the drug’s activity.
The atropine molecule has a lipid-soluble tertiary amine structure
consisting of a tropic acid ester linked to an organic base (see
Fig. 20.2), and it easily crosses the blood–brain and blood–placenta
barriers [23].
Onset of action after IV and IM atropine administration is
approximately 1 and 5 min, respectively, in dogs, with an increase in
heart rate lasting for about 30 min [24]. Other body systems are
generally affected for one to several hours, although mydriasis after
topical administration can persist for up to 3 days.
The metabolism of atropine varies between species. Atropine is
rapidly cleared by atropine esterase, which is present in the plasma,
and hydrolyzes the parent compound to inactive tropic acid.
Atropinase levels are not the same across animal species [25].
Rabbits can eat the leaves of the usually toxic deadly nightshade
with impunity because they have the ability to metabolize atropine-
like compounds rapidly via a plasma esterase, atropinase, which
may render typical clinical doses ineffective. Not all rabbits possess
large amounts of this enzyme, hence the full picture of how this
species metabolizes atropine is yet to be elucidated [25]. In cats and
rats, hepatic and renal esterases contribute to atropine’s clearance
from the plasma, while in dogs up to 90% may be excreted
unchanged by the kidneys [26,27].
Clinical use
Atropine is mostly used to prevent or treat bradycardia associated
with anesthesia. IM and IV dosing are preferred over the subcutane-
ous route by most anesthesiologists in order to maximize absorption
and minimize onset time.
Cardiac rhythm disturbances associated with atropine adminis-
tration can be pronounced [28]. Transient bradycardia and second-
degree atrioventricular block are common parasympathomimetic
effects that tend to occur more frequently with administration of
lower doses [29]. Evidence suggests that these paradoxical effects
result from the initial blockade of presynaptic peripheral M 1 recep-
tors that normally inhibit acetylcholine release. This causes a tran-
sient increase in acetylcholine prior to the onset of atropine-induced
postsynaptic M 2 receptor blockade [12]. The resulting bradycardia
(with or without atrioventricular block) typically resolves sponta-
neously with establishment of postsynaptic blockade, or upon
administration of a supplemental dose of drug. In sheep, unex-
pected bradycardia has been reported after administration of a
higher dose (0.08 mg/kg IV) of atropine [30]. It surprisingly
resolved after administration of edrophonium, the reasons for
which are not clear (see Table 20.3 for dose ranges).
Dose-dependent tachycardia is frequently observed following
atropine administration [24]. The mean dose required to increase
heart rate by 50% in conscious dogs was reported to be approxi-
mately 0.04 mg/kg IV [24]. Greater increases in heart rate may be
observed in patients with high pre-existing vagal tone, a phenome-
non called “excess tachycardia.” In addition, occasional premature
ventricular contractions have also been reported in dogs but are not
necessarily proportional to the magnitude of tachycardia [29].
Although transient tachycardia is generally well tolerated in normal
healthy veterinary patients, atropine should be used with caution in
those who may be adversely impacted by tachycardia, such as
patients with hypertrophic or restrictive forms of cardiomyopathy.
Atropine is commonly used prior to administration of choliner-
gic drugs such as neostigmine and edrophonium when reversing
neuromuscular blockade (see Chapter 26). Additionally, atropine
has historically been recommended during cardiopulmonary-
cerebral resuscitation (CPCR). The role and effectiveness of atro-
pine use in CPCR have been reviewed as part of the RECOVER
initiative [31] (see Chapter 5). After a review of the literature, the
authors found that atropine had neither a positive nor negative
effect on whether patients had return of spontaneous circulation
during CPCR. Atropine is, however, still considered useful in cases
where cardiac arrest may be due to high vagal tone, and the
RECOVER guidelines state that it can be administered after
CH2
NCH3
CH2 	CH2OH	CH
CH 2 	CH2	CH
Atropine
O
OH
C
N
Glycopyrrolate
H3 C 	CH3
C
O
CHOCOCH
Figure 20.2 Chemical structures of muscarinic antagonists. Source: Adapted
from Stoelting and Hillier [11], with permission.
Table 20.3 Dose ranges for atropine and glycopyrrolate IV or IM (mg/kg).
Animal 	Atropine 	Glycopyrrolate
Cats and dogs 	0.02–0.04 	0.005–0.01
Horses 	0.02–0.04 	0.0025–0.005
Ruminants 	0.04–0.08 	0.0025–0.005
Pigs 	0.04–0.08 	0.0025–0.005
Rabbits 	— 	0.01 IV, 0.1 IM

-- 332 of 1450 --

Chapter 20: Anticholinergics 	317
initiating basic life support when the underlying electrocardiogram
shows asystole or pulseless electrical activity. Atropine can be deliv-
ered via the endotracheal tube at two to three times the usual IV
dose if venous access has not been established prior to cardiopul-
monary collapse.
Glycopyrrolate
Pharmacology
Glycopyrrolate is a synthetic quaternary ammonium compound
that is poorly lipid soluble, making it difficult for the molecule to
cross the blood–brain or blood–placenta barriers [23]. The molecule
consists of a mandelic acid ester linked to an organic base (see
Fig. 20.2). Glycopyrrolate has four times the potency of atropine.
The onset of action of glycopyrrolate is slightly slower than that
of atropine, usually occurring within a few minutes. In people, the
duration of action is similar to that of atropine but in conscious
dogs, the cardiovascular effects lasted for approximately 1 h, which
was longer than those associated with atropine [32]. Hepatic metab-
olism of glycopyrrolate has been demonstrated in mice and rats, as
has limited biotransformation via the liver in dogs, with the main
metabolite, M9, being inactive [33]. Glycopyrrolate is otherwise
cleared from the plasma relatively rapidly, with most of it being
excreted unchanged in the urine.
Whereas topical glycopyrrolate has been shown to readily induce
persistent mydriasis and cycloplegia in rabbits [18], systemic
administration of clinically relevant doses is reported to have mini-
mal effects on ocular parameters in dogs [34,35].
In people, the purported benefit of glycopyrrolate over atropine
is its improved cardiovascular parameters with less risk of tachycar-
dia. This is not the case in dogs, where drug effects on the cardio-
vascular system are similar between the two anticholinergics [29].
The effect of glycopyrrolate on gastrointestinal motility has been
evaluated in anesthetized dogs and horses. Motility was decreased
for up to 30 min in dogs and the duration of decreased motility in
horses was dose-dependent, lasting for over 6 h after a 0.005 mg/kg
IV dose [36,37]. Development of colic postoperatively in horses is
multifactorial and antimuscarinic drug administration may be a
contributing factor. Of 17 horses that received glycopyrrolate intra-
operatively, one subsequently showed signs of colic [38,39].
Clinical use
Glycopyrrolate is mostly used to treat or prevent bradycardia in
the perioperative period. It can also be used to counteract the cho-
linergic effects when reversing neuromuscular blockade with a
cholinergic drug such as neostigmine, and in some countries, the
two drugs are combined in a single preparation for this purpose. It
is not used as an emergency drug in CPCR when atropine is avail-
able owing to its longer onset time. See Table 20.3 for dose ranges.
Drug combinations
Anticholinergics are water soluble and have historically been used in
premixed combinations of preanesthetic medications in small ani-
mal anesthesia such as “BAG” (butorphanol, acepromazine, and gly-
copyrrolate) and “superBAG” (buprenorphine, acepromazine, and
glycopyrrolate). Anticholinergics are often selected to counteract the
bradycardia associated with the use of α2
-adrenergic receptor ago-
nists. Clinically, it is important to determine whether the bradycar-
dia is a baroreceptor response to an increase in arterial blood
pressure secondary to peripheral vasoconstriction, or is due to cen-
trally mediated suppression of sympathetic output with accompany-
ing low blood pressure. Increasing the heart rate in the face of arterial
vasoconstriction has the potential to decrease CO further while
significantly increasing myocardial oxygen consumption [40].
CO is usually not significantly improved when dogs are sedated
with dexmedetomidine compared with dexmedetomidine and
atropine. The routine use of atropine was not recommended by the
authors owing to the detection of cardiac arrhythmias when atropine
was co-administered and lack of any clear benefit [41]. Similarly,
Monteiro et al. found no benefit in sedating cats with dexmedeto-
midine and atropine versus dexmedetomidine alone, although CO
was not measured [42]. The rationale for use of an anticholinergic
with an α2 - adrenergic receptor agonist when preceding general
anesthesia (versus sedation) has yet to be critically evaluated.
Following the use of α2 -adrenergic receptor agonists, if the arte-
rial blood pressure is low, administration of an anticholinergic may
be considered to counter bradycardia and improve blood pressure.
However, if bradycardia is secondary to decreased sympathetic
nervous system activity, antagonism of parasympathetic influence
on the sinus node may not cause improvement in heart rate. In
those cases, administration of a sympathomimetic agent (e.g.,
ephedrine), or reversal of the α2 -adrenergic receptor agonist, may
be beneficial.
It is important to consider that adverse effects of combinations of
drugs may be additive. For example, anticholinergics, opioids, and
α2
- adrenergic agonists can all decrease gastrointestinal activity.
Although this does not preclude the use of anticholinergics as part
of a preanesthetic medication, their use should not be indiscrimi-
nate and instead should be based on a risk-benefit analysis for the
individual patient.
References
1 Lee MR. Solanaceae III: henbane, hags and Hawley Harvey Crippen. J R Coll
Physicians Edinb 2006; 36: 366–373.
2 Lee MR. Solanaceae IV: Atropa belladonna, deadly nightshade. J R Coll Physicians
Edinb 2007; 37: 77–84.
3 Caulfield MP, Birdsall NJM. International Union of Pharmacology. XVII.
Classification of muscarinic acetylcholine receptors. Pharmacol Rev 1998; 50:
279–290.
4 Karakiulakis G, Roth M. Muscarinic receptors and their antagonists in COPD: anti-
inflammatory and antiremodeling effects. Mediators Inflamm 2012; 2012: 409580.
5 Rosenblum K, Futter M, Jones M, et al. ERKI/II regulation by the muscarinic
acetylcholine receptors in neurons. J Neurosci 2000; 20: 977–985.
6 Eglen, RM. Overview of muscarinic receptor subtypes. In: Fryer AD, Christopoulos A,
Nathanson NM, eds. Muscarinic Receptors, Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2012; 208: 3–28.
7 Saternos HC, Almarghalani DA, Gibson HM, et al. Distribution and function of the
muscarinic receptor subtypes in the cardiovascular system. Physiol Genom 2018;
50: 1–9.
8 Cuevas J, Adams DJ. M4 muscarinic receptor activation modulates calcium channel
currents in rat intracardiac neurons. J Neurophysiol 1997; 78: 1903–1912.
9 Croy CH, Chan WY, Castetter AM, et al. Characterization of PCS1055, a novel
muscarinic M4 receptor antagonist. Eur J Pharmacol 2016; 782: 70–76.
10 Raffa RB. The M5 muscarinic receptor as possible target for treatment of drug
abuse. J Clin Pharm Ther 2009; 34: 623–629.
11 Stoelting RK, Hillier SC. Anticholinergic drugs. Pharmacology and Physiology in
Anesthetic Practice, 4th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2006:
266–275.
12 Wellstein A, Pitschner HF. Complex dose-response curves of atropine in man
explained by different functions of M1- and M2-cholinoceptors. Naunyn
Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol 1988; 338: 19–27.
13 Ribeiro AP, Crivelaro RM, Teixeira PP, et al. Effects of different mydriatics on
intraocular pressure, pupil diameter, and ruminal and intestinal motility in healthy
sheep. Vet Ophthalmol 2014; 17: 397–402.
14 Whelan NC, Castillo-Alcala FC, Lizarraga I. Efficacy of tropicamide, homatropine,
cyclopentolate, atropine and hyoscine as mydriatics in Angora goats. N Z Vet J 2011;
59: 328–331.
15 Stadtbäumer K, Frommlet F, Nell B. Effects of mydriatics on intraocular pressure
and pupil size in the normal feline eye. Vet Ophthalmol 2006; 9: 233–237.

-- 333 of 1450 --

318 	Section 3: Pharmacology
16 Davis JL, Stewart T, Brazik E, et al. The effect of topical administration of atropine
sulfate on the normal equine pupil: influence of age, breed and gender. Vet
Ophthalmol 2003; 6: 329–332.
17 Mughannam AJ, Buyukmihci NC, Kass PH. Effect of topical atropine on intraocu-
lar pressure and pupil diameter in the normal horse eye. Vet Ophthalmol 1999;
2: 213–215.
18 Varsanno D, Rothamn S, Haas K, et al. The mydriatic effect of topical glycopyrro-
late. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 1996; 234: 205–207.
19 Ludders JW, Heavner JE. Effect of atropine on tear formation in anesthetized dogs.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1979; 175: 585–586.
20 Arnett BD, Brightman AH, Mussleman EE. Effect of atropine sulfate on tear pro-
duction in the cat when used with ketamine hydrochloride and acetylpromazine
maleate. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1984; 185: 214–215.
21 Ducharme NG, Fubini SL. Gastrointestinal complications associated with the use of
atropine in horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1983; 167: 200–202.
22 Roush JK, Keene BW, Eicker SW, et al. Effects of atropine and glycopyrrolate on
esophageal, gastric and tracheal pH in anesthetized dogs. Vet Surg 1990; 19: 88–92.
23 Proakis AG, Harris GB. Comparative penetration of glycopyrrolate and atropine
across the blood–brain and placental barriers in anesthetized dogs. Anesthesiology
1978; 48: 339–344.
24 Hendrix PK, Robinson EP. Effects of a selective and a nonselective muscarinic cho-
linergic antagonist on heart rate and intestinal motility in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 1997; 20: 387–395.
25 Harrison PK, Tattersall JE, Gosden E. The presence of atropinesterase activity in
animal plasma. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol 2000; 373: 230–236.
26 Godeaux J, Tønnsen M. Investigations into atropine metabolism in the animal
organism. Acta Pharm 1949; 5: 95–109.
27 Albanus L, Sundwall A, Vangbo B, et al. The fate of atropine in the dog. Acta
Pharmacol Toxicol 1968; 26: 571–582.
28 Muir WW. Effects of atropine on cardiac rate and rhythm in dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 1978; 172: 917–921.
29 Richards DL, Clutton RE, Boyd C. Electrocardiographic findings following intrave-
nous glycopyrrolate to sedated dogs: a comparison with atropine. J Assoc Vet
Anaesth 1989; 16: 46–50.
30 Clutton RE, Glasby MA. Cardiovascular and autonomic nervous effects of edro-
phonium and atropine combinations during neuromuscular blockade antagonism
in sheep. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35: 191–200.
31 Fletcher D, Boller M, Brainard BM, et al. RECOVER evidence and knowledge gap
analysis on veterinary CPR. Part 7: clinical guidelines. J Vet Emerg Crit Care
(San Antonio) 2012; 22(Suppl 1): S102–S131.
32 Lemke KA. Electrocardiographic and cardiopulmonary effects of intramuscular
administration of glycopyrrolate and romifidine in conscious Beagle dogs. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2001; 28: 75–86.
33 Chabicovsky M, Winkler S, Soeberdt M, et al. Pharmacology, toxicology and clini-
cal safety of glycopyrrolate. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2019; 370: 154–169.
34 Frischmeyer KJ, Miller PE, Bellay Y, et al. Parenteral anticholinergics in dogs with
normal and elevated intraocular pressure. Vet Surg 1993; 22: 230–234.
35 Hall LW, Clarke KW, Trim CM. Principles of sedation, analgesia and premedica-
tion. In: Hall LW, Clarke KW, Trim CM, eds. Veterinary Anaesthesia, 10th edn.
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders, 2000: 75–112.
36 Short CE, Paddleford RR, Cloyd GD. Glycopyrrolate for prevention of pulmonary
complications during anesthesia. Mod Vet Pract 1974; 55: 194–196.
37 Singh S, McDonell WN, Young SS, et al. The effect of glycopyrrolate on heart rate
and intestinal motility in conscious horses. J Vet Anaesth 1997; 24: 14–19.
38 Gonçalves S, Julliand V, Leblond A. Risk factors associated with colic in horses.
Vet Res 2002; 33: 641–652.
39 Dyson DH, Pascoe PJ, McDonell WN. Effects of intravenously administered glyco-
pyrrolate in anesthetized horses. Can Vet J 1999; 40: 29–32.
40 Lemke KA, Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, et al. Hemodynamic effects of atropine
and glycopyrrolate in isoflurane–xylazine-anesthetized dogs. Vet Surg 1993; 22:
163–169.
41 Congdon JM, Marquez M, Niyom S, Boscan P. Evaluation of the sedative and
cardiovascular effects of intramuscular administration of dexmedetomidine with
and without concurrent atropine administration in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2011;
239: 81–89.
42 Monteiro ER, Campagnol D, Parrilha LR, et al. Evaluation of cardiorespiratory
effects of combinations of dexmedetomidine and atropine in cats. J Feline Med Surg
2009; 11: 783–792.

-- 334 of 1450 --

319
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: T he Sixth E dition of L umb and J ones	. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
Adrenergic agents are drugs that act on the sympathetic nervous
system (SNS) and as such are widely used in veterinary anesthesia
for the management of cardiorespiratory function. In order to
understand the mechanism of action of the different drugs, it is
important to have a thorough knowledge of the physiology of
adrenergic receptors and the autonomic nervous system (further
details are available in the neurologic disease chapter). Table 21.1
provides a brief overview of the distributions, effects, and mecha-
nisms of action of adrenergic and dopaminergic receptors. This is
useful to help predict the physiologic effects of the different drugs
acting at these receptor types.
There are a number of different systems that can be used to clas-
sify adrenergic agents, for example, the receptor at which the drug
exerts an effect, whether the drug is an agonist or antagonist at the
receptor, or whether the drug is a naturally occurring or synthetic
agent.
Classification of adrenergic agents can also be confusing because
some agents act at more than one type of receptor (e.g., ephedrine is
an agonist at both α- and β-adrenergic receptors), whereas others
may act differentially at receptors depending on dose (e.g., dopa-
mine is a β1 - adrenergic receptor agonist when administered at low
doses, but at higher doses, α1
- agonist effects tend to predominate).
Adrenergic agents that are agonists at α1
- , β1
- , and β2
- adrenergic
receptors are also classified as sympathomimetics because they
cause stimulation or activation of the SNS. Drugs acting at dopa-
mine receptors are also sympathomimetics and, therefore, are
included in this chapter. Sympathomimetics can also be classified
according to whether they have a direct effect at adrenergic recep-
tors or whether they act indirectly by causing the release of norepi-
nephrine. In contrast, antagonists at α- and β-adrenergic receptors
are classified as sympatholytics because they reduce the level of
activation of the SNS.
Catecholamines and other adrenergic
agonists
The structure of sympathomimetics is based on a benzene ring with
various amine side-chains attached at the C1 position. Where a
hydroxyl group is present at the C3 and C4 positions, the agent is
known as a “catecholamine” (because 3,4-dihydroxybenzene is oth-
erwise known as “catechol”). In this chapter, the naturally occurring
catecholamines are discussed first, followed by synthetic catechola-
mines and then other non-catecholamine synthetic adrenergic agents.
The synthetic adrenergic agents are classified according to receptor
type and whether they act as agonists or antagonists.
Naturally occurring catecholamines
Epinephrine
Epinephrine acts non-selectively and directly as an agonist at all of
the adrenergic receptors (i.e., α1
, α2 , β1 , and β2
) (see Table 21.1). In
veterinary anesthesia, epinephrine is principally used to support
cardiovascular function during cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
21 Adrenergic Agents
Jo C. Murrell
Bristol Veterinary Specialists, Severn Beach, Bristol, UK
Chapter contents
Introduction, 319
Catecholamines and other adrenergic agonists, 319
Naturally occurring catecholamines, 319
Synthetic catecholamines, 322
α1
- Adrenergic receptor agonists, 324
α2
- Adrenergic receptor agonists, 325
β2
- Adrenergic receptor agonists, 325
Mixed α- and β-adrenergic receptor agonists, 326
Adrenergic receptor antagonists, 326
α1 - Adrenergic receptor antagonists, 326
α2 - Adrenergic receptor antagonists, 327
Non- selective α- adrenergic receptor antagonists, 327
β1
- Adrenergic receptor antagonists, 328
Non- selective β- adrenergic receptor antagonists, 329
References, 329

-- 335 of 1450 --

320 	Section 3: Pharmacology
Epinephrine for systemic administration is available in vials and
prefilled syringes at concentrations of 0.1 mg/mL (1:10,000) and
1 mg/mL (1:1000). It must be protected from light and, therefore, is
presented in colored glass vials or prefilled syringes stored inside
protective packaging. In animals, it is administered systemically
by intravenous injection or via the airway during resuscitation
(intratracheal administration), although for humans, epinephrine
is also available in a metered aerosol preparation to treat swelling
associated with upper airway obstruction due to its vasoconstrictive
effects. Epinephrine is also formulated with local anesthetic solu-
tions for infiltration at concentrations ranging from 1:200,000 to
1:80,000. Most formulations contain racemic epinephrine, although
the R(–) isomer (levo-epinephrine) is the active form.
Cardiovascular system effects
The cardiovascular effects of epinephrine are dose dependent. Low
doses of epinephrine administered by bolus (0.01 mg/kg IV) cause
β1 - and β2
- adrenergic receptor agonist effects to predominate. The
cardiac effects of β1
-adrenergic agonism result in increased cardiac
output, myocardial oxygen consumption, coronary artery dilation,
and a reduced threshold for arrhythmias. In low doses, peripheral
β2
- adrenergic receptor agonist effects result in a decrease in dias-
tolic blood pressure and peripheral vascular resistance. At high
doses (0.1 mg/kg IV), α1 - adrenergic effects predominate, causing a
marked rise in systemic vascular resistance.
Data describing the detailed cardiovascular effects of epineph-
rine in different species are sparse. However, in cats anesthetized
with isoflurane, the cardiovascular effects of epinephrine infusion
at dose rates of 0.125–2 μg/kg/min were dose dependent [1].
All infusion rates caused increases in packed cell volume (PCV) due
to α1
- adrenergic-induced splenic contraction [2], arterial oxygen
content, heart rate, cardiac index, and stroke volume index (SVI) [1].
Increases in SVI were greatest with infusion rates of 1 and
2 μg/kg/min. Mean arterial blood pressure increased at infusion
rates of 0.5 μg/kg/min and higher. At the infusion rates tested, epi-
nephrine was not associated with an increase in systemic vascular
resistance, reflecting the predominant β-adrenergic effects at these
lower dose rates. However, the increases in blood pressure and car-
diac index were also associated with increased lactate concentrations
and progressive metabolic acidosis. The cardiovascular effects of
epinephrine waned after the end of the infusion and the majority
of the parameters returned to preinfusion values 30 min later.
Extravasation of epinephrine can cause tissue necrosis due to
localized vasoconstriction; hence, care must be taken during
intravenous administration.
Epinephrine, along with other catecholamines, is recognized to
be proarrhythmogenic, causing a decrease in threshold for ventric-
ular fibrillation and increased incidence of premature ventricular
contractions and missed beats [3]. The precise mechanisms under-
lying the proarrhythmogenic effects of epinephrine are complex
and are likely multifactorial [4]. Agonist effects at postsynaptic
α1 -and β1
- adrenergic receptors on myocardial cells are implicated,
in addition to activation of cardiac cholinergic reflexes [3].
Importantly, some anesthetic agents, notably halothane, are
recognized to sensitize the myocardium to catecholamine-induced
arrhythmias [5]. The proarrhythmogenic effects of epinephrine
during halothane anesthesia have been documented in a wide range
of species, including dogs [4], cats [6], horses [7], and swine [8].
Similar to the proarrhythmogenic effects of catecholamines in
awake animals, the mechanisms are multiple and complex and are
considered to involve α1 -adrenergic, β1 - adrenergic, and cholinergic
receptors in the heart [3,4]. In comparison with halothane,
isoflurane and sevoflurane do not sensitize the myocardium to
epinephrine to any great extent [9,10].
The effects of other anesthetic agents, in combination with halo-
thane, on the arrhythmogenic dose of epinephrine have also been
investigated in a variety of species. Xylazine does not alter the
arrhythmogenic dose of epinephrine in horses induced with
Table 21.1 Adrenergic and dopaminergic receptor distributions, effects, and mechanisms of action.
Receptor 	Subtype 	Location 	Effects when stimulated 	Mechanism of action
Alpha (α) 	1 	Smooth muscle (blood vessels,
bronchi, GI system, uterus,
urinary system)
Contraction of smooth muscle,
vasoconstriction
Excitatory G-protein-coupled receptor linked to PLC;
receptor binding activates PLC, which increases
intracellular IP3 and leads to an increase in
intracellular [Ca2+
]
2 	Throughout the CNS 	Sedation, analgesia, attenuation of
sympathetically mediated responses
Inhibitory G-protein-coupled receptor linked to AC;
receptor binding reduces AC activity which leads to a
decrease in intracellular [cAMP]	Platelets 	Platelet aggregation
Beta (β) 	1 	Heart 	Positive inotropic and chronotropic
effects
Excitatory G-protein-coupled receptor linked to AC;
receptor binding activates AC and leads to an increase
in intracellular [cAMP]
2 	Smooth muscle (blood vessels,
bronchi, GI system, uterus,
urinary system)
Relaxation of smooth muscle,
vasodilation
Excitatory G-protein-coupled receptor linked to AC;
receptor binding activates AC and leads to an increase
in intracellular [cAMP]; cAMP activates PKA and also
increases Na+- K+ ATPase activity, causing
hyperpolarization
Heart 	Positive inotropic and chronotropic
effects (minor)
3 	Adipose tissue 	Lipolysis 	Excitatory G-protein-coupled receptor linked to AC;
receptor binding activates AC and leads to an increase
in intracellular [cAMP]
Dopamine 	1 	Throughout the CNS 	Modulates extrapyramidal activity 	Excitatory G-protein-coupled receptor linked to AC;
receptor binding activates AC and leads to an increase
in intracellular [cAMP]
Vascular smooth muscle, kidney,
sympathetic ganglia, etc.
Vasodilation of renal and mesenteric
vasculature
2 	Throughout the CNS 	Reduced pituitary hormone output 	Inhibitory G-protein-coupled receptor linked to AC;
receptor binding reduces AC activity, which leads to a
decrease in intracellular [cAMP]
Vascular smooth muscle, kidney,
sympathetic ganglia, etc.
Inhibit further norepinephrine
release
GI, gastrointestinal; PLC, phospholipase C; IP3
, inositol triphosphate; AC, adenylate cyclase; cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate; PKA, protein kinase A; CNS, central nervous system.

-- 336 of 1450 --

Chapter 21: Adrenergic Agents 	321
thiopental and maintained with halothane [11]. Ketamine decreases
the arrhythmogenic dose of epinephrine in halothane-anesthetized
cats [12,13] and dogs [14].
Other effects
Epinephrine will produce a small increase in minute volume
through its bronchodilator effects, which are β2 -adrenergic receptor
mediated. Pulmonary vascular resistance is increased at higher
dose rates reflecting agonism at pulmonary vascular α1 - adrenergic
receptors [15].
Epinephrine has wide-ranging effects on metabolism that are
dose dependent. Basal metabolic rate is increased, resulting in a
slight increase in body temperature following administration [1].
Plasma glucose concentration is increased via multiple mechanisms,
including inhibition of insulin secretion (an α2
- and β2
- adrenergic
effect), glycogenolysis in liver and muscle (an α1
- and β2
- adrenergic
effect), lipolysis (a β2
- and β3
-adrenergic effect), and gluconeogenesis
(an α1 - and β2
-adrenergic effect). Serum potassium concentration
will increase initially following epinephrine administration, fol-
lowed by hypokalemia caused by increased uptake of potassium
into cells (a β2 -effect).
Anesthetic requirement is related to the release of CNS catecho-
lamines [16]; therefore, it would be predicted that epinephrine will
increase the minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) of volatile
agents. However, no effect of low-dose epinephrine on the MAC of
halothane was reported in dogs [17].
Epinephrine causes the release of renin from the kidney through
multiple mechanisms, including stimulation of intrarenal β1
- and
β2
-adrenergic receptors in addition to extrarenal adrenergic recep-
tors [18,19]. Renal blood flow is moderately decreased due to
regional vasoconstriction.
Pharmacokinetics
Epinephrine has a very short half-life due to rapid metabolism,
necessitating frequent redosing or administration by infusion for a
prolonged effect. Following intravenous administration, epineph-
rine is rapidly metabolized by mitochondrial monoamine oxidase
and catechol-O-methyltransferase within the liver, kidney, and
circulation to inactive metabolites (3-methoxy-4- hydroxymandelic
acid and metanephrine). The metabolites are conjugated with glu-
curonic acid or sulfates and excreted in the urine.
Norepinephrine
Norepinephrine acts as an agonist at α1
-, α2
- , and β1
- adrenergic
receptors, with effects at α-adrenergic receptors predominating
at clinically used dose rates (see Table 21.1). Norepinephrine is
predominantly used during anesthesia to manage hypotension,
particularly when caused by a reduction in systemic vascular resist-
ance (i.e., vasodilation) due to sepsis or administration of volatile
anesthetic agents.
Norepinephrine differs from epinephrine in the absence of a
methyl group on the nitrogen atom. It is generally supplied as a
1 mg/mL solution in the form of the bitartrate salt with the pre-
servative sodium metabisulfite.
Cardiovascular system effects
At very low dose rates (0.025 μg/kg/min), norepinephrine’s
β1
-adrenergic receptor-mediated effects predominate and are mani-
fested as increases in heart rate and cardiac output and decreases
in systemic vascular resistance [20]. At higher dose rates (greater
than 0.5–1.5 μg/kg/min), norepinephrine causes dose-dependent
increases in systolic, diastolic, and mean arterial blood pressures,
cardiac output, and systemic and pulmonary vascular resist-
ance [21–23]. Norepinephrine will also cause coronary vasodilation
to promote increased coronary blood flow. Tachycardia is less likely
when compared with administration of epinephrine. A recent study
in healthy, isoflurane-anesthetized dogs, administered norepineph-
rine at doses ranging between 0.05 and 2 μg/kg/min and measured
changes in blood pressure, cardiac index, and systemic vascular
resistance. This study found that cardiac index and mean arterial
blood pressure increased in a dose-dependent manner with infu-
sion of norepinephrine with no significant differences in systemic
vascular resistance, thereby concluding that, at the doses studied,
norepinephrine does not cause excessive vasoconstriction that
interferes with the systemic circulation [24].
Norepinephrine (0.3 and 1.0 μg/kg/min) was effective at improv-
ing cardiovascular function and maintaining splanchnic function
in foals [22] and alpacas [23] with isoflurane-induced hypotension.
At high doses, the increased systemic vascular resistance will
ultimately reduce cardiac output and increase myocardial oxygen
consumption due to the increase in afterload [25]. Extravasation
of norepinephrine can cause tissue necrosis due to localized
vasoconstriction; hence, care must be taken during intravenous
administration. The arrhythmogenic effects of norepinephrine are
similar to those of epinephrine.
Pharmacokinetics
Exogenously administered norepinephrine is metabolized sim-
ilarly to epinephrine and has a short half-life. Unlike epineph-
rine, approximately 25% of administered norepinephrine is
extracted from the circulation as it passes through the lung,
where it is deactivated by monoamine oxidase and catechol-O-
methyltransferase in the endothelial cells of the pulmonary
microvasculature [26].
Dopamine
The receptor effects of dopamine are dose dependent. At low doses
(1–2 μg/kg/min), effects on dopamine receptors (D 1 and D 2
)
predominate. As dose rates increase further, β1
- and β2
- adrenergic
receptor effects predominate. Finally, α1
- adrenergic receptor effects
are noted at infusion rates greater than 10 μg/kg/min (see Table 21.1).
Dopamine will also stimulate the release of endogenous norepi-
nephrine from presynaptic storage sites at adrenergic receptors to
cause an endogenous sympathomimetic effect. Dopamine is pre-
dominantly used by continuous rate infusion to improve hemody-
namic parameters.
Dopamine is available as an injectable preparation, typically as a
40 mg/mL dopamine hydrochloride solution. It contains the pre-
servative sodium metabisulfite. Dopamine hydrochloride in 100 mL
dextrose 5% is also commercially available in a range of concentra-
tions from 0.8 to 6.4 mg/mL.
Cardiovascular system effects
At dose rates less than 10 μg/kg/min, the β1
- adrenergic effects of
dopamine predominate, leading to increases in myocardial contrac-
tility, heart rate, cardiac output, and coronary blood flow. At dose
rates greater than 10 μg/kg/min, α1
- adrenergic receptor agonist
effects dominate, leading to increased systemic and pulmonary
vascular resistance, venous return, and PCV due to splenic contrac-
tion. Tachycardia can occur at higher dose rates. A reduction in
mean arterial blood pressure and cardiac output generally occurs
after cessation of dopamine infusions, with return to preinfusion

-- 337 of 1450 --

322 	Section 3: Pharmacology
values within 30 min, leading to the recommendation that adminis-
tration of dopamine be stopped in a stepwise manner [1].
The cardiovascular effects of dopamine given by continuous rate
infusion have been studied in dogs, cats, and horses during volatile
agent anesthesia. In dogs anesthetized with isoflurane, increasing
infusion rates of dopamine from 3 to 20 μg/kg/min caused a dose-
dependent increase in cardiac index and blood pressure, with
increases in heart rate and systemic vascular resistance noted at
dose rates greater than 7 μg/kg/min [27]. Doses less than 7 μg/kg/min
were insufficient to support hemodynamic variables using the
defined criteria (e.g., mean arterial blood pressure greater than
70 mmHg). At a dopamine infusion rate of 10 μg/kg/min and
greater, there was a marked increase in systemic vascular resistance
and a reduction in stroke volume, reflecting increased myocardial
work associated with the increased afterload. This dose recommen-
dation is supported by other studies investigating the dose-
dependent effects of dopamine in dogs [28–31].
Similar dose-dependent effects have been reported in cats [1],
with infusion rates around 10 μg/kg/min necessary to maintain
mean arterial blood pressure above 70 mmHg in cats anesthetized
with isoflurane. Wiese et al. [32] investigated the effects of a dopa-
mine infusion on cardiovascular variables in cats with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy anesthetized with isoflurane. Dopamine infusion
rates between 2.5 and 10 μg/kg/min increased heart rate, blood
pressure, cardiac output, and oxygen delivery, while global oxygen
consumption was reduced. However, all six cats in the study devel-
oped premature ventricular complexes, and the authors suggested
that dopamine may have negatively impacted myocardial oxygen
consumption, which was not measured, despite the observed
increase in global oxygen delivery. A recent study investigated the
effects of a dopamine continuous rate infusion on systemic vasodi-
lation produced by infusions of vatinoxan and dexmedetomidine in
isoflurane-anesthetized cats [33]. Even high doses of dopamine
were insufficient to prevent hypotension caused by vatinoxan sug-
gesting that dopamine had limited effects on systemic vascular
resistance in this study. Hypotension has been documented in cats
following the rapid termination of dopamine infusions, likely
attributed to the rapid metabolism of dopamine [1]. It has been
suggested that dopamine infusion rates be reduced in a stepwise
manner to avoid rebound hypotension on abrupt termination of the
infusion.
In horses, the effect of dopamine infusion for management
of hypotension during volatile agent anesthesia has been widely
investigated. A dopamine infusion rate of 5 μg/kg/min increases
myocardial contractility and cardiac output with little effect on
blood pressure [34–38]. This is attributed to a reduction in systemic
vascular resistance caused by a decrease in smooth muscle vascular
tone elicited by stimulation of D 1 and D 2 receptors [39] in the
absence of α1 - adrenergic receptor agonist effects, which are only
activated at higher doses. Continuous infusion rates of 1, 2, and
5 μg/kg/min dopamine in isoflurane-anesthetized horses were
found to increase heart rate, stroke volume, and cardiac output
while reducing mean arterial blood pressure and systemic vascular
resistance in a dose-dependent manner [40]. Importantly, at these
infusion rates, dopamine decreased microperfusion of the gastroin-
testinal tract.
Extravasation of dopamine can cause tissue necrosis due to
localized vasoconstriction; therefore, care must be taken during
intravenous administration. Dopamine has the potential to be
proarrhythmogenic at higher doses (10 μg/kg/min or greater).
Other effects
Infusions of dopamine attenuate the response of the carotid body to
hypoxemia [41]. Early studies suggested that at very low doses (less
than 2 μg/kg/min), dopamine infusions had a renal-specific action,
preferentially increasing renal blood flow and causing renal artery
dilation, leading to a concomitant increase in urine output [42,43].
This was attributed to an effect of dopamine at renal D 1 and D 2
receptors. Consequently, in human patients, there was significant
use of low-dose dopamine for the management of acute renal fail-
ure in the intensive care unit [44]. However, it is now recognized
that increased urine output associated with dopamine administration
is caused by improved hemodynamic function [45,46] in combina-
tion with inhibition of proximal tubular Na + reabsorption [47].
Dopamine will produce vasodilation in mesenteric vascular
beds [48] mediated by D 1 receptor activation [49].
Pharmacokinetics
Dopamine has a short half-life of approximately 3 min and, there-
fore, is given by continuous rate infusion. Onset of action after the
start of an infusion can be up to 5 min. Dopamine is metabolized
via monoamine oxidase and catechol-O- methyltransferase in the
liver, kidney, and plasma to inactive compounds that are excreted in
the urine as sulfate and glucuronide conjugates. About 25% is con-
verted to norepinephrine in sympathetic nerve terminals.
Synthetic catecholamines
Dobutamine
Dobutamine primarily stimulates β1
- adrenergic receptors but at
higher dose rates (5–10 μg/kg/min) will also stimulate β2 - and
α1
-adrenergic receptors. It does not exert an effect at α2 - adrenergic
receptors. Dobutamine is principally used to augment low cardiac
output states associated with reduced myocardial function. It is
very commonly used in equine inhalant anesthesia to manage
hypotension.
Dobutamine is a direct-acting synthetic catecholamine that is a
derivative of isoproterenol. It is available in a range of concentra-
tions from 12.5 to 50 mg/mL; the solution usually contains sodium
metabisulfite as a preservative.
Cardiovascular system effects
The effects on the cardiovascular system are dose dependent and
have been well described in cats, dogs, and horses. In halothane-
anesthetized normotensive horses, very low-dose infusion of
dobutamine for 30 min (0.5 μg/kg/min) increased systolic, diastolic,
and mean arterial blood pressure but did not increase myocardial
contractility or cardiac output; PCV was also increased [50].
Infusion rates of 4–5 μg/kg/min to halothane-anesthetized horses
increased arterial blood pressure and cardiac output with minimal
effects on heart rate and systemic vascular resistance [34,38,51].
Dancker et al. studied the cardiovascular effects of low-dose infu-
sions of dobutamine in isoflurane-anesthetized horses (0.5, 1, and
3 μg/kg/min) and found dose-dependent increases in stroke volume
and cardiac output and a reduction in systemic vascular resistance
that was associated with increased microperfusion of the gastroin-
testinal tract [40]. Dobutamine at 10 μg/kg/min tends to increase
systemic vascular resistance and heart rate, with increases in cardiac
output at high doses attributed to both inotropic and chronotropic
effects of the drug [34,38]. In comparison with dopamine, dopex-
amine, and phenylephrine, dobutamine has been shown to have a
more consistent effect in increasing intramuscular blood flow in

-- 338 of 1450 --

Chapter 21: Adrenergic Agents 	323
ponies anesthetized with halothane [38]. In conscious horses,
dobutamine 2 μg/kg/min increased blood pressure and decreased
heart rate without a concomitant statistically significant increase in
cardiac output or systemic vascular resistance [52]. However, the
authors proposed that a vasoconstrictive effect occurred, which was
not detected in their analysis due to the small sample size.
In isoflurane-anesthetized dogs, dobutamine at doses up to
10 μg/kg/min had more limited effects on blood pressure, but
caused increases in cardiac output, heart rate, and systemic vascular
resistance [27,30]. The authors noted that owing to the limited
effect of dobutamine on blood pressure, assessment of the effec-
tiveness of dobutamine to improve hemodynamic function was
challenging in the absence of cardiac output measurements. In a
recent study, the effects of dobutamine infusions (2–12 μg/kg/min)
on cardiovascular function in dogs anesthetized with different con-
centrations of isoflurane with experimentally induced mitral valve
insufficiency were studied [53]. Dobutamine increased myocardial
contractility, which was attenuated by isoflurane suggesting that
dobutamine may be useful to manage poor cardiovascular function
in dogs with mitral valve disease.
In cats, dobutamine at similar dose rates to those studied in dogs
also had limited effects on blood pressure and increased heart
rate [1]. Systemic vascular resistance decreased, reflecting the
β2
-adrenergic receptor agonist effects of the drug causing periph-
eral vasodilation in skeletal muscle.
Like other catecholamines, dobutamine has the potential to be
proarrhythmogenic at high doses (10 μg/kg/min or greater).
Pharmacokinetics
Dobutamine has a short half-life and is, therefore, administered
by continuous rate infusion. It is predominantly metabolized via
catechol-O- methyltransferase in the liver to inactive metabolites
that are conjugated and excreted in the urine.
Dopexamine
Dopexamine is a potent stimulator of β2 -adrenergic receptors with
weak agonist effects at β1
, D1
, and D2 receptors. It has no effect on
α1
- adrenergic receptors. Dopexamine inhibits the neuronal uptake
of endogenous catecholamines. In human medicine, dopexamine is
primarily used to improve cardiac output and mesenteric perfusion.
The potential ability of dopexamine to protect hepatosplanchnic and
renal blood flow has resulted in the recommendation of dopexam-
ine over other positive inotropes such as dopamine and dobutamine
for use in patients particularly at risk of poor splanchnic blood flow,
although evidence to support this contention is lacking [54].
Dopexamine is available as a 10 mg/mL solution in 5 mL vials.
Cardiovascular system effects
Dopexamine has a positive inotropic effect via cardiac β2
- adrenergic
receptors, although systemic blood pressure may fall due to
β2
-receptor-mediated vasodilation of peripheral blood vessels,
particularly in skeletal muscle. The reduction in systemic vascular
resistance helps to promote an increase in cardiac output. The car-
diovascular effects of dopexamine infusion at dose rates varying
from 1 to 10 μg/kg/min have been investigated in horses anesthe-
tized with halothane [38,55–57]. Low doses (1–2.5 μg/kg/min)
increased blood pressure and cardiac output, but higher dose rates
(at or above 5 μg/kg/min) were associated with tachycardia,
cardiac arrhythmias, muscle twitching, and poor recoveries from
anesthesia. Therefore, despite the positive hemodynamic effects of
dopexamine, administration to support hemodynamic function
during anesthesia in horses is not recommended.
There are a few reports on the investigation of the effects of
dopexamine infusions in dogs; dopexamine increased cardiac
output and heart rate in a dose-dependent manner [58,59], with one
study indicating that the arrhythmogenic potential of dopexamine
is lower than that of dopamine [60]. These studies evaluated infu-
sion rates between 0.25 and 3.5 μg/kg/min. Despite the potential
advantages of increased cardiac output with reduced systemic vas-
cular resistance and, therefore, a more limited effect on myocardial
oxygen consumption compared with other inotropes, dopexamine
is not commonly used clinically in dogs.
Other effects
Dopexamine causes bronchodilation via β2 - adrenergic receptors.
Blood flow to the gastrointestinal system and kidneys is increased
due to increased cardiac output and reduced regional vascular
resistance; there is a concomitant increase in urine output. The
clinical benefit of selecting dopexamine over other inotropes in
human patients where increased splanchnic perfusion is desirable
has been debated [61].
Pharmacokinetics
Dopexamine has a short half-life and is rapidly metabolized by
O- methylation and sulfation in the liver [62].
Isoproterenol (isoprenaline)
Isoproterenol is a very potent synthetic catecholamine that is an
agonist at β1 - and β2
- adrenergic receptors. It has no α-adrenergic
receptor effects. Isoproterenol is used to increase heart rate and
myocardial contractility during anesthesia. In human medicine,
isoproterenol may also be used to promote abnormal electrical
activity of the heart during electrophysiological studies. Low doses
of isoproterenol are used as a “test dose” to detect intravascular
needle placement during epidural anesthesia in children. This is to
prevent inadvertent intravascular injection of local anesthetics that
may be associated with adverse effects [63]. There are very limited
data on the clinical use of isoproterenol in animals.
Isoproterenol is typically available as a 0.2 mg/mL solution that
contains sodium metabisulfite as a preservative. It should be
protected from light.
Cardiovascular system effects
Stimulation of β1
- adrenergic receptors causes an increase in heart
rate, myocardial contractility, and cardiac output [64]. Agonist
effects at β2
-adrenergic receptors generally reduce systemic vascular
resistance such that the mean arterial blood pressure falls. At higher
infusion rates (2.5 μg/kg/min), myocardial oxygen delivery is likely
to be compromised owing to the combined effects of increased
heart rate reducing coronary filling time, while decreased systemic
blood pressure reduces coronary perfusion [65]. However, a very
low-dose infusion (0.1 μg/kg/min) of isoproterenol in dogs anes-
thetized with isoflurane increased cardiac output and heart rate
while increasing myocardial blood flow such that adequate myo-
cardial oxygenation was maintained [64]. This was attributed to
metabolically driven vasodilation of coronary blood vessels rather
than direct stimulation of coronary vasculature β2 - adrenergic
receptors. Given these actions, the administration of a potent
β1
/β2 - agonist such as isoproterenol to a low blood volume patient
(e.g., hemorrhagic shock or severe dehydration) dependent upon

-- 339 of 1450 --

324 	Section 3: Pharmacology
intense compensatory vasoconstriction for coronary perfusion
pressure is problematic and discouraged, unless and until blood and
stroke volume can be restored. Isoproterenol has been used for its
chronotropic effects in dogs with third-degree atrioventricular
block or sick sinus syndrome.
Isoproterenol has well-characterized proarrhythmogenic effects
through its effects on ion channel kinetics and promotion of intra-
cellular calcium accumulation and tachycardia [66].
Other effects
Isoproterenol is a potent bronchodilator, increasing anatomic dead-
space and thus ventilation–perfusion mismatching, which has the
potential to cause systemic hypoxemia. It causes stimulation of the
central nervous system and, therefore, can increase the level of
arousal during general anesthesia [67]. Isoproterenol increases
splanchnic and renal blood flow via selective vasodilation mediated
by stimulation of β-adrenergic receptors [68].
Typical metabolic effects of β-adrenergic receptor stimulation
are seen following isoproterenol administration, including increases
in blood glucose and free fatty acid concentrations, and a decrease
in serum potassium concentration caused by a shift of potassium
into cells.
Pharmacokinetics
Isoproterenol has a short half-life. It is rapidly metabolized by
catechol-O- methyltransferase in the liver, in addition to being
excreted in the urine unchanged [69]. In addition, both isoprotere-
nol and its metabolites may be excreted as conjugated sulfates in the
urine.
α1 - Adrenergic receptor agonists
Phenylephrine
Phenylephrine is a direct-acting sympathomimetic amine with
potent α1
-adrenergic receptor agonist effects, and therefore, it is
often referred to as “vasopressor.” It has no effect on β-adrenergic
receptors. Phenylephrine is used systemically during anesthesia to
increase systemic vascular resistance and, therefore, increase blood
pressure. Phenylephrine can also be administered topically to
mucosal surfaces to produce localized vasoconstriction and reduce
edema or hemorrhage. In the horse, phenylephrine may be used in
the medical management of nephrosplenic entrapment prior to
rolling or laparoscopic surgical correction of the condition. The aim
of phenylephrine administration is to reduce splenic size and, there-
fore, facilitate medical or surgical correction of the entrapment.
Phenylephrine is typically available for injection as a 10 mg/mL
solution as the hydrochloride salt. However, phenylephrine is also
present in some topical eye preparations and is a common ingredi-
ent in decongestants for use in people.
Cardiovascular system effects
Administered systemically, phenylephrine causes a dose-dependent
increase in systemic vascular resistance and mean arterial blood
pressure and a reflex reduction in heart rate. Cardiac output is usu-
ally minimally altered or may fall as a result of increased afterload
combined with bradycardia. In horses, phenylephrine is typically
infused intravenously at a rate of 1 μg/kg/min preceded by a 2 μg/kg
loading dose [50,70] until the blood pressure is increased. The
hemodynamic effects wane rapidly once the infusion is terminated.
Systemic and pulmonary vascular resistances are increased, and
there is a limited effect on cardiac output. Phenylephrine at dose
rates between 0.25 and 2 μg/kg/min did not improve skeletal
muscle blood flow in horses anesthetized with halothane [38,50].
Frederick et al. [71] reported five cases of severe phenylephrine-
associated hemorrhage in aged horses. The phenylephrine was
administered to facilitate management of nephrosplenic entrap-
ment and the hemorrhage was attributed to secondary hyperten-
sion caused by increased systemic vascular resistance. The negative
effects of phenylephrine on cardiac output and skeletal muscle
blood flow suggest that phenylephrine should not be used to man-
age hypotension primarily caused by myocardial depression in
anesthetized horses. Phenylephrine at 0.5, 1, and 3 μg/kg/min also
decreased microvascular blood flow of the gastrointestinal tract in
healthy isoflurane-anesthetized horses [40].
There are limited clinical data on the use of phenylephrine in
dogs, but a few experimental studies have investigated the cardio-
vascular effects of infusion. A dose of at least 0.4 μg/kg/min was
necessary to increase mean arterial blood pressure significantly in
conscious dogs [72], followed by linear increases in blood pressure
up to the maximum infusion rate evaluated of 4 μg/kg/min. A
reduction in heart rate occurred at the lowest infusion rate tested
(0.008 μg/kg/min), which was attributed to a vagally mediated
reflex bradycardia [72]. Phenylephrine at 0.14 mg/kg was necessary
to manage hypotension caused by acepromazine in halothane-
anesthetized dogs [73].
The cardiovascular effects of phenylephrine have been studied
in healthy cats anesthetized with isoflurane [1] and in cats with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy [32]. In healthy cats, infusion rates of
0.125–2 μg/kg/min were studied. Mean arterial blood pressure was
significantly increased at infusion rates at and above 1 μg/kg/min,
which was associated with increased systemic vascular resistance.
Heart rate did not change as isoflurane likely obtunded baroreflex-
mediated reflex activity. In contrast to horses, these infusion rates
were associated with an increase in cardiac output; oxygen delivery
was also increased, which was attributed to an increase in PCV and
cardiac output. Phenylephrine infusion rates of 0.25–1 μg/kg/min
were studied in cats with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy anesthe-
tized with isoflurane [32]. Similar changes in heart rate and blood
pressure to those observed in healthy cats were reported; there was
no change in cardiac output, but oxygen delivery increased with no
change in global oxygen consumption.
There is little evidence to suggest that phenylephrine is proar-
rhythmogenic when used clinically.
Other effects
Phenylephrine has no stimulatory effects on the central nervous
system. Hepatic and renal blood flow are reduced, mediated
by 	α1
- adrenergic 	receptor-induced 	vasoconstriction 	[74,75].
Phenylephrine will reduce uterine blood flow, and it is generally
recommended to avoid administration during pregnancy due to
potential adverse effects on fetal oxygen delivery [76].
Intranasal administration of phenylephrine to anesthetized
horses prior to recovery from anesthesia is used to reduce nasal
edema and the potential for upper airway obstruction [77].
Administration of 5 mL of 0.15% phenylephrine solution into
each nostril approximately 50 min before extubation was sufficient
to reduce nasal edema and significantly reduced the requirement for
placement of a nasal tube during recovery in the majority of horses
studied (20 horses) compared with a control group (20 horses). No
adverse cardiovascular effects following administration were noted.
Topical eye drops containing 10% phenylephrine hydrochloride
caused increased blood pressure in both anesthetized and conscious
dogs [78,79].

-- 340 of 1450 --

Chapter 21: Adrenergic Agents 	325
Pharmacokinetics
Phenylephrine has a short half-life when administered intrave-
nously. It is metabolized in the liver by monoamine oxidase.
Methoxamine
Methoxamine is a direct-acting sympathomimetic amine with spe-
cific α1 - adrenergic receptor agonist effects and is also classified as a
vasopressor. The clinical effects of methoxamine are similar to those
of phenylephrine; however, methoxamine is purported to have a
longer duration of action, despite limited pharmacological data on
systemically administered methoxamine in animals. Methoxamine
is reported to predominantly cause vasoconstriction of arterioles, with
little effect at capacitance vessels. In horses, a dose of 0.04 mg/kg IV
approximately 5–10 min before induction of anesthesia did not
modulate halothane-induced hypotension during the maintenance
phase of anesthesia, with no effect on mean arterial blood pressure,
heart rate, cardiac output, or central venous pressure [80]. However,
experimental studies have demonstrated the cardiovascular effects
of methoxamine in other species. Doses of methoxamine from 0.4
to 6.0 mg/kg in lambs caused an increase in cardiac output, attrib-
uted to stimulation of α1
-adrenergic receptors in the lamb myocar-
dium [81]. In contrast, no positive inotropic action was reported in
dogs [82,83], suggesting species-specific effects of methoxamine on
the myocardium.
Methoxamine is available as a 20 mg/mL solution as the hydro-
chloride salt for intravenous injection.
α2
- Adrenergic receptor agonists
Dexmedetomidine, medetomidine, detomidine, xylazine,
and romifidine
These agents are not classified as sympathomimetics, but they are
used extensively in veterinary medicine for their excellent sedative
and analgesic properties. Their other α2
- adrenergic receptor-
mediated effects are considered, in most instances, to be adverse
side effects. Further information on α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist
pharmacology is available in Chapter 22.
β2
- Adrenergic receptor agonists
Clenbuterol, albuterol (salbutamol), and terbutaline
Clenbuterol, albuterol, and terbutaline are predominantly used for
the management of bronchospasm in people with asthma. In veteri-
nary medicine, they are used to treat bronchospasm in both awake
and anesthetized animals. In addition, clenbuterol has been used
illegally to increase the muscle mass and reduce the fat composition
of carcasses of food-producing animals.
Clenbuterol has Marketing Authorization for administration to
horses for the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary dis-
ease and is available as an injectable solution for administration
intravenously, and also as syrup and granule preparations for oral
administration. An injectable preparation is also licensed for
administration to cattle to delay the onset of parturition by causing
uterine relaxation. Albuterol and terbutaline are not licensed for
administration to animals but are available as aerosol and oral
preparations for the management of asthma in people.
Cardiovascular system effects
At high doses, this class of agents can also exert agonist effects at
β1
-adrenergic receptors causing tachycardia, whereas at lower doses,
decreases in blood pressure are noted due to β2
-adrenergic receptor-
mediated vasodilation.
These agents are noted to be proarrhythmogenic as they shorten
the refractory period of the atrioventricular node, slow ventricular
conduction, and shorten the refractory period of the ventricular
myocardium [84]. The arrhythmogenic effects are likely to be
more pronounced during concurrent hypoxemia (e.g., caused by an
increase in shunt fraction) or during hypokalemia.
Other effects
These agents stimulate Na+
- K+ ATPase, leading to increased
intracellular uptake of K+ and hypokalemia. The blood glucose
concentration typically increases. In the respiratory system, they
cause relaxation of bronchial smooth muscle and reversal of hypoxic
pulmonary vasoconstriction (see below).
Clenbuterol and albuterol have been evaluated in anesthetized
horses for the management of hypoxemia. Data pertaining to the
clinical effects of clenbuterol (IV) are conflicting. Early studies
investigating clenbuterol at 0.8 and 2.4 mg/kg IV reported improved
arterial oxygenation in horses anesthetized with halothane [85,86],
with a prolonged duration of effect of up to 90 min. However, more
recent studies have found no effect of clenbuterol on arterial oxygen
concentrations at similar doses rates, or a potentiation of hypox-
emia [38,87]. Potentiation of hypoxemia [87] was attributed to an
increased shunt fraction associated with bronchodilation and a
reduction in hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction. At these dose
rates, clenbuterol caused hemodynamic effects consistent with
β2
- adrenergic receptor stimulation, causing a small increase in
heart rate and cardiac output that persisted for up to 30 min after
administration and that was associated with a transient increase in
muscle perfusion. Adverse effects of clenbuterol include profuse
sweating and increased oxygen consumption associated with the
sympathomimetic effects on cardiovascular function. Consequently,
clenbuterol administered intravenously is not recommended as a
treatment for hypoxemia in anesthetized horses.
Albuterol, administered via inhalation through the endotracheal
tube, has been shown to improve arterial oxygenation in anesthe-
tized horses, predominantly through a sympathomimetic effect on
hemodynamic function. Robertson and Bailey [88] administered
2 μg/kg albuterol using a human metered dose inhaler, with the
dose delivered over a number of consecutive breaths at the start of
each inspiration. This treatment was administered to 81 horses dur-
ing volatile agent anesthesia when PaO2 decreased below 70 mmHg.
The authors reported an almost twofold increase in PaO2 within
20 min of administration, with no concurrent effects on heart rate
or mean arterial blood pressure. Patschova et al. [89] investigated
the effects of the same dose (2 μg/kg) administered via the endotra-
cheal tube on arterial oxygen concentrations and hemodynamics in
isoflurane-anesthetized horses. There was a significant increase in
cardiac output 15 min after albuterol administration, persisting for
the duration of the monitored period (60 min). There was a tran-
sient increase in heart rate, while mean arterial blood pressure was
unchanged, which was attributed to a reduction in systemic vascu-
lar resistance mediated by β2
- adrenergic receptors. The PaO 2
:FI
O2
ratio improved, but to a lesser extent than reported by Robertson
and Bailey [88] and coincided with the peak effect of albuterol on
cardiac output. These data suggest that improvements in oxygena-
tion following albuterol administration arise predominantly from
the positive hemodynamic effects of the drug. Collectively, these
studies support the use of inhaled albuterol to manage hypoxemia
in anesthetized horses.
There are no clinical reports of administration of this class of
drugs to dogs during anesthesia; however, a number of studies have

-- 341 of 1450 --

326 	Section 3: Pharmacology
investigated the efficacy of inhaled albuterol in the management of
bronchospasm in cats [90–92]. Albuterol at 100 μg/kg, delivered via
a face mask immediately prior to induction of anesthesia, was effec-
tive at reducing bronchoconstriction in response to bronchoalveo-
lar lavage in both normal cats and cats with experimentally induced
asthma [90]. This investigation did not monitor for concurrent car-
diovascular effects of drug administration. Terbutaline is also used
in cats for the management of bronchospasm during bronchoscopy
and bronchoalveolar lavage, particularly in cats with asthma. A dose of
0.01 mg/kg IM or SC has a duration of action of about 4 h, with peak
effects occurring approximately 15 min after administration [93].
Mixed α- and β- adrenergic receptor agonists
Ephedrine
Ephedrine has both direct and indirect sympathomimetic actions,
acting as an agonist at α1
- , α2
- , β1 - , and β2
- adrenergic receptors. It
also inhibits the action of monoamine oxidase on norepinephrine.
Tachyphylaxis occurs with repeated dosing due to depletion of nor-
epinephrine stores and therefore a reduction in the magnitude of
indirect sympathomimetic effects [94].
Ephedrine is used in the management of hypotension during
anesthesia. Its longer duration of action compared with many other
vasopressors and inotropes allows the administration of an intrave-
nous bolus to produce clinical effects, removing the necessity for
administration of drugs by continuous rate infusion. Infusions can
be more time consuming to prepare and, therefore, delay the initia-
tion of vasopressor or inotropic therapy.
Ephedrine is available in a variety of formulations for human use
as a decongestant. For use during anesthesia, a 30 or 50 mg/mL
solution is typically used. There are at least four isomers of ephed-
rine, all of which show some activity in dogs and cats [95], although
this may vary between species [96]; two of the isomers are termed
“pseudoephedrine” and the other two “ephedrine.” The commercially
available medical preparation is (1R ,2S)(–)-ephedrine.
Cardiovascular system effects
Ephedrine increases cardiac output, heart rate, blood pressure, coro-
nary blood flow, and myocardial oxygen consumption. In horses anes-
thetized with halothane, administration of ephedrine (0.06 mg/kg IV)
caused an increase in cardiac output and mean arterial blood pres-
sure, with minimal effect on systemic vascular resistance [97]. The
increase in cardiac output was attributed to increased stroke volume
rather than a chronotropic effect. The effect of ephedrine was
detected at 10 min (the first measured time point) after adminis-
tration and persisted for 45–60 min. In this study, there was a
concurrent increase in PaO2
, attributed to the effect of increased
cardiac output on pulmonary perfusion. A similar dose of ephed-
rine administered to halothane-anesthetized horses with blood
pressures below 65 mmHg also caused an increase in mean arterial
blood pressure, detected 5 min after administration [51]; heart rate
was unchanged, and there was no significant increase in PCV.
In dogs, single doses of ephedrine have been evaluated for the
management of isoflurane-induced hypotension during anesthe-
sia [31,98]. Chen et al. [31] administered ephedrine at 0.2 mg/kg IV
to dogs with a mean arterial blood pressure lower than 70 mmHg
and documented increased cardiac output, stroke volume, blood
pressure, and global oxygen delivery; however, these effects were
very transient, with a duration of effect of approximately 5 min.
A repeat dose of ephedrine given 10 min later was ineffective at
improving any cardiovascular parameters, which was attributed to
tachyphylaxis. These findings were similar to those in an earlier
study by Wagner et al. [98], although they investigated three differ-
ent doses of ephedrine and found a more sustained increase in
hemodynamic parameters following a 0.25 mg/kg dose, persisting
for up to 30 min after administration. In contrast to the effect of
ephedrine in horses, PCV increased at the higher dose in dogs, and
this was attributed to α-adrenergic-induced splenic contraction [99].
There are limited clinical data on the administration of ephed-
rine to cats. Egger et al. [100] reported the cardiovascular effects of
ephedrine at 0.1 mg/kg IM in cats anesthetized with acepromazine,
ketamine, and isoflurane. The ephedrine was given 10 min before
induction of anesthesia and was noted to delay the onset of hypo-
tension (defined as a systolic arterial blood pressure of less than
80 mmHg) until 25 min after induction of anesthesia, compared
with cats administered saline. No other cardiovascular changes
occurred; however, cardiovascular monitoring was less rigorous in
this study compared with studies in dogs and horses.
As with other sympathomimetics, administration of ephedrine
may promote cardiac arrhythmias.
Other effects
Ephedrine causes stimulation of the respiratory system and
bronchodilation similar to other drugs with β2
- adrenergic receptor
agonist activity [see clenbuterol in the section Clenbuterol, albuterol
(salbutamol), and terbutaline for details].
Ephedrine reduces renal blood flow with an associated reduction
in glomerular filtration rate, attributed to regional vasoconstriction
following stimulation of α1 - adrenergic receptors [101].
Pharmacokinetics
The pharmacokinetics of ephedrine have been described in the
dog [102]. It undergoes rapid N-demethylation to norephedrine,
which also has vasopressor effects and is likely to contribute to
the hemodynamic effects of ephedrine seen in this species. There
are limited data available on the metabolism of ephedrine in cats or
horses, but data in ponies suggest that ephedrine is also metabo-
lized to norephedrine [103].
Metaraminol
Similar to ephedrine, metaraminol is a synthetic amine with both
direct and indirect sympathomimetic effects that acts predomi-
nantly on α-adrenergic receptors with some β-adrenergic receptor
activity. In contrast to ephedrine, owing to relatively greater effects
at α1 - adrenergic receptors, its major cardiovascular action is to
increase blood pressure through an increase in systemic vascular
resistance; consequently, cardiac output often falls. Metaraminol is
not commonly used in veterinary anesthesia.
Adrenergic receptor antagonists
Adrenergic receptor antagonists prevent the actions of sympatho-
mimetic amines on adrenergic receptors and are, therefore, called
“sympatholytics.” This class of drug can be subdivided depending
on whether a drug is an antagonist at α- or β- adrenergic receptors,
and then further subdivided according to whether it is selective for
the α1 , α2, β1 , or β2 - subtype.
α1 - Adrenergic receptor antagonists
Prazosin
Prazosin, a quinazoline derivative, is a highly selective α1
- adrenergic
receptor antagonist. It is used predominantly for the management
of functional urethral obstruction in cats and dogs. Stimulation of

-- 342 of 1450 --

Chapter 21: Adrenergic Agents 	327
α1
- adrenergic receptors in the bladder neck and proximal urethra
narrows the bladder outlet maintaining continence. Inappropriate
contraction of the bladder neck or urethra during voiding prevents
normal urine flow and is termed “functional urethral obstruction.”
Although prazosin is not used during the management of anesthesia,
it is important to understand the physiological effects of the drug and
their relevance to anesthesia because of the requirement to anesthe-
tize dogs and cats that are receiving prazosin therapy. Prazosin is
available in an oral preparation (0.5–2 mg tablets) and an injectable
form. The oral preparation is used most commonly in animals.
Cardiovascular system effects
Prazosin produces vasodilation of arteries and veins and reduces
systemic vascular resistance; this is associated with a reduction in
blood pressure, with diastolic blood pressure being impacted most
significantly. There is little or no reflex tachycardia, which is attrib-
uted to a reduction in central thoracic sympathetic outflow [104].
There are limited clinical data on the cardiovascular effects of oral
prazosin in cats or dogs. In a small study of three dogs, prazosin
0.025 mg/kg administered intravenously caused a maximal reduc-
tion in blood pressure that occurred 10 min after administration,
but did not cause clinical hypotension (i.e., mean arterial blood
pressure less than 70 mmHg). However, anecdotally, clinical signs
attributable to hypotension have been reported in cats receiving
prazosin for functional urethral obstruction. Prazosin is recom-
mended for administration every 8–12 h in cats and dogs for the
management of functional urethral obstruction. Therefore, in order
to reduce the likelihood of hypotension during anesthesia of animals
receiving prazosin for this purpose, it is reasonable to recommend
cessation of administration 12–24 h before induction of anesthesia.
Prazosin may also be used in the management of hemodynamic
function in patients with pheochromocytoma, although phenoxy-
benzamine is more commonly used for this purpose (see below).
Pharmacokinetics
The pharmacokinetics of oral and intravenous prazosin have been
described in awake dogs and dogs anesthetized with sodium pento-
barbital [105]. Orally, although well absorbed from the gastrointes-
tinal tract, prazosin has a relatively low bioavailability (approximately
38%), with hepatic extraction contributing to a major proportion of
the presystemic metabolism of the drug. Following intravenous
administration, initial plasma concentrations decrease rapidly due
to extensive tissue distribution. The major liver hepatic pathways
were demethylation, amide hydrolysis, and O-glucuronidation
[105,106]. Anesthesia had a minimal effect on the pharmacokinet-
ics of prazosin; however, it is predicted that drug metabolism would
be significantly slowed in animals with liver dysfunction. The phar-
macokinetics of prazosin in cats have not been described.
α2
- Adrenergic receptor antagonists
Atipamezole, yohimbine, and tolazoline
In veterinary anesthesia, these agents are used for the reversal of
sedation produced by α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists such as
medetomidine and dexmedetomidine. Further information is avail-
able in Chapter 22.
Non-selective α-adrenergic receptor antagonists
Phentolamine
Phentolamine is a competitive non-selective α- adrenergic receptor
blocker, with three times greater affinity for α1
- than α2 - adrenergic
receptors. During anesthesia, phentolamine is used in the
management of hypertensive crises due to excessive administration
of sympathomimetics and pheochromocytoma, especially during
tumor manipulation. In human dentistry, a preparation of phen-
tolamine is available to reverse the effects of local anesthetic admin-
istration [107]. Vasodilation produced by α-adrenergic receptor
blockade increases the systemic absorption of local anesthetics and
therefore shortens the duration of sensory blockade. Phentolamine
is also used in the management of pain associated with complex
regional pain syndrome in people, although there are limited clini-
cal data to support use in this context [108]. There are very limited
published clinical data on the administration of phentolamine to
companion animals. Phentolamine is available as a 10 mg/mL
injectable preparation.
Blockade of postjunctional vascular α1
- and α2 - adrenergic recep-
tors causes vasodilation and hypotension. Blockade of presynaptic
α2
- adrenergic receptors facilitates norepinephrine release, leading
to tachycardia and an increase in cardiac output. Pulmonary artery
pressure is also reduced.
Phentolamine can cause an increase in insulin secretion, pre-
cipitating hypoglycemia; it is advisable to monitor blood glucose
following administration. The drug is metabolized in the liver, with
a short half-life following intravenous administration (approximately
20 min in people). There are no published data on the specific
metabolic pathways of phentolamine in companion animals.
Phenoxybenzamine
Phenoxybenzamine is a long-acting, non-selective α-adrenergic
receptor blocker, with greater affinity for α1
- than α2 - adrenergic
receptors. Its effects are mediated by a reactive intermediate that
forms a covalent bond and alkylates the α-adrenergic receptor,
resulting in irreversible blockade. In addition to receptor blockade,
phenoxybenzamine also inhibits neuronal and extraneuronal
uptake of catecholamines.
In veterinary patients, phenoxybenzamine is most commonly
used for the preoperative management of pheochromocytoma,
administered orally. The aims of administration are to reverse
chronic vasoconstriction due to increased circulating concentra-
tions of epinephrine and norepinephrine that are produced by the
tumor and thereby facilitate expansion of intravascular volume.
The long duration of action of oral phenoxybenzamine allows twice
daily dosing.
In people, preoperative stabilization of patients with pheochro-
mocytoma with oral phenoxybenzamine significantly decreases
mortality rates in the perioperative period [109]. Phenoxybenzamine
is also used to control changes in heart rate and blood pressure dur-
ing surgical tumor manipulation, where the irreversible nature of
the adrenergic blockade results in greater efficacy compared with
shorter acting competitive blockers such as phentolamine.
A retrospective study in dogs with pheochromocytoma [110]
also found preoperative administration of phenoxybenzamine for a
median period of 20 days before adrenalectomy also decreased
mortality compared with untreated controls. The long duration of
action can result in persistent hypotension following tumor removal;
therefore, some anesthetists elect to stop administration of phe-
noxybenzamine 48 h prior to surgery. Phenoxybenzamine may also
be used in the management of functional urethral obstruction in
dogs and cats, where more limited effects on blood pressure are
advantageous compared with treatment with prazosin [111].
Phenoxybenzamine is available as an oral and injectable preparation.
The cardiovascular effects of phenoxybenzamine are similar to
those of phentolamine. Phenoxybenzamine does not prevent

-- 343 of 1450 --

328 	Section 3: Pharmacology
arrhythmias from occurring during adrenalectomy for pheochro-
mocytoma removal as a result of tumor manipulation. In people,
concurrent β-adrenergic blockade is sometimes instituted to con-
trol arrhythmias and reduce tachycardias resulting from β-adrenergic
receptor stimulation [112]. The requirement for concurrent
β-blockade depends on the tumor type and associated hormone
secretion. In dogs with pheochromocytoma, oral doses of approxi-
mately 0.6 mg/kg every 12 h reduced mortality in the perioperative
period [110]. Doses of 0.5 mg/kg twice daily have been recom-
mended in cats.
A reduction in central nervous system sympathetic outflow as a
result of adrenergic blockade can cause mild sedation in treated
animals, although this is not normally of sufficient magnitude to
cause clinically relevant effects.
Phenoxybenzamine is incompletely and variably absorbed from
the gut of people, with an oral bioavailability of about 25%. It is
reasonable to assume that this is also the case in monogastric ani-
mals. The drug is extensively metabolized in the liver and excreted
in urine and bile. Although the plasma half-life is 24 h in people, the
duration of action can be up to 3 days, reflecting the biologic
requirement of new α-adrenergic receptor synthesis for effects to
wane and eventually terminate.
β1
- Adrenergic receptor antagonists
General properties of β-adrenergic receptor antagonists are pre-
sented in Table 21.2. β-Adrenergic receptor antagonists (commonly
termed “beta-blockers” or “β-blockers”) are all competitive antago-
nists with varying degrees of selectivity for β1 - and β2
-adrenergic
receptors. Some β-blockers have intrinsic sympathomimetic activity
(ISA), resulting in a partial agonist effect at β1
, β2
, or both types of
adrenergic receptors [113]. Membrane-stabilizing activity, similar
to that of local anesthetics on the cardiac action potential, is also a
feature of some β-adrenergic receptor antagonists, although con-
centrations greater than those achieved by therapeutic doses are
usually required to elicit this effect.
The therapeutic usefulness of β-adrenergic receptor antagonists
is mediated through their effect at β1
- adrenergic receptors, while
concurrent effects at β2 - receptors are deemed undesirable. Atenolol
and esmolol demonstrate β1
- adrenergic receptor selectivity,
although at high doses antagonist effects at β2
- receptors also occur.
β- Adrenergic receptor antagonists that have ISA are able to
stimulate these receptors and oppose the stimulating effects of
catecholamines in a competitive way. Therefore, the balance between
agonism and antagonism depends on the circulating level of cat-
echolamines. β- Blockers with ISA are partial agonists at β-adrenergic
receptors and elicit a submaximal response at full receptor
occupancy. The presence of ISA results in less resting bradycardia
and a smaller reduction in cardiac output than are observed with
β-blockers without ISA [114]. In the long term, they may produce
arterial vasodilation and increase arterial compliance, which is
postulated to be beneficial in the management of hypertension in
humans [114].
In human medicine, β-adrenergic receptor antagonists are
predominantly used in the treatment of hypertension, angina, and
myocardial infarction. These drugs are also widely used in veterinary
medicine, predominantly for the management of the hemodynamic
and neuroendocrine consequences of cardiac disease, including
the management of cardiac arrhythmias. Therefore, it is important
to have a good understanding of the clinical pharmacology of
β-adrenergic receptor antagonists in order to determine potential
effects during anesthesia in animals receiving therapy. During anes-
thesia, β-blockers are predominantly used in the management of
inappropriate tachycardia, where the increased heart rate is having
a negative effect on hemodynamic function. They are also used in
the perioperative management of pheochromocytomas to prevent
reflex tachycardia associated with α-adrenergic blockade therapy,
and to control arrhythmias and tachycardias associated with
β- adrenergic receptor stimulation due to hormone secretion from
the tumor.
β- Adrenergic receptor antagonists decrease the heart rate by
reducing automaticity in the sinoatrial node and prolonging the
conduction time in the atrioventricular node. A reduction in heart
rate lengthens diastole and, therefore, can improve coronary perfu-
sion and increase regional myocardial oxygen delivery. They are
class II antiarrhythmic agents and are mainly used to treat arrhyth-
mias associated with high circulating levels of catecholamines.
At the same time, they have a negative inotropic effect, which
decreases oxygen demand, thereby collectively improving the
balance between myocardial oxygen supply and demand. Potential
negative effects on cardiovascular function are a prolonged systolic
ejection time, dilation of ventricles, and an increase in coronary
vascular resistance due to the antagonism of coronary vasodilatory
β2 - adrenergic receptors. In human patients with poor left ventricu-
lar function, β-blockade is recognized to be a risk factor for the
development of cardiac failure [115].
β- Blockers control blood pressure [116] predominantly through
a reduction in heart rate and cardiac output and also via inhibition
of the renin–angiotensin system due to blockade of β1
- adrenergic
receptors at the juxtaglomerular apparatus. A reduction in circulat-
ing angiotensin II will ameliorate vasoconstriction that also drives
the secretion of aldosterone. However, when β-adrenergic blockers
are administered acutely during anesthesia, the reductions in car-
diac output and heart rate are the primary mechanisms responsible
for decreased blood pressure.
High doses of all β-blockers, irrespective of selectivity for
β1 - adrenergic receptors at clinical dose rates, will precipitate bron-
chospasm via blockade of β2
- adrenergic receptors in bronchioles,
opposing tonic sympathetically mediated bronchodilation [117].
The metabolic effects of β-blockers are complex owing to the
multiple pathways and organs involved in the regulation of blood
glucose concentration. However, β-blockers can lead both to an
increase in blood glucose concentration (through peripheral insu-
lin resistance and decreased insulin secretion from pancreatic cells)
and to a decrease in blood glucose concentration (by mitigating the
normal increase that occurs during exercise). They can also have
complex effects on lipid metabolism, resulting in increased plasma
triglycerides [118].
Table 21.2 Comparison of receptor selectivity, intrinsic sympathomimetic activity (ISA),
and membrane-stabilizing activity of β- adrenergic receptor antagonists used
in veterinary medicine.
Drug 	β1 - receptor
selectivity
Intrinsic
sympathomimetic
activity
Membrane-stabilizing
activity
Atenolol 	+ 	+ 	–
Esmolol 	++ 	– 	–
Metoprolol 	++ 	– 	+
Pindolol 	– 	++ 	+
Propranolol 	– 	– 	++
Sotalol 	– 	– 	–

-- 344 of 1450 --

Chapter 21: Adrenergic Agents 	329
Atenolol
Atenolol is a relatively cardioselective (i.e., β1
) adrenergic receptor
antagonist that is available as tablet and syrup formulations for oral
administration, and as an injectable preparation (0.5 mg/mL) for
intravenous use. Although it is not widely administered during
anesthesia, atenolol is prescribed to delay the onset of adverse
sequelae in cats with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and for the
management of ventricular arrhythmias in cats and dogs; therefore,
knowledge of atenolol pharmacology is important. It is worth not-
ing that in human medicine, continuation of β-adrenergic blocker
therapy is generally recommended in the perioperative period for
patients with cardiac disease [119,120].
In cats, atenolol is well absorbed orally, with recommended
clinical doses producing plasma concentrations that are within the
therapeutic range within 1 h of oral administration, with effects that
persist for up to 12 h, allowing twice daily dosing [121]. Twice daily
dosing with atenolol, orally, is also recommended in dogs [122]. In
people, atenolol is excreted unchanged in the urine, and effects are,
therefore, more prolonged in patients with renal impairment;
whether this is also the case in small animals is unknown.
Esmolol
Esmolol is highly selective for the β1
- adrenergic receptor and is
very lipophilic, with a rapid onset and offset of action when given
intravenously; therefore, it is the β-blocker of choice for use during
anesthesia to control tachycardia, hypertension, and acute
supraventricular tachycardia associated with inappropriate sympa-
thetic nervous system activity. It is commonly given by infusion,
using a controlled infusion apparatus in order to prevent overdose.
In dogs and cats, a bolus dose of 2 μg/kg followed by an infusion of
50 μg/kg/min is generally recommended to decrease heart rate and
systolic function [123,124]. A recent small retrospective study
reported the use of esmolol for heart rate reduction in non-
anesthetized dogs and cats. A median bolus dose of 330 μg/kg fol-
lowed in most cases by a continuous rate infusion of 50 μg/kg/min
was effective at reducing heart rate by 20% in 46% of animals [125].
Esmolol is rapidly metabolized by red blood cell esterases to an
essentially inactive metabolite with a long half-life and methanol. It
has no ISA or membrane-stabilizing properties.
Metoprolol
Metoprolol is also relatively selective for the β1
- adrenergic receptor
and has no ISA. It is available as an oral tablet preparation and has
been evaluated in the management of dogs with acquired cardiac
disease [126]. Metoprolol is rapidly absorbed from the gut but
undergoes very high first-pass metabolism, giving an oral bioavail-
ability of approximately 50% across species [127,128]. The half-life
of metoprolol is approximately 2 h in dogs [129], with twice daily
dosing generally recommended. In humans, rats, dogs, and horses,
metabolism is via oxidative pathways, with metoprolol and its
metabolites excreted mainly in urine in an unconjugated form [128].
Non-selective β- adrenergic receptor antagonists
Pindolol
Pindolol is a non-selective β-adrenergic antagonist with intrinsic
sympathomimetic and membrane-stabilizing properties that is also
a serotonin receptor (5-HT 1A/1B
) antagonist [130]. In addition to the
typical cardiovascular effects of the drug, pindolol may potentiate
analgesia provided by tramadol in dogs [131], presumably due to
augmentation of serotonergic effects of tramadol by activation of
the serotonergic modulatory system.
Propranolol
Propranolol is a non- selective β-adrenergic antagonist without ISA.
It is available as a racemic mixture, although the S-isomer confers
most of the therapeutic cardiac effects of the drug. The R-isomer
prevents the peripheral conversion of thyroxine (T4) to triiodothy-
ronine (T3) in people, although whether this effect is also present
in animal species has not yet been determined. Propranolol is
available as injectable and oral preparations; in animals, it is most
commonly administered orally for the control of heart rate and
hypertension prior to thyroidectomy in cats with hyperthyroidism,
or as part of the presurgical management of animals with pheochro-
mocytoma. Use of propranolol during anesthesia has been largely
superseded by the availability of esmolol, which has greater selectiv-
ity for the β1
- adrenergic receptor. Propranolol is well absorbed
through the gut, but has a very high first-pass hepatic metabolism
in humans, dogs, rats, and cats [132,133]. The major metabolic
pathways for propranolol also occur in the liver [133]. It is notewor-
thy that the metabolism of oral propranolol is prolonged in hyperthy-
roid compared with euthyroid cats [134], necessitating dosing
adjustments.
Sotalol
Sotalol, in addition to being a non-selective β-adrenergic antagonist
without ISA, is a class III antiarrhythmic and has potassium
channel- blocking effects. It is most commonly used orally to treat
ventricular tachyarrhythmias and has been shown to reduce the
number of ventricular premature contractions in Boxer dogs with
familial ventricular arrhythmias [122]. It is well absorbed from the
gut when administered orally and is excreted largely unchanged in
the urine; therefore, renal impairment will significantly reduce
clearance. In dogs, the plasma half-life is approximately 4 h [135].
References
1 Pascoe PJ, Ilkiw JE, Pypendop BH. Effects of increasing infusion rates of dopamine,
dobutamine, epinephrine, and phenylephrine in healthy anesthetized cats. Am J Vet
Res 2006; 67: 1491–1499.
2 Grassi-Kassisse DM, Faro R, Withrington PG, et al. Characterisation of functional
endothelin receptors in the canine isolated perfused spleen. Eur J Pharmacol 1995;
282: 57–63.
3 Igić R. Mechanism of epinephrine-induced dysrhythmias in rat involves local
cholinergic activation. Can J Physiol Pharmacol 1996; 74: 85–88.
4 Maze M, Smith CM. Identification of receptor mechanism mediating epinephrine-
induced arrhythmias during halothane anesthesia in the dog. Anesthesiology 1983;
59: 322–326.
5 Katz RL, Bigger JT Jr. Cardiac arrhythmias during anesthesia and operation.
Anesthesiology 1970; 33: 193–213.
6 Black GW, Clarke RS, Howard PJ, McCullough H. The cardiovascular effects of
teflurane in the cat. Br J Anaesth 1969; 41: 288–296.
7 Lees P, Tavernor WD. Influence of halothane and catecholamines on heart rate and
rhythm in the horse. Br J Pharmacol 1970; 39: 149–159.
8 Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, Benson GJ. Halothane–catecholamine arrhythmias in
swine (Sus scrofa). Am J Vet Res 1986; 47: 2134–2137.
9 Hikasa Y, Okabe C, Takase K, et al. Ventricular arrhythmogenic dose of adrenaline
during sevoflurane, isoflurane, and halothane anaesthesia either with or without
ketamine or thiopentone in cats. Res Vet Sci 1996; 60: 134–137.
10 Pettifer G, Dyson D, McDonell W. The arrhythmogenic dose of epinephrine
in halothane and isoflurane anesthetized dogs: an assessment of repeatability.
Can J Vet Res 1997; 61: 221–226.
11 Gaynor JS, Bednarski RM, Muir WW III. Effect of xylazine on the arrhythmogenic
dose of epinephrine in thiamylal/halothane-anesthetized horses. Am J Vet Res 1992;
53: 2350–2354.
12 Bednarski RM, Majors LJ. Ketamine and the arrhythmogenic dose of epinephrine in
cats anesthetized with halothane and isoflurane. Am J Vet Res 1986; 47: 2122–2125.
13 Bednarski RM, Sams RA, Majors LJ, et al. Reduction of the ventricular arrhythmo-
genic dose of epinephrine by ketamine administration in halothane-anesthetized
cats. Am J Vet Res 1988; 49: 350–354.

-- 345 of 1450 --

330 	Section 3: Pharmacology
14 Niiya S. The effect of ketamine on epinephrine-induced arrhythmias in dogs anes-
thetized with halothane–nitrous oxide. Masui 1990; 39: 1652–1659.
15 Kaye AD, Hoover JM, Baber SR, et al. Effects of norepinephrine on alpha-subtype
receptors in the feline pulmonary vascular bed. Crit Care Med 2004; 32: 2300–2303.
16 Miller RD, Way WL, Eger EI II. The effects of alpha-methyldopa, reserpine, gua-
nethidine, and iproniazid on minimum alveolar anesthetic requirement (MAC).
Anesthesiology 1968; 29: 1153–1158.
17 Steffey EP, Eger EI. The effect of seven vasopressors of halothane MAC in dogs.
Br J Anaesth 1975; 47: 435–438.
18 Johnson MD. Circulating epinephrine stimulates renin secretion in anesthetized
dogs by activation of extrarenal adrenoceptors. Am J Physiol 1984; 246: F676–F684.
19 Johnson MD, Whitener CJ, Sears TS. Epinephrine-induced renin secretion is not
initiated by cardiac adrenoceptors. Am J Physiol 1988; 254: E265–E271.
20 Laks M, Callis G, Swan HJ. Hemodynamic effects of low doses of norepinephrine in
the conscious dog. Am J Physiol 1971; 220: 171–173.
21 Melchior JC, Pinaud M, Blanloeil Y, et al. Hemodynamic effects of continuous nor-
epinephrine infusion in dogs with and without hyperkinetic endotoxic shock. Crit
Care Med 1987; 15: 687–691.
22 Valverde A, Giguère S, Sanchez LC, et al. Effects of dobutamine, norepinephrine,
and vasopressin on cardiovascular function in anesthetized neonatal foals with
induced hypotension. Am J Vet Res 2006; 67: 1730–1737.
23 Vincent CJ, Hawley AT, Rozanski EA, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of dobu-
tamine and norepinephrine infusion in healthy anesthetized alpacas. Am J Vet Res
2009; 70: 1236–1242.
24 Kojima K, Ishizuka T, Sasaki N, et al. Cardiovascular effects of dose escalating of
norepinephrine in healthy dogs anesthetized with isoflurane. Vet Anaesth Analg
2021; 48: 654–662.
25 Bakker J, Vincent JL. Effects of norepinephrine and dobutamine on oxygen trans-
port and consumption in a dog model of endotoxic shock. Crit Care Med 1993; 21:
425–432.
26 Gillis CN, Pitt BR. The fate of circulating amines within the pulmonary circulation.
Annu Rev Physiol 1982; 44: 269–281.
27 Rosati M, Dyson DH, Sinclair MD, et al. Response of hypotensive dogs to dopa-
mine hydrochloride and dobutamine hydrochloride during deep isoflurane anes-
thesia. Am J Vet Res 2007; 68: 483–494.
28 Brooks HL, Stein PD, Matson JL, et al. Dopamine-induced alterations in coronary
hemodynamics in dogs. Circ Res 1969; 24: 699–704.
29 Scott A, Chakrabarti MK, Hall GM. Oxygen transport during dopamine infusion in
dogs. Br J Anaesth 1979; 51: 1011–1019.
30 Dyson DH, Sinclair MD. Impact of dopamine or dobutamine infusions on cardio-
vascular variables after rapid blood loss and volume replacement during isoflurane-
induced anesthesia in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2006; 67: 1121–1130.
31 Chen HC, Sinclair MD, Dyson DH. Use of ephedrine and dopamine in dogs for the
management of hypotension in routine clinical cases under isoflurane anesthesia.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2007; 34: 301–311.
32 Wiese AJ, Barter LS, Ilkiw JE, et al. Cardiovascular and respiratory effects of incre-
mental doses of dopamine and phenylephrine in the management of isoflurane-
induced hypotension in cats with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am J Vet Res 2012;
73: 908–916.
33 Kobluk K, Pypendop BH. Effects of dopamine, norepinephrine or phenylephrine
on the prevention of hypotension in isoflurane-anesthetized cats administered vati-
noxan or vatinoxan and dexmedetomidine. Vet Anaesth Analg 2022; 49: 54–64.
34 Swanson CR, Muir WW III, Bednarski RM, et al. Hemodynamic responses in
halothane-anesthetized horses given infusions of dopamine or dobutamine.
Am J Vet Res 1985; 46: 365–370.
35 Trim CM, Moore JN, White NA. Cardiopulmonary effects of dopamine hydrochlo-
ride in anaesthetised horses. Equine Vet J 1985; 17: 41–44.
36 Robertson SA, Malark JA, Steele CJ, et al. Metabolic, hormonal, and hemodynamic
changes during dopamine infusions in halothane anesthetized horses. Vet Surg
1996; 25: 88–97.
37 Young LE, Blissitt KJ, Clutton RE, et al. Haemodynamic effects of a sixty minute
infusion of dopamine hydrochloride in horses anaesthetised with halothane.
Equine Vet J 1998; 30: 310–316.
38 Lee YH, Clarke KW, Alibhai HI, et al. Effects of dopamine, dobutamine, dopexam-
ine, phenylephrine, and saline solution on intramuscular blood flow and other
cardiopulmonary variables in halothane-anesthetized ponies. Am J Vet Res 1998;
59: 1463–1472.
39 Lokhandwala MF, Jandhyala BS. The role of sympathetic nervous system in the
vascular actions of dopamine. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1979; 210: 120–126.
40 Dancker C, Hopster K, Rohn K, et al. Effects of dobutamine, dopamine, phenyle-
phrine and noradrenaline on systemic haemodynamics and intestinal perfusion in
isoflurane anaesthetized horses. Equine Vet J 2018; 50: 104–110.
41 Tatsumi K, Pickett CK, Weil JV. Decreased carotid body hypoxic sensitivity in
chronic hypoxia: role of dopamine. Respir Physiol 1995; 101: 47–57.
42 McNay JL, Mcdonald RH Jr, Goldberg LI. Direct renal vasodilatation produced by
dopamine in the dog. Circ Res 1965; 16: 510–517.
43 MacCannell KL, McNay JL, Meyer MB, et al. Dopamine in the treatment of
hypotension and shock. N Engl J Med 1966; 275: 1389–1398.
44 Karthik S, Lisbon A. Low-dose dopamine in the intensive care unit. Semin Dial
2006; 19: 465–471.
45 Clark KL, Robertson MJ, Drew GM. Do renal tubular dopamine receptors mediate
dopamine-induced diuresis in the anesthetized cat? J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 1991;
17: 267–276.
46 Furukawa S, Nagashima Y, Hoshi K, et al. Effects of dopamine infusion on cardiac
and renal blood flows in dogs. J Vet Med Sci 2002; 64: 41–44.
47 Takemoto F, Cohen HT, Satoh T, et al. Dopamine inhibits Na/K-ATPase in single
tubules and cultured cells from distal nephron. Pflugers Arch 1992; 421: 302–306.
48 Clark BJ, Menninger K. Peripheral dopamine receptors. Circ Res 1980; 46:
I59–I63.
49 Voelckel WG, Lindner KH, Wenzel V, et al. Effect of small-dose dopamine on
mesenteric blood flow and renal function in a pig model of cardiopulmonary resus-
citation with vasopressin. Anesth Analg 1999; 89: 1430–1436.
50 Raisis AL, Young LE, Blissitt KJ, et al. Effect of a 30-minute infusion of dobutamine
hydrochloride on hind limb blood flow and hemodynamics in halothane-
anesthetized horses. Am J Vet Res 2000; 61: 1282–1288.
51 Hellyer PW, Wagner AE, Mama KR. The effects of dobutamine and ephedrine on
packed cell volume, total protein, heart rate, and blood pressure in anaesthetized
horses. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1998; 21: 497–499.
52 Meier M, Bettschart-Wolfensberger R, Schwarzwald CC, et al. Effects of dobu-
tamine on cardiovascular function and oxygen delivery in standing horses.
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2020; 43: 470–476.
53 Goya S, Wada T, Shimada K, et al. Dose-dependent effects of isoflurane and dobu-
tamine on cardiovascular function in dogs with experimental mitral regurgitation.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45:432–442.
54 Renton MC, Snowden CP. Dopexamine and its role in the protection of hepatos-
planchnic and renal perfusion in high-risk surgical and critically ill patients.
Br J Anaesth 2005; 94: 459–467.
55 Muir WW III. Inotropic mechanisms of dopexamine hydrochloride in horses.
Am J Vet Res 1992; 53: 1343–1346.
56 Muir WW III. Cardiovascular effects of dopexamine HCl in conscious and
halothane-anaesthetised horses. Equine Vet J Suppl 1992; (11): 24–29.
57 Young LE, Blissitt KJ, Clutton RE, et al. Temporal effects of an infusion of dopexam-
ine hydrochloride in horses anesthetized with halothane. Am J Vet Res 1997; 58:
516–523.
58 Einstein R, Abdul-Hussein N, Wong TW, et al. Cardiovascular actions of dopexam-
ine in anaesthetized and conscious dogs. Br J Pharmacol 1994; 111: 199–204.
59 Scheeren TW, Arndt JO. Different response of oxygen consumption and cardiac
output to various endogenous and synthetic catecholamines in awake dogs.
Crit Care Med 2008; 28: 3861–3868.
60 Neustein SM, Dimich I, Sampson I, et al. Arrhythmogenic potential of dopexamine
hydrochloride during halothane anaesthesia in dogs. Can J Anaesth 1994; 41:
542–546.
61 Asfar P, De Backer D, Meier-Hellmann A, et al. Clinical review: influence of vasoac-
tive and other therapies on intestinal and hepatic circulations in patients with septic
shock. Crit Care 2004; 8: 170–179.
62 Gray PA, Jones T, Park GR. Blood concentrations of dopexamine in patients during
and after orthotopic liver transplantation. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1994; 37: 89–92.
63 Tobias JD. Caudal epidural block: a review of test dosing and recognition of
systemic injection in children. Anesth Analg 2001; 93: 1156–1161.
64 Crystal GJ, Salem MR. Beta-adrenergic stimulation restores oxygen extraction
reserve during acute normovolemic hemodilution. Anesth Analg 2002; 95: 851–857.
65 Sandusky GE, Means JR, Todd GC. Comparative cardiovascular toxicity in dogs
given inotropic agents by continuous intravenous infusion. Toxicol Pathol 1990;
18: 268–278.
66 Volders PG, Kulcśar A, Vos MA, et al. Similarities between early and delayed
afterdepolarizations induced by isoproterenol in canine ventricular myocytes.
Cardiovasc Res 1997; 34: 348–359.
67 O’Neill DK, Aizer A, Linton P, et al. Isoproterenol infusion increases level of con-
sciousness during catheter ablation of atrial fibrillation. J Interv Card Electrophysiol
2012; 34: 137–142.
68 Zhang H, De Jongh R, De Backer D, et al. Effects of alpha- and beta-adrenergic
stimulation on hepatosplanchnic perfusion and oxygen extraction in endotoxic
shock. Crit Care Med 2001; 29: 581–588.
69 Szefler SJ, Acara M. Isoproterenol excretion and metabolism in the isolated
perfused rat kidney. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1979; 210: 295–300.
70 Linton RA, Young LE, Marlin DJ, et al. Cardiac output measured by lithium
dilution, thermodilution, and transesophageal Doppler echocardiography in anes-
thetized horses. Am J Vet Res 2000; 61: 731–737.

-- 346 of 1450 --

Chapter 21: Adrenergic Agents 	331
71 Frederick J, Giguère S, Butterworth K, et al. Severe phenylephrine-associated
hemorrhage in five aged horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2010; 237: 830–834.
72 Robinson JL. Effect of vasopressin and phenylephrine on arterial pressure and heart
rate in conscious dogs. Am J Physiol 1986; 251: H253–H260.
73 Ludders JW, Reitan JA, Martucci R, et al. Blood pressure response to phenylephrine
infusion in halothane-anesthetized dogs given acetylpromazine maleate. Am J Vet
Res 1983; 44: 996–999.
74 Richardson PD, Withrington PG. The role of beta-adrenoceptors in the responses
of the hepatic arterial vascular bed of the dog to phenylephrine, isoproterenol,
noradrenaline and adrenaline. Br J Pharmacol 1977; 60: 239–249.
75 Strandhoy JW, Wolff DW, Buckalew VM Jr. Renal alpha 1- and alpha 2-adrenoceptor
mediated vasoconstriction in dogs. J Hypertens Suppl 1984; 2: S151–S153.
76 Erkinaro T, Mäkikallio K, Kavasmaa T, et al. Effects of ephedrine and phenyle-
phrine on uterine and placental circulations and fetal outcome following fetal
hypoxaemia and epidural-induced hypotension in a sheep model. Br J Anaesth
2004; 93: 825–832.
77 Lukasik VM, Gleed RD, Scarlett JM, et al. Intranasal phenylephrine reduces post
anesthetic upper airway obstruction in horses. Equine Vet J 1997; 29: 236–238.
78 Herring IP, Jacobson JD, Pickett JP. Cardiovascular effects of topical ophthalmic
10% phenylephrine in dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 2004; 7: 41–46.
79 Martin-Flores M, Mercure-McKenzie TM, Campoy L, et al. Controlled retrospec-
tive study of the effects of eyedrops containing phenylephrine hydrochloride and
scopolamine hydrobromide on mean arterial blood pressure in anesthetized dogs.
Am J Vet Res 2010; 71: 1407–1412.
80 Dyson DH, Pascoe PJ. Influence of preinduction methoxamine, lactated Ringer
solution, or hypertonic saline solution infusion or postinduction dobutamine infu-
sion on anesthetic-induced hypotension in horses. Am J Vet Res 1990; 51: 17–21.
81 Lee JC, Fripp RR, Downing SE. Myocardial responses to alpha-adrenoceptor stimula-
tion with methoxamine hydrochloride in lambs. Am J Physiol 1982; 242: H405–H410.
82 Brewster WR, Osgood PF, Isaacs JP, et al. Haemodynamic effects of a pressor amine
(methoxamine) with predominant vasoconstrictor activity. Circ Res 1960; 8: 980–988.
83 Imai S, Shigei T, Hashimoto K. Cardiac actions of methoxamine with special refer-
ence to its antagonistic action to epinephrine. Circ Res 1961; 9: 552–560.
84 Canepa- Anson R, Dawson JR, Frankl WS, et al. Beta 2 adrenoceptor agonists.
Pharmacology, metabolic effects and arrhythmias. Eur Heart J 1982; (Suppl D):
129–134.
85 Gleed RD, Dobson A. Effect of clenbuterol on arterial oxygen tension in the anaes-
thetised horse. Res Vet Sci 1990; 48: 331–337.
86 Keegan RD, Gleed RD, Sanders EA, et al. Treatment of low arterial oxygen tension
in anesthetized horses with clenbuterol. Vet Surg 1991; 20: 148–152.
87 Dodam JR, Moon RE, Olson NC, et al. Effects of clenbuterol hydrochloride on pul-
monary gas exchange and hemodynamics in anesthetized horses. Am J Vet Res
1993; 54: 776–782.
88 Robertson SA, Bailey JE. Aerosolized salbutamol (albuterol) improves PaO2 in
hypoxaemic anaesthetized horses – a prospective clinical trial in 81 horses.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2002; 29: 212–218.
89 Patschova M, Kabes R, Krisova S. The effects of inhalation salbutamol administra-
tion on systemic and pulmonary hemodynamic, pulmonary mechanics and oxygen
balance during general anaesthesia in the horse. Vet Med (Czech) 2010; 55: 445–456.
90 Kirschvink N, Leemans J, Delvaux F, et al. Bronchodilators in bronchoscopy-
induced airflow limitation in allergen-sensitized cats. J Vet Intern Med 2005; 19:
161–167.
91 Leemans J, Kirschvink N, Clercx C, et al. Functional response to inhaled salbutamol
and/or ipratropium bromide in Ascaris suum- sensitised cats with allergen-induced
bronchospasms. Vet J 2010; 186: 76–83.
92 Leemans J, Kirschvink N, Bernaerts F, et al. Salmeterol or doxycycline do not
inhibit acute bronchospasm and airway inflammation in cats with experimentally-
induced asthma. Vet J 2012; 192: 49–56.
93 Padrid P, Church DB. Drugs used in the management of respiratory diseases.
In: Maddison J, Page SW, Church D, eds. Small Animal Clinical Pharmacology, 2nd
edn. Edinburgh: Saunders Elsevier, 2008: 458–468.
94 Takasaki K, Urabe M, Yamamoto R. Tachyphylaxis of indirectly acting sympatho-
mimetic amines. II. Recovery of tyramine tachyphylaxis and crossed tachyphylaxis
between tyramine and other indirectly acting sympathomimetic amines in dogs.
Kurume Med J 1972; 19: 11–22.
95 Patil PN, Tye A, Lapidus JB. A pharmacological study of the ephedrine isomers.
J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1965; 148: 158–168.
96 Young R, Glennon RA. Discriminative stimulus properties of (–)-ephedrine.
Pharmacol Biochem Behav 1998; 60: 771–775.
97 Grandy JL, Hodgson DS, Dunlop CI, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of ephedrine in
halothane-anesthetized horses. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1989; 12: 389–396.
98 Wagner AE, Dunlop CI, Chapman PL. Effects of ephedrine on cardiovascular
function and oxygen delivery in isoflurane-anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 1993;
54: 1917–1922.
99 Davies BN, Withrington PG. The actions of drugs on the smooth muscle of the
capsule and blood vessels of the spleen. Pharmacol Rev 1973; 25: 373–413.
100 Egger C, McCrackin MA, Hofmeister E, et al. Efficacy of preanesthetic intramus-
cular administration of ephedrine for prevention of anesthesia-induced hypoten-
sion in cats and dogs. Can Vet J 2009; 50: 179–184.
101 Amorin RB, Braz JR, Castiglia YM, et al. Effects of ephedrine on cardiovascular
and renal function of dogs anesthetized with sodium pentobarbital. Rev Bras
Anestesiol 2002; 52: 434–445.
102 Axelrod J. Studies on sympathomimetic amines I. The biotransformation and
physiological disposition of l-ephedrine and l-norephedrine. J Pharm Exp Ther
1953; 109: 62–73.
103 Nicholson JD. The metabolism of l-ephedrine in ponies. Arch Int Pharmacodyn
Ther 1970; 188: 375–386.
104 Ramage AG. The effect of prazosin, indoramin and phentolamine on sympathetic
nerve activity. Eur J Pharmacol 1984; 106: 507–513.
105 Rubin P, Yee YG, Anderson M, et al. Prazosin first-pass metabolism and hepatic
extraction in the dog. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 1979; 1: 641–647.
106 Erve JC, Vashishtha SC, DeMaio W, et al. Metabolism of prazosin in rat, dog, and
human liver microsomes and cryopreserved rat and human hepatocytes and char-
acterization of metabolites by liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry.
Drug Metab Dispos 2007; 35: 908–916.
107 Becker DE, Reed KL. Local anesthetics: review of pharmacological considerations.
Anesth Prog 2012; 59: 90–101.
108 Rowbotham MC. Pharmacologic management of complex regional pain
syndrome. Clin J Pain 2006; 22: 425–429.
109 Russell WJ, Metcalfe IR, Tonkin AL, et al. The preoperative management of
phaeochromocytoma. Anaesth Intensive Care 1998; 26: 196–200.
110 Herrera MA, Mehl ML, Kass PH, et al. Predictive factors and the effect of
phenoxybenzamine on outcome in dogs undergoing adrenalectomy for pheochro-
mocytoma. J Vet Intern Med 2008; 22: 1333–1339.
111 Fischer JR, Lane IF, Cribb AE. Urethral pressure profile and hemodynamic effects
of phenoxybenzamine and prazosin in non-sedated male beagle dogs. Can J Vet Res
2003; 67: 30–38.
112 Myklejord DJ. Undiagnosed pheochromocytoma: the anesthesiologist nightmare.
Clin Med Res 2004; 2: 59–62.
113 Frishman WH, Saunders E. β-Adrenergic blockers. J Clin Hypertens 2011;
13: 649–653.
114 Jaillon P. Relevance of intrinsic sympathomimetic activity for beta blockers.
Am J Cardiol 1990; 66: 21C–23C.
115 Ventura HO, Kalapura T. Beta-blocker therapy and severe heart failure: myth or
reality? Congest Heart Fail 2003; 9: 197–202.
116 Wiysonge CS, Bradley HA, Volmink J, et al. Beta- blockers for hypertension.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012; (11): CD002003.
117 Foresi A, Cavigioli G, Signorelli G, et al. Is the use of beta-blockers in COPD still
an unresolved dilemma? Respiration 2010; 80: 177–187.
118 Fonseca VA. Effects of beta-blockers on glucose and lipid metabolism. Curr Med
Res Opin 2010; 26: 615–629.
119 Flynn BC, Vernick WJ, Ellis JE. β-Blockade in the perioperative management of
the patient with cardiac disease undergoing non-cardiac surgery. Br J Anaesth
2011; 107: 13–15.
120 Flier S, Buhre WF, van Klei WA. Cardioprotective effects of perioperative
β- blockade in vascular surgery patients: fact or fiction? Curr Opin Anaesthesiol
2011; 24: 104–110.
121 Khor KH, Campbell FE, Charles BG, et al. Comparative pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics of tablet, suspension and paste formulations of atenolol in
cats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2012; 35: 437–445.
122 Meurs KM, Spier AW, Wright NA, et al. Comparison of the effects of four antiar-
rhythmic treatments for familial ventricular arrhythmias in Boxers. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2002; 221: 522–527.
123 Quon CY, Gorczynski RJ. Pharmacodynamics and onset of action of esmolol in
anesthetized dogs. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1986; 237: 912–918.
124 Schober KE, Fuentes VL, Bonagura JD. Comparison between invasive hemody-
namic measurements and noninvasive assessment of left ventricular diastolic
function by use of Doppler echocardiography in healthy anesthetized cats.
Am J Vet Res 2003; 64: 93–103.
125 Verschoor-Kirss M, Rozanski E, Rush JE. Use of esmolol for control of tachycardia
in 28 dogs and cats (2003–2020). J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2022; 32:
243–248.
126 Rush JE, Freeman LM, Hiler C, et al. Use of metoprolol in dogs with acquired
cardiac disease. J Vet Cardiol 2002; 4: 23–28.
127 Fang J, Semple HA, Song J. Determination of metoprolol and its four metabolites
in dog plasma. J Chromatogr B 2004; 809: 9–14.
128 Dumasia MC. In vivo biotransformation of metoprolol in the horse and on-
column esterification of the aminocarboxylic acid metabolite by alcohols during

-- 347 of 1450 --

332 	Section 3: Pharmacology
solid phase extraction using mixed mode columns. J Pharm Biomed Anal
2006; 40: 75–81.
129 Regârdh CG, Ek L, Hoffmann KJ. Plasma levels and beta-blocking effect of alpha-
hydroxymetoprolol – metabolite of metoprolol – in the dog. J Pharmacokinet
Biopharm 1979; 7: 471–479.
130 Romero L, Bel N, Artigas F, et al. Effect of pindolol on the function of pre- and
postsynaptic 5-HT1A receptors: in vivo microdialysis and electrophysiological
studies in the rat brain. Neuropsychopharmacol 1996; 15: 349–360.
131 Kongara K, Chambers P, Johnson CB. Glomerular filtration rate after tramadol,
parecoxib and pindolol following anaesthesia and analgesia in comparison with
morphine in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36: 86–94.
132 Mills PC, Siebert GA, Roberts MS. A model to study intestinal and hepatic
metabolism of propranolol in the dog. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2004; 27: 45–48.
133 Baughman TM, Talarico CL, Soglia JR. Evaluation of the metabolism of
propranolol by linear ion trap technology in mouse, rat, dog, monkey, and
human cryopreserved hepatocytes. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom 2009; 23:
2146–2150.
134 Jacobs G, Whittem T, Sams R, et al. Pharmacokinetics of propranolol in healthy
cats during euthyroid and hyperthyroid states. Am J Vet Res 1997; 58: 398–403.
135 Ishizaki T, Tawara K. Relationship between pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
namics of the beta adrenergic blocking drug sotalol in dogs. J Pharmacol Exp Ther
1979; 211: 331–337.

-- 348 of 1450 --

333
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth E dition of L umb and J ones	. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
Sedatives and tranquilizers play an important role in day-to-day
veterinary practice. The use of these medications as part of an anes-
thetic plan has many advantages, including, but not limited to,
calming the patient, facilitating intravenous (IV) catheterization,
providing analgesia, blunting sympathetic responses to surgical
stimulation, reducing anesthetic requirements, and promoting
smooth induction and recovery. The selection of drugs should be
individualized to the patient. Species, age, patient temperament,
pathologic processes, blood volume status, and so on should be
considered when selecting drugs and doses.
The distinction between a tranquilizer and sedative is often
nebulous due to species and dosing differences. For example,
α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists are effective in both horses and
cattle, but cattle may require one-tenth the horse dose to achieve a
comparable level of sedation. Phenothiazines are efficacious in dogs
and horses but not so in swine. These distinctions are discussed in
this chapter and in chapters pertaining to techniques in different
species.
In general, a tranquilizer induces a feeling of calm (anxiolysis).
Sedatives, while reducing anxiety, also reduce the overall response
to external stimuli. Analgesia is a feature of some sedatives but cer-
tainly not all. Clinical practice demonstrates that different species
can vary widely in their response to a class of drug, and individuals
within a species may also display variable effects. Terminology
used varies depending on the source but, in this chapter, all the
medications are termed “sedatives,” knowing that effects will vary
with species and dose.
There are a variety of classes of sedatives currently used in veteri-
nary medicine. Phenothiazines, benzodiazepines, and α2 - adrenergic
receptor agonists are among the most commonly used in domestic
animals, and they are often combined with opioids and/or other
injectable agents to produce variable states of calmness, sedation,
and possibly analgesia depending on the medications used. In dogs
and cats, increasing appreciation of the stress associated with vet-
erinary visits has resulted in a significant increase in the use of
off-label anti-anxiety medications such as gabapentin, trazodone,
and melatonin in animals presenting as both out-patients and
in- patients. In many cases, these animals also require sedation or
general anesthesia while hospitalized for a variety of diagnostic or
surgical procedures. Unfortunately, there is little evidence regarding
the interactions of these drugs when they are combined with
phenothiazines, benzodiazepines, α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists,
injectable anesthetics, and inhalant anesthetics in dogs and cats.
As a result, most decisions about sedative and anesthetic drug
and dose selection in patients receiving gabapentin, trazodone, and
melatonin are based on empirical observations of the animal’s
temperament and demeanor in the immediate preanesthetic period.
More information about gabapentin and trazodone is available
in Chapter 25.
22 Sedatives and Tranquilizers
Catherine M. Creighton and Leigh A. Lamont
Department of Companion Animals, Atlantic Veterinary College, University of Prince Edward Island, Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island,
Canada
Chapter contents
Introduction, 333
Phenothiazines, 334
Acepromazine, 334
Butyrophenones, 335
Azaperone, 335
Benzodiazepines, 336
Diazepam, midazolam, and zolazepam, 336
Benzodiazepine antagonist, 338
Flumazenil, 338
α2
- Adrenergic receptor agonists, 338
Xylazine, detomidine, romifidine, medetomidine, and dexmedetomidine, 338
α2
- Adrenergic receptor antagonists, 344
Yohimbine, tolazoline, atipamezole, and vatinoxan, 344
Acknowledgement, 347
References, 347

-- 349 of 1450 --

334 	Section 3: Pharmacology
Phenothiazines
In humans, phenothiazines have been used since the 1950s and
were once the most widely used antipsychotic agents, prescribed to
reduce symptoms in a wide variety of conditions including schizo-
phrenia. They also have clinical applications for control of nausea
and vomiting. Interestingly, while sedation is a well-recognized side
effect of phenothiazines in people, most antipsychotic drugs cause
unpleasant subjective effects in nonpsychotic individuals [1].
Extrapyramidal side-effects have been noted, typically with long-
term use in humans or overdose in veterinary patients (tremor,
coma/catalepsy, and rigidity). Phenothiazines exhibit activity at a
wide variety of receptor systems both centrally and peripherally,
including adrenergic, muscarinic, dopaminergic, serotonergic, and
histaminergic.
Acepromazine
Mechanism of action and indications
The sedative effects of the phenothiazines are mediated primarily
by blockade of dopamine receptors, specifically D 2 receptors.
This pre- and postsynaptic G-protein- coupled receptor blockade
leads to a decrease in cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)
and adenylate cyclase activity, calcium conductance, and altera-
tions in postsynaptic potassium conductance. Blockade of central
α1
- adrenergic, muscarinic, and histaminic (H 1
) receptors may also
play a role in sedation. α1
- Adrenergic receptor antagonism medi-
ates the decrease in blood pressure noted with this group of medica-
tions and may play a role in the decrease in thermoregulatory
control (tendency toward poikilothermia), along with serotonin
blockade.
Acepromazine has been among the most widely used sedatives in
veterinary practice for many years and is labeled for use in small
and large animals in many countries. It is generally reliable as a
sedative when given parentally, often at doses lower than the label
dose, but failure to sedate and/or arousal with stimulation is not
uncommon. Muscle relaxation with acepromazine is reasonably
good, and the drug has been used to counteract muscle rigidly asso-
ciated with other agents, such as ketamine. Acepromazine has no
inherent analgesic properties when administered alone and is fre-
quently given in combination with opioids to produce neuroleptan-
algesia, a state characterized by both sedation and analgesia. There
is no antagonist available to reverse the clinical anti-dopaminergic
effects of acepromazine.
Pharmacokinetics
Acepromazine is highly protein-bound with a large volume of
distribution (Vd
) [2]. Peak central nervous system (CNS) effects are
usually noted 10–20 min after IV administration and 30–40 min
after intramuscular (IM) administration [3]. It has a long duration
of action with reported elimination half-lives of 3–5 h in the
horse [2,4] and 7 h in the dog [5]. In the horse, acepromazine is
metabolized extensively in the liver with urinary excretion of
metabolites [6]. In dogs, bioavailability after oral administration is
approximately 20% [5].
Pharmacodynamics
Cardiovascular system
The hemodynamic impact of acepromazine is variable, likely due to
its diverse receptor interactions both centrally and peripherally.
Acepromazine-induced blockade of vascular α1
-adrenergic recep-
tors results in peripheral vasodilation and has been reported to
decrease stroke volume, cardiac output, and arterial blood pressure
by 20–30% in conscious dogs administered 0.1 mg/kg IV [7,8].
More recently, hemodynamic effects were studied in conscious
dogs administered IV acepromazine incrementally to cumulative
doses of 0.01, 0.025, 0.05, and 0.1 mg/kg. Maximal decreases in
stroke index and mean arterial pressure of 16% and 17%, respectively,
were reported, but there were no significant changes in systemic
vascular resistance or heart rate. The authors attributed the reduc-
tion in arterial pressure to reduced myocardial contractility [9].
Conscious horses administered 0.1 mg/kg IV showed a 20–30%
decrease in mean aortic pressure and a 10–15% decrease in cardiac
output [10]. Mean arterial pressure measured at the tail (not
corrected for height) was significantly reduced in standing horses
receiving 0.1 mg/kg acepromazine [11]. Standing horses receiving
0.04 mg/kg acepromazine IV had lower facial artery pressures but
no real change in digital palmar arterial flow compared with saline-
treated horses [12].
Blood pressure can also be reduced in inhalant-anesthetized dogs
and horses. Dogs anesthetized with halothane receiving aceproma-
zine at 0.05, 0.125, and 0.25 mg/kg IV displayed reductions in mean
arterial pressure of 2.3%, 9.4%, and 16.8%, respectively, that were
attenuated by phenylephrine [13]. Dogs anesthetized with propofol
and isoflurane receiving IV acepromazine incrementally to cumu-
lative doses of 0.01, 0.025, 0.05, and 0.1 mg/kg had increases in
cardiac index but no significant changes in stroke index, systolic,
diastolic, or mean arterial pressure, or heart rate [14]. Systemic
vascular resistance index, however, decreased by 25% in the dogs
receiving 0.05 and 0.1 mg/kg IV cumulative doses. Halothane-
anesthetized horses receiving IV acepromazine at 0.03 mg/kg
showed a decrease in mean arterial blood pressure of up to 25% [15].
Clinical experience suggests that healthy animals premedicated
with low, clinically applicable doses of acepromazine rarely display
dramatic decreases in blood pressure during isoflurane or sevoflu-
rane anesthesia; however, the drug’s hypotensive effects may be
potentiated in hemodynamically unstable patients or in those receiv-
ing epidural or spinal local anesthetics. While changes in heart rate
are variable and typically not significant, mild reflex tachycardia has
been noted in response to decreased systemic vascular resistance
and arterial blood pressure [7,10]. Premedication with acepromazine
will increase the dose of epinephrine required to induce a ventricular
arrhythmia, likely due to α-adrenergic receptor blockade [16–18].
Respiratory system
Acepromazine administration has little effect on pulmonary
function. Respiratory rates often decrease, but arterial partial pres-
sure of carbon dioxide (PaCO 2
) and pH are not typically affected
because tidal volume is increased to maintain adequate minute
ventilation [10,19]. Acepromazine has been shown to have no
impact on respiratory rate and arterial blood gases in halothane-
anesthetized 	horses 	[15]. 	Pretreatment 	with 	acepromazine
(0.035 mg/kg IM) in horses that were subsequently sedated or anes-
thetized with romifidine, butorphanol, and tiletamine–zolazepam
reduced the impact of intrapulmonary shunt and ventilation–
perfusion mismatching [20].
Central nervous system
Acepromazine administration has a significant dose-dependent
impact on inhalant anesthetic requirements. In dogs, acepromazine
at 0.2 mg/kg reduced halothane requirement by 28% and isoflurane
requirement by 48% [21]. In another study of dogs anesthetized
with halothane, IM administration of acepromazine at 0.02 and
0.2 mg/kg reduced the minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) by

-- 350 of 1450 --

Chapter 22: Sedatives and Tranquilizers 	335
34% and 44%, respectively [22]. In ponies receiving 0.05 mg/kg
acepromazine IV, halothane MAC was reduced by 37% [23]. These
across-species MAC-sparing effects indicate that patients receiving
acepromazine must be closely monitored during anesthesia and the
delivery of inhalant anesthetics adjusted accordingly.
For many years, acepromazine administration was associated
with seizure activity and was considered contraindicated in veteri-
nary patients with seizure histories. This association dates back to a
series of 1950’s case reports and experimental studies involving
electroencephalographic (EEG) changes induced by another phe-
nothiazine, chlorpromazine, in rabbits and people [24]. A subse-
quent 1970 study went on to report that high-dose chlorpromazine
altered EEG activity in epileptic dogs [25]. Since that time, however,
several clinical studies have evaluated the effects of acepromazine in
dogs with seizure histories [26,27], or undergoing procedures asso-
ciated with increased seizure risk (e.g., myelography) [28], and
found that acepromazine has no discernible effect on seizure
frequency.
Other effects
Hematologic effects of acepromazine administration include
decreased packed cell volume and potential effects on platelet
aggregation. Hematocrit is reduced in some dogs and horses by
20–30% shortly after acepromazine administration as a result of
splenic engorgement after α1
-adrenergic receptor blockade [2,3,12,29].
This effect can last several hours. Hemoglobin is similarly reduced
by 14–22% in conscious dogs [9]. Evidence on the effects of ace-
promazine on platelet function in dogs is conflicting. One study
demonstrated decreased platelet aggregation and altered coagula-
tion times with acepromazine [30], while a subsequent thromboe-
lastography study found no effect of acepromazine on platelet
function [31].
Acepromazine has well-recognized antiemetic properties that are
attributed to antagonism of dopamine receptors in the chemorecep-
tor trigger zone. In dogs, administration of acepromazine 15 min
prior to a variety of opioids reduced the incidence of vomiting from
45% to 18% [32]; however, its efficacy as an antiemetic was less than
that of the neurokinin-1 receptor antagonist, maropitant, prior to
hydromorphone [33]. Lower esophageal sphincter tone and gastric
emptying are reduced with acepromazine in dogs [34–36], but ace-
promazine with butorphanol was considered acceptable for restraint
when performing upper gastrointestinal contrast studies in healthy
dogs [36]. In horses, acepromazine administration is associated
with similar effects on gastrointestinal motility [37,38]. In dogs, the
combination of acepromazine–hydromorphone was less effective
than dexmedetomidine–hydromorphone at reducing gastroesoph-
ageal reflux during anesthesia when compared to hydromorphone
premedication alone [39].
Penile prolapse (priapism) in stallions has been associated with
acepromazine administration [40,41]. A 2011 retrospective study
by Driessen et al. showed that 2.4% of male horses developed penile
prolapse lasting 1–4 h [41]. One stallion (0.02%) developed a
prolapse lasting more than 12 h but less than 18 h. The incidence
of permanent penile paralysis is extremely low but could be
catastrophic in valuable breeding males. Glomerular filtration is
maintained in dogs premedicated with acepromazine [42,43].
Acepromazine reduces urethral pressure in male cats anesthetized
with halothane [44].
Acepromazine has antihistamine effects through its interactions
at H1 receptors and should not be used for intradermal skin testing
in dogs when wheal size and induration is assessed [45].
Clinical considerations
For more detailed information on the clinical use of acepromazine
in the perianesthetic period in specific species, the reader is directed
to species-specific chapters elsewhere in this text.
Dogs and cats
In healthy dogs and cats, acepromazine is commonly administered,
often in combination with an opioid, for sedation or prior to induc-
tion of general anesthesia at doses ranging from 0.01–0.1 mg/kg IM,
subcutaneous (SC), or IV (with the lower end of the dose range
typically suggested for the IV route of administration). Lower doses
have also been used during recovery from anesthesia to counteract
emergence delirium or reduce hospital-associated anxiety. In healthy
dogs, the combination of acepromazine with an α2
-adrenergic recep-
tor agonist (e.g., medetomidine and dexmedetomidine) prior to
inhalant anesthesia has been investigated and, while effective, the
combination does not appear to offer significant advantages [46–48].
There are anecdotal reports that dogs homozygous for the
MDR1 (ABCB1) gene mutation, which results in non-functional
P-glycoprotein, may show increased sensitivity to various sedative or
analgesic drugs, including acepromazine. A small prospective study
involving genotyped rough-coated collies showed that those with
the homozygous MDR1 mutation tended to have increased and pro-
longed sedation scores after 0.04 mg/kg acepromazine IV compared
to heterozygous or normal dogs [49], but the clinical significance in
this and other susceptible breeds remains to be determined. For
more information on canine and feline P-glycoprotein deficiency,
the reader is referred elsewhere [50]. There have also been anecdotal
reports of collapse and sudden death in Boxer dogs following ace-
promazine administration [51], though the underlying mechanism
remains undefined. If this represents an enhanced vasovagal
response, then use of a much-reduced dose and/or pretreatment
with an anticholinergic may preempt or blunt these adverse effects.
Horses
In horses, acepromazine is administered during the pre- or postanes-
thetic periods, usually at doses ranging from 0.01–0.05 mg/kg IV. The
use of acepromazine in the perianesthetic period has been associated
with decreased risk of anesthetic morbidity and mortality [52]. An
equine study found that acepromazine 0.02 mg/kg IV was similar to
xylazine 0.3 mg/kg IV in its effects on unassisted recovery scores
when administered after general anesthesia with isoflurane [53].
Pigs
Acepromazine is used infrequently for sedation in pigs and, when
administered alone, its sedative effects in this species are generally
considered to be inadequate. In pigs, high doses of acepromazine
(1.1 and 1.65 mg/kg IM) have been shown to reduce the incidence
of halothane-induced malignant hyperthermia in susceptible ani-
mals, while lower doses (0.55 mg/kg IM) only delay its onset [54].
Butyrophenones
Azaperone
Like the phenothiazines, butyrophenone derivatives (e.g., halop-
eridol) are considered first-generation antipsychotics in humans
and have been used for this purpose since the 1950s. In veterinary
medicine, this class of drugs is rarely used for sedation in dogs, cats,
horses, and domestic cattle; however, the butyrophenone azaperone
continues to have clinical applications in swine, zoo animals, and
wildlife. Azaperone’s mechanism of action, like acepromazine,
involves antagonism of central dopaminergic (primarily D 2
)

-- 351 of 1450 --

336 	Section 3: Pharmacology
receptors. It also has a similar side effect profile, though with poten-
tially less hypotension due to decreased affinity for vascular
α1
- adrenergic receptors [1]. For more information on azaperone as
a sedative in veterinary medicine, the reader is referred to species-
specific chapters (Chapters 55, 64, and 65) elsewhere in this text.
Benzodiazepines
The benzodiazepines are sedative-hypnotic drugs that have been
widely used in human and veterinary medicine for many years. The
prototypical drug, diazepam (Valium®), was marketed in the 1960s
for anxiety in people, and it became the top-selling pharmaceutical in
the United States throughout the 1970s and early 1980s [55]. While
there are over 50 benzodiazepine agents used in people and animals
for their behavior modifying and anticonvulsant properties [51], only
diazepam, midazolam, and zolazepam will be discussed here as they
have primary indications in the perianesthetic period.
Benzodiazepines are considered controlled substances in many
jurisdictions. In the United States, they are classified as Schedule IV
drugs by the Drug Enforcement Administration.
Diazepam, midazolam, and zolazepam
Mechanism of action and indications
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) is the primary inhibitory neurotrans-
mitter in the CNS [56]. The GABAA receptor is a heteropentameric
ligand-gated (ionotropic) chloride channel assembled from a family
of at least 19 subunits encoded by distinct genes, and these various
subunit combinations give rise to numerous receptor subtypes [57].
Benzodiazepines augment GABA-mediated inhibitory transmission
at all levels of the CNS through positive allosteric modulation of the
GABAA receptor, resulting in increased chloride conductance and
hyperpolarization of postsynaptic cell membranes [58]. The benzo-
diazepine recognition site on the GABAA receptor is located at the
interface between the α and γ2 subunits [59]. Barbiturates, ethanol,
etomidate, and propofol also all modulate activity at GABAA recep-
tors, and synergistic effects can result in significant CNS depression.
As benzodiazepines enhance endogenous GABA binding to the
receptor but lack direct agonist activity, these drugs are associated
with a wide safety margin with regard to CNS depression.
While all benzodiazepines share a common chemical structure
characterized by a benzene ring linked to a seven-membered diaz-
epine ring, the response to benzodiazepines in vivo is multifactorial.
Variations in receptor subunit configurations, their locations within
the CNS, and a specific drug’s affinity for these receptors, as well as
lipid solubility and other pharmacokinetic parameters, all impact
the clinical effect of a particular drug and dose. In addition, the
discovery of the benzodiazepine-binding site on the GABA A recep-
tor has long fueled speculation that the brain produces its own
endogenous ligands for this site [60]. While a number of endoge-
nous benzodiazepine ligands (“endozepines”) have been identi-
fied [61–63], one in particular (variably called “diazepam-binding
inhibitor” [DBI] and “acyl-CoA-binding protein” [ACBP]) has been
shown to compete with diazepam for receptor occupation and may
be involved in anxiety and mood disorders in humans [64].
Diazepam and midazolam are the most commonly used paren-
terally administered benzodiazepines in veterinary anesthesia, and
their primary indications in the perianesthetic period include
anxiolysis, sedation, and muscle relaxation. Their sedative effects,
however, are species- and patient-dependent and tend to be mild.
In healthy dogs, cats, and horses, they may induce paradoxical
behavioral effects including vocalization, excitement, and dysphoria,
while in neonatal, geriatric, or systemically ill patients, their seda-
tive effects may be more reliable [51].
Zolazepam is a benzodiazepine that is only available in combina-
tion with the dissociative agent, tiletamine, and marketed to veteri-
narians as Telazol® and Zoletil®. Zolazepam metabolism varies
significantly across species, impacting both the duration of effect
and quality of recovery with tiletamine–zolazepam combinations.
More information about tiletamine–zolazepam can be found in
Chapters 27, 55, and 65.
Benzodiazepines do not affect nociceptive pathways and have no
inherent analgesic properties. The effects of benzodiazepines are
reversible with the specific antagonist, flumazenil.
Pharmacokinetics
Diazepam is highly lipid-soluble and is supplied for injection as a
solution of an organic solvent including propylene glycol and etha-
nol. The formulation is viscous with a pH of 6.6–6.9 and may cause
pain on injection. Uptake of diazepam after IM administration is
erratic and unpredictable, and this route is not recommended [65].
Diazepam is light sensitive (i.e., undergoes photodegradation) and
will bind to plastics if exposed to light for long periods [66,67]. In
dogs, diazepam is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract,
with very high bioavailability, and is metabolized by hepatic micro-
somal enzymes via oxidative pathways [68,69].
In dogs, the elimination half-life of IV diazepam has been
reported to range between 14–16 min (0.5 mg/kg) [70] and 3.2 h
(2 mg/kg) [71]. The authors of the former study suggested that this
disparity was a result of their lower administered dose or inadequate
assay sensitivity such that the terminal phase of their concentration–
time curve was not detectable. In dogs given 0.5 mg/kg IV, the active
metabolites nordiazepam (also known as “desmethyldiazepam”)
and oxazepam appear rapidly and persist for longer than the parent
compound, with elimination half-lives of 2.2–2.8 and 3.5–5.1 h,
respectively [70]. In Greyhounds receiving diazepam at 0.5 mg/kg
IV, terminal half-lives were 1.0 h for the parent drug, 2.4 h for nor-
diazepam, and 6.2 h for oxazepam, indicating that breed differences
do exist [68].
Cats receiving very high IV doses of diazepam (5, 10, and
20 mg/kg) had an elimination half-life of approximately 5.5 h.
About 50% of the diazepam is rapidly metabolized to nordiazepam,
which has a half-life of 21 h in this species [72]. Cats have limited
capacity to form glucuronide conjugates of diazepam and its
metabolites, which can result in diazepam-induced liver injury with
repeated dosing in this species [73].
Horses administered 0.05–0.4 mg/kg diazepam IV demonstrated
a half- life of the parent drug ranging from 2.5–21.6 h. Nordiazepam
and oxazepam were not detected in plasma but were present in
urine, suggesting rapid excretion in this species [74].
Midazolam is the other benzodiazepine commonly administered
to veterinary patients in the perianesthetic period. The drug has an
open diazepine ring and is formulated at a pH of less than 4.0,
which effectively stabilizes the diazepine ring and confers water
solubility. On injection at physiologic pH, the diazepine ring closes,
rendering the drug lipid-soluble and able to cross the blood–brain
barrier rapidly to produce its central effects [75]. This unique
chemical structure, along with the fact that midazolam does not
contain propylene glycol as a vehicle, means that it does not cause
pain on IV injection and is reliably absorbed after IM administra-
tion across species. Like diazepam, midazolam is sensitive to light
and undergoes photodegradation; it is also extensively metabolized
by hepatic microsomal enzymes [76].

-- 352 of 1450 --

Chapter 22: Sedatives and Tranquilizers 	337
In dogs, the elimination half-life of IV midazolam has been
reported to range between 63 min (0.2 mg/kg) [77] and 77 min
(0.5 mg/kg) [78]. Bioavailability following IM injection is reliable,
ranging between 50% [77] and 90% [78]. Time to peak plasma con-
centration after IM administration of 0.2 or 0.5 mg/kg is 7.8 and
15 min, respectively [77,78]. Mucosal absorption after oral admin-
istration in dogs occurs in the oral cavity, esophagus, and stomach
and is highly influenced by local pH [79]. The intranasal (IN) route
of administration has been investigated in dogs, and both nasal drops
and atomizer administration have been shown to be effective [80]. An
IN gel formulation had a bioavailability of 70.4% in dogs [81].
Unlike diazepam, the rectal route of administration does not result
in clinically useful plasma concentrations with midazolam, and this
route is not recommended for acute seizure management [77]. Recent
multicenter trials involving canine status epilepticus indicate that
IN midazolam (administered via a mucosal atomizer) was superior
to rectal diazepam [82] and comparable to IV midazolam for acute
seizure management [83]; however, when the time required for IV
catheter placement was taken into account, IN midazolam was con-
sidered the best option for controlling status epilepticus [83].
In cats administered midazolam at 0.3 mg/kg IV under sevoflurane
anesthesia, the elimination half-life was 79 min, and peak plasma con-
centrations of the active metabolite 1-hydroxymidazolam were reached
at 15 min after midazolam administration [84]. This study also
reported high inter-individual variability in plasma concentrations of
1-hydroxymidazolam, which had a low clearance and persisted for
longer compared to the parent drug. The combination of IN mida-
zolam and ketamine has been evaluated in cats, and this route was
associated with a similar onset, degree, and duration of sedation com-
pared to IM administration and was well-tolerated by the cats [85].
In horses, the elimination half-life of IV midazolam has been
reported to be 216 min (0.05 mg/kg) and 408 min (0.1 mg/kg),
demonstrating dose-dependent kinetics [86].
Pharmacodynamics
Cardiovascular system
Benzodiazepines induce relatively minor cardiovascular changes
across species. In healthy dogs, clinically relevant IV doses of diaz-
epam and midazolam have minimal effects on cardiac output,
stroke volume, systemic vascular resistance, and coronary arterial
blood flow [87]. Similarly, in horses, heart rate, cardiac output, and
mean pulmonary arterial, aortic, and right atrial pressures are
unchanged after IV diazepam (0.05–0.4 mg/kg) [74]. Consequently,
these drugs are commonly suggested for veterinary patients with
cardiovascular disease [88,89]. In dogs, however, there is no evi-
dence suggesting that the combination of a benzodiazepine with an
induction agent (e.g., propofol or alfaxalone) improves cardiovas-
cular function compared to the induction agent alone.
Respiratory system
The effects of benzodiazepines on pulmonary function are also
minimal. Arterial blood gas values are unchanged in horses receiv-
ing IV diazepam (0.05–0.4 mg/kg) [74], and in swine receiving IV
midazolam (0.1–1.0 mg/kg) [90]. At high doses, when combined
with other CNS depressants, or when administered to patients with
significant pulmonary disease, benzodiazepine-induced respiratory
depression may be evident.
Central nervous system
Diazepam and midazolam modestly reduce injectable and inhalant
anesthetic requirements when administered in the perianesthetic
period. In healthy dogs, both diazepam and midazolam have been
shown to reduce the induction dose requirements for propofol and
alfaxalone, but the addition of the benzodiazepine does not neces-
sarily improve cardiopulmonary stability over propofol or alfax-
alone alone [91–94]. Inhalant-sparing effects have also been
documented with diazepam (0.044 mg/kg IV) reducing halothane
MAC by 29% in ponies [95] and the combination of diazepam-
fentanyl reducing isoflurane MAC by 74% compared to 54% with
fentanyl alone in dogs [96]. In isoflurane-anesthetized dogs, IV
midazolam (loading dose and constant-rate infusion [CRI]) dose-
dependently reduces MAC, but a ceiling effect is evident with maxi-
mal MAC reduction of approximately 30% [97].
Benzodiazepines produce muscle relaxation through inhibitory
effects on polysynaptic reflexes and spinal internuncial transmis-
sion and, at very high doses, may depress skeletal neuromuscular
junction transmission [98]. At clinical doses, they may cause muscle
weakness and ataxia and, in some species, this may progress to
recumbency. Benzodiazepines are frequently co-administered with
dissociative agents (ketamine and tiletamine) to counteract muscle
rigidity associated with these drugs.
Benzodiazepines have well-recognized anticonvulsant properties
and are able to inhibit the development and spread of epileptiform
electrical activity in the CNS [98]. In the case of diazepam, its
active metabolites, nordiazepam and oxazepam, are associated with
25–33% less anticonvulsant activity than the parent drug [99]. They
generally have a favorable profile with regard to cerebral perfusion,
reducing cerebral oxygen consumption to a greater extent than
cerebral blood flow [100].
Clinical considerations
Dogs and cats
In dogs and cats, diazepam and midazolam are commonly adminis-
tered in the preanesthetic period, often in combination with opioids,
or as co- induction agents with ketamine, propofol, or alfaxalone. In
hemodynamically unstable small animal patients, the combination
of a benzodiazepine and full μ-opioid receptor agonist may be used
to induce general anesthesia. While midazolam is considered more
potent than diazepam in humans, dose ranges in dogs and cats
are similar (0.1–0.4 mg/kg IV), and the two drugs are often used
interchangeably in the perianesthetic period. Anticonvulsant doses
for both drugs tend to be higher (0.5–1.0 mg/kg IV). As discussed
above, the IM route of administration is not recommended for
diazepam due to pain and erratic absorption associated with the
propylene glycol vehicle. The availability of multiple effective routes
of administration for midazolam make it a more versatile option in
the clinical setting. In general, the sedative effects of benzodiaz-
epines in healthy dogs and cats are minimal and unreliable if not
combined with other sedative-hypnotic agents. Paradoxical excita-
tion characterized by restlessness, agitation, and vocalization is
common as doses increase, especially in cats [78,101]. Behavioral
disinhibition due to anxiolysis may even provoke aggressive behav-
ior in some animals.
Horses
In adult horses, midazolam (0.5–0.1 mg/kg IV) alone produces
minimal sedation but is associated with ataxia, weakness, postural
sway, and agitation [86], making it unsuitable for procedures
requiring standing sedation. In neonatal foals, however, the combi-
nation of an IV benzodiazepine with an opioid tends to produce
reliable sedation but may be accompanied by weakness leading to
recumbency. For induction of general anesthesia in adult horses

-- 353 of 1450 --

338 	Section 3: Pharmacology
sedated with an α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist, either diazepam or
midazolam (0.05–0.1 mg/kg IV) is commonly co-administered
with ketamine to enhance muscle relaxation, smooth induction,
and facilitate endotracheal intubation. With commercial preparations
of guaifenesin no longer available in many countries, midazolam
has also been investigated as an alternative to guaifenesin for equine
total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA). The infusion of midazolam–
xylazine–ketamine after induction appears to be suitable for
extending the duration of anesthesia for up to 1 h in horses [102].
Other species
In addition to dogs, cats, and horses, midazolam has been used in a
wide variety of species including swine, goats, sheep, alpacas,
ferrets, rabbits, guinea pigs, and birds [103–108]. In general, small
ruminants, ferrets, rabbits, and birds tend to sedate reasonably well
with benzodiazepines, often in combination with other drugs such
as opioids, α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists, alfaxalone, and ketamine.
The IN route of administration has been studied in rabbits [107]
and various avian species [109,110].
Benzodiazepine antagonist
Flumazenil
Flumazenil is a competitive antagonist with a high affinity for the
benzodiazepine recognition site on the GABAA receptor but no
appreciable agonist activity at the site. As the drug is specific to the
benzodiazepine-binding site on the receptor, it does not antagonize
the CNS effects of other anesthetic agents interacting with the GABAA
receptor such as propofol, alfaxalone, etomidate, and barbiturates.
Flumazenil attenuates the CNS depressant effects of benzodiazepines
and has been shown to reverse their EEG changes in dogs [111,112].
When administered in the absence of a benzodiazepine, the drug
does not appear to induce appreciable CNS stimulation (e.g., agita-
tion, excitement, and tachypnea) in veterinary species [51]. While
flumazenil is thought to antagonize the effects of endogenous
benzodiazepine-like substances (endozepines), which are elevated
in human patients with hepatic encephalopathy, there is little evi-
dence supporting its use for clinical management of hepatic
encephalopathy in people [113].
As a conventional antagonist (as opposed to an inverse agonist
that acts as a negative allosteric modulator of GABA receptor func-
tion), flumazenil appears devoid of direct cardiovascular, respiratory,
or musculoskeletal effects but is effective in reversing benzodiazepine-
induced changes in these systems. In humans, however, antagonism
of benzodiazepine-induced respiratory depression may be less
predictable [98].
There is little pharmacokinetic information available about
flumazenil in veterinary species. Reversal of excessive benzodiazepine-
induced sedation in the perianesthetic period may be accomplished
in dogs with IV doses of 0.01–0.04 mg/kg, and in horses with IV
doses of 0.01–0.02 mg/kg. Repeated doses may be necessary if seda-
tion persists or if re-sedation is noted.
In humans, it is well recognized that flumazenil may precipitate
abstinence syndrome in individuals that have developed physio-
logic dependence to chronic oral benzodiazepines. This phenome-
non has been reported experimentally in dogs, though the doses of
flumazenil studied were very high [114]. Furthermore, flumazenil
may precipitate seizures and cardiac arrhythmias in humans that
have ingested an overdose of benzodiazepines with tricyclic antide-
pressants. An experimental study involving dogs administered
infusions of midazolam and amitriptyline that were suddenly
reversed with flumazenil demonstrated the potential for convulsions
and arrhythmias in this species [115]. For these reasons, flumazenil
is not routinely recommended for the treatment of benzodiazepine
or mixed drug overdose in humans but should be reserved for
selected patients where the benefits of flumazenil administration
outweigh the potential risks [116].
α2 - Adrenergic receptor agonists
Xylazine was discovered in 1962 as an antihypertensive agent by
Farbenfabriken Bayer AG in Leverkusen, Germany, many years
before its mechanism of action as an α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist
was elucidated [117]. During early clinical trials in people, xylazine
induced excessive CNS depression, and the drug was abandoned for
human use and introduced to the veterinary market as a sedative,
analgesic, and muscle relaxant [117]. Early reports of its use in ani-
mals began appearing in the late 1960s and early 1970s [118–122],
and it soon became one of the most commonly administered
sedatives in veterinary medicine, especially in large animals. It was
not until 1981 that xylazine’s CNS depressant effects were definitively
attributed to its actions at central α2
- adrenergic receptors [123].
Over the next 40 years, that discovery would spearhead develop-
ment of new, more specific veterinary α2
- adrenergic receptor
agonists including detomidine, romifidine, and medetomidine/
dexmedetomidine. Dexmedetomidine is also used in human
patients for procedural sedation, ICU sedation in mechanically
ventilated patients, and as an adjunct to general anesthesia.
While α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists have not historically been
classified as controlled substances, concerns about illicit xylazine
use as an emerging public health threat, coupled with the potential
for diversion from veterinary channels, is leading to regulatory
changes involving xylazine in several jurisdictions including in the
United States and Canada.
Xylazine, detomidine, romifidine, medetomidine,
and dexmedetomidine
Mechanism of action and indications
The clinically desired effects of these drugs (sedation, analgesia,
and muscle relaxation) are a result of their interactions with
α2
-adrenergic receptors located both pre- and postsynaptically in the
CNS. In addition, α2
-adrenergic receptors are also widely distributed
throughout peripheral tissues with pre- and postsynaptic receptors
found in many organs and postsynaptic (extrajunctional) receptors
located on vascular endothelium and on platelets. These peripheral
receptors mediate many of the adverse effects associated with
α2
-adrenergic receptor agonist administration in the clinical setting.
The α2
- adrenergic receptor is a G-protein- coupled receptor that
has been recognized as four distinct subtypes: α2A
, α2B
, α2C
, and α2D
.
The α2A subtype was first discovered in human platelets and rabbit
spleen, the α2B subtype in rat lung and kidney, the α2C subtype in
opossum kidney, and the α2D subtype in rat submaxillary gland and
bovine pineal gland [124]. Because the α2A and α2D subtypes are
structurally similar in mammalian species, they are now believed to
be the same receptor but with differing pharmacologic profiles in
humans, dogs, rabbits, pigs, and chickens (α2A
) versus rats, mice,
and cattle (α2D
) [125,126]. To further complicate the nomenclature,
a fourth non-mammalian receptor subtype, also called “α2D
,” has
also been identified in zebrafish [127]. Despite the potential for
subtype-specific effects, the distinction is not clinically relevant as
none of the currently available α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists or
antagonists is subtype specific.

-- 354 of 1450 --

Chapter 22: Sedatives and Tranquilizers 	339
Agonist binding at all subtypes by endogenous ligands (norepi-
nephrine, epinephrine) or exogenous α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists
results in allosteric inhibition through Gi/o leading to inhibition of
adenylate cyclase activity and decreased cAMP concentrations.
Subsequent inhibition of Ca 2+ entry and activation of outward-
opening K+ channels result in membrane hyperpolarization and
suppression of neuronal firing [128,129]. While inhibition of
adenylate cyclase is considered the classic α2
- adrenergic receptor
signaling pathway, other effector mechanisms also appear to play
a role.
The α2A and α2C subtypes predominate in the CNS and are largely
responsible for the sedative, analgesic, and sympatholytic effects
of α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists [130]. The locus coeruleus in
the medial dorsal pons is the major noradrenergic nucleus of the
brain and contains dense populations of α2 - adrenergic receptors.
Activation of presynaptic receptors here results in inhibition of
norepinephrine release and reduced activity in ascending noradr-
energic pathways, resulting in hypnosis and sedation [131,132].
Activation of this negative feedback loop may also produce reductions
in heart rate and blood pressure and attenuation of the sympathetic
stress response.
At the level of the spinal cord dorsal horn, stimulation of
α2
- adrenergic receptors inhibits nociceptive neurons and reduces
the release of norepinephrine and substance P. Although there is
some evidence for supraspinal (i.e., descending modulation via the
locus coeruleus) and peripheral sites of analgesic action, the spinal
mechanism is thought to be responsible for most of the analgesia
associated with α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists [132].
The α2B subtype is located primarily on vascular smooth muscle
and largely mediates vasoconstriction [132]. Some effects of
α2
- adrenergic receptor stimulation do not appear to be mediated
through G-protein coupling, such as inhibition of platelet
aggregation.
In addition to their effects at α2
- adrenergic receptors, all
α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists currently in clinical use also have
some impact on α1
- adrenergic receptors and most also activate
nonadrenergic imidazoline receptors (Table 22.1). Activation of
vascular α1
-adrenergic receptors contributes to vasoconstriction
and increased systemic vascular resistance, while activation of central
α1
- adrenergic receptors has been associated with increased arousal,
restlessness, vigilance, and locomotor activity in animals [133]. In
theory, α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists that are less selective for
α2
- adrenergic receptors may be more likely to cause adverse effects
such as paradoxical excitement and locomotor activity. Of the
commonly used α2 - adrenergic receptor agonists, xylazine has
the lowest α2
:α1 adrenergic receptor binding ratio (Table 22.1).
All of the α2 - adrenergic receptor agonists currently used in
veterinary medicine, except for xylazine, have structural similarities
to imidazoline and thus may also activate the various subtypes of
imidazoline receptors (Table 22.1). Differentiating α2 -adrenergic
versus imidazoline receptor-mediated effects is difficult and there
appears to be considerable overlap. The I1 receptor plays a role in
cardiovascular regulation and has been implicated in modulation of
sodium excretion and urine output, inhibition of catecholamine-
induced arrhythmias, and possibly neuroprotective effects [134].
The I2 receptor may be involved in control of central noradrenergic
and hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis activity, regulation of
intestinal motility, and opioid-induced antinociception [134]. The
I 3 receptor may play a role in insulin secretion and contribute to
α2
- adrenergic agonist-induced hyperglycemia [135].
The α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists are used extensively in
veterinary patients to provide chemical restraint, sedation, analgesia,
and as adjuncts to general anesthesia. They are a versatile class of
drugs and can be administered via a variety of routes including IV, IM,
IV CRI, oral transmucosal (OTM), IN, neuraxial (epidural, spinal),
and perineural. In some species, notably cats, α2
-adrenergic receptor
agonists reliably induce vomiting and may be used as emetics.
Pharmacokinetics
In general, the onset of action of α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists
after IV administration is rapid (within minutes), and peak effects
are noted shortly thereafter. IM administration of α2
-adrenergic
receptor agonists is typically associated with rapid absorption, but
plasma concentrations show significant variation in the first 60 min
following IM administration across species and between individuals
of the same species. Differences in study design and pharmacoki-
netic methodology can further confound interpretation. While the
SC route of administration has not historically been recommended
due to concerns about poor absorption related to peripheral vaso-
constriction, there is some evidence in humans [139,140] and
horses [141] to suggest that the SC route may be effective and could
be clinically useful. Other alternate routes of systemic administra-
tion such as OTM and IN have also been investigated for specific
drugs. As the α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists are highly lipophilic,
neuraxial (epidural, spinal) administration to enhance and prolong
local anesthetic-induced regional anesthesia results in significant
systemic absorption and is usually accompanied by dose-dependent
CNS depression (sedation) and cardiovascular effects that are com-
parable to systemic α2
-adrenergic receptor agonist administration.
Perineural administration to enhance and prolong local anesthetic-
induced peripheral nerve blockade tends to be associated with lower
plasma drug concentrations and possibly fewer systemic side effects.
For xylazine, pharmacokinetic parameters have been described in
dogs, horses, cattle, and sheep by a two-compartment model [142].
In the same study, elimination half-lives after IV administration of
varying species-specific doses ranged between 22 min in sheep and
50 min in horses. After IM administration, peak plasma concentra-
tions were attained within 12–14 min in all species, but mean
bioavailability was higher in dogs (74%) compared to horses (45%)
and sheep (41%) [142]. In racing horses, the pharmacokinetics of
xylazine have been re-evaluated more recently from a regulatory
medicine perspective. After IV administration of 0.3–0.4 mg/kg
xylazine, drug disposition was found to fit a three-compartment
model with reported systemic clearances of 12.7 and 15.8 mL/min/kg,
Table 22.1 α2
:α1 adrenergic receptor selectivity and imidazoline activity for selected
α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists and antagonists.
Drug 	α2
:α1 adrenergic
receptor binding ratio
Imidazoline
receptor activity
Agonists
Xylazine 	160:1 	Noa
Detomidine 	260:1 	Yes
Romifidine 	340:1 	Yes
Medetomidine 	1620:1 	Yesa
Dexmedetomidine 	1620:1 	Yesa
Antagonists
Tolazoline 	4:1 	Yes
Yohimbine 	40:1 	Noa
Atipamezole 	8526:1 	Yesa
Vatinoxan 	105:1b 	Yesc
a [136];
b [137];
c [138]

-- 355 of 1450 --

340 	Section 3: Pharmacology
β half-lives of 2.79 and 3.53 h, and γ half-lives of 26 and 29.8 h
[143,144]. Identification of this third compartment, and the associ-
ated prolonged γ half-lives, reflects increased sensitivity of the
analytical methods used and may not be clinically relevant in the
perianesthetic period. In conscious horses receiving xylazine at
0.5 mg/kg IV followed by a CRI of 1 mg/kg/h for 2, 4, and 6 h,
plasma concentration–time curves were best described by a
one-compartment model, and xylazine did not appear to accumulate
in plasma or tissues with longer infusion periods [145]. In horses
recovering from isoflurane anesthesia, a single IV dose of 0.2 mg/kg
xylazine was associated with significantly slower plasma kinetics
compared to a single IV dose of 0.875 μg/kg dexmedetomidine,
but no differences in time to stand or recovery quality were
observed [146]. The intraosseous route has also been shown to be
effective for administration of xylazine in horses [147].
Regarding detomidine, pharmacokinetic studies in horses at IV
doses ranging between 10 and 80 μg/kg suggest a two-compartment
model with some evidence of dose-dependent elimination
[148–150]. In resting horses, 40 μg/kg IV had a median half-life of
26 min, a volume of distribution of 585 mL/kg, and a median clear-
ance of 15 mL/min/kg. After supramaximal exercise, these parameters
increased to 46 min, 1296 mL/kg, and 20 min, respectively [150]. In
another equine study, the mean elimination half-life of a 30 μg/kg
dose was 26 min for the IV route of administration versus 53 min
for the IM route [151]. In cattle, 80 μg/kg of detomidine IV or IM
showed rapid absorption and distribution, with an elimination
half-life of 1.3 h following the IV dose and 2.6 h following the IM
dose [148].
Injectable detomidine has also been evaluated for OTM adminis-
tration, and an oromucosal gel is marketed in some countries for
use in horses. In horses, the mean bioavailability for the gel was 22%
after sublingual administration of 40 μg/kg, compared with 38.2%
following the same dose of injectable detomidine administered
IM [152]. In addition to horses, OTM detomidine administration
has been evaluated in other species including calves [153],
dogs [154–156], ferrets [157], rabbits [158], and cats [159] with
varying results. Though bioavailability with the OTM route of
administration was lower, clinically relevant sedation was achieved
in dogs, ferrets, and cats. In horses and alpacas, detomidine gel
administered intravaginally resulted in clinically relevant sedation
and bioavailabilities of 25% and 20%, respectively [160,161].
Detomidine has also been administered intranasally via a mucosal
atomizer in sheep [162].
Romifidine administered at 80 μg/kg IV to horses resulted in
plasma concentrations fitted to a two-compartment model with a
prolonged elimination half-life of 135 min [163]. Administration
of a lower dose (10 μg/kg IV) prior to exercise in horses confirmed
the two-compartment model and the extended elimination
half-life [164].
The pharmacokinetics of dexmedetomidine and racemic
medetomidine (a mixture of both dexmedetomidine and levome-
detomidine) are very similar in dogs [165]. All of the pharmacologic
actions of medetomidine are due to the dextrorotatory isomer,
which is isolated in dexmedetomidine. Administration of medeto-
midine at 40 μg/kg IV and dexmedetomidine at 20 and 10 μg/kg IV
produced peak sedation at 10–20 min at plasma concentrations of
18.5, 14, and 5.5 ng/mL, respectively, in dogs. Terminal half-lives
of 0.96, 0.78, and 0.66 h were reported [166]. Administration of
levomedetomidine produced no apparent sedation or analgesia.
Clearance of levomedetomidine was faster [166]. The pharmacoki-
netics of IM dexmedetomidine (10 μg/kg) administered to healthy
dogs have been reported and show significant variations in indi-
vidual plasma concentrations. In cats anesthetized with isoflurane
and administered 10 μg/kg dexmedetomidine IV over 5 min, a
mean terminal half-life of 198 min was reported [167]. In horses
and ponies, IV dexmedetomidine or medetomidine results in rapid
reductions in plasma drug concentrations with reported elimina-
tion half-lives ranging between 8 and 29 min depending on the
study [168–170]. In horses recovering from isoflurane anesthesia, a
single IV dose of 0.875 μg/kg dexmedetomidine was associated
with significantly faster plasma kinetics compared to a single IV
dose of 0.2 mg/kg xylazine, but no differences in time to stand or
recovery quality were observed [146].
Similar to detomidine, OTM administration of injectable
medetomidine and dexmedetomidine has been investigated in cats
and dogs, and an oromucosal dexmedetomidine gel is also mar-
keted for noise phobia in dogs in a number of countries. In cats,
OTM medetomidine produced similar sedation compared to IM
injection but took longer to achieve peak plasma concentrations
(43 versus 21 min). Individual variation was suspected to be
secondary to salivation and drug loss [171]. Dexmedetomidine has
also been administered to cats using the OTM route, sometimes
combined with buprenorphine [172–174]. In dogs, 20 μg/kg of
dexmedetomidine administered OTM was compared to a 5 μg/kg
IV dose. Despite a bioavailability of only 11.2%, OTM dexmedeto-
midine produced a similar degree of sedation and a prolonged
duration of action compared to IV administration [175]. The OTM
route has also been evaluated for a combination of dexmedetomi-
dine and methadone in dogs [176].
IN dexmedetomidine has been evaluated for sedation in children
and, more recently, in dogs and cats. In healthy Beagles, 20 μg/kg
dexmedetomidine administered IN resulted in slower absorption
and lower plasma concentrations at all time points compared to IM
administration, despite clinically similar sedation effects [177].
Perineural administration of 0.5 μg/kg dexmedetomidine with
levobupivacaine for inferior alveolar and infraorbital nerve blocks
in anesthetized dogs resulted in lower plasma dexmedetomidine
concentrations compared to IV administration [178].
In most species, dexmedetomidine appears to undergo hepatic
metabolism to pharmacologically inactive metabolites by hydroxy-
lation, oxidation, or conjugation. In human intensive care unit
patients, where the drug is commonly used as a sedative, high inter-
individual pharmacokinetic variability has been described with
factors such as body size, hepatic impairment, plasma albumin, and
cardiac output reported to influence pharmacokinetics.
Pharmacodynamics
Cardiovascular system
The α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists in current clinical use induce
significant cardiovascular effects that are typically described as
biphasic. Initially, activation of postsynaptic α1 - and α2B - adrenergic
receptors results in peripheral vasoconstriction, increased systemic
vascular resistance, and increased arterial blood pressure. These
peripheral changes induce a baroreceptor-mediated reflex brady-
cardia, which, while it may attenuate hypertension to some extent,
results in significant reductions in cardiac output. While there is
substantial variation depending on the drug, the dose, the route of
administration, and the species, initial hemodynamic changes typi-
cally include bradycardia, with or without bradyarrhythmias, and
hypertension. At the same time, activation of central presynaptic
α2A
- and α2C
- adrenergic receptors results in reduced norepineph-
rine 	release 	and 	sympathetic 	outflow, 	which 	perpetuates

-- 356 of 1450 --

Chapter 22: Sedatives and Tranquilizers 	341
bradycardia and the reduction in cardiac output. The net result of
these secondary hemodynamic changes is usually bradycardia and
hypotension.
At clinically relevant doses, α2 - adrenergic receptor agonists have
been shown to decrease cardiac output in most species by greater
than 50% [179–182]. This reduction in cardiac output is largely due
to changes in cardiac loading conditions (increased systemic vascu-
lar resistance and bradycardia) rather than direct effects on myo-
cardial contractility [183,184]. While these effects are often
considered to be dose-dependent, even low bolus doses may induce
adverse cardiovascular effects [179], and there seems to be a “ceiling
effect” whereby higher doses do not necessarily worsen cardiovas-
cular parameters [166]. It is important to note that the influence of
other drugs administered concurrently (e.g., inhalant anesthetics)
and the route of administration (e.g., IV bolus, versus IM, versus
low-dose CRI) will also impact the magnitude of cardiovascular
changes [185,186].
The reduction in cardiac output is not uniform across all tissue
beds with blood flow redistributed away from nonessential regions
such as skin, adipose tissue, skeletal muscle, and intestine, and is
redirected to essential organs such as brain, heart, and kid-
neys [179,187]. α2
- Adrenergic receptor agonists do not adversely
impact myocardial perfusion and may beneficially modulate coro-
nary blood flow during myocardial ischemia [188,189].
The bradycardia induced by α2 -adrenergic receptor agonists can
be significant and, in addition to sinus bradycardia, vagally medi-
ated bradyarrhythmias such as first- and second-degree atrioven-
tricular block are commonly observed in some species (dogs and
horses) [190]. More serious bradyarrhythmias such as third-degree
atrioventricular block and sinus arrest are rare. The less selective
α2 -adrenergic receptor agonist, xylazine, has been shown to reduce
the arrhythmogenic dose of epinephrine (ADE) in halothane- and
isoflurane-anesthetized dogs [191,192]; however, the more selec-
tive agents (with less α1 -adrenergic receptor activity), such as deto-
midine, medetomidine, and dexmedetomidine, do not alter the
ADE and may even have a protective effect against ventricular
arrhythmias [193–195].
Routine administration of an anticholinergic to prevent or coun-
teract bradycardia during the initial phase of α2
-adrenergic receptor
agonist- mediated peripheral vasoconstriction is not recommended.
While anticholinergic administration in the face of increased sys-
temic vascular resistance may increase heart rate, cardiac output
does not increase proportionally and other adverse effects have
been documented including hypertension, increased myocardial
oxygen consumption, and arrhythmias [190,196–198]. Once the
initial increase in systemic vascular resistance begins to wane leav-
ing the central sympatholytic effects to predominate, anticholiner-
gic administration may be considered on a case-by-case basis to
treat persistent bradycardia, especially if it is accompanied by
hypotension.
Respiratory system
α2 - Adrenergic receptor agonists induce centrally mediated reduc-
tions in both respiratory rate and minute ventilation [199,200];
however, increases in arterial carbon dioxide tension (PaCO 2
) and
decreases in arterial oxygen tension (PaO2
) are not usually signifi-
cant in most species [181,199–202]. Co-administration of α2
-
adrenergic receptor agonists with other sedatives, opioids, or
anesthetics may lead to more significant impairment of ventilatory
drive predisposing to hypercapnia and possibly hypoxemia. In
isoflurane-anesthetized mechanically ventilated dogs, however, a
low-dose dexmedetomidine CRI (1 μg/kg/h IV), with or without a
1 μg/kg IV loading dose, actually improved oxygenation and res-
piratory system compliance, and reduced intrapulmonary shunt
fraction and airway resistance [203]. In humans, dexmedetomidine
is commonly used for sedation in patients requiring mechanical
ventilation in intensive care settings.
Administration of α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists commonly
causes mucous membranes to appear “muddy” or pale blue/gray as
peripheral vasoconstriction slows blood flow in the periphery. The
prolonged capillary transit time allows greater oxygen extraction,
resulting in a greater amount of deoxygenated hemoglobin being
present at the venous end of the capillary. This often exceeds the
5 mg/dL threshold of deoxygenated hemoglobin associated with
the clinical observation of cyanosis. It should be appreciated that
PaO2 values in this situation are often normal or near normal; thus,
the observation of cyanosis in this context has a different implica-
tion than when it is noted in patients with arterial hypoxemia due to
pulmonary disease or severe hypoventilation.
Sheep are uniquely susceptible to hypoxemia following adminis-
tration of α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists due to activation of pul-
monary intravascular macrophages, which damage capillary
endothelium and alveolar type I cells, leading to intra-alveolar
hemorrhage and interstitial and pulmonary edema [204,205].
Central nervous system
α2
- Adrenergic receptor agonist-mediated sedation results from
activation of α2
- adrenergic receptors in the locus coeruleus of the
pons and the rostroventral lateral medulla (the primary areas for
sympathetic outflow from the CNS). This reduces norepinephrine
release, which diminishes arousal as the discharge frequency of
tracts into the cortex slows.
Rigidity, seizures, and/or excitement have been noted following
accidental intracarotid injection of xylazine in horses. Failure to
sedate, or paradoxical excitement, can result when animals are
excited, fearful, in pain, or otherwise stressed. These conditions
result in high circulating catecholamine levels, which are difficult to
overcome 	with 	α2
-adrenergic 	receptor 	agonist 	administra-
tion [190,206]. Animals that appear sedated may be suddenly
aroused and display aggressive behavior if disturbed and may dem-
onstrate increased sensitivity to sound and tactile stimulation [206].
Activation of central α1
- adrenergic receptors has been shown to
functionally antagonize the hypnotic response to α2 - adrenergic
receptor agonists [207], and α1
- adrenergic stimulation may contrib-
ute to some of these paradoxical behaviors, especially with less
selective agents such as xylazine.
Analgesia results from agonist binding to pre- and postsynaptic
α2
- adrenergic receptors at various points in nociceptive pathways
including the substantia gelatinosa of the spinal cord dorsal horn
and the locus coeruleus of the brainstem [208]. Afferent input into
the dorsal horn from peripheral nociceptors continues but is modu-
lated and dampened by decreases in norepinephrine and substance
P release resulting from presynaptic α2
- adrenergic receptor bind-
ing. Postsynaptic α2 - adrenergic receptor binding in the dorsal horn
and supraspinally results in neuronal hyperpolarization and inhibi-
tion of nociceptive neurons. Interaction with imidazoline receptors
(specifically the I 2 receptor) may also play a role in α2 - adrenergic
receptor agonist analgesia through modulation of opioid antinocic-
eption [134]. It has been noted that analgesic effects seem to be
shorter- lived than sedative effects in a number of species, and
plasma drug concentrations exceeding those associated with seda-
tion may be required to produce antinociception [149].

-- 357 of 1450 --

342 	Section 3: Pharmacology
While α2
-adrenergic receptors and opioid receptors share similar
molecular machinery and are present in similar locations through-
out the CNS, α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists and opioids have suf-
ficiently different mechanisms of analgesia to result in synergism
when co-administered. Co-administration with other analgesics
such as local anesthetics and ketamine via a variety of routes (sys-
temically, neuraxially, or in peripheral nerve blocks) is common in
clinical practice. In humans, dexmedetomidine has been shown to
significantly improve postoperative outcomes when used as part of
an Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) protocol and is rec-
ommended as part of a multimodal opioid-sparing approach [209].
The central effects of α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists (both seda-
tive and analgesic) induce significant anesthetic-sparing effects
when combined with injectable or inhalant anesthetics. Effects are
dose-dependent and vary by drug, species, and route of administra-
tion, but α2
-adrenergic receptor agonist-induced reductions in
anesthetic requirements of up to 90% have been reported [51,190].
This underscores the importance of titrating injectable and inhalant
anesthetic doses to effect when combined with this potent class of
drugs.
The effects of α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists on cerebral hemo-
dynamics and intracranial pressure (ICP) have been studied experi-
mentally in animals and clinically in humans with various types of
neurologic disease. In isoflurane-anesthetized dogs, medetomidine
did not change ICP [210], and dexmedetomidine reduced cerebral
blood flow with no alteration in cerebral metabolic rate of oxy-
gen [211]. In humans, these neuroprotective effects (i.e., reduced
cerebral blood flow and ICP) have led to dexmedetomidine’s use
in neurosurgical patients and those with traumatic brain injury to
provide sedation and lower opioid requirements [212]. In veteri-
nary patients with neurologic disease, the decision to include an
α2 - adrenergic receptor agonist in the anesthetic plan should be
made on a case-by- case basis after considering the potential for res-
piratory depression when these drugs are combined with opioids
and anesthetic agents, the significant hemodynamic effects, the
potential for hyperglycemia, and the potential to induce vomiting
and elevate ICP.
Thermoregulation 	is 	impaired 	in 	patients 	administered
α2 -adrenergic receptor agonists due to CNS depression and
reduced muscle activity. However, as these drugs cause peripheral
vasoconstriction and redistribution of blood flow from the skin to
the core, hypothermia may be less significant compared to drugs
that cause peripheral vasodilation, such as acepromazine and
inhalant anesthetics. Regardless, body temperature should be mon-
itored, especially in small animals, and thermoregulatory support
provided as needed.
The effects of α2 -adrenergic receptor agonists on pupil size vary
by species with mydriasis reported in cats, rats, and rabbits, and
either no change in pupil size or miosis reported in dogs. In most
species, reductions in intraocular pressure have been reported,
but this effect is less consistent in dogs. The potential for α2
-adrenergic
receptor agonist-induced nausea and vomiting must be consid-
ered when planning to sedate or anesthetize small animal patients
that may be adversely affected by fluctuations in intraocular
pressure [190].
Gastrointestinal system
α2
- Adrenergic receptor agonists induce nausea and vomiting in
dogs and cats through stimulation of the chemoreceptor trigger
zone, which is in close proximity to the locus coeruleus [213–215].
Depending on the drug, dose, route of administration, and other
drugs administered concurrently, α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists
may induce vomiting in up to 90% of cats and 30% of dogs [51,190].
Gastrointestinal transit time is prolonged and gastric acid secre-
tion, reticuloruminal contractions, and colonic motility are reduced
with α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists [216–218]. These effects are
reversible with α2
- adrenergic receptor antagonists confirming that
effects on gastrointestinal motility are mediated by α2
- adrenergic
receptors.
Genitourinary system
The diuretic effects of α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists are mediated
through multiple mechanisms including reduced production or
release of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) from the pituitary gland;
inhibition of ADH activity on renal collecting tubules; and
enhanced sodium excretion [219–222]. The renin–angiotensin–
aldosterone system is also impacted directly through activation of
renal α2
- adrenergic receptors and indirectly through α2
- adrenergic
receptor agonist-induced hypertension, resulting in reduced renin
secretion and enhanced diuresis [223]. α2 - Adrenergic receptor ago-
nists also impact micturition resulting in decreased micturition
pressure, urinary bladder capacity, micturition volume, and resid-
ual volume, and these effects appear to be mediated largely through
central (spinal) mechanisms [224]. Clinically, the net result of these
effects is that animals administered α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists
tend to produce large volumes of dilute urine.
Myometrial tone and intrauterine pressure can increase with
α2
-adrenergic receptor stimulation [225–229]; however, the clinical
effects of α2
-adrenergic receptor agonist administration are not con-
sistent, and there is considerable variation with different drugs,
doses, routes of administration, timing within the reproductive
cycle, and species. Classically, xylazine was reported to induce
oxytocin-like contraction of the bovine uterus [225] and, based on
anecdotal reports of premature labor and spontaneous abortions in
heifers, its use in heavily pregnant cattle was cautioned despite mini-
mal evidence implicating xylazine in these cases. Regarding the
more specific α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists, detomidine (< 60 μg/
kg IM in the cow and horse) [230,231] and medetomidine (< 20 μg/
kg IV in the dog) [229] have been shown to decrease myometrial
contractions. However, higher doses of medetomidine (40–60 μg/kg
IV) did increase electrical activity of the pregnant canine
uterus [229]. Fluctuations in circulating levels of steroid hormones
throughout pregnancy may impact these changes with estrogen
upregulating excitatory α-adrenergic receptors and progesterone
upregulating inhibitory β-adrenergic receptors in the reproductive
tract [229,232]. Overall, these reproductive effects, combined with
potentially significant cardiovascular effects, suggest α2
-adrenergic
receptor agonists should only be administered to near-term preg-
nant animals on a case-by-case basis after a risk-benefit analysis.
Other effects
Muscle relaxation is reliably produced through inhibition of
α2 -adrenergic receptors at spinal cord interneurons and, like ben-
zodiazepines, α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists are frequently
co-administered with dissociative agents to counteract muscle
rigidity. Involuntary muscle twitching (jactitations) has been
reported in dogs, cats, and, occasionally, in horses but these effects
tend to be self-limiting.
The neuroendocrine stress response is modulated by α2
-adrenergic
receptor agonists. Studies involving various drugs (xylazine,
medetomidine, and detomidine) consistently report decreased cir-
culating catecholamine levels in dogs [233–236], horses [237], and

-- 358 of 1450 --

Chapter 22: Sedatives and Tranquilizers 	343
cattle and sheep [238]. These reductions in epinephrine and norepi-
nephrine levels are reversible by α2
-adrenergic receptor antago-
nists [236,238]. Effects on basal and induced cortisol levels in animals
are more variable. Reduced cortisol concentrations have been
reported after medetomidine or dexmedetomidine administration in
dogs [233,235,239]. However, other studies in dogs [234,240],
horses [237], and cattle and sheep [238] report no suppression of cor-
tisol activity. In humans, a meta-analysis of over 4800 patients found
that dexmedetomidine infusion during the perioperative period
inhibited release of epinephrine, norepinephrine, and cortisol and
concluded that the drug attenuated perioperative stress and inflam-
mation and protected immune function in surgical patients [241].
Glucose regulation is also impacted by α2
-adrenergic receptor ago-
nist administration. Elevations in serum glucose are primarily a
result of activation of α2A
-adrenergic receptors in pancreatic β-cells
suppressing insulin release, though stimulation of glucagon release
by pancreatic α-cells promoting gluconeogenesis has also been sug-
gested [242–244]. Transient hyperglycemia has been reported in
horses and cattle after xylazine [245,246], and in dogs after medeto-
midine [236] and dexmedetomidine [240]. In dogs, hyperglycemic
effects induced by medetomidine were reversed with the α2
-
adrenergic receptor antagonists yohimbine and atipamezole [236],
and hyperglycemia was prevented when dexmedetomidine was co-
administered with the peripheral α2
-adrenergic receptor antagonist,
vatinoxan (MK-467) [240]. Clinically, α2
-adrenergic receptor agonist-
induced hyperglycemia does not typically exceed the renal threshold
for glucose (~180 mg/dL) and is not associated with glucosuria [51].
Clinical considerations
A search of the veterinary literature reveals that α2
- adrenergic
receptor agonists have been administered to virtually every species.
For more detailed information on clinical use of these drugs in spe-
cific species, including doses, the reader is directed to species-
specific chapters in this text and elsewhere. While differences in
species sensitivity tend to be more significant for drugs that are less
selective/less potent (i.e., xylazine) compared to those that are more
selective/more potent agents (i.e., medetomidine, dexmedetomi-
dine), the approximate ranking of species according to α2
- adrenergic
receptor agonist sensitivity from most sensitive to least sensitive is:
goats > sheep, cattle > camelids > horses, dogs, cats > pigs > small
laboratory animals.
While α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists have not historically been
classified as controlled substances, the regulatory considerations
regarding these drugs, notably xylazine, are rapidly evolving. In
North America, illicit fentanyl adulterated with xylazine has been
identified as an emerging threat to human health, and some juris-
dictions are moving to make xylazine a scheduled drug. The impact
of these regulatory changes on large animal veterinarians remains
to be seen.
Dogs and cats
While xylazine is approved for use in dogs and cats and was histori-
cally widely used in these species, the more selective and potent α2
-
adrenergic receptor agonists, medetomidine (a racemic mixture of
both levomedetomidine and dexmedetomidine) and dexmedetomi-
dine (the pharmacologically active S(+)-enantiomer of medetomi-
dine), have largely supplanted xylazine in small animals. Romifidine
is also approved for use in dogs and cats in some countries.
The α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists have wide-ranging clinical
applications in dogs and cats. Even with low doses, caution is
advised in patients with cardiac disease (especially those with
systolic dysfunction), bradyarrhythmias, dehydration, hypov-
olemia, or sepsis due to significant hemodynamic effects.
Combination with other sedatives, analgesics, or anesthetics will
exacerbate CNS, cardiovascular, and respiratory depressant effects,
and diligent titration of both injectable and inhalant anesthetics is
necessary even in healthy patients. As noted previously, stimulation
may cause sudden arousal in an animal that is seemingly well
sedated with an α2 - adrenergic receptor agonist. Common clinical
applications are listed in Box 22.1.
Horses
Multiple α2 -adrenergic receptor agonists are approved for use in
horses not destined for human consumption (xylazine, detomidine,
and romifidine), and both medetomidine and dexmedetomidine
have also been used off-label in this species. Approximate equipo-
tent IV doses for equine sedation are 1 mg/kg xylazine ~ 40–80 μg/
kg romifidine ~ 20–40 μg/kg detomidine ~ 5–10 μg/kg medetomi-
dine (or 2.5–5 μg/kg dexmedetomidine) [261–263]. Duration of
action varies by drug and dose, but in general, detomidine is associ-
ated with the longest duration, romfidine and medetomidine are
intermediate, and xylazine has the shortest duration of action in
horses [262,264,265]. It has been suggested that romifidine may be
associated with less ataxia and lowering of the head when adminis-
tered for standing sedation, but other α2 - adrenergic receptor ago-
nists are commonly used for this purpose as well.
As in dogs and cats, the α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists have
numerous clinical applications in horses listed below (Box 22.2).
Cattle
In the United States, no α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists are
approved by the Food and Drug Administration for use in cattle,
though xylazine is frequently used off-label. The Food Animal
Residue Avoidance Database (FARAD) provides recommendations
for extra-label drug use in cattle and withholding guidelines for
Box 22.1 Common clinical applications of α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists
in dogs and cats.
1 IV or IM administration, often in combination with an opioid, for
sedation- analgesia to facilitate non- invasive or minimally invasive
procedures.
2 IV or IM administration in the preanesthetic period, often in
combination with an opioid, prior to induction with an IV injectable
anesthetic.
3 IM administration in combination with IM opioids, benzodiazepines,
ketamine, or alfaxalone to produce a state ranging from profound
sedation to general anesthesia.
4 IV CRI as an adjunct to inhalant anesthesia for MAC reduction, often
in combination with other agents such as opioids, lidocaine, or
ketamine [247–249].
5 IV CRI for injectable maintenance of anesthesia (TIVA) in combination
with other drugs such as opioids, propofol, alfaxalone, ketamine, and
benzodiazepines [250–252].
6 Low- dose IV bolus administration for postanesthetic sedation-
analgesia and management of emergence delirium at recovery.
7 IV CRI for sedation, analgesia, and anxiolysis postoperatively or in an
intensive care setting [253,254].
8 Epidural anesthesia–analgesia, usually in combination with other
agents such as local anesthetics, opioids, or ketamine [255–258].
9 Perineural administration in combination with a local anesthetic to
prolong or enhance peripheral nerve blockade [178,259].
10 OTM or intranasal administration (detomidine injectable or gel,
dexmedetomidine) for sedation and anxiolysis in dogs or cats where IV
administration is not feasible or desirable [155,159,260].

-- 359 of 1450 --

344 	Section 3: Pharmacology
xylazine vary by dose and route of administration (24–120 h for
milk and 4–10 days for meat) [283]. These recommendations reflect
different xylazine labeling in other countries where the drug is
approved in this species. Detomidine is approved for use in cattle in
Europe with reported milk and meat withholding times varying
between 12–72 h and 2–3 days, respectively.
Cattle are particularly sensitive to the CNS depressant effects of
α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists, especially xylazine, and typically
require approximately one-tenth of the equine dose to produce a
comparable clinical response. It has been speculated that this may
be due to differences in α2
-adrenergic receptor density or subtype
pattern (i.e., α2A/D
), but this has not been substantiated as a cause for
their increased sensitivity to xylazine [284]. Differences in α2 -
adrenergic receptor G-protein coupling efficiency induced by xyla-
zine versus detomidine have been documented in bovine brain
tissue, and it is possible that these molecular events further down
the signaling cascade may contribute to the species differences in
xylazine sensitivity noted clinically [284]. It has also been noted
that certain breeds of cattle (Herefords, Brahmans) appear to be
more sensitive to the effects of xylazine than others (Holsteins). The
other more specific α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists (detomidine
and dexmedetomidine) appear to be more potent in cattle with less
interspecies variation, and clinical doses closer to those used in
horses may be appropriate.
Common clinical applications for α2 - adrenergic receptor ago-
nists in cattle are listed in Box 22.3.
Anesthetic recovery in cattle is typically uneventful and postan-
esthetic sedation is rarely indicated.
Sheep
α2 - Adrenergic receptor agonists are potent and effective sedative–
analgesics in sheep and are often used in combination with other
drugs for induction and maintenance of anesthesia similar to
cattle. As noted in the respiratory system section, however, this
class of drugs may induce hypoxemia in sheep due to activation
of pulmonary intravascular macrophages leading to intra-alveolar
hemorrhage and interstitial and pulmonary edema [204,205]. The
magnitude of hypoxemia seems to be highly variable and depend-
ent on breed-related factors, being most severe after IV injection
during general anesthesia. In light of these factors, and because sub-
clinical pulmonary disease is common in sheep, rapid IV injection
of α2 - adrenergic receptor agonists in situations where provision of
supplemental oxygen is not feasible should be avoided [285,286].
Pigs
α2 -Adrenergic receptor agonists are widely used in pigs, usually in
combination with other agents such as dissociatives (ketamine or
tiletamine in Telazol®), opioids, and benzodiazepines. Pigs tend to
require higher doses of α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists compared
to horses, dogs, and cats, and significantly higher doses compared
to ruminants, especially for xylazine. Doses for the more selective/
potent agents (dexmedetomidine and medetomidine) appear to be
less variable.
α2 - Adrenergic receptor antagonists
The ability to pharmacologically antagonize the sedative, cardiovas-
cular, or respiratory effects of α2 - adrenergic receptor agonists is
considered a major advantage when using this class of drugs clini-
cally in domestic animals as well as in zoo animals and free-ranging
wildlife. There are four α2
- adrenergic receptor antagonists of cur-
rent clinical interest in veterinary medicine: yohimbine, tolazoline,
atipamezole, and vatinoxan. A fifth antagonist, idazoxan, has been
reported to reverse xylazine in sheep [287] and calves [288], but is
rarely used clinically.
Yohimbine was first extracted from the bark of the Pausinystalia
yohimbe tree over 100 years ago and was the first α2
- adrenergic
receptor antagonist used in veterinary medicine to reverse xylazine.
Not long after, in the early 1980s, reports of tolazoline administra-
tion for xylazine reversal also began appearing in the veterinary
literature.
Atipamezole was developed specifically to reverse the effects of
medetomidine in dogs, and it was released to the veterinary market
in 1996. Vatinoxan (previously known as “MK-467” and “L-
659,066”) has been studied since the early 1990s but has only
recently garnered interest for clinical use in veterinary medicine. It
has recently been marketed in combination with medetomidine in
the veterinary product Zenalpha®.
Yohimbine, tolazoline, atipamezole, and vatinoxan
Mechanism of action and indications
Similar to the α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists, antagonists have
unique α2
:α1 adrenergic receptor selectivity ratios and, depending on
their structure, variably bind to imidazoline receptors (Table 22.1).
Box 22.2 Common clinical applications of α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists
in horses.
1 IV bolus administration for standing sedation or chemical restraint,
often in combination with an opioid.
2 IV bolus or CRI for management of visceral pain associated with
colic [266].
3 IV CRI for standing procedures usually in combination with opioids
and locoregional anesthesia to facilitate a variety of surgical
procedures [267–270].
4 IV administration in the preanesthetic period, often in combination
with an opioid, prior to induction with an IV injectable anesthetic.
5 IV CRI as an adjunct to inhalant anesthesia for MAC reduction and/or
modification of recovery [271–274].
6 IV CRI for injectable maintenance of anesthesia (TIVA) in combination
with other drugs (ketamine and guaifenesin in “Triple Drip” or other
combinations) [275,276].
7 Low- dose IV bolus administration for postanesthetic sedation-
analgesia to enhance recovery from inhalant anesthesia [146,277].
8 Epidural anesthesia–analgesia, usually in combination with other
agents such as local anesthetics, opioids, or ketamine [278–280].
9 Perineural administration in combination with a local anesthetic to
prolong or enhance peripheral nerve blockade [281].
10 OTM administration (detomidine injectable or gel) for sedation and
anxiolysis in horses where IV administration is not feasible or
desirable [152,282].
Box 22.3 Common clinical applications of α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists
in cattle.
1 IV or IM administration for standing sedation or chemical restraint,
often in combination with an opioid.
2 IV administration in the preanesthetic period, often in combination
with an opioid, prior to induction with an IV injectable anesthetic.
3 IV CRI (very low “ruminant” dose) for injectable maintenance of
anesthesia (TIVA) in combination with other drugs (ketamine and
guaifenesin in “Triple Drip” or other combinations).
4 Epidural anesthesia–analgesia, usually in combination with other agents
such as local anesthetics, opioids, or ketamine.

-- 360 of 1450 --

Chapter 22: Sedatives and Tranquilizers 	345
These receptor binding characteristics impact an antagonist’s clini-
cal efficacy and side effect profile. Functionally, these drugs act as
competitive antagonists at α2
-adrenergic receptors and, like the ago-
nists, they have no subtype specificity. Differences in lipid solubility,
however, impact how α2
-adrenergic receptor antagonists are distrib-
uted, and their clinical effects vary accordingly. Yohimbine, tolazo-
line, and atipamezole are widely distributed and affect both central
and peripheral α2
-adrenergic receptors, while vatinoxan impacts
peripheral α2
-adrenergic receptors only (see below).
Yohimbine shows minimal selectivity for the α2 - adrenergic
receptor and lacks imidazoline receptor affinity. In addition to α-
adrenergic antagonism, yohimbine also interacts with dopaminer-
gic, serotonergic, and cholinergic receptors [289]. Tolazoline is a
non-selective antagonist with comparable affinity at both α2
- and
α1
- adrenergic receptors, as well as affinity at imidazoline receptors.
Its interactions at histaminergic and cholinergic receptors may con-
tribute to some of the side effects associated with clinical its use.
Atipamezole is by far the most specific α2
- adrenergic receptor
antagonist with an α2 :α1 binding ratio of over 8500:1. It has no sig-
nificant effects at dopaminergic, serotonergic, histaminergic, or
cholinergic receptors, and this specificity contributes to its favora-
ble side effect profile compared to the less selective antagonists,
yohimbine and tolazoline. Atipamezole’s chemical structure
includes an imidazoline ring, so it may interact with imidazoline
receptors.
Vatinoxan is classified as a selective α2
-adrenergic receptor
antagonist with an α2
:α1 binding ratio of 105:1 [137] and potential
imidazoline activity due to its chemical structure. Despite its lower
α2
:α1 selectivity ratio compared to atipamezole, a study in horses
and sheep demonstrated no effect of vatinoxan on the cardiovascu-
lar response to the α1
-adrenergic receptor agonist, methoxamine,
suggesting that vatinoxan has no clinically relevant effects at vascu-
lar α1
- adrenergic receptors [290]. Unlike the other three α2
-
adrenergic receptor antagonists, which are highly lipophilic and
readily penetrate the blood–brain barrier, vatinoxan is poorly lipid
soluble and is effectively excluded from the CNS after systemic
administration [137]. This feature, likely in combination with other
factors such as molecular weight, degree of ionization, protein
binding, or active transport efflux mechanisms, means that vati-
noxan is able to selectively antagonize peripheral postsynaptic α2
-
adrenergic receptors in vascular endothelium with minimal effects
on supraspinal and spinal α2
- adrenergic receptors. These character-
istics open the door to novel clinical applications for vatinoxan,
which are discussed below.
Common clinical indications for antagonist administration
include reversal of both central (i.e., sedation and cardiopulmonary
depression) and/or peripheral (i.e., cardiovascular) effects medi-
ated by α2 - adrenergic receptor agonists. It is important to remem-
ber that, for antagonists that cross the blood–brain barrier
(yohimbine, tolazoline, atipamezole), reversal of α2
- adrenergic
receptor-mediated spinal and supraspinal analgesia will also occur.
In animals with sustained nociception administered atipamezole to
reverse the effects of α2 - adrenergic receptor agonists, atipamezole
increased pain-related responses by blocking norepinephrine-
mediated inhibitory nociceptive pathways [291]. In addition to loss
of analgesia, there is also potential for inducing excitation and
adverse cardiovascular effects (vasodilation, hypotension, and tach-
ycardia), so the decision to administer an α2
-adrenergic receptor
antagonist should be made on a case-by- case basis. In some species
and in certain clinical circumstances, it may be advantageous to
administer a “full dose” of an α2
- adrenergic receptor antagonist but,
in many situations, lower partial doses of antagonist are effective in
antagonizing excessive sedation without reversing all sedative and
analgesic effects and may be associated with fewer adverse effects.
Pharmacokinetics
In horses, IV yohimbine and tolazoline have been reported to have
large volumes of distribution and are cleared slowly leading to pro-
longed terminal half-lives [292,293]. In dogs administered IM ati-
pamezole, both absorption and elimination appear to be rapid, with
the maximum plasma concentration occurring within 30 min and
an elimination half-life of approximately 1 h [294].
Atipamezole has been shown to reduce the area under the curve
of medetomidine in sedated dogs, demonstrating that administra-
tion of an α2
- adrenergic receptor antagonist can impact the phar-
macokinetics of an agonist [294]. It was speculated that the
increased clearance of medetomidine in the presence of atipame-
zole may result from restoration of hemodynamic function after
atipamezole administration. Both atipamezole and medetomidine
undergo hepatic metabolism by hydroxylation in dogs, but there is
no evidence of direct metabolic interactions between these two
drugs [294].
The pharmacokinetics of IV vatinoxan concentrations in
isoflurane-anesthetized cats have been reported to fit a three-
compartment model with a small volume of distribution and a low
clearance [295]. Dexmedetomidine did not have a significant effect
on plasma concentrations of vatinoxan in dogs or cats [296–298].
Other potential routes of administration have been reported for
certain α2
- adrenergic receptor antagonists, including endotracheal
administration of tolazoline in dogs [299], but this appears to have
limited clinical relevance in veterinary medicine.
Pharmacodynamics
Cardiovascular system
When administered alone (without the influence of an α2 -
adrenergic receptor agonist), α2 -adrenergic receptor antagonists
typically cause minimal dose-dependent cardiovascular changes
characterized by increased heart rate and decreased systemic vas-
cular resistance [300].
In animals under the influence of an agonist, administration of
an α2 -adrenergic receptor antagonist will partially reverse the car-
diovascular effects induced by the agonist. In the case of vatinoxan,
only those effects mediated by peripheral (vascular) α2 -adrenergic
receptors will be impacted. Usually, this manifests as a return of
systemic vascular resistance, arterial blood pressure, and heart rate
toward pre-sedation values with a concomitant increase in cardiac
output and resolution of bradyarrhythmias. A number of other fac-
tors, however, including the specific drug, the dose, the timing,
and the route of administration will impact these cardiovascular
effects. Rapid IV administration of an α2 -adrenergic receptor
antagonist to a sedated patient with significantly increased sys-
temic vascular resistance has been reported to cause vasodilation
and marked hypotension, so caution is warranted with this route of
administration.
Reversal of cardiovascular effects, however, is not complete even
for drugs with high α2
- adrenergic receptor specificity. In dogs,
reversal of medetomidine (20 μg/kg IM) with atipamezole (100 μg/
kg IM) administered 30 min later failed to result in sustained
decreases in systemic vascular resistance or increases in heart rate
and cardiac index [301]. The hemodynamic effects of reversal may
differ between sedated animals and those that are anesthetized,
with inhalant anesthetics introducing the potential for significant

-- 361 of 1450 --

346 	Section 3: Pharmacology
arterial hypotension. In isoflurane-anesthetized cats administered
dexmedetomidine (5 μg/kg IV), administration of atipamezole
(25 μg/kg or 50 μg/kg IM) 5 min after dexmedetomidine was
ineffective at increasing heart rate or cardiac output but was associ-
ated with transient but severe arterial hypotension [302].
Vatinoxan’s cardiovascular effects have also been evaluated in the
presence of medetomidine or dexmedetomidine, with or without
the influence of an inhalant anesthetic in several species. In con-
scious dogs administered IM medetomidine or IV dexmedetomi-
dine, vatinoxan attenuated but did not prevent α2
-adrenergic
receptor agonist-induced hemodynamic effects including reduc-
tions in heart rate and cardiac index and increases in systemic vas-
cular resistance and arterial blood pressure [303,304]. In
isoflurane-anesthetized dogs administered dexmedetomidine (2.5
μg/kg IV) and vatinoxan (100 μg/kg IV), vatinoxan similarly atten-
uated dexmedetomidine-induced decreases in cardiac index and
increases in systemic vascular resistance, but resulted in hypoten-
sion [305]. In this study, infusion of dobutamine or norepinephrine
not only restored normotension but significantly improved cardiac
index. In a clinical study in sevoflurane-anesthetized dogs adminis-
tered medetomidine–butorphanol–vatinoxan, significant arterial
hypotension requiring intervention was reported [306].
In conscious cats, co-administration of vatinoxan with dexme-
detomidine 	attenuated 	dexmedetomidine-induced 	bradycar-
dia [307,308], as well as reductions in cardiac index and increases
in systemic vascular resistance [309]. Similar to dogs, the co-
administration of vatinoxan with dexmedetomidine via target-
controlled infusion in isoflurane-anesthetized cats attenuated
dexmedetomidine-induced reductions in cardiac index and
increases in systemic vascular resistance, but vasodilatory effects
resulted in arterial hypotension [310–312]. Infusions of norepi-
nephrine and phenylephrine, but not dopamine, were effective
in preventing hypotension in dexmedetomidine–vatinoxan–
isoflurane-anesthetized cats [312].
In standing horses administered medetomidine with and without
vatinoxan (140 μg/kg IV) followed by medetomidine CRI, vati-
noxan was associated with higher heart rates, lower systemic vascu-
lar resistance, lower arterial blood pressure, and higher cardiac
index compared to medetomidine alone [313]. In horses anesthe-
tized with isoflurane, co-administration of vatinoxan with infu-
sions of either dexmedetomidine or medetomidine lowered
systemic vascular resistance and improved indices of global and
peripheral perfusion and oxygenation but increased the need for
inotropic support of arterial blood pressure [314,315].
Respiratory system
While the respiratory depressant effects of the α2 - adrenergic recep-
tor agonists are much less significant than their cardiovascular
effects, reversal with an α2
- adrenergic receptor antagonist with CNS
penetration is expected to return any changes in arterial blood gas
parameters toward baseline in most species. As discussed previ-
ously, sheep are uniquely susceptible to pulmonary edema and
hypoxemia with administration of α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists,
notably xylazine [316]. In an experimental study, atipamezole was
required in a significant number of sheep receiving xylazine, but
not medetomidine, to counteract tachypnea and hypoxemia, but no
discussion of the efficacy of atipamezole in reversing these pulmo-
nary changes was provided [316].
Administration of vatinoxan (750 μg/kg IV) to sheep prior
to xylazine (0.5 mg/kg IV) improved PaO2 without impacting
pulmonary histopathologic changes observed after euthanasia with
pentobarbital, suggesting that further investigations are war-
ranted [317]. In sevoflurane-anesthetized sheep, vatinoxan pretreat-
ment prevented dexmedetomidine-induced bronchoconstriction,
pulmonary edema, and arterial hypoxemia [318].
Central nervous system
Administration of an α2
- adrenergic receptor antagonist that readily
penetrates the blood–brain barrier (yohimbine, tolazoline, or ati-
pamezole) is expected to reverse the sedative–analgesic effects of an
α2 -adrenergic receptor agonist. These effects have been studied for
yohimbine [319–321], tolazoline [320,322,323], and atipame-
zole [322,324–327] in numerous species. Full reversal of all agonist-
induced CNS depressant effects is not always attained, and reasons
for this are multifactorial depending on the drug’s selectivity for the
α2 -adrenergic receptor (both the agonist and the antagonist), the
dose administered (both the agonist and the antagonist), the timing
after agonist administration, and the route of administration. In
general, the sedative effects of the most selective α2
- adrenergic
receptor agonists (medetomidine and dexmedetomidine) tend to
be the most reliably reversed by the most selective α2
- adrenergic
receptor antagonist (atipamezole).
In animals anesthetized with inhalant anesthetics, the MAC
reduction effects induced by an α2
-adrenergic receptor agonist are
also reversed by administration of an antagonist that penetrates the
CNS [328,329], though the hemodynamic consequences of this
practice caution against routine reversal of α2
- adrenergic receptor
agonists in inhalant-anesthetized patients.
As vatinoxan does not enter the CNS, its effects on α2
-adrenergic
receptor agonist-induced sedation are presumed to be minimal, and
this appears to be the case in dogs [330–332]. Interestingly, in stand-
ing horses administered a medetomidine bolus (7 μg/kg IV) followed
by a CRI, the addition of vatinoxan (140 μg/kg IV) to the medetomi-
dine bolus slightly but significantly lowered sedation scores for the
first 20 min, and the authors suggest that this could be a result of
vatinoxan promoting distribution and clearance of medetomidine
during the initial phase of the infusion [313]. Conversely, in sheep
co-administered medetomidine (30 μg/kg IM) and vatinoxan
(300 μg/kg IM), the addition of vatinoxan resulted in faster onset
of more intense sedation compared to medetomidine alone [333].
The interactions between multiple antagonists (atipamezole and
vatinoxan) are also of interest in the clinical setting. In conscious dogs
sedated with IM medetomidine or medetomidine–vatinoxan, atipam-
ezole reversed medetomidine-induced sedation more efficiently in
vatinoxan-treated dogs and resulted in fewer cases of recurrent seda-
tion [301]. Similar findings were reported in sheep where reversal of
medetomidine-induced sedation with atipamezole was enhanced
when medetomidine was co-administered with vatinoxan [333].
Due to its purported limited penetration of the CNS, the effects
of vatinoxan on the MAC-sparing effects of α2
- adrenergic receptor
agonists would be expected to be negligible; however, this may not
be the case. In isoflurane-anesthetized cats, vatinoxan alone admin-
istered using a target-controlled infusion system increased isoflu-
rane MAC, and significantly reduced the MAC-sparing effects of a
dexmedetomidine target-controlled infusion [334]. Reasons for
this are unclear, and the authors suggest that further studies are
warranted to establish whether vatinoxan penetrates the blood–
brain barrier in cats and the mechanism by which it increases inhal-
ant anesthetic MAC.
Similarly, in sevoflurane-anesthetized dogs, vatinoxan adminis-
tered alone as a loading dose followed by a CRI significantly and
unexpectedly increased MAC at the highest vatinoxan infusion

-- 362 of 1450 --

Chapter 22: Sedatives and Tranquilizers 	347
rate [335]. In a subsequent study, when vatinoxan was infused
with dexmedetomidine in sevoflurane-anesthetized dogs, partial
attenuation of dexmedetomidine’s MAC-sparing effects was
observed [336]. The authors propose that, because MAC is a meas-
ure of immobility that is largely mediated at the level of spinal cord
rather than at supraspinal structures, it is likely that vatinoxan pen-
etrates the spinal cord in concentrations sufficient to alter inhalant
anesthetic requirements [336]. Further studies investigating the
effects of both atipamezole and vatinoxan on inhalant anesthetic
MAC seem warranted.
The analgesic effects of the α2 - adrenergic receptor agonists,
as expected, are readily reversed by systemic administration of
antagonists that readily cross the blood–brain barrier (yohimbine,
tolazoline, and atipamezole) [337–339].
Vatinoxan, with its limited penetration of the CNS, would be
expected to have minimal effects on systemic α2
- adrenergic recep-
tor agonist-induced analgesia, but this may be an oversimplifica-
tion. In dogs, co-administration of vatinoxan (250 μg/kg IV) with
medetomidine (10 μg/kg IV) significantly attenuated racemic
medetomidine-induced antinociception, which was accompanied
by lower plasma concentrations of dexmedetomidine [340]. The
authors attributed these effects to vatinoxan-induced alterations in
medetomidine distribution and clearance, which could be amelio-
rated by administration of a higher dose of medetomidine when
combined with vatinoxan [340]. Another canine study investigated
this possibility and found that co-administration of vatinoxan did
not significantly interfere with medetomidine-induced analgesia as
long as plasma dexmedetomidine concentrations remained above
the threshold needed for antinociception [341].
Other effects
In general, the other effects of α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists on
gastrointestinal function [342], urine output [224,343], and glucose
regulation [344] are largely reversed by administration of the “tra-
ditional” α2
- adrenergic receptor antagonists, yohimbine, tolazoline,
and atipamezole.
The effects of vatinoxan on these parameters are less consistent. In
conscious horses, co-administration of vatinoxan with detomidine,
romifidine, or medetomidine attenuated the reduction in intestinal
hypomotility induced by the α2
-adrenergic receptor agonist [313,345–
347]. However, in isoflurane-anesthetized horses receiving a
medetomidine IV bolus and CRI, IV vatinoxan did not influence the
reduction in fecal output noted after anesthesia [315].
Unlike atipamezole, vatinoxan failed to show any detectable
improvement in voiding parameters in mice administered dexme-
detomidine [224]. In dogs, co-administration of vatinoxan with dex-
medetomidine prevented significant dexmedetomidine-induced
changes in plasma glucose, insulin, and lactate [240].
Clinical considerations
While atipamezole, the most selective α2
-adrenergic antagonist, has
largely supplanted yohimbine and tolazoline for clinical use in
small animals, the older, less selective antagonists are still used clin-
ically in domestic cattle and free-ranging hoofstock, especially for
reversal of xylazine. High IV doses of tolazoline in particular have
been associated with adverse CNS effects (hyperesthesia and opis-
thotonos) in adult cattle, and very high IV doses induced serious
CNS, cardiovascular, respiratory, and gastrointestinal side effects in
calves. For these reasons, lower IV doses of tolazoline are recom-
mended in cattle (or any species), or avoidance of the IV route
except in emergency situations.
In all species, decisions about if, when, or how to reverse the
effects of an α2
- adrenergic agonist should be made on a case-by-
case basis after considering potential advantages and disadvantages.
Potential disadvantages of α2
- adrenergic antagonist administration
include CNS stimulation or excitation, loss of analgesia, and adverse
cardiovascular effects such as vasodilation, hypotension, and tachy-
cardia. In some species and in certain clinical circumstances,
administration of a full “label” dose may be indicated, but, in many
situations, a lower partial dose of antagonist is effective in reversing
excessive or persistent sedation while retaining some sedative and
analgesic effects and avoiding adverse side effects.
Vatinoxan, the peripherally acting α2
- adrenergic antagonist, has
recently been approved in several countries in combination with
racemic medetomidine for use as an IM sedative–analgesic in dogs,
and a brief overview of this product is provided below.
Medetomidine–vatinoxan combination (Zenalpha®)
The combination of vatinoxan with medetomidine in Zenalpha® is
purported to partially counteract the cardiovascular depressant effects
of dexmedetomidine (the pharmacologically active enantiomer in
medetomidine) while preserving dexmedetomidine’s centrally medi-
ated sedative and analgesic effects [348]. Each milliliter of Zenalpha®
contains 0.5 mg medetomidine and 10 mg vatinoxan along with man-
nitol, citric acid monohydrate, methylparaben, and propylparaben.
Label dosing recommendations are 1 mg medetomidine/m2 body sur-
face area, which corresponds to a 40 μg/kg medetomidine dose and an
800 μg/kg vatinoxan dose in a 20 kg dog. Approved indications
include “clinical examinations, clinical procedures, and minor surgi-
cal procedures.” In a field efficacy trial, dogs treated with Zenalpha®
had a shorter time to onset of sedation, shorter duration of sedation,
and less cardiovascular and respiratory depression with fewer adverse
reactions compared to dogs in the control group receiving dexme-
detomidine alone. Administration of IM atipamezole at the approved
dose to reverse medetomidine results in reversal of Zenalpha®’s seda-
tive and analgesic effects within 5–10 min [348].
Despite its more favorable safety profile, the label indicates that
Zenalpha® is contraindicated in dogs with “cardiac disease, respira-
tory disease, shock, severe debilitation that have hypoglycemia or are
at risk of developing hypoglycemia, or are stressed due to extreme
heat, cold, or fatigue.” It is not labeled for administration in combi-
nation with any other drugs; thus, its use in the perianesthetic period
as a preanesthetic agent prior to an injectable and/or inhalant anes-
thetic constitutes extra-label use. The product has generated consid-
erable interest, and numerous studies are emerging describing the
use of this particular formulation in dogs, both on and off-label, in a
variety of clinical situations. While numerous other extra-label uses
in different species are also being investigated, it should be noted
that the 1:20 ratio of medetomidine to vatinoxan in Zenalpha® may
not be appropriate for other species (e.g., cats).
Acknowledgement
The authors would like to acknowledge Dr. David C. Rankin for his
valuable work on the previous edition of this chapter.
References
1 DeBattista C. Antipsychotic agents and lithium. In: Katzung BG, Vanerah TW, eds.
Basic and Clinical Pharmacology, 15th edn. New York, NY: McGraw Hill, 2021: 529.
2 Ballard S, Shults T, Kownacki AA, et al. The pharmacokinetics, pharmacological
responses and behavioral effects of acepromazine in the horse. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
1982; 5: 21–31.

-- 363 of 1450 --

348 	Section 3: Pharmacology
3 Marroum PJ, Webb AI, Aeschbacher G, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
namics of acepromazine in horses. Am J Vet Res 1994; 55: 1428–1433.
4 Knych HK, Seminoff K, McKemie DS, et al. Pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynam-
ics, and metabolism of acepromazine following intravenous, oral, and sublingual
administration to exercised Thoroughbred horses. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2018; 41:
522–535.
5 Hashem A, Kietzmann M, Scherkl R. The pharmacokinetics and bioavailability of
acepromazine in the plasma of dogs. Dtsch Tierarztl Wochenschr 1992; 99:
396–398.
6 Dewey EA, Maylin GA, Ebel JG, et al. The metabolism of promazine and acetyl-
promazine in the horse. Drug Metab Dispos 1981; 9: 30–36.
7 Coulter DB, Whelan SC, Wilson RC, et al. Determination of blood pressure by indi-
rect methods in dogs given acetylpromazine maleate. Cornell Vet 1981; 71: 75–84.
8 Stepien RL, Bonagura JD, Bednarski RM, et al. Cardiorespiratory effects of ace-
promazine maleate and buprenorphine hydrochloride in clinically normal dogs.
Am J Vet Res 1983; 44: 996–999.
9 Rangel JPP, Monteiro ER, Bitti FS, et al. Hemodynamic, respiratory and sedative
effects of progressively increasing doses of acepromazine in conscious dogs. Vet
Anesth Analg 2020; 47: 447–453.
10 Muir WW, Skarda RT, Sheehan W. Hemodynamic and respiratory effects of a
xylazine–acetylpromazine drug combination in horses. Am J Vet Res 1979; 40:
1518–1522.
11 Pequito M, Amory H, Serteyn D, et al. Comparison of the sedative and hemody-
namic effects of acepromazine and promethazine in the standing horse. J Equine
Vet Sci 2012; 32: 799–804.
12 Leise BS, Fugler LA, Stokes AM, et al. Effects of intramuscular administration of
acepromazine on palmar digital blood flow, palmar digital arterial pressure, trans-
verse facial arterial pressure, and packed cell volume in clinically healthy, conscious
horses. Vet Surg 2007; 36: 717–723.
13 Ludders JW, Reitan JA, Martucci R, et al. Blood pressure response to phenylephrine
infusion in halothane anesthetized dogs given acetylpromazine maleate. Am J Vet
Res 1983; 44: 996–999.
14 Rangel JPP, Monteiro ER, Bitti FS, et al. Hemodynamic effects of incremental doses
of acepromazine in isoflurane-anesthetized dogs. Vet Anesth Analg 2021; 48:
167–173.
15 Steffey EP, Kelly AB, Farver TB, et al. Cardiovascular and respiratory effects of
acetylpromazine and xylazine on halothane anesthetized horses. J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 1985; 8: 290–302.
16 Muir WW, Werner LL, Hamlin RL. Effects of xylazine and acetylpromazine upon
induced ventricular fibrillation in dogs anesthetized with thiamylal and halothane.
Am J Vet Res 1975; 36: 1299–1303.
17 Dyson D, Pettifer G. Evaluation of the arrhythmogenicity of a low dose of ace-
promazine: comparison with xylazine. Can J Vet Res 1997; 61: 241–245.
18 Lemke KA, Tranquilli WJ. Anesthetics, arrhythmias, and myocardial sensitization
to epinephrine. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1994; 205: 1679–1684.
19 Popovic NA, Mullane JF, Yhap EO. Effects of acetylpromazine maleate on certain
cardiorespiratory responses in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1972; 33: 1819–1824.
20 Marntell S, Nyman G, Funkquist P, et al. Effects of acepromazine on pulmonary gas
exchange and circulation during sedation and dissociative anaesthesia in horses.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2005; 32: 83–93.
21 Webb AI, O’Brien JM. The effect of acepromazine maleate on the anesthetic
potency of halothane and isoflurane. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1988; 24: 609–613.
22 Heard DJ, Webb AI, Daniels RT. Effect of acepromazine on the anesthetic require-
ment of halothane in the dog. Am J Vet Res 1986; 47: 2113–2115.
23 Doherty TJ, Geiser DR, Rohrback BW. Effect of acepromazine and butorphanol on
halothane minimum alveolar concentration in ponies. Equine Vet J 1997; 29: 374–376.
24 Fabisch W. The effect of chlorpromazine on the electroencephalogram of epileptic
patients. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiat 1957; 20: 185.
25 Holliday TA, Cunningham JG, Gutnick MJ. Comparative clinical and electroen-
cephalographic studies of canine epilepsy. Epilepsia 1970; 11: 281–292.
26 Tobias KM, Marioni-Henry K, Wagner R. A retrospective study on the use of ace-
promazine maleate in dogs with seizures. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2006; 42: 283–289.
27 McConnell J, Kirby R, Rudloff E. Administration of acepromazine maleate to 31
dogs with a history of seizures. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2007; 17: 262–267.
28 Drynan EA, Gray P, Raisis AL. Incidence of seizures associated with the use of ace-
promazine in dogs undergoing myelography. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio)
2012; 22: 262–266.
29 Lang SM, Eglen RM, Henry AC. Acetylpromazine administration: its effect on
canine haematology. Vet Rec 1979; 105: 397–398.
30 Barr SC, Ludders JW, Looney AL, et al. Platelet aggregation in dogs after sedation
with acepromazine and atropine and during subsequent general anesthesia and sur-
gery. Am J Vet Res 1992; 53: 2067–2070.
31 Conner BJ, Hanel RM, Hansen BD, et al. Effects of acepromazine maleate on plate-
let function assessed by use of adenosine diphosphate activated- and arachidonic
acid- activated modified thromboelastography in healthy dogs. Am J Vet Res 2012;
73: 595–601.
32 Valverde A, Cantwell S, Hernández J, et al. Effects of acepromazine on the incidence
of vomiting associated with opioid administration in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2004;
31: 40–45.
33 Claude AK, Dedeaux A, Chiavaccini L, et al. Effects of maropitant citrate or
acepromazine on the incidence of adverse events associated with hydromorphone
premedication in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2014; 28: 1414–1417.
34 Strombeck DR, Harrold D. Effects of atropine, acepromazine, meperidine, and
xylazine on gastroesophageal sphincter pressure in the dog. Am J Vet Res 1985; 46:
963–965.
35 Hall JA, Magne ML, Twedt DC. Effect of acepromazine, diazepam, fentanyl–
droperidol, and oxymorphone on gastroesophageal sphincter pressure in healthy
dogs. Am J Vet Res 1987; 48: 556–557.
36 Scrivani PV, Bednarski RM, Myer CW. Effects of acepromazine and butorphanol on
positive-contrast upper gastrointestinal tract examination in dogs. Am J Vet Res
1998; 59: 1227–1233.
37 Davies JV, Gerring EL. Effect of spasmolytic analgesic drugs on the motility pat-
terns of the equine small intestine. Res Vet Sci 1983; 34: 334–339.
38 Doherty TJ, Andrews FM, Provenza MK, et al. The effect of sedation on gastric
emptying of a liquid marker in ponies. Vet Surg 1999; 28: 375–379.
39 Costa RS, Wetmore LA, Stein A. Randomized, blinded, controlled clinical trial to
assess gastroesophageal reflux and regurgitation in dogs undergoing general anes-
thesia after hydromorphone premedication with or without acepromazine or dex-
medetomidine. Am J Vet Res 2021; 82: 695–700.
40 Pearson H, Weaver BM. Priapism after sedation, neuroleptanalgesia, and anaesthe-
sia in the horse. Equine Vet J 1979; 11: 33–35.
41 Driessen B, Zarucco L, Kalir B, Bertolotti L. Contemporary use of acepromazine in
the anaesthetic management of male horses and ponies: a retrospective study and
opinion poll. Equine Vet J 2011; 43: 88–98.
42 Bostrom I, Nyman G, Kampa N, et al. Effects of acepromazine on renal function in
anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 2003; 64: 590–598.
43 Newell SM, Ko JC, Ginn PE, et al. Effects of three sedative protocols on glomerular
filtration rate in clinically normal dogs. Am J Vet Res 1997; 58: 446–450.
44 Marks SL, Straeter-Knowlen IM, Moore M, et al. Effects of acepromazine maleate
and phenoxybenzamine on urethral pressure profiles of anesthetized, healthy, sexu-
ally intact male cats. Am J Vet Res 1996; 57: 1497–1500.
45 Moriello KA, Eicker SW. Influence of sedative and anesthetic agents on intradermal
skin test reactions in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1991; 52: 1484–1498.
46 Kramer BM, Hector RC, Rezende ML, et al. Sedative and cardiopulmonary effects
of intramuscular combinations of hydromorphone, acepromazine, dexmedetomi-
dine, and glycopyrrolate followed by intravenous propofol and inhalant isoflurane
anesthesia in healthy dogs. Am J Vet Res 2022; 83: 22.06.0098.
47 Alvaides RK, Teixeira Neto FJ, Aguiar AJA, et al. Sedative and cardiorespiratory
effects of acepromazine or atropine given before dexmedetomidine in dogs. Vet Rec
2008; 162: 852–856.
48 Saponaro V, Crovace A, De Marzo L, et al. Echocardiographic evaluation of the
cardiovascular effects of medetomidine, acepromazine and their combination in
healthy dogs. Res Vet Sci 2013; 95: 687–692.
49 Deshpande D, Hill KE, Mealey KL, et al. The effect of the canine ABCB1-1Δ on
sedation after intravenous administration of acepromazine. J Vet Intern Med 2016;
30: 636–641.
50 Mealey KL, Owens JG, Freeman E. Canine and feline P-glycoprotein deficiency:
what we know and where we need to go. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2023; 46: 1–16.
51 Posner LP. Sedatives and tranquilizers. In: Riviere JE, Papich MG, eds. Veterinary
Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 10th edn. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley Blackwell, 2018;
324–368.
52 Johnston GM, Eastment JK, Wood J, et al. The confidential enquiry into periopera-
tive equine fatalities (CEPEF): mortality results of Phases 1 and 2. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2002; 29: 159–170.
53 Valverde A, Black B, Cribb NC, et al. Assessment of unassisted recovery from
repeated general isoflurane anesthesia in horses following post-anesthetic adminis-
tration of xylazine or acepromazine or a combination of xylazine and ketamine. Vet
Anesth Analg 2013; 40: 3–12.
54 McGrath CJ, Rempel WE, Addis PB, et al. Acepromazine and droperidol inhibition
of halothane- induced malignant hyperthermia (porcine stress syndrome) in swine.
Am J Vet Res 1981; 42: 195–198.
55 Calcaterra NE, Barrow JC. Classics in chemical neuroscience: diazepam (valium).
ACS Chem Neurosci 2014; 5: 253–260.
56 Goodchild CS. GABA receptors and benzodiazepines. Br J Anaesth 1993; 71:
127–133.
57 Engin E, Liu J, Uwe R. α2-containing GABAA receptors: a target for the develop-
ment of novel treatment strategies for CNS disorders. Pharmacol Ther 2012; 136:
142–152.

-- 364 of 1450 --

Chapter 22: Sedatives and Tranquilizers 	349
58 Everington EA, Gibbard AG, Swinny JD, et al. Molecular characterization of
GABA-A receptor subunit diversity within major peripheral organs and their plas-
ticity in response to early life psychosocial stress. Front Mol Neurosc 2018; 11: 18.
59 Goetz T, Arslan A, Wisden W, et al. GABA(A) receptors: structure and function in
the basal ganglia. Prog Brain Res 2007; 160: 21–41.
60 Costa E, Guidotti A. Endogenous ligands for benzodiazepine recognition sites.
Biochem Pharmacol 1985; 34: 3399–3403.
61 Baraldi M, Avallone R, Corsi L, et al. Endogenous benzodiazepines. Therapie 2000;
55: 143–146.
62 Cortelli P, Avallone R, Baraldi M, et al. Endozepines in recurrent stupor. Sleep Med
Rev 2005; 9: 477–487.
63 Ahboucha S, Gamrani H, Baker G. GABAergic neurosteroids: the ‘endogenous
benzodiazepines’ of acute liver failure. Neurochem Int 2012; 60: 707–714.
64 Tonon M-C, Vaudry H, Chuquet J, et al. Endozepines and their receptors: structure,
functions and pathophysiological significance. Pharmacol Ther 2020; 208: 1–56.
65 Abbara C, Rousseau JM, Turcant A, et al. Bioavailability of diazepam after intra-
muscular injection of its water-soluble prodrug alone or with atropine-pralidoxime
in healthy volunteers. Br J Pharmacol 2009; 157: 1390–1397.
66 Treleano A, Wolz G, Brandsch R, et al. Investigation into the adsorption of nitro-
glycerine and diazepam into PVC tubes and alternative tube materials during appli-
cation. Int J Pharm 2009; 369: 30–37.
67 Winsnes M, Jeffsson R, Sjoberg B. Diazepam absorption to infusion sets and plastic
syringes. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1981; 25: 93–96.
68 KuKanich B, Nauss JL. Pharmacokinetics of the cytochrome P-450 substrates phe-
nytoin, theophylline, and diazepam in healthy Greyhound dogs. Vet Pharm Ther
2012; 35: 275–281.
69 Shou M, Norcross R, Sandig G, et al. Substrate specificity and kinetic properties of
seven heterologously expressed dog cytochromes p450. Drug Metab Dispos 2003;
31: 1161–1169.
70 Papich MG, Alcorn J. Absorption of diazepam after its rectal administration in
dogs. Am J Vet Res 1995; 56: 1629–1636.
71 Löscher W, Frey HH. Pharmacokinetics of diazepam in the dog. Arch Int
Pharmacodyn Ther 1981; 254: 180–195.
72 Cotler S, Gustafson JH, Colburn WA. Pharmacokinetics of diazepam and nordiaz-
epam in the cat. J Pharm Sci 1984; 73: 348–351.
73 van Beusekom CD, van den Heuvel JJ, Koenderink JB, et al. Feline hepatic biotrans-
formation of diazepam: differences between cats and dogs. Res Vet Sci 2015; 103:
119–125.
74 Muir WW, Sams RA, Huffman RH, et al. Pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic
properties of diazepam in horses. Am J Vet Res 1982; 43: 1756–1762.
75 Kanto JH. Midazolam: the first water-soluble benzodiazepine. Pharmacology, phar-
macokinetics and efficacy in insomnia and anesthesia. Pharmacotherapy 1985; 5:
138–155.
76 KuKanich B, Hubin M. The pharmacokinetics of ketoconazole and its effects on the
pharmacokinetics of midazolam and fentanyl in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2010;
33: 42–49.
77 Schwartz M, Muñana KR, Nettifee-Osborne JA, et al. The pharmacokinetics of
midazolam after intravenous, intramuscular, and rectal administration in healthy
dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2013; 36: 471–477.
78 Court MH, Greenblatt DJ. Pharmacokinetics and preliminary observations of
behavioral changes following administration of midazolam to dogs. J Vet Pharm
Ther 1992; 15: 343–350.
79 Zhang J, Niu S, Zhang H, Streisand JB. Oral mucosal absorption of midazolam in
dogs is strongly pH dependent. J Pharm Sci 2002; 91: 980–982.
80 Henry RJ, Ruano N, Casto D, et al. A pharmacokinetic study of midazolam in dogs:
nasal drop vs. atomizer administration. Pediatr Dent 1998; 20: 321–326.
81 Eagleson JS, Platt SR, Strong DL, et al. Bioavailability of a novel midazolam gel after
intranasal administration in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2012; 73: 539–545.
82 Charalambous M, Bhatti SFM, Van Ham L, et al. Intranasal midazolam versus rec-
tal diazepam for the management of canine status epilepticus: a multicenter rand-
omized parallel-group clinical trial. J Vet Intern Med 2017; 31: 1149–1158.
83 Charalambous M, Volk HA, Tipold A, et al. Comparison of intranasal versus intra-
venous midazolam for management of status epilepticus in dogs: a multi-center
randomized parallel group clinical study. J Vet Intern Med 2019; 33: 2709–2717.
84 Dholakia U, Seddighi R, Cox SK, et al. Pharmacokinetics of midazolam in
sevoflurane-anesthetized cats. Vet Anesth Analg 2020; 47: 200–209.
85 Marjani M, Akbarinejad V, Bagheri M. Comparison of intranasal and intramuscu-
lar ketamine-midazolam combination in cats. Vet Anesth Analg 2015; 42: 178–181.
86 Hubbell JAE, Kelly EM, Aarnes TK, et al. Pharmacokinetics of midazolam after
intravenous administration to horses. Equine Vet J 2013; 45: 721–725.
87 Jones DJ, Stehling LC, Zauder HL. Cardiovascular responses to diazepam and
midazolam maleate in the dog. Anesthesiology 1979; 51: 430–434.
88 Flacke JW, Davis LJ, Flacke WE, et al. Effects of fentanyl and diazepam in dogs
deprived of autonomic tone. Anesth Analg 1985; 64: 1053–1059.
89 Machado CG, Dyson DH, Mathews KA. Evaluation of induction by use of a
combination of oxymorphone and diazepam or hydromorphone and diazepam
and maintenance of anesthesia by use of isoflurane in dogs with experimentally
induced hypovolemia. Am J Vet Res 2005; 66: 1227–1237.
90 Smith AC, Zellner JL, Spinale FG, et al. Sedative and cardiovascular effects of
midazolam in swine. Lab Anim Sci 1991; 41: 157–161.
91 Robinson R, Borer-Weir K. A dose titration study into the effects of diazepam or
midazolam on the propofol dose requirements for induction of general anaesthe-
sia in client owned dogs, premedicated with methadone and acepromazine. Vet
Anesth Analg 2013; 40: 455–463.
92 Ko JC, Payton ME, White AG, et al. Effects of intravenous diazepam or microdose
medetomidine on propofol induced sedation in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2006;
42: 18–27.
93 Italiano M, Robinson R. Effect of benzodiazepines on the dose of alfaxalone
needed for endotracheal intubation in healthy dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45:
720–728.
94 Miller C, Hughes E, Gurney M. Co-induction of anaesthesia with alfaxalone and
midazolam in dogs: a randomized, blinded clinical trial. Vet Anaesth Analg 2019;
46: 613–619.
95 Matthews NS, Dollar NS, Shawley RV. Halothane sparing effect of benzodiaz-
epines in ponies. Cornell Vet 1990; 80: 259–265.
96 Hellyer PW, Mama KR, Shafford HL, et al. Effects of diazepam and flumazenil on
minimum alveolar concentrations for dogs anesthetized with isoflurane or a com-
bination of isoflurane and fentanyl. Am J Vet Res 2001; 62: 555–560.
97 Seddighi R, Egger CM, Rohrbach BW, et al. The effect of midazolam on the end-
tidal concentration of isoflurane necessary to prevent movement in dogs. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2011; 38: 195–202.
98 Trevor AJ. Sedative-hypnotic drugs. In: Katzung BG, Vanerah TW, eds. Basic and
Clinical Pharmacology, 15th edn New York, NY: McGraw Hill, 2021: 395.
99 Bagley RS, Chen AV. Anticonvulsants. In: Peterson ME, Talcott PA, eds. Small
Animal Toxicology, 3rd edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier-Saunders, 2013: 450.
100 Hoffman WE, Albrecht RF, Miletich DJ, et al. Cerebrovascular and cerebral meta-
bolic effects of physostigmine, midazolam, and a benzodiazepine antagonist.
Anesth Analg 1986; 65: 639–644.
101 Ilkiw JE, Suter CM, Farver TB, et al. The behavior of healthy awake cats following
intravenous and intramuscular administration of midazolam. J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 1996; 19: 205–216.
102 Aarnes TK, Lerche P, Bednarski RM, et al. Total intravenous anesthesia using a
midazolam-ketamine-xylazine infusion in horses: 46 cases (2011–2014). Can Vet
J 2018; 59: 500–504.
103 Bustamante R, Valverde A. Determination of a sedative dose and influence of dro-
peridol and midazolam on cardiovascular function in pigs. Can J Vet Res 1997; 61:
246–250.
104 Dzikiti TB, Zeiler GE, Dzikiti LN, et al. The effects of midazolam and butorpha-
nol, administered alone or combined, on the dose and quality of anaesthetic
induction with alfaxalone in goats. J S Afr Vet Assoc 2014; 85: 1047.
105 Simon BT, Scallan EM, O O, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of
midazolam following intravenous and intramuscular administration to sheep. Am
J Vet Res 2017; 78: 539–549.
106 Aarnes TK, Fry PR, Hubbell JA, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
of midazolam after intravenous and intramuscular administration in alpacas. Am
J Vet Res 2013; 74: 294–299.
107 Robertson SA, Eberhart S. Efficacy of the intranasal route for administration of
anesthetic agents to adult rabbits. Lab Anim Sci 1994; 44: 159–165.
108 Álvarez ER, Solé LV, de Carellán Mateo AG. Comparison of subcutaneous seda-
tion with alfaxalone or alfaxalone-midazolam in pet guinea pigs (Cavia porcellus)
of three different age groups. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2022; 260: 1024–1030.
109 Mans C, Guzman DS, Lahner LL, et al. Sedation and physiologic response to
manual restraint after intranasal administration of midazolam in Hispaniolan
Amazon parrots (Amazona ventralis). J Avian Med Surg 2012; 26: 130–139.
110 Schaffer DPH, de Araújo NLLC, Raposo ACS, et al. Sedative effects of intranasal
midazolam administration in wild caught blue-fronted Amazon (Amazona aes-
tiva) and orange-winged Amazon (Amazona amazonica) parrots. J Avian Med
Surg 2017; 31: 213–218.
111 Greene SA, Moore MP, Keegan RD, et al. Quantitative electroencephalography for
measurement of central nervous system responses to diazepam and the benzodi-
azepine antagonist, flumazenil, in isoflurane-anaesthetized dogs. J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 1992; 15: 259–266.
112 Keegan RD, Greene SA, Moore MP, et al. Antagonism by flumazenil of midazolam-
induced changes in quantitative electroencephalographic data from isoflurane-
anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 1993; 54: 761–765.
113 Goh ET, Andersen ML, Morgan MY, et al. Flumazenil versus placebo or no inter-
vention for people with cirrhosis and hepatic encephalopathy. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 2017; 7: CD002798.

-- 365 of 1450 --

350 	Section 3: Pharmacology
114 Martin WR, Sloan JW, Wala E. Precipitated abstinence in orally dosed
benzodiazepine-dependent dogs. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1990; 255: 744–755.
115 Lheureux P, Vranckx M, Leduc D, et al. Flumazenil in mixed benzodiazepine/tri-
cyclic antidepressant overdose: a placebo-controlled study in the dog. Am J Emerg
Med 1992; 10: 184–188.
116 An H, Godwin J. Flumazenil in benzodiazepine overdose. CMAJ 2016; 188: E537.
117 Greene SA, Thurmon JC. Xylazine – a review of its pharmacology and use in
veterinary medicine. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1988; 11: 295–313.
118 Clarke KW, Hall LW. “Xylazine” – a new sedative for horses and cattle. Vet Rec
1969; 85: 512–517.
119 Kerr DD, Jones EW, Huggins K, et al. Sedative and other effects of xylazine given
intravenously to horses. Am J Vet Res 1972; 33: 525–532.
120 Klein L, Baetjer C. Preliminary report: xylazine and morphine sedation in the
horse. Vet Anesth 1974; 2: 2–4.
121 Antonaccio MJ, Robson RD, Kerwin L. Evidence for increased vagal tone and enhance-
ment of baroreceptor reflex activity after xylazine (2-(2,6-dimethylphenylamino)-
4- H- 5,6-dihydro-1,3-thiazine) in anesthestized dogs. Eur J Pharmacol 1973; 23:
311–316.
122 Moye RJ, Pailet A, Smith MW Jr. Clinical use of xylazine in dogs and cats. Vet Med
Small Anim Clin 1973; 68: 236.
123 Hsu WH. Xylazine-induced depression and its antagonism by alpha adrenergic
blocking agents. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1981; 218: 188–192.
124 Bylund DB, Ray-Prenger C, Murphy TJ. Alpha-2A and alpha-2B adrenergic recep-
tor subtypes: antagonist binding in tissues and cell lines containing only one sub-
type. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1988; 245: 600–607.
125 Bylund DB. Alpha-2 adrenoceptor subtypes: are more better? Br J Pharmacol
2005; 144: 159–160.
126 Raczak-Gutknecht J, Frąckowiak T, Nasal A, et al. Are alpha-2D adrenoceptor
subtypes involved in rat mydriasis evoked by new imidazoline derivatives: mar-
sanidine and 7-methylmarsanidine? Dose Response 2017; 15: 1559325817701213.
127 Ruuskanen JO, Xhaard H, Marjamäki A, et al. Identification of duplicated fourth
alpha2- adrenergic receptor subtype by cloning and mapping of five receptor genes
in zebrafish. Mol Biol Evol 2004; 21: 14–28.
128 Ma D, Rajakumaraswamy N, Maze M. α2 - Adrenoceptor agonists: shedding light
on neuroprotection? Br Med Bull 2005; 71: 77–92.
129 Pichot C, Ghignone M, Quintin L. Dexmedetomidine and clonidine: from sec-
ond- to first-line sedative agents in the critical care setting? J Intensive Care Med
2012; 27: 219–237.
130 Buerkle H, Yaksh TL. Pharmacological evidence for different alpha 2-adrenergic
receptor sites mediating analgesia and sedation in the rat. Br J Anaesth 1998; 81:
208–215.
131 Carollo DS, Nossaman BD, Ramadhyani U. Dexmedetomidine: a review of clini-
cal applications. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2008; 21: 457–461.
132 Giovannitti JA Jr, Thoms SM, Crawford JJ. Alpha-2 adrenergic receptor agonists:
a review of current clinical applications. Anesth Prog 2015; 62: 313–319.
133 Puumala T, Riekkinen P Sr, Sirviö J. Modulation of vigilance and behavioral acti-
vation by alpha- 1 adrenoceptors in the rat. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 1997; 56:
705–712.
134 Bousquet P, Hudson A, García-Sevilla JA, et al. Imidazoline receptor system: the
past, the present, and the future. Pharmacol Rev 2020; 72: 50–79.
135 Li Y, Cheng KC, Asakawa A, et al. Activation of imidazoline-I3 receptors amelio-
rates pancreatic damage. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 2015; 42: 964–971.
136 Matsukawa T, Hikasa Y. Effects of imidazoline and nonimidazoline α-
adrenoceptor agonists and antagonists, including xylazine, medetomidine, dex-
medetomidine, yohimbine, and atipamezole, on aggregation of feline platelets.
Am J Vet Res 2020; 81: 159–171.
137 Clineschmidt BV, Pettibone DJ, Lotti VJ, et al. A peripherally acting alpha-2
adrenoceptor antagonist: L-659,066. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1988; 245: 32–40.
138 Pakkanen S. Interaction of alpha2
- adrenoceptor agonists and vatinoxan, a peripher-
ally acting alpha2
- adrenoceptor antagonist, in horses. Academic Dissertation,
University of Helsinki, 2019.
139 Uusalo P, Al-Ramahi D, Tilli I, et al. Subcutaneously administered dexmedetomi-
dine is efficiently absorbed and is associated with attenuated cardiovascular
effects in healthy volunteers. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 2018; 74: 1047–1054.
140 Ashraf MW, Uusalo P, Scheinin M, et al. Population modelling of dexmedetomi-
dine pharmacokinetics and haemodynamic effects after intravenous and subcuta-
neous administration. Clin Pharmacokinet 2020; 59: 1467–1482.
141 Rabbogliatti V, Amari M, Brioschi FA, et al. Use of dexmedetomidine repeated
subcutaneous administration for balanced anaesthesia in horses. BMC Vet Res
2022; 18: 269.
142 Garcia- Villar R, Toutain PL, Alvinerie M, et al. The pharmacokinetics of xylazine
hydrochloride: an interspecific study. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1981; 4: 87–92.
143 Knych HK, Stanley SD, McKemie DS, et al. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacody-
namics of xylazine administered to exercised thoroughbred horses. Drug Test Anal
2017; 9: 713–720.
144 Habershon- Butcher J, Cutler C, Viljanto M, et al. Re-evaluation of the pharma-
cokinetics of xylazine administered to Thoroughbred horses. J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 2020; 43: 6–12.
145 Hopster K, Soma LR, Li X, et al. Pharmacokinetics of xylazine after 2-, 4- , and 6-hr
durations of continuous rate infusions in horses. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2020; 43:
557–564.
146 Guedes A, Knych H, Tucker L, et al. Pharmacokinetics and clinical effects of xyla-
zine and dexmedetomidine in horses recovering from isoflurane anesthesia. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2020; 43: 369–376.
147 Santonastaso A, Hardy J, Cohen N, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynam-
ics of xylazine administered by the intravenous or intra-osseous route in adult
horses. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2014; 37: 565–570.
148 Salonen JS, Vähä- Vahe T, Vainio O, et al. Single-dose pharmacokinetics of detomi-
dine in the horse and cow. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1989; 12: 65–72.
149 Elfenbein JR, Sanchez LC, Robertson SA, et al. Effect of detomidine on visceral
and somatic nociception and duodenal motility in conscious adult horses. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2009; 36: 162–172.
150 Hubbell JAE, Sams RA, Schmall LM, et al. Pharmacokinetics of detomidine
administered to horses at rest and after maximal exercise. Equine Vet J 2009; 5:
419–422.
151 Grimsrud KN, Mama KR, Thomasy SM, et al. Pharmacokinetics of detomidine
and its metabolites following intravenous and intramuscular administration in
horses. Equine Vet J 2009; 4: 361–365.
152 Kaukinen H, Aspegren J, Hyyppa S, et al. Bioavailability of detomidine adminis-
tered sublingually to horses as an oromucosal gel. J Vet Pharm Ther 2011; 34:
76–81.
153 Hokkanen AH, Raekallio MR, Salla K, et al. Sublingual administration of detomi-
dine to calves prior to disbudding: a comparison with the intravenous route. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2014; 41: 372–377.
154 Hopfensperger MJ, Messenger KM, Papich MG, et al. The use of oral transmu-
cosal detomidine hydrochloride gel to facilitate handling in dogs. J Vet Behav Clin
Appl Res 2013; 8: 114–123.
155 Messenger KM, Hopfensperger M, Knych HK, et al. Pharmacokinetics of detomi-
dine following intravenous or oral-transmucosal administration and sedative
effects of the oral-transmucosal treatment in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2016; 77:
413–420.
156 Kasten JI, Messenger KM, Campbell NB. Sedative and cardiopulmonary effects of
buccally administered detomidine gel and reversal with atipamezole in dogs. Am
J Vet Res 2018; 79: 1253–1260.
157 Phillips BE, Harms CA, Messenger KM. Oral transmucosal detomidine gel for the
sedation of the domestic ferret (Mustela putorius furo). J Exot Pet Med 2015; 24:
446–454.
158 Williams MD, Long CT, Durrant JR, et al. Oral transmucosal detomidine gel in
New Zealand white rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus). J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci
2017; 56: 436–442.
159 Smith P, Tolbert MK, Gould E, et al. Pharmacokinetics, sedation and hemody-
namic changes following the administration of oral transmucosal detomidine gel
in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2020; 22: 1184–1190.
160 Seddighi R, Knych HK, Cox SK, et al. Evaluation of the sedative effects and phar-
macokinetics of detomidine gel administered intravaginally to horses. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2019; 46: 772–779.
161 Chow NS, Seddighi R, Knych HK, et al. Sedative effects and pharmacokinetics of
detomidine when administered intravenously and intravaginally as a gel in
alpacas. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47: 773–780.
162 Tahmasbi T, Raisi A, Zakian A, et al. Comparing the effects of intravenous injec-
tion and intranasal atomisation of detomidine in sheep. Vet Med Sci 2023; 9:
353–362.
163 Wojtasiak-Wypart M, Soma LR, Rudy JA, et al. Pharmacokinetic profile and phar-
macodynamic effects of romifidine hydrochloride in the horse. J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 2012; 35: 478–488.
164 Knych HK, Stanley SD, McKemie DS, et al. Pharmacokinetics and selected phar-
macodynamics of romifidine following low-dose intravenous administration in
combination with exercise to quarter horses. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2017; 40:
569–574.
165 Levionnois OL, Barbarossa A, Bardhi A, et al. Enantiospecific pharmacokinetics
of intravenous dexmedetomidine in beagles. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2022; 45:
366–372.
166 Kuusela E, Raekallio M, Anttila M, et al. Clinical effects and pharmacokinetics of
medetomidine and its enantiomers in dogs. J Vet Pharmcol Ther 2000; 23: 15–20.
167 Escobar A, Pypendop BH, Siao KT, et al. Pharmacokinetics of dexmedetomidine
administered intravenously in isoflurane anesthetized cats. Am J Vet Res 2012; 73:
285–289.
168 Rezende ML, Grimsrud KN, Stanley SD, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmaco-
dynamics of intravenous dexmedetomidine in the horse. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
2015; 38: 15–23.

-- 366 of 1450 --

Chapter 22: Sedatives and Tranquilizers 	351
169 Bettschart-Wolfensberger R, Freeman SL, Bowen IM, et al. Cardiopulmonary
effects and pharmacokinetics of IV dexmedetomidine in ponies. Equine Vet J
2005; 37: 60–64.
170 Grimsrud KN, Mama KR, Steffey EP, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
namics of intravenous medetomidine in the horse. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39:
38–48.
171 Ansah OB, Raekallio M, Vainio O. Comparing oral and intramuscular administra-
tion of medetomidine in cats. J Vet Anaesth 1998; 25: 41–46.
172 Slingsby LS, Taylor OM, Monroe T. Thermal antinociception after dexmedetomi-
dine administration in cats: a comparison between intramuscular and oral trans-
mucosal administration. J Feline Med Surg 2009; 11: 829–834.
173 Santos LCP, Ludders JW, Erb HN, et al. Sedative and cardiorespiratory effects of
dexmedetomidine and buprenorphine administered to cats via oral transmucosal
or intramuscular routes. Vet Anesth Analg 2010; 37: 417–424.
174 Porters N, Bosmans T, Debille M, et al. Sedative and antinociceptive effects of
dexmedetomidine and buprenorphine after oral transmucosal or intramuscular
administration in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2014; 41: 90–96.
175 Dent BT, Aarnes TK, Wavreille VA, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
namic effects of oral transmucosal and intravenous administration of dexmedeto-
midine in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2019; 80: 969–975.
176 Gioeni D, Brioschi FA, Di Cesare F, et al. Oral transmucosal or intramuscular
administration of dexmedetomidine-methadone combination in dogs: sedative
and physiological effects. Animals (Basel) 2020; 10: 2057.
177 Santangelo B, Harel M, Fourel I, et al. Intranasal dexmedetomidine in healthy bea-
gles: an echocardiographic and pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic study. Vet J
2019; 251: 105346.
178 Pavlica M, Kržan M, Nemec A, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects and pharmacoki-
netics of dexmedetomidine used as an adjunctive analgesic to regional anesthesia
of the oral cavity with levobupivacaine in dogs. Animals (Basel) 2022; 12: 1217.
179 Pypendop BH, Verstegen JP. Hemodynamic effects of medetomidine in the dog: a
dose titration study. Vet Surg 1998; 27: 612–622.
180 Pypendop BH, Verstegen JP. Cardiovascular effects of romifidine in dogs. Am J
Vet Res 2001; 62: 490–495.
181 Lamont LA, Bulmer BJ, Grimm KA, et al. Cardiopulmonary evaluation of the use
of medetomidine hydrochloride in cats. Am J Vet Res 2001; 62: 1745–1749.
182 Bueno AC, Cornick-Seahorn J, Seahorn TL, et al. Cardiopulmonary and sedative
effects of intravenous administration of low doses of medetomidine and xylazine
to adult horses. Am J Vet Res 1999; 60: 1371–1376.
183 de Morais HS, Muir WW III. The effects of medetomidine on cardiac contractility
in autonomically blocked dogs. Vet Surg 1995; 24: 356–364.
184 Muir WW, Piper FS. Effect of xylazine on indices of myocardial contractility in the
dog. Am J Vet Res 1977; 38: 931–934.
185 Kaartinen J, Pang D, Moreau M, et al. Hemodynamic effects of an intravenous
infusion of medetomidine at six different dose regimens in isoflurane-anesthetized
dogs. Vet Ther 2010; 11: E1–E16.
186 Hopster K, Wittenberg-Voges L, Kästner SBR. Xylazine infusion in isoflurane-
anesthetized and ventilated healthy horses: effects on cardiovascular parameters
and intestinal perfusion. Can J Vet Res 2017; 81: 249–254.
187 Lawrence CJ, Prinzen FW, de Lange S. The effect of dexmedetomidine on nutrient
organ blood flow. Anesth Analg 1996; 83: 1160–1165.
188 Snapir A, Posti J, Kentala E, et al. Effects of low and high plasma concentrations of
dexmedetomidine on myocardial perfusion and cardiac function in healthy male
subjects. Anesthesiology 2006; 105: 902–910.
189 Roekaerts PM, Prinzen FW, De Lange S. Beneficial effects of dexmedetomidine on
ischaemic myocardium of anaesthetized dogs. Br J Anaesth 1996; 77: 427–429.
190 Sinclair MD. A review of the physiological effects of alpha2-agonists related to the
clinical use of medetomidine in small animal practice. Can Vet J 2003; 44:
885–897.
191 Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, Benson GJ, et al. Alteration in the Arrhythmogenic
Dose of Epinephrine (ADE) following xylazine administration to halothane-
anesthetized dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1986; 9: 198–203.
192 Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, Benson GJ. Alterations in epinephrine-induced
arrhythmogenesis after xylazine and subsequent yohimbine administration in
isoflurane-anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 1988; 49: 1072–1075.
193 Lemke KA, Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, et al. Alterations in the arrhythmogenic
dose of epinephrine after xylazine or medetomidine administration in halothane-
anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 1993; 54: 2132–2138.
194 Lemke KA, Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, et al. Alterations in the arrhythmogenic
dose of epinephrine after xylazine or medetomidine administration in isoflurane-
anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 1993; 54: 2139–2144.
195 Hayashi Y, Sumikawa K, Maze M, et al. Dexmedetomidine prevents epinephrine-
induced arrhythmias through stimulation of central alpha 2 adrenoceptors in
halothane-anesthetized dogs. Anesthesiology 1991; 75: 113–117.
196 Short CE. Effects of anticholinergic treatment on the cardiac and respiratory sys-
tems in dogs sedated with medetomidine. Vet Rec 1991; 129: 310–313.
197 Ko JC, Fox SM, Mandsager RE. Effects of preemptive atropine administration on
incidence of medetomidine-induced bradycardia in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2001; 218: 52–58.
198 Singh S, Young SS, McDonell WN, et al. Modification of cardiopulmonary and
intestinal motility effects of xylazine with glycopyrrolate in horses. Can J Vet Res
1997; 61: 99–107.
199 Bloor BC, Abdul-Rasool I, Temp J, et al. The effects of medetomidine, an α2-
adrenergic agonist, on ventilatory drive in the dog. Acta Vet Scand 1989; (Suppl
85): 65–70.
200 Lerche P, Muir WW III. Effect of medetomidine on breathing and inspiratory
neuromuscular drive in conscious dogs. Am J Vet Res 2004; 65: 720–724.
201 Klide AM, Calderwood HW, Soma LR. Cardiopulmonary effects of xylazine in
dogs. Am J Vet Res 1975; 36: 931–935.
202 Selmi AL, Barbudo-Selmi GR, Moreira CF, et al. Evaluation of sedative and cardi-
orespiratory effects of romifidine and romifidine-butorphanol in cats. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2002; 221: 506–510.
203 Di Bella C, Skouropoulou D, Stabile M, et al. Respiratory and hemodynamic
effects of 2 protocols of low-dose infusion of dexmedetomidine in dogs under
isoflurane anesthesia. Can J Vet Res 2020; 84: 96–107.
204 Celly CS, McDonell WN, Young SS, et al. The comparative hypoxaemic effect of
four alpha(2) adrenoceptor agonists (xylazine, romifidine, detomidine and
medetomidine) in sheep. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1997; 20: 464–471.
205 Celly CS, Atwal OS, McDonell WN, et al. Histopathologic alterations induced in
the lungs of sheep by use of alpha2-adrenergic receptor agonists. Am J Vet Res
1999; 60: 154–161.
206 Clarke KW, England GCW. Medetomidine, a new sedative-analgesic for use in the
dog and its reversal with atipamezole. J Small Anim Pract 1989; 30: 343–348.
207 Guo TZ, Tinklenberg J, Oliker R, et al. Central alpha 1-adrenoceptor stimulation
functionally antagonizes the hypnotic response to dexmedetomidine, an alpha
2-adrenoceptor agonist. Anesthesiology 1991; 75: 252–256.
208 Yaksh TL. Pharmacology of spinal adrenergic systems which modulate spinal
nociceptive processing. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 1985; 22: 845–858.
209 Kaye AD, Chernobylsky DJ, Thakur P, et al. Dexmedetomidine in enhanced
recovery after surgery (ERAS) protocols for postoperative pain. Curr Pain
Headache Rep 2020; 24: 21.
210 Keegan RD, Greene SA, Bagley RS, et al. Effects of medetomidine administration
on intracranial pressure and cardiovascular variables of isoflurane anesthetized
dogs. Am J Vet Res 1995; 56: 193–198.
211 Zornow MH, Fleischer JE, Scheller MS, et al. Dexmedetomidine, an alpha
2-adrenergic agonist, decreases cerebral blood flow in the isoflurane-anesthetized
dog. Anesth Analg 1990; 70: 624–630.
212 Flower O, Hellings S. Sedation in traumatic brain injury. Emerg Med Int 2012;
2012: 637171.
213 Colby ED, McCarthy LE, Borison HL. Emetic action of xylazine on the chemore-
ceptor trigger zone for vomiting in cats. J Vet Pharmacol Therap 1981; 4: 93–96.
214 Hikasa Y, Ogasawara S, Takase K. Alpha adrenoceptor subtypes involved in the
emetic action of dogs. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1992; 261: 746–754.
215 Lang IM, Sarna SK. The role of adrenergic receptors in the initiation of vomiting
and its gastrointestinal motor correlates. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1992; 263:
395–403.
216 Ruckebusch Y, Allal C. Depression of reticulo-ruminal motor functions through
the stimulation of α2
- adrenoceptors. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1987; 10: 1–10.
217 Rutkowski JA, Ross MW, Cullen K. Effects of xylazine and/or butorphanol or
neostigmine on myoelectric activity of the cecum and right ventral colon in
female ponies. Am J Vet Res 1989; 50: 1096–1101.
218 Maugeri S, Ferrè JP, Intorre L, et al. Effects of medetomidine on intestinal and
colonic motility in the dog. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1994; 17: 148–154.
219 Humphreys MH, Reid LA, Chou LYN. Suppression of antidiuretic hormone
secretion by clonidine in the anesthetized dog. Kidney Int 1975; 7: 405–412.
220 Reid IA, Nolan PL, Wolf JA, et al. Suppression of vasopressin secretion by cloni-
dine: effect of alpha-adrenoceptor antagonists. Endocrinology 1979; 104:
1403–1406.
221 Gellai M, Edwards RM. Mechanism of α2
- adrenoceptor agonist-induced diuresis.
Am J Physiol 1988; 255: 317–323.
222 Smyth DD, Unemura S, Pettinger WA. Alpha 2 - adrenoceptor antagonism of
vasopression- induced changes in sodium excretion. Am J Physiol 1985; 248:
767–772.
223 Smyth D, Umemura S, Yang E, et al. Inhibition of renin release by alpha-
adrenoceptor stimulation in the isolated perfused rat kidney. Eur J Pharmacol
1987; 140: 33–38.
224 Aro E, Bastman S, Andersson KE, et al. Is there a peripheral site of action contrib-
uting to the voiding effects of α₂-adrenoceptor agonists and antagonists? World J
Urol 2015; 33: 433–440.
225 LeBlanc MM, Hubbell JA, Smith HC. The effects of xylazine hydrochloride on
intrauterine pressure in the cow. Theriogenology 1984; 21: 681–690.

-- 367 of 1450 --

352 	Section 3: Pharmacology
226 Rexroad CE, Barb CR. Contractile response of the uterus of the estrous ewe to
adrenergic stimulation. Biol Reprod 1978; 19: 297–305.
227 Jansen CA, Lowe KC, Nathanielsz PW. The effects of xylazine on uterine activity,
fetal, and maternal oxygenation, cardiovascular function and fetal breathing.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1984; 148: 386–390.
228 Schatzmann U, Jossfck H, Starffer JL, et al. Effects of alpha 2-agonists on intrauter-
ine pressure and sedation in horses: comparison between detomidine, romifidine,
and xylazine. Zentralbl Veterinarmed A 1994; 41: 523–529.
229 Jedruch J, Gajewski Z, Ratajska-Michalczak K. Uterine motor responses to an
α2-adrenergic agonist medetomidine hydrochloride in the bitches during the end
of gestation and the post-partum period. Acta Vet Scand 1989; 85: 129–134.
230 Jedruch J, Gajewski Z. The effect of detomidine hydrochloride (Domosedan) on
the electrical activity of the uterus in cows. Acta Vet Scand 1986; 82: 189–192.
231 Jedruch J, Gajewski Z, Kuussaari J. The effect of detomidine hydrochloride on the
electrical activity of uterus in pregnant mares. Acta Vet Scand 1988; 30: 307–311.
232 Re G, Badino P, Odore R, et al. Identification of functional alpha-adrenoceptor
subtypes in the bovine female genital tract during different phases of the oestrous
cycle. Vet Res Commun 2002; 26: 479–494.
233 Benson GJ, Grubb TL, Neff-Davis C, et al. Perioperative stress response in the dog:
effect of pre-emptive administration of medetomidine. Vet Surg 2000; 29: 85–91.
234 Ambrisko TD, Hikashi Y. Neurohormonal and metabolic effects of medetomidine
compared with xylazine in beagle dogs. Can J Vet Res 2002; 6: 42–49.
235 Vaisanen M, Raekallio M, Kuusela E, et al. Evaluation of the perioperative stress
response in dogs administered medetomidine or acepromazine as part of the pre-
anesthetic medication. Am J Vet Res 2002; 63: 969–975.
236 Ambrisko TD, Hikashi Y. The antagonistic effects of atipamezole and yohimbine
on stress-related neurohormonal and metabolic responses induced by medetomi-
dine in dogs. Can J Vet Res 2003; 67: 64–67.
237 Raekallio M, Vainio O, Scheinin M. Detomidine reduces the plasma catechola-
mine, but not cortisol concentrations in horses. Zentralbl Veterinarmed A 1991;
38: 153–156.
238 Ranheim B, Horsberg TE, Søli NE, et al. The effects of medetomidine and its
reversal with atipamezole on plasma glucose, cortisol and noradrenaline in cattle
and sheep. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2000; 23: 379–387.
239 Maze M, Virtanen R, Daunt D, et al. Effects of dexmedetomidine, a novel imida-
zole sedative-anesthetic agent, on adrenal steroidogenesis: in vivo and in vitro
studies. Anesth Analg 1991; 73: 204–208.
240 Restitutti F, Raekallio M, Vainionpää M, et al. Plasma glucose, insulin, free fatty
acids, lactate and cortisol concentrations in dexmedetomidine-sedated dogs with
or without MK-467: a peripheral α-2 adrenoceptor antagonist. Vet J 2012; 193:
481–485.
241 Wang K, Wu M, Xu J, et al. Effects of dexmedetomidine on perioperative stress,
inflammation, and immune function: systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J
Anaesth 2019; 123: 777–794.
242 Brockman RP. Effect of xylazine on plasma glucose, glucagon and insulin concen-
trations in sheep. Res Vet Science 1981; 30: 383–384.
243 Angel I, Langer SZ. Adrenergic induced hyperglycaemia in anaesthetised rats:
involvement of peripheral α2-adrenoceptors. Eur J Pharmacol 1988; 154:
191–196.
244 Niddam R, Angel I, Bidet S, et al. Pharmacological characterization of alpha-2
adrenergic receptor subtype involved in the release of insulin from isolated rat
pancreatic islets. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1990; 254: 883–887.
245 Thurmon J, Steffey E, Zinkl J, et al. Xylazine causes transient dose-related hyper-
glycemia and increased urine volumes in mares. Am J Vet Res 1984; 45: 224–227.
246 Hsu WH, Hummel SK. Xylazine-induced hyperglycemia in cattle: a possible
involvement of alpha 2-adrenergic receptors regulating insulin release.
Endocrinology 1981: 109: 825–829.
247 Pascoe PJ, Raekallio M, Kuusela E, et al. Changes in the minimum alveolar con-
centration of isoflurane and some cardiopulmonary measurements during three
continuous infusion rates of dexmedetomidine in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2006;
33: 97–103.
248 Pascoe PJ. The cardiopulmonary effects of dexmedetomidine infusions in dogs
during isoflurane anesthesia. Vet Anaesth Analg 2015; 42: 360–368.
249 Simon BT, Scallan EM, Coursey CD, et al. The clinical effects of a low dose dex-
medetomidine constant rate infusion in isoflurane anesthetized cats. Vet J 2018;
234: 55–60.
250 Quirós-Carmona S, Navarrete R, Domínguez JM, et al. A comparison of cardio-
pulmonary effects and anaesthetic requirements of two dexmedetomidine con-
tinuous rate infusions in alfaxalone-anaesthetized Greyhounds. Vet Anaesth Analg
2017; 44: 228–236.
251 Sanches MC, Bessi WH, Rusch E, et al. Cardiopulmonary and propofol-sparing
effects of dexmedetomidine in total intravenous anesthesia in cats undergoing
ovariohysterectomy. J Feline Med Surg 2022; 24: e490–e497.
252 Raffe MR. Total Intravenous anesthesia for the small animal critical patient. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2020; 50: 1433–1444.
253 Lin GY, Robben JH, Murrell JC, et al. Dexmedetomidine constant rate infusion for
24 hours during and after propofol or isoflurane anaesthesia in dogs. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2008; 35: 141–153.
254 Valtolina C, Robben JH, Uilenreef J, et al. Clinical evaluation of the efficacy and
safety of a constant rate infusion of dexmedetomidine for postoperative pain man-
agement in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36: 369–383.
255 Campagnol D, Teixeira Neto FJ, Giordano T, et al. Effects of epidural administra-
tion of dexmedetomidine on the minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in
dogs. Am J Vet Res 2007; 68: 1308–1318.
256 O O, Smith LJ. A comparison of epidural analgesia provided by bupivacaine alone,
bupivacaine + morphine, or bupivacaine + dexmedetomidine for pelvic orthope-
dic surgery in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40: 527–536.
257 Caramalac SM, Albuquerque VB, Oliveira AR, et al. Analgesic, cardiorespiratory
effects and motor block characteristics of epidural levobupivacaine alone or in
combination with methadone or dexmedetomidine in bitches undergoing unilat-
eral total mastectomy. An Acad Bras Cienc 2022; 94(suppl 3): e20210082.
258 Souza SS, Intelisano TR, De Biaggi CP, et al. Cardiopulmonary and isoflurane-
sparing effects of epidural or intravenous infusion of dexmedetomidine in cats
undergoing surgery with epidural lidocaine. Vet Anaesth Analg 2010; 37: 106–115.
259 Lamont LA, Lemke KA. The effects of medetomidine on radial nerve blockade
with mepivacaine in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35: 62–68.
260 Hommuang K, Sattasathuchana P, Thengchaisri N. Effects of intranasal and intra-
muscular dexmedetomidine in cats receiving total intravenous propofol anesthe-
sia. Vet World 2022; 15: 1706–1713.
261 England GC, Clarke KW, Goossens L. A comparison of the sedative effects of
three α2- adrenoceptor agonists (romifidine, detomidine, and xylazine) in the
horse. J Vet Pharm Ther 1992; 15: 194–201.
262 Yamashita K, Muir WW III, Tsubakishita S, et al. Clinical comparison of xylazine and
medetomidine for premedication of horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2002; 221: 1144–1149.
263 Bryant CE, England GC, Clarke KW. Comparison of the sedative effects of
medetomidine and xylazine in horses. Vet Rec 1991; 129: 421–423.
264 Hamm D, Turchi P, Jöchle W. Sedative and analgesic effects of detomidine and
romifidine in horses. Vet Rec 1995; 136: 324–327.
265 Freeman SL, England GC. Investigation of romifidine and detomidine for the
clinical sedation of horses. Vet Rec 2000; 147: 507–511.
266 Valverde A. Alpha-2 agonists as pain therapy in horses. Vet Clin North Am Equine
Pract 2010; 26: 515–532.
267 Ringer SK, Portier K, Torgerson PR, et al. The effects of a loading dose followed by
constant rate infusion of xylazine compared with romifidine on sedation, ataxia
and response to stimuli in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40: 157–165.
268 Pallarols NB, Lamuraglia R, Guglielminetti A, et al. Behavioral and cardiopulmo-
nary effects of a constant rate infusion of remifentanil-xylazine for sedation in
horses. J Equine Vet Sci 2020; 91: 103111.
269 Gozalo-Marcilla M, Luna SP, Gasthuys F, et al. Clinical applicability of detomidine
and methadone constant rate infusions for surgery in standing horses. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2019; 46: 325–334.
270 Hollis AR, Pascal M, Van Dijk J, et al. Behavioural and cardiovascular effects of
medetomidine constant rate infusion compared with detomidine for standing
sedation in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47: 76–81.
271 Pöppel N, Hopster K, Geburek F, et al. Influence of ketamine or xylazine supple-
mentation on isoflurane anaesthetized horses – a controlled clinical trial. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2015; 42: 30–38.
272 Menzies MP, Ringer SK, Conrot A, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects and anaesthesia
recovery quality in horses anaesthetized with isoflurane and low-dose S- ketamine
or medetomidine infusions. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43: 623–634.
273 Kälin I, Henze IS, Ringer SK, et al. Comparison of recovery quality following
medetomidine versus xylazine balanced isoflurane anaesthesia in horses: a retro-
spective analysis. Animals (Basel) 2021; 11: 2440.
274 Marcilla MG, Schauvliege S, Segaert S, et al. Influence of a constant rate infusion
of dexmedetomidine on cardiopulmonary function and recovery quality in isoflu-
rane anaesthetized horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39: 49–58.
275 Greene SA, Thurmon JC, Tranquilli WJ, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of con-
tinuous intravenous infusion of guaifenesin, ketamine, and xylazine in ponies. Am
J Vet Res 1986; 47: 2364–2367.
276 Umar MA, Fukui S, Kawase K, et al. Cardiovascular effects of total intravenous
anesthesia using ketamine-medetomidine-propofol (KMP-TIVA) in horses
undergoing surgery. J Vet Med Sci 2015; 77: 281–288.
277 Guedes AGP, Tearney CC, Cenani A, et al. Comparison between the effects of
postanesthetic xylazine and dexmedetomidine on characteristics of recovery from
sevoflurane anesthesia in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44: 273–280.
278 Leblanc PH, Eberhart SW. Cardiopulmonary effects of epidurally administered
xylazine in the horse. Equine Vet J 1990; 22: 389–391.
279 Grubb TL, Riebold TW, Huber MJ. Comparison of lidocaine, xylazine, and xylazine/
lidocaine for caudal epidural analgesia in horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992; 201:
1187–1190.

-- 368 of 1450 --

Chapter 22: Sedatives and Tranquilizers 	353
280 Robinson EP, Natalini CC. Epidural anesthesia and analgesia in horses. Vet Clin
North Am Equine Pract 2002; 18: 61–82, vi.
281 Nichols CL, Doherty TJ, Schumacher J, et al. Dexmedetomidine prolongs the
duration of action of mepivacaine on anesthesia of the palmar digital nerves of
horses. Am J Vet Res 2021; 83: 114–118.
282 Dai F, Rausk J, Aspegren J, et al. Use of detomidine oromucosal gel for alleviation
of acute anxiety and fear in horses: a pilot study. Front Vet Sci 2020; 7: 573309.
283 United States Food Animal Residue Avoidance Database (FARAD) Withdrawal
Interval Recommendations. http://www.farad.org/wdilookup/wdi_cattle.html
(accessed April 2023).
284 Torneke K, Bergstrom U, Neil A. Interactions of xylazine and detomidine with α
2-adrenoceptors in brain tissue from cattle, swine and rats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
2003; 26: 205–211.
285 Kästner SB. A2-agonists in sheep: a review. Vet Anaesth Analg 2006; 33: 79–96.
286 Kästner SB, Ohlerth S, Pospischil A, et al. Dexmedetomidine-induced pulmonary
alterations in sheep. Res Vet Sci 2007; 83: 217–226.
287 Hsu WH, Hanson CE, Hembrough FB, et al. Effects of idazoxan, tolazoline, and
yohimbine on xylazine-induced respiratory changes and central nervous system
depression in ewes. Am J Vet Res 1989; 50: 1570–1573.
288 Doherty TJ, Ballinger JA, McDonell WN, et al. Antagonism of xylazine induced
sedation by idazoxan in calves. Can J Vet Res 1987; 51: 244–248.
289 Goldberg MR, Robertson D. Yohimbine: a pharmacological probe for study of the
alpha 2-adrenoreceptor. Pharmacol Rev 1983; 35: 143–180.
290 Bryant CE, Thompson J, Clarke KW. Characterisation of the cardiovascular phar-
macology of medetomidine in the horse and sheep. Res Vet Sci 1998; 65:
149–154.
291 Pertovaara A, Haapalinna A, Sirviö J, et al. Pharmacological properties, central
nervous system effects, and potential therapeutic applications of atipamezole, a
selective alpha2-adrenoceptor antagonist. CNS Drug Rev 2005; 11: 273–288.
292 Dimaio Knych HK, Steffey EP, Stanley SD. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
namics of three intravenous doses of yohimbine in the horse. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
2011; 34: 359–366.
293 Casbeer HC, Knych HK. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamic effects of tola-
zoline following intravenous administration to horses. Vet J 2013; 196: 504–509.
294 Salonen S, Vuorilehto L, Vainio O, et al. Atipamezole increases medetomidine
clearance in the dog: an agonist-antagonist interaction. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
1995; 18: 328–332.
295 Pypendop BH, Ahokoivu H, Honkavaara J. Pharmacokinetics of vatinoxan in
male neutered cats anesthetized with isoflurane. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47:
70–75.
296 Honkavaara J, Restitutti F, Raekallio M, et al. Influence of MK-467, a peripherally
acting α2
-adrenoceptor antagonist on the disposition of intravenous dexmedeto-
midine in dogs. Drug Metab Dispos 2012; 40: 445–449.
297 Pypendop BH, Honkavaara J, Ilkiw JE. Pharmacokinetics of dexmedetomidine,
MK-467, and their combination following intravenous administration in male
cats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2016; 39: 460–468.
298 Pypendop BH, Honkavaara J, Ilkiw JE. Pharmacokinetics of dexmedetomidine,
MK-467 and their combination following intramuscular administration in male
cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44: 823–831.
299 Paret G, Eyal O, Mayan H, et al. Endotracheal tolazoline: pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics in dogs. Acta Paediatr 1999; 88: 1020–1023.
300 Pagel PS, Proctor LT, Devcic A, et al. A novel alpha 2-adrenoceptor antagonist
attenuates the early, but preserves the late cardiovascular effects of intravenous
dexmedetomidine in conscious dogs. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 1998; 12:
429–434.
301 Turunen H, Raekallio MR, Honkavaara J, et al. Cardiovascular and sedation rever-
sal effects of intramuscular administration of atipamezole in dogs treated with
medetomidine hydrochloride with or without the peripheral α2 - adrenergic recep-
tor antagonist vatinoxan hydrochloride. Am J Vet Res 2019; 80: 912–922.
302 Zatroch KK, Sakai DM, Parry S, et al. Evaluation of atipamezole as a treatment for
dexmedetomidine-induced cardiovascular depression in anesthetized cats. Am J
Vet Res 2019; 80: 455–460.
303 Honkavaara JM, Restitutti F, Raekallio MR, et al. The effects of increasing doses of
MK-467, a peripheral alpha(2)-adrenergic receptor antagonist, on the cardiopul-
monary effects of intravenous dexmedetomidine in conscious dogs. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2011; 34: 332–337.
304 Restitutti F, Kaartinen MJ, Raekallio MR, et al. Plasma concentration and cardiovascu-
lar effects of intramuscular medetomidine combined with three doses of the periph-
eral alpha2-antagonist MK-467 in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44: 417–426.
305 Huuskonen V, Restitutti F, Raekallio M, et al. Cardiovascular effects of dobutamine,
norepinephrine and phenylephrine in isoflurane-anaesthetized dogs administered
dexmedetomidine-vatinoxan. Vet Anaesth Analg 2022; 49: 546–555.
306 Salla KM, Turunen HA, Kallio-Kujala IJ, et al. Effects of vatinoxan in dogs pre-
medicated with medetomidine and butorphanol followed by sevoflurane anaes-
thesia: a randomized clinical study. Vet Anaesth Analg 2022; 49: 563–571.
307 Honkavaara J, Pypendop B, Ilkiw J. The impact of MK-467 on sedation, heart rate
and arterial blood pressure after intramuscular coadministration with dexme-
detomidine in conscious cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44: 811–822.
308 Honkavaara J, Pypendop B, Turunen H, et al. The effect of MK-467, a peripheral
α2-adrenoceptor antagonist, on dexmedetomidine-induced sedation and brady-
cardia after intravenous administration in conscious cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017;
44: 42–51.
309 Pypendop BH, Honkavaara J, Ilkiw JE. Cardiovascular effects of dexmedetomi-
dine, with or without MK-467, following intravenous administration in cats. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2017; 44: 52–62.
310 Martin-Flores M, Sakai DM, Honkavaara J, et al. Hemodynamic effects of MK-
467 following intravenous administration to isoflurane-anesthetized cats concur-
rently receiving dexmedetomidine. Am J Vet Res 2018; 79: 711–717.
311 Jaegar AT, Pypendop BH, Ahokoivu H, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of dexme-
detomidine, with and without vatinoxan, in isoflurane-anesthetized cats. Vet
Anath Analg 2019; 46: 753–764.
312 Kobluk K, Pypendop BH. Effects of dopamine, norepinephrine or phenylephrine on
the prevention of hypotension in isoflurane-anesthetized cats administered vati-
noxan or vatinoxan and dexmedetomidine. Vet Anaesth Analg 2022; 49: 54–64.
313 Tapio H, Raekallio MR, Mykkanen AK, et al. Effects of vatinoxan on cardiorespi-
ratory function and gastrointestinal motility during constant-rate medetomidine
infusion in standing horses. Equine Vet J 2019; 51: 646–652.
314 Neudeck S, Twele L, Kopp V, et al. Pharmacodynamics and plasma concentrations
of dexmedetomidine with or without vatinoxan as a constant-rate infusion in
horses anaesthetized with isoflurane-A pilot study. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2021; 44:
754–765.
315 Tapio H, Raekallio MR, Mykkanen AK, et al. Effects of vatinoxan on cardiorespi-
ratory function, fecal output and plasma drug concentrations in horses anesthe-
tized with isoflurane and infusion of medetomidine. Vet J 2019; 251: 105345.
316 Raisis AL, Hosgood GL, Crawford N, et al. Comparison of pulmonary function in
isoflurane anaesthetized ventilated sheep (Ovis aries) following administration of
intravenous xylazine versus medetomidine. Lab Anim 2021; 55: 443–452.
317 Adam M, Lindén J, Raekallio M, et al. Effects of vatinoxan on xylazine-induced
pulmonary alterations in sheep. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2022; 45: 117–125.
318 Adam M, Huuskonen V, Raekallio MR, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of vati-
noxan in sevoflurane-anaesthetised sheep receiving dexmedetomidine. Vet J 2018;
238: 63–69.
319 Hatch RC, Kitzman JV, Zahner JM, et al. Antagonism of xylazine sedation with
yohimbine, 4- aminopyridine, and doxapram in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1985; 46:
371–375.
320 Kollias- Baker CA, Court MH, Williams LL. Influence of yohimbine and tolazoline
on the cardiovascular, respiratory, and sedative effects of xylazine in the horse.
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1993; 16: 350–358.
321 Guard CL, Schwark WS. Influence of yohimbine on xylazine-induced depression
of central nervous, gastrointestinal and cardiovascular function in the calf. Cornell
Vet 1984; 74: 312–321.
322 Hubbell JA, Muir WW. Antagonism of detomidine sedation in the horse using
intravenous tolazoline or atipamezole. Equine Vet J 2006; 38: 238–241.
323 Powell JD, Denhart JW, Lloyd WE. Effectiveness of tolazoline in reversing
xylazine-induced sedation in calves. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1998; 212: 90–92.
324 Vainio O, Vähä-Vahe T. Reversal of medetomidine sedation by atipamezole in
dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1990; 13: 15–22.
325 Granholm M, McKusick BC, Westerholm FC, et al. Evaluation of the clinical effi-
cacy and safety of dexmedetomidine or medetomidine in cats and their reversal
with atipamezole. Vet Anaesth Analg 2006; 33: 214–223.
326 Yamashita K, Yonezawa K, Izumisawa Y, et al. Antagonistic effects of atipame-
zole on medetomidine-induced sedation in horses. J Vet Med Sci 1996; 58:
1049–1052.
327 Rioja E, Kerr CL, Enouri SS, et al. Sedative and cardiopulmonary effects of
medetomidine hydrochloride and xylazine hydrochloride and their reversal with
atipamezole hydrochloride in calves. Am J Vet Res 2008; 69: 319–329.
328 Weitz JD, Foster SD, Waugaman WR, et al. Anesthetic and hemodynamic effects
of dexmedetomidine during isoflurane anesthesia in a canine model. Nurse Anesth
1991; 2: 19–27.
329 Ewing KK, Mohammed HO, Scarlett JM, et al. Reduction of isoflurane anesthetic
requirement by medetomidine and its restoration by atipamezole in dogs. Am J
Vet Res 1993; 54: 294–299.
330 Honkavaara JM, Raekallio MR, Kuusela EK, et al. The effects of L-659,066, a
peripheral alpha2
-adrenoceptor antagonist, on dexmedetomidine-induced seda-
tion and bradycardia in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35: 409–413.
331 Restitutti F, Honkavaara JM, Raekallio MR, et al. Effects of different doses of
L-659’066 on the bispectral index and clinical sedation in dogs treated with dex-
medetomidine. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38: 415–422.
332 Rolfe NG, Kerr CL, McDonell WN. Cardiopulmonary and sedative effects of the
peripheral α2-adrenoceptor antagonist MK 0467 administered intravenously or

-- 369 of 1450 --

354 	Section 3: Pharmacology
intramuscularly concurrently with medetomidine in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2012; 73:
587–594.
333 Adam M, Raekallio MR, Vainio OM. Sedative effects of intramuscular medetomi-
dine with and without vatinoxan (MK-467), and its reversal with atipamezole in
sheep. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45: 788–793.
334 Pypendop BH, Ahokoivu H, Honkavaara J. Effects of dexmedetomidine, with or
without vatinoxan (MK-467), on minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane
in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2019; 46: 443–451.
335 Hector RC, Rezende ML, Mama KR, et al. Effects of constant rate infusions of
dexmedetomidine or MK-467 on the minimum alveolar concentration of sevoflu-
rane in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44: 755–765.
336 Hector RC, Rezende ML, Mama KR, et al. Combined effects of dexmedetomidine
and vatinoxan infusions of minimum alveolar concentration and cardiopulmo-
nary function in sevoflurane-anesthetized dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48:
314–323.
337 Siegenthaler J, Pleyers T, Raillard M, et al. Effect of medetomidine, dexmedetomi-
dine, and their reversal with atipamezole on the nociceptive withdrawal reflex in
beagles. Animals (Basel) 2020; 10: 1240.
338 Skarda RT, Muir WW III. Influence of atipamezole on effects of midsacral
subarachnoidally administered detomidine in mares. Am J Vet Res 1998; 59:
468–477.
339 Skarda RT, Muir WW III. Effects of intravenously administered yohimbine on
antinociceptive, cardiorespiratory, and postural changes induced by epidural
administration of detomidine hydrochloride solution to healthy mares. Am J Vet
Res 1999; 60: 1262–1270.
340 Bennett RC, Salla KM, Raekallio MR, et al. Effects of MK-467 on the antinocicep-
tive and sedative actions and pharmacokinetics of medetomidine in dogs. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2016; 39: 336–343.
341 Huuskonen V, Restitutti F, Honkavaara JM, et al. Investigation of the effects of
vatinoxan on somatic and visceral antinociceptive efficacy of medetomidine in
dogs. Am J Vet Res 2020; 81: 299–308.
342 Hikasa Y, Takase K, Emi S, et al. Antagonistic effects of alpha-adrenoceptor block-
ing agents on reticuloruminal hypomotility induced by xylazine in cattle. Can J
Vet Res 1988; 52: 411–415.
343 Harada T, Constantinou CE. The effect of alpha 2 agonists and antagonists on the
lower urinary tract of the rat. J Urol 1993; 149: 159–164.
344 Hsu WH. Yohimbine increases plasma insulin concentrations and reverses
xylazine-induced hypoinsulinemia in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1988; 49: 242–244.
345 Vainionpää MH, Raekallio MR, Pakkanen SA, et al. Plasma drug concentrations
and clinical effects of a peripheral alpha-2-adrenoceptor antagonist, MK-467, in
horses sedated with detomidine. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40: 257–264.
346 Tapio HA, Raekallio MR, Mykkänen A, et al. Effects of MK-467 hydrochloride
and hyoscine butylbromide on cardiorespiratory and gastrointestinal changes
induced by detomidine hydrochloride in horses. Am J Vet Res 2018; 79: 376–387.
347 de Vries A, Pakkanen SA, Raekallio MR, et al. Clinical effects and pharmacoki-
netic variables of romifidine and the peripheral α2 -adrenoceptor antagonist MK-
467 in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43: 599–610.
348 Dechra, Zenalpha® (medetomidine and vatinoxan hydrochlorides injection)
Product Label. https://www.dechra-us.com/Files/Files/ProductDownloads/US/07IN-
ZEN22002-0622-Zenalpha-Product-Insert-Final-1.pdf (accessed April 2023).

-- 370 of 1450 --

355
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of L umb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
Opiates are drugs derived from opium, which is the latex of
unripe seed pods of Papaver somniferum that contains naturally
occurring alkaloids. Opioids are not naturally occurring drugs;
rather, they are partially or completely synthesized in the labora-
tory. Both opiates and opioids interact with opioid receptors.
In this chapter, the term “opioid” will be used to refer to
naturally occurring or synthetic drugs that interact with opioid
receptors. Opioids are the prototypical analgesics, antitussives,
and antidiarrheal drug class. The opioid receptor system has been
identified in a variety of amphibians, fish, reptiles, birds, and
mammals [1,2].
History of opioid use in veterinary practice
Humans have used opium (from Papaver somniferum) for its analgesic
effects for more than 8000 years [3]. The earliest documented use of
opium in domestic animals, attributed to Robert Boyle, dates to the
17th century. Boyle focused on opium as a poison and wrote: “we have
more than once given to a Dog, without much harming him, such a
quantity of Opium, as would probably have suffic’d to have kill’d several
Men” [4]. In 1659, in collaboration with Christopher Wren, Boyle
injected an infusion of opium into a superficial pelvic limb vein caus-
ing deep stupor to an experimental dog [5]. In 1664, Robert Hooke
proposed a practical union between opiate narcosis and surgery [4].
At that time, opium had been used in combination with alcohol and
23 Opioids
Bradley T. Simon1 and Ignacio Lizarraga2
1 Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station,
Texas, USA, and Veterinary Dentistry Specialists, Katy, Texas, USA
2 AgResearch Limited, Grasslands Research Centre, Palmerston North, New Zealand
Chapter contents
Introduction, 355
History of opioid use in veterinary practice, 355
Scheduling, 356
Opioid crisis in North America: veterinary shopping, diversion,
and opioid misuse and abuse in veterinary practice, 356
Pharmacology, 358
Opioid receptors, 358
Pharmacokinetics, 360
Opioid tolerance, dependence, withdrawal, and opioid-induced
hyperalgesia, 363
Clinical pharmacology, 364
Analgesia, 364
Sedation, euphoria, and dysphoria, 366
Cardiovascular system, 367
Respiratory system, 367
Gastrointestinal system, 367
Nervous system, 369
Renal system, 370
Antitussive effects, 371
Thermoregulatory effects, 371
Ophthalmic effects, 371
Immune system effects and effects on cancer metastasis, 371
Effects on inhalant anesthetic minimum alveolar concentration, 372
Traditional routes of administration, 373
Full opioid agonists, 373
Morphine, 373
Hydromorphone, 377
Methadone, 377
Oxymorphone, 378
Fentanyl, 378
Remifentanil, 380
Sufentanil, 380
Meperidine (pethidine), 380
Carfentanil, etorphine, alfentanil, and thiafentanil, 380
Hydrocodone, oxycodone, and codeine, 381
Partial opioid agonists, 381
Buprenorphine, 381
Mixed opioid agonist–antagonists, 382
Butorphanol, 382
Nalbuphine, 383
Opioid antagonists, 384
Naloxone, naltrexone, and methylnaltrexone, 384
Multitargeting molecules, 384
Tramadol, 384
Tapentadol, 385
References, 385

-- 371 of 1450 --

356 	Section 3: Pharmacology
other ingredients to form various forms of laudanum, or tincture of
opium. This became widely used to prepare patients for surgery until
the discovery of effective anesthesia. Paregoric was a weaker prepara-
tion, named after the Greek word for “soothing” or “consoling” and
included opium, honey, licorice root, camphor, aniseed, and wine [6].
Recognizing the limitations of opium for surgical anesthesia, James
Moore reported in 1784 on opium’s postoperative analgesic effects [6].
In 1805, Friedrich Wilhelm Adam Sertürner reported the isolation
of an alkaline substance from opium, which he later named “mor-
phium” [7]. Sertürner administered an aqueous alcoholic extraction
of the salt to four dogs and a mouse. The dogs vomited, convulsed,
and appeared sleepy, but did not sleep; one dog died [8]. Although
these early studies did not provide evidence of morphine’s analgesic
effects, the isolation of morphine permitted accurate calculation of
doses. The use of morphine became widespread following the devel-
opment of the hypodermic needle and syringe in the 1850s.
In 1908, Frederick Hobday reported that morphine’s effects var-
ied considerably by animal species with cats and horses experienc-
ing delirium and dogs experiencing narcosis, although a few
displayed idiosyncratic reactions. He suggested a dose of 1/16th of
a grain per pound of body weight to induce narcosis and analgesia
in dogs [9]. In 1917, Howard Jay Milks reported that, other than in
dogs, morphine had no value to relieve pain in veterinary animal
species. However, he mentioned that two to five grains of morphine-
induced sedation in horses and one- fifth to five grains had
anesthetic-sparing effects in dogs [10].
A limiting factor for the use of morphine in veterinary medicine
was its excitatory effects. In 1921, Fröhner reported excitement
combined with sensory and motor depression in horses adminis-
tered morphine at doses of 0.4, 0.75, 1.5, and 10 g [11]. Although
body weight was not reported, these morphine doses are consider-
ably higher than those recommended in contemporary equine
practice. In 1937, Amadon and Craigie described minimal analge-
sia and excitement in pain-free horses administered morphine at
doses of 0.2 and 0.5 mg/kg, respectively [12]. This may have
prompted many to focus on the adverse effects rather than the anal-
gesic actions of morphine and other opioids [13].
The increased use of opioids to provide analgesia in veterinary
patients can be attributed to Yoxall who proposed that it was the
veterinarian’s duty to alleviate pain whenever it may occur [14].
Since then, many opioid drugs in a variety of dosage forms and
routes of administration have been used in animal species of veteri-
nary interest. These have included the intra-articular administration
or intravenous regional limb perfusion of morphine to induce anal-
gesia and prevent inflammation associated with orthopedic proce-
dures in dogs and horses [15–19], the subcutaneous, intramuscular,
intravenous, or intranasal administration of high-concentration
injectable buprenorphine solutions for analgesic purposes in cats
and dogs [20,21], the transdermal administration of fentanyl con-
tained in patches in dogs, pigs, and sheep [22–25], the subcutaneous
administration of extended-release buprenorphine solutions for
analgesia in mice and rats [26,27], the transdermal administration of
long-acting fentanyl and buprenorphine solutions for analgesia in
cats and dogs [28,29], and the buccal transmucosal administration
of buprenorphine gels for analgesia in dogs [30].
Scheduling
The 1971 Convention of Psychotropic Substances, a United Nations
treaty, introduced control provisions for narcotics. These provisions
aimed to prevent diversion and abuse by limiting the prescription
and clinical use of controlled substances to licensed parties. Global
jurisdictions introduced systems and agencies to comply with these
provisions. Moreover, under federal, state, and local law (where
appropriate), controlled drugs must be maintained in locked stor-
age areas with use documented in a log subject to inspection. In the
United States (US), the Controlled Substances Act places regulated
substances into one of five schedules (I to V). Scheduling is based
on the substance’s medical use, potential for abuse, and safety or
dependence liability. The abuse potential is a determinant in sched-
uling; Schedule I substances have a high potential for abuse and
psychological and/or physical dependence, and Schedule V sub-
stances represent the least potential for abuse.
Opioid crisis in North America: veterinary
shopping, diversion, and opioid misuse
and abuse in veterinary practice
In the 19th and the early 20th centuries, the US experienced an opi-
ate crisis involving over-the-counter opium, morphine, and heroin
products, and the spread of opium dens. Consumer advocacy and
legislation ended the over-the-counter sale of opiate products and
outlawed opium dens [31]. The contemporary North American
opioid crisis, also known as the “opioid epidemic,” has been a
decades- long crisis with three major upsurges. The first upsurge
started in 1995 and involved a profit-driven increase in prescription
opioids that were misleadingly marketed as safe and low-risk
extended-release analgesics. The second upsurge began around
2010 when drug traffickers realized that people addicted to pre-
scription opioids were a lucrative target for heroin. The third
upsurge began around 2014 and has been characterized by illegal
drug producers adding potent synthetic opioids to forged pharma-
ceutical pills, heroin, and stimulants [32].
Initial anecdotal evidence suggested [33], and more recent scien-
tific evidence has confirmed [34–36], that veterinarians are a source
for misused prescription opioids. An example of prescription opi-
oid misuse is opioid diversion, which is the illegal distribution or
abuse of a prescribed opioid or its use for purposes not intended by
the prescriber. Some pet owners seek opioids from veterinarians for
their own use and request opioids for their pets when they are not
needed or recommended. Some have even intentionally made an
animal ill, injured an animal, or made an animal seem ill or injured
to obtain opioids [34]. Some may solicit opioid prescriptions from
multiple veterinarians for the purpose of misuse, which is known as
“vet shopping” [36,37]. In addition to clients, veterinary practice
staff, including veterinarians, have been involved in opioid diver-
sion [34,35]. Thus, opioid diversion could contribute to the growing
opioid crisis, and veterinarians have a role in preventing opioid
abuse and misuse.
A few studies have shed some light on the situation veterinarians in
the US face regarding opioid diversion and vet shopping. In a study
conducted in 2018 involving 697 general veterinarians practicing
across the US, 63.5% of veterinarians expressed concerns for opioid
diversion to pet owners and 24.7% to staff within the clinic [35].
Mason et al. reported in 2018 that out of 189 veterinarians practicing
in Colorado, 73% had either fair, poor, or no veterinary medical school
training on opioid abuse or misuse and 64% had not completed con-
tinuing education on best practices for prescribing opioids since
entering practice. Opioid abuse prevention (81%), pain management
guidelines (55%), and how to engage electronic resources (54%) were
identified as continuing educational priorities. Thirty-six percent of
respondents recommended improving prescription drug monitoring

-- 372 of 1450 --

Chapter 23: Opioids 	357
program (PDMP) guidelines and tutorials to help improve access and
utilization [34]. A study including 14 veterinarians practicing in
tri-state Appalachian counties (Tennessee, n = 8; Kentucky, n =4; and
Virginia, n = 2) found that 93% of respondents had heard of vet shop-
ping, 57% had encountered vet shopping in their own practice, 86%
indicated vet shopping was a problem in tri-state Appalachian coun-
ties, and 71% had received no training on prevention and/or manage-
ment of vet shopping. Respondents mentioned more efficient
communication with other veterinarians and medical professionals
including pharmacists, a valid veterinary–client–patient relationship
(VCPR), more education for themselves and/or their staff, better
tracking of animal prescriptions through databases, and judicious use
of opioid prescriptions as means to prevent and control vet shop-
ping [36]. Enhanced curricular offerings, continuing education train-
ings, and workplace policies, practices, procedures, and monitoring
may foster opioid stewardship among veterinarians and may mitigate
the risks of opioid diversion by both staff and clients.
The implementation of mandatory PDMP enrollment for health-
care providers may deter opioid diversion and foster opioid stew-
ardship [34,38]. As of April 30, 2021, and except for Missouri, all
states and the District of Columbia had a PDMP in place. A total of
47 states had PDMP use mandates for any clinician before con-
trolled substances may be prescribed. Of these, 37 states exempted
veterinarians from mandates and 10 did not: Alaska, Connecticut,
Indiana, Maine, Oklahoma, and West Virginia required veterinari-
ans to check PDMP records of owners in some instances; and
Arkansas, District of Columbia, Rhode Island, and South Carolina
required veterinarians to check records of animals. None required
veterinarians to check records of both owners and animals [37].
Although PDMP use mandates might improve controlled sub-
stances prescribing behaviors by veterinarians and deter opioid
diversion, the benefits of these mandates should outweigh their
costs and consider the impact of their implementation. For instance,
time cost for veterinarians, incompatibility of PDMPs with veteri-
narians’ electronic medical record systems, privacy concerns among
animal owners, lack of linkages between animal and owner PDMP
records in many states, possibility of multiple PDMP records for
animals, scope and types of information available to veterinarians
during a PDMP review, protocols to detect and report suspected
cases of veterinary shopping, and regulations for interstate sharing
of PDMP data from animals and owners must be considered [37].
In line with this, the American Veterinary Medical Association has
lobbied that PDMPs not be implemented for veterinarians until fur-
ther evidence and better systems are put in place.
Published information on the utility of PDMPs to identify poten-
tial vet shoppers is scarce. In a survey of 50 state PDMPs, Simpson
concluded that less than 10 vet shoppers nationwide would be iden-
tified by PDMPs per year [39]. Using data collected between 2014
and 2019 from US retail and mail-order pharmacies, the number of
potential vet shoppers with prescriptions from greater than four
veterinarians during a year for opioid cough-and-cold medications
increased from 150 in 2014 to 1348 in 2019; for opioid analgesics,
this number peaked at 868 in 2016 before decreasing to 733 in
2019 [37] (Table 23.1).
The temporal distribution, use, prescription, and dispensation of
opioids for animals has been investigated. Piper et al. analyzed data
from approximately 200 registrants nationwide for distribution of
Schedule II and III opioids to animals from 2006 to 2019 in US
veterinary teaching institutions [40]. By weight, codeine was the
predominant dispensed opioid with a peak of approximately 2200 g
in 2017, which then decreased to 1200 g in 2019. Hydrocodone
followed codeine with a maximum of 550 g in 2010, which declined
to 160 g in 2011. Oxycodone went from 233 g in 2006 to less than
5 g in 2012, and meperidine reached 55 g in 2006 to then dropped to
10 g in 2019. The distribution of morphine, hydromorphone, and
oxymorphone was relatively stable during 2006–2019. However,
the distribution of methadone increased from approximately 9 g in
2006 to 155 g in 2019. The distribution of fentanyl analogs peaked at
380 mg for remifentanil in 2008, 50 mg for sufentanil in 2009, and
40 mg for alfentanil in 2013. By percentage of total morphine milli-
gram equivalents (MME), the top seven Schedule II and III opioids
distributed in 2019 were methadone (42.3%), fentanyl (35.4%),
codeine (6.4%), hydromorphone (5%), morphine (4.5%), hydroco-
done (4%), and buprenorphine (2.4%). Despite the highly variable
Table 23.1 Potential vet-shopping behaviora by US pet owners from 2014 to 2019.
Outcome 	2014 	2015 	2016 	2017 	2018 	2019
Number of patients with ≥ 1 veterinarian prescription
Any controlled substance class 	479,755 	538,996 	577,161 	567,021 	502,291 	448,541
Opioid analgesics 	241,391 	274,935 	290,809 	275,612 	229,485 	184,364
Opioid cough-and-cold medications 	49,164 	59,902 	72,907 	82,865 	90,786 	101,749
Benzodiazepines 	199,151 	215,884 	225,762 	219,831 	191,707 	171,140
Number of patients linked to potential vet-shopping behavior
Any controlled substance classb 	935 	1711 	2192 	2325 	2520 	2875
Opioid analgesics 	401 	662 	868 	850 	815 	733
Opioid cough-and- cold medications 	150 	453 	677 	839 	1041 	1348
Benzodiazepines 	185 	274 	335 	375 	381 	440
Prevalence (%) of potential vet-shopping behavior
Any controlled substance class 	0.19 	0.32 	0.38 	0.41 	0.50 	0.64
Opioid analgesics 	0.17 	0.24 	0.30 	0.31 	0.36 	0.40
Opioid cough-and- cold medications 	0.31 	0.76 	0.93 	1.01 	1.15 	1.32
Benzodiazepines 	0.09 	0.13 	0.15 	0.17 	0.20 	0.26
a Defined as the occurrence of dispensed controlled substance prescriptions from ≥ 4 veterinarians during the year.
b The numbers in the second through fourth rows in this section do not add up to the number in the first row because (1) the second through fourth
rows are not mutually exclusive (e.g., a patient could have opioid prescriptions from ≥ 4 veterinarians and benzodiazepine prescriptions from ≥ 4
veterinarians) and (2) some patients did not receive prescriptions for any given medication class from ≥ 4 veterinarians, but still received controlled
substance prescriptions from ≥ 4 veterinarians (e.g., opioid prescriptions from two veterinarians and benzodiazepine prescriptions from two other
veterinarians).
Source: Adapted from Chua et al. [37].

-- 373 of 1450 --

358 	Section 3: Pharmacology
temporal pattern for individual opioids, a decline in hydrocodone
use (which preceded its up-scheduling from Schedule III to II), a
recent decline in codeine, a decline in fentanyl use from 2013, and a
gradual increase in methadone distribution were evident. The over-
all use of opioids by MME was relatively stable from 2014 to 2019,
with only a 5.7% reduction. A limitation of this study was the
lack of information on the Schedule IV opioids tramadol and
butorphanol.
Kogan et al. surveyed 697 veterinarians practicing in the US in
2018 and 97.8% used opioids in-clinic, 80.3% dispensed them,
and 70.3% prescribed them [35]. Buprenorphine, butorphanol,
hydromorphone, methadone, morphine, injectable fentanyl, and
tramadol were the most frequently administered opioids in-clinic.
Buprenorphine, tramadol, and hydrocodone were the most frequently
dispensed opioids to clients, and tramadol, buprenorphine,
and hydrocodone were the most frequently prescribed opioids to
outside pharmacies. Overall, 99.7% of respondents used opioids
in- clinic, dispensed, or prescribed them. Buprenorphine (96.0%),
tramadol (90.8%), butorphanol (90.5%), hydromorphone (71.7%),
hydrocodone (61.4%), morphine (44.5%), fentanyl patch (27.3%),
fentanyl injectable (21.4%), methadone (10.9%), and oxymorphone
(5.6%) were the most frequently mentioned opioids. The greater
use of μ-opioid agonists in-clinic compared to prescribing or dis-
pensing of these drugs may be due to concerns about injectable opi-
oids leaving the clinic, lack of efficacy of oral μ-opioid receptor
agonists in dogs and cats, and veterinarian concern over diversion
of potent opioid drugs.
During 2007–2017, veterinarians practicing at a small animal
veterinary teaching hospital prescribed a total of 1,051,836 trama-
dol tablets, 97,547 hydrocodone tablets, 38,939 codeine tablets,
and 3153 fentanyl patches to dogs (73.0%), cats (22.5%), and exotic
species (4.5%). Although prescribing of tramadol tablets and
fentanyl patches decreased, overall MME use increased by 41.2%,
whereas visits only increased by 12.8% over the study period. The
large and increasing volume of opioids prescribed at this veteri-
nary teaching hospital highlights parallel concerns about excessive
opioid prescribing in humans [41]. Increasing opioid prescribing
trends were also found in veterinary practices using pharmacies
to fill pet medications and reporting to West Virginia’s PDMP
between January 2008 and June 2020. Veterinary practices report-
ing to West Virginia’s PDMP ranged from 1 in 2008 to 61 in 2019.
Sixty-nine veterinary practices submitted 7919 opioid prescrip-
tions: 96.4% for tramadol, 1.4% for codeine, 1% for fentanyl, 1% for
hydrocodone–acetaminophen, and 0.2% for morphine. Mandates
in the PDMP and the introduction of tramadol as a controlled
substance in 2014 may have contributed to the increasing trend in
opioid prescribing [42].
Using IQVIA Longitudinal Prescription Datasets, which reports
all prescriptions dispensed from 92% of US retail pharmacies and
70% of US mail-order pharmacies, a mean of 1,110,594 (standard
deviation 104,109) controlled substance prescriptions from veteri-
narians were dispensed annually from 2014 through 2019. During
this period, tramadol accounted for the highest share of opioid
analgesic prescriptions (92.6%), followed by codeine (2.9%), and
hydrocodone (1.9%). Opioid analgesic dispensing peaked in 2016
(290,809 prescriptions) before declining in 2019 (184,364 prescrip-
tions). Hydrocodone products accounted for 99.6% of opioid
cough-and-cold medication prescriptions, while codeine products
accounted for the other 0.4%. Opioid cough-and-cold medication
dispensing doubled between 2014 and 2019, from 106,663 to
211,960 prescriptions [37].
Veterinarians require opioids for the practice of modern veteri-
nary medicine. However, opioids carry risks to both animal patients
and humans. These risks must be carefully managed at the individ-
ual and system levels, and it should be recognized that both patients
and their owners can be harmed by clinical decisions to prescribe or
not to prescribe opioids. There are times when opioids are the best
medical choice and ensuring that veterinarians can provide these
drugs to their patients is critically important. Paradoxically, in the
midst of an opioid crisis, veterinarians have struggled to obtain opi-
oids for their patients and have relied on alternative multimodal
analgesic and anesthetic plans, sometimes without opioids. In 2018,
83% and 59% of 697 veterinarians practicing in the US reported
difficulties obtaining opioids for use in-clinic or to dispense to cli-
ents between May and October and in October alone, respectively.
Conversely, 29% and 22% reported difficulties prescribing opioids
to clients between May and October and in October alone, respec-
tively. The most difficult opioids to obtain were hydromorphone,
morphine, injectable fentanyl, oxymorphone, and methadone, all
Schedule II drugs. The opioid shortage moderately or significantly
affected the ability of 75% and 73% of veterinarians to provide
optimal analgesia and anesthesia to their patients, respectively.
Although only 11% of veterinarians canceled or postponed any pro-
cedures between May and October due to the opioid shortage, 45%
discussed the opioid shortage with clients in situations where their
pet required opioid treatment [35].
Although many believe that an opioid crisis could not happen
outside the US, Canada has had a similar explosion of opioid pre-
scribing and is facing an opioid epidemic. In both countries, more
than 600,000 opioid overdose fatalities have been recorded since
1999 with a record peak in 2020: 70,168 deaths in the US and 6306
deaths Canada [32]. Furthermore, pharmaceutical companies
based in the US are actively expanding opioid markets worldwide
and are using tactics now banned domestically. This may partially
explain the disproportionate distribution of controlled opioids
with 21 countries consuming 89% of all controlled opioids between
2015 and 2017 and recent sharp increases in opioid prescribing
in Australia, the Netherlands, Spain, Israel, Iceland, England, and
Brazil [32,34,43].
A 2021 survey of veterinarians in the United Kingdom (UK)
showed that 88.2% of respondents agreed with the statement “some
drugs prescribed by veterinary professionals are at risk of misuse.” Of
these, 29.9% had suspected a client of taking a drug prescribed to
their animal, and 20.1% had suspected veterinary staff of taking a
veterinary prescription medicine. The opioids tramadol, fentanyl
(transdermal patch), buprenorphine, and codeine were in the
top 10 drugs identified at risk of misuse by humans when pre-
scribed by UK veterinarians [44]. Only 10.5% of respondents had
received formal training regarding recognizing, preventing, or deal-
ing with suspected drug misuse involving staff or clients, and 95.6%
felt they would benefit from additional training or guidance [44].
Thus, veterinarians worldwide may be a source of prescription
opioid misuse and training about this issue is required.
Pharmacology
Opioid receptors
The Nomenclature and Standards Committee of the International
Union of Basic and Clinical Pharmacology approves the use of the
well-established Greek symbol terminology for the three types of
opioid receptors: μ, δ, and κ. Also approved are the symbols
spelled out (mu, delta, and kappa), and the acronyms MOP, DOP,

-- 374 of 1450 --

Chapter 23: Opioids 	359
and KOP where OP stands for opioid peptide [45]. The genes
encoding these receptors are the opioid receptor mu 1 (OPRM1),
opioid receptor delta 1 (OPRD1), and opioid receptor kappa 1
(OPRK1), respectively [45]. The principal endogenous agonists
are: (1) β-endorphin (derived from proopiomelanocortin) for the
μ-opioid receptor; (2) leucine- and methionine-enkephalin
(derived from proenkephalin) for the δ-opioid receptor; and (3)
big dynorphin and dynorphin A (derived from prodynorphin) for
the κ-opioid receptor [45].
The nociceptin/orphanin FQ (N/OFQ) or nociceptin opioid
peptide (NOP) receptor is the fourth member of the opioid receptor
family, and it is activated by the peptide of the same name (i.e., N/
OFQ). Despite sharing high structural homology with conventional
opioid receptors, N/OFQ is considered opioid-related because it
displays distinct pharmacology [45]. This receptor modulates vari-
ous central processes including pain, learning and memory, emo-
tional states, neuroendocrine control, food intake, and motor
control [46]. Because no drugs interacting with this receptor are
available for clinical use, it is beyond the scope of this chapter to
discuss this receptor further.
Opioid receptor regulation
Opioid receptors belong to the family of G-protein- coupled recep-
tors. Upon activation by an agonist, opioid receptors change their
conformation causing the Gαi/o subunit to dissociate from the
receptor and the Gβγ dimer. The guanosine triphosphate bound to
the Gαi/o subunit is hydrolyzed to guanosine diphosphate rendering
the Gαi/o subunit active, which, in turn, inhibits adenylate cyclase
and cAMP-related pathways. Voltage-gated Ca 2+ channels are
inhibited through a Gαi/o
-GTP- tyrosine kinase pathway in a voltage-
independent manner and by Gβγ dimers in a voltage-dependent
manner. The Gβγ dimer also activates G-protein-coupled inwardly
rectifying K+ (GirK) channels [47]. This increases the membrane
potential rendering the cell less susceptible to depolarization. If opi-
oid receptor activation continues long term, Gβγ dimers recruit
G- protein receptor kinase (GRK) to the receptor for phosphoryla-
tion. This changes receptor conformation allowing β-arrestin to
dock and subsequently recruit the endocytosis machinery causing
receptor internalization. Receptors are either recycled after some
time to the cell membrane or transported to proteasomes and lys-
osomes for degradation. The latter causes receptor downregulation,
which decreases the number of opioid receptors available for activa-
tion in the cell membrane. Thus, opioid receptors undergo homolo-
gous desensitization becoming less responsive to continuous or
repeated sustained activation by opioid agonists, which may con-
tribute to the development of tolerance. Interestingly, opioid recep-
tor activation has been demonstrated to occur not only at the cell
membrane, but within cytoplasmic compartments [48]. Receptor
regulation and desensitization is dependent on cellular location,
cell type, and agonist type.
The fact that different agonists produce different pharmacologic
responses when acting at the same opioid receptor led to specula-
tion that multiple subtypes of μ-, δ-, and κ-opioid receptors
existed [49,50]. However, molecular cloning has failed to confirm
the existence of such subtypes, and knockout of each of these
receptors results in a loss of ligand binding and function associated
with that receptor [50]. Instead, differences in response are medi-
ated by rather more complex opioid receptor functions. These
include spatiotemporal specificity in opioid receptor cellular
signaling, ligand-directed biased signaling, positive and negative
allosteric modulation of ligand binding and signaling, homo- and
heterodimerization of different opioid receptors, and the existence
of splice variants with different ligand specificity [51,52].
Alternative splicing of opioid receptor genes may contribute to
interindividual variation in response to opioid treatment. Various
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the OPRM1 gene have
been identified in dogs [53,54]. Interestingly, the C-15A SNP, which
had high prevalence in the Alaskan Malamute, Siberian Husky, and
Labrador Retriever dogs that were studied, seems to play a role in
opioid-induced dysphoria [53].
Opioid receptor localization
Opioid receptors are distributed throughout the body, including
the brain, spinal cord, peripheral sensory nerve terminals, enteric
neurons, genitourinary tract, synovial membranes, leukocytes, and
blood vessels. Therefore, the activation of opioid receptors induces
various effects (Table 23.2). The distribution of opioid receptors
in key areas of pain transmission and modulation contributes to
the analgesic effects of opioid agonists. However, μ- and κ-opioid
receptor distribution in the brain differs by species [55], and
μ- opioid receptor density in the spinal cord increases in chronic
pain states [56]. Activation of opioid receptors in extravascular
Table 23.2 Physiological effects associated with stimulation of opioid receptor types.
μ-opioid receptor 	κ- opioid receptor 	δ- opioid receptor
Analgesia (supraspinal, spinal)
Euphoria/sedation
Miosis/mydriasis (species specific)
Bradycardia
Hypothermia/hyperthermia (species specific)
Urinary retention
Antidiuresis
Reduced gastrointestinal motility
Reduced gastrointestinal secretions
Reduced biliary secretions
Emesis/antiemesis
Pyloric muscle spasm or relaxation
Cough suppression
Respiratory depression (decreased sensitivity of
respiratory center to CO 2 )
Immunomodulation
Physical dependence
Analgesia (supraspinal, spinal)
Dysphoria/sedation
Miosis/mydriasis (species specific)
Diuresis (inhibition of antidiuretic
hormone release)
Reduced gastrointestinal motility
Reduced gastrointestinal secretions
Analgesia (supraspinal, spinal)
Reduced gastrointestinal motility (minimal)
Urinary retention
Respiratory depression
Emesis
Immunomodulation

-- 375 of 1450 --

360 	Section 3: Pharmacology
leukocytes by exogenous opioids triggers secretion of endogenous
opioid peptides from the immune cells contributing to the analgesic
effect of exogenously administered opioid receptor agonists [57].
Opioid receptor–opioid drug interactions
Opioids can also be classified according to the receptor or receptors
they interact with, as well as the effect elicited (e.g., concentration–
response or dose–response relationship). Classically, a full agonist
produces a dose-dependent increase in effect until maximum stimula-
tion of the receptor is achieved (Fig. 23.1A). A partial agonist also pro-
duces a dose-dependent increase in effect, but plateaus at a maximal
response that is less than that achieved with a full agonist (Fig. 23.1B).
An antagonist binds to a receptor with high affinity but produces
no intrinsic effect and inhibits the binding of agonists (both endog-
enous and exogenous). Administration of an antagonist will, there-
fore, “reverse” the receptor-mediated effects of an agonist by
inhibiting agonist binding and displacing previously bound agonist
due to its greater affinity for the receptor. Most opioid receptor
antagonists are considered competitive antagonists based on their
lack of intrinsic activity and the fact that high concentrations of an
agonist can overcome antagonism and still produce a maximum
effect (i.e., the antagonist shifts the agonist’s dose–response curve to
the right). Administration of a partial agonist can act as an antago-
nist by partially reversing the effects of a full agonist (also shifting
the dose–response curve to the right) and this approach may be
preferred over an antagonist in certain situations (e.g., if mainte-
nance of some analgesia is desired) [58].
The potency of an agonist describes the relative dose needed to
elicit a response. For opioids, the response of interest is usually
analgesia measured as a change in withdrawal latency or increased
threshold to a noxious stimulus. For example, fentanyl is a more
potent opioid than morphine, which means the dose of fentanyl
(0.01 mg/kg) needed to produce an equivalent analgesic response to
morphine (1 mg/kg) is lower (Fig. 23.1A). Note that potency does
not describe duration of effect or efficacy. In the example of fenta-
nyl (0.01 mg/kg) and morphine (1 mg/kg), both opioids produce
equivalent maximum analgesic effects, but duration of analgesia is
considerably shorter with fentanyl. While fentanyl and morphine
can be equally efficacious analgesics since both are μ-opioid recep-
tor agonists, the typical dose of morphine is 100-fold greater than
that of fentanyl since it is less potent.
Pharmacokinetics
Pharmacokinetics can be defined simplistically as “what the body
does to a drug,” and it can be divided into absorption, distribu-
tion, metabolism, and excretion. These processes depend on the
drug itself and its formulation, as well as the species, age, disease
status, and other factors specific to the individual. By determining
drug concentrations, usually in blood plasma, pharmacokinetic
studies can estimate the rate and extent of drug absorption, the
persistence of drug after a given dose, and sometimes the poten-
tial for drug interactions. Table 23.3 summarizes selected pharma-
cokinetic parameter estimates for commonly used opioids in
domestic species.
Absorption
Absorption is the movement of a drug from its site of administration
into the systemic circulation. Once in systemic circulation, the drug
Figure 23.1 A. Dose–response curves for two opioids with equal efficacy
but different potencies. This example could represent the full agonists
morphine (line B) and fentanyl (line A). The dose of fentanyl needed to
achieve a given effect is lower, but the maximum effect of both fentanyl and
morphine will be similar. B. Dose–response curves for two opioids with
different efficacies and potencies. This example could represent the full
agonist morphine (solid line) and partial agonist buprenorphine (dashed
line). Despite buprenorphine being a more potent drug with high affinity
for opioid receptors, the maximum effect attained with morphine is greater.
Log dose
(A) 
Effect
0
50
100 	Maximum effect
A 	B
Log dose
Effect
0
50
100
Maximum effect
Maximum effect
(B)
Table 23.3 Selected pharmacokinetic parameters of some clinically relevant opioids in awake, healthy animalsa.
Opioid 	Route 	Dose (mg/kg) 	t½ (hours) 	Vdss (L/kg) 	Cl (mL/min/kg) 	F (%) 	Reference
Dog
Buprenorphineb 	IV or SC 	0.12 	16.05 	6.36 	5.7 	131 	[59]
Butorphanol 	IM or SC 	0.5 	1.62 	7.96 	57.5 	[60]
Fentanyl 	IV 	0.01 	0.75 ± 0.14 	4.94 ± 0.86 	77.9 ± 22.3 	[61]
Fentanyl 	IV + CRI 	0.01 + 0.01/h for 1 h 	0.5 ± 0.4 	4.77 ± 0.25 	61.9 ± 4.6 	[61]
Fentanyl 	IV + CRI 	0.01 + 0.01/h for 3 h 	0.86 ± 0.59 	4.38 ± 0.39 	46.9 ± 7.5 	[61]
Fentanyl 	IV + CRI 	0.01 + 0.01/h for 4 h 	0.69 ± 0.54 	4.04 ± 0.26 	47.9 ± 16.4 	[61]
Hydromorphonec 	IV 	0.1 	0.63 (0.50–0.66) 	4.1 (3.3–5.5) 	112 (83.7–135.4) 	[62]
Hydromorphonec 	IV 	0.5 	1.03 (0.70–1.44) 	4.7 (3.8–5.3) 	55.1 (45–85) 	[62]
Hydromorphonec 	SC 	0.1 	0.67 (0.61–0.80) 	3.1 (3–3.6) 	58.6 (44–74.2) 	185 	[62]
Hydromorphonec 	SC 	0.5 	1.06 (1.04–1.21) 	3.3 (3.2–4.1) 	35.3 (33.2–40.4) 	164 	[62]
Meperidine 	IV 	2 	0.61 ± 0.01 	3.14 ± 0.58 	77 ± 8.28 	[63]

-- 376 of 1450 --

Chapter 23: Opioids 	361
Opioid 	Route 	Dose (mg/kg) 	t½ (hours) 	Vdss (L/kg) 	Cl (mL/min/kg) 	F (%) 	Reference
Morphine 	IV 	0.5 	1.58 (1.09–2.2) 	7.2 (5.9–9.0) 	85.2 (71.6–99.2) 	[64]
Morphine 	IM 	1 	1.36 (0.97–2.23) 	6.8 (2.1–7.2) 	91.2 (83.1–94.6) 	119 (57.9–161) 	[64]
Morphine 	Rectal 	2 	1.1 (0.66–1.66) 	6.1 (3.6–9.0) 	88.4 (85.6–90.3) 	16.5 (10.9–27.4) 	[64]
Tapentadol 	IV 	50 	0.86 ± 0.2 	6.45 ± 0.44 	87.8 ± 22.62 	[65]
Tapentadol 	PO 	200 	0.35 ± 0.15 	35.07 ± 20.37 	57.92 ± 13.52 	[65]
Tramadol 	IV 	4 	1.02 ± 0.2 	1 ± 0.47 	15.38 ± 7.67 	[66]
Tramadol 	IM 	4 	2.28 ± 0.85 	0.29 ± 0.15 	18.85 ± 2.43 	92 ± 9 	[66]
Tramadol 	PO 	10 	1.1 (0.9–1.3) 	23 (15.4–39.8) 	245 (143.9–543.7) 	[67]
Cat
Buprenorphine 	IV 	0.01 	6.9 ± 2.9 	7.1 ± 3.2 	16.7 ± 6.2 	[68]
Buprenorphine 	IM 	0.01 	6.3 ± 2.2 	8.9 ± 5.9 	23.6 ± 12.6 	[68]
Buprenorphineb 	IV, SC, OTM 	0.12–0.24 	12.3 	7.89 	16.33 	94 SC, 23.6 OTM 	[69]
Butorphanol 	IM 	0.4 	6.28 ± 2.77 	7.6 ± 6.28 	12.92 ± 5.04 	[70]
Butorphanol 	OTM 	0.4 	5.23 ± 1.72 	15.63 ± 5.7 	25.35 ± 6.55 	37.16 ± 14.95 	[70]
Fentanyl 	IV 	0.00445–0.01116 	2.35 ± 0.57 	2.56 ± 0.32 	19.83 ± 2.67 	[71]
Meperidine 	IM 	5 	3.6 ± 2.0 	5.2 ± 2.1 	20.1 ± 10.6 	[68]
Morphine 	IV 	0.2 	1.3 ± 0.3 	2.6 ± 1.3 	24.1 ± 10.3 	[68]
Morphine 	IM 	0.2 	1.6 ± 0.1 	1.7 ± 0.8 	13.9 ± 4.0 	[68]
Remifentanil 	IV CRI for 5 min 	0.001 	0.29 (0.09–15.34) 	7.63 (2.28–76.04) 	766 (408–1,473) 	[72]
Tapentadol 	IV 	5 	2.93 ± 0.86 	8.79 ± 1.97 	35.60 ± 7.05 	[73]
Tapentadol 	IM 	5 	2.28 ± 0.85 	7.53 ± 2.95 	37.85 ± 5.68 	93.93 ± 9.91 	[73]
Tapentadol 	SC 	5 	2.05 ± 0.6 	7.06 ± 2.10 	40.13 ± 9.97 	90.01 ± 6.52 	[73]
Tramadol 	IV 	2 	2.23 ± 0.3 	1.6 ± 0.1 	20.8 ± 3.2 	[74]
Tramadol 	PO 	5.2 	3.4 ± 0.13 	3.7 ± 1.2 	21.1 ± 3.0 	93 ± 7 	[74]
Horse
Buprenorphine 	IV 	0.005 	3.58 ± 3.92 	3.01 ± 1.69 	7.97 ± 5.16 	[75]
Buprenorphine 	IM 	0.005 	4.24 ± 1.04 	65.22 ± 16.74 	[75]
Buprenorphineb 	SC 	0.0025 	3.41 ± 0.93 	5.23 ± 0.78 	18.3 ± 3.2 	[76]
Buprenorphineb 	SC 	0.005 	4.77 ± 1.79 	7.06 ± 2.87 	17.18 ± 2.78 	[76]
Butorphanol 	IV 	0.1 	5.9 ± 1.5 	1.4 ± 0.3 	11.5 ± 2.5 	[77]
Codeine 	PO 	0.3 	1.84 (1.00–3.90) 	[78]
Codeine 	PO 	0.6 	1.94 (1.06–4.59) 	[78]
Codeine 	PO 	1.2 	2.60 (1.66–5.32) 	[78]
Hydromorphone 	IV 	0.04 	0.57 ± 0.21 	1.46 ± 0.32 	74.0 ± 10.5 	[79]
Hydromorphone 	IV 	0.04 	0.32 ± 0.15 	1.13 ± 0.31 	79.0 ± 12.9 	[80]
Hydromorphone 	IM 	0.04 	0.45 ± 0.15 	155–200 	[80]
Hydromorphone 	IV 	0.08 	0.69 ± 0.54 	2.24 ± 0.95 	92.7 ± 13.9 	[79]
Morphine 	IV 	0.2 	6.43 (4.11–10.2) 	7.96 (4.75–10.5) 	34.5 (26.8–39.6) 	[81]
Morphine 	IV 	0.2 	5.17 (3.22–19.4) 	6.72 (4.36–11.9) 	32.8 (26.4–40.8) 	[78]
Morphine 	IM 	0.1 	1.48 	4.49 	34.9 	[82]
Tramadol 	IV 	2 	1.37 ± 0.17 	2.17 ± 0.52 	26 ± 3 	[83]
Tramadol 	IM 	2 	1.53 ± 0.23 	111 ± 39 	[83]
Cattle
Butorphanol 	IV 	0.25 	82 	4.18 ± 1.15 	34.6 ± 7.7 	[84]
Butorphanol 	IV 	0.25 	82 	4.18 ± 1.15 	34.6 ± 7.7 	[84]
Fentanyl 	IV 	0.005 	12.7 (7.5–35.1) 	24.8 (15.8–58.8) 	33.3 (25.1–47.0) 	[85]
Morphine 	IV 	0.5 	1.18 ± 1.07 	4.7 ± 3.0 	37.3 ± 13.65 	[86]
Morphine 	IM 	0.5 	2.12 ± 0.82 	[86]
Nalbuphine 	IV 	0.4 	0.68 (0.53–0.79) 	6.8 (4.9–8.9) 	114 (104.3–129.7) 	[87]
Sheep
Buprenorphine 	IV 	0.01 	1.75 (1.07–31.0) 	8.04 (1.05–49.3) 	56.5 (4.17–100.33) 	[88]
Fentanyl 	IV 	0.0025 	3.08 (2.2–3.36) 	8.86 (5.55–15.04) 	60.33 (41.83–89.83) 	[89]
Morphine 	IV CRI for 10 min 	1 	1.98 ± 0.30 	6.38 ± 0.9 	34.3 ± 8.5 	[90]
Oxycodone 	IV 	0.1 	0.64 (0.33–4.4) 	1.8 (1.5–4.7) 	5.2 (4.6–6.2) 	[91]
Tramadol 	IV 	4 	0.67 ± 0.42 	3.27 ± 1.92 	74.43 ± 24.5 	[92]
Tramadol 	IV 	6 	0.57 ± 0.12 	4.29 ± 0.75 	78.87 ± 58.48 	[92]
Goat
Butorphanol 	IV 	0.1 	1.87 ± 1.49 	1.27 ± 0.63 	96 ± 24 	[93]
Butorphanol 	IM 	0.1 	2.75 ± 1.93 	82 ± 41 	[93]
Fentanyl 	IV 	0.0025 	1.2 ± 0.78 	1.51 ± 0.39 	34.83 ± 10.33 	[94]
Morphine 	IV 	0.4 	2.67 ± 0.82 	9.64 ± 6.18 	121.25 ± 38.53 	[95]
Morphine 	IM 	0.4 	1.73 ± 0.30 	144.6 ± 50.5 	[95]
Morphine 	SC 	0.4 	1.63 ± 0.17 	131.9 ± 61.3 	[95]
Tapentadol 	IV 	5 	3.22 ± 3.27 	4.39 ± 1.94 	74.15 ± 18.9 	[96]
Tapentadol 	IM 	5 	1.29 ± 0.54 	87.8 ± 35.6 	[96]
Tramadol 	IV 	1 	0.94 ± 0.34 	2.48 ± 0.58 	36.33 ± 3.83 	[97]
Tramadol 	PO 	2 	2.67 ± 0.54 	30 ± 7 	[97]
a t½ , elimination half-life; Vdss
, volume of distribution at steady state; Cl, clearance; F, bioavailability; IV, intravenous; IM, intramuscular; SC, subcutaneous; CRI, constant rate
infusion; PO, oral; OTM, oral transmucosal.
a Values are mean ± standard error or median and (range).
b High-concentration formulation (1.8 mg/mL).
c Values are median and (25th–75th percentiles).
Table 23.3 (Continued)

-- 377 of 1450 --

362 	Section 3: Pharmacology
is considered to be bioavailable. By definition, a drug that is admin-
istered intravenously (IV) bypasses absorption (i.e., it is already in
the systemic circulation). Opioids are very lipophilic, which allows
them to move easily across cell membranes. Generally, they are
rapidly and extensively absorbed after intramuscular (IM) or sub-
cutaneous (SC) administration. Differences in onset of action and
duration of effect have been reported with SC administration of
hydromorphone and the “traditional” 0.3 mg/mL formulation of
buprenorphine in cats, with the SC route associated with shorter
duration antinociception and analgesia compared to IM or IV
routes [98,99]. However, certain controlled-release opioid formula-
tions (e.g., sustained-release buprenorphine for SC administration)
produce prolonged effects compared to readily absorbable formula-
tions (e.g., “traditional” 0.3 mg/mL buprenorphine) [20]. After oral
(PO) or rectal administration, opioids can move across membranes
in the gastrointestinal tract and enter local capillaries and then travel
to the portal vein and liver where they usually undergo extensive
metabolism [100]. This is known as “first-pass metabolism” and ren-
ders the drug ineffective when administered at standard doses. The
oral transmucosal (OTM) route bypasses first-pass metabolism, and
some buprenorphine formulations have demonstrated high bioa-
vailability with this route of administration [30,101].
Transdermal administration of specially formulated opioids can
result in absorption across the stratum corneum. Transdermal fenta-
nyl patches designed for humans have been used with some success
in veterinary animal species [102]. A buprenorphine transdermal
matrix patch has also been evaluated in cats and, while adequate
plasma concentrations were obtained, no effect on thermal threshold
was measured [103]. Limitations associated with transdermal patch
delivery of opioids to animals such as adherence to animal skin, accu-
rate dosing, and potential for misuse deter their use.
A novel transdermal buprenorphine formulation approved by
the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) results in plasma
drug concentrations that persist for 7 days after a single administra-
tion in cats [104].
Regional or local opioid administration has been used to maxi-
mize therapeutic efficacy and minimize systemic adverse events.
For instance, epidurally administered opioids are used to induce
analgesia with minimal excitation in horses. Interestingly, mor-
phine concentrations were higher in blood plasma than in the cer-
ebrospinal fluid for 24 h after epidural administration and
hysteresis, a delay in analgesia compared to peak drug concentra-
tion, of about 4 h occurred [105,106]. In a similar way, buprenor-
phine was detectable in the synovial fluid of inflamed radiocarpal
joints of horses at high concentrations for up to 24 h after intra-
articular administration, but only for up to 6 h and at low concen-
trations after IV administration; both routes of administration
produced similar blood plasma drug concentrations [107].
Distribution
For a drug to induce its therapeutic effects, it needs to reach its site
of action at effective drug concentrations. The central nervous sys-
tem (CNS) is where opioids induce their analgesic, antitussive, and
sedative effects. Although most opioids penetrate the CNS, not all
induce CNS effects. The μ-opioid receptor agonist loperamide is
actively excluded from the CNS and is sent back into the circulation
by P-glycoprotein efflux pumps. Consequently, loperamide gener-
ally acts peripherally and is used as an antidiarrheal. However, dogs
with non-functional P-glycoprotein due to homozygous mutation
of the ABCB1-1∆ gene display CNS effects after loperamide admin-
istration [108]. Various opioids are substrates for P-glycoprotein
and patients with homozygous or heterozygous ABCB1-1Δ gene
mutation may have longer lasting and more intense effects than
wild-type gene carriers [109]. Interestingly, morphine accumulated
more in the brain than in blood plasma of near-term pregnant
sheep (1.19 ratio) and premature lambs (1.89 ratio) suggesting lack
of an efflux transporter across the blood–brain barrier in sheep [90].
In addition to the blood–brain barrier, opioids can be transported
across other specialized barriers such as the placenta and subse-
quently enter the fetal circulation [90,91,110].
Opioids have large volumes of distribution, but there are differ-
ences between drugs (see Table 23.3). These differences are due to
the biochemical characteristics of the drug and the relative organ
blood supply. For instance, fentanyl (4.28 log P) is more than 1000-
fold more lipophilic than morphine (1.07 log P) and distributes
faster into and out of highly perfused tissues such as the CNS [111].
Therefore, after IV administration, fentanyl has a faster onset, but
shorter duration of analgesia compared to morphine [112]. These
differences in lipophilicity can be exploited when selecting an opi-
oid for epidural administration, with less lipophilic opioids produc-
ing longer lasting analgesia compared to more lipophilic opioids
when administered by this route [105,113].
When opioids are administered into or close to their intended
site of action, such as with epidural or intra-articular administra-
tion, their therapeutic effects are terminated by absorption of the
opioid into the local vasculature before they are metabolized and
eliminated.
Metabolism
Opioids are extensively metabolized by the liver. Phase I reactions,
which include oxidation (via the cytochrome P450 system), reduc-
tion, and hydrolysis, convert the parent drug to a more polar- or
water- soluble molecule. Phase II reactions increase the water solu-
bility of a molecule by conjugation of subgroups usually with glucu-
ronate, acetate, or sulfate. Glucuronidation is the main metabolic
pathway for opioids [78–80,114]. However, cats are deficient in this
pathway and use conjugation with sulfate to metabolize mor-
phine [115]. In contrast to humans, opioids have low oral and rectal
bioavailability in animals due to extensive first-pass metabolism,
usually rendering them ineffective when administered by these
routes at standard doses [64,116]. Opioid metabolizing enzymes are
also found in other tissues such as the intestine and the brain [117].
Differences in individual responses to opioids may be mediated by
genetic polymorphisms in metabolizing enzymes [109].
In general, drug metabolites are less active than the parent drug;
however, many opioid metabolites maintain some pharmacologic
activity. In many species, for instance, morphine is conjugated with
glucuronate to form morphine-3- glucuronide and morphine-6-
glucuronide. Although morphine-6- glucuronide is regarded as the
active metabolite, morphine-3- glucuronide may be active too, and
interactions between these metabolites and the parent drug may
contribute to the effects of morphine [81]. Tramadol is metabolized
to its active O-desmethyltramadol metabolite [116]. Some opioids
are pro-drugs and become active drugs after being metabolized. For
example, hydrocodone is metabolized to the active compound
hydromorphone and the less active norhydrocodone [79,80].
Some drugs induce or inhibit drug metabolizing enzymes and
interactions between these drugs and opioids may have important
clinical implications. After oral tramadol administration in dogs,
for instance, the enzyme inhibitor fluconazole increased by more
than 30- fold both tramadol and O-desmethyltramadol blood
plasma and urine concentrations [118]. Similarly, the enzyme

-- 378 of 1450 --

Chapter 23: Opioids 	363
inhibitors ketoconazole and cimetidine increased mean oral tramadol
bioavailability from 2.6% to 18.2% and 20.3% and mean maximum
blood plasma concentration from 22.9 ng/mL to 109.9 ng/mL and
143.2 ng/mL, respectively [119]. On the other hand, in dogs,
the enzyme inducer grapefruit juice decreased the maximum blood
plasma tramadol concentration (Cmax
) (490 versus 270 ng/mL), delayed
the time that Cmax occurred (Tmax
) (1.33 versus 1.7 h), and decreased
the area under the curve (AUC) (11,610 versus 5890 h·ng/mL) [120].
Also in this last study, O-desmethyltramadol Cmax was increased
(80 versus 130 ng/mL), Tmax occurred faster (1.36 versus 0.86 h),
and AUC was decreased (340 versus 160 h·ng/mL) [120].
Excretion
In general, very little of the opioid dose is excreted as the parent
drug via the urine or feces. Opioid metabolites are often eliminated
in the urine, but some can be eliminated in the feces by biliary
secretion. Patients with hepatic or renal impairment may have
altered opioid clearance and may require dose adjustments to avoid
drug accumulation and the potential for adverse events [121].
Opioid tolerance, dependence, withdrawal,
and opioid-induced hyperalgesia
Opioid agonists activate reward processes in the absence of signifi-
cant pain and motivate repeated use of escalating doses of the drugs
simply for pleasure. This alters the brain so that it functions more or
less normally when the drugs are present and abnormally when
they are not. Two clinically important results of this alteration are
opioid tolerance and dependence. Opioid tolerance is the need to
take higher dosages of drugs to achieve the same therapeutic effect.
Opioid dependence is the need to use an opioid agonist to avoid a
withdrawal syndrome. Opioid withdrawal symptoms, together with
social and genetic effects, contribute to the development of opioid
addiction. Opioid addicts require detoxification and pharmaco-
logical treatment, usually with methadone, levo-α- acetylmethadol,
buprenorphine, or naltrexone, which must be accompanied by
psychosocial therapy [122].
The exact mechanisms involved in the development of opioid
tolerance and reward processes remain to be elucidated. However,
opioid tolerance develops in the midbrain periaqueductal gray
(PAG) and rostral ventral medulla descending system. Increased
activation of adenylate cyclase in γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)
interneurons in the PAG results in protein kinase A-mediated
phosphorylation of Ca 2+ channels and, therefore, increased cal-
cium conductance. The overall effect is increased GABA release
and, therefore, stronger inhibition of PAG output neurons [123].
Opioid reward takes place in the mesolimbic dopamine system
where opioid agonists generate signals in the ventral tegmental
area that result in the release of dopamine in the nucleus
accumbens inducing feelings of pleasure. Other areas of the brain
create memories that associate these good feelings with the cir-
cumstances and environment in which they occur. These condi-
tioned associations lead to the craving for drugs when the abuser
reencounters those people, places, or things, and they drive abus-
ers to seek out more drugs [122].
Opioid tolerance usually precedes opioid dependence, and it may
be overcome by increasing the dose or administering a different
opioid agonist (i.e., opioid rotation). However, increasing the dose
increases the risk of opioid-induced adverse events. Opioid toler-
ance has been extensively studied in experimental pain-free dogs
and cats (Table 23.4). Daily administration of 3 mg/kg of
morphine to dogs initially induced sedation lasting up to 24 h, which
gradually decreased in both degree and duration. Sedation was
increased by increasing the dose, but within three weeks of starting
treatment, morphine did not induce sedation despite the increased
doses. Complete tolerance to morphine’s emetic effects developed
within 10 days [124]. Although the route of administration was
not stated in this report, the dosage used was higher than the
recommended morphine dosage for clinical use in dogs. SC admin-
istration of morphine at lower dose rates (twice a day for 7 days at
0.5 and 2.5 mg/kg or infused at 1–5 mg/kg/day for 8 days) induced
faster tolerance development in dogs [125]. In cats, however,
administration of high doses of morphine (1–4 mg/kg/day IV) for
7 days induced minimal tolerance [126]. Procedural details rather
than species differences between dogs and cats may explain the
differences in the development of tolerance. The cat study also
suggests that tolerance can be prevented by large opioid doses.
Cats exposed to rounds of increasing lower doses of morphine
(1–2 mg/kg/day SC divided into morning and evening doses
over 24 to 30 days) developed tolerance, which was overcome by
increasing the morphine dose [127].
Opioid dependence, determined by appearance of withdrawal
signs, was also reported in the abovementioned studies. One to two
months after morphine (3 mg/kg/day) administration, dogs became
irritable and fought frequently at the end of the 24-h administra-
tion, which was overcome by shortening the dosing interval or
increasing the dose [124]. After ceasing morphine administration,
8 out of 10 dogs showed mild signs of opioid withdrawal character-
ized by rigidity with spastic gait, muscle twitching, retracted belly,
sleepiness, salivation, diarrhea, and vomiting; one dog showed
moderate signs which also included restlessness, piloerection,
gnawing at objects, whining, hiccough, panting, and growling; and
one dog showed marked signs which additionally included jerky
respiration, and being irritable, belligerent, and very noisy. Maximal
signs were seen three days after morphine withdrawal and all
signs disappeared after 8–10 days. When morphine withdrawal
was induced by nalorphine administration, seven, nine, and six
dogs showed slight, moderate, and marked withdrawal signs,
Table 23.4 Effects of morphine on opioid-induced tolerance in dogs and cats.
Species 	Route 	Dose, frequency/duration 	Comments 	Reference
Dog 	Not reported 	3 mg/kg, daily 	At 21 days post-administration sedation no longer observed
At 10 days post-administration vomiting no longer observed
[124]
SC 	0.5 mg/kg and 2.5 mg/kg twice daily
or infused at 1–5 mg/kg/day
Dogs developed opioid tolerance within 8 days of
administration
[125]
Cat 	IV 	1–4 mg/kg/day 	Minimal tolerance observed at 7 days of administration 	[126]
SC 	1–2 mg/kg/day divided into morning
and evening doses
Tolerance was developed by 24–30 days. Tolerance was
overcome via increasing the morphine dose
[127]
IV, intravenous; SC, subcutaneous.

-- 379 of 1450 --

364 	Section 3: Pharmacology
respectively. 1 h after nalorphine administration, excitement was
observed, and 1 h later, it had disappeared [124]. Similarly, after one
week of morphine administration and withdrawal precipitated by
subcutaneous naloxone (1 mg/kg) administration, dogs showed
signs of hyperactivity, biting, licking, grooming, digging, tremors,
nausea, hyperthermia, mydriasis, and increased wakefulness [125].
In cats, whole body shakes, head shakes, urination (often in a stand-
ing position), miosis, and catatonic-like posturing resulted from
naloxone (0.5 mg/kg IV)-precipitated withdrawal in cats main-
tained for 12 days on IV morphine (1–4 mg/kg/day) [126]. After
being exposed to 24- to 30-day- rounds of increasing doses of mor-
phine, cats slept most of the day and ate very little during a 2-day
withdrawal period. This behavior was similar during a 2-week
withdrawal period, with appetite and activity levels improving dur-
ing the second week. Fatigue, muscle weakness, and pupillary con-
striction were noted during the first and second day of withdrawal
periods. Mild muscle tremors were observed, especially early in the
final withdrawal period [127]. Interestingly, plasma cortisol levels
increased in these cats at the beginning of the withdrawal periods
and decreased to baseline levels when morphine was administered
again or 6 weeks after morphine withdrawal [127]. In another cat
study, psychological dependence to opioids was demonstrated by
self-administration of morphine [128]. Together, these studies sug-
gest that opioid-dependent cats will self-medicate with opioids, if
available, and that opioid withdrawal is stressful.
Repeated exposure to opioid agonists may cause an exacerbated
pain state known as “opioid-induced hyperalgesia” (OIH). This
phenomenon was described as early as 1870 [129]; however,
the first prospective, controlled clinical trial demonstrating OIH
was published in 2006 [130]. In this trial, participants suffering
from lower back pain developed hyperalgesia, as assessed by a cold
pressor test, after one month of oral morphine therapy [130]. The
exact mechanisms by which OIH occurs are not fully understood
but involve maladaptive plastic changes in opioid-responsive pain
processing pathways. Some of these changes include: (1) activation
of descending pain facilitation from the rostral ventromedial
medulla by increased activity of cholecystokinin and “on-cell” firing
which in turn activates spinal pathways to upregulate dynorphin
and enhance spinal nociceptive inputs; (2) spinal glutaminergic
systems, via sustained activation of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors,
which sensitize dorsal horn neurons to intensify pronociceptive
ascending pathways; and (3) increased activity of catechol-O-
methyltransferase with subsequent higher breakdown of dopamine
and noradrenaline enhancing nociceptive responses [123,131].
Neuroimmune cell communication has also been implicated in
OIH. Upregulation of P2X4-purinergic receptors in microglia
and subsequent release of brain-derived neurotrophic factor
activated tropomyosin receptor kinase B on spinal dorsal horn
neurons, which downregulated potassium-chloride co-transporter
KCC2, shifting GABA receptor activation from inhibitory to
excitatory [132].
Few studies have investigated OIH in domestic animal species.
Two studies demonstrated a κ-opioid-receptor-mediated pontine-
medullary hyperalgesic system in dogs [133,134], and one study
reported thermal hyperalgesia after morphine administration in
cockerels [135]. Although naloxone reversed the development of
hyperalgesia in these three studies, hyperalgesia was induced after a
single systemic or local administration of an opioid agonist.
Opioid tolerance, dependence, withdrawal, or OIH has not yet
been systematically assessed in veterinary clinical cases. However,
these phenomena may not present practical concerns as opioids are
mainly administered for acute uses and long-term use is not recom-
mended for chronic pain control [136,137]. Furthermore, approved
opioid medications in animals maintain clinical efficacy for up to
4 days after a single administration [104].
Clinical pharmacology
Analgesia
Opioid analgesics have been the cornerstone for perioperative pain
management in veterinary medicine for several decades. A compre-
hensive understanding related to their molecular and cellular
mechanism of action allows the clinician to maximize the efficacy
of opioid analgesics and mitigate their unwanted adverse effects.
Opioids, acting as endogenous (e.g., endorphins, enkephalins,
dynorphins, endomorphins, and nociceptins) or exogenous (e.g.,
methadone, hydromorphone, morphine, etc.) ligands, bind to μ-,
δ- , and κ- opioid receptors as well as nociceptin/orphanin FQ recep-
tors producing a desired effect [138].
Opioid receptors are structurally classified as seven transmem-
brane G-protein-coupled receptors and are located at supraspinal
(e.g., cortex, thalamus, hypothalamus, locus coeruleus, periaque-
ductal gray, amygdala, and cingulate gyrus), spinal (e.g., dorsal
horn of the spinal cord), and peripheral tissue (e.g., dorsal root
ganglia, peripheral nerve endings of sensory neurons, inflamed tis-
sue, and immune cells) levels [139,140]. Binding of an exogenous
or endogenous opioid ligand to opioid receptors results in a
conformational change that allows intracellular coupling of G i /G o
proteins to the C terminus of the opioid receptor (Fig. 23.2) [140].
This activation dissociates the trimeric receptor into several active
subunits (Gα, Gβ, Gγ). The Gα subunit then binds to adenylate
cyclase preventing the formation of cyclic adenosine monophos-
phate, an important secondary messenger associated with auto-
nomic tone [138]. In addition, activation of Gα subunits open
inwardly rectifying potassium channels (Kir3) resulting in an
efflux of potassium ions. This effect hyperpolarizes the cell mem-
brane, preventing neuronal excitation and/or the duration of the
action potential. Gβ and Gγ subunits directly interact with voltage-
gated calcium channels (VGCC) decreasing calcium influx via clo-
sure of pre- and postsynaptic calcium channels, thereby decreasing
intracellular calcium concentrations. Within laminae I and II of
the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, a reduction of calcium influx
reduces the spinal release of glutamate and substance P [141].
Similar to the effect observed with Gα on Kir3 channels, the action
potential duration and the release of pronociceptive neuropeptides
is reduced [138,140]. In the PAG, binding of exogenous opioids
or endogenous opioid peptides to opioid receptors inhibits
GABAergic interneurons, activating descending inhibitory path-
ways that project to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, thereby
modulating transmission of the nociceptive impulse [142].
Stimulation of opioid receptors on peripheral terminals of pri-
mary afferent nerves associated with inflamed tissue can also induce
potent antinociceptive effects [143–145]. Endogenous and exoge-
nous opioids bind to opioid receptors synthesized in the dorsal root
ganglia that are transported along intra-axonal microtubules to
peripheral sensory neuron terminals. This results in inhibition of
peripheral ion channels (e.g., transient receptor potential vanilloid-1
[TRPV1], 	hyperpolarization-activated 	cyclic 	nucleotide-gated
[HCN], sodium, acid-sensing ion [ASIC] channels) and substance
P [140]. Increased neuronal electrical activity and production of
inflammatory cytokines associated with inflamed peripheral tissue
stimulate mRNA and specific proteins to upregulate production of

-- 380 of 1450 --

Chapter 23: Opioids 	365
opioid receptors and induce differential regulation of opioid recep-
tor types [140]. This has been observed more consistently with μ-
opioid receptors [146]. Similar influences on opioid receptor
expression are observed at sites of nerve injury and in tissues
innerved by damaged nerves [147].
Opioid analgesics administered locally to inflamed tissues bind
to peripheral opioid receptors and dampen excitatory impulses of
sensory nerves similar to that observed at presynaptic opioid recep-
tors in the spinal cord. Thus, peripheral analgesic effects are only
produced when opioid agonists are administered to tissues that are
inflamed or affected by nerve injury.
Multiple effective routes of administration contribute to the ver-
satility of opioids as analgesics in a variety of clinical settings. This
is largely a function of the diverse locations of opioid receptors
within the neuroaxis, which allows for effective pain control when
opioids are administered peripherally (intra-articular), neuraxially
(intrathecal and epidural), systemically (IV, IM, SC, and OTM), or
transdermally. Choosing the appropriate opioid for pain manage-
ment depends on several patient-related and drug-specific consid-
erations (Box 23.1). Opioids can be administered in combination
with other perioperative agents to produce neuroleptanalgesia
(e.g., a benzodiazepine or acepromazine with an opioid), and as
part of multimodal analgesic protocols. Full μ-opioid receptor ago-
nists are often preferred over partial or mixed agonists due to their
efficacy in managing acute surgical pain. A higher fraction of
opioid receptor occupancy is often required with partial agonists
(i.e., buprenorphine) to achieve an analgesic response of equiva-
lent magnitude when compared to full agonists. In most domestic
3
5
4
1
2
3
1
2
Opioid
receptor
(A) 	(B)
Ion
channel
Opioid
receptor
GRK
Arrestin
γ
α β
cAMP
PLC 	PKC
Figure 23.2 Opioid receptor signaling and recycling. A. Opioid receptor ligands induce a conformational change at the receptor that allows coupling of
G- proteins to the receptor. The heterotrimeric G-protein dissociates into active Gα and Gβγ subunits, which can inhibit adenylate cyclase and reduce
cAMP, decrease the conductance of voltage-gated Ca2+ channels, or open rectifying K+ channels. In addition, the phospholipase C (PLC)/phosphokinase C
(PKC) pathways can be activated to modulate Ca 2+ channel activity in the plasma membrane. B. Opioid receptor desensitization and trafficking is
activated by G-protein-coupled receptor kinase (GRK). After arrestin binding, the receptor is in a desensitized state at the plasma membrane. Arrestin-
bound receptors can then be internalized via a clathrin-dependent pathway, and either be recycled to the cell surface or degraded in lysosomes.
Source: Stein [140], Annual Reviews.
Box 23.1 Patient- and drug-related considerations when treating pain
with opioid analgesics.
Patient- related considerations
Constipation or gastrointestinal ileus (particularly with large animal species)
Gastrointestinal reflux disease (e.g., hiatal hernia, gastrointestinal
obstruction)
Brachycephalic patients (e.g., prone to gastrointestinal reflux, high vagal
tone, respiratory obstruction which can be exacerbated by opioid
analgesics)
Bradyarrhythmias (i.e., third-degree atrioventricular block, atrial standstill,
sick sinus syndrome)
High vagal tone or procedures with potential for vagal stimulation
(e.g., ophthalmic surgery or procedures adjacent to the carotid artery)
Increased intracranial pressure (exacerbated with emesis associated with
hydromorphone and morphine)
Mast cell tumors (caution with IV morphine or meperidine administration)
Significant respiratory disease (e.g., PaCO2 > 60mmHg)
Severity and duration of pain
Analgesic drug- related considerations
Duration of action
Magnitude of analgesia
Routes of administration available
Hospital versus outpatient setting
Chronicity of administration
Legal concerns
Opioid availability
Cost of opioid use in large animal species

-- 381 of 1450 --

366 	Section 3: Pharmacology
species, full μ-opioid receptor agonists provide more profound
analgesic effects when compared to partial agonists [148–150],
while both full and partial agonists provide superior analgesia
when compared to mixed agonist–antagonist agents [151–155].
This may not always be the case with certain species of birds; how-
ever, this remains controversial. Despite differences among full
agonists, partial agonists, and mixed agonist–antagonists, all three
mediate analgesia to some degree and partial or mixed agonists can
provide effective therapy in patients with moderate or mild pain,
respectively. It has been generally accepted that administration of a
partial μ-opioid receptor agonist (e.g., buprenorphine) produces
an analgesic ceiling effect [156]. However, the classic “bell-shaped”
dose–response curve for buprenorphine reported in some early
rodent studies has not been reproduced in more recent animal
studies or in humans. Some evidence suggests this ceiling effect
may be more relevant to non-analgesic effects, such as respiratory
depression, rather than analgesia [157]. Similar findings may apply
to other opioids such as butorphanol [158–160].
Sedation, euphoria, and dysphoria
Opioids induce dose-dependent sedation in most species [161].
When combined with acepromazine, the rank order of opioids
based on sedative intensity in dogs was methadone (0.5 mg/kg) >
morphine (0.5 mg/kg) > butorphanol (0.15 mg/kg) > nalbuphine
(0.5 mg/kg) [162,163]. Butorphanol (0.2 mg/kg), when combined
and administered IV with dexmedetomidine (2 μg/kg), had a faster
onset and greater magnitude of sedation when compared to metha-
done (0.2 mg/kg) in dogs [163]. Sedation associated with opioid
administration does not always correlate with analgesia; thus, the
clinician must assess the patient for appropriate pain control. For
example, in two human trials, morphine-induced sedation was a
poor indicator of appropriate analgesia during IV titration [164]
and did not ensure adequate pain relief postoperatively [165].
Opioid-based procedural sedation protocols (e.g., an opioid com-
bined with an α2
-adrenergic receptor agonist [166]) used for blood
donation or diagnostic imaging are generally safe with minimal
negative effects on diagnostic findings in healthy dogs [167,168]
and cats [169–172].
The mechanism of opioid-induced sedation is complex and not
completely understood [173]. One theory is that opioids decrease
sensory input and promote the probability of sleep [174]. Contrary
to this theory, there is evidence that opioid administration disrupts
the normal sleep–wake patterns by decreasing the amount of rapid
eye movement (REM) sleep in animals [175,176]. Selectivity for the
opioid receptor may also vary the influence on REM sleep. For
example, intracerebroventricular administration of DAMGO, a
selective μ-opioid receptor agonist, inhibited REM sleep, whereas
DPDE and U50,488H (μ/δ- and κ-opioid receptor agonists, respec-
tively) have minimal to no effect on REM cycles [176]. Spectral
analysis of EEG recordings has been used to further understand
the sedative effects of opioid receptor agonists when administered
peripherally and centrally in animals. High-amplitude, low-
frequency EEG recordings were observed in combination with a
wide range of behaviors (e.g., stupor, immobility, catatonia, ataxia,
increased locomotion, and hyperreactivity) [173]. Similar findings
were observed in humans administered short-acting μ-opioid
receptor agonists [173]. Evoked potentials have also been used to
evaluate the effects of opioid receptor agonists in animals. In rats,
small increases in amplitude and AUC of the cortical evoked
potential were associated with morphine-induced sedation [177].
Morphine administered to human cancer patients resulted in a
delayed response to an auditory stimulus when compared to those
that did not receive opioids [178]. In contrast, the administration of
morphine to relieve chronic non-malignant pain in humans
resulted in enlarged evoked potentials with reduced reaction
times [179,180]. Researchers from the latter study postulate that
cognitive status improved because of the removal of pain as a men-
tal stressor/distractor [179,180].
In addition to individual patient-related factors, species also
impacts the reliability of opioids to produce sedation. Cats have
been reported to exhibit euphoric and/or dysphoric behaviors
following opioid administration. Euphoria, defined as rolling,
kneading with forepaws, vocalizing, and purring, is evident follow-
ing hydromorphone, butorphanol, methadone, and buprenorphine
administration in cats [58,181]. Butorphanol has also been
reported to cause dysphoria (i.e., vocalizing, pacing, and staring)
in cats [182,183]. Both situations hinder the ability to appropriately
restrain patients for intravenous catheterization and routine diag-
nostic procedures. Cats also exhibit unique behavioral effects
with the administration of morphine. “Morphine mania” or “feline
mania” is a dose-dependent (> 5–10 mg/kg) behavioral response
characterized by behavioral excitation, motor agitation, and aggres-
sion [184,185]. Morphine administered to cats at 3 mg/kg intra-
peritoneally (still considerably higher than doses used clinically)
resulted in three distinct behavioral stages: (1) the autonomic stage
(0–15 min post-drug administration) characterized by vocalization,
salivation, licking, swallowing, and vomiting; (2) the quiet stage
(15–60 min post-drug administration) characterized by sitting,
staring, mydriasis, and pricked pinnae; and (3) the head movement
stage (30–60 min and decreasing within 5 h post-drug administra-
tion) characterized by sitting, arousal, discrete head movements
that appear in response to visual-tracking, pouncing/avoidance paw
movements, rocking, pivoting, and backing [186]. Minimal evi-
dence of sleep, grooming, micturition, and defecation were noted
during these stages [186]. Healthy dogs anesthetized with inhalant
anesthetics and administered a μ-opioid receptor agonist (i.e., fen-
tanyl or morphine) may also exhibit signs of dysphoria during the
recovery period [187,188]. The administration of a 0.5 μg/kg dex-
medetomidine bolus IV over 10 min immediately prior to extubation
in dogs administered fentanyl infusions and inhalant anesthetics can
reduce the incidence of opioid-induced dysphoria [189].
Horses also are reported to have excitatory responses following
μ-opioid receptor agonist administration (Table 23.2) [190]. Dose-
dependent increases in arousal and locomotor activity (i.e., foot
stepping, spontaneous flexion of forelimbs, postural changes) are
observed following 2.5, 5, and 10 μg/kg IV doses of fentanyl [191].
Excitation has also been observed following morphine, hydromor-
phone, pentazocine, meperidine, buprenorphine, and methadone
administration in this species [13,192]. It has been suggested that
opioid-induced locomotor enhancement in horses is due to opioid
and dopamine receptor stimulation [191], as the locomotor effects
of fentanyl and morphine can be antagonized by naloxone (0.015–
0.02 mg/kg IV) and acepromazine (0.10–0.16 mg/kg IV) [193].
Conclusions pertaining to opioid-induced locomotion in horses
include: (1) opioids induce eating behavior at low doses; (2) dose-
dependent locomotor activity with incoordination is observed at
high doses; (3) the median effective dose for morphine to result in
increased locomotion is 0.91 mg/kg, which is significantly higher
than doses used to produce analgesia; and (4) there is variability
in behavioral responses in the horse population [194]. It is difficult
to determine if activation of different opioid receptor types plays
a role in opioid-induced excitation in horses. Butorphanol is

-- 382 of 1450 --

Chapter 23: Opioids 	367
reported to enhance locomotor activity associated with fentanyl
administration [190]. However, yawning, ataxia, and staggering are
more commonly observed following κ-opioid receptor agonist
administration [195]. In the author’s experience, butorphanol also
results in head twitching following administration. In general,
μ-opioid receptor agonists promote increased locomotion when
compared to κ-opioid receptor agonists.
Cardiovascular system
Opioids increase parasympathetic tone and inhibit sympathetic
tone leading to vagally mediated bradycardia and occasionally
hypotension. Several predisposing risk factors may increase the
likelihood of opioid-induced bradycardia. These include the
administration of β-adrenergic blocking agents, calcium channel
antagonists, α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists [196], inhalant anes-
thetics [197], muscle relaxants that lack parasympatholytic proper-
ties (e.g., vecuronium), high vagal tone (e.g., brachycephalic breeds)
or various vagotonic physical stimuli (e.g., traction of ophthalmic
muscles [198] or carotid massage [199]), high doses of opioids, and
rapid IV bolus administration. Methadone’s chemical structure
resembles that of calcium blocking agents and results in functional
L-type calcium channel blockade [200]. This is independent of its
μ- opioid receptor effects [200] and, therefore, may potentiate brad-
ycardia [201]. Meperidine exhibits a slightly different action than
other opioids (e.g., increased heart rate) due to its anticholinergic
effects [202]. Conversely, opioids have been reported to increase
heart rate in horses at clinically relevant doses [79].
Opioids generally exhibit a dose-dependent effect on cardiac
index (CI) that is associated with a reduction in heart rate (HR);
however, this may be affected by species and the specific opioid
administered. Morphine administered at 1 mg/kg IV to dogs
resulted in a 26% and 19% reduction in HR and CI, respectively, at
120 min post-administration. Methadone resulted in more pro-
nounced depressant effects on HR and CI in conscious dogs com-
pared to morphine at similar doses (i.e., 0.5 mg/kg methadone
reduced HR by 19–28% and CI by 17–27%; 1 mg/kg methadone
reduced HR by 32–46% and CI by 24–52%) [203]. Alterations in
systemic vascular resistance index (SVRI) vary among opioids. In
general, administration of opioids (e.g., methadone and buprenor-
phine) has been reported to increase SVRI via increased vasopres-
sin concentrations in anesthetized and conscious dogs [197,203].
Morphine, however, has been reported to decrease SVRI [203], and
butorphanol has been reported to have limited effects [204].
Similarly, meperidine has been reported to reduce SVRI due to its
direct smooth muscle relaxant effect and indirect histamine releas-
ing effect [205].
Opioids have been reported to alter the electrocardiogram and
these effects may be exacerbated during inhalant anesthesia [206].
For example, methadone and hydromorphone prolong the PR and
QT intervals when administered at clinically relevant doses in dogs.
Opioids disrupt the delayed rectifier potassium current resulting
in reduction of potassium efflux. This effect prolongs the action
potential and delays ventricular repolarization, thus prolonging the
QT interval on the electrocardiogram [207]. Delays in the PR inter-
val following opioid administration have been known to result in
bradyarrhythmias such as second-degree atrioventricular (AV)
block. The calcium blocking effects of methadone contribute to
delayed depolarization of both the sinoatrial (SA) and AV nodal
pacemaker cells [206]. Administration of an anticholinergic drug
(e.g., glycopyrrolate or atropine) can be used to treat or prevent
opioid-induced bradyarrhythmias [208].
Respiratory system
Opioids have been reported to exert their respiratory depressant
effects at several supraspinal locations (Box 23.2) [209,210]. Opioid-
induced ventilatory depression is a result of interactions with
supraspinal μ-opioid receptors in the forebrain, superficial and deep
brainstem tissue, and/or in the suprapontine tissue [209]. A large
component of excitatory drive to the medullary rhythm generator
(chemodrive) is routed through an area of the brain called the
Parabrachial Nucleus/Kölliker-Fuse Complex and assists in deter-
mining respiratory rate, while tidal volume is dependent on direct
output projections from the retrotrapezoid nucleus to the preBötz-
inger Complex neurons [210]. Opioids depress Parabrachial
Nucleus/Kölliker-Fuse Complex activity in addition to acting at the
nucleus of the solitary tract and the medullary raphe (Fig. 23.3) [210].
Clinically, opioids exert a dose-dependent respiratory depres-
sant effect resulting in respiratory acidosis and increased arterial
carbon dioxide tension (PaCO 2 ), with a resultant decrease in arte-
rial oxygen tension (PaO 2 ) in patients that are breathing room
air [211]. Pure μ-opioid receptor agonists [212,213] result in more
significant depressant effects than partial [214] or mixed opioid
agonists [215]. The magnitude of respiratory depression is directly
correlated with the degree of sedation and/or analgesia pro-
duced [216]. Opioid overdose may limit the respiratory center’s
response to profound hypoxia and hypercapnia, thus requiring full
or partial reversal with administration of naloxone or butorphanol,
respectively [217–220]. While effects are considered mild in
healthy individuals, with PaCO 2 and PaO 2 often remaining within
clinically acceptable limits, opioids may pose more significant risks
in patients with respiratory compromise [221]. Mild reductions in
PaO 2 are a result of alveolar hypoventilation [212]. Elevations of
PaCO 2 are related to reductions in respiratory rate more so than
decreased minute volume; however, elevations in respiratory rate
(e.g., panting) may be observed [211]. Despite the latter, PaCO 2
still remains elevated [211]. Opioid-induced apnea is characterized
by arrest of the respiratory cycle during the expiratory phase (i.e.,
impaired respiratory rate control) rather than from a profound
decrease in tidal volume [222–224].
Gastrointestinal system
Both peripheral and central mechanisms associated with μ-opioid
receptor agonist stimulation may impair gastrointestinal motility or
promote ileus. μ-Opioid receptors are present in the enteric nervous
system and are distributed in the stomach (corpus and antrum),
duodenum, jejunum, ileum, and proximal and distal colon [225].
Stimulation of these opioid receptors suppresses neuronal excitability
via inhibition of Ca2+ channels, membrane hyperpolarization, and
Box 23.2 Supraspinal sites involved in μ- opioid receptor-mediated
respiratory depression.
Carotid body
Nucleus tractus solitarii
Retrotrapezoid nucleus
Medullary raphe
Forebrain
Periaqueductal gray
Parabrachial Nucleus/Kölliker-Fuse Complex
PreBötzinger Complex
Premotor neurons
Phrenic motoneurons
Source: Adapted from Palkovic et al. [210].

-- 383 of 1450 --

368 	Section 3: Pharmacology
decreased cyclic adenosine monophosphate and protein kinase A
activity [225]. The net effect is decreased excitatory neurotransmit-
ter release (e.g., acetylcholine, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide,
and substance P) from acetylcholine- or substance P-containing
neurons [226,227]. Clinical effects lead to reductions in gastrointes-
tinal motility, coordination, secretions, gastric emptying, and pro-
pulsive activity, as well as increases in pyloric and anal sphincter
tone and constipation [225–227]. The effects of opioids on the large
intestine are considered biphasic with initial stimulation of colonic
motility leading to defecation shortly after administration followed
by decreased colonic propulsive motility and secretions [64,187].
The route of administration may impact the magnitude of
opioid- induced gastrointestinal effects. In horses, IV administra-
tion of morphine has been reported to result in more significant
gastrointestinal stasis when compared to epidural morphine
administration [228,229].
Opioid-induced vomiting is a result of δ-opioid receptor stimula-
tion within the chemoreceptor trigger zone (CTZ) outside the
blood–brain barrier [230], a circumventricular organ located on the
floor of the fourth ventricle in the postrema medulla [231]. Opioids
with lower lipid solubility, such as hydromorphone, morphine, and
meperidine, initially stimulate δ-opioid receptors through fenes-
trated capillaries in the CTZ prior to crossing the blood–brain barrier
where all opioids act at the medulla to inhibit the vomiting center
(i.e., antiemetic effect) [230]. Thus, subsequent doses of opioid anal-
gesic are less likely to result in vomiting compared to the initial
dose [232]. Opioids that are highly lipophilic (i.e., fentanyl) penetrate
the blood–brain barrier more rapidly and may inhibit vomiting
[230,231]. Higher doses and/or concentrations of less lipophilic
opioids (i.e., morphine and hydromorphone) may provide a more
pronounced antiemetic effect [230,233]. For example, one study
reported the incidences of morphine-associated vomiting in dogs
administered IV doses of 0.3, 1, and 2 mg/kg were 100%, 60%,
and 0%, respectively [230]. SC and IM routes of administration
of morphine and/or hydromorphone result in higher incidences
of vomiting when compared to the IV route in dogs [62,234,235].
Premotor
cortex
Anterior cingulate cortex
Prefrontal
cortex
Thalamus
Hypothalamus
Hippocampus
	post-I
early-I
pre-I
Raphe
Periaqueductal gray
PBN/KF
RTN	I 	E PreBötzinger/Bötzinger Complex
Carotid body
Phrenic motor nucleus
Abdominal
motoneurons
I-premotor
E-premotor
Premotor
neurons
NTS
Figure 23.3 Excitatory connections within the respiratory control center and opioid effects. Tonic chemodrive (green solid arrows) is the main excitatory
drive to the medullary rhythm generator. A large component of chemodrive is routed through the Parabrachial Nucleus/Kölliker-Fuse Complex (PBN/KF)
to phase-switching neurons in the preBötzinger Complex and determines respiratory rate (dark blue solid arrow). Phasic inputs from the preBötzinger
Complex activate inspiratory (I) and expiratory (E) premotor and motoneurons (blue dotted arrows). Respiratory motor output (tidal volume) depends on
direct projections from the retrotrapezoid nucleus (RTN) to preBötzinger Complex neurons, premotor neurons, and motoneurons. The corticolimbic
system contributes tonic drive to the medullary rhythm generator (light blue solid arrows). Not shown: direct projections from the motor cortex to phrenic
motoneurons as a pathway to override automatic rhythm; projections from the hypothalamus and cerebellum to the medullary raphe, which may contribute
to the state-dependency of respiratory activity. Opioid effects: Parabrachial Nucleus/Kölliker-Fuse Complex activity was depressed in all studies and at all
opioid concentrations. Opioid-induced depression was also shown for the preBötzinger Complex, nucleus tractus solitarii (NTS), and the medullary
raphe. Opioid-induced sedation suggests depression of forebrain inputs. Premotor neurons are only directly depressed at very high opioid concentrations.
Inset: neuronal subtypes constituting the core of respiratory rhythm generation. Through mutual excitation, network activity of pre-inspiratory neurons
(pre-I) in the preBötzinger Complex results in activation of early inspiratory (early-I) neurons (green arrows). Activity of these neurons is terminated
through inhibition by postinspiratory neurons (post-I), which themselves are inhibited by early-I neurons during the inspiratory phase (red circles).
Phasic excitation is relayed to inspiratory (I) and expiratory (E) premotor neurons. Source: Palkovic et al. [210], The American Physiological Society.

-- 384 of 1450 --

Chapter 23: Opioids 	369
Morphine may induce a similar or slightly increased frequency of
vomiting compared to hydromorphone in dogs [234,236]. In cats,
vomiting may occur regardless of route, but usually less often follow-
ing IV administration. For example, vomiting has been reported in
approximately 83% (5/6 cats) [98], 40% (4/10 cats) [237], and 0%
(0/6 cats) [238] to 86% (6/7 cats) [239] of cats administered hydro-
morphone via the SC, IM, and IV routes, respectively. Methadone
and oxymorphone generally produce fewer vomiting episodes when
administered by similar routes compared to hydromorphone or mor-
phine [240]. Vomiting may still be observed with methadone when
administered via the OTM route to dogs [241]. In a study involving
healthy dogs, meperidine (8.8 mg/kg IM) resulted in no episodes of
vomiting, while morphine (0.66 mg/kg IM) resulted in a 50% inci-
dence of vomiting [242]. Several studies have reported ways to reduce
opioid-induced vomiting (Box 23.3) which include the use of acu-
puncture, maropitant, or acepromazine prior to hydromorphone or
morphine administration [243–245].
Opioid administration has been reported to promote gastroe-
sophageal reflux (GER) in anesthetized dogs [242,243,248,250,251].
Opioids potentiate GER via delayed gastric emptying, decreased
lower esophageal sphincter tone, and reductions in gastroesophageal
pressure [252–254]. Similar studies evaluating the effects of opioids
on GER in anesthetized cats have not been performed; however,
GER does occur in cats administered inhalant anesthetics [255].
Further discussion pertaining to GER frequency and species differ-
ences in dogs versus cats is beyond the scope of this chapter.
The effects of opioids on GER may be dose related. Morphine
administered IM at 0.22 and 1.1 mg/kg resulted in a GER frequency
of 50% and 60%, respectively, compared to 27% in isoflurane-
anesthetized dogs that received a placebo [250]. Morphine combined
with common premedication agents (e.g., dexmedetomidine, ace-
promazine, or midazolam) produced GER in 35–45% of inhalant-
anesthetized dogs [256]. Meperidine, when administered IM, is
associated with a lower incidence of GER when compared to IM
morphine in anesthetized dogs (8/20 or 40% versus 11/20 or 55%),
respectively [242]. The incidence of GER with hydromorphone was
reported to be approximately 30–69% in anesthetized dogs [243,251].
Butorphanol may in fact result in the highest incidence of GER
among opioids, but this is difficult to determine as it has not been
studied as a sole agent. One study reported the incidence of GER in
dogs receiving butorphanol with either dexmedetomidine or ace-
promazine to be 53.3% and 66.7%, respectively [256]. Maropitant
has not been shown to be effective in reducing GER associated with
opioids in dogs [243]. Esomeprazole (1 mg/kg IV) with cisapride
(1 mg/kg IV) administered 12–18 h and 1–1.5 h before anesthetic
induction can reduce the incidence of reflux events when compared
to placebo (11% versus 38%, respectively) in isoflurane-anesthetized
dogs administered SC hydromorphone for premedication and a
fentanyl constant rate infusion (CRI) [257]. Metoclopramide
administered at a high dose (bolus loading dose of 1.0 mg/kg IV,
followed by CRI at 1.0 mg/kg/h) was associated with a 54% reduc-
tion in relative risk of developing GER in isoflurane-anesthetized
dogs administered morphine as premedication [258]. Lower doses
(0.4 mg/kg IV loading dose followed by 0.3 mg/kg/h) did not signi-
ficantly affect the incidence of opioid-induced GER in a similar
population [258].
Nervous system
In general, opioids have minimal adverse effects on cerebral blood
flow (CBF), intracranial pressure (ICP), and cerebral metabolic
oxygen consumption in humans, dogs, and cats [259–263]. Average
CBF, oxygen extraction, and oxygen consumption were not signifi-
cantly affected following morphine administration in cats [259].
However, regional changes may exist in areas with dense populations
of opioid receptors [259]. Decreased CBF and oxygen extraction
were noted in the hypothalamus, and decreased oxygen extraction
and consumption were noted in the thalamic region following IV
morphine administration in cats [259].
Indices of cerebral perfusion were significantly decreased at 30
min following morphine administration when compared to base-
line in the right frontal cortex, whereas the left parietal cortex and
subcortical region showed significantly increased perfusion indices
at 30 min post-morphine. No significant differences were noted for
the other regions or at other time points [264]. Several studies have
reported a decrease in CBF by up to 70% following systemic opioid
administration in dogs [264–267]. Administration of morphine
(1 mg/kg IV) also reduces spinal cord blood flow (SCBF) by similar
amounts. Cerebral changes may be a result of decreases in meta-
bolic oxygen demand and consumption as well as cerebral meta-
bolic rate for glucose [265,266]. Morphine injected directly into the
subarachnoid space was reported to have no effect on CBF and
SCBF in dogs, which may indicate that the effects of opioids on cer-
ebral hemodynamics are a result of their interaction with opioid
receptors at supraspinal sites [265].
In cats, both decreased CBF [268] and no change in CBF [259]
have been reported following opioid administration. Contrary to
these findings, a study in cats found that CBF was significantly
increased for approximately 20 min following sufentanil at doses of
10–200 μg/kg. Following this period, CBF gradually decreased
below baseline levels at 60 min post-administration [269]. Increases
in CBF appear to be a result of decreases in cerebrovascular resist-
ance [269] and, based on these findings, sufentanil should be used
with some degree of caution in patients with acute increases in ICP.
However, an alternative may be remifentanil as it has been reported
to be an effective and safe analgesic in human patients with trau-
matic brain injury [261].
While there is conflicting evidence regarding the effects of
opioids on ICP, most animal studies suggest that their impact is
minimal [266,269]. Remifentanil administered at 0.05 to 1.0 μg/kg
followed by a CRI at 0.03–0.26 μg/kg/min decreased ICP with mini-
mal effects on cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) in human subjects
[270]. Remifentanil and alfentanil both reduced ICP during low- (0.5
and 1.6 μg/kg/min, respectively) and high-dose (1 and 3.2 μg/kg/min,
respectively) infusions in dogs anesthetized with 1.0% end-tidal
Box 23.3 Strategies to reduce the incidence of perioperative opioid-
induced vomiting.
Acepromazine 0.05 mg/kg IM administered 15 min prior to opioid
administration [234]
Electroacupuncture at pericardium-6 applied 20 min prior to opioid
administration [244]
Electroacupuncture at pericardium-6, stomach-36, gallbladder-34,
bladder-20, and bladder-21 applied 20 min prior to opioid
administration [244]
Acupuncture at pericardium- 6 applied 30 min prior to opioid
administration [246]
Maropitant 1 mg/kg SC administered 15–30 min prior opioid
administration [247]
Maropitant 2–4 mg/kg PO administered 2 h prior to opioid
administration [248]
Maropitant 8 mg total dose PO administered 2–2.5 h prior to opioid
administration in cats [249]

-- 385 of 1450 --

370 	Section 3: Pharmacology
isoflurane and 50% nitrous oxide in oxygen [267]. However, increases
in ICP post-opioid infusion did occur during the recovery period.
Sufentanil administration was reported to have little effect on ICP
in adequately ventilated normal dogs and in dogs with elevated
baseline ICP [271]. The use of fentanyl, sufentanil, and morphine at
sedative doses in human subjects was well tolerated and did not
result in changes in ICP. However, in another study, both fentanyl
and sufentanil increased ICP in human head trauma patients [272].
Morphine may negatively impact recovery of neurologic
function following acute spinal cord injury (SCI) (Fig. 23.4).
The mechanisms mediating these effects can be classified as
neuronal- or glial-mediated. Morphine’s agonist effects at the
κ-opioid receptor inhibit locomotor function by inducing central
sensitization, enhancing excitatory amino acid levels and aug-
menting N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor-mediated neu-
rotoxicity through reduced glutamate reuptake, and negatively
impacting spinal plasticity [273]. Opioids have also been reported
to enhance immune cell trafficking (e.g., increased glial cell
expression of Toll-like receptors) and chemokine/cytokine activ-
ity, which can further increase pain and the development of neu-
ronal apoptosis [273]. Several studies have evaluated the effects
of morphine following SCI in rats [273–275]. Repeated morphine
administration in rats significantly decreased the expression of
neurons and glia following SCI when compared to vehicle con-
trols [273,275]. The administration of morphine to rats also
increased the size of the SCI lesion, delayed recovery of locomotor
function post-SCI, and contributed to the development of opioid-
induced hyperalgesia with subjects displaying increased reactivity
to innocuous mechanical stimulation [273–275]. A one-time
administration of morphine within the acute phase following SCI
(< 24 h) also contributed to the development of neuropathic pain
at three weeks post-injury [274]. To the authors’ knowledge, only
one study has evaluated the effects of fentanyl administration in
dogs undergoing thoracolumbar spinal surgery for intervertebral
disk herniation [276]. In this study, fentanyl had little impact on
the recovery characteristics in dogs [276]; however, this could be
attributed to the lack of κ-opioid receptor activity associated with
fentanyl. Therefore, fentanyl could be a superior alternative to
morphine in cases with SCI.
Renal system
Opioid analgesics have a dose-dependent effect on postoperative
urinary retention [277,278], and can lead to increased bladder filling
volume, increased micturition cycle duration, or a complete loss of
the voiding phase via reduced coordination between external ure-
thral sphincter activity and detrusor contractions [279]. μ-Opioid
receptor agonists are responsible for decreasing the force of detrusor
contractions and the sensation of fullness via decreasing afferent
inputs from the urinary bladder to the spinal cord [280]. Naloxone
or methylnaltrexone have both been shown to reverse these effects
[281]. Opioids can also decrease electrolyte excretion and promote
antidiuresis via μ-opioid receptor activation. In contrast to the
μ- opioid receptor effects, κ-opioid receptor activation produces
diuresis via suppressed release of arginine vasopressin (antidiuretic
hormone) from the hypothalamus [282].
Epidural administration of opioid analgesics has been associated
with the development of urinary retention in dogs [283–286] and
cats [287,288]. Debate persists as to whether it occurs at a high
enough incidence to determine its clinical relevance in these spe-
cies [286,289], but it has been reported to be as high as 18% in dogs
receiving epidural opioids during total hip replacement surgery
[288,290]. Currently, data regarding the incidence of postoperative
urinary retention after systemic opioid administration in other
companion animal species are lacking [291]. When administered
epidurally, methadone may have an opposite effect on the detrusor
muscle by increasing its tone in dogs when compared to mor-
phine [292]. Buprenorphine has been considered for epidural
administration in veterinary species [113,293], as it may result
NeuN
NF
DAPI
(A) 	(B)
Vehicle
Sham
1200
1000
800
# Neurons
600
400
200
0
C3 	C2 	C1 	LC 	LC
Spinal section
LC 	R1 	R2
Contused–morphine
Contused–vehicle
Sham–morphine
Sham–vehicle
R3
**
Contused
Morphine 	Expression of NeuN
Figure 23.4 A. Representative images (4×) are shown depicting neuronal (NeuN and NF) expression in one-half of a spinal section, at the center of the
lesion, for each treatment group of rats. Sham subjects are shown in the upper images; contused subjects in the lower images; panels on the left were
treated with vehicle for seven days; panels on the right were treated with seven days of intravenous morphine. The contusion injury significantly decreased
NeuN and NF expression at the center of the lesion, but when morphine was administered to the subjects with spinal cord injury (SCI) for seven days,
there were virtually no neurons remaining at the injury site. B. There was a significant effect of SCI on NeuN expression at the center and rostral to the
injury site, with less NeuN expression in the contused subjects. Morphine-treated subjects with SCI had significantly less NeuN expression, at the center
and rostral to the injury site, than both sham control groups. n = 3; **p < 0.05. Source: Hook et al. [275], with permission from Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.

-- 386 of 1450 --

Chapter 23: Opioids 	371
in a lower incidence of urinary retention when compared to
morphine [294]. However, data in humans suggest that urinary
retention can occur with both full and partial μ-opioid receptor
agonists [295–297]. Lastly, administration of opioids at the lum-
bosacral level is associated with a higher incidence of urinary reten-
tion compared to opioids administered at the thoracic level [280].
Antitussive effects
Butorphanol, methadone, hydrocodone, codeine, and morphine are
effective antitussive agents against pathologically and experimentally
induced cough in the dog [298,299]. The duration of antitussive
effects associated with morphine and butorphanol are longer than
that of codeine, lasting approximately 4 h when administered as
compounded oral formulations [299]. Tramadol also has antitussive
properties in cats [300]. Naloxone inhibits the antitussive effects
of morphine, butorphanol, and codeine but not dextromethor-
phan [299]. The antitussive effects of opioids are mediated predom-
inantly by μ- and κ- opioid receptors [301]. More recent evidence
also suggests a potential role of δ-opioid receptor antagonism in the
antitussive effects of this class of drugs [302].
Thermoregulatory effects
Opioid-induced hyperthermia has been reported in cats and can
occur following the administration of hydromorphone, buprenor-
phine, butorphanol, meperidine, morphine, and transdermal fenta-
nyl patches [303–307]. Opioid-induced hyperthermia (> 39.4 °C or
103 °F) is often self-limiting (e.g., < 4 h) [305] with body tempera-
tures in the range of 40–41.1 °C (104–106 °F) [307]. However, tem-
peratures exceeding 42.2 °C (108 °F) have been reported [303] and, in
these situations, treatment with IV naloxone may be required. High-
concentration buprenorphine administered at 0.24 mg/kg SC may
predispose cats to greater risk of hyperthermia compared to mor-
phine administered at 0.1 mg/kg SC [307]. Studies in rats suggest that
opioids alter thermoregulation by raising the temperature set point
that is controlled by the hypothalamus [308]. Horses may also exhibit
transient mild increases in body temperature following administra-
tion of high-dose hydromorphone (0.08 mg/kg), but not after 0.02
and 0.04 mg/kg [79], and after transdermal fentanyl application [309].
However, clinically relevant changes in body temperature with opioid
administration in horses do not routinely occur [310–312].
In contrast to the effects of opioids on feline thermoregulation,
canine subjects may experience hypothermia following opioid
administration [313–315]. It has been postulated that the mecha-
nism associated with hypothermia following opioid administration
in dogs is due to lowering of the thermoregulatory set point [315].
Other species have been investigated, and the effects of opioids on
body temperature appear to be dependent on dose, route, and the
opioid administered [316].
Ophthalmic effects
The administration of IV morphine can cause sustained miosis
in dogs; however, topical ocular administration does not appear
to produce similar effects. Morphine has excitatory effects on
pupilloconstrictor neurons in the visceral nuclei of the oculomotor
nuclear complex in subcortical regions causing pupillary constric-
tion [317]. More recent findings in humans administered fentanyl
suggest that opioids also may induce miosis by blocking the inhibi-
tory input into the pupilloconstrictor nucleus, resulting in reduced
pupillary reflex dilation [318]. In cats, mice, and rats, morphine
results in mydriasis via inhibition of the preganglionic parasympa-
thetic nucleus (central component) and disruption of the release of
acetylcholine from parasympathetic fibers of the ciliary nerves of
the iris (peripheral component) [319].
Immune system effects and effects on cancer
metastasis
Opioids exhibit a broad effect on the body’s immune system and in
general inhibit cell-mediated and humoral immunity as well as
interact with inflammatory cytokines including interleukin (IL)-1,
IL-4, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor [320–323]. Stimulation of
μ-opioid receptors by morphine and fentanyl decreases the expres-
sion of Toll-like receptors on macrophages and suppresses natural
killer (NK) cell function, respectively [324–326]. Morphine also
may exhibit effects on tumor cells, modulating cell cycle, apoptosis,
and angiogenesis (Fig. 23.5). Immune-mediated responses and the
Cell cycle
MAPK/ERK 	EGF
receptor
PI3K/Akt 	p53, p21,
Bax
Bim/Bcl-2
Apoptosis
Bad
ROS
Src 	VEGF
receptor
Angiogenesis
COX-2 	PGE2
p38 MAPK
VEGF
Morphine
Figure 23.5 Mechanism of action of morphine on the tumor cell, modulating cell cycle, apoptosis, and angiogenesis. Source: Szczepaniak et al. [327],
Springer Nature, CCBY 4.0, public domain.

-- 387 of 1450 --

372 	Section 3: Pharmacology
effects of opioids on cancer cells are variable depending on the opi-
oid and patient-related factors. This variation, along with the lim-
ited clinical trials in companion animals and contradictory
conclusions indicating both positive and negative effects on cancer
development and metastasis, makes it difficult to definitively deter-
mine clinical implications.
Effects on inhalant anesthetic minimum alveolar
concentration
Dogs
The impact of opioids on inhalant anesthetic minimum alveolar
concentration (MAC) requirements depends on the type and dose
of opioid and the species. In general, opioid agonists reduce MAC
via an indirect effect on neurons associated with modulation within
the dorsal horn of the spinal cord in response to a noxious stimu-
lus [328]. A thorough review on opioid MAC-sparing effects in
dogs is available elsewhere [329] (Table 23.5). A CRI of morphine at
0.198 mg/kg/h can reduce end-tidal isoflurane concentrations by
48% with minimal hemodynamic effects (e.g., decreased HR) [330].
Extraordinarily high bolus doses of morphine (7 and 27 mg/kg) can
reduce the MAC of enflurane by up to 67% [331]. More clinically
relevant doses of morphine (0.5 and 2 mg/kg) result in MAC reduc-
tion of 17 and 34%, respectively. Oxymorphone, methadone, hydro-
morphone, and fentanyl all result in similar dose-dependent
MAC- reducing effects in dogs [332,333]. Fentanyl and remifentanil
CRIs of 0.2 μg/kg/min or greater can achieve MAC reductions
Table 23.5 Bolus doses, infusion rates, plasma concentration, and MAC effects in studies using pure μ- opioid agonists in dogs.
Drug 	IV bolus dose (mg/kg) 	Infusion rate (μg/kg/min) 	Plasma concentration (ng/mL) 	MAC effect (%) 	Reference
Morphine 	0.5 	N/A 	ND 	↓ 17% (E) 	[331]
2 	N/A 	↓ 32%
7 	N/A 	↓ 63%
27 	N/A 	↓ 67%
Morphine 	2 	N/A 	295 	↓ 50% (I) 	[340]
Morphine 	1 	N/A 	ND 	↓ 34% (I) 	[341]
Morphine 	None 	3.3 	ND 	↓ 48% (I) 	[330]
Morphine 	0.5 	3.3 	ND 	↓ 25% (S) 	[342]
Oxymorphone 	0.05 	N/A 	ND 	↓ 43% (I) 	[332]
Hydromorphone 	0.1 	N/A 	ND 	↓ 48% (I) 	[332]
Methadone 	0.5 	N/A 	ND 	↓ 35% (I) 	[333]
1 	↓ 48%
Methadone 	0.5 	N/A 	ND 	↓ 30% (I) 	[343]
Meperidine 	2.75 	N/A 	880a 	↓ 48% (H) 	[344]
5.5 	930 	↓ 68%
11 	1180 	↓ 73%
Fentanyl 	0.015 	0.05 	3.1 	↓ 33% (E) 	[334]
0.015 	0.1 	6.5 	↓ 53%
0.03 	0.2 	11, 8.2b 	↓ 57%, ↓ 56%
0.09 	0.8 	29 	↓ 64%
0.27 	3.2 	99 	↓ 66%
Fentanyl 	0.015 	0.05 	1 	↓ 28% (E) 	[345]
0.045 	0.2 	3 	↓ 44%
Fentanyl 	0.015 	0.05 	1 	↓ 13% (E) 	[346]
0.045 	0.2 	4 	↓ 40%
Fentanyl 	0.005 	0.15 	ND 	↓ 35% (I) 	[347]
Fentanyl 	0.01 	0.3 	ND 	↓ 53% (I) 	[348]
Fentanyl (MACNM
) 	0.015 	0.1 	3.25 	↓ 39% (S) 	[349]
Fentanyl (MACNM
) 	0.0075 	0.05 	2.19 	↓ 22% (S) 	[350]
0.015 	0.1 	5.13 	↓ 35%
0.03 	0.2 	11.94 	↓ 41%
Fentanyl 	0.005 	0.15 	ND 	↓ 50% (I) 	[351]
Fentanyl 	33 	0.2 	6.2 	↓ 42% (I) 	[352]
102 	0.8 	29.5 	↓ 77%
Remifentanil 	None 	0.055–5.5 	10–15 	Plateau at ↓ 63% (E) 	[353]
Remifentanil 	None 	0.15 	ND 	↓ 43% (I) 	[335]
0.3 	↓ 59%
0.6 	↓ 66%
0.9 	↓ 71%
Alfentanil 	0.0146 	0.625 	19 	↓ 24% (E) 	[354]
0.0146 	1.6 	44 	↓ 53%
0.072 	8 	223 	↓ 69%
0.288 	32 	960 	↓ 73%
0.720 	80 	2613 	↓ 70%
Sufentanil 	0.0015 	0.005 	0.51 	↓ 43% (E) 	[355]
0.003 	0.015 	0.92 	↓ 57%
0.009 	0.045 	2.28 	↓ 63%
0.120 	0.405 	17.43 	↓ 67%
0.243 	1.215 	48.07 	↓ 70%
ND, not determined; N/A, not applicable; E, enflurane; S, sevoflurane; H, halothane; I, isoflurane.
a Blood for plasma concentrations not drawn at exact time of MAC determination. MAC reduction percentage and associated plasma concentrations derived by the authors from
figures provided in the original manuscript.
b Two groups received this treatment.
Source: Reed and Doherty [329], with permission.

-- 388 of 1450 --

Chapter 23: Opioids 	373
> 50% [334,335]. A one-time bolus of buprenorphine can reduce
MAC by 25–35% and, due to its long duration of action, MAC
reductions of 16% have been reported at 6 h following administra-
tion [336]. Butorphanol’s effects on MAC are minimal (e.g., 8–15%
reduction) at clinically relevant doses as are its effects on cardiopul-
monary parameters [331,337]. Epidural morphine administration
at 0.1 mg/kg reduced MAC of halothane from 1.04% to 0.60%
following a supramaximal electrical stimulus applied to a pelvic
limb [338]. Tramadol administered as an IV bolus of 1.5 mg/kg
followed by a CRI of 1.3 mg/kg/h, or as an IV bolus of 3 mg/kg
followed by 2.6 mg/kg/h resulted in MAC reductions of 26% and
36%, respectively [339].
Cats
Opioids produce less of a MAC-sparing effect in cats compared
to dogs. Intravenous morphine at 1 mg/kg, butorphanol at
0.08 mg/kg and 0.8 mg/kg, and buprenorphine at 0.05 mg/kg
produced reductions in isoflurane MAC of 28%, 19%, and 14%,
respectively [356]. Morphine at 0.1 mg/kg and buprenorphine
at 0.005 mg/kg did not produce clinically relevant reductions in
MAC in cats [356]. Hydromorphone at 0.1 mg/kg IV produced
an approximate 30% reduction in the MAC of sevoflurane [357].
Methadone at 0.3 mg/kg IV had a sevoflurane sparing effect
of 25%, with sevoflurane concentrations returning to baseline
concentrations at 156 min following administration [358].
Butorphanol at low (0.25 mg/kg IV bolus followed by 85 μg/kg/
min for 20 min, then 43 μg/kg/min for 40 min, then 19 μg/kg/
min), medium (double the low dose), and high doses (quadru-
ple the low dose) dose-dependently reduced the MAC of isoflu-
rane by 23%, 37%, and 68%, respectively [359]. Butorphanol
administered IM at 0.2 mg/kg to cats resulted in a 15% reduc-
tion in isoflurane MAC [360]. Application of a fentanyl patch
applied 24 h prior to testing and dosed at 25 and 50 μg/h pro-
duced reductions in isoflurane requirements of approximately
20% [361]. Remifentanil infusions between 0.25 and 1 μg/kg/
min produced a reduction in isoflurane MAC between 23% and
29% and did not differ significantly between dosages [362].
Epidurally administered morphine at 0.1 mg/kg and buprenor-
phine at 0.012 mg/kg had minimal effect on the MAC of isoflurane
in cats [363]. Tramadol administered PO at 8.6 to 11.6 mg/kg
produced a significant 40% reduction in sevoflurane MAC [357].
The opioid receptor antagonist naltrexone had no effect on the
MAC of isoflurane in cats [364].
Horses
The effects of opioids on MAC in horses are variable and can
result in decreases or increases in inhalant requirements. For
example, IV morphine at 0.25 mg/kg and 2.0 mg/kg produced
alterations in MAC ranging from –20.2% to +28.3% and –18.9% to
+56.2%, respectively [365]. Fentanyl CRI doses of approximately
0.36 and 3.5 μg/kg/h (equivalent to plasma concentrations of 0.72
and 8.43 ng/mL) had no significant effect on MAC in horses, but
higher doses of 6–7 μg/kg/h (13.3 ng/mL) did reduce MAC by
approximately 18% [366]. Contrary to these findings, other studies
evaluating fentanyl concentrations of 16 ng/mL did not produce
inhalant-sparing effects in horses [367]. Epidurally administered
morphine at 0.1 mg/kg reduced MAC by approximately 15% [368].
Epidural butorphanol at 0.05 mg/kg had no MAC-sparing effects.
Intravenous butorphanol at similar doses (0.022–0.05 mg/kg)
also had no significant effect on the MAC of halothane [369].
Alfentanil CRIs at varying doses did not provide MAC-sparing
effects in horses [370].
Traditional routes of administration
The route of opioid administration often influences the onset,
magnitude, and duration of analgesia and therefore should be
considered by the clinician prior to use [99,371,372]. Intravenous
administration has been considered advantageous over other
traditional routes (IM or SC) because of its rapid onset and rapid
pain relief. In patients without an intravenous cannula, the SC route
is often associated with less pain on injection than the IM or IV
routes; however, it may not provide a similar magnitude of analge-
sia. For example, SC administration of hydromorphone or the
standard concentration of buprenorphine (0.3 mg/mL) in cats pro-
vided significantly less analgesia when compared with the IM or IV
routes [98,137]. Similarly, in dogs, buprenorphine (0.3 mg/mL)
administered SC failed to provide clinical analgesia due to erratic
drug absorption when compared to equivalent doses administered
via IV and IM routes [372]. Therefore, it is generally recommended
that most opioids be administered IV or IM, unless otherwise
labeled specifically for SC administration.
Full opioid agonists
Morphine
Morphine, a natural alkaloid derived from the opium poppy
Papaver somniferum, has a unique and rich history of more than
200 years and was first isolated in its pure state by Friedrich Wilhelm
Adam Sertürner, a German pharmacist, who published his original
report in 1805 and again in 1806 [373]. In the US, it is classified as
a Schedule II narcotic under the Controlled Substances Act.
Morphine has been studied and administered to dogs and cats
since the late 1800s [374] and early 1900s [375–378] and continues
to be administered today as a perioperative analgesic agent for
moderate to severe pain. Morphine’s versatility has contributed to
its attractiveness in veterinary medicine as it can be administered
parenterally [379], epidurally [113], intra-articularly [380], topi-
cally (e.g., cornea) [381], orally [382,383], as a CRI [187,384], or via
nebulization [385]. However, there is limited evidence supporting
the clinical utility of the topical and oral administration routes in
most species.
Morphine, a phenanthrene (Table 23.6), is a weak base (pKa
7.9) that is highly hydrophilic and poorly soluble in lipids at
physiological pH (7.4). It is considered a full agonist at the μ-opioid
receptor and, in humans and other species, maintains moderate
binding affinity (Ki ) for the μ-opioid receptor (approximately
1.16 nM) (Table 23.7) [386,387]. Morphine binds 3.4 times and
10 times more avidly to the μ-opioid receptor compared to the
κ- and δ- opioid receptors, respectively [386,388–390]. Morphine’s
clinical effects are predominately due to its binding and activa-
tion at the μ-opioid receptor [391], with a higher binding affinity
for the pharmacologically defined μ1 subtype (analgesia) com-
pared to the μ2 subtype (respiratory depression, gastrointestinal
side effects) [391,392]; though as discussed previously, molecu-
lar evidence for the existence of these different subtypes is lack-
ing. Morphine also has the ability to bind to the nociceptin opioid
peptide (N/OFQ or NOP), a G-protein-coupled receptor system
that, on a cellular level, produces similar actions to classical opioid
receptors [393].

-- 389 of 1450 --

374 	Section 3: Pharmacology
Dogs
Following administration of morphine at 0.5 mg/kg IV, mean ±
standard error values for half-life, apparent volume of distribu-
tion, and clearance were 1.16 ± 0.15 h, 4.55 ± 0.17 L/kg, and 62.46 ±
10.44 mL/min/kg, respectively [394]. Canine liver microsomal
enzymes catalyze glucuronidation of morphine-3- and morphine-6-
O-glucuronide at 10 times the rate of that observed in humans [395];
however, the active metabolite, morphine-6-glucuronide, cannot be
detected in significant concentrations in canine plasma following IV
or oral administration [394]. Based on plasma concentrations asso-
ciated with analgesia in humans (> 25 ng/mL) and pharmacody-
namic modeling using a von Frey device, it has been suggested that
morphine should be administered IV every 2–4 h at 0.5–1.0 mg/kg
in dogs (Table 23.8) [313,394,396]. Intramuscular administration of
morphine at 1 mg/kg should be dosed at a frequency similar to IV
administration [187] based on previous pharmacokinetic data in
dogs where median plasma morphine concentrations remained
> 20 ng/mL from 5–120 min following IM administration [64].
Bioavailability for IM morphine (119%; range 58–160%) is compa-
rable to that of IV morphine (100%) in dogs; however, variability in
absorption is higher with the IM route.
Morphine infusion rates greater than 0.15 mg/kg/h are required
to maintain plasma concentrations greater than 30 ng/mL [397]. At
higher doses (0.34 mg/kg/h), steady-state plasma concentrations
ranged from 93 to 180 ng/mL [313]. Terminal half- life was 38 ± 5
and 27 ± 14 min for high-dose (0.34 mg/kg/h) and low-dose
(0.17 mg/kg/h) CRIs, respectively [313]. Sedation and analgesia
were observed with both infusion rates; however, the magnitude of
both appears to be dose-dependent [313]. Interestingly, consistent
analgesia during the infusion rates was only reported at plasma
concentrations greater than 100 ng/mL and not at concentrations
less than 50 ng/mL [313]. The authors suggest this apparent lack of
analgesia may be related to their study population (healthy dogs in
an experimental setting) and the model of nociception used.
Therefore, clinicians should always use validated pain assessment
tools to ensure that analgesia is adequate.
Oral morphine, in any formulation, is not recommended as a
sole analgesic due to its poor and highly variable absorption
characteristics in dogs. Oral bioavailability following extended-
release tablets at 1.6 ± 0.1 mg/kg is extremely low at 5% [394]. In
a pharmacokinetic study comparing extended-release and con-
ventional (immediate-release) morphine formulations adminis-
tered at 15 mg PO, both produced similarly low bioavailabilities
(15–17%) [382]. In addition, there was no prolonged effect on
serum morphine concentrations with extended-release compared
to immediate-release morphine [382]. Rectal morphine sup-
pository administered at 1, 2, or 5 mg/kg produced similar bio-
availability (16–24%) when compared to that of orally administered
morphine [64].
Table 23.6 Opioid chemical structures.
Chemical class 	Basic chemical structure 	Examples
Phenanthrenes 	Buprenorphine
Codeine
Hydrocodone
Hydromorphone
Morphine
Nalbuphine
Oxycodone
Morphinans
N
H 	H
H
Butorphanol
Phenylpiperidines
and piperidines
N
H
4-Phenylpiperidine
N
H
Piperidine
Alfentanil
Diphenoxylate
Fentanyl
Loperamide
Meperidine
Remifentanil
Sufentanil
Phenylheptylamines 	H
H
N
Methadone
Source: Chemical structures from the National Center for Biotechnology Information.
PubChem Compound Summary for CID 995, Phenanthrene. https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/compound/Phenanthrene; PubChem Compound Summary for CID 6857497,
(–)-Morphinan. https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/6857497; PubChem
Compound Summary for CID 69873, 4-Phenylpiperidine. https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/compound/4-Phenylpiperidine; PubChem Compound Summary for CID 8082,
Piperidine. https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/Piperidine; PubChem
Compound Summary for CID 91495676, Diphenylheptylamine. https://pubchem.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/compound/Diphenylheptylamine. (accessed September 2023).
Table 23.7 Binding affinity (Ki
) at the μ- opioid receptor for various opioids in humans.
Weak binders 	Moderate binders 	Strong binders
Drug 	Ki (nM) Drug 	Ki (nM) 	Drug 	Ki (nM)
Tramadol 	12,486 	Hydrocodone 	41.58 	Butorphanol 	0.7622
Codeine 	734.2 	Oxycodone 	25.87 	Levorphanol 	0.4194
Meperidine 	450.1 	Diphenoxylate 	12.37 	Oxymorphone 	0.4055
Propoxyphene 	120.2 	Alfentanil 	7.391 	Hydromorphone 	0.3654
Pentazocine 	117.8 	Methadone 	3.378 	Buprenorphine 	0.2157
Nalbuphine 	2.118 	Sufentanil 	0.1380
Fentanyl 	1.346
Morphine 	1.168
Strong binders, Ki < 1 nM; moderate binders, 1 < Ki < 100 nM; weak binders,
Ki > 100 nM.
Source: Modified from Kilpatrick and Smith [386]; Volpe et al. [387].

-- 390 of 1450 --

Chapter 23: Opioids 	375
In dogs, morphine is commonly administered during the periop-
erative period and can provide analgesia for thoracotomy [398],
tumor removal [399], orthopedic [400], mastectomy [401], neuter-
ing [402], or laparotomy [187] procedures. Morphine analgesia has
been reported in dogs with a variety of routes of administration (e.g.,
parenteral, epidural, intrathecal, intra-articular), as well as nontradi-
tional techniques such as nebulization, topical application, and injec-
tion into acupoints (pharmacopuncture) [15,144,381,403–405].
However, the analgesic efficacy of morphine administered by nebuli-
zation or topical ocular application, as well as the extradural route via
gel-foam remains questionable [381,406,407]. The effective dose
(ED50
) of IV morphine in dogs is 0.71 mg/kg with an onset and dura-
tion of analgesia of 10 min and 2–4 h, respectively [396,397,408].
When administering morphine as a CRI in dogs, doses of 0.15 ±
0.02 mg/kg/h were required to maintain significant antinociception
as assessed by von Frey thresholds [397]. Interestingly, it has been
reported that the use of 0.5 mg/kg IV boluses may provide more con-
sistent and effective analgesic plasma concentrations of morphine
when compared to a CRI [397]. Epidurally or intrathecally adminis-
tered morphine has provided long-lasting analgesia for up to 24 h
following administration in dogs undergoing laparotomy, thoracot-
omy, and orthopedic procedures with minimal adverse effects.
Intravenous morphine provides moderate to marked dose-
dependent sedation with an onset of 2–5 min, a peak effect at
15–30 min, and a duration of up to 2 h at higher doses (e.g., 1.0 mg/kg)
[161,203]. The onset of action for sedation with IM morphine
administration can take as long as 30 min [161]. Behavioral adverse
effects are also dose-dependent and include dysphoria and vocaliza-
tion following IV administration in dogs [203,235,313]. Dysphoria
may occur less commonly in dogs administered morphine when
compared to other opioids such as methadone [203,235].
Morphine reduces HR in dogs by 26% for up to 2 h following IV
administration, with minimal negative changes in CI [203]. Dogs
may experience a transient (< 10-min duration) elevation in mean
arterial pressure 5 min following IV administration [203]. Morphine
has very little effect on arterial pH, PaCO2
, and PaO2 values [203].
Increases in minute ventilation via increased respiratory rate (e.g.,
panting) without effects on tidal volume are often observed follow-
ing administration [203].
Morphine has been reported to cause systemic histamine release
in dogs following IV administration [235]. Maximum plasma hista-
mine concentrations reached 440 ng/mL and 589 ng/mL following
0.5 and 1.0 mg/kg of morphine, respectively [235]. Flushing of the
skin is most notable at the higher dose within 1 min following
administration. Cardiovascular parameters are minimally affected
following these doses of morphine despite the release of histamine.
In a previous study, hypotension was noted in one of five dogs at 2
and 5 min following 1.0 mg/kg morphine corresponding to hista-
mine concentrations of 589 and 351 ng/mL, respectively [235].
Clinically used infusion doses result in insignificant cardiovascular
effects associated with morphine-induced histamine release [235].
Following IM morphine administration, nausea and emesis
have been reported in 30–80% and 50–75% of dogs, respectively
[234,244,245,409]. The emetic effect of morphine generally occurs
within 10 min following IM administration and time to cessation
is approximately 1–3 min [234,244]. Salivation and defection are
also commonly observed shortly after administration. Urinary
retention, pruritis, myoclonus, and rarely priapism, have been
noted following epidural or intrathecal morphine administration in
dogs [284,285,410]. Priapism is self-resolving within 7–8 h follow-
ing intrathecal morphine, but supportive interventions such as
lubrication and massage are advised to minimize trauma to the
Table 23.8 Authors’ recommendations pertaining to dose, route, and frequency of administration for commonly used opioids in dogs, cats, and horses. In all clinical situations,
dose and dosing intervals should be guided by use of validated pain assessment tools.
Drug 	Dog 	Cat 	Horse
Morphine 	0.3–1.0 mg/kg IM, IV q2–4 h
0.1–0.2 mg/kg/h IV CRI
0.2–0.4 mg/kg IM, IV q4–6 h
0.05–0.1 mg/kg/h IV CRI
0.05–0.3 mg/kg IM, IV q8 h
0.03 mg/kg/h IV CRI
Hydromorphone 	0.05–0.2 mg/kg IM, IV q2–4 h
0.02–0.04 mg/kg/h IV CRI
0.025–0.1 mg/kg IM, IV q2–4 h
0.02–0.03 mg/kg/h IV CRI
0.01–0.04 mg/kg IM, IV q7–12 h
Oxymorphone 	0.05–0.2 mg/kg IM, IV q4 h 	0.025–0.1 mg/kg IM, IV q4–6 h 	0.01–0.02 mg/kg IM, IV
Methadone 	0.5–1 mg/kg IM, IV q3–4 h 	0.3–0.5 mg/kg IM, IV q4 h 	0.05–0.1 mg/kg IM, IV
0.05 mg/kg h IV CRI
Meperidine (pethidine) 	3–5 mg/kg IM q1–2 h 	3–5 mg/kg IM q1–2 h 	1–2 mg/kg IM
Fentanyl (injectable) 	2–10 μg/kg IV followed by
3–20 μg/kg/h IV CRI
1–10 μg/kg IV followed by
2–15 μg/kg/h IV CRI
2–4 μg/kg IM, IV q3–4 h
0.3–0.5 μg/kg/h IV CRI
Fentanyl (transdermal) 	3–5 μg/kg applied as a patch q3 days 	3–5 μg/kg applied as a patch or
1 x 25 μg/h patch per cat q5 days
3 x 100 μg/h patches per adult horse
q36–48 h
Buprenorphine 	0.01–0.02 mg/kg IV, IM, SC q6–8 ha 	0.01–0.02 mg/kg IV, IM, SC, OTM q4–8 ha
0.24 mg/kg SC q24 hb
8–20 mg transdermal topicalc
0.005–0.01 mg/kg IV, IM, SCa
Butorphanol 	0.4 mg/kg IV, IM, SC q2–4 h
0.2 mg/kg IV followed by
0.2 mg/kg/h IV CRI
0.2–0.4 mg/kg IV, IM, SC q1–4 h 	0.01–0.1 mg/kg IV, IM, SC q2–6 h
0.024 mg/kg/h IV CRI
Nalbuphine 	0.25–1 mg/kg IV, IM, SC q2–4 h 	0.1–0.25 mg/kg IV, IM, SC q2–4 h
Tramadol 	2–4 mg/kg IM, IV q4–8 h
4–10 mg/kg PO q4–6 h
2–4 mg/kg PO 6–12 h
Tapentadol 	5–10 mg/kg IV q8–12 h
10–30 mg/kg PO q12 h
5 mg/kg IV, IM, SC q4–8 h
5–10 mg/kg PO q8–12 h
a 0.3 mg/mL injectable (approved for use in dogs and cats in some countries; approved for use in humans in the US)
b Simbadol®
c Zorbium®
IV, intravenous; IM, intramuscular; SC, subcutaneous; CRI, constant rate infusion; OTM, oral transmucosal; PO, oral.

-- 391 of 1450 --

376 	Section 3: Pharmacology
penis. Urinary retention generally resolves within 24 h but has been
reported to persist for 7 days following epidural morphine admin-
istration [283,286]. Manual expression of the urinary bladder is rec-
ommended if this happens. These side effects are more commonly
observed with intrathecal administration and/or when using mor-
phine with preservatives [284,286].
Cats
Morphine is effective in treating moderate to severe pain in cats and
should be administered every 4–6 h at doses of 0.2–0.4 mg/kg
[137,182,379,411]. Early studies using extremely high doses
(> 5–10 mg/kg) resulted in neuroexcitatory behaviors consisting of
excitement, motor agitation, and aggression (i.e., “feline mania” or
“morphine mania”). At the time, these observations led to the erro-
neous conclusion that cats were poor subjects for future opioid
investigations [184–186]. At clinically relevant doses (0.2 mg/kg),
however, cats generally do not show signs of dysphoria, but rather
euphoria (e.g., purring, kneading, rolling, and or affectionate
behavior) or mild sedation, which can last up to 3 h following IM
administration [182,412].
Similar to dogs, the half-life and apparent volume of distribution
of morphine is 76.3 min and 2.6 L/kg, respectively, following a
0.2 mg/kg IV bolus in cats [68]. However, clearance is about half
that of dogs at 24.1 mL/kg/min. Cats lack the enzyme UDP-
glucuronosyltransferase 2B7 (UGT 2B7), which is responsible for
the glucuronidation of morphine in humans [413]. This enzyme
deficiency may contribute to the lack of metabolites produced fol-
lowing morphine biotransformation in cats [68]. To compensate for
slow glucuronidation, morphine undergoes extensive sulfation in
cats [115,413]. Like dogs, no detectable concentrations of morphine-
3- glucuronide were noted following morphine administration in
cats, and in one study, the metabolite morphine-6- glucuronide was
detected in only 3 of 11 cats [68].
Horses
Morphine provides excellent analgesia in horses, but its use remains
controversial due to the potential for gastrointestinal ileus, excite-
ment, and increased locomotor activity [194,414,415]. The dra-
matic adverse effects published in earlier studies utilized morphine
doses of 0.5–1.0 mg/kg and even up to 2.4 mg/kg [193,416]. For
example, morphine sulfate at 0.5 mg/kg IV can produce muscle
fasciculations, pawing, and pacing for 2–4 h post-administration
[417,418]. In contrast, lower doses of morphine (0.05–0.1 mg/kg)
may not induce any excitatory effects or only minimal, transient
(< 5 min) pawing, head shaking, and circling [310,418]. Furthermore,
in a clinical setting, preoperative doses of 0.1–0.2 mg/kg have not
been shown to increase the incidence of postoperative gastrointes-
tinal complications or produce excitement during the anesthetic
recovery period [419–421]. The epidural route in particular (either
lumbosacral or cervical) is associated with a very low risk of excita-
tion when similar doses are administered [228,422,423].
Morphine administered at doses of 0.5 mg/kg and greater can
result in reduced cecocolic motility that may be prolonged, lasting
for up to 360 min [416,417,424]. A single lower dose of morphine at
0.05 mg/kg IV did not induce alterations in gut motility. Abdominal
auscultation scores and the number of borborygmus events were
reported to be decreased for up to 60 min following 0.05 and
0.1 mg/kg IM and 0.1 mg/kg IV [310]. Borborygmus frequency was
also reduced at 120 min following the 0.1 mg/kg IV dose [310].
Mean weight of feces collected was not different for 48 h following
administration of IM and IV doses of 0.05 and 0.1 mg/kg, and
horses did not show evidence of colic [310]. Repeated morphine
doses every 4 h of 0.1 mg/kg or higher can produce signs associated
with colic in horses [417]. Despite the apparent dose-dependent
effects on gastrointestinal motility reported when comparing low
and high doses of morphine in horses, analgesia was not detected
via thermal and electrical threshold testing [310,425]. Epidurally
administered morphine at 0.1 mg/kg can provide long-lasting anal-
gesia with minimal gastrointestinal or behavioral effects when com-
pared to systemically administered morphine [105,229]; however,
higher epidural doses may impact gastrointestinal motility [228].
A minimum of 0.1–0.2 mg/kg of IV morphine can provide anal-
gesia in horses, with the higher dose producing a more consistent
effect [423,426]. At these doses, antinociception can be provided
from 120–240 min [423,426]. Horses produce both morphine-3-
glucuronide and morphine-6- glucuronide following morphine
administration, and these metabolites may contribute to sedation
and thermal antinociceptive effects in this species [81,418].
Administration of these metabolites, rather than the parent com-
pound, could prove beneficial during the perioperative period.
In one study, morphine administered as an IV bolus of 0.15 mg/
kg follow by a CRI at 0.1 mg/kg/h provided analgesia in horses with
carpal synovitis; however, increased HR, respiratory rate, and
systolic blood pressure as well as decreased gut sounds were
observed [427]. Another study using a similar dosing regimen did
not significantly alter cardiopulmonary variables [428]. Infusion
rates of 0.1–0.3 mg/kg/h can be used intraoperatively for pain man-
agement in horses undergoing general anesthesia and surgery with
minimal negative consequences on recovery quality [429]. Similarly,
two systematic reviews published in 2022 reported that morphine
administration at clinically relevant doses has minimal effect on
recovery in horses and in some instances can improve recovery
quality [430,431]. Morphine (120 mg) administered intra-
articularly also provides significant pain relief in horses with syno-
vitis with few adverse effects [432]. Oral morphine has been recently
studied in horses and is associated with fewer adverse behavioral
effects. At doses of 0.2–0.8 mg/kg PO, it has a bioavailability of
approximately 30% [433]. Additional studies are required to deter-
mine the analgesic benefit of orally administered morphine in this
species. In donkeys, morphine at 0.1 and 0.5 mg/kg IV produced
dose-dependent mechanical antinociceptive effects for 60 and
300 min, respectively, with minimal adverse effects [434].
Food and fiber animals
Opioids are not commonly utilized for pain management in
farm animal species due to withdrawal times (i.e., the need to
ensure no drugs are present in meat and milk) and the need for
controlled substance record keeping [435]. Morphine provides
dose-dependent thermal antinociception in cattle at doses as low as
0.15 mg/kg, increasing the thermal threshold by 10 °C. Increased
locomotor activity is generally not observed in cattle at IV doses of
0.5 or 1.0 mg/kg [436]. Epidural morphine at 0.1 mg/kg can be a
cost-effective technique to provide adequate analgesia in cows
and pigs undergoing surgical procedures or experiencing acute
pain [437–439].
Morphine administration has been recently evaluated in goats.
When comparing morphine plasma concentrations to those associ-
ated with effective analgesia in humans (> 16 ng/mL) [440], mor-
phine administered at 0.25 mg/kg IV to goats would be expected
to provide a brief period of analgesia lasting approximately
30 min [95]. A higher dose of 0.4 mg/kg IV appears to provide little

-- 392 of 1450 --

Chapter 23: Opioids 	377
additional benefit. IM dosing at 0.25 and 0.4 mg/kg may provide
analgesia for 1–3 and 3–4 h, respectively [95]. SC administration
provided a similar duration of analgesia compared to IM doses of
0.25 mg/kg and 0.4 mg/kg, with durations of approximately 1–2 and
2–3 h, respectively [95].
In llamas, morphine had minimal cardiovascular effects and
induced dose-dependent decreases in respiratory rate and increases
in sedation and body temperature when administered at 0.05, 0.25,
and 0.5 mg/kg IV [441]. Following administration of morphine at
0.5 mg/kg IM, bioavailability was 120% with a significantly longer
mean terminal half-life (342 min) in llamas compared to both dogs
(81 min) and cats (93 min) [441]. The metabolite morphine-6-
glucuronide was infrequently detected and remained at concentra-
tions < 40 ng/mL following 0.5 mg/kg IM and IV [441]. Morphine
at 0.5 mg/kg IV may produce muscle tremors, hyperexcitability, and
sedation lasting up to 1 h following administration in llamas [441].
Morphine can be dosed at 0.25 mg/kg IV every 4 h to produce
analgesia in llamas [441].
Hydromorphone
Dogs and cats
Hydromorphone is a full μ-opioid receptor agonist that provides
similar dose-dependent magnitude and duration of analgesia and
sedation, with reduced histamine levels, compared to IV mor-
phine [235,442,443]. It is 5–10 times more potent than morphine
on a milligram basis with similar cardiopulmonary adverse effects.
The duration of analgesia provided by IV hydromorphone at
0.1–0.2 mg/kg is at least 2 h with the potential to last up to 4 h in
dogs and 4–8 h in cats [236,443]. Lower IV doses of 0.05 mg/kg
hydromorphone provided a significantly shorter duration of anal-
gesia (up to 80 min) in cats [442]. Following 0.1 mg/kg IM admin-
istration in cats, analgesia onset occurred in 15 min and duration
of action was 345 min [183]. SC administration in cats resulted in
a much slower onset to peak analgesic effect of (105 min) with a
duration of action of 210 min [98]. The duration and magnitude
of analgesia was less when hydromorphone was administered to
cats 6 months of age compared to adult cats; therefore, it should
be dosed more frequently in younger animals [237]. Liposomal
encapsulated hydromorphone administered SC also provided
long-lasting analgesia for up to 24 h in dogs undergoing limb
amputation [444]. Repeated administration of hydromorphone
within a 4-h period can result in excitation or prolonged anesthetic
recovery [236]. Duration of sedation is up to 3 h following 0.2 mg/
kg SC administration [213], but may be unreliable at lower doses
in clinically healthy dogs [445]. When evaluating its analgesic
efficacy as a CRI, 0.03 mg/kg/h can provide pain relief similar to
fentanyl [446]. Hydromorphone has also been administered
epidurally in cats, but its duration of analgesia is significantly
shorter than that provided by epidural morphine (i.e., 5 h versus
24 h) [447].
Horses
In horses, hydromorphone administered at 0.02–0.08 mg/kg IV
provides analgesia for up to 12 h [311]. Increases in respiratory
rate, HR, and body temperature were also observed [311].
Hydromorphone 0.04 mg/kg IM was shown to have high bioavail-
ability in horses (217%) and can provide similar duration and
magnitude of analgesia when compared to IV administration [80].
Hydromorphone increased arterial pressure and decreased borbo-
rygmi without altering fecal output when administered at 0.025 and
0.05 mg/kg IV [448]. Reductions in borborygmi may persist for
90–120 min at these doses and routes [448]. Horses may experience
excitement (e.g., pacing, vocalizing, rearing, and kicking) for 1–2 h
following administration [80]. Hydromorphone administration
was not shown to increase the incidence of postanesthetic signs of
colic in horses [449]. Hydromorphone at 0.04 mg/kg IV may pro-
vide better analgesia in horses undergoing elective arthroscopy
compared to butorphanol at 0.02 mg/kg IV [450].
Methadone
Dogs and cats
Methadone, a phenylheptylamine (Table 23.6), is a full μ-opioid
receptor agonist that also has effects at monoamine and NMDA
receptors. It is commonly used in the perioperative period in
dogs and cats. It can be administered via a variety of routes; how-
ever, more variability in plasma concentrations was noted with
the standard formulation when administered SC. Methadone
produces more potent dose-dependent cardiovascular depressant
effects on HR when compared to that of morphine (reductions of
32–46% with methadone versus 15–26% with morphine) [203].
Methadone may hinder the feasibility of gastroduodenoscopy
when compared to butorphanol [203] and potentially should be
avoided in non-painful patients undergoing these procedures.
Vomiting is generally rare following methadone administration;
however, it can still occur.
Methadone alone provides mild sedation in dogs, but they may
occasionally whine [314]. When administered with acepromazine,
it can provide dose-dependent sedation of greater magnitude than
morphine–acepromazine or butorphanol–acepromazine [162,451].
Oral transmucosal methadone at 0.4 mg/kg in dogs can also pro-
vide sedative effects; however, sedation is less than that observed
following IM administration of a similar dose [241].
Methadone possesses both opioid and monoamine effects
(mediated by the levo- or R(–)-enantiomer) as well as NMDA
antagonistic effects (mediated by the dextro- or S(+)-enantiomer)
[452–454]. The latter could be beneficial in patients with chronic
pain, hyperalgesia, and central sensitization [455]. In cats, metha-
done at 0.3 mg/kg IV and 0.6 mg/kg OTM produced antinocic-
eption for greater than 2 and 4 h, respectively [456]. IM methadone
also provided a 4-h duration of antinociception [457]. Methadone
can be administered as a CRI at 0.1 mg/kg/h in dogs and provided
analgesia up to 2 h following its discontinuation [458]. Methadone
also provides superior analgesia when compared to buprenor-
phine for dogs undergoing orthopedic and ovariohysterectomy
procedures [149,459]. Similar findings were reported in cats
undergoing neutering procedures [150]. Chloramphenicol and
fluconazole act as enzyme inhibitors of CYP2B11 in dogs and can
alter the pharmacokinetics of opioids [460]. The combination
of methadone–fluconazole administered SC twice within a 6-h
period was shown to provide safe and effective postoperative
analgesia for up to 12–24 h following the second dose in dogs
with minimal adverse effects [461]. In Greyhounds, the dose
to maintain analgesic plasma concentrations of 40 ng/mL is
1.5–2 times higher than that observed in Beagle dogs [454].
Therefore, a dose of 1–1.5 mg/kg is recommended every 3–4 h in
this breed [454].
Horses and ruminants
Methadone provides some sedation in horses, but less than that
associated with butorphanol [462]. When administered as a sole

-- 393 of 1450 --

378 	Section 3: Pharmacology
agent to horses, dysphoria, euphoria, and spontaneous locomotor
activity can be observed for up to 2 h post-administration [463].
This is particularly evident at a dose of 0.5 mg/kg [464]. When
combined with detomidine, sedation and analgesia is enhanced,
but there is a marked increase in ataxia [465]. The combination of
methadone with detomidine may be a more suitable premedication
to maintain cardiovascular stability (e.g., less depressant effects on
blood pressure) than the combination of methadone and aceprom-
azine [466]. Methadone also produces more pronounced antinocic-
eptive effects when combined with detomidine than when combined
with acepromazine [467]. Increases in blood pressure and respiratory
rate and decreases in gut sounds are noted following methadone
administration [427]. Methadone has little effect on arterial blood
gas values in horses [463].
Methadone may be an effective analgesic addition when admin-
istered via parenteral or epidural routes to horses for standing
procedures or for surgical procedures requiring general anesthe-
sia [468,469]. Methadone was effective in providing analgesia for
lipopolysaccharide-induced carpal synovitis when administered as
a 0.25 mg/kg IV bolus followed by a CRI of 0.25 mg/kg/h [427].
Lower infusion rates (0.05 mg/kg/h) have also been used in
combination with detomidine for standing procedures [470].
Inconsistent antinociceptive effects have been reported with
doses of 0.2 mg/kg IV, with more reliable antinociception at
0.5 mg/kg [464]; however, negative behavioral side effects may
be observed. Oral administration of the injectable and lipid
nanocarrier formulations of methadone does not provide antino-
ciception in horses [471]. Epidurally administered methadone
(0.1 mg/kg) provides effective analgesia for up to 5 h with no
appreciable side effects [468]. As with any analgesic intervention,
horses should be monitored closely to ensure adequate pain relief
when administering methadone.
Methadone at 0.3 mg/kg IV provides effective analgesia in small
ruminant species and reduces autonomic responses associated with
noxious stimuli [472]. Methadone can also be administered epidur-
ally to sheep and cows for pain management [473,474]. Additional
research pertaining to the use of methadone in ruminants would
provide a better understanding of the drug’s pharmacodynamic
effects in these species.
Oxymorphone
Oxymorphone is approximately 10 times more potent than mor-
phine and acts primarily at the μ-opioid receptor. Oxymorphone
is metabolized mainly via conjugation, with small amounts
excreted as intact drug or other metabolites in dogs. Its adverse
effects are similar to those of other opioids (e.g., whining, panting,
sedation, dysphoria, and bradycardia) and, though vomiting is
rarely observed with IV administration, it can occur following SC
administration [371]. Oxymorphone provides 90 min of antinoci-
ception following 0.2 mg/kg IM in dogs [475] and up to 5–6 h of
clinical analgesia in dogs and cats following 0.05 mg/kg IV [476].
Like other full μ-opioid receptor agonists, oxymorphone provides
more effective postoperative analgesia compared to butorphanol
in dogs [477]. Oxymorphone did not demonstrate antinociceptive
effects in cats when administered via the OTM route at 0.1 or
0.25 mg/kg due to its low bioavailability, which is approximately
half that of OTM methadone (19% versus 44%) [238,478].
Pharmacokinetic data suggest a dose of 0.03 mg/kg followed by
0.02 mg/kg every 2 h would maintain therapeutic analgesic con-
centrations in cats. However, this will create high- but short-lived
peak concentrations, which could predispose cats to transient
adverse behavioral effects [479]. An alternative would be to
administer a 0.005 mg/kg bolus followed by a CRI of 0.005 mg/kg/h
[479]. Pharmacokinetic data in dogs recommend dosing at
0.1 mg/kg every 2–4 h or 0.006–0.012 mg/kg/h as a CRI [371].
Due to the associated costs, few reports exist regarding the use of
oxymorphone in large animal species.
Fentanyl
Dogs and cats
Fentanyl is a highly protein-bound, lipophilic phenylpiperidine
derivative (Table 23.6) with a rapid onset, short duration of action,
and a potency 75–100 times greater than morphine. It is often
administered as CRI due to its short duration of action which is
attributed to its rapid redistribution from the central to the periph-
eral compartment following injection [61]. In humans, the context-
sensitive half-time for fentanyl increases substantially following 3 h
of administration which may contribute to cumulative effects [480].
This effect has not been reported in dogs following a 4-h infusion
which makes fentanyl CRIs clinically useful for prolonged pain
management in this species [61,351,481,482]. In dogs, fentanyl is
rapidly absorbed following SC administration, and pharmacokinet-
ics are comparable to the IV route of administration [483,484].
Significant pain occurs following subcutaneous injection, and the
addition of 8.4% sodium bicarbonate to fentanyl (1:20 ratio) prior
to injection abolishes discomfort [483]. Fentanyl does not induce
vomiting in dogs [485] and may be associated with fewer adverse
effects compared to morphine [486].
Fentanyl can produce sedation and recumbency in dogs and
increased locomotor activity and euphoria in cats [487]. The latter
effects are more commonly observed at doses > 20 μg/kg IV [487].
It was reported that 25% of healthy dogs undergoing orthopedic
procedures administered a fentanyl CRI developed dysphoria fol-
lowing extubation [188]. The administration of a low bolus dose
(0.5 μg/kg) of dexmedetomidine given slowly IV may improve
recovery quality in dogs administered prolonged fentanyl CRIs
(e.g., > 2 h) [189]. Fentanyl has been reported to cause “woody chest
syndrome” in humans which results in reduced chest wall compli-
ance and impaired ventilation [488]; however, similar findings have
not been reported in dogs [489]. At high doses > 20 μg/kg IV, fenta-
nyl can cause hypoventilation and cyanosis. Severe bradycardia and
asystole have been reported following a 3 μg/kg IV bolus of fentanyl
in two dogs [490].
Fentanyl provides adequate analgesia for acute pain management
in dogs and cats [276,446,491,492]. In cats, a fentanyl CRI at 5 μg/kg/h
produced significant thermal and mechanical antinociception
that was short-lived following cessation of the infusion [493,494].
A lower infusion rate of 3 μg/kg/h, however, did not significantly
increase thermal thresholds in cats [494].
Fentanyl can be administered via transdermal patch to provide
postoperative pain relief for up to 72–96 h. In dogs, the recom-
mended dose is approximately 4 μg/kg/h, and in cats greater than
2 kg, application of one 25-μg/h patch is recommended. Marked
individual variability in drug absorption has been reported in both
dogs and cats using reservoir (gel pouch) patches; however, higher
bioavailability and less variability is observed in dogs compared to
cats [71,495] (Fig. 23.6). Adverse effects are the same as those
observed following parenteral administration. The thickness of the
epidermis may delay the onset of action without disrupting peak
plasma concentrations [496]. Body temperature also influences
serum fentanyl concentration in cats [497]. In general, the onset of
analgesia following application in dogs and cats is approximately

-- 394 of 1450 --

Chapter 23: Opioids 	379
24 and 7–12 h, respectively [498]. When transdermal fentanyl
patches remain in contact with the skin, they can provide analgesia
for up to 72 h; however, there is the potential for plasma fentanyl
concentrations to fall below analgesic levels in cats by 72 h (Fig. 23.6B).
Transdermal patches are generally safe, but accidental ingestion and
exposure resulting in serious adverse effects have been reported in
dogs, pigs, and children [499,500]. Treatment requires naloxone or
naltrexone [500]; however, clinicians must be aware of the potential
for renarcotization following administration of an antagonist. To
minimize adverse effects and illegal use, the original formulation of
a particular transdermal patch (Duragesic®) was modified, and the
gel pouch containing a reservoir of liquid drug was replaced by a
“drug-in- adhesive matrix” designed to minimize fentanyl leakage
and potential for abuse (Duragesic® package insert 2014) [379].
After use, the FDA recommends promptly disposing of patches by
folding them in half with the sticky sides together and then flushing
them down a toilet [501]. The FDA recommends this method of
disposal because a patch could be harmful and possibly fatal in a
single dose if used by someone other than the individual for whom
it is intended. It is recommended that patches not be placed in
household trash cans where children or pets can have access. When
prescribing transdermal fentanyl patches, veterinarians should be
aware of potential complications, absorption variability, liability
issues in the event of accidental human exposure through ingestion
or contact, considerations for extra-label use during acute or inter-
mittent postoperative pain, and potential adverse effects associated
with their use [379].
Horses and food animals
Fentanyl at clinically relevant doses may not provide analgesia in
horses and results in dose-dependent adverse behavioral effects
(e.g., head and eye movement, fine muscle fasciculations, and shift-
ing of forelimbs) [502]. A minimum dose of 10 μg/kg IV provided
thermal antinociception in horses between 10 and 30 min [503].
This equates to minimum fentanyl plasma concentrations of 6.1–
6.8 ng/mL, which is approximately six times what is required in
dogs and cats [23,504]. Intravenous fentanyl is well tolerated in
foals 1–6 weeks of age. Increased locomotor activity was observed
in foals at doses of 8 and 16 μg/kg, while mild and heavy sedation
was observed at 4 and 32 μg/kg, respectively [505]. Plasma concen-
trations associated with analgesia were comparable to those
reported for adult horses; thus, the clinical utility of IV fentanyl in
horses remains somewhat unclear at this time [505]. In sevoflurane-
anesthetized piglets, intravenous fentanyl at 10 μg/kg produces
transient and spontaneously resolving muscle tremors [506]. This
could pose significant issues in specific research surgical settings. In
isoflurane-anesthetized adult pigs, infusions of 5, 10, and 20 μg/kg/h
also produced “shivering” [507].
Transdermal fentanyl patches have been used in horses for long-
term analgesic therapy [508]. The onset of action is rapid with peak
plasma fentanyl concentrations occurring 8–15 h post-application.
Plasma concentrations are maintained between 1 and 3 ng/mL for
up to 48 h [309]; bioavailability is high and reported to be approxi-
mately 96% [309]. Despite these advantages, peak concentrations
did not exceed 3 ng/mL; therefore (based on a previous study),
transdermal fentanyl may not provide adequate analgesia when
administered as monotherapy.
Transdermal fentanyl application in goats produces variable
plasma concentrations (0.83–16.69 ng/mL) with an onset of peak
plasma concentrations similar to horses [94,509]. Sheep, however,
demonstrated more stable plasma concentrations (0.62–2.73 ng/
mL) with peak effects at 12 h following application [89]. Application
of fentanyl patches to calves, even at doses as low as 1–2 μg/kg/h,
resulted in neuroexcitation and tachycardia suggesting that caution
is warranted [510]. In pigs, transdermal fentanyl is well tolerated
and is potentially a better analgesic option than buprenorphine
following surgical procedures [507].
3.0
Dog: Time versus plasma levels
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
Plasma fentanyl concentration (ng/mL)
0.5
0.0
0 	12 	24
Hours post application of patch
36 	48 	60
50
75
100
72
Cat: Time versus plasma levels
6
5
3
4
2
Plasma fentanyl concentration (ng/mL)
1
0
0 	12 	24
Hours post application of patch
36 	48 	60
Half of 25 μg/h
patch
72
(A)
(B)
Figure 23.6 Fentanyl patch plasma concentrations in dogs and cats. A.
Time versus fentanyl plasma concentrations in six groups of dogs. 50,
50- μg/h patch; 75, 75-μg/h patch; 100, 100-μg/h patch. Solid horizontal
lines represent the minimum (0.6 ng/mL) and mean (1.18 ng/mL) plasma
fentanyl concentrations consistent with analgesia. Dotted lines represent
plasma concentrations from dogs where the fentanyl patch was placed on
the caudal abdomen. B. Time versus fentanyl plasma concentration in six
groups of cats. All cats received a 25-μg/h transdermal fentanyl patch (solid
circles), but one group (open squares) was exposed to half of a 25-μg/h
patch. The solid horizontal line represents a plasma fentanyl level of
1.56 ng/mL, which has been correlated to analgesia. Note that the cats
given half of a 25-μg/h patch did not achieve plasma levels shown to be
consistent with analgesia. Source: Hofmeister and Egger [498], American
Animal Hospital Association.

-- 395 of 1450 --

380 	Section 3: Pharmacology
Remifentanil
Remifentanil is a μ-opioid receptor agonist that is structurally
similar to fentanyl (Table 23.6). It has an extremely short half-life
(e.g., 6 min in dogs) and duration of action [511]. Remifentanil is
metabolized via ester hydrolysis by nonspecific esterases in blood
and tissues. This unique pharmacokinetic feature is attributed to
its propanoic acid methyl ester linkage on the piperidine nitro-
gen [512]. Recovery from remifentanil is rapid regardless of dose
and infusion duration, as the context-sensitive half-time remains
unchanged at less than 5 min [512,513].
In cats, a minimum dose of 0.3 μg/kg/min may be required to
prevent the generation of a motor response from an electrical nox-
ious stimulus [514]. In a clinical study in isoflurane-anesthetized
cats undergoing ovariohysterectomy, 0.4 μg/kg/min provided more
appropriate analgesia when compared to 0.1 and 0.2 μg/kg/min
infusion rates [515]. Species differences in the antinociceptive
effects of remifentanil at the level of the spinal cord have been
observed between dogs and cats. For example, remifentanil’s inhibi-
tory effect on nociceptive transmission at the spinal cord was shown
to be less pronounced in cats compared to dogs [516]. Presumably,
this is due to the differences in Aδ fiber distribution within the
CNS, which may account for additional species-level differences in
the antinociceptive effects of μ-opioid receptor agonists [516].
Remifentanil has been associated with acute opioid tolerance and
opioid-induced hyperalgesia in rats, mice, and rabbits [517–519].
Evidence to support similar findings in dogs is lacking [520].
Remifentanil increases arginine vasopressin concentrations in
anesthetized dogs [521]. As with other opioids, this may be a physi-
ologic compensatory response to bradycardia-induced hypotension
or result from direct stimulation of μ-opioid receptors in the neuro-
hypophysis [522,523]. There are limited studies comparing the
adverse effects associated with remifentanil and fentanyl in dogs
and cats. A prospective randomized multicenter study in humans
reported that the frequency of adverse effects was similar between
remifentanil and fentanyl; however, hypotension occurred more
commonly in patients receiving remifentanil [524]. Other clinical
trials found similar results pertaining to blood pressure, but also
reported lower HRs in patients administered remifentanil com-
pared to fentanyl [525]. Remifentanil, however, may be a better
alternative to fentanyl when early and frequent postoperative neu-
ral and motor function assessments are required [526]. Remifentanil
has been used successfully as part of a multimodal protocol in a
horse undergoing a 13-h surgical procedure [527]. It has also been
used as part of an equine sedation protocol at 6 μg/kg/h in conjunc-
tion with a xylazine CRI [528]. In isoflurane-anesthetized horses
also receiving dexmedetomidine, peak blood remifentanil concen-
trations occurred at 45–50 min after starting an IV remifentanil
CRI at 6 μg/kg/h [529].
Sufentanil
Sufentanil is a highly lipid soluble μ-opioid receptor agonist that is
10–15 times more potent than fentanyl. It is a thienyl analogue of
4-anilinopiperidine (Table 23.6). In isoflurane-anesthetized cats,
the clearance, volume of distribution, and terminal half-life of
sufentanil is longer than that of fentanyl and alfentanil [530]. Like
fentanyl, sufentanil has been administered for intraoperative anal-
gesia and constitutes a good alternative during times of fentanyl
shortages. Recovery quality in dogs undergoing ovariohysterec-
tomy was significantly better in dogs administered a sufentanil
infusion when compared to fentanyl, with comparable degrees of
analgesia and respiratory depression [531]. Similar effects on
recovery quality were reported when sufentanil was compared to
fentanyl and administered in combination with lidocaine and keta-
mine in dogs undergoing total ear canal ablation and bulla osteot-
omy [532]. Recovery quality following general anesthesia in cats is
similar between sufentanil and fentanyl [533]. Sufentanil can be
combined with bupivacaine and administered epidurally in dogs
and has been reported to provide a greater degree of analgesia in the
postoperative period when compared to fentanyl and bupiv-
acaine [534]. A novel long-lasting sufentanil formulation has been
evaluated in dogs and can be administered intramuscularly for pro-
longed postoperative pain relief (e.g., approximately 24 h) [535].
Despite its antinociceptive effects, a high incidence of intraopera-
tive respiratory and cardiovascular complications currently pre-
cludes use of this product in clinical scenarios [535]. Limited data
are available regarding the use of sufentanil in large animal species.
Meperidine (pethidine)
Meperidine (pethidine) is a phenylpiperidine synthetic opioid
(Table 23.6) and μ-opioid receptor agonist. Meperidine provides
good but short-duration analgesia lasting approximately 60–90 min
post-administration in dogs [536,537] and cats [538,539]. An active
metabolite, normeperidine, is produced following metabolism by
N- demethylation via hepatic cytochrome P450. Normeperidine is a
CNS excitotoxic agent and can produce agitation, noise sensitiza-
tion, and muscle twitching in dogs with inappropriate dosing [540].
Benzodiazepines, but not naloxone, are recommended to treat these
adverse effects [540]. Meperidine possesses vagolytic properties at
medium doses, but bradycardia is observed at very high doses due
to its local anesthetic-like actions resulting in direct myocardial
depression [541,542]. Tachycardia may also be a result of histamine
release following IV administration. Meperidine’s effects on HR
do not attenuate dexmedetomidine-induced bradycardia [196].
Meperidine can induce pain during IM injection, which may be
related to its acidic pH (3.5–6.0) [196]. Meperidine administered to
conscious dogs at 10 mg/kg IV stimulates peripheral mast cells
resulting an acute and transient period of vocalizing, flare reaction,
scratching, hypersalivation, urination, defecation, and tachypnea
[543]. It also can result in local edema and erythema due to cuta-
neous histamine release following IM injection [242]. Despite
these local effects, meperidine generally does not result in clinically
significant systemic histamine concentrations following IM
administration [544].
Meperidine administered IV, SC, and IM at 1 mg/kg does not
produce thermal antinociceptive effects in horses [311,545].
However, there may be some short-term analgesic benefit with alle-
viation of equine lameness at a dose of 1 mg/kg IM [546]. Meperidine
can, however, provide long-lasting analgesia (240–300 min) with a
quick onset (12 min) following caudal epidural administration with
minimal sedation and ataxia and no adverse cardiopulmonary
effects [547].
Carfentanil, etorphine, alfentanil, and thiafentanil
Carfentanil, a fentanyl analogue that is 20–30 times more potent
than fentanyl and 10,000 times more potent than morphine, was
approved for veterinary use in 1986 as an intramuscular large ani-
mal tranquilizer. In the US, veterinarians must receive authoriza-
tion and be placed on an “Approved Carfentanil Users List” with
special Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) registration class
approval. In Canada, carfentanil is considered a Schedule I sub-
stance, meaning that it serves no accepted medical use and has high
abuse potential. Currently, its only approved use in humans is as a

-- 396 of 1450 --

Chapter 23: Opioids 	381
radiolabeled isotope, [11C]-carfentanil, to aid in mapping the
μ-opioid receptor via positron emission tomography in research
settings.
Veterinarians must handle carfentanil with extreme caution as
very small quantities (0.01 mL) can be lethal. Accidental carfentanil
intoxication in humans can lead to miosis, respiratory and CNS
depression, and potentially death. It is best to handle highly potent
opioids (i.e., thiafentanil, etorphine, and carfentanil) with at least
two people present, to wear protective clothing, gloves, and a face
shield, and have an opioid receptor antagonist (e.g., naloxone, nal-
trexone, or diprenorphine) readily available. The first confirmed
human accidental overdose exposure associated with carfentanil
occurred when a veterinarian accidentally splashed carfentanil cit-
rate 1.5 mg and xylazine 50 mg from an immobilization dart into
his eyes and mouth [548]. Despite irrigation, sedation occurred
within 2 min and the subject was administered naltrexone 100 mg
parenterally (supplied in the same package as carfentanil) prior to
arrival at the hospital [548]. The veterinarian was discharged a day
later after a complete recovery [548]. Etorphine and thiafentanil
carry similar concerns and are discussed elsewhere (Chapter 55).
Hydrocodone, oxycodone, and codeine
Hydrocodone is a μ-opioid receptor agonist and undergoes N-
demethylation and N-oxidation to norhydrocodone and N-oxide
metabolites (major metabolites) as well as hydromorphone and
hydromorphone 	glucuronide 	(minor 	metabolites) 	[549].
Hydrocodone is predominately used in dogs as an antitussive agent
(0.22–0.5 mg/kg PO every 6–12 h) and exerts its antitussive proper-
ties via simulation of μ-opioid receptors on sensory nerve endings
that initiate cough as well within the CNS [550]. Hydrocodone is
often formulated with an anticholinergic drug (homatropine), non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory agent, or acetaminophen (paraceta-
mol). The latter combination should not be used in cats because
acetaminophen is toxic in this species. Codeine has also been used
as an antitussive agent in dogs; however, sedation may be more
prominent than with hydrocodone.
Previous studies evaluating oral administration of opioids such
as hydrocodone and codeine have demonstrated low bioavailability,
large individual variability, erratic gastrointestinal absorption, and
limited analgesic effect, particularly in dogs [551–553]. One study,
however, evaluating hydrocodone at 0.5 mg/kg PO in Greyhound
dogs reported that plasma concentrations of the metabolite hydro-
morphone did exceed those previously reported to provide analge-
sia from 0.5 to 8 h [554]. A clinical trial compared the analgesic
efficacy of oral extended-release hydrocodone (3.0 mg/kg) to firo-
coxib in dogs undergoing tibial plateau leveling osteotomy
(TPLO) [555]. In this study, dogs administered hydrocodone had
higher pain scores and lower limb function than dogs administered
firocoxib. Similarly, pain relief was considered unacceptable in
dogs administered hydrocodone–acetaminophen PO for TPLO
surgery [556]. In dogs, differing metabolic and elimination path-
ways along with a more vigorous first-pass effect [557–560] may
explain the lack of bioavailability and analgesic efficacy of these
drugs compared to other species.
Codeine is classified as a μ-opioid receptor agonist and can be
administered IV, IM, SC, PO, or as a CRI. Oral bioavailability of
codeine is extremely low in dogs (4%) [551]. Metabolism of codeine
generates many metabolites including morphine, codeine, and
codeine-6- glucuronide [561]. Codeine at 1–3 mg/kg SC provides
dose-dependent antinociceptive effects for 1–3 h based on the elec-
trical dental pulp stimulation model in dogs [562]. While
postoperative codeine at 2 mg/kg SC every 8 h for 24 h alone pro-
vided adequate analgesia in 6/9 (66%) dogs undergoing maxillec-
tomy or mandibulectomy [563], pain assessment in this study
involved numeric rating and simple descriptive scales rather than a
validated multidimensional pain scale. In cats, codeine at 2 mg/kg
PO failed to produce thermal antinociceptive effects [564]. Orally
administered codeine in horses is rapidly metabolized to morphine,
morphine-3- glucuronide, 	morphine-6- glucuronide, 	codeine-6-
glucuronide, and norcodeine [565]. Plasma concentrations of
morphine-6- glucuronide following codeine at 0.6 mg/kg PO were
comparable to those following an analgesic dose of morphine in
horses [81,565]. Codeine is generally well tolerated in horses but
lacks the ability to provide antinociception when administered PO
at doses of 0.3, 0.6, and 1.2 mg/kg [78].
More studies are required to prove the analgesic efficacy of these
drugs in veterinary medicine. Due to the lack of evidence support-
ing clinical efficacy of orally administered codeine, oxycodone, or
hydrocodone, the authors do not recommend their use as mono-
therapies for treatment of pain in dogs or cats [379].
Partial opioid agonists
Buprenorphine
Dogs and cats
Buprenorphine is a μ-opioid receptor partial agonist. It is available
as a hydrochloride salt in various formulations approved for use in
humans, cats, and dogs depending on the jurisdiction. In the US, in
addition to the human 0.3 mg/mL preservative-free injectable solu-
tion (Buprenex®), two concentrated buprenorphine formulations
are commercially available for use in cats for postoperative analge-
sia. One contains 1.8 mg/mL buprenorphine (Simbadol®) and is
administered SC once daily for up to 72 h. The other formulation
contains 20 mg/mL buprenorphine (Zorbium®) for single transder-
mal administration providing analgesia for up to 96 h. In Europe,
Canada, and Australia, 0.3 mg/mL multidose injectable formula-
tions are available for IM or IV administration and provide analge-
sia for 6–8 h in dogs [566] and 4–8 h in cats [20]. In the following
discussion, if not specifically noted, statements pertain to the
0.3 mg/mL injectable formulation, which will be referred to as the
“traditional” injectable formulation where applicable.
In dogs, premedication with buprenorphine (0.02 mg/kg IM)
produces inferior postoperative analgesia compared to methadone
(0.3 mg/kg IM) for ovariohysterectomy [149]. However, when
administered IV as a CRI (0.015 mg/kg loading dose and 0.0025 mg/
kg/h for 6 h), buprenorphine provides satisfactory postoperative
analgesia for elective ovariectomy [567]. Buprenorphine transder-
mal patches (0.005–0.006 mg/kg/h applied 40 h before anesthesia)
or IV buprenorphine (0.02 mg/kg administered 30 min before the
induction of anesthesia and then every 6 h for 24 h) provided simi-
lar intra- and postoperative analgesia following unilateral mastec-
tomy [566]. The addition of buprenorphine (0.1 mL of 0.3 mg/mL
solution) to bupivacaine (0.3 mL of 5 mg/mL solution) for infraor-
bital nerve blocks enhanced the duration of analgesia in dogs with
acute dental pain [568].
A commercially available concentrated buprenorphine solution
(1.8 mg/mL, Simbadol®) has been investigated in dogs. Used as pre-
medication at 0.02 mg/kg, it provided adequate postoperative anal-
gesia following ovariohysterectomy when administered IV or IM,
but not when administered SC [372]. The authors attributed this to
erratic drug absorption after SC administration. However, a larger
dosage (0.12 mg/kg IV, SC) in awake dogs demonstrated complete

-- 397 of 1450 --

382 	Section 3: Pharmacology
SC absorption [59]. After intranasal or OTM administration at
0.03 mg/kg, buprenorphine bioavailability was 58% and 41%,
respectively; and plasma drug concentrations associated with anal-
gesia were maintained for up to 5 h [21]. Sedation, panting, whining,
hypersalivation, ataxia, decreased rectal temperature, reduced
appetite, and diarrhea have been observed in awake dogs [21,59].
These effects may limit the clinical utility of Simbadol® as an analge-
sic in dogs. A lipid encapsulated, extended-release buprenorphine
formulation (0.2 mg/kg SC) provided sustained analgesic plasma
drug concentrations and antinociception for up to 72 h [569].
In cats, the traditional formulation of buprenorphine adminis-
tered at 0.02 mg/kg IM preoperatively did not provide postopera-
tive pain relief after ovariohysterectomy; however, an additional
buprenorphine dose administered during wound closure was asso-
ciated with adequate analgesia [153]. Concurrent administration of
meloxicam (0.2 mg/kg SC) or gabapentin (50 mg PO) also seemed
to improve the analgesic effect of preoperative buprenorphine
(0.02 mg/kg IM) for ovariohysterectomy [570]. Similarly, preopera-
tive buprenorphine (0.02 mg/kg IM) in conjunction with intrates-
ticular lidocaine block (2 mg/kg) and postoperative meloxicam
(0.3 mg/kg SC) induced good postoperative analgesia after
orchidectomy in cats [571]. Thus, repeated doses of the traditional
(0.3 mg/mL) injectable formulation of buprenorphine or its use as
part of a multimodal analgesic protocol is required to provide ade-
quate postoperative analgesia after neutering in cats.
The need for outpatient pain control in cats has encouraged the
investigation of alternative formulations and routes of administra-
tion for buprenorphine. For instance, both commercially available
and compounded formulations of injectable buprenorphine are
absorbed by the OTM route. However, individual variation in
buprenorphine absorption and poor palatability associated with
some formulations (those with preservatives) may preclude clinical
utility of this route of administration [572,573]. The commercially
available concentrated buprenorphine formulation (1.8 mg/mL;
0.24 mg/kg SC, Simbadol®) provided similar analgesia to the tradi-
tional injectable formulation (0.3 mg/mL; 0.02 mg/kg IM) follow-
ing dental extractions [20]. The concentrated formulation has the
advantage of longer lasting analgesia compared to the traditional
formulation and, therefore, less frequent dosing and potential aver-
sion to drug administration. However, the concentrated buprenor-
phine formulation produced a higher prevalence of postoperative
hyperthermia than morphine (0.1 mg/kg SC) following ovariohys-
terectomy [307]. A single administration of a compounded liposo-
mal encapsulated buprenorphine formulation (0.2 mg/kg SC)
maintains putative analgesic drug concentrations for 96 h [574]. A
novel transdermal buprenorphine formulation (20 mg/mL;
Zorbium®) also provides 96 h of analgesia when applied topically to
the cervical skin (8 mg to cats 1.2–3 kg, and 20 mg to cats > 3–7.5 kg)
1–2 h prior to both elective surgical reproductive sterilization and
forelimb onychectomy [29].
Horses
In horses, preoperative buprenorphine (0.005 mg/kg IV) provides
better intraoperative analgesia than butorphanol (0.025 mg/kg
IV) [154], and a larger dose (0.01 mg/kg IV) induces effective post-
operative analgesia for surgical castration [575]. Buprenorphine
(0.0075 mg/kg IV) also induces good sedation for cheek tooth
extraction [576]; however, postoperative locomotor stimulation
may occur [154,576]. Attempts to induce long-lasting analgesia
with a single administration of a compounded buprenorphine for-
mulation (0.1 mg/kg SC or IM) failed due to the severity and duration
of adverse gastrointestinal effects and behavioral excitation [577]. A
single off-label administration of a commercially available concen-
trated buprenorphine formulation (1.8 mg/mL; 0.0025 and
0.005 mg/kg SC, Simbadol®) induced antinociception but only at
the lower dose rate and for a duration comparable to that achieved
with traditional concentration buprenorphine (0.3 mg/mL; 0.005–
0.01 mg/kg IV) [76,575]. The gastrointestinal and behavioral
adverse effects may preclude the use of doses greater than 0.005 mg/
kg SC for the concentrated buprenorphine formulation. Alternative
routes of administration have been explored in attempts to prolong
the analgesic effects of buprenorphine. For instance, buprenorphine
concentrations are detectable for at least 24 h in inflamed joints
after a single intra-articular administration (0.005 mg/kg), but the
chondrotoxic effects may preclude clinical use of this route of
administration [107,578].
Mixed opioid agonist–antagonists
Butorphanol
Butorphanol is structurally classified as a morphinan (Table 23.6)
and exhibits antagonist to partial agonist activity at μ-opioid recep-
tors, and agonist activity at κ-opioid receptors. It is approved for use
as an antitussive in dogs and an analgesic in cats and horses, but
approval varies among countries. It is available as butorphanol tar-
trate and may be administered via IV (bolus and CRI), IM, SC, or
PO routes. There are also reports of alternative routes of adminis-
tration such as intravenous regional limb perfusion in horses [579]
and intranasal administration in parrots and rabbits [580,581].
Butorphanol tablets, despite producing antitussive and mild seda-
tive effects, have low oral bioavailability and do not induce effective
analgesia. Extravascular parental administration may be painful on
injection [582].
Dogs and cats
In dogs, butorphanol induces opioid effects measured as decreased
rectal temperature following IV bolus (0.4 mg/kg), IV CRI (0.2 mg/
kg IV followed by 0.2 mg/kg/h), and SC injection of butorphanol
(0.8 mg/kg) with bicarbonate (forming a poorly-water-soluble sus-
pension), but not after SC administration of butorphanol (0.4 mg/
kg) alone [582]. Lower butorphanol doses may be used for sedation
than those required for analgesia. Procedural sedation with butor-
phanol (0.4 mg/kg IV) allows easier and faster endoscopic duode-
nal intubation compared to methadone (0.3 mg/kg IV) [583]. When
combined with dexmedetomidine (2 μg/kg IV), butorphanol
(0.2 mg/kg IV) also induces rapid onset of deep sedation that facili-
tates positioning for radiographic examination [584]. When admin-
istered as premedication or immediately after completing surgery,
butorphanol (0.4 mg/kg IV or IM) provides insufficient postopera-
tive analgesia after ovariohysterectomy, laparotomy, or shoulder
arthrotomy in dogs [477,585,586]. However, the criteria for rescue
analgesia in the Gomes et al. study [585] was set below the validated
intervention point for the scale used (i.e., Glasgow Composite
Measure Pain Scale total score > 3.5/20 instead of > 5/20).
In cats, butorphanol (0.1–0.4 mg/kg IM) induces good quality
sedation, but potentially inferior to that achieved with full μ-opioid
receptor agonists [587]. Butorphanol also prevents vomiting and
reduces the incidence and severity of nausea induced by dexmedeto-
midine [588,589]. Compared to buprenorphine (20 μg/kg IM), the
incidence of vomiting is less with butorphanol [589]. Butorphanol
(0.4 mg/kg IM) combined with medetomidine (15 μg/kg IM) for

-- 398 of 1450 --

Chapter 23: Opioids 	383
premedication failed to induce postoperative analgesia after ovario-
hysterectomy; even after adding another dose of butorphanol dur-
ing wound closure [153]. In contrast, butorphanol (0.3 mg/kg IM)
as part of a multimodal analgesic protocol with dexmedetomidine,
lidocaine, and meloxicam provided effective postoperative analge-
sia after orchidectomy [571]. The requirement of isoflurane is
also reduced with butorphanol compared with buprenorphine in
cats [571], and butorphanol IV CRI dose-dependently reduced the
MAC of isoflurane by 23–68% [359].
Horses
Administered alone to healthy, non-painful horses, butorphanol
increases locomotor activity. Locomotion is prevented by pre-
administering a sedative (e.g., an α2
-adrenergic receptor agonist)
and/or a tranquilizer (e.g., acepromazine) [590]. Increased locomo-
tion with butorphanol is not noted in newborn foals, but sedation
and increased nursing is observed [591]. Mild sedation induced by
a combination of butorphanol (0.01 mg/kg IV) and detomidine
(0.01 mg/kg IV) does not affect the grade of laryngeal function in
horses undergoing endoscopic examination of the upper respira-
tory tract [592]. When administered as part of a premedication
protocol, butorphanol (0.02–0.1 mg/kg IV) induces acceptable
postoperative analgesia in horses undergoing elective surgical pro-
cedures [155]. Acceptable postoperative analgesia is also achieved
when butorphanol (0.02 mg/kg IV) is administered just before skin
incision in horses undergoing elective arthroscopy [450]. However,
premedication with detomidine (0.01 mg/kg IV) followed by butor-
phanol (0.1 mg/kg IV) may not provide adequate postoperative
analgesia following castration in ponies [593].
Interactions with full opioid agonists
Butorphanol decreases some of the effects induced by μ- opioid
receptor agonists while still inducing analgesia via μ- and κ-opioid
receptor activation. Thus, butorphanol (0.2 mg/kg IV) decreases
but still preserves some of the antinociception induced by hydro-
morphone (0.1 mg/kg) in cats [239]. Butorphanol (0.1–0.2 mg/kg IV)
partially reverses oxymorphone-induced respiratory depression
and bradycardia in the early postoperative period in dogs [218]. It
also attenuates respiratory depression and decreases immobilizing
effects induced by etorphine (0.1 mg/kg IM) in goats [594]. In the
case of a prolonged recovery or relative μ-opioid receptor agonist
overdose, titrating butorphanol IV to effect is recommended over
bolus administration [218,239].
Nalbuphine
Nalbuphine is a κ-opioid receptor agonist and μ-opioid receptor
antagonist. It remains the only narcotic analgesic not controlled
under the Controlled Substances Act in the US. An injectable for-
mulation containing nalbuphine hydrochloride at 10 or 20 mg/mL
is approved for use in humans in the US. Nalbuphine alone induces
sedation and analgesia in dogs, but both effects are less potent than
with pure μ-opioid receptor agonists. Also, the sedation and anal-
gesia may not be sufficient to perform some clinical procedures
(e.g., clipping/prepping and catheterization) or alleviate some
types of pain [595]. Both sedation and analgesia exhibit ceiling
effects [596,597]. Deeper sedation is achieved when nalbuphine is
administered in neuroleptanalgesic combinations with aceproma-
zine or α2 - adrenergic receptor agonists [163,595,597]. However,
nalbuphine (0.5 mg/kg or 1 mg/kg IV) combined with aceproma-
zine failed to provide sufficient intra- or postoperative analgesia in
dogs undergoing ovariohysterectomy (as was also the case for
butorphanol and morphine in this study) [585]. Administration of
IV nalbuphine (0.75 mg/kg) every 4 h or less or as a CRI has
been recommended for postoperative analgesia in dogs [598].
Epidural nalbuphine administration (0.3–0.6 mg/kg) induces
MAC-sparing effects and long-lasting postoperative analgesia and
sedation [599]. However, data on the analgesic effects of nalbuphine
CRI and the safety of epidural nalbuphine in dogs are lacking.
Compounded nalbuphine applied topically to the cornea at 0.8–1%
had no effect on pain scores in experimental dogs with surgically
damaged corneas [600], or dogs undergoing phacoemulsification
cataract surgery [601], or on corneal sensitivity in clinically nor-
mal horses [602]. Thus, topical ophthalmic nalbuphine cannot
be recommended as an analgesic. Nalbuphine induces minimal
cardiovascular changes in healthy dogs after IV bolus adminis-
tration (1–2 mg/kg), after an IV loading dose (0.3 mg/kg IV) fol-
lowed by a CRI (0.4 mg/kg/h), or after epidural administration
(0.3–0.6 mg/kg) [597,599,603,604].
There is limited information on nalbuphine in other domestic
animal species. For instance, mild sedation has been reported with
a neuroleptanalgesic combination of nalbuphine (0.5 mg/kg IV or
IM) and acepromazine (0.05 mg/kg IV or IM) in cats, and sedation
was similar to that achieved with butorphanol (0.4 mg/kg IV or IM)
and acepromazine [605]. Similarly, nalbuphine (0.15 mg/kg IM)
is not inferior to butorphanol (0.15 mg/kg IM) when used in
combination with dexmedetomidine and tiletamine–zolazepam
for induction of anesthesia to perform gonadectomy in cats [606].
When administered as an IV premedication in horses, nalbuphine
(0.75 mg/kg) combined with xylazine (1.1 mg/kg) alone or xylazine
(0.5 mg/kg) and acepromazine (0.02 mg/kg) induced smoother
inductions and recoveries from anesthesia, longer duration of
anesthesia, and increased analgesia compared to xylazine alone
(1.1 mg/kg) [607]. This is in contrast to another study that reported
similar analgesia with xylazine alone (1.1 mg/kg IV) or combined
with nalbuphine (0.75 mg/kg IV) in experimental horses during
electrical stimulation of the dentine of a canine tooth [608].
Nalbuphine (0.4 mg/kg IV) reduced some pain-related behaviors
but did not eliminate physiological signs of distress in calves
after surgical castration [87]. Compared to ketamine alone
(10 mg/kg IV), nalbuphine (0.5 mg/kg IV) combined with keta-
mine (5 mg/kg IV) induced smoother induction and recovery from
anesthesia and better postoperative analgesia in goats [609].
Nalbuphine (1 mg/kg SC) induced sedation and analgesia without
affecting cardiovascular function in sheep [610]. Further studies are
required to determine the true clinical utility of nalbuphine in
domestic animal species.
Measuring thermal nociceptive thresholds in Hispaniolan
Amazon parrots, nalbuphine hydrochloride (12.5 mg/kg IM, but
not 25 and 50 mg/kg IM) induced antinociception compared to
saline control and all three doses induced antinociception for up to
3 h compared to baseline values. However, the two larger doses
induced less antinociception than the lowest dose. This is consistent
with a bell-shaped dose–response curve demonstrating a ceiling
effect [611]. Antinociception for up to 12 h was obtained with nal-
buphine decanoate (37.7 mg/kg IM) [612]. Differences in the dura-
tion of antinociception are due to differences in the pharmacokinetic
profile of these two nalbuphine salts [613,614].
When nalbuphine is used concurrently with μ-opioid receptor
agonists, both μ- and κ-opioid receptor-mediated analgesia
may be achieved while decreasing the severity of μ-opioid receptor-
mediated adverse events. This has been partially demonstrated in

-- 399 of 1450 --

384 	Section 3: Pharmacology
dogs where the administration of nalbuphine (0.3–1 mg/kg IV)
decreased the degree of sedation induced by a combination of
morphine (0.5 mg/kg IV) and acepromazine (0.05 mg/kg IV) [596],
and decreased the adverse cardiovascular effects induced by fenta-
nyl (50 μg/kg IV) [615]. Also, in goats, nalbuphine (0.8 mg/kg IV)
decreased the level of immobilization but had minimal effects
on the respiratory depressant effects induced by etorphine
(0.1 mg/kg IM) [594].
Opioid antagonists
Naloxone, naltrexone, and methylnaltrexone
Naloxone is a short-acting opioid receptor antagonist that is rapidly
absorbed after IV and IM administration. A dose of 0.04 mg/kg IV
is recommended for opioid reversal during cardiopulmonary arrest
in dogs and cats [616]. Intranasal naloxone (administered with an
atomizer) is also an effective route in dogs, particularly for emer-
gency use in working canines accidentally exposed to opi-
oids [617,618]. The required dose of intranasal naloxone is four
times higher than the IV dose, with an approximately 50% reduc-
tion in maximum plasma concentrations. Naloxone is often used to
reverse the sedative effects associated with pure μ-opioid receptor
agonists. Patients should be closely monitored as renarcotization
may occur following IV and IM naloxone administration [217]. In
dogs that received oxymorphone, this may occur within 20–40 and
40–70 min following IV and IM naloxone administration, respec-
tively [619]. Similar findings were reported in cats 1 h following
0.04 mg/kg IV naloxone administration to reverse the effects of
0.1 mg/kg IV hydromorphone [239]. Studies have reported that
rapid administration of IV naloxone can result in depressed menta-
tion and blepharospasm [126,620]. The etiology of this adverse
effect is yet to be determined but may be associated with acute opi-
oid withdrawal [126,620], alterations in cerebral vascular tone [621],
or systemic hypertension [622]. In humans, the administration of
IV naloxone did not ablate the analgesic effect of epidural mor-
phine [623]; however, it may reduce the effects of epidural mor-
phine on urinary bladder function [624]. Naloxone also may
attenuate some of the cardiovascular responses associated with
shock. For example, naloxone administered at 0.04 mg/kg IV sig-
nificantly lowered endotoxin-induced increases in right ventricular
pressure and HR in horses [625].
Naltrexone is an opioid antagonist at μ-, κ-, and δ-opioid recep-
tors. Naltrexone is often administered to reverse the sedative effects
of carfentanil and etorphine in wildlife and zoo animals but would
also be effective in reversing other opioids as well. The dose of nal-
trexone is 100 mg per 1 mg of carfentanil administered; typically,
one-quarter of the dose is administered IV and the remainder is
administered SC. Naltrexone’s longer duration of action, at least
twice that of naloxone in some species, makes it desirable in wildlife
and zoo animals where repeat dosing may not be feasible. In dogs,
however, the duration of action of naltrexone may not differ signifi-
cantly from that of naloxone. Serum half-life during the elimination
phase (mean ± SE) was reported to be 71.2 ± 8.9 min for naloxone
and 85.1 ± 9.0 min for naltrexone in dogs [626]. Therefore, while
naltrexone may be longer acting compared to naloxone in other
species, its effects dissipate quickly in the dog [626]. In cats, naltrex-
one at 0.6 mg/kg IV should be administered every 60–120 min to
reverse high-dose opioid agonists [627].
Methylnaltrexone is a quaternary derivative of naltrexone and is
a selective peripherally-acting μ-opioid receptor antagonist [628].
Methylnaltrexone does not bind with δ-opioid receptors but binds
μ-opioid receptors with an eightfold higher potency than κ-opioid
receptors [629]. The addition of the methyl group forms a positively
charged compound with greater polarity and lower lipid solubility
compared to naltrexone [629]. At clinically relevant doses, meth-
ylnaltrexone is restricted from crossing the blood–brain barrier in
animals. This property allows for reduced peripheral adverse effects
while maintaining the central analgesic effects of opioid agonists.
For example, methylnaltrexone can prevent or treat postoperative
opioid-induced gastrointestinal ileus [630]. This could be of
particular benefit in horses administered morphine [631,632]. Its
effects on reducing the gastrointestinal effects associated with
buprenorphine may be limited [633].
Multitargeting molecules
Tramadol
Between 2014 and 2019, tramadol was the most widely prescribed
opioid by veterinarians in the US [37]. Tramadol is a racemic mix-
ture of (+)-tramadol and (–)-tramadol. The positive enantiomer
has low μ-opioid and α2
- adrenergic receptor affinity and inhibits
neuronal serotonin reuptake. The negative enantiomer binds to α2 -
adrenergic receptors and inhibits neuronal norepinephrine reup-
take [634]. Tramadol is extensively metabolized by cytochrome
P450 enzymes and the profile and extent are species- and individual-
specific [634]. The metabolite O-desmethyltramadol, or M1
, has lit-
tle intrinsic activity at μ-opioid receptors but has a 200-fold affinity
compared to tramadol [634]. The opioid-mediated analgesic effi-
cacy of tramadol relies on O-desmethyltramadol. The serotoniner-
gic and noradrenergic effects of tramadol may also contribute to
analgesia by augmenting descending inhibitory pathways. Tramadol
is available in oral formulations in North America, Europe, and
Oceania, and in injectable formulations in parts of Europe and
Latin America.
Dogs produce very low concentrations of O-desmethyltramadol,
and the clinical utility of tramadol has been questioned in this
species. Tramadol (1–10 mg/kg IV) induces minimal, short-lived
mechanical antinociception and no thermal antinociception
[408,635]. A meta-analysis concluded low certainty of tramadol’s
analgesic evidence for postoperative pain management [636]. The
need for rescue analgesia with tramadol is reduced compared to
no treatment, placebo, codeine, buprenorphine, butorphanol, or
nalbuphine, increased compared to methadone, and similar com-
pared to morphine [636]. Administered before surgery, tramadol
(3 mg/kg SC) induced postoperative analgesia similar to that of
morphine (0.5 mg/kg IV) in dogs undergoing surgical neuter-
ing [402,637]. However, when administered postoperatively,
tramadol (3 mg/kg IV every 4 h) induced insufficient analgesia
following surgical tumor removal [399]. When administered
during anesthesia, tramadol (1.5 mg/kg loading dose followed by
1.3 or 2.6 mg/kg/h CRI) had no meaningful sevoflurane MAC-
sparing effect (5% and 8%) [638,639]. Thus, tramadol should be
used judiciously in dogs and the potential for analgesic failure
is high. Tramadol monotherapy is unlikely to have meaningful
benefits for pain control in dogs.
Compared to carprofen (2.2 mg/kg PO every 12 h), tramadol
(5 mg/kg PO every 8–12 h) provided less effective postoperative
analgesia following enucleation in dogs [640]. It had no clinical
benefit for dogs with osteoarthritis of the elbow or stifle [641].
Similarly, the combination of tramadol (4 mg/kg IV) and meloxi-
cam (0.2 mg/kg IV) administered as premedication is not superior
to meloxicam alone at inducing postoperative analgesia following

-- 400 of 1450 --

Chapter 23: Opioids 	385
surgical neutering [642]. Adequate analgesia for up to 30 days fol-
lowing TPLO is achieved with cimicoxib (2 mg/kg PO every 24 h)
and tramadol (2 mg/kg PO every 12 h), but only cimicoxib improved
limb function and range of motion and reduced the occurrence of
hock edema [643]. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs seem to
be superior to tramadol for inducing analgesia in dogs suffering
from painful clinical conditions.
In cats, oral tramadol (0.5–4 mg/kg) induced dose-dependent
thermal antinociception with doses of at least 2 mg/kg necessary to
induce a significant analgesic effect, and doses of 4 mg/kg every 6 h
associated with maintenance of a near maximal antinociceptive
effect [644]. Preoperative oral tramadol (6 mg/kg) provides at least
equivalent analgesia to that of IM tramadol (4 mg/kg), which in
turn is more effective than IM meperidine (6 mg/kg) following
ovariohysterectomy [645,646]. Oral tramadol (2 mg/kg PO every 12
h for 5 days) improves mobility and activity in geriatric cats with
osteoarthritis but adverse effects were reported [647]. Although
tramadol may be a useful drug for acute and chronic pain in cats,
oral formulations are rarely palatable and induce profuse salivation
and poor treatment compliance. This has led to exploration of alter-
native routes of administration in this species. Epidural administra-
tion of tramadol (1 mg/kg) plus lidocaine (2 mg/kg) induced better
postoperative analgesia than either drug alone following orchidec-
tomy [648]. A tramadol gel product (1.9–3.2 mg/kg) has been
investigated for transdermal administration but plasma drug con-
centrations were low or undetectable [649].
Adverse effects have been reported after tramadol administra-
tion in cats and clinical signs include increased neuromuscular
activity, tachycardia, fever, tachypnea, and agitation related to
excessive levels of serotonin [650]. The risk of serotonin syndrome
should be considered when serotonin antagonists and/or reuptake
inhibitors (e.g., trazodone and fluoxetine), monoamine oxidase
inhibitors (e.g., selegiline), or tricyclic antidepressants (e.g., ami-
triptyline and clomipramine) are co-administered with tramadol.
In horses, IV bolus tramadol administration (2 mg/kg) induced
no thermal antinociception [651], and a tramadol IV CRI (1 mg/kg
bolus followed by 3 mg/kg/h) induced no mechanical antinocicep-
tion [652]. However, tramadol co-infused with acetaminophen
(6 g/h IV) induced mechanical antinociception 20 min after start-
ing the infusion that persisted for 15 min after stopping the
infusion [652]. Oral tramadol administration (5 mg/kg PO every
12 h for 1 week) produced minimal analgesia in horses with
chronic laminitis, whereas co-administration of a subanesthetic
dosage of ketamine (0.6 mg/kg/h IV for 6 h on each of the first
3 days of tramadol administration) induced immediate and
lasting analgesia [653]. Intra-articular administration of tramadol
(4 mg/mL) produced no postoperative analgesia following
arthroscopic surgery [654]. Tramadol alone may not induce clinical
analgesia in horses.
Tapentadol
Tapentadol has a dual mechanism of action as a μ-opioid receptor
agonist and a norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor. Current investi-
gations have focused on determining if tapentadol is an effica-
cious analgesic alternative in dogs and cats. Immediate and
extended-release PO formulations are available in the US and
Europe, and an injectable formulation is also available in Europe.
After PO administration to dogs and cats, tapentadol undergoes
extensive first-pass metabolism [65,655,656]. The major metabo-
lite in dogs is tapentadol-O-glucuronide and in cats it is
tapentadol-O-sulfate [655,656].
In dogs, IV (1.4 –6.8 mg/kg) but not PO (5.7–30 mg/kg) admin-
istration of tapentadol induced sedation, salivation, panting, ataxia,
and diarrhea [65,408,655]. Thermal antinociception, similar to that
of morphine (0.5–1.0 mg/kg IV), has been documented with tapen-
tadol (4.6–6.8 mg/kg IV) [408]. Clinical cases of unilateral cranial
cruciate ligament rupture improved in subjective (simple descrip-
tive scale) but not objective (pressure sensitive walkway system)
lameness evaluations at 4 h following tapentadol (30 mg/kg PO)
administration [657]. However, in the latter study, the assessor was
not blinded to treatment and no negative control group was included.
In cats, IV, IM, or SC administration of tapentadol (5 mg/kg)
induced mild sedation, salivation, and panting, with the effects
being less intense and of shorter duration following IM and SC
administration. The bioavailability of IM and SC tapentadol is 94%
and 90%, respectively [73]. Oral tapentadol (5.7 and 11.4 mg/kg)
induced salivation and thermal antinociception with the higher
dosage inducing a similar duration of antinociception as buprenor-
phine (0.02 mg/kg IM) and twice as long as the lower tapentadol
dosage [658].
Although experimental studies indicate potential analgesic ben-
efits of tapentadol in dogs and cats, more research is needed before
any recommendations can be made regarding its use in clinical
veterinary practice.
References
1 Dreborg S, Sundström G, Larsson TA, et al. Evolution of vertebrate opioid recep-
tors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008; 105(40): 15487–15492.
2 Stevens CW. The evolution of vertebrate opioid receptors. Front Biosci (Landmark
Ed) 2009; 14(4): 1247–1269.
3 Brook K, Bennett J, Desai SP. The chemical history of morphine: an 8000-year
journey, from resin to de-novo synthesis. J Anesth Hist 2017; 3(2): 50–55.
4 Dorrington KL, Poole W. The first intravenous anaesthetic: how well was it
managed and its potential realized? Br J Anaesth 2013; 110(1): 7–12.
5 Musser R, Krants JC. The friendship of Robert Boyle and Christopher Wren.
Bull Hist Med 1939; 7: 970–974.
6 Hamilton GR, Baskett TF. In the arms of Morpheus the development of morphine
for postoperative pain relief. Can J Anaesth 2000; 47(4): 367–374.
7 Jurna I. Sertürner and morphine--a historical vignette. Schmerz 2003; 17(4):
280–283.
8 Clutton RE. An Anglocentric history of anaesthetics and analgesics in the refine-
ment of animal experiments. Animals (Basel) 2020; 10(10): 1933.
9 Hobday F. The value and use of morphia in canine surgery. Vet J 1908; 64:
220–228.
10 Milks HJ. Opium-morphine. In: Milks HJ, ed. Practical Veterinary Pharmacology
and Therapeutics. New York, NY: The Macmillan Company, 1917: 136–144.
11 Fröhner E. Morphinum hydrochloricum. Salzsaures morphium. In: Fröhner E, ed.
Lehrbuch der Arzneiverordnungslehre für Tierärzte. Stuttgart, Germany: Verlag von
Ferdin & Enke, 1921: 62–70.
12 Amadon RS, Craigie AH. The actions of morphine on the horse. Preliminary stud-
ies: diacetylmorphine (heroin), dihydrodesoxymorphine-D (desomorphine) and
dihydroheterocodeine. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1937; 91: 674–678.
13 Combie J, Dougherty J, Nugent E, et al. The pharmacology of narcotic analgesics in
the horse. IV. Dose and time response relationships for behavioral responses to
morphine. meperidine, pentazocine, anileridine, methadone, and hydromorphone.
J Equine Med Surg 1979; 3: 377–385.
14 Yoxall AT. Pain in small animals--its recognition and control. J Small Anim Pract
1978; 19(8): 423–438.
15 Day TK, Pepper WT, Tobias TA, et al. Comparison of intra-articular and epidural
morphine for analgesia following stifle arthrotomy in dogs. Vet Surg 1995; 24(6):
522–530.
16 Sheehy JG, Hellyer PW, Sammonds GE, et al. Evaluation of opioid receptors in
synovial membranes of horses. Am J Vet Res 2001; 62(9): 1408–1412.
17 Lindegaard C, Gleerup KB, Thomsen MH, et al. Anti-inflammatory effects of intra-
articular administration of morphine in horses with experimentally induced syno-
vitis. Am J Vet Res 2010; 71(1): 69–75.
18 Lindegaard C, Thomsen MH, Larsen S, et al. Analgesic efficacy of intra-articular
morphine in experimentally induced radiocarpal synovitis in horses. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2010; 37(2): 171–185.

-- 401 of 1450 --

386 	Section 3: Pharmacology
19 Hunter BG, Parker JE, Wehrman R, et al. Morphine synovial fluid concentrations after
intravenous regional limb perfusion in standing horses. Vet Surg 2015; 44(6): 679–686.
20 Watanabe R, Marcoux J, Evangelista MC, et al. The analgesic effects of buprenor-
phine (Vetergesic or Simbadol) in cats undergoing dental extractions: a randomized,
blinded, clinical trial. PLoS ONE 2020; 15(3): e0230079.
21 Enomoto H, Love L, Madsen M, et al. Pharmacokinetics of intravenous, oral trans-
mucosal, and intranasal buprenorphine in healthy male dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
2022; 45(4): 358–365.
22 Kyles AE, Hardie EM, Hansen BD, et al. Comparison of transdermal fentanyl and
intramuscular oxymorphone on post-operative behaviour after ovariohysterec-
tomy in dogs. Res Vet Sci 1998; 65(3): 245–251.
23 Robinson TM, Kruse-Elliott KT, Markel MD, et al. A comparison of transdermal
fentanyl versus epidural morphine for analgesia in dogs undergoing major orthope-
dic surgery. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1999; 35(2): 95–100.
24 Harvey-Clark CJ, Gilespie K, Riggs KW. Transdermal fentanyl compared with par-
enteral buprenorphine in post-surgical pain in swine: a case study. Lab Anim 2000;
34(4): 386–398.
25 Christou C, Oliver RA, Rawlinson J, et al. Transdermal fentanyl and its use in ovine
surgery. Res Vet Sci 2015; 100: 252–256.
26 Carbone ET, Lindstrom KE, Diep S, et al. Duration of action of sustained-release
buprenorphine in 2 strains of mice. J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2012; 51(6): 815–819.
27 Alamaw ED, Franco BD, Jampachaisri K, et al. Extended-release buprenorphine, an
FDA-indexed analgesic, attenuates mechanical hypersensitivity in rats (Rattus
norvegicus). J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2022; 61(1): 81–88.
28 Freise KJ, Linton DD, Newbound GC, et al. Population pharmacokinetics of trans-
dermal fentanyl solution following a single dose administered prior to soft tissue
and orthopedic surgery in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2012; 35(Suppl 2): 65–72.
29 Clark TP, Linton DD, Freise KJ, et al. Multicentered masked placebo-controlled
phase 3 clinical study of an extended duration transdermal buprenorphine solution
for post-operative pain in cats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2022; 45(Suppl 1): S52–S66.
30 Krotscheck U, Boothe DM, Little AA, et al. Pharmacokinetics of buprenorphine in
a sodium carboxymethylcellulose gel after buccal transmucosal administration in
dogs. Vet Ther 2010; 11(3): E1–E8.
31 Presley CC, Lindsley CW. DARK Classics in chemical neuroscience: opium,
a historical perspective. ACS Chem Neurosci 2018; 9(10): 2503–2518.
32 Humphreys K, Shover CL, Andrews CM, et al. Responding to the opioid crisis in
North America and beyond: recommendations of the Stanford-Lancet Commission.
Lancet 2022; 399(10324): 555–604.
33 Russell C, Fischer B, Fidalgo TM. Sourcing of opioid analgesics for nonmedical use:
are veterinarians the latest frontier? J Opioid Manag 2018; 14(2): 77–79.
34 Mason DS, Tenney L, Hellyer PW, et al. Prescription opioid epidemic: do veterinar-
ians have a dog in the fight? Am J Public Health 2018; 108(9): 1162–1163.
35 Kogan L, Hellyer P, Rishniw M, et al. The US opioid epidemic and its impact on US
general practice veterinarians. Front Vet Sci 2019; 6: 222.
36 Patel FC, Raines JA, Kim RW, et al. Veterinarians’ attitudes and practices regarding
opioid-related vet shopping practices in tri-state Appalachian counties: an explora-
tory study. BMC Vet Res 2020; 16(1): 210.
37 Chua KP, Perrone J, Redding LE, et al. Trends in the number of patients linked to
potential vet-shopping behavior in the United States (2014–2019). Am J Vet Res
2022; 83(2): 147–152.
38 Collins LK, Pande LJ, Chung DY, et al. Trends in the medical supply of fentanyl and
fentanyl analogues: United States, 2006 to 2017. Prev Med 2019; 123: 95–100.
39 Simpson RJ. Prescription drug monitoring programs: applying a one size fits all
approach to human and veterinary medical professionals, custom tailoring is
needed. J Anim Environ Law 2014; 5: 1–43.
40 Piper BJ, McCall KL, Kogan LR, et al. Assessment of controlled substance distribu-
tion to U.S. veterinary teaching institutions from 2006 to 2019. Front Vet Sci 2020;
7: 615646.
41 Clarke DL, Drobatz KJ, Korzekwa C, et al. Trends in opioid prescribing and dis-
pensing by veterinarians in Pennsylvania. JAMA Netw Open 2019; 2(1): e186950.
42 Hendricks B, Rudisill T, Pesarsick J, et al. Prescription drug monitoring program
policy reform: human and veterinary practitioner prescribing in West Virginia,
2008–2020. J Public Health Policy 2021; 42(2): 249–257.
43 Richards GC, Aronson JK, Mahtani KR, et al. Global, regional, and national
consumption of controlled opioids: a cross-sectional study of 214 countries and
non- metropolitan territories. Br J Pain 2022; 16(1): 34–40.
44 Lehnus KS, Fordyce PS, McMillan MW. Electronic survey investigating UK veteri-
narians’ perceptions of the potential for veterinary prescription medication misuse
or abuse. Vet Anaesth Analg 2024; 51(1): 16–25.
45 Alexander SP, Christopoulos A, Davenport AP, et al. The concise guide to pharmacology
2021/22: G protein-coupled receptors. Br J Pharmacol 2021; 178(Suppl 1): S27–S156.
46 Toll L, Bruchas MR, Calo G, et al. Nociceptin/Orphanin FQ receptor structure,
signaling, ligands, functions, and interactions with opioid systems. Pharmacol Rev
2016; 68(2): 419–457.
47 Pan HL, Wu ZZ, Zhou HY, et al. Modulation of pain transmission by G-protein-
coupled receptors. Pharmacol Ther 2008; 117(1): 141–161.
48 Stoeber M, Jullié D, Lobingier BT, et al. A genetically encoded biosensor reveals
location bias of opioid drug action. Neuron 2018; 98(5): 963–976.
49 Zaki PA, Bilsky EJ, Vanderah TW, et al. Opioid receptor types and subtypes: the
delta receptor as a model. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 1996; 36: 379–401.
50 Dietis N, Rowbotham DJ, Lambert DG. Opioid receptor subtypes: fact or artifact?
Br J Anaesth 2011; 107(1): 8–18.
51 Cox BM, Christie MJ, Devi L, et al. Challenges for opioid receptor nomenclature:
IUPHAR Review 9. Br J Pharmacol 2015; 172(2): 317–323.
52 Valentino RJ, Volkow ND. Untangling the complexity of opioid receptor function.
Neuropsychopharmacol 2018; 43(13): 2514–2520.
53 Hawley AT, Wetmore LA. Identification of single nucleotide polymorphisms within
exon 1 of the canine mu-opioid receptor gene. Vet Anaesth Analg 2010; 37(1): 79–82.
54 Kubinyi E, Bence M, Koller D, et al. Oxytocin and opioid receptor gene polymor-
phisms associated with greeting behavior in dogs. Front Psychol 2017; 8: 1520.
55 Hellyer PW, Bai L, Supon J, et al. Comparison of opioid and alpha-2 adrenergic
receptor binding in horse and dog brain using radioligand autoradiography.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2003; 30(3): 172–182.
56 Brandt SA, Livingston A. Receptor changes in the spinal cord of sheep associated
with exposure to chronic pain. Pain 1990; 42(3): 323–329.
57 Celik M, Labuz D, Henning K, et al. Leukocyte opioid receptors mediate analgesia via
Ca(2+)-regulated release of opioid peptides. Brain Behav Immun 2016; 57: 227–242.
58 Simon BT, Steagall PV, Monteiro BP, et al. Antinociceptive effects of intravenous
administration of hydromorphone hydrochloride alone or followed by buprenor-
phine hydrochloride or butorphanol tartrate to healthy conscious cats. Am J Vet Res
2016; 77(3): 245–251.
59 Hansford J, Henao-Guerrero N, Machado ML, et al. Pharmacokinetics of a high-
concentration formulation of buprenorphine (Simbadol) in male dogs. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2021; 48(4): 509–516.
60 Pfeffer M, Smyth RD, Pittman KA, et al. Pharmacokinetics of subcutaneous and
intramuscular butorphanol in dogs. J Pharm Sci 1980; 69(7): 801–803.
61 Sano T, Nishimura R, Kanazawa H, et al. Pharmacokinetics of fentanyl after single
intravenous injection and constant rate infusion in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2006;
33(4): 266–273.
62 KuKanich B, Hogan BK, Krugner-Higby LA, et al. Pharmacokinetics of hydromor-
phone hydrochloride in healthy dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35(3): 256–264.
63 Kalthum W, Waterman AE. The pharmacokinetics of intravenous pethidine HCl in
dogs: normal and surgical cases. J Vet Anaesth 1988; 15: 39–55.
64 Barnhart MD, Hubbell JA, Muir WW, et al. Pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics,
and analgesic effects of morphine after rectal, intramuscular, and intravenous
administration in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2000; 61(1): 24–28.
65 Giorgi M, Meizler A, Mills PC. Pharmacokinetics of the novel atypical opioid tap-
entadol following oral and intravenous administration in dogs. Vet J 2012; 194(3):
309–313.
66 Giorgi M, Del Carlo S, Łebkowska-Wieruszewska B, et al. Pharmacokinetics of
tramadol and metabolites after injective administrations in dogs. Pol J Vet Sci 2010;
13(4): 639–644.
67 Kukanich B, Papich MG. Pharmacokinetics and antinociceptive effects of oral
tramadol hydrochloride administration in Greyhounds. Am J Vet Res 2011; 72(2):
256–262.
68 Taylor PM, Robertson SA, Dixon MJ, et al. Morphine, pethidine and buprenor-
phine disposition in the cat. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2001; 24(6): 391–398.
69 Doodnaught GM, Monteiro BP, Benito J, et al. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacody-
namic modelling after subcutaneous, intravenous and buccal administration of a
high-concentration formulation of buprenorphine in conscious cats. PLoS ONE
2017; 12(4): e0176443.
70 Wells SM, Glerum LE, Papich MG. Pharmacokinetics of butorphanol in cats after
intramuscular and buccal transmucosal administration. Am J Vet Res 2008; 69(12):
1548–1554.
71 Lee DD, Papich MG, Hardie EM. Comparison of pharmacokinetics of fentanyl
after intravenous and transdermal administration in cats. Am J Vet Res 2000; 61(6):
672–677.
72 Pypendop BH, Brosnan RJ, Siao KT, et al. Pharmacokinetics of remifentanil in
conscious cats and cats anesthetized with isoflurane. Am J Vet Res 2008; 69(4):
531–536.
73 Lee HK, Łebkowska-Wieruszewska B, Kim TW, et al. Pharmacokinetics of the
novel atypical opioid tapentadol after intravenous, intramuscular and subcutane-
ous administration in cats. Vet J 2013; 198(3): 620–624.
74 Pypendop BH, Ilkiw JE. Pharmacokinetics of tramadol, and its metabolite
O-desmethyl-tramadol, in cats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2008; 31(1): 52–59.
75 Davis JL, Messenger KM, LaFevers DH, et al. Pharmacokinetics of intravenous
and intramuscular buprenorphine in the horse. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2012;
35(1): 52–58.

-- 402 of 1450 --

Chapter 23: Opioids 	387
76 Flynn H, Cenani A, Brosnan RJ, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
of a high concentration of buprenorphine (Simbadol) in conscious horses after
subcutaneous administration. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(4): 585–595.
77 Knych HK, Casbeer HC, McKemie DS, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
namics of butorphanol following intravenous administration to the horse. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2013; 36(1): 21–30.
78 Knych HK, Stucker K, Gretler SR, et al. Pharmacokinetics, adverse effects and
effects on thermal nociception following administration of three doses of codeine
to horses. BMC Vet Res 2022; 18(1): 196.
79 Reed R, Barletta M, Mitchell K, et al. The pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
namics of intravenous hydromorphone in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2019; 46(3):
395–404.
80 Reed RA, Knych HK, Barletta M, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
of hydromorphone after intravenous and intramuscular administration in horses.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(2): 210–218.
81 Knych HK, Kanarr K, Fang Y, et al. Characterization of the pharmacokinetics,
behavioral effects and effects on thermal nociception of morphine 6-glucuronide
and morphine 3-glucuronide in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2022; 49(6): 634–644.
82 Devine EP, KuKanich B, Beard WL. Pharmacokinetics of intramuscularly admin-
istered morphine in horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2013; 243(1): 105–112.
83 Shilo Y, Britzi M, Eytan B, et al. Pharmacokinetics of tramadol in horses after
intravenous, intramuscular and oral administration. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2008;
31(1): 60–65.
84 Court MH, Dodman NH, Levine HD, et al. Pharmacokinetics and milk residues
of butorphanol in dairy cows after single intravenous administration. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 1992; 15(1): 28–35.
85 Smith JS, Coetzee JF, Fisher IWG, et al. Pharmacokinetics of fentanyl citrate and
norfentanyl in Holstein calves and effect of analytical performances on fentanyl
parameter estimation. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2018; 41(4): 555–561.
86 Bussières G, Smith J, Cox S, et al. Pharmacokinetics of morphine and plasma con-
centrations of morphine-6- glucuronide after a single intravenous and intramus-
cular administration in the cow. Vet Anaesth Analg 2023; 50(1): 107.e101.
87 Coetzee JF, Lechtenberg KF, Stock ML, et al. Pharmacokinetics and effect of intra-
venous nalbuphine in weaned Holstein calves after surgical castration. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2014; 37(2): 169–177.
88 Hakomäki H, Kokki H, Lehtonen M, et al. Pharmacokinetics of buprenorphine in
pregnant sheep after intravenous injection. Pharmacol Res Perspect 2021; 9(2):
e00726.
89 Ahern BJ, Soma LR, Rudy JA, et al. Pharmacokinetics of fentanyl administered
transdermally and intravenously in sheep. Am J Vet Res 2010; 71(10): 1127–1132.
90 Bengtsson J, Ederoth P, Ley D, et al. The influence of age on the distribution of
morphine and morphine-3- glucuronide across the blood–brain barrier in sheep.
Br J Pharmacol 2009; 157(6): 1085–1096.
91 Kinnunen M, Kokki H, Hautajärvi H, et al. Oxycodone pharmacokinetics and
fetal exposure after intravenous or epidural administration to the ewe. Acta Obstet
Gynecol Scand 2018; 97(10): 1200–1205.
92 Bortolami E, Della Rocca G, Di Salvo A, et al. Pharmacokinetics and antinocicep-
tive effects of tramadol and its metabolite O-desmethyltramadol following intra-
venous administration in sheep. Vet J 2015; 205(3): 404–409.
93 Carroll GL, Boothe DM, Hartsfield SM, et al. Pharmacokinetics and selected
behavioral responses to butorphanol and its metabolites in goats following intrave-
nous and intramuscular administration. Vet Anaesth Analg 2001; 28(4): 188–195.
94 Carroll GL, Hooper RN, Boothe DM, et al. Pharmacokinetics of fentanyl after
intravenous and transdermal administration in goats. Am J Vet Res 1999; 60(8):
986–991.
95 Gordon E, Dirikolu L, Liu CC, et al. Pharmacokinetic profiles of three dose rates
of morphine sulfate following single intravenous, intramuscular, and subcutane-
ous administration in the goat. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2022; 45(1): 107–116.
96 Lavy E, Lee HK, Mabjeesh SJ, et al. Use of the novel atypical opioid tapentadol in
goats (Capra hircus): pharmacokinetics after intravenous, and intramuscular
administration. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2014; 37(5): 518–521.
97 de Sousa AB, Santos AC, Schramm SG, et al. Pharmacokinetics of tramadol and
O-desmethyltramadol in goats after intravenous and oral administration. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2008; 31(1): 45–51.
98 Robertson SA, Wegner K, Lascelles BD. Antinociceptive and side-effects of hydro-
morphone after subcutaneous administration in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2009;
11(2): 76–81.
99 Giordano T, Steagall PV, Ferreira TH, et al. Postoperative analgesic effects of intra-
venous, intramuscular, subcutaneous or oral transmucosal buprenorphine
administered to cats undergoing ovariohysterectomy. Vet Anaesth Analg 2010;
37(4): 357–366.
100 Kukanich B, Lascelles BD, Aman AM, et al. The effects of inhibiting cytochrome
P450 3A, P-glycoprotein, and gastric acid secretion on the oral bioavailability of
methadone in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2005; 28(5): 461–466.
101 Messenger KM, Davis JL, LaFevers DH, et al. Intravenous and sublingual
buprenorphine in horses: pharmacokinetics and influence of sampling site.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38(4): 374–384.
102 Buchholz T, Hildebrand M, Heider A, et al. Transdermal fentanyl uptake at
two different patch locations in Swiss White Alpine sheep. Animals (Basel) 2020;
10(9): 1675.
103 Murrell JC, Robertson SA, Taylor PM, et al. Use of a transdermal matrix patch of
buprenorphine in cats: preliminary pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic data.
Vet Rec 2007; 160(17): 578–583.
104 Freise KJ, Reinemeyer C, Warren K, et al. Single-dose pharmacokinetics and bio-
availability of a novel extended duration transdermal buprenorphine solution in
cats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2022; 45(Suppl 1): S31–S39.
105 Natalini CC, Robinson EP. Evaluation of the analgesic effects of epidurally admin-
istered morphine, alfentanil, butorphanol, tramadol, and U50488H in horses.
Am J Vet Res 2000; 61(12): 1579–1586.
106 Natalini CC. Plasma and cerebrospinal fluid alfentanil, butorphanol, and
morphine concentrations following caudal epidural administration in horses.
Ciência Rural 2006; 36: 1436–1443.
107 Castro-Cuellar G, Cremer J, Queiroz-Williams P, et al. Pharmacokinetics of intra-
articular buprenorphine in horses with lipopolysaccharide-induced synovitis.
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2023; 46(4): 229–237.
108 Long WM, Sinnott VB, Bracker K, et al. Use of 20% intravenous lipid emulsion for
the treatment of loperamide toxicosis in a Collie homozygous for the ABCB1-1∆
mutation. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2017; 27(3): 357–361.
109 Kongara K. Pharmacogenetics of opioid analgesics in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
2018; 41(2): 195–204.
110 Golub MS, Eisele JH Jr., Anderson JH. Maternal-fetal distribution of morphine
and alfentanil in near-term sheep and rhesus monkeys. Dev Pharmacol Ther 1986;
9(1): 12–22.
111 Burns SM, Cunningham CW, Mercer SL. DARK classics in chemical neurosci-
ence: fentanyl. ACS Chem Neurosci 2018; 9(10): 2428–2437.
112 MacKenzie M, Zed PJ, Ensom MH. Opioid pharmacokinetics-pharmacodynamics:
clinical implications in acute pain management in trauma. Ann Pharmacother
2016; 50(3): 209–218.
113 Steagall PVM, Simon BT, Teixeira-Neto FJ, et al. An update on drugs used for
lumbosacral epidural anesthesia and analgesia in dogs. Front Vet Sci 2017; 4: 68.
114 Wu WN, McKown LA, Gauthier AD, et al. Metabolism of the analgesic drug,
tramadol hydrochloride, in rat and dog. Xenobiotica 2001; 31(7): 423–441.
115 Yeh SY, Chernov HI, Woods LA. Metabolism of morphine by cats. J Pharm Sci
1971; 60(3): 469–471.
116 Giorgi M, Del Carlo S, Saccomanni G, et al. Pharmacokinetics of tramadol and its
major metabolites following rectal and intravenous administration in dogs.
N Z Vet J 2009; 57(3): 146–152.
117 Richards J, Miksys S, Novalen M, et al. CYP2D in the brain impacts oral hydroco-
done analgesia in vivo. Neuropharmacol 2022; 221: 109291.
118 Perez Jimenez TE, Kukanich B, Joo H, et al. Oral coadministration of fluconazole
with tramadol markedly increases plasma and urine concentrations of tramadol
and the O-desmethyltramadol metabolite in healthy dogs. Drug Metab Dispos
2019; 47(1): 15–25.
119 KuKanich B, KuKanich K, Black J. The effects of ketoconazole and cimetidine on
the pharmacokinetics of oral tramadol in greyhound dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
2017; 40(6): e54–e61.
120 Giorgi M, MacCheroni M, Del Carlo S, et al. Effect of oral co-administration of
frozen-dried grapefruit juice on pharmacokinetics of tramadol in dogs. Iran J Vet
Res 2011; 12: 8–15.
121 Dean M. Opioids in renal failure and dialysis patients. J Pain Symptom Manage
2004; 28(5): 497–504.
122 Kosten TR, George TP. The neurobiology of opioid dependence: implications for
treatment. Sci Pract Perspect 2002; 1(1): 13–20.
123 Khan F, Mehan A. Addressing opioid tolerance and opioid-induced hypersensitiv-
ity: recent developments and future therapeutic strategies. Pharmacol Res Perspect
2021; 9(3): e00789.
124 Anonymous. General behavior of dogs, rats and cats in morphine tolerance and
withdrawal. Acta Physiol Scand 1963; 58(s204): 30–38.
125 Yoshimura K, Horiuchi M, Konishi M, et al. Physical dependence on morphine
induced in dogs via the use of miniosmotic pumps. J Pharmacol Toxicol Methods
1993; 30(2): 85–95.
126 French ED, Vasquez SA, George R. Behavioral changes produced in the cat by
acute and chronic morphine injection and naloxone precipitated withdrawal.
Eur J Pharmacol 1979; 57(4): 387–397.
127 Barr MC, Huitron-Resendiz S, Sanchez-Alavez M, et al. Escalating morphine
exposures followed by withdrawal in feline immunodeficiency virus-infected cats:
a model for HIV infection in chronic opiate abusers. Drug Alcohol Depend 2003;
72(2): 141–149.

-- 403 of 1450 --

388 	Section 3: Pharmacology
128 Kilbey MM, Ellinwood EH Jr. Self-administration of morphine in the cat. Int J
Addict 1980; 15(3): 447–460.
129 Albutt C. On the abuse of hypodermic injections of morphia. Practitioner 1870; 5:
327–331.
130 Chu LF, Clark DJ, Angst MS. Opioid tolerance and hyperalgesia in chronic pain
patients after one month of oral morphine therapy: a preliminary prospective
study. J Pain 2006; 7(1): 43–48.
131 Lee M, Silverman SM, Hansen H, et al. A comprehensive review of opioid-induced
hyperalgesia. Pain Physician 2011; 14(2): 145–161.
132 Ferrini F, Trang T, Mattioli TA, et al. Morphine hyperalgesia gated through
microglia-mediated disruption of neuronal Cl¯ homeostasis. Nat Neurosci 2013;
16(2): 183–192.
133 Kamerling SG, Martin WR, Wu KM, et al. Medullary kappa hyperalgesic mecha-
nisms II. The effects of ethylketazocine administered into the fourth cerebral ven-
tricle of the conscious dog. Life Sci 1983; 33(18): 1839–1843.
134 Wu KM, Martin WR, Kamerling SG, et al. Possible medullary kappa hyperalgesic
mechanism. I. A new potential role for endogenous opioid peptides in pain per-
ception. Life Sci 1983; 33(18): 1831–1838.
135 Hughes RA. Codeine analgesic and morphine hyperalgesic effects on thermal
nociception in domestic fowl. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 1990; 35(3): 567–570.
136 Gruen ME, Lascelles BDX, Colleran E, et al. 2022 AAHA Pain management guide-
lines for dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2022; 58(2): 55–76.
137 Steagall PV, Robertson S, Simon B, et al. 2022 ISFM Consensus guidelines on the
management of acute pain in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2022; 24(1): 4–30.
138 Finkel JC, Pukish J. Molecular biology of opioid analgesia and its clinical consid-
erations. Clin J Pain 2019; 35(6): 473–480.
139 Mansour A, Fox CA, Thompson RC, et al. mu-Opioid receptor mRNA expression
in the rat CNS: comparison to mu-receptor binding. Brain Res 1994; 643(1–2):
245–265.
140 Stein C. Opioid receptors. Annu Rev Med 2016; 67: 433–451.
141 Go VL, Yaksh TL. Release of substance P from the cat spinal cord. J Physiol 1987;
391: 141–167.
142 Fields H. State-dependent opioid control of pain. Nat Rev Neurosci 2004; 5(7):
565–575.
143 Stein C. The control of pain in peripheral tissue by opioids. N Engl J Med 1995;
332(25): 1685–1690.
144 Keates HL, Cramond T, Smith MT. Intraarticular and periarticular opioid binding
in inflamed tissue in experimental canine arthritis. Anesth Analg 1999; 89(2):
409–415.
145 Zollner C, Shaqura MA, Bopaiah CP, et al. Painful inflammation-induced increase
in mu- opioid receptor binding and G-protein coupling in primary afferent neu-
rons. Mol Pharmacol 2003; 64(2): 202–210.
146 Busch-Dienstfertig M, Stein C. Opioid receptors and opioid peptide-producing
leukocytes in inflammatory pain-- basic and therapeutic aspects. Brain Behav
Immun 2010; 24(5): 683–694.
147 Machelska H. Dual peripheral actions of immune cells in neuropathic pain. Arch
Immunol Ther Exp (Warsz) 2011; 59(1): 11–24.
148 Potter JJ, MacFarlane PD, Love EJ, et al. Preliminary investigation comparing a deto-
midine continuous rate infusion combined with either morphine or buprenorphine
for standing sedation in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43(2): 189–194.
149 Shah MD, Yates D, Hunt J, et al. A comparison between methadone and buprenor-
phine for perioperative analgesia in dogs undergoing ovariohysterectomy. J Small
Anim Pract 2018; 59(9): 539–546.
150 Shah M, Yates D, Hunt J, et al. Comparison between methadone and buprenor-
phine within the QUAD protocol for perioperative analgesia in cats undergoing
ovariohysterectomy. J Feline Med Surg 2019; 21(8): 723–731.
151 Freitas GC, Carregaro AB, Gehrcke MI, et al. Epidural analgesia with morphine or
buprenorphine in ponies with lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced carpal synovitis.
Can J Vet Res 2011; 75(2): 141–146.
152 Warne LN, Beths T, Holm M, et al. Comparison of perioperative analgesic efficacy
between methadone and butorphanol in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2013; 243(6):
844–850.
153 Warne LN, Beths T, Holm M, et al. Evaluation of the perioperative analgesic effi-
cacy of buprenorphine, compared with butorphanol, in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2014; 245(2): 195–202.
154 Rigotti C, De Vries A, Taylor PM. Buprenorphine provides better anaesthetic con-
ditions than butorphanol for field castration in ponies: results of a randomised
clinical trial. Vet Rec 2014; 175(24): 623.
155 Taylor PM, Hoare HR, de Vries A, et al. A multicentre, prospective, randomised,
blinded clinical trial to compare some perioperative effects of buprenorphine or
butorphanol premedication before equine elective general anaesthesia and sur-
gery. Equine Vet J 2016; 48(4): 442–450.
156 Nielsen S, Rivas C, Demirkol A, et al. Effects of ascending buprenorphine doses on
measures of experimental pain: a pilot study. J Subst Abuse Treat 2019; 104: 128–134.
157 Dahan A, Yassen A, Romberg R, et al. Buprenorphine induces ceiling in respira-
tory depression but not in analgesia. Br J Anaesth 2006; 96(5): 627–632.
158 Zola EM, McLeod DC. Comparative effects and analgesic efficacy of the agonist–
antagonist opioids. Drug Intell Clin Pharm 1983; 17(6): 411–417.
159 Pircio AW, Gylys JA, Cavanagh RL, et al. The pharmacology of butorphanol, a
3,14-dihydroxymorphinan narcotic antagonist analgesic. Arch Int Pharmacodyn
Ther 1976; 220(2): 231–257.
160 Talbert RL, Peters JI, Sorrells SC, et al. Respiratory effects of high-dose butorpha-
nol. Acute Care 1988; 12(Suppl 1): 47–56.
161 Monteiro ER, Rabello TA, Rangel JPP, et al. Effects of 3 morphine doses, in com-
bination with acepromazine, on sedation and some physiological parameters in
dogs. Can J Vet Res 2019; 83(3): 235–240.
162 Monteiro ER, Junior AR, Assis HM, et al. Comparative study on the sedative
effects of morphine, methadone, butorphanol or tramadol, in combination with
acepromazine, in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36(1): 25–33.
163 Gomes VH, Oliveira RL, Marques JL, et al. Comparison of the sedative effects of
nalbuphine and butorphanol, alone or in combination with acepromazine in dogs.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45(1): 68–72.
164 Paqueron X, Lumbroso A, Mergoni P, et al. Is morphine-induced sedation syn-
onymous with analgesia during intravenous morphine titration? Br J Anaesth
2002; 89(5): 697–701.
165 Lentschener C, Tostivint P, White PF, et al. Opioid-induced sedation in the pos-
tanesthesia care unit does not insure adequate pain relief: a case-control study.
Anesth Analg 2007; 105(4): 1143–1147.
166 Kellihan HB, Stepien RL, Hassen KM, et al. Sedative and echocardiographic
effects of dexmedetomidine combined with butorphanol in healthy dogs. J Vet
Cardiol 2015; 17(4): 282–292.
167 Santarelli G, López JT, Del Palacio JF. Effects of a combination of acepromazine
maleate and butorphanol tartrate on conventional and two-dimensional speckle
tracking echocardiography in healthy dogs. Am J Vet Res 2017; 78(2): 158–167.
168 Fernández Castañer J, Quirós Carmona S, Martínez Bernal C, et al. Sedation qual-
ity and cardiorespiratory, echocardiographic, radiographic and electrocardio-
graphic effects of intramuscular alfaxalone and butorphanol in Spanish
Greyhound dogs. Animals (Basel) 2023; 13(18): 2937.
169 Ward JL, Schober KE, Fuentes VL, et al. Effects of sedation on echocardiographic
variables of left atrial and left ventricular function in healthy cats. J Feline Med
Surg 2012; 14(10): 678–685.
170 Ribas T, Bublot I, Junot S, et al. Effects of intramuscular sedation with alfaxalone
and butorphanol on echocardiographic measurements in healthy cats. J Feline
Med Surg 2015; 17(6): 530–536.
171 Reader RC, Barton BA, Abelson AL. Comparison of two intramuscular sedation
protocols on sedation, recovery and ease of venipuncture for cats undergoing
blood donation. J Feline Med Surg 2019; 21(2): 95–102.
172 Reader RC, Yang VK, Babyak JM, et al. The effects of two intramuscular sedation
protocols on echocardiographic variables in cats following sedation and blood
donation. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2021; 31(2): 256–262.
173 Young-McCaughan S, Miaskowski C. Definition of and mechanism for opioid-
induced sedation. Pain Manag Nurs 2001; 2(3): 84–97.
174 Martin WR. Pharmacology of opioids. Pharmacol Rev 1983; 35(4): 283–323.
175 Arankowsky-Sandoval G, Gold PE. Morphine-induced deficits in sleep patterns:
attenuation by glucose. Neurobiol Learn Mem 1995; 64(2): 133–138.
176 Cronin A, Keifer JC, Baghdoyan HA, et al. Opioid inhibition of rapid eye move-
ment sleep by a specific mu receptor agonist. Br J Anaesth 1995; 74(2): 188–192.
177 Danneman PJ. Cortical potentials evoked by tooth pulp stimulation differentiate
between the analgesic and sedative effects of morphine in awake rats. J Pharmacol
Exp Ther 1994; 269(3): 1100–1106.
178 Banning A, Sjøgren P. Cerebral effects of long-term oral opioids in cancer patients
measured by continuous reaction time. Clin J Pain 1990; 6(2): 91–95.
179 Lorenz J, Beck H, Bromm B. Cognitive performance, mood and experimental pain
before and during morphine-induced analgesia in patients with chronic non-
malignant pain. Pain 1997; 73(3): 369–375.
180 Lorenz J, Beck H, Bromm B. Differential changes of laser evoked potentials, late
auditory evoked potentials and P300 under morphine in chronic pain patients.
Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 1997; 104(6): 514–521.
181 Moreno KL, Scallan EM, Monteiro BP, et al. The thermal antinociceptive effects of
a high-concentration formulation of buprenorphine alone or followed by hydro-
morphone in conscious cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(4): 570–576.
182 Robertson SA, Taylor PM, Lascelles BD, et al. Changes in thermal threshold
response in eight cats after administration of buprenorphine, butorphanol and
morphine. Vet Rec 2003; 153(15): 462–465.
183 Lascelles BD, Robertson SA. Antinociceptive effects of hydromorphone, butor-
phanol, or the combination in cats. J Vet Intern Med 2004; 18(2): 190–195.
184 Dhasmana KM, Dixit KS, Jaju BP, et al. Role of central dopaminergic receptors in
manic response of cats to morphine. Psychopharmacologia 1972; 24(3): 380–383.

-- 404 of 1450 --

Chapter 23: Opioids 	389
185 Fertziger AP, Stein EA, Lynch JJ. Letter: suppression of morphine-induced mania
in cats. Psychopharmacologia 1974; 36(2): 185–187.
186 Villablanca JR, Harris CM, Burgess JW, et al. Reassessing morphine effects in cats:
I. Specific behavioral responses in intact and unilaterally brain-lesioned animals.
Pharmacol Biochem Behav 1984; 21(6): 913–921.
187 Lucas AN, Firth AM, Anderson GA, et al. Comparison of the effects of morphine
administered by constant-rate intravenous infusion or intermittent intramuscular
injection in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2001; 218(6): 884–891.
188 Becker WM, Mama KR, Rao S, et al. Prevalence of dysphoria after fentanyl in dogs
undergoing stifle surgery. Vet Surg 2013; 42(3): 302–307.
189 Jarosinski SK, Simon BT, Baetge CL, et al. The effects of prophylactic dexmedeto-
midine administration on general anesthesia recovery quality in healthy dogs
anesthetized with sevoflurane and a fentanyl constant rate infusion undergoing
elective orthopedic procedures. Front Vet Sci 2021; 8: 722038.
190 Mama KR, Pascoe PJ, Steffey EP. Evaluation of the interaction of mu and kappa
opioid agonists on locomotor behavior in the horse. Can J Vet Res 1993; 57(2):
106–109.
191 Kamerling SG, DeQuick DJ, Weckman TJ, et al. Dose-related effects of fentanyl on
autonomic and behavioral responses in performance horses. Gen Pharmacol 1985;
16(3): 253–258.
192 Szöke MO, Blais D, Cuvelliez SG, et al. Effects of buprenorphine on cardiovascular
and pulmonary function in clinically normal horses and horses with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Vet Res 1998; 59(10): 1287–1291.
193 Combie J, Shults T, Nugent EC, et al. Pharmacology of narcotic analgesics in the
horse: selective blockade of narcotic-induced locomotor activity. Am J Vet Res
1981; 42(5): 716–721.
194 Clutton RE. Opioid analgesia in horses. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 2010;
26(3): 493–514.
195 Tobin T, Combie J, Miller JR, et al. The pharmacology of narcotic analgesics in the
horse. II. Studies on the detection, pharmacokinetics, urinary clearance times and
behavioral effects of pentazocine and fentanyl in the horse. Irish Vet J 1979; 33:
169–176.
196 Grint NJ, Burford J, Dugdale AH. Does pethidine affect the cardiovascular and
sedative effects of dexmedetomidine in dogs? J Small Anim Pract 2009; 50(2):
62–66.
197 Garofalo NA, Teixeira-Neto FJ, Pereira CD, et al. Cardiorespiratory and neuroen-
docrine changes induced by methadone in conscious and in isoflurane anaesthe-
tised dogs. Vet J 2012; 194(3): 398–404.
198 Arnold RW, Jansen S, Seelig JC, et al. Anesthetic impacts on the oculocardiac
reflex: evidence from a large, observational study. Clin Ophthalmol 2021; 15:
973–981.
199 de Burgh Daly M, Korner PI, Angell-James JE, et al. Cardiovascular and respira-
tory effects of carotid body stimulation in the monkey. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol
1978; 5(5): 511–524.
200 Lichtenwalner MR, Mencken T, Tully R, et al. False-positive immunochemical
screen for methadone attributable to metabolites of verapamil. Clin Chem 1998;
44(5): 1039–1041.
201 Yang JC, Shan J, Ng KF, et al. Morphine and methadone have different effects
on calcium channel currents in neuroblastoma cells. Brain Res 2000; 870(1–2):
199–203.
202 Latta KS, Ginsberg B, Barkin RL. Meperidine: a critical review. Am J Ther 2002;
9(1): 53–68.
203 Maiante AA, Teixeira-Neto FJ, Beier SL, et al. Comparison of the cardio-
respiratory effects of methadone and morphine in conscious dogs. J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 2009; 32(4): 317–328.
204 Greene SA, Hartsfield SM, Tyner CL. Cardiovascular effects of butorphanol in
halothane-anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 1990; 51(8): 1276–1279.
205 Priano LL, Vatner SF. Generalized cardiovascular and regional hemodynamic
effects of meperidine in conscious dogs. Anesth Analg 1981; 60(9): 649–654.
206 Keating S, Fries R, Kling K, et al. Effect of methadone or hydromorphone on car-
diac conductivity in dogs before and during sevoflurane anesthesia. Front Vet Sci
2020; 7: 573706.
207 Lin C, Somberg T, Molnar J, et al. The effects of chiral isolates of methadone on
the cardiac potassium channel IKr. Cardiology 2009; 113(1): 59–65.
208 Stanley TH, Liu WS, Webster LR, et al. Haemodynamic effects of intravenous
methadone anaesthesia in dogs. Can Anaesth Soc J 1980; 27(1): 52–57.
209 Pelligrino DA, Peterson RD, Henderson SK, et al. Comparative ventilatory effects
of intravenous versus fourth cerebroventricular infusions of morphine sulfate in
the unanesthetized dog. Anesthesiology 1989; 71(2): 250–259.
210 Palkovic B, Marchenko V, Zuperku EJ, et al. Multi-level regulation of opioid-
induced respiratory depression. Physiology (Bethesda) 2020; 35(6): 391–404.
211 Berg RJ, Orton EC. Pulmonary function in dogs after intercostal thoracotomy:
comparison of morphine, oxymorphone, and selective intercostal nerve block.
Am J Vet Res 1986; 47(2): 471–474.
212 Campbell VL, Drobatz KJ, Perkowski SZ. Postoperative hypoxemia and hypercar-
bia in healthy dogs undergoing routine ovariohysterectomy or castration and
receiving butorphanol or hydromorphone for analgesia. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2003;
222(3): 330–336.
213 Wunsch LA, Schmidt BK, Krugner-Higby LA, et al. A comparison of the effects of
hydromorphone HCl and a novel extended release hydromorphone on arterial
blood gas values in conscious healthy dogs. Res Vet Sci 2010; 88(1): 154–158.
214 Dahan A, van Lemmen M, Jansen S, et al. Buprenorphine: a treatment and cause
of opioid- induced respiratory depression. Br J Anaesth 2022; 128(3): 402–404.
215 Trim CM. Cardiopulmonary effects of butorphanol tartrate in dogs. Am J Vet Res
1983; 44(2): 329–331.
216 Dahan A, Romberg R, Teppema L, et al. Simultaneous measurement and inte-
grated analysis of analgesia and respiration after an intravenous morphine infu-
sion. Anesthesiology 2004; 101(5): 1201–1209.
217 Dyson DH, Doherty T, Anderson GI, et al. Reversal of oxymorphone sedation by
naloxone, nalmefene, and butorphanol. Vet Surg 1990; 19(5): 398–403.
218 McCrackin MA, Harvey RC, Sackman JE, et al. Butorphanol tartrate for partial
reversal of oxymorphone-induced postoperative respiratory depression in the
dog. Vet Surg 1994; 23(1): 67–74.
219 Cashman JN, Dolin SJ. Respiratory and haemodynamic effects of acute postopera-
tive pain management: evidence from published data. Br J Anaesth 2004; 93(2):
212–223.
220 Lötsch J, Dudziak R, Freynhagen R, et al. Fatal respiratory depression after multiple
intravenous morphine injections. Clin Pharmacokinet 2006; 45(11): 1051–1060.
221 Quintavalla F, Spindler KP, Aldigeri R, et al. The effect of different opioids on acid-
base balance and blood gas analysis in hospitalized dogs. Front Vet Sci 2022; 9:
802186.
222 Lalley PM. Mu-opioid receptor agonist effects on medullary respiratory neurons
in the cat: evidence for involvement in certain types of ventilatory disturbances.
Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2003; 285(6): R1287–R1304.
223 Prkic I, Mustapic S, Radocaj T, et al. Pontine μ-opioid receptors mediate bradyp-
nea caused by intravenous remifentanil infusions at clinically relevant concentra-
tions in dogs. J Neurophysiol 2012; 108(9): 2430–2441.
224 Saunders SE, Levitt ES. Kölliker-Fuse/Parabrachial complex mu opioid receptors
contribute to fentanyl-induced apnea and respiratory rate depression. Respir
Physiol Neurobiol 2020; 275: 103388.
225 DeHaven-Hudkins DL, DeHaven RN, Little PJ, et al. The involvement of the mu-
opioid receptor in gastrointestinal pathophysiology: therapeutic opportunities for
antagonism at this receptor. Pharmacol Ther 2008; 117(1): 162–187.
226 Kromer W. Endogenous and exogenous opioids in the control of gastrointestinal
motility and secretion. Pharmacol Rev 1988; 40(2): 121–162.
227 Wood JD, Galligan JJ. Function of opioids in the enteric nervous system.
Neurogastroenterol Motil 2004; 16(Suppl 2): 17–28.
228 Sano H, Martín-Flores M, Santos LC, et al. Effects of epidural morphine on gastro-
intestinal transit in unmedicated horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38(2): 121–126.
229 Martín- Flores M, Campoy L, Kinsley MA, et al. Analgesic and gastrointestinal
effects of epidural morphine in horses after laparoscopic cryptorchidectomy
under general anesthesia. Vet Anaesth Analg 2014; 41(4): 430–437.
230 Blancquaert JP, Lefebvre RA, Willems JL. Emetic and antiemetic effects of opioids
in the dog. Eur J Pharmacol 1986; 128(3): 143–150.
231 Costello DJ, Borison HL. Naloxone antagonizes narcotic self blockade of emesis in
the cat. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1977; 203(1): 222–230.
232 Stern LC, Palmisano MP. Frequency of vomiting during the postoperative period
in hydromorphone-treated dogs undergoing orthopedic surgery. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2012; 241(3): 344–347.
233 Barnes NM, Bunce KT, Naylor RJ, et al. The actions of fentanyl to inhibit drug-
induced emesis. Neuropharmacol 1991; 30(10): 1073–1083.
234 Valverde A, Cantwell S, Hernández J, et al. Effects of acepromazine on the inci-
dence of vomiting associated with opioid administration in dogs. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2004; 31(1): 40–45.
235 Guedes AG, Papich MG, Rude EP, et al. Comparison of plasma histamine levels
after intravenous administration of hydromorphone and morphine in dogs. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2007; 30(6): 516–522.
236 Pettifer G, Dyson D. Hydromorphone: a cost-effective alternative to the use of
oxymorphone. Can Vet J 2000; 41(2): 135–137.
237 Simon BT, Scallan EM, Monteiro BP, et al. The effects of aging on hydromorphone-
induced thermal antinociception in healthy female cats. Pain Rep 2019; 4(2): e722.
238 Pypendop BH, Shilo-Benjamini Y, Ilkiw JE. Effect of morphine, methadone,
hydromorphone or oxymorphone on the thermal threshold, following intrave-
nous or buccal administration to cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43(6): 635–642.
239 Simon BT, Scallan EM, Baetge CL, et al. The antinociceptive effects of intravenous
administration of three doses of butorphanol tartrate or naloxone hydrochloride
following hydromorphone hydrochloride to healthy conscious cats. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2019; 46(4): 538–547.

-- 405 of 1450 --

390 	Section 3: Pharmacology
240 Ingvast-Larsson C, Holgersson A, Bondesson U, et al. Clinical pharmacology of
methadone in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2010; 37(1): 48–56.
241 Gioeni D, Brioschi FA, Di Cesare F, et al. Oral transmucosal or intramuscular
administration of dexmedetomidine-methadone combination in dogs: sedative
and physiological effects. Animals (Basel) 2020; 10(11): 2057.
242 Wilson DV, Tom Evans A, Mauer WA. Pre- anesthetic meperidine: associated
vomiting and gastroesophageal reflux during the subsequent anesthetic in dogs.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2007; 34(1): 15–22.
243 Johnson RA. Maropitant prevented vomiting but not gastroesophageal reflux in
anesthetized dogs premedicated with acepromazine-hydromorphone. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2014; 41(4): 406–410.
244 Koh RB, Isaza N, Xie H, et al. Effects of maropitant, acepromazine, and electroa-
cupuncture on vomiting associated with administration of morphine in dogs. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 2014; 244(7): 820–829.
245 Lorenzutti AM, Martín-Flores M, Litterio NJ, et al. Evaluation of the antiemetic
efficacy of maropitant in dogs medicated with morphine and acepromazine. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2016; 43(2): 195–198.
246 Scallan EM, Simon BT. The effects of acupuncture point Pericardium 6 on
hydromorphone-induced nausea and vomiting in healthy dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg
2016; 43(5): 495–501.
247 Hay Kraus BL. Effect of dosing interval on efficacy of maropitant for prevention of
hydromorphone-induced vomiting and signs of nausea in dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2014; 245(9): 1015–1020.
248 Burke JE, Hess RS, Silverstein DC. Effectiveness of orally administered maropitant
and ondansetron in preventing preoperative emesis and nausea in healthy dogs
premedicated with a combination of hydromorphone, acepromazine, and glyco-
pyrrolate. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2021; 260(S1): S40–S45.
249 Martín-Flores M, Mastrocco A, Lorenzutti AM, et al. Maropitant administered
orally 2-2.5 h prior to morphine and dexmedetomidine reduces the incidence of
emesis in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2017; 19(8): 876–879.
250 Wilson DV, Evans AT, Miller R. Effects of preanesthetic administration of
morphine on gastroesophageal reflux and regurgitation during anesthesia in dogs.
Am J Vet Res 2005; 66(3): 386–390.
251 Costa RS, Wetmore LA, Stein A. Randomized, blinded, controlled clinical trial to
assess gastroesophageal reflux and regurgitation in dogs undergoing general anes-
thesia after hydromorphone premedication with or without acepromazine or dex-
medetomidine. Am J Vet Res 2021; 82(9): 695–700.
252 Kostritsky-Pereira A, Woussen- Colle MC, De Graef J. Effects of morphine,
enkephalins and naloxone on postprandial gastric acid secretion, gastric emptying
and gastrin release in dogs. Arch Int Physiol Biochim 1984; 92(1): 19–26.
253 Mittal RK, Frank EB, Lange RC, et al. Effects of morphine and naloxone on esoph-
ageal motility and gastric emptying in man. Dig Dis Sci 1986; 31(9): 936–942.
254 Hall JA, Magne ML, Twedt DC. Effect of acepromazine, diazepam, fentanyl-
droperidol, and oxymorphone on gastroesophageal sphincter pressure in healthy
dogs. Am J Vet Res 1987; 48(4): 556–557.
255 Garcia RS, Belafsky PC, Della Maggiore A, et al. Prevalence of gastroesophageal
reflux in cats during anesthesia and effect of omeprazole on gastric pH. J Vet
Intern Med 2017; 31(3): 734–742.
256 Flouraki ES, Savvas I, Kazakos G, et al. The effect of premedication on the inci-
dence of gastroesophageal reflux in 270 dogs undergoing general anesthesia.
Animals (Basel) 2022; 12(19): 2667.
257 Zacuto AC, Marks SL, Osborn J, et al. The influence of esomeprazole and cisap-
ride on gastroesophageal reflux during anesthesia in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2012;
26(3): 518–525.
258 Wilson DV, Evans AT, Mauer WA. Influence of metoclopramide on gastroesopha-
geal reflux in anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 2006; 67(1): 26–31.
259 Buchweitz E, Grandison L, Weiss HR. Effect of morphine on regional cerebral
oxygen consumption and supply. Brain Res 1984; 291(2): 301–308.
260 Werner C, Kochs E, Bause H, et al. Effects of sufentanil on cerebral hemodynam-
ics and intracranial pressure in patients with brain injury. Anesthesiology 1995;
83(4): 721–726.
261 Engelhard K, Reeker W, Kochs E, et al. Effect of remifentanil on intracranial
pressure and cerebral blood flow velocity in patients with head trauma. Acta
Anaesthesiol Scand 2004; 48(4): 396–399.
262 Fodale V, Schifilliti D, Praticò C, et al. Remifentanil and the brain. Acta
Anaesthesiol Scand 2008; 52(3): 319–326.
263 Mitra S, Babadagli ME, Hatfield T, et al. Effect of fentanyl boluses on cerebral
oxygenation and hemodynamics in preterm infants: a prospective observational
study. Neonatology 2020; 117(4): 480–487.
264 Adriaens A, Peremans K, Waelbers T, et al. The effect of morphine on regional
cerebral blood flow measured by 99mTc-ECD SPECT in dogs. PLoS ONE 2014;
9(10): e109680.
265 Matsumiya N, Dohi S. Effects of intravenous or subarachnoid morphine on cere-
bral and spinal cord hemodynamics and antagonism with naloxone in dogs.
Anesthesiology 1983; 59(3): 175–181.
266 Werner C, Hoffman WE, Baughman VL, et al. Effects of sufentanil on cerebral
blood flow, cerebral blood flow velocity, and metabolism in dogs. Anesth Analg
1991; 72(2): 177–181.
267 Hoffman WE, Cunningham F, James MK, et al. Effects of remifentanil, a new
short-acting opioid, on cerebral blood flow, brain electrical activity, and intracra-
nial pressure in dogs anesthetized with isoflurane and nitrous oxide. Anesthesiology
1993; 79(1): 107–113.
268 Freeman J, Ingvar H. Effects of fentanyl on cerebral cortical blood flow and EEG
in the cat. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1967; 11(4): 381–391.
269 Milde LN, Milde JH, Gallagher WJ. Effects of sufentanil on cerebral circulation
and metabolism in dogs. Anesth Analg 1990; 70(2): 138–146.
270 Tipps LB, Coplin WM, Murry KR, et al. Safety and feasibility of continuous infu-
sion of remifentanil in the neurosurgical intensive care unit. Neurosurgery 2000;
46(3): 596–601.
271 Van Hemelrijck J, Mattheussen M, Wüsten R, et al. The effect of sufentanil on
intracranial pressure (ICP) in anesthetized dogs. Acta Anaesthesiol Belg 1989;
40(4): 239–245.
272 Sperry RJ, Bailey PL, Reichman MV, et al. Fentanyl and sufentanil increase intrac-
ranial pressure in head trauma patients. Anesthesiology 1992; 77(3): 416–420.
273 Woller SA, Hook MA. Opioid administration following spinal cord injury: impli-
cations for pain and locomotor recovery. Exp Neurol 2013; 247: 328–341.
274 Hook MA, Moreno G, Woller S, et al. Intrathecal morphine attenuates recovery of
function after a spinal cord injury. J Neurotrauma 2009; 26(5): 741–752.
275 Hook MA, Woller SA, Bancroft E, et al. Neurobiological effects of morphine after
spinal cord injury. J Neurotrauma 2017; 34(3): 632–644.
276 Lovell S, Simon B, Boudreau EC, et al. Randomized clinical trial comparing out-
comes after fentanyl or ketamine-dexmedetomidine analgesia in thoracolumbar
spinal surgery in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2022; 36(5): 1742–1751.
277 Marret E, Remy C, Bonnet F. Meta-analysis of epidural analgesia versus parenteral
opioid analgesia after colorectal surgery. Br J Surg 2007; 94(6): 665–673.
278 Choi S, Awad I. Maintaining micturition in the perioperative period: strategies to
avoid urinary retention. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2013; 26(3): 361–367.
279 von Siebenthal M, Schneider MP, Zheng S, et al. Effects of opioids and benzodiaz-
epines on bladder function of awake restrained mice. Am J Clin Exp Urol 2021;
9(6): 456–468.
280 Baldini G, Bagry H, Aprikian A, et al. Postoperative urinary retention: anesthetic
and perioperative considerations. Anesthesiology 2009; 110(5): 1139–1157.
281 Rosow CE, Gomery P, Chen TY, et al. Reversal of opioid-induced bladder dys-
function by intravenous naloxone and methylnaltrexone. Clin Pharmacol Ther
2007; 82(1): 48–53.
282 Leander JD, Zerbe RL, Hart JC. Diuresis and suppression of vasopressin by kappa
opioids: comparison with mu and delta opioids and clonidine. J Pharmacol Exp
Ther 1985; 234(2): 463–469.
283 Herperger LJ. Postoperative urinary retention in a dog following morphine with
bupivacaine epidural analgesia. Can Vet J 1998; 39(10): 650–652.
284 Kona-Boun JJ, Pibarot P, Quesnel A. Myoclonus and urinary retention following
subarachnoid morphine injection in a dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 2003; 30(4):
257–264.
285 Kalchofner Guerrero KS, Guerrero TG, Schweizer-Kölliker M, et al. Incidence of
delayed hair re-growth, pruritus, and urinary retention after epidural anaesthesia
in dogs. Tierarztl Prax Ausg K Kleintiere Heimtiere 2014; 42(2): 94–100.
286 Peterson NW, Buote NJ, Bergman P. Effect of epidural analgesia with opioids on
the prevalence of urinary retention in dogs undergoing surgery for cranial cruci-
ate ligament rupture. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2014; 244(8): 940–943.
287 Fujiyama M, Lavallée J, Lewis K, et al. Myoclonus and hypersensitivity of the hind
limbs and tail with urinary retention following neuraxial administration of mor-
phine in a cat. Can Vet J 2021; 62(4): 389–392.
288 Troncy E, Junot S, Keroack S, et al. Results of preemptive epidural administration
of morphine with or without bupivacaine in dogs and cats undergoing surgery:
265 cases (1997–1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2002; 221(5): 666–672.
289 Arnholz M, Hungerbühler S, Weil C, et al. Comparison of ultrasound guided
femoral and sciatic nerve block versus epidural anaesthesia for orthopaedic
surgery in dogs. Tierarztl Prax Ausg K Kleintiere Heimtiere 2017; 45(1): 5–14.
290 Viilmann I, Klöppel H, Wringe E, et al. Success rate and perioperative compli-
cations of lumbosacral extradural anaesthesia in dogs undergoing total hip
replacement: a double-centre retrospective study. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol
2022; 35(2): 81–89.
291 Vasquez EJ, Kendall A, Musulin S, et al. Three-dimensional bladder ultrasound to
measure daily urinary bladder volume in hospitalized dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2021;
35(5): 2256–2262.
292 Drenger B, Magora F, Evron S, et al. The action of intrathecal morphine and
methadone on the lower urinary tract in the dog. J Urol 1986; 135(4): 852–855.
293 Smith LJ, Yu JK. A comparison of epidural buprenorphine with epidural mor-
phine for postoperative analgesia following stifle surgery in dogs. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2001; 28(2): 87–96.

-- 406 of 1450 --

Chapter 23: Opioids 	391
294 Drenger B, Magora F. Urodynamic studies after intrathecal fentanyl and buprenor-
phine in the dog. Anesth Analg 1989; 69(3): 348–353.
295 Simpson KH, Madej TH, McDowell JM, et al. Comparison of extradural
buprenorphine and extradural morphine after caesarean section. Br J Anaesth
1988; 60(6): 627–631.
296 Edwards RT, McCormick-Deaton C, Hosanagar A. Acute urinary retention sec-
ondary to buprenorphine administration. Am J Emerg Med 2014; 32(1): 109.
e101–102.
297 Khan FA, Memon GA, Kamal RS. Effect of route of buprenorphine on recovery
and postoperative analgesic requirement in paediatric patients. Paediatr Anaesth
2002; 12(9): 786–790.
298 Rosiere CE, Winder CV, Wax J. Ammonia cough elicited through a tracheal side
tube in unanesthetized dogs: comparative antitussive bioassay of four morphine
derivatives and methadone in terms of ammonia thresholds. J Pharmacol Exp
Ther 1956; 116(3): 296–316.
299 Cavanagh RL, Gylys JA, Bierwagen ME. Antitussive properties of butorphanol.
Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther 1976; 220(2): 258–268.
300 Nosál’ová G, Strapková A, Korpás J. Relationship between the antitussic and anal-
gesic activity of substances. Acta Physiol Hung 1991; 77(2): 173–178.
301 Kamei J. Role of opioidergic and serotonergic mechanisms in cough and antitus-
sives. Pulm Pharmacol 1996; 9(5–6): 349–356.
302 Kamei J. Delta-opioid receptor antagonists as a new concept for central acting
antitussive drugs. Pulm Pharmacol Ther 2002; 15(3): 235–240.
303 Niedfeldt RL, Robertson SA. Postanesthetic hyperthermia in cats: a retrospective
comparison between hydromorphone and buprenorphine. Vet Anaesth Analg
2006; 33(6): 381–389.
304 Posner LP, Gleed RD, Erb HN, et al. Post-anesthetic hyperthermia in cats.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2007; 34(1): 40–47.
305 Posner LP, Pavuk AA, Rokshar JL, et al. Effects of opioids and anesthetic drugs on
body temperature in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2010; 37(1): 35–43.
306 Gellasch KL, Kruse-Elliott KT, Osmond CS, et al. Comparison of transdermal
administration of fentanyl versus intramuscular administration of butorphanol
for analgesia after onychectomy in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2002; 220(7):
1020–1024.
307 Martín-Flores M, Lorenzutti AM, Nugen SA, et al. High-dose buprenorphine
results in a greater occurrence of postoperative hyperthermia than morphine in a
randomized clinical trial in cats undergoing ovariohysterectomy. Am J Vet Res
2022; 83(6): ajvr.21.11.0183.
308 Cox B, Ary M, Chesarek W, et al. Morphine hyperthermia in the rat: an action on
the central thermostats. Eur J Pharmacol 1976; 36(1): 33–39.
309 Maxwell LK, Thomasy SM, Slovis N, et al. Pharmacokinetics of fentanyl following
intravenous and transdermal administration in horses. Equine Vet J 2003; 35(5):
484–490.
310 Figueiredo JP, Muir WW, Sams R. Cardiorespiratory, gastrointestinal, and analge-
sic effects of morphine sulfate in conscious healthy horses. Am J Vet Res 2012;
73(6): 799–808.
311 Hanafi AL, Reed RA, Trenholme HN, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
namics of meperidine after intramuscular and subcutaneous administration in
horses. Vet Surg 2021; 50(2): 410–417.
312 Skrzypczak H, Reed R, Brainard B, et al. The pharmacokinetics of a fentanyl
matrix patch applied at three different anatomical locations in horses. Equine Vet
J 2022; 54(1): 153–158.
313 Guedes AG, Papich MG, Rude EP, et al. Pharmacokinetics and physiological
effects of two intravenous infusion rates of morphine in conscious dogs. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2007; 30(3): 224–233.
314 Monteiro ER, Figueroa CD, Choma JC, et al. Effects of methadone, alone or in
combination with acepromazine or xylazine, on sedation and physiologic values
in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35(6): 519–527.
315 Lee S, Lee A, Kim WH. Fentanyl-induced hypothermia in a dog. Int J Appl Res Vet
Med 2021; 19: 68–73.
316 Clark WG, Lipton JM. Changes in body temperature after administration of ace-
tylcholine, histamine, morphine, prostaglandins and related agents: II. Neurosci
Biobehav Rev 1985; 9(3): 479–552.
317 Lee HK, Wang SC. Mechanism of morphine-induced miosis in the dog.
J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1975; 192(2): 415–431.
318 Larson MD. Mechanism of opioid-induced pupillary effects. Clin Neurophysiol
2008; 119(6): 1358–1364.
319 Pickworth WB, Sharpe LG. Morphine-induced mydriasis and inhibition of pupil-
lary light reflex and fluctuations in the cat. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1985; 234(3):
603–606.
320 Saurer TB, Ijames SG, Carrigan KA, et al. Neuroimmune mechanisms of opioid-
mediated conditioned immunomodulation. Brain Behav Immun 2008; 22(1):
89–97.
321 Kraus J. Regulation of mu-opioid receptors by cytokines. Front Biosci (Schol Ed)
2009; 1(1): 164–170.
322 Gach K, Wyrębska A, Fichna J, et al. The role of morphine in regulation of cancer
cell growth. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol 2011; 384(3): 221–230.
323 Gong L, Qin Q, Zhou L, et al. Effects of fentanyl anesthesia and sufentanil anesthe-
sia on regulatory T cells frequencies. Int J Clin Exp Pathol 2014; 7(11): 7708–7716.
324 Franchi S, Moretti S, Castelli M, et al. Mu opioid receptor activation modulates
Toll like receptor 4 in murine macrophages. Brain Behav Immun 2012; 26(3):
480–488.
325 Heaney A, Buggy DJ. Can anaesthetic and analgesic techniques affect cancer
recurrence or metastasis? Br J Anaesth 2012; 109(Suppl 1): i17–i28.
326 Liang X, Liu R, Chen C, et al. Opioid system modulates the immune function: a
review. Transl Perioper Pain Med 2016; 1(1): 5–13.
327 Szczepaniak A, Fichna J, Zielińska M. Opioids in cancer development, progres-
sion and metastasis: Focus on colorectal cancer. Curr Treat Options Oncol 2020;
21(1): 6.
328 Sonner JM, Antognini JF, Dutton RC, et al. Inhaled anesthetics and immobility:
mechanisms, mysteries, and minimum alveolar anesthetic concentration. Anesth
Analg 2003; 97(3): 718–740.
329 Reed R, Doherty T. Minimum alveolar concentration: key concepts and a review
of its pharmacological reduction in dogs. Part 2. Res Vet Sci 2018; 118: 27–33.
330 Muir WW 3rd, Wiese AJ, March PA. Effects of morphine, lidocaine, ketamine,
and morphine-lidocaine-ketamine drug combination on minimum alveolar
concentration in dogs anesthetized with isoflurane. Am J Vet Res 2003; 64(9):
1155–1160.
331 Murphy MR, Hug CC Jr. The enflurane sparing effect of morphine, butorphanol,
and nalbuphine. Anesthesiology 1982; 57(6): 489–492.
332 Machado CE, Dyson DH, Grant Maxie M. Effects of oxymorphone and hydro-
morphone on the minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in dogs. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2006; 33(1): 70–77.
333 Credie RG, Teixeira-Neto FJ, Ferreira TH, et al. Effects of methadone on the mini-
mum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2010; 37(3):
240–249.
334 Murphy MR, Hug CC Jr. The anesthetic potency of fentanyl in terms of its reduc-
tion of enflurane MAC. Anesthesiology 1982; 57(6): 485–488.
335 Monteiro ER, Teixeira-Neto FJ, Campagnol D, et al. Effects of remifentanil on the
minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2010; 71(2):
150–156.
336 Queiroz-Williams P, Egger CM, Qu W, et al. The effect of buprenorphine on iso-
flurane minimum alveolar concentration in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2014; 41:
312–318.
337 Ko JC, Lange DN, Mandsager RE, et al. Effects of butorphanol and carprofen on
the minimal alveolar concentration of isoflurane in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2000; 217(7): 1025–1028.
338 Valverde A, Dyson DH, McDonell WN. Epidural morphine reduces halothane
MAC in the dog. Can J Anaesth 1989; 36(6): 629–632.
339 Seddighi MR, Egger CM, Rohrbach BW, et al. Effects of tramadol on the mini-
mum alveolar concentration of sevoflurane in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009;
36(4): 334–340.
340 Steffey EP, Baggot JD, Eisele JH, et al. Morphine-isoflurane interaction in dogs,
swine and rhesus monkeys. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1994; 17(3): 202–210.
341 Ko JC, Weil AB, Inoue T. Effects of carprofen and morphine on the minimum
alveolar concentration of isoflurane in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2009; 45(1):
19–23.
342 Mahidol C, Niyom S, Thitiyanaporn C, et al. Effects of continuous intravenous
infusion of morphine and morphine-tramadol on the minimum alveolar concen-
tration of sevoflurane and electroencephalographic entropy indices in dogs. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2015; 42(2): 182–186.
343 Campagnol D, Teixeira-Neto FJ, Peccinini RG, et al. Comparison of the effects of
epidural or intravenous methadone on the minimum alveolar concentration of
isoflurane in dogs. Vet J 2012; 192(3): 311–315.
344 Steffey EP, Martucci R, Howland D, et al. Meperidine-halothane interaction in
dogs. Can Anaesth Soc J 1977; 24(4): 459–467.
345 Schwieger IM, Hall RI, Hug CC Jr. Less than additive antinociceptive interaction
between midazolam and fentanyl in enflurane-anesthetized dogs. Anesthesiology
1991; 74(6): 1060–1066.
346 Salmenperä MT, Szlam F, Hug CC Jr. Anesthetic and hemodynamic interactions
of dexmedetomidine and fentanyl in dogs. Anesthesiology 1994; 80(4): 837–846.
347 Ueyama Y, Lerche P, Eppler CM, et al. Effects of intravenous administration of
perzinfotel, fentanyl, and a combination of both drugs on the minimum alveolar
concentration of isoflurane in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2009; 70(12): 1459–1464.
348 Hellyer PW, Mama KR, Shafford HL, et al. Effects of diazepam and flumazenil on
minimum alveolar concentrations for dogs anesthetized with isoflurane or a com-
bination of isoflurane and fentanyl. Am J Vet Res 2001; 62(4): 555–560.
349 Suarez MA, Seddighi R, Egger CM, et al. Effect of fentanyl and lidocaine on the
end-tidal sevoflurane concentration preventing motor movement in dogs. Am J
Vet Res 2017; 78(1): 12–16.

-- 407 of 1450 --

392 	Section 3: Pharmacology
350 Reilly S, Seddighi R, Egger CM, et al. The effect of fentanyl on the end-tidal sevo-
flurane concentration needed to prevent motor movement in dogs. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2013; 40(3): 290–296.
351 Simões CR, Monteiro ER, Rangel JP, et al. Effects of a prolonged infusion of fenta-
nyl, with or without atropine, on the minimum alveolar concentration of isoflu-
rane in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43(2): 136–144.
352 Williamson EJ, Soares JHN, Pavlisko ND, et al. Isoflurane minimum alveolar con-
centration sparing effects of fentanyl in the dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(4):
738–745.
353 Michelsen LG, Salmenperä M, Hug CC Jr., et al. Anesthetic potency of remifenta-
nil in dogs. Anesthesiology 1996; 84(4): 865–872.
354 Hall RI, Szlam F, Hug CC Jr. The enflurane-sparing effect of alfentanil in dogs.
Anesth Analg 1987; 66(12): 1287–1291.
355 Hall RI, Murphy MR, Hug CC Jr. The enflurane sparing effect of sufentanil in
dogs. Anesthesiology 1987; 67(4): 518–525.
356 Ilkiw JE, Pascoe PJ, Tripp LD. Effects of morphine, butorphanol, buprenorphine,
and U50488H on the minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in cats. Am J
Vet Res 2002; 63(8): 1198–1202.
357 Ko JC, Abbo LA, Weil AB, et al. Effect of orally administered tramadol alone or
with an intravenously administered opioid on minimum alveolar concentration of
sevoflurane in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008; 232(12): 1834–1840.
358 Ferreira TH, Steffey EP, Mama KR, et al. Determination of the sevoflurane sparing
effect of methadone in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38(4): 310–319.
359 Pypendop BH, Goich M, Shilo-Benjamini Y. Effect of intravenous butorphanol
infusion on the minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in cats. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2022; 49(2): 165–172.
360 Zwijnenberg RJ, C LdR, Pollet RA, et al. Effects of perzinfotel, butorphanol tar-
trate, and a butorphanol-perzinfotel combination on the minimum alveolar con-
centration of isoflurane in cats. Am J Vet Res 2010; 71(11): 1270–1276.
361 Yackey M, Ilkiw JE, Pascoe PJ, et al. Effect of transdermally administered fentanyl
on the minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg
2004; 31(3): 183–189.
362 Ferreira TH, Aguiar AJ, Valverde A, et al. Effect of remifentanil hydrochloride
administered via constant rate infusion on the minimum alveolar concentration
of isoflurane in cats. Am J Vet Res 2009; 70(5): 581–588.
363 Pypendop BH, Pascoe PJ, Ilkiw JE. Effects of epidural administration of morphine
and buprenorphine on the minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in cats.
Am J Vet Res 2006; 67(9): 1471–1475.
364 Brosnan RJ, Pypendop BH, Majewski-Tiedeken CR, et al. Naltrexone does not
affect isoflurane minimum alveolar concentration in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013;
40(2): 225–228.
365 Steffey EP, Eisele JH, Baggot JD. Interactions of morphine and isoflurane in
horses. Am J Vet Res 2003; 64(2): 166–175.
366 Thomasy SM, Steffey EP, Mama KR, et al. The effects of i.v. fentanyl administra-
tion on the minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in horses. Br J Anaesth
2006; 97(2): 232–237.
367 Knych HK, Steffey EP, Mama KR, et al. Effects of high plasma fentanyl concentra-
tions on minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in horses. Am J Vet Res
2009; 70(10): 1193–1200.
368 Doherty TJ, Geiser DR, Rohrbach BW. Effect of high volume epidural morphine,
ketamine and butorphanol on halothane minimum alveolar concentration in
ponies. Equine Vet J 1997; 29(5): 370–373.
369 Doherty TJ, Geiser DR, Rohrbach BW. Effect of acepromazine and butorphanol
on halothane minimum alveolar concentration in ponies. Equine Vet J 1997; 29(5):
374–376.
370 Pascoe PJ, Steffey EP, Black WD, et al. Evaluation of the effect of alfentanil on the
minimum alveolar concentration of halothane in horses. Am J Vet Res 1993; 54(8):
1327–1332.
371 KuKanich B, Schmidt BK, Krugner-Higby LA, et al. Pharmacokinetics and behav-
ioral effects of oxymorphone after intravenous and subcutaneous administration
to healthy dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2008; 31(6): 580–583.
372 Steagall PV, Ruel HLM, Yasuda T, et al. Pharmacokinetics and analgesic effects of
intravenous, intramuscular or subcutaneous buprenorphine in dogs undergoing
ovariohysterectomy: a randomized, prospective, masked, clinical trial. BMC Vet
Res 2020; 16(1): 154.
373 Wicks C, Hudlicky T, Rinner U. Morphine alkaloids: history, biology, and synthe-
sis. Alkaloids Chem Biol 2021; 86: 145–342.
374 McLaughlin JA. How much morphine can a dog stand? Can arsenic produce
paralysis of the lower jaw? J Comp Med Vet Arch 1891; 12(1): 30–31.
375 Cohn AE. The effect of morphin on the mechanism of the dog’s heart after
removal of one vagus nerve. J Exp Med 1913; 18(6): 715–738.
376 Stewart GN, Rogoff JM. The influence of certain factors, especially emotional
disturbances, on epinephrin content of the adrenals. J Exp Med 1916; 24(6):
709–738.
377 Auer J, Kleiner IS. Morphine hyperglycemia in dogs with experimental pancreatic
deficiency. J Exp Med 1918; 27(1): 49–63.
378 Schmidt CF, Harer WB. The action of drugs on respiration : I. The morphine
series. J Exp Med 1923; 37(1): 47–67.
379 Simon BT, Steagall PV. The present and future of opioid analgesics in small animal
practice. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2017; 40(4): 315–326.
380 Santos LC, de Moraes AN, Saito ME. Effects of intraarticular ropivacaine and
morphine on lipopolysaccharide-induced synovitis in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg
2009; 36(3): 280–286.
381 Thomson SM, Oliver JA, Gould DJ, et al. Preliminary investigations into the anal-
gesic effects of topical ocular 1% morphine solution in dogs and cats. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2013; 40(6): 632–640.
382 Dohoo SE, Tasker RA. Pharmacokinetics of oral morphine sulfate in dogs: a com-
parison of sustained release and conventional formulations. Can J Vet Res 1997;
61(4): 251–255.
383 Aragon CL, Read MR, Gaynor JS, et al. Pharmacokinetics of an immediate and
extended release oral morphine formulation utilizing the spheroidal oral drug
absorption system in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2009; 32(2): 129–136.
384 Gozalo-Marcilla M, Hopster K, Gasthuys F, et al. Minimum end-tidal sevoflurane
concentration necessary to prevent movement during a constant rate infusion of
morphine, or morphine plus dexmedetomidine in ponies. Vet Anaesth Analg
2014; 41(2): 212–219.
385 Xu X, Wang X, Ge W, et al. The pharmacokinetics of inhaled morphine delivered
by an ultrasonic nebulizer in ventilated dogs. J Aerosol Med Pulm Drug Deliv 2012;
25(1): 41–46.
386 Kilpatrick GJ, Smith TW. Morphine-6- glucuronide: actions and mechanisms.
Med Res Rev 2005; 25(5): 521–544.
387 Volpe DA, McMahon Tobin GA, Mellon RD, et al. Uniform assessment and rank-
ing of opioid μ receptor binding constants for selected opioid drugs. Regul Toxicol
Pharmacol 2011; 59(3): 385–390.
388 Porreca F, Mosberg HI, Hurst R, et al. Roles of mu, delta and kappa opioid recep-
tors in spinal and supraspinal mediation of gastrointestinal transit effects and hot-
plate analgesia in the mouse. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1984; 230(2): 341–348.
389 Zhang Q, Schäffer M, Elde R, et al. Effects of neurotoxins and hindpaw inflamma-
tion on opioid receptor immunoreactivities in dorsal root ganglia. Neuroscience
1998; 85(1): 281–291.
390 Wang YH, Sun JF, Tao YM, et al. The role of kappa-opioid receptor activation in
mediating antinociception and addiction. Acta Pharmacol Sin 2010; 31(9):
1065–1070.
391 Sverrisdóttir E, Lund TM, Olesen AE, et al. A review of morphine and morphine-
6-glucuronide’s pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic relationships in experimen-
tal and clinical pain. Eur J Pharm Sci 2015; 74: 45–62.
392 Kristensen K, Christensen CB, Christrup LL. The mu1, mu2, delta, kappa opioid
receptor binding profiles of methadone stereoisomers and morphine. Life Sci
1995; 56(2): Pl45–PI50.
393 James A, Williams J. Basic opioid pharmacology – An update. Br J Pain 2020;
14(2): 115–121.
394 KuKanich B, Lascelles BD, Papich MG. Pharmacokinetics of morphine and
plasma concentrations of morphine-6-glucuronide following morphine adminis-
tration to dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2005; 28(4): 371–376.
395 King C, Finley B, Franklin R. The glucuronidation of morphine by dog liver
microsomes: identification of morphine-6-O- glucuronide. Drug Metab Dispos
2000; 28(6): 661–663.
396 KuKanich B, Lascelles BD, Papich MG. Assessment of a von Frey device for evalu-
ation of the antinociceptive effects of morphine and its application in pharmaco-
dynamic modeling of morphine in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2005; 66(9): 1616–1622.
397 KuKanich B, Lascelles BD, Papich MG. Use of a von Frey device for evaluation of
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of morphine after intravenous admin-
istration as an infusion or multiple doses in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2005; 66(11):
1968–1974.
398 Thompson SE, Johnson JM. Analgesia in dogs after intercostal thoracotomy. A
comparison of morphine, selective intercostal nerve block, and interpleural
regional analgesia with bupivacaine. Vet Surg 1991; 20(1): 73–77.
399 Gültekin Ç. Comparison of the analgesic effects of morphine and tramadol after
tumor surgery in dogs. Open Vet J 2021; 11(4): 613–618.
400 Lewis KA, Bednarski RM, Aarnes TK, et al. Postoperative comparison of four
perioperative analgesia protocols in dogs undergoing stifle joint surgery. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2014; 244(9): 1041–1046.
401 Minto BW, Rodrigues LC, Steagall PV, et al. Assessment of postoperative pain after
unilateral mastectomy using two different surgical techniques in dogs. Acta Vet
Scand 2013; 55(1): 60.
402 Kongara K, Chambers JP, Johnson CB. Effects of tramadol, morphine or their com-
bination in dogs undergoing ovariohysterectomy on peri-operative electroencepha-
lographic responses and post-operative pain. N Z Vet J 2012; 60(2): 129–135.

-- 408 of 1450 --

Chapter 23: Opioids 	393
403 Abelson AL, Armitage-Chan E, Lindsey JC, et al. A comparison of epidural mor-
phine with low dose bupivacaine versus epidural morphine alone on motor and
respiratory function in dogs following splenectomy. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011;
38(3): 213–223.
404 Luna SP, Martino ID, Lorena SE, et al. Acupuncture and pharmacopuncture are as
effective as morphine or carprofen for postoperative analgesia in bitches undergo-
ing ovariohysterectomy. Acta Cir Bras 2015; 30(12): 831–837.
405 Dancker C, MacFarlane PD, Love EJ. The effect of neuraxial morphine on post-
operative pain in dogs after extrahepatic portosystemic shunt attenuation.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(1): 111–118.
406 Novello L, Corletto F, Rabozzi R, et al. Sparing effect of a low dose of intrathecal
morphine on fentanyl requirements during spinal surgery: a preliminary clinical
investigation in dogs. Vet Surg 2008; 37(2): 153–160.
407 Barker JR, Clark-Price SC, Gordon-Evans WJ. Evaluation of topical epidural anal-
gesia delivered in gelfoam for postoperative hemilaminectomy pain control.
Vet Surg 2013; 42(1): 79–84.
408 Kögel B, Terlinden R, Schneider J. Characterisation of tramadol, morphine and
tapentadol in an acute pain model in Beagle dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2014; 41(3):
297–304.
409 Lorenzutti AM, Martín-Flores M, Litterio NJ, et al. A comparison between maro-
pitant and metoclopramide for the prevention of morphine-induced nausea and
vomiting in dogs. Can Vet J 2017; 58(1): 35–38.
410 Lardone E, Giaiot V, Franci P. A case of priapism following intrathecal morphine
injection in a dog. Open Vet J 2022; 12(5): 693–696.
411 Stanway GW, Taylor PM, Brodbelt DC. A preliminary investigation comparing
pre-operative morphine and buprenorphine for postoperative analgesia and seda-
tion in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2002; 29(1): 29–35.
412 Steagall PV, Carnicelli P, Taylor PM, et al. Effects of subcutaneous methadone,
morphine, buprenorphine or saline on thermal and pressure thresholds in cats. J
Vet Pharmacol Ther 2006; 29(6): 531–537.
413 Court MH. Feline drug metabolism and disposition: pharmacokinetic evidence
for species differences and molecular mechanisms. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 2013; 43(5): 1039–1054.
414 Muir WW. Pain: mechanisms and management in horses. Vet Clin North Am
Equine Pract 2010; 26(3): 467–480.
415 Robertson SA, Sanchez LC. Treatment of visceral pain in horses. Vet Clin North
Am Equine Pract 2010; 26(3): 603–617.
416 Roger T, Bardon T, Ruckebusch Y. Colonic motor responses in the pony: relevance
of colonic stimulation by opiate antagonists. Am J Vet Res 1985; 46(1): 31–35.
417 Boscan P, Van Hoogmoed LM, Farver TB, et al. Evaluation of the effects of the
opioid agonist morphine on gastrointestinal tract function in horses. Am J Vet Res
2006; 67(6): 992–997.
418 Hamamoto-Hardman BD, Steffey EP, Weiner D, et al. Pharmacokinetics and
selected pharmacodynamics of morphine and its active metabolites in horses after
intravenous administration of four doses. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2019; 42(4):
401–410.
419 Mircica E, Clutton RE, Kyles KW, et al. Problems associated with perioperative
morphine in horses: a retrospective case analysis. Vet Anaesth Analg 2003; 30(3):
147–155.
420 Love EJ, Lane JG, Murison PJ. Morphine administration in horses anaesthetized
for upper respiratory tract surgery. Vet Anaesth Analg 2006; 33(3): 179–188.
421 Clark L, Clutton RE, Blissitt KJ, et al. The effects of morphine on the recovery of
horses from halothane anaesthesia. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35(1): 22–29.
422 Valverde A, Little CB, Dyson DH, et al. Use of epidural morphine to relieve pain
in a horse. Can Vet J 1990; 31(3): 211–212.
423 Hopster K, Watkins AR, Hurcombe SD. Comparison of cervical epidural mor-
phine with intravenous morphine administration on antinociception in adult
horses using thermal threshold testing. Vet Anaesth Analg 2022; 49(4): 417–422.
424 Kohn CW, Muir WW 3rd. Selected aspects of the clinical pharmacology of vis-
ceral analgesics and gut motility modifying drugs in the horse. J Vet Intern Med
1988; 2(2): 85–91.
425 Tessier C, Pitaud JP, Thorin C, et al. Systemic morphine administration causes
gastric distention and hyperphagia in healthy horses. Equine Vet J 2019; 51(5):
653–657.
426 Dönselmann Im Sande P, Hopster K, Kästner S. Effects of morphine, butorphanol
and levomethadone in different doses on thermal nociceptive thresholds in
horses. Tierarztl Prax Ausg G Grosstiere Nutztiere 2017; 45(2): 98–106.
427 Carregaro AB, Freitas GC, Ribeiro MH, et al. Physiological and analgesic effects of
continuous-rate infusion of morphine, butorphanol, tramadol or methadone in
horses with lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced carpal synovitis. BMC Vet Res
2014; 10: 966.
428 Clark L, Clutton RE, Blissitt KJ, et al. Effects of peri-operative morphine adminis-
tration during halothane anaesthesia in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2005; 32(1):
10–15.
429 Chesnel MA, Clutton RE. A comparison of two morphine doses on the quality of
recovery from general anaesthesia in horses. Res Vet Sci 2013; 95(3): 1195–1200.
430 Loomes K, Louro LF. Recovery of horses from general anaesthesia: a systematic
review (2000–2020) of risk factors and influence of interventions during the
recovery period. Equine Vet J 2022; 54(2): 201–218.
431 Loomes K, Louro LF. Recovery of horses from general anaesthesia: a systematic
review (2000–2020) of the influence of anaesthetic protocol on recovery quality.
Equine Vet J 2022; 54(2): 219–261.
432 van Loon JP, de Grauw JC, van Dierendonck M, et al. Intra-articular opioid anal-
gesia is effective in reducing pain and inflammation in an equine LPS induced
synovitis model. Equine Vet J 2010; 42(5): 412–419.
433 Poth MKM, McKemie DS, Traynham M, et al. Concentrations, pharmacokinetics
and selected pharmacodynamics of morphine and its active metabolites following
oral administration to horses. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2023; 46(4): 238–249.
434 Maney JK, Dzikiti BT, Escobar A, et al. Morphine in donkeys: antinociceptive
effect and preliminary pharmacokinetics. Equine Vet J 2023; 55(6): 1086–1093.
435 Marchionatti E, Lardé H, Steagall PV. Opioid-induced adverse effects in a Holstein
calf. Vet Anaesth Analg 2015; 42(2): 229–230.
436 Machado Filho LC, Hurnik JF, Ewing KK. A thermal threshold assay to measure
the nociceptive response to morphine sulphate in cattle. Can J Vet Res 1998; 62(3):
218–223.
437 Fierheller EE, Caulkett NA, Bailey JV. A romifidine and morphine combination
for epidural analgesia of the flank in cattle. Can Vet J 2004; 45(11): 917–923.
438 Malavasi LM, Nyman G, Augustsson H, et al. Effects of epidural morphine and
transdermal fentanyl analgesia on physiology and behaviour after abdominal sur-
gery in pigs. Lab Anim 2006; 40(1): 16–27.
439 Rialland P, Otis C, de Courval ML, et al. Assessing experimental visceral pain in
dairy cattle: a pilot, prospective, blinded, randomized, and controlled study focus-
ing on spinal pain proteomics. J Dairy Sci 2014; 97(4): 2118–2134.
440 Dahlström B, Tamsen A, Paalzow L, et al. Patient-controlled analgesic therapy,
Part IV: pharmacokinetics and analgesic plasma concentrations of morphine. Clin
Pharmacokinet 1982; 7(3): 266–279.
441 Uhrig SR, Papich MG, KuKanich B, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
namics of morphine in llamas. Am J Vet Res 2007; 68(1): 25–34.
442 Wegner K, Robertson SA. Dose-related thermal antinociceptive effects of intrave-
nous hydromorphone in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2007; 34(2): 132–138.
443 Guedes AG, Papich MG, Rude EP, et al. Pharmacokinetics and physiological
effects of intravenous hydromorphone in conscious dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
2008; 31(4): 334–343.
444 Krugner-Higby L, Smith LJ, Schmidt B, et al. Postoperative analgesia provided by
liposomal hydromorphone in client-owned dogs undergoing limb amputation.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2016; 52(1): 13–21.
445 Hofmeister EH, Chandler MJ, Read MR. Effects of acepromazine, hydromor-
phone, or an acepromazine-hydromorphone combination on the degree of seda-
tion in clinically normal dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2010; 237(10): 1155–1159.
446 Biello P, Bateman SW, Kerr CL. Comparison of fentanyl and hydromorphone con-
stant rate infusions for pain management in dogs in an intensive care unit. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2018; 45(5): 673–683.
447 Ambros B, Steagall PV, Mantovani F, et al. Antinociceptive effects of epidural
administration of hydromorphone in conscious cats. Am J Vet Res 2009; 70(10):
1187–1192.
448 Martins FC, Keating SC, Clark-Price SC, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmaco-
dynamics of hydromorphone hydrochloride in healthy horses. Vet Anaesth Analg
2020; 47(4): 509–517.
449 Skrzypczak H, Reed R, Barletta M, et al. A retrospective evaluation of the effect of
perianesthetic hydromorphone administration on the incidence of postanesthetic
signs of colic in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(6): 757–762.
450 Reed R, Trenholme N, Skrzypczak H, et al. Comparison of hydromorphone
and butorphanol for management of pain in equine patients undergoing elec-
tive arthroscopy: a randomized clinical trial. Vet Anaesth Analg 2022; 49(5):
490–498.
451 Bitti FS, Campagnol D, Rangel JP, et al. Effects of three methadone doses com-
bined with acepromazine on sedation and some cardiopulmonary variables in
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(2): 237–245.
452 Shimoyama N, Shimoyama M, Elliott KJ, et al. d-Methadone is antinociceptive in
the rat formalin test. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1997; 283(2): 648–652.
453 Carpenter KJ, Chapman V, Dickenson AH. Neuronal inhibitory effects of metha-
done are predominantly opioid receptor mediated in the rat spinal cord in vivo.
Eur J Pain 2000; 4(1): 19–26.
454 KuKanich B, Borum SL. The disposition and behavioral effects of methadone in
Greyhounds. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35(3): 242–248.
455 Salpeter SR, Buckley JS, Bruera E. The use of very-low- dose methadone for pallia-
tive pain control and the prevention of opioid hyperalgesia. J Palliat Med 2013;
16(6): 616–622.

-- 409 of 1450 --

394 	Section 3: Pharmacology
456 Ferreira TH, Rezende ML, Mama KR, et al. Plasma concentrations and behavioral,
antinociceptive, and physiologic effects of methadone after intravenous and oral
transmucosal administration in cats. Am J Vet Res 2011; 72(6): 764–771.
457 Slingsby LS, Sear JW, Taylor PM, et al. Effect of intramuscular methadone on
pharmacokinetic data and thermal and mechanical nociceptive thresholds in the
cat. J Feline Med Surg 2016; 18(11): 875–881.
458 Amon T, Kästner SBR, Kietzmann M, et al. Plasma levels of a methadone constant
rate infusion and their corresponding effects on thermal and mechanical nocicep-
tive thresholds in dogs. BMC Vet Res 2021; 17(1): 35.
459 Hunt JR, Attenburrow PM, Slingsby LS, et al. Comparison of premedication with
buprenorphine or methadone with meloxicam for postoperative analgesia in dogs
undergoing orthopaedic surgery. J Small Anim Pract 2013; 54(8): 418–424.
460 KuKanich B, KuKanich K. Chloramphenicol significantly affects the pharmacoki-
netics of oral methadone in Greyhound dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2015; 42(6):
597–607.
461 Bieberly ZD, KuKanich B, KuKanich KS, et al. Long-acting injectable methadone
(methadone-fluconazole) provides safe and effective postoperative analgesia in a
randomized clinical trial for dogs undergoing soft tissue surgery. Am J Vet Res
2022; 83(8): ajvr.22.01.0014.
462 Nannarone S, Giannettoni G, Laurenza C, et al. Methadone or butorphanol as
pre-anaesthetic agents combined with romifidine in horses undergoing elective
surgery: qualitative assessment of sedation and induction. Animals (Basel) 2021;
11(9): 2572.
463 Muir WW, Skarda RT, Sheehan WC. Cardiopulmonary effects of narcotic agonists
and a partial agonist in horses. Am J Vet Res 1978; 39(10): 1632–1635.
464 de Oliveira FA, Pignaton W, Teixeira-Neto FJ, et al. Antinociceptive and behavio-
ral effects of methadone alone or in combination with detomidine in conscious
horses. J Equine Vet Sci 2014; 34(3): 380–386.
465 Clarke KW, Paton BS. Combined use of detomidine with opiates in the horse.
Equine Vet J 1988; 20(5): 331–334.
466 Carregaro AB, Ueda GI, Censoni JB, et al. Effect of methadone combined with
acepromazine or detomidine on sedation and dissociative anesthesia in healthy
horses. J Equine Vet Sci 2020; 86: 102908.
467 Lopes C, Luna SP, Rosa AC, et al. Antinociceptive effects of methadone combined
with detomidine or acepromazine in horses. Equine Vet J 2016; 48(5): 613–618.
468 Olbrich VH, Mosing M. A comparison of the analgesic effects of caudal epidural
methadone and lidocaine in the horse. Vet Anaesth Analg 2003; 30(3): 156–164.
469 Gozalo-Marcilla M, Luna SP, Crosignani N, et al. Sedative and antinociceptive
effects of different combinations of detomidine and methadone in standing
horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(5): 1116–1127.
470 Gozalo-Marcilla M, de Oliveira AR, Fonseca MW, et al. Sedative and antinocicep-
tive effects of different detomidine constant rate infusions, with or without metha-
done in standing horses. Equine Vet J 2019; 51(4): 530–536.
471 Crosignani N, Luna SP, Dalla Costa T, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
namics of the injectable formulation of methadone hydrochloride and methadone
in lipid nanocarriers administered orally to horses. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2017;
40(4): 398–405.
472 Bellini L, De Benedictis GM. Effect of three opioid-based analgesic protocols on
the perioperative autonomic-mediated cardiovascular response in sheep. Lab
Anim 2019; 53(5): 491–499.
473 Bergadano A, Moens Y, Schatzmann U. Continuous extradural analgesia in a cow
with complex regional pain syndrome. Vet Anaesth Analg 2006; 33(3): 189–192.
474 DeRossi R, Pagliosa RC, de Carvalho AQ, et al. Fentanyl and methadone used as
adjuncts to bupivacaine for lumbosacral epidural analgesia in sheep. Vet Rec 2017;
180(4): 96.
475 Barnhart MD, Hubbell JA, Muir WW. Evaluation of the analgesic properties of
acepromazine maleate, oxymorphone, medetomidine and a combination of
acepromazine-oxymorphone. Vet Anaesth Analg 2000; 27(2): 89–96.
476 Bateman SW, Haldane S, Stephens JA. Comparison of the analgesic efficacy of
hydromorphone and oxymorphone in dogs and cats: a randomized blinded study.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35(4): 341–347.
477 Mathews KA, Paley DM, Foster RA, et al. A comparison of ketorolac with flunixin,
butorphanol, and oxymorphone in controlling postoperative pain in dogs. Can
Vet J 1996; 37(9): 557–567.
478 Pypendop BH, Ilkiw JE, Shilo-Benjamini Y. Bioavailability of morphine, metha-
done, hydromorphone, and oxymorphone following buccal administration in
cats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2014; 37(3): 295–300.
479 Siao KT, Pypendop BH, Stanley SD, et al. Pharmacokinetics of oxymorphone in
cats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2011; 34(6): 594–598.
480 Hughes MA, Glass PS, Jacobs JR. Context-sensitive half-time in multicompart-
ment pharmacokinetic models for intravenous anesthetic drugs. Anesthesiology
1992; 76(3): 334–341.
481 Murphy MR, Hug CC Jr., McClain DA. Dose-independent pharmacokinetics of
fentanyl. Anesthesiology 1983; 59(6): 537–540.
482 Iizuka T, Nishimura R. Context-sensitive half-time of fentanyl in dogs. J Vet Med
Sci 2015; 77(5): 615–617.
483 KuKanich B. Pharmacokinetics of subcutaneous fentanyl in Greyhounds. Vet J
2011; 190(2): e140–e142.
484 KuKanich B, Allen P. Comparative pharmacokinetics of intravenous fentanyl and
buprenorphine in healthy greyhound dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2014; 37(6):
595–597.
485 Lefebvre RA, Willems JL, Bogaert MG. Gastric relaxation and vomiting by apo-
morphine, morphine and fentanyl in the conscious dog. Eur J Pharmacol 1981;
69(2): 139–145.
486 Freye E, Schnitzler M, Schenk G. Opioid-induced respiratory depression and
analgesia may be mediated by different subreceptors. Pharm Res 1991; 8(2):
196–199.
487 Kamata M, Nagahama S, Kakishima K, et al. Comparison of behavioral effects of
morphine and fentanyl in dogs and cats. J Vet Med Sci 2012; 74(2): 231–234.
488 Çoruh B, Tonelli MR, Park DR. Fentanyl-induced chest wall rigidity. Chest 2013;
143(4): 1145–1146.
489 Soares JH, Henao-Guerrero N, Pavlisko ND, et al. The effect of two doses of fen-
tanyl on chest wall rigidity at equipotent doses of isoflurane in dogs. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2019; 46(3): 360–364.
490 Jang M, Son WG, Lee I. Fentanyl-induced asystole in two dogs. J Small Anim Pract
2015; 56(6): 411–413.
491 Glerum LE, Egger CM, Allen SW, et al. Analgesic effect of the transdermal fentanyl
patch during and after feline ovariohysterectomy. Vet Surg 2001; 30(4): 351–358.
492 Gutierrez-Blanco E, Victoria-Mora JM, Ibancovichi-Camarillo JA, et al.
Postoperative analgesic effects of either a constant rate infusion of fentanyl, lido-
caine, ketamine, dexmedetomidine, or the combination lidocaine-ketamine-
dexmedetomidine after ovariohysterectomy in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2015;
42(3): 309–318.
493 Ambros B, Alcorn J, Duke-Novakovski T, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmaco-
dynamics of a constant rate infusion of fentanyl (5 μg/kg/h) in awake cats. Am J
Vet Res 2014; 75(8): 716–721.
494 Carrozzo MV, Alcorn J, Ambros B. Effects of two fentanyl constant rate infusions
on thermal thresholds and plasma fentanyl concentrations in awake cats. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2018; 45(6): 831–838.
495 Kyles AE, Papich M, Hardie EM. Disposition of transdermally administered fen-
tanyl in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1996; 57(5): 715–719.
496 Schultheiss PJ, Morse BC, Baker WH. Evaluation of a transdermal fentanyl system
in the dog. Contemp Top Lab Anim Sci 1995; 34(5): 75–81.
497 Pettifer GR, Hosgood G. The effect of rectal temperature on perianesthetic serum
concentrations of transdermally administered fentanyl in cats anesthetized with
isoflurane. Am J Vet Res 2003; 64(12): 1557–1561.
498 Hofmeister EH, Egger CM. Transdermal fentanyl patches in small animals. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 2004; 40(6): 468–478.
499 Schmiedt CW, Bjorling DE. Accidental prehension and suspected transmucosal or
oral absorption of fentanyl from a transdermal patch in a dog. Vet Anaesth Analg
2007; 34(1): 70–73.
500 Sredenšek J, Bošnjak M, Lampreht Tratar U, et al. Case Report: intoxication in a
pig (Sus scrofa domesticus) after transdermal fentanyl patch ingestion. Front Vet
Sci 2020; 7: 611097.
501 FDA U. Accidental exposures to fentanyl patches continue to be deadly to chil-
dren: U.S. Food and Drug Administration; 2023. Available from: https://www.fda.
gov/consumers/consumer- updates/accidental- exposures- fentanyl- patches-
continue-be-deadly-children
502 Sanchez LC, Robertson SA, Maxwell LK, et al. Effect of fentanyl on visceral and
somatic nociception in conscious horses. J Vet Intern Med 2007; 21(5):
1067–1075.
503 Echelmeyer J, Taylor PM, Hopster K, et al. Effect of fentanyl on thermal and
mechanical nociceptive thresholds in horses and estimation of anti-nociceptive
plasma concentration. Vet J 2019; 249: 82–88.
504 Robertson SA, Taylor PM, Sear JW, et al. Relationship between plasma concentra-
tions and analgesia after intravenous fentanyl and disposition after other routes of
administration in cats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2005; 28(1): 87–93.
505 Knych HK, Steffey EP, Casbeer HC, et al. Disposition, behavioural and physiologi-
cal effects of escalating doses of intravenously administered fentanyl to young
foals. Equine Vet J 2015; 47(5): 592–598.
506 Ringer SK, Spielmann N, Weiss M, et al. Fentanyl bolus induces muscle tremors in
sevoflurane-anaesthetized piglets. Lab Anim 2016; 50(4): 312–314.
507 Goutchtat R, Chetboun M, Wiart JF, et al. Long-term analgesia following a single
application of fentanyl transdermal solution in pigs. Eur Surg Res 2021; 62(2):
115–120.
508 Thomasy SM, Slovis N, Maxwell LK, et al. Transdermal fentanyl combined with
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for analgesia in horses. J Vet Intern Med
2004; 18(4): 550–554.

-- 410 of 1450 --

Chapter 23: Opioids 	395
509 Burke MJ, Soma LR, Boston RC, et al. Evaluation of the analgesic and pharma-
cokinetic properties of transdermally administered fentanyl in goats. J Vet Emerg
Crit Care (San Antonio) 2017; 27(5): 539–547.
510 Smith JS, Mochel JP, Borts DJ, et al. Adverse reactions to fentanyl transdermal
patches in calves: a preliminary clinical and pharmacokinetic study. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2018; 45(4): 575–580.
511 Hoke JF, Cunningham F, James MK, et al. Comparative pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics of remifentanil, its principle metabolite (GR90291) and alfen-
tanil in dogs. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1997; 281(1): 226–232.
512 Westmoreland CL, Hoke JF, Sebel PS, et al. Pharmacokinetics of remifentanil
(GI87084B) and its major metabolite (GI90291) in patients undergoing elective
inpatient surgery. Anesthesiology 1993; 79(5): 893–903.
513 Chism JP, Rickert DE. The pharmacokinetics and extra-hepatic clearance of
remifentanil, a short acting opioid agonist, in male beagle dogs during constant
rate infusions. Drug Metab Dispos 1996; 24(1): 34–40.
514 Correa Mdo A, Aguiar AJ, Neto FJ, et al. Effects of remifentanil infusion regimens
on cardiovascular function and responses to noxious stimulation in propofol-
anesthetized cats. Am J Vet Res 2007; 68(9): 932–940.
515 Machado ML, Soares JHN, Kuster de Albuquerque Gress MA, et al. Dose-
finding study comparing three treatments of remifentanil in cats anesthetized
with isoflurane undergoing ovariohysterectomy. J Feline Med Surg 2018; 20(2):
164–171.
516 Nagakubo D, Muta K, Kamata M, et al. Effects of remifentanil on the noxiously
stimulated somatosensory evoked potentials recorded at the spinal cord in dogs
and cats. Res Vet Sci 2023; 158: 13–16.
517 Hayashida M, Fukunaga A, Hanaoka K. Detection of acute tolerance to the anal-
gesic and nonanalgesic effects of remifentanil infusion in a rabbit model. Anesth
Analg 2003; 97(5): 1347–1352.
518 Gómez de Segura IA, de la Vibora JB, Aguado D. Opioid tolerance blunts the
reduction in the sevoflurane minimum alveolar concentration produced by
remifentanil in the rat. Anesthesiology 2009; 110(5): 1133–1138.
519 Aguado D, Bustamante R, Gómez de Segura IA. Toll-like receptor 4 deficient mice
do not develop remifentanil-induced mechanical hyperalgesia: an experimental
randomised animal study. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2018; 35(7): 505–510.
520 Ruíz- López P, Navarrete-Calvo R, Morgaz J, et al. Determination of acute toler-
ance and hyperalgesia to remifentanil constant rate infusion in dogs undergoing
sevoflurane anaesthesia. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(2): 183–190.
521 Akashi N, Murahata Y, Hosokawa M, et al. Cardiovascular and renal effects of
constant rate infusions of remifentanil, dexmedetomidine and their combination
in dogs anesthetized with sevoflurane. J Vet Med Sci 2021; 83(2): 285–296.
522 Rockhold RW, Crofton JT, Wang BC, et al. Effect of intracarotid administration of
morphine and naloxone on plasma vasopressin levels and blood pressure in the
dog. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1983; 224(2): 386–390.
523 Hellebrekers LJ, van den Brom WE, Mol JA. Plasma arginine vasopressin response
to intravenous methadone and naloxone in conscious dogs. J Pharmacol Exp Ther
1989; 248(1): 329–333.
524 Joshi GP, Warner DS, Twersky RS, et al. A comparison of the remifentanil and
fentanyl adverse effect profile in a multicenter phase IV study. J Clin Anesth 2002;
14(7): 494–499.
525 Twersky RS, Jamerson B, Warner DS, et al. Hemodynamics and emergence profile
of remifentanil versus fentanyl prospectively compared in a large population of
surgical patients. J Clin Anesth 2001; 13(6): 407–416.
526 Fleisher LA, Hogue S, Colopy M, et al. Does functional ability in the postoperative
period differ between remifentanil- and fentanyl-based anesthesia? J Clin Anesth
2001; 13(6): 401–406.
527 Benmansour P, Duke-Novakovski T. Prolonged anesthesia using sevoflurane,
remifentanil and dexmedetomidine in a horse. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40(5):
521–526.
528 Pallarols NB, Lamuraglia R, Guglielminetti A, et al. Behavioral and cardiopulmo-
nary effects of a constant rate infusion of remifentanil-xylazine for sedation in
horses. J Equine Vet Sci 2020; 91: 103111.
529 Benmansour P, Billinsky J, Duke-Novakovski T, et al. Blood concentrations of
remifentanil during and after infusion in horses anesthetized with isoflurane and
dexmedetomidine. Res Vet Sci 2016; 107: 202–206.
530 Pypendop BH, Brosnan RJ, Majewski-Tiedeken CR, et al. Pharmacokinetics of
fentanyl, alfentanil, and sufentanil in isoflurane-anesthetized cats. J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 2014; 37(1): 13–17.
531 Bufalari A, Di Meo A, Nannarone S, et al. Fentanyl or sufentanil continuous infu-
sion during isoflurane anaesthesia in dogs: clinical experiences. Vet Res Commun
2007; 31(Suppl 1): 277–280.
532 Van Wijnsberghe AS, Marolf V, Claeys S, et al. Effects of fentanyl-lidocaine-
ketamine versus sufentanil-lidocaine-ketamine on the isoflurane requirements in
dogs undergoing total ear canal ablation and lateral bulla osteotomy. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2020; 47(5): 595–603.
533 Mendes GM, Selmi AL. Use of a combination of propofol and fentanyl, alfentanil,
or sufentanil for total intravenous anesthesia in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2003;
223(11): 1608–1613.
534 Almeida TF, Fantoni DT, Mastrocinque S, et al. Epidural anesthesia with bupiv-
acaine, bupivacaine and fentanyl, or bupivacaine and sufentanil during intrave-
nous administration of propofol for ovariohysterectomy in dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2007; 230(1): 45–51.
535 Slingsby LS, Murison PJ, Goossens L, et al. A comparison between pre-operative
carprofen and a long-acting sufentanil formulation for analgesia after ovariohys-
terectomy in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2006; 33(5): 313–327.
536 Lascelles BD, Butterworth SJ, Waterman AE. Postoperative analgesic and sedative
effects of carprofen and pethidine in dogs. Vet Rec 1994; 134(8): 187–191.
537 Slingsby LS, Waterman-Pearson AE. Analgesic effects in dogs of carprofen and
pethidine together compared with the effects of either drug alone. Vet Rec 2001;
148(14): 441–444.
538 Slingsby LS, Waterman-Pearson AE. Comparison of pethidine, buprenorphine
and ketoprofen for postoperative analgesia after ovariohysterectomy in the cat.
Vet Rec 1998; 143(7): 185–189.
539 Dixon MJ, Robertson SA, Taylor PM. A thermal threshold testing device for eval-
uation of analgesics in cats. Res Vet Sci 2002; 72(3): 205–210.
540 Golder FJ, Wilson J, Larenza MP, et al. Suspected acute meperidine toxicity in a
dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 2010; 37(5): 471–477.
541 Avril G, Freye E. Effects of high doses of pethidine and fentanyl on hemodynamics
in the dog. Cah Anesthesiol 1984; 32(1): 15–19.
542 Jaffe RA, Rowe MA. A comparison of the local anesthetic effects of meperidine,
fentanyl, and sufentanil on dorsal root axons. Anesth Analg 1996; 83(4): 776–781.
543 Akcasu A, Yillar DO, Akkan AG, et al. The role of mast cells in the genesis of acute
manifestations following the intravenous injection of meperidine in dogs. J Basic
Clin Physiol Pharmacol 2009; 20(1): 67–72.
544 Yang NY, Ko JC, Wang HC, et al. A preliminary study comparing the sedative,
cardiorespiratory, and histaminic-releasing effects of intramuscular and intrave-
nous administration of pethidine (meperidine) with midazolam in healthy cats.
Vet Anim Sci 2021; 14: 100218.
545 Hamamoto-Hardman BD, Steffey EP, McKemie DS, et al. Meperidine pharmacoki-
netics and effects on physiologic parameters and thermal threshold following intra-
venous administration of three doses to horses. BMC Vet Res 2020; 16(1): 368.
546 Foreman JH, Ruemmler R. Efficacy of intramuscular meperidine hydrochloride
versus placebo in experimental foot lameness in horses. Equine Vet J Suppl 2013;
(45): 48–53.
547 Skarda RT, Muir WW 3rd. Analgesic, hemodynamic, and respiratory effects
induced by caudal epidural administration of meperidine hydrochloride in mares.
Am J Vet Res 2001; 62(7): 1001–1007.
548 George AV, Lu JJ, Pisano MV, et al. Carfentanil-- an ultra potent opioid. Am J
Emerg Med 2010; 28(4): 530–532.
549 Li AC, Chovan JP, Yu E, et al. Update on hydrocodone metabolites in rats and dogs
aided with a semi-automatic software for metabolite identification Mass-MetaSite.
Xenobiotica 2013; 43(4): 390–398.
550 Hsieh BM, Beets AK. Coughing in small animal patients. Front Vet Sci 2019; 6: 513.
551 KuKanich B. Pharmacokinetics of acetaminophen, codeine, and the codeine
metabolites morphine and codeine-6-glucuronide in healthy Greyhound dogs.
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2010; 33(1): 15–21.
552 Benitez ME, Roush JK, KuKanich B, et al. Pharmacokinetics of hydrocodone and
tramadol administered for control of postoperative pain in dogs following tibial
plateau leveling osteotomy. Am J Vet Res 2015; 76(9): 763–770.
553 KuKanich B. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of oral acetaminophen in
combination with codeine in healthy Greyhound dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2016;
39(5): 514–517.
554 KuKanich B, Spade J. Pharmacokinetics of hydrocodone and hydromorphone
after oral hydrocodone in healthy Greyhound dogs. Vet J 2013; 196(2): 266–268.
555 Heffernan AE, Katz EM, Sun Y, et al. Once daily oral extended-release hydroco-
done as analgesia following tibial plateau leveling osteotomy in dogs. Vet Surg
2018; 47(4): 516–523.
556 Benitez ME, Roush JK, McMurphy R, et al. Clinical efficacy of hydrocodone-
acetaminophen and tramadol for control of postoperative pain in dogs following
tibial plateau leveling osteotomy. Am J Vet Res 2015; 76(9): 755–762.
557 Yeh SY, McQuinn RL, Gorodetzky CW. Biotransformation of morphine to dihy-
dromorphinone and normorphine in the mouse, rat, rabbit, guinea pig, cat, dog,
and monkey. Drug Metab Dispos 1977; 5(4): 335–342.
558 Cone EJ, Darwin WD, Gorodetzky CW, et al. Comparative metabolism of
hydrocodone in man, rat, guinea pig, rabbit, and dog. Drug Metab Dispos 1978;
6(4): 488–493.
559 Cone EJ, Darwin WD, Gorodetzky CW. Comparative metabolism of codeine in
man, rat, dog, guinea-pig and rabbit: identification of four new metabolites.
J Pharm Pharmacol 1979; 31(5): 314–317.

-- 411 of 1450 --

396 	Section 3: Pharmacology
560 Garrett ER, Jackson AJ. Pharmacokinetics of morphine and its surrogates. III:
morphine and morphine 3-monoglucuronide pharmacokinetics in the dog as a
function of dose. J Pharm Sci 1979; 68(6): 753–771.
561 Lötsch J, Skarke C, Schmidt H, et al. Evidence for morphine-independent central
nervous opioid effects after administration of codeine: contribution of other
codeine metabolites. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2006; 79(1): 35–48.
562 Skingle M, Tyers MB. Further studies on opiate receptors that mediate antinocep-
tion: tooth pulp stimulation in the dog. Br J Pharmacol 1980; 70(2): 323–327.
563 Martins TL, Kahvegian MA, Noel-Morgan J, et al. Comparison of the effects of
tramadol, codeine, and ketoprofen alone or in combination on postoperative pain
and on concentrations of blood glucose, serum cortisol, and serum interleukin-
6 in dogs undergoing maxillectomy or mandibulectomy. Am J Vet Res 2010; 71(9):
1019–1026.
564 Steagall PV, Monteiro BP, Lavoie AM, et al. Preliminary investigation of the ther-
mal antinociceptive effects of codeine in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2015; 17(12):
1061–1064.
565 Gretler SR, Finno CJ, McKemie DS, et al. Metabolism, pharmacokinetics and
selected pharmacodynamic effects of codeine following a single oral administra-
tion to horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(5): 694–704.
566 Galosi M, Troisi A, Toniolo P, et al. Comparison of the transdermal and intrave-
nous administration of buprenorphine in the management of intra- and postop-
erative pain in dogs undergoing a unilateral mastectomy. Animals (Basel) 2022;
12(24): 3468.
567 Barbarossa A, Rambaldi J, Giunti M, et al. Pharmacokinetics of buprenorphine
following constant rate infusion for postoperative analgesia in dogs undergoing
ovariectomy. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(3): 435–443.
568 Snyder LB, Snyder CJ, Hetzel S. Effects of buprenorphine added to bupivacaine
infraorbital nerve blocks on isoflurane minimum alveolar concentration using a
model for acute dental/oral surgical pain in dogs. J Vet Dent 2016; 33(2): 90–96.
569 Barletta M, Ostenkamp SM, Taylor AC, et al. The pharmacokinetics and analgesic
effects of extended-release buprenorphine administered subcutaneously in
healthy dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2018; 41(4): 502–512.
570 Steagall PV, Benito J, Monteiro BP, et al. Analgesic effects of gabapentin and
buprenorphine in cats undergoing ovariohysterectomy using two pain-scoring
systems: a randomized clinical trial. J Feline Med Surg 2018; 20(8): 741–748.
571 Moser KL, Hasiuk MM, Armstrong T, et al. A randomized clinical trial comparing
butorphanol and buprenorphine within a multimodal analgesic protocol in cats
undergoing orchiectomy. J Feline Med Surg 2020; 22(8): 760–767.
572 Bortolami E, Slingsby L, Love EJ. Comparison of two formulations of buprenor-
phine in cats administered by the oral transmucosal route. J Feline Med Surg 2012;
14(8): 534–539.
573 Gulledge BM, Messenger KM, Cornell KK, et al. Pharmacokinetic comparison of
two buprenorphine formulations after buccal administration in healthy male cats.
J Feline Med Surg 2018; 20(4): 312–318.
574 Johnson RJ, Kerr CL, Enouri SS, et al. Pharmacokinetics of liposomal encapsu-
lated buprenorphine suspension following subcutaneous administration to cats. J
Vet Pharmacol Ther 2017; 40(3): 256–269.
575 Love EJ, Taylor PM, Whay HR, et al. Postcastration analgesia in ponies using
buprenorphine hydrochloride. Vet Rec 2013; 172(24): 635.
576 Haunhorst FR, Hopster K, Schmicke M, et al. Clinical effect of buprenorphine or
butorphanol, in combination with detomidine and diazepam, on sedation and
postoperative pain after cheek tooth extraction in horses. Can Vet J 2022; 63(1):
39–46.
577 Levionnois OL, Graubner C, Spadavecchia C. Colon constipation in horses after
sustained-release buprenorphine administration. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45(6):
876–880.
578 Castro-Cuellar G, Cremer J, Liu CC, et al. Buprenorphine has a concentration-
dependent cytotoxic effect on equine chondrocytes in vitro. Am J Vet Res 2023;
84(3): ajvr.22.08.0143.
579 Crabtree NE, Mochal-King CA, Sloan PB, et al. Synovial butorphanol concentra-
tions and mechanical nociceptive thresholds after intravenous regional limb
perfusion in standing sedated horses. Vet Surg 2019; 48(8): 1473–1482.
580 Conner CM, Hoppes SM, Stevens BJ, et al. Intranasal butorphanol and midazolam
administered prior to intramuscular alfaxalone provides safe and effective
sedation in Quaker parrots (Myiopsitta monachus). Am J Vet Res 2022; 83(12):
ajvr.22.08.0140.
581 Okur S, Yanmaz LE, Golgeli A, et al. Sedative and cardiopulmonary effects of
intranasal butorphanol with midazolam or dexmedetomidine in New Zealand
white rabbits. Vet Rec 2023; 193(1): e2999.
582 Springfield D, KuKanich B, Gray M, et al. Dosing protocols to increase the efficacy
of butorphanol in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2022; 45(6): 516–529.
583 McFadzean WJ, Hall EJ, van Oostrom H. Effect of premedication with butorpha-
nol or methadone on ease of endoscopic duodenal intubation in dogs. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2017; 44(6): 1296–1302.
584 Trimble T, Bhalla RJ, Leece EA. Comparison of sedation in dogs: methadone or
butorphanol in combination with dexmedetomidine intravenously. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2018; 45(5): 597–603.
585 Gomes VH, Barbosa DJ, Motta AS, et al. Evaluation of nalbuphine, butorphanol
and morphine in dogs during ovariohysterectomy and on early postoperative
pain. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(6): 803–809.
586 Gültiken N, Gürler H, Yarım GF, et al. Antioxidant and analgesic potential of
butorphanol in dogs undergoing ovariohysterectomy. Theriogenology 2022;
190: 1–7.
587 Giannettoni G, Moretti G, Menchetti L, et al. Sedation quality of alfaxalone associ-
ated with butorphanol, methadone or pethidine in cats injected into the supraspi-
natus or the quadriceps muscle. J Feline Med Surg 2022; 24(8): e269–e280.
588 Papastefanou AK, Galatos AD, Pappa E, et al. The effect of butorphanol on the
incidence of dexmedetomidine-induced emesis in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2015;
42(6): 608–613.
589 Bhalla RJ, Trimble TA, Leece EA, et al. Comparison of intramuscular butorphanol
and buprenorphine combined with dexmedetomidine for sedation in cats. J Feline
Med Surg 2018; 20(4): 325–331.
590 Lizarraga I, Castillo-Alcala F. Sedative and mechanical hypoalgesic effects of butor-
phanol in xylazine-premedicated donkeys. Equine Vet J 2015; 47(3): 308–312.
591 Arguedas MG, Hines MT, Papich MG, et al. Pharmacokinetics of butorphanol and
evaluation of physiologic and behavioral effects after intravenous and intramus-
cular administration to neonatal foals. J Vet Intern Med 2008; 22(6): 1417–1426.
592 Almonte H, Schumacher J, Johnson CR, et al. Effect of a combination of butorpha-
nol and detomidine on endoscopic assessment of laryngeal function in
Thoroughbred yearlings. Vet Rec 2022; 190(9): e1483.
593 Love EJ, Taylor PM, Clark C, et al. Analgesic effect of butorphanol in ponies fol-
lowing castration. Equine Vet J 2009; 41(6): 552–556.
594 Haw AJ, Meyer LC, Fuller A. Nalbuphine and butorphanol reverse opioid-induced
respiratory depression but increase arousal in etorphine-immobilized goats
(Capra hircus). Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43(5): 539–548.
595 Lester PA, Gaynor JS, Hellyer PW, et al. The sedative and behavioral effects of
nalbuphine in dogs. Contemp Top Lab Anim Sci 2003; 42(4): 27–31.
596 Gomes VH, Barcellos MC, Lima VC, et al. Effect of three doses of nalbuphine on
reversal of sedation and cardiopulmonary effects of morphine-acepromazine in
healthy dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2019; 46(4): 429–434.
597 Gomes VH, Marques JLR, Janiques Borré LDS, et al. Comparison of the sedative
effects of three nalbuphine doses, alone or combined with acepromazine, in dogs.
Am J Vet Res 2022; 83(7): ajvr.21.12.0214.
598 Flecknell PA, Kirk AJ, Liles JH, et al. Post-operative analgesia following thoracot-
omy in the dog: an evaluation of the effects of bupivacaine intercostal nerve block
and nalbuphine on respiratory function. Lab Anim 1991; 25(4): 319–324.
599 Frazílio Fde O, DeRossi R, Jardim PH, et al. Effects of epidural nalbuphine on
intraoperative isoflurane and postoperative analgesic requirements in dogs. Acta
Cir Bras 2014; 29(1): 38–46.
600 Clark JS, Bentley E, Smith LJ. Evaluation of topical nalbuphine or oral tramadol as
analgesics for corneal pain in dogs: a pilot study. Vet Ophthalmol 2011; 14(6):
358–364.
601 Lee CH, Lin SL, Chi TT, et al. Effect of topical administration of 0.8% nalbuphine
on the cornea in dogs after phacoemulsification. J Vet Med Sci 2013; 75(8):
1041–1047.
602 Wotman KL, Utter ME. Effect of treatment with a topical ophthalmic preparation
of 1% nalbuphine solution on corneal sensitivity in clinically normal horses.
Am J Vet Res 2010; 71(2): 223–228.
603 Muhammad SA, Farooq AA, Khan A, et al. Anaesthetic efficacy of nalbuphine
HCl alone and in-combination with propofol and ketamine HCL in dogs.
Pak J Life Soc Sci 2004; 2: 40–42.
604 Marques MG, Marques A, de Siqueira CE, et al. Conventional echocardiography
and two-dimensional speckle tracking in healthy sevoflurane-anesthetized dogs
undergoing continuous rate infusion of nalbuphine. Vet Med Int 2020; 2020:
9278751.
605 Costa GP, Monteiro ER, Marques É J, et al. Sedative effects of acepromazine in
combination with nalbuphine or butorphanol, intramuscularly or intravenously,
in healthy cats: a randomized, blinded clinical trial. J Feline Med Surg 2021; 23(6):
540–548.
606 Kreisler RE, Cornell HN, Smith VA, et al. Use of nalbuphine as a substitute for
butorphanol in combination with dexmedetomidine and tiletamine/zolazepam: a
randomized non-inferiority trial. J Feline Med Surg 2020; 22(2): 100–107.
607 Kulkarni H, William BJ, George RS, et al. Analgesic and adjunct actions of nal-
buphine hydrochloride in xylazine or xylazine and acepromazine premedicated
horses. Indian J Anim Res 2015; 49: 699–703.
608 Brunson DB, Majors LJ. Comparative analgesia of xylazine, xylazine/morphine,
xylazine/butorphanol, and xylazine/nalbuphine in the horse, using dental dolor-
imetry. Am J Vet Res 1987; 48(7): 1087–1091.

-- 412 of 1450 --

Chapter 23: Opioids 	397
609 Abouelfetouh MM, Salah E, Liu L, et al. Immediate postoperative analgesia of
nalbuphine-ketamine combination compared with ketamine alone in xylazine-
sedated goats undergoing left flank laparotomy. Animals (Basel) 2022; 12(4): 509.
610 O’Hair KC, Dodd KT, Phillips YY, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of nalbuphine
hydrochloride and butorphanol tartrate in sheep. Lab Anim Sci 1988; 38(1):
58–61.
611 Sanchez-Migallon Guzman D, KuKanich B, Keuler NS, et al. Antinociceptive
effects of nalbuphine hydrochloride in Hispaniolan Amazon parrots (Amazona
ventralis). Am J Vet Res 2011; 72(6): 736–740.
612 Sanchez-Migallon Guzman D, Braun JM, Steagall PV, et al. Antinociceptive effects
of long-acting nalbuphine decanoate after intramuscular administration to
Hispaniolan Amazon parrots (Amazona ventralis). Am J Vet Res 2013; 74(2):
196–200.
613 Keller DL, Sanchez-Migallon Guzman D, Klauer JM, et al. Pharmacokinetics of
nalbuphine hydrochloride after intravenous and intramuscular administration to
Hispaniolan Amazon parrots (Amazona ventralis). Am J Vet Res 2011; 72(6):
741–745.
614 Sanchez-Migallon Guzman D, KuKanich B, Heath TD, et al. Pharmacokinetics of
long-acting nalbuphine decanoate after intramuscular administration to Hispaniolan
Amazon parrots (Amazona ventralis). Am J Vet Res 2013; 74(2): 191–195.
615 Mills CA, Flacke JW, Flacke WE, et al. Narcotic reversal in hypercapnic dogs: com-
parison of naloxone and nalbuphine. Can J Anaesth 1990; 37(2): 238–244.
616 Fletcher DJ, Boller M, Brainard BM, et al. RECOVER evidence and knowledge gap
analysis on veterinary CPR. Part 7: clinical guidelines. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San
Antonio) 2012; 22(Suppl 1): S102–S131.
617 Palmer LE, Gautier A. Clinical update: the risk of opioid toxicity and naloxone use
in operational K9s. J Spec Oper Med 2017; 17(4): 86–92.
618 Wahler BM, Lerche P, Ricco Pereira CH, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmaco-
dynamics of intranasal and intravenous naloxone hydrochloride administration
in healthy dogs. Am J Vet Res 2019; 80(7): 696–701.
619 Copland VS, Haskins SC, Patz J. Naloxone reversal of oxymorphone effects in
dogs. Am J Vet Res 1989; 50(11): 1854–1858.
620 Rzasa Lynn R, Galinkin JL. Naloxone dosage for opioid reversal: current evidence
and clinical implications. Ther Adv Drug Saf 2018; 9(1): 63–88.
621 Turner DM, Kassell NF, Sasaki T, et al. High dose naloxone produces cerebral
vasodilation. Neurosurgery 1984; 15(2): 192–197.
622 Levin ER, Sharp B, Drayer JI, et al. Severe hypertension induced by naloxone.
Am J Med Sci 1985; 290(2): 70–72.
623 Thind GS, Wells JC, Wilkes RG. The effects of continuous intravenous naloxone
on epidural morphine analgesia. Anaesthesia 1986; 41(6): 582–585.
624 Rawal N, Möllefors K, Axelsson K, et al. An experimental study of urodynamic
effects of epidural morphine and of naloxone reversal. Anesth Analg 1983; 62(7):
641–647.
625 Weld JM, Kamerling SG, Combie JD, et al. The effects of naloxone on endotoxic
and hemorrhagic shock in horses. Res Commun Chem Pathol Pharmacol 1984;
44(2): 227–238.
626 Pace NL, Parrish RG, Lieberman MM, et al. Pharmacokinetics of naloxone and
naltrexone in the dog. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1979; 208(2): 254–256.
627 Pypendop BH, Brosnan RJ, Ilkiw JE. Use of naltrexone to antagonize high doses of
remifentanil in cats: a dose-finding study. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38(6): 594–597.
628 Brown DR, Goldberg LI. The use of quaternary narcotic antagonists in opiate
research. Neuropharmacol 1985; 24(3): 181–191.
629 Chandrasekaran A, Tong Z, Li H, et al. Metabolism of intravenous methylnaltrex-
one in mice, rats, dogs, and humans. Drug Metab Dispos 2010; 38(4): 606–616.
630 Beavers J, Orton L, Atchison L, et al. The efficacy and safety of methylnaltrexone
for the treatment of postoperative ileus. Am Surg 2022; 88(3): 409–413.
631 van Hoogmoed LM, Boscan PL. In vitro evaluation of the effect of the opioid
antagonist N-methylnaltrexone on motility of the equine jejunum and pelvic flex-
ure. Equine Vet J 2005; 37(4): 325–328.
632 Boscan P, Van Hoogmoed LM, Pypendop BH, et al. Pharmacokinetics of the opi-
oid antagonist N-methylnaltrexone and evaluation of its effects on gastrointestinal
tract function in horses treated or not treated with morphine. Am J Vet Res 2006;
67(6): 998–1004.
633 Martín-Flores M, Singh B, Walsh CA, et al. Effects of buprenorphine, methylnal-
trexone, and their combination on gastrointestinal transit in healthy New Zealand
White rabbits. J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2017; 56(2): 155–159.
634 Domínguez-Oliva A, Casas-Alvarado A, Miranda-Cortés AE, et al. Clinical phar-
macology of tramadol and tapentadol, and their therapeutic efficacy in different
models of acute and chronic pain in dogs and cats. J Adv Vet Anim Res 2021; 8(3):
404–422.
635 Schütter AF, Tünsmeyer J, Kästner SBR. Influence of tramadol on acute thermal
and mechanical cutaneous nociception in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(2):
309–316.
636 Donati PA, Tarragona L, Franco JVA, et al. Efficacy of tramadol for postoperative
pain management in dogs: systematic review and meta-analysis. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2021; 48(3): 283–296.
637 Kongara K, Chambers JP, Johnson CB, et al. Effects of tramadol or morphine in
dogs undergoing castration on intra-operative electroencephalogram responses
and post-operative pain. N Z Vet J 2013; 61(6): 349–353.
638 Thengchaisri N, Mahidol C. Evaluating the effects of continuous intravenous
infusions of tramadol and tramadol-lidocaine on sevoflurane minimum alveolar
concentration (MAC) and entropy values in dogs. J Vet Med Sci 2019; 81(5):
682–688.
639 El- Hawari SF, Oyama N, Koyama Y, et al. Sparing effect of tramadol, lidocaine,
dexmedetomidine and their combination on the minimum alveolar concentration
of sevoflurane in dogs. J Vet Sci 2022; 23(4): e53.
640 Delgado C, Bentley E, Hetzel S, et al. Comparison of carprofen and tramadol for
postoperative analgesia in dogs undergoing enucleation. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2014;
245(12): 1375–1381.
641 Budsberg SC, Torres BT, Kleine SA, et al. Lack of effectiveness of tramadol hydro-
chloride for the treatment of pain and joint dysfunction in dogs with chronic
osteoarthritis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2018; 252(4): 427–432.
642 Meunier NV, Panti A, Mazeri S, et al. Randomised trial of perioperative tramadol
for canine sterilisation pain management. Vet Rec 2019; 185(13): 406.
643 Piras LA, Mancusi D, Olimpo M, et al. Post-operative analgesia following TPLO
surgery: a comparison between cimicoxib and tramadol. Res Vet Sci 2021; 136:
351–359.
644 Pypendop BH, Siao KT, Ilkiw JE. Effects of tramadol hydrochloride on the ther-
mal threshold in cats. Am J Vet Res 2009; 70(12): 1465–1470.
645 Evangelista MC, Silva RA, Cardozo LB, et al. Comparison of preoperative trama-
dol and pethidine on postoperative pain in cats undergoing ovariohysterectomy.
BMC Vet Res 2014; 10: 252.
646 Bauquier SH. Randomised clinical trial comparing the perioperative analgesic
efficacy of oral tramadol and intramuscular tramadol in cats. J Feline Med Surg
2022; 24(8): 683–690.
647 Guedes AGP, Meadows JM, Pypendop BH, et al. Evaluation of tramadol for treat-
ment of osteoarthritis in geriatric cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2018; 252(5):
565–571.
648 Vullo C, Falcone A, Marino G, et al. Comparison between the effects of epidural
lidocaine, tramadol, and lidocaine-tramadol on postoperative pain in cats under-
going elective orchiectomy. Acta Vet Scand 2023; 65(1): 33.
649 Aldrich LA, Roush JK, KuKanich B. Plasma concentrations of tramadol after
transdermal application of a single metered dose of a compounded tramadol gel to
cats. Am J Vet Res 2021; 82(10): 840–845.
650 Indrawirawan Y, McAlees T. Tramadol toxicity in a cat: case report and literature
review of serotonin syndrome. J Feline Med Surg 2014; 16(7): 572–578.
651 Dhanjal JK, Wilson DV, Robinson E, et al. Intravenous tramadol: effects, nocicep-
tive properties, and pharmacokinetics in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36(6):
581–590.
652 Tavanaeimanesh H, Azarnoosh A, Ashar FS, et al. Comparison of analgesic effects
of a constant rate infusion of both tramadol and acetaminophen versus those of
infusions of each individual drug in horses. J Equine Vet Sci 2018; 64: 101–106.
653 Guedes AG, Matthews NS, Hood DM. Effect of ketamine hydrochloride on the
analgesic effects of tramadol hydrochloride in horses with signs of chronic
laminitis-associated pain. Am J Vet Res 2012; 73(5): 610–619.
654 Di Salvo A, Chiaradia E, Della Rocca G, et al. Efficacy, chondrotoxicity and
plasma concentrations of tramadol following intra-articular administration in
horses undergoing arthroscopy: preliminary findings. Vet Q 2018; 38(1):
129–137.
655 Howard J, Aarnes TK, Dyce J, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
after oral administration of tapentadol hydrochloride in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2018;
79(4): 367–375.
656 Lakritz J, Aarnes TK, Alva B, et al. Pharmacokinetics of oral tapentadol in cats.
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2024; 47(1): 14–20.
657 Kieves NR, Howard J, Lerche P, et al. Effectiveness of tapentadol hydrochloride for
treatment of orthopedic pain in dogs: a pilot study. Can Vet J 2020; 61(3):
289–293.
658 Doodnaught GM, Evangelista MC, Steagall PVM. Thermal antinociception fol-
lowing oral administration of tapentadol in conscious cats. Vet Anaesth Analg
2017; 44(2): 364–369.

-- 413 of 1450 --

Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of Lumb and Jones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
24
398
Introduction
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are among the
most important drugs used in all species of animals. They have the
advantage of producing both analgesic and anti-inflammatory
effects in animals. Because they are not controlled or scheduled
drugs, they can be easily prescribed and dispensed. There are a vari-
ety of formulations and routes of administration to choose from
that include oral tablets, oral caplets, oral liquids, chewable tablets,
paste (for horses), oral transmucosal mist, transdermal, and inject-
able solutions for intravenous (IV) or subcutaneous (SC) adminis-
tration (Table 24.1, Box 24.1).
This chapter will focus primarily on the most common drugs
used in most countries, but the reader should appreciate that avail-
ability, registration, licensing, and approvals by regulatory authori-
ties vary greatly around the world. There are drugs available in
some countries that are not available in others and some older
drugs on the market that have been replaced by newer approved
animal drugs in some countries. Some older drugs for which new
information has not been generated in many years (aspirin for
example) will not be covered in this chapter, but details of their
pharmacology may be found in previous editions of this and other
older textbooks. Although this chapter focuses primarily on the
major veterinary species of dogs, cats, horses, and cattle, the use of
NSAIDs in other animals should not be overlooked. There has been
extensive work in zoo and exotic species, particularly new work
published in non-mammalian species. Surprising differences in
both activity (e.g., cyclo-oxygenase [COX] activity) and pharma-
cokinetics exist among these other species. But it is beyond the
scope of this chapter to address all the other animal species in which
NSAIDs are administered; therefore, the reader is encouraged to
consult species-specific publications for more guidance.
Information on the pharmacology of these agents has been pro-
vided by Lees [1] as well as many other authors [2–5]. Guidelines
for clinical use in dogs [2,6–8], cats [7–11], horses [12], and food
animals [13] are available in species-specific reviews. A description
of the chemistry, mechanism of action, and clinical use of the coxib
class of NSAIDs is also available [14,15]. Because these extensive
and complete reviews are available, these details will be abbreviated
for this chapter.
Mechanism of action
Metabolism of arachidonic acid
As shown in Fig. 24.1, arachidonic acid, a fatty acid consisting of 20
carbons, is released from cell membranes by the enzyme phospho-
lipase A2 (PLA2 ). Arachidonic acid is the predominant fatty acid in
animal cell membranes. The products of arachidonic acid biotrans-
formation are referred to as “eicosanoids” because of their structure
24 Non-Steroidal Anti- Inflammatory Drugs
Mark G. Papich
Department of Molecular Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 398
Mechanism of action, 398
Metabolism of arachidonic acid, 398
Other possible mechanisms of action, 404
COX-1 versus COX-2 inhibition, 404
Pharmacokinetic properties, 405
Stereoisomerism, 406
Pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic properties, 406
In vivo assessment of PK-PD models, 406
Unique features of non-traditional NSAIDs, 406
Grapiprant, 406
Acetaminophen (Paracetamol), 407
Dipyrone (Metamizole), 408
Adverse effects of NSAIDs, 408
Gastrointestinal injury, 408
Kidney injury related to NSAID administration, 410
Effects of NSAIDs on the liver, 411
Injury to cartilage, 412
Blood coagulation effects: platelet inhibition and thrombotic
abnormalities, 412
Risks in people compared to animals, 412
Drug selection, 412
COX-2 inhibition as selection criterion, 412
Selection of NSAIDs for dogs, 413
Selection of NSAIDs for cats, 414
Selection of NSAIDs for horses, 414
NSAID selection for food animals, 415
References, 415

-- 414 of 1450 --

(Continued)
Table 24.1 Classification and pharmacologic parameters for selected non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs commonly used in animals.
Drug 	Chemical group and structure 	COX-1 or
COX-2 inhibitory
Half-life (t1/2
) 	Apparent volume of
distribution (Vd )a
Bioavailability (F%)b 	Protein
binding
Acetaminophen
(Paracetamol)
Aminophenol
NH	O
OH
CH3
No significant COX
activity
Dogs: 1–4 h (depending on the study)
Cats: 0.6 h
Horses: 2–5 h (depending on the study)
Dogs: 0.87–1.3 L/kg 	Dogs: 44–100%
(depending on the study)
Carprofen 	Propionic acid
Cl
O
OH
CH3
NH
Preferential for COX-2 	S(+)-enantiomer
Dogs: 11.7 h (100 mg IV bolus) and ~ 8 h
(range 4.5–9.8 h, oral)
Horses: 8–20 h (depending on the study)
Cats: 20±16.6 h (range 9–49 h); and
10.7±5.17 h
Calves: 37±2.4 h
Cows: 30.7±2.3 h (43±2.3 h with
mastitis)
Dogs: 0.14±0.02 L/kg
Cats: 0.14±0.05 L/kg; and
0.25 L/kg
Horses: 0.307±0.036 L/kg
Calves: 0.163±0.002 L/kg
Cows: 0.091±0.003 L/kg
Dogs: > 90% (oral) 	Dogs: > 99%
Deracoxib 	Coxib (diaryl substituted pyrazole)
F
F
F
N
N
O	H3 C
NH 2
O
O
S
Selective for COX-2 	Dogs: 3 h (2–3 mg/kg IV)
Cats: 7.9 h
Dogs: ~ 1.5 L/kg 	Dogs: > 90% (2 mg/kg,
oral)
Dogs: > 90%
Robenacoxib 	Coxib
H
N
F
O
OH
CH 3
F
F
F
Selective for COX-2 	Dogs: 0.63 and 1.1 h
Cats: 1.49, 1.87, 0.84, and 0.78 h
(depending on the study)
Dogs: 0.24 L/kg
Cats: 0.13 and 0.19 L/kg
(depending on the study)
Dogs: 84% (non-fed);
62% (fed)
Cats: 49% (non-fed);
10% (fed)
Dogs: 98%
Cats: 99.9%

-- 415 of 1450 --

Drug 	Chemical group and structure 	COX-1 or
COX-2 inhibitory
Half-life (t1/2
) 	Apparent volume of
distribution (Vd )a
Bioavailability (F%)b 	Protein
binding
Etodolac 	Pyranocarboxylic acid
H
O
O
OH	H 3C
CH3	N
Non-selective for
COX-2 or preferential
for COX-2 (depending
on the study)
Dogs: 7.66±2.05 h (oral, fasted);
11.98±5.52 h (oral, non-fasted);
9.7±0.97 h (IV)
Horses: 2.85 h (mean)
Dogs: 1.14 L/kg
Horses: 0.29±0.09 L/kg
Dogs: ~ 100%
Horses: 77% (range
43–100%)
Dogs: > 95%
Firocoxib 	Coxib
H3C
CH3
CH 3
O
O
O
O
O
S
Selective for COX-2
(most highly selective
of all the veterinary
NSAIDs)
Dogs: 7.8 h
Horses: ~ 30–40 h
Dogs: ~ 4.6 L/kg
Horses: 1.7 L/kg
Dogs: ~ 38%
Horses: 80–100%
Dogs: 96%
Horses: > 97%
Grapiprant 	Piprant
N
	N
N
CH 3
H 3C
H 3C 	CH 3
O
O
NH2
NH
S
O
No COX activity;
antagonist of the
prostaglandin-E2 (PGE 2 )
receptor 4 (EP4)
Dogs: 1.95–5.42 h
Cats: 4.4 h
Horses: 5.86 h
Dogs: 1.9 L/kg
Cats: 0.92 L/kg
Dogs: 90% (higher in
fasted)
Cats: 40%
Dogs: 95%
Table 24.1 (Continued)

-- 416 of 1450 --

Drug 	Chemical group and structure 	COX-1 or
COX-2 inhibitory
Half-life (t1/2
) 	Apparent volume of
distribution (Vd
)a
Bioavailability (F%)b 	Protein
binding
Ketoprofen 	Propionic acid
O
O
OH
CH3
Non-selective for
COX-2
S(+)-enantiomer
Dogs: 1.65 ±0.48 h (oral)
Cats: 1.5 h
Horses: 1–7 h (depending on the study)
Calves: 0.42–2.19 h (depending on study
and age)
S(+)-enantiomer
Dogs: 0.39±0.07 L/kg
Horses: 0.14±0.02 L/kg
and 0.22±0.08 L/kg
Calves: 0.26±0.06 L/kg
Dogs, Cats: almost
100%
Horses: 70–100%
Horses: 93%
Mavacoxib 	Coxib
H2N O
N N
CF 3
F
O
S
COX-2 selective 	Dogs: 17 days median (range 8–39 days
in Beagle dogs) and 39 days (in field trial
dogs, with some dogs > 80 days)
Dogs: 1.6 L/kg 	Dogs: 46.1% (fasted),
87.4% (fed); dose based
on fed dogs
Dogs: 98%
Meloxicam 	Enolic acid derivative (oxicam)
S
O 	O
N
N
H
CH3
OH 	O
CH3
S
N
COX-2 preferential, but
at high doses COX-2
specificity diminishes
Dogs: 24.0±26.2% h (IV), 23.7±30.0% h
(oral)
Cats: 26–37 h (depending on study)
Horses: 5–12 h (depending on the study
and formulation)
Cattle: 20–30 h (depending on the
study), 14.6 h (cows)
Dogs: ~ 0.32±20% L/kg
(Vd-area
)
Horses: 0.23 and 0.12 L/
kg (depending on study)
Cats: 0.245 L/kg (Vd/F)
Cattle: 0.194 L/kg
Dogs: 100%
Horses: 75–100%
Cattle: 100%
Dogs: 97%
Horses: 98.5%
Phenylbutazone 	Pyrazolone (pyrazolidinedione)
O
N
N
H 3 C
O
Non-selective for
COX-2
Horses: 5 and up to 7 h (depending on
the study)
Calves: 53.4 h
Bulls: 62 h
Cows: 36–55 h (depending on the study)
Dogs: 4–6 h
Cattle: 0.13–0.14 L/kg
Horses: 0.14 L/kg
Cattle: 54–69% and
69–89% (depending on
the study)
Horses: 70% (delayed
with feeding)
Horses: 99%
Cattle:
93–98%
(Continued)

-- 417 of 1450 --

Drug 	Chemical group and structure 	COX-1 or
COX-2 inhibitory
Half-life (t1/2
) 	Apparent volume of
distribution (Vd )a
Bioavailability (F%)b 	Protein
binding
Flunixin 	Anthranilic acid (pyridinecarboxylic acid)
O
N 	NH
F
F	F
CH3
OH
Non-selective for
COX-2
Horses: 2–3 h (in most studies)
Cows: 3–8 h (depending on the study)
Dogs: 3.7 h
Cats: 6.6 h
Horses: 0.15±0.04 L/kg
Dogs: 0.18±0.08 L/kg
Cats: 0.75 L/kg
Cows: 0.42, 0.78, and
0.50 L/kg in different
studies
Dogs: ~ 100%
Horses: 72%
> 90% in all
animals studied
Dipyrone
(Metamizole)
Pyrazolone
N 	N
N
CH3
H3C
CH3
Na +
S
O
O
O –
O
Mechanism uncertain;
may inhibit COX-3 or
act through other
mechanisms
All values based on the major active
metabolite.
Horses: 3–6 h
Dogs: 5–6 h
Cats: 6–7 h
All values based on the
major active metabolite.
Horses: 1.4–1.6 L/kg
Dogs: 5 L/kg
Cats: 0.967 L/kg
All values based on the
major active metabolite.
Dogs: 100%
Cats: 81%
Not reported
Pharmacokinetic parameters derived from references cited in the text.
a Apparent volume of distribution (Vd
) for most drugs at steady state, unless otherwise noted.
b Percent bioavailability (F%) after oral administration.
Colored portions of the structural diagrams represent the reactive groups.
Table 24.1 (Continued)

-- 418 of 1450 --

Chapter 24: Non- Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs 	403
of 20 carbons (Greek eikosi = 20). Most arachidonic acid is recycled
back to the cell membranes, but in the face of various stimuli, ara-
chidonic acid may be acted upon by COX or lipoxygenase (LOX)
enzymes to form various eicosanoids, which have a role in homeo-
stasis and disease (Fig. 24.2). Prostanoids are specific eicosanoids
that are further metabolized into the various prostaglandins (PGD2
,
PGF 2α, and PGE 2
), prostacyclin (PGI 2
), and thromboxane (TXA 2
).
These products act locally via G-protein-coupled receptors to gen-
erate inflammatory and immunological responses and are also
responsible for important physiological functions. A group of LOX
products, the leukotrienes, are also responsible for inflammation,
but are not inhibited by the traditional drugs covered in this chapter
and will not be further discussed.
The action of traditional NSAIDs is to inhibit COX enzymes and
alter the formation of the prostanoids [16]. The significant develop-
ment that improved the understanding of NSAIDs’ mechanism of
action occurred in the early 1990s when new details about the tar-
gets of these drugs emerged [17,18]. It was elucidated that there are
two isoenzymes (isoforms) of COX (also known as “prostaglandin
synthase”) that are responsible for synthesis of prostaglandins.
Prostaglandin 	synthase-1 	(COX-1) 	is 	usually 	simplistically
described as a constitutive enzyme expressed in tissues [17,18].
Prostaglandins, prostacyclin, and thromboxane synthesized by this
enzyme are responsible for normal physiologic functions.
Prostaglandin synthase-2 (COX- 2), on the other hand, is inducible
(upregulated) and synthesized by macrophages and inflammatory
cells after stimulation by cytokines and other mediators of inflam-
mation. In 2002, a third isoenzyme of COX was described [19,20].
The COX-3 enzyme is a splice variant from the COX-1 gene, which
to date has only been identified in the canine brain, human brain,
Box 24.1 NSAIDS that have been used in various species.
NSAIDs used in dogs
Aspirina
Phenylbutazoneb
Carprofen (Rimadyl, and generic)e
Etodolac (EtoGesic)b
Meloxicam (Metacam, and generic)e
Ketoprofen (Anafen)d
Deracoxib (Deramaxx)
Firocoxib (Previcox)
Meclofenamic acid (Arquel)b
Robenacoxib (Onsior)e,g
Grapiprant (Galliprant)
Tepoxalin (Zubrin)b
Mavacoxib (Trocoxil)f
Tolfenamic acid (Tolfedine)d,e
Cimicoxibf
NSAIDs used in cats
Aspirina
Meloxicam (Metacam)c,e
Carprofene,f
Robenacoxibe
Ketoprofend
Tolfenamic acid (Tolfedine)d,e
NSAIDs used in horses
Aspirina
Flunixin meglumine
Ketoprofen
Phenylbutazone
Meclofenamic acidb
Meloxicamf
NSAIDs used in cattle
Flunixin meglumine
Ketoprofen
Meloxicamf
NSAIDs used in pigs
Ketoprofenf
Meloxicamf
a Aspirin is not FDA- approved for dogs, cats, or horses, with the exception
of a combination with methylprednisolone (Cortaba tablets, 0.5 mg of
methylprednisolone and 300 mg of aspirin).
b Approved but not actively marketed.
c Approved for cats also as a single dose in the US, but for oral multiple
doses in other countries.
d Approved in Canada and other countries for small animals but not in the
US for small animals.
e Available as an injectable as well as oral formulation.
f Approved for this use in other countries, but not the US.
g Oral robenacoxib was withdrawn by the sponsor for dogs in the US.
Injury
Arachidonic acid
Leukotrienes
(LTs) 	Prostanoids
(PGE 2 , PGI2 )
Prostanoids
(TXA2 , PGF)
Phospholipase A 2
Call
membrane
Lipoxygenase
(LOX) 	Cyclo-oxygenase 2 	Cyclo-oxygenase 1
(COX-2) 	(COX-1)
Figure 24.2 Metabolism of arachidonic acid products. The cell membrane
generates arachidonic acid via de-esterification by the enzyme
phospholipase A 2 . Arachidonic acid is further metabolized by cyclo-
oxygenase enzymes (COX-1 and COX-2) to the various prostaglandins
(PGs), prostacyclin (PGI 2
), and thromboxane (TXA2
) to produce clinical,
immunologic, and physiologic functions. An alternative pathway is via the
lipoxygenase enzyme (LOX), which produces the inflammatory
leukotrienes (LTs). The COX enzymes are the targets for non-steroidal
anti- inflammatory drugs, but do not ordinarily affect the LOX enzymes.
Membrane phospholipids
PLA2
PGG 2
PGH 2
PGI 2
Prostacyclin
TXA 2 	PGD2 	PGE2 	PGF2
Arachidonic acid
COX (cyclo-oxygenase)
COX (peroxidase)
Thromboxane
Figure 24.1 Membrane phospholipids are the source of arachidonic acid,
the major eicosanoid in animals. Arachidonic acid is further metabolized
by COX enzymes to the various prostaglandins (PGs), prostacyclin, and
thromboxane to produce clinical, immunologic, and physiologic
functions. The COX enzymes are the targets for non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs.

-- 419 of 1450 --

404 	Section 3: Pharmacology
and heart [20]. It is hypothesized that the mechanism of action of
acetaminophen (paracetamol) is by inhibition of COX-3 although
this hypothesis predated the discovery of the COX-3 splicing vari-
ant [19,20]. Acetaminophen may have other mechanisms of action,
as discussed later in this chapter.
An exception to this traditional view of COX enzyme inhibition
by NSAIDs is the action of grapiprant, a new class of drugs that can
technically be considered “non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs,”
but do not inhibit the COX enzyme. This agent will be discussed in
more detail later in the chapter. Instead of inhibiting production of
prostaglandins, it blocks the prostaglandin receptor. After
inflammation is triggered and prostaglandins are synthesized,
prostaglandin-E2 (PGE 2
) exerts its effects via four receptors (EP1-
4). The EP4 receptor is responsible for some of the sensitization of
sensory neurons and signs of inflammation. Although other recep-
tors are activated during inflammation, the EP4 receptor has been
identified as the primary receptor responsible for mediating pain
and inflammation associated with osteoarthritis. One of the new
“non-traditional” NSAIDs, also called “piprants,” is grapiprant,
which blocks this receptor.
The explanation of COX function described above is likely too
simplistic. Both enzymes can participate in regulatory and homeo-
static function, and both can produce pain and inflammation. The
predominant enzyme reflects the tissue or cell type in which it is
produced. For example, COX-1 is the dominant enzyme in plate-
lets, and COX-2 is the dominant enzyme in inflammatory cells.
In bone, COX-1 is expressed under normal conditions, but
COX-2 is expressed during mechanical stress. Some COX-2 prod-
ucts are important for homeostatic function, and COX-1 products
are involved in pain and inflammation. Prostaglandin synthesis
is inherently higher in canine gastric mucosa than duodenal
mucosa [21,22], but COX-2 production of prostaglandins can be
upregulated in these tissues, responding to inflammatory stimuli to
produce a protective and healing role [23]. COX-2 products are also
important in normal renal function. COX-2 may be upregulated
under conditions that may be stressful to the kidney, such as hypo-
volemia or severe hypotension [24,25].
Therefore, the perception that COX-2 is a “bad” enzyme and
COX-1 is a “good” enzyme is too simplistic because we now under-
stand that there is some overlap in the functions of these isoforms
on organs [26]. Drugs that inhibit these enzymes (e.g., NSAIDs)
can be effective and/or harmful regardless of whether they are
selective or non-selective in their action on these enzymes.
Nevertheless, some of the most recently developed NSAIDs have
targeted COX-2 inhibition, so that COX-1 is spared as much as pos-
sible with the goal of producing analgesia and suppressing inflam-
mation without inhibiting physiologically important prostanoids,
particularly the COX-1 products in the gastrointestinal tract.
Other possible mechanisms of action
Although it is assumed that prostaglandin inhibition in both
peripheral and nervous system (spinal and brain) tissues is the most
important mechanism of action for most NSAIDs, there may be
other mechanisms to explain some of their effects. These properties
have not been accepted as a mechanism compared to prostaglandin
inhibition but deserve some consideration. Some NSAIDs, includ-
ing salicylates, may inhibit nuclear factor kappa-B (NF-κB), which
promotes synthesis of other inflammatory mediators. There is not
universal agreement on the mechanism of action of carprofen,
which is the most commonly prescribed NSAID in dogs. Carprofen
significantly inhibited PGE2 (a biomarker for COX-2) directly at
sites of inflammation in dogs, providing evidence that carprofen
does indeed act on COX-2 [27]. Other evidence indicates that it
inhibits prostaglandins in vitro [28], but carprofen did not show an
in vivo antiprostaglandin effect in dogs [29,30]. In another study,
the investigators were unable to show that carprofen inhibited
either COX-1 or COX-2 [31], suggesting either a central mecha-
nism of action or activity on other pathways.
In horses, similar questions have been raised [32] with a conclu-
sion that the anti-inflammatory effects of carprofen in horses were
not caused by COX inhibition. In another study in the same labora-
tory [33], they concluded that recommended doses of carprofen
produce minimal inhibition of COX, and it is likely to achieve its
therapeutic effects at least partially through other pathways, possi-
bly including weak to moderate inhibition of 5-lipoxygenase and
enzyme release. Other investigators [34] also concluded that there
may be COX-independent mechanisms for some NSAIDs in the
equine intestine.
COX- 1 versus COX-2 inhibition
Selectivity of COX-2 versus COX-1 has been expressed as the COX-
1:COX-2 inhibitory ratio. This ratio is derived from studies in which
the inhibitory effect, usually expressed as the inhibitory concentra-
tion to inhibit 50% of activity (IC50
), is measured from stimulating
cells that are capable of expressing products of these enzymes. In the
whole blood assay, the source for COX-1 products (thromboxane or
TXA2
) is platelets and the source of COX-2 products (PGE2
) is leu-
kocytes. The ratio is expressed as COX-1 [IC50
]:COX-2 [IC50
], or
simply COX-1:COX-2. The higher the value above 1.0, the greater
the inhibitory action of the drug is for COX-2 compared to COX-1.
There is subjective value placed on the magnitude of the ratio when
considering the drug as “COX-1 sparing,” “COX-2 specific,” “COX-2
preferential,” or “COX-2 selective.” These terms have been used by
other investigators [35], but the magnitude of the ratios that define
these criteria has not been agreed upon. In reality, COX-2 selectivity
is a continuous variable that does not easily allow a distinct defini-
tion of COX-2 selective or non-selective. These are relative defini-
tions, rather than absolute categories of NSAIDs.
The drugs with the highest inhibitory ratios are the selective
COX-2 inhibitors (based on in vitro assays for the COX-2 enzyme)
often called the “coxibs” or “coxib class of NSAIDs.” These drugs
include the veterinary products firocoxib, deracoxib, robenacoxib,
and mavacoxib and the human product celecoxib (other coxibs
such as rofecoxib have been withdrawn from the human market
because of adverse effects on the cardiovascular system in human
patients). Carprofen and meloxicam can be considered somewhat
COX-2 preferential. Ketoprofen is non-selective, and etodolac has
been classified as somewhat preferential to non-selective, depend-
ing on the study referenced. Aspirin is highly COX-1 selective.
Although the IC 50 ratio is the normal convention used for determi-
nation of COX selectivity [4,5], some investigators have proposed
that a higher inhibitory concentration ratio (e.g., IC80
) may be bet-
ter for predicting clinical efficacy, because such a high degree of
inhibition may be necessary for analgesia or anti-inflammatory
effects [36].
Comparisons of COX-1 versus COX-2 inhibition of veterinary
NSAIDs vary among the drugs, animal species, and study technique
used [15,37]. For example, deracoxib is considered a highly selec-
tive COX-2 inhibitor based on an assay performed in purified
enzymes [38]. In this study, the COX-1:COX-2 ratio was 1275,
much higher than other drugs tested. But when tested using canine
whole blood and compared to other NSAIDs, deracoxib had a ratio

-- 420 of 1450 --

Chapter 24: Non- Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs 	405
of only 12 [39]. In the same study, carprofen had a ratio of 6–7 and
firocoxib had a ratio of 384–427 [39]. Although etodolac is no
longer used in dogs, there was a tremendous difference between
the canine and human COX-1:COX- 2 ratio, with a value of 8.1 in
humans but 0.52–0.53 in dogs [40].
In a study using canine enzyme systems, carprofen had a COX-
1:COX-2 ratio of 129 [28], but in another study, using cell lines of
another species (sheep and rodent), the ratio was 1.0 [16], and in a
study using canine macrophages, the ratio was 1.75 [41]. Yet another
study on carprofen showed a ratio of 5.3, which was 1000 times less
potent in whole blood than in cell culture [42]. Large differences
among animal species have been shown for carprofen [5,33], which
may be attributed to effects of carprofen on human cells being rela-
tively selective for COX-1, but for canine and feline cells, carprofen
shows preferential activity against COX-2, and for equine cells, it is
non- selective or slightly preferential for COX-2.
In view of the discrepancies among studies and techniques, it is
generally accepted that the whole blood assay should be the gold
standard for determining COX-1/COX- 2 specificity because it
most closely simulates the appropriate physiologic condi-
tions [4,5,35,36,43]. The advantage of the whole blood assay is that
it incorporates the components into the assay that normally occur
in circulating blood, namely proteins, cells, platelets, and enzymes.
These components are not present in isolated cells or enzyme sys-
tems used for some earlier assays. Because the NSAIDs are highly
protein bound (as discussed below), this is particularly important
as only a small fraction, the unbound fraction, is biologically active
in blood. The whole blood assay measures COX-2 products (PGE2
)
from stimulated leukocytes and COX-1 products (TXA2
) from
stimulated platelets.
Pharmacokinetic properties
Pharmacokinetic parameter estimates for NSAIDs are available
from a variety of research reports and the drug package inserts from
sponsors. Some selected values are shown in Table 24.1 and are
derived from a variety of sources. It is not possible to provide an
exhaustive list of every study because there are hundreds of phar-
macokinetic studies published for NSAIDs in animals. The com-
mon features possessed by the NSAIDs used in animals are worth
noting. All have high protein binding (> 90%). Generally, all are
well absorbed after oral administration and are weak acids that have
high lipophilicity at physiologic tissue pH. The lipid/water partition
coefficient, reported as the logarithm of the partition coefficient, or
LogP, for these drugs is greater than or near 2.0. If the LogP for a
medication is close to or above 2.0, diffusion across biologic mem-
branes is favored (unless restricted by protein binding) and oral
absorption is favored by high lipophilicity. Being weak acids, the
lipophilicity (LogD) is highest at the low pH of the stomach and is
lower, but still above 0.0, at the physiologic pH of 7.0. Meloxicam
is an exception because the LogD is –0.75 at a pH of 7.0. Mavacoxib
is another exception because it is a weak base.
Both lipophilicity and protein binding affect a drug’s volume of
distribution. The volume of distribution varies considerably among
the NSAIDs (Table 24.1). For many drugs, high protein binding is
associated with a small volume of distribution because protein
binding decreases diffusion out of the extracellular compartment
(e.g., plasma and extracellular fluid), but this is not a consistent fea-
ture of the NSAIDs. Carprofen and phenylbutazone have the lowest
volume of distribution at 0.14 L/kg (lower than extracellular water
volume), and most NSAIDs have volumes of distribution less than
1.0 L/kg. However, firocoxib, deracoxib, and etodolac all have vol-
umes of distribution greater than 1.0 L/kg. Firocoxib has the high-
est volume of distribution (approximately 4.6 L/kg in dogs) [44],
while it has the lowest lipophilicity (LogP 1.96). Interestingly, car-
profen has one of the highest lipophilicity values among the
NSAIDS (LogP of 3.79), but also has the lowest volume of
distribution.
The estimated plasma half-life varies tremendously among the
NSAIDs, and among species (Table 24.1). For example, in dogs, the
half-life is < 1 h for robenacoxib, 1.6 h for ketoprofen, 3 h for dera-
coxib, and up to 24 h for meloxicam. Phenylbutazone ranges from
5–6 h in dogs and horses to over 50 h in cattle. Firocoxib has a half-
life of 7.8 h in dogs, but 30 h or more in horses. Mavacoxib, an
NSAID approved for dogs in Europe but not the United States (US),
is unusual in that it has very low systemic clearance, resulting in a
half-life in laboratory Beagles of 15.5–19.3 days [45]. However, in
osteoarthritic dogs of other breeds, the half-life was highly variable
with an average of 44 days but exceeding 80 days in some dogs [46].
Despite these differences, the half-life does not appear to influ-
ence dosing intervals. In other words, the canine-approved labels
for these drugs generally state once-daily oral administration for
osteoarthritis or soft tissue inflammation despite the disparate half-
lives. Mavacoxib is a notable exception with initial dosing at a 14-
day interval with subsequent doses given every 30 days [46].
One of the reasons why plasma drug pharmacokinetic parame-
ters (e.g., half-life) may not predict the dose interval is because of a
lag time between the tissue concentrations and blood concentra-
tions, raising questions about the value of plasma or serum pharma-
cokinetics to predict dose and dose intervals. Even the drugs with
short half-lives can be administered once daily because the tissue
concentrations and inhibitory effects persist much longer. Protein
binding has historically been used to explain the long persistence in
tissues, but these drugs are bound in plasma as well as tissues, which
challenges this assumption. The high lipophilicity of these drugs
also may explain the long tissue half-lives because high lipophilicity
favors intracellular distribution, which can serve as a reservoir for
prolonged tissue levels. The concept of “ion trapping” has been
used to explain the high concentrations of NSAIDs in tissues com-
pared to plasma. However, this is a false application of this princi-
ple. NSAIDs generally have a low pKa (weak acids); therefore, they
are ionized in both plasma and tissue. The pH in tissues, even when
inflamed, is generally not below the pKa
, making ion trapping
unlikely because of the small differential between tissue and plasma
pH, compared to the pKa of many NSAIDs, which have a pKa in the
range of 4–5. In other words, the tissue pH does not fall below the
pKa of these NSAIDs for ion trapping to factor into the drug’s
distribution.
The NSAIDs are biotransformed by hepatic mechanisms, which
is characteristic of lipophilic, poorly water-soluble compounds that
have relatively low systemic clearance. Clearance values are not
listed in Table 24.1, but all NSAIDs have clearance values of approx-
imately 0.4 L/kg/h (6.67 mL/kg/min) or less. With liver blood flow
being approximately 30 mL/kg/min in dogs [47], such a low value
for these NSAIDs would qualify them as low clearance compounds.
Mavacoxib is an extreme example with systemic clearance of only
0.0027 L/kg/h in Beagle dogs [45]. Similar properties are observed
for the NSAIDs in other species in which the systemic clearance is
much lower than liver blood flow. There are a few exceptions: sys-
temic clearance of meloxicam in horses is approximately three to
five times higher than in humans and three times higher than in
dogs [48,49]. Robenacoxib has a clearance of approximately

-- 421 of 1450 --

406 	Section 3: Pharmacology
9–12 mL/kg/min in cats [50,51] and 13 mL/kg/min in dogs [51,52],
which is higher than the other NSAIDs, and it also has a corre-
spondingly short half-life in each of these species.
Gastrointestinal absorption is generally high for the formulations
approved for animals (above 90% and often close to 100%), but
there are exceptions. Firocoxib and mavacoxib are unusual with
only 38% and 46% oral bioavailability in dogs, respectively.
Robenacoxib has unusually low bioavailability in cats that is signifi-
cantly affected by feeding [51]. There are also lower values for oral
absorption of some drugs in horses and cattle (Table 24.1).
Feeding may increase, inhibit, or delay absorption of concur-
rently administered NSAIDs. For example, feeding horses at the
same time as oral phenylbutazone administration does not decrease
absorption, but it is delayed significantly, presumably because of
binding to materials in feed and release in the distal intestine [53].
Robenacoxib is highly affected by feeding with oral absorption of
10% in fed cats versus 49% in fasted cats [51,54] and 62% in fed
dogs versus 84% in fasted dogs [51,52]. Mavacoxib (unique because
it is a weak base instead of a weak acid) is affected in the opposite
direction, with feeding increasing the oral absorption from 46% to
87% [45]. Meloxicam has good oral absorption and is only slightly
affected by feeding in horses (Table 24.1).
Stereoisomerism
The propionic acid derivatives (carprofen and ketoprofen) exist as
R(–) and S(+) chiral enantiomers. Chirality is important because
each isomer may exhibit different pharmacokinetic and pharmaco-
dynamic behavior. For example, the S(+)-enantiomer (eutomer) is
most active (lowest IC 50 ) for prostaglandin inhibition for these
two NSAIDs. Etodolac also exists as a chiral enantiomer, with the
S(+)- isomer being more active. None of the other drugs listed in
Table 24.1 have chiral enantiomers.
Pharmacokinetic- pharmacodynamic
properties
The association between the drug’s pharmacokinetics and
action at the target site has been the focus of pharmacokinetic-
pharmacodynamic (PK-PD) studies. If the plasma or serum phar-
macokinetic properties can be compared to the pharmacodynamic
studies that measure COX-1 and COX-2 inhibitory concentrations,
or observations of clinical response, it allows investigators to use the
estimated pharmacokinetic parameters of the drug to derive opti-
mal and safe dosing for animals. These approaches have been used
to evaluate various NSAIDs used in animals [4,5,55–57]. For exam-
ple, this approach was used to characterize the dose for robenacoxib
in dogs and cats [50,51,55–59] and was used to evaluate NSAIDs for
horses [48,49].
This approach entails the use of a blood concentration corre-
sponding to 80% inhibition of COX-2 (IC80
) to produce a therapeu-
tic effect, and a 20% inhibition of COX-1 (IC20
) to avoid adverse
effects. A value of 80% COX-2 inhibition is used to predict clinical
effects because a drug concentration that inhibits the enzyme by
only 50% may not be enough to produce a therapeutic effect. Using
these inhibitory concentration values as targets, PK-PD modeling
can be used to derive doses to attain optimal blood concentra-
tions [36,60]. The doses derived are intended to be starting points
from which other studies investigating clinical safety and effective-
ness can be planned. For example, using the PK-PD modeling
approach, investigators determined a dose of meloxicam of 0.17 mg/
kg every 24 h in cats [56]. This dose of meloxicam deviates from
doses derived from clinical studies because it is below the US Food
and Drug Administration (FDA)-registered single dose (0.3 mg/kg)
for cats [61] but higher than the chronic dose used clinically and
registered in other countries, including Europe [62]. On the other
hand, this approach correctly identified the optimum dose of 2 mg/
kg of robenacoxib in cats [50,51,57,59,63] and dogs [51,64].
In vivo assessment of PK-PD models
Rather than using an in vitro assay such as the whole blood assay to
measure COX inhibition as the pharmacodynamic surrogate
marker for efficacy, another approach is to use an in vivo measure.
An in vivo measure is more likely to reflect physiologic and patho-
logic conditions and predict clinical outcome. Several in vivo mod-
els have been used to test NSAIDs in animals, which are described
in other reports [4,27]. A typical in vivo model involves inducing
inflammation in a tissue cage and measuring the inhibition of the
inflammatory response in relation to the drug concentration.
Alternatively, the model may use an injection of an irritant into a
joint followed by an observation of the response by measuring the
degree of lameness produced, heat, and/or pain [39,49,50]. Values
such as 50% inhibitory concentration (IC50
) can be estimated from
the in vivo model as it was for the in vitro model and used to derive
an effective dose. One example of this approach was used to derive
a dose for meloxicam in cats. Inflammation was induced in experi-
mental cats, and the response was matched to pharmacokinetic
parameters for PK-PD modeling [55]. These investigators calcu-
lated a single dose of 0.25–0.3 mg/kg of meloxicam to produce opti-
mum analgesic, anti-inflammatory, and antipyretic effects. This
dose agrees with the dose derived from clinical trials that led to the
current FDA-registered dose for cats in the US [61], but is higher
than the dose used clinically by many practitioners. In a tissue study
of carprofen in dogs [27], the investigators showed that carprofen
persists in tissue sites much longer than in plasma. But, contrary to
popular views, the concentration in the inflamed tissue was not dif-
ferent from healthy tissue. Carprofen significantly decreased PGE2
in the inflamed tissue.
Unique features of non-traditional NSAIDs
The mechanisms of action described above do not apply to other
agents used for acute and chronic pain in animals. Grapiprant is
technically classified as an NSAID, but it does not inhibit the COX
enzyme. Acetaminophen is often not listed with other NSAIDs
because it does not have anti-inflammatory properties and the
mechanism of action has yet to be fully identified. However, aceta-
minophen will be listed in this chapter because it is sometimes con-
sidered as an oral treatment option for dogs, and more recently for
horses. Dipyrone (metamizole in some countries) is also listed in
this chapter with the NSAIDs. It lacks significant anti-inflammatory
effects, and the mechanism of action is not entirely understood.
However, it has some COX inhibiting activity, is used in small ani-
mals for acute pain in some countries, and is approved for use in
horses in the US.
Grapiprant
Grapiprant is a non-COX-inhibiting agent. Instead of inhibiting
production of prostaglandins, it blocks the prostaglandin receptor.
After inflammation is triggered and prostaglandins are synthesized,
PGE2 exerts its effects via four receptors (EP1-4). The EP4 receptor
is responsible for some of the sensitization of sensory neurons
and signs of inflammation. Although other receptors are activated

-- 422 of 1450 --

Chapter 24: Non- Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs 	407
during inflammation, the EP4 receptor has been identified as the
primary receptor responsible for mediating pain and inflammation
associated with osteoarthritis. In dogs, grapiprant has high binding
affinity for the EP4 receptor and binds competitively at a single
site [65,66]. The effective dose in dogs, based on PK-PD analysis,
and extrapolation from laboratory animal models of pain, is 1.7 mg/
kg [65], which is almost the same as the FDA-approved dose of
2 mg/kg once daily.
In a pivotal clinical study [67], grapiprant showed effectiveness
comparable to traditional COX inhibiting drugs in dogs with naturally
occurring osteoarthritis. In dogs with osteoarthritis, 48% were classi-
fied as treatment successes compared to 31.3% of placebo-treated
dogs (131 dogs in each group). In studies in which grapiprant has been
compared to other NSAIDs for treatment of acute pain, it did not per-
form as well. Compared to firocoxib in a model of acute pain [68], it
was not as effective, and in dogs with experimentally induced synovi-
tis, grapiprant was the least effective agent, compared to carprofen and
another experimental drug [69]. In another study performed in dogs
undergoing ovariohysterectomy surgery, there was no difference
between carprofen and grapiprant using a validated scoring system for
postsurgical pain [70]. However, these were acute pain models and
may not indicate effects during chronic pain treatment.
Adverse reactions in dogs have been minimal and are typical as for
traditional NSAIDs. These may include vomiting, diarrhea, and
decreased appetite, which can be observed after administration of
other NSAIDs. These events have been mild and usually transient. In
a safety study with research dogs, they tolerated a dose equivalent to
30 mg/kg of the tablet for 9 months with adverse effects attributed to
the gastrointestinal tract characterized as mild and infrequent [71].
The pharmacokinetics in cats were similar to dogs [72]. In a
safety assessment for cats [73], it was safe at doses suggested for
therapeutic use (similar dose as for dogs). However, clinical efficacy
in cats has not been established.
Grapiprant has not been evaluated in horses, except for pharma-
cokinetic studies [74]. The plasma concentrations have been low,
and it was concluded that it will likely require a higher dose than the
canine dose of 2 mg/kg to achieve efficacy.
Acetaminophen (Paracetamol)
Acetaminophen has been administered alone or in combination
with opiates (codeine, oxycodone, or hydrocodone). Acetaminophen
should never be prescribed for cats because of the potential for
severe toxicity [75]. However, it is safe in dogs, even when admin-
istered at high doses [75]. Acetaminophen has been considered
when oral treatment is needed for dogs that are refractory to
traditional NSAIDs alone or have adverse effects from NSAIDs.
Acetaminophen has not produced renal or gastric injury in dogs
when prescribed at 15 mg/kg orally, every 8–12 h. Evidence of tox-
icity was not observed in dogs until doses of 100 mg/kg were
exceeded [75].
Although it produces mild analgesic effects, acetaminophen
does not produce anti-inflammatory effects at clinically relevant
doses [76,77]. A study in a canine surgery model that demonstrated
anti-inflammatory effects used doses that are higher than recom-
mended clinically [76]. On the other hand, when acetaminophen
was administered at a dose of 15 mg/kg every 8 h to dogs, there were
no differences between treatments when acetaminophen was com-
pared to carprofen or meloxicam for analgesia in dogs after ovario-
hysterectomy surgery [78]. In experimental dogs with joint pain,
acetaminophen combined with codeine was not as effective as oral
carprofen [79]. There are no studies on the long-term use for
osteoarthritis in dogs. In people, acetaminophen has not been effec-
tive (or minimally effective) for the treatment of osteoarthritis of
the hip and knee [80].
Most of the experience with clinical use of acetaminophen in
dogs has been anecdotal as an alternative to NSAIDs or opioids. It
has been administered to dogs in combination with codeine, oxyco-
done, and hydrocodone, despite a lack of clinical studies on the
effectiveness of these preparations. Codeine absorption is low in
dogs, and there are no studies that demonstrate that it produces
convincing analgesia.
The mechanism of acetaminophen’s action is unknown, but there
are a few proposed theories [81,82]. Although it has long been
assumed that acetaminophen does not inhibit the COX enzyme, it
may be a COX inhibitor but act in cells in which low concentrations
of arachidonic acid are present [81]. The site of acetaminophen
action may be the peroxidase enzyme component of prostaglandin-
H2 synthase [83]. Prostaglandin-H2 synthase consists of both per-
oxidase and COX portions but is collectively referred to as “COX”
in most papers. The target for traditional NSAIDs is the COX por-
tion of prostaglandin-H 2 synthase. COX inhibition probably occurs
at site- specific tissues, sparing the gastrointestinal mucosa, plate-
lets, and kidneys, but acting centrally [20]. It may also be a selective
COX- 2 inhibitor in selected tissues [84].
Other evidence presented to support the analgesic efficacy of
acetaminophen is that it appears to inhibit the COX-1 variant
referred to as “COX-3” [19]. This action may be more prominent in
dogs than in any other species. COX-3 effects occur in the brain
without affecting prostaglandin synthesis at other sites in the body
(e.g., kidney and gastrointestinal mucosa) that could potentially
lead to adverse effects. Other non-traditional NSAIDs (dipyrone
and phenacetin) also appear to inhibit COX-3. Because COX-3 may
be responsible for pyrexia and mediating central pain, this may
explain the efficacy of acetaminophen for the treatment of mild
pain and fever reduction. On the other hand, in other review papers,
the authors have not supported this mechanism for the action of
acetaminophen [83,85,86], and other mechanisms discussed in this
section may be more important.
There is some evidence that acetaminophen may affect inhibi-
tory pain pathways involved in chronic pain and neuropathic pain
syndromes. Descending inhibitory pain pathways are mediated by
serotonin (5-HT 3
). Acetaminophen can stimulate these inhibitory
pain pathways, which can be blocked by serotonin antagonists [87].
This evidence suggests that acetaminophen may activate serotonin
receptors responsible for modulating inhibitory pain pathways in
experimental pain models.
A more recent theory for the action of acetaminophen is that
the parent drug or a metabolite acts centrally as an activator of
transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 (TRPV1) or TRPA recep-
tors [81,82]. In rats, acetaminophen is deacetylated to its primary
amine and is then conjugated with arachidonic acid in the brain
and the spinal cord to form the potent TRPV1 agonist N-
arachidonoylphenolamine (AM404). This action may play a role
in some pain syndromes, but the relevance is undetermined for
clinical use and has not been identified in dogs. However, this
mechanism represents a possible overlap with the endogenous
cannabinoid system.
Acetaminophen may have some potential for treating pain in
dogs (and perhaps horses), but effective doses and blood concentra-
tions are undetermined, and more work is needed before conclu-
sions and recommendations can be made for animal use. One of the
disadvantages of acetaminophen in dogs is that frequent dosing is

-- 423 of 1450 --

408 	Section 3: Pharmacology
needed because of the short half-life of slightly more than 1 h.
Although 15 mg/kg every 8 h was used in some of the studies cited
above, in Labrador Retriever dogs, a dose of 20 mg/kg every 6 h is
needed to maintain drug concentrations in the therapeutic range
that is considered effective in people [88]. Frequent dosing may be
inconvenient for many pet owners. This was confirmed in another
study in which they showed that even at a high dose of over 30 mg/
kg, these effective concentrations were maintained for only 2 h [89].
The effects of acetaminophen in horses have recently been exam-
ined [90–94]. The pharmacokinetics are favorable with a half-life of
approximately 3–5 h. Oral doses of 20 mg/kg every 12 h for 14 days
were well tolerated, but the analgesic effects were not measured [92].
In horses with experimentally induced endotoxemia, it effectively
reduced pyrexia, but effects on the outcome of clinical endotoxemia
were not evaluated [93]. It also produced improvement in lameness
scores in a model of mechanically induced lameness (30 mg/kg
orally) [91], and after a single treatment of 20 mg/kg orally, aceta-
minophen produced a significant thermal antinociceptive effect.
The clinical usefulness of acetaminophen in horses has not been
established, but the authors of some of the studies listed above con-
cluded that it is safe for administration to treat chronic lameness
but may not be effective when used alone [94].
Despite favorable effects in people, dogs, and horses, acetami-
nophen should not be used in cats. The adverse effects are well
documented in other feline references. It is well known that as little
as one tablet can kill a cat, unless they are treated promptly with
agents such as acetylcysteine that increase the clearance. The sus-
ceptibility in cats is related to two properties: (1) cats have poor
ability to form a glucuronide metabolite of the toxic byproduct of
acetaminophen (N-acetyl-p- benzoquinone imine [NAPQI]), and as
this metabolite accumulates, it causes cellular injury; and (2) the
injury to cats is an oxidative injury, both to the liver and red blood
cells. Cats are particularly susceptible to red blood cell oxidative
injury because the feline erythrocyte has eight sulfhydryl groups
that can be oxidized (six more than other mammals). Red blood cell
injury (Heinz body formation) and methemoglobinemia (chocolate
brown color of the blood) are tell-tale observations if cats are
administered toxic doses of acetaminophen.
Dipyrone (Metamizole)
Dipyrone is an older antipyretic/analgesic agent often grouped in the
NSAID class. In many countries, it is known as “metamizole.” It was
once approved for use in people but removed in 1977 because of con-
cern of bone marrow toxicity [95]. It was also banned for use in peo-
ple in the United Kingdom, France, Sweden, Canada, Australia, and
Norway. Therefore, if used in animals, it should be handled carefully
to avoid unintended exposure. However, it is still approved for use in
people in some European countries, Asia, and South America.
Although it has been listed as a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drug with analgesic and anti-inflammatory properties like other
NSAIDs, it has weak anti-inflammatory properties, and it is likely
acting through other non-traditional mechanisms. Dipyrone
appears to be neither a COX-1 nor COX-2 inhibitor but may inhibit
PGE2 synthesis through other mechanisms that reduce the oxida-
tion states of COX-1 and COX-2 [96]; this action may be similar
to that of acetaminophen. It is also unique from the traditional
NSAIDs in that it acts through other mechanisms, most likely cen-
tral inhibition of COX-3, much like the mechanism for acetami-
nophen [19,20]. Another proposed mechanism, in addition to what
is described above, is that it activates the opioid system or the
endogenous cannabinoid system (CB 1 receptor mediated effects).
Dipyrone is a pro-drug, metabolized to other structurally related
pyrazolone compounds. The first reaction is nonenzymatic to con-
vert dipyrone to the active form, 4-methyl-amino-antipyrene,
which is responsible for analgesic and antipyretic effects. This
metabolite can be further metabolized by cytochrome P450
enzymes to non-methylated and oxidized products.
Dipyrone is capable of blocking fever (pyrexia) through
prostaglandin-dependent and independent mechanisms. In horses,
it has long been considered an anti-spasmodic agent that is capable
of relieving discomfort associated with some types of colic in
horses. This mechanism may be through inhibited release of intra-
cellular calcium.
The most common use for dipyrone has been in horses. Dipyrone
is approved for IV use in horses under the trade name Zimeta®, but
equine veterinarians have used compounded formulations for
many years. The approved indication is to treat pyrexia at a dose of
30 mg/kg IV, twice daily for up to three days. Although the approved
indication is for pyrexia, many equine veterinarians use it for other
indications.
In the US, it has not been used in small animals, but this use is
more common in countries where it is more readily available. In
other countries, particularly South America, it is known as “meta-
mizole” and used for perioperative analgesia. The most common
dose in dogs is 25–50 mg/kg IV, intramuscular (IM), or SC, every 12
h. Most of the experience has been for short-term treatment (e.g.,
postoperative pain). Although human-label tablets are available in
some countries, long-term oral treatment has not been reported for
chronic pain in animals. There is not much known about the phar-
macokinetics or effects from repeated doses.
In dogs, the pharmacokinetics of the parent drug and metabolites
have been characterized [97]. The safety concerns expressed for peo-
ple [95] have not been observed in veterinary species. Based on plasma
concentrations of the active metabolite, analgesia is anticipated for
approximately 12 h after administration in dogs [97]. In dogs, it pro-
vided superior postoperative analgesia compared to meloxicam and a
control group (saline) at a dose of 25 mg/kg IV, but when combined
with meloxicam, the analgesic effects were improved [98]. When dif-
ferent doses were compared in dogs [99], dipyrone provided sufficient
postoperative analgesia without adverse effects after 2 days of admin-
istration. These investigators found that a dose of either 25 or 35 mg/
kg was effective, but not a lower dose of 15 mg/kg.
In cats, the pharmacokinetics and analgesic effects have been
characterized [100–102]. The dose in cats is the same as in dogs
(25 mg/kg), although they have a slightly longer half-life (based on
the major active metabolite). Dipyrone administration had signifi-
cant COX-1 and COX-2 inhibiting activity in cats [100] and pro-
duced postoperative analgesia that was equivalent to meloxicam.
Dipyrone (25 mg/kg at various intervals) was effective to manage
postoperative pain in cats [101]; however, the cats also received
tramadol, and the response was not better than tramadol alone. In
these studies, except for some salivation and occasional vomiting
from oral administration, no adverse effects were reported. In the
analgesic studies [100,101], there were no hematological changes
observed in treated cats.
Adverse effects of NSAIDs
Gastrointestinal injury
Among the adverse reactions caused by NSAIDs, gastrointestinal
problems are the most frequent reason to discontinue NSAID
therapy or consider alternative treatment. Gastrointestinal adverse

-- 424 of 1450 --

Chapter 24: Non- Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs 	409
events, including vomiting, diarrhea, inappetence, and ulceration,
have been documented in the veterinary literature, primarily in
dogs and horses but also for other species.
Gastrointestinal toxicity is likely caused by at least two mecha-
nisms; direct irritation of the drug on the gastrointestinal mucosa
and the result of prostaglandin inhibition [23,103–106]. Direct
mucosal irritation occurs because acidic NSAIDs become more
lipophilic in the acid milieu of the stomach and diffuse into the gas-
tric mucosa cells, where they cause injury. Direct effects also occur
in the intestine where NSAIDs within the lumen can directly injure
the intestinal villi. Diagnostic techniques have previously focused
on stomach injury, but with improved imaging and endoscopic
methods available, it is apparent that the intestine is also an impor-
tant site of direct injury [104–105]. Drugs that enter the lumen via
the bile perhaps pose a higher risk for injury, which presents a
greater problem for the NSAIDs that undergo enterohepatic recy-
cling and produce high biliary concentrations. These effects may
not result in perforation but may be an important cause of the nau-
sea, vomiting, and diarrhea observed in animals following adminis-
tration of NSAIDs.
Prostaglandins (along with other eicosanoid products such as
lipoxins) have a cytoprotective effect on the gastrointestinal
mucosa. Inhibition of prostaglandins by NSAIDs results in
decreased cytoprotection, diminished blood flow, decreased syn-
thesis of protective mucus, and inhibition of mucosal cell turnover
and repair. This can lead to gastritis, enteritis, erosions, ulcers, and
perforation. Because NSAIDs can also inhibit platelet function,
injury to the gastrointestinal tract that causes bleeding can be exac-
erbated and result in significant blood loss. Serious complications
have been observed with NSAID use in practically all animal spe-
cies and are discussed with specific examples provided below.
Canine examples of gastrointestinal injury
The gastrointestinal effects of any NSAID can range from mild gas-
tritis and vomiting to severe gastrointestinal ulceration, bleeding,
and death. Vomiting, anorexia, nausea, and diarrhea are by far the
most common events documented [37,107]. Coxibs (COX-2 selec-
tive agents) were not associated with fewer adverse effects than
non-selective agents [107]. In people, both traditional NSAIDs and
coxibs can increase the risk of upper gastrointestinal complica-
tions [108]. Gastrointestinal ulceration and perforation are rare but
can be catastrophic. An examination of published reports of gastro-
intestinal injury related to administration of NSAIDs in animals
indicates that the most (but not all) serious problems are caused by
doses that are higher than recommended [109,110]. This is usually
a result of accidental ingestion, administration of an incorrect dose,
or using inaccurate body weight. Overdosage is studied prior to
regulatory approval by administration of exaggerated doses (e.g., 5×
or 10×) in target animal safety studies performed by pharmaceuti-
cal sponsors and results are available in Freedom of Information
(FOI) documents. Some drugs may lose their COX-2 selectivity at
high doses [104]. Dose-dependent toxicity was shown for etodolac;
at the label dose, it was safe, but at higher doses (2.7× dose), it pro-
duced gastrointestinal lesions, and at the highest dose (5.3× dose),
it caused death [111]. At high doses, meloxicam also produced gas-
trointestinal injury in dogs [110,112,113].
As with most NSAIDs, individual patients can have adverse
effects at lower doses, and according to one report, the sponsors of
meloxicam in Europe recommended reducing the original approved
dose from 0.2 to 0.1 mg/kg because of some initial gastrointestinal
problems [114].
Factors that may increase the risk of gastrointestinal injury
include concurrent corticosteroid administration and/or concur-
rent gastrointestinal disease or injury. In people, there is now evi-
dence that genetic variation may determine one’s susceptibility to
NSAIDs. Whether or not this is a factor in animals is undetermined
but is presumed to be likely due to genetic diversity [115].
In the gastrointestinal tract of healthy dogs, COX-1 is the primary
enzyme that produces prostaglandins (primarily PGE2
) [42]. COX-2
is normally present but is upregulated after exposure to an irri-
tant [21]. Both COX-1 and COX-2 can be upregulated in the feline
duodenum [116]. In the canine stomach, there is a relatively high
level of COX-1-synthesized prostaglandins because of the require-
ment to protect the stomach from high shear forces and gastric acid
and produce mucosal bicarbonate. Therefore, it is logical that inhibi-
tion of COX-1 in the stomach would increase the risk of gastric
erosions and ulcers. In the duodenum, on the other hand, the prosta-
glandin requirement is lower because there is less acid, less require-
ment for mucosal bicarbonate (bicarbonate is secreted by the
pancreas), and less shear force because of the trituration of food that
has already occurred in the stomach. However, clinical observations
show that the proximal duodenum is often the site of severe NSAID-
associated perforating ulcers in dogs. Injury or insult to the duode-
num 	induces 	COX-2 	to 	produce 	protective 	and 	healing
prostaglandins. If the COX-2-mediated prostaglandins are inhibited
by NSAIDs, it may increase the risk of duodenal ulceration. This
adverse event has been observed following treatment with deracoxib,
one of the most selective COX-2 inhibitors in dogs [109]. Although
most dogs in this report were predisposed to injury because of other
factors, it appeared to be the administration of this selective
COX-2 inhibitor that was the trigger for the duodenal injury.
Although there are several drugs available for use in dogs
(Box 24.1), there is no evidence in the published literature of con-
trolled clinical trials to show that one NSAID is noticeably safer for
the gastrointestinal tract than another [37,107]. However, rarely are
these agents compared to one another in prospective controlled
studies. For example, in a study in which carprofen, meloxicam, and
ketoprofen were compared in dogs using endoscopic evaluation
after 7 and 28 days of administration, there was no statistical differ-
ence among the drugs with respect to development of gastroduo-
denal lesions [114]. In another study that compared the
gastrointestinal effects of recommended doses of carprofen,
etodolac, and aspirin on the canine stomach and duodenum for
28 days, etodolac and carprofen produced significantly fewer
lesions than aspirin [117]. Lesion scores in the carprofen and
etodolac groups were no different from administration of placebo.
Equine examples of gastrointestinal injury
The NSAIDs are the drugs most often prescribed to treat pain and
inflammation in horses. As in other animals, gastric ulceration and
intestinal injury have posed important limitations to their use.
Gastric ulcers and related syndromes are a major health problem in
horses, especially in performance horses and foals with stressful
clinical illnesses.
Gastric and intestinal injury in horses is a multifactorial problem
and NSAIDs are just one of the factors contributing to the prob-
lem [118]. Phenylbutazone-induced injury to the gastrointestinal
tract of horses has been documented in the literature for at least 30
years, and details of these findings can be found in other publica-
tions [1,119–123]. As described earlier, adverse effects are associ-
ated with inhibition of protective prostaglandins in the stomach,
coupled with high stress, exercise, and diet. The most severe ulcers

-- 425 of 1450 --

410 	Section 3: Pharmacology
in horses occur in the glandular mucosa, referred to as “equine
glandular gastric disease” (EGGD). It was presumed that these
ulcers are more likely the result of prostaglandin (PGE and/or PGI)
inhibition by NSAIDs. However, there is debate on the role that
NSAIDs have on this disease. Some studies have shown an associa-
tion between phenylbutazone administration and EGGD [121,122],
with non-selective agents producing more severe lesions than
COX-2-specific inhibitors [121], but other research that has studied
the effects of NSAIDs on the equine glandular mucosa and inci-
dence of EGGD have not supported this association. Phenylbutazone
can cause equine glandular lesions, but without reducing prosta-
glandins (PGE2
) in the mucosa [122].
Effects on the equine intestine have also been extensively studied.
These effects have been documented, with effects of specific agents
described [34,120–127]. Although NSAIDs are commonly used in
the management of pain and endotoxemia associated with colic in
the horse [12,123,128], the effects must be balanced against the
association with adverse gastrointestinal effects, and inhibition of
mucosal barrier healing. Flunixin meglumine, one of the agents
most administered for this indication, decreases small intestine bar-
rier function. When the equine intestine is exposed to flunixin, it
inhibits recovery after intestinal ischemia and increases permeabil-
ity to lipopolysaccharide. By contrast, experimental evidence sug-
gests that those NSAIDs with anti-inflammatory effects either
independent of COX inhibition or a COX-2- selective mode of
action, such as firocoxib, may offer significant advantages over tra-
ditional NSAIDs [34,126,127].
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents, particularly phenylbuta-
zone, can also affect the equine colon, producing impaired intestinal
barrier function and contributing to right dorsal colitis [120,123,129].
The pathophysiology is not completely understood, but it is known
that phenylbutazone administration to horses can cause hypoalbu-
minemia, neutropenia, changes in blood flow to the right dorsal
colon, alterations in luminal concentrations of volatile fatty acids,
and microbial dysbiosis [120,123,129].
Gastrointestinal adaptation and chronic NSAID
administration
One of the features consistent in clinical and basic research studies of
NSAIDs is that animals may exhibit an initial adverse reaction to
these agents, but tolerance often develops with continued adminis-
tration. Indeed, there are accounts of dogs, cats, horses, and people
that have survived on daily administration of NSAIDs for a majority
of their lives. What accounts for this tolerance? The process of gas-
trointestinal adaptation involves many factors. Attenuation of gastric
mucosal injury occurs after repeated exposure to aspirin [130].
Gastric adaptation may be attributed to enhanced production of
growth factors, increased cell proliferation, and mucosal regenera-
tion. These authors also argued that gastric adaptation was a long-
lasting effect that produces increased resistance of the adapted
mucosa to subsequent damage by ulcerogenic agents.
Most information and review papers on this topic deal primarily
with laboratory rodents, but studies in dogs from many years
ago [131–138] demonstrated adaptation to administration of aspi-
rin. These reports showed that gastric lesions were observed in the
first few days during aspirin treatment, but after 1–2 weeks of aspi-
rin administration, the lesions resolved in the face of continued
administration. The adaptation to aspirin in the dogs was accompa-
nied by a rise in gastric blood flow, reduction in inflammatory cell
infiltration, and an increase in mucosal cell regeneration and
mucosal content of epidermal growth factor [133–138]. These
observations are consistent with stimulation of a protective factor
known as “aspirin-triggered lipoxin” (ATL) [136–138]. This factor
is produced by acetylated COX-2 and inhibited by COX-2 inhibi-
tors. Additional evidence for upregulation of COX-2 after mucosal
injury was demonstrated in the duodenum of dogs [21]. COX-2 was
increased in the duodenum of dogs after 3 days of administration of
aspirin. These observations raise questions about the safety of selec-
tive COX-2 inhibiting NSAIDs in the face of intestinal injury. The
phenomenon of adaptation related to chronic administration is not
without controversy as other studies have failed to demonstrate gas-
tric adaptation after aspirin administration to dogs. When dogs
received aspirin at an unusually high dose of 25 mg/kg every 8 h,
there was no evidence of adaptation, and lesions were as severe or
worse on day 28 compared to earlier in the study [139].
Kidney injury related to NSAID administration
In the kidney, prostaglandins play an important role in modulating
the tone of blood vessels and regulating salt and water balance.
Renal injury caused by NSAIDs may limit the use of NSAIDs in
patients that have renal compromise. Reported cases of toxicity
usually are associated with high doses of NSAIDs or when there
were other risk factors [140]. Renal injury occurs as a result of inhi-
bition of renal prostaglandin synthesis. Animals with decreased
renal perfusion caused by dehydration, anesthesia, shock, or pre-
existing renal disease are at greater risk for NSAID-induced renal
ischemia [25,140–142].
NSAIDs are not inherently nephrotoxic, but when the kidneys
are compromised, NSAIDs can interfere with protective mecha-
nisms [143]. In healthy animals, the kidneys are usually able to
compensate for NSAID-associated effects. Kidney injury can be
associated with co-existing clinical or occult renal compro-
mise [144]. In the face of factors that produce renal compromise
(e.g., dehydration, tubular dysfunction, electrolyte depletion, and
hemodynamic changes associated with anesthesia), the kidney is
dependent on COX-1 and COX- 2 for prostaglandin synthesis to
regulate water homeostasis, tubular function, and renal blood
flow [145].
Acute kidney injury associated with NSAIDs is characterized by
decreased renal perfusion, sodium and fluid retention, decreased
tubular function, and azotemia. In people, pain in the kidney area is
one of the characteristics of NSAID-induced kidney injury. One
should not assume that NSAIDs that are more specific for the COX-2
enzyme are safer for the kidneys. Both COX-1 and COX-2 enzymes
are involved in renal blood flow regulation and tubular function.
Some of the prostaglandins that play an important role in salt and
water regulation and hemodynamics in the kidney are synthesized by
COX-2 enzymes [24,146]. Administration of a specific COX-2 inhib-
itor to salt-depleted people decreased renal blood flow, glomerular
filtration rate, and electrolyte excretion [146]. Corticosteroids may
also increase the risk of injury because it was shown that administra-
tion of prednisolone to dogs in combination with either meloxicam
or ketoprofen has a potential for serious adverse effects on the kid-
neys as well as the gastrointestinal tract [147].
There is another form of analgesic nephropathy, usually caused
by chronic use of acetaminophen (paracetamol) in people [148].
This syndrome has not been described in domestic animals.
NSAID effects on kidneys in dogs
Of the currently available NSAIDs for dogs, the effects of carprofen
and meloxicam on renal function have been most extensively stud-
ied. Because these drugs are used perioperatively, investigations

-- 426 of 1450 --

Chapter 24: Non- Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs 	411
were performed to determine if there was any evidence of acute kid-
ney injury, particularly in association with anesthesia. Based on
these studies, the risk of kidney injury from these medications
appears to be low. In one study, carprofen, ketorolac, and ketopro-
fen were examined in healthy dogs undergoing surgery, but without
IV fluid administration. There were minor increases in renal tubu-
lar epithelial cells in urine sediment, but carprofen had no adverse
effects on renal function [144]. Some ketorolac- and ketoprofen-
treated dogs had transient azotemia. In other studies, administra-
tion of carprofen to anesthetized healthy dogs had no adverse
effects on renal function [149–153].
Meloxicam did not produce adverse renal effects in healthy dogs
after short-term administration, with and without the cardiac ino-
tropic and vasodilating agent, pimobendan [154]. In healthy dogs
anesthetized and given acepromazine to produce hypotension, pre-
anesthetic administration of meloxicam did not produce any altera-
tion of kidney function, although generalization of the results from
this model to other anesthetic protocols is difficult [155]. Healthy
dogs administered meloxicam prior to anesthesia and an electrical
nociceptive stimulus did not have decreased renal function associ-
ated with treatment [153].
Renal effects following deracoxib administration to dogs were
reported by the manufacturer [156]. At high doses, there is a dose-
dependent effect on renal tubules. It was well tolerated in most
healthy dogs at up to 10 mg/kg for 6 months, but there is a potential
for a dose-dependent renal tubular degeneration/regeneration at
doses of 6 mg/kg or higher (clinically approved dose for long-term
treatment is 1–2 mg/kg per day). Long-term administration of car-
profen, etodolac, flunixin, ketoprofen, or meloxicam to dogs did
not induce any evidence of kidney injury as measured by urinalysis
and serum biochemistry [157].
The common theme in many of the studies cited above was that
dogs were healthy, generally young, and NSAIDs were dosed once
daily within the recommended range. Deviations from this study
design, use of higher doses, longer duration of treatment, or admin-
istration to clinical patients with comorbidities could produce dif-
ferent results.
NSAID effects on kidneys in cats
Because it is often older cats that are treated with NSAIDs for
degenerative joint disease (DJD), veterinarians and pet owners are
concerned about the effects these drugs may have on kidney func-
tion. The effects of both short- and long-term use have attracted
attention. One of the reasons for concern is a so-called “black box
warning” issued by the FDA in 2010, which stated that “repeated
use of meloxicam in cats has been associated with acute renal failure
and death. Do not administer additional injectable or oral meloxi-
cam to cats.” This prompted several studies because overt and sub-
clinical chronic kidney disease (CKD) is common in the population
of cats most often treated with NSAIDs long term. Follow-up stud-
ies have helped to mitigate this concern. In cats with reduced renal
function, but euvolemic, NSAIDs did not alter kidney func-
tion [158]. In their study, neither meloxicam nor acetylsalicylic
acid had a measurable effect on urinary clearance of exogenously
administered creatinine, serum creatinine concentration, or the
protein-to- creatinine ratio. They concluded that kidney function of
euvolemic cats with normal or reduced renal function is not
dependent on COX function and, therefore, not likely impacted by
NSAID administration.
Meloxicam is licensed for chronic use in cats in several countries
(not in the US) and has been the drug recommended for long-term
administration, by consensus, from a group of feline medicine
experts [10]. Three important studies have concluded that chronic
administration of meloxicam to cats can be both safe and effective.
Oral meloxicam was safe and palatable for long-term treatment of
DJD in cats when given with food at a dose of 0.01–0.03 mg/kg/
day [159]. A follow-up study [160] with aged cats with CKD con-
cluded that long-term therapy with meloxicam (0.02 mg/kg daily)
can be administered safely. These cats tolerated meloxicam with
daily administration despite their kidney disease. In an additional
follow-up study, the same investigators [161] concluded that long-
term management with oral meloxicam in cats did not reduce the
lifespan of cats with pre-existent stable CKD and many cats had a
better outcome associated with meloxicam treatment. A more recent
study [162] showed that meloxicam did not adversely affect renal
function in cats with CKD after 6 months of treatment at a dose of
0.02 mg/kg per day. However, the cats had a higher incidence of gas-
trointestinal effects and proteinuria compared to placebo-treated
cats. These authors recommended monitoring urine protein in cats
treated long-term with meloxicam to identify cats that may be at risk
of developing worsening azotemia and hypertension.
These studies have resolved some, but not all, concerns about the
use of meloxicam when administered to aged cats and to cats with
CKD. It should be noted that the doses prescribed in these studies
are lower than the approved label dose [61,62] and lower than the
dose recommended in the review of NSAIDs in cats [10].
Studies have also been completed on another NSAID approved
for cats, robenacoxib [51]. In safety studies using healthy cats, the
data show that robenacoxib was well tolerated even when treatment
was for longer, and at higher doses, than approved [163]. In a con-
trolled study comparing robenacoxib and placebo in cats with kid-
ney disease [164], 194 cats with osteoarthritis were given robenacoxib
(1.0–2.4 mg/kg) or placebo once daily for 28 days. Forty of the cats
had CKD. At the conclusion of the study, there were no differences
between groups in frequencies of reported adverse events, body
weight change, or results of serum or urine chemistry or hematology
variables. Therefore, in this group of cats, robenacoxib at this dose
had no measurable adverse effects on the kidneys.
The common concern for the effects of NSAIDs on the kidneys
in cats prompted several feline pain management experts to pub-
lish a commentary to alleviate these concerns [143]. The title of
the paper, “long-term use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs in cats with CKD: from controversy to optimism,” shows the
emphasis the authors intended to have regarding these concerns.
Despite these studies and commentaries, the debate on the effects
of meloxicam on feline kidneys continues. While some groups
maintain that it can be used safely, others have discouraged its
use [165].
Effects of NSAIDs on the liver
Because of their lipophilic chemistry, ability to diffuse into cells,
and requirement for hepatic metabolism, any NSAID has the
potential for causing liver injury. The liver is exposed to high
concentrations of the parent drug and metabolites. Injury caused
by NSAID administration can be idiosyncratic (unpredictable
and non-dose related) or intrinsic (predictable and dose
related) [166,167]. Toxicity resulting from high doses of acetami-
nophen and aspirin is intrinsic; reactions to other drugs tend to
be idiosyncratic and unpredictable.
Prescribing NSAIDs for animals with hepatic disease has been
questioned because of the role of the liver in metabolizing these
drugs, but there is no evidence that prior hepatic disease

-- 427 of 1450 --

412 	Section 3: Pharmacology
predisposes a patient to NSAID-induced liver injury when properly
dosed. Drug enzyme systems are remarkably preserved in hepatic
disease, and pre-existing hepatic disease is not necessarily a con-
traindication for administration of an NSAID. Patients with liver
disease may be more prone to gastrointestinal ulceration, and there
is concern that administration of NSAIDs could increase the risk of
this complication.
Carprofen has received the most attention related to drug-
induced liver injury in small animal medicine, but the potential
exists with all NSAIDs. Carprofen was approved by the FDA in
October 1996 for relief of pain and inflammation in dogs [168].
Before this approval, it was registered for the treatment of dogs in
Europe and was evaluated in clinical trials [169]. In studies in
dogs with arthritis, it was effective and had a low incidence of
adverse effects [169]. In longer term studies, in which carprofen
was administered from 2 weeks to 5 years, the incidence of adverse
reactions was only 1.3% [168]. Vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia, and
lethargy were the most common adverse reactions documented.
Attention was focused on the hepatic toxicity of carprofen because
of a published report documenting liver injury in a series of dogs
presented to a referral hospital [170]. In the report cited, 21 dogs
were described in which carprofen was associated with acute, idi-
osyncratic hepatotoxicosis. Affected dogs had diminished appe-
tites, vomited, and were icteric with elevations in hepatic enzymes
and bilirubin. Dogs received the recommended dose and devel-
oped signs an average of 19 days after therapy was initiated. No
predisposing conditions were identified, and most dogs recovered
without further consequences following cessation of drug admin-
istration and supportive medical care. Many of the dogs in that
report were Labrador Retrievers, but there is no additional evi-
dence to show that this breed has an increased risk of carprofen
hepatotoxicity [171]. Among other drugs, firocoxib caused fatty
liver changes in young dogs when administered at high doses
(manufacturer’s data) [44]. Signs of hepatic injury are among the
most common adverse events reported for carprofen to the FDA’s
Center for Veterinary Medicine adverse events reporting site
(www.fda.gov).
Despite common recommendation by veterinarians, there is
no evidence that dietary supplements such as silymarin (milk
thistle, 	silybin, 	Marin®), 	S-adenosyl-methionine 	(SAMe,
Denosyl®), or combinations of both (Denamarin®, NutraMax®
Laboratories) have any benefit in preventing liver injury from
NSAIDs. Idiosyncratic reactions are rare (1 in 1000 to 1 in 10,000
patients). Nevertheless, any unexplained increase in hepatic
enzymes or bilirubin 7–90 days after initiating NSAID adminis-
tration should be investigated. Fortunately, liver injury is gener-
ally reversible with supportive care and avoiding additional
exposure to inciting causes.
Injury to cartilage
With chronic use, some NSAIDs have been shown to accelerate
articular cartilage lesions in arthritic joints. However, this problem
was primarily demonstrated experimentally when NSAIDs were
administered at high doses in canine arthritis models. The signifi-
cance in clinical patients when typical doses are administered is
uncertain. Most of the currently used drugs have not been shown to
accelerate the degradation of articular cartilage in vivo [172].
Similar studies have also been conducted in horses, with the con-
clusion in one review [12] that phenylbutazone does not have a del-
eterious effect on equine cartilage, but there is also no proof of
benefits on inflammation-associated cartilage catabolism.
Blood coagulation effects: platelet inhibition
and thrombotic abnormalities
NSAIDs can inhibit COX-1 and reduce thromboxane (TXA 2 )
synthesis in platelets, which inhibits platelet function. This can
potentially lead to increased spontaneous bleeding (e.g.,
epistaxis), or increased bleeding associated with some surgical
procedures. Aspirin, at low doses, is the most specific
COX-1 inhibitor because the acetyl group (aspirin = acetylsali-
cylic acid) inhibits the COX in platelets irreversibly. Non-
acetylated 	NSAIDs 	inhibit 	platelets 	only 	when 	their
concentrations in blood are maintained at inhibitory levels.
Therefore, the effects from non-aspirin NSAIDs are brief and
rarely lead to clinical complications. However, the risk can be
increased by co-administration of anticoagulants such as heparin
during acute care treatment, or oral direct anticoagulants (apixa-
ban and rivaroxaban) administered for long-term treatment.
Risks in people compared to animals
In the human literature, there has been a concern that COX-2-
specific inhibitors may increase the risk of cardiovascular events,
particularly myocardial infarction, thrombosis, stroke, and sudden
death [173–175]. Similar problems have not been identified in ani-
mals. Cardiovascular safety is a concern in people using COX-2-
selective drugs because these drugs preserve COX-1, which may
promote platelet aggregation and vasoconstriction [173,174]. This
is the reason that specific COX-2 inhibitors (rofecoxib and
celecoxib) have been withdrawn or are rarely used in people [175].
It is likely that the high COX-2 selectivity of these drugs led to this
increased risk [176–178].
Drug selection
There are many NSAID choices available to veterinarians (Box 24.1).
It is not possible to define which NSAID drug is most efficacious
and safest in an individual animal. Each medication has advantages
and disadvantages. There are different dosage forms including
injectable, oral solutions, oral transmucosal, conventional tablets,
chewable tablets, equine pastes, and transdermal formulations.
Initial dosing for healthy patients is well established (Table 24.2).
Choice of product will depend on the clinical situation, owner pref-
erence, prior observed efficacy, and compliance. There are veteri-
nary generic formulations of many of the popular drugs, and there
are some human-labeled drugs that are used extra-label (e.g., aspi-
rin, naproxen, meloxicam, and piroxicam).
COX- 2 inhibition as selection criterion
After the discovery of the two isoenzymes, COX-1 and COX-2,
there was a focus in drug development on highly selective
COX-2 inhibitors. Drugs that emerged from this work were
celecoxib, valdecoxib (discontinued), and rofecoxib (discontin-
ued) [180]. At one time, these coxibs were among the top-selling
prescription drugs of any category in human medicine. In veteri-
nary medicine, with a few exceptions, there is little evidence that
drugs with higher COX-1:COX- 2 ratios produce fewer gastrointes-
tinal or renal adverse effects than drugs with low ratios.
Deracoxib was the first veterinary drug in this group followed
by firocoxib and robenacoxib. Mavacoxib and cimicoxib have
been licensed for use in dogs in Europe. Although these drugs
have a higher COX-1:COX-2 inhibitory ratio than older NSAIDs,
clinical superiority has not been demonstrated in large patient
populations. In fact, one of the veterinary drugs with selective

-- 428 of 1450 --

Chapter 24: Non- Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs 	413
COX-2 inhibitory action, deracoxib, was safe during an initial
review [14], but gastrointestinal perforation and bleeding were
associated with deracoxib use in dogs in a later report [109].
Studies that compare the efficacy of one NSAID versus another in
any species are rare. In one canine efficacy study, firocoxib was
compared to etodolac and carprofen and was shown in some
measurements to have better improvement in lameness scores.
Studies that have assessed safety among drugs have been scarce
and of low statistical power. The results that are available, along
with FOI summaries, indicate that approved NSAIDs have a simi-
lar incidence of vomiting and anorexia in dogs. Firocoxib may be
an exception because it was associated with a lower incidence of
vomiting and diarrhea compared to carprofen and etodolac and
less melena compared to etodolac [44]. The studies with robena-
coxib in cats have shown good safety and efficacy [51]. It was
superior to meloxicam in a clinical study in cats [181] but was
non-inferior to older NSAIDs such as ketoprofen in terms of
safety and efficacy [58]. In studies performed in horses, or in
intestinal tissues obtained from horses, there is some evidence
that the COX-2 inhibitor firocoxib may lead to better restoration
of intestinal integrity after an insult (e.g., equine colic) compared
to the non-selective agent flunixin [126].
Selection of NSAIDs for dogs
For acute pain (e.g., postoperative pain), there is good evidence of
efficacy from oral and injectable formulations, which has been pub-
lished in various reports and reviews. Drugs discussed previously
and listed in Tables 24.1 and 24.2 have been used in these instances.
These drugs have been used in the short term to decrease fever and
decrease pain from surgery or trauma. Some of these agents are
available in an injectable form (meloxicam, robenacoxib, and
carprofen), which allows for convenient in-hospital use. Proof of
efficacy is provided in the approved labeling for this indication.
Preoperative injections of carprofen in dogs were shown to be
beneficial for decreasing postoperative pain after ovariohyster-
ectomy [182]. Meloxicam has been reported to be effective in dogs
for perioperative use and was shown to be superior to butorphanol
in some pain assessments [183,184].
Oral NSAIDs may be used for acute treatment of myositis, arthri-
tis, and postoperative pain, or they may be administered chroni-
cally for relief of osteoarthritis-related pain. Drugs that have been
administered in the US to small animals are listed in Box 24.1, and
some veterinarians have also used human-label drugs, but if this
is considered, consult a reliable reference because the pharma-
cokinetics and dosages are different than in people. The approved
Table 24.2 Reported or regulatory agency approved dosages for NSAIDs in animals. The doses were derived from the approved labela, published references listed in the text, and
a veterinary drug handbook.
Drug 	Cats 	Dogs 	Horses 	Cattle
Aspirin 	10 mg/kg q48 h, PO 	10–20 mg/kg q8–12 h, PO 	25–50 mg/kg q8 h, PO 	100 mg/kg q12 h, PO
Carprofen 	1–4 mg/kg given once by injection 	4.4 mg/kg q24 h, or 2.2 mg/kg
q12 h, PO
0.7 mg/kg q24 h, PO or IV 	1.4 mg/kg, once, SC or IV
Deracoxib 	1 mg/kg once, PO 	3–4 mg/kg q24 h, PO for up to
7 days, then 1–2 mg/kg q24 h, PO
No dose established 	No dose established
Etodolac 	No dose established 	10–15 mg/kg q24 h, PO 	23 mg/kg q24 h, PO 	No dose established
Firocoxib 	1.5 mg/kg once, PO 	5 mg/kg q24 h, PO 	0.1 mg/kg q24 h, PO for up to
14 days, or 0.09 mg/kg q24 h,
IV for up to 5 days
Not recommended
Flunixin 	1 mg/kg once, IV, SC, or IM 	1 mg/kg once, PO, IV, or IM 	1 mg/kg q24 h, IM or IV for up
to 5 days, or 1 mg/kg q24 h, PO
1–2 mg/kg q24 h, IV for up to 3 days
Grapiprant 	Not established; 2 mg/kg used
experimentally
2 mg/kg q24 h, PO (fasted
produces better absorption)
Not established; likely requires
higher than the 2 mg/kg canine
dose
Not established
Meloxicam 	0.1 mg/kg initial dose, PO, SC, or
IV, then 0.05 mg/kg q24 h, then
reduce dose to every other day, or
0.02 mg/kg q24 h, PO
0.2 mg/kg initial dose, PO, SC, or
IV, then 0.1 mg/kg q24 h, PO
0.6 mg/kg q24 h, PO or IV 	0.5 mg/kg q24 h, IM, IV, or SC
Naproxen 	Not recommended 	5 mg/kg initial dose, then 2 mg/kg
q48 h, PO
10 mg/kg q12 h, PO 	Not recommended
Phenylbutazone 	6–8 mg/kg q12 h, PO 	15–22 mg/kg q12 h, PO 	4.4–8.8 mg/kg q24 h, PO (limit
highest dose to 2–4 days);
2.2–4.4 mg/kg q24 h, IV for
2–4 days
17–25 mg/kg initial dose, then
2.5–5 mg/kg q24 h or 10–14 mg/kg
q48 h, PO
Piroxicam 	0.3 mg/kg q24 h, PO, or 1 mg per
cat, q24 h, PO
0.3 mg/kg q24 or q48 h, PO 	No dose established 	Not recommended
Robenacoxib 	1–2.4 mg/kg q24 h, PO 	1–2 mg/kg q24 h, PO 	No dose established 	Not recommended
Mavacoxib 	Not recommended 	2 mg/kg once, PO, repeat in
14 days, then repeat q30 days for
up to 6.5 months
Not recommended 	Not recommended
Dipyrone
(Metamizole)
25 mg/kg q8–12 h, IV, IM, or PO 	25–35 mg/kg q8 h, IV, IM, or PO 	30 mg/kg q12 h, IV for up to
3 days
20–50 mg/kg IM or IV or 40–50 mg/kg
PO in some countries; regulatory concerns
in some countries may prohibit its use
Acetaminophen
(Paracetamol)
Do not use 	25–35 mg/kg q6–8 h, PO 	20–30 mg/kg q12 h, PO 	50 mg/kg initial dose, then 30 mg/kg
q6 h, PO
a Label dosing information including species, indicated uses, and precautionary warnings varies by regulatory jurisdiction. Appropriateness of use within the local regulatory
environment should be verified by the prescribing veterinarian.
PO, oral; IV, intravenous; IM, intramuscular; SC, subcutaneous.
Source: Compiled from multiple sources including Papich [179], Elsevier.

-- 429 of 1450 --

414 	Section 3: Pharmacology
traditional NSAID veterinary drugs used most often in dogs are
carprofen, meloxicam, firocoxib, and deracoxib. Other drugs once
available have been removed by the sponsor (tepoxalin, etodolac,
and robenacoxib tablets). In countries outside the US, other
NSAIDs approved for dogs include ketoprofen, mavacoxib, cimi-
coxib, and tolfenamic acid. Because all drugs on this list have
undergone a review by the regulatory agencies in the country in
which they are approved, there is substantial evidence of efficacy for
this indication; however, there is no evidence in the approval that
one agent is superior to another. The availability of grapiprant has
increased the choices for treating chronic osteoarthritis in dogs. It
was effective for the treatment of osteoarthritis in dogs [67], but
results have varied for treatment of short-term postsurgical or
experimental joint pain [68–70].
For long-term use, there are no controlled studies that indicate
which drug is the safest and most effective. Because there are vari-
ous choices of NSAIDs for treating dogs with osteoarthritis, selec-
tion can be frustrating for veterinarians. Like people, there may be
greater differences among individuals in their response than there
are differences among the drugs. Among the drugs available
(Box 24.1), there may be variations among animals with respect to
tolerance of adverse effects and clinical response. When drugs are
compared to one another, it is difficult, using subjective measure-
ments, to demonstrate differences between these drugs for reducing
pain in animals. Clinical trials used for regulatory approval rarely
compare one NSAID to another, and usually, the comparison is
made to a control (placebo) treatment.
Selection of NSAIDs for cats
Excellent in-depth reviews are available for guidance on the use of
NSAIDs in cats. Readers are encouraged to consult publications by
other experts [7,9–11,185]. Treatment of DJD and other sources of
long-term pain in cats has not been addressed adequately in the
past, and these papers help raise awareness of these conditions.
Veterinarians have been reluctant to prescribe NSAIDs to cats
because of a fear of adverse effects. The adverse effects of salicy-
lates (aspirin) in cats are well documented. Cats are susceptible
because of slow clearance and dose-dependent elimination.
Affected cats may have hyperthermia, respiratory alkalosis, meta-
bolic acidosis, methemoglobinemia, hemorrhagic gastritis, and
kidney and liver injury. Cats also are prone to acetaminophen toxi-
cosis because of their deficiency in the drug-metabolizing enzyme
UDP-glucuronosyltransferase [186]. Despite the apparent sensitiv-
ity of cats to some adverse effects of NSAIDs, several NSAIDs have
been used safely and approved by regulatory authorities for cats.
In the US, meloxicam injectable solution is approved by the FDA
only for a single dose in cats at 0.3 mg/kg for postoperative pain.
Meloxicam oral suspension is not approved for cats by the FDA [61],
but the canine oral formulation is used extra-label. However, the oral
suspension is licensed for cats in Europe, Australia, and New
Zealand, even for long-term use. It is not approved for chronic treat-
ment in the US but extra-label drug use in non-food animals is legal
and, by consensus, was recommended by a group of feline medicine
experts for repeated administration [10]. After the International
Society of Feline Medicine and American Association of Feline
Practitioners consensus guidelines were published [10], robenacoxib
became available for cats in the US and Europe. Robenacoxib has
favorable pharmacokinetic and safety properties that would make
this an acceptable choice for repeated dosing [51].
Concerns regarding meloxicam are primarily associated with a
high dose. According to a summary on the FDA-approved label [61],
when cats were administered high doses (five times the recom-
mended dose) of meloxicam, vomiting and other gastrointestinal
problems were reported in some cats. With repeated doses (9 days)
of 0.3 mg/kg per day to cats, inflamed gastrointestinal mucosa and
ulceration were observed in three out of four cats. This high dose
should not be used for more than a single administration. The con-
sensus among experts is that meloxicam can, however, be safely
administered to cats more than once [7,10,11]. As discussed under
the section on renal adverse effects, meloxicam has been adminis-
tered safely and long term at a dose of 0.01–0.03 mg/kg [159] and in
aged cats with kidney disease at a dose of 0.02 mg/kg daily [160,161].
Some regimens recommend meloxicam in cats at 0.1 mg/kg ini-
tially, followed by decreasing doses to maintain effectiveness. One
such regimen recommends that if a favorable response is seen in the
first few days, increase the dose interval to once every 48–72 h, and
then lower the dose to 0.05 mg/kg or less (0.025 mg/kg) if efficacy
can be maintained. In Europe and other countries, the approved
dose for cats is 0.05 mg/kg per day for chronic use with safety data
from the sponsor to support this claim.
The recommended dose of robenacoxib has been optimized
through PK-PD and safety studies [50,51,55–58,163]. The FDA-
approved dose in the US is 1 mg/kg orally per day for a maximum of
3 days, while in the European Union the approved cat dose is
1–2.4 mg/kg body weight per day for up to 6 days. Availability of
drug formulations differs between countries. In the US, there is a
6 mg unscored tablet for use in cats only; tablets were discontinued
for use in the US for dogs. In Europe and other countries, it is also
available as 5, 10, 20, and 40 mg tablets for dogs, and a 20 mg/mL
injectable solution.
Carprofen (injectable solution) is approved for single-dose
administration to cats in Europe. Repeated dosing of carprofen in
cats has been discouraged because of reports of gastroduodenal
toxicosis and high individual variation in half-life when adminis-
tered at canine dose rates. There is one report of firocoxib adminis-
tration in cats [187]. Firocoxib was effective for attenuating
experimentally induced fever in cats at doses of 0.75–3 mg/kg (sin-
gle dose).
Selection of NSAIDs for horses
The clinical pharmacology and use of NSAIDs in horses was thor-
oughly reviewed [12]. The short summary provided below cannot
compare to the extensive amount of information provided in that
review, and readers are encouraged to download that reference for a
more extensive summary [12].
The administration of NSAIDs to horses traditionally has bro-
ken down into two choices. For acute pain, surgical pain, and colic
pain, injections of flunixin meglumine are administered. For
repeated oral doses for musculoskeletal pain and inflammation,
phenylbutazone is most often administered. Phenylbutazone has
been used more often than any other NSAID, and many experts
still believe that it is the most cost-effective treatment, especially
for oral treatment of musculoskeletal inflammation and pain.
Flunixin meglumine is the most utilized injectable NSAID for
acute soft tissue injury, endotoxemia, and abdominal pain [188].
Other NSAIDs have emerged on the market and are approved for
horses, at least in some countries, or used extra-label. These alter-
natives also should be considered, depending on clinician prefer-
ence [12,124,126,189]. These include injectable ketoprofen, the
equine oral paste or injectable formulation of firocoxib, and
meloxicam, which is approved in some countries. For example,
meloxicam is approved in Europe to relieve pain associated with

-- 430 of 1450 --

Chapter 24: Non- Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs 	415
colic, and for acute and chronic pain associated with musculoskel-
etal disorders.
Occasionally meclofenamic acid is still used. In some countries
(not the US), carprofen is licensed for use in horses at an IV dose of
0.7 mg/kg, which can be repeated once after 24 h. Dipyrone has
been used for many years in horses, but only recently has an
approved formulation been available (Zimeta®). This is approved
for IV administration to treat pyrexia, but it is also used to treat
colic pain and other forms of acute pain.
Flunixin has a long history in the treatment of acute pain and
inflammation associated with colic in horses. The rationale for
this treatment has focused on the inhibition of prostanoids that
are responsible for hemodynamic changes during endotox-
emia [127,128]. However, the non-selective NSAIDs may increase
the risk of intestinal injury in horses, or delay restitution and heal-
ing [34,124–127,190]. These studies indicate that selective NSAIDs
such as firocoxib may have a safety advantage [126].
Grapiprant, the unique NSAID approved for dogs, has been stud-
ied in horses [74]. Pharmacokinetic data are available, but no effi-
cacy studies have been conducted. In pharmacokinetic studies,
plasma concentrations did not reach the level reported to be effec-
tive in dogs. It is likely that at the canine dose, it will not reach ther-
apeutic efficacy.
Acetaminophen was discussed in detail earlier in this chapter.
Although some pharmacokinetic properties are favorable, and
there is evidence of efficacy in models of pain, the effectiveness and
doses for clinical indications or long-term use in naturally occur-
ring pain have yet to be established.
NSAID selection for food animals
The administration of NSAIDs in food animals is regulated more
closely than other animals because of the concern for residues that
may end up in the food supply. Therefore, in most countries, the
regulatory authorities limit the use to approved drugs and indica-
tions. Extra-label use requires justification and a reliable scientific
estimate of the withdrawal time for milk and meat [191,192]. In the
US, flunixin meglumine is FDA approved for the control of pyrexia
in beef cattle with bovine respiratory disease and in dairy cattle with
mastitis. It is also approved for the control of pain associated with
foot rot in steers. There is also a unique transdermal formulation of
flunixin (pour on) approved for control of pyrexia associated with
bovine respiratory disease and acute bovine mastitis, and the con-
trol of pain associated with foot rot in cattle.
Ketoprofen is approved in cattle for the control of pyrexia associ-
ated with bovine respiratory disease (3 mg/kg subcutaneously). It is
also approved in Europe for analgesic and antipyretic activity in
pigs with respiratory infections and for mastitis–metritis–agalactia
syndrome in the sow (3 mg/kg single-dose IM).
Meloxicam is approved in Europe, but not the US for use in cattle
and pigs. Meloxicam is approved for use in cattle for fever and
inflammation associated with respiratory infections and cattle with
diarrhea (with fluid therapy). It is also approved in Europe to relieve
postoperative pain following dehorning in calves and as supportive
therapy in the treatment of acute mastitis. Meloxicam is approved
in Europe for pigs for musculoskeletal indications, postoperative
pain associated with minor soft tissue surgery such as castration,
and for supportive therapy in sows after farrowing.
Other NSAIDs are considered off-label, and withdrawal times
should be determined from a reliable source such as the Food
Animal Residue Avoidance Databank (FARAD) [191]. Veterinarians
should consult regulations in each country because some NSAIDs
are approved for food animals in some countries, but not others.
Unfortunately, there are no NSAIDs approved in the US for the
most common sources of pain in cattle – dehorning and castra-
tion [192]. NSAIDs used off-label in food animals include aspirin,
phenylbutazone (prohibited from use in dairy cattle), dipyrone
(prohibited by the FDA), carprofen, and meloxicam (approved for
use in Europe in cattle and pigs) [192–198]. Doses used in food
animals are provided in other resources [189,192] and in Table 24.2.
References
1 Lees P. Analgesic, anti-inflammatory, antipyretic drugs. In: Riviere JE, Papich MG,
eds. Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 10th edn. Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley & Sons, 2018.
2 KuKanich B, Bidgood T, Knesl O. Clinical pharmacology of non-steroidal antiin-
flammatory drugs in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39(1): 69–90.
3 Monteiro- Steagall BP, Steagall PVM, Lascelles BDX. Systematic review of non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drug-induced adverse effects in dogs. J Vet Intern Med
2012; 27(5): 1011–1019.
4 Lees P, Giraudel J, Landoni MF, et al. PK-PD integration and PK- PD modelling of
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: principles and applications in veterinary
pharmacology. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2004; 27(6): 491–502.
5 Lees P, Landoni MF, Giraudel J, et al. Pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of
non- steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in species of veterinary interest. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2004; 27(6): 479–490.
6 Lascelles BDX, McFarland JM, Swann H. Guidelines for safe and effective use of
NSAIDs in dogs. Vet Ther 2005; 6(3): 237–250.
7 Gruen ME, Lascelles BDX, Colleran E, et al. 2022 AAHA pain management guide-
lines for dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2022; 58(2): 55–76.
8 Monteiro BP, Lascelles BDX, Murrell J, et al. 2022 WSAVA guidelines for the recog-
nition, assessment and treatment of pain. J Small Anim Pract 2023; 64(4):
177–254.
9 Lascelles BDX, Court MH, Hardie EM, et al. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs in cats: a review. Vet Anaesth Analg 2007; 34(4): 228–250.
10 Sparkes AH, Heiene R, Lascelles BDX, et al. ISFM and AAFP consensus guidelines:
long-term use of NSAIDs in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2010; 12(7): 521–538.
11 Steagall PV, Robertson S, Simon B, et al. 2022 ISFM consensus guidelines on the
management of acute pain in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2022; 24(1): 4–30.
12 Mercer MA, Davis JL, McKenzie HC. The clinical pharmacology and therapeutic
evaluation of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in adult horses. Animals
(Basel) 2023; 13(10): 1597.
13 Coetzee JF. A review of analgesic compounds used in food animals in the United
States. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 2013; 29(1): 11–28.
14 Bergh MS, Budsberg SC. The Coxib NSAIDs: potential clinical and pharmacologic
importance in veterinary medicine. J Vet Intern Med 2005; 19(5): 633–643.
15 Papich MG. An update on non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in
small animals. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2008; 38(6): 1243–1266.
16 Vane JR, Botting RM. New insights into the mode of action of anti-inflammatory
drugs. Inflamm Res 1995; 44(1): 1–10.
17 Smith WL, Meade EA, DeWitt DL. Pharmacology of prostaglandin endoperoxide
synthase isozymes-1 and -2. Ann NY Acad Sci 1994; 714: 136–142.
18 Laneuville O, Breuer DK, DeWitt DL, et al. Differential inhibition of human pros-
taglandin endoperoxide synthases-1 and -2 by non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs. J Pharm Exp Ther 1994; 271(2): 927–934.
19 Chandrasekharan NV, Dai H, Roos KL, et al. COX-3, a cyclooxygenase-1 variant
inhibited by acetaminophen and other analgesic/antipyretic drugs: cloning, struc-
ture, and expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002; 99(21): 13926–13931.
20 Davies NM, Good RL, Roupe KA, et al. Cyclooxygenase-3: axiom, dogma, anomaly,
enigma or splice error? - not as easy as 1, 2, 3. J Pharm Pharm Sci 2004; 7(2):
217–226.
21 Wooten JG, Blikslager AT, Ryan KA, et al. Cyclooxygenase expression and pros-
tanoid production in pyloric and duodenal mucosae in dogs after administration of
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Am J Vet Res 2008; 69(4): 457–464.
22 Punke JP, Speas AL, Reynolds LR, et al. Effects of firocoxib, meloxicam, and tepoxa-
lin on prostanoid and leukotriene production by duodenal mucosa and other tis-
sues of osteoarthritic dogs. Am J Vet Res 2008; 69(9): 1203–1209.
23 Konturek SJ, Konturek PC, Brzozowski T. Prostaglandins and ulcer healing.
J Physiol Pharmacol 2005; 56(Suppl 5): 5–31.
24 Brater DC. Effects of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs on renal function:
focus on cyclooxygenase-2 selective inhibition. Am J Med 1999; 107(6): 65–70.
25 Lomas AL, Grauer GF. The renal effects of NSAIDs in dogs. JAAHA 2015;
51(3):197–203.

-- 431 of 1450 --

416 	Section 3: Pharmacology
26 Bertolini A, Ottani A, Sandrini M. Dual acting anti-inflammatory drugs: a reap-
praisal. Pharmacol Res 2001; 44(6): 437–450.
27 Messenger KM, Wofford JA, Papich MG. Carprofen pharmacokinetics in plasma
and in control and inflamed canine tissue fluid using in vivo ultrafiltration. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2016; 39(1):32–39.
28 Ricketts AP, Lundy KM, Seibel SB. Evaluation of selective inhibition of canine
cyclooxygenase 1 and 2 by carprofen and other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs. Am J Vet Res 1998; 59(11): 1441–1446.
29 McKellar QA, Pearson T, Bogan JA, et al. Pharmacokinetics, tolerance and serum
thromboxane inhibition of carprofen in the dog. J Small Anim Pract 1990; 31(9):
443–448.
30 McKellar QA, Delatour P, Lees P. Stereospecific pharmacodynamics and pharma-
cokinetics of carprofen in the dog. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1994; 17(6): 447–454.
31 Bryant CE, Farnfield BA, Janicke HJ. Evaluation of the ability of carprofen and flu-
nixin meglumine to inhibit activation of nuclear factor kappa B. Am J Vet Res 2003;
64(2): 211–215.
32 Lees P, McKellar Q, May SA, et al. Pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of
carprofen in the horse. Equine Vet J 1994; 26(3): 203–208.
33 Lees P, Aliabadi FS, Landoni MF. Pharmacodynamics and enantioselective pharma-
cokinetics of racemic carprofen in the horse. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2002; 25(6):
433–448.
34 Little D, Brown SA, Campbell NB, et al. Effects of the cyclooxygenase inhibitor
meloxicam on recovery of ischemia-injured equine jejunum. Am J Vet Res 2007;
68(6): 614–624.
35 Pairet M, van Ryn J. Experimental models used to investigate the differential inhibi-
tion of cyclooxygenase-1 and cyclooxygenase-2 by Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs. Inflamm Res 1998; 47(Suppl 2): S93–S101.
36 Warner TD, Giuliano F, Vojnovic I, et al. Non-steroid drug selectivities for cyclo-
oxygenase-1 rather than cyclo-oxygenase-2 are associated with human gastrointesti-
nal toxicity: a full in vitro analysis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999; 96(13): 7563–7568.
37 Fox SM. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. In: Carroll GL, ed. Small Animal
Anesthesia and Analgesia. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing, 2008: 143–157.
38 Gierse JK, Staten NR, Casperson GF, et al. Cloning, expression, and selective inhibition
of canine cyclooxygenase-1 and cyclooxygenase-2. Vet Ther 2002; 3(3): 270–280.
39 McCann ME, Andersen DR, Zhang D, et al. In vitro effects and in vivo efficacy of a
novel cyclo-oxygenase-2 inhibitor in dogs with experimentally induced synovitis.
Am J Vet Res 2004; 65(4): 503–512.
40 Glaser KB. Cyclooxygenase selectivity and NSAIDs: cyclooxygenase-2 selectivity of
etodolac (LODINE). InflammoPharmacology 1995; 3: 335–345.
41 Kay-Mugford P, Benn SJ, LaMarre J, et al. In vitro effects of non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs on cyclooxygenase activity in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2000; 61(7):
802–810.
42 Wilson JE, Chandrasekharan NV, Westover KD, et al. Determination of expression
of cyclooxygenase-1 and -2 isozymes in canine tissues and their differential sensitiv-
ity to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Am J Vet Res 2004; 65(6): 810–818.
43 Patrignani P, Panara MR, Greco A, et al. Biochemical and pharmacological charac-
terization of the cyclooxygenase activity of human blood prostaglandin endoperox-
ide synthases. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1994; 271(3): 1705–1712.
44 US Food and Drug Administration. Freedom of Information Summary: Previcox
Chewable Tablets (NADA 141–230). Approval Date: July 21, 2004. https://animal
drugsatfda.fda.gov/adafda/app/search/public/document/downloadFoi/768
(accessed September 2014).
45 Cox SR, Lesman SP, Boucher JF, et al. The pharmacokinetics of mavacoxib, a long-
acting COX-2 inhibitor, in young adult laboratory dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2010;
33(5): 461–470.
46 Cox SR, Liao S, Payne-Johnson M, et al. Population pharmacokinetics of mava-
coxib in osteoarthritic dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2011; 34(1): 1–11.
47 Gabrielsson J, Weiner D. Pharmacokinetic and Pharmacodynamic Data Analysis:
Concepts and Applications, 5th edn. Stockholm, Sweden: Swedish Pharmaceutical
Society, 2016: 87. (Table 2.7).
48 Toutain PL, Reymond N, Laroute V, et al. Pharmacokinetics of meloxicam in
plasma and urine of horses. Am J Vet Res 2004; 65(11): 1542–1547.
49 Toutain PL, Cester CC. Pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic relationships and
dose response to meloxicam in horses with induced arthritis in the right carpal
joint. Am J Vet Res 2004; 65(11): 1533–1541.
50 Pelligand L, King JN, Toutain PL, et al. Pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic mod-
elling of robenacoxib in a feline tissue cage model of inflammation. J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 2012; 35(1): 19–32.
51 Lees P, Toutain PL, Elliott J, et al. Pharmacology, safety, efficacy and clinical uses of
the COX-2 inhibitor robenacoxib. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2022; 45(4): 325–351.
52 Jung M, Lees P, Seewald W, King JN. Analytical determination and pharmacokinet-
ics of robenacoxib in the dog. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2009; 32(1): 41–48.
53 Maitho TE, Lees P, Taylor JB. Absorption and pharmacokinetics of phenylbutazone
in Welsh Mountain ponies. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1986; 9(1): 26–39.
54 King JN, Jung M, Maurer MP, et al. Effects of route of administration and feeding
schedule on pharmacokinetics of robenacoxib in cats. Am J Vet Res 2013; 74(3):
465–472.
55 Giraudel JM, Diquelou A, Laroute V, et al. Pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic
modelling of NSAIDs in a model of reversible inflammation in the cat. Br J
Pharmacol 2005; 146(5): 642–653.
56 Giraudel JM, Diquelou A, Lees P, et al. Development and validation of a new model
of inflammation in the cat and selection of surrogate endpoints for testing anti-
inflammatory drugs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2005; 28(3): 275–285.
57 Giraudel JM, King JN, Jeunesse EC, et al. Use of a pharmacokinetic/pharmacody-
namics approach in the cat to determine a dosage regimen for the COX-2 selective
drug robenacoxib. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2009; 32(1): 18–30.
58 Giraudel JM, Gruet P, Alexander DG, et al. Evaluation of orally administered robe-
nacoxib versus ketoprofen for treatment of acute pain and inflammation associated
with musculoskeletal disorders in cats. Am J Vet Res 2010; 71(7): 710–719.
59 King JN, Rudaz C, Borer L, et al. In vitro and ex vivo inhibition of canine cyclooxy-
genase isoforms by robenacoxib: a comparative study. Res Vet Sci 2010; 88(3):
497–506.
60 Hinz B, Brune K. Can drug removals involving cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors be
avoided? A plea for human pharmacology. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2008; 29(8):
391–397.
61 US Food and Drug Administration. Freedom of Information Summary: Metacam
Oral Suspension (NADA 141–213); and https://docs.boehringer-ingelheim.com/
MSDS/Metacam_Injectable_Cat_PI
62 European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products. Meloxicam Summary
Report. June 1997. EMEA/MRL/236/97.
63 Giraudel JM, Toutain PL, King JN, et al. Differential inhibition of cyclooxygenase
isoenzymes in the cat by the NSAID robenacoxib. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2009; 32(1):
31–40.
64 Schmid VB, Spreng DE, Seewald W, et al. Analgesic and anti-inflammatory actions
of robenacoxib in acute joint inflammation in the dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2009;
33(20): 118–131.
65 Nagahisa A, Okumura T. Pharmacology of grapiprant, a novel EP4 antagonist:
receptor binding, efficacy in a rodent postoperative pain model, and a dose estima-
tion for controlling pain in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2017; 40(3): 285–292.
66 Sartini I, Giorgi M. Grapiprant: a snapshot of the current knowledge. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2021; 44(5): 679–688.
67 Rausch-Derra L, Huebner M, Wofford J, et al. A prospective, randomized, masked,
placebo-controlled multisite clinical study of grapiprant, an EP 4 prostaglandin
receptor antagonist (PRA), in dogs with osteoarthritis. J Vet Intern Med 2016; 30(3):
756–763.
68 de Salazar Alcalá AG, Gioda L, Dehman A, et al. Assessment of the efficacy of firo-
coxib (Previcox®) and grapiprant (Galliprant®) in an induced model of acute arthri-
tis in dogs. BMC Vet Res 2019; 15(1): 309.
69 Budsberg SC, Kleine SA, Norton MM, et al. Comparison of two inhibitors of E-type
prostanoid receptor four and carprofen in dogs with experimentally induced acute
synovitis. Am J Vet Res 2019: 80(11): 1001–1006.
70 Southern BL, Long SM, Barnes DN, et al. Preliminary evaluation of the effects of
grapiprant compared with carprofen on acute pain and inflammation following
ovariohysterectomy in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2022; 83(7): ajvr.21.10.0162.
71 Rausch-Dera LC, Huebner M, Rhodes L. Evaluation of the safety of long-term,
daily oral administration of grapiprant, a novel drug for treatment of osteoarthritic
pain and inflammation, in healthy dogs. Am J Vet Res 2015; 76(10): 853–859.
72 Lebkowska-Wieruszewska B, De Vito V, Owen H, et al. Pharmacokinetics of grap-
iprant, a selective EP 4 prostaglandin PGE 2 receptor antagonist, after 2 mg/kg oral
and I.V. administrations in cats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2017; 40(6): e11–e15.
73 Rausch-Derra LC, Rhodes L. Safety and toxicokinetic profiles associated with daily
oral administration of grapiprant, a selective antagonist of the prostaglandin E2
EP4 receptor, to cats. Am J Vet Res 2016; 77(7): 688–692.
74 Knych, H K, Seminoff K, McKemie DS. Detection of grapiprant following oral
administration to exercised Thoroughbred horses. Drug Test Analysis 2018; 10:
1237–1243.
75 Savides MC, Oehme FW, Nash SL, et al. The toxicity and biotransformation of sin-
gle doses of acetaminophen in dogs and cats. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 1984; 74(1):
26–34.
76 Mburu DN, Mbugua LA, Skoglund LA, et al. Effects of paracetamol (acetami-
nophen) and acetylsalicylic acid on the post-operative course after experimental
orthopaedic surgery in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1988; 11(2): 163–170.
77 Mburu DN. Evaluation of the anti-inflammatory effects of a low-dose of acetami-
nophen following surgery in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1991; 14(1): 109–111.
78 Hernández-Avalos I, Valverde A, Ibancovichi-Camarillo JA, et al. Clinical evalua-
tion of postoperative analgesia, cardiorespiratory parameters and changes in liver
and renal function tests of paracetamol compared to meloxicam and carprofen in
dogs undergoing ovariohysterectomy. PLoS ONE 2020; 15(2): e0223697.

-- 432 of 1450 --

Chapter 24: Non- Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs 	417
79 Budsberg SC, Kleine SA, Norton MM, et al. Comparison of the effects on lame-
ness of orally administered acetaminophen-codeine and carprofen in dogs with
experimentally induced synovitis. Am J Vet Res 2020; 81(8): 627–634.
80 Moore N, Salvo F, Duong M, et al. Does paracetamol still have a future in osteoar-
thritis? The Lancet 2016; 387(10033): 2065–2066.
81 Toussaint K, Yang XC, Zielinski MA, et al. What do we (not) know about how
paracetamol (acetaminophen) works? J Clin Pharm Ther 2010; 35(6): 617–638.
82 Ohashi N, Kohno T. Analgesic effect of acetaminophen: a review of known and
novel mechanisms of action. Front Pharmacol 2020; 11: 580289.
83 Aronoff DM, Oates JA, Boutaud O. New insights into the mechanism of action of
acetaminophen: its clinical pharmacologic characteristics reflect its inhibition of
the two prostaglandin H2 synthases. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2005; 79(1): 9–19.
84 Hinz B, Cheremina O, Brune K. Acetaminophen (paracetamol) is a selective
cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor in man. FASEB J 2008; 22(2): 383–390.
85 Hinz B, Brune K. Can drug removals involving cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors be avoided?
A plea for human pharmacology. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2008; 29(8): 391–397.
86 Kis B, Snipes JA, Busija DW. Acetaminophen and the cyclooxygenase-3 puz-
zle: sorting out facts, fictions, and uncertainties. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2005;
315(1): 1–7.
87 Pickering G, Esteve V, Loriot MA, et al. Acetaminophen reinforces descending
inhibitory pain pathways. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2008; 84(1): 47–51.
88 Sartini I, Łebkowska-Wieruszewska B, Lisowski A, et al. Pharmacokinetics of
acetaminophen after intravenous and oral administration in fasted and fed
Labrador Retriever dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2021; 44(1): 28–35.
89 Madsen M, Enomoto H, Messenger K, et al. Effects of housing environment on oral
absorption of acetaminophen in healthy Beagles. Am J Vet Res 2022; 83(1):80–85.
90 Tueshaus T, McKemie DS, Kanarr K, et al. Pharmacokinetics and effects of
codeine in combination with acetaminophen on thermal nociception in horses.
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2023; 46(5): 311–325.
91 Mercer MA, McKenzie HC, Byron CR, et al. Pharmacokinetics and clinical effi-
cacy of acetaminophen (paracetamol) in adult horses with mechanically induced
lameness. Equine Vet J 2023; 55(3): 524–533.
92 Mercer MA, McKenzie HC, Davis JL, et al. Pharmacokinetics and safety of
repeated oral dosing of acetaminophen in adult horses. Equine Vet J 2020; 52(1):
120–125.
93 Mercer MA, Davis JL, McKenzie HC, et al. Pharmacokinetics and efficacy of
orally administered acetaminophen (paracetamol) in adult horses with experi-
mentally induced endotoxemia. J Vet Intern Med 2023; 37(2): 718–727.
94 Mercer MA, Davis JL, McKenzie HC, et al. Pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamic
efficacy, and safety of acetaminophen in adult horses with naturally occurring
chronic lameness. In Proc Am Assoc Equine Pract 2021; 67: 348–349.
95 Cascorbi I. The uncertainties of metamizole use. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2021;
109(6): 1373–1375.
96 Pierre SC, Schmidt R, Brenneis C, et al. Inhibition of cyclooxygenases by dipy-
rone. Br J Pharmacol 2007; 151(4): 494–503.
97 Giorgi MA, Łebkowska-Wieruszewska B, Lisowski A, et al. Pharmacokinetic pro-
files of the active metamizole metabolites after four different routes of administra-
tion in healthy dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2018; 41(3): 428–436.
98 Zanuzzo FS, Teixeira-Neto FJ, Teixeira LR, et al. Analgesic and antihyperalgesic
effects of dipyrone, meloxicam or a dipyrone–meloxicam combination in bitches
undergoing ovariohysterectomy. Vet J 2015; 205(1): 33–37.
99 Imagawa VH, Fantoni DT, Tatarunas AC, et al. The use of different doses of
metamizol for post-operative analgesia in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38(4):
385–393.
100 Pereira MA, Campos KD, Gonçalves LA, et al. Cyclooxygenases 1 and 2 inhibition
and analgesic efficacy of dipyrone at different doses or meloxicam in cats after
ovariohysterectomy. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(1): 7–16.
101 Teixeira LG, Martins LR, Schimites PI, et al. Evaluation of postoperative pain and
toxicological aspects of the use of dipyrone and tramadol in cats. J Feline Med Surg
2020; 22(6): 467–475.
102 Lebkowska-Wieruszewska B, Kim TW, Chea B, et al. Pharmacokinetic profiles of
the two major active metabolites of metamizole (dipyrone) in cats following three
different routes of administration. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2018; 41(2): 334–349.
103 Whittle BJ. Mechanisms underlying intestinal injury induced by anti-
inflammatory COX inhibitors. Eur J Pharmacol 2004; 500(1–3): 427–439.
104 Wolfe MM, Lichtenstein DR, Singh G. Gastrointestinal toxicity of non-steroidal
antiinflammatory drugs. N Engl J Med 1999; 340(24): 1888–1899.
105 Fortun PJ, Hawkey CJ. Non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs and the small intes-
tine. Curr Opin Gastroenterol 2005; 21(2): 169–175.
106 Treinen-Moslen M, Kanz MF. Intestinal tract injury by drugs: importance of
metabolite delivery by yellow bile road. Pharmacol Ther 2006; 112(3): 649–667.
107 Hunt JR, Dean RS, Davis GN, et al. An analysis of the relative frequencies of
reported adverse events associated with NSAID administration in dogs and cats in
the United Kingdom. Vet J 2015; 206(2): 183–190.
108 Bhalla N, Emberson J, Merhi A, et al. Vascular and upper gastrointestinal effects
of non-steroidal anti- inflammatory drugs: meta-analyses of individual participant
data from randomized trials. Lancet 2013; 382(9894): 769–779.
109 Lascelles BDX, Blikslager AT, Fox SM, et al. Gastrointestinal tract perforation in
dogs treated with a selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor: 29 cases (2002–2003).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2005; 227(7): 1112–1117.
110 Enberg TB, Braun LD, Kuzma AB. Gastrointestinal perforation in five dogs associated
with the administration of meloxicam. J Vet Emerge Crit Care 2006; 16(1): 34–43.
111 US Food and Drug Administration. Freedom of Information Summary: EtoGesic
Tablets (NADA 141–108). Approval Date: July 22, 1998. www.fda.gov/ohrms/
dockets/98fr/NADA141–108-FOIS082703.pdf.pdf (accessed September 2014).
112 Doig PA, Purbrook KA, Hare JE, et al. Clinical efficacy and tolerance of meloxi-
cam in dogs with chronic osteoarthritis. Can Vet J 2000; 41(4): 296–300.
113 Jones CJ, Steppe HK, Harmon BG, et al. In vivo effects of meloxicam and aspirin
on blood, gastric mucosal, and synovial fluid prostanoid synthesis in dogs. Am J
Vet Res 2002; 63(11): 1527–1531.
114 Forsyth SF, Guilford WG, Haslett SJ, et al. Endoscopy of the gastroduodenal
mucosa after carprofen, meloxicam and ketoprofen administration in dogs. J
Small Anim Pract 1998; 39(9): 421–424.
115 Lee YS, Kim H, Wu TX, et al. Genetically mediated interindividual variation in
analgesic responses to cyclooxygenase inhibitory drugs. Clin Pharmacol Ther
2006; 79(5): 407–418.
116 Satoh H, Amigas K, Ebara S, et al. Cyclooxygenase (COX)-1 and COX-2 both play
an important role in the protection of the duodenal mucosa in cats. J Pharmacol
Exp Ther 2013; 344(1): 189–195.
117 Reimer ME, Johnston SA, Leib MS, et al. The gastrointestinal effects of buffered
aspirin, carprofen, and etodolac in healthy dogs. J Vet Intern Med 1999; 13(5):
472–477.
118 Nadeau JA, Andrews FM. Equine gastric ulcer syndrome: the continuing conun-
drum. Equine Vet J 2009; 41(7): 611–615.
119 Tobin T, Chay S, Kamerling S, et al. Phenylbutazone in the horse: a review. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 1986; 9(1): 1–25.
120 Whitfield-Cargile CM, Coleman MC, Cohen ND, et al. Effects of phenylbutazone
alone or in combination with a nutritional therapeutic on gastric ulcers, intestinal
permeability, and fecal microbiota in horses. J Vet Intern Med 2021; 35(2):
1121–1130.
121 Richardson LM, Whitfield-Cargile CM, Cohen ND, et al. Effect of selective versus
nonselective cyclooxygenase inhibitors on gastric ulceration scores and intestinal
inflammation in horses. Vet Surg 2018; 47(6): 784–791.
122 Pedersen SK, Cribb AE, Read EK, et al. Phenylbutazone induces equine glandular
gastric disease without decreasing prostaglandin E2 concentrations. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2018; 41(2): 239–245.
123 Davis JL. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug associated right dorsal colitis in
the horse. Equine Vet Educ 2017; 29(2): 104–113.
124 Marshall JF, Blikslager AT. The effect of non-steroidal anti- inflammatory drugs on
the equine intestine. Equine Vet J 2011; 43(s39): 140–144.
125 Tomlinson J, Blikslager A. Role of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in
gastrointestinal tract injury and repair. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2003; 222(7):
946–951.
126 Ziegler AL, Blikslager AT. Sparing the gut: COX-2 inhibitors herald a new era for
treatment of horses with surgical colic. Equine Vet Educ 2020; 32(11): 611–616.
127 Tomlinson JE, Blikslager AT. Effects of cyclooxygenase inhibitors flunixin and
deracoxib on permeability of ischaemic-injured equine jejunum. Equine Vet J
2005; 37(1): 75–80.
128 Moore JN. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug therapy for endotoxemia:
we’re doing the right thing, aren’t we? Compendium Cont Education 1989; 11:
741–744.
129 McConnico RS, Morgan TW, Williams CC, et al. Pathophysiologic effects of phe-
nylbutazone on the right dorsal colon in horses. Am J Vet Res 2008; 69(11):
1496–1505.
130 Brzozowski T, Konturek PC, Konturek SJ, et al. Role of prostaglandins in gastro-
protection and gastric adaptation. J Physiol Pharmacol 2005; 56(Suppl 5): 33–55.
131 Hurley JW, Crandal LA. The effects of salicylates upon the stomach of dogs.
Gasteroenterology 1964; 46: 36–43.
132 Phillips BM. Aspirin-induced gastrointestinal microbleeding in dogs. Toxicol Appl
Pharmacol 1973; 24: 182–189.
133 Konturek JW, Dembinski A, Stoll R, et al. Mucosal adaptation to aspirin induced
gastric damage in humans. Studies on blood flow, gastric mucosal growth, and
neutrophil activation. Gut 1994; 35(9): 1197–1204.
134 Taylor LA, Crawford LM. Aspirin-induced gastrointestinal lesions in dogs. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 1968; 152(6): 617–619.
135 Souza MH, de Lima OM , Jr Zamuner SR, et al. Gastritis increases resistance to
aspirin-induced mucosal injury via COX-2- mediated lipoxin synthesis. Am J
Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2003; 285(1): G54–G61.

-- 433 of 1450 --

418 	Section 3: Pharmacology
136 Wallace JL, Fiorucci S. A magic bullet for mucosal protection and aspirin is the
trigger! Trends Pharmacol Sci 2003; 24(7): 323–236.
137 Wallace JL, Zamuner SR, McKnight W, et al. Aspirin, but not NO-releasing aspirin
(NCX-4016), interacts with selective COX-2 inhibitors to aggravate gastric dam-
age and inflammation. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2004; 286(1):
G76–G81.
138 Fiorucci S, de Lima OM , Jr Mencarelli A, et al. Cyclooxygenase-2- derived lipoxin
A4 increases gastric resistance to aspirin-induced damage. Gastroenterology 2002;
123(5): 1598–1606.
139 Sennello KA, Leib MS. Effects of deracoxib or buffered aspirin on the gastric
mucosa of healthy dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2006; 20(60): 1291–1296.
140 Mathews KA, Doherty T, Dyson DH, et al. Nephrotoxicity in dogs associated with
methoxyflurane anesthesia and flunixin meglumine analgesia. Can Vet J 1990;
31(11): 766–771.
141 Mathews KA. Non- steroidal anti-inflammatory analgesics in pain management in
dogs and cats. Can Vet J 1996; 37(9): 539–545.
142 Gunson DE, Soma LR. Renal papillary necrosis in horses after phenylbutazone
and water deprivation. Vet Pathol 1983; 20(5): 603–610.
143 Monteiro B, Steagall PV, Lascelles BD, et al. Long-term use of non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs in cats with chronic kidney disease: from controversy to opti-
mism. J Small Anim Pract 2019; 60(8): 459–462.
144 Lobetti RG, Joubert KE. Effect of administration of non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs before surgery on renal function in clinically normal dogs.
Am J Vet Res 2000; 61(12): 1501–1506.
145 Gambaro G, Perazella MA. Adverse renal effects of anti-inflammatory agents:
evaluation of selective and nonselective cyclooxygenase inhibitors. J Intern Med
2003; 253(6): 643–652.
146 Rossat J, Maillard M, Nussberger JU, et al. Renal effects of selective
cyclooxygenase-2 inhibition in normotensive salt-depleted subjects. Clin
Pharmacol Ther 1999; 66(1): 76–84.
147 Narita T, Sato R, Motoishi K, et al. The interaction between orally administered
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and prednisolone in healthy dogs. J Vet
Med Sci 2007; 69(4): 353–363.
148 de Broe ME, Elseviers MM. Analgesic nephropathy. N Engl J Med 1998; 338(7):
446–452.
149 Frendin JH, Boström IM, Kampa N, et al. Effects of carprofen on renal function
during medetomidine-propofol-isoflurane anesthesia in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2006;
67(12): 1967–1973.
150 Ko JCH, Miyabiyashi T, Mandsager RE, et al. Renal effects of carprofen adminis-
tered to healthy dogs anesthetized with propofol and isoflurane. Am J Vet Med
Assoc 2000; 217(30): 346–349.
151 Bergmann HML, Nolte IJA, Kramer S. Effects of preoperative administration of
carprofen on renal function and hemostasis in dogs undergoing surgery for frac-
ture repair. Am J Vet Res 2005; 66(8): 1356–1363.
152 Boström IM, Nyman GC, Lord PF, et al. Effects of carprofen on renal function and
results of serum biochemical and hematologic analyses in anesthetized dogs that
had low blood pressure during anesthesia. Am J Vet Res 2002; 63(5): 712–721.
153 Crandell DE, Mathews KA, Dyson DH. Effect of meloxicam and carprofen on
renal function when administered to healthy dogs prior to anesthesia and painful
stimulation. Am J Vet Res 2004; 65(10): 1384–1390.
154 Fusellier M, Desfontis JC, LeRoux A, et al. Effect of short-term treatment with
meloxicam and pimobendan on the renal function in healthy beagle dogs. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2008; 31(20): 150–155.
155 Boström IM, Nyman G, Hoppe A, et al. Effects of meloxicam on renal function in
dogs with hypotension during anaesthesia. Vet Anaesth Analg 2006; 33(1): 62–69.
156 US Food and Drug Administration. Freedom of Information Summary:
Deramaxx Chewable Tablets (NADA 141–203). Approval Date: August 21, 2002.
www.fda.gov/downloads/AnimalVeterinary/Products/ApprovedAnimalDrug
Products/ FOIADrugSummaries/ucm117640.pdf.
157 Luna SP, Basílio AC, Steagall PV, et al. Evaluation of adverse effects of long-term
oral administration of carprofen, etodolac, flunixin meglumine, ketoprofen, and
meloxicam in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2007; 68(3): 258–264.
158 Surdyk KK, Brown CA, Brown SA. Evaluation of glomerular filtration rate in cats
with reduced renal mass and administered meloxicam and acetylsalicylic acid. Am
J Vet Res 2013; 74(4): 648–651.
159 Gunew MN, Menrath VH, Marshall RD. Long-term safety, efficacy and palatabil-
ity of oral meloxicam at 0.01–0.03 mg/kg for treatment of osteoarthritic pain in
cats. J Feline Med Surg 2008; 10(3): 235–241.
160 Gowan RA, Lingard AE, Johnston L, et al. Retrospective case–control study of the
effects of long-term dosing with meloxicam on renal function in aged cats with
degenerative joint disease. J Feline Med Surg 2011; 13(10): 752–761.
161 Gowan RA, Baral RM, Lingard AE, et al. A retrospective analysis of the effects of
meloxicam on the longevity of aged cats with and without overt chronic kidney
disease. J Feline Med Surg 2012; 14(12): 876–881.
162 KuKanich K, George C, Roush JK, et al. Effects of low-dose meloxicam in cats with
chronic kidney disease. J Feline Med Surg 2021; 23(2):138–148.
163 King JN, Hotz R, Reagan EL, et al. Safety of oral robenacoxib in the cat. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2012; 35(3): 290–300.
164 King JN, King S, Budsberg SC, et al. Clinical safety of robenacoxib in feline
osteoarthritis: results of a randomized, blinded, placebo-controlled clinical trial.
J Feline Med Surg 2016; 18(8): 632–642.
165 Wun MK, Leister E, King T, et al. Acute kidney injury in 18 cats after subcutane-
ous meloxicam and an update on non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug usage in
feline patients in Australia. Aust Vet J 2023; 101(3): 90–98.
166 Bjorkman D. Non-steroidal anti- inflammatory drug-associated toxicity of the
liver, lower gastrointestinal tract, and esophagus. Am J Med 1998; 105(Suppl 5A):
17S–21S.
167 Tolman KG. Hepatotoxicity of non-narcotic analgesics. Am J Med 1998; 105(Suppl
1B): 13S–17S.
168 US Food and Drug Administration. Freedom of Information Summary: Rimadyl
Tablets (NADA 141–053). Approval Date: October 25, 1996.
169 Vasseur PB, Johnson AL, Budsberg SC, et al. Randomized, controlled trial of the
efficacy of carprofen, a non-steroidal antiinflammatory drug, in the treatment of
osteoarthritis in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1995; 206(6): 807–811.
170 MacPhail CM, Lappin MR, Meyer DJ, et al. Hepatocellular toxicosis associated
with administration of carprofen in 21 dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1998; 212(120):
1895–1901.
171 Hickford FH, Barr SC, Erb HN. Effect of carprofen on hemostatic variables in
dogs. Am J Vet Res 2001; 62(10): 1642–1646.
172 Budsberg SC, Stoker AM, Johnston SA, et al. In vitro effects of meloxicam on
metabolism in articular chondrocytes from dogs with naturally occurring osteo-
arthritis. Am J Vet Res 2013; 74(9): 1198–1205.
173 Patrono C. Cardiovascular effects of cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors: a mechanistic
and clinical perspective. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2016; 82(4): 957–964.
174 Mukherjee D, Nissen SE, Topol EJ. Risk of cardiovascular events associated with
selective COX-2 inhibitors. JAMA 2001; 286(8): 954–959.
175 Eisenberg RS. Learning the value of drugs – is rofecoxib a regulatory success
story? N Engl J Med 2005; 352(13): 1285–1287.
176 Fitzgerald GA. Coxibs and cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med 2004; 351(17):
1709–1711.
177 Topol EJ. Failing the public health – rofecoxib, Merck and the FDA. N Engl J Med
2004; 351(17): 1707–1709.
178 Drazen JM. COX-2 inhibitors — a lesson in unexpected problems. N England J
Med 2005; 352(17): 1131–1132.
179 Papich MG. Papich Handbook of Veterinary Drugs, 5th edn. St. Louis, MO:
Elsevier, 2021.
180 Fitzgerald GA, Patrono C. The coxibs, selective inhibitors of cyclooxygenase-2. N
Engl J Med 2001; 345(6): 433–442.
181 Kamata M, King JN, Seewald W, et al. Comparison of injectable robenacoxib ver-
sus meloxicam for peri-operative use in cats: results of a randomised clinical trial.
Vet J 2012; 193(1): 114–118.
182 Lascelles BDX, Cripps PJ, Jones A, et al. Efficacy and kinetics of carprofen, admin-
istered preoperatively or postoperatively, for the prevention of pain in dogs under-
going ovariohysterectomy. Vet Surg 1998; 27(6): 568–582.
183 Mathews KA, Pettifer G, Foster R, et al. Safety and efficacy of preoperative
administration of meloxicam, compared with that of ketoprofen and
butorphanol in dogs undergoing abdominal surgery. Am J Vet Res 2001; 62(6):
882–888.
184 Budsberg SC, Cross AR, Quandt JE, et al. Evaluation of intravenous administra-
tion of meloxicam for perioperative pain management following stifle joint sur-
gery in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2002; 63(11): 1557–1563.
185 Bennett D, Johnston P. Osteoarthritis in the cat. How should it be managed and
treated? J Feline Med Surg 2012; 14(1): 76–84.
186 Hjelle JJ, Grauer GF. Acetaminophen-induced toxicosis in dogs and cats. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 1986; 188(7): 742–746.
187 McCann ME, Rickes EL, Hora DF, et al. In vitro effects and in vivo efficacy of a
novel cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor in cats with lipopolysaccharide-induced pyrexia.
Am J Vet Res 2005; 66(7): 1278–1284.
188 Morresey PR. Therapeutic intervention strategies in endotoxemia. Compend
Contin Educ Vet 2001; 23: 925–931.
189 Valverde A, Gunkel CI. Pain management in horses and farm animals. J Vet Emerg
Crit Care 2005; 15(4): 295–307.
190 Cook VL, Meyer CT, Campbell NB, et al. Effect of firocoxib or flunixin meglu-
mine on recovery of ischemic-injured equine jejunum. Am J Vet Res 2009; 70(8):
992–1000.
191 Smith GW, Davis JL, Tell LA, et al. FARAD Digest: extralabel use of non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in cattle. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008; 232(5):
697–701.

-- 434 of 1450 --

Chapter 24: Non- Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs 	419
192 Wagner BK, Nixon E, Robles I, et al. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: phar-
macokinetics and mitigation of procedural-pain in cattle. Animals 2021; 11(2): 282.
193 Coetzee JF, Mosher RA, KuKanich B, et al. Pharmacokinetics and effect of intra-
venous meloxicam in weaned Holstein calves following scoop dehorning without
local anesthesia. BMC Vet Res 2012; 8(1): 1–15.
194 Hirsch AC, Philipp H, Kleemann R. Investigation on the efficacy of meloxicam in
sows with mastitis–metritis–agalactia syndrome. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2003;
26(5): 355–360.
195 Delatour P, Foot R, Foster AP, et al. Pharmacodynamics and chiral pharmacoki-
netics of carprofen in calves. Br Vet J 1996; 152(2): 183–198.
196 Lohuis JACM, Werven TV, Brand A, et al. Pharmacodynamics and pharmacoki-
netics of carprofen, a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug, in healthy cows and
cows with Escherichia coli endotoxin-induced mastitis. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
1991; 14(3): 219–229.
197 Malreddy PR, Coetzee JF, KuKanich B, et al. Pharmacokinetics and milk secretion
of gabapentin and meloxicam co-administered orally in Holstein-Friesian cows.
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2013; 36(1): 14–20.
198 Mosher RA, Coetzee JF, Cull CA, et al. Pharmacokinetics of oral meloxicam
in ruminant and preruminant calves. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2012; 35(4):
373–381.

-- 435 of 1450 --

420
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth E dition of L umb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
Adjunctive drugs can be broadly described as drugs that fall outside
common clinical use but may provide a benefit beyond that of more
commonly used drugs or are less readily characterized because they
play a supportive role in the provision of anesthesia and analgesia.
Some of the drugs described in this chapter may enter the main-
stream as evidence supporting their use grows, while others may
remain unconventional, restricted to second- or third-line therapy,
or fall out of use as alternatives are identified or emerging evidence
fails to support their use. This chapter is divided into non-analgesic
and analgesic adjuncts.
Non- analgesic adjuncts
Dantrolene
Dantrolene is a peripherally acting muscle relaxant, producing skel-
etal muscle relaxation through ryanodine receptor antagonism and
inhibition of the dihydropyridine receptor calcium channel [1–3].
There are three isoforms of ryanodine receptors with RyR1 believed
to be predominant in skeletal muscle. Receptors are located in
organelle membranes (i.e., mitochondrial, endoplasmic and sarco-
plasmic reticular, and nuclear). The primary effect of dantrolene is
to reduce calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum into the
cytoplasm via the RyR1 receptor (a calcium channel), thereby
dissociating excitation–contraction coupling. Its muscle-relaxing
properties are limited to skeletal muscle though cardiac depression
has been reported in dogs when administered at high doses (greater
than 5 mg/kg) or in combination with verapamil [4]. At therapeutic
intravenous (IV) doses (1–5 mg/kg) in dogs and cats, minute venti-
lation during general anesthesia is reduced through depression of
both respiratory rate and tidal volume [5,6]. In humans, adverse
effects are described as minor and include phlebitis, transient mus-
cle weakness, and gastrointestinal upset [7].
Dantrolene is primarily indicated for the treatment and preven-
tion of the pharmacogenetic disorder malignant hyperthermia
(MH) [8–14], and rhabdomyolysis [15–19], with a potential role in
cytoprotection and as an antiarrhythmic [2,3,20].
Shortly after MH was first reported in humans [21,22] and
pigs [23,24], the successful use of dantrolene for the prevention
and treatment of MH was published with the experiments per-
formed in pigs [9]. It has since been used to treat MH in dogs [10]
and horses [11].
Dantrolene is used in the prevention and treatment of exertional
rhabdomyolysis in horses [16,18,25], though use in rhabdomyolysis
in a dog [15] and tetanus in cats [19] has also been reported.
In horses given dantrolene before general anesthesia, there is a
risk of hyperkalemia [26]. A study of six adult horses given oral
dantrolene (6 mg/kg) or water 1 h before induction of general
25 Anesthetic and Analgesic Adjunctive Drugs
Daniel S.J. Pang
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada and
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Université de Montréal, Saint-Hyacinthe, Québec, Canada
Chapter contents
Introduction, 420
Non- analgesic adjuncts, 420
Dantrolene, 420
Diphenhydramine, 421
Doxapram, 421
Famotidine, omeprazole, and pantoprazole, 423
Guaifenesin (GG, glyceryl guaiacolate ether), 424
Maropitant, 425
Methocarbamol, 427
Metoclopramide, 427
Ondansetron and dolasetron, 428
Procainamide, 428
Sodium nitroprusside, 429
Trazodone, 429
Vasopressin (arginine vasopressin, antidiuretic hormone)
and desmopressin, 430
Analgesic adjuncts, 431
Amantadine and memantine, 431
Amitriptyline and nortriptyline, 432
Cannabinoids, 433
Gabapentin and pregabalin, 434
Tapentadol, 436
Tramadol, 436
References, 438

-- 436 of 1450 --

Chapter 25: Anesthetic and Analgesic Adjunctive Drugs 	421
anesthesia (crossover study design) found hyperkalemia (serum
potassium > 5.5 mEq/L) occurred in four horses, with two of these
horses having serum potassium concentrations > 7 mEq/L [26].
Three horses developed bradyarrhythmias associated with hyper-
kalemia. Dantrolene administration was also associated with reduced
cardiac output (approximately 25–30%), heart rate, and arterial blood
pressure (approximately 20%). No difference in recovery time was
observed.
Dantrolene undergoes hepatic metabolism, primarily hydroxyla-
tion, in the dog and horse. Metabolites and up to 1% of unchanged
dantrolene are excreted in urine and bile [27–29].
Dosages in horses are as follows: 1.9 mg/kg IV loading dose
followed by oral dosing at 2.5 mg/kg every 60 min [28], or
2–4 mg/kg PO [11,16,18,26,29]. Notably, there is considerable
interindividual variation in plasma concentrations following oral
administration [16,26].
Dosages in dogs and cats are as follows: 1–3 mg/kg IV (low end
of dose range for muscle relaxation and high end for the treatment
of MH); 5–6 mg/kg PO once daily as prophylaxis. As seen with
horses, oral dosing in dogs is associated with wide variability in
plasma concentrations of dantrolene [30].
Dosages in pigs are as follows: 1–3 mg/kg IV for the treatment of
MH; 5 mg/kg PO for prophylaxis.
Dantrolene is available as a powder for reconstitution (with sterile
water). The two commercial formulations available are reconstituted
to 0.33 mg/mL (Dantrium®) and 50 mg/mL (Ryanodex®). Solutions
of reconstituted dantrolene are light sensitive and stable for 6 h [3].
Dantrolene is also available as 100 mg capsules.
Diphenhydramine
Diphenhydramine has a long history of perioperative use, particu-
larly in dogs and cats undergoing mast cell tumor resection or
exhibiting suspected allergic and anaphylactic reactions. It is an
antihistamine, acting as a reversible competitive antagonist at the
H1 receptor [31,32]. Histamine receptors, of which there are at least
four (H1
, H2 , H3
, and H4
), are widely distributed in the body, with H1
present in the brain, airway smooth muscle, skin, gastrointestinal
and genitourinary tracts, adrenal medulla, immune system, heart,
and vascular endothelium (reviewed by Peters and Kovacic) [32].
Agonist activity at the H 1 receptor leads to phospholipase C activa-
tion and increased intracellular calcium, which, in turn, promotes
airway smooth muscle contraction and catecholamine release from
the adrenal medulla. In the vascular endothelium, H1 receptor acti-
vation leads to nitric oxide formation and vasodilation. Additionally,
increased intracellular calcium triggers a host of secondary signaling
pathways, leading to vasodilation and increased cellular permeability.
Centrally, diphenhydramine’s effect on histamine receptors in the
brain is to cause drowsiness in people [31]. While this effect is often
proposed in animals, there is little supporting evidence [33–35].
In a randomized, blinded, placebo-controlled clinical trial in dogs,
diphenhydramine doses of 2–8 mg/kg intramuscular (IM) were
not associated with sedation (observed for 30 min after adminis-
tration), with sedation scores no different than the saline control
group [33]. At the highest dose (8 mg/kg), there was a small increase
in sedation score compared to baseline, but this was not statistically
significant when compared with other groups. As an older drug, it
is less selective than newer agents. It may be that higher doses, in
the region of 10 mg/kg PO, are required to cause sedation in
dogs [33]. In addition to its effects on the H 1 receptor, it also has
antimuscarinic and antidopaminergic properties, which are likely
to contribute to the adverse effects associated with high doses in
dogs [31,36]. At doses of 30–45 mg/kg PO in dogs, diphenhy-
dramine resulted in mydriasis, muscle tremors, increased muscle
tone, head swaying, and hyperreactivity [36]. It is primarily used in
humans for the management of motion sickness, as well as postop-
erative and opioid-induced nausea and vomiting [37]. In cats, a
dose of 3 mg/kg PO resulted in behavioral changes within 30 min,
reaching a peak effect at 1–2 h and lasting for over 4 h [38]. These
effects included altered locomotion, increased muscle tone, tremors,
hypersalivation, and vomiting. Effects on sleep were varied but
included increased wakefulness and disrupted sleep patterns.
The benefits of diphenhydramine administration before mast
cell tumor excision and in suspected anaphylaxis are unclear.
Based on an earlier pharmacokinetic study showing plasma levels
of diphenhydramine exceeding the therapeutic range in humans,
Sanchez et al., in a randomized, blinded, placebo-controlled trial,
found no impact of diphenhydramine (1 mg/kg IV) on plasma
histamine concentrations in dogs (n = 8) undergoing mast cell
tumor resection (three dogs had grade 1 tumors, two had grade 2,
two had grade 3, and one had grade 4) [39]. Intraoperatively,
mean and diastolic arterial blood pressures were approximately
10–15 mmHg lower in the diphenhydramine group compared to
control, with a small increase in cardiac index [39]. An in vitro
study of a canine mast cell line found that diphenhydramine did
not prevent histamine release [40]. Current treatment guidelines
for anaphylaxis emphasize epinephrine for first-line therapy, with
antihistamines described as having a “limited role” as a second- or
third- line therapy, useful in managing cutaneous symptoms, if pre-
sent [41,42]. In cutaneous allergic reactions in dogs, there is little
evidence supporting the use of diphenhydramine [35].
The pharmacokinetics of diphenhydramine have been described
in rabbits, camels, horses, sheep, and dogs [34,43–46]. In conscious
dogs administered 1 mg/kg IV or 2 mg/kg IM, terminal half-life
was reported to be approximately 4 and 7 h, respectively, with 88%
bioavailability from IM injection [34]. No adverse effects were
reported at these doses and with these routes of injection (the IV
dose was given as a bolus over < 5 s) and resultant plasma levels
were in the therapeutic range reported in humans. Oral diphenhy-
dramine bioavailability in dogs is low (3–7%) [47].
Doses in dogs and cats are 1–4 mg/kg (every 8 h, PO, IM, or IV)
and 0.5–1 mg/kg (every 12 h, PO or IM), respectively. In dogs, IM
injection is preferred over IV use, with a described risk of hypotension/
cardiovascular instability associated with the latter route [34]. The
drug is supplied as a 50 mg/mL injectable formulation.
Doxapram
The analeptic (central nervous system [CNS] stimulant) agent
doxapram has a long history of use in veterinary medicine and
has been applied in a wide variety of situations including arousal
from sedation/anesthesia [48–50], cardiopulmonary resuscitation
(CPR) [51], stimulation of respiration in neonates and following
drug-induced respiratory depression [52–60], and assessment of
laryngeal function [61–63].
The mechanism of action leading to respiratory stimulation is
likely a combination of central and peripheral effects [64–66].
Electrophysiological studies in cats and dogs showed increased
activity of the respiratory nuclei of the medulla when given thera-
peutic doses of doxapram [64]. As the dose was increased, cortical
stimulation occurred followed by convulsions. A safety margin of
20–60:1 was cited before onset of central stimulation and convul-
sions. Experimental evidence suggests that stimulation of respira-
tion is dose dependent, with activation of peripheral aortic and

-- 437 of 1450 --

422 	Section 3: Pharmacology
carotid receptors occurring at doses (0.05–0.25 mg/kg IV) below
those typically used clinically [65]. As the dose is increased
(0.5–5.0 mg/kg IV), stimulation of respiratory and non-respiratory
brainstem neurons occurs [65]. There is limited evidence for inter-
species variability in the doxapram dose effective for respiratory
stimulation versus CNS arousal. Low doses of doxapram are success-
ful in eliciting respiratory stimulation in cats before cardiovascular
or CNS stimulation occurs [64–66], but higher doses may be neces-
sary in other species. It is unclear to what extent this dose depend-
ency occurs in dogs and horses, with evidence of CNS arousal
occurring at doses effective for respiratory stimulation [52,67–69].
The molecular mechanisms underlying peripheral and central
control of respiration remain an active area of research. Recent
evidence suggests involvement of two-pore domain potassium
channels, and these channels may also be involved in the mecha-
nism of inhalational anesthesia [70–72]. See [73] for a review.
Doxapram has the ability to significantly increase minute ventila-
tion through an increase in both respiratory rate and tidal volume,
leading to the term “pharmacologic ventilator” [74]. However, its
effects are relatively short-lived, reflecting a rapid decline in plasma
levels following an IV bolus [75]. Doxapram undergoes hepatic
metabolism in dogs with renal excretion of metabolites. A similar
pharmacokinetic profile is observed in horses with a rapid decline
in plasma levels following IV bolus administration, extensive
hepatic metabolism, and renal excretion of metabolites [76].
Doxapram also results in modest increases in arterial blood pres-
sure and heart rate in humans [74]. While cardiovascular changes
are short-lived in healthy animals (i.e., several minutes), one report
of its use in dogs (1.5 mg/kg IV) rendered hypovolemic from con-
trolled hemorrhage showed sustained increases in cardiac output
and arterial blood pressure for up to 1 h [69]. Doxapram does not
induce cardiac arrhythmias in dogs anesthetized with halothane or
cycloproprane in the presence of epinephrine and hypercapnia
and does not cause meaningful changes in hematology or serum
biochemistry [77–78].
In healthy adult horses and those with experimentally induced
respiratory disease, a dose of 0.3 mg/kg IV resulted in an approxi-
mately 50% increase in respiratory rate and tidal volume [79]. The
duration of action was not described. During halothane anesthesia,
preceded with acepromazine and thiopental in ponies, the addition
of doxapram (0.05 mg/kg/min IV) resulted in a return of arterial
carbon dioxide tension (PaCO2
) and pH to near normal levels, with
an increase in respiratory rate (tidal volume was not measured) [67].
An increase in mean arterial blood pressure of approximately 20%
without an accompanying increase in heart rate was observed dur-
ing doxapram infusion. Interestingly, the infusion of doxapram was
associated with a reduction in plane of anesthesia, necessitating an
increase in halothane vaporizer setting.
In cats anesthetized with a preparation of alfaxalone–alfadolone
(Saffan®), administration of doxapram (7.5 mg/kg IV) resulted in
a 181% increase in minute ventilation, which lasted for several
minutes [53]. A similar pattern was seen in cats anesthetized with
thiopental [53]. At this dose, heart rates increased for several min-
utes during both thiopental and Saffan® anesthesia to approximately
15–20% above the pre- doxapram period. Recovery was faster in the
Saffan® group with the addition of doxapram, while no change was
observed in the thiopental group.
The use of doxapram in patients with a history of seizures is
controversial [73]. While it is clear that cortical activity increases
in a dose-dependent fashion, it is unclear if this constitutes procon-
vulsant activity. Care should be exercised when administering
doxapram in patients with a history of seizures. As always, the use
of appropriate dosing (i.e., to effect) is critical.
Two areas of active doxapram usage are in foal and calf neonatal
medicine and assessment of laryngeal function in dogs. Retrospective
data from a cohort of foals with hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy
(neonatal maladjustment syndrome) revealed doxapram (0.02–
0.05 mg/kg/min IV) to be more effective than caffeine (loading
dose of 7.5–12 mg/kg followed by 2.5–5 mg/kg/day PO via nasogas-
tric tube) at reducing PaCO 2 for at least 12 h [55]. However, foals
remained acidemic with no significant increase in pH. The reduc-
tion in PaCO2 was achieved with an increase in tidal volume, with-
out an increase in respiratory rate. No effects on heart rate were
observed, and there was no difference in mortality rates. These data
agreed with an earlier retrospective study in healthy foals showing
no advantage of caffeine over saline in correcting respiratory acido-
sis created with isoflurane anesthesia [54]. Furthermore, a doxapram
dosing regimen of 0.5 mg/kg followed by 0.03 mg/kg/min IV was as
effective as 0.5 mg/kg followed by 0.08 mg/kg/min. Giguère et al.
also reported an improvement in arterial oxygen tension (PaO 2
)
following doxapram administration, compared with saline control
or caffeine [54]. The effects of doxapram in healthy foals differed
from those observed in healthy adult horses, with a small but
significant increase in heart rate observed in healthy foals regard-
less of doxapram dose. Doxapram also resulted in a modest increase
in mean arterial blood pressure of approximately 10 mmHg.
The mechanism of increased ventilation also differed; minute
ventilation was increased in healthy foals as a result of increased
respiratory rate and not tidal volume.
In calves, a comparison of doxapram (2 mg/kg IV) and theophyl-
line (7 mg/kg IV) showed a marked increase in respiratory rate with
doxapram but not theophylline [56]. Respiratory rate doubled
10 min after doxapram administration followed by a steady decline
over the next 2 h (end of the recording period). The effect on PaCO 2
(maximal decrease of approximate 20 mmHg) and PaO2 (maximal
increase of approximate 15 mmHg) peaked 30 s following admin-
istration, followed by a steady return toward baseline over the
recording period. Small increases in heart rate (120–155 beats/min)
and systemic systolic arterial blood pressure (105–112 mmHg)
were also observed without a significant change in cardiac output.
A greater change (20 mmHg increase) was observed in systolic
pulmonary arterial blood pressures. The authors concluded that the
transient respiratory stimulation following doxapram administra-
tion could be beneficial in newborn calves when positive pressure
ventilation was not possible. Similar results were observed in neo-
natal calves (2–15 h old) given doxapram at approximately 1 mg/kg
IV, which resulted in a doubling of minute ventilation, an approxi-
mately 20% increase in PaO 2
, and a 25% decrease in PaCO2 [57].
Interestingly, a systematic review of doxapram use in human
preterm infants did not identify a clear advantage associated with
doxapram use over saline [80], and there is evidence that doxapram
may cause cortical damage due to a reduction in cerebral blood
flow [81–83].
Laryngeal paralysis in dogs manifests as a paradoxical movement
of the arytenoid cartilages in affected dogs, with inward collapse of
the arytenoid cartilages as subatmospheric thoracic pressure is
generated during inspiration. While there are numerous studies
evaluating the effect of doxapram on arytenoid cartilage motion in
dogs, there appears only one in which both healthy and diseased
(laryngeal paralysis) dogs were included [61]. In that study, following
premedication with acepromazine (0.022 mg/kg IM in diseased dogs
and 0.2 mg/kg IM in healthy dogs) and butorphanol (0.44 mg/kg IM),

-- 438 of 1450 --

Chapter 25: Anesthetic and Analgesic Adjunctive Drugs 	423
animals were preoxygenated for 5 min and general anesthesia
induced with isoflurane delivered by mask. Doxapram was admin-
istered at 1.1 mg/kg IV following induction of general anesthesia.
At baseline, the normalized glottal gap area was significantly larger
in dogs with laryngeal paralysis during both inspiration and expira-
tion. Following doxapram administration, the normalized glottal
gap area at inspiration was significantly reduced in dogs with laryn-
geal paralysis compared to normal dogs, and the area during expira-
tion was significantly greater in dogs with laryngeal paralysis. The
dramatic changes observed (i.e., marked arytenoid adduction
during inspiration) allowed for diagnosis but also led the authors to
warn of the need to potentially intubate the airway to provide oxy-
gen. Studies in healthy dogs consistently report increased laryngeal
motion following doxapram administration (0.5–2.5 mg/kg IV) [63].
In horses, laryngeal function has been evaluated by comparing
the following techniques: animals standing at rest with a twitch, at
rest without twitch, manual occlusion of nostrils, post-exercise
(lunging at canter), swallowing, doxapram (40 mg/kg IV), and
xylazine (0.5 mg/kg IV) [62]. Subjectively, doxapram resulted in
an increased respiratory rate in approximately half of the horses
examined (total n = 7), but the most successful technique for stimu-
lating deep breaths was manual nostril occlusion.
Using doxapram during CPR is no longer recommended, though
this practice may persist. An internet survey of 600 veterinarians
in small animal practice, with or without board certification in
critical care and emergency medicine or anesthesia, showed that
while doxapram was as frequently available to both specialists and
practitioners (74% and 81%, respectively), a significantly higher
percentage of general practitioners had used it during CPR
(29% and 70%, respectively) [51]. This contrasts starkly with the
current evidence-based CPR guidelines in which doxapram is not
mentioned [84].
The use of doxapram at 0.1–0.2 mg/kg IV has also been
suggested to facilitate recovery from general anesthesia in horses,
when appropriate, by increasing the level of arousal and stimulating
respiration, thereby speeding reduction in alveolar concentrations
of inhalational agents [85].
Other species in which doxapram use has been recorded are
cattle (1 mg/kg IV was effective in speeding recovery from xylazine),
camels (0.05–0.13 mg/kg IV was effective at speeding recovery
from xylazine in Bactrian camels), llamas (2.2 mg/kg IV was not
effective in reversing xylazine), and southern elephant seals
(appeared to cause CNS stimulation at 5 mg/kg when used to aid
recovery from a range of drug combinations; therefore, authors
recommended 2 mg/kg) [86–89].
Famotidine, omeprazole, and pantoprazole
Acid secretion in the stomach is initiated at the level of parietal cells
by gastrin, histamine type-2 (H2
), and muscarinic (M3
) receptors.
Receptor activation results in increased proton pump activity on
the luminal side of the cell via calcium- or cAMP-dependent path-
ways. Several H2 receptor antagonists (famotidine, ranitidine, and
cimetidine) have been used clinically. Famotidine and ranitidine
are 20–50 and 4–10 times more potent than cimetidine, respec-
tively. Perioperative use is usually to offset risk of gastrointestinal
ulceration, with common indications including stress- or non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)-related abomasal and
gastric ulcers in calves, foals, and horses, and following regurgita-
tion during anesthesia in dogs.
In a crossover study of five healthy horses, a comparison of famo-
tidine and ranitidine found a high degree of individual variation in
measured gastric fluid pH following administration of either drug
at a range of dosages [90]. Each horse received famotidine (0.5, 1,
and 2 mg/kg) and raniditine (4.4 and 6.6 mg/kg) via nasogastric
tube. For famotidine, gastric fluid pH increased above 6 in three of
five horses receiving 0.5 mg/kg, five of five horses receiving 1 mg/kg,
and three of five horses receiving 2 mg/kg. For ranitidine, gastric
fluid pH increased above 6 in four of five horses receiving 4.4 mg/kg
and five of five horses receiving 6.6 mg/kg. Ranitidine demon-
strated a tendency to result in a longer elevation of gastric fluid pH
(166 ± 106 min versus 98 ± 110 min; mean ± SD). The drug response
varied considerably between horses, leading the authors to suggest
a dose of 6.6 mg/kg ranitidine. Similar studies in 2–6-day- old foals
and milk- fed calves resulted in recommended dosages of ranitidine
of 6.6 mg/kg PO three times daily and 50 mg/kg PO three times
daily, respectively [91–92]. However, more recent evidence high-
lights the risk of extrapolating the need for H 2 antagonists in criti-
cally ill foals without measurement of gastric pH [93]. This study
found that almost 50% of hospitalized foals had a baseline gastric
pH, which was alkaline. Data supporting the use of famotidine in
calves and foals are not available.
Omeprazole and pantoprazole are proton pump inhibitors, which
act on the proton pump located at the luminal surface of gastric
parietal cells. Inhibition of acid secretion by proton pump inhibitors
is cumulative in humans, requiring 2–4 days to achieve maximal
inhibition [94]. This delay results from a combination of (1) increas-
ing inhibition of parietal cells as dormant cells are activated following
initial inhibition of active cells, (2) increased intestinal absorption
of the drug as acid secretion is decreased in response to the drug’s
effects, and potentially (3) the impact of cytochrome P450 inhibi-
tion to decrease the drug’s own metabolism. Proton pump inhibi-
tors are metabolized by the cytochrome P450 system (CYP1A1/2
and CYP2D15 in dogs), and the pharmacokinetics of esomeprazole
(the S-enantiomer of omeprazole) have been reported in dogs [95].
The delay to achieve maximal effect can be minimized with
initial IV administration or use of enteric-coated formulations
(though breaking or crushing coated tablets may reduce this benefit).
Interestingly, the efficacy of proton pump inhibitors is increased
with acid secretion (as occurs with feeding) and reduced when
given in conjunction with H 2 receptor antagonists [96]. Human
clinical evidence suggests that omeprazole is more effective at raising
gastric pH above 3 (a level correlated with healing gastric and duo-
denal ulcers in humans) compared to H2 receptor antagonists [97].
The dose in dogs and cats is 1–2.5 mg/kg PO once or twice
daily [94,98,99], while the dose in horses and foals is 1–4 mg/kg PO
once daily, with the low end of dose range for ulcer prevention and
the higher end for treatment [100–102].
In 2-day-old calves, the pharmacokinetics of IV pantoprazole
(1 mg/kg) have been studied and the terminal half-life reported to
be 2.8 h, which is longer than that reported in foals (1.5 h), adult
alpacas (0.5 h), and adult goats (0.7 h) [103–106]. In foals, panto-
prazole (1.5 mg/kg IV) was effective at increasing gastric pH for up
to 24 h following a single dose [104]. In alpacas, pantoprazole
(2 mg/kg SC or 1 mg/kg IV, daily for 3 days) was effective at increas-
ing third compartment pH above baseline within 4 or 12 h of initial
administration, respectively [105].
The perioperative use of famotidine in dogs and cats is commonly
performed in cases with suspected gastrointestinal ulceration or in
patients at risk of ulceration. Recommended doses of famotidine
in dogs and cats vary widely due to limited clinical data. In dogs,
0.1–0.5 mg/kg twice daily or 1 mg/kg once daily (PO, IV, SC, IM)
has been advocated. In cats, 0.2–0.25 mg/kg once or twice daily

-- 439 of 1450 --

424 	Section 3: Pharmacology
(IM, SC, PO, IV) has been suggested. Slow IV administration in cats
is recommended based on anecdotal evidence that fast injection
(i.e., less than 5 min) is associated with hemolysis from the benzyl
alcohol component of the injectable formulation. However, a retro-
spective study where hospital policy was to administer famotidine
over 5 min IV did not identify an effect on packed cell volume
(PCV) [107]. The same study showed no change in PCV when cats
received famotidine SC. There are limited clinical data demonstrat-
ing efficacy of famotidine in dogs, and omeprazole may be superior
at raising gastric pH for a useful period of time [98,108]. A recent
study in dogs with exercise-induced gastritis and clinically relevant
gastric ulcers showed famotidine (approximately 1 mg/kg PO once
daily) to be superior to no treatment in preventing gastric ulcers
but inferior to omeprazole (approximately 0.85 mg/kg PO once
daily) [108]. In healthy adult dogs, famotidine (0.5 mg/kg IV
twice daily) resulted in a significant elevation of gastric pH above
saline control and ranitidine, but did not raise pH as high, or for as
long, as omeprazole (1 mg/kg PO once daily). Increasing the dosing
frequency of famotidine to three times daily did not result in any
improvement [98].
The preoperative use of omeprazole or esomeprazole shows
variable results depending on dose and route of administration
[95,109–111]. In one study, the administration of esomeprazole
(two 1 mg/kg IV doses 12 h apart before induction of general anes-
thesia) resulted in a less acidic reflux but did not reduce the inci-
dence of reflux [109]. In contrast, another study reporting the use of
preoperative omeprazole (single 1 mg/kg PO dose at least 4 h before
induction of general anesthesia) showed a reduction in the number
of gastroesophageal reflux and regurgitation episodes [110].
A direct comparison between findings is difficult due to differences
in study design. Zacuto et al. also had another treatment group,
esomeprazole (1 mg/kg IV) with cisapride (1 mg/kg IV), which
resulted in less acidic reflux but also a significant reduction in the
number of reflux events compared to the control and omeprazole
groups [109]. Esomeprazole (1 mg/kg, IV, SC, and enteric-coated
formulation PO) was effective at increasing gastric pH in conscious
dogs [95]. The duration that pH was ≥ 3 was longest with SC and
PO administration, with an SC dose maintaining pH ≥ 3 for 80% of
the 24-h observation period (in contrast to approximately 60% and
40% for the first and second 12-h periods after IV administration,
respectively). Slightly greater efficacy (not statistically significant)
and less variability were observed with once daily administration
PO for 5 days. The pharmacokinetic profile of SC and PO adminis-
tration is favorable in dogs, with bioavailability of approximately
100% and 70%, respectively [95]. Peak plasma concentrations were
achieved between 1.8 and 0.8 h after PO administration on the first
and fifth day, respectively. However, the terminal half-life is approx-
imately 1 h regardless of route of administration (PO, SC, IV), indi-
cating that once daily dosing is insufficient, with twice daily dosing
recommended in dogs and cats [94,95]. Similar pharmacodynamic
data were reported in dogs given omeprazole (approximately
0.5–1 mg/kg of an enteric-coated formulation PO, twice daily, for
5 days) in a randomized, blinded, placebo-controlled crossover study,
with gastric pH maintained ≥ 3 for 90% of the 4-day observation
period (days 2–5 of PO administration) [111]. Recently, a long-acting
omeprazole formulation was evaluated in dogs [112]. Following a
single injection (4 mg/kg IM), gastric pH ≥ 3 was maintained for
over 60% of a 7-day observation period (peak effect on days 1–4). A
study of the same formulation in horses (3.4–4.4 mg/kg IM) found
it to be effective for up to 7 days after injection in four of seven
horses studied [113].
There is currently no clear evidence supporting the use of one
proton pump inhibitor over another in dogs or cats, but available
evidence indicates that proton pump inhibitors are better than H2
receptor antagonists at increasing gastric pH [94,98,99,108]. It is
important to recognize that, while the incidence of gastroesopha-
geal reflux is relatively high in anesthetized patients (up to approxi-
mately 50%) [114,115], the incidence of complications such as
esophageal stricture formation is extremely low [116].
There is a theoretical concern with chronic proton pump inhibitor
therapy resulting in a change in gastric fauna and bacterial over-
growth, potentially increasing the risk of pneumonia in patients pre-
disposed to regurgitation, such as those with megaesophagus.
Another potential concern is the effect of omeprazole to inhibit the
cytochrome P450 system, specifically CYP2C19, responsible for diaz-
epam metabolism [117,118]. There is currently no evidence that this
is of clinical significance in veterinary medicine, and the large thera-
peutic margin of diazepam may reduce the risk of adverse events.
Famotidine is available as 10 mg tablets (other strengths may be
available), an 8 mg/mL suspension, and a 10 mg/mL solution for
injection.
Omeprazole is available as 20 and 40 mg capsules and is licensed
as an oral paste in horses (370 mg/g of paste). Esomeprazole is
available as 20 mg capsules and as injectable formulations (21.3 and
42.5 mg/mL). Pantoprazole is available as tablets (20 and 40 mg)
and an injectable formulation (4 mg/mL).
Guaifenesin (GG, glyceryl guaiacolate ether)
Guaifenesin, originally derived from the Guaiacum genus of trees,
is a centrally acting skeletal muscle relaxant with sedative properties
primarily co-administered IV with injectable anesthetic agents for
the induction and maintenance of general anesthesia in horses and
ruminants. Historically, it was used for this indication in humans
along with a role in the management of tetanus. It has been in use in
veterinary anesthesia since the 1960s [119,120]. In humans, it is
currently 	used 	exclusively 	as 	an 	expectorant 	[121]. 	The
mechanism(s) of action of guaifenesin are largely unknown, but
evidence from the 1950s suggests sites of action in both the brain
(brainstem and subcortical regions) and spinal cord (polysynaptic
reflex inhibition) via interneuron depression, resulting in sedation
and muscle relaxation [120,122]. There is extremely limited evi-
dence to suggest it has any analgesic properties and none are typi-
cally attributed [120]. It has a wide therapeutic margin, with doses
resulting in cardiopulmonary adverse effects such as hypotension,
respiratory depression, and apneustic breathing pattern, being
approximately 70–80% greater than that required to induce recum-
bency in horses (75–150 mg/kg) [119–123]. When given to induce
recumbency in ponies and horses (dose ranges of 109–134 mg/kg),
plasma levels of guaifenesin ranged from 238,000 to 313,000
ng/mL [124,125].
Cardiovascular effects are mild when guaifenesin is administered
on its own at recommended doses, with no change in heart rate,
cardiac output, central venous pressure, or respiratory rate, and an
approximately 20% decrease in mean arterial blood pres-
sure [124,126]. Similarly, respiratory effects are minimal, and the
physiologic changes associated with recumbency appear to have a
greater effect than any respiratory depression from guaifene-
sin [127]. Minute ventilation is maintained as a result of increased
respiratory rate offsetting a decrease in tidal volume, indicating a
sparing effect on the respiratory muscles [124]. Schatzmann et al.
found minimal changes in PaO 2 when horses were administered
guaifenesin (100 mg/kg IV) but remained standing [127].

-- 440 of 1450 --

Chapter 25: Anesthetic and Analgesic Adjunctive Drugs 	425
Overdose in horses results in a period of transient muscle spasm
and mydriasis as the dose approaches 180 mg/kg IV, followed by
loss of palpebral reflex, with death following respiratory or cardiac
arrest at approximately 460 mg/kg [120]. Guaifenesin undergoes
hepatic metabolism with glucuronidation followed by renal excre-
tion. A sex difference in elimination has been identified in ponies
with more rapid elimination in females [125]. The dose of guaifen-
esin required to achieve recumbency also shows a sex difference in
ponies, with stallions requiring a higher dose than mares (130 ver-
sus 108 mg/kg IV) and a longer half-life (84 versus 60 min) [124].
Plasma half-life was approximately 75–80 min at doses of 88 and
134 mg/kg IV in adult horses, with no sex difference between geld-
ings and mares, though geldings required a higher dose to achieve
recumbency (163 versus 111 mg/kg IV) [124].
Guaifenesin is commonly prepared as a 5–15% solution with
0.9% saline or 5% dextrose solution, though it can also be solubi-
lized in sterile water. There is a concentration-dependent risk of
hemolysis which appears unrelated to the speed of administra-
tion [119,127,128]. Hemolysis has been documented in horses
when the concentration exceeds a 15% solution, and in cattle when
it exceeds 5% [119,127,129]. Intravascular thrombus formation is
also dose related, and concentrations of greater than 7% are associ-
ated with increased risk of thrombosis [127,130,131]. This effect is
related to solution concentration rather than speed of administra-
tion, with reported histologic changes including endothelial loss
with formation of a fibrin clot [130]. With a 10% solution the
thrombus is not occlusive [130].
Guaifenesin is prone to precipitate out of solution when stored
below room temperature (22 °C), but this is reversible with gentle
heating such as immersion in a warm water bath [120] or gradual
warming in a microwave. Perivascular injection has been associated
with tissue necrosis [120], and administration via an IV catheter is
recommended. Urticaria attributed to guaifenesin has also been
reported [132]. In the reported case, the horse also received xyla-
zine, ketamine, butorphanol, bupivacaine, and isoflurane, but the
timing of the appearance of urticaria and failure of recurrence dur-
ing two subsequent anesthetic episodes without guaifenesin impli-
cates a role for guaifenesin. Plasma histamine levels were slightly
elevated (5.2 ± 7.1 ng/mL) compared with baseline (3.2 ± 2.4 ng/mL)
when guaifenesin was given IV in combination with xylazine and
ketamine to adult horses (n = 14) [133].
The inclusion of guaifenesin (with xylazine and ketamine) as part
of a partial intravenous anesthesia (PIVA) protocol administered to
mares with dystocia was associated with 25 times greater odds of
death compared with α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist and ketamine
PIVA (9 times greater odds), and α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist
PIVA [134]. The authors suggested that the inclusion of guaifenesin
contributed to greater ataxia and sedation in recovery.
In a study of the effect of numerous perianesthetic drugs
(α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists, S-ketamine, lidocaine, rocuronium,
atipamezole, acepromazine, butorphanol, benzodiazepines, and
guaifenesin) on the lithium sensor used in lithium dilution cardiac
output measurement, guaifenesin had minimal effect on sensor
performance (< 10% bias) [135].
Maropitant
Maropitant is a neurokinin-1 (NK1
) receptor antagonist licensed as
an antiemetic in dogs and cats. It is highly protein-bound and
undergoes extensive hepatic metabolism by CYP3A, CYP2D15
(dogs), and CYP1A (cats) enzymes [136] [137]. Oral bioavailability
is approximately 20% in dogs and 50% in cats [138].
Neurokinin receptor antagonism by maropitant reduces binding
of the neuropeptide neurotransmitter substance P. Substance P is
intimately involved in the brainstem nuclei (area postrema, nucleus
tractus solitarius, and vagal dorsal motor nucleus) facilitating
emesis [139].
The most frequently encountered and reported adverse effect of
maropitant is pain on injection [140]. The commercial preparation
is formulated with β-cyclodextrin to increase solubility and the
binding relationship is temperature dependent. Metacresol is
included as a preservative. Until recently, free, unbound maropitant
was suspected to cause pain on injection and refrigerating the solu-
tion was investigated as a means of reducing this reaction. An injec-
tate temperature of 4 °C was associated with a mild response
(“twitching of the skin, licking of the fur, or digging at the injection
site”) in one out of 17 dogs; the remaining 16 dogs did not react to
injection. In contrast, injections at 25 °C were associated with a
painful response in nine out of 17 dogs, four of which were classi-
fied as moderate–severe (“short-term vocalization, jumping, winc-
ing, prolonged yelping or aggression”) [140]. This pattern of
responses was reflected in concurrent visual analog scale (VAS)
scores, with a significant increase in VAS score associated with the
25 °C injectate temperature compared to the 4 °C injectate tempera-
ture (or saline injectate, at both 4 °C and 25 °C) [140]. It appears
that there is a role for the preservative, metacresol, in contributing
to pain on injection [141]. A generic formulation of maropitant,
using benzyl alcohol as a preservative, was found to cause less reac-
tion on SC injection in dogs (total n = 32 dogs, crossover study)
when compared with the formulation using metacresol [141]. Pain
scores (as assessed with a VAS and a simple descriptive scale) were
significantly lower with the benzyl alcohol formulation with no dif-
ference between injectate temperatures (4 °C and 25 °C), and VAS
scores were approximately one-quarter to one- third those recorded
for the metacresol formulation. In cats, the manufacturer reports a
moderate response (retreating and vocalizing) to SC injection in
22.6% of cats (n = 133 total) receiving 1 mg/kg maropitant com-
pared to 1.6% of cats (n = 62 total) receiving a placebo injec-
tion [137]. A significant response (retreating, hissing, scratching,
and vocalizing) to SC injection was reported in 11.3% of cats (n =
133 total) given 1 mg/kg SC maropitant and in 1.6% of cats (n = 62
total) receiving placebo. The injectate temperature was not reported.
Assessing the response to maropitant injection (1 mg/kg SC) in cats
by blinded observers using a VAS found a VAS score ≥ 7/10 cm was
awarded in 27.3% of cats (35/128 observations), in contrast with 4%
(6/136 observations) in the saline injection group [142].
As an antiemetic, maropitant has been shown to be effective in
cats and dogs in a variety of situations, including motion sick-
ness, chemotherapy, and non-specific gastritis [138,143–149]. Its
efficacy has compared favorably to metoclopramide, chlorprom-
azine, and ondansetron with a range of emetogens and clinical
conditions [143,145,150].
Within anesthesia and analgesia, maropitant is primarily used for
its antiemetic properties, with much of the work focused on reduc-
ing vomiting following opioid premedication (hydromorphone,
morphine) [142,151–156]. The potential for maropitant to provide
analgesia has also been studied [157–159].
The mechanism of maropitant as a potential analgesic is medi-
ated via NK 1 receptors. These receptors have been identified at the
following sites: sensory afferent nerves [160], spinal cord [161], brain,
and viscera [162]. There is evidence of higher receptor concentra-
tions of substance P in visceral versus somatic afferent fibers [163].
A minimum alveolar concentration (MAC)-sparing effect ranging

-- 441 of 1450 --

426 	Section 3: Pharmacology
from 16–30% has been shown in two nociceptive models: tail clamp
(dogs) and ovary and ovarian ligament stimulation (dogs and
cats) [157–159]. The range in MAC-sparing effect may reflect the
different study models or doses used in each study, or both. A load-
ing dose of 5 mg/kg IV followed by 150 μg/kg/h resulted in a MAC
reduction of 16% after a tail clamp stimulus during sevoflurane
anesthesia compared to control [157]. Administration of maropi-
tant via the epidural route did not reduce MAC in the same model,
and the authors suggested that inappropriate dose, failure to cross
dural membranes, or a restricted site of action may have contrib-
uted [157]. In contrast, in a canine ovary and ovarian ligament
stimulation model, a lower IV dose of maropitant (1 mg/kg IV fol-
lowed by 30 μg/kg/h) resulted in a 24% decrease in the MAC of
sevoflurane (maropitant plasma concentration of 112 ng/mL) [158].
Increasing the maropitant dose to 5 mg/kg IV followed by infusion
at 150 μg/kg/h resulted in a small (non-significant) further reduc-
tion in MAC of 30% [158]. A similar study in cats (same nociceptive
model and anesthetic agent) but with a single IV bolus of maropi-
tant (1 mg/kg) resulted in a MAC reduction of 15% [159]. Increasing
the dose of maropitant (5 mg/kg) did not lead to a further decrease
in MAC [159]. When maropitant (1 mg/kg SC) is given in conjunc-
tion with a multimodal analgesic protocol (including methadone
and meloxicam), in a randomized, blinded study, to cats undergoing
ovariohysterectomy, the impact on reducing isoflurane requirement
is less marked (approximately 0.25% isoflurane difference) [164]. In
a randomized, blinded, controlled study, providing maropitant by
continuous rate infusion (CRI) (30 or 100 μg/kg/h, after a 1 mg/kg
IV loading dose) to cats undergoing ovariohysterectomy also
receiving morphine (0.3 mg/kg IM) and acepromazine (0.05 mg/kg
IM), maropitant was associated with lower postoperative pain
scores compared with the control group [165]. However, there was
no advantage to maropitant over other treatments (lidocaine CRI,
ketamine CRI, lidocaine–ketamine CRI ± maropitant). A canine
MACBAR study (n = 6 dogs) reported reductions in sevoflurane
requirements of approximately 15% when maropitant (1 mg/kg SC)
or maropitant combined with carprofen (4 mg/kg SC) was adminis-
tered 60 min before an electrical stimulus [166].
Maropitant’s antiemetic effect has been documented in dogs and
cats receiving hydromorphone [151,152], morphine [142,153–156],
or xylazine [138]. In cats, 1 mg/kg of maropitant administered 2 h
before xylazine (0.44 mg/ kg IM) significantly reduced emesis by
76%, 90%, and 100% for the SC, PO, and IV routes of administra-
tion, respectively [138]. Additionally, administration of 1 mg/kg
maropitant orally 24 h before xylazine administration resulted in a
66% reduction in emetic events [138]. Over a similar timeframe,
female cats given maropitant (1 mg/kg SC) 20 h before premedica-
tion with morphine (0.1 mg/kg IM) and dexmedetomidine
(0.02 mg/kg IM) vomited less (1/32 cats) than those given saline
(20/34) [142].
When 1 mg/kg of maropitant was administered SC 1 h before
hydromorphone (0.1 mg/kg IM) in healthy dogs (n = 9), emesis,
retching, and nausea did not occur [151]. This compared to inci-
dences of emesis, retching, and nausea of 66%, 11%, and 22%,
respectively, in the saline control group (n = 9). Compared to the
use of acepromazine as a strategy for reducing emesis following
hydromorphone 	administration, 	maropitant 	is 	more 	effec-
tive [167,168]. When given IV to dogs 45–60 min before premedi-
cation with IM hydromorphone (0.1 mg/kg) and acepromazine
(0.03 mg/kg), maropitant (1 mg/kg) prevented retching and vomit-
ing (0/13 dogs). This contrasted with the saline control group, in
which 6/13 dogs retched or vomited [152]. The same study did not
find any difference in the incidence of gastroesophageal reflux
between treatment groups (induction of anesthesia with propofol,
maintenance with isoflurane, anesthesia time approximately 2.5 h).
The time between administration of maropitant and the agent likely
to cause emesis is important [154,168,169]. When maropitant
(1 mg/kg SC) was given simultaneously with or 15, 30, 45, or 60 min
before hydromorphone (0.1 mg/kg IM), retching or vomiting
occurred in the simultaneous and 15-min treatment groups (60%
and 20%, respectively) but not in the 30-, 45- or 60-min groups (n =
10 dogs per treatment group) [169]. When maropitant (1 mg/kg
SC) was given concurrently with morphine (0.5 mg/kg IM) and
acepromazine (0.05 mg/kg IM), the incidence of retching and vom-
iting (70% and 50%, respectively) was similar to the saline control
group (n = 20 dogs per treatment group) [154]. By contrast, giving
maropitant 30 min before morphine–acepromazine reduced the
incidence of retching and vomiting (25% and 15%, respectively).
Oral administration of maropitant (2–4 mg/kg) given 2 h before
hydromorphone (0.1 mg/kg IM) in dogs appears similarly effective
to SC administration in preventing vomiting [169]. Giving maropi-
tant orally (1–3 mg/kg) up to 19 h before an emetogen (cisplatin)
was effective in significantly reducing incidence of vomiting [144].
In cats, oral maropitant (2.5–3 mg/kg) given approximately 2 or 18 h
before premedication with morphine (0.1 mg/kg IM) and dexme-
detomidine (0.02 mg/kg IM) was effective at reducing the incidence
of retching and vomiting (30–40% in the control group versus
4–13% in the maropitant group) [170,171].
The antiemetic efficacy of maropitant in the face of a wide range
of emetogens likely reflects its central site of action at the common
pathway governing emesis.
The impact of maropitant on nausea has been less clear than with
retching/vomiting, reflecting differences in classifying nausea,
blinding to treatment groups, choice of emetogen, and timing of
administration [142,143,153–156,164,169–174]. Overall, maropi-
tant is less effective in preventing nausea than retching/vomiting,
with most studies showing no difference compared with saline con-
trol [142,143,153–155,164,170–174]. Compared to metoclopra-
mide and ondansetron, in a low-dose cisplatin canine model for
nausea, ondansetron outperformed both maropitant and metoclo-
pramide [143]. Metoclopramide (0.5 mg/kg IV) did not reduce signs
of nausea compared to saline control and maropitant (1 mg/kg IV)
showed a minimal improvement, whereas ondansetron (0.5 mg/kg
IV) attenuated signs associated with nausea. The authors suggested
that 5-HT 3 serotonergic receptors (for which ondansetron is an
antagonist) play a more important role in mediating nausea than
NK1 receptors. In that study, the antiemetics were infused over
15 min beginning 45 min after cisplatin administration. The same
study found arginine vasopressin and cortisol served as biomarkers
for nausea. Similarly, no advantage of maropitant (1 mg/kg SC) over
metoclopramide (0.5 mg/kg SC) for preventing nausea was found
in dogs premedicated with morphine (0.5 mg/kg SC) 45 min after
maropitant or metoclopramide [155].
Limited evidence suggests a potential improvement in return
to feeding and food consumption associated with maropi-
tant [156,175]. A study from the manufacturer found that dogs
undergoing ovariohysterectomy or castration surgery returned to
feeding faster and consumed significantly more food when treated
with maropitant (1 mg/kg SC, 45 min before morphine 0.5 mg/kg
SC) versus saline [156]. These data should be interpreted with cau-
tion as perioperative analgesia was limited to a single dose of mor-
phine and the presence of postoperative pain not assessed. In a
comparison of preanesthetic treatment with maropitant (1 mg/kg SC)

-- 442 of 1450 --

Chapter 25: Anesthetic and Analgesic Adjunctive Drugs 	427
or morphine (0.5 mg/kg SC) in dogs undergoing ovariohysterec-
tomy surgery, a higher proportion of dogs in the maropitant group
(64.7% [11/17] versus 15.3% [2/13] in the morphine group) ate
within 3 h of extubation [175]. Relatively high numbers of dogs in
each treatment group received postoperative rescue analgesia with
IV morphine (13/17 in the preanesthetic maropitant group and
10/13 in the preanesthetic morphine group). Further work is
needed to corroborate these findings but improvements in return to
normal function fit with the concept of enhanced recovery after
surgery [176–178].
As the popularity of maropitant has grown, there is evidence that
it is inappropriately prescribed in dogs for indications for which it
has no efficacy [179].
The current label dose of the injectable maropitant formulation
(10 mg/mL) in dogs is 1 mg/kg SC or 1 mg/kg IV (in dogs over
4 months old, over 1–2 min). In cats (over 4 months old), maropi-
tant is labeled for IV use at 1 mg/kg over 1–2 min. Maropitant
administered IV during general anesthesia (1 mg/kg over 2 min) in
dogs premedicated with acepromazine (0.005 mg/kg IM)–butor-
phanol (0.2 mg/kg IM) or dexmedetomidine (0.005 mg/kg IM)–
butorphanol (0.2 mg/kg IM), followed by induction of anesthesia
with propofol and maintenance with isoflurane, has the potential to
decrease arterial blood pressure [180]. The reduction in arterial
blood pressure was greater in the acepromazine–butorphanol
group, with a short period of mean arterial blood pressure below
60 mmHg during the period of injection. Minimal changes were
observed in the dexmedetomidine–butorphanol group. Statistically
significant decreases in arterial blood pressure (of approximately
10–15 mmHg) were observed in awake dogs, with a compensatory
increase in heart rate. The mechanism of action underlying these
blood pressure changes is unknown.
Pharmacokinetic data for maropitant are available for cats, dogs,
chickens, horses, and rabbits [137,181–185].
Methocarbamol
Methocarbamol is a centrally acting muscle relaxant that selectively
inhibits spinal and supraspinal polysynaptic reflexes through its
action on interneurons, without direct effects on skeletal mus-
cle [186,187]. It is commonly used in human medicine for back
pain with a muscular component [188]. Use in veterinary medicine
has historically been associated with tetanus [189–191], metalde-
hyde, 4-aminopyridine and pyrethrin/permethrin toxicity [192–
198], and exertional rhabdomyolysis [199–200]. More recently, it
has been successfully used for the management of acute muscle
strain in combination with rest, physical therapy, and NSAIDs [201].
Higher doses may result in sedation, and this should be accounted
for when used in combination with sedative and anesthetic agents.
Pharmacokinetics have been studied in dogs [202] and
horses [199,200,203–205]. Therapeutic serum concentrations are
achieved rapidly by an oral route of administration in dogs and
horses [202,203]. Extensive hepatic metabolism (dealkylation and
hydroxylation followed by conjugation) is followed by primarily uri-
nary excretion of metabolites [202]. Guaifenesin is a metabolite of
methocarbamol produced in low concentrations in horses [199,200].
The recommended dose of methocarbamol in cats and dogs is
40–60 mg/kg (PO, IV) three times daily for one day followed by
20–40 mg/kg (PO, IV) three times daily until symptoms resolve [201].
Higher doses may result in toxicity and potential effects of co-
administration of drugs with CNS depressant effects should be con-
sidered [189,191,206]. One case series reported doses of 55–100 mg/
kg IV every 30–60 min in dogs with tetanus, though its efficacy was
questioned when compared to other muscle relaxants/sedatives
employed [191]. Per rectum administration (55–200 mg/kg, up to
330 mg/kg/day per rectum every 6–8 h) has been reported when an
IV formulation was not available [206]. Its use is associated with few
adverse effects, with a human study finding the incidence of adverse
events similar to that of placebo [188]. Administration of methocar-
bamol at therapeutic doses does not result in cardiopulmonary
changes. Overdose may result in sedation and excessive muscle
weakness with any effects being short-lived.
Methocarbamol is available as 500 mg and 750 mg tablets, and
as a 100 mg/mL solution for injection.
Metoclopramide
Metoclopramide is primarily indicated as an antiemetic in small ani-
mals. It is less effective than maropitant as an antiemetic and its pre-
vention of nausea varies between studies [143,150,155,207]. It has
also been investigated for use in promoting gastric emptying and
reduction of gastroesophageal reflux [208–210]. Metoclopramide is
believed to increase gastroesophageal (lower esophageal) sphincter
tone [211,212] and promote peristalsis of the duodenum along with
an improvement in antropyloroduodenal coordination. Together,
these effects promote gastric emptying in healthy dogs and
cats [210,213]. Supporting evidence for its use in promoting gastric
emptying in clinical cases is limited [208]. Following a dose of
0.3 mg/kg in dogs 1 week after gastropexy for correction of gastric
dilatation-volvulus, metoclopramide did not promote gastric emp-
tying [208]. Using manometry in conscious Beagles, a comparison
of oral cisapride (0.5 mg/kg), metoclopramide (0.5 mg/kg), and pla-
cebo (gelatin capsule) found that only cisapride induced a significant
increase in gastroesophageal sphincter pressure, with increased
pressures at 4 and 7 h after administration [214]. Pressures recorded
following metoclopramide did not differ from placebo.
In a comparison of two doses of metoclopramide (loading dose
of 1 mg/kg then 1 mg/kg/h IV, or 0.4 mg/kg then 0.3 mg/kg/h IV) in
dogs undergoing orthopedic surgery, the low and high doses of
metoclopramide resulted in a reduction of the risk of gastroesopha-
geal reflux by 34% and 54%, respectively [209]. Given the low risk
of clinical sequelae following gastroesophageal reflux, the case for
preemptive therapy is unclear. In dogs with laryngeal paralysis, a
population susceptible to aspiration pneumonia, administration of
metoclopramide (1 mg/kg IV loading dose followed by 1 mg/kg/h
CRI) had no impact on the incidence of aspiration pneumonia
(2/28 dogs in the control group, 4/33 dogs in the metoclopramide
group, relative risk 0.59, 95% CI 0.12–3.0) [215]. The anesthetic
protocol was standardized (no premedication, anesthetic induction
with propofol, maintenance with isoflurane or sevoflurane, and
buprenorphine 0.02 mg/kg IV given after orotracheal intubation).
Metoclopramide has multiple sites of action, including serotonin
receptor antagonism in the CNS and dopamine (D2 ) receptor antag-
onism in the CNS and gastrointestinal tract [139]. Its dopamine
antagonist activity can result in extrapyramidal signs (muscle
spasms, restlessness), even at recommended doses, as has been
reported in humans, cattle, and a dog [216–218]. Metabolism is pri-
marily hepatic with a high first-pass effect [219]. The recommended
doses in dogs and cats are 0.25–0.5 mg/kg IV, IM, or PO every 8–12 h
(higher doses may be required in refractory cases). For CRI, a
loading dose of 0.4 mg/kg IV followed by 0.3–1 mg/kg/h is
recommended.
The administration of metoclopramide in horses and ponies has
shown limited efficacy [220]. Doses of 0.06–0.25 mg/kg caused
restlessness, sedation, and occasionally colic. Lack of supporting

-- 443 of 1450 --

428 	Section 3: Pharmacology
evidence for beneficial large intestinal effects does not indicate its
use in colic [221].
Use in cattle is limited as the dose effective at increasing reticular
motility (0.3 mg/kg IM) in healthy animals is associated with
extrapyramidal signs (restlessness then depression) [216]. The
effects of the reported effective dose were short-lived, lasting
approximately 20 min. Similarly, in calves, metoclopramide
(0.1 mg/kg IM) was no better than saline at increasing abomasal
motility or emptying rate [222].
Available formulations include 5 and 10 mg tablets, a 1 mg/mL
oral solution, and a 5 mg/mL injectable solution.
Ondansetron and dolasetron
Ondansetron and dolasetron are serotonin (5-HT 3
) receptor antag-
onists often administered as antiemetics before chemother-
apy [223]. Ondansetron has been shown to be highly effective in
cisplatin-induced nausea and emesis in dogs and doxorubicin-
induced emesis in ferrets [143,224]. Cisplatin induces emesis
through peripheral activity on the gastric mucosa to activate 5-HT3
receptors in vagal and sympathetic afferents to the emetic center of
the brainstem [225,226], and ondansetron and dolasetron block
this pathway at the level of the emetic center. This mechanism of
action differs from the centrally mediated antiemetic effects of
maropitant (see above). Evidence suggests that these drugs can be
successful in treating nausea and vomiting associated with renal
and hepatic disease as well as gastroenteritis in dogs and cats [227–
229]. Ondansetron has also been used successfully in treating a
Chihuahua with obstructive sleep apnea, a condition in which sero-
tonin plays a role in respiration and airway patency [230].
In comparisons between maropitant and ondansetron, the results
are mixed, probably reflecting differences in cause of vomiting
(peripherally versus centrally acting emetogens). Ondansetron
(0.5 mg/kg PO or IV) has been shown to be less effective than
maropitant in preventing emesis resulting from apomorphine
administration, premedication with hydromorphone (0.1 mg/kg
IM)–acepromazine (0.02 mg/kg IM)–glycopyrrolate (0.01 mg/kg
IM), and following tranexamic acid administration in dogs, but
more effective in a cisplatin model of nausea in dogs, and similarly
effective in the management of emesis associated with parvoviral
enteritis [143,150,174,228,231].
Evidence from clinical human literature does not suggest a differ-
ence in efficacy between dolasetron and ondansetron [232]. A similar
comparison has not been studied in a clinical veterinary setting.
While adverse effects have not been reported in dogs and cats, in
2010, the United States Food and Drug Administration released a
drug safety communication contraindicating the use of injectable
dolasetron for the prevention of nausea and vomiting associated
with chemotherapy in humans [233]. This resulted from evidence
of electrocardiographic QT prolongation and torsade de pointes
associated with IV administration. The warning did not extend to
oral therapy.
Pharmacokinetics of ondansetron and dolasetron have been
reported in dogs and cats [234–237]. In the dog, dolasetron under-
goes hepatic metabolism, producing the active metabolite reduced
dolasetron. This metabolite and the unchanged drug are both
excreted in urine and feces [238]. Ondansetron metabolism is
mediated by CYP3A4 in the liver with excretion of metabolites in
urine and feces [239]. The pharmacokinetics of ondansetron are
altered in cats with hepatic disease, with reduced clearance and
increased plasma concentration [237]. Ondansetron dose in cats
and dogs is 0.5–1 mg/kg twice daily (IV or PO) or 30 min before
chemotherapy. A lower dose may be effective in reducing emesis
associated with other emetogens. For example, 0.22 mg/kg IV
reduced the incidence of emesis when co-administered with dex-
medetomidine in cats [240]. The dose of dolasetron in dogs and
cats is 0.6–1 mg/kg IV or PO, once daily.
Available formulations of ondansetron include 4 and 8 mg tab-
lets, a 4 mg/5 mL oral solution, and a 2 mg/mL injectable solution.
Dolasetron is available as 50 and 100 mg tablets and a 20 mg/mL
solution.
Procainamide
Procainamide is a Class 1a (Singh-Vaughan Williams and Keefe
classifications) antiarrhythmic agent with efficacy for the treatment
of supraventricular and ventricular tachyarrhythmias. It is a deriva-
tive of the local anesthetic procaine (ester linkage replaced with
amide). Through sodium channel blockade, it reduces the rate of
rise of phase 0 of the cardiac action potential, raises the threshold
potential, and prolongs the refractory period. It also has some
anticholinergic effects. It is often used as a second-line therapy for
ventricular tachycardia (VT) resistant to lidocaine.
A comparison between procainamide and lidocaine for the man-
agement of postoperative ventricular arrhythmias (i.e., ventricular
premature contractions (VPCs), VT, R-on- T phenomenon, and
multiform VPCs) in a mixed population of medium-to- large breed
dogs showed these drugs to be equally effective in restoring sinus
rhythm [241]. Procainamide was administered as a loading dose of
10 mg/kg IV over 5 min then an infusion of 20 μg/kg/min IV (lido-
caine loading dose of 2 mg/kg IV, followed by 60 μg/kg/min IV). No
adverse effects were associated with procainamide administration.
Efficacy in the treatment of atrial fibrillation is mainly from
experimental models of induced arrhythmia studies in dogs, with
one recent case report [242,243]. The clinical case report describes
the successful use of procainamide (14.3 mg/kg IV over 15 min) to
treat atrial fibrillation associated with pericardiocentesis and unre-
sponsive to a single dose of lidocaine (1.2 mg/kg IV). Procainamide
administration resulted in cardioversion to a sinus rhythm [242]. In
Boxers with familial ventricular arrhythmias (including arrhythmo-
genic right ventricular cardiomyopathy), two studies have reported
the efficacy of antiarrhythmic agents in terms of median survival
time [244] and response of ventricular arrhythmias [245]. Caro-
Vadillo et al. did not find a significant effect on median survival time
(age and the presence of syncope were better predictors) between
the following treatments: sotalol, mexiletine–atenolol, or procaina-
mide (20–26 mg/kg PO every 8 h) [244]. Meurs et al., in a compari-
son between procainamide (20–26 mg/kg PO every 8 h), atenolol,
sotalol, or mexiletine–atenolol, found that only sotalol or mexiletine–
atenolol were effective at reducing the number and severity of VPCs
and heart rate [245]. However, none of the treatments resulted in an
improvement in the incidence of syncope, though it is possible that
the study was underpowered for this outcome.
There is limited evidence of its use in horses, with one report of
failed therapy for ventricular extrasystoles and VT at a total dose
of 20 mg/kg over two administrations given at a 2-h interval [246].
In a case report of a horse with atrial fibrillation, procainamide
(20 mg/kg IV) was included as part of a successful treatment regi-
men (with sotalol and rest) following semisuccessful electrical
cardioversion that converted the cardiac rhythm from atrial fibril-
lation to atrial tachycardia with variable AV conduction [247].
The pharmacokinetics of procainamide have been reported
in horses where, unlike dogs [248], the active metabolite NAPA
(N-acetylprocainamide) 	is 	produced 	which 	has 	class 	III

-- 444 of 1450 --

Chapter 25: Anesthetic and Analgesic Adjunctive Drugs 	429
antiarrhythmic activity (i.e., it prolongs the cardiac action poten-
tial) [249]. Recently, the pharmacokinetics of a sustained-release
formulation of procainamide have been reported in dogs [250].
An effective dose in dogs is 10 mg/kg IV over 10 min followed by
an infusion of 20 μg/kg/min [241]. Single or repeated bolus injec-
tion of 1–2 mg/kg IV may be effective in dogs for the management
of short-duration ventricular ectopic activity associated with surgi-
cal manipulation or catecholamine release. The recommended dose
in cats is a loading dose of 1–2 mg/kg slowly IV followed by an
infusion of 10–20 μg/kg/min.
Toxicity manifests as a widening of the QRS complex, additional
arrhythmias, and hypotension [245].
It is available as 250, 375, and 500 mg tablets and a 100 mg/mL
solution for injection.
Sodium nitroprusside
Sodium nitroprusside (SNP) elicits arterial and venous dilation by
liberating the potent endogenous vasodilator nitric oxide (NO).
Cyanide ions are also produced as a by-product. For an in- depth
review of NO physiology, the reader is referred to [251]. Following
administration of SNP, its vascular effects are mediated locally in
the vascular endothelium and underlying smooth muscle. NO pro-
duction (from reaction with oxyhemoglobin, also generating meth-
emoglobin) activates soluble guanylyl cyclase, increasing levels of
cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) in the vascular muscula-
ture. cGMP inhibits entry of calcium into smooth muscle cells and
increases uptake of intracellular calcium by smooth endoplasmic
reticulum, resulting in vasodilation.
When delivered by IV infusion, SNP has a rapid onset and offset,
allowing titration to effect. A dose range of 1–5 μg/kg/min has been
reported to successfully reduce arterial blood pressure in a dog with
phenylpropanolamine overdose and SNP has been used to induce
hypotension in experimental studies in horses (0.1–1.5 μg/kg/min)
and pigs (0.5–5 μg/kg/min) [252–255]. Close monitoring of sys-
temic arterial blood pressure and heart rate and rhythm is essential
due to the risk of inadvertent hypotension or reflex tachycardia.
Use of SNP during CPR (“sodium nitroprusside enhanced CPR”)
has been shown to provide neuroprotection in experimental mod-
els of cardiac arrest, though it is not currently known if this will
translate to clinical use [256].
The rapid offset of SNP results from the short half-life of NO,
which is rapidly oxidized to nitrite [257]. Cyanide ions, produced
with NO from SNP, are metabolized by the liver to thiocyanate,
which is then excreted by the kidneys [258]. In cases of overdose or
hepatic or renal insufficiency, there is a risk of cyanide and thiocy-
anate toxicity. Toxicity manifests as tachycardia, hyperventilation,
metabolic acidosis (as cyanide binds cytochrome oxidase, thereby
inhibiting aerobic metabolism), and seizures. Toxicity can be
treated with thiosulfate (6 mg/kg/h IV in dogs) [259–261]. Solutions
of SNP are light sensitive, turning from a light orange/straw-colored
solution when fresh (reconstituted with 5% dextrose) to dark
brown/blue upon exposure to light. The solution should be dis-
carded if this occurs.
Nitroprusside is available in 10 and 25 mg/mL solutions for
injection following dilution.
Trazodone
Trazodone is a serotonin antagonist and reuptake inhibitor, with
dose-dependent antagonist activity at 5-HT2A and 5-HT2C receptors
and an inhibitory effect on serotonin reuptake [262]. As such, it
may contribute to serotonin syndrome, when given concurrently
with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, tricyclic antidepres-
sants, or monoamine oxidase inhibitors [263,264]. It also has antag-
onist effects at histamine (H1A
) receptors and α1 - and α2
- adrenergic
receptors [262]. Trazodone has become increasingly popular over
recent years, prescribed for fear management and anxiolysis on a
regular basis and perioperatively [263,265]. It is prescribed in
humans for sleep disorders arising from a variety of causes. Despite
widespread use, there is limited peer-reviewed veterinary literature
available.
In an experimental cat study (n = 6), trazodone reduced activity
(assessed via accelerometry) to 43–86% of pre-dosing values, with
doses of 50, 75, and 100 mg/cat (corresponding to 10.6–16.7 mg/kg,
16–25 mg/kg, and 21–33 mg/kg PO, respectively) [266]. The highest
dose (100 mg/cat) was most effective in reducing activity, with a peak
effect at 2.5 h after dosing, but considerable interindividual variability
in baseline and post-trazodone activity was reported. However,
behavioral responses to a comprehensive physical examination
(including abdominal palpation, otoscopic and ophthalmic examina-
tion, and mock venipuncture and cystocentesis with needle penetra-
tion of skin) performed 90 min after dosing were unchanged
compared to placebo. Similarly, a stress score did not identify differ-
ences between placebo and the 100 mg/kg treatment. Heart and res-
piratory rates were unaffected by trazodone compared with placebo.
In a double- blinded, placebo-controlled, randomized crossover
study (n = 10 cats) evaluating the effect of trazodone on transport
and handling, trazodone (50 mg/cat, approximately 11 mg/kg PO)
reduced signs of stress during transport and improved ease of han-
dling [267]. Reduced stress (from “very tense” to “weakly relaxed”)
and improved tractability (from “restraint needed to examine
safely” to “easy/relatively easy to examine”) were identified.
Sleepiness was identified as an adverse effect. Trazodone was given
approximately 1–1.5 h before transport to the clinic and 1.5–2 h
before physical examination.
As with cats, data from dogs is from a small number of studies,
with variability in reported responses to trazodone. A randomized,
placebo-controlled, double-blinded study did not identify differ-
ences in behaviors between treatments [268]. Dogs (n = 29)
received either placebo or trazodone (2.8–10.8 mg/kg PO, every 12
h) with trazodone dose adjusted according to owner’s wishes dur-
ing a 4-week period following elective orthopedic surgery, during
which activity restriction and confinement were prescribed.
Behavioral assessments included greeting behavior, calmness,
behavior on leash, and tolerance of confinement. The authors sug-
gested several reasons for trial failure, including selection bias
toward calmer dogs, caregiver placebo effect (owners performed
behavioral assessments), placebo-by-proxy effect (owner beliefs
altered interaction with their dog leading to a change in dog behav-
ior), and lack of sensitivity in the behavioral assessment instru-
ment. By contrast, a recent double-blinded, placebo-controlled
crossover study in dogs (n = 20) found that trazodone (9–12 mg/kg
PO) given 90 min before transport to a veterinary clinic was asso-
ciated with reduced stress scores in the clinic, with most owners
(18/20) correctly identifying when trazodone had been given [269].
Two earlier studies in dogs showed efficacy with trazodone, though
both had limitations in study design, limiting data interpretation.
A study of 36 dogs admitted for elective orthopedic surgery all
received trazodone postoperatively for 4 weeks, with a subset of
owners requesting a dose increase after week 2 (to 7 mg/kg PO
every 8 h) [270]. Owners assessed behaviors (greeting behavior,
calmness, behavior on leash, and tolerance of confinement).
Compared to preoperative behavioral assessments, trazodone was

-- 445 of 1450 --

430 	Section 3: Pharmacology
associated with reduced intensity of greeting and overall calmness,
but not response to owner commands or tendency to pull on leash
walks. Trazodone was assessed as improving tolerance of postop-
erative confinement. Most owners reported an onset of drug effects
within 45 min of dosing (16–90 min for 90% of owners) and a
median duration of action of > 4 h (upper limit of observation
period). A study of hospitalized dogs (most dogs were admitted to
the surgery service) evaluated a convenience sample of 59 dogs
prescribed trazodone (4.7 ± 1 mg/kg PO) by the supervising veteri-
narian, with a comparison group of dogs not prescribed trazodone
(n = 58) [271]. Stress-related behavior scores were higher in the
trazodone treatment group at baseline compared with the untreated
group, but there was a significant reduction in these scores when
assessed approximately 110 min following trazodone administra-
tion. One dog showed signs of aggression 60 min after trazodone
administration.
In horses, 6 mg/kg PO induced mild sedation (based on a simple
descriptive scale) in 7/8 horses, which lasted between 0.5 and 8 h
after trazodone administration, with 4/8 horses remaining sedated
at 12 h and no signs of sedation apparent at 24 h [272]. Higher doses
(7.5 and 10 mg/kg PO) caused sedation within 20–30 min of admin-
istration that was generally mild (3/6 horses were heavily sedated at
the higher dose) and lasted a few hours [273]. In the latter study,
arrhythmias diagnosed by thoracic auscultation, without an ECG,
were noted in 2/6 horses that received 10 mg/kg PO.
In goats, intended as a model for wild ruminants, a dose of
10 mg/kg PO resulted in a five- to sixfold increase in time spent
sleeping and lying down, with reduced activity lasting approxi-
mately 4 h [274]. Eating and ruminating were unaffected.
Two studies have evaluated the effect of trazodone on the propo-
fol requirement for induction of general anesthesia in dogs [275,276].
A retrospective study of dogs (n = 15) undergoing radiotherapy
treatment showed a significant reduction in propofol dose (approx-
imately 25%) when trazodone was given approximately 2 h before
anesthesia (4.8 [2.9–7.3] mg/kg PO) [275]. Dogs were premedi-
cated with alfentanil and atropine and served as their own controls.
A prospective, randomized, unblinded study did not find an effect
of trazodone (5–7 mg/kg PO 2 h before anesthesia) on the propofol
dose requirement (dose administered over 20–30 seconds) com-
pared with acepromazine (0.01–0.03 mg/kg IM 30 min before anes-
thesia) [276]. All dogs (n = 15 per treatment) were also given
morphine (1 mg/kg IM 30 min before anesthesia). A MAC-sparing
effect has been identified in dogs, with a 17% reduction in isoflu-
rane MAC following trazodone (8 mg/kg PO) [277].
Trazodone is metabolized to an active metabolite, meta-
chlorophenylpiperazine, which has agonist activity at the 5-HT 2C
receptor, though its significance in animal species is unknown
[273,278]. The primary route of elimination is renal (approximately
75%) with the remainder undergoing fecal elimination.
Pharmacokinetics have been described in dogs (PO, IV, per rec-
tum), horses, pigeons, and goats [272,274,278–281]. Time to peak
effect appears to vary markedly between individual dogs, with peak
plasma concentrations achieved 445 ± 271 min after 8 mg/kg PO
(n = 6 dogs), though onset of signs may be apparent within
45 min [270,280]. Pharmacokinetics have not been described in
cats, but variability in behavioral responses may also reflect interin-
dividual pharmacokinetic differences [266].
Adverse effects appear uncommon in dogs following PO dosing,
with one report of hepatotoxicity in a dog attributed to trazodone
(4 mg/kg PO once or twice daily) and reports of aggression follow-
ing IV (3/6 dogs) and PO (1/59 dogs) administration [271,280,282].
Trazodone at doses between 1 and 30 mg/kg IV results in transient,
dose-dependent reductions in heart rate and arterial blood pres-
sure [283]. In cats (n = 12) given trazodone (approximately 11 mg/kg
PO) 90–120 min before echocardiography, sedation was observed
but there were minimal changes in cardiac measurements [284]. In
horses, 4/8 horses exhibited sweating following oral trazodone
(6 mg/kg), while IV dosing was associated with aggression, ataxia,
tremors, and circling (2/2 horses, 2 mg/kg) and ataxia, tremors,
circling, and sweating (1.5 mg/kg) [272,278].
Reported doses in dogs range from 3 to 12 mg/kg PO every 8–12 h
[268,269,271,280] and those in cats range from 8 to 30 mg/kg
PO [266,267,284]. Available formulations include 50, 100, 150, and
300 mg tablets.
Vasopressin (arginine vasopressin, antidiuretic
hormone) and desmopressin
The primary perioperative indication for vasopressin is in CPR and
refractory hypotension [84,285–288]. It is a potent vasoconstrictor,
acting on V1a receptors located in vascular smooth muscle, though
it also displays activity at V1b (anterior pituitary) and V2 (renal col-
lecting duct) receptors, and inhibits nitric oxide produc-
tion [289,290]. Its analog, desmopressin (DDAVP), is used in the
treatment of central diabetes insipidus [291–293] and management
of coagulopathy [294–296].
Vasopressin is an alternative vasopressor to epinephrine for use
during CPR, though there is no clear evidence supporting its role as
a replacement for epinephrine. Recent veterinary CPR guidelines
suggest its use (0.8 U/kg IV) on alternating rounds of CPR instead
of epinephrine, though there is no evidence that it confers a benefit
over epinephrine in humans [84,297]. Due to the lack of
β1
- adrenergic receptor activity, it may reduce the risk of myocardial
ischemia compared with epinephrine, though it will still cause cor-
onary vasoconstriction. An additional potential advantage over epi-
nephrine is that V 1 receptors, unlike α1
- adrenergic receptors,
remain responsive in an acidic environment [298]. Reports of clini-
cal use in the veterinary literature are mixed [285,287], with vaso-
pressin showing no benefit over epinephrine in a randomized
comparison using a standardized CPR technique [287] but associ-
ated with an improved rate of return to spontaneous circulation in
a hospital-wide study [285]. A meta-analysis demonstrated a poten-
tial improvement in return of spontaneous circulation associated
with its use, though contributing studies were predominantly in
porcine models of ventricular fibrillation [288].
Vasopressin can be administered via the endotracheal route, if
necessary, with one animal study suggesting that the same dose as
that recommended for IV use is effective [299].
What has become clear from the Reassessment Campaign on
Veterinary Resuscitation (RECOVER) initiative [300] is that there
is wide variability in study design and reporting of animal models
of CPR, making it difficult to draw firm conclusions from cur-
rently available experimental evidence. Anecdotal reports suggest
the use of vasopressin in cases of refractory hypotension, though
the available veterinary literature is sparse and human studies are
contradictory [286,290,301–304]. This is likely a reflection of the
heterogeneity of clinical and experimental studies [303]. Infusion
rates of 0.5–5 mU/kg/min and 0.1–2.5 mU/kg/min have been sug-
gested in dogs and foals, respectively [286,290,301]. Users should
be aware of the potential for detrimental hypoperfusion of vascu-
lar beds resulting from the resultant vasoconstriction [305].
Desmopressn acetate (DDAVP), a synthetic analog of vasopres-
sin with reduced vascular effects, is used for perioperative

-- 446 of 1450 --

Chapter 25: Anesthetic and Analgesic Adjunctive Drugs 	431
management of patients with von Willebrand disease [295,306,307]
and management of central diabetes insipidus [291–293,308].
von Willebrand disease, the most common canine hereditary
defect of hemostasis, is classified according to one of three sub-
types, with type 1 being the least severe and most common, espe-
cially in Doberman Pinschers [309]. Management consists of both
non-transfusion and transfusion therapy, based on disease severity
and clinical presentation. Non-transfusion therapy includes appro-
priate patient management (i.e., good surgical technique, minimiz-
ing use of drugs with antiplatelet activity, careful handling) and
DDAVP. Administration of 1 μg/kg SC or IV 30 min before surgery
may support hemostasis, but the response is more variable in dogs
than humans [295,306]. Administering DDAVP intranasally or into
the conjunctival sac is commonly performed, but there is limited
supporting evidence of its efficacy via this route in von Willebrand
disease.
Other reported uses for DDAVP include support of hemostasis
following administration of aspirin before surgery [310,311], as a
prophylactic measure to manage postoperative diabetes insipidus
following hypophysectomy [296], and administration to canine
blood donors to increase von Willebrand factor production before
blood collection for cryoprecipitate [312].
Injectable vasopressin is available as a 20 U/mL solution. DDAVP is
available as a 4 μg/mL injectable solution, 0.1 and 0.2 mg tablets,
100 μg/mL spray, and a 0.01% solution for intranasal administration.
Analgesic adjuncts
Amantadine and memantine
The dopamine agonist and N-methyl-D- aspartate (NMDA) recep-
tor antagonist amantadine was originally used as an antiviral
agent [313,314] but has entered clinical use in human medicine for
diseases and presentations as varied as Parkinson’s disease [315],
traumatic brain injury (TBI), and pain. Its continued use in the
management of Parkinson’s disease arose serendipitously from a
patient with Parkinson’s disease noticing an improvement in motor
function wtaking amantadine for influenza [316]. Recent meta-
analysis and systematic reviews have indicated a potential role for
amantadine in TBI though further studies are required to confirm
promising earlier findings [317,318]. Human studies have demon-
strated improved arousal when amantadine was administered
between 3 days and 4 weeks following TBI, and purported mecha-
nisms are through CNS stimulation mediated by amantadine’s
dopaminergic activity and reduced neurotoxicity through its
NMDA receptor antagonism [319,320]. Its use in animals is cur-
rently limited to an experimental model of TBI in rats where learn-
ing and hippocampal neuron survival were improved with
amantadine administration 1 h following TBI [321].
Memantine, a derivative of amantadine, has similar pharmaco-
logical properties [322]. It has been used in dogs for compulsive
disorders, though there is currently limited evidence of its use in
pain management [265].
Amantadine has been used for analgesia, acting via NMDA
receptor antagonism [323]. Its role as an analgesic appears to be
limited to chronic pain, particularly where central sensitization
may play a role, such as in chronic arthritis and limb amputation,
though its efficacy appears variable [324–327]. In dogs with pelvic
limb lameness and pain that was not alleviated by NSAID use,
activity increased following 3 weeks of therapy combining meloxi-
cam (0.1 mg/kg PO once daily) and amantadine (3–5 mg/kg PO
once daily) [324]. Doses of 2–10 mg/kg PO 2–3 times daily have
also been suggested. At these higher/more frequent doses, there is a
possibility of CNS excitation. Pharmacokinetic data (from a single
dose study) are supportive of 5 mg/kg PO twice daily dosing in dogs
(a dose of 10 mg/kg PO twice daily was predicted to result in plasma
levels associated with adverse effects in humans), though more
work is needed to confirm this prediction [328,329]. Amantadine
(14 mg/kg PO once daily with meloxicam 0.1 mg/kg PO) has also
been reported as successful in managing chronic pain following
bilateral pelvic fractures that was not responsive to meloxicam and
gabapentin [330].
In cats, amantadine at a dose of 3–5 mg/kg PO once or twice daily
has been suggested in cases of chronic arthritis [323,328,331]. A
blinded, placebo-controlled, randomized crossover study of 13 cats
with osteoarthritis found that amantadine (5 mg/kg PO once daily)
was associated with reduced activity (as assessed via accelerometry)
but improved owner-assessed outcomes (client-specific outcome
measures) [331]. Amantadine was also associated with a higher pro-
portion of owners reporting an improved quality of life for their cat.
Over the course of the 3-week treatment period, the only adverse
effect was vomiting, which occurred with a similar frequency in the
amantadine and placebo groups. The study did not include a wash-
out period between treatments, justified based upon the short half-
life in cats [331,332]. In a thermal threshold testing model in healthy
cats given oxymorphone to induce antinociception, amantadine did
not result in any further antinociception; however, it may be that an
acute nociception model in otherwise healthy cats may not be
appropriate for assessing amantadine [333,334].
Amantadine (3 mg/kg PO twice daily) was associated with marked
improvements in activity and interaction in a rhinoceros with sus-
pected chronic osteoarthritis and neuropathic pain of the thoracic
limbs that showed limited response to, or adverse effects associated
with, phenylbutazone, pentosan polysulfate, and gabapentin [335].
Pharmacokinetic data are available for dogs, cats, and par-
rots [329,332,336]. In Greyhounds, the short half-life (approximately
5 h) indicates that twice daily oral dosing (5 mg/kg) may be prefer-
able to once daily [329]. No adverse effects were reported. In cats,
amantadine has high oral bioavailability and a half-life similar to
that reported in dogs (approximately 5.5 h) following a dose of 5 mg/
kg PO [332]. As for dogs, this suggests that twice daily dosing may be
needed to maintain appropriate plasma concentrations. In orange-
winged Amazon parrots (Amazona amazonica), a 5 mg/kg PO dose
of amantadine, once daily, produced plasma concentrations consid-
ered therapeutic in dogs without causing adverse effects [336]. There
is currently no species-specific pharmacodynamic data to support
this dose. Based on renal elimination of minimally/partially metabo-
lized drug in other species, the authors suggested that birds with
renal disease may be at increased risk of developing toxicity [336].
Amantadine undergoes primarily renal excretion in dogs [337], and
there are limited dose-response data from rats [338].
More work is required to clarify the potential role of amantadine
and memantine in chronic pain, with a recent meta-analysis identi-
fying a lack of strong evidence for its use in people with a range of
neuropathic pain etiologies [327].
As a result of its dopaminergic properties, CNS stimulation is a
predicted side effect from overdose, and caution should be exer-
cised in patients receiving other dopamine agonists (e.g., the mono-
amine oxidase inhibitor selegiline), or agents inhibiting the reuptake
of serotonin (e.g., the tricyclic antidepressants such as amitripty-
line, and the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors such as fluoxe-
tine). Such combinations risk the occurrence of serotonin
syndrome, a potentially fatal syndrome characterized by signs of

-- 447 of 1450 --

432 	Section 3: Pharmacology
CNS stimulation, muscular tremors, and autonomic stimulation
including tachycardia, tachypnea, and hypertension [339–342]. The
risk is likely increased in the presence of hepatic insufficiency as
monoamine oxidase inhibitors and selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors are metabolized by the CYP450 pathway. Specific to
anesthesia, there is evidence from human medicine that the phenyl-
piperidine opioids (meperidine, fentanyl, and fentanyl’s congeners,
tramadol and methadone) all increase the CNS concentration of
serotonin to varying degrees and in some instances have contrib-
uted to serotonin syndrome, although the risk to veterinary patients
remains unknown [343,344].
A less studied use of amantadine and memantine involves their
use as local anesthetics. Local anesthesia appears to be mediated
through sodium channel-blocking properties in addition to NMDA
receptor antagonism [338,345]. It remains to be seen if there are
significant advantages over traditional local anesthetics such as
lidocaine and bupivacaine.
It is possible that amantadine availability for animal use may
become restricted in some jurisdictions [346].
Amantadine is available as 100 mg tablets and capsules and as a
10 mg/mL syrup. Memantine is available as 5 and 10 mg tablets and
as a 2 mg/mL oral formulation.
Amitriptyline and nortriptyline
The tricyclic antidepressant amitriptyline is indicated for behavio-
ral disorders (e.g., obsessive-compulsive disorder) [347], idiopathic
feline lower urinary tract disease (IFLUTD) [348,349], and more
recently, neuropathic pain states [350–352]. Tricyclic antidepres-
sants are selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, increasing synap-
tic levels of serotonin and norepinephrine. This appears to be the
primary mechanism mediating their useful behavioral modifica-
tion effects. However, other less well-understood mechanisms of
action may also contribute to their clinical potential as analge-
sics [350]. These include sodium channel blockade [353], NMDA
receptor antagonism [354], and antihistamine activity [355], but
not opioid receptor activity [356].
Amitriptyline (1–2 mg/kg/day) is commonly prescribed for
management of IFLUTD, though which mechanism(s) of action
result in improved clinical signs is unclear: serotonin reuptake
inhibition, antihistamine, and anticholinergic activity may be
involved [348,349,357].
Use of amitriptyline in treating neuropathic pain remains largely
anecdotal [207,350–352]. One case series of three dogs with neuro-
pathic pain reported a positive response to amitriptyline (1.1–
1.3 mg/kg PO twice daily) in two of the dogs [350]. Of these, one dog
had signs consistent with mechanical allodynia and dysesthesia over
the facial dermatome innervated by the infraorbital branch of the
right trigeminal nerve. Following no apparent response to gabapen-
tin (12.5 mg/kg PO twice daily), there was an improvement associ-
ated with amitriptyline (1.3 mg/kg PO twice daily), with clinical
signs resolving over 6 weeks. Owner-initiated discontinuation of
treatment was associated with a rapid return of clinical signs (in
3 days), leading to reinstitution and maintenance use of amitripty-
line therapy. A second successful use of amitriptyline (1.1 mg/kg PO
twice daily) was for management of intermittent lumbar pain with
diffuse mechanical allodynia. Clinical signs improved within a week
of initiating treatment and were resolved within one month. Again,
discontinuing therapy was associated with a return of pain (in
2 days), resulting in long-term amitriptyline therapy. In the third
case, in which there was mechanical allodynia secondary to ulnar
and median nerve lesions, amitriptyline (1.4 mg/kg PO twice daily)
did not improve clinical signs; however, there was improvement
with gabapentin (14.3 mg/kg PO twice daily). Sedation, a common
adverse effect of amitriptyline, was reported by the owners. In each
of these three cases, initial trials with NSAIDs, steroids, and opioids
for pain management were unsuccessful. It is also interesting that
when one therapy fails, the addition of or switch to another may prove
successful. This illustrates the potential complexity and challenge of
treating these cases. A study of 13 dogs diagnosed with osteosar-
coma receiving a combination of therapies (cimicoxib 2 mg/kg PO
once daily; amitriptyline 1–1.5 mg/kg PO once daily; gabapentin
10 mg/kg PO every 8 h) and a battery of nociceptive tests (including
investigator and owner behavioral assessments, quantitative sensory
testing, activity level and quality of life assessment) failed to identify
a clear benefit from the prescribed analgesics [358]. This highlights
the difficulty in studying complex, dynamic, naturally occurring
pain states, which is further complicated by use of poorly established
effective analgesic therapies. Attributing analgesia to a single drug is
often complicated in reported case series when animals are given
multiple drugs concurrently [207,352].
A feline case of suspected neuropathic pain was thought to have
developed following an initial femoral fracture repair, iatrogenic
sciatic 	nerve 	trauma, 	and 	subsequent 	amputation 	[351].
Approximately 1 month after amputation, the cat was observed fre-
quently shaking the stump though there were no signs associated
with pain when the stump was palpated. This was believed to be a
case of phantom limb pain. Initial treatment consisted of an IV
infusion of morphine, ketamine, and lidocaine for 37 h, followed by
oral transmucosal buprenorphine (approximately 0.03 mg/kg twice
daily) and oral amitriptyline (approximately 2 mg/kg twice daily).
The cat was ambulating normally at discharge. At follow-
up 10 months later, no further shaking of the amputation stump
was reported. There is increasing evidence of neuropathic pain in
cases of Chiari-like malformation and syringomyelia [359], and it
may also be implicated in some cases of head shaking in horses [360].
Hepatic metabolism of amitriptyline results in production of the
active metabolite nortriptyline in dogs and humans [361]. Both
amitriptyline and nortriptyline are also excreted unchanged in
urine, and caution should, therefore, be exercised in animals with
renal insufficiency. Nortriptyline is used clinically as a treatment for
neuropathic pain in humans [362], though its use in animals has
not been reported.
The recommended route of administration is oral [363]; trans-
dermal application is not effective at raising plasma drug levels and
intrathecal administration resulted in marked spinal cord pathol-
ogy [354]. The pharmacokinetics of amitriptyline have been
described in dogs and horses [329,364,365]. Further work is
required to further understand the pharmacokinetics in horses as
there is evidence of oral transmucosal absorption [364]. In a study
of six horses, amitriptyline (1 mg/kg PO) administration was asso-
ciated with significant reductions in heart rate (remaining within
normal limits) and intestinal motility (for 2 h post-administration),
with no respiratory changes observed [364]. One horse developed
transient second-degree AV block at 30 min post-administration,
which lasted for 2 h. Another horse developed ventricular prema-
ture contractions (1 per min) at 30 min post-administration (dura-
tion not reported). In dogs, amitriptyline pharmacokinetics may be
altered depending on whether dogs are fed or fasted at the time of
oral administration, with possible important differences in bioa-
vailability, though limited sample sizes prevent firm conclusions
from being drawn [329,365,366]. Fed Greyhounds given 4 mg/kg
PO had low bioavailability (6%) and peak plasma levels below those

-- 448 of 1450 --

Chapter 25: Anesthetic and Analgesic Adjunctive Drugs 	433
considered therapeutic in humans [329]. In contrast, at a similar
dose in fasted mixed-breed dogs, plasma levels were within the
therapeutic range for humans [366]. Breed differences may also
play a role in pharmacokinetic differences. Two fasted dogs vom-
ited following oral amitriptyline administration, though it was
unclear if this was drug related [329]. When given at 4 mg/kg IV to
Greyhounds, the following adverse effects were observed: sedation,
ataxia, transient tachycardia, polyphagia, and vomiting [329].
Adverse effects on the heart include tachycardia mediated via
inhibition of cardiac sodium channels and an anticholinergic effect
and potential fatal ventricular tachyarrhythmias from overdose
(greater than approximately 15 mg/kg IV) in dogs and cats [367–
369]. Ventricular tachyarrhythmias are preceded by prolongation of
the QRS complex. No ECG abnormalities were detected in dogs
receiving appropriate doses of amitriptyline (0.74–2.5 mg/kg PO
every 12 h) for behavioral disorders [370]. Other signs of toxicity in
conscious dogs include hypersalivation and vomiting. Common
adverse effects at therapeutic doses are weight gain and seda-
tion [357]. While there is a theoretical risk of triggering serotonin
syndrome with the concurrent use of tricyclic antidepressants and
monoamine oxidase inhibitors, this risk (at least in humans) is
believed to be low with amitriptyline [344]. Treatment of amitripty-
line toxicity includes alkalinization (with sodium bicarbonate) and
lipid emulsion therapy [369].
Available formulations of amitriptyline include 10, 25 , 50, 75 ,
100, and 150 mg tablets. Available formulations of nortriptyline
include 10, 25, 50 , and 75 mg tablets and a 10 mg/5 mL oral
solution.
Cannabinoids
Use of the cannabis plant, Cannabis spp., has spanned thousands of
years, for both its psychoactive and medicinal properties. There has
been a renewed interest more recently as it has become legalized
(under varying conditions, according to jurisdiction) and more
readily accessible [371,372]. This is reflected in a rapid growth in
the published human and veterinary literature, with several veteri-
nary reviews available [373,374].
The active molecules of interest that derive from Cannabis are
delta-9- tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and cannabidiol (CBD). A
somewhat simplified view is that THC exerts psychoactive effects
and CBD exerts therapeutic effects. These cannabinoids act via can-
nabinoid receptors, primarily CB 1 and CB2
, which exist as part of an
endogenous cannabinoid system with the following endogenous
ligands 	(endocannabinoids): 	anandamide 	(N-arachidonoyl),
2-arachidonoyl glycerol, and 2-arachidonoyl ether. In addition to
endocannabinoids, cannabimimetics (endogenous fatty acids)
modulate the endogenous cannabinoid system [375,376]. CB 1 and
CB 2 receptors are widely distributed in the body, including the cen-
tral and peripheral nervous systems, the immune system, intestines,
and skin, among others [374]. Receptor and ligand expression is
likely to vary in different disease states and may present a route for
therapeutic modulation of disease response [374]. To date, most
clinical veterinary studies have focused on osteoarthritis, epilepsy,
behavioral disorders, and atopic dermatitis, with varying quality of
evidence [373,377]. Compounding the limited number of high-
quality trials is variation in the cannabinoid or cannabimimetic
molecules studied, methods of administration, and poorly estab-
lished doses [374].
In osteoarthritis, there are a small number of higher quality clini-
cal trials reported in a mix of dog breeds [207,378–380]. In a double-
blinded, placebo-controlled, randomized, crossover trial of dogs
with osteoarthritis (n = 16 dogs), CBD in oil (with measurable levels
of THC but no evidence of psychoactive effects during the study) at
a dose of 2 mg/kg twice daily PO for 4 weeks resulted in a significant
reduction in pain scores (Canine Brief Pain Inventory and veteri-
nary assessment) and increase in activity levels, but no improvement
in lameness score or weight-bearing [378]. In this study, dogs also
received a variety of other drugs including NSAIDs and nutritional
joint supplements, with no change to treatment regimens during the
study. Reported adverse effects included an increase in alkaline
phosphatase (ALP) (mean of 323 versus 160 U/L in 9/16 dogs). A
double-blinded, placebo-controlled, parallel group, randomized
study in dogs with osteoarthritis compared three treatments (0.5 mg/
kg CBD PO, 1.2 mg/kg CBD PO, and 0.5 mg/kg liposomal CBD PO,
once daily; n = 5 dogs per treatment group) against placebo (n = 5
dogs), with each group treated for 4 weeks [379]. Pain was evaluated
with the Helsinki Chronic Pain Index and veterinary assessments.
No adverse effects were reported based on the evaluation of hemato-
crit and serum chemistry. There was a dose-dependent reduction in
pain and increase in mobility in the 1.2 mg/kg CBD and 0.5 mg/kg/
day liposomal CBD treatment groups. A double-blinded, placebo-
controlled, crossover trial of dogs with osteoarthritis (n = 23), given
a CBD-rich hemp oil (2.5 mg/kg twice daily PO, which also con-
tained 0.3% THC) for 6 weeks (with no washout period, based on
predicted half-life < 4 h), did not identify any improvement in the
recorded outcome measures (activity, Canine Brief Pain Inventory,
Liverpool Osteoarthritis in Dogs questionnaire, and gait analy-
sis) [380]. In this study, approximately 50% of the dogs were also
receiving an NSAID. Adverse effects included vomiting (2/23 dogs)
and elevated ALP, aspartate aminotransferase (AST), or alanine
transaminase (ALT) (14/23 dogs). It has been suggested that dosing
follows an escalation schedule, with treatment for at least 14 days
before a dose increase, if necessary [374]. Brioschi et al. compared
CBD (2 mg/kg twice daily via oral transmucosal route for 12 weeks)
combined with multimodal analgesia (gabapentin, amitriptyline,
prednisone, or firocoxib) against multimodal analgesia alone in dogs
with osteoarthritis in a randomized, parallel group study design (n =
9 receiving CBD protocol, n = 21 receiving multimodal analgesia
protocol) [207]. Pain was assessed with the Canine Brief Pain
Inventory, with scale items significantly lower in dogs during CBD
treatment. No adverse effects in CBC or serum biochemistry param-
eters were noted, with observed somnolence and ataxia attributed to
concurrent gabapentin, and some ptyalism associated with CBD
administration. In all these studies, some of the reported improve-
ments reflect statistical significance but fairly small changes in
assessment scale scores. This may reflect multiple factors, including
heterogeneity of osteoarthritis in the studied population, assessment
scale sensitivity, interindividual variability in response to treatment,
and small sample sizes, all of which underline the need for addi-
tional well-designed studies.
Similarly, high-quality evidence is also currently limited in stud-
ies of cannabinoids for the treatment of epilepsy, behavioral disor-
ders, and atopic dermatitis [381–383].
The pharmacokinetics for some cannabinoids have been pub-
lished for dogs, pigs, horses, and guinea pigs [378,384–393].
However, variations in formulation can affect absorption and bioa-
vailability and, in dogs, cannabinoid absorption varies according to
fasting state, so care should be taken when selecting a formulation
and dose [387]. Oral bioavailability of CBD in dogs is low (approxi-
mately 19%), with extensive first pass metabolism and primarily
fecal elimination [393–395]. Active metabolites are formed follow-
ing hepatic metabolism in humans, though more work is required

-- 449 of 1450 --

434 	Section 3: Pharmacology
to understand their presence and effects in animal spe-
cies [374,392,393,396]. Following oral administration of CBD in
dogs, peak plasma levels are achieved between 1.5 to 5 h, with
results varying between studies and with dose [378,384,387,391,392].
Importantly, there can be wide variability between cannabinoid
product labels and actual content [397].
With the expansion of access to cannabinoids, there is increasing
information available on toxicity and its management [394,398].
Toxicity manifests as a combination of clinical signs involving the
neurologic, cardiovascular, and gastrointestinal systems, with com-
mon signs in dogs including ataxia, dullness/disorientation, mydri-
asis, 	urinary 	incontinence, 	hyperesthesia, 	tremors/shaking/
twitching, bradycardia, and vomiting [394,398,399]. Prognosis fol-
lowing intoxication is generally good, with a reported LD 50 exceed-
ing 3000 mg/kg PO for THC [400]. The LD50 for CBD has not been
described, though available reports suggest mortality is low follow-
ing exposure [394,399]. A safety and tolerability study of CBD
(doses up to 30.5 mg/kg PO), THC (doses up to 41.5 mg/kg PO),
and CBD-THC combination (doses up to 13:8.4 mg/kg PO) in cats
reported lethargy, hypothermia, ataxia, and protrusion of the nicti-
tating membrane as the most common adverse effects, primarily
associated with THC and CBD–THC [401]. A similar study in dogs
suggests better tolerability of cannabinoids in this species compared
to cats [396]. Cardiovascular changes (pale mucous membranes,
bradycardia, and tachycardia) and tachypnea were similarly
reported for each treatment.
Gabapentin and pregabalin
Gabapentin and pregabalin are structural analogs of γ-aminobutyric
acid (GABA). Historically, gabapentin has been prescribed as an
anticonvulsant in humans and veterinary species, but is being used
increasingly for neuropathic, chronic, and perioperative pain.
Previous systematic reviews and meta-analyses identified some
promising results for a role in chronic and neuropathic pain, but a
more recent meta-analysis shows that the evidence supporting their
use for chronic postoperative pain remains unclear [402–406]. For
acute postoperative pain in humans, current evidence indicates that
any statistically significant reductions in pain scores are not clini-
cally significant [407]. There is a growing body of veterinary litera-
ture describing its use in dogs [350,358,408–412], cats [413–417],
horses [418–421], and cattle [422–424], though questions remain
regarding its efficacy and appropriate dosing regimens.
The mechanism of action of gabapentin and pregabalin is not
fully understood. They do not appear to interact with GABA,
NMDA, or dopamine receptors, with most evidence indicating
inhibition of voltage-gated calcium channels, with an intracellular
site of action that requires active uptake [425–427]. Inhibition leads
to a reduction of calcium influx, in turn reducing the release of a
range of excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitters, altering chan-
nel trafficking, and stimulating movement of channels away from
neuronal cell membranes [426].
Pharmacokinetic data, primarily for gabapentin, are available for
dogs [411,428], cats [414,429], horses [418,419,430], cattle [422–
424], pigs [431], and horses [432]. In dogs, a short terminal half-life
suggests the need for frequent dosing; this is supported by limited
clinical evidence indicating that the therapeutic dose is in the range
of 10–20 mg/kg PO two to three times daily [408,410].
Approximately 30% of the drug undergoes hepatic metabolism (to
N-methyl-gabapentin), followed by renal elimination [428]. In
humans, pregabalin shows favorable pharmacokinetics over gabap-
entin, with greater binding affinity for the voltage-gated calcium
channel, linear pharmacokinetics, and non-saturable absorption
from the gastrointestinal tract [433]. It remains to be seen to what
extent these differences are present in animal species [429,432].
Since the previous edition of this textbook was published, several
randomized, double-blinded clinical trials have been published and
the following discussion will focus on these [434–436]. The most
common population for these studies has been Chiari-like malfor-
mation and syringomyelia in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels, which
is associated with neuropathic pain secondary to caudal cerebellar
herniation and development of syringes in the spinal cord [434–
436]. A randomized, placebo-controlled, double- blinded clinical
trial in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels with Chiari-like malforma-
tion and syringomyelia (n = 8 dogs) found significant reductions in
owner-rated pain scores using a numerical rating scale (including
spontaneous vocalizations, phantom scratching, and exercise
impairment) and improvement in quantitative sensory testing
(reduced mechanical hyperalgesia, cold hyperalgesia, and allo-
dynia) in dogs receiving pregabalin [434]. The mean difference in
pain scale scores was 1 (scale range 0 to 10). Dogs were given prega-
balin (5 mg/kg PO twice daily) or placebo for 14 days and all dogs
also received an NSAID throughout the study period. Two dogs
showed signs of sedation. Another study of Cavalier King Charles
Spaniels with Chiari-like malformation and syringomyelia, using a
randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blinded crossover design,
reported reduced scratching and pain intensity (both owner and
investigator assessed) and fewer scratching events (84% reduction)
associated with pregabalin treatment (n = 12 dogs) [435]. All own-
ers stated a preference for the period in which their dogs received
pregabalin. Dogs received 150 mg pregabalin PO twice daily (13–
19 mg/kg) for 21 days with a 2-day dose escalation, 2-day dose
tapering, and 2-day washout period between treatments. The main
adverse events reported were increased appetite (did not result in
significant increase in body mass) and transient ataxia. A third ran-
domized, blinded, crossover study in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels
with Chiari-like malformation and syringomyelia (n = 33) found a
significant improvement in quality of life associated with gabapen-
tin (approximately 11.5 mg/kg PO three times daily) combined
with carprofen (approximately 2.2 mg/kg PO once daily), in com-
parison with baseline scores or carprofen therapy alone [436].
Quality of life was owner-assessed using a visual analog scale (VAS)
and showed a 10-mm reduction on the scale. A similar result was
found with administration of the carbonic anhydrase inhibitor,
topiramate (approximately 11 mg/kg PO three times daily).
Blinding to treatment was incomplete as capsules containing gabap-
entin were labeled as such, limiting control of a placebo effect.
Reported adverse effects were mild and self-limiting and included
sedation, polyphagia, vomiting, diarrhea, and inappetence in four
dogs. One dog in the gabapentin-carprofen group died, but the
cause of death could not be determined (no necropsy performed).
Pharmacokinetic data for the use of pregabalin for analgesia in
dogs suggest that plasma concentrations associated with analgesia
in humans are achieved with a single dose of 4 mg/kg PO [437].
A randomized, blinded, placebo-controlled study of pregabalin
(4 mg/kg PO three times daily) in 46 dogs (predominantly
Dachshunds) initiated immediately before surgery for interverte-
bral disc herniation and continued for 5 days postoperatively found
a significant reduction in pain scale scores (using a composite
measure pain scale; mean reduction of 2.5 units on a 0–20 scale)
and an increase in mechanical nociceptive thresholds [438]. Rescue
analgesia requirements were low and similar in both treatment
groups, and all dogs also had a fentanyl patch in place during the

-- 450 of 1450 --

Chapter 25: Anesthetic and Analgesic Adjunctive Drugs 	435
assessment period. Serum concentrations of pregabalin (sampled
shortly before the next dose was administered) were highly variable,
showing an approximately 30-fold difference between individuals.
A randomized, blinded, placebo-controlled clinical trial evaluat-
ing gabapentin in 29 dogs undergoing thoracic limb amputation did
not identify an advantage of gabapentin over placebo (gelatin cap-
sule) for postoperative pain [410]. Dogs received varying combina-
tions of other analgesics (methadone, fentanyl, and NSAIDs),
which may have made it difficult to identify a small treatment effect
(the authors suggested the trial was underpowered) and the gabap-
entin dose (10 mg/kg total daily dose) may have been insufficient. A
randomized, blinded, placebo-controlled clinical trial in a popula-
tion of dogs undergoing hemilaminectomy surgery (n = 63 dogs
total) included gabapentin (10 mg/kg PO twice daily) as an adjunc-
tive analgesic (alongside levomethadone and a fentanyl patch) [408].
Compared to placebo, there was a non-significant reduction in pain
scores. These mixed outcomes of gabapentin/pregabalin therapy
may also reflect its mechanism of action in relation to the disease
state, as voltage-gated calcium channels are upregulated following
nerve injury and there is a delay for this to occur [439,440]. This
could explain the lack of support for a role in acute postoperative
pain in humans [407]. Further clinical studies are needed to better
understand when gabapentin therapy is warranted.
In contrast to cats, gabapentin (20 mg/kg PO, 2 h before general
anesthesia) has an isoflurane MAC-sparing effect (20% ± 14%
reduction) in dogs, with no impact on cardiovascular varia-
bles [441]. Gabapentin (25–30 mg/kg PO) reduces fear behaviors in
dogs with storm phobia when given approximately 90 min before
exposure, with ataxia reported as an adverse effect [442].
Pharmacokinetic data for gabapentin in cats shows a high oral
bioavailability (approximately 90%) and terminal half-life of around
3–4 h, with a suggested a dosing regimen of 8 mg/kg PO every 8 h,
or 3 mg/kg PO every 6 h, in order to achieve plasma concentrations
associated with analgesia in humans [414,443,444]. However, an
increase in thermal threshold did not occur when gabapentin was
administered orally at 5, 10, or 30 mg/kg in healthy cats [413].
These doses resulted in plasma drug concentrations in excess of
those associated with analgesia in humans, leaving the authors to
question the utility of gabapentin in healthy cats and the adequacy
of the pain model. Sedation was not associated with gabapentin in
this study at any dose, though it is a common adverse effect in dogs.
The same investigators were not able to show a MAC-sparing effect
of gabapentin on isoflurane despite achieving plasma drug concen-
trations almost double those reported to be effective in humans,
though this does not rule out an analgesic effect [415]. In the pres-
ence of chronic kidney disease, plasma levels of gabapentin (10 mg/
kg PO) were elevated to twice the concentration observed with the
same dose in healthy cats and positively correlated with serum cre-
atinine and serum symmetric dimethylarginine concentrations,
indicating that dose reduction is necessary in cats with chronic kid-
ney disease [444]. A randomized, blinded, placebo-controlled study
in cats undergoing ovariohysterectomy (n = 15–19 cats per treat-
ment group) did not identify a benefit of gabapentin (approximately
17 mg/kg PO twice daily) over meloxicam [417]. Rescue analgesia
was required in all treatment groups as follows: gabapentin (25% of
cats), meloxicam (13% of cats), and placebo (50% of cats). Two
doses of gabapentin were given preoperatively, and a single dose of
meloxicam (0.2 mg/kg SC) was given shortly before surgery. All cats
also received buprenorphine perioperatively. Despite a lack of clear
supporting evidence, it appears to be a popular choice for chronic
musculoskeletal pain in cats [443]. The successful use of gabapentin
(10 mg/kg PO every 8 h) was reported following polytrauma in two
cases of road traffic accidents [416]. In each case, clinical signs were
consistent with mechanical allodynia. Gabapentin was initiated
when mechanical allodynia was observed 24–48 h following the
surgical procedure and, in both cases, clinical signs resolved within
24 h, allowing a reduction of all administered analgesics.
Importantly, a multimodal analgesic approach was used in both
cases with cats also receiving opioids, NSAIDs, and locoregional
analgesia. Chronic use of gabapentin in three cats (polytrauma or
osteoarthritis) for between approximately 100–350 days (6.5 mg/kg
PO twice daily) has been reported, without apparent adverse
effects [445]. Pharmacokinetic data for pregabalin in cats indicate a
longer terminal half-life compared to gabapentin which, along with
linear pharmacokinetics, may make pregabalin preferable to gabap-
entin in this species [429,446]. Pregabalin (2 mg/kg PO twice daily)
was associated with superficial dermatitis lesions in a cat with squa-
mous cell carcinoma and clinical signs of neuropathic pain [447].
Lesions resolved with cessation of treatment and recurred when
pregabalin was re-started (in response to recurrence of clinical neu-
ropathic pain signs).
There has been increasing interest in gabapentin (13–30 mg/kg
PO 1 to 1.5 h before transport) and pregabalin (5–10 mg/kg PO 1.5
h before transport) for anxiety and fear reduction in cats with both
drugs appearing to be effective and associated with minimal, self-
limiting adverse effects (sedation, ataxia, hypersalivation, and vom-
iting) [448–450]. Pregabalin is approved in Europe and the United
States as a single oral dose (5 mg/kg 1.5 h before travel) to reduce
anxiety before travel and veterinary visits [450].
In a study of gabapentin, reporting pharmacokinetic and behavio-
ral data in horses, following 20 mg/kg PO or IV, no significant
changes in heart rate or mean arterial blood pressure were
recorded [419]. Sedation, scored as mild to moderate, occurred in all
horses for 1 h following IV gabapentin. The frequency of drinking
and standing at rest increased and decreased, respectively, over the
11-h observation period. Oral dosing of gabapentin had a lower bio-
availability in horses (16%) compared to dogs (80%), which is likely
to influence dosing requirements. No metabolites were detected in
equine plasma, indicating that metabolism may be similar to that
reported in humans, with the majority of drug excreted unchanged
in urine. These pharmacokinetic data were in broad agreement with
those previously reported in this species [418]. Oral dosing of gabap-
entin, up to 120 mg/kg PO twice daily, was not associated with seda-
tion or ataxia, and vital signs and serum biochemistry values
remained within the reference ranges [432]. By contrast, pregabalin
appears to have considerably higher oral (nasogastric tube) bioavail-
ability (> 90%) in horses, with a terminal half-life of 8 h [430].
There are few clinical reports of gabapentin use in horses
[420,421,451]. In one randomized, blinded, crossover study (n = 14
horses) of chronic thoracic limb lameness (navicular syndrome,
osteoarthritis, or collateral cartridge ossification), no advantage of
including gabapentin (20 mg/kg in grain twice daily) in addition to
an NSAID was identified [451]. Horses were evaluated with a subjec-
tive lameness score and various force plate measurements.
Gabapentin (2–3.3 mg/kg PO every 8 to 12 h) was included as
part of a multimodal analgesic plan (with opioids, NSAIDs, locore-
gional analgesia, α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists, and ketamine at
various times) in a horse following initial debridement of subsolar
seromas, followed by infection and ongoing chronic laminitis and
tendonitis [420]. Though difficult to specify the contribution of
gabapentin, pain scores improved with initiation of gabapentin
(along with concurrent perineural administration of bupivacaine)

-- 451 of 1450 --

436 	Section 3: Pharmacology
and no adverse effects were noted. In another reported case involv-
ing a pregnant mare following colic surgery, continuing signs of
pain (circling and pawing with the affected hoof) were associated
with femoral neuropathy and pelvic limb paresis [421]. Following a
lack of response to xylazine, butorphanol, flunixin, and a lidocaine
CRI, with adverse effects (marked sedation) during a detomidine
CRI, gabapentin was begun (2.5 mg/kg PO every 8 h for 24 h, then
every 12 h). Two h after giving gabapentin, during which time deto-
midine CRI (3 μg/ kg/h IV) and acepromazine (0.03 mg/kg IV
every 6 h) were continued, the mare was less agitated and clinical
signs improved over the following 36 h.
Pharmacokinetic and some pharmacodynamic data are available
in adult cows [424] and calves [422,423]. A comparison of gabapen-
tin (15 mg/kg PO once 1 h before dehorning) with flunixin, meloxi-
cam, and meloxicam with gabapentin did not result in significant
differences between groups or compared with placebo in plasma
cortisol concentrations or eye temperature [423]. The results for
mechanical nociceptive threshold were equivocal. Weight gain was
the only parameter to show a difference between analgesic treat-
ments and placebo. Average daily weight gain was greater in calves
treated with meloxicam and gabapentin than placebo, gabapentin
alone, or meloxicam alone. A combination of gabapentin (15 mg/kg
PO) and meloxicam (0.5 mg/kg PO) resulted in plasma levels of
gabapentin greater than 2 μg/mL (which is the threshold associated
with analgesia in humans) for 15 h [422]. Compared with horses
and dogs where maximal plasma concentrations were achieved
within 2 h, peak concentrations in calves were not reached until 7 h
post-administration. In adult Holstein-Friesian cows, the time to
achieve maximal plasma concentrations of gabapentin (10–20 mg/
kg PO co-administered with meloxicam 1 mg/kg PO) was also slow,
taking over 8 h [424]. Both gabapentin and meloxicam concentra-
tions in milk took 3 days to drop below the level of detection.
In dogs, approximately 30–35% of an administered dose of
gabapentin undergoes hepatic metabolism while unchanged drug is
excreted by the kidneys [428]. The metabolism of gabapentin has
not been reported in the cat.
Gabapentin is available as tablets and capsules (100, 300, 400,
600, and 800 mg) and as a 50 mg/mL oral formulation. Pregabalin
is available as capsules (25, 50, 75, 100, 150, 200, 225, and 300 mg)
and as an oral solution (20 mg/mL).
Tapentadol
The analgesic agent tapentadol was designed with the aims of com-
bining μ-opioid receptor agonism and norepinephrine reuptake inhi-
bition without dependency on generating active metabolites, as is the
case with tramadol [452,453]. Tapentadol has a higher affinity
(approximately 50-fold) for the μ-opioid receptor compared to tram-
adol, but lower affinity compared to the M1 metabolite of tramadol.
Compared to tramadol, it has similar potency for inhibition of nor-
epinephrine reuptake, and lesser potency (approximately fivefold) at
inhibiting serotonin reuptake inhibition [452]. These activities, with-
out a reliance on metabolism to an active metabolite, make tapent-
adol an attractive analgesic option though evidence of its use in
veterinary species is limited. The pharmacokinetics have been
described in dogs and cats [454–456]. In dogs, it has a low oral bioa-
vailability (approximately 4%) and, as in humans, is expected to
undergo extensive hepatic metabolism (glucuronidation) to generate
inactive metabolites, of which tapentadol-O-glucuronide appears
most important in dogs [455,456]. Oral dosing at 10, 20, and 30 mg/
kg showed rapid absorption, with a terminal half-life of 3.5–4 h [456].
In a canine pharmacokinetic study, dose-related adverse effects
(salivation, sedation, and panting) were described more frequently
after IV administration [454]. The dose ranges were 1.4–3.9 mg/kg
IV and 5.7–15.8 mg/kg PO. This contrasts with an oral pharmacoki-
netic study in which no adverse effects (no change in heart or respira-
tory rates and no sedation) were reported at doses of 10, 20, and
30 mg/kg PO [456]. In cats, bioavailability appears high after IM
(94%) and SC (90%) injection with a terminal half-life of 2–3 h.
Adverse effects (salivation, agitation, and panting lasting around
15–20 min) were reported at a dose of 5 mg/kg but were more com-
mon following IV rather than IM or SC administration [455].
Effective doses in dogs and cats are not well established [457,458].
In an acute pain model (thermal withdrawal latency; tail flick) in
healthy Beagles, tapentadol (6.8 mg/kg IV) induced a significant
increase in withdrawal latency that was similar to morphine
(1.0 mg/kg IV) and lasted around 40 min with peak effect at
10 min [457]. In the same study, tramadol (6.8–10 mg/kg IV) had
no effect on thermal thresholds. Tapentadol was associated with
sedation, ataxia, hypersalivation, and diarrhea. An unblinded clini-
cal study of 18 dogs with cranial cruciate rupture assessed 4 h after
tapentadol (30 mg/kg PO) showed an improvement in subjective
lameness assessment, with no change in gait analysis variables [459].
No sedation was reported. In a randomized, blinded, crossover,
experimental study in healthy cats (n = 6), two different doses of
tapentadol (approximately 6 and 11 mg/kg PO) increased thermal
thresholds from baseline for 1- and 2-h post- administration,
respectively; however, thermal thresholds were not significantly
different from placebo. The 2-h duration of effect observed with the
higher tapentadol dose was comparable to that observed in the
buprenorphine (0.02 mg/kg IM) group [458]. Most cats hypersali-
vated following tapentadol administration, and this effect lasted up
to 20 min.
Tapentadol is classified as a controlled substance in most juris-
dictions. Oral formulations include 50, 75, and 100 mg tablets and a
20 mg/mL solution.
Tramadol
Tramadol is a racemic mixture and has been described as an “atypi-
cal” opioid due to the potential provision of analgesia via opioid and
non-opioid (serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibition)
mechanisms [460]. Interestingly, both enantiomers of the parent
compound and the M 1 metabolite (O-desmethyltramadol) contrib-
ute to analgesia. Norepinephrine reuptake inhibition results from
activity of the (– or levo)-enantiomer of tramadol, serotonin (5-
HT) reuptake inhibition results from activity of the (+ or dextro)-
enantiomer of tramadol, and μ-opioid receptor agonism results
from activity of the (+)-enantiomer of the M 1 metabolite and the
(+)- enantiomer of tramadol [460–462]. It is, therefore, clear that
the potential for interindividual as well as inter- and intraspecies
variation in analgesic potency may occur as a result of variations in
metabolism.
The pharmacokinetics of tramadol have been described in the
dog [463–469], cat [468,470,471], horse [472–475], alpaca [476],
llama [477], goat [478], piglet [479], and rhesus macaque [480].
In humans, metabolism of tramadol to the active M1 metabolite is
mediated by CYP2D6. In the dog, there appears to be limited produc-
tion of the M1 metabolite, indicating that analgesia is largely depend-
ent on activity of the parent compound, concentrations of which
display considerable interindividual variability (> 10-fold variation in
plasma concentrations) [461,463–466,481]. A canine hepatic micro-
somal study has identified CYP2D15 as contributing to M1 formation
and CYP2B11/CYP3A12 as contributing to the predominant inactive

-- 452 of 1450 --

Chapter 25: Anesthetic and Analgesic Adjunctive Drugs 	437
M2 metabolite (N-desmethyltramadol) [469]. While the therapeutic
plasma concentration of M1 is unknown in the dog, measured levels
are typically substantially below those associated with analgesia in
humans. This may explain the variability in efficacy observed clini-
cally, with a similar pattern observed in a subsection of humans who
are “poor metabolizers” (i.e., those lacking the CYP2D6 isozyme) and
consequently experience substantially lower analgesia from trama-
dol [482]. There is also evidence of genetic polymorphism in thor-
oughbred horses, which may explain the variation in plasma
metabolite concentrations in this species [483]. As tramadol is
excreted largely unchanged in urine, hepatic dysfunction would not
be expected to result in complications with therapeutic dosing.
In cats, metabolism of tramadol is significant, resulting in M 1
metabolite concentrations associated with analgesia in humans
[468,471,484]. Clearance was lower than reported in dogs, indi-
cating that less frequent dosing may be effective. Excretion of
parent drug and metabolites is suspected to be renal.
Tramadol may prove an effective analgesic in llamas as signifi-
cant concentrations of the M 1 metabolite were detected following
IV and IM administration, but clearance was similar to that
reported in horses, which could make frequent dosing neces-
sary [477]. In alpacas, a study of six adult animals discovered wide
interindividual variation in oral absorption (ranging from 6% to
20%) and rapid clearance, with variable detection of the M1 metab-
olite [476]. At doses of 3.4–4 mg/kg IV, adverse effects such as head
tremor, ataxia, and star gazing were observed. A lower rate of infu-
sion (i.e., the same dose but administered over 10 min) or oral dos-
ing was not associated with side effects. Further work is needed to
identify an effective dose in alpacas.
Lumbosacral epidural administration of tramadol (3 mg/kg) pro-
vided less effective and shorter acting analgesia than lidocaine
(4 mg/kg) in adult goats undergoing castration with a rubber ten-
sion band [485].
Since the previous edition of this book, a systematic review and
meta-analysis has been published on the use of tramadol for post-
operative analgesia in dogs [486]. In reviewing 26 randomized clin-
ical trials, including 848 dogs, the authors found that the certainty
of evidence (a reflection of quality of evidence) supporting the use
of tramadol for postoperative analgesia, specifically rescue analge-
sia requirement, was low or very low based on a four-point scale
(high, moderate, low, and very low). Studies published up to
2020 were included in this analysis and grading reflects the poor
quality of reporting, risk of bias, and imprecision, all of which are
recognized and ongoing problems in the veterinary literature [487–
491]. Disappointingly, none of the included studies performed a
power calculation to estimate sample size and most (25/26) were
designed as superiority trials, to identify a benefit of tramadol use.
Together, this makes interpretation of existing data challenging,
though evidence that tramadol does not make an important contri-
bution to either postoperative analgesia or experimental nocicep-
tive models continues to grow [457,481,492–494]. While there is
probably some benefit to providing tramadol versus no analgesia
(relative risk [RR]: 0.47; 95% CI: 0.26–0.85), its efficacy in reducing
the highest pain score observed is questionable (standardized mean
difference: –1.09; 95% CI: -2.34–0.16) [486]. When compared with
different opioids (methadone, morphine, butorphanol, buprenor-
phine, codeine, and nalbuphine), there was no clear benefit associ-
ated with tramadol, with a possible exception for nalbuphine
(tramadol may perform better; low certainty of evidence). There is
some evidence that tramadol is less effective than NSAIDs, though
the 95% CI for the RR is wide (RR: 2.27; 95% CI: 0.68–7.60).
Unfortunately, weaknesses in study design, limitations of using dif-
ferent pain assessment scales, and inconsistencies in their applica-
tion all contribute to difficulties in interpreting these data. The
ongoing popularity of tramadol for chronic osteoarthritis pain
management raises major concerns regarding the efficacy of anal-
gesia provided [492,495]. A 26–36% sevoflurane MAC-reduction
effect has been reported in dogs [496].
In horses, several pharmacokinetic studies of tramadol have been
performed [471–473,475,483,497]. In contrast to humans, and simi-
lar to dogs, production of the unconjugated M1 metabolite in horses
is low, below the threshold associated with analgesia in humans [474].
However, in contrast to dogs, this does not represent a limitation of
metabolism but rather very efficient glucuronidation (glucuronide-
conjugated M1 metabolite is rapidly produced following IV and PO
dosing) [473,474]. The role of the glucuronide-conjugated M1
metabolite in analgesia in horses is unclear. Similar to other species,
large interindividual variability in M1 metabolite production is also
present in horses, with some of this variability perhaps explained by
genetic polymorphism in CYP2D50 [473,474,483,497]. In addition
to low concentrations of the M1 metabolite, rapid clearance and
short terminal half-life (approximately 2–3 h) may limit the trama-
dol’s use in this species [473,474,483,497]. Repeated oral dosing (5
and 10 mg/kg every 12 h) resulted in accumulation of plasma trama-
dol (and extended terminal half-life) but not of its M1 metabolite,
though plasma concentrations continued to reflect widespread
interindividual variability [497]. One horse, with a high plasma con-
centration, developed signs of colic though a clear causal relation-
ship could not be established. Tramadol pharmacokinetics in foals
(6–43 days old, administered 3 mg/kg IV) differed from that of adult
horses, with a larger volume of distribution and faster clearance,
though glucuronidation capability was reduced and different adverse
effects were observed [475]. Between 13 and 43 days of age, transient
inactivity and sedation were observed.
Dose-dependent adverse behavioral effects (muscle tremors, agi-
tation, and circling) are observed following IV (1.5–3 mg/kg) but
not oral administration (3–10 mg/kg) in horses [473,474,497].
Doses of tramadol greater than 3.1 mg/kg IV in horses were associ-
ated with significant (approximately 100%) increases in respiratory
rate, 50% reductions in borborygmus, and trembling [498]. At
lower doses (0.3 mg/kg IV), signs associated with CNS stimulation
(i.e., head nodding) were observed.
Clinical data are increasingly available for both chronic and acute
pain conditions. In four horses with chronic laminitis given oral
tramadol (5 or 10 mg/kg twice daily), the higher dose resulted in a
modest improvement in comfort (using a proxy measure of off-
loading frequency) [499]. Extradural administration (0.5–1 mg/kg)
shows promise and may be a useful alternative route, providing
analgesia and limiting CNS stimulation [500,501]. The extradural
administration of tramadol has also been reported in cattle and
lambs [502,503]. In horses, a dose of 2 mg/kg IV did not result in
significant reductions in skin twitch latency or hoof withdrawal
reflex during exposure to thermal stimulation [498]. While higher
doses may have resulted in analgesia, the 2 mg/kg dose was selected
as adverse effects were observed with higher doses.
Sedation was observed with tramadol doses greater than 2 mg/kg
IV and at 4 mg/kg IM in dogs [466,504,505]. In cats, 1 mg/kg SC had
variable behavioral effects with six of eight cats exhibiting signs of
euphoria and two cats appearing dysphoric [506]. Reliance on renal
excretion of parent drug and the active M1 metabolite implies that
renal dysfunction might result in increased adverse effects [507],
though none have been reported in veterinary species.

-- 453 of 1450 --

438 	Section 3: Pharmacology
In cats, the limited evidence available shows some promise for
an analgesic effect of tramadol, which may reflect the increased
production of the M 1 metabolite in this species [413,471]. Further
research is needed to confirm these initial findings and establish
effective doses. Oral administration at 8.6–11.6 mg/kg was effec-
tive at reducing the MAC of sevoflurane by approximately
40% [508]. Doses between 2 and 4 mg/kg PO have been associated
with an increased thermal threshold in cats, and a dose of 4 mg/kg
PO every 6 h has been proposed for providing analgesia [413]. An
oral dose of 6 mg/kg provided similar levels of analgesia as 4 mg/
kg IM for ovariohysterectomy surgery, though the author recog-
nized a limitation of small sample size [509]. A comparison of
meperidine (pethidine) and tramadol (2 and 4 mg/kg IM) found
similar levels of analgesia, with an increased requirement for res-
cue analgesia in the meperidine group [510]. A 2 mg/kg IM dose
of tramadol appeared to provide similar levels of analgesia as both
morphine and control comparison groups (all cats also received
medetomidine and ketamine) though the group sample size was
estimated based on cardiovascular changes rather than pain
assessment [511]. In cats exposed to mechanical stimulation,
extradural administration of tramadol (1 mg/kg) was more effec-
tive than saline control but shorter lasting than extradural mor-
phine [512]. A 2 mg/kg SC dose was no more effective than
placebo following ovariohysterectomy when assessed with an
interactive VAS and composite pain score, though there was a
lower requirement for rescue analgesia compared with pla-
cebo [513]. A comparison of oral tramadol (3 mg/kg every 12 h)
combined with a meloxicam spray to placebo with meloxicam
spray in cats with osteoarthritis did not identify any advantage of
including tramadol [514]. Similarly, 1 mg/kg SC did not substan-
tially increase either pressure or thermal threshold responses in
cats [506]. An important barrier to the use of tramadol in cats is
the very low palatability of oral suspensions, which can trigger
considerable hypersalivation. Formulating oral doses as capsules
circumvents this problem [509,515]. A proprietary transdermal
formulation of tramadol (200 mg/mL tramadol), administered at
approximately 3 mg/kg either did not result in detectable plasma
tramadol concentrations or concentrations greater than 100 times
lower than an oral dose of 1 mg/kg [516]. Furthermore, the pro-
prietary metered-dose applicators delivered an amount that
exceeded the intended dose by up to 39%. In a randomized,
placebo-controlled, blinded comparison of different doses of
tramadol, in cats with osteoarthritis (0, 1, 2, and 4 mg/kg PO),
activity and owner-assessed outcomes improved at the 2 mg/kg
dose [515]. The frequency of adverse events was dose dependent,
with mydriasis, euphoria, agitation, sedation, decreased appetite,
and diarrhea observed most frequently. A case report of acciden-
tal tramadol overdose (80 mg/kg PO instead of 4 mg/kg PO)
resulted in agitation, hypersalivation, head jerking, and hyperten-
sion after the first dose, followed by obtunded mentation, lateral
recumbency, hypertension, tachycardia, abdominal distension,
and pain after a further dose [264]. These signs were attributed to
serotonin toxicity resulting from tramadol’s effects as a serotonin
reuptake inhibitor. The cat responded to supportive therapy (flu-
ids, analgesia), an enema to relieve abdominal distension, and
cyproheptadine (a serotonin receptor antagonist, 2 mg/kg PO
once daily), with resolution of clinical signs over several days.
Tramadol is classified as a controlled substance in most jurisdic-
tions. Available oral formulations include 50 and 100 mg tablets and
a 5 mg/mL oral solution. Injectable formulations are approved in
some countries.
References
1 Rosenberg H, Pollock N, Schiemann A, et al. Malignant hyperthermia: a review.
Orphanet J Rare Dis 2015; 10: 93.
2 Boys JA, Toledo AH, Anaya-Prado R, et al. Effects of dantrolene on ischemia-
reperfusion injury in animal models: a review of outcomes in heart, brain, liver, and
kidney. J Investig Med 2010; 58: 875–882.
3 Inan S, Wei H. The cytoprotective effects of dantrolene: a ryanodine receptor antag-
onist. Anesth Analg 2010; 111: 1400–1410.
4 Lynch C, Durbin CGJ, Fisher NA, et al. Effects of dantrolene and verapamil on
atrioventricular conduction and cardiovascular performance in dogs. Anesth Analg
1986; 65: 252–258.
5 Oliven A, Deal ECJ, Kelsen SG. Effect of dantrolene on ventilation and respiratory
muscle activity in anaesthetized dogs. Br J Anaesth 1990; 64: 207–213.
6 Bowman WC, Houston J, Khan HH, et al. Effects of dantrolene sodium on respira-
tory and other muscles and on respiratory parameters in the anaesthetised cat. Eur
J Pharmacol 1979; 55: 293–303.
7 Brandom BW, Larach MG, Chen MS, et al. Complications associated with the
administration of dantrolene 1987 to 2006: a report from the North American
Malignant Hyperthermia Registry of the Malignant Hyperthermia Association of
the United States. Anesth Analg 2011; 112: 1115–1123.
8 Bagshaw RJ, Cox RH, Rosenberg H. Dantrolene treatment of malignant hyperther-
mia. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1981; 178: 1129.
9 Harrison GG. Control of the malignant hyperpyrexic syndrome in MHS swine by
dantrolene sodium. Br J Anaesth 1975; 47: 62–65.
10 Kirmayer AH, Klide AM, Purvance JE. Malignant hyperthermia in a dog: case
report and review of the syndrome. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1984; 185: 978–982.
11 Klein L, Ailes N, Fackelman GE, et al. Postanesthetic equine myopathy suggestive
of malignant hyperthermia. A case report. Vet Surg 1989; 18: 479–482.
12 Nelson TE. Malignant hyperthermia in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1991; 198:
989–994.
13 Rand JS, O’Brien PJ. Exercise-induced malignant hyperthermia in an English
springer spaniel. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1987; 190: 1013–1014.
14 Waldron-Mease E, Klein LV, Rosenberg H, et al. Malignant hyperthermia in a
halothane- anesthetized horse. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1981; 179: 896–898.
15 Wells RJ, Sedacca CD, Aman AM, et al. Successful management of a dog that had
severe rhabdomyolysis with myocardial and respiratory failure. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2009; 234: 1049–1054.
16 McKenzie EC, Valberg SJ, Godden SM, et al. Effect of oral administration of dant-
rolene sodium on serum creatine kinase activity after exercise in horses with recur-
rent exertional rhabdomyolysis. Am J Vet Res 2004; 65: 74–79.
17 McKenzie EC, Garrett RL, Payton ME, et al. Effect of feed restriction on plasma
dantrolene concentrations in horses. Equine Vet J Suppl 2010; 38: 613–617.
18 Edwards JG, Newtont JR, Ramzan PH, et al. The efficacy of dantrolene sodium in
controlling exertional rhabdomyolysis in the Thoroughbred racehorse. Equine Vet J
2003; 35: 707–711.
19 Takano K. Effect of dantrolene sodium upon the activity of the hind leg muscle
of the cat with local tetanus. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol 1976; 293:
195–196.
20 Zamiri N, Massé S, Ramadeen A, et al. Dantrolene improves survival after ven-
tricular fibrillation by mitigating impaired calcium handling in animal models.
Circulation 2014; 129: 875–885.
21 Denborough MA, Lovell RRH. Anaesthetic deaths in a family. Lancet 1960; 276: 45.
22 Denborough MA, Forster JFA, Lovell RRH, et al. Anesthetic deaths in a family. Br J
Anaesth 1962; 34: 395–396.
23 Jones EW, Nelson TE, Anderson IL, et al. Malignant hyperthermia of swine.
Anesthesiology 1972; 36: 42–51.
24 Hall LW, Woolf N, Bradley JW, et al. Unusual reaction to suxamethonium chloride.
Br Med J 1966; 2: 1305.
25 Aldrich K, Velez-Irizarry D, Fenger C, et al. Pathways of calcium regulation, elec-
tron transport, and mitochondrial protein translation are molecular signatures of
susceptibility to recurrent exertional rhabdomyolysis in Thoroughbred racehorses.
PLoS ONE 2021; 16: e0244556.
26 McKenzie EC, Di Concetto S, Payton ME, et al. Effect of dantrolene premedication
on various cardiovascular and biochemical variables and the recovery in healthy
isoflurane-anesthetized horses. Am J Vet Res 2015; 76: 293–301.
27 Wuis EW, Janssen MG, Vree TB, et al. Determination of a dantrolene metabolite,
5-(p-nitrophenyl)-2-furoic acid, in plasma and urine by high-performance liquid
chromatography. J Chromatogr 1990; 526: 575–580.
28 Court MH, Engelking LR, Dodman NH, et al. Pharmacokinetics of dantrolene
sodium in horses. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1987; 10: 218–226.
29 DiMaio Knych HK, Arthur RM, Taylor A, et al. Pharmacokinetics and metabolism
of dantrolene in horses. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2011; 34: 238–246.
30 Haraschak JL, Langston VC, Wang R, et al. Pharmacokinetic evaluation of oral dan-
trolene in the dog. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2014; 37: 286–294.

-- 454 of 1450 --

Chapter 25: Anesthetic and Analgesic Adjunctive Drugs 	439
31 Zabirowicz ES, Gan TJ. Pharmacology of postoperative nausea and vomiting. In:
Hemmings HC, Egan TD, eds. Pharmacology and Physiology for Anesthesia.
Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier, 2019: 671–692.
32 Peters LJ, Kovacic JP. Histamine: metabolism, physiology, and pathophysiology
with applications in veterinary medicine. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2009;
19: 311–328.
33 Hofmeister EH, Egger CM. Evaluation of diphenhydramine as a sedative for dogs.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2005; 226: 1092–1094.
34 Sanchez A, Valverde A, Sinclair M, et al. The pharmacokinetics of DPH after the
administration of a single intravenous or intramuscular dose in healthy dogs.
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2016; 39: 452–459.
35 Banovic F, Denley T, Blubaugh A, et al. Effect of diphenhydramine and cetirizine on
immediate and late-phase cutaneous allergic reactions in healthy dogs: a rand-
omized, double-blinded crossover study. Vet Dermatol 2020; 31: e256–e258.
36 Barnett A, Iorio LC, Kreutner W, et al. Evaluation of the CNS properties of SCH
29851, a potential non-sedating antihistamine. Agents Actions 1984; 14: 590–597.
37 Kranke P, Morin AM, Roewer N, et al. Dimenhydrinate for prophylaxis of postop-
erative nausea and vomiting: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2002; 46: 238–244.
38 Marzanatti M, Monopoli A, Trampus M, et al. Effects of nonsedating histamine
H1-antagonists on EEG activity and behavior in the cat. Pharmacol Biochem Behav
1989; 32: 861–866.
39 Sanchez A, Valverde A, Sinclair M, et al. Antihistaminic and cardiorespiratory
effects of diphenhydramine hydrochloride in anesthetized dogs undergoing exci-
sion of mast cell tumors. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2017; 251: 804–813.
40 Gamperl S, Stefanzl G, Willmann M, et al. In vitro effects of histamine receptor 1
antagonists on proliferation and histamine release in canine neoplastic mast cells.
Vet Med Sci 2021; 7: 57–68.
41 Cardona V, Ansotegui IJ, Ebisawa M, et al. World allergy organization anaphylaxis
guidance 2020. World Allergy Organ J 2020; 13: 100472.
42 Pang DSJ, Prebble M. Suspected anaphylaxis from intravenous cefazolin during
general anaesthesia in a dog. Vet Rec Case Rep 2016; 4: e000352.
43 Simons KJ, Chen X, Fraser TG, et al. Effect of cimetidine on the pharmacokinetics
and pharmacodynamics of chlorpheniramine and diphenhydramine in rabbits.
Pharm Res 1996; 13: 301–304.
44 Wasfi IA, Abdel Hadi AA, Elghazali M, et al. Comparative pharmacokinetics of
diphenhydramine in camels and horses after intravenous administration. Vet Res
Commun 2003; 27: 463–473.
45 Au- Yeung SC, Riggs KW, Gruber N, et al. The use of microdialysis for the study of
drug kinetics: central nervous system pharmacokinetics of diphenhydramine in
fetal, newborn, and adult sheep. Drug Metab Dispos 2007; 35: 1285–1291.
46 Kumar S, Riggs KW, Rurak DW. Role of the liver and gut in systemic diphenhy-
dramine clearance in adult nonpregnant sheep. Drug Metab Dispos 1999; 27:
297–302.
47 Koyanagi T, Yamaura Y, Yano K, et al. Age-related pharmacokinetic changes of
acetaminophen, antipyrine, diazepam, diphenhydramine, and ofloxacin in male
cynomolgus monkeys and beagle dogs. Xenobiotica 2014; 44: 893–901.
48 Hatch RC, Jernigan AD, Wilson RC, et al. Prompt arousal from fentanyl-droperidol-
pentobarbital anesthesia in dogs: a preliminary study. Can J Vet Res 1986; 50:
251–258.
49 Short CE. Doxapram for reversing xylazine sedation [letter]. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1984; 184: 237, 258.
50 Zapata M, Hofmeister EH. Refinement of the dose of doxapram to counteract the
sedative effects of acepromazine in dogs. J Small Anim Pract 2013; 54: 405–408.
51 Boller M, Kellett-Gregory L, Shofer FS, et al. The clinical practice of CPCR in small
animals: an internet-based survey. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2010; 20:
558–570.
52 Roy RC, Stullken EH. Electroencephalographic evidence of arousal in dogs from
halothane after doxapram, physostigmine, or naloxone. Anesthesiology 1981; 55:
392–397.
53 Curtis R, Evans JM. The effect of doxapram hydrochloride on cats anaesthetized
with either Saffan or thiopentone sodium. J Small Anim Pract 1981; 22: 77–83.
54 Giguère S, Sanchez LC, Shih A, et al. Comparison of the effects of caffeine and
doxapram on respiratory and cardiovascular function in foals with induced respira-
tory acidosis. Am J Vet Res 2007; 68: 1407–1416.
55 Giguère S, Slade JK, Sanchez LC. Retrospective comparison of caffeine and
doxapram for the treatment of hypercapnia in foals with hypoxic-ischemic enceph-
alopathy. J Vet Intern Med 2008; 22: 401–405.
56 Bleul U, Bircher B, Jud RS, et al. Respiratory and cardiovascular effects of doxapram
and theophylline for the treatment of asphyxia in neonatal calves. Theriogenology
2010; 73: 612–619.
57 Bleul U, Bylang T. Effects of doxapram, prethcamide and lobeline on spirometric,
blood gas and acid-base variables in healthy new-born calves. Vet J 2012; 194:
240–246.
58 Short CE, Cloyd GD, Ward JW. An evaluation of doxapram hydrochloride to con-
trol respiration in dogs during and after inhalation anesthesia. Vet Med Small Anim
Clin 1970; 65: 787–790.
59 Short CE, Cloyd GD. The use of doxapram hydrochloride with inhalation anesthet-
ics in horses. II. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 1970; 65: 260–261.
60 Short CE, Cloyd GD, Ward JW. The use of doxapram hydrochloride with intrave-
nous anesthetics in horses. I. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 1970; 65: 157–160.
61 Tobias KM, Jackson AM, Harvey RC. Effects of doxapram HCl on laryngeal func-
tion of normal dogs and dogs with naturally occurring laryngeal paralysis. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2004; 31: 258–263.
62 Archer RM, Lindsay WA, Duncan ID. A comparison of techniques to enhance the
evaluation of equine laryngeal function. Equine Vet J 1991; 23: 104–107.
63 Ranninger E, Kantyka M, Bektas RN. The Influence of anaesthetic drugs on the
laryngeal motion in dogs: a systematic review. Animals (Basel) 2020; 10: E530.
64 Funderburk WH, Oliver KL, Ward JW. Electrophysiologic analysis of the site of
action of doxapram hydrochloride. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1966; 151: 360–368.
65 Hirsh K, Wang SC. Selective respiratory stimulating action of doxapram compared
to pentylenetetrazaol. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1974; 189: 1–11.
66 Kato H, Buckley JP. Possible sites of action of the respiratory stimulant effect of
doxapram hydrochloride. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1964; 144: 260–264.
67 Taylor PM. Doxapram infusion during halothane anaesthesia in ponies. Equine Vet
J 1990; 22: 329–332.
68 Soma LR, Kenny R. Respiratory, cardiovascular, metabolic and electroencephalo-
graphic effects of doxapram hydrochloride in the dog. Am J Vet Res 1967; 28:
191–198.
69 Kim SI, Winnie AP, Collins VJ, et al. Hemodynamic responses to doxapram in nor-
movolemic and hypovolemic dogs. Anesth Analg 1971; 50: 705–710.
70 Pang DS, Robledo CJ, Carr DR, et al. An unexpected role for TASK-3 potassium
channels in network oscillations with implications for sleep mechanisms and anes-
thetic action. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009; 106: 17546–17551.
71 Cotten JF. TASK-1 (KCNK3) and TASK-3 (KCNK9) tandem pore potassium chan-
nel antagonists stimulate breathing in isoflurane-anesthetized rats. Anesth Analg
2013; 116: 810–816.
72 Trapp S, Aller MI, Wisden W, et al. A role for TASK-1 (KCNK3) channels in the
chemosensory control of breathing. J Neurosci 2008; 28: 8844–8850.
73 Yost CS. A new look at the respiratory stimulant doxapram. CNS Drug Rev 2006; 12:
236–249.
74 Winnie AP, Collins VJ. The search for a pharmacologic ventilator. Acta Anaesthesiol
Scand Suppl 1966; 23: 63–71.
75 Bruce RB, Pitts JE, Pinchbeck F, et al. Excretion, distribution, and metabolism of
doxapram hydrochloride. J Med Chem 1965; 8: 157–164.
76 Sams RA, Detra RL, Muir WW. Pharmacokinetics and metabolism of intravenous
doxapram in horses. Equine Vet J Suppl 1992; 11: 45–51.
77 Huffington P, Craythorne NW. Effect of doxapram on heart rhythm during anes-
thesia in dog and man. Anesth Analg 1966; 45: 558–563.
78 Sabiza S, Naddaf H, Jalali SM, et al. The effects of doxapram on haematology, serum
biochemical parameters and erythrocyte oxidant/ antioxidant status in dogs anaes-
thetized with propofol. Vet Med Sci 2021; 7: 586–592.
79 Aguilera-Tejero E, Pascoe JR, Smith BL, et al. The effect of doxapram-induced
hyperventilation on respiratory mechanics in horses. Res Vet Sci 1997; 62: 143–146.
80 Henderson-Smart DJ, Steer PA. Doxapram treatment for apnea in preterm infants.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2001; 4: CD000074.
81 Uehara H, Yoshioka H, Nagai H, et al. Doxapram accentuates white matter injury in
neonatal rats following bilateral carotid artery occlusion. Neurosci Lett 2000; 281:
191–194.
82 Roll C, Horsch S. Effect of doxapram on cerebral blood flow velocity in preterm
infants. Neuropediatrics 2004; 35: 126–129.
83 Dani C, Bertini G, Pezzati M, et al. Brain hemodynamic effects of doxapram in
preterm infants. Biol Neonate 2006; 89: 69–74.
84 Fletcher DJ, Boller M, Brainard BM, et al. RECOVER evidence and knowledge gap
analysis on veterinary CPR. Part 7: clinical guidelines. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San
Antonio) 2012; 22(Suppl 1): S102–S131.
85 Hubbell JAE, Muir WW. Considerations for induction, maintenance and recovery.
In: Hubbell JAE, Muir WW, eds. Equine Anesthesia: Monitoring and Emergency
Therapy, 2nd edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2009: 381–396.
86 Zahner JM, Hatch RC, Wilson RC, et al. Antagonism of xylazine sedation in steers
by doxapram and 4-aminopyridine. Am J Vet Res 1984; 45: 2546–2551.
87 Riebold TW, Kaneps AJ, Schmotzer WB. Reversal of xylazine-induced sedation in
llamas, using doxapram or 4-aminopyridine and yohimbine. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1986; 189: 1059–1061.
88 Said AH. Some aspects of anaesthesia in the camel. Vet Rec 1964; 76: 550.
89 Woods R, McLean S, Nicol S, et al. Antagonism of some cyclohexamine-based drug
combinations used for chemical restraint of southern elephant seals (Mirounga
leonina). Aust Vet J 1995; 72: 165–171.

-- 455 of 1450 --

440 	Section 3: Pharmacology
90 Murray MJ, Grodinsky C. The effects of famotidine, ranitidine and magnesium
hydroxide/aluminium hydroxide on gastric fluid pH in adult horses. Equine Vet J
Suppl 1992; 11: 52–55.
91 Ahmed AF, Constable PD, Misk NA. Effect of orally administered cimetidine and
ranitidine on abomasal luminal pH in clinically normal milk-fed calves. Am J Vet
Res 2001; 62: 1531–1538.
92 Sanchez LC, Lester GD, Merritt AM. Effect of ranitidine on intragastric pH in
clinically normal neonatal foals. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1998; 212: 1407–1412.
93 Sanchez LC, Lester GD, Merritt AM. Intragastric pH in critically ill neonatal foals
and the effect of ranitidine. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2001; 218: 907–911.
94 Marks SL, Kook PH, Papich MG, et al. ACVIM consensus statement: support for
rational administration of gastrointestinal protectants to dogs and cats. J Vet
Intern Med 2018; 32: 1823–1840.
95 Hwang JH, Jeong JW, Song GH, et al. Pharmacokinetics and acid suppressant effi-
cacy of esomeprazole after intravenous, oral, and subcutaneous administration to
healthy Beagle dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2017; 31: 743–750.
96 De Graef J, Woussen-Colle MC. Influence of the stimulation state of the parietal
cells on the inhibitory effect of omeprazole on gastric acid secretion in dogs.
Gastroenterology 1986; 91: 333–337.
97 Huang JQ, Hunt RH. Pharmacological and pharmacodynamic essentials of H(2)-
receptor antagonists and proton pump inhibitors for the practising physician. Best
Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol 2001; 15: 355–370.
98 Bersenas AM, Mathews KA, Allen DG, et al. Effects of ranitidine, famotidine,
pantoprazole, and omeprazole on intragastric pH in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2005; 66:
425–431.
99 Tolbert K, Bissett S, King A, et al. Efficacy of oral famotidine and 2 omeprazole
formulations for the control of intragastric pH in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2011; 25:
47–54.
100 Andrews FM, Doherty TJ, Blackford JT, et al. Effects of orally administered
enteric-coated omeprazole on gastric acid secretion in horses. Am J Vet Res 1999;
60: 929–931.
101 Murray MJ. Suppression of gastric acidity in horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1997;
211: 37–40.
102 Sanchez LC, Murray MJ, Merritt AM. Effect of omeprazole paste on intragastric
pH in clinically normal neonatal foals. Am J Vet Res 2004; 65: 1039–1041.
103 Olivarez JD, Kreuder AJ, Tatarniuk DM, et al. Pharmacokinetics and tissue levels
of pantoprazole in neonatal calves after intravenous administration. Front Vet Sci
2020; 7: 580735.
104 Ryan CA, Sanchez LC, Giguère S, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
of pantoprazole in clinically normal neonatal foals. Equine Vet J 2005; 37: 336–341.
105 Smith GW, Davis JL, Smith SM, et al. Efficacy and pharmacokinetics of pantopra-
zole in alpacas. J Vet Intern Med 2010; 24: 949–955.
106 Smith JS, Mochel JP, Soto-Gonzalez WM, et al. Pharmacokinetics of pantoprazole
and pantoprazole sulfone in goats after intravenous administration: a preliminary
report. Front Vet Sci 2021; 8: 744813.
107 de Brito Galvao JF, Trepanier LA. Risk of hemolytic anemia with intravenous
administration of famotidine to hospitalized cats. J Vet Intern Med 2008; 22:
325–329.
108 Williamson KK, Willard MD, Payton ME, et al. Efficacy of omeprazole versus
high- dose famotidine for prevention of exercise-induced gastritis in racing
Alaskan sled dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2010; 24: 285–288.
109 Zacuto AC, Marks SL, Osborn J, et al. The influence of esomeprazole and cisap-
ride on gastroesophageal reflux during anesthesia in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2012;
26: 518–525.
110 Panti A, Bennett RC, Corletto F, et al. The effect of omeprazole on oesophageal pH
in dogs during anaesthesia. J Small Anim Pract 2009; 50: 540–544.
111 Gaier A, Price J, Grubb L, et al. A prospective, randomized, masked, placebo-
controlled crossover study for the effect of 10 mg omeprazole capsules on gastric
pH in healthy dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2021; 35: 887–891.
112 Odunayo A, Galyon G, Price J, et al. Evaluation of a long-acting injectable formu-
lation of omeprazole in healthy dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2022; 36: 1416–1421.
113 Sykes BW, Kathawala K, Song Y, et al. Preliminary investigations into a novel,
long-acting, injectable, intramuscular formulation of omeprazole in the horse.
Equine Vet J 2017; 49: 795–801.
114 Adamama-Moraitou KK, Rallis TS, Prassinos NN, et al. Benign esophageal stricture
in the dog and cat: a retrospective study of 20 cases. Can J Vet Res 2002; 66: 55–59.
115 Wilson DV, Walshaw R. Postanesthetic esophageal dysfunction in 13 dogs. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 2004; 40: 455–460.
116 Pearson H, Darke PG, Gibbs C, et al. Reflux oesophagitis and stricture formation
after anaesthesia: a review of seven cases in dogs and cats. J Small Anim Pract
1978; 19: 507–519.
117 Andersson T, Cederberg C, Edvardsson G, et al. Effect of omeprazole treatment
on diazepam plasma levels in slow versus normal rapid metabolizers of omepra-
zole. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1990; 47: 79–85.
118 Hassan-Alin M, Andersson T, Niazi M, et al. A pharmacokinetic study comparing
single and repeated oral doses of 20 mg and 40 mg omeprazole and its two optical
isomers, S-omeprazole (esomeprazole) and R-omeprazole, in healthy subjects. Eur
J Clin Pharmacol 2005; 60: 779–784.
119 Funk KA. Glyceryl guaiacolate: a centrally acting muscle relaxant. Equine Vet J
1970; 2: 173–178.
120 Funk KA. Glyceryl guaiacolate: some effects and indications in horses. Equine Vet
J 1973; 5: 15–19.
121 Seagrave J, Albrecht H, Park YS, et al. Effect of guaifenesin on mucin production,
rheology, and mucociliary transport in differentiated human airway epithelial
cells. Exp Lung Res 2011; 37: 606–614.
122 Posner LP, Burns P. Injectable anesthetic agents. In: Riviere JE, Papich MG, eds.
Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 9th edn. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell,
2009: 265–289.
123 Muir WW. Intravenous anesthetic drugs. In: Hubbell JAE, Muir WW, eds. Equine
Anesthesia: Monitoring and Emergency Therapy, 2nd edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders
Elsevier, 2009: 243–259.
124 Hubbell JA, Muir WW, Sams RA. Guaifenesin: cardiopulmonary effects and
plasma concentrations in horses. Am J Vet Res 1980; 41: 1751–1755.
125 Davis LE, Wolff WA. Pharmacokinetics and metabolism of glyceryl guaiacolate in
ponies. Am J Vet Res 1970; 31: 469–473.
126 Tavernor WD. The influence of guaiacol glycerol ether on cardiovascular and res-
piratory function in the horse. Res Vet Sci 1970; 11: 91–93.
127 Schatzmann U, Tschudi P, Held JP, et al. An investigation of the action and haemo-
lytic effect of glyceryl guaiacolate in the horse. Equine Vet J 1978; 10: 224–228.
128 Mostert JW, Metz J. Observations on the haemolytic activity of guaiacol glycerol
ether. Br J Anaesth 1963; 35: 461–464.
129 Wall R, Muir WW. Hemolytic potential of guaifenesin in cattle. Cornell Vet 1990;
80: 209–216.
130 Herschl MA, Trim CM, Mahaffey EA. Effects of 5% and 10% guaifenesin infusion
on equine vascular endothelium. Vet Surg 1992; 21: 494–497.
131 Dickson LR, Badcoe LM, Burbidge H, et al. Jugular thrombophlebitis resulting
from an anaesthetic induction technique in the horse. Equine Vet J 1990; 22:
177–179.
132 Matthews NS, Light GS, Sanders EA, et al. Urticarial response during anesthesia
in a horse. Equine Vet J 1993; 25: 555–556.
133 Duke-Novakovski T, Jimenez CP, Fujiyama M, et al. Plasma histamine concentra-
tions in horses administered sodium penicillin, guaifenesin-xylazine-ketamine
and isoflurane with morphine or butorphanol. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48:
17–25.
134 Rioja E, Cernicchiaro N, Costa MC, et al. Perioperative risk factors for mortality
and length of hospitalization in mares with dystocia undergoing general anesthe-
sia: a retrospective study. Can Vet J 2012; 53: 502–510.
135 Ambrisko TD, Kabes R, Moens Y. Influence of drugs on the response characteris-
tics of the LiDCO sensor: an in vitro study. Br J Anaesth 2013; 110: 305–310.
136 Benchaoui HA, Cox SR, Schneider RP, et al. The pharmacokinetics of maropitant,
a novel neurokinin type-1 receptor antagonist, in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2007;
30: 336–344.
137 Zoetis. Cerenia (Maropitant Citrate) Package Insert. www.zoetisus.com/content/_assets/
docs/Petcare/Cerenia/Cerenia- Tablets- and- Injectable- Solution- Combined-
Marketing-Package-Insert.pdf (accessed September 2022).
138 Hickman MA, Cox SR, Mahabir S, et al. Safety, pharmacokinetics and use of the
novel NK-1 receptor antagonist maropitant (Cerenia) for the prevention of emesis
and motion sickness in cats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2008; 31: 220–229.
139 Diemunsch P, Grelot L. Potential of substance P antagonists as antiemetics. Drugs
2000; 60: 533–546.
140 Narishetty ST, Galvan B, Coscarelli E, et al. Effect of refrigeration of the antiemetic
Cerenia (maropitant) on pain on injection. Vet Ther 2009; 10: 93–102.
141 Deckers N, Ruigrok CA, Verhoeve HP, et al. Comparison of pain response after
subcutaneous injection of two maropitant formulations to beagle dogs. Vet Rec
Open 2018; 5: e000262.
142 Martín-Flores M, Sakai DM, Learn MM, et al. Effects of maropitant in cats receiv-
ing dexmedetomidine and morphine. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2016; 248: 1257–1261.
143 Kenward H, Elliott J, Lee T, et al. Anti-nausea effects and pharmacokinetics
of ondansetron, maropitant and metoclopramide in a low-dose cisplatin
model of nausea and vomiting in the dog: a blinded crossover study. BMC Vet
Res 2017; 13: 244.
144 de la Puente-Redondo VA, Tilt N, Rowan TG, et al. Efficacy of maropitant for
treatment and prevention of emesis caused by intravenous infusion of cisplatin in
dogs. Am J Vet Res 2007; 68: 48–56.
145 de la Puente-Redondo VA, Siedek EM, Benchaoui HA, et al. The anti-emetic effi-
cacy of maropitant (Cerenia) in the treatment of ongoing emesis caused by a wide
range of underlying clinical aetiologies in canine patients in Europe. J Small Anim
Pract 2007; 48: 93–98.

-- 456 of 1450 --

Chapter 25: Anesthetic and Analgesic Adjunctive Drugs 	441
146 Vail DM, Rodabaugh HS, Conder GA, et al. Efficacy of injectable maropitant
(Cerenia) in a randomized clinical trial for prevention and treatment of cisplatin-
induced emesis in dogs presented as veterinary patients. Vet Comp Oncol 2007;
5: 38–46.
147 Rau SE, Barber LG, Burgess KE. Efficacy of maropitant in the prevention of
delayed vomiting associated with administration of doxorubicin to dogs. J Vet
Intern Med 2010; 24: 1452–1457.
148 Ramsey DS, Kincaid K, Watkins JA, et al. Safety and efficacy of injectable and oral
maropitant, a selective neurokinin 1 receptor antagonist, in a randomized clinical
trial for treatment of vomiting in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2008; 31: 538–543.
149 Conder GA, Sedlacek HS, Boucher JF, et al. Efficacy and safety of maropitant, a
selective neurokinin 1 receptor antagonist, in two randomized clinical trials for
prevention of vomiting due to motion sickness in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
2008; 31: 528–532.
150 Sedlacek HS, Ramsey DS, Boucher JF, et al. Comparative efficacy of maropitant
and selected drugs in preventing emesis induced by centrally or peripherally
acting emetogens in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2008; 31: 533–537.
151 Hay Kraus BL. Efficacy of maropitant in preventing vomiting in dogs premedi-
cated with hydromorphone. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40: 28–34.
152 Johnson RA. Maropitant prevented vomiting but not gastroesophageal reflux in
anesthetized dogs premedicated with acepromazine-hydromorphone. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2014; 41: 406–410.
153 Koh RB, Isaza N, Xie H, et al. Effects of maropitant, acepromazine, and electroa-
cupuncture on vomiting associated with administration of morphine in dogs.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2014; 244: 820–829.
154 Lorenzutti AM, Martín-Flores M, Litterio NJ, et al. Evaluation of the antiemetic
efficacy of maropitant in dogs medicated with morphine and acepromazine. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2016; 43: 195–198.
155 Lorenzutti AM, Martín-Flores M, Litterio NJ, et al. A comparison between maro-
pitant and metoclopramide for the prevention of morphine-induced nausea and
vomiting in dogs. Can Vet J 2017; 58: 35–38.
156 Ramsey D, Fleck T, Berg T, et al. Cerenia prevents perioperative nausea and vomit-
ing and improves recovery in dogs undergoing routine surgery. Intern J Appl Res
Vet Med 2014; 12: 228–237.
157 Alvillar BM, Boscan P, Mama KR, et al. Effect of epidural and intravenous use of the
neurokinin-1 (NK-1) receptor antagonist maropitant on the sevoflurane minimum
alveolar concentration (MAC) in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39: 201–205.
158 Boscan P, Monnet E, Mama K, et al. Effect of maropitant, a neurokinin 1 receptor
antagonist, on anesthetic requirements during noxious visceral stimulation of the
ovary in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2011; 72: 1576–1579.
159 Niyom S, Boscan P, Twedt DC, et al. Effect of maropitant, a neurokinin-1 receptor
antagonist, on the minimum alveolar concentration of sevoflurane during stimu-
lation of the ovarian ligament in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40: 425–431.
160 Inoue M, Kobayashi M, Kozaki S, et al. Nociceptin/orphanin FQ-induced nocic-
eptive responses through substance P release from peripheral nerve endings in
mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998; 95: 10949–10953.
161 Morris R, Cheunsuang O, Stewart A, et al. Spinal dorsal horn neurone targets for
nociceptive primary afferents: do single neurone morphological characteristics
suggest how nociceptive information is processed at the spinal level. Brain Res
Brain Res Rev 2004; 46: 173–190.
162 Mantyh PW, Gates T, Mantyh CR, et al. Autoradiographic localization and charac-
terization of tachykinin receptor binding sites in the rat brain and peripheral tis-
sues. J Neurosci 1989; 9: 258–279.
163 Perry MJ, Lawson SN. Differences in expression of oligosaccharides, neuropeptides,
carbonic anhydrase and neurofilament in rat primary afferent neurons retrogradely
labelled via skin, muscle or visceral nerves. Neuroscience 1998; 85: 293–310.
164 Swallow A, Rioja E, Elmer T, et al. The effect of maropitant on intraoperative
isoflurane requirements and postoperative nausea and vomiting in dogs: a rand-
omized clinical trial. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44: 785–793.
165 Corrêa JMX, Niella RV, Oliveira JNS, et al. Antinociceptive and analgesic effect of
continuous intravenous infusion of maropitant, lidocaine and ketamine alone or in
combination in cats undergoing ovariohysterectomy. Acta Vet Scand 2021; 63: 49.
166 Fukui S, Ooyama N, Tamura J, et al. Interaction between maropitant and carpro-
fen on sparing of the minimum alveolar concentration for blunting adrenergic
response (MAC-BAR) of sevoflurane in dogs. J Vet Med Sci 2017; 79: 502–508.
167 Valverde A, Cantwell S, Hernandez J, et al. Effects of acepromazine on the inci-
dence of vomiting associated with opioid administration in dogs. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2004; 31: 40–45.
168 Claude AK, Dedeaux A, Chiavaccini L, et al. Effects of maropitant citrate or ace-
promazine on the incidence of adverse events associated with hydromorphone
premedication in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2014; 28: 1414–1417.
169 Hay Kraus BL. Effect of dosing interval on efficacy of maropitant for prevention of
hydromorphone-induced vomiting and signs of nausea in dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2014; 245: 1015–1020.
170 Martín-Flores M, Sakai DM, Mastrocco A, et al. Evaluation of oral maropitant as
an antiemetic in cats receiving morphine and dexmedetomidine. J Feline Med Surg
2016; 18: 921–924.
171 Martín-Flores M, Mastrocco A, Lorenzutti AM, et al. Maropitant administered
orally 2–2.5 h prior to morphine and dexmedetomidine reduces the incidence of
emesis in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2017; 19: 876–879.
172 Hay Kraus BL. Efficacy of orally administered maropitant citrate in preventing
vomiting associated with hydromorphone administration in dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2014; 244: 1164–1169.
173 Kanda T, Toda C, Morimoto H, et al. Antiemetic effect of oral maropitant treat-
ment before the administration of brimonidine ophthalmic solution in healthy
cats. J Feline Med Surg 2020; 22: 557–563.
174 Kantyka ME, Meira C, Bettschart-Wolfensberger R, et al. Prospective, controlled,
blinded, randomized crossover trial evaluating the effect of maropitant versus
ondansetron on inhibiting tranexamic acid-evoked emesis. J Vet Emerg Crit Care
(San Antonio) 2020; 30: 436–441.
175 Marquez M, Boscan P, Weir H, et al. Comparison of NK-1 receptor antagonist
(maropitant) to morphine as a pre-anaesthetic agent for canine ovariohysterec-
tomy. PLoS ONE 2015; 10: e0140734.
176 Armstrong T, Wagner MC, Cheema J, et al. Assessing analgesia equivalence and appe-
tite following alfaxalone- or ketamine-based injectable anesthesia for feline castration
as an example of enhanced recovery after surgery. J Feline Med Surg 2018; 20: 73–82.
177 Hasiuk MM, Brown D, Cooney C, et al. Application of fast-track surgery principles
to evaluate effects of atipamezole on recovery and analgesia following ovariohyster-
ectomy in cats anesthetized with dexmedetomidine-ketamine-hydromorphone.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2015; 246: 645–653.
178 Moser KL, Hasiuk MM, Armstrong T, et al. A randomized clinical trial comparing
butorphanol and buprenorphine within a multimodal analgesic protocol in cats
undergoing orchiectomy. J Feline Med Surg 2020; 22: 760–767.
179 McCormack R, Olley L, Glanemann B, et al. Prospective observational study of
the use of omeprazole and maropitant citrate in veterinary specialist care. Sci Rep
2020; 10: 15727.
180 Chi TT, Hay Kraus BL. The effect of intravenous maropitant on blood pressure in
healthy awake and anesthetized dogs. PLoS ONE 2020; 15: e0229736.
181 Berryhill EH, Knych H, Edman JM, et al. Pharmacokinetics of single doses of
maropitant citrate in adult horses. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2019; 42: 487–491.
182 Berryhill EH, Knych H, Chigerwe M, et al. Pharmacokinetics of maropitant citrate
after oral administration of multiple doses in adult horses. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
2020; 43: 282–287.
183 Lesman SP, Boucher JF, Grover GS, et al. The pharmacokinetics of maropitant
citrate dosed orally to dogs at 2 mg/kg and 8 mg/kg once daily for 14 days con-
secutive days. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2013; 36: 462–470.
184 Mones AB, Petritz OA, Knych HK, et al. Pharmacokinetics of maropitant citrate in
Rhode Island Red chickens (Gallus gallus domesticus) following subcutaneous
administration. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2022; 45: 495–500.
185 Ozawa SM, Hawkins MG, Drazenovich TL, et al. Pharmacokinetics of maropitant
citrate in New Zealand White rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus). Am J Vet Res 2019;
80: 963–968.
186 Roszkowski AP. A pharmacological comparison of therapeutically useful centrally
acting skeletal muscle relaxants. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1960; 129: 75–81.
187 Witkin LB, Spitaletta P, Galdi F, et al. Some neuropharmacologic effects of four
mephenesin-like agents in mice. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 1960; 2: 264–269.
188 Valtonen EJ. A double- blind trial of methocarbamol versus placebo in painful
muscle spasm. Curr Med Res Opin 1975; 3: 382–385.
189 Simmonds EE, Alwood AJ, Costello MF. Magnesium sulfate as an adjunct therapy
in the management of severe generalized tetanus in a dog. J Vet Emerg Crit Care
(San Antonio) 2011; 21:542–546.
190 Burkitt JM, Sturges BK, Jandrey KE, et al. Risk factors associated with outcome in
dogs with tetanus: 38 cases (1987–2005). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2007; 230: 76–83.
191 Bandt C, Rozanski EA, Steinberg T, et al. Retrospective study of tetanus in 20 dogs:
1988–2004. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2007; 43: 143–148.
192 Boland LA, Angles JM. Feline permethrin toxicity: retrospective study of 42 cases.
J Feline Med Surg 2010; 12: 61–71.
193 Bates NS, Sutton NM, Campbell A. Suspected metaldehyde slug bait poisoning in
dogs: a retrospective analysis of cases reported to the Veterinary Poisons
Information Service. Vet Rec 2012; 171: 324.
194 Richardson JA. Permethrin spot-on toxicosis in cats. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2000;
10: 103–106.
195 McLean MK, Khan S. A review of 29 incidents involving 4-aminopyridine in non-
target species reported to the ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center. J Med
Toxicol 2013; 9: 418–421.
196 Peacock RE, Hosgood G, Swindells KL, et al. A randomized, controlled clinical
trial of intravenous lipid emulsion as an adjunctive treatment for permethrin toxi-
cosis in cats. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2015; 25: 597–605.

-- 457 of 1450 --

442 	Section 3: Pharmacology
197 Kuo K, Odunayo A. Adjunctive therapy with intravenous lipid emulsion and
methocarbamol for permethrin toxicity in 2 cats. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San
Antonio) 2013; 23: 436–441.
198 Draper WE, Bolfer L, Cottam E, et al. Methocarbamol CRI for symptomatic treat-
ment of pyrethroid intoxication: a report of three cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
2013; 49: 325–328.
199 Muir WW, Sams RA, Ashcraft S. Pharmacologic and pharmacokinetic properties
of methocarbamol in the horse. Am J Vet Res 1984; 45: 2256–2260.
200 Muir WW, Sams RA, Ashcraft S. The pharmacology and pharmacokinetics of
high-dose methocarbamol in horses. Equine Vet J Suppl 1992: 41–44.
201 Nielsen C, Pluhar GE. Diagnosis and treatment of hind limb muscle strain injuries
in 22 dogs. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2005; 18: 247–253.
202 Bruce RB, Turnbull LB, Newman JH. Metabolism of methocarbamol in the rat,
dog, and human. J Pharm Sci 1971; 60: 104–106.
203 Cunningham FE, Fisher JH, Bevelle C, et al. The pharmacokinetics of methocar-
bamol in the Thoroughbred race horse. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1992; 15: 96–100.
204 Rumpler MJ, Colahan P, Sams RA. The pharmacokinetics of methocarbamol and
guaifenesin after single intravenous and multiple-dose oral administration of
methocarbamol in the horse. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2014; 37: 25–34.
205 Knych HK, Stanley SD, Seminoff KN, et al. Pharmacokinetics of methocarbamol
and phenylbutazone in exercised Thoroughbred horses. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
2016; 39: 469–477.
206 Dymond NL, Swift IM. Permethrin toxicity in cats: a retrospective study of 20
cases. Aust Vet J 2008; 86: 219–223.
207 Brioschi FA, Di Cesare F, Gioeni D, et al. Oral transmucosal cannabidiol oil for-
mulation as part of a multimodal analgesic regimen: effects on pain relief and
quality of life improvement in dogs affected by spontaneous osteoarthritis.
Animals (Basel) 2020; 10: E1505.
208 Hall JA, Solie TN, Seim HB, et al. Effect of metoclopramide on fed- state gastric
myoelectric and motor activity in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1996; 57: 1616–1622.
209 Wilson DV, Evans AT, Mauer WA. Influence of metoclopramide on gastroesopha-
geal reflux in anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 2006; 67: 26–31.
210 Husnik R, Gaschen FP, Fletcher JM, et al. Ultrasonographic assessment of the
effect of metoclopramide, erythromycin, and exenatide on solid-phase gastric
emptying in healthy cats. J Vet Intern Med 2020; 34: 1440–1446.
211 Strombeck DR, Harrold D. Effect of gastrin, histamine, serotonin, and adrenergic
amines on gastroesophageal sphincter pressure in the dog. Am J Vet Res 1985; 46:
1684–1690.
212 Punto L, Mokka RE, Kairaluoma MI, et al. Effect of metoclopramide on the lower
oesophageal sphincter. An experimental study in dogs. Med Biol 1977; 55: 66–68.
213 Orihata M, Sarna SK. Contractile mechanisms of action of gastroprokinetic
agents: cisapride, metoclopramide, and domperidone. Am J Physiol 1994; 266:
G665–G676.
214 Kempf J, Lewis F, Reusch CE, et al. High-resolution manometric evaluation of the
effects of cisapride and metoclopramide hydrochloride administered orally on
lower esophageal sphincter pressure in awake dogs. Am J Vet Res 2014; 75:
361–366.
215 Milovancev M, Townsend K, Spina J, et al. Effect of metoclopramide on the inci-
dence of early postoperative aspiration pneumonia in dogs with acquired idio-
pathic laryngeal paralysis. Vet Surg 2016; 45: 577–581.
216 El-Khodery SA, Sato M. Ultrasonographic assessment of the reticular motility in
cows after administration of different doses of metoclopramide and neostigmine.
Vet Res Commun 2008; 32: 473–480.
217 Watcha MF, White PF. Postoperative nausea and vomiting. Its etiology, treatment,
and prevention. Anesthesiology 1992; 77: 162–184.
218 Piana F, Minghella E. Extrapyramidal signs following a single intravenous dose
of metoclopramide in an English Bulldog [letter]. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48:
977–978.
219 Bakke OM, Segura J. The absorption and elimination of metoclopramide in three
animal species. J Pharm Pharmacol 1976; 28: 32–39.
220 Kohn CW, Muir WW. Selected aspects of the clinical pharmacology of visceral
analgesics and gut motility modifying drugs in the horse. J Vet Intern Med 1988; 2:
85–91.
221 Sojka JE, Adams SB, Lamar CH, et al. Effect of butorphanol, pentazocine, meperi-
dine, or metoclopramide on intestinal motility in female ponies. Am J Vet Res
1988; 49: 527–529.
222 Wittek T, Constable PD. Assessment of the effects of erythromycin, neostigmine,
and metoclopramide on abomasal motility and emptying rate in calves. Am J Vet
Res 2005; 66: 545–552.
223 Butler A, Hill JM, Ireland SJ, et al. Pharmacological properties of GR38032F, a
novel antagonist at 5-HT3 receptors. Br J Pharmacol 1988; 94: 397–412.
224 Sagrada A, Turconi M, Bonali P, et al. Antiemetic activity of the new 5-HT3 antag-
onist DAU 6215 in animal models of cancer chemotherapy and radiation. Cancer
Chemother Pharmacol 1991; 28: 470–474.
225 Fukui H, Yamamoto M, Sato S. Vagal afferent fibers and peripheral 5-HT3 recep-
tors mediate cisplatin-induced emesis in dogs. Jpn J Pharmacol 1992; 59:
221–226.
226 Miller AD, Nonaka S. Mechanisms of vomiting induced by serotonin-3 receptor
agonists in the cat: effect of vagotomy, splanchnicectomy or area postrema lesion.
J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1992; 260: 509–517.
227 Ogilvie GK. Dolasetron: a new option for nausea and vomiting. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 2000; 36: 481–483.
228 Yalcin E, Keser GO. Comparative efficacy of metoclopramide, ondansetron and
maropitant in preventing parvoviral enteritis-induced emesis in dogs. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2017; 40: 599–603.
229 Sullivan LA, Lenberg JP, Boscan P, et al. Assessing the efficacy of maropitant ver-
sus ondansetron in the treatment of dogs with parvoviral enteritis. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 2018; 54: 338–343.
230 Kopke MA, Wightman P, Ruaux CG. Obstructive sleep apnea in a Chihuahua suc-
cessfully managed with ondansetron. Clin Case Rep 2019; 7: 872–876.
231 Burke JE, Hess RS, Silverstein DC. Effectiveness of orally administered maropitant
and ondansetron in preventing preoperative emesis and nausea in healthy dogs
premedicated with a combination of hydromorphone, acepromazine, and glyco-
pyrrolate. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2021; 260: S40–S45.
232 Zarate E, Watcha MF, White PF, et al. A comparison of the costs and efficacy of
ondansetron versus dolasetron for antiemetic prophylaxis. Anesth Analg 2000; 90:
1352–1358.
233 United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Drug Safety Communication:
Abnormal Heart Rhythms Associated with Use of Anzemet (Dolasetron
Mesylate). 2010. www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/fda-drug-safety-
communication-abnormal-heart-rhythms-associated-use-anzemet-dolasetron-
mesylate (accessed September 2022).
234 Herndon AK, Quimby JM, Sieberg LG, et al. Preliminary pharmacokinetics of
intravenous and subcutaneous dolasetron and pharmacodynamics of subcutane-
ous dolasetron in healthy cats. J Feline Med Surg 2018; 20: 721–727.
235 Quimby JM, Lake RC, Hansen RJ, et al. Oral, subcutaneous, and intravenous
pharmacokinetics of ondansetron in healthy cats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2014; 37:
348–353.
236 Baek IH, Lee BY, Kang J, et al. Pharmacokinetic modeling and Monte Carlo simu-
lation of ondansetron following oral administration in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
2015; 38: 199–202.
237 Fitzpatrick RL, Wittenburg LA, Hansen RJ, et al. Limited sampling pharmacokinet-
ics of subcutaneous ondansetron in healthy geriatric cats, cats with chronic kidney
disease, and cats with liver disease. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2016; 39: 350–355.
238 Dow J, Francesco GF, Berg C. Comparison of the pharmacokinetics of dolasetron
and its major active metabolite, reduced dolasetron, in dog. J Pharm Sci 1996; 85:
685–689.
239 Somers GI, Harris AJ, Bayliss MK, et al. The metabolism of the 5HT3 antagonists
ondansetron, alosetron and GR87442 I: a comparison of in vitro and in vivo
metabolism and in vitro enzyme kinetics in rat, dog and human hepatocytes,
microsomes and recombinant human enzymes. Xenobiotica 2007; 37: 832–854.
240 Santos LC, Ludders JW, Erb HN, et al. A randomized, blinded, controlled trial of
the antiemetic effect of ondansetron on dexmedetomidine-induced emesis in cats.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38: 320–327.
241 Chandler JC, Monnet E, Staatz AJ. Comparison of acute hemodynamic effects of
lidocaine and procainamide for postoperative ventricular arrhythmias in dogs.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2006; 42: 262–268.
242 Fries R, Saunders AB. Use of procainamide for conversion of acute onset AF fol-
lowing pericardiocentesis in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2012; 48: 429–433.
243 Chou CC, Zhou S, Miyauchi Y, et al. Effects of procainamide on electrical activity
in thoracic veins and atria in canine model of sustained atrial fibrillation.
Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2004; 286: H1936–H1945.
244 Caro-Vadillo A, Garcia-Guasch L, Carreton E, et al. Arrhythmogenic right ven-
tricular cardiomyopathy in boxer dogs: a retrospective study of survival. Vet Rec
2013; 172: 268.
245 Meurs KM, Spier AW, Wright NA, et al. Comparison of the effects of four antiar-
rhythmic treatments for familial ventricular arrhythmias in Boxers. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2002; 221: 522–527.
246 Wijnberg ID, Ververs FF. Phenytoin sodium as a treatment for ventricular dys-
rhythmia in horses. J Vet Intern Med 2004; 18: 350–353.
247 Barrell EA, Fiorenza LR, Perkins GA, et al. ECG of the Month. Persistent atrial
tachycardia after cardioversion in a horse. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2015; 247: 751–753.
248 Papich MG, Davis LE, Davis CA. Procainamide in the dog: antiarrhythmic plasma
concentrations after intravenous administration. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1986; 9:
359–369.
249 Ellis EJ, Ravis WR, Malloy M, et al. The pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynam-
ics of procainamide in horses after intravenous administration. J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 1994; 17: 265–270.

-- 458 of 1450 --

Chapter 25: Anesthetic and Analgesic Adjunctive Drugs 	443
250 Thomason JD, Boothe D, KuKanich B, et al. Pharmacokinetic evaluation of a
sustained-release compounded procainamide preparation after 24-h (acute)
administration in normal dogs. J Vet Cardiol 2019; 24: 58–63.
251 Forstermann U, Sessa WC. Nitric oxide synthases: regulation and function. Eur
Heart J 2012; 33: 829–837, 837a.
252 Ginn JA, Bentley E, Stepien RL. Systemic hypertension and hypertensive retinopa-
thy following PPA overdose in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2013; 49: 46–53.
253 Raisis AL, Mosing M, Hosgood GL, et al. The use of electrical impedance tomog-
raphy (EIT) to evaluate pulse rate in anaesthetised horses. Vet J 2021; 273: 105694.
254 Kurita T, Kawashima S, Morita K, et al. Assessment of cerebral and renal autoregu-
lation using near-infrared spectroscopy under normal, hypovolaemic and post-
fluid resuscitation conditions in a swine model: an observational study. Eur J
Anaesthesiol 2019; 36: 531–540.
255 Wilson KA, Raisis AL, Drynan EA, et al. Agreement between invasive blood pres-
sure measured centrally and peripherally in anaesthetized horses. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2018; 45: 467–476.
256 Moore JC, Bartos JA, Matsuura TR, et al. The future is now: neuroprotection dur-
ing cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Curr Opin Crit Care 2017; 23: 215–222.
257 Kelm M. Nitric oxide metabolism and breakdown. Biochim Biophys Acta 1999;
1411: 273–289.
258 Thomas C, Svehla L, Moffett BS. Sodium-nitroprusside-induced cyanide toxicity
in pediatric patients. Expert Opin Drug Saf 2009; 8: 599–602.
259 Michenfelder JD. Cyanide release from sodium nitroprusside in the dog.
Anesthesiology 1977; 46: 196–201.
260 Michenfelder JD, Tinker JH. Cyanide toxicity and thiosulfate protection during
chronic administration of sodium nitroprusside in the dog: correlation with a
human case. Anesthesiology 1977; 47: 441–448.
261 Ivankovich AD, Braverman B, Shulman M, et al. Prevention of nitroprusside tox-
icity with thiosulfate in dogs. Anesth Analg 1982; 61: 120–126.
262 Stahl SM. Mechanism of action of trazodone: a multifunctional drug. CNS Spectr
2009; 14: 536–546.
263 Erickson A, Harbin K, MacPherson J, et al. A review of pre-appointment medica-
tions to reduce fear and anxiety in dogs and cats at veterinary visits. Can Vet J
2021; 62: 952–960.
264 Indrawirawan Y, McAlees T. Tramadol toxicity in a cat: case report and literature
review of serotonin syndrome. J Feline Med Surg 2014; 16: 572–578.
265 Sinn L. Advances in behavioral psychopharmacology. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 2018; 48: 457–471.
266 Orlando JM, Case BC, Thomson AE, et al. Use of oral trazodone for sedation in
cats: a pilot study. J Feline Med Surg 2016; 18: 476–482.
267 Stevens BJ, Frantz EM, Orlando JM, et al. Efficacy of a single dose of trazodone
hydrochloride given to cats prior to veterinary visits to reduce signs of transport-
and examination-related anxiety. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2016; 249: 202–207.
268 Gruen ME, Roe SC, Griffith EH, et al. The use of trazodone to facilitate calm
behavior after elective orthopedic surgery in dogs: results and lessons learned
from a clinical trial. J Vet Behav 2017; 22: 41–45.
269 Kim SA, Borchardt MR, Lee K, et al. Effects of trazodone on behavioral and physi-
ological signs of stress in dogs during veterinary visits: a randomized double-blind
placebo-controlled crossover clinical trial. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2022; 260: 876–883.
270 Gruen ME, Roe SC, Griffith E, et al. Use of trazodone to facilitate postsurgical
confinement in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2014; 245: 296–301.
271 Gilbert-Gregory SE, Stull JW, Rice MR, et al. Effects of trazodone on behavioral
signs of stress in hospitalized dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2016; 249: 1281–1291.
272 Moss AL, Hritz RL, Hector RC, et al. Investigation of the effects of orally adminis-
tered trazodone on intraocular pressure, pupil diameter, physical examination
variables, and sedation level in healthy equids. Am J Vet Res 2021; 82: 138–143.
273 Davis JL, Schirmer J, Medlin E. Pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics and clini-
cal use of trazodone and its active metabolite m-chlorophenylpiperazine in the
horse. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2018; 41: 393–401.
274 Desmarchelier MR, Beaudry F, Ferrell ST, et al. Determination of the pharmacoki-
netics of a single oral dose of trazodone and its effect on the activity level of
domestic pigeons (Columba livia). Am J Vet Res 2019; 80: 102–109.
275 Walters K, Gittel C, Brearley JC. The effect of preanaesthetic oral trazodone
hydrochloride on the induction dose of propofol: a preliminary retrospective
study. Vet Anaesth Analg 2022: S1467–S2987(22)00073.
276 Murphy LA, Barletta M, Graham LF, et al. Effects of acepromazine and trazodone on
anesthetic induction dose of propofol and cardiovascular variables in dogs undergoing
general anesthesia for orthopedic surgery. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2017; 250: 408–416.
277 Hoffman EA, Aarnes TK, Ricco Pereira CH, et al. Effect of oral trazodone on the
minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018;
45: 754–759.
278 Knych HK, Mama KR, Steffey EP, et al. Pharmacokinetics and selected pharmaco-
dynamics of trazodone following intravenous and oral administration to horses
undergoing fitness training. Am J Vet Res 2017; 78: 1182–1192.
279 Prud’homme Y, Ferrell ST, Beaudry F, et al. Pharmacokinetics and clinical effects
of a single oral dose of trazodone in the domestic goat (Capra hircus) as a model
for wild ruminants. J Zoo Wildl Med 2021; 51: 896–904.
280 Jay AR, Krotscheck U, Parsley E, et al. Pharmacokinetics, bioavailability, and
hemodynamic effects of trazodone after intravenous and oral administration of a
single dose to dogs. Am J Vet Res 2013; 74: 1450–1456.
281 O’Donnell EM, Press SA, Karriker MJ, et al. Pharmacokinetics and efficacy of
trazodone following rectal administration of a single dose to healthy dogs. Am J
Vet Res 2020; 81: 739–746.
282 Arnold A, Davis A, Wismer T, et al. Suspected hepatotoxicity secondary to trazo-
done therapy in a dog. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2021; 31: 112–116.
283 Gomoll AW, Byrne JE. Trazodone and imipramine: comparative effects on canine
cardiac conduction. Eur J Pharmacol 1979; 57: 335–342.
284 Fries RC, Kadotani S, Vitt JP, et al. Effects of oral trazodone on echocardio-
graphic and hemodynamic variables in healthy cats. J Feline Med Surg 2019; 21:
1080–1085.
285 Hofmeister EH, Brainard BM, Egger CM, et al. Prognostic indicators for dogs and
cats with cardiopulmonary arrest treated by cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscita-
tion at a university teaching hospital. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2009; 235: 50–57.
286 Dickey EJ, McKenzie H, Johnson A, et al. Use of pressor therapy in 34 hypotensive
critically ill neonatal foals. Aust Vet J 2010; 88: 472–477.
287 Buckley GJ, Rozanski EA, Rush JE. Randomized, blinded comparison of epineph-
rine and vasopressin for treatment of naturally occurring cardiopulmonary arrest
in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2011; 25: 1334–1340.
288 Biondi-Zoccai GG, Abbate A, Parisi Q, et al. Is vasopressin superior to adrenaline
or placebo in the management of cardiac arrest? A meta-analysis. Resuscitation
2003; 59: 221–224.
289 Koshimizu TA, Nakamura K, Egashira N, et al. Vasopressin V1a and V1b recep-
tors: from molecules to physiological systems. Physiol Rev 2012; 92: 1813–1864.
290 Silverstein DC, Beer KA. Controversies regarding choice of vasopressor therapy
for management of septic shock in animals. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio)
2015; 25: 48–54.
291 Schott HC. Water homeostasis and diabetes insipidus in horses. Vet Clin North Am
Equine Pract 2011; 27: 175–195.
292 Kranenburg LC, Thelen MH, Westermann CM, et al. Use of desmopressin eye
drops in the treatment of equine congenital central diabetes insipidus. Vet Rec
2010; 167: 790–791.
293 Simpson CJ, Mansfield CS, Milne ME, et al. Central diabetes insipidus in a cat
with central nervous system B cell lymphoma. J Feline Med Surg 2011; 13:
787–792.
294 Mansell PD, Parry BW. Changes in factor VIII: coagulant activity and von
Willebrand factor antigen concentration after subcutaneous injection of desmo-
pressin in dogs with mild hemophilia A. J Vet Intern Med 1991; 5: 191–194.
295 Callan MB, Giger U. Effect of desmopressin acetate administration on primary
hemostasis in Doberman Pinschers with type-1 von Willebrand disease as
assessed by a point-of-care instrument. Am J Vet Res 2002; 63: 1700–1706.
296 Hara Y, Masuda H, Taoda T, et al. Prophylactic efficacy of desmopressin acetate
for diabetes insipidus after hypophysectomy in the dog. J Vet Med Sci 2003; 65:
17–22.
297 Panchal AR, Bartos JA, Cabañas JG, et al. Part 3: adult basic and advanced life
support: 2020 American Heart Association Guidelines for cardiopulmonary
resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care. Circulation 2020; 142:
S366–S468.
298 Fox AW, May RE, Mitch WE. Comparison of peptide and nonpeptide receptor-
mediated responses in rat tail artery. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 1992; 20: 282–289.
299 Wenzel V, Lindner KH, Prengel AW, et al. Endobronchial vasopressin improves
survival during cardiopulmonary resuscitation in pigs. Anesthesiology 1997; 86:
1375–1381.
300 Reassessment Campaign on Veterinary Resuscitation (RECOVER). 2012.
Available at: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/toc/14764431/2012/22/s1
301 Morales D, Madigan J, Cullinane S, et al. Reversal by vasopressin of intractable
hypotension in the late phase of hemorrhagic shock. Circulation 1999; 100:
226–229.
302 Cohn SM. Potential benefit of vasopressin in resuscitation of hemorrhagic shock.
J Trauma 2007; 62: S56–S57.
303 Russell JA. Bench-to- bedside review: vasopressin in the management of septic
shock. Crit Care 2011; 15: 226.
304 Murphy KM, Rishniw M, Silverstein DC. Use of vasopressors for treatment of
vasodilatory hypotension in dogs and cats by Diplomates of the American College
of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio)
2022; 32: 714–722.
305 Valverde A, Giguère S, Sanchez LC, et al. Effects of dobutamine, norepinephrine,
and vasopressin on cardiovascular function in anesthetized neonatal foals with
induced hypotension. Am J Vet Res 2006; 67: 1730–1737.

-- 459 of 1450 --

444 	Section 3: Pharmacology
306 Kraus KH, Turrentine MA, Jergens AE, et al. Effect of desmopressin acetate on
bleeding times and plasma von Willebrand factor in Doberman pinscher dogs
with von Willebrand’s disease. Vet Surg 1989; 18: 103–109.
307 Bebar KN, Sinnott V, Brooks MB. Recurrent hemorrhage caused by type 3 von
Willebrand disease in a domestic long-haired cat. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San
Antonio) 2014; 24: 326–331.
308 Fenn J, Kenny PJ, Scudder CJ, et al. Efficacy of hypophysectomy for the treatment
of hypersomatotropism-induced diabetes mellitus in 68 cats. J Vet Intern Med
2021; 35: 823–833.
309 Brooks MB, Catafalmo JL. Platelet disorders and von Willebrand disease. In:
Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, eds. Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 6th edn.
St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders, 2005: 1918–1929.
310 Di Mauro FM, Holowaychuk MK. Intravenous administration of desmopressin
acetate to reverse acetylsalicylic acid-induced coagulopathy in three dogs. J Vet
Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2013; 23: 455–458.
311 Sakai M, Watari T, Miura T, et al. Effects of DDAVP administrated subcutaneously
in dogs with aspirin-induced platelet dysfunction and hemostatic impairment due
to chronic liver diseases. J Vet Med Sci 2003; 65: 83–86.
312 Jagodich TA, Holowaychuk MK. Transfusion practice in dogs and cats: an
Internet-based survey. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2016; 26: 360–372.
313 Grunert RR, McGahen JW, Davies WL. The in vivo antiviral activity of
1-adamantanamine (amantadine). I. Prophylactic and therapeutic activity against
influenza viruses. Virology 1965; 26: 262–269.
314 Lee SM, Yen HL. Targeting the host or the virus: current and novel concepts for anti-
viral approaches against influenza virus infection. Antiviral Res 2012; 96: 391–404.
315 Hubsher G, Haider M, Okun MS. Amantadine: the journey from fighting flu to
treating Parkinson disease. Neurology 2012; 78: 1096–1099.
316 Schwab RS, England AC, Poskanzer DC, et al. Amantadine in the treatment of
Parkinson’s disease. JAMA 1969; 208: 1168–1170.
317 Wheaton P, Mathias JL, Vink R. Impact of early pharmacological treatment on
cognitive and behavioral outcome after traumatic brain injury in adults: a meta-
analysis. J Clin Psychopharmacol 2009; 29: 468–477.
318 Frenette AJ, Kanji S, Rees L, et al. Efficacy and safety of dopamine agonists in
traumatic brain injury: a systematic review of randomized controlled trials.
J Neurotrauma 2012; 29: 1–18.
319 Saniova B, Drobny M, Kneslova L, et al. The outcome of patients with severe head
injuries treated with amantadine sulphate. J Neural Transm 2004; 111: 511–514.
320 Giacino JT, Whyte J, Bagiella E, et al. Placebo- controlled trial of amantadine for
severe traumatic brain injury. N Engl J Med 2012; 366: 819–826.
321 Wang T, Huang XJ, Van KC, et al. Amantadine improves cognitive outcome and
increases neuronal survival after fluid percussion traumatic brain injury in rats.
J Neurotrauma 2014; 31: 370–377.
322 Ma HM, Zafonte RD. Amantadine and memantine: a comprehensive review for
acquired brain injury. Brain Inj 2020; 34: 299–315.
323 Robertson SA. Managing pain in feline patients. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 2008; 38: 1267–1290, vi.
324 Lascelles BD, Gaynor JS, Smith ES, et al. Amantadine in a multimodal analgesic
regimen for alleviation of refractory osteoarthritis pain in dogs. J Vet Intern Med
2008; 22: 53–59.
325 Suzuki M. Role of N-methyl-D- aspartate receptor antagonists in postoperative
pain management. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2009; 22: 618–622.
326 Eisenberg E, Pud D. Can patients with chronic neuropathic pain be cured by acute
administration of the NMDA receptor antagonist amantadine? Pain 1998; 74:
337–339.
327 Collins S, Sigtermans MJ, Dahan A, et al. NMDA receptor antagonists for the
treatment of neuropathic pain. Pain Med 2010; 11: 1726–1742.
328 Pozzi A, Muir WW, Traverso F. Prevention of central sensitization and pain
by N- methyl-D- aspartate receptor antagonists. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2006; 228:
53–60.
329 Norkus C, Rankin D, Warner M, et al. Pharmacokinetics of oral amantadine in
greyhound dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2015; 38: 305–308.
330 Madden M, Gurney M, Bright S. Amantadine, an N-Methyl-D- Aspartate antago-
nist, for treatment of chronic neuropathic pain in a dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 2014;
41: 440–441.
331 Shipley H, Flynn K, Tucker L, et al. Owner evaluation of quality of life and mobil-
ity in osteoarthritic cats treated with amantadine or placebo. J Feline Med Surg
2021; 23: 568–574.
332 Siao KT, Pypendop BH, Stanley SD, et al. Pharmacokinetics of amantadine in cats.
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2011; 34: 599–604.
333 Siao KT, Pypendop BH, Escobar A, et al. Effect of amantadine on oxymorphone-
induced thermal antinociception in cats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2012; 35: 169–174.
334 KuKanich B. Outpatient oral analgesics in dogs and cats beyond nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs: an evidence-based approach. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 2013; 43: 1109–1125.
335 Gardner BR, Rourke NL. Multimodal analgesia in a Southern White Rhinoceros
(Ceratotherium simum) with pentosan polysulfate, gabapentin, amantadine and
phenylbutazone to manage chronic pain. Aust Vet J 2021; 99: 86–88.
336 Berg KJ, Sanchez-Migallon Guzman D, Knych HK, et al. Pharmacokinetics of
amantadine after oral administration of single and multiple doses to orange-
winged Amazon parrots (Amazona amazonica). Am J Vet Res 2020; 81: 651–655.
337 Bleidner WE, Harmon JB, Hewes WE, et al. Absorption, distribution and excre-
tion of amantadine hydrochloride. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1965; 150: 484–490.
338 Chen YW, Chu CC, Chen YC, et al. The local anesthetic effect of memantine on
infiltrative cutaneous analgesia in the rat. Anesth Analg 2011; 113: 191–195.
339 Crowell-Davis SL, Poggiagliolmi S. Understanding behavior: serotonin syndrome.
Compend Contin Educ Vet 2008; 30: 490–493.
340 Mohammad-Zadeh LF, Moses L, Gwaltney-Brant SM. Serotonin: a review. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2008; 31: 187–199.
341 Pugh CM, Sweeney JT, Bloch CP, et al. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor
(SSRI) toxicosis in cats: 33 cases (2004–2010). J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio)
2013; 23: 565–570.
342 Thomas DE, Lee JA, Hovda LR. Retrospective evaluation of toxicosis from
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor antidepressants: 313 dogs (2005–2010).
J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2012; 22: 674–681.
343 Kitson R, Carr B. Tramadol and severe serotonin syndrome. Anaesthesia 2005; 60:
934–935.
344 Gillman PK. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors, opioid analgesics and serotonin
toxicity. Br J Anaesth 2005; 95: 434–441.
345 Chen YW, Shieh JP, Chen YC, et al. Cutaneous analgesia after subcutaneous
injection of memantine and amantadine and their systemic toxicity in rats.
Eur J Pharmacol 2012; 693: 25–30.
346 Gray A. Veterinary use of amantadine under threat. Vet Rec 2022; 191: 11.
347 Overall KL, Dunham AE. Clinical features and outcome in dogs and cats with
obsessive-compulsive disorder: 126 cases (1989–2000). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2002;
221: 1445–1452.
348 Kraijer M, Fink-Gremmels J, Nickel RF. The short-term clinical efficacy of ami-
triptyline in the management of idiopathic feline lower urinary tract disease: a
controlled clinical study. J Feline Med Surg 2003; 5: 191–196.
349 Kruger JM, Conway TS, Kaneene JB, et al. Randomized controlled trial of the
efficacy of short-term amitriptyline administration for treatment of acute, nonob-
structive, idiopathic lower urinary tract disease in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2003;
222: 749–758.
350 Cashmore RG, Harcourt-Brown TR, Freeman PM, et al. Clinical diagnosis and
treatment of suspected neuropathic pain in three dogs. Aust Vet J 2009; 87: 45–50.
351 O’Hagan BJ. Neuropathic pain in a cat post-amputation. Aust Vet J 2006; 84:
83–86.
352 Amengual Batle P, Rusbridge C, Nuttall T, et al. Feline hyperaesthesia syndrome
with self-trauma to the tail: retrospective study of seven cases and proposal for an
integrated multidisciplinary diagnostic approach. J Feline Med Surg 2019; 21:
178–185.
353 Wang GK, Russell C, Wang SY. State-dependent block of voltage-gated Na+
channels by amitriptyline via the local anesthetic receptor and its implication for
neuropathic pain. Pain 2004; 110: 166–174.
354 Yaksh TL, Tozier N, Horais KA, et al. Toxicology profile of N-methyl-D-aspartate
antagonists delivered by intrathecal infusion in the canine model. Anesthesiology
2008; 108: 938–949.
355 Irman-Florjanc T, Stanovnik L. Tricyclic antidepressants change plasma histamine
kinetics after its secretion induced by compound 48/80 in the rat. Inflamm Res
1998; 47(Suppl 1): S26–S27.
356 Bohren Y, Karavelic D, Tessier LH, et al. Mu-opioid receptors are not necessary for
nortriptyline treatment of neuropathic allodynia. Eur J Pain 2010; 14: 700–704.
357 Chew DJ, Buffington CA, Kendall MS, et al. Amitriptyline treatment for severe
recurrent idiopathic cystitis in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1998; 213: 1282–1286.
358 Monteiro BP, de Lorimier LP, Moreau M, et al. Pain characterization and response
to palliative care in dogs with naturally-occurring appendicular osteosarcoma: an
open label clinical trial. PLoS ONE 2018; 13: e0207200.
359 Rusbridge C, Jeffery ND. Pathophysiology and treatment of neuropathic pain
associated with syringomyelia. Vet J 2008; 175: 164–172.
360 Newton SA, Knottenbelt DC, Eldridge PR. Headshaking in horses: possible aeti-
opathogenesis suggested by the results of diagnostic tests and several treatment
regimes used in 20 cases. Equine Vet J 2000; 32: 208–216.
361 Hucker HB, Balletto AJ, Demetriades J, et al. Urinary metabolites of amitriptyline
in the dog. Drug Metab Dispos 1977; 5: 132–142.
362 Dworkin RH, O’Connor AB, Backonja M, et al. Pharmacologic management of
neuropathic pain: evidence-based recommendations. Pain 2007; 132: 237–251.
363 Mealey KL, Peck KE, Bennett BS, et al. Systemic absorption of amitriptyline and
buspirone after oral and transdermal administration to healthy cats. J Vet Intern
Med 2004; 18: 43–46.

-- 460 of 1450 --

Chapter 25: Anesthetic and Analgesic Adjunctive Drugs 	445
364 Recchi L, Alvariza S, Benech A, et al. Pharmacokinetic study of oral amitriptyline
in horses. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2020; 43: 381–384.
365 Norkus C, Rankin D, KuKanich B. Evaluation of the pharmacokinetics of oral
amitriptyline and its active metabolite nortriptyline in fed and fasted Greyhound
dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2015; 38: 619–622.
366 Kukes VG, Kondratenko SN, Savelyeva MI, et al. Experimental and clinical phar-
macokinetics of amitriptyline: comparative analysis. Bull Exp Biol Med 2009; 147:
434–437.
367 Nattel S, Keable H, Sasyniuk BI. Experimental amitriptyline intoxication: electro-
physiologic manifestations and management. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 1984; 6:
83–89.
368 Kwok YH, Mitchelson F. Comparison of the antimuscarinic activity of mianserin
and amitriptyline in the cat superior cervical ganglion. Naunyn Schmiedebergs
Arch Pharmacol 1981; 316: 161–164.
369 Tsujikawa S, Matsuura T, Hori K, et al. Superior efficacy of lipid emulsion infusion
over serum alkalinization in reversing amitriptyline-induced cardiotoxicity in
guinea pig. Anesth Analg 2018; 126: 1159–1169.
370 Reich MR, Ohad DG, Overall KL, et al. Electrocardiographic assessment of
antianxiety medication in dogs and correlation with serum drug concentration. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 2000; 216: 1571–1575.
371 Kogan L, Schoenfeld-Tacher R, Hellyer P, et al. US veterinarians’ knowledge, expe-
rience, and perception regarding the use of cannabidiol for canine medical condi-
tions. Front Vet Sci 2018; 5: 338.
372 Kogan LR, Hellyer PW, Silcox S, et al. Canadian dog owners’ use and perceptions
of cannabis products. Can Vet J 2019; 60: 749–755.
373 Lima TM, Santiago NR, Alves ECR, et al. Use of cannabis in the treatment of ani-
mals: a systematic review of randomized clinical trials. Anim Health Res Rev 2022;
23: 25–38.
374 R C Coelho MP, de O P Leme F, A Moreira F, et al. Current review of hemp-based
medicines in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2021; 44: 870–882.
375 Abramo F, Campora L, Albanese F, et al. Increased levels of palmitoylethanola-
mide and other bioactive lipid mediators and enhanced local mast cell prolifera-
tion in canine atopic dermatitis. BMC Vet Res 2014; 10: 21.
376 Valastro C, Campanile D, Marinaro M, et al. Characterization of endocannabi-
noids and related acylethanolamides in the synovial fluid of dogs with osteoarthri-
tis: a pilot study. BMC Vet Res 2017; 13: 309.
377 Morrow L, Belshaw Z. Does the addition of cannabidiol alongside current drug
treatments reduce pain in dogs with osteoarthritis? Vet Rec 2020; 186: 493–494.
378 Gamble LJ, Boesch JM, Frye CW, et al. Pharmacokinetics, safety, and clinical effi-
cacy of cannabidiol treatment in osteoarthritic dogs. Front Vet Sci 2018; 5: 165.
379 Verrico CD, Wesson S, Konduri V, et al. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled study of daily cannabidiol for the treatment of canine osteoarthritis
pain. Pain 2020; 161: 2191–2202.
380 Mejia S, Duerr FM, Griffenhagen G, et al. Evaluation of the effect of cannabidiol
on naturally occurring osteoarthritis-associated pain: a pilot study in dogs. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 2021; 57: 81–90.
381 Loewinger M, Wakshlag JJ, Bowden D, et al. The effect of a mixed cannabidiol and
cannabidiolic acid based oil on client-owned dogs with atopic dermatitis. Vet
Dermatol 2022; 33: 329–e77.
382 McGrath S, Bartner LR, Rao S, et al. Randomized blinded controlled clinical trial
to assess the effect of oral cannabidiol administration in addition to conventional
antiepileptic treatment on seizure frequency in dogs with intractable idiopathic
epilepsy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2019; 254: 1301–1308.
383 Corsetti S, Borruso S, Malandrucco L, et al. Cannabis sativa L. may reduce
aggressive behaviour towards humans in shelter dogs. Sci Rep 2021; 11: 2773.
384 Vaughn DM, Paulionis LJ, Kulpa JE. Randomized, placebo-controlled, 28-day
safety and pharmacokinetics evaluation of repeated oral cannabidiol administration
in healthy dogs. Am J Vet Res 2021; 82: 405–416.
385 Schaefer N, Wojtyniak JG, Kettner M, et al. Pharmacokinetics of (synthetic) can-
nabinoids in pigs and their relevance for clinical and forensic toxicology. Toxicol
Lett 2016; 253: 7–16.
386 Williams MR, Holbrook TC, Maxwell L, et al. Pharmacokinetic evaluation of a
cannabidiol supplement in horses. J Equine Vet Sci 2022; 110: 103842.
387 Deabold KA, Schwark WS, Wolf L, et al. Single-dose pharmacokinetics and pre-
liminary safety assessment with use of CBD-rich hemp nutraceutical in healthy
dogs and cats. Animals (Basel) 2019; 9: E832.
388 Ryan D, McKemie DS, Kass PH, et al. Pharmacokinetics and effects on arachi-
donic acid metabolism of low doses of cannabidiol following oral administration
to horses. Drug Test Anal 2021; 13: 1305–1317.
389 Polidoro D, Temmerman R, Devreese M, et al. Pharmacokinetics of cannabidiol
following intranasal, intrarectal, and oral administration in healthy dogs. Front
Vet Sci 2022; 9: 899940.
390 Spittler AP, Helbling JE, McGrath S, et al. Plasma and joint tissue pharmacokinet-
ics of two doses of oral cannabidiol oil in guinea pigs (Cavia porcellus). J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2021; 44: 967–974.
391 Bartner LR, McGrath S, Rao S, et al. Pharmacokinetics of cannabidiol adminis-
tered by 3 delivery methods at 2 different dosages to healthy dogs. Can J Vet Res
2018; 82: 178–183.
392 Chicoine A, Illing K, Vuong S, et al. Pharmacokinetic and safety evaluation of
various oral doses of a novel 1:20 THC:CBD cannabis herbal extract in dogs. Front
Vet Sci 2020; 7: 583404.
393 Samara E, Bialer M, Mechoulam R. Pharmacokinetics of cannabidiol in dogs.
Drug Metab Dispos 1988; 16: 469–472.
394 Brutlag A, Hommerding H. Toxicology of marijuana, synthetic cannabinoids,
and cannabidiol in dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2018; 48:
1087–1102.
395 De Briyne N, Holmes D, Sandler I, et al. Cannabis, cannabidiol oils and
tetrahydrocannabinol-what do veterinarians need to know. Animals (Basel) 2021;
11: 892.
396 Vaughn D, Kulpa J, Paulionis L. Preliminary investigation of the safety of escalat-
ing cannabinoid doses in healthy dogs. Front Vet Sci 2020; 7: 51.
397 Wakshlag JJ, Schwark WS, Deabold KA, et al. Pharmacokinetics of cannabidiol,
cannabidiolic acid, Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol, tetrahydrocannabinolic acid and
related metabolites in canine serum after dosing with three oral forms of hemp
extract. Front Vet Sci 2020; 7: 505.
398 Meola SD, Tearney CC, Haas SA, et al. Evaluation of trends in marijuana toxicosis
in dogs living in a state with legalized medical marijuana: 125 dogs (2005–2010).
J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2012; 22: 690–696.
399 Amissah RQ, Vogt NA, Chen C, et al. Prevalence and characteristics of cannabis-
induced toxicoses in pets: results from a survey of veterinarians in North America.
PLoS ONE 2022; 17: e0261909.
400 Thompson GR, Rosenkrantz H, Schaeppi UH, et al. Comparison of acute oral
toxicity of cannabinoids in rats, dogs and monkeys. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 1973;
25: 363–372.
401 Kulpa JE, Paulionis LJ, Eglit GM, et al. Safety and tolerability of escalating
cannabinoid doses in healthy cats. J Feline Med Surg 2021; 23: 1162–1175.
402 Abbass K. Efficacy of gabapentin for treatment of adults with phantom limb pain.
Ann Pharmacother 2012; 46: 1707–1711.
403 Chaparro LE, Smith SA, Moore RA, et al. Pharmacotherapy for the prevention
of chronic pain after surgery in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013; 7:
CD008307.
404 Snedecor SJ, Sudharshan L, Cappelleri JC, et al. Systematic review and comparison
of pharmacologic therapies for neuropathic pain associated with spinal cord
injury. J Pain Res 2013; 6: 539–547.
405 Zakkar M, Frazer S, Hunt I. Is there a role for gabapentin in preventing or treating
pain following thoracic surgery? Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg 2013; 17:
716–719.
406 Carley ME, Chaparro LE, Choinière M, et al. Pharmacotherapy for the prevention
of chronic pain after surgery in adults: an updated systematic review and meta-
analysis [editorial]. Anesthesiology 2021; 135: 304–325.
407 Verret M, Lauzier F, Zarychanski R, et al. Perioperative use of gabapentinoids for
the management of postoperative acute pain: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Anesthesiology 2020; 133: 265–279.
408 Aghighi SA, Tipold A, Piechotta M, et al. Assessment of the effects of adjunctive
gabapentin on postoperative pain after intervertebral disc surgery in dogs. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2012; 39: 636–646.
409 Plessas IN, Rusbridge C, Driver CJ, et al. Long-term outcome of Cavalier King
Charles spaniel dogs with clinical signs associated with Chiari-like malformation
and syringomyelia. Vet Rec 2012; 171: 501.
410 Wagner AE, Mich PM, Uhrig SR, et al. Clinical evaluation of perioperative
administration of gabapentin as an adjunct for postoperative analgesia in dogs
undergoing amputation of a forelimb. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2010; 236: 751–756.
411 Kukanich B, Cohen RL. Pharmacokinetics of oral gabapentin in greyhound dogs.
Vet J 2011; 187: 133–135.
412 Ruel HLM, Watanabe R, Evangelista MC, et al. Pain burden, sensory profile
and inflammatory cytokines of dogs with naturally-occurring neuropathic
pain treated with gabapentin alone or with meloxicam. PLoS ONE 2020; 15:
e0237121.
413 Pypendop BH, Siao KT, Ilkiw JE. Thermal antinociceptive effect of orally admin-
istered gabapentin in healthy cats. Am J Vet Res 2010; 71: 1027–1032.
414 Siao KT, Pypendop BH, Ilkiw JE. Pharmacokinetics of gabapentin in cats. Am J Vet
Res 2010; 71: 817–821.
415 Reid P, Pypendop BH, Ilkiw JE. The effects of intravenous gabapentin administra-
tion on the minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in cats. Anesth Analg
2010; 111: 633–637.
416 Vettorato E, Corletto F. Gabapentin as part of multi-modal analgesia in two cats
suffering multiple injuries. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38: 518–520.
417 Steagall PV, Benito J, Monteiro BP, et al. Analgesic effects of gabapentin and
buprenorphine in cats undergoing ovariohysterectomy using two pain-scoring
systems: a randomized clinical trial. J Feline Med Surg 2018; 20: 741–748.

-- 461 of 1450 --

446 	Section 3: Pharmacology
418 Dirikolu L, Dafalla A, Ely KJ, et al. Pharmacokinetics of gabapentin in horses. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2008; 31: 175–177.
419 Terry RL, McDonnell SM, Van Eps AW, et al. Pharmacokinetic profile and behav-
ioral effects of gabapentin in the horse. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2010; 33: 485–494.
420 Dutton DW, Lasnhnits KJ, Wegner K. Managing severe hoof pain in a horse using
multimodal analgesia and a modified composite pain score. Equine vet Educ 2009;
21: 37–43.
421 Davis JL, Posner LP, Elce Y. Gabapentin for the treatment of neuropathic pain in a
pregnant horse. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2007; 231: 755–758.
422 Coetzee JF, Mosher RA, Kohake LE, et al. Pharmacokinetics of oral gabapentin
alone or co-administered with meloxicam in ruminant beef calves. Vet J 2011; 190:
98–102.
423 Glynn HD, Coetzee JF, Edwards-Callaway LN, et al. The pharmacokinetics and
effects of meloxicam, gabapentin, and flunixin in postweaning dairy calves follow-
ing dehorning with local anesthesia. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2013; 36: 550–561.
424 Malreddy PR, Coetzee JF, Kukanich B, et al. Pharmacokinetics and milk secretion
of gabapentin and meloxicam co-administered orally in Holstein-Friesian cows.
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2013; 36: 14–20.
425 Chincholkar M. Analgesic mechanisms of gabapentinoids and effects in experi-
mental pain models: a narrative review. Br J Anaesth 2018; 120: 1315–1334.
426 Taylor CP. Mechanisms of analgesia by gabapentin and pregabalin-- calcium
channel alpha2-delta [Cavalpha2-delta] ligands. Pain 2009; 142: 13–16.
427 Field MJ, Cox PJ, Stott E, et al. Identification of the alpha2-delta-1 subunit of
voltage-dependent calcium channels as a molecular target for pain mediating
the analgesic actions of pregabalin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006; 103:
17537–17542.
428 Radulovic LL, Türck D, von Hodenberg A, et al. Disposition of gabapentin (neu-
rontin) in mice, rats, dogs, and monkeys. Drug Metab Dispos 1995; 23: 441–448.
429 Lamminen T, Doedée A, Hyttilä-Hopponen M, et al. Pharmacokinetics of single
and repeated oral doses of pregabalin oral solution formulation in cats. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2022; 45: 385–391.
430 Mullen KR, Schwark W, Divers TJ. Pharmacokinetics of single-dose intragastric
and intravenous pregabalin administration in clinically normal horses. Am J Vet
Res 2013; 74: 1043–1048.
431 Hampton CE, Queiroz-Williams P, Oubre MJ, et al. Pharmacokinetics of oral and
compounded intravenous gabapentin in Duroc swine (Sus Scrofa). J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 2021; 44: 776–782.
432 Gold JR, Grubb TL, Cox S, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of
repeat dosing of gabapentin in adult horses. J Vet Intern Med 2022; 36: 792–797.
433 Bockbrader HN, Wesche D, Miller R, et al. A comparison of the pharmacokinetics
and pharmacodynamics of pregabalin and gabapentin. Clin Pharmacokinet 2010;
49: 661–669.
434 Sanchis-Mora S, Chang YM, Abeyesinghe SM, et al. Pregabalin for the treatment
of syringomyelia-associated neuropathic pain in dogs: a randomised, placebo-
controlled, double-masked clinical trial. Vet J 2019; 250: 55–62.
435 Thoefner MS, Skovgaard LT, McEvoy FJ, et al. Pregabalin alleviates clinical signs of
syringomyelia-related central neuropathic pain in Cavalier King Charles Spaniel
dogs: a randomized controlled trial. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47: 238–248.
436 Plessas IN, Volk HA, Rusbridge C, et al. Comparison of gabapentin versus topira-
mate on clinically affected dogs with Chiari-like malformation and syringomyelia.
Vet Rec 2015; 177: 288.
437 Salazar V, Dewey CW, Schwark W, et al. Pharmacokinetics of single-dose oral
pregabalin administration in normal dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36:
574–580.
438 Schmierer PA, Tünsmeyer J, Tipold A, et al. Randomized controlled trial of prega-
balin for analgesia after surgical treatment of intervertebral disc disease in dogs.
Vet Surg 2020; 49: 905–913.
439 Brennan FH, Noble BT, Wang Y, et al. Acute post-injury blockade of α2δ- 1 cal-
cium channel subunits prevents pathological autonomic plasticity after spinal
cord injury. Cell Rep 2021; 34: 108667.
440 Boroujerdi A, Zeng J, Sharp K, et al. Calcium channel alpha-2- delta-1 protein
upregulation in dorsal spinal cord mediates spinal cord injury-induced neuro-
pathic pain states. Pain 2011; 152: 649–655.
441 Johnson BA, Aarnes TK, Wanstrath AW, et al. Effect of oral administration of
gabapentin on the minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in dogs. Am J
Vet Res 2019; 80: 1007–1009.
442 Bleuer-Elsner S, Medam T, Masson S. Effects of a single oral dose of gabapentin on
storm phobia in dogs: a double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover trial. Vet Rec
2021; 189: e453.
443 Adrian D, Papich MG, Baynes R, et al. The pharmacokinetics of gabapentin in
cats. J Vet Intern Med 2018; 32: 1996–2002.
444 Quimby JM, Lorbach SK, Saffire A, et al. Serum concentrations of gabapentin
in cats with chronic kidney disease. J Feline Med Surg 2022; 24: 1260–1266.
445 Lorenz ND, Comerford EJ, Iff I. Long-term use of gabapentin for musculoskeletal
disease and trauma in three cats. J Feline Med Surg 2013; 15: 507–512.
446 Esteban MA, Dewey CW, Schwark WS, et al. Pharmacokinetics of single-dose oral
pregabalin administration in normal cats. Front Vet Sci 2018; 5: 136.
447 Clark L, Doyle RS, Shroeder S. Skin lesions following pregabalin administration in
a cat. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44: 383–385.
448 van Haaften KA, Forsythe LRE, Stelow EA, et al. Effects of a single preappoint-
ment dose of gabapentin on signs of stress in cats during transportation and vet-
erinary examination. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2017; 251: 1175–1181.
449 Gurney M, Gower L. Randomised clinical trial evaluating the effect of a single
preappointment dose of gabapentin on signs of stress in hyperthyroid cats. J Feline
Med Surg 2022; 24: e85–e89.
450 Lamminen T, Korpivaara M, Suokko M, et al. Efficacy of a single dose of pregaba-
lin on signs of anxiety in cats during transportation-a pilot study. Front Vet Sci
2021; 8: 711816.
451 Young JM, Schoonover MJ, Kembel SL, et al. Efficacy of orally administered
gabapentin in horses with chronic thoracic limb lameness. Vet Anaesth Analg
2020; 47: 259–266.
452 Raffa RB, Buschmann H, Christoph T, et al. Mechanistic and functional differen-
tiation of tapentadol and tramadol. Expert Opin Pharmacother 2012; 13:
1437–1449.
453 Tzschentke TM, Christoph T, Kögel B, et al. (- )-(1R,2R)-3- (3-dimethylamino-1-
ethyl- 2-methyl- propyl)-phenol hydrochloride (tapentadol HCl): a novel mu-
opioid receptor agonist/norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor with broad-spectrum
analgesic properties. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2007; 323: 265–276.
454 Giorgi M, Meizler A, Mills PC. Pharmacokinetics of the novel atypical opioid tap-
entadol following oral and intravenous administration in dogs. Vet J 2012; 194:
309–313.
455 Lee HK, Lebkowska-Wieruszewska B, Kim TW, et al. Pharmacokinetics of the
novel atypical opioid tapentadol after intravenous, intramuscular and subcutane-
ous administration in cats. Vet J 2013; 198: 620–624.
456 Howard J, Aarnes TK, Dyce J, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
after oral administration of tapentadol hydrochloride in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2018;
79: 367–375.
457 Kögel B, Terlinden R, Schneider J. Characterisation of tramadol, morphine and
tapentadol in an acute pain model in Beagle dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2014; 41:
297–304.
458 Doodnaught GM, Evangelista MC, Steagall PVM. Thermal antinociception fol-
lowing oral administration of tapentadol in conscious cats. Vet Anaesth Analg
2017; 44: 364–369.
459 Kieves NR, Howard J, Lerche P, et al. Effectiveness of tapentadol hydrochloride for
treatment of orthopedic pain in dogs: a pilot study. Can Vet J 2020; 61: 289–293.
460 Raffa RB, Friderichs E, Reimann W, et al. Opioid and nonopioid components
independently contribute to the mechanism of action of tramadol, an ‘atypical’
opioid analgesic. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1992; 260: 275–285.
461 Raffa RB, Friderichs E, Reimann W, et al. Complementary and synergistic antino-
ciceptive interaction between the enantiomers of tramadol. J Pharmacol Exp Ther
1993; 267: 331–340.
462 Frink MC, Hennies HH, Englberger W, et al. Influence of tramadol on neuro-
transmitter systems of the rat brain. Arzneimittelforschung 1996; 46: 1029–1036.
463 KuKanich B, Papich MG. Pharmacokinetics of tramadol and the metabolite
O-desmethyltramadol in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2004; 27: 239–246.
464 Kukanich B, Papich MG. Pharmacokinetics and antinociceptive effects of oral
tramadol hydrochloride administration in Greyhounds. Am J Vet Res 2011; 72:
256–262.
465 Giorgi M, Del Carlo S, Saccomanni G, et al. Pharmacokinetics of tramadol and its
major metabolites following rectal and intravenous administration in dogs. N Z
Vet J 2009; 57: 146–152.
466 McMillan CJ, Livingston A, Clark CR, et al. Pharmacokinetics of intravenous
tramadol in dogs. Can J Vet Res 2008; 72: 325–331.
467 Vettorato E, Zonca A, Isola M, et al. Pharmacokinetics and efficacy of intravenous
and extradural tramadol in dogs. Vet J 2010; 183: 310–315.
468 Perez Jimenez TE, Mealey KL, Grubb TL, et al. Tramadol metabolism to
O- desmethyl tramadol (M1) and N-desmethyl tramadol (M2) by dog liver micro-
somes: species comparison and identification of responsible canine cytochrome
P- 450s (CYPs). Drug Metab Dispos 2016; 44: 1963–1972.
469 Perez Jimenez TE, Mealey KL, Schnider D, et al. Identification of canine
cytochrome P-450s (CYPs) metabolizing the tramadol (+)-M1 and (+)-
M2 metabolites to the tramadol (+)-M5 metabolite in dog liver microsomes. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2018; 41: 815–824.
470 Pypendop BH, Ilkiw JE. Pharmacokinetics of tramadol, and its metabolite
O-desmethyl-tramadol, in cats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2008; 31: 52–59.
471 Cagnardi P, Villa R, Zonca A, et al. Pharmacokinetics, intraoperative effect and
postoperative analgesia of tramadol in cats. Res Vet Sci 2011; 90: 503–509.
472 Stewart AJ, Boothe DM, Cruz-Espindola C, et al. Pharmacokinetics of tramadol
and metabolites O-desmethyltramadol and N-desmethyltramadol in adult horses.
Am J Vet Res 2011; 72: 967–974.

-- 462 of 1450 --

Chapter 25: Anesthetic and Analgesic Adjunctive Drugs 	447
473 Knych HK, Corado CR, McKemie DS, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
namics of tramadol in horses following oral administration. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
2013; 36: 389–398.
474 Knych HK, Corado CR, McKemie DS, et al. Pharmacokinetics and selected phar-
macodynamic effects of tramadol following intravenous administration to the
horse. Equine Vet J 2013; 45: 490–496.
475 Knych HK, Steffey EP, White AM, et al. Effects of age on the pharmacokinetics of
tramadol and its active metabolite, O-desmethyltramadol following intravenous
administration to foals. Equine Vet J 2016; 48: 65–71.
476 Edmondson MA, Duran SH, Boothe DM, et al. Pharmacokinetics of tramadol and
its major metabolites in alpacas following intravenous and oral administration.
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2012; 35: 389–396.
477 Cox S, Martin-Jimenez T, van Amstel S, et al. Pharmacokinetics of intravenous
and intramuscular tramadol in llamas. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2011; 34: 259–264.
478 de Sousa AB, Santos AC, Schramm SG, et al. Pharmacokinetics of tramadol and
O-desmethyltramadol in goats after intravenous and oral administration. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2008; 31: 45–51.
479 Vullo C, Kim TW, Meligrana M, et al. Pharmacokinetics of tramadol and its major
metabolite after intramuscular administration in piglets. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
2014; 37: 603–606.
480 Kelly KR, Pypendop BH, Christe KL. Pharmacokinetics of tramadol following
intravenous and oral administration in male rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta).
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2015; 38: 375–382.
481 Schütter AF, Tünsmeyer J, Kästner SBR. Influence of tramadol on acute thermal and
mechanical cutaneous nociception in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44: 309–316.
482 Poulsen L, Arendt-Nielsen L, Brosen K, et al. The hypoalgesic effect of tramadol
in relation to CYP2D6. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1996; 60: 636–644.
483 Corado CR, McKemie DS, Young A, et al. Evidence for polymorphism in the
cytochrome P450 2D50 gene in horses. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2016; 39: 245–254.
484 Pypendop BH, Siao KT, Ilkiw JE. Effects of tramadol hydrochloride on the ther-
mal threshold in cats. Am J Vet Res 2009; 70: 1465–1470.
485 Ajadi RA, Owanikin AO, Martins MM, et al. Effect of epidural tramadol and lig-
nocaine on physiological and behavioural changes in goats subjected to castration
with a high tension band. N Z Vet J 2012; 60: 344–348.
486 Donati PA, Tarragona L, Franco JVA, et al. Efficacy of tramadol for postoperative
pain management in dogs: systematic review and meta-analysis. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2021; 48: 283–296.
487 Rufiange M, Rousseau-Blass F, Pang DSJ. Incomplete reporting of experimental
studies and items associated with risk of bias in veterinary research. Vet Rec Open
2019; 6: e000322.
488 Munro BA, Bergen P, Pang DS. Randomization, blinding, data handling and sam-
ple size estimation in papers published in Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia in
2009 and 2019. Vet Anaesth Analg 2022; 49: 18–25.
489 Bennett RC. Reporting guidelines: has their use improved the quality of reporting in
Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia [editorial]. Vet Anaesth Analg 2022; 49: 4–6.
490 Sargeant JM, Elgie R, Valcour J, et al. Methodological quality and completeness of
reporting in clinical trials conducted in livestock species. Prev Vet Med 2009; 91:
107–115.
491 Sargeant JM, Thompson A, Valcour J, et al. Quality of reporting of clinical trials of
dogs and cats and associations with treatment effects. J Vet Intern Med 2010; 24:
44–50.
492 Budsberg SC, Torres BT, Kleine SA, et al. Lack of effectiveness of tramadol hydro-
chloride for the treatment of pain and joint dysfunction in dogs with chronic
osteoarthritis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2018; 252: 427–432.
493 Meunier NV, Panti A, Mazeri S, et al. Randomised trial of perioperative tramadol
for canine sterilisation pain management. Vet Rec 2019; 185: 406.
494 Piras LA, Mancusi D, Olimpo M, et al. Post-operative analgesia following TPLO
surgery: a comparison between cimicoxib and tramadol. Res Vet Sci 2021; 136:
351–359.
495 O’Neill DG, Brodbelt DC, Hodge R, et al. Epidemiology and clinical management
of elbow joint disease in dogs under primary veterinary care in the UK. Canine
Med Genet 2020; 7: 1.
496 Seddighi MR, Egger CM, Rohrbach BW, et al. Effects of tramadol on the mini-
mum alveolar concentration of sevoflurane in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36:
334–340.
497 Guedes AG, Knych HK, Soares JH, et al. Pharmacokinetics and physiological
effects of repeated oral administrations of tramadol in horses. J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 2014; 37: 269–278.
498 Dhanjal JK, Wilson DV, Robinson E, et al. Intravenous tramadol: effects, nocicep-
tive properties, and pharmacokinetics in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36:
581–590.
499 Guedes A, Knych H, Hood D. Plasma concentrations, analgesic and physiological
assessments in horses with chronic laminitis treated with two doses of oral trama-
dol. Equine Vet J 2016; 48: 528–531.
500 Natalini CC, Robinson EP. Evaluation of the analgesic effects of epidurally admin-
istered morphine, alfentanil, butorphanol, tramadol, and U50488H in horses. Am
J Vet Res 2000; 61: 1579–1586.
501 DeRossi R, Modolo TJ, Maciel FB, et al. Efficacy of epidural lidocaine combined
with tramadol or neostigmine on perineal analgesia in the horse. Equine Vet J
2013; 45: 497–502.
502 Bigham AS, Habibian S, Ghasemian F, et al. Caudal epidural injection of lidocaine,
tramadol, and lidocaine-tramadol for epidural anesthesia in cattle. J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 2010; 33: 439–443.
503 Habibian S, Bigham AS, Aali E. Comparison of lidocaine, tramadol, and lidocaine-
tramadol for epidural analgesia in lambs. Res Vet Sci 2011; 91: 434–438.
504 Monteiro ER, Junior AR, Assis HM, et al. Comparative study on the sedative
effects of morphine, methadone, butorphanol or tramadol, in combination with
acepromazine, in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36: 25–33.
505 Ronagh A, Sabiza S, Naddaf H, et al. Comparison of sedative and some cardiopul-
monary effects of intramuscular medetomidine or medetomidine-tramadol in
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47: 381–384.
506 Steagall PV, Taylor PM, Brondani JT, et al. Antinociceptive effects of tramadol and
acepromazine in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2008; 10: 24–31.
507 Barnung SK, Treschow M, Borgbjerg FM. Respiratory depression following oral
tramadol in a patient with impaired renal function. Pain 1997; 71: 111–112.
508 Ko JC, Abbo LA, Weil AB, et al. Effect of orally administered tramadol alone or
with an intravenously administered opioid on minimum alveolar concentration of
sevoflurane in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008; 232: 1834–1840.
509 Bauquier SH. Randomised clinical trial comparing the perioperative analgesic
efficacy of oral tramadol and intramuscular tramadol in cats. J Feline Med Surg
2022; 24: 683–690.
510 Evangelista MC, Silva RA, Cardozo LB, et al. Comparison of preoperative trama-
dol and pethidine on postoperative pain in cats undergoing ovariohysterectomy.
BMC Vet Res 2014; 10: 252.
511 Zeiler GE, Dzikiti BT, Fosgate GT, et al. Anaesthetic, analgesic and cardiorespira-
tory effects of intramuscular medetomidine-ketamine combination alone or with
morphine or tramadol for orchiectomy in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2014; 41:
411–420.
512 Castro DS, Silva MF, Shih AC, et al. Comparison between the analgesic effects of
morphine and tramadol delivered epidurally in cats receiving a standardized nox-
ious stimulation. J Feline Med Surg 2009; 11: 948–953.
513 Brondani JT, Luna SP, Marcello GC, et al. Perioperative administration of vedapro-
fen, tramadol or their combination does not interfere with platelet aggregation,
bleeding time and biochemical variables in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2009; 11:
503–509.
514 Monteiro BP, Klinck MP, Moreau M, et al. Analgesic efficacy of an oral transmu-
cosal spray formulation of meloxicam alone or in combination with tramadol in
cats with naturally occurring osteoarthritis. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43:
643–651.
515 Guedes AGP, Meadows JM, Pypendop BH, et al. Evaluation of tramadol for treat-
ment of osteoarthritis in geriatric cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2018; 252: 565–571.
516 Aldrich LA, Roush JK, KuKanich B. Plasma concentrations of tramadol after
transdermal application of a single metered dose of a compounded tramadol gel to
cats. Am J Vet Res 2021; 82: 840–845.

-- 463 of 1450 --

26
448
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: T he Sixth E dition of L umb and J ones	. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
History of neuromuscular blocking agents
Long before its introduction to medical practice, curare was extracted
primarily from plants, such as Chondrodendron species, by native
South American aboriginal populations for use in quivers, arrows,
or spears to hunt animals. Curare’s site of action, the neuromuscular
junction (NMJ), was described by Claude Bernard as early as 1844
through his well-known experiments using frog nerve–muscle
preparations, demonstrating that direct muscle stimulation could
be achieved while evoked contractions were abolished when motor
nerves were stimulated in the presence of curare. This discovery
was preceded by observations by Benjamin Brodie in 1812 who
described that animals injected with curare could be kept alive
if their lungs were ventilated. Later, in 1934, Henry Dale described
the role of acetylcholine (ACh) in neuromuscular transmission.
A multitude of studies that followed those original observations
described the anatomy and function of the NMJ and the neuro-
transmitters involved. The NMJ and the events that result in neu-
romuscular transmission are now well understood and an immense
amount of information has been made available since those initial
reports.
Curare was first introduced to medical practice as a potential
treatment for convulsive seizures and spasticity and as part of shock
therapy. It was then recognized that the effects of curare could be
useful in providing muscle relaxation during general anesthesia.
The first report of the agent being used for this purpose occurred in
1942 by Dr. Harold Randall Griffith and his resident, Dr. Enid
Johnson, during an appendectomy [1]. The synthesis of the alkaloid
agent tubocurarine followed and its use during anesthesia began to
gain traction. Further studies by Drs. John Halton and Cecil Gray
with tubocurarine in 1946 laid the foundation for development of
what became known as the “Liverpool anesthetic technique” – the
first example of the concept of balanced anesthesia. The technique
became popular and the practice of using deep planes of anesthesia
to avoid movement was largely abandoned [2–4]. Within the next
10 years, the use of neuromuscular blockade for anesthesia in
people had spread throughout the world.
Neuromuscular blocking agents in veterinary
anesthesia
Possibly owing to more limited access to mechanical ventilators, or
because most intubations and surgeries can be performed in veteri-
nary species without the need for muscle paralysis, the uptake on
incorporating neuromuscular blocking agents (NMBAs) into vet-
erinary anesthesia has been much slower and more limited than in
human anesthesiology. The depolarizing agent succinylcholine was
first used for canine anesthesia in 1952 [5] and in 1954, Hall and
Weaver described the use of the nondepolarizing agent gallamine
coupled with positive-pressure ventilation as part of balanced anes-
thesia in the dog and cat [6]. Since those initial reports, a significant
body of evidence relating to the effects, clinical use, monitoring,
and antagonism of neuromuscular blockade in veterinary anesthesia
has now accumulated. While our understanding of these agents has
grown exponentially, NMBAs remain part of only a small proportion
of all cases in veterinary anesthesia [7].
26 Neuromuscular Blockade
Manuel Martin-Flores
Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA
Chapter contents
History of neuromuscular blocking agents, 448
Neuromuscular blocking agents in veterinary anesthesia, 448
Anatomy and physiology of the neuromuscular junction, 449
Neuromuscular blockade, 450
Pharmacology and nomenclature, 450
Nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents, 450
Depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents, 452
Novel nondepolarizing agents, 453
Monitoring neuromuscular transmission, 453
Muscle selection for monitoring neuromuscular transmission, 455
Factors affecting duration and recovery from neuromuscular blockade, 456
Reversal of neuromuscular blockade, 456
Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, 456
Selective relaxant binding agents, 457
Reversal of succinylcholine, 457
Clinical strategies to minimize the risk of residual neuromuscular
blockade, 458
References, 458

-- 464 of 1450 --

Chapter 26: Neuromuscular Blockade 	449
Anatomy and physiology of the
neuromuscular junction
NMBAs exert their actions by interrupting transmission through
the NMJ. The NMJ is composed of a presynaptic motor neuron
and a postsynaptic skeletal muscle cell separated by the synaptic
cleft (Fig. 26.1). The presynaptic cell originates in the spine and
travels uninterrupted to the target muscle. It loses its myelin sheath
when it approaches the synapse and branches to contact several
muscle cells, composing what is known as a “motor unit.” This
presynaptic cell synthetizes and stores ACh in vesicles; both a
reserve and a readily available population of ACh vesicles are
found within this cell. Depolarization of the motor neuron results
in an influx of Ca 2+ via voltage-gated channels that triggers the
mobilization of vesicles and the release of a large amount of ACh
into the cleft. When two molecules of ACh interact with both α
subunits of a nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) located in
the folds of the postsynaptic cell, a conformational change occurs
within the receptor, allowing an influx of Na + into the skeletal
muscle cell. Depolarization of the endplate terminal triggers the
activation of voltage-gated Na + channels that propagate the action
potential along the cell, signaling the process for muscular contrac-
tion [8,9]. The interaction between ACh and the nAChR is very
brief, with its effects terminating almost immediately. Free ACh is
promptly hydrolyzed by the acetylcholinesterase enzyme into cho-
line and acetic acid [10]. The sudden and drastic reduction in the
concentration of ACh in the cleft favors the movement of ACh
away from the nAChR.
The amount of ACh released by the nerve is affected by the con-
centration of extracellular Ca2+
. The absence of Ca2+ would result in
the absence of ACh release and muscular contractions, while dou-
bling the concentration of Ca2+ would result in a 16-fold increase in
the amount of released ACh. Under normal circumstances, only a
fraction of the available vesicles of ACh are released; however, this
fraction is more than sufficient for effective neuromuscular trans-
mission. Moreover, only a small number of available nAChR need
to be activated to cause maximal depolarization of the muscle cell.
These redundancies in the process of neuromuscular transmission
provide the NMJ with a substantial margin of safety and an immense
reserve [11].
Pentameric nAChRs are found postsynaptically in the shoulders
of the primary clefts, and presynaptically in the motor nerve. The
postsynaptic receptor contains two α1 subunits, which are the bind-
ing sites of ACh (and NMBAs). The fetal and mature forms of this
receptor vary by only one subunit: a γ subunit in the fetal subtype,
and the ε subunit in the mature form. β1 and δ subunits complete
the receptor. The fetal subtype, and a third subtype composed of α7
subunits, are found during development, and are replaced by the
mature form soon after birth; the adult form remains for life. The
fetal and α7 subtypes can also proliferate in abnormal situations
that result in decreased muscle activity, such as poor innervation,
prolonged immobilization, or increased muscle catabolism (e.g.,
inflammation). Opening time of the sodium channel and sensitivity
to specific ligands are altered in these receptors. This explains in
part why increased sensitivity to succinylcholine and decreased
potency of nondepolarizing agents are observed in neonates or dur-
ing abnormal states when other subtypes of the nAChR proliferate.
Upregulation of receptors may also be involved in the differences
observed during neuromuscular pathologies [12,13].
Presynaptic nAChR are also found in the NMJ. Through positive
and negative feedback loops, presynaptic receptors control the
mobilization and release of ACh. A negative feedback loop stops
further release of the transmitter when the concentrations of ACh
Presynaptic neuron 	Myelin
Presynaptic nAChR
Ca 2+
Na +
Synaptic vesicles
Voltage-gated
Ca2+ channel
Schwann cell
nAChR
Acetylcholine
(neurotransmitter)
Postsynaptic membrane
Figure 26.1 Representation of the neuromuscular junction and its main components. See text for details.

-- 465 of 1450 --

450 	Section 3: Pharmacology
in the cleft are sufficiently high. In a complementary mechanism, a
positive feedback loop signals the mobilization of reserve ACh
toward the active zone, increasing the population of readily availa-
ble ACh in preparation for the next stimulus. The latter mechanism
may play a key role in the development of fade during repeated
nerve stimulation when nondepolarizing NMBAs are used (discussed
in the section on monitoring neuromuscular transmission). The
depolarizing agent succinylcholine does not inhibit this receptor,
explaining why no fade is observed when that agent is used [14].
Neuromuscular blockade
Neuromuscular transmission can be interrupted, producing paralysis,
and thereby providing one of the main components of anesthesia
(relaxation/immobility) without the need for excessively profound
depression of the central nervous system. NMBAs do this through
one of two main mechanisms: depolarization of the postsynaptic
cell (depolarizing NMBA) or competitive antagonism of the nAChR
(nondepolarizing NMBA).
Pharmacology and nomenclature
The effects of NMBAs are measured by quantitating the reduction
in the evoked force of contraction (or a surrogate). Potency is deter-
mined by constructing a dose-response curve, which is composed
of the responses to several submaximal doses (Fig. 26.2A). From
that relationship, the effective doses that produce 50% and 95%
depression of force of contraction (ED 50 and ED 95
, respectively) can
be identified. The ED95 can be used to compare agents given at equi-
potent doses, or to compare the characteristics of multiples of the
ED 95
. The onset time is the interval between administration and a
predetermined effect, typically 95% depression. Duration of action
(sometimes called “duration of clinical or surgical block”) is the
time between injection and the return of 25% (sometimes 10%) of
force of contraction. The recovery index is the time between 25%
and 75% recovery of the evoked force of contraction and describes
the slope (or speed) of recovery. Complete recovery of neuromus-
cular transmission requires more time and is reached when no
residual weakness can be measured (Fig. 26.2B).
Nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents
Nondepolarizing NMBAs exert their action through competitive
antagonism of the nAChR receptors. The binding of a nondepolar-
izing NMBA with at least one α1 subunit of the nicotinic receptor
prevents the conformational change produced by ACh. Therefore,
Na+ influx, depolarization, and contraction do not occur. In general,
nondepolarizing NMBAs are large, water-soluble molecules, with
relatively low volumes of distribution (typically 0.2–0.4 L/kg) that do
not cross the placenta or the blood–brain barrier. No sensory
100
50
ST depression (%)
0
0.0 	0.2 	0.4 	0.6
ED50 	ED95
Dose (mg/kg)
0.8 	1.0 	1.2 	1.4
T1 and TOF ratio (%)
Time
NMBA
ST
recovery
TOF
recovery
100
50
0
(A)
(B)
Figure 26.2 A. A dose-response curve illustrating responses to varying submaximal doses of an NMBA (simulated data). The depression in the magnitude
(or height) of the single twitch (ST) is measured relative to its magnitude prior to NMBA administration. The effective dose producing 50% (ED 50
) and
95% (ED 95
) twitch depression can be calculated. Source: Dr. Daniel M. Sakai, with permission. B. An example of the time-course of neuromuscular block
after administration of a nondepolarizing NMBA (simulated data). Time is shown on the x-axis and the magnitude of evoked responses for the first
response (T1; black bars and line) to train-of-four (TOF) stimulation, and the TOF ratio (T4:T1; red line) are shown on the y-axis. Onset time is the
period between NMBA administration and maximal effect. Notice that the magnitude of T1 returns earlier than the TOF ratio, making it a less sensitive
indicator of partial block.

-- 466 of 1450 --

Chapter 26: Neuromuscular Blockade 	451
depression results from their use, therefore, other components of
anesthesia, such as hypnosis and analgesia, need to be provided by
different means. Onset time for neuromuscular blockade after injec-
tion of nondepolarizing agents is relatively slow, requiring 2–5 min
to reach full effect. Both the onset and offset are progressive phe-
nomena and respond to the concentration of drug at the site of action,
the NMJ. Peak effect occurs with some delay (typically 1 min) after
peak plasma concentration is reached, as the drug is transferred into
the NMJ. Similar to other anesthetic agents, onset time is affected by
cardiac output, muscle blood flow, and distance from the heart to
each muscle. Therefore, onset time will vary between muscles.
Moreover, the sensitivity of different muscles to the effects of an
NMBA varies, with the diaphragm being characteristically resistant.
That is, both the speed of action and the magnitude of the effect may
differ between muscle groups after a dose is administered. In gen-
eral, less potent agents have shorter onset times than more potent
drugs. Owing to the margin of safety inherent to the NMJ, a large
proportion of receptors need to be occupied before transmission is
interrupted and contraction is abolished. Blockade occurs faster
when larger numbers of molecules are administered, which is the
case for less potent NMBAs. For each agent, increasing the dosage of
the agent will accelerate onset and prolong duration.
The margin of safety associated with neuromuscular transmission
has distinct clinical consequences. It is estimated that before any
effect from an NMBA can be appreciated, approximately 70% of the
nAChRs must be antagonized [15]. Therefore, a small dose that only
interacts with a smaller proportion of receptors may not have a meas-
urable impact on neuromuscular transmission and force of contrac-
tion. This observation is the basis for the priming technique, which
was once popular when slower agents were commonplace. With this
technique, a small and mostly clinically inconsequential dose of an
NMBA is given during preoxygenation. After a few minutes,
induction is performed followed by a larger dose of the NMBA. The
intent is that the priming dose has already occupied a number of
receptors without depressing the force of contraction. The second
dose will produce a faster onset as it will act on “active” receptors.
Onset time with a priming method produces faster paralysis than if
the complete dose was administered at once. A second consequence
of the margin of safety is that the neuromuscular effects from an ini-
tial dose will begin to dissipate while a large number of nAChRs are
still occupied by the drug. A second dose, administered to prolong
the duration of neuromuscular block, will therefore produce a larger
and longer-lasting effect than the initial dose. This explains why anes-
thesiologists typically re-dose an NMBA with aliquots that are only a
fraction (commonly 1/3 to 1/2) of the initial dose.
During offset, force of contraction is gradually restored until full
neuromuscular transmission has recovered. Recovery occurs as the
NMBA leaves the NMJ, a process closely related to a decay in plasma
concentrations. Plasma concentrations will decrease because of
redistribution, biotransformation, and excretion or, in particular
cases, when binding agents are administered and the NMBA
molecules are altered.
Nondepolarizing NMBAs are classified into two main chemical
families: (1) benzylisoquinoliniums (e.g., atracurium, cisatracu-
rium, and tubocurarine), and (2) aminosteroids (e.g., vecuronium,
rocuronium, and pancuronium) (Table 26.1). In general, benzyliso-
quinolinium compounds are intermediate-acting NMBAs, with
an expected duration of neuromuscular block of approximately
20–40 min. Agents of this family undergo extrahepatic paths of
metabolism and most compounds are capable of releasing histamine
upon injection. Aminosteroid compounds, on the other hand, do
not generally cause histamine release and have fewer cardiovascular
effects, although some agents may have a vagolytic effect leading to
increased heart rate. Agents of this family undergo biotransformation
Table 26.1 Selected neuromuscular blocking agents (NMBAs) used in veterinary medicine.
Drug 	Onset (min)a 	Duration (min)a 	Elimination 	Intravenous
dose (mg/kg)
Intravenous
infusion (mg/kg/h)
Nondepolarizing agents
Benzylisoquinoliniums
Atracurium 	3–5 	20–40 	Ester hydrolysis, Hoffmann elimination 	Canine 0.1–0.2
Feline 0.1–0.25
Equine 0.07–0.15
Canine 0.18–0.36
Equine 0.17
Cisatracurium 	3–5 	30–40 	Hoffmann elimination 	Canine 0.075–0.3
Feline 0.05–0.3
Aminosteroids
Vecuronium 	3–5 	30–40 	Hepatic metabolism biliary and renal
excretion
Canine 0.05–0.1
Feline 0.025–0.1
Equine 0.1
Rocuronium 	1–2 	20–30 	Hepatic uptake and biliary excretion 	Canine 0.1–0.6
Feline 0.1–0.6
Equine 0.3–0.6
Canine 0.2
Pancuronium 	5 	30–60 	Hepatic metabolism and renal
elimination of active metabolites
Canine 0.07–0.1
Feline 0.06–0.1
Equine 0.12
Fumarate diesters
Gantacurium 	1–2 	5 	Ester hydrolysis, cysteine adduction 	Canine 0.06
Feline 0.06
Depolarizing agent
Succinylcholine 	1–2 	6–20 	Hydrolysis by plasma cholinesterase 	Canine 0.3–0.4
Feline 0.1–0.2
Equine 0.12–0.15
a Values listed for the nondepolarizing agents are based on canine studies.
Source: Compiled from Lee et al. [17]; Wright et al. [18]; Martin-Flores et al. [19]; Cottrell et al. [20]; Martin-Flores et al. [21].

-- 467 of 1450 --

452 	Section 3: Pharmacology
and elimination via the liver or kidneys and, hence, clearance is
altered when organ function is decreased. Modern agents in this
family are largely considered intermediate-acting drugs with pan-
curonium (typically classified as long-acting) being an exception.
Atracurium is a benzylisoquinolinium compound comprising a
mixture of 10 isomers of varying potency that undergoes enzymatic
degradation by nonspecific esterases, which accounts for approxi-
mately two-thirds of its biotransformation [16]. These enzymes
are distinct from acetylcholinesterase and plasma cholinesterase
(also known as “pseudocholinesterase”). Hence, abnormal plasma
cholinesterase concentrations do not affect degradation of atracu-
rium. In addition, nonenzymatic degradation occurs spontaneously
in the presence of normal pH and temperature via a process named
“Hoffman elimination.” Decreases in temperature and pH will delay
nonenzymatic degradation, although it is unlikely that changes in
pH observed under most clinical situations will have a noticeable
impact. Moreover, changes in pH may also affect enzymatic hydrol-
ysis in the opposite direction. Therefore, small changes in pH are
unlikely to result in clinically relevant changes in duration of action
of atracurium. For storage, atracurium is provided in a low-pH
solution and should be kept refrigerated.
Degradation of atracurium by either pathway results in the pro-
duction of laudanosine [22]. This byproduct has no neuromuscular
blocking effects but can be a central nervous system stimulant.
High concentrations of laudanosine can increase the minimum
alveolar concentration of volatile anesthetics by as much as 30% [23].
Laudanosine elimination occurs mostly through bile (~70%) and
urine (~30%) and, unlike its precursor atracurium, is dependent
on hepatic function [24]. Therefore, hepatic disease is unlikely to
substantially affect the duration of atracurium but can result in
accumulation of laudanosine. As an example, laudanosine, but not
atracurium, has been shown to accumulate during the anhepatic
phase of liver transplant in pigs [25].
Like most benzylisoquinolinium relaxants, including tubocurar-
ine, atracurium can release histamine upon administration, which
may cause tachycardia and arterial hypotension. However, this is
typically observed after several multiples of the ED95 are used [26].
Cisatracurium is one of the isomers that compose atracurium. It
was developed in an attempt to decrease the risk of histamine
release and improve atracurium’s margin of safety. In humans, eight
times the ED95 needs to be administered before clinical conse-
quences of histamine release are observed; therefore, histamine
release does not occur under normal clinical situations.
Like atracurium, cisatracurium is degraded via Hoffman elimi-
nation. Nonspecific enzymatic hydrolysis occurs at substantially
lower rates than for atracurium [27]. As in the case for atracurium,
laudanosine is a byproduct of metabolism; however, smaller quanti-
ties are formed as cisatracurium is more potent than atracurium so
smaller doses are used to produce equivalent effects [28]. Like
atracurium, duration of action is considered intermediate; however,
since cisatracurium is more potent than atracurium and fewer
molecules need to be administered, onset is slower.
Other examples in the benzylisoquinolinium family include
the historically relevant agent tubocurarine (also known as
“(+)- tubocurarine” or “d-tubocurarine”) and mivacurium. Tubo-
curarine was considered a long-lasting agent that could release
histamine at doses below the ED95
, hence, cardiovascular effects
were common with its use. Mivacurium was introduced to clinical
practice as an agent of short duration, owing to its rapid hydrolysis
by plasma cholinesterase (pseudocholinesterase), a degradation
path shared with succinylcholine [29]. Consequently, abnormally
low levels of this enzyme increase the duration of action of this
agent [30]. While mivacurium’s effects are short-acting in people,
differences in enzymatic activity in dogs result in long-lasting
neuromuscular block in this species [31]. Like other agents of this
family, mivacurium causes a dose-dependent release of histamine.
Of the aminosteroid NMBAs, pancuronium is longer-lasting,
with a duration approximating or exceeding an hour [17]. Owing to
its vagolytic effect, administration of pancuronium can result in
increases in heart rate and arterial blood pressure [32,33].
Vecuronium results from demethylation of pancuronium and,
unlike the parent compound, is not vagolytic and is largely devoid
of any cardiovascular effects. An active (3-hydroxy) metabolite
of vecuronium is produced during spontaneous deacetylation,
which conserves 60–80% of the neuromuscular blocking potency.
Vecuronium and its active metabolites are biotransformed by
the liver and kidneys. Therefore, prolonged administration in the
presence of decreased organ function is likely to result in
accumulation [18].
Like vecuronium, rocuronium is an intermediate-acting NMBA,
but with a lower potency and faster onset. At equipotent doses,
rocuronium has a faster onset than vecuronium, mivacurium, and
cisatracurium [34]. Metabolism of rocuronium is limited, and most
of the drug is excreted unchanged through urine and bile. Like
vecuronium, no hemodynamic alterations are observed at clinically
useful doses (up to four times the ED95
) [35].
Depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents
Succinylcholine is the only member of this family that is available
for clinical use. The mechanism of action of succinylcholine is
almost diametrically opposite to that of the nondepolarizing agents:
succinylcholine binds to the nAChR and acts as an agonist. While
the detailed mechanism of action is not fully understood, some key
steps are known. Like ACh, succinylcholine binds the nAChR and
depolarization of the membrane occurs. This opens voltage-gated
Na+ channels on the skeletal muscle cell resulting in muscle con-
traction. Closure and inactivation of the Na+ channels only occurs
when the membrane potential is reset. Normally, with ACh acting
as the agonist at the nAChR, this is a very rapid process as ACh is
hydrolyzed by the acetylcholinesterase enzyme in the synaptic cleft.
Succinylcholine, however, is not metabolized by this enzyme and
the drug remains at the NMJ for far longer. The Na + channels
remain inactivated, transmission is blocked, and the muscle
becomes flaccid. This depolarization-induced block (also called
“Phase I block”) is often preceded by an initial disorganized
contraction of muscles (called “fasciculations”) before relaxation
follows [36]. Fasciculations typically last for a very short period,
although sustained contraction (several minutes) has been observed
in the masseter and adductor pollicis muscles in humans [37].
Recovery from depolarization or Phase I block induced by
succinylcholine occurs as the drug redistributes out of the NMJ, a
process that is facilitated by the decrease in the plasma concentra-
tion as the agent is hydrolyzed by the enzyme plasma cholinesterase
(also known as “pseudocholinesterase”) [36]. The enzyme is
synthetized in the liver and, consequently, liver diseases may lead to
lower levels of this enzyme and an increased duration of action of
succinylcholine [38]. Abnormal plasma cholinesterase is present in
individuals with a genetic mutation that affects the synthesis of the
enzyme. In those cases, the duration of action of succinylcholine
can be increased from an expected 10 min to 4 h [39]. A transfusion
with whole blood or fresh frozen plasma might be required to
terminate the effects of succinylcholine under those conditions.

-- 468 of 1450 --

Chapter 26: Neuromuscular Blockade 	453
The activity of plasma cholinesterase can be assessed in suspect
individuals by measuring the dibucaine number. Dibucaine is a local
anesthetic that inhibits the activity of the plasma cholinesterase
enzyme. The activity of the abnormal form of the enzyme is resist-
ant to this inhibition. The dibucaine number indicates the percent-
age of enzyme activity that is inhibited when exposed to dibucaine
and shows whether normal or atypical plasma cholinesterase
is present.
Under normal conditions in humans, succinylcholine produces a
very fast onset and a short duration of action. There is species
variation to these characteristics. A similar time-course is seen in
cats; however, a longer duration (20–30 min) is commonly seen
in dogs, likely due to lower enzymatic activity [19,40]. When the
NMJ is exposed to increasing doses of the drug, usually through
repeated boluses or continuous infusions, succinylcholine-induced
block begins to assume the characteristics of a nondepolarizing
(i.e., competitive) block and this phenomenon has been variably
referred to as “Phase II,” “desensitization,” or “dual” block [36].
Unlike the nondepolarizing drugs, succinylcholine has several
important effects on other organs. Interactions with muscarinic
receptors can produce bradycardia, but interactions with sympa-
thetic ganglia can increase circulating levels of catecholamines
and result in tachycardia and hypertension. While no direct effect on
the central nervous system occurs, increased intracranial and
intraocular pressure have been reported [20,41–43]. Histamine
release is possible following administration of this agent, and
hence, swings in blood pressure should be expected. Hyperkalemia
is also induced by administration of succinylcholine and may be fatal
in individuals with muscle trauma or motor neuron defects [44,45].
Despite these drawbacks, succinylcholine remains in clinical use
for humans, primarily (if not exclusively) due to its rapid onset. When
a rapid sequence induction is necessary, succinylcholine produces
acceptable intubating conditions faster than any other NMBA.
Novel nondepolarizing agents
Fumarate (olefinic isoquinolinium diester) compounds constitute a
new family of nondepolarizing agents that are being developed.
Several agents have been investigated, which provide either fast
onset and ultra-short duration, or intermediate duration that can be
shortened by a novel mechanism of reversal. While all agents have a
potential for histamine release, this does not occur at clinically use-
ful doses [46]. Gantacurium offers a fast onset and very short dura-
tion. In cats, gantacurium had an onset time of 1–1.5 min and a
duration of 4–7 min to complete recovery [21]. This short duration
is the consequence of different paths of metabolism: a slow
pH-sensitive ester hydrolysis and a faster unique mechanism
involving adduction of cysteine to the NMBA molecule. The
adduction of cysteine occurs at the central fumarate bond, replac-
ing chlorine. The resultant molecule has negligible neuromuscular
blocking properties. This method of inactivation can be further
accelerated by the administration of exogenous cysteine (L-cysteine)
[47,48]. Analogues of gantacurium (CW 002 and CW 011) have
also been synthesized to undergo slower cysteine adduction, yield-
ing an intermediate duration of action. Predictably, their effects can
be substantially shortened by the administration of L-cysteine [49].
Moreover, a newer agent (CW 1759-50) that is rapid-acting with
a short duration like gantacurium, but with an improved cardiovas-
cular profile, is also being studied [50]. These agents may soon be
available for clinical use, and everything indicates they may result
in better control of neuromuscular transmission blockade and
recovery.
Monitoring neuromuscular transmission
Monitoring neuromuscular transmission is useful for titrating infu-
sions of NMBAs, or for deciding when a dose should be repeated. It
is necessary for assessing whether reversal is needed or even possi-
ble, and it is essential for avoiding inadvertent residual neuromus-
cular block. Neuromuscular function is monitored by stimulating a
motor nerve and assessing the response evoked by that stimulus.
The evoked responses can be assessed subjectively by observation
or can be objectively measured. Measurements of isometric force of
contraction (mechanomyography [MMG]) are widely considered
the gold standard. The methodology is cumbersome as it requires
that a limb be attached under tension to a force transducer.
Commonly, either the distal end of the extremity or, in a more inva-
sive fashion, a tendon, is secured to the transducer. A less invasive
method of near-isometric force has been described, by suturing a
tendon to the transducer [51,52]. Both methods of MMG are
impractical for use in the operating room.
As alternatives, acceleromyography (AMG) and electromyogra-
phy (EMG) can be utilized. Unlike MMG, AMG measures the
acceleration of a freely moving limb and, therefore, avoids the need
for setups that prevent movement. AMG is user-friendly, relatively
inexpensive, and can be easily used in a clinical setting. Several
handheld devices, as well as modules included in multiparameter
monitors, are currently available. The method is reliable and a good
surrogate for MMG; however, measurements are not interchangea-
ble [52]. AMG has gained widespread acceptance as both a clinical
and research tool [53] and, by helping to identify residual block, it
can attenuate the consequences of this complication [54–56].
EMG measures the compound action potential at the muscle.
Since it is cellular activation and not movement that is quantified,
EMG is not affected by the position of the limb, or whether move-
ment is opposed or not during stimulation. EMG correlates well
with MMG and is more user-friendly as a clinical tool [57]. Both
handheld devices and multiparameter monitors are available.
Prior to the development of these monitors, evoked responses
were typically assessed visually in clinical settings. Subjective assess-
ment is limited in that partial neuromuscular blockade cannot be
appreciated unless the level of block is of considerable magnitude.
Therefore, the method is not sufficiently sensitive to detect mild or
shallow levels of residual block at extubation, which could result in
severe complications.
Neuromuscular monitoring requires the electrical stimulation of
a motor nerve. In veterinary medicine, the ulnar and fibular nerves
are typically used for this purpose [58]. Facial nerves have also been
used, but results obtained at the limbs do not always agree with
those obtained at the face [58]. Stimulation of the nerve should be
performed, if possible, away from the muscle that is being stimu-
lated. For example, when stimulating the fibular nerve, it is prefer-
able to place the electrodes lateral to the stifle, and not directly over
the belly of the cranial tibial muscle (Fig. 26.3). Placing the elec-
trodes directly over the muscle could result in direct muscle stimu-
lation. Since NMBAs interrupt neuromuscular transmission, it is
the transmission between nerve and muscle that should be tested.
As shown originally by Claude Bernard almost two centuries ago,
direct muscle stimulation may trigger a contraction even when
neuromuscular transmission is blocked. To further minimize the
risk of direct muscle stimulations, short square-wave pulses of
0.1–0.3 ms duration are typically used during stimulation; longer
pulses are more likely to directly recruit muscle cells in the prox-
imity to the electrodes. Square-wave pulses are preferred as
they produce effective stimulation at lower currents than other

-- 469 of 1450 --

454 	Section 3: Pharmacology
waveforms [59]. Supramaximal current is commonly used so that
all fibers innervated can be recruited. Supramaximal current can be
found for each individual by creating a dose-response curve, where
the current is gradually increased until a plateau in the evoked
response is measured. A current slightly higher than maximal is
used thereafter. However, supramaximal current stimulation can be
uncomfortable in lightly anesthetized animals. Submaximal cur-
rents, as discussed below with train-of- four, are better tolerated and
can be safely used under certain conditions.
There are several patterns of stimulation that can be used. The
simplest method is the “single twitch”’ (ST), whereby a single pulse
is delivered (typically every 10 s; 0.1 Hz), and the muscular twitch
that it evokes is measured. Regardless of the method of quantifica-
tion used (MMG, AMG, or EMG), it is the relative reduction in
twitch magnitude that is plotted, not an absolute value. Hence, a
precise baseline must be obtained, so that all subsequent values can
be compared. For this reason, the ST is not used in the clinical set-
ting; methods that do not require a baseline value are advantageous,
as they allow the anesthesiologist to administer NMBAs during sur-
gery and monitor the adequacy of neuromuscular transmission just
prior to emergence. In addition, ST depression is an insensitive
indicator of residual block. That is, when the magnitude of ST
returns to normal, substantial weakness can still be identified by
other means (Fig. 26.2B).
The use of ST is typically reserved for potency studies. Briefly, the
percentage twitch depression (relative to pre-NMBA values) is plot-
ted against a number of submaximal doses of the NMBA, and a
dose-response curve is created (Fig. 26.2A). ST depression occurs
from blockade of the postsynaptic nAChR, hence it is observed
with the administration of depolarizing or nondepolarizing agents.
The “train-of- four” (TOF) was introduced to practice in the early
1970s after a series of now-classical studies by Ali, Utting, and
Gray [60–64]. The TOF is composed of four stimuli administered
every 0.5 s (2 Hz). Each train is repeated at least 10 s apart. Studies
have shown that it is safe to use submaximal currents when moni-
toring the TOF as long as the current is sufficient to generate all
four evoked responses [65,66]. Lower currents are less likely to be
painful and are better tolerated by patients lightly anesthetized.
There are several advantages to the use of TOF over ST, the main
one being its sensitivity to detect partial blockade.
Prior to administration of an NMBA, all four responses to TOF
stimulation are of equal magnitude. During the onset of neuromus-
cular blockade, all four twitches of the TOF decrease progressively
until the “TOF count” (TOFc) equals zero (i.e., no responses to
TOF) and blockade is complete. During block onset, twitch magni-
tude decreases and reaches zero in order of last to first twitch. In
other words, T4 disappears first (TOFc = 3), followed by T3 (TOFc
= 2), T2 (TOFc = 1), and finally T1 (TOFc = 0). During recovery
from block, the reverse occurs, and twitches reappear from first to
last. That is, T1 reappears and is then followed by T2, T3, and finally
T4. The progressive increase in twitch magnitude during recovery
also occurs in order, so that T4 recovery lags behind T1. This delay
results in a visible (and measurable) fade. Once T1 recovers to its
baseline magnitude, T4 will continue to increase until its pre-
NMBA value is reached (Fig. 26.4). The decrease in the magnitude
of T1 during TOF is analogous to the decrease seen when using ST.
Therefore, T1 depression during TOF can also be used for potency
studies and is attributed to postsynaptic block of nAChRs. Fade
during repeated stimulation, however, is generally thought to be a
consequence of presynaptic receptor blockade resulting in delayed
Figure 26.3 Electrode placement on the forelimb (ulnar nerve) or hindlimb (fibular nerve) of a dog for neuromuscular monitoring. In order to stimulate
the nerve rather than directly stimulate the muscle belly, electrodes should not be placed directly over the muscle that is being stimulated.
1.0
TOFr 1.0 TOFr 0.35
TOFc 3
Time (min)
TOFc 1
TOFc 1
TOFc 2
TOFc 3
TOFr 0.4
TOFr 0.58
TOFr 0.81 TOFr 1.0
0.5
TOF ratio (T4:T1)
0.0
Figure 26.4 Representation of the train-of- four count (TOFc) and TOF ratio (TOFr) during onset and offset of nondepolarizing block. A fade can be
observed between the first (T1) and fourth (T4) evoked responses in the presence of partial block. The number of responses to TOF disappear (from T4
to T1) during onset (first segment) and reappear (from T1 to T4) during recovery (second and third segments).

-- 470 of 1450 --

Chapter 26: Neuromuscular Blockade 	455
ACh mobilization. Because fade occurs with nondepolarizing drugs
but is not observed during depolarizing or Phase I block induced by
succinylcholine, this phenomenon is considered to be a feature of
nondepolarizing blockade.
Fade is quantified by dividing the magnitude of T4 by that of T1
(T4:T1), which is known as the “TOF ratio” (TOFr). Measurement
of the TOFr is useful for assessing neuromuscular function without
a reference to baseline values; each TOF acts as its own reference.
Therefore, a TOFr ≥ 1.0 (or 100%) is seen in the absence of neuro-
muscular blockade, and a TOFr < 1.0 is indicative of impaired
neuromuscular transmission. As shown in Fig. 26.4, recovery of the
TOFr lags behind the recovery of the magnitude of T1 (or ST), and
hence, is a more sensitive indicator of partial block.
If neuromuscular impairment is substantial, that is, if the TOFr is
< 0.5, fade can be easily observed. However, moderate to mild neu-
romuscular block (TOFr of 0.5–0.9) is not easily detected by visual
inspection. It has been shown in humans, horses, and dogs, that our
ability to identify modest changes in acceleration of the different
components of the TOF is quite limited [55,56,67]. In dogs, the
probability to detect impairment by observation of the TOF when
the ratio is 0.7 was only 50% [56]. This inability to detect mild block
is not dependent on the experience of the observers. Hence, visual
assessment of the TOF cannot detect residual block reliably. The
ability to accurately interpret TOFc and TOFr makes it possible to
administer NMBAs during anesthesia without obtaining a baseline
recording and improves safety by ensuring adequate neuromuscular
function prior to extubation.
“Double burst stimulation” (DBS) uses the same general principles
as TOF; repeated stimulation that can identify partial impairment
without the need for baseline measurements. Unlike TOF, however,
DBS is composed of two short tetanic stimulations (bursts) sepa-
rated by a 750-ms interval [68]. Each burst is typically composed of
three stimuli administered at 50 Hz, although some minor variations
have been studied. The response to DBS is observed as two big
twitches and, therefore, visual detection of any fade might be
improved compared with TOF. However, similar limitations to vis-
ual assessment of TOF were observed when DBS was evaluated in
dogs [56]. Hence, DBS seems to offer only minor advantages over
TOF, and is likely to cause more discomfort.
The “post-tetanic count” (PTC) differs from the previous pat-
terns in that it can help discern depths of neuromuscular block
when no responses to TOF are present, that is, at quite profound
levels of muscle paralysis. PTC is based on a physiological phenom-
enon known as “post-tetanic facilitation.” Simply put, a tetanic
stimulus increases intracellular Ca2+ in the presynaptic cell, leading
to increased mobilization and release of ACh into the cleft for a
short period of time (~90–120 s). This increased amount of ACh
can transiently reverse the effects of competitive NMBAs. To meas-
ure the PTC, modern monitors deliver a sequence of impulses as
follows: 15 s of ST at 1 Hz, 5 s of tetanic stimulation at 50 Hz, and
15 s of ST at 1 Hz (or a slight variation of this sequence). The num-
ber of ST responses that can be detected after tetanic facilitation is
inversely related to the magnitude of block (i.e., the time of the
return of T1) (Fig. 26.5) [69–71]. This pattern of stimulation is only
reserved for profound depths of paralysis, and it should be noted
that without tetanic facilitation, no responses would be detected
during ST or TOF stimulation.
Muscle selection for monitoring neuromuscular
transmission
Neuromuscular function is measured at a nerve-muscle unit, but
results need to be extrapolated to the entire individual. This is
complicated by the differences in potency and duration of NMBAs
between muscles. For example, in most species, the diaphragm
is among the most resistant muscles. After injection of an NMBA,
the magnitude of block is less and recovery occurs faster at the
diaphragm than at a limb, where monitoring is usually carried out.
Return of spontaneous ventilation during offset of block does not
necessarily indicate recovery from neuromuscular blockade in the
patient; rather, it only indicates recovery of muscles responsible for
ventilation. The well-known “curare cleft” in the capnograph is an
indication of early recovery of the diaphragm in an otherwise
relaxed individual. The relationship between the return of sponta-
neous ventilation and neuromuscular block measured at the limb
was studied in dogs. It was shown that when tidal volume, peak
inspiratory flow, and minute ventilation returned to pre-relaxation
levels, substantial neuromuscular impairment was measured at the
limbs (TOFr ≤ 0.2) [72]. In humans, neuromuscular function is
typically measured at the adductor pollicis muscle, following stimu-
lation of the ulnar nerve. This muscle recovers late relative to other
important ones. For example, by the time neuromuscular function
is restored at the adductor pollicis muscle, function has already
ST 1Hz
Response
 
Stim
TET 5s
0 	10 	20 	30
Time (seconds)
40
ST 1Hz
40
30
20
10
Time to return of T1 (min)
0
0 	5 	10
PTC
15
(A) 	(B)
Figure 26.5 A. Representation of the post-tetanic count (PTC). The upper panel illustrates the pattern of stimuli. A period of single twitch (ST)
stimulation at 1 Hz (1/s) is shown, followed by a tetanic (TET) stimulation (5 s at 5 Hz). After a 3-s pause, ST at 1 Hz resumes. The number of responses
observed (bottom panel) after the TET stimulation constitutes the PTC and is inversely associated with the time required for recovery. B. Association
between PTC and return of the first twitch of the train-of-four (T1) (simulated data). Note that no response to TOF or ST is visible without post-tetanic
facilitation.

-- 471 of 1450 --

456 	Section 3: Pharmacology
been restored at the larynx [73]. In dogs, a different relation was
observed, and recovery of the larynx occurred later than at the
pelvic limb [74,75] (Fig. 26.6). The implication is that complete
recovery of function measured from stimulation of the fibular
nerve in small animals may not necessarily ensure that laryngeal
function will be normal. Therefore, it might be prudent to delay
extubation a few minutes if neuromuscular function has just
returned at the limbs.
Factors affecting duration and recovery
from neuromuscular blockade
As previously mentioned, changes in temperature, enzyme activity,
and, to a lesser extent, pH may affect the duration of certain agents,
such as the benzylisoquinolinium compounds and succinylcholine.
For the aminosteroidal relaxants, on the other hand, hepatic and
renal function play a more important role.
NMBAs can interact with other drugs that may affect their
potency or duration. Volatile anesthetics potentiate the effects of
NMBAs, and smaller doses are needed when inhalational anesthet-
ics are administered [76,77]. Some antibiotics, such as polymyxin
and aminoglycosides, also potentiate the effects of NMBAs by
affecting neurotransmitter release or action [78]. This effect appears
to be more important when aminosteroidal relaxants are used, but
it appears to be modest when benzylisoquinolinium agents are
used. For example, in dogs and horses, gentamicin potentiates
atracurium-induced block, but only minimally [79,80].
Changes in electrolyte concentrations will also affect neuromus-
cular function. As mentioned earlier, hypocalcemia will decrease
the release of ACh, and therefore facilitate the effects of NMBAs.
Magnesium can compete with Ca2+ and decrease the release of ACh.
The effects of NMBAs can be greatly enhanced if magnesium is
administered, and reversal may be difficult [81].
Recovery from neuromuscular blockade, even in the absence of
any of the factors described above, is a variable phenomenon. For
example, the time for spontaneous recovery after a single dose of
atracurium or cisatracurium in healthy horses and dogs may vary
by as much as 100% between individuals [55,82]. Recovery from
neuromuscular blockade may also be affected by the context of
administration. When vecuronium was administered to healthy
dogs at different doses, the recovery period (defined in that study as
the time between the return of T1 and a TOFr > 0.9) increased with
higher doses. This is the case even when the recovery period was
measured from the same baseline level of relaxation (and presum-
ably similar plasma NMBA concentration) to the return of T1 [83].
As a result of this variability and the potential impact of several
external factors, relying on an expected duration of time to consider
an animal recovered from neuromuscular blockade carries a high
risk for residual block after extubation. The potential negative clini-
cal consequences of all factors affecting the duration or potency
of blockade are greatly minimized if quantitative monitoring of
neuromuscular blockade is used.
Reversal of neuromuscular blockade
Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors
Recovery from nondepolarizing neuromuscular block can be
enhanced with an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor agent, such as
neostigmine or edrophonium. These agents do not directly antago-
nize neuromuscular block; rather, they inhibit the activity of the
acetylcholinesterase enzyme at the NMJ. As a result, ACh that is
released into the cleft is allowed to accumulate. It is ACh that will
compete for the nAChR with the nondepolarizing NMBA. This
indirect mechanism for reversal is of clinical importance: accumu-
lation of ACh will depend on its release, and some time will elapse
before a sufficiently high concentration is reached. There is a limit
to how much ACh can be released and accumulate within the cleft;
this final concentration is insufficient to effectively compete with
high concentrations of the NMBA. Profound neuromuscular block,
which occurs with high concentrations of NMBA at the NMJ, can-
not be reversed with these agents. The competition between NMBA
and ACh is also biased in favor of the relaxant as binding of NMBA
to only one α1 subunit is required to block neuromuscular transmis-
sion, whereas two molecules of ACh are required for activation of
the receptors. Hence, acetylcholinesterase inhibitors can enhance
or accelerate recovery from block, but do not directly antagonize
the nondepolarizing NMBAs. This process is relatively slow, and 5
to 15 min might be necessary after injection before function is fully
restored. It should also be remembered that once the cholinesterase
enzyme is fully inhibited, further doses of the reversal agents will
have no more beneficial effects.
The two agents available, neostigmine and edrophonium, are
similar in their effects but differ in their molecular mechanism of
action (Table 26.2). The acetylcholinesterase enzyme has two active
sites: an esteratic site, and an anionic site [84,85]. Neostigmine
interacts with the enzyme to produce a carbamyl-ester complex at the
1.0
0.9
0.5
	TOF ratio
0.0
20 	40
Time (min)
60
Figure 26.6 Recovery of the train-of-four (TOF) ratio in a dog measured
simultaneously with electromyography (EMG) at the larynx (open circles)
and a pelvic limb (black circles). Recovery at the larynx occurred more
slowly than at the pelvic limb. Source: Adapted and redrawn based on
Sakai et al. [74].
Table 26.2 Selected drugs for reversal of neuromuscular blockade in veterinary
medicine.
Drug 	Intravenous dose (mg/kg)
Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors
Neostigmine 	Canine 0.02–0.07
Feline 0.02–0.05
Equine 0.04
Edrophonium 	Canine 0.1–0.5
Equine 0.5–1
Selective relaxant binding agent
Sugammadex 	Canine 8
Equine 4
Source: Compiled from Mosing et al. [58]; Mosing et al. [91]. Note that data on the
dosage of sugammadex in companion animals is limited.

-- 472 of 1450 --

Chapter 26: Neuromuscular Blockade 	457
esteratic site and competes with ACh as a substrate for the enzyme.
The carbamylated enzyme is unable to hydrolyze ACh. The half-life
of this bond ranges between 7 and 30 min [86]. Edrophonium does
not possess a carbamyl group but forms an electrostatic bond with
the anionic site of the acetylcholinesterase. The electrostatic bond is
less stable than the chemical bond, and can be reversed by ACh,
making edrophonium a weaker acetylcholinesterase inhibitor.
As the half-life of the edrophonium–acetylcholinesterase enzyme
complex is very short, edrophonium might be less effective as a
reversal agent [86,87].
Similar to the NMBAs, the volumes of distribution for both
reversal agents are relatively small, ranging between 0.7 and 1.0 L/kg,
with an elimination half-time of approximately 1–2 h [67,88].
Hepatic biotransformation produces active metabolites that do not
contribute to the reversal of blockade [89]. Both agents are primar-
ily excreted by the kidneys. Hypothermia can delay reversal with
neostigmine, likely due to reduced blood flow and a slower onset of
action [90].
A wide range of doses of neostigmine have been used in dogs
(0.0125–0.2 mg/kg); however, doses in the range of 0.02–0.07 mg/kg
are used most commonly. Predictably, larger doses produce not
only faster but less variable results in terms of speed of reversal [92].
The depth of neuromuscular block at the time of reversal also
affects speed of recovery, as deeper levels of blockade are associated
with higher concentrations of the NMBA at the NMJ. As mentioned
earlier, complete block cannot be antagonized, and recovery times
are no shorter if reversal agents are administered in the absence of
any responses to TOF stimulation. It was historically suggested that
“some degree of spontaneous recovery” should be present prior to
administration of a reversal agent. Prior to the availability of periph-
eral nerve stimulators (PNS), this meant that either spontaneous
ventilation or other movements should be observed before reversal
in order to avoid administration during complete neuromuscular
block. Now that PNS are widely available, reversal should be
avoided while the TOFc is zero. Allowing further spontaneous
recovery of neuromuscular transmission results in shorter and
more predictable reversal times. In dogs, the time to reach a TOFr >
0.9 with administration of neostigmine (0.04 mg/kg) was reduced
from 7 to 4 min if neostigmine was administered when the TOFc
was 4 versus 2. Variability in the speed of recovery was also
reduced [93]. When reversal with neostigmine is performed early
during recovery from block, or when low doses of neostigmine are
used, 10–15 min might be necessary before the TOFr is 0.9 at a
limb [91,92].
The onset of action of edrophonium is shorter than that of
neostigmine. In humans, time to peak antagonism after edropho-
nium was 2 min, compared with 11 min for neostigmine, when
reversing tubocurarine [94]. Similar results were observed when
reversing pancuronium [95]. There are some drawbacks to edro-
phonium. Being a “weaker” enzyme inhibitor, results are unpredict-
able when the drug is used if ≤ 2 responses to TOF are present
during recovery from pancuronium [96]. When comparing
neostigmine and edrophonium administered during profound lev-
els of neuromuscular blockade (T1 < 5%), recovery was faster and
more predictable with neostigmine [87]. Edrophonium is commonly
used at doses ranging between 0.5 and 1.0 mg/kg in veterinary
medicine.
Administration of acetylcholinesterase inhibitors results in
increased circulating levels of Ach, which can produce potentially
fatal bradyarrhythmias. Gastrointestinal activation may also be
observed, which has been suggested as a cause of discomfort
following gastrointestinal surgery in people. To avoid bradycardia,
these agents are almost always administered with, or preceded by,
antimuscarinic agents such as atropine or glycopyrrolate. The
slower onset of glycopyrrolate compared with atropine might be
better suited as a compliment to neostigmine. When atropine is
used, an initial increase in heart rate might be observed owing to
its fast onset. The combination of glycopyrrolate with edrophonium
is poorly matched in terms of onset and if both agents are adminis-
tered together bradycardia may ensue. An alternative is to administer
the anticholinergic agent a minute prior to reversal. Both atropine
and glycopyrrolate have been used successfully in veterinary anes-
thesia at doses of 0.02 and 0.01 mg/kg, respectively [93,97,98].
Selective relaxant binding agents
Sugammadex is the first selective relaxant binding agent (SRBA)
marketed for clinical use. It is a modified γ-cyclodextrin that binds
to rocuronium by encapsulating it in its lipophilic pocket [99].
The sugammadex–rocuronium complex constitutes an irreversible
bond and is devoid of neuromuscular blocking effects. The complex
is then excreted unchanged by the kidneys. As sugammadex binds to
rocuronium, the plasma concentration of free rocuronium is dras-
tically reduced, and the resulting concentration gradient favors its
movement out of the NMJ. As long as sugammadex levels persist
in plasma to “capture” rocuronium, this redistribution process will
continue. As a result, both the plasma concentration of free rocuro-
nium and the concentration at the NMJ fall promptly and neuro-
muscular transmission is restored [100,101]. Unlike reversal of
neuromuscular blockade with acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, pro-
found blockade can be reversed with sugammadex as long as suffi-
cient molecules are administered to bind with rocuronium. Due
to their structural similarities, vecuronium can also be reversed
with sugammadex (Table 26.2). In dogs, sugammadex completely
restored neuromuscular function in < 2 min when administered
during complete rocuronium or vecuronium block [91]. Similar
results (4 min to complete recovery) were shown in ponies after
rocuronium-induced block [58].
The calabadions (calabadion 1 and calabadion 2) are first- and
second-generation derivatives that are members of the cucurbituril
family of drugs (commonly written as cucurbit[n]uril where n is the
number of glycoluril units). These agents were developed as “molecu-
lar containers” to encapsulate both aminosteroidal and benzyliso-
quinolinium compounds and appear to quickly and completely
reverse rocuronium- and cisatracurium-induced block. Unlike sug-
ammadex, the calabadions are less-specific encapsulation agents
and there is a risk of unintended encapsulation of other molecules
with their administration [102,103].
Another agent that is undergoing investigation is L-cysteine for
reversal of a novel class of NMBAs, the fumarates (e.g., gantacu-
rium). Unlike sugammadex and the calabadions that work by
encapsulating agents and carry an intrinsic risk of unintended
encapsulation of other compounds, cysteine works by inactivating
the NMBA. This process is not reversible, thus conferring safety
against potential recurarization [47,49,104].
Reversal of succinylcholine
The depolarizing agent succinylcholine acts as an agonist at the
nAChR and as such, depolarizing (Phase I) block cannot be reversed
by competition with ACh. Thus, administration of an acetylcho-
linesterase inhibitor during Phase I block will not only fail to
promote recovery but may also delay its onset. Neostigmine, but
not edrophonium, also inhibits plasma cholinesterase, which is

-- 473 of 1450 --

458 	Section 3: Pharmacology
responsible for the degradation of succinylcholine. Hence, neostig-
mine may also contribute to delayed recovery from succinylcholine
by this mechanism if administered during Phase I block [105].
Conversely, succinylcholine-induced Phase II block has many of the
same features as competitive, nondepolarizing block and may be
reversed by acetylcholinesterase inhibitors.
Clinical strategies to minimize the risk
of residual neuromuscular blockade
Residual neuromuscular blockade, also called “postoperative resid-
ual curarization” (PORC), is a common and important complica-
tion with the use of NMBAs [106,107]. If unrecognized, even subtle
degrees of weakness can have serious complications. Studies in vol-
unteers show that laryngeal function is affected when the TOFr is
between 0.6 and 0.9, leading to aspiration of solids; this is (mostly)
prevented once the TOFr is > 0.9 [108,109]. In addition to muscular
weakness, residual block (TOFr ~0.7) can depress carotid body
chemoreceptors [110]. This occurs from interactions of the NMBA
with neuronal nAChRs [111]. As a result, the expected ventilatory
response to hypoxia is blunted [112–114]. Moreover, impairment of
the chemoreflex response to hypoxia may persist even after reversal
of block [115]. Large clinical studies also show that upper airway
obstruction occurs more frequently when mild degrees of PORC
are present [116] and these complications are observed soon after
endotracheal extubation. In veterinary anesthesia, the early recovery
period represents a particularly risky time, as oxygen support, air-
way instrumentation (even if noninvasive), and vital sign monitor-
ing are often discontinued. Moreover, the effects of PORC may be
exacerbated by hypothermia, residual effects of anesthetic drugs,
and postoperative sedatives and analgesics, which are often admin-
istered during or soon after emergence from anesthesia. Hence,
avoidance of PORC is of paramount importance, and efforts to
ensure complete recovery of neuromuscular function are critical.
Different strategies can be used in combination to reduce the
incidence and risks of PORC. Short- or intermediate-acting NMBAs
are preferred over long-lasting agents [117]. If an extended duration
of paralysis is needed during anesthesia, repeated small doses may
be safer than an initial large dose of an NMBA, as the slope of recov-
ery is flatter when large doses are used [83]. Constant rate infusions
of NMBAs might appear convenient but carry an inherent risk of
overdosing. If the infusion keeps the TOFc at zero, it is difficult to
assess whether excessive drug delivery is leading to accumulation
unless PTC is used. Repeated small doses at the reappearance of T1
during TOF reduce this risk and provide sufficient relaxation for
most procedures. If an infusion is used, titration aiming to achieve
a TOFc of 1 might be prudent to avoid inadvertently inducing
excessive depth of blockade. Given the differences in recovery times
for muscle groups, it is also recommended to document recovery of
neuromuscular function at the limb for several minutes before the
trachea is extubated.
Neuromuscular monitoring should be mandatory when these
agents are used. Ideally, quantitative monitoring should be used as
this has been shown to reduce the incidence of PORC and can
detect partial recovery at the end of the procedure [54,118]. When
this is the case, a TOFr ≥ 1.0 should be recorded prior to emergence
from anesthesia. If a quantitative monitor is not available, a tradi-
tional PNS should be used. At least two twitches, and preferably
four, should be detected before reversal with an acetylcholinesterase
inhibitor is performed. As mentioned previously, mild PORC can-
not be observed with qualitative PNS monitoring and the practice
of relying on the passage of time to determine if NMBA effects have
waned is risky. If complete recovery of function cannot be docu-
mented, reversing most patients might be the safest course of
action, though the practice of “reverse all” (or most) will undoubt-
edly result in some animals receiving reversal agents unnecessarily.
It has been suggested that administration of acetylcholinesterase
inhibitors when residual paralysis is minimal (or absent) can result
in paradoxical weakness, and that this may be the result of an excess
of ACh at the NMJ [119–121]. Administration of neostigmine
when the TOFr has recovered to ≥ 0.9 does produce a transient
decrease in the TOFr. However, that reduction in the ratio is driven
by an increase in the height of T1 relative to that of T4, and none of
the evoked responses exhibit a reduction in magnitude (Fig. 26.7)
[119,121,122]. It is unclear whether this represents weakness since
the force of contraction of any individual response is not reduced.
This phenomenon, however, can be avoided by using low doses of
neostigmine (0.01–0.03 mg/kg) or by using edrophonium as the
reversal agent [122,123].
References
1 Gillies D, Wynands JE. Harold Randall Griffith. The pioneer of the use of muscle
relaxants in anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth 1986; 58: 943–945.
2 Gray TC, Halton J. A milestone in Aanaesthesia?: (d-tubocurarine chloride). Proc
R Soc Med 1946; 39: 400–410.
3 Gray TC, Halton J. Curarine with balanced anaesthesia. Br Med J 1946; 2: 293–295.
4 Gray TC, Halton J. Technique for the use of d-tubocurarine chloride with balanced
anaesthesia. Br Med J 1946; 2: 293–295.
5 Hall L. A report on the clinical use of bis (beta-dimethylaminoethyl)-succinate
bisethiodide (“Brevedil, E” M and B2210) during anaesthesia in the dog. Vet Rec
1952; 64: 491–493.
6 Hall L, Weaver B. Some notes on balanced anaesthesia for the dog and cat. Vet Rec
1954; 66: 289–293.
7 Martin- Flores M, Sakai DM, Campoy L, et al. Survey of how different groups of
veterinarians manage the use of neuromuscular blocking agents in anesthetized
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45: 443–451.
8 Rahamimoff R, Lev-Tov A, Meiri H, et al. Regulation of acetylcholine liberation
from presynaptic nerve terminals. Monogr Neural Sci 1980; 7: 3–18.
Neostigmine
140
120
100
0 	2 	4 	6 	8
Time (min)
10
T1
T4
TOF ratio
%
80
60
Figure 26.7 Force of contraction measured via mechanomyography
(MMG) of the first (T1) and fourth (T4) evoked responses to train-of- four
(TOF) stimulation, and TOF ratio (T4/T1) in an anesthetized dog.
Neostigmine (0.04 mg/kg) and atropine (0.02 mg/kg) were administered
IV when the TOF ratio had spontaneously recovered to 90% after
vecuronium-induced neuromuscular block. A transient decrease in the
TOF ratio is observed after neostigmine administration accompanied by
an increase in the magnitude of T1 and a stable/slightly increased
magnitude of T4. Source: Adapted and redrawn based on Romano
et al. [122].

-- 474 of 1450 --

Chapter 26: Neuromuscular Blockade 	459
9 Auerbach A. Activation of endplate nicotinic acetylcholine receptors by agonists.
Biochem Pharmacol 2015; 97: 601–618.
10 Booij LH. Neuromuscular transmission and its pharmacological blockade. Part 1:
neuromuscular transmission and general aspects of its blockade. Pharm World Sci
1997; 19: 1–12.
11 Rich MM. The control of neuromuscular transmission in health and disease.
Neuroscientist 2006; 12: 134–142.
12 Jeevendra Martyn JA, Fukushima Y, Chon JY, et al. Muscle relaxants in burns,
trauma, and critical illness. Int Anesthesiol Clin 2006; 44: 123–143.
13 Martyn JA, Richtsfeld M. Succinylcholine-induced hyperkalemia in acquired path-
ologic states: etiologic factors and molecular mechanisms. Anesthesiology 2006;
104: 158–169.
14 Jonsson M, Gurley D, Dabrowski M, et al. Distinct pharmacologic properties of neu-
romuscular blocking agents on human neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors: a
possible explanation for the train-of- four fade. Anesthesiology 2006; 105: 521–533.
15 Waud BE, Waud DR. The relation between the response to “train-of- four” stimula-
tion and receptor occlusion during competitive neuromuscular block. Anesthesiology
1972; 37: 413–416.
16 Fisher DM, Canfell PC, Fahey MR, et al. Elimination of atracurium in humans:
contribution of Hofmann elimination and ester hydrolysis versus organ-based
elimination. Anesthesiology 1986; 65: 6–12.
17 Lee DD, Meyer RE, Sullivan TC, et al. Respiratory depressant and skeletal muscle
relaxant effects of low-dose pancuronium bromide in spontaneously breathing,
isoflurane-anesthetized dogs. Vet Surg 1998; 27: 473–479.
18 Wright PM, Hart P, Lau M, et al. Cumulative characteristics of atracurium and
vecuronium. A simultaneous clinical and pharmacokinetic study. Anesthesiology
1994; 81: 59–68; discussion 27A.
19 Martin-Flores M, Pare MD, Campoy L, et al. The kalaemic and neuromuscular
effects of succinylcholine in centronuclear myopathy: a pilot investigation in a
canine model. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2015; 32: 666–671.
20 Cottrell JE, Hartung J, Giffin JP, et al. Intracranial and hemodynamic changes after
succinylcholine administration in cats. Anesth Analg 1983; 62: 1006–1009.
21 Martin-Flores M, Cheetham J, Campoy L, et al. Effect of gantacurium on evoked
laryngospasm and duration of apnea in anesthetized healthy cats. Am J Vet Res
2015; 76: 216–223.
22 Agoston S, Vandenbrom RH, Wierda JM. Clinical pharmacokinetics of neuromus-
cular blocking drugs. Clin Pharmacokinet 1992; 22: 94–115.
23 Shi WZ, Fahey MR, Fisher DM, et al. Laudanosine (a metabolite of atracurium)
increases the minimum alveolar concentration of halothane in rabbits. Anesthesiology
1985; 63: 584–588.
24 Ward S, Weatherley BC. Pharmacokinetics of atracurium and its metabolites.
Br J Anaesth 1986; 58(Suppl 1): 6S–10S.
25 Pittet JF, Tassonyi E, Schopfer C, et al. Plasma concentrations of laudanosine, but
not of atracurium, are increased during the anhepatic phase of orthotopic liver
transplantation in pigs. Anesthesiology 1990; 72: 145–152.
26 Hughes R, Chapple DJ. The pharmacology of atracurium: a new competitive
neuromuscular blocking agent. Br J Anaesth 1981; 53: 31–44.
27 Welch RM, Brown A, Ravitch J, et al. The in vitro degradation of cisatracurium, the
R, cis-R’- isomer of atracurium, in human and rat plasma. Clin Pharmacol Ther
1995; 58: 132–142.
28 Fodale V, Santamaria LB. Laudanosine, an atracurium and cisatracurium metabo-
lite. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2002; 19: 466–473.
29 Savarese JJ, Ali HH, Basta SJ, et al. The clinical neuromuscular pharmacology of
mivacurium chloride (BW B1090U). A short-acting nondepolarizing ester neuro-
muscular blocking drug. Anesthesiology 1988; 68: 723–732.
30 Cerf C, Mesguish M, Gabriel I, et al. Screening patients with prolonged neuromus-
cular blockade after succinylcholine and mivacurium. Anesth Analg 2002; 94:
461–466, table of contents.
31 Smith LJ, Moon PF, Lukasik VM, et al. Duration of action and hemodynamic prop-
erties of mivacurium chloride in dogs anesthetized with halothane. Am J Vet Res
1999; 60: 1047–1050.
32 Booij LH, Edwards RP, Sohn YJ, et al. Cardiovascular and neuromuscular effects of
Org NC 45, pancuronium, metocurine, and d-tubocurarine in dogs. Anesth Analg
1980; 59: 26–30.
33 Fitzal S, Gilly H, Ilias W. Comparative investigations on the cardiovascular effects
of Org NC 45 and pancuronium in dogs. Br J Anaesth 1983; 55: 641–646.
34 Kopman AF, Klewicka MM, Kopman DJ, et al. Molar potency is predictive of the
speed of onset of neuromuscular block for agents of intermediate, short, and ultra-
short duration. Anesthesiology 1999; 90: 425–431.
35 Levy JH, Davis GK, Duggan J, et al. Determination of the hemodynamics and
histamine release of rocuronium (Org 9426) when administered in increased doses
under N2O/O2-sufentanil anesthesia. Anesth Analg 1994; 78: 318–321.
36 Appiah-Ankam J, Hunter J. Pharmacology of neuromuscular blocking drugs.
Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain 2004; 4: 2–7.
37 Smith CE, Saddler JM, Bevan JC, et al. Pretreatment with non-depolarizing neuro-
muscular blocking agents and suxamethonium-induced increases in resting jaw
tension in children. Br J Anaesth 1990; 64: 577–581.
38 Birch JH, Foldes FF, Rendell-Baker L. Causes and prevention of prolonged apnea
with succinylcholine. Curr Res Anesth Analg 1956; 35: 609–633.
39 Soliday FK, Conley YP, Henker R. Pseudocholinesterase deficiency: a comprehen-
sive review of genetic, acquired, and drug influences. AANA J 2010; 78: 313–320.
40 Cullen LK, Jones RS. The nature of suxamethonium neuromuscular block in the
dog assessed by train-of- four stimulation. Res Vet Sci 1980; 29: 281–288.
41 Minton MD, Grosslight K, Stirt JA, et al. Increases in intracranial pressure from
succinylcholine: prevention by prior nondepolarizing blockade. Anesthesiology
1986; 65: 165–169.
42 Chiu CL, Jaais F, Wang CY. Effect of rocuronium compared with succinylcholine on
intraocular pressure during rapid sequence induction of anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth
1999; 82: 757–760.
43 Lanier WL, Milde JH, Michenfelder JD. Cerebral stimulation following succinyl-
choline in dogs. Anesthesiology 1986; 64: 551–559.
44 Cairoli VJ, Ivankovich AD, Vucicevic D, et al. Succinylcholine-induced hyper-
kalemia in the rat following radiation injury to muscle. Anesth Analg 1982; 61:
83–86.
45 Stone WA, Beach TP, Hamelberg W. Succinylcholine-induced hyperkalemia in dogs
with transected sciatic nerves or spinal cords. Anesthesiology 1970; 32: 515–520.
46 Heerdt PM, Kang R, The A, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of the novel neuromus-
cular blocking drug GW280430A (AV430A) in dogs. Anesthesiology 2004; 100:
846–851.
47 Lien CA, Savard P, Belmont M, et al. Fumarates: unique nondepolarizing neuro-
muscular blocking agents that are antagonized by cysteine. J Crit Care 2009; 24:
50–57.
48 Lien CA. Development and potential clinical impairment of ultra-short-acting
neuromuscular blocking agents. Br J Anaesth 2011; 107(Suppl 1): i60–i71.
49 Savarese JJ, McGilvra JD, Sunaga H, et al. Rapid chemical antagonism of neuromus-
cular blockade by L-cysteine adduction to and inactivation of the olefinic (double-
bonded) isoquinolinium diester compounds gantacurium (AV430A), CW 002, and
CW 011. Anesthesiology 2010; 113: 58–73.
50 Savarese JJ, Sunaga H, McGilvra JD, et al. Preclinical pharmacology in the rhesus
monkey of CW 1759-50, a new ultra-short acting nondepolarizing neuromuscular
blocking agent, degraded and antagonized by L-cysteine. Anesthesiology 2018; 129:
970–988.
51 Diaz LL, Zhang J, Heerdt PM. Comparative pharmacodynamics of pancuronium,
cisatracurium, and CW002 in rabbits. J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2014; 53: 283–289.
52 Sakai DM, Romano M, Tseng CT, et al. Bias, limits of agreement, and percent errors
between acceleromyography and mechanomyography in anesthetized dogs. Vet J
2018; 233: 3–7.
53 Claudius C, Viby-Mogensen J. Acceleromyography for use in scientific and clinical
practice: a systematic review of the evidence. Anesthesiology 2008; 108: 1117–1140.
54 Murphy GS, Szokol JW, Avram MJ, et al. Intraoperative acceleromyography moni-
toring reduces symptoms of muscle weakness and improves quality of recovery in
the early postoperative period. Anesthesiology 2011; 115: 946–954.
55 Martin-Flores M, Campoy L, Ludders JW, et al. Comparison between acceleromyo-
graphy and visual assessment of train-of- four for monitoring neuromuscular
blockade in horses undergoing surgery. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35: 220–227.
56 Martin- Flores M, Sakai DM, Tseng CT, et al. Can we see fade? A survey of anesthe-
sia providers and our ability to detect partial neuromuscular block in dogs. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2019; 46: 182–187.
57 Sakai DM, Martin-Flores M, Tomak EA, et al. Differences between acceleromyo-
graphy and electromyography during neuromuscular function monitoring in anes-
thetized Beagle dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2015; 42: 233–241.
58 Mosing M, Auer U, Bardell D, et al. Reversal of profound rocuronium block moni-
tored in three muscle groups with sugammadex in ponies. Br J Anaesth 2010; 105:
480–486.
59 Mundl WJ. A constant-current stimulator. Physiol Behav 1980; 24: 991–993.
60 Ali HH, Utting JE, Nightingale DA, et al. Quantitative assessment of residual curar-
ization in humans. Br J Anaesth 1970; 42: 802–803.
61 Ali HH, Utting JE, Gray C. Stimulus frequency in the detection of neuromuscular
block in humans. Br J Anaesth 1970; 42: 967–978.
62 Ali HH, Utting JE, Gray TC. Quantitative assessment of residual antidepolarizing
block. I. Br J Anaesth 1971; 43: 473–477.
63 Ali HH, Utting JE, Gray TC. Quantitative assessment of residual antidepolarizing
block. II. Br J Anaesth 1971; 43: 478–485.
64 Ali HH, Wilson RS, Savarese JJ, et al. The effect of tubocurarine on indirectly
elicited train-of- four muscle response and respiratory measurements in humans.
Br J Anaesth 1975; 47: 570–574.
65 Brull SJ, Ehrenwerth J, Silverman DG. Stimulation with submaximal current for
train- of-four monitoring. Anesthesiology 1990; 72: 629–632.

-- 475 of 1450 --

460 	Section 3: Pharmacology
66 Silverman DG, Connelly NR, O’Connor TZ, et al. Accelographic train-of- four at
near-threshold currents. Anesthesiology 1992; 76: 34–38.
67 Ansermino JM, Sanderson PM, Bevan JC, et al. Acceleromyography improves
detection of residual neuromuscular blockade in children. Can J Anaesth 1996; 43:
589–594.
68 Engbaek J, Ostergaard D, Viby-Mogensen J. Double burst stimulation (DBS): a new
pattern of nerve stimulation to identify residual neuromuscular block. Br J Anaesth
1989; 62: 274–278.
69 Viby-Mogensen J, Howardy-Hansen P, Chraemmer-Jørgensen B, et al. Posttetanic
count (PTC): a new method of evaluating an intense nondepolarizing neuromuscu-
lar blockade. Anesthesiology 1981; 55: 458–461.
70 Vincent RD, Jr., Brockwell RC, Moreno MC, et al. Posttetanic count revisited: are
measurements more reliable using the TOF-Watch accelerographic peripheral
nerve stimulator? J Clin Monit Comput 2004; 18: 33–37.
71 Sarrafzadeh-Rezaei F, Eddie Clutton R. The post-tetanic count during vecuronium-
induced neuromuscular blockade in halothane-anaesthetized dogs. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2009; 36: 246–254.
72 Martin-Flores M, Sakai DM, Campoy L, et al. Recovery from neuromuscular block
in dogs: restoration of spontaneous ventilation does not exclude residual blockade.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2014; 41: 269–277.
73 Hemmerling TM, Schmidt J, Hanusa C, et al. Simultaneous determination of neu-
romuscular block at the larynx, diaphragm, adductor pollicis, orbicularis oculi and
corrugator muscles. Br J Anaesth 2000; 85: 856–860.
74 Sakai DM, Martin-Flores M, Romano M, et al. Recovery from rocuronium-induced
neuromuscular block was longer in the larynx than in the pelvic limb of anesthe-
tized dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44: 246–253.
75 Tseng CT, Sakai DM, Libin M, et al. Partial neuromuscular block impairs arytenoid
abduction during hypercarbic challenge in anesthetized dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg
2017; 44: 1049–1056.
76 Nagahama S, Nishimura R, Mochizuki M, et al. The effects of propofol, isoflurane
and sevoflurane on vecuronium infusion rates for surgical muscle relaxation in
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2006; 33: 169–174.
77 Kastrup MR, Marsico FF, Ascoli FO, et al. Neuromuscular blocking properties of
atracurium during sevoflurane or propofol anaesthesia in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg
2005; 32: 222–227.
78 Sokoll MD, Gergis SD. Antibiotics and neuromuscular function. Anesthesiology
1981; 55: 148–159.
79 Martinez EA, Mealey KL, Wooldridge AA, et al. Pharmacokinetics, effects on renal
function, and potentiation of atracurium-induced neuromuscular blockade after
administration of a high dose of gentamicin in isoflurane-anesthetized dogs.
Am J Vet Res 1996; 57: 1623–1626.
80 Hildebrand SV, Hill T. Interaction of gentamycin and atracurium in anaesthetised
horses. Equine Vet J 1994; 26: 209–211.
81 Martin- Flores M, Boesch J, Campoy L, et al. Failure to reverse prolonged
vecuronium-induced neuromuscular blockade with edrophonium in an anesthe-
tized dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2011; 47: 294–298.
82 Chen IY, Liang YY, Chen KS, et al. Comparison of the neuromuscular blocking
effects of cisatracurium during isoflurane or propofol anesthesia in dogs.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47: 454–462.
83 Lorenzutti AM, Zarazaga MP, Sakai DM, et al. Context-sensitive recovery of neuro-
muscular function from vecuronium in dogs: effects of dose and dosing protocol.
Vet J 2019; 248: 14–17.
84 Naguib M, Flood P, McArdle JJ, et al. Advances in neurobiology of the neuromus-
cular junction: implications for the anesthesiologist. Anesthesiology 2002; 96:
202–231.
85 Wilson IB, Bergmann F. Studies on cholinesterase. VII. The active surface of acetyl-
choline esterase derived from effects of pH on inhibitors. J Biol Chem 1950; 185:
479–489.
86 Wilson IB. The interaction of tensilon and neostigmine with acetylcholinesterase.
Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther 1955; 104: 204–213.
87 Rupp SM, McChristian JW, Miller RD, et al. Neostigmine and edrophonium antag-
onism of varying intensity neuromuscular blockade induced by atracurium, pancu-
ronium, or vecuronium. Anesthesiology 1986; 64: 711–717.
88 Cronnelly R, Morris RB. Antagonism of neuromuscular blockade. Br J Anaesth
1982; 54: 183–194.
89 Hennis PJ, Cronnelly R, Sharma M, et al. Metabolites of neostigmine and pyri-
dostigmine do not contribute to antagonism of neuromuscular blockade in the dog.
Anesthesiology 1984; 61: 534–539.
90 Heier T, Clough D, Wright PM, et al. The influence of mild hypothermia on the
pharmacokinetics and time course of action of neostigmine in anesthetized volun-
teers. Anesthesiology 2002; 97: 90–95.
91 Mosing M, Auer U, West E, et al. Reversal of profound rocuronium or vecuronium-
induced neuromuscular block with sugammadex in isoflurane-anaesthetised dogs.
Vet J 2012; 192: 467–471.
92 Martin- Flores M, Lorenzutti AM, Litterio NJ, et al. Speed of reversal of vecuro-
nium neuromuscular block with different doses of neostigmine in anesthetized
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44: 28–34.
93 Lorenzutti AM, Martin-Flores M, Baldivieso JM, et al. Evaluation of neostigmine
antagonism at different levels of vecuronium-induced neuromuscular blockade in
isoflurane anesthetized dogs. Can Vet J 2014; 55: 156–160.
94 Cronnelly R, Morris RB, Miller RD. Edrophonium: duration of action and atro-
pine requirement in humans during halothane anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1982;
57: 261–266.
95 Ferguson A, Egerszegi P, Bevan DR. Neostigmine, pyridostigmine, and edropho-
nium as antagonists of pancuronium. Anesthesiology 1980; 53: 390–394.
96 Kopman AF. Edrophonium antagonism of pancuronium-induced neuromuscular
blockade in man: a reappraisal. Anesthesiology 1979; 51: 139–142.
97 Martin- Flores M, Pare MD, Campoy L, et al. Neuromuscular blocking effects
of cisatracurium and its antagonism with neostigmine in a canine model of
autosomal-recessive centronuclear myopathy. Br J Anaesth 2015; 115: 927–931.
98 Adams WA, Mark Senior J, Jones RS, et al. cis-atracurium in dogs with and with-
out porto-systemic shunts. Vet Anaesth Analg 2006; 33: 17–23.
99 Adam JM, Bennett DJ, Bom A, et al. Cyclodextrin-derived host molecules as
reversal agents for the neuromuscular blocker rocuronium bromide: synthesis and
structure-activity relationships. J Med Chem 2002; 45: 1806–1816.
100 Bom A, Bradley M, Cameron K, et al. A novel concept of reversing neuromuscular
block: chemical encapsulation of rocuronium bromide by a cyclodextrin-based
synthetic host. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 2002; 41: 266–270.
101 Bom A, Clark JK, Palin R. New approaches to reversal of neuromuscular block.
Curr Opin Drug Discov Devel 2002; 5: 793–800.
102 Hoffmann U, Grosse-Sundrup M, Eikermann-Haerter K, et al. Calabadion: a new
agent to reverse the effects of benzylisoquinoline and steroidal neuromuscular-
blocking agents. Anesthesiology 2013; 119: 317–325.
103 Ma D, Zhang B, Hoffmann U, et al. Acyclic cucurbit[n]uril-type molecular con-
tainers bind neuromuscular blocking agents in vitro and reverse neuromuscular
block in vivo. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 2012; 51: 11358–11362.
104 Sunaga H, Malhotra JK, Yoon E, et al. Cysteine reversal of the novel neuromuscu-
lar blocking drug CW002 in dogs: pharmacodynamics, acute cardiovascular
effects, and preliminary toxicology. Anesthesiology 2010; 112: 900–909.
105 Sunew KY, Hicks RG. Effects of neostigmine and pyridostigmine on duration of
succinylcholine action and pseudocholinesterase activity. Anesthesiology 1978; 49:
188–191.
106 Murphy GS, Szokol JW, Marymont JH, et al. Residual paralysis at the time of
tracheal extubation. Anesth Analg 2005; 100: 1840–1845.
107 Murphy GS. Residual neuromuscular blockade: incidence, assessment, and
relevance in the postoperative period. Minerva anestesiologica 2006; 72: 97–109.
108 Eriksson LI, Sundman E, Olsson R, et al. Functional assessment of the pharynx at
rest and during swallowing in partially paralyzed humans: simultaneous videoma-
nometry and mechanomyography of awake human volunteers. Anesthesiology
1997; 87: 1035–1043.
109 Sundman E, Witt H, Olsson R, et al. The incidence and mechanisms of pharyngeal
and upper esophageal dysfunction in partially paralyzed humans: pharyngeal
videoradiography and simultaneous manometry after atracurium. Anesthesiology
2000; 92: 977–984.
110 Wyon N, Joensen H, Yamamoto Y, et al. Carotid body chemoreceptor function is
impaired by vecuronium during hypoxia. Anesthesiology 1998; 89: 1471–1479.
111 Jonsson M, Wyon N, Lindahl SG, et al. Neuromuscular blocking agents block
carotid body neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Eur J Pharmacol 2004;
497: 173–180.
112 Eriksson LI, Sato M, Severinghaus JW. Effect of a vecuronium-induced partial neuro-
muscular block on hypoxic ventilatory response. Anesthesiology 1993; 78: 693–699.
113 Eriksson LI. Reduced hypoxic chemosensitivity in partially paralysed man. A new
property of muscle relaxants? Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1996; 40: 520–523.
114 Christensson E, Ebberyd A, Hårdemark Cedborg A, et al. Hypoxic ventilatory
response after rocuronium-induced partial neuromuscular blockade in men with
obstructive sleep apnoea. Anaesthesia 2020; 75: 338–347.
115 Broens SJL, Boon M, Martini CH, et al. Reversal of partial neuromuscular block
and the ventilatory response to hypoxia: a randomized controlled trial in healthy
volunteers. Anesthesiology 2019; 131: 467–476.
116 Murphy GS, Szokol JW, Marymont JH, et al. Residual neuromuscular blockade
and critical respiratory events in the postanesthesia care unit. Anesth Analg 2008;
107: 130–137.
117 Berg H, Roed J, Viby-Mogensen J, et al. Residual neuromuscular block is a risk
factor for postoperative pulmonary complications. A prospective, randomised,
and blinded study of postoperative pulmonary complications after atracurium,
vecuronium and pancuronium. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1997; 41: 1095–1103.
118 Murphy GS, Szokol JW, Marymont JH, et al. Intraoperative acceleromyographic
monitoring reduces the risk of residual neuromuscular blockade and adverse

-- 476 of 1450 --

Chapter 26: Neuromuscular Blockade 	461
respiratory events in the postanesthesia care unit. Anesthesiology 2008; 109:
389–398.
119 Caldwell JE. Reversal of residual neuromuscular block with neostigmine at one to
four hours after a single intubating dose of vecuronium. Anesth Analg 1995; 80:
1168–1174.
120 Herbstreit F, Zigrahn D, Ochterbeck C, et al. Neostigmine/glycopyrrolate
administered after recovery from neuromuscular block increases upper airway
collapsibility by decreasing genioglossus muscle activity in response to negative
pharyngeal pressure. Anesthesiology 2010; 113: 1280–1288.
121 Goldhill DR, Wainwright AP, Stuart CS, et al. Neostigmine after spontaneous
recovery from neuromuscular blockade. Effect on depth of blockade monitored
with train-of- four and tetanic stimuli. Anaesthesia 1989; 44: 293–299.
122 Romano M, Martin-Flores M, Sakai DM, et al. Effects of neostigmine or edropho-
nium on force of contraction when administered at a train-of- four ratio of 0.9 in
anesthetized dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44: 1313–1320.
123 Fuchs-Buder T, Baumann C, De Guis J, et al. Low-dose neostigmine to antagonise
shallow atracurium neuromuscular block during inhalational anaesthesia: a ran-
domised controlled trial. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2013; 30: 594–598.

-- 477 of 1450 --

Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of Lumb and Jones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
27
462
Introduction
The drugs described below produce reliable sedation and anesthe-
sia in veterinary patients. Most commonly, these agents are admin-
istered intravenously (IV) to induce an unconscious state suitable
for intubation and transition to an inhaled anesthetic. However,
when administered by either constant rate infusion, intermittent
bolus, or intramuscularly (IM), injectable anesthetics can also be
used to maintain anesthesia for short periods of time.
Ideally, all injectable anesthetics would be water soluble, have a
long shelf-life, and be stable when exposed to heat and light. Only a
small volume of drug would be needed to induce anesthesia, and
these agents would have a large safety margin. Their duration of
action would be short, with no cumulative effects, and they would
be readily metabolized into non-toxic metabolites and/or excreted
from the body. Their half-lives would be well characterized, as
would their maximum residual limits so that withdrawal times
could be established for animals destined for human consumption.
Analgesia adequate for the procedure and some degree of muscle
relaxation would also be produced by ideal injectable anesthetics.
Most importantly perhaps, the ideal injectable anesthetic would not
create unpredictable life-threatening changes in cardiovascular and
respiratory function.
An injectable anesthetic that possesses all of these characteristics
has not yet been produced. When selecting an injectable anesthetic,
the practitioner should consider the pharmacokinetics and phar-
macodynamics of the anesthetic, in addition to the patient’s physical
status, in order to select the most appropriate agent and dose for
that individual patient.
27 Injectable Anesthetics
Stephanie M. Hamilton
Department of Companion Animals, Atlantic Veterinary College, University of Prince Edward Island, Charlottetown,
Prince Edward Island, Canada
Chapter contents
Introduction, 462
Barbiturates, 463
Chemical structure, 463
Mechanism of action, 463
Pharmacokinetics, 463
Pharmacodynamics, 464
Species-specific effects, 465
Clinical use, 465
Propofol, 466
Chemical structure, 466
Mechanism of action, 466
Pharmacokinetics, 466
Pharmacodynamics, 467
Species-specific effects, 467
Clinical use, 468
Fospropofol and other propofol prodrugs, 468
Dissociatives, 469
Chemical structure, 469
Mechanism of action, 469
Pharmacokinetics, 469
Pharmacodynamics, 470
Species-specific effects, 471
Clinical use, 472
Ketamine– propofol (ketofol), 472
Etomidate, 474
Chemical structure, 474
Mechanism of action, 474
Pharmacokinetics, 474
Pharmacodynamics, 474
Species-specific effects, 476
Clinical use, 476
Etomidate analogs, 477
Alfaxalone, 477
Chemical structure, 477
Mechanism of action, 477
Pharmacokinetics, 478
Pharmacodynamics, 478
Species-specific effects, 479
Clinical use, 481
Other drugs, 481
Metomidate, 481
Chloral hydrate, 481
Magnesium sulfate, 481
Chloralose, 481
References, 482

-- 478 of 1450 --

Chapter 27: Injectable Anesthetics 	463
Barbiturates
Barbiturates have been used in veterinary medicine for decades as
both injectable anesthetics and anticonvulsants. For many years,
thiopental was among the most commonly used injectable drugs
for induction of anesthesia. However, over the past decade, its lack
of availability in the United States and other countries has meant
that veterinarians have increasingly turned to other non-barbiturate
injectable anesthetic drugs.
Chemical structure
All of the drugs in this category are derivatives of barbituric acid, a
combination of urea and malonic acid (Fig. 27.1). While barbituric
acid does not have sedative or hypnotic properties, side chains
added at position 5 in the pyrimidine nucleus impart hypnotic
activity. The length of the side chain at position 5 influences the
potency and the duration of action of these drugs, with longer side
chains increasing potency. If a sulfur atom replaces the oxygen atom
at position 2, an active barbiturate with a faster onset of action and
a shorter duration is produced. In general, any modification of the
barbiturate that increases the lipophilicity of the molecule will
increase its potency while shortening the onset time and duration
of action. Many barbiturates (thiopental, thiamylal, and methohexi-
tal) have asymmetric carbon atoms in one of the side chains
attached to the barbiturate ring at position 5, which results in stere-
oisomers. Despite differences in potency of the stereoisomers (i.e.,
S(–)-enantiomers are nearly twice as potent as R(+)-enantiomers),
barbiturates are supplied as racemic mixtures.
Commonly, barbiturates are classified by their duration of action
(long, intermediate, short, and ultra-short) or their chemical struc-
ture. Thiobarbiturates (thiopental and thiamylal) are those with a
sulfur atom at position 2, while oxybarbiturates (pentobarbital, phe-
nobarbital, and methohexital) have an oxygen atom at position 2.
Historically, the ultra-short-acting thiobarbiturate, thiopental,
was commonly used for anesthetic induction in veterinary medi-
cine. In jurisdictions where it is still available, it is supplied as a
yellow crystalline powder buffered with sodium bicarbonate, which
is usually reconstituted with sterile water or saline to produce 2.5%,
5%, or 10% solutions. The resulting solution is alkaline (pH 10–11)
and can cause tissue necrosis if injected perivascularly. The recon-
stituted solution is stable at room temperature for up to 1 week [1].
As the solution ages, crystals precipitate resulting in a progressive
loss of potency; therefore, higher doses may be needed to induce
anesthesia.
Thiamylal is an ultra-short-acting thiobarbiturate that differs
from thiopental in that the ethyl radical in thiopental has been
replaced with an allyl radical. While thiamylal was commonly used
in veterinary medicine for some time, it is no longer commercially
available.
Methohexital is an ultra-short-acting oxybarbiturate that pos-
sesses a methyl group at the N-1 position. This results in a drug
that is twice as potent as thiopental, but also has an increased
incidence of excitatory side effects. Methohexital sodium is
supplied as a powder and is reconstituted with sterile water or
saline to produce a 2.5% solution that is stable for up to 6 weeks if
refrigerated [2].
Pentobarbital is classified as a short-acting oxybarbiturate that is
identical to methohexital but lacks a methyl group at the N-1 posi-
tion. These substitutions result in a drug that has a longer duration of
action (typically 1–2 h) and a lower margin of safety (anesthetic dose
is 50–70% lethal dose). Pentobarbital has largely been replaced as a
general anesthetic in most domestic species. It is still used as an
injectable anesthetic in laboratory rodents, particularly in non-
recovery procedures, and remains the primary ingredient in most
commercially available veterinary euthanasia solutions. Pentobarbital
is available in solutions of varying concentrations that, stored at room
temperature, are stable for years.
Mechanism of action
Barbiturates produce central nervous system (CNS) depression by
activating the ionotropic subtype of the γ-aminobutyric acid
(GABA) receptor known as “GABAA
” [3]. Activation of the GABAA
receptor increases transmembrane chloride conduction, resulting
in hyperpolarization of the postsynaptic cell membrane. It appears
that the barbiturates reduce the rate of dissociation of GABA from
its receptor, which increases the duration of chloride channel open-
ing. At increasing drug concentrations, barbiturates can mimic the
action of GABA and activate the chloride channels directly [3,4].
Ultimately, inhibition of the postsynaptic neuron results in CNS
depression and loss of consciousness.
Pharmacokinetics
Distribution of the barbiturates within the body is determined by
factors such as time, protein binding, degree of ionization, and
lipid solubility. Lipid solubility increases with the substitution of a
sulfur molecule at carbon position 2 in the barbiturate ring. As
previously stated, an increase in lipid solubility increases potency
and shortens onset and duration of action. Protein binding corre-
lates with lipid solubility, with barbiturates that are highly lipo-
philic (thiopental) also being highly bound to protein. Decreased
protein binding due to displacement from binding sites by other
drugs (aspirin and phenylbutazone) or hypoproteinemia can lead
to increased drug effects.
The acid dissociation constant (pKa
) and pH of the environment
can be used to predict the proportion of ionization of the barbitu-
rates for any given condition. The pKa is the pH at which the barbi-
turate exists 50% in the ionized and 50% in the non-ionized form.
For a barbiturate to penetrate the lipid layer of a cell, it needs to be
in the non-ionized form. Therefore, as blood becomes more acidic,
more non-ionized drug exists. This leads to an increase in the bar-
biturate’s CNS penetration and clinical effectiveness. The reverse is
also true: with more alkaline blood, the ionized form is favored, and
the anesthetic effect may be reduced.
Metabolism of the barbiturates occurs in the liver and is
followed by excretion by the kidneys. Biotransformation (oxidation,
N-dealkylation, desulfuration, and destruction of the barbituric
acid ring structure) in the liver occurs primarily in the endoplasmic
reticulum of hepatocytes and can result in hepatic enzyme induc-
tion (cytochrome P450 system) [5]. The reserve capacity of the liver
is quite large; therefore, significant hepatic dysfunction must be
present before there is a prolongation of the duration of action of
barbiturates [6].
R3 	O
O	H
R 1
R 2
C
C
C 	C	X
N
N
Figure 27.1 General chemical structure of barbiturates.

-- 479 of 1450 --

464 	Section 3: Pharmacology
Thiopental
After IV administration of thiopental, the drug mixes within the
blood and is delivered to body tissues in accordance with the rate
of perfusion, the tissue affinity for the drug, and the relative con-
centration of thiopental in the blood and tissues. Well-perfused,
small-volume tissues, such as the brain, equilibrate rapidly with
the thiopental concentrations in the blood, inducing anesthesia.
The concentration of thiopental in the blood and brain falls rap-
idly as the drug redistributes to less perfused muscular tissues,
allowing the animal to regain consciousness. Dogs receiving
15 mg/kg of thiopental IV remained unresponsive to noxious
stimuli (toe pinch) for 12 ± 6 min. Recovery to sternal recum-
bency took 52 ± 29 min and standing took place 77 ± 32 min after
administration [7]. The principal factor limiting anesthetic dura-
tion after a single dose of thiopental is redistribution from the
brain to other tissues [5]. Therefore, when thiopental is adminis-
tered in large doses, as repeated doses, or as a constant rate infu-
sion, recovery from anesthesia may be prolonged as lean tissues
(e.g., muscle) approach equilibrium with the concentration of
thiopental in the blood. This equilibrium progressively decreases
the capacity of the tissues to remove the drug from the blood [8,9].
Additionally, obesity increases the mean disposition residence
time of thiopental, and this is associated with a prolongation of
terminal half-life, although the increased adipose mass will serve
to remove more drugs from the blood and speed clinical recovery
from a single bolus [10].
Pharmacokinetic parameters of thiopental have been described
in dogs, horses, sheep, and rabbits [11,12]. The initial volume of
distribution was 38.1 ± 18.4 mL/kg in dogs, 44.5 ± 9.1 mL/kg in
sheep, and 38.6 ± 10.0 mL/kg in rabbits [12]. Horses and ponies had
large volumes of distribution: 783 ± 128 mL/kg and 1127 ± 86 mL/kg,
respectively [11]. The elimination half-life (t1/2
) was shown to be
shortest in the rabbit (43.1 ± 3.4 min) and longest in the sheep
(251.9 ± 107.8 min) [12]. The t1/2 in the dog was 182.4 ± 57.9 min
[12], and 147 ± 21 min in the horse [11,12].
Methohexital
A single dose of IV methohexital produces unconsciousness of
short duration (8 ± 3 min in dogs). Recovery times compared to
thiopental are faster with time to sternal recumbency and standing
at 19 and 32 min, respectively [7]. Pharmacokinetic parameters in
dogs receiving an IV dose of 10 mg/kg revealed both a rapid dispo-
sition phase (distribution half-life = 0.87 min) and a rapid elimina-
tion phase (t1/2 = 24.1 min). The volume of distribution was 1602 ±
643 mL/kg while the total plasma clearance was 37.5 ± 8.07 mL/kg/
min [7]. Administration of methohexital induces cardiopulmonary
changes similar to thiopental. A recent study evaluating the effect of
methohexital on laryngeal function dogs described adverse events
after methohexital administration, including tachycardia, seizure-
like activity, vomiting, and regurgitation [13].
Thiamylal
Mixed-breed dogs receiving 15 mg/kg of thiamylal IV remained
unresponsive to toe pinch for 17 ± 9 min, returned to sternal recum-
bency in 55 ± 31 min, and were standing after 93 ± 46 min.
Cardiopulmonary values in these dogs were similar to dogs receiving
thiopental. Pharmacokinetics reveal a rapid disposition phase (distri-
bution half-life = 38.9 min) and an extended elimination phase (t1/2 =
666 min). The volume of distribution was 3352 ± 1887 mL/kg while
the total plasma clearance was 3.21 ± 1.27 mL/kg/min [7]. A recent
study using thiamylal to induce and maintain anesthesia in calves for
approximately 2 h reported mean recovery times of over 5 h [14].
Pentobarbital
A single IV dose of 20 mg/kg of pentobarbital in mixed-breed dogs
produces anesthesia of 64 ± 31 min. These dogs then needed 238 ±
52 min to return to sternal recumbency and 432 ± 22 min to
stand [15]. Pentobarbital undergoes extensive hepatic metabolism
and is totally dependent on the liver for biotransformation and
elimination. Sheep and goats, however, are rapid metabolizers of
the drug and require supplemental doses if anesthesia is to be main-
tained beyond 20–30 min.
Pharmacodynamics
Central nervous system
As noted previously, administration of barbiturates results in CNS
depression and anesthesia. Following barbiturate administration,
the electroencephalogram (EEG) is depressed in a dose-dependent
fashion. With the administration of thiopental, the awake α pattern
progresses to δ and θ waves until there is burst suppression and a flat
EEG [16]. The barbiturates appear to possess cerebroprotectant
properties. Cerebral metabolism of oxygen (CMRO2
) is reduced by
up to 55% in a dose-dependent fashion [17]. Cerebral blood flow
and intracranial pressure (ICP) are also decreased in parallel with
the reduction in CMRO2 [17]. Cerebral perfusion pressure, however,
is usually not adversely affected because ICP decreases more than
mean arterial pressure. Several studies have been performed evaluat-
ing thiopental as a cerebroprotectant and have shown that it may be
of some clinical value. In dogs pretreated with thiopental and sub-
jected to isolated brainstem ischemia, auditory evoked potentials
were increased compared to those dogs that were not pretreated with
thiopental [18]. Additionally, it was demonstrated that the mitigat-
ing effect of immediate post-arrest hypothermia in dogs with posti-
schemic encephalopathy might be enhanced by thiopental [19].
These properties make thiopental an appropriate choice for patients
with intracranial disease or a history of seizures. Methohexital has
been associated with CNS excitation and epileptiform seizures,
making it a poor choice for patients with seizures. Intraocular pres-
sure is reduced slightly by thiopental administration [20].
Cardiovascular system
Administration of lower doses of thiopental results in a decrease in
stroke volume and myocardial contractility [21]. A mild decrease in
arterial blood pressure can be seen, but it is usually offset by a com-
pensatory increase in heart rate. Venodilation after thiopental
administration can lead to sequestration of red blood cells in the
spleen, an increase in splenic size, and a decrease in packed cell vol-
ume. Vasodilation of cutaneous and skeletal blood vessels may also
predispose the patient to hypothermia. Ventricular arrhythmias,
particularly ventricular bigeminy, have also been demonstrated [22].
The incidence of these arrhythmias may be reduced with adequate
ventilation and oxygenation prior to thiopental administration.
Thiopental sensitizes the myocardium to epinephrine-induced
arrhythmias in many species studied [23].
Respiratory system
Barbiturate administration for the induction of anesthesia causes
dose- dependent depression of ventilatory centers, decreasing the
brain’s responsiveness to hypoxemia and hypercarbia [24]. There is
a decrease in respiratory rate and minute ventilation [25]. Transient
periods of apnea are commonly reported after large, rapidly

-- 480 of 1450 --

Chapter 27: Injectable Anesthetics 	465
administered doses of thiopental. Thiopental has also been shown
to cause bronchoconstriction in the dog [26]. However, laryngeal
reflexes may be less affected by thiopental administration com-
pared to other induction agents; therefore, it may be a good choice
for evaluation of laryngeal function [27]. Thiopental has also been
shown to reduce mucociliary clearance in the dog [28].
Hepatic, renal, and gastrointestinal systems
Healthy patients have little change in hepatic or gastrointestinal
function after induction of anesthesia with thiopental and only
modest decreases in hepatic blood flow may be seen. Barbiturates
stimulate an increase in microsomal enzymes, but only after 2 to
7 days of sustained drug administration [29].
While gastrointestinal effects such as diarrhea or intestinal stasis
have not been reported with barbiturate administration, thiopental
has been shown to decrease the tone of the lower esophageal
sphincter in cats [30].
Renal blood flow may be decreased slightly by thiopental admin-
istration, most likely due to decreases in systemic blood pressure and
cardiac output. A 15 mg/kg dose of thiopental in the dog resulted in
a mean glomerular filtration rate of 2.04 ± 0.36 mL/min/kg, which
did not differ significantly from other induction agents [31].
Fetal/neonatal effects
IV barbiturates easily cross the placenta and establish a dynamic
equilibrium between maternal and fetal circulation. However, it
should be remembered that the placental circulation passes through
the liver before reaching the fetal CNS, thereby reducing overall drug
exposure for most highly metabolized drugs. In a study performed on
dogs, thiopental more profoundly depressed neurological reflexes in
puppies born by cesarean section compared to propofol or epidural
anesthesia [32]. Additionally, uterine blood flow transiently decreased
in pregnant ewes induced with thiopental [33].
Analgesic effects
It should be noted that barbiturates do not produce antinociception
(and analgesia only during unconsciousness); therefore, additional
analgesics should be administered to patients undergoing painful
procedures. In fact, at subanesthetic doses, the barbiturates may
actually be hyperalgesic. However, this effect is controversial and is
likely not clinically significant [34].
Species-specific effects
Canine
Documented breed-associated differences in anesthetic pharma-
cokinetics and pharmacodynamics are uncommon. However,
among canine breeds, Greyhounds are relatively deficient in the
hepatic microsomal enzymes that are needed to metabolize the
thiobarbiturates. This deficiency, along with lean bodies and low-
fat stores, potentially results in prolonged recoveries from thiopen-
tal anesthesia when larger doses are administered [29]. Barbiturate
anesthetics are often not recommended for sighthound breeds (e.g.,
Greyhound, Irish Wolfhound, and Afghan Hound) but use of
anesthetic-sparing premedications and minimal thiobarbiturate
doses has allowed safe anesthetic induction in these breeds with
minimal delay in recovery.
Equine
The pharmacokinetics of a single dose of thiopental at 11 mg/kg has
been studied [11]. In that study, a three-compartment open model
best described the disposition kinetics of thiopental. In plasma,
thiopental has a very rapid initial distribution phase (distribution
half-life = 1.4 ± 1.2 min and 1.3 ± 0.7 min in horses and ponies,
respectively). While horses had a somewhat shorter t1/2 (147 ±
21 min) than ponies (222 ± 44 min), no obvious difference in clear-
ance of the drug between horses (3.5 ± 0.5 mL/kg/min) and
ponies (3.6 ± 0.8 mL/kg/min) was noted [11].
Thiopental should not be administered to horses without prior
sedation with an a 2
- adrenergic receptor agonist, as significant
excitement and incoordination may result. Additionally, anesthesia
induction with guaifenesin and thiopental in horses that have just
undergone maximal exercise is not recommended [35].
Ruminant
The pharmacokinetics of thiopental in sheep has also been
described using a three-compartment open model [36]. The vol-
ume of distribution was 1005 ± 196 mL/kg, total body clearance was
3.5 ± 0.8 mL/kg/min, and t1/2 was 196 ± 64 min in that study. Time
of awakening was 36.6 ± 6.36 min [36]. The authors suggest that the
relatively short duration of action of thiopental should be attributed
mainly to elimination of the drug by hepatic metabolism and uptake
by body fat [36]. This theory differs from the widely held belief that
redistribution of thiopental terminates its anesthetic action. Toutain
et al. propose that this is perhaps due to differences in regional
blood flow between sheep and monogastric species, although this
remains unestablished [36].
Swine
Barbiturates are effective anesthetic agents in swine limited only by
the difficulty of attaining IV access in these species [37,38], although
care should be used when administering thiopental to hypovolemic
pigs as the anesthetic requirement for thiopental is reduced by
approximately 35% in these animals [39]. Barbiturates do not trig-
ger malignant hyperthermia in swine.
Clinical use
The induction doses of thiopental used in veterinary species are
listed in Table 27.1. It should be noted that the dose required to
induce anesthesia and facilitate endotracheal intubation is altered
by premedications and the patient’s physical status. Patients that are
premedicated with other CNS depressants, or those that are hypov-
olemic, hypoproteinemic, acidotic, and/or uremic, will require less
thiopental to induce anesthesia. Thiopental should be administered
IV, preferably through a catheter, and the dose should be titrated to
effect. Induction of anesthesia is rapid, occurring in approximately
20–30 s after administration. Because periods of apnea are often
reported after induction of anesthesia with thiopental, equipment
to facilitate intubation with a cuffed endotracheal tube, and to assist
ventilation should be immediately available. The duration of action
Table 27.1 Barbiturate dosages in various species.
Thiopental mg/kg IV 	Pentobarbital mg/kg IV
Dog 	8–22 	2–30
Cat 	8–22 	2–15
Horse 	4–15
Cow 	4–22
Sheep 	8–15 	20–30
Llama 	6–15
Pig 	5–12
IV, intravenous.

-- 481 of 1450 --

466 	Section 3: Pharmacology
of thiopental is quite short with the distribution/redistribution
phase lasting 14.9 ± 3.3 min in dogs [6].
Perivascular administration of thiopental is associated with
tissue necrosis, especially at higher concentrations (e.g., 5%). If
inadvertent perivascular injection occurs, dilution of the drug
should be attempted. This is best accomplished by injection of
saline through the needle or catheter that still remains in place. At
the same time, lidocaine can be injected to produce vasodilation
and local anesthesia.
In order to reduce the incidence of ventricular arrhythmias, IV
lidocaine has been investigated as a co-induction agent with thiobar-
biturates. Thiopental administered IV to dogs at a dose of 11 mg/kg
and lidocaine at a dose of 8.8 mg/kg produced a smooth induction
with no arrhythmias and less cardiovascular depression as compared
to thiopental alone [40]. This technique may not be suitable for all
species since the IV administration of a relatively large dose of lido-
caine may cause toxicity. Mixtures of thiopental and propofol (1:1)
have also been used in the dog [41]. The dose of each drug required
for induction was reduced and induction quality was similar to that
of thiopental or propofol alone. Recovery times and quality of recov-
ery were similar to those of propofol and superior to those of thio-
pental alone [41]. It should be noted that the mixture should inhibit
bacterial growth and is bactericidal after 48 h against Staphylococcus
aureus, Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Candida albi-
cans [42]. Mixtures of thiopental and propofol at a ratio of less than
1:1 do not maintain bactericidal properties [42]. Proper evaluation
of drug stability in these mixtures is lacking, but they appear to
maintain relatively normal potency.
Propofol
Propofol is chemically distinct from all other IV drugs used to
induce or maintain anesthesia. Awakening from anesthesia has
been found to be more rapid and complete with propofol than with
other induction agents. It is this rapid return to consciousness with
minimal residual effects that has made propofol such a popular
anesthetic induction agent in both human and veterinary anesthe-
sia. Its first use was reported in 1977 [43].
Chemical structure
Propofol is a substituted isopropylphenol (2,6-diisopropylphenol)
that can be used to produce sedation, as well as to induce and main-
tain anesthesia (Fig. 27.2A). It is formulated as proprietary varia-
tions of an oil-in-water emulsion containing 1% propofol, 10%
soybean oil, 2.25% glycerol, and 1.2% purified egg phosphatide.
Propofol is relatively insoluble in aqueous solutions but is highly
lipid soluble. It is a slightly viscous, milky white substance with a
pH of 6.5–8.5. This formulation of propofol is stable at room tem-
perature and is not light-sensitive. Most formulations do not con-
tain preservatives and therefore will support bacterial or fungal
growth; therefore, strict aseptic technique should be used when
using multidose vials of propofol [44]. According to most labels,
opened vials should be used or discarded before 6 h. When using
propofol as a constant rate infusion, it would be prudent to discard
IV tubing and administration sets every 12 h or if gross bacterial
contamination occurs.
A lipid-free microemulsion formulation of propofol has been
developed to increase vial shelf-life when broached, reduce infec-
tion risk by the addition of antimicrobial agents, reduce inherent
emulsion instability, and reduce pain on injection [45,46]. It has a
shelf-life of 28 days once the vial is opened. Additionally, a propofol
formulation for the veterinary market containing benzyl alcohol
has also been developed for use in dogs which has an increased
shelf-life of 28 days once the vial is opened [47].
Mechanism of action
Like barbiturates, propofol appears to exert its anesthetic effects
through an interaction with GABA A receptors [48]. Propofol also
inhibits the N-methyl-D- aspartate (NMDA) receptor through
modulation of channel gating which may also contribute to its CNS
effects [49].
Pharmacokinetics
Propofol pharmacokinetics can be described by a two-compartment
open model, with a rapid distribution phase followed by a slower
clearance phase [51]. Following IV injection of propofol, it rapidly
moves into the CNS resulting in induction of anesthesia. It is then
rapidly redistributed from the brain to other tissues in the body,
terminating its anesthetic action. In most species (cats are an excep-
tion), propofol undergoes rapid and extensive hepatic metabolism
resulting in the production of inactive water-soluble sulfide and
glucuronide metabolites. These are then excreted by the kidneys [52].
Clearance of propofol from the plasma exceeds hepatic blood flow,
which emphasizes the importance of tissue uptake and suggests that
extrahepatic metabolism or extrarenal excretion may occur [53].
In humans, there is no evidence of impaired elimination of propofol
in patients with cirrhosis of the liver and extrahepatic metabolism
has been confirmed in the anhepatic phase of liver transplant
O
H
H H
P
O
O
O
O
O
(A) 	(B)
Figure 27.2 Chemical structure of A. propofol and
B. fospropofol. Source: National Center for
Biotechnology Information [50].

-- 482 of 1450 --

Chapter 27: Injectable Anesthetics 	467
patients [53,54]. In cats, extrahepatic metabolism of propofol has
been demonstrated in pulmonary tissue [55]. In cats with hepatic
lipidosis, anesthetic induction with propofol for placement of a
feeding tube did not increase morbidity or mortality despite the
anticipated alteration of drug action [56].
The pharmacokinetics of propofol have been thoroughly studied
in the dog [51,57,58]. Propofol’s lipophilic nature results in a large
apparent volume of distribution (17.9 L/kg) as well as steady-state
volume of distribution (9.7 mL/kg) [51]. Due to the rapid redistri-
bution of the drug into other tissues as well as rapid and extensive
metabolism, the initial distribution half-life is short as is the rate of
disappearance from plasma. Greyhounds appear to have a smaller
apparent volume of distribution and steady-state volume of distri-
bution, which suggests recovery from propofol anesthesia in
Greyhounds will be slower [58]. Dogs greater than 8.5 years of age
also have been shown to have a slower clearance rate compared to
younger dogs [57]. The rapid distribution and clearance of propofol
make it a suitable choice for maintenance of anesthesia by constant
rate infusion of the drug in many species. In most species (except
cats), propofol does not accumulate after repeated doses and/or
prolonged infusion of the drug, so recovery from anesthesia
remains rapid and of good quality [59,60].
Pharmacodynamics
Central nervous system
IV injection of propofol results in rapid CNS depression and
induction of anesthesia. Much like the barbiturates, propofol
reduces ICP and CMRO 2 [61]. Cerebral perfusion pressure is
reduced slightly in patients with normal ICP, but in patients with
elevated ICP, the drop in cerebral perfusion pressure is signifi-
cant and may not be beneficial [62]. Brain responsiveness to car-
bon dioxide and cerebral metabolic autoregulation is maintained
during propofol administration [61]; however, this response
may be modified by concurrent administration of other drugs
such as opioids. Propofol produces cortical EEG changes similar
to barbiturates, including the incidence of burst suppression
with the administration of high doses [61]. Propofol possesses
anticonvulsant effects and can be used in the treatment of
seizures [63,64].
Cardiovascular system
The most prominent cardiovascular effect of propofol administration
is a decrease in arterial blood pressure. Decreases in systemic vascu-
lar resistance and cardiac output are also seen [65,66]. The magnitude
of myocardial depression and vasodilation appear to be dependent
on dose (and plasma concentration) [65]. These cardiovascular
effects may be more profound in patients that are hypovolemic [67],
geriatric, or have compromised left ventricular function [68]. Unlike
thiopental, however, administration of propofol does not usually
result in a compensatory increase in heart rate. Propofol does appear
to sensitize the myocardium to epinephrine-induced arrhythmias
but does not appear to be arrhythmogenic [69].
Respiratory system
Much like thiopental, propofol causes dose-dependent depression
of ventilation and postinduction apnea (PIA), with transient cyano-
sis occurring regularly [70]. The incidence of apnea appears to be
related to dose and rate of administration, with rapid injection rates
making apnea more likely to occur [70]. The ventilatory response to
hypoxemia [71] and carbon dioxide [72] is reduced by propo-
fol [73], and the administration of opioids may enhance propofol’s
effect on ventilation [74]. Respiratory effects are also seen when
propofol is administered as a constant rate infusion, with propofol
decreasing tidal volume and respiratory rate [72].
Hepatic, renal, and gastrointestinal systems
Propofol does not adversely affect hepatic blood flow [75] or
glomerular filtration rate in dogs [31]. In humans, propofol has
been shown to be a very effective antiemetic. In fact, subanesthetic
doses of propofol may be used postanesthesia to treat nausea and
vomiting [76]; however, this effect has not been demonstrated in
domestic animals.
Muscle
Like thiopental, propofol produces excellent muscle relaxation.
Occasionally, however, myoclonic movements have been reported
in both humans and dogs [77,78]. These movements resolve
spontaneously.
Fetal/neonatal effects
Propofol readily crosses the placenta, but it is rapidly cleared from
the neonatal circulation [79]. It is considered an acceptable choice
for dogs undergoing cesarean section, as effects on healthy puppies
are minimal [80].
Analgesic effects
Propofol produces neither antinociception nor hyperalgesia [34].
Animals undergoing painful procedures should therefore receive
appropriate analgesics as part of the anesthetic plan.
Species-specific effects
Canine
Propofol can be administered IV for sedation and induction of
anesthesia. It is also well suited to be used as a constant rate infusion
for the maintenance of anesthesia. Propofol is often recommended
for use in Greyhounds. The dose required for induction of anesthe-
sia in Greyhounds is the same as mixed-breed dogs, but the recov-
ery time is longer in Greyhounds [52].
As mentioned previously, the lipid-based emulsion formulation of
propofol is capable of supporting microbial growth. In a retrospec-
tive study of clean wounds in dogs and cats, animals receiving
propofol were 3.8 times more likely to develop wound infections
compared to animals that did not receive propofol [81]. Causal
mechanisms have not been established and the numerous confound-
ing factors of wound infection rates would caution against overem-
phasizing the results of this study. However, strict aseptic technique
should be followed when using propofol as an anesthetic and prompt
disposal of unused drug should reduce the potential for drug con-
tamination and any impact that would have on infection rates.
The lipid-free microemulsion formulation of propofol has been
evaluated in the dog [82] and appears to be pharmacokinetically and
pharmacodynamically similar to the lipid formulation. However, it
has been reported that IV injection of the microemulsion formula-
tion resulted in severe pain and complications in dogs [83].
Feline
Repeated daily administration of propofol can induce oxidative inju-
ries to feline red blood cells [84]. Heinz body formation, facial
edema, generalized malaise, anorexia, and diarrhea were all reported
in one study in which cats received propofol on consecutive days.
Heinz body formation was significantly increased by the third day of
propofol administration and recovery times were significantly

-- 483 of 1450 --

468 	Section 3: Pharmacology
increased after the second consecutive day [84]. However, in another
study, repeated propofol anesthesia was evaluated and no relevant
hematologic changes were reported [85].
The formulation of propofol containing benzyl alcohol
(PropofloTM
28) has been evaluated in cats [47]. While there has
been concern regarding this formulation due to potential adverse
effects of benzyl alcohol on feline blood and nervous systems, it has
been shown that administration to healthy cats of normal to high
clinical doses of the formulation did not cause organ toxicity [47].
The lipid-free microemulsion formulation has also been evaluated
in cats [46,86] and, when compared to the lipid-emulsion formula-
tion, produces comparable pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamic,
and physiologic responses [46].
Equine
The clinical effects of propofol in the horse are similar to those seen
in other species. IV administration of propofol following sedation
produces rapid induction of anesthesia, a short duration of action,
and a rapid, smooth recovery [87,88]. However, propofol can pro-
duce unpredictable behavioral responses and excitation at the time
of induction, thereby limiting its use as a routine induction agent in
adult horses [89]. These adverse effects at the time of induction
appear to be prevented; however, by the IV administration of
guaifenesin for 3 min prior to administration of propofol [90].
Propofol, either solely or in combination with other drugs, has
been used effectively as a constant rate infusion in horses to main-
tain anesthesia [91–93]. While adverse events at induction were
noted with propofol administration, horses appeared calm and
coordinated in recovery [89]. This prompted the investigation of
propofol, in combination with xylazine, as a potential modulator of
recovery [94,95]. In these reports, it was noted that a combination
of xylazine and propofol might be of some benefit as the quality of
recovery was significantly improved [94,95].
The lipid-free microemulsion formulation of propofol has also
been evaluated in the horse [96,97]. A 3-h continuous rate infusion
produced similar cardiopulmonary and biochemical results to
those reported when the lipid formulation was used [97]. However,
in a different study of the pharmacokinetics, investigators urged
caution when using propofol to maintain anesthesia due to variable
kinetics, poor analgesia, and myoclonic activity [96].
Ruminant
Propofol has been satisfactorily used as an induction agent in
sheep [98], goats [99], cows [100], and camelids [101]. Reported
characteristics of propofol anesthesia in these species are similar to
those reported in other veterinary species. Induction is rapid and
smooth, duration of action is short, and recovery is of good quality.
Cardiopulmonary effects are similar to those reported in other
species.
The pharmacokinetics of propofol have been described in the
goat. The mean t1/2 was short (15.5 min), the volume of distribution
at steady state was large (2.56 L/kg), and the clearance rate was
rapid (275 mL/kg/min) [99]. These values differ from those
obtained in sheep where the mean t1/2 was 56.6 ± 13.1 min, volume
of distribution was 1.037 ± 0.48 L/kg, and clearance was 85.4 ±
28.0 mL/kg/min [102].
Swine
Propofol does not induce malignant hyperthermia in susceptible
swine [103]. As with other species, respiratory depression and
apnea have been reported with propofol administration [104].
Clinical use
Propofol doses commonly used in veterinary patients are given in
Table 27.2. It should be noted that the dose required to achieve
endotracheal intubation is altered by premedications and the physi-
cal status of the patient. Patients that are debilitated and/or have
received CNS depressants will often require less propofol for
induction.
Propofol should be administered IV, preferably through a cathe-
ter, and the dose should be titrated to effect. Once administered,
induction of anesthesia with propofol occurs within 20–30 s,
although in states of low cardiac output, the lag period may be pro-
longed. The quality of induction with propofol is good with a smooth
transition to unconsciousness. To reduce the incidence of PIA, it is
often recommended that the titrated dose of propofol should be
administered slowly (over 60–90 s); however, apnea may still occur.
Transient apnea is seldom a problem (except when establishment of
a patent airway is difficult or impossible such as with some oro-
pharyngeal conditions) as long as the anesthetist is prepared to intu-
bate with an endotracheal tube and assist or control ventilation until
spontaneous respiration begins. Duration of unconsciousness ranges
from 2–8 min and the quality of recovery is good.
While perivascular injection of propofol will not produce anes-
thesia, it is not associated with tissue necrosis. Pain on IV injection
has been reported and appears to be associated with injection of
propofol into smaller vessels, not necessarily perivascular injection.
To decrease the incidence of injection pain, clinicians may choose
to inject propofol into larger vessels, administer a small dose of
lidocaine IV prior to propofol injection, or dilute the dose by
administering propofol into a running IV fluid line.
Fospropofol and other propofol prodrugs
As stated previously, propofol is relatively insoluble in aqueous solu-
tions and is therefore formulated as an oil-in-water emulsion.
Disadvantages of this type of formulation have been discussed previ-
ously (e.g., pain at the injection site and potential bacterial contamina-
tion). Other drawbacks of the emulsion formulation include propofol
infusion syndrome and hypertriglyceridemia with prolonged infu-
sion. Research has therefore focused on finding alternative formu-
lations or related drugs to address these issues. Fospropofol is a
water-soluble prodrug of propofol licensed by the United States Food
and Drug Administration [107]. It is chemically described as a
2,6-diisopropylphenoxymethyl phosphate disodium salt (Fig. 27.2B).
Following administration, it is metabolized by alkaline phosphatase
producing propofol, phosphate, and formaldehyde. The formaldehyde
Table 27.2 Propofol dosages in various species.
Induction dose (mg/kg) IV 	Constant rate infusion (mg/kg/min)
Dog 	3a–10 	0.2–0.6
Cat 	5–10 	0.2–1.0
Horse 	2–3a, 6–8 	0.2–0.4
Foal 	2 	0.33
Donkey 	2 	0.21
Pig 	2–3 	0.1–0.2
Llama 	2 	0.4
Ferret 	2–4
Rabbit 	2–10 	0.6–0.9b
Sheep 	2–6 	0.3–0.4
Goat 	3–6 	0.3
a Premedicated
b Martin-Cancho et al. [105]; Terada et al. [106].
IV, intravenous.

-- 484 of 1450 --

Chapter 27: Injectable Anesthetics 	469
is rapidly metabolized by aldehyde dehydrogenase in the liver and
erythrocytes into formate. Systemic formaldehyde levels do not
increase beyond those occurring from food and environmental intake
or metabolism [107]. The available formulation of fospropofol is an
aqueous, colorless, and clear solution supplied in a single dose vial at a
concentration of 35 mg/mL. The pharmacokinetics are complex and
reliable data on the kinetics are lacking as most publications on the sub-
ject have been retracted due to potential analytical errors [108]. In
dogs, a single IV dose of 6 mg/kg of fospropofol resulted in a signifi-
cantly slower onset (124 ± 15 s) and longer duration (1448 ± 155 s) of
unconsciousness than propofol. This is unsurprising as the prodrug
requires enzymatic conversion to the active drug [45]. In rabbits receiv-
ing infusions of fospropofol, the minimum infusion rate (MIR) was
2.0 mg/kg/min compared to 0.9 mg/kg/min for propofol and recovery
time increased as the duration of infusion increased [109]. Rabbits
receiving infusions of fospropofol for 6 or 8 h needed significantly
more time (52 ± 6 and 84 ± 10 min, respectively) to recover than those
receiving propofol (36 ± 7 and 48 ± 5 min, respectively) [109].
Additional water-soluble prodrugs of propofol have shown
promise and are under investigation. HX0507 was found to have
anesthetic effects similar to propofol and, in dogs, was found to
cause similar dose-dependent hypotension but less dose-dependent
respiratory depression [110]. Also, in development is HX0969w, a
water-soluble ester prodrug of propofol that is similar to fospropo-
fol, but releases γ-hydroxybutyrate instead of formaldehyde [111].
With modifications to the HX0969w molecule, studies in rats show
greater water solubility, faster onset, and similar anesthetic effects
as fospropofol [112].
While these new formulations are promising, they must offer sig-
nificant advantages over the standard propofol emulsion to justify
their incorporation into clinical practice.
Dissociatives
The dissociatives are phencyclidine derivatives that produce a so-
called state of “dissociative anesthesia” characterized by dissocia-
tion of the thalamocortical and limbic systems causing a change in
awareness [113]. Ketamine hydrochloride and tiletamine hydro-
chloride are the dissociative anesthetics most commonly used in
veterinary medicine.
Chemical structure
Ketamine is 2-(o-chlorophenol)-2- (methylamino)- cyclohexanone
hydrochloride (Fig. 27.3A). Two optical isomers of ketamine exist
due to an asymmetric carbon. Most formulations contain the race-
mic mixture, but a purified S-ketamine formulation is available in
some countries. The S(+)-enantiomer produces more intense
analgesia, is metabolized more rapidly, and has a lower incidence
of emergence reactions than the R(–)-enantiomer [114]. Racemic
ketamine is available as a 10% aqueous solution. It has a pH of
3.5–5.5 and is preserved by benzethonium chloride.
Tietamine 	is 	2-(ethylamino)-2-(2-thienyl)-cyclohexanone
hydrochloride (Fig. 27.3B). It is only available in combination with
the benzodiazepine, zolazepam, and is marketed under the names
Telazol® and Zoletil®. Tiletamine–zolazepam combinations are
available as a white powder that is reconstituted with 5 mL of
diluent. The final concentrations of tiletamine and zolazepam
depend on the product being used.
Mechanism of action
The dissociative anesthetics act on NMDA, opioid, monoaminer-
gic, and muscarinic receptors. Additionally, they interact with
voltage-gated calcium channels [116,117]. Interestingly, the disso-
ciatives do not appear to interact with GABA receptors as the other
injectable anesthetics do.
Ketamine and tiletamine are non-competitive antagonists at the
NMDA receptor. They bind to the phencyclidine-binding site,
which prevents glutamate, an excitatory neurotransmitter, from
binding. Prevention of glutamate binding results in depression of
the thalamocortical, limbic, and reticular activating systems.
Dissociatives have also been reported to have action at μ-, δ-, and
κ- opioid receptors [118]. Activity at the opioid receptors imparts
analgesic properties unlike other injectable anesthetics, although
the clinical significance of this action at clinically relevant doses is
debatable. Additionally, the dissociatives’ interaction at monoamin-
ergic receptors may also contribute to antinociception [117].
Because dissociative anesthesia is associated with anticholinergic
symptoms (emergence delirium, bronchodilation, and sympatho-
mimetic actions), it is thought that these drugs have antagonist
activity at the muscarinic receptors [117]. However, many of these
effects may also be related to the sympathetic nervous system-
stimulating effects of ketamine and tiletamine.
Pharmacokinetics
The dissociatives are similar to other injectable anesthetics in that
they have a rapid onset of action (especially when given IV), short
duration, and are highly lipophilic. Unlike other injectable anes-
thetics, the dissociatives are effective when administered IM. Peak
plasma concentrations occur within 1 min of IV administration
and 10 min following IM injection. The high lipid solubility of the
dissociatives ensures that the blood–brain barrier is crossed quickly,
which establishes effective brain concentrations of the drugs [119].
H
N
CI
O
H 	S
N
O
(A) 	(B)
Figure 27.3 Chemical structure of A. ketamine
and B. tiletamine. Source: National Center for
Biotechnology Information [115].

-- 485 of 1450 --

470 	Section 3: Pharmacology
In most species, metabolism of the dissociatives occurs in the
liver. Ketamine is demethylated by hepatic microsomal enzymes
producing the active metabolite norketamine. Eventually, norketa-
mine is hydroxylated and then conjugated to form water-soluble
and inactive glucuronide metabolites that are excreted by the kid-
ney [120]. This process differs in the cat, where ketamine is bio-
transformed to norketamine, which is excreted unchanged in the
urine [121]. Dissociatives should be used with care in animals with
significant hepatic and/or renal dysfunction as prolonged anes-
thetic times may result.
Tiletamine also undergoes hepatic metabolism and renal excre-
tion. Since tiletamine is only supplied with zolazepam, the action of
the benzodiazepine should also be discussed. In cats, the duration
of action of zolazepam is longer than that of tiletamine. This means
that the CNS effects of the benzodiazepine (sedation) are present
longer than those of tiletamine. In the dog, the reverse is true; the
duration of action of tiletamine is longer than zolazepam. This
means that the effects of the dissociative are observed, including
muscle rigidity, sympathetic stimulation, and emergence delirium.
Pigs appear to have a slow, calm recovery from tiletamine–zolazepam
combinations, while in horses an agitated recovery may be seen
if additional sedation is not provided. If significant plasma levels
of tiletamine are present, reversal of the benzodiazepine with
flumazenil may result in an anxious recovery.
Pharmacodynamics
Central nervous system
Dissociative anesthesia resembles a cataleptic state in which the
patient does not appear to be asleep but does not respond to external
stimuli. As mentioned previously, antagonism of the NMDA recep-
tor leads to a dissociation of the limbic and thalamocortical sys-
tems [122]. Unlike other injectable anesthetics, the dissociatives
increase cerebral blood flow and CMRO2 [123]. Cerebral vasodila-
tion and an increase in blood pressure results in an increase in
ICP [122]. It appears that this increase in ICP can be attenuated if
ventilation is controlled and animals remain eucapnic [124].
Administration of thiopental or a benzodiazepine has also been
shown to reduce ketamine-induced increases in ICP [119]. Clinicians
should still exercise caution, however, when using dissociatives in
patients that have or are suspected of having increased ICP.
Eleptiform EEG patterns are seen after ketamine administra-
tion [125], resulting in the recommendation that dissociatives
should be avoided in patients with seizure disorders. However, it has
been shown that ketamine does not alter the seizure threshold in
epileptic patients [126]. Additionally, there is evidence that ketamine
possesses anticonvulsant as well as neuroprotective activity [127].
Abnormal behavior that may progress to emergence delirium may
occur during recovery from dissociative anesthesia. Misrepresentation
of visual and auditory stimuli may be responsible for this reac-
tion [120]. A patient experiencing an emergence reaction may be
ataxic, hyperreflexic, sensitive to touch, have increased motor activ-
ity, and may have a violent recovery. These reactions are usually
temporary and usually resolve within a few hours. Administration
of CNS depressants such as benzodiazepines, acepromazine, or
α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists may decrease the incidence and/or
the severity of these reactions [120].
Cardiovascular system
Ketamine has a direct negative cardiac inotropic effect [128], but it
is usually overcome by central sympathetic stimulation. IV admin-
istration of ketamine increases systemic and pulmonary arterial
pressures, heart rate, cardiac output, myocardial oxygen require-
ments, and cardiac work [129]. It is likely that these changes are the
result of direct stimulation of the CNS leading to increased sympa-
thetic nervous system outflow [130]. Ketamine also inhibits norepi-
nephrine reuptake into postganglionic sympathetic nerve endings
leading to an increased concentration of plasma catechola-
mines [131]. Critically ill patients may respond to induction of
anesthesia with ketamine with a decrease in systemic blood pres-
sure and cardiac output. The catecholamine stores and the sympa-
thetic nervous system’s compensatory mechanism may be
exhausted, unveiling ketamine’s negative inotropic effects [132].
While healthy animals are usually tolerant of increased cardiac
work, myocardial oxygen requirements, and heart rate, ketamine
should be used with caution in those animals that have severe car-
diovascular disease (e.g., uncontrolled hypertension, cardiomyopa-
thy, or heart failure), and/or are already tachycardic or dysrhythmic.
Stimulation of the cardiovascular system in these patients may not
be desirable.
Respiratory system
Unlike other injectable anesthetics, ketamine does not cause signifi-
cant respiratory depression. Ventilatory responses to hypoxia and
carbon dioxide are maintained in animals receiving ketamine as the
sole anesthetic agent [133]. When ketamine is administered with
other CNS depressants, significant respiratory depression can occur.
Ketamine administration has been associated with an “apneustic”
respiratory pattern, characterized by a prolonged inspiratory dura-
tion and relatively short expiratory time [134]. Despite this altered
respiratory pattern, carbon dioxide levels and minute ventilation
usually remain within normal limits.
Ketamine is a bronchial smooth muscle relaxant and causes
bronchodilation and a decrease in airway resistance [135]. This
makes it an attractive choice when anesthetizing animals with
asthma or obstructive airway diseases such as chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Pharyngeal and laryngeal reflexes remain intact
when ketamine is used as the sole anesthetic agent [136]. It should
be noted, however, that these reflexes are often uncoordinated and
not protective. An endotracheal tube should always be placed to
prevent aspiration. Maintaining a secure airway is especially impor-
tant because ketamine increases salivation and respiratory tract
secretions [119]. These can be reduced with the administration of
an anticholinergic.
Hepatic, renal, and gastrointestinal systems
Laboratory tests that indicate hepatic or renal function are not
altered by the administration of dissociatives. Gastrointestinal
motility is unchanged after the administration of ketamine in the
dog [137].
Analgesic effects
As previously discussed, the action of the dissociatives at NMDA
and opioid receptors imparts analgesic properties. In fact, it
has been demonstrated that subanesthetic doses of ketamine
produce profound analgesia, especially in situations of somatic
pain [116]. Additionally, blockade of the excitatory neurotrans-
mitter glutamate at the NMDA receptor by the dissociatives is
thought to play a role in preventing or minimizing central sensiti-
zation or wind-up pain. Therefore, preemptive administration of
ketamine prior to painful stimuli may play a role in attenuating
central sensitization [138,139].

-- 486 of 1450 --

Chapter 27: Injectable Anesthetics 	471
Muscle
Unlike the previously discussed injectable anesthetic agents, the
dissociatives produce little muscle relaxation. In fact, the dissocia-
tives may cause muscle rigidity and often spontaneous movement
of the limbs, trunk, and/or head. Substantial increases in intraocu-
lar pressure (IOP) are seen after ketamine administration which
may be a result of increased tone of the extraocular muscles [140].
Muscle relaxation can be improved with the co-administration of
benzodiazepines or α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists.
Fetal/neonatal effects
Ketamine crosses the placenta and enters fetal circulation. In a
study evaluating neurologic reflexes in puppies born via cesarean
section, anesthetic induction of the dam with ketamine and mida-
zolam resulted in the most depression of neurologic reflexes when
compared with other injectable induction drugs [32].
Species-specific effects
Canine
The dissociatives can be administered either IV or IM to produce a
range of effects from sedation to anesthesia. Induction of anesthesia
with ketamine alone can lead to muscle rigidity, spontaneous move-
ment, and undesirable recoveries. Therefore, it is usually adminis-
tered with a co-induction agent such as a benzodiazepine. Because
tiletamine is supplied as a combination with zolazepam, there is no
need for additional benzodiazepine for IV administration.
IM ketamine or tiletamine–zolazepam combinations are frequently
combined with an α2
-adrenergic receptor agonist and an opioid
to produce excellent immobilization with muscle relaxation and
analgesia. Table 27.3 shows dosages of ketamine alone or in combi-
nation with other anesthetics commonly used in the dog. Table 27.4
shows common doses and usage of Telazol® in dogs.
Feline
The dissociatives have been used to produce a range of effects from
sedation to anesthesia in cats. These drugs can be administered IV
or IM. Ketamine is also absorbed through the oral mucosa. In par-
ticularly fractious cats, ketamine can be sprayed into the mouth to
effectively induce sedation and facilitate the induction of anesthe-
sia [141]. Copious salivation usually results due to the bitter taste
and/or low pH of ketamine.
α2
- Adrenergic receptor agonists, benzodiazepines, and/or ace-
promazine are commonly administered in combination with IM
ketamine. The combination of dexmedetomidine, ketamine, and an
opioid produces excellent chemical restraint/anesthesia, muscle
relaxation, and analgesia [142].
Tiletamine–zolazepam combinations (500 mg) have been recon-
stituted with xylazine (100 mg) and ketamine (400 mg) to form a
potent chemical restraint/anesthesia cocktail that can be adminis-
tered IM [143,144]. Care must be exercised when administering the
drug combination as the overall volume is very small and accurate
measurement is important. Additionally, careful patient monitoring
to prevent profound hypothermia is required since prolonged recov-
ery may result due to a reduction in metabolic rate. Flumazenil and/
or an α2
-adrenergic receptor antagonist has been used to speed
recovery from this combination. Table 27.5 shows common combi-
nations and dosages of Telazol® in cats.
The use of tiletamine–zolazepam combinations in large felids,
especially tigers, is not recommended. Adverse reactions, including
delayed recovery, hindlimb paresis, hyperreflexia, seizures, and
death have been reported [145].
Table 27.3 Commonly used ketamine dosages alone or in combination in dogs.
Agent 	Dose (mg/kg) Route Duration
(min)
Effect
Ketamine
alone
10 	IV 	7–23 	Short duration, anesthesia
inadequate for surgery
Acepromazine
Ketamine
0.2
10
IV 	31–47 	Clinical anesthesia, less
muscle rigidity
Acepromazine
Ketamine
0.22
11–18
IM 	Restraint, spastic
movements, prolonged
recovery
Xylazine
Ketamine
0.55–1.1 IM
22 IV to effect
IM/IV 	28–36 	Surgical anesthesia, muscle
relaxation, analgesia for
abdominal surgery
Atropine
Xylazine
Ketamine
0.04
1.1
11
IV 	17–35 	Increased risk with dogs
with cardiopulmonary
compromise
Atropine
Xylazine
Ketamine
0.04
1.1
22
IM 	17–35 	Increased risk with dogs
with cardiopulmonary
compromise
Medetomidine
Ketamine
0.04
5
IM 	25–35 	Longer muscle relaxation
and recovery than xylazine/
ketamine
Diazepam
Ketamine
0.28
5.5
IV 	Suitable induction for
sighthounds
Midazolam
Ketamine
0.5
10
IV 	10–16 	Increased heart rate, mild
respiratory depression,
good muscle relaxation
IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous.
Table 27.4 Commonly used tiletamine–zolazepam (Telazol®
) dosages alone or in
combination in dogs.
Agent 	Dose
(mg/kg)
Route 	Duration
(min)
Effect
Telazol® 	9.9 	IM 	10–30 	Rough recovery
Telazol® 	6.6 	IV 	7–27
Telazol®
Xylazine
Butorphanol
8.8
1.1
0.22
IM 	100 	Clinical anesthesia, good
muscle relaxation, good
analgesia
Butorphanol
Telazol®
0.7
9.3–11.9
IM 	Unsatisfactory sedation in
vicious dogs
Acepromazine
Telazol®
0.6–3.0
17.5–21.1
IM 	Adequate sedation in vicious
dogs
IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous.
Table 27.5 Commonly used tiletamine–zolazepam (Telazol®
) dosages alone or in
combination in cats.
Agent 	Dose (mg/kg) 	Route 	Duration
(min)
Effect
Telazol® alone 	6–40
(average 12.8)
IM 	40–70 	Salivation, apneustic
breathing
Telazol ® alone 	12.8 	IV 	35–70 	Salivation, apneustic
breathing
Acepromazine
Telazol ®
0.1
3.4 ± 1.09
IM 	Adequate anesthesia
for castration
Telazol ®
Ketamine
Xylazine
3.3
2.64
0.66
IM 	34–52 	Smooth induction
and recovery,
excellent muscle
relaxation, good
analgesia
IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous.

-- 487 of 1450 --

472 	Section 3: Pharmacology
Equine
The dissociatives, particularly ketamine, are used extensively in
equine anesthesia. IV administration of the dissociatives rapidly and
smoothly induces anesthesia provided that adequate sedation has
been achieved prior to their administration. If the dissociatives are
administered before adequate sedation has been provided, excitement
will occur. Some muscle rigidity and involuntary movement may still
occur when ketamine is used; therefore, it is frequently combined
with a co-induction agent such as a benzodiazepine, α2
-adrenergic
receptor agonist, or guaifenesin.
Anesthesia can be maintained by administering additional IV
doses of ketamine. These doses may be administered as intermit-
tent boluses or as a constant rate infusion. When used as a constant
rate infusion, ketamine is frequently combined with sedatives and
analgesic agents (e.g., α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists, guaifenesin,
and opioids) in a combination commonly referred to as “triple
drip.” Commonly used doses for ketamine in combination with
other anesthetic agents can be found in Table 27.6.
Tiletamine–zolazepam combinations can be administered IV to
induce anesthesia in the horse after adequate sedation has been
achieved. It should be noted, however, that recovery from tiletamine–
zolazepam anesthesia is sometimes associated with excitement and
incoordination if additional sedatives such as α2
-adrenergic receptor
agonists are not administered, or anesthesia is not prolonged with
inhalants [151]. Table 27.7 shows dosages for tiletamine in horses.
Ruminant
The dissociatives can be used in ruminants to induce anesthesia.
Sedation and muscle relaxation are usually improved by the admin-
istration of an α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist or benzodiazepine
prior to the administration of ketamine. Anesthesia can be main-
tained with a constant rate infusion of ketamine or by a combina-
tion of ketamine, guaifenesin, and xylazine.
Subanesthetic doses of ketamine (in combination with xylazine)
have been administered to calves to produce sedation prior to cas-
tration [152]. This so-called “ketamine stun” technique may be an
efficacious and cost-effective alternative or adjunct to local anesthe-
sia for castration [152]. See Table 27.7 for dosages of the dissocia-
tives in ruminants.
Swine
The dissociatives have been used extensively in swine for chemical
restraint and anesthesia. Ketamine does not induce malignant
hyperthermia in susceptible pigs, although its use in these animals
has been controversial [153]. Similar to other species, ketamine as
a sole anesthetic agent produces poor muscle relaxation so it is
commonly combined with azaperone, benzodiazepines, and/or
α2 -adrenergic receptor agonists for sedation and anesthesia.
Tiletamine–zolazepam combinations are commonly reconstituted
with 250 mg of xylazine and 250 mg of ketamine and used as an
injectable anesthetic in swine [154]. See Table 27.7 for dosages of
dissociative anesthetics in swine.
Clinical use
The tables mentioned previously list the commonly used doses of
ketamine and tiletamine–zolazepam combinations, respectively.
Both IV and IM routes of administration are listed. The total dose
required to induce anesthesia will be affected by premedications,
the patient’s physical status, and route of administration. Clinicians
should evaluate patients carefully to determine if the dosage needs
to be altered.
Depending on the dose administered, IM injection of dissociatives
produces effects ranging from rapid and reliable chemical immobi-
lization to general anesthesia. Onset of action occurs within 10 min
of IM injection. Duration of anesthesia is dependent on the dose
administered but is usually longer following IM injection due to the
higher overall dose. Reversal of the sedative/tranquilizer used in
combination with the dissociative should not occur until the effects
of the dissociative have waned. Early reversal of sedatives may lead
to emergence delirium and a rough recovery.
IV administration of ketamine plus a benzodiazepine or
tiletamine–zolazepam combinations results in anesthetic induction in
approximately 45–90 s. The quality of induction is good, but clini-
cians should remember that ocular, laryngeal, and pharyngeal reflexes
may remain intact. The eyes stay open, but the patient is anesthetized.
Anesthetic duration of a single induction dose of ketamine–diazepam
or tiletamine–zolazepam combinations is approximately 20 min.
Recovery from IV dissociative administration is usually of good quality
especially if other drugs (e.g., α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists) are co-
administered or anesthesia is prolonged with inhalants.
Ketamine–propofol (ketofol)
A combination of ketamine and propofol, commonly referred to as
“ketofol,” has been studied in various clinical settings as an alterna-
tive anesthetic induction agent. It has been used extensively in
humans for sedation and anesthesia in emergency procedures as it
is thought to provide adequate sedation and analgesia with more
stable hemodynamic and respiratory parameters compared to other
injectable induction agents.
Mixtures of ketamine and propofol at 50:50 and 30:70 ratios are
physically compatible and chemically stable in capped polypropyl-
ene syringes exposed to light and stored at room temperature for 3
h. Additionally, mixtures of propofol and ketamine in 5:1 and 6.7:1
ratios remained homogenous and physically stable for 6 h in a poly-
propylene syringe [155]. This ensures that ketamine and propofol
delivered from the same syringe can be used in constant rate infu-
sions and that the concentrations of the drugs delivered to patients
are those calculated [156].
The combination of ketamine and propofol has been studied in
domestic species. Five minutes after the induction of anesthesia in
dogs premedicated with acepromazine and oxymorphone, ketofol
(1:1 mixture, 2 mg/kg IV of each drug) increased heart rate, cardiac
output, and calculated oxygen delivery. Mean arterial blood pres-
sure and stroke volume remained unchanged while systemic vascu-
lar resistance was decreased. Respiratory depression (increased
arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide and hypoxemia) was
reported, although the incidence of apnea was not different in dogs
receiving propofol, ketofol, or ketamine and diazepam. Regardless
of the agent used for induction of anesthesia, close monitoring of
respiratory function is recommended [157]. In another study in
dogs, a 1:1 mixture of ketamine and propofol reduced the dose of
propofol required for the induction of anesthesia by 25% (4.0 ±
1.0 mg/kg versus 5.3 ± 1.1 mg/kg). Kennedy and Smith demon-
strated that ketofol, when delivered as a constant rate infusion for
60 min, reduced the dose of propofol needed to maintain anesthesia
by 50% (0.3 ± 0.1 mg/kg/min versus 0.6 mg/kg/min) [158].
Additionally, the cardiopulmonary effects of ketofol were similar to
those reported by Riccό and Henao-Guerrero [157]. Martinez-
Taboada and Leece [159] concluded that the quality of induction
and tracheal intubation after ketofol was consistently good, and less
variable compared to induction with propofol alone. Anesthesia

-- 488 of 1450 --

Chapter 27: Injectable Anesthetics 	473
with ketofol was sufficient for castration in dogs premedicated with
medetomidine [160].
The combination of ketamine and propofol is effective for the
induction and maintenance of anesthesia in cats [161,162]. In cats
undergoing ovariectomy, induction (2 mg/kg IV of each drug) and
maintenance (10 mg/kg/h IV of each drug) of anesthesia with
a 1:1 mixture of ketamine and propofol, resulted in smooth inductions
and recoveries with extubation occurring quickly after cessation of the
constant rate infusion (7.1 ± 2.5 min) [161]. The pharmacokinetics of
ketofol in these cats was also described. Despite the rapid recovery
Table 27.6 Commonly used ketamine combination dosages in horses.
Agent 	Dose (mg/kg) 	Route 	Duration (min) 	Effect
Xylazine
Ketamine
1.1
2.2
IV 	12–35 	Smooth induction and recovery, inadequate muscle relaxation
Xylazine
Butorphanol
Ketamine
1.1
0.1–0.2
2.2
IV 	18–56 depending
on breed
Behavioral changes, muscle relaxation, good analgesia
Xylazine
Ketamine
Methadone
1.1
2.2
0.1
IV 	Satisfactory anesthesia
Methadone
Acepromazine
Xylazine
Ketamine
0.1
0.15
1.1
2.2
IV 	Inadequate anesthesia
Acepromazine
Methadone
Ketamine
0.04
0.04
2.0–2.5
IV 	3–18 	Muscle tremors
Guaifenesin
Xylazine
Ketamine
50
0.5
1.0
IV 	120 	Low blood pressure and hypoventilation
Guaifenesin
Ketamine
50
1.5–2.2
Less cardiovascular depression than guaifenesin–barbiturate
Xylazine
Diazepam
Ketamine
1.1
0.1
2.0
IV 	Supplement with 200–750 mg ketamine, maintain with inhalant, good muscle
relaxation
Xylazine
Temazepam
Ketamine
1.1
0.044
2.2
IV 	Longer recumbency
Romifidine
Ketamine
0.1
2.0–2.2
IV 	10–25 	Initial limb rigidity, mild tremor
Romifidine
Midazolam
Ketamine
0.08
0.06
2.2
IV 	25–40 	May require additional dose of midazolam and ketamine, smooth recovery
Methotrimeprazine
Midazolam
Guaifenesin
Ketamine
0.5
0.1
100
1.6
IV 	Induction of anesthesia, smooth recovery
Detomidine
Ketamine
0.02
2.2
IV 	10–43 	Required more time than xylazine–ketamine to assume recumbency, occasional poor
recovery, longer hypertension
Guaifenesin
Detomidine
Ketamine
50
0.04
4
IV 	140 	Surgical anesthesia but may require additional ketamine during surgery, good recovery
Detomidine
Butorphanol
Ketamine
0.02
0.04
2.2
IV 	18–67 	Smooth induction, smooth recovery, muscle relaxation
Propofol
Ketamine
1.0
1.0
IV 	Doses are for induction of anesthesia after premedication with medetomidine and
midazolam, good-quality induction, and recovery [146]
Xylazine
Ketamine
Propofol
0.016
0.03
0.1
IV 	Doses are mg/kg/min for TIVA after premedication with xylazine and induction with
ketamine, supplemental oxygen is recommended [147]
Propofol
Ketamine
0.5
3.0
IV 	Doses are for induction of anesthesia after premedication with xylazine [148]
Ketamine
Medetomidine
Propofol
1
0.00125
7.8–10.2 following a
0.5 loading dose
IV 	160–190 (duration
of TIVA)
Doses are mg/kg/h for TIVA, after premedication with medetomidine and induction
with midazolam–ketamine, satisfactory anesthesia with minimal cardiovascular
depression [149]
Propofol
Ketamine
0.3–0.5
2.5–3.1
IV 	Doses are for induction of anesthesia after premedication with xylazine, satisfactory
inductions, and recoveries without clinically relevant adverse effects [150]
IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; TIVA, total intravenous anesthesia.

-- 489 of 1450 --

474 	Section 3: Pharmacology
after ketofol infusion, propofol was quantifiable in most animals until
24 h after the infusion while ketamine was quantifiable for 8 h [162]
albeit in concentrations less than what is considered effective.
Ketofol has also been used effectively in rabbits with doses of
5 mg/kg of each drug IV resulting in the loss of righting reflex in 11
± 5 s with a duration of 374 ± 26 s. Hemodynamic function was well
maintained, but hypoxemia was observed at this dose therefore
oxygen supplementation is recommended [163].
A 3:1 mixture of propofol and ketamine has been studied in
sheep and compared to propofol alone [102]. The combination of
ketamine and propofol produced satisfactory anesthesia for super-
ficial surgery and animals recovered quickly with the mean times to
extubation, sternal recumbency, and standing being 5.3 ± 0.9, 11.2
± 1.7, and 15.1 ± 2.2 min, respectively [102].
Simultaneous infusions of ketamine and propofol have been used
to maintain anesthesia in ponies undergoing castration [164]. The
combination provided satisfactory anesthesia and rapid, smooth
recoveries with no evidence of excitement. The mean times to extu-
bation, sternal recumbency, and standing were 1.9 ± 0.2, 8.4 ± 3.2,
and 14.9 ± 10.1 min, respectively. Cardiopulmonary parameters
were well maintained [164]. The pharmacokinetics of the simulta-
neous infusions were also described. The mean t1/2 of propofol was
69.0 ± 8.0 min while ketamine was 89.8 ± 26.7 min. The mean resi-
dence times for propofol and ketamine were 87.1 ± 4.1 and 110.7 ±
8.2 min, respectively. The mean residence time for norketamine, the
main metabolite of ketamine, was 144 ± 16 min [165].
Etomidate
Synthesized in 1964 and introduced into human medical practice in
1972, etomidate has been used as an induction and maintenance
agent due to its minimal cardiopulmonary and cerebral protective
effects [166,167]. Recent interest in etomidate derivatives such as
methoxycarbonyl-etomidate (MOC-etomidate or MOC-ET) has
resulted in an improved understanding of etomidate pharmacology
and adverse effects.
Chemical structure
Etomidate is an imidazole derivative, ethyl 1-(1- phenylethyl)-1H-
imidazole- 5 carboxylate sulfate, which exists in two isomers, with
only the R(+)-enantiomer producing hypnosis (Fig. 27.4). Etomidate
is unstable in neutral solutions and is insoluble in water. It is
supplied as a 0.2% solution in 35% propylene glycol with a pH
of 6.9. Commercially available etomidate preparations have a high
osmolality, which may result in some of its adverse effects, including
the potential for erythrocyte damage.
Mechanism of action
Similar to other injectable anesthetics, etomidate has agonist
activity at the GABA receptor [3]. Etomidate enhances the action
of the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA, which increases chlo-
ride conduction into the cell resulting in hyperpolarization of the
postsynaptic neuron. The hyperpolarization of the postsynaptic
neuron results in CNS depression and hypnosis.
Pharmacokinetics
The pharmacokinetics of etomidate have been described in cats and
people as a three-compartment open model [168,169]. Etomidate is
redistributed rapidly in the cat (0.05 h) and its t1/2 is 2.89 h [169].
The volume of distribution at steady state is large (4.88 ± 2.25 L/kg
in cats) and total clearance occurs at 2.47 ± 0.78 L/kg/h [169].
Etomidate penetrates the brain quickly, resulting in a rapid induc-
tion of anesthesia. Recovery from a single IV injection of etomidate
is rapid due to redistribution of the drug from the brain to inactive
tissue sites. Approximately, 75% of etomidate is bound to albumin,
therefore conditions where albumin concentrations are decreased
result in increases in the pharmacologically active drug [170]. The
therapeutic index (LD 50
/ ED 50
) of etomidate in rats is quite large
(26.0) as compared to thiopental (4.6) [171].
Etomidate undergoes hydrolysis of its ethyl ester sidechain that
forms a water-soluble, pharmacologically inactive metabolite that is
excreted in the urine, bile, and feces. Hepatic enzymes and plasma
esterases carry out the hydrolysis. The hydrolysis of the drug is
nearly complete as less than 3% of etomidate is excreted unchanged
in the urine [172,173].
Pharmacodynamics
Central nervous system
The primary CNS effect of etomidate is hypnosis that is accom-
plished through GABA agonist activity. In cats, etomidate decreases
the spontaneous firing of cortical neurons as well as the firing
rate of neurons in the thalamus and reticular formation. This
depression of neuronal activity likely contributes to anesthetic-
induced unconsciousness [175].
Etomidate causes vasoconstriction of the cerebral vasculature
and reduces cerebral blood flow and CMRO2 [176,177]. Because
mean arterial blood pressure is unchanged after etomidate admin-
istration, cerebral perfusion pressure is maintained [177]. As a
result, previously elevated ICP is reduced after etomidate adminis-
tration much like it is after thiopental administration [178,179]. In
a canine model for cerebral hypoperfusion, cerebral oxygen extrac-
tion fraction did not change during hypotension when etomidate
was administered. Therefore, it was concluded that etomidate may
preserve the cerebral metabolic state [180]. Reducing the cerebral
metabolic rate of oxygen consumption while lowering the rate of
rise of ICP and producing immobilization may reduce the effects of
a hypoxic insult to the brain of animals [181]. Etomidate produces
changes in the EEG similar to barbiturates [179], but it has also
been associated with grand mal seizures [182]. For this reason,
some anesthetists argue against etomidate’s use in patients with a
history of seizures.
Cardiovascular system
IV administration of etomidate in healthy animals is characterized
by cardiovascular stability. A single induction dose of etomidate
results in minimal to no changes in heart rate, stroke volume, cardiac
output, mean arterial blood pressure, central venous pressure, or
cardiac index [183,184]. In a canine-isolated papillary muscle
Table 27.7 Ketamine and tiletamine–zolazepam (Telazol®) dosages in various species.
Species 	Dose of ketamine
(mg/kg)
Dose of tiletamine–zolazepam
(mg/kg)
Dog 	5–10 IV 	1 IV
3–6 IM
Cat 	5–10 IV
5–15 IM
4–7 IM
Horse 	2–2.2 IV (after
adequate sedation)
1–3 IV (after adequate sedation)
Cattle 	2–4 IV 	2–4 IV
Pig 	10 IM 	6 IM
IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous.

-- 490 of 1450 --

Chapter 27: Injectable Anesthetics 	475
preparation, etomidate produced less myocardial depression than an
equally potent dose of thiopental [185]. Baroreceptor function and
sympathetic nervous system responses appear to remain intact after
etomidate administration, further contributing to hemodynamic
stability [186]. When administered to hypovolemic dogs, etomidate
produced minimal changes in cardiopulmonary variables [187]. In
dogs with dilated cardiomyopathy, however, arterial blood pressure
remains stable during etomidate anesthesia due to increases in arte-
rial resistance and aortic impedance along with decreases in aortic
compliance [188]. This indicates that arterial pressure is maintained
due to an increase in left ventricular afterload, which adversely
affects left ventricular systolic and diastolic performance in patients
with impaired left ventricular function [188]. It should be empha-
sized that etomidate is usually only suitable for induction of anesthe-
sia and that the greatest cardiovascular effects the patient is likely to
experience will be due to the drugs used to maintain anesthesia
(usually inhalant anesthetics), which may negate or alter any poten-
tial benefits from using etomidate.
Respiratory system
Etomidate has minimal effects on the respiratory system. PIA has
been reported after rapid IV administration [189]. In most patients,
any reduction in tidal volume that is seen after etomidate adminis-
tration is usually offset by an increase in respiratory rate [166].
Hepatic, renal, and gastrointestinal systems
Etomidate does not decrease renal blood flow or glomerular filtra-
tion rate [31]. Hepatic and renal function tests are not affected by
etomidate administration [168].
Endocrine system
Adrenocortical suppression has been documented after etomidate
administration. Etomidate reduces adrenal steroidogenesis at sev-
eral metabolic sites, including inhibition of the conversion of cho-
lesterol to cortisol by the 11β-hydroxylase enzyme and suppression
of the cholesterol-side chain cleavage enzyme [190–192]. This sup-
pression of the adrenocortical system persists for up to 6 h in the
dog [193] and 5 h in the cat [194]. This has been a proposed mecha-
nism for the increased mortality in human patients observed in
some studies following etomidate anesthesia. Care should be exer-
cised when anesthetizing patients with existing adrenocortical dis-
ease (e.g., hypoadrenocorticism), highly stressed patients, or when
etomidate is being used as a constant rate infusion to maintain
anesthesia. Significant decreases in aldosterone and cortisol were
N
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
1
2
3 4
5
O
O
R 	F
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O 	O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
N
N
N
N
N
N 	N
N
N
N
N
N 	N
N	N
N
N
MOC-ET
ET-26
Etomidate
Carboetomidate 	MOC-carboetomidate
R = electron-withdrawing group 	EL-052
ET-42
CPMM 	DMMM
Figure 27.4 Chemical structure of etomidate and its analogs. MOC-ET, methoxycarbonyl-etomidate; CPMM, cyclopropyl-methoxycarbonyl-metomidate
(renamed ABP-700); DMMM, dimethyl-methoxycarbonyl-metomidate; ET-26, methoxyethyl-etomidate; ET-42, methoxy-2- methylpropan-etomidate;
MOC-carboetomidate, methoxycarbonyl-carboetomidate. Source: Jiang et al. [174].

-- 491 of 1450 --

476 	Section 3: Pharmacology
noted in dogs receiving a 3-h constant rate infusion of etomidate.
These decreases were dependent on both the dose and the duration
of infusion [195]. Infusion of etomidate for long durations is not
recommended.
Analgesic effects
Etomidate does not produce antinociception; therefore, patients
undergoing painful procedures should have appropriate analgesics
administered during the perioperative period.
Muscle
Myoclonus, dystonia, and tremor can occur with etomidate admin-
istration [196]. It is thought that this is the result of disinhibition of
subcortical structures that normally suppress extrapyramidal motor
activity [197]. Myoclonic activity can be decreased with adequate
premedication and/or the IV administration of a benzodiazepine
immediately prior to etomidate administration [196].
Pain on injection
IV administration of etomidate frequently results in pain. It is
thought that this is due to the propylene glycol vehicle or the hyper-
osmolar nature of the commercial product. The incidence of pain
can be lessened by administration of etomidate into a large vein,
through a running IV line, or IV administration of an opioid imme-
diately prior to etomidate administration [196].
Other considerations
The current formulation of etomidate in propylene glycol results in
a solution with an osmolality of 4640 mOsm/L. This is hyperos-
motic when compared to plasma (approximately 300 mOsm/L) and
has been associated with intravascular hemolysis. In dogs, clinically
significant hemolysis has been reported following prolonged
administration of etomidate [198].
Species-specific effects
Canine
Despite side effects of administration such as vomiting, myoclonus,
excitement, and hemolysis, etomidate still should be considered as
an IV induction agent in patients with cardiovascular instability,
increased ICP, and/or cirrhosis [199].
Feline
The pharmacokinetics of etomidate have been described in the cat
and are detailed above. When used as an induction agent in normal
cats, etomidate has been demonstrated to be an acceptable induc-
tion agent producing minimal cardiopulmonary effects [200].
Additionally, when investigated as an IV induction agent for cats
with decreased cardiovascular reserve, etomidate administered at a
dose of 1–2 mg/kg titrated to effect was determined to be effective.
Excessive salivation was noted in all cats, however [200]. It should
be noted, however, that due to the fragility of feline red blood cells,
cats may be more likely to have intravascular hemolysis when eto-
midate is administered.
Equine
Etomidate is not used clinically in horses.
Ruminant
Etomidate has been studied in pregnant ewes. Fresno et al. studied
the cardiovascular and acid–base effects of etomidate in the preg-
nant ewe and fetus [201]. It was determined that an IV bolus of
1 mg/kg of etomidate did not depress cardiovascular function in
the ewe or fetus. When etomidate was administered as a constant
rate infusion for 1 h, the maternal heart rate and blood pressure
increased during the second half of the infusion and in the initial
stages of recovery. Acid–base alterations led to transient but slight
respiratory depression of the mother and fetus, which may have
been due to a combination of etomidate and positioning of the
animal [201]. Placental transfer of etomidate was also examined
in pregnant ewes. It was determined that etomidate crosses the
placenta rapidly and reaches the fetus in high amounts. However,
cumulative effects of etomidate in the fetus were not demon-
strated because fetal elimination occurred just as quickly as it did
in the dam [202].
The inhibitory effects of etomidate on basal and ACTH-
stimulated cortisol synthesis by isolated bovine adrenocortical cells
have also been investigated. In concentrations likely to be achieved
during anesthesia, etomidate blocks cortisol output by these iso-
lated bovine cells [191].
Swine
Etomidate has been used as an IV induction agent in swine [203].
As in other species, etomidate provides cardiovascular stability,
decreases cerebral blood flow, and renal blood flow remains essen-
tially unchanged [204]. Additionally, etomidate does not trigger
malignant hyperthermia in susceptible pigs [205].
Clinical use
Doses of etomidate commonly used in domestic species are given
in Table 27.8. Clinicians should note that the dose needed to
achieve endotracheal intubation is affected by the patient’s physical
status and prior administration of other CNS depressants (e.g.,
sedatives, tranquilizers, and opioids). Etomidate may be a reason-
able anesthetic induction agent for those patients with some types
of myocardial disease, cardiovascular instability, and/or intracra-
nial lesions [199].
Induction of anesthesia with etomidate is rapid and endotracheal
intubation is usually possible within 30 s of administration. As
noted previously, pain on IV injection has been described. The inci-
dence of injection pain may be reduced by IV administration of an
opioid analgesic prior to etomidate injection, administration of eto-
midate through an IV catheter placed in a large vein, and/or admin-
istration of etomidate via a running IV line. Myoclonus following
IV etomidate administration has also been described. Adequate
premedication with sedatives such as benzodiazepines may reduce
the incidence of myoclonic activity.
The duration of anesthesia after IV administration of etomidate
is dose-dependent but awakening from a single dose of etomidate is
more rapid than after barbiturate administration [166]. Anesthesia
can be maintained by administering etomidate as a constant rate
infusion as there is little evidence of cumulative drug effect.
However, this practice is not recommended due to the previously
discussed adrenocortical suppression and erythrocyte damage.
Table 27.8 Etomidate dosages in various species.
Species 	Dose (mg/kg) IV
Dog 	0.5–4.0
Cat 	0.5–4.0
Pig 	2–4
IV, intravenous.

-- 492 of 1450 --

Chapter 27: Injectable Anesthetics 	477
Etomidate analogs
Efforts to produce an etomidate analog that maintains the desirable
qualities of etomidate (rapid onset and recovery, excellent hemody-
namic stability, and high therapeutic index) while minimizing the
inhibition of adrenal steroid synthesis are ongoing. These analogs
target modifications to the imidazole ring or the ester side chain of
etomidate (Fig. 27.4). Carboetomidate replaces the imidazole ring
with a pyrrole ring. The resulting drug does not suppress adreno-
cortical functioning; however, its sedation potency is seven times
less than etomidate [206]. This reduction in potency causes a rela-
tively slow onset of hypnosis compared to etomidate.
Methoxyethyl-etomidate (ET-26) leaves the imidazole ring of
etomidate intact and instead modifies the ester side chain. Studies
of ET-26 in rats and dogs reveal a sedative-hypnotic effect with
maintenance of myocardial performance [207] and milder adre-
nal gland suppression [208]. Phase I clinical trials of ET-26 are
imminent.
Methoxycarbonyl-etomidate (MOC-ET) was the first etomidate
analog designed. While MOC-ET retained the rapid onset of hypno-
sis and hemodynamic stability of etomidate, its rapid metabolism
resulted in a short duration of action [209]. This led to the adaptation
of MOC-ET to cyclopropyl-methoxycarbonyl metomidate (CPMM).
CPMM has been studied in rats [208] and dogs [210,211] showing
hypnotic activity and a duration of action between that of MOC-ET
and etomidate. Recovery from CPMM in these species was swift and
adrenocortical suppression was significantly shorter than with eto-
midate. IV infusion of CPMM in dogs was associated with involun-
tary muscle movements and the incidence of these movements was
higher during CPMM infusions than when etomidate was used [211].
CPMM was renamed ABP-700 and has undergone promising clinical
trials in heathy human subjects. Adrenal gland function was pre-
served, few patients experienced pain on injection, and the incidence
of postoperative nausea and vomiting was only moderate [212–214].
The development of ABP-700 is ongoing.
Alfaxalone
Alfaxalone has been used in veterinary medicine since its anesthetic
properties were described in 1971 [215]. Because alfaxalone is
poorly water soluble, it was originally combined with a weak anes-
thetic, alfadolone, and formulated in a 20% polyoxyethylated castor
oil vehicle. Althesin® was formulated for human use while Saffan®
was marketed for veterinary use. This combination of two neuro-
steroids was used to induce and/or maintain anesthesia in a variety
of species, including cats, horses, pigs, and sheep [216]. However, the
castor oil vehicle, Cremophor EL®, was associated with hyperemia in
cats [217] and histamine release with resultant anaphylactic reac-
tions in dogs [215]. A solution containing alfaxalone in a noncremo-
phor (cyclodextrin) vehicle (Alfaxan-CD®) has been approved for
dogs and cats. The cyclodextrin molecule is derived from starch and
has a hydrophobic core in which the alfaxalone binds. This allows
the mixture of alfaxalone and cyclodextrin to be dissolved in water.
This formulation is not associated with histamine release [218],
although one case of anaphylaxis associated with IV administration
of alfaxalone in a dog has been reported [219].
Chemical structure
Alfaxalone (3α-hydroxy- 5α-pregnane-11,20-dione) is a neuroac-
tive steroid molecule capable of inducing anesthesia (Fig. 27.5). It is
supplied as a 1% solution in 2-hydroxypropyl-β- cyclodextrin. The
solution does not contain an antimicrobial preservative and
supports the growth of S. aureus and E. coli (although less readily
than propofol). The labeled shelf-life of this original, preservative-
free formulation of alfaxalone varies between countries. In the
United Kingdom, the vial is labeled as single use, while in the
United States, it should be discarded 6 h after first puncture. In
Australia, a vial stored at 4 °C can be used for 7 days. The microbial
integrity of preservative-free alfaxalone has been evaluated [220].
In this study, no microbial contamination was found in alfaxalone
stored at 4 °C for 7 days and handled with a protected port (closed
system transfer device or nonclosed dispensing pin) [220]. A multi-
dose formulation of alfaxalone containing the preservatives etha-
nol, benzethonium chloride, and chlorocresol extends the shelf-life
of alfaxalone to 28 days [221]. The use and safety of these preserva-
tives have been reviewed by Rowe et al. [222], and the formulation
has been demonstrated to be pharmaceutically bioequivalent [223].
An experimental 4% solution of alfaxalone has been formulated
and studied in remote delivery situations [224,225].
Mechanism of action
As with many of the other injectable anesthetic agents, alfaxalone
produces CNS depression by activity at GABA A receptors [227],
although there is evidence that the exact neurosteroid binding sites
are separate from those of propofol and etomidate [228]. Typical
GABA A receptors consist of 2α, 2β, and 1γ subunit with these subu-
nits existing in numerous isoforms (e.g., α(1–6), β(1–3), and γ(1–
3)). Recent evidence demonstrates that alfaxalone contacts α1β3γ2L
GABA A receptors. In further describing the GABA A receptor struc-
ture, each subunit contains an N-terminal extracellular domain and
a transmembrane domain with four α helices (M1 to M4). Each
subunit interface is designated by the subunit and the helices form-
ing the interface (e.g., α+
-β−
, where + corresponds to the M3 face
and – is the M1 face). Within the receptor, alfaxalone binds to the
transmembrane β+
- α– inter subunit sites that are intracellular and
adjacent to the sites for propofol and etomidate [228]. Binding of
alfaxalone to the GABAA receptor causes movement of chloride into
the cell resulting in hyperpolarization of the postsynaptic mem-
brane. This, in turn, inhibits the pathways responsible for arousal
and awareness. When present in lower concentrations, alfaxalone
will modulate ion currents through the GABA A receptor. At higher
concentrations, however, alfaxalone acts as a GABA agonist, similar
to barbiturates [227].
O
O
O
H
H
H
H H
Figure 27.5 Chemical structure of alfaxalone. Source: National Center for
Biotechnology Information [226].

-- 493 of 1450 --

478 	Section 3: Pharmacology
Pharmacokinetics
The pharmacokinetics of IV alfaxalone have been determined in
several species, including dogs, cats, horses, and rabbits. In dogs, the
pharmacokinetics have been described using a non-compartmental
model and a dose-dependent effect on the elimination half-life has
been demonstrated [218]. After an IV dose of 2 mg/kg, the t1/2 is
24 ± 1.9 min. A dose of 10 mg/kg IV increased the t1/2 to 37.4 ±
1.6 min. There is also a dose-dependent effect on plasma clearance.
Alfaxalone is cleared at 59.4 ± 12.9 mL/kg/min and 52.9 ± 12.8 mL/
kg/min after 2 or 10 mg/kg IV, respectively [218]. The volume
of distribution after a single dose of 2 mg/kg IV is 2.4 L/kg. The
duration of anesthesia, t1/2
, and plasma clearance for alfaxalone in
nonpremedicated Greyhounds are similar to those reported in
Beagles [229]. Data has also been collected on dogs receiving 3 mg/
kg IV alfaxalone followed by a constant rate infusion of 0.15 mg/kg/
min for 90 or 180 min. The volume of distribution at steady state
was 935.74 ± 170.25 and 1119.15 ± 190.65 mL/kg, the t1/2 was 12 ± 2
and 13 ± 3 min, and clearance from the central compartment was
26.02 ± 4.41 and 27.74 ± 5.65 for the 90- and 180-min infusions,
respectively [230].
In cats receiving a single 5 mg/kg IV dose, the volume of distribu-
tion was 1.8 L/kg, the mean terminal plasma t1/2 was approximately
45 min, while mean plasma clearance was 25.1 ± 7.6 mL/kg/
min [231]. The mean (standard deviation) bioavailability of an IM
injection of 5 mg/kg alfaxalone in cats was 94.7 (19.8)%, and the
mean t1/2 and mean residence time following IM administration
were 1.28 (0.21) and 2.09 (0.36) h, respectively [232].
In the horse, the volume of distribution after a 1 mg/kg IV dose
was 1.6 ± 0.4 L/kg. The t1/2 of a 1 mg/kg IV dose was 33.4 min, and
the plasma clearance was 37.1 ± 11.1 mL/min/kg [233]. The median
(range) values for volume of distribution, t1/2
, and clearance were
0.9 (0.9–1.2) L/kg, 59.8 (47.5–68.0) min, and 14.7 (12.1–16.0) mL/
min/kg, respectively in horses receiving 2 mg/kg IV [234]. In foals
premedicated with butorphanol, 3 mg/kg of alfaxalone IV had a
mean plasma t1/2 of 22.8 ± 5.2 min, and an observed plasma clear-
ance and volume of distribution of 19.9 ± 5.9 mL/min/kg and 0.6 ±
0.2 L, respectively [235]. Alfaxalone as an IV constant rate infusion
to maintain anesthesia in Standardbred horses has also been exam-
ined [236]. The infusion was administered for 180 min, and the
median (range) IV infusion rate delivered was 3.1 (2.4–4.3) mg/
kg/h. The volume of distribution was 1.60 ± 0.5 L/kg, the mean
plasma t1/2 was 41 min, and the plasma clearance was 25 ± 6.3 mL/
min/kg [236].
Rabbits receiving alfaxalone at 5 mg/kg IV demonstrated a vol-
ume of distribution of 3.39 ± 0.64 L/kg, a t1/2 of 1.59 h, and a clear-
ance of 1.55 ± 0.27 L/kg/h [237].
There is evidence that alfaxalone is rapidly metabolized by
the liver [238]. In the rat, it appears alfaxalone undergoes both
cytochrome P450-dependent (Phase I) and conjugation-dependent
(Phase II) hepatic metabolism [238]. Cats and dogs seem to form
the same five Phase I metabolites of alfaxalone [239]. While cats
produce alfaxalone sulfate and alfaxalone glucuronide in Phase II,
dogs are observed to produce alfaxalone glucuronide [239]. While
the exact mechanism of clearance is not known, it is likely that these
metabolites are then primarily excreted in the urine [240].
Pharmacodynamics
Central nervous system
Alfaxalone administration produces unconsciousness and a dose-
dependent reduction in EEG activity [235]. Cerebral blood flow,
ICP, and cerebral metabolic oxygen demands are all decreased [241].
The duration of anesthesia and unresponsiveness to noxious stimuli
increases with increasing dosages of alfaxalone in cats and dogs. In
dogs anesthetized with halothane, alfaxalone administration resulted
in EEG changes, including a shift in the dominant frequency band to
δ from β, occasional burst suppression, and decreases in median and
spectral edge frequency [242]. In dogs receiving 3.5 mg/kg followed
by 0.15 mg/kg/min of alfaxalone IV, cerebral blood flow was signifi-
cantly reduced as compared to dogs receiving propofol or isoflurane.
However, alfaxalone maintained higher hypocapnic cerebrovascular
reactivity to carbon dioxide [243].
Cardiovascular system
IV administration of alfaxalone produces dose-dependent cardio-
vascular depression in dogs and cats. Arterial blood pressure, car-
diac output, and heart rate decreased in cats that were administered
15 and 50 mg/kg of IV alfaxalone. In those animals that received the
50 mg/kg dose, the decrease in systolic blood pressure was marked,
and did not return to a clinically acceptable value for approximately
15–30 min [244]. In dogs that received 6 and 20 mg/kg of IV alfax-
alone, heart rate increased while arterial blood pressure and mean
pulmonary arterial pressure decreased in a dose-dependent fash-
ion [245]. It should be noted, however, that when alfaxalone is
administered to dogs and cats at clinically relevant doses (5 mg/kg
in cats and 2 mg/kg in dogs), cardiovascular parameters remain
quite stable [231]. Studies utilizing clinical doses of alfaxalone in
horses [234–236,246], sheep [247–249], and swine [250,251] have
also demonstrated clinically acceptable cardiovascular parameters.
Respiratory system
In dogs and cats, the administration of alfaxalone produces dose-
dependent respiratory depression, with apnea being the most com-
mon side effect [244,245]. In dogs, the duration of apnea was related
to the dose of alfaxalone administered [245]. Dose-dependent
decreases in respiratory rate, minute volume, and arterial partial
pressure of oxygen (PaO 2
) were noted in both dogs and
cats [244,245]. The arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide
(PaCO 2
) increased in cats receiving 50 mg/kg and in dogs receiving
6 and 20 mg/kg [244,245]. Neither apnea nor increased PaCO 2
occurred in dogs that received 2 mg/kg of alfaxalone [245]. The rate
of administration may affect the incidence of PIA. Premedicated
dogs receiving alfaxalone at a rate of 0.5 mg/kg/min were less likely
to experience PIA as compared to those receiving alfaxalone at a
rate of 2 mg/kg/min [252]. However, a slower infusion rate did not
have the same effect on the incidence of PIA in cats[253]. Decreased
respiratory rate, hypoxemia, and increased PaCO2 have been
reported in other species receiving alfaxalone. While these effects
are manageable, it is recommended that mechanisms to provide
oxygen and assist ventilation are available when using alfaxalone.
Hepatic, renal, and gastrointestinal systems
To the author’s knowledge, no controlled studies examining the
effect of alfaxalone alone on hepatic or renal blood flow have been
published. Studies involving alfaxalone–alfadolone have demon-
strated that renal function in rats is only transiently altered, if changed
at all [254,255], while a study in dogs showed that renal blood flow
remained unchanged [256]. Administration of alfaxalone–alfadolone
in Greyhounds decreased hepatic blood flow and hepatic oxygen
supply [257]. As discussed previously, alfaxalone undergoes
cytochrome P450 hepatic metabolism. Induction of the cytochrome
P450 enzyme system leads to an increase in the rate of alfaxalone
degradation, which may decrease the duration of anesthesia [238].

-- 494 of 1450 --

Chapter 27: Injectable Anesthetics 	479
In patients with renal portal systems, such as reptiles, the site of
alfaxalone injection may alter the effectiveness of alfaxalone. When
injections are performed in the caudal portions of these animals,
the injected drug may undergo first-pass extraction by the renal
portal system and rapid metabolism by the liver. This reduces effi-
cacy and plasma half-life of the injected drug. In studies performed
on rattlesnakes and ball pythons, alfaxalone injections in the cranial
third of the snakes produced more profound sedation with longer
durations as compared to caudal injections [258–260].
Other effects
Alfaxalone is a steroid compound derived from progesterone;
therefore, it is possible that sex-specific metabolism could produce
pharmacokinetic differences between male and female animals.
Previous publications have dismissed this possibility [218], how-
ever, this phenomenon has been demonstrated in several studies
involving laboratory species. IV administration of alfaxalone to
Sprague–Dawley rats demonstrated significant differences between
sexes in plasma clearance, half-life, and mean residence time with
reduced clearance and longer half-life and mean residence times in
female rats [261]. These sex differences appear consistent regard-
less of route of administration as intraperitoneal alfaxalone pro-
duced longer sedation and anesthesia in female Sprague–Dawley
rats [262,263], and IM alfaxalone with ketamine in female naked
mole rats produced deeper sedation with more rapid onset and
longer duration compared to males [264]. Similar results were
found in mice receiving intraperitoneal xylazine and alfaxalone.
Male C57BL/6J mice required 80–120 mg/kg of alfaxalone to pro-
duce surgical anesthesia compared to 40–80 mg/kg in females [265].
While sex differences have not been documented in clinical prac-
tice, population pharmacokinetics, and further investigation
should be considered.
Species-specific effects
Canine
In a multicenter clinical trial involving 231 dogs, alfaxalone was
found to be a safe and efficacious agent for the induction and main-
tenance of anesthesia [266]. In this study, the average induction
dose for alfaxalone was 2.2 mg/kg in nonpremedicated dogs and
1.6 mg/kg in dogs that received premedications [266]. This reduc-
tion in the dose of alfaxalone needed for induction has been dem-
onstrated in other studies [267,268].
As described previously, cardiovascular and respiratory parame-
ters remain quite stable in dogs that are administered alfaxalone at
clinically relevant doses, with PIA being the most commonly
reported side effect [245]. When compared to etomidate, induction
of anesthesia with alfaxalone resulted in tachycardia and an increase
in cardiac index. Additionally, arterial blood pressure and systemic
vascular resistance index were decreased, although both remained
at clinically acceptable values [183]. When used in a clinical study
involving dogs of poor anesthetic risk, alfaxalone did not produce
significant changes in systolic blood pressure and was determined
to be a clinically acceptable induction agent [269].
Alfaxalone has also been used as a constant rate infusion to
maintain anesthesia in dogs and has been shown to be an effective
anesthetic producing clinically acceptable hemodynamic val-
ues [270]. Constant rate infusions of alfaxalone produce effective
anesthesia for surgical procedures [271,272]. Doses of 0.07 mg/
kg/min adjusted to maintain adequate anesthetic depth [271] and
0.11 ± 0.01 mg/kg/min [272] produced satisfactory anesthesia in
dogs undergoing ovariohysterectomy. In both studies, significant
respiratory depression was observed; therefore, ventilatory moni-
toring is recommended [271,272].
Alfaxalone has also been evaluated in dogs less than 12 weeks of
age and has been determined to be a suitable induction agent [273].
Additionally, alfaxalone has been used to induce anesthesia in dogs
prior to cesarean section [274]. Seventy-four bitches were included
in the study, 26 of which received alfaxalone to induce anesthesia.
Puppy vigor scores were higher in those dogs receiving alfaxalone
when compared to those receiving propofol, but survival rates 24 h
after birth were similar between groups (97% for alfaxalone and
98% for propofol) [274]. In another retrospective study, neonatal
mortality was unaffected by the use of IV alfaxalone to induce anes-
thesia [275]. In giant-breed dogs undergoing elective cesarean sec-
tions, alfaxalone was associated with higher Apgar scores [276].
However, when total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) with alfaxalone
(0.2 mg/kg/min) was used in dogs undergoing elective cesarean
sections, puppy vigor was reduced at 5 and 60 min when compared
to those dogs maintained with isoflurane [277].
Other studies of alfaxalone in dogs show that IV or IM adminis-
tration of alfaxalone will briefly increase IOP [278] and reduce tear
production [279–281]. Unlike some formulations of propofol, IV
injection of alfaxalone does not cause pain on injection [83].
Recovery from alfaxalone anesthesia is longer compared to
propofol and has been associated with adverse events such as pad-
dling, rigidity, myoclonus, and vocalization [266,282]. However,
these events lasted less than 2 min and did not result in injury or
require treatment [282].
Alfaxalone is effective when administered IM in the dog with
rapid absorption and onset of action. Cruz-Benedetti et al. [283]
described moderate to deep sedation lasting approximately
35 min after 4 mg/kg IM. The pharmacokinetic data showed a vol-
ume of distribution of 1.94 ± 0.63 L/kg, a mean plasma t1/2 of 29 ±
8 min, and a plasma clearance rate of 47.7 ± 14.1mL/min/kg. Of
the 12 dogs included in the study, 10 of them exhibited paddling,
trembling, nystagmus, and hypersensitivity to sounds [283].
Combinations of alfaxalone with other sedatives and opioids have
been studied [281,284–288]. In most cases, the addition of a seda-
tive and/or opioid improved the quality of sedation or anesthesia
while maintaining acceptable cardiopulmonary function. It should
be noted that with a high bioavailability, and especially in combi-
nation with other CNS depressants, IM alfaxalone can produce
anesthesia with a loss of laryngeal reflexes [284]. Endotracheal
tubes and mechanisms to provide oxygen and support ventilation
should be available when administering these drugs.
Feline
Alfaxalone has been used for sedation as well as induction and
maintenance of anesthesia in the cat. When used IV at clinically
relevant doses to induce anesthesia, alfaxalone produces dose-
dependent anesthesia and unresponsiveness to noxious stim-
uli [244]. As noted previously, cardiopulmonary parameters
remain relatively stable, with hypoventilation and hypoxia being
the most frequent side effects associated with administration
of high doses of alfaxalone [244]. When compared to propofol, IV
administration of alfaxalone resulted in similar and clinically
acceptable inductions, cardiorespiratory variables, and recover-
ies [289,290]. In cats, 3–12 months of age, IV administration of
alfaxalone produced a smooth induction of anesthesia with a rapid
recovery [291]. Alfaxalone has also been demonstrated to be a suit-
able induction and maintenance agent in cats less than 12 weeks of
age [292].

-- 495 of 1450 --

480 	Section 3: Pharmacology
Intermittent IV bolus doses of alfaxalone to not appear to
accumulate in the plasma nor do they increase recovery times, so
alfaxalone can be used as a constant rate infusion to maintain anes-
thesia [231]. In cats premedicated with morphine and dexmedeto-
midine undergoing neutering procedures, alfaxalone induction and
constant rate infusion (1.7 mg/kg and 0.18 mg/kg/min, respec-
tively) were effective for surgical anesthesia [293].
Similar to the dog, minor adverse events have been noted during
recovery in animals that have received alfaxalone. When compared
to propofol, cats receiving alfaxalone were more likely to have epi-
sodes of paddling and trembling during recovery [294]. However,
most recoveries were assessed as smooth overall and were similar to
those cats receiving propofol [294].
As in the dog, alfaxalone is effective when administered by other
routes. Subcutaneous (SC) administration of alfaxalone and butor-
phanol in hyperthyroid cats resulted in adequate sedation for oral
administration of iodine-131 [295]. IM alfaxalone in combination
with dexmedetomidine and hydromorphone resulted in prolonged
recoveries with excitement, ataxia, and hyper-reactivity in all cats
and therefore this route of administration for alfaxalone was not
recommended [296]. However, subsequent studies involving IM
administration have demonstrated effective sedation and anesthe-
sia of good quality. Echocardiographic variables in cats receiving
alfaxalone and dexmedetomidine IM showed minimal changes
after blood donation [297]. IM combinations of alfaxalone, α2
-
adrenergic receptor agonists, and opioids have produced anesthesia
sufficient for minor procedures as well as surgery [296,298–300].
Recovery scores in cats receiving these IM alfaxalone combinations
were not different from cats receiving IM dexmedetomidine and
butorphanol [301], and were scored as excellent in cats adminis-
tered alfaxalone, dexmedetomidine, and butorphanol [302].
Equine
Alfaxalone has been used to induce and maintain anesthesia in
horses [303–305]. When administered to horses following xylazine
and guaifenesin, 1 mg/kg of IV alfaxalone satisfactorily induced
anesthesia, although tremors/shaking were reported [304]. When
compared with ketamine, 1 mg/kg of alfaxalone with 0.02 mg/kg
diazepam IV, produced shorter induction times (18 ± 4 s) with sim-
ilar anesthesia times [305]. Recovery scores, however, were signifi-
cantly worse in horses receiving alfaxalone [305]. Alfaxalone has
also been administered as a constant rate infusion to maintain gen-
eral anesthesia in horses undergoing field castration. In this study,
alfaxalone at a dose of 2 mg/kg/h and medetomidine at a dose of 5
μg/kg/h were determined to be suitable for short-term field anes-
thesia in the horse [303]. Alfaxalone, along with remifentanil and
dexmedetomidine, was sufficient for abdominal surgery in a foal,
but recovery was prolonged [306].
The use of alfaxalone for the induction and maintenance of anes-
thesia has also been investigated in donkeys. IV alfaxalone induced
anesthesia rapidly and was appropriate for surgical procedures.
However, time to standing was longer and recovery scores were
lower when compared to ketamine [307–309].
Ruminant
Alfaxalone has been shown to produce acceptable anesthesia
while maintaining cardiovascular and respiratory function in
sheep [247,249]. It has been demonstrated that a constant rate
infusion of alfaxalone in desflurane anesthetized sheep reduced
inhalant 	requirements 	while 	cardiorespiratory 	parameters
remained similar to sheep anesthetized with desflurane alone [247].
In another study, a 2 mg/kg IV dose of alfaxalone produced mini-
mal changes in cardiopulmonary and acid–base variables [249].
Alfaxalone has also been shown to have no effect on IOP in sheep;
however, a marked miosis was observed [310].
IV alfaxalone for induction prior to isoflurane anesthesia is effec-
tive in goats. Goats receiving a dose of 2 mg/kg IV became uncon-
scious quickly and smoothly and recovery scores were good to
excellent [311]. The minimum infusion rate (MIR) of alfaxalone to
prevent purposeful movement in goats is 0.16 mg/kg/h [312].
Fentanyl and midazolam lower the MIR in a dose-dependent man-
ner [313,314]. Lidocaine, administered at doses of 3, 6, and 12 mg/
kg/h, will also reduce MIR by 10, 30, and 30%, respectively [315].
Swine
Alfaxalone has been used to induce sedation and anesthesia in pigs.
Alfaxalone alone or in combination with diazepam has been
injected IM in pigs. This rapidly produced recumbency, deep seda-
tion, and minimal side effects. It was noted that this combination
may be useful for premedication in pigs, but that the volume of
injectate would limit its use to small pigs [316]. IM dexmedetomi-
dine and alfaxalone produced a deeper and better quality of seda-
tion compared to dexmedetomidine and ketamine in Landrace ×
Large White pigs [317]. Intratesticular alfaxalone with lidocaine
administered to piglets was sufficient for castration [318]. Intranasal
alfaxalone at a dose of 1 or 2 mg/kg in Yucatan swine did increase
sedation scores but did not facilitate handling or the performance of
any clinical procedures [319].
Induction of anesthesia with IV alfaxalone has also been
described in swine. In pigs premedicated with IM azaperone, IV
alfaxalone resulted in satisfactory conditions for intubation with
minimal side effects [320]. Maintenance of anesthesia in pigs with
alfaxalone has also been described. TIVA with alfaxalone, keta-
mine, and dexmedetomidine was effective and resulted in higher
respiratory rates and lower end-tidal carbon dioxide values as com-
pared to pigs receiving propofol, ketamine, and dexmedetomi-
dine [321]. IM alfaxalone in combination with butorphanol and
medetomidine followed by IV alfaxalone for the maintenance of
anesthesia was satisfactory and produced minimal cardiovascular
side effects [251].
Other species
SC, IM, and IV administration of alfaxalone has been studied in
several avian species with varying results. When used as the sole
agent, alfaxalone produced varying levels of sedation and poor
recoveries in peafowl [322], lovebirds [323], Quaker parrots [324],
Mallard ducks [325], and budgerigars [326]. As with other species,
the addition of other CNS depressants and or opioids may improve
both the depth and quality of sedation in birds.
IM administration of alfaxalone has produced sedation, loss
of righting reflex, and facilitated endotracheal intubation in rab-
bits [149,327–329]. Rousseau-Blass et al. [330] demonstrated that
early oxygen supplementation after IM alfaxalone, dexmedeto-
midine, and midazolam resolved hypoxemia, but resulted in a
decreased respiratory rate and increased PaCO 2
. IM and SC admin-
istration have also been studied in guinea pigs [331–334], hedge-
hogs [335,336], and ferrets [337].
Sedation and anesthesia by immersion in alfaxalone have been
demonstrated in goldfish and fire-bellied toads. Surgical anesthesia
with a smooth induction and recovery with minimal side effects
was produced by immersing goldfish in water containing 6 mg/L of
alfaxalone [338]. Immersion in alfaxalone at a concentration of

-- 496 of 1450 --

Chapter 27: Injectable Anesthetics 	481
200 mg/L produced anesthesia in 10/11 toads and did not cause
skin irritation or changes in pigmentation [339]. Adding dexme-
detomidine to the alfaxalone did not potentiate the level of uncon-
sciousness in fire-bellied toads and proved unsuitable for invasive
procedures [340] while morphine provided superior antinocicep-
tion compared to butorphanol [341].
Clinical use
Table 27.9 lists commonly used doses for alfaxalone. As with all
injectable induction agents, the dose should be tailored according
to concurrent drug administration and physical status.
As discussed previously, alfaxalone can be effective when
administered IV or IM. However, due to volume of injection, the
IM route of administration should be limited to small patients.
A new formulation (40 mg/mL), RD0387, has been produced and
studied [225,342].
While recovering from alfaxalone anesthesia, it is recommended
that animals be left in a quiet, dark area where they are not handled
or disturbed except for necessary monitoring. Paddling of the
limbs, muscle twitching, hyper-reactivity, and ataxia have been
reported in animals that are recovering from alfaxalone anesthesia.
These reactions may be attenuated by the use of sedative agents.
Other drugs
The following injectable anesthetic agents are no longer routinely
used in clinical practice but do have historical significance in the
study of veterinary anesthesia or are occasionally of interest to labo-
ratory investigators.
Metomidate
Metomidate is the first compound of the imidazole class of anes-
thetics that was designed as a non-barbiturate IV hypnotic drug. It
is freely soluble in water, but aqueous solutions are unstable and
should be used within 24 h. It was introduced initially as a hypnotic
for pigs, horses [343], and a variety of avian species. When given by
IV injection, metomidate produces loss of consciousness quickly. It
has a short duration of action of less than 25 min; however, animals
will sleep for several hours. Recovery in horses may be extremely
violent [344].
Metomidate anesthesia is characterized by cardiovascular stabil-
ity. Mild hypotension results initially, along with a decrease in heart
rate and a slight decrease in cardiac output. Minute ventilation also
remains stable with a slightly decreased respiratory rate but
increased tidal volume. Metomidate produces profound muscle
relaxation, but little analgesia, so it must be combined with analge-
sics for surgical procedures [344]. Further development of the
imidazole compounds created the superior substance, etomidate,
which has gained use in human and veterinary medicine.
Chloral hydrate
Chloral hydrate, 1,1,1-trichloro-2,2- dihydroxyethane, is a hypnotic
that was first introduced in 1869. It is a crystalline substance that
has a distinct odor and volatizes slowly at room temperature. It is
readily soluble in water and aqueous solutions remain generally sta-
ble. Chloral hydrate is metabolized after administration to trichlo-
roethanol, which is responsible for most of the observed effects.
Although the mechanism of action is unknown, it is likely that
chloral hydrate interacts with the GABA receptor in a similar fash-
ion as the other injectable anesthetics. When administered, chloral
hydrate produces dose-dependent sedation. The dose required to
produce anesthesia approaches the minimum lethal dose, so its
margin of safety is quite narrow. The effects of an IV injection are
slow to occur, which makes it difficult to assess the degree of seda-
tion or depression. Even after slow administration, sedation contin-
ues to deepen for a few minutes after the injection is stopped, likely
due to the lag time required for metabolism to trichloroethanol.
Myocardial contractility is reduced, resulting in hypotension.
The respiratory system is mildly affected by chloral hydrate admin-
istration but at doses needed to produce anesthesia, respiratory
depression can be severe. Ventricular fibrillation and sudden death
in the recovery period have been reported. To mitigate the risk of
death, the addition of either magnesium sulfate, pentobarbital, or
both has been used.
Historically, chloral hydrate has been used for sedation in horses
and cattle and was administered either IV or orally (PO). Chloral
hydrate is irritating to the stomach and mucous membranes; its irri-
tating nature means that perivascular injection results in necrosis
and sloughing of the vessel wall and the surrounding tissues. If IV
injection is continued until a surgical plane of anesthesia is reached,
recovery will be prolonged.
Magnesium sulfate
Magnesium sulfate is probably better thought of as a muscle relax-
ant and CNS depressant rather than an injectable anesthetic. When
combined with chloral hydrate, it hastens the onset of anesthesia,
increases its depth, and reduces the toxicity associated with chloral
hydrate. The recommended mixture is two parts chloral hydrate to
one part magnesium sulfate.
Dilute solutions of magnesium sulfate have been used to induce
anesthesia in small animal patients. However, magnesium sulfate
administration results in global depression of the CNS, and respira-
tory arrest occurs frequently. Magnesium sulfate has been used for
euthanasia, but it should only be administered after the animal is
rendered unconscious with another anesthetic agent.
Chloralose
Chloralose is a solution prepared by heating glucose and chloral
hydrate. Its use as an anesthetic is limited to laboratory animals
being used in non-survival surgical experiments.
Anesthesia produced with chloralose is similar to chloral hydrate
but the effects last 8–10 h. Compared to chloral hydrate, blood pres-
sure is elevated, as is the heart rate and the respiratory rate [344].
Chloralose is transformed to chloraldehyde and glucose and the
safety margin is relatively large. Recovery from chloralose anesthe-
sia is slow and marked by paddling and muscle fasciculations.
Consequently, there is little indication for its use in veterinary
medicine.
Table 27.9 Alfaxalone dosages in various species.
Species 	Intravenous induction
of anesthesia (mg/kg)
Constant rate
infusion (mg/kg/min)
Sedation
dose (mg/kg)
Dog 	0.5–2.2 	0.07–0.12
Cat 	0.5–5.0 	0.18 	3.0 SC
Horse 	1–3 	0.033a
Foal 	3
Sheep 	1.2–2.6
Pig 	0.6–1.1 	5.0 IM
a Administered with 5 μg/kg/h medetomidine
IM, intramuscular; SC, subcutaneous.

-- 497 of 1450 --

482 	Section 3: Pharmacology
References
1 Haws JL, Herman N, Clark Y, et al. The chemical stability and sterility of sodium
thiopental after preparation. Anesth Analg 1998; 86(1): 208–213.
2 Beeman CS, Dembo J, Bogardus A. Stability of reconstituted methohexital sodium.
J Oral Maxillofac Surg 1994; 52(4): 393–396.
3 Olsen RW, Li GD. GABA(A) receptors as molecular targets of general anesthetics:
identification of binding sites provides clues to allosteric modulation. Can J Anaesth
2011; 58(2): 206–215.
4 Tanelian DL, Kosek P, Mody I, et al. The role of the GABAA receptor/chloride
channel complex in anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1993; 78(4): 757–776.
5 Saidman LJ. Uptake, distribution, and elimination of barbiturates. In: Eger EI, ed.
Anesthetic Uptake and Action, 2nd edn. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins, 1974:
264–285.
6 Brandon RA, Baggot JD. The pharmacokinetics of thiopentone. J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 1981; 4(2): 79–85.
7 Sams RA, Muir WW, Detra RL, et al. Comparative pharmacokinetics and anesthetic
effects of methohexital, pentobarbital, thiamylal, and thiopental in Greyhound dogs
and non-Greyhound, mixed-breed dogs. Am J Vet Res 1985; 46(8): 1677–1683.
8 Russo H, Bressolle F. Pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of thiopental. Clin
Pharmacokinet 1998; 35(2): 95–134.
9 Price HL. A dynamic concept of the distribution of thiopental in the human body.
Anesthesiology 1960; 21: 40–45.
10 Weiss M. How does obesity affect residence time dispersion and the shape of drug
disposition curves? Thiopental as an example. J Pharmacokinet Pharmacodyn 2008;
35(3): 325–336.
11 Abass BT, Weaver BM, Staddon GE, et al. Pharmacokinetics of thiopentone in the
horse. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1994; 17(5): 331–338.
12 Ilkiw JE, Benthuysen JA, Ebling WF, et al. A comparative study of the
pharmacokinetics of thiopental in the rabbit, sheep and dog. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
1991; 14(2): 134–140.
13 Brown MB, Dugat DR, Lyon SD, et al. Comparison of methohexital and propofol as
induction agents for evaluation of laryngeal function in healthy dogs. Vet Surg 2019;
48(1): 70–78.
14 Kim A, Sasaki N, Lee I, et al. Analgesic and cardiopulmonary effects of premedica-
tion with tramadol in calves anesthetized with the infusion of guaifenesin and thia-
mylal. J Vet Med Sci 2021; 83(12): 1988–1993.
15 Robinson EP, Sams RA, Muir WW. Barbiturate anesthesia in greyhound and
mixed-breed dogs: comparative cardiopulmonary effects, anesthetic effects, and
recovery rates. Am J Vet Res 1986; 47(10): 2105–2112.
16 Kiersey DK, Bickford RG, Faulconer A, Jr. Electro-encephalographic patterns pro-
duced by thiopental sodium during surgical operations; description and classifica-
tion. Br J Anaesth 1951; 23(3): 141–152.
17 Albrecht RF, Miletich DJ, Rosenberg R, et al. Cerebral blood flow and metabolic
changes from induction to onset of anesthesia with halothane or pentobarbital.
Anesthesiology 1977; 47(3): 252–256.
18 Guo J, White JA, Batjer HH. The protective effects of thiopental on brain stem
ischemia. Neurosurgery 1995; 37(3): 490–495.
19 Ebmeyer U, Safar P, Radovsky A, et al. Thiopental combination treatments for cer-
ebral resuscitation after prolonged cardiac arrest in dogs. Exploratory outcome
study. Resuscitation 2000; 45(2): 119–131.
20 Hofmeister EH, Williams CO, Braun C, et al. Propofol versus thiopental: effects on
peri-induction intraocular pressures in normal dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008;
35(4): 275–281.
21 Turner DM, Ilkiw JE. Cardiovascular and respiratory effects of three rapidly acting
barbiturates in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1990; 51(4): 598–604.
22 Muir WW. Thiobarbiturate-induced dysrhythmias: the role of heart rate and auto-
nomic imbalance. Am J Vet Res 1977; 38(9): 1377–1381.
23 Hayashi Y, Sumikawa K, Yamatodani A, et al. Myocardial sensitization by thiopen-
tal to arrhythmogenic action of epinephrine in dogs. Anesthesiology 1989; 71(6):
929–935.
24 Hirshman CA, McCullough RE, Cohen PJ, et al. Hypoxic ventilatory drive in dogs
during thiopental, ketamine, or pentobarbital anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1975;
43(6): 628–634.
25 Quandt JE, Robinson EP, Rivers WJ, et al. Cardiorespiratory and anesthetic effects
of propofol and thiopental in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1998; 59(9): 1137–1143.
26 Hirota K, Ohtomo N, Hashimoto Y, et al. Effects of thiopental on airway calibre in
dogs: direct visualization method using a superfine fibreoptic bronchoscope. Br J
Anaesth 1998; 81(2): 203–207.
27 Jackson AM, Tobias K, Long C, et al. Effects of various anesthetic agents on laryn-
geal motion during laryngoscopy in normal dogs. Vet Surg 2004; 33(2): 102–106.
28 Forbes AR, Gamsu G. Depression of lung mucociliary clearance by thiopental and
halothane. Anesth Analg 1979; 58(5): 387–389.
29 Sams RA, Muir WW. Effects of phenobarbital on thiopental pharmacokinetics in
greyhounds. Am J Vet Res 1988; 49(2): 245–249.
30 Hashim MA, Waterman AE. Effects of thiopentone, propofol, alphaxalone-
alphadolone, ketamine and xylazine-ketamine on lower oesophageal sphincter
pressure and barrier pressure in cats. Vet Rec 1991; 129(7): 137–139.
31 Chang J, Kim S, Jung J, et al. Evaluation of the effects of thiopental, propofol, and
etomidate on glomerular filtration rate measured by the use of dynamic computed
tomography in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2011; 72(1): 146–151.
32 Luna SP, Cassu RN, Castro GB, et al. Effects of four anaesthetic protocols on the
neurological and cardiorespiratory variables of puppies born by caesarean section.
Vet Rec 2004; 154(13): 387–389.
33 Alon E, Ball RH, Gillie MH, et al. Effects of propofol and thiopental on maternal
and fetal cardiovascular and acid-base variables in the pregnant ewe. Anesthesiology
1993; 78(3): 562–576.
34 Wilder-Smith OH, Kolletzki M, Wilder-Smith CH. Sedation with intravenous infu-
sions of propofol or thiopentone. Effects on pain perception. Anaesthesia 1995;
50(3): 218–222.
35 Hubbell JA, Hinchcliff KW, Schmall LM, et al. Anesthetic, cardiorespiratory, and
metabolic effects of four intravenous anesthetic regimens induced in horses imme-
diately after maximal exercise. Am J Vet Res 2000; 61(12): 1545–1552.
36 Toutain PL, Brandon RA, Alvinerie M, et al. Thiopentone pharmacokinetics and
electrocorticogram pattern in sheep. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1983; 6(3): 201–209.
37 Søfteland E, Framstad T, Thorsen T, et al. Evaluation of thiopentone-midazolam-
fentanyl anaesthesia in pigs. Lab Anim 1995; 29(3): 269–275.
38 Dyess DL, Tacchi E, Powell RQ, et al. Development of a protocol to provide pro-
longed general anesthesia to pregnant sows. J Invest Surg 1994; 7(3): 235–242.
39 Weiskopf RB, Bogetz MS. Haemorrhage decreases the anaesthetic requirement for
ketamine and thiopentone in the pig. Br J Anaesth 1985; 57(10): 1022–1025.
40 Rawlings CA, Kolata RJ. Cardiopulmonary effects of thiopental/lidocaine combi-
nation during anesthetic induction in the dog. Am J Vet Res 1983; 44(1): 144–149.
41 Ko JC, Golder FJ, Mandsager RE, et al. Anesthetic and cardiorespiratory effects of a
1:1 mixture of propofol and thiopental sodium in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1999;
215(9): 1292–1296.
42 Joubert KE, Picard J, Sethusa M. Inhibition of bacterial growth by different mix-
tures of propofol and thiopentone. J S Afr Vet Assoc 2005; 76(2): 85–89.
43 Kay B, Rolly G. I.C.I. 35868, a new intravenous induction agent. Acta Anaesthesiol
Belg 1977; 28(4): 303–316.
44 Wachowski I, Jolly DT, Hrazdil J, et al. The growth of microorganisms in propofol
and mixtures of propofol and lidocaine. Anesth Analg 1999; 88(1): 209–212.
45 McIntosh MP, Rajewski RA. Comparative canine pharmacokinetics–pharmacody-
namics of fospropofol disodium injection, propofol emulsion, and cyclodextrin-
enabled propofol solution following bolus parenteral administration. J Pharm Sci
2012; 101(9): 3547–3552.
46 Cleale RM, Muir WW, Waselau AC, et al. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic
evaluation of propofol administered to cats in a novel, aqueous, nano-droplet for-
mulation or as an oil-in- water macroemulsion. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2009; 32(5):
436–445.
47 Taylor PM, Chengelis CP, Miller WR, et al. Evaluation of propofol containing 2%
benzyl alcohol preservative in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2012; 14(8): 516–526.
48 Ying SW, Goldstein PA. Propofol suppresses synaptic responsiveness of somatosen-
sory relay neurons to excitatory input by potentiating GABA(A) receptor chloride
channels. Mol Pain 2005; 1: 2.
49 Orser BA, Bertlik M, Wang LY, et al. Inhibition by propofol (2,6 di-isopropylphenol)
of the N-methyl-D- aspartate subtype of glutamate receptor in cultured hippocam-
pal neurones. Br J Pharmacol 1995; 116(2): 1761–1768.
50 National Center for Biotechnology Information. PubChem Compound Summary
for CID 4943, Propofol; https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/Propofol
and CID 3038498, Fospropofol; https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/
Fospropofol (accessed June 2022).
51 Zoran DL, Riedesel DH, Dyer DC. Pharmacokinetics of propofol in mixed-breed
dogs and greyhounds. Am J Vet Res 1993; 54(5): 755–760.
52 Hay-Kraus BL, Greenblatt DJ, Venkatakrishnan K, et al. Evidence for propofol
hydroxylation by cytochrome P4502B11 in canine liver microsomes: breed and
gender differences. Xenobiotica 2000; 30(6): 575–588.
53 Veroli P, O’Kelly B, Bertrand F, et al. Extrahepatic metabolism of propofol in man
during the anhepatic phase of orthotopic liver transplantation. Br J Anaesth 1992;
68(2): 183–186.
54 Servin F, Cockshott ID, Farinotti R, et al. Pharmacokinetics of propofol infusions in
patients with cirrhosis. Br J Anaesth 1990; 65(2): 177–183.
55 Matot I, Neely CF, Katz RY, et al. Pulmonary uptake of propofol in cats. Effect of
fentanyl and halothane. Anesthesiology 1993; 78(6): 1157–1165.
56 Posner LP, Asakawa M, Erb HN. Use of propofol for anesthesia in cats with primary
hepatic lipidosis: 44 cases (1995–2004). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008; 232(12):
1841–1843.
57 Reid J, Nolan AM. Pharmacokinetics of propofol as an induction agent in geriatric
dogs. Res Vet Sci 1996; 61(2): 169–171.

-- 498 of 1450 --

Chapter 27: Injectable Anesthetics 	483
58 Court MH, Hay-Kraus BL, Hill DW, et al. Propofol hydroxylation by dog liver
microsomes: assay development and dog breed differences. Drug Metab Dispos
1999; 27(11): 1293–1299.
59 Adam HK, Glen JB, Hoyle PA. Pharmacokinetics in laboratory animals of ICI 35
868, a new i.v. anaesthetic agent. Br J Anaesth 1980; 52(8): 743–746.
60 Mandsager RE, Clarke CR, Shawley RV, et al. Effects of chloramphenicol on infusion
pharmacokinetics of propofol in greyhounds. Am J Vet Res 1995; 56(1): 95–99.
61 Artru AA, Shapira Y, Bowdle TA. Electroencephalogram, cerebral metabolic, and
vascular responses to propofol anesthesia in dogs. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol 1992;
4(2): 99–109.
62 Herregods L, Verbeke J, Rolly G, et al. Effect of propofol on elevated intracranial
pressure. Preliminary results. Anaesthesia 1988; 43(Suppl): 107–109.
63 Cheng MA, Tempelhoff R, Silbergeld DL, et al. Large-dose propofol alone in
adult epileptic patients: electrocorticographic results. Anesth Analg 1996; 83(1):
169–174.
64 Steffen F, Grasmueck S. Propofol for treatment of refractory seizures in dogs and a
cat with intracranial disorders. J Small Anim Pract 2000; 41(11): 496–499.
65 Goodchild CS, Serrao JM. Cardiovascular effects of propofol in the anaesthetized
dog. Br J Anaesth 1989; 63(1): 87–92.
66 Brüssel T, Theissen JL, Vigfusson G, et al. Hemodynamic and cardiodynamic
effects of propofol and etomidate: negative inotropic properties of propofol. Anesth
Analg 1989; 69(1): 35–40.
67 Ilkiw JE, Pascoe PJ, Haskins SC, et al. Cardiovascular and respiratory effects of
propofol administration in hypovolemic dogs. Am J Vet Res 1992; 53(12):
2323–2327.
68 Pagel PS, Hettrick DA, Kersten JR, et al. Cardiovascular effects of propofol in dogs
with dilated cardiomyopathy. Anesthesiology 1998; 88(1): 180–189.
69 Kamibayashi T, Hayashi Y, Sumikawa K, et al. Enhancement by propofol of
epinephrine-induced arrhythmias in dogs. Anesthesiology 1991; 75(6): 1035–1040.
70 Muir WW III, Gadawski JE. Respiratory depression and apnea induced by propofol
in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1998; 59(2): 157–161.
71 Blouin RT, Seifert HA, Babenco HD, et al. Propofol depresses the hypoxic ventila-
tory response during conscious sedation and isohypercapnia. Anesthesiology 1993;
79(6): 1177–1182.
72 Goodman NW, Black AM, Carter JA. Some ventilatory effects of propofol as sole
anaesthetic agent. Br J Anaesth 1987; 59(12): 1497–1503.
73 Ponte J, Sadler CL. Effect of thiopentone, etomidate and propofol on carotid body
chemoreceptor activity in the rabbit and the cat. Br J Anaesth 1989; 62(1): 41–45.
74 Taylor MB, Grounds RM, Mulrooney PD, et al. Ventilatory effects of propofol dur-
ing induction of anaesthesia. Comparison with thiopentone. Anaesthesia 1986;
41(8): 816–820.
75 Haberer JP, Audibert G, Saunier CG, et al. Effect of propofol and thiopentone on
regional blood flow in brain and peripheral tissues during normoxia and hypoxia in
the dog. Clin Physiol 1993; 13(2): 197–207.
76 Apfel CC, Korttila K, Abdalla M, et al. A factorial trial of six interventions for the
prevention of postoperative nausea and vomiting. N Engl J Med 2004; 350(24):
2441–2451.
77 Smedile LE, Duke T, Taylor SM. Excitatory movements in a dog following propofol
anesthesia. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1996; 32(4): 365–368.
78 Nimmaanrat S. Myoclonic movements following induction of anesthesia with
propofol: a case report. J Med Assoc Thai 2005; 88(12): 1955–1957.
79 Andaluz A, Tusell J, Trasserres O, et al. Transplacental transfer of propofol in preg-
nant ewes. Vet J 2003; 166(2): 198–204.
80 Doebeli A, Michel E, Bettschart R, et al. Apgar score after induction of anesthesia
for canine cesarean section with alfaxalone versus propofol. Theriogenology 2013;
80(8): 850–854.
81 Heldmann E, Brown DC, Shofer F. The association of propofol usage with postop-
erative wound infection rate in clean wounds: a retrospective study. Vet Surg 1999;
28(4): 256–259.
82 Lee SH, Ghim JL, Song MH, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of a
new reformulated microemulsion and the long-chain triglyceride emulsion of
propofol in beagle dogs. Br J Pharmacol 2009; 158(8): 1982–1995.
83 Michou JN, Leece EA, Brearley JC. Comparison of pain on injection during induc-
tion of anaesthesia with alfaxalone and two formulations of propofol in dogs. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2012; 39(3): 275–281.
84 Andress JL, Day TK, Day D. The effects of consecutive day propofol anesthesia on
feline red blood cells. Vet Surg 1995; 24(3): 277–282.
85 Bley CR, Roos M, Price J, et al. Clinical assessment of repeated propofol-associated
anesthesia in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2007; 231(9): 1347–1353.
86 Wiese AJ, Lerche P, Cleale RM, et al. Investigation of escalating and large bolus
doses of a novel, nano-droplet, aqueous 1% propofol formulation in cats. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2010; 37(3): 250–257.
87 Nolan AM, Hall LW. Total intravenous anaesthesia in the horse with propofol.
Equine Vet J 1985; 17(5): 394–398.
88 Mama KR, Steffey EP, Pascoe PJ. Evaluation of propofol as a general anesthetic for
horses. Vet Surg 1995; 24(2): 188–194.
89 Mama KR, Steffey EP, Pascoe PJ. Evaluation of propofol for general anesthesia in
premedicated horses. Am J Vet Res 1996; 57(4): 512–516.
90 Brosnan RJ, Steffey EP, Escobar A, et al. Anesthetic induction with guaifenesin
and propofol in adult horses. Am J Vet Res 2011; 72(12): 1569–1575.
91 Oku K, Ohta M, Katoh T, et al. Cardiovascular effects of continuous propofol infu-
sion in horses. J Vet Med Sci 2006; 68(8): 773–778.
92 Umar MA, Yamashita K, Kushiro T, et al. Evaluation of total intravenous anesthe-
sia with propofol or ketamine–medetomidine–propofol combination in horses.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2006; 228(8): 1221–1227.
93 Ishizuka T, Itami T, Tamura J, et al. Anesthetic and cardiorespiratory effects of
propofol, medetomidine, lidocaine and butorphanol total intravenous anesthesia
in horses. J Vet Med Sci 2013; 75(2): 165–172.
94 Wagner AE, Mama KR, Steffey EP, et al. Evaluation of infusions of xylazine with
ketamine or propofol to modulate recovery following sevoflurane anesthesia in
horses. Am J Vet Res 2012; 73(3): 346–352.
95 Steffey EP, Mama KR, Brosnan RJ, et al. Effect of administration of propofol and
xylazine hydrochloride on recovery of horses after four hours of anesthesia with
desflurane. Am J Vet Res 2009; 70(8): 956–963.
96 Boscan P, Rezende ML, Grimsrud K, et al. Pharmacokinetic profile in relation to
anaesthesia characteristics after a 5% micellar microemulsion of propofol in the
horse. Br J Anaesth 2010; 104(3): 330–337.
97 Rezende ML, Boscan P, Stanley SD, et al. Evaluation of cardiovascular, respiratory
and biochemical effects, and anesthetic induction and recovery behavior in horses
anesthetized with a 5% micellar microemulsion propofol formulation. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2010; 37(5): 440–450.
98 Lin HC, Purohit RC, Powe TA. Anesthesia in sheep with propofol or with
xylazine-ketamine followed by halothane. Vet Surg 1997; 26(3): 247–252.
99 Reid J, Nolan AM, Welsh E. Propofol as an induction agent in the goat: a pharma-
cokinetic study. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1993; 16(4): 488–493.
100 Cagnardi P, Zonca A, Gallo M, et al. Pharmacokinetics of propofol in calves
undergoing abdominal surgery. Vet Res Commun 2009; 33(Suppl 1): 177–179.
101 Duke T, Egger CM, Ferguson JG, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of propofol infu-
sion in llamas. Am J Vet Res 1997; 58(2): 153–156.
102 Correia D, Nolan AM, Reid J. Pharmacokinetics of propofol infusions, either
alone or with ketamine, in sheep premedicated with acepromazine and papavere-
tum. Res Vet Sci 1996; 60(3): 213–217.
103 Foster PS, Hopkinson KC, Denborough MA. Propofol anaesthesia in malignant
hyperpyrexia susceptible swine. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 1992; 19(3):
183–186.
104 Kaiser GM, Breuckmann F, Aker S, et al. Anesthesia for cardiovascular interven-
tions and magnetic resonance imaging in pigs. J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2007;
46(2): 30–33.
105 Martin- Cancho MF, Lima JR, Luis L, et al. Relationship of bispectral index values,
haemodynamic changes and recovery times during sevoflurane or propofol anaes-
thesia in rabbits. Lab Anim-UK 2006; 40(1): 28–42.
106 Terada Y, Ishiyama T, Asano N, et al. Optimal doses of sevoflurane and propofol
in rabbits. BMC Res Notes 2014; 7(1): 820.
107 Fechner J, Ihmsen H, Jeleazcov C, et al. Fospropofol disodium, a water-soluble
prodrug of the intravenous anesthetic propofol (2,6-diisopropylphenol). Expert
Opin Invest Drugs 2009; 18(10): 1565–1571.
108 Feng AY, Kaye AD, Kaye RJ, et al. Novel propofol derivatives and implications for
anesthesia practice. J Anaesthesiol Clin Pharmacol 2017; 33(1): 9–15.
109 Li R, Zhang W, Liu J, et al. Minimum infusion rates and recovery times from different
durations of continuous infusion of fospropofol, a prodrug of propofol, in rabbits:
a comparison with propofol emulsion. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39(4): 373–384.
110 Feng AY, Kaye AD, Kaye RJ, et al. Novel propofol derivatives and implications for
anesthesia practice. J Anaesthesiol Clin Pharmacol 2017; 33(1): 9–15.
111 Zhou Y, Yang J, Liu J, et al. Efficacy comparison of the novel water-soluble propo-
fol prodrug HX0969w and fospropofol in mice and rats. Br J Anaesth 2013; 111(5):
825–832.
112 Lang BC, Yang J, Wang Y, et al. An improved design of water-soluble propofol prod-
rugs characterized by rapid onset of action. Anesth Analg 2014; 118(4): 745–754.
113 Reich DL, Silvay G. Ketamine: an update on the first twenty-five years of clinical
experience. Can J Anaesth 1989; 36(2): 186–197.
114 White PF, Ham J, Way WL, et al. Pharmacology of ketamine isomers in surgical
patients. Anesthesiology 1980; 52(3): 231–239.
115 National Center for Biotechnology Information. PubChem Compound Summary
for CID 3821, Ketamine; https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/Ketamine
and CID 26533, Tiletamine; https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/
Tiletamine (accessed June 2022).
116 Annetta MG, Iemma D, Garisto C, et al. Ketamine: new indications for an old
drug. Curr Drug Targets 2005; 6(7): 789–794.

-- 499 of 1450 --

484 	Section 3: Pharmacology
117 Hirota K, Lambert DG. Ketamine: its mechanism(s) of action and unusual clinical
uses. Br J Anaesth 1996; 77(4): 441–444.
118 Hustveit O, Maurset A, Oye I. Interaction of the chiral forms of ketamine with
opioid, phencyclidine, sigma and muscarinic receptors. Pharmacol Toxicol 1995;
77(6): 355–359.
119 Stoelting RK. Nonbarbiturate induction drugs. In: Stoelting RK, ed. Pharmacology
and Physiology in Anesthetic Practice. 3rd edn. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams
& Wilkins, 1999: 140–157.
120 White PF, Way WL, Trevor AJ. Ketamine – its pharmacology and therapeutic uses.
Anesthesiology 1982; 56(2): 119–136.
121 Hanna RM, Borchard RE, Schmidt SL. Pharmacokinetics of ketamine HCl and
metabolite I in the cat: a comparison of i.v., i.m., and rectal administration. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 1988; 11(1): 84–93.
122 Takeshita H, Okuda Y, Sari A. The effects of ketamine on cerebral circulation and
metabolism in man. Anesthesiology 1972; 36(1): 69–75.
123 Dawson B, Michenfelder JD, Theye RA. Effects of ketamine on canine cerebral
blood flow and metabolism: modification by prior administration of thiopental.
Anesth Analg 1971; 50(3): 443–447.
124 Pfenninger E, Dick W, Ahnefeld FW. The influence of ketamine on both normal
and raised intracranial pressure of artificially ventilated animals. Eur J Anaesthesiol
1985; 2(3): 297–307.
125 Kayama Y. Ketamine and e.e.g. seizure waves: interaction with anti-epileptic
drugs. Br J Anaesth 1982; 54(8): 879–883.
126 Celesia GG, Chen RC, Bamforth BJ. Effects of ketamine in epilepsy. Neurology
1975; 25(2): 169–172.
127 Reder BS, Trapp LD, Troutman KC. Ketamine suppression of chemically induced
convulsions in the two-day-old white leghorn cockerel. Anesth Analg 1980; 59(6):
406–409.
128 Diaz FA, Bianco JA, Bello A, et al. Effects of ketamine on canine cardiovascular
function. Br J Anaesth 1976; 48(10): 941–946.
129 Haskins SC, Farver TB, Patz JD. Ketamine in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1985; 46(9):
1855–1860.
130 Wong DH, Jenkins LC. An experimental study of the mechanism of action of keta-
mine on the central nervous system. Can Anaesth Soc J 1974; 21(1): 57–67.
131 Baraka A, Harrison T, Kachachi T. Catecholamine levels after ketamine anesthesia
in man. Anesth Analg 1973; 52(2): 198–200.
132 Waxman K, Shoemaker WC, Lippmann M. Cardiovascular effects of anesthetic
induction with ketamine. Anesth Analg 1980; 59(5): 355–358.
133 Soliman MG, Brindle GF, Kuster G. Response to hypercapnia under ketamine
anaesthesia. Can Anaesth Soc J 1975; 22(4): 486–494.
134 Jaspar N, Mazzarelli M, Tessier C, et al. Effect of ketamine on control of breathing
in cats. J Appl Physiol Respir Environ Exerc Physiol 1983; 55(3): 851–859.
135 Hirshman CA, Downes H, Farbood A, et al. Ketamine block of bronchospasm in
experimental canine asthma. Br J Anaesth 1979; 51(8): 713–718.
136 Taylor PA, Towey RM. Ketamine anaesthesia. Br Med J 1971; 3(5771): 432–a.
137 Fass J, Bares R, Hermsdorf V, et al. Effects of intravenous ketamine on gastrointes-
tinal motility in the dog. Intensive Care Med 1995; 21(7): 584–589.
138 Aida S, Yamakura T, Baba H, et al. Preemptive analgesia by intravenous low-dose
ketamine and epidural morphine in gastrectomy: a randomized double-blind
study. Anesthesiology 2000; 92(6): 1624–1630.
139 Hamilton SM, Johnston SA, Broadstone RV. Evaluation of analgesia provided by
the administration of epidural ketamine in dogs with a chemically induced syno-
vitis. Vet Anaesth Analg 2005; 32(1): 30–39.
140 Kovalcuka L, Birgele E, Bandere D, et al. The effects of ketamine hydrochloride
and diazepam on the intraocular pressure and pupil diameter of the dog’s eye. Vet
Ophthalmol 2013; 16(1): 29–34.
141 Wetzel RW, Ramsay EC. Comparison of four regimens for intraoral administra-
tion of medication to induce sedation in cats prior to euthanasia. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 1998; 213(2): 243–245.
142 Harrison KA, Robertson SA, Levy JK, et al. Evaluation of medetomidine, keta-
mine and buprenorphine for neutering feral cats. J Feline Med Surg 2011; 13(12):
896–902.
143 Cistola AM, Golder FJ, Centonze LA, et al. Anesthetic and physiologic effects of
tiletamine, zolazepam, ketamine, and xylazine combination (TKX) in feral cats
undergoing surgical sterilization. J Feline Med Surg 2004; 6(5): 297–303.
144 Cruz ML, Luna SP, de Castro GB, et al. A preliminary trial comparison of several
anesthetic techniques in cats. Can Vet J 2000; 41(6): 481–485.
145 Gunkel C, Lafortune M. Felids. In: West G, Heard D, Caulkett N, eds. Zoo Animal
and Wildlife Immobilization and Anesthesia. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing, 2007:
443–458.
146 Tokushige H, Araki M, Kusano K, et al. A retrospective comparison of induction
with thiopental/guaifenesin and propofol/ketamine in Thoroughbred racehorses
anesthetized with sevoflurane and medetomidine during arthroscopic surgery.
J Equine Sci 2019; 30(2): 25–31.
147 Sage AM, Keating SC, Lascola KM, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects and recovery
characteristics of horses anesthetized with xylazine-ketamine with midazolam or
propofol. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45(6): 772–781.
148 Jarrett MA, Bailey KM, Messenger KM, et al. Recovery of horses from general
anesthesia after induction with propofol and ketamine versus midazolam and
ketamine. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2018; 253(1): 101–107.
149 Umar MA, Yamashita K, Kushiro T, et al. Evaluation of total intravenous anesthe-
sia with propofol or ketamine–medetomidine–propofol combination in horses.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2006; 228(8): 1221–1227.
150 Posner LP, Kasten JI, Kata C. Propofol with ketamine following sedation with
xylazine for routine induction of general anaesthesia in horses. Vet Rec 2013;
173(22): 550.
151 Muir WW III, Lerche P, Robertson JT, et al. Comparison of four drug combina-
tions for total intravenous anesthesia of horses undergoing surgical removal of an
abdominal testis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000; 217(6): 869–873.
152 Coetzee JF, Gehring R, Tarus-Sang J, et al. Effect of sub-anesthetic xylazine and
ketamine (’ketamine stun’) administered to calves immediately prior to castration.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2010; 37(6): 566–578.
153 Dershwitz M, Sréter FA, Ryan JF. Ketamine does not trigger malignant hyperther-
mia in susceptible swine. Anesth Analg 1989; 69(4): 501–503.
154 Ko JC, Williams BL, Smith VL, et al. Comparison of Telazol, Telazol–ketamine,
Telazol–xylazine, and Telazol–ketamine–xylazine as chemical restraint and anes-
thetic induction combination in swine. Lab Anim Sci 1993; 43(5): 476–480.
155 Donnelly RF, Willman E, Andolfatto G. Stability of ketamine–propofol mixtures
for procedural sedation and analgesia in the emergency department. Can J Hosp
Pharm 2008; 61(6).
156 Izgi M, Basaran B, Muderrisoglu A, et al. Evaluation of the stability and stratifica-
tion of propofol and ketamine mixtures for pediatric anesthesia. Paediatr Anaesth
2018; 28(3): 275–280.
157 Riccό CH, Henao-Guerrero N. Cardiovascular effects of orotracheal intubation
following anesthetic induction with propofol, ketamine–propofol, or ketamine–
diazepam in premedicated dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2014: 244.
158 Kennedy MJ, Smith LJ. A comparison of cardiopulmonary function, recovery
quality, and total dosages required for induction and total intravenous anesthesia
with propofol versus a propofol-ketamine combination in healthy Beagle dogs. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2015; 42(4): 350–359.
159 Martinez-Taboada F, Leece EA. Comparison of propofol with ketofol, a propofol-
ketamine admixture, for induction of anaesthesia in healthy dogs. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2014; 41(6): 575–582.
160 Wamaitha MN, Mogoa EM, Mande JD. Evaluation of anesthesia produced by
ketofol in acepromazine- or medetomidine-sedated dogs. J Adv Vet Anim Res
2019; 6(2): 215–221.
161 Ravasio G, Gallo M, Beccaglia M, et al. Evaluation of a ketamine–propofol drug
combination with or without dexmedetomidine for intravenous anesthesia in cats
undergoing ovariectomy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2012; 241(10): 1307–1313.
162 Zonca A, Ravasio G, Gallo M, et al. Pharmacokinetics of ketamine and propofol
combination administered as ketofol via continuous infusion in cats. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2012; 35(6): 580–587.
163 Santos M, Viñuela A, Vela AA, et al. Single-syringe ketamine–propofol for induc-
tion of anaesthesia in rabbits. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43(5): 561–565.
164 Flaherty D, Reid J, Welsh E, et al. A pharmacodynamic study of propofol or propofol and
ketamine infusions in ponies undergoing surgery. Res Vet Sci 1997; 62(2): 179–184.
165 Nolan A, Reid J, Welsh E, et al. Simultaneous infusions of propofol and ketamine
in ponies premedicated with detomidine: a pharmacokinetic study. Res Vet Sci
1996; 60(3): 262–266.
166 Nagel ML, Muir WW, Nguyen K. Comparison of the cardiopulmonary effects of
etomidate and thiamylal in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1979; 40(2): 193–196.
167 Tulleken CA, van Dieren A, Jonkman J, et al. Clinical and experimental experience with
etomidate as a brain protective agent. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 1982; 2(Suppl 1): 92.
168 Van Hamme MJ, Ghoneim MM, Ambre JJ. Pharmacokinetics of etomidate, a new
intravenous anesthetic. Anesthesiology 1978; 49(4): 274–277.
169 Wertz EM, Benson GJ, Thurmon JC, et al. Pharmacokinetics of etomidate in cats.
Am J Vet Res 1990; 51(2): 281–285.
170 Meuldermans WE, Heykants JJ. The plasma protein binding and distribution of
etomidate in dog, rat and human blood. Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther 1976; 221(1):
150–162.
171 Janssen PA, Niemegeers CJ, Marsboom RP. Etomidate, a potent non-barbiturate
hypnotic. Intravenous etomidate in mice, rats, guinea-pigs, rabbits and dogs. Arch
Int Pharmacodyn Ther 1975; 214(1): 92.
172 Gooding JM, Corssen G. Etomidate: an ultrashort-acting nonbarbiturate agent for
anesthesia induction. Anesth Analg 1976; 55(2): 286–289.
173 Heykants JJ, Meuldermans WE, Michiels LJ, et al. Distribution, metabolism and
excretion of etomidate, a short-acting hypnotic drug, in the rat. Comparative study
of (R)-(+)-(--)-Etomidate. Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther 1975; 216(1): 113–129.

-- 500 of 1450 --

Chapter 27: Injectable Anesthetics 	485
174 Jiang JH, Xu XQ, Jiang WG, et al. Discovery of the EL-0052 as a potential anes-
thetic drug. Comput Struct Biotechnol J 2021; 19: 710–718.
175 Andrada J, Livingston P, Lee BJ, et al. Propofol and etomidate depress cortical,
thalamic, and reticular formation neurons during anesthetic-induced uncon-
sciousness. Anesth Analg 2012; 114(3): 661–669.
176 Milde LN, Milde JH, Michenfelder JD. Cerebral functional, metabolic, and hemo-
dynamic effects of etomidate in dogs. Anesthesiology 1985; 63(4): 371–377.
177 Cold GE, Eskesen V, Eriksen H, et al. CBF and CMRO2 during continuous etomidate
infusion supplemented with N2O and fentanyl in patients with supratentorial cere-
bral tumour. A dose-response study. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1985; 29(5): 490–494.
178 Dearden NM, McDowall DG. Comparison of etomidate and althesin in the reduc-
tion of increased intracranial pressure after head injury. Br J Anaesth 1985; 57(4):
361–368.
179 Ghoneim MM, Yamada T. Etomidate: a clinical and electroencephalographic
comparison with thiopental. Anesth Analg 1977; 56(4): 479–485.
180 Frizzell RT, Meyer YJ, Borchers DJ, et al. The effects of etomidate on cerebral
metabolism and blood flow in a canine model for hypoperfusion. J Neurosurg
1991; 74(2): 263–269.
181 Wauquier A. Profile of etomidate. A hypnotic, anticonvulsant and brain protective
compound. Anaesthesia 1983; 38(Suppl): 26–33.
182 Ebrahim ZY, DeBoer GE, Luders H, et al. Effect of etomidate on the electroen-
cephalogram of patients with epilepsy. Anesth Analg 1986; 65(10): 1004–1006.
183 Rodríguez JM, Muñoz-Rascón P, Navarrete-Calvo R, et al. Comparison of the car-
diopulmonary parameters after induction of anaesthesia with alphaxalone or eto-
midate in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39(4): 357–365.
184 Sams L, Braun C, Allman D, et al. A comparison of the effects of propofol and
etomidate on the induction of anesthesia and on cardiopulmonary parameters in
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35(6): 488–494.
185 Kissin I, Motomura S, Aultman DF, et al. Inotropic and anesthetic potencies of
etomidate and thiopental in dogs. Anesth Analg 1983; 62(11): 961–965.
186 Priano LL, Bernards C, Marrone B. Effect of anesthetic induction agents on car-
diovascular neuroregulation in dogs. Anesth Analg 1989; 68(3): 344–349.
187 Pascoe PJ, Ilkiw JE, Haskins SC, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of etomidate in
hypovolemic dogs. Am J Vet Res 1992; 53(11): 2178–2182.
188 Pagel PS, Hettrick DA, Kersten JR, et al. Etomidate adversely alters determinants
of left ventricular afterload in dogs with dilated cardiomyopathy. Anesth Analg
1998; 86(5): 932–938.
189 Choi SD, Spaulding BC, Gross JB, et al. Comparison of the ventilatory effects of
etomidate and methohexital. Anesthesiology 1985; 62(4): 442–447.
190 Fraser R, Watt I, Gray CE, et al. The effect of etomidate on adrenocortical function
in dogs before and during hemorrhagic shock. Endocrinology 1984; 115(6):
2266–2270.
191 Kenyon CJ, McNeil LM, Fraser R. Comparison of the effects of etomidate, thio-
pentone and propofol on cortisol synthesis. Br J Anaesth 1985; 57(5): 509–511.
192 Wagner RL, White PF, Kan PB, et al. Inhibition of adrenal steroidogenesis by the
anesthetic etomidate. N Engl J Med 1984; 310(22): 1415–1421.
193 Dodam JR, Kruse-Elliott KT, Aucoin DP, et al. Duration of etomidate-induced
adrenocortical suppression during surgery in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1990; 51(5):
786–788.
194 Moon PF. Cortisol suppression in cats after induction of anesthesia with etomi-
date, compared with ketamine–diazepam combination. Am J Vet Res 1997; 58(8):
868–871.
195 Qin B, Hu H, Cao B, et al. Effects of continuous infusion of etomidate at various
dose rates on adrenal function in dogs. BMC Anesthesiology 2016; 16(1): 2.
196 Muir WW III, Mason DE. Side effects of etomidate in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1989; 194(10): 1430–1434.
197 Reddy RV, Moorthy SS, Dierdorf SF, et al. Excitatory effects and electroencephalo-
graphic correlation of etomidate, thiopental, methohexital, and propofol. Anesth
Analg 1993; 77(5): 1008–1011.
198 Moon PF. Acute toxicosis in two dogs associated with etomidate-propylene glycol
infusion. Lab Anim Sci 1994; 44(6): 590–594.
199 Robertson S. Advantages of etomidate use as an anesthetic agent. Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 1992; 22(2): 277–280.
200 Akkerdaas LC, Sap R, Hellebreker LJ. An alternative premedication and induc-
tion regime for cats with a decreased cardio-vascular reserve. Vet Q 1998;
20(Suppl 1): S108.
201 Fresno L, Andaluz A, Moll X, et al. The effects on maternal and fetal cardiovascu-
lar and acid-base variables after the administration of etomidate in the pregnant
ewe. Vet J 2008; 177(1): 94–103.
202 Fresno L, Andaluz A, Moll X, et al. Placental transfer of etomidate in pregnant
ewes after an intravenous bolus dose and continuous infusion. Vet J 2008; 175(3):
395–402.
203 Clutton RE, Blissitt KJ, Bradley AA, et al. Comparison of three injectable
anaesthetic techniques in pigs. Vet Rec 1997; 141(6): 140–146.
204 Prakash O, Dhasmana KM, Verdouw PD, et al. Cardiovascular effects of
etomidate with emphasis on regional myocardial blood flow and performance.
Br J Anaesth 1981; 53(6): 591–599.
205 Suresh MS, Nelson TE. Malignant hyperthermia: is etomidate safe? Anesth Analg
1985; 64(4): 420–424.
206 Cotten JF, Forman SA, Laha JK, et al. Carboetomidate: a pyrrole analog of etomi-
date designed not to suppress adrenocortical function. Anesthesiology 2010;
112(3): 637–644.
207 Liu X, Song H, Yang J, et al. The etomidate analog ET-26 HCl retains superior
myocardial performance: comparisons with etomidate in vivo and in vitro. PLoS
ONE 2018; 13(1): e0190994. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0190994
208 Wang B, Yang J, Chen J, et al. An etomidate analogue with less adrenocortical sup-
pression, stable hemodynamics, and improved behavioral recovery in rats. Anesth
Analg 2017; 125(2): 442–450.
209 Cotten JF, Husain SS, Forman SA, et al. Methoxycarbonyl-etomidate: a novel rap-
idly metabolized and ultra-short- acting etomidate analogue that does not produce
prolonged adrenocortical suppression. Anesthesiology 2009; 111(2): 240–249.
210 Yang J, Kang Y, Wang B, et al. Metabolite-inactive etomidate analogues alleviating
suppression on adrenal function in Beagle dogs. Eur J Pharm Sci 2017; 99: 343–349.
211 Campagna JA, Pojasek K, Grayzel D, et al. Advancing novel anesthetics: pharma-
codynamic and pharmacokinetic studies of cyclopropyl-methoxycarbonyl meto-
midate in dogs. Anesthesiology 2014; 121(6): 1203–1216.
212 Struys MMRF, Valk BI, Eleveld DJ, et al. A Phase 1, single-center, double- blind,
placebo-controlled study in healthy subjects to assess the safety, tolerability,
clinical effects, and pharmacokinetics–pharmacodynamics of intravenous
cyclopropyl-methoxycarbonylmetomidate (ABP-700) after a single ascending
bolus dose. Anesthesiology 2017; 127(1): 20–35.
213 Valk BI, Absalom AR, Meyer P, et al. Safety and clinical effect of i.v. infusion of
cyclopropyl-methoxycarbonyl etomidate (ABP-700), a soft analogue of etomidate,
in healthy subjects. Br J Anaesth 2018; 120(6): 1401–1411.
214 Valk BI, Struys MMRF. Etomidate and its analogs: a review of pharmacokinetics
and pharmacodynamics. Clin Pharmacokinet 2021; 60(10): 1253–1269.
215 Child KJ, Currie JP, Dis B, et al. The pharmacological properties in animals of
CT1341- - a new steroid anaesthetic agent. Br J Anaesth 1971; 43(1): 2–13.
216 Hall LW. Althesin in the larger animal. Postgrad Med J 1972; 48(Suppl 2): 55–58.
217 Dodman NH. Complications of saffan anaesthesia in cats. Vet Rec 1980; 107(21):
481–483.
218 Ferré PJ, Pasloske K, Whittem T, et al. Plasma pharmacokinetics of alfaxalone in
dogs after an intravenous bolus of Alfaxan-CD RTU. Vet Anaesth Analg 2006;
33(4): 229–236.
219 Haworth M, McEwen M, Dixon B, et al. Anaphylaxis associated with intravenous
administration of alphaxalone in a dog. Aust Vet J 2019; 97(6): 197–201.
220 Whitehead MC, Vanetten CL, Jacob ME, et al. Microbial integrity of preservative-
free alfaxalone in a multiple-use system for two storage conditions and three
handling techniques. Am J Vet Res 2018; 79(7): 704–710.
221 Jurox. Alfaxan Multidose IDX (Alfaxalone) [package insert]. Available at: www.
fda.gov/media/135542/download?attachment (accessed June 2022).
222 Rowe RC, Sheskey PJ, Quinn ME. Monographs. In: Rowe RC, Sheskey PJ, Quinn
ME, eds. Handbook of Pharmaceutical Excipients, 6th edn. London, UK:
Pharmaceutical Press, 2009: 17–171.
223 Pasloske K, Ranasinghe MG, Sauer S, et al. The bioequivalence of a single intravenous
administration of the anesthetic alfaxalone in cyclodextrin versus alfaxalone in cyclo-
dextrin plus preservatives in cats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2018; 41(3): 437–446.
224 Hector RC, Mama KR, Fisher MC, et al. Evaluation of two medetomidine-
azaperone-alfaxalone combinations in captive Rocky Mountain Elk (Cervus
Elaphus Nelsoni). J Zoo Wildl Med 2021; 51(4): 825–833.
225 Patterson M, Caulkett N, Neuhaus P, et al. The utility of a novel formulation of
alfaxalone in a remote delivery system. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(4): 537–540.
226 National Center for Biotechnology Information. PubChem Compound Summary
for CID 104845, Alfaxalone. https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/Alfaxalone
(accessed June 2022).
227 Cottrell GA, Lambert JJ, Peters JA. Modulation of GABAA receptor activity by
alphaxalone. Br J Pharmacol 1987; 90(3): 491–500.
228 Ziemba AM, Szabo A, Pierce DW, et al. Alphaxalone binds in inner transmem-
brane β+-α- interfaces of α1β3γ2 γ-Aminobutyric acid type A receptors.
Anesthesiology 2018; 128(2): 338–351.
229 Pasloske K, Sauer B, Perkins N, et al. Plasma pharmacokinetics of alfaxalone in both
premedicated and unpremedicated Greyhound dogs after single, intravenous admin-
istration of Alfaxan at a clinical dose. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2009; 32(5): 510–513.
230 Dehuisser V, Bosmans T, Devreese M, et al. Alfaxalone total intravenous anaesthe-
sia in dogs: pharmacokinetics, cardiovascular data and recovery characteristics.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2019; 46(5): 605–612.
231 Whittem T, Pasloske KS, Heit MC, et al. The pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
namics of alfaxalone in cats after single and multiple intravenous administration

-- 501 of 1450 --

486 	Section 3: Pharmacology
of Alfaxan at clinical and supraclinical doses. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2008; 31(6):
571–579.
232 Rodrigo-Mocholí D, Escudero E, Belda E, et al. Pharmacokinetics and effects of
alfaxalone after intravenous and intramuscular administration to cats. N Z Vet J
2018; 66(4): 172–177.
233 Goodwin WA, Keates HL, Pasloske K, et al. The pharmacokinetics and pharmaco-
dynamics of the injectable anaesthetic alfaxalone in the horse. Vet Anaesth Analg
2011; 38(5): 431–438.
234 Wakuno A, Aoki M, Kushiro A, et al. Clinical pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
namics of intravenous alfaxalone in young Thoroughbred horses premedicated
with medetomidine and midazolam. Vet Rec 2019; 184(13): 411.
235 Goodwin W, Keates H, Pasloske K, et al. Plasma pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
namics of alfaxalone in neonatal foals after an intravenous bolus of alfaxalone following
premedication with butorphanol tartrate. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39(5): 503–510.
236 Goodwin WA, Pasloske K, Keates HL, et al. Alfaxalone for total intravenous
anaesthesia in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2019; 46(2): 188–199.
237 Marín P, Belda E, Laredo FG, et al. Pharmacokinetics and sedative effects of alfax-
alone with or without dexmedetomidine in rabbits. Res Vet Sci 2020; 129: 6–12.
238 Sear JW, McGivan JD. Metabolism of alphaxalone in the rat: evidence for the limi-
tation of the anaesthetic effect by the rate of degradation through the hepatic
mixed function oxygenase system. Br J Anaesth 1981; 53(4): 417–424.
239 Warne LN, Beths T, Whittem T, et al. A review of the pharmacology and clinical
application of alfaxalone in cats. Vet J 2015; 203(2): 141–148.
240 Sear JW. Steroid anesthetics: old compounds, new drugs. J Clin Anesth 1996; 8(3
Suppl): 91S–98S.
241 Rasmussen NJ, Rosendal T, Overgaard J. Althesin in neurosurgical patients:
effects on cerebral hemodynamics and metabolism. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1978;
22(3): 257–269.
242 Ambrisko TD, Johnson CB, Chambers P. Effect of alfaxalone infusion on the elec-
troencephalogram of dogs anaesthetized with halothane. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011;
38(6): 529–535.
243 Bini G, Bailey K, Voyvodic J, et al. Effects of propofol, alfaxalone and isoflurane on
cerebral blood flow and cerebrovascular reactivity to CO2 in dogs. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2020; 47(6): 855.e2.
244 Muir W, Lerche P, Wiese A, et al. The cardiorespiratory and anesthetic effects of
clinical and supraclinical doses of alfaxalone in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009;
36(1): 42–54.
245 Muir W, Lerche P, Wiese A, et al. Cardiorespiratory and anesthetic effects of clini-
cal and supraclinical doses of alfaxalone in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35(6):
451–462.
246 Ohmura H, Okano A, Mukai K, et al. Cardiorespiratory and anesthetic effects of
combined alfaxalone, butorphanol, and medetomidine in Thoroughbred horses.
J Equine Sci 2016; 27(1): 7–11.
247 Granados MM, Domínguez JM, Fernández-Sarmiento A, et al. Anaesthetic and
cardiorespiratory effects of a constant-rate infusion of alfaxalone in desflurane-
anaesthetised sheep. Vet Rec 2012; 171(5): 125.
248 Moll X, Santos L, García F, et al. The effects on cardio-respiratory and acid-base
variables of a constant rate infusion of alfaxalone-HPCD in sheep. Vet J 2013;
196(2): 209–212.
249 Andaluz A, Felez-Ocaña N, Santos L, et al. The effects on cardio-respiratory and
acid-base variables of the anaesthetic alfaxalone in a 2-hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin
(HPCD) formulation in sheep. Vet J 2012; 191(3): 389–392.
250 Duval JD, Pang JM, Boysen SR, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of a partial intrave-
nous anesthesia technique for laboratory swine. J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2018;
57(4): 376–381.
251 Bigby SE, Carter JE, Bauquier S, et al. The use of alfaxalone for premedication,
induction and maintenance of anaesthesia in pigs: a pilot study. Vet Anaesth Analg
2017; 44(4): 905–909.
252 Bigby SE, Beths T, Bauquier S, et al. Effect of rate of administration of propofol
or alfaxalone on induction dose requirements and occurrence of apnea in dogs.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(6): 1267–1275.
253 Bauquier SH, Warne LN, Carter JE, et al. Influence of two administration rates of
alfaxalone at induction on its relative potency in cats: a pilot study. J Feline Med
Surg 2017; 19(2): 231–234.
254 Petersen JS, Shalmi M, Christensen S, et al. Comparison of the renal effects of six
sedating agents in rats. Physiol Behav 1996; 60(3): 759–765.
255 Chen CF, Chapman BJ, Munday KA. The effect of althesin, ketamine or pentothal
on renal function in saline loaded rats. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 1985; 12(2):
99–105.
256 Patschke D, Passian J, Tarnow J, et al. Effect of althesin on renal perfusion in
anaesthetized dogs. Can Anaesth Soc J 1975; 22(2): 138–143.
257 Thomson IA, Fitch W, Hughes RL, et al. Effects of certain i.v. anaesthetics on liver
blood flow and hepatic oxygen consumption in the Greyhound. Br J Anaesth 1986;
58(1): 69–80.
258 Webb JK, Keller KA, Chinnadurai SK, et al. Optimizing the pharmacodynamics
and evaluating cardiogenic effects of the injectable anesthetic alfaxalone in prairie
rattlesnakes (Crotalus Viridis). J Zoo Wildl Med 2021; 52(4): 1105–1112.
259 Yaw TJ, Mans C, Johnson SM, et al. Effect of injection site on alfaxalone-induced
sedation in ball pythons (Python regius). J Small Anim Pract 2018; 59(12): 747–751.
260 James LE, Williams CJ, Bertelsen MF, et al. Anaesthetic induction with alfaxalone
in the ball python (Python regius): dose response and effect of injection site. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2018; 45(3): 329–337.
261 White KL, Paine S, Harris J. A clinical evaluation of the pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics of intravenous alfaxalone in cyclodextrin in male and female
rats following a loading dose and constant rate infusion. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017;
44(4): 865–875.
262 West SE, Lee JC, Johns TN, et al. Intraperitoneal alfaxalone and alfaxalone-
dexmedetomidine anesthesia in Sprague–Dawley rats (Rattus norvegicus). J Am
Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2020; 59(5): 531–538.
263 Arenillas M, Gomez de Segura IA. Anaesthetic effects of alfaxalone administered
intraperitoneally alone or combined with dexmedetomidine and fentanyl in the
rat. Lab Anim 2018; 52(6): 588–598.
264 Ambar N, Eshar D, Shrader TC, et al. Anesthetic effects of intramuscular
alfaxalone-ketamine in naked mole rats (Heterocephalus glaber). J Am Assoc Lab
Anim Sci 2020; 59(5): 539–545.
265 Erickson RL, Blevins CE, Souza Dyer C, et al. Alfaxalone-xylazine anesthesia in
laboratory mice (Mus musculus). J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2019; 58(1): 30–39.
266 Pasloske K, Gazzard B, Perkins N. A Multi Centre Clinical Trial Evaluating the
Efficacy and Safety of Alfaxan-CD RTU Administered to Dogs for Induction and
Maintenance of Anesthesia. Birmingham, UK: BSAVA Congress, April 7–10, 2005.
267 Pinelas R, Alibhai HI, Mathis A, et al. Effects of different doses of dexmedetomi-
dine on anaesthetic induction with alfaxalone-- a clinical trial. Vet Anaesth Analg
2014; 41(4): 378–385.
268 Maddern K, Adams VJ, Hill NA, et al. Alfaxalone induction dose following
administration of medetomidine and butorphanol in the dog. Vet Anaesth Analg
2010; 37(1): 7–13.
269 Psatha E, Alibhai HI, Jimenez-Lozano A, et al. Clinical efficacy and cardiorespira-
tory effects of alfaxalone, or diazepam/fentanyl for induction of anaesthesia in
dogs that are a poor anaesthetic risk. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38(1): 24–36.
270 Ambros B, Duke-Novakovski T, Pasloske KS. Comparison of the anesthetic effi-
cacy and cardiopulmonary effects of continuous rate infusions of alfaxalone-2-
hydroxypropyl-beta- cyclodextrin and propofol in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2008; 69(11):
1391–1398.
271 Herbert GL, Bowlt KL, Ford-Fennah V, et al. Alfaxalone for total intravenous anaes-
thesia in dogs undergoing ovariohysterectomy: a comparison of premedication with
acepromazine or dexmedetomidine. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40(2): 124–133.
272 Suarez MA, Dzikiti BT, Stegmann FG, et al. Comparison of alfaxalone and propo-
fol administered as total intravenous anaesthesia for ovariohysterectomy in dogs.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39(3): 236–244.
273 O’Hagan B, Pasloske K, McKinnon C, et al. Clinical evaluation of alfaxalone as an
anaesthetic induction agent in dogs less than 12 weeks of age. Aust Vet J 2012;
90(9): 346–350.
274 Metcalfe S, Hulands-Nave A, Bell M, et al. Multicentre, randomised clinical trial
evaluating the efficacy and safety of alfaxalone administered to bitches for induc-
tion of anaesthesia prior to caesarean section. Aust Vet J 2014; 92(9): 333–338.
275 Schmidt K, Feng C, Wu T, et al. Influence of maternal, anesthetic, and surgical
factors on neonatal survival after emergency cesarean section in 78 dogs: a retro-
spective study (2002 to 2020). Can Vet J 2021; 62(9): 961–968.
276 Melandri M, Alonge S, Peric T, et al. Effects of alfaxalone or propofol on giant-
breed dog neonates’ viability during elective caesarean sections. Animals (Basel)
2019; 9(11): 962. doi: 10.3390/ani9110962
277 Conde Ruiz C, Del Carro AP, Rosset E, et al. Alfaxalone for total intravenous
anaesthesia in bitches undergoing elective caesarean section and its effects on
puppies: a randomized clinical trial. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43(3): 281–290.
278 Hasiuk MM, Forde N, Cooke A, et al. A comparison of alfaxalone and propofol on
intraocular pressure in healthy dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 2014; 17(6): 411–416.
279 Costa D, Leiva M, Moll X, et al. Alfaxalone versus propofol in dogs: a randomised
trial to assess effects on peri-induction tear production, intraocular pressure and
globe position. Vet Rec 2015; 176(3): 73.
280 Bauer BS, Ambros B. The effects of intravenous alfaxalone with and without premedi-
cation on intraocular pressure in healthy dogs. Can J Vet Res 2016; 80(2): 156–161.
281 Mayordomo-Febrer A, Rubio M, Martínez-Gassent M, et al. Effects of
morphine-alfaxalone-midazolam premedication, alfaxalone induction and sevo-
flurane maintenance on intraocular pressure and tear production in dogs. Vet Rec
2017; 180(19): 474.
282 Maney JK, Shepard MK, Braun C, et al. A comparison of cardiopulmonary and
anesthetic effects of an induction dose of alfaxalone or propofol in dogs. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2013; 40(3): 237–244.

-- 502 of 1450 --

Chapter 27: Injectable Anesthetics 	487
283 Cruz-Benedetti IC, Bublot I, Ribas T, et al. Pharmacokinetics of intramuscular
alfaxalone and its echocardiographic, cardiopulmonary and sedative effects in
healthy dogs. PLoS ONE 2018; 13(9): e0204553. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0204553
284 Kato K, Itami T, Nomoto K, et al. The anesthetic effects of intramuscular alfax-
alone in dogs premedicated with low-dose medetomidine and/or butorphanol.
J Vet Med Sci 2021; 83(1): 53–61.
285 Arenillas M, Aguado D, Canfrán S, et al. Sedative effects of two doses of alfaxalone
in combination with methadone and a low dose of dexmedetomidine in healthy
Beagles. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(4): 463–471.
286 Murdock MA, Riccó Pereira CH, Aarnes TK, et al. Sedative and cardiorespiratory
effects of intramuscular administration of alfaxalone and butorphanol combined
with acepromazine, midazolam, or dexmedetomidine in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2020;
81(1): 65–76.
287 Micieli F, Chiavaccini L, Paré MD, et al. Comparison of the sedative effects of
alfaxalone and methadone with or without midazolam in dogs. Can Vet J 2019;
60(10): 1060–1064.
288 Lee J, Suh S, Choi R, et al. Cardiorespiratory and anesthetic effects produced by
the combination of butorphanol, medetomidine and alfaxalone administered
intramuscularly in Beagle dogs. J Vet Med Sci 2016; 77(12): 1677–1680.
289 Taboada FM, Murison PJ. Induction of anaesthesia with alfaxalone or propofol
before isoflurane maintenance in cats. Vet Rec 2010; 167(3): 85–89.
290 Tamura J, Oyama N, Fukui S, et al. Comparison of the anesthetic effects between
5 mg/kg of alfaxalone and 10 mg/kg of propofol administered intravenously in
cats. J Vet Med Sci 2021; 83(1): 73–77.
291 Zaki S, Ticehurst K, Miyaki Y. Clinical evaluation of Alfaxan-CD(R) as an intrave-
nous anaesthetic in young cats. Aust Vet J 2009; 87(3): 82–87.
292 O’Hagan BJ, Pasloske K, McKinnon C, et al. Clinical evaluation of alfaxalone as an
anaesthetic induction agent in cats less than 12 weeks of age. Aust Vet J 2012;
90(10): 395–401.
293 Beths T, Touzot-Jourde G, Musk G, et al. Clinical evaluation of alfaxalone to
induce and maintain anaesthesia in cats undergoing neutering procedures. J Feline
Med Surg 2014; 16(8): 609–615.
294 Mathis A, Pinelas R, Brodbelt DC, et al. Comparison of quality of recovery from
anaesthesia in cats induced with propofol or alfaxalone. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012;
39(3): 282–290.
295 Ramoo S, Bradbury LA, Anderson GA, et al. Sedation of hyperthyroid cats with
subcutaneous administration of a combination of alfaxalone and butorphanol.
Aust Vet J 2013; 91(4): 131–136.
296 Grubb TL, Greene SA, Perez TE. Cardiovascular and respiratory effects, and qual-
ity of anesthesia produced by alfaxalone administered intramuscularly to cats
sedated with dexmedetomidine and hydromorphone. J Feline Med Surg 2013;
15(10): 858–865.
297 Reader RC, Yang VK, Babyak JM, et al. The effects of two intramuscular sedation
protocols on echocardiographic variables in cats following sedation and blood
donation. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2021; 31(2): 256–262.
298 Wheeler EP, Abelson AL, Lindsey JC, et al. Sedative effects of alfaxalone and
hydromorphone with or without midazolam in cats: a pilot study. J Feline Med
Surg 2021; 23(12): 1109–1116.
299 Khenissi L, Nikolayenkova-Topie O, Broussaud S, et al. Comparison of intramus-
cular alfaxalone and ketamine combined with dexmedetomidine and butorphanol
for castration in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2017; 19(8): 791–797.
300 Fernandez-Parra R, Adami C, Dresco T, et al. Dexmedetomidine-methadone-
ketamine versus dexmedetomidine-methadone-alfaxalone for cats undergoing
ovariectomy. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(6): 1332–1340.
301 Reader RC, Barton BA, Abelson AL. Comparison of two intramuscular sedation
protocols on sedation, recovery and ease of venipuncture for cats undergoing
blood donation. J Feline Med Surg 2019; 21(2): 95–102.
302 Cremer J, Riccó CH. Cardiovascular, respiratory and sedative effects of intramus-
cular alfaxalone, butorphanol and dexmedetomidine compared with ketamine,
butorphanol and dexmedetomidine in healthy cats. J Feline Med Surg 2018;
20(10): 973–979.
303 Goodwin WA, Keates HL, Pearson M, et al. Alfaxalone and medetomidine intra-
venous infusion to maintain anaesthesia in colts undergoing field castration.
Equine Vet J 2013; 45(3): 315–319.
304 Keates HL, van Eps AW, Pearson MR. Alfaxalone compared with ketamine for
induction of anaesthesia in horses following xylazine and guaifenesin. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2012; 39(6): 591–598.
305 Klöppel H, Leece EA. Comparison of ketamine and alfaxalone for induction and
maintenance of anaesthesia in ponies undergoing castration. Vet Anaesth Analg
2011; 38(1): 37–43.
306 Jones T, Bracamonte JL, Ambros B, et al. Total intravenous anesthesia with alfax-
alone, dexmedetomidine and remifentanil in healthy foals undergoing abdominal
surgery. Vet Anaesth Analg 2019; 46(3): 315–324.
307 Loomes K. Alfaxalone total intravenous anaesthesia in a donkey foal. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2020; 47(5): 733–734.
308 Maney JK, Dzikiti BT. Evaluation of xylazine-alfaxalone anesthesia for field cas-
tration in donkey foals. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(4): 547–551.
309 Maney JK, Durham HE Jr., Goucher KP, et al. Induction of anesthesia and recov-
ery in donkeys sedated with xylazine: a comparison of midazolam-alfaxalone and
midazolam-ketamine. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45(4): 539–544.
310 Torres MD, Andaluz A, García F, et al. Effects of an intravenous bolus of alfax-
alone versus propofol on intraocular pressure in sheep. Vet Rec 2012; 170(9): 226.
311 Oakleaf MH, Mama KR, Mangin LM, et al. Comparison of intravenous anesthetic
induction doses and physiologic effects of ketamine or alfaxalone in goats under-
going surgery with isoflurane anesthesia. Am J Vet Res 2019; 80(9): 819–824.
312 Ndawana PS, Dzikiti BT, Zeiler G, et al. Determination of the minimum infusion
rate (MIR) of alfaxalone required to prevent purposeful movement of the extremi-
ties in response to a standardised noxious stimulus in goats. Vet Anaesth Analg
2015; 42(1): 65–71.
313 Dzikiti TB, Ndawana PS, Zeiler G, et al. Determination of the minimum infusion
rate of alfaxalone during its co-administration with midazolam in goats. Vet Rec
Open 2015; 2(1): e000065.
314 Dzikiti BT, Ndawana PS, Zeiler G, et al. Determination of the minimum infusion
rate of alfaxalone during its co-administration with fentanyl at three different doses
by constant rate infusion intravenously in goats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43(3):
316–325.
315 Dzikiti BT, Ndawana PS, Dzikiti LN, et al. The minimum infusion rate of
alfaxalone during its co-administration with lidocaine at three different doses
by constant rate infusion in goats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45(3): 285–294.
316 Santos González M, Bertrán de Lis BT, Tendillo Cortijo FJ. Effects of intramuscu-
lar alfaxalone alone or in combination with diazepam in swine. Vet Anaesth Analg
2013; 40(4): 399–402.
317 Santos M, Bertrán de Lis BT, Tendillo FJ. Effects of intramuscular dexmedetomi-
dine in combination with ketamine or alfaxalone in swine. Vet Anaesth Analg
2016; 43(1): 81–85.
318 Hancock TM, Caulkett NA, Pajor EA, et al. An investigation of the effects of
intratesticular alfaxalone and lidocaine during castration in piglets. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2018; 45(6): 858–864.
319 Hampton CE, Takawira C, Ross JM, et al. Sedation characteristics of intranasal
alfaxalone in adult Yucatan Swine. J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2021; 60(2): 184–187.
320 Keates H. Induction of anaesthesia in pigs using a new alphaxalone formulation.
Vet Rec 2003; 153(20): 627–628.
321 Lervik A, Toverud SF, Krontveit R, et al. A comparison of respiratory function in
pigs anaesthetised by propofol or alfaxalone in combination with dexmedetomi-
dine and ketamine. Acta Vet Scand 2020; 62(1): 14.
322 Hasse K, Crawford A, Gustafson D, et al. Plasma concentration and pharmacody-
namics of intramuscular administration of alfaxalone in Indian peafowl (Pavo
Cristatus). J Zoo Wildl Med 2022; 53(1): 108–115.
323 Greunz EM, Limón D, Bertelsen MF. Alfaxalone Sedation in black-cheeked love-
birds (Agapornis nigrigenis) for non-invasive procedures. J Avian Med Surg 2021;
35(2): 161–166.
324 Whitehead MC, Hoppes SM, Musser JMB, et al. The use of alfaxalone in Quaker
parrots (Myiopsitta monachus). J Avian Med Surg 2019; 33(4): 340–348.
325 Kruse TN, Messenger KM, Bowman AS, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmaco-
dynamics of alfaxalone after a single intramuscular or intravascular injection in
mallard ducks (Anas platyrhynchos). J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2019; 42(6): 713–721.
326 Balko JA, Lindemann DM, Allender MC, et al. Evaluation of the anesthetic and
cardiorespiratory effects of intramuscular alfaxalone administration and isoflu-
rane in budgerigars (Melopsittacus undulatus) and comparison with manual
restraint. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2019; 254(12): 1427–1435.
327 Bradley MP, Doerning CM, Nowland MH, et al. Intramuscular administration of
alfaxalone alone and in combination for sedation and anesthesia of rabbits
(Oryctolagus cuniculus). J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2019; 58(2): 216–222.
328 Huynh M, Poumeyrol S, Pignon C, et al. Intramuscular administration of alfax-
alone for sedation in rabbits. Vet Rec 2015; 176(10): 255.
329 Reabel SN, Queiroz-Williams P, Cremer J, et al. Assessment of intramuscular
administration of three doses of alfaxalone combined with hydromorphone and
dexmedetomidine for endoscopic-guided orotracheal intubation in domestic
rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2021; 259(10): 1148–1153.
330 Rousseau-Blass F, Pang DS. Hypoventilation following oxygen administration
associated with alfaxalone-dexmedetomidine-midazolam anesthesia in New
Zealand White rabbits. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(5): 637–646.
331 Doerning CM, Bradley MP, Lester PA, et al. Effects of subcutaneous alfaxalone
alone and in combination with dexmedetomidine and buprenorphine in guinea
pigs (Cavia porcellus). Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45(5): 658–666.
332 d’Ovidio D, Marino F, Noviello E, et al. Sedative effects of intramuscular alfaxalone
in pet guinea pigs (Cavia porcellus). Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45(2): 183–189.

-- 503 of 1450 --

488 	Section 3: Pharmacology
333 Sixtus RP, Pacharinsak C, Gray CL, et al. Differential effects of four intramuscular
sedatives on cardiorespiratory stability in juvenile guinea pigs (Cavia porcellus).
PLoS ONE 2021; 16(11): e0259559.
334 Álvarez ER, Solé LV, de Carellán Mateo AG. Comparison of subcutaneous seda-
tion with alfaxalone or alfaxalone-midazolam in pet guinea pigs (Cavia porcellus)
of three different age groups. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2022: 1–7.
335 Hawkins SJ, Doss GA, Mans C. Evaluation of subcutaneous administration of
alfaxalone–midazolam and ketamine–midazolam as sedation protocols in African
pygmy hedgehogs (Atelerix albiventris). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2020; 257(8): 820–825.
336 Bellini L, Pagani G, Mollo A, et al. Evaluation of alfaxalone and dexmedetomidine
for intramuscular restraint in European hedgehogs (Erinaceus europaeus). Vet Rec
2019; 185(5): 145.
337 Milloway MC, Posner LP, Balko JA. Sedative and cardiorespiratory effects of intra-
muscular alfaxalone and butorphanol at two dosages in ferrets (Mustela Putorius
Furo). J Zoo Wildl Med 2021; 51(4): 841–847.
338 Leonardi F, Costa GL, Interlandi CD, et al. Immersion anaesthesia in goldfish
(Carassius auratus) with three concentrations of alfaxalone. Vet Anaesth Analg
2019; 46(1): 79–83.
339 Adami C, Spadavecchia C, Angeli G, et al. Alfaxalone anesthesia by immersion in
oriental fire-bellied toads (Bombina orientalis). Vet Anaesth Analg 2015; 42(5):
547–551.
340 Adami C, d’Ovidio D, Casoni D. Alfaxalone versus alfaxalone-dexmedetomidine
anaesthesia by immersion in oriental fire-bellied toads (Bombina orientalis). Vet
Anaesth Analg 2016; 43(3): 326–332.
341 Adami C, d’Ovidio D, Casoni D. Alfaxalone-butorphanol versus alfaxalone-
morphine combination for immersion anaesthesia in oriental fire-bellied toads
(Bombina orientalis). Lab Anim 2016; 50(3): 204–211.
342 Williams M, Caulkett N, Neuhaus P, et al. Comparison of the efficacy and safety of
medetomidine-ketamine versus medetomidine-azaperone- alfaxalone combina-
tion in free-ranging rocky mountain bighorn sheep (Ovis Canadensis). J Zoo Wildl
Med 2018; 49(3): 662–670.
343 Hillidge CJ, Lees P, Serrano L. Investigations of azaperone-metomidate anaesthe-
sia in the horse. Vet Rec 1973; 93(11): 307–311.
344 Hall LW, Clarke KW. General pharmacology of the intravenous anaesthetics. In:
Hall LW, Clarke KW, eds. Veterinary Anesthesia. Chichester, UK: Baillière Tindall,
1983: 74–93.

-- 504 of 1450 --

489
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The S ixth Edition of L umb and J ones	. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
Inhalation anesthetics are used widely for the anesthetic management
of animals. They are unique among anesthetic drugs because they
are administered, and in large part removed from the body, via the
lungs. Their popularity arises in part because their pharmacoki-
netic characteristics favor predictable and rapid adjustment of
anesthetic depth. In addition, a special apparatus is usually used to
deliver the inhaled agents. This apparatus includes a source of
oxygen (O2 ) and a patient breathing circuit, which in turn usually
includes an endotracheal tube or face mask, a means of eliminating
carbon dioxide (CO2
), and a compliant gas reservoir. These compo-
nents help minimize patient morbidity or mortality because they
facilitate lung ventilation and improve arterial oxygenation. In
addition, inhalation anesthetics in gas samples can be readily
measured continuously. Measurement of inhalation anesthetic
concentration enhances the precision and safety of anesthetic man-
agement beyond the extent commonly possible with injectable
anesthetic agents.
Over the nearly 150 years that inhalation anesthesia has been
used in clinical practice, less than 20 agents have actually been
introduced and approved for general use with patients (Fig. 28.1) [1].
Less than 10 of these have a history of widespread clinical use in
veterinary medicine, and only four are of current veterinary
importance in North America. It is this group of anesthetics that is
the focus of this chapter. Isoflurane remains the most widely used
veterinary inhalation anesthetic in North America, with sevoflu-
rane a close second. Other inhalation anesthetics include desflurane
and the gaseous agent nitrous oxide (N 2
O), which are used much
less frequently. Halothane, once the most popular volatile anesthetic
throughout the world, is no longer commercially distributed in
North America. However, it remains available elsewhere (at least on
a limited basis), and, considering the agent’s widespread interna-
tional distribution, we will continue to include information here on
some actions of clinical importance to veterinary anesthesia.
Two additional volatile agents continue to receive brief attention
for different reasons. Methoxyflurane, an agent popular during the
period of about 1960 to 1990, has not been commercially available
in North America for many years. However, because of some of its
physicochemical characteristics, its inclusion here has value, espe-
cially to students of our clinical discipline and pharmacologists,
and permits easy comparison to agents of more current interest. It
remains commercially available in some global regions especially,
for example, in the southern hemisphere. Enflurane, introduced for
use in human patients in 1972 and still commercially available, has
28 Inhalation Anesthetics
Eugene P. Steffey1 , Robert J. Brosnan2 and Khursheed R. Mama3
1 Emeritus Professor, Department of Surgical and Radiological Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California–Davis, Davis,
California, USA
2 Department of Surgical and Radiological Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California–Davis, Davis, California, USA
3 Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 489
Physicochemical characteristics, 490
Chemical characteristics, 490
Physical characteristics, 491
Pharmacokinetics: uptake and elimination of inhalation anesthetics, 497
Anesthetic uptake: factors that determine the PA of anesthetic, 497
Anesthetic elimination, 500
Anesthetic dose: the minimum alveolar concentration (MAC), 502
Pharmacodynamics: actions and toxicity of the volatile inhalation anesthetics
on body systems, 504
Central nervous system, 505
Respiratory system, 508
Cardiovascular system, 509
Effects on the kidneys, 511
Effects on the liver, 512
Effects on skeletal muscle: malignant hyperthermia, 512
The gaseous anesthetic: nitrous oxide, 512
Dose, 512
Pharmacokinetics, 513
Pharmacodynamics, 513
Transfer of N 2
O to closed gas spaces, 513
Diffusion hypoxia, 513
Interaction with respiratory gas monitoring, 514
Waste inhalation anesthetics, 514
Occupational exposure: trace concentrations of inhalation anesthetics, 514
Environmental implications of inhalation anesthetics, 515
References, 515

-- 505 of 1450 --

490 	Section 3: Pharmacology
little or no use in veterinary practice in North America. Information
on this volatile anesthetic was included in previous editions of this
text. However, because enflurane is only in very limited and focused
veterinary use elsewhere, we have deleted most information about
this agent in the present chapter and refer interested readers to the
fourth edition of this text for some coverage. Although of investiga-
tional and very limited human patient interest, a review of xenon is
again not included in this animal patient-focused chapter.
In this edition, information on agents of largely historical interest
again has not been included. Readers interested in aspects of these
formerly used agents are referred to the earlier editions of this and
other textbooks [2–6]. Examples of such agents are diethyl ether
and chloroform. A more complete listing is noted in Fig. 28.1.
Physicochemical characteristics
The chemical structure of inhalation anesthetics and their physical
properties determine their actions and safety of administration. An
in-depth analysis of the impact of agent chemical structure and
physical properties is beyond the scope of this chapter. However,
brief discussion of aspects of Fig. 28.2 and Table 28.1 is appropriate
because the physicochemical characteristics summarized deter-
mine and/or influence practical considerations of their clinical use.
For example, they determine the form in which the agents are sup-
plied by the manufacturer (e.g., as a gas or liquid) and account for
the resistance of the anesthetic molecule to degradation by physical
factors (e.g., heat and light) and substances it contacts during use
(e.g., metal components of the anesthetic delivery apparatus and the
CO2 absorbents such as soda lime). The equipment necessary to
safely deliver the agent to the patient (e.g., vaporizer and breathing
circuit) is influenced by some of these properties, as are the agent’s
uptake, distribution within, and elimination (including potential for
metabolic breakdown) from the patient. In summary, a knowledge
and understanding of fundamental properties permits intelligent
use of contemporary anesthetics.
Chemical characteristics
Most contemporary inhalation anesthetics are organic compounds,
except N2
O (Fig. 28.2) (xenon is another notable inorganic anes-
thetic). Agents of current interest are further classified as either
aliphatic (i.e., straight or branch chained) hydrocarbons or ethers
(i.e., two organic radicals attached to an atom of oxygen; the general
structure is ROR). In the continued search for a less reactive, more
potent, nonflammable inhalation anesthetic, focus on halogenation
(i.e., addition of fluorine, chlorine, or bromine) of these compounds
has predominated. Chlorine and bromine especially convert many
compounds of low anesthetic potency into more potent drugs.
Historically, interest in fluorinated derivatives was delayed until the
1940s because of difficulties in synthesis, and thus quantities avail-
able for study were limited. Methods of synthesis, although difficult,
improved considerably and facilitated new agent discovery (see
Fig. 28.2). It is interesting that organic fluorinated compounds are a
group of extreme contrasts – some are toxic, others are not; some
are inert, others are highly reactive. In some anesthetics, fluorine is
substituted for chlorine or bromine to improve stability, but at the
expense of reduced anesthetic potency and solubility.
Halothane (see Fig. 28.2) is a halogenated, aliphatic saturated
hydrocarbon (ethane). Predictions that a halogenated structure
would confer non-flammability and molecular stability encouraged
the development of halothane in the early 1950s. However, soon
Nitrous oxide
1840 	1880 	1920
Year introduced
Diethyl ether
Chloroform
Ethyl chloride
Ethylene
Divinyl ether
Cyclopropane
Trichloroethylene
Methyl propyl ether
Fluroxene
Ethyl vinyl ether
Halothane
Methoxyflurane
Enflurane
Isoflurane
Desflurane
Sevoflurane
1960 	2000
Figure 28.1 Inhalation anesthetics introduced for widespread clinical use.
Source: Adapted from Eger [1].
Cl
C
C C 	C	F
C
F
C	O
O
H
Enflurane
(Ethrane®)
Desflurane
(Suprane®, 1653)
Halothane
(Fluothane®)
Isoflurane
Nitrous oxide
(Forane®, Aerrane®)
Sevoflurane
(Ultane®, Sevoflo®)
H
H
H C
Cl
Br
C F
F C
F
F 	F
F
H 	F C F
H 	F C F
F
F C O 	H	C
C
Cl
H
N
O
N
O C
F
H
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
H
F
F
F
Figure 28.2 Chemical structure of inhalation anesthetics in current use for
animals. Trade names are given in parentheses.

-- 506 of 1450 --

Chapter 28: Inhalation Anesthetics 	491
after clinical introduction, it was observed that the concurrent
presence of halothane and catecholamines increased the incidence
of cardiac arrhythmias, especially in human patients. An ether
linkage in the molecule reduces the incidence of cardiac arrhyth-
mias. Consequently, this chemical structure is a predominant
characteristic of all agents, which have been developed or entered
clinical use since the introduction of halothane (see Fig. 28.2).
Despite many favorable characteristics and improvements over
earlier anesthetics (see Fig. 28.1) that included improved chemical
stability, halothane is susceptible to decomposition. Accordingly, it
is stored in dark bottles and a very small amount of a preservative,
thymol, is added to slow decomposition. Thymol is much less vola-
tile than halothane and over time concentrates within the devices
used to control delivery of the volatile anesthetic (i.e., vaporizers)
and causes them to malfunction. To achieve greater molecular
stability, fluorine is substituted for chlorine or bromine in the
anesthetic molecule. This chemical manipulation added shelf-life
to the substance and negated the need for additives such as thymol.
Unfortunately, the fluorine ion is also toxic to some tissues
(e.g., kidneys), which is of clinical concern if the parent compound
(e.g., historically, most notably methoxyflurane) is not resistant to
metabolism (see Fig. 28.2).
Physical characteristics
Life is supported via a constant interchange of respiratory gases
(O2 and CO2
) between cells and the external environment and blood
transport. Inhalation anesthetics similarly gain entrance and exit the
body via the respiratory system and their movement from a container
to sites of action in the central nervous system (CNS) involves similar
considerations as respiratory gases. Early in the process of controlled
transfer, the agent is diluted to an appropriate amount (partial pres-
sure or concentration) and directed to the respiratory system in a gas
mixture that contains enough O2 to support life. The chain of events
that ensues is influenced by many physical and chemical characteris-
tics that can be quantitatively described (Tables 28.1–28.4). The prac-
tical clinical applications of these quantitative descriptions are
reviewed here. Limited space does not permit in-depth review of all
underlying principles, and readers interested in further background
information are referred elsewhere [8,9].
The physical characteristics of importance to our understanding
of the action of inhalation anesthetics can be conveniently divided
into two general categories: those that determine the means by
which the agents are administered and those that help determine
their kinetics in the body. This information is applied in the clinical
manipulation of anesthetic induction and recovery and in
facilitating changes in anesthetic-induced CNS depression in a
timely fashion.
Properties determining methods of administration
A variety of physical/chemical properties determine the means by
which inhalation anesthetics are administered. These include char-
acteristics such as boiling point, liquid density (specific gravity),
and vapor pressure.
General principles: a brief review
Molecules are in a constant state of motion and exhibit a force of
mutual attraction. The degree of attraction is evident by the state in
which the substance exists (i.e., solid, liquid, or gas). Molecular
motion increases as energy (e.g., in the form of heat) is added to
the molecular aggregate and decreases as energy is removed. With
increased motion, there is a reduction in the intermolecular forces;
if conditions are extreme enough, a change in physical state may
ensue. All substances exist naturally in a particular state but can be
made to exist (at least in theory) in any or all phases by altering
conditions. Water, as an example, exists as ice (mutual molecular
attraction is great), liquid water, or water vapor (attraction consid-
erably reduced) depending upon conditions.
Gas versus vapor
Inhalation anesthetics are either gases or vapors. In relation to inha-
lation anesthetics, the term “gas” refers to an agent, such as N2
O, that
exists in its gaseous form at room temperature and sea level pres-
sure. The term “vapor” indicates the gaseous state of a substance that
at ambient temperature and pressure is a liquid. With the exception
of N2
O, all the contemporary anesthetics fall into this category.
Desflurane (see Table 28.1) is one volatile liquid that comes close to
the transition stage and offers some unique (among the inhalation
anesthetics) considerations to be discussed later in this chapter [7].
Whether inhalation agents are supplied as a gas or volatile liquid
under ambient conditions, the same physical principles apply to
each agent when it is in the gaseous state. Molecules move about in
haphazard fashion at high speeds and collide with each other or the
walls of the containing vessel. The force per unit area of the bom-
bardment is measurable and referred to as “pressure.” In the case of
gases, if the space or volume in which the gas is enclosed is
increased, the number of bombardments decreases (i.e., a smaller
number of molecular collisions per unit time) and then the pressure
decreases. The behavior of gases is predictably described by various
gas laws. Relationships such as those described by Boyle’s law
(volume versus pressure), Charles’s law (volume versus temperature),
Gay-Lussac’s law (temperature versus pressure), Dalton’s law of
Table 28.1 Some physical and chemical properties of inhalation anesthetics used clinically in animals.
Property 	Desflurane 	Enflurane 	Halothane 	Isoflurane 	Methoxyfluranea 	Nitrous oxide 	Sevoflurane
Molecular weight (g) 	168 	185 	197 	185 	165 	44 	200
Liquid specific gravity (20 °C) (g/mL) 	1.47 	1.52 	1.86 	1.49 	1.42 	1.42 	1.52
Boiling point (°C) 	23.5 	57 	50 	49 	105 	-89 	59
Vapor pressure (mmHg) at:
20 °C 	700b 	172 	243 	240 	23 	– 	160
24 °C 	804 	207 	288 	286 	28 	– 	183
mL vapor/mL liquid at 20 °C 	209.7 	197.5 	227 	194.7 	206.9 	– 	182.7
Preservative 	None 	None 	Yes 	None 	Not available 	None 	Yes
Stability in:
Soda lime 	No 	No 	No 	No 	No 	Yes 	No
Ultraviolet light 	Yes 	Yes 	No 	Yes 	No 	Yes 	??
a Methoxyflurane is no longer commercially available in the United States.
b Value from [7].

-- 507 of 1450 --

492 	Section 3: Pharmacology
partial pressure (the total pressure of a mixture of gases is equal to
the sum of the partial pressures of all the gaseous substances present),
and others are important to our overall understanding of aspects of
respiratory and anesthetic gases and vapors. However, in-depth
descriptions of these principles are beyond the scope of this chapter
and readers are referred elsewhere for this information [9].
Methods of description
Quantities of inhalation anesthetic agent are usually characterized
by one of three methods: pressure (e.g., in mmHg), concentration
(in vol %), or mass (in mg or g). The form most familiar to clini-
cians is that of concentration (e.g., X% of agent A in relation to the
whole gas mixture). Agent analysis monitoring equipment samples
inspired and expired gases and provides readings for inhalation
anesthetics. Precision vaporizers used to control delivery of inhala-
tion anesthetics are calibrated in percentage of agent, and effective
doses are almost always reported in percentages.
Pressure is also an important way of describing inhalation anes-
thetics and is further discussed under the heading of anesthetic
potency. A mixture of gases in a closed container will exert pressure
on the walls of the container. The individual pressure of each gas in
a mixture of gases is referred to as its “partial pressure.” As noted
earlier, this expression of the behavior of a mixture of gases is
known as Dalton’s law, and its use in understanding inhalation
anesthesia is inescapable. Use of the concept of partial pressure is
important in understanding inhalation anesthetic action in a mul-
tiphase biologic system because, unlike concentration, the partial
pressure of an agent is the same in different compartments that
are in equilibrium with each other. That is, in contradistinction to
concentration or volume percent, an expression of the relative ratio
of gas molecules in a mixture, partial pressure is an expression of
the absolute value.
Molecular weight and agent density are used in many calculations
to convert from liquid to vapor volumes and mass. Briefly (and in
simplified fashion), Avogadro’s principle is that equal volume of all
gases under the same conditions of temperature and pressure
contain the same number of molecules (6.022 × 1023 [Avogadro’s
number] per gram molecular weight). Furthermore, under standard
Table 28.2 Partition coefficients (solvent/gas) of some inhalation anesthetics at 37 °C.
Solvent 	Desflurane 	Enflurane 	Halothane 	Isoflurane 	Methoxyflurane 	Nitrous oxide 	Sevoflurane
Water 	– 	0.78 	0.82 	0.62 	4.50 	0.47 	0.60
Blood 	0.42 	2.00 	2.54 	1.46 	15.00 	0.47 	0.68
Olive oil 	18.70 	96.00 	224.00 	91.00 	970.00 	1.40 	47.00
Brain 	1.30 	2.70 	1.90 	1.60 	20.00 	0.50 	1.70
Liver 	1.30 	3.70 	2.10 	1.80 	29.00 	0.38 	1.80
Kidney 	1.00 	1.90 	1.00 	1.20 	11.00 	0.40 	1.20
Muscle 	2.00 	2.20 	3.40 	2.90 	16.00 	0.54 	3.10
Fat 	27.00 	83.00 	51.00 	45.00 	902.00 	1.08 	48.00
Source: Tissue samples are derived from human sources. Data are from sources referenced in the 4th edition of this text.
Table 28.3 Blood/gas partition coefficients for desflurane, halothane, isoflurane, methoxyflurane, and sevoflurane in species of common clinical and/or research interest
in veterinary medicine, including for comparison similarly derived values for humans.
Species 	Desflurane 	Halothane 	Isoflurane 	Methoxyflurane 	Sevoflurane 	Nitrous oxide
Cat 	0.58 	– 	1.40 	26.4 	0.59 	–
Cow 	0.44 	2.40 [10] 	1.22 	11.3 	0.52 	–
Dog 	0.63 	3.51 [10] 	1.40 	26.1 	0.66 	0.43 [11]
Goat 	0.52 	– 	1.37 	13.0 	0.56 	–
Horse 	0.54 	1.77 [10] 	1.13 	13.0 	0.65 	–
Pig 	0.50 	– 	1.07 	11.1 	0.52 	–
Rat 	0.61 	6.56 [12] 	1.41 	17.7 	0.74 	–
Rabbit 	0.72 	4.36 [13] 	1.37 	25.0 	0.70 	–
Sheep 	0.50 	– 	1.24 	13.2 	0.56 	–
Human 	0.50 	2.54 [12] 	1.32 	14.3 	0.64 	0.41 [11]
Note, some values reported in the present and the 5th editions of this text differ from earlier editions. Present and 5th edition values are taken primarily from the 2012 reported
work of Soares et al. [14], except where indicated. Values are reported for 37 °C. A dash indicates the value was not found.
Table 28.4 Rubber or plastic/gas partition coefficients at room temperature.
Solvent 	Desflurane 	Enflurane 	Halothane 	Isoflurane 	Methoxyflurane 	Nitrous oxide 	Sevoflurane 	Reference
Rubber 	– 	74 	120 	62 	630 	1.2 	– 	[1]
19 	– 	190 	49 	– 	– 	29 	[15]
Poly(vinyl chloride) 	– 	120 	190 	110 	– 	– 	– 	[1]
35 	– 	233 	114 	– 	– 	69 	[15]
Poly(ethylene) 	– 	~2 	26 	~2 	118 	– 	– 	[1]
16 	– 	128 	58 	– 	– 	31 	[15]
These data are summarized from multiple sources as reported in Eger [1], with some differences in methods of determination. The data from Targ et al. [15] indicate more
recently derived data which, unlike earlier data, were recorded following complete equilibration with these materials. Where there is overlap, the ranking of partition coefficients
is consistent with halothane > isoflurane > sevoflurane > desflurane. Combining both groupings yields methoxyflurane > halothane > enflurane > isoflurane > sevoflurane >
desflurane > N 2 O.

-- 508 of 1450 --

Chapter 28: Inhalation Anesthetics 	493
conditions, the number of gas molecules in a gram molecular
weight of a substance occupies 22.4 L. In order to compare proper-
ties of different substances of similar state, it is necessary to do so
under comparable conditions; with respect to gases and liquids, this
usually means with reference to pressure and temperature. Unless
otherwise indicated, physical scientists have arbitrarily selected
standard conditions as 0 °C (273 K in absolute scale) and 760 mmHg
pressure (1 atmosphere at sea level). If conditions differ, appropriate
temperature and/or pressure corrections must be applied to result-
ant data.
The weight of a given volume of liquid, gas, or vapor may be
expressed in terms of its density or specific gravity. The density is an
absolute value of mass (usually grams) per unit volume (for liquids,
volume = 1 mL; for gases, 1 L at standard conditions). The specific
gravity is a relative value; that is, the ratio of the weight of a unit
volume of one substance to a similar volume of water, in the case of
liquids, or air, in the case of gases (or vapors), under similar condi-
tions. The value of both air and water is one. At least for clinical
purposes, the value for density and specific gravity for an inhalation
anesthetic is the same. Thus, for example, we can determine the
volume of isoflurane gas (vapor) at 20 °C from 1 mL of isoflurane
liquid according to the scheme given in Box 28.1. This type of
calculation has practical applications. For example, to determine
the savings in isoflurane liquid afforded by reducing the fresh gas
(e.g., O2
) inflow rate, a series of calculations as presented in Box 28.2
can be made.
Vapor pressure Molecules of liquids are in constant random motion.
Some of those in the surface layer gain sufficient velocity to over-
come the attractive forces of neighboring molecules and in escaping
from the surface, enter the vapor phase. The change in state from a
liquid to a gas phase is known as “vaporization” or “evaporation.”
This process is dynamic and in a closed container that is kept at a
constant temperature, eventually reaches an equilibrium whereby
there is no further net loss of molecules to the gas phase (i.e., the
numbers of molecules leaving and returning to the liquid phase are
equal). The gas phase at this point is saturated.
Molecules of a vapor exert a force per unit area or pressure in
exactly the same manner as molecules of a gas. The pressure (units
of measure are mmHg) that the vapor molecules exert when the
liquid and vapor phases are in equilibrium is known as the “vapor
pressure.” Thus, the vapor pressure of an anesthetic is a measure of
its ability to evaporate; that is, it is a measure of the tendency for
molecules in the liquid state to enter the gaseous (vapor) phase. The
vapor pressure of a volatile anesthetic must be at least sufficient to
provide enough molecules of anesthetic in the vapor state to pro-
duce anesthesia at ambient conditions. The saturated vapor pressure
represents a maximum concentration of molecules in the vapor
state that exists for a given liquid at each temperature. Herein lies a
practical difference between substances classified as a gas or vapor;
a gas can be administered over a range of concentrations from 0%
to 100%, whereas the vapor has a ceiling that is dictated by its vapor
pressure. The saturated vapor concentration can be easily deter-
mined by relating the vapor pressure to the ambient pressure. For
example, in the case of isoflurane (see Table 28.1), a maximal con-
centration of 32% isoflurane is possible under usual conditions and
20 °C (i.e., [240/760] × 100 = 32%, where 760 mmHg is the baro-
metric pressure at sea level). With other variables considered con-
stant, the greater the vapor pressure, the greater the concentration
of the drug deliverable to the patient. Therefore, again from
Table 28.1, isoflurane, for example, is more volatile than methoxy-
flurane under similar conditions. The barometric pressure also
influences the final concentration of an agent. For example, in loca-
tions such as Denver, Colorado, where the altitude is about 5000
feet above sea level and the barometric pressure is only about
635 mmHg, the saturated vapor concentration of isoflurane at 20 °C
is now (240/635) × 100 = 37.8%.
It is important to recognize that the saturated vapor pressure at
1 atmosphere is unique for each volatile anesthetic agent and
depends only on its temperature. In this case, the effect of baromet-
ric pressure can be neglected over ranges normally encountered in
the practice of anesthesia. Thus, for a given agent, the graph of the
saturated vapor pressure versus temperature is a curve as shown in
Fig. 28.3. From this graph, it can be seen that if the temperature of
the liquid is increased, more molecules escape the liquid phase and
enter the gaseous phase. The greater number of molecules in the
vapor phase results in a greater vapor pressure and vapor concen-
tration. Conversely, if the liquid is cooled, the reverse occurs and
vapor concentration decreases. Liquid cooling may occur not only
as a result of ambient conditions but also as a natural consequence
Box 28.1 Example calculations to determine the volume of isoflurane
vapor at 20 °C from 1 mL of isoflurane liquid.
Isoflurane specific gravity = 1.49 g/mL, therefore:
1 mL liquid isoflurane = 1 mL × 1.49 g/mL = 1.49 g
Since molecular weight of isoflurane = 185 g (from Table 28.1), then:
1.49 g ÷ 185 g = 0.0081 mol of liquid
Since 1 mol of gas = 22.4 L, then:
0.0081 mol × 22,400 mL/mol = 181.4 mL of isoflurane vapor at 0 °C and
1 atmosphere
But vapor is at 20 °C (293 K) not 0 °C (273 K), therefore:
181.4 mL × 293/273 = 194.7 mL vapor/mL liquid isoflurane at 20 °C and
1 atmosphere pressure (i.e., sea level)
For substantial variation in ambient pressure, the final figure noted above
would have to be further “corrected” by a factor of (760/ambient
barometric pressure)
Box 28.2 Problem: Determine the savings in isoflurane liquid afforded by
reducing the fresh gas (e.g., O2
) inflow rate from 6 Lpm (liters per minute)
to 4 Lpm, given that the average delivered (vaporizer setting) concentration
for 2 h is 3%.
Total isoflurane vapor delivered over 2 h (120 min) estimated at:
3%/100 × 6 Lpm = 0.18 Lpm × 120 min = 21.6 L/120 min =
21,600 mL/120 min
versus
3%/100 × 4 Lpm = 0.12 Lpm × 120 min = 14.4 L/120 min =
14,400 mL/120 min
Total vapor volume saved:
21,600 mL/120 min – 14,400 mL/120 min = 7200 mL vapor/120 min
saved
Total liquid isoflurane volume saved/2 h (120 min):
7200 mL vapor ÷ 194.7 mL vapor/mL liquid = 36.98 mL of isoflurane
liquid
(194.7 mL vapor/mL liquid can be calculated as in Box 28.1 or taken from
Table 28.1)
The economic value of reducing isoflurane consumption can then be
determined by calculating the product of the liquid volume saved and the
purchase cost/mL of isoflurane liquid.

-- 509 of 1450 --

494 	Section 3: Pharmacology
of the vaporization process. For example, during vaporization the
“fastest” molecules at the surface escape first. With depletion of
these “high- energy” molecules, the average kinetic energy of those
left behind is reduced and there is a tendency for the temperature of
the remaining liquid to fall if this process is not compensated for
externally. As the temperature decreases, the vapor pressure, and
thus the vapor concentration, also decreases.
Boiling point The boiling point of a liquid is defined as the tempera-
ture at which the vapor pressure of the liquid is equal to the atmos-
pheric pressure. Customarily, the boiling temperature is stated at
the standard atmospheric pressure of 760 mmHg. The boiling point
decreases with increasing altitude because the vapor pressure does
not change but the barometric pressure decreases. The boiling point
of N2
O is −89 °C (see Table 28.1) at 1 atmosphere pressure at sea
level. It is thus a gas under operating room conditions. Because of
this, it is distributed for clinical purposes in steel tanks compressed
to the liquid state at about 750 psi (pounds per square inch;
750 psi/14.9 psi [1 atmosphere] = 50 atmospheres pressure). As the
N 2 O gas is drawn from the tank, liquid N2 O is vaporized, and the
over-riding gas pressure remains constant until no further liquid
remains in the tank. At that point, only N2
O gas remains, and the gas
pressure decreases from this point as remaining gas is vented from
the tank. Consequently, the weight of the N 2
O minus the weight of
the tank rather than the gas pressure within the tank is a more accu-
rate guide to the remaining amount of N2
O in the tank [16].
Desflurane also possesses an interesting consideration because
its boiling point (see Table 28.1) is near room temperature. This
characteristic accounted for an interesting engineering challenge in
developing an administration device (i.e., a vaporizer) for routine
use in the relatively constant environment of the operating room
and limits further consideration of its use in all but a narrow range
of circumstances commonly encountered in veterinary medical
applications. For example, because of its low boiling point, even
evaporative cooling has a large influence on vapor pressure and thus
the vapor concentration of gas mixtures delivered to the patient.
Calculation of anesthetic concentration delivered by a vaporizer
The saturated vapor pressure of most volatile anesthetics is of such
magnitude that the maximal concentration of anesthetic attainable
at usual operating room conditions is above the range of concentra-
tions that are commonly necessary for safe clinical anesthetic man-
agement. Therefore, some control of the delivered concentration is
necessary and usually provided by a device known as a “vaporizer.”
The purpose of the vaporizer is to dilute the vapor generated from
the liquid anesthetic with O 2 (or O 2 plus N 2 O, or O 2 plus air mix-
tures) to produce a more satisfactory inspired anesthetic concentra-
tion. This anesthetic dilution is usually accomplished as indicated
in the model shown in Fig. 28.4 by diverting the gas entering the
vaporizer into two streams: one that enters the vaporizing chamber
(anesthetic chamber volume: Vanes
) and the other that bypasses the
vaporizing chamber (dilution volume or Vdilution
). If the vaporizer is
efficient, the carrier gas passing through the vaporizing chamber
becomes completely saturated to an anesthetic concentration (%)
reflected by (anesthetic agent vapor pressure/atmospheric pressure)
× 100, at the vaporizer chamber temperature. The resultant anes-
thetic concentration then is decreased (diluted) downstream by the
second gas stream to a “working” concentration. In modern, preci-
sion, agent-specific vaporizers, no mental effort is required – just
set the dial, as the manufacturers have precalibrated the vaporizer
for accurate delivery of the dialed concentration (within some vari-
ability, say 10% of delivered concentration, allowance). Nevertheless,
it is helpful to our overall understanding to know the principles
underlying this convenience and how to apply these principles in
the use of older, non-compensated measured flow vaporizers.
To calculate the anesthetic concentration from the vaporizer, one
must know the vapor pressure of the agent (at the temperature of
use), the atmospheric pressure, the fresh gas flow entering the
vaporizing chamber, and the diluent gas flow. Then:
% Anesthetic flow of anesthetic from the vaporizing chamber
ttotal gas flow
More detail for interested readers is given in Fig. 28.4.
Properties influencing drug kinetics: solubility
Anesthetic gases and vapors dissolve in liquids and solids. The solu-
bility of an anesthetic is a major characteristic of the agent and has
important clinical ramifications. For example, anesthetic solubility
in blood and body tissues is a primary factor in the rate of uptake
and its distribution within the body. It is therefore a primary deter-
minant of the speed of anesthetic induction and recovery. Solubility
in lipid bears a strong relationship to anesthetic potency, and its
tendency to dissolve in anesthetic delivery components such as rub-
ber goods influences equipment selection and other aspects of anes-
thetic management.
Solubility of gases
As previously mentioned, molecules of a gas that overlie a liquid
surface are in random motion and some penetrate the liquid sur-
face. After entering the liquid, they intermingle with the molecules
of the liquid (i.e., the gas dissolves in the liquid). There is a net
movement of the gas into the liquid until equilibrium is established
between the dissolved gas in the liquid and the undissolved portion
above the liquid. At this time, there is no further net gain of gas
molecules by the liquid, and the number of gas molecules entering
the liquid equals the number leaving. The gas molecules within the
liquid exert the same pressure or tension that they exert in the
Vapor pressure-temperature relationship
Temperature (°C)
Desflurane
Halothane
Isoflurane
Methoxyflurane
Sevoflurane
Enflurane
	Vapor pressure (mmHg)
600
400
200
0
600
400
200
0
0 	10	0 	20 	30 	40
Figure 28.3 Vapor pressure as a function of temperature for six volatile
anesthetics. Curves are generated from Antoine equations.

-- 510 of 1450 --

Chapter 28: Inhalation Anesthetics 	495
gas phase. If the pressure (i.e., the number of gas molecules overly-
ing the liquid) is increased, more molecules pass into the liquid and
the pressure within the liquid is increased. This net inward move-
ment of gas molecules continues until a new equilibrium is estab-
lished between the pressure of the gas in the liquid and that
overlying the liquid. Alternatively, if the pressure of gas overlying
the liquid is somehow decreased below that in the liquid, gas
molecules escape from the liquid. This net outward movement of
gas molecules from the liquid phase continues until equilibrium
between the two phases is re-established.
The amount, that is, the total number of molecules of a given gas
dissolving in a solvent, depends on the chemical nature of the gas
itself, the partial pressure of the gas, the nature of the solvent, and
the temperature. This relationship is described by Henry’s law:
V 	S P
where V is the volume of gas, P is the partial pressure of the gas, and
S is the solubility coefficient for the gas in the solvent at a given
temperature. Henry’s law applies to gases that do not combine
chemically with the solvent to form compounds.
Before leaving this basic information, a brief focus on a number
of variations may be helpful. First, it is important to recognize that
if the atmosphere that overlies the solvent is made up of a mixture
of gases, then each gas dissolves in the solvent in proportion to the
partial pressure of the individual gases. The total pressure exerted
by the molecules of all gases within the solvent equals the total gas
pressure lying above the solvent.
Within the body, there is a partition of anesthetic gases between
blood and body tissues in accordance with Henry’s law. This
process can perhaps be better understood by visualizing a system
composed of three compartments (e.g., gas, water, and oil) contained
in a closed container (Fig. 28.5). In such a system the gas overlies
the oil, which in turn overlies the water. Because there is a passive
gradient from the gas phase to the oil, gas molecules move into the
oil compartment. This movement in turn develops a gradient for
the gas molecules in oil relative to water. If gas is continually added
above the oil, there will be a continual net movement of the gas
Figure 28.4 An anesthetic vaporizer model to assist in illustrating the principles associated with the calculation of the vapor concentration of an inhalation
anesthetic emerging from a vaporizer. Conditions associated with halothane delivery in San Francisco (i.e., at sea level; barometric pressure = 760 mm Hg)
at 20 °C are used as an example of general principles.
Steps:
1
2
3
4
The saturated concentration of anesthetic in the anesthetic
vaporizing chamber and leaving it (ideally at A above) is
calculated knowing the saturated vapor pressure (PVP ) (from
Table 28.1) and barometric pressure (PB).
Vhalo is then contained in a total gas volume at B of:
Vtotal gas = Vhalo + Vcarrier + Vdiluent
Then, in our example for a
So the final halothane vapor concentration is determined by:
Vdiluent of 1000 mL (in 1 minute):
Again, in our example:
Alternatively, with some basic algebraic work with the equations given
above, the same numbers can be applied to the resultant formula given
below to arrive at the anesthetic concentration. The condensed
formula is:
Wher
(i.e., flow meter; units here of mL/minute) or by the vaporizer
design and dial setting.
e Vdiluent is set by the anesthetist using a second gas control
The volume of anesthetic leaving the vaporizing chamber is
the original volume of the carrier gas (O 2) entering the
anesthetic vaporizing chamber (Vcarrier) and the volume of
anesthetic (Vhalo) added to it.
For example:
Vcarrier + Vhalo
Halothane % = 	× 100
Vhalo
Halothane % = 243
760 × 100 = 32%
Halothane % is known from eqn. 28.1 above and Vcarrier is
known from control of a flowmeter (e.g., a measured flow
vaporizer) or via the design characteristics of a commercial,
agent-specific vaporizer that automatically “splits” the fresh
gas flow from a single flow meter. In the first case, two gas
flow controls are necessary, one for Vcarrier and one for an
automatic fresh gas flow alteration. The equation is then
solved for Vhalo (expressed in mL of halothane vapor).
(28.1)
(28.3)
(28.2)
For example, if Vcarrier = 100 mL O2 , then:
32% =
3200 + 32Vhalo = 100Vhalo
3200 = 68Vhalo
Vhalo = 47.1 mL halothane vapor
× 100
Vhalo
100 + Vhalo
Vtotal = 47.1 + 100 + 1000
= 1147 mL (rounded off)
Halothane % = 	× 100
Vhalo
Vtotal
Halothane % = 	= 4.1%
47.1
1147
Anesthetic concentration (%) = Vcarrier • PVP • 100
Vdiluent (PB – PVP) + (V carrier • PB)
V diluent
Vcarrier
Vanes + Vcarrier
Inflow 	Bypass
Vaporizing chamber
Outflow
Liquid anesthetic
A
B

-- 511 of 1450 --

496 	Section 3: Pharmacology
molecules from the gas phase into both the oil and, in turn, the
water. At a given temperature, when no more gas dissolves in
the solvent, the solvent is said to be fully saturated. At this point, the
pressure of the gas molecules within the three compartments will be
equal but the amount (i.e., the number of molecules or volume of
gas) partitioned between the two liquids will vary with the nature of
the liquid and gas. Finally, it is important to understand that the
amount of gas that goes into solution depends upon the tempera-
ture of the solvent. Less gas dissolves in a solvent as temperature
increases, and more gas is taken up as solvent temperature decreases.
For example, as water is heated, air bubbles appear inside the
container as a result of the decreasing solubility of the air in water.
Conversely, as blood is cooled from a normal body temperature
(e.g., hypothermia), gases become more soluble in blood.
The extent to which a gas will dissolve in a given solvent is
usually expressed in terms of its solubility coefficient (see
Table 28.2). With inhalation anesthetics, solubility is most commonly
measured and expressed as a partition coefficient (PC). Other
measurements of solubility include the Bunsen and Ostwald
solubility coefficients [9,17].
The PC is the concentration ratio of an anesthetic in the solvent
and gas phases (e.g., blood and gas; Fig. 28.6) or between two tissue
solvents (e.g., brain and blood; see Table 28.2). It thus describes the
capacity of a given solvent to dissolve the anesthetic gas. That is,
how the anesthetic will partition itself between the gas and the
liquid solvent phases after equilibrium has been reached. Remember,
anesthetic gas movement occurs because of a partial pressure differ-
ence in the gas and liquid solvent phases, so when there is no longer
any anesthetic partial pressure difference, there is no longer any net
movement of anesthetic and equilibrium has been achieved.
Solvent/gas PCs are summarized in Table 28.2. Values noted in this
table are for human tissues because they are most widely available
in the anesthesia literature. Comparative data for blood solubility of
desflurane, isoflurane, and sevoflurane in a variety of species of
clinical interest in veterinary medicine are listed in Table 28.3.
Regardless of the species, it is important to emphasize that many
factors can alter anesthetic agent solubility [17–20]. Perhaps the
most notable after the nature of the solvent is that of temperature.
Of all the PCs that have been described or are of interest, two are
of particular importance in the practical understanding of anesthetic
action. They are the blood/gas and the oil/gas solubility coefficients.
Blood/gas partition coefficient Blood/gas solubility coefficients (see
Tables 28.2 and 28.3) provide a means for predicting the speed of
anesthetic induction, recovery, and change of anesthetic depth.
Assume, for example, that anesthetic A has a blood/gas PC value of
15. This means that the concentration of the anesthetic in blood will
be 15 times greater at equilibrium than that in alveolar gas.
Expressed differently, the same volume of blood, say 1 mL, will hold
15 times more anesthetic A than 1 mL of alveolar gas despite an
equal partial pressure. Alternatively, consider anesthetic B with a
PC of 1.4. This PC indicates that at equilibrium, the amount of
anesthetic B is only 1.4 times greater in blood than it is in alveolar
air. Comparing the PC of anesthetic A with that of anesthetic B
indicates that anesthetic A is much more soluble in blood than B
(nearly 11 times more soluble: 15/1.4). From this, and assuming
other conditions are equal, anesthetic A will require a longer time
of administration to attain a partial pressure in the body for a
particular endpoint (say, anesthetic induction) than will anesthetic B.
Also, since there is more anesthetic A contained in blood and
other body tissues under similar conditions, elimination (and
therefore anesthetic recovery) will be prolonged when compared to
anesthetic B.
Oil/gas partition coefficient The oil/gas PC is another solubility
characteristic of clinical importance (see Table 28.2). This PC
describes the ratio of the concentration of an anesthetic in oil (olive
oil is the standard) and gas phases at equilibrium. The oil/gas PC
correlates directly with anesthetic potency (see Anesthetic dose: the
minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) and Mechanism of action
sections later in this chapter) and describes the capacity of lipids for
anesthetic.
Other partition coefficients Solubility characteristics for various
tissues (see Tables 28.2 and 28.3) and other media, such as rubber
and plastic (see Table 28.4), are also important. For example, the
solubility of a tissue determines in part the quantity of anesthetic
removed from the blood to which it is exposed. The higher the
tissue solubility, the longer it will take to saturate the tissue with
(A)
Blood 	1%
2% = 0.5	=
Gas
(B)
Blood 	2%
1% = 2.0	=
Gas
Figure 28.6 Illustration of two hypothetical gases (A. and B.) with varying
blood/gas partition coefficients. See text for explanation. Source: Adapted
from Eger [17].
Gas
Oil
Water
Figure 28.5 Diagrammatic representation of an anesthetic gas distributing
itself among three compartments (gas, oil, and water). At equilibrium, the
number of anesthetic molecules in the three compartments differs but
the pressure exerted by the anesthetic molecules is the same in each
compartment.

-- 512 of 1450 --

Chapter 28: Inhalation Anesthetics 	497
anesthetic agent. Thus, other things considered equal, anesthetics
that are very soluble in tissues will require a longer period for
induction and recovery. If the amount of rubber goods in the appa-
ratus used to deliver the anesthetic to the patient is substantial and
the anesthetic agent solubility in rubber is large (as, for example,
was common with equipment in use prior to the 21st century), the
amount of uptake of anesthetic agent by the rubber may also be of
clinical significance.
Pharmacokinetics: uptake and elimination
of inhalation anesthetics
The aim in administering an inhalation anesthetic to a patient is to
achieve an adequate partial pressure or tension of anesthetic (Panes
)
in the central nervous system (CNS, e.g., brain; for purposes of this
discussion considerations of anesthetic delivery to spinal cord sites
of action are considered similar to those of the brain) to cause a
desired level of CNS depression commensurate with the definition
of general anesthesia. Anesthetic depth varies directly with Panes in
brain and spinal cord tissue. The rate of change of anesthetic depth
is of obvious clinical importance and is directly dependent upon the
rate of change in anesthetic tensions in the various media in which
it is contained before reaching the brain. Thus, knowledge of the
factors that govern these relationships is of fundamental impor-
tance to skillful control of general inhalation anesthesia.
Inhalation anesthetics are unique among the classes of drugs that
are used to produce general anesthesia because they are adminis-
tered via the lungs. The pharmacokinetics of the inhaled anesthetics
describe the rate of their uptake by blood from the lungs, distribu-
tion in the body, and eventual elimination by the lungs and other
routes. Readers seeking more in-depth coverage are directed to
reviews by Eger [17,21,22] and Mapleson [23].
Inhalation anesthetics, similar to the gases of respiration (i.e., O2
and CO 2
), move down a series of partial pressure gradients from
regions of higher tension to those of lower tension until equilibrium
(i.e., equal pressure throughout the apparatus and body tissues) is
established. Thus, on induction, the Panes at its source in the vapor-
izer is high, as is dictated by the vapor pressure, and progressively
decreases as anesthetic travels from vaporizer to patient breathing
circuit, from circuit to lungs, from lungs to arterial blood, and
finally, from arterial blood to body tissues (e.g., the brain; Fig. 28.7).
Of these, the alveolar partial pressure of anesthetic, PA Anes, is piv-
otal. The brain has a rich blood supply and the anesthetic in arterial
blood, Pa
Anes, rapidly equilibrates with brain tissue, P brain
Anes.
Usually, gas exchange at the alveolar level is sufficiently efficient
that the Pa
Anes is close to PA
Anes. Thus, the P brain
Anes closely
follows PA
Anes, and by controlling the PA Anes there is a reliable
indirect way for controlling P brain
Anes and anesthetic depth.
At this point, it may also be helpful to recall that although the
partial pressure of anesthetic is of primary importance, we fre-
quently define the clinical dose of an inhaled anesthetic in terms of
concentration (C, i.e., vol %). As previously noted, this is because it
is common practice for the clinician to regulate and/or measure
respiratory and anesthetic gases in volume percent. In addition, in
the gaseous phase, the relationship between the Panes and the Canes is
a simple one:
P 	fractional anesthetic concentration total ambient pr	anes 	eessure
The fractional anesthetic concentration is of course Canes
/100.
However, as reviewed in the preceding section, in blood or tissues,
the actual quantity of anesthetic depends on both the Panes and the
anesthetic solubility (as measured by the PC) within the solvent
(e.g., blood or oil). Consequently, at equilibrium, the partial
pressure of the gas in the alveoli and among tissue compartments
will be equal, although concentrations will vary within these tissues.
Anesthetic uptake: factors that determine the PA
of anesthetic
The PA of anesthetic is a balance between anesthetic input (i.e.,
delivery to the alveoli) and loss (uptake by blood and body tissues)
from the lungs. A rapid rise in the PA of anesthetic is associated with
a rapid anesthetic induction or change in anesthetic depth. Factors
that contribute to a rapid change in the PA of anesthetic are sum-
marized in Box 28.3.
Delivery to the alveoli
Delivery of anesthetic to the alveoli and therefore the rate of rise of
the alveolar concentration or fraction (FA
) toward the inspired con-
centration or fraction (F I
) depends on the inspired anesthetic
concentration itself and the magnitude of alveolar ventilation.
Increasing either one of these or both increases the rate of rise of
the PA of anesthetic; that is, with other things considered equal,
there is an increase in speed of anesthetic induction or change in
anesthetic level.
Inspired concentration
The inspired concentration has a number of variables controlling it.
First of all, the upper limit of inspired concentration is dictated
Pdelivered
Pcircuit
Pinspired
Palveolar
Pexpired
Parterial 	Pvenous
P tissues
Figure 28.7 The flow pattern of inhalation anesthetic agents during
anesthetic induction and recovery. Inhalation anesthesia may be viewed as
the development of a series of partial pressure (tension) gradients. During
induction, there is a high anesthetic tension in the vaporizer that decreases
progressively as the flow of anesthetic gas moves from its source to the
brain. Some of these gradients are easily manipulated by the anesthetist;
others are not or are difficult to achieve.

-- 513 of 1450 --

498 	Section 3: Pharmacology
by the agent vapor pressure, which in turn is dependent on
temperature. This may be especially important in veterinary
medicine considering the breadth of applications involving inhaled
anesthesia and methods of vaporizing volatile anesthetics under
widely diverse conditions (some environmental conditions are
quite hostile).
Characteristics of the patient breathing system can also be a
major factor in generating a suitable inspired concentration under
usual operating room conditions. Characteristics of special impor-
tance include the volume of the system, the amount of rubber or
plastic components of the system, the position of the vaporizer
relative to the breathing circuit (i.e., within or outside the circuit),
and the fresh gas inflow to the patient breathing circuit. The patient
breathing circuit contains a gas volume that must be replaced with
gas containing the desired anesthetic concentration. Thus, the
volume of the breathing circuit serves as a buffer to delay the rise
of anesthetic concentration. In the management of small animals
(i.e., less than 10 kg), a nonrebreathing patient circuit and/or a
relatively high fresh gas inflow into the patient breathing circuit is
usually used, so there should not be a clinically important differ-
ence between the delivered (e.g., vaporizer dial setting) and the
inspired concentration. That is, when the vaporizer dial setting is
adjusted to the desired concentration setting, the fresh gas plus
anesthetic flowing from the vaporizer almost immediately con-
tains the dialed anesthetic vapor concentration. In addition, the
total gas flow is high relative to the volume of the delivery circuit,
so the anesthetic concentration in the inspired breath is rapidly
increased. However, with larger animals (i.e., greater than 10 kg), a
rebreathing (circle) patient circuit with a CO 2 absorber is most
commonly used for inhalation anesthesia. The volume of this
breathing circuit may be very large compared to fresh gas inflow.
This volume markedly delays the rate of rise of inspired anesthetic
concentration because the residual gas volume must be “washed
out” and replaced by anesthetic containing fresh gas in order for
the inspired concentration to increase to that delivered from the
vaporizer (Fig. 28.8). In addition, rebreathing of exhaled gas
(minus CO 2 ) occurs to varying degrees with these circuits. The
inspired gas is composed of exhaled and fresh gases. Because the
expired gas contains less anesthetic than the fresh gas, the inspired
anesthetic gas concentration will be less than that of the fresh gas
leaving the vaporizer.
In veterinary applications, the delaying influence of the circle
circuit is most notable with anesthetic management of very large
animals such as horses [24] and cattle and/or when using a
closed-circuit fresh gas flow rate (i.e., where O2 is the fresh gas and
its inflow [plus anesthetic] to the circuit just meets the metabolic
needs of the patient). With closed-circuit delivery, the fresh gas
inflow is very low relative to the circuit volume [8,17,24].
The high solubility of some anesthetics (e.g., methoxyflurane;
see Table 28.4) in rubber and plastic delays development of an
appropriate inspired anesthetic concentration. The loss of anes-
thetic to these equipment “sinks” increases the apparent volume
of the anesthetic circuitry and may, in some cases, be clinically
important (e.g., the use of rubber hoses and a large rubber
rebreathing bag on circuits designed for anesthetic management of
horses). With the newest inhalation anesthetics and more modern
anesthetic delivery equipment, this issue is of minor or no clinical
importance.
Positioning the vaporizer in relation to the patient breathing cir-
cuit will influence inspired anesthetic concentration [23,25]. For
example, with the vaporizer positioned within a circle rebreathing
circuit, a decrease in inspired concentration will follow an increase
in fresh gas inflow to the circuit, whereas an increase in inspired
concentration will result if the vaporizer is positioned outside the
circuit (Table 28.5). With the loss of methoxyflurane to clinical
practice, nearly all, if not all, vaporizers in use in North America are
agent-specific, precision vaporizers. This style of vaporizer is always
placed upstream and outside the patient’s breathing circuit.
Alveolar ventilation
An increase in alveolar ventilation increases the rate of delivery of
inhalation anesthetic to the alveolus (Fig. 28.9). If unopposed by
blood and tissue uptake of anesthetic, alveolar ventilation would
rapidly increase the alveolar concentration of anesthetic so that
within minutes, the alveolar concentration would equal the inspired
concentration. However, in reality, the input created by alveolar
ventilation is countered by absorption of anesthetic into blood.
Predictably, hypoventilation decreases the rate at which the alveolar
Box 28.3 Factors related to a rapid change in alveolar anesthetic
tension (PA
).
Increased alveolar delivery
Increased inspired anesthetic concentration
Increased vaporization of agent
Increased vaporizer dial setting
Increased fresh gas inflow
Decreased gas volume of patient breathing circuit
Increased alveolar ventilation
Increased minute ventilation
Decreased deadspace ventilation
Decreased removal from the alveoli
Decreased blood solubility of anesthetic
Decreased cardiac output
Decreased alveolar–venous anesthetic gradient
Minutes
SAAM
(3L bag)
1 LPM
2 LPM
3 LPM
6 LPM
	12 LPM
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
	F insp
Fdel
0.8
1.0
0 	5 	10 	15 	20
Figure 28.8 A comparison of the rate of increase of inspired halothane
concentration toward a constant delivered concentration F insp
/Fdel in a 7 L
small animal anesthetic breathing circuit (SAAM) at fresh gas flow rates of
1, 3, 6, and 12 Lpm. Source: Eger [24].
Table 28.5 Vaporizer positioning within or outside a circle patient rebreathing circuit
influences inspired anesthetic concentration.
Factor 	Vaporizer positioning
Out of circuit 	In circuit
Increase ventilation 	Decrease 	Increase
Increase fresh gas (O2
) inflow to circuit 	Increase 	Decrease

-- 514 of 1450 --

Chapter 28: Inhalation Anesthetics 	499
concentration increases over time compared to the inspired con-
centration (i.e., anesthetic induction is slowed). Alveolar ventilation
is altered by changes in anesthetic depth (increased depth usually
means decreased ventilation), mechanical ventilation (usually
increased ventilation), and deadspace ventilation (i.e., for constant
minute ventilation, a decrease in deadspace ventilation results in an
increase in alveolar ventilation).
Alveolar ventilation and thus the alveolar anesthetic concentra-
tion can also be influenced by administering a potent inhalation
anesthetic such as halothane in conjunction with N 2
O. Very early in
the administration of N2
O (during the period of large volume
uptake; the first 5–10 min of delivery), the rate of rise of the alveolar
concentration of the concurrently administered inhalation anes-
thetic is increased. This is commonly referred to as the “second gas
effect,” and this phenomenon can be applied clinically to speed
anesthetic induction [17,21,26].
Removal from alveoli: uptake by blood
As noted by Eger [17], anesthetic uptake is the product of three
factors: solubility (S, the blood/gas solubility; see Table 28.3),
cardiac output (CO), and the difference in the anesthetic partial
pressure between the alveolus and venous blood returning to the
lungs (PA − PV̄ /Pbar
), expressed in mmHg; that is:
Uptake 	CO P 	P 	P	A 	V 	bar	S 	/
where P bar = barometric pressure in mmHg. Note that if any of these
three factors equals zero, there is no further uptake of anesthetic
by blood.
Solubility
As previously discussed, the solubility of an inhalation anesthetic
in blood and tissues is characterized by its partition coefficient
(PC; see Tables 28.2 and 28.3). Remember that a PC describes how
an inhalation anesthetic distributes itself between two phases or
two solvents (e.g., the quantity of agent in blood and alveoli [gas] or
blood and muscle, respectively) once equilibrium is established
(i.e., when the anesthetic partial pressure is equal). Based on blood/
gas PCs, inhalation anesthetics range from highly soluble (meth-
oxyflurane) to poorly soluble (N 2
O, desflurane, and sevoflurane).
Agents such as halothane and isoflurane are intermediate.
Compared to an anesthetic with high blood solubility (PC), an
agent with low blood solubility is associated with a more rapid
equilibration because a smaller amount of anesthetic must be dis-
solved in the blood before equilibrium is reached with the gas
phase. In the case of the agent with a high blood/gas PC, the blood
acts like a large “sink” into which the anesthetic is poured and
accordingly, blood is “reluctant” to give up the agent to other tis-
sues (such as the brain). The blood serves as a conduit for drug
delivery to the brain and as such can be visualized as a pharmaco-
logically inactive reservoir that is interposed between the lungs
and the agent’s site of desired pharmacologic activity (i.e., brain).
Therefore, an anesthetic agent with a low blood/gas PC is usually
more desirable than a highly soluble agent, because it is associated
with (1) a more rapid anesthetic induction (i.e., more rapid rate of
rise in alveolar concentration during induction; Fig. 28.10);
(2) more precise control of anesthetic depth (i.e., alveolar concen-
tration during the anesthetic maintenance); and (3) a more rapid
elimination of anesthetic and recovery (i.e., a rapid decrease in
alveolar concentration during recovery).
Cardiac output
The amount of blood flowing through the lungs and on to body tis-
sues also influences anesthetic uptake from the lungs. The greater
the CO, the more blood passes through the lungs carrying away
anesthetic from the alveoli. Thus, a large CO, like increased anes-
thetic agent blood solubility, delays the alveolar rise of Panes
(Fig. 28.11). Patient excitement is an example in which a relatively
0.0 0 	10 	20
Minutes
2 L /min
4 L /min
8 L /min
30 	40
0.5
	FA /F I
1.0
Figure 28.9 The effect of ventilation on the rise of the alveolar (FA
)
concentration of halothane toward the inspired (FI
) concentration.
As noted, the FA
:FI ratio increases more rapidly as ventilation is increased
from 2 to 8 L/min. Source: Eger [17], with permission of Wolters Kluwer
Health, Inc.
0.0 0 	10 	20
Minutes
30 	40
0.5
	F A/F I
1.0
Methoxyflurane
Halothane
Enflurane
Isoflurane
Sevoflurane
Desflurane
Nitrous oxide
Figure 28.10 The rise in the alveolar (FA
) anesthetic concentration toward
the inspired (F I
) concentration. Note the rise is most rapid with the least
soluble anesthetic, N 2
O, and slowest with the most soluble anesthetic,
methoxyflurane. All data are from studies of humans. Source: The curves
are redrawn from Eger [1]; Eger [27].

-- 515 of 1450 --

500 	Section 3: Pharmacology
large CO is anticipated. Conversely, a reduced CO should be antici-
pated with a patient with poor myocardial function or severe brady-
cardia. Such a situation would be associated with an increase in the
rate of rise of the PA of the anesthetic and this, along with other
factors, makes the anesthetic induction more rapid and risky.
Alveolar to venous anesthetic partial pressure difference
The magnitude of difference in anesthetic partial pressure between
the alveoli and mixed venous blood returning to the lungs is related
to the amount of uptake of anesthetic by tissues. It is not surprising
that the largest gradient occurs during induction. Once the tissues
no longer absorb anesthetic (i.e., equilibrium is reached), there is
no longer any uptake of anesthetic from the lungs because PV̄ = PA
(i.e., the mixed venous blood returning to the lungs contains as
much anesthetic as when it left the lungs). The changes in gradient
between the initiation of induction and equilibration result in part
from the relative distribution of CO. In this regard, it is important
to recognize that roughly 70–80% of the CO is normally directed to
only a small volume of body tissues in a lean individual [28,29].
Tissues such as the brain, heart, hepatoportal system, and kidneys
represent only about 10% of the body mass but normally receive
about 75% of the total blood flow each minute. As a result, these
highly perfused tissues equilibrate rapidly with arterial anesthetic
partial pressure when compared to other body tissues (actual tim-
ing is influenced by agent solubility). Since the venous anesthetic
pressure or tension equals that in the tissue within 10 or 15 min,
about 75% of the blood returning to the lungs is the same as the
alveolar tension. This presumes there has been no change in arterial
anesthetic partial pressure during this time and thus uptake is
reduced. Skin and muscle comprise the major bulk of the body
(about 50% in humans) but at rest receive only about 15–20% of the
CO, so saturation of these tissues takes hours to accomplish. Fat is a
variable component of body bulk and receives only a small propor-
tion of blood flow. Consequently, anesthetic saturation of this tissue
is very slow because all anesthetics are considerably more soluble in
fat than other tissue groups (see Table 28.2).
Other factors can influence the magnitude of the alveolar to arte-
rial anesthetic partial pressure gradient. For example, abnormalities
of ventilation/perfusion result in an alveolar–arterial gradient pro-
portional to the degree of abnormality [17,30,31]. Others include
loss of anesthetic via the skin [32–34] and into closed gas
spaces [17,21,26], and metabolism [17,21].
Overview
The rate at which the alveolar anesthetic concentration increases
relative to the inspired concentration (i.e., the rate of change in anes-
thetic level) is often summarized as a plot of the ratio of FA
:FI versus
time. The position of individual curves representing different anes-
thetics on a plot is related to the solubility characteristics of the anes-
thetics (see Fig. 28.10). The shape of the graph of FA
:FI versus time is
similar for all anesthetics (see Fig. 28.10). There is a rapid rise ini-
tially that results from the effect of alveolar ventilation bringing
anesthetic into the lung. There is then a decrease in the rate of rise of
the curve as uptake by the blood occurs. With time, the highly per-
fused tissues of the body equilibrate with incoming blood so that
eventually about three-quarters of the total blood flow returning to
the heart has the same anesthetic partial pressure as it had when it
left the lungs. Thus, further uptake from the lung is decreased and
the rate of approach of the FA to FI over time is further decreased.
Anesthetic elimination
Recovery from inhalation anesthesia results from the elimination of
anesthetic from the CNS. This requires a decrease in alveolar anes-
thetic partial pressure (concentration), which in turn fosters a
decrease in arterial and then CNS anesthetic partial pressure (see
Box. 28.3). Prominent factors accounting for recovery are the same
as those for anesthetic induction. The percent clearance of an
inhaled anesthetic can be expressed as:
% Clearance 100 V
(agent blood/gas PC CO) + V
A
A
[35]
Therefore, factors such as alveolar ventilation (VA
), CO, and especially
agent solubility greatly influence recovery from inhalation anesthesia.
Indeed, the graphic curves representing the washout of anesthetic
from alveoli versus time (Fig. 28.12) are essentially inverses of the
0.0 0 	10 	20
Minutes
18 L /min
6 L /min
2 L /min
30 	40
0.5
	FA/FI
1.0
Figure 28.11 The effect of cardiac output on the rise of the alveolar (FA
)
concentration of halothane toward the inspired (FI
) concentration. As noted,
the FA
:FI ratio increases more rapidly as cardiac output is decreased from 18 to
2 L/min. Source: Eger [17], with permission of Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.
0.01
0.1
FA/FAO
1
0 	10 	20
Minutes of elimination
30 	40
Halothane
Sevoflurane
Desflurane
Isoflurane
50 	60
Figure 28.12 The fall in alveolar (FA
) concentration relative to the alveolar
concentration at the end of anesthesia (FAO
). Note that the newest, most
insoluble, volatile anesthetic, desflurane, is eliminated in humans more
rapidly than the other contemporary potent anesthetics. Not shown is
information for methoxyflurane. If present, the curve for methoxyflurane
would appear above that for halothane. Source: Reproduced with
permission from Eger [27].

-- 516 of 1450 --

Chapter 28: Inhalation Anesthetics 	501
wash-in curves. That is, the wash-out of the less soluble anesthetics
is high at first (i.e., rapid wash-out by ventilation of the lung func-
tional residual capacity), then rapidly declines to a lower output level
that continues to decrease but at a slower rate. The wash-out of
more soluble agents is also high at first, but the magnitude of
decrease in alveolar anesthetic concentration is less and decreases
more gradually with time (see Fig. 28.12).
An important factor during the wash-out period is the duration
of anesthesia. This effect and a comparison of this effect between
three agents spanning a range of blood solubilities are summarized
in Fig. 28.13 [36]. Times to recovery from anesthesia in, for exam-
ple, rats correlate with values for blood solubility of anesthetics
(Fig. 28.14) [37]. If a patient rebreathing anesthetic circuit (e.g., cir-
cle system) is in use and the patient is not disconnected from the
circuit at the end of anesthesia, the circuit itself may also reduce the
rate of recovery, just as the circuit was shown to decrease the rate of
rise of anesthetic during induction. This influence of rebreathing
circuits can be reduced by directing high flow rates of anesthetic-
free O 2 into the anesthetic circuit (i.e., applying principles of a non-
rebreathing circuit).
Other factors that are important to varying degrees for inhalation
anesthetic elimination from the body include percutaneous loss,
intertissue diffusion of agents, and metabolism. While some trans-
cutaneous movement of inhalation agent occurs, the amount under
consideration is small [32–35,38]. Intertissue diffusion is of theo-
retical interest, but its clinical importance is limited [35,39,40]. In
this regard, the impact of obesity on recovery from anesthesia may
be important to consider clinically [35]. Metabolism may also play
a small role with some inhalation anesthetics (e.g., methoxyflurane
and perhaps even halothane), especially when associated with
prolonged anesthesia [39,41–43].
0
0
0.5
1.0
40 	120	80 	0
0
0.5
Minutes
of anesthesia:
Time in minutes
240
120
60
30
15
1.0
40
Nitrous oxide
λ = 0.47
Halothane
λ = 2.3
Methoxyflurane
λ = 13
120	80 	0
0
0.5
1.0
40 	120	80
F E
FEO
∞
Figure 28.13 The decrease in the alveolar (FE
) anesthetic concentration from the concentration at the time of breathing circuit disconnect (i.e., the
beginning of recovery from anesthesia; FEO
) is influenced by both the solubility (λ) of anesthetic and the duration of anesthesia. Source: Stoelting and
Eger [36], with permission of Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.
Minutes to
recovery
on rotarod
Duration of
anesthesia
2 hrs
40
20
0 0.4 	0.8 	1.2 	1.6
Halothane
Isoflurane
Sevoflurane
MAC
I – 653
Figure 28.14 Increasing the delivered concentration of inhalation
anesthetic increased the time to recovery of the motor coordination
necessary to remain atop a 6 cm rod rotating at 8 rpm. The duration of
anesthesia was constant for all trials. Source: Eger and Johnson [37], with
permission of Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

-- 517 of 1450 --

502 	Section 3: Pharmacology
A special consideration associated with recovery following use
of N2
O deserves comment. Diffusion hypoxia is a possibility at the
end of N2
O administration when the patient breathes air immedi-
ately rather than O2 for at least a brief transition period (i.e.,
5–10 min) [44–46]. In this case, a large volume of N2
O returns to
the lungs from the blood. This early rapid inflow of N2
O to the lung
displaces other gases within the lung. If at this time the patient is
breathing air (only about 21% O 2
) rather than 100% O 2
, N 2
O dilutes
alveolar O2 , further reducing O2 partial pressure from levels found
in ambient air. This may cause life-threatening reductions in arte-
rial oxygenation. Since the major effect is in the first few minutes
after discontinuing N2
O, the condition can be prevented by admin-
istering high-inspired fractions of O 2 at the conclusion of N 2
O
administration rather than allowing the patient to immediately
breathe ambient air.
Biotransformation
Most inhalation anesthetics are not chemically inert [47]. They
undergo varying degrees of metabolism, primarily in the liver
but also to lesser degrees in the lung, kidney, and intestinal
tract [41,48–51]. The importance of this is two-fold. First, in a
very limited way, metabolism may facilitate anesthetic recovery.
Second, and more important, is the potential for acute and chronic
toxicities by intermediate or end metabolites of inhalation
agents, especially involving the kidneys, liver, and reproductive
organs [41,51].
The magnitude of metabolism of inhalation anesthetic agents
varies greatly and is determined by a variety of factors, including
the chemical structure, hepatic enzyme activity (cytochrome
P450 enzymes located in the endoplasmic reticulum of the hepat-
ocyte), the blood concentration of the anesthetic [52], disease
states, and genetic factors (i.e., some species and individuals are
more active metabolizers of these drugs than others, e.g., humans
versus rats).
An indication of the extent of biotransformation of contempo-
rary inhalation anesthetics is given in Table 28.6. The degradation
of sevoflurane occurs in vivo to about the same extent as isoflu-
rane, perhaps a bit more depending on circumstances, and as
indicated by transient postanesthetic increases in blood and
urinary fluoride levels in rats [53–57], dogs [56], horses [58–60],
swine [61], and humans [62]. The peak serum fluoride concentra-
tions observed in humans during and following sevoflurane
anesthesia are low, and nephrotoxicity is not expected [62,63].
Desflurane resists degradation in vivo [61,64,65]. The increase in
serum inorganic fluoride is much smaller than that found with
isoflurane [61,64,65].
For further information on the biotransformation of inhalation
anesthetics in general and specific details regarding individual
anesthetic agents, readers are referred to reviews by Baden and
Rice [41], Mazze and Fujinaga [51], and Njoku et al. [66].
Anesthetic dose: the minimum alveolar
concentration (MAC)
In 1963, Merkel and Eger described what became the standard index
of anesthetic potency for inhalation anesthetics, MAC [73]. MAC is
defined as the minimum alveolar concentration of an anesthetic at
1 atmosphere that produces immobility in 50% of subjects exposed
to a supramaximal noxious stimulus. Thus, MAC corresponds to the
effective dose50 or ED50
; half of the subjects are anesthetized, and half
have not yet reached that “level.” The dose that corresponds to the
ED95 (95% of the individuals are anesthetized), at least in humans, is
20–40% greater than MAC [74]. Anesthetic potency of an inhaled
anesthetic is inversely related to MAC (i.e., potency = 1/MAC).
From information presented earlier, it also follows that MAC is
inversely related to the oil/gas PC. Thus, a very potent anesthetic
such as methoxyflurane, which has a high oil/ gas PC has a low
MAC, whereas an agent with a low oil/gas PC has a high MAC.
A number of characteristics of MAC deserve emphasis [17].
First, the “A” in MAC represents alveolar concentration, not inspired
or delivered (as, for example, from a vaporizer). This is important
because the alveolar concentration is easily monitored with
contemporary technology. Also, as we reviewed earlier, after sufficient
time for equilibration (minutes), alveolar partial pressure will closely
approximate arterial and brain (CNS) anesthetic partial pressures.
Second, MAC is defined in terms of volumes percent of 1 atmos-
phere and therefore represents an anesthetic partial pressure (P) at
the anesthetic site of action (i.e., remember Px = (C/100) Pbar
, where
P x stands for the partial pressure of the anesthetic in the gas mix-
ture, C is the anesthetic concentration in vol % and P bar is the baro-
metric or total pressure of the gas mixture). Thus, although the
concentration at MAC for a given agent may vary depending on
ambient pressure conditions (e.g., sea level versus high altitude), the
anesthetic partial pressure always remains the same. For example,
MAC for isoflurane in healthy cats is reported as 1.63 volumes %.
The study reporting this value was conducted at near sea level
conditions at Davis, California (i.e., P bar of 760 mmHg). Based on
discussion above, MAC of 1.63% represents an alveolar isoflurane
partial pressure (Piso
) of 11.6 mmHg. In comparison, for the same
dog at Mexico City (elevation 2240 m above sea level; P bar =
584 mmHg), the alveolar Piso at MAC is expected to be the same as
determined at Davis, California (i.e., 11.6 mmHg); however, MAC
(i.e., the alveolar concentration) would be about 2.17%.
Finally, it is important to note that MAC is determined in healthy
animals under laboratory conditions in the absence of other drugs and
circumstances common to clinical use that may modify the require-
ments for anesthesia. General techniques for determining MAC in
animals are given elsewhere [17,75–79]. In determining MAC in
humans, the initial surgical skin incision has been the standard nox-
ious stimulus used [17]. For the determination of MAC in smaller
animals (mice to dogs and pigs) [17,80,81], the standard stimulus has
been application of a forceps or other surgical clamp to the base of the
tail or the base of the dewclaw of the limb (e.g., pigs [78]), while elec-
trical stimulus applied beneath the oral mucus membranes is most
commonly used in larger species such as horses [76].
The MAC values for contemporary inhalation anesthetics for a vari-
ety of mammals commonly encountered in veterinary medicine are
summarized in Table 28.7A, while the ED50 values for non-mammalian
species are given in Table 28.7B. Values for humans are also given for
comparison. For values of agents of historical interest such as methoxy-
flurane, enflurane, or diethyl ether, readers are referred to the review in
an earlier edition of this book or elsewhere [17,81].
Since its original introduction, the MAC concept has been
extended to other stimulus endpoints in an effort to better define
Table 28.6 Biotransformation of inhalation anesthetics in humans.
Anesthetic 	% of Anesthetic metabolized 	Reference
Methoxyflurane 	50–75 	[43,50]
Halothane 	20–46 	[43,49,67]
Sevoflurane 	2–5 	[62,68]
Enflurane 	2–8 	[43,69]
Isoflurane 	0.2 	[70]
Desflurane 	0.02 	[65]
Nitrous oxide 	0.004 	[71,72]

-- 518 of 1450 --

Chapter 28: Inhalation Anesthetics 	503
and understand the anesthetic state. For example, Stoelting
et al. [82] determined the value for MAC of an anesthetic at which
humans opened their eyes on verbal command during emergence
from anesthesia; this has been termed “MAC-awake.” The verbal
stimulus is of course less intense than the surgical incision in
humans and thus the response occurs at a lower concentration of
anesthetic than movement following incision. The end-tidal con-
centration preventing movement in response to tracheal intubation
(MAC for intubation) is more stimulating to humans than surgical
incision and was described by Yakaitis et al. [83,84]. Roizen
et al. [85] reported an even greater alveolar concentration necessary
to prevent adrenergic response (rise in endogenous catechola-
mines) to skin incision (also in human patients) compared to the
concentration necessary to just prevent movement; this is known as
“MAC–BAR.” Similarly, Boscan et al. showed that ovarian/ovarian
ligament traction increased sevoflurane MAC compared to tail
clamp in dogs [86]. Thus, a group of response curves is possible and
dependent upon the strength of the stimulus applied.
In a single species the variability in MAC (response to a noxious
stimulus) is generally small and is not substantially influenced by
gender, duration of anesthesia, variation of PaCO2 (from 10 to
90 mmHg), metabolic alkalosis or acidosis, variation in PaO2 (from
40 to 500 mmHg), moderate anemia, or moderate hypotension (see
Table 28.7A) [17,81,87]. Even between species, the variability in
MAC for a given agent is usually not large. However, there is at least
one notable exception (see Table 28.7A). In humans, the MAC for
N2
O is 104%, making it the least potent of the inhalation anesthetics
currently used in this species. Its potency in other species is less
than half that in humans (i.e., around 200%). Because the N2 O
MAC is above 100%, it cannot be used by itself at 1 atmosphere
pressure in any species and still provide adequate amounts of O 2
.
Consequently, and assuming that MAC values for combinations of
inhaled anesthetics are additive, N2
O is usually administered with
another more potent agent to thereby reduce the concentration of
the second agent necessary for anesthesia (see Fig. 28.15). However,
because of the potency difference between animals and humans, the
amount of reduction differs in an important way. For example,
administration of 60% N 2 O with halothane reduces the amount of
halothane needed to produce MAC by about 55% in healthy
humans (see Fig. 28.15) but reduces it only by about 20–30% in
dogs. As noted in Fig. 28.15, the response of other animals most
closely resembles the dog. Some factors that are known to influence
MAC are given in Table 28.8.
Equipotent doses (i.e., equivalent concentrations of different
anesthetics at MAC) are useful for comparing effects of inhalation
anesthetics on vital organs. In this regard, anesthetic dose is com-
monly defined in terms of multiples of MAC (i.e., 1.5- or 2.0-times
MAC, or simply 1.5 MAC or 2.0 MAC). From the preceding discus-
sion, therefore, the ED 50 equals MAC or 1.0 MAC and represents a
light level of anesthesia (clearly inadequate in 50% of otherwise
unmedicated, healthy animals). The ED95 is 1.2 to 1.4 MAC, and
2.0 MAC represents a deep level of anesthesia, in some cases even
an anesthetic overdose. The authors will use the concept of MAC
multiples later to compare drug effects and contrast pharmacody-
namics of multiple doses of a specific drug.
In concluding this introduction to MAC, a few additional
comments are warranted with further details available in recent
publications and below in the section on CNS actions. Inhalation
anesthetics act in the CNS to cause immobility, analgesia, and
unconsciousness. Immobility is now known to reflect the activity
of inhalation anesthetics on the spinal cord [88–90], but equi-
MAC may not translate to equivalent potency in the brain, at
least when evaluated with regards to analgesic and hypnotic
potency [91]. Regardless, and despite the fact that “. . .MAC has
withstood the test of time. . .,” a recent editorial [92] (from which
this quote was taken) in response to a publication in the same
issue of the journal Anesthesiology [93] notes, “. . . in an era of
precision medicine, we should use more precise terminology. It is
time to call a MAC (minimum alveolar concentration) a MAC
(median alveolar concentration).”
Table 28.7A MAC values (%) for a variety of mammals at sea level or near sea level conditions.
Species 	Desflurane 	Halothane 	Isoflurane 	Sevoflurane 	Nitrous oxide
Cat 	9.79 [94]
10.27 [95]
0.99 [96,97]
1.14 [98]
1.19 [99]
1.28 [100]
1.50 [97]
1.61 [99]
1.63 [101]
1.90 [95]
2.21 [102]
2.58 [103]
3.07 [97]
3.41 [95]
255 [98]
Cow 	0.76 [104] (calf) 	1.14 [105] 	223 [104] (calf)
Dog 	7.2 [106]
7.68–8.19 [107]
10.3 [108]
0.86 [109]
0.87 [98,110,111]
0.89 [112,113]
0.92 [114]
0.93 [115]
1.28 [101]
1.30 [116]
1.31 [117]
1.39 [101]
1.39–1.50 [118]
2.10 [119]
2.36 [113]
188 [110]
222 [98]
Ferret 	1.01 [120] 	1.52 [120]
1.74 [121]
267 [120]
Goat 	1.29 [122]
1.3 [123]
1.2 [89]
1.23 [124]
1.29 [122]
1.31 [125]
1.43 [126]
1.5 [123]
2.33 [122]
Horse 	7.02 [127]
8.06 [128]
0.88 [76]
0.95 [129]
1.02 [130]
1.05 [131]
1.31 [76]
1.43 [132]
1.44 [133]
1.64 [134]
2.31 [135]
2.84 [60]
205 [136]
Monkey 	0.89 [98]
1.15 [137]
1.28 [137]
1.46 [116]
200 [98]
(Continued)

-- 519 of 1450 --

504 	Section 3: Pharmacology
Pharmacodynamics: actions
and toxicity of the volatile inhalation
anesthetics on body systems
All contemporary inhalation anesthetic agents in one way or
another influence vital organ function. Some actions are inevitable
and accompany the use of all agents, whereas other actions are a
special or prominent feature of one or a number of the agents. In
addition, dose–response relationships of inhalation anesthetics are
not necessarily parallel. Differences in action, and especially unde-
sirable action, of specific anesthetic agents, form the basis for
selecting one agent over another for a particular patient and/or pro-
cedure. Undesirable actions also provide primary impetus for
development of new agents and/or anesthetic techniques.
Data from healthy animals exposed to equipotent alveolar con-
centrations of these drugs under controlled circumstances pro-
vide foundational information for this review. In other cases,
results of studies of human volunteers form the basis of our
understanding of some drug actions because actions in animals of
common clinical focus in veterinary medicine have not been
described. Because animals are commonly allowed to breathe
Table 28.7B ED50 values for a variety of non- mammals at sea level or near sea level conditions.
Desflurane 	Halothane 	Isoflurane 	Sevoflurane 	Nitrous oxide
Birds:
Chicken 	0.85 [77] 	1.15 [192]
Cockatoo 	1.44 [193]
Crane 	1.34 [194]
Duck 	1.04 [195] 	1.30 [195]
Guinea fowl 	1.45 [196] 	2.9 [197] 	220 [196]
Hawk 	2.05 [198]
Parrot, Amazon 	1.47 [193]
Parrot, African Gray 	1.91 [193]
Parrot, thick-billed 	1.07 [199]
Pigeon 	1.51 [196]
1.45 [200]
154 [196]
Other:
Goldfish 	0.76 [201]
Toad 	0.67 [202] 	82.2 [202]
Species 	Desflurane 	Halothane 	Isoflurane 	Sevoflurane 	Nitrous oxide
Mouse 	6.6–9.1a [138] 	0.95 [139]
1.00 [140]
1.19–1.37a [138]
1.31–1.77a [138]
1.35 [139]
1.41 [140]
2.7 [141] 	150 [142]
275 [140]
Pig 	10.00 [78] 	0.90 [143]
0.91 [144]
1.25 [145]
1.45 [146]
1.48 [143]
1.51 [116]
1.55 [147]
1.75 [148]
2.04 [78]
1.97 [149]
2.12 [143]
2.53 [150]
2.66 [151]
162 [147]
195 [148]
277 [145]
Rabbit 	8.90 [106] 	0.80 [152]
0.82 [153]
1.05 [154]
1.39 [155]
1.42 [156]
1.44 [157]
1.56 [158]
2.05 [155]
2.07 [156]
2.12 [157]
3.70 [159]
Rat 	5.72 [160]
6.48 [161]
6.85 [162]
7.10 [163]
0.81 [164]
0.95 [165]
1.02 [166]
1.03 [139]
1.10 [167]
1.11 [168]
1.13 [169,170]
1.17 [171]
1.23 [162]
1.17 [164]
1.28 [172]
1.30 [173]
1.38 [168]
1.46 [139]
1.46 [162]
1.58 [121,165]
2.99 [166]
2.40 [167]
2.50 [53]
136 [174]
155 [175]
204 [176]
221 [177]
235 [177]
Sheep 	0.97 [178] 	1.58 [178]
Human (30–60 years) 	6.00 [179] 	0.73 [180]
0.74 [181,182]
0.77 [183]
1.15 [184] 	1.58 [185]
1.71 [186]
1.83 [187]
1.84 [188]
1.85 [189]
1.9 [190]
2.05 [159]
104 [191]
a Absolute value related to strain.
Note, some variability within and across species is likely associated with the technique of measurement of alveolar anesthetic concentration [79].
Table 28.7A (Continued)

-- 520 of 1450 --

Chapter 28: Inhalation Anesthetics 	505
spontaneously during clinical management of general anesthesia
(versus controlled mechanical ventilation), investigational results
obtained from spontaneously breathing test animals are often
considered baseline by veterinarians. However, in the broader
anesthesiology and pharmacology literature, results of studies
from human volunteers or animals administered precise amounts
of inhalation anesthetics during controlled ventilation (and nor-
mocapnia) most commonly form the basis of comparison of
pharmacodynamic differences. It is important to stress that many
variables other than mode of ventilation commonly accompany
anesthetic management of animals in both clinical and laboratory
settings. These variables influence drug pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics and may cause individuals to respond differ-
ently from test subjects that were studied under standardized con-
ditions. Such confounding variables include species, duration of
anesthesia, noxious (painful) stimulation, co-existing disease,
concurrent medications, variation in body temperature, and
extremes of age, as examples.
Central nervous system
Inhalation anesthetics affect the CNS in many ways. Mostly these
agents are selected because they induce a reversible, dose-related
state of CNS (somatic, motor), but also hemodynamic and endo-
crine unresponsiveness to noxious stimulation, that is, a state of
general anesthesia. Interestingly, although clinical anesthesia was
introduced more than 150 years ago, the mechanisms and sites by
which general anesthetics (including inhalation anesthetics) cause
unresponsiveness to surgical or other forms of noxious stimulation
remain unknown [221]. Inhalation anesthetics influence electrical
activity of the brain, cerebral metabolism, cerebral perfusion,
intracranial pressure, and analgesia – issues of critical importance
to the anesthetic management of animals. Our systematic review
will start with a focus on mechanisms of action of inhalation anes-
thetics within the CNS.
Mechanism of action
Molecular mechanisms of action
Background Ever since the first public demonstration of diethyl
ether in 1846, the molecular determinants of inhaled anesthetic
action have remained elusive [221]. As a class, inhaled anesthetics
Cat
1.2
0.9
Halothane (%)
0.6
0.3
0
0 	25 	50
N 2O (%)
75 	100
Horse
Dog
Monkey
Calf
Man
Figure 28.15 When N2
O is combined with halothane the alveolar
concentration of halothane at MAC is decreased. However, the halothane
sparing imposed by N 2
O is less in animals compared to humans.
Source: Reproduced with permission from Steffey and Eger [203].
Table 28.8 Some factors that influence the value of MAC (anesthetic requirement).
No change 	Increase 	Decrease
Arterial blood pressure > 50 mmHg [204]
Atropine, glycopyrrolate, scopolamine [96]
Duration of anesthesia
Gender
Hyperkalemia, hypokalemia
Metabolic acid-base change
PaO2 > 40 mmHg
PaCO2 15–95 mmHg
Drugs causing CNS stimulation:
Amphetamine
Ephedrine
Morphine (horse) [131]
Laudanosine [158]
Physostigmine [205]
Hyperthermia (to 42 °C)
Drugs causing CNS depressiona:
Other inhaled anesthetic; N2
O [26]
Injectable anesthetics:
Ketamine [206]
Lidocaine [102,115]
Thiopental [207]
Preanesthetic medications:
Acepromazine [208–210]
Diazepam [211–213]
Detomidine [133]
Fentanyl [214]
Medetomidine [215,216]
Meperidine [217]
Midazolam [218]
Morphine [219]
Xylazine [134]
Other:
Adenosine
Central anticholinergic [205]
5-HT antagonist [220]
Arterial blood pressure < 50 mmHg
Hyponatremia
Hypothermia
Increasing adult age
PaO 2 < 40 mmHg
PaCO2 > 95 mmHg
Pregnancy
a The list of example drugs is intended to be representative, not exhaustive. The list is summarized from previous reviews [17,75,81]
except where indicated by reference numbers.

-- 521 of 1450 --

506 	Section 3: Pharmacology
exhibit unusual actions that set them apart from most other phar-
macologic agents. Most drugs rely on a unique molecular size,
shape, volume, charge, polarity, functional group, or other struc-
tural motif in order to bind with a specific target molecule and
induce a functional change, as set forth by Fisher’s Schloss und
Schlüssel (lock and key) description of specific enzyme–substrate
or protein–drug interactions [222]. Yet inhaled anesthetics share no
chemical or structural commonalities; they range in composition
from single atoms (xenon) and diatomic elements (nitrogen) to
inorganic molecules (N 2
O) and hydrocarbons of varying lengths
containing any number of halogens and organic functional groups,
including alkanes (chloroform, halothane), alkenes (trichloroethyl-
ene), alcohols (ethanol), ethers (isoflurane, sevoflurane, and desflu-
rane), and combinations thereof (ethyl vinyl ether, fluroxene). Even
endogenous by-products of metabolism such as CO 2 [223], ammo-
nia [224], and ketones [225] exert anesthetic effects. Such chemical
diversity among drug “keys” is incongruent with classical notions of
drug–ligand interactions.
Inhaled anesthetic efficacy is not limited to humans and domes-
tic mammals. These drugs can reversibly immobilize all vertebrate
and invertebrate animals in which they have been studied, includ-
ing worms, fish, amphibians, reptiles, and birds. In fact, efficacy is
not limited to the animal kingdom, as inhaled anesthetics can even
prevent movement in protozoa [226] and plants (those with touch-
sensitive contractile leaves) [227]. It is unknown why these pharma-
cologic effects should be conserved across such diverse phyla,
especially since most anesthetics are not found in nature and there
is no obvious selective pressure underlying anesthetic sensitivity. It
suggests, perhaps, that the molecular mechanism underlying
inhaled anesthetic action involves interactions with cellular compo-
nents that are essential to all life. Indeed, given that we are sur-
rounded by potential anesthetics – from the nitrogen [228] in the
air we breathe to the volatile essential oils [229] in the food we eat –
there may have been evolutionary pressure to minimize sensitivity
of target sites at the concentrations these “natural anesthetics” are
present within the environment.
Molecular sites: lipid and aqueous theories Meyer [230] and
Overton [231] noted that narcotic potency correlated with anesthetic
solubility in oil from which they concluded that the cell lipid mem-
brane served as the site of anesthetic action. However, non-specific
lipid theories do not adequately explain effect differences between
anesthetic stereoisomers [232] or the existence of the anesthetic cut-
off effect and non-immobilizers, compounds that lack an immobiliz-
ing effect at concentrations predicted by the Meyer–Overton
hypothesis to produce general anesthesia [233]. More recently,
Cantor [234,235] hypothesized that anesthetics may alter molecular
composition and forces within a bilayer plane and cause a change in
the lateral pressure profile exerted upon proteins within the lipid
membrane, a theory that was supported by several computer simula-
tion models [236–239]. However, using an experimental assay to
detect changes in lipid bilayer properties, neither isoflurane, halo-
thane, nor cyclopropane was found to produce detectable membrane
effects at clinically relevant concentrations [240].
Miller [241] and Pauling [242] each proposed an aqueous site of
action whereby the ordering of water into gas hydrates or clathrates
alters electrical conductance across the cell membrane to produce
unconsciousness. However, anesthetic MAC correlates better with
lipid solubility than with hydrate dissociation pressure [243,244]. In
addition, enthalpy for anesthetic hydrate formation is much greater
than calculated for in vivo hypothermia MAC studies [109], and the
extreme transience of anesthetic clathrate formation with reduced
water concentration at anesthetic binding sites [245] makes a bulk
aqueous phase site of action unlikely.
Molecular sites: protein Inhaled anesthetics bind proteins and can
modulate their function even in the absence of a lipid environ-
ment [246]. Presynaptically, volatile anesthetics inhibit calcium chan-
nel function in the terminal bouton of the neuron and bind soluble
N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive attachment proteins (SNAP) and SNAP
receptor (SNARE) and associated proteins to decrease neurotrans-
mitter release [247–255]. The magnitude of these effects is much
greater at excitatory glutamatergic synapses than at inhibitory GABA-
ergic synapses, resulting in reduced excitatory neurotransmission
relative to inhibitory neurotransmission [256,257]. Inhaled anesthet-
ics also act postsynaptically to potentiate inhibitory cell targets such
as γ-aminobutyric acid type A (GABAA
) receptors, glycine receptors,
and two-pore domain potassium channels; these same agents
inhibit excitatory cell targets such as N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA)
receptors, α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole-propionic acid
(AMPA) receptors, neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, and
voltage-gated sodium channels [221,232,258–264].
Inability to identify a single target critical to anesthetic action
may in fact suggest that immobility is the product of multiple cell
receptor and ion channel target modulations [265] acting in a com-
bination of in-parallel and in-series cell pathways and neuronal cir-
cuits to decrease cell excitability [266]. Such a model, in which the
anesthetic MAC greatly exceeds the dissociation constant between
the anesthetic and its relevant protein targets, also predicts steep
dose responses (large Hill coefficients) and additive combinatorial
effects that are hallmarks of most inhaled anesthetic actions both
in vivo [267] and in vitro [268]. Multiple relevant sites of action
would also explain why loss of anesthetic efficacy at one cellular
target consequently produces greater anesthetic modulation of
other putative cellular targets at MAC [269,270].
How can a single inhaled anesthetic modulate so many different
protein targets? At MAC, aqueous phase drug concentrations are
around 300 μM or more, depending on the agent, which implies
low-affinity drug binding of protein targets [271,272]. Indeed, any
hydrocarbon – not just conventional inhaled anesthetics – appears
able to modulate anesthetic-sensitive ion channels and receptors
when present at sufficiently high concentrations, limited only by
the molar water solubility of the drug itself. However, according to
the Molar Water Solubility Hypothesis, if a hydrocarbon’s saturated
aqueous phase concentration is less than a critical cut-off value spe-
cific for a given receptor, then the drug fails to modulate that recep-
tor’s function [273–275]. This suggests that anesthetic binding may
occur at allosterically active amphipathic pockets in the protein that
are normally occupied by water with a high dissociation constant
(kd
). When an anesthetic agent is present at sufficiently high con-
centrations relative to the water kd
, the drug displaces the water
molecule from this site and induces a change in protein structure
and function. Although this implies that access to this amphipathic
site is not dependent on drug structure, the type and strength of the
subsequent protein–drug molecular interaction – and hence the
direction (positive or negative) and magnitude (efficacy) of recep-
tor modulation – certainly would be.
Anatomic sites of action
Inhaled anesthetics cause immobility, amnesia, and unconscious-
ness, but these distinct endpoints are achieved via actions at differ-
ent CNS sites [88–90]. In an experimental goat model in which the

-- 522 of 1450 --

Chapter 28: Inhalation Anesthetics 	507
cerebral circulation was isolated from the rest of the body, selective
brain isoflurane administration more than doubled the anesthetic
requirement for immobility compared to whole-body isoflurane
administration. This demonstrated that the spinal cord, and not the
brain, is principally responsible for preventing movement during
surgery with inhaled anesthetics [89]. Within the spinal cord,
immobility is most likely produced by depression of locomotor
neuronal networks located in the ventral horn [276].
In contrast, amnestic effects of inhaled anesthetics are produced by
actions within the brain, most probably within the amygdala and hip-
pocampus [277]. Lesions created within the amygdala of rats can
block amnestic actions of sevoflurane [278]. Patch clamp recordings
in vitro of murine amygdala slice preparations also show decreased
synaptic transmission at 1 MAC of isoflurane due to inhibition of glu-
tamatergic currents and potentiation of GABAA receptor cur-
rents [279]. Moreover, infusion of a selective 5-HT7 receptor agonist
bilaterally into the basolateral amygdala in rats can actually reverse
memory impairment caused by sevoflurane [280]. On electroen-
cephalography, hippocampal-dependent θ-rhythm frequency slows
in proportion to the amnestic effects observed with subanesthetic
concentrations of isoflurane in rats [281]. Furthermore, mutant mice
lacking the gene encoding either the α4 or β3 subunits of GABAA
receptors are resistant to isoflurane depression of hippocampus-
dependent learning and memory [282,283], and antagonism of
α5 subunit-containing GABA A receptors restores hippocampal-
dependent memory during sevoflurane administration [284].
Consciousness in humans is commonly assessed by testing for
voluntary responses to verbal commands. In animals, behavioral
tests of consciousness include presence of a righting reflex, move-
ment in response to non-noxious stimuli, and spontaneous interac-
tion with the environment. Cholinergic stimulation of the prefrontal
cortex, but not the parietal cortex, causes wakefulness and sponta-
neous 	movement 	in 	rats 	breathing 	1.9–2.4% 	sevoflurane.
Stimulation of the central medial thalamus via infusions of antibod-
ies against the voltage-gated K + channel Kv
1.2 restores ambulation
and exploring behavior in rats breathing 0.5 MAC sevoflurane or
desflurane [285]. Activation of dopaminergic neurons within the
ventral tegmental area of the midbrain in rats or mice using electri-
cal or optogenetic stimulation restores the righting reflex during
isoflurane or sevoflurane anesthesia [286,287]. Finally, electrical or
glutamatergic stimulation of neurons in the parabrachial nucleus of
the pons can also cause return of righting in mice anesthetized with
isoflurane or sevoflurane [288,289]. Collectively, these findings
suggest that volatile anesthetics produce unconsciousness through
actions at multiple discrete sites within the pons, midbrain, thala-
mus, and possibly cerebral cortex.
At concentrations above MAC, it is presumed that inhaled anes-
thetics sufficiently depress cortical function to prevent animals
from experiencing motivational-affective dimensions of pain [290].
Additionally, concentrations of modern volatile agents (halothane,
enflurane, isoflurane, sevoflurane, and desflurane) between 0.8 and
1.0 MAC decrease, but do not ablate, wind-up, and central sensiti-
zation and so may help prevent heightened postoperative pain sen-
sitivity; however, higher concentrations of contemporary drugs
offer no further benefit in this regard [291,292]. Volatile anesthetic
concentrations between 0.4 and 0.8 MAC decrease withdrawal
responses to noxious stimuli, but lower concentrations can actually
cause hyperalgesia with a peak effect at 0.1 MAC [293,294] due to
potent nicotinic cholinergic receptor inhibition [295]. In contrast,
the gaseous anesthetics xenon and N 2
O produce analgesia via gluta-
matergic receptor inhibition [296] and, in the case of N2 O, through
additional modulation of noradrenergic-opioid receptor path-
ways [297]. Anatomically, analgesic actions occur both supraspi-
nally and within the dorsal horn of the spinal cord and are likely
responsible for greater blunting of autonomic responses associated
with these gases compared to the modern volatile agents [298].
Electroencephalographic effects
The electroencephalogram (EEG) is used to help identify patho-
logic brain disorders and predict outcome of brain insults. Studies
have shown that general anesthesia alters EEG parameters; how-
ever, all anesthetics do not produce exactly the same changes in
EEG pattern as dose (anesthetic depth) increases; therefore, the
generic correlation of the raw EEG with anesthetic dose is not pre-
cise. Indeed, despite some weak correlations and its usefulness as
an indication of changing anesthetic depth, no parameter has had
sensitivity and specificity sufficient to justify use of the EEG alone
as a reliable index of anesthetic depth [299]. With technological
advances in recent years, research has focused on use of processed
EEG parameters (e.g., the bispectral index) as improved descrip-
tions of anesthetic states. Additional information on this topic is
available in Chapter 10.
In general, as the depth of anesthesia increases from awake states,
the electric activity of the cerebral cortex becomes desynchronized.
Using isoflurane as an example of the general EEG response to vola-
tile anesthetics [1], there is initially an increased frequency of the
EEG activity (alveolar concentrations less than 0.4 MAC). With fur-
ther increases in anesthetic concentration, a decrease in frequency
and increased amplitude of the EEG waves occur. The wave ampli-
tude increases to a peak (about 1.0 MAC) and then, with further
dose increase, it progressively declines (burst suppression occurs at
about 1.5 MAC, that is, bursts of slow high-voltage activity sepa-
rated by electrical silence) and eventually becomes flat line. With
isoflurane, an isoelectric pattern occurs at about 2.0 MAC, while at
the other extreme, it is not seen with halothane until > 3.5 MAC.
Electrical silence does not occur with enflurane. The two newest
volatile anesthetics, sevoflurane and desflurane, cause dose-related
changes similar to those of isoflurane [300–302]. Systematic studies
of EEG activity in humans [303] and dogs [304] showed that enflu-
rane was associated with spontaneous or noise-initiated intensified
seizures. In addition, enflurane induces seizure activity that is asso-
ciated with substantial increases in cerebral blood flow and cerebral
metabolic use of O2
. The EEG responses of desflurane, sevoflurane,
and isoflurane are similar [300–302] and all three can suppress
drug- induced convulsive behavior [305–309]. However, there are
reports of seizure activity in animals [119,310] and human
patients [311,312] during sevoflurane anesthesia.
Cerebral metabolism
All volatile anesthetics decrease cerebral metabolic rate (cerebral
oxygen consumption [CMRO2
]). The magnitude of decrease is
least with halothane but similar with isoflurane, sevoflurane, and
desflurane [119,300,305,313,314].
Cerebral blood flow and cerebral perfusion pressure
Anesthetic goals for patients having, or at risk for, intracranial
hypertension should include reduction of intracranial pressure
(ICP), maintenance of cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP), and
matching cerebral blood flow (CBF) to a reduced CMRO 2
.
According to the Monro–Kellie doctrine [315,316], three
volumes are contained within the calvarium: brain parenchyma,

-- 523 of 1450 --

508 	Section 3: Pharmacology
cerebrospinal fluid, and blood; an increase in volume of one com-
ponent will increase ICP unless compensated by a decrease in one
or both of the other intracranial component volumes. Most inhaled
agents cause cerebral vasodilation, thereby increasing brain blood
volume and ICP. This effect is greatest with halothane, less with
enflurane, isoflurane, and desflurane, and least with sevoflu-
rane [317,318]. The gas anesthetics currently in use have divergent
effects; N 2
O causes more cerebral vasodilation than equipotent
doses of volatile anesthetics [319], whereas xenon has little effect on
ICP and cerebral vascular tone [320].
CPP is defined as the difference between mean arterial blood
pressure (MAP) and ICP; it represents the driving pressure for
blood flow to the brain. The potent volatile agents depress cardio-
vascular function and decrease MAP, and thus decrease CPP [321].
Nonetheless, CBF typically increases due to dose-dependent cere-
bral vasodilation that reduces vascular resistance [322], despite
dose-dependent reductions in EEG activity and CMRO2
. Through
possible actions on nitric oxide synthase [323–326], cyclo-
oxygenase, [323], adenylate cyclase [327], and ATP-sensitive K +
channels [328], vasodilation caused by potent volatile anesthetics
leads to a loss of cerebrovascular autoregulation, reflected by an
uncoupling of cerebral perfusion from cerebral oxygen demand.
Increased CBF from N2
O is accompanied by an actual increase in
metabolic rate of the cerebral cortex if administered alone [329],
but not when co-administered with a potent volatile agent such as
isoflurane [330,331]. Xenon minimally affects CMRO2 [332] and
preserves normal cerebrovascular autoregulation [333].
In addition to specific agent effects, anesthetic modulation of
cerebral hemodynamics depends upon agent dose, anesthetic time,
animal species studied, and hyper- or hypoventilation. At 0.5 MAC,
cerebrovascular autoregulation during anesthesia with potent
inhaled agents is slowed or obtunded; however, at concentrations
greater than MAC, cerebrovascular autoregulation is significantly
and progressively diminished as CBF becomes simply a function of
CPP [334,335]. Blood flow also increases throughout most of the
brain as a function of anesthetic duration, presumably due to time-
dependent increases in nitric oxide synthase inhibition [336].
Carbon dioxide tension further affects autoregulation. Although
halothane tends to increase CBF regardless of ventilation sta-
tus [337], cerebrovascular autoregulation may be better preserved
at a given MAC-multiple of a haloether anesthetic when hyperven-
tilation is maintained concurrently [338]. The converse also appears
true: autoregulation is lost and CBF is increased at lower inhaled
anesthetic doses when animals are allowed to hypoventilate [339],
although this interaction between CO2 and agent is greater with iso-
flurane than for sevoflurane [340].
Intracranial pressure
Although most anesthetic effects on cerebral hemodynamics are
similar among humans and small animal research models, the same
does not hold true for horses, and perhaps other very large animal
species. Intracranial pressure (ICP) in awake horses remains con-
stant irrespective of head position [341], but cerebral vasodilation
during inhalant anesthesia causes large increases in ICP – some-
times similar in magnitude to values seen with severe head trauma
in human patients – that is exacerbated by dorsal recumbency,
head-down positioning, hypercapnia during spontaneous ventila-
tion, and anesthetic time during controlled ventilation [342–345].
Surprisingly, over a wide range of perfusion pressures, isoflurane-
anesthetized horses maintain regional CBF relatively constant,
albeit at a low flow that may still place animals at risk for tissue
hypoxia [346]. Blood flow to the thoracolumbar spinal cord is
particularly low, and further reduction may predispose to postanes-
thetic myelomalacia in horses [347].
Respiratory system
Inhalation anesthetics depress respiratory system function. The
volatile agents in particular decrease ventilation in a drug- and
species-specific manner. Depending on conditions, including spe-
cies of interest, some of the most commonly considered measures
of breathing effectiveness, that is, breathing rate and depth (tidal
volume), may not be revealing or may even be misleading. In gen-
eral, spontaneous ventilation progressively decreases as inhalation
anesthetic dose is increased because at low doses tidal volume
decreases more than frequency increases. As anesthetic dose is
further increased, respiratory frequency also decreases. In other-
wise unmedicated animals (including humans) anesthetized
with volatile agents, respiratory arrest occurs at 1.5–3.0 MAC
(Table 28.9). The overall decrease in minute ventilation and the
likely variable increase in deadspace ventilation (resulting in an
increase in the deadspace to tidal volume ratio, V D /V T
, from a nor-
mal of about 0.3 to 0.5 or more) result in a reduction in alveolar
ventilation. Decreases in alveolar ventilation are out of proportion
to decreases in CO 2 production (O 2 utilization is decreased by
general anesthesia), such that PaCO 2 increases (Fig. 28.16). In
addition, the normal stimulation of ventilation caused by
increased PaCO 2 (or decreased PaO 2 ) is depressed by the inhala-
tion anesthetics, presumably via the action of these agents directly
on the medullary and peripheral (aortic and carotid body)
chemoreceptors [348–351].
Bronchospasm is associated with some conditions that contrib-
ute to increased airway resistance. A variety of early studies indi-
cated that among anesthetics available at the time, halothane was
the most effective bronchodilator [352,353]. That effect is believed
to result, at least partially, from decreased cholinergic neurotrans-
mission [354,355]. Therefore, it was often recommended for
patients at risk of bronchospasm. The work of Hirschman et al. sug-
gests that isoflurane and perhaps enflurane were as effective in
decreasing experimentally produced airway resistance and there-
fore were good alternatives to halothane [356,357]. Recent work
with isoflurane, sevoflurane, and desflurane indicates that relaxa-
tion of constricted bronchial muscles by these agents at least equals
or exceeds that caused by halothane [355,358,359].
Avoiding airway irritation during administration of inhalation
anesthetics is important, especially during induction of anesthesia
because it may cause breath holding, coughing, and laryngospasm
(particularly in some species such as primates, both human and
nonhuman) that in turn result in arterial oxyhemoglobin desatura-
tion. At least in humans, none of the potent inhalation anesthetics
seem to have irritant properties at subanesthetic concentrations.
However, patient objection and airway irritation are evident with
desflurane (and to a lesser degree with isoflurane [360]) at concen-
trations of 7% or greater [361,362] and as a result, desflurane is not
commonly used for anesthetic induction of human patients.
Arterial carbon dioxide tension
The PaCO2 is the most frequently used measure of respiratory system
response to general anesthetics. All contemporary inhalation anes-
thetics depress alveolar ventilation and increase PaCO2 in dose-related
fashion. Fig. 28.16 summarizes the effects of inhalation anesthetics in
humans, the species for which data are most complete [349,363–367].

-- 524 of 1450 --

Chapter 28: Inhalation Anesthetics 	509
Because appropriate data in the species of interest to veterinary anes-
thetists are incomplete, rank order of the magnitude of hypoventila-
tion caused by the four contemporary volatile anesthetics at a common
alveolar dose cannot be expressed with authority. Indeed, species vari-
ability is an important confounder (see below).
Factors influencing respiratory effects
Mode of ventilation
Ventilation is often assisted or controlled during inhalation anes-
thesia to compensate for the anesthetic-induced respiratory depres-
sion. Controlled mechanical ventilation is used to predictably
maintain a normal or some other specific PaCO2 , during anesthe-
sia. Assisted ventilation (i.e., the anesthetist augments tidal volume,
but the animal determines its own breathing frequency) is used to
attempt to improve the efficiency of oxygenating arterial blood and
reduce the work of breathing but is usually not effective in substan-
tially lowering PaCO2 compared to circumstances associated with
spontaneous ventilation (i.e., the animal controls both the rate and
depth of breathing) [370,371].
Duration of anesthesia
Respiratory function, including PaCO2
, is little changed for as long
as up to 10 h of constant, low-dose halothane (or methoxyflurane)
dogs [372,373]. This is also supported by studies of humans [374]
anesthetized with constant low-dose halothane. However, in horses
anesthetized for 5 h with a constant dose of 1.2 MAC isoflurane, a
substantial temporal increase in PaCO2 was noted [375]. A similar
but more modest trend was noted in horses when halothane was
used for anesthesia [376,377]. At least in some species, if the alveo-
lar dose of halothane is increased above about 1–1.3 MAC and
maintained constant at a heightened level, the magnitude of change
in hypoventilation also worsens with time [373]. Conversely, there
is evidence for recovery from the ventilatory depressant effects of
volatile anesthetics in humans [367].
Surgery and other noxious stimulation
Noxious stimulation may result in sufficient central nervous
stimulation to lessen the ventilatory depression of inhalation
anesthetics [378–381]. This effect is diminished with increasing
anesthetic depth.
Concurrent drugs
In humans, the substitution of N2
O for an equivalent amount of a
concurrently administered volatile agent such as isoflurane results in
a lower PaCO2 than that seen with the volatile agent alone [26].
However, in dogs and monkeys anesthetized with halothane, venti-
lation was at least as, and sometimes more, depressed when N2
O was
substituted for a portion of the halothane [382,383]. The addition of
opioid drugs such as morphine may increase the respiratory depres-
sion produced by an inhalation anesthetic [116,131,132,380].
Cardiovascular system
All volatile inhalation anesthetics cause dose-dependent and drug-
specific changes in cardiovascular performance. The magnitude and
sometimes direction of change may be influenced by other variables
that often accompany general anesthesia (Box 28.4). The mecha-
nisms of cardiovascular effects are diverse but often include direct
myocardial depression and a decrease in sympathoadrenal activity.
Cardiac output
All of the volatile anesthetics can decrease cardiac output (CO). The
magnitude of change is dose-related and dependent upon agent. In
general, among the contemporary agents in use with animals, halo-
thane is most depressing to CO [1,384–386]. Desflurane in many
ways is similar in cardiovascular action to isoflurane while sevoflu-
rane has characteristics resembling both halothane and isoflurane.
All of the newer volatile anesthetics tend to preserve CO at clinically
useful concentrations, facilitated by reductions in systemic vascular
resistance [128,361,387–394]. However, the direct effect of volatile
agents on CO (if vascular resistance is maintained) is often a
Enflurane
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
1 	2
MAC
3	0
Desflurane
Isoflurane
Halothane
Methoxyflurane
Sevoflurane
PaCO
2 (mmHg)
Figure 28.16 Respiratory response to an increase in the alveolar
concentration (expressed as a multiple of MAC) of inhalation anesthetics
in humans. Source: Data are taken from multiple sources Fourcade
et al. [349]; Lockhart et al. [363]; Munson et al. [364]; Larson et al. [365];
Doi and Ikeda [366]; Calverley et al. [367].
Table 28.9 Apneic Index (AI) in various species.
Species 	Desflurane 	Halothane 	Isoflurane
MAC 	AI 	MAC 	AI 	MAC 	AI
Cat 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA 	1.63 	2.4 [101]
Dog 	7.2 	2.4 [361] 	0.87 	2.9 [111] 	1.28 	2.5 [101]
Horse 	NA 	NA 	0.88 	2.6 [76] 	1.31 	2.3 [76]
Pig 	9.8 	1.6 [361,368] 	NA 	NA 	NA 	NA
Rat 	NA 	NA 	1.11 	2.3 [369] 	1.38 	3.1 [176]
Human 	7.25 	1.8 [363] 	0.77 	2.3 [363] 	1.15 	1.7 [363]
Minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) is given in vol % and the AI is a ratio of the
end-tidal anesthetic concentration at apnea and MAC. Similar data are not currently
available for sevoflurane. NA, not available.
Box 28.4 Factors that influence cardiovascular effects of inhalation
anesthetics.
Anesthetic dose
Duration of anesthesia
Concurrent drug therapy
Intravenous fluid therapy
Magnitude of PaCO2
Mechanical ventilation
Noxious stimulation

-- 525 of 1450 --

510 	Section 3: Pharmacology
decrease in stroke volume as a result of dose-related depression in
myocardial contractility [1,128,361,391,395–397].
The effect of inhalation anesthetics on heart rate (HR) is variable
and depends on agent and species. For example, in humans, HR is
not substantially altered with halothane anesthesia but is usually
increased by isoflurane, desflurane, and sevoflurane [393,398,399].
Compared to conditions in awake, calm dogs, HR is increased with
all four of the anesthetics listed [390,394]. There is evidence to sug-
gest that differences between agents in the degree of increase in HR
in dogs are explained by differences in their vagolytic activity [392].
In the dog, the HR usually remains constant over a range of clinically
useful alveolar concentrations in the absence of other modifying
factors (e.g., noxious stimulation) [384,385,390,394,400,401].
Cardiac rhythm and catecholamines
Inhalation anesthetics may increase the automaticity of the myocar-
dium and the likelihood of propagated impulses from ectopic sites,
especially from within the ventricle [402]. While spontaneous dys-
rhythmias were most notable with earlier inhalation anesthetics
(e.g., halothane), it appears that none of the three most recently
introduced ether-derivative agents predispose the heart to extrasys-
toles. However, adrenergic agonist-associated dysrhythmias may
be exaggerated by the presence of inhalant anesthetics [403]. The
association of cardiac dysrhythmias with adrenergic drugs and
anesthetic agents has received extensive study.
Halothane markedly reduces the amount of epinephrine neces-
sary to cause ventricular premature contractions [404]. There is
some evidence that deeper levels of halothane decrease this inci-
dence [405–407], but this is not a consistent finding [408]. Enflurane
and methoxyflurane are less likely to sensitize the heart to
arrhythmogenic effects of epinephrine, and isoflurane, desflurane,
and sevoflurane are least arrhythmogenic [1,407,409–414]. The
potential for dysrhythmias follows administration of most
catecholamine-type drugs, although the magnitude of such poten-
tial varies with the drug co-administered [414–419] and other asso-
ciated conditions [420].
Regional blood flow
A fundamental principle of circulatory function is that blood flow
is sufficient to deliver adequate amounts of O2 and nutrients to tis-
sues and to remove metabolic waste. However, tissues have very dif-
ferent requirements for blood flow per unit volume of tissue and
these tissue-specific blood flow requirements change with condi-
tions (e.g., basal versus exercise or “flight or fight”). In general,
blood flow to each tissue is usually maintained at a level only slightly
more than that required for metabolic activity by the tissue.
Unfortunately, inhalation anesthetics not only reduce total blood
flow (i.e., CO) but also impact the distribution of blood flow to tis-
sues. In most patients, the changes are qualitatively similar for all
the contemporary agents, but in others, agents have clear differ-
ences. Dose of anesthetic and species differences add further impact
to their ultimate effect. Detailed information on the many permuta-
tions of anesthetic effects on regional blood flow is not available for
all species and is beyond the scope of this chapter. However, refer-
ences are included here as an introduction to this much broader
topic [388,421–424].
Arterial blood pressure
Volatile anesthetics cause a dose-dependent decrease in arterial
blood pressure (Fig. 28.17) [60,101,112,128,384,388,394,424–427].
In general, the dose-related decrease in arterial blood pressure is
similar regardless of the species studied [76,112,384,386,389,
425–428]. The dose-related decrease in blood pressure with all four
of the contemporary agents is usually related to a decrease in stroke
volume but in some cases (agent and/or species), a decrease in
peripheral vascular resistance may play an important role. This
common scenario in animals differs from results generally
reported from studies with humans anesthetized with isoflurane,
sevoflurane, and desflurane, where pressure decreases primarily
from a decrease in systemic vascular resistance [22,429]. Indices
of anesthetic influence on cardiovascular collapse are given in
Table 28.10 [176,369,384].
Factors influencing circulatory effects
A variety of circumstances associated with the anesthetic manage-
ment of veterinary patients may add to or oppose the primary
effects of the anesthetic. The most profound modifications of drug
action are usually on cardiovascular function. They may include
mechanical ventilation and alterations in PaCO 2
, noxious (surgical)
stimulation, duration of anesthesia, and co-existing drugs.
Mode of ventilation and PaCO 2
There may be considerable difference in the cardiovascular effects of
inhalation anesthetics in animals breathing spontaneously compared
Enflurane
MAP (mm Hg)
	Halothane
Halothane-N2 O
Isoflurane
Methoxyflurane
Sevoflurane
Desflurane
Mac multiple
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
0 	1 	2 	3
Figure 28.17 Inhalation anesthetics cause a dose (expressed as multiples of
MAC)- dependent decrease in mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) in dogs
whose ventilation is mechanically controlled to produce eucapnia.
Source: Data are from multiple sources Steffey et al. [112]; Klide [385];
Merin et al. [388]; Mutoh et al. [394]; Steffey et al. [425].
Table 28.10 Anesthetic-induced cardiovascular depression as expressed by
cardiovascular anesthetic indices.
Species 	Desflurane 	Halothane 	Isoflurane
Doga 	2.84 	2.69
Pigb 	2.45 	3.02
Ratc 	3.0 	5.7
a The anesthetic concentration causing death in ventilated dogs related to MAC [361].
b Mean fatal dose related to MAC [368].
c Heart concentration of anesthetic at cardiovascular failure related to heart
concentration of anesthetic at establishment of anesthesia [176,369].

-- 526 of 1450 --

Chapter 28: Inhalation Anesthetics 	511
to when their breathing is mechanically controlled (e.g., intermittent
positive-pressure ventilation or IPPV) to produce and maintain a
normal PaCO2
. In general, cardiovascular function is usually
depressed during IPPV relative to spontaneous ventilation. This
results from either the direct mechanical actions (i.e., intermittent
elevation of intrathoracic pressure and resultant decrease in venous
return to the heart) or lessening of the indirect pharmacologic action
of PaCO2 [430], or both. Carbon dioxide has pharmacologic actions
important to these considerations. For example, an increased PaCO2
has direct depressant actions on the heart and smooth muscle of the
peripheral blood vessels (i.e., vessel dilation) but indirect (via sympa-
thetic nervous system) stimulation of circulatory function. In gener-
ally healthy, sympathetically intact animals, the stimulatory actions of
hypercapnia usually predominate, so increased CO and arterial blood
pressure usually accompany an increase in PaCO2
, becoming lower
when PaCO2 is normalized [60,370,386,426,428,431–436].
Noxious stimulation
Noxious stimulation during anesthesia modifies the circulatory
effect of inhalation anesthetics via stimulation of the sympathetic
nervous system. An increase in arterial blood pressure and HR (CO)
commonly accompanies noxious stimulation [85,380,381,437,438].
The response is anesthetic dose related. For example, Roizen
et al. [85] and Yasuda et al. [437] showed that deeper levels of
halothane and enflurane decreased or prevented surgically induced
increases in serum norepinephrine levels in human patients.
Anesthetic doses that block the response are in the range of 1.5–
2.0 MAC [85,437]. Similar responses have been reported for
animals as well [439–444].
Duration of anesthesia
Some cardiovascular effects of inhalation anesthetics may change
with duration of anesthesia. For example, in humans, halothane
anesthesia lasting 5–6 h is associated with an increase in values
of some measures of cardiovascular function such as CO and
HR [432,445]. Similarly, varying degrees of time-related changes
have been reported with enflurane [367], desflurane [399,446,447],
and others [398,446–450]. Temporal changes in cardiovascular
function have also been reported in a variety of animals with
halothane [373,376,451,452], isoflurane [375,451,453], and sevo-
flurane [453]. Dose of anesthetic [373,389,454] and body posture
during anesthesia [377,455] apparently also play a temporal role in
some species.
The causes of these changes remain unclear. In vitro, depression
of the cat papillary muscle exposed to a constant concentration of
halothane does not vary over a 3-h period [456]. This observation
suggests that temporal effects associated with inhalation anesthetics
are not the result of improved intrinsic cardiac function. Studies
of human volunteers have shown that temporal responses to
halothane can be prevented if the subjects are given propranolol
before anesthesia, suggesting the mechanism is related to increasing
sympathetic nervous system activity [457].
Usually, the temporal changes associated with inhalation
anesthetics are of only minor or no concern to the clinician.
However, such changes must be considered in interpreting results
of laboratory studies in which these agents are used for anesthetic
management.
Concurrent drugs
Drugs administered immediately before or in conjunction with inha-
lation anesthetics (preanesthetic medication, injectable anesthetic
induction drugs, vasoactive and cardiotonic drugs, etc.) may
influence cardiovascular function by altering the anesthetic require-
ment (i.e., MAC and thereby increased or decreased anesthetic
level) or by their own direct action on cardiovascular performance
or sympathetic nervous system function.
For example, N2
O is used on occasion to substitute for a portion
of a potent inhalation anesthetic. Because of its own anesthetic
potency (albeit low; remember the MAC for N2
O in animals is in
the range of 2 atmospheres; see Table 28.7A), its use may facilitate
delivery of a reduced amount of the potent volatile agent, and
thereby contribute to some cardiovascular sparing. Nitrous oxide
may depress the myocardium directly, but these effects are usually
counterbalanced by its sympathomimetic effect, resulting in a net
improvement in cardiovascular function compared to conditions
without N 2
O. In animal patients, the magnitude of N 2
O effect is
limited and species-dependent [136,203,382,383,425,458,459].
Injectable drugs such as acepromazine, α2 -adrenergic receptor
agonists, alfaxalone, dissociatives (e.g., ketamine), opioids, propo-
fol, and others are frequently administered to animals as part of
their anesthetic management. They confound the primary effects of
the inhalation anesthetics and may accentuate cardiovascular
depression. On the other hand, sympathomimetic drugs such as
ephedrine [460], dopamine, and dobutamine [461,462], and nor-
epinephrine, and phenylephrine are frequently given to counteract
unwanted cardiovascular depression of the anesthetic.
Effects on the kidneys
It is generally regarded that clinically used volatile inhalation anes-
thetics produce similar mild, reversible, dose-related decreases in
renal blood flow, and glomerular filtration rate and that such
changes largely reflect an anesthetic-induced decrease in CO [429].
However, some studies show little or no change in these kidney-
related parameters [53,422,463,464].
As a consequence of the anesthetic-induced decrease in glomer-
ular filtration, healthy anesthetized animals commonly produce a
smaller volume of concentrated urine compared to when awake. An
increase in serum urea nitrogen, creatinine, and inorganic phosphate
may accompany prolonged anesthesia [465–468]. The reduction in
renal function is highly influenced by the animal’s state of hydration
and hemodynamics during anesthesia [469]. Intravenous fluid
therapy and prevention of a marked reduction in renal blood flow
will lessen or counteract the tendency for reduced renal function. In
most cases, especially in healthy animals, effects of inhalation anes-
thesia on renal function are rapidly reversed after anesthesia.
Among the inhalation anesthetics, methoxyflurane was the most
nephrotoxic. Although it is no longer available in North America
for use in human or animal patients, it is of pathophysiologic inter-
est and therefore will be briefly reviewed. In humans and some
strains of rats, methoxyflurane caused renal failure that was char-
acterized not by oliguria but by a large urine volume (polyuria)
unresponsive to vasopressin [41]. This was caused by the biotrans-
formation of methoxyflurane and the large release of free fluoride
ion (both in peak levels and in the prolonged exposure due to high
adipose accumulation of methoxyflurane during anesthesia) that
in turn caused direct damage to the renal tubules. Although renal
injury in animals is rare, it has been reported in dogs when meth-
oxyflurane was used in combination with tetracycline antibiot-
ics [470] and flunixin [470].
With the possible exception of enflurane and sevoflurane, the
breakdown of other inhalation anesthetics does not pose a risk of
fluoride-induced nephrotoxicity. Biotransformation of enflurane

-- 527 of 1450 --

512 	Section 3: Pharmacology
and sevoflurane by humans following moderate duration of anes-
thesia causes serum inorganic fluoride concentrations to increase
even beyond the 50 μmol/L level, which is normally considered the
nephrotoxic threshold in humans [41,429,471,472]. However, clini-
cal, histological, or biochemical evidence of injury related to
increases in fluoride has only rarely been reported in human
patients. The over-riding consensus is that sevoflurane has little
potential for nephrotoxicity as a result of defluorination [41,429].
Two factors may explain the general lack of injury despite the
body’s ability to degrade sevoflurane. In 1977, Mazze et al. proposed
that the area under the serum fluoride concentration versus time
curve may be a more important determinant of nephrotoxicity than
peak serum fluoride concentration [473]. Because sevoflurane is
poorly soluble and is rapidly eliminated via the lungs, the duration
of its availability for biotransformation is notably limited.
Subsequently, Kharasch et al. proposed another considera-
tion [474]. Sevoflurane is primarily metabolized by the liver while
hepatic and renal sites are important for methoxyflurane break-
down. The relative lack of intrarenal anesthetic defluorination may
markedly reduce its nephrotoxic potential [475]. Studies have con-
firmed the increase in serum fluoride in horses anesthetized with
sevoflurane [58–60]. In these reports, the magnitude and time
course of fluoride increase were similar to those reported for
humans. As with humans, there has been no evidence of untoward
renal effects associated with the increase in fluoride in horses.
Early reports of sevoflurane noted its degradation by CO 2 absor-
bents such as soda lime and Baralyme [54,62]. A nephrotoxic
breakdown product, Compound A, is produced [54]. Compound A
can cause renal injury and death in rats [476] and the concentration
threshold for nephrotoxicity in rats [477–479] is within the range of
concentrations that may be found associated with the anesthetic
management of human patients [480]. However, reports of nephro-
toxicity in humans are rare [475] and point to alternative mecha-
nisms of toxicity such as species-dependent metabolic degradation
of Compound A to directly nephrotoxic compounds. Not surpris-
ingly, Compound A is formed in the breathing circuits used for ani-
mals (except non-rebreathing circuits which do not use CO 2
absorbent) [481]. The ultimate importance of in vitro sevoflurane
degradation to the well-being of veterinary patients such as dogs,
cats, and horses [59] remains to be established. Regardless, because
of concerns associated with anesthetic management of human
patients, most commercially available absorbents now used in
North America no longer contain KOH or NaOH.
Effects on the liver
Depression of hepatic function and hepatocellular damage may be
caused by the action of volatile anesthetics. Effects may be mild and
transient or permanent, and injury may be by direct or indirect
action. Studies by Reilly et al. [482] suggested that halothane (but
likely also other potent inhalation anesthetics) substantially inhibits
drug-metabolizing capacity in the liver. A reduction in intrinsic
hepatic clearance of drugs, along with anesthetic-induced alteration
of other pharmacokinetically important variables (e.g., reduced
hepatic blood flow), delays drug removal, and may increase plasma
drug concentration during anesthesia. Examples of such circum-
stances have been reported [206,217,482–484]. Prolonged or
increased (relative to conditions in the unanesthetized animal)
plasma concentrations of some drugs have important toxic implica-
tions, especially in physiologically compromised patients.
All of the potent inhalation anesthetics are capable of causing
hepatocellular injury by reducing liver blood flow and oxygen
delivery. However, available data suggest that of the four contem-
porary volatile anesthetics, isoflurane is most likely to better
maintain liver O 2 delivery and thus is the agent least likely to pro-
duce hepatocyte injury. Sevoflurane and desflurane are similar to
isoflurane, whereas halothane produces the most striking adverse
changes [41,388,421,422,424,485–490]. Results of studies indicate
that confounding factors, including N 2 O [491], concurrent
hypoxia [489,492–494], prior induction of hepatic drug-
metabolizing enzymes [495,496], mode of ventilation [497], and
positive end-expired pressure [498] may worsen conditions and
increase the likelihood of hepatocellular damage.
It now appears that halothane produces two types of hepatotoxicity
in susceptible individuals. One is a mild, self-limiting postanesthetic
form of hepatocellular damage and associated increase in serum con-
centrations of liver enzymes. Signs of hepatotoxicity occur shortly
after anesthetic exposure. The other is a rare, severe, often fatal hepa-
totoxicity with delayed onset. The fulminant hepatopathy appears
limited to human patients (i.e., “halothane hepatitis”) and is thought
to be an immune-mediated toxicity [499,500]. The mechanism of
halothane hepatitis may also be genetically associated [501]. The
increased incidence of hepatic injury associated with halothane is the
principal factor leading to the decrease in use of halothane for human
patients nearly three decades ago.
Effects on skeletal muscle: malignant
hyperthermia
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a potentially life-threatening
pharmacogenetic myopathy that is most commonly reported in
susceptible human patients [502,503] and swine [504]. However,
reports of its occurrence in other species exist [505–511]. Its clin-
icopathological, histopathological, and genetic basis has recently
been further described for the horse [512–514]. All of the four con-
temporary volatile anesthetics can initiate MH, but halothane is the
most potent triggering agent (relative to other inhalation anesthet-
ics) [503]. The syndrome is characterized by a rapid rise in cellular
metabolic activity that, if not treated quickly, causes death.
Monitoring of temperature, CO2 production, and other signs of
metabolic imbalance (e.g., arterial blood gases and pH) is war-
ranted in susceptible/suspected patients. Patients that are known to
be susceptible to MH can usually be anesthetized safely. Avoidance
of triggering agents and prophylactic dantrolene given before anes-
thesia is effective in blocking the onset of MH [503].
The gaseous anesthetic: nitrous oxide
Nitrous oxide (N 2
O) was introduced into clinical practice more
than 150 years ago. Since then, its use has formed the basis for more
general anesthetic techniques for human patients than any other
single inhalation agent [26]. Its widespread use resulted from many
desirable properties, including low blood solubility (see Table 28.2),
limited cardiovascular and respiratory system depression, and min-
imal toxicity [26]. The origin of its clinical use in the anesthetic
management of animal patients in the early 1960s arose from its
clinical use with human patients rather than from objective species-
specific supporting evidence.
Dose
Nitrous oxide is not the ideal anesthetic for humans or animals. As
discussed earlier in this chapter, N 2
O is not a potent anesthetic (see
Table 28.7A) and will not anesthetize a fit, healthy individual when
given alone. To maximize the benefits of N 2
O, it is usually used in

-- 528 of 1450 --

Chapter 28: Inhalation Anesthetics 	513
high- inspired concentrations. However, as the concentration of
N2
O is increased, there is a change in the proportion and partial
pressure of the various other constituents of the inspired breath,
notably O 2
. Consequently, to avoid hypoxemia, 75% of the inspired
breath is the highest fraction that can be safely administered under
conditions at sea level. Use of N 2 O at locations above sea level
requires a lower N2
O concentration to ensure an adequate PI
O2
.
Nitrous oxide has less value in the anesthetic management of ani-
mals than in that of humans because the anesthetic potency of N 2 O
in most animals studied is only about half (or less) that found for
humans (e.g., MAC for the dog is about 200% versus about 100%
for humans; see Table 28.7A) [17,203]. Thus, the value of N 2
O in
veterinary clinical practice is as an anesthetic adjuvant, that is,
accompanying other inhaled or injectable drugs. Since the effects of
N 2
O on vital organ function (including cardiovascular and respira-
tory) in the absence of hypoxemia are small (but not necessarily
inconsequential) in most veterinary patients, benefit is most com-
monly afforded by allowing a certain reduction in the amount of the
primary, more potent, inhaled or injectable anesthetic agents.
Pharmacokinetics
Nitrous oxide’s low blood solubility (see Table 28.2) is responsible
for its rapid onset of action. Although it does not have the potency
to produce anesthesia by itself, it may be used to speed induction of
inhalation anesthesia as a result of its own (albeit limited) CNS
effects and, as mentioned earlier, also by augmenting the uptake of
a concurrently administered, more potent volatile anesthetic such
as halothane, the “second gas effect” [17,26,515,516]. When a high
concentration of N 2
O is given concurrently in a mixture with an
inhalation agent (e.g., N 2
O plus halothane), the alveolar concentra-
tion of the simultaneously administered anesthetic (halothane)
increases more rapidly than when the “second” gas had been
administered without N2
O. The second gas effect is the result of an
increased inspiratory volume secondary to the large volume of N2
O
taken up [515] and a concentrating effect on the second gas in a
smaller volume (and thus increased gradient for transfer to blood)
as a result of the uptake of the large volume of N2
O [17,516]. Results
of a more recent study with desflurane confirm previous findings
for the second gas effect [517].
Pharmacodynamics
As noted previously, N2
O’s effects on cardiovascular and respiratory
function (other than reducing the inspired O 2 concentration) are
small compared to other inhalation anesthetics. It does depress
myocardial function directly, but its sympathetic stimulation prop-
erties counteract some of the direct depression (its own as well as
that from accompanying volatile anesthetics) [203,518]. As a result
of its sympathetic nervous system activation, it may contribute to a
desirable increased arterial blood pressure [136,519] or an undesir-
able increased incidence of cardiac arrhythmias [520,521]. There is
evidence to suggest that its use contributes to myocardial ischemia
in some circumstances [522–525]. Overall, a conservative outlook
regarding N 2
O use relative to respiration and circulation is that sig-
nificant concern is warranted only in patients with initially com-
promised function [526,527]. As with any agent, its advantages and
disadvantages should be considered on an individual patient basis.
N 2
O has little or no effect on liver and kidney function [528–
530]. Although there is evidence of N2 O-induced interference with
production of red and white blood cells by bone marrow, the risk of
adverse outcomes to a subject exposed under most clinical veteri-
nary circumstances is little or none [529,531]. However, prolonged
exposure to N 2 O causes megaloblastic hematopoiesis and polyneu-
ropathy. Seriously ill patients may have increased sensitivity to
these toxicities. Problems result from N 2 O- induced inactivation of
the vitamin B12
- dependent enzyme methionine synthase, an
enzyme that controls inter-relations between vitamin B 12 and folic
acid metabolism [532]. Although an occasional patient may develop
signs suggestive of vitamin B12 and folic acid deficiency after an
anesthetic technique that includes N2
O, this is a rare event in human
and animal patients [529,533]. Prolonged occupational or abusive
exposure to N 2
O may be equally harmful and should be considered
in management plans of veterinary practices [41,529,534,535]. In
this regard, it is important to recognize that while use of commer-
cially available charcoal adsorbers used to scavenge patient breath-
ing circuit effluent gases effectively capture volatile anesthetics,
they are ineffective in removing N2
O, most of which is rapidly elim-
inated in the exhaled breath. The extent of biotransformation (to
molecular N2 ) is very small and mainly by intestinal flora (see
Table 28.6) [41,71,72].
Transfer of N2 O to closed gas spaces
Gas spaces exist or may exist in the body under a variety of condi-
tions. For example, gas is normally found in the stomach and intes-
tines. The gut is a dynamic reservoir; the gas it contains is freely
movable into and out of it according to the laws of diffusion. The
gas in the gut originates from air swallowing, normal production
from bacterial processes, chemical reactions, and diffusion from
the blood. There is marked variability in both composition and vol-
ume of stomach and bowel gas (e.g., herbivore versus carnivore).
There are other natural air cavities, such as the air sinuses and the
middle ear, and then there are circumstances in which air may be
electively or inadvertently introduced as part of diagnostic or thera-
peutic actions (e.g., pneumoencephalogram, pneumocystogram,
endoscopy, vascular air emboli, and others).
Potential problems associated with gas spaces arise when an ani-
mal breathing air is given a gas mixture containing a high partial
pressure of N 2
O [17,26]. Nitrogen (N2 ) is the major component of
air (80%) and of most gas spaces within the body (methane, CO 2
,
and hydrogen are also found in variable quantities in the gut).
When N 2
O is introduced into the inspired breath, a re-equilibration
of gases in the gas space begins with N2
O quickly entering and N2
slowly leaving. That is, because of its greater blood solubility the
volume of N 2
O that can be transported to a closed gas space is many
times the volume of N 2 that can be carried away [17]. For example,
the blood/gas PC for N 2
O is 0.47 (see Table 28.2), whereas that for
N2 is about 0.015 [536]. Thus, N2
O is more than 30 times more solu-
ble in blood than N2 (0.47/0.015). The result of the net transfer of
gas to the gas space can be manifested as an increase in volume
(e.g., with the gut [537,538], pneumothorax [538], or blood embo-
lus [539,540]), an increase in pressure (e.g., middle ear [541,542], or
pneumoencephalogram [543]), or both (as the distending limits of
the compliant container are reached). Usually, air is used to inflate
the cuff of an endotracheal tube. This cuff is another relatively com-
pliant, enclosed air space. Nitrous oxide will similarly expand this
gas space and may increase the pressure exerted on the tracheal
wall [544–546].
Diffusion hypoxia
A further consideration for the differential movement of N2
O and
N 2 occurs at the end of anesthesia when N2
O is discontinued.
Because of the large volume of N 2 O stored in the body during anes-
thesia and the unequal change of N2
O for N2
, a deficiency in blood

-- 529 of 1450 --

514 	Section 3: Pharmacology
oxygenation may occur at the end of anesthesia if air is abruptly
substituted for N 2
O. As discussed earlier in this chapter, this condi-
tion is referred to as “diffusion hypoxia” [44,45]. The rapid outpour-
ing of N2
O from the blood into the lung results in a transient but
marked decrease in alveolar PO 2 with a resultant decrease in PaO2
.
Interaction with respiratory gas monitoring
Routine monitoring of expired CO2 is of well-established impor-
tance in the operating room of veterinary hospitals. Nitrous oxide
interferes with the accurate detection of CO2 with some, especially
older vintage monitoring devices. This interaction must be consid-
ered in decisions regarding the purchasing of equipment and over-
all anesthetic management plan. A more complete summary of the
advantages and disadvantages of N2
O use is available elsewhere [26].
Brief summaries of practical considerations for N 2 O use in veteri-
nary practice are also available [547,548].
Waste inhalation anesthetics
Occupational exposure: trace concentrations
of inhalation anesthetics
Operating room personnel are often exposed to low concentrations
of inhalation anesthetics. Contamination of ambient air occurs via
vaporizer filling, known and unknown leaks in the patient breath-
ing circuit, and careless spillage of liquid agents. Another source of
anesthetic gas exposure is disconnection of a patient from an anes-
thetic machine at the end of a procedure without first flushing the
system with anesthetic-free gas and allowing the patient to expire
into the machine for several minutes. Measurable amounts of anes-
thetic gases and vapors are present in operating room air under a
variety of conditions [549–556]. As shown by various studies, per-
sonnel inhale and retain these agents for some time [557,558]. The
slow rate of elimination of some vapors (especially the more blood-
soluble agents such as halothane) allows accumulation of retained
trace anesthetic quantities from one day to the next.
Concern is raised because epidemiologic studies of humans and
laboratory studies of animals have suggested that chronic exposure
to trace levels of anesthetics may constitute a health hazard. The
possibility that chronic exposure to low levels of anesthetic agents
constitutes a hazard to health science personnel has attracted and
maintained worldwide interest since the early 1970s. Of particular
concern are reports that inhaled anesthetics possess mutagenic, car-
cinogenic, or teratogenic potential. Depending on the point in life
at which exposure occurs, there is concern that these underlying
mechanisms in turn may result in an increased incidence of fetal
death, spontaneous abortion, birth defects, or cancer in exposed
workers [559–561]. However, to date, no genotoxic effect of long-
term or short-term exposure to inhaled anesthetics has been dem-
onstrated in humans and “. . .the conclusion from both animal and
human studies is that there is no carcinogenic risk either from
exposure to the currently used inhaled anesthetics” [41].
Although the data to date, especially regarding effects on human
reproduction, remain equivocal, a firm cause-and-effect relation-
ship between chronic exposure to trace levels of anesthetics and
human health problems does not exist. Although the risk of long-
term exposure to trace concentrations of anesthetics for those in
operating room conditions appears minimal, current evidence is
suggestive enough to cause concern and to encourage practices to
reduce the contamination by anesthetics of operating room person-
nel. Indeed, within the United States, there are three federal agen-
cies concerned with possible hazards associated with exposure to
waste anesthetic gases: the National Institute for Occupational
Safety and Health (NIOSH), an agency of the Department of Health,
Education, and Welfare, the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA), an agency of the Department of Labor,
and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Levels of exposure
have been recommended and published by NIOSH as 2.0 parts per
million (ppm) for volatile agents and 25 ppm for N2 O [559]. In this
regard, inexpensive methods to reduce and control anesthetic expo-
sure by operating room personnel are available and should be used
(Box 28.5). Indeed, the spillage of inhalation anesthetic agents into
the operating room environment has been reduced significantly
since the 1970s by the widespread introduction of anesthetic deliv-
ery equipment scavenging systems. However, with the exception of
anesthetic adsorbent systems, most systems in use deposit the waste
gases directly and unchanged into the atmosphere.
Frequent monitoring of actual levels of anesthetic gas/vapor is of
obvious value and is encouraged in specialized circumstances and/
or environments of high use. Likely the greatest impact results from
educating personnel about the potential problem of waste anes-
thetic gases and methods for controlling exposure levels [559–562].
For further information on this subject, readers are directed to a
more complete report of current knowledge and conclusions from
available data that have been developed by the American Society of
Anesthesiologists (ASA) Task Force on Trace Anesthetic Gases of
the ASA Committee on Occupational Health of Operating Room
Personnel [563]. Commentary and recommendations on control
of waste anesthetic gases in the veterinary medical workplace
have also been articulated by the American College of Veterinary
Anesthesia and Analgesia (www.acvaa.org/veterinarians/guidelines;
Control of Waste Anesthetic Gas) [564].
While exposure of personnel during anesthetic delivery equip-
ment preparation and clean-up, inhalation anesthetic induction
procedures, and when working with anesthetic equipment that is
not leak-free is most notable, the postanesthetic recovery period is
not without concern. In human hospitals, postanesthetic care per-
sonnel interacting with patients recovering from anesthesia are also
exposed to gases eliminated from those patients. Studies of human
postanesthetic care circumstances have reported quantities of vola-
tile anesthetic concentrations that in some cases approach NIOSH
recommended maximum exposure limits [565,566]. Similar cir-
cumstances are undoubtedly also present in veterinary medicine,
particularly those veterinary hospitals (small and large animal
patients) with large daily inhalation anesthesia requirements. For
example, horses recovering from inhalation anesthesia in a rela-
tively small room with limited fresh air changes per unit time can
likely raise the concentration of exhaled inhalation anesthetic
Box 28.5 Methods to reduce occupational exposure to inhalation
anesthetics in the operating room.
1 Educate personnel.
2 Use waste gas scavenger to collect gas from the adjustable pressure
relief (pop-off) valve of the patient breathing circuit and ventilator.
3 Conduct regular inspections and maintenance to detect and repair
leaks in anesthetic machines and patient breathing circuits, piped gas
supplies (N 2
O), etc.
4 Alter work practices (e.g., minimize leaks around face mask, turn off
vaporizer/fresh gas flow when patient breathing circuit not attached to
patient).
5 Adequately ventilate operating rooms and recovery rooms/areas.
6 Monitor room trace anesthetic gas levels.

-- 530 of 1450 --

Chapter 28: Inhalation Anesthetics 	515
considerably and in such cases likewise approach or perhaps
exceed OSHA recommended maximum amounts. Additional helpful
information on this subject may be found at the ASA website
(www.asahq.org; Operating Room Design Manual May 2022).
Environmental implications of inhalation
anesthetics
Research and commentary regarding the impact (or lack of
impact) of contemporary general anesthetic gases and vapors on
the global environment have been ongoing in the medical litera-
ture since early concerns were publicly voiced about stratospheric
ozone destruction by man-made halogenated organic compounds
[567,568] and biomedical contributions to the global atmosphere
of exponentially increasing concentrations of N 2 O, and other
“greenhouse gases” [569].
Before proceeding to focus on anesthetic gases, a brief review of
selected aspects of atmospheric science seems appropriate. Earth is
surrounded by an atmosphere that gradually changes its composi-
tion (via molecular diffusion) with altitude. The inner two layers of
our atmosphere important to life are the innermost (closest to earth)
troposphere (upper limit at about 5–10 miles above the earth’s sur-
face) and the outer of these two layers, the stratosphere (reaching up
to 30 miles above earth). Circumstances associated with the upper-
most layers of our environment, the mesosphere, thermosphere, and
exosphere, are not important to the present discussion. Life on earth
depends on solar energy. Of the sunlight that ultimately reaches the
earth’s surface, some is reflected upward again as infrared radiation.
Emission of infrared radiation into space is an important mecha-
nism by which the earth’s temperature is regulated, that is, the heat
caused by infrared radiation is absorbed by “greenhouse gases” such
as water vapor, carbon dioxide, ozone, methane, and others, which
in turn slows the energy’s escape from the troposphere and thus
regulates climatic conditions by trapping the heat. Therefore, the
greenhouse effect is an essential environmental prerequisite for life
on earth as without it, conditions on earth would be far too cold to
sustain the ecosystem as we know it. Additions (quantitative and
qualitative) to greenhouse gases distort and accelerate the natural
process and result in more such gases in the atmosphere than are
necessary to regulate and maintain an ideal temperature on earth;
global warming is a consequence. The other layer associated with
this discussion, the stratospheric ozone layer, shields the earth’s sur-
face from the sun’s harmful ultraviolet (UV) radiation.
The major atmospheric effects that result from emission of inha-
lation anesthetics are their contributions to ozone depletion in the
stratosphere and to greenhouse warming in the troposphere. The
stratospheric ozone layer is known to be damaged by the rapid,
widespread global usage, and subsequent atmospheric presence,
of volatile, synthetic, long-lived organochlorine- and bromine-
containing compounds (chlorofluorocarbons [CFCs]). Indeed,
knowledge of ozone depletion by CFCs was one of the major
environmental issues of the 20th century and is sure to continue in
a major way well into the 21st century. The CFCs causing most of
the original worldwide concern regarding destruction of the ozone
layer were those used as refrigerants, aerosol propellants, cleaning
solutions, and foaming agents [570,571].
As halogenated compounds, all of the contemporary volatile
anesthetics are in theory potentially destructive to the ozone
layer [572–574]. In effect, however, only chlorine-containing halo-
thane and, much less so, isoflurane, are of concern in this regard
(substances that contain only fluorine do not harm the ozone layer).
In addition, the relative contribution of these two volatile agents has
been estimated to be at most only 0.01% of the annual global release
of CFCs [572], and thus their resulting impact on ozone depletion is
comparatively small [574,575]. Historically, CFCs have been consid-
ered the dominant ozone-depleting substances but N2
O shares many
similarities with the CFCs and N2
O emission has been highlighted as
“. . . the single most important ozone-depleting emission and is
expected to remain the largest throughout the 21st century . . .” [576].
The inhalation anesthetics, including N2
O, are not regulated by the
1987 Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer
(the Montreal Protocol to the Vienna Convention for the Protection
of the Ozone Layer is an international agreement designed to protect
the ozone layer, ratified by 197 states) [577]. Although the magni-
tude of stratospheric impact of halothane and isoflurane is contro-
versial, there is increasing concern that as a result of the effectiveness
of the Montreal Protocol and associated efforts to decrease CFCs
globally, the influence of the volatile anesthetics on ozone depletion
is becoming proportionally more important [574].
As noted previously, both N2
O and the volatile agents affect
global warming. The impact of the volatile agents is small relative to
the much larger players such as CO2 and methane, so present debate
relates more to their potential status [574,575,578–581]. For exam-
ple, in their recently published assessment of the impact on global
climate of general anesthetic gases, Sulbaek Andersen et al. [575]
estimated that “the inhaled anesthetics released during the
approximately 200 million anesthetic procedures performed glob-
ally each year, globally have a climate impact that is approximately
0.01% . . . of that of the CO2 released from global fossil fuel
combustion.” Regardless, the majority of impacts of inhalation
anesthetics are due to desflurane, which has the highest heat
trapping effect of the inhalation anesthetics [578,579,582,583],
and N 2
O which is released to the atmosphere in the greatest
quantity [570,572,573,575,578,583]. In an attempt to provide con-
temporary comparative relevance, Ryan and Nielsen [578] note
that, on an hourly basis and given the US average of 398 g of CO2
emissions/mile of auto driving, “. . . using desflurane equates with
driving 235–470 miles per hour of anesthetic use, whereas sevoflu-
rane and isoflurane equate with driving 18 and 20–40 miles per
hour of anesthetic use, respectively.”
In conclusion, while the contributions of N 2
O and volatile anes-
thetics are relatively low compared to other produced substances,
they are intrinsically potent greenhouse gases and as such have the
potential to cause harm. Accordingly, factors to reduce waste and
minimize the impact of these agents on both environmental and
occupational health should be considered. Recent reviews focusing
on these subjects are available for further in-depth information
applicable to inhalation anesthetic use in clinical veterinary medical
practice (ASA website, www.asahq.org; Greening the Operating
Room and Perioperative Arena: Environmental Sustainability for
Anesthesia Practice) [584–587].
References
1 Eger EI II. Isoflurane (Forane): A Compendium and Reference, 2nd edn. Madison,
WI: Anaquest, 1985.
2 Soma LR. Textbook of Veterinary Anesthesia. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins,
1971.
3 Hall LW. Wright’s Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia, 7th edn. London, UK:
Baillière Tindall, 1971.
4 Lumb WV, Jones EW. Veterinary Anesthesia. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger, 1973.
5 Short CE. Inhalant anesthetics. In: Short CE, ed. Principles & Practice of Veterinary
Anesthesia. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins, 1987: 70–90.
6 Steffey EP, Mama KR. Inhalation anesthetics. In: Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC,
Grimm KA, eds. Lumb and Jones’ Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia, 4th edn.
Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing, 2007: 355–393.

-- 531 of 1450 --

516 	Section 3: Pharmacology
7 Susay SR, Smith MA, Lockwood GG. The saturated vapor pressure of desflurane at
various temperatures. Anesth Analg 1996; 83: 864–866.
8 Lowe HJ, Ernst EA. The Quantitative Practice of Anesthesia: Use of Closed Circuit.
Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins, 1981.
9 Hill DW. Physics Applied to Anaesthesia, 4th edn. London, UK: Butterworth, 1980.
10 Webb AI, Weaver BMQ. Solubility of halothane in equine tissues at 37°C. Br J
Anaesth 1981; 53: 479–486.
11 Kety SS, Harmel MH, Broomell HT, et al. The solubility of nitrous oxide in blood
and brain. J Biol Chem 1948; 173: 487–496.
12 Wahrenbrock EA, Eger EI II, Laravuso RB, et al. Anesthetic uptake – of mice and
men (and whales). Anesthesiology 1974; 40: 19–23.
13 Coburn CM, Eger EI II. The partial pressure of isoflurane or halothane does not
affect their solubility in rabbit blood or brain or human brain: inhaled anesthetics
obey Henry’s law. Anesth Analg 1986; 65(9): 960–963.
14 Soares JHN, Brosnan RJ, Fukushima FB, et al. Solubility of haloether anesthetics in
human and animal blood. Anesthesiology 2012; 117(1): 48–55.
15 Targ AG, Yasuda N, Eger EI II. Solubility of I-653, sevoflurane, isoflurane, and halo-
thane in plastics and rubber composing a conventional anesthetic circuit. Anesth
Analg 1989; 69: 218–225.
16 Haskins S, Sansome AL. A time-table for exhaustion of nitrous oxide cylinders
using cylinder pressure. Vet Anesth 1979; 6: 6–8.
17 Eger EI II. Anesthetic Uptake and Action. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins, 1974.
18 Mapleson WW, Allott PR, Steward A. The variability of partition coefficients for
halothane in the rabbit. Br J Anaesth 1972; 44: 650.
19 Eger RR, Eger EI II. Effect of temperature and age on the solubility of enflurane,
halothane, isoflurane, and methoxyflurane in human blood. Anesth Analg 1985; 64:
640–642.
20 Lerman J, Schmitt-Bantel BI, Gregory GA, et al. Effect of age on the solubility of
volatile anesthetics in human tissues. Anesthesiology 1986; 65(3): 307–312.
21 Eger EI II. Uptake and distribution. In: Miller RD, ed. Anesthesia, 5th edn.
Philadelphia, PA: Churchill Livingstone, 2000: 74–95.
22 Eger EI II, Eisenkraft JB, Weiskopf RB. The Pharmacology of Inhaled Anesthetics,
2nd edn. San Francisco, CA: Dannemiller Memorial Educational Foundation, 2003.
23 Mapleson WW. Pharmacokinetics of inhalational anaesthetics. In: Nunn JF, Utting
JE, Brown BR Jr., eds. General Anaesthesia, 5th edn. London, UK: Butterworths,
1989: 44–59.
24 Steffey EP, Howland D Jr. Rate of change of halothane concentration in a large ani-
mal circle anesthetic system. Am J Vet Res 1977; 38(12): 1993–1996.
25 Mapleson WW. The concentration of anaesthetics in closed circuits, with special
reference to halothane. I. Theoretical studies. Br J Anaesth 1960; 32: 298–309.
26 Eger EI II. Nitrous Oxide/N2O. New York: Elsevier, 1985.
27 Eger EI II. Desflurane animal and human pharmacology: aspects of kinetics, safety,
and MAC. Anesth Analg 1992; 75: S3–S9.
28 Webb AI. The effect of species differences in the uptake and distribution of inhalant
anesthetic agents. In: Grandy J, Hildebrand S, McDonell W, et al., eds. Proceedings
of the Second International Congress of Veterinary Anesthesia. Santa Barbara, CA:
Veterinary Practice Publishing Co., 1985: 27–32.
29 Staddon GE, Weaver BMQ, Webb AI. Distribution of cardiac output in anaesthe-
tized horses. Res Vet Sci 1979; 27: 38–45.
30 Eger EI II, Severinghaus JW. Effect of uneven pulmonary distribution of blood and
gas on induction with inhalation anesthetics. Anesthesiology 1964; 25: 620–626.
31 Stoelting RK. The effect of right to left shunt on the rate of increase of arterial anes-
thetic concentration. Anesthesiology 1972; 36: 352–356.
32 Stoelting RK, Eger EI II. Percutaneous loss of nitrous oxide, cyclopropane, ether
and halothane in man. Anesthesiology 1969; 30(3): 278–283.
33 Fassoulaki A, Lockhart SH, Freire BA, et al. Percutaneous loss of desflurane, isoflu-
rane, and halothane in humans. Anesthesiology 1991; 74: 479–483.
34 Lockhart SH, Yasuda N, Peterson N, et al. Comparison of percutaneous losses of
sevoflurane and isoflurane in humans. Anesth Analg 1991; 72: 212–215.
35 Eger EI II, Saidman LJ. Illustrations of inhaled anesthetic uptake, including intertis-
sue diffusion to and from fat. Anesth Analg 2005; 100: 1020–1033.
36 Stoelting RK, Eger EI II. The effects of ventilation and anesthetic solubility on
recovery from anesthesia: an in vivo and analog analysis before and after equilibra-
tion. Anesthesiology 1969; 30(3): 290–296.
37 Eger EI II, Johnson BH. Rates of awakening from anesthesia with I-653, halothane,
isoflurane, and sevoflurane – a test of the effect of anesthetic concentration and
duration in rats. Anesth Analg 1987; 66: 977–983.
38 Cullen BF, Eger EI II. Diffusion of nitrous oxide, cyclopropane, and halothane
through human skin and amniotic membrane. Anesthesiology 1972; 36: 168–173.
39 Carpenter RL, Eger EI II, Johnson BH, et al. Does the duration of anesthetic admin-
istration affect the pharmacokinetics or metabolism of inhaled anesthetics in
humans? Anesth Analg 1987; 66: 1–8.
40 Laster MJ, Taheri S, Eger EI, et al. Visceral losses of desflurane, isoflurane, and halo-
thane in swine. Anesth Analg 1991; 73: 209–212.
41 Baden JM, Rice SA. Metabolism and toxicity of inhaled anesthetics. In: Miller RD,
ed. Anesthesia, 5th edn. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 2000: 147–173.
42 Cahalan MK, Johnson BH, Eger EI II. Relationship of concentrations of halothane
and enflurane to their metabolism and elimination in man. Anesthesiology 1981;
54: 3–8.
43 Carpenter RL, Eger EI II, Johnson BH, et al. The extent of metabolism of inhaled
anesthetics in humans. Anesthesiology 1986; 65: 201–206.
44 Fink BR. Diffusion anoxia. Anesthesiology 1955; 16: 511–519.
45 Rackow H, Salanitre E, Frumin MH. Dilution of alveolar gases during nitrous oxide
excretion in man. J Appl Physiol 1961; 16(4): 723–728.
46 Sheffer L, Steffenson JL, Birch AA. Nitrous oxide-induced diffusion hypoxia in
patients breathing spontaneously. Anesthesiology 1972; 37: 436–439.
47 Van Dyke RA, Chenoweth MB, van Poznak A. Metabolism of volatile anesthetics. I.
Conversion in vivo of several anesthetics to 14-CO2 and chloride. Biochem
Pharmacol 1964; 13: 1239–1247.
48 Stier A, Alter H, Hessler O, et al. Urinary excretion of bromide in halothane
anesthesia. Anesth Analg 1964; 43: 723–728.
49 Rehder K, Forbes J, Alter H, et al. Halothane biotransformation in man: a quantita-
tive study. Anesthesiology 1967; 28: 711–715.
50 Holaday DA, Rudofsky S, Treuhaft PS. The metabolic degradation of methoxyflu-
rane in man. Anesthesiology 1970; 33(6): 579–593.
51 Mazze RI, Fujinaga M. Biotransformation of inhalational anaesthetics. In: Nunn JF,
Utting JE, Brown BR, eds. General Anaesthesia, 5th edn. London, UK: Butterworths,
1989: 73–85.
52 Sawyer DC, Eger EI II, Bahlman SH, et al. Concentration dependence of hepatic
halothane metabolism. Anesthesiology 1971; 34: 230–235.
53 Cook TL, Beppu WJ, Hitt BA, et al. Renal effects and metabolism of sevoflurane
in Fischer 344 rats: an in-vivo and in-vitro comparison with methoxyflurane.
Anesthesiology 1975; 43: 70–77.
54 Wallin RF, Regan BM, Napoli MD, et al. Sevoflurane: a new inhalational anesthetic
agent. Anesth Analg 1975; 54: 758–766.
55 Cook TL, Beppu WJ, Hitt BA, et al. A comparison of renal effects and metabolism
of sevoflurane and methoxyflurane in enzyme-induced rats. Anesth Analg 1975; 54:
829–835.
56 Martis L, Lynch S, Napoli MD, et al. Biotransformation of sevoflurane in dogs and
rats. Anesth Analg 1981; 60: 186–191.
57 Rice SA, Dooley JR, Mazze RI. Metabolism by rat hepatic microsomes of fluori-
nated ether anesthetics following ethanol consumption. Anesthesiology 1983; 58:
237–241.
58 Aida H, Mizuno Y, Hobo S, et al. Cardiovascular and pulmonary effects of sevoflu-
rane anesthesia in horses. Vet Surg 1996; 25: 164–170.
59 Driessen B, Zarucco L, Steffey EP, et al. Serum fluoride concentrations, biochemical
and histopathological changes associated with prolonged sevoflurane anaesthesia
in horses. J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med 2002; 49: 337–347.
60 Steffey EP, Mama KR, Galey F, et al. Effects of sevoflurane dose and mode of venti-
lation on cardiopulmonary function and blood biochemical variables in horses. Am
J Vet Res 2005; 66(4): 606–614.
61 Koblin DD, Weiskopf RB, Holmes MA, et al. Metabolism of I-653 and isoflurane in
swine. Anesth Analg 1989; 68: 147–149.
62 Holaday DA, Smith FR. Clinical characteristics and biotransformation of sevoflu-
rane in healthy human volunteers. Anesthesiology 1981; 54: 100–106.
63 Frink EJ Jr, Malan TP Jr., Brown EA, et al. Plasma inorganic fluoride levels with
sevoflurane anesthesia in morbidly obese and nonobese patients. Anesth Analg
1993; 76: 1333–1337.
64 Koblin DD, Eger EI II, Johnson BH, et al. I-653 resists degradation in rats. Anesth
Analg 1988; 67: 534–539.
65 Sutton TS, Koblin DD, Gruenke LD, et al. Fluoride metabolites after prolonged
exposure of volunteers and patients to desflurane. Anesth Analg 1991; 73: 180–185.
66 Njoku D, Laster MJ, Gong DH, et al. Biotransformation of halothane, enflurane,
isoflurane, and desflurane to trifluoroacetylated liver proteins: association between
protein acylation and hepatic injury. Anesth Analg 1997; 84(1): 173–178.
67 Cascorbi HF, Blake DA, Helrich M. Differences in the biotransformation of halo-
thane in man. Anesthesiology 1970; 32: 119–123.
68 Shiraishi Y, Ikeda K. Uptake and biotransformation of sevoflurane in humans: a
comparative study of sevoflurane with halothane, enflurane and isoflurane. J Clin
Anesth 1990; 2(6): 377–380.
69 Chase RE, Holaday DA, Fiserova-Bergerova V, et al. The biotransformation of
ethrane in man. Anesthesiology 1971; 35(3): 262–267.
70 Holaday DA, Fiserova-Bergerova V, Latto IP, et al. Resistance of isoflurane to bio-
transformation in man. Anesthesiology 1975; 43: 325–332.
71 Hong K, Trudell JR, O’Neil JR, et al. Biotransformation of nitrous oxide.
Anesthesiology 1980; 53: 354–355.
72 Hong K, Trudell JR, O’Neil JR, et al. Metabolism of nitrous oxide by human and rat
intestinal contents. Anesthesiology 1980; 52: 16–19.

-- 532 of 1450 --

Chapter 28: Inhalation Anesthetics 	517
73 Merkel G, Eger EI II. A comparative study of halothane and halopropane anesthe-
sia: including method for determining equipotency. Anesthesiology 1963; 24(3):
346–357.
74 deJong RH, Eger EI II. MAC expanded: AD50 and AD95 values of common inha-
lation anesthetics in man. Anesthesiology 1975; 42: 408–419.
75 Stanski DR. Monitoring depth of anesthesia. In: Miller RD, ed. Anesthesia,
5th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Churchill Livingstone, 2000: 1087–1116.
76 Steffey EP, Howland D Jr., Giri S, et al. Enflurane, halothane and isoflurane
potency in horses. Am J Vet Res 1977; 38: 1037–1039.
77 Ludders JW, Mitchell GS, Schaefer SI. Minimum anesthetic dose and cardiopul-
monary response for halothane in chickens. Am J Vet Res 1988; 49: 929–933.
78 Eger EI II, Johnson BH, Weiskopf RB, et al. Minimum alveolar concentration of
I-653 and isoflurane in pigs: definition of a supramaximal stimulus. Anesth Analg
1988; 67: 1174–1177.
79 Steffey EP. Methodology for determining minimum alveolar concentration: a
critical appraisal. Vet Anes Anal 2017; 44: 2–6.
80 Eger EI II, Saidman LJ, Brandstater B. Minimal alveolar anesthetic concentration:
a standard of anesthetic potency. Anesthesiology 1965; 26: 756–763.
81 Quasha AL, Eger EI II, Tinker JH. Determination and applications of MAC.
Anesthesiology 1980; 53(4): 315–334.
82 Stoelting RK, Longnecker DE, Eger EI II. Minimum alveolar concentrations in
man on awakening from methoxyflurane, halothane, ether and fluroxene anesthe-
sia: MAC awake. Anesthesiology 1970; 33: 5–9.
83 Yakaitis RW, Blitt CD, Angiulo JP. End-tidal halothane concentration for endotra-
cheal intubation. Anesthesiology 1977; 47: 386–388.
84 Yakaitis RW, Blitt CD, Angiulo JP. End-tidal enflurane concentration for endotra-
cheal intubation. Anesthesiology 1979; 50: 59–61.
85 Roizen MF, Horrigan RW, Frazer BM. Anesthetic doses blocking adrenergic
(stress) and cardiovascular responses to incision – MAC BAR. Anesthesiology
1981; 54: 390–398.
86 Boscan P, Monnet E, Mama K, et al. A dog model to study ovary, ovarian ligament
and visceral pain. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38(3): 260–266.
87 Drummond JC, Patel PM. Cerebral physiology and the effects of anesthetics and
techniques. In: Miller RD, ed. Anesthesia, 5th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Churchill
Livingstone, 2000: 695–733.
88 Rampil IJ, Mason P, Singh H. Anesthetic potency (MAC) is independent of fore-
brain structures in the rat. Anesthesiology 1993; 78: 707–712.
89 Antognini JF, Schwartz K. Exaggerated anesthetic requirements in the preferen-
tially anesthetized brain. Anesthesiology 1993; 79: 1244–1249.
90 Rampil IJ. Anesthetic potency is not altered after hypothermic spinal cord tran-
section in rats. Anesthesiology 1994; 80: 606–610.
91 Ryu K- H, Song K, Lim T-Y, et al. Does Equi-minimum alveolar concentration
value ensure equivalent analgesic or hypnotic potency? A comparison between
desflurane and sevoflurane. Anesthesiology 128: 1092–1098.
92 Kharasch ED. Anesthetic MAC: origin, utility, and nomenclature revisited.
Anesthesiology 2022; 136: 885–887.
93 Hendrickx JFA, De Wolf AM. End-tidal anesthetic concentration: monitoring
interpretation, and clinical application. Anesthesiology 2022; 136: 985–996.
94 McMurphy RM, Hodgson DS. The minimum alveolar concentration of desflurane
in cats. Vet Surg 1995; 24: 453–455.
95 Barter LS, Ilkiw JE, Steffey EP, et al. Animal dependence of inhaled anaeshtetic
requirements in cats. Br J Anaesth 2004; 92(2): 275–277.
96 Webb AI, McMurphy RM. Effect of anticholinergic preanesthetic medicaments on
the requirements of halothane for anesthesia in the cat. Am J Vet Res 1987; 48:
1733–1736.
97 Ide T, Sakurai Y, Aono M, et al. Minimum alveolar anesthetic concentrations for
airway occlusion in cats: a new concept of minimum alveolar anesthetic concen-
tration airway occlusion response. Anesth Analg 1998; 86(1): 191–197.
98 Steffey EP, Gillespie JR, Berry JD, et al. Anesthetic potency (MAC) of nitrous
oxide in the dog, cat and stumptail monkey. J Appl Physiol 1974; 36: 530–532.
99 Drummond JC, Todd MM, Shapiro HM. Minimal alveolar concentrations for
halothane, enflurane, and isoflurane in the cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1983; 182:
1099–1101.
100 Ilkiw JE, Pascoe PJ, Fisher LD. Effect of alfentanil on the mimimum alveolar con-
centration of isoflurane in cats. Am J Vet Res 1997; 58(11): 1274–1279.
101 Steffey EP, Howland D Jr. Isoflurane potency in the dog and cat. Am J Vet Res 1977;
38: 1833–1836.
102 Pypendop BH, Ilkiw JE. The effects of intravenous lidocaine administration on
the minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in cats. Anesth Analg 2005;
100(1): 97–101.
103 Doi M, Yunoki H, Ikeda K. The minimum alveolar concentration of sevoflurane
in cats. J Anesth 1988; 2: 113–114.
104 Steffey EP, Howland D Jr. Halothane anesthesia in calves. Am J Vet Res 1979; 40:
372–376.
105 Cantalapierdra AG, Villanueva B, Pereira JL. Anaesthetic potency of isoflurane in
cattle: determination of the minimum alveolar concentration. Vet Anaesth Analg
2000; 27(1): 22–26.
106 Doorley MB, Waters SJ, Terrell RC, Robinson JL. MAC of I-653 in Beagle dogs and
New Zealand white rabbits. Anesthesiology 1988; 69: 89–92.
107 Wang BG, Tang J, White PF, et al. The effect of GP683, an adenosine kinase
inhibitor, on the desflurane anesthetic requirement in dogs. Anesth Analg 1997;
85: 675–680.
108 Hammond RA, Alibhai HIK, Walsh KP, et al. Desflurane in the dog; minimum
alveolar concentration (MAC) alone and in combination with nitrous oxide. J Vet
Anaesth 1994; 21: 21–23.
109 Eger EI II, Saidman LJ, Brandstater B. Temperature dependence of halothane and
cylcopropane anesthesia in dogs: correlation with some theories of anesthetic
action. Anesthesiology 1965; 26(6): 764–770.
110 Eger EI II, Brandstater B, Saidman LJ, et al. Equipotent alveolar concentrations of
methoxyflurane, halothane, diethyl ether, fluroxene, cyclopropane, xenon, and
nitrous oxide in the dog. Anesthesiology 1965; 26(6): 771–777.
111 Regan MJ, Eger EI II. Effect of hypothermia in dogs on anesthetizing and apneic
doses of inhalation agents. Determination of the anesthetic index (apnea/MAC).
Anesthesiology 1967; 28(4): 689–700.
112 Steffey EP, Farver TB, Woliner MJ. Circulatory and respiratory effects of methoxy-
flurane in dogs: comparison of halothane. Am J Vet Res 1984; 45: 2574–2579.
113 Kazama T, Ikeda K. Comparison of MAC and the rate of rise of alveolar concen-
tration of sevoflurane with halothane and isoflurane in the dog. Anesthesiology
1988; 68: 435–438.
114 Steffey EP, Eger EI II. Hyperthermia and halothane MAC in the dog. Anesthesiology
1974; 41(4): 392–396.
115 Himez RS Jr., DiFazio CA, Burmey RC. Effects of lidocaine on the anesthetic
requirements of nitrous oxide and halothane. Anesthesiology 1977; 47: 437–440.
116 Steffey EP, Baggot JD, Eisele JH, et al. Morphine–isoflurane interaction in dogs,
swine and rhesus monkeys. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1994; 17: 202–210.
117 Schwieger IM, Szlam F, Hug CC. Absence of agonistic or antagonistic effect of
flumazenil (Ro 15-1788) in dogs anesthetized with enflurane, isoflurane, or fenta-
nyl- enflurane. Anesthesiology 1989; 70(3): 477–481.
118 Schwartz AE, Maneksha FR, Kanchuger MS, et al. Flumazenil decreases the minimum
alveolar concentration of isoflurane in dogs. Anesthesiology 1989; 70(5): 764–767.
119 Scheller MS, Nakakimura K, Fleischer JE, Zornow MH. Cerebral effects of sevo-
flurane in the dog: comparison with isoflurane and enflurane. Br J Anaesth 1990;
65: 388–392.
120 Murat I, Housmans PR. Minimum alveolar concentrations of halothane, enflu-
rane, and isoflurane in ferrets. Anesthesiology 1988; 68(5): 783–787.
121 Imai A, Steffey EP, Farver TB, et al. Assessment of isoflurane-induced anesthesia
in ferrets and rats. Am J Vet Res 1999; 60(12): 1577–1583.
122 Hikasa Y, Okuyama K, Kakuta T, et al. Anesthetic potency and cardiopulmonary
effects of sevoflurane in goats: comparison with isoflurane and halothane. Can J
Vet Res 1998; 62: 299–306.
123 Antognini JF, Eisele PH. Anesthetic potency and cardiopulmonary effects of
enflurane, halothane, and isoflurane in goats. Lab Anim Sci 1993; 43: 607–610.
124 Doherty TJ, Rohrbach BW, Geiser DR. Effect of acepromazine and butorphanol
on isoflurane minimum alveolar concentration in goats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
2002; 25: 65–67.
125 Doherty TJ, Rohrbach BW, Ross L, Schultz H. The effect of tiletamine and zolaz-
epam on isoflurane minimum alveolar concentration in goats. J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 2002; 25(3): 233–235.
126 Doherty TJ, Will WA, Rohrbach BW, Geiser DR. Effect of morphine and flunixin
meglumine on isoflurane minimum alveolar concentration in goats. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2004; 31(2): 97–101.
127 Tendillo FJ, Mascias A, Santos M, et al. Anesthetic potency of desflurane in the
horse: determination of the minimum alveolar concentration. Vet Surg 1997;
26(4): 354–357.
128 Steffey EP, Woliner MJ, Puschner B, Galey F. Effects of desflurane and mode of
ventilation on cardiovascular and respiratory functions and clinicopathologic
variables in horses. Am J Vet Res 2005; 66(4): 669–677.
129 Steffey EP, Willits N, Woliner M. Hemodynamic and respiratory responses to vari-
able arterial partial pressure of oxygen in halothane-anesthetized horses during
spontaneous and controlled ventilation. Am J Vet Res 1992; 53: 1850–1858.
130 Pascoe PJ, Steffey EP, Black WD, et al. Evaluation of the effect of alfentanil on the
minimum alveolar concentration on halothane in horses. Am J Vet Res 1993; 54:
1327–1332.
131 Bennett RC, Steffey EP, Kollias-Baker C, et al. Influence of morphine sulfate on the
halothane sparing effect of xylazine hydrochloride in horses. Am J Vet Res 2004;
65(4): 519–526.
132 Steffey EP, Eisele JH, Baggot JD. Interactions of morphine and isoflurane in
horses. Am J Vet Res 2003; 64(2): 166–175.

-- 533 of 1450 --

518 	Section 3: Pharmacology
133 Steffey EP, Pascoe PJ. Detomidine reduces isoflurane anesthetic requirement
(MAC) in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2002; 29(4): 223–227.
134 Steffey EP, Pascoe PJ, Woliner MJ, et al. Effects of xylazine hydrochloride during
isoflurane-induced anesthesia in horses. Am J Vet Res 2000; 61(10): 1225–1231.
135 Aida H, Mizuno Y, Hobo S, et al. Determination of the minimum alveolar concen-
tration (MAC) and physical response to sevoflurane inhalation in horses. J Vet
Med Sci 1994; 56: 1161–1165.
136 Steffey EP, Howland D Jr. Potency of halothane-N2
O in the horse. Am J Vet Res
1978; 39: 1141–1146.
137 Tinker JH, Sharbough FW, Michenfelder TD. Anterior shift of the dominant EEG
rhythm during anesthesia in the Java monkey. Anesthesiology 1977; 46: 252–259.
138 Sonner JM, Gong D, Eger EI II. Naturally occurring variability in anesthetic
potency among inbred mouse strains. Anesth Analg 2000; 91: 720–726.
139 Mazze RI, Rice SA, Baden JM. Halothane, isoflurane, and enflurane MAC in
pregnant and nonpregnant female and male mice and rats. Anesthesiology 1985;
62: 339–342.
140 Deady JR, Koblin DD, Eger EI II, et al. Anesthetic potencies and the unitary
theory of narcosis. Anesth Analg 1981; 60: 380–384.
141 Dahan A, Sarton E, Teppema L, et al. Anesthetic potency and influence of
morphine and sevoflurane on respiration in mu-opioid receptor knockout mice.
Anesthesiology 2001; 94: 824–832.
142 Miller KW, Paton WDM, Smith EB, et al. Physiochemical approaches to the mode
of action of general anesthetics. Anesthesiology 1972; 36: 339–351.
143 Lerman J, Oyston JP, Gallagher TM, et al. The minimum alveolar concentration
(MAC) and hemodynamic effects of halothane, isoflurane, and sevoflurane in
newborn swine. Anesthesiology 1990; 73: 717–721.
144 Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, Benson GJ, et al. Halothane potency in pigs (Sus.
scrofa). Am J Vet Res 1983; 44: 1106–1107.
145 Weiskopf R, Bogetz MS. Minimum alveolar concentrations (MAC) of halothane
and nitrous oxide in swine. Anesth Analg 1984; 63: 529–532.
146 Lundeen G, Manohar M, Parks C. Systemic distribution of blood flow in swine
while awake and during 1.0 and 1.5 MAC isoflurane anesthesia with or without
50% nitrous oxide. Anesth Analg 1983; 62: 499–512.
147 Eisele PH, Talken L, Eisele JH Jr. Potency of isoflurane and nitrous oxide in con-
ventional swine. Lab Anim Sci 1985; 35: 76–78.
148 Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, Benson GJ. Anesthetic potency of nitrous oxide in
young swine (Sus scrofa). Am J Vet Res 1985; 46: 58–61.
149 Gallagher TM, Burrows FA, Miyasaka K, et al. Sevoflurane in newborn swine: anes-
thetic requirements (MAC) and circulatory responses. Anesthesiology 1987; 67: A503.
150 Hecker KE, Baumert JH, Horn N, et al. Minimum anesthetic concentration of
sevoflurane with different xenon concentrations in swine. Anesth Analg 2003;
97(5): 1364–1369.
151 Manohar M, Parks CM. Porcine systemic and regional organ blood flow during
1.0 and 1.5 minimum alveolar concentrations of sevoflurane anesthesia without
and with 50% nitrous oxide. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1984; 231(3): 640–648.
152 Wear R, Robinson S, Gregory GA. Effect of halothane on baroresponse of adult
and baby rabbits. Anesthesiology 1982; 56: 188–191.
153 Davis NL, Nunnally RL, Malinin TI. Determination of the minimum alveolar con-
centration (MAC) of halothane in the white New Zealand rabbit. Br J Anaesth
1975; 47: 341–345.
154 Sobair ATH, Cottrell DF, Camburn MA. Focal heat stimulation for the determina-
tion of the minimum alveolar concentration of halothane in the rabbit. Vet Res
Commun 1997; 21: 149–159.
155 Drummond JC. MAC for halothane, enflurane, and isoflurane in the New Zealand
white rabbit: and a test for the validity of MAC determinations. Anesthesiology
1985; 62(3): 336–339.
156 Imai A, Steffey EP, Ilkiw JE, et al. Comparison of clinical signs and hemodynamic
variables used to monitor rabbits during halothane- and isoflurane-induced anes-
thesia. Am J Vet Res 1999; 60(10): 1189–1195.
157 McLain GE, Sipes IG, Brown B, Thompson MF. The noncompetitive N-methyl-
D-aspartate receptor antagonist, MK-810 profoundly reduces volatile anesthetic
requirements. Neuropharmacology 1989; 28: 677–681.
158 Shi WZ, Fahey MR, Fisher DM, et al. Increase in minimum alveolar concentration
(MAC) of halothane by laudanosine in rabbits. Anesth Analg 1985; 64: 282.
159 Scheller MS, Saidman LJ, Partridge BL. MAC of sevoflurane in humans and the
New Zealand white rabbit. Can J Anaesth 1988; 35: 153–157.
160 Eger EI II, Johnson BH. MAC of I-653 in rats, including a test of the effect of body
temperature and anesthetic duration. Anesth Analg 1987; 66: 974–977.
161 Yost CS, Hampson AJ, Leonoudakis D, et al. Oleamide potentiates benzodiazepine-
sensitive g-aminobutyric acid receptor activity but does not alter minimum alveo-
lar anesthetic concentration. Anesth Analg 1998; 86: 1294–1300.
162 Laster MJ, Liu J, Eger EI II, et al. Electrical stimulation as a substitute for the tail
clamp in the determination of minimum alveolar concentration. Anesth Analg
1993; 76: 1310–1312.
163 Taheri S, Halsey MJ, Liu J, et al. What solvent best represents the site of action of
inhaled anesthetics in humans, rats, and dogs? Anesth Analg 1991; 72: 627–634.
164 Vitez TS, White PF, Eger EI II. Effects of hypothermia on halothane MAC and
isoflurane MAC in the rat. Anesthesiology 1974; 41: 80–81.
165 Cole DJ, Kalichman MW, Shapiro HM, et al. The nonlinear potency of sub-MAC
concentrations of nitrous oxide in decreasing the anesthetic requirement of enflu-
rane, halothane, and isoflurane in rats. Anesthesiology 1990; 73: 93–99.
166 Steffey MA, Brosnan RJ, Steffey EP. Assessment of halothane and sevoflurane
anesthesia in spontaneously breathing rats. Am J Vet Res 2003; 64(4): 470–474.
167 Crawford MW, Lerman J, Saldivia V, et al. Hemodynamic and organ blood flow
responses to halothane and sevoflurane anesthesia during spontaneous ventila-
tion. Anesth Analg 1992; 75: 1000–1006.
168 White PF, Johnston RR, Eger EI II. Determination of anesthetic requirement in
rats. Anesthesiology 1974; 40: 52–57.
169 Strout CD, Nahrwold MC. Halothane requirement during pregnancy and lacta-
tion in rats. Anesthesiology 1981; 55: 322–323.
170 Roizen MF, White PF, Eger EI II, et al. Effects of ablation of serotonin or norepi-
nephrine brain-stem areas on halothane and cyclopropane MACs in rats.
Anesthesiology 1978; 49: 252–255.
171 Waizer PR, Baez S, Orkin LR. A method for determining minimum alveolar con-
centration of anesthetic in the rat. Anesthesiology 1973; 39: 394–397.
172 Russell GB, Graybeal JM. Differences in anesthetic potency between Sprague–
Dawley and Long–Evans rats for isoflurane but not nitrous oxide. Pharmacology
1995; 50: 162–167.
173 Rampil IJ, Laster M. No correlation between quantitative electroencephalographic
measures and movement response to noxious stimuli during isoflurane anesthesia
in rats. Anesthesiology 1992; 77(5): 920–925.
174 DiFazio CA, Brown RE, Ball CG, et al. Additive effects of anesthetics and theories
of anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1972; 36: 57–63.
175 Russell GB, Graybeal JM. Direct measurement of nitrous oxide MAC and neuro-
logic monitoring in rats during anesthesia under hyperbaric conditions. Anesth
Analg 1992; 75: 995–999.
176 Wolfson B, Hebrick WD, Lake CL, et al. Anesthetic indices – further data.
Anesthesiology 1978; 48: 187–190.
177 Gonsowski CT, Eger EI II. Nitrous oxide minimum alveolar anesthetic concentra-
tion in rats is greater than previously reported. Anesth Analg 1994; 79: 710–712.
178 Palahniuk RJ, Shnider SM, Eger EI II. Pregnancy decreases the requirement for
inhaled anesthetic agents. Anesthesiology 1974; 41: 82–83.
179 Rampil IJ, Lockhart SH, Zwass MS, et al. Clinical characteristics of desflurane in
surgical patients – minimum alveolar concentration. Anesthesiology 1991; 74:
429–433.
180 Miller RD, Wahrenbrock EA, Schroeder CF, et al. Ethylene–halothane anesthesia:
addition or synergism? Anesthesiology 1969; 31: 301–304.
181 Saidman LJ, Eger EI II. Effect of nitrous oxide and of narcotic premedication on
the alveolar concentration of halothane required for anesthesia. Anesthesiology
1964; 25: 302–306.
182 Gibbons RT, Steffey EP, Eger EI II. The effect of spontaneous versus controlled
ventilation on the rate of rise of alveolar halothane concentration in dogs. Anesth
Analg 1977; 56: 32–34.
183 Saidman LJ, Eger EI II, Munson ES, et al. Minimum alveolar concentrations of
methoxyflurane, halothane, ether and cyclopropane in man: correlation with
theories of anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1967; 28: 994–1002.
184 Stevens WC, Dolan WM, Gibbons RD, et al. Minimum alveolar concentrations
(MAC) of isoflurane with and without nitrous oxide in patients of various ages.
Anesthesiology 1975; 42: 197–200.
185 Kimura T, Watanabe S, Asakura N, et al. Determination of end-tidal sevoflurane
concentration for tracheal intubation and minimum alveolar anesthetic concen-
tration in adults. Anesth Analg 1994; 79: 378–381.
186 Katoh T, Ikeda K. The minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) of sevoflurane in
humans. Anesthesiology 1987; 66: 301–304.
187 Katoh T, Ikeda K. The effect of clonidine on sevoflurane requirements for anaes-
thesia and hypnosis. Anaesthesia 2005; 52: 364–381.
188 Katoh T, Ikeda K. The effects of fentanyl on sevoflurane requirements for loss of
consciousness and skin incision. Anesthesiology 1998; 88: 18–24.
189 Katoh T, Kobayashi S, Suzuki A, et al. The effect of fentanyl on sevoflurane
requirements for somatic and sympathetic responses to surgical incision.
Anesthesiology 1999; 90(2): 398–405.
190 Suzuki A, Katoh T, Ikeda K. The effect of adenosine triphosphate on sevoflurane
requirements for minimum alveolar anesthetic concentration and minimum alve-
olar anesthetic concentration awake. Anesth Analg 1998; 86(1): 179–183.
191 Hornbein TF, Eger EI II, Winter PM, et al. The minimum alveolar concentration
on nitrous oxide in man. Anesth Analg 1982; 61: 553–556.
192 Martin-Jurado O, Vogt R, Knutter APN, et al. Effect of inhalation of isoflurane at
end-tidal concentrations greater than, equal to, and less than the minimum

-- 534 of 1450 --

Chapter 28: Inhalation Anesthetics 	519
anesthetic concentration on bispectral index in chickens. Am J Vet Res 2008;
69(10): 1254–1261.
193 Curro TG, Brunson DB, Paul-Murphy J. Determination of the ED50 of isoflurane
and evaluation of the isoflurane-sparing effect of butorphanol in cockatoos
(Cacatua spp.). Vet Surg 1994; 23: 429–433.
194 Ludders JW, Rode J, Mitchell GS. Isoflurane anesthesia in sandhill cranes (Grus
canadensis): minimal anesthetic concentration and cardiopulmonary dose–
response during spontaneous and controlled breathing. Anesth Analg 1989; 68:
511–516.
195 Ludders JW, Mitchell GS, Rode J. Minimal anesthetic concentration and cardio-
pulmonary dose response of isoflurane in ducks. Vet Surg 1990; 19: 304–307.
196 Fitzgerald G, Blais D. Effect of nitrous oxide on the minimal anesthetic dose of
isoflurane in pigeons and red-tailed hawks. In: Proceedings of the 4th International
Congress of Veterinary Anaesthesia, Utrecht, Netherlands, 1991: 27.
197 Escobar A, Valadao CAA, Brosnan RJ, et al. Effects of butorphanol on the mini-
mum anesthetic concentration for sevoflurane in guineafowl (Numida meleagris).
Am J Vet Res 2012; 73(2): 183–188.
198 Pavez JC, Hawkins MG, Pascoe PJ, et al. Effect of fentanyl target-controlled infu-
sions on isoflurane minimum anaesthetic concentration and cardiovascular func-
tion in red-tailed hawks (Buteo jamaicensis). Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38(4):
344–351.
199 Mercado JA, Larsen RS, Wack RF, et al. Minimum anesthetic concentration of
isoflurane in captive thick-billed parrots (Rhynchopsitta pachyrhyncha). Am J Vet
Res 2008; 69(2): 189–194.
200 Smith J, Mason DE, Muir WW III. The influence of midazolam on the minimum
anesthetic concentration of isoflurane in racing pigeons. Vet Surg 1993; 22(6):
546–547.
201 Cherkin A, Catchpool JF. Temperature dependence of anesthesia in goldfish.
Science 1964; 144: 1460–1462.
202 Shim CY, Andersen NB. The effects of oxygen on minimal anesthetic require-
ments in the toad. Anesthesiology 1971; 34: 333–337.
203 Steffey EP, Eger EI II. Nitrous oxide in veterinary practice and animal research. In:
Eger EI II, ed. Nitrous Oxide/N2O. New York, NY: Elsevier, 1984: 305–312.
204 Wouters P, Doursout MF, Merin RG, et al. Influence of hypertension on MAC of
halothane in rats. Anesthesiology 1990; 72: 843–845.
205 Zucker J. Central cholinergic depression reduces MAC for isoflurane in rats.
Anesth Analg 1991; 72: 790–795.
206 White PF, Johnston RR, Pudwill CR. Interaction of ketamine and halothane in
rats. Anesthesiology 1975; 42: 179–186.
207 Stone DJ, Moscicki JC, DiFazio CA. Thiopental reduces halothane MAC in rats.
Anesth Analg 1992; 74: 542–546.
208 Doherty TJ, Geiser DR, Rohrbach BW. Effect of acepromazine and butorphanol
on halothane minimum alveolar concentration in ponies. Equine Vet J 1997; 29(5):
374–376.
209 Heard DJ, Webb AI, Daniels RT. Effect of acepromazine on the anesthetic require-
ment of halothane in the dog. Am J Vet Res 1986; 47: 2113–2116.
210 Webb AI, Obrien JM. The effect of acepromazine maleate on the anesthetic
potency of halothane and isoflurane. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1988; 24(6): 609–615.
211 Matthews NS, Dollar NS, Shawley RV. Halothane-sparing effect of benzodiaz-
epines in ponies. Cornell Vet 1990; 80: 259–265.
212 Hellyer PW, Mama KR, Shafford HL, et al. Effects of diazepam and flumazenil on
minimum alveolar concentrations for dogs anestetized with isoflurane or a com-
bination of isoflurane and fentanyl. Am J Vet Res 2001; 62(4): 555–560.
213 Perisho JA, Buechel DR, Miller RD. The effect of diazepam on minimum alveolar
anesthetic requirement (MAC) in man. Can Anaesth Soc J 1971; 18: 536.
214 Murphy MR, Hug CC Jr. The anesthetic potency of fentanyl in terms of its reduc-
tion of enflurane MAC. Anesthesiology 1982; 57: 485–488.
215 Ewing KK, Mohammed HO, Scarlett JM, et al. Reduction of isoflurane anesthetic
requirement by medetomidine and its restoration by atipamezole in dogs. Am J
Vet Res 1993; 54: 294–299.
216 Gross ME, Clifford CA, Hardy DA. Excitement in an elephant after intravenous
administration of atropine. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1994; 205(10): 1437–1438.
217 Steffey EP, Martucci R, Howland D, et al. Meperidine–halothane interaction in
dogs. Can Anaesth Soc J 1977; 24(4): 459–467.
218 Melvin MA, Johnson BH, Quasha AL, et al. Induction of anesthesia with midazolam
decreases halothane MAC in humans. Anesthesiology 1982; 57(3): 238–241.
219 Lambert–Zechovsky N, Bingen E, Bourillon A, et al. Effects of antibiotics on the
microbial intestinal ecosystem. Dev Pharmacol Ther 1984; 7(1): 150–157.
220 Doherty TJ, McDonell WN, Dyson DH, et al. The effect of a 5-hydroxytryptamine
antagonist (R51703) on halothane MAC in the dog. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1995;
18: 153–155.
221 Sonner JM, Antognini JF, Dutton RC, et al. Inhaled anesthetics and immobility:
mechanisms, mysteries, and minimum alveolar anesthetic concentration. Anesth
Analg 2003; 97(3): 718–740.
222 Fischer E. Einfluss der configuration auf die wirkung der enzyme. Der Dtsch
Chem Ges 1894; 27: 2985–2993.
223 Brosnan RJ, Eger EI II, Laster MJ, et al. Anesthetic properties of carbon dioxide in
the rat. Anesth Analg 2007; 105(1): 103–106.
224 Brosnan RJ, Yang L, Milutinovic PS, et al. Ammonia has anesthetic properties.
Anesth Analg 2007; 104(6): 1430–1433.
225 Won A, Oh I, Liao M, et al. The minimum alveolar anesthetic concentration of 2-,
3-, and 4- alcohols and ketones in rats: relevance to anesthetic mechanisms.
Anesth Analg 2006; 102(5): 1419–1426.
226 Nunn JF, Sturrock JE, Willis EJ, et al. The effect of inhalational anaesthetics on the
swimming velocity of Tetrahymena pyriformis. J Cell Sci 1974; 15: 537–554.
227 Livingston JS. On the anaesthetic effects of chloroform, ether, and amylene on
sensitive plants. Trans Bot Soc Edinburgh 1860; 6: 323–325.
228 Winter PM, Burce DL, Bach MJ, et al. The anesthetic effect of air at atmospheric
pressure. Anesthesiology 1975; 42: 658–661.
229 Brosnan RJ, Ramos K, Aguiar AJA, et al. Anesthetic pharmacology of the mint
extracts L-carvone and methyl salicylate. Pharmacology 2022; 107: 167–178.
230 Meyer H. Zur theorie der alkoholnarkose. Naunyn-Schmiedeberg Arch Pharmacol
1899; 42: 109–118.
231 Overton CE. Studies of Narcosis. London, UK: Chapman and Hall, 1991.
232 Brosnan R, Gong D, Cotten J, et al. Chirality in anesthesia II: stereoselective mod-
ulation of ion channel function by secondary alcohol enantiomers. Anesth Analg
2006; 103(1): 86–91.
233 Koblin DD, Chortkoff BS, Laster MJ, et al. Polyhalogenated and perfluorinated
compounds that disobey the Meyer–Overton hypothesis. Anesth Analg 1994; 79:
1043–1048.
234 Cantor RS. Breaking the Meyer–Overton rule: predicted effects of varying stiff-
ness and interfacial activity on the intrinsic potency of anesthetics. Biophys J 2001;
80(5): 2284–2297.
235 Cantor RS. Breaking the Meyer–Overton rule: predicted effects of varying stiff-
ness and interfacial activity on the intrinsic potency of anesthetics. Biophys J 2001;
80: 2284–2297.
236 Fabian B, Sega M, Voloshin VP, et al. Lateral pressure profile and free volume
properties in phospholipid membranes containing anesthetics. J Phys Chem B
2017; 121: 2814–2824.
237 Booker RD, Sum AK. Biophysical changes induced by xenon on phospholipid
bilayers. Biochem Biophys Acta 2013; 1828: 1347–1356.
238 Reigada R. Atomistic study of lipid membranes containing chloroform: looking
for a lipid-mediated mechanism of anesthesia. PLoS ONE 2013; 8: e52631.
239 Darvas M, Hoang PN, Picaud S, et al. Anestheti molecules embedded in a alipid
membrane: a computer simulation study. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2012; 14:
12956–12969.
240 Herold KF, Sanford RL, Lee W, et al. Clinical concentrations of chemically diverse
general anesthetics minimally affect lipid bilayer properties. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2017; 114: 3109–3114.
241 Miller SL. A theory of gaseous anesthetics. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1961; 47:
1515–1524.
242 Pauling L. A molecular theory of general anesthesia. Science 1961; 134: 15–21.
243 Miller KW, Paton WD, Smith EB. Site of action of general anaesthetics. Nature
1965; 206: 574–577.
244 Eger EI II, Lundgren C, Miller SL, et al. Anesthetic potencies of sulfur hexafluor-
ide, carbon tetrafluoride, chloroform and ethrane in dogs: correlation with the
hydrate and lipid theories of anesthetic action. Anesthesiology 1969; 30(2):
129–135.
245 Willenbring D, Xu Y, Tang P. The role of structured water in mediating general
anesthetic action on alpha4beta2 nAChR. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2010; 12:
10263–10269.
246 Franks NP, Lieb WR. Do general anaesthetics act by competitive binding to spe-
cific receptors? Nature 1984; 310: 599–602.
247 Xie Z, McMillan K, Pike CM, et al. Interaction of anesthetics with neurotransmit-
ter release machinery proteins. J Neurophysiol 2013; 109: 758–767.
248 Nagele P, Mendel JB, Placzek WJ, et al. Volatile anesthetics bind rat synaptic snare
proteins. Anesthesiology 2005; 103: 768–778.
249 Miao N, Frazer MJ, Lynch C III. Volatile anesthetics depress Ca2+ transients and glu-
tamate release in isolated cerebral synaptosomes. Anesthesiology 1995; 83: 593–603.
250 Wang HY, Eguchi K, Yamashita T, et al. Frequency-dependent block of excitatory
neurotransmission by isoflurane via dual presynaptic mechanisms. J Neurosci
2020; 40: 4103–4115.
251 Hemmings HC Jr., Yan W, Westphalen RI, et al. The general anesthetic isoflurane
depresses synaptic vesicle exocytosis. Mol Pharmacol 2005; 67: 1591–1599.
252 Torturo CL, Zhou ZY, Ryan TA, et al. Isoflurane inhibits dopaminergic synaptic
vesicle exocytosis coupled to CaV2.2 in rat midbrain neurons. eNeuro 2019: 6.
253 Wu XS, Sun JY, Evers AS, et al. Isoflurane inhibits transmitter release and the
presynaptic action potential. Anesthesiology 2004; 100: 663–670.

-- 535 of 1450 --

520 	Section 3: Pharmacology
254 Herring BE, Xie Z, Marks J, et al. Isoflurane inhibits the neurotransmitter release
machinery. J Neurophysiol 2009; 102: 1265–1273.
255 Baumgart JP, Zhou ZY, Hara M, et al. Isoflurane inhibits synaptic vesicle exocyto-
sis through reduced Ca2+ influx, not Ca2+-exocytosis coupling. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2015; 112: 11959–11964.
256 Wesphalen RI, Hemmings HC Jr. Volatile anesthetic effects on glutamate versus
GABA release from isolated rat cortical nerve terminals: basal release. J Pharmacol
Exp Ther 2006; 316: 208–215.
257 Westphalen RI, Hemmings HC Jr. Volatile anesthetic effects on glutamate versus
GABA release from isolated rat cortical nerve terminals: 4-aminopyridine-evoked
release. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2006; 316: 216–223.
258 Yamakura T, Harris RA. Effects of gaseous anesthetics nitrous oxide and xenon on
ligand-gated ion channels. Comparison with isoflurane and ethanol. Anesthesiology
2000; 93: 1095–1101.
259 Ogata J, Shiraishi M, Namba T, et al. Effects of anesthetics on mutant N-methyl-
D- asparate receptors expressed in Xenopus oocytes. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2006;
318; 434–443.
260 Krasowski MD, Harrison NL. The actions of ether, alcohol and alkane general
anaesthetics on BABAA and glycine receptors and the effects of TM2 and
TM3 mutations. Br J Pharmacol 2000; 129: 731–743.
261 Violet JM, Downie DL, Nakisa RC, et al. Differential sensitivities of mammalian
neuronal and muscle nicotinic acetylcholine receptors to general anesthetics.
Anesthesiology 1997; 86: 866–874.
262 Lin LH, Chen LL, Zirrolli JA, et al. General anesthetics potentiate gamma-
aminobutyric acid actions on gamma-aminobutyric acid A receptors expressed by
Xenopus oocytes: lack of involvement of intracellular calcium. J Pharmacol Exp
Ther 1992; 263: 569–578.
263 Downie DL, Hall AC, Lieb WR, et al. Effects of inhalational general anaesthetics
on native glycine receptors in rat medullary neurons and recombinant glycine
receptors in Xenopus oocytes. Br J Pharmacol 1996; 118: 493–502.
264 Liu C, Au JD, Zou HL, et al. Potent activation of the human tandem pore domain
K channel TRESK with clinical concentrations of volatile anesthetics. Anesth
Analg 2004; 99: 1715–1722.
265 Eckenhoff RG, Johansson JS. On the relevance of ‘clinically relevant concentrations’
of inhaled anesthetics in in vitro experiments. Anesthesiology 1999; 91: 856–860.
266 Shafer SL, Hendrickx JFA, Flood P, et al. Additivity versus synergy: a theoretical
analysis of implications for anesthetic mechanisms. Anesth Analg 2008; 107(2):
507–524.
267 Eger EI II, Tang M, Liao M, et al. Inhaled anesthetics do not combine to produce
synergistic effects regarding minimum alveolar anesthetic concentration in rats.
Anesth Analg 2008; 107(2): 479–485.
268 Brosnan RJ. Does anesthetic additivity imply a similar molecular mechanism of
anesthetic action at N-methyl-D- aspartate receptors? Anesth Analg 2011; 112:
568–573.
269 Brosnan RJ. GABA-A receptor antagonism increases NMDA receptor inhibition
by isoflurane at a minimum alveolar concentration. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011;
38(3): 231–239.
270 Brosnan RJ. Increased NMDA receptor inhibition at an increased sevoflurane
MAC. BMC Anesthesiol 2012; 12: 9.
271 Franks NP, Lieb WR. Selective actions of volatile general anaesthetics at molecular
and cellular levels. Br J Anaesth 1993; 71: 65–76.
272 Franks NP, Lieb WR. Temperature dependence of the potency of volatile general
anesthetics implications for in vitro experiments. Anesthesiology 1996; 84: 716–720.
273 Brosnan RJ, Pham TL. Hydrocarbon molar water solubility predicts NMDA vs
GABAA receptor modulation. BMC Pharmacol Toxicol 2014; 15: 62.
274 Brosnan RJ, Pham TL. GABAA receptor modulation by phenyl ring compounds is
associated with a water solubility cut-off value. Pharmacology 2016; 98: 13–19.
275 Brosnan RJ, Pham TL. Anesthetic-sensitive ion channel modulation is associated
with a molar water solubility cut-off. BMC Pharmacol Toxicol 2018; 19: 57.
276 Jinks SL, Atherley RJ, Dominguez CL, et al. Isoflurane disrupts central pattern
generator activity and coordination in the lamprey isolated spinal cord.
Anesthesiology 2005; 103: 567–575.
277 Eger EI II, Xing Y, Pearce R, et al. Isoflurane antagonizes the capacity of flurothyl
or 1,2-dichlorohexafluorocyclobutane to impair fear conditioning to context and
tone. Anesth Analg 2003; 96: 1010–1018.
278 Alkire MT, Nathan SV. Does the amygdala mediate anesthetic-induced amnesia?
Basolateral amygdala lesions block sevoflurane-induced amnesia. Anesthesiology
2005; 102: 754–760.
279 Ranft A, Kurz J, Deuringer M, et al. Isoflurane modulates glutamatergic
and GABAergic neurotransmission in the amygdala. Eur J Neurosci 2004; 20:
1276–1280.
280 Zhang F, Feng X, Zeng Q, et al. Sevoflurane induced amnesia inhibits hippocam-
pal Arc expression partially through 5-hydroxytryptamine-7 receptors in the
bilateral basolateral amygdala in rats. Neurosci Lett 2014; 562: 13–18.
281 Perauansky M, Rau V, Ford T, et al. Slowing of the hippocampal theta rhythm cor-
relates with anesthetic-induced amnesia. Anesthesiology 2010; 113: 1299–1309.
282 Rau V, Iyer SV, Oh I, et al. Gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptor alpha 4
subunit knowckout mice are resistant to the amnesic effect of isoflurane. Anesth
Analg 2009; 109: 1816–1822.
283 Rau V, Oh I, Liao M, et al. Gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptor beta3 subu-
nit forebrain-specific knowckout mice are resistant to the amnestic effect of isoflu-
rane. Anesth Analg 2011; 113: 500–504.
284 Zurek AA, Bridgwater EM, Orser BA. Inhibition of alpha5 gamma-aminobutyric
acid type A receptors restore recognition memory after general anesthesia. Anesth
Analg 2012; 114: 845–855.
285 Alkire MT, Asher CD, Franciscus AM, Hahn EL. Thalamic microinfusion of anti-
body to a voltage-gated potassium channel restores consciousness during anesthe-
sia. Anesthesiology 2009; 110: 766–773.
286 Solt K, Van Dort CJ, Chemali JJ, et al. Electrical stimulation of the ventral tegmen-
tal area induces reanimation from general anesthesia. Anesthesiology 2014; 121:
311–319.
287 Boyden ES, Brown EN, Solt K. Optogenetic activation of dopamine neurons in the
ventral tegmental area induces reanimation from general anesthesia. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2016; 113: 12826–12831.
288 Muindi F, Kenny JD, Taylor NE, et al. Electrical stimulation of the parabrachial
nucleus induces reanimation from isoflurane general anesthesia. Behav Brain Res
2016; 306: 20–25.
289 Wang TX, Xiong B, Xu W, et al. Activation of parabrachial nucleus gluta-
matergic neurons accelerates reanimation from sevoflurane anesthesia in mice.
Anesthesiology 2019; 130: 106–118.
290 Melzack R, Casey KL. Sensory, motivational and control determinants of pain; a
new conceptual model. In: Kenshalo D, ed. The Skin Senses. Tallahassee, FL:
Thomas, 1967: 423–443.
291 O’Connor TC, Abram SE. Inhibition of nociception-induced spinal sensitization
by anesthetic agents. Anesthesiology 1995; 82: 259–266.
292 Mitsuyo T, Dutton RC, Antognini JF, et al. The differential effects of halothane
and isoflurane on windup of dorsal horn neurons selected in unanesthetized
decerebrated rats. Anesth Analg 2006; 103(3): 753–760.
293 Zhang Y, Eger EI, Dutton RC, et al. Inhaled anesthetics have hyperalgesic effects at
0.1 minimum alveolar anesthetic concentration. Anesth Analg 2000; 91: 462–466.
294 Sonner J, Li J, Eger EI. Desflurane and nitrous oxide, but not nonimmobilizers,
affect nociceptive responses. Anesth Analg 1998; 86(3): 629–634.
295 Flood P, Sonner JM, Gong D, et al. Isoflurane hyperalgesia is modulated by nico-
tinic inhibition. Anesthesiology 2002; 97: 192–198.
296 Yamakura T, Harris RA. Effects of gaseous anesthetics nitrous oxide and xenon on
ligand-gated ion channels. Comparison with isoflurane and ethanol. Anesthesiology
2000; 93: 1095–1101.
297 Zhang C, Davies MF, Guo TZ, et al. The analgesic action of nitrous oxide is
dependent on the release of norepinephrine in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord.
Anesthesiology 1999; 91: 1401–1407.
298 Nakata Y, Goto T, Ishiguro Y, et al. Anesthetic doses of sevoflurane to block car-
diovascular responses to incision when administered with xenon or nitrous oxide.
Anesthesiology 1999; 91: 369–373.
299 Dwyer RC, Rampil IJ, Eger EI II, Bennett HL. The electroencephalogram does not
predict depth of isoflurane anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1994; 81: 403–409.
300 Scheller MS, Tateishi A, Drummond JC, et al. The effects of sevoflurane on cerebral
blood flow, cerebral metabolic rate for oxygen, intracranial pressure, and the elec-
troencephalogram are similar to those of isoflurane in the rabbit. Anesthesiology
1988; 68: 548–552.
301 Rampil IJ, Weiskopf RB, Brown JG, et al. I-653 and isoflurane produce similar
dose-related changes in the electroencephalogram of pigs. Anesthesiology 1988;
69: 298–302.
302 Rampil IJ, Lockhart SH, Eger EI II, et al. The electroencephalographic effects of
desflurane in humans. Anesthesiology 1991; 74: 434–439.
303 Neigh JL, Garman JK, Harp JR. The electroencephalographic pattern during anes-
thesia with Ethrane: effects of depth of anesthesia, PaCO2 and nitrous oxide.
Anesthesiology 1971; 35: 482–487.
304 Joas TA, Stevens WC, Eger EI II. Electroencephalographic seizure activity in dogs
during anaesthesia: studies with Ethrane, fluroxene, halothane, chloroform, divi-
nyl ether, diethyl ether, methoxyflurane, cyclopropane and forane. Br J Anaesth
1971; 43: 739–745.
305 Todd MM, Drummond JC. A comparison of the cerebrovascular and metabolic
effects of halothane and isoflurane in the cat. Anesthesiology 1984; 60: 276–282.
306 Karasawa F. The effects of sevoflurane on lidocaine-induced convulsions. J Anesth
1991; 5(1): 60–67.
307 Fukuda H, Hirabayashi Y, Shimizu R, et al. Sevoflurane is equivalent to isoflurane
for attenuating bupivacaine-induced arrhythmias and seizures in rats. Anesth
Analg 1996; 83: 570–573.

-- 536 of 1450 --

Chapter 28: Inhalation Anesthetics 	521
308 Murao K, Shingu K, Tsushima K, et al. The anticonvulsant effects of volatile anes-
thetics on penicillin-induced status epilepticus in cats. Anesth Analg 2000; 90(1):
142–147.
309 Murao K, Shingu I, Tsushima K, et al. The anticonvulsant effects of volatile anes-
thetics on lidocaine-induced seizures in cats. Anesth Analg 2000; 90(1): 148–155.
310 Osawa M, Shingu K, Murakawa M, et al. Effect of sevoflurane on central nervous
system electrical activity in cats. Anesth Analg 1994; 79: 52–57.
311 Woodforth IJ, Hicks RG, Crawford MR, et al. Electroencephalographic evidence
of seizure activity under deep sevoflurane anesthesia in a nonepileptic patient.
Anesthesiology 1997; 87: 1579–1582.
312 Komatsu H, Tale S, Endo S, et al. Electrical seizures during sevoflurane anesthesia
in two pediatric patients with epilepsy. Anesthesiology 1994; 81: 1535–1537.
313 Cucchiara RF, Theye RA, Michenfelder JD. The effects of isoflurane on canine
cerebral metabolism and blood flow. Anesthesiology 1974; 40: 571–574.
314 Lutz LJ, Milde JH, Milde LN. The cerebral functional, metabolic, and hemody-
namic effects of desflurane in dogs. Anesthesiology 1990; 73: 125–131.
315 Munro A. Observations on the Structure and Functions of the Nervous System.
Edinburgh: William Creech, 1783.
316 Kellie G. Account of the appearances observed in the dissection of two of three indi-
viduals presumed to have perished in the storm of the 3rd, and whose bodies were
discovered in the vicinity of Leith on the morning of the 4th, November 1821: with
some reflections on the pathology of the brain. Trans Medico- Chirurgical Soc Edinb
1824; 1: 84–169.
317 Artru AA. Relationship between cerebral blood volume and CSF pressure during
anesthesia with halothane or enflurane in dogs. Anesthesiology 1983; 58(6): 533–539.
318 Holmstrom A, Akeson J. Desflurane increases intracranial pressure more and
sevoflurane less than isoflurane in pigs subjected to intracranial hypertension.
J Neurosurg Anesthesiol 2004; 16: 136–143.
319 Lam AM, Mayberg TS, Eng CC, et al. Nitrous oxide- isoflurane anesthesia causes
more cerebral vasodilation than an equipotent dose of isoflurane in humans.
Anesth Analg 1994; 78: 462–468.
320 Fukuda T, Nakayama H, Yanagi K, et al. The effects of 30% and 60% xenon inhala-
tion on pial vessel diameter and intracranial pressure in rabbits. Anesth Analg
2001; 92: 1245–1250.
321 Fraga M, Rama-Macerias P, Rodino S, et al. The effects of isoflurane and desflu-
rane on intracranial pressure, cerebral perfusion pressure, and cerebral arterio-
venous oxygen content difference in normocapnic patients with supratentorial
brain tumors. Anesthesiology 2003; 98: 1085–1090.
322 Matta BF, Heath KJ, Tipping K, et al. Direct cerebral vasodilatory effects of sevo-
flurane and isoflurane. Anesthesiology 1999; 91: 677–680.
323 Moore LE, Kirsch J, Helfaer MA, et al. Nitric oxide and prostanoids contribute to
isoflurane-induced cerebral hyperemia in pigs. Anesthesiology 1994; 80:
1328–1337.
324 Iadecola C. Does nitric oxide mediate the increases in cerebral blood flow elicited
by hypercapnia? Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992; 89: 3913–3916.
325 Sjakste N, Baumane L, Meirena D, et al. Drastic increase in nitric oxide content in
rat brain under halothane anesthesia revealed by EPR method. Biochem Pharmacol
1999; 58: 1955–1959.
326 Todd MM, Wu B, Warner DS, et al. The dose-related effects of nitric oxide syn-
thase inhibition on cerebral blood flow during isoflurane and pentobarbital anes-
thesia. Anesthesiology 1994; 80: 1128–1136.
327 Kant GJ, Muller TW, Lenox RH, et al. In vivo effects of pentobarbital and halo-
thane anesthesia on levels of adenosine 3′, 5′-monophosphate and guanosine 3′,
5′-monophosphate in rat brain regions and pituitary. Biochem Pharmacol 1980;
29: 1891–1896.
328 Iida H, Ohata H, Iida M, et al. Isoflurane and sevoflurane induced vasodilation of
cerebral vessels via ATP-sensitive K+ channel activation. Anesthesiology 1998; 89:
954–960.
329 Pelligrino DA, Miletich DJ, Hoffman WE, et al. Nitrous oxide markedly increases
cerebral cortical metabolic rate and blood flow in the goat. Anesthesiology 1984;
60: 405–412.
330 Reasoner DK, Warner DS, Todd MM, et al. Effects of nitrous oxide on cerebral
metabolic rate in rats anaesthetized with isoflurane. Br J Anaesth 1990; 65:
210–215.
331 Drummond JC, Scheller MS, Todd MM. The effect of nitrous oxide on cortical
cerebral blood flow during anesthesia with halothane and isoflurane, with and
without morphine in the rabbit. Anesth Analg 1987; 66: 1083–1089.
332 Frietsch T, Bogdanski R, Blobner M, et al. Effects of xenon on cerebral blood flow
and cerebral glucose utilization in rats. Anesthesiology 2001; 94: 290–297.
333 Fink H, Blobner M, Bogdanski R, et al. Effects of xenon on cerebral blood flow and
autoregulation: an experimental study in pigs. Br J Anaesth 2000; 84: 221–225.
334 Strebel S, Lam AM, Matta B, et al. Dynamic and static cerebral autoregulation
during isoflurane, desflurane, and propofol anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1995; 83:
66–76.
335 Hoffman WE, Edelman G, Kochs E, et al. Cerebral autoregulation in awake versus
isoflurane-anesthetized rats. Anesth Analg 1991; 73: 753–757.
336 McPherson RW, Kirsch J, Tobin J, et al. Cerebral blood flow in primates is
increased by isoflurane over time and is decreased by nitric oxide synthase inhibi-
tion. Anesthesiology 1994; 80: 1320–1327.
337 Alexander SC, Wollman H, Cohen PJ, et al. Cerebrovascular response to Pa
CO2
during halothane anesthesia in man. J Appl Physiol 1964; 19: 561–565.
338 Scheller MS, Todd MM, Drummond JC. Isoflurane, halothane, and regional cer-
ebral blood flow at various levels of PaCO2 in rabbits. Anesthesiology 1986; 64(5):
598–605.
339 McPherson RW, Brian JE, Traysman RJ. Cerebrovascular responsiveness to carbon
dioxide in dogs with 1.4% and 2.8% isoflurane. Anesthesiology 1989; 70(5):843–851.
340 Nishiyama T, Matsukawa T, Yokoyama T, et al. Cerebrovascular carbon dioxide
reactivity during general anesthesia: a comparison between sevoflurane and iso-
flurane. Anesth Analg 1999; 89: 1437–1441.
341 Brosnan RJ, LeCouteur RA, Steffey EP, et al. Direct measurement of intracranial
pressure in adult horses. Am J Vet Res 2002; 63(9): 1252–1256.
342 Brosnan RJ, Steffey EP, LeCouteur RA, et al. Effects of body position on intracra-
nial and cerebral perfusion pressures in isoflurane-anesthetized horses. J Appl
Physiol 2002; 92: 2542–2546.
343 Brosnan RJ, Steffey EP, LeCouteur RA, et al. Effects of ventilation and isoflurane
end-tidal concentration on intracranial and cerebral perfusion pressures in
horses. Am J Vet Res 2003; 64(1): 21–25.
344 Brosnan RJ, Steffey EP, LeCouteur RA, et al. Effects of duration of isoflurane anes-
thesia and mode of ventilation on intracranial and cerebral perfusion pressures in
horses. Am J Vet Res 2003; 64(11): 1444–1448.
345 Brosnan RJ, Esteller-Vico A, Steffey EP, et al. Effects of head-down positioning on
regional central nervous system perfusion in isoflurane-anesthetized horses. Am J
Vet Res 2008; 69(6): 737–743.
346 Brosnan RJ, Steffey EP, LeCouteur RA, et al. Effects of isoflurane anesthesia on
cerebrovascular autoregulation in horses. Am J Vet Res 2011; 72(1): 18–24.
347 Trim CM. Postanesthetic hemorrhagic myelopathy or myelomalacia? Vet Clin
North Am Equine Pract 1997; 13: 73–77.
348 Knill RL, Kieraszewicz HT, Dodgson BG, et al. Chemical regulation of ventilation dur-
ing isoflurane sedation and anaesthesia in humans. Br J Anaesth 1983; 49: 957–963.
349 Fourcade HE, Stevens WC, Larson CP Jr., et al. The ventilatory effects of forane, a
new inhaled anesthetic. Anesthesiology 1971; 35: 26–31.
350 Hirshman CA, McCullough KE, Cohen PJ, et al. Depression of hypoxic ventila-
tory response by halothane, enflurane and isoflurane in dogs. Br J Anaesth 1977;
49: 947–962.
351 Knill RL, Manninen PH, Clement JL. Ventilation and chemoreflexes during enflu-
rane sedation and anaesthesia in man. Can Anaesth Soc J 1979; 26: 353–360.
352 Coon RL, Kampine JP. Hypocapnic bronchoconstriction and inhalation anesthet-
ics. Anesthesiology 1975; 43: 635–641.
353 Klide AM, Aviado DM. Mechanism for the reduction in pulmonary resistance
induced by halothane. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1967; 158: 28–35.
354 Tobias JD, Hirshman CA. Attenuation of histamine-induced airway constriction
by albuterol during halothane anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1990; 72: 105–110.
355 Habre W, Petak F, Sly PD, et al. Protective effects of volatile agents against metha-
choline- induced bronchoconstriction in rats. Anesthesiology 2001; 94: 348–353.
356 Hirshman CA, Bergman NA. Halothane and enflurane protect against bronchos-
pasm in an asthma dog model. Anesth Analg 1978; 57: 629–633.
357 Hirshman CA, Edelstein H, Peetz S, et al. Mechanism of action of inhalational
anesthesia on airways. Anesthesiology 1982; 56: 107–111.
358 Mazzeo AJ, Cheng EY, Bosnjak ZJ, et al. Differential effects of desflurane and halo-
thane on peripheral airway smooth muscle. Br J Anaesth 1996; 76: 841–846.
359 Wiklund CU, Lim S, Lindsten U, et al. Relaxation by sevoflurane, desflurane and
halothane in the isolated guinea-pig trachea via inhibition of cholinergic neuro-
transmission. Br J Anaesth 1999; 83(3): 422–429.
360 Doi M, Ikeda K. Airway irritation produced by volatile anaesthetics during brief
inhalation: comparison of halothane, enflurane, isoflurane and sevoflurane. Can J
Anaesth 1993; 40: 122–126.
361 Eger EI II. Desflurane (Suprane): A Compendium and Reference. Rutherford, NJ:
Healthpress Publishing Group, 1993.
362 Terriet MF, Desouza GJA, Jacobs JS, et al. Which is most pungent: isoflurane,
sevoflurane or desflurane? Br J Anaesth 2000; 85: 305–307.
363 Lockhart SH, Rampil IJ, Yasuda N, et al. Depression of ventilation by desflurane in
humans. Anesthesiology 1991; 74: 484–488.
364 Munson ES, Larson CP Jr., Babad AA, et al. The effects of halothane, fluroxene
and cyclopropane on ventilation: a comparative study in man. Anesthesiology
1966; 27(6): 716–728.
365 Larson CP Jr., Eger EI II, Muallem M, et al. The effects of diethyl ether and meth-
oxyflurane on ventilation: II. A comparative study in man. Anesthesiology 1969;
30(2): 174–184.

-- 537 of 1450 --

522 	Section 3: Pharmacology
366 Doi M, Ikeda K. Respiratory effects of sevoflurane. Anesth Analg 1987; 66: 241–244.
367 Calverley RK, Smith NT, Jones CW, et al. Ventilatory and cardiovascular effects of
enflurane anesthesia during spontaneous ventilation in man. Anesth Analg 1978;
51: 610–618.
368 Weiskopf RB, Holmes MA, Rampil IJ, et al. Cardiovascular safety and actions of high
concentrations of I-653 and isoflurane in swine. Anesthesiology 1989; 70: 793–799.
369 Wolfson B, Kielar CM, Lake C, et al. Anesthetic Index – a new approach.
Anesthesiology 1973; 38: 583–586.
370 Hodgson DS, Steffey EP, Grandy JL, et al. Effects of spontaneous, assisted, and
controlled ventilation in halothane-anesthetized geldings. Am J Vet Res 1986; 47:
992–996.
371 Steffey EP, Wheat JD, Meagher DM, et al. Body position and mode of ventilation
influences arterial pH, oxygen and carbon dioxide tensions in halothane–
anesthetized horses. Am J Vet Res 1977; 38: 379–382.
372 Brandstater B, Eger EI II, Edelist G. Constant-depth halothane anesthesia in
respiratory studies. J Appl Physiol 1965; 20(2): 171–174.
373 Steffey EP, Farver TB, Woliner MJ. Cardiopulmonary function during 7 h of
constant– dose halothane and methoxyflurane. J Appl Physiol 1987; 63: 1351–1359.
374 Fourcade HE, Larson CP Jr., Hickey RF, et al. Effects of time on ventilation during
halothane and cyclopropane anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1972; 36: 83–88.
375 Steffey EP, Hodgson DS, Dunlop CI, et al. Cardiopulmonary function during 5
hours of constant-dose isoflurane in laterally recumbent, spontaneously breathing
horses. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1987; 10: 290–297.
376 Steffey EP, Kelly AB, Woliner MJ. Time–related responses of spontaneously
breathing laterally recumbent horses to prolonged anesthesia with halothane. Am
J Vet Res 1987; 48: 952–957.
377 Steffey EP, Kelly AB, Hodgson DS, et al. Effect of body posture on cardiopulmo-
nary function in horses during five hours of constant-dose halothane anesthesia.
Am J Vet Res 1990; 51: 11–16.
378 France CJ, Plumer HM, Eger EI II, et al. Ventilatory effects of isoflurane (Forane)
or halothane when combined with morphine, nitrous oxide and surgery. Br J
Anaesth 1974; 46: 117–120.
379 Eger EI II, Dolan WM, Stevens WC, et al. Surgical stimulation antagonizes the
respiratory depression produced by Forane. Anesthesiology 1972; 36: 544–549.
380 Steffey EP, Eisele JH, Baggot JD, et al. Influence of inhaled anesthetics on the
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of morphine. Anesth Analg 1993; 77:
346–351.
381 Steffey EP, Pascoe PJ. Xylazine blunts the cardiovascular but not the respiratory
response induced by noxious stimulation in isoflurane anesthetized horses (abstract).
Proceedings of the 7th International Congress of Veterinary Anaesthesia, 2000.
382 Steffey EP, Gillespie RJ, Berry JD, et al. Circulatory effects of halothane and
halothane–nitrous oxide anesthesia in the dog: spontaneous ventilation. Am J Vet
Res 1975; 36(2): 197–200.
383 Steffey EP, Gillespie JR, Berry JD, et al. Cardiovascular effects with the addition of
N2 O to halothane in stump-tailed macaques during spontaneous and controlled
ventilation. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1974; 165: 834–837.
384 Steffey EP, Howland D Jr. Potency of enflurane in dogs: comparison with halo-
thane and isoflurane. Am J Vet Res 1978; 39: 673–677.
385 Klide AM. Cardiovascular effects of enflurane and isoflurane in the dog. Am J Vet
Res 1976; 37: 127–131.
386 Steffey EP, Howland D Jr. Comparison of circulatory and respiratory effects of
isoflurane and halothane anesthesia in horses. Am J Vet Res 1980; 41: 821–825.
387 Eger EI II. New inhaled anesthetics. Anesthesiology 1994; 80: 906–922.
388 Merin RG, Bernard JM, Doursout MF, et al. Comparison of the effects of isoflu-
rane and desflurane on cardiovascular dynamics and regional blood flow in the
chronically instrumented dog. Anesthesiology 1991; 74(3): 568–574.
389 Weiskopf RB, Holmes MA, Eger EI II, et al. Cardiovascular effects of I-653 in
swine. Anesthesiology 1988; 69: 303–309.
390 Pagel PS, Kampine JP, Schmeling WT, et al. Comparison of the systemic and coro-
nary hemodynamic actions of desflurane, isoflurane, halothane, and enflurane in
the chronically instrumented dog. Anesthesiology 1991; 74: 539–551.
391 Warltier DC, Pagel PS. Cardiovascular and respiratory actions of desflurane: is
desflurane different from isoflurane? Anesth Analg 1992; 75: S17–S31.
392 Picker O, Scheeren TWL, Arndt JO. Inhalation anaesthetics increase heart rate by
decreasing cardiac vagal activity in dogs. Br J Anaesth 1988; 87(5): 748–754.
393 Malan TP, DiNardo JA, Isner J, et al. Cardiovascular effects of sevoflurane com-
pared with those of isoflurane in volunteers. Anesthesiology 1995; 83: 918–928.
394 Mutoh T, Nishimura R, Kim HY, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of sevoflurane,
compared with halothane, enflurane, and isoflurane, in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1997;
58(8): 885–890.
395 Pagel PS, Kampine JP, Schmeling WT, et al. Influence of volatile anesthetics on
myocardial contractility in vivo – desflurane versus isoflurane. Anesthesiology
1991; 74: 900–907.
396 Pagel PS, Kampine JP, Schmeling WT, et al. Evaluation of myocardial contractility
in the chronically instrumented dog with intact autonomic nervous system func-
tion: effects of desflurane and isoflurane. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1993; 37(2):
203–210.
397 Boban M, Stowe DF, Buljubasic N, et al. Direct comparative effects of isoflurane
and desflurane in isolated guinea pig hearts. Anesthesiology 1992; 76: 775–780.
398 Stevens WC, Cromwell TH, Halsey MJ, et al. The cardiovascular effects of a new
inhalation anesthetic, Forane, in human volunteers at constant arterial carbon
dioxide tension. Anesthesiology 1971; 35: 8–16.
399 Weiskopf RB, Cahalan MK, Eger EI II, et al. Cardiovascular actions of desflurane
in normocarbic volunteers. Anesth Analg 1991; 73: 143–156.
400 Bernard JM, Wouters PF, Doursout MF, et al. Effects of sevoflurane and isoflu-
rane on cardiac and coronary dynamics in chronically instrumented dogs.
Anesthesiology 1990; 72: 659–662.
401 Clarke KW, Alibhai HIK, Lee YHL, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of desflurane
in the dog during spontaneous and artificial ventilation. Res Vet Sci 1996; 61:
82–86.
402 Price HL. The significance of catecholamine release during anesthesia. Br J
Anaesth 1966; 38: 705–711.
403 Katz RL, Epstein RA. The interaction of anesthetic agents and adrenergic drugs to
produce cardiac arrhythmias. Anesthesiology 1968; 29: 763–784.
404 Raventos J. The action of fluothane: a new volatile anaesthetic. Br J Pharmacol
1956; 11: 394–409.
405 Muir BJ, Hall LW, Littlewort MCG. Cardiac irregularities in cats under halothane
anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth 1959; 31: 488–489.
406 Ueda I, Hirakawa M, Arakawa K, Kamaya H. Do anesthetics fluidize membranes?
Anesthesiology 1986; 64: 67–72.
407 Joas TA, Stevens WC. Comparison of the arrhythmic doses of epinephrine during
Forane, halothane, and fluroxene anesthesia in dogs. Anesthesiology 1971; 35(1): 48–53.
408 Muir WW III, Hubbell JAE, Flaherty S. Increasing halothane concentration
abolishes anesthesia-associated arrhythmias in cats and dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1988; 192: 1730–1735.
409 Moore MA, Weiskopf RB, Eger EI II, et al. Arrhythmogenic doses of epinephrine
are similar during desflurane or isoflurane anesthesia in humans. Anesthesiology
1993; 79(5): 943–947.
410 Munson ES, Tucker WK. Doses of epinephrine causing arrhythmia during enflu-
rane, methoxyflurane and halothane anesthesia in dogs. Can Anaesth Soc J 1975;
22: 495–501.
411 Navarro R, Weiskopf RB, Moore MA, et al. Humans anesthetized with sevoflurane
or isoflurane have similar arrhythmic response to epinephrine. Anesthesiology
1994; 80: 545–549.
412 Weiskopf RB, Eger EI II, Holmes MA, et al. Epinephrine-induced premature ven-
tricular contractions and changes in arterial blood pressure and heart rate during
I-653, isoflurane, and halothane anesthesia in swine. Anesthesiology 1989; 70:
293–298.
413 Johnston RR, Eger EI II, Wilson C. A comparative interaction of epinephrine with
enflurane, isoflurane and halothane in man. Anesth Analg 1976; 55: 709–712.
414 Hikasa Y, Okabe C, Takase K, et al. Ventricular arrhythmogenic dose of adrenaline
during sevoflurane, isoflurane, and halothane anaesthesia either with or without
ketamine or thiopentone in cats. Res Vet Sci 1996; 60: 134–137.
415 Tucker WK, Rackstein AD, Munson ES. Comparison of arrhythmic doses of
adrenaline, metaraminol, ephedrine, and phenylephrine, during isoflurane and
halothane anesthesia in dogs. Br J Anaesth 1974; 46: 392–396.
416 Maze M, Smith CM. Identification of receptor mechanisms mediating epineph-
rine- induced arrhythmias during halothane anesthesia in the dog. Anesthesiology
1983; 59: 322–326.
417 Light GS, Hellyer PW, Swanson CR. Parasympathetic influence on the arrhythmo-
genicity of graded dobutamine infusions in halothane-anesthetized horses. Am J
Vet Res 1992; 53(7): 1154–1160.
418 Lemke KA, Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, et al. Alterations in the arrhythmogenic
dose of epinephrine after xylazine or medetomidine administration in halothane-
anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 1993; 54: 2132–2138.
419 Lemke KA, Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, et al. Alterations in the arrhythmogenic
dose of epinephrine after xylazine or medetomidine administration in isoflurane-
anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 1993; 54: 2139–2144.
420 Robertson BJ, Clement JL, Knill RL. Enhancement of the arrhythmogenic effect of
hypercarbia by surgical stimulation during halothane anaesthesia in man. Can
Anaesth Soc J 1981; 28: 342.
421 Gelman S, Fowler KC, Smith LR. Liver circulation and function during isoflurane
and halothane anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1984; 61(6): 726–731.
422 Bernard JM, Doursout MF, Wouters P, et al. Effects of enflurane and isoflurane on
hepatic and renal circulations in chronically instrumented dogs. Anesthesiology
1991; 74(2): 298–302.

-- 538 of 1450 --

Chapter 28: Inhalation Anesthetics 	523
423 Bernard JM, Doursout MF, Wouters P, et al. Effects of sevoflurane and isoflurane
on hepatic circulation in the chronically instrumented dog. Anesthesiology 1992;
77(3): 541–545.
424 Frink EJ Jr., Morgan SE, Coetzee A, et al. The effects of sevoflurane, halothane,
enflurane, and isoflurane on hepatic blood flow and oxygenation in chronically
instrumented Greyhound dogs. Anesthesiology 1992; 76: 85–90.
425 Steffey EP, Gillespie JR, Berry JD, et al. Circulatory effects of halothane and
halothane–nitrous oxide anesthesia in the dog: controlled ventilation. Am J Vet
Res 1974; 35: 1289–1293.
426 Steffey EP, Howland D Jr. Cardiovascular effects of halothane in the horse. Am J
Vet Res 1978; 39: 611–615.
427 Pypendop BH, Ilkiw JE. Hemodynamic effects of sevoflurane in cats. Am J Vet Res
2004; 65(1): 20–25.
428 Steffey EP, Gillespie JR, Berry JD, et al. Cardiovascular effect of halothane in the
stump-tailed macaque during spontaneous and controlled ventilation. Am J Vet
Res 1974; 35: 1315–1319.
429 Stoelting RK. Inhaled Anesthetics. Pharmacology and Physiology in Anesthetic
Practice, 3rd edn. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott-Raven, 1999: 36–76.
430 Cullen DJ, Eger EI II. Cardiovascular effects of carbon dioxide in man.
Anesthesiology 1974; 41: 345–349.
431 Grandy JL, Hodgson DS, Dunlop CI, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of halothane
anesthesia in cats. Am J Vet Res 1989; 50: 1729–1732.
432 Bahlman SH, Eger EI II, Halsey MJ, et al. The cardiovascular effects of halothane
in man during spontaneous ventilation. Anesthesiology 1972; 36: 494–502.
433 Cromwell TH, Stevens WC, Eger EI II, et al. The cardiovascular effects of com-
pound 469 (Forane) during spontaneous ventilation and CO2 challenge in man.
Anesthesiology 1971; 35(1): 17–25.
434 Cullen LK, Steffey EP, Bailey CS, et al. Effect of high PaCO 2 and time on cerebro-
spinal fluid and intraocular pressure in halothane-anesthetized horses. Am J Vet
Res 1990; 51: 300–304.
435 Smith NT, Eger EI II, Stoelting RK, et al. The cardiovascular and sympathomi-
metic response to the addition of nitrous oxide to halothane in man. Anesthesiology
1970; 32(5): 410–421.
436 Yamashita K, Tsubakishita S, Futaoka S, et al. Cardiovascular effects of medetomi-
dine, detomidine and xylazine in horses. J Vet Med Sci 2000; 62(10): 1025–1032.
437 Yasuda N, Weiskopf RB, Cahalan MK, et al. Does desflurane modify circulatory
responses to stimulation in humans? Anesth Analg 1991; 73: 175–179.
438 Zbinden AM, Petersenfelix S, Thomson DA. Anesthetic depth defined using mul-
tiple noxious stimuli during isoflurane/oxygen anesthesia. II. Hemodynamic
responses. Anesthesiology 1994; 80(2): 261–267.
439 Antognini JF, Berg K. Cardiovascular responses to noxious stimuli during isoflu-
rane anesthesia are minimally affected by anesthetic action in the brain. Anesth
Analg 1995; 81: 843–848.
440 March PA, Muir WW III. Minimum alveolar concentration measures of central
nervous system activation in cats anesthetized with isoflurane. Am J Vet Res 2003;
64(12): 1528–1533.
441 Love L, Egger C, Rohrbach B, et al. The effect of ketamine on the MACBAR of
sevoflurane in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38(4): 292–300.
442 Yamashita K, Frukawa E, Itami T, et al. Minimum alveolar concentratin for blunt-
ing adrenergic responses (MAC-BAR) of sevoflurane in dogs. J Vet Med Sci 2012;
74(4): 507–511.
443 Hofmeister EH, Brainard BM, Sams LM, et al. Evaluation of induction character-
istics and hypnotic potency of isoflurane and sevoflurane in healthy dogs. Am J
Vet Res 2008; 69(4): 451–456.
444 Schmeling WT, Ganjoo P, Staunton M, et al. Pretreatment with dexmedetomidine:
altered indices of anesthetic depth for halothane in the neuraxis of cats. Anesth
Analg 1999; 88: 625–632.
445 Eger EI II, Smith NT, Stoelting RK, et al. Cardiovascular effects of halothane in
man. Anesthesiology 1970; 32(5): 396–409.
446 Eger EI II, Bowland T, Ionescu P, et al. Recovery and kinetic characteristics of
desflurane and sevoflurane in volunteers after 8-h exposure, including kinetics of
degradation products. Anesthesiology 1997; 87(3): 517–526.
447 Tayefeh F, Larson MD, Sessler DI, et al. Time-dependent changes in heart rate and
pupil size during desflurane or sevoflurane anesthesia. Anesth Analg 1997; 85(12):
1362–1366.
448 Cullen BF, Eger EI II, Smith NT, et al. Cardiovascular effects of fluroxene in man.
Anesthesiology 1970; 32(3): 218–230.
449 Libonati M, Cooperman LH, Price HL. Time-dependent circulatory effects of
methoxyflurane in man. Anesthesiology 1971; 34: 439–444.
450 Gregory GA, Eger EI II, Smith NT. The cardiovascular effects of diethyl ether in
man. Anesthesiology 1971; 34(1): 19–24.
451 Dunlop CI, Steffey EP, Miller MF, et al. Temporal effects of halothane and isoflurane
in laterally recumbent ventilated male horses. Am J Vet Res 1987; 48: 1250–1255.
452 Steffey EP, Dunlop CI, Cullen LK, et al. Circulatory and respiratory responses of
spontaneously breathing, laterally recumbent horses to 12 hours of halothane
anesthesia. Am J Vet Res 1993; 54: 929–936.
453 Yamanaka T, Oku K, Koyama H, et al. Time-related changes of the cardiovascular
system during maintenance anesthesia with sevoflurane and isoflurane in horses.
J Vet Med Sci 2001; 63(5): 527–532.
454 Whitehair KJ, Steffey EP, Willits NH, et al. Recovery of horses from inhalation
anesthesia. Am J Vet Res 1993; 54: 1693–1702.
455 Steffey EP, Woliner MJ, Dunlop C. Effects of 5 hours of constant 1.2 MAC halo-
thane in sternally recumbent, spontaneously breathing horses. Equine Vet J 1990;
22: 433–436.
456 Shimosato S, Yasuda I. Cardiac performance during prolonged halothane anaes-
thesia in the cat. Br J Anaesth 1978; 50: 215–219.
457 Price HL, Skovsted P, Pauca AL, et al. Evidence for beta-receptor activation pro-
duced by halothane in normal man. Anesthesiology 1970; 32(5): 389–395.
458 Bahlman SH, Eger EI II, Smith NT, et al. The cardiovascular effects of nitrous
oxide–halothane anesthesia in man. Anesthesiology 1971; 35(3): 274–285.
459 Eisele JH Jr. Cardiovascular effects of nitrous oxide. In: Eger EI II, ed. Nitrous
Oxide/N2O. New York: Elsevier, 1985: 125–156.
460 Grandy JL, Hodgson DS, Dunlop CI, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of ephedrine
in halothane- anesthetized horses. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1989; 12: 389–396.
461 Dyson DH, Pascoe PJ. Influence of preinduction methoxamine, lactated ringer solu-
tion, or hypertonic saline solution infusion or postinduction dobutamine infusion
on anesthetic-induced hypotension in horses. Am J Vet Res 1990; 51(1): 17–21.
462 Swanson CR, Muir WW III, Bednarski RM, et al. Hemodynamic responses in
halothane-anesthetized horses given infusions of dopamine or dobutamine. Am J
Vet Res 1985; 46: 365–371.
463 Priano LL, Marrone B. Effect of halothane on renal hemodynamics during nor-
movolemia and acute hemorrhagic hypovolemia. Anesthesiology 1985; 63(4):
357–364.
464 Gelman S, Fowler KC, Smith LR. Regional blood flow during isoflurane and halo-
thane anesthesia. Anesth Analg 1984; 63(6): 557–566.
465 Steffey EP, Zinkl J, Howland D Jr. Minimal changes in blood cell counts and bio-
chemical values associated with prolonged isoflurane anesthesia of horses. Am J
Vet Res 1979; 40(11): 1646–1648.
466 Steffey EP, Farver T, Zinkl J, et al. Alterations in horse blood cell count and bio-
chemical values after halothane anesthesia. Am J Vet Res 1980; 41(6): 934–939.
467 Stover SM, Steffey EP, Dybdal NO, et al. Hematologic and biochemical values
associated with multiple halothane anesthesias and minor surgical trauma of
horses. Am J Vet Res 1988; 49: 236–241.
468 Steffey EP, Giri SN, Dunlop CI, et al. Biochemical and haematological changes
following prolonged halothane anaesthesia in horses. Res Vet Sci 1993; 55:
338–345.
469 Nunez E, Steffey EP, Ocampo L, et al. Effects of alpha-2 adrenergic receptor ago-
nists on urine production in horses deprived of food and water. Am J Vet Res 2004;
65(10): 1342–1346.
470 Pedersoli WM. Blood serum inorganic ionic fluoride tetracycline and methoxy-
flurane anesthesia in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1977; 13: 242–246.
471 Mazze RI, Trudell JR, Cousins MJ. Methoxyflurane metabolism and renal dys-
function: clinical correlation in man. Anesthesiology 1971; 35: 247–252.
472 Leiman BC, Katz J, Stanley TH, et al. Removal of tracheal secretions in anesthe-
tized dogs: balloon catheters versus suction. Anesth Analg 1987; 66: 529–533.
473 Mazze RI, Calverley RK, Smith NT. Inorganic fluoride nephrotoxicity: prolonged
enflurane and halothane anesthesia in volunteers. Anesthesiology 1977; 46: 265–271.
474 Kharasch ED, Hankins DC, Thummel KE. Human kidney methoxyflurane and
sevoflurane metabolism – intrarenal fluoride production as a possible mechanism
of methoxyflurane nephrotoxicity. Anesthesiology 1995; 82(3): 689–699.
475 Ikeda S, Makino H. A round trip: the Japanese contribution to the development of
sevoflurane. Anesthe Analg 2022; 134: 432–439.
476 Morio M, Fujii K, Satoh N, et al. Reaction of sevoflurane and its degradation prod-
ucts with soda lime. Anesthesiology 1992; 77: 1155–1164.
477 Gonsowski CT, Laster MJ, Eger EI II, et al. Toxicity of compound A in rats: effect
of a 3–hour administration. Anesthesiology 1994; 80: 556–565.
478 Gonsowski CT, Laster MJ, Eger EI II, et al. Toxicity of compound A in rats: effect
of increasing duration of administration. Anesthesiology 1994; 80: 566–573.
479 Kandel L, Laster MJ, Eger EI II, et al. Nephrotoxicity in rats undergoing a 1 hour
exposure to compound A. Anesth Analg 1995; 81: 559–563.
480 Frink EJ Jr., Malan TP Jr., Isner RJ, et al. Renal concentrating function with pro-
longed sevoflurane or enflurane anesthesia in volunteers. Anesthesiology 1994; 80:
1019–1025.
481 Muir WW III, Gadawski JE. Cardiorespiratory effects of low-flow and closed cir-
cuit inhalation anesthesia, using sevoflurane delivered with an in-circuit vaporizer
and concentrations of compound A. Am J Vet Res 1998; 59(5): 603–608.

-- 539 of 1450 --

524 	Section 3: Pharmacology
482 Reilly CS, Wood AJJ, Koshakji RP, et al. The effect of halothane on drug disposi-
tion: contribution of changes in intrinsic drug metabolizing capacity and hepatic
blood flow. Anesthesiology 1985; 63: 70–76.
483 Pearson GR, Bogan JA, Sanford J. An increase in the half-life of pentobarbitone
with the administration of halothane in sheep. Br J Anaesth 1973; 45: 586–591.
484 Smith CM, Steffey EP, Baggot JD, et al. Effects of halothane anesthesia on the
clearance of gentamicin sulfate in horses. Am J Vet Res 1988; 49(1): 19–22.
485 Subcommittee of the National Halothane Study of the Committee on Anesthesia
NAoS-NRC. Summary of the National Halothane Study: possible association
between halothane anesthesia and postoperative hepatic necrosis. JAMA 1966;
197: 121–134.
486 Inman WHW, Mushin WW. Jaundice after repeated exposure to halothane: an
analysis of reports to the Committee on Safety of Medicines. BMJ J 1974; 1: 5–10.
487 Holmes MA, Weiskopf RB, Eger EI II, et al. Hepatocellular integrity in swine after
prolonged desflurane (I-653) and isoflurane anesthesia: evaluation of plasma ala-
nine aminotransferase activity. Anesth Analg 1990; 71: 249–253.
488 Eger EI II, Johnson BH, Ferrell LD. Comparison of the toxicity of I-653 and isoflu-
rane in rats: a test of the effect of repeated anesthesia and use of dry soda lime.
Anesth Analg 1987; 66: 1230–1233.
489 Strum DP, Eger EI II, Johnson BH, et al. Toxicity of sevoflurane in rats. Anesth
Analg 1987; 66: 769–773.
490 Eger EI II, Johnson BH, Strum DP, et al. Studies of the toxicity of I-653, halo-
thane, and isoflurane in enzyme-induced, hypoxic rats. Anesth Analg 1987; 66:
1227–1230.
491 Ross JAS, Monk SJ, Duffy SW. Effect of nitrous oxide on halothane-induced hepa-
totoxicity in hypoxic, enzyme-induced rats. Br J Anaesth 1984; 56(5): 527–533.
492 Shingu K, Eger EI II, Johnson BH. Hypoxia per se can produce hepatic damage
without death in rats. Anesth Analg 1982; 61: 820–823.
493 Shingu K, Eger EI II, Johnson BH. Hypoxia may be more important than reduc-
tive metabolism in halothane- induced hepatic injury. Anesth Analg 1982; 61:
824–827.
494 Whitehair KJ, Steffey EP, Woliner MJ, et al. Effects of inhalation anesthetic agents
on response of horses to 3 hours of hypoxemia. Am J Vet Res 1996; 57: 351–360.
495 Reynolds ES, Moslen MT. Liver injury following halothane anesthesia in pheno-
barbital- pretreated rats. Biochem Pharmacol 1974; 23: 189–195.
496 Reynolds ES, Moslen MT. Halothane hepatotoxicity: enhancement by polychlo-
rinated biphenyl pretreatment. Anesthesiology 1977; 47(1): 19–27.
497 Cooperman LH, Warden JC, Price HL. Splanchnic circulation during nitrous oxide
anesthesia and hypocarbia in normal man. Anesthesiology 1968; 29: 254–258.
498 Johnson EE, Hedley-Whyte J. Continuous positive-pressure ventilation and chole-
dochoduodenal flow resistance. J Appl Physiol 1975; 39: 937–942.
499 Davis M, Eddleston ALWF, Neuberger JM, et al. Halothane hepatitis. N Engl J Med
1980; 303(19): 1123–1124.
500 Kitteringham NR, Kenna JG, Park BK. Detection of autoantibodies directed
against human hepatic endoplasmic reticulum in sera from patients with halo-
thane- associated hepatitis. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1995; 40(4): 379–386.
501 Farrell G, Prendergast D, Murray M. Halothane hepatitis: detection of a constitu-
tional susceptibility factor. N Engl J Med 1985; 313: 1310–1315.
502 Denborough MA, Forster JFP, Lovell RRH. Anaesthetic deaths in a family. Br J
Anaesth 1962; 34: 395–396.
503 Gronert GA, Antognini JF, Pessah IN. Malignant hyperthermia. In: Miller RD, ed.
Anesthesia, 5th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Churchill Livingstone, 2000: 1033–1052.
504 Hall LW, Woolf N, Bradley JWP, et al. Unusual reaction to suxamethonium chlo-
ride. BMJ 1966; 2: 1305.
505 Kirmayer AH, Klide AM, Purvance JE. Malignant hyperthermia in a dog: case
report and review of the syndrome. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1984; 185: 978–983.
506 Deuster PA, Bockman EL, Muldoon SM. In vitro responses of cat skeletal muscle
to halothane and caffeine. J Appl Physiol 1985; 58: 521–528.
507 Bagshaw RJ, Cox RH, Knight DH, et al. Malignant hyperthermia in a greyhound.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1978; 172: 61.
508 Rosenberg H, Waldron-Mease E. Malignant hyperpyrexia in horses: anesthetic
sensitivity proven by muscle biopsy (abstract). In: Annual Meeting of the American
Society of Anesthesiologists, 1977: 333–334.
509 Hildebrand SV, Howitt GA. Succinylcholine infusion associated with hyperther-
mia in ponies anesthetized with halothane. Am J Vet Res 1983; 44: 2280–2284.
510 Short C, Paddleford RR. Malignant hyperthermia in the dog – letter. Anesthesiology
1973; 39: 462–463.
511 deJong RH, Heavner JE, Amory DW. Malignant hyperpyrexia in the cat.
Anesthesiology 1974; 41: 608–609.
512 Aleman M, Brosnan RJ, Williams DC, et al. Malignant hyperthermia in a horse
anesthetized with halothane. J Vet Intern Med 2005; 19: 363–367.
513 Aleman M, Riehl J, Aldridge BM, et al. Association of a mutation in the ryanodine
receptor 1 gene with equine malignant hyperthermia. Muscle Nerve 2004; 30(3):
356–365.
514 Aleman M, Aldridge BM, Riehl J, et al. Equine malignant hyperthermia. Proc Am
Assoc Equine Pract 2004; 50: 51–54.
515 Epstein RM, Rackow H, Salanitre E, et al. Influence of the concentration effect on
the uptake of anesthetic mixtures: the second gas effect. Anesthesiology 1964; 25:
364–371.
516 Stoelting RK, Eger EI II. An additional explanation for the second gas effect: a
concentrating effort. Anesthesiology 1969; 30(3): 273–277.
517 Taheri S, Eger EI. A demonstration of the concentration and second gas effects in
humans anesthetized with nitrous oxide and desflurane. Anesth Analg 1999; 89:
774–780.
518 Fukunaga AF, Epstein RM. Sympathetic excitation during nitrous oxide–
halothane anesthesia in the cat. Anesthesiology 1973; 39: 23–36.
519 Pypendop BH, Ilkiw JE, Imai A, et al. Hemodynamic effects of nitrous oxide in
isoflurane-anesthetized cats. Am J Vet Res 2003; 64(3): 273–278.
520 Liu WS, Wong KC, Port JD, et al. Epinephrine-induced arrhythmia during halo-
thane anesthesia with the addition of nitrous oxide, nitrogen or helium in dogs.
Anesth Analg 1982; 61: 414–417.
521 Lampe GH, Donegan JH, Rupp SM, et al. Nitrous oxide and epinephrine-induced
arrhythmias. Anesth Analg 1990; 71: 602–605.
522 Philbin DM, Foex P, Drummond G, et al. Postsystolic shortening of canine left
ventricle supplied by a stenotic coronary artery when nitrous oxide is added in the
presence of narcotics. Anesthesiology 1985; 62: 166–174.
523 Leone BJ, Philbin DM, Lehot JJ, et al. Gradual or abrupt nitrous oxide administra-
tion in a canine model of critical coronary stenosis induces regional myocardial
dysfunction that is worsened by halothane. Anesth Analg 1988; 67: 814–822.
524 Nathan HJ. Nitrous oxide worsens myocardial ischemia in isoflurane-anesthetized
dogs. Anesthesiology 1988; 68: 407–416.
525 Diedericks J, Leone BJ, Foex P, et al. Nitrous oxide causes myocardial ischemia
when added to propofol in the compromised canine myocardium. Anesth Analg
1993; 76: 1322–1326.
526 Saidman LJ, Hamilton WK. We should continue to use nitrous oxide. In: Eger EI
II, ed. Nitrous Oxide/N2O. New York: Elsevier, 1985: 345–353.
527 Eger EI II, Lampe GH, Wauk LZ, et al. Clinical pharmacology of nitrous oxide: an
argument for its continued use. Anesth Analg 1990; 71: 575–585.
528 Lampe GH, Wauk LZ, Whitendale P, et al. Nitrous oxide does not impair hepatic
function in young or old surgical patients. Anesth Analg 1990; 71: 606–609.
529 Brodsky JB. Toxicity of nitrous oxide. In: Eger EI II, ed. Nitrous Oxide/N2O.
New York: Elsevier, 1985: 259–279.
530 Lampe GH, Wauk LZ, Donegan JH, et al. Effect on outcome of prolonged expo-
sure of patients to nitrous oxide. Anesth Analg 1990; 71: 586–590.
531 Waldman FM, Koblin DD, Lampe GH, et al. Hematologic effects of nitrous oxide
in surgical patients. Anesth Analg 1990; 71: 618–624.
532 Nunn JF, Chanarin I. Nitrous oxide inactivates methionine synthetase. In: Eger EI
II, ed. Nitrous Oxide/N2O. New York: Elsevier, 1985: 211–233.
533 Koblin DD, Tomerson BW, Waldman FM, et al. Effect of nitrous oxide on folate
and vitamin B12 metabolism in patients. Anesth Analg 1990; 71: 610–617.
534 Layzer RB, Fishman RA, Schafer JA. Neuropathy following abuse of nitrous oxide.
Neurology 1978; 28: 504–506.
535 Layzer RB. Myeloneuropathy after prolonged exposure to nitrous oxide. Lancet
1978; 2: 1227–1230.
536 Weathersby PK, Homer LD. Solubility of inert gases in biological fluids and tis-
sues: a review. Undersea Biomed Res 1980; 7: 277–296.
537 Steffey EP, Johnson BH, Eger EI II, et al. Nitrous oxide increases the accumulation
rate and decreases the uptake of bowel gases. Anesth Analg 1979; 58: 405–408.
538 Eger EI II, Saidman LJ. Hazards of nitrous oxide anesthesia in bowel obstruction
and pneumothorax. Anesthesiology 1965; 26(1): 61–66.
539 Steffey EP, Gauger GE, Eger EI II. Cardiovascular effects of venous air embolism
during air and oxygen breathing. Anesth Analg 1974; 53: 599–604.
540 Munson ES, Merrick HC. Effect of nitrous oxide on venous air embolism.
Anesthesiology 1966; 27: 783–787.
541 Davis I, Moore JRM, Lahiri SK. Nitrous oxide and the middle ear. Anaesthesia
1979; 34: 147–151.
542 Perreault L, Normandin N, Plamondon L, et al. Middle ear pressure variations
during nitrous oxide and oxygen anaesthesia. Can Anaesth Soc J 1982; 29(5):
428–434.
543 Saidman LJ, Eger EI II. Change in cerebrospinal fluid pressure during pneumoen-
cephalography under nitrous oxide anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1965; 26(1):
67–72.
544 Stanley TH, Kawamura R, Graves C. Effects of N2
O on volume and pressure of
endotracheal tube cuffs. Anesthesiology 1974; 41: 256–262.
545 Stanley TH. Effects of anesthetic gases on endotracheal tube cuff gas volumes.
Anesth Analg 1974; 53(3): 480–482.
546 Stanley TH. Nitrous oxide and pressures and volumes of high- and low-pressure
endotracheal tube cuffs in intubated patients. Anesthesiology 1975; 42: 637–640.

-- 540 of 1450 --

Chapter 28: Inhalation Anesthetics 	525
547 Bednarski RM. Advantages and guidelines for using nitrous oxide. Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 1992; 22: 313–314.
548 Klide AM, Haskins SC. Precautions when using nitrous oxide. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 1992; 22: 314–316.
549 Linde HW, Bruce DL. Occupational exposure of anesthetists to halothane, nitrous
oxide and radiation. Anesthesiology 1969; 30: 363–368.
550 Whitcher CE, Cohen EN, Trudell JR. Chronic exposure to anesthetic gases in the
operating room. Anesthesiology 1971; 35: 348–353.
551 Ward GS, Byland RR. Concentrations of methoxyflurane and nitrous oxide in vet-
erinary operating rooms. Am J Vet Res 1982; 43: 360–362.
552 Ward GS, Byland RR. Concentrations of halothane in veterinary operating and
treatment rooms. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1982; 180: 174–177.
553 Milligan JE, Sablan JL, Short CE. A survey of waste anesthetic gas concentrations
in U.S. Airforce veterinary surgeries. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1980; 177: 1021–1022.
554 Dreesen DW, Jones GL, Brown J, et al. Monitoring for trace anesthetic gases in a
veterinary teaching hospital. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1981; 179: 797–799.
555 Manley SV, McDonell WF. Recommendations for reduction of anesthetic gas pol-
lution. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1980; 176: 519–524.
556 Manley SV, Taloff P, Aberg N, et al. Occupational exposure to waste anesthetic
gases in veterinary practice. California Vet 1982; 36: 14–19.
557 Pfaffli P, Nikki P, Ahlman K. Halothane and nitrous oxide in end-tidal air and
venous blood of surgical personnel. Ann Clin Res 1972; 4: 273–277.
558 Corbett TH. Retention of anesthetic agents following occupational exposure.
Anesth Analg 1973; 52: 614–618.
559 Ad Hoc Committee on Effects of Trace Anesthetic Agents on Health of Operating
Room Personnel. Waste Anesthetic Gases in Operating Room Air: A Suggested
Program to Reduce Personnel Exposure. Park Ridge, IL: American Society of
Anesthesiologists, 1983.
560 Cohen EN, Bellville JW, Brown BW. Anesthesia, pregnancy, and miscarriage: a study
of operating room nurses and anesthetists. Anesthesiology 1971; 35: 343–347.
561 Cohen EN, Brown BW Jr., Bruce DL, et al. A survey of anesthetic health hazards
among dentists. J Am Dental Assoc 1975; 90: 1291–1296.
562 Lecky JH. Anesthetic pollution in the operating room: a notice to operating room
personnel. Anesthesiology 1980; 52: 157–159.
563 Berry A, McGregor DG, Baden JM, et al. Waste Anesthetic Gases: Information for
Management in Anesthetizing Areas and The Postanesthetic Care Unit (PACU).
Park Ridge, IL: American Society of Anesthesiologists, 2005.
564 American College of Veterinary Anesthesiologists Ad Hoc Committee on Waste
Anesthetic Gas Pollution and Its Control. Commentary and recommendations on
control of waste anesthetic gases in the workplace. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1996; 209:
75–77.
565 Sessler DI, Badgwell JM. Exposure of postoperative nurses to exhaled anesthetic
gases. Anesth Analg 1998; 87: 1083–1088.
566 Summer G, Lirk P, Hoerauf K, et al. Sevoflurane in exhaled air of operating room
personnel. Anesth Analg 2003; 97(4): 1070–1073.
567 Cicerone RJ, Stolarski RS, Walters S. Stratospheric ozone destruction by man-
made chlorofluoromethanes. Science 1974; 185(4157): 1165–1167.
568 Fox JWC, Fox EJ, Villanueva R. Stratospheric ozone destruction and halogenated
anaesthetics. Lancet 1975; 1: 864.
569 Sherman SJ, Cullen BF. Nitrous oxide and the greenhouse effect. Anesthesiology
1988; 68(5): 816–817.
570 Rowland FS. Chlorofluorocarbons and the depletion of stratospheric ozone.
Am Sci 1989; 77: 36–45.
571 Rowland FS. Stratospheric ozone depletion. Phil Trans R Soc London B Biol Sci
2006; 361(1469): 769–790.
572 Logan M, Farmer JG. Anaesthesia and the ozone layer. Br J Anaesth 1989; 63(6):
645–647.
573 Ishizawa Y. General anesthetic gases and the global environment. Anesth Analg
2011; 112(1): 213–217.
574 Langbein T, Sonntag H, Trapp D, et al. Volatile anaesthetics and the atmosphere:
atmospheric lifetimes and atmospheric effects of halothane, enflurane, isoflurane,
desflurane and sevoflurane. Br J Anaesth 1999; 82(1): 66–73.
575 Sulbaek Andersen MP, Nielsen OJ, Wallington TJ, et al. Assessing the impact on
global climate from general anesthetic gases. Anesth Analg 2012; 114(5):
1081–1085.
576 Ravishankara AR, Daniel JS, Portmann RW. Nitrous oxide (N2 O): the dominant
ozone-depleting substance emitted in the 21st century. Science 2009; 326:
123–125.
577 United Nations. Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone
Layer. www.unep.org/ozonaction/who-we-are/about-montreal-protocol (accessed
September 2022).
578 Ryan SM, Nielsen CJ. Global warming potential of inhaled anesthetics: application
to clinical use. Anesth Analg 2010; 111(1): 92–98.
579 Sulbaek Andersen MP, Sander SP, Nielsen O, et al. Inhalation anaesthetics and
climate change. Br J Anaesth 2010; 105(6): 760–766.
580 Ryan S. Sustainable anesthesia. Anesth Analg 2012; 114(5): 921–923.
581 Mychaskiw G II, Eger EI II. A different perspective on anesthetics and climate
change. Anesth Analg 2013; 116(3): 734–735.
582 Sulbaek Andersen MP, Nielsen OJ, Karpichev B, et al. Atmospheric chemistry of
isoflurane, desflurane, and sevoflurane: kinetics and mechanisms of reactions
with chlorine atoms and OH radicals and global warming potentials. J Phys Chem
2012; 116: 5806–5820.
583 Sherman J, Le C, Lamers V, Eckelman M. Life cycle greenhouse gas emissions of
anesthetic drugs. Anesth Analg 2012; 114(5): 1086–1089.
584 Varughese S, Ahmed R. Environmental and occupational considerations of anes-
thesia: a narrative review and update. Anesth Analg 2021; 133: 826–835.
585 Chol BJJ, Chen CL. The triple bottom line and stabilization wedges: a framework
for perioperative sustainability. Anesth Analg 2022; 134: 475–485.
586 White SM, Shelton CL, Gelb AW, et al. Principles of environmentally-sustainable
anaesthesia: a global consensus statement from the World Federation of Societies
of Anaesthesiologists. Anaesthesia 2022; 77: 201–212.
587 Devlin-Hegedus JA, McGain F, Harris RD, et al. Action guidance for addressing
pollution from inhalational anaesthetics. Anaesthesia 2022; 77: 1023–1029.

-- 541 of 1450 --

Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of Lumb and Jones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
29
526
Introduction
Local anesthetics reversibly block the generation and propagation
of electrical impulses in nerves, thereby causing sensory and motor
blockade. Their use dates from the late 1880s when cocaine was first
used for ophthalmologic procedures by Carl Köller and Sigmund
Freud. However, cocaine was found to be highly toxic and addictive
and, since then, new agents with better pharmacologic profiles and
less potential for systemic toxicity have been developed. Today,
local anesthetics are the mainstay analgesic drugs used for local and
regional anesthetic techniques in the perioperative period. These
techniques cause complete desensitization of a localized area of the
body, allowing a reduction in general anesthetic requirements and
promoting greater cardiorespiratory stability. Sustained analgesia
when a long-acting local anesthetic is used is also beneficial in
the recovery period. Apart from these advantages, there is new
evidence in veterinary anesthesia that locoregional techniques,
when used as part of a balanced anesthetic protocol, may reduce the
risk of perianesthetic mortality [1]. There is also moderate-quality
evidence in humans that regional anesthesia may reduce the risk
of developing persistent postoperative pain for up to 18 months in
some type of surgeries [2]. In recent years, the surge in interest
in locoregional anesthesia in veterinary medicine has meant the
introduction of numerous new techniques and increased the use of
local anesthetics worldwide.
In addition to locoregional applications related to nerve impulse
blockade, the local anesthetic lidocaine may also be administered
systemically for a variety of indications, including management
of ventricular arrhythmias, improvement of intestinal motility
following 	ischemia-reperfusion-injury, 	reduction 	in 	general
anesthetic requirements, and systemic analgesia.
Pharmacology
Molecular mechanism of action
Local anesthetics are considered primarily ion channel blockers,
acting mainly on voltage-gated Na+ channels. However, they also
block voltage-dependent K+ and Ca2+ channels, though with lower
affinity [3–7]. Some studies also suggest that local anesthetics act on
intracellular sites involved in the signal transduction of G-protein-
coupled receptors [8]. This range of molecular targets may explain
some of the adverse and toxic effects that this group of drugs
produces on various organ systems.
Ten different genes encode voltage-gated Na + channels and they
are differentially expressed throughout the major excitable tissues.
29 Local Anesthetics
Eva Rioja Garcia
Optivet Referrals, Havant, Hampshire, UK
Chapter contents
Introduction, 526
Pharmacology, 526
Molecular mechanism of action, 526
Mechanism of blockade of neural tissue, 528
Chemical structure, 530
Physicochemical properties, 530
Clinical pharmacology, 531
Pharmacokinetics, 531
Mixtures of local anesthetics, 537
Tachyphylaxis, 538
Specific drugs and clinical uses, 538
Aminoesters, 538
Aminoamides, 539
Special formulations, 540
Adverse effects, 541
Systemic toxicity, 541
Local toxicity, 544
Methemoglobinemia, 544
Toxicosis (oral ingestion), 545
Allergic reactions, 545
References, 545

-- 542 of 1450 --

Chapter 29: Local Anesthetics 	527
For example, sensory neurons express mainly NaV
1.7 and NaV
1.8 Na+
channels, whereas cardiac cells, breast, and colon cancer metastatic
cells express Na V
1.5 [9]. While all of the current clinically available
local anesthetics are nonselective, it is possible that in the future
there will be subtype-selective Na+ channel blockers [9].
The most important mechanism of action leading to local anes-
thesia involves the blockade of inward Na + currents through
voltage-gated Na + channels, thereby impeding membrane depolari-
zation and nerve excitation and conduction [10]. The Na+ channel
is a multimolecular complex with a large α-subunit composed
of almost 2000 amino acids that traverses the cell membrane
several times. This subunit forms the channel’s pore and gating
apparatus [10]. Some smaller auxiliary β-subunits influence the
activation–inactivation states of the channel [11]. The α-subunit
consists of four domains (I to IV) each containing six helical
segments (S1 to S6) that wrap around and form a bell-shaped
central channel. Segments S5 and S6, and the P loop between them,
form the channel or pore. The S4 segments in each domain
have positively charged arginine or lysine molecules and form the
voltage-sensing module. The inactivation gate is formed by a short
intracellular loop between domains III and IV (Fig. 29.1) [9,12].
The binding site for local anesthetic, antiarrhythmic and anticon-
vulsant drugs, is formed by amino acid residues in the S6 segments
of domains I, II, and IV, which contribute to a single drug-binding
site within the pore [12]. Because this binding site is localized within
the pore, it is only accessible when the Na+ channel is open [13].
The channel is a gated conduit for Na + ions and exists in three
different gating states: resting (closed), open, and inactivated
(Fig. 29.2), depending on the membrane potential and timing. At
resting membrane potential (–70 mV), the S4 segments are in the
“down” position, making the channel non-conductive. During
depolarization, the channel opens by outward spiral rotation of
the S4 segments allowing rapid influx of Na + ions down the
electrical and chemical gradients. This conformational change
exposes the receptor site of the inactivation gate, located between
domains III and IV, which leads to channel inactivation after only
a few milliseconds. Only by repolarization of the cell membrane
does the channel recover to the resting state from the inactivated
state [11,14].
There is evidence that local anesthetics may interact with the
lipid membrane, altering its fluidity, causing membrane expansion,
and thus reducing Na+ conductance [15]; however, this does not
completely explain the mechanism of action of modern clinically
used local anesthetics.
The “modulated-receptor hypothesis” proposes that local anes-
thetics have high binding affinity for the Na+ channel in its open
and inactivated states, but low affinity for the resting state [10,16].
Lipid-soluble drug forms are thought to enter and leave the receptor
via a hydrophobic region of the membrane, while charged less
lipid- soluble forms pass via a hydrophilic region (the inner channel
pore) [16]. The hydrophilic pathway is open only when the gates
of the channel are open, which causes cumulative binding of
β-subunit
N
S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 	S6 	S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 	S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 	S1 S2 S3 S4 S5	S6 	S6 	S6
I 	II 	III 	IV
N
N
Selectivity pore
Inactivation gate
II
III	I
IV
S3 	S5
S4
S1
S2
S6
C
C	C
β-subunit	α-subunit
Figure 29.1 Structure of the voltage-gated Na+ channel. I through IV represent distinct domains of the α-subunit. S1 through S6 represent helical
segments within each domain that wrap around and form a bell-shaped central channel. Segments S5 and S6, and the P loop between them, form the
channel or pore. The S4 segments in each domain have positively charged arginine or lysine molecules and form the voltage-sensing module.
The inactivation gate is formed by a short intracellular loop between domains III and IV. Source: Taylor and McLeod [9], with permission of Elsevier.

-- 543 of 1450 --

528 	Section 3: Pharmacology
local anesthetics to the Na+ channel when the channels are active.
The “guarded-receptor hypothesis” proposes that the receptor for
local anesthetics is located inside the channel and that the drug
binds to this receptor with constant affinity [17]. Access to the
receptor is regulated by the channel gates and therefore the channel
needs to be open for the receptor to be accessible to the local anes-
thetic. Increasing the frequency of stimulation increases the number
of Na+ channels in the open and inactive states, which increases the
binding of local anesthetics.
Both of these hypotheses explain the property of tertiary amine
local anesthetics whereby the depth of the block increases with
repetitive membrane depolarization, which has been termed
“use-dependent block” or “phasic block” [18,19]. On the other hand,
blockade obtained on unstimulated nerves is constant, which is
termed “tonic block” [18,19].
Mechanism of blockade of neural tissue
Local anesthetics show a differential pattern of sensory and motor
blockade that can be observed clinically when applied to peripheral
nerves and the central neuraxis [20,21]. Vasodilation occurs first,
followed by loss of sensation of temperature, sharp pain, light touch,
and finally loss of motor activity (Table 29.1) [22]. This property is
called “differential block” and was first described by Gasser and
Erlanger in 1929 when they observed that, within myelinated A fibers,
Resting (closed)
Na+ 	Na+
Na+
Open
Inactivated (closed)
Extracellular
Intracellular
Repolarization
–70 mV
Time 1–2 ms
Voltage sensor
Inactivation gate
S
S
I
I
Depolarization
Figure 29.2 The Na+ channel has two gates: an activation (“voltage sensor”) and an inactivation gate. At resting membrane potential, the channel exists in
its resting (closed) state. Depolarization of the membrane causes outward rotation of the voltage-sensing module causing opening of the channel, allowing
Na + ions to flow intracellularly. Within 1–2 ms, the inactivation gate closes automatically (inactivated channel), allowing repolarization to occur.
Repolarization leads to conformational changes with closure of the activation gate and opening of the inactivation gate within 2–5 ms (i.e., the refractory
period). Following repolarization, the channel is in a resting state again.
Table 29.1 Classification of nerve fibers by Erlanger and Gasser and order of blockade.
Classification 	Diameter (μm) 	Myelin 	Conduction (m/s) 	Location 	Function 	Order of blockade
Aα 	12–20 	+ 	70–120 	Afferent/efferent for muscles
and joints
Afferent proprioception; efferent motor 	5
Aβ 	5–12 	+ 	30–70 	Efferent to muscle; afferent
sensory nerve
Motor and sensory (touch and pressure) 	4
Aγ 	3–6 	+ 	15–30 	Efferent to muscle spindles 	Muscle tone 	3
Aδ 	2–5 	+ 	12–30 	Afferent sensory nerve 	Pain (fast), touch, temperature (cold) 	2
B 	< 3 	+ 	3–15 	Preganglionic sympathetic 	Autonomic 	1
C 	0.4–1.2 	– 	0.5–2 	Postganglionic sympathetic;
afferent sensory nerve
Autonomic, pain (slow), temperature, some
mechanoreceptors and reflex responses
2
Source: Adapted from Khurana et al. [28].

-- 544 of 1450 --

Chapter 29: Local Anesthetics 	529
cocaine reduced compound action potentials from slower and
smaller fibers more rapidly than from faster and larger fibers [23].
However, this differential block in vivo cannot be simply explained
by the size of the fiber, but rather is influenced by numerous factors,
including type of fiber (size and myelination), frequency of stimula-
tion, length of nerve exposed to the local anesthetic, and choice and
concentration of local anesthetic drug.
Initially, it was hypothesized that the differential block produced
by local anesthetics when applied to peripheral nerves was due to a
greater susceptibility of small, unmyelinated C fibers compared to
larger, myelinated A fibers. However, in vitro [24] and in vivo stud-
ies [18,25] have shown that A-fiber susceptibility to phasic and
tonic block is actually greater than that of C fibers, with the order of
blockade from fastest to slowest being Aγ > Aδ = Aα > Aβ > C. This
would suggest that motor and proprioceptive deficits should occur
prior to loss of nociception, but this is opposite to what is clinically
observed.
Anatomic features such as myelination may also account for
some differences in susceptibility, since myelin can effectively
pool anesthetic molecules close to the axon membrane [26].
Experimental studies have found that unmyelinated fibers are less
sensitive to lidocaine than myelinated fibers [27]. This is contrary
to clinical observations of differential block, which is manifested
by the loss of small fiber-mediated sensation (e.g., temperature)
two or more dermatomes beyond the sensory limit for large fiber-
mediated sensations.
Exposure length of the nerve to the local anesthetic may in part
explain differential block in vivo, as smaller fibers need a shorter
length exposed than larger fibers for block to occur [29]. This has
been called the “critical length” to completely block conduction
which, in myelinated fibers, corresponds to three or more nodes of
Ranvier [30]. Therefore, larger fibers with greater internodal dis-
tances are less susceptible to local anesthetic blockade.
The somatotopic fascicular organization of peripheral nerve
fibers may also influence the order of blockade. Early investigations
of the brachial plexus in humans observed that nerve fibers in the
mantle or peripheral bundles innervate primarily motor fibers of
the proximal limb, whereas fibers localized more internally within
the nerve innervate the distal limb, with sensory fibers being local-
ized in the center bundles [31,32]. This could partially explain why
in certain nerve trunks such as the brachial plexus, onset of anes-
thesia proceeds from proximal to distal as the local anesthetic pen-
etrates the nerve down a concentration gradient. This is especially
true when high concentrations of local anesthetics are used [32].
The recovery from the block may not follow the same pattern
due to the intrinsic vascularization of nerves, which may contribute
to the observed recovery of distal portions of the limb occurring
before more proximal areas [32].
However, this somatotopic distribution of nerve fibers within
nerves may not be consistent in different nerves or across species.
What seems to be clear is that there is a high degree of somatic
organization within mammalian nerves: each fascicle contains
motor or sensory fibers innervating very specific areas of skin or
specific muscles (Fig. 29.3) [33]. This distribution of fibers may also
explain the partial blockade that is sometimes observed clinically.
Another important mechanism of local anesthetic blockade is
the phenomenon of decremental conduction, which describes
the diminished ability of successive nodes of Ranvier to propagate the
impulse in the presence of a local anesthetic [35]. This principle
explains why the propagation of an impulse can be stopped even if
none of the nodes has been rendered completely inexcitable [30], as
occurs, for example, with low concentrations of local anesthetics.
Concentrations of local anesthetic that block 74–84% of the sodium
conductance at successive nodes cause a progressive decrease in
amplitude of the impulse, until it eventually decays below the
threshold [30]. Higher concentrations that block more than 84% of
the sodium conductance at three consecutive nodes will prevent
impulse propagation completely [30]. This explains why blocks of
greater extent and duration result from injection of small-volume/
high-concentration solutions versus large-volume/low-concentration
solutions, despite the same total drug dose [36].
Some authors suggest that a large portion of the sensory informa-
tion transmitted by peripheral nerves is carried via coding of
electrical signals in after-potentials and after-oscillations [37]. Sub-
blocking concentrations of local anesthetics can suppress these
intrinsic oscillatory after-effects of impulse discharge without sig-
nificantly affecting action potential conduction [38]. Thus, another
possible mechanism of blockade of nerve function, especially at low
concentrations of local anesthetics, is by disruption of coding of
electrical information [19].
When local anesthetics are administered in the central neuraxis
(epidurally or intrathecally) or systemically, they may possess other
Carpal tunnel
Distal forearm
Proximal forearm
Distal arm
Proximal arm
Figure 29.3 Camera lucida drawings of the median nerve from a Macaca
mulatta monkey in which the nerve fibers of an individual digital nerve
(in this case, the radial digital nerve of the thumb) were exposed to
horseradish peroxidase. Sections from the nerve from the carpal tunnel to
proximal arm show that these nerve fibers mainly remain closely packed
together (black, dense labeling), but there is some scattering of a few of the
nerve fibers (stippled areas, sparse labeling). Source: Brushart [34].

-- 545 of 1450 --

530 	Section 3: Pharmacology
mechanisms of analgesic action at the level of the spinal cord in
addition to those previously discussed. Local anesthetics inhibit
other ion channels such as K+ or Ca2+ channels at the level of the
dorsal horn of the spinal cord. This may affect central neuropro-
cessing of sensory information, thereby contributing to their antin-
ociceptive effects [39–41]. In addition to ion channels, nociceptive
transmission is mediated by several neurotransmitters in the dorsal
horn, such as the tachykinins (e.g., substance P). Local anesthetics
have been shown to inhibit substance P binding and evoked
increases in intracellular Ca 2+ [42]. Additionally, local anesthetics
also inhibit glutamatergic transmission in spinal dorsal horn neu-
rons, reducing N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)- and neurokinin-
mediated postsynaptic depolarizations [43,44].
Chemical structure
Clinically useful local anesthetic drugs are composed of a lipophilic,
benzene ring with different substitutions (aromatic ring), and a
hydrophilic amine group (tertiary or quaternary amine), which are
linked through an intermediate chain, either an ester or an amide.
Depending on the type of link, local anesthetics are classified as
(1) aminoesters which are hydrolyzed by plasma cholinesterase
(also known as “butyrylcholinesterase” or “pseudocholinesterase”),
or (2) aminoamides which are metabolized by the liver.
Physicochemical properties
The physicochemical properties influencing local anesthetic activ-
ity include molecular weight, pKa
, lipid solubility, and degree of
protein binding (Table 29.2) [45,46].
The molecular weight of clinically used local anesthetics is very
similar, ranging between 220 and 288 Da. The diffusion coefficient
is thus not significantly affected and molecular weight does not
seem to be an important factor determining differences in activity
of local anesthetics [45]. However, changes in molecular weight due
to alkyl substitutions may influence other properties such as lipid
solubility and pKa
.
All clinically useful local anesthetics are weak bases, and as such
they exist in equilibrium between the neutral, non-ionized, lipid-
soluble form (B) and the ionized (charged), water-soluble form
(BH +
). They are formulated as acidic solutions of hydrochloride
salts (pH 4–7), which are more highly ionized and water soluble.
The receptor for local anesthetics appears to be located within
the pore of the Na+ channel close to the cytoplasm [13] and only the
ionized, charged form of the local anesthetic can interact with this
receptor [47]. Local anesthetics can cross the cell membrane in two
different ways: (1) the ionized form can pass through the open
sodium channel, and (2) the non-ionized, lipophilic form can pen-
etrate through the lipid membrane. The latter seems to be the main
method for local anesthetics to access the cell (Fig. 29.4).
The pKa of a drug is the pH at which the two forms exist in equal
concentrations and is alkaline (pH > 7.4) for all clinically used local
anesthetics.
p 	pH 	BH	a	K 	log [ ] [ 	]	B
The higher the pKa
, the greater the degree of ionization or propor-
tion of local anesthetic in the ionized, charged hydrophilic form at
physiologic pH, and the slower the onset of action. On the other
hand, a local anesthetic with a low pKa will have a greater propor-
tion of the non-ionized, lipid-soluble form at physiologic pH and a
more rapid onset of action.
Lipid solubility is the main determinant of intrinsic local anes-
thetic potency, and it will determine the clinically relevant concen-
trations needed to produce effective conduction blockade [48–50].
Increasing lipid solubility facilitates the penetration through lipid
membranes, potentially hastening onset of action; however, highly
lipid-soluble agents will also become sequestered within the myelin
and other lipid compartments. Thus, the net effect of increasing
lipid solubility is delayed onset of action of local anesthetics [51].
On the other hand, sequestration of local anesthetic in myelin and
other lipid compartments creates a depot for slow release of the
Table 29.2 Physicochemical properties and relative potencies of clinically used local anesthetics.
Local anesthetic 	pKa
a 	% Ionized
(at pH 7.4)
Lipid solubilityb 	% Protein binding 	Relative anesthetic
potencyc
Relative potency
for CNS toxicityd
CV:CNS ratioe
Ester- linked
Low potency, short duration
Procaine 	8.89 	97 	100 	6 	1 	0.3 	3.7
Chloroprocaine 	9.06 	95 	810 	7 	1 	0.3 	3.7
High potency, long duration
Tetracaine 	8.38 	93 	5822 	94 	8 	2 	ND
Amide-linked
Intermediate potency and duration
Lidocaine 	7.77 	76 	366 	64 	2 	1 	7.1
Mepivacaine 	7.72 	61 	130 	77 	2 	1.4 	7.1
Prilocaine 	8.02 	76 	129 	55 	2 	1.2 	3.1
Intermediate potency, long duration
Ropivacaine 	8.16 	83 	775 	94 	6 	2.9 	2
High potency, long duration
Bupivacaine 	8.1 	83 	3420 	95 	8 	4 	2
Levobupivacaine 	8.1 	83 	3420 	> 97 	8 	2.9 	2
Etidocaine 	7.87 	66 	7317 	94 	6 	2 	4.4
a Measured with spectrophotometric method at 36 °C, except prilocaine and ropivacaine measured at 25 °C.
b Partition coefficients expressed as relative concentrations (mol/L) in octanol and buffer at 36 °C, except prilocaine and ropivacaine measured at 25 °C.
c Potency relative to procaine.
d Potency relative to lidocaine.
e Cardiovascular (CV) to central nervous system (CNS) toxicity ratio. CV denotes the disappearance of pulse and CNS denotes the onset of seizures.
Source: Data obtained from Liu [46]; Strichartz et al. [48]. ND, no data.

-- 546 of 1450 --

Chapter 29: Local Anesthetics 	531
drug, increasing the duration of the effect [51]. It has also been pos-
tulated that more lipophilic drugs such as bupivacaine may be less
likely to travel by bulk flow than less lipophilic drugs such as mepi-
vacaine, and therefore, more hydrophilic local anesthetics may have
greater ability to spread further [52].
The degree of protein binding also influences activity of local
anesthetics, as only the unbound, free fraction is pharmacologically
active. Higher protein binding is associated with increased duration
of action. This cannot be explained by slower dissociation kinetics
from the Na + channel, as this dissociation occurs within seconds
regardless of the degree of protein binding [53]. Increased duration
of action of highly protein-bound local anesthetics is probably asso-
ciated with other membrane or extracellular proteins [54].
Lidocaine, procaine, and tetracaine are achiral molecules, while
levobupivacaine and ropivacaine are pure S(–)-enantiomers [45,55].
The rest of the clinically available local anesthetics are racemic
mixtures of the R(+)- and S(–)- enantiomers in a 50:50 mixture.
Although both enantiomers have the same physicochemical
properties, they have different affinities for the ion channels of Na+
,
K +
, and Ca 2+
, with the R(+)-enantiomer having greater in vitro
potency and thus greater therapeutic efficacy but also greater poten-
tial for systemic toxicity [56,57]. There is less potential for nervous
and cardiac toxicity with the S(–)-enantiomer compared with the
R(+)- enantiomer or the racemic mixture [58].
Studies in vitro have characterized the relative potencies of local
anesthetic agents, which depend not only on their physicochemical
properties (i.e., lipid solubility) but also on the individual nerve
fibers and frequency of stimulation [59]. However, in vivo potencies
do not necessarily correlate with in vitro studies [60], because of the
complex interaction of factors, including site of administration,
dose, and volume of local anesthetics, and other environmental
factors.
Local anesthetics with an amide group, high pKa
, and lower lipid
solubility show greater differential blockade, with more potent
blockade of C fibers than of fast-conducting A fibers [51,61]. This
is believed to be due to the slower diffusion across permeability
barriers present in A fibers. The relative order of differential rate
of blockade is chloroprocaine > ropivacaine > bupivacaine,
levobupivacaine > lidocaine, mepivacaine > etidocaine [62,63].
This is especially true at low concentrations and the differential rate
of blockade tends to disappear as local anesthetic concentrations
increase.
Clinical pharmacology
Pharmacokinetics
Absorption
Disposition of local anesthetics within the body after local adminis-
tration is governed by several competing factors, including bulk
flow, diffusion and binding to neural and non-neural structures,
and vascular uptake (Fig. 29.5). The rate and extent of systemic
absorption of the local anesthetic are important as toxic plasma
concentrations may be achieved. Therefore, local anesthetics with
lower systemic absorption will have a greater margin of safety.
Systemic absorption depends on several factors, including the site
of injection (i.e., vascularity), the intrinsic lipid solubility and vaso-
activity of the agent, the dose administered, the presence of addi-
tives such as vasoconstrictors, other formulation factors that modify
local drug residence and release, the influence of the nerve block in
the region (i.e., vasodilation), and the (patho)physiologic state of
the patient [45].
In general, areas with greater vascularity will have more extensive
and rapid systemic drug absorption than areas with more fat,
regardless of the agent used [19]. Areas with greater vascularity will
have a greater peak plasma concentration (Cmax
) and a shorter time-
to- peak plasma concentration (Tmax
). In an experimental study in
pigs, lidocaine rate of absorption following subcutaneous adminis-
tration was highest in the pectoral region, followed by the face and
neck, with the slowest being the abdomen [64]. With regard to spe-
cific blocks, the degree of systemic absorption is as follows, in
decreasing order: intercostal > epidural > brachial plexus > sciatic/
femoral [65]. Following administration of lidocaine in an inverted L
nerve block in cows, the serum Cmax was 572 ng/mL, which occurred
at Tmax 0.52 h, while lidocaine via a caudal epidural block was
BH+
BH+
BH+
BH+
BH+
Na+
BH+
BH+
H+
	H+
H+
	H+
B
B
R 	R
B
Figure 29.4 The cell membrane lipid bilayer with the Na+ channel. Local anesthetics exist as a neutral base (B) and an ionized form (BH+
) in equilibrium.
The neutral form is lipid soluble and easily crosses the cell membrane. The ionized form is more water soluble and can cross through the open channel.
The neutral form can cause membrane expansion and closure of the Na + channel. The ionized form interacts with its receptor on the intracellular side of
the Na + channel.

-- 547 of 1450 --

532 	Section 3: Pharmacology
undetectable in serum [66]. Systemic absorption of local anesthetic
drugs is much lower after spinal (intrathecal) than after epidural
administration [67,68]. Normally, the greatest risk of systemic tox-
icity coincides with Tmax in arterial blood, which will vary from 5 to
45 min after injection, depending on the site of the block, speed
of injection, and drug injected [45]. However, Tmax is independent
of the dose injected [69]. Faster speed of injection is associated
with greater Cmax
, and therefore with increased risk of systemic
toxicity [70].
Physicochemical properties of local anesthetics will also influ-
ence systemic absorption. In general, drugs with greater lipid solu-
bility and protein binding will result in lower systemic absorption
and Cmax [45]. Therefore, shorter-acting amide drugs such as lido-
caine and mepivacaine will be absorbed into the systemic circula-
tion more readily than longer-acting bupivacaine, ropivacaine, and
levobupivacaine, probably because of binding of the latter to neural
and non- neural lipid-rich tissues [19]. Another factor influencing
the rate of absorption is the intrinsic vasoactivity of the local anes-
thetic. Most clinically used local anesthetics cause vasodilation
when applied locally, with the exceptions of ropivacaine and lev-
obupivacaine [71,72]. The vasoconstrictive activity of ropivacaine
and levobupivacaine results in slower absorption and therefore
longer Tmax values [73,74].
The addition of a vasoconstrictor, such as epinephrine, will coun-
teract the inherent vasodilating effects on the local vasculature
induced by most agents, delaying their systemic absorption.
Hyaluronidase is another additive occasionally added to local
anesthetics to improve their anesthetic effect by causing depolym-
erization of interstitial hyaluronic acid and thus increasing the per-
meability of the tissues; however, hyaluronidase also enhances
systemic absorption and the risk of systemic toxicity (see the sec-
tion on Additives later in this chapter).
There are some formulations, such as local anesthetic-loaded
liposomes, polylactide microspheres, or cyclodextrin inclusion
complexes, among others, which are designed to cause a slow
release of the drug, providing a local depot of local anesthetic which
significantly decreases systemic absorption and prolongs the dura-
tion of effect [69,75,76]. When liposome-encapsulated lidocaine
was administered epidurally to dogs, the Cmax was lower while the
Tmax and the duration of effect (170 versus 61 min) were signifi-
cantly longer compared to regular lidocaine [75]. In sheep, intercos-
tal administration of bupivacaine–dexamethasone microspheres
prolonged the duration of the block up to 13 days, with plasma
concentrations remaining 10 times below the convulsive concentra-
tion [77]. Liposome-encapsulated lidocaine has also been adminis-
tered topically to cats at a dose of 15 mg/kg, which proved to be safe,
with Cmax well below the toxic plasma levels for that species [78].
Administration of different slow-release lidocaine formulations for
sciatic nerve block in postoperative pain models in rats produced
analgesia from 3 days up to 1 week and inhibited the development
of hyperalgesia [79,80]. A number of newer formulations of local
anesthetics have been approved for use in animals that greatly
reduce systemic absorption, thereby limiting the extent of their
effect to the surgical area, prolonging the analgesic effect, and
reducing Cmax and the possibility of systemic toxicity. These are dis-
cussed later in this chapter in the Special formulations section.
Distribution
After absorption into the bloodstream, aminoester local anesthetics
are rapidly hydrolyzed by plasma cholinesterases, and their distri-
bution into body tissues is limited. Aminoamide local anesthetics
are widely distributed into different body organs and tissues. The
degree of tissue distribution and binding is normally represented by
the pharmacokinetic parameter known as the “apparent volume of
distribution at steady state” (Vdss
), which is usually paralleled by the
degree of protein binding [45]. Only the free, active fraction of the
drug, and not the protein-bound fraction, governs tissue concentra-
tion and degree of entry into the central nervous system (CNS) [81].
Local anesthetic
dose
Injectate drug pool (ionized and non-ionized)
Binding to
neural tissues
Systemic absorption
Neural
blockade
Nerve
Liver and kidneys
(metabolism and excretion)
Vital and responsive
tissues (heart, brain)
Binding to non-
neural tissues
Non-responsive
tissues
Side effects
Skin
Blood
drug pool
(bound and
unbound)
Lungs
(first-pass effect)
Figure 29.5 Disposition of local anesthetics within the body following peripheral administration.

-- 548 of 1450 --

Chapter 29: Local Anesthetics 	533
Amide-type local anesthetics bind primarily to α1
- acid glycoprotein
(AAG) in the plasma and to a lesser extent to albumin [82,83]. In
dogs, increasing concentrations of AAG caused an increase in total
serum concentration but a decrease in the free fraction, Vdss
, and
elimination half-life of lidocaine [81,84]. Because AAG is an acute-
phase protein, its circulating levels will be increased during trauma,
surgery, cancer, or any inflammatory state. Therefore, although the
total concentration of local anesthetic in plasma will be greater,
reflecting the increase in AAG, the unbound (active) drug fraction
will remain similar [45,85].
Amide-type local anesthetics in venous blood undergo first-pass
pulmonary uptake, which effectively decreases the plasma concen-
tration of the drug temporarily [86,87]. Consequently, the lungs are
able to attenuate the toxic effects after accidental intravenous injec-
tions of local anesthetics. In animals with right-to- left cardiac
shunts, the pulmonary first-pass effect is absent and there is an
increased risk of toxicity. The pulmonary uptake of a local anes-
thetic is mostly dependent on its physicochemical properties,
mainly lipid solubility and pKa
. More lipid-soluble agents undergo
greater pulmonary uptake and those with lower pKa values will have
a greater fraction of the non-ionized base form, which is the form
that accumulates in the lung [88]. Decreasing blood pH (i.e., aci-
demia) decreases the degree of pulmonary uptake of local anesthet-
ics, which may contribute to increased plasma concentrations and
promote toxicity [86,88]. The rank order of pulmonary uptake in
rat lung slices was found to be bupivacaine > etidocaine > lido-
caine [88]. Others have also found greater uptake of prilocaine
compared to bupivacaine and mepivacaine in isolated perfused rat
lungs, with little evidence of pulmonary metabolism [89]. The
mean pulmonary uptake of lidocaine after IV administration in
dogs has been calculated to be 63.6% [87]. There is evidence of a
pulmonary contribution to lidocaine metabolism using rat pulmo-
nary microsomes in vitro [90]. After an intravenous bolus injection
in rabbits, the pulmonary uptake of levobupivacaine was greater
than that of ropivacaine (31% versus 23%) [91].
Local anesthetic agents also distribute rapidly and extensively
into milk and muscle at concentrations proportional to those in the
bloodstream. Drugs that diffuse most readily into milk are those
that are relatively lipophilic, non-ionized, not strongly protein-
bound, and with low molecular weights [92]. Following an inverted
L nerve block with 100 mL of 2% lidocaine in adult Holstein cows,
the lidocaine Cmax in milk was 300 ng/mL compared with serum
Cmax of 572 ng/mL; Tmax in milk was 1.75 h compared with serum
Tmax of 0.52 h [66]. The last measurable time of lidocaine detection
in milk after inverted L block was 32.5 h with a mean concentration
of 46 ng/mL [66]. On the other hand, following caudal epidural
administration of 0.22 mg/kg of lidocaine, there was no detectable
lidocaine concentration present in any serum or milk sample [66].
The current Food Animal Residue Avoidance Database (FARAD)
withdrawal intervals reflect these differences, with a 4-day meat
withdrawal and 72 h milk withdrawal following infiltrative lido-
caine administration, but only a 1-day meat withdrawal and 24-h
milk withdrawal following epidural lidocaine administration. The
European Medicines Agency (EMA), on the other hand, establishes
a 28-day withdrawal period for meat and 15-day milk withdrawal
after lidocaine administration by any route.
Local anesthetic drugs also cross the placenta and appear in the
fetus following administration to the pregnant animal. Ester-linked
local anesthetic agents are rapidly metabolized and placental trans-
fer is limited [45]. Amide-linked local anesthetic agents can become
“trapped” in their ionized forms on the more acidotic fetal side of
the placenta, and therefore their net transfer across the placenta is
increased [93]. In pregnant ewes, as fetal blood pH decreased from
7.35 to 7.10, the fetal–maternal ratio (F:M) for lidocaine increased
from 0.76 to 1.21 [93]. Apart from the pH, the degree of local anes-
thetic binding to both maternal and fetal plasma proteins is also an
important determinant of placental transfer of local anesthetics, as
only the unbound, free drug crosses the placenta [94]. Since fetal
AAG content and binding are less than maternal [95], the F:M of
highly protein-bound local anesthetics such as bupivacaine (F:M =
0.36) is lower than less protein-bound drugs such as lidocaine
(F:M = 1) [94,96]. The placental transfer of levobupivacaine and
ropivacaine is similar to bupivacaine in pregnant ewes [97].
An important consideration when choosing a local anesthetic
agent in the pregnant animal is the ability of the neonate to metabo-
lize and excrete the drug after birth. Studies in sheep show that
back-transfer of bupivacaine, but not of lidocaine, from the fetus to
the mother occurs [94,96]. Lidocaine and its metabolites monoeth-
ylglycinexylidide (MEGX) and glycinexylidide (GX) were detected
in fetal urine within 1–2 h following intravenous infusion of lido-
caine to pregnant ewes [94]. These studies suggest that lidocaine
might be a better option in pregnant animals since the fetus/neo-
nate will be able to readily eliminate the drug. They also suggest that
if high plasma concentrations of local anesthetic in maternal blood
are likely (i.e., large volumes used for local blockade or inadvertent
intravenous administration), it would be beneficial to delay delivery
in the case of bupivacaine, but there would be no benefit in doing so
in the case of lidocaine [94].
Metabolism
Ester-linked local anesthetics are cleared mainly in the blood by
plasma cholinesterase (also known variably as butyrylcholinesterase,
non-specific cholinesterase, or pseudocholinesterase), where they
undergo ester hydrolysis. Esterases present in the liver, red blood
cells, and synovial fluid also contribute to the clearance of these
drugs [98–100]. Among the ester agents, chloroprocaine is cleared
most rapidly due to its faster hydrolysis rate. In vitro half-lives tend
to be very short for the ester-linked drugs, ranging from 11 s for
chloroprocaine in human plasma [101] to 9 s and 12 s for procaine
in equine whole blood and plasma, respectively [98], and up to
several minutes for tetracaine [45]. In vivo terminal half-lives are
typically longer, probably reflecting slow uptake from the site of
administration and/or wide distribution within the body [45,102].
The terminal half-life of procaine in horses after intravenous
administration is 50 min with an apparent volume of distribution of
6.7 L/kg [102]. The hydrolysis products of procaine, chloroprocaine,
and tetracaine appear to be pharmacologically inactive. Procaine
and benzocaine are hydrolyzed to para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA)
which may, however, cause rare allergic reactions [45].
Cocaine undergoes ester hydrolysis in plasma and liver, but also
N-demethylation in the liver to norcocaine, which subsequently
undergoes further hydrolysis [100]. Cocaine is rarely used in veteri-
nary medicine, but illegal use in horses or dogs before races to
increase performance and delay the time to exhaustion is possi-
ble [103]. Procaine also possesses CNS stimulatory effects and its
use is banned in racehorses [102].
Amide-linked local anesthetics are almost exclusively metabo-
lized in the liver by microsomal enzymes (CYP450). Phase I reac-
tions involve hydroxylation, N-dealkylation, and N-demethylation,
followed by Phase II reactions where the metabolites are conjugated
with amino acids or glucuronide into less active and inactive
metabolites. Clearance values differ among species, but typically

-- 549 of 1450 --

534 	Section 3: Pharmacology
the rank order of clearance is prilocaine > etidocaine > lidocaine >
mepivacaine > ropivacaine > bupivacaine [45]. In humans, prilo-
caine is cleared most rapidly, with blood clearance values that
exceed liver blood flow, indicating extrahepatic metabolism in this
species [45]. Hydrolysis of prilocaine produces ortho-toluidine (o-
toluidine), a metabolite that oxidizes hemoglobin to methemo-
globin (MHb) [104].
Lidocaine undergoes hydroxylation and N-demethylation in
the liver. Its two main metabolites are monoethylglycinexylidide
(MEGX) and glycinexylidide (GX) in dogs [105], rabbits [106],
rats [107], cats [108], horses [109,110], goats [111], and chickens [112],
but these metabolites have not been detected in cows [113]. Of these
metabolites, MEGX in particular has significant activity (approxi-
mately, 70% that of lidocaine) and could potentially contribute to its
toxicity during prolonged intravenous infusions [45,110]. Another
metabolite of lidocaine, 2,6-xylidine, is of interest in food-producing
animals as it has been shown to have genotoxic and carcinogenic
potential following ingestion in humans. Other amides such as
mepivacaine, bupivacaine, and ropivacaine undergo mainly N-
dealkylation and hydroxylation. These agents produce the less
toxic metabolite pipecoloxylidide (PPX) [114]. The N-dealkylated
metabolite of bupivacaine, N-desbutylbupivacaine, is about half
as cardiotoxic as bupivacaine, but less toxic to the CNS in rat
studies [115]. Some amide metabolites are further conjugated to
glucuronide before they are eliminated in the urine or bile [116].
Excretion
Local anesthetics are poorly water soluble, which limits renal excre-
tion of the unchanged drug. The hydrolysis metabolites of ester-
linked local anesthetics are mainly excreted in urine [117]. Similarly,
the metabolites of amide-linked local anesthetics are eliminated in
urine or bile. A small portion of amide-type local anesthetics is
excreted unchanged in urine (4–7% for lidocaine, 6% for bupiv-
acaine, and 16% for mepivacaine in humans; 1.7–2.9% for lidocaine
in horses) [118–120].
Factors affecting pharmacokinetics and activity
Patient factors, such as age, may influence the pharmacokinetics of
local anesthetics. Absorption of lidocaine from laryngeal spray was
higher in dogs less than 20 days of age compared to 2–3-month-old
puppies [121]. The volume of distribution and the elimination half-
life of lidocaine were greater in neonatal lambs compared with adult
sheep [122]. In a pharmacokinetic study of lidocaine in puppies, the
elimination rate constant from the central compartment (k10
) was
lower, and the elimination half-life was longer in 3–16-day old com-
pared with 6-month-old puppies [123]. When comparing neonatal
lambs with adult sheep, hepatic clearance of lidocaine was similar
but renal clearance of unchanged drug was greater in the neonate,
probably due to decreased protein binding, lower urine pH, and
decreased tubular reabsorption because of higher urine flow
rates [122]. Plasma hydrolysis of ester-linked local anesthetics is
also affected by age, as observed in human neonates and infants
where plasma cholinesterase activity was half that of adults [124].
In geriatric animals, hepatic clearance of local anesthetics may be
decreased, and half-life increased [125,126].
Increased nerve sensitivity to local anesthetics seems to be pre-
sent during pregnancy with faster onset of conduction block-
ade [127]. Acute progesterone treatment had no effect on
bupivacaine-induced conduction blockade in the isolated rabbit
vagus nerve; therefore, this effect is unlikely to be a direct effect of
progesterone on the cell membrane but may involve hormonal
effects on protein synthesis [128]. Pregnant ewes were found to
clear lidocaine more rapidly, but bupivacaine and ropivacaine more
slowly than non-pregnant ewes [129,130]. This difference may be
explained by lidocaine’s clearance being more dependent on hepatic
blood flow, which is increased during pregnancy, whereas clearance
of bupivacaine and ropivacaine is more dependent on hepatic enzy-
matic activity, which may be inhibited during pregnancy [45].
Hepatic disease can decrease the rate of metabolism of amide-
linked local anesthetics. Plasma cholinesterase activity is also
reduced in the presence of liver disease and during pregnancy,
which will decrease the rate of hydrolysis of ester-linked local anes-
thetics [131,132]. In general, standard doses may be administered
to animals with hepatic disease for single-dose neural blockade but
repeated doses, dosing intervals, and continuous rate infusions
need to be adjusted to avoid accumulation and toxicity [45]. A
decrease in hepatic blood flow, as can occur during general anesthe-
sia, cardiac disease, or any condition decreasing cardiac output, will
decrease hepatic clearance of local anesthetics, especially those
more dependent on hepatic blood flow such as lidocaine [45,133].
The Vdss and clearance (Cl) of intravenous lidocaine were signifi-
cantly decreased in anesthetized compared to awake horses (0.4
versus 0.79 L/kg and 15 versus 29 mL/kg/min, respectively) [134],
and in anesthetized compared to awake cats (1.4 versus 1.9 L/kg and
21 versus 26 mL/kg/min, respectively) [108]. Hepatic clearance of
other amide-linked local anesthetics such as mepivacaine or bupiv-
acaine is more dependent on activity of hepatic enzymes and the
effect of reduced hepatic blood flow is less pronounced.
Renal failure decreases plasma cholinesterase activity by 40% in
humans [135]. Aminoamides are excreted mainly as water-soluble
metabolites, which may accumulate in animals with renal failure
and contribute to CNS toxicity if they are active (e.g., MEGX and
GX) [133].
Fasting has been shown to decrease hepatic clearance of lido-
caine in horses [120]. Gastrointestinal disease (e.g., equine colic)
may also affect clearance of aminoamide local anesthetics that
depend mainly on hepatic blood flow, such as lidocaine, espe-
cially if cardiac output is significantly reduced. However, phar-
macokinetic parameters of intravenous lidocaine in horses
undergoing abdominal surgery for colic are similar to those of
healthy, awake horses, with Vdss and Cl values of 0.7 L/kg and
25 mL/kg/min [136]. It was hypothesized that the cardiac output
of the horses included in that study might have been increased,
rather than decreased [136].
Interestingly, diabetes mellitus increases hepatic clearance of
lidocaine, although the excretion of the metabolite MEGX is
impaired [137,138].
Concomitant administration of local anesthetics with other
drugs may affect their distribution and elimination kinetics. Drugs
that decrease plasma or red cell esterase activity, such as neostig-
mine or acetazolamide, will prolong half-life of ester-linked local
anesthetics [139,140]. When CYP1A2 and CYP3A4 inhibitors, such
as erythromycin, are co-administered with aminoamide local anes-
thetics, their hepatic clearance may decrease [141]. β- Adrenergic
receptor blocking drugs reduce liver perfusion and inhibit the
activity of hepatic microsomal metabolizing enzymes responsible
for the metabolism of aminoamide local anesthetics; hence, greater
plasma concentration and decreased elimination will occur when
these drugs are co-administered [142].
Co-administration of different classes of local anesthetics may
also affect their pharmacokinetic parameters. The rate of hydrolysis
of chloroprocaine is reduced by concomitant administration of

-- 550 of 1450 --

Chapter 29: Local Anesthetics 	535
bupivacaine or etidocaine, but not when it is co-administered with
lidocaine or mepivacaine [139,143].
Temperature may also affect the pharmacokinetics and pharma-
codynamics of local anesthetics. Lidocaine’s ability to block nerve
impulses, both in vitro and in vivo, is potentiated by cool-
ing [144,145]. Conversely, lidocaine uptake by mammalian sciatic
nerve is reduced by cooling, with a 45% decrease when the tem-
perature falls from 37 °C to 20 °C [146]. Some clinical studies in
humans have observed an increase in the speed of onset of various
types of blocks when the temperature of the local anesthetic solu-
tion was increased to 37 °C [147–150], although this effect has not
been consistent [151,152]. Cooling of the local anesthetic solution
increases the pKa and the relative amount of ionized active form,
while warming the solution decreases the pKa and increases the
amount of non-ionized lipid-soluble form [146]. These pKa changes
may explain the increased potency of local anesthetics with cooling
and the hastening of onset of action with warming.
Baricity is one of the most important physical properties of local
anesthetics during subarachnoid or intrathecal administration as it
will affect the distribution and spread of the solution, and therefore
impact the characteristics of the block [153]. Baricity of a local
anesthetic solution is the calculated ratio of the density of the solu-
tion to the density of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), both measured
at the same temperature, which is normally 37 °C. Density is the
weight in grams of 1 mL of the solution, and it is inversely related to
its temperature [154]. An isobaric solution has a baricity ratio of 1.
If the ratio is > 1, the solution is hyperbaric, and if it is < 1, it is
hypobaric. At room temperature, most commercially available local
anesthetic solutions are isobaric with respect to the CSF, but when
they are warmed to body temperature, they become hypo-
baric [154]. The densities of commercial 2% lidocaine and 0.5% and
0.75% bupivacaine are lower than that of human CSF at 37 °C,
which makes them relatively hypobaric [155]. Dilution of these
solutions with water makes them increasingly hypobaric [155].
When local anesthetics are mixed with dextrose or hypertonic
saline, the resulting solution is hyperbaric [154,156]. Neurotoxicity
has been observed with hyperbaric bupivacaine when high concen-
trations and doses are administered intrathecally in dogs (≥ 10 mg
of 1% or 2% bupivacaine in 10% glucose solution), but not with low
concentrations and doses (5 mg of 0.5% bupivacaine in 10% glucose
solution) [157]. High concentrations and doses of hypobaric bupiv-
acaine (20 mg of 2% bupivacaine in water) were not associated with
neurotoxicity when administered intrathecally to dogs [157].
Hypobaric solutions, when injected into the subarachnoid space,
will migrate to non-dependent areas, because their density is lower
than that of the CSF, while hyperbaric solutions will migrate to
dependent areas. This migration allows preferential blockade to
occur on the surgical side, with unilateral spinal anesthesia being
possible when low doses of local anesthetics are used [158]. Isobaric
solutions will migrate to both sides of the spinal cord, causing bilat-
eral spinal block. In humans, it is reported that unilateral spinal
block results in a four-fold reduction of the incidence of clinically
relevant hypotension with more stable cardiovascular parameters as
compared with conventional bilateral spinal block [159]. Because
only small amounts of local anesthetic solution are injected, the
extent of spinal block is reduced, and the resolution of sensory and
motor blockade is faster [159].
Mixtures of local anesthetic agents with additives such as sol-
vents or vasoconstrictors, or with other drugs such as opioids, may
alter the density and baricity of the solution. When 0.125–0.5%
bupivacaine solutions are mixed with fentanyl (0.005%), sufentanil
(0.005%), or morphine (0.1%), the resultant solutions are hypo-
baric [160]. The mixture of 2% lidocaine and epinephrine
(1:200,000) results in a hyperbaric solution [160].
There is some variation in the density of the CSF among indi-
viduals [161]. Density of the CSF may also be influenced by
physiologic status (e.g., density is decreased during pregnancy in
humans) [162]. Therefore, there may be some interindividual
variation in clinical response to intrathecal solutions, especially
with those that are marginally hypo- or hyperbaric [153].
Additives
Epinephrine (adrenaline)
Epinephrine has been used as an adjunct to local anesthetics for
more than a century. The rationale behind its use is that it causes
vasoconstriction and therefore decreases the systemic absorption
of the local anesthetic agent, which decreases the dose of local
anesthetic required and prolongs its duration of effect [163,164].
Decreased systemic absorption also reduces the local anesthetic
Cmax
, which decreases the probability of systemic toxicity. Several
studies have demonstrated decreased Cmax of local anesthetics when
administered with epinephrine both in peripheral and neuraxial
blocks [164–167]. In general, the greatest effects are observed with
shorter-acting rather than with longer-acting agents.
In addition to this pharmacokinetic interaction, epinephrine
seems to have analgesic effects on its own when administered epi-
durally or intrathecally by stimulating α2
-adrenergic receptors,
thereby inhibiting presynaptic neurotransmitter release from C and
Aδ fibers in the substantia gelatinosa of the spinal cord dorsal
horn [168–170]. It has also been shown that α2
-adrenergic receptors
can modify certain K+ channels in the axons of peripheral nerves,
potentiating the impulse-blocking actions of local anesthet-
ics [171,172]. A later study in rats also showed that local infiltration
of epinephrine causes cutaneous anesthesia mediated by activation
of local α1
-adrenergic receptors [173]. Therefore, it seems that phar-
macokinetic and pharmacodynamic interactions between epineph-
rine and local anesthetics are responsible for the increased duration
and intensity of the block when administered in combination.
A potential concern when epinephrine is co-administered with
local anesthetics is a decrease in peripheral nerve or spinal cord
blood flow, which could cause nerve or spinal cord ischemia.
However, research studies with radiolabeled microspheres in
dogs and cats show that epinephrine injected intrathecally causes
regional dural vasoconstriction but does not reduce spinal cord or
cerebral blood flow [174,175]. This is supported by many years of
clinical experience using epinephrine-containing solutions for neu-
raxial anesthesia and the absence of observed detrimental effects on
spinal cord function [172,176]. In vitro studies in rats showed that
sciatic nerve blood flow is reduced by injection of lidocaine without
epinephrine, but that the reduction is more pronounced when epi-
nephrine (5 μg/mL) is added [177]. However, a more recent in vivo
rat study using radiolabeled microspheres showed that lidocaine
with or without epinephrine (10 μg/mL) does not reduce sciatic
nerve or surrounding skeletal muscle blood flow [178]. The authors
of this study concluded that mechanisms other than local vasocon-
striction might contribute to the prolongation of lidocaine periph-
eral nerve blockade by epinephrine.
Systemic absorption of epinephrine administered in combina-
tion with local anesthetics can also cause cardiovascular effects
characterized by an increase in heart rate, stroke volume, and car-
diac output, and a decrease in peripheral vascular resistance [179].
A study in humans also showed an improvement in left ventricular

-- 551 of 1450 --

536 	Section 3: Pharmacology
diastolic function with epinephrine added to local anesthetics, in
contrast with norepinephrine, which impaired it [179]. Excessive
plasma concentrations of epinephrine could precipitate tachycardia
and arrhythmias.
The recommended concentrations of epinephrine for addition to
local anesthetic solutions for clinical use range between 1:400,000
(1 mg/400 mL or 2.5 μg/mL) and 1:200,000 (1 mg/200 mL or 5 μg/
mL] [172]. A 1:200,000 concentration can be obtained by adding
0.1 mL of a 1:1000 epinephrine solution (0.1 mg) into 20 mL of local
anesthetic solution. Concentrations in excess of 5 μg/mL do not
provide any additional decrease in Cmax and should therefore be
avoided in light of the potential for systemic side effects [45].
Market preparations of local anesthetics that contain epinephrine
have lower pH values than plain or freshly prepared solutions. The
lower pH of these epinephrine-containing preparations could
potentially decrease the amount of non-ionized form, thereby slow-
ing the onset of action.
Phenylephrine and methoxamine
Other vasoconstrictors such as phenylephrine or methoxamine
may be added to prolong the duration of the effect of local anesthet-
ics by decreasing their systemic absorption [180]. Some degree of
pharmacodynamic interaction may also exist as the infiltration of
these α1
- adrenergic receptor agonists caused cutaneous anesthesia
in rats [173]. But in contrast with epinephrine, these other agents
lack α2
- adrenergic receptor effects and, therefore, potential interac-
tions with local anesthetics mediated by these receptors are not pos-
sible. Moreover, phenylephrine, but not epinephrine, caused a
significant decrease in sciatic nerve and skeletal muscle blood flow
when administered in combination with lidocaine [178], which
could potentially cause complications due to nerve ischemia.
Vasoconstrictors should be avoided for blockade of areas with
erratic blood supply or without good collateral perfusion (e.g.,
intravenous regional anesthesia, teat blocks, or large areas of
skin) because of the possibility of vasoconstriction-induced tissue
ischemia and necrosis.
Phentolamine
Phentolamine, a non-selective α-adrenergic receptor antagonist, has
been shown to reverse prolonged local anesthetic-induced block
when administered in combination with vasoconstrictors [181].
A commercial preparation of phentolamine mesylate (OraVerse®)
has been approved for the reversal of soft tissue anesthesia and the
associated functional deficits resulting from local dental anesthesia
in humans.
Hyaluronidase
Hyaluronidase, an enzyme that depolymerizes hyaluronic acid, the
main cement of the interstitium, may be added to local anesthetics
to improve tissue penetration and thereby shorten onset and
increase spread of the block [182]. The addition of hyaluronidase
raises the pH of the anesthetic solution to a slightly more physio-
logic level, which may contribute to the shortening of onset by
increasing the amount of non-ionized drug. However, local anes-
thetic Cmax and the risk of systemic toxicity may also increase.
Human studies show diverse results with respect to improved effi-
cacy. Some human studies show better quality of peribulbar or ret-
robulbar block and shorter onset of action when hyaluronidase is
added at concentrations as low as 3.5 IU/mL to mixtures of 0.5% or
0.75% bupivacaine and 2% lidocaine [183–185], while others show
no benefit when hyaluronidase is added at concentrations as high as
150 IU/mL to a mixture of 0.75% bupivacaine and 2% lidocaine for
peribulbar block [186,187]. Hyaluronidase added to bupivacaine
with epinephrine (1:200,000) for brachial plexus block did not
increase the speed of onset of anesthesia or reduce the incidence of
inadequate nerve block in humans [188]. When used in infiltration
anesthesia, hyaluronidase added at 15 IU/mL to 1% lidocaine
increased the area of desensitized skin, but pain on injection also
increased compared with plain 1% lidocaine in humans [189]. The
addition of hyaluronidase seems particularly advantageous in oph-
thalmic blocks in humans, as it has been shown to limit the acute
intraocular pressure increase secondary to periocular injection and
seems to have a protective effect against local anesthetic-induced
myotoxicity resulting in postoperative strabismus [190]. In dogs,
the addition of 400 IU of hyaluronidase to 1.06 mg/kg of 0.5% lev-
obupivacaine for lumbosacral epidural block decreased the onset
from 15 to 5 min, but it also decreased the duration of block, while
dermatomal spread was unchanged [191]. Another study in dogs
looking at the effects of hyaluronidase added to ropivacaine or
bupivacaine for femoral–ischiatic blocks showed highly variable
onset and offset times and no difference compared to the addition
of saline [192]. The addition of hyaluronidase to lidocaine for infil-
tration block does not delay wound healing [193].
Sodium bicarbonate
The pH of commercially available local anesthetic solutions is nor-
mally acidic to enhance stability and solubility and extend shelf-
life [194,195]. Alkalinization of the solution by addition of sodium
bicarbonate causes an increase in the amount of local anesthetic in
the non-ionized form, which is the lipid-soluble fraction able to
cross the axonal membrane, thereby shortening the onset of the
block. The intensity and duration of the block may also increase due
to an increase in the transmembrane pH gradient, causing ion trap-
ping of the ionized active form inside the nerve. The efficacy of
alkalinization depends on the local anesthetic solution, the site of
the block, and the concurrent addition of epinephrine.
Buffering of 1% lidocaine, 1% mepivacaine, or 0.5% bupivacaine
with sodium bicarbonate for intradermal administration does not
affect the onset, extent, and duration of skin anesthesia in
humans [196,197]. Addition of bicarbonate to lidocaine for median
nerve block in humans increased the rate of motor block without
changing the onset or extent of sensory block [198]. Similarly, alka-
linization of 1% lidocaine or 0.25% bupivacaine to a pH of 7.4 did not
prolong infraorbital nerve block duration in rats [199]. Studies using
buffered local anesthetics during epidural anesthesia show conflict-
ing results. Some studies show shorter onset of epidural block when
1.5–2% lidocaine, 2% mepivacaine, or 0.5% bupivacaine solutions
are alkalinized with bicarbonate [200–202], while others show no
shortening of onset with buffered 2% lidocaine or 0.5% bupiv-
acaine [203–205]. The alkalinization of 0.75% ropivacaine solution
does not decrease sensory or motor block onset but increases the
duration of the epidural block [206]. In femoral and sciatic nerve
blocks, the effects of alkalinization on the onset of sensory analgesia
and motor block were more evident with 2% mepivacaine, but for
brachial plexus axillary block, the greatest effect was observed with
2% lidocaine [202]. Nonetheless, in studies where hastening of block
onset occurred with alkalinization, the decrease was less than 5 min
when compared with commercial preparations. In addition, it seems
that the effect of alkalinization is mainly observed when epinephrine
is also added to the solution [207]. Thus, the value of alkalinization
of local anesthetics appears debatable as a clinically useful tool to
improve anesthesia [19].

-- 552 of 1450 --

Chapter 29: Local Anesthetics 	537
Alkalinization has a greater effect when the local anesthetic is
administered into an acidic environment, as with intravesicular
instillation where the urine is normally acidic. Intravesicular instil-
lation of 5% lidocaine buffered with an equal volume of 8.4%
sodium bicarbonate to a pH of 8.0 provided local anesthesia of the
bladder submucosa as indicated by the rapid decrease in pain scores
in human patients with interstitial cystitis [208]. However, intrave-
sicular administration of alkalinized lidocaine for up to three con-
secutive days had no apparent beneficial effect on decreasing
recurrence rate and severity of clinical signs in cats with obstructive
idiopathic lower urinary tract disease [209].
Buffered local anesthetics also have a greater effect when topi-
cally administered to the cornea. The corneal permeability of topi-
cally applied lidocaine increased when the pH of the solution was
buffered from 5.2 to 7.2, with greater concentrations of lidocaine
found in the aqueous humor [210,211].
Buffering of the local anesthetic solution with bicarbonate decreases
pain on injection when administered subcutaneously and also
decreases pain when an epidural catheter is inserted [194,195,212].
Reduction of pain on injection seems to be enhanced by additional
warming of the solution to body temperature [212].
The most common dose of sodium bicarbonate used is 0.1 mEq
per mL of local anesthetic solution. The addition of bicarbonate
may cause precipitation of the solution, especially with bupivacaine
and etidocaine when the pH rises above 7.0 [213]. Mepivacaine
may also precipitate at a pH above neutral within 20 min [214].
Therefore, it is recommended to use the mixed solution immedi-
ately after the addition of sodium bicarbonate.
Carbon dioxide
Carbonation of local anesthetics by adding carbon dioxide (CO2
)
is sometimes used to decrease onset and improve quality of the
block. The addition of CO 2 to a solution of lidocaine decreased
the amount of lidocaine needed to achieve conduction block
in vitro [215]. This potentiation of local anesthetic block is possibly
due to a decreased intracellular pH, causing ion trapping.
Carbonated lidocaine administered epidurally shortened the onset
and improved the block in humans [216,217]; however, it did not
offer any advantage over the hydrochloride salt for caudal epidural
anesthesia in horses [218].
α2
- Adrenergic receptor agonists
The addition of α2
-adrenergic receptor agonist drugs to local anes-
thetics during regional blocks is being increasingly used in veteri-
nary medicine. Clonidine has been extensively used in humans
to prolong the duration of intrathecal, epidural, and peripheral
nerve blocks. Meta- analyses and systematic reviews clearly show
an analgesic benefit from the addition of clonidine to local
anesthetics [219]. In large animals, epidural or intrathecal xylazine
has been used in combination with lidocaine since the early 1990s
to prolong the analgesic effect [220]. In dogs, a study showed that
xylazine administered epidurally in combination with lidocaine
produced the longest analgesic effect compared with clonidine,
detomidine, romifidine, and dexmedetomidine, which may be
attributed to xylazine’s local anesthetic-like properties and its
lower lipophilicity compared with the other α2
-adrenergic receptor
agonists [221]. Medetomidine administered either perineurally or
systemically (0.01 mg/kg) in combination with mepivacaine for
radial nerve block in dogs prolonged the duration of sensory and
motor blockade, with residual sensory blockade persisting beyond
the observable sedative effects [222].
Dexmedetomidine is now the most widely used α2
- adrenergic
receptor agonist regional anesthesia adjuvant in humans and animals.
Studies in rats showed that administration of dexmedetomidine in
combination with bupivacaine or ropivacaine enhances sensory
and motor blockade in sciatic nerve block without inducing neuro-
toxicity [223,224]. In fact, addition of dexmedetomidine to ropiv-
acaine for sciatic nerve block in rats not only prolonged the duration
of sensory and motor block, but also markedly reduced ropivacaine-
induced neurotoxicity dose-dependently [225]. Evidence in humans
supports block prolongation from 1–8 h when dexmedetomidine
is added depending on the type of block and local anesthetic used,
but it also increases the incidence of bradycardia and sedation
intraoperatively [226].
Several studies involving the addition of dexmedetomidine to
hindlimb nerve blocks in dogs, both experimental and clinical,
report contradictory results. Some studies showed that dexmedeto-
midine, at doses ranging between 0.15 and 2 μg/kg, combined with
ropivacaine for sciatic and saphenous or femoral nerve blocks pro-
longed the duration of sensory but not motor blockade [227,228].
Another study showed that sciatic and femoral nerve blocks using
bupivacaine plus dexmedetomidine (0.1 μg/kg) had a similar degree
and duration of analgesia (up to 24 h) compared with epidural
bupivacaine plus buprenorphine [229]. However, a two-center
study using 0.5 μg/kg dexmedetomidine in combination with ropi-
vacaine for sciatic and femoral nerve block did not reduce the use of
postoperative methadone compared with ropivacaine alone [230].
Epidural administration of dexmedetomidine and bupivacaine in
dogs undergoing pelvic limb surgery provided a similar degree of
analgesia compared with bupivacaine plus morphine; however, the
increased duration of motor blockade was a clinical concern [231].
In cats, dexmedetomidine has also been used in combination
with local anesthetics. A clinical study showed that dexmedetomi-
dine combined with bupivacaine intraperitoneally during ovario-
hysterectomy produced a similar duration and degree of analgesia
than bupivacaine combined with epinephrine [232]. An experi-
mental study in cats using dexmedetomidine combined with bupi-
vacaine for sciatic and femoral nerve blocks could not demonstrate
a benefit in terms of degree and duration of analgesia compared
with bupivacaine alone, although the results may have been influ-
enced by the administration of atipamezole [233].
The increased duration of analgesia caused by adding
α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists to local anesthetics is postulated to
be due to hyperpolarization of C fibers through blockade of the
so-called “hyperpolarization-activated cation current” [234,235].
α-Adrenergic receptors do not seem to be implicated as administra-
tion of α-adrenergic receptor antagonists neither reverses the con-
duction block nor decreases the duration of the block [234–236].
Mixtures of local anesthetics
Local anesthetic mixtures of aminoamide agents consisting of an
intermediate-acting agent, such as lidocaine or mepivacaine, com-
bined with a long-acting agent, such as bupivacaine, are used in the
belief that the combination will provide a shorter block onset and a
similar duration than the long-acting agent administered alone.
However, these mixtures produce unpredictable and variable clini-
cal results. Clinical studies in humans using a 50:50 mixture of lido-
caine or mepivacaine with bupivacaine or ropivacaine for peripheral
nerve blocks show a shorter onset of effect, but also a shorter dura-
tion of action, compared with the administration of bupivacaine or
ropivacaine alone [237–239]. The epidural or intrathecal combina-
tion of lidocaine and bupivacaine in cows [240], cats [241], and

-- 553 of 1450 --

538 	Section 3: Pharmacology
humans [242–245] produced similar sensory block onset than
either agent alone, and the duration was intermediate between the
two agents or similar to bupivacaine.
When chloroprocaine, a short-onset, short-duration-of- action
aminoester local anesthetic, is administered prior to bupivacaine,
the duration of bupivacaine-induced blockade is decreased. This
may be due to an inhibitory effect caused by chloroprocaine metab-
olites on the Na+ channel receptor site for bupivacaine [246]. Mixing
commercial preparations of chloroprocaine and bupivacaine
resulted in a pH of 3.6 and nerve blockade with characteristics of a
chloroprocaine block [247]. When the pH of the mixture was
increased to 5.56, the nerve block resembled that of bupivacaine.
Therefore, mixing commercially available solutions of local anes-
thetics results in unpredictable blockade that will depend on a
number of factors, including the pH of the final mixture [247].
Furthermore, local anesthetic toxicity of combinations of drugs is
additive [248].
Tachyphylaxis
Tachyphylaxis to local anesthetics is defined as a decrease in dura-
tion, segmental spread, or intensity of a regional block despite
repeated constant dosages [249]. In 1969, Bromage described that
repeated injection of a constant dose of epidural lidocaine led to a
reduction in both the number of dermatomes blocked and the
duration of the block [250]. The incidence of this phenomenon in
veterinary medicine is unknown, and probably is largely unrecog-
nized. Tachyphylaxis appears neither to be linked to structural or
pharmacologic properties of the local anesthetics, nor the tech-
nique or mode of administration, as it can occur with both ester-
and amide-linked local anesthetics and with either neuraxial or
peripheral nerve blocks [250–253]. Bromage found that tachyphy-
laxis to local anesthetics is promoted by longer interanalgesic inter-
vals between injections [250]. If local anesthetic injections were
repeated at intervals short enough to prevent return of pain or at
intervals with pain of less than 10 min duration, tachyphylaxis did
not occur and augmentation of the analgesic effect was noted.
Conversely, if the patient experienced pain between local anesthetic
administrations for more than 10 min, tachyphylaxis occurred
more rapidly.
The mechanisms underlying tachyphylaxis may involve both
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic aspects. Suggested phar-
macokinetic mechanisms include local edema, increased epidural
protein concentration, changes in local anesthetic distribution in
the epidural space, a decrease in perineural pH (limiting the diffu-
sion of local anesthetic from the epidural space to binding sites at
the Na+ channel), an increase in epidural blood flow, or an increase
in local metabolism (favoring clearance of local anesthetics from
the epidural space) [249]. Other pharmacodynamic mechanisms
have also been suggested, such as antagonistic effects of nucleotides
or increased Na + concentration, increased afferent input from noci-
ceptors, or receptor downregulation of Na + channels [249]. A
human study with repeated injections of epidural lidocaine showed
lack of changes in the distribution or rate of elimination of lidocaine
from the epidural space [253] and another study in rats failed to
show an effect of tissue pH on the development of tachyphylaxis to
bupivacaine [251].
Tachyphylaxis to local anesthetics does not result from reduced
drug effectiveness at the nerve itself [254], but it seems to be mainly
mediated by a spinal site of action [255]. Tachyphylaxis and central
hyperalgesia seem to be related, as evidenced by studies in rats,
where tachyphylaxis occurred only under conditions where they
concurrently developed hyperalgesia in the tested paw [256]. If only
non-noxious motor tests were used to test the duration of the
block, tachyphylaxis did not occur. Moreover, it has been shown
that drugs that prevent hyperalgesia at spinal sites, such as NMDA
receptor antagonists [256] and nitric oxide synthase inhibitors [257],
prevent the development of tachyphylaxis. Therefore, it seems that
a spinal nitric oxide pathway is involved in the development of
tachyphylaxis to local anesthetics [243]. Additionally, descending
pathways do not seem necessary for the development of tachyphy-
laxis since it occurs even after spinal cord transection at the tenth
thoracic level in rats [255].
Local anesthetic switching has also been proposed when tachy-
phylaxis to a local anesthetic agent develops. This approach has
been successful in humans with cancer-related pain in whom
intrathecal morphine and bupivacaine were not effective and sub-
stitution of bupivacaine with lidocaine improved analgesia [258].
Specific drugs and clinical uses
Aminoesters
Proparacaine (proxymetacaine)
This aminoester is used as a topical anesthetic for the cornea and is
commercialized as a 0.5% preparation. It is reported to produce
quick desensitization of the cornea (within 1 min) and a duration of
maximal corneal anesthesia of 25 min in dogs [259] but only 5 min
in cats [260]. Reduced corneal sensitivity lasts up to 55 min in dogs
and 25 min in cats after 2 drops of the commercial preparation. One
of the reported side effects of topical local anesthetics in the eye is
that they reduce tear production due to reduced corneal sensation.
Also, if used repeatedly, topical local anesthetics may slow corneal
healing [261].
Oxybuprocaine
This ester of para- aminobenzoic acid is also used for topical anes-
thesia of the cornea and is commercialized as a 0.4% ophthalmic
solution. It is reported to cause rapid desensitization of the cornea
(within 1 min) and to have a duration of up to 45 min in dogs [262].
Procaine
This agent has a quick onset and short duration of effect (30–
60 min) because of its rapid hydrolysis in blood [19]. Epinephrine
may be added to prolong its duration of effect. Its potential for
systemic toxicity is minimal, but it occasionally causes allergic
reactions due to a hydrolysis metabolite (PABA).
Procaine is used in veterinary medicine for infiltration and
nerve blocks at concentrations of 1–2% [263]. It is rarely used for
topical anesthesia, as it is not very effective via this route [263].
In humans, it is sometimes administered intrathecally for short
procedures [264].
Intravenous procaine is a CNS stimulant in horses [102]. Because
of this property, and its analgesic effect when used for peripheral
nerve blocks, it has been illegally used in racehorses [263]. Procaine
is sometimes added to drug formulations (i.e., procaine penicillin)
to prolong the duration of effect.
Benzocaine
This agent is also a fast-acting and short-lasting local anesthetic,
available exclusively for topical anesthesia. It causes methemo-
globinemia in several animal species and therefore it is no longer
used in clinical practice. Benzocaine is also an anesthetic for fish
when added to water [265].

-- 554 of 1450 --

Chapter 29: Local Anesthetics 	539
Chloroprocaine
This agent is similar to procaine, with a fast onset and short dura-
tion of action (30–60 min). It is available in concentrations of 1% to
3%. It is not widely used in veterinary medicine, but in humans, its
use has re-emerged for short-duration epidural and intrathecal
anesthesia because it is associated with a lower incidence of tran-
sient neurologic symptoms compared with lidocaine [266]. It may
also be used for local infiltration blocks when a short duration of
effect is required.
Tetracaine
Tetracaine is also called amethocaine. It is rarely used in veterinary
medicine. In humans, it is most commonly used for intrathecal
anesthesia because it has a fast onset (3–5 min) and its effect lasts
2–3 h [267]. It is rarely used for other forms of regional anesthesia
due to its extremely slow onset and potential for systemic toxic-
ity [267]. It is an excellent topical anesthetic and because of this
property, it is included in topical anesthetic solutions such as
ophthalmological preparations (0.5% and 1.0% aqueous solutions,
or a 0.5% viscous formulation). A study in horses showed that the
viscous formulation resulted in the greatest decrease in corneal sen-
sitivity and the longest duration of action (30 min) compared with
aqueous solutions of proparacaine or tetracaine (20 min) [268]. The
absorption of tetracaine from mucous membranes is very rapid
and several fatalities have been reported after its use for endoscopic
procedures in humans [269]. Human studies have shown that tet-
racaine topical preparations, including a lidocaine–tetracaine patch
(Synera®, Rapydan®), provide faster and better dermal anesthesia
than the eutectic mixture of lidocaine and prilocaine (EMLA®
cream) [270,271].
Aminoamides
Lidocaine
Lidocaine remains the most versatile and most widely used local
anesthetic in veterinary medicine because of its fast onset, moder-
ate duration of effect, and moderate toxicity. It is available as 0.5%,
1%, 1.5%, and 2% solutions. Lidocaine is used for infiltration anes-
thesia, peripheral nerve blocks, epidural and intrathecal blocks, and
intravenous regional anesthesia. The duration of plain lidocaine is
approximately 1 h, which can be prolonged up to 3–4 h with the
addition of epinephrine [19]. It is also commonly used topically for
laryngeal desensitization before tracheal intubation (2%, 4%, or
10% spray solution). For dermal anesthesia, it is available in differ-
ent formulations such as the eutectic mixture with prilocaine (2.5%
EMLA® cream), as patches of lidocaine alone (5% Lidoderm®),
mixed with tetracaine (Synera®, Rapydan®), or mixed with bupiv-
acaine (Tri-Solfen®) (see Special formulations section later in this
chapter).
Lidocaine has numerous non-anesthetic uses when administered
intravenously. It is a Class Ib antiarrhythmic drug. It also reduces
the requirements for inhalational anesthetics when administered
intravenously in different species, including dogs [272–274],
cats [275], goats [111], horses [276,277], and calves [278]. It is also
an analgesic drug for different types of pain when administered sys-
temically, as shown in human patients [279,280] and experimental
studies in laboratory animals [281,282]. Administration of intrave-
nous lidocaine (2 mg/kg bolus followed by 0.05 mg/kg/min) pro-
duced thermal antinociception in horses [283]. However, it did not
affect the thermal threshold in cats (plasma concentrations up to
4.3 μg/mL) [284], or the electrical threshold in dogs (2 mg/kg IV
bolus followed by an infusion of up to 0.1 mg/kg/min) [285].
The mechanism by which systemically administered lidocaine
produces analgesia is uncertain but is thought to include action at
Na+
, Ca 2+
, and K + channels and the NMDA receptor [39–41,43,44].
Lidocaine also possesses anti-inflammatory effects, which may be
important in producing analgesia because inflammatory mediators
augment neuronal excitability [286]. In addition, some studies
show that lidocaine administered as an intravenous infusion perio-
peratively may improve gastrointestinal motility, reducing reflux,
jejunal distension, and peritoneal fluid accumulation, and prevent-
ing the development of postoperative ileus in horses with colic of
varying etiologies [287–289]. This beneficial effect on motility may
be especially true in cases with small intestinal lesions and ischemia-
reperfusion injury, and it may be enhanced if lidocaine is adminis-
tered early during the intraoperative period [290]. However, a
single-center study showed no effect on the prevalence of postop-
erative reflux, total reflux volume, and duration of reflux, or post-
operative survival in horses undergoing surgical management of
small intestinal disease [291]. In healthy horses, lidocaine adminis-
tration as an intravenous infusion has no effect on gastrointestinal
transit time [292] or may prolong it [293].
The disposition of lidocaine after intravenous administration has
been described for sheep [122], dogs [105,123,294], cats [108],
horses [134], cows [113], and chickens [112] (Table 29.3).
Mepivacaine
This agent has a pharmacologic profile very similar to lidocaine,
with a slightly longer duration of effect (up to 2 h), probably because
of slightly less intrinsic vasodilatory properties. It is available at
concentrations from 0.5% to 2%. Its use in clinical practice is simi-
lar to lidocaine, except that it is not routinely used for intravenous
regional anesthesia or for obstetric procedures due to its very slow
metabolism in the fetus and newborn [267]. Unlike lidocaine,
mepivacaine is not an effective topical anesthetic [267]. It is the
preferred agent for diagnostic peripheral nerve blocks in horses
because of its lower neurotoxicity compared with other local
anesthetics [295].
Bupivacaine
This is a highly lipophilic agent, about four times as potent as lido-
caine, and with slow onset of action (20–30 min) and a long dura-
tion of effect (3–10 h) [267]. It is used in concentrations, ranging
from 0.125% to 0.75%. Its clinical uses include infiltrative, periph-
eral nerve, epidural, and intrathecal blocks. Bupivacaine is not used
for topical anesthesia, and it is not recommended for intravenous
regional anesthesia because of its high cardiotoxicity potential. It
possesses intrinsic differential blocking properties, especially at low
concentrations, and therefore is indicated when sensory blockade
accompanied by minimal motor dysfunction is desired.
Table 29.3 Pharmacokinetic parameters (mean ± SD) of intravenous lidocaine
in domestic species.
t1/2 (minutes) 	Vdss (L/kg) 	Cl (mL/kg/min)
Dog [294] 	68.1 ± 10.9 	1.38 ± 0.08 	27.5 ± 6
Cat [108] 	100 ± 28 	1.39 ± 0.37 	26 ± 2.7
Horse [134] 	79 ± 41 	0.79 ± 0.16 	29 ± 7.6
Cattle [113] 	63.6 ± 42 	3.3 ± 1.6 	42.2 ± 20.5
Sheep [122] 	30.9 	NA 	41.2
t1/2
, terminal half-life; Vdss
, apparent volume of distribution in steady state; Cl, total
body clearance.

-- 555 of 1450 --

540 	Section 3: Pharmacology
Levobupivacaine
This is the S(–)-enantiomer (“levorotatory” isomer) of bupivacaine,
with slightly less cardiotoxic potential than the racemic mixture.
Its physicochemical properties and clinical uses are the same as
bupivacaine.
Ropivacaine
This agent is structurally related to mepivacaine and bupivacaine,
but it is marketed as the pure S(–)-enantiomer to reduce the cardio-
toxicity associated with the R(+)-enantiomer. It is slightly less
potent than bupivacaine and is available in concentrations of up to
1%. Its clinical uses are the same as bupivacaine, with similar onset
of effect, a marginally shorter sensory blockade (up to 6 h), and a
slightly lower degree of motor blockade at equipotent doses [251]. It
has a biphasic effect on peripheral vasculature, causing vasocon-
striction at concentrations below 0.5% and vasodilation at concen-
trations over 1% [296].
Special formulations
In addition to standard local anesthetic preparations, there are
several special formulations that improve topical absorption and/or
prolong their effects (Table 29.4). These formulations include encap-
sulation in liposomes, association with biopolymers, complexation
in cyclodextrins, incorporation into transdermal non-liposomal
carriers, and other carrier systems. These carriers present in differ-
ent physical states, including solids (patches), semisolids (gel, cream,
and ointment), and liquids (emulsion and dispersion).
Lidocaine dermal patches and eutectic creams
Lidocaine patches are made of a nonwoven polyester felt backing
with adhesive material, and commercially available products con-
tain 5% lidocaine (50 mg of lidocaine per gram of adhesive, with a
total of 700 mg lidocaine per patch measuring 10 × 14 cm). They
consist of a single-layer matrix that allows lidocaine to diffuse
across the different layers of the skin via passive diffusion down a
concentration gradient. The patch itself is an occlusive delivery sys-
tem that prevents water loss from the skin, increasing the hydration
of the stratum corneum, and therefore enhancing the absorption of
the drug through the skin [297]. The pharmacokinetics of lidocaine
patches have been described in different species, with a low sys-
temic absorption observed in cats [298], dogs [299,300], and
horses [301,302] when they were applied to intact, clipped, and sur-
gically prepared skin. When they were applied on a surgical incision
in dogs, the area under the curve lidocaine plasma concentration
was significantly higher than when applied on intact skin [303],
although these levels were well below the reported concentrations
measured when lidocaine is administered intravenously at clinically
recommended doses [273].
Table 29.4 Clinically relevant local anesthetic commercial preparations, indications, and doses.
Local anesthetic 	Commercial preparations 	Indications 	Doses
Procaine 	Novocaine
Procasel
Adrenacaine
Dalocain
Isocain (with epinephrine)
Infiltration
Nerve blocks
Maximum dose:
2–4 mg/kg
Lidocaine 	Topical:
EMLA cream (with prilocaine)
Xylocaine
Intubeaze
Lidoderm patches
Tri-Solfen (with bupivacaine)
Injectable:
Lidocaine HCl
Lignocaine
Xylocaine (some with epinephrine)
Topical (dermal, mucous membranes, wounds)
Infiltration
Nerve blocks
Interpleural
Epidural
Intrathecala
Intravenous (IV)
Maximum dose:
6–10 mg/kg (Ca)
3–5 mg/kg (Fe)
6 mg/kg (Eq, Bo, Ov, Cp, Sw)
IV infusion dose:
1–2 mg/kg bolus, 30–50 μg/kg/min awake (Ca)
1–2 mg/kg bolus, 50–200 μg/kg/min under
general anesthesia (Ca)
1.3 mg/kg bolus, 25–50 μg/kg/min (Eq, Bo)
Mepivacaine 	Carbocaine
Intra-Epicaine
Vetacaine
Infiltration
Nerve blocks
Interpleural
Epidural
Intrathecala
Intra-articular
Maximum dose:
5–6 mg/kg (Ca, Eq, Bo, Ov, Cp, Sw)
2–3 mg/kg (Fe)
Intra-articular dose:
1–2 mg/kg
Bupivacaine 	Topical:
Tri-Solfen (with lidocaine)
Injectable:
Marcaine
Nocita
Topical (wounds)
Infiltration
Nerve blocks
Interpleural
Epidural
Intrathecala
Maximum dose:
2 mg/kg (Ca, Eq, Bo, Ov, Cp, Sw)
1–1.5 mg/kg (Fe)
Levobupivacaine 	Chirocaine 	Infiltration
Nerve blocks
Interpleural
Epidural
Intrathecala
Maximum dose:
3 mg/kg (Ca, Eq, Bo, Ov, Cp, Sw)
1.5 mg/kg (Fe)
Ropivacaine 	Naropin 	Infiltration
Nerve blocks
Interpleural
Epidural
Intrathecala
Maximum dose:
3 mg/kg (Ca, Eq, Bo, Ov, Cp, Sw)
1.5 mg/kg (Fe)
a Intrathecal dose is one-tenth of epidural dose.
Ca, Canine; Fe, Feline; Eq, Equine; Bo, Bovine; Ov, Ovine; Cp, Caprine; Sw, Swine.

-- 556 of 1450 --

Chapter 29: Local Anesthetics 	541
The efficacy of lidocaine patches to provide analgesia in clinical
conditions has been evaluated in dogs undergoing ovariohysterec-
tomy and hemilaminectomy surgery, with no improvement of post-
operative pain scores when they are used in combination with other
analgesic therapies [304,305]. A study in horses showed a reduction
in the visual analog scale scores to pinprick when a 5% lidocaine
cream was used, but not when lidocaine patches were applied proxi-
mal to the carpus [302]. Another later study in horses showed that
lidocaine patches applied over the withers and saddle area increased
local thermal and mechanical nociceptive thresholds under experi-
mental conditions [306]. This study also tested eutectic cream mix-
tures of lidocaine with prilocaine and lidocaine with tetracaine and
found a greater intensity and longer duration of local thermal and
mechanical antinociception compared to the lidocaine patches in
horses [306].
Lidocaine–bupivacaine gel (Tri-Solfen®)
A commercially available topical anesthetic in a gel base (Tri-
Solfen®) consisting of 5% lidocaine hydrochloride and 0.5%
bupivacaine hydrochloride, mixed with epinephrine 1:2000 for
hemostasis, and 0.5% cetrimide as an antiseptic, has been registered
in Australia and New Zealand since 2006 to provide pain relief in
lambs and calves. It has also been approved in 2022 in the United
Kingdom for the alleviation of pain in pigs. When applied directly
over the disbudding wound, this preparation was reported to be
effective to mitigate postoperative pain in calves [307,308], causing
no toxic effects or negative impact on wound healing at doses up
to five times the recommended dose, and with evidence of lower
levels of bacterial colonization [309]. It has also been shown to
reduce pain in lambs following mulesing, castration, and tail dock-
ing [310,311], in dairy cows during treatment of hoof lesions [312],
and in piglets following castration [313].
Liposome-encapsulated bupivacaine (Nocita®)
Liposome-encapsulated bupivacaine (Nocita®) is a sterile, non-
pyrogenic, preservative-free, aqueous suspension of multivesicular
lipid- based particles containing bupivacaine at a concentration of
13.3 mg/mL. The liposomes are microscopic structures made of
nonconcentric lipid bilayers resembling a honeycomb-like matrix
designed to allow a gradual release of bupivacaine from the vesicles
for 72 h, as the lipid bilayers break down. Liposome-encapsulated
bupivacaine was approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) in 2016 in dogs for single-dose infiltration
into the surgical site for cranial cruciate ligament surgery at a dose
of 5.3 mg/kg. In 2018, it also obtained FDA approval for peripheral
nerve blocks for onychectomy in cats at a dose of 5.3 mg/kg per paw
(10.6 mg/kg total dose). If a greater volume is needed, it may be
mixed with 0.9% saline or another isotonic solution (e.g., Lactated
Ringer’s solution) in a 1:1 ratio [314]. Mixing the product with
sterile water or another hypotonic solution is not recommended as
this may disrupt the liposomes.
Several studies have shown that locally infiltrated liposome-
encapsulated bupivacaine is more effective than placebo (signifi-
cantly lower pain scores) in dogs undergoing stifle surgery [315], and
at least as effective as local infiltration with 0.5% bupivacaine hydro-
chloride (similar postoperative pain scores) in dogs undergoing tibial
plateau leveling osteotomy [316] and in cats undergoing ovariohys-
terectomy [317]. Dogs administered liposome-encapsulated bupiv-
acaine, however, were less likely to require rescue analgesia and
received lower amounts of opioids than dogs administered 0.5%
bupivacaine hydrochloride [316].
There are also some pre-clinical studies in horses using liposome-
encapsulated bupivacaine for perineural analgesia in experimen-
tally induced lameness. Compared with bupivacaine hydrochloride
at milligram-equivalent doses, liposome-encapsulated bupivacaine
ameliorated forelimb lameness in most horses (5/6), and with a
similar duration of effect (median 4.5 h) [318]. However, in another
study using a different experimental model of lameness, horses
treated with bupivacaine hydrochloride had reduced mechanical
nociceptive thresholds and improved objective lameness parame-
ters for only 1 h post-block compared with a duration of up to 24 h
in horses treated with liposome-encapsulated bupivacaine [319].
Dual-acting bupivacaine–meloxicam extended-release
polymer
A novel formulation of bupivacaine hydrochloride combined with a
low dose of meloxicam (HTX-011) using extended-release polymer
technology was approved for use in humans in 2021 by the FDA,
and in several other countries, including the European Union and
United Kingdom (ZynrelefTM
). It is instilled locally around the inci-
sion site after surgery to produce postoperative analgesia up to 72 h.
Pre-clinical studies in pigs showed the ability of meloxicam to
reduce local tissue inflammation, thereby lessening the drop in tis-
sue pH in the incision after surgery compared with control, which
was associated with potentiated and prolonged analgesic activity of
bupivacaine [320].
Adverse effects
Systemic toxicity
Local anesthetic drugs may cause CNS and cardiac toxicity at high
plasma concentrations. Plasma concentrations are determined by
the rate of drug absorption into the systemic circulation, but the
most common reason for excessive plasma concentrations is the
inadvertent direct intravascular injection of the local anesthetic
solution while performing peripheral or neuraxial blocks. Local
anesthetics vary considerably in their potency at causing systemic
toxic reactions, and generally, this potency follows the same rank
order as their potency at producing nerve blockade [321]. More
lipid-soluble drugs (i.e., bupivacaine) are more potent at causing
systemic toxicity than less lipid-soluble agents (i.e., lidocaine or
mepivacaine), and the S(–)-enantiomers (i.e., levobupivacaine or
ropivacaine) are less toxic than the R(+)-enantiomers, or than the
racemic mixture of both [322–325].
The dose of a local anesthetic causing systemic toxicity will
depend on the route and speed of administration (rapid intrave-
nous administration will be more likely to cause high plasma
levels), the species involved, and patient factors (such as acid–base
balance, serum potassium levels, and whether the animal is under
anesthesia).
The clinical incidence of systemic toxicity in domestic animals is
unknown. The incidence of systemic toxicity associated with
regional anesthetic blocks in humans is estimated to be around 1 in
10,000, with peripheral blocks having the highest incidence (7.5 in
10,000) [326,327].
Central nervous system toxicity
CNS toxic signs follow a progression as the plasma concentration
of local anesthetic increases (Fig. 29.6). At low doses, all local
anesthetics are effective anticonvulsants, and they also have seda-
tive effects [328]. In conscious, unsedated humans, the initial
signs of local anesthetic CNS toxicity include tongue numbness,

-- 557 of 1450 --

542 	Section 3: Pharmacology
light-headedness, dizziness, drowsiness, paresthesia of sight and
sound, and acute anxiety, or even fear of death [329]. In horses,
this has been described as alteration in visual function, rapid eye
blinking, anxiety, mild sedation, and ataxia [287,288,330]. As the
plasma level rises, local anesthetics inhibit inhibitory cortical
neurons in the temporal lobe or the amygdala, allowing facilita-
tory neurons to function in an unopposed fashion, resulting in
increased excitatory activity, which first leads to muscle twitching
followed by grand mal seizures [321,328]. As the plasma concen-
tration increases further, local anesthetics can inhibit both inhibi-
tory and facilitatory pathways, resulting in CNS depression,
unconsciousness, and coma [321,328].
Not all local anesthetics produce signs of aura, such as drowsi-
ness or excitement, before the onset of seizures. With highly
lipophilic, highly protein-bound agents such as bupivacaine, the
excitement phase can be brief and mild, and the first signs may be
bradycardia, cyanosis, and unconsciousness [331].
CNS toxicity is generally assumed to precede cardiovascular tox-
icity. This derives from studies in conscious sheep where the doses
and plasma drug concentrations associated with cardiovascular col-
lapse (defined as the disappearance of pulsatile blood pressure) and
CNS toxicity (signified by the onset of seizures) were calculated as
the CV:CNS ratio. Values for the CV:CNS ratio for various local
anesthetics in conscious sheep are much greater than 1, supporting
this notion [323,332].
In humans, the frequency of seizures and accompanying cardio-
vascular changes associated with various regional block techniques
have been reviewed. There is a significant difference between the
rate of seizure development with caudal > brachial plexus > epi-
dural blocks, with no adverse cardiovascular or pulmonary effects
occurring during seizures [333].
In conscious dogs, the mean cumulative dose required for con-
vulsive activity was 4 mg/kg for tetracaine, 5 mg/kg for bupivacaine,
8 mg/kg for etidocaine, and 22 mg/kg for lidocaine in one study [13].
In another study, administration of intravenous infusions of lido-
caine (8 mg/kg/min), bupivacaine (2 mg/kg/min), or ropivacaine
(2 mg/kg/min) caused generalized seizures at an average dose of
21 mg/kg of lidocaine, 4 mg/kg of bupivacaine, and 5 mg/kg of
ropivacaine in conscious dogs [334]. The first seizure activity
observed with lidocaine toxicity in dogs was tonic extension at an
infused dose of 12 mg/kg, followed by running activity after
23 mg/kg, and with tonic- clonic seizures occurring at an infused
dose of 33 mg/kg [335]. The plasma concentration of lidocaine
causing muscle tremors was 2.7 μg/mL after administration of a
total dose of 11.1 mg/kg IV to conscious dogs [336]. The onset of
seizures occurred when lidocaine plasma concentrations reached
8.2 μg/mL in another study involving awake dogs [337].
In conscious horses, the mean toxic plasma concentration of
lidocaine causing muscle fasciculations was determined to be
3.24 μg/mL (range 1.85–4.53 μg/mL), and it did not change regard-
less of speed of administration [330]. Such plasma concentrations
may be achieved during prolonged lidocaine IV infusions of greater
than 12 h in postcolic surgery horses [338,339].
In lightly anesthetized and ventilated cats, seizures occurred after
administration of 12 mg/kg of lidocaine and 5 mg/kg of bupivacaine
given at intravenous infusion rates of 16 mg/kg/min and 4 mg/kg/min,
respectively [340]. The onset of seizures occurred with lidocaine
plasma concentrations of 19.6 μg/mL [341]. The CV:CNS toxicity ratio
for drug dosage was 4.0 with lidocaine and 4.8 with bupivacaine in
cats [340].
In conscious sheep, the doses of infused lidocaine, bupivacaine,
and ropivacaine necessary to produce convulsions were 6.8 mg/kg,
1.6 mg/kg, and 3.5 mg/kg, respectively [342]. Therefore, the ratio of
the mean convulsant doses (lidocaine/bupivacaine/ropivacaine)
was approximately 5:1:2 [342].
There is an inverse relationship between the seizure threshold
dose of local anesthetics and the arterial CO2 tension [343]. This
may be due to an increase in cerebral blood flow during hypercap-
nia causing increased delivery of drug to the brain and/or a decrease
in plasma protein binding of local anesthetics causing an increase in
free drug [344]. Hypoxemia also increases the CNS and cardiovas-
cular toxicity of local anesthetics [345].
Cardiovascular toxicity
At low concentrations, most local anesthetics have an antiarrhyth-
mic effect, but at higher concentrations, they produce cardiac tox-
icity. Local anesthetics block cardiac Na + channels and decrease the
maximum rate of rise of Phase 0 of the action potential, leading to
a pronounced and evolving inhibition of cardiac conduction [346].
Electrocardiographic changes include prolonged PR and QRS
intervals and a prolonged refractory period [346–348]. The cardio-
vascular effects of local anesthetics are complex and non-linear,
including direct effects on cardiac conduction, cardiac contractility,
and vascular smooth muscle, as well as indirect effects mediated by
the CNS [321].
All local anesthetics cause myocardial depression with small
intravenous doses that cause no overt CNS toxicity [325,349].
At subconvulsant doses, heart rate may increase slightly and the
QRS complex may widen, but there are no major effects on blood
pressure and cardiac output [325,349]. These effects are mild and
rapidly reversed, with no qualitative differences among local
anesthetics [325]. At the onset of convulsions, there is a profound
sympathetic response associated with all local anesthetics, which
reverses the induced myocardial depression causing tachycardia
and increased blood pressure and cardiac output [324,325,342].
Convulsant doses of all longer-acting local anesthetics cause marked
arrhythmias, typically ventricular tachycardia, that may progress
to ventricular fibrillation or cardiovascular collapse [324,350].
Supraconvulsant doses of lidocaine cause profound hypotension,
Plasma concentration
(μg/mL)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Positive inotropy, analgesia,
lightheadedness, numbness
Visual disturbances
Muscle twitching
Seizures
Unconsciousness
Coma
Respiratory arrest
Cardiovascular depression/collapse
Anticonvulsant and antiarrhythmic effects
Figure 29.6 Progressive signs of lidocaine systemic toxicity with increasing
plasma concentrations. Note that concentrations are approximate and
depend on various factors (see text for details).

-- 558 of 1450 --

Chapter 29: Local Anesthetics 	543
bradycardia, decreases in myocardial contractility, respiratory
arrest, and ultimately asystole [324,342].
It has been postulated that the CNS toxic effects may be involved
in the production of serious cardiotoxicity because of the onset of
respiratory failure accompanied by hypoxia, bradycardia, hypercap-
nia, and acidosis [328].
While all local anesthetics cause direct negative inotropic effects,
the shorter-acting local anesthetics such as lidocaine and mepiv-
acaine are less arrhythmogenic than the longer-acting ones, such
as bupivacaine or ropivacaine [324,350]. These differences are
caused by differences in the kinetics of binding and unbinding
from various ion channels [351,352]. While both shorter- and
longer-acting agents have similar rates of binding to cardiac Na +
channels, the longer-acting agents have slower unbinding rates,
hence predisposing to cardiac arrhythmias [321]. The R(+)-
enantiomers of the more lipophilic local anesthetics have slower
unbinding rates than the S(–)-enantiomers, thereby making them
even more arrhythmogenic [351,352].
No ventricular arrhythmias were observed with cardiotoxic
doses of lidocaine in conscious dogs [324]. Ventricular tachycardia
with no hemodynamic impairment was observed in only one of
eight conscious sheep with lidocaine and one of seven with mepiv-
acaine [350]. In contrast, ventricular arrhythmias occurred in one
of six conscious dogs with cardiotoxic doses of ropivacaine and five
of six with bupivacaine [324]. Polymorphic ventricular tachycardia
accompanied by decreased cardiac output occurred in 7 of 10 con-
scious sheep receiving bupivacaine, 4 of 11 with levobupivacaine,
and 5 of 12 with ropivacaine [350]. Even though the newer local
anesthetics ropivacaine and levobupivacaine appear to be less car-
diotoxic than bupivacaine (judging by the larger doses tolerated
before the onset of serious arrhythmias), they must not be regarded
as totally safe [353].
General anesthesia has a substantial impact on toxicity, mortality,
and pharmacokinetics of various local anesthetics and distorts
pharmacokinetic–pharmacodynamic relationships. In a study in
halothane-anesthetized sheep, the pre-existing myocardial depres-
sion from halothane was markedly exacerbated by infusions of lido-
caine, mepivacaine, prilocaine, bupivacaine, levobupivacaine, or
ropivacaine [350]. The cardiovascular toxic effects of each local
anesthetic were also prolonged in anesthetized sheep compared with
conscious sheep, and concurrently, the blood drug concentrations
were markedly increased under general anesthesia. However, no
serious arrhythmias occurred in any anesthetized sheep. Despite the
exaggerated cardiovascular effects of the local anesthetics when the
sheep were anesthetized, none of them died, whereas approximately
15% died from fatal cardiac arrhythmias when conscious [350].
As the K + gradient across cardiac myocyte membranes is the
most important factor in establishing the membrane potential,
hyperkalemia can markedly increase local anesthetic toxicity.
Under conditions of hyperkalemia (5.4 mEq/L) in dogs, the cardio-
toxic doses of both lidocaine and bupivacaine were halved com-
pared to conditions of normokalemia, while the seizure-inducing
doses did not change for either agent [354]. Conversely, hypoka-
lemia decreases local anesthetic cardiotoxicity [354].
Treatment of systemic toxicity
When signs of systemic toxicity are noted, the administration
of local anesthetic should be discontinued. Treatment of systemic
toxicity is primarily supportive (Box 29.1). Oxygenation and
ventilation are the main goals. It may be necessary to intubate the
trachea and mechanically ventilate the animal to avoid or reverse
hypoxemia, hypercapnia, and acidosis, all of which promote toxicity.
If grand mal seizures are present, an anticonvulsant drug may be
administered. If cardiovascular depression is also present, barbitu-
rates or propofol are not recommended and treatment with a ben-
zodiazepine is preferable.
Cardiovascular toxicity induced by lidocaine or mepivacaine is
usually mild and reversible with the use of positive inotropic drugs
and fluid support [19]. Cardiac arrhythmias produced by longer-
acting local anesthetics such as bupivacaine (i.e., ventricular tachy-
cardia or fibrillation) are usually malignant and refractory to
routine treatment. In these cases, cardiopulmonary resuscitation
should be immediately instituted, and defibrillation initiated if nec-
essary. In humans, the guidelines of the American Society of
Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine recommend using low
doses of epinephrine (< 1 μg/kg) and avoiding vasopressin [355].
Calcium channel blockers should not be administered as their car-
diodepressant effects are exaggerated [356]. Amiodarone rather
than lidocaine is indicated to treat ventricular arrhythmias in this
setting [356]. In cases of refractory cardiac arrest, it is recom-
mended to use an intravenous lipid emulsion (i.e., Intralipid® 20%),
which has been shown to reverse refractory arrhythmias caused by
highly lipophilic local anesthetics in different experimental mod-
els [357,358] and in human clinical reports [359–361].
In a rodent model of bupivacaine-induced asystole in animals
pretreated with an intravenous lipid solution, the median lethal
dose (LD 50
) of bupivacaine increased by 48% [357]. In a dog model
of bupivacaine-induced cardiotoxicity (10 mg/kg IV), cardiopul-
monary resuscitation was instituted for 10 min and then dogs
received similar volumes of either intravenous saline fluid or a 20%
lipid solution (4 mL/kg over 2 min, followed by 0.5 mL/kg/min over
10 min) [358]. Notably, all dogs in the saline control group failed to
regain spontaneous circulation and died, while all dogs treated with
the lipid solution survived, achieving near baseline blood pressure
and heart rate values within 30 min of its administration [358].
Later studies in rats have demonstrated the potential adverse effects
of epinephrine administered at high doses during lipid emulsion
rescue with a higher incidence of ventricular arrhythmias, hyper-
lactatemia, hypoxia, acidosis, and pulmonary edema [362,363].
Another study in rats also demonstrated worse outcomes when
vasopressin was administered alone or in combination with epi-
nephrine compared with a lipid emulsion [364].
Box 29.1 Guidelines for treatment of local anesthetic systemic toxicity.
Central nervous system toxicity
1 Intubate trachea, administer O2
, and ventilate
2 Treat seizures with a benzodiazepine
Cardiac arrest
1 Start basic cardiopulmonary resuscitation
2 Administer epinephrine at low doses (≤ 1 μg/kg IV)
3 AVOID lidocaine, vasopressin, calcium channel blockers, and β-blockers
4 Administer a 20% lipid emulsion IV:
• Initial bolus 1.5–4 mL/kg over 1 min
• Continue with CRI at 0.25 mL/kg/min for 30–60 min
• If non- responsive administer additional boluses of 1.5 mL/kg (up to
a maximum of 7 mL/kg)
• CRI may be continued at 0.5 mL/kg/h until clinical signs improve
(24 h maximum)
CRI, constant rate infusion.
Source: Adapted from Neal et al. [355]; Fernandez et al. [365].

-- 559 of 1450 --

544 	Section 3: Pharmacology
The exact mechanism of action of lipid emulsions is unknown
and is likely multifactorial, but it is thought to be related to improved
myocardial performance and a “lipid sink” effect, which postulates
that the lipophilic local anesthetic is sequestered into a lipid com-
partment within the bloodstream [365].
Propofol should not be administered as a substitute for intravenous
lipid emulsions as its lipid content is too low (10%) and the large doses
required would induce profound cardiovascular depression.
Local toxicity
Neurotoxicity
Exposure of the peripheral or central nervous systems to local anes-
thetics can cause direct damage, although this complication is rare.
Mechanisms of local anesthetic neurotoxicity remain speculative,
but some studies suggest injury to Schwann cells, which is time and
concentration dependent [366], inhibition of fast axonal transport,
disruption of the blood–nerve barrier, decreased neural blood flow
with associated ischemia [367], and disruption of cell membrane
integrity due to a detergent property of local anesthetics [368].
All local anesthetics are potentially neurotoxic and neurotoxicity
parallels anesthetic potency. The in vitro rank order of potency for
cytotoxicity is procaine ≤ mepivacaine < lidocaine < chloroprocaine
< ropivacaine < bupivacaine, based on the LD 50 for neuronal
cells [295]. Neurotoxicity is also related to the concentration of local
anesthetic. Clinically relevant concentrations of local anesthetics
are considered safe for peripheral nerves [369]. The spinal cord and
nerve roots, on the other hand, are more prone to injury [19].
Intrathecal administration of 8% lidocaine, 2% bupivacaine, and 1%
tetracaine, but not of 2% chloroprocaine and 2% ropivacaine, caused
histopathologic changes in the spinal cord and neurologic deficits in
rabbits [370]. The cytotoxic effect of lidocaine and bupivacaine is
concentration dependent, with higher concentrations causing death
of all cells in culture. In contrast, mepivacaine, ropivacaine, pro-
caine, and chloroprocaine did not kill all cells even at very high
concentrations [295].
The effects of local anesthetics on spinal cord blood flow appear
to be benign, and do not seem responsible for spinal cord neurotox-
icity. Intrathecal administration of lidocaine, mepivacaine, bupiv-
acaine, and tetracaine causes vasodilation and increases spinal cord
blood flow, whereas ropivacaine causes vasoconstriction and
decreases spinal cord blood flow, with both effects being concentra-
tion dependent [72].
The incidence of long-term neurologic injury in human patients
undergoing spinal anesthesia is 0–0.02% [327]. Therefore, it seems
to be a relatively safe technique in clinical practice if properly per-
formed using clinically appropriate local anesthetic concentrations.
Myotoxicity
Local anesthetics can cause toxicity to skeletal muscle. Experimentally,
all local anesthetics have the potential for myotoxicity at clinically
relevant concentrations. Myotoxicity is concentration dependent, as
observed in a study in rabbits where extraocular muscle injection with
0.75% bupivacaine caused acute myonecrosis and degeneration, com-
pared with only scattered and significantly fewer areas of mild muscle
fiber degeneration with 0.38% bupivacaine, and no muscle degenera-
tion observed when the injection was with 0.19% bupivacaine [371].
Bupivacaine seems to be more myotoxic than other local anesthetics
as judged by the larger extent of muscle lesions observed [372]. The
mechanism of local anesthetic-induced muscle toxicity is likely to
be related to dysregulation of intracellular calcium concentration
and/or alterations in mitochondrial bioenergetics [373].
In most cases, local anesthetic-induced myonecrosis appears to
be regenerative and clinically imperceptible. However, bupivacaine
and ropivacaine produced irreversible skeletal muscle damage char-
acterized by calcific myonecrosis observed 4 weeks after peripheral
nerve blockade in a study in pigs [372].
Clinically relevant myopathy and myonecrosis have been
described in humans after receiving continuous peripheral blocks,
infiltration of wound margins, trigger point injections, and peri-
and retrobulbar blocks [374].
Chondrotoxicity
Local anesthetics are sometimes injected intra-articularly in clinical
practice. Local anesthetic chondrotoxicity has been demonstrated both
in vivo and in vitro in both animal and human cartilage [375–378].
Clinically, chondrolysis has been associated with the use of intra-
articular local anesthetic pain pumps in humans [379,380].
The chondrotoxicity exhibited by local anesthetics is time and
concentration dependent. In vitro bovine chondrocyte viability
decreased after just 15 min of exposure to 1% lidocaine, and longer
exposures to 1% and 2% lidocaine further reduced chondrocyte
viability [376]. Chondrocyte viability was reduced to a larger extent
when exposed to 2% lidocaine compared to 1% lidocaine [376]. This
study also showed that the intact articular surface is not protective
against local anesthetic chondrotoxicity [376].
In vitro exposure of equine chondrocytes to 0.5% bupivacaine,
2% lidocaine, or 2% mepivacaine for 30 or 60 min revealed that
bupivacaine is the most chondrotoxic of the three local anesthetics
and that mepivacaine is the least toxic [377]. Ropivacaine is also
significantly less toxic than bupivacaine and lidocaine in both intact
human articular cartilage and chondrocyte culture [381,382]. The
marked chondrotoxicity exhibited by bupivacaine and lidocaine is
mainly due to necrosis rather than apoptosis [377].
In conclusion, evidence suggests that there is a greater risk for
chondrolysis with longer exposure to a higher concentration of
local anesthetics, such as with a pain pump, than with a single injec-
tion, and that mepivacaine seems to be the least toxic and conse-
quently the preferred drug for intra-articular administration.
Methemoglobinemia
Methemoglobin (MHb) formation may be induced by certain local
anesthetics in several animal species and humans. MHb is pro-
duced by oxidative damage to the hemoglobin molecule. Specifically,
the iron of the heme group is oxidized to the ferric (Fe3+
) form. In
this state, it cannot bind oxygen (O 2 ), and therefore blood oxygen-
carrying capacity is decreased. The physiologic range of MHb in the
blood is 0–2% [383]. Concentrations of MHb of 10–20% are toler-
ated well, but higher levels are often associated with clinical signs,
and levels above 70% may cause death [383]. Oxidative denatura-
tion of hemoglobin can cause Heinz body formation (precipitated
hemoglobin or globin subunits), which is irreversible, decreases the
lifespan of red blood cells, and causes hemolysis.
The local anesthetics more often associated with MHb formation
are the aminoester benzocaine, and the aminoamide prilocaine.
Administration of a 2 s spray of benzocaine (estimated dose 56 mg)
to the mucous membranes of the nasopharynx of dogs, cats, ferrets,
monkeys, rabbits, and miniature pigs induced MHb formation
ranging from 3.5–38% 15–60 min after administration in more
than 95% of the animals tested [384]. In sheep, intranasal admin-
istration of topical benzocaine for 2 s caused MHb in half of the
animals tested, ranging from 16–26%, and a 10 s spray caused
MHb levels of up to 50.5% [385,386]. Dermal administration of

-- 560 of 1450 --

Chapter 29: Local Anesthetics 	545
benzocaine has also been implicated in clinical cases of methemo-
globinemia in dogs and cats [387–388]. An N-hydroxy metabolite
of benzocaine (i.e., o-toluidine) is the likely active MHb-forming
substance [385]. Prilocaine has been implicated in cases of methe-
moglobinemia in mothers and fetuses following epidural adminis-
tration for labor [389] and following topical administration for
dental procedures in humans [383]. Topical lidocaine did not
induce MHb formation in sheep or monkeys, but it may be associ-
ated with MHb formation in cats and humans [385,390].
When MHb levels are 30% or higher, clinical signs of tissue
hypoxia occur including cyanosis, dyspnea, nausea, vomiting, and
tachycardia [383,387]. Lethargy, stupor, and shock occur when
MHb levels approach 55% [383,388]. Animals with chronic methe-
moglobinemia may only present with Heinz body anemia and
lethargy [388]. Chocolate brown-colored blood together with clin-
ical signs that are not responsive to O 2 therapy are suggestive of
methemoglobinemia. Definitive diagnosis is made by measuring
the MHb concentration with co-oximetry or spectrophotometry.
Blood smears will reveal the presence of Heinz bodies in the red
blood cells.
Traditional first-line therapy of methemoglobinemia consists
of slow intravenous administration of 1% methylene blue solution
(4 mg/kg in dogs, 1–2 mg/kg in cats) [391–393]. The action of
methylene blue depends on the availability of reduced nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) within red blood
cells [383]. This dose can be repeated in dogs, but caution should
be exercised in cats as repeated injections of methylene blue can
markedly aggravate subsequent hemolysis without further lowering
MHb content [394]. Glucose should also be administered because
it is the major source of reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NADH) in red blood cells, which is necessary to form NADPH,
which is in turn needed for methylene blue to be effective [383]. In
severe cases, a blood transfusion may be required.
Toxicosis (oral ingestion)
Topical preparations containing lidocaine, benzocaine, and tet-
racaine are found in many prescription and non-prescription prod-
ucts, such as ointments, teething gels, suppositories, and aerosols.
These topical local anesthetic preparations can be hazardous if
ingested or inappropriately applied to animals. Between 1995 and
1999, the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(ASPCA) Animal Poison Control Center (APCC) consulted on
more than 70 cases of local anesthetic toxicosis in a variety of ani-
mal species [395]. Benzocaine toxicosis cases reported to the
ASPCA APCC involved either ingestion of topical preparations or
application of a laryngeal spray before endotracheal intubation.
Clinical signs in cats and ferrets with benzocaine toxicosis included
varying degrees of vomiting, depression, cyanosis, dyspnea, and
tachypnea [395]. Other signs observed with local anesthetic toxico-
sis in different species include prolonged sedation, vasodilation
(leading to hypotension), cardiac arrhythmias, respiratory depres-
sion, tremors and seizures, and death [395].
Allergic reactions
Ester-type local anesthetics (e.g., procaine) are associated with a higher
incidence of allergic reactions due to a para-aminobenzoic acid
(PABA) metabolite. Amide-type agents do not undergo such metabo-
lism and rarely cause allergic reactions. However, preservative com-
pounds (i.e., methylparaben and sodium metabisulfite) used in
preparations of amide-type local anesthetics are metabolized to PABA
and may cause allergies [396,397]. Therefore, it is recommended that
animals known to be allergic to ester-type local anesthetics be
treated with a preservative-free amide-type agent [396].
True allergic reactions to amide-type local anesthetics are rare in
humans but have been documented [398]. The incidence in veteri-
nary species appears to be extremely rare. Anaphylactic reactions
are characterized by bronchospasm, upper airway edema, vasodila-
tion, increased capillary permeability, and cutaneous wheal and
flare. Rapid intervention with airway maintenance, O2 therapy, epi-
nephrine administration, and volume expansion is essential to
avoid a fatal outcome.
References
1 Redondo JI, Bilbao I, Costa C, et al. Mortalidad anestésica en perros en España.
Proyecto COMPLRED 2016–2021. Proceedings of the Southern European Veterinary
Conference 2021. Online virtual conference. October 19–22, 2021.
2 Weinstein EJ, Levene JL, Cohen MS, et al. Local anaesthetics and regional anaesthe-
sia versus conventional analgesia for preventing persistent postoperative pain in
adults and children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2018; 6(6): CD007105.
3 Komai H, McDowell TS. Local anesthetic inhibition of voltage-activated potassium
currents in rat dorsal root ganglion neurons. Anesthesiology 2001; 94: 1089–1095.
4 Olschewski A, Hempelmann G, Vogel W, et al. Blockade of Na + and K + currents
by local anesthetics in the dorsal horn neurons of the spinal cord. Anesthesiology
1998; 88: 172–179.
5 Xiong ZL, Strichartz GR. Inhibition by local anesthetics of Ca2+ channels in rat
anterior pituitary cells. Eur J Pharmacol 1998; 363: 81–90.
6 Sugiyama K, Muteki T. Local anesthetics depress the calcium current of rat sensory
neurons in culture. Anesthesiology 1994; 80: 1369–1378.
7 Scholz A. Mechanisms of (local) anaesthetics on voltage-gated sodium and other
ion channels. Br J Anaesth 2002; 89: 52–61.
8 Hollmann MW, Wieczorek KS, Berger A, et al. Local anesthetic inhibition of G
protein-coupled receptor signaling by interference with Galpha(q) protein func-
tion. Mol Pharmacol 2001; 59: 294–301.
9 Taylor A, McLeod G. Basic pharmacology of local anaesthetics. BJA Educ 2020;
20(2): 34–41.
10 Fozzard HA, Lee PJ, Lipkind GM. Mechanism of local anesthetic drug action on
voltage- gated sodium channels. Curr Pharm Des 2005; 11(21): 2671–2686.
11 Catterall WA. From ionic currents to molecular mechanisms: the structure and
function of voltage-gated sodium channels. Neuron 2000; 26(1): 13–25.
12 Catterall WA, Swanson TM. Structural basis for pharmacology of voltage-gated
sodium and calcium channels. Mol Pharmacol 2015; 88(1): 141–150.
13 Narahashi T, Frazier DT. Site of action and active form of local anesthetics. Neurosci
Res 1971; 4: 65–99.
14 Wann KT. Neuronal sodium and potassium channels: structure and function. Br J
Anaesth 1993; 71(1): 2–14.
15 Yun I, Cho ES, Jang HO, et al. Amphiphilic effects of local anesthetics on rotational
mobility in neuronal and model membranes. Biochim Biophys Acta 2002; 1564(1):
123–132.
16 Hille B. Local anesthetics: hydrophilic and hydrophobic pathways for the drug-
receptor reaction. J Gen Physiol 1977; 69(4): 497–515.
17 Starmer CF, Grant AO, Strauss HC. Mechanisms of use-dependent block of sodium
channels in excitable membranes by local anesthetics. Biophys J 1984; 46(1): 15–27.
18 Huang JH, Thalhammer JG, Raymond SA, et al. Susceptibility to lidocaine of
impulses in different somatosensory afferent fibers of rat sciatic nerve. J Pharmacol
Exp Ther 1997; 292: 802–811.
19 Lin Y, Liu SS. Local anesthetics. In: Barash PG, Cullen BF, Stoelting RK, et al., eds.
Clinical Anesthesia, 8th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer, 2017: 564–584.
20 Stevens RA, Bray JG, Artuso JD, et al. Differential epidural block. Reg Anesth 1992;
17: 22–25.
21 Sakura S, Sumi M, Yamada Y, et al. Quantitative and selective assessment of sensory
block during lumbar epidural anaesthesia with 1% or 2% lidocaine. Br J Anaesth
1998; 81: 718–722.
22 Nathan PW. Observations on sensory and sympathetic function during intrathecal
analgesia. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1976; 39: 114–121.
23 Gasser HS, Erlanger J. Role of fibre size in the establishment of nerve block by pres-
sure or cocaine. Am J Physiol 1929; 88: 581–591.
24 Gissen AJ, Covino BG, Gregus J. Differential sensitivities of mammalian nerve fib-
ers to local anesthetic agents. Anesthesiology 1980; 53: 467–474.
25 Gokin AP, Philip B, Strichartz GR. Preferential block of small myelinated sensory
and motor fibers by lidocaine: in vivo electrophysiology in the rat sciatic nerve.
Anesthesiology 2001; 95: 1441–1454.

-- 561 of 1450 --

546 	Section 3: Pharmacology
26 Strichartz G, Pastijn E, Sugimoto K. Neural physiology and local anesthetic action.
In: Cousins MJ, Carr DB, Horlocker TT, Bridenbaugh PO, eds. Cousins &
Bridenbaugh’s Neural Blockade in Clinical Anesthesia and Pain Medicine, 4th edn.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2009: 26–47.
27 Jaffe RA, Rowe MA. Differential nerve block. Direct measurements on individual
myelinated and unmyelinated dorsal root axons. Anesthesiology 1996; 84: 1455–1464.
28 Khurana I, Khurana A, Kowlgi NG. The nerve. In: Textbook of Medical Physiology,
3rd edn, E-book. India: Elsevier Health Sciences, 2020: 51–72.
29 Raymond SA, Steffensen SC, Gugino LD, et al. The role of length of nerve exposed
to local anesthetics in impulse blocking action. Anesth Analg 1989; 68: 563–570.
30 Fink BR. Mechanisms of differential axial blockade in epidural and subarachnoid
anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1989; 70: 851–858.
31 de Jong RH, Wagman IH. Physiological mechanisms of peripheral nerve block by
local anesthetics. Anesthesiology 1963; 24: 684–727.
32 Winnie AP, Tay CH, Patel KP, et al. Pharmacokinetics of local anesthetics during
plexus blocks. Anesth Analg 1977; 56(6): 852–861.
33 Stewart JD. Peripheral nerve fascicles: anatomy and clinical relevance. Muscle Nerve
2003; 28(5): 525–541.
34 Brushart TM. Central course of digital axons within the median nerve of Macaca
mulatta. J Comp Neurol 1991; 311(2): 197–209.
35 Condouris GA, Goebel RH, Brady T. Computer simulation of local anesthetic
effects using a mathematical model of myelinated nerve. J Pharmacol Exp Ther
1976; 196: 737–745.
36 Nakamura T, Popitz-Bergez F, Birknes J, et al. The critical role of concentration for
lidocaine block of peripheral nerve in vivo. Studies of function and drug uptake in
the rat. Anesthesiology 2003; 99: 1187–1197.
37 Waikar SS, Thalhammer JG, Raymond SA, et al. Mechanoreceptive afferents exhibit
functionally-specific activity dependent changes in conduction velocity. Brain Res
1996; 721: 91–100.
38 Raymond SA. Subblocking concentrations of local anesthetics: effects on impulse
generation and conduction in single myelinated sciatic nerve axons in frog. Anesth
Analg 1992; 75: 906–921.
39 Olschewski A, Wolff M, Bräu ME, et al. Enhancement of delayed-rectifier potas-
sium conductance by low concentrations of local anaesthetics in spinal sensory
neurones. Br J Pharmacol 2002; 136: 540–549.
40 Olschewski A, Schnoebel-Ehehalt R, Li Y, et al. Mexiletine and lidocaine suppress
the excitability of dorsal horn neurons. Anesth Analg 2009; 109: 258–264.
41 Ku WH, Schneider SP. Multiple T-type Ca2+ current subtypes in electrophysiologi-
cally characterized hamster dorsal horn neurons: possible role in spinal sensory
integration. J Neurophysiol 2011; 106: 2486–2498.
42 Li YM, Wingrove DE, Too HP, et al. Local anesthetics inhibit substance P binding
and evoked increases in intracellular Ca2+
. Anesthesiology 1995; 82: 166–173.
43 Nagy I, Woolf CJ. Lignocaine selectively reduces C fibre-evoked neuronal activity
in rat spinal cord in vitro by decreasing N-methyl-D-aspartate and neurokinin
receptor-mediated post-synaptic depolarizations: implications for the development
of novel centrally acting analgesics. Pain 1996; 64: 59–70.
44 Furutani K, Ikoma M, Ishii H, et al. Bupivacaine inhibits glutamatergic transmis-
sion in spinal dorsal horn neurons. Anesthesiology 2010; 112: 138–143.
45 Mather LE, Tucker GT. Properties, absorption and disposition of local anesthetic
agents. In: Cousins MJ, Carr DB, Horlocker TT, Bridenbaugh PO, eds. Cousins &
Bridenbaugh’s Neural Blockade in Clinical Anesthesia and Pain Medicine, 4th edn.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2009: 48–95.
46 Liu SS. Local anesthetics and analgesia. In: Ashburn MA, Rice LJ, eds. The
Management of Pain. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1997: 141–170.
47 Butterworth JF, Strichartz GR. Molecular mechanisms of local anesthetics: a review.
Anesthesiology 1990; 72: 711–734.
48 Strichartz GR, Sanchez V, Arthur R, et al. Fundamental properties of local anesthet-
ics II. Measured Octanol: Buffer partition coefficients and pKa, values of clinically
used drugs. Anesth Analg 1990; 71: 158–170.
49 Bräu ME, Vogel W, Hempelmann G. Fundamental properties of local anesthetics:
half-maximal blocking concentrations for tonic block of Na+ and K+ channels in
peripheral nerve. Anesth Analg 1998; 87: 885–889.
50 Covino BG, Wildsmith JAW. Clinical pharmacology of local anesthetic agents. In:
Cousins MJ, Bridenbaugh PO, eds. Neural Blockade in Clinical Anesthesia and
Management of Pain, 3rd edn. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott-Raven, 1998: 97–128.
51 Gissen AJ, Covino BG, Gregus J. Differential sensitivity of fast and slow fibers in
mammalian nerve II. Margin of safety for nerve transmission. Anesth Analg 1982;
61: 561–569.
52 Burm AG, Vermeulen NP, van Kleef JW, et al. Pharmacokinetics of lignocaine and
bupivacaine in surgical patients following epidural administration. Simultaneous
investigation of absorption and disposition kinetics using stable isotopes. Clin
Pharmacokinet 1987; 13(3): 191–203.
53 Ulbricht W. Kinetics of drug action and equilibrium results at the node of Ranvier.
Physiol Rev 1981; 61: 785–828.
54 Salinas FV, Liu SL, Scholz AM. Ion channel ligands, sodium channel blockers, local
anesthetics. In: Evers AS, Maze M, eds. Anesthetic Pharmacology, Physiologic Principles
and Clinical Practice. Philadelphia, PA: Churchill Livingstone, 2004: 507–537.
55 Leone S, di Cianni S, Casati A, et al. Pharmacology, toxicology and clinical use of
new long acting local anesthetics, ropivacaine and levobupivacaine. Acta Biomed
2008; 79: 92–105.
56 Aberg G. Toxicological and local anesthetic effects of optically active isomers of two
local anesthetic compounds. Acta Pharmacol Toxicol Scand 1972; 31: 273–286.
57 Lee- Son MB, Wang GK, Concus A, et al. Stereoselective inhibition of neuronal
sodium channels by local anesthetics. Anesthesiology 1992; 77: 324–335.
58 Huang YF, Pryor ME, Veering BT, et al. Cardiovascular and central nervous system
effects of intravenous levobupivacaine and bupivacaine in sheep. Anesth Analg
1998; 86: 797–804.
59 Wildsmith JA, Brown DT, Paul D, et al. Structure–activity relationships in diffe-
rential nerve block at high and low frequency stimulation. Br J Anaesth 1989; 63:
444–452.
60 Pateromichelakis S, Prokopiou AA. Local anaesthesia efficacy: discrepancy
between in vitro and in vivo studies. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1988; 32: 672–675.
61 Wildsmith JA, Gissen AJ, Takman B, et al. Differential nerve blockade: esters v.
amides and the influence of pKa. Br J Anaesth 1987; 59: 379–384.
62 Ford DJ, Raj PP, Singh P, et al. Differential peripheral nerve block by local anesthet-
ics in the cat. Anesthesiology 1984; 60: 28–33.
63 Markham A, Faulds D. Ropivacaine. A review of its pharmacology and therapeutic
use in regional anaesthesia. Drugs 1996; 52: 429–449.
64 Mottura AA, Procickieviez O. The fate of lidocaine infiltrate during abdominoplasty
and a comparative study of absorption of local anesthetic in 3 different regions:
experimental studies in a porcine model. Aesthet Surg J 2001; 21: 418–422.
65 Tucker GT, Moore DC, Bridenbaugh PO, et al. Systemic absorption of mepivacaine
in commonly used regional block procedures. Anesthesiology 1972; 37: 277–387.
66 Sellers G, Lin HC, Riddell MG, et al. Pharmacokinetics of lidocaine in serum and
milk of mature Holstein cows. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2009; 32: 446–450.
67 Sum DC, Chung PC. Plasma lidocaine level during spinal or epidural anesthesia in
geriatric patients. Ma Zui Xue Za Zhi 1993; 31: 59–63.
68 Clement R, Malinovsky JM, Le Corre P, et al. Cerebrospinal fluid bioavailability and
pharmacokinetics of bupivacaine and lidocaine after intrathecal and epidural
administrations in rabbits using microdialysis. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1999; 289:
1015–1021.
69 Estebe JP, Le Corre P, du Plessis L, et al. The pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
namics of bupivacaine-loaded microspheres on a brachial plexus block model in
sheep. Anesth Analg 2001; 93: 447–455.
70 Jiang X, Wen X, Gao B, et al. The plasma concentrations of lidocaine after slow
versus rapid administration of an initial dose of epidural anesthesia. Anesth Analg
1997; 84: 570–573.
71 Johns RA, DiFazio CA, Longnecker DE. Lidocaine constricts or dilates rat arteri-
oles in a dose-dependent manner. Anesthesiology 1985; 62: 141–144.
72 Iida H, Ohata H, Iida M, et al. The differential effects of stereoisomers of ropiv-
acaine and bupivacaine on cerebral pial arterioles in dogs. Anesth Analg 2001; 93:
1552–1556.
73 Ala- Kokko TI, Partanen A, Karinen J, et al. Pharmacokinetics of 0.2% ropivacaine
and 0.2% bupivacaine following caudal blocks in children. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand
2000; 44: 1099–1102.
74 Karmakar MK, Aun CS, Wong EL, et al. Ropivacaine undergoes slower systemic
absorption from the caudal epidural space in children than bupivacaine. Anesth
Analg 2002; 94: 259–265.
75 Mashimo T, Uchida I, Pak M, et al. Prolongation of canine epidural anesthesia by
liposome encapsulation of lidocaine. Anesth Analg 1992; 74: 827–834.
76 Tofoli GR, Cereda CM, de Araujo DR. Pharmacokinetic and local toxicity studies of
liposome-encapsulated and plain mepivacaine solutions in rats. Drug Deliv 2010;
17: 68–76.
77 Dräger C, Benziger D, Gao F, et al. Prolonged intercostal nerve blockade in sheep
using controlled-release of bupivacaine and dexamethasone from polymer micro-
spheres. Anesthesiology 1998; 89: 969–979.
78 Fransson BA, Peck KE, Smith JK, et al. Transdermal absorption of a liposome-
encapsulated formulation of lidocaine following topical administration in cats. Am
J Vet Res 2002; 63: 1309–1312.
79 Tobe M, Obata H, Suto T, et al. Long-term effect of sciatic nerve block with slow-
release lidocaine in a rat model of postoperative pain. Anesthesiology 2010; 112:
1473–1481.
80 Wang CF, Pancaro C, Gerner P, Strichartz G. Prolonged suppression of postinci-
sional pain by a slow-release formulation of lidocaine. Anesthesiology 2011; 114:
135–149.
81 Marathe PH, Shen DD, Artru AA, et al. Effect of serum protein binding on the
entry of lidocaine into brain and cerebrospinal fluid in dogs. Anesthesiology 1991;
75: 804–812.

-- 562 of 1450 --

Chapter 29: Local Anesthetics 	547
82 Shand DG. Alpha 1-acid glycoprotein and plasma lidocaine binding. Clin
Pharmacokinet 1984; 9: 27–31.
83 Tucker G. Pharmacokinetics of local anaesthetics. Br J Anaesth 1986; 58:
717–731.
84 De Rick AF, Belpaire FM, Dello C, Bogaert MG. Influence of enhanced alpha-1-
acid glycoprotein concentration on protein binding, pharmacokinetics and
antiarrhythmic effect of lidocaine in the dog. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1987; 241:
289–293.
85 Belpaire FM, de Rick A, Dello C, et al. Alpha 1-acid glycoprotein and serum bind-
ing of drugs in healthy and diseased dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1987; 10: 43–48.
86 Palazzo MG, Kalso EA, Argiras E, et al. First pass lung uptake of bupivacaine:
effect of acidosis in an intact rabbit lung model. Br J Anaesth 1991; 67: 759–763.
87 Krejcie TC, Avram MJ, Gentry WB, et al. A recirculatory model of the pulmonary
uptake and pharmacokinetics of lidocaine based on analysis of arterial and mixed
venous data from dogs. J Pharmacokinet Biopharm 1997; 25: 169–190.
88 Post C, Andersson RG, Ryrfeldt A, et al. Physico-chemical modification of
lidocaine uptake in rat lung tissue. Acta Pharmacol Toxicol (Copenh) 1979; 44:
103–109.
89 Geng WP, Ebke M, Foth H. Prilocaine elimination by isolated perfused rat lung
and liver. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol 1995; 351: 93–98.
90 Aoki M, Okudaira K, Haga M, et al. Contribution of rat pulmonary metabolism to
the elimination of lidocaine, midazolam, and nifedipine. Drug Metab Dispos 2010;
38: 1183–1188.
91 Ohmura S, Sugano A, Kawada M, et al. Pulmonary uptake of ropivacaine and
levobupivacaine in rabbits. Anesth Analg 2003; 97: 893–897.
92 Puente NW, Josephy PD. Analysis of the lidocaine metabolite 2, 6-dimethylaniline
in bovine and human milk. J Anal Toxicol 2001; 25(8): 711–715.
93 Biehl D, Shnider SM, Levinson G, et al. Placental transfer of lidocaine: effects of
fetal acidosis. Anesthesiology 1978; 48: 409–412.
94 Kennedy RL, Bell JU, Miller RP, et al. Uptake and distribution of lidocaine in fetal
lambs. Anesthesiology 1990; 72: 483–489.
95 Hamshaw-Thomas A, Reynolds F. Placental transfer of bupivacaine, pethidine
and lignocaine in the rabbit. Effect of umbilical flow rate and protein content. Br J
Obstet Gynaecol 1985; 92: 706–713.
96 Kennedy RL, Miller RP, Bell JU, et al. Uptake and distribution of bupivacaine in
fetal lambs. Anesthesiology 1986; 65: 247–253.
97 Santos AC, Karpel B, Noble G. The placental transfer and fetal effects of
levobupivacaine, racemic bupivacaine, and ropivacaine. Anesthesiology 1999; 90:
1698–1703.
98 Tobin T, Blake JW, Sturma L, et al. Pharmacology of procaine in the horse: pro-
caine esterase properties of equine plasma and synovial fluid. Am J Vet Res 1976;
37: 1165–1170.
99 Calvo R, Carlos R, Erill S. Effects of disease and acetazolamide on procaine
hydrolysis by red blood cell enzymes. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1980; 27: 179–183.
100 Matsubara K, Kagawa M, Fukui Y. In vivo and in vitro studies on cocaine metabo-
lism: ecgonine methyl ester as a major metabolite of cocaine. Forensic Sci Int 1984;
26: 169–180.
101 Kuhnert BR, Kuhnert PM, Philipson EH, et al. The half-life of 2-chloroprocaine.
Anesth Analg 1986; 65: 273–278.
102 Tobin T, Blake JW. A review of the pharmacology, pharmacokinetics and
behavioral effects of procaine in Thoroughbred horses. Br J Sports Med 1976; 10:
109–116.
103 McKeever KH, Hinchcliff KW, Gerken DF, et al. Effects of cocaine on incremental
treadmill exercise in horses. J Appl Physiol 1993; 75: 2727–2733.
104 Hjelm M, Ragnarsson B, Wistrand P. Biochemical effects of aromatic compounds.
3. Ferrihaemoglobinaemia and the presence of p-hydroxy-o- toluidine in human
blood after the administration of prilocaine. Biochem Pharmacol 1972; 21:
2825–2834.
105 Wilcke JR, Davis LE, Neff-Davis CA, et al. Pharmacokinetics of lidocaine and its
active metabolites in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1983; 6: 49–57.
106 Kammerer RC, Schmitz DA. Lidocaine metabolism by rabbit-liver homogenate
and detection of a new metabolite. Xenobiotica 1986; 16: 681–690.
107 Oda Y, Imaoka S, Nakahira Y, et al. Metabolism of lidocaine by purified rat liver
microsomal cytochrome P-450 isozymes. Biochem Pharmacol 1989; 38: 4439–4444.
108 Thomasy SM, Pypendop BH, Ilkiw JE, et al. Pharmacokinetics of lidocaine and
its active metabolite, monoethylglycinexylidide, after intravenous administration
of lidocaine to awake and isoflurane-anesthetized cats. Am J Vet Res 2005; 66:
1162–1166.
109 Valverde A, Gunkelt C, Doherty TJ, et al. Effect of a constant rate infusion of
lidocaine on the quality of recovery from sevoflurane or isoflurane general anaes-
thesia in horses. Equine Vet J 2005; 37: 559–564.
110 Dickey EJ, McKenzie HC III, Brown KA, et al. Serum concentrations of lidocaine
and its metabolites after prolonged infusion in healthy horses. Equine Vet J 2008;
40: 348–352.
111 Doherty T, Redua MA, Queiroz-Castro P, et al. Effect of intravenous lidocaine and
ketamine on the minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in goats. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2007; 34: 125–131.
112 Da Cunha AF, Messenger KM, Stout RW, et al. Pharmacokinetics of lidocaine
and its active metabolite monoethylglycinexylidide after a single intravenous
administration in chickens (Gallus domesticus) anesthetized with isoflurane. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2012; 35: 604–607.
113 Cox S, Wilson J, Doherty T. Pharmacokinetics of lidocaine after intravenous
administration to cows. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2012; 35: 305–308.
114 Webb AI, Pablo LS. Local anesthetics. In: Riviere JE, Papich MG, eds. Veterinary
Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 9th edn. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009:
381–400.
115 Rosenberg PH, Heavner JE. Acute cardiovascular and central nervous system
toxicity of bupivacaine and desbutylbupivacaine in the rat. Acta Anaesthesiol
Scand 1992; 36: 138–141.
116 Harkins JD, Karpiesiuk W, Tobin T, et al. Identification of hydroxyropivacaine
glucuronide in equine urine by ESI+/MS/MS. Can J Vet Res 2000; 64: 178–183.
117 O’Brien JE, Abbey V, Hinsvark O, et al. Metabolism and measurement of
chloroprocaine, an ester-type local anesthetic. J Pharm Sci 1979; 68: 75–78.
118 Reynolds F. Metabolism and excretion of bupivacaine in man: a comparison with
mepivacaine. Br J Anaesth 1971; 43: 33–37.
119 Rowland M, Thomson PD, Guichard A, Melmon KL. Disposition kinetics of
lidocaine in normal subjects. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1971; 179: 383–398.
120 Engelking LR, Blyden GT, Lofstedt J, et al. Pharmacokinetics of antipyrine,
acetaminophen and lidocaine in fed and fasted horses. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1987;
10: 73–82.
121 Hastings CL, Brown TC, Eyres RL, et al. The influence of age on plasma lignocaine
levels following tracheal spray in young dogs. Anaesth Intensive Care 1985; 13:
392–394.
122 Morishima HO, Finster M, Pedersen H, et al. Pharmacokinetics of lidocaine in
fetal and neonatal lambs and adult sheep. Anesthesiology 1979; 50: 431–436.
123 Hastings CL, Brown TC, Eyres RL, et al. The influence of age on lignocaine
pharmacokinetics in young puppies. Anaesth Intensive Care 1986; 14: 135–139.
124 Zsigmond EK, Downs JR. Plasma cholinesterase activity in newborns and infants.
Can Anaesth Soc J 1971; 18: 278–285.
125 Abernethy DR, Greenblatt DJ. Impairment of lidocaine clearance in elderly male
subjects. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 1983; 5: 1093–1096.
126 Veering BT, Burm AG, van Kleef JW, et al. Epidural anesthesia with bupivacaine:
effects of age on neural blockade and pharmacokinetics. Anesth Analg 1987; 66:
589–593.
127 Datta S, Lambert DH, Gregus J, et al. Differential sensitivities of mammalian
nerve fibers during pregnancy. Anesth Analg 1983; 62: 1070–1072.
128 Bader AM, Datta S, Moller RA, et al. Acute progesterone treatment has no effect
on bupivacaine-induced conduction blockade in the isolated rabbit vagus nerve.
Anesth Analg 1990; 71: 545–548.
129 Santos AC, Pedersen H, Morishima HO, et al. Pharmacokinetics of lidocaine in
nonpregnant and pregnant ewes. Anesth Analg 1988; 67: 1154–1158.
130 Santos AC, Arthur GR, Lehning EJ, et al. Comparative pharmacokinetics of
ropivacaine and bupivacaine in nonpregnant and pregnant ewes. Anesth Analg
1997; 85: 87–93.
131 Gentz HD, Schlicht I, Wiederholt W. Pseudocholinesterase in patients with and
without liver diseases. Med Klin 1978; 73: 1422–1426.
132 Venkataraman BV, Iyer GY, Narayanan R, et al. Erythrocyte and plasma cholinest-
erase activity in normal pregnancy. Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 1990; 34: 26–28.
133 Waller ES. Pharmacokinetic principles of lidocaine dosing in relation to disease
state. J Clin Pharmacol 1981; 21: 181–194.
134 Feary DJ, Mama KR, Wagner AE, et al. Influence of general anesthesia on
pharmacokinetics of intravenous lidocaine infusion in horses. Am J Vet Res 2005;
66: 574–580.
135 Calvo R, Carlos R, Erill S. Procaine hydrolysis defect in uraemia does not appear
to be due to carbamylation of plasma esterases. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1983; 24(4):
533–535.
136 Feary DJ, Mama KR, Thomasy SM, et al. Influence of gastrointestinal tract disease
on pharmacokinetics of lidocaine after intravenous infusion in anesthetized
horses. Am J Vet Res 2006; 67: 317–322.
137 Peeyush M, Ravishankar M, Adithan C, et al. Altered pharmacokinetics of ligno-
caine after epidural injection in type II diabetics. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1992; 43:
269–271.
138 Gawrońska-Szklarz B, Musiał DH, Pawlik A, et al. Effect of experimental diabetes
on pharmacokinetic parameters of lidocaine and MEGX in rats. Pol J Pharmacol
2003; 55: 619–624.
139 Raj PP, Ohlweiler D, Hitt BA, et al. Kinetics of local anesthetic esters and the
effects of adjuvant drugs on 2-chloroprocaine hydrolysis. Anesthesiology 1980; 53:
307–314.

-- 563 of 1450 --

548 	Section 3: Pharmacology
140 Calvo R, Carlos R, Erill S. Effects of disease and acetazolamide on procaine
hydrolysis by red blood cell enzymes. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1980; 27: 179–183.
141 Olkkola KT, Isohanni MH, Hamunen K, et al. The effect of erythromycin and
fluvoxamine on the pharmacokinetics of intravenous lidocaine. Anesth Analg
2005; 100: 1352–1356.
142 Tesseromatis C, Kotsiou A, Tsagataki M, et al. In vitro binding of lidocaine to liver
tissue under the influence of propranolol: another mechanism of interaction? Eur
J Drug Metab Pharmacokinet 2007; 32: 213–217.
143 Lalka D, Vicuna N, Burrow SR, et al. Bupivacaine and other amide local anesthet-
ics inhibit the hydrolysis of chloroprocaine by human serum. Anesth Analg 1978;
57: 534–539.
144 Rosenberg PH, Heavner JE. Temperature-dependent nerve-blocking action of
lidocaine and halothane. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1980; 24: 314–320.
145 Butterworth JF, Walker FO, Neal JM. Cooling potentiates lidocaine inhibition of
median nerve sensory fibers. Anesth Analg 1990; 70: 507–511.
146 Sanchez V, Arthur GR, Strichartz GR. Fundamental properties of local anesthet-
ics. I. The dependence of lidocaine’s ionization and octanol: buffer partitioning on
solvent and temperature. Anesth Analg 1987; 66: 159–165.
147 Heath PJ, Brownlie GS, Herrick MJ. Latency of brachial plexus block. The effect on
onset time of warming local anaesthetic solutions. Anaesthesia 1990; 45: 297–301.
148 Han SS, Lee SC, Ro YJ, et al. Warming the epidural injectate improves first sacral
segment block: a randomised double-blind study. Anaesth Intensive Care 2010; 38:
690–694.
149 Liu FC, Liou JT, Day YJ, et al. Effect of warm lidocaine on the sensory onset of
epidural anesthesia: a randomized trial. Chang Gung Med J 2009; 32: 643–649.
150 Lee R, Kim YM, Choi EM, et al. Effect of warmed ropivacaine solution on onset
and duration of axillary block. Korean J Anesthesiol 2012; 62: 52–56.
151 Chilvers CR. Warm local anaesthetic – effect on latency of onset of axillary bra-
chial plexus block. Anaesth Intensive Care 1993; 21: 795–798.
152 Kristoffersen E, Sloth E, Husted JC, et al. Spinal anaesthesia with plain 0.5% bupi-
vacaine at 19 degrees C and 37 degrees C. Br J Anaesth 1990; 65: 504–507.
153 Greene NM. Distribution of local anesthetic solutions within the subarachnoid
space. Anesth Analg 1985; 64: 715–730.
154 Imbelloni LE, Moreira AD, Gaspar FC, et al. Assessment of the densities of local
anesthetics and their combination with adjuvants: an experimental study. Rev Bras
Anestesiol 2009; 59: 154–165.
155 Horlocker TT, Wedel DJ. Density, specific gravity, and baricity of spinal anesthetic
solutions at body temperature. Anesth Analg 1993; 76: 1015–1018.
156 McLeod GA. Density of spinal anaesthetic solutions of bupivacaine, levobupiv-
acaine, and ropivacaine with and without dextrose. Br J Anaesth 2004; 92: 547–551.
157 Ganem EM, Vianna PT, Marques M, et al. Neurotoxicity of subarachnoid hyper-
baric bupivacaine in dogs. Reg Anesth 1996; 21: 234–238.
158 Kaya M, Oguz S, Aslan K, et al. A low-dose bupivacaine: a comparison of hyper-
baric and hypobaric solutions for unilateral spinal anesthesia. Reg Anesth Pain
Med 2004; 29: 17–22.
159 Casati A, Fanelli G. Unilateral spinal anesthesia. State of the art. Minerva Anestesiol
2001; 67: 855–862.
160 Richardson MG, Wissler RN. Densities of dextrose-free intrathecal local anesthet-
ics, opioids, and combinations measured at 37 degrees C. Anesth Analg 1997; 84:
95–99.
161 Lui AC, Polis TZ, Cicutti NJ. Densities of cerebrospinal fluid and spinal anaes-
thetic solutions in surgical patients at body temperature. Can J Anaesth 1998; 45:
297–303.
162 Richardson MG, Wissler RN. Density of lumbar cerebrospinal fluid in pregnant
and nonpregnant humans. Anesthesiology 1996; 85: 326–330.
163 Bernards CM, Kopacz DJ. Effect of epinephrine on lidocaine clearance in vivo: a
microdialysis study in humans. Anesthesiology 1999; 91: 962–968.
164 Kuchembuck NL, Colahan PT, Zientek KD, et al. Plasma concentration and local
anesthetic activity of procaine hydrochloride following subcutaneous administra-
tion to horses. Am J Vet Res 2007; 68: 495–500.
165 Burm AG, van Kleef JW, Gladines MP, et al. Epidural anesthesia with lidocaine
and bupivacaine: effects of epinephrine on the plasma concentration profiles.
Anesth Analg 1986; 65: 1281–1284.
166 Karmakar MK, Ho AM, Law BK, et al. Arterial and venous pharmacokinetics of
ropivacaine with and without epinephrine after thoracic paravertebral block.
Anesthesiology 2005; 103: 704–711.
167 Ratajczak-Enselme M, Estebe JP, Rose FX, et al. Effect of epinephrine on epidural,
intrathecal, and plasma pharmacokinetics of ropivacaine and bupivacaine in
sheep. Br J Anaesth 2007; 99: 881–890.
168 Reddy SV, Maderdrut JL, Yaksh TL. Spinal cord pharmacology of adrenergic ago-
nist- mediated antinociception. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1980; 213: 525–533.
169 Collins JG, Kitahata LM, Matsumoto M, et al. Spinally administered epinephrine
suppresses noxiously evoked activity of WDR neurons in the dorsal horn of the
spinal cord. Anesthesiology 1984; 60: 269–725.
170 Sonohata M, Furue H, Katafuchi T, et al. Actions of noradrenaline on substantia
gelatinosa neurones in the rat spinal cord revealed by in vivo patch recording. J
Physiol 2004; 555: 515–526.
171 Sinnott CJ, Cogswell III LP, Johnson A, et al. On the mechanism by which epi-
nephrine potentiates lidocaine’s peripheral nerve block. Anesthesiology 2003; 98:
181–188.
172 Niemi G. Advantages and disadvantages of adrenaline in regional anaesthesia.
Best Pract Res Clin Anaesth 2005; 19: 229–245.
173 Shieh JP, Chu CC, Wang JJ, et al. Epinephrine, phenylephrine, and methoxamine
induce infiltrative anesthesia via alpha1-adrenoceptors in rats. Acta Pharmacol Sin
2009; 30: 1227–1236.
174 Kozody R, Palahniuk RJ, Wade JG, et al. The effect of subarachnoid epinephrine
and phenylephrine on spinal cord blood flow. Can Anaesth Soc J 1984; 31:
503–508.
175 Porter SS, Albin MS, Watson WA, et al. Spinal cord and cerebral blood flow
responses to subarachnoid injection of local anesthetics with and without epi-
nephrine. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1985; 29: 330–338.
176 Neal JM. Effects of epinephrine in local anesthetics on the central and peripheral
nervous systems: neurotoxicity and neural blood flow. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2003;
28: 124–134.
177 Myers RR, Heckman HM. Effects of local anesthesia on nerve blood flow: studies
using lidocaine with and without epinephrine. Anesthesiology 1989; 71: 757–762.
178 Palmer GM, Cairns BE, Berkes SL, et al. The effects of lidocaine and adrenergic
agonists on rat sciatic nerve and skeletal muscle blood flow in vivo. Anesth Analg
2002; 95: 1080–1086.
179 Niwa H, Hirota Y, Sibutani T, et al. The effects of epinephrine and norepinephrine
administered during local anesthesia on left ventricular diastolic function. Anesth
Prog 1991; 38: 221–226.
180 Henslee TM, Hodson SB, Lamy CJ, et al. Vasoconstrictive agents commonly used
in combination with local anesthetics: a literature review. J Foot Surg 1987; 26:
504–510.
181 Yagiela JA. What’s new with phentolamine mesylate: a reversal agent for local
anaesthesia? SAAD Dig 2011; 27: 3–7.
182 Kirby CK, Eckenhoff JE, Looby JP. The use of hyaluronidase with local anesthetic
agents in nerve block and infiltration anesthesia. Surgery 1949; 25: 101–104.
183 Dempsey GA, Barrett PJ, Kirby IJ. Hyaluronidase and peribulbar block. Br J
Anaesth 1997; 78: 671–674.
184 Nicoll JM, Treuren B, Acharya PA, et al. Retrobulbar anesthesia: the role of hyalu-
ronidase. Anesth Analg 1986; 65: 1324–1328.
185 Kallio H, Paloheimo M, Maunuksela EL. Hyaluronidase as an adjuvant in bupiv-
acaine- lidocaine mixture for retrobulbar/peribulbar block. Anesth Analg 2000;
91: 934–937.
186 Crawford M, Kerr WJ. The effect of hyaluronidase on peribulbar block.
Anaesthesia 1994; 49: 907–908.
187 Brydon CW, Basler M, Kerr WJ. An evaluation of two concentrations of hyaluro-
nidase for supplementation of peribulbar anaesthesia. Anaesthesia 1995; 50:
998–1000.
188 Keeler JF, Simpson KH, Ellis FR, et al. Effect of addition of hyaluronidase to bupi-
vacaine during axillary brachial plexus block. Br J Anaesth 1992; 68: 68–71.
189 Nevarre DR, Tzarnas CD. The effects of hyaluronidase on the efficacy and on the
pain of administration of 1% lidocaine. Plast Reconstr Surg 1998; 101: 365–369.
190 Etesse B, Beaudroit L, Deleuze M, et al. Hyaluronidase: here we go again. Ann Fr
Anesth Reanim 2009; 28: 658–665.
191 DeRossi R, de Barros AL, Silva-Neto AB, et al. Hyaluronidase shortens levobupiv-
acaine lumbosacral epidural anaesthesia in dogs. J Small Anim Pract 2011; 52:
195–199.
192 Gray TR, Dzikiti BT, Zeiler GE. Effects of hyaluronidase on ropivacaine or bupiv-
acaine regional anaesthesia of the canine pelvic limb. Vet Anaesth Analg 2019;
46(2): 214–225.
193 Wohlrab J, Finke R, Franke WG, et al. Clinical trial for safety evaluation of hyalu-
ronidase as diffusion enhancing adjuvant for infiltration analgesia of skin with
lidocaine. Dermatol Surg 2012; 38: 91–96.
194 Morris R, McKay W, Mushlin P. Comparison of pain associated with intradermal
and subcutaneous infiltration with various local anesthetic solutions. Anesth
Analg 1987; 66: 1180–1182.
195 McKay W, Morris R, Mushlin P. Sodium bicarbonate attenuates pain on skin
infiltration with lidocaine, with or without epinephrine. Anesth Analg 1987; 66:
572–574.
196 Christoph RA, Buchanan L, Begalla K, et al. Pain reduction in local anesthetic
administration through pH buffering. Ann Emerg Med 1988; 17: 117–120.
197 Jones JS, Plzak C, Wynn BN, et al. Effect of temperature and pH adjustment of
bupivacaine for intradermal anesthesia. Am J Emerg Med 1998; 16: 117–120.
198 Ririe DG, Walker FO, James RL, et al. Effect of alkalinization of lidocaine on
median nerve block. Br J Anaesth 2000; 84: 163–168.

-- 564 of 1450 --

Chapter 29: Local Anesthetics 	549
199 Buckley FP, Duval Neto G, Fink BR. Acid and alkaline solutions of local anesthet-
ics: duration of nerve block and tissue pH. Anesth Analg 1985; 64: 477–482.
200 Capogna G, Celleno D, Varrassi G, et al. Epidural mepivacaine for cesarean sec-
tion: effects of a pH-adjusted solution. J Clin Anesth 1991; 3: 211–214.
201 Benzon HT, Toleikis JR, Dixit P, et al. Onset, intensity of blockade and somatosen-
sory evoked potential changes of the lumbosacral dermatomes after epidural anes-
thesia with alkalinized lidocaine. Anesth Analg 1993; 76: 328–332.
202 Capogna G, Celleno D, Laudano D, et al. Alkalinization of local anesthetics.
Which block, which local anesthetic? Reg Anesth 1995; 20: 369–377.
203 Stevens RA, Chester WL, Grueter JA, et al. The effect of pH adjustment of 0.5%
bupivacaine on the latency of epidural anesthesia. Reg Anesth 1989; 14: 236–239.
204 Verborgh C, Claeys MA, Camu F. Onset of epidural blockade after plain or alka-
linized 0.5% bupivacaine. Anesth Analg 1991; 73: 401–404.
205 Gaggero G, Meyer O, van Gessel E, et al. Alkalinization of lidocaine 2% does not
influence the quality of epidural anaesthesia for elective caesarean section. Can J
Anaesth 1995; 42: 1080–1084.
206 Ramos G, Pereira E, Simonetti MP. Does alkalinization of 0.75% ropivacaine promote
a lumbar peridural block of higher quality? Reg Anesth Pain Med 2001; 26: 357–362.
207 Sinnott CJ, Garfield JM, Thalhammer JG, et al. Addition of sodium bicarbonate to
lidocaine decreases the duration of peripheral nerve block in the rat. Anesthesiology
2000; 93: 1045–1052.
208 Henry R, Patterson L, Avery N, et al. Absorption of alkalized intravesical lidocaine
in normal and inflamed bladders: a simple method for improving bladder anes-
thesia. J Urol 2001; 165: 1900–1903.
209 Zezza L, Reusch CE, Gerber B. Intravesical application of lidocaine and sodium
bicarbonate in the treatment of obstructive idiopathic lower urinary tract disease
in cats. J Vet Intern Med 2012; 26: 526–531.
210 Zehetmayer M, Rainer G, Turnheim K, et al. Topical anesthesia with pH-adjusted
versus standard lidocaine 4% for clear corneal cataract surgery. J Cataract Refract
Surg 1997; 23: 1390–1393.
211 Fuchsjäger-Mayrl G, Zehetmayer M, Plass H, et al. Alkalinization increases pen-
etration of lidocaine across the human cornea. J Cataract Refract Surg 2002; 28:
692–696.
212 Nakayama M, Munemura Y, Kanaya N, et al. Efficacy of alkalinized lidocaine for
reducing pain on intravenous and epidural catheterization. J Anesth 2001; 15:
201–203.
213 Mader TJ, Playe SJ, Garb JL. Reducing the pain of local anesthetic infiltration:
warming and buffering have a synergistic effect. Ann Emerg Med 1994; 23:
550–554.
214 Peterfreund RA, Datta S, Ostheimer GW. pH adjustment of local anesthetic solu-
tions with sodium bicarbonate: laboratory evaluation of alkalinization and pre-
cipitation. Reg Anesth 1989; 14: 265–270.
215 Bokesch PM, Raymond SA, Strichartz GR. Dependence of lidocaine potency on
pH and PCO2 . Anesth Analg 1987; 66: 9–17.
216 Bromage PR, Burfoot MF, Crowell DE, et al. Quality of epidural blockade. 3.
Carbonated local anaesthetic solutions. Br J Anaesth 1967; 39: 197–209.
217 Gosteli P, van Gessel E, Gamulin Z. Effects of pH adjustment and carbonation of
lidocaine during epidural anesthesia for foot or ankle surgery. Anesth Analg 1995;
81: 104–109.
218 Schelling CG, Klein LV. Comparison of carbonated lidocaine and lidocaine hydro-
chloride for caudal epidural anesthesia in horses. Am J Vet Res 1985; 46: 1375–1377.
219 Brummett CM, Williams BA. Additives to local anesthetics for peripheral nerve
blockade. Int Anesthesiol Clin 2011; 49: 104–116.
220 Grubb TL, Riebold TW, Huber MJ. Comparison of lidocaine, xylazine, and
xylazine/ lidocaine for caudal epidural analgesia in horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1992; 201: 1187–1190.
221 Pohl VH, Carregaro AB, Lopes C, et al. Epidural anesthesia and postoperatory
analgesia with alpha–2 adrenergic agonists and lidocaine for ovariohysterectomy
in bitches. Can J Vet Res 2012; 76(3): 215–220.
222 Lamont LA, Lemke KA. The effects of medetomidine on radial nerve blockade
with mepivacaine in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35: 62–68.
223 Brummett CM, Norat MA, Palmisano JM, et al. Perineural administration of
dexmedetomidine in combination with bupivacaine enhances sensory and motor
blockade in sciatic nerve block without inducing neurotoxicity in rat. Anesthesiology
2008; 109: 502–511.
224 Brummett CM, Padda AK, Amodeo FS, et al. Perineural dexmedetomidine added
to ropivacaine causes a dose-dependent increase in the duration of thermal antin-
ociception in sciatic nerve block in rat. Anesthesiology 2009; 111: 1111–1119.
225 Xue X, Fan J, Ma X, et al. Effects of local dexmedetomidine administration on the
neurotoxicity of ropivacaine for sciatic nerve block in rats. Mol Med Rep 2020;
22(5): 4360–4366.
226 Kirksey MA, Haskins SC, Cheng J, et al. Local anesthetic peripheral nerve block
adjuvants for prolongation of analgesia: a systematic qualitative review. PLoS ONE
2015; 10(9): e0137312.
227 Trein TA, Floriano BP, Wagatsuma JT, et al. Effects of dexmedetomidine com-
bined with ropivacaine on sciatic and femoral nerve blockade in dogs. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2017; 44(1): 144–153.
228 Marolf V, Ida KK, Siluk D, et al. Effects of perineural administration of ropivacaine
combined with perineural or intravenous administration of dexmedetomidine for
sciatic and saphenous nerve blocks in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2021; 82(6): 449–458.
229 Bartel AK, Campoy L, Martin-Flores M, et al. Comparison of bupivacaine and
dexmedetomidine femoral and sciatic nerve blocks with bupivacaine and
buprenorphine epidural injection for stifle arthroplasty in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg
2016; 43(4): 435–443.
230 Marolf V, Selz J, Picavet P, et al. Effects of perineural dexmedetomidine combined
with ropivacaine on postoperative methadone requirements in dogs after tibial
plateau levelling osteotomy: a two-centre study. Vet Anaesth Analg 2022; 49(3):
313–322.
231 O O, Smith LJ. A comparison of epidural analgesia provided by bupivacaine alone,
bupivacaine + morphine, or bupivacaine + dexmedetomidine for pelvic orthope-
dic surgery in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40(5): 527–536.
232 Benito J, Monteiro B, Beaudry F, et al. Efficacy and pharmacokinetics of bupiv-
acaine with epinephrine or dexmedetomidine after intraperitoneal administration
in cats undergoing ovariohysterectomy. Can J Vet Res 2018; 82(2): 124–130.
233 Evangelista MC, Doodnaught GM, Fantoni DT, et al. Sciatic and femoral nerve
blockade using bupivacaine alone, or in combination with dexmedetomidine or
buprenorphine in cats. Vet Rec 2017; 180(24): 592.
234 Kroin JS, Buvanendran A, Beck DR, et al. Clonidine prolongation of lidocaine
analgesia after sciatic nerve block in rats is mediated via the hyperpolarization-
activated cation current, not by alpha-adrenoreceptors. Anesthesiology 2004; 101:
488–494.
235 Brummett CM, Hong EK, Janda AM, et al. Perineural dexmedetomidine added to
ropivacaine for sciatic nerve block in rats prolongs the duration of analgesia by
blocking the hyperpolarization-activated cation current. Anesthesiology 2011; 115:
836–843.
236 Leem JW, Choi Y, Han SM, et al. Conduction block by clonidine is not mediated
by alpha- 2-adrenergic receptors in rat sciatic nerve fibers. Reg Anesth Pain Med
2000; 25: 620–625.
237 Ribotsky BM, Berkowitz KD, Montague JR. Local anesthetics. Is there an advan-
tage to mixing solutions? J Am Podiatr Med Assoc 1996; 86: 487–491.
238 Cuvillon P, Nouvellon E, Ripart J, et al. A comparison of the pharmacodynamics
and pharmacokinetics of bupivacaine, ropivacaine (with epinephrine) and their
equal volume mixtures with lidocaine used for femoral and sciatic nerve blocks: a
double- blind randomized study. Anesth Analg 2009; 108: 641–649.
239 Gadsden J, Hadzic A, Gandhi K, et al. The effect of mixing 1.5% mepivacaine and
0.5% bupivacaine on duration of analgesia and latency of block onset in ultra-
sound- guided interscalene block. Anesth Analg 2011; 112: 471–476.
240 Vesal N, Ahmadi M, Foroud M, et al. Caudal epidural anti-nociception using lido-
caine, bupivacaine or their combination in cows undergoing reproductive proce-
dures. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40(3): 328–332.
241 Lawal FM, Adetunji A. A comparison of epidural anaesthesia with lignocaine,
bupivacaine and a lignocaine-bupivacaine mixture in cats. J S Afr Vet Assoc 2009;
80: 243–246.
242 Seow LT, Lips FJ, Cousins MJ, et al. Lidocaine and bupivacaine mixtures for
epidural blockade. Anesthesiology 1982; 56: 177–183.
243 Kaukinen S, Kaukinen L, Eerola R. Epidural anaesthesia with mixtures of bupivacaine-
lidocaine and etidocaine-lidocaine. Ann Chir Gynaecol 1980; 69: 281–286.
244 Magee DA, Sweet PT, Holland AJ. Epidural anaesthesia with mixtures of bupivic-
aine and lidocaine. Can Anaesth Soc J 1983; 30: 174–178.
245 Jacobsen J, Husum B, von Staffeldt H, et al. The addition of lidocaine to bupiv-
acaine does not shorten the duration of spinal anesthesia: a randomized, double-
blinded study of patients undergoing knee arthroscopy. Anesth Analg 2011; 113:
1272–1275.
246 Corke BC, Carlson CG, Dettbarn WD. The influence of 2-chloroprocaine on the
subsequent analgesic potency of bupivacaine. Anesthesiology 1984; 60: 25–27.
247 Galindo A, Witcher T. Mixtures of local anesthetics: bupivacaine-chloroprocaine.
Anesth Analg 1980; 59: 683–685.
248 Mets B, Janicki PK, James MF, et al. Lidocaine and bupivacaine cardiorespiratory
toxicity is additive: a study in rats. Anesth Analg 1992; 75: 611–614.
249 Kottenberg-Assenmacher E, Peters J. Mechanisms of tachyphylaxis in regional
anesthesia of long duration. Anasthesiol Intensivmed Notfallmed Schmerzther
1999; 34: 733–742.
250 Bromage PR, Pettigrew RT, Crowell DE. Tachyphylaxis in epidural analgesia: I.
Augmentation and decay of local anesthesia. J Clin Pharmacol J New Drugs 1969;
9: 30–38.
251 Baker CE, Berry RL, Elston RC. Effect of pH of bupivacaine on duration of
repeated sciatic nerve blocks in the albino rat. Local Anesthetics for Neuralgia
Study Group. Anesth Analg 1991; 72: 773–778.

-- 565 of 1450 --

550 	Section 3: Pharmacology
252 Wang C, Liu H, Wilder RT, et al. Effects of repeated injection of local anesthetic on
sciatic nerve blocks response. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technolog Med Sci 2004; 24:
497–499.
253 Mogensen T, Simonsen L, Scott NB, et al. Tachyphylaxis associated with repeated
epidural injections of lidocaine is not related to changes in distribution or the rate
of elimination from the epidural space. Anesth Analg 1989; 69: 180–184.
254 Lipfert P, Holthusen H, Arndt JO. Tachyphylaxis to local anesthetics does not
result from reduced drug effectiveness at the nerve itself. Anesthesiology 1989; 70:
71–75.
255 Wang C, Sholas MG, Berde CB, et al. Evidence that spinal segmental nitric oxide
mediates tachyphylaxis to peripheral local anesthetic nerve block. Acta
Anaesthesiol Scand 2001; 45: 945–953.
256 Lee KC, Wilder RT, Smith RL, et al. Thermal hyperalgesia accelerates and MK-801
prevents the development of tachyphylaxis to rat sciatic nerve blockade.
Anesthesiology 1994; 81: 1284–1293.
257 Wilder RT, Sholas MG, Berde CB. NG-nitro-L- arginine methyl ester (L-NAME)
prevents tachyphylaxis to local anesthetics in a dose-dependent manner. Anesth
Analg 1996; 83: 1251–1255.
258 Mercadante S, Villari P, Ferrera P, et al. Local anesthetic switching for intrathecal
tachyphylaxis in cancer patients with pain. Anesth Analg 2003; 97: 187–189.
259 Herring IP, Bobofchak MA, Landry MP, et al. Duration of effect and effect of mul-
tiple doses of topical ophthalmic 0.5% proparacaine hydrochloride in clinically
normal dogs. Am J Vet Res 2005; 66(1): 77–80.
260 Binder DR, Herring IP. Duration of corneal anesthesia following topical adminis-
tration of 0.5% proparacaine hydrochloride solution in clinically normal cats. Am
J Vet Res 2006; 67(10): 1780–1782.
261 Peyman GA, Rahimy MH, Fernandes ML. Effects of morphine on corneal sensi-
tivity and epithelial wound healing: implications for topical ophthalmic analgesia.
Br J Ophthalmol 1994; 78(2): 138–141.
262 Douet JY, Michel J, Regnier A. Degree and duration of corneal anesthesia after
topical application of 0.4% oxybuprocaine hydrochloride ophthalmic solution in
ophthalmically normal dogs. Am J Vet Res 2013; 74(10): 1321–1326.
263 Mama KR, Steffey EP. Local anesthetics. In: Adams HR, ed. Veterinary
Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 8th edn. Ames, IA: Blackwell, 2001: 343–359.
264 Axelrod EH, Alexander GD, Brown M, et al. Procaine spinal anesthesia: a pilot study
of the incidence of transient neurologic symptoms. J Clin Anesth 1998; 10: 404–409.
265 Heo GJ, Shin G. Efficacy of benzocaine as an anaesthetic for Crucian carp
(Carassius carassius). Vet Anaesth Analg 2010; 37: 132–135.
266 Forster JG, Rosenberg PH. Revival of old local anesthetics for spinal anesthesia in
ambulatory surgery. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2011; 24: 633–637.
267 Butterworth JF. Clinical pharmacology of local anesthetics. In: Cousins MJ, Carr
DB, Horlocker TT, Bridenbaugh PO, eds. Cousins & Bridenbaugh’s Neural
Blockade in Clinical Anesthesia and Pain Medicine, 4th edn. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2009: 96–113.
268 Sharrow- Reabe KL, Townsend WM. Effects of action of proparacaine and tet-
racaine topical ophthalmic formulations on corneal sensitivity in horses. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2012; 241(12): 1645–1649.
269 Patel D, Chopra S, Berman MD. Serious systemic toxicity resulting from use of
tetracaine for pharyngeal anesthesia in upper endoscopic procedures. Dig Dis Sci
1989; 34: 882–884.
270 Lander JA, Weltman BJ, So SS. EMLA and amethocaine for reduction of children’s
pain associated with needle insertion. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006; 19(3):
CD004236.
271 Sawyer J, Febbraro S, Masud S, et al. Heated lidocaine/tetracaine patch (Synera,
Rapydan) compared with lidocaine/prilocaine cream (EMLA) for topical anaes-
thesia before vascular access. Br J Anaesth 2009; 102: 210–215.
272 Muir WW, Wiese AJ, March PA. Effects of morphine, lidocaine, ketamine, and
morphine-lidocaine-ketamine drug combination on minimum alveolar concen-
tration in dogs anesthetized with isoflurane. Am J Vet Res 2003; 64: 1155–1160.
273 Valverde A, Doherty TJ, Hernandez J, et al. Effect of lidocaine on the minimum
alveolar concentration of isoflurane in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2004; 31: 264–271.
274 Wilson J, Doherty TJ, Egger CM, et al. Effects of intravenous lidocaine, ketamine,
and the combination on the minimum alveolar concentration of sevoflurane in
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35: 289–296.
275 Pypendop BH, Ilkiw JE. The effects of intravenous lidocaine administration on
the minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in cats. Anesth Analg 2005; 100:
97–101.
276 Dzikiti TB, Hellebrekers LJ, van Dijk P. Effects of intravenous lidocaine on isoflu-
rane concentration, physiological parameters, metabolic parameters and stress-
related hormones in horses undergoing surgery. J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin
Med 2003; 50: 190–195.
277 Rezende ML, Wagner AE, Mama KR, et al. Effects of intravenous administration
of lidocaine on the minimum alveolar concentration of sevoflurane in horses. Am
J Vet Res 2011; 72: 446–451.
278 Vesal N, Spadavecchia C, Steiner A, et al. Evaluation of the isoflurane-sparing
effects of lidocaine infusion during umbilical surgery in calves. Vet Anaesth Analg
2011; 38: 451–460.
279 Yardeni IZ, Beilin B, Mayburd E, et al. The effect of perioperative intravenous
lidocaine on postoperative pain and immune function. Anesth Analg 2009; 109:
1464–1469.
280 Swenson BR, Gottschalk A, Wells LT, et al. Intravenous lidocaine is as effective as
epidural bupivacaine in reducing ileus duration, hospital stay, and pain after open
colon resection: a randomized clinical trial. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2010; 35:
370–376.
281 Ness TJ. Intravenous lidocaine inhibits visceral nociceptive reflexes and spinal
neurons in the rat. Anesthesiology 2000; 92: 1685–1691.
282 Smith LJ, Shih A, Miletic G, et al. Continual systemic infusion of lidocaine pro-
vides analgesia in an animal model of neuropathic pain. Pain 2002; 97: 267–273.
283 Robertson SA, Sanchez LC, Merritt AM, et al. Effect of systemic lidocaine on
visceral and somatic nociception in conscious horses. Equine Vet J 2005; 37:
122–127.
284 Pypendop BH, Ilkiw JE, Robertson SA. Effects of intravenous administration of
lidocaine on the thermal threshold in cats. Am J Vet Res 2006; 67: 16–20.
285 MacDougall LM, Hethey JA, Livingston A, et al. Antinociceptive, cardiopul-
monary, and sedative effects of five intravenous infusion rates of lidocaine in
conscious dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36: 512–522.
286 Doherty TJ, Seddighi MR. Local anesthetics as pain therapy in horses. Vet Clin
North Am Equine Pract 2010; 26: 533–549.
287 Brianceau P, Chevalier H, Karas A, et al. Intravenous lidocaine and small-
intestinal size, abdominal fluid, and outcome after colic surgery in horses. J Vet
Intern Med 2002; 16: 736–741.
288 Malone E, Ensink J, Turner T, et al. Intravenous continuous infusion of lidocaine
for treatment of equine ileus. Vet Surg 2006; 35: 60–66.
289 Torfs S, Delesalle C, Dewulf J, et al. Risk factors for equine postoperative ileus and
effectiveness of prophylactic lidocaine. J Vet Intern Med 2009; 23: 606–611.
290 Guschlbauer M, Feige K, Geburek F, et al. Effects of in vivo lidocaine administra-
tion at the time of ischemia and reperfusion on in vitro contractility of equine
jejunal smooth muscle. Am J Vet Res 2011; 72: 1449–1455.
291 Salem SE, Proudman CJ, Archer DC. Has intravenous lidocaine improved the out-
come in horses following surgical management of small intestinal lesions in a UK
hospital population? BMC Vet Res 2016; 12(1): 157.
292 Elfenbein JR, Robertson SA, MacKay RJ, et al. Systemic and anti-nociceptive
effects of prolonged lidocaine, ketamine, and butorphanol infusions alone and in
combination in healthy horses. BMC Vet Res 2014; 10(Suppl 1): S6.
293 Rusiecki KE, Nieto JE, Puchalski SM, et al. Evaluation of continuous infusion of
lidocaine on gastrointestinal tract function in normal horses. Vet Surg 2008; 37:
564–570.
294 Ngo LY, Tam YK, Tawfik S, et al. Effects of intravenous infusion of lidocaine on
its pharmacokinetics in conscious instrumented dogs. J Pharm Sci 1997; 86:
944–952.
295 Perez-Castro R, Patel S, Garavito-Aguilar ZV, et al. Cytotoxicity of local anesthet-
ics in human neuronal cells. Anesth Analg 2009; 108: 997–1007.
296 Cederholm I, Evers H, Lofstrom JB. Skin blood flow after intradermal injection of
ropivacaine in various concentrations with and without epinephrine evaluated by
laser Doppler flowmetry. Reg Anesth 1992; 17: 322–328.
297 Riviere JE, Papich MG. Potential and problems of developing transdermal patches
for veterinary applications. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2001; 50(3): 175–203.
298 Ko JC, Maxwell LK, Abbo LA, et al. Pharmacokinetics of lidocaine following the
application of 5% lidocaine patches to cats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2008; 31(4):
359–367.
299 Weiland L, Croubels S, Baert K, et al. Pharmacokinetics of a lidocaine patch 5% in
dogs. J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med 2006; 53(1): 34–39.
300 Ko J, Weil A, Maxwell L, et al. Plasma concentrations of lidocaine in dogs follow-
ing lidocaine patch application. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2007; 43(5): 280–283.
301 Bidwell LA, Wilson DV, Caron JP. Lack of systemic absorption of lidocaine from
5% patches placed on horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2007; 34(6): 443–446.
302 Andreoni V, Giorgi M. Evaluation of plasma detectable concentrations of two
lidocaine transdermal formulations and their analgesic effect in the horse.
J Equine Vet Sci 2009; 29(9): 681–686.
303 Joudrey SD, Robinson DA, Kearney MT, et al. Plasma concentrations of lidocaine
in dogs following lidocaine patch application over an incision compared to intact
skin. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2015; 38(6): 575–580.
304 Merema DK, Schoenrock EK, Le Boedec K, et al. Effects of a transdermal lido-
caine patch on indicators of postoperative pain in dogs undergoing midline ovari-
ohysterectomy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2017; 250(10): 1140–1147.
305 Re Bravo V, Aprea F, Bhalla RJ, et al. Effect of 5% transdermal lidocaine patches on
postoperative analgesia in dogs undergoing hemilaminectomy. J Small Anim Pract
2019; 60(3): 161–166.

-- 566 of 1450 --

Chapter 29: Local Anesthetics 	551
306 Söbbeler FJ, Kästner SB. Effects of transdermal lidocaine or lidocaine with prilo-
caine or tetracaine on mechanical superficial sensation and nociceptive thermal
thresholds in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45(2): 227–233.
307 Espinoza C, Lomax S, Windsor P. The effect of a topical anesthetic on the sensitiv-
ity of calf dehorning wounds. J Dairy Sci 2013; 96(5): 2894–2902.
308 Cuttance EL, Mason WA, Yang DA, et al. Effects of a topically applied anaesthetic
on the behaviour, pain sensitivity and weight gain of dairy calves following ther-
mocautery disbudding with a local anaesthetic. N Z Vet J 2019; 67(6): 295–305.
309 Sheil M, Chambers M, Polkinghorne A, et al. Topical application of lidocaine and
bupivacaine to disbudding wounds in dairy calves: safety, toxicology and wound
healing. Animals (Basel) 2021; 11(3): 869.
310 Lomax S, Sheil M, Windsor PA. Impact of topical anaesthesia on pain alleviation
and wound healing in lambs after mulesing. Aust Vet J 2008; 86(5): 159–168.
311 Lomax S, Dickson H, Sheil M, et al. Topical anaesthesia alleviates short-term pain
of castration and tail docking in lambs. Aust Vet J 2010; 88(3): 67–74.
312 Ferrador AM. Use of Tri-Solfen to Control Pain during Treatment of Hoof Lesions
in Dairy Cows. Dissertation Universidade de Lisboa, Faculdade de Medicina
Veterinária, 2018.
313 Sheil M, De Benedictis GM, Scollo A, et al. Efficacy of intra-operative topical
wound anaesthesia to mitigate piglet castration pain – a large, multi-centred field
trial. Animals (Basel) 2021; 11(10): 2763.
314 NOCITA® (Bupivacaine Liposome Injectable Suspension) (2018b) Package Insert.
Leawood, KS. Aratana Therapeutics. https://assets-eu- 01.kc-usercontent.com/
43db687c-fb47-015f-c990-00802940e2bc/9e1f56d5-5b93-4691-9fe2-ea6514b2d793/
2019_NocitaPckg_Insert_10mL-NO%20BARCODE.pdf (accessed June 2022)
315 Lascelles BD, Rausch-Derra LC, Wofford JA, et al. Pilot, randomized, placebo-
controlled clinical field study to evaluate the effectiveness of bupivacaine liposome
injectable suspension for the provision of post-surgical analgesia in dogs undergo-
ing stifle surgery. BMC Vet Res 2016; 12(1): 168.
316 Reader RC, McCarthy RJ, Schultz KL, et al. Comparison of liposomal bupivacaine
and 0.5% bupivacaine hydrochloride for control of postoperative pain in dogs
undergoing tibial plateau leveling osteotomy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2020; 256(9):
1011–1019.
317 Gordon-Evans WJ, Suh HY, Guedes AG. Controlled, non-inferiority trial of bupi-
vacaine liposome injectable suspension. J Feline Med Surg 2020; 22(10): 916–921.
318 Le KM, Caston SS, Hossetter JM, et al. Comparison of analgesic and tissue effects
of subcutaneous perineural injection of liposomal bupivacaine and bupivacaine
hydrochloride in horses with forelimb lameness induced via circumferential
clamp. Am J Vet Res 2020; 81(7): 551–556.
319 Moorman VJ, Pezzanite LM, Griffenhagen GM. Liposomal bupivacaine provides
longer duration analgesia than bupivacaine hydrochloride in an adjustable sole-
pressure model of equine lameness. Am J Vet Res 2022; 83(4): 298–304.
320 Ottoboni T, Quart B, Pawasauskas J, et al. Mechanism of action of HTX-011:
a novel, extended-release, dual-acting local anesthetic formulation for postopera-
tive pain. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2020; 45: 117–123.
321 Mather LE. The acute toxicity of local anesthetics. Expert Opin Drug Metab
Toxicol 2010; 6: 1313–1332.
322 Aberg G. Toxicological and local anesthetic effects of optically active isomers
of two local anesthetic compounds. Acta Pharmacol Toxicol Scand 1972; 31:
273–286.
323 Santos AC, DeArmas PE. Systemic toxicity of levobupivacaine, bupivacaine, and
ropivacaine during continuous intravenous infusion to nonpregnant and pregnant
ewes. Anesthesiology 2001; 95: 1256–1264.
324 Feldman HS, Arthur GR, Covino BG. Comparative systemic toxicity of convul-
sant and supraconvulsant doses of intravenous ropivacaine, bupivacaine, and
lidocaine in the conscious dog. Anesth Analg 1989; 69: 794–801.
325 Rutten AJ, Nancarrow C, Mather LE, et al. Hemodynamic and central nervous
system effects of intravenous bolus doses of lidocaine, bupivacaine, and
ropivacaine in sheep. Anesth Analg 1989; 69: 291–299.
326 Faccenda KA, Finucane BT. Complications of regional anaesthesia: incidence
and prevention. Drug Saf 2001; 24: 413–442.
327 Auroy Y, Benhamou D, Bargues L, et al. Major complications of regional anesthe-
sia in France: the SOS Regional Anesthesia Hotline Service. Anesthesiology 2002;
97: 1274–1280.
328 Cox B, Durieux ME, Marcus MAE. Toxicity of local anaesthetics. Best Pract Res
Clin Anaesth 2003; 17: 111–136.
329 Marsch S, Schaefer H, Castelli I. Unusual psychological manifestation of systemic
local anaesthetic toxicity. Anesthesiology 1998; 88: 532–533.
330 Meyer GA, Lin HC, Hanson RR, et al. Effects of intravenous lidocaine overdose
on cardiac electrical activity and blood pressure in the horse. Equine Vet J 2001;
33: 434–437.
331 Rosenberg P, Kalso E, Tuominen M, et al. Acute bupivacaine toxicity as a result of
venous leakage under the tourniquet cuff during a bier block. Anesthesiology 1983;
58: 95–98.
332 Morishima HO, Pedersen H, Finster M, et al. Bupivacaine toxicity in pregnant and
nonpregnant ewes. Anesthesiology 1985; 63: 134–139.
333 Brown DL, Ransom DM, Hall JA, et al. Regional anesthesia and local anesthetic-
induced systemic toxicity: seizure frequency and accompanying cardiovascular
changes. Anesth Analg 1995; 81: 321–328.
334 Liu PL, Feldman HS, Giasi R, et al. Comparative CNS toxicity of lidocaine, eti-
docaine, bupivacaine, and tetracaine in awake dogs following rapid intravenous
administration. Anesth Analg 1983; 62: 375–379.
335 Hofman WF, Jerram DC, Gangarosa LP. Cardiorespiratory and behavioral reac-
tions to the lidocaine-induced convulsions in the dog. Res Commun Chem Pathol
Pharmacol 1977; 16: 581–591.
336 Lemo N, Vnuk D, Radisic B, et al. Determination of the toxic dose of lidocaine in
dogs and its corresponding serum concentration. Vet Rec 2007; 160: 374–375.
337 Wilcke JR, Davis LE, Neff-Davis CA. Determination of lidocaine concentrations
producing therapeutic and toxic effects in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1983; 6:
105–111.
338 Milligan M, Kukanich B, Beard W, et al. The disposition of lidocaine during a 12-
hour intravenous infusion to postoperative horses. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2006; 29:
495–499.
339 Navas de Solis C, McKenzie HC. Serum concentrations of lidocaine and its metab-
olites MEGX and GX during and after prolonged intravenous infusion of lido-
caine in horses after colic surgery. J Equine Vet Sci 2007; 27: 398–404.
340 Chadwick HS. Toxicity and resuscitation in lidocaine- or bupivacaine-infused
cats. Anesthesiology 1985; 63: 385–390.
341 de Jong RH, Ronfeld RA, DeRosa RA. Cardiovascular effects of convulsant and
supraconvulsant doses of amide local anesthetics. Anesth Analg 1982; 61(1): 3–9.
342 Nancarrow C, Rutten AJ, Runciman WB, et al. Myocardial and cerebral drug con-
centrations and the mechanisms of death after fatal intravenous doses of lidocaine,
bupivacaine, and ropivacaine in the sheep. Anesth Analg 1989; 69: 276–283.
343 Heavner JE, Badgwell JM, Dryden CF Jr., et al. Bupivacaine toxicity in lightly anes-
thetized pigs with respiratory imbalances plus or minus halothane. Reg Anesth
1995; 20: 20–26.
344 Burney RG, DiFazio CA, Foster JA. Effects of pH on protein binding of lidocaine.
Anesth Analg 1978; 57: 478–480.
345 Heavner JE, Dryden CF Jr., Sanghani V, et al. Severe hypoxia enhances central
nervous system and cardiovascular toxicity of bupivacaine in lightly anesthetized
pigs. Anesthesiology 1992; 77: 142–147.
346 Beecroft C, Davies G. Systemic toxic effects of local anaesthetics. Anaesth Intensive
Care Med 2010; 11: 98–100.
347 Mazoit JX, Boico O, Samii K. Myocardial uptake of bupivacaine: II.
Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of bupivacaine enantiomers in the iso-
lated perfused rabbit heart. Anesth Analg 1993; 77: 477–482.
348 Chang DH, Ladd LA, Wilson KA, et al. Tolerability of large-dose intravenous lev-
obupivacaine in sheep. Anesth Analg 2000; 91: 671–679.
349 Huang YF, Upton RN, Runciman WB. I.V. bolus administration of subconvulsive
doses of lignocaine to conscious sheep: myocardial pharmacokinetics. Br J
Anaesth 1993; 70: 326–332.
350 Copeland SE, Ladd LA, Gu SQ, et al. The effects of general anesthesia on the cen-
tral nervous and cardiovascular system toxicity of local anesthetics. Anesth Analg
2008; 106: 1429–1439.
351 Valenzuela C, Snyders DJ, Bennett PB, et al. Stereoselective block of cardiac
sodium channels by bupivacaine in guinea pig ventricular myocytes. Circulation
1995; 92: 3014–3024.
352 Valenzuela C, Delpon E, Tamkun MM, et al. Stereoselective block of a human
cardiac potassium channel (Kv1.5) by bupivacaine enantiomers. Biophys J 1995;
69: 418–427.
353 Mather L, Chang D. Cardiotoxicity with modern local anaesthetics: is there a safe
choice? Drugs 2001; 61: 333–342.
354 Avery P, Redon D, Schaenzer G, et al. The influence of serum potassium on the
cerebral and cardiac toxicity of bupivacaine and lidocaine. Anesthesiology 1984;
61: 134–138.
355 Neal JM, Mulroy MF, Weinberg GL. American Society of Regional Anesthesia and
Pain Medicine checklist for managing local anesthetic systemic toxicity: 2012 ver-
sion. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2012; 37: 16–18.
356 Weinberg GL. Current concepts in resuscitation of patients with local anesthetic
cardiac toxicity. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2002; 27: 568–575.
357 Weinberg GL, VadeBoncouer T, Ramaraju GA, et al. Pretreatment or resuscitation
with a lipid infusion shifts the dose-response to bupivacaine- induced asystole in
rats. Anesthesiology 1998; 88: 1071–1075.
358 Weinberg G, Ripper R, Feinstein DL, et al. Lipid emulsion infusion rescues dogs from
bupivacaine-induced cardiac toxicity. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2003; 28: 198–202.
359 Rosenblatt MA, Abel M, Fischer GW, et al. Successful use of a 20% lipid emulsion
to resuscitate a patient after a presumed bupivacaine-related cardiac arrest.
Anesthesiology 2006; 105: 217–218.

-- 567 of 1450 --

552 	Section 3: Pharmacology
360 Warren JA, Thoma RB, Georgescu A, et al. Intravenous lipid infusion in the suc-
cessful resuscitation of local anesthetic-induced cardiovascular collapse after
supraclavicular brachial plexus block. Anesth Analg 2008; 106: 1578–1580.
361 Sonsino DH, Fischler M. Immediate intravenous lipid infusion in the successful
resuscitation of ropivacaine-induced cardiac arrest after infraclavicular brachial
plexus block. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2009; 34: 276–277.
362 Weinberg GL, di Gregorio G, Ripper R, et al. Resuscitation with lipid versus epi-
nephrine in a rat model of bupivacaine overdose. Anesthesiology 2008; 108:
907–913.
363 Hiller DB, Gregorio GD, Ripper R, et al. Epinephrine impairs lipid resuscitation
from bupivacaine overdose: a threshold effect. Anesthesiology 2009; 111:
498–505.
364 Gregorio G, Schwartz D, Ripper R, et al. Lipid emulsion is superior to vasopressin
in a rodent model of resuscitation from toxin-induced cardiac arrest. Crit Care
Med 2009; 37: 993–999.
365 Fernandez AL, Lee JA, Rahilly L, et al. The use of intravenous lipid emulsion as an
antidote in veterinary toxicology. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2011; 21: 309–320.
366 Yang S, Abrahams MS, Hurn PD, et al. Local anesthetic Schwann cell toxicity is
time and concentration dependent. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2011; 36: 444–451.
367 Kalichman MW. Physiologic mechanisms by which local anesthetics may cause
injury to nerve and spinal cord. Reg Anesth 1993; 18: 448–452.
368 Kitagawa N, Oda M, Totoki T. Possible mechanism of irreversible nerve injury
caused by local anesthetics: detergent properties of local anesthetics and mem-
brane disruption. Anesthesiology 2004; 100: 962–967.
369 Selander D. Neurotoxicity of local anesthetics: animal data. Reg Anesth 1993; 18:
461–468.
370 Yamashita A, Matsumoto M, Matsumoto S, et al. A comparison of the neurotoxic
effects on the spinal cord of tetracaine, lidocaine, bupivacaine, and ropivacaine
administered intrathecally in rabbits. Anesth Analg 2003; 97: 512–519.
371 Zhang C, Phamonvaechavan P, Rajan A, et al. Concentration-dependent bupiv-
acaine myotoxicity in rabbit extraocular muscle. J AAPOS 2010; 14: 323–327.
372 Zink W, Bohl JR, Hacke N, et al. The long term myotoxic effects of bupivacaine
and ropivacaine after continuous peripheral nerve blocks. Anesth Analg 2005; 101:
548–554.
373 Nouette-Gaulain K, Sirvent P, Canal-Raffin M, et al. Effects of intermittent femo-
ral nerve injections of bupivacaine, levobupivacaine, and ropivacaine on mito-
chondrial energy metabolism and intracellular calcium homeostasis in rat psoas
muscle. Anesthesiology 2007; 106: 1026–1034.
374 Zink W, Graf BM. Local anesthetic myotoxicity. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2004; 29:
333–340.
375 Gomoll AH, Kang RW, Williams JM, et al. Chondrolysis after continuous intraar-
ticular bupivacaine infusion: an experimental model investigating chondrotoxic-
ity in the rabbit shoulder. Arthroscopy 2006; 22: 813–819.
376 Karpie JC, Chu CR. Lidocaine exhibits dose- and time-dependent cytotoxic effects
on bovine articular chondrocytes in vitro. Am J Sports Med 2007; 35: 1621–1627.
377 Park J, Sutradhar BC, Hong G, et al. Comparison of the cytotoxic effects of bupiv-
acaine, lidocaine, and mepivacaine in equine articular chondrocytes. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2011; 38: 127–133.
378 Dragoo JL, Braun HJ, Kim HJ, et al. The in vitro chondrotoxicity of single-dose
local anesthetics. Am J Sports Med 2012; 40: 794–799.
379 Hansen BP, Beck CL, Beck EP, et al. Postarthroscopic glenohumeral chondrolysis.
Am J Sports Med 2007; 35: 1628–1634.
380 Rapley JH, Beavis RC, Barber FA. Glenohumeral chondrolysis after shoulder
arthroscopy associated with continuous bupivacaine infusion. Arthroscopy 2009;
25: 1367–1373.
381 Piper SL, Kim HT. Comparison of ropivacaine and bupivacaine toxicity in human
articular chondrocytes. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2008; 90: 986–991.
382 Grishko V, Xu M, Wilson G, et al. Apoptosis and mitochondrial dysfunction in
human chondrocytes following exposure to lidocaine, bupivacaine, and ropiv-
acaine. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2010; 92: 609–618.
383 Rehman HU. Methemoglobinemia. West J Med 2001; 175: 193–196.
384 Davis JA, Greenfield RE, Brewer TG. Benzocaine-induced methemoglobinemia
attributed to topical application of the anesthetic in several laboratory animal spe-
cies. Am J Vet Res 1993; 54: 1322–1326.
385 Guertler AT, Lagutchik MS, Martin DG. Topical anesthetic-induced methemo-
globinemia in sheep: a comparison of benzocaine and lidocaine. Fundam Appl
Toxicol 1992; 18: 294–298.
386 Lagutchik MS, Mundie TG, Martin DG. Methemoglobinemia induced by a ben-
zocaine- based topically administered anesthetic in eight sheep. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 1992; 201: 1407–1410.
387 Wilkie DA, Kirby R. Methemoglobinemia associated with dermal application of
benzocaine cream in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1988; 192: 85–86.
388 Harvey JW, Sameck JH, Burgard FJ. Benzocaine-induced methemoglobinemia in
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1979; 175: 1171–1175.
389 Poppers PJ, Mastri AR. Maternal and foetal methaemoglobinaemia caused by pri-
locaine. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand Suppl 1969; 37: 258–263.
390 Martin DG, Watson CE, Gold MB, et al. Topical anesthetic-induced methemo-
globinemia and sulfhemoglobinemia in macaques: a comparison of benzocaine
and lidocaine. J Appl Toxicol 1995; 15: 153–158.
391 Jaffey JA, Harmon MR, Villani NA, et al. Long-term treatment with methylene
blue in a dog with hereditary methemoglobinemia caused by cytochrome b5
reductase deficiency. J Vet Intern Med 2017; 31: 1860–1865.
392 Vasiliadou E, Karakitsou V, Kazakos G, et al. Hereditary methemoglobinemia in a
cyanotic cat presented for ovariohysterectomy. Can Vet J 2019; 60(5): 502–506.
393 Fidanzio F, Corsini A, Spindler KP, et al. Suspected drinking water poisoning in a
domestic kitten with methemoglobinemia. Vet Sci 2021; 8(11): 243.
394 Harvey JW, Keitt AS. Studies of the efficacy and potential hazards of methylene
blue therapy in aniline-induced methaemoglobinaemia. Br J Haematol 1983; 54:
29–41.
395 Welch SL. Local anesthetic toxicosis. Vet Med 2000; 95: 670–673.
396 Eggleston ST, Lush LW. Understanding allergic reactions to local anesthetics. Ann
Pharmacother 1996; 30: 851–857.
397 Dooms-Goossens A, de Alam AG, Degreef H, et al. Local anesthetic intolerance
due to metabisulfite. Contact Derm 1989; 20: 124–126.
398 Bina B, Hersh EV, Hilario M, et al. True allergy to amide local anesthetics: a review
and case presentation. Anesth Prog 2018; 65(2): 119–123.

-- 568 of 1450 --

SECTION 4
Body Fluids and Fluid Therapy

-- 569 of 1450 --



-- 570 of 1450 --

555
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of L umb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
A fundamental principle of physiology is homeostasis: the mainte-
nance of constant conditions through dynamic equilibrium of the
body’s internal environment. An important component of homeo-
stasis is the regulation of “acid–base balance,” a term introduced by
Henderson in 1908 [1]. Current understanding of acid–base physi-
ology is evolving but similar to many scientific fields, the timeline
for the historical development of analytical methods has greatly
impacted the clinical interpretation of acid–base disorders. What
once was a purely descriptive science has become far more quanti-
tative and mechanistically based, contributing significantly to a
more comprehensive understanding of the multiple factors respon-
sible for acid–base regulation in health and disease.
Central to all schemes of acid–base balance is the understanding
that metabolism of food (carbohydrates, fats, and proteins) results
in the predictable production of work, heat, and waste products
such as carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) and hydrogen ions. Indeed, normal
metabolic processes are responsible for the production of thou-
sands of millimoles of carbon dioxide (CO 2
; volatile acid) and
potentially hundreds of milliequivalents of nonvolatile hydrogen
ions (fixed acid) daily. Individual differences in the amount of CO2
and hydrogen ions (H +
) produced are influenced by diet, basal
metabolic rate, activity, and body temperature. Animals consuming
high-protein diets produce CO2 and excess quantities of H+ precur-
sors, whereas animals consuming diets high in plant material
produce CO2 and excess quantities of bicarbonate ion (HCO 3
−)
precursors. The CO 2 that is produced is combined with water,
catalyzed by carbonic anhydrase, to form carbonic acid (H 2 CO3
).
The formation of carbonic acid from CO2 and water (H2
O) (eqn 30.1)
and the subsequent generation of H+ and HCO 3
− (eqn 30.2) provide
a focal point for almost all discussions of acid–base balance.
Starting in 1917, plasma hydrogen ion activity (aH +
) and CO 2
content, as well as plasma bicarbonate concentration (cHCO3
−)
were the only relevant acid–base quantities that could be conveni-
ently and accurately measured in the laboratory. Henderson’s
studies emphasized that large quantities of CO2 are produced by
metabolizing cells and that CO 2 is in equilibrium with H + and
HCO 3
−, such that:
CO 	H O 	H CO	2 	2 	2 	3	�	 	(30.1)
H CO 	H 	HCO	2 	3 	3	�	 	(30.2)
Combining eqns 30.1 and 30.2 yields:
CO 	H O 	H CO 	H 	HCO	2 	2 	2 	3 	3	�	�	 	(30.3)
It is important to emphasize that carbonic anhydrase catalyzes the
interconversion of CO2 and H2
CO3 and that current-day technolo-
gies have advanced the science of acid–base homeostasis far
beyond that available in 1917 and Henderson’s introduction of the
30 Acid–Base Physiology
Peter D. Constable1 and William W. Muir2
1 College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, USA
2 Gillespie College of Veterinary Medicine (LMU-CVM) at Lincoln Memorial University, Harrogate, Tennessee, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 555
Acids and bases, 556
pH, 556
pKa and the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation, 557
Temperature effects on acid–base balance, 557
Mechanisms to minimize changes in blood pH, 558
Chemical buffers, 558
Respiratory system, 559
Renal system, 559
Approaches to evaluating acid–base balance, 559
Traditional (bicarbonate-centric) approach, 559
Base excess (buffer-centric) approach, 563
Physicochemical approach (simplified strong ion approach), 564
Anion gap and cNa+
–cCl− difference, 565
Strong ion gap, 567
Clinical acid–base disturbances, 568
Disorders of PCO2
, 568
Disorders in strong ion difference, 569
Disorders in ATOT
, 571
Free-water abnormalities (combined disorders in SID and ATOT
), 571
Evaluations of acid–base balance, 571
References, 572

-- 571 of 1450 --

556 	Section 4: Body Fluids and Fluid Therapy
term “acid–base balance.” Regardless, the central importance of
H + regulation to cell function and animal health cannot be over-
emphasized and led Hastings to state: “Tiny though it is, I suppose
no constituent of living matter has so much power to influence
biological behavior” [2].
Acid–base homeostasis involves the integrated normal activity of
the lungs, kidney, liver, and gastrointestinal tract (Fig. 30.1). The
lung removes CO2
; the kidneys remove H+ as fixed acids (i.e., acid
produced from sources other than CO 2 and not excreted by the
lungs), ammonium, and non-metabolizable (fixed) strong cations
such as Na + and K + and strong anions such as Cl− and sulfate; the
liver metabolizes protein; and the gastrointestinal tract regulates the
absorption of water, nutrients, and minerals, and eliminates wastes.
This chapter reviews the basic principles that determine acid–base
balance and their integration into both descriptive and quantitative
approaches to acid–base abnormalities in animals. Other more spe-
cific texts should be consulted for a more comprehensive review of
the subject [3–8].
Acids and bases
pH
Most formal definitions of acids or bases when applied to biologic
solutions utilize the Brønsted–Lowry concept, which classifies acids
as proton donors and bases as proton acceptors. A more appropriate
working definition, however, may be that acids are substances that
increase H+ ion activity (aH+
), the preferred chemical term for pro-
tons in aqueous solutions [9]. Hydrogen ion activity is preferred to
the term H+ ion concentration ([H+
]) for a number of reasons. First,
a proton unaccompanied by an electron shell is much smaller than
elements such as Na + or Cl− or any molecule. The proton is there-
fore more appropriately viewed as a highly reactive electromotive
force or free energy source in solution rather than a concentration.
Second, the strength of an acid and resultant acidity of a solution
are determined, in part, by its activity coefficient, a factor influ-
enced by temperature and ionic strength that determines the degree
of dissociation. The glass electrode that is used to determine pH
provides a measure of the hydrogen ion activity referenced to that
of standard buffers, and theoretically [H +
] can be calculated by mul-
tiplying aH+ by the activity coefficient. However, the activity coef-
ficient for the proton in water cannot be accurately estimated and is
< 1 in vertebrate fluids because the ionic strength approximates 0.15
M and the fluids are not infinitely dilute (ionic strength ≈ 0 M, the
value where the activity concentration = 1). In other words, use of
the term [H +
] is based on an incorrect assumption that the activity
coefficient is 1. Third, the concept of pH is historically based as a
symbol for the “power of hydrogen” and defined as the negative
value of the log to the base 10 of hydrogen ion activity, –log10
(aH+
).
The logarithmic expression was developed to simplify the notation
necessary to describe the large amounts of H + produced and the
changes of aH+ observed in nature and chemical experiments. This
means of expression, although cumbersome mathematically,
defines the nonlinear relationship between pH and aH+ (Fig. 30.2):
pH 	H 	/ H	log 	log	10 	10 1	a 	a 	(30.4)
Fourth, the variability in pH is much less than that of aH+
, and
the distribution of aH+ is usually skewed in vertebrate fluids.
Consequently, pH is more accurately expressed as mean ± SD than
aH +
. Finally, because the proton is so reactive in water, it exists
fleetingly in many forms, with the hydronium ion (H3
O+
) being the
predominant form. As such, use of the term “hydrogen ion concen-
tration,” which suggests a constant state over time, is misleading
and inaccurate when applied to protons in water.
Because a base is defined as a H + (proton) acceptor, each acid
dissociates into H + and a potential H + acceptor, or conjugate base.
For example, H2
CO3 in aqueous solution dissociates into H+ and its
conjugate base HCO3
− (eqn 30.2). Substances that are strong acids
Oral Intake
(Carbohydrates,
protein, fat)
Protein 	Protein
Glutamine
Tissue
Metabolism
H +
H+
	H2CO3–
CO2
CO2 	Urine
CO2 + H 2O
H 2CO3– 	HCO3–
NH3 + H+
NH4+
NH4+
H+ : HCO3–
Extracellular fluid
Figure 30.1 The lung, kidney, liver, and gastrointestinal tract aid in
acid–base homeostasis.
120
7.50
7.40
7.30
7.20
7.10
7.00
6.90
32
40
50
64
80
100
125
pH = –log10 αH+
αH+ (nEq/L)
100
80
60
7.00 	7.20 	7.40 	7.60
pH
7.80 	8.00
40
20
0
Figure 30.2 Relationship between aH+ and pH. The relationship is
curvilinear.

-- 572 of 1450 --

Chapter 30: Acid–Base Physiology 	557
have weak conjugate bases and vice versa. Interestingly, water, the
most abundant solvent in the body, can function as both an acid
(H3
O+
; proton donor) or a base (H 2
O; proton acceptor) depending
on local conditions (H 3
O+ ↔ H+ + H2
O). At normal pH (7.40),
temperature (37–38 °C), and ionic strength (0.15 M), water is the
most abundant base in the body.
Physiologically and clinically, the formation of acids and there-
fore H+ production are emphasized in acid–base regulation because
the end-products of ingestion, absorption, and metabolism, as well
as that of many pathophysiologic processes, are protons or CO 2
.
Regardless of conversion issues and the relatively narrow range
(20–150 nEq/L) over which changes in aH + occur in biologic fluids,
the concept of pH has persisted and is routinely reported on all pH
and blood gas analyzers.
pKa and the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation
The development of methods to measure pH in blood by Hasselbalch
(1912) and CO2 content and cHCO 3
− in plasma or serum by Van
Slyke (1917) led to the widespread adoption of the Henderson–
Hasselbalch equation and subsequent characterization of acid–base
disturbances as being either respiratory or non-respiratory (meta-
bolic) in origin. The presence of many chemical equilibriums in
blood (e.g., phosphates and sulfates) and the law of mass action pro-
duce many potential equilibrium equations that could be used to
explain acid–base balance. The reasons why the carbonic acid
equilibrium equation (eqn 30.3) was chosen to describe acid–base
balance were (1) historical (methods were available to determine
CO2 content); (2) HCO 3
− is quantitatively the most important
buffer in extracellular fluid; and (3) the carbonic acid equation
includes a volatile substance (CO 2
). The respiratory system in air-
breathing vertebrates is an open system in that CO 2 can leave the
system (body) rapidly by an increase in minute ventilation. As a
consequence, the buffering ability of HCO3
− in an open system is
much greater than that in a closed system, such as a test tube that
is capped. This is best appreciated by expressing eqn 30.3 in the
reverse direction, such that:
H 	HCO 	H CO 	CO 	H O	3 	2 	3 	2 	2	�	�	 	(30.5)
Continuous removal of CO 2 by ventilation in an open system drives
the reaction to the right and therefore greatly assists the rapid
removal of excess protons from the body.
The law of mass action states that the rate (velocity) of a reaction
is dependent on the concentration of the reactants, the dissociation
constant (K) for the reaction, as well as the temperature and ionic
strength of the solution. For mammalian fluids such as blood,
plasma, and serum, changes in temperature and ionic strength are
relatively small, and consequently, their effects can be ignored for
clinical purposes. It is important to note that this is not the case for
ectothermic (“cold-blooded” animals).
The rate of dissociation (r) for an uncharged monoprotic acid
(HA) can be characterized as:
HA 	H 	A 	(30.6)
using the concentration of HA (cHA) and dissociation constant K1
,
r 	HA	1 	1	K 	c 	(30.7)
Similarly:
H 	A 	HA 	(30.8)
and using the hydrogen ion activity and the concentration of A− (cA−):
r 	H 	A	2 	2	K 	a 	c 	(30.9)
which at equilibrium results in r 1 = r 2 , or the following mass action
equation:
K K 	K 	a 	c 	c	2 	1	/ 	H 	A / HA	a 	(30.10)
where Ka is the dissociation constant for the uncharged monoprotic
acid HA. Applying this general approach to carbonic acid, an
uncharged diprotic acid (H 2
CO3
) using the dissociation reaction
described in eqn 30.3, Henderson derived:
a 	K 	c	H 	PCO / HCO	a 	2 	3 	(30.11)
Henderson used the concentration of dissolved molecular CO 2
instead of H 2
CO3 because H 2
CO3 could not be measured.
Hasselbalch then introduced PCO 2 into Henderson’s equation and
applied Sørensen’s logarithmic format, producing the Henderson–
Hasselbalch equation for carbonic acid, arguably the most famous
equation in biology:
pH 	p 	HCO / 	PCO	a	K 	c 	S	log 10 	3 	2 	(30.12)
where pH is –log10
(aH+
), pKa is = −log10
(Ka
), and S (0.0307 {mmol/L}/
mmHg) is the solubility of CO 2 in the solution. In blood, plasma,
and serum, pKa is termed the apparent dissociation constant (pK1 ´)
for carbonic acid, with a value at 37 o
C of 6.095 when blood is ana-
lyzed and 6.105 when plasma or serum is analyzed.
The Henderson–Hasselbalch equation has been rewritten for
clinical explanatory purposes as follows:
pH 	p 	base 	acid
p 	kidney function
a
a
K
K
log
log
10
10 	lung function 	(30.13)
This equation is an oversimplification of acid–base regulation
because it ignores the role of non-bicarbonate buffers such as
hemoglobin, albumin, globulins, and phosphate, ignores the role of
the liver in amino-acid metabolism and bicarbonate formation, and
implies that the time required for renal adaptation to an acute acid–
base disturbance (typically hours to days) is similar to the time
required for respiratory adaptation to an acute acid–base distur-
bance (typically minutes). It is therefore time to retire eqn 30.13.
Temperature effects on acid–base balance
Increases or decreases in body temperature are frequently encoun-
tered in animals during anesthesia and surgery. Increases in body
temperature may be caused by systemic disease, stress, increases in
skeletal muscle activity (inadequate relaxation), and/or infectious
and genetic disorders (malignant hyperthermia). Hypothermia is a
common consequence of anesthesia and surgery and is much more
profound in small animals (< 8 to 10 kg) because of their larger
body surface area to body mass ratio. Decreases in body tempera-
ture are potentiated by cleaning solutions (water or alcohol), cold
exposure (stainless steel tables), illness (shock), drugs that cause
vasodilation (phenothiazine drugs, inhalant anesthesia), and mus-
cle relaxants (neuromuscular blocking drugs). Changes in body
temperature affect the pH of all body fluids. Decreases in body tem-
perature increase pH and vice versa such that blood pH increases by
0.015–0.020 units for every 1 °C decrease in body temperature [10].
Changes in pH with body temperature are expected because of
known temperature-induced changes on dissociation constants
(pKa
) and the solubility of CO 2 in blood. For example, as body

-- 573 of 1450 --

558 	Section 4: Body Fluids and Fluid Therapy
temperature decreases, the pKa and blood solubility of CO2 increase,
producing an increase in pH and decrease in PCO2 (Table 30.1).
These temperature-dependent changes in both intracellular and
extracellular pH are believed to be important in maintaining a con-
stant relative alkalinity to that of water. This ensures constant net
protein charge and structure, thereby preserving protein activity and
function [11,12]. The most important dissociable group responsible
for the maintenance of a constant net protein charge is the imidazole
ring of histidine, in that the fractional dissociation of imidazole–
histidine remains constant as temperature changes and varies with
pH during isothermal conditions. This regulation of imidazole–
histidine dissociation to maintain acid–base balance is termed
alpha-stat regulation in contrast to the pH-stat regulation concept
wherein pH values are maintained constant (Table 30.2) [12,13,14].
Both the alpha-stat and pH-stat concepts of acid–base balance
have been used to interpret pH and blood gases in humans with body
temperatures higher or lower than normal [14]. Proponents of the
pH-stat hypothesis argue that it is important to maintain a constant
pH of 7.40 and PCO2 of 40 mmHg at any temperature, whereas pro-
ponents of the alpha-stat strategy attempt to keep a constant relative
alkalinity. Proponents of the pH-stat strategy realize that if the pH
and PCO2 were kept constant at pH of 7.40 and PCO2 of 40 mmHg
during hypothermia, the animal would be acidemic, but they argue
that pH-stat-oriented therapy reduces morbidity [15]. Proponents of
alpha-stat-oriented therapy argue similarly and point out that blood
flow to vital organs, particularly cerebral blood flow, becomes
pressure-dependent (loss of autoregulation) with pH-stat manage-
ment. From a practical standpoint, pH and PCO2 do not need to be
corrected for temperature unless absolute values at the animal’s cur-
rent temperature are required. Determining the pH and blood gases
(PO2
, PCO2
) from a blood sample taken from a hypothermic animal
(the temperature at which most blood gas machines are calibrated is
37 °C) enables interpretation of acid–base abnormalities for appro-
priate therapeutic decisions. This last statement is made with the
knowledge that the pH and blood gas values obtained are correct only
at 37 °C and do not represent the actual values at the animal’s current
body temperature (unless it is 37 °C). The clinical utility of using an
alpha-stat approach is that only one reference range is needed (that
obtained at 37 °C), whereas a pH-stat approach requires a reference
range for every potential temperature (Table 30.2).
Mechanisms to minimize changes in blood pH
Maintenance of pH within a narrow range of values is vital to nor-
mal tissue enzyme activity and cell viability. The body uses three
principal mechanisms to minimize or buffer changes in blood pH.
Chemical buffers act within seconds (extracellular buffers) or up to
4 h (intracellular buffers) of a pH shift and constitute the first line of
defense against changes in pH. The respiratory system, via central
and peripheral chemoreceptors, responds within seconds to min-
utes to resist changes in pH by regulating the partial pressure of CO2
(physiologic buffering). For example, an increase in proton forma-
tion will drive the reaction in eqn 30.5 to the right and increase
PCO 2 that can be eliminated from the animal by increased minute
ventilation. Finally, protons produced by non-respiratory mecha-
nisms (non-respiratory acidosis) are excreted by the kidney in the
urine over a period of hours or days (Fig. 30.3).
Chemical buffers
Chemical buffers are substances that minimize changes in the pH of
a solution when an acid or base is added. A buffer solution consists
of a weak acid and its conjugate base and is most effective when the
pH is within 1.0 to 1.5 pH units of its dissociation constant
(pKa
) [16] (Table 30.3). Alterations in blood, interstitial, and intra-
cellular fluid pH are immediately buffered (modified) by chemical
buffer systems, as described by the mass action equation (eqn 30.10).
Extracellular buffering by HCO3–
Immediate (sec)
Intracellular buffering
Up to four hours
H+ load
Respiratory
buffering
by PCO2
Minutes
Renal
H+ excretion
Hours to days
Figure 30.3 Body buffering mechanisms.
Table 30.3 pKa values of important chemical buffersa.
Compound 	pKa
Lactic acid 	3.9
3-Hydroxybutyric acid 	4.7
Creatinine 	5.0
Organic phosphates 	6.0–7.5
Carbonic acid (H2
CO3 ) 	6.1
Imidazole group of histidine (protein) 	6.4–6.7
Oxygenated hemoglobin 	6.7
Inorganic phosphates 	6.8
α-Amino (amino terminal) 	7.4–7.9
Deoxygenated hemoglobin (protein) 	7.9
Ammonium (NH4
+
) 	9.2
Bicarbonate (HCO 3
–
) 	9.8
a pKa values are approximate and represent a mix of values obtained at room
temperature or 37 °C. Compounds with pKa values in the range of 6.4 to 8.4 are most
useful as buffers in biological systems. The pKa values for the imidazole group of
histidine and for the α-amino (amino terminal) groups are for those side groups in
proteins. The pKa range for organic phosphates refers to such intracellular compounds
as ATP, ADP, and 2,3- DPG.
Table 30.1 Effect of temperature on blood PCO2 and pH. All blood pH and gas
analyzers measure blood at 37 °C (shaded) and reference ranges for blood pH and gas
tensions should be obtained at a temperature of 37 °C.
Temperature (°C) 	PCO 2 	pH
20 	19 	7.65
25 	24 	7.58
30 	30 	7.50
35 	37 	7.43
36 	38 	7.41
37 	40 	7.40
38 	42 	7.39
39 	44 	7.37
40 	45 	7.36
Table 30.2 Comparison of pH-stat and alpha-stat regulation of acid–base balance.
Concept 	Purpose 	Total
CO 2
α- lmidazole and
buffering
Enzyme structure
and function
pH- stat 	Constant pH 	Increases 	Altered net protein
charge, buffering
decreased
Altered and activity
decreased
Alpha-stat 	Constant
relative
alkalinity
Constant 	Constant net
protein charge,
buffering constant
Normal and activity
maximal

-- 574 of 1450 --

Chapter 30: Acid–Base Physiology 	559
For the weak acid HA, as pH decreases (aH+ increases), cA−
decreases, and cHA increases by equal amounts, keeping the total
amount of ATOT (ATOT = cHA + cA−) the same.
The principal chemical buffers are the bicarbonate (HCO3
−/
H 2
CO3 ), protein (Prot/H-Prot+
), and phosphate (HPO4
2–
/H2
PO4
–
)
systems. In rapidly growing animals, bone can readily contribute
calcium carbonate and calcium phosphate to the extracellular fluid,
thereby increasing the buffering capacity. Functionally, anytime
there is a decreased pH in the body, the buffer (HCO3
−, Prot,
HPO 4
2–
) at physiologic pH accepts the excess proton, converting the
buffer to its conjugate acid (H 2
CO3
, H-Prot+
, H 2
PO4
–-) [17]. Because
the body can have only one pH in a well-mixed fluid compartment,
the ratio of the acid to salt forms of the various buffer pairs in solu-
tion can always be predicted by the relevant mass action equation
(isohydric principle), providing their concentration and dissocia-
tion constant (pKa
) are known [18]. In other words, with knowledge
of the behavior of one buffer pair, one can predict the behavior of all
the other buffer pairs in solution. As pointed out above, the HCO3
−/
H 2
CO3 buffer pair is most frequently used to determine acid–base
status in clinical practice because it is the most prominent chemical
buffer in the extracellular fluid and in the presence of carbonic
anhydrase, carbonic acid forms CO 2
, which is eliminated by alveo-
lar ventilation. Thus, during normal conditions, the body can be
considered an “open” system.
Approximately, 60% of the body’s chemical buffering capacity
occurs by intracellular phosphates and proteins. Inorganic and
organic (ATP, ADP, and 2,3-DPG) phosphates possess pKa values
that range from 6.0 to 7.5, making them ideal chemical buffers over
a wide range of potential intracellular pH values. The most impor-
tant intracellular protein-dissociable group is the imidazole ring of
the amino-acid histidine (pKa 6.4–6.7). The α-amino groups of pro-
teins (pKa 7.4–7.9) play a secondary but important role in intracel-
lular buffering.
Hemoglobin contributes approximately 80% of the non-
bicarbonate buffering capacity of whole blood and with other intra-
cellular proteins is responsible for three-fourths of the chemical
buffering power of the body. Plasma proteins, particularly albumin,
typically contain 16 histidine and 1 α-amino groups, with some spe-
cies differences, and collectively are responsible for approximately
20% of the non-bicarbonate buffering capacity of whole blood.
Inorganic phosphate (pKa 6.8) and creatinine (pKa 5.0) are the
major buffers in carnivore and omnivore urine because renal tubu-
lar pH (typically 5.5–6.5) is within 1.0 to 1.5 units of their pKa [19].
Respiratory system
The respiratory system provides a route by which pH can be regu-
lated by varying the partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PCO 2
) in
blood (Fig. 30.1). Chemoreceptors throughout the body, but par-
ticularly those located in the carotid body and medulla oblongata,
monitor changes in pH and PCO 2 and adjust breathing (tidal vol-
ume and frequency) to maintain a normal pH. The association of
protons with cHCO 3
− and the subsequent formation of CO 2 and
H2
O is an example of very rapid chemical buffering (closed system),
whereas subsequent elimination of CO 2 by the lung via increased
ventilation (open physiologic system) requires a longer response
time (usually minutes). Changes in blood PCO2 also have impor-
tant consequences for hemoglobin’s affinity for oxygen and its buff-
ering capacity. Increases in PCO2 decrease blood pH and decrease
hemoglobin affinity for oxygen (Bohr effect: shifting the oxygen–
hemoglobin curve to the right). This decrease in the oxygen affinity
of hemoglobin is advantageous in tissues, allowing hemoglobin to
release more oxygen for metabolism. Non-oxygenated hemoglobin
in turn can transport more CO 2 in the form of hemoglobin carba-
mino compounds to the lungs (Haldane effect).
Renal system
The synthesis of new HCO3
− and excretion of excess H+ emphasizes
the role of the kidneys in both chemical and physiologic buffering
(Fig. 30.1). Although relatively slow (hours to days), compared with
the lungs (minutes) and chemical buffering (seconds), the kidney
serves as the principal means by which acids produced by metabolic
processes (not owing to CO 2 production) are ultimately eliminated
(Fig. 30.3). Protons produced by metabolic processes are excreted
in the urine in combination with weak anions (titratable acidity),
primarily phosphate and to a lesser extent creatinine, and in a much
smaller amount as free protons [19,20].
The term “titratable acidity” may be considered synonymous
with urinary phosphate concentration but actually represents the
buffering effect of all weak acids in urine, including creatinine and
urate. Although titratable acidity is frequently emphasized when
the renal role in acid–base balance is discussed, the much more
important mechanism for acid excretion during severe metabolic
acidosis is urinary ammonium excretion (Fig. 30.4); however, it can
take up to five days for the maximal rate of urinary ammonium
excretion to be obtained [21]. Ammonium (NH4
+
) is produced in
the proximal tubule primarily from glutamine metabolism to α-
ketoglutarate and NH3 , a process that simultaneously generates
HCO 3
− that is returned to the plasma.
Approaches to evaluating acid–base balance
Three conceptual frameworks for describing acid–base balance are
currently used to describe acid–base balance (Fig. 30.5) [22,23]. In
chronologic order of development, the three approaches are the tra-
ditional approach, which is bicarbonate-centric in that it utilizes the
Henderson–Hasselbalch equation; the base excess approach, which
is buffer-centric in that it is based on the buffering ability of hemo-
globin and plasma proteins in the Van Slyke equation; and the phys-
icochemical approach, which is based on three fundamental laws of
chemistry, the law of mass action, the conservation of mass, and the
requirement for electroneutrality.
Traditional (bicarbonate- centric) approach
Traditional descriptions of acid–base balance and acid–base abnor-
malities are based on the Brønsted–Lowry definition (proton
donor) of an acid and base and the Henderson–Hasselbalch equa-
tion to determine pH. The terms “acidemia” and “alkalemia” are
used to describe whether the blood pH is acid or alkaline, respec-
tively. The terms “acidosis” and “alkalosis” are used to describe the
abnormal or pathologic (-osis) state due to the accumulation or
decrease of protons in the body. Importantly, the terms “acidosis”
and “alkalosis” must always be preceded by the descriptor respira-
tory or non-respiratory (metabolic). The Henderson–Hasselbalch
equation characterizes all acid–base disturbances as being either
respiratory or non-respiratory because of the body’s production
and elimination of volatile (dissolved CO 2
, H 2
CO3
) and non-volatile
or fixed (e.g., lactic, ketoacid, and uremic) acids, respectively.
Clinically, the terms “respiratory” and “non-respiratory” (meta-
bolic) have been used to imply the respective roles of the lung
and kidney in acid–base regulation. The term “non-respiratory”
frequently replaces metabolic in many discussions of acid–base
imbalance because it incorporates all mechanisms responsible for

-- 575 of 1450 --

560 	Section 4: Body Fluids and Fluid Therapy
acid–base imbalance other than the production of CO 2 and car-
bonic acid (H 2
CO3
). Therefore, only four primary acid–base abnor-
malities are possible when using the traditional approach to
acid–base evaluation: respiratory acidosis, non-respiratory acido-
sis, respiratory alkalosis, and non-respiratory alkalosis (Table 30.4;
Fig. 30.6).
The traditional approach posits that primary acid–base abnor-
malities arise from altered PCO2 or cHCO3
− (Fig. 30.5). A funda-
mental flaw with using the traditional approach and the
Henderson–Hasselbalch equation is that blood cHCO3
− cannot be
an independent predictor of blood pH because cHCO3
− is calculated
from blood pH and PCO 2
!
Na+ CI–
Na+
HPO4=
H2PO4– 	H2 O
H2 O
H2CO3
CO2 	CO2 + H2O
HCO 3–
H2CO 3
HCO3– 	HCO3–
Reabsorped
Na+ 	Na+
H+
Tubular
lumen
Renal tubule
Urine
Tubular cell
Glutaminase 	CA
Glomerular
filtration
+
+
+
H+
Na+ HCO3–
Na2HPO4
NH3
Glu-NH2
NH3
NH4+
NH4+ CI–	Na+ H2PO4–
Figure 30.4 Reabsorption and regeneration of sodium bicarbonate ion (HCO3
−) in the renal tubules. Bicarbonate reabsorption in the proximal tubule
coincides with H+ secretion. Bicarbonate regeneration in the renal tubules coincides with titration of phosphate by H+ and ammonium formation.
Traditional and Base
excess approaches
pH
Respiratory
Standard
Base Excess	PCO2 	PCO 2	cHCO3– 	SID+ 	ATOT
Non-respiratory
Constant buffering due to
hemoglobin and total protein
Na+
SO 42–
Lactate
Ketoacids
K +
Ca 2+ Mg2+
Cl –
pH
Respiratory
Albumin
Globulins
Phosphate
Non-respiratory
Physicochemical approach
Figure 30.5 Summary of three approaches to describe an acid–base imbalance. All three approaches use the partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PCO 2
,
mmHg) to evaluate the respiratory component of acid–base balance. The left panel summarizes the traditional (bicarbonate-centric) and base excess
(buffer-centric) approaches to evaluate the non-respiratory component of acid–base balance. The traditional approach uses plasma bicarbonate
concentration (cHCO3
−); however, plasma cHCO3
− does not provide an independent measure of an acid–base change because it is directly calculated from
PCO2 and pH and is therefore dependent on their values. The base excess approach uses Standard Base Excess (SBE) by assigning a fixed buffer value to
extracellular fluid; however, SBE does not provide an independent measure of an acid–base change because it is calculated from PCO 2 and pH and
assumes a constant buffer value for blood and extracellular fluid. The right panel summarizes the physicochemical approach to evaluating the non-
respiratory component of acid–base balance. This approach uses strong ion difference (SID, mmol/L difference in charge between strong cations and
anions in plasma) and the total weak acid concentration (ATOT
, mmol of dissociable groups/L). Source: Adapted from Constable [24].

-- 576 of 1450 --

Chapter 30: Acid–Base Physiology 	561
In the traditional approach, simple acid–base abnormalities
occur only when either PCO 2 or cHCO 3
− are responsible for the
acid–base disturbance. Mixed acid–base abnormalities are caused
by disturbances in both PCO2 or cHCO3
−. Mixed acid–base abnor-
malities may be additive (respiratory and non-respiratory acidosis)
or offsetting (respiratory alkalosis and non-respiratory acidosis)
with regard to their ability to influence pH (Table 30.5) [25].
Offsetting mixed acid–base abnormalities occur when two primary
acid–base abnormalities produce opposite effects on plasma pH.
Animals with offsetting mixed acid–base abnormalities have both
acidosis and alkalosis but do not necessarily demonstrate acidemia
or alkalemia because the offsetting change might be partially (i.e.,
returns pH toward normal) or fully compensatory in which case
blood pH will be normal. Observations that should lead to suspi-
cions of a mixed acid–base disturbance when evaluating blood gas
and pH values include [25]:
• the presence of a normal pH with abnormal PCO2 or cHCO3
−
• a pH change in a direction opposite to that predicted for the
known primary disorder
• PCO2 and cHCO 3
− changing in opposite directions.
Mixed acid–base disorders can be classified based on the origin
of the primary disturbances as mixed respiratory disturbances,
mixed non-respiratory and respiratory disturbances, mixed non-
respiratory disturbances, and triple disorders. They also can be
classified based on their effect on an animal’s pH in additive combi-
nations, offsetting combinations, and occasionally triple disorders
(Table 30.5). In additive combinations, both primary disorders tend
to change pH in the same direction (e.g., respiratory acidosis and
non-respiratory acidosis), whereas in offsetting combinations, the
primary disorders tend to change the pH in opposite directions
(e.g., respiratory alkalosis and non-respiratory acidosis). The final
pH reflects the dominant of the two offsetting disorders in offset-
ting combinations.
Secondary or compensatory (adaptive) acid–base changes fre-
quently occur in response to most primary acid–base abnormalities
and aid in buffering or minimizing changes in plasma pH.
Respiratory acid–base abnormalities, for example, are generally
compensated for by controlled, oppositely directed changes in non-
respiratory function (Table 30.6). In simple acid–base abnormali-
ties such as primary respiratory acidosis caused by hypoventilation,
the kidney compensates by producing non-respiratory alkalosis
(Table 30.4).
Respiratory compensation for primary non-respiratory acidosis
is accomplished by increasing alveolar ventilation and CO2 excre-
tion by the lungs. Non-respiratory acidosis is characterized by a
decrease in blood cHCO 3
− and pH, and a decrease in PCO2 (respira-
tory alkalosis), caused by secondary hyperventilation. Non-
respiratory alkalosis is characterized by an increase in blood
cHCO 3
− and pH, and an increase in PCO2 , owing to compensatory
hypoventilation (respiratory acidosis) (Table 30.4).
In primary respiratory acid–base disorders, the compensation
occurs in two phases. The first phase consists of titration of protons
Table 30.4 Traditional characteristics of primary acid–base disturbances as assessed
using the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation.
Disordera 	pH 	ɑH + 	Primary
disturbance
Compensatory
response
Respiratory acidosis 	↓ 	↑ 	↑ PCO2 	↑ cHCO3
−
Respiratory alkalosis 	↑ 	↓ 	↓ PCO2 	↓ cHCO3
−
Non-respiratory acidosis 	↓ 	↑ 	↓ cHCO3
− 	↓ PCO2
Non-respiratory alkalosis 	↑ 	↓ 	↑ cHCO3
− 	↑ PCO2
a In this table, the descriptor non-respiratory is used in preference to the descriptor
metabolic. ɑH+
, proton activity; cHCO3
−
, bicarbonate concentration in plasma or serum.
7.7
7.6
7.5
7.4
7.3
–80 	–60 	–40
Change from normal value (%)
Respiratory
alkalosis
Non-respiratory
acidosis
Non-respiratory
alkalosis
Respiratory
acidosis
pH
–20 	0 	20 	40 	60 	80
7.2
7.1
7.0
6.9
6.8
6.7
cHCO 3– = 30 mmol/L
P CO2 = 53 mmHg
Figure 30.6 Spiderplot characterizing the curvilinear relationship between
plasma pH and blood PCO 2 to evaluate the respiratory component of an
acid–base disturbance in neonatal calves, and the curvilinear relationship
between blood pH and plasma bicarbonate concentration (cHCO 3
−) to
evaluate the non-respiratory component. The spider plot was obtained by
systematically varying one input variable, while holding the other input
variable at their normal value for calf plasma. The dashed lines indicate
that pH = 7.38 when PCO 2 and cHCO 3
− are at their reference mean values.
The four quadrants reflect the four primary acid–base disturbances
identified in Table 30.4. Source: Adapted from Constable [23].
Table 30.5 Classification of mixed acid–base disorders according to the traditional
bicarbonate-centric (Henderson–Hasselbalch) approach.
Classification 	Effect on the pH
Mixed respiratory disorders
Acute and chronic respiratory acidosis 	Additive
Acute and chronic respiratory alkalosis 	Additive
Mixed respiratory and non-respiratory disorders
Respiratory acidosis and non-respiratory
acidosis
Additive
Respiratory acidosis and non-respiratory
alkalosis
Offsetting
Respiratory alkalosis and non-respiratory
acidosis
Offsetting
Respiratory alkalosis and non-respiratory
alkalosis
Additive
Mixed non-respiratory disorders
Non-respiratory acidosis and
non-respiratory alkalosis
Offsetting
Normal plus high anion gap
non-respiratory acidosis
Additive
Mixed high anion gap non-respiratory
acidosis
Additive
Mixed normal anion gap non-respiratory
acidosis
Additive
Triple disorders
Non-respiratory acidosis, non-respiratory
alkalosis, and respiratory acidosis
Final pH is function of relative
dominance of acidifying and
alkalinizing processes
Non-respiratory acidosis, non-respiratory
alkalosis, and respiratory alkalosis
Final pH is function of relative
dominance of acidifying and
alkalinizing processes

-- 577 of 1450 --

562 	Section 4: Body Fluids and Fluid Therapy
by non- bicarbonate buffers, and the second phase reflects renal
compensation of the acid–base disorder, by increasing or decreas-
ing HCO3
− and Cl− excretion in the urine (Fig. 30.7). Primary res-
piratory acidosis is characterized by increased PCO 2 due to alveolar
hypoventilation, leading directly to decreased pH and an associated
increase in blood cHCO 3
−. Renal compensation occurs by titration
of non-bicarbonate buffers, an increase in net acid and Cl− excre-
tion by the kidneys, and increased HCO 3
− reabsorption and pro-
duction by the kidneys. Primary respiratory alkalosis is characterized
by decreased PCO 2 due to alveolar hyperventilation, leading
directly to increased pH and a compensatory decrease in blood
cHCO3
−. The initial compensation in respiratory alkalosis is caused
by release of H+ from non-bicarbonate buffers within cells. The sec-
ond phase is mediated by a compensatory decrease in net acid
excretion by the kidneys.
When analyzing secondary changes in a given acid-base disor-
der, it is important to remember the following three points:
• With the exception of chronic respiratory alkalosis, compensa-
tion does not return the pH to normal. The pH almost always
trends toward the primary condition.
• Overcompensation does not occur.
• Sufficient time must elapse for compensation to reach a steady
state, at which time the expected compensation can be estimated
(see Table 30.6).
The question that often arises when analyzing simple acid–base
abnormalities that demonstrate both respiratory acidosis and non-
respiratory alkalosis is, “Which is the primary problem and is
there a secondary and/or compensatory event?” The answer is not
always obvious, although simple primary acid–base abnormalities
generally change pH in the direction of the primary disorder.
Non-respiratory
Hyperventilation
Chemical buffering
(Acute)
Renal regulation
(Chronic)
Chemical buffering
(Acute)
Renal regulation
(Chronic)
Hypoventilation
Respiratory 	Respiratory	Non-respiratory
Arterial blood sample
Primary
disorder
Compensatory
response
Acidemia
HCO3–
HCO 3– 	HCO 3–
HCO 3–	PCO 2
PCO 2	PCO2
PCO 2
pH
7.4 	7.4
Alkalemia
Figure 30.7 Analysis of simple acid–base disorders according to the traditional approach. An arterial blood sample is preferred for analysis when clinical
abnormalities of the respiratory system are identified, or the presence of a cardiovascular anatomic shunt is suspected.
Table 30.6 Compensatory responses in primary acid–base disorders as evaluated using the traditional (bicarbonate-centric) approach.
Equations should be regarded as rough “rules of thumb,” and species-to-species variation in equation values should be expected.
Disorder 	Primary change 	Expected range of compensation
Non-respiratory
acidosis
↓ cHCO 3
− 	ΔPCO2 = 1 − 1.13 × (ΔcHCO3
−
)
PCO 2 = cHCO3
− + 15
PCO2 = 0.7 × cHCO3− ± 3 (dogs)
Non- respiratory
alkalosis
↑ cHCO 3
− 	PCO2 increases variably
PCO2 increases 0.6 mmHg for each new 1 mmol/L increase in cHCO3
−
PCO2 = 0.7 × cHCO3
− ± 3 (dogs)
Respiratory acidosis,
Acute
↑ PCO 2 	cHCO3
− increases 1 mmol/L and pH decreases 0.05 units for every 10 mmHg
increase in PCO 2
cHCO3
− = 0.15 × PCO2 ± 2 (dogs)
Respiratory acidosis,
Chronic
↑ PCO 2 	cHCO3
− increases 3.5 mmol/L and pH decreases 0.07 units for every 10 mmHg
increase in PCO 2
cHCO3
− = 0.35 × PCO2 ± 2 (dogs)
Respiratory alkalosis,
Acute
↓ PCO 2 	cHCO3
− falls 2 mmol/L and pH increases 0.1 units for each 10 mmHg fall in PCO2
cHCO3
− = 0.25 × PCO2 ± 2 (dogs)
Respiratory alkalosis,
Chronic
↓ PCO 2 	cHCO3
− falls 5 mmol/L and pH increases 0.15 units for each 10 mmHg fall in PCO2
cHCO3
− = 0.55 × PCO2 ± 2 (dogs)
cHCO3
−
, bicarbonate concentration.

-- 578 of 1450 --

Chapter 30: Acid–Base Physiology 	563
For example, an animal with respiratory acidosis and compensatory
non-respiratory alkalosis would have a pH that tended to be
acidemic (below the reference range; e.g., a pH of 7.31). Mixed
respiratory and non-respiratory acid–base abnormalities are much
more difficult to decipher, and like simple acid–base abnormalities
must be carefully evaluated in the context of an animal’s disease,
and other available diagnostic information.
Because non-respiratory acidosis is so frequently associated with
disease processes in animals, two indices of acid–base balance have
been developed to enable quantitative evaluation of the non-
respiratory component of an acid–base abnormality: standard
bicarbonate and base excess. Standard bicarbonate was the first
index to be developed, and it represents the concentration of
bicarbonate in plasma after the whole-blood sample has been
equilibrated to a PCO2 of 40 mmHg at 37 °C. This index purport-
edly quantifies the non-respiratory component of an acid–base
abnormality; however, standard bicarbonate is no longer used
because it is increased in acute respiratory acidosis and initially
required two additional measurements using a tonometer. Methods
to estimate standard bicarbonate using a nomogram or calculate
standard bicarbonate from other acid–base values have been devel-
oped. These methods have the advantage that tonometry is not
required; however, nomograms are cumbersome and slow to use,
and the equation is based on the calculated value for base excess.
Consequently, base excess has become widely used to evaluate the
non-respiratory component of an acid–base abnormality.
Base excess (buffer-centric) approach
Buffering and buffer values are foundational concepts when acid–
base balance is interpreted using the base excess approach, and
consequently, the approach is best described as buffer-centric or
buffer-centered. The base excess of blood (BEb
) quantitates the
mmols of strong acid (such as HCl) or strong base (such as NaOH)
required to titrate 1 L of blood to pH 7.40 at 37 °C while the PCO 2
is held constant at 40 mmHg. BEb from healthy humans is defined
as 0 mmol/L with a reference range of –2.3 to +2.3 mmol/L. A
positive BEb value indicates base excess (non-respiratory alkalosis),
whereas a negative BEb value indicates a base deficit (non-
respiratory acidosis) [4].
Values for BEb were initially read from a graphical calculating
device called a “nomogram,” which is a two-dimensional diagram
that provides an approximate graphical computation of a relation-
ship between two or more entities. Since 1977, BEb has been calcu-
lated using the Van Slyke equation [26], and the nomogram is no
longer used to provide the value for BEb
. The Van Slyke equation
takes the following general form for human arterial (oxygenated)
blood when temperature = 37 °C, pH = 7.40, and PCO2 = 40 mmHg,
with Z providing an adjustment for the effect of changes in hemato-
crit assuming a fixed value for the mean hemoglobin concentration
in erythrocytes [27], such that:
BE 	HCO 	pH 	Z	b 	c 	3 	7 40 	1	. 	(30.14)
In eqn 30.14, ΔcHCO 3
– is the difference between the actual cHCO3
–
and the reference value at blood pH = 7.40 and PCO 2 = 40 mmHg,
β is the overall buffer value for blood (an index of buffering ability
that is determined primarily by the blood hemoglobin concentra-
tion) and pH is the measured pH.
Valid initial criticisms of the base excess approach were that BEb
did not reflect the in vivo changes observed during CO2 titration in
humans and dogs [28,29] because the calculated value for BEb was
obtained from in vitro studies. This criticism was empirically
addressed by assuming a substantial amount of in vivo acid–base
buffering was occurring in the extracellular fluid volume. Assuming
an approximate ratio of 1 part blood volume to 2 parts interstitial
fluid volume in adult mammals, a hemoglobin concentration of 5 g/
dL (one-third the typical value for human blood of 15 g/dL) has
been generally accepted to provide a clinically useful model for
the in vivo buffer response to an acid–base disturbance (Fig. 30.5).
The value for Standard Base Excess (SBE) in mmol/L, also called
“extracellular base excess” (BE ecf ), is calculated using a hemoglobin
concentration of 5 g/dL in eqn 30.14, providing the following
equation [30]:
SBE 	BE 	HCO 	pH	ecf 	c 	3 	24 8 	16 2 	7 40	. 	. 	. 	(30.15)
Equation 30.15 uses reference values for cHCO 3
– of 24.8 mmol/L
and pH of 7.40, based on a reference value for PCO 2 of 40 mmHg
and S of 0.0307 {mmol/L}/mmHg [30]. Equation 30.15 also assumes
that the value for Z in eqn 30.14 = 0.
All modern automated blood gas analyzers report BEb and SBE
values calculated from the buffering characteristics of human
blood. The difference between BEb and SBE is small, and only one
of the two base excess values should be used clinically and reported
in clinical studies, with the preference being SBE because it more
closely reflects the in vivo response to an acid–base disturbance.
The buffering characteristics of dog blood and bovine blood are dif-
ferent from that of human blood, whereas the buffering character-
istics of equine blood appear to be similar to that of human blood.
Cattle [31], dog [32], and pig [33,34] base excess nomograms have
been developed that differ from that of human blood; however,
these nomograms are rarely used because commercial blood gas
analyzers are programmed specifically for human blood. The rou-
tine use of human values for BEb and SBE equations is suspected to
create minimal error for clinical use in domestic animals, although
the error may be more important in research studies [22,23,32].
Bicarbonate distribution space
Clinically, a negative value for SBE represents a base deficit (non-
respiratory acidosis) that is most accurately corrected by intravenous
administration of sodium bicarbonate. The amount of sodium
bicarbonate required (the value for SBE in mmol/L) has tradition-
ally been multiplied by the apparent distribution space of bicarbo-
nate in L (equivalent to 0.3 × body weight (kg) in adult mammals [35]
and 0.4 × body weight (kg) in neonatal mammals), reflecting the
extracellular fluid volume in healthy animals, such that:
Base Na HCO 	needed 	SBE 	body weight in kg	3 	0 3.
(30.16)
A positive value for SBE represents a base excess (non-respiratory
alkalosis) that is usually best corrected by intravenous administra-
tion of isotonic saline (0.9 % NaCl), such that:
Acid Na Cl 	needed 	SBE 	body weight in kg	0 3. 	(30.17)
It should be noted that equations 30.16 and 30.17 use the
100-year- old acid–base terms of Van Slyke et al. that predates
the current Brønsted–Lowry definition of acid (proton donor)
and base (proton acceptor), in that a base is a non-metabolizable
cation such as sodium and an acid is a non-metabolizable anion
such as chloride.

-- 579 of 1450 --

564 	Section 4: Body Fluids and Fluid Therapy
It should also be noted that the distribution space for intrave-
nously administered bicarbonate, called the “apparent bicarbonate
space” (ABS; units of L per kg body weight) in eqn 30.16 and 30.17,
uses a 1960 estimate derived from rapid intravenous administration
of 5% sodium bicarbonate solution over 10 min in nine adult
humans with blood pH and standard bicarbonate concentrations
within the reference range [35]. This study suggested that the typi-
cal extracellular fluid volume was 30% of body weight [35]. Studies
in humans, dogs, and calves have subsequently demonstrated that
the ABS is not a fixed value (such as the typical extracellular fluid
volume) but is dependent on the initial plasma cHCO3
−.
A recent study [36] in critically ill neonatal calves with marked
acidemia (median pH, 7.00; range, 6.58 to 7.26) and varying degrees
of non-respiratory (metabolic) acidosis demonstrated that the ABS
was nonlinearly related to jugular venous cHCO3
− and negatively
related to jugular venous PCO2 (Fig. 30.8). The negative linear rela-
tionship between ABS and PCO 2 was consistent with eqn 30.5,
in that administered intravenously administered bicarbonate buff-
ers excess protons, resulting in excretion of CO2
.
The two equations can be simplified for clinical application in
neonatal animals, such that:
ABS 	/ HCO	0 4 1 	3	. 	c 	(30.18)
ABS 	PCO	0 85 0 008 	2	. 	. 	(30.19)
For neonates, we, therefore, suggest the amount (mmol) of bicarbo-
nate needed to correct the non-respiratory acid–base abnormality
be calculated from SBE and cHCO3
− in mmol/L as follows:
mmol HCO 	needed 	SBE 	/ HCO
body weight in kg
3 	3	0 4 1	. 	c
(30.20)
It remains to be determined whether these new equations also apply
to adult animals where the typical extracellular fluid volume in L is
0.3 × body weight in kg [35] instead of 0.4 × body weight in kg [36].
Until such studies are completed, we suggest the following equation
should be used in adult animals:
mmol HCO 	needed 	SBE 	/ HCO
body weight in kg
3 	0 3 1 	3	. 	c
(30.21)
Physicochemical approach (simplified strong ion
approach)
A physicochemical description of acid–base balance was first intro-
duced by Henderson in 1928 [3], formalized by Singer and Hastings
in 1948 [37], expanded to include plasma buffers by Stewart in
1981 [5,38], and simplified by Constable in 1997 [16,39]. The phys-
icochemical approach is based on a fundamental assumption that
quantitatively important chemical reactions in plasma are those of
simple ions in solution. This assumption can be made because the
quantitatively important cations (Na +
, K+
, Ca2+
, and Mg2+
) and ani-
ons (Cl –
, HCO 3
–
, Protein –
, l- lactate –
, and sulfate 2–
) in plasma bind
each other in a salt-type manner at physiologic pH [16,38,40].
Strong ions are electrically charged substances that are com-
pletely dissociated in plasma at body pH and therefore exert no
buffering effect. The most important strong cations in plasma are
Na +
, K+
, Ca2+
, and Mg 2+
, and the most important strong anions in
plasma are Cl−, lactate, β-hydroxybutyrate, acetoacetate, and sul-
fate [16]. The sum of the strong cation charge in plasma exceeds
that of the strong anion charge, and Stewart termed this difference
the “strong ion difference” (SID), which can be regarded as a collec-
tive unit of positive charge with a net cation charge of +1 per
mmol [5,38]. An increase in SID correlates with non-respiratory
alkalosis, whereas a decrease in SID correlates with non-respiratory
acidosis.
The physicochemical approach is based on three fundamental
laws of chemistry [5,16,38]:
• Electroneutrality must be maintained, in that the sum of all posi-
tively charged ions in solution must equal the sum of all nega-
tively charged ions
• The mass action law. Bicarbonate and a lumped group of non-
bicarbonate buffers are only partially dissociated at physiologic
pH, being described by an apparent dissociation constant for car-
bonic acid in plasma (K1 ´), and a lumped dissociation constant
(Ka
) for non-bicarbonate buffers with the anionic dissociated
form (A−) having a concentration cA−, and the undissociated
form (HA) having a concentration cHA
• Conservation of mass for a lumped group of non-bicarbonate
buffers with total concentration of ATOT
, such that ATOT = cHA + cA−
Stewart developed a polynomial equation in 1981 based on the
three fundamental laws that indicated pH was dependent on eight
variables [5]. Constable demonstrated in 1997 that two of Stewart’s
Apparent bicarbonate space	
Apparent bicarbonate space
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0 	5
Initial bicarbonate concentration (mmol/L) 	Initial venous PCO 2 (mmHg)
10 	15 	20 	25 	20 	25 	30 	35 	40 	45 	50 	55 	60
Figure 30.8 Relationship between the calculated apparent bicarbonate space (L/kg body weight) and the initial jugular venous bicarbonate concentration
(left panel) and jugular venous carbon dioxide tension (PCO 2
) in 25 neonatal calves with diarrhea, acidemia, and non-respiratory acidosis. Calves received
a hypertonic sodium bicarbonate and glucose solution that was administered over a period of 1 h. Values for apparent bicarbonate space were determined
at the end of the infusion. Lines represent the results of nonlinear regression analysis. Source: Figures Adapted from Trefz et al. [36].

-- 580 of 1450 --

Chapter 30: Acid–Base Physiology 	565
eight variables were redundant, resulting in development of the
simplified strong ion equation [16] that contained six variables,
such that:
pH 	SID
PCO 	A 	SID
PCO 	SID
a 	TOT 	a
a
	log 10
1 	2
1 	2
	2
K 	S 	K 	K
K 	S 	K 	Kaa 	TOT
a 	TOT
A
SID A
2
2
	4K
(30.22)
Equation 30.22 was termed the “Constable equation” in 2008 [41];
the equation indicates that plasma pH is dependent on three inde-
pendent variables, the plasma carbon dioxide tension (PCO2
), the
difference in charge at physiologic pH assigned to strong cations
and strong anions in plasma (SID), and ATOT (Fig. 30.5) as well as
three constants, Ka
, S (the solubility of CO2 in plasma) and K1′.
An algebraically simpler, but equivalent equation to eqn 30.22
where pKa = – log10
(Ka
) and pK1′ = – log10
(K1′) is the following
expression [16]:
pH 	p 	SID A 	PCO	TOT
p a pH
K 	S
K
1 	10 	2	1 10	log 	(30.23)
It is important to note that in solutions that do not contain a
non-bicarbonate buffer, eqn 30.23 simplifies to the Henderson–
Hasselbalch equation because ATOT = 0 mmol/L and SID =
cHCO3
– [16]. Equation 30.22 similarly simplifies to the Henderson–
Hasselbalch equation in solutions where ATOT = 0 mmol/L.
Although the Constable equation provides a mechanistic phys-
icochemical description of acid–base balance, application of the
equation to vertebrate plasma requires accurate estimates for ATOT
,
Ka
, and SID to be physiologically and clinically useful [16,22,23].
Stewart assigned different values for ATOT and Ka and did not pro-
vide a method for their experimental determination. Constable
developed a method applying nonlinear regression to paired pH-
PCO 2 data values obtained by CO 2 tonometry of plasma to experi-
mentally determine values for ATOT and Ka and permit calculation of
more accurate estimates for SID [16]. Mean SID and ATOT values for
selected animals have been experimentally determined (Table 30.7),
with the Ka value approximating that of the imidazole dissociable
group in histidine.
Blood PCO2 provides an independent measure of the respiratory
component of plasma pH. SID and ATOT provide independent meas-
ures of the non-respiratory component of plasma pH. Therefore,
when using the strong ion approach for acid–base analysis, there
are two respiratory acid–base disorders and four primary non-
respiratory (metabolic) acid–base disorders (Fig. 30.5). Non-
respiratory acidosis is further defined by being either decreased SID
or increased ATOT
, whereas non-respiratory alkalosis is characterized
by either increased SID or decreased ATOT relative to reference mean
values (Fig. 30.9; Table 30.8).
These mechanisms include alterations in the concentrations of
strong (fully dissociated) ions as assessed by the anion gap and SID
and the concentration of non-bicarbonate plasma buffers (primar-
ily serum proteins; ATOT
) (Fig. 30.5). Note that non-respiratory
(metabolic) acid–base disturbances can be brought about by
changes in the concentration of strong ions or weak ions. These
ions can be routinely measured (e.g., Cl–
) or not (e.g., lactate and
ketoacids). Those that are not routinely measured are referred to as
“unmeasured ions.”
In summary, the physicochemical approach posits that acid–base
disorders are caused by changes in three independent factors
(PCO2 , SID, and ATOT
) that can change independently to each other,
with the change directly and predictably resulting in changes in pH.
It should be noted, however, that changes in temperature can affect
all the independent variables, a consideration that has special
importance during surgery and anesthesia, especially in ectother-
mic animals [6,13].
Anion gap and cNa +
–cCl− difference
The anion gap (AG), like SID, is calculated on the basis of the
principle of electroneutrality and is used clinically to estimate
the concentration of unmeasured anions in plasma or serum
(Fig. 30.10). The AG is a useful tool to assess mixed acid–base dis-
orders [49–51] particularly when using the traditional or base
excess approach. Chemically, there is no AG because electroneu-
trality must be maintained at all times and the “AG” is the difference
between the concentration of unmeasured anions (cUA−) and
unmeasured cations (cUC +
). The AG is calculated using four quan-
titatively important cations and anions that are routinely measured
and change appreciably in their concentrations in a variety of clini-
cal conditions. The two cations measured are the plasma or serum
pH
7.7
7.6
Respiratory
alkalosis
Respiratory
acidosis
SID (42 mmol/L)
P CO2 (53 mm Hg)
A tot (18.5 mmol/L)
Strong ion
alkalosis
	Nonbuffer
ion alkalosis
Strong ion
acidosis
Nonbuffer ion
acidosis
7.5
7.4
7.3
7.2
7.1
7.0
6.9
6.8
6.7
–80 	–60 	–40 	–20
Change from normal value (%)
20 	40 	60 	80	0
Figure 30.9 Spiderplot characterizing the curvilinear relationship between
plasma pH and blood PCO 2 to evaluate the respiratory component of an
acid–base disturbance, the curvilinear relationship between blood pH and
plasma strong ion difference (SID) to evaluate the SID component, and the
linear relationship between blood pH and ATOT to evaluate the buffer ion
component. The spider plot was obtained by systematically varying one
input variable, while holding the other input variables at their normal
values for calf plasma. The dashed lines indicate that pH = 7.38 when
PCO2
, SID, and ATOT are at their reference mean values. The four quadrants
identify the six primary acid–base disturbances identified by the
physicochemical approach. Source: Adapted from Constable [23].
Table 30.7 Comparative experimentally determined mean values for pH, PCO2 , SID,
and ATOT of venous blood at 37 °C in selected domestic animals.
Animal 	pH 	PCO 2
(mmHg)
SID
(mmol/L)
ATOT
(mmol/L)
Reference
Horse 	7.43 	44 	40 	14.0 	[16]
Horse 	7.42 	47 	43 	14.9 	[42]
Human 	7.37 	45 	37 	17.2 	[43]
Cat 	7.35 	30 	30 	24.3 	[44]
Cattle 	7.43 	43 	44 	22.9 	[45]
Calf 	7.38 	53 	42 	18.5 	[46]
Dog 	7.40 	37 	27 	17.4 	[47]
Pigeon 	7.43 	41 	34 	7.8 	[48]

-- 581 of 1450 --

566 	Section 4: Body Fluids and Fluid Therapy
Cations
Na+
HCO3–
A–
HCO 3–
A–
ΔAG
CI– 	CI –
K+
Ca2+
Mg2+
Na +
K +
Ca2+
Mg2+
Anions
(A)
AG
SID
AG
SIDe
SIDa
SIG
(B)
Figure 30.10 A. Cation and anion equivalency diagrams can be used to illustrate the relationship among the anion gap (AG), strong ion difference (SID), and
strong ion gap (SIG). B. Cation and anion equivalency diagrams can also be used to illustrate the difference between an abnormal and baseline AG (ΔAG).
The ΔAG is quantitatively similar to the strong ion gap (SIG) or difference between the SID apparent (SIDa) and SID effective (SIDe): SIG = SIDa–SIDe.
Table 30.8 Causes of non-respiratory (metabolic) acid–base abnormalities classified according to the physicochemical approach.
SID acidosis (↓ SID) 	SID alkalosis (↑ SID)
Hyperchloremic acidosis (↑ Cl–
corr
)
Loss of Na + relative to Cl–
Diarrhea
Gain of Cl– relative to Na+
Fluid therapy (0.9% NaCl, 7.2% NaCl, KCl-supplemented fluids)
Retention of Cl– relative to Na+
Renal failure
Hypoadrenocorticism
Organic acidosis (↑ unmeasured strong anions)
Uremic, keto- or lactic acidosis
Toxicities
Ethylene glycol
Salicylate
Dilution acidosis (↓ Na+
)
With hypervolemia
Severe liver disease
Congestive heart failure
Nephrotic syndrome
With normovolemia
Psychogenic polydipsia
Hypotonic fluid infusion
With hypovolemia
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Hypoadrenocorticism
Third space loss
Diuretic administration
Hypochloremic alkalosis (↓ Cl–
corr
)
Gain of Na+ relative to Cl–
Isotonic or hypertonic NaHCO3 administration
Loss of Cl– relative to Na+
Vomiting of stomach contents
Thiazide or loop diuretics
Concentration alkalosis (↑ Na+)
Pure water loss
Water deprivation
Diabetes insipidus
Hypotonic fluid loss
Vomiting
Non-oliguric renal failure
Postobstructive diuresis
A TOT acidosis (↑ ATOT ) 	ATOT alkalosis (↓ ATOT
)
Hyperalbuminemia
Water deprivation
Hyperphosphatemia
Translocation
Tumor cell lysis
Tissue trauma/rhabdomyolysis
Increased intake
Phosphate-containing enemas
Intravenous phosphate
Decreased loss
Renal failure
Urethral obstruction
Uroabdomen
Hypoalbuminemia
Decreased production
Chronic liver disease
Acute phase response to inflammation
Malnutrition/starvation
Extracorporeal loss
Protein-losing nephropathy
Protein-losing enteropathy
Sequestration
Inflammatory effusions
Vasculitis
Source: Modified from Constable [39].

-- 582 of 1450 --

Chapter 30: Acid–Base Physiology 	567
concentrations of sodium (cNa +
) and potassium (cK +
). The two ani-
ons measured are the plasma or serum concentrations of chloride
(cCl –
) and bicarbonate (cHCO3
–
). The law of electroneutrality
requires the following:
c 	c 	c 	c 	c 	c	Na 	K 	UC 	Cl 	HCO 	UA	3 	(30.24)
or, when applied clinically:
AG 	UC 	UA 	Na 	K 	Cl 	HCO	c 	c 	c 	c 	c 	c 	3 	(30.25)
Based on eqn 30.24, every time there is a decrease in cHCO 3
−,
either cCl−or cUA− must be increased to maintain electroneutrality.
When titrated HCO3
− is replaced by Cl− in non- respiratory acido-
sis, the difference (cUA− – cUC +
; and consequently, the AG) will
remain the same (called “hyperchloremic” or “normal AG acido-
sis”). When titrated HCO3
− is replaced by UA−, the difference
(cUA− – cUC +
; i.e., the AG) will increase while cCl− remains the
same (called “normochloremic” or “high AG acidosis”) [52,53].
Negatively charged proteins, phosphates, sulfates, and organic acids
(e.g., l-lactate, β- hydroxybutyrate, acetoacetate, and uremic ani-
ons) constitute the UA− [51,54,55].
An increase in AG clinically implies an accumulation of organic
acids in the body [50], and assuming no laboratory error, a large
increase in AG is always due to a large increase in the concentration
of unmeasured strong anions in plasma. However, a mild increase
in AG also occurs by an increase in the net negative charge on
serum proteins due to hyperproteinemia [52]. Hypoalbuminemia is
the most common cause of a decrease in AG, and each decrease in
albumin concentration of 1 g/dL produces a decrease of approxi-
mately 2.5–3.0 mmol/L in the AG. A patient with concurrent lactic
acidosis and hypoalbuminemia may therefore have a normal AG.
Thus, AG alone can be clinically misleading in elucidating some
complex mixed acid–base disorders. It should be noted that the AG
can increase because of excessive exposure of serum to air, resulting
in a decrease in cHCO 3
− and increase in AG of 6.5 ± 2.3 mmol/L
after 2 h [56].
Similar to AG, the cNa+
–cCl− difference (average value in
health animals approximates 36 mmol/L) is potentially useful for
initial assessment of those non-respiratory acid–base distur-
bances not associated with an increase in unmeasured anions
(Table 30.9) [57,58]. If cNa+ is normal, hypochloremia increases its
value and is an indication of metabolic alkalosis, whereas hyper-
chloremia decreases the cNa+
–cCl− difference and is an indication
of hyperchloremic acidosis [8]. In addition, the chloride to sodium
(cCl−:cNa+
) ratio (normal range 0.75–0.79) serves as a simple
method to quantify the role of hyperchloremia in acid–base distur-
bances. An increased cCl−:cNa+ ratio (> 0.79) has an acidifying effect,
and a decreased ratio (< 0.75) has an alkalinizing effect. Animals
with metabolic acidosis and an increased cCl−:cNa+ generally have
hyperchloremia as the cause of acidosis. A normal cCl−:cNa+ and
metabolic acidosis indicate a mixed acidosis. The cNa+
–cCl− and
cCl−:cNa+ can be used in conjunction with the AG to identify
disorders in hydration and acid–base balance (Box 30.1).
Strong ion gap
The strong ion gap (SIG) represents the concentration of unmeas-
ured strong ions in plasma. The SIG, similar to AG, is based on the
requirement for electroneutrality, but differs from the AG in that it
has a value approximating 0 mmol/L in healthy subjects (Fig. 30.10).
A positive value for SIG is very rare and usually indicates the pres-
ence of laboratory error. A negative value for SIG quantifies the
concentration of unmeasured strong anions in plasma. Confusion
Table 30.9 Primary non-respiratory acid–base disorders and respiratory compensation.
Non- respiratory
disorder
cNa +–cCl− 	AG 	TCO2 	Respiratory
compensation
Biochemical profile
Alkalosis
Hypoalbuminemia 	N 	N,↓ 	↑ 	No 	↓ cAlbumin
Hypochloremia 	↑ 	N 	↑ 	No 	↓ cCl−
corrected
Concentration 	↑ 	N 	↑ 	Yes 	↑ cNa +
Acidosis
Hyperalbuminemia 	N 	N,↑ 	↓ 	No 	↑ cAlbumin
Hyperphosphatemia 	N 	N,↑ 	↓ 	No 	↑ cInorganic phosphate
Hyperchloremia 	↓ 	N 	↓ 	Yes 	↑ cCl−
corrected
Dilution 	↓ 	N 	↓ 	Yes 	↓ cNa +
Organic 	N 	↓ 	↓ 	Yes 	Specific assays required
cNa+ – cCl−, difference between sodium and chloride concentration; AG, anion gap; TCO2
, total CO2
; ↑, increase; N, normal; and ↓,
decrease. See the text for limitations in using cNa+–cCl− difference and AG; cCl−
corrected
, see eqn 30.30. Source: Adapted from de
Morais and Muir [58].
Box 30.1 Relative changes in cNa+
0 and cCl−
0 as an index of disorders in
hydration or acid–base balance or both.
a Proportionate change in cNa +
0 and cCl−
0 are always due to the
disturbances of hydration alone.
Dehydration
cNa+
0 ↑ and cCl0 ↑
Overhydration
cNa+
0 ↓ and cCl0 ↓
b Changes in cCl−
0 without any change in cNa+
0 are always due to
disturbances of acid-base alone.
Respiratory acidosis or non-respiratory alkalosis
cNa+
0 and cCl−
0 ↓
Respiratory alkalosis or hyperchloremic acidosis
cNa +
0 and cCl0 ↑
c Disproportionate changes in cNa+
0 and cCl−
0 are due to disturbances in
both hydration and acid–base balance.
Dehydration plus respiratory acidosis or non-respiratory alkalosis
cNa+
0 ↑ and cCl−
0
Dehydration plus respiratory alkalosis or non-respiratory acidosis
cNa+
0 ↑ and cCI−
0 ↑↑
Overhydration plus respiratory alkalosis or hyperchloremic acidosis
cNa-0 ↓ and cCl−
0
Overhydration plus respiratory acidosis or non-respiratory alkalosis
cNa+
0 ↓ and cCl− ↓↓
Source: Adapted from Emmett and Seldin [57].

-- 583 of 1450 --

568 	Section 4: Body Fluids and Fluid Therapy
exists in the way SIG is calculated in that there are two SIGs; the first
equation was developed by Kellum et al. in 1995 [59] that is a direct
extension of the AG concept, and the second equation was devel-
oped by Constable et al. in 1998 [54] that is a direct extension of the
physicochemical approach to acid–base balance.
Kellum et al. defined the SIG as the difference between the appar-
ent strong ion difference (SIDa) and the effective strong ion differ-
ence (SIDe). The value for SIDa is the difference between measured
strong cation charge and strong anion charge in plasma. Equations
for SIDa vary, depending on the availability, cost, and clinical value
of measuring quantitatively important strong cations and strong
anions, but a commonly used equation is:
SIDa 	Na 	K 	Ca 	Mg 	Cl 	-lactate	L	c 	c 	c 	c 	c 	c	2 	2 	(30.26)
where cCa2+ + cMg2+ represent the charge assigned to these divalent
ions in mEq/L. The value for SIDe is calculated from the three quan-
titatively important buffer anions in human plasma (bicarbonate,
albumin, and phosphate), with bicarbonate (in mmol/L) being calcu-
lated using the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation and albumin (in
g/L) and phosphate (in mmol/L) being calculated using linear pH
equations developed by Figge et al. [60] for human plasma, such that:
SIDe 	HCO 	Albumin 	pH
Phosphate 	p
c 	c
c
3 	0 123 	0 631
0 309
. 	.
. 	HH 0 469	. 	(30.27)
The SIG is then calculated as the difference between SIDa and SIDe,
such that:
SIG 	SIDa 	SIDe 	(30.28)
Constable et al. developed a different SIG equation by algebraic
rearrangement of the simplified strong ion equation in terms of
other factors [54], such that:
SIG 	A 	AG	TOT
p 	pH	a
	1 10 K 	(30.29)
Equation 30.29 provides a simpler method for calculating SIG than
that provided by eqns 30.26 and 30.27 and is theoretically more
accurate for species other than humans, in that species-specific val-
ues for ATOT and pKa are used (Table 30.7).
Very few studies have formally compared the predictive ability
of the two methods for calculating SIG; however, the predictive
ability of eqn 30.29 in critically ill cattle with abomasal volvulus
was greater than that of eqn 30.28 [54], and the predictive ability
of both methods for calculating SIG was greater than that for
AG [54].
An alternative method for quantifying unmeasured strong
anions in plasma, called the “Fencl method,” was introduced in
1993 [61]. The Fencl method attempts to take into account the
effect that changes in sodium, chloride, and plasma protein con-
centrations exert on plasma pH. Although the method has been
applied to a variety of domestic animals [45,62–65], Fencl’s
method has been formally evaluated in the pig where it was found
to be “a biased and imprecise predictor of unmeasured strong ion
concentration” [62], and in cattle where it had reduced explana-
tory power relative to SIG calculated using eqn 30.29 [45]. In sum-
mary, Fencl’s method is considered “too imprecise for use in
species other than humans” [54]. Accordingly, Fencl’s method is
currently not recommended for evaluating acid–base imbalances
in domestic animals.
Clinical acid–base disturbances
Acid–base disturbances occur when an abnormality in one of the
principal independent determinants of pH (e.g., PCO2 , SID, or
ATOT
) occurs (Figs. 30.5, 30.9; Table 30.8). So-called “simple” acid–
base disturbances include both the primary process and the com-
pensatory response. That is, if a sustained primary disturbance
occurs in PCO2
, a compensatory change of regulated magnitude
normally occurs in the SID and vice versa. If the primary distur-
bance results from a change in ATOT
, however, ventilatory compen-
sation does not occur but renal excretion of chloride is altered.
Therapeutic success or failure depends on interventions that adjust
the independent variables [16,66,67].
Disorders of PCO 2
Primary respiratory disturbances result from increases in PCO2
(respiratory acidosis) or decreases in PCO2 (respiratory alkalosis).
CO2 tension can be changed by alveolar ventilation, which has a
profound effect on pH, and combined evaluation of pH and PCO 2
can be used to make descriptive decisions regarding the primary
process for the observed acid–base abnormality (Table 30.10).
Because PaCO 2 is inversely related to alveolar ventilation, measure-
ment of PaCO 2 provides direct information about the adequacy of
alveolar ventilation. Respiratory acidosis is therefore caused by and
synonymous with hypoventilation, whereas respiratory alkalosis is
caused by and synonymous with hyperventilation.
Principal disorders associated with respiratory acidosis are air-
way obstruction, respiratory center depression (e.g., drugs or neu-
rologic disorders), cardiopulmonary arrest (PaCO2 may be below
normal during cardiopulmonary resuscitation), neuromuscular
diseases, diaphragmatic hernia, chest wall trauma, and inadequate
mechanical ventilation. Therapy for respiratory acidosis should be
directed toward elimination of the underlying cause of alveolar
hypoventilation. Ventilatory assistance should be provided when
necessary. It is clinically important to note that respiratory acidosis
is not an indication for bicarbonate therapy. Administration of
sodium bicarbonate to conscious animals will increase pH and
decrease ventilatory drive, thus worsening hypoxemia and hyper-
capnia in animals with primary respiratory acidosis. Treatment for
hypercapnia in animals with chronic pulmonary disease should be
directed toward the underlying disease.
Principal causes of respiratory alkalosis are hypoxia, low cardiac
output, severe anemia, pulmonary disease (stimulation of periph-
eral reflexes, e.g., pneumonia), hyperventilation mediated by the
central nervous system (e.g., drugs, central nervous system inflam-
mation or tumor, liver disease, fear, or pain), and overzealous
mechanical ventilation. Hypocapnia itself is not a major threat to
the well-being of animals with respiratory alkalosis. The arterial pH
in chronic primary respiratory alkalosis is usually normal or slightly
alkalemic owing to efficient renal compensation in this setting.
Table 30.10 Primary processes associated with changes in PaCO2 and pH.
PaCO 2 	pH 	Primary process
Normal 	Normal 	None
Normal 	High 	Non-respiratory alkalosis, respiratory alkalosis
Normal 	Low 	Non-respiratory acidosis, respiratory acidosis
High 	Normal 	Respiratory acidosis, non-respiratory alkalosis
High 	High 	Non-respiratory alkalosis
High 	Low 	Respiratory acidosis
Low 	Normal 	Chronic respiratory alkalosis
Low 	High 	Respiratory alkalosis
Low 	Low 	Non-respiratory acidosis

-- 584 of 1450 --

Chapter 30: Acid–Base Physiology 	569
Therapy for the underlying disease responsible for hypocapnia
should be the primary focus in animals with respiratory alkalosis.
Notably, PCO2 is a primary determinant of cerebral blood flow.
Overventilation and low PCO 2 reduces cerebral blood flow and
predisposes to cerebral ischemia [68,69].
Disorders in strong ion difference
Changes in strong ion difference (SID) are usually recognized in the
traditional approach to acid–base balance by changes in cHCO 3
−
or BE [22,23,59]. A decrease in SID causes a strong ion acidosis,
whereas an increase in SID causes a strong ion alkalosis (Fig. 30.9;
Table 30.8). There are three common mechanisms by which SID
can change (Table 30.11): (1) changing plasma cCl−; (2) increasing
the concentration of unidentified strong anions (cXA−) in plasma;
and (3) changing the free-water content of plasma [61,67].
The selection of intravenous fluids during anesthesia should
always consider effects on the SID and ATOT
, although conventional
rates of fluid administration (10 mL/kg/h) for up to 3 h do not affect
acid–base balance [70,71]. Intravenous infusion of larger volumes at
faster rates (> 30 mL/kg/h) of either a crystalloid or synthetic colloid
(e.g., hydroxyethyl starch) drives the SID and ATOT of the extracellu-
lar fluid toward the SID and ATOT of the fluid being administered.
The acid–base changes induced by the crystalloid depend upon the
fluid’s effect on SID and ATOT
. A reduction in SID has an acidifying
effect and an increase in SID has an alkalinizing effect. Since crystal-
loids do not contain ATOT they dilute the extracellular fluid ATOT
causing an alkalinizing effect. If the fluid’s SID is greater than the
plasma SID this will also cause an alkalinizing effect. The extent of
the changes in SID and ATOT depends upon the amount and rate of
crystalloid administered. NaCl 0.9% has a SID of 0 mEq/L and
always reduces plasma SID, producing an acidifying effect [72,73].
The ideal SID of a “balanced” crystalloid solution should be
approximately 25 mmol/L in order to counteract the ATOT dilutional
alkalosis produced by the fluid being administered: commercial
crystalloids do not contain ATOT [70,73,74]. The addition of metabo-
lizable strong anions like l-lactate and acetate do contribute to the
fluid SID on administration but they are usually rapidly metabolized
on infusion and should therefore not be included as strong anions
when calculating solution SID. In contrast, the addition of slowly
metabolizable strong anions such as d-lactate and gluconate should
be included in the estimation of solution SID [23,74–76]. Notably,
the SID of 0.9% NaCl (normal saline) is 0 mmol/L, and infusions of
large volumes of this fluid can produce hyperchloremic non-
respiratory acidosis [70,74] (Fig 30.11). This is also true for Ringer’s
solution, 5% dextrose, and 7.2% hypertonic saline solutions [74].
Figure 30.11 tells a clear and compelling story, 0.9% NaCl and
similar solutions with SID = 0 mmol/L decrease plasma pH in
a dose-dependent manner when rapidly infused intravenously.
Based on normal values for human plasma, the intravenous
administration of a crystalloid solution with an effective SID less
than 25 mEq/L is always acidifying, whereas the administration of a
crystalloid solution with an effective SID greater than 25 mEq/L is
always alkalinizing (Fig. 30.11). This prediction has been experi-
mentally verified by an in vitro study [77]. Currently, available for-
mulations of Lactated Ringer’s (l-lactate concentration, 28 mmol/L)
and Acetated Ringer’s (acetate concentration, 27 mmol/L; gluco-
nate, 23 mmol/L) are very mildly alkalinizing when infused into
humans and domestic animals. Historic formulations of Lactated
Ringer’s solution contained approximately equimolar amounts of
l-lactate (14 mmol/L) and d- lactate (14 mmol/L) and consequently
were mildly acidifying when infused rapidly.
Isonatremic chloride abnormalities
If there is no change in the water content of plasma, plasma cNa +
will be normal. Other strong cations (e.g., K +
) are regulated for pur-
poses other than acid–base balance, and their concentration never
changes sufficiently to affect SID substantially [52,53]. Consequently,
SID changes only as a result of changes in strong anions when water
content is normal. If cNa+ remains constant, changes in cCl− can
Plasma pH
7.7
7.8
7.6
7.5
7.4
7.3
7.2
0 	5 	10 	15
Volume infused (% of initial plasma volume)
1.3% Sodium bicarbonate (SIDe = 155 mmol/L)
Lactated Ringer’s (SIDe = 28 mmol/L)
Lactated Ringer’s (SIDe = 14 mmol/L)
0.9% NaCI Ringer’s, 5% Dextrose, 7.2% NacI
(SIDe = 0 mmol/L)
Acetated Ringer’s (SIDe = 27 mmol/L)
Neutral solution (SIDe = 24.8 mmol/L)
20 	25 	30 	35 	40 	45 	50
7.1
Figure 30.11 Graphic representation of the theoretic effect of rapid
intravenous administration of six crystalloid solutions on plasma pH in
humans. SIDe is the effective difference between the solution charge of
strong cations and strong anions, such as l-lactate and acetate, that are
rapidly metabolized in plasma. The figure assumes that Lactated Ringer’s
solution formulation that contains l-lactate (28 mmol/L) that is rapidly
metabolized, or the historic formulation that contained l-lactate
(14 mmol/L) that is rapidly metabolized and d-lactate (14 mmol/L) that is
very slowly metabolized. Acetated Ringer’s solution contains acetate
(27 mmol/L) that is rapidly metabolized and gluconate (23 mmol/L) that is
slowly metabolized. Source: Adapted from Constable [74].
Table 30.11 Causes for changes in plasma strong ion difference (SID).
Chloride abnormalities
Decrease in cCl− corrected 	→ Hypochloremic alkalosis
Increase in cCl − corrected 	→ Hyperchloremic acidosis
Unmeasured strong anion abnormalities
Increase in cXA − 	→ Organic acidosis
Free-water abnormalities
Increase in cNa + due to decreased plasma-free water 	→ “Concentration” alkalosis
Decrease in cNa + due to increased plasma-free water → “Dilution” acidosis
cXA −
, unidentified strong anions.

-- 585 of 1450 --

570 	Section 4: Body Fluids and Fluid Therapy
substantially increase or decrease SID [78]. Evaluation of cCl− must
be considered in conjunction with the cNa + because cCl− can change
for reasons other than a change in water balance (see Box 30.1) [52].
The animal’s cCl− is therefore “corrected” for changes in cNa +
,
applying a formula developed for use in people and adapted for use
in small and large animals:
c 	c 	c 	c	Cl 	Cl 	Na 	/ Na	corrected 	normal 	(30.30)
where cCl− and cNa + are the animal’s plasma Cl− and Na + concen-
trations. The ideal cNa+ is the normal cNa+ for the species being
evaluated. Suggested normal values for cNa+ in dogs are 144 to
152 mmol/L [47,79], whereas for cats they range from 148 to
160 mmol/L [44,79]. In large animals, normal cNa+ is approximately
138 mmol/L in horses [42] and 142 mmol/L in cattle. Normal cCl−
is approximately 111–121 mmol/L for dogs [47,79], 110–126 mmol/L
for cats [44,79], 101 mmol/L for horses [16,42], and 102 mmol/L for
cattle. These values may vary for different laboratories and different
analyzers. An increase or decrease in cCl−
corrected indicates that cCl−
is responsible at least in part for the changes in SID. An increase
in cCl−
corrected (i.e., an increase in cCl− relative to cNa +
) results in a
hyperchloremic non-respiratory acidosis, whereas a decrease in
cCl−
corrected (i.e., a decrease in cCl− relative to cNa +
) results in
hypochloremic non-respiratory alkalosis. A cCl−
corrected to normal
in the presence of abnormal observed cCl− indicates that SID
changes are caused by dilution acidosis or concentration alkalosis.
The principal causes of hyperchloremic acidosis and hypochlo-
remic alkalosis are listed in Box 30.2. Treatment of hyperchloremic
acidosis should be directed at correction of the underlying disease.
Administration of NaHCO3
, when pH values are < 7.20 will tend to
correct hyperchloremic acidosis because 1.3% sodium bicarbonate
has an SID greater than plasma (Fig. 30.11).
Chloride-responsive hypochloremic alkalosis can be caused by
excessive loss of Cl− relative to Na+ or by administration of sub-
stances containing more Na+ than Cl− compared with ECF (e.g.,
NaHCO 3
). The former can occur following the administration
of diuretics that cause Cl− loss (e.g., furosemide) or when the lost
fluid has a low or negative SID, (e.g., acute vomiting). Chloride
administration is essential for the treatment of chloride-responsive
hypochloremic alkalosis. Renal Cl− conservation is ordinarily
enhanced in hypochloremic states and renal Cl− reabsorption does
not return to normal until plasma cCl− is restored to normal or near
normal [22]. In situations where expansion of extracellular volume
is desired, intravenous infusion of 0.9% NaCl is the treatment of
choice. This solution has an SID of 0 and will decrease plasma
SID [70,74]. If hypokalemia is present, KCl should be added to the
fluid. If volume expansion is not necessary, Cl− can be administered
using salts without Na+ (e.g., ammonium chloride, potassium chlo-
ride, calcium chloride, and magnesium chloride). These salts
should correct the alkalosis because Cl− is given together with cati-
ons that are regulated within narrow limits for purposes unrelated
to acid–base balance [22,23]. Chloride-resistant hypochloremic
alkalosis can occur in animals through hyperadrenocorticism and
primary hyperaldosteronism. Increased mineralocorticoid activity
causes sodium retention and urinary chloride loss in these diseases
and both will increase SID. Administration of chloride will not cor-
rect the metabolic alkalosis because of chloruresis. Fortunately,
metabolic alkalosis in these animals is usually very mild.
Isonatremic organic acid abnormalities
Accumulation of metabolically produced organic strong anions
(e.g., l- lactate, d- lactate, acetoacetate, and β-hydroxybutyrate) or
addition of exogenous organic strong anions (e.g., salicylate, glyco-
late from ethylene glycol poisoning, and formate from methanol
poisoning) can cause non-respiratory acidosis because these strong
anions decrease SID [22,23]. Addition of some inorganic strong
anions (e.g., SO 4
2− during renal failure) will resemble organic acido-
sis because SID decreases without changing electrolytes. The most
frequently encountered causes of organic acidosis are listed in
Table 30.12.
Treatment of organic acidosis should be directed toward the pri-
mary disorder and stabilization of the animal. Sodium bicarbonate
should be used cautiously because metabolism of accumulated
organic anions will normalize SID and increase HCO 3
−. The initial
goal in animals with severe organic acidosis is to raise systemic pH
to an acceptable value of > 7.20 and treat the primary disease.
Box 30.2 Principal causes of chloride abnormalities.
Hypochloremic alkalosisa (↓cCl− corrected)
Excessive loss of chloride relative to sodium
Vomiting of stomach contents
Gastric reflux in horses with ileus
Abomasum volvulus (ruminants)
Vagal indigestion with internal vomiting (ruminants)
Therapy with thiazides or loop diuretics
Hyperadrenocorticism
Excessive gain of sodium relative to chloride
Sodium bicarbonate therapy
Hyperchloremic acidosisb (↑cCl− corrected)
Excessive loss of sodium relative to chloride
Diarrhea
Excessive gain of chloride relative to sodium
Fluid therapy (e.g., 0.9% NaCI and KCI supplemental fluids)
Salt poisoning
Total parenteral nutrition
Ammonium chloride or potassium chloride therapy
Chloride retention
Renal failure
Renal tubular acidosis
Hypoadrenocorticism
Diabetes mellitus
Drug induced (e.g., acetazolamide and spironolactone)
a Chronic respiratory acidosis will cause a compensatory decrease in
corrected Cl−
.
b Chronic respiratory alkalosis will cause a compensatory increase in
corrected Cl−
.
Source: Adapted from de Morais and Muir [58].
Table 30.12 Principal disorders of the unidentified strong ions.
Disorder 	Strong anions
Uremic acidosis 	SO 4
2− and other anions of renal
failure
Diabetic ketoacidosis, ketosis, pregnancy
toxemia
β-hydroxybutyrate, acetoacetate
l- Lactic acidosis 	l-Lactate
d-Lactic acidosis 	d- Lactate
Salicylate intoxication 	Salicylate
Ethylene glycol toxicity 	Glycolate
Methanol toxicity 	Formate
[XA−], unidentified strong anions.
Source: Adapted from de Morais and Muir [58].

-- 586 of 1450 --

Chapter 30: Acid–Base Physiology 	571
Disorders in ATOT
Albumin, globulins, and inorganic phosphate are non-bicarbonate
(nonvolatile) weak acids and collectively are the major contributors
to ATOT (see Fig. 30.5) [8,22,23]. Consequently, changes in their con-
centrations will change pH. Hypoalbuminemia will decrease ATOT
and cause a non-respiratory alkalosis (Fig. 30.9; Tables 30.8, 30.9).
Although rare except for water deprivation, an increase in albumin
concentration can cause non-respiratory acidosis, owing to an increase
in ATOT
. Phosphate also contributes to ATOT and is normally present in
plasma at a low concentration. Severe hyperphosphatemia will increase
ATOT
, resulting in non-respiratory acidosis. Treatment for hyperal-
buminemic acidosis, hyperphosphatemic acidosis, and hypoalbu-
minemic alkalosis should be directed at the underlying cause. The
administration of sodium bicarbonate shifts phosphorus into cells and
expands the extracellular fluid volume and can be used as adjuvant
therapy in patients with hyperphosphatemic acidosis [80].
Free-water abnormalities (combined disorders in
SID and ATOT
)
Changing the water content of body fluid compartments will dilute
or concentrate both strong cations and strong anions as well as all
non-bicarbonate buffers [22,23,74]. Consequently, SID and ATOT will
change by the same proportion with changes in free water. Although
increases or decreases in SID and ATOT have opposite effects on pH,
the effect of SID on pH predominates; for example, an increase in
plasma-free water decreases SID (acidifying effect) and ATOT (alka-
linizing effect), with the overall effect being mild acidification
because there are similar percent changes in SID and ATOT
. For com-
parison, a decrease in plasma-free water increases SID (alkalinizing
effect) and ATOT (acidifying effect), with the overall effect being mild
alkalinization because there are similar percent changes in SID and
ATOT
. Changes in plasma-free water can be identified by evaluating
the cNa+
. An increase in SID caused by water loss increases in cNa+
and results in concentration alkalosis, whereas a decrease in SID
caused by decreases in cNa+ results in dilutional acidosis. Principal
causes of free-water abnormalities are listed in Box 30.3. Therapy for
dilution acidosis and concentration alkalosis should be directed at
the underlying cause responsible for changing cNa+
. If necessary,
cNa+ and plasma osmolality should be corrected [78].
Evaluations of acid–base balance
A systematic stepwise approach should be followed in animals with
suspected acid–base disorders. Thorough assessment of acid–base
status requires blood gas and pH analysis and serum biochemical
analysis, with blood samples being obtained from a major vein or
any artery.
If the primary clinical interest is acid–base assessment, then a
jugular venous blood sample should be anerobically obtained in a 1
to 3 mL polypropylene syringe that has been previously coated inter-
nally with sodium heparin (by drawing sodium heparin into the
syringe barrel and then expelling all heparin from the barrel before
blood collection). Air bubbles are removed from the blood in the
syringe after blood collection by tapping on the syringe held verti-
cally with the hub uppermost. This causes small bubbles to float to
the syringe hub, from where they coalesce and are eliminated by
expelling a small volume of blood. The syringe is capped to prevent
loss of CO2 and addition of O2 to the blood sample, and the syringe
is placed on ice (4 °C) until analysis. This minimizes any time-
related changes in pH, PCO2
, and SBE that occur when blood is held
at room temperature after collection [81–83]. If the primary interest
is evaluation of the respiratory system, an arterial blood sample
should be obtained in the same manner, but the sample should be
kept at body temperature until analyzed, which should be completed
as soon as possible. This is because keeping blood in polypropylene
syringes in iced water (0 °C) facilitates oxygen diffusion through the
syringe barrel, resulting in a post-collection increase in PO2 [81–83].
Blood samples for gas and pH analysis should not be collected into
partially evacuated (vacutainer) tubes as this sampling method does
not provide an anaerobic sample [81].
If serum total protein, albumin, and phosphate concentrations
are approximately normal, then acid–base status should be evalu-
ated using blood pH, PCO 2
, and SBE or cHCO 3
–
. There are four
primary acid–base abnormalities: respiratory acidosis, respiratory
alkalosis, non-respiratory acidosis, and non-respiratory alkalosis
(Fig. 30.6). This is the base excess or traditional (Henderson–
Hasselbalch) approach (Fig. 30.5). The possibility of a mixed res-
piratory and non-respiratory acid–base disorder should be assessed
by calculating the expected compensation (see Table 30.6). The
presence of unidentified anions should be investigated by calculat-
ing the AG using eqn 30.25.
If serum total protein, albumin, or phosphate concentrations are
markedly abnormal, then acid–base status should be evaluated
using blood pH, PCO 2
, measured SID 4 (cNa + + cK + – cCl – – cl-
lactate –
), and ATOT (calculated from the plasma concentration of
total protein or albumin). There are six primary acid–base abnor-
malities: respiratory acidosis, respiratory alkalosis, strong ion aci-
dosis, strong ion alkalosis, non-bicarbonate buffer ion acidosis, and
Box 30.3 Principal causes of free-water abnormalities.
Concentration alkalosis (↑cNa+
)
Pure-water deficit
Primary hypodipsia
Diabetes Insipidus
Fever
Inadequate access to water
High environmental temperature
Hypotonic fluid loss
Vomiting
Peritonitis
Pancreatitis
Non-oliguric renal failure
Post-obstructive diuresis
Sodium gain
Salt poisoning
Hypertonic fluid administration (e.g., hypertonic saline and sodium
bicarbonate)
Hyperaldosteronism
Hyperadrenocorticism
Dilution acidosis (↓cNa +
)
Severe liver disease
Nephrotic syndrome
Advanced renal failure
Congestive heart failure
Psychogenic polydipsia
Excessive sweating in horses
Hypotonic fluid administration (e.g., 0.45% NaCl solution)
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Uroabdomen
Hypoadrenocorticism
Diuretic administration
Source: Adapted from de Morais and Muir [58].

-- 587 of 1450 --

572 	Section 4: Body Fluids and Fluid Therapy
non- bicarbonate buffer ion alkalosis (Fig. 30.9). This is the physico-
chemical (simplified strong ion) approach (Fig. 30.5). The presence
of unidentified strong ions should be investigated by calculating the
SIG using eqn 30.29 and species-specific values for ATOT and pKa
(Table 30.7). General anesthesia produces dose-dependent respira-
tory and cardiovascular depression, thereby predisposing animals
to the development of respiratory and non-respiratory acidosis that
can exaggerate or complicate a pre-existing acid–base imbalance.
The application of physicochemical methods for the analysis, diag-
nosis, and treatment of acid–base disorders compels clinicians to
consider a more comprehensive set of potential causes for acid–
base disturbances and by doing so, focuses diagnostic approaches
and refines therapeutic decisions.
References
1 Henderson LJ. The theory of neutrality regulation in the animal organism. Am J
Physiol 1908; 21:427–448.
2 Hastings AB. Acid-base measurements in vitro. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1966; 133:
15–24.
3 Henderson LJ. Blood. A Study in General Physiology. New Haven: Yale University
Press, 1928: 1–397.
4 Siggaard-Andersen O. The Acid- Base Status of the Blood, 4th ed. Munksgaard,
Copenhagen: Munksgaard, 1974: 1–229.
5 Stewart PA. How to Understand Acid-base: A Quantitative Acid-base Primer for
Biology and Medicine. New York, NY: Elsevier, 1981.
6 Truchot JP. Comparative Aspects of Extracellular Acid-Base Balance. New York, NY:
Springer- Verlag, 1987: 1–248.
7 Jones NL. Blood Gases and Acid-base Physiology. New York: Thieme, 1987.
8 Kellum JA, Elbers PWG, eds. Stewart’s Textbook of Acid-base. Raleigh, NC: Lulu
Enterprises (www.Lulu.com), 2009.
9 Davis RP. Logland: a Gibbsian view of acid-base balance. Am J Med 1967; 42:
159–162.
10 Rosenthal TB. The effect of temperature on the pH of blood and plasma in vitro. J
Biol Chem 1948; 173: 25–30.
11 Reeves RB. An imidazole alphastat hypothesis for vertebrate acid-base regulation:
tissue carbon dioxide content and body temperature in bullfrogs. Resp Physiol 1972;
14: 219–236.
12 Cameron JN. Acid-base homeostasis: past and present perspectives. Physiol Zoology
1989; 62: 845–865.
13 Nattie EE. The alpha-stat hypothesis in respiratory control and acid-base balance. J
Appl Physiol 1990; 69: 1201–1207.
14 Settergren G. pH-stat, alpha-stat versus temperature correction. J Cardiothorac
Anesth 1989; 3: 526–527.
15 Murkin JM, Martzke JS, Buchan AM, et al. A randomized study of the influence of
perfusion technique and pH management strategy in 316 patients undergoing cor-
onary artery bypass surgery. I. Mortality and cardiovascular morbidity. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg 1995; 110: 340–348.
16 Constable PD. A simplified strong ion model for acid-base equilibria: application to
horse plasma. J Appl Physiol 1997; 83: 297–311.
17 Burton RF. The roles of buffers in body fluids: mathematical analysis. Resp Physiol
1973; 18: 34–42.
18 Watson PD. Modeling the effects of proteins on pH in plasma. J Appl Physiol 1999;
86: 1421–1427.
19 Constable PD, Gelfert CC, Fürll M, et al. Application of strong ion difference theory
to urine and the relationship between urine pH and net acid excretion in cattle. Am
J Vet Res 2009; 70: 915–925.
20 Constable PD, Megahed AA, Hiew MW. Measurement of urine pH and net acid
excretion and their association with urine calcium excretion in periparturient dairy
cows. J Dairy Sci 2019; 102: 11370–11383.
21 Sartorius OW, Roemmelt JC, Pitts RF, et al. The renal regulation of acid-base bal-
ance in man. IV. The nature of the renal compensations in ammonium chloride
acidosis. J Clin Invest 1949; 28: 423–439.
22 Constable PD. Clinical assessment of acid-base status: comparison of the
Henderson–Hasselbalch and strong ion approaches. Vet Clin Path 2000; 29:
115–128.
23 Constable PD. Acid-base assessment: when and how to apply the Henderson–
Hasselbalch equation and strong ion difference theory. Vet Clin North Am Food
Anim Pract 2014; 30: 295–316.
24 Constable PD. Clinical assessment of acid–base status: strong ion difference theory.
Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 1999; 15: 447–471.
25 Adams LG, Polzin DJ. Mixed acid-base disorders. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 1989; 19: 307–326.
26 Siggaard- Andersen O. The van Slyke equation. Scand J Clin Lab Invest
Supplementum 1977; 146: 15–20.
27 Lang W, Zander R. The accuracy of calculated base excess in blood. Clin Chem Lab
Med 2002; 40: 404–410.
28 Schwartz WB, Relman AS. A critique of the parameters used in the evaluation of acid-
base disorders: whole-blood buffer base and standard bicarbonate compared with blood
pH and plasma bicarbonate concentration. New Engl J Med 1963; 268:1382–1388.
29 Brown Jr EB, Clancy RL. In vivo and in vitro CO2 blood buffer curves. J Appl Physiol
1965; 20: 885–889.
30 Clinical Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI). Blood Gas and pH Analysis and
Related Measurements; Approved Guideline - 2nd edn. CLSI Document C46-A2.
Wayne, PA: Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute, 2009.
31 Phillips GD. The assessment of blood acid-base parameters in ruminants. Brit Vet J
1970; 126: 325–332.
32 Emuakpor DS, Maas AH, Ruigrok TJ, et al. Acid-base curve nomogram for dog
blood. Pflügers Archiv 1976; 363: 141–147.
33 Weiskopf RB, Townsley MI, Riordan KK, et al. Acid-base curve and alignment
nomograms for swine blood. J Appl Physiol 1983; 54: 978–983.
34 Hannon JP. Construction of acid-base alignment nomograms to estimate buffer
base and base- excess concentrations in arterial blood from immature pigs. Am J Vet
Res 1984; 45: 1918–1923.
35 Mellemgaard K, Astrup P. The quantitative determination of surplus amounts of
acid or base in the human body. Scand J Clin Lab Invest 1960; 12: 187–199.
36 Trefz FM, Lorenz I, Constable PD. Dependence of the apparent bicarbonate space
on initial plasma bicarbonate concentration and carbon dioxide tension in neonatal
calves with diarrhea, acidemia, and metabolic acidosis. J Vet Intern Med 2021; 35:
644–654.
37 Singer RB, Hastings AB. An improved clinical method for the estimation of distur-
bances of the acid-base balance of human blood. Medicine 1948; 27: 223–242.
38 Stewart PA. Modern quantitative acid-base chemistry. Can J Physiol Pharmacol
1983; 61: 1444–1461.
39 Constable PD. Comparative animal physiology and adaptation. In: Kellum JA,
Elbers PWG, eds. Stewart’s Textbook of Acid-Base Physiology. Raleigh, NC: Lulu
Enterprises (www.Lulu.com), 2009: 305–320.
40 Van Leeuwen AM. Net cation equivalency (’base binding power’) of the plasma
proteins. Acta Medica Scandinavica 1964; 176(Suppl 422).
41 Kurtz I, Kraut J, Ornekian V, et al. Acid-base analysis: a critique of the Stewart and
bicarbonate-centered approaches. Am J Renal Physiol 2008; 294: F1009–F1031.
42 Stämpfli HR, Misiaszek S, Lumsden JH, et al. Weak acid-concentration Atot and
dissociation constant Ka of plasma proteins in racehorses. Eq Vet J 1999; 31:
438–442.
43 Staempfli HR, Constable PD. Experimental determination of net protein charge
and Atot and Ka on nonvolatile buffers in human plasma. J Appl Physiol 2003; 95:
620–630.
44 McCullough SM, Constable PD. Calculation of the total plasma concentration of
nonvolatile weak acids and the effective dissociation constant of nonvolatile buffers
in the plasma for use in the strong ion approach to acid-base balance in cats. Am J
Vet Res 2003; 64: 1047–1051.
45 Constable PD. Calculation of variables describing plasma nonvolatile weak acids
for use in the strong ion approach to acid-base balance in cattle. Am J Vet Res 2002;
63: 482–490.
46 Constable PD, Stämpfli HR, Navetat H, et al. Use of a quantitative strong ion
approach to determine the mechanism for acid-base abnormalities in sick calves
with or without diarrhea. J Vet Intern Med 2005; 19: 581–589.
47 Constable PD, Stämpfli HR. Experimental determination of net protein charge and
Atot and Ka of nonvolatile buffers in canine plasma. J Vet Intern Med 2005; 19:
507–514.
48 Stämpfli H, Taylor M, McNicoll C, et al. Experimental determination of net protein
charge, Atot, and Ka of nonvolatile buffers in bird plasma. J Appl Physiol 2006; 100:
1831–1836.
49 Oh MS, Carroll HJ. Current concepts. The anion gap. New Engl J Med 1977; 297:
814–817.
50 Gabow PA. Disorders associated with high altered gap. Kidney Int 1985; 27: 472–483.
51 Constable PD, Streeter RN, Koenig GJ, et al. Determinants and utility of the anion
gap in predicting hyperlactatemia in cattle. J Vet Intern Med 1997; 11: 71–79.
52 Constable PD. Hyperchloremic acidosis: the classic example of strong ion acidosis.
Anesth Analg 2003; 96: 919–922.
53 Handy JM, Soni N. Physiological effects of hyperchloraemia and acidosis. Br J
Anaesth 2008; 101: 141–150.
54 Constable PD, Hinchcliff KW, Muir WW III. Comparison of anion gap and strong
ion gap as predictors of unmeasured strong ion concentration in plasma and serum
from horses. Am J Vet Res 1998; 59: 881–887.

-- 588 of 1450 --

Chapter 30: Acid–Base Physiology 	573
55 Trefz FM, Constable PD, Lorenz I. Quantitative physicochemical analysis of acid-
base balance and clinical utility of anion gap and strong ion gap in 806 neonatal
calves with diarrhea. J Vet Intern Med 2015; 29: 678–687.
56 Nanji A, Blank D. Spurious increases in the anion gap due to exposure of serum to
air. N Engl J Med 1982; 307: 190–191.
57 Emmett M, Seldin DW. Evaluation of acid-base disorders from plasma composi-
tion. In: Seldin DW, Giebisch G, eds. The Regulation of Acid-base Balance.
New York, NY: Raven, 1989: 259–268.
58 de Morais HAS, Muir WW. Strong ions and acid-base disorders. In: Bonagura JD,
Kirk RW, eds. Kirk’s Current Veterinary Therapy, 12th edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB
Saunders, 1995: 121–127.
59 Kellum JA, Kramer DJ, Pinsky MR. Strong ion gap: a methodology for exploring
unexplained anions. J Crit Care 1995; 10: 51–55.
60 Figge J, Mydosh T, Fencl V. Serum proteins and acid-base equilibria: a follow-up. J
Lab Clin Med 1992; 120: 713–719.
61 Fencl V, Leith DE. Stewart’s quantitative acid-base chemistry: applications in biol-
ogy and medicine. Resp Physiol 1993; 91: 1–16.
62 Frischmeyer KJ, Moon PF. Evaluation of quantitative acid-base balance and deter-
mination of unidentified anions in swine. Am J Vet Res 1994; 55: 1153–1157.
63 Whitehair KJ, Haskins SC, Whitehair JG, et al. Clinical applications of quantitative
acid-base chemistry. J Vet Intern Med 1995; 9: 1–11.
64 Hopper K, Epstein SE, Kass PH, et al. Evaluation of acid-base disorders in dogs and
cats presenting to an emergency room. Part 2: comparison of anion gap, strong ion
gap, and semiquantitative analysis. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2014; 24: 502–508.
65 Zeiler GE, Fuller A, Kamerman P, et al. Describing acid-base balance using three
different methods of analysis in a feline acute haemorrhage-resuscitation model.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2022; 49: 65–75.
66 Corey HE. Stewart and beyond: new models of acid-base balance. Kidney Int 2003;
64: 777–787.
67 Wooten EW. Science review: quantitative acid-base physiology using the Stewart
model. Crit Care 2004; 8: 448–452.
68 Raichle ME, Plum F. Hyperventilation and cerebral blood flow. Stroke 1972; 3:
566–575.
69 Yoon S, Zuccarello M, Rapoport RM. PCO2 and pH regulation of cerebral blood
flow. Front Physiol 2012; 3: 365.
70 Morgan JT. The meaning of acid-base abnormalities in the intensive care unit: Part
III: effects of fluid administration. Crit Care 2005; 9: 204–211.
71 Valverde A, Hatcher ME, Stämpfli HR. Effects of fluid therapy on total protein and
its influence on calculated unmeasured anions in the anesthetized dog. J Vet Emerg
Crit Care 2008; 18: 480–487.
72 Langer T, Ferrari M, Zazzeron L, et al. Effects of intravenous solutions on acid-base
equilibrium: from crystalloids to colloids and blood components. Anaesthesiol
Intensive Ther 2014; 46: 350–360.
73 Muir W. Effect of intravenously administered crystalloid solutions on acid-base
balance in domestic animals. J Vet Intern Med 2017; 31:1371–1381.
74 Constable PD. In response: letters to the editor. Anesth Analg 2004; 98: 271–272.
75 Müller KR, Gentile A, Klee W, et al. Importance of the effective strong ion difference
of an intravenous solution in the treatment of diarrheic calves with naturally-acquired
acidemia and strong ion (metabolic) acidosis. J Vet Intern Med 2012; 26: 674–683.
76 Weinberg L, Collins N, Van Mourik K, et al. Plasma-Lyte 148: a clinical review.
World J Crit Care Med 2016; 5:235–250.
77 Morgan TJ, Venkatesh B, Hall J. Crystalloid strong ion difference determines meta-
bolic acid-base change during in vitro hemodilution. Crit Care Med 2002; 30:
157–160.
78 Lloyd P. Strong ion calculator – a practical bedside application of modern quantita-
tive acid-base physiology. Crit Care Resus 2004; 6: 285–294.
79 Hopper K, Epstein SE, Kass PH, et al. Evaluation of acid-base disorders in dogs and
cats presenting to an emergency room. Part 1: comparison of three methods of
acid-base analysis. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2014; 24: 493–501.
80 Barsotti G, Lazzeri M, Cristofano C, et al. The role of metabolic acidosis in causing
uremic hyperphosphatemia. Miner Electrolyte Metab 1986; 12: 103–106.
81 Noël PG, Couëtil L, Constable PD. Effects of collecting blood into plastic heparin-
ised Vacutainer® tubes and storage conditions on blood gas analysis values in
horses. Eq Vet J 2010; 42: 91–97.
82 Kennedy SA, Constable PD, Sen I, et al. Effects of syringe type and storage condi-
tions on results of equine blood gas and acid-base analysis. Am J Vet Res 2012; 73:
979–987.
83 Tinkler SH, Couëtil LL, Kennedy SA, et al. Effect of the size of evacuated blood
collection tubes on total carbon dioxide concentration in equine plasma. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2012; 241: 922–926.

-- 589 of 1450 --

Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of Lumb and Jones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
31
574
Introduction
Interest in the process of both normal and disordered hemostasis in
the veterinary patient has experienced resurgence in recent years.
This is due in part to the availability of newer tests and techniques
that can better illustrate the process and products of coagulation. At
the same time, new understanding of the formation of clots in vivo
has made it clear that traditional testing provides only a limited
view into the actual mechanisms and pathophysiology of clot for-
mation and platelet function.
The cell-based model of hemostasis
The cell-based model of hemostasis provides a framework for under-
standing the complex interactions between cellular components,
soluble factors, and the vascular endothelium in the formation of
a clot. In some cases, this model explains why certain conditions
(e.g., factor deficiencies) have a particular hemostatic phenotype.
Coagulation as described by this model consists of three phases:
initiation, amplification, and propagation [1].
The vast majority of coagulation in vivo occurs as a result of
tissue factor (TF, factor III) initiation of the extrinsic coagulation
cascade (as opposed to contact activation via the intrinsic coagula-
tion cascade [also termed the “contact-activation pathway”], which
may occur on the surfaces of foreign materials like intravenous
catheters) [2]. TF is exposed following intimal injury of a blood
vessel and may also be present on the surface of circulating
monocytes and microparticles, especially in the setting of systemic
inflammation. Microparticles are small membrane blebs released
from activated endothelial cells, platelets, or leukocytes. The other
important player in the initiation of coagulation is the platelet.
Following activation, the platelet undergoes a shape change, and
anionic phospholipids such as phosphatidyl serine are exposed on
the outer platelet membrane. These phospholipids provide a surface
for the assembly of coagulation factors into complexes that promote
clot amplification [3]. In the initiation step, exposed TF comes into
contact with activated factor VII (fVIIa) and activated factor X
(fXa), forming a TF-fVIIa-fXa complex [1]. A small amount of
thrombin (factor IIa) is generated by this complex.
The small amount of thrombin released in the initiation step
promotes the amplification stage, where additional platelets and
coagulation factors V, VIII, and XI are activated [2]. Thrombin is
generated in the propagation phase from complexes of these factors
assembled on cell membranes. The tenase complex, composed of
factors IXa, VIIIa, and calcium, activates coagulation factor X. The
presence of factor Xa then allows formation of the prothrombinase
complex, which is composed of factors Xa, Va, and calcium. The
prothrombinase complex is an extremely efficient complex that
promotes the formation of thrombin (factor IIa) from prothrombin,
which then catalyzes the formation of fibrin from fibrinogen [4].
Endogenous coagulation inhibitors are present at each stage of
the coagulation process to prevent excessive thrombin formation.
Tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI) is a potent inhibitor of the
TF-fVIIa- Xa complex [1]. Antithrombin acts to inhibit factors Xa
and IIa. The protein C/protein S system supports the inhibition of
factors Va and VIIIa. Patients with urinary losses of antithrombin
and humans with congenital low concentrations of protein C are
thought to have an increased risk for the development of thrombo-
embolism. Dogs with sepsis have decreased activities of protein C
31 Treatment of Coagulation
and Platelet Disorders
Benjamin M. Brainard
Department of Small Animal Medicine and Surgery, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 574
The cell- based model of hemostasis, 574
Coagulation and platelet function testing, 575
Platelet function testing (primary hemostasis), 575
Coagulation testing (secondary hemostasis), 575
Anticoagulant therapy, 575
Antiplatelet drugs, 575
Coagulation inhibitors, 576
Fibrinolytic drugs, 577
Procoagulant therapies, 577
Drugs that support coagulation, 578
References, 578

-- 590 of 1450 --

Chapter 31: Treatment of Coagulation and Platelet Disorders 	575
and antithrombin [5]. Dogs with sepsis have also been reported to
have increased thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFI)
activity [6]. TAFI is activated in the presence of thrombin and acts
to decrease the speed of fibrinolysis or clot breakdown.
Coagulation and platelet function testing
The complex in vivo physiology of clot formation is very difficult to
mimic in vitro. Most laboratory tests of coagulation function are
focused on individual aspects of the coagulation process.
Platelet function testing (primary hemostasis)
Platelet function may be assessed using tools such as optical or
impedance aggregometry, which document the response of plate-
lets (in platelet-rich plasma or whole blood, respectively) to discrete
agonists such as adenosine diphosphate (ADP), collagen, or arachi-
donic acid [7]. Most aggregometry testing is performed under low
shear settings, which do not necessarily reflect the in vivo physiol-
ogy of the high-shear condition of flowing blood. The PFA-100
(Siemens-Dade Behring) is a whole blood test that aspirates blood
through a small aperture using a vacuum [8]. The aperture is coated
with a combination of either epinephrine and collagen or ADP and
collagen. As platelets pass through the aperture, they are activated
by the agonists and form a plug, stopping the flow of blood. The
time it takes for this to occur is termed the “closure time” and is
measured in seconds. In dogs with von Willebrand disease (vWD,
which impairs the ability of platelets to tether and adhere to sites of
vascular injury) and in animals treated with drugs that decrease
platelet activity, the closure time is prolonged [9]. This is a rapid,
benchtop test that can be used to assess an animal’s risk of bleeding
due to platelet function abnormalities. Low hematocrits and platelet
counts less than 90 × 10 9 platelets/L may cause prolonged closure
times unrelated to platelet function.
Buccal mucosal bleeding time (BMBT) is another test that can
diagnose platelet function abnormalities. It is simple and can be
done rapidly as part of a presurgical screen. To perform this test, the
buccal mucosa is exposed and a standard incision (5 mm long and
1 mm deep) is made using a SimPlate® device [10]. Once the inci-
sion is made, the area is observed for the formation of a gel-like
platelet plug. The bleeding time is defined as the time until bleeding
has ceased and is between 3–5 min in normal animals. Because cats
have a small buccal surface, the oral mucosal bleeding time (OMBT)
is performed instead, by making the incision in the gums above the
upper canine tooth [11]. Cats generally need to be sedated or anes-
thetized for this test. As with the PFA, the BMBT will be prolonged
if patients have thrombocytopenia (< 75 × 109 platelets/L).
Coagulation testing (secondary hemostasis)
Assessment of coagulation factor activity is generally performed
using citrated plasma but may also be assessed in whole blood sys-
tems. Most tests monitor for the formation of a fibrin clot by expos-
ing citrated plasma to calcium in combination with an activating
substance and report the time until clot formation (which may be
sensed optically or mechanically) as the clotting time [12]. The pro-
thrombin time (PT) is initiated using a mixture of TF and phospho-
lipid and primarily assesses the extrinsic and common pathway of
coagulation (i.e., factors VII, X, V, II). Activated partial thrombo-
plastin time (aPTT) is initiated with a strong contact activator such
as kaolin and reflects activity in the intrinsic and common path-
ways (i.e., factors XII, XI, IX, VIII, X, V, II). The thrombin time is
dependent on the blood fibrinogen concentration and assesses only
the formation of fibrin in the common pathway following the addi-
tion of thrombin. Modifications of both PT and aPTT have been
developed to use citrated whole blood for coagulation testing as
well [13]. The activated clotting time (ACT) adds whole blood to
diatomaceous earth (a strong contact activator) and measures the
time until it forms into a clot. The reference intervals for coagula-
tion times of normal animals vary depending on methodology and
technique.
Viscoelastic coagulation testing using techniques such as throm-
boelastography (TEG), rotational thromboelastometry (ROTEM),
or Sonoclot use citrated whole blood to evaluate both primary and
secondary hemostasis, in addition to fibrinolysis [14]. Viscoelastic
testing displays the change in viscosity as blood gels into a clot and
can identify both hypocoagulable and hypercoagulable states.
Transfusion algorithms based on intraoperative viscoelastic moni-
toring have resulted in more targeted transfusion strategies and
decreased waste of blood products in human medicine [15].
Viscoelastic techniques have been described in dogs, cats, and
horses [16–18].
Anticoagulant therapy
In human medicine, arterial thromboses are thought to result from
activation or hyperactivity of platelets, while venous thrombosis or
thromboembolism is more associated with blood stasis and activa-
tion of coagulation factors [19]. While these two pathophysiologic
consequences dictate different treatment approaches, the reality in
veterinary medicine balances the need for patient safety and ease of
administration. For this reason, most anticoagulants used in veteri-
nary medicine are antiplatelet agents that can be administered
orally. Injectable anticoagulants that target the coagulation cascade
are also used, especially in hospitalized patients, and newer oral
anticoagulants may provide a safer approach to providing tailored
long-term anticoagulation in veterinary patients.
Antiplatelet drugs
Platelet activation results in a series of events that allow the platelet
to adhere to sites of vascular damage (tethered by molecules such as
von Willebrand Factor and collagen) and also cause the release of
substances that support coagulation and activate adjacent platelets.
Molecules released from activated platelets include ADP, throm-
boxane, serotonin, and calcium. Because there are specific receptors
for many of these agonists, antiplatelet agents have been designed to
affect the binding or release of these agonists.
Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid, ASA) decreases platelet responsive-
ness and has been evaluated in most domestic species. Aspirin
exerts an antiplatelet effect by irreversible inhibition of platelet
cyclo-oxygenase (COX), which produces thromboxane A2 (TXA2
)
from arachidonic acid in response to platelet activation [20,21].
TXA 2 is a potent vasoconstrictor and platelet activator, although
platelet responses vary between species and individuals. In dogs,
aspirin at various doses has been recommended to decrease platelet
activity in patients with immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
(IMHA) and other diseases that are associated with hypercoagula-
ble states (e.g., protein-losing nephropathy) [5]. In many of these
cases, a low dose of aspirin (0.5–1.0 mg/kg PO q 12 h) has been
recommended, although the efficacy of these lower doses on plate-
let aggregation is unclear [22]. Interestingly, certain breeds or fami-
lies of dogs may not be as responsive to aspirin-mediated platelet
inhibition [23]. The same may be true in humans, and a syndrome
of “aspirin resistance” has been described [24]. In cats, aspirin has

-- 591 of 1450 --

576 	Section 4: Body Fluids and Fluid Therapy
been recommended for thromboprophylaxis in animals with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, although efficacy for inhibition of
platelet aggregation or for prevention of intracardiac thrombus for-
mation has not been definitively demonstrated [21,25]. Aspirin has
been used to treat horses with jugular venous thrombosis. Other
veterinary-labeled non-steroidal anti- inflammatory drugs may
cause transient impairment of platelet function in dogs, which is
unlikely to cause clinically significant perioperative bleeding unless
used in patients with other comorbidities that decrease platelet
function (e.g., vWD).
Clopidogrel (Plavix®, Sanofi Synthelabo, New York) is an irre-
versible antagonist of the platelet P2Y 12 receptor, one of two ADP
receptors on the platelet surface. In dogs, cats, and horses, clopi-
dogrel effectively decreases platelet aggregation in response to
ADP [11,26,27]. Clopidogrel is a prodrug, requiring hepatic bio-
transformation to an active compound. Co-administration of drugs
that affect the hepatic P450 enzyme system may alter the pharma-
cokinetics of clopidogrel; however, recent studies do not indicate a
clinically relevant interaction with proton pump inhibitors in
dogs [28]. As with aspirin, there are human patients who do not
demonstrate decreased platelet aggregation following clopidogrel
therapy. The mechanism may be altered hepatic processing or vari-
ations of platelet receptor affinity, and this phenomenon likely
occurs in veterinary species as well [29,30].
Because both aspirin and clopidogrel result in irreversible inhibi-
tion of platelet function, it is necessary for patients to release new
platelets to regain platelet function. In animals with normal bone
marrow function, a new platelet population is generally present
5–7 days after cessation of antiplatelet medications, although clini-
cal response to platelet agonists may return prior to this point.
Aspirin and clopidogrel are frequently prescribed for veterinary
patients diagnosed with hypercoagulable conditions because they
are generally well tolerated, easily administered at home, and not
associated with adverse events such as hemorrhage when used indi-
vidually. When clopidogrel and aspirin were used together in
human patients, the antithrombotic effects were more pronounced,
but there was also an increased incidence of gastrointestinal
bleeding [31].
Coagulation inhibitors
Warfarin is an oral vitamin K epoxide reductase antagonist that pre-
vents the hepatic recycling of vitamin K, resulting in decreased coag-
ulation factor production. It impairs the production of vitamin
K-dependent coagulation factors (i.e., II, VII, IX, and X) [32].
Warfarin is difficult to titrate. Clinical use requires initial weekly
measurements of PT, a tightly regulated diet, and a strict dosing
schedule to minimize the chances for hemorrhage. Warfarin therapy
has been used as a component of medical management in dogs with
venous thrombi [33] and was also utilized in a small number of cats
with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. However, in those cats, its use
was associated with a shorter survival time [25]. The effects of war-
farin can be antagonized using either oral vitamin K (phytonadione)
therapy or by transfusions of fresh frozen or stored plasma [34].
Despite the fact that warfarin is administered orally, it is not fre-
quently used in veterinary medicine due to the potential severity of
complications and difficulty in ensuring owner compliance.
Other oral anticoagulant medications such as rivaroxaban
(Xarelto®, Bayer Healthcare) and apixaban (Eliquis®, Pfizer/Bristol-
Myers Squibb) have recently been introduced for human
patients [35,36]. These drugs are inhibitors of activated coagulation
factor X (Xa) and have shown equivalent or superior effect to
warfarin in a number of human studies. In cats and dogs, rivaroxa-
ban displays dose-dependent anticoagulant activity [35,36].
Apixaban also appears to have dose-dependent pharmacodynamic
activity in dogs, cats, and horses [37–39]. In horses, apixaban has
very low oral bioavailability, which can be overcome with increased
doses [40]. There is not an easily available reversal agent to treat
overdose of the anti-Xa medications, short of transfusions of fresh
frozen plasma. Studies in veterinary medicine that will provide
clearer information on dosing guidelines and safety of the anti-Xa
drugs are ongoing. Plasma drug concentrations for rivaroxaban and
apixaban can be measured directly or estimated using specifically
calibrated anti-Xa activity assays [41]. Higher plasma drug concen-
trations (potentially above the therapeutic target range) will result
in prolongations of traditional coagulation tests (e.g., PT or aPTT).
Heparins are another class of drugs commonly used for antico-
agulation in veterinary species. The use of both unfractionated
heparin (UFH) and low-molecular-weight heparins (LMWH) has
been described in many animal species. They have been used to
treat many conditions associated with potential or actual thrombo-
sis [42,43]. All heparins are injectable drugs and may be given by
either the intravenous or subcutaneous route. Heparins enhance
the inhibitory effect of antithrombin on activated coagulation fac-
tors X and II. LMWH is a smaller molecule and primarily inhibits
factor Xa activity. Heparins are indicated for anticoagulation in
patients with gross thrombosis, or for those in danger of thrombotic
complications, especially in the perioperative period [44].
UFH has been used in the treatment of dogs with IMHA, pulmo-
nary thromboembolism, and other prothrombotic conditions [44].
There is no evidence to support preincubation of fresh frozen
plasma with UFH in the context of disseminated intravascular
coagulation (DIC), and this practice may actually decrease the
amount of available antithrombin in the plasma [45]. In addition,
UFH is frequently used for anticoagulation during cardiopulmo-
nary bypass and hemodialysis procedures. Postoperative UFH and
LMWH administration has been described in dogs following adre-
nal gland resection [46] and may be used during other vascular pro-
cedures. In horses, UFH may result in anemia caused by
agglutination of red blood cells. This adverse event is rapidly
reversed following the cessation of UFH therapy [47].
In people, LMWH has a more favorable pharmacokinetic profile
(once- daily dosing) and a decreased risk of hemorrhage compared
to UFH. It may be safer in the perioperative period for this reason,
although this has not been specifically studied in veterinary
patients. Of the LMWHs available, dalteparin (Fragmin®, Pfizer)
and enoxaparin (Lovenox®, Sanofi) have been most studied in vet-
erinary medicine. Direct comparisons between these and UFH have
been performed in cats [43] and dogs [48] with more focused stud-
ies available in horses [49] and other species. Although the pharma-
cokinetics in humans are amenable to once-daily dosing, the
pharmacodynamic studies available for veterinary species suggest
that multiple doses may be required to maintain anti-factor Xa
activity in the presumed therapeutic range. The utility of LMWH
versus UFH for thromboprophylaxis in veterinary medicine is not
clear. The use of a newer synthetic LMWH, fondaparinux, has been
described in cats [50].
Human guidelines for dosing of heparin are based on anti Xa
activity (aXa), and targets vary for prophylactic or therapeutic dos-
ing. Target therapeutic aXa levels for UFH (measured at 4 h after
administration of a dose) are 0.35–0.7 U/mL, while prophylactic
levels are approximately 10% of these [51,52]. LMWH targets for
therapeutic aXa levels are 0.5–1.0 U/mL and 0.1–0.3 U/mL for

-- 592 of 1450 --

Chapter 31: Treatment of Coagulation and Platelet Disorders 	577
prophylaxis. In dogs, due to limited availability of rapid aXa testing,
UFH is usually dose adjusted by measuring serial aPTT until the
aPTT is extended to 1.5–2 times the normal value [53]. These
guidelines will vary depending on the type of machine used to
measure aPTT, and using some methodologies, a prolongation
closer to 1.2–1.5 times normal aPTT may be indicated [16].
Guidance for dosing regimens for most anticoagulant medications
in small animal species has been reviewed in Table 31.1 [44].
Fibrinolytic drugs
In animals that have developed venous or arterial thrombi, blood
flow and oxygen delivery may be restored through the use of
fibrinolytic drugs that encourage the dissolution of clots in vivo.
The primary drugs that have been used for clot dissolution are tis-
sue plasminogen activator (tPA) and streptokinase. Streptokinase is
no longer available in many countries. tPA is a potent activator of
plasmin, which breaks down fibrin into fibrinopeptides A and B. If
the fibrin has been cross-linked by activated factor XIII, dissolution
by plasmin also results in the generation of d-dimers [66]. Systemic
administration of tPA can be associated with hemorrhage, and
rapid reperfusion of thrombosed areas following tPA administra-
tion may lead to reperfusion injury [67]. Local administration of
tPA using catheter-guided delivery may mitigate some side effects
of systemic administration. When used for clot dissolution in cats
with aortic thromboembolism, approximately 50% of cats experi-
enced rapid reperfusion of thrombosed limbs [68]. This percentage
is similar to that reported for cats receiving supportive care (treat-
ment of congestive heart failure, analgesia) without specific fibrino-
lytic therapy, and most cats experienced side effects including
azotemia, neurologic signs, and sudden death [68]. tPA usage in
dogs has been infrequently reported in clinical settings, although it
has been used experimentally [69].
Procoagulant therapies
There are very few procoagulant therapies available to the veterinar-
ian. The majority are topical products including hemostatic gels and
solubilized liquid thrombin, which are applied directly to the source
of hemorrhage. In patients with hemorrhage due to clotting factor
deficiency, products such as fresh frozen plasma or stored plasma
may be appropriate to restore clotting function. In patients with anti-
coagulant rodenticide toxicosis or some forms of hepatic disease
(especially in cats), the administration of vitamin K (phytonadione)
at 1–5 mg/kg/day either PO or SC may allow the body to support
production of necessary factors. Cryoprecipitate contains high con-
centrations of von Willebrand Factor, factor V, and fibrinogen and is
useful for acute treatment of hemorrhage due to vWD. Both frozen
and lyophilized platelet concentrates are available for dogs and can
be used to address hemorrhage due to thrombocytopenia [70].
A drug that is available to human medicine and that has been
used in dogs to a small degree is recombinant activated factor VII
(fVIIa; Novoseven®, Novo Nordisk, Denmark). Its mechanism is
explained as follows: although physiologic levels of fVIIa only result
in small amounts of thrombin, the larger dose used with rfVIIa
results in sufficient thrombin formation to allow coagulation to
proceed. Activated factor VII is indicated for the cessation of bleed-
ing in patients with hemophilia or other coagulation factor defi-
ciencies and has been used to correct hemostatic testing
abnormalities in fVII-deficient Beagles [71]. fVIIa has also been
used to stop bleeding in human patients with severe trauma and
coagulopathy [72]. In this context, it effectively stops or slows
bleeding without a concomitant increase in the incidence of throm-
bosis. While this represents a possible indication for use of fVIIa in
veterinary patients, the effectiveness of therapy and immunogenic-
ity of the compound itself have not been extensively studied.
If an iatrogenic coagulopathy has developed secondary to the use
of heparin molecules, protamine may be used to reverse the effects
Table 31.1 Doses of anticoagulant and antiplatelet drugs used in veterinary medicine.
Drug 	Species 	Dose 	Comments
Aspirin 	Dog
Cat
Horse
5 mg/kg PO q24 h [20]
81 mg/cat PO q48–72 h [25]
5 mg/kg PO q48 h [21]
5 mg/kg PO q24 h [26]
10 mg/kg [54]
Analgesic dose higher
Questionable efficacy at either dose
No decrease in platelet function
Effective; single dose
Clopidogrel 	Dog
Cat
Horse
1–3 mg/kg PO q24 h [27,44]
18.75 mg/cat PO q24 h [11]
2 mg/kg PO q24 h [26]
Warfarin 	Dog
Cat
0.22 mg/kg PO q12–24 h [55]
0.06–0.09 mg/kg PO q24 h [56]
Adjust using PT or INR
Monitor PT
Unfractionated
heparin
Dog
Cat
Horse
150–300 U/kg SC q8 h [16,42,44]
20–50 U/kg/h IV
150–300 U/kg SC q6–8 h [43,44]
40–150 U/kg SC q12 h [57]
Adjust to target aPTT or anti-Xa levels
Loading dose of 100 U/kg IV may be given prior to IV
constant rate infusion in dogs [44]
May result in anemia
Low-molecular-
weight heparin
Dog
Cat
Horse
Dalteparin 150 U/kg SC q8 h [58,59]
Dalteparin 100–175 U/kg SC q8 h [44]
Enoxaparin 0.8 mg/kg SC q6 h [44,60]
Dalteparin 75–200 IU/kg SC q6–8 h [43,44,61]
Enoxaparin 0.75–1 mg/kg SC q6–12 h [43,44,62]
Dalteparin 50 U/kg SC q12 h [63,71]
Enoxaparin 40–80 U/kg SC q24 h [64]
Rivaroxaban 	Dog
Cat
0.5–2 mg/kg PO q 24 h [44,65]
2.5 mg/cat PO q 24 h [35]
0.5–1 mg/kg PO q24 h [44]
When used in combination with clopidogrel a lower dose
(i.e., 0.5–1 mg/kg) should be targeted
aPTT, activated partial thromboplastin time; INR, international normalized ratio; PO, per os; PT, prothrombin time; SC, subcutaneous.

-- 593 of 1450 --

578 	Section 4: Body Fluids and Fluid Therapy
of heparin. Protamine forms 1:1 complexes with heparins (UFH
more so than LMWH). When administered in excess, it may cause
anticoagulation. Dosing recommendations are 1–1.5 mg of prota-
mine per 100 units of heparin administered [73]. Because heparin is
rapidly metabolized, if 30 min have elapsed following heparin
administration, the protamine dose is halved and then subsequently
halved 30 min later [73]. Protamine may cause histamine release
and hypotension or bradycardia if administered rapidly IV and has
sometimes been reported to cause fatal anaphylactic reactions in
humans, which may be related to prior exposure to protamine-
containing insulin products (e.g., protamine-zinc insulin) [74].
Although these reactions have not been reported in veterinary
medicine, protamine should be administered slowly, especially in
patients who may have prior sensitization.
Drugs that support coagulation
Other drugs may be used to augment coagulation by strengthening
the fibrin clot. The lysine analogues aminocaproic acid and
tranexamic acid are classified as antifibrinolytic agents because of
their ability to limit clot breakdown in normal and pathologic cir-
cumstances. Both of these drugs work by occupying the lysine bind-
ing site on plasmin. This prevents its association with fibrin and
consequently stabilizes the clot (plasmin binds to lysine residues on
fibrin to initiate fibrinolysis). Antifibrinolytic agents are not indi-
cated for treatment of DIC but may be useful in the treatment of
perioperative bleeding, especially in patients with otherwise nor-
mal coagulation competency. They may also be used topically to
treat mucosal bleeding.
Antifibrinolytics are used in equine nasal surgery, where exten-
sive hemorrhage can occur [75]. Other authors have considered
their use in dogs with hemoperitoneum or other conditions where
the maintenance of clot integrity is critical [76]. Pharmacokinetic
and pharmacodynamic analyses of single doses of both antifibrino-
lytic agents have been published for dogs, but the safety and efficacy
in cats has not been evaluated [77,78]. The perioperative use of ami-
nocaproic acid has been described in Greyhounds due to the ten-
dency of this breed to develop postoperative hemorrhage 48–72 h
following surgery [79]. The authors hypothesized, based on the
onset of hemorrhage, that the bleeding occurred due to the break-
down of formed clots, and that Greyhounds may be hyperfibrino-
lytic in some circumstances.
References
1 McMichael M. New models of hemostasis. Top Companion Anim Med 2012; 27:
40–45.
2 Smith SA. The cell-based model of coagulation. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2009; 19:
3–10.
3 Mann KG, Krishnaswamy S, Lawson JH. Surface-dependent hemostasis. Semin
Hematol 1992; 29: 213–226.
4 Kalafatis M. Coagulation factor V: a plethora of anticoagulant molecules. Curr Opin
Hematol 2005; 12: 141–148.
5 De Laforcade AM. Diseases associated with thrombosis. Top Companion Anim Med
2012; 27: 59–64.
6 Jessen LR, Wiinberg B, Kjelgaard-Hansen M, et al. Thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis
inhibitor activity in healthy and diseased dogs. Vet Clin Pathol 2010; 39: 296–301.
7 Born G, Patrono C. Antiplatelet drugs. Br J Pharmacol 2006; 147(Suppl 1):
S241–S251.
8 Jandrey KE. Assessment of platelet function. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2012; 22:
81–98.
9 Callan MB, Giger U. Assessment of a point-of-care instrument for identification of
primary hemostatic disorders in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2001; 62: 652–658.
10 Brooks M, Catalfamo J. Buccal mucosa bleeding time is prolonged in canine models
of primary hemostatic disorders. Thromb Haemost 1993; 70: 777–780.
11 Hogan DF, Andrews DA, Green HW, et al. Antiplatelet effects and pharmacody-
namics of clopidogrel in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2004; 225: 1406–1411.
12 Babski DM, Brainard BM, Krimer PM, et al. Sonoclot evaluation of whole blood
coagulation in healthy adult dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2012; 22: 646–652.
13 Dixon-Jimenez AC, Brainard BM, Cathcart CJ, et al. Evaluation of a point-of-care
coagulation analyzer (Abaxis VSPro) for identification of coagulopathies in dogs.
J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2013; 23: 402–407.
14 Ganter MT, Hofer CK. Coagulation monitoring: current techniques and clinical
use of viscoelastic point-of-care coagulation devices. Anesth Analg 2008; 106:
1366–1375.
15 Whiting P, Al M, Westwood M, et al. Viscoelastic point-of- care testing to assist with
the diagnosis, management and monitoring of haemostasis: a systematic review
and cost- effectiveness analysis. Health Technol Assess 2015; 19: 1–228, v–vi.
16 Babski DM, Brainard BM, Ralph AG, et al. Sonoclot(R) evaluation of single- and
multiple-dose subcutaneous unfractionated heparin therapy in healthy adult dogs.
J Vet Intern Med 2012; 26: 631–638.
17 Epstein KL, Brainard BM, Lopes MA, et al. Thrombelastography in 26 healthy
horses with and without activation by recombinant human tissue factor. J Vet Emerg
Crit Care 2009; 19: 96–101.
18 Banerjee A, Blois SL, Wood RD. Comparing citrated native, kaolin-activated, and
tissue factor-activated samples and determining intraindividual variability for
feline thromboelastography. J Vet Diagn Invest 2011; 23: 1109–1113.
19 Mackman N. Triggers, targets and treatments for thrombosis. Nature 2008; 451:
914–918.
20 Brainard BM, Meredith CP, Callan MB, et al. Changes in platelet function, hemo-
stasis, and prostaglandin expression after treatment with nonsteroidal antiinflam-
matory drugs with various cyclooxygenase selectivities in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2007;
68: 251–257.
21 Cathcart CJ, Brainard BM, Reynolds LR, et al. Lack of inhibitory effect of acetylsali-
cylic acid and meloxicam on whole blood platelet aggregation in cats. J Vet Emerg
Crit Care 2012; 22: 99–106.
22 McLewee N, Archer T, Wills R, et al. Effects of aspirin dose escalation on platelet
function and urinary thromboxane and prostacyclin levels in normal dogs. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2018; 41: 60–67.
23 Johnson GJ, Leis LA, King RA. Thromboxane responsiveness of dog platelets is
inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. Thromb Haemost 1991; 65: 578–580.
24 Berent R, Sinzinger H. “Aspirin – resistance”? A few critical considerations on defi-
nition, terminology, diagnosis, clinical value, natural course of atherosclerotic dis-
ease, and therapeutic consequences. Vasa 2011; 40: 429–438.
25 Smith SA, Tobias AH, Jacob KA, et al. Arterial thromboembolism in cats: acute
crisis in 127 cases (1992–2001) and long-term management with low-dose aspirin
in 24 cases. J Vet Intern Med 2003; 17: 73–83.
26 Brainard BM, Epstein KL, LoBato D, et al. Effects of clopidogrel and aspirin on
platelet aggregation, thromboxane production, and serotonin secretion in horses.
J Vet Intern Med 2011; 25: 116–122.
27 Brainard BM, Kleine SA, Papich MG, et al. Pharmacodynamic and pharmacoki-
netic evaluation of clopidogrel and the carboxylic acid metabolite SR 26334 in
healthy dogs. Am J Vet Res 2010; 71: 822–830.
28 Thames BE, Lovvorn J, Papich MG, et al. The effects of clopidogrel and omeprazole
on platelet function in normal dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2017; 40(2): 130–139.
29 Vadasz D, Sztriha LK, Sas K, et al. Aspirin and clopidogrel resistance: possible
mechanisms and clinical relevance. Part I: concept of resistance. Ideggyogy Sz 2012;
65: 377–385.
30 Ueda Y, Li RHL, Nguyen N, et al. A genetic polymorphism in P2RY1 impacts
response to clopidogrel in cats with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Sci Rep 2021;
11(1): 12522.
31 Palacio S, Hart RG, Pearce LA, et al. Effect of addition of clopidogrel to aspirin on
mortality: systematic review of randomized trials. Stroke 2012; 43: 2157–2162.
32 Waddell LS, Poppenga RH, Drobatz KJ. Anticoagulant rodenticide screening in
dogs: 123 cases (1996–2003). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2013; 242: 516–521.
33 Winter RL, Sedacca CD, Adams A, et al. Aortic thrombosis in dogs: presentation,
therapy, and outcome in 26 cases. J Vet Cardiol 2012; 14: 333–342.
34 Logan JC, Callan MB, Drew K, et al. Clinical indications for use of fresh frozen
plasma in dogs: 74 dogs (October through December 1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc
2001; 218: 1449–1455.
35 Dixon-Jimenez AC, Brainard BM, Brooks MB, et al. Pharmacokinetic and pharma-
codynamic evaluation of oral rivaroxaban in healthy adult cats. J Vet Emerg Crit
Care 2016; 26: 619–629.
36 Bae J, Kim H, Kim W, et al. Therapeutic monitoring of rivaroxaban in dogs
using thromboelastography and prothrombin time. J Vet Intern Med 2019; 33:
1322–1330.
37 Myers JA, Wittenburg LA, Olver CS, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynam-
ics of the factor Xa inhibitor apixaban after oral and intravenous administration to
cats. Am J Vet Res 2015; 76: 732–738.

-- 594 of 1450 --

Chapter 31: Treatment of Coagulation and Platelet Disorders 	579
38 He K, Luettgen JM, Zhang D, et al. Preclinical pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
namics of apixaban, a potent and selective factor Xa inhibitor. Eur J Drug Metab
Pharmacokinet 2011; 36: 129–139.
39 Mischke R, Teuber M, Tiede A. Measurements of endogenous thrombin potential
using the CAT method in cats: reference values and influence of the direct factor Xa
inhibitor apixaban. Res Vet Sci 2019; 127: 113–121.
40 Wallace GE, McKaba VF, Reinhart JM, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
namics of intravenous and oral apixaban in horses. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2021; 44:
724–732.
41 Douxfils J, Adcock DM, Bates SM, et al. 2021 update of the International Council for
Standardization in Haematology Recommendations for Laboratory Measurement of
Direct Oral Anticoagulants. Thromb Haemost 2021; 121: 1008–1020.
42 Pittman JR, Koenig A, Brainard BM. The effect of unfractionated heparin on
thrombelastographic analysis in healthy dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2010; 20:
216–223.
43 Alwood AJ, Downend AB, Brooks MB, et al. Anticoagulant effects of low-molecular
weight heparins in healthy cats. J Vet Intern Med 2007; 21: 378–387.
44 Blais MC, Bianco D, Goggs R, et al. Consensus on the Rational Use of
Antithrombotics in Veterinary Critical Care (CURATIVE): Domain 3-Defining
antithrombotic protocols. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2019; 29: 60–74.
45 Rozanski EA, Hughes D, Giger U. The effect of heparin and fresh frozen plasma on
antithombin III activity, prothrombin time and activated partial thromboplastin
time in critically ill dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2001; 11: 15–21.
46 Kyles AE, Feldman EC, de Cock HE, et al. Surgical management of adrenal gland
tumors with and without associated tumor thrombi in dogs: 40 cases (1994–2001).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2003; 223: 654–662.
47 Moore JN, Mahaffey EA, Zboran M. Heparin-induced agglutination of erythro-
cytes in horses. Am J Vet Res 1987; 48: 68–71.
48 Morris TA, Marsh JJ, Konopka R, et al. Anti-thrombotic efficacies of enoxaparin,
dalteparin, and unfractionated heparin in venous thrombo-embolism. Thromb Res
2000; 100: 185–194.
49 Schwarzwald CC, Feige K, Wunderli-Allenspach H, et al. Comparison of pharma-
cokinetic variables for two low-molecular-weight heparins after subcutaneous
administration of a single dose to horses. Am J Vet Res 2002; 63: 868–873.
50 Fiakpui NN, Hogan DF, Whittem T, et al. Dose determination of fondaparinux in
healthy cats. Am J Vet Res 2012; 73: 556–561.
51 Monagle P, Chalmers E, Chan A, et al. Antithrombotic therapy in neonates and
children: American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice
Guidelines, 8th edn. Chest 2008; 133: 887S–968S.
52 Hirsh J, Bauer KA, Donati MB, et al. Parenteral anticoagulants: American College
of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines, 8th edn. Chest
2008; 133: 141S–159S.
53 Breuhl EL, Moore G, Brooks MB, et al. A prospective study of unfractionated hepa-
rin therapy in dogs with primary immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 2009; 45: 125–133.
54 Segura D, Monreal L, Espada Y, et al. Assessment of a platelet function analyser in
horses: reference range and influence of a platelet aggregation inhibitor. Vet J 2005;
170: 108–112.
55 Neff-Davis CA, Davis LE, Gillette EL. Warfarin in the dog: pharmacokinetics as
related to clinical response. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1981; 4: 135–140.
56 Smith SA, Kraft SL, Lewis DC, et al. Pharmacodynamics of warfarin in cats. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2000; 23: 339–344.
57 Feige K, Schwarzwald CC, Bombeli T. Comparison of unfractioned and low molec-
ular weight heparin for prophylaxis of coagulopathies in 52 horses with colic: a
randomised double-blind clinical trial. Equine Vet J 2003; 35: 506–513.
58 Mischke R, Grebe S, Jacobs C, et al. Amidolytic heparin activity and values for
several hemostatic variables after repeated subcutaneous administration of high
doses of a low molecular weight heparin in healthy dogs. Am J Vet Res 2001; 62:
595–598.
59 Mischke R, Grebe S. The correlation between plasma anti-factor Xa activity and
haemostatic tests in healthy dogs, following the administration of a low molecular
weight heparin. Res Vet Sci 2000; 69: 241–247.
60 Lunsford KV, Mackin AJ, Langston VC, et al. Pharmacokinetics of subcutaneous
low molecular weight heparin (enoxaparin) in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2009;
45: 261–267.
61 Mischke R, Schmitt J, Wolken S, et al. Pharmacokinetics of the low molecular
weight heparin dalteparin in cats. Vet J 2012; 192: 299–303.
62 Van de Wiele CM, Hogan DF, Green HW, et al. Antithrombotic effect of enoxaparin
in clinically healthy cats: a venous stasis model. J Vet Intern Med 2010; 24:
185–191.
63 Whelchel DD, Tennent-Brown BS, Giguere S, Epstein KL. Pharmacodynamics of
multi-dose low molecular weight heparin in healthy horses. Vet Surg 2013; 42(4):
448–454.
64 Schwarzwald CC, Feige K, Wunderli-Allenspach H, et al. Comparison of pharma-
cokinetic variables for two low-molecular-weight heparins after subcutaneous
administration of a single dose to horses. Am J Vet Res 2002; 63: 868–873.
65 Yang VK, Cunningham SM, Rush JE, de Laforcade A. The use of rivaroxaban for
the treatment of thrombotic complications in four dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2016;
26: 729–736.
66 Griffin A, Callan MB, Shofer FS, et al. Evaluation of a canine D-dimer point-of- care
test kit for use in samples obtained from dogs with disseminated intravascular
coagulation, thromboembolic disease, and hemorrhage. Am J Vet Res 2003; 64:
1562–1569.
67 Welch KM, Rozanski EA, Freeman LM, et al. Prospective evaluation of tissue plas-
minogen activator in 11 cats with arterial thromboembolism. J Feline Med Surg
2010; 12: 122–128.
68 Guillaumin J, Gibson RM, Goy-Thollot I, Bonagura JD. Thrombolysis with Tissue
Plasminogen Activator (TPA) in feline acute aortic thromboembolism: a retrospec-
tive study of 16 cases. J Feline Med Surg 2019; 21: 340–346.
69 Hong TT, Huang J, Lucchesi BR. Effect of thrombolysis on myocardial injury:
recombinant tissue plasminogen activator vs. alfimeprase. Am J Physiol Heart Circ
Physiol 2006; 290: H959–H967.
70 Goggs R, Brainard BM, LeVine DN, et al. Lyophilized platelets versus cryopre-
served platelets for management of bleeding in thrombocytopenic dogs: a multi-
center randomized clinical trial. J Vet Intern Med 2020; 34: 2384–2397.
71 Callan MB, Aljamali MN, Margaritis P, et al. A novel missense mutation responsible
for factor VII deficiency in research Beagle colonies. J Thromb Haemost 2006; 4:
2616–2622.
72 Sorensen B, Fries D. Emerging treatment strategies for trauma-induced coagulopa-
thy. Br J Surg 2012; 99(Suppl 1): 40–50.
73 Plumb DC. Veterinary Drug Handbook, 5th edn. Ames, IA: Blackwell, 2005.
74 Weiler JM, Freiman P, Sharath MD, et al. Serious adverse reactions to protamine
sulfate: are alternatives needed? J Allergy Clin Immunol 1985; 75: 297–303.
75 Ross J, Dallap BL, Dolente BA, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of
epsilon-aminocaproic acid in horses. Am J Vet Res 2007; 68: 1016–1021.
76 Kelmer E, Marer K, Bruchim Y, et al. Retrospective evaluation of the safety and
efficacy of tranexamic acid (Hexakapron) for the treatment of bleeding disorders in
dogs. Isr J Vet Med 2013; 68: 94–100.
77 Brown JC, Brainard BM, Fletcher DJ, et al. Effect of aminocaproic acid on clot
strength and clot lysis of canine blood determined by use of an in vitro model of
hyperfibrinolysis. Am J Vet Res 2016; 77: 1258–1265.
78 Osekavage KE, Brainard BM, Lane SL, et al. Pharmacokinetics of tranexamic acid
in healthy dogs and assessment of its antifibrinolytic properties in canine blood.
Am J Vet Res 2018; 79: 1057–1063.
79 Marin LM, Iazbik MC, Zaldivar-Lopez S, et al. Retrospective evaluation of the
effectiveness of epsilon aminocaproic acid for the prevention of postamputation
bleeding in retired racing Greyhounds with appendicular bone tumors: 46 cases
(2003–2008). J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2012; 22: 332–340.

-- 595 of 1450 --

32
580
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of Lumb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Physiology of body fluids
The body is principally composed of water, a triatomic molecule
composed of two hydrogen molecules bound by covalent bonds to
one oxygen molecule (H–O–H). Water behaves like a charged mol-
ecule: a dipole created by negatively charged oxygen and positively
charged hydrogen. This polarity is responsible for imparting many
of water’s chemical and physical properties such as high surface
tension, high specific heat, high heat of vaporization, low vapor
pressure, and a high boiling point. Because of water’s ionizing
nature, substances dissolved in water segregate into individual
components. Water also exists in an ionized form, composed of a
negatively charged hydroxyl ion (OH−) and a positively charged
protonated ion (H3
O+
). The aqueous milieu created by water provides
the framework where all the metabolic and enzymatic processes
take place.
Total body water
Water is the single most abundant compound in the body, making
up the majority of body weight. On average, water constitutes
approximately 60% of adult mammalian body weight. Age, body
composition, and sex can influence total body water (TBW).
Neonatal animals have greater TBW compared to adults (80%
versus 60%), and an age-related decrease has been described in
companion animals during the first six months of life [1]. Adipose
tissue has less water content compared to lean body tissues like
muscle, so estimation of TBW needs to consider body condition
since obesity can lead to overestimation.
To understand distribution of body water, the body fluids can be
thought of as existing in two major compartments: intracellular
fluid (ICF) and extracellular fluid (ECF). ECF can be further
divided into two compartments: interstitial fluid (ISF) that surrounds
the cells, and intravascular fluid (IVF) that is contained within the
vessels. The largest volume of water in the body is contained within
the cells, making ICF the largest contributor to body weight.
Of TBW, about two-thirds (i.e., 40% of body weight) is ICF. The
remaining one-third of TBW (i.e., 20% of body weight) is ECF
where it is distributed between ISF and IVF in a ratio of 3:1. About
three-quarters of ECF (i.e., 15% of body weight) is ISF that bathes
the cells and one-quarter of ECF (i.e., 5% of body weight) is IVF
(i.e., plasma volume).
32 Clinical Pharmacology and Administration
of Fluid, Electrolyte, and Blood Component
Solutions
Amandeep S. Chohan1 and Elizabeth B. Davidow2
1 Department of Surgical and Radiological Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California–Davis, Davis, California, USA
2 Timberline Veterinary Emergency and Specialty, Seattle, Washington, USA
Chapter contents
Physiology of body fluids, 580
Total body water, 580
Solute composition of various body fluid compartments, 581
Movement of water between intracellular and extracellular fluid
compartments, 581
Fluid shifts between intravascular (plasma) and interstitial fluid
compartments, 581
Endothelial glycocalyx model of transvascular fluid exchange
and modification of Starling’s equation, 582
Different types of fluids used in clinical practice, 582
Crystalloids, 582
Perioperative fluid therapy, 588
Liberal versus restrictive approach, 588
Monitoring fluid balance, 589
Individualized goal-directed fluid therapy, 589
Improving the utility of dynamic indices of preload responsiveness, 591
Microvasculature and fluid therapy, 591
Electrolytes, 592
Sodium, 592
Calcium, 593
Potassium, 593
Transfusion therapy, 595
Blood component therapy, 595
Transfusion compatibility testing, 599
Transfusion considerations for massive blood loss, 600
Blood administration, 600
Adverse effects of transfusion, 600
Alternatives to allogenic blood transfusions, 602
Autologous transfusion, 602
Blood substitutes, 603
Strategies to minimize perioperative blood loss, 603
References, 603

-- 596 of 1450 --

Chapter 32: Clinical Pharmacology and Administration of Fluid, Electrolyte, and Blood Component Solutions 	581
Solute composition of various body fluid
compartments
In addition to water, body fluid compartments also contain varying
concentrations of different solutes (Table 32.1). This heterogeneity
is because the membranes separating fluid compartments have dif-
ferent permeability characteristics for various solutes. The ICF and
ECF are separated by cell membranes, while capillary endothelium
separates ISF and IVF. Endothelium is freely permeable to water
and various ionic solutes, and the concentration of these is similar
in ISF and IVF. On the other hand, the cell membrane is freely per-
meable to water, but by utilizing various carrier proteins, active
transport and passive diffusion mechanisms maintain a specific
intracellular milieu, resulting in very different solute concentrations
in ICF compared to ECF (Table 32.1). The Gibbs–Donnan equilib-
rium results in slightly different concentrations of cations and anions
in the ISF and IVF (i.e., plasma), but clinically this difference is neg-
ligible and the plasma concentration of various ions is considered to
be a reflection of ECF solute concentrations. The major cation in
ECF is Na +
, with Cl− and HCO 3
− being the most abundant anions. In
contrast, the major cations in ICF are K+ and Mg2+
, and the most
common anions are organic phosphates and proteins.
Movement of water between intracellular
and extracellular fluid compartments
Movement of water between ICF and ECF is governed by the
osmotic gradient created by the differing concentrations of solutes
between these two fluid compartments. The concentrations of sol-
utes within a solution determine osmolality, which is dependent
only on the number of particles in solution and not on their chemi-
cal formula, valence, molecular weight (MW), or size. Osmotic
pressure due to solutes is expressed as milliosmoles per kilogram
of water (mOsm/kg). In biologic fluids, the difference between
osmolarity (solute osmotic concentration per unit volume of solu-
tion) and osmolality (solute osmotic concentration per unit mass of
solvent) is not significant, and the milliosmolar concentration of a
solution can be expressed as milliosmolarity or milliosmolality
of solution.
Osmolality (i.e., the number of osmotically active particles) in
part determines the volume of water in ECF and ICF. Solutes that
cannot cross the cell membrane contribute to effective osmolality
(or tonicity) and are called “effective osmoles.” On the other hand,
solutes that can freely diffuse across the cell membrane (like urea)
are called “ineffective osmoles” and do not contribute to fluid shifts
across cell membranes since they are in equilibrium on both sides
of the semipermeable membrane. Osmosis is the movement of
water across the semipermeable membrane from an area of lower
(low solute concentration) to higher (high solute concentration)
osmotic pressure.
In both the plasma and ISF, osmolality is mainly the result of ions
such as Na +
, K +
, Cl−, HCO3
−, glucose, and urea. Large molecules like
albumin, though an important component of colloid osmotic pres-
sure (COP), contribute little to osmolality. Being the most abundant
cation in ECF, Na + and its associated anions are responsible for
the majority of ECF osmolality. The ECF osmolality (essentially
the plasma osmolality) can be estimated by using the following
formula:
Plasma osmolality 	Na 	K Glucose 	BUN
mOsm
2 18 	2 8
([ 	] [ 	]) [ 	] [ 	]
.	/	( 	kkg)
where Na+ and K+ are expressed in mEq/L, and glucose and blood
urea nitrogen (BUN) are expressed in mg/dL. Glucose is an effec-
tive osmole by not being freely permeable through cell membranes,
but urea is not an effective osmole because it is freely permeable
across cell membranes. The concentration of all effective and inef-
fective osmoles is referred to as “plasma osmolality,” but the concen-
tration of only effective osmoles refers to “effective osmolality” or
“tonicity.” When the concentrations of various solutes on either side
of the cell membrane are not disturbed (e.g., equilibrium), the fluid
is in osmotic equilibrium (same osmolality), and there is no gradient
for the movement of water between the two fluid compartments. If
there is extracellular loss of free water, the concentration of solutes
increases in the ECF, leading to generation of higher osmolality
(i.e., osmotic pressure) compared to ICF, resulting in osmotic pull
causing net movement (osmosis) of water through the cell membrane
into the ECF until a new osmotic equilibrium is achieved. Hence,
water is lost from the ICF to replace an ECF free water deficit.
Osmolality can be either measured or calculated (as described
earlier). Osmolality is measured clinically by freezing point
depression of a serum sample. Normal serum osmolality is around
300 mOsm/kg. Clinically, the measured osmolality may not be
equal to the calculated value, and the difference between the two
(osmolal gap) can be used to predict the presence of unmeasured
solutes (such as ethylene glycol and acetone).
Fluid shifts between intravascular (plasma)
and interstitial fluid compartments
Fluid shifts between IVF (plasma) and ISF compartments occur at
the level of capillaries. The fundamental principles that govern
movement were described by Starling in 1896 [2]. Fluid movement
across the capillary wall is determined by the imbalance between
the osmotic absorption pressure created by plasma proteins (COP)
and the capillary hydrostatic pressure. The capillary endothelial
barrier slowly leaks plasma proteins into ISF. Staverman’s osmotic
reflection coefficient, σ, can be used to quantify the degree of leaki-
ness of capillary membrane to any particular solute. It ranges from
1 (i.e., 100% reflection or not permeable) to 0 (i.e., no reflection or
completely permeable). For a membrane separating solutions of a
single solute at two different concentrations, the principle of irre-
versible thermodynamics states that
Jv
p
A L 	P	[ 	]
where Jv is the volume filtration rate per unit membrane area A, Lp
represents the hydraulic permeability, ΔP the difference in hydro-
static pressures, and Δπ is the difference in osmotic pressures across
the membrane.
Table 32.1 Solute composition of various body compartments.
Ions 	Extracellular fluid (mEq/L) 	Intracellular
fluid (mEq/L)
Interstitial fluid 	Intravascular
fluid (plasma)
Na + 	145 	142 	12
K + 	4 	5 	140
Ca 2+ 	2 	2 	4
Mg 2+ 	2 	2 	34
Cl – 	112 	104 	4
HCO 3
– 	27 	24 	12
HPO 4
2–
, H2 PO4
– 	2 	2 	40
Protein – 	1 	14 	50

-- 597 of 1450 --

582 	Section 4: Body Fluids and Fluid Therapy
IVF and ISF each contain many solutes (species “n”). Therefore,
to describe the movement of fluid across the capillary wall, the
above equation can be written as:
J n 	n
i
n
v
p
A L 	P 1
where i
n
n
1
∆πn represents the sum of the difference in osmotic
pressure exerted across the capillary wall by all the solutes in IVF
and ISF. In the above equation, ΔP describes the difference between
local capillary blood pressure (Pc ) and ISF hydrostatic pressure (Pi ).
In most microvascular beds, the capillary wall is freely permeable to
water and other ionic solutes like Na +
, K +
, and glucose because of
their very small σ of ≤ 0.1. In other words, they are ineffective
osmoles in this scenario and do not contribute to water distribu-
tion between ISF and IVF. Only the macromolecular solutes
(like proteins) with high σ, and which are present in significantly
different concentrations across the capillary wall, will contribute to
generation of osmotic gradients (σΔπ). If πp is the osmotic pressure
generated by plasma proteins (COP) in IVF and πi is the osmotic
pressure generated by macromolecules in ISF, then the above equa-
tion can be written as the conventional expression for Starling’s
equation as follows:
J P 	P	v
p 	c 	i 	p 	i
A L [( 	) 	( 	)]
Under normal circumstances, Pc is much greater than Pi
, produc-
ing a hydrostatic pressure gradient at the arterial end that favors
movement of fluid out of the capillary into the interstitium.
Capillary blood pressure is decreased from the arteriolar to venous
end of the capillary, while the πp stays almost the same, resulting in
an oncotic pressure gradient that favors the movement of fluid from
the interstitium into the capillaries at the venous end [3]. Altogether
there is a net filtration pressure that is responsible for the move-
ment of water out of the capillaries into the interstitium. Some of
the filtered fluid is normally returned back to the circulation via the
lymphatic system.
Endothelial glycocalyx model of transvascular
fluid exchange and modification of Starling’s
equation
As the understanding of microcapillary structure has evolved, it has
been proposed that the filtration properties of the capillary wall
actually reside in an endothelial surface layer (ESL) that is com-
posed of a matrix of membrane bound complex sugars called the
endothelial glycocalyx (EG). The matrix covers the intercellular
clefts and the endothelial cells on the luminal side of the capillar-
ies [4,5]. Traditional Starling’s forces describe that the fluid filtered
at the arteriolar end of the capillary is absorbed back into the circu-
lation at the venous end under the influence of the dominant
osmotic pressure gradient generated by the difference, πp − πi
.
Recently, it has been shown that the effect of πi on fluid exchange at
the capillary level is much less than predicted by Starling’s original
equation. It is now established that many capillaries filter fluid into
the ISF throughout their length, and absorption at the venous end
of the capillaries does not take place. Plasma protein oncotic pres-
sure (COP) opposes this filtration but does not change the direction
of net filtration (i.e., filtration is always occurring toward the ISF).
Most of the filtered fluid returns to the circulation via lymphatics.
The EG layer separates plasma from a subglycocalyx space that
contains a very small amount of protein. This subglycocalyx
COP (πg
) should replace πi in the Starling’s equation to determine
the transcapillary flow (Jv ):
J P 	P	v
p 	c 	i 	p 	g
A L [ 	( 	)]
Low protein concentration in the subglycocalyx space results in a
low value of πg causing a higher value for (πp − πg
), that is, a bigger
opposing force against the transcapillary flow (Jv ) that occurs under
the influence of differences in hydrostatic pressures around the
capillary membrane (Pc – Pi
). The fact that the low value of πg results
in low Jv
, coupled with the important contribution of lymph flow in
various tissues in returning fluid back into circulation, are critical
features on which the glycocalyx model of transvascular fluid
exchange is based.
An index of vascular permeability is transcapillary escape rate of
albumin (TCERA). In humans, it is about 5% of the plasma albu-
min per hour. This rate could double during surgery or increase
20% or more in septic patients. Evidence points to a compromised
EG in those patients. Loss of plasma albumin causes reduction in
πp leading to an increase in Jv
. Increasing the πp (COP) in septic
patients with synthetic or natural colloids will decrease Jv and
prolong vascular expansion compared to crystalloids, though the
use of artificial colloids is controversial in septic patients (see
discussion below).
Different types of fluids used in clinical
practice
Crystalloids
Crystalloid solutions are prepared by dissolving crystalline com-
pounds in water. Most of the clinically used crystalloids are either
polyionic sodium-based or dextrose solutions in water. Crystalloids
are classified mostly based on their tonicity relative to plasma.
Isotonic crystalloids
Isotonic crystalloids have similar tonicity/osmolality compared to
the plasma. This means that administration of isotonic fluids will
not cause any change in the solute concentration of the ECF. There
will not be any alteration in the net osmotic forces that might trig-
ger the water movement between ICF and ECF. Hence, the isotonic
crystalloid fluid will stay within the ECF, and no alteration in ICF
volume will take place unless previous free water loss occurred
from the ICF compartment. After intravenous administration, iso-
tonic crystalloids stay within the ECF and redistribute into the IVF
and ISF. This redistribution occurs according to the normal fluid
distribution in the body so that within 30–60 min post infusion,
only about one-quarter of the administered amount remains intra-
vascular and the rest moves out to the ISF [6,7]. The most commonly
used isotonic fluids and their constituents can be found in Table 32.2.
Isotonic fluids contain mixtures of various electrolytes found in
plasma with or without additives, which affect the acid–base status
of the patient. Some crystalloids contain dextrose. Except for physi-
ological (or “normal”) saline (0.9% NaCl), most of the commonly
used crystalloids contain a precursor for bicarbonate production
such as lactate or acetate and gluconate ions (Lactated Ringer’s
solution [LRS], or Normosol® and Plasma-Lyte®, respectively).
Lactate ions undergo either oxidation or gluconeogenesis primarily
in the liver, although kidneys and muscle tissues also participate to

-- 598 of 1450 --

Chapter 32: Clinical Pharmacology and Administration of Fluid, Electrolyte, and Blood Component Solutions 	583
some extent. During glycogenesis, lactate is converted to glucose
via pyruvate, and this process utilizes H +
. So lactate also has a
bicarbonate-sparing effect. Acetate is metabolized mostly in mus-
cle, and gluconate can be metabolized by most tissues. Because
these crystalloids increase bicarbonate level in the plasma, they
have been called “alkalinizing fluids.” 0.9% sodium chloride, on the
other hand, is an “acidifying solution” due to plasma bicarbonate
dilution (dilutional acidosis) and high Cl− content that can decrease
the strong ion difference and cause hyperchloremic metabolic aci-
dosis [8–10]. The composition of some crystalloids more closely
matches plasma (e.g., LRS, Plasma-Lyte®-148, Normosol®-R) com-
pared to others (e.g., 0.9% NaCl), and they are considered balanced
isotonic crystalloids in comparison to unbalanced crystalloids.
Another way of looking at crystalloids is from the standpoint of
their clinical use. Most of the isotonic crystalloids, because of their
similar osmolality and solute composition to plasma, do not cause
osmotic water shift from blood cells to plasma and can be used for
emergency volume resuscitation and are, therefore, called “replace-
ment fluids.”
To understand the clinical use of various crystalloids, it is imper-
ative to understand which body compartment is deficient in fluid
(intravascular/perfusion 	versus 	intracellular/hydration) 	[11].
When isotonic crystalloids are used for replenishment of IVF and
electrolyte deficits, about 75% of the fluid redistributes to ISF.
Therefore, relatively large volumes are usually administered to
replenish intravascular deficits. In dogs, Silverstein et al. demon-
strated the potential of isotonic fluids to increase the blood
volume [12]. Immediately following the infusion of fluid, the blood
volume increased by 76%, more than 3–4.5 times the increase
following hypertonic fluid and colloids. However, at 30 min post
infusion, the increase was only 35%. The initial increase in blood
volume was attributed to the greater volume of isotonic crystalloids
administered. More importantly, the authors also calculated the
efficacy ratio (ER; increase in blood volume compared to the volume
of fluid infused), and isotonic fluid had an ER of only 0.4 at 30 min
post infusion. Typically, three to four times the deficit volume of crys-
talloid fluids is recommended to replenish the intravascular space.
Shock, hemorrhage, and severe volume deficit due to diarrhea,
vomiting, excessive diuresis, or third spacing constitute common
scenarios when these fluids are administered. Crystalloids are also
administered during most elective surgery procedures in healthy
patients. It is often recommended that patients with shock should
receive up to one blood volume (e.g., 80–90 mL/kg in dogs) in an
hour, starting with one-quarter to one-third of the shock dose given
incrementally with constant monitoring for desired endpoints to
guide fluid therapy further (i.e., goal-directed fluid therapy). A typical
fluid rate used for patients under general anesthesia is 5–10 mL/kg/h
[13,14], although recent trends have been to reduce these rates fur-
ther in patients without risk factors for perioperative fluid loss.
Slight variability in composition and concentration of various
solutes (electrolytes and buffers) in different isotonic crystalloids
(see Table 32.2) may make administration of one solution preferable
in certain clinical situations. Patients with hypochloremic metabolic
alkalosis and hypercalcemia may benefit from the use of 0.9%
saline [15,16]. Alkalinizing fluids are not used very commonly in
adult dehydrated cattle because metabolic acidosis is not a common
occurrence except in cases of grain overload, hepatic lipidosis,
chronic ketosis, or kidney disease [17,18]. Patients that are acidotic
may benefit from the use of alkalinizing fluids. LRS can contain
either a racemic mixture of both L-lactate (i.e., S(+)- lactate) and
D- lactate (i.e., R(–)-lactate), or just L-lactate. Fluids containing
acetate might have a more profound alkalinizing effect, as dogs
cannot metabolize D-lactate as readily [15].
Various isotonic crystalloids have different Na + ion concentra-
tions, giving them a range of osmolalities (see Table 32.2). In severe
electrolyte disturbances, it is recommended to use a fluid with a Na+
concentration closest to that of the patient for resuscitation to avoid
rapid changes in Na + ion concentration (Na+ concentration should
not change more than 0.5–1 mEq/L/h). While resuscitating patients
with head trauma or cerebral edema, replacement crystalloid solu-
tions with the highest Na+ concentration (i.e., 0.9% NaCl) will be least
likely to reduce plasma osmolality that might favor the movement
of water into brain cells. With a Na + content of 130 mEq/L, LRS is
relatively hypotonic compared to plasma and has been associated
with increased intracranial pressure in some models of traumatic
brain injury [19,20].
ISF accumulation/edema can occur after excessive fluid adminis-
tration, especially in patients suffering from oliguric renal failure,
cardiac insufficiency, head trauma, pulmonary contusions, or
decreased COP. In clinical scenarios characterized by active intra-
cavitary (abdominal or thoracic) or intracranial bleeding, aggressive
fluid administration to achieve normotensive resuscitation endpoints
before surgical control of bleeding is achieved could increase hydro-
static pressure and might lead to disruption of blood clots and
worsening of bleeding. “Hypotensive” fluid resuscitation is often
advocated in these patients, aiming to achieve the lower limit of
clinically acceptable mean arterial pressure (60 mmHg, corresponding
to a minimally adequate perfusion pressure of various vital organ
systems). Others suggest delayed fluid resuscitation until hemosta-
sis is achieved; however, the risk of anesthetizing hemodynamically
unstable patients should be weighed against the perceived risk of
volume resuscitation. The veterinarian should also be cognizant of
the possibility of excessive hemodilution of clotting factors, plate-
lets, plasma protein, and red blood cells (RBCs) when large volumes
of fluid are administered [6,7,21]. This may be even more relevant
in patients undergoing surgical procedures associated with more
blood loss or patients that already have pre-existing coagulopathies,
hypoproteinemia, or anemia.
Table 32.2 Characteristics of various isotonic crystalloids compared to plasma.
Fluid (isotonic,
replacement)
Electrolytes (mEq/L) 	Buffers (mEq/L) 	Osmolarity
(mOsm/L)
pH
Na + 	Cl− 	K + 	Ca2+ 	Mg2+ 	Lactate 	Acetate 	Gluconate
0.9% NaCl 	154 	154 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 	308 	5.0
Lactated Ringer’s solution 	130 	109 	4 	3 	0 	28 	0 	0 	272 	6.5
Plasma-Lyte ®- 148 	140 	98 	5 	0 	3 	0 	27 	23 	294 	5.5
Normosol ®
- R 	140 	98 	5 	0 	3 	0 	27 	23 	294 	6.4
Plasma-Lyte ®- A 	140 	98 	5 	0 	3 	0 	27 	23 	294
Plasma 	142 	104 	5 	5 	3 	HCO3
− = 24 	300 	7.4

-- 599 of 1450 --

584 	Section 4: Body Fluids and Fluid Therapy
Due to the presence of Ca 2+ ions in LRS, it is recommended that
blood products not be administered in the same fluid line since Ca2+
may antagonize common anticoagulants, leading to microemboli.
Studies have concluded that rapid transfusion rates for whole blood
(WB) or packed red blood cells (PRBCs) can be safely used with
LRS [22] and that LRS can be safely used to dilute citrate phosphate
dextrose preserved PRBCs in emergency settings [23]. Because of
the liver’s major contribution to lactate metabolism, there has been
some concern about the use of LRS in patients with hepatic insuf-
ficiency. However, studies have failed to show any increase in blood
lactate levels after LRS administration [24,25]. Hyperlactatemia
is common in cancer patients due to use of anaerobic glycolysis
by neoplastic cells, but a study in dogs suffering from lymphoma
showed only a transient increase in lactate levels that became nor-
mal after 2 h of infusion of LRS [26]. Large quantities of rapidly
administered acetate solutions can cause vasodilation due to release
of adenosine from muscles that could cause hypotension, especially
in hypovolemic patients [27–29].
Hypertonic crystalloids
Hypertonic solutions have an increased tonicity/osmolality com-
pared to plasma. Administration of hypertonic fluids will increase
osmotic pressure in the IVF and set up a gradient for the move-
ment of water from ISF as well as ICF (with lesser osmotic pres-
sure; lower solute concentration). The most commonly used
hypertonic fluids in clinical practice are hypertonic saline solutions
(HSSs; Table 32.3). The reflection coefficient of Na + for cell mem-
branes is maintained close to 1 by the Na + -K + ATPase pump,
whereas the reflection coefficient of the endothelial membrane is
only 0.1. This means that most of the movement of water after HSS
administration is from the ICF rather than ISF [30]. Hence, fluid is
pulled out of the cells (cellular dehydration) and interstitium into
the intravascular space. Analysis of transcapillary driving pres-
sures (governed by Starling’s forces) supports an immediate plasma
volume expansion under the effect of HSS that rapidly reverses the
transcapillary pressure gradient from a small filtration force under
normal physiologic conditions to a large absorptive force (osmotic
pressure gradient). Due to a very low reflection coefficient of capil-
lary endothelium for Na + , the generated osmotic pressure is trans-
mitted across the capillary endothelium to the cell membrane and
is responsible for pulling the water out of cells. As HSS itself does
little to address TBW deficits, it is imperative that hypertonic ther-
apy be followed by administration of appropriate follow-up fluids
(isotonic crystalloids, colloids, or blood products). In cattle, it was
recommended, after using hypertonic fluids, to administer fluids
ororuminally if the animal does not consume more than 5 gallons
of fluid orally [17,31]. HSSs are unbalanced crystalloids and are
available in various concentrations having very high osmolality
compared to plasma (see Table 32.3). Clinically, 7.5% HSS is most
commonly used. Although mannitol is also another hyperosmotic
agent, its osmotic effects are typically delayed by 15–30 min [32]
and effects are not as profound as 7.5% NaCl because its osmolarity
is only half (1250 mOsm/L for 25% mannitol) as much. The discus-
sion here will focus on HSS only.
In hypovolemic animals (hemorrhagic shock models), plasma
volume expansion at the end of an HSS bolus/infusion given over
1–10 min at a dose of 4–8 mL/kg varied from 10 to 21 mL/kg with
higher doses causing more volume expansion. However, HSS
quickly equilibrated within ECF so that after 1–3 h, there was
minimal plasma volume expansion [33–36]. In normovolemic dogs,
Silverstein et al. showed that the ER (defined as the relative increase
in blood volume in relation to the volume infused) was maximum
with HSS immediately post infusion (2.7 ± 0.5; approximately three
times that of other fluid types) and was still higher at 30 min post
infusion compared to isotonic crystalloids and synthetic colloids [12].
In order to prolong the duration of effect, HSS was combined with
a colloid (6% dextran 70 [HSD]) that not only increased the extent
of immediate plasma volume expansion but the plasma volume
expansion persisted 3 h later [34,35]. Other available colloids like
hydroxyethyl starch (HES) can also be combined with HSS. This
hypertonic–hyperoncotic combination constitutes “small-volume
fluid resuscitation” [17]. Usually, it is constituted by diluting
23.4% HSS with the colloid in the ratio of 1:2.5, or the two can
be used separately (2–6 mL/kg of 7% HSS plus 4–10 mL/kg of
colloid) [17,31].
Cardiovascular effects of HSS administration are characterized
by an increase in preload, heart rate, and myocardial contractility
and a decrease in systemic vascular resistance (SVR), leading to an
increase in cardiac output (CO) [37–39]. Beneficial immunomodu-
latory effects have been described characterized by decreased inter-
action of neutrophils with endothelial cells, reduced neutrophilic
activation, and improved activity of lymphocytes and natural killer
T cells [40–42]. HSSs have also been shown to reduce cytotoxic
edema and improve splanchnic and muscle capillary perfusion in
animal injury models of soft tissue contusions, hemorrhagic shock,
and superior mesenteric artery occlusion [43–47].
Most of the clinical and experimental literature on HSS/HSD
suggests its application in the management of hemorrhagic hypov-
olemic shock [33–36,48,49]. Another area where HSS has been
shown to be beneficial is in the management of intracranial hyper-
tension. Although brain trauma management foundation guide-
lines [50] still recommend mannitol as the primary hyperosmolar
therapy (Level II evidence), new evidence has been emerging that
shows hypertonic saline to be a better choice [51–56]. Benefits of
hypertonic resuscitation have also been documented in the canine
model of gastric dilation-volvulus-induced obstructive shock [57],
canine model of bile-induced pancreatitis [58], and murine models
of acute pancreatitis [59,60]
Large animal practice has found HSS/HSD to be particularly
helpful where the patient’s large blood volume makes volume
expansion challenging. Oral rehydration therapy has been
suggested as acceptable if the calf or cattle is < 8% dehydrated, but a
combination of HSS intravenous therapy plus oral rehydration was
shown to be successful if dehydration was ≥ 8% [17,31]. Use of
hypertonic–hyperoncotic resuscitation has been described in
horses with endotoxemia [61,62], in calves with endotoxemia [63]
or diarrhea [64–66], and in adult endotoxemic cattle [67].
Use of HSS in patients with uncontrolled hemorrhage can lead to
increased bleeding and worsened outcome compared to isotonic
resuscitation. However, studies demonstrate that if the hemorrhage
is controlled, then HSS can improve hemodynamic variables and
final outcomes [68–70]. It has been shown that if a bolus of
Table 32.3 Characteristics of various hypertonic saline solutions compared to plasma.
Composition 	Hypertonic saline solutions 	Normal
saline
Plasma
3% 	5% 	7.2% 7.5% 23% 	0.9%
Na+ (mEq/L) 	513 	856 1232 	1283 	4004 	154 	142
Cl– (mEq/L) 	513 	856 1232 	1283 	4004 	154 	104
Osmolarity (mOsm/L) 1026 1712 1464 	2566 	8008 	308 	300

-- 600 of 1450 --

Chapter 32: Clinical Pharmacology and Administration of Fluid, Electrolyte, and Blood Component Solutions 	585
hypertonic–hyperoncotic fluid (4 mL/kg) is administered slowly
(over about 12 min) compared to 1 min, blood loss was significantly
reduced and survival improved [69,71].
Pre-existing dehydration has been suggested as a contraindica-
tion to administration of HSS because a dehydrated intracellular
environment could decrease the efficacy of intravascular hyper-
tonic fluid resuscitation. Studies performed in dehydrated hemor-
rhagic swine [72] and sheep [73,74] models with preinfusion
plasma osmolalities of 325–340 mOsm/L showed that administra-
tion of 4 mL/kg of 7.5% NaCl achieved hemodynamic stability and
an increase in plasma volume similar to euvolemic animals. When
a rapid onset of action is desired, HSS can in fact be considered as
an adjunct with isotonic resuscitation to correct hypovolemia in
dehydrated patients. A recent study in endurance horses showed
that horses resuscitated with 2 L of HSS followed by 5 L of isotonic
saline achieved normal packed cell volume (PCV) and total protein
(TP) compared to horses that received 7 L of 0.9% sodium chloride
alone that demonstrated residual hemoconcentration [75]. Keeping
in mind the diuresis that occurs after HSS administration and
mobilization of ICF to the intravascular space with the potential
to be filtered, the possibility of subsequent dehydration must be
considered in veterinary patients, especially when appropriate
follow-up fluid administration is delayed or impossible (e.g., some
field conditions).
HSS has been associated with cardiac arrhythmias, bradycardia,
hypotension, and volume overload. Such effects are noted mostly
when high doses of higher concentration HSS are administered at a
very fast rate [76]. The recommended administration regimen of
7.5% NaCl at a dose of 4–6 mL/kg given at a rate no faster than
1 mL/kg/min is not usually associated with complications. Use of
recommended doses rarely causes any consistent blood chemistry
abnormalities, but the potential for hypernatremia, hyperchloremic
metabolic acidosis, hyperosmolar renal failure, and hypokalemia
should be considered especially if pre-existing electrolyte abnor-
malities or repeated dosing with HSS are considered [8–10,21].
Ajito et al. [77] administered doses of 2.5, 5, and 15 mL/kg of 7.2%
NaCl at a rate of 1.6 mL/kg/min to anesthetized Beagle dogs.
Administering 5 mL/kg caused only transient elevations in Na +
(153 at 3 min; 165 at 5 min; baseline 142) that returned to below
160 mEq/L at the end of infusion, whereas a dose of 15 mL/kg led
to consistent hypernatremia (161–174 mEq/L) from 10 to 90 min
after initiation of infusion. A study conducted in dogs showed that
the maximum tolerated dose of 7.5% NaCl was 20 mL/kg, although
that dose caused transient neurological signs like pacing and leth-
argy, which resolved within 24 h [78].
Hypotonic crystalloids
Hypotonic crystalloid solutions have lower tonicity/osmolality than
plasma (Table 32.4). Dextrose in water is a source of free water
because the dextrose is metabolized leaving water that is free of
osmotic particles. Dextrose administration decreases ECF solute
concentration compared to ICF, creating an osmotic pressure gradi-
ent for movement of water from the ECF to ICF (cellular swelling).
Less than 10% of infused hypotonic fluid remains in the IVF space
after 30–60 min. Due to their large volume of distribution and
potential for cellular swelling, hypotonic fluids are not indicated for
intravenous volume replenishment. They are used mostly to pro-
vide maintenance needs of patients in which water intake is absent
because they are anorexic (no feed intake), unable to drink, and/or
fluid losses are not beyond normal physiologic losses (unlike vom-
iting, diarrhea, etc.) [79].
Maintenance fluid requirements can be calculated in several
ways [80,81]. The simple empirical formula of 40 mL/kg/day
(in large dogs) or 60 mL/kg/day (small dogs and cats) can be used.
Since water requirements are tied to metabolism, daily maintenance
energy expenditure (and water requirement) may be calculated as
140 kcal × body weight (kg) 0.75 [80]. Another formula used to calcu-
late maintenance water requirement is [30 × body weight (kg)] + 70,
but if the patient weight is less than 2 kg or more than 50 kg, then it
is proposed to use the caloric requirement to calculate the mainte-
nance fluid requirements [80,81]. One milliliter of water is required
for every kcal of energy consumed. The ongoing physiologic fluid
losses may consist of insensible (feces, saliva, skin, and respiratory
tract) and/or sensible (urinary) losses. These losses are typically
hypotonic in nature with low Na + and high K + compared to that of
ECF [81]. Hypotonic fluids are manufactured to match this compo-
sition (Table 32.4). However, in patients with normal renal func-
tion, isotonic replacement fluids with some added K + can also be
used for maintenance purposes because kidneys can excrete excess
electrolytes. This is a frequently used method in many veterinary
clinics due to a combination of economic pressures to maintain low
inventory as well as lack of familiarity with maintenance/hypotonic
crystalloids. Other major indications for hypotonic crystalloids
involve free water supplementation (e.g., hypernatremia and diabe-
tes insipidus), dextrose supplementation during hypoglycemia, and
perioperative fluid therapy for patients at risk of volume overload
(i.e., congestive heart failure).
It is important to administer these fluids at a slow rate so that
sudden and excessive dilution of plasma solutes is avoided as the
reduced ECF osmolality could cause cellular swelling (cerebral
edema). It is advisable to monitor electrolyte concentrations in
patients receiving hypotonic fluids.
Colloids
Colloids are composed of macromolecular particles suspended in a
crystalloid fluid solution. In the absence of increased microvascular
permeability, their movement is limited across the endothelium,
and they are less able to accumulate in the interstitium. This results
Table 32.4 Characteristics of commonly available hypotonic crystalloids compared to plasma.
Fluid 	Electrolytes (mEq/L) 	Buffers (mEq/L) 	Osmolarity
(mOsm/L)
pH 	Glucose
(g/L)
Na+ 	Cl– 	K+ 	Ca2+ 	Mg2+ 	Lactate 	Acetate 	Gluconate
0.45% NaCl 	77 	77 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 	154 	5.0 	0
0.45% NaCl with 2.5% dextrose 	77 	77 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 	280 	4.5 	25
Plasma-Lyte®
- M with 5% dextrose 	40 	40 	16 	5 	3 	12 	12 	0 	376 	5.5 	50
Normosol®- M with 5% dextrose 	40 	40 	13 	0 	3 	0 	16 	0 	364 	5.5 	50
Dextrose 5% 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 	252 	4.0 	50
Plasma 	142 	104 	5 	5 	3 	HCO3
− = 24 	300 	7.4

-- 601 of 1450 --

586 	Section 4: Body Fluids and Fluid Therapy
in a longer dwell time within the IVF compartment compared to
crystalloids, and they can pull fluid into the IVF compartment
based on their oncotic properties. Colloidal oncotic pressure is the
osmotic pressure generated by the colloids in solution and is deter-
mined by the number of particles rather than their size. In clinical
practice, colloids are mostly used in patients requiring oncotic
support (hypoproteinemia) to prevent ISF accumulation or in
hypovolemic patients as a resuscitative fluid [82–87]. Colloidal
preparations can be classified as consisting of blood component
products (discussed later in this chapter) or synthetic compounds
(discussed below).
Synthetic colloids
Synthetic colloids contain compounds composed of three major
groups: the hydroxyethylstarch derivatives, dextrans, and gelatins.
Most of the following discussion revolves around HES solutions
due to their common use in clinical practice, but some basics about
dextrans and gelatins are also presented.
Hydroxyethyl starches
HESs are the synthetic colloid preparations most commonly used in
both human and veterinary medicine. Chemically, HES prepara-
tions are modified polymers of amylopectin, a polysaccharide very
similar to glycogen. The polymers are suspended in saline or a bal-
anced electrolyte crystalloid solution. Different preparations of HES
with variable structural characteristics (Table 32.5) have different
physicochemical properties governed by three main variables:
mean molecular weight (MW), molar substitution (MS), and C2:C6
ratio. It is important to understand these differences in order to
appreciate the clinical variability with respect to the pharmacoki-
netics, pharmacodynamics, and adverse effect profile of various
HES preparations [88–90]. HESs are typically identified by three
numbers (e.g., 6% HES 130/0.4). The first number dictates the con-
centration of the solution, the second represents the manufactured
mean MW in kilodaltons (kDa), and the third indicates the MS.
The concentration of HES influences the initial volume expan-
sion. 6% solutions are iso-oncotic, and 10% solutions are hyperon-
cotic with considerably more volume expansion. MW is the
weight-averaged (Mw ) or number-averaged (Mn
) size of the poly-
mers. Since the polymers actually are of varying length (ranging
from a few thousand to few million daltons), this parameter is only
an average. HESs are arbitrarily classified by the manufactured mean
MW into high-MW (> 400 kDa), medium-MW (200–400 kDa),
and low-MW (< 200 kDa) preparations. As Mw takes into account
the individual weights of different particles, it is influenced by the
presence of large molecules in the system and will give a larger
value compared to the Mn that represents the total weight of all the
molecules divided by the number of molecules. The ratio Mw :Mn
provides an index of the polydispersity (that is, the variation in par-
ticle size). It is important to understand that the given MW applies
to the colloidal preparation in vitro because soon after these fluids
are administered to a patient, the low-MW fraction is excreted by
the kidneys and larger molecules are progressively hydrolyzed by
serum α-amylase, resulting in a narrow distribution of MWs with
an in vivo mean MW that is lower than the mean MW of the infused
preparation. The decrease in COP after initial excretion of the low-
MW fraction is partly compensated for by the availability of a
greater number of small MW molecules created by metabolism
(cleavage) of larger molecules.
Molar substitution (MS) describes the degree of substitution of
glucose molecules with hydroxyethyl groups. This substitution
increases the polymer solubility and inhibits the metabolism of the
polymer by amylase. The degree of MS can be calculated in two
ways. One method, termed the “degree of substitution” (DS), is cal-
culated by the number of substituted glucose residues divided by
the total number of glucose residues. With the second method, MS
is calculated as the average number of hydroxyethyl residues per
glucose unit. More than one substitution can occur at each glucose
residue, so the MS could be higher than the DS. The value of 0.4 in
the 6% HES 130/0.4 indicates that there are four hydroxyethyl
residues on average per 10 glucose subunits. Based on DS, HESs
have been referred to as “hetastarch” (≥ 0.7), “hexastarch” (0.6),
“pentastarch” (0.5), and “tetrastarch” (0.4). The greater the MS, the
harder it is to metabolize the HES.
The C2:C6 ratio describes the pattern of hydroxyethylation and
also 	impacts 	the 	pharmacokinetics 	of 	HES 	preparations.
Hydroxyethyl groups at position C2 of the glucose molecule inhibit
the access of α-amylase to the substrate more efficiently than the C6
position. HES products with high MW, larger C2:C6 ratio, and
greater MS are metabolized slowly and have prolonged persistence
in plasma. Based on these physicochemical properties, HES prepa-
rations can be classified in a more clinically relevant way as slowly
degradable (e.g., hetastarch) or rapidly degradable (e.g., Voluven®
or Vetstarch®) preparations (see Table 32.5).
Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of various HES prep-
arations are complex in part due to their polydisperse nature [91].
After intravenous administration, particles having MWs below the
renal threshold (45–60 kDa) are quickly filtered into the urine.
Additionally, small amounts diffuse into the interstitium of tissues,
eventually redistribute, and are subsequently eliminated. A transient
proportion is stored in tissues and degraded by the reticuloen-
dothelial system. Larger molecules are retained in the plasma for a
Table 32.5 Characteristics of hydroxyethyl starch (HES) preparations commonly used in veterinary anesthesia.
Type of HES 	HES
product
Physicochemical properties 	Carrier 	COP
(mmHg)
Osmolarity
(mOsm/L)
Plasma
volume
expansion
(%)
Concentration 	Weight (kDa) 	MS 	C2:C6
Molecular 	Number average
Rapidly degradable 	Tetrastarch
(Voluven ®
,
Vetstarch®)
6% 	130 	70–80 	0.4 	9:1 	Saline 	High 30s 	308 	130
Slowly degradable 	Hetastarch
(Hextend®
)
6% 	670 	0.75 	4–5:1 	Balanced 	Low 30s 	307 	100
Hetastarch
(Hespan®
)
6% 	450 	69 	0.7 	4:1 	Saline 	Low 30s 	309 	100
MS, molar substitution; COP, colloidal osmotic pressure.

-- 602 of 1450 --

Chapter 32: Clinical Pharmacology and Administration of Fluid, Electrolyte, and Blood Component Solutions 	587
variable period of time subject to their metabolism by α-amylase.
Metabolism is, in turn, influenced by the physicochemical proper-
ties of the particular HES preparations as described earlier
[88–90]. The resulting smaller fractions after metabolism are fur-
ther excreted in urine. Studies in animals and humans have demon-
strated significantly more accumulation of slowly degradable HES
preparations compared to rapidly degradable preparations, espe-
cially after repeated administration [91]. Clearance of tetrastarches
has been shown to be about 23 times faster than hetastarch and five
times greater than pentastarch. The pharmacokinetics of HES have
been described in dogs and horses [92–94]. Species-specific differ-
ences in plasma amylase activity have also been documented and
contribute to the variable half-life of HES in different species.
Relative to humans, amylase activity has been shown to be greater
in dog plasma [92] and less in equine plasma [93].
The pharmacodynamics of synthetic colloid fluids are related to
the volume and duration of intravascular volume expansion and
may be influenced by many factors including dose, speed of admin-
istration, specific colloid preparation, microvascular permeability,
species of animal, and preinfusion intravascular volume status
[88–91,95]. Iso-oncotic (6%) preparations of HES have been associ-
ated with similar increase in intravascular volume compared to the
volume administered, while the hyperoncotic preparations (10%)
can expand volume up to 145% by pulling fluid from the interstitial
space [88,89]. The initial increase in plasma volume is the result of
COP of the colloidal preparation administered and is mostly attrib-
uted to the large number of small MW particles. As these smaller
molecules are removed from the circulation during the first few
hours, a significant decrease in COP occurs, translating clinically
into reduced effect on plasma volume expansion over time. Due to
the presence of the remaining large MW particles in the plasma, the
concentration of the colloidal preparation (mass per unit volume)
may still be quite high, but the COP will be low.
Slowly degradable preparations have a longer plasma half-life,
but this does not translate into an increased duration of volume
expansion. In spite of minimal plasma accumulation of tetrastarch,
studies in orthopedic [96,97] and cardiac [98] surgeries have
demonstrated its duration of effect (at similar concentration) to be
comparable to pentastarch [99] and hetastarch [96,100]. It is impor-
tant to understand that though the clearance and residual plasma
concentration of HES are affected by their physicochemical proper-
ties (mainly MS and C2:C6 ratio [101]), the COP depends upon the
number of osmotically active particles and not on the concentration
of HES [88–90,95]. In a given volume of HES solution, there will be
more particles of lower MW product compared to an HES prepara-
tion with higher MW translating into a greater COP at similar
plasma concentrations.
The effect of hetastarch on COP has been described in healthy
ponies and horses, hypoproteinemic dogs and horses, hypovolemic,
and hypotensive dogs under anesthesia, and dogs undergoing
orthopedic surgery [82,83,102–107]. Effects of various HES prepa-
rations on COP do not seem to last beyond 24 h. It is important to
remember that variables like health status [104,105], pre-existing
volume status [82,91,95], concurrent fluid therapy [106,108],
dose [107], type of preparation [83,93,102], and anesthesia [109] all
have the potential to influence plasma COP, meaning that results of
different studies must be evaluated carefully. A study in horses
reported that COP was higher in the group receiving tetrastarch
(130/0.4) compared to hetastarch (600/0.75) but returned to baseline
at 24 h [83]. Due to its ability to provide colloidal oncotic support
and prolonged intravascular retention, HES has proven to be better
at providing intravascular support and improvement in hemody-
namic indices compared to crystalloids [82–87].
Adverse events have been associated with HES use in clinical
patients. It is important to point out that results from in vitro studies
cannot be directly extrapolated to clinical scenarios (in vivo) as the
side-effect profile is heavily impacted by the in vivo pharmacoki-
netic behavior of various HES products and slowly degradable
preparations (hetastarch and pentastarch) carry more risk compared
to rapidly degradable preparations (tetrastarches) [88–90].
All types of fluids have the potential to cause dilutional
coagulopathy, but the HES solutions also impact hemostasis directly
by altering both primary and secondary hemostasis [88]. HES
decreases the expression of platelet surface GP IIb-IIIa complex and
also physically coats the surface of platelets, causing decreased
interaction of agonists like soluble fibrinogen and von Willebrand
factor (vWF) with this receptor, thus preventing platelet aggregation.
HES also decreases factor VIII/vWF complex concentration,
possibly due to accelerated elimination of this complex after
binding to HES. These adverse effects have clinically translated into
increased blood loss perioperatively. Use of rapidly degradable
HES preparations (HES 130/0.4) caused lower blood loss in
various types of surgeries in humans compared to slowly
degradable HES preparations (HES 200/0.5, HES 450/0.7, and
HES 600/0.75) [96,110,111]. Desmopressin has been suggested as a
treatment option for mild coagulopathy associated with HES
administration [112]. Studies in dogs [103,106,113–118] and
horses 	[62,83,102,107,119] 	have 	also 	reported 	dose-related
effects [107,116,117,119,120] of hetastarch and tetrastarch on
platelet function and factor VIII/vWF complex [115–117,119–121]
in vitro and in vivo but have failed to document increases in clinical
bleeding [103,106,113]. Several of these studies documented less
impact on hemostasis when tetrastarches were used [83,107,116,121].
Human studies [122,123] have shown that HES preparations
formulated in a balanced carrier solution containing Ca2+ ions cause
less impairment of hemostasis compared to 0.9% sodium-chloride-
based formulations. Similar in vitro comparisons in dogs [115] and
horses [119] did not show improved platelet function as assessed by
estimation of platelet closure times. Concerns about hyperchloremic
metabolic acidosis with 0.9% sodium chloride formulations have
also been expressed [88].
A multicenter blinded trial in severely septic human patients
revealed that HES 130/0.42 was associated with more mortality and
need for renal replacement therapy compared to the Ringer’s ace-
tate group [124]. A meta-analysis in humans revealed an increased
risk of acute kidney injury (AKI) in critically ill patients receiving
HES preparations [125]. In dogs and cats, retrospective studies have
shown conflicting impacts of HES on renal function [126–130].
One study revealed the use of 10% HES 200/0.5 and its increasing
dose as a risk factor for AKI [126]. Other studies did not show any
risk of AKI with 6% HES 130/0.4, but one study documented an
association between the length of administration of 6% HES 130/0.4
and grade of AKI within 10 days of HES administration [127].
A case report documented exacerbation of renal dysfunction in a
dog with pre-existing azotemia that received a 10 mL/kg dose of
6% HES 130/0.4 in an effort to increase its osmotic pressure [131].
A subgroup analysis in two studies specifically performed in septic
small animal patients did not reveal any association between HES
and AKI [129–130]. Due to different doses and types of HES prod-
ucts, no standardization of AKI definition, and small sample size, it
is difficult to draw any firm conclusions. Experimental studies did
not reveal any association between 6% HES 130/0.4 and biomarkers

-- 603 of 1450 --

588 	Section 4: Body Fluids and Fluid Therapy
of AKI within 3 or 72 h post-HES bolus (20 mL/kg) administration
[132,133]. Furthermore, a randomized clinical trial in dogs undergo-
ing shock resuscitation with 6% HES 130/0.4 or Hartmann’s solution
did not reveal any difference in urinary biomarkers of AKI [134].
Reports indicating a low incidence of anaphylactoid reactions,
increases in α-amylase level, and tissue accumulation of slowly
degradable preparations causing pruritus in humans have been
published [88,90]. In cats, hetastarch has been associated with vom-
iting if administered too rapidly.
Most of the dosage recommendations in veterinary patients are
extrapolated from manufacturer’s and human literature rather than
veterinary-specific studies, but it seems appropriate to not exceed
a dose of 20 mL/kg/day for various types of HES formulations
although doses of up to 50 mL/kg/day have been suggested in the
past for tetrastarches due to their relatively less negative impact on
hemostasis [83,107,116,121]. Increased blood loss was reported
in dogs when a > 30 mL/kg dose of hetastarch was used [135,136].
A few studies in horses have suggested a hetastarch dose of 10 mL/
kg/day is well tolerated [62,93].
Dextrans
Dextrans are linear polysaccharide molecules and include a low
(10% dextran 40) and high (6% dextran 70) MW preparation in
0.9% saline. Smaller molecules are removed by glomerular filtration
with bigger molecules staying in circulation longer and eventually
being metabolized by dextranase enzyme systems in the kidney,
liver, and spleen to produce carbon dioxide and water. Due to the
importance of glomerular filtration in excretion of dextrans, half-
life can be increased in patients with renal insufficiency. Dextrans
are hyperoncotic compared to plasma and cause plasma volume
expansion that can be more than the volume infused (dextran 40 >
dextran 70).
Dextrans have been used to improve microcirculatory blood flow
(especially dextran 40) and as thromboprophylaxis to prevent deep
vein thrombosis in humans. Complications associated with their
use include anaphylactic reactions, renal function impairment
(especially with dextran 40), and impaired hemostasis (inhibited
platelet aggregation, dose-dependent hyperfibrinolysis, decreased
levels of vWF, and factor VIII:C activity) [136–141]. They can also
coat the surface of RBCs, interfering with cross-matching procedures.
A maximum dose of 10–20 mL/kg/day in dogs and 5–10 mL/kg/day
in cats has been suggested to minimize adverse effects.
Gelatins
Gelatins are large MW polydisperse proteins formed by hydrolysis
of bovine collagen. Three modified newer generation gelatin prepa-
rations are succinylated or modified fluid gelatins, urea-cross-linked
gelatins, and oxy-cross-linked gelatins (oxypolygelatins). Gelatin
preparations have similar average MWs (30–35 kDa) and are sup-
plied in concentrations of 3.5–5.5% [142]. The small size of gelatin
molecules makes them susceptible to glomerular filtration, which is
the main route of elimination. The half-life of oxypolygelatin has
been suggested at 2–4 h in dogs [138]. The distribution of total dose
administered by 24 h is 71% in urine, 16% extravascular, and 13%
remains in the plasma [142]. Rapid renal excretion means less
plasma retention, and though similar side effects on coagulation
compared to other synthetic colloids are reported, their magnitude
is less [138,143,144]. Urea-cross-linked gelatins have been associ-
ated with anaphylactoid reactions due to histamine release that
were blocked by prophylactic use of histamine blockers [145].
Although there are no standard guidelines for gelatin dosages in
veterinary species, a dose of 5 mL/kg for oxypolygelatin in dogs has
been recommended [138].
Clinical implications of synthetic colloid use
in veterinary medicine
Most of the studies in veterinary medicine have looked at the effect
of HES, dextrans, and gelatins in healthy animals and have docu-
mented dose-related deterioration in both primary and secondary
hemostasis but failed to show exacerbation of clinical bleeding.
A meta-analysis in humans documented increased blood loss with
HES compared to crystalloid therapy in perioperative settings [146],
and recent human guidelines published for trauma patients recom-
mended avoiding use of HES due to the adverse impact on hemo-
stasis [147]. As effects of synthetic colloids on hemostasis are
directly linked to their plasma concentration, it is reasonable to
assume that if they are used in dosages higher than the maximum
recommended, are used repeatedly, are used when there is decreased
clearance (e.g., renal impairment), or are used in patients with
pre- existing bleeding diatheses, the potential to increase clinical
bleeding does exist.
Renal filtration is the major route of HES excretion, and urine
osmolality and specific gravity are increased in dogs administered
HES 600/0.75 [148]. Hyperviscosity of the urine after glomerular
filtration of colloid molecules theoretically causing tubular obstruc-
tion due to stasis of urine flow seems the most likely mechanism of
renal impairment [90,140,141]. A case report and a retrospective
study in critically ill dogs revealed a positive association between
the histopathological evidence of osmotic nephrosis and the sever-
ity of renal tubular vacuolization with administration of 6% HES
130/0.4 and cumulative dose of 6% HES 600/0.75, respectively
[131,149]. Based on the present evidence [126–134,149], the use of
HES in dogs and cats poses a limited risk for AKI when HESs are
administered at a relatively low dose and for shorter periods of time.
The possibility of renal dysfunction may exist, especially in critically
ill patients with pre-existing renal compromise, warranting renal
function monitoring (urine output, creatinine, BUN, etc.) and use
of minimal amounts of synthetic colloids in such scenarios. Also,
hyperoncotic preparations seem to potentiate this issue so it might
be advisable to use iso-oncotic preparations of synthetic colloids
when possible [90,140,141].
Perioperative fluid therapy
Liberal versus restrictive approach
The objective of perioperative fluid therapy is to maintain circula-
tory volume so that end-organ perfusion and oxygen delivery are
not compromised. The traditional approach to achieving this goal
entails administration of replacement crystalloids at a dose rate that
could vary between 5 and 20 mL/kg/h [13,14]. This high rate of
fluid administration was expected to offset the transient intraop-
erative hypovolemia due to fluid deprivation during preoperative
fasting, vasodilation associated with anesthetic drugs, third spacing
of intravascular fluids, insensible fluid losses, and intraoperative
fluid or blood loss [150,151]. With emerging evidence, most of these
physiologic theories are being reexamined. Present perioperative
patient management does not advocate prolonged fasting times [152],
with patients usually having access to water up until the time of sur-
gery. Additionally, blood volume has been shown to stay normal even
after prolonged fasting [153]. The concept of third spacing of fluids
during surgery [154] and fluid loading of normovolemic patients to
prevent intraoperative hypotension [155] has also been questioned.

-- 604 of 1450 --

Chapter 32: Clinical Pharmacology and Administration of Fluid, Electrolyte, and Blood Component Solutions 	589
Stress associated with surgery and anesthesia leads to neuroen-
docrine responses mediated by stimulation of the hypothalamic–
pituitary–adrenal axis, activation of the renin–angiotensin–
aldosterone system, and atrial natriuretic peptide and vasopressin
release. All of these compensatory mechanisms can alter fluid dynam-
ics independent of renal function [156]. In dogs, antidiuretic hor-
mone concentration increased [157] and urine production decreased
after morphine premedication [158], but did not change during
anesthesia and surgery when patients received conventional fluid
therapy [159] or increased crystalloid fluid administration [7].
Anesthesia- and surgery-related physiological effects cease or
decrease at the end of surgery, possibly resulting in a patient who
has been given a relatively large quantity of fluids. Postoperatively,
such patients end up gaining body weight [159,160]. This positive
fluid balance and weight gain mostly occurs in the ECF and has
been shown to be associated with a host of abnormalities including
increased lung water, decreased pulmonary function, increased
infection rate, reduced gut motility, decreased PCV, decreased TP,
and a decrease in body temperature eventually translating into
increased morbidity and mortality [160–163]. The Confidential
Enquiry into Perioperative Small Animal Fatalities (CEPSAF) revealed
that cats receiving fluids (likely not goal-directed dosing) were four
times more likely to die, and the authors speculated that excessive
fluid administration causing fluid overload could be a cause [164].
Restrictive intraoperative fluid administration could improve post-
operative pulmonary function and hypoxemia [165–167].
What constitutes restrictive or liberal fluid therapy is still a ques-
tion of debate because different randomized controlled trials in
humans have used different fluid regimens [168]. Evidence from
human anesthesia suggests that low-risk patients undergoing low-
to- moderate-risk surgery benefit from liberal intraoperative fluid
therapy (20–40 mL/kg total dose) resulting in reduced postopera-
tive complications like dizziness, pain, nausea, vomiting, drowsi-
ness, and reduced hospital length of stay [167,169,170]. Restrictive
fluid therapy in humans was shown to be beneficial in high-risk
patients undergoing major abdominal surgeries [171,172] and was
not associated with renal function compromise [166], but findings
from a recently published large prospective randomized controlled
trial on perioperative fluid therapy in humans were somewhat
contradictory. The Restrictive versus Liberal Fluid Therapy in
Major Abdominal Surgery (RELIEF) trial conducted in 2983 patients
undergoing major abdominal surgery revealed a significantly higher
incidence of acute renal injury (8.6% versus 5.0%), need for renal
replacement therapy (0.9% versus 0.3%), and surgical site infection
(16.5% versus 13.6%) when a restrictive fluid therapy regimen to
achieve zero net fluid balance was used intraoperatively and for 24 h
postoperatively [173]. Overall, median fluid volume received intra-
operatively and in the first 24 h postoperatively in the RELIEF trial
was ~6 mL/kg/h and ~1 mL/kg/h in the restricted group and
~11 mL/kg/h and ~1.5 mL/kg/h in the liberal group, respectively.
No impact on systolic blood pressure was noticed in dogs receiv-
ing fluid rates between 0 and 15 mL/kg/h [174], and increasing fluid
rates from 0 to 30 mL/kg/h did not cause any change in urine pro-
duction or oxygen delivery under anesthesia [7]. Though not based
on any specific clinical evidence nor accepted universally, the
AAHA/AAFP fluid therapy guidelines in dogs and cats [175] have
suggested initially starting fluid administration at 3 mL/kg/h in cats
and 5 mL/kg/h in dogs. In short procedures, minimal fluid volume
will be administered with these suggested rates, so it is important to
closely assess the patient’s hydration and volume status as well as
total fluid volume delivered.
Monitoring fluid balance
As measurement of ICF and ISF is not easily accomplished, estima-
tion of IVF volume status is typically undertaken in clinical practice.
There is no single variable that can assess the intravascular volume
status, which creates some difficulties for application of goal-
directed fluid therapy. Furthermore, it is important to do serial
evaluations of a patient to optimize volume status. Clinical exami-
nation (mucous membrane color, capillary refill time, pulse rate
and quality, temperature of extremities, mentation, skin turgor,
moistness of mucous membranes, peripheral edema, thoracic aus-
cultation for crackles, papilledema, respiration rate, pulse oximetry,
blood pressure, urine output, and serial body weights), invasive
hemodynamic monitoring to obtain objective data (direct blood
pressure monitoring, CO monitoring, cardiac filling pressures
including central venous pressure [CVP] and pulmonary artery
occlusion pressure, pulse pressure variation [PPV] and stroke volume
variation [SVV], and transesophageal echocardiography), and lab-
oratory data (arterial and venous blood gases, electrolyte status, and
renal function evaluation) all should be used in conjunction to
estimate the volume status. Information on various macrovascular
(CVP, arterial blood pressure, and urine output) and microvascular
(lactate concentration and clearance, base excess, and mixed or cen-
tral venous oxygen saturation) perfusion parameters help dictate
the state of critical oxygen delivery to the tissues [176,177]. Early
goal-directed therapy to normalize some of these endpoints has
been shown to improve outcomes [178].
Therapy with synthetic colloids should ideally be monitored
using colloid osmometry to measure COP rather than relying on
the refractometric analysis because the relationship between COP
and refractive index may be different for plasma proteins versus
synthetic colloid [179]. There is a poor correlation between the
changes in COP and TP as measured by a refractometer after
administration of a high-MW HES formulation (hetastarch) and
dextran 70. Both of these synthetic colloids push the refractometric
reading toward 4.5 g/dL [180]. Recently published studies in dogs
showed that low-MW 6% HES 130/0.4 formulation (VetStarch®)
and 4% succinylated gelatin can also interfere with refractometric
measurement of total plasma protein, pushing its reading toward
4.3 g/dL, and this interference could last up to 3 h [181,182].
Refractometric total solids (TS) readings could decrease after
colloid administration due to dilutional effects, and this could be
falsely interpreted as a need for additional colloidal support,
leading to fluid overload [95].
Individualized goal-directed fluid therapy
The eventual goal of fluid administration is to improve venous
return resulting in an improvement in stroke volume (SV). Venous
return depends on the gradient between mean circulatory filling
pressure (MCFP) and right atrial pressure and the resistance to
blood flow in venous circulation. Physiologically, about 70% of the
blood volume is unstressed (volume of blood in the vasculature
at zero transmural pressure) and the remainder is stressed (volume of
blood that must be removed from the vasculature to drop trans-
mural pressure to zero from existing values) [183]. The stressed
volume is a major determinant of venous return and is responsible
for generating blood flow by increasing transmural pressure across
blood vessels resulting in increased MCFP [184,185]. An unpre-
dictable distribution of administered fluids between stressed and
unstressed volumes may in part be responsible for fluid unrespon-
siveness in certain patients as only about 50% of critically ill human
patients respond to fluid challenge with a significant increase in

-- 605 of 1450 --

590 	Section 4: Body Fluids and Fluid Therapy
SV [186,187]. It is important to recognize patients that are not fluid
responsive (non-responders) to avoid ineffective or deleterious
fluid overloading [188]. Although no standard fluid therapy guide-
lines have been devised as yet, an individualized fluid therapy
approach called “individualized goal-directed therapy” based on
objective feedback from a patient’s fluid responsiveness has been
shown to improve outcomes [189–192].
At the core of fluid responsiveness is the Frank–Starling
curve [193,194]. In the case of responders, the heart is operating on
the ascending part of this curve and they respond with a 10–15%
increase in their SV or CO when a fluid bolus is administered to
augment the preload [195,196]. The Marik–Philips curve illustrates
the relationship between preload and extravascular lung water
(EVLW) [197]. Non-responders operate on the flat part of the
Frank–Starling curve resulting in minimal improvement in SV, but,
at the same time, the administered fluid results in an increase in
EVLW and tissue edema. These curves are influenced by changes
in patient physiology imposed by various diseases that necessitate
an individualized approach to fluid therapy. Although considered
simultaneously, it is important to appreciate the distinction between
volume status and fluid responsiveness since a patient that is fluid
responsive may not be hypovolemic and vice versa due to changes
in vascular permeability, capillary leakage, changes in cardiac func-
tion, vascular tone, and complex local and systemic implications
of EG damage. Assessment of fluid responsiveness can minimize
unnecessary fluid administration, especially in patients predis-
posed to fluid overload, and may aid in ascertaining the need for
inotropic and/or vasopressor therapy.
Both static and dynamic indices of preload responsiveness have
been described. A parameter is considered static if it is measured at
a single time point, whereas a dynamic parameter is measured in
real time in response to a change in preload. Based on the Frank–
Starling curve, an increase in SV may be expected with fluid admin-
istration if the preload is low. This is why the markers of cardiac
preload were proposed to predict fluid responsiveness. However,
studies have shown that CVP, pulmonary capillary occlusion pres-
sure, and end-diastolic dimensions of the ventricle are unreliable
and generally late indicators of fluid overload, alterations in blood
volume, and fluid responsiveness [194,198]. CVP is a poor indica-
tor of right atrial pressure, cardiac filling pressure, and preload
changes because the pressure and volume relationship of the ventri-
cle is not linear and CVP is affected by lung, cardiac, and intratho-
racic pressures [199,200]. In dogs, it was also shown that CVP
performs poorly compared to dynamic indices to evaluate fluid
responsiveness [201,202]. The filling pressures may still be helpful
to evaluate volume status of the patient such that a low value may
justify fluid administration and a high value should prompt stop-
ping or reducing the fluid administration. Originally, pulmonary
artery catheterization (PAC) was used to guide optimal oxygen
delivery in high-risk surgical patients but, due to morbidity and
mortality increases associated with the use of the PAC itself, and
failure to show any clear benefit, it fell out of favor [203–205].
The position of cardiac performance on the Frank–Starling curve
is best understood by performing functional hemodynamic testing
or the use of heart–lung interactions in mechanically ventilated
patients by evaluating respiratory variation in various dynamic
indices of preload responsiveness [195,196,206–210]. Functional
hemodynamic testing involves administration of an intravenous
fluid bolus or performance of a passive leg raise maneuver to shift
volume into the central circulation and augment preload
[195,196,211,212]. It is desirable to use as small a fluid bolus as
possible to assess fluid responsiveness to further minimize the
potential for fluid overload. A meta-analysis in humans revealed
that a mini- fluid challenge can successfully predict fluid respon-
siveness [213]. A mini-fluid bolus approach has been reported in
dogs using 3–5 mL/kg LRS or Hartmann’s solution administered
over 1–5 min [213–217], but the use of 10–20 mL/kg LRS bolus over
5–15 min was reported most often [202,218–222]. Colloids have
also been used for fluid challenges in humans [223], and this has
been reported in one dog study that used 10 mL/kg of 6% HES
130/0.4 as a fluid bolus that was administered over 13 min [201].
Various veterinary studies have reported a fluid responsiveness rate
anywhere from 38% to 100% in healthy and normovolemic dogs
under anesthesia [214,201,217,219,221, 222], in dogs undergoing
anesthesia for orthopedic or oncologic surgery [220,218], or dogs
undergoing abdominal surgery [202]. The variation in fluid respon-
siveness could be the result of different patient populations, size of
the fluid bolus, rate of bolus administration, and modality used to
evaluate the change in CO or SV [223,224].
A change in arterial blood pressure is commonly used in veteri-
nary clinical settings as a surrogate for changes in SV or CO, but it
is important to appreciate the limitations of this assumption as
alterations in SVR may have significant impacts on arterial blood
pressure in hypotensive and/or hypovolemic patients [224,225].
Studies in spontaneously breathing anesthetized dogs have demon-
strated the inability of mean arterial pressure to discriminate
between fluid responders and non-responders in spite of an increase
in CO or SV [201,202,216,220–222]. Various modalities to measure
CO have been utilized in anesthetized dogs to evaluate fluid respon-
siveness including transpulmonary thermodilution [219,221,222],
transesophageal echocardiography [218,220], transthoracic echo-
cardiography [201,214–216], uncalibrated pulse contour analysis
(PCA) [217], and esophageal Doppler [202]. Many minimally inva-
sive and non-invasive flow monitoring modalities provide real-time,
continuous, and beat-by- beat SV information that is particularly
useful when response to a fluid challenge needs to be evaluated.
These modalities hold the potential for clinical utility in veterinary
medicine, but they should be thoroughly evaluated for their agree-
ment and trending ability with a reference method to measure SV
and CO [226,227]. An uncalibrated PCA method does not require
any calibration with a reference method, but its performance may
suffer during hemodynamic instability and when significant
changes in SVR occur [228]. The pressure recording analytical
method (PRAM) (incorporated into Most Care Up®) is an uncali-
brated PCA method that showed good precision and trending
ability with bolus pulmonary artery thermodilution (PATD) CO
measurement in dogs under stable circulatory conditions [229] and
has been recently used to measure a response to a small volume
fluid bolus in dogs [217]. However, in dynamic circulatory condi-
tions created by a hemorrhagic shock dog model [230], and use of
various sympathomimetics [231], PRAM revealed a high bias, low
precision, and low concordance when compared with bolus PATD
CO measurement. Another uncalibrated PCA device (FloTrac/
Vigileo®) was found unsuitable to monitor CO in dogs when it was
compared with indicator dilution techniques [232,233]. Other non-
invasive methods to measure CO, like electrical velocimetry [234]
and pulse wave transit time [235], have also been evaluated in dogs.
Different variables related to aortic blood flow have been evalu-
ated in dogs using Doppler technology that could yield information
about CO and have been studied in the context of fluid responsive-
ness [214,215,221,236]. In anesthetized dogs, a > 14.7% change in
the velocity time integral (VTI) after a fluid challenge as measured

-- 606 of 1450 --

Chapter 32: Clinical Pharmacology and Administration of Fluid, Electrolyte, and Blood Component Solutions 	591
by transthoracic echocardiography tracked closely to the change in
SV (> 15%) measured by transpulmonary thermodilution, suggest-
ing that change in the aortic VTI may serve as a surrogate marker
for change in SV to predict fluid responsiveness [221]. Another
study in conscious dogs with a variety of clinical conditions revealed
that an aortic flow VTI of ≤ 10.3 cm showed a sensitivity of 84.6%
and a specificity of 100% to predict fluid responsiveness [215].
Although CO obtained from an esophageal Doppler monitor did
not show good agreement with bolus PATD CO [237], an abstract
in dogs reported a correlation coefficient of 0.9 between the bolus
PATD SV and stroke distance (SD) (i.e., the VTI obtained from the
descending aorta by the esophageal Doppler) in a hemorrhagic
dog model, suggesting that changes in SD may serve as a surrogate
marker of changes in SV induced by fluid challenge [236].
Furthermore, the SD variation increased with hemorrhage and
decreased when the blood was retransfused. The same abstract
showed an increase in descending aortic peak velocity index with
hemorrhage and a decrease when the blood was retransfused.
Two more studies in dogs revealed significantly higher aortic peak
velocity in responders compared to non-responders with one study
showing an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve of
0.95 for prediction of fluid responsiveness, suggesting that changes
in aortic blood flow peak velocity could provide information about
fluid responsiveness [214,215].
Heart–lung interactions are a dynamic index of volume respon-
siveness that do not require fluid administration and rely on
respiratory variation in preload caused by cyclic alterations in pleu-
ral and transpulmonary pressure during mechanical ventilation
[202,206–210,238,239]. Reduction in venous return during inspira-
tion with positive-pressure ventilation is the major determinant of the
variation in these dynamic indices. According to the Frank–Starling
principle, diastolic filling of the ventricles determines the myocardial
stretch and hence SV as related to myocardial contractility. In hypo-
volemic states, the variation in dynamic indices is high, and the left
ventricular contractility depends on the preload to a greater extent.
In other words, the ventricle operates on the ascending limb of the
Frank–Starling curve. As the volume expands, the left ventricular
function shifts in the rightward direction on the Frank–Starling
curve and causes an observed decrease in dynamic indices variation.
Preload changes result in stroke volume variation (SVV) during
inspiration and expiration. In addition, it has been shown that pulse
pressure variation (PPV) and systolic pressure variation (SPV) can
be used as surrogate markers of SVV and could be easily employed
in clinical settings where arterial catheters are placed and patients
are ventilated mechanically [202,207–210]. The plethysmographic
variability index (PVI) is a non-invasive dynamic index of preload
responsiveness that evaluates changes in perfusion index as
obtained by a pulse oximeter (Masimo™ Radical-7®) [202]. Various
canine studies have suggested that SVV > 11–14.7% [217,239],
PPV > 7–16% [201,202,217,219,220,240], SPV > 4.1–7.4 mmHg
[217,220], PVI > 11–14% [201,202,217,241], and caudal vena cava
distensibility index of 24% [214] predict fluid responsiveness with
good sensitivity and specificity. A few human and canine studies
have suggested PPV to be a better index of fluid responsiveness
compared to SPV and PVI [202,208,217].
An abbreviated echocardiogram (“cardiac point-of-care ultra-
sound”) is also being used increasingly due to its rapid, non-invasive,
and real-time ability to evaluate patient volume status [242].
Estimation of volume status mostly focuses on the subjective
assessment of atrial and ventricular lumen size, ventricular wall
thickness, and cardiac contractility, all of which require minimal
training to learn [243,244]. Studies performed in dogs and cats
revealed these changes to be proportional to the severity of
hypovolemia [245].
Improving the utility of dynamic indices of preload
responsiveness
The difference in cutoff values, sensitivity, and specificity of various
dynamic indices among different studies is a reflection of a lack of
standardization of the volume and rate of fluid administration and
ventilatory parameters, including tidal volume, peak inspiratory
pressure, and positive end-expiratory pressure, and is also affected
by patient–ventilator asynchrony, changes in respiratory system
compliance, changes in vascular tone, arrhythmias, right heart fail-
ure, and intra-abdominal hypertension [223,246–251]. The propor-
tion of responders to fluid bolus has not been shown to be influenced
by the type of fluid [223]. In clinical veterinary settings, tidal
volumes are often altered, patients may buck the ventilator, many
patients undergo minimally invasive laparoscopic procedures
coupled with increased intra-abdominal pressure, and critically ill
patients may have cardiac arrhythmias or be exposed to vasoactive
drugs to support arterial blood pressure. In order to improve the
utility of published thresholds for dynamic indices, it is important
to understand the context of the published study and the clinical
scenario in which the dynamic index will be employed.
One should refrain from interpretation of these tests in isolation
since they are not 100% sensitive and specific. Every patient has an
individual set of Frank–Starling and Marik–Philips curves that
are influenced by various physiological and pathological factors.
Understanding of the individual’s physiology should allow clini-
cians to estimate the impact of fluid administration in patients but
obviously without absolute certainty. Also, it is important to under-
stand that fluid responsiveness does not equate to fluid requirement
unless there is clear cut evidence of benefit to a patient’s hemody-
namic status as well as a lack of associated risks and various
confounding factors [252–255]. Administration of fluids to the
point of lack of fluid responsiveness could lead to fluid overload
and hemodilution that could be detrimental to the patient [255].
Microvasculature and fluid therapy
Arterioles, capillaries, and venules are the structural components of
the microcirculation and are the conduit of oxygen and nutrient
delivery to the tissues. As described above, the endothelial glycoca-
lyx (EG) is a protective layer of carbohydrate scaffold that coats the
luminal surface of endothelium and plays a vital role in cell signal-
ing and transvascular permeability [4,5,256]. The EG is composed
of proteoglycans, glycosaminoglycans, and glycoproteins. Together
with the mobile or soluble protein components, including albumin
and antithrombin, it constitutes the ESL. The ESL regulates vascular
permeability and controls local inflammation. Its system-wide deg-
radation has been associated with severity of illness, increased vas-
cular permeability, and exacerbated systemic inflammation via
soluble heparan sulfate and low-MW hyaluronan that are shed into
the circulation after EG damage [257–258]. Though clinicians rely
heavily on the measurement of macrocirculatory perfusion param-
eters like CO and arterial blood pressure, it has been demonstrated
that despite their normalization, heterogeneity in capillary blood
flow could still persist [259,260]. There is evidence that ESL degra-
dation can alter microcirculation resulting in reduced capillary blood
flow [261].
EG biomarkers are components of the ESL that are released into
circulation after degradation and data supports an association

-- 607 of 1450 --

592 	Section 4: Body Fluids and Fluid Therapy
between the concentration of biomarkers like hyaluronan,
syndecan, and heparan sulfate and the volume of fluid administered
(that is, excessive fluid therapy itself degrades the ESL).
Inflammation and shock can result in ESL degradation even before
any fluid therapy is administered via proinflammatory cytokines like
tumor necrosis factor-α, matrix metalloproteinases released by acti-
vated leukocytes, ischemia and reperfusion, reactive oxygen species,
and bacterial components like lipopolysaccharides. Hemodilution
caused by crystalloids leads to a reduction in ESL thickness and an
increase in vascular permeability. In addition, bolus fluid therapy
results in degradation of the EG and increased vascular permeability
due to release of atrial and brain natriuretic peptides (ANP and BNP)
from the atria and ventricles during myocardial stretch [262,263].
Fluid loading in human surgical patients resulted in a parallel
increase in ANP and EG biomarkers syndecan-1 and hyaluronan in
serum [264]. A rapid volume expansion with a balanced isotonic
crystalloid in a canine hemorrhagic model, however, did not show
an increase in ANP but did reveal an increase in hyaluronan concen-
tration and enhanced inflammatory response indicated by increased
plasma concentrations of interleukin-6 and interleukin-10 [265].
Although the clinical relevance of ESL degradation with fluid
therapy is not yet clear, it may promote microcirculatory dysfunc-
tion, inflammation, and coagulation. It is therefore advisable to
avoid excessive hemodilution and hypervolemia. Careful fluid titra-
tion should be considered in septic patients suffering from vasodi-
lation and microcirculatory dysfunction due to lack of hemodynamic
coherence between the macro- and microcirculations [259,266,267].
At the same time, caution is advised in restricting fluid volume in
non-septic patients as a recent randomized controlled trial revealed
a higher rate of AKI and surgical site infection in patients receiving
restrictive fluid therapy [173]. There is also some evidence that
rapid fluid administration may result in more heterogeneity in
microcirculatory blood flow and higher inflammatory cytokines
due to amplified EG degradation; slower fluid administration may
help achieve similar endpoints without deleterious effects on the
EG [268,269].
The question about the type of fluid (crystalloids or colloids) to
be used for volume expansion has long been debated. The relatively
higher efficacy of colloids to restore intravascular volume has been
shown in patients without systemic disease [270]. However, more
recent clinical studies in systemically ill people have failed to sup-
port these findings and suggested a colloid-to- crystalloid volume
expansion ratio of 1:1 to 1:1.5 [271]. Damage to the EG caused by
systemic illness results in fluid extravasation of both colloids and
crystalloids resulting in loss of the volume efficacy effect of col-
loids [272,273]. In addition, the duration of the volume expansion
by colloids is reduced under systemic inflammatory conditions
due to increased vascular permeability. Although there is some
evidence that colloids may be associated with less ESL degradation
[274–276], altering the fluid choice to optimize microcirculation
based on its potential beneficial or detrimental impact on ESL is
premature. In the absence of any clear-cut benefit on mortality, the
human literature does not advocate the use of one over another type
of fluid [277].
Electrolytes
Sodium
Sodium is the most abundant cation in the ECF (see Table 32.1).
Embedded in the cell membrane, Na +
- K+ ATPase maintains a rela-
tively low intracellular concentration of Na+
. The concentration of
Na + in the serum is a reflection of the amount of Na+ relative to total
ECF and does not provide any indication about the content of total
body sodium. Disorders of sodium are mostly the result of changes
in the amount of body water so changes in Na + concentration
should be viewed as changes in free water content of the body. In
response to changes in intravascular volume, antidiuretic hormone
(ADH), signals from baroreceptors and osmoreceptors, thirst
mechanisms, the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone (RAAS), and ANP
all act accordingly to promote homeostasis of volume and tonicity
of body fluids via regulation of Na + and water balance [278].
Hypernatremia could result from hypotonic dehydration
(resulting in hypovolemic hypernatremia), a deficit of free water
(resulting in normovolemic hypernatremia), or ingestion or iatro-
genic administration of high sodium-containing fluids (resulting in
hypervolemia) [279]. Hypernatremia results in cellular dehydration
(especially of brain cells) as water moves from the ICF to the ECF.
Shrinking of brain tissue can cause tearing of blood vessels, result-
ing in subarachnoid and intracerebral hemorrhage [278].
The pathophysiological consequences of hypernatremia are
determined mainly by the rapidity of onset of hypernatremia rather
than the absolute value. Under chronic circumstances (> 2–3 days),
brain cells increase intracellular osmolality by accumulation of
osmotically active solutes called “idiogenic osmoles” [280,281].
Lien et al. [281] found that hypernatremia in rats increased con-
centrations of myoinositol, bataine, glycerophosphorylcholine,
phosphocreatine, glutamine, glutamate, and taurine in the brain.
Idiogenic osmoles help maintain intracellular volume and prevent
efflux of fluid. Hence, in chronic hypernatremia, rapid correction of
the sodium level could decrease extracellular osmolality and favor
the movement of water into brain cells, causing cerebral edema. If
hypernatremia is of relatively acute onset (< 24 h), rapid correction
is better tolerated because idiogenic osmoles are not yet present.
Intracranial hemorrhage and neuronal dehydration associated
with hypernatremia could result in muscle weakness, lethargy,
ataxia, seizure, coma, and death [279]. Treatment should involve
correction of the underlying problem and fluid administration to
replenish free water content. In hypovolemic hypernatremic
patients, intravascular volume deficits should be corrected using a
fluid that is isotonic to the patient followed by correction of the
free water deficit with fluids like 5% dextrose or 2.5% dextrose in
0.45% saline [282]. The formula given below is used to calculate the
free water deficit (FWD):
FWD 	Serum Na 	Body weight kg	[( 	/ 	) 	] 	) 	.	(	140 	1 	0 6
It is recommended that in cases of chronic hypernatremia, free
water deficits should be corrected slowly over 48–72 h so that Na +
concentration does not decrease at a rate that exceeds 0.5 mEq/L/h
to avoid cerebral edema.
Hyponatremia can result from gain of free water or loss of
sodium. Variable pathophysiology could result in hyponatremia
that may be characterized by normal osmolality (e.g., pseudohy-
ponatremia), hyperosmolality (e.g., extreme hyperglycemia), or
hypo-osmolality (seen most commonly clinically). Hyponatremia
with hypo-osmolality could be further divided into hyponatremia
with hypovolemia (e.g., gastrointestinal losses, third space loss,
Addison’s disease, etc.), hypervolemia (e.g., congestive heart failure,
cirrhosis, nephrotic syndrome, etc.), or euvolemia (e.g., myxedema
coma, administration of hypotonic fluids, syndrome of inappropri-
ate secretion of ADH [SIADH], etc.) [278,283]. In people and dogs,
SIADH is characterized by secretion of ADH in the absence of

-- 608 of 1450 --

Chapter 32: Clinical Pharmacology and Administration of Fluid, Electrolyte, and Blood Component Solutions 	593
hyperosmolality or hypovolemia and may cause hyponatremia
[284,285]. In perioperative settings, SIADH has been associated
with the use of various anesthetic drugs including opioids [284,286].
Sympathetic stimulation due to pain associated with surgical pro-
cedures can also cause ADH release in the absence of volume con-
traction. All these factors can lead to renal retention of water and
development of hyponatremia in surgical patients [278]. Transurethral
resection of prostate (TURP) syndrome is an established cause of
hyponatremia in human anesthetic patients due to intravascular
absorption of irrigation fluids causing hypotonic hyponatremia [287].
However, a case series describing a small number of dogs undergo-
ing this procedure did not show hyponatremia [288].
Pathophysiological consequences of hyponatremia depend on its
rate of development. A decrease in serum sodium concentration can
generate an osmotic gradient across the blood–brain barrier that
would cause movement of water into brain cells causing cerebral
edema. Clinical signs typically do not develop unless the concentra-
tion drops below 125 mEq/L and include ataxia, vomiting, depres-
sion, seizures, and coma [289]. During chronic hyponatremia, the
recommended Na + correction rate is not more than 0.5 mEq/L/h.
If correction is faster, higher plasma osmolality can cause efflux of
water from brain cells (cellular dehydration), producing the clinical
syndrome of osmotic demyelination or central pontine myelinoly-
sis [290,291]. Treatment of hyponatremia will partly depend upon
the volume status of the patient. An approach using 3% saline has
been described for correction of hyponatremia [284].
Calcium
Calcium is a divalent cation involved in many biologic processes, of
which its effects on cardiac smooth muscle, vascular smooth
muscle, and blood coagulation are particularly important to the
anesthesiologist [292]. In addition, calcium is involved in skeletal
muscle contraction, neuronal conduction, synaptic transmission,
and hormone secretion and acts as a major intracellular messenger
required for many cellular functions. Approximately 99% of the
total body calcium is stored as hydroxyapatite in the skeletal tissue,
and the rest is divided between the ICF and ECF compartments.
Calcium exists in three biologic forms: (1) in plasma as ionized or
free calcium (iCa 2+ ); (2) complexed or chelated to phosphate,
sulfate, bicarbonate, citrate, and lactate; and (3) protein-bound
calcium [293]. The biologically active form is the iCa2+
. The serum
level of calcium is controlled by parathyroid hormone (PTH), calci-
tonin, and calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol). These hor-
mones act at the level of bone, kidneys, and gastrointestinal tract to
regulate calcium homeostasis [292].
Hypocalcemia is common in critically ill small animal patients,
in horses suffering from colic, and sick cattle and has been shown
to carry a poor prognosis [18,31,61,294,295]. Inhalant anesthesia
decreases total and ionized calcium concentrations in horses
[296,297]. Hypocalcemia could occur due to impaired PTH release
(primary and secondary hypoparathyroidism, post-thyroidectomy,
post-parathyroidectomy), impaired calcitriol synthesis (acute or
chronic renal failure, malabsorptive syndromes, liver insufficiency,
etc.), and chelation of serum calcium (sodium phosphate enemas,
bicarbonate therapy, blood products containing citrate, ethylene
glycol toxicity, saponification of fat in pancreatitis or steatitis, etc.)
[292,295,298]. Hypoalbuminemia/hypoproteinemia could decrease
total calcium concentration though formulas traditionally used to
correct total calcium concentration for changes in albumin concen-
tration have been shown to be erroneous, and it is advisable to
always measure iCa2+ concentration [299].
The severity of clinical signs depends upon the magnitude and
the rapidity of onset of hypocalcemia. Pathophysiological conse-
quences are due to a decrease in threshold membrane potential
(TMP) resulting in increased membrane excitability as neural
membranes become more permeable to sodium. Hyperkalemia
and hypomagnesemia potentiate the cardiac and neuromuscular
effects of hypocalcemia [283]. Clinical signs are attributable to
neuromuscular irritability and include tetany, seizures, restlessness
or excitation, facial rubbing, muscle tremors, tachycardia, hyper-
thermia, hypotension, and cardiopulmonary arrest [283]. The
electrocardiogram may reveal a prolonged QT interval. Symptomatic
acute hypocalcemia should be treated with calcium gluconate
(10% solution at a dose of 0.5–1.5 mL/kg), administered intrave-
nously slowly over 15–20 min with continuous heart rate and
rhythm monitoring.
Hypercalcemia could result from increased resorption of
calcium from bones (hyperparathyroidism, hypercalcemia of
malignancy, etc.), increased absorption from the gastrointestinal
tract (hypervitaminosis D, granulomatous diseases, antipsoriasis
creams, vitamin D rodenticides, etc.), or decreased renal excretion
(acute or chronic renal failure) [283]. Hydrogen ions can compete
with iCa2+ for binding sites on albumin, hence acidemia can increase
ionized calcium concentration [300]. Hypercalcemia can result in
neuromuscular, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, renal, and skeletal
muscle abnormalities [283,292]. Clinical signs may be character-
ized by nausea, anorexia, constipation, abdominal pain, polyuria,
polydipsia, and soft tissue mineralization [283]. Electrocardio-
graphic changes are characterized by QT interval shortening,
prolonged PR interval, and a widened QRS complex.
Treatment of hypercalcemia should involve correction of dehy-
dration, promotion of calciuresis, inhibition of bone resorption,
and treatment of the underlying disease process [283,292]. Calcium-
free fluids, especially 0.9% NaCl, are preferred as they competitively
inhibit renal tubular calcium reabsorption [283]. Once the patient
is properly hydrated, use of a loop diuretic (furosemide) can be
considered to promote calciuresis with regular monitoring of
serum electrolytes. Additionally, glucocorticoids, bisphosphonates
(pamidronate, etidronate disodium, etc.), and calcitonin could be
used to treat some tumor-associated hypercalcemias and decrease
bone resorption [283,292]. Effects of various drugs used during anes-
thesia, including CNS and cardiovascular effects, can be influenced
by changes in calcium concentration, including inhalant anesthet-
ics, local anesthetics, and non-depolarizing muscle relaxants [292].
Potassium
Potassium is the most abundant intracellular cation (see Table 32.1).
About 95% of total body potassium is present intracellularly with
only 5% in the ECF. Clearly, the routine measurement of plasma
potassium concentration gives little indication of total body potas-
sium content. Plasma potassium concentration is a reflection of
intake (nutrition), gastrointestinal loss, renal function, and trans-
cellular potassium shifts [301]. The major causes of hyperkalemia
involve increased intake (mostly iatrogenic overadministration of
potassium-containing fluids), decreased renal excretion (urethral
obstruction, ruptured bladder, anuric or oliguric renal failure,
hypoadrenocorticism, drugs, etc.), translocation from ICF to ECF
(acute mineral acidosis, insulin deficiency, tumor lysis syndrome,
drugs, reperfusion injury, hyperkalemic periodic paralysis, etc.),
and pseudohyperkalemia (hemolysis especially in Japanese dog
breeds, thrombocytosis, and samples collected in Na +
/K+ EDTA)
[301,302]. In addition, hyperkalemia has also been documented in

-- 609 of 1450 --

594 	Section 4: Body Fluids and Fluid Therapy
two Greyhounds [303], a Rottweiler [304], and large felids during
general anesthesia [305,306].
The normally high gradient between ICF and ECF potassium is
maintained by the Na +
- K+ ATPase pump. In the resting state, per-
meability of the cell membrane is approximately 100 times higher
for K + than Na + ions and the resting membrane potential (RMP) is
largely determined by the intracellular to extracellular K+ gradient as
described by the Nernst and Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz equations [307].
Most of the effects seen due to alterations in ECF [K+
] are the result
of alterations in the RMP, which may have a profound impact on
electrophysiologic function particularly noticeable in excitable cell
membranes like cardiac tissue [308].
Hyperkalemia results in a decreased concentration gradient of K+
across the cell membrane, resulting initially in an increased or less
negative RMP, causing cell membrane excitability to increase due to
a reduced gradient between RMP and threshold membrane poten-
tial (TMP). If the RMP reaches TMP, then depolarization occurs.
This results in opening of voltage-gated fast Na + channels causing
an influx of Na+ ions. The number of voltage-gated fast Na+ chan-
nels that open during generation of the action potential (phase 0) is
influenced by the RMP. If the RMP is less negative than normal at
the start of depolarization, some voltage-gated fast Na+ channels
remain in the inactivated (closed) state, decreasing the rate of rise of
phase 0 of the action potential (Vmax
) due to reduced magnitude of
inward Na + current [309–311]. As ECF [K +
] continues to rise,
depression of myocardial conduction results as the proportion
of voltage-gated fast Na + channels participating in generation of
inward Na+ current to cause depolarization are reduced. The
decrease in Vmax results in slowing of impulse conduction through
the myocardium and prolongation of membrane depolarization
resulting in prolonged duration of P wave, PR interval, and QRS
complex on the electrocardiogram. Atrial and ventricular myocytes
are more sensitive to the effects of hyperkalemia compared to the
sinoatrial node, atrioventricular node, and internodal fibers due
to their dependence on voltage-gated fast Na + channels, whereas
depolarization in nodal tissues is dependent upon slow Ca2+ chan-
nels [312]. During phases 2 and 3 of the cardiac action potential, the
inward rectifying potassium current (IKr
) is responsible for K+ efflux
and is sensitive to the ECF [K +
] [313]. As the levels rise, the K + con-
ductance through these currents is increased, resulting in more K+
leaving the myocytes per unit time. It leads to an increase in the
slope of phases 2 and 3 causing shortening of the repolarization
time. This has been speculated to result in early electrocardiographic
changes associated with hyperkalemia, characterized by tenting
of T waves, shortening of the QT interval, and ST segment
depression [314,315].
Clinical signs include muscle weakness and cardiac toxicity that
is especially apparent at concentrations > 7.5 mEq/L. Concurrent
hypocalcemia, hyponatremia, acidemia, and hypovolemia can exac-
erbate the cardiac deterioration at lower concentrations [283,301,308].
Changes in the electrocardiogram due to hyperkalemia have been
described [308], and the mechanism for these changes has been
discussed earlier. As the concentration of potassium in ECF
increases from mild to severe, changes in the electrocardiogram are
characterized by increasing amplitude and narrowing of the T wave
(tenting), shortening of the QT interval, prolongation of the PR
interval, widening of the QRS complex, decreasing amplitude and
widening of the P wave, disappearance of the P wave, atrial standstill,
extreme bradycardia, sinoventricular rhythm and eventually sine
wave appearance of the QRS complex, followed by ventricular fibril-
lation or ventricular asystole. These ECG changes are inconsistent
and influenced by other variables including acid–base balance, rate
of K + increase, and concurrent electrolyte anomalies [308,316].
It should also be noted that various tachyarrhythmias are possible
with mild increases in plasma potassium concentrations.
Treatment involves use of calcium salts for cardiac protection,
initiation of movement of potassium from ECF to ICF, and removal
of potassium from the body via diuresis with fluids or relief of uri-
nary obstruction if present [301]. Peritoneal dialysis or hemodialy-
sis are viable options for refractory hyperkalemia [283]. Although
the use of potassium-free fluids in patients with hyperkalemia
has been suggested, in cats with urethral obstruction, there was no
difference in the rate of reduction of potassium with either
Normosol®-R or 0.9% sodium chloride [317]. Intravenous adminis-
tration of calcium raises the TMP so that the gradient between the
RMP and TMP is re-established, resulting in restoration of mem-
brane excitability. Calcium therapy starts to work within minutes and
the response typically lasts anywhere between 30 and 60 min [301].
A slow bolus administration (10–20 min) of 10% calcium gluconate
at a dose of 50–150 mg/kg (0.5–1.5 mL/kg) with continuous moni-
toring of the ECG should be considered as fast administration
could cause bradycardia. Approximately one-third of the dose
should be administered if calcium chloride is used [283].
Calcium administration does not do anything to lower the potas-
sium concentration. To move the potassium intracellularly and
decrease the serum potassium concentration, intravenous dextrose
can be administered with or without insulin, though dextrose alone
is slow to resolve hyperkalemia and may not be fully effective.
Insulin facilitates the movement of glucose into the cells and potas-
sium moves in the same direction (intracellularly), though an inde-
pendent mechanism resulting in Na +
- K+ ATPase pump activation
(especially in the muscles) has been suggested [318]. Regular
crystalline insulin should be used at a dose of 0.25–0.5 U/kg of
body weight. Dextrose (dilute 50%) at a dose of 2 g (4 mL) per unit
of insulin administered should be given simultaneously. Onset of
treatment effect is about 30 min and it could last for about an
hour [188]. The potential for iatrogenic hypoglycemia exists with
insulin-dextrose therapy and once initial stabilization is achieved,
dextrose supplementation may be required until euglycemia is
reached. Intravenous administration of sodium bicarbonate results
in alkalosis that in turn causes hydrogen ions to move from ICF to
ECF and potassium moves into the ICF in exchange. The recom-
mended dose is 1–2 mEq/kg, but concerns about paradoxical
cerebrospinal acidosis, hyperosmolality, and the patient’s ability to
ventilate should be considered beforehand. Also, bicarbonate therapy
will cause hypocalcemia that may be counterproductive if calcium
salts have been used for their cardioprotective effects [283]. Therapy
takes effect in about 15 min and could last for an hour. Use of a
β2
- adrenergic receptor agonist has been described to treat hyper-
kalemia by stimulating the Na +
-K+ ATPase pump that occurs inde-
pendent of insulin [319].
Hypokalemia is the result of dilution (from potassium-depleted
fluids), decreased dietary intake, increased urinary excretion (chronic
renal failure, postobstructive diuresis, diuretics, mineralocorticoid
excess, etc.), increased gastrointestinal loss (vomiting, diarrhea),
and intracellular shift (alkalosis, glucose/insulin-containing fluids,
β- adrenergic receptor agonists, etc.) [283,301,320]. Refractory
hypokalemia could occur in the presence of hypomagnesemia [281].
Clinical signs of hypokalemia are characterized by neuromuscular
function disturbances due to hyperpolarization, especially when
the concentration is below 2.5 mEq/L, and include cervical
ventroflexion, respiratory paralysis, anorexia, vomiting, decreased

-- 610 of 1450 --

Chapter 32: Clinical Pharmacology and Administration of Fluid, Electrolyte, and Blood Component Solutions 	595
gastrointestinal motility, and lethargy [283,321]. Electrocardiographic
abnormalities could include ST segment depression, decreased
amplitude or inversion of T wave, increased P wave amplitude, and
prolonged PR and QRS intervals, but life-threatening arrhythmias
are uncommon [283]. Treatment involves parenteral supplementa-
tion with potassium chloride or potassium phosphate as additives
to the crystalloids. It is important to remember that potassium
supplementation rate should generally not exceed 0.5–1 mEq/kg/h
because of cardiotoxic effects of potassium on cardiac conduc-
tion [283]. If potassium-supplemented fluids are used during anes-
thesia, it is important to have another catheter placed with a second
fluid bag attached without additional potassium in case there is a
need for fluid bolus administration. In addition, careful mixing of
fluid bags with added potassium should be accomplished to avoid
accidental potassium bolus.
Transfusion therapy
While crystalloids and synthetic colloids can provide cardiovascular
support by improving hemodynamic variables, in situations of
significant blood loss or coagulopathy, blood products become
necessary. However, blood products are costly, have a more limited
shelf-life, need specific storage conditions, and are highly immuno-
genic due to the presence of biologic products like proteins and cells
(transfusions can be considered a liquid transplant). Thus, it is
important to adequately determine when a transfusion is necessary,
which components are needed, and how to best deliver the blood
safely. There are limited publications in the veterinary literature
specifically about use of transfusions in the perioperative period
and during anesthesia. However, an understanding of available
blood components and their usage, indications for autologous
transfusions, and new information about transfusions in situations
of massive blood loss can help guide practice.
Blood component therapy
Red blood cell products
Red blood cell (RBC) products are indicated in anemic patients
to improve their oxygen-carrying capacity. Oxygen delivery
(DO 2 ) is the product of cardiac output (CO) and arterial oxygen
content (CaO 2 ):
DO 	CO CaO	2 	2
where CaO2 = (PaO2 × 0.003) + (SaO2 × Hb × 1.34). In this equation,
PaO2 is partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood, SaO2 is saturation
of hemoglobin with oxygen in arterial blood, and 1.34 is the number
of milliliters of oxygen each 1 g of hemoglobin (Hb) can carry.
The transfusion trigger is the concentration of hemoglobin below
which the DO2 decreases to an extent that anaerobic metabolism
starts. Although there is still a deficiency of literature defining a
transfusion trigger in human surgical patients with substantial
blood loss, in stable anemic patients RBC administration is recom-
mended when the hemoglobin concentration falls below 6 g/dL
(corresponding to a PCV of approximately 18% in most species as
Hb occupies 1/3 of the RBC) [322]. In small animals, it has been
suggested that a PCV of 15–18% may be a reasonable transfusion
trigger [323]. In euvolemic cattle, a hemoglobin level of 5 g/dL (i.e.,
a PCV of ~15%) is recommended, and in cattle undergoing surgery,
having pulmonary disease or in late pregnancy, a transfusion trigger
value of 7 g/dL (i.e., a PCV of ~21%) has been suggested [324].
A PCV of 20% has been suggested as the transfusion trigger in
horses [325].
However, the use of only the hemoglobin level or PCV as a trans-
fusion trigger should be avoided, and any decision to transfuse
should be based on an individual patient’s intravascular volume sta-
tus, presence of ongoing bleeding, signs of organ ischemia, duration
(acute versus chronic), extent of anemia, and cardiopulmonary
physiologic parameters [322]. In acute settings, animals lack the
compensatory changes that occur during chronic anemia such as
(1) a right-shifted oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve due to increased
synthesis of 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG) (facilitating oxygen
release to tissues); (2) diversion of blood flow away from skeletal,
skin, and splanchnic circulation toward coronary and cerebral
circulations secondary to alterations in sympathetic tone; and
(3) recruitment of capillaries to facilitate tissue oxygen extraction
[326]. Conversely, in the face of chronic anemia, some compensatory
adaptations to chronic anemia may be diminished by the cardiovas-
cular side effects of anesthesia.
Intraoperative blood loss can be monitored by visual assessment
of the surgical field, estimating the amount of blood on the drapes
and floor, and collecting and weighing gauze and lap sponges. The
amount of blood on gauze and lap sponges can be estimated by sub-
tracting the weight of dry gauze and lap sponges from the weight
of blood-soaked ones (assuming 1 g weight = 1 mL of blood). If no
lavage fluid is used, the volume of blood collected in the suction
bottle can be measured directly. If the bottle contains a mixture
of blood and fluid, the following formula can be used to estimate
blood loss [327]:
Blood loss mL PCV of suctioned fluid Volume in canister
( 	) (( 	)	mL
Preoperative patient PCV
It is also helpful to look at blood loss as a percentage of the total
blood volume to estimate severity, as animals under anesthesia
are often not as able to compensate for significant blood loss as an
awake patient can. Profound hemodynamic changes occur in
anesthetized animals when approximately 15–20% of their blood
volume is acutely lost and its impact on oxygen delivery may be
more profound because of depressed cardiovascular reflexes under
anesthesia [82,328].
Traditional transfusion triggers are based on PCV, and allowable
blood loss will be greater in patients with a high PCV at the start of
anesthesia. However, intraoperative changes in PCV and TS can be
difficult to interpret in the face of intraoperative fluid therapy and
the timing of measurement after blood loss. When whole blood
(WB) is lost acutely, the ratio of RBCs to plasma stays the same. The
PCV only begins to decline after intraoperative fluid administra-
tion or after IVF shifts, and other compensatory mechanisms result
in plasma volume expansion and hemodilution [324]. Often a drop
in TS will be the first sign of acute blood loss as splenic contraction
may maintain the hematocrit initially. Alternatively, a decrease in
PCV and TS due to fluid administration in a surgery without signifi-
cant hemorrhage may represent hemodilution, and a better estimate
of actual blood loss may be obtained by rechecking the values after
fluid redistribution has occurred (often several hours later).
Monitoring for indices of inadequate perfusion and oxygenation
should not only involve standard intraoperative monitoring like
blood pressure, heart rate, electrocardiography, and pulse oximetry
but should also include lactate, base excess, mixed venous saturation/
central venous saturation, and/or echocardiography when applicable
[176,177,322,325]. It has been shown that blood loss under anesthe-
sia may decrease CO without the expected changes in heart rate and
blood pressure due to blunting of the baroreceptor response [328].

-- 611 of 1450 --

596 	Section 4: Body Fluids and Fluid Therapy
Thus, these standard cardiovascular parameters monitored in
veterinary anesthesia may not identify the severity of blood loss.
Careful monitoring of physical blood loss as described above in
conjunction with perfusion parameters like lactate and base excess
may yield a better perspective on compromised oxygen delivery
and need for improved oxygen-carrying capacity.
Various reasons for transfusion of WB or PRBCs in veterinary
patients include anemia due to blood loss, hemolysis, and erythro-
poietic failure [329–335]. Once the decision has been made to
provide RBCs, there are several products that can be chosen.
Fresh whole blood
Fresh whole blood (FWB) is commonly used in clinical veterinary
medicine due to its ready availability from in-house donors. It has
all the components of blood including RBC, plasma proteins,
platelets, and labile and stable coagulation factors. If held at room
temperature, it should be used within 4–6 h of collection due to the
potential for bacterial growth [323]. Its use should be restricted to
patients with massive blood loss or those that are missing multiple
components. FWB can be transfused at varying rates depending on
the rate of blood loss and size of the volume deficit. The dose can be
estimated as each 2 mL/kg will raise the PCV by 1% [336,337], or
more precisely calculated using the following formula where blood
volume is estimated to be 88 mL/kg in a dog, 80 mL/kg in a horse,
and 66 mL/kg in a cat [323,325]:
FWB mL PCV 	PCV
PCV Body weight
	required 	recipient
donor
( 	) [ 	] kg
Blood volume (mL/kg)
( 	)
If not used within 6 h, FWB can be stored in a refrigerator at 1–6 °C
for 28 days if CPDA-1 is used as a preservative, or 30 days if acid
citrate dextrose (ACD) is used.
Stored whole blood
Stored refrigerated WB retains its ability to form a strong clot
through the first 14 days of storage. Although canine refrigerated
platelets lose activity over time, the ability to aggregate into a strong
clot is not lost until after day 14 [338]. After day 14, stored WB is
best used for supplementing oxygen-carrying capacity in a hypo-
proteinemic patient or a patient with lost circulatory blood volume.
The dose can be calculated as for FWB.
Packed red blood cells
PRBCs are prepared by separating the RBCs from plasma using a
hard spin in a refrigerated centrifuge. Units of PRBCs contain RBCs,
a small amount of plasma, white blood cells (WBCs), platelets, and
a small amount of anticoagulant. A unit of PRBC obtained from a
unit of WB contains approximately the same oxygen-carrying
capacity as a unit of WB but in a smaller volume. Transfusion with
PRBCs is indicated in patients that need improvement in their
oxygen-carrying capacity but are otherwise normovolemic and
have no clotting abnormalities. In severe thrombocytopenia, risk of
bleeding is also affected by degree of anemia, and RBCs can reduce
the risk of bleeding in such patients by scavenging nitric oxide,
leading to an increase in platelet activity. The higher hematocrit
following PRBC administration can push the platelets toward the
endothelial wall to improve contact and increase production of
thromboxane by platelets at the injury site and help reduce shear
stress [339,340]. If initial collection of PRBC is done in CPDA-1,
the product can be stored at 4 °C for approximately 20 days.
If nutrient additive solutions are added, the storage time can be
extended (35 days with Nutricel® or Optisol® and 37 days with
Adsol®) [323]. The hematocrit of PRBC products can vary consider-
ably, but for dogs, if the PCV of PRBC is approximately 60%, then
the volume required to raise the recipient PCV can be calculated as
below [341]:
PRBC mL 	mL Desired increase in PCV Body weight kg	( 	) 	. 	% 	( 	)	1 5
If the PCV is higher, the formula listed above for WB can be used.
Plasma products
Plasma products are indicated perioperatively to treat significant
coagulopathy. These may be used prophylactically in patients with
known coagulopathies or perioperatively if active bleeding occurs.
The type of product used depends on the coagulopathy being treated.
Fresh frozen plasma
Fresh frozen plasma (FFP) is plasma separated by a hard spin from
WB that is frozen within 8 h of collection. In addition to plasma
proteins and clotting factors, FFP is rich in labile clotting factors V
and VIII and vWF. Units of FFP can be stored up to 1 year in a
freezer maintained at –20 to –30 °C and can be used prophylacti-
cally prior to surgery in patients with known significant inherited
or acquired coagulopathies. They can also be used perioperatively if
active bleeding due to coagulopathy occurs and prothrombin time
(PT) is greater than 1.5 times normal, activated partial thrombo-
plastin time (APTT) is greater than 2 times normal, or international
normalized ratio (INR) is greater than 2 [322]. Units of FFP can be
thawed at room temperature or in a warm water bath maintained at
37 °C. They should be placed in a sealed plastic bag before place-
ment in a water bath to prevent contamination of the ports. The
recommended dosage for treatment of vitamin K antagonist roden-
ticide toxicity is 10–20 mL/kg [342] and 15–30 mL/kg is required to
treat coagulopathy associated with hemophilia A or von Willebrand
disease (vWD) [343].
Frozen plasma
If FFP is stored for more than 1 year it is called “frozen plasma”
(FP). If, at initial separation from WB, it is not frozen within 24 h or
if the FFP is thawed and refrozen, then too it is called “frozen
plasma.” It differs from FFP in the lack of labile clotting factors V
and VIII and vWF. Units of FP can be kept frozen at –20 °C for
5 years from the date of collection. Though the labile clotting factors
and anticoagulant proteins are not active, FP can be used for treat-
ment of vitamin K-dependent (factors II, VII, IX, and X) coagu-
lopathies like rodenticide toxicity [323,344]. Also, it can potentially
be used as a source of albumin to provide COP support [323].
Cryoprecipitate (cryo)
Cryoprecipitate (cryo) can be prepared from FFP within 12 months
of collection. It is formed by slow thawing at 0–6 °C. A white pre-
cipitate forms and both the plasma and precipitated fractions are
separated by centrifugation and refrozen. The precipitated fraction
is called “cryoprecipitate” and serves as a concentrated source of
labile factors V and VIII, vWF, and fibrinogen. It should be used
within 12 months from the date of initial blood draw. Cryoprecipitate
is the treatment of choice for prophylaxis or active bleeding in dogs
with hemophilia A or vWD [343,345,346]. Recommended dosing
for cryoprecipitate is 1 unit per 10 kg of body weight. A lyophilized
commercial canine cryoprecipitate product is available that can be

-- 612 of 1450 --

Chapter 32: Clinical Pharmacology and Administration of Fluid, Electrolyte, and Blood Component Solutions 	597
stored for 18 months in the refrigerator prior to rehydration
(Canine Cryoprecipitate, Lyophilized, Animal Blood Resources
International, Stockbridge, MI).
The supernatant produced in the process of procuring cryopre-
cipitate is called “cryo-poor plasma” (CPP). This blood product
lacks labile clotting factors but still contains the non-labile factors
II, VII, IX, and X, so it can be used for the treatment of coagulopa-
thies associated with rodenticide toxicity [347].
Albumin products
Albumin constitutes 50–60% of the total plasma protein and provides
75–80% of COP in healthy animals. It also has other important
physiologic functions including transport of various substrates and
drugs, buffer capacity, scavenging of free radicals, mediation of
coagulation, and wound healing [348]. Many critically ill patients
suffer from hypoalbuminemia that could result in ISF accumulation
including pulmonary edema, impaired wound healing, improper
transport of various anesthetic drugs, hypercoagulability, and
systemic organ dysfunction [349,350]. Hypoalbuminemia has been
associated with a poor prognosis in both human and veterinary
patients. In critically ill patients, the relationship between albumin
and COP is not as predictable as expected and edema formation
results from complex pathophysiological processes involving changes
in capillary permeability, lymphatic function, plasma COP, albumin
kinetics, and extracellular matrix structure. The most common
form of species-specific albumin supplementation for COP support
has been in the form of plasma transfusions. However, a large
volume of plasma will be required to supply a relatively small
amount of albumin; it is estimated that 22.5 mL/kg of plasma will be
required to raise the albumin level by 0.5 g/dL [323]. Consequently,
a large amount of fluid will accompany the plasma transfusion that
potentially could lead to transfusion-associated circulatory overload
(TACO). Two concentrated forms of albumin, human serum albu-
min (HSA) and canine serum albumin (CSA), have been used as
sources of albumin in veterinary species. The use of bovine serum
albumin in dogs has also been described [351].
Human serum albumin
Use of HSA has been reported mostly in small animal patients
though its use in horses has also been described [352–357]. Use
of 25% hyperoncotic and 5% iso-oncotic preparations have been
reported in retrospective studies in critically ill small animal patients
[352–355] and prospectively in healthy animals [358–360].
The prospective studies in healthy dogs [358–360] were under-
taken to study any potential adverse effects with the use of HSA. In
these studies, a few dogs developed immediate hypersensitivity
reactions (anaphylactoid reactions) characterized by vomiting,
facial edema, tachypnea, collapse, and hypotension. In addition,
some dogs developed delayed hypersensitivity reactions 5–13 days
after the initial transfusion characterized by facial edema, limb
edema, pruritus, shifting limb lameness, vomiting, lethargy, inap-
petence, ecchymoses, lymphadenopathy, diarrhea, and cutaneous
lesions indicative of vasculitis. Two of the dogs in one study suf-
fered fatal consequences [358]. The delayed hypersensitivity was
shown to be characterized by antigen–antibody complex deposition
in various tissues, a characteristic of type III hypersensitivity
[356,358,360]. Also, HSA transfusion led to a prolonged immuno-
globulin E (IgE) immune response in healthy dogs as shown by
positive intradermal testing [360].
Initial retrospective studies conducted in critically ill small ani-
mal patients receiving HSA showed fewer adverse reactions. In a
study conducted by Mathews and Barry [352], out of 64 dogs and
two cats, facial edema was reported in only two dogs while trans-
fusing HSA, but no information was available about delayed reac-
tions. Another study conducted in 73 critically ill dogs showed no
fulminant anaphylaxis but minor complications in 27% of animals
characterized by tachypnea, tachycardia, increased body tempera-
ture, peripheral edema, and ventricular arrhythmias [353]. Delayed
reactions were seen in three dogs 5–14 days after administration
characterized by edema, urticaria, lameness, pyrexia, vomiting,
cutaneous lesions, and generalized pain. A recent study in 418 dogs
and 170 cats using 5% HSA showed diarrhea, hyperthermia, or
tremors in 43.5% of dogs and 36.5% of cats but there were no severe
hypersensitivity reactions [350]. However, a more recent report
identified delayed type III hypersensitivity reaction with acute kidney
failure and death in two dogs given HSA for septic peritonitis [355].
Given the severe sequelae, HSA should only be considered in
severely compromised small animal patients where all other options
have been exhausted.
Canine serum albumin
Fortunately, CSA is now available (Lyophilized canine albumin,
Animal Blood Resources International, Dixon, CA). The product
is derived from canine source donor plasma using a heat shock
process. It is available as a lyophilized preparation in 5 g vials that
can be reconstituted with sodium chloride solution. It can be used
as a hyperosmotic 16% solution (166 mg/mL) or an iso-osmotic 5%
(50 mg/mL) preparation. The 16% solution can be used in hypo-
tensive patients with low albumin concentrations with a goal of
achieving acute volume expansion and maintenance of intravascu-
lar volume.
The use of CSA in postoperative management of dogs after
source control surgery for septic peritonitis has been reported [361].
Fourteen dogs were divided into two groups with one group receiv-
ing CSA and the other group receiving clinician-directed therapy
(CDT). They used 800 mg/kg of 5% CSA for 6 h in the CSA group.
Doppler blood pressure, albumin concentration, and COP were
significantly higher at 2 h post infusion, and the albumin concen-
tration was significantly higher at 24 h post infusion in the CSA
group compared to the CDT group. No difference was noticed in
COP at the 24 h time point. Both groups received similar amounts
of crystalloids and synthetic colloids during their hospitalization.
The authors speculated that HES (COP 32.7 mmHg) administration
during subsequent hospitalization masked the effect of 5% CSA
(COP 22 mmHg) on COP. Only one dog showed an increase in res-
piration rate during the transfusion that resolved with slowing of
the administration rate. Two safety studies of two different CSA
products have been conducted in healthy purpose-bred Beagle
dogs which were given a dose of 1 g/kg repeatedly for several
weeks [362,363]. Two dogs had minor reactions. One dog, during
the second weekly infusion, developed pallor and prolonged capil-
lary refill time that resolved on slowing the infusion and another
vomited once during its second infusion and had no other signs.
The investigators concluded that healthy dogs tolerated the repeated
infusion well without any evidence of physical or biochemical
abnormality.
In spite of the favorable experimental data and physiologic ben-
efits from the use of albumin, literature in human medicine has not
been able to demonstrate significant benefits with its use for initial
resuscitation over sodium chloride solution in terms of improve-
ment in morbidity and mortality [364,365]. However, albumin is
recommended as the colloid of choice in patients with sepsis and

-- 613 of 1450 --

598 	Section 4: Body Fluids and Fluid Therapy
septic shock. It also appears useful in conjunction with furosemide
in treatment of acute lung injury and in support of patients with
cirrhosis and severe ascites [366].
Platelet products
Platelet transfusions in human patients are done for prophylactic
as well as therapeutic purposes. A prospective study in humans
revealed that out of 7401 platelet transfusions performed in 503
patients, about 74% were prophylactic in nature, 18% were therapeu-
tic, and 8% were administered prior to surgery or invasive procedures
in patients with coagulopathy or at high risk of bleeding [367]. In
the perioperative setting, prophylactic platelet transfusion should
be considered if the platelet count is < 50 × 10 9
/L [322]. The need
for therapy, including any prophylactic treatment in patients with
platelet counts in the range of 50–100 × 109
/L, should be based on
potential for platelet dysfunction, anticipated or ongoing hemor-
rhage, and the risk of bleeding in a confined space (e.g., brain) [322].
Platelet transfusion may be indicated in patients with normal
platelet counts if there is suspected or known platelet dysfunction
(e.g., antiplatelet drug exposure or congenital thrombopathies).
Aside from invasive procedures associated with high risk of
bleeding, in humans, platelets are recommended for prophylaxis
only if the count is < 10 × 10 9 /L [368,369]. In actively bleeding
patients, therapeutic platelet transfusion is warranted if the count
is < 20 × 10 9 /L [368,369].
In veterinary medicine, the indications for platelet transfusions
are similar but specific platelet products are used less commonly
due to issues with storage and expense. WB is the most readily
available veterinary blood product that serves as a source of plate-
lets and should be used within 8 h of collection. While the platelets
in FWB last longer in circulation, canine platelets in stored WB
maintain activity for up to 14 days [338]. WB should ideally be used
in patients that are anemic and also have thrombocytopenia or
thrombocytopathia. A dose of 10 mL/kg is expected to raise the
platelet count by 10,000/μL [370,371]. In non-anemic patients, this
volume of transfused RBCs may lead to polycythemia and volume
overload. Advantages of using FWB are that no platelets are lost
during processing and there is less activation of platelets than if they
were obtained by centrifugation [371].
Platelet-rich plasma
Platelet- rich plasma (PRP) is produced from FWB using a “soft
spin” centrifugation technique. The supernatant plasma contains
the platelets and is separated from the PRBCs [370]. The recom-
mended dose of PRP is 1 unit per 10 kg of body weight. Use of WB
to produce PRP has also been described in cattle and horses [372].
Platelet concentrate
Platelet concentrate (PC) can be prepared from PRP by “hard spin”
centrifugation. The supernatant (platelet-poor plasma) is expressed
into a satellite bag attached to the PRP bag, leaving about 35–70 mL
of concentrated platelets. A canine study revealed a mean platelet
yield of 8 × 1010 per unit of PC and that about 25% of platelets are
lost during the process of making PC from FWB [373]. The use of
automated blood cell separators for canine plateletpheresis has been
described that gave a mean platelet yield of 3.3 × 1011 platelets in a
mean collected volume of 246 mL [374]. The recommended dose of
PC is 1 unit per 10 kg of body weight and a maximum rise in plate-
let count of 40,000/μL is expected [370]. Fresh platelet products,
including both PRP and PC, are stored at 20–24 °C with gentle
continuous or intermittent agitation for 5 days when prepared using
a closed collection system [370]. Despite evidence of a short life span
in vivo, cold-stored (refrigerated) platelets retain hemostatic capa-
bility and use is increasing in human trauma medicine [375].
Frozen platelet concentrate
Frozen PC can be made by stabilizing apheresed platelets with
6% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) or 2% DMSO and ThromoboSol®
(a mixture of amiloride, adenosine, and sodium nitroprusside,
second messenger effectors that inhibit platelet function) [376].
Valeri et al. showed that canine platelets preserved with 6% DMSO
and kept at –80 °C for 1 year had a 70% recovery rate with a half-life
of 2 days versus 3.5 days for fresh platelets [377]. Moreover, the
platelets were effective in stopping clinical bleeding in thrombocy-
topenic dogs [378]. Another canine study revealed 49% platelet
recovery when preserved with 6% DMSO compared to 44% with
2% DMSO and ThromboSol®. The half-life was approximately
2 days compared to 3.8 days for fresh platelets [376]. Because the
platelets retain the ability to be activated with a reasonable half-
life, they hold promise for the management of life-threatening
bleeding in severely thrombocytopenic or thrombocytopathic
dogs. Cryopreserved platelets with 6% DMSO are available in
the veterinary market (Leukoreduced Frozen Canine Platelet
Concentrate, Animal Blood Resources International, Dixon, CA).
The recommended dose is 1 unit/10 kg body weight given over 4 h.
Studies evaluating this commercial product indicated a decreased
recovery rate of platelets at 59% and increased activation of platelets
as indicated by flow cytometry and aggregometry [379,380].
Lyophilized platelets
Lyophilized platelets (LYO) are stabilized using an aldehyde cross-
linking of membrane proteins and lipids and then lyophilized. Units
of LYO can be stored in a refrigerator for up to 2 years and can
be reconstituted with 0.9% sodium chloride immediately before
administration [381]. Experimental data show that LYO act like
normal platelets (as demonstrated by binding to collagen, damaged
endothelium, vWF, and the cell membrane receptors), are activated
normally, and bind fibrinogen [382,383]. In an experimental canine
model of thrombocytopenia and platelet dysfunction induced by
cardiac bypass, an infusion of LYO led to improvement in venous
bleeding times that peaked at 20–30 min after infusion compared to
the control group [384]. An initial prospective multicenter trial
compared the use of LYO and PC in 37 dogs with thrombocytope-
nia and evidence of active bleeding [385]. Twenty-two dogs received
LYO and 15 received PC. The incidence of transfusion reactions
was low in both groups and there was no difference in hospitaliza-
tion time and mortality between groups. A commercial canine
LYO product using trehalose-stabilized platelets was available
(StablePlateRX, Bodevet, Rockville, MD) but is currently off the
market. A prospective multicenter trial compared the use of this LYO
with cryopreserved platelets for control of bleeding in thrombocy-
topenic dogs. Eighty-eight dogs were enrolled with 50 receiving LYO
and 38 receiving CPP. At 1 h post-administration, both the bleeding
score and hematocrit had improved more in the LYO group; and LYO
were non-inferior compared to CPP for bleeding score and hemato-
crit at 24 h, change in platelet count, need for additional RBC units,
and survival to discharge [386]. There is also potential for LYO to be
used as a hemostatic agent even if the platelet count and function are
normal. In a swine model of liver injury, administration of LYO led
to 80% survival compared to 20% in the placebo group [387]. One
of the pigs in the LYO group had evidence of thrombi in other loca-
tions on necropsy indicating the risk of thromboembolic potential.

-- 614 of 1450 --

Chapter 32: Clinical Pharmacology and Administration of Fluid, Electrolyte, and Blood Component Solutions 	599
Transfusion compatibility testing
Once the decision has been made to transfuse, compatibility testing
should be undertaken if the transfusion is not an emergency. If
excessive bleeding is a risk, typing and cross-matching should be
considered prior to surgical procedures.
Blood typing
Blood groups are based on the expression of RBC surface antigens
and are important in transfusion compatibility. The number and
type of significant blood groups varies among different domestic
animal species.
Dogs
In dogs, recognized blood types include dog erythrocytic antigen
(DEA) 1, 3, 4, 5, and 7 [323,388,389]. The DEA 1 system is the most
antigenic. Due to the absence of naturally occurring alloantibodies,
the first transfusion from a DEA 1-positive donor to a DEA
1- negative recipient should not cause an immune reaction to the
erythrocytes. However, the second such transfusion will often lead
to a severe hemolytic reaction if enough time has elapsed to allow
an immune response to develop [390]. It has been shown that natu-
rally occurring alloantibodies are present in some dogs for DEA 3,
DEA 5, and DEA 7 [323,391–393]. These alloantibodies can result
in transfusion reactions that are usually mild or delayed and a sig-
nificantly shorter half-life of transfused RBCs may be noticed [394].
At present, a dog is considered a universal donor if it is DEA 4 positive
and negative for all the other DEA antigens. Dal, a more recently
discovered antigen, exists at a high frequency in dogs but is missing
in some Dalmatians and also in some other breeds [395,396].
In vitro antibodies against Dal induce a strong agglutination reac-
tion and could cause a severe transfusion reaction. Kai is another
recently discovered antigen [396]. Based on population prevalence,
it has been speculated that DEA 1 compatibility testing could decrease
the risk of acute transfusion reaction by 24% and, by decreasing
exposure to other DEA systems, the risk of acute and delayed trans-
fusion reactions could be reduced by an additional 8% [323].
In- house blood typing kits are available for DEA 1 and are recom-
mended for dogs prior to transfusion when at all possible. The
Association of Veterinary Hematology and Transfusion Medicine
(AVHTM) Transfusion Reaction Small Animal Consensus Statement
(TRACS) strongly recommends using DEA 1-negative blood for
DEA 1-negative dogs and DEA 1-positive blood for DEA 1-positive
dogs. DEA 1-negative can be given to a DEA 1-positive blood in an
emergency or if DEA 1-positive blood is not available [397].
Cats
Cat blood group types include A, B, and AB. An additional feline
blood group antigen, Mik, has also been identified [398].
Distribution of these blood types varies geographically with the
highest prevalence of type B reported in Australia (36% of the pop-
ulation) [399]. The incidence of type B has been reported at 6% in
the United States [400]. Blood group B is more prevalent among
some pure-bred cats, including Birman (18%), Devon Rex (41%),
Cornish Rex (31%), British Shorthair (36%), and Scottish Fold
(19%) [401]. Type AB has been reported to occur in less than 1% of
the general cat population, although the prevalence may actually be
higher, as new typing methodologies appear better at identifying
these cats [402]. Blood type A cats may have low titers of natural
alloantibodies that can cause shortened RBC survival if type B
blood is given. On the other hand, type B cats have naturally occur-
ring alloantibodies against type A in high titers and that can cause a
fatal reaction even if 1 mL of type A blood is transfused [403,404].
Type AB cats have neither alloantibody but should receive either
AB or A type RBC products because of the strong anti-A alloanti-
bodies present in type B blood products. Most cats have the Mik
antigen, but in cats without Mik, naturally occurring alloantibodies
can lead to a hemolytic transfusion reaction even without having
received a previous transfusion [398]. In simple terms, the likelihood
of a severe transfusion reaction is much higher in cats compared to
dogs if an unmatched transfusion is performed. In-house typing
kits are readily available for cats and it is strongly recommended
that all cats are typed prior to transfusion and given type-specific
blood [397,405].
In cases where transfusion is necessary and either no feline blood
is available, or the cat is type B and no type B blood is available,
canine blood can be used. This xenotransfusion can be lifesaving in
emergencies, but the RBCs are very short lived in circulation, with
hemolysis usually occurring within 48 h. Xenotransfusion can only
be performed once as a second canine transfusion will result in a
severe life-threatening acute hemolytic reaction [406].
Horses
In horses, there are eight blood groups with more than 30 red cell
antigens recognized [325]. Approximately 90% of horses do not
have naturally occurring alloantibodies but the most common are
to Aa and Ca. Full blood typing for horses is available through only
a few diagnostic laboratories [407], but a stall side test is now avail-
able for Ca (Quick Test BT, Equine, Alvedia, Limonest, France).
Chances of adverse reactions increase if either the donor or recipi-
ent is a mare that has been bred previously. Thus, it is recommended
to use blood from male horses or mares that have never been preg-
nant as preferred donors. It is also preferable to consider donors that
are negative for factors Aa and Qa to prevent sensitization of brood
mares against the alloantigens most frequently involved in neonatal
isoerythrolysis [325].
Ruminants
In cattle, the likelihood of reaction during first transfusion is low
due to a lack of naturally occurring alloantibodies or low titers in
the serum. However, cows with J-negative antigen on the RBCs may
have J antibodies that can cause a reaction on a first transfusion if
J-positive donor cells are used [408]. Although this reaction seems
to be of minor clinical significance, the ideal donor cow should have
J- negative RBCs.
Other ruminants also appear to have low circulating naturally
occurring antibodies. Goats have six blood group systems, sheep
have eight, and camelids have at least six group factors [409].
Pigs
Pigs have 16 recognized blood groups. The A-O group is most
important and is very similar to the human ABO group but without
a B antigen. While hemolytic reactions do not seem to occur with a
first transfusion, incompatible A-O transfusions may cause pulmo-
nary hypertension and other adverse events. These reactions seem
to be related to anti-A antibodies in plasma so use of PRBCs is safer.
Cross-matching should always be performed prior to additional
transfusions [410].
Cross-matching
Cross-matching determines the serological compatibility between
recipient and donor blood and is based on an agglutination reac-
tion. It detects naturally occurring alloantibodies or alloantibodies

-- 615 of 1450 --

600 	Section 4: Body Fluids and Fluid Therapy
produced as a result of previous exposure to incompatible blood
products. The major cross-match evaluates the compatibility between
donor RBCs and recipient plasma/serum. The minor cross-match
assesses compatibility between the recipient’s RBCs and donor
plasma/serum. In dogs, cross-matching is strongly recommended if
transfusion history is unknown, if hemolytic reaction is noticed
during the first transfusion, or in any dog who has been previously
transfused more than 4 days prior, independent of initial typing and
cross-matching results [390,391,397]. Cross-matching should be
considered prior to a first transfusion in dogs due to the presence of
naturally occurring antibodies to other antigens and possible influ-
ence on RBC life span [323]. In cats, both typing and cross-matching
are recommended before an initial transfusion because of identifi-
cation of the Mik antigen with naturally occurring alloantibodies
and the potential for a severe transfusion reaction [397,403–405].
In horses, cross-matching is recommended if a second transfusion
is needed more than 4–7 days after a first transfusion or if any reac-
tion is noted during the first transfusion [325]. Cattle serum carries
minimal agglutinating antibodies and cross-match is usually of little
benefit in predicting a transfusion reaction unless a hemolytic test
using complement is performed [324]. Standard cross-matching
procedures [323] can be found in many texts. A gel cross-match kit
is now available for dogs and cats that simplifies the procedure
(RapidVet®-H, DMS Laboratories Inc., Flemington, NJ). A gel
cross-match kit is also available for horses [411].
Transfusion considerations for massive blood loss
Massive transfusion (MT) involves administration of WB or blood
components in an amount that is more than the patient’s blood vol-
ume in 24 h or more than half of the blood volume in 3 h [412].
Human studies have shown that increasing the ratios of plasma and
platelets relative to PRBCs early in the resuscitation phase leads to
improvement in outcome [413–415]. Due to these new develop-
ments, MT protocols (also known as “substantial bleeding proto-
cols” [SBP] or “trauma exsanguination protocol” [TEP]) have been
developed [416]. The PROMMTT (Prospective, observational,
multicenter, major trauma transfusion) study showed that in the
initial 6 h, mortality was decreased in patients who received higher
plasma:RBC and platelet:RBC ratios [417]. A meta-analysis of the
impact of MT protocols with increased ratios of plasma and plate-
lets showed that these protocols significantly reduced the overall
mortality for trauma patients [418].
There are limited veterinary studies of MT. One veterinary
canine study with MT had a high mortality rate of 74% with 100%
mortality in dogs with elevated clotting times [412]. Another study
in three cats that received MT revealed 67% survival [332]. A dog
with aortic laceration that received MT and five units of PRBCs, three
units of FFP, and 1.2 L of autotransfused blood survived [419].
Blood administration
Due to the higher viscosity of PRBCs, administration can be facili-
tated by diluting the cells with warm 0.9% sodium chloride and
using the largest possible catheter for venous access. Various RBC
products can be warmed by wrapping in a sealed plastic bag and
putting in a water bath maintained at 37 °C. Medications and cal-
cium containing fluids should not be given in the same line while
administering blood products [323]. Intravenous administration is
preferred but blood may be given by the intraosseous route in neo-
nates and animals with difficult vascular access. In healthy dogs,
more than 90% of delivered RBCs can be seen in the peripheral
circulation after intraosseous administration [420]. The initial rate
of administration is usually 0.5 mL/kg over the first 15 min to mon-
itor for any adverse effects of transfusion [336]. The rate can be
increased to 10–20 mL/kg/h if no adverse effects are detected. In
patients with heart disease, the rate should be less and in cats, rates
of 4 mL/kg/h, 10 mL/kg/h, and 60 mL/kg/h have been described in
cardiovascular anomalies, normovolemia, and hypovolemic shock,
respectively [329,397]. Ideally, blood transfusion is finished within
4 h due to the potential risk of bacterial overgrowth in blood main-
tained at room temperature. In settings of substantial bleeding or
trauma, blood can be given as rapidly as possible. This is facilitated
by using short length and larger gauge catheters.
RBCs and all plasma products should be administered with a filter
to avoid administration of microthrombi. An in-line 170–260 μm
filter is most appropriate for canine blood products. An 18-μm
microaggregate filter can be used in cats. Different types of pumps
are available to allow administration of a specified volume over a
specific time, but this delivery technique can potentially influence
the half-life of transfused RBCs [397]. A study in dogs showed
significantly shorter RBC life span when a syringe pump and micro-
aggregate filter were used compared to gravity flow and an in-line
filter [421]. Studies have also shown increased hemolysis of canine
PRBC when administered with peristaltic and rotary pumps. In dogs,
administration with an in-line filter and gravity flow or a specifi-
cally evaluated piston pump (Hospira Plum A+® infusion pump,
Hospira Inc, Lake Forest, IL) is recommended [397]. In cats, use of
a syringe pump and a microaggregate filter (18 μm) resulted in
acceptable RBC survival [397,422].
Adverse effects of transfusion
Transfusion reactions are categorized as immune-mediated or
non-immunologic as well as acute or delayed [323]. Immunologic
reactions are often against RBCs, plasma proteins, WBCs, or plate-
let antigens. Non-immunologic reactions can be related to admin-
istration, contamination, additives, and storage. The incidence of
transfusion reaction varies from 0% to 38% in the veterinary litera-
ture, depending on species, blood product, and reaction definitions
[324,333,409,423].
Clinical signs of reactions can include fever, tachycardia, dyspnea,
vomiting, tremors, face rubbing, hives, hemolysis, and, in horses,
signs of colic [324,333,409,423]. Regardless of the species, transfu-
sion reaction signs typical for conscious animals may be masked
or absent in anesthetized patients [424]. American Society of
Anesthesiologists practice guidelines recommend that patients
should be monitored carefully for urticaria, hypotension, tachycar-
dia, increased peak airway pressure, hyperthermia, hemoglobinuria,
decreased urine output, and evidence of increased microvascular
bleeding [322]. If any of these are seen, transfusion should be
stopped, and appropriate diagnostic testing should be ordered.
Premedication with antihistamines or antipyretic medications
has shown no utility in either human or veterinary medicine and is
not recommended [423,424].
Febrile non-hemolytic transfusion reactions (FNHTRs) are the
most common adverse events with veterinary transfusions, defined
as a temperature of more than 39 °C and increase of more than 1 °C
from the pretransfusion temperature during or within 4 h of trans-
fusion where external warming and other reactions have been ruled
out [423]. These reactions are mostly associated with leukocyte-
derived cytokines and/or circulating antileukocyte antibodies in
the recipient against donor leukocytes. In people, the use of leu-
koreduction filters while collecting blood components appears to
decrease the incidence of these reactions [397]. If a fever is noted,

-- 616 of 1450 --

Chapter 32: Clinical Pharmacology and Administration of Fluid, Electrolyte, and Blood Component Solutions 	601
the transfusion should be paused while vital signs are checked. The
unit should also be double checked for identification, expiration
date, and any visual evidence of particulate matter or discoloration
that could indicate a storage problem or bacterial contamination.
A sample should be drawn from both the patient and the unit to
check for hemolysis. If fever is the only clinical sign seen, the unit
is correct and not discolored, and the patient’s sample is not
hemolyzed, the transfusion may be restarted at a slower rate [425].
Fever can also be an early sign of a transfusion transmitted infec-
tion, an acute hemolytic transfusion reaction (AHTR), or transfusion-
related acute lung injury (TRALI), so if the patient is unstable, the
unit is hemolyzed or discolored, or the patient’s sample is hemolyzed,
the transfusion should not be restarted and further investigation is
warranted [425].
AHTRs can either be immunologic or related to storage or
administration issues. Immunologic AHTRs are characterized by
intravascular hemolysis and are antigen–antibody, type II hyper-
sensitivity reactions primarily mediated by immunoglobulin G
(IgG). They occur due to sensitized alloantibody-mediated incom-
patibilities (such as a DEA 1-negative dog sensitized after receiving
DEA 1-positive blood) or due to the presence of natural alloanti-
bodies (like naturally occurring anti-A antibodies in a type B cat)
[390,403]. The antigen–antibody interaction causes activation of
complement and cytokines and can result in hyperbilirubinemia,
hyperbilirubinuria, hemolysis, hemoglobinuria, an inadequate
increase in PCV, hypotension, fever, and/or tachycardia seen during
or within 24 h of transfusion [423]. The incidence of AHTR can be
greatly decreased by blood typing and cross-matching prior to
transfusion. Non-immunologic AHTR can be minimized by proper
blood storage and checking blood units for hemolysis prior to
administration [425].
Non-immune-mediated hemolysis can happen because of over-
heating, freezing of the blood bag or mixing with hypotonic fluids.
Signs of hemoglobinemia and/or hemoglobinuria can be noticed
during transfusion without other associated signs of an AHTR.
However, severe clinical signs were documented in four dogs after
transfusion with blood that was hemolyzed due to improper stor-
age [426]. It is recommended to check RBC units for hemolysis
prior to administration. Consistent with human guidelines, units
with greater than 1% hemolysis should not be used [397].
TRALI is defined as respiratory distress with bilateral pulmonary
edema on imaging and hypoxemia (PaO 2
/FI
O2 < 300 mmHg or
SpO2 < 90% on room air) that occurs within 6 h of transfusion,
without evidence of left atrial hypertension or an alternate risk
factor for acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) [427]. In
humans, the TRALI incidence has been reported to be between
0.08% and 15% [428]. A study in small animals reported the inci-
dence of veterinary acute lung injury after transfusion to be
3.7% [429]. In humans, it has been reported with all types of blood
products, but FFP has been implicated most frequently [428].
Bioactive mediators of TRALI can include antibodies and,
additionally, products that accumulate during storage [430].
Antileukocyte antibodies from the donor plasma can interact with
recipient leukocyte antigens leading to neutrophil and complement
activation that can produce endothelial damage and capillary leakage.
In other cases, the clinical condition of the patient causes endothelial
activation and sequestration of neutrophils. Then, when transfu-
sion of biologically active mediators such as lipids and cytokines
occurs, these sequestered neutrophils release oxidases and proteases
that cause endothelial cell damage and capillary leakage, resulting
in TRALI. The clinical picture of TRALI includes tachypnea,
tachycardia, and hypoxemia with or without fever with no evidence
of circulatory overload. Differentials include TACO, AHTRs,
anaphylactoid reactions, or an underlying respiratory disease not
related to the transfusion [425]. Radiographs and echocardiography
are recommended to rule out cardiac disease and other differen-
tials [425]. Treatment is mainly supportive and may include only
oxygen supplementation in minor cases or mechanical ventilation
in severe cases. Usually, TRALI is self-limiting and human patients
recover within 96 h [428].
In human medicine, development of TRALI has been particu-
larly associated with plasma transfusion from parturient female
donors, and use of plasma from male and non-parturient female
donors decreases the incidence of TRALI significantly [431]. RBC
alloantibodies are not increased in dogs with repeated pregnancies,
but WBC alloantibodies have not been studied [432].
Some blood products have significant colloidal potential and
administration to normovolemic animals or animals with compro-
mised cardiac or pulmonary function predisposes them to hyperv-
olemia, known as TACO. Clinical signs include dyspnea, cyanosis,
pulmonary edema, increased CVP, and pulmonary venous distension
on thoracic radiographs. Echocardiography and measurement of
NTproBNP are used for diagnosis in humans and should be consid-
ered in veterinary patients [425]. Treatment involves discontinuing
the transfusion, oxygen supplementation, and diuretics.
Allergic reactions are the result of an IgE antibody-mediated
type I hypersensitivity reaction and are caused by soluble sub-
stances in the donor plasma that bind to preformed IgE antibodies
on mast cells in the recipient, causing release of histamine. These
reactions can range from mild hives to severe anaphylaxis causing
hypotension and shock. Vomiting might also be a sign of an allergic
transfusion reaction in dogs [425]. If the only signs are hives or a
single episode of vomiting, and no other signs are observed, the
transfusion can be temporarily interrupted and an antihistamine
administered [425]. If anaphylaxis is suspected, immediate treat-
ment with epinephrine is warranted and the transfusion should be
discontinued [425].
Bacterial contamination of blood components is rare but can lead
to sepsis [433]. Bacteria can originate from inadequately screened
donors or from the venipuncture site. In a case series of 14 cats,
contamination of blood products was linked to Serratia marcescens
contamination of a jar containing alcohol-soaked cotton balls and a
bag of saline solution used during venipuncture [434]. Signs of sepsis
in six cats in this report included vomiting, diarrhea, collapse, and
acute death. If vomiting occurs, a full set of vital signs should be
obtained. If sepsis is suspected, the transfusion should be stopped
immediately and a Gram stain and blood culture should be obtained
directly from the unit and the patient [425].
Metabolic and hemostatic complications similar to humans
have been described in dogs after MTs that included hypocalcemia,
hypomagnesemia, thrombocytopenia, elevations in clotting times
(PT and APTT), and hypothermia [396]. Thrombocytopenia and
dilutional coagulopathy occur from dilution of clotting factors and
platelets with factor-depleted stored blood, resulting in prolongation
of coagulation times. Elevation in clotting times was a poor prognos-
tic indicator in the above study in dogs with MT. Hypocalcemia and
hypomagnesemia likely arise from binding of anticoagulant citrate
to ionized calcium and magnesium. Following transfusion, citrate is
usually metabolized quite fast by the liver but, under circumstances
of rapid administration, could cause hypocalcemia. In addition,
citrate metabolism may be slowed in patients with poor liver func-
tion, hypothermia, or decreased perfusion to the liver. Symptomatic

-- 617 of 1450 --

602 	Section 4: Body Fluids and Fluid Therapy
hypocalcemia (muscle tremors, arrhythmias, hypotension, etc.)
should be treated using calcium gluconate (50–150 mg/kg of 10%
solution) or calcium chloride (5–10 mg/kg of 10% solution). Stored
blood usually is at a temperature of 4 °C and, if administered with-
out warming, could potentially cause arrhythmias and decreased
CO initially in addition to hypothermia, although these adverse
effects also depend on the rate of administration [435].
During storage, RBCs undergo a series of biologic and bio-
chemical changes collectively referred to as “storage lesions.” There
is progressive depletion of ATP and 2,3-DPG, decreased deforma-
bility of RBCs, decrease in the pH of stored units due to glycolysis,
and increased potassium content of the unit due to RBC lysis. In
humans, transfusion-associated hyperkalemia can occur but RBCs
from most dog breeds (except some like Akitas and Shiba Inus) are
low in intracellular potassium so hyperkalemia from stored RBC
products is less of a problem in most dogs [436]. Hyperkalemia has
been reported in 20% (2/10) of dogs with MT and also in one dog
that was given 28-day-old PRBCs [412,436].
In cats, the half-life of transfused RBCs is approximately
35–38 days for compatible transfusions and decreases to only 1–2 h
if a type B cat receives type A blood, and approximately 2 days when
type B blood is given to a type A cat [323]. The half-life of allogenic
transfused RBCs in cattle has been shown to be 2–4 days with a
rapid loss of 10–15% of cells occurring in the first 24 h [324].
Previous studies using radioactive RBC labeling techniques have
reported that transfused RBCs survive less than a week in the horse
and sometimes less than 2 days, but a recent study using biotin-
labeled RBCs reported an average life span of 20 days in allogenic
RBC transfusions [437].
Alternatives to allogenic blood transfusions
Because of the potential complications associated with the use of
allogenic blood products and to help conserve blood products,
alternative strategies have been examined to reduce the need for
blood products in the perioperative settings.
Autologous transfusion
Autologous transfusion involves administering blood to a patient
that was previously collected from that patient. By using one’s own
blood, the risks associated with the transmission of infectious
diseases or transfusion reactions are minimized. Three forms of
autologous transfusion strategies have been explored.
Preoperative autologous blood donation
Preoperative autologous blood donation (PABD) provides a supply
of safe blood for patients scheduled to undergo an elective surgical
procedure that could potentially be associated with significant
blood loss. Patients donate their own blood in advance and it is
stored for their own use. Data from human meta-analyses on PABD
revealed a 63% reduction in allogenic blood transfusions but an
increased overall transfusion of RBCs by 30% (both allogenic and
autologous) in patients that undertook the donation. A decline in
the patient’s hemoglobin by an average of 1.23 g/dL from before
PABD to immediately prior to surgery was reported [438–440]. Use
of PABD has been described especially in total joint replacement
surgeries in humans [441]. In veterinary medicine, PABD has been
described in horses that were scheduled for sinus surgeries and
in cats that underwent craniotomies [442,443]. In cats, the median
time from donation until surgery was 12 days. The predonation
median PCV was 30% (approximately 10 g/dL hemoglobin) and
the PCV before surgery was 26% (approximately 8.7 g/dL hemo-
globin), a decrease (1.3 g/dL) similar to that reported in humans
[438,443]. Preoperatively, mild anemia was noticed in 3/15 cats.
Eleven of 15 cats that received an autologous transfusion periopera-
tively did not require an allogenic transfusion. Some inherent
limitations to this technique would include the need for advanced
planning, cost, need for sedation in veterinary patients, risk of
bacterial contamination, and the fact that some patients may expe-
rience perioperative anemia thereby increasing the likelihood that
transfusion is needed. In addition, waste of unneeded PABD units
of blood products has been reported to vary from 18% to above 50%
in humans [444,445]. Waste may be decreased by using the PABD
unit for other animals, but this would require infectious disease
screening, blood typing, and cross-matching, all of which add to
the expense.
Acute normovolemic hemodilution
Acute normovolemic hemodilution (ANH) involves removal of a
patient’s WB before anticipated surgical blood loss. It is performed
shortly before or after induction of anesthesia. The circulating
blood volume is restored by using crystalloids or colloids in a ratio
of 3:1 or 1:1, respectively [446]. The blood is collected in standard
blood collection bags and stored in the operating room at room
temperature. Collected blood is administered within 6–8 h so that
there is little deterioration of platelets and clotting factors. The
main benefit of ANH is reduction in RBC losses when WB with
lower PCV is lost after ANH is completed. A decrease in blood vis-
cosity caused by hemodilution decreases peripheral resistance and
CO can be increased. Although arterial oxygen content (CaO2
) is
decreased, DO 2 is maintained by the increase in CO. When per-
forming ANH, a target PCV of 25% is usual but should be dictated
by the anticipated blood loss, pre-existing volume status, type of
surgical procedure, PCV before ANH, presence of any other comor-
bidities, and institutional policies. In order to calculate the amount
of blood that could be collected to achieve a desired PCV, the
following formula may be used:
Collected blood mL EBV 	H 	H
H
o 	f
av
( 	) [ 	]	( 	)
where EBV is effective circulating blood volume calculated as body
weight (kg) times the volume of blood (mL/kg), Ho is the original
PCV of the patient before ANH, Hf is the targeted PCV, and Hav is
the average of Ho and Hf
. In humans, ANH has been successfully
utilized during surgical procedures for radical prostatectomy, hip
and knee arthroplasty, and vascular surgeries. A relative drop of
31% in the frequency of allogenic transfusion has been reported
[438,446–449]. There are also rare case reports of ANH in veteri-
nary medicine [450].
Cell salvage
Autologous transfusion using cell salvage methodology is a tech-
nique by which blood lost intra- or postoperatively is collected,
washed, and administered to the patient [451]. Relatively simple
methods of blood salvage involve using sterile vacuum suction tips
or a syringe and tubing system for blood aspiration connected to an
attached reservoir for collection [452]. If the blood has been in con-
tact with serosal surfaces for more than an hour, defibrination
occurs that precludes the need for an anticoagulant but when blood
is collected from a site of fresh and rapid hemorrhage, anticoagulant
will be required. The blood collected via these methods should be

-- 618 of 1450 --

Chapter 32: Clinical Pharmacology and Administration of Fluid, Electrolyte, and Blood Component Solutions 	603
transfused within 4–6 h of collection compared to ANH which can
be kept for up to 8 h.
Use of a semiautomated autotransfusion cell separator system
(Electa Autotransfusion Cell Separator, Dideco, Mirandola, Italy)
was described in a case series of dogs with hemoabdomen [451].
Blood is directly suctioned from the surgical field into a reservoir
where automatic mixing with the anticoagulant takes place. It is then
moved to a centrifugation bowl system, a process called “priming,”
followed by “washing” to remove plasma, activated clotting factors,
anticoagulants, complement, and systemic medications. After com-
pletion of the washing phase, the “emptying” phase moves the blood
to a reinfusion bag. The authors speculated that by using the above
technique, they were able to reduce the transfusion requirement.
Meta-analysis in humans has shown that cell salvage techniques
lead to 38% relative and 21% absolute reduction in the risk of expo-
sure to allogenic RBC transfusion [453].
An in-line leukoreduction filter is used during transfusion of sal-
vaged cells to reduce the nucleated cell count and bacterial load
delivered to the patient. In humans, salvaged cell solutions used for
administration are equal or superior to blood bank units with
regard to cell morphology, pH, red cell osmotic resistance, and levels
of 2,3-DPG [454,455]. The contraindication often given to using
these techniques is in patients with neoplasia, to avoid iatrogenic
hematogenous spread. However, this risk is reduced as the process
of cell salvage and use of leukoreduction filters remove tumor cells.
Studies in humans have failed to document an increase in any
adverse outcomes when cell salvage techniques were employed in
perioperative oncologic settings [455–458]. Septicemia does not
appear to be a major complication of cell salvaging [456,459]. If less
sophisticated methods of autotransfusion are used and enteric con-
tamination is suspected or hemoabdomen is from a suspected
splenic hemangiosarcoma, autotransfusion should be avoided.
Hemolysis, hypocalcemia, and coagulopathy are complications of
autotransfusion and have been seen in dogs [435]. To avoid hemol-
ysis as a result of collection technique, it is recommended to keep
the needle or suction tip below the surface of the blood to avoid air
interface damage and to keep the maximum vacuum settings
between 100 and 300 mmHg [460]. Ionized calcium should be
checked after autotransfusion and treatment should be considered
if there are clinical signs of hypocalcemia or if the ionized calcium
is < 0.9 mmol/L [425].
Blood substitutes
Use of oxygen-carrying solutions as an alternative to blood transfu-
sion has been researched for decades. Early versions of hemoglobin-
based oxygen carriers (HBOC) were associated with nephrotoxic
effects and a short intravascular half-life [461]. These were
improved by ultrapurification to remove RBC stromal elements and
polymerization of hemoglobin units with glutaraldehyde [462,463].
Oxyglobin® was a clinically approved ultrapurified glutaraldehyde-
polymerized bovine-derived hemoglobin solution for use in dogs
with anemia [463,464]. It contained 13 g/dL hemoglobin concen-
tration in a modified Ringer’s solution with a pH of 7.8 and an
osmolality of 300 mOsm/kg. It could be stored at room temperature
for 3 years from the date of manufacture and there was no need for
a cross-match [465–467]. While it was approved for use only in
dogs, it was used off label in other species including cats [468–470]
and ponies [471]. However, cell-free hemoglobin can lead to high
blood pressure and can damage the kidneys. Oxyglobin® is now
produced by Hemoglobin Oxygen Therapeutics (Soulderton, PA)
but is no longer commercially available. The human product,
Hemopure (Hemoglobin Oxygen Therapeutics) is only readily
available in South Africa. However, several HBOC products can be
obtained for people under compassionate use rules. Research in this
area is ongoing [472].
Strategies to minimize perioperative
blood loss
Selective and non-selective inhibitors of cyclooxygenase enzymes
including carprofen, meloxicam, deracoxib, and aspirin can impair
hemostasis by inhibiting platelet function to variable extents
[473–475]. In addition, antiplatelet drugs such as clopidogrel also
inhibit platelet function with effects in cats lasting for approximately
7 days after stopping drug administration [476]. The CURATIVE
guidelines on rational use of antithrombotic agents in dogs and cats
recommend discontinuing antithrombotic drugs prior to surgery
and antiplatelet drugs 5–7 days prior in animals at low to moderate
risk of thrombosis. In animals at high risk of thrombosis, these
medications should not be discontinued but close attention should
be paid to hemostasis [477]. Desmopressin can improve hemostasis
during invasive procedures such as biopsy and surgery. Use of
desmopressin acetate (DDAVP) has been shown to improve primary
hemostasis in dogs with aspirin-induced platelet dysfunction, von
Willebrand’s disease, and chronic liver disease [478,479].
Antifibrinolytic drugs prevent the breakdown of clots. In
humans, their use has been associated with significant reductions
in blood loss during and after surgery [480,481]. Aprotinin
reduced the probability of RBC transfusion requirement by a
relative 34% and appeared more effective than lysine analogs
ε-aminocaproic acid and tranexamic acid. In the veterinary litera-
ture, two studies [482,483] documented the use of ε-aminocaproic
acid in retired running Greyhounds undergoing amputation and
gonadectomy and its use was associated with significantly lower
postoperative blood loss. American Society of Anesthesiologists
practice guidelines recommend considering antifibrinolytic ther-
apy as prophylaxis in patients undergoing cardiopulmonary
bypass, having liver surgery, or in other surgical cases at high risk
for excessive bleeding [322].
Maintenance of near-normothermia is important in the periop-
erative period because hypothermia can increase surgical blood
loss [484]. In elective hip arthroplasty procedures, a drop in core
body temperature of 1.6 °C resulted in a 500 mL increase in blood
loss and a significant increase in need for allogenic blood transfu-
sion [485,486]. Hypothermia can influence both platelet function
and clotting factor activity adversely [487,488].
References
1 MacIntire DK. Pediatric fluid therapy. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2008; 38:
621–627.
2 Starling EH. On the absorption of fluids from the connective tissue spaces. J Physiol
1896; 19: 312–326.
3 Landis EM, Pappenheimer JR. Exchange of substances through capillary walls. In:
Hamilton WF, Dow P, eds. Handbook of Physiology, Section 2: Circulation II.
Washington, DC: American Physiological Society, 1963: 961–1034.
4 Woodcock TE, Woodcock TM. Revised Starling equation and the glycocalyx model
of transvascular fluid exchange: an improved paradigm for prescribing intravenous
fluid therapy. Br J Anaesth 2012; 108: 384–394.
5 Levick JR, Michel CC. Microvascular fluid exchange and revised Starling principle.
Cardiovascular Res 2010; 87: 198–210.
6 Valverde A, Gianotti G, Rioja-Garcia E, et al. Effects of high volume, rapid fluid
therapy on cardiovascular function and hematological values during isoflurane-
induced hypotension in healthy dogs. Can J Vet Res 2012; 76: 99–108.

-- 619 of 1450 --

604 	Section 4: Body Fluids and Fluid Therapy
7 Muir WW, Kitjawornrat A, Ueyama Y, et al. Effects of intravenous administration
of lactated Ringer’s solution on hematologic, serum biochemical, rheological,
hemodynamic, and renal measurements in healthy isoflurane-anesthetized dogs.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2011; 239: 630–637.
8 Kolsen-Peterson JA, Nielsen JO, Tonnesen E. Acid base and electrolyte changes
after hypertonic saline (7.5%) infusion: a randomized controlled clinical trial.
Scand J Clin Lab Invest 2005; 65: 13–22.
9 Hopper K, Epstein SE. Incidence, nature, and etiology of metabolic acidosis in dogs
and cats. J Vet Intern Med 2012; 26: 1107–1114.
10 Handy JM, Soni N. Physiological effects and hyperchloremia and acidosis.
Br J Anaesth 2008; 101: 141–150.
11 Tonozzi CC, Rudloff E, Kirby R. Perfusion versus hydration: impact on the fluid
therapy plan. Compend Contin Edu Vet 2009: E1–E14.
12 Silverstein DC, Aldrich J, Haskins SC, et al. Assessment of changes in blood volume
in response to resuscitative fluid administration in dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2005;
15: 185–192.
13 Kudnig ST, Mama K. Guidelines for perioperative fluid therapy. Compend Contin
Edu Pract Vet 2003; 25: 102–111.
14 Bednarski R, Grimm K, Harvey R, et al. AAHA anesthesia guidelines for dogs and
cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2011; 47: 377–385.
15 Schenck PA, Chew DJ, Nagode LA, et al. Disorders of calcium: hypercalcemia and
hypocalcemia. In: Dibartola SP, ed. Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Disorders in
Small Animal Practice, 4th edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2012: 120–194.
16 Schaer M. Therapeutic approach to electrolyte emergencies. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 2008; 38: 513–533.
17 Smith GW. Supportive therapy of the toxic cow. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract
2005; 21: 595–614.
18 Roussel AJ, Cohen ND, Holland PS, et al. Alterations in acid-base and serum elec-
trolyte concentrations in cattle: 632 cases (1984–1994). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1998;
212: 1769–1775.
19 Pinto FC, Capone-Neto A, Prist R, et al. Volume replacement with lactated Ringer’s
or 3% hypertonic saline solution during combined experimental hemorrhagic
shock and traumatic brain injury. J Trauma 2006; 60: 758–764.
20 Ramming S, Shackford SR, Zhuang J, et al. The relationship of fluid balance and
sodium administration to cerebral edema formation and intracranial pressure in a
porcine model of brain injury. J Trauma 1994; 37: 705–713.
21 Schmall LM, Muir WW, Robertson JT. Haematological, serum electrolyte and
blood gas effects of small volume hypertonic saline in experimentally induced hem-
orrhagic shock. Equine Vet J 1990; 22: 278–283.
22 Lorenzo M, Davis JW, Negin S, et al. Can Ringer’s lactate be used safely with blood
transfusions? Am J Surg 1998; 175: 308–310.
23 Cull DL, Lally KP, Murphy KD. Compatibility of packed erythrocytes and Ringer’s
lactate solution. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1991; 173: 9–12.
24 Goldstein SM, MacLean LD. Ringers lactate infusion with severe hepatic damage:
effect on arterial lactate level. Can J Surg 1972; 15: 318–321.
25 Didwania A, Miller J, Kassel D, et al. Effect of intravenous lactated Ringer’ solution
infusion on the circulating lactate concentration: Part 3. Results of a prospective,
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Crit Care Med 1997; 25:
1851–1854.
26 Vall DM, Ogilvie GK, Fettman MJ, et al. Exacerbation of hyperlactatemia by
infusion of lactated Ringer’s solution in dogs with lymphoma. J Vet Intern Med
1990; 4: 228–232.
27 Steffen RP, McKenzie JE, Bockman EL, et al. Changes in dog gracilis muscle adeno-
sine during exercise and acetate infusion. Am J Physiol 1983; 244: H387–H395.
28 Saragoca MA, Bessa AM, Mulinari RA, et al. Sodium acetate, an arterial vasodila-
tor: haemodynamic characterization in normal dogs. Proc Eur Dial Transplant
Assoc 1985; 21: 221–224.
29 Keshaviah PR. The role of acetate in the etiology of symptomatic hypotension.
Artif Organs 1982; 6: 378–387.
30 Strandvik GF. Hypertonic saline in critical care: a review of literature and guidelines
for use in hypotensive states and raised intracranial pressure. Anaesthesia 2009; 64:
990–1003.
31 Constable P. Fluid and electrolyte therapy in ruminants. Vet Clin North Am Food
Anim Pract 2003; 19: 557–597.
32 Barry KG, Berman AR. Mannitol infusion. Part III. The acute effect of the intrave-
nous infusion of mannitol on blood and plasma volume. N Engl J Med 1961; 264:
1085–1088.
33 Velasco IT, Pontieri V, Rocha e Silva M, et al. Hyperosmotic NaCl and severe
hemorrhagic shock. Am J Physiol 1980; 239: H664–H673.
34 Smith GJ, Kramer GC, Perron P, et al. A comparison of several hypertonic solutions
for resuscitation of bled sheep. J Surg Res 1985; 39: 517–528.
35 Velasco IT, Rocha e Silva M, Oliveira MA, et al. Hypertonic and hyperoncotic resus-
citation from severe hemorrhagic shock in dogs: a comparative study. Crit Care
Med 1989; 17: 261–264.
36 Schertel ER, Valentine AK, Rademakers AM, et al. Influence of 7% NaCl on the
mechanical properties of the systemic circulation in hypovolemic dogs. Circ Shock
1990; 31: 203–214.
37 Wildenthal K, Mierzwiak DS, Mitchell JH. Acute effects of increased serum
smolality on left ventricular performance. Am J Physiol 1969; 216: 898–904.
38 Kien ND, Kramer GC. Cardiac performance following hypertonic saline.
Braz J Med Biol Res 1989; 22: 245–248.
39 Gazitua MC, Scott JB, Swindall B. Resistance responses to local changes in plasma
osmolality in three vascular beds. Am J Physiol 1971; 220: 384–391.
40 Pascual JL, Khwaja KA, Chaudhury P, et al. Hypertonic saline and microcirculation.
J Trauma 2003; 54: S133–S140.
41 Ciesla DJ, Moore EE, Silliman CC, et al. Hypertonic saline attenuation of polymor-
phonuclear cytotoxicity: timing is everything. J Trauma 2000; 48: 388–395.
42 Hirsh M, Dyugovaskaya L, Bashenko Y, et al. Reduced rate of bacterial transloca-
tion and improved variables of natural killer cell and T-cell activity in rats surviving
controlled hemorrhagic shock and treated with hypertonic saline. Crit Care Med
2002; 30: 861–867.
43 Rocha e Silva M, Poli de Figueiredo LF. Small volume hypertonic resuscitation of
circulatory shock. Clinics 2005; 60: 159–172.
44 Vajda K, Szabo A, Boros M. Heterogeneous microcirculation in the rat small
intestine during hemorrhagic shock: quantification of the effects of hypertonic-
hyperoncotic resuscitation. Eur Surg Res 2004; 36: 338–344.
45 Zhao L, Wang B, You G, et al. Effects of different resuscitation fluids on the
rheologic behavior of red blood cells, blood viscosity and plasma viscosity in exper-
imental hemorrhagic shock. Resuscitation 2009; 80: 253–258.
46 Jonas J, Heimann A, Strecker U, et al. Hypertonic/hyperoncotic resuscitation after
intestinal superior mesenteric artery occlusion: early effects on circulation and
intestinal reperfusion. Shock 2000; 14: 24–29.
47 Mittlmeier T, Vollmar B, Menger MD, et al. Small volume hypertonic hydroxyethyl
starch reduces acute microvascular dysfunction after closed soft tissue trauma.
J Bone Joint Surg 2003; 85B: 126–132.
48 Schmall LM, Muir WW, Robertson JT. Haematological, serum electrolyte and
blood gas effects of small volume hypertonic saline in experimentally induced hem-
orrhagic shock. Equine Vet J 1990; 22: 278–283.
49 Wade CE, Grady JJ, Kramer GC. Efficacy of hypertonic saline dextran fluid resusci-
tation for patients with hypotension from penetrating trauma. J Trauma 2003; 54:
S144–S148.
50 Bratton SL, Chestnut RM, Ghajar J, et al. Brain trauma foundation guidelines
for the management of severe traumatic brain injury. II Hyperosmolar therapy.
J Neurotrauma 2007; 24(S1): S14–S21.
51 Zornow MH, Todd MM, Moore SS. The acute cerebral effects of changes in plasma
osmolality and oncotic pressure. Anesthesiology 1987; 67: 936–941.
52 Qureshi AI, Silson DA, Traystman RJ. Treatment of elevated intracranial pressure
in experimental intracerebral hemorrhage: comparison between mannitol and
hypertonic saline. Neurosurgery 1999; 44: 1055–1063.
53 Kamel H, Navi BB, Nakagawa K, et al. Hypertonic saline versus mannitol for the
treatment of elevated intracarial pressure: a meta-analysis of randomized clinical
trials. Crit Care Med 2011; 39: 554–559.
54 Mortazavi MM, Romeo AK, Deep A, et al. Hypertonic saline for treating intrac-
ranial pressure: literature review with meta-analysis. J Neurosurg 2012; 116:
210–221.
55 Shackford SR, Schmoker JD, Zhuang J. The effect of hypertonic resuscitation on
pial arteriolar tone after brain injury and shock. J Trauma 1994; 37: 899–908.
56 Doyle JA, Davis DP, Hoyt DB. The use of hypertonic saline in the treatment of
traumatic brain injury. J Trauma 2001; 50: 367–383.
57 Schertel ER, Allen DA, Muir WW, et al. Evaluation of a hypertonic saline-dextran
solution for treatment of dogs with shock induced by gastric-dilation-volvulus.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1997; 210: 226–230.
58 Horton JW, Dunn CW, Burnweit CA, et al. Hypertonic saline-dextran resuscitation
of acute canine bile-induced pancreatitis. Am J Surg 1989; 158: 48–56.
59 Machado MC, Coelho AM, Pontieri V, et al. Local and systemic effects of
hypertonic solution (NaCl 7.5%) in experimentally acute pancreatitis. Pancreas
2006; 32: 80–86.
60 Shields CJ, Sookhai S, Ryan L, et al. Hypertonic saline attenuates end organ damage
in experimental model of acute pancreatitis. Br J Surg 2000; 87: 1336–1340.
61 Pantaleon LG, Furr MO, McKenzie HC, et al. Cardiovascular and pulmonary
effects of hetastarch plus hypertonic saline solutions during experimental endotox-
emia in anesthetized horses. J Vet Intern Med 2006; 20: 1422–1428.
62 Pantaleon LG, Furr MO, McKenzie HC, et al. Effects of small- and large-volume
resuscitation on coagulation and electrolytes during experimental endotoxemia in
anesthetized horses. J Vet Intern Med 2007; 21: 1374–1379.
63 Constable PD, Schmall LM, Muir WW, et al. Hemodynamic responses of endotox-
emic calves to treatment with small-volume hypertonic saline solution. Am J Vet Res
1991; 52: 990–998.

-- 620 of 1450 --

Chapter 32: Clinical Pharmacology and Administration of Fluid, Electrolyte, and Blood Component Solutions 	605
64 Constable PD, Gohar HM, Morin DE, et al. Use of hypertonic saline-dextran solution
to resuscitate hypovolemic calves with diarrhea. Am J Vet Res 1996; 57: 97–104.
65 Koch A, Kaske M. Clinical efficacy of intravenous hypertonic saline solution or
hypertonic bicarbonate solution in the treatment of inappetent calves with neonatal
diarrhea. J Vet Intern Med 2008; 22: 202–211.
66 Senturk S. Effects of a hypertonic saline solution and dextran 70 combination in the
treatment of diarrheic dehydrated calves. J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med 2003;
50: 57–61.
67 Tyler JW, Welles EG, Erskine RJ, et al. Clinical and clinicopathologic changes in
cows with endotoxin-induced mastitis treated with small volumes of isotonic or
hypertonic sodium chloride administered intravenously. Am J Vet Res 1994; 55:
278–287.
68 Gross D, Landau EH, Klin B, et al. Treatment of uncontrolled hemorrhagic shock
with hypertonic saline solution. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1990; 170: 106–112.
69 Bruttig SP, O’Benar J, Wade CE, et al. Benefit of slow infusion of hypertonic saline/
dextran in swine with uncontrolled aortotomy hemorrhage. Shock 2005; 24: 92–96.
70 Landau EG, Gross D, Assalia A, et al. Treatment of uncontrolled hemorrhagic
shock with hypertonic saline and external counter pressure. Ann Emerg Med 1989;
18: 1039–1043.
71 Stern SA, Kowalenko T, Younger J, et al. Comparison of the effects of bolus vs. slow
infusion of 7.5% NaCl/6% dextran-70 in a model of near-lethal uncontrolled
hemorrhage. Shock 2000; 14: 616–622.
72 McKirnan MD, Williams RL, Limjoco U, et al. Hypertonic saline/dextran vs.
lactated Ringer’s treatment for hemorrhage in dehydrated swine. Circ Shock 1994;
44: 238–246.
73 Ho HS, Sondeen JL, Dubick MA, et al. The renal effects of 7.5% NaCl-6% dextran-
70 versus lactated Ringer’s resuscitation of hemorrhage in dehydrated sheep. Shock
1996; 5: 289–297.
74 Sondeen JL, Gunther RA, Dubick MA. Comparison of 7.5% NaCl/6% dextran-70
resuscitation of hemorrhage between euhydrated and dehydrated sheep. Shock
1995; 3: 63–68.
75 Fielding CL, Magdesian KG. A comparison of hypertonic (7.2%) and isotonic
(0.9%) saline for fluid resuscitation in horses: a randomized, double-blinded,
clinical trial. J Vet Intern Med 2011; 25: 1138–1143.
76 Kramer GC. Hypertonic resuscitation: physiologic mechanisms and recommenda-
tions for trauma care. J Trauma 2003; 54: S89–S99.
77 Ajito T, Suzuki K, Iwabuchi S. Effect of intravenous infusion of 7.2% hypertonic
saline solution on serum electrolytes and osmotic pressure in healthy Beagles.
J Vet Med Sci 1999; 61: 637–641.
78 Dubick MA, Zaucha GM, Korte DW Jr., et al. Acute and subacute toxicity of 7.5%
hypertonic saline-6% dextran-70 (HSD) in dogs. 2. Biochemical and behavioral
responses. J Appl Toxicol 1993; 13: 49–55.
79 Mensack S. Fluid therapy: options and rational administration. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 2008; 38: 575–586.
80 Wellman ML, DiBartola SP, Kohn CW. Applied physiology of body fluids in dogs
and cats. In: Dibartola SP, ed. Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Disorders in Small
Animal Practice, 4th edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2012: 2–25.
81 Silverstein DC. Daily intravenous fluid therapy. In: Silverstein D, Hopper K, eds.
Small Animal Critical Care Medicine. St. Louis, MO: Saunders, 2009: 271–275.
82 Muir WW, Wiese AJ. Comparison of lactated Ringer’s solution and physiologically
balanced 6% hetastarch plasma expander for the treatment of hypotension induced
via blood withdrawal in isoflurane anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 2004; 65:
1189–1194.
83 Epstein KL, Bergren A, Giguere S, et al. Cardiovascular, colloid osmotic pressure,
and hemostatic effects of 2 formulations of hydroxyethyl starch in healthy horses.
J Vet Intern Med 2014; 28: 223–233.
84 Aarnes TK, Bednarski RM, Lerche P, et al. Effect of intravenous administration of
lactated Ringer’s solution or hetastarch for the treatment of isoflurane induced
hypotension in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2009; 70: 1345–1353.
85 Hallowell GD, Corley KT. Preoperative administration of hydroxyethyl starch or
hypertonic saline to horses with colic. J Vet Intern Med 2006; 20: 980–986.
86 Hiltebrand LB, Kimberger O, Arnberger M, et al. Crystalloids versus colloids for
goal-directed fluid therapy in major surgery. Crit Care 2009; 13: R40–R53.
87 Mcllory DR, Kharasch ED. Acute intravascular volume expansion with rapidly
administered crystalloid or colloid in the setting of moderate hypovolemia. Anesth
Analg 2003; 96: 1572–1577.
88 Westphal M, James MFM, Kozek-Langenecker S, et al. Hydroxyethyl starches,
different products-different effects. Anesthesiology 2009; 111: 187–202.
89 Kozek-Langenecker S. Effects of hydroxyethyl starch solutions on hemostasis.
Anesthesiology 2005; 103: 654–660.
90 Boldt J. Modern rapidly degradable hydroxyethyl starches: current concepts.
Anesth Analg 2009; 108: 1574–1582.
91 Jungheinrich C, Neff TA. Pharmacokinetics of hydroxyethyl starch. Clin
Pharmacokinet 2005; 44: 681–699.
92 Yacobi A, Gibson TP, McEntegrat CM, et al. Pharmacokinetics of high molecular
weight hydroxyethyl starch in dogs. Res Commun Chem Pathol Pharmacol 1982;
36: 199–204.
93 Meiseter D, Hermann M, Mathis GA. Kinetics of hydroxyethyl starch in horses.
Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd 1992; 134: 329–339.
94 Thompson WL, Fukushima T, Rutherford RB, et al. Intravascular persistence,
tissue storage, and excretion of hydroxyethyl starch. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1970;
131: 965–972.
95 Hughes D. Fluid therapy with artificial colloids: complications and controversies.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2001; 28: 111–118.
96 Gandhi SD, Weiskopf RB, Jungheinrich C, et al. Volume replacement therapy dur-
ing major orthopaedic surgery using Voluven (hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.4) or
hetastarch. Anesthesiology 2007; 106: 1120–1127.
97 Langeron O, Doelberg M, Ang ET, et al. Voluven®, a lower substituted novel
hydroxyethyl starch (HES 130/0.4) causes fewer effects on coagulation in major
orthopaedic surgery than HES 200/0.5. Anesth Analg 2001; 92: 855–862.
98 Gallandat Huet RC, Siemons AW, Baus D, et al. A novel hydroxyethyl starch
(Voluven®) for effective perioperative plasma volume substitution in cardiac sur-
gery. Can J Anaesth 2000; 47: 1207–1215.
99 Ickx BE, Bepperling F, Melot C, et al. Plasma substitution effects of a new hydroxy-
ethyl starch HES 130/0.4 compared with HES 200/0.5 during and after extended
acute normovolaemic hemodilution. Br J Anaesth 2003; 91: 196–202.
100 James MF, Latoo MY, Mythen MG, et al. Plasma volume changes associated with
two hydroxyethyl starch colloids following acute hypovolaemia in volunteers.
Anaesthesia 2004; 59: 738–742.
101 Madjdpour C, Dettori N, Frascarol P, et al. Molecular weight of hydroxyethyl-
starch: is there an effect on blood coagulation and pharmacokinetics? Br J Anaesth
2005; 94: 569–576.
102 Jones PA, Tomasic M, Gentry PA. Oncotic, hemodilutional, and hemostatic effects
of isotonic saline and hydroxyethyl starch solutions in clinically normal ponies.
Am J Vet Res 1997; 58: 541–548.
103 Smiley LE, Garvey MS. The use of hetastarch as adjunct therapy in 26 dogs
with hypoalbuminemia: a phase two clinical trial. J Vet Intern Med 1994; 8: 195–202.
104 Moore LE, Garvey MS. The effect of hetastarch on serum colloid oncotic pressure
in hypoalbuminemic dogs. J Vet Intern Med 1996; 10: 300–303.
105 Jones PA, Bain FT, Byars TD, et al. Effect of hydroxyethyl starch infusion on col-
loid oncotic pressure in hypoproteinemic horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2001; 218:
1130–1135.
106 Chohan AS, Greene SA, Grubb TL, et al. Effects of 6% hetastarch (600/0/75) or
lactated Ringer’s solution on hemostatic variables and clinical bleeding in healthy
dogs anesthetized for orthopedic surgery. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38: 94–105.
107 Viljoen A, Page PC, Fosgate GT, et al. Coagulation, oncotic and haemodilutional
effects of a third-generation hydroxyethyl starch (130/0.4) solution in horses.
Equine Vet J 2014; 46: 739–744.
108 Wendt-Hornickle EL, Snyder LBC, Tang R, et al. The effects of lactated Ringer’s
solution (LRS) or LRS and 6% hetastarch on colloid osmotic pressure, total protein
and osmolality in healthy horses under general anesthesia. Vet Anaesth Analg
2011; 38: 336–343.
109 Wright BD, Hopkins A. Change in colloid osmotic pressure as a function of anes-
thesia and surgery in the presence and absence of isotonic fluid administration in
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35: 282–288.
110 Kozek-Langenecker SA, Jungheinrich C, Sauermann W, et al. The effects of hydrox-
yethyl starch 130/0.4 (6%) on blood loss and use of blood products in major surgery:
a pooled analysis of randomized clinical trials. Anesth Analg 2008; 107: 382–390.
111 Gandhi S, Warltier D, Weiskopf R, et al. Volume substitution with HES
130/0.4 Voluven) versus HES 450/0.7 (hetastarch) during major orthopedic surgery.
Crit Care 2005; 9(Suppl 1): P206.
112 Conroy JM, Fishman RL, Reeves ST, et al. The effects of desmopressin and 6%
hydroxyethyl starch on factor VIII:C. Anesth Analg 1996; 83: 804–807.
113 Zoran DL, Jergens AE, Riedesel DH, et al. Evaluation of hemostatic analytes after
use of hypertonic saline solution combined with colloids for resuscitation of dogs
with hypovolemia. Am J Vet Res 1992; 53: 1791–1796.
114 Smart L, Jandrey KE, Wierenga JR, et al. The effect of hetastarch (670/0.75) in vivo
on platelet closure time in the dog. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2009; 19: 444– 449.
115 Wierenga JR, Jandrey KE, Haskins SC, et al. In vitro comparison of the effects of
two forms of hydroxyethyl starch solutions on platelet function in dogs. Am J Vet
Res 2007; 68: 605–609.
116 McBride D, Hosgood GL, Mansfield CS, et al. The effect of hydroxyethyl starch
130/0.4 and 200/0.5 on canine platelet function in vitro. Am J Vet Res 2013; 74:
1133–1137.
117 McBride D, Hosgood G, Smart L, et al. Platelet closure time in dogs with hemor-
rhagic shock treated with hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.4 or 0.9% NaCl. In: Proceedings
of the 18th International Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Society Meeting,
2012: 701.

-- 621 of 1450 --

606 	Section 4: Body Fluids and Fluid Therapy
118 Gauthier V, Bersenas A, Holowaychuk M, et al. Effect of synthetic colloid admin-
istration of coagulation in dogs with systemic inflammation. In: Proceedings of
the 18th International Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Society Meeting,
2012: 697.
119 Blong AE, Epstein KL, Brainard BM. In vitro effects of hydroxyethyl starch solutions
on coagulation and platelet function in horses. Am J Vet Res 2013; 74: 713–720.
120 Classen J, Adamik KN, Weber K, et al. In vitro effect of hydroxyethyl starch
130/0/42 on canine platelet function. Am J Vet Res 2012; 73: 1908–1912.
121 Bacek LM, Martin LG, Spangler EA, et al. Determination of the in vitro effects of
two forms of hydroxyethyl starch solutions on thromboelastography and coagula-
tion parameters in healthy dogs. In: Proceedings of the 17th International Veterinary
Emergency and Critical Care Society Meeting, 2011: 732.
122 Boldt J, Haish G, Suttner S, et al. Effects of a new modified, balanced hydroxyethyl
starch preparations (Hextend) on measures of coagulation. Br J Anaesth 2002; 89:
722–728.
123 Deusch E, Thaler U, Kozek-Langenecker SA. The effects of high molecular weight
hydroxyethyl starch solutions on platelet function. Anesth Analg 2004; 99: 665–668.
124 Perner A, Hasse N, Guttormsen AB, et al. Hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.42 versus
Ringer’s acetate in severe sepsis. N Engl J Med 2012; 73: 124–134.
125 Zarychanski R, Abou-Setta AM, Turgeon AF, et al. Association of hydroxyethyl
starch administration with mortality and acute kidney injury in critically ill
patients requiring volume resuscitation: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
JAMA 2013; 309: 678–688.
126 Hayes G, Benedicenti L, Mathews K. Retrospective cohort study on the incidence of
acute kidney injury and death following hydroxyethyl starch (HES 10% 250/0.5/5:1)
administration in dogs (2007–2010). J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2015; 26: 35–40.
127 Sigrist NE, Kalin N, Dreyfus A. Changes in serum creatinine concentration and
acute kidney injury (AKI) grade in dogs treated with hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.4
from 2013 to 2015. J Vet Intern Med 2017; 31: 434–441.
128 Sigrist NE, Kalin N, Dreyfus A. Effects of hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.4 on serum
creatinine concentration and development of acute kidney injury in nonazotemic
cats. J Vet Intern Med 2017; 31: 1749–1756.
129 Yozova ID, Howard J, Adamik KN. Retrospective evaluation of the effects of
administration of tetrastarch (hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.4) on plasma creatinine
concentration in dogs (2010–2013): 201 dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2016; 26:
568–577.
130 Yozova ID, Howard J, Adamik KN. Effect of tetrastarch (hydroxyethyl starch
130/0.4) on plasma creatinine concentration in cats: a retrospective analysis
(2010–2015). J Feline Med Surg 2017; 19: 1073–1079.
131 Bae J, Soliman M, Kim H, et al. Rapid exacerbation of renal function after admin-
istration of hydroxyethyl starch in a dog. J Vet Med Sci 2017; 79: 1591–1595.
132 Boyd CJ, Claus MA, Raisis AL, et al. Evaluation of biomarkers of kidney injury fol-
lowing 4% succinylated gelatin and 6% hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.4 administration
in a canine hemorrhagic shock model. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2019; 29: 132–142.
133 Diniz MS, Teixeira-Neto FJ, Celeita-Rodríguez N, et al. Effects of 6% tetrastarch
and lactated Ringer’s solution on extravascular lung water and markers of acute
renal injury in hemorrhaged, isoflurane-anesthetized healthy dogs. J Vet Intern
Med 2018; 32: 712–721.
134 Boyd C, Claus M, Sharp C, et al. Biomarkers of acute kidney injury in dogs after
6% hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.4 or hartmann’s solution: a randomized blinded
clinical trial. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2019; 29: 306–314.
135 Garzon AA, Cheng C, Lerner B, et al. Hydroxyethyl starch (HES) and bleeding: an
experimental investigation of its effect on hemostasis. J Trauma 1967; 7: 757–766.
136 Thompson WL, Gadsen RH. Prolonged bleeding time and hypofibrinogenemia in
dogs after infusion of hydroxyethyl starch and dextran. Transfusion 1965; 5:
440–446.
137 Concannon KT, Haskins SC, Feldman BF. Hemostatic defects associated with two
infusion rates of dextran 70 in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1992; 53: 1369–1375.
138 Glowaski MM, Massat-Moon PF, Erb HN, et al. Effects of oxypolygelatin and dex-
tran 70 on hemostatic variables in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2003; 30: 202–210.
139 Heath MF, Evans RJ, Hayes LJ. Dextran-70 inhibits equine platelet aggregation
induced by PAF but not by other agonists. Equine Vet J 1998; 30: 408–411.
140 Mailloux L, Swartz CD, Dappizzi R, et al. Acute renal failure after administration
of low-molecular weight dextran. N Engl J Med 1967; 277: 1113–1118.
141 Zwaveling JH, Meulenbelt J, van Xanten NH, et al. Renal failure associated with
the use of dextran-40. Neth J Med 1989; 35: 321–326.
142 Mitra S, Khandelwal P. Are all colloids same? How to select the right colloid? Ind
J Anaesth 2009; 53: 592–607.
143 de Jonge E, Levi M, Berends F, et al. Impaired haemostasis by intravenous admin-
istration of a gelatin-based plasma expander in human subjects. Thromb Haemost
1998; 79: 286–290.
144 Mortelmans YJ, Vermaut G, Verbruggen AM, et al. Effects of 6% hydroxyethyl
starch and 3% modified fluid gelatin on intravascular volume and coagulation
during intraoperative hemodilution. Anesth Analg 1995; 81: 1235–1242.
145 Lorenz W, Duda D, Dick W, et al. Incidence and clinical importance of periopera-
tive histamine release: randomized study of volume loading and antihistamines
after induction of anesthesia. Lancet 1994; 343: 933–940.
146 Rasmussen KC, Secher NH, Pedersen T. Effect of perioperative crystalloid or
colloid fluid therapy on hemorrhage, coagulation competence, and outcome: a
systematic review and stratified meta-analysis. Medicine 2016; 95: e4498.
147 Spahn DR, Bouillon B, Cerny V, et al. The European guideline on management of
major bleeding and coagulopathy following trauma. Crit Care 2019; 23: 98.
148 Smart L, Hopper K, Aldrich J, et al. The effect of hetastarch (670/0.75) on urine
specific gravity and osmolality in the dog. J Vet Intern Med 2009; 23: 388–391.
149 Schmid SM, Cianciolo RE, Drobatz KJ, et al. Postmortem evaluation of renal tubu-
lar vacuolization in critically ill dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2019; 29: 279–287.
150 Shires T, Williams J, Broen F. Acute changes in extracellular fluids associated with
major surgical procedures. Ann Surg 1961; 154: 803–810.
151 Virtue RW, LeVine DS, Aikawa JW. Fluid shifts during the surgical period: RISA
and S35 determinations following glucose, saline or lactate infusions. Ann Surg
1965; 163: 523–528.
152 Savvas I, Rallis T, Raptopoulos D. The effect of pre-anesthetic fasting time and
type of food on gastric content volume and acidity in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg
2009; 36: 539–546.
153 Jacob M, Chappel D, Conzen P, et al. Blood volume is normal after pre-operative
overnight fasting. Acta Anesthesiol Scand 2008; 52: 522–529.
154 Brandstrup B, Svensen C, Engquist A. Hemorrhage and operation cause a contrac-
tion of the extracellular space needing replacement - evidence and implications?
A systematic review. Surgery 2006; 139: 419–432.
155 Jackson R, Reid JA, Thorburn J. Volume preloading is not essential to prevent
spinal- induced hypotension at Caesarean section. Br J Anaesth 1995; 75: 262–265.
156 Iijima T. Complexity of blood volume control system and its implications in
perioperative fluid management. J Anesth 2009; 23: 534–542.
157 Hauptman JG, Richter MA, Wood SL, et al. Effects of anesthesia, surgery, and
intravenous administration of fluids on antidiuretic hormone concentration in
healthy dogs. Am J Vet Res 2000; 61: 1273–1276.
158 Robertson SA, Hauptman JG, Nachreiner RF, et al. Effects of acetylpromazine or
morphine on urine production in halothane-anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res
2001; 62: 1922–1927.
159 Boscan P, Pypendop BH, Siao KT, et al. Fluid balance, glomerular filtration rate,
and urine output in dogs anesthetized for an orthopedic surgical procedure.
Am J Vet Res 2010; 71: 497–596.
160 Rahbari NN, Zimmermann JB, Schmidt T, et al. Meta- analysis of standard,
restrictive and supplemental fluid administration in colorectal surgery. Br J Surg
2009; 96: 331–341.
161 Chappell D, Jacob M, Hoffmann-Kiefer K, et al. A rational approach to periopera-
tive fluid management. Anesthesiology 2008; 109: 723–740.
162 Holte K, Sharrock NE, Kehlet H. Pathophysiology and clinical implications of
perioperative fluid excess. Br J Anaesth 2002; 89: 622–632.
163 Cotton BA, Guy JS, Morris JA, et al. The cellular, metabolic, and systemic conse-
quences of aggressive fluid resuscitation strategies. Shock 2006; 26: 115–121.
164 Brodbelt DC, Pfeiffer DU, Young LE, et al. Risk factors for anaesthetic-related
death in cats: results from the Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Small
Animal Fatalities (CEPSAF). Br J Anaesth 2007; 99: 617–623.
165 Holte K, Foss NB, Anderson J, et al. Liberal or restrictive fluid administration in
fast-track colonic surgery: a randomized double-blinded study. Br J Anaesth 2007;
99: 500–508.
166 Brandstrup B, Tonnesen H, Beier-Holgersen R, et al. Effect of intravenous fluid
restrictions on postoperative complications: comparison of two perioperative
fluid regimens: a randomized assessor-blinded multicenter trial. Ann Surg 2003;
238: 641–648.
167 Yogendran S, Asokumar B, Cheng DC, et al. A prospective randomized double
blinded study of the effect of intravenous fluid therapy on adverse outcome on
outpatient surgery. Anesth Analg 1995; 80: 682–686.
168 Bundgaard-Nielson M, Secher NH, Kehlet H. ‘Liberal’ vs. ‘Restrictive’ periopera-
tive fluid therapy - a critical assessment of the evidence. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand
2009; 53: 843–851.
169 Lambert KG, Wakim JH, Lambert NE. Preoperative fluid bolus and reduction of
postoperative nausea and vomiting in patients undergoing laparoscopic gyneco-
logic surgery. AANA J 2009; 77: 110–114.
170 Holte K, Klarskov B, Christensen DS, et al. Liberal versus restrictive fluid admin-
istration to improved recovery after laproscopic cholecystectomy: a randomized,
double blinded study. Ann Surg 2004; 240: 892–899.
171 Nisanevich V, Felsenstein I, Almogy G, et al. Effect of intraoperative fluid
management on outcome after intraabdominal surgery. Anesthesiology 2005;
103: 25–32.
172 Joshi GP. Intraoperative fluid restriction improves outcome after major elective
gastrointestinal surgery. Anesth Analg 2005; 101: 601–605.

-- 622 of 1450 --

Chapter 32: Clinical Pharmacology and Administration of Fluid, Electrolyte, and Blood Component Solutions 	607
173 Myles PS, Bellomo R, Corcoran T, et al. Australian and New Zealand College of
Anaesthetists Clinical Trials Network, the Australian and New Zealand Intensive
Care Society Clinical Trials Group. Restrictive versus Liberal fluid therapy for
major abdominal surgery. N Engl J Med 2018; 378: 2263–2274.
174 Gaynor JS, Wertz EM, Kesel LM, et al. Effect of intravenous administration of
fluids on packed cell volume, blood pressure, total protein and blood glucose con-
centration in healthy halothane anesthetized dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1996; 208:
2013–2015.
175 Davis H, Jensen T, Johnson A, et al. 2013 AAHA/AAFP fluid therapy guidelines
for dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2013; 49: 149–159.
176 Butler AL. Goal-directed therapy in small animal critical care. Vet Clin North Am
Sm Anim Pract 2011; 41: 817–838.
177 Hayes GM, Mathews K, Boston S, et al. Low central venous oxygen saturation is
associated with increased mortality in critically ill dogs. J Small Anim Pract 2011;
52: 433–440.
178 Rivers E, Nguyen B, Havstad S, et al. Early goal-directed therapy in the treatment
of severe sepsis and septic shock. N Engl J Med 2001; 345: 1368–1377.
179 Concannon KT. Colloid osmotic pressure and the clinical use of colloidal
solutions. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2002; 3: 49–62.
180 Bumpus SE, Haskins SC, Kass PH. Effect of synthetic colloids on refractometric
readings of total solids. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 1998; 8: 21–26.
181 Yam E, Hosgood G, Rossi G, et al. Synthetic colloid fluids, (6% hydroxyethyl
starch 130/0.4 and 4% succinylated gelatin), interfere with measurement of total
plasma protein in vitro. Vet Clin Pathol 2018; 47: 575–587.
182 Yam E, Boyd CJ, Hosgood G, et al. (2019) Hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.4 and succi-
nylated gelatin (4%) interferes with refractometry in dogs with hemorrhagic
shock. Vet Anaesth Analg 2019; 46: 579–586.
183 Rothe CF. Reflex control of veins and vascular capacitance. Physiol Rev 1983; 63:
1281–1342.
184 Gelman S. Venous function and central venous pressure: a physiologic story.
Anesthesiology 2008; 108: 735–748.
185 Magder S. Volume and its relationship to cardiac output and venous return.
Crit Care 2016; 20: 271.
186 Michard F, Teboul JL. Predicting fluid responsiveness in ICU patients: a critical
analysis of the evidence. Chest 2002; 121: 2000–2008.
187 Messina A, Longhini F, Coppo C, et al. Use of the fluid challenge in critically ill
adult patients: a systematic review. Anesth Analg 2017; 125: 1532–1543.
188 Renner J, Scholz J, Bein B. Monitoring fluid therapy. Best Pract Res Clin Anesthesiol
2009; 23: 159–171.
189 Kehlet H, Bundgaard-Nielson M. Goal-directed perioperative fluid therapy.
Anesthesiology 2009; 110: 453–455.
190 Bednarczyk JM, Fridfinnson JA, Kumar A, et al. Incorporating dynamic assess-
ment of fluid responsiveness into goal directed therapy: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Crit Care Med 2017; 45: 1538–1545.
191 Som A, Maitra S, Bhattacharjee S, et al. Goal directed fluid therapy decreases post-
operative morbidity but not mor- tality in major non-cardiac surgery: a meta-
analysis and trial sequential analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Anesth
2017; 31: 66–81.
192 Jessen MK, Vallentin MF, Holmberg MJ, et al. Goal directed hemodynamic
therapy during general anesthesia for noncardiac surgery: a systematic view and
meta-analysis. B J Anaesth 2022; 128: 416–433.
193 Cherpanath TG, Geerts BF, Lagrand WK, et al. Basic concepts of fluid responsive-
ness. Neth Heart J 2013; 21: 530–536.
194 Guerin L, Monnet X, Teboul JL. Monitoring volume and fluid responsiveness:
from static to dynamic indicators. Best Pract Res Clin Anesth 2013; 17: 177–185.
195 Cecconi M, Parsons AK, Rhodes A. What is a fluid challenge? Curr Opin Crit Care
2011; 17: 290–295.
196 Carsetti A, Cecconi M, Rhodes A. Fluid bolus therapy: monitoring and predicting
fluid responsiveness. Curr Opin Crit Care 2015; 21: 388–394.
197 Marik PE, Lemson J. Fluid responsiveness: an evolution of our understanding. Br J
Anaesth 2014; 112: 620–622.
198 Osman D, Ridel C, Ray P, et al. Cardiac filling pressures are not appropriate to
predict hemodynamic response to volume challenge. Crit Care Med 2007; 35:
64–68.
199 Marik PE, Baram M, Vahid B. Does central venous pressure predict fluid respon-
siveness? A systematic review of the literature and the tale of seven mares. Chest
2008; 134: 172–178.
200 Marik PE, Cavallazzi R. Does the central venous pressure predict fluid responsive-
ness? An updated meta-analysis and a plea for some common sense. Crit Care
Med 2013; 41: 1774–1781.
201 Sano H, Seo J, Wightman P, et al. Evaluation of pulse pressure variation and pleth
variability index to predict fluid responsiveness in mechanically ventilated
isoflurane-anesthetized dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2018; 28: 301–309.
202 Drozdzynska MJ, Chang YM, Stanzani G, et al. Evaluation of the dynamic predic-
tors of fluid responsiveness in dogs receiving goal-directed fluid therapy.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45: 22–30.
203 Vincent JL. The pulmonary artery catheter. J Clin Monit Comput 2012; 26:
341–345.
204 Marik PE. Obituary: pulmonary artery catheter 1970 to 2013. Ann Intensive Care
2013; 28: 38.
205 Harvey S, Harrison DA, Singer M, et al. Assessment of clinical effectiveness of
pulmonary artery catheters in management of patients in intensive care
(PACMan): a randomized controlled trial. Lancet 2005; 366: 472–477.
206 Araos J, Kenny JS, Rousseau-Blass F, et al. Dynamic prediction of fluid respon-
siveness during positive pressure ventilation: a review of the physiology underly-
ing heart-lung interactions and a critical interpretation. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020;
47: 3–14.
207 Michard F. Changes in arterial pressure during mechanical ventilation.
Anesthesiology 2005; 103: 419–428.
208 Marik PE, Cavallazi R, Vasu T, et al. Dynamic changes in arterial waveform
derived variables and fluid responsiveness in mechanically ventilated patients: a
systematic review of literature. Crit Care Med 2009; 37: 2642–2647.
209 Thiele R, Durieux ME. Arterial waveform analysis for the anesthesiologist: past,
present, and future concepts. Anesth Analg 2011; 113: 766–776.
210 Michard F, Teboul JL. Using heart-lung interactions to assess fluid responsiveness
during mechanical ventilation. Crit Care 2000; 4: 282–289.
211 Monnet X, Teboul JL. Passive leg raising: five rules, not a drop of fluid! Crit Care
2015; 19: 18.
212 Paranjape VV, Shih AC, Garcia-Pereira FL. Use of a modified passive leg-raising
maneuver to predict fluid responsiveness during experimental induction and cor-
rection of hypovolemia in healthy isoflurane-anesthetized pigs. Am J Vet Res 2019;
80: 24–32.
213 Messina A, Dell’Anna A, Baggiani M, et al. Functional hemodynamic tests: a sys-
tematic review and a metanalysis on the reliability of the end-expiratory occlusion
test and of the mini-fluid challenge in predicting fluid responsiveness. Crit Care
2019; 23: 264.
214 Bucci M, Rabozzi R, Guglielmini C, et al. Respiratory variation in aortic blood
peak velocity and caudal vena cava diameter can predict fluid responsiveness in
anaesthetised and mechanically ventilated dogs. Vet J 2017; 227: 30–35.
215 Oricco S, Rabozzi R, Meneghini C, et al. Usefulness of focused cardiac ultrasonog-
raphy for predicting fluid responsiveness in conscious, spontaneously breathing
dogs. Am J Vet Res 2019; 80: 369–377.
216 Rabozzi R, Oricco S, Meneghini C, et al. Evaluation of the caudal vena cava
diameter to abdominal aortic diameter ratio and the caudal vena cava respiratory
collapsibility for predicting fluid responsiveness in a heterogeneous population of
hospitalized conscious dogs. J Vet Med Sci 2020; 82: 337–344.
217 Skouropoulou D, Lacitignola L, Di Bella C, et al. Intraoperative assessment of
fluid responsiveness in normotensive dogs under isoflurane anaesthesia. Vet Sci
2021; 8: 26.
218 Fantoni DT, Ida KK, Gimenes AM, et al. Pulse pressure variation as a guide for
volume expansion in dogs undergoing orthopedic surgery. Vet Anaesth Analg
2017; 44: 710–718.
219 Celeita-Rodríguez N, Teixeira-Neto FJ, Garofalo NA, et al. Comparison of the
diagnostic accuracy of dynamic and static preload indexes to predict fluid respon-
siveness in mechanically ventilated, isoflurane anesthetized dogs. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2019; 6: 276–288.
220 Gonçalves LA, Otsuki DA, Pereira MA, et al. Comparison of pulse pressure varia-
tion versus echocardiography-derived stroke volume variation for prediction of
fluid responsiveness in mechanically ventilated anesthetized dogs. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2020; 47: 28–37.
221 de Oliveira GCV, Teixeira-Neto FJ, Dalmagro TL, et al. Use of aortic flow indexes
derived from transthoracic echocardiography to evaluate response to a fluid chal-
lenge in anesthetized dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48: 187–197.
222 Dalmagro TL, Teixeira-Neto FJ, Celeita-Rodríguez N, et al. Comparison between
pulse pressure variation and systolic pressure variation measured from a periph-
eral artery for accurately predicting fluid responsiveness in mechanically venti-
lated dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48: 501–508.
223 Toscani L, Aya HD, Antonakaki D, et al. What is the impact of fluid challenge
technique on diagnosis of fluid responsiveness? A systematic review and meta-
analysis. Critical Care 2017; 21: 207–219.
224 Cecconi M, Hofer C, Teboul JL, et al. Fluid challenges in intensive care: the
FENICE study: a global inception cohort study. Intensive Care Med 2015; 41:
1529–1537.
225 Pierrakos C, Velissaris D, Scolletta S, et al. Can changes in arterial pressure be used
to detect changes in cardiac index during fluid challenge in patients with septic
shock? Intensive Care Med 2012; 38: 422–428.

-- 623 of 1450 --

608 	Section 4: Body Fluids and Fluid Therapy
226 Critchley LA, Critchley JA. A meta-analysis of studies using bias and precision
statistics to compare cardiac output measurement techniques. J Clin Monit
Comput 1999; 15: 85–91.
227 Critchley LA, Critchley LA, Yang XX, et al. Assessment of trending ability of
cardiac output monitors by polar plot methodology. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth
2011; 25: 536–546.
228 Grensemann J. Cardiac output monitoring bypulse contour analysis, the technical
basis of less-invasive techniques. Front Med 2018; 5: 64.
229 Briganti A, Evangelista F, Centonze P, et al. A preliminary study evaluating cardiac
output measurement using Pressure Recording Analytical Method (PRAM) in
anaesthetized dogs. BMC Vet Res 2018; 14: 72.
230 Chohan AS, Pascoe PJ. Experimental evaluation of a pressure related analytical
method (PRAM), a pulse contour analysis method, to calculate cardiac output
during progressive hypovolemia and volume restoration in Beagle dogs.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48: 984.e3.
231 Chohan AS, Pascoe PJ. Experimental evaluation of a Pressure Recording
Analytical Method (PRAM), a pulse contour análisis method, for monitoring
cardiac output in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2023; 50: e107–e108.
232 Valverde A, Gianotti G, Rioja E, et al. Comparison of cardiac output determined
by arterial pulse pressure waveform analysis method (FloTrac/Vigileo) versus
lithium dilution method in anesthetized dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2011; 21:
328–334.
233 Bektas RN, Kutter AP, Hartnack S, et al. Evaluation of a minimally invasive
non-calibrated pulse contour cardiac output monitor (FloTrac/Vigileo) in anaes-
thetized dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39: 464–471.
234 Sasaki K, Mutoh T, Kawashima R, et al. Electrical velocimetry for non-invasive
cardiac output and stroke volume variation measurements in dogs undergoing
cardiovascular surgery. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44: 7–16.
235 Sano H, Chambers JP. Ability of pulse wave transit time to detect changes in stroke
volume and to estimate cardiac output compared to thermodilution technique in
isoflurane-anaesthetised dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44: 1057–1067.
236 Chohan AS, Pascoe PJ. Evaluation of transesophageal Doppler in Beagle dogs as
an aid to provide goal directed fluid therapy. Vet Anaesth Analg 2019; 46: 831.e4.
237 Canfrán S, Cediel R, Sández I, et al. Evaluation of an oesophageal Doppler device
for monitoring cardiac output in anaesthetised healthy normotensive dogs.
J Small Anim Pract 2015; 56: 450–455.
238 Monnet X, Marik PE, Teboul JL. Prediction of fluid responsiveness:an update.
Ann Intensive Care 2016; 6: 111.
239 Mesquida J, Kim HK, Pinsky MR. Effect of tidal volume, intrathoracic pressure,
and cardiac contractility on variations in pulse pressure, stroke volume, and
intrathoracic blood volume. Intensive Care Med 2011; 37: 1672–1679.
240 Endo Y, Tamura J, Ishizuka T, et al. Stroke Volume Variation (SVV) and Pulse
Pressure Variation (PPV) as indicators of fluid responsiveness in sevoflurane
anesthetized mechanically ventilated euvolemic dogs. J Vet Med Sci 2017; 79:
1437–1445.
241 Endo Y, Kawase K, Miyasho T, et al. Plethysmography variability index for pre-
diction of fluid responsiveness during graded haemorrhage and transfusion in
sevoflurane anaesthetized mechanically ventilated dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017;
44: 1303–1312.
242 Mackenzie DC, Noble VE. Assessing volume status and fluid responsiveness in the
emergency department. Clin Exp Emerg Med 2014; 1: 67–77.
243 Durkan, SD, Rush J, Rozanski E. Echocardiographic findings in dogs with hypov-
olemia [Abstract]. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2005; 15: S1–S13.
244 Campbell FE, Kittleson MD. The effect of hydration status on the echocardio-
graphic measurements of normal cats. J Vet Intern Med 2007; 21: 1008–1015.
245 Fine DM, Durham HE Jr., Rossi NF, et al. Echocardiographic assessment of hemo-
dynamic changes produced by two methods of inducing fluid deficit in dogs.
J Vet Intern Med 2010; 24: 348–353.
246 Teboul JL, Monnet X. Pulse pressure variation and ARDS. Minerva Anesthesiol
2013; 79: 398–407.
247 Diaz F, Erranz B, Donoso A, et al. Influence of tidal volume on pulse pressure
variation and stroke volume variation during experimental intra-abdominal
hypertension. BMC Anesthesiol 2015; 15: 127.
248 Nouira S, Elatrous S, Dimassi S, et al. Effects of norepinephrine on static and
dynamic preload indicators in experimental hemorrhagic shock. Crit Care Med
2005; 33: 2339–2343.
249 Diniz MS, Teixeira-Neto FJ, Candido TD, et al. Effects of dexmedetomidine on
pulse pressure variation changes induced by hemorrhage followed by volume
replacement in isoflurane-anesthetized dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2014; 24:
681–692.
250 Hadian M, Severyn DA, Pinsky MR. The effects of vasoactive drugs on pulse pres-
sure and stroke volume variation in postoperative ventilated patients. J Crit Care
2011; 26: 328.e1–8.
251 Mair S, Tschirwahn J, Gotz S, et al. Applicability of stroke volume variation in
patients of a general intensive care unit a longitudinal observational study.
J Clin Monit Comput 2017; 31: 1177–1187.
252 Magder S. Fluid status and fluid responsiveness. Curr Opin Crit Care 2010; 16:
289–296.
253 Navarro LH, Bloomstone JA, Auler JO Jr., et al. Perioperative fluid therapy: a
statement from the International Fluid Optimization Group. Perioper Med
(London) 2015; 4: 3.
254 Pinsky MR. Cardiopulmonary interactions: physiologic basis and clinical applica-
tions. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2018; 15: S45–S48.
255 Takala J. Volume responsive, but does the patient need volume? Intensive Care
Med 2016; 42: 1461–1463.
256 Reines BP, Ninham BW. Structure and function of the endothelial surface layer:
unraveling the nanoarchitecture of biological surfaces. Q Rev Biophys 2019; 52: e13.
257 Akbarshahi H, Axelsson JB, Said K, et al. TLR4 dependent heparan sulphate-
induced pancreatic inflammatory response is IRF3-mediated. J Transl Med 2011;
9: 219.
258 Scheibner KA, Lutz MA, Boodoo S, et al. Hyaluronan fragments act as an endog-
enous danger signal by engaging TLR2. J Immunol 2006; 177: 1272–1281.
259 De Backer D, Donadello K, Sakr Y, et al. Microcirculatory alterations in patients
with severe sepsis: impact of time of assessment and relationship with outcome.
Crit Care Med 2013; 41: 791–799.
260 Tachon G, Harrois A, Tanaka S, et al. Microcirculatory alterations in traumatic
hemorrhagic shock. Crit Care Med 2014; 42: 1433–1441.
261 Cabrales P, Vazquez BY, Tsai AG, et al. Microvascular and capillary perfusion fol-
lowing glycocalyx degradation. J Appl Physiol 2007; 102: 2251–2259.
262 Chen W, Gassner B, Borner S, et al. Atrial natriuretic peptide enhances microvas-
cular albumin permeability by the caveolae-mediated transcellular pathway.
Cardiovasc Res 2012; 93: 141–151.
263 Chappell D, Bruegger D, Potzel J, et al. Hypervolemia increases release of atrial
natriuretic peptide and shedding of the endothelial glycocalyx. Crit Care 2014;
18: 538.
264 Belavi´c M, Sotošek TokmadŽi´c V, Fiši´c E, et al. The effect of various doses of
infusion solutions on the endothelial glycocalyx layer in laparoscopic cholecystec-
tomy patients. Minerva Anestesiol 2018; 84: 1032–1043.
265 Smart L, Boyd CJ, Claus MA, et al. Large-volume crystalloid fluid is associated
with increased hyaluronan shedding and inflammation in a canine hemorrhagic
shock model. Inflammation 2018; 41: 1515–1523.
266 Marik PE, Byrne L, van Haren F. Fluid resuscitation in sepsis: the great 30 mL per
kg hoax. J Thor Dis 2020; 12(Suppl. 1): S37–S47.
267 Macdonald SPJ, Keijzers G, Taylor DM, et al. Restricted fluid resuscitation in sus-
pected sepsis associated hypotension (REFRESH): a pilot randomised controlled
trial. Intensive Care Med 2018; 44: 2070–2078.
268 Turek Z, Cerny V, Parizkova R, et al. Prolonged hypervolemic hemodilution
decreases functional capillary density of ileal mucosa in pigs revealed by side-
stream dark-field imaging. J Zhejiang Univ Sci B 2011; 2: 867–874.
269 Yu TC, Yang FL, Hsu BG, et al. Deleterious effects of aggressive rapid crystalloid
resuscitation on treatment of hyperinflammatory response and lung injury
induced by hemorrhage in aging rats. J Surg Res 2014; 187: 587–595.
270 Jacob M, Chappell D, Hofmann-Kiefer K, et al. The intravascular volume effect of
Ringer’s lactate is below 20%: a prospective study in humans. Crit Care 2012; 16: R86.
271 Zazzeron L, Gattinoni L, Caironi P. Role of albumin, starches and gelatins versus
crystalloids in volume resuscitation of critically ill patients. Curr Opin Crit Care
2016; 22: 428–436.
272 Chelazzi C, Villa G, Mancinelli P, et al. Glycocalyx and sepsis-induced alterations
in vascular permeability. Crit Care 2015; 19: 26.
273 Fleck A, Hawker F, Wallace PI, et al. Increased vascular permeability: a major
cause of hypoalbuminaemia in disease and injury. Lancet 1985; 325: 781–784.
274 Müller RB, Ostrowski SR, Haase N, et al. Markers of endothelial damage and
coagulation impairment in patients with severe sepsis resuscitated with hydroxy-
ethyl starch 130/0.42 vs Ringer acetate. J Crit Care 2016; 32: 16–20.
275 Torres LN, Sondeen JL, Dubick MA, et al. Systemic and microvascular effects of
resuscitation with blood products after severe hemorrhage in rats. J Trauma Acute
Care Surg 2014; 77: 716–723.
276 Kozar RA, Peng Z, Zhang R, et al. Plasma restoration of endothelial glycocalyx in
a rodent model of hemorrhagic shock. Anesth Analg 2011; 112: 1289–1295.
277 Lewis SR, Pritchard MW, Evans DJ, et al. Colloids versus crystalloids for
fluid resuscitation in critically ill people. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2018; 8:
CD000567.
278 Dibartola SP. Disorders of sodium and water: hypernatremia and hyponatremia.
In: Dibartola SP, ed. Fluid, Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal
Practice, 4th edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2012: 45–79.
279 Androgue HJ, Madias NE. Hypernatremia. N Engl J Med 2000; 342: 1493–1499.

-- 624 of 1450 --

Chapter 32: Clinical Pharmacology and Administration of Fluid, Electrolyte, and Blood Component Solutions 	609
280 Pollock AS, Arieff AI. Abnormalities of cell volume regulation and their func-
tional consequences. Am J Physiol 1980; 239: F195–F205.
281 Willard M. Therapeutic approach to chronic electrolyte disorders. Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 2008; 38: 535–541.
282 Lien YH, Shapiro JI, Chan L. Effects of hypernatremia on organic brain osmoles. J
Clin Invest 1990; 85: 1427–1435.
283 Schaer M. Therapeutic approach to electrolyte emergencies. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 2008; 38: 513–533.
284 Ellison DH, Berl T. The syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis. N Engl J Med
2007; 356: 2064–2072.
285 Houston DM, Allen DG, Kruth SA, et al. Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic
hormone secretion in a dog. Can Vet J 1989; 30: 423.
286 Kokko H, Hall PD, Afrin LB. Fentanyl associated syndrome of inappropriate anti-
diuretic hormone secretion. Pharmacotherapy 2002; 22: 1188–1192.
287 Demirel I, Ozer AB, Bayar MK, et al. TRUP syndrome and severe hyponatremia
under general anesthesia. BMJ Case Rep 2012; BCR-2012: 006899.
288 Liptak JM, Brutsher SP, Monnet E, et al. Transurethral resection in the manage-
ment of urethral and prostatic neoplasia in 6 dogs. Vet Surg 2004; 33: 505–516.
289 Toll J, Barr SC, Hickford FH. Acute water intoxication in a dog. J Vet Emerg Crit
Care 1999; 9: 19–22.
290 O’Brien DP, Kroll RA, Johnson GC, et al. Myelinolysis after correction of hypona-
tremia in two dogs. J Vet Intern Med 1994; 8: 40–48.
291 Churcher RK, Wason ADJ, Eaton A. Suspected myelinolysis following rapid
correction of hyponatremia in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1999; 35: 492–497.
292 Aguilera IM, Vaughan RS. Calcium and the anesthetist. Anaesthesia 2000; 55:
779–790.
293 Schenck PA, Chew DJ. Calcium: total or ionized? Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim
Pract 2008; 38: 497–502.
294 Holowaychuk MK, Martin LG. Review of hypocalcemia in septic patients.
J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2007; 17: 348–358.
295 Borer KE, Corley KTT. Electrolyte disorders in horses with colic. Part 2: calcium,
sodium, chloride and phosphate. Equine Vet Educ 2006; 18: 320–325.
296 Grubb TL, Benson GJ, Foreman JH, et al. Hemodynamic effects of ionized
calcium in horses anesthetized with halothane or isoflurane. Am J Vet Res 1999;
60: 1430–1435.
297 Gasthuys F, de Moor A, Parmentier D, et al. Cardiovascular effects of low dose
calcium chloride infusions during halothane anesthesia in dorsally recumbent
ventilated ponies. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1991; 38: 728–736.
298 Dhupa N, Proulx J. Hypocalcemia and hypomagnesemia. Vet Clin North Am Sm
Anim Pract 1998; 28: 587–608.
299 Sharp CR, Kerl ME, Mann FA. A comparison of total calcium, corrected calcium,
and ionized calcium concentrations as indicators of calcium homeostasis among
hypoalbuminemic dogs requiring intensive care. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2009; 19:
571–578.
300 Brennan SF, O’Donovan J, Mooney CT. Changes in canine ionized calcium under
three storage conditions. J Small Anim Pract 2006; 47: 383–386.
301 Dibartola SP, de Morais HA. Disorders of potassium: hypokalemia and hyper-
kalemia. In: Dibartola SP, ed. Fluid, Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders in Small
Animal Practice, 4th edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2012: 92–119.
302 Kablack KA, Embertson RM, Bernard WV, et al. Uroperitoneum in the hospital-
ized equine neonates: retrospective study of 31 cases. Equine Vet J 2000; 32:
505–508.
303 Jones SJ, Mama KR, Brock NK, et al. Hyperkalemia during general anesthesia in
two Greyhounds. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2019; 254: 1329–1334.
304 Tong CW, Balakrishnan A, Wynn RM. Recurrent hyperkalemia during general
anesthesia in a dog. Front Vet Sci 2020; 7: 210.
305 Reilly S, Seddighi MR, Steeil JC, et al. Selected clinical, biochemical, and electro-
lyte alterations in anesthetized captive Tigers (Panthera Tigris) and lions (Panthera
Leo). J Zoo Wildl Med 2014; 45: 328–334.
306 McEntire MS, Ramsay EC, Price J, et al. The effects of procedure duration and
atipamezole administration on hyperkalemia in Tigers (Panthera Tigris) and lions
(Panthera Leo) anesthetized with alpha-2 agonists. J Zoo Wildl Med 2020; 51:
490–496.
307 Guyton AC, Hall JE. Textbook of Medical Physiology, 14th edn. Philadelphia, PA:
Elsevier, 2021: 63–77.
308 Tag TL, Day TK. Electrocardiographic assessment of hyperkalemia in dogs and
cats. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2008; 18: 61–67.
309 Dananberg J. Electrolyte abnormalities affecting the heart. In: Schwartz GR, ed.
Principles and Practice of Emergency Medicine, 4th edn. Baltimore, MD: Williams
& Wilkins, 1999: 425–427.
310 Quick G, Bastani B. Prolonged asystolic hyperkalemic cardiac arrest with no
neurologic sequelae. Ann Emerg Med 1994; 24: 305–311.
311 Parham WA, Mehdirad AA, Biermann KM, et al. Hyperkalemia revisited.
Tex Heart Inst J 2006; 33: 40–47.
312 Norman BC, Côté E, Barrett KA. Wide-complex tachycardia associated with
severe hyperkalemia in three cats. J Feline Med Surg 2006; 8: 372–378.
313 Roden DM, Lazzara R, Rosen M, et al. Multiple mechanisms in the long-QT syn-
drome. Current knowledge, gaps, and future directions. The SADS Foundation
Task Force on LQTS. Circulation 1996; 94: 1996–2012.
314 Dittrich KL, Walls RM. Hyperkalemia: ECG manifestations and clinical
considerations. J Emerg Med 1986; 4: 449–455.
315 Ettinger PO, Regan TJ, Oldewurtel HA. Hyperkalemia, cardiac conduction, and
the electrocardiogram: a review. Am Heart J 1974; 88: 360–371.
316 Parks J. Electrocardiographic abnormalities from serum electrolyte imbalance due
to feline urethral obstruction. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1975; 11: 102–109.
317 Drobatz KJ, Cole SG. The influence of crystalloid type on acid-base and electrolyte
status of cats with urethral obstruction. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2008; 18: 355–361.
318 Ho K. A critically swift response: insulin-stimulated potassium and glucose trans-
port in skeletal muscle. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2011; 6: 1513–1516.
319 Carvalhanna V, Burry L, Lapinsky SE. Management of severe hyperkalemia with-
out hemodialysis: case report and literature review. J Crit Care 2006; 21: 316–321.
320 Borer KE, Corley KTT. Electrolyte disorders in horses with colic. Part 1: potas-
sium and magnesium. Equine Vet J 2006; 18: 266–271.
321 Haldane S, Graves TK, Bateman S, et al. Profound hypokalemia causing respiratory
failure in a cat with hyperaldosteronism. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2007; 17: 202–207.
322 American Society of Anesthesiologists. Practice guidelines for perioperative blood
management; An updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists task
force on perioperative blood management. Anesthesiology 2015; 122: 241–275.
323 Davidow B. Transfusion medicine in small animals. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 2013; 43: 735–756.
324 Divers TJ. Blood component transfusion. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract
2005; 21: 615–622.
325 Mudge MC. Acute hemorrhage and blood transfusions in horses. Vet Clin North
Am Equine Pract 2014; 30: 427–436.
326 Herbert P, van der Linden P, Biro G, et al. Physiologic aspects of anemia. Crit Care
Med 2004; 20: 187–212.
327 Jutkowitz LA. Blood transfusion in the perioperative period. Clin Tech Small Anim
Pract 2004; 2: 75–82.
328 Teixeira-Neto FJ, Luna S, Cruz MA, et al. A study of the effect of hemorrhage on
the cardiorespiratory actions of halothane, isoflurane and sevoflurane in the dog.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2007; 34: 107–116.
329 Weingart C, Giger U, Kohn B. Whole blood transfusion in 91 cats: a clinical
evaluation. J Fel Med Surg 2004; 6: 139–148.
330 Klaser DA, Reine NJ, Hohenhaus AE. Red blood cell transfusion in cats: 126 cases
(1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2005; 226: 920–923.
331 Castellanos I, Couto CG, Gray TL. Clinical use of blood products in cats: a retro-
spective study (1997–2000). J Vet Intern Med 2004; 18: 529–532.
332 Roux FA, Deschamps JY, Blais MC, et al. Multiple red cell transfusion in 27 cats
(2003–2006). J Fel Med Surg 2008; 10: 213–218.
333 Hurcombe SD, Mudge MC, Hinchcliff KW. Clinical and clinicopathologic varia-
bles in adult horses receiving blood transfusion. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2007; 231:
267–274.
334 Kerl ME, Hohenhaus AE. Packed red blood cell transfusions in dogs: 131 case
(1989). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993; 202: 1495–1499.
335 Callan MB, Oakley DA, Shofer ES, et al. Canine red blood cell transfusion practice.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1996; 32: 303–311.
336 Kuo KW, McMichael M. Small animal transfusion medicine. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 2020; 50: 1203–1214.
337 Reed N, Espadas I, Lalor SM, et al. Assessment of five formulae to predict
post-transfusion packed cell volume in cats. J Fel Med Surg 2014; 16: 651–656.
338 Edwards TH, Darlington DN, Pusateri AE, et al. Hemostatic capacity of canine
chilled whole blood over time. J Vet Crit Care 2021; 31: 239–246.
339 Valeri CR, Khuri S, Ragno G. Nonsurgical bleeding diathesis in anemic thrombo-
cytopenic patients: role of temperature, red blood cells, platelets, and plasma-
clotting proteins. Transfusion 2007; 47: 206S–248S.
340 Valeri CR, Cassidy G, Pivacek LE, et al. Anemia-induced increase in the bleeding
time: implications for treatment of nonsurgical blood loss. Transfusion 2001; 41:
977–983.
341 Sort JL, Diehl S, Seshadri R, et al. Accuracy of formulas used to predict posttrans-
fusion packed cell volume rise in anemic dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2012; 22:
428–434.
342 Brooks MB, Wardrop KJ. Stability of hemostatic proteins in canine fresh frozen
plasma units. Vet Clin Pathol 2001; 30: 91–95.
343 Stokol T, Parry B. Efficacy of fresh-frozen plasma and cryoprecipitate in dogs with
von Willebrand’s disease or hemophilia A. J Vet Intern Med 1998; 12: 84–92.
344 Urban R, Couto CG, Iazbik MC. Evaluation of hemostatic activity of canine frozen
plasma for transfusion by thromboelastography. J Vet Intern Med 2013; 27:
964–969.

-- 625 of 1450 --

610 	Section 4: Body Fluids and Fluid Therapy
345 Stokol T, Parry BW. Stability of canine factor VIII and von Willebrand factor
antigen concentration in the frozen state. Res Vet Sci 1995; 59: 156–159.
346 Ching YNLH, Meyers KM, Brassard JA, et al. Effect of cryoprecipitate and plasma
on plasma von Willebrand factor multimers and bleeding time in Doberman
Pinschers with type-I von Willebrand’s disease. Am J Vet Res 1994; 55: 102–110.
347 Cheung H, Jandrey KE, Burges J, et al. An in vitro study of canine cryopoor
plasma to correct vitamin K-dependent coagulopathy in dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit
Care 2021; 31: 231–238.
348 Throop JL, Kerl ME, Cohn LA. Albumin in health and disease: protein metabo-
lism and function. Comp Cont Educ Vet 2004; 26: 932–939.
349 Mazzaferro EM, Rudloff E, Kirby R. The role of albumin replacement in the
critically ill veterinary patient. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2002; 12: 113–124.
350 Vigano F, Perissinotto L, Bosco V. Administration of 5% human serum albumin in
critically ill small animal patients with hypoalbuminemia: 418 dogs and 170 cats
(1994–2008). J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2010; 20: 237–243.
351 Mosley CAE, Matthews KA. The use of concentrated serum albumin in canines.
Vet Anesth Analg 2005; 32: 14–15.
352 Mathews K, Barry M. The use of 25% human serum albumin: outcome and effi-
cacy in raising serum albumin and systemic blood pressure in critically ill dogs
and cats. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2005; 15: 110–118.
353 Trow A, Rozanski E, de Laforcade A, et al. Evaluation of the use of human albu-
min in critically ill dogs: 73 cases (2003–2006). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008; 233:
607–612.
354 Vigano F, Perissinotto L, Bosco V. Administration of 5% human serum albumin in
critically ill small animal patients with hypoalbuminemia: 418 dogs and 170 cats
(1994–2008). J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2010; 20: 237–243.
355 Mazzaferro EM, Balakrishnan A, Hackner SG, et al. Delayed type III hypersensi-
tivity reaction with acute kidney injury in two dogs following administration of
concentration human albumin during treatment for hypoalbuminemia secondary
to septic peritonitis. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2020; 30: 574–580.
356 Powell C, Thompson L, Murtaugh RJ. Type III hypersensitivity reaction with
immune complex deposition in 2 critically ill dogs administered human serum
albumin. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2013; 23: 598–604.
357 DeWitt SF, Paradis MR. Use of human albumin as a colloidal therapy in the hypo-
proteinemic equine [Abstract]. J Vet Intern Med 2004; 14: S8.
358 Francis AH, Martin L, Haldorson GJ, et al. Adverse reactions suggestive of type III
hypersensitivity in six healthy dogs given human albumin. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2007; 320: 873–879.
359 Cohn LA, Kerl ME, Lenox CE, et al. Response of healthy dogs to infusion of
human serum albumin. Am J Vet Res 2007; 68: 657–663.
360 Martin LG, Luther TY, Alperin DC, et al. Serum antibodies against human albu-
min in critically ill and healthy dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008; 232: 1004–1009.
361 Craft EM, Powell LL. The use of canine-specific albumin in dogs with septic peri-
tonitis. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2012; 22: 631–639.
362 Enders B, Musulin S, Holowaychuk M, et al. Repeated infusion of lyophilized
canine albumin safely and effectively increases serum albumin and colloid osmotic
pressure in healthy dogs [Abstract]. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2018; 28(S1): S5.
363 Smith CL, Ramsey NB, Parr AM, et al. Evaluation of a novel canine albumin solu-
tion in normal Beagles [Abstract]. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2009; 19(Suppl): A3.
364 Finfer S, Bellomo R, Boyce N, et al. A comparison of albumin and saline for fluid
resuscitation in the intensive care unit. N Engl J Med 2004; 350: 2247–2256.
365 Roberts I, Blackhall K, Alderson P, et al. Human albumin solution for resuscitation
and volume expansion in critically ill patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011;
11: CD001208.
366 Melia D, Post B. Human albumin solutions in intensive care: A review. J Intensive
Care Soc 2021; 22: 248–254.
367 Greeno E, McCullough J, Weisdorf D. Platelet utilization and the transfusion trig-
ger: a prospective analysis. Transfusion 2007; 47: 201–205.
368 Petrides M, Stack G, Cooling L, et al. Practical Guide to Transfusion Medicine.
Bethesda, MD: AABB Press, 2007.
369 Callow CR, Swindell R, Randall W, et al. The frequency of bleeding complications
in patients with haematological malignancy following the introduction of a strin-
gent prophylactic platelet transfusion policy. Br J Haematol 2002; 118: 677–682.
370 Abrams-Ogg AC. Triggers for prophylactic use of platelet transfusions and opti-
mal platelet dosing in thrombocytopenic dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 2003; 33: 1401–1418.
371 Callan MB, Appleman EH, Sachais BS. Canine platelet transfusions. J Vet Emerg
Crit Care 2009; 19: 401–415.
372 Clemmons RM, Bliss EL, Dorsey-Lee MR, et al. Platelet function, size and yield in
whole blood and in platelet-rich plasma prepared using different centrifugation
force and time in domestic and food-producing animals. Thromb Haemost 1983;
50: 838–843.
373 Abrams-Ogg ACG, Kruth SA, Carter RF, et al. Preparation and transfusion of
canine platelet concentrates. Am J Vet Res 1993; 54: 635–642.
374 Callan MB, Appleman EH, Shofer FS, et al. Clinical and clinicopathologic effects
of plateletpheresis on healthy donor dogs. Transfusion 2008; 48: 2214–2221.
375 Mack JP, Miles J, Stolla. Cold-stored platelets: review of studies in humans.
Transfus Med Rev 2020; 34: 221–226.
376 Appleman EH, Sachais BS, Patel R, et al. Cryopreservation of canine platelets.
J Vet Intern Med 2009; 23: 138–145.
377 Valeri CR, Feingold H, Marchionni LD. A simple method for freezing human
platelets using 6 per cent dimethyl-sulfoxide and storage at -80 degrees C. Blood
1974; 43: 131–136.
378 Valeri CR, Feingold H, Melaragno AJ, et al. Cryopreservation of dog platelets with
dimethyl sulfoxide: therapeutic effectiveness of cryopreserved platelets in the treat-
ment of thrombocytopenic dogs, and the effect of platelet storage at -80 degrees C.
Cryobiology 1986; 23: 387–394.
379 Guillaumin J, Jandrey KE, Norris JW, et al. Assessment of a dimethyl-sulfoxide-
stabilized frozen canine platelet concentrate. Am J Vet Res 2008; 69: 1580–1586.
380 Guillaumin J, Jandrey KE, Norris JW, et al. Analysis of a commercial dimethyl-
sulfoxide-stabilized frozen canine platelet concentrate by turbidimetric aggregom-
etry. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2010; 20: 571–577.
381 Bode AP, Fischer TH. Lyophilized platelets: fifty years in the making. Artif Cells
Blood Substit Immobil Biotechnol 2007; 35: 125–133.
382 Read MS, Reddick RL, Bode AP, et al. Preservation of hemostatic and structural
properties of rehydrated lyophilized platelets: potential for long-term storage of
dried platelets for transfusion. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995; 92: 397–401.
383 Fischer TH, Merricks EP, Bode AP, et al. Thrombus formation with rehydrated,
lyophilized platelets. Hematology 2002; 7: 359–369.
384 Bode AP, Lust RM, Read MS, et al. Correction of the bleeding time with lyophi-
lized platelet infusions in dogs on cardiopulmonary bypass. Clin Appl Thromb
Hemost 2008; 14: 38–54.
385 Davidow EB, Brainard B, Martin LG, et al. Use of fresh platelet concentrate or
lyophilized platelets in thrombocytopenic dogs with clinical signs of hemorrhage:
a preliminary trial in 37 dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2012; 22: 116–125.
386 Goggs R, Brainard BM, LeVine D, et al. Lyophilized platelets versus cryopreserved
platelets for management of bleeding in thrombocytopenic dogs: a multicenter
randomized clinical trial. J Vet Intern Med 2020; 34: 2384–2397.
387 Hawksworth JS, Elster EA, Fryer D, et al. Evaluation of lyophilized platelets as an
infusible hemostatic agent in experimental non-compressible hemorrhage in
swine. J Thromb Haemost 2009; 7: 1663–1671.
388 Symons M, Bell K. Canine blood groups: description of 20 specificities. Anim
Genet 1992; 23: 509–515.
389 Symons M, Bell K. Expansion of the canine A blood group system. Anim Genet
1991; 22: 227–235.
390 Giger U, Gelens CJ, Callan MB, et al. An acute hemolytic transfusion reaction
caused by dog erythrocyte antigen 1.1 incompatibility in a previously sensitized
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1995; 206: 1358–1362.
391 Kessler RJ, Reese J, Chang D, et al. Dog erythrocyte antigens 1.1, 1.2, 3, 4, 7, and
Dal blood typing and cross-matching by gel column technique. Vet Clin Pathol
2010; 39: 306–316.
392 Callan MB, Jones LT, Giger U. Hemolytic transfusion reactions in a dog with an
alloantibody to a common antigen. J Vet Intern Med 1995; 9: 277–279.
393 Spada E, Proverbio D, Vinals Florez LM, et al. Prevalence of naturally occurring
antibodies against dog erythrocyte antigen 7 in a population of dog erythrocyte
antigen 7-negative dogs from Spain and Italy. Am J Vet Res 2016; 77: 877–881.
394 Swisher SN, Young LE, Trabold N. In vitro and in vivo studies of the behavior of
canine erythrocyte-isoantibody systems. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1962; 97: 15–25.
395 Blais MC, Berman L, Oakley DA, et al. Canine Dal blood type: a red cell antigen
lacking in some Dalmatians. J Vet Intern Med 2007; 21: 281–286.
396 Ebelt AK, Fuchs S, Weber C, et al. Survey of blood groups DEA1, DEA4, DEA5,
Dal, and Kai 1/Kai 2 in different canine breeds from a diagnostic laboratory in
Germany. Front Vet Sci 2020; 7: 85.
397 Davidow EB, Blois SL, Goy-Thollot I, et al. Association of Veterinary Hematology
and Transfusion Medicine (AVHTM) Transfusion Reaction Small Animal
Consensus Statement (TRACS) Part 2: Prevention and monitoring. J Vet Emerg
Crit Care 2021; 31: 167–188.
398 Weinstein NM, Blais MC, Harris K, et al. A newly recognized blood group in
domestic shorthair cats: the Mik red cell antigen. J Vet Intern Med 2007; 21:
287–292.
399 Malik R, Griffin DL, White JD, et al. The prevalence of feline A/B blood types in
the Sydney region. Aust Vet J 2005; 83: 38–44.
400 Giger U, Kilrain CG, Filippich LJ, et al. Frequencies of feline blood groups in the
United States. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1989; 195: 1230–1232.
401 Giger U, Bucheler J, Patterson DF. Frequency and inheritance of A and B blood
types in feline breeds of the United States. J Hered 1991; 82: 15–20.
402 Proverbio D, Spada E, Baggiani L, et al. Comparison of gel column agglutination
with monoclonal antibodies and card agglutination methods for assessing the

-- 626 of 1450 --

Chapter 32: Clinical Pharmacology and Administration of Fluid, Electrolyte, and Blood Component Solutions 	611
feline AB group system and a frequency study of feline blood types in northern
Italy. Vet Clin Pathol 2011; 40: 32–39.
403 Giger U, Bucheler J. Transfusion of type-A and type-B blood to cats. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 1991; 198: 411–418.
404 Giger U, Akol KG. Acute hemolytic transfusion reaction in an Abyssinian cat with
blood type B. J Vet Intern Med 1990; 4: 315–316.
405 Martinez-Sogues L, Blois SL, Mazanilla EG, et al. Exploration of risk factors for
non- survival and for transfusion-associated complications in cats receiving red
blood cell transfusions: 450 cases (2009–2017). J Sm Anim Pract 2020; 61:
177–184.
406 Le Gal A, Thomas EK, Humm KR. Xenotransfusion of canine blood to cats: a
review of 49 cases and their outcome. J Small Anim Pract 2020; 61: 156–162.
407 Proverbio D, Perego R, Baggiani L, et al. Prevalence of Ca blood type and alloan-
tibodies in a population of horses from Italy. Animals (Basel) 2020; 10: 1179.
408 Stormont CJ. Blood groups in animals. Adv Vet Sci Comp Med 1991; 36: 9–55.
409 Luethy D, Stefanovski D, Salber R, et al. Prediction of packed cell volume after
whole blood transfusion in small ruminants and South American camelids: 80
cases (2006–2016). J Vet Intern Med 2017; 31: 1900.
410 Smith DM, Newhouse M, Naziruddin B, et al. Blood groups and transfusions in
pigs. Xenotransplantation 2006; 13: 186–194.
411 Luethy D, Owens SD, Stefanovski D, et al. Comparison of tube, gel, and immuno-
chromatic strip methods for evaluation of blood transfusion compatibility in
horses. J Vet Intern Med 2016; 30: 1864–1871.
412 Jutkowitz LA, Rozanski EA, Moreau JA, et al. Massive transfusion in dogs: 15 cases
(1997–2001). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2002; 220: 1664–1669.
413 Holcomb JB, Wade CE, Michalek JE, et al. Increased plasma and platelet to red
blood cell ratios improves outcome in 466 massively transfused civilian trauma
patients. Ann Surg 2008; 248: 447–458.
414 Zink KA, Sambasivan CN, Holcomb JB, et al. A high ratio of plasma and platelets
to packed red blood cells in the first 6 hours of massive transfusion improves out-
comes in a large multicenter study. Am J Surg 2009; 197: 565–570.
415 Shaz BH, Dente CJ, Nicholas J, et al. Increased number of coagulation products in
relationship to red blood cell products transfused improves mortality in trauma
patients. Transfusion 2010; 50: 493–500.
416 Nunez TC, Young PP, Holcomb JB, et al. Creation, implementation, and matura-
tion of a massive transfusion protocol for the exsanguinating trauma patient. J
Trauma 2010; 68: 1498–1505.
417 Holcomb JB, del Junco DJ, Fox EE, et al. The prospective observational multicenter
major trauma transfusion (PROMMTT) study: comparative effectiveness of a time-
varying treatment with competing risk. J Am Med Assoc 2013; 148: 127–136.
418 Consunji R, Elseed A, El-Menyar A, et al. The effect of massive transfusion proto-
col implementation on the survival of trauma patients; a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Blood Transfus 2020; 18: 434–445.
419 Buckley GJ, Aktay SA, Rozanski EA. Massive transfusion and surgical manage-
ment of iatrogenic aortic laceration associated with cystocentesis in a dog. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 2009; 235: 288–291.
420 Clark CH, Woodley CH. The absorption of red blood cells after parenteral injec-
tion at various sites. Am J Vet Res 1959; 10: 1062–1066.
421 McDevitt RI, Ruaux CG, Baltzer WI. Influence of transfusion technique on sur-
vival of autologous red blood cells in the dog. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2011; 21:
209–216.
422 Heikes B, Ruaux CG. Syringe and aggregate filter administration does not effect
survival of transfused autologous feline red blood cells. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2014;
24: 162–167.
423 Davidow EB, Blois SL, Goy-Thollot I, et al. Association of Veterinary Hematology
and Transfusion Medicine (AVHTM) Transfusion Reaction Small Animal
Consensus Statement (TRACS) Part 1: Definitions and clinical signs. J Vet Emerg
Crit Care 2021; 31: 141–166.
424 Bruce JA, Kriese-Anderson L, Bruce AM, et al. Effect of premedication and other
factors on the occurrence of acute transfusion reactions in dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit
Care 2015; 25: 620–630.
425 Odunayo A, Nash KJ, Davidow EB, et al. Association of Veterinary Hematology
and Transfusion Medicine (AVHTM) Transfusion Reaction Small Animal
Consensus Statement (TRACS) Part 3: Diagnosis and treatment. J Vet Emerg Crit
Care 2021; 31: 189–203.
426 Patterson J, Rousseau A, Kessler RJ, et al. In vitro lysis and acute transfusion reac-
tions with hemolysis caused by inappropriate storage of canine red blood cell
products. J Vet Intern Med 2011; 25: 927–933.
427 Vlaar APJ, Toy P, Fung M, et al. A consensus redefinition of transfusion-related
acute lung injury. Transfusion 2019; 59: 2465–2476.
428 Vlaar APJ, Juffermans NP. Transfusion related acute lung injury - clinical review.
Lancet 2013; 382: 984–994.
429 Thomovsky E, Bach J. Incidence of acute lung injury in dogs receiving transfusion.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2014; 244: 170–174.
430 Looney MR. Current concepts in TRALI pathogenesis. ISBT Sci Ser 2016;
11(S1): 206–210.
431 Palfi M, Berg S, Ernerudh J, et al. A randomized controlled trial of transfusion-
related acute lung injury: is plasma from multiparous blood donors dangerous?
Transfusion 2001; 41: 317–322.
432 Blais MC, Rozanski EA, Hale AS, et al. Lack of evidence of pregnancy- induced
alloantibodies in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2009; 23: 462–465.
433 Hillyer CD, Josephson CD, Blajchman MA, et al. Bacterial contamination of blood
components: risks, strategies, and regulation: joint ASH and AABB educational
session in transfusion medicine. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Edu Program 2003:
575–589.
434 Hohenhaus AE, Drustin LM, Garvey MS. Serratia marcescens contamination of feline
whole blood in a hospital blood bank. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1997; 210: 794–798.
435 Maxwell MJ, Wilson MJA. Complications of blood transfusion. Contin Educ
Anaesth Crit Care Pain 2006; 6: 225–229.
436 Nickel JR, Shih A. Anesthesia case of the month. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2011; 239:
1429–1431.
437 Mudge MC, Walker NJ, Borjesson DL, et al. Post-transfusion survival of biotin-
labeled allogenic RBCs in adult horses. Vet Clin Pathol 2012; 41: 56–62.
438 Forgie MA, Wells PS, Laupacis A, et al. Preoperative autologous donation decreased
allogeneic transfusion by relative 63 percent, but increases exposure to all red blood
cell transfusion by 30 percent: results of a meta-analysis. International Study of
Perioperative Transfusion (ISPOT) Investigators. Arch Int Med 1998; 158: 610–616.
439 Henry DA, Carless PA, Moxey AJ, et al. Pre-operative autologous donation for
minimizing perioperative allogeneic blood transfusion. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 2002; 2: CD003602.
440 Carless P, Moxey A, O’Connell D, et al. Autologous transfusion techniques: a
systematic review of their efficacy. Transfusion Med 2004; 14: 123–144.
441 Sinclair KC, Clarke HD, Noble BN. Blood management in total knee arthroplasty:
a comparison of techniques. Orthopedics 2009; 32: 19.
442 Mudge MC, Macdonald MH, Owens SD, et al. Comparison of 4 blood storage
methods in a protocol for equine pre-operative autologous donation. Vet Surg
2004; 33: 475–486.
443 Fusco JV, Hohenhaus AE, Aiken SW, et al. Autologous blood collection and trans-
fusion in cats undergoing partial craniectomy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000; 216:
1584–1588.
444 Mijovic A, Britten C, Regan F, et al. Preoperative autologous blood donation for
bone marrow harvests: are we wasting donors’ time and blood? Transfus Med
2006; 16: 57–62.
445 Bess RS, Lenke LG, Bridwell KH, et al. Wasting of preoperatively donated autolo-
gous blood in the surgical treatment of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis. Spine 2006;
31: 2375–2380.
446 Monk TG, Goodnough LT, Pulley DD, et al. Acute normovolemic hemodilution
can replace preoperative autologous blood donation as a standard of care for
autologous blood procurement in radical prostatectomy. Anesth Analg 1997; 85:
953–958.
447 Monk TG, Goodnough LT, Brecher ME, et al. A prospective randomized compari-
son of three blood conservation strategies for radical prostatectomy. Anesthesiology
1999; 91: 24–33.
448 Oishi CS, d’Lima DD, Morris BA, et al. Hemodilution with other blood reinfusion
techniques in total hip arthroplasty. Clin Orthop 1997; 339: 132–139.
449 Schmied H, Schiferer A, Sessler DI, et al. The effects of red-cell scavenging,
hemodilution, and active warming on allogeneic blood requirements in patients
undergoing hip or knee arthroplasty. Anesth Analg 1998; 86: 387–391.
450 Joubert KE. Acute normovoaemic haemodilution - 2 case studies. J S Afr Vet Assoc
2008; 79: 46–49.
451 Hirst C, Admantos S. Autologous blood transfusion following red blood cell sal-
vage for the management of blood loss in 3 dogs with hemoperitoneum. J Vet
Emerg Crit Care 2012; 22: 355–360.
452 Higgs VA, Rudloff E, Kirby R, et al. Autologous blood transfusion in dogs with
thoracic or abdominal hemorrhage: 25 cases (2007–2012). J Vet Emerg Crit Care
2015; 25: 731–738.
453 Carless PA, Henry DA, O’Connell D, et al. Cell salvage for minimizing periop-
erative allogenic blood transfusion. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010; 4:
CD001888.
454 Serrick CJ, Scholz M, Melo A, et al. Quality of red blood cells using autotransfu-
sion devices: a comparative analysis. J Extra Corpor Technol 2003; 35: 28–34.
455 Kirkpatrick UJ, Adams RA, Lardi A, et al. Rheological properties and function of
blood cells in stored bank blood and salvaged blood. Br J Haematol 1998; 101:
364–368.
456 Esper SA, Waters JH. Intra-operative cell salvage: a fresh look at the indications
and contraindications. Blood Transfus 2011; 9: 139–147.
457 Catling S, Williams S, Freites O, et al. Use of a leucocyte filter to remove tumour
cells from intra-operative cell salvage blood. Anaesthesia 2008; 63: 1332–1338.

-- 627 of 1450 --

612 	Section 4: Body Fluids and Fluid Therapy
458 Waters JH, Donnenberg AD. Blood salvage and cancer surgery: should we do it?
Transfusion 2009; 49: 2016–2018.
459 Waters JH, Tuohy MJ, Hobson DF, et al. Bacterial reduction by cell salvage wash-
ing and leukocyte depletion filtration. Anesthesiology 2003; 99: 652–655.
460 Gregoretti S. Suction-induced hemolysis at various vacuum pressures: implica-
tions for intraoperative blood salvage. Transfusion 1996; 36: 57–60.
461 Bull BS, Bull MH. The salvaged blood syndrome: a sequel to mechanochemical
activation of platelets and leukocytes? Blood Cells 1990; 16: 5–20.
462 Reid TJ. Hb-based oxygen carriers: are we there yet? Transfusion 2003; 43: 280–287.
463 Haney CR, Buehler PW, Gulati A. Purification and chemical modifications of
hemoglobin in developing hemoglobin based oxygen carriers. Adv Drug Deliv Rev
2000; 40: 153–169.
464 Muir WW, Wellman LM. Hemoglobin solutions and tissue oxygenation. J Vet
Intern Med 2003; 17: 127–135.
465 Rentko VT, Wohl J, Murtaugh R, et al. A clinical trial of hemoglobin-based
oxygen-carrying (HBOC) fluid in the treatment of anemia in dogs. J Vet Intern
Med 1996; 10: 177.
466 Rentko VT, Pearce LB, Moon-Massat PF, et al. Pharmacokinetics of a hemoglobin
based O2 carrier in dogs [Abstract]. J Vet Intern Med 2003; 17: 407.
467 Driessen B, Jahr JS, Lurie F, et al. Arterial oxygenation and oxygen delivery after
hemoglobin-based oxygen carrier infusion in canine hypovolemic shock: a dose-
response study. Crit Care Med 2003; 31: 1771–1779.
468 Gibson GR, Callan MB, Hoffmann V, et al. Use of hemoglobin based oxygen carry-
ing solutions in cats: 72 cases (1998–2000). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2002; 221: 96–102.
469 Weingart C, Kohn B. Clinical use of a hemoglobin-based oxygen carrying solution
(Oxyglobin) in 48 cats (2002–2006). J Feline Med Surg 2008; 10: 431–438.
470 Wehausen CE, Kirby R, Rudloff E. Evaluation of the effects of bovine hemoglobin
glutamer-200 on systolic arterial blood pressure in hypotensive cats: 44 cases
(1997–2008). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2011; 238: 909–914.
471 Belgrave RL, Hines MT, Keegan RD, et al. Effects of polymerized ultrapurified
bovine hemoglobin blood substitute administrated to ponies with normovolemic
anemia. J Vet Intern Med 2002; 16: 396–403.
472 Jahr JS, Guinn NR, Lowery DR, et al. Blood substitutes and oxygen therapeutics: a
review. Anesth Analg 2021; 132: 119–129.
473 Brainard BM, Meredith CP, Callan MB, et al. Changes in platelet function, hemo-
stasis, and prostaglandin expression after treatment with nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs with various cyclooxygenase selectivities in dogs. Am J Vet
Res 2007; 68: 251–257.
474 Blois SI, Allen DG, Wood D, et al. Effects of aspirin, carprofen, deracoxib, and
meloxicam on platelet function and systemic prostaglandin concentrations in
healthy dogs. Am J Vet Res 2010; 71: 349–358.
475 Mullins KB, Thomason JM, Lunsford KV, et al. Effects of carprofen, meloxicam
and deracoxib on platelet function in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39: 206–217.
476 Hogan DF, Andrews DA, Green HW, et al. Antiplatelet effects and pharmacody-
namics of clopidogrel in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2004; 225: 1406–1411.
477 Brainard BM, Buriko Y, Good J, et al. Consensus on the Rational Use of
Antithrombotics in Veterinary Critical Care (CURATIVE): Domain 5 -
Discontinuation of anticoagulant therapy in small animals. J Vet Emerg Crit Care
2019; 29: 88–97.
478 Callan MB, Giger U. Effect of desmopressin acetate administration on primary
hemostasis in Doberman Pinschers with type-1 von Willebrand disease as
assessed by a point-of- care instrument. Am J Vet Res 2002; 63: 1700–1706.
479 Sakai M, Watari T, Miura T, et al. Effects of DDAVP administration subcutane-
ously in dogs with aspirin induced platelet dysfunction and hemostatic impair-
ment due to chronic liver disease. J Vet Med Sci 2003; 65: 83–86.
480 Henry DA, Carless PA, Moxey AJ, et al. Anti- fibrinolytic use for minimizing peri-
operative allogenic blood transfusion. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011; 16:
CD001886.
481 Berenholtz SM, Pham JC, Garrett-Mayer E, et al. Effect of epsilon aminocaproic
acid on red-cell transfusion requirements in major spinal surgery. Spine 2009; 34:
2096–2103.
482 Marin LM, Iazbik MC, Zaldivar-Lopez S, et al. Retrospective evaluation of epsilon
aminocaproic acid for the prevention of postamputation bleeding in retired racing
Greyhounds with appendicular bone tumors: 46 cases (2003–2008). J Vet Emerg
Crit Care 2012; 22: 332–340.
483 Marin LM, Iazbik MC, Zaldivar-Lopez S, et al. Epsilon aminocaproic acid for the
prevention of delayed postoperative bleeding in retired racing Greyhounds under-
going gonadectomy. Vet Surg 2012; 41: 594–603.
484 Rajagopalan S, Mascha E, Na Jie, et al. The effects of mild perioperative hypother-
mia on blood loss and transfusion requirement. Anesthesiology 2008; 108: 71–77.
485 Schmied H, Kurz A, Sessler DI, et al. Mild intraoperative hypothermia increases
blood loss and allogeneic transfusion requirements during total hip arthroplasty.
Lancet 1996; 347: 289–292.
486 Schmied H, Schiferer A, Sessler DI, et al. The effects of red-cell scavenging,
hemodilution, and active warming on allogeneic blood requirement in patients
undergoing hip or knee arthroplasty. Anesth Analg 1998; 86: 387–391.
487 Felfernig M, Blaicher A, Kettner SC, et al. Effects of temperature on partial throm-
boplastin time in heparinized plasma in vitro. Eur J Anaesthesiology 2001; 18:
467–470.
488 Shimokawa M, Kitaguchi K, Kawaguchi M, et al. The influence of induced hypo-
thermia for hemostatic function on temperature-adjusted measurements in rab-
bits. Anesth Analg 2003; 96: 1209–1213.

-- 628 of 1450 --

SECTION 5
Physiology and Anesthetic
Management

-- 629 of 1450 --



-- 630 of 1450 --

615
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of Lumb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
The cardiovascular system is a closed tubular arrangement that
consists of the heart, blood vessels, and blood. The purpose of the
cardiovascular system is to circulate blood and other essential
materials, especially oxygen, remove waste products, and maintain
homeostatic control of the body’s temperature, pH, and cellular
environment. The purpose of the heart is to pump blood in quanti-
ties sufficient to meet the body’s oxygen demands. The purpose of
the vasculature is to distribute blood to tissues, maintain adequate
parenchymal perfusion, and facilitate the cellular exchange of nutri-
ents for waste products. Blood transports oxygen, carbon dioxide,
nutrients, waste, and hormones; regulates pH, temperature, and
fluid balance; and protects the body from blood loss and foreign
invaders via clotting mechanisms and the immune response,
respectively. Schematically, the cardiovascular system of mammals
is a circuit comprised of two circulations (i.e., systemic and pulmo-
nary) in series (Fig. 33.1).
Oxygen is essential for maintaining normal cellular metabolic
function in all tissues. Relatively brief periods (2–3 min) of
cerebral or cardiac anoxia, for example, can produce devastating
consequences that threaten life even if blood flow is restored.
Oxygenated blood returning from the lungs enters the left atrium
and then the left ventricle and is pumped into the aorta and coro-
nary circulation. The aorta, in conjunction with an elaborate array
of large arteries, distributes blood throughout the systemic circula-
tion to the tissue beds of each body organ (e.g., brain, heart, kidney,
skeletal muscle, etc.). Large arteries transition to smaller arteries
and eventually into arterioles (i.e., resistance vessels) that distribute
and regulate blood flow and oxygen delivery to capillary beds (i.e.,
exchange vessels) based upon their oxygen demand. Capillaries
provide a surface area that is over three orders of magnitude larger
than the aorta and are the primary sites for tissue oxygen, carbon
dioxide, and nutrient exchange. Capillary beds coalesce to form
venules that return deoxygenated blood, carbon dioxide, and meta-
bolic waste products to small and large veins that transition into the
venae cavae. The venae cavae return deoxygenated blood to the
right atrium and subsequently the right ventricle and pulmonary
artery. Pulmonary capillaries exchange carbon dioxide for oxygen
33 Cardiovascular Physiology
William W. Muir
Gillespie College of Veterinary Medicine (LMU-CVM) at Lincoln Memorial University, Harrogate, Tennessee, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 615
Comparative cardiovascular morphology and shunting, 617
The mammalian cardiovascular system, 619
Anatomy, 619
Metabolism, 620
Electrophysiology and electrocardiogram, 620
Excitation–contraction coupling, 626
The actin-activated myosin chemomechanical ATPase cycle, 629
Myocardial contraction and relaxation, 629
The vascular system, 631
Large arteries and veins, 633
Small arteries, 633
Resistance vessels, 633
Capillaries, 634
Transcapillary fluid exchange, 635
Veins, venules, and venous capacitance, 638
Smooth muscle metabolism, 638
Smooth muscle contraction and relaxation, 638
Blood, 640
Lymphatic system, 641
Hemodynamics and cardiac function, 642
Blood flow, 642
Blood pressure, 644
Resistance, 646
Preload and afterload, 647
The cardiac cycle and pressure–volume loop, 647
Assessment of cardiac function, 650
Oxygen delivery and oxygen consumption, 653
Neurohumoral and local control mechanisms, 654
Neurohormonal mechanisms, 656
Local mechanisms, 658
Special circulations, 658
Coronary circulation, 658
Cerebral circulation, 659
Pulmonary circulation, 659
Splanchnic circulation, 660
Renal circulation, 660
References, 660

-- 631 of 1450 --

616 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
and return oxygenated blood to the left atrium thus completing the
circuit. The body’s circulatory system also includes a network of
lymph vessels, nodes, and organs (e.g., thymus and tonsils) in paral-
lel with the vascular system that actively maintain interstitial fluid
homeostasis by regulating filtered plasma (i.e., lymph) accumula-
tion, preventing infection (i.e., immune response), and removing or
destroying bacteria and toxins (Fig. 33.1).
The circulation of fluid (i.e., blood and lymph) throughout the
body depends on a normally functioning heart, blood vessels,
blood volume, and lymphatic system. Since blood flow is respon-
sible for the uptake, delivery, and elimination of all drugs includ-
ing anesthetic drugs, a functional appreciation of cardiovascular
anatomy and circulatory dynamics are required for safe anesthetic
practice. This chapter reviews the anatomy and physiology of the
Lungs
Trachea
Bronchus
Alveolus
Pulmonary
lymphatic
capillaries
(afferent)
Arterioles
15%
Pulmonary circulation
Venules
Thoracic duct
Efferent
lymphatic
vessel
Pulmonary
artery
RA Heart
valves
Systemic veins
70%
LA
RV
Capillaries
5%
Pulmonary
vein
Heart
valves
LV
Aorta
10%
Systemic circulation	
Lymph
node
Afferent
Lymphatic
vessel
Tissues
Venules
Venous
valves
Blood capillary
Interstitial fluid
Lymphatic capillary
Arterioles
Arteries
Fluid, protein, cells
Figure 33.1 The mammalian circulatory systems consist of the heart, two circulations, pulmonary and systemic, and the lymphatic system. Blood
returning to the right atrium (RA) from the systemic veins (70% blood volume) enters the right ventricle (RV) and is pumped into the pulmonary artery
and oxygenated in the capillaries of the lung (15% blood volume). Oxygenated blood returns to the left atrium (LA) enters the left ventricle (LV), is
pumped into the aorta and arterial conduits (10% blood volume), and distributed to capillaries (5% blood volume). Deoxygenated blood (blue);
oxygenated blood (red); lymph (green). The lymphatic system regulates tissue fluid homeostasis by transporting interstitial fluid (i.e., lymph) to the
venous system via the thoracic duct.

-- 632 of 1450 --

Chapter 33: Cardiovascular Physiology 	617
cardiovascular and lymphatic systems of mammals and summa-
rizes the general effects of anesthesia and anesthetic drugs on
their function.
Comparative cardiovascular morphology
and shunting
All vertebrate animals have a heart and circulatory systems (i.e.,
pulmonary, systemic, and lymphatic) although this can vary sub-
stantially among genera. The heart exhibits intrinsic electrical and
mechanical properties that ensure the delivery of blood to closed
(i.e., blood is contained within blood vessels) systemic and pulmo-
nary circulations (Table 33.1). The lymphatic circulatory system is
an open network of tissues, vessels, and organs that moves filtered
interstitial fluid (i.e., lymph) back into the bloodstream. The
American Veterinary Medical Association lists fish, ferrets, rabbits,
hamsters, birds, gerbils, rodents, frogs, turtles, snakes, and lizards
among others as exotic species. Several of these species have unique
circulatory systems and not all have a four-chambered heart
(Fig. 33.2) [1,2]. Current opinions regarding circulatory system
architectures, “open” or “closed” configurations, and different spe-
cies’ unique circulatory characteristics are beyond the scope of this
chapter; however, the opinion that the heart and circulation of
amphibians and reptiles (i.e., three chambers with cardiac and
vascular shunts) are functionally inefficient intermediate steps to
the four-chambered heart of birds and mammals is considered
obsolete [1–3]. It is more likely that cardiac and vascular shunts
represent an adaptive phenotypic trait providing various genera
with the ability to regulate blood flow depending upon cellular res-
piration and environmental requirements.
The fish heart consists of four parts that includes two primary
chambers, an entrance, and an exit, and its cardiovascular system is
considered to consist of a single-cycle (i.e., one “circulation”)
closed-loop circulatory system (Fig. 33.2). Amphibians have a
three-chambered heart (i.e., two atria and one ventricle) and are
considered to have a “double” circulatory system (arterial and
venous). The ventricle is incompletely separated by a partial septum
into two pumps that results in less mixing of oxygenated and deoxy-
genated blood. Blood returning to the heart is pumped into two
circulations: one carries blood to the lungs and skin for oxygena-
tion, and the other delivers oxygenated blood to the rest of the body
(Fig. 33.2).
The systemic circulation of reptiles, like other vertebrates, con-
sists of arterial, venous, and lymphatic vessels. The hearts of many
reptiles including turtles, snakes, and lizards consist of two atria
and a single ventricle that delivers blood to two circulatory routes;
however, blood is only oxygenated in the lungs. The single ventricle
has an incomplete muscular ridge that acts to divide the ventricle
Table 33.1 Intrinsic properties of the heart.
Term 	Description
Chronotropy* 	Heart rate
Bathmotropy 	Excitability
Dromotropy 	Conduction
Inotropy 	Force
Lusitropy 	Relaxation
Clinotropy 	Velocity
* tropy = change.
Fish 	Amphibians 	Turtles, Lizards, Snakes
Crocodilians 	Birds and Mammals
Foramen of Panizza
gills 	body
heart
heart 	heart
heart 	heart
lungs 	body 	lungs
lungs 	lungs	skin 	body 	body
body
Oxygenated blood
Deoxygenated blood
Mixed blood
Figure 33.2 The circulatory systems of vertebrates. Birds and mammals have a closed vascular system and complete ventricular septum. The hearts of
turtles, lizards, and snakes consist of two atrial chambers and two ventricular chambers separated by an incomplete ventricular septum. The heart of
crocodilians is completely divided into four chambers but retains a dual aortic arch system. The foramen of Panizza located near the RV and LV outflow
tracts allows blood to bypass the lungs when submerged. Note that the ventricular septum is absent or incomplete in fish, amphibians, turtles, lizards, and
snakes. Source: Adapted from Hicks [2].

-- 633 of 1450 --

618 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
into two major chambers minimizing the mixing of oxygenated and
deoxygenated blood (Fig. 33.2) [2,4]. The pulmonary artery and
right and left aortic arches originate from specific anatomical sites
(i.e., cavum pulmonale and cavum venosum) [5]. The sinus venosus
is occasionally considered to be an additional chamber classifying
the non-crocodilian heart as an atypical “four-chambered”
organ [5]. The pulmonary artery is equipped with a muscular
sphincter that when contracted diverts blood flow through the
incomplete ventricular septum into the left ventricle and out the
aorta producing a right-to- left (R-L) shunt estimated to equal
60–70% of the venous return. Both pulmonary and systemic arte-
rial vascular resistance and the degree of contraction of the muscu-
lar ridge control the magnitude and direction of cardiac shunting in
reptiles [2]. For example, deoxygenated blood mixes with oxygen-
ated blood during diastole but not during systole when the contrac-
tion process causes the ventricle to function as a dual chamber
pressure pump. Factors that control the direction and magnitude of
R-L shunting during diving and breath-holding include the size of
the shunt orifice, the pressure gradient between the chambers or
vessels that produce the shunt, and the “downstream” resistance to
flow (Table 33.2) [2]. Both diving and breath-holding also increase
peripheral vascular resistance resulting in bradycardia, a normal
response in reptiles, leading to the redirection of blood flow to the
brain and the heart. Reptiles switch from aerobic to anaerobic gly-
colysis during extended breath-holding resulting in restricted pul-
monary blood flow and R-L shunting of blood to ensure that blood
flow continues to the systemic circulation [4]. The resumption of
normal breathing reverses these events, decreasing pulmonary
resistance, increasing heart rate, and reducing R-L shunting. These
physiologic changes can be pharmacologically induced by dissocia-
tive anesthetics (e.g., ketamine and tiletamine), α2
-adrenergic
receptor agonists (e.g., medetomidine and dexmedetomidine), or
propofol and should be anticipated [4].
Snakes possess a vertebral venous plexus comprised of a network
of spinal veins located within and around the vertebral column. The
plexus is supported by the surrounding bones providing a route for
venous return and the maintenance of cerebral blood supply [5]. A
renal portal system is found in birds, amphibians, reptiles, and fish,
suggesting that drugs metabolized or excreted predominantly by the
liver will undergo a greater hepatic first-pass effect (e.g., opioids and
most anesthetics) [6]. Venous blood returning from the tail and
hindlimbs is filtered through the kidneys and through the liver.
Valves located between the abdominal and femoral veins regulate
blood flow through the kidneys especially during times of water
conservation. Parenteral drug administration of potentially nephro-
toxic drugs into the tail or caudal extremities is generally not recom-
mended because of the potential for nephrotoxicity [7]. The
administration of non-nephrotoxic drugs into the caudal extremities
does not pose a risk [6]. Reptiles have a lymphatic system but lack
lymph nodes. The lymph vessels have muscular dilations referred to
as “lymph hearts” that propel lymph into the venous system [5].
The circulatory anatomy of crocodilians is unique among reptiles
and more like birds and mammals (i.e., four separate heart chambers
and a complete ventricular septum), thus preventing intracardiac
R-L shunting. However, crocodilians retain the dual aortic arch sys-
tem found in many reptiles [2]. The left aortic arch originates from
the right ventricle next to the pulmonary artery, and the right aortic
arch originates from the left ventricle. Importantly, the left and right
aortic arches of crocodilians communicate via the foramen of
Panizza located close to the heart (Fig. 33.2). This anatomic arrange-
ment permits systemic venous blood to bypass the pulmonary circu-
lation. The consequences of R-L and left-to-right (L-R) shunts can
have important consequences for anesthesia (Box 33.1). An R-L
shunt bypasses the lungs diverting deoxygenated blood back into the
systemic circulation, whereas an L-R shunt recirculates pulmonary
venous (oxygenated) blood back into the pulmonary circulation.
Physiologic L-R shunting in reptiles is not thought to contribute to
pulmonary circulation overload due to the ability of blood to be
shunted either L-R or R-L, although it can contribute to pulmonary
overcirculation in mammals. Autonomic tone, neurohumoral sub-
stances, and the activity of pulmonary stretch and chemoreceptors
control pulmonary and systemic vascular resistances in reptiles and
the direction and magnitude of cardiac shunting. Ventilatory status,
particularly in diving animals, thermoregulation, feeding, and diges-
tion may also influence cardiac shunting. For example, most reptiles
breathe intermittently with long periods of apnea. Parasympathetic
tone increases during apnea resulting in bradycardia and increased
pulmonary vascular resistance promoting the development of R-L
shunting [2].
The heart of birds and mammals is comprised of four chambers:
two thin-walled atria separated by an interatrial septum, and two
thick-walled ventricles separated by a complete interventricular sep-
tum. The unique respiratory system of birds includes the presence of
air sacs that facilitate gas exchange throughout the inspiratory and
expiratory respiratory cycle. Intrapulmonary or intracardiac (con-
genital malformation) shunts can affect the onset and elimination of
anesthetic drug effects in birds and mammals, particularly when
inhalant anesthetics are administered (Box 33.1). The speed of
inhalant anesthetic induction is determined by how fast the anes-
thetic partial pressure is reached in the brain, which is determined
by the rate of anesthetic inflow into the lungs, the rate of anesthetic
transfer to the blood, and the rate of anesthetic transfer from the
arterial blood to the brain. Inhalant anesthetics with a low blood-gas
partition coefficient (low solubility) are generally expected to pro-
duce a more rapid induction and recovery in normal mammals. For
example, anesthetic induction and washout in healthy pigs is more
rapid with the less soluble desflurane than with sevoflurane, which is
more rapid than with isoflurane [8].
Box 33.1 Effect of intracardiac shunts on anesthetic induction.
L- R shunt
IV anesthetic: little effect on induction
Inhalant anesthetic: little effect on induction
R-L shunt
IV anesthetic: rapid induction; blood bypasses lungs and goes to brain
Inhalant anesthetic: slower induction with less soluble inhalants
Table 33.2 Physiologic effects of cardiac shunting in mammals.
Physiologic effect 	Direction of shunt
Decreased arterial oxygen content 	R-L
Decreased carbon dioxide removal 	R- L
Decreased lung plasma filtration 	R- L
Erythrocytosis 	R- L
Increased heart rate 	R- L
Increased arterial oxygen content 	L- R
Increased carbon dioxide removal 	L-R
Reduced ventilation–perfusion mismatch 	L- R
Pulmonary overperfusion 	L-R
Renin–angiotensin system activation 	L- R
R-L, right-to-left shunt; L-R, left-to- right shunt.

-- 634 of 1450 --

Chapter 33: Cardiovascular Physiology 	619
An L-R cardiac shunt has minimal or no effect on the onset or
elimination of injectable or inhalant anesthetics in mammals
(Box 33.1). The rate of inhalant anesthetic induction is unchanged
even though recirculation of blood through the lungs promotes a
more rapid rate of rise in alveolar partial pressure. The speed of
induction increases following the administration of an intrave-
nous anesthetic to animals that have an R-L shunt due to its
immediate transfer to the brain. An R-L shunt slows the rate of
inhalant anesthetic induction and elimination, and this effect is
more pronounced with less soluble anesthetics (e.g., isoflurane,
sevoflurane, and desflurane) compared to a more soluble anes-
thetic (e.g., halothane). This effect is dependent upon the size of
the shunt and the dilutional effect of shunted blood, which con-
tains no volatile anesthetic. One study demonstrated that the rate
of rise of the end-tidal concentration of the comparatively soluble
anesthetic halothane was not significantly affected by an R-L
intracardiac shunt in children [9].
The mammalian cardiovascular system
Anatomy
The boundaries of the cardiac chambers in mammals are easily
defined by the great veins (i.e., cranial and caudal venae cavae) that
return blood to the right atrium, the smaller pulmonary veins that
return oxygenated blood from the lung to the left atrium, the coro-
nary sulcus (i.e., groove) that demarcates the atria from the ventri-
cles, and the anterior (i.e., ventral) and posterior (i.e., dorsal)
interventricular sulci that contain branches of the left circumflex
coronary artery that separate the right and left ventricles (Fig. 33.3).
All four chambers of the heart are easily visualized (Fig. 33.3A). The
ventral interventricular branch of the left main coronary artery,
occasionally referred to as the “left anterior descending coronary
artery” in humans, provides blood supply to the ventricular septum
and left ventricular free wall. The dorsal interventricular artery,
generally an extension of the left circumflex coronary artery (the
other major branch of the left main coronary artery), provides
blood supply to most of the left ventricle. The right coronary artery
provides blood supply to the right ventricular free wall and occa-
sionally a large portion of the left ventricle (Fig. 33.3B). Anatomical
differences in the anatomy of the coronary circulation among spe-
cies account for dissimilarities in the source and distribution of
myocardial blood flow. The left interventricular (i.e., anterior
descending) coronary artery and its diagonal branches supply a
larger mass of myocardium than the circumflex in humans, swine,
rats, and nonhuman primates. The circumflex artery supplies the
largest mass of cardiac muscle in dogs, cats, horses, and cattle
although there is considerable species variation. Dogs have an
extensive collateral coronary circulation (i.e., a network of tiny
blood vessels that are not open under normal conditions but open
during reduced blood flow), while pigs, monkeys, and humans do
not. Cardiac veins empty into the great cardiac vein, which empties
into the right atrium via the coronary sinus and accounts for over
90% of the venous return from the heart. Small capillary-like vessels
(Thebesian veins) are present throughout the endocardium and
drain directly into the cardiac chambers accounting for approxi-
mately 4% of the heart’s venous return.
Blood returning from the systemic circulation (i.e., venous
return) and pulmonary veins empties into the right and left atrium,
respectively. The ventricles are the major pumping chambers of the
heart and are separated from the atria by a fibrous skeleton of
dense connective tissue (i.e., fibrous trigone) that anchors the atri-
oventricular (AV) (i.e., tricuspid and mitral) and semilunar (i.e.,
pulmonic and aortic) heart valves. The tricuspid valve is located
between the right atrium and right ventricle and the mitral valve
between the left atrium and left ventricle. The pulmonic valve is
located between the right ventricle and pulmonary artery and the
aortic valve between the left ventricle and aorta. Once the process of
cardiac contraction is initiated, almost simultaneous contraction of
Coronary
arteries
Membranous
septum PA
LA
TV
IVS
MV
LV
Right
atrioventricular
valve
Chordae
tendineae
Ao
PA
Right
auricular
appendage
AV
LA
MV
RV
RA
IVS
RV
Papillary muscles
(A) 	(B)
DORSAL
Dorsal interventricular branch 	Left ventricle
Right ventricle
Right coronary artery 	Aortic valve 	Septal branch
Left
atrioventricular
valve
Left coronary
artery
Ventral
interventricular
branch
Pulmonary valve
LV
Right fibrous trigone
Circumflex
branch
Left fibrous
trigone
Figure 33.3 A. The mammalian heart is comprised of two thin-walled (i.e., right, and left atria) and two thick-walled chambers (i.e., right and left
ventricles) and contains a highly reactive and diffuse vascular network (i.e., coronary circulation). The thin-walled right atrium (RA) and left atrium (LA)
are separated from each other by a membranous septum. The interventricular muscular septum (IVS) lies between the right and left ventricles. The
tricuspid valve (TV) and mitral valve (MV) lie between the RA and RV and the LA and LV, respectively. The pulmonary and aortic (AV) valves separate
the RV and LV from the pulmonary artery (PA) and aorta (Ao), respectively. B. A fibrous trigone located at the center of the heart provides the scaffolding
for the heart valves, atria, and ventricles. The right and left coronary arteries emerge from the base of the aorta and supply blood to all the chambers of the
heart including the heart valves.

-- 635 of 1450 --

620 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
the atria is followed by nearly synchronous and simultaneous con-
traction of the ventricles. Cardiac contraction produces pressure
changes that are responsible for AV and semilunar valve opening
and closing and the production of audible heart sounds. Fibrous
bands (i.e., chordae tendineae) originating from papillary muscles
located on the inner wall of the ventricular chambers are attached
to the free edges of the AV valve leaflets and limit valve prolapse
into the atria during ventricular contraction thereby preventing the
regurgitation of blood into the atrium (Fig. 33.3A). Alterations in
heart chamber geometry (e.g., stretch, dilation, or hypertrophy)
produced by changes in blood volume, ventricular deformation
(pericardial tamponade), incompetent heart valves, or disease (e.g.,
tumors and scarring) can have profound effects on ventricular pres-
sures, blood flow, and myocardial function.
Metabolism
The maintenance of normal cardiac electrical and mechanical
activity is dependent upon the energy (i.e., adenosine triphosphate
[ATP]) derived from multiple metabolic pathways. Mitochondria
generate more than 95% of the ATP used by the heart, in addition
to regulating intracellular calcium concentrations, cell signaling,
and coordinated cell death. A detailed description of these path-
ways is beyond the scope of this chapter and is more appropriately
described in reviews and texts specifically dedicated to this sub-
ject [10,11]. The heart produces ATP when mitochondrial oxidative
phosphorylation is fueled by electrons generated by dehydrogena-
tion of carbon fuels (i.e., fats and carbohydrates) and the oxidation
(i.e., electron transfer) of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NADH) and flavin adenine dinucleotide (FADH 2
). NADH and
FADH 2 are primarily produced by fatty acid oxidation, the citric
acid cycle, and to a minor extent, by the pyruvate dehydrogenase
reaction and glycolysis (Fig. 33.4). Oxidative phosphorylation is
responsible for approximately 60–90% of the ATP formation in the
heart during normal non- ischemic conditions with the remainder
derived from the citric acid cycle. The citric acid cycle is dependent
upon acetyl-CoA formed by the decarboxylation of pyruvate and
the oxidation of fatty acids (Fig. 33.4) [10]. Approximately 60–70%
of ATP hydrolysis is consumed by cardiac contraction, while
the remaining 30–40% is used to maintain the ion pumps and
sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca 2+ ATPase. The rate of oxidative phos-
phorylation is directly linked to the rate of ATP hydrolysis so that
ATP concentrations remain constant during intense exercise or
changes in neurohumoral activity (e.g., variations in catecholamine
concentrations) [11].
Electrophysiology and electrocardiogram
A highly integrated series of electrical, metabolic, and mechanical
events are required to produce normal cardiac contractile function
(i.e., excitation–contraction coupling). Notably, myocardial con-
traction is preceded by, and will not occur without, electrical
activation although normal or near-normal electrical activity is
possible without myocardial contraction (e.g., electrical–mechanical
uncoupling, electrical–mechanical dissociation, and pulseless
electrical activity [PEA]). PEA is the presence of organized cardiac
electrical activity, other than ventricular fibrillation or ventricular
tachycardia, that should produce a pulse, but does not. The cardiac
cell membrane (sarcolemma) is a highly specialized lipid bilayer
that contains protein-associated channels, pumps, enzymes, and
exchangers in an architecturally organized, yet fluid (i.e., reorgan-
izable and movable) medium [12]. The molecular composition and
fluidity (i.e., freely movable membrane protein and lipid con-
stituents) of cardiac membranes determine their ion transport/
exchange and membrane-associated electrical properties, as well as
the ability to generate and propagate electrical impulses [12,13].
The unequal distribution (i.e., concentrations) of various ions (i.e.,
sodium, potassium, chloride, and calcium) across the sarcolemma
and its permeability to these ions are responsible for the develop-
ment of the resting membrane potential. Resting membrane poten-
tial can be estimated by the Nernst equation or more accurately
determined by the Goldman–Hodgkin–Katz constant-field equa-
tion [12] as shown below.
Nernst equation for potassium ions:
E RT
zF ln K
K
o
i
E RT
zF
K
o
i
K
K
2 303 	10	. 	log
EK
i
o
mEq L
mEq L mV	61 150
4 96	10	log /
/
where E is electromotive force; 2.303 is the conversion of ln to log 10
;
Ci and Co are ion concentrations inside (i) and outside (o) the cell
membrane; R is the gas constant; T is absolute temperature in
Kelvin; z is valence of the ion (in this case, 1); F is the Faraday con-
stant; and mV is millivolts at 37 °C.
Goldman–Hodgkin–Katz equation:
E RT
F
P 	P 	P
P 	P
m
Na 	i 	K 	i 	Cl 	o
Na 	o 	K
Na 	K 	Cl
Na 	K
ln
o 	Cl 	i
Cl	P
where Em is the resting membrane potential and PNa (0.04), PK (1.0),
and PCl (0.45) are the relative permeabilities of the membrane at
rest, and other terms are defined above.
Glucose
metabolism
Citric acid
cycle
Fatty acid
β-oxidation
NADH
ATP
- Contraction
- SR Ca 2+ pump
- Ion homeostasis
- ADP + Pi
Figure 33.4 ATP is primarily produced (60–90%) by mitochondrial
oxidative phosphorylation of free fatty acids but can also be generated by
glycolysis (10–40%). Dehydrogenation reactions produced by the fatty acid
β- oxidation pathway, citric acid cycle, and glycolysis generate reducing
equivalents (i.e., NADH) that deliver electrons to the electron transport
chain resulting in ATP formation. Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and its
metabolite (adenosine diphosphate) provide energy for myocardial
contraction, membrane pump activity, and ion homeostasis, NADH,
reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide.

-- 636 of 1450 --

Chapter 33: Cardiovascular Physiology 	621
Transmembrane changes in the electric potential (i.e., action
potential) generated by cardiac cells are the result of transmembrane
ion fluxes (active properties) that generate currents through voltage-
and ligand-gated membrane channels (Fig. 33.5; Table 33.3) [12,14,15].
The term “gated” refers to the opening (activation) or closing (deacti-
vation or inactivation) of ion channels. Ion channels are character-
ized by their ionic selectivity, conductance, gating characteristics, and
density. The channel gating mechanisms control ion passage and
are composed of both activation and inactivation gates, which are
voltage- and frequently time-dependent (e.g., sodium channels).
The functional configuration of the gates determines channel state:
activated or open, inactivated or closed, and resting (i.e., capable of
being activated) [13]. The directional movement (inward or out-
ward) of the various ions ultimately depends on channel state and the
electrochemical driving force (i.e., equilibrium potential minus
membrane potential) for each ion. The electrochemical driving force,
as illustrated by the Nernst equation, is composed of an electric
force and the transmembrane ion concentration gradient. It should
be noted that most local anesthetics (e.g., lidocaine, bupivacaine,
etc.) demonstrate use- (i.e., frequency-) dependent block [16,17].
Use-dependent block is the phenomenon exhibited by cardiac cells
when, in the presence of a drug, increases in stimulation rate (i.e.,
chronotropy) produce a more pronounced drug effect because more
drug molecules are able to enter the channel and cause more inactiva-
tion than during slower rates of stimulation [16].
Excitability (i.e., bathmotropy), or the ability of the cardiac cell
membrane to be activated, generate, and propagate an electric
potential (action potential), is a fundamental intrinsic property of
cardiac cells [12,13]. The cardiac action potential (AP) morphology
and duration vary considerably from that of nerves and skeletal
muscle (Fig. 33.6A) [15]. The cardiac muscle AP arises from a more
negative membrane potential (–90 versus –70 mV), may be of simi-
lar magnitude, but is much longer in duration (150–300 versus
1 ms) than APs recorded from nerve or skeletal muscle (Fig. 33.6A).
Cardiac AP magnitude and duration also vary depending on the
type of cardiac cell that generates them (Fig. 33.6B). Five character-
istic phases of the cardiac AP are discernible in most cardiac cells:
phase 0, or the phase of rapid depolarization, is caused by the rapid
and relatively large influx of sodium ions (i.e., fast inward current)
into the cell; phase 1, the early repolarization phase, is caused by the
transient outward movement of potassium ions; phase 2, the pla-
teau phase, is attributed to the continued, but decreased, entry of
sodium ions and a large, but slower, influx of calcium ions (i.e., slow
inward current) into the cell; phase 3 is the phase of membrane
repolarization during which the membrane potential returns to its
resting value primarily due to potassium efflux (i.e., outward cur-
rent) from the cell; and phase 4 is a resting phase in atrial and ven-
tricular muscle cells during which membrane pumps (i.e., Na +
–K+
ATPase, Ca 2+ pumps), and exchange mechanisms maintain the
negative membrane potential and keep intracellular ion concentra-
tions more or less constant prior to initiation of the next AP. For
example, the Na +
–Ca2+ exchanger (NCX) or antiporter membrane
protein removes calcium from cells helping to restore normal trans-
membrane electrolyte concentrations (Fig. 33.5; Table 33.3) but is
reversible, moving Ca 2+ out or into the cell depending on the pre-
vailing electrochemical driving forces for Ca2+ and Na+
. Notably, a
great deal of interest has been focused upon repolarization currents
(IK
) due to their importance in determining membrane resting
potential, AP duration, and their involvement in repolarization
abnormalities (i.e., inhomogeneities or dispersion of the QT inter-
val) including long QT syndrome [18,19]. Long QT syndrome is
Ito↑
Early
repolarization
(1)
Plateau (2)
IKur↑
ICaL↓
IKs↑
0
INa↓
IKr↑
mV
	Upstroke
(0) 	IKACh↑
Final
repolarization (3)
If↓
IKACh↑
IK1↑
IK1↑
APD
Pacemaker
function
–80 Resting
(4) 	0.2 seconds 	NCX↓
IK1
INa
Ito
IKur
ICaL
IKr
IKs
NCX
If
IKACh
Figure 33.5 The normal action potential has five phases: Resting (4),
Upstroke or depolarization (0), Early repolarization (1), Plateau (2), and
Late or final repolarization (3). Gradual depolarization occurs at the end of
phase 3 during phase 4 (blue dotted line) in automatic tissues (e.g., sinus
node; Purkinje fibers). The inward currents, INa , ICa
, If
, and the sodium-
calcium exchanger (NCX) are shown in bold black lined boxes. NCX is
electrogenic and can generate an inward or outward current depending
upon the membrane potential. Outward currents, IKACh
, IK1
, Ito
, IKur
, IKr
, and
IKs are shown in light gray lined boxes. The action potential duration
(APD) in ventricular muscle cells is usually > 100 milliseconds.
Source: Grant [15], Nature Publishing Group.
Table 33.3 Cardiac action potential (AP) currents.
Current 	Abbreviation 	Effect 	AP phase
Sodium 	INa 	Rapid depolarization 	Phase 0
Transient outward 	Ito 	Transient repolarization 	Phase 1
Delayed rectifier 	IKur 	Rapid repolarization 	Phase 1
L-type calcium 	ICaL 	Plateau depolarizations 	Phase 2
Delayed rectifier 	IKs 	Slow repolarization 	Phase 3
Delayed rectifier 	IKr 	Rapid repolarization 	Phase 3
Inward rectifier 	IK1 	Resting membrane potential 	Phases 3, 4
Muscarinic
potassium
IKAch 	Inwardly rectifying SA node
pacemaker
Phase 4
Pacemaker 	If 	Hyperpolarization-activated
inward pacemaker current
Phase 4
Other Currents
T-type calcium 	ICaT 	Transient depolarization 	Phase 2
ADP activated
potassium
IKATP 	Inward rectification 	Phases 1, 2
Na+–Ca2+
exchanger
NCX 	Electrogenic exchange;
reversible
All phases

-- 637 of 1450 --

622 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
an uncommon hereditary or drug-induced condition (e.g., select
antiarrhythmics, antidepressants, antipsychotics, antimicrobials,
and opioids), in which AP duration becomes longer and may
become highly variable among ventricular myocytes leading to
electrical instability and the risk of reentrant induced torsades de
pointes and ventricular fibrillation [20–22].
The speed of conduction of the cardiac electrical impulse (i.e.,
dromotropy) is determined by the magnitude and rate of sodium
influx into the cardiac muscle cells and is directly related to the rate
of voltage change (dV/dt) during phase 0 (Fig. 33.5; Table 33.4) [23].
A large dV/dt indicates more rapid depolarization of the cell mem-
brane and more rapid conduction of the cardiac impulse through
cardiac tissue [12]. The change (d) in transmembrane potential (V)
is determined by the transmembrane ionic current (Iion
) and the
membrane capacitance (Cm
; 1 μF/cm2
) provided by the charge
separation across the lipid bilayer:
d /d 	/ m 	ion	V 	t 	C 	I	1
Ion movement occurs due to the activity of voltage-gated ion
channels, pumps, and exchangers [13]. A negative Iion indicates the
inward flow of positive ions into the cell and produces a positive
dV/dt, which depolarizes (i.e., makes the inside of the cells more
positive) the membrane potential. A positive Iion indicates an out-
ward flow of positive ions, which repolarizes the membrane poten-
tial by generating a negative dV/dt. The generation of the cardiac
AP results from the time-, voltage-, and concentration-dependent
evolution of Iion and represents the contribution of multiple
ion-selective mechanisms for ion movement across the cardiac cell
membrane (Fig. 33.5) [23]. Current flows from a depolarized cell to
its neighboring less depolarized cells via intercellular resistive path-
ways known as “gap junctions.” Gap junctions are hydrophilic inter-
cellular protein channels (i.e., connexons) composed of six connexin
proteins that allow ions and electrical impulses to pass between cells
through regulated hydrophilic channels [23]. Voltage-gated ionic
channels and gap junctions are depressed (i.e., resistance is
increased) by anesthetic drugs through direct interaction with their
protein subunits, thereby interfering with cardiac excitability, trans-
mission, and propagation of electrical impulses [24–26].
Calcium enters cardiac cells through L-type calcium channels
during phase 2 of the AP triggering intracellular calcium release
from the sarcoplasmic reticulum, which is important for normal
cellular contraction. Since calcium enters the cell more slowly than
sodium (i.e., slow inward calcium current) and from a less negative
membrane potential, cardiac cells with a reduced resting membrane
potential (e.g., the sinoatrial [SA] and atrioventricular [AV] nodes)
demonstrate a considerably smaller phase 0 dV/dt and slower
conduction velocity compared to those with a more negative resting
membrane potential (e.g., atrial and ventricular muscle and
Purkinje cells) [11–13]. Potassium efflux from cardiac cells is con-
trolled by a variety of mechanisms, including the concentration
difference of potassium across the membrane and changes in mem-
brane permeability to potassium as the membrane potential changes
(Table 33.3). The channels responsible for repolarization (phase 3)
are major determinants of cardiac AP duration and cardiac cell
refractoriness (Fig. 33.7). The duration of the cardiac AP and
refractoriness have important clinical implications relative to the
amount of calcium that enters the cell during depolarization (i.e.,
longer AP duration permits more calcium entry) and the potential
for arrhythmia development, respectively [12,27]. Arrhythmias
develop if there are large differences (i.e., inhomogeneities) in myo-
cyte AP duration (e.g., > 20–40 ms) among groups of adjacent car-
diac cells because of the potential for electrical impulses to re-enter
cells that have rapidly repolarized and regained excitability and
conduction capabilities (i.e., reentry). Cardiac cells with particu-
larly long AP durations are thought to predispose to dispersion of
refractoriness and afterdepolarizations (i.e., afterpotentials) that
leads to electrical instability and cardiac arrhythmias [27–29].
Phase 4, diastolic depolarization, endows the heart with the
unique property of automaticity (i.e., self-excitation). SA automaticity
(A)
Nerve
cell
Atrial
pacemaker
200 ms
Time
Bundle of His
AV node
(B)
SA node
0
Ventricular
myocyte
+30
0
–30
–90
–60
–100
+50 Atrium
Membrane potential (mV)
Purkinje network
Membrane potential (mV)
Ventricle
–50
0
–100
+50
–50
Time 	300 ms
Figure 33.6 A. Nerve cell action potentials (light blue) are much shorter in duration (e.g., sodium based 1–2 ms) than cardiac muscle cell action potentials
(black). Automatic cells determine heart rate (e.g., atrial pacemaker: orange). B. Action potential magnitudes and durations from various cardiac tissues.
Table 33.4 Intrinsic rate, action potential duration, and conduction velocity in cardiac
tissues of larger mammalsa.
Cardiac tissue 	Intrinsic rate 	APD (ms) 	Conduction velocity
(m/second)
Sinoatrial node 	50–80 	80–120 	0.01–0.05
Atrial muscleb 	– 	120–200 	1.0
Atrioventricular node 	20–40 	80–120 	0.01–0.05
Bundle of His 	20–40 	120–200 	1.5
Purkinje fibers 	5–20 	300–450 	2–4
Ventricular muscleb 	– 	150–250 	1.0
APD, action potential duration.
a APD decreases and conduction velocity increases as intrinsic rate increases.
b Atrial and ventricular muscle is not normally automatic.

-- 638 of 1450 --

Chapter 33: Cardiovascular Physiology 	623
is produced by depolarizing membrane currents and is influenced
by local factors, including temperature, pH, and blood gases (PO2
and PCO2
), extracellular potassium concentration, catecholamines,
and various hormones (Fig. 33.8). Cells in the SA and AV nodes and
specialized atrial and ventricular muscle cells (i.e., Purkinje) cells are
automatic (Table 33.4) [30]. The resting membrane potential of
these cells depolarizes toward a threshold potential, which when
reached triggers the development of an AP. The ionic processes
responsible for phase 4 diastolic depolarization vary among the vari-
ous specialized tissues of the heart primarily because of differences
in their resting membrane potential and cell type (e.g., SA node, AV
node, and Purkinje cell), but all are dependent upon the funny cur-
rent (If ), a mixed sodium–potassium current that activates upon
hyperpolarization [31]. The funny current, first described in SA
node myocytes as an inward current activated during hyperpolariza-
tion, determines the end of an AP, the steepness of phase 4 depolari-
zation, and the frequency of AP firing [31]. Cells in the SA and AV
nodes have comparatively less negative maximum diastolic
potentials (–65 mV) compared to cardiac muscle and Purkinje cells
(≥ –90 mV) and depend upon If
, the entry of calcium ions (i.e.,
inward calcium current), and a progressive decrease in membrane
permeability to potassium efflux for their automaticity [12,13,31,32].
Automatic cells in atrial specialized pathways and the ventricular
Purkinje network have a more negative maximum diastolic potential
(≥ –90 mV) and depend more upon If [32]. The principal mecha-
nisms responsible for altering automaticity are changes in the
threshold potential, the rate of phase 4 depolarization, and the maxi-
mum diastolic potential following repolarization. The cardiac tissue
with the most rapid rate of phase 4 depolarization (normally the SA
node) is termed the “pacemaker” and determines the heart rate
(HR). The cardiac pacemaker normally activates (i.e., overdrives)
and, therefore, resets the automaticity of slower or subsidiary pace-
makers, thereby preventing other potential pacemakers from con-
trolling HR (i.e., overdrive suppression; Fig. 33.9A) [32]. Overdrive
suppression of subsidiary pacemakers is caused by activation of
the sodium–potassium (Na+
–K+
) pump, leading to membrane
hyperpolarization and a longer time required to reach threshold
(Fig. 33.9B) [13]. Subsidiary pacemakers are depressed by fast HRs
because the Na+
–K+ pump is more active at faster rates, resulting in
a more negative maximum diastolic potential. Clinically, the admin-
istration of anticholinergic drugs (e.g., atropine and glycopyrrolate)
can produce increases in sinus rate that eliminate (i.e., overdrive
suppress) infrequent or slower automatic ventricular arrhythmias.
Alternatively, ivabradine, a drug that selectively and specifically
inhibits the cardiac pacemaker current If
, slows HR [33].
The average of the voltage vectors produced by all the APs pro-
duced by activation of each cardiac cell is responsible for the body
surface electrocardiogram (ECG; a graphical representation of the
electrical 	depolarization 	and 	repolarization 	of 	the 	heart)
(Fig. 33.10). Initiation of an electric impulse in the SA node is fol-
lowed by rapid transmission of a wave of depolarization through-
out the atria, giving rise to the P wave. Repolarization of the atria
gives rise to the Ta wave, which is small and difficult to identify in
smaller animals (e.g., rats, rabbits, dogs, cats, etc.) but becomes
obvious in larger animals (e.g., horses and cattle) because the total
atrial tissue mass is substantial enough to generate an electromo-
tive force that can be detected electrocardiographically from the
body surface. Similarly, depolarization of the SA and AV nodes
does not normally generate a large enough electromotive force to
be recorded at the body surface. Once the wave of depolarization
1
2
0
0
Membrane potential (mV)
–50
4 	4
3
–90
–100 ARP
ERP
RRP
Supranormal
period
T	ECG
QRS
P
Figure 33.7 Absolute (ARP), effective (ERP), and relative (RRP) refractory
periods. During the ARP the cell is incapable of generating an electrical
response (i.e., action potential). ERP: An electrical response can be
generated during the ERP but is not conducted. RRP: A greater than
normal stimulus can generate a conducted response. The functional
refractory period (FRP; not shown) is the shortest interval between two
consecutively conducted responses. Supranormal period: the period
following the RRP during which a smaller than normal stimulus can
generate a conducted action potential.
0
Action
potential
–40
–60
Diastolic
depolarization
ICA L
ICA T
Decay
Phase
4
Maximum
diastolic
potential
Threshold
potential
mV
Decreased
automaticity
Time
Automaticity increased by:
↑ Temp
Mild O2 deficiency
↓ K 0
↑ Ca2+
Catecholamines
Anticholinergics
IK
IK
Figure 33.8 The transmembrane potential of the sinoatrial node
(i.e., normal pacemaker) is characterized by a maximum diastolic
potential ≅ 60 mV that depolarizes toward threshold (i.e., phase 4 diastolic
depolarization), a slow phase 0 caused by ICa
, and a relatively rapid
repolarization due to IK
. The rate of phase 4 diastolic depolarization
(i.e., automaticity) can be increased by increases in temperature, calcium,
mild oxygen deficiency, catecholamines, decreases in extracellular
potassium concentration, and anticholinergic drugs (e.g., atropine).
Increases in extracellular potassium concentration and If inhibitors
(e.g., ivabradine) decrease diastolic depolarization.

-- 639 of 1450 --

624 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
reaches the AV node, conduction is slowed because of its less
negative resting membrane potential (i.e., –40 to –60 mV) and
reduced slope (dV/dt) of phase 0 (Fig. 33.6B). This is especially
evident when the AV node is stimulated at higher rates due to a
phenomenon called “decremental conduction,” which is character-
ized by poor propagation of the electrical impulse due to progres-
sive decreases in membrane potential and AP dV/dt. Increased
parasympathetic tone also produces marked slowing of AV nodal
conduction, leading to first-degree, second-degree, and, occasion-
ally, third-degree AV block. Many drugs used for anesthesia,
including opioids, α2 -adrenergic receptor agonists, and occasion-
ally acepromazine, can increase parasympathetic tone, causing
sinus slowing and bradyarrhythmias. The use of anticholinergic
drugs (e.g., atropine and glycopyrrolate) is generally effective
therapy in these situations but not when AV block is caused by
inflammation or structural disease (e.g., fibrosis and calcification).
Caution is indicated when atropine or glycopyrrolate are co-
administered with α2 -adrenergic receptor agonists due to their
potential to produce or exacerbate ventricular arrhythmias. α2 -
Adrenergic receptor agonist–anticholinergic drug combinations
that produce cardiac arrhythmias are likely due to increases in the
rate–pressure product and myocardial oxygen consumption, or
myocardial ischemia in conjunction with functional impairment
of autonomic tone (i.e., dysautonomia) [34,35].
(A)
0
Overdrive stimulation
Membrane
potential (mV)
–90
(B)
Cell driven by a
primary pacemaker
Time
Secondary pacemaker
If Depolarizing
current
2 K +
+ 	Na+ K+
ATPase
Hyperpolarizing
current
3 Na +
Higher
frequency of
depolarizing
currents
Na +
+
Figure 33.9 A. Overdrive suppression occurs
when a higher frequency of activation
suppresses automaticity. Usually interpreted to
mean that increase SA node firing suppresses
other pacemaker sites. B. Overdrive
suppression is mediated by enhanced Na +
–K+
ATPase pump activity. Increased frequency of
depolarizations increases intracellular Na+
stimulating the electrogenic (i.e., moves more
Na + outward than K+ inward) Na+
–K+ ATPase
pump thereby generating an outward
(hyperpolarizing) current across the cell
membrane and a more negative membrane
potential, counteracting the depolarizing If
current, thus slowing the rate of phase 4
diastolic depolarization and suppressing
spontaneous impulse initiation.
SA node
Action
potential
Conduction
velocity
(m/s)
0.05
0.05
1
3
4
1
AV node
PR
int
QT
int
T
U
0.6	0.4
Time(s)
0.2
QRS
ST
seg
P
Atrial m.
Bundle brs.
Purkinje
fibers
ECG
Ventricular
m.
Figure 33.10 The electrocardiogram (ECG) is the
average of the voltage vectors produced by the
electrical activation (i.e., action potentials) of the
heart during a cardiac cycle. SA, sinoatrial node;
AV, atrioventricular node; brs, branches; int, interval;
LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; m, muscle;
RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle; seg, segment.

-- 640 of 1450 --

Chapter 33: Cardiovascular Physiology 	625
The conduction of the electrical impulse through the AV node
provides time for the atria to contract (i.e., atrial priming or kick)
prior to activation and contraction of the ventricles. The delay in
ventricular depolarization is responsible for the PR or PQ interval
of the ECG (Fig. 33.10). This delay is functionally important, par-
ticularly at faster HRs, because it enables atrial contraction to con-
tribute to ventricular filling. It is worth remembering that cells of
the AV node depend upon both sodium and calcium ions for the
generation and conduction of their AP. Thus, cells of the AV node
are extremely sensitive to drugs that block transmembrane calcium
flux, including excessive doses of anesthetic drugs and calcium
channel antagonists (e.g., verapamil and diltiazem). Excessive doses
of injectable or inhalant anesthetic drugs can produce post-
repolarization refractoriness, a phenomenon wherein cardiac cells
remain refractory to electric activation after complete repolariza-
tion. This phenomenon is likely to produce AV block as HR
increases. In addition, increases in parasympathetic tone in the
presence of drugs or diseases (e.g., inflammation and ischemia) that
interfere with conduction of the electric impulse through the AV
node can lead to ECG sinus bradycardia and first-degree (pro-
longed PR interval), second-degree (blocked P wave), or third-
degree (dissociation of P from the QRS complex) AV block.
Once the electrical impulse has traversed the AV node, it is rap-
idly transmitted via specialized pathways to ventricular muscle
cells. Bundles of Purkinje cells (the right and left bundle branches)
transmit the electrical impulse to the ventricular septum and the
right and left ventricular wall papillary muscles, respectively, via the
moderator band in the right ventricle and the left anterior and pos-
terior divisions of the left bundle branch, in the left ventricle
(Fig. 33.11A). Purkinje fibers conduct the electric impulse at rela-
tively rapid speeds (3–4 m/s) throughout the ventricles. Purkinje
cells and midmyocardial (M) cells located at the terminal ends of
the Purkinje bundle branches and in the middle of the ventricular
walls, respectively, have the longest AP durations and, therefore,
serve as physiological “gates” preventing reentry or recycling of
electric impulses into the ventricular myocardium [36,37]. The
comparatively long duration of Purkinje and M cell APs is also con-
sidered to be one cause for the development of U waves in the ECG
(Fig. 33.10). It is important to remember that the electrical trans-
mission of the cardiac AP ultimately depends on spatial variation in
myocardial cell refractoriness and the maintenance of uniform (iso-
tropic) cell-to- cell resistive and capacitive (passive force) mem-
brane properties that are largely determined by low-resistance gap
or nexus junctions between cells [38,39].
The interval beginning immediately after the terminal S wave of
the QRS complex (J point) and the ventricular repolarization T
wave is referred to as the “ST segment.” Elevation or depression of
the ST segment (±0.2 mV or greater) from the isoelectric line is
indicative of myocardial hypoxia or ischemia caused by low car-
diac output (CO), hypotension, anemia, pericarditis, or cardiac
contusion, and suggests the potential for arrhythmias to develop.
The ST segment is followed by, and may slur into, the T wave [40].
(A)
Bachmann's bundle conduction velocity
1 m/s
Sinoatrial (SA) node
Internodal tracts:
Anterior
Middle
Posterior
Atrioventricular
(AV) node
Bundle of His
Right branch bundle
Conduction pathways
(B)
1 	2
SAN
4
3
Atria
AV node
Left
branch
bundle
0.01–0.05 m/s
His-Purkinje
Ventricle 	1 m/s
RA 	AVN LA
4
3
RV
1
2
1
2–4 m/s
LV
Figure 33.11 A. The specialized conducting
pathways of the heart include the sinoatrial
node, the atrial internodal pathways, the
atrioventricular node and His bundle, and the
right and left bundle branches. Bachmann’s
bundle facilitates electrical signal
transmission to the left atrium. The
conduction velocity of the electrical signal
varies in different cardiac tissues. B. The
sequence of electrical conduction in the atrial
and ventricles (1–4) from initiation (yellow)
to termination (dark blue) in relation to the
development of the ECG.

-- 641 of 1450 --

626 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
The configuration and magnitude of the T wave vary considerably
among species and are particularly influenced by changes in HR,
blood temperature, and the extracellular potassium concentration.
Hyperkalemia, for example, produces an increase in membrane
conductance to potassium and shortens repolarization producing
large magnitude, spiked, or pointed T waves and a shortened QT
interval. U waves, when present, can be distinguished immediately
following the T wave (Fig. 33.10) [36,41]. Like Ta waves, U waves
are more frequently observed in larger species of animals (horses
and cattle).
As described previously, the ECG is produced by recording the
electrically synchronized depolarization and repolarization of the
atria and ventricles. The morphology of the various waveforms (i.e.,
P, QRS, and T waves) that characterize atrial and ventricular depo-
larization and repolarization is dependent upon the different pat-
terns of depolarization, electrode placement, the size of the cardiac
chambers (e.g., hypertrophy increases the electromotive force gen-
erated), the orthogonal direction of the dominant electromotive
force, resistance to electrical signal transmission (i.e., fat, fluid, and
air), and a host of electrode, equipment, and environmental factors
(e.g., electrical noise). P wave morphology will vary depending on
where within the crescent-shaped SA node electrical activation
originates and spreads into the right atrium. The electrical signal is
then transmitted via intra-atrial and interatrial specialized path-
ways that depolarize the right and left atrial (e.g., Bachmann’s bun-
dle) muscle fibers, respectively (Fig. 33.11A). The right atrium is
normally activated before the left atrium since the electrical signal
normally originates in the SA node. This sequence of activation
(i.e., right atrium then left atrium) may be hard to appreciate in
smaller animals (e.g., rats, rabbits, cats, and small dogs) since their
atrial muscle mass is relatively small and the electrical activation
process is completed in a shorter time compared to larger animals
(e.g., pigs, horses, goats, and cattle). The larger atrial muscle mass in
large animals or in larger smaller species (e.g., dogs) with an
enlarged left atrium can often be identified by a bifid P wave. Once
the atrial electrical signal traverses the AV node, it activates the rap-
idly conducting Purkinje fiber network. Bundles of Purkinje fibers
form the right and left bundle branches, which distribute the wave
of depolarization to the respective papillary muscles and ventricu-
lar muscle cells of the right and left ventricles generating the QRS
wave that represents ventricular depolarization (Figs. 33.10
and 33.11B). Purkinje fibers penetrate a short distance from the
subendocardium in smaller animal species (Category I: rats, rab-
bits, cats, and dogs) while larger animal species have evolved a more
diffuse Purkinje fiber distribution that extends close to the subepi-
cardium (Category II: sheep, goats, cattle, pigs, and horses). This
difference in Purkinje fiber anatomical distribution ensures the
synchrony of ventricular activation and contraction. Fiber-to- fiber
spread of the ventricular myocardial electrical signal occurs from
the endpoints of the Purkinje fibers in the subendocardium of
Category I (i.e., smaller) species (Fig. 33.12A) or wherever Purkinje
fibers terminate in Category II (i.e., larger) species (Fig. 33.12B).
Orthogonal (i.e., X, Y, Z; ECG leads: I, aVf, V10) ECG lead place-
ment illustrates differences in the dominant ventricular electrical
activation forces, spatial orientation, and pattern of ventricular
depolarization generated by animals in Category I (e.g., cats, dogs,
and humans) and Category II (Category IIA: sheep, goats, and cat-
tle; Category IIB: pigs and horses) (Fig. 33.13).
Several inhalant (e.g., halothane, isoflurane, and enflurane) and
injectable (e.g., thiopental, propofol, and opioids) anesthetic drugs
are known to sensitize the myocardium to catecholamines or
facilitate torsadogenicity resulting in the development of cardiac
arrhythmias [42–45]. Cardiac sensitization to anesthetic drugs has
been linked to cardiac α1
-adrenerigc receptor stimulation and is
likely produced by drug-related alterations in intracellular calcium
cycling, alterations in electrical impulse propagation, and muscle
cell excitability [46,47]. Anesthetic drugs, particularly volatile anes-
thetics, are also known to interact with multiple cardiac ion chan-
nels. Halothane, isoflurane, and sevoflurane depress ion channels at
different minimum alveolar anesthetic concentration (MAC) mul-
tiples: sodium (> 2 MAC), calcium (~30% at > 2 MAC), potassium
(~20% at > 1 MAC), and chloride (> 2 MAC) [48]. Inhibition of
these channels may alter AP shape (i.e., triangulation) and conduc-
tion velocity and these are the two most common proarrhythmic
changes in the cardiac AP associated with volatile anesthetics [48–
51]. Triangulation allows more time for Na +
–Ca2+ exchange, reacti-
vation of the sodium current, reduced synchronization of APs, and
facilitation of re-excitation predisposing to the development of
early afterdepolarizations [50,51]. Slowed conduction and tissue
refractoriness are key factors for determining whether reentrant
arrhythmias occur. In addition to these mechanisms, autonomic
nervous system imbalances lead to events that predispose to cardiac
repolarization and conduction abnormalities, coronary vasospasm,
and unifocal or multifocal ventricular tachycardias. Autonomic
imbalance may be responsible for the cardiac arrhythmias attrib-
uted to the concurrent administration of anticholinergic (e.g., atro-
pine) and α2
- adrenerigc receptor agonist (e.g., medetomidine and
dexmedetomidine) drugs [34]. γ-Aminobutyric acid type A
(GABAA ) anesthetics (i.e., propofol, etomidate, and alfaxalone) act-
ing on various GABAA subunits (α, β, γ) may also inhibit postgan-
glionic vagal input (i.e., reduce M 2 receptor activity) to the heart
provoking sinus tachycardia while several opioids, particularly
methadone, are known to lengthen the QT interval predisposing to
ventricular arrhythmias [52,53].
In summary, the active (i.e., ion movement) and passive (resistive
and capacitive) properties of cardiac cell membranes determine the
heart’s excitability (i.e., bathmotropy), automaticity (i.e., chronotropy),
conduction (i.e., dromotropy), rhythmicity, and refractoriness.
Injectable and inhalant anesthetic drugs produce alterations in cardiac
ion channels and transmembrane ion flux that may impair mechani-
cal contraction or induce cardiac arrhythmias [42,46,47,54,55].
Excitation–contraction coupling
Excitation–contraction coupling refers to the process whereby
electrical activation of myocardial cells is transformed into muscle
contraction [56–59]. The process begins with depolarization of the
cardiac cell membrane and ends with sarcomere and subsequently
muscle fiber shortening. The normal extracellular [Ca2+
] is 10-3 M
compared with an intracellular [Ca2+
] of 10-7 M. The electrical activa-
tion of the sarcolemma and its extensions (i.e., transverse [T] tubules)
into the cell interior initiates an influx of calcium ions through L-type
calcium channels that trigger the release (i.e., calcium-induced cal-
cium release [CICR]) of calcium from ryanodine-sensitive Ca2+
release channels in the sarcoplasmic reticulum [59]. CICR raises the
intracellular calcium concentration from 10-7 to 10-5 M resulting in
myosin–actin cycling and sarcomere contraction (Fig. 33.14). While
most calcium ions enter the cardiac cell through voltage-dependent
L-type calcium channels (i.e., dihydropyridine channel or DHP chan-
nel), some calcium ions enter via the Na+
–Ca2+ exchanger (NCX)
mechanism [37]. Voltage-dependent calcium channels are of two
types (Table 33.3): a fast but transient (i.e., T-type) channel that is

-- 642 of 1450 --

Chapter 33: Cardiovascular Physiology 	627
activated earlier and at more negative potentials than L-type channels
and is believed to play a role in activation of pacemaker cells; and a
slow, long-lasting (i.e., L-type) channel that is opened by cellular depo-
larization and is responsible for excitation–contraction coupling.
T-type channels are insensitive to sodium channel blockers (e.g., lido-
caine or tetrodotoxin) and calcium antagonists [57]. L-type channels
are sensitive to specific types of calcium antagonists (e.g., verapamil,
diltiazem, and nifedipine-like compounds) [57,58]. The L-type chan-
nels are more prevalent in atrial and ventricular muscle cells than are
T-type channels, open at less negative potentials, and account for the
latter phases of calcium channel opening [56]. Both channels are phys-
iologically linked via specialized bridging or spanning (i.e., “foot”)
proteins that connect them to the ryanodine-sensitive Ca2+ release
channels in the sarcoplasmic reticulum. The foot structures are part of
a high-molecular-weight protein complex termed the “ryanodine
receptor” (RyR) because of its affinity for the insecticide ryano-
dine [60]. Multiple RyR isoforms exist and cardiac RyRs are of the
RyR2 type [60]. Any drug that prolongs channel opening triggered by
Category II
Apex
Epicardium
	Endocardium
Base
Category I
4 	4
4 	4
4
4
2
2
2
2
1
1 1
1
3
(A)
(B)
3
3
3
3
3
Apex
Base
Epicardium
	Endocardium
Figure 33.12 A. Depolarization reaches every point in the myocardium by traveling rapidly in specialized pathways and slowly from muscle fiber to
muscle fiber. Hearts from larger animals (e.g., horses, cattle) or hearts from species with large ancestors (e.g., sheep and goats) require more complete
penetration of Purkinje fibers to achieve adequate synchronization of contraction. B. Conduction velocity along His–Purkinje fibers (red arrows) is
~2–4 m/s for all animals. Conduction patterns within the ventricular myocardium from the endpoint of the Purkinje fiber network (red dot) are
responsible for different patterns of ventricular activation and body surface ECG patterns: Category 1 (e.g., guinea pig, rabbits, dog, cat, and humans);
Category IIA (e.g., goat and cow); Category IIB (e.g., horse, pig, dolphins). Source: Dr. Robert Hamlin, with permission.
Dog (I) 	Goat/Cow (IIA) 	Horse/Pig (IIB)
Deep long S in I
and in AVF
aVF
I
Brief R or r and long S
or s in aVF; qr in V10	R in aVF
Qr in V 10 	qR or qr in V10
V 10
Figure 33.13 QRS patterns in orthogonal (i.e., X, Y. Z: I, aVf, V10) ECG
leads in Category I (e.g., cat, dog, and human) and Category II (e.g.,
Category IIA: sheep, goat, and cattle; Category IIB: pigs and horses)
animals. Source: Dr. Robert Hamlin, with permission.

-- 643 of 1450 --

628 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
cytoplasmic Ca2+ will also promote RyR activation and increase cyto-
plasmic [Ca2+
]. For example, mutations in the skeletal muscle isoform
of the ryanodine receptor Ca2+
-release channel (RyR1) are responsible
for susceptibility to malignant hyperthermia and can be triggered by
inhalant anesthetics (e.g., halothane, isoflurane, sevoflurane, and suc-
cinylcholine) [61,62]. Membrane-bound inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate
receptors (IP3
R) provide a second pathway for internal Ca2+
release [63]. Their subcellular localization in atrial, ventricular, and
Purkinje fibers is about 50-fold less than RyR2s in ventricular myo-
cytes. They are believed to modulate transcription, amplify RyR2 Ca2+
signals, and provide independent cellular activation through diverse
pathways that generate IP3
. The activation of IP3
Rs by select agonists
(e.g., angiotensin II, endothelin, and norepinephrine) is believed to be
important in development of cardiac arrhythmias, hypertrophy and
heart failure [63]. Notably, inhalant (i.e., halothane, isoflurane, sevo-
flurane, and desflurane) and injectable (i.e., propofol, etomidate, and
midazolam) anesthetics produce dose-dependent inhibition of the
cardiac L-type calcium current by interacting with and inhibiting
DHP and RyR calcium channels thereby reducing CICR and the force
of cardiac contraction [64–67].
Ca 2+ 10 –3
Extracellular space
Plasma membrane
K+ 	K+
K+
3Na+ 	Na+ /Ca2+
exchanger
NCX
Ca2+
Na +
channel
K+
channels
Ca 2+ 10 –7
Connexin
channel
K +
Triad complex
Junctin-
triadin
complex
Ryanodine
(Ca2+ -release)
channel
Ca 2+
L-type Ca2+
channel
Ca 2+
Na + /K+
pump
Calsequestrin
Sarcplasmic
reticulum 	SERCA
Ca 2+
uptake
pump
Phospholamban 	Ca2+
ATPase
ATPase
Na +
Tn complex
Actin 	Tm 	Ca 2+
Ca 2+
Desmosome
T-tubule
Myosin head 	Myosin-binding
site exposed
Myosin filament (thick)
Mitochondrion
ATP
10 –5
Na +
Figure 33.14 Cardiac muscle cell excitation–contraction coupling. Cardiac muscle cells (cardiomyocytes) are surrounded by a surface membrane with
tubular invaginations (T-tubules). The T-tubular network assists action potential propagation into the cytoplasm of cardiac muscle cells. Calcium enters
the cardiac cell during phase 2 of the action potential via L-type calcium channels (i.e., dihydropyridine receptors). The junctin, triadin, calsequestrin, and
ryanodine receptor form a quaternary complex (i.e., foot protein) that triggers normal intracellular Ca2+ release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) by a
process termed “calcium-induced calcium release” (CICR). Increases in intracellular calcium (10−7 to 10−5 M) activates the regulatory protein troponin
(Tn) complex (i.e., Tn-C on the thin (i.e., actin) filament allowing binding of thick filament myosin heads to attach to exposed binding sites on the thin
filament (inset) resulting in filament sliding, sarcomere shortening and muscle contraction. Calcium is transported back into the sarcoplasmic reticulum
(SR) by the SR-Ca2+ ATPase pump (SERCA) and out of the cell by the sodium-calcium exchanger (NCX), located in the surface membrane.
Phospholamban modulates Ca2+ pump reuptake of calcium into the SR. Metabolism of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and formation of adenosine
diphosphate and inorganic phosphate, and reuptake of calcium by the SR cause sarcomere relaxation. Small quantities of cytosolic Ca 2+ stimulate
mitochondrion resynthesis of ATP.

-- 644 of 1450 --

Chapter 33: Cardiovascular Physiology 	629
The actin- activated myosin chemomechanical
ATPase cycle
Cardiac muscle cells (myocytes) are composed of repeating core
contractile units called “sarcomeres” (Fig. 33.15A). Sarcomeres
contain the contractile proteins actin (i.e., thin) and myosin (i.e.,
thick) filaments, which are the smallest functional units of striated
cardiac muscle cells. The thin actin filaments have plus and minus
ends and are attached at their plus end to structural proteins (i.e., Z
bands) that separate each sarcomere (Fig. 33.15B) [68]. Each actin
filament contains two helical strands of actin intertwined with tro-
pomyosin, which has periodic troponin complexes. Increases in
intracellular calcium-ion concentration initiated during phase 2 of
the cardiac AP and amplified by CICR serve as the catalyst for
actin–myosin interaction and sarcomere shortening. More specifi-
cally, calcium ions bind to the regulatory protein troponin C (Tn-C;
C for calcium) and remove the inhibitory function of troponin I
(Tn-I; I for inhibitor) on the chemical interaction between actin and
myosin thick filaments, allowing actin–myosin crossbridges to
form (Fig. 33.15C). Myosin heavy chain (MHC) is the actin-
activated molecular motor of muscle thick filaments that forms
crossbridges with actin pulling the thin actin filament over the
thicker myosin filament toward the center of the sarcomere, thereby
shortening the sarcomere [68,69]. Two functionally distinct iso-
forms of myosin, alpha (α) and beta (β), are present in mammalian
hearts both containing ATPase and actin-binding domains. The
isoforms are structurally similar and are key determinants of sar-
comere force generation and shortening velocity [70]. The α iso-
form is more highly expressed in the atria and ventricles of smaller
mammals (i.e., mice and rats), whereas the β isoform predominates
in the ventricles of larger mammals (i.e., pig, dogs, and humans) [71].
β-Myosin has lower ATPase activity and produces slower actin
sliding velocities than α-myosin but is able to generate greater
force [72].
Cardiac MHCs are comprised of two domains: heavy meromyo-
sin (HMM) and light meromyosin (LMM). HMM is subdivided
into subfragments (S1 and S2) (Fig. 33.15D). The S1 subfragment is
comprised of two actin-activated ATPase globular heads (the motor
domain) followed by a converter domain and a lever arm. The
essential light chain (ELC) and regulatory light chain (RLC) com-
prise the lever arm. Both the ELC and RLC in conjunction with
myosin-binding protein C (MyBPC) modulate sarcomere activity,
intermolecular interactions between the two myosin S1 heads, and
the conversion of chemical energy (ATP) into heat (i.e., Fenn effect)
and mechanical work (Fig. 33.15C) [73–75]. The force produced by
myosin motors is fueled by ATP hydrolysis resulting in the sequen-
tial release of inorganic phosphate (Pi ) and ADP, strong actin–
myosin binding, and the swing of the lever arm. The swing of the
lever arm pulls the actin (i.e., power stroke) causing the sarcomere
to shorten. The lever arm merges with the coiled-coil tail of HMM
(i.e., S2 subfragment) and connects to LMM molecules that are
packed with the tails of other LMM molecules forming the back-
bone of the thick filament (Fig. 33.15C) [68,76].
Pairs of myosin S1 heads encircle the thick filament in a helical or
quasi-helical fashion and exist in one of three transitional states:
active, disordered relaxed (DRX; approximately 50–60%), and
super-relaxed (SRX; approximately 40–50%) [77,78]. The SRX state
is “off ” or “hibernating.” SRX myosin S1 heads are folded back
(“parked” or “docked”) along the thick filament. Parked S1 heads
have markedly reduced ATPase activity, cannot bind to actin, and
provide a method for regulating cardiac contractility in response to
changes in loading conditions (i.e., preload and afterload) [79,80].
Activation of cardiac muscle only involves free heads in the DRX
state. Myosin S1 heads in the DRX state display a flexible or free
(“swaying”) position (Fig. 33.15C). Their partnered blocked myosin
S1 head is docked onto its S2 tail and cannot bind to actin.
Intermolecular interactions between myosin S1 heads and their S2
tails, ELC, RLC, and MyBPC favor the DRX or SRX states and are
collectively referred to as the “interacting-heads motif ” (IHM) [68].
The regulatory protein MyBPC modulates force generation by
maintaining the SRX (“off ”) state [79,81–83]. Phosphorylation of
the RLC releases one (i.e., free head) or both of the two myosin S1
heads, and increases myosin S1 step size, the velocity of sarcomeric
shortening, isometric force, and power generation [68]. These
interactions modulate the kinetics of actin–myosin crossbridge for-
mation, myosin ATPase activity, and calcium utilization thereby
acting as molecular regulators of muscle force and velocity genera-
tion [84]. Notably, stress sensed by the myosin thick filament desta-
bilizes the SRX state releasing myosin S1 heads from their docked
state and transitioning them from an “off ” to an active state (i.e.,
positive cooperativity) [68,78,85]. Cycling of the myosin S1 heads
(i.e., velocity of lever-arm swinging; number that synchronously
swing and form strong attachments) produces the force, velocity,
and power needed for contraction [86,87].
Important steps in the actin-activated myosin chemomechanical
ATPase cycle (i.e., “swinging lever-arm” model) include (Fig. 33.16):
(1) ATP hydrolysis to ADP and Pi and adoption of a bent or “cocked”
(pre- power stroke) position by the myosin S1 head; (2) weak bind-
ing of the myosin S1 head containing ADP and Pi to actin; (3) tran-
sition of the myosin S1 head from a weak to strong binding state
upon Pi release and lever-arm swinging pulling the actin filament
toward the center of the sarcomere (“swinging lever-arm” model);
(4) adoption of a post-power stroke position associated with ADP
release; and (5) binding of ATP to the myosin S1 head weakening its
interaction with actin.
The rate of P i release is the rate limiting step that determines
the duration that myosin S1 heads are strongly bound to actin.
The velocity of actin filament sliding until the myosin S1 heads
detach is determined by ADP release (i.e., detachment rate
[kdet ]) [84,87,88]. Cyclic asynchronous ATP-driven actin–myosin
mechanosensing and biased Brownian motion driven by increased
ionic strength are responsible for the lever-arm swing, myosin dis-
placement, sarcomere shortening, and force development [89,90].
Maximum velocity of contraction (Vmax ) is derived from the uni-
tary displacement divided by the myosin head detachment rate.
Thus, the load-dependent attachment rate, overall cycle rate,
amount of time that myosin is attached to actin, and the total
number of myosin S1 heads in the active state (i.e., duty ratio)
determine the developed force (F), sliding velocity (Vmax ), and
amount of ATP consumed [90–93].
Myocardial contraction and relaxation
Increases in intracellular calcium facilitate increased myosin
ATPase activity. Therefore, intracellular calcium concentration
serves as the principal factor for determining the rate at which
crossbridges attach and detach. The rate of crossbridge detachment
and the number of interacting crossbridges (e.g., baseline: 20–30%
of total crossbridges) is the basis for the force–velocity relationship
that determines cardiac contractility [84,87,94,95].
The concept of optimal sarcomere length serves as the explana-
tion for the Frank–Starling law of the heart and predicts an increase
in contractile force when sarcomeres are stretched (e.g., increased

-- 645 of 1450 --

630 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
Sarcomere
Myosin
filament
Actin
filament A-Band
M-Line 	Z-Disc
I-Band
(–) C-Zone
Myosin
filament
MyBP-C
Actin filament
M-Line 	Titin
Actin
Tn
complex 	Tm
"Sarcomere"
The quintessential contractile unit
Myosin: Molecular Motor
Interacting heads motif: IHM
Three states:
Super Relaxed (SRX): Off
Disordered Relaxed (DRX)
Active; On
(+)
Z-Disc
Ca2+
Tn-1
Tn-t Tn-C
Troponin complex
Myosin-binding
site
MyBP-C
S1 myosin head 	Catalytic domain
ELC
RLC Lever arm
SRX
Myosin filament (thick) 	S1
LMM
S2
Prox S2
HMM
H-Band
Figure 33.15 A. Cardiac muscle cells contain sarcomeres, mitochondria, and a sarcoplasmic reticulum that occupy ~60%, 35%, and 5% of the cell volume,
respectively. Sarcomeres contain an overlapping array of thin (actin) and thick (myosin) protein filaments that produces a striated or banded (i.e., A, H, I)
appearance. Sarcomeres are separated by Z-discs (i.e., bands). B. The left half of a sarcomere illustrates the polarized (-/+) thin actin filament connected to
the Z-disc and the myosin thick filament connected to the center of the sarcomere (M-line). The mechanosensing protein titin regulates myosin length
and connects myosin to the M-line and Z- Disc. Myosin-binding protein C (MyBPC) modulates the force of contraction. C. Actin–myosin crossbridges are
formed when myosin heads bind to myosin-binding sites on the actin filament. Myosin access to actin-binding sites is regulated by the troponin (Tn)
complex comprised of three regulatory proteins: troponin I, troponin T, troponin C. An increase in intracellular calcium concentration increases calcium
binding to Tn-C repositioning tropomyosin (Tm) and exposing myosin-binding sites on actin filaments to myosin heads. Myosin heads exist in free,
disorganized (DRX), and folded-back, super relaxed (SRX), or docked (i.e., parked) states, collectively referred to as the “interacting-heads motif ” (IHM).
Myosin head binding is regulated by interactions among the MyBPC, the converter domain (dark dot), essential light chain (ELC) and the regulatory light
chain (RLC). D. The myosin filament is composed of heavy meromyosin (HMM) that includes subfragment 1 (myosin S1 head [S1], essential light chain
[ELC], regulatory light chain [RLC]) and subfragment 2 (S2) that transitions to a coiled-coil tail and then into light meromyosin (LMM). S2 tails combine
with other light meromyosin (LMM) tails to form the thick myosin filament.

-- 646 of 1450 --

Chapter 33: Cardiovascular Physiology 	631
ventricular volume) to their optimal length (i.e., approximately
2.2 μm) [94–96]. It is unlikely, however, that this explanation pro-
vides an adequate explanation of the Frank–Starling effect since sar-
comeres rarely change length even during dilated forms of heart
failure [37]. The more probable reason for Starling’s law of the heart
is that sarcomere loading increases troponin C affinity for calcium
and RLC phosphorylation leading to increased activation of the myo-
filament and sarcomere shortening without increases in sarcomere
length or additional increases in intracellular calcium [96,97].
Decreased interaction between actin and myosin filaments is
directly related to a decrease in [Ca2+
]i and signals the beginning of
the actin–myosin uncoupling process and myocardial relaxation [98].
Three principal mechanisms are responsible for reducing intracellu-
lar calcium-ion concentration and the subsequent decrease in cardiac
contractile force. Depolarization-triggered increases in intracellular
calcium increase the activity of the calcium regulatory protein
calmodulin. Calmodulin serves as an intracellular calcium sensor
and, when activated (i.e., calmodulin-calcium complex), stimulates
the active extrusion of calcium by pumps in the sarcolemma.
Phosphorylation of the phospholamban-modulated calcium pump
increases calcium uptake by the sarcoplasmic reticulum and enhances
the activity of the Na+
–Ca2+ exchanger (NCX) (Fig. 33.14) [99].
Calcium transported by the sarcoendoplasmic reticulum calcium
transport ATPase (SERCA) lowers the cytosolic calcium concen-
tration and removes calcium from Tn-C [100]. The reduced
intracellular calcium induces a conformational change in the tro-
ponin complex allowing Tn-I inhibition of the actin-binding site.
Upon completion of the chemomechanical cycle, a new ATP binds to
the myosin S1 head displacing ADP and restoring the initial sar-
comere length, and the entire cycle is ready to be repeated (Fig. 33.16).
Most intravenous anesthetic drugs (e.g., barbiturates, ketamine,
and propofol), and in particular the inhalation anesthetics, produce
dose-dependent decreases in cardiac contractility by decreasing
calcium influx through L-type channels, decreasing calcium release
from the sarcoplasmic reticulum, and decreasing Tn-C sensitivity
to calcium [101–110]. Anesthetic drugs also interfere with the
reuptake of calcium by the sarcoplasmic reticulum ultimately lead-
ing to depletion of intracellular calcium [98,106,107,111,112].
Notably, the effects of both injectable and inhalant anesthetics on
the chemomechanical mechanisms responsible for myocardial con-
traction and relaxation require reexamination using updated con-
temporary experimental technologies.
The vascular system
The function of the vascular system (arteries, capillaries, and veins)
is to transport blood, nutrients, and oxygen to tissues, remove waste
products (e.g., carbon dioxide), protect tissues, and stop bleeding.
Blood vessels larger than 100–150 μm comprise the macrocircu-
lation, while those that are smaller than 100 μm constitute the
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
Actin filament (thin)
ATPase
5 	1
ATP
ATP
ADP
Myosin filament (thick)
ATP
hydrolysis	ADP
ADP
P i
Pi
2
4 	3
Figure 33.16 The actin-activated myosin chemomechanical ATPase cycle (i.e., ATP binding, hydrolysis, Pi release, ADP release). A. ATP binds to the
ATPase containing the myosin S1 globular head (“molecular motor”) weakening its interaction with actin thereby freeing the myosin S1 head so that the
lever arm can cock into a pre-power stroke DRX position. B. One myosin S1 head is in the folded back SRX (docked on the coiled-coil S2 tail) state and
the other is in the post-stroke DRX state (1). ATP hydrolysis transitions the myosin S1 head from a weak to strong binding state with actin (2). C. Pi
release is associated with a leftward shift (leftward arrow) of the lever arm and movement of the actin filament to the left (3). The swing of the lever arm is
responsible for force production (power stroke). D. ADP dissociates, forming the rigor state (4). Binding of ATP to myosin S1 head dissociates it from
actin forming the post-rigor state (5).

-- 647 of 1450 --

632 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
microcirculation [113]. The largest blood vessels are not embedded
in organs and function as conduits for the delivery of blood to
and from the heart, lungs, and peripheral tissues. Small vessels (i.e.,
< 100 μm) are embedded in organs and are actively involved in
regulating blood flow or exchange processes. The pulmonary artery
and aorta deliver blood to the pulmonary and systemic circulations,
respectively. The pulmonary circulation receives its blood supply
from the right ventricle via the pulmonary artery while the nutrient
supply of the lung parenchyma is provided by the bronchial arteries.
The systemic circulation receives its blood supply from the left ven-
tricle via the aorta. The left ventricle, aorta, and other large arteries
comprise the high-pressure portion of the systemic circulation
while the right ventricle, pulmonary artery, left atrium, and all the
veins are considered low pressure (i.e., < 20–30 mmHg). Vessels of
the systemic circulation undergo repeated division into smaller and
smaller parallel vascular beds that terminate in arterioles (i.e., the
smallest arteries at 10–30 μm) that subdivide and transition into
capillaries (5–10 μm).
Blood vessels can be functionally categorized as primarily elastic,
compliant conduits (e.g., large arteries: aorta), muscular arteries
(e.g., distributive arteries: femoral artery), sphincter or resistance
vessels (e.g., arterioles), exchange vessels (e.g., capillaries), capaci-
tance vessels (e.g., venules and veins), large conduit veins, and shunt
vessels (e.g., arteriovenous anastomoses) [114]. All vessels have an
endothelial surface and all but capillaries contain varying propor-
tions of elastic fibers, smooth muscle, and fibrous tissue (Fig. 33.17).
The tunica media is composed mostly of smooth muscle and elastic
connective tissue, and the outer layer, the tunica externa (i.e., tunica
adventitia), contains fibrous collagen fibers. The proportion of elas-
tic connective tissue to smooth muscle determines the vessel’s prin-
cipal function (i.e., conduit, resistive, or capacitive). Larger arteries
possess a high proportion of elastic tissue in comparison to smooth
muscle and fibrous tissues found in veins (Fig. 33.17). These struc-
tural differences allow the aorta to stretch during ventricular con-
traction and the ejection of blood. The potential (stored) energy
imparted to the elastic fibers of the stretched proximal aorta is
returned as kinetic (motion) energy assisting blood flow (i.e., the
Windkessel effect) [115]. Thus, the highly elastic architecture of the
aorta aids in converting pulsatile (non-uniform) flow to continuous
blood flow (Fig. 33.18). The Windkessel effect is believed to be
responsible for up to 50% of peripheral blood flow in most animals
during normal resting HRs.
Macrovessels 	Microvessels
Aorta
25 mm	Diameter
Wall
thickness
Endothelium
Elastic tissue
Smooth muscle
Fibrous tissue
4 mm
Artery 	Vein 	Vena cava 	Arteriole Terminal
arteriole
30 μm 	10 μm 	8 μm 	20 μm
6 μm 	2 μm 	.5 μm 	1 μm
Capillary 	Venule
5 mm 	30 mm
2 mm 	1 mm 	.5 mm 	1.5 mm
Figure 33.17 Blood vessel types, diameter, and wall thickness. Note the differences in vessel diameter, elastic tissue, and smooth muscle between arteries
and veins.
Peripheral
resistance
LA
Systole 	Diastole
LA
LV
LV
Peripheral
resistance
Figure 33.18 Aortic distensibility (i.e., compliance) and elasticity (i.e., ability to resume its normal shape after being stretched) are often conflated with
stiffness. Aortic elasticity is responsible for the Windkessel effect wherein the aorta is distended during systole and recoils during diastole. Large
distensible elastic arteries briefly store blood (i.e., hydraulic accumulator) during systole and distribute blood during diastole.

-- 648 of 1450 --

Chapter 33: Cardiovascular Physiology 	633
The luminal surface of all blood vessels is lined by endothelial
cells (i.e., tunica intima; Fig. 33.17) that are covered with a multilay-
ered endothelial surface layer (Fig. 33.19A). The glycocalyx is a thin
layer of negatively charged (anionic) material composed of synde-
cans, glypicans, glycoproteins, and polysaccharides that extends
from the surface of vascular endothelial cells and binds plasma
proteins and soluble glycosaminoglycans (Fig. 33.19A) [116,117].
Endothelial cells are dynamic and have both metabolic and syn-
thetic functions exerting autocrine, paracrine, and endocrine
actions that modulate smooth muscle contraction and relaxation,
platelet and leukocyte adherence, thrombosis, and thrombolysis.
Endothelial cells generate and maintain the glycocalyx [117,118], a
voluminous water-phobic (negatively charged) intravascular com-
partment that plays an important role in maintaining vascular wall
homeostasis, red and white blood cell movement, and vessel wall
permeability in capillaries (Fig. 33.19B) [117–120]. Pathologic loss
of the glycocalyx initiates breakdown of the vascular barrier and has
been linked to ischemia, systemic inflammatory response, sepsis,
and volume overload [117,121–123].
Large arteries and veins
Large elastic arteries serve as conduits through which blood is
transported to the periphery (Fig. 33.17). The elasticity of large
arteries opposes the stretching effect that the blood pressure pro-
duces following ventricular contraction. For example, the initial
stretching of the aorta produced by ventricular ejection is opposed
by the elastic tissue in the vessel walls, which returns the aorta and
large arteries to their original dimension once the pressure imposed
by ventricular ejection subsides (i.e., the Windkessel effect) [115].
The degree to which the larger arteries can be stretched depends on
the ratio of elastic to collagen fibers and fibrous tissue. Systemic
veins are more than 30 times more distensible (i.e., compliant) than
systemic arteries (Fig. 33.20A) and the lumped systemic circulation
(i.e., arteries, capillaries, and veins) is more compliant than the
lumped pulmonary circulation (Fig. 33.20B) [124].
Small arteries
Peripheral muscular arteries contain greater percentages of smooth
muscle compared to elastic tissue, thereby providing greater control
over vessel diameter, vascular resistance, and the regulation of
blood flow (Fig. 33.17). The amount of smooth muscle determines
the vessel’s resting tone (i.e., myogenic basal tone), the ability to
respond to an increase in blood pressure, and the amount of stress
relaxation (i.e., vasoconstriction followed by delayed relaxation;
Bayliss effect), and reverse stress relaxation (i.e., vessel contraction
due to fall in blood volume) [125,126]. Stress relaxation is charac-
terized by a rapid initial increase in resting tone caused by an
increase in pressure that declines gradually during the next several
minutes. The blood pressure decreases because of smooth muscle
myofilament rearrangement. Reverse stress relaxation is the reverse
of this process [125].
The most distal branches of peripheral feed arteries terminate in
“resistance vessels” that control the distribution of blood flow.
These vessels contain a predominance of smooth muscle, are
densely innervated by the sympathetic nervous system, and include
arterioles, metarterioles, and arteriovenous anastomoses.
Resistance vessels
Resistance vessels include the muscular arterioles, metarterioles
(i.e., short vessels that link arterioles and capillaries), and arterio-
venous anastomoses (Fig. 33.17). The small arteries and arterioles
represent the primary vessels involved in the distribution of blood
(A)
Water 	Plasma proteins 	Platelet
(B)
Erythrocyte
Plasma
Flow direction
Endothelial
surface layer
(ESL)
Endothelial
glycocalyx
(EG)
Endothelial cell
Interstitial space
Subglyceal space
Intercellular cleft 	Transcytotic vesicle
Endothelial glycocalyx
Endothelial cell 	0.1 μm
Figure 33.19 A. The endothelial surface layer (ESL) is a multilayered structure that covers the endothelial surface of most blood vessels. It is composed of
water, a dense inner layer of sulfated proteoglycans (e.g., syndecans, glypicans) and a less dense outer layer of covalently bound glycosaminoglycans
(GAGs: heparan sulfate, chondroitin sulfate, and hyaluronan), glycoproteins, and plasma proteins. Transcytosis of albumin via caveolae is an important
means for its transport across the endothelium. B. The electroviscous effects of the glycocalyx attenuate blood cell–vessel wall interactions and influences
the permeability of larger negatively charged molecules (e.g., albumin).

-- 649 of 1450 --

634 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
flow and regulation of arterial blood pressure. Notably, approxi-
mately 50–60% of the pressure drop between the aorta and capillar-
ies occurs across terminal arterioles and metarterioles (Fig. 33.21).
Functionally, precapillary resistance vessels (i.e., sphincter vessels)
help to regulate the number of open capillaries and, therefore, the
size of the capillary bed that is available for exchange processes. The
relatively thick-walled muscular arterioles and sphincter vessels are
regulated by a variety of neural, humoral, and local metabolic fac-
tors and are the principal determinants of the total amount of blood
flow distributed to all tissues of the body (Table 33.5). Arteriovenous
anastomoses bypass the capillary by connecting arterioles to small
veins. These vessels reduce or totally interrupt blood flow to capil-
laries and are densely populated by both α1 - and α2
-adrenergic
receptors [127]. Arteriovenous anastomoses possess smooth mus-
cle cells throughout their entire length and are found in the greatest
numbers in the skin and extremities (ears, feet, and hooves) of most
species [127,128]. When open, they shunt arterial blood to venous
plexuses in the limbs and play an important role in temperature
regulation. Their identification in the intestine, kidney, liver, and
skeletal muscles suggests their importance as a separate blood flow
regulatory mechanism for controlling nutrient blood flow in these
tissues. α2
-Adrenergic receptor agonists have been demonstrated to
cause redistribution of CO away from less vital organs [129].
Capillaries
The microcirculation includes the smallest blood vessels in
the body and consists of the terminal arterioles, the capillary
network (4–8 μm) and venules (≲ 10–100 μm) (Fig. 33.17).
(A)
(B)
15
10
5
Pressure (mmHg)
 
Pressure (mmHg)
Lumped pulmonary
0.22 mL/kg/mmHg
Lumped systemic
2.6 mL/kg/mmHg
15
Arteries
0.067 mL/kg/mmHg
10
5
Veins
2.6 mL/kg/mmHg
5 	10 	15
Volume (mL/kg)
Volume (mL/kg)
20
5 	10 	15 	20
Figure 33.20 A. Lumped (i.e., arteries, capillaries, veins) pulmonary and
systemic compliance (i.e., V/P). Lumped pulmonary compliance is less
than lumped systemic compliance. A small increase in pulmonary blood
volume causes a much larger increase in pulmonary pressure. B. Systemic
arteries are much less compliant than systemic veins. Source: Adapted from
Green [124].
L. atrium
	L. ventricle
	Aorta
4000
Pulmonary veins
mmHg
Pulmonary arts.
	Capillaries
	R. ventricle
	Vein
R. atrium
	Venules
	Arterioles
	Capillaries
	Arteries
140 	3500
120
3000	100
80 Pressure
60 	2500
40
20 	2000
	cm
2
0
1500
	Velocity
cm/s
15
1000
10
5 	Cross-sectional
area
0 4 cm² 	V
– 0.03 cm/s 	6 cm2 	0
500
20
Figure 33.21 Blood pressure (mmHg), flow velocity (cm/s), and vascular
cross- sectional area (cm2
) in the systemic vasculature. As blood approaches
the capillaries, blood pressure and blood flow velocity decrease and
cross- sectional area increase.
Table 33.5 Factors producing vasodilation or vasoconstriction.
Vasoconstriction 	Vasodilation
Systemic
Increased noradrenergic discharge
Circulating catecholamines
Angiotensin II
Arginine vasopressin
Serotonin (5-HTB receptors)
Endothelin A
Neuropeptide Y
Thromboxane A2
PgA2
, PGF2α
Reactive oxygen species
(superoxide, hydroxyl radical)
Activation of cholinergic dilators in skeletal
muscle
Bradykinin
Histamine
Kallikrein
Endothelin B
Substance P (axon reflex)
PGI2
, PGE2
Local
Decreased temperature 	Increased temperature
Increased PO2 	Decreased PO2
Increased H+, K+, lactic acid, H2
S
Increased NO
Adenosine

-- 650 of 1450 --

Chapter 33: Cardiovascular Physiology 	635
The microcirculation is embedded within organs and responsible
for the exchange of oxygen (O2
), carbon dioxide (CO2
), nutrients,
metabolites, and fluid between blood and tissue. Exchange occurs by
three processes: passive diffusion, filtration, and pinocytosis (e.g.,
fluid endocytosis). A single layer of endothelial cells, normally cov-
ered by the glycocalyx, separates the intravascular volume from the
interstitial fluid volume (Fig. 33.19A) [117]. The glycocalyx, part
liquid and part solid, becomes denser closer to the endothelial cell
surface and serves as the major barrier to transcapillary flow of mac-
romolecules larger than 15 nm [130]. The dense inner region is com-
posed of a network of membrane-bound and membrane-attached
proteoglycans, glycosaminoglycans, glycoproteins, and adherent
plasma proteins extending out from the endothelial surface
(Fig. 33.19A) [115]. The capillary wall, therefore, is a three-layered
structure consisting of the glycocalyx on the luminal surface, the
basement membrane on the abluminal surface, and endothelial cells
in between. The intravascular volume consists of the glycocalyx,
plasma volume, and red cell volume. The glycocalyx is normally the
dynamic and active interface between plasma and the endothelial
cell surface acting as a semipermeable molecular sieve with respect
to anionic macromolecules such as albumin and other plasma pro-
teins, whose size and structure determine their ability to penetrate
the layer (Fig. 33.19B) [117–121]. The normal glycocalyx is imper-
meable to red blood cells (RBCs) and molecules larger than 70 kDa
and semipermeable to albumin (molecular weight ~69 kDa;
diameter ~7 nm; reflection coefficient 0.79–0.9) [129]. Increasing
evidence, however, suggests that albumin transport from blood
plasma to the interstitial fluid may occur via plasmalemmal vesicles
(i.e., transcytosis) thereby serving as large pore (i.e., 20–70 nm)
equivalents (Fig. 33.19A). For example, hydrostatic pressure-
dependent activation of albumin transcytosis in the lung microvas-
culature increases interstitial colloid osmotic pressure (COP)
enhancing fluid flux across the endothelium, reducing intravascular
pressure. Functionally, amphiphilic (i.e., having both hydrophilic
and hydrophobic parts) molecules like albumin help to sustain and
regulate the vascular and glycocalyx permeability [130,131].
There are three types of capillaries: continuous non-fenestrated,
fenestrated, and discontinuous or sinusoidal (Fig. 33.22A) [132].
Their distribution, porosity, and numbers vary in different tissue
beds depending on tissue metabolism (O 2 requirements) and the
importance of fluid exchange. Continuous non-fenestrated capil-
laries with tight junctions are present in all tissues of the body
except epithelia and cartilage. They have a functional pore size of
approximately 5 nm that permits the diffusion of water, small sol-
utes, and lipid-soluble materials into the interstitial fluid. The term
“pore” is not a simple opening but refers to any path through (e.g.,
transcytosis) or between (e.g., intercellular cleft) endothelial cells
that allows fluid to pass.
Specialized continuous non-fenestrated capillaries are found
throughout most of the central nervous system (CNS), enteric
nervous system, retina, and in the thymus (Fig. 33.22B). The
endothelial cells are bound together by tight junctions with an
effective pore size of < 1 nm [132]. Endothelial cells in the brain and
spinal cord are tightly opposed by zonula occludens (i.e., tight junc-
tions) with few interendothelial breaks and are responsible for the
blood–brain barrier. The blood–brain barrier is only permeable to
the smallest non-lipid-soluble molecules. Breaks within the inter-
endothelial cell junctions produced by trauma or inflammation are
the primary path for increased porosity and transvascular fluid
filtration. Aquaporins (i.e., water channels) are present within
continuous, but not fenestrated, vascular endothelial cells [133].
Aquaporins selectively facilitate the rapid transport of fluid across
epithelial and endothelial cells but are also found in other tissues
such as muscle and nerve cells. Aquaporins mediate osmotic water
transport across plasma membranes and function as membrane
channels for water alone or for water plus small molecules [132].
Anesthetic drugs (e.g., propofol, isoflurane, and sevoflurane) are
known to influence aquaporin expression and water homeostasis,
but additional research is required to determine the clinical rele-
vance of these findings [134,135].
Fenestrated (i.e., windowed) capillaries with diaphragmed
fenestrae and small gaps between adjacent endothelial cells are pre-
sent in skin, connective tissue, kidney, intestinal mucosa, endocrine
and exocrine glands, and the choroid plexus (Fig. 33.22B). The
basement membrane of these capillaries is continuous. Their upper
pore size is in the range of 6–12 nm [132]. Fenestrated capillaries
with open fenestrae (i.e., “windows,”) span the endothelial lining
(Fig. 33.22B). Windows permit the rapid exchange of water and sol-
utes. Open fenestrated capillaries are present in the kidney cortex
and medulla, the gastrointestinal mucosa, and the lymph nodes.
Sinusoidal capillaries (sinusoids) resemble fenestrated capillaries
but are discontinuous and are characterized by gaps between adja-
cent endothelial cells. The basement membrane and glycocalyx are
absent, and interstitial fluid is part of the plasma volume in sinusoi-
dal tissues (spleen, liver, bone marrow, and endocrine organs;
Fig. 33.22B). Plasma proteins (e.g., albumin) secreted by liver cells
pass easily through the sinusoids into the bloodstream through
pores as large as 200–280 nm [132]. Phagocytic cells monitor the
passing blood in sinusoidal tissues, engulfing damaged RBCs, path-
ogens, and cellular debris.
Transcapillary fluid exchange
Capillary fluid exchange is governed by two primary processes:
diffusion and filtration. Diffusion is the movement of a specific
molecule from an area of high concentration to a low concentra-
tion. Fick’s law of diffusion describes solute exchange (Js
) as
J 	DA M C	s 	T D	/
where D is the diffusion coefficient, A is the capillary surface area,
MT is the membrane thickness, and CD is the transmembrane
concentration gradient or difference. The diffusion coefficient is
determined by the diffusion medium and the qualities charac-
teristic of the diffusion particle such as the molecular weight,
molecular shape, ionic charge, and lipid solubility. Filtration is
the movement of fluid and molecules from an area of high pressure
to one of low pressure. Fluid exchange (i.e., fluid flux [Jv ]) by filtra-
tion is determined by four primary factors (Pc , Pi
, πc , and πi )
according to a dynamic equilibrium originally hypothesized by
Starling but formulated by others (i.e., Starling principle of capil-
lary fluid exchange), wherein
J 	K 	P 	P	v 	f 	c 	i 	c 	i
where, in the classical Starling equation, Jv is fluid flux across the
capillary (positive for filtration, and negative for reabsorption), Pc
and Pi are capillary and interstitial hydrostatic pressures, πc and πi
are the plasma and interstitial colloid osmotic pressures, Kf is the
capillary filtration coefficient, and σ is the osmotic reflection coef-
ficient for all plasma proteins [136–139]. The filtration coefficient
(Kf ) indicates the resistance of the capillary wall to fluid flow and is
determined by the surface area, the number and radius of capillary
pores, the capillary wall thickness, and the viscosity of the fluid
being filtered. The osmotic reflection coefficient (σ) is an indicator

-- 651 of 1450 --

636 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
of transvascular protein transport (i.e., a reflection coefficient of 0
implies that the substance is freely permeable and 1 implies that the
substance does not pass through the membrane). The initial
osmotic reflection coefficient for albumin and most colloid solu-
tions (i.e., > 70 kDa) is close to 1 in normal animals since most
capillary membranes are impermeable to large colloids. Providing
that all factors can be accurately measured or approximated, net
fluid flux across the capillary wall can be estimated by the Starling
equation [139]. Historically, Starling’s principle of capillary fluid
flux suggested fluid filtration at the arterial end of the capillary and
fluid reabsorption at the venous end of the capillary. Lymph vessels
were assumed to carry excess interstitial fluid back to the venous
circulation. It is now understood, however, that non-fenestrated
capillaries normally filter fluid throughout their entire length, fluid
flux to the interstitial space is under a dominant hydrostatic pres-
sure gradient (capillary pressure Pc minus Pi ), and that the effect of
πc on transvascular fluid exchange is much less than predicted [119].
The low protein concentration within the subglycocalyx intercellu-
lar spaces accounts for low Jv and lymph flow in most tissues during
normal physiologic conditions. Absorption through capillaries and
venules does not occur except in abnormal physiologic conditions
or disease states. During normal conditions, πc opposes but does
not reverse filtration, and most of the filtered plasma returns to the
circulation as lymph [120]. The glycocalyx covers the endothelial
intercellular clefts in fenestrated capillaries, separating plasma from
an almost protein-free subglycocalyx space (Fig. 33.19). The subg-
lycocalyx COP (πg
) replaces πi as a determinant of transcapillary
fluid flux (Jv ). The fluid at the abluminal side of the glycocalyx is
separated from the pericapillary interstitial fluid by the tortuous
path through the intercellular clefts. Plasma proteins, including
albumin, can escape to the interstitial space through the intercellu-
lar clefts or via transcytosis (i.e., large pores) and are responsible for
the increased Jv observed during endothelial inflammatory states.
Importantly, Jv can be modified by many factors including drugs
(A)
Intercellular cleft 	Fenestrations
Incomplete
basement membrane
Intercellular gap
Basement
membrane
Endothelial layer
(tunica intima)
Capillary type 	Continuous
Organs 	Muscle and lungs
Fenestrated
Pores/
Inter-endothelial
Junctions
(B)
< 5 nm
Non-fenestrated capillary
(nervous system, muscle
connective tissue, lung)
Erythrocytes
Glycocalyx
Basement
membrane
& extracellular
matrix
Fenestrated capillary
(endocrine, choroid plexus, gut mucosa)
Sinusoidal
Kidney, small intestine
and endocrine glands
Liver, bone marrow
and spleen
5–15 nm 	> 50 nm
Sinusoidal capillary
(liver, bone marrow and spleen)
Fenestrated capillary
(glomerular)
Endothelial cells
Figure 33.22 A. Types of capillaries: sinusoidal, fenestrated, and continuous or non-fenestrated. B. Capillaries and associated glycocalyx and basement
membrane. Fenestrated capillaries exist in most tissues. Non-sinusoidal non-fenestrated capillaries have a continuous basement membrane.
Interendothelial cell breaks between cell junctions are the primary pathway for transvascular fluid flux.

-- 652 of 1450 --

Chapter 33: Cardiovascular Physiology 	637
and intravenous fluid replacement regimens that produce fluid
overload. A more accurate depiction of transcapillary fluid flux is
represented by the revised Starling equation (Fig. 33.23):
J 	K 	P 	P	v 	f 	c 	i 	p 	g
where πg is the COP of the ultrafiltrate on the underside of the
glycocalyx. πg is normally very low, for two reasons; σ is high, or the
outward flow of the ultrafiltrate prevents protein diffusion between
the subglycocalyx fluid and the pericapillary interstitial fluid.
The filtration of fluid across the microvascular endothelial bar-
rier constitutes the primary mechanism for removal of excess
fluid from the bloodstream, the formation of lymph, and increases
in interstitial fluid volume particularly during excess IV fluid
administration [140]. Increases in Pc (e.g., volume overload,
venous obstruction, and heart failure) and increases Kf (e.g., hista-
mine, cytokines, and kinins) or decreases in πp (e.g., hypopro-
teinemia) can lead to fluid accumulation in the interstitial space,
resulting in edema particularly when the lymphatic circulation is
impaired (Box 33.2). Interstitial edema increases the diffusion
distance for oxygen and other nutrients and collapses capillaries
in swollen tissue (capillary no-reflow), especially in encapsulated
organs (e.g., brain and kidney) compromising cellular metabolism
and impairing nutritive tissue perfusion. Edema formation and
capillary no-reflow (i.e., capillary occlusion by swollen endothe-
lial or muscle cells) also act to limit the diffusional removal of
potentially toxic by-products of cellular metabolism. Edema is
facilitated by an increase in Pc but also by degradation of the gly-
cocalyx [141]. Decreases in Pc (hypotension and hypovolemia)
and increases in πp (hyperproteinemia and dehydration) favor
fluid retention or fluid reabsorption into the vascular compart-
ment (autotransfusion) and reduce the potential for fluid to
accumulate in interstitial space [142]. Anesthesia, anesthetic
drugs, the volume (mL/kg) and rate (mL/kg/min) of fluid admin-
istration, the type of fluid administered, and the anesthetic proto-
col can produce important effects on the Starling forces and the
glycocalyx that lead to interstitial fluid accumulation [121,143].
For example, many anesthetic drugs and anesthetic techniques
decrease Pc , causing a transient fluid reabsorption from the inter-
stitial space and hemodilution. If the anesthetic drug or technique
produces mild precapillary vasodilation, however, Pc may increase,
promoting transcapillary fluid flux and interstitial fluid accumu-
lation (e.g., edema). Several anticancer drugs (e.g., doxorubicin),
anesthetic drugs, (e.g., morphine and meperidine), and drug dilu-
ents (e.g., cremophor EL) produce histamine release, thereby
(A) 	(B)
Classical Starling principle
Net transvascular fluid movement 	Net transvascular fluid movement
Capillary
pressure
(Pc )
Capillary
pressure
(Pc )
Interstitial
fluid pressure
(Pi )
Plasma colloid
osmotic pressure
(πc)
Plasma colloid
osmotic pressure
(πc)
Interstitial colloid
osmotic pressure
(πi )
JV = Kf (Pc – Pi) – σ(πc – π¡ ) 	JV = Kf (Pc – Pi) – σ(πc – πg )
Revised Starling principle
GLX
GLX
To thoracic
duct
Interstitial
fluid pressure
(Pi )
Interstitial colloid
osmotic pressure
(πi )
To
thoracic duct
Lymphatic System
Figure 33.23 Classical and revised Starling principle of transcapillary fluid flux. A. Classical: Transcapillary fluid flux is determined by four classic Starling
forces (Pc
, Pi
, πc
, and πi
). Blue arrows indicate net force imbalance and the direction and magnitude of fluid filtration and absorption. B. Revised: Starling
equation forces predicted by the glycocalyx-cleft model (Pc
, Pi
, πc
, and πg
). Fluid filtration reabsorption is primarily due to capillary hydrostatic pressure
(Pc
). Blue arrows indicate fluid filtration from the capillary throughout its length. These diagrams assume the filtration coefficient and the osmotic
reflection coefficient are minimally affected.
Box 33.2 Causes of increased interstitial fluid volume (i.e., edema).
Increased hydrostatic pressure
Arterial dilatation
Venular constriction
Increased systemic or pulmonary venous pressures
Decreased capillary osmotic pressure gradient
Decreased plasma protein (i.e., albumin)
Accumulation of interstitial osmotic substances (i.e., colloids)
Increased capillary permeability (i.e., endotheliopathy)
Inflammation (i.e., cytokines)
Substance P
Histamine
Kinins
Obstructed lymph flow
Lymph vessel obstruction
Lymphangitis
Fluid overload

-- 653 of 1450 --

638 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
increasing Kf and tissue fluid accumulation [144–146]. Fluid over-
load degrades the glycocalyx promoting interstitial fluid accumu-
lation (Table 33.5) [147].
Veins, venules, and venous capacitance
Veins are composed of an endothelial lining, elastic tissue, smooth
muscle, and fibrous tissue while venules have an endothelium sur-
rounded by fibrous tissue (Fig. 33.17). Like capillaries, the walls of
the smallest venules are very porous and serve as major sites for fluid
exchange. Fluid and macromolecular exchange occur most promi-
nently at venular cell junctions where phagocytic white blood cells
migrate from the blood into surrounding infected or diseased tis-
sues. Some venules act as postcapillary sphincters. Venules then
merge into small veins which are about two times as numerous as
arterioles and arteries and are the most compliant vessels in the body
(i.e., capacitance vessels) [148]. Sympathetic tone (i.e., venoconstric-
tion) has an important function in regulating capillary hydrostatic
pressure. Small and larger veins contain increasing amounts of
fibrous tissue in addition to smooth muscle and elastic tissue,
although their walls are much thinner than comparably sized arter-
ies. Larger veins (i.e., > 2 mm) contain valves that act in conjunction
with external compression (i.e., contracting muscles) and pressure
differences in the abdominal and thoracic cavities to facilitate the
return flow of blood to the right atrium [149]. The systemic venous
system is 30 times more compliant (i.e., distensible) than the sys-
temic arterial system and a major blood reservoir containing 60–70%
of the blood volume during resting conditions (Figs. 33.1 and 33.20;
Table 33.6). Splanchnic and cutaneous veins, unlike skeletal muscle
veins, have a high density of α1
- and α2
-adrenergic receptors, which,
when activated, help to mobilize blood into the circulation when
needed (see section on splanchnic circulation) [148,150,151].
Adjustments in venous capacitance are important in blood vol-
ume distribution and maintaining an effective or “stressed” circu-
lating blood volume. Stressed volume (Vs
) is the intravascular blood
volume required to produce a measurable increase in transmural
blood pressure and is a primary determinant of venous return.
Unstressed volume (Vus
) is the intravascular volume of blood
required to fill the circulatory system to capacity without increasing
the vascular transmural pressure [152]. Vus provides a recruitable
reservoir of blood that can be mobilized (e.g., during exercise,
trauma, and hemorrhage) to preserve Vs
. Only Vs is hemodynami-
cally active [152]. The mean circulatory filling pressure (MCFP) is
the pressure within the circulatory system when the heart is stopped
and blood pressure throughout the systemic circulatory system sta-
bilizes [152]. Some physiologists believe that MCFP and right atrial
pressure are the main determinants of venous return and, therefore,
CO (e.g., venous return curves), thereby neglecting the importance
of the heart and distribution of vascular segmental pressures and
volumes in determining CO [152–154]. Contemporary evidence,
however, suggests that cardiac contraction is the driving force for
venous return and CO and that venous return curves are mislead-
ing mythical abstractions that should be removed from educational
materials [154–157].
Smooth muscle metabolism
Vascular smooth muscle metabolism of carbohydrates and fatty
acids is characterized by a substantial production of lactic acid
even under fully oxygenated conditions [158,159]. While the role
of aerobic production of lactate in the energetics of smooth muscle
has not been completely defined, it likely serves as a mechanism
affording optimal coordination and modulation of glucose supply
and linking oxidative energy production to energy demand. The
vascular smooth muscle membrane contains microdomains and
ion channels that regulate cellular metabolism and cellular func-
tion. These include but are not limited to a host of G-protein-
coupled receptors (GPCRs), second messengers (e.g., adenylate
cyclase and phospholipase C), kinases (e.g., rho kinase, protein
kinase C, and protein kinase A), and ion channels (e.g., L-type cal-
cium channels and KATP channels) in close proximity that regulate
vascular smooth muscle function [158,159].
Smooth muscle contraction and relaxation
Smooth muscle is involuntary in non-striated muscle and funda-
mentally different from skeletal and cardiac muscle in terms of
structure, function, regulation of contraction, and excitation–
contraction coupling. Vascular smooth muscle is divided into two
subgroups: single-unit (unitary) and multiunit smooth muscle.
Unitary vascular smooth muscle predominates at precapillary
sphincter sites and is characterized by spontaneous activity initiated
by pacemaker areas that are activated by stretch. Unitary vascular
smooth muscle operates to maintain a constant local blood flow
despite changing perfusion pressures [158]. Multiunit smooth
muscle fibers are present in larger arteries and veins, are under
CNS control, do not usually respond to stretch, and override uni-
tary smooth muscle in order to regulate the distribution of body
blood flow [160,161]. Smooth muscle cell contraction is regulated
by receptor and mechanical (stretch) activation of the contractile
proteins, actin and myosin. A change in membrane potential initi-
ated by APs can also trigger contraction. All three mechanisms
(i.e., stretch, receptor, and AP) lead to increases in cytosolic Ca 2+
([Ca 2+
]i
) [159]. Increases in cytosolic Ca2+ via Ca2+ channels (i.e.,
receptor- operated Ca2+ channels) increase Ca 2+ release from intra-
cellular stores in the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Contractile activity in
smooth muscle is determined primarily by the phosphorylation of
the myosin light chain (MLC). Intracellular Ca2+ combines with the
protein calmodulin and the Ca 2+
- calmodulin complex activates
MLC kinase (MLCK), phosphorylating MLC, which results in the
interaction of myosin with actin and contraction (Fig. 33.24).
Energy released from ATP results in the cycling of myosin–actin
crossbridges and contraction. Low levels of phosphorylation of the
MLC maintain basal levels of vascular smooth muscle tone [162].
Sensitization of the contractile proteins to Ca2+ is signaled by the
RhoA/Rho kinase pathway inhibiting dephosphorylation of tyros-
ine light chain, thereby maintaining sustained force generation.
Table 33.6 Distribution of blood volume and average number of vessels.
Segment 	% of Intravascular
volume
Average number of
individual vessels
Aorta 	2.0 	1
Large arteries 	4.0 	40
Main arterial branches 	3.4 	600
Terminal branches 	1.7 	1800
Small arteries 	2.7 	40 × 10 6
Arterioles 	1.0 	400 × 10 6
Capillaries, postcapillary venules 	3.9 	7.600 × 10 6
Venules 	25.6 	1200 × 10 6
Small veins 	18.6 	80 × 10 6
Main venous branches 	18.5 	600
Large veins 	15.2 	40
Vena cava 	3.4 	2

-- 654 of 1450 --

Chapter 33: Cardiovascular Physiology 	639
Plasmalemmal calcium (Ca2+
) channels are the principal routes
whereby Ca2+ enters vascular smooth muscle cells [162]. Various
types of Ca 2+ channels have been identified including voltage-
operated Ca2+ channels (VOCCs), receptor-operated Ca 2+ channels
(ROCCs), and store-operated Ca2+ channels (SOCCs). ROCCs are
further subdivided into ligand-gated Ca2+ channels and second
messenger- operated Ca2+ channels [162]. ROCCs can be blocked by
calcium antagonists (e.g., verapamil, diltiazem, or nifedipine) [160].
All play a role in increasing intracellular Ca2+ concentration, but
VOCCs are believed to be crucial in the physiologic regulation of
vascular smooth muscle tone. Cytosolic [Ca2+
] is reduced by plasma
membrane Ca2+ ATPase (PMCA), sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+
ATPase (SERCA), the Na+
–Ca2+ exchanger (NCX), and cytosolic
Ca2+
- binding proteins (e.g., calmodulin). Both PMCA-mediated
Ca 2+ extrusion and SERCA-mediated Ca2+ uptake play a major role
in decreasing vascular smooth muscle [Ca2+
]i
. Various agonist (e.g.,
norepinephrine, epinephrine, angiotensin II, endothelin, etc.)
induce smooth muscle contraction by binding to GPCRs that stim-
ulate phospholipase C, which activates the membrane lipid phos-
phatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP 2
) to catalyze the formation
of two second messengers: inositol trisphosphate (IP3
) and diacylg-
lycerol (DAG). Activation of IP3 receptor channels is believed to
play a primary physiologic role in intracellular Ca 2+ mobilization.
The binding of IP3 to receptors on the sarcoplasmic reticulum
results in the release of Ca2+ into the cytosol (Fig. 33.24). Notably,
this calcium-induced calcium release (CICR) mechanism is consid-
ered essential for maintaining cellular Ca 2+ homeostasis in vascular
smooth muscle cells [161,162].
In addition to the Ca2+
- dependent activation of MLCK, MLC
phosphorylation is also regulated by MLC phosphatase (MLCP)
that removes high-energy phosphate from MLC, thereby initiating
smooth muscle relaxation (Fig. 33.24) [162]. Smooth muscle relaxa-
tion occurs as a result of removal of the contractile stimulus,
decreases in [Ca 2+
]i
, and an increase in MLCP activity, or by a sub-
stance that directly inhibits the contractile mechanism. A decrease
in the [Ca2+
]i by Ca2+ uptake into the sarcoplasmic reticulum is
dependent on ATP hydrolysis. Sarcoplasmic Ca2+ binding proteins
(e.g., calmodulin) also contribute to decreased intracellular Ca 2+
concentrations. The plasma membrane also contains NCXs and
Ca 2+
–Mg2+ ATPases, providing an additional mechanism for reduc-
ing the concentration of activator Ca 2+ inside the cell [160,162].
Most volatile and intravenous anesthetics, including ketamine,
inhibit vascular smooth muscle contractile activity at clinically
relevant concentrations [163–165]. Vasoconstriction caused by
many common endogenous and exogenous receptor agonists
including epinephrine, norepinephrine, dopamine, dobutamine,
and phenylephrine is blunted by anesthetic drugs [165]. Receptor-
operated activation, VOCCs, SERCA, and myofilament Ca 2+ sen-
sitivity are inhibited by all currently available volatile and
injectable anesthetics [160,161]. Isoflurane, sevoflurane, propofol,
and benzodiazepines inhibit smooth muscle contraction by block-
ing calcium channels, especially the VOCCs, and by raising intra-
cellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and cyclic
guanosine monophosphate (cGMP). Volatile anesthetic-induced
suppression of smooth muscle contraction is also attributable to
mechanisms independent of [Ca 2+ ] i , which involve the depression
of Ca 2+ sensitization mediated by protein kinase C [165]. ATP-
sensitive potassium (KATP ) channels present in vascular smooth
muscle cells play an important role in the vascular responses to a
variety of pharmacological and endogenous vasodilators [166].
The KATP channels are inhibited by intracellular ATP and by sul-
phonylurea agents. Pharmacological vasodilators are used to
lower arterial blood pressure (e.g., cromakalim and pinacidil) and
many anesthetics, including isoflurane, sevoflurane, and propofol,
directly activate KATP channels resulting in K + exit from the cell
and membrane hyperpolarization [163–167]. The associated
membrane hyperpolarization closes voltage-dependent Ca 2+
channels, which leads to a reduction in intracellular Ca 2+ and vas-
odilation [166]. Isoflurane activates KATP channels via protein
kinase A activation [167]. By contrast, hypotension after systemic
Receptor-operated channels
+ 	+
Ca2+
Voltage-operated channels
(ICaT, I CaL
)
Sarcolemma
Ca 2+
Calmodulin
+
Myosin
light chain
kinase
(MLCK)
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
+ 	–
P
Ca2+ release from SR
Actin–myosin interaction
P
Myosin
light chain
phosphatase
(MLCP)
Contraction
SL, SR Ca pump reuptake
Ca i-Nao exchange (SL)
Lower
[Ca] i
Turn-off
of ICa(s)
Relaxation
Ca2+ slow
-channel inhib
AP repol
I k stim
Figure 33.24 Vascular smooth muscle excitation–
contraction coupling. Calcium entry into smooth
muscle cells through L-type channels located in the
caveolae of the cell membrane is initiated by
depolarization, hormones, or neurotransmitters.
Intracellular calcium stimulates the release of calcium
from the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) by way of
ryanodine receptors and IP3
. Some agonists act on
smooth muscle membrane receptors (not shown) to
stimulate phosphatidylinositol turnover and the
production of inositol triphosphate (IP 3
) and
diacylglycerol (DAG). IP 3 releases calcium from the SR
and DAG activates protein kinase C, which stimulates
the activity of the voltage-dependent slow calcium
channels. Increases in intracellular calcium also interact
with calmodulin to form a calcium–calmodulin
complex that stimulates myosin light chain kinase
(MLCK), which together with intracellular calcium
facilitates actin–myosin interaction. Contraction
terminates when myosin light chain phosphatase
(MLCP) dephosphorylates the myosin light chain and
intracellular calcium is reduced by sarcolemmal (SL)
intracellular calcium–extracellular sodium exchange, SR
reuptake, and when the slow calcium channels turn off.

-- 655 of 1450 --

640 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
propofol administration is mainly caused by its direct relaxation
effect on vascular smooth muscle [163]. Notably, K ATP channels
are also activated by pathophysiological conditions, such as
hypoxia, ischemia, acidosis, and septic shock [166].
Blood
Blood is a non- Newtonian (i.e., viscosity changes when flow rate
changes) viscous fluid (i.e., 3.5–5.5 cP) composed of approximately
60% plasma and 40% blood cells and is responsible for carrying
oxygen and nutrients to tissues and transporting the by-products
of cellular metabolism (e.g., CO 2
, drugs metabolites) to the organs
of elimination. This suspension of red and white blood cells and
platelets in plasma is responsible for maintaining a normal internal
environment, defending against infections and toxins (immunity),
and preventing or limiting hemorrhage (hemostasis) [168,169].
Blood volume averages 5.5–8.5% of body weight in many animal
species, but this varies with fitness level (Table 33.7).
RBCs (i.e., erythrocytes) contain the iron-rich protein hemo-
globin (Hb). Hemoglobin exists as a tetramer (i.e., molecular
weight, 64 kDa) consisting of two α and two β polypeptide chains.
Each polypeptide chain contains heme and a central iron molecule
that can bind oxygen [168]. Heme must be in the reduced or ferrous
state (Fe2+
) to bind oxygen. Hemoglobin’s affinity for oxygen is
determined by the partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PCO2
), pH,
body temperature, the RBC concentration of 2,3-diphosphoglycerate
(2,3-DPG) and the chemical structure of Hb (Fig. 33.25A) [171].
RBC 2,3-DPG concentration controls Hb oxygen release to tis-
sues [171]. A decrease in pH or increase in RBC PCO 2 , 2,3-DPG, or
temperature decreases Hb’s affinity for oxygen and vice versa
thereby helping to maintain a physiologically relevant P 50 (i.e., PO 2
where Hb is 50% saturated with oxygen). Mammalian P 50 values
normally range between 23 to 28 mmHg and are used as a compara-
tive indicator of Hb affinity for oxygen (Fig. 33.25A) [172].
Oxygen delivery (DO 2 ) to tissues is an essential function of blood
and is primarily dependent upon the blood hemoglobin (Hb) con-
centration since oxygen is relatively insoluble in plasma (i.e.,
0.003 mL O 2 per 100 mL of plasma per mmHg). Therefore, 100 mL
of plasma carries approximately 0.3 mL (i.e., vol %) O2 when the
partial pressure of O 2 (PaO2
) is 100 mmHg (e.g., 0.003 mL ×
100 mmHg). Hemoglobin’s oxygen-binding capacity (i.e., the
amount of oxygen that chemically combines with Hb) is 1.34–
1.39 mL/g Hb when 100% saturated. Oxygen-binding capacity does
not include oxygen dissolved in plasma. This indicates that the
amount of O2 carried by blood with a Hct of 45% (i.e., Hb = 1/3 Hct;
1/3 × 45 = 15 g/dL Hb) is approximately 20 mL/100 mL (i.e., 15 g/
dL × 1.34 mL = 20.1 mL/dL) if each gram of hemoglobin carries
1.34 mL of O 2 and is 100% saturated. The total amount of O 2 carried
by blood (i.e., bound to Hb and dissolved in plasma) is termed the
“oxygen content” (i.e., CaO2
) and is determined by the Hb oxygen
capacity, % Hb saturation (SaO2
), the amount of O2 dissolved in
plasma, and the PaO2 :
CaO 	Hb 	SaO 	PaO	2 	2 	2	1 34 	0 003	. 	.
The CaO2 is 20.4 mL/dL when blood PaO2 is 100 mmHg and [Hb]
is 15 g/dL (i.e., CaO2 = ([1.34 mL × 15 g/dL) × 1] + (0.003 × 100) =
20.4 mL) emphasizing the importance of hemoglobin as an oxygen
(B)
(A)
100
90
80
Hb % Saturation
15
60
50
20 	P 50
↓ pH
↑ CO 2
↑ Temp.
↑ 2,3-DPG
10
5
0
0 	28 	40 	60
PO 2 (mmHg)
Relative oxygen
delivery
100	80
60
Relative Oxygen Delivery (%)
40
	Hemoglobin
0
80
100
Hemoglobin (g/dL)
20
Viscosity
50
10.0
7.5
5.0
2.5
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
10 	30 	70
PCV (%)
Viscosity (cP)
O 2 Content (CaO
2 )
for Hb 15 g/dL
40
Vol%
20
50
Figure 33.25 The oxyhemoglobin-dissociation relationship. A.
Hemoglobin (Hb) saturation with oxygen (O2 ) versus the partial pressure
of oxygen (PO 2
). The relationship is right shifted (Hb has less affinity for
O 2
) when pH is decreased (i.e., acidosis) and carbon dioxide [CO 2
]), body
temperature, and 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG) are increased. B.
Oxygen delivery is dependent upon blood Hb concentration and viscosity.
Viscosity increases as Hb concentration increases. Oxygen delivery (DO2
)
is maximal at a PCV of approximately 30%.
Table 33.7 Average blood volume in select animal species.
Animal 	Blood volume (mL/kg)
Dog 	80
> 90 in racing Greyhounds
Cat 	55
Horse 	75
Cow 	60
Sheep 	60
Goat 	70
Pig 	65
Rabbit 	60
Rat 	65
Poultry 	65
Monkey 	65
Human 	75
Source: Adapted from Burke [170].

-- 656 of 1450 --

Chapter 33: Cardiovascular Physiology 	641
carrier. Tissue oxygen delivery DO2 is determined by systemic
blood flow (Q) or CO multiplied by CaO 2
:
DO 	CaO	2 	2	Q
DO2 is significantly influenced by [Hb] and blood viscosity during
normal resting conditions (Fig. 33.25B).
Methemoglobin is a stable oxidized form of Hb that is spontane-
ously produced when the iron contained within the Hb molecule
is oxidized to the ferric state (Fe 3+
). This form of Hb cannot bind
oxygen and is usually below 3% of the total Hb concentration.
Hemoglobin is maintained in the ferrous state (Fe 2+ ) inside RBCs
by reduced NADH–methemoglobin reductase. Carboxyhemoglobin
(e.g., carbon monoxide poisoning), sulfhemoglobin, and cyan-
methemoglobin are other forms of Hb that interfere with Hb’s abil-
ity to carry oxygen. The binding of oxygen to hemoglobin has
important vasoregulatory effects by promoting Hb binding of nitric
oxide (NO) and the formation of S-nitrosohemoglobin (SNO) [173–
176]. Current evidence suggests that deoxygenation of hemoglobin
is accompanied by an allosteric transition of SNO (i.e., transitions
from R [relaxed]-oxygenated to T [tense]-deoxygenated state) that
releases NO [177]. The release of NO relaxes vessels and increases
blood flow [177,178]. Thus, by sensing the physiological oxygen
gradient in tissues, Hb exploits conformational changes in SNO
to bring about changes in local blood flow and oxygen delivery
(Fig. 33.26).
Tissue oxygen deprivation induced by inadequate PaO 2
, low
blood flow, low [Hb], or exposure to substances that limit Hb’s O 2
carrying capabilities (e.g., carbon monoxide) activates genes that
initiate angiogenesis, glucose metabolism, and increase the produc-
tion of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) as well as activates fibro-
blasts in the renal cortex to increase erythropoietin synthesis and
the differentiation of proerythroblasts to RBCs [179,180].
Cell- free Hb (e.g., arising from hemolysis) is maintained in the
ferrous (Fe 2+
) state and reacts with NO to inhibit NO signal-
ing [178,181]. Cell-free heme and iron also promote oxidative and
inflammatory injury via activation of macrophages and mono-
cytes [182,183]. Homeostatic protective pathways that normally
limit these NO and oxidation reactions include haptoglobin- and
hemopexin-mediated sequestration of hemoglobin monomers,
dimers, and heme [182,183]. Hemoxygenase and biliverdin reduc-
tase signaling detoxify heme and iron and provide catalytic antioxi-
dant, antiproliferative, and anti-inflammatory effects. There is little
to no information regarding the effects of anesthetic drugs on Hb
oxygen affinity and what little literature does exist suggests that
inhalational anesthetic drugs do not change the oxygen dissociation
curve or jeopardize tissue oxygenation [184]. Notably, several local
anesthetics (e.g., prilocaine and benzocaine) and drug diluent
excipients (e.g., benzyl alcohol) are known to predispose to methe-
moglobinemia, especially in cats [185,186]. In addition, sevoflurane
has been demonstrated to inhibit the accumulation and expression
of HIF following ischemia reperfusion injury [187].
Lymphatic system
The lymphatic system is part of the circulatory and immune systems
and consists of a dense and diffuse network of lymph channels (i.e.,
lymph capillaries), lymph vessels, nodes, ducts, organs (e.g., bone
marrow and thymus), and tissues (e.g., tonsils and spleen) [188].
Lymphatic capillaries exist in all vascularized organs and tissues
except retina, bone, and brain [189,190]. The interstitial space is
the primary source of lymph [191]. Like peripheral tissue beds, a
glymphatic system of perivascular channels, formed by astroglia
cells, provides efficient elimination of fluid, soluble proteins, and
metabolic wastes from the CNS [192].
Systemic lymph (i.e., filtered plasma) is formed as an ultrafiltrate
of the capillary microcirculation supplemented by proteins of cel-
lular origin (i.e., 25% extracellular, 32% from cytoplasm, 21% from
nucleus, and 11% from plasma membrane). Lymph contains large
numbers of lymphocytes that are essential for the development of
the adaptive immune response [193,194]. Lymph vessels contain
smooth muscle within their walls and function to provide the one-
way transport of interstitial fluid, proteins, lipids, and waste prod-
ucts back to the circulation blood via the thoracic duct and other
lymph vessel-venous anastomoses (Figs. 33.1 and 33.27). Interstitial
fluid balance is critically modulated by interstitial fluid pressure
and lymphatic vessel smooth muscle contractions. Lymph nodes
filter the interstitial fluid containing phagocytic cells (e.g., mac-
rophages and monocytes) and proteolytic enzymes that break down
bacteria, viruses, and waste products [188,190]. Lymphatic drain-
age is mainly driven by NO-dependent rhythmic contractions of
lymph vessel smooth muscle and local skeletal muscle contractions
(i.e., lymphatic pump) [188]. Lymphatic capillaries (lacteals) collect
interstitial fluid (lymph) and chylomicrons (triglycerides, phospho-
lipids, cholesterol, and proteins) that is eventually returned to the
cranial vena cava and right atrium after passing through a series of
O2
O2
Lung
Tissue delivery
NO
SNO
O 2
O 2 	O 2
O 2
	O 2
Fe
Fe
S
Fe
Fe
Hb[FeNO]
Fe
Fe 	Fe
SNO-Hb
Fe
SNO
CO2
CO2
Lungs
Arteries	Veins
Tissues
↑PO2
↓PO2
R
R
T
R	T	T
Figure 33.26 Red blood cell Hb alternates between R (relaxed or
oxygenated) and T (tense and deoxygenated) states depending on PO2 and
PCO2
. Blood oxygenation in the lung produces the R state and promotes
S-nitrosylated Hb (SNO-Hb) formation. Endothelial nitric oxide (NO)
synthase is responsible for the production of the NO group in SNO-Hb.
RBCs offload O 2 as Hb senses falling PO2 in tissues, triggering the release
of NO thereby increasing blood flow to tissues. Source: Adapted from
McMahon et al. [177].

-- 657 of 1450 --

642 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
lymph vessels and lymph nodes (Fig. 33.1) [189]. Lymphatic
capillaries do not have a basement membrane but are lined with
a single layer of partly overlapping lymphatic endothelial cells
(LECs) [189,190]. The LECs are anchored to the extracellular
matrices and function as primary valves that unidirectionally con-
trol lymph fluid drainage when interstitial pressure increases
(Fig. 33.27). LECs modulate the inflammatory response by secret-
ing chemokines for recruitment of immune (e.g., dendritic) cells
into the lymphatic system. Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are highly
expressed in LECs and contribute to lipopolysaccharide-induced
lymphangiogenesis by chemotactic recruitment of macrophages
[195,196]. TLRs also act as the first line of host defense against
microbial infection and are pivotal in the development of both
innate and adaptive immune responses [197].
Hemodynamics and cardiac function
Hemodynamics is the study of blood flow and the circulation of
blood [198]. Direct (i.e., invasive; invading the circulatory system)
and indirect (i.e., non-invasive; not entering the body) methods for
assessing hemodynamic events include a host of both singular (e.g.,
pressure and blood flow velocity) and derived (e.g., resistance and
ejection fraction) parameters that may include simultaneous meas-
ures of temporally related electrical (e.g., ECG), mechanical (e.g.,
transit times), and acoustic (e.g., heart sounds) events [199]. Blood
pressure and blood flow velocity decrease as the total vascular
cross-sectional area increases ensuring adequate exchange of nutri-
ents and gases (Fig. 33.21). Hemodynamic measures should be
accurate (i.e., closeness of the measurement to the true value) and
precise (i.e., closeness of repeated measurements to each other) and
are used to identify normal and abnormal physiology, confirm opti-
mal tissue perfusion, and develop therapeutic plans. Uninterrupted
recordings of dynamic (i.e., continuously changing) cardiovascular
events provide the most clinically relevant information.
The primary function of the heart is to pump blood. Succinct
definitions of terms used to describe cardiac function should be
employed (Box 33.3). Many terms, however, are often controversial
and occasionally ambiguous. The reasons for this include the use of
different abbreviations to describe the same item (e.g., stroke vol-
ume abbreviated as SV or Vs
), the conflation of diverse terms (e.g.,
cardiac function versus performance), and the application of terms
developed from in vitro experiments to in vivo events (e.g., after-
load) [200]. For example, there are more than 20 different defini-
tions for the commonly used terms “preload” and “afterload” [200].
Furthermore, three terms (i.e., “performance,” “inotropy,” and “con-
tractility”) commonly employed to describe cardiac function are
often conflated but have different meanings. Cardiac performance
is determined by measuring changes in blood flow (i.e., cardiac out-
put) and inotropy is determined by measuring changes in myocar-
dial force [201,202]. Both are load (i.e., preload, afterload, and heart
rate) dependent [201–203]. Conversely, cardiac contractility is
load-independent (Box 33.3) [204–206].
Blood flow
Blood flow (Q) is determined by the driving pressure (i.e., P1 – P2
)
and the resistance to flow (R) as derived by the hydraulic equivalent
of Ohm’s law (I = E/R) where I is current flow, E is electromotive
force (i.e., voltage), and R is resistance.
Q 	P 	P 	R	1 	2 /
Resistance to blood flow (e.g., systemic vascular resistance
[SVR]) is determined by blood vessel geometry (i.e., vessel radius,
length, and morphology), compliance, blood volume, and the
characteristics of the fluid medium (i.e., rheological properties),
key among which is blood viscosity (η). The steady, non-pulsatile,
laminar flow of Newtonian fluids (i.e., homogenous fluids, such
as water or saline, where viscosity does not change with flow
velocity or tube geometry) is described by the Hagen–Poiseuille
equation:
P 	P 	Q 	L 	r	1 	2
4
	8 	/
Tissue fluid 	Capillary 	Tissue cells
Low
pressure
Lymphatic
Interstitial fluid pressure (mmHg)
Increased lymph flow
↑ Pc
↓ πc
↑ πi
↑ Capillary permeability
–6 	–4 	–2 	0 	2 	4
Plasma exuded
High
pressure
Arteriole
Relative lymph flow
Venule
20
10
1
Figure 33.27 Lymphatic capillaries (green) collect and transfer interstitial tissue fluid (i.e., lymph) to larger afferent collecting vessels that drain into
lymph nodes. Black arrows indicate outward transvascular fluid flux. Increases in capillary hydrostatic pressure (Pc
), interstitial oncotic pressure (πi
), and
capillary permeability increase lymph flow. Decreases in capillary oncotic pressure (πc
) increase lymph flow. Source: Adapted from Shang et al. [189].

-- 658 of 1450 --

Chapter 33: Cardiovascular Physiology 	643
Therefore
Q 	P 	P 	r 	L	1 	2
4 8	/
where P1 – P2 is the driving pressure, L is the length of the tube, η
is the viscosity of the fluid, r4 is the radius to the fourth power, and
8/π is a constant of proportionality. The maintenance of laminar
flow (i.e., smooth regular paths) is a fundamental assumption of the
Hagen–Poiseuille equation [207]. This equation is frequently used
to determine blood flow but must be kept in perspective since blood
is not a homogenous fluid (i.e., it is non-Newtonian), viscosity is
not constant but varies with flow rate, blood vessels are not rigid but
distensible and progressively decrease in radius, and blood flow is
only intermittently laminar, may contain vortices (i.e., regions in
which flow revolves around an axis line), and may be turbulent.
Vascular resistance and autoregulatory processes regulate the distri-
bution of blood flow throughout the body [208,209]. Pulsatile
blood flow is generally considered to be laminar in large straight
vessels and takes the form of a parabola but can become turbulent
where blood vessels curve or branch, or when constrictions are
encountered (Fig. 33.28). Turbulence is predicted by a dimension-
less number, Reynolds number (Re):
Re 	Dv/
where ρ is the fluid density, D is the vessel diameter, and v is the
mean blood flow velocity (Fig. 33.28) [210]. Blood viscosity (η) is
inversely proportional to Re. Re values greater than 2000 suggest the
development of turbulent blood flow that produces periodic wave
fluctuations and vibrations of surrounding tissue structures leading
to murmurs and, with time, weakening of the supporting elements
of the vessel wall resulting in vascular dilation (i.e., aneurysm).
Anemia and chronic or acute hemodilution (e.g., fluid therapy)
reduce hematocrit and blood viscosity, increasing Re and the
potential for a “functional” or “innocent” cardiac murmur. Flow
restrictions caused by congenital diseases (e.g., aortic or pulmonic
stenosis) produce an increase in blood flow velocity as predicted by
the continuity equation (i.e., total blood flow through different
areas of a continuous intact vascular system must be equal;
Box 33.3 Definitions for popular hemodynamic terms.
Afterload: operationally defined in terms of the external factors that
oppose or prevent muscle fiber shortening. In vitro afterload is the weight
(load) the muscle fiber or sarcomere must lift or shorten against. In vivo
indices of afterload include total peripheral resistance, peak systolic
pressure, ventricular wall tension during ejection, and arterial (aortic input)
impedance (i.e., the hindrance to blood flow into a great artery imposed
by its stiffness; the combination of both resistance and reactance).
Capacitance: the relationship between volume and distending pressure
in a vessel, vascular bed, or circulation. Vascular capacitance curves are
constructed from the relationship between blood volume and mean
circulatory filling pressure.
Cardiac performance: the heart’s ability to pump blood (i.e., cardiac
output) that is determined by heart rate and stroke volume. Cardiac
performance is load- (i.e., preload, afterload, heart rate) dependent
regardless of changes in force development or the velocity of muscle
shortening (see Preload, Afterload). Both stroke volume and cardiac
output are inversely related to afterload when preload is held constant.
Compliance: the ratio of the change in volume (ΔV) to a change in
pressure (ΔP) in a vessel; the ability of a blood vessel or chamber to distend.
Contractility: the actin-activated, intrinsic, kinetically controlled,
chemomechanical processes responsible for the development of force and
velocity. Contractility is load-independent.
Force-frequency relationship (Bowditch, treppe, staircase effect,
chronotropic- inotropy): operationally defined as an increase in the force
of cardiac contraction in response to an increase in heart rate.
Heart rate: operationally defined as the number of times the heart beats
in 1 min. Heart rate or frequency-dependent increases in sarcomere force
and velocity occur in all mammals.
Heterometric autoregulation (Cyon–Frank–Starling mechanism):
operationally defined as a change (increase/decrease) in the force of
contraction in response to a directionally similar change in muscle fiber or
sarcomere length (i.e., length-dependent).
Homeometric autoregulation (von Anrep effect in vivo; slow force
response in vitro): operationally defined as a progressive increase in force
leading to a decrease in left ventricular end-diastolic pressure that occurs after
an initial increase in afterload or attributed to angiotensin II release and an
increase in the calcium transient through activation of the Na+
-Ca2+ exchanger.
Inotropy: the ability of a muscle to develop force. Inotropy is load- (i.e.,
preload, afterload, heart rate) dependent.
Mean circulatory filling pressure: the average pressure in the
circulatory system when the heart is acutely stopped, blood is redistrib-
uted, and all pressures are the same throughout the system.
Preload: operationally defined as the initial muscle fiber or sarcomere
length (i.e., in vitro) just prior to muscle contraction. In vivo, preload is
often described in terms of the end-diastolic volume, end-diastolic
pressure, or end-diastolic wall stress.
Stressed volume: the volume of blood in the venous system, in addition
to the unstressed volume, that increases the transmural pressure above
zero. The sum of stressed (~30% of total) and unstressed (~70% of total)
volumes is the total blood volume in the venous system during normal
resting conditions.
Unstressed volume: the volume of blood in the venous system required
to fill the vasculature to a transmural pressure of 0 mmHg.
Ventricular elastance (“stiffness”): operationally defined as a change in
pressure for a given change in volume (dP/dV mmHg/mL). Greater
ventricular elastance increases the tendency for the wall to recoil toward
its original volume on removal of the distending force; the lower the
elastance, the higher the compliance.
Ventricular–vascular coupling: represents the interaction between the
ventricle and the elastance of the corresponding great artery (e.g., aorta,
pulmonary artery) expressed as a dimensionless ratio between the
end-systolic elastance of the ventricle (Ees ) and the aorta or pulmonary
trunk (Ea) at a time when muscle fibers have maximally contracted, and
the ventricle has ejected its stroke volume.
Source: Adapted from Norton [200].
v0 	vmax	Velocity
2r
Crossing midline
Vortices
Turbulent flow 	Laminar flow
Re = (v × D × ρ)/η
Axial
stream
Figure 33.28 Velocity profile for laminar (i.e., blood moves in ordered,
parallel layers; straight red arrows) and turbulent (i.e., chaotic; curved and
circular red arrows) blood flow. Velocity is highest in the center of the
blood vessel during laminar flow. Turbulence occurs at a critical flow rate
as determined by the Reynolds (Re) number. An increased perfusion
pressure is required during turbulent blood flow to maintain tissue
perfusion. v, mean velocity; D, vessel diameter; ρ, blood density; η, blood
viscosity.

-- 659 of 1450 --

644 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
therefore, blood flow through a narrowed orifice must increase).
Blood flow immediately downstream from narrowed or partially
obstructed vessels often contains vortices and becomes turbulent.
Cardiac (e.g., aortic, pulmonic stenosis) and vascular diseases (e.g.,
thrombophlebitis) that narrow blood vessels increase blood flow
velocity across the area of constriction producing turbulence and
murmurs. The heart must produce a greater pressure to pump tur-
bulent blood flow resulting in increased work and myocardial oxy-
gen consumption (i.e., MVO 2
). Blood flow velocity and the pressure
gradient across a constricted orifice can be quantified using Doppler
echocardiography and the Bernoulli equation:
P 	v	4 2
where ΔP is the pressure change and v is blood flow velocity with
the assumption that velocity distal to the obstruction is significantly
greater than the velocity proximal to the obstruction and is, there-
fore, ignored [211].
Blood flow distribution is determined by tissue metabolism
and oxygen requirements (Table 33.8). Tissues with higher oxy-
gen demand, therefore, receive a greater percentage of the CO.
Anesthetic drugs are delivered to the various tissues based upon the
distribution of CO. Approximately 75% of the CO is distributed to
“vessel-rich” group tissues (heart, brain, liver, kidney, and adrenal
glands) compared to muscle group (muscle and skin) or “vessel-
poor” group (fat, bone, and cartilage) tissues during resting condi-
tions (Fig. 33.29) [212]. Blood flow distribution changes during
stressful conditions (e.g., fear and pain exercise) and influences the
onset, magnitude, and duration of drug-related effects. Regulatory
control of blood flow and compensatory responses are integrated
through the combined effects of central and peripheral nervous
system activity, the influence of circulating (humoral) vasoactive
substances, and local tissue mediators. These regulatory processes
maintain blood flow at an appropriate level while distributing blood
to meet the needs of tissue beds that have the greatest oxygen
demand.
Blood pressure
Blood pressure is the force that moves blood and is exerted against
vascular walls. Measurement of arterial blood pressure is one of the
fastest and most informative methods for assessing cardiovascular
function and, when done correctly, provides an indication of hemo-
dynamic trends, drug effects, and aberrant cardiovascular events.
The factors that determine arterial blood pressure include HR,
stroke volume (SV), vascular resistance, vascular compliance, and
blood volume. The volume of blood in the vascular system and vas-
cular tone are key variables affecting arterial blood pressure. If
either CO (i.e., flow [Q]) or vascular resistance (R) increase indi-
vidually or together, pressure (P) will increase (i.e., P = Q × R), and
vice versa. The Hagen–Poiseuille equation (Q = P/R; R = 8Lη /r4π)
predicts that vascular resistance will increase as blood viscosity and
vessel length increase and vessel radius decreases [206]. Clinically, a
mean arterial blood pressure greater than 60 mmHg is required to
provide adequate blood flow to most organs realizing that both
systolic (Ps
) and diastolic (Pd
) arterial pressures provide additional
information. Mean arterial blood pressure can be estimated as:
P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P	m 	d 	s 	d 	m 	d 	s	/ 	or 	/ 	/	1 3 	2 3 	1 3
where Pm
, Ps
, and Pd are mean (m), systolic (s), and diastolic (d)
blood pressures, respectively (Fig. 33.30A) [213]. Ps increases, and
Pm and Pd decrease in more distal conduit arteries (Fig. 33.30B). The
difference between Ps and Pd is known as the “arterial pulse pres-
sure” (PP = Ps – Pd
). The Ps
, Pd
, and Pm can be measured, calculated,
or estimated using invasive (direct) vascular catheterization or non-
invasive (indirect) Doppler or oscillometric techniques.
Intravascular pressure exerts tension on the vessel wall as
described by the law of Laplace:
T 	h 	P 	hT r	Pr / 	or 	/	2 	2
where T is wall tension, P is developed pressure, r is the internal
radius, and h is the chamber or vessel wall thickness [214]. Tension
is a key determinant of tissue myocardial oxygen consumption
Pl Palv
VRG: brain, liver, kidneys
MG: muscle, skin
FG: fat
VPG: bone, cartilage, ligaments
P MVR
PVRG
PMG
PFG
PVPG
Part
Tissue
group
VRG
MG
FG
VPG
75%
18%
5.5%
1.5%
9%
50%
19%
22%
%
Cardiac
output
%
Body
weight
Figure 33.29 Regulation of cardiac output to various tissue groups based
upon tissue type (i.e., vessel-rich group, muscle group, fat group, and
vessel-poor group), percent of cardiac output, and percent body weight.
Vessel-rich group tissues receive the greatest percentage of cardiac output
based upon tissue weight and rapidly equilibrate with anesthetic drugs.
Table 33.8 Distribution of blood flow (i.e., cardiac
output) during resting conditions.
Organ 	% of Total
Heart 	5
Brain 	15
Kidneys 	20
Splanchnic organs 	25
Skeletal muscle 	20
Skin 	5
Other 	10

-- 660 of 1450 --

Chapter 33: Cardiovascular Physiology 	645
(MVO2
) and factors that increase tension development by cardiac
muscle cells, the rate of tension development, or the number of ten-
sion generating cycles (e.g., increased HR) will increase MVO2
(Fig. 33.31) [215].
The arterial pulse pressure (PP = Ps – Pd
), pulse pressure wave-
form, and pulse pressure variation provide valuable information
regarding changes in vascular compliance, vessel tone, vascular
volume, and fluid responsiveness [214–217]. Increases or decreases
in pulse pressure are suggestive of cardiovascular disease. For
example, increases in PP (i.e., > 60 mmHg) suggest aortic regurgita-
tion or vasodilation (e.g., sepsis), while decreases in PP (i.e., <
20 mmHg) suggest severe cardiogenic shock, cardiac tamponade,
massive pulmonary embolism, or tension pneumothorax.
Pressure values and pressure waveform morphology change
as the pressure wave travels peripherally, with systolic pressure
increasing and mean and diastolic pressures decreasing (Fig. 33.30B).
Pulse pressure is proportional to the volume of blood ejected from
the ventricle (i.e., SV) during normal physiologic conditions but
may vary during disease. Drugs (e.g., acepromazine) or diseases
(e.g., hyperdynamic septic shock) that produce arterial dilation
increase vascular compliance, causing a rapid rise, short duration, a
rapid fall in the arterial waveform, and an increased pulse pres-
sure [217]. Situations that produce vasoconstriction decrease vas-
cular compliance and produce a longer-duration pulse waveform
and a slower fall in the systolic to diastolic blood pressure value,
thereby decreasing pulse pressure. The diastolic component of the
arterial pressure waveform can contain secondary and sometimes
tertiary pressure waveforms, particularly if the measuring site is in
a peripheral artery at a distance from the heart [218]. Secondary
and tertiary pulse-wave fluctuations may be indicative of normal or
elevated vascular tone in response to sympathetic nervous system
activity or the vascular effects of vasoactive drugs (e.g., dexmedeto-
midine or catecholamines).
Traditionally, arterial and central venous pressures values and
waveform morphology have been used to assess cardiovascular
status during anesthesia [218–220]. Emphasis is placed upon
Systolic
arterial
pressure
(Ps)
Pulse
pressure
(PP)
Diastolic
pressure
(Pd)
Pm = Pd + 1/ 3 (Ps – Pd)
=120 mmHg
= 40 mmHg
= 80 mmHg
Pm
Pm
Systole 	Diastole
Cardiac cycle time
Aorta 	Brachial 	Radial
Decreasing Pd
Site of arterial waveform
Femoral 	Dorsal pedal
120
(A)
(B)
100
Pressure (mmHg)
80
60
Increasing Ps
Figure 33.30 A. Arterial blood pressure. The mean arterial pressure (Pm
) represents the area under the arterial pressure curve divided by the duration of
the cardiac cycle. Pm is estimated by adding one-third of the difference between the systolic arterial pressure (Ps ) and diastolic arterial pressure (Pd ) to Pd
. Ps
minus Pd is the pulse pressure (PP). PP is normally about 40 mmHg. B. Ps increases and Pm and Pd decreases as arteries decrease in diameter.
Determinants
1. Tension development
2. Heart rate
3. Contractile state
4. Basal cost (membrane pumps)
h 	T = wall tension
P = pressure
r = radius
h = wall thickness
Law of Laplace: T = (P × r) / (2 × h)
Indirect index of myocardial oxygen consumption
Rate pressure product (RPP) = HR × Systolic blood pressure
r
P
T
Figure 33.31 Determinants of myocardial oxygen consumption (MVO2
).
Myocardial oxygen consumption is estimated by the law of Laplace:
ventricular wall tension is proportional to ventricular radius and
intraventricular pressure divided by two times the wall thickness.
Ventricular wall tension and heart rate are the two principal
determinants of MVO 2
.

-- 661 of 1450 --

646 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
maximum and minimum acceptable values, waveform contour,
pulse pressure variation, and expected changes associated with
anesthetic drugs or vasoactive therapies (e.g., vasopressors and
fluid administration). Caution is advised when assessing central
venous pressure, however, due to its dependence on multiple vari-
ables including blood volume, HR, venous return, right ventricular
function, and pulmonary arterial pressure [219].
Resistance
Factors opposing blood flow (i.e., afterload) are described and quan-
titated in terms of resistance, hindrance, and impedance. These
terms are frequently conflated but are not the same and should not
be used interchangeably. The Hagen–Poiseuille equation is the pop-
ular method employed for reporting vascular resistance (R):
R 	L 	r	8 	4
	/
R is usually derived by dividing the change in pressure by flow
(i.e., R = (P1 – P2
)/Q) and although convenient is arguably the least
accurate since, as stated previously, blood is not a Newtonian fluid,
vessels are not rigid tubes, and blood flow is not laminar in all parts
of the arterial tree. The rheological term that characterizes blood
flow conditions (i.e., blood flow velocity) is “shear rate,” which is
a function of blood flow velocity and vascular geometry. Blood vis-
cosity is shear rate (i.e., blood flow velocity) dependent. Viscosity
decreases as shear rate increases according to this equation:
shear stress dynes/cm 	/shear rate s	2 	1
where η is viscosity and shear stress is the force applied during pul-
satile blood flow between theoretic parallel layers of blood in the
blood vessel [221,222]. Shear rate gradually increases and blood vis-
cosity decreases as large arteries become smaller and is greatest in
the capillaries regardless of low blood flow rates [223,224]. This phe-
nomenon (decreased blood viscosity in smaller vessels) is known
as the “Fåhræus–Lindqvist effect” and is attributed to the centrali-
zation (i.e., central streaming) of RBCs, reduced RBC numbers
(Fåhræus effect) at the vessel wall (“plasma skimming”), and RBC
deformability. Rephrasing, as the diameter of the vessel decreases,
the concentration of RBCs decreases (Fåhræus effect) and blood
viscosity also decreases (Fåhræus–Lindqvist effect) [225]. Viscosity
in capillaries is low because RBCs pass through capillaries single file
in the center of the capillary. Blood viscosity is, therefore, dependent
upon the RBC concentration (hematocrit), RBC deformability and
aggregability, plasma viscosity, temperature, and blood flow condi-
tions [226,227]. Notably, blood viscosity is rarely measured or calcu-
lated in most studies reporting vascular resistance although it can be
responsible for significant effects in smaller blood vessels, during
hemodilution, and in low blood flow states. Maintaining normal
blood viscosity sustains microcirculatory blood flow and supports
coherence between macrovascular and microvascular perfusion
(i.e., hemodynamic coherence) [228–231].
Vascular hindrance (Rh ) varies with blood viscosity (η) and vessel
geometry (i.e., radius, length) and the number of blood vessels
arranged in parallel over which the resistance measurement is being
made [232]. Vascular hindrance (Rh ) is
R 	R	h 	/
An increase in viscosity is known to produce compensatory
vasodilation [233,234].
Impedance (Z) is defined as the ratio between the frequency com-
ponents of the local blood pressure and blood flow waveforms [235].
Impedance includes both the resistance (R) and reactance (i.e.,
changes in vessel compliance or stiffness) of the vessel wall to pul-
satile changes in intravascular pressure
Z 	R 	R	L 	p
where ZL represents longitudinal impedance, which is the sum of
the pulsatile (Rp
) and steady non- pulsatile components of longitu-
dinal arterial resistance (R) [235,236]. Under normal (non-stressed)
conditions, the steady resistive non-pulsatile component (R) repre-
sents approximately 85–90% of the total impedance to blood flow
while the pulsatile component (Rp
) comprises the remaining
10–15%. This fact (R = 85–90% of ZL
) is the principal reason why
investigators and clinicians are usually satisfied with the determina-
tion of vascular resistance from blood flow and driving pressure
(i.e., Hagen–Poiseuille equation: R = P/Q). The components of Z
change substantially, however, during heart failure or pharmaco-
logical manipulation [237]. Aortic input impedance (Zi) is the ratio
of pressure and flow at the aortic root and is dependent upon aortic
elastance or compliance [235,236]. Impedance to blood flow, there-
fore, is viewed as having a resistive (steady-state [R]) component
due primarily to the arterioles and a reactive (pulsatile [Rp
]) compo-
nent due to vessel wall properties (i.e., compliance, elastance, and
pulse-wave reflection). Low systolic arterial pressure enables more
complete ventricular ejection, maintains low myocardial oxygen
demands, and provides little stimulus for producing hypertrophy.
High diastolic pressure ensures adequate coronary blood flow and
myocardial perfusion because most of myocardial blood flow
occurs during ventricular relaxation. Increases in systolic and dias-
tolic pressures increase myocardial work, oxygen consumption, and
energy requirements and decrease myocardial perfusion [215].
Ideally, the best match between the heart’s pumping activity and the
vascular response to the ejection of blood (ventricular–vascular
coupling) is obtained when myocardial work is kept as low as pos-
sible (i.e., relatively low systolic pressure), while adequate myocar-
dial and peripheral tissue perfusion (i.e., higher diastolic pressure)
is maintained [238]. Anesthesia and fluid therapy generally decrease
hematocrit and plasma protein concentrations leading to decreases
in blood viscosity, which, when combined with a decrease in imped-
ance (i.e., vasodilation and vessel smooth muscle relaxation),
favorably affect ventricular–vascular coupling, providing that
hypotension (e.g., Pm < 60 mmHg) does not occur [239–242].
The optimum hematocrit for transporting oxygen varies among
species and generally ranges between 30% and 45% [243]. Splenic
contraction (e.g., dogs and horses) provides additional RBCs (i.e.,
increases hematocrit) and oxygen-carrying capacity during times of
stress or exercise [244]. Excessively elevated hematocrits (e.g., poly-
cythemia; > 65%) and hyperproteinemia (e.g., dehydration) dra-
matically increase blood viscosity and myocardial work due to an
increase in RBC aggregability and rouleaux formation resulting in
an increase in Rp (i.e., Z) and a decrease in oxygen delivery to tis-
sues. Hemodilution (e.g., isovolumic hemodilution) can be benefi-
cial in reducing blood viscosity and is used during anesthesia to
improve oxygen delivery to tissues [245,246]. Blood flow is more
dependent upon plasma viscosity in smaller vessels (< 100 μm) and
capillaries [246]. The viscous properties of plasma and its effects on
wall shear stress, nitric oxide production, and functional capillary
density, therefore, are particularly significant for maintaining
microcirculatory flow [247,248]. Hematocrit values less than 30%,
however, jeopardize blood oxygen content, microcirculatory blood
flow, and tissue oxygenation. Anesthesia and fluid therapy generally
produce favorable effects on hematocrit, RBC deformability, and

-- 662 of 1450 --

Chapter 33: Cardiovascular Physiology 	647
plasma protein concentration, leading to alterations in blood vis-
cosity, which decrease impedance and improve ventricular–vascular
coupling [241,242].
Preload and afterload
Preload is the stretch (i.e., increased muscle length) or load imposed
on a muscle fiber or the myocardial wall at the end of diastole just
before contraction begins (Box 33.3) [249]. End-diastolic muscle
length (i.e., in vitro), end-diastolic volume (EDV), end-diastolic
pressure (EDP), and ventricular wall stress have all been used as
measures of preload. Sarcomere length provides the most meaning-
ful measure of preload but is impossible to measure in vivo. The
EDV is directly related to the degree of stretch imposed on myocar-
dial sarcomeres and, therefore, provides the most accurate in vivo
preload determinant. Preload is usually explained in terms of the
Frank–Starling relationship where the force generated by ventricu-
lar contraction occurs in direct relation to the end-diastolic fiber
length (i.e., heterometric autoregulation) [250]. Increases in cardiac
muscle resting tension likely increase sensitivity to calcium, result-
ing in an increase in contractile force [251]. The Frank–Starling
relationship serves as an important compensatory mechanism for
maintaining SV when afterload or contractility is acutely changed
(Fig. 33.32) [252]. Notably, preload is affected by afterload [253].
Increases in afterload decrease the volume of blood pumped by
the heart with each beat (i.e., SV), which results in increased end-
systolic volume (ESV) that augments EDV (i.e., preload).
Afterload is the force opposing ventricular ejection (Box 33.3)
[249]. Although conceptually straightforward use of the term
“afterload” suffers from multiple definitions and incomplete under-
standing of what the term represents. Afterload in isolated muscle
tissues (i.e., in vitro) is the external force that inhibits the muscle
(i.e., sarcomere) from shortening [200]. In contrast, afterload
in intact animals changes continuously throughout ventricular
ejection and is more accurately described by the hindrance or
impedance to blood flow during ventricular ejection. An acute
increase in arterial blood pressure increases ventricular EDV and
decreases SV. The increased ventricular EDV increases ventricular
wall stretch and contractile force via the Frank–Starling mechanism
(i.e., heterometric autoregulation). This, however, is followed by a
progressive decrease in the EDV to near-normal values and a sus-
tained increase in SV (i.e., homeometric autoregulation; von Anrep
effect; Box 33.3). Multiple mechanisms are responsible for this
response including release of angiotensin II and endothelin, activa-
tion of the mineralocorticoid receptor and myocardial Na + –H+
exchanger, increase in intracellular Na+ concentration, and aug-
mentation of the Ca 2+ transient amplitude through the Na +
–Ca2+
exchanger (NCX). The net effect of all of these mechanisms is an
increased SV at a lower diastolic volume [254]. The major reason
for interest in afterload is because of its inverse relationship with
SV in failing hearts and its direct correlation with myocardial
oxygen consumption (i.e., MVO 2
) as a result of an increase in ven-
tricular wall tension (Fig. 33.31) [215]. The effects of anesthetic
drugs on afterload and homeometric autoregulation require further
investigation.
The cardiac cycle and pressure–volume loop
Detailed illustrations of the cardiac cycle (i.e., Wiggers diagram) are
used to explain the time-related relationships among the various
electrical, mechanical (e.g., pressure, volume, and flow), and acous-
tic (Table 33.9) components of cardiac contraction and relaxation
(Fig. 33.33A) [255]. The diagram provides a pictorial representa-
tion of all the major events that occur during one cardiac cycle.
Similarly, the ventricular pressure–volume (PV) loop provides a
real-time image of changes in ventricular pressure plotted against
ventricular volume (Fig. 33.33B) [256,257]. Changes in the PV loop
are used to illustrate and quantitate changes in cardiac function:
preload, afterload, contractility, and ventricular–vascular cou-
pling [256–258]. Various components of the cardiac cycle and PV
loop for both the right and left ventricles are qualitatively similar,
although quantitatively different.
The P wave of the surface ECG is a reasonable starting point to
begin a description of the cardiac cycle since electric activity pre-
cedes mechanical activity (Fig. 33.33A). Electrical impulses origi-
nating in the SA node are rapidly transmitted from the right to the
left atrium by atrial specialized fibers (i.e., Bachmann’s bundle)
causing generation of the P wave and almost simultaneous contrac-
tion of the right and left atria. Bifid P waves representing electrical
activation of the right and then left atria are frequently observed in
ECGs obtained from larger animals (e.g., horses and cattle) due to
the increased size and volume of the atria, and the time required to
traverse the increased muscle mass. Atrial contraction increases
intra-atrial pressure, producing the “a” wave of the atrial pressure
curve. Both right and left atria function as reservoirs and conduits
for blood transfer and, upon contraction (i.e., atrial kick), prime the
ventricles contributing approximately 10–30% of the ventricular
blood volume at resting HRs and becoming more important at
faster HRs. The reflected pressure wave from the atrial kick and
structural vibrations in the AV valves prior to ventricular contrac-
tion are responsible for the fourth heart sound (S 4
, atrial gallop) that
generally remains inaudible in small animals (e.g., dogs and cats)
but is frequently auscultated in larger animals (e.g., horses and cat-
tle) or in animals with dilated and stiffened ventricles (Table 33.9).
Ventricular contraction is signaled by the R wave and begins after a
variable delay (i.e., PR interval), during which the electrical impulse
traverses the AV node. Once the ventricle is electrically activated,
ventricular contraction raises intracavitary pressure to a value
greater than in the atrium closing the AV (i.e., tricuspid and mitral)
valves. The AV valves bulge into their respective atria due to the
Cardiac output
↓ Afterload
↑ Contractility
↑ Afterload
↓ Contractility
Preload (venous return)
Figure 33.32 Frank–Starling curves. Increases in afterload and decreases in
contractility shift the cardiac output–preload relationship down and to the
right. Increases in contractility and decreases in afterload shift the cardiac
output–preload relationship up and to the left.

-- 663 of 1450 --

648 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
increased pressures in their respective ventricles, thereby decreas-
ing atrial volume and giving rise to the “c” wave of the atrial pres-
sure curve. The AV valves are prevented from completely prolapsing
into the atrial chambers by cord-like fibrous structures (i.e., chor-
dae tendineae) that connect ventricular papillary muscles to the
edges of the tricuspid and the mitral valves. The sudden develop-
ment of tension in the contracting ventricular myocardium and
tensing of the chordae tendineae coincident with AV valve closure
are responsible for the first heart sound (S 1
; Table 33.9). The rapid
increase in ventricular pressure while both the AV and semilunar
(i.e., aortic and pulmonic) valves are closed produces isovolumic
contraction (Fig. 33.33A,B). Once ventricular pressure exceeds that
in the aorta or pulmonary artery, the semilunar valves open and
ventricular ejection begins (Fig. 33.33A). The initial portion of the
ejection phase of the cardiac cycle coincides with an abrupt decrease
in ventricular volume, a large increase in aortic flow velocity, and a
decrease in the venous pressure curve since the AV valves are drawn
toward the apex of the heart thereby increasing the volume of the
atria (i.e., the “x descent” following the “c” wave of the atrial pres-
sure curve; Fig. 33.33A). Ventricular pressure exceeds aortic pres-
sure during the first one-third of ventricular ejection (i.e., the rapid
ejection period), reaches equilibrium with aortic pressure, and
thereafter declines more rapidly than aortic pressure because of the
onset of ventricular relaxation. Once the ventricular pressure
decreases to values below the arterial pressure, the semilunar valves
close. Closure of the semilunar valves is associated with the devel-
opment of an incisura (i.e., dicrotic notch) in the arterial pressure
waveform, the second heart sound (S2
), and the end of ventricular
systole. The second heart sound is composed of both aortic (A2
)
and pulmonic (P 2
) components and is frequently split (10–15 ms)
during slow HRs and in larger species (e.g., horses and cattle) [259].
The volume of blood ejected by the ventricle (i.e., SV) is the differ-
ence between ventricular EDV and ESV
SV 	EDV ESV
The period between closure of the semilunar valves and open-
ing of the AV valves and the beginning of ventricular filling is
termed “isovolumic relaxation” (Fig. 33.33A,B). Isovolumic relax-
ation is characterized by a rapid decrease in ventricular pressure
and no change in ventricular volume. Once ventricular pressure
falls below atrial pressure, the AV valves open, initiating a phase of
rapid ventricular filling and producing the third heart sound (S 3 ;
ventricular gallop; Table 33.9). The third heart sound is believed
to be caused by vibrations in the ventricular walls once they reach
their elastic limit during ventricular filling. The third sound is fre-
quently heard in larger species (horses and cattle) or in dogs and
cats with dilated ventricular chambers due to cardiac disease [260].
Ventricular filling proceeds more gradually after the initial rapid
filling phase, whereas ventricular pressure and volume increase
nonlinearly during late diastole (Fig. 33.33B). The slope of the PV
curve (dP/dV) during ventricular filling is an index of ventricular
elasticity, and its inverse (dV/dP) is used to assess ventricular
compliance [257]. The ventricular filling phase continues as blood
returns to the atria from the systemic and pulmonary circulations
until the cardiac cycle is reinitiated by the next SA nodal electrical
impulse.
Table 33.9 Normal heart sounds and auscultation locations.
Sequence
First heart sound 	S1 	Mitral and tricuspid valves close
ECG tracing
Sound tracing
S 4
S1
S2 S3
Second heart sound 	S2
Third heart sound
Fourth heart sound
S1 mitral (radiates dorsally); S2 aortic (radiates cranially);
*Auscultable with enlarged heart chambers and in healthy large animals (e.g., > 250 kg)
S3
S4
Aortic and pulmonary valves close
Ventricular filling*
Atrial filling*
Nomenclature 	Associated events
S 3
S2 S1,
S4
S1 ,
S4

-- 664 of 1450 --

Chapter 33: Cardiovascular Physiology 	649
A PV loop represents the simultaneous changes in pressure and
volume that take place during a single cardiac contraction and is
represented as an irregular rectangle, inscribed in a counterclock-
wise fashion, in which intraventricular pressure is plotted on the y-
axis against ventricular volume on the x-axis [257,261]. Analysis of
the PV loop begins at point (B) and occurs at end-diastole (i.e., at
the onset of systole as demarcated by closure of the AV valves and
the first heart sound; Fig. 33.34A). The coordinates of this point are
EDV and EDP. The ratio of EDV to EDP is a measure of static ven-
tricular compliance, and the ratio of EDP to EDV is a measure of
static ventricular stiffness. The relative slope of the ventricular fill-
ing line from A to B (Fig. 33.34A) is an estimate of dynamic ven-
tricular compliance (Cdynamic
) and the steepness of the slope is a
measure of dynamic stiffness.
Ventricular pressure increases rapidly from B to C once the AV
valves close, but there is no change in volume (i.e., isovolumetric
contraction) until the semilunar valve opens at C (Fig. 33.34A) and
blood begins to be ejected into the aorta. Ventricular pressure
changes minimally during the ventricular ejection from C to D (i.e.,
isotonic contraction; Fig. 33.34A) but ventricular volume decreases.
The change in ventricular volume represented by the horizontal
distance between BC and DA (Fig. 33.34A) is the SV, and the ratio
(SV/EDV) is the ejection fraction (EF).
EF 	SV/EDV
The EF is the percentage of the EDV the ventricle pumps into the
aorta during each contraction and ranges from 50–60% in healthy
animals. The EF is considered a “gold standard” for assessing the
general health of the cardiovascular system [262,263].
Closure of the semilunar valves (i.e., point D) indicates the end of
systole. The ratio of end-systolic pressure (ESP) to ESV (ESP/ESV)
is a measure of end-systolic elastance or stiffness of the ventricle
contracting from any given EDV. The slope of the end-systolic
pressure–volume relationship (ESPVR) obtained from ventricular
contractions during decreases in ventricular volume is a load-
independent measure of myocardial contractility [261]. This slope
D
120
80
40
0
80	40	0 	120
Volume (mL)
Pressure (mmHg)
A
Stroke volume
end
systole
End-systole
PV relationship
Isovolumic relaxation
Isovolumic
	contraction
 
Afterload
Stroke work
Rest (end-diastole)
(pre-load)
C
B
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
Time (s)
Electrocardiogram
Heart
	sounds
Ventricular
	volume (mL)
Aortic blood flow
(L/min)
Blood pressure (mmHg)
Venous
	pulse
0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
Aortic valve
closes
Atrial systole
	Isovol. contract.
Isovol. relax.
	Rapid ejection
	Reduced
	ejection
Rapid
ventricular filling
	Reduced
	ventricular filling-
	diastasis
Aortic
pressure
Left
ventricular
pressure
Mitral
valve
opens
Mitral
valve
closes
Left atrial pressure
4
1 2
3
a 	c 	v
Ventricular
systole
P
R
Q S
T 	P
(A)
(B)
A: isovolumic contraction
B: ejection
C: isovolumic relaxation
D. filling phase
Aortic
valve
opens
Figure 33.33 A. The cardiac cycle (i.e., Wiggers diagram) illustrates the temporal relationship between mechanical, acoustical, and electrical events during
systole and diastole. B. The pressure–volume (PV) loop is a time-independent illustration of ventricular contraction used to derive load-independent
indices of cardiac function (i.e., contractility) via the end-systolic PV relationship.

-- 665 of 1450 --

650 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
(Ees
) is believed to be the most useful and accurate load-independent
estimate of cardiac contractility currently available (Fig. 33.34B).
The ventricular pressure falls quickly once the semilunar valves
close (i.e., D to A; isovolumetric relaxation; Fig. 33.34A) and the
ventricles begin to fill once the AV valves open.
Arterial elastance (Ea
), a measure of the opposition to ventricular
ejection (i.e., afterload), is the slope of a line that starts at the EDV
and goes through the end-systolic PV point (Fig. 33.34B). Ea can
also be calculated (i.e., Ea = Pes
/SV) [261]. The Ea
/Ees ratio is a meas-
ure of ventricular–arterial coupling and is normally close to 1.0
implying that the ventricular and arterial systems are optimally
coupled (Fig. 33.34C) [264,265]. Ventricular–arterial uncoupling
occurs when the Ea
/Ees ratio is > 1.0.
The total area within the PV loop represents the total work per-
formed by the ventricle against the opposition to ejection (i.e., after-
load) imposed by arterial pressure and the stiffness (i.e., elastance)
of the arterial wall. Total work is comprised of both internal work
(i.e., cycling of heavy meromyosin heads and stretching the series
elastic elements) and external work (i.e., moving a volume of blood
against a resistance). Total work is a measure of myocardial oxygen
consumption (MVO2
) and, along with oxygen delivery (DO2
), is
used to estimate energetic balance (MVO2 /DO2 ) and oxygen extrac-
tion ratio (O2
ER = MVO 2
/DO2
) [215].
Thus, ventricular PV loops allow calculation of: (1) intracardiac
ventricular pressures, (2) ventricular compliance, (3) myocardial
contractility, (4) SV, and (5) myocardial oxygen consumption. In
addition, the ratio of pulsatile aortic pressure to SV is an estimate of
arterial stiffness and, like Ea
/Ees
, can be used to monitor changes in
ventricular–vascular coupling [266].
The cardiac cycle and PV loop illustrate the hemodynamic events
that occur during cardiac contraction and relaxation (Figs. 33.33
and 33.34). Clinically, M-mode echocardiography and two-
dimensional color-flow Doppler echocardiography provide a
dynamic representation of cardiac function (Fig. 33.35) [267]. For
example, CO can be quantitatively estimated non-invasively (e.g.,
via echocardiography) as the product of HR and SV:
CO 	HR SV
SV 	LVOT area LVOT VTI
where LVOT area is the left ventricular outflow tract area and LVOT
VTI is the velocity time integral.
Assessment of cardiac function
Assessment of cardiac contractile function (i.e., systolic function)
encompasses multiple physical and image-based methods for deter-
mining performance (i.e., CO), inotropy (i.e., force), and contractil-
ity (i.e., force and velocity) (Box 33.4) [268–270]. Measurements of
CO and inotropy are load-dependent and, therefore, must account
for changes in either preload or afterload to explain hemodynamic
and cardiovascular functional changes. Cardiac contractility is
load-independent and, therefore, requires methods of measure-
ment that are not sensitive to changes in preload, afterload, or
HR [69,206]. Contractility is generally described by shifts of the
force–velocity–length relationship, shifts in the ventricular func-
tion curve (e.g., shifts in the Frank–Starling relationship) when
preload and afterload are held constant, or by changes in Ees
(Fig. 33.36) [89,257,261,265]. Available indices used to evaluate car-
diac contractile function generally fall into one of four broad cate-
gories: (1) isovolumic contraction phase indices, (2) ejection phase
Peak systolic pressure
Aortic
valve
closes
External
stroke work
Aortic
valve
opens
Pressure
	Stroke
volume
Mitral
valve
opens
	Ventricle fills
The slope of
the diagonal
constructed from
end-systole (D)
to end-diastole (B)
Mitral
valve
closes
Volume
150
Ees ESPVR
Internal
work
125
(ESV, Pes)
100
LV Pressure (mmHg)
75 	Ea
50
25
0
0 	50
LV Volume (mL)
EDPVR
150
Vo 	EDV
Ea = Ees
Pes
0
Ees 	Ea
SV
LVV
C′
C
D
A
B
Figure 33.34 Ventricular PV loops provide a quantitative approach for
determining cardiac contractility independent of preload, afterload, and
heart rate. The Ea /Ees ratio is a measure of ventricular–arterial coupling.
The Ea
/Ees ranges from 0.6–1.2 in normal hearts. Pes
, end-systolic pressure;
SV, stroke volume; ESV, end-systolic volume; LVV, left ventricular volume;
EDPVR, end-diastolic pressure–volume relationship; ESPVR, end-systolic
pressure–volume relationship; Ees
, end-systolic elastance (i.e., slope is an
index of contractility; Ea , effective arterial elastance (i.e., index of
afterload).

-- 666 of 1450 --

Chapter 33: Cardiovascular Physiology 	651
indices, (3) PV relationship indices, and (4) stress–strain
relationship indices.
The dLVP/dtmax and dLVP/dtmax divided by left ventricular end-
diastolic volume (LVEDV), termed “preload-adjusted (i.e., PA) left
ventricular dP/dtmax
” or “PALVdP/dtmax
,” are sensitive indicators of
changes in contractility during properly controlled experimental
conditions or when dLVP/dtmax is normalized to EDV (PALVdP)/
dtmax
) [271–274]. An even more robust expression of contractility
can be obtained from the ventricular PV loop by determining the
slope of the straight line formed when graphing stroke work (mean
(A) M-mode echocardiography
TW
TV
AMV
EN 	LA
AV AO
PER
RV
Thoracic wall (TW)
RVW
RVW
IVS 	AO
LV
LVW
IVS
RV
AMV
AV
PMV LA
LV
PMV
lung
	1 	2 	3 	4
1 	2 	3 	4
LVW
Lung
(B) Pulsed-wave Doppler echocardiography
(C) LVOT (aortic) velocity profile
Figure 33.35 Non-invasive methods of assessing cardiac function. A. M-mode and pulsed-wave Doppler echocardiography produce dynamic real-time
relationships in cardiac function in animals; B. Pulsed-wave Doppler echocardiography illustrating cardiac chambers; C. Left ventricular aortic outflow
tract (LVOT) illustrating blood flow velocity. RVW, right ventricular wall; RV, right ventricle chamber; TV, tricuspid valve; IVS, interventricular septum; LV,
left ventricular chamber; AMV, anterior mitral valve; PMV, posterior mitral valve; AV, aortic valve; AO, aorta; EN, endocardium; LVW, left ventricular wall.

-- 667 of 1450 --

652 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
pressure during ejection × SV) against decreasing EDV as EDV is
reduced by partial venous inflow occlusion (preload recruitable
stroke work [PRSW]) [261]. Measures of contractility extracted
from families of PV loops (e.g., Ees
, V0 ) generated in response to IV
doses of known positive or negative inotropes (e.g., dobutamine,
isoflurane) and vasoactive compounds (e.g., phenylephrine, isoflu-
rane) indicate that Ees and the volume-axis intercept, V0
, provide a
relatively good measure of the left ventricular contractility index
because it is less sensitive to afterload compared to other indi-
ces [242]. It is important to note, however, that the methodological
techniques used to manipulate preload or afterload are important.
Changes in preload induced by administering IV fluids or removal
of blood, occlusion of the caudal vena cava, or by changing after-
load via physical constriction of the aorta produce a different result
than changing preload or afterload pharmacologically (e.g., meth-
oxamine, phenylephrine to increase afterload; nitroprusside, isoflu-
rane to decrease preload). Differences arise due to the additional
vasoactive, inotropic, clinotropic, lusitropic, chronotropic, and
dromotropic properties that these drugs produce [202,263]. The PV
loop produces more information about contraction and relaxation
of the ventricle than any other method of expressing either systolic
or diastolic function. It allows direct measurement of EDV
(preload), ESV, SV, and EDP and permits calculation of EDP/EDV
(elastance), PRSW, Ees
, Ea
, Ea
/Ees
, and the slope of the PV curve dur-
ing ventricular filling. If the loops were interrupted (z-axis modula-
tion) at a fixed rate (i.e., every 2 ms) the intervals (durations)
between the interruptions could be used to calculate dLVP/dtmax
,
left ventricular ejection time (LVET), isovolumetric contraction
time (IVCT), and IVCT/LVET [273]. The IVCT/LVET relates
inversely to EF, can be obtained non-invasively, and is considered to
be the “gold standard” of ventricular systolic function in clinical
cardiology [274].
Less invasive assessment of Ees has been approximated by myo-
cardial stress, magnetic resonance elastography, or from a single
PV loop for which volume is estimated non-invasively by echocar-
diography and pressure is estimated indirectly from peak systemic
systolic arterial pressure using sphygmomanometry [275]. Despite
arithmetic “corrections,” estimates of volume (by echocardiogra-
phy) and pressure (e.g., sphygmomanometer) are at best esti-
mates. “True” ESV obtained by echocardiography is limited by
geometrical considerations, precision, and reproducibility, while
“true” ESP differs from peak pressure in non-central arteries with
peripheral arterial peak pressure variably and significantly higher
than that realized by the ventricle at end-systole [276]. Regardless,
evaluation of contractility estimated from a single PV loop
obtained by non-invasive measurements has produced accurate
predictions of patient outcomes [276,277]. In addition, segmental
strain curves obtained non-invasively by trans-diaphragmatic
two-dimensional echocardiographic images and speckle tracking
analysis have been demonstrated to produce a load-independent
measure of the cardiac contractile state [278]. The PV relationship
has been used to assess the effects of most anesthetic drugs on
cardiac function [279–281].
Lusitropy (i.e., rate of myocardial relaxation) refers to the ability
of the myocardium to relax following excitation–contraction
Supply
dependent
DO2
critical point
Total oxygen consumption (VO
2)
Increased O2
extraction
Total oxygen delivery (DO2 )
Hct 20–30%
DO 2 crit = Hb > 7–9 g/dL
Hct > 20–30%
Supply
independent
Figure 33.36 Oxygen consumption (VO2
) is not normally limited by
oxygen delivery (DO 2 = CO × CaO2
) and oxygen extraction (OE =
CaO2 – CvO2
) (i.e., supply independent). Decreases in cardiac output
(blood flow) to critically low values (e.g., hemorrhagic shock, heart failure)
produce situations where VO 2 can become DO 2 dependent (i.e., supply
dependent). CaO2
, arterial oxygen content; CvO2
, venous oxygen content.
Box 33.4 Examples of hemodynamic indices of systolic and diastolic
function
Systolic function
1 Isovolumic indices
a Echocardiographic assessment (M-mode, two-dimensional, Doppler)
b dP/dtmax
, dP/dt40 , and dP/dt/Ved
c Vmax
d Power; rate of change of power
2 Ejection phase indices
a Echocardiographic assessment (M-mode, two-dimensional, Doppler)
b Cardiac output
c Ejection fraction, (EDV – ESV)/EDV
d Stroke work
e Maximum velocity of circumferential shortening
f Left ventricular ejection time
g Pre- ejection period
3 Pressure–volume indices
a Echocardiographic assessment (M-mode, two-dimensional, Doppler)
b Ees and Emax
c End- systolic pressure–volume ratios
d Tmax (time to Emax
)
4 Stress–strain indices
a Elastic stiffness (stress/strain)
b End-systolic stress–volume ratio
c Echocardiographic derived 2D strain
Diastolic function
1 Isovolumic relaxation indices (pressure derived)
a Echocardiographic assessment (M-mode, two-dimensional, Doppler)
b dP/dtmin
c Time constant of left ventricular pressure fall (τ)
d Relaxation time
e –dT/dt (tension fall)
2 Diastolic filling indices
a dP/dV
b Peak filling rate (dV/dtmax
)
c Chamber stiffness (dP/dV versus P)
3 End- diastolic indices
a End- diastolic pressure
b End- diastolic P/V ratio
4 Interval-derived indices
a Echocardiographic assessment (M-mode, two-dimensional, Doppler)
b Time to –dP/dtmin
; time to 50% –dP/dtmin
c Diastolic filling time
d Isovolumic relaxation period
e Time from minimal left ventricular dimension to mitral valve opening
5 Stress–strain indices
a Echocardiographic LV global diastolic strain rate (DSr avg)

-- 668 of 1450 --

Chapter 33: Cardiovascular Physiology 	653
coupling and is fundamentally important to an understanding of
cardiac performance [112,282]. The most popular and clinically rel-
evant definition of diastole states that relaxation begins with the
closure of the aortic valve, which is indicated by the second heart
sound (S 2
, Fig. 33.33A). Diastole is thereafter divided into four
phases: (1) isovolumic relaxation, (2) early rapid ventricular filling,
(3) slow (i.e., reduced) ventricular filling (diastasis), and (4) atrial
systole (during sinus rhythm). Mechanical factors, loading factors,
inotropic activity, HR, and synchronicity (patterns of relaxation)
are the major determinants of lusitropy [112,283–285]. Factors and
interventions that alter relaxation are of special interest because of
their importance in determining ventricular compliance or stiff-
ness. A partial list of methods used to quantitatively describe relax-
ation includes pressure, volume-derived, and interval indices
(Box 33.4). Indices of isovolumetric relaxation (i.e., the rate of ven-
tricular pressure decline; –dP/dt) and the time constant for relaxa-
tion (τ) are useful for measuring the active phase of relaxation and
reflect the dissociation of actin–myosin linkages because of reup-
take of cytoplasmic calcium by the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Both
indices are influenced by myocardial systolic function, ventricular
loading conditions (preload and afterload), and HR and are, there-
fore, considered to be load-dependent.
Drugs used as preanesthetic medication or for intravenous or
inhalation anesthesia often produce profound effects on the cardio-
vascular system and indices of cardiac function (Table 33.10).
While the arterial effects of anesthetic dugs are well-recognized,
consideration should also be given to effects on venous physiology,
unstressed vascular volume (Vus
), and venous return. The venous
vascular effects of anesthetics on the effective or stressed circulating
blood volume (Vs
) are much more complex than originally sur-
mised and can be responsible for precipitous and dramatic decreases
in venous return and cardiac function [286,287].
Oxygen delivery and oxygen consumption
The importance of adequate oxygen delivery (DO2 ) cannot be over-
emphasized because reduced oxygen consumption (VO 2 ) and the
development of increasing oxygen debt are directly linked to increased
morbidity and mortality [288–291]. Once DO2 falls below the mini-
mum threshold for tissue metabolic requirements an oxygen supply–
demand imbalance occurs (Fig. 33.36). Inadequate DO2 increases
oxygen debt and promotes anaerobic metabolism [289]. The severity
of oxygen debt and anaerobic metabolism can be quantitated by their
metabolic correlates, lactic acid and negative base excess (i.e., base
deficit) [291]. Lactate accumulation and base deficit are used clini-
cally, to quantitate the onset and severity of oxygen debt, the probability
of death (LD50
), and the therapeutic reversal of oxygen debt [292].
Tissue oxygen consumption (VO 2 ) is determined by cellular
metabolic rate. The VO2 can be determined by the Fick, or oxygen
consumption, equation [293]:
VO 	CO CaO 	CvO	2 	2 	2
where CaO2 is arterial oxygen content and CvO2 is mixed venous
oxygen content. The Fick equation is rearranged to derive oxygen
delivery (DO2 = CO × CaO2
), oxygen extraction (OE = CaO2 – Cv
O2
), and the oxygen extraction ratio (OER = CaO2 × CvO2
/CaO2
),
noting that all of the equations contain the term “CaO2
” and are,
therefore, mathematically coupled [293]. Arterial blood oxygen con-
tent (CaO2
) is approximately 20–21 mL of O2
/dL of blood when Hb
concentration is 15 g/dL; each gram of hemoglobin carries 1.34 mL
O2
/g Hb; the SaO2 is 100%; and the PaO2 is 100 mmHg (room air):
CaO 	Hb 	SaO 	PaO	2 	2 	2	1 34 	0 003	. 	.
The venous blood oxygen content (CvO2 ) is generally 14–15 mL/dL
during resting states yielding an OER of 0.2 to 0.3 (20–30%).
Table 33.10 Effects of clinically relevant doses of commonly administered anesthetic drugs.a
Drug 	HR 	ABP 	CO 	Cardiac
contractile
force
MCFP 	Vasomotor
tone
Baroreceptor
reflex activity
Sympathetic
nervous system
activity
Splanchnic
venous
capacitance
Venous
return
Inhalant anesthetic 	↑↓± 	↓↓ 	↓↓ 	↓ 	↓↓ 	↓↓ 	↓↓ 	↓↓ 	↑↑ 	↓↓
Injectable hypnotic
Propofol
Etomidate
Barbiturate
Alfaxalone
±↓
±
±↑
±↓
↓↓
↓
±
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
±↓
↓
±↓
±↓
±↓
↓
±↓
↓
±↓
↓
±↓
↓
↓
↓
±↓
↓
↓
↑↑
↑
↑
↑
↓↓
±↓
↓
↓
Dissociative
Ketamine
Tiletamine
↑
↑
↑
↑
↑±
↑±
↑±
↑±
–
–
–
–
–
–
– ↑
– ↑
–
–
–
–
Opioid
Morphine
Hydromorphone
Fentanyl
↓
↓
↓
–↓
– ↓
–↓
– ↓
– ↓
– ↓
– ↓
– ↓
–↓
–
–
–
–
–
–
– ↓
– ↓
–↓
– ↓
– ↓
– ↓
–
–
–
– ↓
– ↓
– ↓
α2
- Adrenergic receptor
agonist
↓↓ 	↑→↓ 	↓↓ 	–↓ 	↑→↓ 	↑→↓ 	– ↓ 	– 	↓→↑ 	↑→↓
Benzodiazepine
Diazepam
Midazolam
– 	– 	– ↓ 	– 	– ↓ 	– ↓ 	– 	– ↓ 	– ↓ 	–↓
Phenothiazine
Acepromazine 	±↓ 	↓ 	–↓ 	–↓ 	↓ 	↓ 	↓ 	↓ 	↑ 	↓
Local anesthetic
Lidocaine 	±↑ 	↓ 	–↓ 	– ↓ 	↓ 	↓ 	– 	↓ 	↑ 	↓
HR, heart rate; ABP, arterial blood pressure; CO, cardiac output; MCFP, mean circulatory filling pressure.
a Clinically relevant dosages are generally equal to or less than those recommended by the manufacturer. Idealized effects expected from normal healthy dogs.
↑, increase; ↓, decrease; ±, increase or decrease; –, little or no change; ↑→↓, increase followed by decease; ↓→↑, decrease followed by increase.

-- 669 of 1450 --

654 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
Decreased Hb concentration (e.g., parasitism, hemorrhage, and
hemodilution) causes OE to increase to maintain the requisite
oxygen delivery required by metabolizing tissues. The critical Hb
concentration, DO2Crit
, and OERCrit are approximately 4 g/dL,
5–7 mL/kg/min, and 0.6 (60%), respectively, in normal healthy
dogs (Fig. 33.36) [294,295]. Higher concentrations of most anes-
thetics, including ketamine, are known to decrease tolerance to ane-
mia and OER in a dose-dependent manner purportedly due to
anesthetic-induced blunting of CO and alterations in blood flow
distribution among organ systems [296,297]. It is important to rec-
ognize that most experimental studies detailing anesthetic drug
effects in animals and humans frequently include additional derived
or calculated variables (e.g., CO, SVR, stroke work, and MVO 2
) that
provide additional information regarding drug-related effects.
Mathematic coupling occurs when one variable either directly or
indirectly contains the whole or components of a second varia-
ble [298,299]. This can lead to erroneous results and invalid conclu-
sions in studies involving these derived and/or calculated
variables.
Neurohumoral and local control mechanisms
Blood flow is regulated by the integration of supraregional (i.e.,
CNS), regional, and local factors (Box 33.5). These regulatory
elements coordinate immediate and long-term adjustments in total
vascular resistance, vascular capacitance, blood volume, blood
pressure, and CO. CNS regulation depends on three components:
afferent input, central integration and processing, and efferent out-
put [300]. Continuous adjustments in cardiovascular system
function and reflex responses help to modulate and buffer changes
in blood volume, pressure, and flow in order to sustain oxygen and
nutrient delivery to tissues (Fig. 33.37; Box 33.6). The autonomic
nervous system exerts a major influence on the regulation of cardi-
ovascular function [301]. Peripheral receptors, including barore-
ceptors, mechanoreceptors, and chemoreceptors, sense and respond
to changes in blood flow, blood pressure, blood volume, and blood-
gas tensions. These sensory signals are integrated in “control cent-
ers” located in the hypothalamus, pons, and medulla from which a
host of neurohumoral responses are elicited. The autonomic nerv-
ous system regulates the release of neurotransmitters (e.g., norepi-
nephrine and acetylcholine) that activate adrenergic and cholinergic
receptors that modify cardiac performance and vascular tone
(Table 33.11). Minute-to-minute changes in blood flow are also
regulated by local control mechanisms, which integrate with nerv-
ous system activity [302]. Many of the cardiac and vasoactive
effects produced by neurotransmitters and circulating substances
are mediated by the activation of G-protein- coupled receptors
(GPCRs) 	[303]. 	GPCRs 	are 	transmembrane 	heterotrimeric
G-proteins composed of α, β and γ subunits and are located in
the membranes of cardiomyocytes, fibroblasts, endothelial cells,
and vascular smooth muscle cells. They convert extracellular sig-
nals into intracellular responses and are activated by neurotrans-
mitters, neuropeptides, hormones, glycoproteins, and a variety
Box 33.5 Neurohumoral factors that regulate blood flow, pressure,
and volume.
Immediate (short term)
1 Autonomic nervous system (sympathetic and parasympathetic)
Regulate heart rate and vessel tone and capacity
2 Vascular baroreceptor or pressoreceptor reflexes (stretch receptors)
Regulate heart rate and vessel tone and capacity
3 Cardiac stretch receptors
Regulate heart rate and vessel tone and capacity
4 Chemoreceptor reflexes (sense changes in oxygen and carbon dioxide
[hydrogen ions])
Regulate heart rate and vessel tone
5 Blood borne (humoral) responses (epinephrine and norepinephrine)
Regulate heart rate, vessel tone, and cardiac contractility
6 Local factors: arteriolar oxygen partial pressure; local metabolites
(carbon dioxide, hydrogen ions, and lactate); myogenic autoregulation
Regulate vessel tone to changes in blood pressure in order to maintain
tissue blood flow
Intermediate
1 Transcapillary fluid shifts and the lymphatic system
Regulate fluid filtration and reabsorption
2 Hormonal responses (renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system)
Regulate vessel tone and salt and water retention
Long term
1 Oral fluid consumption
Regulate body water and electrolytes
2 Renal control system (vasopressin [ADH], aldosterone, and atrial
natriuretic peptide)
Regulate total body water and renal fluid output
3 Hormonal response (i.e., kidney cell erythropoietin release) to low
oxygen
Regulate red blood cell production
↓ Atrial
volume
↓ Sodium load
to distal tubules
↓ Stretch of
afferent
arterioles
↓ Peritubular
capillary
hydrostatic
pressure
↓ Sodium excretion
↓ Water excretion
↑ Renin release
↑ Angiotensin I
↑ Angiotensin II
↑ Plasma
volume
↑ Extracellular
fluid volume
↑ Intake of sodium
and water
↑ Aldosterone
↓ GFR
↑ AVP ↓ ANP
↓ Arterial
pressure
Medullary cardiovascular
center: increased
sympathetic nerve firing
β receptors 	α receptors
Renal
vasoconstriction
↓ Blood
volume
+
Figure 33.37 Neurohumoral response to a decrease in blood volume. AVP,
arginine vasopressin; ANP, atrial natriuretic peptide; GFR, glomerular
filtration rate.

-- 670 of 1450 --

Chapter 33: Cardiovascular Physiology 	655
of anesthetic drugs including opiates and α2 - adrenergic receptor
agonists [303,304]. There are four main classes of G-proteins
(i.e., Gαstimulatory [Gαs
], Gαinhibitory [Gαi
], Gαq
, and Gα12/13
) allowing for
diverse signaling transduction functions. Once activated, GPCRs
modify the function of a variety of intracellular signaling molecules,
enzymes, and ion channels leading to changes in cAMP concentra-
tions and the degree of phosphorylation of proteins that either
stimulate or inhibit the activity of effector proteins. The Gαs and
Gαi stimulate or depress, respectively, the effector enzyme ade-
nylate cyclase thereby increasing or decreasing the second messen-
ger cAMP, protein kinase A, and phosphorylation of intracellular
proteins that regulate cellular responses (Fig. 33.38).
Most anesthetic drugs blunt the neurohormonal and sensory
(input), neural integration (processing), and effector (output)
mechanisms that control cardiovascular function [305–308].
Inhalation anesthetics in particular blunt compensatory responses
to blood loss, trauma, fluid administration and resuscitative drugs
(e.g., catecholamines and/or vasopressors) and, when administered
in excessive amounts, can totally abolish homeostatic control mech-
anisms [308–312]. Normally, a decrease in arterial blood pressure
in conscious animals (e.g., blood loss, bradycardia, and poor car-
diac performance) is sensed by central and peripheral high-pressure
Box 33.6 Cardiovascular and pulmonary reflexes and effects.
Abdominocardiac reflex: Mechanical stimulation of the abdominal viscera
causes changes in heart rate, usually slowing; rarely causes extrasystoles.
Anrep effect: Increases in aortic pressure results in a positive inotropic
effect, augmented resistance to outflow in the heart.
Atrial stretch-receptor reflex: Atrial distension causes the release of atrial
natriuretic peptide (ANP) from the atria, resulting in diuretic activity,
vasodilation, inhibition, and aldosterone secretion. ANP is an endogenous
antagonist of angiotensin II. Sinus and supraventricular tachycardias are
common stimuli for this response.
Bainbridge reflex: An increase in heart rate initiated by stretch-sensitive
mechanoreceptors in the great veins and right and left atria. The reflex is
primarily attributed to an increase in venous return and withdrawal of vagal
tone. A reverse Bainbridge reflex is used to explain a decrease in heart
rate during an acute decrease in venous return.
Baroreceptor reflex (i.e., high-pressure baroreceptor [mechanoreceptor]
reflex): Stretch-sensitive mechanoreceptors in the carotid sinus and aortic arch
decreases heart rate in response to increases in arterial blood pressure. A
decrease in arterial pressure produces hyperventilation, and an increase in
arterial blood pressure causes respiratory depression and ultimately apnea.
Bayliss effect: A mechanism by which vessels keep organ blood supply
constant. Increased blood pressure induces reactive vasoconstriction thereby
limiting increases in blood flow and vice versa.
Bezold–Jarisch reflex: Afferent and efferent pathways in the vagus nerve
stimulation of cardiac, primarily ventricular, chemoreceptors or stretch
receptors (mechanoreceptors), induce sinus bradycardia, hypotension, and
peripheral vasodilation. Stretch of ventricular mechanoreceptors is
responsible for syncope when standing.
Branham’s sign: Slowing of the heart rate following compression or
excision of an arteriovenous fistula (e.g., patent ductus arteriosus ligation).
Chemoreceptor reflex: Systemic hypoxia or hypercarbia cause bradycardia,
coronary vasodilation, and systemic vasoconstriction.
Cough reflex: Stimulation of the larynx, trachea, or main bronchi or
chemical stimulation throughout the respiratory tree result in cough or
endotracheal tube precipitates bradycardia.
Craniocardiac reflex: Stimulation of cranial nerves (olfactory, ophthalmic,
and trigeminal), resulting in bradycardia and hypotension (depressor effects).
Cushing reflex: Increases in intracranial pressure result in Cushing’s triad
(i.e., increasing systolic blood pressure and widened pulse pressure,
bradycardia, and irregular respiration) theorized to be caused by increased
sympathetic and parasympathetic (i.e., vagal tone) activation form increases
in cerebral and peripheral blood pressures, respectively.
Diving reflex (i.e., oxygen-conserving reflex): Stimulation of the
trigeminal nerve (i.e., cranial nerve five) by cold temperature, pressure of
immersion) causes activation of the vagus nerve and sympathetic chain
causing bradycardia, systemic vasoconstriction, and cerebral vasodilation.
Hering–Breuer reflex: Effects of the vagus in the control of respiration –
lung inflation arrests inspiration, and lung deflation initiates inspiration
Low-pressure baroreceptor reflex: Low-pressure baroreceptors in the
large systemic veins, pulmonary vessels, and walls of the right atrium and
ventricles sense changes in wall tension and are involved with the regulation
of blood volume. Increases in blood volume increases atrial natriuretic
peptide (ANP) and antidiuretic hormone secretion, inhibits constriction of
renal arterioles and increases heart rate (see: Bainbridge reflex).
Oculocardiac reflex (Aschner’s reflex): Pressure on the eyeball causes
bradycardia, vasoconstriction, and cerebral vasodilation
Pulmonary chemoreflex: Stimulation of C-fiber endings (juxtapulmonary
capillary receptors [J receptors]) by tissue damage. Fluid accumulation of cytokines
produces sinus bradycardia, hypotension, shallow breathing and apnea,
bronchoconstriction, and mucous secretion (e.g., isoflurane administration).
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia: Cyclical changes in heart rate coincident
with normal respiration. Heart increases during inspiration and decreases
during expiration.
Vagovagal reflex: Afferent and efferent pathways in the vagus nerve.
Stimulation or irritation of the larynx or trachea by a laryngoscope or
endotracheal tube precipitates bradycardia.
Vasovagal reflex (Barcroft–Edholm reflex): Initiated by a decrease in
venous return to the heart (e.g., hypovolemia, orthostasis, compression of
the inferior vena cava, micturition, increased intrathoracic pressure, and
regional analgesia), causing sinus bradycardia and vasodilation. The term has
come to include neurocardiogenic syncope, carotid sinus syndrome, and
micturition syncope in human patients.
Venorespiratory reflex: Increases in right atrial pressure stimulate increases
in respiration.
Table 33.11 Cardiovascular effects of autonomic nervous system activity.
Cardiovascular
tissue
Sympathetic 	Parasympathetic
Primary
receptor
type
Effect 	Primary
receptor
type
Effect
SA node 	β1 	↑ HR 	M2 	↓ HR
Atria 	β1 	↑ Excitability
↑ Conduction
M2 	↓ Excitability
↓ Conduction
AV node 	β1 	↑ Conduction 	M2 	↓ Conduction
Ventricle 	β1 	↑ Contractility
↑ Excitability
↑ Conduction
↑ Lusitropy
M1-5 	Little to no effect
Coronary
arteries
β2
α1 , α2
Vasodilation
Vasoconstriction
M3
, M5
(Endo- NO)
M1
, M3 (SM)
Vasodilation
Vasoconstriction
Arteries 	β2
α1 , α2
Vasodilation
Vasoconstriction
M3 	Vasodilation
Arterioles 	α1 , α2 	Vasoconstriction M3 	Vasodilation
Large and small
veins
β2
α1 , α2
Vasodilation
Vasoconstriction
M3 	Vasodilation
Muscarinic M3 receptor subtype mediates cholinergic endothelium-dependent vasodilation
and endothelium-independent vasoconstriction. Endo-NO, endothelial nitric oxide;
SM, smooth muscle.

-- 671 of 1450 --

656 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
vascular receptors (i.e., baroreceptors), which are the most impor-
tant short-term determinants of arterial blood pressure. Output
from these receptors triggers readjustments in CNS autonomic out-
put, which compensates for small changes in arterial blood pres-
sure. Local myogenic autoregulation also helps to protect the brain,
heart, liver, mesentery, and skeletal muscle from small changes in
blood pressure. If arterial blood pressure is reduced to a point that
tissue blood flow is negatively affected, baroreceptor-triggered
responses produce increases in HR, cardiac contractility, and vas-
cular tone. Epinephrine and norepinephrine are released from the
adrenal gland during severe decreases in mean blood pressure (<
40–60 mmHg) exacerbating these effects. In addition, blood flow is
redistributed to the lungs, heart, and brain (i.e., central circulation)
and away from the skin, skeletal muscle, kidney, and splanchnic vis-
cera (i.e., from the unstressed vascular volume [Vus
] to the effective
or stressed vascular volume [Vs
]) [313]. Similarly, peripheral chem-
oreceptors sense changes in blood gases (i.e., PO 2
, PCO 2 ) and the
acute onset of hypoxemia or hypercarbia (i.e., respiratory acidosis)
activates autonomic responses that induce tachycardia and periph-
eral vasoconstriction.
Neurohormonal mechanisms
Neurohormonal factors, including osmoreceptors in the hypothala-
mus, antidiuretic hormone released by neurons in the supraoptic
and paraventricular nuclei, aldosterone secreted by the adrenal cor-
tex, renin and erythropoietin produced by the kidney, and atrial
natriuretic peptide released by stretch-sensitive atrial muscle cells,
are all integrally involved in maintaining plasma volume, the pro-
duction of RBCs, and preserving blood volume (Fig. 33.37) [314,315].
Arterial baroreceptors are stretch receptors (mechanoreceptors)
located in the carotid sinus and aortic arch which respond to
decreases in arterial blood pressure and the rate of change of
blood pressure by incremental increases in the rate of electrical
impulses (i.e., baroreceptor reflex). Impulses from the carotid sinus
baroreceptors are carried by the carotid sinus and glossopharyngeal
nerve (cranial nerve IX), while impulses from the aortic arch are
carried by the vagus nerve (cranial nerve X) to the nucleus tractus
solitarius in the brain. The signals are processed and initiate an
effector response that adjusts parasympathetic and sympathetic
outflow returning arterial blood pressure to its normal range. For
example, parasympathetic nervous system activity increases and
sympathetic nervous system activity decreases when arterial pres-
sure increases above the normal set point. The increased parasym-
pathetic activity to the SA node decreases HR. Simultaneously,
decreased sympathetic activity reduces HR and myocardial con-
tractility and results in vasodilation in arterioles and small veins.
Baroreceptor activity is minimal at mean arterial blood pressures
below 60 mmHg but progressively increases as mean arterial pres-
sure rises above 60 mmHg, reaching a maximum at approximately
180 mmHg. Most baroreceptors have a set point of approximately
100 mmHg. Decreases in arterial blood pressure (Pm < 60 mmHg)
decrease the firing rate of the carotid sinus nerve which decreases
parasympathetic activity to the heart and increases sympathetic
activity to the heart and blood vessels, thereby increasing HR and
blood flow, and redistributing blood volume from Vus to Vs
.
Anesthetic drugs interfere with the baroreceptor reflex [316].
Inhalation anesthetics depress normal baroreflex responsiveness
and diminish sympathetic output from the CNS [308,309]. The
degree of baroreceptor depression depends upon the rate of drug
administration and the depth of anesthesia produced.
Low-pressure cardiac mechanoreceptors located in the atria,
ventricles, and pulmonary veins help to minimize changes in sys-
temic blood pressure in response to changes in blood volume [314].
These cardiac stretch receptors respond to comparatively small
changes in pressure or stretch. The atria contain two types of low-
pressure receptors located at the venoatrial junctions. An increase
in atrial volume activates both types of atrial mechanoreceptors,
sending impulses to the medulla via vagal afferents. Depending on
Ligand 	Norepinephrine
β1-adrenergic
receptor
Adenylate cyclase
cAMP
PKA
Gαs/βγ
Phospholipase C-β1
IP3’ diacylglycerol
PKC
Gαq/βγ
α1 -adrenergic
receptor
AT1 receptor 	ET A receptor
Angiotensin II 	Endothelin
GPCR
Effectors
Second
messengers
Kinases
Target protein
effects
↑ Heart rate
↑ Conduction velocity
↓ Refractory period
↑ Contractile strength
↑ Hypertrophy
? Cell death
↑ Vasoconstriction
↑ Contractility
↑ Systolic function
↑ Hypertrophy
Figure 33.38 Activation of various G-protein-coupled
receptors (GPCRs) regulate cardiovascular function through
modulation of multiple target proteins. β1
- Adrenerigc
receptors function through Gαs/βγ, adenylate cyclase, and
protein kinase A (PKA). α1
- Adrenergic, angiotensin II type 1
(AT 1
), and Endothelin-1 (ETA
) receptors signal through
Gαq/βγ, phospholipase C-β1 and protein kinase C (PKC).
Norepinephrine also activates α2
-adrenergic receptors that
regulate vascular tone. The effects of anesthetic drugs on
these neurohumoral signaling systems are unclear and
require continued investigation.

-- 672 of 1450 --

Chapter 33: Cardiovascular Physiology 	657
the prevailing HR, arterial blood pressure, and venous return, HR
may increase or decrease [317]. Increases in venous return and
atrial distension usually cause a withdrawal of vagal tone and
enhancement of sympathetic outflow increasing HR (i.e., Bainbridge
reflex) and vice versa (i.e., reverse Bainbridge reflex; Box 33.6).
Atrial distension also decreases sympathetic output to renal afferent
arterioles resulting in vasodilation and decreases in vasopressin
(antidiuretic hormone) release, thereby reducing fluid reabsorption
in the renal tubular collecting ducts and increasing urine flow. The
rapid loss of free water into the urine helps return circulating blood
volume to normal values. In addition to these neural responses,
atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) and brain natriuretic peptide
(BNP) are released into the bloodstream (Fig. 33.37) [318]. ANP is
produced in atrial cardiomyocytes in response to atrial distension
and increases sodium excretion by the kidney with an accompany-
ing increase in water loss. BNP has a similar effect to ANP and is
produced by ventricular muscle cells in response to increases in
myocardial stretch [319].
Ventricular mechanoreceptors located in the ventricular endo-
cardium discharge in parallel with changes in ventricular pressure
and produce effects that help to regulate systemic blood pressure
and myocardial work. Ventricular distension, however, also stimu-
lates powerful depressor reflexes that decrease HR and peripheral
vascular resistance, resulting in bradycardia and hypotension (i.e.,
Bezold–Jarisch reflex) [320–322]. Impulses initiated by either ven-
tricular distention or the injection of select chemicals (e.g., capsai-
cin or serotonin) into the coronary arteries can produce the
Bezold–Jarisch reflex, which is also called the “coronary chemore-
flex” (Box 33.6) [322].
The carotid artery and aortic arch contain specialized sensory
chemoreceptors termed the “carotid and aortic bodies” [323]. The
carotid and aortic bodies are innervated by the glossopharyngeal
(i.e., cranial nerve IX) and vagus (i.e., cranial nerve X) nerves and
receive the highest blood flow per gram of tissue weight of any
organ within the body. They are sensitive to changes in arterial oxy-
gen tension below 60 mmHg, increases in carbon dioxide tension
greater than 45 mmHg, and pH less than 7.30 [323]. They are
depressed by hypothermia. Increases in afferent activity from the
chemoreceptors increase minute ventilation, restoring arterial
blood pH, carbon dioxide, and/or oxygen to normal.
The kidney is the major site for activation of the renin–angiotensin–
aldosterone system (RAAS) [324,325]. The RAAS produces pep-
tides that demonstrate autocrine (i.e., on the cells where they are
being produced), paracrine (i.e., on neighboring cells), or endo-
crine (i.e., on a distant organ or tissue via systemic circulation)
effects. Renin is produced by the juxtaglomerular cells of the kidney
and is secreted into the circulation during hypotension or hypov-
olemia [324]. This enzyme cleaves angiotensinogen, produced by
the liver, to angiotensin I, thereby initiating an enzymatic cascade
that generates peptides that regulate blood pressure, cell growth,
apoptosis, and electrolyte balance. Angiotensin I is hydrolyzed by
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE1) producing the octapep-
tide, angiotensin II. Angiotensin II acts on angiotensin II type 1 and
type 2 receptors (i.e., AT1R and AT2R) promoting vasoconstric-
tion, inflammation, salt and water reabsorption, and oxidative
stress via AT1R activation [325]. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2
(ACE2) is expressed in various organ systems including the cardio-
vascular system, kidneys, lungs, and brain, and exerts important
actions to maintain cardiovascular homeostasis. ACE2 activa-
tion is the dominant mechanism for counter-regulating the effects
of angiotensin II by metabolizing it into the beneficial peptide
Angiotensin-(1–7). Angiotensin-(1–7) binds to Mas 1 receptors
(i.e., ACE2/Ang-(1–7)/MasR axis) present on cardiomyocytes, car-
diac fibroblasts, and endothelial cells limiting the oxidative and
inflammatory effects of angiotensin II and producing cardioprotec-
tive effects (Fig. 33.39) [326]. The impact of anesthesia and anes-
thetic drugs on the RAAS and homeostasis requires further
investigation [327].
The hypothalamus is directly involved in the hormonal control of
cardiovascular responses. Arginine vasopressin (antidiuretic hor-
mone) is produced in the hypothalamus and is transported through
nerve cell axons to the posterior pituitary [328,329]. Under normal
circumstances, the pituitary releases vasopressin in response to
increases in plasma solute (Box 33.5). Vasopressin acts on the col-
lecting ducts of the kidney, where it stimulates water conservation,
thereby returning plasma osmolality (and volume) to normal.
Vasopressin is a vasoconstrictor, especially in mesenteric vessels;
therefore, the presence of circulating vasopressin is influential in
Angiotensinogen
Kidney
Renin
ACE
APA
ACE 	ACE
ACE2
ACE2
PCP
Angiotensin I
Angiotensin II
AT 2 receptor
• Vasoconstriction
• Cell proliferation
• Hypertrophy
• Fibrosis
• Anti-hypertrophic
• Anti-fibrotic
• Vasodilation
• Anti-oxidant
(A)
(B)
Ang I 	Ang I
ACE2
activators
AT 1 receptor
AT1 receptor 	Mas receptor
Mas receptor
Angiotensin III
Angiotensin 1–9
Angiotensin 1–7
↑ Ang II 	↓ Ang II
↓ Ang 1–9
↓ Ang 1–7
↓ Ang 1–9
↓ Ang 1–7
↓ ACE2 	↑ ACE2
Figure 33.39 Enzymatic cascade of the renin–angiotensin system (RAAS),
receptor systems, and the biological effects mediated by angiotensin II
(Ang II) and angiotensin-(1-7) (Ang 1–7). A. Angiotensinogen is cleaved
by renin to Ang I. Ang I is cleaved by angiotensin-converting enzyme
(ACE) to Ang II, which is cleaved by ACE2 to Ang 1–7. Ang II acts on
angiotensin II type 1 and type 2 receptors: AT1
R, AT2
R. B. Ang 1–7 acts on
Mas receptors (MasR) and counterbalances AT1
R effects. Decreased ACE2
shifts the balance to the AT 1
R resulting in disease. Increased ACE2 (e.g.,
ACE2 activators) shifts the balance to the Ang 1–7/MasR leading to
mitigating disease. APA, aminopeptidase A; PCP, prolyl carboxypeptidase.

-- 673 of 1450 --

658 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
the redistribution of systemic blood flow [330]. Vasopressin release
by the pituitary can also occur in the absence of changes in plasma
osmolality. Examples of non-osmotic stimuli that cause the release
of vasopressin are pain, stress, hypoxia, heart failure, and vascular
volume depletion. Some anesthetic drugs are associated with
increased circulating levels of arginine vasopressin, including opi-
oids (morphine and meperidine) and barbiturates [328].
Local mechanisms
Autoregulation is the ability of blood vessels to adjust blood flow in
accordance with metabolic needs despite changes in tissue perfu-
sion pressure [331–333]. Mechanisms that contribute to changes in
vascular tone include responses to intraluminal pressure (myogenic
response), the effects of blood flow on the endothelial lining of
vessels (shear-dependent response), and the concentrations of met-
abolic factors on vessels (metabolic response). The myogenic mech-
anism is a type of autoregulation that responds almost immediately
to changes in arterial blood pressure by increasing smooth muscle
contraction in response to increases in arterial pressure and vice
versa. The vasoconstriction or dilation helps to maintain a constant
tissue blood flow. Similarly, increases in blood flow velocity increase
wall shear stress and the release of nitric oxide from the vascular
endothelium producing vasodilation and vice versa [334]. The met-
abolic response occurs after longer periods (30 s) of low tissue
blood flow. Increases in tissue oxygen demand or decreases in oxy-
gen tension release vasodilatory substances (e.g., CO2
, H +
, K +
) and
vasodilatory prostaglandins (e.g., PGI 2
) that relax vascular smooth
muscle, thereby improving blood flow until normal oxygen tension
is reestablished [335].
In summary, vascular tone and tissue perfusion are modulated by
host neurogenic, neurohumoral, and local factors that determine
tissue blood flow [336–339]. Collectively, these factors determine
the number of perfused (RBC-containing) capillaries, known as the
“functional capillary density.” Whether a given capillary remains
open or closed depends on the contractile state of the terminal arte-
rioles located near the entrance to the capillary bed.
Special circulations
Special circulations include those organs that control or modulate
their own blood flow using methods that override those described
by Poiseuille’s law (see section on hemodynamics and cardiac func-
tion) [340]. Active hyperemia is the concept that organ blood flow
is proportional to metabolic activity and the production of
vasodilator metabolites (CO 2
, H +
, K +
, lactate, and adenosine).
Reactive hyperemia occurs in response to a prior period of
decreased blood flow (i.e., ischemia). The coronary, cerebral, pul-
monary, and splanchnic circulations are primarily dependent on
local metabolic activity for regulation of blood flow while renal
blood flow is primarily determined by myogenic tone and tubulo-
glomerular feedback (Table 33.12). Skin and skeletal muscle blood
flow are primarily determined by changes in sympathetic tone. Skin
arterioles have a high density of α1
- adrenergic receptors that when
activated cause vasoconstriction. It is noteworthy that anesthetic
drugs and anesthesia blunt all normal compensatory responses and
autoregulatory mechanisms that mobilize and redistribute blood to
tissues that are in highest demand. These effects are due to their
direct vasodilatory effects and depression of sympathoadrenal
activation [160,161,341].
Coronary circulation
The heart has the highest oxygen consumption per tissue mass of all
organs in the resting body and receives most of its blood flow during
diastole (Fig. 33.40). Myocardial arterial oxygen extraction is 70–80%,
compared with 25% for most other organs. The heart receives
approximately 5% of the CO and possesses a rich capillary network,
three to four times denser than skeletal muscle, to achieve this high
extraction [342–346]. Species differences in coronary artery anatomy
and its regulation are responsible for different patterns of myocardial
perfusion and the heart’s response to ischemia [347–349].
Flow across the resting myocardium is usually dependent upon
the pressure gradient between the aortic root (“coronary driving
pressure”) and the right atrium although coronary perfusion pres-
sure in the left ventricle is more accurately determined as the differ-
ence between the aortic diastolic pressure and left ventricular
end-diastolic pressure. Under normal conditions the driving pres-
sure is fully maintained along epicardial conduit vessels with little
pressure loss in the distal epicardial arteries. Intracoronary arterial
pressure declines in the microvasculature (< 100 μm) reaching a
value of 20–30 mmHg across the capillaries [346]. The majority of
coronary blood flow occurs during diastole and decreases by 50%
or more during isovolumic contraction in intramyocardial vessels
compared to epicardial arteries (Fig. 33.40) [346]. Blood flow
resumes during isovolumic relaxation. The primary determinants
of resistance to blood flow in the myocardium include extravascular
compression of intramural coronary vessels (30–40% of total resist-
ances), the contractile state of the myocardium, and HR [343]. In
addition, systolic ventricular torsion also increases coronary
Table 33.12 Mechanisms responsible for blood flow control of special circulationsa.
Circulation 	Mechanism 	Vasoactive metabolites 	Mechanical effects
Coronary 	Local vasoactive metabolites most
important
Hypoxia, adenosine, K+
, H2
O2
, and redox
signaling
Reduced blood flow during systole
Cerebral 	Local vasoactive metabolites most
important
High PCO2 and H+ 	Increased ICP decreases blood flow
Pulmonary 	Local vasoactive metabolites most
important
Low PA O2 , endothelin-1 (ET- 1), thromboxane,
prostacyclin (PGI), nitric oxide (NO)
Lung inflation decreases blood flow
Splanchnic 	Local vasoactive metabolites most
important
Low PO2
, high PCO2 and H+
, adenosine,
serotonin, histamine, bradykinin,
prostaglandins
Abdominal distention decreases blood
flow; fluid overload
Renal 	Myogenic tone and tubuloglomerular
feedback most important
ATP, adenosine, nitric oxide, PGE2 	Fluid overload causes renal impairment
and decreased urine output
a Sympathetic tone is the most important regulator of skin and skeletal muscle blood flow during resting conditions. ICP, intracranial pressure.

-- 674 of 1450 --

Chapter 33: Cardiovascular Physiology 	659
resistance to a point that systolic flow within the myocardium may
be zero or negative during systole.
Coronary blood flow is mainly determined by local metabolic
activity, oxygen demand, and HR (Table 33.12) [351]. Autoregulatory
myogenic and metabolic mechanisms coordinate the interaction
between intracoronary driving pressure and microvascular resist-
ance to maintain adequate flow across capillaries for substrate
delivery and metabolite removal. The vascular endothelium is the
final common pathway controlling vasomotor tone (coronary
autoregulation) and, like all other vessels, nitric oxide production
plays a major role [352–353]. Local regulatory mechanisms main-
tain blood flow within the physiologic range but fail during hypo-
tension when flows become strongly dependent on the driving
pressure. Coronary arteries receive their innervation through bilat-
eral vagal (parasympathetic) fibers from the cardiac plexus at the
base of the aorta and sympathetic nerves from the stellate gan-
glion [354]. Factors that lower arterial blood pressure (hypov-
olemia), increase ventricular diastolic pressure (heart failure), or
decrease diastolic time (tachycardia) lower the subendocardial to
subepicardial flow ratio predisposing to subendocardial ischemia,
ST segment changes, and cardiac arrhythmias. Increases in HR
impinge on diastolic time more than systolic time thereby decreas-
ing perfusion time. Anesthesia and anesthetics drugs decrease
myocardial perfusion by increasing HR, lowering arterial blood
pressure, and impairing ventricular function.
Cerebral circulation
The brain has little capacity for anaerobic metabolism or storing
energy and is therefore dependent upon an uninterrupted blood
flow. Cerebral autoregulation maintains stable cerebral blood flow
during changes in arterial blood pressure (i.e., cerebral perfusion
pressure [CPP]) ranging from 50–150 mmHg [355]. Cerebral blood
flow (CBF) is dependent on CPP and inversely proportional to cer-
ebrovascular resistance (CVR):
CBF 	CPP/CVR 	MAP ICP /CVR
where MAP is the mean arterial pressure and ICP is the intracra-
nial pressure. If intracranial pressure is stable, CPP is replaceable
by MAP. Both myogenic and local metabolic factors determine
CBF, with local metabolic factors being the most important.
For example, increases in the arterial partial pressure of carbon
dioxide (PaCO 2 ) of 1 mmHg decrease CVR and increase CBF
by approximately 3–4%, and vice versa (Table 33.5) [356–358].
Severe hypocapnia can, therefore, markedly increase CVR and
decrease CBF, predisposing to brain ischemia. Myogenic tone
decreases in response to decreased pressure and vice versa. If CPP
increases or decreases, the myogenic reflex results in vasocon-
striction or vasodilation, respectively [355]. Cerebral vasoreac-
tivity is also modulated by astrocytes and microglia that secrete
neurotransmitters with vasoactive properties [356]. Such neuro-
transmitters include acetylcholine and nitric oxide that are
potent vasodilators, and serotonin and neuropeptide Y that
cause vasoconstriction [356]. Endothelial mechanisms also
include the cellular secretion of the vasodilator nitric oxide as
well as the vasoconstrictors thromboxane A 2 and endothelin-1.
Inhalation and dissociative (e.g., ketamine and tiletamine) anesthetics
have been demonstrated to increase CBF, while most hypnotics
and sedatives (e.g., propofol, alfaxalone, etomidate, and dexme-
detomidine) reduce CBF [359].
Pulmonary circulation
The lung is unique among all organs in that it receives the entire
CO, contains approximately 10–15% of the total blood volume, and
serves as an important blood reservoir stabilizing left ventricular
SV and CO (Fig. 33.1) [360,361]. The primary purpose of the pul-
monary circulation is gas exchange [362]. The right ventricle and
pulmonary circulation buffer dynamic changes in blood volume
and flow resulting from respiration, positional changes, and changes
in left ventricular CO [360]. This low-pressure system has limited
ability to control the regional distribution of blood flow resulting in
the potential for the pulmonary capillaries to collapse [363]. Mild
increases in pulmonary arterial blood pressure normally distend
and recruit pulmonary capillaries, decreasing pulmonary vascular
resistance. Pulmonary blood flow is determined by the difference
between inflow and outflow pressures unless the surrounding pres-
sure (i.e., alveolar pressure) is greater than the outflow pres-
sure [363]. Pulmonary blood flow, therefore, is often described in
terms of a “Starling resistor” where the pressure surrounding a col-
lapsible tube influences the fluid flow through it. Low vascular pres-
sure also predisposes the lung to the so-called “waterfall effect”
wherein pulmonary venous pressure may be below alveolar pres-
sure and therefore only intermittently permits blood flow.
Pulmonary blood flow is particularly influenced by gravity in larger
animals (e.g., adult horses and cattle) resulting in the regional redis-
tribution of pulmonary blood flow during anesthesia [362,363].
Excessive and prolonged inspiratory pressure during anesthesia and
Systole 	Diastole
Aortic pressure (mmHg)
 120
110 	Dicrotic notch
Aorta
100
90
80
Coronary blood flow (mL/100 g/min)
200
150
Greater coronary blood
flow during diastole
Sharp fall in coronary blood flow
during isovolumetric contraction
Greater coronary blood
flow during systole
Left coronary
Right coronary
100
50
0
30
20
10
0
0.00 	0.25 	0.50
Time (s)
0.75 	1.00
Figure 33.40 Coronary artery blood flow during systole and diastole. Left
coronary artery blood flow is greatest during diastole. The right ventricle
develops less force so right coronary artery blood flow is greatest during
systole. Source: Chambers et al. [350], Cambridge University Press.

-- 675 of 1450 --

660 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
mechanical ventilation can markedly reduce or stop pulmonary
blood flow leading to marked reductions CO and arterial blood
pressure [364].
The bronchial circulation (i.e., bronchial arteries) supplies oxy-
genated arterial blood to the lung parenchyma. Although physical
factors have an important role in determining both pulmonary and
bronchial blood flow, local vasoactive metabolites and low alveolar
oxygen tension (PA
O2
) determine pulmonary parenchymal blood
flow (Table 33.12). Low PA
O2 produces vasoconstriction of intrapul-
monary arteries [365]. Alveolar hypoxia activates mitochondrial
sensors increasing the production of reactive oxygen species that
depolarize pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells leading to the
activation of voltage-gated calcium channels, increases in cytosolic
calcium, and vasoconstriction [365]. The primary site of action is in
small extra-alveolar vessels. During hypoxic conditions the pulmo-
nary vessels constrict increasing pulmonary arterial pres-
sure [366,367]. This response distends and recruits under-perfused
pulmonary vessels effectively shunting blood to better ventilated
alveoli and resulting in an improved ventilation–perfusion ratio.
Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction (HPV) functions as a nega-
tive feedback mechanism for matching ventilation and perfusion
and is minimally inhibited by recommended doses of anesthetic
drugs, including propofol [368,369].
Splanchnic circulation
The splanchnic circulation includes multiple organs, contains
approximately 20% of total blood volume, and receives approxi-
mately 25% of the CO (Table 33.8) [370,371]. Splanchnic vessels,
particularly veins, are highly compliant and serve as one of the
body’s largest blood volume reservoirs. Local metabolites regulate
tissue perfusion during normal resting conditions (Table 33.12).
Splanchnic veins and the spleen, however, also contain a high popu-
lation of α1
- and α2
-adrenergic receptors that are highly sensitive to
adrenergic stimulation [148,150,151,372–374]. For example, the
volume of blood that can be mobilized from the spleen, liver, and
intestine of hemorrhaged dogs ranges from 6% to 30% of their total
blood depending upon the severity of hemorrhage [375]. If arterial
blood pressure decreases substantially, sympathoadrenal stimula-
tion causes splanchnic arterial constriction, increasing the pressure
in capacitance vessels and expelling splanchnic blood into the sys-
temic circulation [152]. Active mobilization of splanchnic blood
volume is almost entirely the result of β2
- and α1
-adrenergic recep-
tor activation [373]. Both β2
- and α1
- adrenergic receptors act in
concert to maximally shift blood from the splanchnic vasculature
into the systemic circulation by decreasing splanchnic vascular
capacitance and intrahepatic vascular resistance [375–377]. These
processes deliver blood to the systemic circulation and can effec-
tively compensate for up to 50–60% of lost blood volume. Inhalant
and injectable anesthetic drugs including benzodiazepines (e.g.,
midazolam) blunt the ability of the splanchnic circulation to mobi-
lize blood [378–380]. This effect may be more important than the
arterial vasodilatory or negative cardiac inotropic effects of anes-
thetic drugs when considering the potential causes for arterial
hypotension and/or low CO during anesthesia.
Renal circulation
Myogenic tone and tubuloglomerular feedback are the two most
important mechanisms that regulate renal blood flow during rest-
ing conditions (Table 33.12) [381,382]. Increases in arterial blood
pressure stretch smooth muscle cells in the walls of afferent arteri-
oles perfusing the glomerulus causing them to contract, thereby
increasing vascular resistance and minimizing a change in glomer-
ular blood flow. Decreases in arterial blood pressure cause the
smooth muscle cells to relax, decreasing vascular resistance and
maintaining blood flow.
The juxtaglomerular apparatus is a specialized structure formed
by the glomerular afferent arteriole and the distal convoluted
tubule. Renin is the key regulator of the renin–angiotensin–
aldosterone system and is critically involved in salt, volume, and
blood pressure homeostasis. Renin is mainly produced and released
into the circulation by juxtaglomerular epithelioid cells (i.e., macula
densa) located in the walls of the distal nephron and constricts
renal afferent arterioles as they enter the glomerular capillary net-
work [382]. Elevated sodium concentration in the distal tubule
triggers the macula densa to release ATP and adenosine that stimu-
lates the juxtaglomerular cells of the afferent arteriole to contract,
thereby decreasing glomerular blood flow and filtration rate,
and vice versa. The vasodilator, nitric oxide, modulates this
response [383]. Changes in sympathetic tone also modulate renal
blood flow during resting conditions. Increases in sympathetic tone
reduce renal blood flow, filtrate formation, and urine output while
decreases in sympathetic tone result in vasodilation, increased
blood flow, and increased urine output.
References
1 Reiber CL, McGaw IJ. A review of the ‘open’ and ‘closed’ circulatory systems: new
terminology for complex invertebrate circulatory systems in light of current find-
ings. Int J Zool 2009: 1–8.
2 Hicks JW. The physiological and evolutionary significance of cardiovascular shunt-
ing patterns in reptiles. News Physiol Sci 2002; 17: 241–245.
3 Moore JE Jr., Bertram CD. Lymphatic system flows. Annu Rev Fluid Mech 2018; 50:
459–482.
4 Kik MJL, Mitchell MA. Reptile cardiology: a review of anatomy and physiology,
diagnostic approaches, and clinical disease. Semin Avian Exot Pet Med 2005; 14:
52–60.
5 Girling SJ, Hynes B. Cardiovascular and haemopoietic systems. In: Girling SJ, Raiti
P, eds. BSAVA Manual of Reptiles, 2nd edn. Quedgeley, Gloucester, UK: BSAVA,
2004: 243–260.
6 Holz PH. Anatomy and physiology of the reptile renal portal system. Vet Clin Exotic
Am Pract 2020; 23(1): 103–114.
7 Holz PH, Burger JP, Pasloske K, et al. Effect of injection site on carbenicillin phar-
macokinetics in the carpet python, Morelia spilota. J Herp Med Surg 2002; 12(4):
12–16.
8 Yasuda N, Targ AG, Eger EI, et al. Pharmacokinetics of desflurane, sevoflurane,
isoflurane, and halothane in pigs. Anesth Analg 1990; 71(4): 340–348.
9 Huntington JH, Malviya S, Voepel-Lewis T, et al. The effect of a right-to- left intra-
cardiac shunt on the rate of rise of arterial and end-tidal halothane in children.
Anesth Analg 1999; 88(4): 759–762.
10 Stanley WC, Recchia FA, Lopaschuk GD. Myocardial substrate metabolism in the
normal and failing heart. Physiol Rev 2005; 85(3): 1093–1129.
11 Opie LH. Fuels. Aerobic and anaerobic metabolism. In: Opie LH, ed. Heart
Physiology: From Cell to Circulation, 4th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams
& Wilkins, 2004: 306–354.
12 Opie LH. Channels, pumps, and exchangers. In: Opie LH, ed. Heart Physiology:
From Cell to Circulation, 4th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
2004: 73–118.
13 Kléber AG, Rudy Y. Basic mechanisms of cardiac impulse propagation and associ-
ated arrhythmias. Physiol Rev 2004; 84(2): 431–488.
14 Nattel S, Carlsson L. Innovative approaches to anti-arrhythmic drug therapy. Nat
Rev Drug Discov 2006; 5(12): 1034–1049.
15 Grant AO. Cardiac ion channels. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol 2009; 2(2):
185–194.
16 Starmer CF, Grant AO, Strauss HC. Mechanisms of use-dependent block of sodium
channels in excitable membranes by local anesthetics. Biophys J 1984; 46(1):
15–27.
17 Scholz A. Mechanisms of (local) anaesthetics on voltage-gated sodium and other
ion channels. Br J Anaesth 2002; 89(1): 52–61.
18 Hauneke R, Fassl J, Rossiant R, et al. Effects of volatile anesthetics on cardiac ion
channels. Anaesthesiol 2004; 48: 547–561.

-- 676 of 1450 --

Chapter 33: Cardiovascular Physiology 	661
19 Booker PD, Whyte SD, Ladusans EJ. Long QT syndrome and anaesthesia. Br J
Anaesth 2003; 90(3): 349–366.
20 Behzadi M, Joukar S, Beik A. Opioids and cardiac arrhythmia: a literature review.
Med Princ Pract 2018; 27(5): 401–414.
21 Krantz MJ, Mehler PS. Synthetic opioids and QT prolongation. Arch Intern Med
2003; 163(13): 1615.
22 Ehret GB, Desmeules JA, Broers B. Methadone-associated long QT syndrome:
improving pharmacotherapy for dependence on illegal opioids and lessons learned
for pharmacology. Expert Opin Drug Saf 2007; 6(3): 289–303.
23 Carmeliet E. Conduction in cardiac tissue. Historical reflections. Physiol Rep 2019;
7(1): e13860.
24 Burt JM, Spray DC. Volatile anesthetics block intercellular communication between
neonatal rat myocardial cells. Circ Res 1989; 65: 829–836.
25 Turner LA, Polic S, Hoffmann RG, et al. Actions of volatile anesthetics on ischemic
and nonischemic Purkinje fibers in the canine heart: regional action potential char-
acteristics. Anesth Analg 1993; 76(4): 726–733.
26 Weigt HU, Kwok WM, Rehmert GC, et al. Voltage-dependent effects of volatile
anesthetics on cardiac sodium current. Anesth Analg 1997; 84(2): 285–293.
27 The ’Sicilian Gambit’. A new approach to the classification of antiarrhythmic
drugs based on their actions on arrhythmogenic mechanisms. The Task Force of
the Working Group on Arrhythmias of the European Society of Cardiology. Eur
Heart J 1991; 12(10): 1112–1131.
28 Dhein S, Seidel T, Salameh A, et al. Remodeling of cardiac passive electrical prop-
erties and susceptibility to ventricular and atrial arrhythmias. Front Physiol 2014;
5: 424.
29 Osadchii OE. Role of abnormal repolarization in the mechanism of cardiac arrhyth-
mia. Acta Physiol (Oxf) 2017; 220(Suppl 712): 1–71.
30 Vetulli HM, Elizari MV, Naccarelli GV, et al. Cardiac automaticity: basic concepts
and clinical observations. J Interv Card Electrophysiol 2018; 52(3): 263–270.
31 DiFrancesco D. The role of the funny current in pacemaker activity. Circ Res 2010;
106(3): 434–446.
32 Noble D, Noble SJ. A model of sino-atrial node electrical activity based on a modi-
fication of the DiFrancesco-Noble (1984) equations. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
1984; 222(1228): 295–304.
33 Petite SE, Bishop BM, Mauro VF. Role of the funny current inhibitor ivabradine in
cardiac pharmacotherapy: a systematic review. Am J Ther 2018; 25(2): e247–e266.
34 Robertson D, Goldberg MR, Tung CS, et al. Use of alpha 2 adrenoreceptor agonists
and antagonists in the functional assessment of the sympathetic nervous system. J
Clin Invest 1986; 78(2): 576–581.
35 Congdon JM, Marquez M, Niyom S, et al. Evaluation of the sedative and cardiovas-
cular effects of intramuscular administration of dexmedetomidine with and with-
out concurrent atropine administration in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2011; 239(1):
81–89.
36 Antzelevitch C, Shimizu W, Yan GX, et al. The M cell: its contribution to the ECG
and to normal and abnormal electrical function of the heart. J Cardiovasc
Electrophysiol 1999; 10(8): 1124–1152.
37 Lukas A. Electrophysiology of myocardial cells in the epicardial, midmyocardial,
and endocardial layers of the ventricle. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol Ther 1997; 2(1):
61–72.
38 Spach MS, Dolber PC. Discontinuous anisotropic propagation. In: Rosen MR,
Janse MJ, Wit AL, eds. Cardiac Electrophysiology: A Textbook. Mount Kisco, NY:
Futura, 1990: 517–534.
39 Spach MS, Dolber PC, Heidlage JF. Influence of the passive anisotropic properties
on directional differences in propagation following modification of the sodium
conductance in human atrial muscle. A model of reentry based on anisotropic dis-
continuous propagation. Circ Res 1988; 62(4): 811–832.
40 Kléber AG. ST-segment elevation in the electrocardiogram: a sign of myocardial
ischemia. Cardiovasc Res 2000; 45(1): 111–118.
41 di Bernardo D, Murray A. Origin on the electrocardiogram of U-waves and abnor-
mal U-wave inversion. Cardiovasc Res 2002; 53(1): 202–208.
42 Staikou C, Stamelos M, Stavroulakis E. Impact of anaesthetic drugs and adjuvants
on ECG markers of torsadogenicity. Br J Anaesth 2014; 112(2): 217–230.
43 Hayashi Y, Kamibayashi T, Sumikawa K, et al. Adrenoceptor mechanism involved
in thiopental-epinephrine-induced arrhythmias in dogs. Am J Physiol 1993; 265(4
Pt 2): H1380–H1385.
44 Kamibayashi T, Hayashi Y, Sumikawa K, et al. Enhancement by propofol of
epinephrine-induced arrhythmias in dogs. Anesthesiology 1991; 75(6): 1035–1040.
45 Bednarski RM, Majors LJ. Ketamine and the arrhythmogenic dose of epinephrine
in cats anesthetized with halothane and isoflurane. Am J Vet Res 1986; 47(10):
2122–2125.
46 Cárceles MD, Laorden ML, Hernandez J, et al. Halothane, isoflurane and enflurane
potentiate the effect of noradrenaline on ventricular automaticity in the rat heart:
evidence of the involvement of both alpha- and beta-adrenoceptors. J Pharm
Pharmacol 1990; 42(3): 186–190.
47 Kulier AH, Turner LA, Vodanovic S, et al. Multiple agents potentiate alpha1-
adrenoceptor-induced conduction depression in canine cardiac purkinje fibers.
Anesthesiology 2000; 92(6): 1713–1721.
48 Himmel HM. Mechanisms involved in cardiac sensitization by volatile anesthetics:
general applicability to halogenated hydrocarbons? Crit Rev Toxicol 2008; 38:
773–803.
49 Batchvarov VN, Behr ER. QRS-ST- T triangulation with repolarization shortening
as a precursor of sustained ventricular tachycardia during acute myocardial
ischemia. J Arrhythm 2015; 31(2): 118–120.
50 Hondeghem LM. Relative contributions of TRIaD and QT to proarrhythmia.
J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 2007; 18(6): 655–657.
51 Roden DM. Predicting drug-induced QT prolongation and torsades de pointes.
J Physiol 2016; 594(9): 2459–2468.
52 Bentzen BH, Grunnet M. Central and peripheral GABA(A) receptor regulation of
the heart rate depends on the conscious state of the animal. Adv Pharmacol Sci
2011; 2011: 578273.
53 Etaee F, Tobin M, Vuppala S, et al. Effects of opioid receptor agonist and antagonist
medications on electrocardiogram changes and presentation of cardiac arrhythmia:
review article. J Interv Card Electrophysiol 2022; 63(2): 471–500.
54 Bujubasic N, Marijic J, Berczi V, et al. Differential effects of etomidate, propofol and
midazolam on calcium and potassium channel currents in canine myocardial cells.
Anesthesiology 1996; 85: 1092–1099.
55 Hatakeyama N, Ito Y, Momose Y. Effects of sevoflurane, isoflurane, and halothane
on mechanical and electrophysiologic properties of canine myocardium. Anesth
Analg 1993; 76(6): 1327–1332.
56 Bers DM. Cardiac excitation–contraction coupling. Nature 2002; 415(6868):
198–205.
57 Opie LH. Excitation–contraction coupling and calcium. In: Opie LH, ed. Heart
Physiology: From Cell to Circulation, 4th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams
& Wilkins, 2004: 159–185.
58 Greenstein JL, Winslow RL. Integrative systems models of cardiac excitation–
contraction coupling. Circ Res 2011; 108(1): 70–84.
59 Eisner DA. Caldwell JL, Kistamás K, et al. Calcium and excitation–contraction
coupling in the heart. Circ Res 2017; 121: 181–195.
60 Laver DR. Ca2+ stores regulate ryanodine receptor Ca2+ release channels via
luminal and cytosolic Ca2+ sites. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 2007; 34(9):
889–896.
61 Diaz- Sylvester PL, Porta M, Copello JA. Halothane modulation of skeletal muscle
ryanodine receptors: dependence on Ca2+, Mg2+, and ATP. Am J Physiol Cell
Physiol 2008; 294(4): C1103–C1112.
62 Cieniewicz A, Trzebicki J, Mayzner-Zawadzka E, et al. Malignant hyperthermia –
what do we know in 2019? Anaesthesiol Intensive Ther 2019; 51: 69–177.
63 Hund TJ, Ziman AP, Lederer WJ, et al. The cardiac IP3 receptor: uncovering
the role of ‘the other’ calcium-release channel. J Mol Cell Cardiol 2008; 45(2):
159–161.
64 Bosnjak ZJ. Cardiac effects of anesthetics. In: Blanck TJJ, Wheeler DM, eds.
Mechanisms of Anesthetic Action in Skeletal, Cardiac and Smooth Muscles. New York,
NY: Plenum Press, 1991: 91–98.
65 Bosnjak ZJ, Supan FD, Rusch NJ. The effects of halothane, enflurane, and isoflurane
on calcium current in isolated canine ventricular cells. Anesthesiology 1991; 74(2):
340–345.
66 Zhou W, Fontenot JH, Liu S, et al. Modulation of cardiac calcium channels by
propofol. Anesthesiology 1997; 86: 670–675.
67 Hobai IA. Anesthetics, the ryanodine receptors, and the heart. Anesthesiology 2017;
126: 373–375.
68 Trivedi DV, Nag S, Spudich A, et al. The myosin family of mechanoenzymes: from
mechanisms to therapeutic approaches. Annu Rev Biochem 2020; 89: 667–693.
69 Kawas RF, Anderson RL, Ingle SRB, et al. A small-molecule modulator of cardiac
myosin acts on multiple stages of the myosin chemomechanical cycle. J Biol Chem
2017; 292(40): 16571–16577.
70 Batters C, Veigel C, Homsher E, et al. To understand muscle you must take it apart.
Front Physiol 2014; 5: 90.
71 Nikitina LV, Kopylova GV, Shchepkin DV, et al. Investigations of molecular mecha-
nisms of actin–myosin interactions in cardiac muscle. Biochem (Mosc) 2015;
80(13): 1748–1763.
72 Reiser PJ, Portman MA, Ning XH, et al. Human cardiac myosin heavy chain iso-
forms in fetal and failing adult atria and ventricles. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol
2001; 280(4): H1814–H1820.
73 Gibbs CL. Cardiac energetics and the Fenn effect. Basic Res Cardiol 1987;
82(Suppl 2): 61–68.
74 Nagayama T, Takimoto E, Sadayappan S, et al. Control of in vivo left ventricular
[correction] contraction/relaxation kinetics by myosin-binding protein C: protein
kinase A phosphorylation dependent and independent regulation. Circulation
2007; 116(21): 2399–2408.

-- 677 of 1450 --

662 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
75 Heling LWHJ, Geeves MA, Kad NM. MyBP-C: one protein to govern them all. J
Muscle Res Cell Motil 2020; 41(1): 91–101.
76 Rüegg C, Veigel C, Molloy JE, et al. Molecular motors: force and movement gener-
ated by single myosin II molecules. News Physiol Sci 2002; 17: 213–218.
77 Squire JM. Muscle myosin filaments: cores, crowns and couplings. Biophys Rev
2009; 1(3): 149.
78 Anderson RL, Trivedi DV, Sarkar SS, et al. Deciphering the super relaxed state of
human β- cardiac myosin and the mode of action of mavacamten from myosin
molecules to muscle fibers. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2018; 115(35): E8143–E8152.
79 McNamara JW, Li A, Dos Remedios CG, et al. The role of super-relaxed myosin in
skeletal and cardiac muscle. Biophys Rev 2015; 7(1): 5–14.
80 Alamo L, Ware JS, Pinto A, et al. Effects of myosin variants on interacting-heads
motif explain distinct hypertrophic and dilated cardiomyopathy phenotypes. Elife
2017; 6: e24634.
81 Sweeney HL, Holzbaur ELF. Motor proteins. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2018;
10(5): a021931.
82 Kampourakis T, Ponnam S, Sun YB, et al. Structural and functional effects of
myosin-binding protein- C phosphorylation in heart muscle are not mimicked by
serine-to-aspartate substitutions. J Biol Chem 2018; 293(37): 14270–14275.
83 McNamara JW, Singh RR, Sadayappan S. Cardiac myosin binding protein-C phos-
phorylation regulates the super-relaxed state of myosin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2019; 116(24): 11731–11736.
84 Janssen PML. Myocardial relaxation in human heart failure: why sarcomere kinet-
ics should be center-stage. Arch Biochem Biophys 2019; 661: 145–148.
85 Tang W, Yengo CM. Inter-filament co-operativity is crucial for regulating muscle
contraction. J Physiol 2018; 596(1): 17–18.
86 Landesberg A, Livshitz L, Ter Keurs HE. The effect of sarcomere shortening veloc-
ity on force generation, analysis, and verification of models for crossbridge
dynamics. Ann Biomed Eng 2000; 28(8): 968–978.
87 Liu C, Kawana M, Song D, et al. Controlling load-dependent kinetics of β-cardiac
myosin at the single-molecule level. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2018; 25(6): 505–514.
88 Houdusse A, Sweeney HL. How myosin generates force on actin filaments. Trends
Biochem Sci 2016; 41(12): 989–997.
89 Sequeira V, van der Velden J. Historical perspective on heart function: the Frank–
Starling Law. Biophys Rev 2015; 7(4): 421–447.
90 Piazzesi G, Caremani M, Linari M, et al. Thick filament mechano-sensing in skel-
etal and cardiac muscles: a common mechanism able to adapt the energetic cost of
the contraction to the task. Front Physiol 2018; 9: 736.
91 Sweeney HL, Houdusse A, Robert-Paganin J. Myosin structures. Adv Exp Med
Biol 2020; 1239: 7–19.
92 Katz AM. Structure, biochemistry, and biophysics; the contractile proteins. In:
Katz AM, ed. Physiology of the Heart, 5th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins, 2011: 88–106.
93 Fujita K, Ohmachi M, Ikezaki K, et al. Direct visualization of human myosin II
force generation using DNA origami-based thick filaments. Commun Biol 2019;
2: 437.
94 Opie LH. Myocardidal contraction and relaxation. In: Opie LH, ed. Heart
Physiology: From Cell to Circulation, 4th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins, 2004: 221–246.
95 Muir WW, Hamlin RL. Myocardial contractility: historical and contemporary
considerations. Front Physiol 2020; 11: 222.
96 Toepfer CN, West TG, Ferenczi MA. Revisiting Frank–Starling: regulatory light
chain phosphorylation alters the rate of force redevelopment (ktr) in a length-
dependent fashion. J Physiol 2016; 594(18): 5237–5254.
97 Sevrieva IR, Brandmeier B, Ponnam S, et al. Cardiac myosin regulatory light chain
kinase modulates cardiac contractility by phosphorylating both myosin regula-
tory light chain and troponin I. J Biol Chem 2020; 295(14): 4398–4410.
98 Eisner DA, Caldwell JL, Trafford AW, et al. The control of diastolic calcium in the
heart: basic mechanisms and functional implications. Circ Res 2020; 126(3):
395–412.
99 Scranton K, John S, Escobar A, et al. Modulation of the cardiac Na+
- Ca2+ exchanger
by cytoplasmic protons: molecular mechanisms and physiological implications.
Cell Calcium 2020; 87: 102140.
100 Stammers AN, Susser SE, Hamm NC, et al. The regulation of sarco(endo)plasmic
reticulum calcium-ATPases (SERCA). Can J Physiol Pharmacol 2015; 93(10):
843–854.
101 Gelissen HP, Epema AH, Henning RH, et al. Inotropic effects of propofol, thio-
pental, midazolam, etomidate, and ketamine on isolated human atrial muscle.
Anesthesiology 1996; 84(2): 397–403.
102 Blanck TJ, Chiancone E, Salviati G, et al. Halothane does not alter Ca2+ affinity of
troponin C. Anesthesiology 1992; 76(1): 100–105.
103 Meng T, Bu W, Ren X, et al. Molecular mechanism of anesthetic-induced depres-
sion of myocardial contraction. FASEB J 2016; 30(8): 2915–2925.
104 Haworth RA, Goknur AB. Inhibition of sodium/calcium exchange and calcium chan-
nels of heart cells by volatile anesthestics. Anesthesiology 1995; 82(5): 1255–1265.
105 Kongsayreepong S, Cook DJ, Housmans PR. Mechanism of the direct, negative
inotropic effect of ketamine in isolated ferret and frog ventricular myocardium.
Anesthesiology 1993; 79(2): 313–322.
106 Pagel PS, Kampine JP, Schmeling WT, et al. Reversal of volatile anesthetic-induced
depression of myocardial contractility by extracellular calcium also enhances left
ventricular diastolic function. Anesthesiology 1993; 78(1): 141–154.
107 Rusy BF, Komai H. Anesthetic depression of myocardial contractility: a review of
possible mechanisms. Anesthesiology 1987; 67(5): 745–766.
108 Lynch C III, Frazer MJ. Depressant effects of volatile anesthetics upon rat and
amphibian ventricular myocardium: insights into anesthetic mechanisms of
action. Anesthesiology 1989; 70(3): 511–522.
109 Schmidt U, Schwinger RH, Böhm S, et al. Evidence for an interaction of halothane
with the L-type Ca2+ channel in human myocardium. Anesthesiology 1993; 79(2):
332–339.
110 Wilde DW, Davidson BA, Smith MD, et al. Effects of isoflurane and enflurane on
intracellular Ca2+ mobilization in isolated cardiac myocytes. Anesthesiology 1993;
79(1): 73–82.
111 Humphrey LS, Stinson DC, Humphrey MJ, et al. Volatile anesthetic effects on left
ventricular relaxation in swine. Anesthesiology 1990; 73(4): 731–738.
112 Constable P, Muir W III, Sisson D. Clinical assessment of left ventricular relaxa-
tion. J Vet Intern Med 1999; 13(1): 5–13.
113 Guven G, Hilty MP, Ince C. Microcirculation: physiology, pathophysiology, and
clinical application. Blood Purif 2020; 49(1–2): 143–150.
114 Shepard JT, Vanhoutte P. Components of the cardiovascular system: how structure
is geared to function. In: Shepard JT, Vanhoutte P, eds. The Human Cardiovascular
System: Facts and Concepts. New York, NY: Raven, 1979: 5–8.
115 Westerhof N, Lankhaar JW, Westerhof BE. The arterial Windkessel. Med Biol Eng
Comput 2009; 47(2): 131–141.
116 Reines BP, Ninham BW. Structure and function of the endothelial surface layer:
unraveling the nanoarchitecture of biological surfaces. Q Rev Biophys 2019; 52: e13.
117 Gaudette S, Hughes D, Boller M. The endothelial glycocalyx: structure and func-
tion in health and critical illness. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2020; 30(2):
117–134.
118 Jedlicka J, Becker BF, Chappell D. Endothelial glycocalyx. Crit Care Clin 2020;
36(2): 217–232.
119 Levick JR, Michel CC. Microvascular fluid exchange and the revised Starling prin-
ciple. Cardiovasc Res 2010; 87(2): 198–210.
120 Woodcock TE, Woodcock TM. Revised Starling equation and the glycocalyx
model of transvascular fluid exchange: an improved paradigm for prescribing
intravenous fluid therapy. Br J Anaest 2012; 108(3): 384–394.
121 Chappell D, Westphal M, Jacob M. The impact of the glycocalyx on microcircula-
tory oxygen distribution in critical illness. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2009; 22(2):
155–162.
122 Rodrigues SF, Granger DN. Role of blood cells in ischaemia-reperfusion induced
endothelial barrier failure. Cardiovasc Res 2010; 87(2): 291–299.
123 Kundra P, Goswami S. Endothelial glycocalyx: role in body fluid homeostasis and
fluid management. Indian J Anaesth 2019; 63(1): 6–14.
124 Green JR. Circulatory mechanics. In: Fundamental Cardiovascular and Pulmonary
Physiology, 2nd edn. Philadelphia, PA: Lea and Febiger, 1987: 59–80.
125 Waghmare LS, Srivastava TK. Conceptualizing physiology of arterial blood pres-
sure regulation through the logic model. Adv Physiol Educ 2016; 40(4): 477–479.
126 Voets T, Nilius B. TRPCs, GPCRs and the Bayliss effect. EMBO J 2009; 28(1): 4–5.
127 Roosterman D, Goerge T, Schneider SW, et al. Neuronal control of skin function:
the skin as a neuroimmunoendocrine organ. Physiol Rev 2006; 86(4): 1309–1379.
128 Molyneux GS, Haller CJ, Mogg K, et al. The structure, innervation and location of
arteriovenous anastomoses in the equine foot. Equine Vet J 1994; 26(4): 305–312.
129 Lawrence CJ, Prinzen FW, de Lange S. The effect of dexmedetomidine on nutrient
organ blood flow. Anesth Analg 1996; 83(6): 1160–1165.
130 Woodcock TE, Michel CC. Advances in the Starling principle and microvascular
fluid exchange; consequences and implications for fluid therapy. Front Vet Sci
2021; 8: 623671.
131 Dull RO, Chignalia AZ. The glycocalyx and pressure-dependent transcellular
albumin transport. Cardiovasc Eng Technol 2020; 11(6): 655–662.
132 Sarin H. Physiologic upper limits of pore size of different blood capillary types and
another perspective on the dual pore theory of microvascular permeability. J
Angiogenes Res 2010; 2: 14.
133 Verkman AS. Aquaporins in clinical medicine. Annu Rev Med 2012; 63: 303–316.
134 Yang WC, Zhou LJ, Zhang R, et al. Effects of propofol and sevoflurane on
aquaporin-4 and aquaporin-9 expression in patients performed gliomas resec-
tion. Brain Res 2015; 1622: 1–6.
135 Demirgan S, Akyol O, Temel Z, et al. Isoflurane exposure in infant rats acutely
increases aquaporin 4 and does not cause neurocognitive impairment. Bosn J
Basic Med Sci 2019; 19(3): 257–264.
136 Starling EH. On the absorption of fluids from the connective tissue spaces. J
Physiol 1896; 19: 312–326.

-- 678 of 1450 --

Chapter 33: Cardiovascular Physiology 	663
137 Landis EM. Microinjection studies of capillary permeability. II. The relation
between capillary pressure and the rate of which fluid passes through the walls of
single capillaries. Am J Physiol 1927; 82(2): 217–238.
138 Pappenheimer JR, Soto-Rivera A. Effective osmotic pressure of the plasma pro-
teins and other quantities associated with the capillary circulation in the hindlimbs
of cats and dogs. Am J Physiol 1948; 152(3): 471–491.
139 Taylor AE. Capillary fluid filtration. Starling forces and lymph flow. Circ Res 1981;
49(3): 557–575.
140 Reed RK, Rubin K. Transcapillary exchange: role and importance of the interstitial
fluid pressure and the extracellular matrix. Cardiovasc Res 2010; 87(2): 211–217.
141 Woodcock TA. Plasma volume, tissue oedema, and the steady-state Starling prin-
ciple. BJA Educ 2017; 17(2): 74–78.
142 Dull RO, Hahn RG. Transcapillary refill: the physiology underlying fluid reab-
sorption. J Trauma Acute Care Surg 2021; 90(2): e31–e39.
143 Becker BF, Chappell D, Bruegger D, et al. Therapeutic strategies targeting the
endothelial glycocalyx: acute deficits, but great potential. Cardiovasc Res 2010;
87(2): 300–310.
144 Eschalier A, Lavarenne J, Burtin C, et al. Study of histamine release induced by
acute administration of antitumor agents in dogs. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol
1988; 21(3): 246–250.
145 Robinson EP, Faggella AM, Henry DP, et al. Comparison of histamine release
induced by morphine and oxymorphone administration in dogs. Am J Vet Res
1988; 49: 1699–1701.
146 Lorenz W, Schmal A, Schult H, et al. Histamine release and hypotensive reactions
in dogs by solubilizing agents and fatty acids: analysis of various components in
cremophor El and development of a compound with reduced toxicity. Agents
Actions 1982; 12(1–2): 64–80.
147 Jacobs R, Jonckheer J, Malbrain M. Fluid overload FADEs away! Time for fluid
stewardship. J Crit Care 2018; 48: 458–461.
148 Hainsworth R. Vascular capacitance: its control and importance. Rev Physiol
Biochem Pharmacol 1986; 105: 101–173.
149 Caggiati A, Phillips M, Lametschwandtner A, et al. Valves in small veins and ven-
ules. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg 2006; 32(4): 447–452.
150 Elsner D, Stewart DJ, Sommer O, et al. Postsynaptic alpha 1- and alpha
2- adrenergic receptors in adrenergic control of capacitance vessel tone in vivo.
Hypertension 1986; 8(11): 1003–1014.
151 Noble BJ, Drinkhill MJ, Myers DS, et al. Reflex control of splanchnic blood vol-
ume in anaesthetized dogs. J Physiol 1998; 513(Pt 1): 263–272.
152 Gelman S. Venous function and central venous pressure: a physiologic story.
Anesthesiology 2008; 108(4): 735–748.
153 Guyton AC, Lindsey AW, Abernathy B, et al. Venous return at various right atrial
pressures and the normal venous return curve. Am J Physiol 1957; 189: 609–615.
154 Beard DA, Feigl EO. Understanding Guyton’s venous return curves. Am J Physiol
Heart Circ Physiol 2011; 301(3): H629–H633.
155 Levy MN. The cardiac and vascular factors that determine systemic blood flow.
Circ Res 1979; 44: 739–747.
156 Brengelmann GL. A critical analysis of the view that right atrial pressure deter-
mines venous return. J Appl Physiol 2003; 94: 849–859.
157 Reddi BA, Carpenter RH. Venous return: cardiomythology? Clin Med (Lond)
2007; 7(1): 35–36.
158 Webb RC. Smooth muscle contraction and relaxation. Adv Physiol Educ 2003;
27(1–4): 201–206.
159 Clifford PS. Local control of blood flow. Adv Physiol Educ 2011; 35(1): 5–15.
160 Akata T. Cellular and molecular mechanisms regulating vascular tone. Part 1:
basic mechanisms controlling cytosolic Ca2+ concentration and the Ca2+-
dependent regulation of vascular tone. J Anesth 2007; 21(2): 220–231.
161 Akata T. Cellular and molecular mechanisms regulating vascular tone. Part 2:
regulatory mechanisms modulating Ca2+ mobilization and/or myofilament Ca2+
sensitivity in vascular smooth muscle cells. J Anesth 2007; 21(2): 232–242.
162 Goulopoulou S, Webb RC. Symphony of vascular contraction: how smooth mus-
cle cells lose harmony to signal increased vascular resistance in hypertension.
Hypertension 2014; 63(3): e33–e39.
163 Chang KS, Davis RF. Propofol produces endothelium-independent vasodilation
and may act as a Ca2+ channel blocker. Anesth Analg 1993; 76(1): 24–32.
164 Akata T, Izumi K, Nakashima M. Mechanisms of direct inhibitory action of keta-
mine on vascular smooth muscle in mesenteric resistance arteries. Anesthesiology
2001; 95: 452–462.
165 Akata T. General anesthetics and vascular smooth muscle: direct actions of gen-
eral anesthetics on cellular mechanisms regulating vascular tone. Anesthesiology
2007; 106(2): 365–391.
166 Tykocki NR, Boerman EM, Jackson WF. Smooth muscle ion channels and regulation of
vascular tone in resistance arteries and arterioles. Compr Physiol 2017; 7(2): 485–581.
167 Tanaka K, Kawano T, Nakamura A, et al. Isoflurane activates sarcolemmal adeno-
sine triphosphate-sensitive potassium channels in vascular smooth muscle cells: a
role for protein kinase A. Anesthesiology 2007; 106(5): 984–991.
168 Burton AC. Composition of blood. In: Burton AC, ed. Physiology and Biophysics of
the Circulation, 2nd edn. Chicago, IL: Year Book, 1972: 15–21.
169 Davies KJ. Adaptive homeostasis. Mol Aspects Med 2016; 49: 1–7.
170 Burke JD. Blood volume in mammals. Physiological Zoology, 1954; 27: 1–21.
171 Ahmed MH, Ghatge MS, Safo MK. Hemoglobin: structure, function and allostery.
Subcell Biochem 2020; 94: 345–382.
172 Cambier C, Wierinckx M, Clerbaux T, et al. Haemoglobin oxygen affinity and
regulating factors of the blood oxygen transport in canine and feline blood. Res
Vet Sci 2004; 77(1): 83–88.
173 Lima B, Forrester MT, Hess DT, et al. S-nitrosylation in cardiovascular signaling.
Circ Res 2010; 106(4): 633–646.
174 Doctor A, Stamler JS. Nitric oxide transport in blood: a third gas in the respiratory
cycle. Compr Physiol 2011; 1(1): 541–568.
175 Chen K, Pittman RN, Popel AS. Nitric oxide in the vasculature: where does it
come from and where does it go? A quantitative perspective. Antioxid Redox Signal
2008; 10(7): 1185–1198.
176 Schechter AN, Gladwin MT. Hemoglobin and the paracrine and endocrine func-
tions of nitric oxide. N Engl J Med 2003; 348(15): 1483–1485.
177 McMahon TJ, Moon RE, Luschinger BP, et al. Nitric oxide in the human respira-
tory cycle. Nat Med 2002; 8(7): 711–717.
178 Sonveaux P, Lobysheva II, Renon O, et al. Transport and peripheral bioactivities of
nitrogen oxides carried by red blood cell hemoglobin: role in oxygen delivery.
Physiology 2007; 22: 97–112.
179 MacIntyre NR. Tissue hypoxia: implications for the respiratory clinician. Respir
Care 2014; 59(10): 1590–1596.
180 Corrado C, Fontana S. Hypoxia and HIF signaling: one axis with divergent effects.
Int J Mol Sci 2020; 21(16): 5611.
181 Rifkind JM, Nagababu E, Ramasamy S. The quaternary hemoglobin conformation
regulates the formation of the nitrite-induced bioactive intermediate and the disso-
ciation of nitric oxide from this intermediate. Nitric Oxide 2011; 24(2): 102–109.
182 Silva G, Jeney V, Chora A, et al. Oxidized hemoglobin is an endogenous proin-
flammatory agonist that targets vascular endothelial cells. J Biol Chem 2009;
284(43): 29582–29595.
183 Alayash AI, Patel RP, Cashon RE. Redox reactions of hemoglobin and myoglobin:
biological and toxicological implications. Antioxid Redox Signal 2001; 3(2):
313–327.
184 Lanza V, Mercadante S, Pignataro A. Effects of halothane, enflurane, and nitrous
oxide on oxyhemoglobin affinity. Anesthesiology 1988; 68(4): 591–594.
185 Wilkie DA, Kirby R. Methemoglobinemia associated with dermal application of
benzocaine cream in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1988; 192(1): 85–86.
186 Guay J. Methemoglobinemia related to local anesthetics: a summary of 242 epi-
sodes. Anesth Analg 2009; 108(3): 837–845.
187 Yu F, Tong LJ, Cai DS. Sevoflurane inhibits neuronal apoptosis and expressions of
HIF-1 and HSP70 in brain tissues of rats with cerebral ischemia/reperfusion
injury. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci 2020; 24(9): 5082–5090.
188 Choi I, Lee S, Hong YK. The new era of the lymphatic system: no longer secondary
to the blood vascular system. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2012; 2(4): a006445.
189 Shang T, Liang J, Kapron CM, et al. Pathophysiology of aged lymphatic vessels.
Aging (Albany NY) 2019; 11(16): 6602–6613.
190 Kesler CT, Liao S, Munn LL, et al. Lymphatic vessels in health and disease. Wiley
Interdiscip Rev Syst Biol Med 2013; 5(1): 111–124.
191 Stewart RH. A modern view of the interstitial space in health and disease. Front
Vet Sci 2020; 7: 609583.
192 Jessen NA, Munk AS, Lundgaard I, et al. the glymphatic system: a beginner’s
guide. Neurochem Res 2015; 40(12): 2583–2599.
193 Chaplin DD. Overview of the immune response. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;
125(2 Suppl 2): S3–S23.
194 Hansen KC, D’Alessandro A, Clement CC, et al. Lymph formation, composition
and circulation: a proteomics perspective. Int Immunol 2015; 27(5): 219–227.
195 Kang S, Lee SP, Kim KE, et al. Toll-like receptor 4 in lymphatic endothelial cells
contributes to LPS-induced lymphangiogenesis by chemotactic recruitment of
macrophages. Blood 2009; 113(11): 2605–2613.
196 Hemmi H, Akira S. TLR signaling and the function of dendritic cells. Chem
Immunol Allergy 2005; 86: 120–135.
197 Akira S, Takeda K, Kaisho T. Toll-like receptors: critical proteins linking innate
and acquired immunity. Nat Immunol 2001; 2(8): 675–680.
198 Secomb TW. Hemodynamics. Compr Physiol 2016; 6(2): 975–1003.
199 Scheeren TWL, Ramsay MAE. New developments in hemodynamic monitoring.
J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2019; 33(Suppl 1): S67–S72.
200 Norton JM. Toward consistent definitions for preload and afterload. Adv Physiol
Educ 2001; 25(1): 53–61.
201 Ross J. Cardiac function and myocardial contractility: a perspective. J Am Coll
Cardiol 1983; 1: 52–62.
202 Sonnenblick EH. Instantaneous force–velocity–length determinants in the con-
traction of heart muscle. Circ Res 1965; 16: 441–451.

-- 679 of 1450 --

664 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
203 Ross J, Franklin D, Sasayama S. Preload, afterload, and the role of afterload mis-
match in the descending limb of cardiac function. Eur J Cardiol 1976; 4(Suppl):
77–86.
204 Brutsaert DL, Sonnenblick EH. Cardiac muscle mechanics in the evaluation of
myocardial contractility and pump function: problems, concepts, and directions.
Prog Cardiovasc Dis 1973; 16(3): 337–361.
205 Kass DA, Maughan WL, Guo ZM, et al. Comparative influence of load versus
inotropic states on indexes of ventricular contractility: experimental and theoreti-
cal analysis based on pressure–volume relationships. Circulation 1987; 76(6):
1422–1436.
206 Monge García MI, Jian Z, Settels JJ, et al. Determinants of left ventricular ejection
fraction and a novel method to improve its assessment of myocardial contractility.
Ann Intensive Care 2019; 9(1): 48.
207 Sutera SP, Skalak R. The history of Poiseuille’s law. Ann Rev Fluid Mech 1993; 25:
1–19.
208 Guyton AC. Regulation of cardiac output. N Engl J Med 1967; 277(15): 805–812.
209 Guyton AC. Regulation of cardiac output. Anesthesiology 1968; 29(2): 314–326.
210 He S, Seddighi M. Transition of transient channel flow after a change in Reynolds
number. J Fluid Mech 2015; 764: 395–427.
211 Yoganathan AP, Cape EG, Sung HW, et al. Review of hydrodynamic principles for
the cardiologist: applications to the study of blood flow and jets by imaging tech-
niques. J Am Coll Cardiol 1988; 12(5): 1344–1353.
212 Eger EI. Tissue groups arranged by solubility and perfusion characteristics. In:
Anesthetic Uptake and Action. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins, 1974: 88–94.
213 Westerhof BE, van Gemert MJC, van den Wijngaard JP. Pressure and flow rela-
tions in the systemic arterial tree throughout development from newborn to adult.
Front Pediatr 2020; 8: 251.
214 Basford JR. The Law of Laplace and its relevance to contemporary medicine and
rehabilitation. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 2002; 83(8): 1165–1170.
215 Guensch DP, Fischer K, Jung C, et al. Relationship between myocardial oxygena-
tion and blood pressure: experimental validation using oxygenation-sensitive car-
diovascular magnetic resonance. PLoS ONE 2019; 14(1): e0210098.
216 Thiele RH, Durieux ME. Arterial waveform analysis for the anesthesiologist: past,
present, and future concepts. Anesth Analg 2011; 113(4): 766–776.
217 Boysen SR, Gommeren K. Assessment of volume status and fluid responsiveness
in small animals. Front Vet Sci 2021; 8: 630643.
218 Barbeito A, Mark JB. Arterial and central venous pressure monitoring. Anesthesiol
Clin 2006; 24(4): 717–735.
219 Marik PE, Baram M, Vahid B. Does central venous pressure predict fluid respon-
siveness? A systematic review of the literature and the tale of seven mares. Chest
2008; 34(1): 172–178.
220 Marik PE. Noninvasive cardiac output monitors: a state-of- the-art review. J
Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2013; 27(1): 121–134.
221 Eckmann DM, Bowers S, Stecker M, et al. Hematocrit, volume expander, tempera-
ture, and shear rate effects on blood viscosity. Anesth Analg 2000; 91(3): 539–545.
222 Reinhart WH. Molecular biology and self-regulatory mechanisms of blood vis-
cosity: a review. Biorheology 2001; 38(2–3): 203–212.
223 Ercan M, Koksal C. The relationship between shear rate and vessel diameter.
Anesth Analg 2003; 96(1): 307; author reply 307–308.
224 Pries AR, Secomb TW, Gaehtgens P, et al. Blood flow in microvascular networks.
Experiments and simulation. Circ Res 1990; 67(4): 826–834.
225 Ascolese M, Farina A, Fasano A. The Fåhræus–Lindqvist effect in small blood
vessels: how does it help the heart? J Biol Phys 2019; 45(4): 379–394.
226 Lasala PA, Chien S, Michelsen CB. Hemorrheology: what is the ideal hematocrit?
In: Askanasi J, Starker RM, Weissman C, eds. Fluid and Electrolyte Management in
Critical Care. Boston, MA: Butterworth, 1986: 203–213.
227 Goto Y, Sakakura S, Hatta M, et al. Hemorrheological effects of colloidal plasma sub-
stitutes infusion. A comparative study. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1985; 29(2): 217–223.
228 Cabrales P, Intaglietta M, Tsai AG. Increase plasma viscosity sustains microcircu-
lation after resuscitation from hemorrhagic shock and continuous bleeding. Shock
2005; 23(6): 549–555.
229 Martini J, Carpentier B, Chávez Negrete A, et al. Beneficial effects due to increas-
ing blood and plasma viscosity. Clin Hemorheol Microcirc 2006; 35(1–2): 51–57.
230 Negrete A, Tsai AG, Forconi S, et al. Cardiovascular benefits in moderate increases
of blood and plasma viscosity surpass those associated with lowering viscosity:
experimental and clinical evidence. Clin Hemorheol Microcirc 2010; 44(2): 75–85.
231 Arnemann PH, Hessler M, Kampmeier T, et al. Resuscitation with hydroxyethyl
starch maintains hemodynamic coherence in ovine hemorrhagic shock.
Anesthesiology 2020; 132(1): 131–139.
232 Olson RM. In vivo blood viscosity and hindrance. Am J Physiol 1964; 206:
955–961.
233 Whittaker SR, Winton FR. The apparent viscosity of blood flowing in the isolated
hindlimb of the dog, and its variation with corpuscular concentration. J Physiol
1933; 78(4): 339–369.
234 Chen RY, Carlin RD, Simchon S, et al. Effects of dextran-induced hyperviscosity
on regional blood flow and hemodynamics in dogs. Am J Physiol 1989; 256(3 Pt
2): H898–H905.
235 O’Rourke MF, Pauca A, Jiang XJ. Pulse wave analysis. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2001;
51(6): 507–522.
236 O’Rourke MF. Vascular impedance in studies of arterial and cardiac function.
Physiol Rev 1982; 62(2): 570–623.
237 Zelis R, Flaim SF, Liedtke AJ, et al. Cardiocirculatory dynamics in the normal and
failing heart. Annu Rev Physiol 1981; 43: 455–476.
238 Little WC, Cheng CP. Left ventricular–arterial coupling in conscious dogs. Am J
Physiol 1991; 261(1 Pt 2): H70–H76.
239 Kouraklis G, Karayannacos P, Sechas M, et al. The influence of hemodilution on
left ventricular function. Int Angiol 1990; 9(1): 38–42.
240 Wood NB. Aspects of fluid dynamics applied to the larger arteries. J Theor Biol
1999; 199(2): 137–161.
241 Deryck YL, Brimioulle S, Maggiorini M, et al. Systemic vascular effects of isoflu-
rane versus propofol anesthesia in dogs. Anesth Analg 1996; 83(5): 958–964.
242 Hettrick DA, Pagel PS, Warltier DC. Isoflurane and halothane produce similar
alterations in aortic distensibility and characteristic aortic impedance. Anesth
Analg 1996; 83(6): 1166–1172.
243 Crowell JW, Smith EE. Determinant of the optimal hematocrit. J Appl Physiol
1967; 22(3): 501–504.
244 Hsia CC, Johnson RL Jr., Dane DM, et al. The canine spleen in oxygen transport:
gas exchange and hemodynamic responses to splenectomy. J Appl Physiol (1985)
2007; 103(5): 1496–1505.
245 Chapler CK, Cain SM. The physiologic reserve in oxygen carrying capacity: stud-
ies in experimental hemodilution. Can J Physiol Pharmacol 1986; 64(1): 7–12.
246 Leone BJ, Spahn DR. Anemia, hemodilution, and oxygen delivery. Anesth Analg
1992; 75(5): 651–653.
247 Cabrales P, Tsai AG, Intaglietta M. Microvascular pressure and functional capillary den-
sity in extreme hemodilution with low- and high-viscosity dextran and a low-viscosity
Hb-based O2 carrier. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2004; 287(1): H363–H373.
248 Tsai AG, Acero C, Nance PR, et al. Elevated plasma viscosity in extreme hemodi-
lution increases perivascular nitric oxide concentration and microvascular perfu-
sion. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2005; 288(4): H1730–H1739.
249 Rothe C. Toward consistent definitions for preload and afterload-- revisited. Adv
Physiol Educ 2003; 27(1–4): 44–45; author reply 89–90.
250 Suga H, Igarashi Y, Yamada O, et al. Mechanical efficiency of the left ventricle as a
function of preload, afterload, and contractility. Heart Vessels 1985; 1(1): 3–8.
251 Cazorla O, Lacampagne A. Regional variation in myofilament length-dependent
activation. Pflugers Arch 2011; 462(1): 15–28.
252 Katz AM. Ernest Henry Starling, his predecessors, and the ‘Law of the Heart’.
Circulation 2002; 106: 2986–2992.
253 Schotola H, Sossalla ST, Renner A, et al. The contractile adaption to preload
depends on the amount of afterload. ESC Heart Fail 2017; 4(4): 468–478.
254 Cingolani HE, Pérez NG, Cingolani OH, et al. The Anrep effect: 100 years later.
Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2013; 304(2): H175–H182.
255 Mitchell JR, Wang JJ. Expanding application of the Wiggers diagram to teach car-
diovascular physiology. Adv Physiol Educ 2014; 38(2): 170–175.
256 Sagawa K. The end-systolic pressure–volume relation of the ventricle: definition,
modifications and clinical use. Circulation 1981; 63(6): 1223–1227.
257 Burkhoff D, Mirsky I, Suga H. Assessment of systolic and diastolic ventricular
properties via pressure–volume analysis: a guide for clinical, translational, and
basic researchers. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2005; 289(2): H501–H512.
258 Kass DA, Kelly RP. Ventriculo-arterial coupling: concepts, assumptions, and
applications. Ann Biomed Eng 1992; 20(1): 41–62.
259 Welker FH, Muir WW. An investigation of the second heart sound in the normal
horse. Equine Vet J 1990; 22(6): 403–407.
260 Ettinger SJ, Suter PF. Heart sounds and phonocardiography. In: Canine Cardiology.
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 1970: 12–39.
261 Bastos MB, Burkhoff D, Maly J, et al. Invasive left ventricle pressure–volume analysis:
overview and practical clinical implications. Eur Heart J 2020; 41(12): 1286–1297.
262 Monge García MI, Jian Z, Settels JJ, et al. Determinants of left ventricular ejection
fraction and a novel method to improve its assessment of myocardial contractility.
Ann Intensive Care 2019; 9(1): 48.
263 McDonald M, Virani S, Chan M, et al. CCS/CHFS heart failure guidelines update:
defining a new pharmacologic standard of care for heart failure with reduced ejec-
tion fraction. Can J Cardiol 2021; 37(4): 531–546.
264 Antonini-Canterin F, Poli S, Vriz O, et al. The ventricular–arterial coupling: from
basic pathophysiology to clinical application in the echocardiography laboratory.
J Cardiovasc Echogr 2013; 23(4): 91–95.
265 De Tombe PP, Jones S, Burkhoff D, et al. Ventricular stroke work and efficiency
both remain nearly optimal despite altered vascular loading. Am J Physiol 1993;
264(6 Pt 2): H1817–H1824.

-- 680 of 1450 --

Chapter 33: Cardiovascular Physiology 	665
266 Pavlopoulos H, Nihoyannopoulos P. Pulse pressure/stroke volume: a surrogate
index of arterial stiffness and the relation to segmental relaxation and longitudinal
systolic deformation in hypertensive disease. Eur J Echocardiogr 2009; 10(4):
519–526.
267 Anavekar NS, Oh JK. Doppler echocardiography: a contemporary review. J
Cardiol 2009; 54(3): 347–358.
268 Geerts BF, Aarts LP, Jansen JR. Methods in pharmacology: measurement of car-
diac output. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2011; 71(3): 316–330.
269 Spinale FG. Assessment of cardiac function-- basic principles and approaches.
Compr Physiol 2015; 5(4): 1911–1946.
270 Bombardini T. Myocardial contractility in the echo lab: molecular, cellular and
pathophysiological basis. Cardiovasc Ultrasound 2005; 3: 27.
271 Sarazan DR, Parish ST. An evaluation of the utility of LVdP/dt 40
, QA interval,
LVdP/dt min and Tau as indicators of drug-induced changes in contractility and
lusitropy in dogs. J Pharmacol Toxicol Methods 2017; 85: 1–21.
272 Sarazan RD, Kroehle JP, Main BW. Left ventricular pressure, contractility and dP/
dt(max) in nonclinical drug safety assessment studies. J Pharmacol Toxicol
Methods 2012; 66(2): 71–78.
273 Blaudszun G, Licker MJ, Morel DR. Preload-adjusted left ventricular dP/dtmax: a
sensitive, continuous, load-independent contractility index. Exp Physiol 2013;
98(10): 1446–1456.
274 Biering-Sørensen T, Mogelvang R, Schnohr P, et al. Cardiac time intervals meas-
ured by tissue Doppler imaging M-mode: association with hypertension, left ven-
tricular geometry, and future ischemic cardiovascular diseases. J Am Heart Assoc
2016; 5(1): e002687.
275 Smiseth OA, Torp H, Opdahl A, et al. Myocardial strain imaging: how useful is it
in clinical decision making? Eur Heart J 2016; 37(15): 1196–1207.
276 Senzaki H, Chen CH, Kass DA. Single-beat estimation of end-systolic pressure–
volume relation in humans. A new method with the potential for noninvasive
application. Circulation 1996; 94(10): 2497–2506.
277 Brinke EA, Klautz RJ, Verwey HF, et al. Single-beat estimation of the left ventricu-
lar end-systolic pressure–volume relationship in patients with heart failure. Acta
Physiol (Oxf) 2010; 198(1): 37–46.
278 Mirea O, Vallecilla C, Claus P, et al. Experimental validation of the prestretch-
strain relationship as a non-invasive index of left ventricular myocardial contrac-
tility. PLoS ONE 2020; 15(2): e0228027.
279 Swanson CR, Muir WW III. Simultaneous evaluation of left ventricular end-
systolic pressure–volume ratio and time constant of isovolumic pressure decline
in dogs exposed to equivalent MAC halothane and isoflurane. Anesthesiology
1988; 68(5): 764–770.
280 Pagel PS, Kampine JP, Schmeling WT, et al. Comparison of the systemic and coro-
nary hemodynamic actions of desflurane, isoflurane, halothane, and enflurane in
the chronically instrumented dog. Anesthesiology 1991; 74(3): 539–551.
281 Pagel PS, Schmeling WT, Kampine JP, et al. Alteration of canine left ventricular
diastolic function by intravenous anesthetics in vivo. Ketamine and propofol.
Anesthesiology 1992; 76(3): 419–425.
282 Brutsaert DL, Rademakers FE, Sys SU, et al. Analysis of relaxation in the evaluation
of ventricular function of the heart. Prog Cardiovasc Dis 1985; 28(2): 143–163.
283 Ogunyankin KO. Assessment of left ventricular diastolic function: the power, pos-
sibilities, and pitfalls of echocardiographic imaging techniques. Can J Cardiol
2011; 27(3): 311–318.
284 Zhao W, Choi JH, Hong GR, et al. Left ventricular relaxation. Heart Fail Clin 2008;
4(1): 37–46.
285 Nagueh SF. Non-invasive assessment of left ventricular filling pressure. Eur J
Heart Fail 2018; 20(1): 38–48.
286 Pagel PS, Grossman W, Haering JM, et al. Left ventricular diastolic function in the
normal and diseased heart. Perspectives for the anesthesiologist (1). Anesthesiology
1993; 79(4): 836–854.
287 Noel-Morgan J, Muir WW. Anesthesia-associated relative hypovolemia: mecha-
nisms, monitoring, and treatment considerations. Front Vet Sci 2018; 5: 53.
288 Schumacker PT, Cain SM. The concept of a critical oxygen delivery. Intensive Care
Med 1987; 13(4): 223–239.
289 Dunham CM, Siegel JH, Weireter L, et al. Oxygen debt and metabolic acidemia as
quantitative predictors of mortality and the severity of the ischemic insult in hem-
orrhagic shock. Crit Care Med 1991; 19(2): 231–243.
290 Shoemaker WC, Appel PL, Kram HB. Role of oxygen debt in the development of
organ failure sepsis, and death in high-risk surgical patients. Chest 1992; 102(1):
208–215.
291 Rixen D, Siegel JH. Bench-to-bedside review: oxygen debt and its metabolic cor-
relates as quantifiers of the severity of hemorrhagic and post-traumatic shock. Crit
Care 2005; 9(5): 441–453.
292 Siegel JH, Fabian M, Smith JA, et al. Oxygen debt criteria quantify the effective-
ness of early partial resuscitation after hypovolemic hemorrhagic shock. J Trauma
2003; 54(5): 862–880.
293 Schumacker PT, Long GR, Wood LD. Tissue oxygen extraction during hypov-
olemia: role of hemoglobin P50. J Appl Physiol (1985) 1987; 62(5): 1801–1807.
294 Van der Linden P, Schmartz D, De Groote F, et al. Critical haemoglobin concentra-
tion in anaesthetized dogs: comparison of two plasma substitutes. Br J Anaesth
1998; 81(4): 556–562.
295 Cain SM. Oxygen delivery and uptake in dogs during anemic and hypoxic
hypoxia. J Appl Physiol Respir Environ Exerc Physiol 1977; 42(2): 228–234.
296 Van der Linden P, Gilbart E, Engelman E, et al. Effects of anesthetic agents on
systemic critical O2 delivery. J Appl Physiol (1985) 1991; 71(1): 83–93.
297 Van der Linden P, De Hert S, Mathieu N, et al. Tolerance to acute isovolemic
hemodilution. Effect of anesthetic depth. Anesthesiology 2003; 99(1): 97–104.
298 Archie JP Jr. Mathematic coupling of data: a common source of error. Ann Surg
1981; 193(3): 296–303.
299 Walsh TS, Lee A. Mathematical coupling in medical research: lessons from studies
of oxygen kinetics. Br J Anaesth 1998; 81(2): 118–120.
300 Dampney RA. Central neural control of the cardiovascular system: current per-
spectives. Adv Physiol Educ 2016; 40(3): 283–296.
301 McCorry LK. Physiology of the autonomic nervous system. Am J Pharm Educ
2007; 71(4): 78.
302 Segal SS. Regulation of blood flow in the microcirculation. Microcirculation 2005;
12(1): 33–45.
303 Hollmann MW, Strumper D, Herroeder S, et al. Receptors, G proteins, and their
interactions. Anesthesiology 2005; 103(5): 1066–1078.
304 Wang J, Gareri C, Rockman HA. G-protein-coupled receptors in heart disease.
Circ Res 2018; 123(6): 716–735.
305 Arimura H, Bosnjak ZJ, Hoka S, et al. Modifications by halothane of responses to
acute hypoxia in systemic vascular capacitance, resistance, and sympathetic nerve
activity in dogs. Anesth Analg 1991; 73(3): 319–326.
306 McCallum JB, Stekiel TA, Bosnjak ZJ, et al. Does isoflurane alter mesenteric
venous capacitance in the intact rabbit? Anesth Analg 1993; 76(5): 1095–1105.
307 Nakamura K, Terasako K, Toda H, et al. Mechanisms of inhibition of endothelium-
dependent relaxation by halothane, isoflurane, and sevoflurane. Can J Anaesth
1994; 41(4): 340–346.
308 Vatner SF. Effects of anesthesia on cardiovascular control mechanisms. Environ
Health Perspect 1978; 26: 193–206.
309 Zimpfer M, Sit SP, Vatner SF. Effects of anesthesia on the canine carotid chemore-
ceptor reflex. Circ Res 1981; 48(3): 400–406.
310 Mayer N, Zimpfer M, Raberger G, et al. Fentanyl inhibits the canine carotid chem-
oreceptor reflex. Anesth Analg 1989; 69(6): 756–762.
311 Uggeri MJ, Proctor GJ, Johns RA. Halothane, enflurane, and isoflurane attenuate
both receptor- and non-receptor- mediated EDRF production in rat thoracic
aorta. Anesthesiology 1992; 76(6): 1012–1017.
312 Ickx BE, Rigolet M, Van der Linden PJ. Cardiovascular and metabolic response to
acute normovolemic anemia. Effects of anesthesia. Anesthesiology 2000; 93(4):
1011–1016.
313 Skillman JJ, Eltringham WK, Goldensen RH, et al. Transcapillary refilling after
hemorrhage in the splenectomized dog. J Surg Res 1968; 8(2): 57–67.
314 Isbister JP. Physiology and pathophysiology of blood volume regulation. Transfus
Sci 1997; 18(3): 409–423.
315 Wadei HM, Textor SC. The role of the kidney in regulating arterial blood pressure.
Nat Rev Nephrol 2012; 8(10): 602–609.
316 Daniel M, Weiskopf RB, Noorani M, et al. Fentanyl augments the blockade of the
sympathetic response to incision (MAC-BAR) produced by desflurane and isoflu-
rane: desflurane and isoflurane MAC-BAR without and with fentanyl. Anesthesiology
1998; 88(1): 43–49.
317 Crystal GJ, Salem MR. The Bainbridge and the ‘reverse’ Bainbridge reflexes: his-
tory, physiology, and clinical relevance. Anesth Analg 2012; 114(3): 520–532.
318 Zhang YH, Youm JB, Earm YE. Stretch-activated non-selective cation channel: a
causal link between mechanical stretch and atrial natriuretic peptide secretion.
Prog Biophys Mol Biol 2008; 8(1): 1–9.
319 Goetze JP, Bruneau BG, Ramos HR, et al. Cardiac natriuretic peptides. Nat Rev
Cardiol 2020; 17(11): 698–717.
320 Aviado DM, Guevara Aviado D. The Bezold–Jarisch reflex. A historical perspec-
tive of cardiopulmonary reflexes. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2001; 940: 48–58.
321 Kinsella SM, Tuckey JP. Perioperative bradycardia and asystole: relationship to vas-
ovagal syncope and the Bezold–Jarisch reflex. Br J Anaesth 2001; 86(6): 859–868.
322 Campagna JA, Carter C. Clinical relevance of the Bezold–Jarisch reflex.
Anesthesiology 2003; 98(5): 1250–1260.
323 Lindsey BG, Nuding SC, Segers LS, et al. Carotid bodies and the integrated cardi-
orespiratory response to hypoxia. Physiology (Bethesda) 2018; 33(4): 281–297.
324 Persson PB. Renin: origin, secretion and synthesis. J Physiol 2003; 552(Pt 3):
667–671.
325 Bader M, Ganten D. Update on tissue renin–angiotensin systems. J Mol Med (Berl)
2008; 86(6): 615–621.

-- 681 of 1450 --

666 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
326 Patel VB, Zhong JC, Grant MB, et al. Role of the ACE2/angiotensin 1–7 axis of the
renin–angiotensin system in heart failure. Circ Res 2016; 118(8): 1313–1326.
327 Mirenda JV, Grissom TE. Anesthetic implications of the renin–angiotensin sys-
tem and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors. Anesth Analg 1991; 72(5):
667–683.
328 Philbin DM, Coggins CH. The effects of anesthesia on antidiuretic hormone.
Contemp Anesth Pract 1980; 3: 29–38.
329 Maybauer MO, Maybauer DM, Enkhbaatar P, et al. Physiology of the vasopressin
receptors. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2008; 22(2): 253–263.
330 Bankir L, Bichet DG, Morgenthaler NG. Vasopressin: physiology, assessment and
osmosensation. J Intern Med 2017; 282(4): 284–297.
331 Armstead WM. Cerebral blood flow autoregulation and dysautoregulation.
Anesthesiol Clin 2016; 34(3): 465–477.
332 Olsson RA. Local factors regulating cardiac and skeletal muscle blood flow. Annu
Rev Physiol 1981; 43: 385–395.
333 Carlson BE, Arciero JC, Secomb TW. Theoretical model of blood flow autoregula-
tion: roles of myogenic, shear-dependent, and metabolic responses. Am J Physiol
Heart Circ Physiol 2008; 295(4): H1572–H1579.
334 Cengel A, Sahinarslan A. Nitric oxide and cardiovascular system. Anadolu
Kardiyol Derg 2006; 6(4): 364–368.
335 Davis MJ, Hill MA. Signaling mechanisms underlying the vascular myogenic
response. Physiol Rev 1999; 79(2): 387–423.
336 Popel AS, Johnson PC. Microcirculation and hemorheology. Annu Rev Fluid Mech
2005; 37: 43–69.
337 Sriram K, Salazar Vázquez BY, Tsai AG, et al. Autoregulation and mechanotrans-
duction control the arteriolar response to small changes in hematocrit. Am J
Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2012; 303(9): H1096–H1106.
338 Yetik-Anacak G, Catravas JD. Nitric oxide and the endothelium: history and
impact on cardiovascular disease. Vascul Pharmacol 2006; 45(5): 268–276.
339 Watts SW. Endothelin receptors: what’s new and what do we need to know? Am J
Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2010; 298(2): R254–R260.
340 Sawdon M. Characteristics of special circulations. Anesth Int Care Med 2013;
14(2): 68–71.
341 Barile L, Fominskiy E, Di Tomasso N, et al. Acute normovolemic hemodilution
reduces allogenic red blood cell transfusion in cardiac surgery: a systematic
review and meta- analysis of randomized trials. Anesth Analg 2017; 124(3):
743–752.
342 Ramanathan T, Skinner H. Coronary blood flow. Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care
Pain 2005; 5: 61–64.
343 Feigl EO. Coronary autoregulation. J Hypertens Suppl 1989; 7(4): S55–S58.
344 Rowe GG. Responses of the coronary circulation to physiologic changes and phar-
macologic agents. Anesthesiology 1974; 41(2): 182–196.
345 Schelbert HR. Anatomy and physiology of coronary blood flow. J Nucl Cardiol
2010; 17(4): 545–554.
346 Christensen GC, Campeti FD. Anatomic and functional studies of the coronary
circulation in the dog and pig. Am J Vet Res 1959; 20: 18–23.
347 Sethna DH, Moffitt EA. An appreciation of the coronary circulation. Anesth Analg
1986; 65: 294–305.
348 Esperança Pina JA, Correia M, O’Neill JG. Morphological study on the thebesian
veins of the right cavities of the heart in the dog. Acta Anat (Basel) 1975; 92:
310–320.
349 Goodwill AG, Dick GM, Kiel AM, et al. Regulation of coronary blood flow. Compr
Physiol 2017; 7(2): 321–382.
350 Chambers D, Huang C, Matthews G. Cardiac anatomy and function. In: Chambers
D, Huang C, Matthews G, eds. Basic Physiology for Anaesthetists. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press: 2015: 111–116.
351 Tune JD, Richmond KN, Gorman MW, et al. Role of nitric oxide and adenosine in
control of coronary blood flow in exercising dogs. Circ 2000; 101: 2942–2948.
352 Denn MJ, Stone HL. Autonomic innervation of dog coronary arteries. J Appl
Physiol 1976; 41: 30–35.
353 Greyson CR. The right ventricle and pulmonary circulation: basic concepts. Rev
Esp Cardiol 2010; 63: 81–95.
354 Silverman A, Petersen NH. Physiology, cerebral autoregulation. In: Stat Pearls
[Internet]. Treasure Island, FL: StatPearls Publishing, 2021.
355 Hamel E. Perivascular nerves and the regulation of cerebrovascular tone. J Appl
Physiol (1985) 2006 Mar; 100(3): 1059–1064.
356 Yoshihara M, Bandoh K, Marmarou A. Cerebrovascular carbon dioxide reactivity
assessed by intracranial pressure dynamics in severely head injured patients. J
Neurosurg 1995; 82(3): 386–393.
357 Nadeem M, Murray D, Boylan G, et al. Blood carbon dioxide levels and adverse
outcome in neonatal hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy. Am J Perinatol 2010;
27(5): 361–365.
358 Slupe AM, Kirsch JR. Effects of anesthesia on cerebral blood flow, metabolism,
and neuroprotection. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2018; 38(12): 2192–2208.
359 West JB. Comparative physiology of the pulmonary circulation. Compr Physiol
2011; 1(3): 1525–1539.
360 Suresh K, Shimoda LA. Lung circulation. Compr Physiol 2016; 6(2): 897–943.
361 Gillespie JR, Tyler WS, Eberly VE. Pulmonary ventilation and resistance in
emphysematous and control horses. J Appl Physiol 1966; 21(2): 416–422.
362 West JB. Blood flow to the lung and gas exchange. Anesthesiology 1974; 41(2):
124–138.
363 Robinson NE. Some functional consequences of species differences in lung anat-
omy. Adv Vet Sci Comp Med 1982; 26: 1–33.
364 Michard F. Changes in arterial pressure during mechanical ventilation.
Anesthesiology 2005; 103(2): 419–428.
365 Dunham- Snary KJ, Wu D, Sykes EA, et al. Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction:
from molecular mechanisms to medicine. Chest 2017; 151(1): 181–192.
366 Lumb AB, Slinger P. Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction: physiology and anes-
thetic implications. Anesthesiology 2015; 122(4): 932–946.
367 MacEachern KE, Smith GL, Nolan AM. Characteristics of the in vitro hypoxic
pulmonary vasoconstrictor response in isolated equine and bovine pulmonary
arterial rings. Vet Anaesth Analg 2004; 31(4): 239–249.
368 Van Keer L, Van Aken H, Vandermeersch E, et al. Propofol does not inhibit hypoxic
pulmonary vasoconstriction in humans. J Clin Anesth 1989; 1(4): 284–288.
369 Benumof JL. Isoflurane anesthesia and arterial oxygenation during one-lung ven-
tilation. Anesthesiology 1986; 64(4): 419–422.
370 Harper D, Chandler B. Splanchnic circulation. BJA Educ 2016; 16(2): 66–71.
371 Gelman S, Mushlin PS. Catecholamine-induced changes in the splanchnic circu-
lation affecting systemic hemodynamics. Anesthesiology 2004; 100(2): 434–439.
372 Hainsworth R, Karim F. Responses of abdominal vascular capacitance in the
anaesthetized dog to changes in carotid sinus pressure. J Physiol 1976; 262(3):
659–677.
373 Shigemi K, Brunner MJ, Shoukas AA. Alpha- and beta-adrenergic mechanisms in
the control of vascular capacitance by the carotid sinus baroreflex system. Am J
Physiol 1994; 267(1 Pt 2): H201–H210.
374 Rothe CF. Reflex control of veins and vascular capacitance. Physiol Rev 1983;
63(4): 1281–1342.
375 Carneiro JJ, Donald DE. Blood reservoir function of dog spleen, liver, and intes-
tine. Am J Physiol 1977; 232(1): H67–H72.
376 Mellander S, Johansson B. Control of resistance, exchange, and capacitance func-
tions in the peripheral circulation. Pharmacol Rev 1968; 20(3): 117–196.
377 Mellander S. On the control of capillary fluid transfer by precapillary and postcap-
illary vascular adjustments. A brief review with special emphasis on myogenic
mechanisms. Microvasc Res 1978; 15(3): 319–330.
378 Gelman S, Reves JG, Harris D. Circulatory responses to midazolam anesthesia:
emphasis on canine splanchnic circulation. Anesth Analg 1983; 62(2): 135–139.
379 Hoka S, Yamaura K, Takenaka T, et al. Propofol-induced increase in vascular
capacitance is due to inhibition of sympathetic vasoconstrictive activity.
Anesthesiology 1998; 89(6): 1495–1500.
380 Yamazaki M, Stekiel TA, Bosnjak ZJ, et al. Effects of volatile anesthetic agents on
in situ vascular smooth muscle transmembrane potential in resistance- and
capacitance-regulating blood vessels. Anesthesiology 1998; 88(4): 1085–1095.
381 Burke M, Pabbidi MR, Farley J, et al. Molecular mechanisms of renal blood flow
autoregulation. Curr Vasc Pharmacol 2014; 12(6): 845–858.
382 Zehra T, Cupples WA, Braam B. Tubuloglomerular feedback synchronization in
nephrovascular networks. J Am Soc Nephrol 2021; 32(6): 1293–1304.
383 Tojo A, Onozato ML, Fujita T. Role of macula densa neuronal nitric oxide syn-
thase in renal diseases. Med Mol Morphol 2006; 39(1): 2–7.

-- 682 of 1450 --

667
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth E dition of L umb and J ones	. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
The term “cardiopulmonary bypass” is broadly applied to the
procedure by which blood is diverted away from the heart and
lungs while also providing oxygenated blood to other organs to sus-
tain viability. There is a long history of the use of animals, predomi-
nantly pigs and sheep, for cardiovascular surgical training and
research. Additionally, over the past three decades, animals, most
notably dogs (albeit there are occasional reports of cats [1]), have
been anesthetized with varying frequency in the clinical arena to
facilitate surgical procedures involving the heart (and lungs) [2–15].
Although perioperative morbidity is common (e.g., dysrhythmias,
bleeding, phrenic nerve damage, hypoventilation, and hypoxemia),
acute survival (off pump to recovery) percentages from the
aforementioned reports are generally high, even 100%. Longer-term
survival, however, is variable, with wide-ranging complications
including hemorrhage, thromboembolism, pleural effusion, heart
failure, and sudden death being reported.
The focus of this chapter is to introduce the reader to cardiopul-
monary bypass as used to facilitate cardiac surgery in canine
patients. Challenges associated with this as a clinical tool have been
reviewed [16]. Although anesthesia management is reviewed here,
much of the chapter is devoted to introducing the basics of circuitry
and instrumentation used to facilitate cardiopulmonary bypass
and the considerations (e.g., cardiac protection and management of
coagulation) that arise as a result. As the reader is no doubt aware,
many cardiac procedures may be performed on the beating heart,
sometimes with the added utilization of inflow occlusion and
hypothermia. This chapter is limited to a discussion of the manage-
ment of clinical canine patients where cardiopulmonary bypass is
necessary to facilitate cardiac surgery.
The circuitry and patient cannulation
The external circuit
The circuit external to the patient consists of a reservoir for blood
and fluids used to prime the pump, a membrane (versus bubble) [17]
oxygenator of appropriate size (pediatric size is commonly used for
small- to medium-sized dogs), ventilating system, pumps (roller
or centrifugal) [18,19] of varying number (three to five) to facilitate
circulation of blood, a heat exchanger, and circulating heating/
cooling water bath to permit initial cooling and subsequent warm-
ing of the patient (Fig. 34.1). Tubing appropriate to the patient’s size
(so that excessive hemodilution resulting from excessive prime
volume, exposure to circuit components, and subsequent red blood
cell trauma can be minimized) connects these parts and is attached
to lines from/to the patient. As the lung is no longer functional dur-
ing this process, an oxygen flowmeter (or oxygen and air flowme-
ters along with an oxygen blender to vary the oxygen fraction) and
vaporizer are connected to the circuit to facilitate the delivery of
inhaled anesthetic as needed. Maintenance of anesthesia with par-
enterally administered injectable drugs has also been described [14].
Newer bypass circuits have an independent pump and tubing
mechanism for the delivery of cardioplegic solutions, arterial and/
or venous in-line monitors (to record temperature, hematocrit,
34 Anesthesia for Cardiopulmonary Bypass
Khursheed R. Mama
Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 667
The circuitry and patient cannulation, 667
The external circuit, 667
Patient cannulation, 668
Systemic responses – pathobiology, 669
Drugs and interventions used during cardiopulmonary bypass, 669
Antibiotics, 669
Steroids, 669
Antifibrinolytics, 669
Anticoagulation and reversal, 669
Hypothermia, 669
Preanesthetic preparation, 670
Patient evaluation, 670
Anesthesia setup, 670
Medications, 670
The sequence of events and terminology, 671
References, 673

-- 683 of 1450 --

668 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
Figure 34.2 Bicaval cannulation for removal of a right atrial mass (in the
center of the picture). The caudal vena cava is in the 11 o’clock position and
cranial vena cava in the 1 o’clock position. Tape ties are pulled up around
each cava, to prevent blood leakage into the right atrium. The cardiotomy
sucker in the 7 o’clock position is in place to drain any coronary sinus flow.
saturation, etc.), and safety devices (e.g., bubble detector and flow
sensors). A more complete description and diagram of bypass cir-
cuitry available for human cardiopulmonary bypass are available in
other medical texts [20].
Although the personnel responsible for the anesthetic manage-
ment of the patient should have a general understanding of the
external circuitry used, the author’s experience has been that an
individual with specialized training in perfusion should be respon-
sible for ensuring functionality of the external circuitry and bypass
equipment. The anesthesia personnel will, however, need to be in
constant communication and provide the perfusionist with patient-
specific information, such as the hematocrit and calculated blood
volume. This information will be used to determine the pump prime
volume with a target hematocrit of 25–30% to optimize capillary
flow and oxygen-carrying capacity during bypass when hypother-
mia causes an increase in blood viscosity [21]. The perfusionist may
request crystalloid fluids, synthetic colloids, blood, plasma or
packed red cells (usually in smaller patients), and additives such as
mannitol, sodium bicarbonate, and heparin to add to the pump
prime. Steroids are added to the pump prime in some circum-
stances but with decreasing frequency. The perfusion team may
also request a vaporizer and inhalant anesthetic consistent with
what the anesthesia team is using for the patient. Additional details
regarding types and sizes of oxygenators, calculation of pump prime
volume, components of prime solution, types and sizes of tubing,
etc. may be found elsewhere [21–23].
Patient cannulation
Patient cannulation is performed by the surgical team. A lateral
thoracotomy is the preferred approach in the dog if the cardiac
procedure to be performed allows for this; a median sternotomy
approach is a feasible alternative. Commonly, arterial (oxygenated)
blood is actively returned (using a pump) to the patient via a can-
nula placed in the femoral or carotid artery. It is important that the
anesthesia team is aware of which site will be used and, specifically
for the femoral vessels, which limb will be utilized, so they do not
place the arterial catheter to monitor systemic arterial blood pres-
sure in the same limb. The arterial cannula is either placed first or
at the same time as the thoracotomy is performed if there are two
surgeons. Early placement facilitates a quicker connection to the
bypass circuitry if the patient’s status deteriorates during placement
of the venous cannula(e).
Bicaval or atrial venous cannulation is performed by the surgical
team depending on the procedure to be performed. For procedures
involving the right heart, bicaval cannulation is preferred to mini-
mize blood in the surgical field and minimize compromise to
venous drainage if the heart is retracted during the procedure
(Fig. 34.2). The venous line connected to the cannula passively
drains the majority of blood returned to the heart into the reservoir
of the bypass circuit. Blood returning from the thebesian veins,
coronary sinus, and systemic collaterals can usually be drained by
appropriate (depending on the nature of the surgery) placement of
these cannulas to reduce the risk of right ventricular distention.
As this is a gravity-dependent process, the height of the patient
above the reservoir is an important consideration. Suction may be
cautiously applied to venous drainage if needed. An additional left
ventricular vent line may be placed to minimize left ventricular
distention and warming resulting from drainage of systemic, peri-
cardial, and bronchopulmonary collaterals and thebesian veins [20].
A surgical suction cannula is also available and may be connected
with a line to the reservoir.
Placement of the aforementioned cannulas facilitates extracor-
poreal circulation and a bloodless surgical field but does not offer a
mechanism for myocardial protection. An additional cannula is,
therefore, placed for administration of cardioplegia. This cannula
may be placed such that flow of cardioplegic solution is anterograde
via an aortic root cannula located on the cardiac side of the aortic
cross clamp, or retrograde via a balloon catheter in the coronary
sinus. Cardioplegic solutions are administered to stop cardiac
activity once the aortic cross clamp is placed to reduce energy
requirements, protect myocardial cells, and scavenge free radicals.
Cardioplegic solutions may be blood-based (sanguineous) or
crystalloid-based, with additives for cardiac protection (e.g., mannitol
or lidocaine) and high levels of potassium to stop electrical activity.
Figure 34.1 Standard and pediatric cardiopulmonary bypass pumps.

-- 684 of 1450 --

Chapter 34: Anesthesia for Cardiopulmonary Bypass 	669
Sanguineous solutions are thought to provide better oxygen delivery
and scavenging of free radicals, especially for longer procedures
[20,23]. Additional myocardial protection is achieved using systemic
and/or local hypothermia (using iced saline slush around the heart if
appropriate and with adequate protection of the phrenic nerve).
Systemic responses – pathobiology
Although cardiopulmonary bypass offers ideal conditions for surgi-
cal intervention, the processes involved also generate real or poten-
tial negative effects on a multitude of organ systems. These have
been reviewed extensively and many continue to form the basis of
ongoing study [24–27]. Briefly, contact of blood components with
the cardiopulmonary bypass circuitry (tubing, pump, and oxygen-
ator) rapidly results in significant activation of the inflammatory
cascade not dissimilar to that occurring in sepsis. Surgical processes
also contribute and together these result in platelet, white blood
cell, complement, and cytokine activation. The consequences of
this inflammatory response can be far reaching, influencing coagu-
lation, which, in turn, can increase microemboli and bleeding and
result in organ dysfunction. This is, therefore, an area of significant
investigation both into how anesthetic drugs or/and modifications
in circuit components (e.g., heparin-bonded circuits) might favora-
bly modulate these responses to benefit the patient. A few of the
common medications and strategies that aim to maximize patient
outcome in light of these changes are presented in the next section.
Drugs and interventions used during
cardiopulmonary bypass
Antibiotics
Owing to the invasive nature of the surgical procedure and inflam-
matory changes resulting from bypass, a broad-spectrum antibiotic
is administered prior to and at fixed intervals during surgery.
Steroids
Historically, because of the many cellular and humoral changes that
occur during cardiopulmonary bypass, steroid use has been advo-
cated. Although steroid administration is associated with an increase
in blood glucose, which, in turn, is associated with a poor neuro-
logic outcome, considerations such as improved hemodynamic
stability, lower rates of postoperative atrial fibrillation, and reduced
myocardial injury and inflammation have generally outweighed
concerns [28–30]. More recently, while use may still be advocated in
children even though evidence of benefit is limited [31], steroid use
is considered equivocal in adults with some studies suggesting
increased risk of myocardial infarction and lack of benefit to out-
come. A meta-analysis suggests that dose may have a significant
impact on results following steroid use with low doses being
considered potentially beneficial and high doses potentially detri-
mental [32]. Steroids are no longer routinely administered to dogs
prior to cardiopulmonary bypass at the author’s institution.
Antifibrinolytics
Both lysine analogs (e.g., ε-aminocaproic acid and tranexamic acid)
that inhibit proteases through antagonism of free plasmin, and
nonspecific protease (or plasmin) and kalikrein inhibitors (e.g.,
aprotinin) have been used preoperatively with to the aim of reducing
the need for post-bypass transfusion in human patients [33–35].
The lysine analogs act as antifibrinolytics and help prevent dissolu-
tion of the clot, while aprotinin has both antifibrinolytic and
anti-inflammatory actions. While aprotinin was used in both
human and canine patients and was effective at reducing transfu-
sion requirements perioperatively, there was suggestion of increased
risk of renal, neurologic, and cardiovascular complications and ana-
phylaxis, which led to its (temporary) withdrawal. Both tranexamic
and aminocaproic acid continue to be used in human patients
although dosing guidelines (dosage and timing of administration)
vary. Seizures are more commonly reported with tranexamic acid as
compared to aminocaproic acid but both are effective at decreasing
the need for transfusions in people [36]. Our current practice is to
use ε-aminocaproic acid prior to and during cardiopulmonary
bypass and until chest wall closure. Following assessment of coagu-
lation parameters and clinical signs, additional drug may be admin-
istered during the postoperative period.
Anticoagulation and reversal
Heparin is approved and routinely utilized in human patients for
anticoagulation during cardiopulmonary bypass despite the large
individual variability in its actions. An initial dose of 300–400 IU/kg
of unfractionated heparin has been recommended for human
patients and has also been used in clinical canine patients. In the
author’s experience, the activated clotting time (ACT) following
administration of this dose to dogs is typically greater than 1000 s
when blood is sampled approximately 10 min after administration;
an ACT greater than 400–480 s (in hypothermic patients) is consid-
ered by most to be adequate to initiate bypass. Repeated (often
partial) dosing is considered necessary if ACT values approach this,
while the patient is still connected to the bypass circuit. With the
availability of heparin-coated circuits, both initial and repeat dos-
ing may need to be adjusted.
Low-molecular-weight heparin (e.g., dalteparin and enoxaparin)
and other anticoagulants that result in direct Factor IIa (thrombin)
inhibition (e.g., argatroban and dabigratran), in addition to anti-
platelet medications (e.g., clopidogrel) and factor Xa inhibitors
(e.g., apixaban and rivaroxaban), are increasingly available for use
in the management of (anti)coagulation in humans. Some of these
have been studied and used in dogs and cats, but specific studies of
their use during cardiopulmonary bypass are lacking [37–40]; how-
ever, they are often used for weeks to months postoperatively to
prevent clot formation.
The effects of heparin are reversed with protamine sulfate at the
conclusion of cardiopulmonary bypass. As discussed later, slow
administration is advised as protamine is reported to cause signifi-
cant hypotension in dogs when administered rapidly [41].
Hypothermia
This is a strategy commonly used during cardiopulmonary bypass
to reduce metabolic rate and oxygen consumption. Hypothermia
preserves high-energy phosphate stores and reduces excitatory
neurotransmitter release, calcium-mediated enzyme induction, and
cell destruction [42,43]. The reduction in oxygen demand allows
for lower pump flow rates, which, in turn, reduces cell trauma and
embolic events and provides better surgical visualization. However,
it is not without negative aspects. These include, but are not limited
to, changes in drug disposition, coagulation, acid–base and electro-
lyte values, and increases in blood glucose, viscosity, and cardiac
arrhythmogenicity. Extreme hypothermia can also affect the ability
to successfully defibrillate the patient.
Of significant importance to the anesthesia team is how pH and
blood gas values are managed with body temperature changes.
Recall that the solubility of carbon dioxide (and oxygen) in blood

-- 685 of 1450 --

670 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
increases with hypothermia, while its content remains constant.
Hence, the pCO2 value decreases and pH increases. The influence
of temperature on pH results from a change in carbon dioxide solu-
bility (as stated above) and another mechanism that is independent
of solubility. The latter mechanism by which pH is influenced is
related to the fact that water, a weak solution of acid and base, is a
primary solvent in body systems, and its dissociation is directly
influenced by temperature. As body temperature decreases, the
tendency of water to dissociate to its ionized components (H+ and
OH –
) decreases. Changes in blood pH parallel temperature-related
changes for water but are tempered by the buffering capability of
the amino acid histidine (and its five-membered imidazole ring).
Hence, blood pH remains higher than the pH of neutrality for water
at a given temperature [21,43,44].
Alpha-stat management of acid–base balance allows pH and car-
bon dioxide tensions to follow thermodynamic dissociation changes
but keeps the total carbon dioxide constant. The term “alpha” refers
to the ratio of unprotonated to protonated histidine. Relevant to the
clinician, pH and blood gas values are not corrected for body
temperature, but interpreted and managed as they would be at 37 °C.
Conversely, pH-stat management consists of holding temperature-
corrected values at normal (at 37 °C) as the patient is cooled. In
adult human patients, for various reasons including better mainte-
nance of cerebral autoregulation and prevention of stroke, alpha-stat
management is most common, and this has also been the manage-
ment strategy with which the author is familiar for dogs [21,22]. In
young children, where the risk for microemboli to cause stroke is
negligible, it has been suggested that pH-stat management may
improve outcomes by increasing cerebral perfusion. A prospective
study in children less than 9 months of age at the time of surgery,
however, did not show any difference in neurologic development at
either a 2- or 4-year follow-up. Interestingly, a trend to lower post-
operative morbidity was observed [45].
Preanesthetic preparation
Patient evaluation
In addition to an accurate body weight and routine physical assess-
ment and laboratory evaluation (including complete blood count,
serum chemistry profile, and urinalysis), the patient should have a
coagulation profile (prothrombin time [PT], partial thromboplastin
time [PTT], thromboelastography, and fibrinogen) and ACT (once
anesthetized) assessed, and a blood type and cross-match per-
formed. A complete cardiac evaluation and medication history
should also be available. This information forms the basis of discus-
sion among team members of any special considerations for the
individual patient. For example, it may be in the patient’s best inter-
est to have certain medications (e.g., enalapril) discontinued in
advance of anesthesia and surgery, while others (e.g., pimobendan)
may be administered. It is increasingly common in our practice to
administer oral antiemetics (e.g., maropitant) 8–12 h before anes-
thesia; gabapentin or trazodone is also considered in active dogs
where there are concerns that preoperative sedation with an opioid
and benzodiazepine will not be adequate. While there are reports in
people suggesting QT prolongation and cardiac excitability follow-
ing trazodone [46], we have not observed this in our patient popu-
lation. If pulmonary hypertension is observed, sildenafil may be
given PO prior to anesthesia. If a patient presents with abdominal
or pleural effusion, drainage of the same may be considered.
Anesthesia setup
A small animal anesthesia machine and ventilator should be
checked for functionality and absence of leaks. Standard catheteri-
zation (arterial, venous, and central venous multilumen or Swan-
Ganz catheters, if desired) and intubation equipment in appropriate
sizes should be available. As the patient will be anticoagulated,
atraumatic catheter placement is followed by wrapping the catheter
sites. A physiologic monitor with the capability to monitor heart
rate and rhythm, direct arterial blood pressures, central venous/
pulmonary arterial pressures, end-tidal carbon dioxide, oxygen
saturation, and both rectal and esophageal temperature should be
available. A tool to monitor the neuromuscular junction (e.g.,
peripheral nerve stimulator and accelerometer), coagulation status
(ACT block or PT/INR [prothrombin time/international normal-
ized ratio]), and urinary catheter and collection system should also
be readied. It is the author’s preference also to have a Doppler non-
invasive blood pressure monitor, respirometer, and positive end-
expiratory pressure (PEEP) valve available. Multiple syringe pumps,
intravenous (IV) fluids, colloids, blood product and medication/
administration supplies, blood gas syringes, pressure bags, etc., are
also best kept in an easily accessed location.
Additional supplies that should be available include a pacing unit
and leads, defibrillator with both external and internal paddles, and
tracheostomy supplies (in the event of need for postanesthesia ven-
tilation). An epidural catheter may be considered (generally after
coagulation status is normalized) to assist in postoperative pain
management.
Medications
In addition to drugs used for anesthesia (Table 34.1), numerous
other medications (Tables 34.2 and 34.3) should be available and, in
some cases, drawn up. These include anticholinergics, inotropes,
vasopressors, antiarrhythmics, furosemide, electrolytes, sodium
bicarbonate, heparin, an antifibrinolytic, a neuromuscular blocking
agent, and protamine. Insulin may be necessary for treatment of
hyperglycemia. Although it is our practice to use an opioid, benzo-
diazepine, inhaled anesthetic, and neuromuscular blocking agent or
balanced anesthesia plan, other anesthesia techniques have been
described [13,14].
Table 34.1 Suggested anesthesia drugs for dogs undergoing cardiopulmonary bypass.
Drug 	Dose (mg/kg or as noted)
Premedication
Hydromorphone or
Methadone
0.1, SC, IM
0.7 SC, IM
Midazolam 	0.1 SC, IM
Atropine or
Glycopyrrolate
0.02, SC, IM
0.01, SC, IM
Anesthesia induction
Fentanyl 	0.01, IV
Midazolam 	0.2, IV
Etomidate or 	0.5, IV
Alfaxalone 	0.5, IV
Anesthesia maintenance (balanced technique)
Fentanyl 	0.35–0.7 μg/kg/min, IV CRI
Midazolam 	0.35–0.7 μg/kg/min, IV CRI
Isoflurane or sevoflurane 	Dosed to effect
Cisatracurium or atracurium 	0.1–0.25, IV
Local anesthetic nerve blocks for
postoperative analgesia
Per individual preference and drug

-- 686 of 1450 --

Chapter 34: Anesthesia for Cardiopulmonary Bypass 	671
The sequence of events and terminology
Much of what is described here is experientially based from work in
two institutions. The author recognizes that other approaches are
viable and better suited to other environments.
Following a quick assessment on the morning of surgery and
confirmation of the medication and fasting status, the dog is pre-
medicated. Premedication is administered subcutaneously or intra-
muscularly and generally consists of a non-histamine-releasing
opioid such as hydromorphone or methadone. Midazolam and an
anticholinergic may be concurrently administered. After approxi-
mately 30 min, during which time the anesthesia equipment has
been checked for function and drug infusions verified, the dog is
brought to the anesthesia induction area and instrumented with an
ECG, Doppler, and cephalic IV catheter. Oxygen, IV fluids, and
anesthesia drug infusions (which in our practice consist of fentanyl
and midazolam) are started. As many dogs are being treated for
heart failure, IV fluid administration is conservatively maintained
in the range 1–2 mL/kg/h. Anesthesia is induced with IV fentanyl
and midazolam along with a low dose of a hypnotic agent (e.g., eto-
midate, alfaxalone, or propofol) if needed. Following endotracheal
intubation and connection to the anesthesia machine, additional
equipment, including a pulse oximeter, capnograph, and esopha-
geal temperature probe, are placed. Additional catheters to facilitate
arterial and central venous blood pressure measurements and blood
sampling for pH, blood gas, glucose, acid–base status, electrolytes,
packed cell volume (PCV) and total protein (TP), and ACT and PT
are placed. Support at this stage may consist of an inotrope to main-
tain blood pressure and an antiarrhythmic if arrhythmias are
observed and of consequence to the patient. The patient is venti-
lated to maintain a normal arterial carbon dioxide tension, which is
verified with a blood gas sample taken after the arterial catheter is
in place. If other abnormalities are noted in pH, blood gas, acid–
base, electrolyte, or glucose values, attempts are made to correct
these. External heat is typically not provided in these patients at this
stage since patient cooling will occur with initiation of bypass.
While the surgical site is being clipped, prophylactic antibiotics
are administered and repeated at 90-min intervals during anesthe-
sia. A loading dose (followed by an infusion) of ε-aminocaproic
acid is also started at this time.
Following movement of the dog into the operating room and
appropriate positioning, a rectal temperature probe is placed. If
neuromuscular blocking agents are to be used, a peripheral nerve
stimulator with accelerometer is placed. The central venous line is
connected for monitoring central venous pressure. A baseline ACT
or PT is taken prior to administration of heparin and commonly
another blood sample is taken for measurement of pH, blood gases,
electrolytes, glucose, lactate, PCV, and TP. The patency of the urine
collection system bag is verified, and the bag emptied if necessary.
The surgeons begin working on placement of the femoral (or
carotid) cannula and may simultaneously or subsequently begin
the thoracotomy. This is usually a good time to have internal
defibrillator paddles set up on the surgical table. Heparin is given
and the ACT or PT is rechecked within 10 min following adminis-
tration. If a neuromuscular blocking agent is to be used, it may be
administered at this time. Fentanyl and midazolam infusions are
continued, and the inhalant and inotropes are adjusted as necessary
to normalize blood pressure while maintaining an appropriate
anesthetic plane. As surgeons manipulate the heart to place the
cannulas, hypotension resulting from changes in cardiac filling and
arrhythmias may be seen and are treated as necessary to minimize
influence on blood pressure and/or chance of premature fibrillation.
PEEP at 2.5–5.0 cmH2
O is applied after the chest is open in an effort
to maintain oxygenation if it does not impair visualization by the
surgeon [47,48]. Alternatively, it may be applied once the pericar-
dial sling is in place.
Occasionally, a dog may lose blood or fibrillate during cannula
placement. Treatment is appropriate to the cause and in some cases
might include a rapid transition to extracorporeal circulation. If the
process goes uneventfully, then the planned transition to partial
bypass is initiated by unclamping the venous lines (connected to the
venous cannulas) and starting the arterial pump. It should be kept
in mind that flow is no longer pulsatile, so monitors will tend to
record only a mean value once the heart stops ejecting. It is common
for blood pressure to decrease significantly during this transition
to extracorporeal circulation. This is thought to be due in part to
abrupt changes in volume, hematocrit, colloid oncotic pressure, and
viscosity. The perfusionist will adjust the pump flow to vary the
mean arterial pressure with the traditional goal in adult humans
being to maintain pressure between 40 and 70 mmHg [20]; recently,
higher pressures have been suggested in human patients due to the
beneficial impact on neurological outcome. The perfusionist may
request a vasoconstrictor such as phenylephrine to assist in mainte-
nance of blood pressure if the pump flow rate is deemed to be
adequate for the size of the patient.
This is also the time when the perfusionist starts to take over the
administration of the inhaled anesthetic, and mechanical ventilation
may be reduced or stopped as the heart stops ejecting blood. PEEP
is maintained as it has been shown in dogs to benefit oxygenation
at least transiently without negative impact on cardiac output
[47–49]. Injectable anesthetic infusions are frequently decreased
as the patient is cooled. This is done despite demonstrated
decreases in concentrations resulting from hemodilution and pump
Table 34.2 Anticholinergics, inotropes, vasopressors, and antiarrhythmic medications
for dogs anesthetized for cardiopulmonary bypass.
Drug 	Bolus dose (mg/kg, IV) 	Infusion dose
(μg/kg/min, IV)
Atropine 	0.02–0.04 	NA
Lidocaine 	1–3 	80–100
Amiodarone 	2 (over 10 min) 	10–12
Esmolol 	0.1 	70–100
Diltiazem 	0.24 (slowly) 	6
Dobutamine 	NA 	5–10
Dopamine 	NA 	2–10
Milrinone 	0.05 	0.5
Epinephrine 	0.005–0.05 	0.05–0.2
Phenylephrine 	0.002–0.005 	1–3
Norepinephrine 	NA 	0.1–0.2
Table 34.3 Adjunct drug doses for dogs undergoing anesthesia for cardiopulmonary
bypass.
Drug 	Dose (IV)
Heparin 	300–400 IU/kg
Cefoxitin or cefazolin 	22 mg/kg every 90 min
ε-Aminocaproic acid 	50–100 mg/kg loading dose over 30 min;
10–15 mg/kg/h, IV CRI
Furosemide 	0.5–2.0 mg/kg
Protamine 	3 mg/kg or 1.3 mg/mg heparin over 30 min

-- 687 of 1450 --

672 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
sequestration for drugs such as fentanyl due to the decrease in
metabolic rate with hypothermia (which, in turn, decreases anesthetic
requirements) and changes in protein binding (which increase the
free drug fraction) [50,51]. If atracurium or cisatracurium is used
for neuromuscular blockade, significant increases in dosing inter-
val will be noted with hypothermia. Antifibrinolytic medications,
when used, are usually continued at least until conclusion of bypass,
but increasingly until the chest wall is closed. Blood for pH, blood
gases, acid–base, blood glucose and electrolyte values, ACT/PT, and
PCV/TP may be obtained from the perfusionist, who is also able to
administer medications (e.g., antibiotics, neuromuscular blocking
agents) as necessary; IV lines may continue to be used, but it should
be noted that vascular flow patterns are altered and this may have
an additional influence on drug kinetics. Peripheral vasoconstric-
tion resulting from hypothermia is also common.
As the patient cools, the cardiac rhythm, if not already altered
from primary disease and manipulation, will often change and
ventricular fibrillation may be noted. Although one can attempt to
defibrillate electrically at this time, success is limited in profoundly
hypothermic patients. Hence, it is best to place the patient on total
bypass as soon as feasible. To do this, the surgeon places the aortic
cross clamp and administers cardioplegic solution as previously
described to stop electrical activity. Once the aortic cross clamp has
been placed, the ventilator is turned off if this was not done previ-
ously. The perfusionist now assumes full responsibility for patient
management while the surgical team works on the heart. The anes-
thesia team serves a supportive role during this period.
As the cardiac procedure is reaching its end, the anesthesia, sur-
gical, and perfusion teams must be in communication to transition
the patient off bypass successfully. It is worthwhile to check blood
values just prior to coming off the pump. It should be kept in mind
that potassium values may be abnormally high due to the adminis-
tration of cardioplegic solution, but no intervention is necessary
as this effect will resolve once cardiac circulation resumes. Infusions
of antiarrhythmic, inotropic, and vasoactive drugs are usually
started at this time in an effort to load them prior to coming off
bypass; bolus doses may be used as needed. Although epinephrine
or a combination of dobutamine and dopamine has been success-
fully used, the author’s preference has been to transition the dog off
bypass with dobutamine and phenylephrine. It has further been
our experience that dogs do not typically require antihypertensive
medications such as nitroprusside. However, these should be
available as their necessity has been described by others. The perfu-
sionist will also start to warm the patient at this time in anticipation
of transitioning off bypass.
Ventricular fibrillation may be noted during this period or after
removal of the aortic cross clamp. If defibrillation is unsuccessful
after a few attempts, it may be wise to let the heart rest and warm,
while the dog is still on partial bypass. Although there is no absolute
guideline, clinical experience suggests that if defibrillation attempts
are unsuccessful during weaning from the pump, warming the
patient to between 33 and 35 ºC usually results in success. On rare
occasions, the dog may need to be paced temporarily. The patient
may also spontaneously resume a normal electrical rhythm and
gradually begin to eject blood with cardiovascular support as
warming continues. The surgeon will ask the anesthesia team to
help de-air the heart by using the ventilator to give a large breath or
series of breaths and move blood into the heart. Transesophageal
echocardiography may also be used to verify the absence of air in
the left heart prior to cardiac closure. Ventilation is resumed once
the heart begins to eject blood as noted by return of pulsatile
flow on the arterial line. The perfusionist will gradually decrease
the pump’s contribution to circulation as the heart resumes
functioning.
Once the heart is pumping adequately, cannulas can be removed
and protamine administration started. Doses between 2 and 6 mg/
kg or 1.3 mg/mg heparin have been described. Selection of dose
should be made after consideration of duration of heparin adminis-
tration, ACT/PT values, and body temperature. Significant hypo-
tension may be seen with protamine administration in dogs, which
is thought to be primarily associated with histamine release,
but increased central nitric oxide release has also been impli-
cated [41,52]. With slow administration, anaphylactoid reactions
are still possible and in part are thought to be due to excessive
complement activation resulting from the formation of heparin-
protamine complexes. In some patients, anaphylactoid reactions
may be mediated via immunoglobulin E antibodies. The responses
can be immediate or delayed. Protamine has also been reported to
affect platelet number and function, enhance fibrinolysis, and
decrease clot strength, which, in turn, can contribute to bleeding
[53–55]. Given that there may be other causes of hypotension (e.g.,
surgical bleeding) during this period, communication between the
surgical and anesthesia teams is critical to determine the cause and
extent. pH, blood gases, blood glucose, acid–base status and elec-
trolytes, PCV/TP, and ACT are checked as needed during this
period and abnormal values are addressed. Urine output is also
assessed at this time, keeping in mind that it is not unusual to see
discoloration related to hemolysis following bypass. It is fairly com-
mon, despite the use of high potassium-containing cardioplegic
solutions, to see potassium values decrease during this phase.
Calcium values also tend to be low and supplementation may help
correct protamine-induced hypotension. Although magnesium
may be used in a patient where difficulty is encountered during
defibrillation attempts, treatment of hypomagnesemia is usually
deferred until the patient is in the critical care unit owing to the
potential for hypotension with administration. Fresh whole blood
can be administered concurrently with or after protamine to pro-
vide platelets and coagulation factors.
The closure of the chest wall is managed as for any thoracotomy;
a chest drain is placed. If blood gases are suggestive of hypoxemia
relative to the FI
O2
, furosemide may be administered. The team
may also elect to maintain these patients on a ventilator for the
immediate postoperative phase either via the orotracheal tube or, if
less sedation is desirable, a tracheotomy. Typically, anesthesia infu-
sions are reduced during body wall closure. Intercostal or intra-
pleural local anesthetic blocks may be performed. The supportive
infusions and IV fluids (crystalloid, colloid, and blood products)
are titrated as necessary. If available, a cell salvage device can be a
useful tool to conserve blood. At the conclusion of surgery, the criti-
cal care team verifies and rewraps all catheters, the chest tube, etc.,
and the patient is then transitioned to them for postoperative care.
In addition to evaluation of blood gases, electrolytes, blood glucose
and lactate, coagulation parameters may be rechecked at this time.
Given the complexity of the process and relatively infrequent
nature with which cardiopulmonary bypass is currently performed
in veterinary medicine, it is imperative that lines of communication
between the anesthesia, perfusion, surgery, and critical care teams
are maintained to maximize the possibility of a successful outcome.

-- 688 of 1450 --

Chapter 34: Anesthesia for Cardiopulmonary Bypass 	673
References
1 Brourman JD, Schertel ER, Holt DW, et al. Cardiopulmonary bypass in the cat.
Vet Surg 2002; 31: 412–417.
2 Klement P, Feindel CM, Scully HE, et al. Mitral valve replacement in dogs. Surgical
technique and post operative management. Vet Surg 1987; 16: 231–237.
3 Kombtebedde J, Ilkiw JE, Follette DM, et al. Resection of subvalvular aortic
stenosis. Surgical and perioperative management in seven dogs. Vet Surg 1993; 22:
419–430.
4 Monnet E, Orton EC, Gaynor JS, et al. Open resection of subvalvular aortic stenosis
in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1996; 209: 1255–1261.
5 Monnet E, Orton E, Gaynor J, et al. Diagnosis and surgical repair of partial atrio-
ventricular septal defects in two dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1997; 211: 567–572.
6 Orton EC, Herndon GD, Boon JA, et al. Influence of open surgical correction on
intermediate-term outcome in dogs with subvalvular aortic stenosis: 44 cases
(1991–1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000; 216: 364–367.
7 Lew LJ, Fowler JD, Egger CM, et al. Deep hypothermic low flow cardiopulmonary
bypass in small dogs. Vet Surg 1997; 26: 281–289.
8 Orton EC, Mama K, Hellyer P, et al. Open surgical repair of tetralogy of Fallot in
two dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2001; 219: 1089–1093.
9 Martin JM, Orton EC, Boon JA, et al. Surgical correction of double-chambered
right ventricle in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2002; 6: 770–774.
10 Griffiths LG, Orton EC, Boon JA. Evaluation of techniques and outcomes of mitral
valve repair in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2004; 224: 1941–1945.
11 Orton EC, Hackett TB, Mama K, et al. Technique and outcome of mitral valve
replacement in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2005; 226: 1508–1511.
12 Tanaka R, Shimizu M, Hoshi K, et al. Efficacy of open patch-grafting under
cardiopulmonary bypass for pulmonic stenosis in small dogs. Aust Vet J 2009; 87:
88–92.
13 Kanemoto I, Taguchi, D, Yokoyama S, et al. Open heart surgery with deep
hypothermia and cardiopulmonary bypass in small and toy dogs. Vet Surg 2010;
39: 674–679.
14 Uechi M, Mizukoshi T, Mizuno T, et al. Mitral valve repair under cardiopulmonary
bypass in small-breed dogs: 48 cases (2006–2009). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2012; 240:
1194–2012.
15 Rodriguez AL, Mama KR, Wagner AE, et al. Retrospective evaluation of plasma
biochemical values in dogs anesthetized for cardiopulmonary bypass and influence
on anesthetic mortality. In: Proceedings of the 9th World Congress of Veterinary
Anesthesia 2006, Santos, Brazil, 2006; 131.
16 Pelosi A, Anderson LK, Paugh J, et al. Challenges of cardiopulmonary bypass – a
review of the veterinary literature. Vet Surg 2013; 42: 119–136.
17 Iwahashi H, Yuri K, Nose Y. Development of the oxygenator: past, present and
future. J Artif Organs 2004; 7: 111–120.
18 Nishinaka T, Nishida H, Endo M, et al. Less blood damage in the impeller centrifu-
gal pump. A comparative study with the roller pump in open heart surgery. Artif
Organs 1996; 20: 707–710.
19 Linneweber J, Chow TW, Kawamura M, et al. In vitro comparison of blood pump
induced platelet microaggregates between a centrifugal and roller pump during
cardiopulmonary bypass. Int J Artif Organs 2002; 25: 549–555.
20 Nyhan D and Johns RA. Anesthesia for cardiac surgery procedures. In: Miller RD,
ed. Miller’s Anesthesia, 6th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone,
2005: 1941–2004.
21 Nussmeier NA, Hauser MC, Sarwar MF, et al. Anesthesia for cardiac surgical pro-
cedures. In: Miller RD, Eriksson LI, Fleisher LA, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia,
7th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone, 2010: 1889–1975.
22 Greeley WJ, Berkowitz DH, Nathan AT. Anesthesia for pediatric cardiac surgery.
In: Miller RD, Eriksson LI, Fleisher LA, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia, 7th edn.
Philadelphia, PA: Churchill Livingstone Elsevier, 2010: 2599–2652.
23 Orton EC. Inflow occlusion and cardiopulmonary bypass. Small Animal Thoracic
Surgery. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins, 1995: 185–201.
24 Gravlee GP, Davis RE, Utley JR, eds. Cardiopulmonary Bypass: Principles and
Practice. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins, 1993.
25 Knudsen F, Andersen LW. Immunological aspects of cardiopulmonary bypass.
J Cardiothorac Anesth 1990; 4: 245–258.
26 Hirai S. Systemic inflammatory response syndrome after cardiac surgery under
cardiopulmonary bypass. Ann Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2003; 9: 365–370.
27 Hammon JW Jr, Edmunds HL Jr. Extracorporeal circulation: organ damage. In:
Cohn LH, Edmunds LH Jr, eds. Cardiac Surgery in the Adult. New York, NY:
McGraw Hill, 2003: 361–368.
28 Aarts LP, Boonstra PW, Rakhorst G, et al. Prophylactic use of dexamethasone in
cardiopulmonary bypass. Chest 2004; 126: 854S.
29 Engleman RM, Rousou JA, Flack JE, et al. Influence of steroids on complement and
cytokine generation after cardiopulmonary bypass. Ann Thorac Surg 1994; 60:
801–804.
30 Tilman VS, Savvas G, Gotz JKW, et al. Effects of dexamethasone on intravascular
and extravascular fluid balance in patients undergoing coronary bypass surgery
with cardiopulmonary bypass. Anesthesiology 2002; 96: 827–834.
31 Gibbison B, Villalobos Lizardi JC, Aviles Martinez KI, et al. Prophylactic corticos-
teroids for paediatric heart surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2020; 10: CD013101.
32 Chai T, Zhuang X, Tian M, et al. Meta- analysis: shouldn’t prophylactic corticoster-
oids be administered during cardiac surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass?
Front Surg 2022; 9: 832205.
33 Troianos CA, Sypula RW, Lucas DM, et al. The effect of prophylactic epsilon-
aminocaproic acid on bleeding, transfusions, platelet function and fibrinolysis
during coronary artery bypass grafting. Anesthesiology 1999; 91: 430–435.
34 American Society of Anesthesiologists. Practice guidelines for perioperative blood
transfusion and adjuvant therapies: an updated report by the American Society of
Anesthesiologists Task Force on Perioperative Blood Transfusion and Adjuvant
Therapies. Anesthesiology 2006; 105: 198–208.
35 Kovesi T, Royston D. Pharmacological approaches to reducing allogenic blood
exposure. Vox Sang 2003; 84: 2–10.
36 Aggarwal NK, Subramanian A. Antifibrinolytics and cardiac surgery: the past, the
present and the future. Ann Card Anaesth 2020; 23: 193–199.
37 Gagnon AL, Scansen BA, Olver C, et al. Phase I clinical trial of an antithrombotic
drug protocol combining apixaban and clopidogrel in dogs. J Vet Cardiol 2021; 36:
105–114.
38 Bae J, Kim H, Kim W, et al. Therapeutic monitoring of rivaroxaban in dogs using
thromboelastography and prothrombin time. J Vet Intern Med 2019; 33: 1322–1330.
39 Brainard BM, Kleine SA, Papich MG, et al. Pharmacodynamic and pharmacoki-
netic evaluation of clopidogrel and the carboxylic acid metabolite SR 26334 in
healthy dogs. Am J Vet Res 2010; 71: 822–830.
40 Mischke R, Schmitt J, Wolken S, et al. Pharmacokinetics of low molecular weight
heparin dalteparin in cats. Vet J 2012; 192: 299–303.
41 Stoelting RK, Henry DP, Verburg KM, et al. Haemodynamic changes and circulat-
ing histamine concentrations following protamine administration to patients and
dogs. Can Anaesth Soc J 1984; 5: 534–540.
42 Little DM. Hypothermia. Anesthesiology 1959; 20: 842–877.
43 Davies LK. Hypothermia: physiology and clinical use. In: Gravlee GP, Davis RE,
Utley JR, eds. Cardiopulmonary Bypass: Principles and Practice. Baltimore, MD:
Williams & Wilkins, 1993: 140–154.
44 Alston TA. Blood gases and pH during hypothermia: the “-stats.” Int Anesthesiol
Clin 2004; 42: 73–80.
45 Bellinger DC, Wypij D, du Plessis AJ, et al. Developmental and neurologic effects of
alpha- stat versus pH-stat strategies for deep hypothermic cardiopulmonary bypass
in infants. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2001; 121: 374–383.
46 Laiwala RC, Srinivasan S. Mind the heart – evaluating the arrhythmogenic potential
of trazodone. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2017; 25: S108–S109.
47 Rustomjee T, Wagner A, Orton EC. Effect of 5 cm of water positive end-expiratory
pressure on arterial oxygen tension in dogs during and after thoracotomy. Vet Surg
1994; 4: 307–310.
48 Kudnig ST, Monnet E, Riquelme M, et al. Effect of positive end-expiratory pressure
on oxygen delivery during 1-lung ventilation for thoracoscopy in normal dogs.
Vet Surg 2006; 35: 534–542.
49 Riquelme M, Monnet E, Kudnig ST, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of positive end-
expiratory pressure during one-lung ventilation in anesthetized dogs with a closed
thoracic cavity. Am J Vet Res 2005; 66: 978–983.
50 Mets B. The pharmacokinetics of anesthetic drugs and adjuvants during cardiopul-
monary bypass. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2000; 44: 261–273.
51 Hall RI. Cardiopulmonary bypass and the systemic inflammatory response: effects
on drug action. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2002; 18: 83–98.
52 Hamada Y, Kameyama Y, Narita H, et al. Protamine after heparin produces hypo-
tension resulting from decreased sympathetic outflow secondary to increased nitric
oxide in the central nervous system. Anesth Analg 2005; 100: 33–37.
53 Lindblad B, Wajefuield TW, Whitehouse WM, et al. The effect of protamine sulfate
on platelet function. Scand J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1988; 22: 55–59.
54 Nielsen VG. Protamine enhances fibrinolysis by decreasing clot strength: role of
tissue factor-initiated thrombin generation. Ann Thorac Surg 2006; 81: 1720–1727.
55 Bailey CJ, Koenigshof AM. The effects of protamine sulfate on clot formation time
and clot strength thromboelastography variables for canine blood samples.
Am J Vet Res 2014; 75: 338–343.

-- 689 of 1450 --

35
674
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The S ixth E dition of L umb and J ones	. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
Cardiac anesthesia and surgery can generally be described as high
risk, high reward. Pacemaker implantation exemplifies this since no
other group of patients has such a high risk of sudden asystole and
death, but yet can have a dramatic improvement in quality of life
with successful implantation. The anesthetist can have a significant
impact on the management of perioperative risk through under-
standing the surgical procedure and the needs of the cardiologist,
selecting drugs and techniques that minimize the effects on heart
rhythm and function, and having an emergency plan should severe
bradycardia or asystole occur. Since pacemaker implantation can
extend the lifespan of many animals, it is becoming more common
to perform non-cardiac elective and emergency procedures on ani-
mals with pacemakers.
Since the first report of pacemaker implantation in a dog with
complete heart block [1], artificial pacemakers have become a
mainstay for dogs, and less commonly cats, for bradyarrhythmia
management. Because of the increasing number of pacemaker
implantations, there are two common scenarios that will be encoun-
tered by the anesthetist: (1) anesthesia for pacemaker implantation
or pacemaker system modification in a patient with a bradyarrhyth-
mia or (2) anesthesia of a patient with a previously implanted and
functional artificial pacing system undergoing an unrelated medi-
cal or surgical procedure [2]. While anesthesia delivery to these
patients can be challenging, by better understanding implantation
procedures, the function of pacemakers, and interactions of anes-
thetic and hemodynamic supportive drugs, overall anesthetic risk
can be reduced.
Artificial pacemakers
Permanent transvenous artificial pacemakers are comprised of
one or more pacing leads and a pulse generator (Fig. 35.1). The
pacing lead wire delivers the electrical impulses to the heart and
serves as the sensing electrode to detect native electrical activity.
The lead consists of three parts: (1) the conductor (a coil of wire
that conducts the electrical current), (2) lead insulation, and
(3) a lead connector. Attachment of a transvenous pacemaker lead
to the endocardial surface is most often accomplished using either
passive (e.g., tined) or active fixation (e.g., fixed or retractable
helical screw) leads (Fig. 35.2). Many leads incorporate a steroid
eluting reservoir in an attempt to reduce scar tissue formation,
which, if it were to occur, could contribute to unacceptably high
pacing thresholds.
The pacemaker lead is the weakest link of the implantable
artificial pacemaker system. It serves a passive function to deliver
current developed from the pulse generator to the heart and to relay
signals from the heart to the pulse generator. At a stimulus rate of
70 beats/min, the heart contracts 36.8 million times per year.
Respiration, along with motion induced by ventricular and atrial
contraction and closure of the tricuspid valve, exposes transvenous
leads to profound mechanical stresses of flexion, torsion, and elonga-
tion that must be combated. Despite ever-improving lead technology,
failure related to conductor fracture, insulation breakage, or lead
dislodgement and failure at the header remain recognized compli-
cations (Fig. 35.3) [3].
The pulse generator contains the battery and computer circuitry
controlling the timing of electrical impulses sent to the heart,
35 Cardiac Pacemakers and Anesthesia
Barret J. Bulmer
Tufts Veterinary Emergency Treatment and Specialties, Walpole, Massachusetts, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 674
Artificial pacemakers, 674
Pacemaker modalities, 675
Anesthetic management, 676
Patient evaluation, 676
Temporary pacemaker implantation, 677
Permanent pacemaker implantation, 677
Considerations for anesthesia, 677
Complications, 678
Pacemaker patients undergoing non-cardiac procedures, 678
References, 678

-- 690 of 1450 --

Chapter 35: Cardiac Pacemakers and Anesthesia 	675
the sensing threshold of the pacing lead, and the response to sensed
electrical activity. Pulse generator technology has progressed with
the incorporation of advanced circuitry and microprocessors
providing telemetrically programmable pacing parameters and a
wealth of diagnostic data to help monitor and manage arrhyth-
mias [4]. These advancements have allowed the development of
more sophisticated and physiologic pacing modalities.
Pacemaker modalities
Pacemakers implanted in dogs most often employ a single lead
that paces the apex of the ventricle (e.g., right ventricle for a single
transvenous lead) irrespective of atrial activity. More advanced
pacing systems may employ a single-lead physiologic pacemaker
(e.g., coordinates native atrial depolarization with ventricular
stimulation) [5], a dual-lead system to pace the atria and ventricles,
or a three-lead system to pace the atria along with simultaneous acti-
vation of the right and left ventricles [6]. Programmed pacemaker
modalities are most often described using a five-letter code
(Table 35.1). The NBG coding system is a joint project between the
North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology (NASPE)
and the British Pacing and Electrophysiology Group (BPEG).
Although some newer pulse generators defy description by the NBG
code, most pacemakers implanted in veterinary patients employ
only the first three or four letters. However, with a potential increase
in implantation of cardiac defibrillators in dogs [7,8], veterinary
medicine may have need of the complete five-letter NBG code.
The first position in the code indicates the chamber paced,
the second indicates the chamber sensed, the third indicates the
response to spontaneous depolarizations, and the fourth commonly
describes rate modulation. Hence a VVIR pacemaker paces and
(A) 	(B)
Figure 35.2 A. Tined (passive) pacemaker leads employ small plastic “fins” to entangle within the trabeculae carneae to enhance short-term lead security.
B. Active fixation leads have either a fixed or a retractable helical screw to penetrate and adhere to the myocardium.
Figure 35.1 A dual- chamber pulse generator (both atrial and ventricular
ports are present) along with a transvenous pacemaker lead. This particular
lead has two floating atrial electrodes which enables atrioventricular (AV)
sequential pacing in dogs with AV block using only a single pacemaker lead.
Figure 35.3 Radiograph from a dog that had loss of pacemaker capture on
a recheck examination. Failure to pace was related to fracture of the pacing
lead at its junction with the header.

-- 691 of 1450 --

676 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
senses only the ventricle. In response to a sensed impulse, a VVIR
pacemaker is inhibited until there is another period of quiescence
in the sensed chamber. If no impulse is detected in a VVIR
pacemaker at the end of a programmable lower rate interval, a
ventricular stimulus will be delivered. The fourth position, most
commonly an R, represents rate modulation wherein an activity
sensor (e.g., accelerometer, respiratory rate, and QT interval) is able
to increase the programmed heart rate during activity. A VDD
pacemaker paces only the ventricle, but it senses both the atrium
and ventricle. Delivery of a stimulating electrical impulse to the
ventricle is triggered by a sensed atrial impulse and it is inhibited by
a sensed ventricular impulse. A DDD pacemaker is able to sense
and pace both the atrium and the ventricle. Biventricular (BiV) pac-
ing implies simultaneous pacing of the right ventricular apex and
left ventricular free wall.
Most pacemakers are programmed to discharge only on demand
(synchronous pacing). However, on rare occasions pacemakers may
be programmed (often temporarily) to an asynchronous pacing
mode (e.g., VOO). In this modality, the ventricle is paced at a fixed
rate independent of the underlying rhythm. Depending on the pulse
generator, placement of a strong magnetic field over the generator
may change the programming from synchronous to asynchronous. If
the installed unit is an implantable cardioverter defibrillator, place-
ment of a magnet over the generator usually turns off defibrillation.
Asynchronous pacing can increase the likelihood that a pacemaker
impulse may fall on the T-wave of a spontaneous beat, causing an R
on T event, which may lead to ventricular fibrillation. The avoid-
ance of asynchronous pacing will reduce this risk.
Anesthetic management
The most common indications for pacemaker implantation in dogs
and cats are high-grade second- and third-degree atrioventricular
(AV) block, sick sinus syndrome (SSS), and persistent atrial stand-
still. In humans, pacemaker implantation for these indications is
usually performed on an outpatient basis with local anesthetic
techniques, limiting the need for an anesthesiologist’s involvement.
However, to facilitate cooperation by veterinary patients, most arti-
ficial pacing systems are placed during general anesthesia [9,10].
Currently, there is no evidence that anesthetics alter the stimulation
threshold of pacemakers [11]; therefore, the primary considerations
when formulating an anesthetic plan are focused on (1) the utility
of placing a temporary pacing system and (2) selection of anesthetic
drug and techniques that do not adversely affect the animal’s under-
lying cardiac status during the implantation procedures.
Patient evaluation
Patients may have considerable variability in their ventricular rate
and underlying rhythm. Atropine response tests are often performed
during initial patient workup and provide guidance as to whether
anticholinergics will be beneficial. Cats with third-degree AV block
have ventricular escape rates that far exceed those seen in most
dogs [12]. The median heart rate reported in 21 cats with third-
degree AV block was 120 beats/min (range 80–140) [12]. In the
author’s experience, cats with intermittent high-grade AV block (as
opposed to sustained third-degree AV block) are the most unstable,
often exhibiting ventricular asystole presumably related to overdrive
suppression of ventricular escape foci (Fig. 35.4). The intermittent
5.8 s
11.2 s
7.0 s
Figure 35.4 Continuous lead II ECG (25 mm/s) from a cat that presented for acute onset “seizure-like” activity. The episodes were triggered by
intermittent, sustained atrioventricular (AV) block with lack of a stable ventricular escape focus. In this particular ECG, an absence of AV conduction or
stable ventricular escape focus persisted for approximately 24 s. The artifact in the ECG was produced by movement accompanying the syncopal episode.
Emergency pacemaker implantation was performed and the cat survived without recurrence of episodes for more than 2 years.
Table 35.1 The five-letter NBG coding system description of pacemaker modalities.
I Chamber paced 	II Chamber sensed 	III Response to a
sensed impulse
IV Programmable
functions/rate modulation
V Anti-tachycardia
function
V = ventricle
A = atrium
D = dual (V and A)
O = none
V = ventricle
A = atrium
D = dual (V and A)
O = none
I = inhibited
T = triggered
D = dual (I and T)
O = none
P = programmable
M = multiprogrammable
C = communicating
R = rate modulation
O = none
P = pacing
S = shock
D = dual (P and S)
O = none
NBG, joint project between the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology (NASPE) and the British Pacing and Electrophysiology Group (BPEG).

-- 692 of 1450 --

Chapter 35: Cardiac Pacemakers and Anesthesia 	677
nature of AV block can also make diagnosis more challenging as the
presence of sinus rhythm on examination does not exclude an inter-
mittent arrhythmogenic cause for “seizure-like” activity [13].
Additional testing, such as blood chemistries and complete blood
counts, is also useful in helping identify primary or secondary
changes such as renal insufficiency or electrolyte abnormalities. It
should be emphasized that blood collection via jugular venipunc-
ture should not be performed in these patients. Hematoma forma-
tion can delay or prevent successful transvenous lead placement,
especially when transvenous temporary pacing is employed wherein
both jugular veins are commonly used. Patients with a previously
implanted transvenous pacing lead should never be injected or bled
from that jugular vein since accidental damage to the pacing lead
could result. A thorough evaluation of the patient’s cardiac status is
important as canine valvular disease, feline myocardial disease, or
volume overload related to long-standing bradycardia may influence
anesthetic candidacy along with short- and long-term outcome
post- pacemaker implantation.
Temporary pacemaker implantation
Despite the increasing frequency of pacemaker implantation,
anesthetic and procedural times remain long enough that animals
with symptomatic bradyarrhythmias may become unstable with
irreversible asystole. A report from an experienced veterinary cardi-
ology center reported mean procedural times of 94.9 and 133.5 min
and mean anesthesia times of 137.9 and 179.1 min for implantation
of single- and dual-chamber pacing systems, respectively [14].
Therefore, placement of a temporary pacing system in the event
that a ventricular escape focus becomes unstable, or a prolonged
period of sinus arrest occurs, would seem prudent.
Either a transvenous or transthoracic [15] method is most often
used to achieve temporary cardiac pacing. Transesophageal place-
ment of a pacing lead or electrophysiologic catheter may capture
the atria but would be less suitable for temporary pacing in dogs
with AV block [16,17]. Prior to beginning the procedure, intravenous
antibiotics are administered to reduce the risk of lead contamination,
vegetative endocarditis, and phlebitis. Temporary transvenous
pacing requires placement of a catheter introducer into the jugular
(or lateral saphenous) vein under mild sedation or local anesthesia.
If local anesthetics (e.g., lidocaine or bupivacaine) are used in
animals with an escape rhythm, the smallest dose possible is recom-
mended owing to the potential inhibition of myocardial sodium
channels and inadvertent suppression of the escape rhythm.
Fluoroscopic guidance can be used to maneuver a temporary pacing
lead, via the catheter introducer, through the right atrium, across
the tricuspid valve, and into the right ventricle. After appropriate
positioning, the temporary pacing lead is connected to an external
temporary pulse generator and artificial pacing can commence.
This permits control of heart rate during induction and prevents
anesthetic drug-induced alterations. Transvenous pacing, in com-
parison with transthoracic pacing, has the advantage of myocardial
stimulation without pain or thoracic skeletal muscle stimula-
tion [15]. The disadvantages include the technical skill needed for
placement of the catheter introducer and lead (especially if the
patient is only lightly sedated), risk for vascular/cardiac perforation
or infection, risk for lead dislodgement/loss of ventricular capture
with lack of resumption of the ventricular escape focus leading to
asystole, and the need for an external cardiac pulse generator and
sterile temporary pacing lead.
Transthoracic temporary cardiac pacing generally employs an
external cardiovertor defibrillator with pacing capabilities and a
pair of disposable transthoracic patch electrodes. The left and right
precordia are shaved, conductive paste is placed on the surface of
the electrodes, and the adhesive patches are placed on the left and
right side of the chest directly over the precordial impulse [15].
Often the electrodes are secured with elastic non-adhesive bandag-
ing material to maintain skin contact during muscle contraction
and patient movement. In most cases, anesthesia with rapid-acting
injectable anesthetics is subsequently induced and testing for ven-
tricular capture is performed. The disadvantages of transthoracic
temporary pacing are the requirement for higher current output in
comparison with transvenous pacing, the need for general anesthe-
sia because of the pain induced by a required higher current output,
thoracic skeletal muscle stimulation during cardiac pacing that
may make permanent pacemaker placement more challenging, the
potential risk in very large dogs of incomplete ventricular capture,
and the need for a defibrillator with pacing capabilities. To avoid
skeletal muscle stimulation when using transthoracic pacing, the
cardiologist may test for ventricular capture and then turn off
temporary pacing unless hemodynamically significant bradyasystole
develops. Alternatively, neuromuscular junction-blocking drugs
may be administered, requiring the availability of controlled venti-
lation methods. Neuromuscular junction-blocking drugs may not
abolish all muscle activity since the pacing current may be high
enough to cause direct muscle depolarization.
Temporary pacing systems should not be used without concur-
rent careful patient monitoring. If the temporary transvenous
pacing lead were to dislodge from the endocardial surface or if the
transthoracic electrodes failed to capture the ventricle, the ECG
monitor will often still record the pacing spike in the absence of
myocardial stimulation. Detection of a QRS complex following the
pacing spike and monitoring of the arterial pulse allow confirma-
tion of cardiac contraction. Temporary pacemakers should be
viewed as a backup should asystole occur and not be relied upon to
replace careful patient monitoring.
Permanent pacemaker implantation
Permanent pacemaker system implantation is usually performed
under general anesthesia. Protocols may vary, but the over-riding
goal is to maintain the intrinsic heart rate until the pacemaker can
be activated. After the pacemaker has become active, protocol
choice is of minimal importance. The most common transvenous
technique involves identification, isolation, and incision of the jug-
ular vein. The pacemaker lead, often with the help of a stylet and
fluoroscopic guidance, is advanced through the cranial vena cava
and right atrium, across the tricuspid valve, and into the apex of the
right ventricle. A pulse generator pocket is often formed in the neck
or dorsally between the scapulae and, if necessary, the lead is tun-
neled under the skin to connect to the pulse generator. Following
connection/activation of permanent pacing, threshold testing to
ensure good ventricular capture is often performed, the lead and
generator are secured in place, and the incision(s) are closed.
Alternative techniques are available for placement of epicardial
pacemaker leads [18,19] in cases of pacemaker revision or for the
initial implantation in very small dogs, cats, and puppies.
Considerations for anesthesia
The use of anticholinergic drugs should be carefully considered
based on the type of underlying rhythm, the expected response
(as many animals with high-grade AV block have no meaningful
increase in heart rate), and the cardiologist’s preferences. The use of

-- 693 of 1450 --

678 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
atropine or glycopyrrolate may increase the sinus rate in animals
with responsive AV block or SSS. If responsive, these animals may
develop tachyarrhythmias where the heart rate exceeds the upper
limit of the pulse generator. Although this is not a problem for the
patient, it may make it difficult to determine if the lead placement is
suitable, and if the pulse generator settings are adequate to take over
pacing when the effects of the anticholinergic eventually wane.
Anticholinergics can also cause an initial transient increase in vagal
tone, which may cause a temporary worsening of the underlying
rhythm before any beneficial response is seen.
Anesthetic drug selection often incorporates classes that are
thought to have minimal, or manageable, effects on conduction and
heart rate. Dissociative anesthetics such as ketamine typically cause
an increased heart rate through increased sympathetic nervous
system activity. However, in animals with maximally stimulated
sympathetic nervous systems, significant myocardial depression
may occur [20]. Benzodiazepine premedication may provide some
reduction in anesthetic dose requirements, but excitation may be
induced in some animals.
Hypnotic drugs such as propofol, alfaxalone, and barbiturates
have been used with varying success. Propofol infusion is a tech-
nique that allows titration of depth of anesthesia without excessive
depression of conduction. With all intravenous drug administra-
tion, it should be remembered that animals with extremely low
heart rates usually have low cardiac output and prolonged drug
distribution (onset of effect), and doses result in higher initial
plasma concentrations. Slower, careful administration is required
when dosing to effect.
Opioid drugs have been used for sedation and analgesia prior to
pacemaker implantation. They are reversible with specific antago-
nists and generally have minimal effects on myocardial contractil-
ity. However, most opioids, especially at higher doses, can enhance
vagal tone and promote AV blockade. Anticholinergics will often
minimize these effects.
Inhalant anesthetics allow the rapid titration of anesthetic depth.
Many pacemakers have been placed during inhalant anesthesia, but
effects on Ca 2+ currents and other ion fluxes, along with effects on
conduction, have cautioned some to avoid inhalant administration
until temporary or permanent pacing is established.
Following anesthesia, sedation is often desirable to facilitate
a smooth recovery and minimize risk of lead dislodgement.
α2
-Adrenergic receptor agonists are not recommended for pacemaker
placement, but acepromazine, benzodiazepines, and sedating
opioids have all been used successfully.
Complications
Severe bradyarrhythmia or hypotension during pacemaker implan-
tation requires rapid treatment. The use of β1
- adrenergic receptor
agonists such as isoproterenol, dobutamine, dopamine, or epineph-
rine may improve dromotropy and stimulate escape rates. However,
the routine use of positive dromotropes may also potentiate
mechanically triggered ventricular early depolarizations, which
may lead to ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation. Drugs and
equipment should be readied for administration, but withheld until
clearly needed.
Ventricular arrhythmias during lead placement typically indicate
that the lead has traversed the tricuspid valve. Treatment of ven-
tricular early depolarizations with antiarrhythmic drugs such as
lidocaine is often reserved for those patients with severe arrhyth-
mias, and who are not relying on a ventricular escape rhythm for
sustaining life.
Pacemaker patients undergoing non-cardiac
procedures
Often the anesthetist is called upon to anesthetize patients with
pacemakers 	for 	other 	emergent 	and 	elective 	procedures.
Consultation with a cardiologist is advisable to assess the adequacy
of the programmed parameters and battery life, the expected
response to atrial, ventricular, or ectopic complexes, the severity of
myocardial or valvular dysfunction, and recommendations for
perioperative antibiotic prophylaxis. If possible, anesthesia should
be performed in the same facility where the pacemaker program-
mer is located so that changes in pacing rate, threshold, or sensing
algorithm can be made, if necessary. A contemporary ECG record-
ing with the planned surgical procedure is recommended prior to
induction of anesthesia.
Patients with rate-responsive, ventricular demand pacemakers
(e.g., VVIR) often have a programmed lower rate limit at or below
80 beats/min. This may not be adequate to maintain arterial blood
pressure in the face of inhalant anesthetic-induced vasodilation
(e.g., isoflurane). It is often advantageous to increase the minimum
rate to a level appropriate for anesthesia (e.g., 120 beats/min). If the
surgery also has a high likelihood of producing significant chest
wall movement, it may be necessary to turn off rate responsiveness
to avoid inappropriate pacemaker-derived tachycardia.
In most instances, artificial pacemakers are incompatible with
magnetic resonance imaging. Similarly, high-frequency signals
accompanying electrocautery may produce numerous complications
with implanted pacemakers, including induction of arrhythmias,
increased pacing rate in rate-responsive pacemakers, asynchronous
pacing, inhibition of pacing, or electrical resetting. Therefore,
monopolar electrocautery should ideally be avoided in pacemaker
patients unless the pulse generator documentation specifically
allows it. Some precautions that may be useful if electrocautery can-
not be avoided include pacemaker reprogramming, using short,
intermittent bursts at the lowest energy level, avoiding contact
between the electrocautery probe and the pacemaker, placement of
the return electrode as far from the pulse generator as possible,
ensuring that the current pathway does not intersect the pulse
generator, and the use of bipolar electrocautery.
Antimicrobial prophylaxis is important in pacemaker patients
undergoing procedures associated with bacteremia (e.g., dental
cleaning). Various protocols exist, but the goal is to reduce the risk
associated with bacterial seeding of the transvenous lead and
subsequent phlebitis and endocarditis, which may require surgical
removal of the pacing lead.
References
1 Buchanan JW, Dear MG, Pyle RL, et al. Medical and pacemaker therapy of complete
heart block and congestive heart failure in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1968; 152(8):
1099–1109.
2 De Carellán Mateo AG, Casamián-Sorrosal D. The perioperative management of
small animals with previously implanted pacemakers undergoing anesthesia.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2022; 49(1): 7–17.
3 Borek PP, Wilkoff BL. Pacemaker and ICD leads: strategies for long-term manage-
ment. J Interv Card Electrophysiol 2008; 23(1): 59–72.
4 Ohm OJ, Danilovic D. Improvements in pacemaker energy consumption and
functional capability: four decades of progress. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 1997;
20(1 Pt 1): 2–9.
5 Bulmer BJ, Sisson DD, Oyama MA, et al. Physiologic VDD versus nonphysiologic
VVI pacing in canine 3rd-degree atrioventricular block. J Vet Intern Med 2006;
20(2): 257–271.
6 Estrada AH, Maisenbacher HW III, Prosek R, et al. Evaluation of pacing site in dogs
with naturally occurring complete heart block. J Vet Cardiol 2009; 11(2): 79–88.

-- 694 of 1450 --

Chapter 35: Cardiac Pacemakers and Anesthesia 	679
7 Nelson OL, Lahmers S, Schneider T, et al. The use of an implantable cardioverter
defibrillator in a Boxer dog to control clinical signs of arrhythmogenic right ven-
tricular cardiomyopathy. J Vet Intern Med 2006; 20(5): 1232–1237.
8 Pariaut R, Saelinger C, Vila J, et al. Evaluation of shock waveform configuration on
the defibrillation capacity of implantable cardioverter defibrillators in dogs.
J Vet Cardiol 2012; 14(3): 389–398.
9 Musselman EE, Rouse GP, Parker AJ. Permanent pacemaker implantation with
transvenous electrode placement in a dog with complete atrioventricular heart
block, congestive heart failure and Stokes–Adams syndrome. J Small Anim Pract
1976; 17(3): 149–162.
10 Sisson D, Thomas WP, Woodfield J, et al. Permanent transvenous pacemaker
implantation in forty dogs. J Vet Intern Med 1991; 5(6): 322–331.
11 Veve I, Melo LF. Anesthesia for pacemaker insertion. Semin Cardiothorac Vasc
Anesth 2000; 4(3): 138–143.
12 Kellum HB, Stepien RL. Third-degree atrioventricular block in 21 cats (1997–2004).
J Vet Intern Med 2006; 20(1): 97–103.
13 Penning VA, Connolly DJ, Gajanayake I, et al. Seizure-like episodes in 3 cats with
intermittent high-grade atrioventricular dysfunction. J Vet Intern Med 2009; 23(1):
200–205.
14 Genovese DW, Estrada AH, Maisenbacher HW, et al. Procedure times, complication
rates, and survival times associated with single-chamber versus dual-chamber
pacemaker implantation in dogs with clinical signs of bradyarrhythmia: 54 cases
(2004–2009). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2013; 242(2): 230–236.
15 DeFrancesco TC, Hansen BD, Atkins CE, et al. Noninvasive transthoracic tempo-
rary cardiac pacing in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2003; 17(5): 663–667.
16 Sanders RA, Green HW III, Hogan DF, et al. Efficacy of transesophageal and
transgastric cardiac pacing in the dog. J Vet Cardiol 2010; 12(1): 49–52.
17 Chapel EH, Sanders RA. Efficacy of two commercially available cardiac pacing cath-
eters for transesophageal atrial pacing in dogs. J Vet Cardiol 2012; 14(3): 409–414.
18 Fox PR, Matthiesen DT, Purse D, et al. Ventral abdominal, transdiaphragmatic
approach for implantation of cardiac pacemakers in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1986; 189(10): 1303–1308.
19 Nelson DA, Miller MW, Gordon SG, et al. Minimally invasive transxiphoid
approach to the cardiac apex and caudoventral intrathoracic space. Vet Surg 2012;
41(8): 915–917.
20 Chamberlain JH, Seed RG, Undre N. Myocardial depression by ketamine.
Haemodynamic and metabolic observations in animals. Anaesthesia 1981; 36(4):
366–370.

-- 695 of 1450 --

36
680
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of L umb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
In animals with suspected cardiac disease, care must be taken
both prior to and during anesthesia to assess the heart’s ability
to (1) provide adequate cardiac output and tissue perfusion,
(2) maintain low venous pressures and prevent congestion, and
(3) avoid arrhythmias. The preanesthetic database should include
the medical history and physical examination, with particular
attention to cardiac and pulmonary auscultation, inspection of the
jugular veins, and palpation of peripheral arterial pulses. Commonly
considered diagnostics include electrocardiography (ECG), thoracic
radiography, echocardiography, and noninvasive blood pressure
measurement. The use of cardiac-specific blood-based markers
such as N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NTproBNP)
and cardiac troponin I (cTnI) as part of the preanesthetic work-up
in animals with suspected cardiac disease may be included. The
decision regarding if and how to anesthetize patients with cardiac
disease relies on the appropriate selection and interpretation of
these and other diagnostic tests.
Preanesthetic evaluation
Electrocardiography
ECG is the gold standard for the evaluation of cardiac arrhythmias.
However, in the absence of arrhythmias, the sensitivity of ECG to
detect underlying cardiac dysfunction and disease is relatively poor.
The ECG should be evaluated for heart rate, mean electrical axis (when
applicable), rhythm, and criteria for cardiac chamber enlargement.
The reader is referred to several excellent reviews of ECG interpreta-
tion for further information [1–3]. ECG findings that most commonly
impact anesthesia include abnormalities of rate (either bradycardia or
tachycardia) or criteria for chamber enlargement. In cats, abnormali-
ties of mean electrical axis are occasionally detected with underlying
structural disease, such as cardiomyopathy.
Clinically important bradycardias include second- or third-degree
atrioventricular nodal (AV) block, sinus arrest or block, sinus brady-
cardia, and, less commonly, atrial standstill. The presence of AV
block, sinus arrest/block, and sinus bradycardia is often challenged
by administration of vagolytic agents such as atropine or glycopyr-
rolate. Complete resolution of the bradycardia following challenge
usually indicates that the bradycardia is due to physiologic high
resting vagal tone, and bradycardia occurring while under anesthe-
sia can often be effectively treated with repeated administration
of atropine or glycopyrrolate. Incomplete resolution or absence of
response to vagolytic challenge often indicates injury or disease
of the cardiac conduction system and additional diagnostics, such
as thoracic radiography, echocardiography, serial ECG, or 24-h
ambulatory ECG (Holter) monitoring should be pursued prior to
anesthesia. Depending on the response to vagolytic challenge, some
dogs with partial responses can be safely anesthetized with proper
selection of anesthetic agents, monitoring, and/or availability of
temporary artificial cardiac pacing. Most instances of sinus block/
arrest or sinus bradycardia that are part of a pronounced respiratory
sinus arrhythmia are vagally mediated and present little risk for
anesthesia. In contrast, most cases of high-grade second-degree AV
block, third-degree AV block, and atrial standstill indicate the pres-
ence of either primary cardiac disease or severe electrolyte or acid-
base disturbances and are associated with a significant increase in
anesthetic risk. Various forms of bradycardia can also be present in
36 Pathophysiology and Anesthetic Management
of Patients with Cardiovascular Disease
Sandra Z. Perkowski1 and Mark A. Oyama2
1 BluePearl Specialty and Emergency Pet Hospital, Malvern, Pennsylvania, USA
2 Department of Clinical Sciences and Advanced Medicine, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 680
Preanesthetic evaluation, 680
Electrocardiography, 680
Thoracic radiography, 681
Echocardiography, 681
Blood-based cardiac markers, 682
Cooperation between the cardiologist and anesthesiologist, 682
Anesthesia for specific conditions, 683
Conditions associated with volume overload, 683
Right- to-left shunting congenital defects, 687
Conditions associated with pressure overload, 688
Diastolic dysfunction-associated diseases, 689
Diseases associated with arrhythmias, 691
Hypotension, 692
Shock, 693
References, 694

-- 696 of 1450 --

Chapter 36: Pathophysiology and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 	681
patients with sick sinus syndrome (SSS) wherein intermittent peri-
ods of bradycardia and tachycardia both occur.
Clinically important tachycardias include supraventricular tachy-
cardia (SVT), ventricular tachycardia (VT), and atrial fibrillation
(AF) or flutter. Sinus tachycardia due to pain, hyperthyroidism, con-
gestive heart failure, and drugs/toxins (e.g., theophylline, terbutaline,
and theobromine) can also be present. The impact of tachyarrhyth-
mias on anesthesia depends on the rate, frequency, and duration of
such arrhythmias. Very rapid, frequent, and sustained tachyarrhyth-
mias decrease diastolic filling time and cardiac output (CO) while
increasing myocardial oxygen demand. Tachyarrhythmias such as
sustained SVT, VT, and AF are often associated with clinically sig-
nificant primary cardiac disease, such as degenerative mitral valve
disease in the dog or various forms of cardiomyopathy in both the
dog and cat. Ventricular arrhythmias are also common in dogs with
extra-cardiac disease, especially diseases of the abdomen such as
splenic or hepatic neoplasia or gastric dilation-volvulus. Thus, fur-
ther diagnostics such as thoracic radiography, echocardiography,
Holter monitoring, abdominal ultrasound, and serum chemistry are
usually pursued in animals with tachyarrhythmias. In cases wherein
arrhythmias appear to be due solely to extra-cardiac causes such that
echocardiography reveals normal cardiac structure and function,
anesthesia often can be achieved with minimal additional risk.
Thoracic radiography
Thoracic radiography is an extremely useful tool in assessing
patients with cardiac disease. Cardiac disease results in activation of
neurohormonal responses that serve to increase cardiac preload via
renal retention of fluid and sodium. The resultant volume overload
produces eccentric cardiac hypertrophy, the severity of which
reflects the degree of injury and neurohormonal activity. Thus,
radiographic heart size is an excellent surrogate marker of disease
severity and risk for congestive heart failure (CHF). Evaluation of
radiographic heart size is confounded by variables such as radio-
graphic technique, patient body weight, chest conformation, and
breed. Standardized measurement techniques such as the vertebral
heart size (VHS) are useful to minimize variability and increase
diagnostic value. The VHS system has been extensively reviewed
elsewhere [4–6]. Briefly, the long and short axes of the heart are
measured from the right or left lateral projection and these meas-
urements are indexed to the number of vertebral bodies starting
from the cranial aspect of the fourth thoracic vertebra (Fig. 36.1).
The sum of the vertebral length and width of the heart represents
the VHS. The range of VHS in healthy dogs and cats is 8.5–10.5 and
6.9–8.1 vertebra, respectively. Although these ranges are generally
regarded as applicable across a wide range of breeds and ages, some
reports indicate slightly different ranges, although only two of the
studies had at least 100 subjects (Table 36.1). As a preanesthetic test,
VHS is useful in determining the severity of canine degenerative
mitral valve disease in geriatric patients with the typical left-sided
systolic murmur. In the authors’ experience, regardless of the
intensity of the murmur, dogs with VHS < 11.0–11.5 are at low
risk for spontaneous development of CHF, whereas those with
VHS > 11.5–12.0 are at higher risk. Coupled with inspection of the
pulmonary veins and pulmonary parenchymal pattern, VHS helps
assess the risk of induced CHF secondary to IV fluid administra-
tion (at 5–10 mL/kg/h) while under anesthesia.
In species and diseases other than canine degenerative mitral
valve disease, the authors regard VHS as a useful means to assess
the risk of induced or spontaneous CHF in dogs with dilated
cardiomyopathy 	and 	cats 	with 	hypertrophic 	or 	restrictive
cardiomyopathy. In instances of suspected canine or feline cardio-
myopathy, detailed echocardiographic evaluation of systolic and
diastolic function can supplement radiographic findings.
Echocardiography
Echocardiography represents the gold standard for the clinical
evaluation of cardiac structure and function. It is less useful than
thoracic radiography in trying to determine the presence or
Table 36.1 Reported mean (SD) radiographic vertebral heart size from various studies
in dogs and cats.
Species/Breed 	n 	Mean (SD) 	Comments
Canine/Beagle [7] 	19 	10.3 (0.4)
Canine/Greyhound [8] 	42 	10.5 (0.1)
Canine/Whippet [9] 	44 	11.0 (0.5) 	Right lateral recumbency
11.3 (0.5) 	Left lateral recumbency
Canine/Rottweiler [9] 	38 	9.8 (0.1)
Canine/Cavalier King Charles
Spaniel [6]
10 	10.8 (0.49)
Canine/mixed [10] 	63 	9.8 (0.6) 	Right lateral recumbency
9.5 (0.8) 	Left lateral recumbency
Canine/puppies [11] 	11 	10.0 (0.5) 	3 months
9.8 (0.4) 	6 months
9.9 (0.6) 	12 months
6 	10.3 (0.6) 	36 months
Canine/Boxer [12] 	20 	11.6 (0.8)
Canine/Labrador Retriever [12] 	25 	10.8 (0.6)
Canine/German Shepherd [12] 	20 	9.7 (0.7)
Canine/Doberman [12] 	20 	10.0 (0.6)
Canine/Cavalier King Charles
Spaniel [12]
20 	10.6 (0.5)
Canine/Yorkshire Terrier [12] 	22 	9.7 (0.5)
Canine/mixed [4] 	100 	9.7 (0.5)
Feline/mixed [13] 	50 	7.3 (0.49) 	Right lateral recumbency
7.3 (0.55) 	Left lateral recumbency
Feline/mixed [5] 	100 	7.5 (0.3)
Figure 36.1 Right lateral thoracic radiograph from a 13-year-old female
spayed Toy Poodle demonstrating the vertebral heart size (VHS)
measurement technique. The length of the cardiac silhouette is measured
from a point ventral to the carina of the trachea to the apex of the heart
and the width of the silhouette is measured along the widest portion of the
heart perpendicular to the long axis. The ventral border of the caudal vena
cava is often used as the starting point for the width measurement.
The length and width measurements are compared with the number of
vertebral bodies starting from the cranial aspect of the fourth vertebral
body. In this instance, the length of the silhouette is 6.2 vertebra and the
width is 5.0 vertebra, yielding an overall VHS of 11.2.

-- 697 of 1450 --

682 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
likelihood of CHF manifested as pulmonary edema. Echo provides
data regarding ventricular and atrial chamber dimensions, thick-
ness of the ventricular walls and interventricular septum, pattern of
blood flow through the heart and proximal portions of the great
vessels, myocardial contractility, and morphology of valve structure
(Table 36.2). Echo should be performed by individuals not only
proficient in image acquisition but also with an adequate familiarity
with the pathophysiology of the most common cardiac diseases
since interpretation of the echocardiographic-derived data is neces-
sary to assess the impact of changes on anesthetic risk. Measurements
from individual animals are interpreted using reference ranges
from healthy animals indexed to body weight. The most accurate
reference ranges utilize indices indexed to the body weight raised to
the power of approximately 1/3, providing a single range of values
applicable across all body weights (Table 36.3) [14].
Diseases that result in volume overload (e.g., eccentric hypertro-
phy) such as canine mitral valve disease, dilated cardiomyopathy
(DCM), and patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), result in increased
diastolic chamber dimensions, whereas diseases that result in con-
centric hypertrophy such as feline hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
(HCM), systemic hypertension, and congenital subaortic stenosis
(SAS), result in increased diastolic and systolic ventricular wall
thickness. Diseases that produce decreased contractility, such
as DCM, result in increased systolic chamber dimensions.
Interpretation of the echocardiogram relies on both subjective and
objective evaluation. Because of many breed peculiarities with
respect to chest conformation and imaging planes, objective data
should always be compared against the subjective evaluation of the
sonographer. In fact, subjective estimation of cardiac function by
experienced echocardiographers possesses a better correlation
with angiographic evaluation than many of the routine objective
calculations [15]. Thus, objective measurements should align
closely with the trained echocardiographer’s subjective assessment
of cardiac morphology and function, and discrepancies between
the two often indicate measurement errors due to suboptimal
imaging planes.
Echocardiographic studies are typically obtained by imaging
through the thorax, but images can also be obtained with the use
of an intraesophageal probe or transesophageal echocardiography
(TEE). TEE, by virtue of its closer proximity to the heart, renders
highly detailed views of the heart and great vessels and is often used
in patients whose chest conformation or body weight precludes
high-quality transthoracic imaging. The high resolution and visual
acuity of TEE images facilitate cardiac catheterization procedures,
such as device occlusion of PDA or balloon valvuloplasty of valvu-
lar pulmonic stenosis (PS). The TEE probe consists of a flexible and
steerable shaft (similar to an endoscope) with a phased array ultra-
sound transducer at its tip. Biplane TEE utilizes two transducers
positioned at right-angles from each other whereas multiplane TEE
utilizes a single transducer that can be rotated within the scope’s
housing to permit imaging along any plane from 0º to 180º. In
veterinary patients, TEE examination is performed under general
anesthesia or heavy sedation, and the TEE probe is inserted through
a mouth gag into the patient’s oropharynx and esophagus. The
probe is positioned over the heart base and multiple imaging planes
of the heart can be obtained by switching between the two transduc-
ers (biplane) or by rotating the transducer within the probe housing
(multiplane) (Fig. 36.2). Excellent reviews of biplane TEE imaging
technique and planes in the dog and cat are available [16,17].
Blood-based cardiac markers
The heart is an active endocrine organ. In the case of the sympatho-
mimetic and renin–angiotensin–aldosterone systems, the heart is
an end- organ target of neurohormonal activity, whereas in the case
of atrial and B-type natriuretic peptide (ANP, BNP), the heart is a
source of neurohormonal production. Measurement of ANP, BNP,
and NTproBNP (a precursor of BNP) can help differentiate cardiac
versus respiratory etiology of respiratory signs, detect occult cardi-
omyopathy, and provide prognostic information [18–21]. In the
setting of anesthesia, the natriuretic peptides, in addition to mark-
ers of cardiac tissue injury, such as cTnI, are probably most useful in
helping to ascertain the risk of occult cardiomyopathy in cats dur-
ing the preanesthetic work-up. In selected populations of cats that
are at high risk for cardiomyopathy, such as adult cats with a heart
murmur, gallop, or arrhythmia, NTproBNP assay detects clinically
significant occult cardiomyopathy with moderate sensitivity and
specificity [19,20]. Elevated values warrant additional diagnostics
such as echocardiography to achieve a definitive diagnosis and help
formulate anesthetic recommendations. Natriuretic or troponin
assay as part of the preanesthetic work-up prior to routine elective
surgery (e.g., spay or neuter) is not currently recommended as the
low prevalence of cardiomyopathy in these populations will result
in many false positive results.
Cooperation between the cardiologist
and anesthesiologist
Animals with pre-existing cardiac disease often undergo evaluation
by a cardiology specialist prior to anesthesia. Depending on
findings, cardiologists might make recommendations regarding
Table 36.2 Common echocardiographic measurements and calculations.
Measurement 	Commonly used
abbreviation(s)
Left ventricle at end-diastole
Left ventricular end-diastolic dimension; values that are
indexed or normalized to the animal’s body weight
commonly utilize an “i” or “n” (i.e., iLVEDD or LVIDdN)
LVEDD, LVIDd, LVd
Thickness of the left ventricular posterior wall 	LVPWd
Thickness of the interventricular septum 	IVSd
Left ventricle at end-systole
Left ventricular end-systolic dimension; values that are
indexed or normalized to the animal’s body weight
commonly utilize an “i” or “n” (i.e., iLVESD or LVIDsN)
LVESD, LVIDs, LVs
Thickness of the left ventricular posterior wall 	LVPWs
Thickness of the interventricular septum 	IVSs
Diameter of the aortic root 	AoD
Diameter of the left atrium 	LAD
Ratio of the aortic to left atrium diameter 	LA:Ao, LAD:AoD
Fractional shortening [(LVEDD – LVEDSD)/LVEDD] × 100% 	FS%
Table 36.3 Upper and lower bounds of the 95th percentile confidence interval (CI)
for indexed echocardiographic formula constants in healthy dogs. The constants
multiplied by the body weight (BW in kg) raised to an exponential power provide
a single reference range across all body weights for the indicated measurements.
Measurement 	95% CI boundary 	Formula (BW in kg)
iLVIDd 	1.35–1.73 	iLVIDd = LVIDd/BW 0.294
iLVIDs 	0.79–1.14 	iLVIDs = LVIDs/BW 0.315
iIVSd 	0.33–0.52 	iIVSd = IVSd/BW 0.241
iIVSs 	0.48–0.71 	iIVSs = IVSs/BW 0.240
iLVPWd 	0.33–0.53 	iLVPWd = LVPWd/BW 0.232
iLVPWs 	0.53–0.78 	iLVPWs = LVPWs/BW 0.222
iLAD 	0.64–0.90 	iLAD = LAD/BW 0.345
iAoD 	0.68–0.89 	iAoD = AoD/BW 0.341
Source: Adapted from Cornell et al. [14].

-- 698 of 1450 --

Chapter 36: Pathophysiology and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 	683
chronic medications and recheck exams following anesthesia and
resolution of the animal’s primary problem. In the authors’ opinion,
cardiologists should refrain from routinely including specific anes-
thesia recommendations as part of their consult barring specific
requests from the anesthesiologist. The goal of the preanesthetic
cardiology consult is to provide the anesthesiologist with informa-
tion regarding diagnosis and severity of cardiac disease so that the
anesthesiologist can make appropriate plans. Good communication
and division of duties between the cardiologist and anesthesiologist
are essential for proper patient care.
Anesthesia for specific conditions
When anesthetizing any animal with cardiovascular disease, main-
taining CO and tissue perfusion is a primary goal. How that goal
is best achieved will differ depending on the underlying cardiac
condition.
CO is the product of stroke volume and heart rate and decreases
in either of these can lead to a low output state. Conversely, fast
heart rates, either atrial (e.g., AF) or ventricular in origin, can also
lead to a low output state, since diastolic filling times are decreased
and/or the atrial contribution (atrial “kick”) to ventricular filling is
decreased. To determine accurately the reasons for a decrease in
stroke volume, it is important to ascertain whether it is due to a
change in preload, afterload (increased systemic vascular resistance
[SVR]), and/or contractility of the left ventricle. All of these
variables are interdependent. For example, chronic excess preload
can cause ventricular over-distension and systolic dysfunction.
Myocardial contractility and stroke volume also may be affected by
indirect causes such as pericardial effusion, inflammatory cytokines,
and anesthetic agents.
Valvular heart lesions and/or septal defects lead to changes in the
loading conditions of the heart and the approach to the patient
changes accordingly. For example, the left ventricle is volume over-
loaded in mitral regurgitation and pressure overloaded in subaortic
stenosis. Compensatory mechanisms differ between conditions
and can include chamber enlargement, myocardial hypertrophy,
changes in vascular tone, and alterations in sympathetic activity.
Changes in myocardial compliance and chronic myocardial
dysfunction may follow. Anesthetic management requires an
understanding of the alterations in loading conditions so that com-
pensatory mechanisms may be preserved, and problems may be
anticipated and avoided before they occur.
Conditions associated with volume overload
Mitral valve insufficiency/regurgitation
Mitral valve regurgitation (MR) can be caused by primary
incompetence of the valve leaflets (e.g., myxomatous mitral valve
degeneration [MMVD], bacterial endocarditis, congenital malfor-
mation) or secondarily to dilation of the annular ring in diseases
that cause eccentric hypertrophy secondary to systolic dysfunction
(e.g., DCM). MMVD is the most common cause of MR, having a
prevalence of approximately 30% in small-breed dogs over the age
of 10 years. Regardless of the initial cause, the presence of MR
induces further eccentric hypertrophy and annular dilation in a
vicious cycle wherein “MR begets further MR.”
MR results in volume overload of the left ventricle and left
atrium. With incompetence of the mitral valve, the outflow of the
left ventricle is divided between the relatively high-pressure/
low-compliance outflow tract through the aorta and arterial tree,
and the low-pressure/high-compliance outflow route across the
incompetent mitral valve into the left atrium. This mismatch in
afterload conditions can result in MR volumes representing a high
percentage of total stroke volume. This regurgitant fraction can be
as high as 50–70% of total stroke volume, highlighting the often-
severe degree of volume overload within the left ventricle and atrium.
Thoracic radiography is particularly useful in dogs with MMVD
such that the radiographic heart size is proportional to the severity
of MR. In many cases of uncomplicated MMVD, radiographic
inspection of the cardiac silhouette, pulmonary vessels, and
(B)	(A)
Figure 36.2 Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) in dogs. A. Dog with congenital pulmonic stenosis showing the incomplete opening and abnormal
thickness of the pulmonic valve leaflets from the cranial transverse probe position (RVOT, right ventricular outflow tract; Ao, aorta; PA, pulmonary artery).
B. Dog with congenital mitral stenosis showing incomplete opening of the mitral valve leaflets and from the middle transverse position (LA, left atrium;
LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle; RA, right atrium).

-- 699 of 1450 --

684 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
pulmonary parenchyma provides sufficient information regarding
severity of disease and risk for CHF and helps guide the need for
chronic medical therapy.
Although the volume work of the left ventricle is increased, left
ventricular systolic wall tension is minimally increased, as the pres-
ence of MR allows a large percentage of the work to be done at
low pressure. Thus, in most small-breed dogs (body weight < 15 kg)
with MR, systolic contractility often appears normal or even hyper-
contractile when assessed by echocardiography. In larger breed dogs,
systolic dysfunction secondary to MR is much more common, for
reasons that are poorly understood. Thus, preanesthetic echocardi-
ography to detect systolic dysfunction is often of greater value in
large- than small-breed dogs.
The time course for the development of MR influences the
severity of symptoms. If the MR develops slowly over time, the left
atrium compensates with gradual dilation, and some dogs with
severe amounts of MR can be asymptomatic. However, if the MR
occurs acutely, as in the case of bacterial endocarditis or acute rup-
tured primary chordae tendinae, the sudden volume overload can
lead to a rapid increase in left atrial pressures and severe pulmonary
congestion.
Chronic medical therapy for MR involves reduction in preload
(diuretics such as furosemide and spironolactone), reduction
in arterial afterload (vasodilators such as angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitors [ACEIs], and pimobendan), and maintenance
of adequate systolic contractility (positive inotropes such as
pimobendan). Initiation of medical therapy prior to elective anes-
thesia should be considered for newly diagnosed cases of MR.
Anesthetic considerations
The primary goal of anesthesia in the patient with MR is to maintain
forward aortic flow while minimizing regurgitant flow and devel-
opment of pulmonary edema (Box 36.1). The volume of regurgitant
flow across the mitral valve is related to the size of the regurgitant
orifice (which is related to ventricular size), the time available for
retrograde flow, and the pressure gradient across the dysfunctional
valve [22]. Patients with chronic, compensated MR will be sensitive
to changes in ventricular loading conditions and preload should
generally be maintained during anesthesia [23]. Overzealous fluid
administration should be avoided; however, to avoid ventricular
distension and resultant changes in regurgitant flow. Maintenance
fluid rates of 2–4 mL/kg/h are generally recommended. Preload
reduction may be helpful in some cases. Heart rates should be
maintained at a normal or slightly above normal rate to help main-
tain smaller left ventricular volumes and minimize MR secondary
to annular dilation. Bradycardia also increases the duration of
systolic contraction and the time available for regurgitant flow.
Most patients with MR benefit greatly from afterload reduction.
By reducing afterload, the left ventricular systolic pressures required
for ejection from the ventricle to the aorta and arterial vasculature
decrease, optimizing forward flow. This, in turn, decreases the
pressure gradient from the left ventricle to the left atrium during
systole and decreases regurgitant flow. Adequate depth of anesthe-
sia and anesthetic agents that promote arteriolar dilation and
maintenance of heart rate are generally recommended. In contrast,
administration of drugs that cause increases in systemic blood
pressure and afterload (e.g., α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists) can
impair forward flow, increase regurgitant flow, and cause rapid
deterioration of patients with MR. In early compensated MR,
LV contractility may be preserved, but patients with significant MR
may benefit from inotropic support with a drug such as dobutamine
(5–15 μg/kg/min) (Table 36.4).
Premedication may be required in some cases to decrease the anxi-
ety of the animal and stress during patient handling, minimizing cat-
echolamine release, tachycardia, and increased myocardial work.
Ideally, patients should receive supplemental oxygen after receiving
sedative medication, but the stress of restraint for oxygen administra-
tion should be considered. If preoperative sedation is necessary, opi-
oid receptor agonists are generally the drug class of choice since they
usually cause minimal cardiovascular depression at clinically useful
doses, with left ventricular contractility, CO, and systemic blood
pressure being well maintained. In healthy animals, opioids cause
behavioral changes ranging from sedation to excitement; however, in
depressed or critically ill patients, opioids usually cause sedation.
Opioids may cause dose-dependent bradycardia by stimulation of the
vagal nerve [24]. Heart rate should be monitored and an anticholin-
ergic drug such as glycopyrrolate or atropine administered if benefi-
cial. Some animals with MR may also have pulmonary hypertension
(PHT) and right heart failure. Increased carbon dioxide secondary to
opioid-induced hypoventilation can increase pulmonary pressures
and may be of concern in those animals with PHT.
Table 36.4 Inotropic and vasopressor drugs, adrenergic receptor binding, and standard dose range for dogs and cats.
Drug 	α1 	α2 	β1 	β2 	Dose 	Comments
Epinephrine 	5+ 	3+ 	4+ 	2+ 	0.01–1 μg/kg/min 	Primarily β effects at lower doses; increasing α effects at higher doses
0.02–0.2 mg/kg bolus 	For cardiac arrest
Norepinephrine 	5+ 	5+ 	3+ 	0/1+ 	0.01–0.1 μg/kg/min 	β2 effect not evident clinically
Dobutamine 	0/1+ 	0 	4+ 	2+ 	5–15 μg/kg/min 	Positive inotropic effects, β2 effect decreases afterload
Phenylephrine 	5+ 	2+ 	0 	0 	0.2–2 μg/kg/min
Dopamine 	1–5+ 	2+ 	3+ 	2+ 	Actions are dependent on dose:
1–3 μg/kg/min 	Acts primarily on dopamine-1 receptors in renal and splanchnic
vasculature to produce vasodilation
5–10 μg/kg/min 	Primarily β effects
> 10 μg/kg/min 	Primarily α effects
Ephedrine 	2+ 	1+ 	3+ 	1+ 	0.05–0.5 mg/kg 	Primary action by an indirect effect; direct and indirect effects
(norepinephrine release)
Box 36.1 Hemodynamic goals in patients with mitral valve regurgitation.
Preload: usually increased; some reduction may help decrease
regurgitant flow
Afterload: decreases help minimize regurgitant flow
Contractility: unrecognized myocardial depression is possible
Rate: modest increases help maintain smaller left ventricular volume

-- 700 of 1450 --

Chapter 36: Pathophysiology and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 	685
A combination of an opioid receptor agonist (e.g., fentanyl, meth-
adone, or hydromorphone) or agonist/antagonist (e.g., butorphanol
and buprenorphine) and a benzodiazepine tranquilizer (diazepam
or midazolam) may be used to sedate patients for chest radiographs
or echocardiography. This combination provides sedation with
minimal cardiovascular depression [25–27]. The use of fentanyl
may be more likely to cause clinically significant bradycardia.
Reversal may be accomplished by using an opioid receptor antago-
nist such as naloxone and/or a benzodiazepine antagonist such as
flumazenil. Phenothiazine tranquilizers such as acepromazine in
low doses may be beneficial in some patients with MR because they
calm the patient, decrease afterload, and decrease the incidence of
arrhythmias. Acepromazine should only be used after careful con-
sideration; however, since α1
- adrenergic receptor antagonism may
cause hypotension, not only by decreasing SVR, but also by causing
venodilation and decreased preload. In conscious dogs, intravenous
acepromazine (0.01–0.05 mg/kg) decreased mean arterial pressure
(MAP) and stroke index, but did not significantly change SVR,
heart rate, or cardiac index [28].
In general, a carefully titrated anesthetic induction is preferred in
the cardiac patient with continuous monitoring of cardiovascular
parameters. Although no one best technique exists, a high-dose
opioid technique including an opioid and a benzodiazepine tran-
quilizer with or without low-dose propofol, etomidate, and/or alfax-
alone is often advocated for induction to maintain systolic function
in patients with severe myocardial dysfunction. Premedicaton with
maropitant 30–60 min prior to induction is helpful in preventing
emesis if hydromorphone or etomidate are being used [29]. MR
patients with minimal systolic dysfunction may be anesthetized
with other protocols using propofol or alfaxalone, (remembering to
avoid excessive increases in SVR).
The primary advantages of opioids are lack of myocardial depres-
sion and maintenance of hemodynamic stability. Most opioid receptor
agonists, with the exception of meperidine, lack negative inotropic
effects with clinically used doses. Hydromorphone, methadone, fen-
tanyl, or synthetic fentanyl derivatives such as remifentanil [30–34] are
usually preferred. μ-Opioid receptor agonists such as fentanyl and its
analogs, although relatively free of direct cardiovascular effects, can
cause a significant vagally mediated bradycardia that would result in
decreased CO. The extent of the bradycardia is dependent on the
dose and rate of drug administration, and the use of any opioid in
high doses can produce excessive bradycardia. Some anesthesiolo-
gists prefer to administer anticholinergics such as glycopyrrolate
prior to high-dose opioids used during induction to avoid extreme
swings in heart rate. Vagally mediated bradycardia induced by fenta-
nyl (e.g., at 5 μg/kg IV) can sometimes be useful in ameliorating the
sympathomimetic effects of other induction agents such as alfax-
alone and help prevent significant changes in heart rate during
induction. Other adjunctive drugs are commonly used, including
benzodiazepine tranquilizers such as midazolam or diazepam.
A low dose of propofol given as a slow infusion is often used as an
induction agent in patients with MR or other cardiac disease.
Propofol acts as a vasodilator and can decrease afterload while
maintaining heart rate. Rapid administration of large doses of
propofol should generally be avoided owing to potentially profound
cardiovascular effects, including vasodilation, decreased cardiac
contractility, and hypotension [35–41]. In patients with poor sys-
tolic function, propofol induction requirements can be reduced by
concurrent administration of other drugs in a balanced induction
protocol, including an opioid, a benzodiazepine, and/or etomidate.
Co-administration of propofol and etomidate decreases the
required doses of each individual drug. While one study found that
midazolam co-induction decreased the induction dose of propofol
and improved the quality of induction, it did not improve cardio-
pulmonary variables in critically ill dogs [40]. Etomidate is a useful
anesthetic induction agent in any animal with cardiac disease asso-
ciated with poor systolic function [42–45]. Left ventricular pressures,
mean aortic pressure, and coronary blood flow do not change
significantly in healthy dogs receiving up to 2.5 mg/kg for induction.
Etomidate is not arrhythmogenic and may also be useful in animals
with cardiac conduction abnormalities. The addition of midazolam
decreases the etomidate induction dose required with no change in
cardiopulmonary function [45]. An opioid is also used as part of
this induction protocol. Alfaxalone has a rather large therapeutic
index and can also be used to induce animals with heart disease,
although dose-dependent adverse effects such as tachycardia can be
seen after larger doses are given rapidly [46–51]. The administration
of fentanyl prior to alfaxalone can decrease induction requirements
and ameliorate changes in heart rate.
Maintenance of anesthesia can be achieved with an opioid
(e.g., fentanyl or remifentanil), propofol infusion, and/or alfaxalone
infusion (or some combination of these) with or without an inhalant
agent. Etomidate infusions are not recommended owing to the
potential for hemolysis associated with the high osmolality of the
commercially available formulations and also concerns related
to prolonged adrenocortical suppression [52–54]. A single bolus
injection of 2 mg/kg etomidate reduces the adrenocortical response
to anesthesia and surgery for 2–6 h, and longer infusions have been
associated with prolonged adrenocortical suppression and higher
mortality rates in critically ill multiple-trauma patients [55].
The hemodynamic changes associated with dexmedetomidine
administration include bradycardia and increased SVR and are gen-
erally to be avoided. When given as a constant rate infusion without
a loading bolus, plasma concentrations are lower and may reduce
cardiovascular side effects, although increased blood pressure and
decreased heart rate still occur [56]. Use of vatinoxan (MK-467), a
peripheral α2
-adrenergic receptor antagonist, in combination with
medetomidine may reduce the increase in SVR and may expand the
potential utility of α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists in patients with
myocardial disease. However, further research to establish the safety
of this combination in patients with heart disease is needed.
Most of the commonly used inhalant agents (e.g., isoflurane,
sevoflurane, and desflurane) tend to preserve myocardial contractil-
ity at light anesthetic planes. The advantages of inhalant anesthetics
for maintenance of anesthesia include their dose-dependent cardio-
vascular effects, the ability to rapidly adjust the depth of anesthesia,
and their suppression of sympathetic responses associated with sur-
gical stress. Disadvantages include myocardial depression, systemic
hypotension (due to decreased contractility or vasodilation), and
lack of postoperative analgesia. Mild decreases in SVR coupled with
adequate systolic function may reduce regurgitant fraction and are
goals of anesthetizing patients with MR. Decreased preload and
decreased systolic function associated with deep planes of inhalant
anesthesia are not recommended; therefore, multimodal “balanced”
anesthetic techniques are often advocated.
Patients on medication for heart disease are generally continued
on their medications (especially diuretics, calcium channel blockers,
antiarrhythmics, and inotropic drugs) until the time of anesthesia.
Pimobendan acts as both a positive inotrope (by increasing calcium
binding to the myofibrils) and as a vasodilator (by acting as a
phosphodiesterase 3 inhibitor) and is usually given on the day of
anesthesia. However, hypotension may be more pronounced under

-- 701 of 1450 --

686 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
anesthesia in patients receiving ACEIs such as enalapril and some
anesthesiologists prefer to delay giving enalapril until after recovery.
It is always prudent to have inotropic and venoconstrictor agents
immediately available for the management of intraoperative hypo-
tension since fluid administration is often contraindicated.
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is defined as idiopathic systolic
dysfunction and is accompanied by eccentric dilation and volume
overload as the heart’s generation of normal forward stroke volume
decreases. The resulting left ventricular dilation involves the mitral
valve annulus creating secondary MR, which further contributes to
volume overload. DCM is common in large-breed dogs, and in par-
ticular the Doberman Pinscher, Irish Wolfhound, and Great Dane.
DCM is relatively uncommon in cats following the recognition of
taurine deficiency and subsequent reformulation of commercial
diets. Taurine deficiency is occasionally seen in dogs, in particular,
the Cocker Spaniel. Some dogs receiving grain-free diets are also
noted to have moderate-to-severely decreased contractility.
DCM predisposes to CHF in addition to ventricular arrhythmias.
In most cases, heart failure is left-sided (pulmonary edema) but can
occasionally be right-sided (ascites, pleural effusion). Frequent ven-
tricular arrhythmias can cause activity intolerance, syncope, and
sudden cardiac death. A combination of echocardiography, thoracic
radiography, and ECG is typically used to diagnose and stage the
severity of DCM. Holter monitoring is commonly performed to
screen at-risk dogs for ventricular premature beats, which is an
early sign of disease. Chronic therapy is targeted toward reduction
of preload (diuretics such as furosemide and spironolactone),
reduction of afterload (ACEIs and pimobendan), and increased
contractility (positive inotropes such as pimobendan and digoxin).
Suppression of ventricular arrhythmias is performed acutely using
lidocaine or procainamide continuous rate infusion (CRI), and
chronically using sotalol or amiodarone. β-Adrenergic receptor
antagonists (β-blockers) are occasionally used as an adjunctive
ventricular antiarrhythmic but, owing to their negative inotropic
effects, caution should be exercised in animals with severe systolic
dysfunction or active CHF.
Many cases of DCM are further complicated by the development
of AF. AF is particularly common in Great Danes, Mastiffs, Irish
Wolfhounds, and other giant breed dogs with DCM. The rapid
ventricular rate associated with AF increases myocardial oxygen
demand and reduces CO as diastolic filling time decreases. Hence,
therapy of AF involves reduction of AV conduction and slowing of
ventricular heart rate. The most common agents used include
digoxin, calcium channel blockers (e.g., diltiazem), and β-blockers.
Many dogs with early DCM are asymptomatic. Older, large-breed
dogs that have occasional ventricular early depolarizations (VPCs)
before or during anesthesia, which do not resolve following anes-
thesia, may benefit from examination by a cardiologist. Some cases
of occult DCM are only diagnosed after unexplained VPCs are
noticed during and after anesthesia, prompting consultation with a
cardiologist.
Anesthetic considerations
Anesthetic considerations for DCM patients are similar to those of
animals with MR, with the added concerns of decreased systolic
function (which may be severe), CHF, and increased incidence of car-
diac arrhythmias. Additionally, dogs with cardiomyopathy often have
a significant downregulation of β-adrenergic receptors in the heart,
although receptor affinity does not change [57], making these
animals more resistant to treatment with a positive inotrope. Dogs
with significant systolic dysfunction probably benefit from inotropic
drug support (e.g., dobutamine or dopamine) during anesthesia.
Ventricular arrhythmias can be seen during anesthesia in animals
with DCM. Antiarrhythmic drugs such as lidocaine and procaina-
mide should be available but are often reserved for cases where the
frequency of abnormal beats creates significant blood pressure or
CO decreases. Although often unnecessary, esmolol, a short-acting
β-blocker, may be given as an infusion as indicated (0.5 mg/kg load-
ing bolus followed by an infusion of 0.01–0.2 mg/kg/min to reduce
the frequency of ventricular premature contractions associated
with sympathetic stimulation). The dose rate may be adjusted as
needed to minimize any negative inotropic and bradycardic effects
associated with β-receptor blockade. In addition to blood pressure
monitoring (direct or indirect), monitoring of end-tidal CO 2 can be
helpful under anesthesia, as a secondary means of monitoring CO.
In dogs with concurrent DCM and AF, electrocardioversion may
be considered (if the patient is a candidate) at the beginning of
anesthesia. The increased ventricular filling following resynchroni-
zation of the atria and ventricles can improve CO. Alternatively,
drugs that slow the sinus rate and conduction through the AV node,
such as fentanyl, can be used during anesthesia. Anticholinergic
agents are to be avoided in dogs with AF but may be useful for dogs
with DCM without AF that are bradycardic under anesthesia.
Fentanyl at a dose of 5–40 μg/kg/h can be an effective anesthetic in
sick dogs when used as a primary agent in combination with oxy-
gen and ventilation in those animals that do not tolerate inhalant
anesthetics. Remifentanil has an elimination half-life shorter than
that of fentanyl, with rapid recovery times regardless of the duration
of infusion, although either opioid is suitable for an infusion tech-
nique. Infusion of remifentanil at 0.25–0.5 μg/kg/min with propofol
at 0.2 mg/kg/min produces little change in mean arterial blood
pressures in healthy dogs, although the heart rate decreases with
increasing doses of remifentanil [34].
Left-to-right shunting congenital defects – ventricular
septal defect and patent ductus arteriosus
Both ventricular septal defect (VSD) and patent ductus arteriosus
(PDA) permit left-to-right shunting, which produces volume over-
load of the pulmonary circulation and left heart. As the physiologic
response to the increased pulmonary circulation progresses, pul-
monary and right ventricular pressures may increase, resulting in
minimal or reverse flow (right-to- left shunt). Anesthesia without
consideration of drug selection and patient management on SVR
(and blood pressure) and pulmonary and right ventricular pressure
may result in reverse shunt flow and rapid deterioration of the patient’s
condition. Careful echocardiographic evaluation prior to anesthe-
sia and careful perianesthetic monitoring of patients can facilitate
anesthetic management of patients with cardiovascular shunts.
Many VSDs in dogs and cats are relatively small and the volume
of the shunt is not sufficient to cause CHF. In contrast, the majority
of animals with PDA will suffer from left-sided heart failure within
the first year of life if the defect is not corrected. PDA is common in
dogs and less so in cats, whereas VSD is more common in cats than
in dogs. Both PDA and VSD generate characteristic murmurs that
often permit a presumptive diagnosis based on the physical exami-
nation findings alone. In both diseases, a combination of echocardi-
ography and thoracic radiography facilitates a definitive diagnosis
and permits assessment of shunt volume and risk for heart failure.
In general, the extent of left ventricular eccentric hypertrophy and
degree of left atrial dilation reflect the magnitude of the shunt.

-- 702 of 1450 --

Chapter 36: Pathophysiology and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 	687
The extent of shunting depends not only on the cross-sectional area
of the lesion, but also on the relative pressures and compliance of
the right and left portions of the circulation. Low pressure and com-
pliance of the pulmonary circulation and right ventricle relative to
the systemic circulation and left ventricle promote left-to- right
shunting. Interventions that either increase right-sided pressure or
decrease left-sided pressure decrease the shunt severity, at least to
the point where flow reverses through the shunt when hypoxemia
and polycythemia can develop. Hence systemic arterial vasodilators
can be used to reduce the shunt volume, as can surgical interven-
tions such as pulmonary artery banding, which increase pressure
within the right ventricle.
Anesthetic considerations
In animals with VSD or PDA, the degree and magnitude of shunt
flow are dependent upon relative outflow resistances, which are
determined by the size of the defect or ductus and the difference
between systemic and pulmonary resistance. With simple left-to-
right shunting, pulmonary blood flow is increased, and the right
ventricle and pulmonary vasculature can be pressure or volume
overloaded; some degree of pulmonary hypertension (PHT) may be
present. Further increases in pulmonary blood flow are avoided
by preventing increases in SVR. In addition, manipulations
that decrease pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) (hypocapnia,
alkalemia, spontaneous ventilation, and deep anesthesia) can also
increase the magnitude of left-to-right shunt flow.
In many cases, heart failure is not yet present, and the animal is
relatively young and active and may become excited with restraint.
Almost any anesthetic agent that does not significantly alter SVR
may be used safely for premedication, induction, or maintenance.
Drugs that significantly increase SVR, including the α2
-adrenergic
receptor agonists (e.g., dexmedetomidine) are generally avoided.
Repair of PDA may be accomplished by surgical ligation or trans-
vascular occlusion, with the rate of survival being similar between
the two techniques [58], although arrhythmias and hypotension are
commonly reported [59].
If not corrected within the first year, a significant percentage of
dogs with PDA will develop CHF. For those cases in which some
degree of CHF is present, considerations are similar to those for
patients with volume overload (see earlier). An opioid-based induc-
tion technique with benzodiazepine tranquilizer and etomidate,
alfaxalone, or propofol followed by inhalant anesthesia or propofol
infusion, or a combination of fentanyl/remifentanil and propofol
infusion can all be used [33,58,59]. Propofol can result in clinically
significant changes in cardiac shunt direction and arterial desatura-
tion; however, due to a decrease in SVR [60]. This decrease is
usually dependent on the dose and rapidity with which the propofol
is given.
Diastolic pressures are often low in these patients owing to the
shunting of blood from the systemic circulation to the lower resist-
ance pulmonary circulation. A characteristic change in the arterial
waveform may be seen with ligation of the PDA, including a decrease
in the pulse pressure, increase in mean and diastolic pressures, and
reappearance of a dicrotic (reflected) wave (Fig. 36.3). Hypotension
may be pronounced in some patients due to the low diastolic pres-
sures and is generally treated with the use of an inotrope such as
dobutamine (see Table 36.4), which helps maintain myocardial
function and heart rate while avoiding increases in SVR. However,
significant decreases in SVR must also be avoided, especially in
those patients with significant PHT in which shunt flows may
reverse in the face of inhalant anesthetic-associated arteriolar dila-
tion. These patients will benefit from the administration of a vaso-
constrictor (e.g., dopamine or phenylephrine; see Table 36.4) to
maintain baseline SVR. A sudden decrease in arterial oxygen satu-
ration due to venous admixture as monitored with a pulse oximeter
or arterial blood gas may be an early indicator of shunt reversal.
If surgery is to be performed on a relatively young animal for
repair of a congenital heart defect, the progressive maturation of
the autonomic nervous system and cardiovascular responses must
be taken into account. In puppies, the adrenergic vasoconstrictor
response is not fully developed until after 8 weeks of age [61].
Similarly, although chronotropic responsiveness is apparent at
1 week, the inotropic response to sympathetic stimulation does
not fully develop until after 8 weeks of age [62]. Neonatal patients
typically have a higher heart rate and lower arterial blood pressure
and SVR than adults. In addition, the cardiovascular response
to sympathomimetic agents may be less pronounced in the neo-
natal or pediatric patient than the adult animals of similar
species [63–65].
Right-to- left shunting congenital defects
Tetralogy of Fallot and reverse patent ductus arteriosus
Tetralogy of Fallot (TF) and reverse patent ductus arteriosus (rPDA)
are uncommon congenital heart defects in dogs and are rare in cats.
The pathophysiology of both TF and rPDA involves right-to- left
shunting and systemic hypoxemia. In the case of rPDA, concurrent
Figure 36.3 Output from a patient monitor during occlusion of a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) showing the electrocardiogram and arterial pressure
waveform. Notice the rapid increase in diastolic arterial blood pressure and the appearance of a dicrotic (reflected) wave during diastole immediately
following occlusion (blue arrow). These changes are characteristic of decreased flow through the PDA and can be used to help identify the vessel during
surgery.

-- 703 of 1450 --

688 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
pulmonary hypertension (PHT) is present. TF is caused by defects
in the fetal conotruncal formation resulting in a dextro- or rightward-
positioned aortic root, VSD, PS/pulmonic hypoplasia, and second-
ary right ventricular concentric hypertrophy. The presence of the
pulmonic lesion creates pressure overload of the right ventricle suf-
ficient to cause right ventricular to left ventricular shunting through
the VSD. The dextropositioned aorta further contributes to admix-
ture of unoxygenated blood into the systemic circulation. rPDA is
characterized by a large cylindrical ductus arteriosus and the devel-
opment of progressive PHT over the animal’s first 6–8 months of
life. The PHT increases pulmonary artery pressures sufficiently to
“reverse” the flow through the ductus arteriosus and shunt blood
from the pulmonary circulation to the systemic circulation.
Animals with TF or rPDA often display poor growth, activity intol-
erance, weakness, fainting, and cyanosis. Echocardiography and
radiography help provide a definitive diagnosis and assessment of
disease severity. ECG abnormalities commonly include right axis
shift, interventricular conduction abnormalities, ST segment changes,
and occasionally ventricular arrhythmias. The degree of hypoxemia
can be assessed through pulse oximetry or arterial blood gas analy-
sis. Chronic hypoxemia stimulates red blood cell production and
polycythemia is an important component of the pathophysiology of
right-to- left defects. Clinical signs in animals with TF or rPDA are
usually due to hypoxemia and polycythemia, and CHF is very rare
in both conditions. A packed cell volume (PCV) as high as 70–75%
is not uncommon, and activity intolerance, organ dysfunction, and
clotting abnormalities commonly occur at these extreme values.
Periodic phlebotomy is used to maintain PCV at or below 65%.
The balance between the right- and left-sided pressures affects
the extent of shunting, and interventions that lower SVR such as
arterial vasodilators can potentiate signs. Signs of weakness or
cyanosis are common during attempted exercise as systemic arterial
vasodilation to the animal’s skeletal muscle occurs. Affected
animals are sometimes prescribed non-selective β-blockers such as
propranolol to try and limit the amount of β2
- adrenergic receptor-
mediated vasodilation during activity.
Anesthetic considerations
Goals of anesthesia for the patient with TF or other reverse shunt
disorders are to maintain SVR and arterial pressures while mini-
mizing changes in PVR and pulmonary pressures. As right-to- left
shunting increases so does arterial oxygen desaturation. Patients with
significant PHT can be sensitive to changes in preload. Hypotension
secondary to hypovolemia or vasodilation should be avoided and
treated immediately if it occurs.
Premedication with an intramuscular opioid may be useful as
struggling and sympathetic stimulation with restraint can increase
right-to- left flow. These drugs should, however, be used judiciously
as hypoventilation can lead to hypercarbia and respiratory acidosis,
which can increase PVR and reverse shunting. Hypoxemia and
hypotension can occur quickly in these patients. Preoxygenation
prior to induction of anesthesia is extremely important, not only to
address the underlying chronic hypoxemia that occurs in these ani-
mals, but also as a means of decreasing PVR. Other manipulations
that can help decrease PVR include lowering the hematocrit to
< 60% prior to anesthesia and hyperventilation with the mainte-
nance of relative hypocarbia and respiratory alkalosis during
anesthesia. Care must be taken with controlled ventilation, as
increases in intrathoracic pressure with mechanical ventilation or
the use of positive end-expiratory pressure can increase PVR and
the magnitude of right-to- left shunt flow.
Patients with TF often have a dynamic component to the stenotic
lesion and increases in heart rate may exacerbate the pulmonary
outflow obstruction and reverse shunting [23]. An opioid-based
induction technique is often used with or without etomidate,
although significant decreases in heart rates should be avoided,
especially if fentanyl or remifentanil is used. All catheters and
injection ports should be cleared of bubbles to avoid systemic air
embolization.
SVR must be maintained in these patients, as excessive hypo-
tension will increase the right-to- left flow. Phenylephrine, an
α-adrenergic receptor agonist that causes arterial and venous
vasoconstriction, can be useful in reversing right-to-left shunting
during anesthesia, although other pressor agents such as norepi-
nephrine or dopamine may also be used.
Conditions associated with pressure overload
Subaortic stenosis and pulmonic stenosis
Subaortic stenosis (SAS) and pulmonic stenosis (PS) are common
congenital valvular defects in the dog. SAS and PS lead to a chronic
systolic pressure increase in the left or right ventricle, respectively,
with a resultant increase in wall tension and a compensatory
increase in ventricular wall thickness or concentric hypertrophy. The
increase in ventricular muscle mass and the increase in myocardial
work required to generate increased systolic pressures result in an
increased demand for coronary blood flow and myocardial oxygen
delivery. In theory, the resulting risk for ischemia is greatest during
periods of tachycardia and leads to myocardial necrosis, replacement
fibrosis, and development of ventricular arrhythmias. In young
dogs with severe SAS, the risk for syncope or sudden arrhythmic
death is high, whereas the risk of left-sided CHF is typically recog-
nized in much older dogs. Right ventricular concentric hypertro-
phy, even in cases of severe PS, appears to be better tolerated than
cases of left ventricular hypertrophy. Sudden death in dogs with
severe PS is relatively uncommon, although clinical signs such as
activity intolerance or syncope occur. In the authors’ experience,
CHF, in the form of ascites, is more common in dogs with PS.
Chronic medical management of severe SAS or PS often involves
β-blockers to reduce heart rate and myocardial oxygen demand.
Echocardiography is an extremely useful modality to assess the
severity of the SAS or PS lesion and the extent of concentric hyper-
trophy. ECG, 24-h ambulatory ECG (Holter) monitoring, and
cardiac troponin assay are useful to evaluate cardiac rhythm and to
detect ST segment elevation or depression, which is suggestive of
myocardial ischemia. In both SAS and PS, arterial vasodilators
should be used with caution as a decrease in arterial blood pressure
increases the pressure gradient across the stenotic valve and can
lead to increased myocardial work, severe hypotension, and
decreased coronary perfusion pressure.
Anesthetic considerations
Patients with SAS or PS often have poor ventricular compliance;
thus, it is critically important to maintain adequate preload in these
animals. Maintaining an adequate venous return by insuring a full
intravascular volume to fill the non-compliant ventricular chamber
will help optimize diastolic filling and CO, although volume over-
load should be avoided. In addition, these patients are dependent
on maintenance of a normal sinus rhythm and atrial “kick” to
optimize ventricular filling. Tachycardia must be avoided to limit
myocardial oxygen deficit (Box 36.2). The stenosis may also have
a dynamic component, becoming more pronounced at rapid
heart rates.

-- 704 of 1450 --

Chapter 36: Pathophysiology and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 	689
Afterload is elevated, but relatively fixed due to the stenosis at the
level of the valve. Vasodilation and reductions in vascular tone gen-
erally do little to relieve the fixed afterload from a stenotic valve, but
rather decrease preload and reduce coronary perfusion pressure.
When managing the patient with SAS or PS, it is important to
minimize hypotension and treat aggressively if it develops. Volume
is the first treatment for hypotension in these patients, followed by
the use of a vasoconstrictor such as phenylephrine or norepineph-
rine (see Table 36.4). Contractility is generally maintained, although
inotropes may be helpful in patients with severe SAS or PS with
ventricular dysfunction. Dopamine may be preferred to dobu-
tamine since the former will maintain or increase SVR and may be
more effective at treating inhalant anesthetic-associated hypoten-
sion [66,67], whereas dobutamine maintains or decreases SVR such
that the MAP changes little despite an increase in cardiac contrac-
tility [68–70]. Norepinephrine may increase MAP by increasing
CO, rather than by causing significant increases in SVR, in dogs
anesthetized with isoflurane [71]. In some patients with SAS or PS,
the obstruction also has a dynamic component, which may be
accentuated by reductions in ventricular size, as occurs with
increases in heart rate or contractility or decreases in preload or
afterload. In patients with PS, increases in PVR may be minimized
by maintaining a high FI
O2 and low PaCO 2
.
Premedication of patients with SAS or PS may decrease the
anxiety of the animal and stress during patient handling and help
prevent unnecessary increases in heart rate. Care must be taken,
however, to ensure adequate venous return (preload) and optimal
diastolic filling. Ideally, patients should receive supplemental oxygen
after receiving any medication. If preoperative sedation is necessary,
opioids are generally the drugs of choice since they cause minimal
cardiovascular depression, although hypoventilation may be of
concern in patients with PS. Antiarrhythmic therapy should be
instituted to maintain a normal sinus rhythm as needed [72].
Dogs with SAS are at increased risk for bacterial endocarditis of
the aortic and mitral valves. Perioperative antibiotics should be
considered for surgical conditions that result in bacteremia.
Diastolic dysfunction-associated diseases
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and restrictive
cardiomyopathy
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) and restrictive cardiomyo-
pathy (RCM) are common cardiomyopathies in cats but are rare
in dogs. Both HCM and RCM are characterized by diastolic
dysfunction as opposed to DCM, which is primarily a disease of
systolic function. The pathophysiology of HCM involves idiopathic
concentric hypertrophy of the left ventricle, increased myocardial
oxygen demand, myocardial ischemia, and development of left
ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) obstruction due to systolic ante-
rior motion (SAM) of the mitral valve leaflets. The pathophysiology
of RCM involves idiopathic fibrosis of the left ventricle muscle with
resultant diastolic dysfunction in the absence of appreciable
concentric hypertrophy. Thus, while the gross appearance of the left
ventricle is different between HCM and RCM, the underlying
pathophysiology involving diastolic performance is similar.
Diastolic dysfunction results in the inability of the ventricle to
properly relax during diastole. The non-compliant left ventricle
requires increased pressure to fill properly and the resultant increase
in left atrial pressure and volume overload predisposes to CHF. In
cats, left-sided CHF can manifest as either pulmonary edema, pleu-
ral effusion, or both. Both ventricular arrhythmias due to suspected
ischemia and systemic thromboembolism are common in cats with
HCM or RCM. It is prudent to evaluate any cat for cardiomyopathy
that has unexplained ventricular premature contractions during the
perianesthetic period.
The presence of SAM in cases of HCM is multifactorial and
incompletely understood. Likely mechanisms for the development
of SAM include abnormal mitral leaflet morphology, interventricu-
lar septal hypertrophy, misalignment of the papillary muscle and
chordae tendinae apparatus due to concentric hypertrophy, and
increased flow rates through the narrowed LVOT, which “pulls” the
mitral leaflets into the outflow tract. HCM with LVOT obstruction
due to SAM is often termed “hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyo-
pathy” (HOCM), and HOCM makes up as much as 50% of all HCM
cases. The presence of the LVOT obstruction is akin to animals with
SAS. The resulting left ventricular pressure overload further stimu-
lates concentric hypertrophy and increases myocardial oxygen
demand. Therapy for HOCM involves reductions in ventricular
contractility, heart rate, and outflow tract pressure gradient,
which reduce the degree of SAM. Commonly used agents include
β-blockers such as atenolol or calcium channel blockers such as
diltiazem. Systemic hypertension secondary to chronic kidney dis-
ease and hyperthyroidism are common comorbidities in geriatric
cats with HCM or HOCM. Overly aggressive arterial vasodilators
should be avoided as a reduction in SVR will increase the pressure
gradient across the LVOT, potentiate SAM, and increase myocardial
oxygen demand. Chronic therapy of HCM, HOCM, and RCM
includes preload reduction using diuretics, heart rate control using
β-blockers or calcium channel blockers, and antithrombosis using
aspirin or clopidogrel. ACEIs are also often prescribed but used
with caution due to their arterial vasodilatory potential.
Anesthetic considerations
Anesthesia in cats with HCM is directed at optimizing diastolic fill-
ing, both by maintaining relatively low heart rates and by avoiding
drugs that may increase cardiac contractility (Box 36.3). Optimizing
preload and ventricular filling can be useful. Afterload reduction
may worsen the obstruction and marked decreases in arterial
pressures are poorly tolerated. Decreases in aortic pressure will con-
tribute to inadequate coronary perfusion and potential myocardial
ischemia. In contrast, increasing afterload may decrease SAM and
outflow tract obstruction. One study found complete resolution of
dynamic outflow obstruction in cats with HCM or SAM receiving
medetomidine [73]. Medetomidine, an α2
- adrenergic receptor
agonist, causes vasoconstriction and increased SVR, which are both
potentially desirable effects in HCM with LVOT obstruction.
However, systolic function should be carefully evaluated prior to
administration of α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists, and ultimately
drugs that can be titrated carefully (e.g., phenylephrine) may be
better choices during the anesthetic period [74].
Positive inotropic activity can potentially increase dynamic outflow
tract obstruction in addition to myocardial oxygen consumption.
Box 36.2 Hemodynamic goals in patients with pulmonic or subaortic
stenosis.
Preload: optimize intravascular volume to maintain filling of
non- compliant ventricle
Afterload: already elevated, but relatively fixed
Contractility: usually not impaired in most patients
Rate: avoid bradycardia (decreased CO), avoid tachycardia (myocardial
oxygen deficit)

-- 705 of 1450 --

690 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
Ketamine or tiletamine can cause catecholamine release, tachycardia,
and increased myocardial contractility and oxygen consumption
[75–77]. These agents may also predispose to arrhythmias.
Therefore, other anesthetic agents are often preferred. Intramuscular
administration of alfaxalone and methadone in healthy cats with or
without a low dose of ketamine, provided sedation with no clinically
significant effect on echocardiographic variables [78]. Similarly,
intramuscular alfaxalone alone or combined with butorphanol had
no significant effect on echocardiographic variables, while provid-
ing enough sedation for diagnostic procedures [79]. Intravenous
bolus administration of alfaxalone can cause dose-dependent
cardiopulmonary depression [80]. When given as an intravenous
infusion, cardiac index did not change in spontaneously ventilated
cats [81]. Low doses of an opioid such as fentanyl or methadone
may be given as part of the induction technique. Induction with
etomidate, which has a minimal effect on cardiovascular contractility,
and a benzodiazepine tranquilizer such as midazolam or diazepam,
is often used when venous access is available. Decreased SVR due to
decreased sympathetic nervous system activity, which accompanies
loss of consciousness, should be anticipated with any anesthetic
protocol and appropriate contingency measures considered before
induction.
Hypotension occurs with relative frequency in healthy cats
anesthetized with inhalation anesthetics. Pressure support for
cats with HCM under anesthesia usually involves the use of vaso-
pressors such as phenylephrine, an α1
-adrenergic receptor agonist
with little or no β-activity. Phenylephrine increases SVR with
little direct effect on the myocardium. In cats with HCM without
LVOT anesthetized with isoflurane, both phenylephrine and
dopamine increased systemic and arterial blood pressure, although
only dopamine increased cardiac index [74]. Plasma levels of cTnI,
measured as a marker of cardiac injury, increased in response to
hypotension but were not different between the two groups.
Phenylephrine or norepinephrine may still be preferred in those
cases with LVOT.
Pericardial effusion
The pericardium encloses the heart within the sheet of fibroelastic
tissue and the space between the epicardial surface of the heart
and the parietal pericardium normally contains a small volume of
fluid, the purpose of which is to lubricate the heart and provide a
friction-free environment. Pericardial effusion is the abnormal
accumulation of large volumes of fluid within the pericardial space,
which exerts external compressive forces on the heart. The term
“cardiac tamponade” is used to describe situations in which the
volume of pericardial effusion is sufficient to decrease cardiac
filling markedly, leading to poor CO and shock. In the case of peri-
cardial effusion, the diastolic dysfunction that occurs is not due to
an intrinsic abnormality of the myocardium but rather an external
compression and restriction of diastolic filling of the heart.
Common causes of pericardial effusion include cardiac neoplasia
and idiopathic pericarditis in dogs, and CHF and feline infectious
peritonitis in cats. Less common is infectious pericarditis or uremic
pericarditis.
Common clinical findings in animals with cardiac tamponade
include muffled heart sounds, dyspnea, weakness, collapse, pallor,
hypotension, tachycardia, and right heart failure (typically ascites
or chylothorax). ECG and thoracic radiography can reveal low
amplitude QRS complexes and electrical alternans, and a globoid
cardiac silhouette, respectively. Echocardiography is particularly
useful in confirming the presence of pericardial effusion and
detecting heart base masses. Hemangiosarcoma of the right atrium/
auricle or chemodectoma associated with the aortic root are two
common tumors associated with pericardial effusion.
Therapy involves pericardiocentesis, which provides immediate
relief and improvement in CO. Animals with pericardial effusion
are very sensitive to changes in preload and diuresis should not be
routinely performed unless the animal is volume overloaded, as this
can worsen tamponade, further reduce CO, and aggravate clinical
signs. In cases with severe ascites, abdominocentesis can be per-
formed to improve respiration and comfort. Chronic pericardial
effusion often necessitates surgical pericardiectomy; however, the
decision whether to pursue this course is influenced by the etiology
of the effusion.
Anesthetic considerations
In the presence of tamponade, intrapericardial pressures determine
venous return, and the ventricle can become small and underloaded
despite a compensatory increase in right and left ventricular filling
pressures to maintain cardiac filling. Stroke volume becomes limited
and CO becomes dependent on compensatory mechanisms,
including peripheral vasoconstriction to maintain venous return,
tachycardia, and increased contractility.
The goal of anesthesia is to select agents that will preserve these
compensatory mechanisms and maintain forward flow. Intravenous
fluids should be administered prior to induction of anesthesia to
optimize preload and maintain cardiac-filling pressures. Small
(2–5 mL/kg) boluses of crystalloid or colloids at induction given to
optimize preload can offset anesthetic-associated venodilation while
avoiding the worsening of pericardial effusion that can occur with
longer-term fluid therapy. Drugs that cause myocardial depression,
bradycardia, or vasodilation should be avoided. Ketamine, because
of its sympathomimetic effects, may be helpful in preserving heart
rate and blood pressure [75–77]. However, larger doses can induce
hypotension in those animals that are already under maximum sym-
pathetic stress or in critically ill patients [82,83]. Alfaxalone may
similarly be helpful in preserving heart rate and blood pressure. An
opioid technique can be used, although anticholinergics may be
required to preserve heart rate. Regardless of anesthetic technique, it
is often beneficial to use a multimodal approach with careful moni-
toring and titration of drug effect.
Any manipulation that may decrease venous return should be
avoided. Controlled positive-pressure ventilation with large tidal
volumes may significantly decrease preload and CO. Since thora-
cotomy for pericardiectomy is usually the surgical treatment for
pericardial effusion, positive-pressure ventilation using smaller
volumes (lower peak inspiratory pressure) with a higher respiratory
rate should be used. Pericardiocentesis may be indicated prior
to induction of anesthesia in some animals with severe hemody-
namic compromise in order to optimize cardiac filling and stroke
volume.
Box 36.3 Hemodynamic goals in patients with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy.
Preload: optimize intravascular volume to maintain filling of non-
compliant ventricle
Afterload: maintain or augment, manage hypotension with vasoconstric-
tor titrated to effect
Contractility: reduction may be helpful
Rate: avoid tachycardia, modest reductions in rate preferred

-- 706 of 1450 --

Chapter 36: Pathophysiology and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 	691
Diseases associated with arrhythmias
Arrhythmogenic diseases resulting in tachycardia
Common tachycardias and associated cardiac diseases include
ventricular tachycardia (VT) (seen in Boxer arrhythmogenic right
ventricular cardiomyopathy [ARVC], feline cardiomyopathy,
DCM, and SAS), atrial fibrillation (AF) (seen in MMVD and
DCM), supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) (seen in DCM and
MMVD), and accessory pathway-mediated SVT in Labrador
Retrievers. Common to all pathological tachycardias is the increase
in myocardial oxygen demand and progressive decrease in diastolic
filling time. The exact heart rate at which a tachycardia goes from
beneficial to detrimental is dependent on many factors, including
the origin of the tachycardia (i.e., sinus versus ectopic), species,
breed (primarily related to body size), underlying systolic and dias-
tolic function of the heart, and presence of eccentric or concentric
hypertrophy. In general, ectopic heart rates > 250 beats/min in cats
and small-breed dogs and > 200 beats/min in large-breed dogs
are regarded as sufficiently tachycardic to warrant intervention.
Clinical findings associated with tachycardia include signs of
diminished CO, such as weakness, syncope, pallor, disorientation,
hypothermia, or cold extremities. Arterial blood pressure may be
normal during tachycardia and reduced CO, but it is due to com-
pensatory arteriolar constriction. Anesthesia with subsequent arte-
riolar dilation may result in profound hypotension even though the
heart rate does not decrease significantly. Tachycardias, especially
VT, can predispose to ventricular fibrillation and sudden death.
Treatment is centered on addressing any underlying cardiac dis-
ease or heart failure, and administration of specific antiarrhythmic
agents. Commonly used agents for acute treatment of ventricular
arrhythmias during anesthesia include lidocaine, procainamide,
and short-acting parenteral β- blockers such as esmolol. Acute ther-
apy for AF or SVT includes parenteral esmolol or calcium channel
blockers such as diltiazem. Chronic therapy of ventricular arrhyth-
mias often uses sotalol or mexiletine or less commonly amiodarone,
and chronic therapy of AF or supraventricular arrhythmias uses
oral digoxin, diltiazem and/or β-blockers, and occasionally sotalol.
Owing to the potential for side effects, lidocaine and procainamide
are uncommonly used in cats. Electrocardioversion of tachyarrhyth-
mias may be appropriate for some patients and is often performed
just after induction of anesthesia.
Arrhythmogenic diseases resulting in bradycardia
Common bradycardias include second- and third-degree (com-
plete) AV nodal block, sick sinus syndrome (SSS), and atrial stand-
still. Bradycardia is relatively uncommon in cats but does occur. All
cases of bradycardia detected with auscultation during the preanes-
thetic physical examination should be further evaluated with an
ECG and other diagnostics as indicated. SSS is commonly seen
in Miniature Schnauzers, whereas AV nodal block is often detected
in larger breed dogs, such as the Labrador Retriever. Bradycardia
can be detected in association with underlying structural heart
disease, but often occurs in isolation, and is thought to represent
primary disease of the cardiac conduction system. Idiopathic
degeneration of the sinus node, AV node, and other conduction
tissue is often assumed. In some cases, acute inflammatory injury to
the heart (i.e., myocarditis) is suspected. Bradycardia secondary to
electrolyte abnormalities such as severe hyperkalemia can occur
in cases of renal disease, uncontrolled hyperadrenocorticism, soft
tissue injury, and other conditions.
The exact heart rate at which bradycardia becomes clinically sig-
nificant depends on the underlying cardiac function, species, and
breed. Periods of asystole lasting > 5–8 s are usually sufficient to
cause weakness or syncope. Chronic bradycardia with heart rates
< 50 beats/min is often associated with activity intolerance,
lethargy, weakness, or syncope in dogs. It should be remembered
that resting heart rates during sleep can be relatively low compared
to values during normal activity. However, the rate during sleep
may be a better indicator of the patient’s acceptable heart rate
during anesthesia. Any time arterial blood pressure becomes heart
rate dependent during anesthesia, intervention to increase the
heart rate should be considered because it represents a point
where stroke volume cannot increase further to maintain CO.
In rare instances, CHF due to excessively slow rates occurs. In the
authors’ experience, chronic symptomatic bradycardia in the cat is
rare as most cats maintain escape rates at or near 100 beats/min,
which is sufficient to maintain an acceptable quality of life.
Therapy of bradycardia includes correction of underlying
electrolyte abnormalities and support of heart rate through paren-
teral or oral parasympatholytic (e.g., atropine, glycopyrrolate, and
probanthine bromide) or sympathomimetic (e.g., isoproterenol,
terbutaline, and theophylline) agents. Standard diagnostics performed
in animals with bradycardia include bloodwork, ECG, echocardi-
ography, and radiography. Commonly, the influence of native vagal
tone on the bradycardia is determined by ECG examination before
and after administration of atropine, with the presumption that
early or mild conduction system disease (such as asymptomatic
intermittent second-degree AV block) can be differentiated from
high resting vagal tone by an abnormal response to atropine. Rarely
do cases of symptomatic AV block or SSS demonstrate a normal
response to atropine, indicating the presence of structural disease of
the conduction system.
In cases that are poorly responsive to medical therapy, artificial
pacing can be performed. Permanent transvenous or epicardial
pacemaker implantation is considered in animals with bradycardia
sufficient to cause clinical signs. Temporary transvenous or tran-
sthoracic artificial pacing can also be performed in instances where
temporary worsening of relatively benign bradycardia could occur,
for instance, during anesthesia (see below).
Anesthetic considerations
The goal of anesthesia in the patient with a known cardiac rhythm
disturbance is to avoid further deterioration of the rhythm.
Arrhythmias should be evaluated prior to anesthesia in terms of
both their electrical stability (or lack thereof) and their hemody-
namic consequences. Any electrolyte abnormalities should be
corrected prior to induction. Stress during restraint of the animal
should be minimized if at all possible. Very low doses of aceproma-
zine in combination with an opioid may be helpful as a premedica-
tion in some animals with ventricular arrhythmias. In the case of
tachycardias that are ventricular in origin, drugs such as propofol,
alfaxalone, or etomidate, which have little to no effect on cardiac
conduction, may be preferred for induction. An opioid and/or
benzodiazepine may also be used as part of the induction tech-
nique. A single dose of lidocaine can be given prior to induction to
determine the efficacy of this agent in suppressing the ventricular
arrhythmia and is occasionally continued as a CRI throughout the
procedure, depending on the severity of the arrhythmia. However,
VPCs must be differentiated from other ventricular complexes such
as escape beats or VT secondary to hyperkalemia, as lidocaine
administration in those cases may cause immediate asystole.
Alternatively, procainamide may be given intravenously and has a
longer duration of action than lidocaine. Drugs such as ketamine

-- 707 of 1450 --

692 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
that can cause catecholamine release and increased heart rate are
usually avoided.
SVT can be difficult to differentiate from VT. In those patients
with known SVT, vagomimetic drugs such as fentanyl or a fentanyl
analog such as remifentanil may be useful, as these drugs can cause
a pronounced decrease in sinus rate mediated through the vagus
nerve [84–86]. In these patients, drugs that increase AV nodal con-
duction (e.g., anticholinergics) are generally avoided. In the case of
severe SVT, esmolol may be loaded intravenously and given as a
CRI, although the β-receptor blockade can also lead to negative
inotropic effects.
For the patient with SSS or heart block, the goal of anesthesia is
to prevent the worsening of the bradycardia (e.g., asystole) with
drug administration. A relatively high dose of atropine or glycopyr-
rolate is often given prior to anesthesia to avoid the consequences of
a sudden increase in vagal tone. Ketamine–benzodiazepine, alfax-
alone, propofol, and etomidate may all be used for induction. Drugs
known to cause bradyarrhythmias, such as α2
- adrenergic receptor
agonists, should be avoided. A temporary transvenous pacemaker is
ideally placed prior to induction of anesthesia or transthoracic arti-
ficial pacing pads may be used as needed. During artificial pacing,
blood pressure should be carefully monitored as paced beats result
in atypical sequences of ventricular depolarization, and coupled
with the loss of synchronized atrial activity, CO can be markedly
reduced despite successful electrical capture of the heart. In the
authors’ experience, transthoracic pacing often results in inade-
quate CO if relied upon for anything other than brief periods of
time. Heart rates can decrease dramatically upon induction with
the relative decrease in sympathetic tone. Dobutamine, dopamine,
or isoproterenol infusions [87] should be prepared prior to anes-
thetic induction if a temporary pacemaker has not been placed.
Hypotension
Systemic blood pressure is dependent on CO and SVR and must be
maintained above the minimum level required to maintain cere-
bral, coronary, and renal perfusion. Mean arterial blood pressures
(MAPs) less than 65–70 mmHg are generally considered inade-
quate for maintaining optimal blood flow to tissues. In patients that
are hypovolemic and hemodynamically unstable, neural and neuro-
hormonal mechanisms can increase SVR and minimize apparent
changes in blood pressure, while decreasing blood flow and oxygen
delivery to the tissues. Patients that are compensating by increasing
SVR can have a precipitous decrease in blood pressure following
induction of anesthesia.
CO is determined by stroke volume and heart rate, although
stroke volume can also be affected by changes in vascular resistance.
Decreases in stroke volume may be seen secondary to decreased
venous return (decreased preload), often caused by underlying
fluid deficits or peripheral vasodilation (decreased SVR), leading to
a relative fluid deficit. In addition, stroke volume may be decreased
due to decreased myocardial contractility, increased SVR (increased
afterload), and/or cardiac arrhythmias. Induction of anesthesia
and the subsequent decreases in sympathetic stimulation can lead
to decreases in heart rate, preload, and cardiac contractility, all
of which will affect CO. Similarly, administration of vagomimetic
opioids (e.g., fentanyl and remifentanil) can reduce heart rate and
affect blood pressure, although they are frequently recommended
for use as adjunct anesthetics in patients with cardiovascular com-
promise to reduce inhalant anesthetic requirements.
Duration of hypotension is important in determining ultimate
clinical outcome in both cardiac and non-cardiac patients [88],
so early recognition is key. Methods for recognition of hypotension
can include monitoring changes in heart rate and rhythm, meas-
uring decreases in MAP below 60–65 mmHg, and/or assessing
changes in tissue perfusion (e.g., decreases in central venous oxygen
saturation and increases in serum lactate). Tachycardia is generally
considered a major compensatory response to fluid/blood loss
and hypovolemia, although increases in heart rate may also be
seen due to inadequate anesthesia, hypercarbia, hypoxemia, or drug
administration (e.g., anticholinergics). In addition, the use of vago-
mimetic drugs such as fentanyl may mask the early compensatory
increase in heart rate in response to changes in preload.
Arterial blood pressure may be measured using non-invasive
measuring techniques, including Doppler ultrasonographic flow
probes and oscillometric measuring devices, or invasively using a
direct arterial line and blood pressure transducer. Central venous
pressure (CVP) is often used as an indicator of volume status in a
given patient. However, a review of the literature found a very poor
relationship between CVP and blood volume and the inability of
CVP change to predict the hemodynamic response to a fluid
challenge [89]. Changes in parameters related to tissue oxygenation
such as lactate, blood pH, base deficit, and central venous oxygen
saturation are being used with increasing frequency to assess the
adequacy of fluid resuscitation and inotropic and/or pressor support.
Other dynamic variables used to assess fluid responsiveness, such
as pulse pressure variation and systolic pressure variation, may be
useful in patients undergoing mechanical ventilation [90].
In any animal, the underlying cause of hypotension should be
identified and corrected as rapidly as possible. Hypotension is
common during anesthesia due to inadequate preoperative fluid
replacement, failure to keep up with intraoperative fluid and/or
blood loss, and dose-dependent effects of anesthetics on CO and
SVR. Rapid administration of high volumes of crystalloid fluid
(e.g., Plasma-Lyte® and Lactated Ringer’s solution) has a minimal
effect in improving arterial blood pressure during isoflurane-
induced hypotension in normovolemic dogs unless the anesthetic
plane is also lightened [91,92]. Although CO and stroke volume
improve, arterial blood pressure does not change significantly
due to decreases in SVR. Colloid administration using relatively
large volumes of hetastarch (hydroxyethyl starch [HES]) or dextran
70 [91,93] may increase both cardiac index and blood pressure in
anesthetized animals. However, long-term administration of syn-
thetic colloids has been associated with acute kidney injury and
increased mortality in human patients with sepsis. The use of other
colloids such as fresh frozen plasma and packed red blood cells can
also be considered. The underlying disease process, evaluation of
ongoing losses and changes in volume status, and close monitoring
of changes in PCV, total solids, and determinants of tissue oxygena-
tion should all be used in determining the rate and type of fluids
administered to the patient.
Higher fluid rates are usually needed in emergent patients with
pre-existing deficits or ongoing blood losses. Low diastolic pressures
(< 40 mmHg), large position-associated changes in blood pressure,
or difficulty in tolerating positive-pressure ventilation may all alert
the clinician to the presence of inadequate volume. In some cases,
maintenance of anesthesia may need to be changed from an inhalant
to an injectable technique, which causes less myocardial depression
and vasodilation than most inhalant techniques.
Pharmacological support
Pharmacological support may be required if hypotension is severe
and does not respond to fluid therapy or changes in anesthetic depth.

-- 708 of 1450 --

Chapter 36: Pathophysiology and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 	693
In addition, patients with cardiovascular disease may not tolerate
fluid administration. Drugs are selected for cardiovascular support
based on the patient’s condition and underlying hemodynamic
disturbance, the physiologic response desired, the pharmacology
of the available drugs, and clinician experience and opinion. The
principal effects include changes in heart rate (chronotropism),
contractility (inotropism), myocardial conduction velocity (dromo-
tropism), rhythm, and peripheral vasodilation or vasoconstriction,
which influences preload and afterload.
For many years, the choice of agent was made depending primar-
ily on its effects on myocardial function and vascular resistance as
determinants of blood pressure. More recently, attention has also
been focused on changes in venous capacitance and preload, as well
as the distribution of blood flow to the various organs. For example,
norepinephrine (0.1–1 μg/kg/min) acts on both α- and β-adrenergic
receptors, although it acts primarily as a vasoconstrictor due to its
predominant effects at α-adrenergic receptors. Norepinephrine
increases arterial vascular tone (afterload), but also increases veno-
constriction (preload), which can improve venous return and CO.
In healthy dogs anesthetized with isoflurane, norepinephrine
increased MAP, CO, and oxygen delivery in a dose-dependent
manner, while SVR did not significantly change [71]. In contrast,
dobutamine (5–15 μg/kg/min) acts primarily at β-adrenergic
receptors, improving cardiac contractility if systolic function is
decreased. In addition, β2
-adrenergic receptor-mediated vasodila-
tion may decrease afterload and improve forward flow and tissue
perfusion, despite no change in measured blood pressure. Changes
in blood lactate, pH, base deficit, and central venous oxygen satura-
tion are often used clinically to help determine what changes in flow
are occurring at the tissue level. Drugs used to treat hypotension are
discussed in more detail in other chapters.
Shock
The therapeutic priority in patients with circulatory shock is oxygen
delivery to the tissues. Sequelae to decreased CO, decreased SVR,
and/or decreased blood oxygen content include tissue hypoxia, sys-
temic inflammation, and organ dysfunction. In order to achieve
this goal, fluid resuscitation, including blood transfusion, and the
use of vasopressors (see Table 36.4) may be required, although the
optimal strategy, including choice of fluid for resuscitation and
hemodynamic goals, is still controversial in both the human and the
veterinary literature.
Selection of target indices for monitoring the hemodynamic
response to therapy has changed over the last several years. Blood
pressure is relatively easy to measure and is often used as a primary
measurement for evaluating the severity of circulatory shock and
the adequacy of resuscitation. Blood pressure is also a major criterion
used in separating septic syndrome from septic shock [94]. Blood
pressure monitoring has serious limitations; however, it assumes that
changes in blood pressure values are directly related to altered blood
flow (i.e., SVR is unchanged). In the early stages of hemorrhage, neu-
rohormonal mechanisms may maintain blood pressure near normal
(at the expense of perfusion to selected tissues) by increasing SVR.
Shoemaker et al. first introduced the concept of goal-directed
resuscitation in the 1980s, after noting that survivors of high-risk
surgical procedures had a higher cardiac index and oxygen delivery
in concert with an increased oxygen demand compared with
non-survivors [95,96]. Changes in MAP lagged changes in cardiac
index, and by the time hypovolemia and low flow to the tissues were
of sufficient magnitude to produce severe hypotension, the deterio-
rating circulatory condition was well advanced [97].
Early goal-directed therapy, involving manipulation of cardiac
preload, afterload, and contractility to balance oxygen delivery
with oxygen demand, has been used in human patients with sys-
temic inflammatory response syndrome as a means to slow pro-
gression to severe sepsis and septic shock [98]. The systemic
inflammatory response syndrome is a continuum, with circula-
tory abnormalities, including intravascular volume depletion,
peripheral vasodilation, myocardial depression, and increased tis-
sue metabolic needs causing an imbalance between systemic oxy-
gen delivery and oxygen demand. Changes in vital signs, CVP, and
urinary output have proven to be poor indicators of effective
hemodynamic resuscitation and fail to detect tissue hypoxia.
More recently, researchers have chosen alternative targets to mon-
itor successful therapy, including normalized values for mixed
venous oxygen saturation (as a substitute for cardiac index as a
target of hemodynamic therapy), arterial lactate concentration,
base deficit, and pH. The Early Goal-Directed Therapy (EGDT)
trial by Rivers et al. [98] found that, during the first 6 h of therapy,
there was no significant difference in mean heart rate or CVP
between the EGDT group and standard therapy group. MAP was
maintained at ≥ 65 mmHg in both groups with the use of vaso-
pressors and CVP was maintained at ≥ 8 mmHg with the use of
crystalloid fluid boluses. However, patients in the early goal-
directed groups first received red blood cells to maintain a hema-
tocrit of ≥ 30% if the central venous oxygen saturation (venous
blood gas from jugular central line) fell below 70%, and then
received dobutamine to improve cardiac contractility if central
venous oxygen saturation remained below 70%. Choice of the
alternative target indices in the early stages of treatment improved
survival rates by 16% in human patients with severe sepsis and
served as the basis for recommendations made following the
Surviving 	Sepsis 	Campaign 	in 	2004 	and 	2008 	[99,100].
Recommendations also included either dopamine or norepineph-
rine as a first-line vasopressor, although vasopressin or phenyle-
phrine may also be used. A resuscitation protocol using blood
pressure, central venous oxygen saturation, CVP, lactate, base
deficit, and hematocrit has been evaluated in dogs with sepsis sec-
ondary to pyometra, with central venous oxygen saturation and
base deficit being the best predictors of non-survival [101].
In terms of the type and amount of fluid used for resuscitation,
no definitive proof can be found in the literature that supports the
superiority of one type of fluid over another for fluid resuscitation
in acute trauma or septic patients [102–104]. Crystalloids are the
primary first line of fluid resuscitation with balanced electrolyte
solutions such as Lactated Ringer’s solution and Plasma-Lyte® pre-
ferred over 0.9% NaCl. High chloride solutions such as 0.9% NaCl
may cause renal vasoconstriction and contribute to acute kidney
injury in people [105]. In experimental models of sepsis, high
chloride solutions may increase circulating inflammatory molecules,
such as tumor necrosis factor-α, IL-10, and IL-6, and impair micro-
circulatory function compared to more balanced solutions [106].
An important advantage that colloids have over crystalloids is that
they can induce a more rapid and persistent plasma expansion due
to the larger increase in colloid oncotic pressure. In addition, resus-
citation with large volumes of crystalloids has been associated with
tissue edema and hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis. However,
crystalloids are less expensive and research findings have shown no
survival benefit when colloids are administered.
A review of critically ill human patients [107] with trauma or
burns or after surgery found no evidence that resuscitation with
colloids reduced the risk of death compared with resuscitation with

-- 709 of 1450 --

694 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
crystalloids. Rather, impaired coagulation, an increase in clinical
bleeding, and acute kidney injury are frequently reported with
some types of HES used in humans [108,109]. In addition,
recent reports in the human literature, including the Efficacy of
Volume Substitution and Insulin Therapy in Severe Sepsis (VISEP)
study [110], found that patients receiving HES for resuscitation had
lower survival rates and more pronounced kidney dysfunction than
patients resuscitated with crystalloids. Perner et al. [111] showed an
increased risk of death (at day 90) in patients with severe sepsis
who received fluid resuscitation with 6% HES in Ringer’s acetate
compared with patients resuscitated with Ringer’s acetate alone
(6S trial). Renal dysfunction was also more pronounced in the HES
group. How these findings relate to fluid resuscitation in the septic
or bleeding patient in the acute perioperative period is unknown,
but HES has been removed from the human market in Europe and
is under review in the United States. It is not known if these results
can be extrapolated to veterinary medicine, due to species-specific
differences in HES metabolism. In addition, products may differ.
For example, Vetstarch® is composed of a relatively homogeneous
group of molecules, while Hespan®, is composed of a more hetero-
geneous group of molecules. The larger molecules tend to be
retained in the intravascular space for a more prolonged period and
may have a more significant impact on coagulopathy and other side
effects. A consensus on the use of synthetic colloids in veterinary
medicine has not been reached. Several retrospective studies in
dogs have resulted in conflicting results [112,113]. In non-azotemic
cats, retrospective studies have found no association between HES
administration and kidney injury [114].
Other colloids may be used for resuscitation. Whole blood, red
blood cells, and fresh frozen plasma may all be used to expand
intravascular volume and provide colloidal support. In addition,
administration of whole blood or red blood cells can restore
oxygen-carrying capacity in patients that are bleeding or anemic for
other reasons. Risks associated with red blood cell administration
include transfusion reactions, and many patients are blood-typed
or cross-matched prior to transfusion. Human serum albumin
(HSA, 25%) has also been used in canine patients with markedly
varied success. In human patients, the SAFE study found no
difference in the overall mortality rates of ICU patients treated
with albumin and saline [115]. However, in a subgroup of patients
with brain injury, relative risk was higher in patients assigned to the
albumin- treated group than the saline-treated group. Conversely,
in a subset of patients with sepsis, relative risk was decreased in
patients receiving albumin. One of the first retrospective reports of
HSA administration in critically ill canine and feline patients [116]
found that administration of an average of 5 mL/kg increased
albumin levels and systemic blood pressure. However, two of the
64 dogs developed facial edema and five animals died during or
immediately after transfusion. In healthy dogs receiving HSA, three
of nine dogs developed facial edema and urticaria within days of
receiving the transfusion and two dogs developed severe hyperten-
sion [117]. One of the nine dogs developed a severe anaphylactoid
reaction within 10 min of receiving the infusion. Two out of two
dogs receiving a second infusion had a similar severe anaphylactoid
reaction. Martin et al. [118] found that administration of HSA
resulted in antibody formation in both healthy and critically ill
patients, with the onset time being shorter in healthy dogs.
Interestingly, two of the 57 control dogs also had anti-HSA antibod-
ies, despite never having received an infusion. Canine albumin is
now commercially available in the United States and a number of
other countries. Allergic reactions occur with some regularity but
tend to be less severe than those seen with HSA. In dogs with septic
peritonitis, albumin levels remained increased 24 h after receiving
5% canine albumin [119].
References
1 Tilley LP, Burtnick NL. ECG for the Small Animal Practitioner. Jackson, WY:
Teton NewMedia, 1999.
2 Fuentes VL, Johnson LR, Dennis D, eds. Canine and Feline Cardiorespiratory
Medicine, 2nd edn. Quedgeley, Gloucester, UK: British Small Animal Veterinary
Association, 2013.
3 Tilley LP, Smith FW, Oyama MA, Sleeper MM, eds. Manual of Canine and Feline
Cardiology, 4th edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2013.
4 Buchanan JW, Bucheler J. Vertebral scale system to measure canine heart size in
radiographs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1995; 206: 194–199.
5 Litster AL, Buchanan JW. Vertebral scale system to measure heart size in radio-
graphs of cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000; 216: 210–214.
6 Hansson K, Haggstrom J, Kvart C, et al. Interobserver variability of vertebral heart
size measurements in dogs with normal and enlarged hearts. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
2005; 46: 122–130.
7 Kraetschmer S, Ludwig K, Meneses F, et al. Vertebral heart scale in the Beagle dog.
J Small Anim Pract 2008; 49: 240–243.
8 Marin LM, Brown J, McBrien C, et al. Vertebral heart size in retired racing
Greyhounds. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2007; 48: 332–334.
9 Bavegems V, Van Caelenberg A, Duchateau L, et al. Vertebral heart size ranges
specific for whippets. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2005; 46: 400–403.
10 Greco A, Meomartino L, Raiano V, et al. Effect of left vs. right recumbency on the
vertebral heart score in normal dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2008; 49: 454–455.
11 Sleeper MM, Buchanan JW. Vertebral scale system to measure heart size in growing
puppies. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2001; 219: 57–59.
12 Lamb CR, Wikeley H, Boswood A, et al. Use of breed-specific ranges for the verte-
bral heart scale as an aid to the radiographic diagnosis of cardiac disease in dogs.
Vet Rec 2001; 148: 707–711.
13 Ghadiri A, Avizeh R, Rasekh A, et al. Radiographic measurement of vertebral heart
size in healthy stray cats. J Feline Med Surg 2008; 10: 61–65.
14 Cornell CC, Kittleson MD, Della TP, et al. Allometric scaling of M-mode cardiac
measurements in normal adult dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2004; 18: 311–321.
15 Mueller X, Stauffer JC, Jaussi A, et al. Subjective visual echocardiographic estimate of
left ventricular ejection fraction as an alternative to conventional echocardiographic
methods: comparison with contrast angiography. Clin Cardiol 1991; 14: 898–902.
16 Loyer C, Thomas WP. Biplane transesophageal echocardiography in the dog: tech-
nique, anatomy, and imaging planes. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1995; 36: 212–226.
17 Kienle RD, Thomas WP, Rishniw M. Biplane transesophageal echocardiography in
the normal cat. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1997; 38: 288–298.
18 Fox PR, Oyama MA, Reynolds C, et al. Utility of plasma N-terminal pro-brain natriu-
retic peptide (NT-proBNP) to distinguish between congestive heart failure and non-
cardiac causes of acute dyspnea in cats. J Vet Cardiol 2009; 11(Suppl 1): S51–S61.
19 Fox PR, Rush JE, Reynolds CA, et al. Multicenter evaluation of plasma N-terminal
probrain natriuretic peptide (NT-pro BNP) as a biochemical screening test for
asymptomatic (occult) cardiomyopathy in cats. J Vet Intern Med 2011; 25: 1010–1016.
20 Wess G, Daisenberger P, Mahling M, et al. Utility of measuring plasma N-terminal
pro-brain natriuretic peptide in detecting hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and
differentiating grades of severity in cats. Vet Clin Pathol 2011; 40: 237–244.
21 Hezzell MJ, Boswood A, Chang YM, et al. The combined prognostic potential of
serum high-sensitivity cardiac troponin I and N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic
peptide concentrations in dogs with degenerative mitral valve disease. J Vet Intern
Med 2012; 26: 302–311.
22 Yoran C, Yellin EL, Becker RM, et al. Dynamic aspects of acute mitral regurgitation:
effects of ventricular volume, pressure and contractility on the effective regurgitant
orifice area. Circulation 1979; 60: 170–176.
23 Nussmeier NA, Hauser MC, Sarwar MF, et al. Anesthesia for cardiac surgical
procedures. In: Miller RD, Eriksson LI, Fleisher LA, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia,
7th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Churchill Livingstone Elsevier, 2010: 2599–2652.
24 Reitan JA, Stengart KB, Wynmore MC, et al. Central vagal control of fentanyl
induced bradycardia during halothane anesthesia. Anaesth Analg 1978; 57: 31–36.
25 Smith LJ, Yi JK, Bjorling DE, et al. Effects of hydromorphone or oxymorphone,
with or without acepromazine, on preanesthetic sedation, physiologic values, and
histamine release in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2001; 218: 1101–1105.
26 Flacke JW, Davis LJ, Flacke WE, et al. Effects of fentanyl and diazepam in dogs
deprived of autonomic tone. Anesth Analg 1985; 64: 1053–1059.
27 Machado CG, Dyson DH, Mathews KA. Evaluation of induction by use of a combi-
nation of oxymorphone and diazepam or hydromorphone and diazepam and
maintenance of anesthesia by use of isoflurane in dogs with experimentally induced
hypovolemia. Am J Vet Res 2005; 66: 1227–1237.

-- 710 of 1450 --

Chapter 36: Pathophysiology and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 	695
28 Rangel JPP, Monteiro ER, Bitti FS, et al. Hemodynamic, respiratory and sedative
effects of progressively increasing doses of acepromazine in conscious dogs.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47: 447–453.
29 Hay Kraus BL. Effect of dosing interval on efficacy of maropitant for prevention of
hydromorphone-induced vomiting and signs of nausea in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2014; 245:1015–1020.
30 Grimm KA, Tranquilli WJ, Gross DR, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of fentanyl in
conscious dogs and dogs sedated with a continuous rate infusion of medetomidine.
Am J Vet Res 2005; 66: 1222–1226.
31 Michelsen LG, Salmenpera M, Hug CC, et al. Anesthetic potency of remifentanil in
dogs. Anesthesiology 1996; 84: 865–872.
32 Marques MG, Cancelli CHB, Fernandes CMS, et al. Effect of a constant rate infu-
sion of remifentanil hydrochloride on left ventricular systolic and diastolic function
in propofol-anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 2018; 79: 1261–1267.
33 Gimenes AM, de Araujo Aguiar AJ, Perri SHV, et al. Effect of intravenous propofol
and remifentanil on heart rate, blood pressure and nociceptive response in ace-
promazine premedicated dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38: 54–62.
34 Musk GC, Flaherty DA. Target-controlled infusion of propofol combined with
variable rate infusion of remifentanil for anaesthesia of a dog with patent ductus
arteriosus. Vet Anaesth Analg 2007; 34: 359–364.
35 De Hert SG, Vermeyen KM, Adriaensen HF. Influence of thiopental, etomidate,
and propofol on regional myocardial function in the normal and acute ischemic
heart segment in dogs. Anesth Analg 1990; 70: 600–607.
36 Coetzee A, Fourie P, Coetzee J, et al. Effect of various propofol plasma concentra-
tions on regional myocardial contractility and left ventricular afterload. Anesth Analg
1989; 69: 473–483.
37 Ismail EF, Kim S, Ramez Salem M, et al. Direct effects of propofol on myocardial
contractility in in situ canine hearts. Anesthesiology 1992; 77: 964–972.
38 Nakaigawa Y, Akazawa S, Shimizu R, et al. Effects of graded infusion rates of
propofol on cardiovascular haemodynamics, coronary circulation and myocardial
metabolism in dogs. Br J Anaesth 1995; 75: 616–621.
39 Ilkiw JE, Pascoe PJ, Haskins SC, et al. Cardiovascular and respiratory effects of
propofol administration in hypovolemic dogs. Am J Vet Res 1992; 53: 2323–2327.
40 Aguilera R, Sinclair M, Valverde A, et al. Dose and cardiopulmonary effects of
propofol alone or with midazolam for induction of anesthesia in critically ill dogs.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47:472–480.
41 Pagel PS, Schmeling WT, Kampine JP, et al. Alteration of canine left ventricular
diastolic function by intravenous anesthetics in vivo: ketamine and propofol.
Anesthesiology 1992; 76: 419–425.
42 Nagel ML, Muir WW, Nguyen K. Comparison of the cardiopulmonary effects of
etomidate and thiamylal in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1979; 40: 193–196.
43 P Pascoe P, Ilkiw J, Haskins S, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of etomidate in
hypovolemic dogs. Am J Vet Res 1992; 53: 2178–2182.
44 Gooding JM, Weng JT, Smith RA, et al. Cardiovascular and pulmonary responses
following etomidate induction of anesthesia in patients with demonstrated cardiac
disease. Anesth Analg 1979; 58: 40–41.
45 Keating SCJ, Sage AM, Ambrisko T, et al. The effect of midazolam or lidocaine
administration prior to etomidate induction of anesthesia on heart rate, arterial
pressure, intraocular pressure and serum cortisol concentration in healthy dogs.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47: 160–167.
46 Muir W, Lerche P, Wiese A, et al. The cardiorespiratory and anesthetic effects of
clinical and supraclinical doses of alfaxalone in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35:
451–462.
47 Dehuisser V, Bosmans T, Devreese M, et al. Alfaxalone total intravenous anaesthe-
sia in dogs: pharmacokinetics, cardiovascular data and recovery characteristics.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2019: 46: 605–612.
48 Hampton EC, Riebold TW, LeBlanc NL, et al. Effects of intravenous administration
of tiletamine-zolazepam, alfaxalone, ketamine, diazepam, and propofol for induc-
tion of anesthesia in healthy dogs before and during anesthesia maintained with
isoflurane. Am J Vet Res 2019; 80: 33–44.
49 Bennett KJ, Seddighi R, Moorhead KA, et al. Effect of fentanyl on the induction
dose and minimum infusion rate of alfaxalone preventing movement in dogs.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2019; 46: 173–181.
50 Psatha E, Alibhai HI, Jimenez-Lozano A, et al. Clinical efficacy and cardiorespira-
tory effects of alfaxalone, or diazepam/fentanyl for induction of anaesthesia in dogs
that are a poor anaesthetic risk. Vet Anesth Analg 2011; 38: 24–36.
51 Rodríguez JM, Munoz-Rascón P, Navarrete-Calvo R, et al. Comparison of the
cardiopulmonary parameters after induction of anaesthesia with alphaxalone or
etomidate in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39: 357–365.
52 Moon PF. Acute toxicosis in two dogs associated with etomidate–propylene glycol
infusion. Lab Anim Sci 1994; 44: 590–594.
53 Dodam JR, Kruse-Elliott KT, Aucoin DP, et al. Duration of etomidate induced
adrenocortical suppression during surgery in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1990; 51:
786–788.
54 Wagner RL, White PF, Kan PB, et al. Inhibition of adrenal steroidogenesis by
the anesthetic etomidate. N Engl J Med 1984; 310: 1415–1421.
55 Ledingham IM, Watt I. Influence of sedation on mortality in critically ill multiple
trauma patients. Lancet 1983; 1(8336): 1270.
56 Nagashima JK, Goncalves LA, Pereira MAA, et al. Microcirculation assessment of
dexmedetomidine constant rate infusion during anesthesia of dogs with sepsis
from pyometra: a randomized clinical study. Vet Anaesth Analg 2022; 49: 536–545.
57 Badino P, Odore R, Re G. Are so many adrenergic receptor subtypes really present in
domestic animal tissues? A pharmacological perspective. Vet J 2005; 170: 163–174.
58 Ranganathan B, LeBlanc N, Scollan KF, et al. Comparison of major complication
and survival rates begween surgical ligation and use of a canine ductal occlude
device for treatment of dogs with left-to-right shunting patent ductus arteriosus.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2018; 253: 1046–1052.
59 Parisi C, Phillips V, Ferreira J, et al. Anaesthetic management and complications of
transvascular patent ductus arteriosus occlusion in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020;
47: 581–587.
60 Williams GD, Jones TK, Hanson KA, et al. The hemodynamic effects of propofol in
children with congenital heart disease. Anesth Analg 1999; 89: 1411–1416.
61 Boatman DL, Shaffer RA, Dixon RL, et al. Function of vascular smooth muscle and
its sympathetic innervation in the newborn dog. J Clin Invest 1965; 44: 241–246.
62 Boatman DL, Brody MJ. Cardiac responses to adrenergic stimulation in the
newborn dog. Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther 1967; 170: 1–11.
63 Driscoll DJ, Gillette PC, Lewis RM, et al. Comparative hemodynamic effects of
isoproterenol, dopamine, and dobutamine in the newborn dog. Pediatr Res 1979;
13: 1006–1009.
64 Park IS, Michael LH, Driscoll DJ. Comparative response of the developing canine
myocardium to inotropic agents. Am J Physiol 1982; 242: H13–H18.
65 Manders WT, Pagani M, Vatner SF. Depressed responsiveness to vasoconstrictor
and dilator agents and baroreflex sensitivity in conscious, newborn lambs.
Circulation 1979; 60: 945–955.
66 Rosati M, Dyson DH, Sinclair MD, et al. Response of hypotensive dogs to dopa-
mine hydrochloride and dobutamine hydrochloride during deep isoflurane anes-
thesia. Am J Vet Res 2007; 68: 483–494.
67 Pascoe PJ, Ilkiw JE, Pypendop BH. Effects of increasing infusion rates of dopamine,
dobutamine, epinephrine and phenylephrine in healthy anesthetized cats. Am J Vet
Res 2006; 67: 1491–1499.
68 Abdul-Rasool IH, Chamberlain JH, Swan PC, et al. Cardiorespiratory and meta-
bolic effects of dopamine and dobutamine infusions in dogs. Crit Care Med 1987;
15: 1044–1050.
69 Vatner SF, McRitchie RJ, Braunwald E. Effects of dobutamine on left ventricular
performance, coronary dynamics and distribution of cardiac output in conscious
dogs. J Clin Invest 1974; 53: 1265–1273.
70 Orchard CH, Chakrabarti MK, Sykes MK. Cardiorespiratory responses to an i.v. infu-
sion of dobutamine in the intact anaesthetized dog. Br J Anaesth 1982; 54: 673–679.
71 Kojima K, Ishizuka T, Sasaki N, et al. Cardiovascular effects of dose escalating of
norepinephrine in healthy dogs anesthetized with norepinephrine. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2021; 48: 654–662.
72 De Moraes AN, Dyson DH, O’Grady MR, et al. Plasma concentrations and cardio-
vascular influence of lidocaine infusions during isoflurane anesthesia in healthy
dogs and dogs with subaortic stenosis. Vet Surg 1998; 27: 486–497.
73 Lamont LA, Bulmer BJ, Sisson DD, et al. Doppler echocardiographic effects of
medetomidine on dynamic left ventricular outflow tract obstruction in cats.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2002; 221: 1276–1281.
74 Wiese AJ, Barter LS, Ilkiw JE, et al. Cardiovascular and respiratory effects of
incremental doses of dopamine and phenylephrine in the management of isoflurane-
induced hypotension in cats with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am J Vet Res 2012;
73: 908–916.
75 White PF, Way WL, Trevor AJ. Ketamine – its pharmacology and therapeutic uses.
Anesthesiology 1982; 56: 119–136.
76 Haskins SC, Farver TB, Patz JD. Ketamine in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1985; 46: 1855–1860.
77 Pascoe PJ, Ilkiw JE, Craig C, et al. The effects of ketamine on the minimum alveolar
concentration of isoflurane in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2007; 34: 31–39.
78 Lazzarini E, Martinellui E, Brioschi A, et al. Intramuscular alfaxalone and methadone
with or without ketamine in healthy cats:effects on sedations and echocardiographic
measurements. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47: 621–630.
79 Ribas T, Bublot I, Junot S, et al. Effects of intramuscular sedation with alfaxalone
and butorphanol on echocardiographic measurements in healthy cats. J Feline Med
Surg 2015; 17: 530–536.
80 Muir W, Lerche P, Wiese A, et al. The cardiorespiratory and anesthetic effects of
clinical and supraclinical doses of alfaxalone in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36:
42–54.
81 Pypendop BH, Barter LS, Pascoe PJ, et al. Hemodynamic effect of subclinical,
clinical and supraclinical plasma alfaxalone concentrations in cats. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2019; 46: 597–604.

-- 711 of 1450 --

696 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
82 Lippman M, Appel PL, Mok MS, et al. Sequential cardiorespiratory patterns of
anesthetic induction with ketamine in critically ill patients. Crit Care Med 1983;
11: 730–734.
83 Jacobson JD, Hartsfield SM. Cardiovascular effects of intravenous bolus adminis-
tration and infusion of ketamine–midazolam in isoflurane-anesthetized dogs.
Am J Vet Res 1993; 54: 1715–1720.
84 Joshi GP, Warner DS, Twersky RS, et al. A comparison of remifentanil and fentanyl
adverse effect profile in a multicenter phase IV study. J Clin Anesth 2002; 14: 494–499.
85 Nosier RK, Ficke DJ, Kundu A, et al. Sympathetic and vascular consequences from
remifentanil in humans. Anesth Analg 2003; 96: 1645–1650.
86 Allweiler S, Broadbelt DC, Borer K, et al. The isoflurane-sparing and clinical
effects of a constant rate infusion of remifentanil in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2007;
34: 388–393.
87 Overgaard CB, Dzavik V. Inotropes and vasopressors. Review of physiology and
clinical use in cardiovascular disease. Circulation 2008; 118: 1047–1056.
88 Walsh M, Devereaux PJ, Garg AX, et al. Relationship between intraoperative mean
arterial pressure and clinical outcomes after noncardiac surgery: towards an
empirical definition of hypotension. Anesthesiology 2013; 119: 507–515.
89 Marik PE, Baram M, Vahid B. Does central venous pressure predict fluid respon-
siveness? A systematic review of the literature and the tale of seven mares.
Chest 2008; 134: 172–178.
90 Fantoni ET, Ida KK, Gimenes AM, et al. Pulse pressure variation as a guide for
volume expansion in dogs undergoing orthopedic surgery. Vet Anaesth Analg
2017; 44: 710–718.
91 Aarnes TK, Bednarski RM, Lerche P, et al. Effect of intravenous administration of
Lactated Ringer’s solution or Hetastarch for the treatment of isoflurane-induced
hypotension in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2009; 70: 1345–1353.
92 Valverde A, Gianotti G, Rioja-Garcia E, et al. Effects of high-volume, rapid-fluid
therapy on cardiovascular function and hematological values during isoflurane-
induced hypotension in healthy dogs. Can J Vet Res 2012; 76: 99–108.
93 Sinclair MD, Dyson DH. The impact of acepromazine on the efficacy of crystal-
loid, dextran or ephedrine treatment in hypotensive dogs under isoflurane anes-
thesia. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39: 563–573.
94 Bone RC, Balk RA, Cerra FB, et al. Definitions for sepsis and organ failure and
guidelines for the use of innovative therapies in sepsis. The ACCP/SCCM Consensus
Conference Committee, American College of Chest Physicians/Society of Critical
Care Medicine. Crit Care Med 1992; 20: 864–874.
95 Shoemaker WC, Appel PL, Kram HB. Hemodynamic and oxygen transport
responses in survivors and nonsurvivors of high-risk surgery. Crit Care Med 1983;
21: 977–990.
96 Shoemaker WC, Appel P, Bland R. Use of physiologic monitoring to predict
outcome and to assist in clinical decision in critically ill postoperative patients.
Am J Surg 1983; 146: 43–50.
97 Wo CC, Shoemaker WE, Appel PL, et al. Unreliability of blood pressure and heart
rate to evaluate cardiac output in emergency resuscitation and critical illness.
Crit Care Med 1993; 21: 218–223.
98 Rivers E, Nguyen B, Havstad S, et al. Early goal-directed therapy in the treatment
of severe sepsis and septic shock. N Engl J Med 2001; 345: 1368–1377.
99 Dellinger RP, Carlet JM, Masur H, et al. Surviving Sepsis Campaign: guidelines for
management of severe sepsis and septic shock. Crit Care Med 2004; 32: 858–873.
100 Dellinger RP, Levy MM, Carlet JM, et al. Surviving Sepsis Campaign: international
guidelines for management of severe sepsis and septic shock. Crit Care Med 2008;
36: 296–327.
101 Conti-Patara A, de Araujo Caldeira J, de Mattos-Junior E, et al. Changes in tissue
perfusion parameters in dogs with severe sepsis/septic shock in response to
goal – directed hemodnamic optimization at admission to ICU and the relation
to outcome. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2012; 22: 409–418.
102 Bouglé A, Harrois A, Duranteau J. Resuscitative strategies in traumatic hemor-
rhagic shock. Ann Intensive Care 2013; 3: 1.
103 The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Acute Respiratory Distress
Syndrome (ARDS) Clinical Trials Network. Comparison of two fluid-management
strategies in acute lung injury. N Engl J Med 2006; 354: 2564–2575.
104 Mapstone J, Roberts I, Evans P. Fluid resuscitation strategies: a systematic review
of animal trials. J Trauma 2003; 55: 571–589.
105 Chowdhury AH, Cox EF, Francis ST, et al. A randomized, controlled, double-
blind crossover study on the effects of 2-L infusions of 0.9% saline and Plasma-
Lyte 148 on renal blood flow velocity and renal cortical tissue perfusion in healthy
volunteers. Ann Surg 2012; 256: 18–24.
106 Santacruz CA, De Backer D, Taccone FS, et al. Effects of different crystalloid
solutions on hemodynamics, peripheral perfusion, and the microcirculation in
experimental abdominal sepsis. Anesthesiology 2016; 125: 744–754.
107 Perel P, Roberts I. Colloids versus crystalloids for fluid resuscitation in critically ill
patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011; (3): CD000567; update: Perel P,
Roberts I, Ker K. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013; (2): CD000567.
108 Groeneveld AB, Navickis RJ, Wilkes MM. Update on the comparative safety
of colloids: a systematic review of clinical studies. Ann Surg 2011; 253: 470–483.
109 Choi SJ, Ahn HJ, Chung SS, et al. Hemostatic and electrolyte effects of hydroxye-
thyl starches in patients undergoing posterior lumbar interbody fusion using
pedicle screws and cages. Spine 2010; 35: 829–834.
110 Brunkhorst FM, Engel C, Bloos F, et al. Intensive insulin therapy and pentastarch
resuscitation in severe sepsis. N Engl J Med 2008; 358: 125–139.
111 Perner A, Haase N, Guttormsen AB, et al. Hydroxyethyl starch 130/0/42 versus
Ringer’s acetate in severe sepsis. N Engl J Med 2012; 367: 124–134.
112 Sigrist NE, Kalin N, Dreyfus A. Changes in serum creatinine concentration and
acute kidney injury (AKI) grade in dogs treated with hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.4
from 2013 to 2015. J Vet Intern Med 2017; 31: 434–441.
113 Hayes G, Benedicenti L, Mathew K. Retrospective cohort study on the incidence
of acute kidney injury and death following hydroxyethyl starch (HES 10%
250/0/5/5:1) administration in dogs (2007–2010). J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2016; 26:
35–40.
114 Sigrist NE, Kalin N, Dreyfus A. Effects of hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.4 on serum
creatinine concentration and development of acute kidney injury in nonazotemic
cats. J Vet Intern Med 2017; 31: 1749–1756.
115 Finfer S, Bellomo R, Boyce N, et al. A comparison of albumin and saline for fluid
resuscitation in the intensive care unit. N Engl J Med 2004; 350: 2247–2256.
116 Mathews KA, Barry M. The use of 25% human serum albumin: outcome and
efficacy in raising serum albumin and systemic blood pressure in critically ill dogs
and cats. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2005; 15: 110–118.
117 Cohn LA, Kerl ME, Lenox CE, et al. Response of healthy dogs to infusions of
human serum albumin. Am J Vet Res 2007; 68: 657–663.
118 Martin LG, Luther TY, Alperin DC, et al. Serum antibodies against human albumin
in critically ill and healthy dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008; 232: 1004–1009.
119 Craft EM, Powell LL. The use of canine-specific albumin in dogs with septic
peritonitis. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2012; 22: 631–639.

-- 712 of 1450 --

697
Veterinary A nesthesia and A nalgesia: T he S ixth Edition of L umb and J ones	. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
Maintenance of adequate respiratory function is a principal
requirement for safe anesthesia. The respiratory system is responsi-
ble for eliminating carbon dioxide (CO2
) via adjustments in alveo-
lar ventilation per minute (V̇ A
), and for transferring oxygen from
the alveoli to mixed venous blood (pulmonary artery blood) at the
pulmonary capillary level. In conscious resting, mammals breath-
ing air (fraction of inspired oxygen [FI
O2
] of 0.21) at sea level, CO 2
partial pressure in arterial blood (PaCO2
), and oxygen partial
pressure in arterial blood (PaO2
) usually range from 35 to 45 mmHg
and from 90 to 110 mmHg, respectively, with some variation among
species (Table 37.1). These gas partial pressures reflect adequate CO2
elimination and oxygen uptake to meet tissue metabolic require-
ments in normal patients at rest.
During general anesthesia, there is a tendency for PaO2 to be
lower and PaCO2 to be elevated above that observed in the same
species while conscious and breathing the same FI
O2 [1–5].
Depending on the species and health of the individual patient,
sedation alone may also result in deterioration of normal gas
exchange [6–8]. Alteration in the efficacy of the gas exchange asso-
ciated with sedation and/or general anesthesia results from changes
in V̇A
, pulmonary perfusion (Q̇), or alveolar ventilation–perfusion
ratios (V̇A
/Q̇ ) within the lung. Numerous factors, including species,
influence the degree and nature of lung dysfunction in the periop-
erative period. However, within a species, the degree of change in
lung function associated with anesthesia is significantly greater in
individuals with underlying respiratory disease.
Strategies employed to manage the changes in respiratory function
associated with sedation and general anesthesia include increasing
the F I
O2 delivered to a patient, establishing an artificial airway,
and supporting ventilation through mechanical means. In certain
instances, pharmaceutical interventions are warranted to address
either underlying conditions or counter the side-effects of diagnos-
tic or therapeutic interventions. Further details regarding current
strategies used to support veterinary patients’ respiratory function
during anesthesia are provided in Chapter 38. While many strate-
gies used in veterinary anesthesia are also employed in humans,
veterinary species differ in terms of lung structure, body size, and
the circumstances in which they are anesthetized. As such, it is
important to consider the evidence surrounding the risks and ben-
efits of the various interventions in the veterinary context as the
goals and means to achieve them may be different than in humans.
While perioperative morbidity and mortality are clearly linked to
respiratory dysfunction, with appropriate interventions, the risks
can be minimized, and outcomes optimized.
This chapter aims to provide a review of respiratory physiology
with emphasis on pathophysiological changes in respiratory function
associated with sedation and general anesthesia. Several excellent
reviews of basic respiratory physiology exist, and the reader is
encouraged to consult these works for further detail [9,10].
Key concepts and lung volumes
The primary function of the respiratory system is to eliminate
CO 2 produced by cell metabolism to the atmosphere and to transfer
oxygen from the atmosphere to deoxygenated blood. Other functions
include regulation of acid–base balance, via adjustment of CO 2
partial pressure (PCO2
) in blood; defense against pollutants and
microorganisms that may be inhaled; and metabolism of vasoactive
peptides by enzymes in lung cells (e.g., bradykinin and angiotensin).
Respiration is the total process whereby oxygen is supplied to and
used by cells and CO 2 is eliminated by means of partial pressure
37 Respiratory Physiology and Pathophysiology
Carolyn L. Kerr1 and Francisco J. Teixeira-Neto2
1 Department of Clinical Studies, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada
2 Faculdade de Medicina Veterinária e Zootecnia, Universidade Estadual Paulista (UNESP), Botucatu, Brazil
Chapter contents
Introduction, 697
Key concepts and lung volumes, 697
Respiratory function in conscious and anesthetized animals, 700
Neural control of ventilation, 700
Pulmonary ventilation, 702
Pulmonary perfusion, 713
Ventilation–perfusion relationships, 718
Effects of anesthesia on ventilation, pulmonary perfusion, and ventilation–
perfusion relationships, 721
Oxygen transport, 737
Carbon dioxide transport, 740
References, 743

-- 713 of 1450 --

698 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
gradients. It is dependent on the integrated action of the respiratory
and cardiovascular systems. Ventilation is the movement of gas in
and out of the lungs. The ventilatory requirement for homeostasis
varies with metabolic rate, and therefore varies with the animal
species, age, body mass, level of activity, body temperature, and
depth of anesthesia.
The volume of gas within the respiratory system is subdivided
into four different volumes. Occasionally, it is desirable to consider
two or more of the volumes together. Such combinations are termed
“pulmonary capacities” (Fig. 37.1):
1 Tidal volume (V T
) is the volume of air that moves in and out of the
respiratory system (conducting airways and alveoli) in one breath.
2 Inspiratory reserve volume (IRV) is the volume of air that can be
inspired over and above the normal V T
.
3 Expiratory reserve volume (ERV) is the amount of air that can be
expired by forceful expiration after a normal expiration.
4 Residual volume (RV) is the air remaining in the lungs after a
maximal expiration.
5 Inspiratory capacity (IC) is the V T plus the inspiratory reserve
volume. This is the amount of air that can be inhaled starting
after a normal expiration and distending the lungs to the
maximum amount.
6 Functional residual capacity (FRC) is the expiratory reserve volume
plus the residual volume. This is the amount of air remaining in
the lungs after a normal expiration. From a mechanical view-
point, at FRC, the inward “pull” of the lungs due to their elasticity
equals the outward “pull” of the chest wall.
7 Vital capacity (VC) is the inspiratory reserve volume plus the V T
plus the expiratory reserve volume. This is the maximum amount
of air that can be expelled from the lungs after first filling them to
their maximum capacity.
8 Total lung capacity (TLC) is the inspiratory reserve volume plus
the V T plus the expiratory reserve volume plus the residual volume,
or the maximum volume to which the lungs can be expanded
with the greatest possible inspiratory effort (or by full inflation to
30 cmH 2
O airway pressure when a patient is anesthetized).
Most of these volumes cannot be measured in conscious ani-
mals (Fig. 37.1), because to do so requires cooperation of the test
subject. The TLC, FRC, and RV reported in mammalian species
are summarized in Table 37.2. The TLC is generally estimated by
inflation of the lung to pressures above 30 cmH 2 O in anesthetized
animals. Values for TLC are reasonably similar among the domes-
tic species when compared on a body-weight basis, but the total
volume varies from less than 2 mL in mice to over 45 L in horses
and cows. The volume of gas remaining in the lungs at the end of
a normal expiration (that is, the FRC) varies considerably among
species and can rapidly change within an individual patient.
Increased abdominal volume from any source (e.g., near-term
gravid uterus, bowel distension, obesity, or large abdominal
tumor) will tend to move the diaphragm forward and lessen the
FRC. Conversely, overnight fasting increased the FRC of ponies
by about 16% [27]. Changes in body position, specifically, chang-
ing from standing to lateral or dorsal recumbency can signifi-
cantly alter FRC in humans and in some veterinary species [27–29].
Few actual measurements have been made of this phenomenon
in relation to animals in health and disease, but the consequences
for ventilation and arterial oxygenation in patients with severe
lung disease or during anesthesia are consistent with a decrease
in FRC.
Minute ventilation (V̇ E ), calculated as V T times breathing
frequency (f), is the volume of air that moves in and out of the
respiratory system (conducting airways and alveoli) over 1 min. It is
only the fraction of V̇ E that effectively ventilates the alveoli over
1 min (V̇ A
) that determines gas exchange.
Under normal conditions, V̇ E is matched with CO 2 production
per minute (V̇ CO2
) to maintain PaCO2 within physiological ranges
(Table 37.1). Factors that influence CO2 production and V̇ E include
species, age, body mass, level of activity, body temperature, and depth
of anesthesia. Although basal metabolic rate and CO2 production
per unit body mass are significantly higher in small mammals
(mice and rats) than in large animal species (horses and cows), nor-
mal PaCO 2 values are not substantially different. This is explained
by the fact that V̇ E (and V̇ A
) is significantly higher in mice and
rats [32] than in horses and cows when indexed to body
mass [25,36–38]. The V̇E recorded in several animal species is
presented in Table 37.3.
Table 37.1 Arterial blood gas and acid–base values for various species.
Species 	Body weight (kg) 	n 	Conditions 	pHa 	PaCO2 (mmHg) 	PaO2 (mmHg) 	HCO 3
−
(mEq/L) 	Reference
Rat 	0.207 	10 	Awake, chronic catheter 	7.44 	32.7 	21.5 	[11]
0.305 	8 	Awake, prone, chronic catheter 	7.467 	39.8 	28.7 	[12]
Rabbit 	3.1 	NS 	Awake, catheter 	7.388 	32.8 	86 	21 	[13]
3.5 	20 	Awake, catheter 	7.47 	28.5 	89.2 	20.2 	[14]
Cat 	2.5–5.1 	8 	Unsedated, chronic catheter, prone 	7.41 	28.0 	108 	18 	[15]
3–8 	10 	Unsedated, not restrained, chronic catheter 	7.426 	32.5 	108 	22.1 	[16]
Dog 	18.8 	8 	Unsedated, chronic trach/catheter, standing 	7.383 	39.0 	103.8 	22.1 	[17]
12.2 	22 	Chronic catheters, lateral recumbency 	7.40 	35 	102 	21 	[18]
Sheep 	33 	NS 	Awake, catheter 	7.44 	40.9 	96 	27.6 	[13]
24.5 	11 	Unsedated, prone, carotid loop 	7.48 	33 	92 	[19]
Goat 	18 	6 	Unsedated, standing 	7.46 	36.5 	101 	[20]
47.6 	6 	Unsedated, standing, catheter 	7.45 	35.3 	94.5 	24.1 	[21]
46.6 	6 	Unsedated, standing 	7.45 	41.1 	87.1 	27.6 	[22]
Calf 	31–57 	4 	Standing, unsedated, aortic catheter 	7.39 	40 	81 	24 	[23]
48–66 	20 	Unanesthetized, catheter 	7.37 	42.8 	93.6 	23.6 	[24]
Cow 	517 	7 	Awake, unsedated, standing 	7.40 	39.6 	83.1 	24.4 	[25]
641 	7 	Awake, unsedated, standing 	7.435 	38.7 	95.1 	25.5 	a
Horse 	402 	6 	Awake, unsedated, standing 	7.39 	41.1 	80.7 	24.5 	[25]
Pony 	147 	19 	Standing, aortic catheter 	7.40 	40 	88.7 	24.4 	[26]
n, sample size; NS, not specified; trach, tracheostomy.
a Warren R and McDonell WN; unpublished observations.

-- 714 of 1450 --

Chapter 37: Respiratory Physiology and Pathophysiology 	699
Table 37.2 Lung volumes for various mammalian species.
Species 	Body weight (kg) 	n 	Conditions 	TLC 	FRC (mL/kg) 	RV (mL/kg) 	Reference
mL 	mL/kg
Mouse 	0.020 	NS 	Anesthetized 	1.57 	78.5 	25.0 	19.5 	[32]
Rat 	0.31 	NS 	Anesthetized, prone 	12.2 	39.4 	6.8 	4.2 	[32]
Rabbit 	3.14 	NS 	Anesthetized, supine 	111 	35.4 	11.6 	6.4 	[32]
Cat 	3.7 	4 	Anesthetized 	17.8 	[33]
Dog 	18.6 	6 	Awake, prone 	2090 	112.4 	53.6 	16.7 	[34]
9.2 	140 	Unsedated, 1-year old 	44.8 	[35]
Sheep 	24.5 	4 	Unsedated, prone, nasal endotracheal tube 	45.3 	[19]
Goat 	46.4 	6 	Unsedated, standing, face mask 	49.6 	[22]
Cow 	517 	7 	Awake, standing 	39.4 	[30]
537 	5 	Anesthetized, prone 	45,377 	84.5 	31.9 	16.1 	[30]
Horse 	485 	Anesthetized, prone 	44,800 	92.4 	36.3 	19.0 	[28]
402 	6 	Awake, standing 	51.3 	[30]
394 	4 	Anesthetized, prone, lung inflated to 35 cmH2
O,
starved 18 h
45,468 	115.4 	37.9 	[30]
450–822 	6 	Conscious, standing 	35.6 	[27]
Pony 	164–288 	8 	Conscious, standing 	39.9 	[27]
n, sample size; NS, not specified; TLC, total lung capacity; FRC, functional residual capacity; RV, residual volume.
Table 37.3 Breathing frequency (f), tidal volume (VT
), and minute ventilation (V̇E
) for various species.
Species 	Mean body
weight (kg)
n 	Conditions 	f (breaths/min) 	VT 	V̇E 	Reference
mL 	mL/kg 	mL/min 	mL/kg/min
Mouse 	0.02 	NS 	Awake, prone 	163.4 	0.15 	7.78 	24.5 	1239 	[32]
0.032 	NS 	Anesthetized 	109 	0.18 	5.63 	21.0 	720 	[32]
Rat 	0.113 	NS 	Awake, prone 	85.5 	0.87 	7.67 	72.9 	646 	[32]
0.305 	NS 	Awake, pleth 	103 	2.08 	6.83 	213 	701 	[32]
Cat 	3.8 	4 	Unanesthetized, pleth 	22 	30 	7.9 	664 	174 	[39]
3.7 	NS 	Anesthetized 	30 	34 	9.2 	960 	310 	[32]
Dog 	18.6 	6 	Awake, prone, chronic trach, intubated 	13 	309 	16.6 	3818 	205 	[34]
18.8 	8 	Awake, standing, chronic trach, intubated 	16.5 	314 	16.9 	4963 	264 	[17]
Sheep 	32–37 	4 	Awake, standing, mask 	38 	289 	8.3 	10,400 	297 	[40]
Goat 	36.3 	3 	Awake, standing, mask 	13.6 	470 	12.9 	6313 	174 	[20]
Pig 	46.4 	6 	Awake, standing, mask 	26 	483 	10.4 	11,900 	256 	[22]
47.6 	6 	Awake, standing, mask 	17.6 	602 	12.6 	10,540 	221 	[21]
12.9 	4 	Awake, standing 	13.1 	209 	15.9 	2731 	208 	[41]
Cow 	517 Holstein 	7 	Awake, standing, mask 	23.7 	3676 	7.1 	85,977 	166 	[25]
405 Jersey 	11 	Awake, standing, mask 	28.6 	3360 	8.3 	94,870 	234 	[38]
Calf 	43–73 Hereford 	8 	4–6 weeks old, standing, sling 	26.7 	403 	15.1 	10,290 	385 	[42]
Horse 	402 	6 	Awake, standing, mask 	11.8 	4253 	10.6 	49,466 	123 	[25]
483 	6 	Awake, standing, mask 	15.5 	4860 	10.1 	74,600 	154 	[37]
486 	15 	Awake, standing, mask (some sedated)
(mask VD not removed)
10 	7300 	15.0 	79,000 	163 	[36]
Pony 	147 	19 	Awake, standing, mask 	19.0 	1370 	9.3 	26,380 	180 	[26]
n, sample size; NS, not specified; pleth, whole-body plethysmograph; trach, tracheostomy.
Inspiratory
capacity
Inspiratory reserve volume
Tidal volume
(any level of activity)
Vital capacity
Resting tidal
volume
Functional
residual
capacity
Special divisions for
pulmonary function tests
Primary subdivisions of
lung volume
Expiratory reserve volume
Residual
volume
Total lung capacity	
Figure 37.1 Lung volumes and capacities. Only V T (obtained
using a tightly fitting face mask attached to a pneumotachograph
or by placing the animal in a whole-body barometric
plethysmography chamber) and FRC (obtained by an open-
circuit nitrogen washout technique) can be measured in
conscious animals since the other measurements require
cooperation of the subject being studied or general anesthesia.
Source: Adapted from Gallivan et al. [30]; Liu et al. [31].

-- 715 of 1450 --

700 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
Respiratory function in conscious
and anesthetized animals
When considering respiratory function and dysfunction in the clinical
setting, it is useful to evaluate the respiratory system in terms of its
major components: neural control, structures involved in achieving
ventilation (upper airway and the bellows mechanism, including
the thoracic wall and diaphragm), and lung parenchyma where
the matching of ventilation and perfusion results in gas exchange
(Fig. 37.2). Alterations of arterial blood gas values occur due to
changes in (1) the neural control of ventilation by sedative, opioid, or
anesthetic depression and/or central nervous system (CNS) disease;
(2) upper airway or lower airway patency by muscle relaxation or
spasm; or (3) the bellows mechanism of the thorax through decreased
inspiratory muscle tone (diaphragm and intercostal muscles) by anes-
thetic drugs, neuromuscular paralysis, space-occupying lesions of
the thorax, or a change in the diaphragm shape, location, or function;
and (4) the parenchyma, such as an abnormal alveolar–capillary
membrane or less than optimal matching between V̇A and Q̇.
Neural control of ventilation
The movement of air in and out of the lungs in a rhythmic ventila-
tory pattern is determined by a complex network of neurons located
in the brainstem (medulla oblongata and pons), which receive neu-
ral input from central and peripheral chemoreceptors, the cerebral
cortex, and from pulmonary receptors (Fig. 37.3) [44]. Respiratory
neurons include those located in the pontine respiratory group
(lateral parabrachial and Kölliker–Fuse areas) and several medullary
areas, most notably the retrotrapezoid nucleus, the Bötzinger and
preBötzinger complexes, the rostral (nucleus ambiguous) and cau-
dal ventral respiratory groups (nucleus parambigualis and nucleus
retroambigualis), and a dorsal respiratory group of neurons located
in the nucleus tractus solitarius [44]. Current understanding of res-
piratory processing and control mechanisms are described in detail
elsewhere [43–45]. Normal respiratory rhythmicity originates from
neuronal activity in a subset of respiratory neurons, referred to as
the “central pattern generator,” which initiates inspiration by
increasing efferent nerve signals to the external intercostal muscles
and diaphragm. The intercostal nerves, which originate from the
ventral branch of spinal thoracic nerves, provide motor innervation
to the intercostal muscles; while the phrenic nerve, which originates
from branches of cervical nerves (between the fourth and seventh
cervical vertebrae), is responsible for the contraction of the
diaphragm. Inspiration, which is an active process that involves
contraction of external intercostal muscles and diaphragm, is
terminated through inhibition of the inspiratory neurons by the
pontine respiratory group, also known as the “pneumotaxic center,”
and by afferent nerve impulses originating from pulmonary stretch
receptors. In most species, expiration occurs passively, without any
muscular effort (equidae being a notable exception). In some
circumstances, such as during exercise, expiratory neurons in
the medulla can become activated, resulting in contraction of the
expiratory muscles (abdominal and internal intercostal mus-
cles) [43,46]. Respiratory control mechanisms monitor the chemical
composition of blood (pH, PaCO2
, and PaO2 ), the effort exerted by
Central
neural
control
Inspired gas:
PIO2 = F IO2 × PB
PIO2 = 160 mmHg (sea level)
Central neural control:
V˙ E = f × VT
P–
vCO2 = 46 mmHg
PACO2 = PaCO2
Pc’CO2 40 mmHg
Pc’O2 110 mmHg
P AO2 = F IO2 × (PB – PH2O) – PACO 2/R*
P AO2 = 110 mmHg (ambient air)
P –
vO2 = 40 mmHg
Mixed venous blood (pulmonary artery):
Ideal alveolar gas at sea level assuming
normal ventilation (PaCO 2 = 40 mmHg):
Pulmonary capillary blood leaving alveoli
PaCO 2 = 40 mmHg, PaO 2 = 100 mmHg
Arterial blood assuming negligible mismatch
between ventilation and perfusion:
Upper airway
Trachea
P A CO2 :
40 mmHg
P A O2:
110 mmHg
PA CO 2:
40 mmHg
P A O2:
110 mmHg
Diaphragm
Deoxygenated blood (higher PCO2)
Oxygenated blood (lower PCO 2)
Bronchi
Bronchioles
Thoracic
wall
Alveolus
V T = V Daw 	VTalv
	+
Figure 37.2 Diagrammatic representation of the neural control, bellows mechanism (diaphragm and thoracic wall), and matching of pulmonary
artery (mixed venous) blood and alveolar gas in the lung under ideal conditions. Minute volume (V̇ E ), respiratory frequency (f), tidal volume (V T ),
airway deadspace (VDaw
) (colored blue), alveolar tidal volume (VTalv
) (colored yellow), and representative inspired (PI
), alveolar (PA ), mixed venous (Pv ),
end-capillary (Pc′), and arterial (Pa) partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide are also illustrated (see the text for a detailed explanation).
*Respiratory quotient (R) represents the relative ratio of carbon dioxide production to oxygen consumption (assumed to be 0.9 in conscious healthy dogs).
Source: Adapted from Walters et al. [43].

-- 716 of 1450 --

Chapter 37: Respiratory Physiology and Pathophysiology 	701
respiratory muscles, and the presence of foreign material within the
airway, providing input to the brainstem to alter the bronchomotor
tone, duration of inspiration, airflow velocity on inspiration and
expiration, and respiratory frequency.
Central and peripheral chemoreceptors provide the major afferent
input to the respiratory neurons in the medulla and pons as illus-
trated in Fig. 37.3 [44–46]. The central chemoreceptors, located
primarily on the ventral surface of the medulla, as well as in other
locations within the CNS, are responsible for maintaining a tonic
ventilatory drive at normal baseline PaCO 2 levels and for increasing
V̇E in response to increasing PaCO2 levels [47]. The effect of PaCO2
on central chemoreceptor activity occurs indirectly via changes in
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) hydrogen ion concentration (pH) as CO 2
readily crosses the blood–brain barrier and reacts with water to
form carbonic acid (H2
CO3
), which in turn dissociates into H+ and
bicarbonate (HCO 3
−) (Fig. 37.3). The CSF exhibits poor buffering
capacity and any change in PCO2 within the CNS is quickly reflected
as a change in pH [44,46]. The correlation between V̇ E and progres-
sively increasing CO 2 levels in conscious horses is shown in
Fig. 37.4A. Anesthetic drugs alter the relationship between V̇E and
PaCO 2 by decreasing central chemoreceptor sensitivity to increas-
ing CO2 levels and by inhibiting neuronal activity within the res-
piratory center of the brainstem.
Peripheral chemoreceptors are primarily responsible for the ven-
tilatory response to decreases in PaO 2 (Fig. 37.3) [44]. These recep-
tors respond faster than central chemoreceptors and are located
within the highly vascular carotid and aortic bodies, although the
role of the chemoreceptors in the aortic bodies in mature animals is
believed to play a less significant role [44]. As PaO2 levels fall,
peripheral chemoreceptors increase input to the respiratory center
in the brainstem to increase V̇ E , a response referred to as the
“hypoxic ventilatory drive.” Peripheral chemoreceptor also play an
important role in the maintenance of normal PaCO2 and arterial
pH and are responsible for 30–50% of the tonic drive to ventilate. In
Blood–brain barrier
+
+ 	+ 	+
Central
chemoreceptors
Cerebral cortex
(voluntary/
behavioral input)
Brainstem:
• Medullary respiratory center
• Pontine respiratory center
Stretch receptors
(Hering–Breuer reflex)
Irritant receptors
J receptors
Pulmonary
ventilation
Peripheral
chemoreceptors
Pulmonary
reflexes
CO2 	CO2 + H2O 	H + + HCO 3–
↑H+
↓PO2 	↑PCO2 	↑H+
Figure 37.3 Diagrammatic representation of the neural control of ventilation. The medullary respiratory center receives multiple inputs and coordinates
activity of respiratory muscles and adjusts pulmonary ventilation (see text for detailed explanation). Source: Adapted from Lyons and Kevin [46].
1000
800
600
400
V˙ E (L/min)
% change in V
˙ E from control (21% O
2)
200
40 	50 	60
Apnea point
PETCO2 (mmHg) 	Inspired oxygen concentration (%)
(A) 	(B)
70 	80 	90 	5
0
200
160
120
80
40
0
10 15 20 25 	50 	75	0 	100
–40
Control
Acepromazine
Figure 37.4 A. Effects of hypercapnia on V̇E in conscious horses. End-tidal CO2 partial pressure (PET
CO2
) was used as an indicator of hypercapnia induced
by CO 2 rebreathing. B. Effects of changes in inspired oxygen concentration on percent changes in V̇E from baseline (inspired oxygen = 21%) recorded in
conscious horses (control), and in horses that received a tranquilizer (acepromazine). Source: Adapted from Gauvreau et al. [48]; Muir and Hamlin [50].

-- 717 of 1450 --

702 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
sheep, goats, calves, pigs, and ponies, carotid body denervation
causes hypoventilation, hypoxemia, and hypercapnia [23,41].
In general, there is tight physiologic control over PaCO 2 with a
quasi-linear relationship between V̇E and PaCO2 (and end-tidal
CO2 partial pressure [PET
CO2
]), with higher CO 2 levels increasing
V̇E as illustrated in Fig. 37.4A [48]. Species differences in response
to progressive increases in PaCO2 or PET
CO2 induced by increasing
inspired CO2 exist, with horses being slightly less responsive and
burrowing or diving animals being much less responsive than
humans [48–50]. Unlike the quasi-linear relationship between V̇E
and increasing CO 2 levels, the change in V̇ E evoked by changes in
PaO2 is curvilinear. While V̇E remains relatively constant with PaO2
values above 70 mmHg, an exponential increase in V̇ E occurs as
PaO2 falls below 60–70 mmHg in mature animals [44,46,49].
As illustrated in Fig. 37.4B, when the FI
O2 in conscious horses was
decreased from approximately 1 (100% inspired oxygen concentra-
tion) to 0.16 (16% inspired oxygen concentration), there was no
substantial change in V̇E
; however, as FI
O2 was decreased below 0.16,
an inspired oxygen concentration that would result in PaO2 <
60 mmHg, V̇ E increased exponentially [50].
Metabolic acid–base disturbances trigger a compensatory response
in ventilation through peripheral chemoreceptors. A decrease in
plasma pH originating from non-respiratory causes stimulates
peripheral chemoreceptors and increases V̇ E . The decrease in
PaCO2 secondary to the increase in ventilatory drive reduces the
impact of metabolic acidosis on blood/extracellular pH. The com-
pensatory decrease in PaCO 2 in animals with metabolic acidosis is
self-limiting because of a decrease in central chemoreceptor activity
associated with the alkalinization of CSF pH, which limits further
reductions in PaCO 2 . Therefore, respiratory compensation of meta-
bolic acidosis may only partially offset the impact of the metabolic
acid–base disturbance on pH [46,51]. The decreased V̇ E and com-
pensatory increase in PaCO2 during metabolic alkalosis is also
limited because rising PCO 2 levels within the CNS increase the
ventilatory drive [51].
The respiratory compensation of metabolic acid–base disturbances
can be estimated in dogs. To date, there is limited data to allow cal-
culation of the expected respiratory compensation of metabolic
acid–base disturbances in cats, but it appears that the feline species
have a limited ability to reduce the impact of metabolic acidosis on
pH through an increase in pulmonary ventilation [51]. In dogs with
primary metabolic acidosis, for each mEq/L of decrease in plasma
HCO3
− from normal values (e.g., 20 mEq/L), a compensatory
decrease in PaCO 2 of 0.7 mmHg is expected to occur [51,52].
Changes in PaCO 2 of the same magnitude but in an opposite direc-
tion occur during metabolic alkalosis. Calculating the expected
respiratory compensation to metabolic acid–base derangements is
useful to differentiate simple from mixed acid–base disturbances
and the reader is referred to the specialized literature for further
details [51,52]. From an anesthesiologist’s perspective, it is impor-
tant to understand that anesthetic drugs may decrease central and
peripheral chemoreceptor activity, increasing PaCO 2 and inhibiting
the respiratory compensation to metabolic acidosis.
The cerebral cortex also provides input to the medullary respira-
tory center, mediating behavioral/voluntary changes in pulmonary
ventilation (Fig. 37.3). Behavioral changes such as fear, anxiety,
excitement, and pain are thought to be particularly important in
small animal species and will often increase ventilatory drive and
cause hypocapnia (low PaCO2
)/primary respiratory alkalosis because
of increased V̇ E and V̇ A [53]. Heat stress/hyperthermia may also
increase the ventilatory drive, particularly in animals with limited
ability to sweat through the skin, such as dogs. In these species,
panting is an important thermoregulatory mechanism. Panting is
characterized by a controlled increase in f and a decrease in V T with
the purpose of increasing evaporative heat loss through the upper
airways [54]. Although V̇E is increased in animals that are panting,
such change results mainly from increased deadspace ventilation
(increased ventilation to the conducting airways). Therefore, PaCO2
may be close to normal because the decrease in V T prevents V̇A
from increasing.
Pulmonary inputs to the medullary respiratory center include
the pulmonary stretch receptors (also known as “slowly adapting
stretch receptors”), J receptors, and irritant receptors (also known as
“rapidly adapting stretch receptors”) (Fig. 37.3) [44,46]. The pulmo-
nary stretch receptors, located in the smooth muscle of the airways
(trachea and bronchi) [55], are stimulated by distension of airway
smooth muscle (enlargement of airway cross-sectional area) as lung
volume increases during inspiration [56]. As there is an increase in
the frequency of depolarization from these receptors caused by
the conditions described above, a negative feedback mechanism
(the Hering–Breuer reflex) determines termination of inspiration
and prevents lung over-inflation [44,46]. Although the role of pul-
monary stretch receptors in controlling inspiration in adult humans
is now believed to be minor, in several veterinary species including
dogs, cats, and rabbits, it appears to play a significant role in the
regulation of V T [44,57]. The J receptors are nerve endings located
in the pulmonary interstitium and the conducting airways.
Stimulation of J receptors by inflammation results in rapid, shallow
breathing, mucus production, and bronchoconstriction [44].
Irritant receptors are nerve endings located in the epithelial cells of
the conducting airways that are activated by noxious stimuli such as
gases/chemicals and suspended particles [44]. Activation of these
receptors will alter the ventilatory rhythmic pattern and may lead
to rapid/shallow breathing. Sniffing and sneezing are caused by
the presence of irritants in the nasal cavity, whereas stimulation
of laryngeal and pharyngeal irritant receptors may cause cough,
mucus secretion, or, in severe situations, laryngospasm, bronchos-
pasm, and apnea.
Pulmonary ventilation
Physics of respiratory gases and the alveolar gas equation
Respiratory gases (oxygen, CO2
, and nitrogen) can be measured as
percent of total volume represented by each gas in the mixture (%)
or according to their partial pressure in millimeters of mercury
(mmHg) or kilopascals (1 kPa = 7.5 mmHg). Gases dissolve in
fluids and diffuse across membranes (e.g., alveolar–capillary mem-
brane) according to their partial pressures [58]. Dalton’s law states
that the total partial pressure of a gas mixture equals the sum of the
partial pressure of each gas. The partial pressure of each gas is
calculated by multiplying the percent volume of each gas in the
mixture by the barometric pressure (PB
), that is, the pressure exerted
by the atmosphere, and is expressed in mmHg or kPa (Fig. 37.5).
Because the degree of collision among gas molecules is influenced
by the gravitational forces exerted by the earth, the partial pressure
of a single gas or gas mixture will vary according to the altitude in
relation to sea level [58]. While the partial pressure of a gas or gas
mixture decreases in proportion to the decrease in barometric pres-
sure at higher altitudes, the percent volume of gas in the mixture
remains constant with changes in altitude and barometric pressure.
As such, FI
O2 is the same at sea level or the top of Mount Everest
(21%), the highest peak on earth (8848 meters above sea level).
However, because PB at Mount Everest is about one-third of that at

-- 718 of 1450 --

Chapter 37: Respiratory Physiology and Pathophysiology 	703
sea level (253 mmHg and 760 mmHg, respectively), oxygen partial
pressure in inspired gas (PI
O2
) at this altitude will be markedly low
(53 mmHg, calculated as FI
O2 × PB
), leading to a degree of hypox-
emia that is incompatible with life. While extremely high altitudes
(above 5500 meters or 18,000 feet) generally cannot sustain devel-
oped forms of life due to the low PI
O2
, another more realistic example
of the impact of altitude on inspired gases is illustrated in Fig. 37.5.
Compared to Rio de Janeiro (Brazil), located at sea level, the PI
O2 in
Fort Collins (United States), located 1525 meters above sea level, is
reduced from 160 mmHg to 134 mmHg due to altitude. Oxygen
partial pressure in alveolar gas (PA
O2
), calculated on the basis of the
alveolar gas equation, will be approximately 105 mmHg and
85 mmHg at sea level and an altitude of 1525 meters, respectively.
Assuming that the alveolar to arterial oxygen gradient (P(a-a)O2
) is
normally between 5 and 15 mmHg, normal PaO 2 levels in Rio de
Janeiro and Fort Collins are estimated to be approximately
95–100 mmHg and 75–80 mmHg, respectively.
The water vapor partial pressure (PH O2
) decreases the PB and
should be subtracted from the altitude-based barometric pressure if
ambient air humidity is elevated. In the presence of water vapor,
the sum of the partial pressures of a gas mixture should be equal to
PB minus PH O2	
(Table 37.4). For simplicity, it is typically assumed
that water vapor partial pressure is zero in ambient air and the sum
of partial pressure of gases equals the barometric pressure at a given
altitude (Table. 37.4). While water vapor partial pressure in inspired
gas is probably zero in a patient receiving 100% medical oxygen
without humidification, this simplification may stray from reality if
relative air humidity and ambient temperature are elevated. If the
relative air humidity is 51%, water vapor pressure of ambient air is
9 mmHg at 20 °C [58].
The composition of alveolar gas differs from inspired dry air
because, in addition to oxygen and nitrogen, it contains saturated
water vapor and CO 2 that diffused out of pulmonary capillary
blood, according to the alveolar gas equation (Fig. 37.2, Table 37.4):
P O 	FO 	P 	P P CO
R
	A 	I 	B 	H O
A
2 	2
2
2
Where PA
O2 is oxygen partial pressure in alveolar gas, F I
O2 is the
fraction of inspired oxygen, PB is the barometric pressure, PH O2	
is
the water vapor pressure, PA
CO 2 is the alveolar CO 2 partial pressure,
and R is the respiratory quotient. As inspired gases are warmed and
Partial
pressure
Concentration
(% volume) 	21% 	79% 	21% 	79%
Gas
measurement
unit
PIO 2
160 mmHg
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (sea level):
PB 760 mmHg
PIN 2
600 mmHg
P B (sea level)
760 mmHg
+ 	= 	+	P IO2
134 mmHg
P IN2
504 mmHg
Fort Collins, USA (1525 meters above sea level):
PB 638 mmHg
PB (1525 meters)
638 mmHg
=
O 2
O 2
O 2
O 2
N2
N2
N2
N2 	N2
N2
N 2
N2
N2
O 2 	O2
O 2
O 2
O2
N 2
N2
N2
N2 	N2
N2
N2
N 2
N2
O2
Figure 37.5 Diagrammatic representation of the influence of variations in altitude on ambient air assuming negligible air humidity (i.e., water vapor
partial pressure = zero) (see text for explanation). PI
O2
, inspired partial pressure of oxygen; PI
N2
, inspired partial pressure of nitrogen; PB
, barometric pressure.
Table 37.4 Composition of respiratory gases expressed as percent volume (%) and as partial pressure (mmHg) at sea level for air and 100% oxygen.
Gas 	Inspired gas (breathing air):
PH O2 = 9 mmHga
Alveolar gas (breathing air):
PH O2 = 47 mmHgb
Percent volume 	Partial pressure 	Percent volume 	Partial pressure
Nitrogen 	79% 	593 mmHg 	79% 	563 mmHg
Oxygen 	20.95% 	157 mmHg 	15.3% 	109 mmHg
Carbon dioxide 	0.04% 	0.3 mmHg 	5.7% 	41 mmHg
Total sumc 	100% 	751 mmHg 	100% 	713 mmHg
Gas 	Inspired gas (breathing 100% oxygen):
PH O2 = 0 mmHg
Alveolar gas (breathing 100% oxygen):
PH O2 = 47 mmHgb
Percent volume 	Partial pressure 	Percent volume 	Partial pressure
Nitrogen 	3% 	23 mmHg 	3% 	21 mmHg
Oxygen 	97% 	737 mmHg 	91.3% 	651 mmHg
Carbon dioxide 	− 	− 	5.7% 	41 mmHg
Total sumc 	100% 	760 mmHg 	100% 	713 mmHg
a Water vapor partial pressure assuming 51% relative humidity at 20 °C ambient temperature.
b Water vapor partial pressure assuming alveolar gas fully saturated with water and warmed (37 °C) after passing through the conducting airways.
c Total sum of partial pressures will equal atmospheric pressure at sea level (760 mmHg) if water vapor pressure is added.
Source: Data taken from Hlastala [58].

-- 719 of 1450 --

704 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
humidified after passing through the conducting airways, water
vapor partial pressure increases to 47 mmHg at 37 °C (Fig. 37.2,
Table 37.4). Carbon dioxide is highly diffusible across the alveolar–
capillary membrane; therefore, PA
CO2 is assumed to be equal to
PaCO2
. However, to account for the metabolic rate, PA
CO2 should be
divided by the R, that is, the ratio between CO2 production per minute
(V̇ CO2
) and oxygen consumption per minute (V̇ O2
), as follows:
R 

VCO
VO
2
2
The respiratory quotient is influenced by the diet/source of
energy metabolism and varies with the percentage of carbohy-
drates, proteins, and fats being oxidized. Oxidative metabolism of
carbohydrates, proteins, and fats results in R values of 1, 0.8, and
0.7, respectively [58]. The reason for this difference is that when
oxygen fuels carbohydrate metabolism, one molecule of CO2 is
formed for each molecule of oxygen consumed; during oxidative
metabolism of fats, a large share of the oxygen combines with
hydrogen atoms from the fats to form water instead of CO2
. In
humans consuming a Western diet, R has been determined to be
0.8 while studies in healthy conscious dogs report an R-value of
0.9 [43]. The respiratory quotient can be altered by species, breed,
nutritional state, hormonal circadian rhythm, and level of activity.
Because of changes in the energy metabolism, R values ranging
from 0.7 to 0.8 have been reported in critically ill dogs [59].
Kinetics of carbon dioxide elimination
The ideal gas exchange between pulmonary capillary blood and the
alveoli is illustrated in Fig. 37.2. As the CO 2 in mixed venous blood
(CO2 partial pressure in mixed venous blood [PvCO2
]) reaches the
pulmonary capillaries, it equilibrates with PA
CO2 . The rate of CO2
removal from the alveoli to ambient air, and consequently the
PA
CO2 and the CO 2 partial pressure in end-pulmonary capillary
blood (Pc´CO 2
), is determined by the volume of air flowing in and
out of alveoli over 1 min, that is, V̇A [9]. The PaCO 2 , which averages
CO2 of the end-capillary blood from all alveoli, indicates the adequacy
of V̇A . It is important to understand the variables that influence CO2
removal to manage V̇ A and PaCO2 in the perianesthetic setting.
The flow of gas in and out of the lungs is an essential component
of gas exchange between alveoli and the pulmonary capillary blood.
As explained before, V̇E
, is determined by the breathing frequency (f )
and by the volume of gas that enters and leaves the mouth or nostrils
in each breath, that is the tidal volume (V T
) (Fig. 37.2, Table 37.3).
VE 	T	V	f
Gas exchange takes place only at the level of the alveolar–capillary
barrier, more specifically in alveoli that are ventilated and perfused.
Areas of the respiratory tract that receive ventilation but that do not
participate in gas exchange, are referred to as “deadspace.” Because
the upper airways and tracheobronchial tree do not participate in
gas exchange, the relative volume necessary to fill these structures
during tidal breathing is termed “airway deadspace” (VDaw
). The
conducting airways are not the only component of the respiratory
system responsible for deadspace ventilation, however, ventilated
but not perfused alveoli also contribute to deadspace. The volume
of these alveolar units is referred to as “alveolar deadspace” (VDalv
).
“Physiologic deadspace” (VD phys
) is the total deadspace volume,
which includes VDaw
and VDalv
(Fig. 37.6A):
V 	V 	V	D 	D 	D	phys 	aw 	alv
Although V̇E is commonly measured to evaluate pulmonary ven-
tilation, the important factor in pulmonary gas exchange is the rate
at which alveolar air is exchanged with atmospheric air. Alveolar
ventilation per minute (V̇ A
) is described by:
 	 	 		V 	V 	V 	or V 	V 	V	A 	T 	D 	A 	E 	D	phys 	phys	
f
(B)
(C)
(A)
Deoxygenated blood: higher CO2 content 	PETCO 2
PECO 2	Oxygenated blood: lower CO2 content
Airway deadspace (V Daw)
Non-ventilated alveoli (shunt) Upper
airway
Trachea
Bronchi
Bronchioles
Alveoli with ideal V˙ A /Q˙ ratio
Alveolar deadspace (VDalv )
Pulmonary artery
Pv–CO2
PA CO2
PaCO2
VDalv
VDaw
VDphys
40
30
20
CO
 2 (mmHg)
CO
 2 (mmHg)
10
0
40
30
20
PA CO2
Inflection
point
PETCO 2
PECO 2
PaCO2
10
0
I
VD aw
Expired VT (mL)
V Talv
II 	III
Pulmonary vein
Slope
phase III
Slope
	phase II
 	V TCO 2, br
Figure 37.6 A. Diagrammatic representation of ventilation-to-perfusion relationships in relation to deadspace ventilation and the kinetics of carbon
dioxide elimination. B. and C. Graphic representation of expired carbon dioxide partial pressure changes in relation to expired V T (volumetric capnography)
(see the text for detailed explanation).

-- 720 of 1450 --

Chapter 37: Respiratory Physiology and Pathophysiology 	705
The formula above accounts for the volume of gas that enters and
leaves the physiologic deadspace per minute ( VD phys
). With the use of
volumetric capnography (further discussed below in this section),
V̇A can be measured. Alternatively, the alveolar ventilation equation
can be used to quantitate V̇ A
. In this equation, V̇ CO 2 is CO 2 produc-
tion per minute, PA
CO2 is the CO2 partial pressure in the alveolus,
which is assumed to be equal to PaCO 2
, and K is a constant:
 
V VCO
PaCO	
A 	K 	2
2
From this equation, it is evident that V̇A is inversely correlated
with PaCO 2
. If V̇ A is reduced by 50%, and V̇ CO2 is unchanged
( stable metabolism), PaCO2 will double and vice versa. Pulmonary
ventilation (V̇ E and V̇ A ) in the resting state should match the CO 2
production at the basal metabolic rate, which may vary among ani-
mal species and breeds [60]. Because energy expenditure and basal
metabolic rate are significantly higher at birth and progressively
decrease as aging occurs [60], V̇E and V̇A are significantly higher in
neonatal and pediatric patients than in adult animals. The clinical
implication of higher V̇ E and V̇ A in younger patients is that respira-
tory depression caused by anesthetic agents can rapidly lead to
severe hypercapnia and hypoxemia in these individuals.
Based on the second formula above (V̇A = V̇E – VD phys
), isolating V̇E
on one side of the equation shows that V̇E is the sum of VD phys
and V̇A .
However, during a single breath, gas exchange will depend on the
fraction of V T that goes beyond the VD phys
, and effectively ventilates
alveoli that are perfused. While both fractions of a V T are useful to
consider as independent variables, over time, there is some mixing
between the gas in the VDaw
and the alveolar gas due to diffusion of
gases, a phenomenon facilitated by the movement created by the
beating heart [61]. This “mixing” action probably explains why
PaCO 2 levels are usually not all that elevated in smaller dogs or cats
showing a very shallow tachypneic breathing pattern wherein V T
must be near VDaw
. It probably also explains why insufflation of
15 L/min oxygen deep into the trachea in an apneic horse will main-
tain PaO2 values in the 50–60 mmHg range (Dr. Wayne McDonell,
personal observation).
Experimentally, VD phys
has been evaluated in animals using several
techniques that are influenced to varying degrees by pulmonary
ventilation and perfusion abnormalities (V̇A /Q̇ mismatch and shunt).
As clinicians and researchers, it is important to consider the meth-
odology and the factors influencing the measurement as it may
alter the interpretation of the results [62–64]. Initial studies in
humans measured VDaw
using the single-breath nitrogen washout
test (Fowler’s technique), which involves plotting the partial pressure
of nitrogen in expired gas of a single breath after a maximal voluntary
inspiration of 100% oxygen [9,65]. However, the Fowler technique
is technically challenging to perform in conscious animals due to
the need for voluntary maximum inspiration.
Physiologic deadspace to tidal volume ratio (VD phys
/V T ), which is
the proportion of V T that does not contribute to gas exchange, has
been determined through application of the Bohr equation:
V
V
P CO 	P CO
P CO
D
T
A 	E
A
phys 	2 	2
2
In this equation, PA
CO2 represents mean alveolar CO 2 partial
pressure and PE
CO2 is the average CO 2 partial pressure in mixed
expired gas collected during a single breath. Effectively, the greater
the amount of gas from alveolar units that are ventilated and non-
perfused (VDalv
) that is added to the exhaled breath, the greater the
reduction of PE CO2 below PA
CO2
, thereby indicating a greater pro-
portion of deadspace ventilation in relation to V T
. However, before
the advent of volumetric capnography, measurement of PA
CO2
required complex methodology applicable only to the research set-
ting (for example, multiple inert gas elimination technique) [25,66].
Therefore, PaCO 2 has been substituted for PA
CO2 in the calculation
(Bohr–Enghoff equation) as follows:
V
V
PaCO 	P CO
PaCO
D
T
E	phys 	2 	2
2
The presence of perfused non-ventilated alveoli (shunt) or alve-
oli with low ventilation-to- perfusion (V̇A /Q̇ ) ratio does not increase
true VDalv
; however, the calculated VD phys
/V T ratio using the Enghoff
modification of the Bohr equation is impacted by ventilation-to-
perfusion inequalities caused by shunt and areas of low V̇ A
/Q̇ ratio
as these abnormalities will add CO 2
- rich mixed venous blood to
arterial blood, increasing PaCO2
, and resulting in greater overesti-
mation of VD phys
/V T by the Bohr–Enghoff equation. Specifically, any
calculation that replaces PA
CO2 with PaCO 2 will artificially increase
the deadspace determination in the presence of poorly ventilated
(low V̇A /Q̇ ratio) and non- ventilated alveoli (shunt) due to rising
PaCO 2 levels, assuming constant V T [62–64]. In patients with lower-
than- expected PaO 2 values in relation to the F I
O2
, the impact of
shunt and low V̇A /Q̇ regions on gas exchange should be considered
when applying these calculations to patient ventilatory management.
In addition to the Bohr–Enghoff VD phys
/V T
, the alveolar deadspace
fraction (VDalv
/V T
), that is the fraction of V T that ventilates non-
perfused alveoli, has been proposed to be estimated by replacing
PE CO2 with PET
CO2 [67]:
V
V
PaCO 	P CO
PaCO
D
T
ET	alv 	2 	2
2
Calculation of VDalv
/V T as described above will result in a signifi-
cantly smaller deadspace value as it reflects only a fraction of total
(physiologic) deadspace [62–64]. Under normal circumstances,
PET
CO2 is up to 5 mmHg lower than PaCO2 because of dilution of
alveolar gas, which contains CO 2
, with gas from deadspace which
does not contain CO2
. As a simplification of the formula above, VDalv
is considered to be increased if the arterial to end-tidal CO2 gradient
(P(a-ET)CO2
) is abnormally high. In this case, because PA
CO2 is
replaced by PaCO 2
, VDalv
/V T and P(a-et)CO2 will also increase in
the presence of V̇A /Q̇ mismatch caused by shunted flow and a low
V̇A
/Q̇ ratio leading to oxygenation impairment, in a similar way as
the Bohr–Enghoff VD phys
/V T [68]. Therefore, in the presence of the
above-described conditions, an increase in VDalv
/V T and P(a-et)CO2
reflects an increase in the scatter of V̇ A
/Q̇ mismatch in the lung
rather than only an increase in VDalv
.
In the research setting, VD phys
/V T can be determined by collecting
arterial blood gas samples to measure PaCO 2 as an equivalent to
PA
CO2 as well as collecting exhaled gases in a mixing chamber, or
Douglas bag, to measure CO2 in mixed expired gas (PE CO2
) in large
animals (horses and cows) and dogs [25,69]. More recently, with the
introduction of volumetric capnography for monitoring patients
during mechanical ventilation, VD phys
/V T can be more practically
and reliably measured in intubated small animals [70]. Volumetric
capnography is the graphic representation of expired CO2 versus

-- 721 of 1450 --

706 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
expired V T measured using a capnograph and a pneumotachometer
(device that measures flow over time) placed at the end of an
endotracheal tube.
The diagram in Fig. 37.6A shows the composition of deadspace
and its relationship with alveoli presenting different ventilation-to-
perfusion ratios. If alveoli present an ideal ventilation-to- perfusion
ratio (V̇A /Q̇ = 1), an equilibrium is established between deoxygen-
ated (mixed venous) blood with higher CO2 content entering the
pulmonary capillary and alveolar CO2 (PA
CO2
). The mixed expired
CO2 in each tidal breath reflects the average CO 2 from alveoli that
are effectively ventilated and perfused over a range of V̇ A
/Q̇ ratios,
which contribute to CO2 elimination, and alveoli that are ventilated
but not perfused (VDalv
), which do not contribute to CO2 elimina-
tion. An increase in VDalv
, lowers CO 2 in mixed expired gas (PE
CO2
)
and increases the gradient between PA
CO2 (or PaCO 2 according to
the Bohr–Enghoff equation) and PE CO2 [62–64].
The kinetics of CO 2 elimination assessed by the volumetric cap-
nography curve has three distinct phases (Fig. 37.6B). Phase I repre-
sents exhaled gas from the upper airways, which does not contain
CO 2 . Phase II represents expired gas from the lower portions of the
airways mixed with CO2
- rich alveolar gas, which causes a rapid rise
in CO2
. Phase III is the expired volume that represents pure alveolar
gas as the CO 2 curve flattens and plateaus. The slope of phase III
reflects the emptying of alveoli with different time constants. In
patients with small airway disease/bronchoconstriction, or with
lung disease, resistance to gas flow may differ substantially among
alveolar units [71]. During expiration, alveoli where the conducting
airways offer low resistance to gas flow empty first (“fast” alveoli),
whereas poorly ventilated alveolar units due to increased resistance
to gas flow take longer to empty. Because alveoli with different
time constants differ in the speed they are emptied during expira-
tion, the slope of phase III increases [71]. The area under the CO 2
curve represents the total amount of CO2 exhaled during a single
breath (V T
CO2,br
). The CO2 eliminated per minute, which is assumed
to be equivalent to CO2 production per minute (V̇ CO2
), is calculated
by multiplying the respiratory rate (f) by the V T
CO2,br
.
The airway–alveolar interface, identified as the inflection point
of phase II, is the limit between exhaled gas from lower conducting
airways (bronchioles) and CO2 - rich alveolar gas (Fig. 37.6C). The
expired volume below and above the inflection point represents
the airway deadspace (VDaw
) and the alveolar tidal volume (VTalv
),
respectively. The CO 2 level at the midpoint of phase III slope,
starting at the inflection point and ending at the end-tidal partial
pressure of CO 2 (PET
CO2 ), represents the average CO 2 of all alveolar
units (PA
CO2
) [64,66,72]. Studies measuring PA
CO2 by the multiple
inert gas elimination technique have validated PA
CO2 measured by
volumetric capnography [66,72].
The area above the volumetric capnography curve, which reflects
deadspace ventilation, shows that VD phys
(VDaw
+ VDalv
) calculations
based on the Bohr equation (Fig. 37.7A) are overestimated when
PaCO 2 is used to replace PA
CO2 in the Enghoff modification of the
original formula (Bohr–Enghoff equation) (Fig. 37.7B).
In heathy individuals, VD phys
is representative of VDaw
as VDalv
is neg-
ligible. In normal conscious humans at rest, VD phys
is approximately
2 mL/kg (150 mL) and V T is 6–7 mL/kg of ideal body weight
(assuming a V T of 450–500 mL in a 75 kg adult human), resulting
in a VD phys
/V T ratio of approximately 30% [65]. Veterinary species
in general have significantly larger deadspace volumes (indexed
to body weight) than humans. Under normal conditions, VDaw
remains relatively constant, however, V T can change for a variety of
reasons (e.g., thermoregulation, excitement, and acid–base distur-
bances) and therefore alter the relative amount of deadspace per V T
.
As such, it is important to consider the deadspace volume as well
as V T indexed to ideal body weight, particularly as it relates to
both anesthetic equipment and mechanical ventilation settings. In
an experimental setting, unsedated normal tracheostomized dogs
breathing quietly through a standard endotracheal tube had a VD phys
of 5.9 mL/kg [17]. In conscious healthy horses and cows breathing
through a face mask, the Bohr–Enghoff VD phys
(calculated using a
correction factor for the added deadspace represented by the face-
mask) was about 5.2 and 3.7 mL/kg [25]. Recent observations in
anesthetized dogs receiving mechanical ventilation have confirmed
that VDaw
estimated by volumetric capnography is substantially
larger in the canine species (6.5–7.6 mL/kg) than the VDaw
calculated
using the single-breath nitrogen washout test (Fowler’s method) in
humans (2 mL/kg) [65,69,70]. Although some of the measured
Airway deadspace (VDaw
)
Alveolar deadspace (VDalv )
VDaw 	VDalv
PACO2
alveolar–airway interface
P ETCO2
PECO2
(A) 	(B)
40
30
20
CO
2 (mmHg)
10
0
Deadspace to tidal volume ratio (Bohr):
=
VT
Expired VT (mL)
V Daw 	VDalv
PACO2
alveolar–airway interface
P ETCO 2
PaCO2
PE CO2
40
30
20
CO2
 (mmHg)
10
0
Expired VT (mL)
PACO 2 – PECO2
PACO 2
Deadspace to tidal volume ratio (Bohr-Enghoff):
VDphys
	V Dphys 	=
VT
PaCO2 – P ECO2
PaCO2
Figure 37.7 Graphic representation of expired carbon dioxide partial pressure changes in relation to expired V T (volumetric capnography) showing the
area used to calculate deadspace volumes according to the A. Bohr and B. Bohr–Enghoff equations.

-- 722 of 1450 --

Chapter 37: Respiratory Physiology and Pathophysiology 	707
differences in deadspace between humans and animals can be
attributed to the use of the Bohr–Enghoff equation, which overesti-
mates the VD phys
/V T ratio, the use of this method likely did not have
a major influence because measurements were obtained under con-
ditions where alveolar deadspace, shunt, and V̇A
/Q̇ mismatch were
minimal (standing horses and cows, healthy conscious and anesthe-
tized dogs) [73]. Because of differences in VD phys
between animal
species and humans, V T settings during mechanical ventilation can-
not be directly extrapolated from humans to animals, as discussed
further in Chapter 38.
The relationship between V̇E , V̇A
, and VD phys
is critical to under-
standing the kinetics of CO2 in both health and disease. Clinically,
an increase in total deadspace volume (VD phys
) can be due to a
change in VDaw
(either physiologic due to bronchodilation or iatro-
genic with artificial airways/apparatus deadspace) and/or VDalv
. An
increase in f with a reduction in V T
, and therefore the creation of a
higher VD phys
/V T ratio, is extremely common in conscious animals
for a variety of reasons, including thermoregulation. In healthy ani-
mals, V̇A and as a result, PaCO2 are maintained within physiological
limits through central and peripheral chemoreceptor stimulation as
previously discussed. In disease states, increases in VDalv
commonly
occur with low pulmonary perfusion pressures secondary to a low
cardiac output (CO), pulmonary thromboembolism, severe airway
disease, and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) [74–77].
An increase in VDalv
does not necessarily impair arterial oxygenation
(PaO2
) if the capillary flow that bypasses ventilated alveoli is perfus-
ing well- ventilated lung areas. PaCO2 levels can also be maintained
within normal levels when there is an increase in VDalv
by increasing
f or V T to maintain V̇A
. Arterial blood gases (PaO2 and PaCO 2
) may
therefore be maintained within normal ranges in awake spontane-
ously breathing animals with increases in VDalv
. In patients with
underlying disease and patients under general anesthesia, a com-
pensatory increase in V̇ A in the face of increased VDalv
may not
occur. In these instances, PaCO2 will rise due to a reduction in V̇A
.
In addition to impacting PaCO2 values, decreases in V̇A associated
with an increase in VD phys
may also have an impact on a patient’s
oxygenation by lowering the PA
O2 if inspired gases are not enriched
with oxygen (Table 37.5).
Effects of altered alveolar ventilation
While changes in deadspace may not necessarily impact the ability
to achieve adequate gas exchange, when V̇A is altered significant
changes in PA
CO2 and PA
O2 can occur (Fig. 37.2, Table 37.5). As
previously discussed, V̇A is inversely correlated with PaCO2 as
described by the alveolar ventilation equation (V̇ A = K × V̇ CO2
/
PaCO 2
). Hyperventilation occurs when V̇A is excessive relative to
metabolic rate; as a result, PaCO2 is reduced. An increase in f,
referred to as “tachypnea,” may not result in hyperventilation if a
decrease in V T prevents V̇ E and V̇A from increasing. Hypoventilation
is present when PaCO2 rises because V̇A is low relative to V̇CO2 . The
effects of hypoventilation on PA
O 2 and PaO 2 in a healthy dog
breathing ambient air or 100% oxygen are illustrated in Table 37.5.
In an individual breathing ambient air at sea level with normal V̇ A
(e.g., PaCO 2 = 36 mmHg), PA
O2 is predicted to be approximately
110 mmHg by the alveolar gas equation. If there is a decrease in V̇ A
(e.g., PaCO 2 increases from 36 mmHg to 72 mmHg), PA
O2 decreases
from 110 mmHg to approximately 70 mmHg because of rising CO 2
levels within the alveoli. Considering that the alveolar to arterial
oxygen gradient (P(a-a)O 2
) is 5–15 mmHg for a healthy individual
breathing ambient air, PaO 2 can be predicted to be decreased from
95–105 during normal ventilation to 55–65 mmHg during
hypoventilation. If air is replaced by 100% oxygen in inspired gas
(FI
O2 = 0.97), PA
O2 will be markedly increased (612 mm Hg) despite
severe hypoventilation. Although P(a-a)O 2 may increase over
time due to absorption atelectasis caused by elevated FI
O2 , PaO2 can
be estimated to be approximately 500 mmHg in the presence of
severe hypoventilation with an F I
O2 close to 1.0.
Pulmonary mechanics
Fluctuating pressure gradients between the airway opening and the
alveoli cause air to flow in and out of the lungs. The factors that
contribute to these pressure gradients and the measurement of their
magnitude are referred to as “pulmonary mechanics.” During spon-
taneous breathing, a negative pressure gradient between the airway
opening (mouth, nostrils, or the interface between the breathing
circuit and the endotracheal tube) and the alveoli/pleural cavity is
responsible for the inflow of gas to the lungs. In anesthetized
patients, a mechanical ventilator is commonly used to create a posi-
tive pressure gradient between the airway opening (endotracheal
tube) and the alveoli to generate flow of gases into the lungs during
inspiration. Factors that influence the development of a pressure
gradient between the airway opening and the alveoli include the
elasticity of the lungs, thoracic cage, and diaphragm (chest wall),
in addition to the resistance to flow between these two regions.
These properties determine the normal distribution of airflow
within the lung and the energy expended to achieve optimal venti-
lation (work of breathing). Both anesthesia and disease can alter
the elastic properties and resistance of the respiratory system,
impacting the ability to achieve adequate alveolar ventilation. While
pulmonary physical characteristics are generally measured on the
whole lung in the clinical setting, regional differences in physical
properties are also important in determining normal distribution of
ventilation.
Pressures measured in the respiratory system are illustrated in
Fig. 37.8. By convention transpulmonary pressure (PL
) is the
difference in pressure across the entire respiratory system, from the
Table 37.5 The effects of hypoventilation on gas exchange in a dog breathing ambient air or 100% oxygen.
Normal ventilation, ambient air
(PaCO2 = 36 mmHg and FI
O2 = 0.21)
Hypoventilation, ambient air
(PaCO 2 = 72 mmHg and FI
O2 = 0.21)
Hypoventilation, 100% oxygen
(PaCO2 = 72 mmHg and FI
O2 = 0.97)
PA
O2 = (760–47) × 0.21 – 40a
PA
O2 = 110 mmHg
PA
O2 = (760–47) × 0.21–80a
PA
O2 = 70 mmHg
PA
O2 = (760–47) × 0.97−80a
PA O2 = 612 mmHg
PaO 2 = 95 to 105 mmHgb 	PaO2 = 55 to 65 mmHgb 	PaO2 = 450 to 520 mmHgc
a PA O2 = (PB –PH2O
) × FI
O2 − (PA CO2 /R) where PA O2 is the oxygen partial pressure in alveolar gas, PB is the local barometric pressure (760 mmHg at sea level), PH O2 is the water vapor
pressure after humidification of inspiratory gases (47 mmHg), F I
O2 is the inspired oxygen fraction (0.21 for ambient air and 0.97 mmHg for 100% oxygen), and the second term
is calculated by considering PA
CO2 as equal to PaCO2, and dividing it by the respiratory quotient (0.9 in healthy dogs) [43].
b PaO2 levels assuming a normal alveolar to arterial oxygen gradient for ambient air (P(a-a)O2 = 5 to 15 mmHg).
c PaO2 levels considering that the use of 100% in inspired gas increases P(a- a)O2 due to absorption atelectasis.

-- 723 of 1450 --

708 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
pressure at the airway opening (Pao
) to the pleural pressure (P pl
);
however, intensive care specialists and anesthesiologists often
define PL as the difference between alveolar and pleural pressures
(Palv−Ppl
), creating some confusion in the literature [10,78]. The
pressure gradient from atmospheric pressure (taken as Pao
) to the
pleural space (Ppl
) is responsible for the movement of air to and
from the lungs during spontaneous breathing. The Pao is always
0 cmH2
O at 1 atmosphere throughout the respiratory cycle in non-
instrumented, conscious, and spontaneously breathing animals.
With initiation of inspiration, as active muscular effort enlarges the
pleural cavity through expansion of the thoracic wall and contrac-
tion of the diaphragm, P pl becomes more negative and causes Palv to
become slightly sub-atmospheric (negative). The slightly negative
pressure gradient between Pao (0 cmH2
O) and Palv (e.g., −1 cmH2 O)
drives airflow from the mouth/nostrils to the alveoli, and lung vol-
ume increases. In contrast to inspiration, expiration is normally
passive and depends on the elastic recoil of the lungs, diaphragm,
and intercostal muscles, which causes P pl to become less negative
and returns the lungs to a resting position, that is, to FRC. The
horse is a notable exception in that abdominal muscle contraction
plays a part in normal expiratory activity, producing a biphasic
mode of exhalation. As the Ppl becomes less negative, Palv may
slightly increase above atmospheric pressure. Reversal of the pres-
sure gradient during expiration (Palv > Pao
) causes air to flow from
the alveoli to the airway opening/atmosphere [49,79].
The pressure difference between the airway opening and the
pleural space, PL (Fig. 37.8), can be measured using a differential
pressure transducer connected to the airway opening to measure Pao
(face mask or endotracheal tube) and to an esophageal balloon
placed in the thoracic esophagus to provide a surrogate measure of
P pl
. The change in lung volume (or V T ) can be measured using a
spirometer, a body plethysmograph, or a pneumotachometer [10].
The pressure gradient between the alveoli and the pleural cavity
(Palv−Ppl ) is traditionally defined as elastic recoil pressure of the lung
(Pel(L)
) (Fig. 37.8 and 37.9) [78]. In spontaneously breathing sub-
jects, Pel(L) measured at the end of inspiration provides an estimate
of the lung’s ability to deflate/return to its resting position (FRC). In
anesthetized individuals receiving positive-pressure ventilation,
Palv−Ppl provides an assessment of the positive pressure applied to
the lung tissue per se, excluding the effects of the chest wall and
abdomen [80].
In spontaneously breathing animals, the relationship between
change in pleural pressure (∆Ppl
) and the resultant change in lung
volume (∆V) is known as “respiratory system compliance” (C RS
) or
“total compliance” [9,61].
C V L
P 	cmH O
	RS
pl
( )
( 	)	2
As shown by the formula above, CRS describes the ability of the
lungs to distend in response to a change in pleural pressure.
Compliance provides a measure of how stiff the lung is and is
Upper airway
Pressure at the
airway opening (Pao)
Alveolar
pressure (Palv) Transpulmonary
pressure (P L)
Elastic recoil
pressure
of the lung (P el(L) )
Pleural
pressure (Ppl)
Pressure at
body surface (PBS)
Pressure across
the chest wall
(Pcw )
Trachea
Lung
Bronchi/bronchioles
Alveoli
Thoracic wall
Figure 37.8 Diagrammatic representation of pressures (white boxes) and of pressure gradients (gray boxes) measured across the respiratory system
(see text for explanation). Source: Adapted from Loring et al. [78].
Volume
Tidal volume
Functional
residual
capacity
Lung
volume
Alveolar
pressure
Pleural
pressure
Inspiration 	Expiration
Elastic recoil
pressure*
+2
0
–2
Pressure (cmH
2 O)
–4
–6
–8
Figure 37.9 Changes in lung volume, alveolar, and pleural pressures during
spontaneous breathing. Note that difference between alveolar and pleural
pressure at the end of inspiration (elastic recoil pressure of the lung) may
also be referred to as “transpulmonary pressure” in some literature.
Source: Ewart [79], Elsevier.

-- 724 of 1450 --

Chapter 37: Respiratory Physiology and Pathophysiology 	709
inversely correlated with elastance, that is, the force causing the lungs
to recoil to FRC. CRS is also known as “total compliance” because
both the lungs and chest wall (thoracic wall and diaphragm) pro-
vide an elastic resistance to lung expansion on inspiration. However,
in spontaneously breathing animals, the contribution of the latter to
the total respiratory system compliance is not captured when intra-
pleural pressures are measured due to the effort exerted by the
inspiratory muscles. When the chest wall and diaphragm are par-
tially or completely relaxed (and do not contribute any effort to
breathing), however, as often occurs during general anesthesia, they
become an important contributor to the elastic resistance to inspi-
ration and total compliance (C RS
). During general anesthesia, the
relationship of CRS to the individual compliance of the lungs (CL
)
and chest wall (C CW ) is additive, because the lungs and chest wall are
arranged concentrically and can be expressed as:
1 	1 	1
C 	C 	C	RS 	L 	CW
During positive-pressure ventilation, the pressure gradient that
drives gas into the lungs is no longer negative and is determined by
the difference between airway pressure measured at end-inspiration
and end-expiration (∆Paw ). Therefore, in anesthetized patients
receiving mechanical ventilatory support, CRS is measured as the
ratio between change in lung volume ∆V (that is the V T delivered
by the ventilator) and the change in airway pressure (∆Paw ) during
a mechanical breath:
C V L
P 	cmH O
	RS
aw
( )
( 	)	2
Prior to the advent of spirometry, in anesthetized patients receiv-
ing positive-pressure ventilation, airway pressures at end-inspiration
and end-expiration were used for pressure determinations, and
ventilator settings (volume displaced by the bellows) were used for
volume calculations. As further described in Chapter 38, with the
use of modern anesthesia ventilators incorporating built-in flow
sensors (built-in spirometry) or with the use of stand-alone mul-
tiparameter monitors incorporating flow sensors that are placed
between the endotracheal tube and the breathing circuit (near patient
spirometry), more accurate determination of changes in volume
and pressure can be obtained during mechanical ventilation [81,82].
The difference in how C RS is measured in spontaneously breathing
versus animals receiving positive-pressure ventilation is an impor-
tant concept for the veterinary clinician as the contribution of the
different components (lung and/or chest wall) to total compliance
needs to be considered when interpreting values and when imple-
menting ventilatory support strategies.
Compliance is further characterized as either dynamic, static, or
quasistatic. In spontaneously breathing animals, dynamic compli-
ance describes changes in lung volume per unit change in pleural
pressure in the presence of airflow. If the patient is receiving
mechanical ventilation in a volume-controlled mode without an
inspiratory pause (period of zero flow at the end of inspiration),
then dynamic compliance is measured as the change in lung volume
per unit change in airway pressure (peak inspiratory pressure minus
end-expiratory pressure) (Fig. 37.10A). Dynamic C RS is altered by
changes in the elastic properties of the respiratory system and
by changes in airway resistance (R aw ). Static and quasistatic C RS
describes changes in lung volume per unit change in pressure dur-
ing a brief pause at end-inspiration (zero airflow). Because patient
cooperation is required, static compliance measurements are often
performed in anesthetized animals receiving mechanical ventila-
tory support with an inspiratory pause (Fig. 37.10B) [30,83–85].
The pause at end-inspiration, before passive expiration begins,
must be long enough to allow airflow to equilibrate between alveoli
with faster and slower filling rates, the latter reflective of areas with
heightened resistance to airflow that may be increased during
400
(A) Volume-controlled ventilation
Inspiration 	Expiration
(B) VCV with inspiratory pause
Inspiration 	Expiration
(C)
Inspiration 	Expiration 	Inspiration 	Expiration
200
Tidal volume (mL)
0
400
200
Flow (mL/second)
Airway Pressure (cm H
2O)
0
200
400
15
10 	Ppeak
End-expiratory
pressure
P peak
Period
of zero
flow
Period
of zero
flow
Period
of zero
flow
P plat
End-expiratory
pressure
P peak 	Pplat
Ppeak 	R aw
Pplat
End-expiratory
pressure
End-expiratory
pressure
5
0
–5
VCV with inspiratory
pause (decreased C stat) (D) VCV with inspiratory
pause (increased Raw )
Figure 37.10 Diagrammatic representation of changes in lung volume (tidal volume), flow, and airway pressure measured at the distal end of an endotracheal tube
in a normal anesthetized individual during: A. Volume-controlled ventilation (VCV) without an inspiratory pause. B. VCV with an inspiratory pause (period of
zero flow at end-inspiration). C. During constant volume ventilation, an increase in the gradient between plateau pressure (Pplat
) and end-expiratory pressure occurs
with a decrease in static or quasistatic CRS
. D. An increase in the gradient between peak inspiratory pressure (Ppeak
) and Pplat occurs with an increase in R aw
.

-- 725 of 1450 --

710 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
pathological conditions (e.g., bronchitis/pneumonia in small
animals and small airway disease in horses) [84,85]. If the
duration of the inspiratory pause is between 0.5 and 2 s, frictional
resistance imposed by the airways may impact measurements in
humans; therefore compliance measurements are better defined as
quasistatic [84,85]. Once gas flow distribution has been completed,
that is, the resistive properties of the respiratory system are over-
come, the ratio between V T and the change in airway pressure
(plateau minus end-expiratory pressure) reflects solely the elastic
properties of the respiratory system (static or quasistatic C RS )
(Fig. 37.10C). Lungs develop low static compliance (become stiffer)
with a reduction in lung volume, such as occurs with regional atelec-
tasis, pulmonary edema, or fibrosis. In the case of dynamic compliance,
increases in Raw can contribute to decreases in compliance measure-
ments. For example, asthma (heaves, recurrent airway obstruction)
in horses and asthma (bronchopulmonary disease) in cats decreases
dynamic lung compliance via increased R aw [86,87].
As previously mentioned in this section, for gas to flow into the
lungs, a pressure gradient must be developed to overcome, in
addition to the elastic resistance, the nonelastic resistance of the res-
piratory system. The relationship between the pressure gradient and
gas flow illustrated in Fig. 37.11A is analogous to a fundamental
principle of physics, referred to as Ohm's law, wherein voltage
(equivalent to pressure gradient along a tube) is proportional to
current (equivalent to gas flow) multiplied by resistance [88].
Voltage 	Current Resistance
Or in terms of gas flow:
P 	Flow rate Resistance
Rearranging Ohm’s law to determine resistance:
Resistance P
Flow Rate
According to the Hagen–Poiseuille equation, laminar gas flow
through an unbranched straight tube is proportional to the pressure
gradient across the tube and the fourth power of the radius of the
tube, and inversely proportional to the viscosity of the gas and
length of the tube:
Flow rate P 	radius
viscosity length of tube
4
8
Laminar flow: 	Turbulent flow:
P1 	P2 	P1 	P2
ΔP 	ΔP
ΔP
ΔP
Flow velocity 	Flow velocity
flow
Resistance = 	=
ΔP
ΔP, pressure gradient across a tube; η, gas viscosity;
I, length of tube; r, radius of tube; ρ, gas density
ΔP = constant × ρ × flow 2
	8ηl
πr 4	flow rate
flow
(A) 	(B)
Figure 37.11 A. Diagrammatic representation of laminar flow through an unbranched tube and of the linear relationship between the pressure gradient
across a tube (∆P) and flow velocity during laminar flow. During laminar flow, molecules of a fluid (gas or liquid) are moving in a smooth and
streamlined pattern with a greater velocity at the center of the tube. The relationship between the pressure gradient developed (∆P), that is, the drop in
pressure as gas flows down an unbranched tube, and the flow rate follows a linear pattern [89,90]. Because the pressure gradient equals resistance to gas
flow, resistance (R) can be calculated as R = ∆P/flow rate. B. Diagrammatic representation of turbulent flow through an unbranched tube and of the
nonlinear relationship between ∆P and flow velocity during turbulent flow (see text for explanation). Source: Adapted from Mitchell and Cheesman [89].

-- 726 of 1450 --

Chapter 37: Respiratory Physiology and Pathophysiology 	711
By combining Ohm’s law and the Hagen–Poiseuille equation
(substituting Hagen–Poiseuille’s determinants of flow into Ohm’s
law), the resistance to laminar gas flow can be established:
Resistance viscosity length of tube
radius
8 4
Resistance to laminar flow therefore increases with an increase in
the tube length or a reduction in tube radius. The significance of
this equation for the anesthetist is the impact of the diameter of a
patient’s airway on the resistance to gas flow. An increase in resistance
can result from a variety of conditions such as bronchospasm, con-
genital or acquired anatomic abnormalities in the airway, and/or
the presence of mucus, exudates, foreign bodies, or tumors within
the airway lumen [89,90]. If a narrow endotracheal tube is used in a
patient with an already increased airway resistance due to respiratory
disease (e.g., tracheal collapse or brachycephalic airway syndrome),
there may be a dramatic increase in resistance to airflow during
anesthesia with spontaneous ventilation. For example, if the diam-
eter of the upper airway is reduced by 50% due to pathology or
secondary to the placement of a small endotracheal tube, the R aw
goes up 16-fold. Of note, with laminar flow, viscosity is the only gas
property to influence resistance.
While the above relationship between gas flow, pressure gradient,
and resistance is valid during laminar flow, when flow rate exceeds
a critical velocity, it becomes turbulent as gas molecules swirl
and turn in a chaotic pattern rather than in an orderly manner.
In this circumstance, the relationship between the pressure gradient
as gas flows through a straight tube (∆P) and the flow rate is no
longer linear. Fig. 37.11B shows the physics of turbulent flow. In
this case, ∆P will depend on gas density and the squared flow as
follows [89,90]:
P 	constant gas density flow 2
With turbulent flow, the change in pressure is inversely propor-
tional to the fifth power of the radius of the tube (Fanning equa-
tion); therefore, airway radius has an even greater impact on air
flow than with laminar flow [91]. In a straight unbranched tube, the
transition from laminar flow to turbulent flow can be estimated by
the Reynold number (Re), a nondimensional number that is derived
from gas velocity, tube diameter, gas density, and gas viscosity.
Re linear gas velocity tube diameter gas density
gas viscosiity
As the Reynolds number increases above 2000, air flow becomes
progressively more turbulent. While airway resistance and its deter-
minants are generally explained in terms of laminar flow, the struc-
ture of airways results in a mix of laminar and turbulent flow in the
major airways. In addition to the variables included in calculating
the Reynolds number, branching and/or irregularities in the tube
predispose to turbulent flow. In general, resistance to gas flow is
significantly greater with turbulent flow relative to laminar flow and
turbulent flow is dependent on gas density and not viscosity.
Because flow may become turbulent during pathological conditions
that include narrowing/partial obstruction of the airways, incorpo-
rating helium, a gas with less density relative to oxygen or air, as a
carrier gas with oxygen (mixture of 70% helium and 30% oxygen)
may reduce resistance to gas flow [92,93]. As gas flow is usually
laminar in the distal airways (and therefore not influenced by gas
density), helium, which has a viscosity similar to air, may be less
useful in animals with mild-to-moderate bronchoconstriction of
the distal airways but it may have a positive impact in the presence
of severe bronchospasm affecting the whole bronchial tree, as gas
flow is likely turbulent under these circumstances [89]. In anesthe-
tized horses, an alveolar recruitment maneuver with a mixture of
70% helium and 30% oxygen increased dynamic CRS and improved
pulmonary oxygen exchange (decreased P(a-a)O2
) when compared
to 100% oxygen [93]. However, dynamic CRS is altered by the resis-
tive and elastic properties of the respiratory system, and it remains
to be demonstrated that the use of helium as a carrier gas would
improve pulmonary mechanics by reducing resistance to gas flow in
horses [93].
During spontaneous ventilation, the relationship between the
pressure gradient across the respiratory system during inspira-
tion, that is, the pressure at the airway opening (Pao
) minus the
pleural pressure (P pl ) and the rate of inspiratory airflow (usually
expressed in liters per second, L/s) is known as R aw (expressed in
cmH 2
O/L/s) [61,79].
R P 	P
Flow rate
	aw
ao 	pl	( 	)
Airway resistance can be calculated during mechanical ventila-
tion if using a volume-controlled mode with an inspiratory pause
during anesthesia (Fig. 37.10D). Considering that plateau pressure
(Pplat
) recorded at the end of an inspiratory pause is the pressure that
reflects the elastic properties of the respiratory system, while peak
inspiratory pressure (Ppeak ) is the pressure that is necessary to
overcome both the frictional resistance imposed by the airways
(resistance) and the elastic properties of the respiratory system, R aw
is calculated as the gradient between P peak and P plat
, divided by the
flow rate [84,85]:
R P 	P
Flow rate
	aw
peak 	plat	( 	)
In conscious animals, measurement of R aw can be obtained by
simultaneous determination of instantaneous airflow with a pneu-
motachometer connected to the airway opening (mouth or nostrils)
via a facemask and of the gradient between Pao and P pl (estimated by
an esophageal balloon catheter), using a differential pressure trans-
ducer. The upper airways including the nasal cavity, pharynx, and
larynx are major determinants of resistance to airflow within the
respiratory system, generally contributing over 50% of the total
R aw [79]. Due to the extensive branching of the airways and dra-
matic increase in total airway area toward the periphery of the lung,
despite the narrow radius, airflow velocity in bronchioles is very
low and follows a laminar pattern. Therefore, the relative
contribution of the small airways and bronchioles to total R aw is low
(< 10%) unless marked lower airway disease/bronchospasm is
present [79]. As with lung compliance, resistance to airflow changes
with lung volume. As lung volume decreases, R aw increases, with
dramatic increases occurring at lung volumes below FRC.
Presence of turbulent flow and increased R aw directly impact the
work of breathing, which is the energy spent by respiratory muscles
(measured in joules) for air to flow in and out of the lungs. Work of
breathing is measured as the product of pressure changes across the
respiratory system (Pao − Ppl in spontaneously breathing animals)

-- 727 of 1450 --

712 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
and the volume of gas moved (V T
) [89,90]. Because inspiration is an
active process that involves contraction of the diaphragm and chest
wall muscles, most of the work done occurs during inspira-
tion [89,90]. Respiratory work is further divided into elastic work
(required to overcome the recoil of the lung) and resistive work
(required to overcome the frictional opposition or resistance to air-
flow) [89,90]. As is discussed in Chapter 38, turbulent flow and
increased R aw are likely to be present in dogs with brachycephalic
airway syndrome or collapsed trachea and horses with severe bron-
chospasm secondary small airway disease (heaves). The consequent
increase in the respiratory work may lead to fatigue of inspiratory
muscles, therefore, mechanical ventilatory support may be required
in these patients.
Distribution of ventilation
The distribution of inspired gases during inspiration is not
completely homogenous throughout the lung, with gravity playing
a major role in regional pulmonary ventilation. Specifically, due
to the weight of the lung in the thorax, P pl is more negative
(sub-atmospheric) in the uppermost part of the thorax relative to
the lowermost portion and the negative pressure gradient between
the alveoli and the pleural cavity (Palv − P pl
) is greater in dorsal lung
compared to ventral lung areas. Therefore, the average alveolar size
is larger in the uppermost areas and smaller in the lowermost
areas of the lung at end-expiration (Fig. 37.12A) [94,95]. Since
larger alveoli have lower compliance (they are less distensible), they
expand less on inspiration, and air preferentially enters the more
compliant lowermost alveoli (Fig. 37.12B), producing a vertical
gradient of ventilation distribution in standing animals breathing
quietly [96–98]. This tendency for preferential ventral ventilation
in the lung may also be associated with regional chest wall and
diaphragmatic movement. During anesthesia, the distribution of
ventilation becomes more uneven and may even reverse so that the
uppermost lung of a laterally recumbent horse is receiving most of
the ventilation.
Local resistance to air flow and compliance are the two major
determinants of regional distribution of ventilation [79] (Fig. 37.13).
Alveoli within regions with normal resistance and compliance com-
pletely fill during slow and fast tidal breathing, while alveoli that are
poorly complaint due to inflammation/fluid accumulation in the
interstitium (e.g., in pneumonia) only partially fill during inspira-
tion. If there is increased resistance to airflow due to narrowing of
the small airways caused by mucus, bronchoconstriction, or foreign
material, these alveolar units take longer to fill and empty during
tidal breathing and are referred to as “slow” alveoli. Slow alveoli also
tend to be under-distended during inspiration (less ventilated than
perfused), especially at faster respiratory frequencies [79]. Slow
alveoli contrast with alveoli that completely fill regardless of the
breathing pattern (“fast alveoli”). Uneven distribution of ventila-
tion, leading to areas of low V̇ A /Q̇ and gas exchange impairment
(lower- than- expected PaO 2 values) occur in lung disease due to
areas with poor compliance or increased resistance to airflow.
(A) 
Alveolar size at end expiration
Lung
Dorsal
Ventral
Expiratory
flow
Bronchi
Bronchioles 	Pleural cavity
P pl = 0 cmH2O
↓ Alveolar size
↑ Compliance
Ppl = –5 cmH2 O
↑ Alveolar size
↓ Compliance
Alveoli
(B) 
Alveolar size at end inspiration
Dorsal
Ventral
Inspiratory
flow
Ppl = –5 cmH2 O
↑Alveolar size at end
inspiration
Ppl = –15 cmH2O
Minimum or
no change in
alveolar size at
end inspiration
Figure 37.12 Relative alveolar size at end-expiration and end-inspiration and distribution of ventilation in standing horse. A. End- expiration: In the
uppermost lung regions alveoli are close to their maximum size (i.e., are less compliant) because Ppl is more sub-atmospheric (negative) in dorsal regions.
In the lowermost lung regions, Ppl is less negative, alveoli are more compliant because Ppl is less sub-atmospheric. B. End- inspiration: As Ppl become more
negative causing the lungs to expand, ventilation (inspiratory flow) is directed preferentially to smaller/more compliant alveoli located in lowermost and
intermediate lung regions.

-- 728 of 1450 --

Chapter 37: Respiratory Physiology and Pathophysiology 	713
Pulmonary perfusion
The pulmonary circulation is a low-pressure system composed of
highly compliant arterial vessels that offer low resistance to blood
flow. Because pulmonary arterial tree vessels are relatively thin-
walled and compliant, the pulmonary circulation can accommodate
large increases in blood flow without an appreciable increase in
mean pulmonary arterial pressure (MPAP) under physiological
conditions. One notable exception is horses, where MPAP increases
from 25–30 mmHg at rest to values above 80 mmHg during gallop-
ing because the pulmonary vasculature cannot dilate to accommo-
date the large increase in pulmonary blood flow/CO that occurs
during high-intensity exercise [99]. The pulmonary hypertension
caused by the increase in pulmonary blood flow is considered a
major factor that contributes to exercise-induced pulmonary
hemorrhage in equine species [100]. The extensive branching of the
pulmonary arterial tree increases the vascular surface area available
for gas exchange. Although this is followed by a progressive reduc-
tion in the diameter of arterial vessels, when the multiple arterial
branches are arranged in parallel, the total cross-sectional area of
the pulmonary arterial tree is greatly increased; hence, vascular
resistance is lower in the pulmonary than in the systemic circula-
tion even though it accepts the same volume of blood per unit of
time. Interestingly, there are differences among species, with horses
having higher pulmonary artery pressures at rest than humans and
dogs [101,102]. Typically, MPAP values in resting conscious horses
are in the range of 25–30 mmHg while in dogs MPAP values are
approximately 15 mmHg [101–103]. Higher pulmonary artery
pressure values observed in large animal species are necessary to
overcome the large vertical hydrostatic pressure gradient and
provide perfusion to the uppermost areas of the lungs.
In the absence of intracardiac shunting, the pulmonary blood
flow generated by the right ventricle equals the aortic blood flow
generated by the left ventricle. The total blood flow to the lungs
(Q̇T
), is determined by the gradient between arterial MPAP and left
atrial pressure (LAP) and by pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR),
as follows:
Q MPAP LAP
PVR	
T
( 	)
While LAP is difficult to measure unless under experimental
conditions, invasive hemodynamic monitoring with a pulmonary
artery catheter allows continuous measurement of MPAP and
intermittent measurement of pulmonary artery occlusion pressure
(PAOP), a surrogate of LAP. As illustrated in Fig. 37.14A,B, PAOP is
measured by gently inflating a balloon at the distal end of the cath-
eter until it is “wedged” into a distal branch of the pulmonary artery.
This creates a static column of blood between the catheter tip and
the left atrium, and the pressure measured at the catheter tip after
occlusion of blood flow will be equivalent to the pulmonary vein and
LAP if there is no obstruction of blood flow between the pulmonary
artery and the left ventricle [104]. PAOP is considered a close esti-
mate of left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP), although
there are situations where this proximity may not hold true [104].
In addition to CO determinations by the thermodilution tech-
nique (that is equivalent to Q̇T ) (Fig. 37.14C), a pulmonary artery
catheter allows measurement of pulmonary perfusion pressure
(Fig. 37.14D), that is, the gradient between MPAP and PAOP, while
PVR is calculated as follows:
PVR MPAP PAOP
Q T
( 	)

Distribution of pulmonary perfusion
For many years, it was believed that gravity was a primary determi-
nant of the distribution of pulmonary blood flow. Specifically, a
vertical perfusion gradient was thought to direct more blood flow
to lower lung regions compared to upper lung regions in both
conscious and anesthetized animals [96,105]. Current evidence
suggests that distribution of pulmonary blood flow is governed by
other factors, such as the branching pattern of the pulmonary arte-
rial tree and regional differences in PVR, with little gravitational
dependence in quadrupeds [106–108]. While some of the conflict-
ing results can be attributed to inaccurate methods of determining
blood flow distribution, a heterogeneous pattern of lung perfusion
has been documented in conscious standing horses, with a larger
proportion of the blood flow being directed toward the uppermost
(caudo-dorsal) lung regions, against gravitational forces [106].
In standing humans, gravity bears some influence on the
(A)
(B)
End
expiration
End inspiration
(slow breathing)
End inspiration
(more rapid breathing)
Conducting
airways
Alveolar
size 	A 	B 	C A
A
B
B
A 	B	C
C
A
B
C
C
Pleural
pressure
(cmH 2O)
Alveolar
size
–5
Slow breating 	More rapid breathing
Inspiration 	Inspiration
Expiration 	Expiration
–10
–5
–10
Figure 37.13 A. Relative alveolar size at end-expiration and end-inspiration during slow breathing versus more rapid breathing in alveoli with varying
resistance and compliance. Alveoli labeled A represent normal resistance and compliance; alveoli labeled B represent high resistance and normal
compliance; and alveoli labeled C represent normal resistance and low compliance. B. Graphical representation of changes in pleural pressure and
alveolar size during slow breathing and more rapid breathing in alveoli with varying resistance and compliance (A, B, and C). See text for explanation.
Source: Adapted from Robinson [49].

-- 729 of 1450 --

714 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
distribution of pulmonary blood flow as demonstrated in
experiments with varying gravitational forces; however, it likely
plays less of a role in supine positions [61,109].
The historical gravitational effects on distribution of lung per-
fusion have been commonly divided, and functionally described,
as a three- or four-zone system in humans according to J. B.
West, as illustrated in Fig. 37.15 [96,110]. While the relevance of
linking the zones to specific regions of the lung may not be as
applicable in quadrupeds in the awake or anesthetized state, the
relationship of pulmonary artery, pulmonary vein, and alveolar
pressures is still relevant and warrants consideration. Specifically,
perfusion of pulmonary capillaries is not only determined by the
gradient between arterial and venous pressure, such as in the sys-
temic circulation, but also by alveolar pressure. Zone I represents
alveoli that are not perfused, as alveolar pressure (Palv ) is greater
than pulmonary artery (P PA ) and pulmonary vein (P PV ) pressures.
In zone II, P PA is greater than Palv
, and the difference between the
two is the driving pressure for blood flow through the pulmo-
nary capillaries. In zone III, P PA and P PV both exceed Palv
, and the
capillary vessels are fully distended, with perfusion being deter-
mined by the pressure difference between P PA and P PV
. In zone IV,
the flow per unit of lung is reduced in comparison to zone III.
This occurs because, as lung interstitial pressure (P int ) increases
above venous pressure (P PV ), capillary perfusion pressure
becomes governed by the gradient between P PA and P int [111]. In
zone IV blood flow may cease altogether if P int increases above
P PA , such as in the development of interstitial pulmonary edema.
While the exact mechanism for the reduced flow in the most
dependent lung regions is unknown, an increase in vascular
resistance of the extra-alveolar pulmonary vessels, hypoxic pul-
monary vasoconstriction (HPV), or the anatomical structure of
the vasculature are potential mechanisms [9,10]. Prior to the
research cited above, it was thought that when the body position
was altered, and an animal became recumbent, pulmonary blood
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D) 	Systemic hemodynamics:
Pulmonary hemodynamics:
SVR = 	MAP = (CO × SVR) + CVP
MAP = CO × SVR
MAP – CVP
CO
Connection between proximal port and
pressure transducer (CVP or RAP)
PA
VC
RA
RV
Connection between
thermistor and CO monitor
Syringe with thermal signal
(ice cold or room temperature 5% dextrose)
PA catheter
balloon
inflated
Air-filled syringe connected to
balloon at the distal port (PAOP)
Connection between distal port and
pressure transducer (MPAP and PAOP)
Right ventricular pressure: 	Pulmonary artery pressure:
25
20
15
PAOP
PA catheter balloon inflated
10
Pressure (mmHg)
ΔT (°C)
Time (seconds)
5
0
CO computer:
Thermodilution curve
used for CO calculation
PVR = MPAP – PAOP
Q˙ T
MPAP = (Q˙ T × PVR) + PAOP
Figure 37.14 Hemodynamic monitoring with a pulmonary artery (PA) catheter. A. Correct anatomical positioning of a PA catheter. As the PA catheter is
advanced through the vena cava (VC) and right atrium (RA) and reaches the right ventricle (RV), the balloon located at its tip is inflated and the catheter
is advanced until the balloon is wedged into a branch of the PA. B. Pressure waveforms observed during PA catheterization which can be used to guide
positioning of the PA catheter (alternatively, the procedure can be performed under fluoroscopic guidance). C. Measurement of cardiac output (CO) by a
PA catheter is based on the area under the thermodilution curve. A fast response thermistor located at the tip of the PA catheter detects changes in blood
temperature (∆T) induced by injection of a room temperature or ice-cold 5% dextrose bolus into the proximal port of the PA catheter which is also used
to monitor central venous pressure (CVP) or right atrial pressure (RAP). D. Because CVP (or RAP) is often near 0 mmHg its contribution is minor and
the major determinants of mean arterial pressure (MAP) are CO and systemic vascular resistance (SVR). In the pulmonary circulation, increases in mean
pulmonary arterial pressure (MPAP) are not only a result of increases in pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) and pulmonary blood flow (Q̇T
) (which is
equivalent to CO), but increases in pulmonary artery occlusion pressure (PAOP) (a surrogate measure of pulmonary vein pressure/left atrial pressure [LAP])
may also contribute.

-- 730 of 1450 --

Chapter 37: Respiratory Physiology and Pathophysiology 	715
flow would realign along gravitational lines consistent with the
new body position [96,105].
Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction
Unlike smooth muscle in systemic arteries, which dilates in
response to hypoxia, pulmonary arterial smooth muscle contracts
when exposed to low oxygen partial pressures, a response referred
to as “hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction” (HPV). The contractile
response of pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells to hypoxia has
been shown to be an inherent characteristic, with endothelial cells
now regarded as modulators of the response [112–114]. Activation
of a mitochondrial sensor in the smooth muscle cell in response
to hypoxia results in closure of potassium channels, opening of
calcium channels, and subsequent activation of the contractile
apparatus within the smooth muscle cells [113]. This local response
diverts mixed venous blood from poorly ventilated lung areas to
better-ventilated alveoli, thus helping to minimize the increase in
venous admixture and oxygenation impairment caused by low
V̇A
/Q̇ and shunt (Fig. 37.16) [112,115]. HPV develops when the
alveolar oxygen partial pressure falls to less than 100 mmHg in
the normal lung, and the response is maximal when the oxygen
tension is approximately 30 mmHg [112]. There is an apparent
difference in the strength of the HPV response to whole lung
hypoxia in various species [116], based on exposure of animals to
high altitude and excised lung studies [117–119]. Cattle and swine
have a strong reflex, whereas ponies, cats, and rabbits have an
intermediate response, and sheep and dogs show less response. It
appears, however, that under normal conditions even species with a
weak hypoxic pulmonary reflex are capable of considerable blood
flow diversion in response to regional areas of low alveolar oxygen
partial pressure [116,118]. Interestingly, the response varies with time
and repeat exposure to low oxygen conditions [112]. While HPV
Arteries 	Capillaries
Blood
flow
PPA 	PPV
Palv
PPA 	PPV
Palv
PPA 	PPV
P alv
PPA 	PPV
Palv
Veins
West zone I:
P alv > PPA > PPV
Zero blood flow
(does not normally occur)
Continuous
blood flow
Blood flow
Continuous
blood flow
Vertical height
West zone II:
PPA > Palv > PPV
West zone III:
PPA > PPV > Palv
West zone IV:
P PA > Pint > PPV > Palv
Figure 37.15 Diagrammatic illustration of gravitational blood flow distribution within the lung. Although the vertical gradient of blood flow distribution
originally developed for bipeds (humans) cannot be applied to quadrupeds, the pattern of blood flow governed by the relationship between alveolar
pressure (Palv
), pulmonary artery pressure (PPA
), pulmonary vein pressure (PPV ), and interstitial pressure (Pint
) should be considered when analyzing the
heterogeneity of lung perfusion (see text for further explanation). Source: Adapted from Chambers et al. [110].
Alveoli
Arteries
Deoxygenated blood
Veins
↑ Venous
admixture
O2
O 2
↓O2
(A)
Alveoli
Arteries
Oxygenated blood
Veins
↓ Venous
admixture
HPV
O2
O2
↓O2
(B)
Figure 37.16 A. During ventilation-to- perfusion mismatch in the absence of hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction (HPV), a relatively large proportion of
mixed venous blood (white arrows) flows past non-ventilated alveoli or alveoli with low oxygen partial pressure (↓ O2
). Arterial oxygen levels decrease
because deoxygenated blood is mixed with oxygenated end-capillary blood (increased venous admixture). B. HPV (blue arrows) triggered by alveoli with
low oxygen partial pressures (↓ O2
) diverts mixed venous blood toward better-ventilated lung areas (white arrows), improving the matching between
ventilation and perfusion and decreasing venous admixture. Source: Adapted from Sommer et al. [115].

-- 731 of 1450 --

716 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
plays a major role in diverting blood flow from the pulmonary
circulation to the placenta during fetal life, the anesthesiologist
should be aware that HPV may assume an important role in
maintaining oxygenation in mature animals with lung pathology.
Anesthetic drugs have the potential to inhibit HPV to various
degrees and aggravate V̇ A /Q̇ mismatch caused by pre-existing lung
disease (discussed later).
Pulmonary hypertension
Understanding the factors that cause an abnormal increase in
pulmonary artery pressure is important because anesthesia of
animals with conditions leading to pulmonary hypertension
may be required. Although a pulmonary artery catheter (Fig. 37.14)
is the gold standard method for evaluating pulmonary hyperten-
sion, diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension in dogs is based on the
measurement of tricuspid regurgitation velocity using Doppler
echocardiography and on echocardiographic signs of pulmonary
hypertension [120]. Fig. 37.17 illustrates the pathophysiological
changes that may result in pulmonary hypertension in animals.
Pulmonary hypertension has been classified according to its
origin as precapillary, postcapillary, or mixed (pre- and postcapillary).
Precapillary pulmonary hypertension, also known as “pulmonary
arterial hypertension,” is caused by abnormalities on the arterial
side of the pulmonary circulation and occurs when MPAP is
abnormally increased because of an increase in PVR secondary
to lung disease associated with arterial vasoconstriction, and/or
pulmonary thromboembolism. Precapillary pulmonary hyperten-
sion also occurs in severe forms of heartworm disease in dogs
(dirofilariasis) [120,121]. Lung disease leading to alveolar hypoxia
(low alveolar PO2
) also has the potential to cause pulmonary hyper-
tension (defined in humans as MPAP > 25 mmHg) because of a
vasoconstrictive response (increased PVR) in alveoli exposed to
low PO2
, that is, HPV. In dogs, pulmonary hypertension is associated
with a diverse spectrum of respiratory diseases, most commonly
obstructive disorders, and estimates of systolic pulmonary artery
pressures > 47 mmHg using Doppler echocardiography were
associated with non- survival [122].
Congenital cardiac defects leading to increased total pulmonary
blood flow (Q̇ T ) may also cause pulmonary arterial (precapillary)
hypertension (Fig. 37.17) [120,121]. Because pressures on the left
side of the heart are higher than on the right side of the circulation,
persistent ductus arteriosus (PDA), ventricular septal defect (VSD),
and atrial septal defect (ASD) often result in arterial blood being
added to mixed venous blood (left-to- right shunt) in dogs. If the
shunted flow is relatively small (e.g., PDA with small ductal diam-
eter, small VSD), the resulting increase in blood flow through the
pulmonary artery may not result in significant pulmonary
hypertension because the pulmonary vasculature is highly
compliant and can accommodate the increase blood volume.
However, in their most severe forms, these congenital defects may
be associated with significant pulmonary arterial hypertension
ultimately resulting in shunt reversal.
PDA is one of the most common congenital cardiac defects in
dogs, accounting for up to 30% of congenital defects in this species.
Direction of blood flow through the PDA is determined by the pres-
sure gradient between the aorta and the pulmonary artery. Usually,
when PDA is detected in young dogs, there is a continuous left-to-
right shunt because pressures and vascular resistance are higher in
the aorta than in the pulmonary artery. Blood flow though the duct
is dependent on ductal diameter. In case of a very large PDA caus-
ing excessive increases in Q̇T
, hypertrophy of smooth muscle from
small pulmonary arteries/increased PVR occurs to protect pulmo-
nary capillaries from volume overload. Precapillary pulmonary
hypertension secondary to increased PVR can precipitate reversal
Pulmonary hypertension:
Precapillary (↑ PVR) 	Postcapillary (↑ PAOP)
Pulmonary
capillaries
Small arteries,
arterioles
Pulmonary
artery
Vena
cava
RV 	LA 	LV	RA
Small veins,
venules
Pulmonary
vein
Aorta
↑ Q˙ T
•ASD
↑ Q˙ T
•VSD
↑PAOP:
• Left heart disease
↑PVR:
•HPV
•Lung disease
•Congenital cardiac defects (severe forms)
•Pulmonary thromboembolism
↑ Q˙ T
•PDA
Figure 37.17 Pathophysiological changes that result in pulmonary hypertension in animals at rest (see text for explanation).

-- 732 of 1450 --

Chapter 37: Respiratory Physiology and Pathophysiology 	717
of shunt and cause cyanosis, while volume overload of the left
atrium and left ventricle results in left-sided heart failure. Cyanosis
due to right-to- left shunt is relatively uncommon in young dogs
with PDA and may be more often observed in animals that live into
adulthood [123–125]. Contrasting with PDA in dogs, where the
incidence of pulmonary hypertension estimated by Doppler echo-
cardiography is relatively low, ranging from 3% in 5-month-old
dogs (median age) to 22% in animals older than 5 years [124],
pulmonary hypertension is more frequently associated with PDA
in cats with up to 46% of animals presenting with this complica-
tion [126]. Right-to- left shunting associated with severe pulmonary
hypertension may also occur more frequently in cats than in
dogs [125,126]. Anesthesia is unlikely to be performed in animals
with PDA and right-to-left shunting because ductal closure may be
contraindicated under these circumstances. Although there might
be a concern that decreases in SVR/hypotension induced by general
anesthesia could reverse the shunt from left-to- right to right-to- left
because aortic pressures could fall below pulmonary artery pres-
sures, precipitating cyanosis, there are no complications related to
shunt reversal (hypoxemia/cyanosis) reported in dogs anesthetized
with isoflurane for transvascular PDA occlusion [127]. However,
the absence of studies reporting shunt reversal in dogs undergoing
anesthesia for PDA correction must be interpreted with care.
If anesthesia is performed in animals with severe pulmonary
hypertension where pulmonary artery pressures approach aortic
pressures, drug-induced hypotension could in theory reverse the
shunt and precipitate cyanosis/hypoxemia.
Pulmonary hypertension of postcapillary origin (also known as
“pulmonary venous hypertension”) (Fig. 37.17), is characterized by
elevated pressures on the venous side of the pulmonary circulation
(PAOP > 15 mmHg in humans). Postcapillary pulmonary hyperten-
sion caused by left-sided congestive heart failure is the result of
passive backward transmission of elevated left ventricular filling
pressures (LVEDP and LAP) increasing pressures in the pulmonary
veins, capillaries, and arteries. Chronic left-sided congestive heart
failure secondary to myxomatous mitral valve disease or dilated
cardiomyopathy is a common cause of postcapillary pulmonary
hypertension in dogs with at least 40–70% of cases affected
[128,129]. At this time, the incidence of postcapillary pulmonary
hypertension secondary to left-sided congestive heart failure is
smaller in cats (17%) than in dogs (> 70%) [130].
Pulmonary edema
Pulmonary edema is defined as an increase in pulmonary extravascular
water. In its more severe form, alveoli are flooded with transudate
(hydrostatic pulmonary edema) or exudate fluid (increased
permeability pulmonary edema) [131,132]. Movement of fluid across
capillary membranes was first described by Starling and has since
been refined and described by the following equation [131,132]:
J 	K 	P 	P	v 	cap 	cap	int 	int
Where Jv is the flow rate of transudated fluid across the
endothelium which, in equilibrium, will be equal to the lymphatic
drainage; K is the filtration coefficient or leakiness of fluid from
the endothelium to the interstitium (also known as “hydraulic
conductance”); Pcap is the hydrostatic pressure in the pulmonary
capillary; Pint is the hydrostatic pressure in the interstitial space;
σ (sigma) is the protein reflection coefficient, which is an expres-
sion of the permeability of the endothelium to albumin; πcap is the
oncotic pressure in the pulmonary capillaries (mainly determined
by albumin); and πint is the oncotic pressure in the interstitium
[131–133]. In the normal lung Pint is slightly negative compared to
Pcap
, which results in the movement of fluid from the microvascula-
ture to the interstitium. However, interstitial edema does not occur
under normal circumstances because this is matched by lymphatic
system’s ability to remove the filtrate from the interstitium. If there
are no changes in the normal endothelial structure, intravascular
oncotic pressure (πcap
) is higher than in the interstitium (πint
), which
also helps to retain fluid within the intravascular space [131–133].
It has been traditionally accepted that the fluid balance in the
lungs and other tissues obeys the classical Starling equation
described above. However, with the evolving knowledge of the role
of the endothelial glycocalyx in fluid dynamics across the capillaries,
this classical view has been reassessed as it may not fully reflect the
transvascular movement of fluid at the capillary level [133,134].
The glycocalyx, which is a layer of proteoglycans and glycoproteins
lining the luminal aspect of capillaries, serves as a barrier to the
efflux of plasma proteins (albumin) and therefore helps to maintain
the Starling forces that prevent pulmonary edema. In the revised
Starling equation, the oncotic pressure gradient is between the
intravascular space and the protein-free space beneath the glycoca-
lyx. In this construct, pulmonary edema develops as Pcap and Jv
increase and/or lymphatic drainage decreases [133,134]. Damage to
the endothelial glycocalyx by shear stress induced by fluid resusci-
tation, or by inflammatory mechanisms associated with sepsis may
increase the risk of pulmonary edema caused by excess fluid admin-
istration in hypovolemic and septic animals [135,136].
There are three basic mechanisms responsible for pulmonary
edema: (1) increased hydrostatic forces within the microvasculature,
(2) increased microvascular permeability, and (3) low plasma
oncotic pressure (hypoalbuminemia). The third mechanism does
not appear to play an important role in causing lung edema per se.
However, hypoalbuminemia may contribute to pulmonary edema
when it occurs concomitantly with the other two mechanisms.
Hydrostatic pulmonary edema occurs when increased Pcap causes
fluid accumulation within the interstitium and leakage of fluid floods
alveoli with transudate fluid [131,132]. Hydrostatic pulmonary
edema occurs in animals presenting in advanced stages of left-sided
congestive heart failure (e.g., degenerative mitral valve disease and
dilated cardiomyopathy in dogs, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in
cats) or animals receiving excessive amounts of intravenous
fluids [128,137,138]. Left-sided heart disease leading to severe
diastolic dysfunction may precipitate hydrostatic pulmonary edema
as excessive LAP and LVEDP will increase pressures in vessels
located proximally in the pulmonary circulation (pulmonary vein,
and pulmonary capillary pressures) [128]. Doppler echocardiog-
raphy is an important tool to evaluate the degree of diastolic dys-
function and risk of pulmonary edema in the latter patients [128,139].
A restrictive fluid therapy strategy should be adopted during
anesthesia if a restrictive pattern of diastolic function (suggested
by elevated LVEDP) is identified by Doppler echocardiography in
small animals [128,137,139,140].
Although less common, pulmonary edema can occur secondary
to upper airway obstruction, a condition referred to as “negative-
pressure pulmonary edema” or “postobstructive pulmonary edema.”
The etiology is likely multifactorial; however, excessively negative
intrathoracic/alveolar pressures, generated by contraction of inspir-
atory muscles against an obstructed upper airway, lead to an increase
in venous return to the right side of the heart and an increase in
hydrostatic pressures in the pulmonary vasculature. In combination
with greater negative alveolar pressures under these circumstances,

-- 733 of 1450 --

718 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
transvascular fluid filtration is increased, precipitating interstitial
and alveolar edema [141,142]. In one retrospective study of noncar-
diogenic pulmonary edema diagnosed in 23 dogs and 3 cats,
lung edema resulting from airway obstruction was recorded in 8
animals [143]. Hemorrhagic/negative-pressure pulmonary edema
is a rare but potentially fatal complication reported in horses with
acute upper airway obstruction during recovery from anesthesia
[142,144]. The hemorrhagic nature of pulmonary edema (presence
of pink frothy fluid in the airways) in this species is likely a result of
injury to pulmonary capillaries and alveolar membranes caused by
the extremely negative intrathoracic/airway pressure [142,144].
Increased permeability pulmonary edema occurs when damage to
the microvascular endothelial surface layer and alveolar epithelium
leads to leakage of protein-rich fluid from the microvasculature
to the interstitial compartment and alveoli [131,132]. In humans,
increased permeability pulmonary edema is a characteristic of
acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Direct causes of acute
lung injury (ALI) leading to ARDS in humans include pneumonia,
aspiration of gastric contents, inadequate ventilator settings leading
to alveolar overdistension, inhalation injury, pulmonary contusion,
pulmonary vasculitis, and drowning. Humans may also develop
ARDS secondary to indirect injury to the lungs, which may occur
due to sepsis not involving the lungs, major trauma, pancreatitis,
severe burns, non-cardiogenic shock, drug overdose, and multiple
transfusions [145]. Based on the criteria for the diagnosis of veteri-
nary ARDS in small animals and foals published in 2007 [146], the
most frequent cause of lung injury leading to increased permeability
pulmonary edema and signs of ARDS was aspiration pneumonia in
dogs and systemic inflammatory response syndrome without sepsis
in cats [147]. Current evidence shows that acute necrotizing pan-
creatitis may be an important cause of indirect lung injury in dogs,
as this disease has been associated with recruitment of pulmonary
intravascular macrophages (PIMs) and histological evidence of
lung inflammation [148,149]. While anesthesia of animals with
increased permeability pulmonary edema and/or ARDS is rarely
necessary, when required, a protective ventilatory support strategy
is highly recommended to avoid further lung injury and is discussed
further in Chapter 38.
Ventilation–perfusion relationships
Ventilation–perfusion relationships and gas exchange
To achieve optimal gas exchange with the least amount of energy
expenditure, ventilation and perfusion would not necessarily be
uniform throughout the lung but rather would be matched in order
to achieve optimal oxygenation and CO 2 removal. In fact, when an
arterial blood gas sample is analyzed for efficacy of gas exchange, it
must be borne in mind that PaO 2 and PaCO 2 values reflect the
blood flow from millions of alveoli with varying V̇A
/Q̇ ratios.
A mismatch between ventilation and perfusion, more specifically
increased areas of low V̇ A /Q̇ ratio and shunt (perfusion of non-
ventilated regions), has a major impact on oxygen uptake by the
lung. Since CO 2 is more diffusible across the alveolar–capillary
barrier than oxygen, the presence of low V̇ A /Q̇ regions leads to
decreased PaO 2 levels before PaCO2 is increased [9,96,150,151].
A diagrammatic representation of V̇A /Q̇ relationships is detailed
in Fig. 37.18A. Ideal matching between ventilation and perfusion
occurs when the V̇A
/Q̇ ratio is 1. In the conscious resting animal
with normal lung function, gas exchange is optimal because the
relative distribution of V̇A /Q̇ ratios is centralized toward the preva-
lence of alveoli with a V̇A /Q̇ ratio close to 1 (Fig. 37.18B) As alveolar
units become less ventilated (areas of low V̇ A
/Q̇ ratio), there is a
progressive increase in the amount of mixed venous blood added to
end-capillary blood, known as “venous admixture.” One extreme is
to have perfused alveoli or areas of the lung with no ventilation such
that blood passing through such a region is not oxygenated. This is
referred to as “intrapulmonary shunt” and has a V̇A
/Q̇ ratio equal to
zero [150]. The major consequence of adding mixed venous blood
(PvO2 = 40 mmHg) to pulmonary end-capillary blood is a decrease
in PaO2 and arterial oxygen content (CaO 2 ). Oxygenation impair-
ment secondary to areas of low V̇ A /Q̇ ratio and shunt may be
observed in animals with pulmonary disease (pneumonia, neopla-
sia, and lung edema) or during general anesthesia. Although
arterial oxygenation can be impaired, CO2 elimination may not be
compromised during the early stages of pulmonary disease. In fact,
severe hypoxemia (PaO 2 < 60 mmHg) caused by areas of low V̇ A
/Q̇
and shunt may be associated with normal or below normal PaCO 2
(respiratory alkalosis) due to stimulation of peripheral chemore-
ceptors located in the carotid body by low PaO 2 (hypoxic drive),
which mediates an increase in V̇ A through increases in f and
V T [53,150]. This is possible because CO 2 is 20 times more diffusi-
ble across the alveolar–capillary membrane than oxygen and there
is an inverse relationship between V̇ A and PaCO 2
. In animals that
have a reduced central respiratory drive (due to disease or second-
ary to drugs including opioids and general anesthetics), low V̇ A
/Q̇
and shunt may contribute to rising PaCO 2 levels. Because areas of
low V̇ A
/Q̇ are partially ventilated, hypoxemia caused by low V̇ A
/Q̇
can be counteracted by increasing alveolar oxygen partial pressure
(PA
O2
) via oxygen supplementation (i.e., increasing F I
O2
). If a
patient that is ventilated fails to respond to an increase in FI
O2
,
shunt should be suspected as the major cause of oxygenation
impairment.
As capillary blood flow decreases in relation to the ideal in venti-
lated alveoli (areas of high V̇ A /Q̇ ratio), there is an increase in the
fraction of total ventilation that does not contribute to gas exchange,
that is wasted ventilation [150]. Alveolar deadspace (VDalv
) is an
extreme instance of a high V̇A
/Q̇ ratio, where alveoli are ventilated
but are not perfused. As explained above, VDalv
adds to the airway
deadspace (VDaw
) to form the physiologic deadspace (VD phys
). An
increase in VDalv
per se does not impact gas exchange if there is a
compensatory increase in V̇ A [150]. However, if the ventilatory
response is obliterated or reduced by anesthetic drugs, PaCO2
will increase.
Based on radioisotope studies evaluating distribution of blood
flow in pulmonary capillaries across the lung tissue, the vertical
gradient of perfusion and ventilation is minimal in standing dogs
with a horizontal lung [107,152]. Matching of vertical perfusion
and ventilation gradients in conscious horses is such that there is
little difference in V̇A
/Q̇ in different lung regions [97,106]. Studies
using a multiple inert gas elimination technique in horses suggest
that the scatter of V̇A
/Q̇ ratios in conscious horses is very similar to
that seen in people [153]. No regions of low V̇ A
/Q̇ were identified,
but a minor shunt component (less than 3% of CO) was observed.
A high V̇A
/Q̇ area was identified (constituting 3–17% of the total),
and the extent of this area was correlated with lower pulmonary
artery pressures [153] (Fig. 37.19).
Measurement of ventilation-to- perfusion mismatch
in clinical practice
Matching between ventilation and perfusion is measured in the
research setting by the multiple inert gas elimination technique.
However, this method is not applicable to the clinical setting. When
the PB
, FI
O2
, PaCO2
, and R are known, the PA
O2 can be calculated as

-- 734 of 1450 --

(A)
(B)
Deoxygenated blood
Oxygenated blood
Non-ventilated alveoli (Shunt)
Poorly ventilated alveoli (Low V˙ A /Q˙ )
Shunt fraction/venous admixture:
Airway deadspace (VD aw
)
Ventilated, non-perfused alveoli (VD alv
)
Ventilated alveoli with low
perfusion (high V˙ A /Q˙ )
Physiologic deadspace (VD phys ):
V D phys = VD aw + V Dalv
Pulmonary vein
Upper airway
Trachea 	Conducting
airways
(V Daw )
15
Bronchi
Bronchioles
Shunt
Shunt
Venous
admixture
Ideal
alveolar gas
Wasted
ventilation
Pulmonary artery
Alveolar
capillary
interface
10
5
	Frequency (%)
0
0 	0.01 	0.1 	1.0 	10 	100 	∞
V˙ A /Q˙ ratio
Low V˙ A/Q˙ 	High V˙ A/Q˙
V D alv
V Dalv
Q˙ S /Q˙ T =
V˙
A /Q˙ = 0.1 	V˙
A /Q˙ = 1 	V˙
A /Q˙ = 10 	V˙ A /Q˙ = ∞	V˙ A /Q˙ = 0
Cc’O2 – CaO2
Cc’O2 – Cv–O 2
Figure 37.18 A. Diagrammatic representation of ventilation-to- perfusion (V̇A
/Q̇) ratios. Deoxygenated mixed venous blood (blue) from the pulmonary
artery is distributed to the alveoli with different V̇A
/Q̇ ratios. Optimal gas exchange/transfer of oxygen from alveoli to pulmonary capillary blood occurs
as the V̇A
/Q̇ ratio approaches 1. As the V̇A
/Q̇ ratio decreases (V̇A
/Q̇ = 0.1), there is an increase in poorly oxygenated (mixed venous) blood added to oxygenated
blood (increased venous admixture). Intrapulmonary shunt (V̇ A
/Q̇ ratio = 0) occurs when alveoli or areas of lung are perfused but do not receive ventilation.
As the V̇A
/Q̇ ratio increases above 1 (V̇A
/Q̇ = 10), there is wasted ventilation because a greater proportion of V̇ A is ineffective and does not participate in
gas exchange. The alveolar deadspace represents completely wasted ventilation because ventilated alveoli are not perfused, representing a V̇ A
/Q̇ ratio equal
to infinity (∞). B. The percent distribution of alveolar units in a normal lung. Gas exchange is optimized when alveoli with a V̇ A
/Q̇ ratio close to 1 prevail
and alveoli with low or high V̇ A
/Q̇ ratios represent much lower percentages of lung parenchyma. Source: Adapted from Petersson and Glenny [150].
(A) 	(B)
8.0 	Gelding 5
6.0
4.0
2.0
Ventilation and blood flow (L /min)
0
0 	0.01 	0.1 	1 	10 	100
V˙ A
V˙ A /Q˙
Q˙
8.0 	Mare 6
6.0
4.0
2.0
Ventilation and blood flow (L /min)
0
0 	0.01 	0.1 	1 	10 	100
V˙ A
High V˙ A /Q˙
Q˙ S/Q˙ T = 2.8%
V˙ A /Q˙
Q˙
Figure 37.19 Ventilation-to-perfusion (V̇A
/Q̇) ratios measured by inert gas elimination in two conscious standing horses. A. The first horse presented
with a unimodal V̇ A
/Q̇ ratio centered on 1. B. The second horse presented with a bimodal distribution with a V̇A
/Q̇ ratio centered on 1 and an additional
high V̇ A
/Q̇ ratio. There was also minor shunting (Q̇S
/ Q̇T
) corresponding to 2.8% of total blood flow. Animals were clinically healthy and a shunt fraction
ranging from 1.1 to 2.8% was recorded in 5/8 horses. Areas with high V̇A
/Q̇ ratio identified in 5/8 horses were explained by poor perfusion of upper lung
regions due to lower pulmonary artery pressures. Source: Reproduced with permission from Hedenstierna et al. [153], John Wiley & Sons.

-- 735 of 1450 --

720 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
previously described (Fig. 37.2, Table 37.4). The difference between
this value and the PaO2 (that is, the alveolar to arterial oxygen
gradient, P(a- a)O 2
) provides a measure of the relative efficiency of
gas exchange. The P(a-a)O 2 increases with hypoxemia caused by
V̇A /Q̇ mismatch (areas of low V̇A
/Q̇), shunt, and diffusion impair-
ment, but not in the case of hypoxemia caused by hypoventilation
(increased PaCO 2 ) or low PI
O2 [9,150,151]. The P(a- a)O2 ranges
from 5–15 mmHg in an animal breathing ambient air and is usually
less than 150 mmHg in a healthy patient breathing 100% oxygen.
Healthy individuals breathing high FI
O2 levels (≥ 0.8) show an increase
in P(a-a)O2 over time because of absorption atelectasis. Collapse of
poorly ventilated alveolar units (V̇ A /Q̇ < 0.15) is precipitated by
high FI
O2 because the transfer of oxygen to pulmonary capillary
blood exceeds the inspired gas flow entering these alveoli [154].
A more clinically practical way of assessing the efficiency of gas
exchange is by measuring the PaO 2 /FI
O2 ratio, as it is simpler to
calculate and provides a rough assessment of P(a-a)O 2 under cer-
tain conditions. The normal PaO 2
/FI
O2 ratio in patients breathing
ambient air (FI
O2 = 0.21) and 100% oxygen (FI
O2 > 0.90) is approxi-
mately 500. In patients breathing air, low PaO 2
/FI
O2 ratio with
normal or below normal PaCO2 levels suggests the presence of oxy-
genation impairment caused by low V̇A
/Q̇ and/or shunt. However,
particularly in individuals breathing ambient air, this index may not
differentiate hypoxemia caused by alveolar hypoventilation from
hypoxemia secondary to low V̇A /Q̇ and shunt. The PaO2
/FI
O2 is also
insensitive to detect hypoxemia caused by low PI
O2 at high altitudes
(discussed previously). A more detailed description of the assess-
ment of hypoxemia is provided in Chapter 38.
If the patient has a pulmonary artery catheter and a second cath-
eter placed in an artery of the systemic circulation for measuring
blood gases and hemoglobin concentration in mixed venous blood
and in arterial blood, respectively, shunt fraction (Q̇S
/Q̇T ) can be
measured as follows (Fig. 37.18):
Q
Q
Cc O 	CaO
Cc O 	CvO
S
T
2 	2
2 	2
Where CcʹO2 is the oxygen content in end-capillary blood,
estimated based on the assumption that oxygen partial pressure in
end- capillary blood (PcʹO2 ) equals that of ideal alveolar gas (PA
O2
)
according to the alveolar gas equation (Fig. 37.2); while CaO 2 and
CvO2 are the arterial and mixed venous oxygen content, respectively.
Shunt fraction is the percentage of total blood flow generated by
the right ventricle (i.e., Q̇T ) that reaches the left ventricle without
exposure to ventilated areas of the lung. Shunted flow is divided
into intrapulmonary and anatomic shunt. Intrapulmonary shunt
occurs when mixed venous (pulmonary arterial) blood perfuses
non-ventilated areas of the lung (V̇ A
/Q̇ = 0). Anatomic shunt is
blood flow that bypasses lung parenchyma (that is, the portion of
the lung where there is gas exchange), moving directly from the
right side of the heart to the left side of the heart. Anatomic shunt
can be either physiologic or pathologic, as in some congenital
cardiac diseases (e.g., PDA with right-to-left shunt, as explained
previously). Physiologic anatomic shunt corresponds to the outflow
from bronchial and Thebesian veins (a network of vessels that
irrigate the myocardium in mammals) that drains directly into the
left heart [150,151,155,156]. The presence of a small physiologic
anatomic shunt (2 to 5% of Q̇ T
) explains why, in conscious
individuals breathing ambient air, PaO2 is slightly lower than
PA
O2 [150,151,156]. As explained before, intrapulmonary shunt
(V̇A
/Q̇ = 0) plays a major role in causing oxygenation impairment in
patients with severe lung disease and in some animal species during
general anesthesia. Pathologic anatomic shunt is a major cause of
increased shunt fraction in animals with congenital heart diseases
leading to severe hypoxemia/cyanosis.
The terms “venous admixture” and “shunt fraction” do not mean
the same thing, although they are often used interchangeably in the
literature, which causes some confusion. While shunt fraction is the
percentage of Q̇ T going past non-ventilated areas of the lung, venous
admixture is the degree of admixture of mixed venous blood
(including mixed venous blood from areas of low V̇A
/Q̇ and shunted
flow) with pulmonary end-capillary blood that would be required
to produce the observed difference between the arterial and the
end-capillary oxygen partial pressure. True shunt fraction can be
calculated by the formula described above only in patients breath-
ing 100% oxygen (F I
O2 > 0.9), as the impact of low V̇ A /Q̇ units on
venous admixture is eliminated [150,151]. However, if the patient
is breathing lower inspired oxygen concentrations (e.g., F I
O2 = 0.21
to 0.6), the calculation above is better referred to as “venous
admixture” as it will represent not only shunted flow but also the
blood flow going past low V̇ A /Q̇ units.
Finally, if one knows the inspired oxygen concentration and the
PaO2 and assumes that arterial–venous oxygen extraction is normal,
an isoshunt diagram can be used to provide a convenient and
reasonably accurate estimate of the magnitude of pulmonary shunt
flow (Fig. 37.20) [157]. Fig. 37.20 also illustrates the poor response,
Virtual shunt lines:
400
C(a-v–)O2 : 5 mL/dL
PaCO2: 25–40 mmHg
Hb: 10–14 g/dL
15%
20%
25%
30%
50%
300
200
PaO
 2 (mmHg)
100
0 20 	30 	40
Inspired oxygen concentration (%)
50 	60 	70 	80 	90 	100
0 	5% 	10%
Figure 37.20 An isoshunt diagram depicting the relationship between
inspired oxygen concentration, PaO2
, and various degrees of venous
admixture or pulmonary shunt. Shunt flow is expressed as a percentage of
cardiac output, ranging from 0 to 50%. The arteriovenous (a-v) oxygen
content difference is assumed to be 5 mL per 100 mL of blood, reflecting a
normal cardiac output. The shunt bands have been drawn to include the
range of hemoglobin (Hb) and arterial carbon dioxide partial pressure
(PaCO2
) levels shown. Note that at the higher levels of shunt flow (30–50%),
there is little improvement in arterial oxygen levels even when the inspired
oxygen concentration is 100%. Also note that if the inspired oxygen
concentration and PaO2 are known, it is possible to obtain a quick estimate
of the degree of venous admixture or shunt flow. Source: Adapted from
Benatar et al. [157].

-- 736 of 1450 --

Chapter 37: Respiratory Physiology and Pathophysiology 	721
in terms of improving PaO2 , that will occur with increased inspired-
oxygen concentrations when shunt flows exceed 30%.
Effects of anesthesia on ventilation, pulmonary
perfusion, and ventilation–perfusion relationships
Influence of anesthetic drugs on neural control
of ventilation
Injectable and inhalant anesthetic agents and some sedative/
analgesic drugs used during the perioperative period decrease the
ventilatory response to increases in PaCO2 and decreases in PaO2 in
a dose-dependent manner. This occurs secondary to suppression of
neuronal activity in the medulla and pons, decreased central and
peripheral chemoreceptor activity, as well as inhibition of mechan-
oreceptors throughout the respiratory system [44].
The typical hypoventilation and the resulting hypercapnia
observed in spontaneously breathing anesthetized animals is not
harmful per se if extracellular/blood pH is not markedly decreased
(< 7.20) and hypoxemia is prevented by increasing FI
O2
. However, if
general anesthesia is induced in animals with uncorrected meta-
bolic acidosis, suppression of chemoreceptor activity leading to
increased PaCO2 above physiologic ranges (> 45 mmHg) has the
potential to precipitate a mixed acid–base disturbance (metabolic
acidosis and respiratory acidosis) that may result in severe acidemia
(pH < 7.10–7.20) [52]. The effects of the latter on homeostasis
during general anesthesia may be translated into poor cardiovascu-
lar function and hypotension refractory to catecholamines [158]. In
addition to metabolic disease, in patients with pre-existing impaired
gas exchange prior to sedation/anesthesia, appropriate selection of
drugs and the management of the clinical consequences associated
with the effects on the neural control of ventilation will improve
outcomes.
To determine drug effects on the neural control of ventilation
in vivo, the change in V̇E in response to alterations in environmental
conditions (hypoxia, hyperoxia, hypercapnia, and hypocapnia)
can be measured in experimental settings. In conscious normal
mammals, the CO 2 response curve, which is the graphic representa-
tion of the change in V̇ E in response to increases in PaCO 2 or PET
CO2
is relatively linear (Fig. 37.4A). The effects of drugs on the neural con-
trol of ventilation are determined by measuring changes in respira-
tory pattern (most notably frequency) and the degree of respiratory
depression as assessed by PaCO 2
, in addition to the ventilatory
response to increased CO 2 and decreased PaO 2 with different drug
doses or combinations.
Inhalant and injectable anesthetic drugs
The anesthetic index, calculated by dividing the end-tidal anes-
thetic concentration that induces apnea (cessation of breathing for
60 s) by the minimum alveolar concentration (MAC), provides an
assessment of the central respiratory depressant effects of inhalant
anesthetics [159,160]. Inhalant anesthetics in current use cause
progressive increases in PaCO 2 as the anesthetic dose is increased
from 1 MAC to 1.5 and 2 MAC multiples [4]. Although the degree
of hypercapnia observed with equipotent concentrations of
sevoflurane and isoflurane, ranging from 1 to 2 MAC is similar [4],
the anesthetic index was reported to be larger for sevoflurane
(3.45 MAC) than for isoflurane (2.65 MAC) in dogs, suggesting that
sevoflurane causes less respiratory depression at higher equipotent
anesthetic concentrations than does isoflurane [161].
As noted above, CO2 is a major determinant of ventilatory drive
in normal mammals under typical environmental conditions.
All inhalant general anesthetic agents in current use produce a
dose-dependent decrease in the ventilatory response to CO2
.
Therefore, for any given PaCO 2 , the V̇ E is lower than in a conscious
animal and the CO 2 response curve is shifted downward and to the
right as illustrated in Fig. 37.21A [162]. The reduced sensory input
and central sensitivity to CO2 produce a marked fall in V̇ E , usually
through a dose-related decrease in V T
, with a variable effect on
breathing frequency depending on the inhalant anesthetic. As a
result of these changes, PaCO 2 levels increase as the anesthetic dose
is increased when animals breathe spontaneously [2,4,163,164].
The degree of hypercapnia at equipotent doses of inhalant anesthetic
agents varies with the species and the degree of surgical stimulation
[4,160,163–165]. Afferent sensory input from surgical stimulation
will stimulate the respiratory center in the brainstem and increase
40
(A) 	(B)
30
Medetomidine 20 μg/kg
Isoflurane (1 MAC) + sufentanil
Isoflurane (0.5 MAC) + sufentanil
20
10
0
40 	50 	60
P ETCO2 (torr)
70 	80
40 	50 	60
P ETCO 2 (mmHg)
70 	80
20
15
10
5
0
Awake
(Hirshman
et al. 1977)
(Bloor et al. 1989)
Isoflurane 1 MAC
Isoflurane (1 MAC)
(Bloor et al. 1989)
V˙ E (L/min)
V˙ E (L/min)
Figure 37.21 A. Increases in minute ventilation in response to increasing end-tidal CO2 partial pressure (PET
CO2
) induced by CO2 rebreathing
(CO 2 response curves). Data were recorded in dogs that were conscious (awake), dogs anesthetized with 1 minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) of
isoflurane, and dogs that received intravenous medetomidine (20 μg/kg over 30 min, with data recorded 15 min after medetomidine administration and
discontinuation of isoflurane). B. Carbon dioxide response curves recorded in dogs anesthetized with isoflurane alone (1 MAC) or anesthetized with
isoflurane (1 and 0.5 MAC) plus an intravenous infusion of sufentanil. A decrease in the slope of the CO 2 response curves denotes drug-induced decreases
in central chemoreceptor sensitivity to CO2
. Source: Adapted from Bloor et al. [162]; Abdul-Rasool and Ward [173].

-- 737 of 1450 --

722 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
the ventilatory drive. Therefore, the respiratory depression induced
by general anesthetics is usually less in the presence of surgical
stimulation. Noxious stimulation however will not alter ventilatory
drive during general anesthesia if afferent sensory input is blocked
by local/regional anesthesia techniques. Of the inhalant anesthetics,
halothane produces the least increase in PaCO 2 during spontaneous
respiration, whereas, at equipotent doses, isoflurane, sevoflurane,
and desflurane produce somewhat higher and similar PaCO2 levels
in most species [4,163,166–168]. In ruminants, the degree of
hypercapnia is greater with equipotent inhalant anesthetic doses
than for horses, and horses show more respiratory depression than
monkeys, cats, and dogs [4,160,163,165,169,170]. Clinically, swine,
ferrets, rabbits, and rats also seem to be more prone to hypercapnia,
whereas deep-diving seals may become totally apneic during light
levels of anesthesia or with opioid-only sedation [167,171,172].
The apneic threshold can be defined as the PaCO 2 level at which
spontaneous ventilatory effort ceases due to loss of central respira-
tory drive (e.g., low PaCO2 or high CSF pH [relative to the set-point]).
A PaCO 2 reduction of 5–9 mmHg from normal resting values
through voluntary hyperventilation in conscious humans, or by
artificial ventilation of deeply sedated or anesthetized animals, pro-
duces apnea. The distance between the resting normal PaCO 2 level
and the apneic threshold is relatively constant (i.e., 4–6 mmHg less
than the normal resting level) irrespective of the anesthetic
depth [174,175]. Because inhalant and injectable anesthetics reset
the apneic threshold to a higher level, PaCO2 must be higher than
the normal range for the animal species for spontaneous breathing
efforts to occur during general anesthesia [176]. It is a common
practice to provide mechanical ventilation in anesthetized animals
simply by adjusting the number of mandatory breaths (f) and the V T
(or inspiratory pressure) delivered by the ventilator (i.e., V̇ E
) to
maintain PaCO2 levels within normal ranges (35–45 mmHg), with-
out having to resort to neuromuscular blocking agents to abolish
spontaneous respiratory efforts. This technique may not be effec-
tive, however, if V̇ E delivered by the mechanical ventilator is less
than necessary to maintain eucapnia. On the other hand, if the
ventilator is adjusted to deliver a relatively large V̇ E
, the resultant
decrease in PaCO 2 (hypocapnia) can lead to a more prolonged
period of apnea after discontinuation of mechanical ventilation at
the end of anesthesia. One practical way of reducing the period of
apnea following mechanical ventilation is to decrease V̇E by lower-
ing the ventilator respiratory rate to allow PaCO 2 to increase above
the apneic threshold toward the end of anesthesia. In anesthetized
horses, adjusting controlled mechanical ventilation to allow higher
PET
CO 2 values (60 mmHg) results in a more rapid return of spon-
taneous ventilation at the end of anesthesia when compared to
animals where mechanical ventilation was adjusted to achieve a
PET
CO2 of 40 mmHg [177]. When weaning a patient from ventila-
tory support, if the animal is apneic for more than 30 s to 1 min,
the anesthesiologist can intermittently provide manually assisted
breaths while allowing PaCO 2 to rise to a level where the apneic
threshold is again exceeded, and spontaneous ventilation resumes.
Depending on the residual analgesic or anesthetic drug levels, the
latter typically occurs at elevated PaCO2 levels.
Among the contemporary injectable anesthetic agents, propofol
is known for inducing respiratory depression and transient apnea in
a similar fashion as thiopental in small animals [178]. The injecta-
ble anesthetic alfaxalone, may also cause respiratory depression/
apnea after rapid intravenous administration. In dogs sedated with
dexmedetomidine–methadone, incidence of post-induction apnea
did not differ between induction of anesthesia with propofol and
alfaxalone [179]. However, when both agents were administered at
a faster rate to induce anesthesia (2 mg/kg/min and 4 mg/kg/min
for alfaxalone and propofol, respectively) 100% of animals devel-
oped apnea lasting for at least 30 s; while a slower rate of adminis-
tration (0.5 mg/kg/min and 1.0 mg/kg/min for alfaxalone and
propofol, respectively), reduced the incidence of apnea to 25% for
both anesthetic agents [179]. In dogs, current evidence therefore
favors the slow titration of injectable anesthetics to achieve the
desired depth of anesthesia to minimize post-induction respiratory
depression/apnea [179,180]. Use of propofol as part of a total intra-
venous anesthesia technique often results in significant respiratory
depression/apnea that requires mechanical ventilatory support in
animals [181,182]. There is some evidence that total intravenous
anesthesia with alfaxalone might be favored when mechanical ven-
tilation is not available in cats because of less respiratory depression
relative to that observed with propofol [182]. However, evidence in
dogs undergoing elective surgery points out that maintenance of
anesthesia with propofol (mean infusion rate 0.37 ± 0.09 mg/kg/min)
or alfaxalone (mean infusion rate 0.11 ± 0.01 mg/kg/min) results in
a similar degree of hypoventilation [183].
Although ketamine may be associated with less respiratory
depression than other injectable anesthetics, when dissociative
anesthetics are used in combination with other drugs during clinical
anesthesia, they may also contribute to apnea or reduced V̇E . For
example, post-induction apnea was more common in dogs after
administration of propofol–ketamine (2 mg/kg each) than after
propofol (4 mg/kg) alone [184]. Similarly, induction of anesthesia
with propofol–ketamine in dogs for laryngeal examination resulted
in lower hemoglobin saturation (87%) than propofol alone (94%),
an observation attributed to a reduced central ventilatory drive and
associated hypoventilation [185]. In cats, pulmonary ventilation
may be decreased when supratherapeutic doses of ketamine are
used, but the slope of the CO2 response curve is not altered in
comparison to the conscious state [186]. In horses, short-term
anesthesia with α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists and ketamine alone
or in combination benzodiazepines and/or guaifenesin induces
some degree of respiratory depression (increased PaCO2
), although
less than that observed with inhalant anesthetics [187–189]. During
anesthesia produced with tiletamine–zolazepam or halothane in
horses, PaCO2 levels will increase by 5–10 mmHg if the inspired
oxygen concentration is increased from 21–30% to 90–100%
[190,191]. The latter is attributed to a reduction in chemoreceptor
activity associated with higher PaO 2 levels [44]. Other studies have
shown a trend toward greater respiratory depression (i.e., higher
PaCO2 levels) in spontaneously breathing, isoflurane-anesthetized
horses inhaling an inspired oxygen concentration approaching
100% compared to 50% oxygen [192]. Greater respiratory depres-
sion associated with high F I
O2 has been reported in other species
under general anesthesia, including the rabbit [193]. Although
there is a decrease in respiratory drive observed in spontaneously
breathing animals during anesthesia with increased FI
O2 levels,
oxygen supplementation is still recommended to minimize the risk
of hypoxemia, particularly in the equine [187,188,190,192,194,195].
As described previously, in conscious individuals V̇E steeply
increases when PaO 2 falls below 60 mmHg, with the slope of the
curve approaching infinity as PaO 2 falls to 30–40 mmHg [196]
(Fig. 37.4B). Compared to the conscious state, most general anes-
thetics suppress peripheral chemoreceptor activity and inhibit the
hypoxic ventilatory drive in a dose-related fashion (Fig. 37.22)
[197–202]. Early studies demonstrated that isoflurane causes less
suppression of the hypoxic ventilatory drive compared to halothane

-- 738 of 1450 --

Chapter 37: Respiratory Physiology and Pathophysiology 	723
and enflurane (Fig. 37.22) [198]; and sevoflurane appears to cause
less 	suppression 	of 	the 	hypoxic 	ventilatory 	drive 	than
isoflurane [202]. While barbiturates (thiopental and pentobarbital)
are known for inhibiting the hypoxic ventilatory drive, intravenous
ketamine (10 mg/kg, followed by 0.5 mg/kg/min) was shown to
preserve the ventilatory response to low PaO2 levels in dogs under
experimental conditions (Fig. 37.22) [197]. In human subjects,
propofol inhibits the hypoxic ventilatory response even when
administered at subanesthetic doses to produce sedation without
loss of consciousness [201].
Anesthetic drugs that suppress the hypoxic ventilatory drive
should be used cautiously for induction of anesthesia in animal
species where endotracheal intubation is associated with a greater
degree of difficulty, such as lagomorphs (rabbits) and rodents, or if
the equipment necessary to perform endotracheal intubation and
artificially ventilate the lungs is not readily available. If prolonged
apnea occurs during induction of anesthesia, failure to establish a
patent airway for oxygen supplementation and positive-pressure
ventilation will quickly precipitate an episode of severe hypoxemia/
tissue hypoxia, and an anesthetic fatality. For anesthesiologists
who are less experienced with endotracheal intubation in rabbits,
a species-specific supraglottic airway device (laryngeal mask)
may facilitate more rapid establishment of a patent airway for
oxygen supplementation and artificial ventilation of the lungs if
necessary [203,204].
Sedatives and hypnotics
Mild to moderate sedation with α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists
alone usually does not result in clinically relevant changes in
arterial blood gases in most species. However, when relatively high
doses of α2 - adrenergic receptor agonists are combined with opioids
or ketamine to produce deeper levels of sedation/chemical restraint,
some degree of gas exchange impairment (increased PaCO 2 and
decreased PaO 2 ) can be observed in small animal species breathing
room air (Fig. 37.23A,B) [205–208]. In ruminants, the degree of
impaired gas exchange associated with α2
- adrenergic receptor ago-
nists alone, administered at doses sufficient to induce recumbency,
can be marked [7,209]. When arterial blood gas changes associated
with α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist combinations are observed,
they cannot be explained only by a centrally mediated decrease in
V̇ E and V̇A
, as the increase in PaCO2 per se does not justify the
decrease in arterial oxygenation observed after administration of
these drug combinations. While the decrease in V̇E and increase
in PaCO2 induced by injectable/inhalant anesthetics appears to be
related to the CNS depressant effects of these drugs, V̇A
/Q̇ mismatch
likely contributes to the decrease in PaO 2 in animals receiving
30
20
10
0
140
(A)
120 100
PETO 2 (mmHg)
80 	60 	40
Awake
Ketamine
Thiopental
Pentobarbital
V˙ E (L/min)
30
20
10
0
140
(B)
(C) 	(D)
120 100
PETO 2 (mmHg)
80 	60 	40
Awake
Halothane
Isoflurane
Enflurane
V˙ E (L/min)
600
500
400
300
200
Hypoxic ventilatory drive
100
30 	40
PETCO 2 (mmHg)
50
Awake
Ketamine
Thiopental
Pentobarbital
4500
3000
Hypoxic ventilatory drive
1500
0
30 	40 	50
PETCO 2 (mmHg)
60
Awake
Halothane
Isoflurane
Enflurane
Figure 37.22 A. and B. Relationship between progressive decreases in expired oxygen partial pressure (PET
O2
) and minute ventilation (V̇ E
) in dogs
anesthetized with injectable and inhalant anesthetics (n = 6). A rightward shift of the curve in comparison to the awake state denotes suppression of the
hypoxic ventilatory drive. C. and D. Effects of carbon dioxide levels (end-tidal carbon dioxide, PET
CO2
) on the hypoxic ventilatory drive with injectable
and inhalant anesthetics in dogs (n = 6). A decrease in the slope of the linear regression line denotes suppression of the hypoxic ventilatory drive during
conditions of hypercapnia (increased PET
CO2
). Source: Adapted from Hirshman et al. [197]; Hirshman et al. [198].

-- 739 of 1450 --

724 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
injectable/inhalant anesthetics and α2 - adrenergic receptor agonist
drug combinations.
Experimental data in dogs suggests that high doses of medetomi-
dine administered intravenously (20 μg/kg) inhibit the ventilatory
response to increased CO 2 levels in comparison to the awake state,
but such effect is less than that observed during isoflurane anesthe-
sia (Fig. 37.21A) [162,198]. Dexmedetomidine-induced sedation
has also been shown to impair the ventilatory response to hypox-
emia and hypercapnia in humans [210]. In dogs that were receiving
a fentanyl infusion (5 μg/kg/min) during recovery from isoflurane
anesthesia, intravenous dexmedetomidine administration (2.5 μg/kg)
resulted in significant respiratory depression (PaCO 2 > 45 mmHg)
when compared to placebo or acepromazine (0.05 mg/kg) [207].
Therefore, caution should be exerted when α2 - adrenergic receptor
agonists are used to provide sedation during recovery from general
anesthesia because of the potential for respiratory depression par-
ticularly when oxygenation will not be monitored or the ability to
provide oxygen supplementation is not available. Relatively low
doses of α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists are commonly adminis-
tered after discontinuation of inhalant anesthesia in horses with
the goal of improving the quality of recovery [211,212]. However,
administration of α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists and other anes-
thetic adjuvants to horses in the recovery room should be delayed
until strong spontaneous breathing efforts are present, if measures
to support ventilatory support are not available, as apnea may be
precipitated if these drugs are administered to animals that are in a
deep plane of anesthesia.
Phenothiazines (acepromazine) and butyrophenones (droperidol)
may increase the hypoxic ventilatory drive, possibly by blocking
the effects of endogenous dopamine on peripheral chemoreceptors
[50,213,214]. Interestingly, in humans and cats, intravenous dopa-
mine (3–5 μg/kg/min) inhibits the ventilatory response to low PaO2
due to depression of peripheral chemoreceptor (carotid body)
output [215,216]. In human patients with heart failure breathing
ambient air, intravenous dopamine has also been shown to decrease
V̇ E despite decreased oxygen saturation and increased PET
CO2
,
although the clinical significance of this in the management of
clinical veterinary patients is unknown [217].
Opioids
Opioids are known for inducing respiratory depression. In knockout
mice lacking μ-opioid receptors, morphine and other pure μ-opioid
receptor agonists do not induce respiratory depression, demon-
strating that the adverse ventilatory effects induced by these drugs
are largely mediated by stimulation of μ-opioid receptors [218,219].
Experimental evidence obtained in conscious human subjects pro-
vides ample evidence that pure μ-opioid receptor agonists suppress
the ventilatory response to hypercapnia [220]. Contrasting with
pure μ- opioid receptor agonists, drugs that act as μ- opioid receptor
antagonists and κ-opioid receptor agonists (butorphanol and nal-
buphine) have a limited (ceiling) effect on the ventilatory response
to increasing CO 2 levels [221,222] and can reverse the respiratory
depression induced by pure μ-opioid receptor agonists [223–225].
In humans not experiencing pain, opioid-induced respiratory
120
110
100
90
80
	PaO
2 (mmHg)
70
60
50
45
40
35
30
PaCO
2 (mmHg)
7.40
7.35
7.30
7.25
0 	15
Time after drug administration (min)
M
M-B
M-H
45
pH
120
110
100 	a
a
a
a
a 	a 	a
a 	a	a
b
a
a
a 	a
a
b
b
a
b
b
b
a a
b
b
b 	c 	b
a
a 	a
b b 	b b 	b
b
b b
b
a
a
b
b 	b
b
+
* +
* + 	* +
*
*
*
** *
*
* +
*
90
80
	PaO
2 (mmHg)
(A) 	(B)
70
60
50
45
40
35
30
PaCO
2 (mmHg)
7.40
7.35
7.30
7.25
0 	10 	20 	30 	40 	50
Time after drug administration (min)
M
M-B
M-K
pH
Figure 37.23 A. Arterial blood gas changes observed in six healthy mixed breed dogs (mean ± standard deviation) after intravenous administration of
20 μg/kg of medetomidine (M) alone or combined with 0.2 mg/kg of butorphanol (M-B) or 0.1 mg/kg of hydromorphone (M-H) in a randomized
crossover design. *Significant difference from baseline (time 0). +
Significant difference from medetomidine alone. B. Arterial blood gas changes observed
in six healthy dogs (mean ± standard deviation) after intramuscular administration of 30 μg/kg of medetomidine (M) alone or combined with 0.2 mg/kg
of butorphanol (M-B) or 3 mg/kg of ketamine (M-K) in a randomized crossover design.a,b,c For a given time point, treatment group means followed by
different letters are significantly different from each other (a>b>c). Source: Adapted from Ko et al. [205]; Kuo and Keegan [206].

-- 740 of 1450 --

Chapter 37: Respiratory Physiology and Pathophysiology 	725
depression (decreased V̇E
) is further aggravated by use of high
F I
O2 [226]. However, the clinical significance of respiratory depres-
sion caused by hyperoxia associated with high FI
O2 in animals
receiving opioids is presently unclear.
Opioids may induce panting in some species, most notably
dogs [227–229]. In conscious dogs, panting is more frequently
observed after administration of pure μ-opioid receptor agonists
(oxymorphone) than after μ-opioid receptor antagonists/κ-opioid
receptor agonists (butorphanol) [230]. This reaction is thought to
be mediated by the hypothalamic thermoregulatory center that
resets as if the body temperature was increased (though it is not).
Because panting is an important thermoregulatory mechanism
in canine species, opioid administration to conscious dogs may
decrease body temperature [54]. Interestingly, an increase in body
temperature leading to clinically relevant hyperthermia is
observed after opioid administration in cats, which is attributed to
drug-induced changes in the thermoregulatory center [231].
Although panting is commonly observed after opioid adminis-
tration in canine species, relatively high doses of methadone
(0.5–1 mg/kg) or morphine (1.0 mg/kg) administered intravenously
do not cause clinically relevant changes in arterial blood gases in
healthy conscious dogs [232]. Administration of hydromorphone
(0.2 mg/kg) subcutaneously, or liposome-encapsulated hydromor-
phone (2.0 mg/kg, subcutaneously), increased PaCO 2 and decreased
PaO2 from baseline values in dogs [233]. However, blood gas
changes were mild in the latter study, and in most cases, PaCO 2 val-
ues were not increased above the high normal range (45 mmHg),
and PaO 2 values were not decreased below the low normal range
(80 mmHg) [233]. Butorphanol does not induce significant changes
in arterial blood gases when administered to conscious dogs at a
dose of 0.3 mg/kg intravenously [234], or even when larger doses
(up to 0.8 mg/kg) are administered in spontaneously ventilating
dogs anesthetized with halothane [235]. However, in human sub-
jects anesthetized with 50% nitrous oxide in oxygen, butorphanol
was shown to inhibit the increase in V̇E in response to increasing
CO2 levels [236]. While administration of opioid analgesics to con-
scious non- painful horses may result in excitatory behavior, arterial
blood gases are unaltered [237–239]. In isoflurane-anesthetized
horses, morphine administered intravenously at doses, ranging
from 0.15 to 0.25 mg/kg does not induce respiratory depression,
while supratherapeutic doses (2.0 mg/kg) cause significant
respiratory depression/hypercapnia [240,241].
Pure μ-opioid receptor agonists (methadone, 0.25–0.75 mg/kg;
morphine, 0.25–1.0 mg/kg) combined with intramuscular aceprom-
azine (0.05 mg/kg) induce sedative effects with minimal evidence of
respiratory depression based on arterial blood gases in healthy
dogs [242,243]. Intravenous or intramuscular administration of
acepromazine (0.05 mg/kg) combined with butorphanol (0.4 mg/kg)
or nalbuphine (0.5 mg/kg) in cats induces mild sedation without
evidence of respiratory acidosis based on venous blood gases [244].
In animals, the respiratory depressant effects of opioids are evident
when these drugs are administered intravenously during general
anesthesia [240,245–247]. Respiratory depression/apnea associated
with intraoperative opioid administration often requires mechanical
ventilatory support in anesthetized animals [245,247,248]. Constant
rate infusion of short-acting pure μ-opioid receptor agonists
(e.g., sufentanil) in isoflurane-anesthetized dogs causes the CO2
response curve to become nearly flat, suggesting that these drugs
produce marked inhibition of central chemoreceptor activity
during general anesthesia (Fig. 37.21B) [173]. Studies in cats under
light anesthesia with α-chloralose and urethane have shown that
morphine (0.15 mg/kg) depresses ventilation at hyperoxia but does
not alter the ventilatory response (increase in V̇ E
) to hypoxia [249].
Administration of μ-opioid receptor agonists as premedication
may also impair ventilation during recovery from anesthesia. Clinical
evidence in healthy dogs undergoing surgery (ovariohysterectomy
and castration) indicates that premedication with hydromorphone
0.2 mg/kg, intramuscularly may result in higher PaCO2 in compari-
son to the use of butorphanol 0.4 mg/kg, intramuscularly [250].
When μ-opioid receptor agonists are used as premedication, the
degree of respiratory depression is usually mild and well tolerated
by healthy animals undergoing elective surgeries [250]. However,
caution should be exerted when these drugs are administered to
sick animals or patients with respiratory disease, as they may have a
greater impact on ventilation and lead to clinically relevant hyper-
capnia and hypoxemia. During recovery from general anesthesia in
dogs, persistent respiratory depression caused by opioids resulting
in low hemoglobin saturation (e.g., pulse oximetry < 94%) can occur
while the patient is breathing ambient air and is often accompanied
by excessive residual sedation and delayed extubation (lack of return
of swallowing reflex). These signs can be reversed by slow intrave-
nous titration of a μ-opioid receptor antagonist (naloxone 1–5 μg/kg)
or a μ-opioid receptor antagonist/κ-opioid receptor agonist (butor-
phanol 0.05–0.1 mg/kg). In dogs, intravenous naloxone at 1 μg/kg
increments every 2 min can be administered until the breathing
frequency and amplitude of spontaneous respiratory efforts are
increased to the point of normalizing pulse oximetry saturation
(≥ 95%), and there is an improvement in the levels of consciousness/
return of the swallowing reflex allowing orotracheal tube removal.
Because respiratory depression and analgesia are clinical effects
associated with μ-opioid receptor stimulation, slow titration until
achieving the desired effect is important to avoid reversal of the
analgesic effects. The elimination half-life of intravenous naloxone
is relatively short in dogs (37 min) [251]. Therefore, clinicians
should be aware of possible recurrence of respiratory depression
and the need for additional opioid reversal over time [252]. In the
case of opioid intoxication, much higher doses of naloxone (40 μg/kg)
are necessary to reverse the adverse effects/respiratory depression
induced by the opioid and there may be the need for repeated
administration of high doses in case of an inadequate response.
Pharmacokinetic studies in dogs suggest that the intranasal route
(4 mg via a commercially available fixed-dose naloxone atomizer;
mean dose of 0.17 mg/kg) may represent an effective alternative to
intravenous naloxone administration in emergency situations of
opioid intoxication [251].
Effects of sedation and anesthesia on pulmonary
ventilation and mechanics
In addition to reducing central respiratory drive as discussed above,
sedation and anesthesia can alter pulmonary ventilation by chang-
ing the volume of the lung, absolute or relative amount of deadspace
(physiological and apparatus deadspace) in relation to V T
, and the
mechanical properties of the respiratory system. While the changes
associated with anesthesia can be considered individually, it is
important to recognize that alterations in individual components of
the respiratory system are not independent. For example, changes
in lung volume influence the mechanical properties of the respira-
tory system, and vice versa.
Ventilation and lung volumes
A reduction in lung volume, specifically the lung volume at end-
expiration (FRC), is one of the major physiologic changes associated

-- 741 of 1450 --

726 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
with general anesthesia and recumbency [61,253–256]. While not
extensively studied in all species, a reduction in FRC observed with
general anesthesia has been demonstrated in several species,
including humans, horses, and dogs [27–29,256,257]. In recumbent
humans, FRC is reduced by about 20% with the induction of general
anesthesia [256,257]. While a reduced FRC does not necessarily
result in atelectasis, it is a commonly recognized sequela to the
reduction of lung volume associated with recumbency and
relaxation/paralysis of respiratory muscles induced by anesthesia.
Atelectasis has been reported to occur in up to 90% of adult human
patients with normal cardiopulmonary function undergoing general
anesthesia, with up to 20–25% of the lung becoming atelectatic or
poorly ventilated as assessed by computed tomography [254,258].
One study in beagle dogs showed no change in FRC associated
with thiopental anesthesia; however, sedation and both sternal
and lateral recumbency have been shown to reduce FRC in deep-
chested dogs [29,259]. While measurement of FRC has rarely been
performed in dogs, with advances in thoracic imaging, specifically
computed tomography, changes in lung volume and the develop-
ment of atelectasis during anesthesia have been evaluated more
extensively. In dogs sedated and maintained in sternal recumbency,
minimal atelectasis is evident on computed tomography images;
however, mild attenuation of aeration/atelectasis occurs in lateral or
dorsally recumbent dogs during sedation and/or general anesthesia
breathing spontaneously or receiving mechanical ventilation
[260–263]. In horses and cows, the decrease in FRC with the onset
of recumbency and general anesthesia may be marked, as much as
50–70%. This has been directly measured by helium dilution [27,264]
and open-circuit nitrogen washout [28] and is consistent with imag-
ing studies showing reduced lung aeration [265,266]. The reduction
in FRC seems to be primarily related to the positional change
from an upright posture to recumbency and, in horses, is greater in
lateral or dorsal recumbency compared to sternal positioning [28].
Laterally recumbent horses and cows have a smaller FRC compared
to the conscious state and radiographic images indicate that the
dependent lung is poorly aerated [265,266]. Studies using nuclear
scintigraphy and computed tomography have clearly demonstrated
that there is markedly less ventilation of the dependent lung of
horses in lateral and dorsal recumbency during anesthesia [267,268].
In horses, the reduction in lower lung volume is accompanied by
atelectasis and may be influenced by the degree of obesity or body
conformation, a finding consistent with studies in humans [269,270].
The acute reduction in FRC and development of atelectasis asso-
ciated with anesthesia has been primarily attributed to three factors:
(1) alterations in chest wall (thoracic wall and diaphragm) function
and configuration with a resultant increase in P pl (globally with
regional differences), (2) low distal airway/alveolar pressures (Palv
),
and (3) loss of functional surfactant. The former two mechanisms
are believed to be the major mechanisms contributing to the devel-
opment of atelectasis in healthy humans and in some animal species
under anesthesia while surfactant dysfunction is recognized to
contribute to the development of atelectasis in patients with pre-
existing lung injury and/or patients receiving long-term mechanical
ventilatory support [257,271].
Alterations in chest wall function and configuration are respon-
sible for most of the reduction in FRC associated with anesthesia,
particularly in large animal species such as horses and cows. In
conscious animals, the outward recoil of the chest wall results in
a sub-atmospheric pressure within the pleural cavity (P pl ). The
pressure difference between the inside (alveoli) and the outside of
the lung (pleural cavity) (Palv − P pl
), is responsible for maintaining
the alveoli open throughout the respiratory cycle (inspiration and
expiration). Induction of anesthesia results in relaxation of the chest
wall (thoracic wall and diaphragm), which in turn increases Ppl
(it becomes less negative) and decreases the outward pull on the
lung. Cranial migration of the diaphragm, increased transfer of
pressure from the abdominal cavity to the thorax, and the weight
of the lung within the chest wall also contribute to an increased
(less negative) P pl
, most notably in the dependent lung regions.
When the pressure outside the lungs (P pl
) exceeds the pressure
within the airways and alveoli (Palv
), compression atelectasis develops.
Because of their long-sloping diaphragm (notably horses), anatomy
of their gastrointestinal tract, and their body mass, large animal
species are more prone to compression of the lungs and atelectasis
in dependent zones when recumbent relative to small animal species.
In horses and cows, with the onset of anesthesia and movement into
lateral recumbency, there is radiographic evidence of a marked
change in the two-dimensional lung silhouette and the position of
the diaphragm [265,266]. In ponies anesthetized with halothane,
the diaphragmatic outline moved forward in both sternal and lateral
recumbency, although the forward shift was considerably greater in
lateral recumbency [265]. When the ponies were positioned in
dorsal recumbency, the diaphragmatic outline moved toward the
dependent spine region. With minor variations, observations of
315–400 kg cattle were very similar [266]. The positional alteration
of the diaphragmatic silhouette concurs with the reduction in FRC
noted by Sorenson and Robinson when ponies were moved from
sternal to lateral or dorsal recumbency [28]. In addition to changes
in position of the diaphragm, the tonic activity of the lateral chest
wall, especially that provided by the serratus ventralis muscle, may
be decreased in anesthetized horses, and it is postulated that this
phenomenon reduces the stabilization of the lateral chest wall and
likely contributes to the loss of FRC in this species [272].
In addition to loss of lung volume secondary to compression,
distal airway and alveolar pressures (Palv
) may also contribute to the
loss of lung volume and atelectasis during anesthesia [271].
Reduction in airway radius or even obstruction of small airways
secondary to compression (as described above), constriction, or the
presence of intraluminal material (e.g., mucus) may reduce ventila-
tion to distal lung units. Absorption of gases from the regions of
lung that are poorly ventilated but still perfused may subsequently
result in the development of absorption atelectasis. The development
of the latter is influenced by the characteristics of the gases in the
distal lung unit. In individuals breathing ambient air, alveolar gas
contains approximately 79% of nitrogen (Table 37.4). Because
nitrogen is insoluble in blood, it is not absorbed from the alveoli to
capillary blood and may have a role in preventing alveolar units
with low V̇ A
/Q̇ ratio from collapsing (acting as a “nitrogen skele-
ton”). If alveolar nitrogen is largely replaced by oxygen by using
high F I
O2 (> 0.8), the flow of oxygen from alveoli to capillary blood
in low V̇A
/Q̇ units exceeds flow of inspired gas (oxygen) entering
these alveoli, causing these lung units to become progressively
smaller until they collapse [154]. High FI
O2 in the perianesthetic
period has been demonstrated to lead to a greater degree of
atelectasis in horses, dogs, cats, and humans, an observation
consistent with absorption of gases in distal airways and alveoli
[61,191,253,261,262,273].
There are several important consequences resulting from a
decrease in lung volume at end-expiration. Most importantly, a
reduced FRC predisposes a patient to V̇ A
/Q̇ mismatching and
intrapulmonary shunting of blood secondary to the development of
atelectasis [256]. Due to compression of lung parenchyma during

-- 742 of 1450 --

Chapter 37: Respiratory Physiology and Pathophysiology 	727
anesthesia, a portion of blood supplying the lung will flow by
collapsed (V̇A
/Q̇ = 0) and/or poorly ventilated alveoli (V̇ A /Q̇ ratio
between 0.01 and 0.1) without achieving adequate oxygenation
(assuming HPV does not divert blood to well-ventilated lung units),
thereby contributing to a reduction in oxygen levels in the blood
leaving the lung (i.e., increased venous admixture) [274], as
discussed previously. Although oxygenation impairment/low PaO 2
is the major consequence of atelectatic lung areas, an increase in
Q̇ s/Q̇ T through the lung also adds CO2
- rich mixed venous blood to
oxygenated blood, further aggravating hypercapnia caused by a
decrease in V̇A during anesthesia. In addition to impacting gas
exchange function of the lung, changes in lung volume also influ-
ence pulmonary mechanics, with pulmonary resistance increasing
and compliance decreasing with a reduction in FRC/atelectasis.
To minimize the loss of lung volume and the development of
atelectasis associated with anesthesia and recumbency, several
strategies have been investigated including the use of negative-
pressure ventilation, positive-pressure ventilation, and varying
inspired gas composition. Early mechanical ventilators were designed
to create a negative (sub-atmospheric) pressure around the thorax
to enlarge the chest wall and pull gas into the lungs by creating a
negative intrapleural pressure. This was achieved by encasing the
whole body (except the head) inside a cylinder that intermittently
generated a sub-atmospheric pressure. These early ventilators, also
called “iron lungs,” were widely used during the 1950s to provide
mechanical ventilation in patients who suffered from paralysis of
diaphragm caused by poliomyelitis. Due to the required equipment
and limited access to the patient’s thorax, ventilatory support
using negative-pressure ventilation is not in common use today.
Application of intermittent positive pressure to oxygen or air/oxy-
gen mixtures supplying the lungs is now commonly used during
veterinary medicine to maintain alveolar ventilation. Depending on
the strategy, positive-pressure ventilation may establish a positive
pressure gradient between the alveoli and pleural space such that
loss of lung volume and atelectasis does not occur. However, the
level of applied positive pressure and its resulting Palv may not be
enough to overcome the increased Ppl in the dependent lung zones,
therefore the latter may remain closed throughout the respiratory
cycle. Even if inspiratory pressures are set to a level that is high
enough to open up atelectatic lung areas during inspiration, if there
is no positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) or if the level of PEEP
is inadequate to keep the alveoli open during expiration, the inter-
mittent opening and closure of alveoli (tidal recruitment) will lead
to ventilator-induced lung injury, specifically atelectrauma [275,276].
Reversal of atelectasis during anesthesia may require an alveolar
recruitment maneuver, that is, the temporary application of high
inspiratory airway pressures to open up atelectatic lung areas,
followed by mechanical ventilation with an adequate PEEP level
to prevent loss of lung volume and recurrence of atelectasis
[93,262,277,278]. As high FI
O2 levels have been shown to contribute
to absorption atelectasis, the use of varying inspired F I
O2 and/or
supplementation of inspired gases with less soluble gases such as
helium have been investigated [93,194,279,280]. Inspired gas con-
centrations, alveolar recruitment maneuvers, and PEEP adjustment
during mechanical ventilation are discussed in greater detail in
Chapter 38.
Ventilation and deadspace
As previously discussed, V̇A and the maintenance of normal PaCO2
levels can be influenced by alterations in deadspace and the VD phys
/V T
relationship. In anesthetized patients, deadspace can be altered
through a change in either VD phys
(airway or alveolar) or mechanical
(apparatus) deadspace. Airway deadspace can increase with
positional changes such as extension of the head and neck, high
airway pressures associated with positive-pressure ventilation, and
bronchodilation [281,282].
While bypassing the upper airways through use of a tracheos-
tomy or placement of an endotracheal tube (of appropriate length)
decreases total deadspace (physiologic and apparatus deadspace),
anesthetic equipment, including facemasks, excessively long endotra-
cheal tubes that protrude outside the mouth/nostrils, and airway
adaptors placed between the breathing circuit and the endotracheal
tube for airway gas sampling/analysis or spirometry can dramati-
cally increase apparatus and total deadspace, with possible clinical
relevance, particularly in small patients [283]. While an increase in
deadspace will not alter V̇ A if a compensatory change in V T and/or f
occurs, as one may expect to occur in a conscious healthy individual,
an increase in deadspace due to anesthesia equipment, combined
with an unchanged or decreased V T associated with general
anesthesia, can significantly increase VD phys
/V T
, reduce V̇ A , and
contribute to hypercapnia.
As previously discussed, changes in expired nitrogen concentra-
tion over a single breath after the patient inhales 100% oxygen can
be used to estimate deadspace values in an experimental setting
(single-breath nitrogen washout), while volumetric capnography is
the current clinical gold standard to determine VD phys
, VDalv
, VDaw
, and
effective alveolar ventilation per minute [V̇A = (V T – VD phys
) × f ]. In
general, VD phys
does not change significantly in healthy human patients
during general anesthesia with either spontaneous or artificial ven-
tilation [257]. In healthy spontaneously breathing horses with nor-
mal cardiovascular function placed in dorsal recumbency, VD phys
/V T
ratio measured according to the Bohr equation by volumetric
capnography was approximately 0.35–0.39 and remained relatively
stable over 3 h of general anesthesia [68]. In anesthetized dogs
receiving positive-pressure ventilation, VD phys
/V T ratio calculated
using the Bohr–Enghoff equation, was approximately 0.6, and
remained stable throughout a 60-min period [69]. Use of high air-
way pressures (typically with high PEEP levels) during mechanical
ventilation can, however, result in an increase in Palv and VDalv
by
impairing alveolar perfusion [284]. A decrease in pulmonary perfu-
sion from a variety of causes including a reduced CO associated
with anesthesia or an embolic event, can also lead to an increase
in VDalv
[281]. In hemodynamically compromised small animal or
large animal patients, an increase in P(a-et)CO 2 may not reflect
only impaired pulmonary perfusion if there is significant oxygena-
tion impairment secondary to areas of low V̇A
/Q̇ and intrapulmonary
shunting of blood.
Ventilation and lung mechanics
As previously described, the mechanical properties of the respira-
tory system, specifically regional compliance and resistance,
determine the normal distribution of airflow within the lung and
the energy expended to achieve optimal ventilation. Changes in the
upper and lower airways, thoracic cage, and diaphragm associated
with anesthesia produce marked changes in airway resistance and
pulmonary compliance. While thoracic and lung tissues contribute
to overall pulmonary resistance, the relative change over time in
healthy subjects is believed to be minor relative to the airways.
While changes in lung mechanical properties are significant with
anesthesia, interpretation of measurements of both pulmonary
resistance and compliance during anesthesia is difficult because
changes in lung volume per se will alter these values [79,257].

-- 743 of 1450 --

728 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
The latter is particularly relevant when considering the etiology of
such changes. Absolute values for pulmonary resistance and com-
pliance are influenced by many factors including the method of
measurement, airway device and diameter, patient size, and method
of ventilation. Further discussion regarding the measurement of
pulmonary mechanics during anesthesia is provided in Chapter 38.
At rest under normal circumstances (nasal breathing), the upper
airways (nasal cavity, pharynx, and larynx) are responsible for more
than 50% of the total R aw
. With sedation and anesthesia in horses,
alar and pharyngeal muscles relax, reducing the diameter of the
upper airways, further increasing the resistance to breathing and
increasing the relative contribution of the upper airways to total
R aw [285–287]. In some patients, the consequences of an increase in
upper airway resistance may be limited to an increase in the patient’s
effort to achieve alveolar ventilation. This is typically characterized by
an increase in abdominal movement during inspiration with minimal
or paradoxical (inward-moving) chest wall movement. The latter
respiratory pattern is due to a greater impact of anesthetics on the
function of intercostal muscles versus the diaphragm. Upper airway
obstruction following sedation or induction of general anesthesia
may also occur, particularly in patients with structurally abnormal
upper airways, such as in brachycephalic dogs and cats, or patients
with pathology of the upper airways. In the equine placed in dorsal
recumbency for prolonged periods, congestion and tissue swelling
of the nasopharyngeal structures are particularly common. For
obligate nasal breathers (e.g., cats and horses), bypassing the naso-
pharynx by placing an orotracheal tube, nasotracheal tube (horses),
or supraglottic airway device (cats) reduces upper airway resistance
and the work of breathing, ensuring a patent airway during anes-
thesia [287]. Further discussion regarding the relative risk and
benefits of different airway devices is provided in chapters dedicated
to specific species management. In contrast to the upper airways,
most currently used injectable and inhalant anesthetics result in a
dose-dependent bronchodilation in addition to inhibiting airway
vagal reflexes and bronchoconstriction [175,288–291]. One notable
exception is desflurane, which may cause an increase in R aw due
to bronchoconstriction at higher doses (1.5–2.0 MAC) [290,292].
Airway resistance is, however, influenced by lung volume, with
lower lung volumes resulting in an increase in resistance, particu-
larly as lung volumes approach RV [293].
In general, in humans, an overall increase in R aw (excluding the
effect of upper airways) occurs with anesthesia. It is unknown if this
is due to the reduction in lung volume or change in airflow rates,
two variables that impact resistance measurements [61]. During an
anesthetic period, however, R aw generally remains stable in healthy
human patients receiving ventilatory support [61]. There are few
studies evaluating conscious versus anesthetized respiratory mechan-
ics in veterinary species using consistent methodology that take into
consideration the effect of lung volume and airflows, therefore it is
difficult to make conclusions regarding the effects of anesthesia
alone. In one study evaluating cows anesthetized for 3 h with halo-
thane, R aw tended to increase, however, the degree of change was only
significant in fed cows [294]. The latter also was reported to become
tympanic, therefore, it is possible that the change over time in R aw was
related to a loss of lung volume. In anesthetized mechanically venti-
lated healthy dogs placed in lateral or dorsal recumbency for ortho-
pedic procedures, R aw did not significantly increase over a 120-min
period [295]. Resistance was also unchanged in healthy sedated
recumbent foals receiving ventilatory support over a 24-h period [296].
Similar to the decrease in lung volumes with anesthesia, total
respiratory system compliance (CRS
) is reduced during anesthesia. It
is important to emphasize that decreased C RS in anesthetized
animals may be the result of decreases in lung (C L
) and chest wall
(C CW ) compliance. Development of anesthesia-related atelectasis
and severe lung disease will reduce C RS because of poor CL
. Factors
that are external to the lung, such as loss of respiratory muscle tone/
muscle paralysis (diaphragm and intercostal muscles) induced by
anesthetic drugs, obesity, increased intra-abdominal volume and
pressure, and chest wall conformation (barrel-chested dogs) will
result in a less compliant chest wall (decreased C CW ) and contribute
to a reduced CRS during anesthesia [297]. Although an independent
assessment of C L and C CW would allow the anesthetist to identify the
cause of decreased CRS and to direct the clinical conduct to improve
overall compliance, as described previously, in the clinical setting
CRS is often measured during anesthesia with positive-pressure ven-
tilation. Specifically, total C RS (either dynamic or static/quasistatic
C RS
), is calculated as the ratio between the V T (mL) and the driving
pressure (cm H2
O) (inspiratory minus end-expiratory pressures)
during mechanical ventilation. However, comparison of compliance
measurements among veterinary species requires indexing values
to ideal body weight (mL/cmH2
O/kg). Analysis of CRS measurements
indexed to body weight shows that adult horses present signifi-
cantly lower CRS (0.4 mL/cmH2
O/kg) than dogs (1.3 mL/cmH2
O/kg)
during anesthesia and positive-pressure ventilation [93,297].
In healthy human patients, the decrease in C RS with anesthesia is
believed to be due to the reduction in lung volume [257]. The time-
line of changes in lung volume with changes in compliance, are con-
sistent with the latter etiology. In healthy dogs maintained under
general anesthesia in a clinical setting, quasistatic CRS has been
shown to be relatively stable over time, but it is reduced in obese
animals and animals with a barrel-shaped chest [295,297]. Although
there is a paucity of data in the literature, adequate preoperative
fasting appears to be important to minimize the decrease in CRS and
improve gas exchange during general anesthesia in ruminants. In
one study, a progressive decrease in dynamic C RS was recorded dur-
ing a 90-min period of halothane anesthesia in nonfasted cows and
in cows that were deprived of food for 48 h and water for 12 h prior
to anesthesia [294]. However, dynamic CRS was decreased to a
greater extent in nonfasted than in fasted cows and these changes in
pulmonary mechanics were associated with progressive worsening
of gas exchange (higher PaCO2 and lower PaO2 values), probably
because of a greater degree of atelectasis associated with the devel-
opment of abdominal tympany in cows that were not fasted before
anesthesia [294].
Effects of anesthesia on pulmonary perfusion and hypoxic
pulmonary vasoconstriction
Pulmonary perfusion is driven by the gradient between MPAP and
LAP. Inhalant anesthetics have a major impact on the perfusion of
systemic organs due to dose-dependent decreases in mean arterial
pressure (MAP) and/or CO. The effects of inhalant anesthetics on
pulmonary circulation, however, are less obvious as increasing doses
of inhalant anesthetics (from 1.0 to 1.5–2.0 MAC) did not cause
significant changes in MPAP in spontaneously breathing dogs,
despite reduction of MAP in a dose-related manner (Fig. 37.24A) [4].
In mechanically ventilated horses anesthetized with sevoflurane,
MPAP was significantly decreased from values observed in conscious
animals, although changes in MPAP were not observed between MAC
multiples (Fig. 37.24B) [298]. Absence of changes in MPAP occurred
despite dose-related decreases in MAP and CO (Fig. 37.24B) [298].
Ventilated but poorly perfused lung areas (high V̇ A /Q̇ ratio), appar-
ently caused by low MPAP, appear to be relatively common finding

-- 744 of 1450 --

Chapter 37: Respiratory Physiology and Pathophysiology 	729
in standing conscious horses [153,299]. Although general anesthe-
sia decreases CO and MPAP compared to the conscious state in
equine species, areas of high V̇ A /Q̇ ratio are paradoxically decreased
from values recorded during the conscious state in dorsal recum-
bency anesthetized horses [299].
Major changes in CO during anesthesia will influence arterial
and mixed venous blood oxygenation. In a patient with a relatively
large intrapulmonary shunt (e.g., 50% of shunted flow leading to
hypoxemia/low PaO2 ), arterial oxygenation will be further impaired
if CO is significantly decreased by anesthesia or hemorrhage. This
effect is secondary to a decrease in mixed venous blood PO 2 and
not to a direct effect of low CO on gas exchange within the
lungs [300,301]. Because oxygen delivery is decreased by low CO, a
compensatory increase in oxygen extraction by tissues reduces the
PO2
/hemoglobin saturation in mixed venous blood. As the pulmo-
nary artery blood with lower-than-normal PO 2 and hemoglobin
saturation (e.g., 30 mmHg and 57%) reaches ventilated alveoli, it
will not be fully oxygenated and the blood leaving these alveolar
units will further aggravate the oxygenation impairment caused by
the intrapulmonary shunt [300,301]. Based on this physiologic con-
cept, the anesthesiologist should consider means to improve CO
(e.g., inotropic and/or fluid administration) in patients where poor
hemodynamic function is coinciding with hypoxemia caused by
intrapulmonary shunting during anesthesia.
General anesthesia and mechanical ventilation may decrease
perfusion in specific areas of the lung through decreases in Q̇T
,
which may contribute to an increase in VDalv
if perfusion is
completely abolished in some lung areas. As previously discussed,
ventilated lung areas where capillary blood flow is absent because
Palv is greater than arterial and venous pressures (West zone I)
(Fig. 37.15) can be increased in anesthetized patients receiving
mechanical ventilation, especially if high inspiratory pressures and/
or high levels of PEEP are used. Due to relationship between PET
CO2
and PaCO 2 in mammalian species with normal lungs, monitoring
P ET CO 2 provides a quick and non-invasive tool to assess the
adequacy of ventilation in patients under general anesthesia.
Under normal circumstances, the P ET CO 2 (which represents the
CO 2 eliminated from alveoli that are ventilated and perfused) is
up to 5 mmHg less than PaCO 2 , as alveolar CO 2 is diluted with gas
from the airways, which does not contain CO 2 [302]. However, in
the event of decreased lung perfusion during anesthesia contrib-
uting to an abnormally high VDalv
, the P(a-et)CO 2 will often
increase above 5 mmHg. As previously noted, the anesthesiologist
should also be aware that the use of P(a-et)CO 2 as an index
that reflects solely pulmonary/alveolar deadspace is limited in
the presence of significant low V̇ A /Q̇ areas and intrapulmonary
shunting [62,68]. Mixed venous blood bypassing ventilated alveoli
(shunted flow) and areas with low V̇ A /Q̇ ratios adds CO 2 -rich
blood to the arterial side leading to an increase in PaCO 2 and
overestimation of pulmonary/alveolar deadspace based on the
Enghoff method [62,68]. For practical purposes, the anesthesiolo-
gist may suspect that intrapulmonary shunting is increased, and
therefore bears a greater influence on P(a-et)CO 2 calculations, by
evaluating PaO 2 values while the animal is breathing an inspired
MAP (mmHg)
MPAP (mmHg)
CO (mL /min/kg)
10
12
14
16
18
20
20
40
60
80
100
120
Dogs (n = 6): Sevoflurane anesthesia
(spontaneous ventilation)
280
260
240
220
200
180
160
140
Conscious 	1.0 	1.5
MAC multiples
2.0
* *† *‡
(A)
MAP (mmHg)
MPAP (mmHg)
CO (mL /min/kg)
5
10
15
20
25
20
40
60
80
100
120
Horses (n = 6): Sevoflurane anesthesia
(mechanical ventilation)
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
Conscious 	1.0 	1.5
MAC multiples
2.0
*†
*‡
* ‡
* 	*	*
* *
(B)
Figure 37.24 Effects of increasing doses of sevoflurane expressed as multiples of minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) on mean arterial pressure
(MAP), mean pulmonary arterial pressure (MPAP), and cardiac output (CO) in A. spontaneously breathing dogs, and B. mechanically ventilated horses.
* Significant difference from value recorded when animals were conscious; † Significant difference from value recorded at 1.0 MAC; ‡ Significant
difference from value recorded at 1.5 MAC. Source: Adapted from Mutoh et al. [4]; Aida et al. [298].

-- 745 of 1450 --

730 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
oxygen concentration close to 100%; if PaO2 is near 500 mmHg,
intrapulmonary shunting is likely to be minimal, and pulmonary/
alveolar deadspace is likely the major determinant of the P(a-et)
CO 2 gradient.
In hemodynamically unstable patients, if P(a-et)CO 2 is elevated
or increases over time, there could be an increase in pulmonary/
alveolar deadspace secondary to poor pulmonary perfusion, which
should be investigated. Identification and resolution of the cause of
abnormally high P(a-et)CO2 is paramount to avoid the development
of further complications during anesthesia. For practical purposes,
in anesthetized small animals presenting a clearly distinguishable
phase III (alveolar plateau) in the capnogram, an increased discrep-
ancy between PET
CO2 and PaCO 2 (P(a-et)CO 2 > 5 mmHg) may
provide a rough estimate that VDalv
/V T is increased. In otherwise
healthy anesthetized animals receiving constant volume mechani-
cal ventilation, a temporal increase in P(a-et)CO 2 may suggest
poor pulmonary perfusion secondary to low CO caused by surgical
factors such as intraoperative hemorrhage/shock [75,76]. Similar
changes secondary to low CO caused by obstruction of venous
return (vena cava) or aortic flow during surgical manipulation of
the abdominal cavity may be observed in small animal anesthesia.
In anesthetized horses, P(a-et)CO2 gradients of 10 mmHg or
higher are a common finding and this difference historically was
thought to arise as consequence of increased pulmonary/alveolar
deadspace in this species [67,303]. The degree of underestimation
of PaCO2 by PET
CO2 in dorsally recumbent horses is higher during
emergency colic surgery than during elective arthroscopic surgery
(Fig. 37.25A,B) [303]. High airway pressures (> 30 cmH2 O) are
frequently necessary to provide mechanical ventilation in colic
horses with poor chest wall compliance associated with a distended
abdomen; the elevated Palv generated by mechanical ventilation
under these circumstances likely has a negative impact on lung per-
fusion because of compression of pulmonary capillaries. However,
because of the significant increase in shunted flow observed during
routine anesthesia in horses, P(a-et)CO2 and VDalv
/V T calculations
based on the Enghoff method may not only reflect an increase in
pulmonary/alveolar deadspace but should be considered global
indices of gas exchange efficiency (Fig. 37.25A,B) [68]. Therapeutic
measures to improve CO/pulmonary perfusion (e.g., initiating
or increasing dobutamine infusion rate) should be considered
if P(a-et)CO2 is excessively increased. In the case of high airway
pressures observed during anesthesia for colic surgery, the surgeon
should expedite abdominal decompression to minimize the negative
impact of distended bowel on chest wall compliance. An
improvement in lung perfusion in these cases may also be associated
with increases in PaO 2 due to better V̇A
/Q̇ matching.
Besides influencing gas exchange, pulmonary perfusion is an
important factor to consider when evaluating the pharmacokinetics
of injectable anesthetics/anesthetic adjuvants, as drugs are subject to
first-pass pulmonary uptake, that is, the instantaneous extraction of
a drug from the circulation by lung tissue [304]. Pulmonary retention
is related to the percentage of the injected dose that remains in the
lungs after the first-pass period [304]. While metabolism will not
necessarily occur in the lungs, drugs that are substantially retained
Arthoscopy – IPPV
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
PET
CO
2–PaCO
 2 (mmHg)
P(a-
 ET )CO
2 (mmHg)
–15
–20
–25
–30
30 	35 	40 	45 	50 	55 	60 	65
PaCO 2 (mmHg)	(A)
70 	75
Mean + 2 SD
Mean – 2 SD
Mean difference
80 	85 	90
Colic – IPPV
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
PET
CO
2–PaCO
 2 (mmHg)
–15
–20
–25
–30
30 	35 	40 	45 	50 	55 	60 	65
PaCO 2 (mmHg)	(B)
(C) 	(D)
70 	75
Mean + 2 SD
Mean – 2 SD
Mean difference
80 	85 	90
40
30
20
10
0
–10
0.1 	0.2 	0.3 	0.4 	0.5
r = 0.694 	r = 0.684
0.6
Q˙ S/Q˙ T
VDalv
/ VT
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.1 	0.2 	0.3 	0.4 	0.5 	0.6
Q˙ S/Q˙ T
Figure 37.25 A. and B. Discrepancy between arterial (PaCO2
) and end-tidal CO2 (PET
CO2
) in dorsally recumbent horses anesthetized with isoflurane
that received intermittent positive-pressure ventilation (IPPV) during arthroscopy and colic surgery. C. and D. Correlation between arterial to end-tidal
CO2 gradient (P(a-et)CO2
) or alveolar deadspace fraction (VDalv
/V T
) with shunt fraction (Q̇ S
/Q̇T
) in dorsally recumbent spontaneously breathing horses
anesthetized with isoflurane and a medetomidine constant rate infusion. SD, standard deviation; r, Pearson’s correlation coefficient. Source: Adapted from
Mosing et al. [68]; Koenig et al. [303].

-- 746 of 1450 --

Chapter 37: Respiratory Physiology and Pathophysiology 	731
in the lungs after the first-pass period are released back into the
blood stream as incoming blood concentrations decrease.
Propofol undergoes significant first-pass pulmonary retention in
animals and man but there is no definitive evidence that this drug
is metabolized in the lung. Although studies have suggested that
the lungs take part in the metabolism/elimination of propofol
in humans [305], this has been a matter of dispute [306,307]. In
human surgical patients, propofol was shown to undergo extensive
first-pass pulmonary retention (28.4%) but was released back into
the circulation, as indicated by comparable propofol concentration
versus time curves obtained from blood entering the lungs (mixed
venous blood collected from a pulmonary artery catheter) and from
blood exiting the lungs (arterial blood collected from a radial artery
catheter) [306]. In sheep, 30% of a propofol dose was eliminated
during first-pass through the lungs [308]. However, the study could
not determine if elimination was attributed to true drug metabolism
in the lung or to distribution into a deep lung compartment [308].
In pentobarbital anesthetized cats, first-pass pulmonary retention
of propofol is relatively large (60%) and is significantly reduced
when fentanyl is administered 30 s before propofol injection, but
not when fentanyl is administered 3 or 10 min before propo-
fol [309,310]. Propofol and its metabolites are mainly excreted in
urine and an extremely small fraction of propofol is exhaled though
the lungs. Because the concentration of propofol in expired gas
correlates well with plasma concentrations, monitoring of expired
propofol concentrations may have a clinical application in the
future [311–313]. Other drugs used during anesthesia such as
thiopental, ketamine, opioids, local anesthetics, benzodiazepines,
and catecholamines (norepinephrine and dopamine) can be taken
up by the lungs and more specific details on handling of these
drugs by lung tissue in humans and animal species are available
elsewhere [304].
Anesthesia and hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction
As discussed previously, HPV is a physiologic mechanism whereby
a decrease in alveolar PO2 causes constriction of adjacent arterioles.
In the presence of gas exchange impairment/hypoxemia due to
areas of low V̇A /Q̇ ratio or shunt, HPV may improve arterial
oxygenation by diverting pulmonary blood flow to better-aerated
regions of the lung. Comparison of the effects of anesthetic drugs
on PaO 2 and shunt fraction during one-lung ventilation has been
used extensively to indirectly assess the effects of inhalant or
intravenous anesthetics on HPV in humans, but this model fails to
evaluate the effects of lung regions with low PaO2 on the vascular
tone of adjacent arterioles. On the other hand, in vitro studies using
isolated lung preparations ventilated with low FI
O2 may be able to
demonstrate drug effects on HPV but may not be directly extrapo-
lated to clinical situations.
Attenuation of HPV by some anesthetic drugs may in part
explain the lower than expected PaO 2 values observed during
general anesthesia. Early experimental studies in the 1970s using a
perfused lung model in cats and dogs originally postulated that
inhalant anesthetics could inhibit HPV, and that this could lead to an
increase in the proportion of mixed venous blood flowing through
areas of low V̇A /Q̇ ratio or non-ventilated lung areas (shunt), thereby
contributing to a decrease in PaO2 during anesthesia [314]. This
postulation was later confirmed using isolated rat lung prepara-
tions, which showed that HPV was inhibited by inhalant agents
(halothane, methoxyflurane, and ether), but remained unaffected
by injectable anesthetics (barbiturates and ketamine) [315]. Other
in vitro studies supported the observation that all contemporary
inhalant anesthetics (isoflurane, sevoflurane, and desflurane) would
block HPV and that this effect could, at least in part, explain the
absolute or relative hypoxemia observed in animals receiving inhal-
ant anesthesia [316–318]. Although isoflurane was reported to
inhibit HPV [316,319–321], some early studies failed to show a
consistent effect of this inhalant on HPV/arterial oxygenation in
anesthetized animals and humans due to methodological issues,
including lack of comparison of the HPV response to that of
non-anesthetized individuals, the confounding effect of other
concurrently administered drugs (e.g., pentobarbital anesthesia), or
the lack of comparison of the pressor response to alveolar hypoxia
at a fixed pulmonary artery flow [322–325]. Because the pressor
response of pulmonary arterial vessels to low alveolar PO 2 (i.e.,
HPV) is also flow dependent, the effects of drugs on HPV should be
compared at a similar pulmonary artery flow [326,327].
The effects of inhalant anesthetics on HPV are controversial at
best. Studies performed during one-lung ventilation in humans have
suggested that sevoflurane and desflurane inhibit HPV in a similar
fashion as isoflurane because of absence of differences in PaO2
among these drugs [328–331]. However, sevoflurane and desflu-
rane did not inhibit the pressor response to low alveolar PO2 at a
similar CO/pulmonary flow range in piglets [332]. In chronically
instrumented dogs, the increase in pulmonary artery pressure in
response to alveolar hypoxia (due to low FI
O2 ) at a similar pulmo-
nary artery flow indicates that isoflurane, but not sevoflurane or
desflurane, inhibits HPV in comparison to the HPV observed in the
conscious state (Fig. 37.26A,B) [327,333]. Based on the same meth-
odology, ketamine did not alter HPV while propofol potentiated
HPV in comparison to the HPV observed in conscious state in dogs
(Fig. 37.26C,D) [334].
Although some experimental models provide evidence that the
pressor response to low alveolar PO 2 is maintained by propofol,
ketamine, desflurane, and sevoflurane [327,332–334], there is no
evidence that any one anesthetic drug is associated with better arte-
rial oxygenation during one-lung ventilation, with the exception of
propofol [328–331,335,336]. In conscious animals presenting with
lung disease associated with areas of low V̇ A /Q̇ ratio and shunt,
HPV may represent an important mechanism that prevents further
oxygenation impairment. Under these circumstances, the anesthe-
siologist could opt for drugs that are more likely to preserve the
HPV response observed during the conscious state (i.e., propofol,
ketamine, sevoflurane, and desflurane).
Effects of anesthesia on ventilation–perfusion
relationships
All forms of general anesthesia are associated with some degree
of deterioration in pulmonary gas exchange. A decrease in arterial
oxygenation that cannot be explained by hypoventilation/
hypercapnia is commonly observed in otherwise healthy animals
undergoing general anesthesia. An increased P(a-a)O 2 resulting in
lower- than-expected PaO2 levels is usually attributed to a mismatch
between ventilation and perfusion of the lungs (V̇ A
/Q̇ mismatch);
more specifically due to areas of low V̇A /Q̇ ratio (between 0.01
and 0.1) or areas of the lungs that are perfused but not ventilated
(V̇A /Q̇ ratio = 0). Development of atelectasis of dependent lung
regions resulting in shunted flow to the lungs (V̇A /Q̇ ratio = 0) com-
bined with the inhibition of HPV is the main cause of oxygenation
impairment during general anesthesia. As previously discussed,
factors such as body mass, obesity, type of recumbency, intrab-
dominal volume/pressure, and inspired oxygen concentration, may
contribute to development of atelectasis and poor lung compliance

-- 747 of 1450 --

732 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
during anesthesia [27,28,261,268,337]. There are species differences
in the development of V̇A
/Q̇ mismatch and shunt. Horses are
particularly prone to develop a large shunt (> 15–20% of CO) due to
the presence of large areas of alveolar collapse during anesthesia,
with body positioning in dorsal recumbency resulting in larger
areas of atelectasis and shunt when compared to lateral recumbency
(Figs. 37.27 and 37.28) [268,299]. As previously noted, because of
their body mass, large animal species are more prone to compres-
sion of the lungs leading to atelectasis than small animals. More
specifically, in horses, compression of the lungs by gravitational
forces acting on the chest wall, and by abdominal viscera pushing
the diaphragm forward, are of greater magnitude than in dogs and
cats, explaining why this species develops more atelectasis/shunted
blood flow during anesthesia (Figs. 37.27 and 37.28).
In humans, atelectasis that develops after induction of anesthesia
may extend into the postoperative period and cause some degree
of oxygenation impairment after recovery and has been associated
with a higher incidence of postoperative complications (e.g.,
pneumonia) [338,339]. Evidence of the negative impact of intraop-
erative atelectasis in the postanesthetic period in veterinary species
is currently lacking.
The gold standard method for assessing the matching between
ventilation and perfusion of the lung (V̇A /Q̇) is the multiple inert
gas elimination technique, which has advanced the understanding
of the mechanism of gas exchange impairment during anesthesia in
humans and animal species [299,301,340,341]. In normal conscious
humans, a bimodal distribution of V̇A
/Q̇ ratios has been identified,
with one mode centered around the ratio of 1 and another, smaller
mode, within low V̇A /Q̇ regions [341].
Fig. 37.29 shows changes in ventilation and perfusion matching
evaluated by a multiple inert gas elimination technique in conscious
and anesthetized horses [299]. The relative distribution of ventila-
tion and perfusion in conscious standing animals with normal
lungs is centered around 1, which is the ideal matching between
ventilation and perfusion to achieve optimal gas exchange. A small
area of high V̇A
/Q̇ ratio (between 10 and 100) and of shunted flow
(V̇ A
/Q̇ = 0), which represents < 3% of total pulmonary blood flow
(Q̇ S
/Q̇T < 3%), may also be observed in healthy horses in a quadru-
pedal position (Fig. 37.29A) [153,299]. After induction of anesthe-
sia in horses breathing spontaneously, there is a marked increase in
shunt flow, which often exceeds 30% of total pulmonary blood flow
(Q̇S
/Q̇T > 30%) when animals are positioned in dorsal recumbency.
Such increases in shunt flow result in oxygenation impairment
characterized by marked increases in P(a-a)O 2 (Fig. 37.29B). Use of
conventional mechanical ventilation with zero end-expiratory
pressure (ZEEP) or 10 cm H2 O of PEEP does not consistently
decrease the shunt in dorsally recumbent horses and may contribute
to further decreases in PaO2 if inotropic support is not used to
counteract the negative effects of positive-pressure ventilation on
pulmonary blood flow (CO) (Fig. 37.29C,D).
16
12
8
4
PAP – LAP (mmHg)
0
0 	40
Left pulmonary blood flow (mL /min/kg)
20
16
12
8
PAP – LAP (mmHg)
4
0
0 	40
Left pulmonary blood flow (mL /min/kg)
80
Conscious + HPV
Ketamine (1.0 mg/kg/min) + HPV
120 	160
(A)
80
Conscious + HPV
Isoflurane (1.2 MAC) + HPV
120 	160
16
12
8
4
	PAP – LAP (mmHg)
0
0 	40
Left pulmonary blood flow (mL /min/kg)	(B)
(C)
20
16
12
8
PAP – LAP (mmHg)
4
0
0 	40
Left pulmonary blood flow (mL /min/kg)
80
Conscious + HPV
Propofol (0.5 mg/kg/min) + HPV
Propofol (1.0 mg/kg/min) + HPV
120 	160
(D)
80
Conscious + HPV
Sevoflurane (1.5 MAC) + HPV
Desflurane (1.5 MAC) + HPV
120 	160
Figure 37.26 Relationships between pulmonary perfusion pressure (pulmonary artery pressure [PAP] minus left atrial pressure [LAP]) and changes in left
pulmonary artery blood flow in conscious and anesthetized dogs where hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction (HPV) was induced by lowering the inspired
oxygen fraction. When compared to the conscious state, a decrease in pressure at the same flow range denotes inhibition of HPV and vice versa (dashed
red squares). A. Isoflurane (1.2 minimum alveolar concentration [MAC]) attenuates HPV compared to the conscious state. B. Sevoflurane and desflurane
(1.5 MAC) do not alter HPV compared to the conscious state. C. Ketamine does not alter HPV compared to the conscious state. D. Propofol potentiates
HPV compared to the conscious state. *Significant difference from HPV observed in conscious dogs. Source: Adapted from Lennon and Murray [327];
Lesitsky et al. [333]; Nakayama and Murray [334].

-- 748 of 1450 --

Chapter 37: Respiratory Physiology and Pathophysiology 	733
(A) Conscious, standing
(FIO2 = 0.21):
(B) Anesthetized, dorsal recumbency
(spontaneous breathing, F IO2 > 0.95):
High V˙ A /Q˙
Alveolar deadspace
(minimal)
Diaphragm
Low V˙ A/Q˙ and
shunt (minimal)
Endotracheal
tube
↑ Alveolar deadspace
↑ Shunted flow
(atelectasis)
Diaphragm
Abdominal
viscera
Relative alveolar size at the end of inspiration
High V˙ A /Q˙ ratio or alveolar deadspace (V˙ A /Q˙ = ∞)
V˙ A /Q˙ matching approaching the ideal ratio (1)
Low V˙ A/Q˙ ratio or shunt (V˙ A /Q˙ = 0)
Figure 37.27 Effect of anesthesia and postural changes on V̇A
/Q̇ matching in horses. A. In conscious standing horses, most of the lung has V̇A
/Q̇ matching
approaching the ideal ratio (1). B. During general anesthesia in spontaneously breathing horses positioned in dorsal recumbency, compression of the lung
tissue by the weight of abdominal viscera and cephalad displacement of the diaphragm contributes to a marked increase in shunt because of atelectasis of
dependent areas of both lungs. Alveolar deadspace may also be increased because of decreased pulmonary blood flow and MPAP induced by anesthesia
in relation to the conscious state.
(A) 	(B) 	(C) 	(D)
Figure 37.28 A. and B. Computed tomography images of the lungs of a spontaneously breathing pony anesthetized with an inspired oxygen concentration
close to 100% in A. lateral and B. dorsal recumbency. The large dense areas of dependent lung regions encircled by white lines (arrows) were identified as
atelectatic lung tissue by histology. C. and D. Computed tomography images of the lungs of a dog anesthetized in dorsal recumbency with an inspired
oxygen concentration of C. 40% oxygen, or D. 100% oxygen receiving mechanical ventilation in a volume-controlled mode (V T = 15 mL/kg, inspiration to
expiration ratio = 1:2, and 25% inspiratory hold). Use of 40% oxygen eliminated the dense (atelectatic) lung areas observed with 100% oxygen (arrows).
Note that the dense atelectatic areas observed in D. dorsally recumbent dogs inspiring 100% oxygen are less extensive than in B. dorsally recumbent
horses inhaling a similar oxygen concentration. Source: Reproduced from Staffieri et al. [261], with permission of American Veterinary Medical
Association; Nyman et al. [268], with permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

-- 749 of 1450 --

734 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
An increase in VD phys
/V T may also occur due to an increase in VDalv
(V̇A
/Q̇ ratio = ∞ [infinity]) associated with decreased pulmonary
blood flow/CO and MPAP in anesthetized horses. In conscious ani-
mals, increased deadspace ventilation can be compensated for by an
increase in V̇A to maintain PaCO2 levels within physiological ranges.
During general anesthesia, increased VD phys
/V T (caused by increases
in VDalv
) may aggravate hypercapnia in spontaneously breathing
patients as the ventilatory response to increased CO2 is suppressed.
As the predominant mechanism responsible for the increase in
intrapulmonary shunt during anesthesia in humans with normal
lungs is compression atelectasis, the use of lower F I
O2 by mixing
oxygen and air in inspired gas per se does not abolish atelectasis
PaO2 = 70 mmHg
PaO2 = 121mmHg 	PaO2 = 55 mmHg
PaO2 = 109 mmHg
Horse 2: 	Horse 4:
Horse 2: 	Horse 4:
Horse 2: 	Horse 4:
PaO2 = 94 mmHg
VDphys /VT = 37.1%
V Dphys /VT = 59.4%
V Dphys /VT = 43.2%
V Dphys /VT = 36.2%
VDphys /VT = 59.5%
8
6
4
2
0
0 	0.01 	0.1 	1 	10 	100
V˙ A and Q
˙ (L/min)
3
2
1
0
4
2
3
1
0
V˙ A and Q
˙ (L/min)
V˙ A and Q
˙ (L/min)
V˙ A and Q
˙ (L/min)
 
V˙ A and Q
˙ (L/min)
V˙ A /Q˙ ratio
0 	0.01 	0.1 	1 	10 	100
V˙ A /Q˙ ratio
0 	0.01 	0.1 	1 	10 	100 	0 	0.01 	0.1 	1 	10 	100
V˙ A /Q˙ ratio 	V˙ A /Q˙ ratio
0 	0.01 	0.1 	1 	10 	100
V˙ A /Q˙ ratio
Q˙ S/Q˙ T = 39.9%
Q˙ S/Q˙ T = 26.1% 	Q˙ S/Q˙ T = 37.7%
Q˙ S/Q˙ T = 37.4%
Q˙ S/Q˙ T = 2.8%
V˙ A
V˙ A
Q˙
V˙ A
Q˙
V˙ A
Q˙
V˙ A
Q˙
V˙ A
Q˙
Q˙
High
V˙ A /Q˙
PaO2 = 98 mmHg
VDphys /V T = 56.7%
8
6
4
2
0
0 	0.01 	0.1 	1 	10 	100
V˙ A and Q
˙ (L/min)
V˙ A /Q˙ ratio
Q˙ S/Q˙ T = 1.6%
High V˙ A /Q˙
3
2
1
0
5
4
3
0
2
1
PaO2 = 95 mmHg 	PaO 2 = 52 mmHg
Horse 2: 	Horse 4:
V Dphys /VT = 52.0% 	V Dphys /VT = 31.4%
V˙ A and Q
˙ (L/min)
V˙ A and Q
˙ (L/min)
0 	0.01 	0.1 	1 	10 	100 	0 	0.01 	0.1 	1 	10 	100
V˙ A /Q˙ ratio 	V˙ A /Q˙ ratio
Q˙ S/Q˙ T = 24.5% 	Q˙ S/Q˙ T = 34.1%
V˙ A
Q˙
V˙ A
Q˙
4
2
3
1
0
6
5
4
0
2
3
1
Conscious, standing (FIO2 = 0.21):	(A)
Anesthetized, dorsal recumbency (spontaneous breathing, FIO2 > 0.95):	(B)
Anesthetized, dorsal recumbency (IPPV + ZEEP, FIO2 > 0.95):	(C)
Anesthetized, dorsal recumbency (IPPV + 10 cmH2O PEEP, FI O2 > 0.95):	(D)
Figure 37.29 Examples of V̇A
/Q̇ matching as measured using the multiple inert gas elimination technique in two horses (horse 2 and horse 4) while
conscious and anesthetized with halothane. A. Conscious, standing; B. Anesthetized, dorsal recumbency, spontaneous breathing; C. Anesthetized, dorsal
recumbency, intermittent positive-pressure ventilation (IPPV) with zero end-expiratory pressure (ZEEP); D. Anesthetized, dorsal recumbency, IPPV with
10 cmH2
O positive end-expired pressure (PEEP). Notice that the large shunt that developed during anesthesia in dorsal recumbency was only slightly
decreased (horse 2) or was not changed/minimally changed (horse 4) with the use of IPPV with ZEEP or 10 cmH 2
O PEEP. In horse 4, PaO2 was further
decreased by IPPV in comparison to PaO 2 during spontaneous breathing because mechanical ventilation resulted in a major decrease in CO/pulmonary
blood flow. Source: Adapted from Nyman and Hedenstierna [299].

-- 750 of 1450 --

Chapter 37: Respiratory Physiology and Pathophysiology 	735
during anesthesia and surgery [342]. However, current guidelines
for lung protective mechanical ventilation in anesthetized human
patients include the recommendation to set the FI
O2 after intubation
to ≤ 0.4 with subsequent adjustments in FI
O2 to the lowest value
necessary to maintain oxygen saturation monitored by pulse
oximetry ≥ 94% (strength of recommendation: weak) [343].
Current evidence indicates that lower FI
O2 values (e.g., 0.4) may
decrease intrapulmonary shunt in those animal species where com-
pression atelectasis is less likely to play a major role in causing oxy-
genation impairment (e.g., dogs and cats) [261,273]. A study in
horses anesthetized with halothane and positioned in lateral recum-
bency suggests that a low FI
O2 (0.3) results in less respiratory
depression/hypercapnia and less V̇A /Q̇ mismatch (decreased P(a-a)
O 2 secondary to a smaller shunt fraction) in comparison to a high
F I
O2 (> 0.85) [190]. However, as the duration of anesthesia was
extended to 4 h with 30% inspired oxygen, PaO 2 decreased to
levels characterized as clinically relevant hypoxemia (PaO 2 = 96 ±
13 mmHg at 30 min versus PaO2 = 60 ± 4 mmHg at 240 min).
Qualitatively similar findings were observed in spontaneously
breathing horses anesthetized with isoflurane in dorsal recum-
bency, where a 50% inspired oxygen concentration decreased P(a-a)
O2 but increased the risk of hypoxemia (PaO 2 = 70 ± 18 mmHg after
90 min of anesthesia) in comparison to > 95% inspired oxygen
(178 ± 114 mmHg after 90 min of anesthesia) (Fig. 37.30A) [192].
Although the use of 100% oxygen as the carrier gas may result in
greater V̇A /Q̇ mismatch from absorption atelectasis, anesthesia with
Isoflurane anesthetized horses
(n = 8)
Dorsal recumbency
Spontaneous breathing
75
70
65
60
55
50
PaCO
2 (mmHg)
45
40
35
350 FI O2 = 0.5 	F I O2 > 0.95
F I O2 = 0.4 	FI O 2 > 0.9
F I O2 = 0.4
FI O 2 = 0.4 	FI O2 > 0.9
Atelectasis
F I O 2 > 0.9
F I O2 = 0.4 	FI O 2 > 0.9
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
PaO2
 (mmHg)
600
500
400
300
200
100
15
* 	* 	* *
*
* 	* 	* * *
30
Time after isoflurane and
F IO2 stabilization (min)
Isoflurane
anesthetized cats
(n =15 per group)
Dorsal recumbency
Spontaneous breathing
60 	90
P( A -a)O
2 (mmHg)
(A)
(C)
Isoflurane anesthetized cats
(n = 15 per group)
Dorsal recumbency
Spontaneous breathing
55
50
45
40
35
	PaCO
2 (mmHg)
30
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
PaO2
 (mmHg)
200
150
100
50
0
P(A-a)O2
 (mmHg)
(B)
Figure 37.30 A. and B. Effects of a decrease in inspired oxygen concentration (FI
O2
) during isoflurane anesthesia in spontaneously breathing, dorsally
recumbent horses and cats (see text for explanation). C. Computed tomography images of the lungs of an isoflurane-anesthetized spontaneously breathing
cat in dorsal recumbency with FI
O2 = 0.4 and > 0.9. *Significantly lower than high FI
O2
. Source: Adapted from Crumley et al. [192]; Staffieri et al. [273],
with permission of Elsevier.

-- 751 of 1450 --

736 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
high F I
O2 still is safer in spontaneously breathing horses because it
may prevent hypoxemia under these circumstances. Experimental
studies carried out during conventional mechanical ventilation
in dorsally recumbent horses (V T = 15 mL/kg and f adjusted to
maintain eucapnia) have shown that inhaling a 50% oxygen
concentration does not reduce the Q̇S
/Q̇T in comparison to a > 95%
oxygen concentration (n = 5 per group) [194]. Contrasting with the
high incidence of hypoxemia during anesthesia with lower F I
O2
(0.3–0.5) in spontaneously breathing horses, use of 40% inspired
oxygen in isoflurane-anesthetized cats not receiving mechanical
ventilatory support resulted in greater optimization of oxygen
transfer from alveoli to capillary blood (P(a-a)O2 = 24 ± 11 mmHg
with F I
O2 = 0.4 versus P(a-a)O2 = 163 ± 31 mmHg with F I
O2 > 0.9)
and was not associated with hypoxemia (Fig. 37.30B) [273].
Computed tomography images confirmed that decreases in FI
O2
from > 0.9 to 0.4 decreased atelectatic areas of the lungs, likely
because of decreased absorption atelectasis (Fig. 37.30C). In
mechanically ventilated isoflurane-anesthetized dogs, computed
tomography also showed that 40% inspired oxygen reduced poorly
aerated and non-aerated lung areas in comparison to 100% oxygen,
probably because of decreased absorption atelectasis [261]
(Fig. 37.28B). Reduction of atelectasis with 40% oxygen in dogs
resulted in lower P(a- a)O2 than with 100% oxygen (36 ± 12 mmHg
versus 177 ± 49 mmHg). Use of lower FI
O2 may reduce lung collapse
without increasing the risk of hypoxemia in small animal species
(dogs and cats). However, at present, there is no evidence to support
the potential benefits of preventing absorption atelectasis during
the early recovery phase and postanesthetic period in normal
veterinary patients.
In 	contrast 	to 	other 	species, 	intravenous 	injection 	of
α2 -adrenergic receptor agonists has been reported to cause moder-
ate (PaO 2 < 60 mmHg) to severe (PaO2 < 40 mmHg) hypoxemia in
sheep [209,344]. The severity of hypoxemia is highly variable
among different breeds and among individual animals of the same
breed [345]; however, it may be life-threatening in animals with
pre-existing respiratory disease or in individual animals that have
greater sensitivity to this adverse reaction. In addition to low PaO 2
levels, PaCO 2 may be normal or below normal values [209];
hypocapnia observed concurrently with hypoxemia is likely caused
by an increase in VE secondary to activation of peripheral chemo-
receptors by low PaO2 levels (hypoxic ventilatory drive).
Experimental evidence shows that hypoxemia caused by sedation
with α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists in sheep is the result of an
increase in shunted flow (Q̇ S /Q̇T
) secondary to an inflammatory
response in the lungs/pulmonary edema [345,346]. Studies using a
pulmonary artery catheter (Fig. 37.14), have shown that the oxy-
genation impairment caused by α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists
in anesthetized sheep is associated with pulmonary hypertension
(MPAP > 25 mmHg) and significant increases in PAOP, which often
exceeds the threshold associated with pulmonary edema caused by
increased hydrostatic pressure (PAOP > 15–18 mmHg) [345,346]
(Fig. 37.31A). The marked increase in PAOP (> 15–18 mmHg),
reported 2 min after intravenous dexmedetomidine (2 μg/kg) in
sevoflurane-anesthetized sheep, suggests that early development
of oxygenation impairment/pulmonary edema is secondary to
increased hydrostatic pressure in the microcirculation, which leads
to the movement of fluid from the intravascular compartment to
the alveolar interstitium/alveolar lumen [345] (Fig. 37.31A).
Sheep are particularly susceptible to the adverse effects of
α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists on the pulmonary circulation
where significant increases in MPAP and PAOP are observed after
relatively small cumulative doses of medetomidine (1.5 μg/kg,
intravenously) [346]. Based on the pathophysiology of pulmonary
hypertension discussed previously, cumulative doses of medeto-
midine (0.5 to 4.0 μg/kg/min) likely cause pre- and postcapillary
pulmonary hypertension (increases in MPAP secondary to
increases in PVR and PAOP, respectively) [346]. This response
contrasts with a study evaluating progressively increasing doses
of medetomidine (1 to 20 μg/kg intravenously) in conscious dogs,
where only a high dose (20 μg/kg) significantly increased PAOP and
MPAP [347] (Fig. 37.31B). However, even when medetomidine was
administered at doses that may cause clinically relevant increases in
pulmonary capillary hydrostatic pressure (PAOP > 15–18 mmHg),
there was no evidence of pulmonary edema as PaO 2 was not sig-
nificantly altered in healthy dogs (Fig. 37.31B). Collectively, these
results suggest that elevated hydrostatic pressure is not the only
factor that triggers the pulmonary edema/oxygenation impairment
observed following α2 - adrenergic receptor agonist administration
in sheep.
Damage of the capillary endothelium and type-1 alveolar cells,
intra-alveolar hemorrhage/edema, and interstitial edema has been
reported 60 min after intravenous xylazine (0.15 mg/kg) adminis-
tration to sheep [348]. Besides the pulmonary edema of hydrostatic
origin, it has been proposed that damage to lung parenchyma/pul-
monary edema may also result from an inflammatory component
that involves activation of pulmonary intravascular macrophages
(PIMs) [348]. These are phagocytic cells that play an important role
in removing particulate material from the circulation in some ani-
mal species (ruminants, pigs, and cats) [349]. It appears that PIMs
are activated early during the course of pulmonary edema, as these
cells present morphological changes 3 min after α2
- adrenergic
receptor agonist injection in sheep [348].
Besides damage to lung parenchyma in vitro, studies have also
shown that α2 -adrenergic receptor agonists induce airway smooth
muscle contraction in sheep but not in other species such as cattle
and horses [350–352]. Bronchoconstriction, combined with lung
edema, may be responsible for the increase airway resistance (R aw )
observed following intravenous medetomidine administration in
halothane-anesthetized sheep receiving mechanical ventilation [346].
Increased R aw /bronchoconstriction might be caused by proinflam-
matory mediators (cytokines) secondary to lung damage or by
direct stimulation of α2
- adrenergic receptors located in airway
smooth muscle [351]. Besides increasing R aw
, α2
- adrenergic recep-
tor agonists also decrease dynamic compliance of the respiratory
system (C RS
), which can be attributed to a decrease in lung compli-
ance due to pulmonary hemorrhage/edema, although dynamic C RS
may also decrease if resistance to gas flow (R aw ) is elevated, as
explained previously.
α2
-Adrenergic receptor agonists that cannot cross the blood–brain
barrier and are devoid of sedative/analgesic effects also induce
hypoxemia and pulmonary inflammation/edema, providing evidence
that these adverse effects are mediated by peripheral α2
- adrenergic
receptor stimulation [344,346,348]. Intravenous administration of
vatinoxan (0.75 mg/kg), a peripheral α2
- adrenergic receptor antag-
onist that does not cross the blood–brain barrier, can prevent
hypoxemia caused by a high dose of xylazine in sheep (0.5 mg/kg,
intravenously) without an apparent effect on sedation [353]
(Fig. 37.32). Although these results suggest that vatinoxan may be
a promising option to prevent the adverse pulmonary effects of
α2 -adrenergic receptor agonists in this species, its use was associ-
ated with more severe histopathological changes in the lung
which requires further investigation [353]. α2
- Adrenergic receptor

-- 752 of 1450 --

Chapter 37: Respiratory Physiology and Pathophysiology 	737
agonists are potent sedatives and analgesics that are useful as
premedication in sheep. To minimize their adverse effects on
respiratory function in this species, intravenous administration
should be avoided, and the lowest possible dose used to attain a
satisfactory sedative effect; their use in sheep with pre-existing
respiratory disease is contraindicated [354].
Oxygen transport
Arterial oxygen content
Oxygen is transported from the lungs to tissues largely in chemical
combination with hemoglobin, with only a small fraction of total
arterial oxygen content (CaO2 ) dissolved in plasma (PaO2
).
Mammalian hemoglobin consists of four-unit molecules. Each
unit molecule contains a heme group, which is a protoporphyrin
consisting of four pyrroles with a central ferrous ion (Fe 2+
). Oxygen
combines reversibly with the Fe2+ in proportion to the PO2
.
At complete saturation, each gram of hemoglobin combines with
approximately 1.36 mL of oxygen. This is the total carrying capacity
of hemoglobin, or four oxygen molecules combined with each
hemoglobin molecule [355,356]. The total oxygen content of
arterial blood, in mL of oxygen per deciliter (100 mL) of blood, is
calculated as follows:
CaO 	SaO 	Hb 	PaO	2 	2 	2	1 36 	0 0031	( 	. 	) ( 	. 	)
The first part of the equation corresponds to the amount of
oxygen carried by hemoglobin in mL/dL, where SaO2 is the
hemoglobin saturation in arterial blood (expressed as fraction),
Hb is the hemoglobin concentration (g/dL), and 1.36 is the
maximum oxygen-carrying capacity of fully saturated hemoglobin.
The second part of the equation corresponds to the amount of
oxygen dissolved in blood (mL/dL), calculated as PaO 2 multiplied
by the solubility coefficient of oxygen in 1 deciliter of blood
(0.0031) [355,356].
(A) 	Sheep (n = 7): Sevoflurane
anesthesia (mechanical ventilation)
(B) 	Dogs (n = 5):
Conscious
550
450
350
250
PaO
2 (mmHg)
PaO
2 (mmHg)
MPAP
 (mmHg)
PAOP
 (mmHg)
150
50
60
40
30
20
10
0
30
20
10
0
70
80
90
100
110
120
40
30
20
MPAP
 (mmHg)
10
0
30
20
PAOP
 (mmHg)
10
0
BL1 	Hypoxia 	BL2 	10
Time (min) 	Time (min)
Dexmedetomidine: 2 μg/kg 	Medetomidine: 20 μg/kg
30 	BL 	5 	10 	15 	30 	45 	60	2
*
*
* 	* 	* 	*
* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	*
*
* *
*
*
* *
Figure 37.31 Hemodynamic changes in pulmonary circulation and PaO2 observed before and after intravenous α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist
administration (mean and standard deviation) in sheep and dogs. A. In sevoflurane-anesthetized sheep receiving mechanical ventilation with an F I
O2
of 1.0 (BL1), a decrease in F I
O2 to 0.1 (Hypoxia) caused a marked decrease in PaO 2 (< 40 mmHg) but did not increase MPAP likely due to inhibition of
hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction by sevoflurane. After F I
O2 was increased again to 1.0 (BL2), a small dose of dexmedetomidine (2 μg/kg,
intravenously) transiently increased MPAP and PAOP to values characterizing pulmonary hypertension (MPAP > 25 mmHg) and excessive increases in
pulmonary capillary pressure (PAOP > 15 mmHg) (indicated by dashed lines). These changes were paralleled by a longer-lasting oxygenation impairment,
as shown by the lower-than- expected PaO2 values (gray shaded area) persisting for 30 min after dexmedetomidine administration. B. In conscious dogs,
a high dose of medetomidine (20 μg/kg intravenously) induced longer-lasting increases MPAP and PAOP, with values that characterize pulmonary
hypertension and excessive increases in pulmonary capillary pressure (indicated by dashed lines), but these changes were not accompanied by a
decrease in PaO 2 below normal ranges for animals breathing ambient air (gray shaded area). See text for further explanation. BL1, baseline recorded with
F I
O2 = 1.0; Hypoxia data recorded after reducing FI
O2 to 0.1; BL2 baseline recorded after returning FI
O2 to 1.0, before dexmedetomidine injection; BL,
baseline recorded before medetomidine injection in animals breathing ambient air (FI
O2 = 0.21); *Significantly different from baseline. Source: Adapted
from Kästner et al. [345]; Pypendop and Verstegen [347].

-- 753 of 1450 --

738 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
The oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve and the Bohr effect
As most of the oxygen is carried by hemoglobin, it is important
to understand the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve, which
describes the relationship between hemoglobin saturation and PO 2
(Fig. 37.33A). The ability of hemoglobin to combine with oxygen
depends on the PO2 in the surrounding environment. The sigmoidal
shape of the oxyhemoglobin curve reflects its physiologic role in
uploading oxygen in the lungs and offloading oxygen to the tissues.
At the pulmonary capillary level, hemoglobin has a high affinity to
oxygen, being almost fully saturated in a normal conscious animal.
This affinity translates into a tendency for the oxyhemoglobin curve
to become flat as PO2 in arterial blood increases above 70 mmHg,
which corresponds to a hemoglobin saturation above 94% [355,356].
At the systemic capillary level, transfer of oxygen from blood to
tissues is facilitated by the decrease in hemoglobin’s affinity for
oxygen. This is reflected by the steeper slope of the oxyhemoglobin
curve at PO2 values less than 60 mmHg. At a PO 2 of 40 mmHg,
which is the oxygen tension typically found in mixed venous blood
draining systemic capillaries, the hemoglobin saturation falls to
approximately 75% and the total oxygen content in mixed venous
blood is approximately 24–25% less than in arterial blood [355,356].
The position of the oxyhemoglobin curve is dynamic and is
modified according to changes in metabolic status. Physiological
conditions that signal an increase in metabolic activity such as
increased temperature, high PCO2, and low pH decrease the affinity
of hemoglobin for oxygen and cause a rightward shift of the
oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve (Fig. 37.33B). Physiological
changes that signal decreased metabolic activity (decreased
temperature, low PCO2, and increased pH) increase the affinity of
hemoglobin for oxygen and cause a leftward shift of the
oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve [355,356]. Certain enzyme
systems aid the dissociation of oxygen from hemoglobin, the most
completely 	studied 	being 	the 	enzyme 	system 	producing
2,3- diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG). This enzyme is a byproduct of
glycolysis within the red blood cells that enhances the dissociation
of oxygen from hemoglobin by competing with oxygen for the
binding site. Anemia, chronic hypoxemia, and acclimation to high
altitude reduce oxygen content in blood and stimulate glycolysis.
Increased glycolysis and 2,3-DPG production during these clinical
conditions facilitate unloading of oxygen at the tissue level. A
lowered level of this enzyme, as occurs with stored blood used for
transfusion, increases the affinity of hemoglobin for oxygen and
shifts the dissociation curve to the left [355,356]. While changes in
2,3-DPG levels are a major factor influencing the loading and
unloading of oxygen in humans, in some animal species, including
cats and ruminants, hemoglobin affinity for oxygen is less affected
by 2,3-DPG. In these species, chloride ions (Cl−) play a greater role
in modifying hemoglobin oxygen affinity [357–359]. As red blood
cells reach the capillaries of the systemic circulation, rising CO 2
levels originating from tissue aerobic activity form HCO 3
− inside
140
120
100
PR (beats/min)
f (breaths/min)
SpO
 2(%)
80
60
120
100
80
60
40
20
100
95
90
85
80
Saline–xylazine
Vatinoxan–xylazine
Vatinoxan
or saline
(–10 min)
Xylazine
(0 min)
75
70
65
60
BL 	–5 min
Time in relation to xylazine injection
3 min 	8 min
*	*
* 	*+
*+ *+
+
+
Figure 37.32 Effects of a peripheral α2
- adrenergic receptor antagonist,
vatinoxan (0.75 mg/kg, intravenously, n = 7), or saline (n = 7) administered
10 min before sedation with intravenous xylazine (0.5 mg/kg) in sheep
(mean and standard deviation). PR, pulse rate; f, breathing frequency; SpO2
,
pulse oximetry hemoglobin saturation; BL, baseline. Source: Adapted from
Adam et al. [353].
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
20
30
10
0
0 	20 	40
PO2 (mmHg)	(A) 	(B)
Hb saturation (%)
Venous blood
	Arterial blood
60 	80 	100
100
90
80
Temperature
Temperature
PCO 2
pH
PCO 2
pH
70
60
50
40
20
30
10
0
0 	20 	40
PO2 (mmHg)
Hb saturation (%)
60 	80 	100
Figure 37.33 A. Oxyhemoglobin curve describing the relationship between hemoglobin (Hb) saturation and oxygen partial pressure (PO2
). B. Effect
of changes in temperature, pH, and partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PCO2
) on the affinity of hemoglobin for oxygen (hemoglobin curve) (see text for
explanation).

-- 754 of 1450 --

Chapter 37: Respiratory Physiology and Pathophysiology 	739
these cells. In a mechanism named “chloride shift” or “Hamburger
effect” (see further details below), the HCO 3
− is driven out of red
blood cells to plasma in exchange for Cl−. The increase in Cl− inside
the red blood cells, in a similar fashion as 2,3-DPG, reduces affinity
of hemoglobin for oxygen, facilitating the unloading of oxygen to
tissues [357–359].
In 1904, the Danish physiologist Christian Bohr first showed
that increased PCO 2 decreases the affinity of hemoglobin for
oxygen [360]. The effects of changes in pH and PCO 2 on the affinity
of hemoglobin for oxygen (Bohr effect) play an important role in
facilitating the uploading of oxygen in the lungs and its subsequent
transfer to tissues (Fig. 37.33B) [361]. As CO 2 is eliminated by
alveolar ventilation, the decrease in PCO 2 and increase in pH at the
pulmonary capillary level augments the affinity of hemoglobin for
oxygen (leftward shift of the oxyhemoglobin curve), facilitating the
uploading of oxygen to pulmonary capillary blood. In the systemic
capillaries, as CO 2 produced by metabolic activity is transferred
from tissues to capillary blood, the resultant increase in PCO 2 levels
and decrease in pH reduces the affinity of hemoglobin for oxygen
(rightward shift of the dissociation curve), facilitating the unload-
ing of oxygen from hemoglobin to tissues [361].
The oxyhemoglobin dissociation curves are not superimposed in
all mammals but have a similar sigmoidal shape among mamma-
lian species (Fig. 37.34) [356,362]. The oxygen partial pressure at
which hemoglobin saturation is 50% (P50
) provides a comparative
measure of the affinity of hemoglobin for oxygen, and this value
varies between species. Slightly higher P 50 values are found in dogs
and rabbits in comparison to horses, cattle, and elephants suggest-
ing that small animals are better adapted to oxygen delivery at the
tissue level than large animal species (Fig. 37.34A) [356,362]. Also,
P50 is reduced in septic patients and carbon monoxide poisoning,
whereas the reverse has been encountered in chronic anemia. Since
tissues require a given volume of oxygen per unit time, the hemo-
globin concentration of blood has a significant influence on oxygen
content and delivery to the tissues.
South American camelids (e.g., llamas and alpacas), have geneti-
cally coded changes in hemoglobin that increase its affinity for oxy-
gen and result in lower P 50 values in comparison to other mammal
species (Fig. 37.34B) [363–365]. The relatively low P 50 in Andean
camelids is an important adaptation for life in their natural
environment, where altitudes above 4000 meters decrease PI
O2
from 160 mmHg (sea level) to 95 mmHg or less. Because of their
relatively low P50 (22.7 mmHg), denoting high affinity of hemo-
globin for oxygen, llamas were reportedly able to maintain a high
SaO 2 (> 92%) when PaO 2 values were already at hypoxemic levels
(51–53 mmHg) due to the high altitude (PI
O2 = 107 mmHg at 3420
meters where PB is 511 mmHg) [363]. By comparison, in humans,
SaO2 is reduced to 86–87% at a PaO2 of 51–53 mmHg. While
increased hemoglobin affinity for oxygen is physiologically advan-
tageous because CaO 2 is maintained despite hypoxemic conditions/
low PaO2
, unloading of oxygen at the tissue level may be reduced.
However, high-altitude camelids present a very effective mechanism
of oxygen transfer to tissues [363,364].
Hypoxemia
“Hypoxemia” is a term that specifically refers to abnormally low
PaO2 or hemoglobin saturation in arterial blood. Hypoxemia can be
caused by low PI
O2
, hypoventilation, and anything that causes
venous admixture (including low V̇ A
/Q̇ ratio, shunt, and diffusion
impairment). As explained before, hypoxemia caused by hypoven-
tilation, low V̇A /Q̇ ratio, and shunt are of particular interest to the
anesthesiologist. Another important factor that may contribute
to hypoxemia in anesthetized animals, that is not related to gas
exchange impairment across the alveolar–capillary membrane, is a
decrease in mixed venous oxygen saturation secondary to low
CO during anesthesia in the face of a large pre-existing shunt, as
discussed previously [300,301]. Diffusion limitation across the
alveolar–capillary membrane may play an important role in the devel-
opment of hypoxemia in some circumstances. Diffusion of oxygen
to capillary blood can be limited by interstitial edema or fibrotic
thickening of the alveolar–capillary membrane (interstitial lung dis-
ease), or when there is an extremely short capillary transit time [151].
In humans with interstitial lung disease, diffusion limitation most
commonly causes hypoxemia during exercise as under these
circumstances the decrease in capillary transit time does not allow
enough time for oxygen to equilibrate between the alveolar gas and
end- capillary blood [150,366]. Mild hypoxemia (PaO 2 between 60
and 80 mmHg) observed during heavy exercise in horses is the
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
20
30
10
0
100
80
60
40
20
0
0 	25 	50 	75 	100 	125 	150 	225 	300 	20	0 	40 	60 	80
(A) 	(B)
P50 (PO2 at 50% Hb saturation)	Species
Man (n = 68) 	26.6 ± 1.2 mmHg
Alpaca at
3300 meters
Alpaca (3300 meters):
P 50 = 17.8 ± 0.52 mmHg
Alpaca at
sea level
Alpaca (sea level):
P50 = 19.7 ± 1.05 mmHg
Normal human
Humans:
P50 = 27 mmHg
28.8 ± 1.6 mmHg
23.8 ± 0.8 mmHg
25.0 ± 1.4 mmHg
Dog (n = 23)
Horse (n = 10)
Cattle (n = 20)
PO 2 (mmHg) 	PO 2 mmHg
Hb saturation (%)
	Hb saturation (%)
Figure 37.34 A. Oxyhemoglobin curves in man, dogs, horses, and cattle. The oxygen partial pressure at which hemoglobin is 50% saturated (P50
) is
presented. B. Oxyhemoglobin curves in alpacas at high altitudes (3300 meters) and sea level in comparison to the human oxyhemoglobin curve (see text
for explanation). Source: Adapted from Clerbaux et al. [362]; Sillau et al. [364].

-- 755 of 1450 --

740 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
result of diffusion limitation, which is precipitated by the shorter
transit time of blood through the capillaries associated with the
increase in CO during exercise [367].
Based on PaO2 and SaO2 values, hypoxemia can be classified as
mild, moderate, or severe (Table 37.6). Classification of the severity
of hypoxemia considers the magnitude of the change in PaO2 on
SaO 2 and the impact on oxygen content. For instance, if PaO 2
decreases from 100 (SaO 2 = 0.977) to 50 mmHg (SaO 2 = 0.85),
hypoxemia is classified as moderate because CaO2 decreases by only
13% (e.g., from 20.2 to 17.5 mL/dL) as 85% of hemoglobin is still
saturated. However, if PaO2 falls below 40 mmHg, critical hemo-
globin desaturation is observed because of the steep slope of the
oxyhemoglobin curve (Fig. 37.33). If PaO2 falls to approximately
27 mmHg, hemoglobin saturation is only 50%. At this level of desat-
uration, hypoxemia is classified as severe since CaO2 falls by nearly
50% of the normal value (from 20.2 to 10.3 mL/dL).
As explained before, an increase in F I
O2 by 100% oxygen admin-
istration can markedly increase PaO 2 if intrapulmonary shunt is not
the source of oxygenation impairment. However, this increased
PaO2 results in a relatively small increase in CaO2 if hemoglobin
saturation is already close to 100% while the animal is breathing
ambient air. In a conscious individual breathing ambient air
(F I
O2 = 0.21) with a PaO2 (100 mmHg), 1 deciliter (100 mL) of
blood will hold 0.3 mL of oxygen dissolved in solution. If oxygen
bound to hemoglobin is considered (hemoglobin saturation = 97.7%
at a PaO2 of 100 mmHg and hemoglobin concentration = 15 g/dL),
total oxygen content increases to approximately 20.2 mL of oxygen
per 100 mL of blood, or about 70 times as much as plasma.
An increase in FI
O2 from 0.21 to > 0.9 increases PaO2 by fivefold
(from 100 to 500 mmHg), but CaO 2 will increase only by 9% (from
20.2 to 22.0 mL/dL), as nearly all hemoglobin is already saturated
when PaO2 is 100 mmHg (97.7%). Although this increase in oxygen
content is relatively small, it may be of clinical relevance in patients
whose oxygen-carrying capacity is already compromised by severe
anemia (e.g., hematocrit < 15% or hemoglobin < 5 g/dL). The PaO2
level is also of some importance because oxygen transfers from
blood to tissues by diffusion, and the process occurs at a rate pro-
portional to the difference in oxygen tension between plasma and
tissues. Preoxygenation of the lungs, preferentially via a sealed face
mask attached to a breathing circuit filled with 100% oxygen, is
recommended for added safety before induction of anesthesia in
anemic animals, as the decrease in CaO2 is more likely to achieve
critical levels if mild-to-moderate hypoxemia occurs in patients
with an already reduced oxygen-carrying capacity.
As hypoxemia becomes severe, cyanosis (blue-purple tinge) of
mucous membranes can be observed because deoxygenated hemo-
globin is dark red. However, cyanotic mucous membranes may not
be perceived if the animal is anemic. Blood gas analyzers directly
measure PO2 in plasma through polarographic electrodes, while
hemoglobin saturation is often calculated from PO2 based on the
human oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve. A more accurate meas-
urement of hemoglobin saturation would require the use of species-
specific algorithms, or the direct measurement of hemoglobin
saturation via a blood gas analyzer equipped with a CO-oximeter.
Pulse oximeters are non- invasive tools that measure hemoglobin
saturation by absorption and transmission of two wavelengths of
light (red and infrared light) through the tongue or other anatomic
structures in animal species. Conventional pulse oximeters, however,
are unable to detect other forms of hemoglobin that cannot bind to
oxygen and will provide erratic hemoglobin saturation values in the
presence of carboxyhemoglobin or methemoglobin [368,369].
Similarly, calculation of hemoglobin saturation from PO 2 using a
blood gas analyzer not equipped with a CO-oximeter will lead to
an erroneous estimation of hemoglobin saturation under these
circumstances. If dyshemoglobinemias are suspected (e.g., methe-
moglobinemia or carboxyhemoglobinemia due to carbon monox-
ide poisoning), or if there is a discrepancy between PaO2 measured
by blood gas analysis and hemoglobin saturation measured by
conventional pulse oximetry, an accurate measure of hemoglobin
saturation can be obtained via CO-oximetry, which can measure
concentrations of oxyhemoglobin, deoxyhemoglobin, and other
forms of hemoglobin (including methemoglobin and carboxyhemo-
globin), or via non-invasive multiple wavelength pulse CO-oximetry
technology [370–372].
Carbon dioxide transport
Carbon dioxide is 20 times more soluble in water than oxygen. Its
solubility coefficient is 0.0308 mmol/mmHg, which corresponds to
0.066 mL/mmHg/100 mL of blood. Therefore, the amount of CO2
dissolved in 100 mL of venous and arterial blood is approximately
3 mL (PvCO 2 = 46 mmHg) and 2.5 mL (PaCO 2 = 40 mmHg),
respectively; the difference is eliminated by alveolar ventilation [373].
Because CO2 has a much higher solubility and diffusing capability
when compared to oxygen, its partial pressure in pulmonary capillary
blood and the alveoli will be virtually the same [373]. This rapid
equilibration ensures that CO2 elimination by the lungs is not
impaired in the face of a large intrapulmonary shunt if the ventilatory
response in alveoli that are ventilated and perfused is preserved.
Arterial CO2 levels are a function of CO 2 elimination and
production, and under normal circumstances, PaCO2 levels are
maintained within narrow limits. During high-intensity exercise,
the production of CO2 is increased enormously, whereas during
anesthesia, production likely decreases. Elimination of CO2 depends
on pulmonary blood flow (Q̇ T
) and alveolar ventilation (V̇ A ).
Normally, CO 2 production (V̇ CO 2 ) parallels oxygen consumption
(V̇ O2 ) according to the respiratory quotient (R). As explained previ-
ously, the ratio between V̇ CO 2 and V̇ O2 varies according to the diet
and source of energy metabolism [58]. Although the value varies
depending on the diet, R equals 0.8 at steady state in humans and
may differ in animals. Due to the blood buffer systems, CO2 trans-
port to the lungs for excretion occurs with little change in blood pH.
Carbon dioxide content in blood and the Haldane effect
The total amount of CO 2 produced in tissues by aerobic metabolism
is transported to the lungs in three ways: (1) as gas dissolved in
blood; (2) as HCO3
−; and (3) as carbamino compounds [356,373].
Carbon dioxide produced by the tissues diffuses down a concen-
tration gradient to capillary blood in the systemic circulation in a
process that is coupled with the transfer of oxygen from capillary
Table 37.6 Classification of hypoxemia according to arterial oxygen partial pressure
(PaO2 ) and arterial hemoglobin saturation (SaO2
).
Classification 	PaO2 	SaO2 	Percent decrease
in CaO2
a
Normal 	80 to 100 mmHg 	95 to 98% 	Reference valueb
Mild hypoxemia 	60 to < 80 mmHg 	90 to < 95% 	3 to 7%
Moderate hypoxemia 	40 to < 60 mmHg 	75 to < 90% 	8 to 24%
Severe hypoxemia 	20 to < 40 mmHg 	32 to < 75% 	25 to 68%
a CaO2 calculated assuming a constant hemoglobin concentration (15 mL/dL).
b Reference CaO2 value estimated as 20.2 mL/dL (PaO2 100 mmHg, SaO2 97.7%,
and Hb concentration 15 g/dL).

-- 756 of 1450 --

Chapter 37: Respiratory Physiology and Pathophysiology 	741
blood to tissues. The transport of CO2 and O2 at the tissue level is
summarized in Fig. 37.35. Typically, the PCO2 of mixed venous
blood draining tissues and organs of the systemic circulation is
slightly higher than the PCO2 of arterial blood (Pv CO2 = 46 mmHg
versus PaCO 2 = 40 mmHg). However, most CO2 is transported in
mixed venous blood as plasma HCO 3
- or combined with hemo-
globin as carbamino compounds, with CO2 dissolved in blood repre-
senting a smaller fraction of total CO2 content. Because CO 2 is a
nonpolar molecule, it readily diffuses across the lipid membrane of
red blood cells, where carbonic anhydrase catalyzes the hydration
of CO2 to H 2
CO3 and its dissociated form (HCO3
− and H +
). This
reaction occurs within red blood cells but not in plasma of verte-
brates, which does not contain carbonic anhydrase. A buildup of
hydrogen within the cell would prevent further conversion of
HCO 3
− from H 2
CO3 . However, as oxyhemoglobin (HbO 2
) releases
oxygen to tissues, deoxyhemoglobin (Hb−) buffers the hydrogen
ion released by H2 CO3 , further shifting the reaction toward the gen-
eration of HCO 3
−, which increases the total CO2 content in blood.
The newly formed HCO3
− anion is exported from the red blood cell
to plasma in exchange for Cl− in a mechanism named the “chloride
shift” or “Hamburger effect.” Approximately 60% of total CO2 content
in venous blood is transported as HCO 3
− [373]. As hemoglobin
unloads oxygen to tissues, total CO2 content increases because CO2
reversibly binds to the amino groups (-NH 2
) of deoxyhemoglobin
to form carbamino compounds (HbCO 2 ), which is the second most
important form of CO 2 transport and corresponds to 30% of total
CO2 content in mixed venous blood. Finally, the remaining 10% of
the total CO 2 content is present in venous blood as CO2 dissolved in
solution [373]. The Haldane effect is the increase in CO2 carrying
capacity (total CO2 content) that occurs with a decrease in PO2
. At
the tissue level, the Haldane effect is explained by: (1) the buffering
action of deoxygenated hemoglobin which combines with hydro-
gen ions released by H 2
CO3 and contributes to an increase in plasma
HCO3
− and (2) the reversible combination between deoxyhemo-
globin and CO2 forming carbamino compounds. The interplay
between the Bohr (effect of changes in pH and PCO2 on hemo-
globin’s affinity for oxygen) and Haldane effects at the tissue level is
detailed in Fig. 37.36.
Venous blood
(% of total CO2)
CO2
CI – 	CI–
HbH
Hb –
Hb –
Hb–
H +
O 2
O2
O2
HbO 2
HbCO 2
HbCO2
30%
CO2 +
CO2 	CO 2 + H2 O
H2 CO3
CO2 10%
HCO3–
60%
HCO3– 	HCO3–
Tissue Cells 	Plasma 	Red blood cell
Figure 37.35 Carbon dioxide and oxygen transport at the tissue level. As oxygen is delivered to tissues there is an increase in CO2 carrying capacity
(CO2 content) in venous blood attributable to deoxyhemoglobin (Hb−). See text for explanation.
Haldane effect in tissues
O2 transferred from capillary
blood to tissues
Capillary PO 2
Total CO2 content
in arterial blood
HCO3– originated
from CO 2
H+ buffering by
deoxygemoglobin
Binding of CO 2 to
deoxyhemoglobin
Affinity of hemoglobin
for O2
Facilitated transfer of O2 from
capillary blood to tissues
Capillary
blood PCO2
Carbamino
compounds
Deoxyhemoglobin
in arterial blood
Capillary
blood pH	Deoxyhemoglobin
CO 2 transferred from
tissues to capillary blood
Bohr effect in tissues
Figure 37.36 Interplay between the Haldane and Bohr effects in tissues.

-- 757 of 1450 --

742 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
Once mixed venous blood reaches the lung, the partial pressure
of CO 2 decreases from 46 mmHg to approximately 40 mmHg in
end-capillary blood. The difference corresponds to the amount of
CO 2 eliminated by alveolar ventilation. However, CO 2 transported
as gas dissolved in plasma is not the only source of CO 2 eliminated
by alveolar ventilation. A large proportion of exhaled CO 2
originates from carbamino compounds (HbCO 2 ) and HCO 3
−. As
illustrated in Fig. 37.37, as CO 2 is eliminated by alveolar ventilation,
the relative contribution of CO 2 dissolved in plasma to total CO 2
content is reduced from 10% in venous blood to 5% in arterial
blood, whereas the carbamino compounds have their relative
contribution to total CO 2 reduced from 30% in venous blood to 5%
in arterial blood; the remaining CO 2 (90%) is transported in
arterial blood as HCO3
−. As CO2 is transferred from plasma to
ventilated alveoli, the decrease in pulmonary capillary PCO 2 shifts
the H 2 CO 3 ⇌ HCO 3
− reaction toward the formation of CO 2 and
H 2 O. Additionally, as oxygen is transferred from alveoli to capillary
blood, an increase in HbO 2 reduces CO 2 carrying capacity by
decreasing the amount of Hb− available to form carbamino
compounds. In summary, the Haldane effect in the lungs
(decreased total CO 2 content at high PO 2 levels in pulmonary
capillary blood) is explained by: (1) decreased amount of Hb−
which limits the buffering of hydrogen ions released by H 2 CO 3 and
shifts the equation toward the formation of H 2 CO 3 with its
subsequent dissociation into CO 2 and H 2 O, and (2) decreased
availability of Hb− to combine with CO 2 and form carbamino
compounds. The interplay between the Bohr and Haldane effects
at the alveolar–capillary barrier is detailed in Fig. 37.38.
Hypercapnia and hypocapnia
Fig. 37.39, shows that CO2 content changes significantly with
changes in PaCO2 . As previously mentioned, hyperventilation
occurs when V̇A is excessive relative to the metabolic rate and as a
result, PaCO2 is reduced. Hypoventilation is present when V̇ A is low
Arterial blood
(% of total CO2)
CO2
CI – 	CI –
HbH
Hb –
Hb–
Hb–
H+
O2
O2
O2
HbO 2
HbCO 2
HbCO2 5%
CO2 +
CO 2 	CO 2 + H2O
H 2CO3
CO2 5%
HCO 3–
90%
HCO3– 	HCO 3–
Alveoli 	Plasma 	Red blood cell
Figure 37.37 Carbon dioxide and oxygen transport at the alveoli (see text for explanation).
Haldane effect in alveoli
O2 transferred from alveoli
to capillary blood
Capillary PO2
Total CO2 content
in arterial blood
HCO3– originated
from CO 2
H+ buffering by
deoxygemoglobin
Binding of CO 2 to
deoxyhemoglobin
Affinity of hemoglobin
for O2
Facilitated transfer of O2
from alveoli to capillary blood
Capillary
blood PCO 2
Carbamino
compounds
Deoxyhemoglobin
in arterial blood
Capillary
blood pH	Deoxyhemoglobin
O 2 transferred from
capillary blood to alveoli
Bohr effect in alveoli
Figure 37.38 Interplay between the Haldane and Bohr effects in the alveoli.

-- 758 of 1450 --

Chapter 37: Respiratory Physiology and Pathophysiology 	743
relative to metabolic rate, and PaCO 2 rises. A lowered PaCO 2 level is
referred to as “hypocapnia” and an elevated level as “hypercapnia,”
whereas normal PaCO2 is termed “eucapnia.” Most, but not all, of
the common mammalian species, have a normal resting PaCO 2
level close to 40 mmHg (Table 37.2). Hypercapnia and hypocapnia
produce respiratory acidosis and alkalosis, respectively, because
CO 2 in the body is in dynamic equilibrium with H 2
CO3 and, ulti-
mately, hydrogen ion concentration [H +
]:
CO 2 + H2
O ⇄ H2
CO3 ⇄ H+ + HCO3
–
The normal pH is slightly more acidic in venous blood
(7.34 to 7.43) than in arterial blood (7.35 to 7.45) because of higher
PCO2 in venous blood. Acidemia and alkalemia are defined as a
plasma pH below or above, respectively, the normal range for the
species in question. Concurrent metabolic acid–base disturbances
and the presence or absence of renal compensation of the respira-
tory acid–base disturbance will determine the actual degree of pH
change accompanying hypocapnia or hypercapnia.
During acute respiratory acidosis (e.g., general anesthesia in a
spontaneously ventilating patient), there can be a small compen-
satory increase in plasma HCO 3
−. In dogs and cats with acute res-
piratory acidosis, HCO 3
− has been estimated to increase by
0.15 mmol/L for each mmHg increase in PCO 2 above normal
(e.g., PCO 2 = 36 mmHg) [52,53]. Hemoglobin contributes to the
increase in HCO3
− during acute respiratory acidosis, as deoxygen-
ated hemoglobin (Hb−) will neutralize the hydrogen ions released
from H 2
CO3
, shifting the H 2
CO3 ⇌ HCO 3
− equation toward the
formation of HCO3
−. If hypercapnia persists for several days,
chronic respiratory acidosis is associated with a renal compensatory
response. The kidneys eliminate the excess acid load via excretion
of ammonium chloride (NH4
+
Cl−) [53]. Increased excretion of Cl−
is paralleled by increased reabsorption of HCO3
− by renal tubular
cells, resulting in a state of hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis
(decreased plasma Cl− and increased plasma HCO 3
−), which may
be able to minimize or neutralize the impact of chronic respiratory
acidosis on pH. The compensatory renal response to chronic acido-
sis is estimated to increase plasma HCO3
− by 0.35 mmol/L for each
mmHg of increase in PCO2 in dogs but current data does not allow
the estimation of the renal compensation to chronic respiratory
acidosis in cats [53].
References
1 Hall LW, Gillespie JR, Tyler WS. Alveolar-arterial oxygen tension differences in
anaesthetized horses. Br J Anaesth 1968; 40: 560–568.
2 Steffey EP, Wheat JD, Meagher DM, et al. Body position and mode of ventilation
influences arterial pH, oxygen, and carbon dioxide tensions in halothane-
anesthetized horses. Am J Vet Res 1977; 38: 379–382.
3 Hall LW. Oxygenation of pulmonary vein blood in conscious and anaesthetised
ponies. Equine Vet J 1979; 11: 71–75.
4 Mutoh T, Nishimura R, Kim HY, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of sevoflurane,
compared with halothane, enflurane, and isoflurane, in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1997; 58:
885–890.
5 Hodgson DS, Dunlop CI, Chapman PL, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of anes-
thesia induced and maintained with isoflurane in cats. Am J Vet Res 1998; 59:
182–185.
6 Enouri SS, Kerr CL, McDonell WN, et al. Effects of a peripheral alpha2 adrenergic-
receptor antagonist on the hemodynamic changes induced by medetomidine
administration in conscious dogs. Am J Vet Res 2008; 69: 728–736.
7 Rioja E, Kerr CL, Enouri SS, et al. Sedative and cardiopulmonary effects of
medetomidine hydrochloride and xylazine hydrochloride and their reversal with
atipamezole hydrochloride in calves. Am J Vet Res 2008; 69: 319–329.
8 Borges LP, Nishimura LT, Carvalho LL, et al. Behavioral and cardiopulmonary
effects of dexmedetomidine alone and in combination with butorphanol, metha-
done, morphine or tramadol in conscious sheep. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43:
549–560.
9 West JB, Luks AM. West’s Respiratory Physiology. The Essentials, 11th edn.
Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer, 2021.
10 Lumb AB, Thomas C. Nunn and Lumb’s Applied Respiratory Physiology, 9th edn.
Edinburgh, UK: Elsevier, 2021.
11 Libermann IM, Capano A, Gonzalez F, et al. Blood acid–base status in normal
albino rats. Lab Anim Sci 1973; 23: 862–865.
12 Lai YL, Tsuya Y, Hildebrandt J. Ventilatory responses to acute CO2 exposure in the
rat. J Appl Physiol Respir Environ Exerc Physiol 1978; 45: 611–618.
13 Lahiri S. Blood oxygen affinity and alveolar ventilation in relation in body weight in
mammals. Am J Physiol 1975; 229: 529–536.
14 Neutze JM, Wyler F, Rudolph AM. Use of radioactive microspheres to assess
distribution of cardiac output in rabbits. Am J Physiol 1968; 215: 486–495.
15 Dyson DH, Allen DG, Ingwersen W, et al. Effects of saffan on cardiopulmonary
function in healthy cats. Can J Vet Res 1987; 51: 236–239.
16 Herbert DA, Mitchell RA. Blood gas tensions and acid–base balance in awake cats.
J Appl Physiol 1971; 30: 434–436.
17 McDonell WN. Ventilation and acid–base equilibrium with methoxyflurane
anesthesia in dogs. MSc Thesis, University of Guelph, 1969.
18 Horwitz LD, Bishop VS, Stone HL, et al. Cardiovascular effects of low-oxygen
atmospheres in conscious and anesthetized dogs. J Appl Physiol 1969; 27: 370–373.
19 Wanner A, Reinhart ME. Respiratory mechanics in conscious sheep: response to
methacholine. J Appl Physiol Respir Environ Exerc Physiol 1978; 44: 479–482.
20 Bakima M, Gustin P, Lekeux P, et al. Mechanics of breathing in goats. Res Vet Sci
1988; 45: 332–336.
21 Forster HV, Bisgard GE, Klein JP. Effect of peripheral chemoreceptor denervation
on acclimatization of goats during hypoxia. J Appl Physiol Respir Environ Exerc
Physiol 1981; 50: 392–398.
22 Mesina JE Jr., Bisgard GE, Robinson GM. Pulmonary function changes in goats
given 3-methylindole orally. Am J Vet Res 1984; 45: 1526–1531.
23 Bisgard GE, Vogel JH. Hypoventilation and pulmonary hypertension in calves after
carotid body excision. J Appl Physiol 1971; 31: 431–437.
24 Donawick WJ, Baue AE. Blood gases, acid–base balance, and alveolar-arterial oxy-
gen gradient in calves. Am J Vet Res 1968; 29: 561–567.
25 Gallivan GJ, McDonell WN, Forrest JB. Comparative ventilation and gas exchange
in the horse and the cow. Res Vet Sci 1989; 46: 331–336.
26 Orr JA, Bisgard GE, Forster HV, et al. Cardiopulmonary measurements in nonan-
esthetized, resting normal ponies. Am J Vet Res 1975; 36: 1667–1670.
27 McDonell W, Hall LW. Functional residual capacity in conscious and anaesthetized
horses. Br J Anaesth 1974; 46: 802–803.
28 Sorenson PR, Robinson NE. Postural effects on lung volumes and asynchronous
ventilation in anesthetized horses. J Appl Physiol Respir Environ Exerc Physiol 1980;
48: 97–103.
29 Rozanski EA, Bedenice D, Lofgren J, et al. The effect of body position, sedation, and
thoracic bandaging on functional residual capacity in healthy deep-chested dogs.
Can J Vet Res 2010; 74: 34–39.
30 Gallivan GJ, McDonell WN, Forrest JB. Comparative pulmonary mechanics in the
horse and the cow. Res Vet Sci 1989; 46: 322–330.
31 Liu NC, Adams VJ, Kalmar L, et al. Whole-body barometric plethysmography
characterizes upper airway obstruction in 3 brachycephalic breeds of dogs. J Vet
Intern Med 2016; 30: 853–865.
30
Partial pressure of O2
and CO2 (mmHg)
Content of O
2 and CO
2
(mL/100mL of blood)
40
20
30 	60 	90
O2
CO 2
Figure 37.39 Correlation between partial pressures and content of CO2
and O 2 in blood. Normal ranges of partial pressures of CO2 (35–45 mmHg,
blue dashed lines) and of O2 (80–100 mmHg, red dashed lines) in arterial
blood are shown (see text for explanation). Source: Adapted from Arthurs
and Sudhakar [373].

-- 759 of 1450 --

744 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
32 Lai YL. Comparative ventilation of the normal lung. In: Parent RA, ed. Treatise of
Pulmonary Toxicology Vol 1: Comparative Biology of the Normal Lung. Boca Raton,
FL: CRC Press, 1992: 219–224.
33 Crosfill ML, Widdicombe JG. Physical characteristics of the chest and lungs and the
work of breathing in different mammalian species. J Physiol 1961; 158: 1–14.
34 Gillespie DJ, Hyatt RE. Respiratory mechanics in the unanesthetized dog.
J Appl Physiol 1974; 36: 98–102.
35 Mauderly JL. Effect of age on pulmonary structure and function of immature and
adult animals and man. Fed Proc 1979; 38: 173–177.
36 Gillespie JR, Tyler WS, Eberly VE. Pulmonary ventilation and resistance in
emphysematous and control horses. J Appl Physiol 1966; 21: 416–422.
37 Willoughby RA, McDonell WN. Pulmonary function testing in horses. Vet Clin
North Am Large Anim Pract 1979; 1: 171–196.
38 Keith IM, Bisgard GE, Manohar M, et al. Respiratory effects of pregnancy and pro-
gesterone in Jersey cows. Respir Physiol 1982; 50: 351–358.
39 Fordyce WE, Tenney SM. Role of the carotid bodies in ventilatory acclimation to
chronic hypoxia by the awake cat. Respir Physiol 1984; 58: 207–221.
40 Hales JR, Webster ME. Respiratory function during thermal tachypnoea in sheep.
J Physiol 1967; 190: 241–260.
41 Verbrugghe C, Laurent P, Bouverot P. Chemoreflex drive of ventilation in the awake
miniature pig. Respir Physiol 1982; 47: 379–391.
42 Bisgard GE, Ruiz AV, Grover RF, et al. Ventilatory control in the Hereford calf.
J Appl Physiol 1973; 35: 220–226.
43 Walters LM, Ogilvie GK, Salman MD, et al. Repeatability of energy expenditure
measurements in clinically normal dogs by use of indirect calorimetry. Am J Vet Res
1993; 54: 1881–1885.
44 Ewart SL. Control of ventilation. In: Klein BG, ed. Cunningham’s Textbook of
Veterinary Physiology, 6th edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2020: 560–567.
45 Levitzky MG. Control of breathing. In: Levitzky MG, ed. Pulmonary Physiology,
9th edn. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2018: 206–234.
46 Lyons C, Kevin LG. Respiration: control of ventilation. Anaesth Intensive Care Med
2021; 22: 174–178.
47 Nattie E, Li A. Central chemoreceptors: locations and functions. Compr Physiol
2012; 2: 221–254.
48 Gauvreau GM, Wilson BA, Schnurr DL, et al. Oxygen cost of ventilation in the
resting horse. Res Vet Sci 1995; 59: 168–171.
49 Robinson N. The respiratory system. In: Muir WW, Hubbell J, eds. Equine
Anesthesia: Monitoring and Emergency Therapy, 2nd edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders,
2009: 11–36.
50 Muir WW, Hamlin RL. Effects of acetylpromazine on ventilatory variables in the
horse. Am J Vet Res 1975; 36: 1439–1442.
51 DiBartola SP. Metabolic acid–base disorders. In: DiBartola SP, ed. Fluid, Electrolyte,
and Acid–Base Disorders, 4th edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders, 2012: 253–286.
52 de Morais HA, Leiseweitz AL. Mixed acid–base disorders. In: DiBartola SP, ed.
Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid–Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice, 4th edn.
St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Sanders, 2012: 302–315.
53 Johnson RA, de Morais HA. Respiratory acid–base disorders. In: DiBartola SP, ed.
Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid–Base Disorders, 4th edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier
Saunders, 2012: 287–301.
54 Robertshaw D. Mechanisms for the control of respiratory evaporative heat loss in
panting animals. J Appl Physiol (1985) 2006; 101: 664–668.
55 Bartlett D Jr., Jeffery P, Sant’ambrogio G, et al. Location of stretch receptors in the
trachea and bronchi of the dog. J Physiol 1976; 258: 409–420.
56 Guz A, Trenchard DW. Pulmonary stretch receptor activity in man: a comparison
with dog and cat. J Physiol 1971; 213: 329–343.
57 Lumb AB, Horncastle E. Pulmonary physiology. In: Hemmings HC Jr., Egan TD,
eds. Pharmacology and Physiology for Anesthesia, 2nd edn. Philadelphia, PA:
Elsevier, 2019: 586–608.
58 Hlastala MP. Ventilation. In: Laurent GJ, Sharpiro SD, eds. Encyclopedia of
Respiratory Medicine, 1st edn. Cambridge, MA: Academic Press, 2006: 428–434.
59 Walton RS, Wingfield WE, Ogilvie GK. Energy expenditure in 104 postoperative
and traumatically injured dogs with indirect calorimetry. J Vet Emerg Crit Care
1996; 6: 71–79.
60 Speakman JR, van Acker A, Harper EJ. Age-related changes in the metabolism and
body composition of three dog breeds and their relationship to life expectancy.
Aging Cell 2003; 2: 265–275.
61 Kavanagh BP, Hedenstierna G. Respiratory physiology and pathophysiology. In:
Gropper MA, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia, 9th edn.
Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier, 2020: 354–383.
62 Tusman G, Sipmann FS, Böhm SH. Rationale of dead space measurement by
volumetric capnography. Anesth Analg 2012; 114: 866–874.
63 Bourgoin P, Baudin F, Brossier D, et al. Assessment of Bohr and Enghoff dead space
equations in mechanically ventilated children. Respir Care 2017; 62: 468–474.
64 Kremeier P, Böhm SH, Tusman G. Clinical use of volumetric capnography in
mechanically ventilated patients. J Clin Monit Comput 2020; 34: 7–16.
65 Levitzky MG. Alveolar ventilation. In: Levitzky MG, ed. Pulmonary Physiology,
9th edn. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2018: 59–92.
66 Tusman G, Sipmann FS, Borges JB, et al. Validation of Bohr dead space measured
by volumetric capnography. Intensive Care Med 2011; 37: 870–874.
67 Moens Y. Arterial-alveolar carbon dioxide tension difference and alveolar dead
space in halothane anaesthetised horses. Equine Vet J 1989; 21: 282–284.
68 Mosing M, Böhm SH, Rasis A, et al. Physiologic factors influencing the arterial-to-
end-tidal CO2 difference and the alveolar dead space fraction in spontaneously
breathing anesthetised horses. Front Vet Sci 2018; 5: 58.
69 Mosing M, Staub L, Moens Y. Comparison of two different methods for physiologic
dead space measurements in ventilated dogs in a clinical setting. Vet Anaesth Analg
2010; 37: 393–400.
70 Bumbacher S, Schramel JP, Mosing M. Evaluation of three tidal volumes (10, 12 and
15 mL kg(-1)) in dogs for controlled mechanical ventilation assessed by volumetric
capnography: a randomized clinical trial. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44: 775–784.
71 Mosing M, Iff I, Hirt R, et al. Evaluation of variables to describe the shape of volu-
metric capnography curves during bronchoconstriction in dogs. Res Vet Sci 2012;
93: 386–392.
72 Fletcher R, Jonson B, Cumming G, et al. The concept of deadspace with special
reference to the single breath test for carbon dioxide. Br J Anaesth 1981; 53: 77–88.
73 Tang Y, Turner MJ, Baker AB. Effects of alveolar dead-space, shunt and V/Q distri-
bution on respiratory dead-space measurements. Br J Anaesth 2005; 95: 538–548.
74 Tornabene VW, Fortune JB, Wagner PD, et al. Gas exchange after pulmonary fat
embolism in dogs. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1979; 78: 589–599.
75 Dubin A, Murias G, Estenssoro E, et al. End-tidal CO2 pressure determinants
during hemorrhagic shock. Intensive Care Med 2000; 26: 1619–1623.
76 Teixeira-Neto FJ, Luna SP, Cruz ML, et al. A study of the effect of hemorrhage on
the cardiorespiratory actions of halothane, isoflurane and sevoflurane in the dog.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2007; 34: 107–116.
77 Murias G, Blanch L, Lucangelo U. The physiology of ventilation. Respir Care 2014;
59: 1795–1807.
78 Loring SH, Topulos GP, Hubmayr RD. Transpulmonary pressure: the importance of
precise definitions and limiting assumptions. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2016; 194:
1452–1457.
79 Ewart SL. Overview of respiratory function: ventilation of the lungs. In: Klein BG,
ed. Cunningham’s Textbook of Veterinary Physiology, 6th edn. St. Louis, MO:
Elsevier, 2020: 518–531.
80 Grieco DL, Chen L, Brochard L. Transpulmonary pressure: importance and limits.
Ann Transl Med 2017; 5: 285.
81 Moens YP, Gootjes P, Ionita JC, et al. In vitro validation of a Pitot-based flow meter
for the measurement of respiratory volume and flow in large animal anaesthesia.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36: 209–219.
82 Morgenroth S, Thomas J, Cannizzaro V, et al. Accuracy of near-patient vs. inbuilt
spirometry for monitoring tidal volumes in an in-vitro paediatric lung model.
Anaesthesia 2018; 73: 972–979.
83 Corcoran BM. Static respiratory compliance in normal dogs. J Small Anim Pract
1991; 32: 438–442.
84 Barberis L, Manno E, Guérin C. Effect of end-inspiratory pause duration on plateau
pressure in mechanically ventilated patients. Intensive Care Med 2003; 29: 130–134.
85 Henderson WR, Sheel AW. Pulmonary mechanics during mechanical ventilation.
Respir Physiol Neurobiol 2012; 180: 162–172.
86 Dye JA, McKiernan BC, Rozanski EA, et al. Bronchopulmonary disease in the cat:
historical, physical, radiographic, clinicopathologic, and pulmonary functional
evaluation of 24 affected and 15 healthy cats. J Vet Intern Med 1996; 10: 385–400.
87 Hoffman AM, Oura TJ, Riedelberger KJ, et al. Plethysmographic comparison of
breathing pattern in heaves (recurrent airway obstruction) versus experimental
bronchoconstriction or hyperpnea in horses. J Vet Intern Med 2007; 21: 184–192.
88 Lumb AB, Thomas C. Respiratory system resistance. In: Lumb AB, Thomas C, eds.
Nunn and Lumb’s Applied Respiratory Physiology, 9th edn. Edinburgh, UK: Elsevier,
2021: 27–41.
89 Mitchell V, Cheesman K. Gas, tubes and flow. Anaesth Intensive Care Med 2007;
8: 7–10.
90 Kaminsky DA. What does airway resistance tell us about lung function? Respir Care
2012; 57: 85–96.
91 Lumb AB, Thomas C. Elastic forces and lung volumes. In: Lumb AB, Thomas C,
eds. Nunn and Lumb’s Applied Respiratory Physiology, 9th edn. Edinburgh, UK:
Elsevier, 2021: 14–26.
92 Papamoschou D. Theoretical validation of the respiratory benefits of helium-
oxygen mixtures. Respir Physiol 1995; 99: 183–190.
93 Hopster K, Duffee LR, Hopster-Iversen CCS, et al. Efficacy of an alveolar recruit-
ment maneuver for improving gas exchange and pulmonary mechanics in anesthe-
tized horses ventilated with oxygen or a helium-oxygen mixture. Am J Vet Res 2018;
79: 1021–1027.
94 Derksen FJ, Robinson NE. Esophageal and intrapleural pressures in the healthy
conscious pony. Am J Vet Res 1980; 41: 1756–1761.

-- 760 of 1450 --

Chapter 37: Respiratory Physiology and Pathophysiology 	745
95 Olson LE, Lai- Fook SJ. Pleural liquid pressure measured with rib capsules in
anesthetized ponies. J Appl Physiol (1985) 1988; 64: 102–107.
96 West JB. State of the art: ventilation–perfusion relationships. Am Rev Respir Dis
1977; 116: 919–943.
97 Amis TC, Pascoe JR, Hornof W. Topographic distribution of pulmonary ventila-
tion and perfusion in the horse. Am J Vet Res 1984; 45: 1597–1601.
98 Schramel J, Nagel C, Auer U, et al. Distribution of ventilation in pregnant Shetland
ponies measured by Electrical Impedance Tomography. Respir Physiol Neurobiol
2012; 180: 258–262.
99 Pelletier N, Leith DE. Cardiac output but not high pulmonary artery pressure
varies with FIO2 in exercising horses. Respir Physiol 1993; 91: 83–97.
100 Manohar M, Hutchens E, Coney E. Pulmonary haemodynamics in the exercising
horse and their relationship to exercise-induced pulmonary haemorrhage.
Br Vet J 1993; 149: 419–428.
101 Elkins RC, Milnor WR. Pulmonary vascular response to exercise in the dog.
Circ Res 1971; 29: 591–599.
102 Erickson BK, Erickson HH, Coffman JR. Pulmonary artery, aortic and oesopha-
geal pressure changes during high intensity treadmill exercise in the horse: a
possible relation to exercise-induced pulmonary haemorrhage. Equine Vet J Suppl
1990; 9: 47–52.
103 Stpeanek J, Christen P. Pulmonary arterial pressure in conscious and anaesthe-
tized dogs. Bull Physiopathol Respir (Nancy) 1975; 11: 295–304.
104 Lampert BC. Right heart catheterization. In: Vasan RS, Sawyer DB, eds.
Encyclopedia of Cardiovscular Research and Medicine. Oxford, UK: Elsevier, 2018:
298–306.
105 Porcelli RJ. Pulmonary hemodynamics. In: Parent RA, ed. Treatise on Pulmonary
Toxicology, Vol 1. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1992: 241–270.
106 Hlastala MP, Bernard SL, Erickson HH, et al. Pulmonary blood flow distribution
in standing horses is not dominated by gravity. J Appl Physiol (1985) 1996; 81:
1051–1061.
107 Glenny RW, Lamm WJ, Albert RK, et al. Gravity is a minor determinant of pulmo-
nary blood flow distribution. J Appl Physiol (1985) 1991; 71: 620–629.
108 Pelletier N, Robinson NE, Kaiser L, et al. Regional differences in endothelial func-
tion in horse lungs: possible role in blood flow distribution? J Appl Physiol (1985)
1998; 85: 537–542.
109 Galvin I, Drummond GB, Nirmalan M. Distribution of blood flow and ventilation
in the lung: gravity is not the only factor. Br J Anaesth 2007; 98: 420–428.
110 Chambers D, Huang C, Matthews G. Ventilation–perfusion zones in the lung. In:
Chambers D, Huang C, Matthews G, eds. Basic Physiology for Anaesthetists,
2nd edn. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2019: 71–73.
111 McLean SR, Lohser J. Physiology of the lateral decubitus position, open chest and
one-lung ventilation. In: Slinger PS, ed. Principles and Practice of Anesthesia for
Thoracic Surgery, 1st edn. New York, NY: Springer, 2011: 93–105.
112 Lumb AB, Slinger P. Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction: physiology and
anesthetic implications. Anesthesiology 2015; 122: 932–946.
113 Dunham-Snary KJ, Wu D, Sykes EA, et al. Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction:
from molecular mechanisms to medicine. Chest 2017; 151: 181–192.
114 Lumb AB, Thomas C. The pulmonary circulation. In: Lumb AB Thomas C, eds.
Nunn and Lumb’s Applied Respiratory Physiology, 9th edn. Edinburgh, UK:
Elsevier, 2021: 73–87.
115 Sommer N, Strielkov I, Pak O, et al. Oxygen sensing and signal transduction in
hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction. Eur Respir J 2016; 47: 288–303.
116 Robinson NE. Some functional consequences of species differences in lung
anatomy. Adv Vet Sci Comp Med 1982; 26: 1–33.
117 Tucker A, McMurtry IF, Reeves JT, et al. Lung vascular smooth muscle as a
determinant of pulmonary hypertension at high altitude. Am J Physiol 1975; 228:
762–767.
118 Marshall BE, Marshall C, Benumof J, et al. Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction
in dogs: effects of lung segment size and oxygen tension. J Appl Physiol Respir
Environ Exerc Physiol 1981; 51: 1543–1551.
119 Elliott AR, Steffey EP, Jarvis KA, et al. Unilateral hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstric-
tion in the dog, pony and miniature swine. Respir Physiol 1991; 85: 355–369.
120 Reinero C, Visser LC, Kellihan HB, et al. ACVIM consensus statement guidelines
for the diagnosis, classification, treatment, and monitoring of pulmonary hyper-
tension in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2020; 34: 549–573.
121 Kellihan HB, Stepien RL. Pulmonary hypertension in dogs: diagnosis and therapy.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2010; 40: 623–641.
122 Jaffey JA, Wiggen K, Leach SB, et al. Pulmonary hypertension secondary to res-
piratory disease and/or hypoxia in dogs: clinical features, diagnostic testing and
survival. Vet J 2019; 251: 105347.
123 Pyle RL, Park RD, Alexander AF, et al. Patent ductus arteriosus with pulmonary
hypertension in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1981; 178: 565–571.
124 Boutet BG, Saunders AB, Gordon SG. Clinical characteristics of adult dogs more
than 5 years of age at presentation for patent ductus arteriosus. J Vet Intern Med
2017; 31: 685–690.
125 Greet V, Bode EF, Dukes-McEwan J, et al. Clinical features and outcome of dogs
and cats with bidirectional and continuous right-to-left shunting patent ductus
arteriosus. J Vet Intern Med 2021; 35: 780–788.
126 Bascuñán A, Thieman Mankin KM, et al. Patent ductus arteriosus in cats
(Felis catus): 50 cases (2000–2015). J Vet Cardiol 2017; 19: 35–43.
127 Parisi C, Phillips V, Ferreira J, et al. Anaesthetic management and complications of
transvascular patent ductus arteriosus occlusion in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020;
47: 581–587.
128 Schober KE, Hart TM, Stern JA, et al. Detection of congestive heart failure in dogs
by Doppler echocardiography. J Vet Intern Med 2010; 24: 1358–1368.
129 Borgarelli M, Abbott J, Braz-Ruivo L, et al. Prevalence and prognostic importance
of pulmonary hypertension in dogs with myxomatous mitral valve disease.
J Vet Intern Med 2015; 29: 569–574.
130 Vezzosi T, Schober KE. Doppler-derived echocardiographic evidence of pulmonary
hypertension in cats with left-sided congestive heart failure. J Vet Cardiol 2019;
23: 58–68.
131 Matthay MA, Quinn TE. Pulmonary edema. In: Laurent GJ, Shapiro SD, eds.
Encyclopedia of Respiratory Medicine. Oxford, UK: Academic Press, 2006:
544–550.
132 Lumb AB, Thomas C. Pulmonary vascular disease. In: Lumb AB, Thomas C, eds.
Nunn and Lumb’s Applied Respiratory Physiology, 9th edn. Edinburgh, UK: Elsevier,
2021: 339–348.
133 Collins SR, Blank RS, Deatherage LS, et al. Special article: the endothelial glyco-
calyx: emerging concepts in pulmonary edema and acute lung injury. Anesth
Analg 2013; 117: 664–674.
134 Woodcock TE, Woodcock TM. Revised Starling equation and the glycocalyx
model of transvascular fluid exchange: an improved paradigm for prescribing
intravenous fluid therapy. Br J Anaesth 2012; 108: 84–394.
135 Chappell D, Bruegger D, Potzel J, et al. Hypervolemia increases release of atrial
natriuretic peptide and shedding of the endothelial glycocalyx. Crit Care 2014;
18: 538.
136 Uchimido R, Schmidt EP, Shapiro NI. The glycocalyx: a novel diagnostic and
therapeutic target in sepsis. Crit Care 2019; 23: 16.
137 Schober KE, Bonagura J, Scansen BA, et al. Estimation of left ventricular filling
pressure by use of Doppler echocardiography in healthy anesthetized dogs
subjected to acute volume loading. Am J Vet Res 2008; 69: 1034–1049.
138 Hansen B. Fluid overload. Front Vet Sci 2021; 8: 668688.
139 Schober KE, Chetboul V. Echocardiographic evaluation of left ventricular diastolic
function in cats: hemodynamic determinants and pattern recognition. J Vet Cardiol
2015; 17(Suppl 1): S102–S133.
140 Teixeira-Neto FJ, Valverde A. Clinical application of the fluid challenge approach
in goal-directed fluid therapy: what can we learn from human studies? Front Vet
Sci 2021; 8: 701377.
141 Bhattacharya M, Kallet RH, Ware LB, et al. Negative-pressure pulmonary edema.
Chest 2016; 150: 927–933.
142 Tute AS, Wilkins PA, Gleed RD, et al. Negative pressure pulmonary edema as a
post-anesthetic complication associated with upper airway obstruction in a horse.
Vet Surg 1996; 25: 519–523.
143 Drobatz KJ, Saunders HM, Pugh CR, et al. Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema in
dogs and cats: 26 cases (1987–1993). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1995; 206: 1732–1736.
144 Kollias- Baker CA, Pipers FS, Heard D, et al. Pulmonary edema associated with
transient airway obstruction in three horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993; 202:
1116–1118.
145 Ranieri VM, Rubenfeld GD, Thompson BT, et al. Acute respiratory distress
syndrome: the Berlin Definition. J Am Med Assoc 2012; 307: 2526–2533.
146 Wilkins PA, Otto CM, Baumgardner JE, et al. Acute lung injury and acute respira-
tory distress syndromes in veterinary medicine: consensus definitions: the
Dorothy Russell Havemeyer Working Group on ALI and ARDS in Veterinary
Medicine. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2007; 17: 333–339.
147 Boiron L, Hopper K, Borchers A. Risk factors, characteristics, and outcomes
of acute respiratory distress syndrome in dogs and cats: 54 cases. J Vet Emerg Crit
Care (San Antonio) 2019; 29: 173–179.
148 Vrolyk V, Wobeser BK, Al-Dissi AN, et al. Lung inflammation associated with
clinical acute necrotizing pancreatitis in dogs. Vet Pathol 2017; 54: 129–140.
149 Vrolyk V, Singh B. Animal models to study the role of pulmonary intravascular
macrophages in spontaneous and induced acute pancreatitis. Cell Tissue Res 2020;
380: 207–222.
150 Petersson J, Glenny RW. Gas exchange and ventilation–perfusion relationships
in the lung. Eur Respir J 2014; 44: 1023–1041.
151 Levitzky MG. Ventilation–perfusion relationships. In: Levitsky MG, ed.
Pulmonary Physiology, 9th edn. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2018: 124–141.
152 Amis TC, Jones HA, Hughes JM. A conscious dog model for study of regional lung
function. J Appl Physiol Respir Environ Exerc Physiol 1982; 53: 1050–1054.
153 Hedenstierna G, Nyman G, Kvart C, et al. Ventilation–perfusion relationships in
the standing horse: an inert gas elimination study. Equine Vet J 1987; 19: 514–519.

-- 761 of 1450 --

746 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
154 Dantzker DR, Wagner PD, West JB. Proceedings: instability of poorly ventilated
lung units during oxygen breathing. J Physiol 1974; 242: 72.
155 Moir TW, Driscol TE, Eckstein RW. Thebisian drainage in the left heart of the dog.
Circ Res 1964; 14: 245–249.
156 Ravin MB, Epstein RM, Malm JR. Contribution of Thebesian veins to the physi-
ologic shunt in anesthetized man. J Appl Physiol 1965; 20: 1148–1152.
157 Benatar SR, Hewlett AM, Nunn JF. The use of iso-shunt lines for control of oxygen
therapy. Br J Anaesth 1973; 45: 711–718.
158 Kimmoun A, Ducrocq N, Sennoun N, et al. Efficient extra- and intracellular
alkalinization improves cardiovascular functions in severe lactic acidosis induced
by hemorrhagic shock. Anesthesiology 2014; 120: 926–934.
159 Regan MJ, Eger EI II. Effect of hypothermia in dogs on anesthetizing and apneic
doses of inhalation agents. Determination of the anesthetic index (Apnea/MAC).
Anesthesiology 1967; 28: 689–700.
160 Steffey EP, Howland D Jr. Isoflurane potency in the dog and cat. Am J Vet Res 1977;
38: 1833–1836.
161 Galloway DS, Ko JC, Reaugh HF, et al. Anesthetic indices of sevoflurane and
isoflurane in unpremedicated dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2004; 225: 700–704.
162 Bloor BC, Abdul-Rasool I, Temp J, et al. The effects of medetomidine, an alpha
2-adrenergic agonist, on ventilatory drive in the dog. Acta Vet Scand Suppl 1989;
85: 65–70.
163 Steffey EP, Howland D Jr. Potency of enflurane in dogs: comparison with
halothane and isoflurane. Am J Vet Res 1978; 39: 573–577.
164 Hikasa Y, Okuyama K, Kakuta T, et al. Anesthetic potency and cardiopulmonary
effects of sevoflurane in goats: comparison with isoflurane and halothane.
Can J Vet Res 1998; 62: 299–306.
165 Steffey EP, Gillespie JR, Berry JD, et al. Cardiovascular effects of halothane
in the stump-tailed macaque during spontaneous and controlled ventilation.
Am J Vet Res 1974; 35: 1315–1319.
166 Steffey EP, Woliner MJ, Puschner B, et al. Effects of desflurane and mode of
ventilation on cardiovascular and respiratory functions and clinicopathologic
variables in horses. Am J Vet Res 2005; 66: 669–677.
167 Steffey MA, Brosnan RJ, Steffey EP. Assessment of halothane and sevoflurane
anesthesia in spontaneously breathing rats. Am J Vet Res 2003; 64: 470–474.
168 Grosenbaugh DA, Muir WW. Cardiorespiratory effects of sevoflurane, isoflurane,
and halothane anesthesia in horses. Am J Vet Res 1998; 59: 101–106.
169 Steffey EP, Howland D Jr., Giri S, et al. Enflurane, halothane, and isoflurane
potency in horses. Am J Vet Res 1977; 38: 1037–1039.
170 Steffey EP, Howland D Jr. Halothane anesthesia in calves. Am J Vet Res 1979; 40:
372–376.
171 McDonell W. Anesthesia of the harp seal. J Wildl Dis 1972; 8: 287–295.
172 Flecknell PA, Roughan JV, Hedenqvist P. Induction of anaesthesia with sevoflu-
rane and isoflurane in the rabbit. Lab Anim 1999; 33: 41–46.
173 Abdul-Rasool IH, Ward DS. Ventilatory and cardiovascular responses to sufen-
tanil infusion in dogs anesthetized with isoflurane. Anesth Analg 1989; 69:
300–306.
174 Hornbein TF. Anesthetics and ventilatory control. In: Covino BG FH, Rehder K,
Strichartz G, eds. Effects of Anesthesia. Bethesda, MD: American Physiologic
Society, 1985: 75–90.
175 Evgenov OV, Liang Y, Jiang Y, et al. Pulmonary pharmacology and inhaled anes-
thetics. In: Gropper MA, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia,
9th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier, 2020: 540–571.
176 Boden AG, Harris MC, Parkes MJ. Apneic threshold for CO2 in the anesthetized
rat: fundamental properties under steady-state conditions. J Appl Physiol (1985)
1998; 85: 898–907.
177 Thompson KR, Bardell D. The effect of two different intra-operative end-tidal
carbon dioxide tensions on apnoeic duration in the recovery period in horses.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43: 163–170.
178 Quandt JE, Robinson EP, Rivers WJ, et al. Cardiorespiratory and anesthetic effects
of propofol and thiopental in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1998; 59: 1137–1143.
179 Bigby SE, Beths T, Bauquier S, et al. Effect of rate of administration of propofol or
alfaxalone on induction dose requirements and occurrence of apnea in dogs.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44: 1267–1275.
180 Muir WW III, Gadawski JE. Respiratory depression and apnea induced by propo-
fol in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1998; 59: 157–161.
181 Liehmann L, Mosing M, Auer U. A comparison of cardiorespiratory variables dur-
ing isoflurane-fentanyl and propofol-fentanyl anaesthesia for surgery in injured
cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2006; 33: 158–168.
182 Campagna I, Schwarz A, Keller S, et al. Comparison of the effects of propofol or
alfaxalone for anaesthesia induction and maintenance on respiration in cats.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2015; 42: 484–492.
183 Suarez MA, Dzikiti BT, Stegmann FG, et al. Comparison of alfaxalone and propo-
fol administered as total intravenous anaesthesia for ovariohysterectomy in dogs.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39: 236–244.
184 Lerche P, Nolan AM, Reid J. Comparative study of propofol or propofol and
ketamine for the induction of anaesthesia in dogs. Vet Rec 2000; 146: 571–574.
185 McKeirnan KL, Gross ME, Rochat M, et al. Comparison of propofol and
propofol/ketamine anesthesia for evaluation of laryngeal function in healthy dogs.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2014; 50: 19–26.
186 Jaspar N, Mazzarelli M, Tessier C, et al. Effect of ketamine on control of breathing
in cats. J Appl Physiol Respir Environ Exerc Physiol 1983; 55: 851–859.
187 Brock N, Hildebrand SV. A comparison of xylazine-diazepam-ketamine and
xylazine-guaifenesin- ketamine in equine anesthesia. Vet Surg 1990; 19: 468–474.
188 Kerr CL, McDonell WN, Young SS. A comparison of romifidine and xylazine
when used with diazepam/ketamine for short duration anesthesia in the horse.
Can Vet J 1996; 37: 601–609.
189 McMurphy RM, Young LE, Marlin DJ, et al. Comparison of the cardiopulmonary
effects of anesthesia maintained by continuous infusion of romifidine, guaifenesin,
and ketamine with anesthesia maintained by inhalation of halothane in horses.
Am J Vet Res 2002; 63: 1655–1661.
190 Cuvelliez SG, Eicker SW, McLauchlan C, et al. Cardiovascular and respiratory
effects of inspired oxygen fraction in halothane-anesthetized horses. Am J Vet Res
1990; 51: 1226–1231.
191 Marntell S, Nyman G, Hedenstierna G. High inspired oxygen concentrations
increase intrapulmonary shunt in anaesthetized horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2005;
32: 338–347.
192 Crumley MN, McMurphy RM, Hodgson DS, et al. Effects of inspired oxygen
concentration on ventilation, ventilatory rhythm, and gas exchange in isoflurane-
anesthetized horses. Am J Vet Res 2013; 74: 183–190.
193 Rousseau-Blass F, Pang DS. Hypoventilation following oxygen administration
associated with alfaxalone-dexmedetomidine-midazolam anesthesia in New
Zealand White rabbits. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47: 637–646.
194 Hubbell JA, Aarnes TK, Bednarski RM, et al. Effect of 50% and maximal inspired
oxygen concentrations on respiratory variables in isoflurane-anesthetized horses.
BMC Vet Res 2011; 7: 23.
195 Kerr CL, McDonell WN, Young SS. Cardiopulmonary effects of romifidine/
ketamine or xylazine/ketamine when used for short duration anesthesia in the
horse. Can J Vet Res 2004; 68: 274–282.
196 Weil JV, Byrne-Quinn E, Sodal IE, et al. Hypoxic ventilatory drive in normal man.
J Clin Invest 1970; 49: 1061–1072.
197 Hirshman CA, McCullough RE, Cohen PJ, et al. Hypoxic ventilatory drive in dogs
during thiopental, ketamine, or pentobarbital anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1975; 43:
628–634.
198 Hirshman CA, McCullough RE, Cohen PJ, et al. Depression of hypoxic ventilatory
response by halothane, enflurane and isoflurane in dogs. Br J Anaesth 1977; 49:
957–963.
199 Ponte J, Sadler CL. Effect of thiopentone, etomidate and propofol on carotid body
chemoreceptor activity in the rabbit and the cat. Br J Anaesth 1989; 62: 41–45.
200 Ponte J, Sadler CL. Effect of halothane, enflurane and isoflurane on carotid body
chemoreceptor activity in the rabbit and the cat. Br J Anaesth 1989; 62: 33–40.
201 Blouin RT, Seifert HA, Babenco HD, et al. Propofol depresses the hypoxic ventila-
tory response during conscious sedation and isohypercapnia. Anesthesiology 1993;
79: 1177–1182.
202 Karanovic N, Pecotic R, Valic M, et al. The acute hypoxic ventilatory response
under halothane, isoflurane, and sevoflurane anaesthesia in rats. Anaesthesia
2010; 65: 227–234.
203 Engbers S, Larkin A, Rousset N, et al. Comparison of a supraglottic airway device
(v-gel(®)) with blind orotracheal intubation in rabbits. Front Vet Sci 2017; 4: 49.
204 Wenger S, Müllhaupt D, Ohlerth S, et al. Experimental evaluation of four airway
devices in anaesthetized New Zealand White rabbits. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44:
529–537.
205 Ko JC, Fox SM, Mandsager RE. Sedative and cardiorespiratory effects of
medetomidine, medetomidine-butorphanol, and medetomidine-ketamine in dogs.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000; 216: 1578–1583.
206 Kuo WC, Keegan RD. Comparative cardiovascular, analgesic, and sedative effects
of medetomidine, medetomidine-hydromorphone, and medetomidine-butorphanol
in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2004; 65: 931–937.
207 Keating SC, Kerr CL, Valverde A, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of intravenous
fentanyl infusion in dogs during isoflurane anesthesia and with concurrent
acepromazine or dexmedetomidine administration during anesthetic recovery.
Am J Vet Res 2013; 74: 672–682.
208 Enouri SS, Kerr CL, McDonell WN, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of anesthetic
induction with thiopental, propofol, or a combination of ketamine hydrochloride
and diazepam in dogs sedated with a combination of medetomidine and hydro-
morphone. Am J Vet Res 2008; 69: 586–595.
209 Celly CS, McDonell WN, Young SS, et al. The comparative hypoxaemic effect
of four alpha 2 adrenoceptor agonists (xylazine, romifidine, detomidine and
medetomidine) in sheep. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1997; 20: 464–471.

-- 762 of 1450 --

Chapter 37: Respiratory Physiology and Pathophysiology 	747
210 Lodenius Å, Ebberyd A, Hårdemark Cedborg A, et al. Sedation with dexmedetomidine
or propofol impairs hypoxic control of breathing in healthy male volunteers: a non-
blinded, randomized crossover study. Anesthesiology 2016; 125: 700–715.
211 Santos M, Fuente M, Garcia-Iturralde R, et al. Effects of alpha-2 adrenoceptor
agonists during recovery from isoflurane anaesthesia in horses. Equine Vet J 2003;
35: 170–175.
212 Woodhouse KJ, Brosnan RJ, Nguyen KQ, et al. Effects of postanesthetic sedation
with romifidine or xylazine on quality of recovery from isoflurane anesthesia in
horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2013; 242: 533–539.
213 Ward DS. Stimulation of hypoxic ventilatory drive by droperidol. Anesth Analg
1984; 63: 106–110.
214 Murphy DJ, Renninger JP, Schramek D. Respiratory inductive plethysmography as
a method for measuring ventilatory parameters in conscious, non-restrained
dogs. J Pharmacol Toxicol Methods 2010; 62: 47–53.
215 Ide T, Shirahata M, Chou CL, et al. Effects of a continuous infusion of dopamine
on the ventilatory and carotid body responses to hypoxia in cats. Clin Exp
Pharmacol Physiol 1995; 22: 658–664.
216 Dahan A, Ward D, van den Elsen M, et al. Influence of reduced carotid body
drive during sustained hypoxia on hypoxic depression of ventilation in humans.
J Appl Physiol (1985) 1996; 81: 565–572.
217 van de Borne P, Oren R, Somers VK. Dopamine depresses minute ventilation in
patients with heart failure. Circulation 1998; 98: 126–131.
218 Dahan A, Sarton E, Teppema L, et al. Anesthetic potency and influence of
morphine and sevoflurane on respiration in mu-opioid receptor knockout mice.
Anesthesiology 2001; 94: 824–832.
219 Romberg R, Sarton E, Teppema L, et al. Comparison of morphine-6-glucuronide
and morphine on respiratory depressant and antinociceptive responses in wild
type and mu-opioid receptor deficient mice. Br J Anaesth 2003; 91: 862–870.
220 Camporesi EM, Nielsen CH, Bromage PR, et al. Ventilatory CO2 sensitivity after
intravenous and epidural morphine in volunteers. Anesth Analg 1983; 62: 633–640.
221 Romagnoli A, Keats AS. Ceiling effect for respiratory depression by nalbuphine.
Clin Pharmacol Ther 1980; 27: 478–485.
222 Talbert RL, Peters JI, Sorrells SC, et al. Respiratory effects of high-dose butorphanol.
Acute Care 1988; 12(Suppl 1): 47–56.
223 Freye E, Azevedo L, Hartung E. Reversal of fentanyl related respiratory depression
with nalbuphine. Effects on the CO2 - response curve in man. Acta Anaesthesiol
Belg 1985; 36: 365–374.
224 Bowdle TA, Greichen SL, Bjurstrom RL, et al. Butorphanol improves CO 2 response
and ventilation after fentanyl anesthesia. Anesth Analg 1987; 66: 517–522.
225 McCrackin MA, Harvey RC, Sackman JE, et al. Butorphanol tartrate for partial
reversal of oxymorphone-induced postoperative respiratory depression in the
dog. Vet Surg 1994; 23: 67–74.
226 Niesters M, Mahajan RP, Aarts L, et al. High-inspired oxygen concentration further
impairs opioid-induced respiratory depression. Br J Anaesth 2013; 110: 837–841.
227 Jacobson JD, McGrath CJ, Smith EP. Cardiorespiratory effects of four opioid-
tranquilizer combinations in dogs. Vet Surg 1994; 23: 299–306.
228 Cullen LK, Raffe MR, Randall DA, et al. Assessment of the respiratory actions of
intramuscular morphine in conscious dogs. Res Vet Sci 1999; 67: 141–148.
229 Smith LJ, Yu JK, Bjorling DE, et al. Effects of hydromorphone or oxymorphone,
with or without acepromazine, on preanesthetic sedation, physiologic values, and
histamine release in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2001; 218: 1101–1105.
230 Dyson DH, Atilola M. A clinical comparison of oxymorphone-acepromazine and
butorphanol-acepromazine sedation in dogs. Vet Surg 1992; 21: 418–421.
231 Posner LP, Pavuk AA, Rokshar JL, et al. Effects of opioids and anesthetic drugs on
body temperature in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2010; 37: 35–43.
232 Maiante AA, Teixeira-Neto FJ, Beier SL, et al. Comparison of the cardio-
respiratory effects of methadone and morphine in conscious dogs. J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 2009; 32: 317–328.
233 Wunsch LA, Schmidt BK, Krugner-Higby LA, et al. A comparison of the effects of
hydromorphone HCl and a novel extended release hydromorphone on arterial
blood gas values in conscious healthy dogs. Res Vet Sci 2010; 88: 154–158.
234 Trim CM. Cardiopulmonary effects of butorphanol tartrate in dogs. Am J Vet Res
1983; 44: 329–331.
235 Quandt JE, Raffe MR, Robinson EP. Butorphanol does not reduce the minimum
alveolar concentration of halothane in dogs. Vet Surg 1994; 23: 156–159.
236 Zucker JR, Neuenfeldt T, Freund PR. Respiratory effects of nalbuphine and
butorphanol in anesthetized patients. Anesth Analg 1987; 66: 879–881.
237 Robertson JT, Muir WW, Sams R. Cardiopulmonary effects of butorphanol
tartrate in horses. Am J Vet Res 1981; 42: 41–44.
238 Carregaro AB, Neto FJ, Beier SL, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of buprenorphine
in horses. Am J Vet Res 2006; 67: 1675–1680.
239 Figueiredo JP, Muir WW, Sams R. Cardiorespiratory, gastrointestinal, and anal-
gesic effects of morphine sulfate in conscious healthy horses. Am J Vet Res 2012;
73: 799–808.
240 Steffey EP, Eisele JH, Baggot JD. Interactions of morphine and isoflurane in
horses. Am J Vet Res 2003; 64: 166–175.
241 Clark L, Clutton RE, Blissitt KJ, et al. Effects of peri-operative morphine administra-
tion during halothane anaesthesia in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2005; 32: 10–15.
242 Bitti FS, Campagnol D, Rangel JP, et al. Effects of three methadone doses com-
bined with acepromazine on sedation and some cardiopulmonary variables in
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44: 237–245.
243 Monteiro ER, Rabello TA, Rangel JPP, et al. Effects of 3 morphine doses, in com-
bination with acepromazine, on sedation and some physiological parameters in
dogs. Can J Vet Res 2019; 83: 235–240.
244 Costa GP, Monteiro ER, Marques ÉJ, et al. Sedative effects of acepromazine in
combination with nalbuphine or butorphanol, intramuscularly or intravenously,
in healthy cats: a randomized, blinded clinical trial. J Feline Med Surg 2021; 23:
540–548.
245 Nolan AM, Reid J. The use of intraoperative fentanyl in spontaneously breathing
dogs undergoing orthopaedic surgery. J Vet Anaesth 1991; 18: 30–39.
246 Steffey EP, Baggot JD, Eisele JH, et al. Morphine-isoflurane interaction in dogs,
swine and rhesus monkeys. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1994; 17: 202–210.
247 Garofalo NA, Teixeira-Neto FJ, Pereira CD, et al. Cardiorespiratory and neuroen-
docrine changes induced by methadone in conscious and in isoflurane anaesthe-
tised dogs. Vet J 2012; 194: 398–404.
248 Leibetseder EN, Mosing M, Jones RS. A comparison of extradural and intravenous
methadone on intraoperative isoflurane and postoperative analgesia requirements
in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2006; 33: 128–136.
249 Berkenbosch A, Teppema LJ, Olievier CN, et al. Influences of morphine on the
ventilatory response to isocapnic hypoxia. Anesthesiology 1997; 86: 1342–1349.
250 Campbell VL, Drobatz KJ, Perkowski SZ. Postoperative hypoxemia and hyper-
carbia in healthy dogs undergoing routine ovariohysterectomy or castration and
receiving butorphanol or hydromorphone for analgesia. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2003;
222: 330–336.
251 Wahler BM, Lerche P, Ricco Pereira CH, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmaco-
dynamics of intranasal and intravenous naloxone hydrochloride administration
in healthy dogs. Am J Vet Res 2019; 80: 696–701.
252 Copland VS, Haskins SC, Patz J. Naloxone reversal of oxymorphone effects in
dogs. Am J Vet Res 1989; 50: 1854–1858.
253 Hedenstierna G. Gas exchange during anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth 1990; 64: 507–514.
254 Reber A, Engberg G, Sporre B, et al. Volumetric analysis of aeration in the lungs
during general anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth 1996; 76: 760–766.
255 Rothen HU, Sporre B, Engberg G, et al. Airway closure, atelectasis and gas
exchange during general anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth 1998; 81: 681–686.
256 Wahba RW. Perioperative functional residual capacity. Can J Anaesth 1991; 38:
384–400.
257 Lumb AB, Thomas C. Anaesthesia. In: Lumb AB, Thomas C, eds. Nunn and
Lumb’s Applied Respiratory Physiology, 9th edn. Edinburgh, UK: Elsevier, 2021:
244–267.
258 Hedenstierna G, Tokics L, Reinius H, et al. Higher age and obesity limit atelec-
tasis formation during anaesthesia: an analysis of computed tomography data in
243 subjects. Br J Anaesth 2020; 124: 336–344.
259 Lai YL, Rodarte JR, Hyatt RE. Respiratory mechanics in recumbent dogs anes-
thetized with thiopental sodium. J Appl Physiol Respir Environ Exerc Physiol 1979;
46: 716–720.
260 Barletta M, Almondia D, Williams J, et al. Radiographic evaluation of positional
atelectasis in sedated dogs breathing room air versus 100% oxygen. Can Vet J 2014;
55: 985–991.
261 Staffieri F, Franchini D, Carella GL, et al. Computed tomographic analysis of the
effects of two inspired oxygen concentrations on pulmonary aeration in anesthe-
tized and mechanically ventilated dogs. Am J Vet Res 2007; 68: 925–931.
262 De Monte V, Grasso S, De Marzo C, et al. Effects of reduction of inspired oxygen
fraction or application of positive end-expiratory pressure after an alveolar recruit-
ment maneuver on respiratory mechanics, gas exchange, and lung aeration in dogs
during anesthesia and neuromuscular blockade. Am J Vet Res 2013; 74: 25–33.
263 Ambrosio AM, Carvalho-Kamakura TPA, Ida KK, et al. Ventilation distribution
assessed with electrical impedance tomography and the influence of tidal volume,
recruitment and positive end-expiratory pressure in isoflurane-anesthetized dogs.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44: 254–263.
264 McDonell W. The effect of anesthesia on pulmonary gas exchange and arterial
oxygenation in the horse. PhD Thesis, University of Cambridge, 1974.
265 McDonell WN, Hall LW, Jeffcott LB. Radiographic evidence of impaired pulmo-
nary function in laterally recumbent anaesthetised horses. Equine Vet J 1979; 11:
24–32.
266 Watney GC. Radiographic evidence of pulmonary dysfunction in anaesthetised
cattle. Res Vet Sci 1986; 41: 162–171.
267 Hornof WJ, Dunlop CI, Prestage R, et al. Effects of lateral recumbency on regional
lung function in anesthetized horses. Am J Vet Res 1986; 47: 277–282.

-- 763 of 1450 --

748 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
268 Nyman G, Funkquist B, Kvart C, et al. Atelectasis causes gas exchange impairment
in the anaesthetised horse. Equine Vet J 1990; 22: 317–324.
269 Moens Y, Lagerweij E, Gootjes P, et al. Distribution of inspired gas to each lung in the
anaesthetised horse and influence of body shape. Equine Vet J 1995; 27: 110–116.
270 Damia G, Mascheroni D, Croci M, et al. Perioperative changes in functional
residual capacity in morbidly obese patients. Br J Anaesth 1988; 60: 574–578.
271 Zeng C, Lagier D, Lee JW, et al. Perioperative pulmonary atelectasis: Part I.
Biology and mechanisms. Anesthesiology 2022; 136: 181–205.
272 Benson GJ, Manohar M, Kneller SK, et al. Radiographic characterization of
diaphragmatic excursion in halothane-anesthetized ponies: spontaneous and
controlled ventilation systems. Am J Vet Res 1982; 43: 617–621.
273 Staffieri F, De Monte V, De Marzo C, et al. Effects of two fractions of inspired
oxygen on lung aeration and gas exchange in cats under inhalant anaesthesia.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2010; 37: 483–490.
274 Hedenstierna G, Tokics L, Strandberg A, et al. Correlation of gas exchange impair-
ment to development of atelectasis during anaesthesia and muscle paralysis.
Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1986; 30: 183–191.
275 Pavone L, Albert S, DiRocco J, et al. Alveolar instability caused by mechanical venti-
lation initially damages the nondependent normal lung. Crit Care 2007; 11: R104.
276 Pavone LA, Albert S, Carney D, et al. Injurious mechanical ventilation in the normal
lung causes a progressive pathologic change in dynamic alveolar mechanics.
Crit Care 2007; 11: R64.
277 Hopster K, Kästner SB, Rohn K, et al. Intermittent positive pressure ventilation
with constant positive end-expiratory pressure and alveolar recruitment manoeuvre
during inhalation anaesthesia in horses undergoing surgery for colic, and its influ-
ence on the early recovery period. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38: 169–177.
278 Canfrán S, Gómez de Segura IA, Cediel R, et al. Effects of a stepwise lung recruit-
ment manoeuvre and positive end-expiratory pressure on lung compliance and
arterial blood oxygenation in healthy dogs. Vet J 2012; 194: 89–93.
279 Varner KM, Hopster K, Driessen B. Comparison of various types of inert gas com-
ponents on efficacy of an alveolar recruitment maneuver in dorsally recumbent
anesthetized horses. Am J Vet Res 2019; 80: 631–636.
280 Staffieri F, Bauquier SH, Moate PJ, et al. Pulmonary gas exchange in anaesthetised
horses mechanically ventilated with oxygen or a helium/oxygen mixture. Equine
Vet J 2009; 41: 747–752.
281 Hedenstierna G, McCarthy G. The effect of anaesthesia and intermittent positive
pressure ventilation with different frequencies on the anatomical and alveolar
deadspace. Br J Anaesth 1975; 47: 847–852.
282 Tusman G, Suarez-Sipmann F, Böhm SH, et al. Monitoring dead space during
recruitment and PEEP titration in an experimental model. Intensive Care Med
2006; 32: 1863–1871.
283 Casati A, Fanelli G, Torri G. Physiological dead space/tidal volume ratio during
face mask, laryngeal mask, and cuffed oropharyngeal airway spontaneous ventila-
tion. J Clin Anesth 1998; 10: 652–655.
284 Maisch S, Reissmann H, Fuellekrug B, et al. Compliance and dead space fraction
indicate an optimal level of positive end-expiratory pressure after recruitment in
anesthetized patients. Anesth Analg 2008; 106: 175–181.
285 Lavoie JP, Pascoe JR, Kurpershoek CJ. Effect of head and neck position on respiratory
mechanics in horses sedated with xylazine. Am J Vet Res 1992; 53: 1652–1657.
286 Broadstone RV, Gray PR, Robinson NE, et al. Effects of xylazine on airway function
in ponies with recurrent airway obstruction. Am J Vet Res 1992; 53: 1813–1817.
287 Tomasic M, Mann LS, Soma LR. Effects of sedation, anesthesia, and endotracheal
intubation on respiratory mechanics in adult horses. Am J Vet Res 1997; 58:
641–646.
288 Brown RH, Zerhouni EA, Hirshman CA. Comparison of low concentrations of
halothane and isoflurane as bronchodilators. Anesthesiology 1993; 78: 1097–1101.
289 Yamakage M. Effects of anaesthetic agents on airway smooth muscles. Br J Anaesth
2002; 88: 624–627.
290 Dikmen Y, Eminoglu E, Salihoglu Z, et al. Pulmonary mechanics during isoflu-
rane, sevoflurane and desflurane anaesthesia. Anaesthesia 2003; 58: 745–748.
291 Myers CF, Fontao F, Jánosi TZ, et al. Sevoflurane and desflurane protect cholinergic-
induced bronchoconstriction of hyperreactive airways in rabbits. Can J Anaesth
2011; 58: 1007–1015.
292 Nyktari V, Papaioannou A, Volakakis N, et al. Respiratory resistance during anaes-
thesia with isoflurane, sevoflurane, and desflurane: a randomized clinical trial.
Br J Anaesth 2011; 107: 454–661.
293 Westbrook PR, Stubbs SE, Sessler AD, et al. Effects of anesthesia and muscle paral-
ysis on respiratory mechanics in normal man. J Appl Physiol 1973; 34: 81–86.
294 Blaze CA, LeBlanc PH, Robinson NE. Effect of withholding feed on ventilation
and the incidence of regurgitation during halothane anesthesia of adult cattle.
Am J Vet Res 1988; 49: 2126–2129.
295 Bradbrook CA, Clark L, Dugdale AH, et al. Measurement of respiratory system com-
pliance and respiratory system resistance in healthy dogs undergoing general anaes-
thesia for elective orthopaedic procedures. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40: 382–389.
296 Kerr CL, Keating SCJ, Arroyo LG, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects and recovery
characteristics associated with 2 sedative protocols for assisted ventilation in
healthy neonatal foals. Can J Vet Res 2021; 85: 251–260.
297 Asorey I, Pellegrini L, Canfrán S, et al. Factors affecting respiratory system com-
pliance in anaesthetised mechanically ventilated healthy dogs: a retrospective
study. J Small Anim Pract 2020; 61: 617–623.
298 Aida H, Mizuno Y, Hobo S, et al. Cardiovascular and pulmonary effects of
sevoflurane anesthesia in horses. Vet Surg 1996; 25: 164–170.
299 Nyman G, Hedenstierna G. Ventilation–perfusion relationships in the anaesthe-
tised horse. Equine Vet J 1989; 21: 274–281.
300 Takala J. Hypoxemia due to increased venous admixture: influence of cardiac
output on oxygenation. Intensive Care Med 2007; 33: 908–911.
301 Wagner PD. The multiple inert gas elimination technique (MIGET). Intensive
Care Med 2008; 34: 994–1001.
302 Bhavani-Shankar K, Moseley H, Kumar AY, et al. Capnometry and anaesthesia.
Can J Anaesth 1992; 39: 617–632.
303 Koenig J, McDonell W, Valverde A. Accuracy of pulse oximetry and capnography
in healthy and compromised horses during spontaneous and controlled ventilation.
Can J Vet Res 2003; 67: 169–174.
304 Boer F. Drug handling by the lungs. Br J Anaesth 2003; 91: 50–60.
305 Dawidowicz AL, Fornal E, Mardarowicz M, et al. The role of human lungs in the
biotransformation of propofol. Anesthesiology 2000; 93: 992–997.
306 He YL, Ueyama H, Tashiro C, et al. Pulmonary disposition of propofol in surgical
patients. Anesthesiology 2000; 93: 986–991.
307 Hiraoka H, Yamamoto K, Miyoshi S, et al. Kidneys contribute to the extrahepatic
clearance of propofol in humans, but not lungs and brain. Br J Clin Pharmacol
2005; 60: 176–182.
308 Kuipers JA, Boer F, Olieman W, et al. First- pass lung uptake and pulmonary
clearance of propofol: assessment with a recirculatory indocyanine green pharma-
cokinetic model. Anesthesiology 1999; 91: 1780–1787.
309 Matot I, Neely CF, Katz RY, et al. Fentanyl and propofol uptake by the lung: effect
of time between injections. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1994; 38: 711–715.
310 Matot I, Neely CF, Katz RY, et al. Pulmonary uptake of propofol in cats. Effect of
fentanyl and halothane. Anesthesiology 1993; 78: 1157–1165.
311 Grossherr M, Hengstenberg A, Meier T, et al. Discontinuous monitoring of propo-
fol concentrations in expired alveolar gas and in arterial and venous plasma
during artificial ventilation. Anesthesiology 2006; 104: 786–790.
312 Takita A, Masui K, Kazama T. On-line monitoring of end-tidal propofol concen-
tration in anesthetized patients. Anesthesiology 2007; 106: 659–664.
313 Colin P, Eleveld DJ, van den Berg JP, et al. Propofol breath monitoring as a poten-
tial tool to improve the prediction of intraoperative plasma concentrations.
Clin Pharmacokinet 2016; 55: 849–859.
314 Sykes MK, Loh L, Seed RF, et al. The effect of inhalational anaesthetics on hypoxic
pulmonary vasoconstriction and pulmonary vascular resistance in the perfused
lungs of the dog and cat. Br J Anaesth 1972; 44: 776–788.
315 Bjertnaes LJ. Hypoxia-induced vasoconstriction in isolated perfused lungs
exposed to injectable or inhalation anesthetics. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1977; 21:
133–147.
316 Marshall C, Lindgren L, Marshall BE. Effects of halothane, enflurane, and isoflu-
rane on hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction in rat lungs in vitro. Anesthesiology
1984; 60: 304–308.
317 Ishibe Y, Gui X, Uno H, et al. Effect of sevoflurane on hypoxic pulmonary
vasoconstriction in the perfused rabbit lung. Anesthesiology 1993; 79: 1348–1353.
318 Loer SA, Scheeren TW, Tarnow J. Desflurane inhibits hypoxic pulmonary
vasoconstriction in isolated rabbit lungs. Anesthesiology 1995; 83: 552–556.
319 Mathers J, Benumof JL, Wahrenbrock EA. General anesthetics and regional
hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction. Anesthesiology 1977; 46: 111–114.
320 Naeije R, Lambert M, Lejeune P, et al. Cardiovascular and blood gas responses to
inhaled anaesthetics in normoxic and hypoxic dogs. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1986;
30: 538–544.
321 Domino KB, Borowec L, Alexander CM, et al. Influence of isoflurane on hypoxic
pulmonary vasoconstriction in dogs. Anesthesiology 1986; 64: 423–429.
322 Ewalenko P, Stefanidis C, Holoye A, et al. Pulmonary vascular impedance vs.
resistance in hypoxic and hyperoxic dogs: effects of propofol and isoflurane.
J Appl Physiol (1985) 1993; 74: 2188–2193.
323 Rogers SN, Benumof JL. Halothane and isoflurane do not decrease PaO2 during
one-lung ventilation in intravenously anesthetized patients. Anesth Analg 1985;
64: 946–954.
324 Benumof JL, Augustine SD, Gibbons JA. Halothane and isoflurane only slightly
impair arterial oxygenation during one-lung ventilation in patients undergoing
thoracotomy. Anesthesiology 1987; 67: 910–915.
325 Naeije R, Lejeune P, Leeman M, et al. Effects of propofol on pulmonary and
systemic arterial pressure-flow relationships in hyperoxic and hypoxic dogs.
Br J Anaesth 1989; 62: 532–539.

-- 764 of 1450 --

Chapter 37: Respiratory Physiology and Pathophysiology 	749
326 Shoukas AA, Brunner MJ, Frankle AE, et al. Carotid sinus baroreceptor reflex
control and the role of autoregulation in the systemic and pulmonary arterial
pressure-flow relationships of the dog. Circ Res 1984; 54: 674–682.
327 Lennon PF, Murray PA. Attenuated hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction during
isoflurane anesthesia is abolished by cyclooxygenase inhibition in chronically
instrumented dogs. Anesthesiology 1996; 84: 404–414.
328 Abe K, Mashimo T, Yoshiya I. Arterial oxygenation and shunt fraction during
one-lung ventilation: a comparison of isoflurane and sevoflurane. Anesth Analg
1998; 86: 1266–1270.
329 Pagel PS, Fu JL, Damask MC, et al. Desflurane and isoflurane produce similar
alterations in systemic and pulmonary hemodynamics and arterial oxygenation in
patients undergoing one-lung ventilation during thoracotomy. Anesth Analg 1998;
87: 800–807.
330 Wang JY, Russell GN, Page RD, et al. Comparison of the effects of sevoflurane and
isoflurane on arterial oxygenation during one lung ventilation. Br J Anaesth 1998;
81: 850–853.
331 Wang JY, Russell GN, Page RD, et al. A comparison of the effects of desflurane and
isoflurane on arterial oxygenation during one-lung ventilation. Anaesthesia 2000;
55: 167–173.
332 Kerbaul F, Bellezza M, Guidon C, et al. Effects of sevoflurane on hypoxic
pulmonary vasoconstriction in anaesthetized piglets. Br J Anaesth 2000; 85:
440–445.
333 Lesitsky MA, Davis S, Murray PA. Preservation of hypoxic pulmonary vasocon-
striction during sevoflurane and desflurane anesthesia compared to the conscious
state in chronically instrumented dogs. Anesthesiology 1998; 89: 1501–1508.
334 Nakayama M, Murray PA. Ketamine preserves and propofol potentiates hypoxic
pulmonary vasoconstriction compared with the conscious state in chronically
instrumented dogs. Anesthesiology 1999; 91: 760–771.
335 Van Keer L, Van Aken H, Vandermeersch E, et al. Propofol does not inhibit
hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction in humans. J Clin Anesth 1989; 1: 284–288.
336 Abe K, Shimizu T, Takashina M, et al. The effects of propofol, isoflurane, and
sevoflurane on oxygenation and shunt fraction during one-lung ventilation.
Anesth Analg 1998; 87: 1164–1169.
337 Hedenstierna G, Edmark L. Mechanisms of atelectasis in the perioperative period.
Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2010; 24: 157–169.
338 Benoît Z, Wicky S, Fischer JF, et al. The effect of increased FIO(2) before tracheal
extubation on postoperative atelectasis. Anesth Analg 2002; 95: 1777–1781.
339 Lindberg P, Gunnarsson L, Tokics L, et al. Atelectasis and lung function in the
postoperative period. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1992; 36: 546–553.
340 Baumgardner JE, Hedenstierna G. Ventilation/perfusion distributions revisited.
Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2016; 29: 2–7.
341 Bindslev L, Hedenstierna G, Santesson J, et al. Ventilation–perfusion distribution
during inhalation anaesthesia. Effects of spontaneous breathing, mechanical ven-
tilation and positive end-expiratory pressure. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1981; 25:
360–371.
342 Joyce CJ, Baker AB. What is the role of absorption atelectasis in the genesis of
perioperative pulmonary collapse? Anaesth Intensive Care 1995; 23: 691–696.
343 Young CC, Harris EM, Vacchiano C, et al. Lung-protective ventilation for the
surgical patient: international expert panel-based consensus recommendations.
Br J Anaesth 2019; 123: 898–913.
344 Celly CS, McDonell WN, Black WD, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of clonidine,
diazepam and the peripheral alpha 2 adrenoceptor agonist ST-91 in conscious
sheep. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1997; 20: 472–478.
345 Kästner SB, Ohlerth S, Pospischil A, et al. Dexmedetomidine-induced pulmonary
alterations in sheep. Res Vet Sci 2007; 83: 217–226.
346 Celly CS, McDonell WN, Black WD. Cardiopulmonary effects of the alpha2-
adrenoceptor agonists medetomidine and ST-91 in anesthetized sheep. J Pharmacol
Exp Ther 1999; 289: 712–720.
347 Pypendop BH, Verstegen JP. Hemodynamic effects of medetomidine in the dog: a
dose titration study. Vet Surg 1998; 27: 612–622.
348 Celly CS, Atwal OS, McDonell WN, et al. Histopathologic alterations induced in
the lungs of sheep by use of alpha2-adrenergic receptor agonists. Am J Vet Res
1999; 60: 154–161.
349 Brain JD, Molina RM, DeCamp MM, et al. Pulmonary intravascular macrophages:
their contribution to the mononuclear phagocyte system in 13 species. Am J Physiol
1999; 276: L146–L154.
350 LeBlanc PH, Eberhart SW, Robinson NE. In vitro effects of alpha 2-adrenergic
receptor stimulation on cholinergic contractions of equine distal airways. Am J Vet
Res 1993; 54: 788–792.
351 Papazoglou L, Raptopoulos D, Kounenis G. The effect of xylazine on the isolated
sheep trachea. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1995; 18: 216–219.
352 Manning MM, Broadstone RV. Effects of alpha 2-adrenergic receptor agonist and
antagonist drugs on cholinergic contraction in bovine tracheal smooth muscle
in vitro. Am J Vet Res 1995; 56: 930–935.
353 Adam M, Lindén J, Raekallio M, et al. Effects of vatinoxan on xylazine-induced
pulmonary alterations in sheep. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2022; 45: 117–125.
354 Kästner SB. A2-agonists in sheep: a review. Vet Anaesth Analg 2006; 33: 79–96.
355 Levitzky MG. Transport of oxygen and carbon dioxide in blood. In: Levitzky MG,
ed. Pulmonary Physiology, 9th edn. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2018: 157–178.
356 Ewart SL. Gas transport in the blood. In: Klein, BG, ed. Cunningham’s Textbook of
Veterinary Physiology, 6th edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2020: 550–559.
357 Bunn HF. Regulation of hemoglobin function in mammals. Amer Zool 1980;
20: 199–211.
358 Cambier C, Detry B, Beerens D, et al. Effects of hyperchloremia on blood oxygen
binding in healthy calves. J Appl Physiol (1985) 1998; 85: 1267–1272.
359 Prange HD, Shoemaker JL Jr., Westen EA, et al. Physiological consequences of
oxygen-dependent chloride binding to hemoglobin. J Appl Physiol (1985) 2001;
91: 33–38.
360 Bohr C, Hasselbalch K, Krogh A. Ueber einen in biologischer beziehung wichtigen
einfluss, den die kohlensäurespannung des blutes auf dessen sauerstoffbindung übt.
Skand Arch Physiol 1904; 16: 402–412.
361 Jensen FB. Red blood cell pH, the Bohr effect, and other oxygenation-linked
phenomena in blood O2 and CO 2 transport. Acta Physiol Scand 2004; 182:
215–227.
362 Clerbaux T, Gustin P, Detry B, et al. Comparative study of the oxyhaemoglobin
dissociation curve of four mammals: man, dog, horse and cattle. Comp Biochem
Physiol Comp Physiol 1993; 106: 687–694.
363 Banchero N, Grover RF, Will JA. Oxygen transport in the llama (Lama glama).
Respir Physiol 1971; 13: 102–115.
364 Sillau AH, Cueva S, Valenzuela A, et al. O2 transport in the alpaca (Lama pacos) at
sea level and at 3,300 m. Respir Physiol 1976; 27: 147–155.
365 Weber RE. High-altitude adaptations in vertebrate hemoglobins. Respir Physiol
Neurobiol 2007; 158: 132–142.
366 Levitzky MG. Mechanics of breathing. In: Levitsky MG, ed. Pulmonary Physiology,
9th edn. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2018: 13–58.
367 Wagner PD, Gillespie JR, Landgren GL, et al. Mechanism of exercise-induced
hypoxemia in horses. J Appl Physiol (1985) 1989; 66: 1227–1233.
368 Barker SJ, Tremper KK, Hyatt J. Effects of methemoglobinemia on pulse oximetry
and mixed venous oximetry. Anesthesiology 1989; 70: 112–117.
369 Hampson NB. Pulse oximetry in severe carbon monoxide poisoning. Chest 1998;
114: 1036–1041.
370 Feiner JR, Bickler PE. Improved accuracy of methemoglobin detection by pulse
CO-oximetry during hypoxia. Anesth Analg 2010; 111: 1160–1167.
371 Love L, Singer M. Anesthesia case of the month. Methemoglobinemia. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2013; 242: 753–756.
372 Sández I, Márquez F, López A, et al. Detection of methaemoglobinaemia in a
Pomeranian dog using pulse co-oximetry. Vet Anaesth Analg 2019; 46: 708–710.
373 Arthurs GJ, Sudhakar M. Carbon dioxide transport. Continuing Ed in Anaesth Crit
Care Pain 2005; 5: 207–210.

-- 765 of 1450 --

Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of Lumb and Jones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
38
750
Introduction
Sedation and general anesthesia can produce profound changes
in respiratory function, with the degree of change depending on
drugs employed, species involved, depth of anesthesia, surgical pro-
cedure, and the health of the individual animal. Of greatest concern
is significant reduction in gas exchange causing inadequate oxygen
delivery to vital tissues and/or carbon dioxide (CO 2
) removal from
the body.
The aim of oxygen supplementation/therapy is to increase the
alveolar oxygen partial pressure (PA
O2
) to a level that achieves a tar-
get arterial hemoglobin oxygen saturation (SaO2
), most commonly
> 94%. This objective is achieved by increasing the inspired oxygen
fraction (F I
O2
) in both intubated and non-intubated patients.
Oxygen supplementation may be necessary before induction of
general anesthesia, during anesthesia, and into the postanesthetic
period.
To prevent a decrease in SaO 2
/hypoxemia caused by the decreased
minute ventilation (V̇E
) induced by anesthetic drugs, it is common
practice to increase the F I
O2 in spontaneously breathing patients.
However, in animal species where atelectasis plays a major role in
causing oxygenation impairment during anesthesia (e.g., horses),
use of a high FI
O2 (> 0.8) may not abolish or prevent the develop-
ment of hypoxemia [1,2].
The use of mechanical ventilators to provide positive-pressure
ventilatory support has become a routine component of anesthesia
management in both small and large animal referral hospitals.
While mechanical ventilatory support has variable effects on PaO2
in animals with respiratory disease or in the presence of significant
atelectasis, it is an effective means of preventing the increase in arte-
rial carbon dioxide partial pressure (PaCO2 ) caused by anesthetic
drugs. Supporting ventilation by an artificial means, in addition to
counteracting the negative effects of anesthesia on gas exchange,
will also decrease the work of breathing, which may be particularly
beneficial in animals presenting with clinical conditions associated
with fatigue of respiratory muscles [3]. Mechanical ventilation is an
essential support measure for patients that are undergoing
intrathoracic procedures including thoracoscopy, thoracotomy,
and/or one- lung ventilation (OLV). It is important for the clinician
to understand the physiologic effects of oxygen therapy and mechan-
ical ventilation, in addition to their indications and contraindica-
tions, to maximize their benefits and minimize any potential
negative effects associated with their use. In addition to standard
perianesthetic patient preparation, use of balanced anesthetic tech-
niques, monitoring, and supportive care, specific considerations for
managing patients with underlying respiratory disease that require
anesthesia for a variety of procedures are discussed below.
38 Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation,
and Anesthetic Management of Patients
with Respiratory Disease
Francisco J. Teixeira-Neto1 and Carolyn L. Kerr2
1 Faculdade de Medicina Veterinária e Zootecnia, Universidade Estadual Paulista (UNESP), Botucatu, Brazil
2 Department of Clinical Studies, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada
Chapter contents
Introduction, 750
Oxygen therapy, 751
Physiologic effects of oxygen therapy, 751
Strategies for oxygen supplementation, 752
Oxygen toxicity, 755
Mechanical ventilation during anesthesia, 755
Evolution of mechanical ventilators used in veterinary and human
anesthesia, 756
Modes of mechanical ventilation utilized during anesthesia, 764
Monitoring pulmonary mechanics during mechanical ventilation, 770
Strategies for reducing atelectasis during mechanical ventilation, 773
Effects of mechanical ventilation on cardiovascular function, 777
Ventilator-induced lung injury, 778
Mechanical ventilation during anesthesia in humans and veterinary
species, 780
Anesthesia for bronchoscopy, 782
Anesthesia for intrathoracic procedures, 783
Separation of the lungs and one-lung ventilation (OLV), 786
Anesthetic management of patients with respiratory disease, 788
Anesthesia and upper respiratory disease, 788
Anesthesia and lower airway disease, 802
Anesthesia and pleural space disease, 804
Anesthesia and pulmonary parenchymal disease, 806
Anesthesia and pulmonary hypertension, 809
References, 811

-- 766 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	751
Oxygen therapy
Inspired oxygen supplementation is routinely performed in both
the perianesthetic period and intensive care setting. Overall, oxygen
therapy aims to prevent hypoxemia by maintaining arterial hemo-
globin oxygen saturation above 94%. Hypoxemia refers to an
abnormally low PaO2 or SaO2 compromising the oxygen content in
arterial blood (CaO 2
), which may lead to an inadequate oxygen sup-
ply to tissues. Animals may be considered hypoxemic when PaO2
levels are < 80 mmHg and SaO2 is < 95% [4]. Oxygen supplementa-
tion to maintain hemoglobin saturation above 90% (or PaO2 >
60 mmHg) may be acceptable (assuming normal hemoglobin levels)
as the CaO 2 will be close to values observed when hemoglobin is
fully saturated. Depending on the species and health of the indi-
vidual animal, oxygen supplementation may be required prior to,
during, or following anesthesia to prevent hypoxemia.
Physiologic effects of oxygen therapy
Supplementation of inspired gases with oxygen, either alone or with
ventilatory support, results in an increase in PA
O2 , as described by
the alveolar gas equation (Chapter 37, Fig. 37.2, and Table 37.5). The
impact of altering FI
O2 on PA
O2 with varying levels of alveolar ven-
tilation is highlighted in Fig. 38.1. If alveolar ventilation is decreased
by 50% of its normal resting value, PA
O2 in an individual breathing
ambient air at sea level is predicted to decrease from values close to
100 mmHg to < 50 mmHg (effect related to CO2 build-up within
the alveoli). However, if FI
O2 is increased from 0.21 (ambient air) to
values between 0.3 and 0.4 (or more), alveolar oxygen will be main-
tained above 100 mmHg despite severe hypoventilation.
When matching of alveolar ventilation and perfusion (V̇A
/Q̇)
within the lung is close to ideal, minimal V̇A
/Q̇ mismatch (lung areas
with low V̇A
/Q̇ ratio) or intrapulmonary shunt (V̇A
/Q̇ ratio = 0) are
present, and the alveolar–capillary membrane is normal, an increase
in PA
O2 induced by enriching the inspired oxygen concentration will
significantly raise PaO2 as illustrated in Fig. 38.2. Although increasing
FI
O2 and PA
O2 can be an effective means of preventing hypoxemia
caused by hypoventilation, V̇A
/Q̇ mismatch, and diffusion impair-
ment (thickening of the alveolar–capillary barrier), its effects on
hypoxemia caused by intrapulmonary shunt are dependent on the
percentage of mixed-venous blood that bypasses ventilated lung
areas, specifically, the shunt fraction (Q̇s
/Q̇T
). As there is a progressive
increase in Q̇s
/Q̇T
, the gradient between alveolar and arterial oxygen
partial pressures (P(A-a)O2
) increases to the point where high per-
centages of shunted flow (≥ 30%) results in little or no improvement
in PaO2 in response to inspired oxygen concentrations approaching
100% [6]. Therefore, whenever progressive increases in FI
O2 fail to
improve arterial oxygenation, a major increase in shunt flow should
be suspected and the possible causes investigated and treated.
Anesthetized healthy dogs and cats typically have relatively
low levels of venous admixture (< 10%) originating from lung
areas with a low V̇A
/Q̇ ratio and from intrapulmonary shunting
(V̇A
/Q̇ = 0), therefore, oxygen supplementation results in PaO2 val-
ues approaching theoretical PA
O2 levels. Studies evaluating the res-
piratory effects of inhalant or injectable anesthetics in spontaneously
breathing dogs and cats receiving oxygen (F I
O2 > 0.9) have reported
PaO2 levels greater than 450 mmHg that remain constant over time
periods typical of clinical anesthesia [7–13]. Although PaO2 values
≥ 450 mmHg result in 100% SaO 2 , these values are less than the
predicted PA
O2 (> 600 mmHg) probably because of normal physio-
logic shunt (bronchial veins and myocardial thebesian veins that
bypass the lung) as well as shunted flow in some alveolar units due
to atelectasis. Experimental research has shown that the use of F I
O2
Virtual shunt lines:
400
C(a-v–)O2 : 5 mL/dL
PaCO2 : 25–40 mmHg
Hb: 10–14 g/dL
15%
20%
25%
30%
50%
300
200
PaO
 2 (mmHg)
100
0 20 	30 	40
Inspired oxygen concentration (%)
50 	60 	70 	80 	90 	100
0 	5% 	10%
Figure 38.2 An isoshunt diagram depicting the relationship between
inspired oxygen concentration, PaO 2
, and various degrees of venous
admixture or pulmonary shunt. Shunt flow is expressed as a percentage of
cardiac output, ranging from 0 to 50%. The arteriovenous (a-v) oxygen
content difference is assumed to be 5 mL per 100 mL of blood, reflecting
a normal cardiac output. The shunt bands have been drawn to include the
range of hemoglobin (Hb) and PaCO 2 levels shown. Note that at the higher
levels of shunt flow (30–50%), there is little improvement in arterial
oxygen levels even when the inspired oxygen concentration is 100%.
Also note that if the inspired oxygen concentration and PaO 2 are known,
it is possible to obtain a quick estimate of the degree of venous
admixture or shunt flow. Source: Redrawn from Benatar et al. [6],
with permission.
200
150
100
PA O2 (mmHg)
50
1/ 2 N 	N 	2N
Alveolar ventilation
FI O2
F I O2
0.1
0.15
0.25
0.21
0.3	0.4	0.5
Figure 38.1 Effect of varying FI
O2 levels with various degrees of alveolar
hypoventilation and hyperventilation on alveolar oxygen partial pressure
(PA
O2
) at sea level (barometric pressure of 760 mmHg). Alveolar
ventilation is displayed on the x-axis with N representing normal alveolar
ventilation and PA
O2 is on the y-axis (see text for explanation). Source:
Modified from Nunn [5], reproduced with permission of Elsevier.

-- 767 of 1450 --

752 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
of 0.4 during anesthesia in small animals reduced atelectasis in
comparison to an FI
O2 > 0.9 [14,15]. The impact of different FI
O2 s
on the development of atelectasis over time in healthy dogs and cats
has yet to be demonstrated.
During procedures performed under deep sedation or with
short-duration intravenous anesthesia, a minimum FI
O2 of 0.3
(which can be easily achieved by using flow-by oxygen or by
supplementing oxygen through a face mask) is recommended to
minimize the risk of hypoxemia due to hypoventilation and V̇A /Q̇
mismatching. Evidence to support this recommendation includes
reports of impaired oxygenation as reflected by PaO 2 values below
65 mmHg in dogs sedated with an α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist,
either alone or in combination with an opioid, in addition to reports
of cyanosis and low PaO 2 values during induction of anesthesia
with injectable anesthetics when supplemental oxygen is not pro-
vided [16–19]. In some animals receiving oxygen supplementation,
PaO 2 may not increase as predicted based on the delivered F I
O2
.
Small animal patients with pulmonary parenchymal disease typically
have clinically significant alveolar–capillary diffusion barriers,
V̇A /Q̇ mismatching, and increased shunt fraction. These patients
may have lower-than- expected increases in PaO2 associated with
oxygen therapy [20–23].
Recumbency and general anesthesia of mature large animal
patients commonly produce significant V̇A /Q̇ mismatch and
intrapulmonary shunting of blood due to anesthesia-related atelec-
tasis [1,24]. Thus, despite normal lung parenchyma prior to anes-
thesia, these patients have a reduced and variable response to
oxygen supplementation when recumbent. Horses breathing ambi-
ent air with an intravenous anesthetic regimen commonly have
PaO2 values in the range of 50–70 mmHg during recum-
bency [25,26]. During inhalational anesthesia with 100% oxygen as
the carrier gas, laterally recumbent spontaneously breathing healthy
horses have PaO 2 values that typically range from 300 to 350 mmHg;
horses in dorsal recumbency often have lower levels, ranging from
200 to 300 mmHg [2]. Unlike the dog and cat, where PaO 2 levels
usually remain stable over time during general anesthesia with an
FI
O2 > 0.95, PaO 2 values often decrease over time in the equine,
particularly when they are positioned in dorsal recumbency [2,27–
30]. While oxygen supplementation is generally administered to
reduce the risk of hypoxemia, high FI
O2 during general anesthesia
(to either spontaneously breathing or mechanically ventilated
patients) can contribute to atelectasis in numerous species, includ-
ing dogs, cats, horses, and humans [14,15,31–34]. Absorption of
oxygen, which is more soluble than nitrogen, into the bloodstream
and out of the alveoli, is responsible for the atelectasis associated
with high inspired FI
O2
. If the degree of atelectasis resulting from
absorption is significant, it can contribute to an increase in the
P(A-a)O2 gradient. In larger species such as the horse, the contribu-
tion of absorption of alveolar gases relative to the development of
atelectasis because of compression of alveoli by abdominal contents
may be minor, but its significance may vary with body position and
the specific inspired oxygen level [24,27,35,36]. In humans, atelec-
tasis attributed to high F I
O2 values has been associated with an
increased incidence of postoperative hypoxemia and respiratory
complications [37]. The presence of atelectasis has been associated
with progression of lung injury in human patients and in numerous
experimental animal models of lung injury receiving ventilatory
support (see below). In veterinary species, the clinical significance
of anesthesia-associated atelectasis without hypoxemia on lung
health in the patient with no pre-existing pulmonary disease is yet
undetermined. Irrespective of the impact on the creation or
progression of lung injury, the presence of atelectasis may affect the
quality of thoracic imaging and may warrant consideration when
evaluating and comparing images to those obtained while the ani-
mal is exposed to a lower F I
O2 or following application of specific
ventilator strategies aimed at maintaining lung volume [38]. In
humans, administration of 100% oxygen via face mask prior to and
during the induction of general anesthesia (i.e., preoxygenation)
has been a relatively standard procedure to increase the time to
hemoglobin desaturation once oxygen is withdrawn, as occurs dur-
ing orotracheal intubation. However, this technique is now being
called into question as it has been shown to result in a greater degree
of atelectasis compared with inspiring lower oxygen fractions such
as 60 or 80% [33]. Although preoxygenation is not always accom-
plished in healthy veterinary patients, it is recommended in cases
where a prolonged time from induction of anesthesia to securing an
airway is anticipated, or in animals with respiratory disease. Relative
to the situation in human anesthesia, when oxygen is administered
via a non-sealed face mask to veterinary species in the clinical set-
ting, it is unlikely that FI
O2 values will be greater than 0.8 unless an
unusually tight-fitting face mask is utilized [39,40].
Spontaneously breathing anesthetized patients receiving oxygen
supplementation may experience higher PaCO 2 levels than animals
breathing either room air or an F I
O2 < 0.5 [27,31,39,41]. Horses
anesthetized with halothane receiving an F I
O2 of 0.3 versus > 0.85
had significantly lower PaCO 2 levels [27]. Similar findings have
been reported in horses under injectable anesthesia [31]. Dogs that
were preoxygenated prior to induction of anesthesia also had a ten-
dency toward an increased PaCO 2 compared with dogs breathing
room air [39]. Maintenance of PaO2 above levels that increase
peripheral chemoreceptor input into the respiratory center in the
brainstem (PaO2 > 60–70 mmHg) is likely the main mechanism
responsible for a greater degree of hypoventilation in animals
receiving oxygen supplementation compared to animals breathing
a lower F I
O2 during anesthesia.
Strategies for oxygen supplementation
In intubated patients connected to an anesthetic machine equipped
with oxygen and air flowmeters, the flow rate of gases entering the
breathing circuit can be adjusted to achieve a variable FI
O2 (e.g., 0.4).
Most veterinary anesthesia machines, however, do not permit
adjustment of F I
O2 because they are equipped with only an oxygen
flowmeter and therefore deliver an FI
O2 > 0.95 in an animal with a
sealed airway (for example, with an endotracheal tube or laryngeal
mask in place). In non-intubated patients, there are numerous
different strategies/techniques which are described below that are
used to increase a patient’s FI
O2
.
Low- flow oxygen systems
In conscious, sedated, or anesthetized non-intubated patients, F I
O2
can be increased above 0.3 by administering oxygen at the level of
the nares, nasopharynx, or trachea. Oxygen supplementation in
non-intubated patients is commonly provided using low-flow sys-
tems that deliver a maximum oxygen flow rate of 15 L/min. These
systems include (1) flow-by oxygen near the nostrils/mouth;
(2) supply of oxygen by face mask; and (3) supply of oxygen by nasal,
nasopharyngeal, or nasotracheal catheter. The efficacy of these sys-
tems in increasing F I
O2 will be dependent on the amount of dilution
of the inspired gases with room air. For example, in animals that
present with tachypnea, the inspiratory flow may greatly exceed the
flow rate provided by the external oxygen source. As a result,
the F I
O2 will be less than expected because ambient air will enter the

-- 768 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	753
lungs to a greater degree when compared to an animal that is
breathing at a slower respiratory rate, a phenomenon referred to as
“air entrainment” [42]. In animals receiving oxygen supplementa-
tion through a nasal catheter, dilution of inspired oxygen may also
occur if the animal breathes through its mouth, as commonly
occurs in dogs [42].
Flow-by oxygen supplementation, which consists of placing an
oxygen source within approximately 2 cm of a patient’s nostrils and
mouth, is the easiest and simplest way of increasing F I
O2 during
emergency situations in small animals. Oxygen flow rates typically
used in small animals with this technique range from 100–200 mL/
kg/min and the resulting FI
O2 has been reported to be 0.24 to
0.45 [42,43]. Unfortunately, the efficacy of this strategy is reduced
in uncooperative patients as they typically move their heads away
from the oxygen source.
Oxygen supplementation via a face mask attached to an anes-
thesia breathing circuit is an effective means of increasing F I
O 2 in
dogs, cats, neonatal foals, and calves. In many animals, sedation
may be required for the animal to accept placement of a face mask.
If a tight-fitting face mask is attached to a small animal anesthesia
breathing circuit delivering 100 mL/kg/min of oxygen, it may
result in F I
O 2 levels > 0.8. In dogs, providing oxygen (100 mL/kg/
min) through a tightly fitting face mask attached to a breathing
circuit for 3 min prior to induction of anesthesia increased
inspired oxygen concentration to 90%; while flow-by oxygen sup-
plementation at the same rate resulted in an inspired concentra-
tion of 30% [40]. The time to desaturation (defined as a pulse
oximetry hemoglobin saturation of 90%) after propofol-induced
apnea was significantly longer in dogs receiving preoxygenation
by a face mask (approximately 3 min [187 ± 67 s]) than in animals
receiving flow-by oxygen (approximately 1 min [66 ± 17 s]) [40],
consistent with a previous publication assessing preoxygenation
with a facemask in healthy dogs [39]. Oxygen supplementation by
face mask before inhalant anesthesia is a practical means of reduc-
ing the risk of hypoxemia caused by injectable induction agents
in patients with respiratory disease. Although commonly used
before induction of general anesthesia in small animals, face
masks may not be suitable for delivering oxygen for prolonged
periods due to lack of patient tolerance and the need for personnel
to hold the mask to the animal.
Delivery of oxygen using a nasal catheter is suitable for long-term
oxygen supplementation. Animals with respiratory disease may
have a nasal oxygen system in place prior to anesthesia and/or
require oxygen supplementation using this system following anes-
thesia. A short nasal catheter, consisting of two 1 cm long prongs
designed for people, has been used to deliver oxygen with some suc-
cess in dogs; however, they are easily dislodged and only fit a small
subset of animals. Longer nasopharyngeal catheters, generally con-
structed of soft flexible material, ideally with multiple fenestrations,
can be placed further into the nasal cavity and are less likely to be
dislodged. They have been shown to be effective in delivering oxy-
gen in a variety of species [44–48]. To avoid patient discomfort dur-
ing catheter placement, a local anesthetic jelly is applied to the
nostrils, followed by instillation of a local anesthetic solution into
the nasal cavity with the animal’s head extended upwards. Sedation
may be required in uncooperative patients and additional care
should be taken not to exceed the recommended maximum dose of
local anesthetic to avoid toxic effects in cats or other small patients.
Catheters can be placed unilaterally or bilaterally in the ventral
nasal meatus and extended distally into the nasal cavity or naso-
pharynx. In most dogs, advancing the catheter to the level of the
medial canthus of the eye places its tip within the nasal cavity, while
advancing it further to the level of the vertical ramus of the mandible
places the catheter within the nasopharynx. In conscious animals,
delivering oxygen at a flow rate of 30–150 mL/kg/min through a
nasal cannula can result in an F I
O2 of 0.3 to 0.7 (depending on spe-
cies) [44,45,48]. Higher flow rates, while improving PaO 2
, can result
in low patient tolerance and nasal mucosal damage [45,48]. In dogs,
gastric tympany secondary to aerophagia has also been reported
with high flow rates [49]. The effects of progressively increasing
oxygen flow rates (from 50 to 200 mL/kg/min) through unilateral
or bilateral nasal catheters in dogs and neonatal foals are illustrated
in Fig. 38.3 [44,45]. As oxygen flow rates are increased, there are
progressive increases in FI
O2 and PaO2
, without significant changes
in PaCO 2
, from values obtained while animals are breathing room
air [44,45]. Oxygen supplementation with bilateral catheters may
result in slightly higher FI
O2 and PaO2 in comparison to a unilateral
nasal catheter. Patient tolerance to higher oxygen flow rates has also
been reported to improve when nasal catheters are placed bilater-
ally compared to unilaterally in dogs [44]. To minimize the risk of
oxygen toxicity caused by prolonged exposure to high F I
O2 levels
and other adverse reactions (low patient tolerance, excessive drying/
irritation of the nasal mucosa, and aerophagia/gastric distension),
the oxygen flow rate should be adjusted to the minimum necessary
to maintain an acceptable hemoglobin saturation/PaO 2 level
(e.g., saturation > 90% or PaO 2 > 60 mmHg). If a nasal catheter fails
to maintain arterial oxygenation with high oxygen flow rates
(> 150–200 mL/kg/min), or if the work of breathing does not
improve despite increased oxygen levels, escalation to other meth-
ods of oxygen supplementation (high-flow nasal oxygen therapy) or
invasive mechanical ventilation should be considered.
In horses sedated with detomidine and butorphanol, a nasal
catheter providing 15 L/min (approximately, 30 mL/kg/min) of
oxygen for 3 min increased PaO 2 immediately after induction
of anesthesia to 83 ± 20 mmHg (mean ± standard deviation) in
comparison to PaO 2 measured at the same time point in horses not
receiving oxygen supplementation (56 ± 12 mmHg) [50]. Although
this procedure appears effective to ameliorate the decrease in PaO 2
immediately after induction of anesthesia with an injectable anes-
thetic, oxygenation relative to horses that were not administered
nasal oxygen was not different after 30 min of anesthesia, and to
date, there is no evidence to support routine preanesthetic nasal
oxygen administration in healthy horses. Oxygen insufflation into
the nasal cavity or trachea via a nasotracheal or orotracheal tube is
commonly used in horses during recovery from general anesthe-
sia. Delivery of 15 L/min oxygen through a nasotracheal catheter
has been shown to result in PaO 2 values greater than 90 mmHg in
laterally recumbent horses during anesthetic recovery [51].
Administration of oxygen using a percutaneous transtracheal
system has been described in foals in respiratory distress, as well as
in healthy standing horses, and therefore should be considered for
use in equine patients with impaired oxygenation [47,52].
Commercially available oxygen cages and hoods constructed of
clear acrylic or plexiglass are available for use in small animals.
Some commercially available cage designs permit the control of
oxygen levels, environmental temperature, and humidity within the
cage and are very effective for long-term oxygen supplementation
in small patients. Both systems are suitable for use prior to or fol-
lowing anesthesia but not during periods where access to the patient
is required. Helmets designed for pediatric humans have been used
to increase F I
O2 and deliver continuous positive airway pressure
(CPAP) in dogs recovering from anesthesia [53].

-- 769 of 1450 --

754 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
High-flow oxygen systems
In contrast to low-flow oxygen therapy systems discussed above,
where the maximum oxygen flow rate is limited to 15 L/min,
high-flow nasal oxygen therapy (HFNOT) systems can deliver up to
60 L/min of humidified and heated oxygen or oxygen-enriched air.
The system includes an oxygen cylinder (or oxygen concentrator),
an air mixer, a humidifier, heated tubing of varying sizes, and
purpose-made nasal prongs [42,54]. While low-flow systems result
in variable effects on F I
O2 because of variations in V̇E and peak
inspiratory flow, HFNOT systems reliably achieve the target F I
O2
level because the high flow delivered to the airway exceeds the
patient’s peak inspiratory flow [55]. In addition to a more reliable
increase in F I
O2 than traditional oxygen supplementation systems,
HFNOT systems create a low level of CPAP, which may increase the
functional residual capacity (FRC) and improve matching between
ventilation and perfusion within the lungs, while still permitting
the patient to breathe spontaneously [56–58]. The CPAP associated
with HFNOT may also stent the airways opened, decreasing the
work of breathing and mitigating the need for invasive mechanical
ventilation in some patients [56]. The relative humidity of inspired
gas provided by HFNOT systems is close to 100% at a temperature
between 34 and 37 °C, thereby reducing the sensation of respiratory
distress or mouth dryness in humans [59]. Because inspired gas
flow is heated and humified, HFNOT may also result in better
patient tolerance by not desiccating the nasal mucosa [59].
Based on human recommendations, the soft silicone binasal
prongs used for HFNOT should occlude up to 50% of the nares in
veterinary patients [56,60,61]. Preliminary canine studies have
shown that the ability of HFNOT to achieve the target F I
O2 and
CPAP is dependent on the flow rate of oxygen or oxygen-enriched
air delivered to the patient. Oxygen flow rates between 1 to
2 L/kg/min achieve FI
O2 levels > 0.95 in dogs [56] (Fig. 38.4).
Despite the advantages of HFNOT over traditional oxygen sup-
plementation systems, there are some conditions that may limit the
clinical utility of HFNOT systems in veterinary patients, including
patient intolerance, and the need to adapt the bilateral nasal prongs
made for pediatric and adult humans to a variety of head sizes and
conformations. In very small patients, it has been suggested to
apply only one nasal prong as placement of bilateral pediatric nasal
prongs may occlude more than 50% of the nares and impair expira-
tory flow [62]. Another disadvantage is the decrease in FI
O2 below
the target level in animals that are open-mouth breathing because
the oxygen-rich gas delivered by the HFNOT system is diluted with
ambient air entering through the mouth. Although it is possible
that the HFNOT systems are less affected by panting/open-mouth
breathing, this hypothesis has not yet been evaluated [42,54].
Although morbidity associated with HFNOT is considered mini-
mal, aerophagia leading to gastric distension is a potential compli-
cation of this therapy in dogs and may require placement of an
orogastric tube [56,62,63].
HFNOT has the potential for use during the perianesthetic
period or when orotracheal intubation is not feasible in anesthetized/
deeply sedated patients. Because of the flow-dependent increase in
pharyngeal pressures/CPAP reported in dogs receiving 100% oxy-
gen at flow rates ≥ 1 L/kg/min [56], the use of HFNOT may be
particularly useful to reduce the inspiratory work of breathing and
alleviate signs of upper airway obstruction of dogs with brachyce-
phalic obstructive airway syndrome (BOAS). In one case series
report, application of HFNOT to brachycephalic dogs with clinical
signs of upper airway obstruction (dyspnea/inspiratory stridor)
55
Conscious adult dogs
(n = 8, sternal recumbency)
50
45
40
35
30
500
400
300
200
100
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
FI O2 
PaO
2 (mmHg)
 
PaCO
 2 (mmHg)
FI O2 
PaO
2 (mmHg)
 
PaCO
 2 (mmHg)
0
(A) 	(B)
50 	100
(Oxygen flow rate (mL/kg/min)
Baseline (ambient air) 	Unilateral nasal catheter 	Bilateral nasal catheter
(Oxygen flow rate (mL/kg/min)
200 	0 	50 	100 	150 	200
55
50
45
40
35
30
500
400
300
200
100
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
Conscious neonatal foals
(n = 9, laternal recumbency)
Figure 38.3 Effects of oxygen supplementation through
unilateral or bilateral catheters advanced to the level of
the nasopharynx on FI
O2
, PaO2
, and PaCO2
, (mean ±
standard deviation) in conscious adult dogs (A.) and in
neonatal foals (B.). The FI
O2 in both studies was
measured by an intratracheal catheter connected to an
airway gas analyzer. The gray shaded area shows the
PaCO2 range considered normal for most species
(35 to 45 mmHg). See text for further explanation.
Source: Data compiled from Dunphy et al. [44];
Wong et al. [45].

-- 770 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	755
during recovery from anesthesia improved the respiratory pattern
(decreased inspiratory stridor) [62]. However, results were limited
by the small number of animals (n = 5) and by the lack of another
group not receiving HFNOT for comparison [54]. In another case
series report, HFNOT set to deliver 1 L/kg/min of 100% oxygen
(33 °C) was evaluated in non-intubated dogs anesthetized with
propofol for bronchoscopy [64]. Of the four animals enrolled in this
study, two animals showed transient hypoxemia (pulse oximetry
saturation of 84% and 92% lasting < 1 min) during or after comple-
tion of bronchoalveolar lavage [64]. Delivery of high-flow nasal
oxygen may not be enough to counteract hypoxemia secondary to
bronchoalveolar lavage, but conclusions of this case series were
also limited by the small number of animals and by the lack of a
control treatment.
HFNOT systems have also been evaluated in animals with
hypoxemic respiratory failure, where the most frequent pathology
was pneumonia/aspiration pneumonia [65–68]. Collective analysis
of these studies shows that HFNOT should be considered if tradi-
tional oxygen supplementation methods fail to improve patient’s
oxygenation or cannot mitigate the increased respiratory effort/
work of breathing. Under these circumstances, HFNOT may be
effective in improving PaO 2 and reducing signs of dyspnea, thereby
avoiding escalation to invasive mechanical ventilation in some
cases.
Oxygen toxicity
It has long been recognized that high inspired oxygen levels
(over 70%) when administered for prolonged periods will produce
pulmonary dysfunction and even death in previously healthy
laboratory and domestic animals [69]. Studies in animals with
experimentally induced lung injury have also demonstrated that
lung injury is negatively impacted by high FI
O2 [70–73]. The onset of
pulmonary damage in healthy animals seems to require FI
O2 > 0.7,
producing PaO 2 values exceeding 450 mmHg and “prolonged expo-
sure,” generally longer than the period usually associated with clini-
cal veterinary anesthesia. While high FI
O2 may promote atelectasis,
there is no evidence that the use of 100% oxygen as the carrier gas
during anesthesia negatively impacts outcomes in clinical veteri-
nary patients. In critically ill humans, current recommendations
include avoiding supramaximal PaO2 and maintaining PaO2 and
SaO2 within a physiologic range [74–77]. Therefore, in the critical
care setting, if spontaneously breathing patients receive oxygen sup-
plementation, or if escalation to invasive mechanical ventilation is
necessary, the general approach is to adjust the FI
O2 to the point
where PaO 2 levels are in the range of 60–80 mmHg with hemo-
globin oxygen saturation levels between 90–94% [76]. With severe
pulmonary parenchymal injury in humans, there is current discus-
sion of targeting some degree of “permissive hypoxemia” [78–80].
To date, the impact of permissive hypoxemia on mortality has not
been clearly demonstrated [80,81].
Mechanical ventilation during anesthesia
Mechanical ventilators can be described as flow generators, driving
gas into the lungs by creating a pressure gradient between the
airway opening (Pao
, pressure measured at the distal end of the
endotracheal tube as airway pressure) and the alveoli (Palv
, alveolar
pressure). Inspiration ceases after the peak airway pressure (P peak ) or
volume set on the ventilator is achieved and, once the expiratory
valve is opened, the elastic recoil of the lungs and chest wall results
in passive expiration.
While intensive care unit (ICU) ventilators vent exhaled gases
out into the environment, anesthesia ventilators are designed to
allow rebreathing of expired gases. The primary goals of
mechanical ventilation during anesthesia are to optimize gas
exchange and reduce the work of breathing while minimizing
Conscious dogs, traditional
nasal cannula (n = 8)
FI O2
Airway pressure (cmH
2 O)
FI O2
Airway pressure (cmH
2 O)
Conscious dogs, high flow
nasal cannula (n = 8)
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
13
11
9
7
5
3
1
–1
–3
13
11
9
7
5
3
1
–1
–3
0 	100
Oxygen flow rate (mL/kg/min) 	Oxygen flow rate (L/kg/min)
Inspiratory airway pressure
Expiratory airway pressure
200 	400 	0 	0.4 	1.0 	2.0 	2.5
(A) 	(B)
Figure 38.4 Effects of oxygen supplementation on
airway pressure and F I
O2 (mean and lower-upper
range) measured at the level of the oropharynx in
dogs using A. a traditional nasal cannula and B.
a high-flow nasal cannula. Treatments were
administered in randomized crossover design and
included non-sedated patients (traditional nasal
cannula) and sedated/non-sedated animals (high-flow
nasal cannula). With the high-flow nasal oxygen
therapy (HFNOT) system, the heated and humidified
oxygen source was selected to deliver an FI
O2 of 1.0.
Notice that low-flow oxygen supplementation
(traditional nasal cannula) does not provide
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) and has
variable effects on FI
O2
, while the HFNOT adjusted to
deliver oxygen flow rates between 1 to 2 L/kg/min can
produce low to moderate levels of continuous positive
airway pressure (CPAP) levels and reliably results in
FI
O2 close to the target level (1.0). Increasing the
oxygen flow rate above 2 L/kg/min did not induce
additional changes in CPAP and F I
O2 and increased
patient intolerance. Source: Data compiled from
Jagodich et al. [56].

-- 771 of 1450 --

756 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
the risk of iatrogenic lung injury. In addition to its beneficial
effects on respiratory function, mechanical ventilation may
facilitate the control of depth of inhalant anesthesia when com-
pared to spontaneous breathing. In anesthetized, spontaneously
breathing animals, changes in the respiratory pattern (respiratory
rate [f] and tidal volume [V T ]) leading to variations in minute
ventilation (V̇E = f × V T ) will modify the rate at which the alveolar
(end-tidal) anesthetic concentration approaches the inspired
anesthetic concentration. As a practical example, if an animal
hypoventilates significantly (decreased V̇E ) immediately after
induction of anesthesia, the decreased V̇E will slow down the rate
of rise in end-tidal anesthetic concentration, potentially delaying
the time until an adequate depth of anesthesia is achieved.
Alternatively, if the animal receives mechanical ventilation and
the V̇E is adjusted to prevent hypoventilation, the end-tidal
anesthetic concentration will increase more rapidly.
Evolution of mechanical ventilators used
in veterinary and human anesthesia
The first mention of mechanical ventilation in the form of positive-
pressure ventilation dates back to the mid-1500s when the Dutch
physician at the University of Padua (Italy) Andreas Vesalius
observed that “… life may be restored to the animal, an opening
must be attempted in the trunk of the trachea, into which a tube of
reed or cane should be put; you will then blow into this, so that the
lung may rise again and take air” [82]. Early mechanical ventilators
were designed to establish a negative (sub-atmospheric) pressure
around the thorax to enlarge the chest wall and pull gas into the
lungs by creating a negative intrapleural/alveolar pressure. After
the development of rudimentary models of negative-pressure venti-
lators between the second half of the 1800s and early 1900s, the first
negative-pressure ventilator effectively used for life support in
humans with respiratory muscle paralysis was developed from
studies in curare-paralyzed cats by Philip Drinker and Louis Agassiz
Shaw in the United States. These ventilators were named “iron
lungs” and became widely used for life support in human patients
suffering from respiratory muscle paralysis secondary to poliomy-
elitis during the 1950s [83].
Due to the required equipment and limited access to the patient’s
thorax, abdomen, and limbs, ventilatory support using negative-
pressure ventilation cannot be applied to anesthesia machines
designed for use in the operating room or the modern ICU setting.
Instead, mechanical ventilation under these circumstances can be
more effectively adopted by applying positive pressure to the airways.
When William Thomas Green Morton performed the first official
demonstration that surgery could be carried out without pain by
administration of an inhalant anesthetic on October 16, 1846 (Ether
Day), early inhalant anesthetic delivery systems were simple inhalers
whose aim was to evaporate the anesthetic agent as a function of the
patient’s own breath. This rudimentary equipment evolved during
the first decades of the 20th century to anesthesia machines that
allowed precise administration of an anesthetic gas flow independent
of the patient’s breathing effort. Further developments included CO2
absorption and the circle breathing system, which allowed rebreath-
ing of inhalant anesthetics and oxygen. However, it was only in the
1950s that anesthesia ventilators were effectively integrated into
inhalant anesthetic delivery systems [84,85] (Fig. 38.5).
The bellows-type ventilator
Conventional anesthesia ventilators used in veterinary practice
operate solely in a volumetric mode where the user adjusts the
inspiratory flow and/or inspiratory time to achieve the target
volume displaced by the bellows or, alternatively, the target P peak
(Fig. 38.6A and B). As discussed further below, the volume dis-
placed by the bellows may not accurately reflect the V T delivered to
the animal [86]. There are two types of ventilators according to the
movement of the bellows during expiration: ascending and
descending bellows. Early ventilators were designed with bellows
that descended during expiration (Fig. 38.5E and F). Unfortunately,
in case of a leak in the circuit and/or accidental disconnection of the
breathing circuit, the operator may be unaware of ventilator failure
because a descending bellows will continue to move upwards dur-
ing inspiration and downwards during expiration as gravity will
cause the bellows to fill with ambient air. In contrast, ascending bel-
lows ventilators have the advantage of providing an early warning in
case of disconnection or a large leak in the breathing circuit because
the bellows will not move upwards during expiration. Providing
that the fresh gas flow (FGF) delivered by the flowmeter is not ele-
vated, small leaks within the breathing circuit can also be detected
by an ascending bellows as it will not completely fill/reach the top of
its housing during expiration. Because there is a requirement for a
compressed gas source to drive the ascending bellows downwards
during inspiration and generate the tidal breath, these devices are
classified as pneumatic ventilators. While older models did not
require electricity, several bellows-type ventilators used in veteri-
nary medicine incorporate electronically controlled parameters
(e.g., respiratory rate and inspiratory time or inspiration-to-
expiration [I:E] ratio) and require both compressed gas and elec-
tricity to function (Fig. 38.6A and B). Ventilators designed for use
in the magnetic resonance imaging environment require only com-
pressed gas and do not have electronic components.
The interval at which each mechanical breath is initiated is set
by the respiratory rate control knob. Because termination of each
mechanical breath occurs after a predetermined time has elapsed,
which corresponds to the inspiratory time, these devices are clas-
sified as time-cycled ventilators. In some electronically con-
trolled bellows-type ventilators, the inspiratory time is indirectly
defined by adjusting the respiratory rate and the I:E ratio
(Fig. 38.6A), whereas for other ventilators, there is a control knob
to adjust the inspiratory time, and the I:E ratio is indirectly
defined as a function of the inspiratory time and breathing
frequency (Fig. 38.6B).
Fig. 38.7 illustrates a circle breathing circuit attached to an
ascending bellows-type ventilator. These ventilators are also
known as “double circuit ventilators,” meaning that the drive gas
and the breathing gas circuit exist in two separate circuits. During
inspiration (Fig. 38.7A), the driving gas (compressed air or oxy-
gen) is routed into the bellows housing, which causes the bellows
to move downwards. Airway pressure increases as the bellows is
compressed, and the V T is delivered to the patient. The degree of
compression of the bellows/V T delivered to the patient is set by
adjusting the inspiratory flow knob until the volume displaced by
the bellows (as shown by a volume scale located in the bellows
housing) matches the target V T
. However, the volume displaced by
the bellows may be an inaccurate estimate of the actual V T deliv-
ered to the patient [86] as the inspired V T is not solely determined
by the volume displaced by the bellows. Inspired V T will also be
influenced by compliance and leaks within the breathing circuit
and by the FGF. As an alternative to setting a predefined V T based
on the volume displaced by the bellows, the inspiratory flow may
be adjusted until P peak (assessed by the breathing circuit pressure
gauge) increases to a certain level.

-- 772 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	757
Delivery of pressurized drive gas into the bellows housing is
interrupted during expiration. As passive expiration occurs
through the elastic recoil of the lungs and chest wall, the bellows
fills with expired gas and fresh gas entering the circuit, while the
exhalation valve opens to allow the drive gas to be vented out to
the room or the exterior/anesthetic gas absorber through the scav-
enge outlet (Fig. 38.7B). When the bellows is full, excess FGF will
cause pressure build-up within the breathing circuit. As pressure
in the circuit reaches 2–4 cmH 2 O, the ventilator pop-off valve
(also known as the “spill valve”) opens and excess breathing cir-
cuit gas is vented out through the scavenge outlet (Fig. 38.7C).
Because of the weight of the passive bellows and of the pressure
necessary to open the ventilator pop-off valve, ascending bellows
ventilators typically result in an intrinsic positive end-expiratory
pressure (PEEP) of 2–4 cmH 2 O. In large animal anesthesia
machines, the weight of the ascending bellows results in higher
intrinsic pressures.
Influence of gas compression, breathing circuit
compliance, and fresh gas flow on ventilator performance
During mechanical ventilation, part of the volume displaced by the
bellows may get compressed within the breathing circuit before
reaching the lungs. Gas compression losses cause the volume deliv-
ered to the lungs (inspired V T ) to be less than the volume displaced
by the bellows. The volume of compressed gas within one ventilator
model was found to increase linearly at a ratio of 3.8 mL for every
1 cmH 2
O increase in airway pressure [88]. Also, part of the volume
generated by the ventilator may not reach the patient because of the
compliance of the breathing circuit. The latter is defined as the
change in volume (distension of breathing circuit tubing) caused by
an increase in pressure (mL/cmH 2 O). Breathing circuit compliance
losses causing a decrease in inspired V T depend on the level of posi-
tive pressure achieved within the circuit, and on the diameter and
length of the corrugated tubing. According to international stand-
ards, breathing circuit compliance losses should ideally be less than
(A) 	(B)
Dräger Romulus
Anesthesia Machine (1952)
BOC Boyle Machine
(1950–1955)
Dräger Pulmomat
Anesthesia Ventilator
(1952) 	Engstrom Model 150 Anesthesia
Machine and Ventilator (1950)
Ascending
bellows
Descending
Foregger Eiffel Model
(1957)
Bird Mark 4 Anesthesia
Assistor/Controller (1959)
Ohio 30/70 Anesthesia
Machine (1978)
bellows
Descending
bellows
(C) 	(D) 	(E) 	(F)
Figure 38.5 Early models of anesthesia ventilators incorporated into anesthetic delivery systems. A. and B. The Dräger Romulus (Germany) and the
Engstrom Model 150 (Sweden) were integrated with ventilators that applied positive pressure to the airways to expand the lungs during inspiration.
During expiration, negative pressure was applied to the airways to “remove residual air from the lungs,” a concept that is no longer utilized. The ascending
bellows design (classification based on the movement of the bellows during expiration) of the Dräger Pulmomat ventilator is still used by contemporary
anesthesia ventilators. C. and D. The BOC Boyle Machine (United Kingdom) and the Foregger Eiffel Anesthesia Machines (USA) did not incorporate
anesthesia ventilators and ventilation had to be performed by manually squeezing the reservoir bag. E. As mechanical ventilation became increasingly
popular in human anesthesia in North America, the Bird Corporation developed a stand-alone anesthesia ventilator that could be integrated into
pre-existing anesthesia machines by replacing the reservoir bag of the circle circuit with a descending bellows ventilator (Bird Mark 4). F. Ohio Medical
Products began integrating anesthesia ventilators into their equipment in the 1960s. Source: Reproduced with permission from the Wood Library
Museum of Anesthesiology.

-- 773 of 1450 --

758 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
1 mL per cm H 2
O of distending pressure for every 1 meter of
tubing [89]. If that is the case and the anesthesia circuit for medium/
large size dogs is 3 meters in total length for the inspiratory and
expiratory limbs, mechanical ventilation to a Ppeak of 10 cmH2
O will
result in a delivered V T of 30 mL less than the volume displaced by
the bellows. Besides compliance and gas compression losses, which
may vary according to tubing characteristics and total internal vol-
ume of the breathing circuit, leaks within the breathing circuit are
an important source of discrepancy between the volume delivered
by the bellows and inspired V T
. Therefore, to prevent accidents such
as failure to properly ventilate an anesthetized animal, a thorough
preanesthetic assessment of the ventilator, including a leak test of
the breathing circuit, should be performed prior to use.
In a conventional anesthesia apparatus, the portion of FGF enter-
ing the breathing circuit during inspiration adds to the volume deliv-
ered by the bellows to the lungs and increases Ppeak
, an effect known
as “fresh gas coupling” (Fig. 38.7A) [86,87,90,91]. Activation of the
oxygen flush valve during inspiration, which delivers a high flow of
100% oxygen directly into the breathing circuit, will also generate
excessively high P peak values and increase inspired V T if the appara-
tus does not incorporate an appropriately adjusted inspiratory pres-
sure limiter (maximum airway pressure-control) (Fig. 38.6A). If
FGF is relatively low (e.g., ≤ 50 mL/kg/min), the added volume to the
V T delivered by the bellows may not be clinically relevant; however, if
FGF is high (relative to the size of the patient), it can substantially
increase the V T
. As shown in Table 38.1, in an anesthetized dog
weighing 20 kg, where the ventilator is set to deliver 15 mL/kg based
on the bellows scale (300 mL), with a respiratory rate of 10 breaths/
min and an I:E ratio of 1:2 (2 s of inspiratory time), if the FGF is set at
1 L/min (50 mL/kg/min), approximately 16.6 mL of fresh gas will
enter the breathing circuit every second. Therefore, during the
inspiratory phase of each mechanical breath (2 s), a total volume of
33.3 mL is added to the volume of gas delivered by the bellows. When
this added FGF volume is balanced against losses from breathing cir-
cuit compliance and gas compression, one may expect that the
inspired V T will be close to 300 mL because the relatively small vol-
ume added by the FGF during inspiration (33.3 mL) will be close to
breathing circuit compliance and gas compression losses (39 mL)
(Table 38.1). If FGF is increased from 1 to 4 L/min, 66.6 mL of fresh
gas will be entering the breathing circuit every second, which could
potentially increase the inspired V T from 294 mL (14.7 mL/kg) to
379 mL (19 mL/kg) (Table 38.1). While fresh gas coupling may have
a smaller impact on the V T delivered for medium-sized/large dogs,
this effect may be particularly hazardous during anesthesia of ani-
mals weighing ≤ 5 kg. If the FGF is increased from 1 to 4 L/min in a
3.3 kg cat, the inspired V T may increase by approximately 126%, from
48 mL (14.5 mL/kg) to 113 mL (34.2 mL/kg). Such supraphysiologi-
cal V T
, in addition to being harmful to the lungs, will result in ele-
vated Ppeak and could result in greater cardiovascular depression due
to decreased venous return and cardiac output. In contrast, the effects
of FGF on the V T in a large animal anesthesia ventilator are not clini-
cally relevant. Assuming a V T delivered by a large animal ventilator
(based on the scale of the bellows housing) is 6 L for a 500 kg horse
and the inspiratory time is set at 2 s, the additional volume generated
by a 6 L/min FGF will represent less than 5% of the set V T (6 L plus
200 mL of FGF) and will likely be minimized by breathing circuit
compliance and gas compression losses.
As discussed below, modern anesthesia ventilators either decouple
the FGF from the inspired V T or compensate for the effect of FGF by
adjusting the inspired volume generated by the ventilator to achieve
the user-set V T [87,90,91]. When using a ventilator that does not
decouple or compensate for changes in FGF, the user must exert
Scale of volume
delivered by the
bellows
On/Off
control
Flow
rate
range
Respiratory
rate control
Pressure
limit control
I:E ratio control
	Inspiratory flow control
Inspiratory flow control
Inspiratory
time control
Respiratory
rate control
On/Off
Standby
control
I:E
ratio
Figure 38.6 Examples of time-cycled, electronically controlled, ascending bellows ventilators designed for veterinary use that can be fitted into pre-existing
anesthesia machines. These ventilators operate only in volume-control mode (mandatory breaths only), where the operator sets the breathing rate, I:E
ratio (or inspiratory time), and the volume displaced by the bellows. Some ventilators incorporate a pressure limit control to prevent an excessive increase
in peak airway pressure (Ppeak ). The inspiratory flow control knob adjusts the flow of compressed gas (e.g., oxygen) that drives the bellows downwards,
regulating volume that enters the breathing circuit. During small animal anesthesia, the inspired V T may differ substantially from the volume displaced by
the bellows [86], therefore it may be preferable to perform pressure-limited ventilation by adjusting the inspiratory flow to achieve a target P peak (based on
the pressure gauge of the breathing circuit) instead of a target volume.

-- 774 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	759
Adjustable pressure-limiting
(APL) valve (closed)
Expiratory
valve (closed)
Inspiration
Early expiratory phase
Late expiratory phase
Oressure gauge
(airway pressure)
Breathing
circuit hose
CO2
absorber
Inspiratory
valve (opened)
Ventilator
hose
Reservoir bag
(replaced by the
bellows)
Fresh gas
inlet (FGF)
Expiratory
valve (opened)
Patient
Pressure gauge
(airway pressure)
Inspiratory
valve (closed)
Ventilator
pop-off
(closed)
Ventilator
hose
Fresh gas
inlet (FGF)
Expiratory
valve (opened)
APL valve
(closed)
Bellows
housing
Breathing
circuit hose
CO2
absorber
APL valve
(closed)
Bellows
Bellows
housing
Driving gas
Exhalation
valve (opened)
Scavenger
outlet
Patient
Bellows
housing
Bellows
Driving gas
Exhalation
valve (closed)
Scavenger
outlet
Ventilator
pop-off
(closed)
Bellows 	Driving gas
Exhalation
valve (opened)
Scavenger
outlet
Ventilator
pop-off
(opened)
Ventilator
hose
Fresh gas
inlet (FGF)
Inspiratory
valve (closed)
CO 2
absorber
Pressure gauge
(airway pressure)
Breathing
circuit hose
Patient
Figure 38.7 Dynamics of gas flow in a breathing circuit of a conventional anesthesia apparatus equipped with a bellows-type ventilator. See text for further
details. Source: Adapted from Bokoch and Weston [87].

-- 775 of 1450 --

Operator set parameters (VCV mode)
Figure 38.8 Modern anesthesia workstation (EX-35Vet, Mindray Animal Care) incorporating an ascending bellows ventilator (1). Interchange between
spontaneous and mechanical ventilation is performed by a switch (2). The pop-off (adjustable pressure-limiting [APL]) valve) (3) and the reservoir bag
(4) remain active only during spontaneous ventilation. During mechanical ventilation, flow sensors placed close to the inspiratory (5) and expiratory
(6) valves of the breathing circuit provide accurate monitoring of inspired V T and expired V T (7) and allow display of the inspiratory and expiratory flow
curves over time (8). A pressure transducer within the breathing circuit monitors airway pressures during inspiration and expiration and allows the
graphical display of airway pressure changes over time (9). Continuous monitoring of airway pressure and volume changes throughout the respiratory
cycle provides the graphical display of pressure–volume (P–V) loops (10). Airway resistance (R aw ) is calculated from the difference between plateau
pressure (Pplat
) and positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) divided by the peak expiratory flow, while compliance (Compl) is calculated as the ratio
between tidal volume (V T
) and the driving pressure (Pplat − PEEP).
Table 38.1 Effects of fresh gas flow (FGF), breathing circuit compliance, and gas compression on the inspired tidal volume (VT ) in a 20 kg dog and in a 3.3 kg cat anesthetized
with a bellows-type ventilator where the volume delivered by the bellows was adjusted to 15 mL/kg.
Volume delivered
by the bellows
FGF entering the
breathing circuit
FGF/volume added
during inspirationa
Breathing circuit
compliance lossesb
Gas compression
lossesc
Inspired VT
d 	% difference between
bellows and inspired VT
20 kg dog 	300 mL
(15 mL/kg)
1 L/min
(16.6 mL/s)
33.3 mL 	9 mL
(P peak = 10 cmH2
O)
30 mL
(P peak = 10 cmH2 O)
294 mL
(14.7 mL/kg)
−2%
2 L/min
(33.3 mL/s)
66.6 mL 	10.8 mL
(Ppeak = 12 cmH2
O)
36 mL
(P peak = 12 cmH2 O)
320 mL
(16 mL/kg)
+7%
4 L/min
(66.6 mL/s)
133.2 mL 	12.6 mL
(Ppeak = 14 cmH2
O:
42 mL
(P peak = 14 cmH2 O:
379 mL
(19.0 mL/kg)
+26%
3.3 kg cat 	50 mL
(15 mL/kg)
1 L/min
(16.6 mL/s)
33.3 mL 	8.1 mL
(P peak = 9 cmH2
O)
27 mL
(P peak = 9 cmH2 O)
48 mL
(14.5 mL/kg)
−4%
2 L/min
(33.3 mL/s)
66.6 mL 	10.8 mL
(Ppeak = 12 cmH2
O)
36 mL
(P peak = 12 cmH2 O)
70 mL
(21.2 mL/kg)
+40%
4 L/min
(66.6 mL/s)
133.2 mL 	16.2 mL
(Ppeak = 18 cmH2
O)
54 mL
(P peak = 18 cmH2 O
113 mL
(34.2 mL/kg)
+126%
a Assuming a fixed inspiratory time (2 s): 10 breaths/min and I:E ratio = 1:2.
b Assuming a compliance loss of 0.3 mL per 1 cmH2 O of distending pressure for every 1 m of breathing circuit corrugated tubing (1.5 m inspiratory hose + 1.5 m expiratory
hose = 3 m of tubing length).
c Assuming a gas compression loss of 3 mL for every 1 cm H2
O of distending pressure.
d Inspired VT = Volume delivered by the bellows + (Volume added during inspiration by the FGF – [breathing circuit compliance losses + gas compression losses]).
FGF, fresh gas flow; V T
, tidal volume; Ppeak
, peak airway pressure.

-- 776 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	761
caution when adjusting the FGF on the anesthetic machine. If FGF
is increased, the circuit pressure should be monitored, and the
inspiratory flow (tidal volume control) reduced to maintain Ppeak at a
target value to avoid lung overdistention. As accurate measurement
of inspired and expired V T (via spirometry) is not readily available in
many veterinary anesthesia ventilators, the operator may adjust the
inspiratory flow to achieve a target Ppeak (e.g., 8–10 cmH2
O for
medium-sized dogs). Further adjustments in Ppeak and respiratory
rate are performed with the aim of maintaining end-tidal carbon
dioxide partial pressure (PET
CO2
) within a predefined range (e.g.,
between 35 and 45 mmHg).
Modern anesthesia ventilators
Modern anesthesia ventilators incorporate many features that were
previously available only in ICU ventilators. Some ventilators incor-
porate pressure transducers that permit the accurate measurement
of breathing circuit pressure and can display airway pressure-time
curves. Advanced anesthesia ventilators also incorporate flow sen-
sors (spirometers) placed between the breathing circuit and the
endotracheal tube (proximal or near-patient spirometry) or placed
near the inspiratory and expiratory valves (distal or inbuilt spirom-
etry) of the breathing circuit and display flow-time curves
(Fig. 38.8). Numerical integration of the flow signal by the ventila-
tor permits accurate monitoring of inspired and expired V T on a
breath-by-breath basis. In addition to these variables, incorporation
of flow sensors and airway pressure transducers to anesthesia venti-
lators provides real-time monitoring of pressure–volume (P–V)
loops, that is, the graphic display of changes in airway pressure (∆P)
plotted as a function of changes in lung volume (∆V), and of
changes in flow versus changes in lung volume (flow-volume
loops) [92]. These parameters, combined with arterial blood gases
and other non- invasive monitoring tools (capnography and pulse
oximetry), provide the basis for adjusting ventilation parameters.
For anesthesia ventilators that do not incorporate built-in flow sen-
sors, a multiparameter monitor that uses a near-patient/proximal
flow sensor (Pitot tube) originally designed for humans can be used
to accurately monitor V T in small animals [92,93]. This same flow
sensor refashioned to fit between a large animal endotracheal tube
and the Y-piece of a large animal anesthesia machine has been used
to accurately monitor V T during mechanical ventilation in horses
and other large animals [94,95].
Monitoring V T by means of proximal/near-patient flow sensors
more accurately reflects the actual V T delivered during mechanical
ventilation in pediatric/neonatal humans than distal flow sensors
placed near the expiratory valve [96,97]. For an ascending bellows
human anesthesia ventilator (Aisys CS 2 , GE Healthcare), V T meas-
urements provided by a proximal flow sensor also resulted in more
accurate and precise estimates of V T than a variable orifice flow sen-
sor placed near the inspiratory and expiratory valves of the breath-
ing circuit (Fig. 38.9) [98]. Although proximal flow sensors have
some disadvantages (e.g., inaccuracy in the presence of excess
humidity) in comparison to distal flow sensors, their performance
may be superior for neonatal/pediatric humans and for animals
weighing ≤ 5 kg [98]. This difference in performance may be
explained by different sensor technologies and the fact that sensors
placed near the endotracheal tube may achieve better signal-to-
noise ratio; that is, the level of the desired signal (flow) is higher in
comparison to the level of background noise/interference (which
causes inaccuracy). The reader is referred to the specialized litera-
ture for additional details regarding advantages and disadvantages
of different flow sensors used in anesthesia ventilators [92,99].
As previously described, there are two types of ventilators accord-
ing to the movement of the bellows during expiration (ascending
and descending bellows). Modern anesthesia ventilators usually
incorporate the ascending bellows design, which allows visualization
of leaks within the breathing circuit as the bellows does not
completely fill during expiration. One disadvantage of bellows
ventilators is the consumption of higher amounts of compressed
gas (air or oxygen compressed within a cylinder) [87,90,91]. One
veterinary anesthesia ventilator uses a turbine to generate the
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
–5%
–10%
–15%
–20%
–25%
0 	50 	100 	150
Mean tidal volume [(Spirometry + ASL)/2] (mL)
% error
	% error
200 	250 	300 	0 	50 	100 	150
Mean tidal volume [(Spirometry + ASL)/2] (mL)
200 	250 	300
5%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
–5%
–10%
–15%
–20%
–25%
(A) Percentage error of expired VT for near-
patient spirometry (proximal flow sensor)
(B) Percentage error of expired VT for respirator-
inbuilt spirometry (distal flow sensor)
Figure 38.9 Bland–Altmann plots showing percentage error of expired V T measured by proximal and distal flow sensors in relation to V T
s generated by a
pediatric lung model (ASL). A. Near-patient spirometer (pediatric D-Lyte, GE Healthcare) and B. Variable orifice inbuilt spirometer (Aisys CS2
, GE Healthcare).
The mean bias (continuous line) and precision (dashed lines) show better agreement and precision of the near-patient spirometer with the V T s generated by the
simulated lung model. Differences were most significant with V T
s used in pediatric/neonatal humans or animals weighing ≤ 5 kg (V T ≤ 50 mL, red ovals),
suggesting that near-patient spirometry could be preferable under these circumstances. Source: Morgenroth et al. [98]; reproduced with permission.

-- 777 of 1450 --

762 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
compressed gas (ambient air) necessary for driving the ventilator
bellows (Veta 5, Mindray Animal Health). A potential problem asso-
ciated with ventilators that use compressed gas to drive the ventilator
bellows is excessive V T delivery (and possibly barotrauma) if there is
a communication due to a tear or leak between the bellows and the
housing assembly because high-pressure driving gas can enter the
patient circuit. Inhalant anesthetic concentrations within the breath-
ing circuit may be abnormally low as breathing circuit contamina-
tion by drive gas will lead to a dilutional effect. If the bellows is
driven by compressed air, breathing circuit contamination by the
drive gas will lower the inspired oxygen concentration [87,90,91].
The major advantage of modern anesthesia ventilators is that
changes in FGF do not alter their ability to deliver an accurate V T
.
This is achieved by either the ventilator reducing the volume delivered
to compensate for the FGF entering the circuit during inspiration
(fresh gas flow compensation) or by preventing fresh gas from entering
the breathing circuit during inspiration (fresh gas decoupling). Fresh
gas flow compensation is used by bellows-type ventilators, whereas
fresh gas decoupling has been used by piston-driven ventilators
originally designed for human anesthesia [87,90,91]. Accuracy of
inspired V T can also be guaranteed by compensation for losses caused
by compliance of the breathing circuit with some ventilators [87,90,91].
Advanced anesthesia workstations perform a mandatory self-test
before the machine becomes fully operational. Among other safety
checks, the pre-use self-test may quantify volume losses caused
by compliance of the breathing circuit (mL/cmH2
O) and by small
leaks (Fig. 38.10). These measurements are considered when the elec-
tronically adjusted V T is delivered to the patient (breathing circuit
compliance 	compensation). 	To 	guarantee 	optimal 	ventilator
performance, the pre-use self-test should be repeated every time the
hoses and other components of the breathing circuit are changed
between anesthetic procedures and the flow sensors should be cali-
brated as per manufacturer recommendations.
Fig. 38.11 illustrates the dynamics of gas flow of an advanced
anesthesia workstation equipped with an ascending bellows-type
ventilator. During inspiration (Fig. 38.11A), pressurized gas enters
the bellows housing, driving the bellows downwards to deliver the
V T
. The bellows contains a mixture of exhaled gas and fresh gas, that
will add to the fresh gas entering the circuit (fresh gas inlet). The V T
set by the user on the screen of the ventilator electronically controls
the gas flow that enters the bellows housing and drives the bellows
downward, using data integrated from inspiratory and expiratory
flow sensors to deliver an accurate V T
. A stable V T delivered by the
ventilator is guaranteed by a feedback signal provided by the inspira-
tory flow sensor placed near the inspiratory valve. The inspired V T is
not altered by the FGF because the volume delivered by the bellows
is constantly adjusted to compensate for the volume added by the
FGF, and as mentioned, for breathing circuit compliance losses iden-
tified during the mandatory pre-use self-test. The expired V T is
measured by a flow sensor placed near the expiratory valve and data
from inspiratory and expiratory flow sensors is used by some anes-
thesia ventilators to compensate for compliance losses (Fig. 38.11B).
Because the inspired V T does not account for small leaks around the
endotracheal tube or supraglottic device, assessment of ventilation
should be based on expired V T
. While the bellows moves toward the
top of the housing during passive expiration, the pop-off valve (spill
or pressure relief valve) of the ventilator remains closed and only the
drive gas exits through the exhalation valve to the scavenge system.
Once the bellows is filled, pressure built up within the system opens
the ventilator pop-off valve and allows excess gas from the breathing
circuit to exit to the scavenge system (not shown) [87,90,91].
While the bellows-type ventilator is the most common type of
ventilator used in veterinary medicine, newer ventilator technolo-
gies are available in modern anesthesia workstations originally
designed for humans, including piston, volume reflective, and
turbine ventilators. The reader is referred to the literature for more
details on these newer anesthesia workstations [87]. One piston-
driven ventilator has been specifically designed for use in large ani-
mals (Tafonius, Hallowell EMC) and is described in Chapter 6. An
electrically driven piston ventilator (Fig. 38.12) functions as a single-
circuit ventilator as there is not a second circuit with compressed gas
to drive the piston. Instead, a stepped electric motor controls the
movement of a piston within a cylinder to deliver the inspired V T
.
This driving mechanism has the advantage of significantly reducing
the use of compressed gas, but in the event of a power failure, it will
depend on limited battery backup [90]. The inspired V T is accurately
delivered because of: (1) the low compliance of the piston chamber
and the accuracy of the stepped electric motor; (2) the volume dis-
placed by the piston is increased to compensate for breathing circuit
compliance losses assessed during the pre-use self-test (compliance
compensation) (Fig. 38.10); and (3) the FGF is decoupled during
inspiration (decoupling valve closed) (Fig. 38.12A) [87,90,91].
During inspiration, the piston delivers a mixture of exhaled and
fresh gas, and the FGF entering the circuit is diverted to the reservoir
bag, which remains active during mechanical ventilation. In contrast
Figure 38.10 Screenshot of the mandatory self-test of the Dräger Primus
Anesthesia Workstation with a pediatric circle system. After pressurizing
the system to 30 cmH2
O (pop-off/APL valve set to 30 cm H2
O), breathing
circuit compliance was 0.2 mL/cmH2
O and leak was 7 mL/min. The
green light means that the parameter passed the self-test according to
manufacturer standards. The volume delivered by the piston-driven
ventilator, in addition to being decoupled from the fresh gas flow, will
compensate for compliance losses to deliver an accurate V T .

-- 778 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	763
to a bellows ventilator, excess circuit gas is vented through the
scavenge outlet during inspiration (Fig. 38.12A). Expired gases pass
through the CO2 absorber and initially fill the reservoir bag. As the
decoupling valve opens, a mixture of expired and fresh gas from
the reservoir bag and FGF entering the circuit fills the ventilator as
the piston moves downwards to its original position (Fig. 38.12B).
Unlike the bellows-type ventilator where the movement of the
bellows can be directly visualized through its transparent housing,
the piston within the cylinder is usually concealed from view by the
operator. With the ascending bellows ventilator, an accidental dis-
connection or a large leak within the breathing circuit can be rapidly
detected as the bellows will not fill during expiration; while smaller
Driving gas
Bellows
housing
Exhalation value
(closed)
Scavenger
outlet
APL valve
(inactive)
Bag-ventilator
selector
Reservoir
bag (inactive)
Isolated when ventilator
switch selected
Driving gas
Exhalation valve
(opened)
Scavenger
outlet
Ventilator
pop-off
(closed)
Bag-ventilator
selector 	APL valve
(inactive)
Reservoir
bag (inactive)
Isolated when ventilator
switch selected
Ventilator
pop-off
(closed)
Bellows
Expiratory
valve (closed)
Patient
Inpiratory
flow sensor
(inspired VT) Pressure
transducer
port (airway
pressure)
Fresh gas
inlet (FGF)
Bellows
housing
Inspiratory
valve (opened)
Expiratory
valve (opened)
CO 2
absorber
Galvanic O 2
sensor (FI O2 )
Inspiratory
valve (closed)
Inspiratory
flow sensor
(Inspired VT) 	Pressure
transducer
port (airway
pressure)
Fresh gas
inlet (FGF)
Expiratory
flow sensor
(expired VT)
Expiratory
flow sensor
(expired V T)
Galvanic O 2
(sensor (FI O2)
CO 2
absorber
Bellows
Patient
(A) Inspiration
(B) Expiration
Figure 38.11 Dynamics of gas flow during A. inspiration, and B. expiration in a breathing circuit of an advanced anesthesia apparatus equipped with a
bellows-type ventilator (Aysis anesthesia workstation, GE Healthcare). The bellows-type ventilator is positioned distal to the expiratory valve of the
breathing circuit. Notice that the reservoir bag and the APL (pop-off) valve are isolated (inactive) during mechanical ventilation. After the bellows reaches
the top of the housing during expiration, excess gas within the breathing circuit opens the ventilator pop-off valve once the pressure exceeds 2 cmH 2
O and
exits to the scavenge outlet (not shown). See text for further explanation. Source: Modified from Bokoch and Weston [87].

-- 779 of 1450 --

764 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
leaks will cause the bellows to incompletely fill. A leak in a piston-
driven ventilator may be more difficult to detect. If a leak is present,
during expiration the cylinder will fill with ambient air by activation
of a negative-pressure valve, diluting inspired gases with air,
decreasing FI
O2
, and reducing anesthetic gas concentration within
the circuit (possibly leading to patient awareness). Collapse of the
reservoir bag, which contains a mixture of expired and fresh gas
during mechanical ventilation, provides the user with an alert of a
large leak/disconnection in the breathing circuit of a piston ventilator.
Modes of mechanical ventilation utilized during
anesthesia
Continuous mandatory ventilation
In continuous mandatory ventilation (CMV), also known as “con-
trolled ventilation,” the ventilator delivers all mechanical breaths at
predefined intervals according to the respiratory rate set by the
operator. Continuous mandatory modes of ventilation are typically
time cycled, that is termination of the inspiratory phase occurs after
a certain time has elapsed. As explained above, for some ventilators,
PEEP valve
(closed) 	Expiratory
valve (closed) APL valve
(inactive)
Exaust valve
(opened)
Scavenger
outlet
APL bypass valve
Reservoir
bag (acticve)
Fresh
gas inlet
(FGF)
Negative
pressure valve
Piston
ventilator
PEEP valve
(opened)
Patient
Expiratory
Flow sensor
(expired V T)
CO 2
absorber
Exaust valve
(closed)
Scavenger
outlet
APL bypass valve
	Decoupling
valve (opened)
APL valve
(inactive)
Galvanic O2
Sensor
Inspiratory
valve (closed)
Piston
ventilator
Pressure
transducer
port (airway
pressure)
Negative
pressure valve
Fresh
gas inlet
(FGF)
Reservoir
bag (active)
Expiratory
valve (opened)
Pressure
transducer
port (airway
pressure)
Expiratory
Flow sensor
(expired V T)
CO2
absorber
Inspiratory
valve (opened) Decoupling
valve (closed)
Galvanic O2
sensor (FIO 2)
Patient
(B) Expiration
(A) Inspiration
Figure 38.12 Dynamics of gas flow during A. inspiration, and B. expiration in a modern anesthesia apparatus equipped with a piston ventilator (Fabius
GS anesthesia system, Dräger). A piston-type ventilator is located between the fresh gas inlet and the inspiratory valve. Notice that the rebreathing bag
remains active during mechanical ventilation and excess gas exits the breathing circuit during inspiration. See text for further explanation. Source:
Modified from Bokoch and Weston [87].

-- 780 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	765
the inspiratory time is directly adjusted by the operator, while for
other machines inspiratory time is indirectly adjusted via changes
in the I:E ratio and respiratory rate.
Volume-controlled ventilation (VCV)
When a standard VCV mode is chosen, the operator selects the V T
to be delivered (target variable), in addition to other variables (e.g.,
respiratory rate, I:E ratio or inspiratory time, and the PEEP level).
In VCV mode, the V T is the independent variable as it will remain
constant, whereas P peak is the dependent variable as it will change in
case of modifications in respiratory system compliance (C RS
) and
airway resistance (R aw ). The inspiratory flow, which is automatically
adjusted by the ventilator to achieve the target V T
, will remain
constant throughout inspiration (square wave flow-time curve).
Because of the constant inspiratory flow pattern, airway pressure
measured within the breathing circuit (that is equivalent to Pao
)
increases in a quasilinear fashion until the end of inspiration
(Fig. 38.13A). The peak increase in airway pressure (P peak ) recorded
at the end of constant flow inspiration reflects the combined effects
of airway resistance (R aw ) and compliance of the respiratory system
(CRS
) on airway pressures [100–103]. Therefore, during conven-
tional mechanical ventilation with a constant V T
, a temporal
increase in Ppeak suggests a decrease in CRS or an increase in R aw
, and
vice versa (Fig. 38.13B and C):
P 	cmH O R
C
peak
aw
RS
2
In healthy lungs, it is assumed that the increase in airway pres-
sure will rapidly equilibrate with Palv
, expanding alveoli across the
lung tissue. However, in VCV mode without an inspiratory pause,
the absence of a plateau pressure (Pplat
) at the end of inspiration
could favor an unequal distribution of inspiratory flow, leading to
preferential volume delivery to alveoli with faster-filling rates
(Fig. 38.14). Alternatively, VCV may allow maintenance of a Pplat
during inspiration [100–103]. This goal can be achieved by adding
an inspiratory pause (period of zero flow) after the target V T is
achieved, which is usually defined by the operator as percent of
total inspiratory time. Maintenance of a Pplat may theoretically
allow a more homogenous distribution of gas flow across the
lung (Fig. 38.14).
A pause in inspiratory flow during VCV allows measurement of
P peak at the end of constant inspiratory flow (when the target V T is
delivered) and of Pplat at the end of the inspiratory pause (Fig. 38.15A).
Inspiration 	Expiration 	Inspiration 	Expiration
Shorter
expiratory flow
Longer
expiratory flow
Longer time to
return to FRC
Shorter time to
return to FRC
Ppeak
PEEP
(A) Normal CRS and R aw 	(B) Decreased CRS 	(C) Increased Raw
V T 	VT	VT
FRC 	FRC	FRC
Airway pressure
Flow
Lung volume
PEEP 	PEEP
P peak
Inspiration 	Expiration
P peak
Figure 38.13 Diagrammatic representation of changes in airway pressure, inspiratory and expiratory flow, and lung volume during volume-controlled
ventilation without an inspiratory pause: A. in a normal patient, B. in a patient with decreased C RS
, and C. in a patient with increased R aw
. A decrease in
C RS or an increase in R aw will increase Ppeak while V T remains unaltered. During passive expiration, a decrease in CRS (or an increase in its reciprocal
elastance) accelerates lung emptying as the time until expiratory flow returns to zero and the time until lung volume returns to its resting position (FRC)
is shortened. Otherwise, increased R aw slows lung emptying and the flow-time curve takes longer to reach zero while lung volume takes longer to return
to FRC. V T
, tidal volume; CRS
, respiratory system compliance; R aw
, airway resistance; Ppeak
, peak airway pressure; PEEP, positive end-expired pressure;
FRC, functional residual capacity. Source: Partially modified from Kaczka et al. [104].

-- 781 of 1450 --

766 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
The P plat (and the driving pressure, calculated as the gradient
between P plat and the PEEP level) is influenced by V T and by CRS
.
Therefore, during mechanical ventilation with a constant V T
, an
increase in Pplat or driving pressure over time is indicative of a
decrease in C RS (Fig. 38.15B):
P 	cmH O V
C
plat
T
RS
2
As explained before, the Ppeak recorded in VCV mode is the
distending pressure of the lungs that is necessary to overcome the
Conducting
airways
EXPIRATION 	INSPIRATION
(VCV without a plateau
pressure)
INSPIRATION
(VCV with a plateau
pressure)
A
A
B 	B	C 	C
A 	B 	C
Alveolar
size
Figure 38.14 Diagrammatic representation of distribution of inspiratory gas flow during volume-controlled ventilation (VCV) in alveoli with different
filling rates: (A) small airways with normal resistance to flow leading to alveoli with normal compliance (“fast” alveoli); (B) small airways with high
resistance to flow (“slow” alveoli); and (C) alveoli with low compliance. In the case of constant inspiratory flow leading to a quasilinear increase in airway
pressure (i.e., positive-pressure ventilation without a plateau pressure), gas flow is preferentially distributed to ‘fast’ alveoli, which may be overdistended.
Maintenance of a plateau pressure during inspiration theoretically favors homogeneous gas distribution to alveoli with different filling rates.
Ppeak
↑ Ppeak
PEEP
(A) Normal CRS and Raw 	(B) Decreased CRS 	(C) Increased Raw
V T 	V T 	V T	FRC
Lung volume
 
Flow
 
Airway pressure
FRC 	FRC
PEEP 	PEEP
P plat
Pplat 	↑ Ppeak
Pplat
Inspiration
Period
of zero
flow
Period
of zero
flow
Period
of zero
flow
Expiration 	Inspiration 	Expiration 	Inspiration 	Expiration
Longer
expiratory flow
Longer time to
return to FRC
Shorter time to
return to FRC
Shorter
expiratory flow
C RS
R aw
Figure 38.15 Diagrammatic representation of changes in airway pressure, inspiratory and expiratory flow, and lung volume during volume-controlled
ventilation with an inspiratory pause: A. in a normal patient, B. in a patient with decreased C RS and C. in a patient with increased R aw
. Setting an
inspiratory pause during VCV may allow the differentiation of the effects of changes in C RS and R aw on pulmonary mechanics. A decrease in CRS (or an
increase in its reciprocal, elastance) results in an increase in P plat and driving pressure (Pplat – PEEP), without altering the V T and gradient between P peak and
Pplat
. An increase in R aw will increase the gradient between Ppeak and Pplat
. Duration of expiratory flow and time for lung volume to return to FRC follow the
pattern explained in Fig. 38.13. V T
, tidal volume; CRS
, respiratory system compliance; R aw
, airway resistance; Ppeak
, peak airway pressure; Pplat
, plateau
pressure; PEEP, positive end-expired pressure; FRC, functional residual capacity. Source: Partially modified from Kaczka et al. [104].

-- 782 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	767
resistive and viscoelastic properties of the respiratory system
(R aw and CRS
, respectively). In humans, the P plat recorded at the end
of an inspiratory pause (period of zero flow) of at least 0.5 s, may
reflect the distending pressure of the lungs that is necessary to over-
come viscoelastic properties of the respiratory system (C RS
) per se,
without the confounding effects of R aw [100,103]. Analysis of the
airway pressure-time curve and the gradient between Ppeak and Pplat
during VCV with an inspiratory pause of at least 0.5 s may allow
the discrimination of the effects of C RS and R aw on airway pres-
sures [100,103] (Fig. 38.15B and C).
Animals may have low C RS because of obesity, increased intra-
abdominal volume caused by pregnancy, distended abdominal
viscera, pneumoperitoneum, shape of the chest wall (dogs with
barrel-shaped chest conformation), atelectasis, and pleural/
parenchymal lung disease. As explained before, during ventilation
in volume-controlled mode, V T will remain constant while airway
pressure increases or decreases as a function of changes in CRS
. If V T
and respiratory frequency are adjusted appropriately, V̇E and nor-
mal PaCO 2 levels can be maintained despite decreases in CRS related
to patient positioning or the surgical procedure (e.g., pneumoperi-
toneum) [101,105]. Since a decrease in CRS will increase airway
pressure during constant volume ventilation, modern anesthesia
machines allow adjusting the maximum airway pressure in VCV
mode, that is, inspiratory flow will be interrupted before preset V T
is achieved if the airway pressure limit set by the operator is
exceeded.
Airway resistance may also increase because of anesthetic equip-
ment (e.g., relatively narrow/kinked endotracheal tube, narrow
tubing of the breathing circuit) or because of pathophysiological
changes in the airways (e.g., brachycephalic syndrome in dogs,
tracheal stenosis, and partial obstruction of the airways by thick/
viscous secretions or foreign material). The use of an inspiratory
pause during VCV may be advantageous because it may allow
discrimination of changes in pulmonary mechanics caused by
increased R aw from those caused by decreased C RS (Fig. 38.16).
Pressure-controlled ventilation (PCV)
The PCV mode is characterized by a decelerating flow-time curve
during inspiration. Unlike the VCV mode, the operator selects the
maximum inspiratory pressure (Pmax
) rather than the V T to be
delivered to the patient. During PCV, the Pmax is the independent
variable while V T is the dependent variable. Specifically, the Pmax set
by the operator will remain constant while V T will vary as a func-
tion of changes in CRS and R aw
. Therefore, if CRS decreases or R aw
increases, inspiratory airflow and V T will decrease, and vice versa
(Fig. 38.17) [104,106].
During inspiration, following a rapid rise in airway pressure,
which coincides with the peak inspiratory flow, pressure increases
in a more curvilinear fashion until the target airway pressure (Pmax
)
is achieved. The decelerating flow may reach zero before the expira-
tory valve opens and passive expiration begins creating an inspiratory
pause/P plat (Fig. 38.17). Because the ventilator generates a decelerat-
ing inspiratory flow, PCV does not result in a peak rise in airway
pressure (Ppeak ) that is observed at the end of a constant inspiratory
flow (VCV mode). For some anesthesia ventilators the rise time
(Tslope
), that is the time elapsed for airway pressure to increase from
PEEP to Pmax in PCV mode, can be adjusted. An increase in Tslope in
relation to the total inspiratory time will lower the peak increase in
inspiratory flow and shorten the period of zero flow during inspira-
tion, and vice versa (Fig. 38.18).
When using PCV, the anesthesiologist must be aware that
changes in chest wall compliance associated with specific surgical
conditions, such as laparoscopic surgery associated pneumoperi-
toneum, could decrease C RS and lead to some degree of alveolar
collapse/hypoventilation because V T will fall [105]. Therefore, if
there is a decrease in expired V T monitored by the flow sensor dur-
ing PCV, the operator may need to reset airway pressure to a higher
value to maintain V T and prevent hypercapnia.
Dual-controlled ventilation
VCV has the advantage of maintaining a constant V T and V̇E ; how-
ever, it may result in high airway pressures. Conversely, PCV does
not guarantee that V T and V̇E are maintained but has the advantage
of reducing alveolar stress by limiting the maximum airway pres-
sure delivered to the lung [106]. To overcome the disadvantages of
decreased V T and V̇E in face of decreased C RS and increased R aw
during PCV, some anesthesia ventilators incorporate the option to
perform a volume-targeted (or volume-guaranteed) PCV mode.
This ventilation mode, also known as “dual-mode ventilation,”
combines the advantages of VCV and PCV (delivery of a fixed V T
and decelerating inspiratory flow resulting in lower airway pres-
sures). In volume-targeted PCV, the user selects the V T while the
(A) 	(B)
Figure 38.16 Screenshots of an anesthesia ventilator (Dräger Fabius Plus, Drägerwerk AG & Co.) used for a 3.8 kg cat anesthetized with isoflurane during
volume-controlled ventilation. The ventilator was adjusted to obtain an expired V T of approximately 40 mL (10–11 mL/kg) with an inspiratory pause of 40%
of inspiratory time. The respiratory rate was set to maintain PET
CO2 close to 35–40 mmHg. A. After a 3 mm internal diameter endotracheal tube was placed,
the airway pressure tracing is suggestive of increased R aw and there is an increased gradient between Ppeak and Pplat
. B. Immediately after the 3 mm tube was
replaced by a 4 mm inner diameter endotracheal tube, the gradient between Ppeak and Pplat decreased, denoting a decrease in R aw
. PET
CO2
, end-tidal carbon
dioxide partial pressure; Ppeak
, peak airway pressure; Pplat
, plateau pressure; R aw
, airway resistance; V T
, expired tidal volume. Source: Drägerwerk AG & Co.

-- 783 of 1450 --

768 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
ventilator adjusts the lowest possible airway pressure to achieve the
preset volume [101,107]. In healthy dogs undergoing abdominal
surgery (ovariohysterectomy), PCV targeting a V T of 10 mL/kg
improved airway dynamics (lower P peak ) and resulted in higher C RS
but without a detectable improvement in gas exchange (PaCO 2 ,
PaO 2 , and alveolar-to-arterial oxygen gradient P(A-a)O 2 in com-
parison to VCV (V T = 10 mL/kg) during the intraoperative
period [108]. Recent meta-analysis studies in humans have shown
that volume-guaranteed PCV improves airway dynamics (lower
P peak and P plat with higher C RS ) during two-lung ventilation in com-
parison with VCV, while an effective improvement in PaO 2 was
detected only during one-lung ventilation (OLV) [109]. Although
these findings might apply to animals without lung disease, these
results may not be reproduced in animals with lung disease. A
summary of the differences between controlled ventilation modes
(VCV, PCV, and volume-guaranteed PCV) is presented in
Table 38.2.
Assisted and assisted- controlled ventilation modes
Assisted and assisted-controlled ventilation modes may be available
in some anesthesia ventilators. In the assisted mode, the ventilator
detects a trigger signal from the patient, that is, the commencement
of a spontaneous breathing effort, to provide a synchronized
mechanical breath. The trigger signal of anesthesia ventilators is
usually based on a pneumatic signal, that is, the inspiratory flow or
on the level of negative airway pressure generated by a spontaneous
breath. Detection of chest wall motion and diaphragmatic electro-
myograms (neurally adjusted ventilatory assist) are other forms of
triggering assisted mechanical breaths adopted in ICU ventilators
that may improve patient-ventilator synchrony, and the reader is
referred to the literature for detailed descriptions of these
technologies [110,111].
Pressure support ventilation
Pressure support ventilation (PSV) is a modality of assisted ventila-
tion where the ventilator delivers a target inspiratory pressure with
a decelerating flow pattern when a spontaneous breathing effort is
detected [101]. Delivery of an assisted breath is based on the level
of negative airway pressure or the inspiratory flow generated by a
spontaneous breathing effort. The operator can increase the sensi-
tivity of the triggering mechanism either by decreasing the inspira-
tory flow or by adjusting the level of negative airway pressure to a
Inspiration 	Expiration 	Inspiration 	Expiration 	Inspiration
Longer
inspiratory
flow
V T
Shorter
inspiratory
flow
Expiration
Longer
expiratory flow
Longer time to
return to FRC
Shorter time to
return to FRC
Shorter
expiratory flow
P max 	Pmax 	P max
PEEP 	PEEP 	PEEP
(A) Normal CRS and Raw 	(B) Decreased CRS 	(C) Increased Raw
VT
VT
Lung volume
 
Flow
 
Airway pressure
Figure 38.17 Diagrammatic representation of changes in airway pressure, inspiratory and expiratory flow, and lung volume during pressure-controlled
ventilation: A. in a normal patient, B. in a patient with decreased CRS
, and C. in a patient with increased R aw
. Notice that as inspiratory flow decelerates, airway
pressure increases in a more curvilinear fashion compared to volume-controlled ventilation and there is no Ppeak
. Because airway pressure set by the user is
kept constant, inspiratory/expiratory flow and consequently V T will change as a function of changes in CRS and R aw
. In a more rigid lung (decreased CRS
),
inspiratory/expiratory flow is decreased and more quickly returns to zero. The decrease in airflow results in decreased V T
. If R aw is increased, inspiratory/
expiratory flow also decreases, resulting in a decrease in V T
. V T
, tidal volume; CRS
, respiratory system compliance; R aw
, airway resistance; Pmax
, maximum
inspiratory pressure; PEEP, positive end-expired pressure; FRC, functional residual capacity. Source: Partially modified from Kaczka et al. [104].

-- 784 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	769
less negative value, and vice versa. During PSV mode, delivery of
mechanical breaths is dependent on the degree of central
ventilatory drive. Therefore, depending on the suppression of
central nervous system (CNS) sensitivity to CO 2 and the level of
relaxation of respiratory muscles by anesthetic drugs, the number
of patient-triggered mechanical breaths will vary and result in
varying degrees of decreased V̇E /hypercapnia or may even result in
apnea. Ventilators often offer PSV with safety backup ventilation to
provide the patient with mandatory ventilation in case of complete
suppression of the CNS ventilatory drive or excessive respiratory
muscle relaxation/paralysis [101]. This mode of ventilation can be
adopted for weaning the animal from the ventilator when there is
enough ventilatory drive for the patient to initiate spontaneous
breaths.
Another fundamental difference between controlled ventila-
tion modes (VCV, PCV, and volume-guaranteed PCV) and PSV is
the mechanism of termination of inspiratory flow (also known as
“cycling mechanism”) [112,113]. As explained before, termination
of inspiratory flow, that is the transition between inspiration and
expiration, in controlled ventilation modes occurs after a certain
time has elapsed (inspiratory time), as defined by the operator.
Cycling (that is passive exhalation) in PSV mode occurs after the
Table 38.2 Summary characteristics of volume-controlled ventilation (VCV), pressure- controlled ventilation (PCV), and dual-controlled (volume-guaranteed PCV) ventilation.
Volume- controlled ventilation 	Pressure-controlled ventilation 	Dual-controlled ventilation
Breathing pattern 	Only mandatory breaths 	Only mandatory breaths 	Only mandatory breaths
Termination of inspiratory flow 	Time cycled 	Time cycled 	Time cycled
Inspiratory flow pattern 	Constant (square wave) flow 	Decelerating flow 	Decelerating flow
Target variable 	VT 	Pmax
a 	VT
Advantages 	Allows maintenance of V̇E and PaCO2
regardless of changes in C RS and R aw
If an inspiratory pause is added,
quasistatic CRS and R aw (P peak − Pplat
) can be
assessed
Lower airway pressures +/− better
compliance than VCV
Combines the advantages of VCV and PCV
Disadvantages 	Higher airway pressures (Ppeak
) than PCV 	V̇ E and PaCO2 influenced by changes
in C RS and Raw
Cannot assess Raw by the gradient
between Ppeak and P plat (typical Ppeak in
VCV not measured)
Cannot assess Raw by the gradient between
Ppeak and Pplat (typical Ppeak in VCV not
measured)
a The target pressure set in PCV mode is better defined as Pmax as true Ppeak (as measured at the end of constant inspiratory flow in VCV mode) cannot be measured with the
decelerating flow that is characteristic of PCV. VCV, volume-controlled ventilation; PCV, pressure-controlled ventilation; VT
, tidal volume; V̇E, minute ventilation; CRS
, respiratory
system compliance; Raw
, airway resistance; Ppeak
, peak airway pressure; Pplat
, plateau pressure.
P-V loop
P peak
Pplat
PEEP
Inspired and
expired VT
Ventilatory
mode selected
Preset airway
pressure (P max)
Inspiratory time 	Tslope (1.7 sec) (0.6 sec)	(1.7 sec)
Inspiratory time
(1.7 sec)
V T
VE
FIO2
f
Raw and CRS
Tslope
(A) 	(B)
Figure 38.18 Airway pressure and flow curves recorded during pressure-controlled ventilation in a 10 kg dog (9 kg ideal body weight) anesthetized
with isoflurane and a constant rate infusion of fentanyl. The Pmax was adjusted to 12 cmH 2 O aiming to deliver a V T of approximately 12 mL/kg (108 mL
based on ideal body weight) at a respiratory frequency of 12 breaths/min and an I:E ratio of 1:2, which resulted in an inspiratory time of 1.7 s. A.
Notice that when the rise time (Tslope ) was adjusted to match the inspiratory time (1.7 s), there was no period of zero flow and the pressure rose in a
curvilinear fashion until reaching P max . The measured P peak (P max ) cannot be considered equivalent to the P peak measured in VCV mode because it was
measured at the end of the period of decelerating flow and not at the end of a period of constant inspiratory flow that is typical of VCV. The measured
P plat also cannot be considered reliable because there is no period of zero flow before passive expiration begins. B. Notice that when the Tslope is adjusted
to 0.6 s (approximately, 35% of inspiratory time), a period of zero flow is created before passive expiration begins. This results in the formation of a
plateau in the airway pressure curve, which allows correct measurement of P plat . P max, maximum inspiratory pressure; V T
, tidal volume; P plat , plateau
pressure.

-- 785 of 1450 --

770 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
inspiratory flow decelerates to a certain percentage of its peak.
Typically, the end of inspiration can be set at 25% of peak inspira-
tory flow to avoid breath holding (period of zero flow during
inspiration), which may be uncomfortable to a patient that is
spontaneously breathing. Although patient-ventilator asynchrony
is avoided during PSV as the patient initiates the mechanical
breaths, asynchrony may still occur if the duration of inspiratory
flow exceeds the time of an active exhalation effort, a phenome-
non known as “delayed cycling.” If the patient tries to exhale while
positive airway pressure is still being applied to the airway, the
major consequence of delayed cycling is the creation of PEEP,
which may also impair the triggering of assisted breaths.
Avoidance of patient-ventilator asynchrony caused by delayed
cycling can be achieved by shortening the inspiratory flow by
increasing the percent of peak inspiratory flow at which the venti-
lator cycles to exhalation (Fig. 38.19A and B). Adjusting the flow-
cycling is of great relevance in ICU patients that are on PSV and
the reader is referred to the literature for further details [112,113].
Spontaneous intermittent mandatory ventilation
Spontaneous intermittent mandatory ventilation (SIMV) is an
assisted-controlled ventilation modality provided by some anesthe-
sia ventilators. This ventilation mode allows mandatory mechanical
breaths as selected by the operator (controlled ventilation) and
patient-triggered mechanical breaths (assisted ventilation), with
the mandatory breaths either in volume-control (SIMV- VCV) or
pressure-control (SIMV-PCV) mode [101]. During the expiratory
phase following a mandatory breath, there is a trigger window at
late expiration (set by the operator as percentage of expiratory time)
where the ventilator algorithm responds to a pneumatic signal
(negative airway pressure or inspiratory flow generated by the
patient) with assisted mechanical breaths either in volume-control
(constant flow and volume targeted) or pressure-control (decelerat-
ing flow and pressure-targeted) mode. A pressure-targeted flow
cycled breath (PSV mode) is delivered if the patient makes
spontaneous breathing efforts at any time during expiration outside
the triggering window. If the patient has an increased ventilatory
drive and assisted mechanical breaths superimpose on the time
interval programmed by the ventilator to deliver a mandatory
breath, pre-programmed breaths are canceled, avoiding patient-
ventilator asynchrony (Fig. 38.20).
Anesthesia ventilators with SIMV capabilities often present the
flow and pressure curves originating from patient-triggered
breaths with a distinctive color, or another graphic hallmark, to
allow the operator to discriminate patient-triggered from manda-
tory breaths. The SIMV mode (either in pressure- or volume-
control mode) can be selected for maintenance of general
anesthesia; absence of patient-triggered breaths during anesthesia
can be achieved by setting a proper V̇E (based on f and V T during
SIMV-VCV or f and Pmax during SIMV-PCV) to maintain eucapnia
and by ensuring an adequate depth of anesthesia. Alternatively,
spontaneous breathing efforts can be abolished by administering a
neuromuscular blocking agent during anesthesia. The SIMV mode
can be useful as an alternative to controlled modes of ventilation
(VCV and PCV) in animals with spontaneous breathing efforts
despite proper V̇E and adequate depth of anesthesia (Fig 38.20). At
the end of anesthesia, weaning the animal off the ventilator can be
achieved by reducing the number of mandatory breaths to allow
CO 2 to build-up and increase central ventilatory drive; once venti-
latory drive is judged to be adequate, as observed by the number of
patient-triggered breaths, the ventilation mode can be switched to
assisted (PSV), before allowing the patient to resume spontaneous
ventilation.
Monitoring pulmonary mechanics during
mechanical ventilation
Pressure–volume (P–V) loops
Dynamic P–V loops, which graphically present changes in airway
pressure (∆P) on the x-axis and changes in lung volume (∆V) on
the y- axis during a mechanical breath, provide important informa-
tion regarding R aw and CRS
. A summary of changes in dynamic P–V
loops that may occur during VCV and PCV are illustrated in
Fig. 38.21. Analysis of dynamic P–V loops reveals that lung volume
during inspiration is less than lung volume recorded at the same
airway pressure during expiration. The difference in lung volume
during inflation and deflation occurs because some of the energy
spent to distend the lungs is lost during deflation. The dissipating
energy during lung inflation/deflation (defined by the area within
the P–V loop), named “hysteresis,” is attributed to alveolar recruit-
ment during inspiration and de-recruitment during expiration,
alveolar surface tension/surfactant, gas absorption, and stress
relaxation of lung tissue [114,115].
2 	100 	10% 	25% 	50%
1
Time (seconds)	Time (seconds)	Time (seconds)
2	1 	2	1 	2
0
–80
20
10
0
0
–2
40
–10
Active exhalation
Flow
Pressure
	(cmH
2
O)
Flow
(L/min)
Pressure
(A) 	(B)
Figure 38.19 Changes in inspiratory and expiratory flow and airway pressure during pressure support ventilation (PSV). A. The oval shows an abnormal
deflection in the airway pressure curve (additional increase in airway pressure) caused by active exhalation while the ventilator is still generating
inspiratory flow. B. Lung model showing flow-cycling (end of inspiration) at 10%, 25%, and 50% of peak inspiratory flow. Notice that when the percent of
peak flow is increased, there is a shortening of inspiratory flow, which may avoid patient-ventilator asynchrony caused by delayed cycling. Source:
Hess [112]; Gentile [113], reproduced with permission.

-- 786 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	771
Standard veterinary anesthesia ventilators or older model
human anesthesia workstations adapted for veterinary use usually
can perform mechanical ventilation only in volume-controlled
mode, without the option for adding an inspiratory pause. The
user sets the inspiratory flow necessary to achieve a target V T
. Tidal
volume monitoring may be restricted to the visual analysis of the
volume displaced on the ventilator bellows during inspiration,
which strays from the actual inspired V T [86], while airway pres-
sure is monitored by a pressure gauge incorporated into the breath-
ing circuit. If the anesthesia apparatus does not incorporate flow
sensors and pressure transducers, pulmonary mechanics can be
monitored in small and large animal species by a near-patient
(Trigger window)
(Flow-cycling: PSV)
(Time -cycling: VCV)
(Inspiratory pause)
(Trigger for assisted vent.)
(Pressure limit)
Target
VT
Target
P aw(PSV)
Respiratory
rate
Operator set variables
PEEP
Operator set variables
1
3 	3
Interval between mandatory breaths
Trigger window
2	2
Expiratory time
(B)
• Minute volume (MV)
• Expired VT (TVexp)
• Peak pressure (Ppeak)
• Plateau pressure (Pplat)
• PEEP
Monitored parameters:
• Inspired oxygen
concentration
• Pressure (Paw) /
Volume (Vol) Loop
• Compliance (Compl)
Mandatory, volume
targeted breaths
Patient triggered,
volume targeted
breaths
Patient triggered,
pressure targeted
breaths (PSV)
1	1* 	1*
Mandatory breath
cancelled to avoid
overlaping with
patient triggered
breath
1*
2
3
1
(A)
Figure 38.20 Mechanical ventilation with SIMV-VCV (9100c nxt, GE Healthcare) in a 15 kg dog with ventilator asynchrony in volume-controlled
ventilation (VCV) mode, despite an adequate depth of anesthesia and a PET
CO2 between 32–34 mmHg (pulse oximetry = 98% with an FI
O2 = 0.35).
A. Ventilation mode was switched to SIMV-VCV (operator settings shown). B. The airway pressure and flow curves of mandatory volume-targeted
breaths are displayed in yellow and green, respectively, while patient-triggered breaths are displayed in blue. Patient-triggered, volume-targeted breaths
(blue), are delivered only during the trigger window after a mandatory breath (window set at 50% of expiratory time); spontaneous breathing efforts
outside the trigger window initiate pressure-targeted breaths (PSV). Notice that if patient-triggered breaths coincide with the timing of mandatory
breaths, the mandatory cycle is canceled to avoid asynchrony (overlapping between assisted and controlled breaths).

-- 787 of 1450 --

772 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
spirometer (Pitot tube-based flow sensor), originally designed for
use during mechanical ventilation in humans [93–95]. The origi-
nal flow sensor (adult and pediatric D-lite) can be used in small
animals or other species with a maximum V T < 2 L; whereas the
sensor remodeled into a larger scale (H-lite) can be used during
anesthesia in large animals (e.g., horses). The sensor, placed
between the endotracheal tube and the Y-piece of the breathing
circuit, provides real-time monitoring of inspired and expired V T
,
inspired and expired minute volume, P peak , P plat , PEEP, C RS , and P–V
loops (Fig. 38.22).
Compliance of the respiratory system and airway
resistance
Dynamic CRS can be measured during VCV as the ratio between the
change in lung volume (V T
) and the change in airway pressure
( difference between P peak and PEEP):
Dynamic C 	mL/cmH O V mL
P 	PEEP cmH O
RS
T
peak
2
2
The P peak generated by a constant inspiratory flow during VCV
is the pressure necessary to overcome the resistive and viscoelastic
properties of the respiratory system [100–102]. Therefore,
decreased dynamic C RS is not only attributed to factors that
decrease lung (atelectasis and pulmonary edema) and chest
wall 	(increased 	intra-abdominal 	pressure 	and 	obesity)
compliance, but also to factors that increase R aw (narrow/kinked
endotracheal tube, viscous secretions in the airways, and
bronchoconstriction) [100–102].
Static C RS
, measured as the ratio between V T and the driving
pressure (P plat – PEEP) during conditions of zero flow, allows
evaluation of the viscoelastic properties of the respiratory system
per se, without the confounding effects of the frictional component
of the work done (R aw ) [100–102].
Static C 	mL/cmH O V mL
P 	PEEP cmH O
RS
T
plat
2
2
In humans, a P plat created by the inspiratory hold (period of
zero flow at end-inspiration) should last for at least 2–5 s to allow
measurement of true Palv after gas flow distribution between alveoli
with faster and slower filling rates (Fig. 38.14) [100,103]. If the
duration of the inspiratory pause is between 0.5 and 2 s, it may
still mostly overcome the frictional resistance imposed by the
airways, but such compliance measurements are better defined as
quasistatic [100,103].
The algorithm used to calculate CRS may significantly impact
evaluation of pulmonary mechanics. During VCV without an
(A) Reference P–V loop during VCV:
VT
VT 	VT VT
VT 	VT
Expiration
Expiration
Inspiration
Inspiration
Lung volume
(mL)
Lung volume
(mL)
Lung volume
(mL)
Lung volume
(mL)
Lung volume
(mL)
Lung volume
(mL)
Airway pressure
(cmH2O)
Airway pressure
(cmH 2O)
Airway pressure
(cmH2O)
Airway pressure
(cmH 2O)
Airway pressure
(cmH2O)
Airway pressure
(cmH2O)
Reference
P-V loop
Reference
P-V loop
Reference
P-V loop
Reference
P-V loop
• ↑ Hysteresis
(expiration) 	• No change in
hysteresis
• No change in VT
• ↓ Slope
• ↓ Slope
• ↓ VT
• ↑ Hysteresis
• ↓ VT
(B) Increased Raw during VCV: 	(C) Decreased CRS during VCV:
(D) Reference P–V loop during PCV: 	(E) Increased Raw during PCV: 	(F) Decreased CRS during PCV:
• ↓ Slope
• No change in VT
Figure 38.21 Diagrammatic representation of dynamic P–V loops recorded during volume-controlled ventilation (VCV) and pressure-controlled ventilation
(PCV) in dogs. A. Reference pressure–volume (P–V) loop during VCV. The inspiratory limb is a near-straight line because airway pressure increases in a
quasilinear fashion with lung volume during VCV. The slope is represented by the red dotted line. B. An increase in R aw during VCV may increase the area of
the expiratory limb (hysteresis) due to an increase in resistive expiratory work. The slope also decreases during VCV because Ppeak increases to compensate for
the increase in R aw
. C. A decrease in CRS during VCV decreases the slope of the P–V loop while hysteresis may not be significantly altered. D. Reference loop
during PCV. The inspiratory limb has a more rounded shape compared to VCV because of the decelerating inspiratory flow. E. An increase in R aw during PCV
increases hysteresis during inspiration and expiration (box-shaped P–V loop) while the slope may be unaltered. F. A decrease in CRS decreases the slope of the
P–V loop during PCV. V T
, tidal volume; CRS
, respiratory system compliance; R aw
, airway resistance; Ppeak
, peak airway pressure.

-- 788 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	773
inspiratory pause, compliance measurements provided by the ven-
tilator should be considered dynamic. If there is an inspiratory
pause during VCV and the manufacturer’s algorithm calculates CRS
from P plat
, compliance measurements can be considered quasistatic
or static, depending on the duration of the inspiratory pause
(Fig. 38.23). Close hemodynamic monitoring should be performed,
especially if longer periods of inspiratory hold are performed
(> 25% of inspiratory time). Maintaining alveolar distension for
longer periods could have negative hemodynamic consequences
attributed to longer-lasting decreases in vena caval blood flow and
stroke volume (due to increased Ppl during mechanical ventilation)
and to more prolonged increases in right ventricular (RV) afterload
secondary to compression of pulmonary capillaries in West zones I
and II during the inspiratory hold [116].
Compliance measurements usually are not indexed to body
weight in adult humans. However, because of the large variation in
body mass and size of the lungs among veterinary species, C RS
should be indexed to body weight (mL/cmH2 O/kg). In dorsally
recumbent adult horses undergoing VCV with zero end-expiratory
pressure (F I
O2 > 90%), dynamic C RS may be close to 0.4 mL/
cmH2
O/kg, which is considerably less than C RS in anesthetized dogs
(F I
O2 = 50%) during VCV and with 2–6 cmH2
O PEEP (1.3 mL/
cmH2
O/kg) [117,118]. Poor CRS typically found during mechanical
ventilation in large animal species is caused by impaired lung and
chest wall compliance. Compression atelectasis associated with
relaxation and cranial displacement of the diaphragm is a major
contributing factor to the decrease in lung compliance observed in
horses [1,119,120]. Factors such as increased intra-abdominal pres-
sure, pregnancy, and obesity may further aggravate compression
atelectasis and lead to greater decreases in CRS
. Factors found to
influence C RS in mechanically ventilated dogs include body weight,
body condition score, and shape of the chest wall [118,121]. Three
types of chest wall conformation are recognized in dogs: barrel-
chested (wide chest at the sternum), deep-chested (narrow chest at
the sternum), and intermediate-chested (chest area at sternum
between the deep and barrel-shaped chest). In dogs with a barrel-
shaped thorax, CRS may be reduced by approximately 20% in
comparison to dogs with intermediate chest wall shape. Similar
decreases in CRS may be observed in dogs that are overweight (high
body condition score) in comparison to dogs with normal body
condition scores (Fig. 38.24) [118].
Strategies for reducing atelectasis during
mechanical ventilation
Development of atelectasis during anesthesia is associated with
oxygenation 	impairment 	and 	decreased 	lung 	compliance.
Conventional mechanical ventilation, which often improves V̇E and
prevents hypercapnia, may fail to reopen atelectatic lung areas and
increase PaO 2 levels. If poor lung compliance (decreased CRS
)
and low PaO 2 values in relation to the F I
O2 (PaO 2
/FI
O2 ratio <
300 mmHg) are observed, a temporary increase in airway pressures
aiming to reopen atelectatic lung areas, that is, an alveolar recruit-
ment maneuver (ARM), may be considered to increase CRS and
PaO 2 levels. In the open-lung approach, originally developed for
clinical use in humans with acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS) during mechanical ventilation, collapsed alveoli are opened
by temporary application of elevated inspiratory pressures and
post-recruitment PEEP is applied to prevent recurrence of atelecta-
sis [122]. In addition to an improvement in pulmonary mechanics
and gas exchange, preventing cyclic alveolar collapse reduces the
progression of lung injury associated with mechanical ventilation in
ARDS patients because of improved homogeneity in alveolar dis-
tention throughout the lung parenchyma [123,124]. In addition to
their use in humans with ARDS in the ICU setting, ARMs are an
effective means to increase C RS and PaO 2 levels in anesthetized
humans not suffering from ARDS, or those undergoing cardiac and
thoracic surgeries [125]. Systematic reviews in humans have recom-
mended routine use of ARMs followed by PEEP after induction of
(A)
(B)
(C)
Figure 38.22 A. Pitot tube-based spirometer/flow sensor designed for
human anesthesia that is compatible for use in small animals (D-lite, GE/
Datex- Ohmeda) and the same sensor remodeled into a larger scale for use
in large animals (H-lite). B. Pressure–volume (P–V) loops measured by the
D-lite sensor in a 26 kg dog undergoing laparoscopic ovariectomy under
pneumoperitoneum (intra-abdominal pressure of 15 mmHg). Compared
to the P–V loop recorded before abdominal insufflation (L1), the decreased
slope observed after induction of pneumoperitoneum (L2), suggests
worsening (decreased) dynamic CRS
. C. Pressure–volume loops measured
by the H-lite sensor in a 400 kg horse undergoing colic surgery in dorsal
recumbency. Compared to the loop recorded before the abdominal cavity
was opened (white arrow), the increased slope observed after abdominal
decompression (black arrow) suggests an improvement (increase) in
dynamic CRS
. For the H-Lite actual tidal volumes (TV) and dynamic
compliance (C) are obtained by multiplying the displayed values by 5.
Source: Reproduced from Calice et al. [93]; Moens et al. [94], with
permission from Elsevier.

-- 789 of 1450 --

774 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
general anesthesia, and in the face of declining hemoglobin
saturation [125].
Despite the potential benefits of ARMs followed by PEEP, some
individuals may not respond favorably to an open-lung approach
(Fig. 38.25) and the potential benefits should be weighed against
the negative physiological impact of high alveolar pressures on
hemodynamic function [126]. Elevated airway pressures (Palv
)
during an ARM increase intrathoracic (P pl
) and transpulmonary
pressures (gradient between alveolar [Palv
] and pleural pressure
[Ppl
]), reducing venous return through the vena cava [127,128].
In addition, distension of the alveolar wall by elevated Palv leads to
compression of pulmonary capillaries and increases pulmonary
vascular resistance (PVR)/RV afterload, which may further
contribute to the decrease in stroke volume/cardiac output caused
by the ARM [127–129]. For these reasons, this technique cannot be
applied to hemodynamically unstable or hypovolemic individuals
and close hemodynamic monitoring is necessary during lung
recruitment maneuvers. Furthermore, ARMs may need to be inter-
rupted and the target increase in airway pressure may not be
achieved if cardiovascular compromise develops (e.g., severe hypo-
tension). Inotropic/vasopressor drugs and/or intravenous fluid
boluses may be initiated in anticipation of the hemodynamic
(A)
(B)
Figure 38.23 Airway pressure and flow curves and dynamic pressure–volume (P–V) loops recorded during volume-controlled ventilation (VCV) (9100c
nxt, GE Healthcare) in a 23 kg dog (ideal body weight) anesthetized with isoflurane. A. The ventilator was set to deliver a V T (Vc) of 10 mL/kg (230 mL) at
a respiratory frequency (FR) of 12 breaths/min and a 1:2 inspiration-to- expiration ratio (I:E). The end-inspiratory hold was set to 40%. Peak inspiratory
pressure (Ppeak ), plateau pressure (Pplat
), minute volume (VM = expired V T × respiratory frequency), and respiratory system compliance [Compl = expired
V T
/(Pplat – PEEP)] are shown on the left-hand side of the screen. Compliance measurements are quasistatic because the duration of inspiratory pause was
between 0.5–2 s (0.66 s). The inspiratory limb of the dynamic P–V loop shows a quasilinear increase in airway pressure during VCV (arrow). The P–V
loop stored when the same animal was under pressure-controlled ventilation (PCV) shows that the inspiratory limb has a more rounded shape during
PCV (arrow). The slope of the P–V loop is shown by the dashed red line. B. Screenshot recorded after the cuffed endotracheal tube was kinked in the
same animal under VCV. The airway pressure tracing is suggestive of increased R aw and there is an increased gradient between peak (15 cmH2
O) and
plateau pressure (9 cmH 2
O). The dynamic P–V loop shows increased expiratory resistance (area above the slope of the P–V loop – dashed red line). The
slope is decreased because P peak increased with increased R aw
. Quasistatic CRS remained constant (35–36 mL/cmH2
O, or 1.5 mL/cmH2
O/kg) after partial
obstruction of the endotracheal tube.

-- 790 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	775
(A) Responder (improvement in compliance and oxygenation)
(B) Nonresponder (no improvement or worsening of compliance and oxygenation)
Before ARM + PEEP
Nondependent
(uppermost)
lung area
↑ Normally
aerated alveoli
↑ Lung compliance
↑ Oxygenation
↓ Atelectatic
alveoli
Atelectatic alveoli
(no change or ↑)
↓ Normally
aerated alveoli
Center
of lung
Dependent
(lowermost)
lung area
Nondependent
(uppermost)
lung area
Lung compliance
(no change or ↓)
Oxygenation
(No change or ↓)
Center
of lung
Dependent
(lowermost)
lung area
Overdistended
alveoli
Normally
aerated alveoli 	Atelectatic alveoli
After ARM + PEEP
Before ARM + PEEP 	After ARM + PEEP
↑ Overdistended
alveoli
↓ Overdistended
alveoli
Figure 38.25 Effects of an alveolar recruitment maneuver followed by open-lung positive end-expiratory pressure (ARM + PEEP) on the distribution of
lung aeration considering two possible phenotypes: A. responder to lung recruitment; B. nonresponder to lung recruitment. Source: Adapted from Pensier
et al. [126].
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
CRS
 (mL/cmH
2O/kg)
All dogs
1–4/9 	5/9 	6–9/9 	Interm. Barrel
Body condition score 	Thorax shape
n = 100
n = 3
n = 57
n = 36
n = 80
n = 20
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Figure 38.24 Influence of body condition score (underweight, 1–4; normal, 5; overweight, 6–9) and thorax shape (intermediate shaped [Interm.] and
barrel-shaped [Barrel]) on CRS during volume-controlled ventilation in anesthetized healthy dogs (n = 100). The V T (8–12 mL/kg) was set according to
actual body weight and an inspiratory pause of 20% was added after the preset V T was achieved. Source: Reproduced from Asorey et al. [118], with
permission. *Significant difference between groups (p < 0.05).

-- 791 of 1450 --

776 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
compromise in animals that present arterial blood pressures that
are approaching the lower acceptable range (60 and 90 mmHg for
mean and systolic arterial pressure, respectively).
The degree of alveolar collapse leading to decreased C RS and
oxygenation impairment varies substantially among mammalian
species and there is no evidence supporting the routine use of
ARMs in veterinary anesthesia. Incidence of hypoxemia is high in
dorsally recumbent horses undergoing elective surgeries, with
reports showing that up to 20% of dorsally recumbent animals
receiving conventional mechanical ventilation develop severe
intraoperative hypoxemia (PaO 2 < 60%) while breathing 100%
oxygen [2]. Oxygenation impairment observed in dorsally
recumbent horses is caused by the development of a large shunt
fraction, which may exceed 30–50% of pulmonary blood flow, due
to atelectasis of dependent lung regions and these effects may
persist despite the use of conventional mechanical ventilation [1,24].
Although recruitment maneuvers may be useful in this scenario,
one must be aware of the cardiovascular depressant effects caused
by the high airway pressures (60–80 cmH 2 O) that may be necessary
to improve PaO 2 in equine species [130], and of the possibility of
such 	elevated 	pressures 	to 	cause 	alveolar 	overdistension/
inflammation in horses [131]. In anesthetized horses subjected to
an ARM reaching a P peak of 60 cmH 2 O, histological analysis of lung
tissue revealed overdistended lung areas but there was no
cytological (bronchoalveolar lavage) or histopathological evidence
of lung injury [131]. However, compared to the groups of conscious
horses and spontaneously breathing anesthetized horses, an
increased expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines (interleukin
1-β and 6) matrix metalloproteinases (MMP 1 and 9) was observed
in the lung tissue of groups that received conventional mechanical
ventilation alone or combined with an ARM, suggesting that
mechanical ventilation per se might be associated with early stages
of lung injury [131]. Despite controversies regarding its clinical
application, lung recruitment maneuvers should be considered to
improve arterial oxygen levels in severely hypoxemic horses (PaO2
< 60 mmHg) undergoing surgery in dorsal recumbency [130,132–
134]. If a decision has been made to apply an ARM in horses with
colic, this procedure should be performed after abdominal
decompression/exposure of the large colon, which may allow some
improvement in C RS and PaO 2 levels. In contrast to the situation in
horses, the degree of oxygenation impairment caused by atelectasis
is significantly less during routine anesthesia in small animal
species. Currently, the use of ARMs followed by PEEP in small
animal anesthesia may be considered in selected clinical conditions
associated with poor C RS due to atelectasis and low PaO2
/FI
O2 ratio
(< 300 mmHg) or hypoxemia. These conditions may be caused by
obesity, increased intra-abdominal pressure (e.g., laparoscopic
surgery under pneumoperitoneum), diaphragmatic hernia, or
presence of poorly aerated areas due to lung disease.
Recruitment maneuvers can be performed in several ways as
illustrated in Fig. 38.26. The simplest way of performing lung
recruitment in humans involves a temporary increase in airway
pressure to 30–40 cmH 2 O lasting up to 30–40 s, while monitoring
the 	patient 	for 	adverse 	effects 	such 	as 	hemodynamic
compromise [101,135] (Fig. 38.26A). A temporary increase in
airway pressure to 40 cmH 2 O for 20 s, followed by 5 cmH 2 O PEEP
has been successfully applied to increase arterial oxygenation and
static C RS in healthy dogs undergoing laparoscopy [136]. Much
higher airway pressures (60–80 cmH 2 O for 10–12 s), have been
reported to recruit alveoli and promote an increase in PaO 2 levels
in dorsally recumbent horses undergoing elective or emergency
(colic) surgeries [130,134].
Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) is a tool originally
designed 	for 	non-invasive 	ventilation 	in 	non-intubated,
spontaneously breathing patients. However, if the anesthesia
ventilator has the option for performing CPAP, this ventilation
(A) 	(B)
(C) 	(D)
30
Airway pressure
(cmH
2O)
Airway pressure
(cmH
 2O)
Airway pressure
(cmH
 2O)
Airway pressure
(cmH
 2O)
Bag squeezing
Cycling maneuver with decremental PEEP trial Stepwise V T changes
Time
Ascending/descending PEEP
CPAP
Time	Time
Time
Post ARM PEEP
Post ARM PEEP
Post ARM PEEP
Post ARM PEEP
ΔP 	ΔP
20
10
0
30
20
10
0
30
20
10
0
30
20
10
0
ΔP	
↓ ΔP 	↓ ΔP
↓ ΔP	↓ ΔP
ΔP
Figure 38.26 Diagrammatic representation of airway pressure–time curves of alveolar recruitment maneuvers (ARMs). A. Manual recruitment with bag
squeezing. B. Recruitment with continuous CPAP. C. Cycling maneuver with decremental positive PEEP trial. D. Stepwise V T changes. Effective alveolar
recruitment should decrease the driving pressure (∆P, gradient between inspiratory and end-expiratory pressure) and increase C RS
. CPAP, continuous
positive airway pressure; PEEP, positive end-expired pressure; V T
, tidal volume; CRS
, respiratory system compliance. Source: Partially modified from
Ball et al. [101].

-- 792 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	777
mode may be selected in intubated patients to achieve an elevated
airway pressure for a short period of time (e.g., 30 cmH 2 O for 20 s),
before returning to a standard mechanical ventilation protocol and
post-recruitment 	PEEP, 	which 	aims 	to 	keep 	the 	alveoli
opened [38,101,136] (Fig. 38.26B). However, most anesthesia
machines do not have the option for CPAP. In this case, with the
spontaneous mode selected, the rebreathing bag is manually
squeezed with the pop-off (APL) valve closed/semi-closed to
achieve the target airway pressure for the desired length of time.
This technique may be used to improve oxygenation and expand
the lungs in small animal species (dogs and cats) with diaphragmatic
hernia. In this case, the increase in airway pressure should be
applied after reduction of the visceral contents herniated into the
thoracic cavity, while the surgeon is guiding the increase in airway
pressure by visually assessing lung expansion within the thoracic
cavity (see discussion below regarding re-expansion pulmonary
edema). The maximum airway pressure can be limited to
30 cmH 2 O or less, pending the severity of cardiovascular depression
(e.g., hypotension) observed during the recruitment maneuver.
Cats with a diaphragmatic hernia may be more sensitive to the
negative cardiovascular effects of ARMs, therefore a reduced
maximum airway pressure is initially recommended (≤ 20 cmH 2 O).
Alveolar recruitment may also be performed using cycling
maneuvers, which have three distinct phases: (1) hemodynamic
conditioning; (2) recruitment; and (3) decremental PEEP trial
(Fig. 38.26C and 38.27). During the hemodynamic conditioning
phase, before the lung’s opening pressure is achieved, inspiratory
pressures and PEEP are progressively increased with ventilation in
PCV mode while the driving pressure (gradient between Pmax and
PEEP) is held constant. Theoretically, pulmonary tissue stress is less
than during CPAP maneuvers. Stepwise increases in airway pres-
sure may reduce the possibility of overdistension of ventilated lung
areas as it progressively spreads across the collapsed lung tissue,
opening atelectatic alveoli in a more controlled manner than with
CPAP maneuvers [101,135]. Stepwise increases in airway pressures
also identify individuals with occult hypovolemia, who may not
tolerate the higher airway pressures that are necessary to open
collapsed lung areas [135]. If severe hypotension is identified dur-
ing this phase, the procedure is interrupted, and intravenous fluid
boluses and/or sympathomimetics are administered before the
cycling maneuver is reinstituted. During the recruitment phase,
while PEEP is maintained at the maximum target level (e.g.,
15 cmH 2 O for 30 s), the driving pressure can be temporarily
increased by adjusting Pmax to achieve inspiratory pressures that are
necessary to open collapsed lung areas (e.g., 30 cmH 2 O). The
decremental PEEP trial is the last phase of a cycling maneuver and
aims to determine the lowest PEEP level that will prevent de-
recruitment or re-collapse of lung tissue. As PEEP is progressively
reduced in 2 cmH2 O steps, it will reach the closing pressure, that is
the pressure at which alveoli collapse [135]. Identification of the
closing pressure can be performed by measuring the quasistatic CRS
at the end of each stepwise decrease in PEEP during VCV with an
inspiratory pause. The post-recruitment PEEP level can be adjusted
based on the PEEP that resulted in highest quasistatic CRS during
the decremental PEEP trial + 2 cmH 2
O [135,137–139].
Effects of mechanical ventilation on cardiovascular
function
In general, greater cardiovascular depression occurs in anesthetized
animals receiving positive-pressure ventilation compared to
anesthetized animals that are permitted to breathe spontaneously.
Mechanical ventilation alters cardiovascular function directly through
changes in intrapleural and alveolar pressures. Cardiovascular
function is also indirectly modified by mechanical ventilation via
changes in PaCO2 levels. A decrease in V̇E due to low respiratory
frequency and/or low V T set on the ventilator will cause varying
degrees of hypercapnia. In conscious dogs and humans, hypercap-
nia increases endogenous catecholamine levels leading to a cardio-
vascular stimulant effect (increased heart rate, cardiac output, and
arterial blood pressure, and decreased systemic vascular resistance
[SVR]). Although general anesthetics can potentially blunt the
sympathetic stimulation caused by high PaCO2 levels, studies in
anesthetized mechanically ventilated horses have shown that
hypercapnia increases circulating plasma epinephrine and norepi-
nephrine levels and results in cardiovascular stimulation [140,141].
In humans under general anesthesia, mild hypercapnia (PaCO 2 up
to 60 mmHg) during mechanical ventilation increases subcutane-
ous tissue oxygen tension, which may contribute to oxidative killing
of surgical pathogens by neutrophils and reduce the rate of surgical
infection [142]. However, cardiovascular depression/poor respon-
siveness to exogenous catecholamines can occur in the face of
severe acidemia (pH < 7.2).
In most patients, mechanical ventilation depresses cardiovascu-
lar function by decreasing venous return. The blood flow entering
the heart through the vena cava (VR) is directly proportional to the
gradient between the mean circulatory filling pressure (MCFP) of
the venous circulation and right atrial pressure (RAP) divided by
the resistance to blood flow in the venous circulation.
VR MCFP RAP
Venous resistance
The MCFP is determined by the stressed volume (Vs
), which rep-
resents the blood volume that exerts pressure inside the veins and
effectively contributes to VR; while the unstressed volume (Vus ) is
the blood that keeps small veins and venules minimally opened and
does not contribute significantly to VR [143,144]. Changes in VR
during spontaneous breathing and during mechanical ventilation
are illustrated in Fig. 38.28. During spontaneous breathing, VR
transiently increases because the gradient between MCFP and RAP
increases as P pl become more negative during inspiration. In con-
trast, mechanical ventilation decreases the gradient between MCFP
and RAP as Ppl increases during inspiration. According to the
Frank–Starling mechanism, as VR and preload are decreased, RV
stroke volume decreases on the next heartbeat. Under normal cir-
cumstances, decreases in preload/stroke volume induced by
mechanical breaths are relatively small. However, in hypovolemic
animals, the inspiratory rise in Ppl caused by mechanical ventilation
induces larger decreases in VR/preload, which may result in signifi-
cant cardiovascular depression. An excessively large V T delivered by
the ventilator may also induce greater decreases in VR/preload,
mimicking the effects of hypovolemia.
In addition to the effects on VR, distension of the alveolar wall
caused by the rise in alveolar pressure (Palv
) increases RV afterload
because of compression of pulmonary capillaries in West zones I
and II. The increase in RV afterload opposes RV ejection and may
contribute to the decrease in RV stroke volume (Fig. 38.29) [116,145].
On the left side of the circulation, increases in pleural (P pl )
and alveolar (Palv ) pressures induced by mechanical breaths
cause intermittent increases and decreases in aortic blood flow
and left ventricular (LV) stroke volume (Fig. 38.29). Aortic
blood flow and LV stroke volume transiently decrease because of
the inspiratory decrease in preload/RV stroke volume as
discussed before; however, the maximum decrease in aortic

-- 793 of 1450 --

778 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
flow/LV stroke volume caused by this mechanism will only be
detected a few heartbeats later, during expiration, reflecting the
time needed for blood to travel through the pulmonary
circulation. On the other hand, an inspiratory increase in aortic
flow/LV stroke volume occurs because of increased LV preload
and decreased LV afterload caused by increased Palv and by
increased P pl , respectively, as illustrated in Fig. 38.29. Because
patients that are hypovolemic have larger variations in aortic
flow/LV stroke volume induced by mechanical breaths, heart–
lung interactions during mechanical ventilation provide the
physiologic basis for assessment of fluid responsiveness, that is,
the determination of whether a patient will respond or not to
intravascular volume expansion with increases in stroke volume/
cardiac output [116,145].
Ventilator-induced lung injury
Precise monitoring of V T and airway pressure during positive-
pressure ventilation is critical because inappropriate mechanical
ventilator settings can cause lung damage. Currently, it is recognized
that there are four basic mechanisms that contribute, either alone or
in combination, to lung injury associated with mechanical ventilation:
barotrauma, volutrauma, atelectrauma, and biotrauma. Barotrauma,
Inspiratory pressure
in PCV mode (Pmax )
10
cmH2O
8
cmH 2O 	6
cmH 2O 	4
cmH 2O 	2
cmH 2O
5
cmH 2O
10
cmH 2O
15
cmH 2O
0
cmH 2O
5
cmH 2O
10
cmH2O
15
cmH2O
10
cmH 2O
PEEP
VCV + ZEEP
VCV + ZEEP
VCV + fixed PEEP (5 cmH2 O)
VCV + fixed PEEP (5 cmH2 O)
VCV + ARM / open lung PEEP
VCV + ARM / open lung PEEP
PEEP 	“Open lung” PEEP
(PEEP at the point of
maximal CRS + 2 cmH2O)
15
cmH2O
20
cmH2O
30
cmH2O
10
cmH2O
15
cmH2O
20
cmH 2O
30
cmH2O
VCV with inspiratory
pause (fixed V T)
Inspiratory pressure
in PCV mode (Pmax)
VCV with inspiratory
pause (fixed VT)
35 	35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
30
Airway pressure (cmH
2 O)
(A)
(B) 	(C)
CRS
 (mL/cmH
2O/kg)
Airway pressure (cmH
2O)
Hemodynamic
conditioning
Recruitment 	Decremental PEEP trial
(C RS recorded at the end o each step)
Hemodynamic
conditioning
Recruitment
1 min. 	1 min. 	1 min. 	1 min. 	1 min.
25
20
15
10
5
0
2.4 	14
ΔP (cmH
2O)
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
2.0
1.6
1.2
0.8
0.4
Baseline 	10
Time after ARM / open lung PEEP (minutes) 	Time after ARM / open lung PEEP (minutes)
20 	30 	40 	50 	60 	Baseline 	10 	20 	30 	40 	50 	60
Figure 38.27 Example of a cycling maneuver followed by decremental PEEP trial in anesthetized dogs. A. Progressive increases in Pmax and PEEP are
performed in PCV mode (hemodynamic conditioning phase). Each step may last for a fixed number of breaths (e.g., 5 breaths). After a maximum PEEP
level is achieved, the driving pressure (Pmax – PEEP) is increased to achieve the lung’s opening pressure (recruitment phase). After lung recruitment,
progressive decreases in PEEP are performed with a fixed V T in VCV mode with an inspiratory pause lasting ≥ 0.5 s (decremental PEEP trial phase).
Quasistatic CRS
, measured after 1 minute at each stepwise decrease in PEEP, is used to identify the lowest PEEP associated with maximum CRS
. After a new
recruitment was performed, anesthesia was maintained in VCV + PEEP associated with maximum C RS + 2 cmH2
O (open-lung PEEP). B. and C. In
healthy dogs anesthetized under VCV a cycling maneuver (ARM + open-lung PEEP) resulted in higher quasistatic CRS and lower ∆P than animals
anesthetized under VCV + PEEP (5 cmH 2
O) and VCV + ZEEP. PEEP, positive end-expired pressure; Pmax
, maximum airway pressure; PCV, pressure-
controlled ventilation; V T
, tidal volume; VCV, volume-controlled ventilation; CRS
, respiratory system compliance; ARM, alveolar recruitment maneuver;
ZEEP, zero end-expired pressure; ∆P, driving pressure. Source: Data compiled from García-Sanz et al. [138].

-- 794 of 1450 --

Chest wall
Pleural cavity
(A5)
RA 	RV 	LA 	LV
(A4) 	(A2)
(B1)
(B2)
(B4)
(B3)
(A3)	(A1)
↑P alv
↑Ppl
↑ RV afterload
(Compression
of capillaries
in West zones I-II)
↑ VR
(pulmonary vein)
↑Palv
↑P pl
↑ VR to the left heart
(Compression of capillaries in West zone III)
↑ RAP
↓ PA blood
flow ↓ LV
transmural
systolic
pressure
↓ LV
afterload
(aorta)
↓ Stressed
volume
(hypovolemia)
↓ VR
(vena cava)
Figure 38.29 Heart–lung interactions during mechanical ventilation. Mechanisms that cause intermittent decreases and increases in aortic blood flow/LV
stroke volume are described in sequences A1 to A5 and B1 to B4, respectively. The increase in Ppl induced by mechanical breaths increases RAP (A1),
which leads to a decrease in VR and RV preload (A2). PA blood flow and RV stroke volume are decreased (A3). The impairment in VR induced by
mechanical ventilation is magnified by hypovolemia, which decreases the stressed blood volume (A4). The increase in Palv induced by mechanical breaths
causes compression of capillaries not engorged with blood (West zones I and II) and increases RV afterload (A5), contributing to further decreases in PA
blood flow/RV stroke volume (A3). The maximum decrease in aortic blood flow/LV stroke volume is detected during expiration because of the delay
associated with transit of blood flow through the pulmonary circulation. Increased Palv squeezes blood out of capillaries in West zone III (B1) and
increases venous return to the left heart (B2). Increased P pl during inspiration (B3) decreases LV systolic transmural pressure (the pressure difference
between the inside and the outside of LV during systole), consequently decreasing LV afterload (B4). The increase in LV preload (B1 and B2), combined
with the decrease in LV afterload (B3 and B4) increases LV stroke volume during inspiration. Ppl
, pleural pressure; RAP, right atrial pressure; VR, venous
return; RV, right ventricle; PA, pulmonary artery; Palv
, alveolar pressure; RA, right atrium; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle. Source: Adapted from
Michard et al. [116].
(A) Spontaneous ventilation
(C) Mechanical ventilation – hypovolemia 	(D) Mechanical ventilation – large V T
(B) Mechanical ventilation – normovolemia
MCFP
(Vs)
↓MCFP
(↓Vs ) MCFP
(Vs)
MCFP
(Vs)
Vs
Vs
↑VR
MCFP – ↓RAP
Venous resistance
↑VR =
↓VR
↓RAP
↑RAP 	↑↑RAP
↑RAP
↓↓VR 	↓↓VR
↓ Ppl 	↑ Ppl
↑ Ppl
↑↑ P pl
Vu 	Vu
Vu	Vu
Vs
Vs
Vs
Vs
Vs
Vs
Vena cava
Vena cava 	Vena cava
Vena cava
Right atrium
Right atrium 	Right atrium
Right atrium
↓MCFP – ↑RAP
Venous resistance
↓↓VR = MCFP – ↑↑RAP
Venous resistance
↓↓VR =
MCFP – ↑RAP
Venous resistance
↓VR =
Figure 38.28 Diagrammatic representation of inspiratory changes in venous return (VR) during spontaneous and mechanical ventilation. A. During
spontaneous ventilation, the decrease in Ppl during inspiration increases right atrial transmural pressure (the difference between pressure inside and
outside an elastic organ) and transiently decreases RAP. Venous return increases because the gradient between MCFP and RAP is increased. B. During
mechanical ventilation, the increase in P pl during inspiration decreases right atrial transmural pressure and RAP is increased. Venous return decreases
because the gradient between MCFP and RAP is reduced. C. Greater decreases in VR are induced by mechanical ventilation in hypovolemic patients
because the decrease in MCFP (due to a decrease in Vs
) further reduces the gradient between MCFP and RAP. D. Mechanical ventilation with a large V T
can mimic the effects of hypovolemia on VR and preload. A supraphysiological V T results in larger increases in Ppl
, and causes greater increases in RAP,
which further reduces VR. Vs
, stressed volume; Vus
, unstressed volume; VR, venous return; MCFP, mean circulatory filling pressure; RAP, right atrial
pressure; Ppl
, pleural pressure.

-- 795 of 1450 --

780 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
initially defined as excessively high airway pressures/Palv causing lung
damage, was the first proposed mechanism of ventilator-induced lung
injury (VILI). However, experimental studies in the 1980s showed
that VILI occurs when excessively high airway pressures/Palv causes
excessive alveolar expansion (volutrauma) [146,147]. Therefore,
elevated inspiratory pressure (equivalent to Palv
) is more likely to result
in VILI if it results in excessive increases in lung volume. This
fundamental 	concept 	was 	shown 	by 	experimental 	studies
demonstrating that mechanical ventilation with high airway pressures
(Ppeak of 45 cmH2
O) did not result in evidence of lung damage/
inflammation when lung expansion was limited by low chest wall
compliance (Fig. 38.30) [146]. Barotrauma is currently defined as lung
injury caused by high transpulmonary pressures, that is the pressure
difference between inside (Palv
) and outside the lung (Ppl
), which effec-
tively results in alveolar overdistension [148]. Although barotrauma
may occur during VCV because of high inspiratory pressures, the
anesthesiologist should consider that elevated inspiratory pressures
(high Palv
) may not result in excessive increases in transpulmonary
pressure (alveolar overdistension) if Ppl is also increased because chest
wall compliance is markedly reduced, as in morbidly obese animals or
animals with marked increases in intra-abdominal pressure. As an
example, standard mechanical ventilator settings (V T of 12–15 mL/kg)
in horses with colic and severe abdominal distension may, on some
occasions, result in Ppeak values that exceed 45 cmH2
O. Although no
specific measurements of transpulmonary pressures have been per-
formed in horses under these circumstances, the decrease in Ppeak that
is noticeable after the surgeon removes the distended bowel from the
abdominal cavity suggests that the cause of vof the chest wall by
abdominal viscera. Therefore, high inspiratory pressures under these
conditions are less likely to be harmful to the lungs.
Besides 	barotrauma 	and 	volutrauma, 	atelectrauma, 	and
biotrauma are now recognized as mechanisms of VILI [148].
Atelectrauma is caused by high shear forces from cyclic opening
and closure of atelectatic alveoli, which can trigger a local
inflammatory response and injure the alveolar–capillary mem-
brane [148]. The alveolar instability caused by the intermittent
opening and closure of atelectatic lung areas, named “tidal recruit-
ment,” occurs when the level of inspiratory pressure is large
enough to open atelectatic alveoli, but these alveoli subsequently
collapse during expiration because the level of end-expiratory pres-
sure is insufficient to keep them open throughout the ventilatory
cycle [149–151]. Biotrauma has been recognized as an important
mechanism of VILI in ARDS. It is characterized as a biological
response, including activation of a pro-inflammatory cytokine
cascade that promotes injury even in lung areas not subjected to
mechanical stress and in extrapulmonary organs [148]. Although
data are lacking in veterinary medicine, it has been recognized
that a lung-protective ventilation strategy in humans with ARDS,
aimed at minimizing mechanical stress to the lungs by use of
low V T
s, may attenuate the systemic inflammatory response and
associated multiple organ failure, contributing to a decrease in
mortality [123,152–154].
Mechanical ventilation during anesthesia
in humans and veterinary species
Experimental animal models of ARDS show that application of
PEEP with a relatively small V T is less injurious to the lung than
ventilation with a large V T in the absence of PEEP [147]. In the
medical field, the importance of VILI and its negative impact
on clinical outcomes was first established in humans with
ARDS [123,153–155]. Historically, routine anesthesia in humans
was performed with relatively high V T (10–15 mL/kg) without
PEEP in most instances [156]. While the concept of lung-protective
ventilation with low V T (≤ 6 mL/kg) and high PEEP (> 12 cmH 2
O)
has been a standard procedure for long-term ventilation in humans
with ARDS in the ICU setting for more than 20 years [157], ventila-
tion strategies for routine anesthesia in humans only started to
change with advances in the understanding of mechanisms of VILI,
where lung damage is closely related to the amplitude of cyclic stretch
of lung parenchyma induced by mechanical ventilation [158].
In human patients without lung disease undergoing anesthesia for
elective surgeries, mechanical ventilation with lower V T (6 mL/kg)
and 10 cmH2 O PEEP may reduce lung inflammation compared to a
higher V T (12 mL/kg) [159]. A reduction in V T from values
≥ 10 mL/kg to < 8 mL/kg also improves the clinical outcome (lower
incidence of postoperative pneumonia/respiratory failure and
shorter duration of hospital stay) in human patients without ARDS
in the operating room [160,161]. To prevent postoperative pulmo-
nary complications, current guidelines for protective mechanical
ventilation in human patients undergoing surgery recommend
targeting a V T of 6–8 mL/kg based on predicted (ideal) body weight
and an initial PEEP level of 5 cmH2
O [162].
Ventilator settings in veterinary species cannot be directly
extrapolated from recommendations in humans for several reasons
including: (1) minute ventilation (V T × f) should be adjusted
according to the CO2 production (metabolic rate), which can vary
among animals and man; (2) the V T adjusted on the ventilator may
vary among species because of differences in airway deadspace
( 	)	VDaw	
and physiological space ( 	)	VD phys
, which lead to differences in
effective alveolar ventilation (V̇A
); and (3) the maximum airway
*+
*+
45	30
Peak inspiratory pressure
(cmH 2O)
Closed chest
Kfc (mL/min/cmH
2O/100g)
Body cast
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0 15
Figure 38.30 Effects of mechanical ventilation with peak inspiratory
pressures of 15, 30, and 45 cmH2
O on capillary filtration coefficient (Kfc
) in
the lungs of rabbits with normal chest wall compliance (Closed chest, white
bar) and in rabbits where lung expansion was restricted by a full body
plaster cast surrounding the chest wall and abdomen. The body cast was
molded while rabbits were breathing spontaneously (Body cast, black bars).
The increase in Kfc was observed only when elevated airway pressures
resulted in increased lung volume (Closed chest group), which
likely resulted in high transpulmonary pressures (Palv – P pl ).
Source: Reproduced from Hernandez et al. [146], with permission.
* Significantly higher than 15 cmH2
O in Closed chest group.
† Significantly higher than Body cast group at the same peak inspiratory
pressure.

-- 796 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	781
pressure and driving pressure (gradient between P plat and PEEP)
may differ among animals and man because of differences in C RS
,
which is affected by body mass (large versus small animals), shape
of chest wall, intra-abdominal volume/pressure, and degree of ate-
lectasis, among other factors. Tidal volume adjustments however
should be based on ideal (predicted) body weight as variable
degrees of alveolar overdistension/higher driving pressures may
occur if V T calculation is based on actual body weight in obese ani-
mals [163]. In animals with poor body condition scores, calculation
of V T based on actual body weight instead of ideal body weight
could result in alveolar sub-distension/atelectasis.
A critical point to consider is the size of mechanical breaths
delivered to veterinary patients because the V T must be large
enough to overcome the airway deadspace (V Daw
) and expand the
alveoli (V Talv
), according to the formula:
V 	V 	V	T 	D 	T	aw 	alv
Typically, the VDaw
measured by the single nitrogen washout
(Fowler’s) technique in adult humans is 150 mL (2 mL/kg for an
adult averaging 75 kg) [164]. Therefore, a V T between 6–8 mL/kg
(450–600 mL for 75 kg adult human) is large enough to overcome
the deadspace represented by the conducting airways, effectively
expanding the alveoli during inspiration without causing alveolar
overdistension or cyclic alveolar opening and closure (tidal recruit-
ment), especially when combined with a moderate PEEP level
(5 cmH2
O or more). However, a V T currently recommended for rou-
tine ventilation during anesthesia in humans (e.g., 6 mL/kg) may not
be large enough to go past the VDaw measured in dogs by volumetric
capnography (6.5 to 7.6 mL/kg) and effectively expand the
alveoli [165].
As explained in Chapter 37, CO2 removal by the lungs and PaCO2
levels depend on the fraction of V T that goes beyond the
physiological deadspace ( 	)	VD phys
, which is the sum of areas of the
respiratory system that do not participate in gas exchange, including
the conducting airways ( 	)	VDaw
and alveoli that are ventilated but not
perfused (alveolar deadspace [ 	]	VDalv
):
V 	V 	V	D 	D 	D	phys 	aw 	alv
Therefore, the rate of CO2 removal is better described by the
effective alveolar ventilation per minute (V̇A
) than by the minute
ventilation (V̇E ), because the former considers the VD phys
:
V 	V 	V	A 	T 	D phys	
f
Fig. 38.31 shows deadspace calculations using volumetric
capnography in a dog anesthetized with isoflurane receiving
mechanical ventilation (VCV mode). As discussed in Chapter 37,
the Enghoff modification of the Bohr equation for calculating the
physiological deadspace to tidal volume ratio (VD phys
/V T ) may over-
estimate true VD phys
in the presence of increased areas of low alveolar
ventilation-to-perfusion (V̇A
/Q̇) ratio and shunt. The PaO2
/FI
O2
ratio close to 500 mmHg (480 mmHg) in Fig. 38.31 demonstrates
that venous admixture/shunt is minimal; therefore, the Bohr–Enghoff
formula may provide a reasonable estimate of true VD phys
/V T
. For this
dog, VD phys
was 7 mL/kg (6.4 mL/kg of VDaw
and 0.6 mL/kg of VDalv )
and mechanical ventilation with a standard V T adopted in humans
(6 mL/kg) would be inappropriate because it would only ventilate
deadspace. Airway deadspace calculations based on the volumetric
capnography curve (6.4 mL/kg) show a larger VDaw
than values con-
sidered physiological in humans (2 mL/kg). Other species may also
Temperature-corrected arterial blood gases (FIO 2 = 0.43):
PaO2/F IO2 ratio = 479 mmHg
PaCO 2 – PeCO 2
48.8 mmHg – 17 mmHg
PaCO 2
Deadspace calculations
(Volumetric capnography curve):
Deadspace calculations (Bohr-Enghoff):
Expired V T = 74 mL (10.7 mL/kg)
VDaw = 44 mL
(6.4 mL/kg)
V Talv = 29 mL
(4.2 mL/kg)
V D phys
/V T =
VD phys
/V T =
VD phys
/V T =
VDphys = VDphys /VT × Expired V T
V Dphys = 48 mL (7 mL/kg)
0.65
VDalv = VDphys – V Daw
V Dalv = 4 mL (0.6 mL/kg)
48.8 mmHg
Figure 38.31 Arterial blood gases and deadspace volume calculations using data from volumetric capnography (plotting of expired CO2 and expired V T
) in a
healthy dog (6.9 kg) anesthetized with isoflurane and receiving mechanical ventilation in VCV mode (target VT 12 mL/kg [83 mL], I:E ratio 1:2, f 18 breaths/min,
FI
O2 0.43). See text for further explanation. VT
, tidal volume; VCV, volume-controlled ventilation; VD phys
/VT
, physiologic deadspace to tidal volume ratio; PeCO2
,
partial pressure of CO2 in mixed expired gas; VDaw
, airway deadspace; VD phys
, physiological deadspace; VDalv
, alveolar deadspace; VTalv
, alveolar tidal volume.

-- 797 of 1450 --

782 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
present a larger VDaw
and VD phys
, which could also impact extrapola-
tion of V T currently recommended for mechanical ventilation in
humans. In conscious healthy horses and cows breathing through a
face mask, the Bohr–Enghoff VD phys
(calculated using a correction
factor for the added deadspace represented by the facemask) was
about 5.2 and 3.7 mL/kg, respectively [166].
The use of low V T (8 mL/kg) has been evaluated in anesthetized
dogs; however, a real benefit in terms of improved clinical outcome
(decreased postanesthetic respiratory complications) has not been
identified [167,168]. In addition, one canine study showed that a V T
of 8 mL/kg results in less than ideal V̇A leading to hypercapnia/
respiratory acidosis despite the use of high breathing rates (> 30
breaths/min) [167]. In this same study, computerized tomography
also provided evidence that the low V T (8 mL/kg) resulted in a
greater degree of atelectasis/poorly aerated lung areas in compari-
son to a V T of 15 mL/kg plus 5 cmH2
O of PEEP [167]. As VDaw
tends
to remain relatively constant, VD phys
can be further increased by an
increase in VDalv
during clinical anesthesia. Under these circum-
stances, mechanical ventilation with V T in the range that approaches
the deadspace represented by the conducting airways (6–8 mL/kg)
could result in even higher degrees of hypercapnia despite attempts
to maintain V̇A by increasing the number of mandatory breaths (f).
While data are lacking for most species, current evidence still sup-
ports the use of V T
s in the range of 10–15 mL/kg during routine
anesthesia in most species as no real benefit has been shown with
V T
s recommended in humans to provide “protective lung ventila-
tion.” If anesthesia ventilators that incorporate flow sensors that
allow accurate adjustment of V T are not available, Ppeak is often
adjusted along with respiratory rate to maintain eucapnia based on
capnography in small animal practice.
During PCV, the target airway pressure (Pmax
) will vary according
to the species as they differ in their CRS
. Also, specific conditions
such as decreased CRS due to obesity, pneumoperitoneum, or
thoracic shape (barrel-chested dogs) may require a higher Pmax to
provide effective alveolar ventilation. The Pmax can be initially set at
5–7 cmH2
O in cats with healthy lungs receiving PCV with zero end-
expiratory pressure (driving pressure between 5–7 cmH2 O) [169].
Setting the Pmax
/driving pressure at 5–7 cmH2
O was recommended
because when Pmax values were increased above this range there
were progressive increases in overinflated pulmonary parenchyma
upon computed tomography [169]. To date, there are no published
studies evaluating the Pmax during PCV in canine species; however,
clinical experience has shown that in non-obese medium-sized
dogs with healthy lungs, the Pmax can be initially set at 8–10 cmH2
O;
taking into consideration that there is an intrinsic PEEP of at least
2 cmH 2
O in a bellows-type ventilator, this level of Pmax will result in
a driving pressure of 6–8 cmH2
O.
In humans, avoidance of 100% oxygen as carrier gas and mainte-
nance of PEEP during mechanical ventilation are strategies used to
reduce atelectasis and improve oxygen transfer from alveoli to arte-
rial blood (decrease the P(A-a)O 2 and increase PaO2 /FI
O2 ratio). As
explained in Chapter 37, collapse of poorly ventilated alveolar units
(V̇A /Q̇ < 0.15) is precipitated by high F I
O2 (> 0.8) because the trans-
fer of oxygen to pulmonary capillary blood exceeds the inspired gas
flow entering these alveoli [170]. As the predominant mechanism
responsible for the increase in intrapulmonary shunt during anes-
thesia in humans with normal lungs is compression atelectasis, the
use of lower FI
O2 by mixing oxygen and air in inspired gas per se
does not abolish atelectasis during anesthesia and surgery [171].
However, current guidelines for lung-protective mechanical venti-
lation in anesthetized human patients include the recommendation
to set the FI
O2 after intubation to ≤ 0.4 with subsequent adjustments
in FI
O2 to the lowest value necessary to maintain oxygen saturation
monitored by pulse oximetry ≥ 94% (strength of recommendation:
weak) [162].
A reduction in the inspired oxygen concentration from 100% to
40% during VCV (V T adjusted to 15 mL/kg) in dogs reduced atelec-
tasis and poorly aerated lung areas, recognized as dense lung areas
upon computed tomography, and improved oxygen transfer from
alveoli to arterial blood (decreased P(A-a)O2
) despite lower PaO 2
values in comparison to animals receiving 100% oxygen [15].
During VCV in dogs (V T adjusted to 12 mL/kg), a reduction in
inspired oxygen from 100% to 40% while maintaining zero end-
expiratory pressure or the use of 100% oxygen with PEEP (5 cmH2
O)
after an ARM (CPAP of 40 cmH2
O applied for 20 s) resulted in
higher PaO 2
/FI
O2 ratio, improved pulmonary mechanics (increased
compliance), and increased lung aeration in comparison to 100%
oxygen and zero end-expiratory pressure [38]. While the use of
lower FI
O2 may be a feasible alternative to improve lung function
during mechanical ventilation in dogs with healthy lungs, reducing
the FI
O2 from values > 95% to 50% during conventional VCV did
not reduce the large shunt fraction/venous admixture that develops
in dorsally recumbent, isoflurane-anesthetized horses [35].
Anesthesia for bronchoscopy
While lower airway procedures in large animals can be performed
using sedation and topical anesthesia, general anesthesia is required
to permit bronchoscopy in companion animals. General considera-
tions when performing anesthesia for bronchoscopy include the
impact of the patient’s underlying condition on respiratory function,
potential for bronchospasm, overall impairment of gas exchange
function of the lung during and following the intervention, reduction
in airway lumen by the bronchoscope increasing R aw and the work
of breathing, and a potential lack of a sealed airway throughout the
bronchoscopy procedure, which could lead to environmental pollu-
tion and impair efficacy of positive-pressure ventilation. Reported
complications associated with bronchoscopy (with or without
bronchoalveolar lavage) in companion animals include hypoxemia,
hemodynamic changes (bradycardia, tachycardia, hypotension, and
hypertension), pneumothorax, bronchospasm, prolonged anesthetic
recovery, and death [172–177]. Most complications that occur
during anesthesia are transient and improve over time with oxygen
supplementation, ventilatory support, and/or specific interventions
such as thoracocentesis; however, mortality during anesthesia in
feline patients undergoing bronchoscopy may be higher compared
to that observed with other interventions [172].
Management of anesthesia
Most canine and feline patients scheduled for bronchoscopy have
clinically significant underlying respiratory disease that warrants
a thorough history, preoperative physical examination, and
diagnostic work up, including chest radiography. In general,
sedation of small animal patients with opioid analgesics is routinely
performed 	due 	to 	their 	mild 	sedative 	and 	antitussive
properties [172]. Inclusion of anticholinergics in premedication
protocols may not prevent bronchospasm; however, they can be
included based on other indications [178]. Preoxygenation of
patients prior to induction of anesthesia with injectable anesthetics
and subsequent delivery of oxygen using an anesthetic breathing
circuit is recommended. Methods used to secure the airway prior
to bronchoscopy in cats include a sterilized standard endotracheal
tube or a supraglottic airway device [172,179], while sterilized
standard orotracheal tubes are generally used in dogs. Anesthesia
may be initially maintained with either an inhalant anesthetic or an

-- 798 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	783
injectable anesthetic. As the patient’s cardiopulmonary status can
change rapidly during endoscopic airway procedures, it is
recommended that monitoring devices such as an electrocardiogram
(ECG), blood pressure monitor, pulse oximeter, and capnograph
are in use prior to initiation of any airway procedure.
Several different strategies can be used to facilitate oxygen
delivery during airway examination and sample collection. A bron-
choscope swivel adapter placed between the patient’s end of the
breathing circuit and endotracheal tube permits use of an endo-
scope with an endotracheal tube or supraglottic device (Fig. 38.32).
Use of a bronchoscope adapter avoids the need to disconnect an
intubated patient from the breathing circuit during the exam,
allowing more effective oxygen supplementation/high FI
O2 levels to
be provided throughout the procedure. Of concern for the anesthe-
siologist is the narrowing of the trachea (in non-intubated patients)
or of the endotracheal tube by the bronchoscope, which will increase
R aw and the work of breathing. Therefore, intubation should be per-
formed with an endotracheal tube with the largest internal diameter
possible and if possible, mechanical ventilation should be consid-
ered to improve gas exchange and reduce the work of breathing,
especially in patients that are already dyspneic and experiencing
respiratory muscle fatigue due to increased work of breathing.
Providing oxygen (from the anesthesia machine or alternative
oxygen source) via a catheter that is suitable for insertion into the
trachea with or without an orotracheal tube in place is an alterna-
tive option. In patients that are too small to permit passage of a
scope through an endotracheal tube and/or placement of a catheter
beside the scope, it may be possible to deliver oxygen through one
of the endoscope channels. With the latter technique, low oxygen
flows should be used, and care taken to ensure adequate expiratory
airflow to prevent gas trapping in the lungs and development of a
pneumothorax. To minimize potential environmental contamina-
tion and personnel exposure to inhalant anesthetics, injectable
agents such as propofol or alfaxalone, administered as an infusion
or intermittent boluses are generally preferred to maintain anesthesia
during bronchoscopy if it is not feasible to use a bronchoscope
swivel adapter with a breathing circuit. During anesthetic recovery
following bronchoscopy, continued supplementation of inspired gases
with oxygen and monitoring of the patient’s adequacy of oxygenation
is highly recommended. Further recommendations regarding
preanesthetic patient preparation and anesthetic management for
patients with specific respiratory diseases are provided below.
Anesthesia for intrathoracic procedures
Indications for thoracic exploration in companion animals typically
include spontaneous pneumothorax, lung lobe torsion, intrathoracic
or thoracic mass lesions, traumatic lesions to the thorax, diaphrag-
matic hernia, congenital vascular anomalies such as persistent right
aortic arch or persistent ductus arteriosus, pericardial disease, chy-
lothorax, and pyothorax [180–185]. In addition, esophageal foreign
bodies and/or esophageal perforations are relatively common in
companion animals, and in some instances, they may require
thoracic exploration for removal and repair, respectively [186].
Although less common, in the equine and bovine, pleuropneumonia,
pericarditis, and traumatic injuries to the thorax, resulting in a
pneumothorax and/or diaphragmatic hernia may be indications for
thoracic exploration and surgical repair [187–190]. Diagnostic or
therapeutic interventions related to intrathoracic structures may be
performed using an intercostal thoracotomy, median sternotomy in
small/medium-sized animals, or a thoracoscopic approach. In some
instances, more than one surgical technique may be required to
achieve the desired outcome, particularly when thoracoscopy is the
initial technique employed, therefore, the anesthetist should be pre-
pared for multiple surgical approaches [183,184,191,192].
In most species, intrathoracic procedures are performed under
general anesthesia; however, in adult cows and horses, both thora-
cotomy and thoracoscopy have been performed in standing sedated
animals using local anesthetic techniques [187,190,193]. Although
an incomplete mediastinum is possible in large animal species, in
mature horses and cattle, the mediastinum is commonly reported to
be complete [190,193,194]. As such, despite lung collapse on the
side of surgery, adequate gas exchange can be maintained due to the
function of the contralateral lung when the surgery is performed
with the horse or cow standing, assuming it does not have similar
pathology. Like large animals, dogs and cats generally have a
Port for
bronchoscope
Connect to
anesthesia
circuit
Connect to
endotracheal
tube
Figure 38.32 Bronchoscopy can be performed in intubated anesthetized patients receiving oxygen supplementation and mechanical ventilation using a
bronchoscope swivel adapter. Source: www.dmsveterinary.com/product/mila-15mm- tracheal-tube-connector-double- swiveling.

-- 799 of 1450 --

784 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
complete mediastinum; however, when any veterinary patient is
under general anesthesia, ventilatory support is generally required
once the pleural space is entered even if the contralateral thoracic
space and lung are normal. Traditional two-lung ventilation is gen-
erally used during intrathoracic procedures under general anesthe-
sia; however, as will be discussed below, one-lung ventilation (OLV)
is feasible in dogs and may provide optimal surgical conditions for
some intrathoracic procedures. Thoracoscopy under general anes-
thesia with two-lung ventilation may be performed with or without
intrathoracic CO 2 insufflation to facilitate visualization of intratho-
racic structures [180,185,194,195]. In the cat during general anes-
thesia, CO 2 insufflation pressures greater than 3 mmHg result in
significant cardiovascular side effects and are not recommended in
this species [196–198]. In the horse and dog during general anes-
thesia, use of thoracic CO 2 insufflation is described, and the cardio-
pulmonary effects can be marked. Insufflation of the thoracic cavity
should not be undertaken unless required and in-depth cardiopul-
monary monitoring is recommended [187,199–202].
Complications and outcomes associated with thoracic interven-
tions are dependent on the primary disease and concurrent condi-
tions; however, in general, major intraoperative concerns include the
potential reduction in pulmonary gas exchange both during and
following the procedure, iatrogenic injury to intrathoracic structures,
as well as a deterioration in cardiovascular performance associated
with ventilatory support, reduced venous return, vasodilation, and/
or hemorrhage [183,191]. Postoperatively, pneumothorax and pleu-
ral effusion are frequently reported, particularly if patients have
clinical signs associated with pulmonary or pleural disease preop-
eratively [181,186,191]. Cellulitis and abscessation of the thoracot-
omy site have been reported in horses with pleuropneumonia
following thoracic exploration [189]. Commonly encountered
conditions involving the respiratory system that require either
thoracoscopy or thoracotomy are discussed further below.
Management of anesthesia
Prior to anesthesia, the surgical approach should be reviewed with
the surgical team to facilitate planning for patient positioning,
management of ventilation, including the need for OLV or thoracic
insufflation, as well as a postoperative patient management plan,
including the optimal approach to analgesic management.
Intrathoracic procedures are major surgeries with potential for
considerable reduction in respiratory and cardiovascular function
intraoperatively and a thorough preoperative assessment of the
patient is strongly recommended. In addition, a complete blood
count (CBC), serum biochemistry, and thoracic radiographs are
highly recommended in all patients undergoing intrathoracic pro-
cedures with additional diagnostic imaging such as ultrasound and
computed tomography as appropriate. In patients with pre-existing
respiratory disease, preoperative arterial blood gas analysis can pro-
vide information regarding lung function if it is available. Patients
with intrapulmonary masses should be evaluated for metastasis,
and changes in hepatic or renal function, in addition to the effects
of the mass on respiratory function. Cardiovascular assessment
with an ECG, echocardiographic evaluation, and blood pressure
measurement are appropriate for patients with pre-existing cardiac
disease. For patients with a history of trauma, an ECG and arterial
blood gas are also highly recommended preoperatively due to the
potential presence of arrhythmias and gas exchange impairment.
Whenever possible, patients should be normovolemic with ade-
quate hemoglobin concentrations prior to intrathoracic procedures
as blood loss is a potential complication [184]. Preoperative fluid
therapy may therefore include crystalloid, artificial colloid, and/or
blood product administration. In cases where significant hemor-
rhage is anticipated, preoperative blood typing or crossmatching is
warranted. Medications aimed at optimizing cardiopulmonary
function should be maintained preoperatively. In patients with pre-
existing pneumothorax or pleural effusion, air and/or fluid should
be removed from the intrathoracic space immediately prior to anes-
thesia, to minimize the patient’s work of breathing and improve gas
exchange during anesthetic induction. In cases with rapidly accu-
mulating intrathoracic air or fluid, measures to permit repeated
chest evacuation, such as a chest tube should be in place prior to
induction of anesthesia.
The specific anesthetic protocol used for thoracic procedures
should be tailored to the individual patient. Systemic administration
of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs), sedatives,
and opioid analgesics, with regional anesthesia (paravertebral or
intercostal nerve block) or infiltration of local anesthetic at surgery
sites, generally provides suitable conditions for thoracoscopy in the
standing adult horse or cow [187,189,190,193,194,203]. Monitoring
of the patient’s PaO2 is recommended and oxygen administration
through nasal catheter(s) is indicated if hemoglobin saturation falls
below 95% [190,203].
Recommendations for small animal patients undergoing general
anesthesia include preoxygenation of the patient if there is any pre-
existing impairment of pulmonary function, use of rapid induction
strategies to secure a sealed airway quickly, use of mechanical
ventilatory support during the thoracic procedure or earlier if
indicated, providing hemodynamic support as required (inotrope/
vasopressor infusions and antiarrhythmic medications), employing
active warming strategies to maintain the patient’s body tempera-
ture, and using multiple approaches to manage postoperative pain.
In general, a balanced anesthetic technique using a combination of
inhalant anesthetics and infusions of minimum alveolar concentra-
tion (MAC)-reducing agents such as opioids, lidocaine (except cats),
and ketamine can be used to maintain a suitable plane of anesthesia
while providing intraoperative analgesia and minimizing the car-
diovascular depression induced by inhalant anesthetics. In cases
where pulmonary tissue is being resected or there is a risk of air
leak, inhalant agents are ideally avoided to prevent environmental
contamination. Neuromuscular blocking agents are not routinely
used in veterinary patients undergoing intrathoracic procedures as
adequate muscle relaxation is typically achieved with the protocols
discussed above.
Critical to the success of intrathoracic procedures performed
during general anesthesia is the use of appropriate ventilatory
support techniques. While ventilation can be supported manually
for a short period of time, mechanical ventilation should be
available for any intrathoracic intervention planned under general
anesthesia. This will permit consistent ventilation using set volumes
or pressures while freeing up the anesthetist to monitor and manage
other aspects of anesthesia such as providing appropriate and timely
hemodynamic support. In cases with significant pulmonary
parenchymal disease or pleural effusion, the clinician should be
prepared to provide ventilatory support immediately after
anesthetic induction while in some patients, spontaneous
ventilation may be feasible before thoracotomy or thoracoscopy. In
patients undergoing a thoracotomy or thoracoscopy, once the
thoracic cavity is open to the atmosphere and intrapleural pressure
equilibrates with atmospheric pressure, the patient’s breathing
effort will not be able to create a negative intrapleural pressure and
normal airflow into the ipsilateral lung. As previously noted, in

-- 800 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	785
most healthy dogs and cats, the mediastinum is complete; however,
it may be disrupted in cases with thoracic disease and entry to the
chest may impact both lungs. For some intrathoracic procedures in
canine patients, controlling ventilation to the right and left lungs
independently may be desirable, and techniques to achieve such
conditions are discussed below. In most cases requiring separation
of the lungs, ventilation is initiated using a standard orotracheal
tube, and therefore whole lung ventilation is conducted until the
patient is prepared and positioned for surgery. Placement of an
endobronchial blocker or performing selective endobronchial
intubation to initiate OLV is then performed to minimize lung
movement and improve surgical visualization.
With traditional (non-PEEP) ventilatory support, opening of
the pleural cavity via a thoracotomy or thoracoscopy typically results
in a decrease in PaO2 because of venous admixture associated with
V̇A
/Q̇ mismatch and intrapulmonary shunting of blood [190,193,203–
207]. The latter is attributed to a decrease in FRC (to below closing
capacity) associated with the loss of the elastic recoil of the chest wall
and its associated negative intrapleural pressure [204]. The
significance of the fall in PaO2 will be dependent on the patient’s
baseline oxygenation; however, in most companion animals without
primary lung disease, hemoglobin oxygen saturation is generally well
maintained during intrathoracic procedures. While the use of PEEP
and conservative V T settings (< 15 mL/kg) may not influence
outcomes in patients with healthy lungs, in patients with lung injury,
the use of ventilatory strategies that minimize lung collapse and
maintain alveolar recruitment, as discussed above, should be
employed to prevent further lung injury. In terms of lung mechanical
properties, as FRC is reduced, the compliance of the lung will
decrease; however, the overall impact on the patient may be variable
depending on the contribution of the chest wall, as total respiratory
compliance (CRS
) is the sum of both lung and chest wall compliance.
For example, during thoracoscopy, CRS may not change significantly,
while it may increase in a patient undergoing a median sternotomy
because the constraint imposed by the chest wall on total CRS has
been removed. In the latter circumstance, if the patient is receiving
ventilatory support with a preset pressure target (PCV mode) and the
Pmax is not decreased once the thorax is open, PaCO2 will generally fall
due to excessive alveolar ventilation associated with an increase in V T
.
Irrespective of the surgical approach, if the V T delivered to the patient
is maintained (VCV mode), changes in PaCO2 will be minimal after
the thorax is opened [205,208].
Recommended monitoring during intrathoracic procedures
under general anesthesia includes pulse oximetry, capnography,
ECG, direct arterial blood pressure, blood gas analysis, and body
temperature. While end-tidal CO2 monitoring may be a useful tool
to adjust mechanical ventilation in healthy dogs, PET
CO2 may not
reliably assess adequacy of ventilation in dogs undergoing thora-
cotomy [209,210]. Despite its limited ability to evaluate adequacy of
ventilation, PET
CO2 monitoring and determination of P(a-et)CO 2
by serial arterial blood gas analysis may provide important infor-
mation related to changes in alveolar deadspace and lung perfusion
in patients undergoing thoracic surgery.
Arterial blood gas analysis will provide an accurate measure of
PaCO 2 as well as information regarding the patient’s oxygenation
and degree of intrapulmonary shunting of blood. In terms of lung
mechanical properties, airway pressure should also be monitored
and if available, spirometry will provide additional information
regarding pulmonary mechanics to help guide ventilatory support
as described above. In small animal patients, if it is not possible to
monitor blood pressure invasively, a Doppler blood pressure
monitor is recommended in addition to an oscillometric technique,
as it can be used repeatedly over a short period of time, and it has an
audible signal permitting the anesthesiologist to continuously
evaluate the pulse rate, rhythm, and quality of peripheral perfusion.
Arrhythmias are relatively common in patients undergoing thoracic
procedures due to underlying cardiovascular disease, hemodynamic
alterations associated with the intervention, or direct myocardial
irritation, therefore the clinician should monitor the ECG continu-
ously and have antiarrhythmics available.
Small animal patients with chronic pleural space disease (e.g.,
chronic diaphragmatic hernia or chylothorax) may have concurrent
pulmonary parenchymal disease and/or lung lobe collapse, which
will be further injured by rapid re-expansion during surgery.
The pathophysiology of pulmonary re-expansion injury (i.e.,
re-expansion pulmonary edema) is complex but includes mechanical
stress leading to increases in the pulmonary microvascular
permeability secondary to the abrupt re-expansion of the lungs, and
infiltration of immune cells [211,212]. In humans, re-expansion
pulmonary edema is a rare but potentially fatal complication that
may occur after rapid re-expansion of chronically collapsed/
atelectatic lungs secondary to pneumothorax, hemothorax, and
pleural effusion [211,212]. Although objective data are lacking in
the veterinary literature, rapid re-expansion of the lungs during
surgery in cats with chronic diaphragmatic hernia may carry high
risk of fatality because of re-expansion pulmonary edema [213].
Therefore, in cases of diaphragmatic hernia where chronic alveolar
collapse is suspected, extra caution should be exerted when applying
progressively increasing inspiratory pressures and increased PEEP
levels to reopen collapsed alveoli. Visual assessment of the reopening
of collapsed lung (which changes from a dark color to a light pink)
by the surgeons may help to guide the anesthesiologist when
recruiting collapsed areas. Pulmonary edema has been observed in
some individuals in the early postoperative period, which has led
to various recommendations such as limited crystalloid volume
administration, use of colloids, administration of diuretics, and
administration of corticosteroids. Despite the lack of published
evidence, gradual re-expansion of chronically collapsed lung might
carry a lower risk of complications compared to rapid re-expansion
of the lung intraoperatively. When considering alveolar recruitment
maneuvers (ARMs) previously discussed in this chapter, a stepwise
increase in airway pressures by using a cycling maneuver approach
could be an option to minimize sudden re-expansion of the collapsed
lung after the abdominal viscera are removed from the thorax.
Placement of at least one thoracic tube prior to chest closure is
routine in patients at risk of intrapleural air or fluid accumulation
following thoracoscopy or thoracotomy. At the end of the surgical
intervention, the anesthesia-surgery team needs to communicate
when the chest is closed to ensure removal of intrapleural air and
closure of the chest tubes prior to recovery from anesthesia.
Recommended analgesic techniques used in patients undergo-
ing a thoracotomy include regional anesthesia techniques (e.g.,
intercostal nerve block, serratus plane block, paravertebral nerve
block, and placement of bupivacaine liposomal injectable sus-
pension at wound closure), epidural analgesia with opioids,
and systemic analgesia with opioids, ketamine, lidocaine, dexme-
detomidine, and NSAIDs. In clinical patients, using more than
one approach is highly recommended. Epidural morphine admin-
istration is an effective means of providing analgesia for thora-
cotomies in small animals [214,215]. As morphine is more soluble
in water than in fat, epidural administration of this opioid at
the level of the lumbosacral space results in relatively high

-- 801 of 1450 --

786 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
concentrations in the cerebrospinal fluid, which favors its cranial
spread within the medulla and the extension of its analgesic effects
up to the level of thoracic dermatomes [216].
More recently, an ultrasound-guided erector spinae block adopted
in humans for pain control in thoracic surgery has been evaluated
in cadaveric studies performed in dogs (level of the ninth thoracic
transverse process) [217,218]. A bilateral erector spinae block has
been used in anesthetized dogs undergoing sternotomies [219],
whereas another case series not including a control group reported
that epidural morphine, combined with an ultrasound-guided
erector spinae plane block with bupivacaine, provided adequate
intra- and postoperative pain control for lateral thoracotomies in
dogs [220]. A serratus block is another interfascial plane block that
provides analgesia for thoracotomies in humans [221] that has been
evaluated in cadaveric studies in dogs [222]. However, like the erec-
tor spinae block, published evidence of its effectiveness for control-
ling pain in thoracic surgery is based on a case series study with a
small number of animals [223].
Intrapleural instillation and infiltration of local anesthetic around
chest tube insertion sites have also been shown to be safe and improve
postoperative analgesia in dogs [224–226]. When local anesthetic
techniques are employed, bupivacaine or ropivacaine are generally
preferred due to the longer duration of action relative to lidocaine.
Due to potential toxicity, the total dose of bupivacaine should not
exceed 2 mg/kg in dogs, whereas the dose of ropivacaine should
not exceed 3 mg/kg in this species.
Separation of the lungs and one-lung
ventilation (OLV)
Functional separation of the lungs can be performed during anes-
thesia for a variety of indications. In veterinary medicine, the most
common indications are to facilitate thoracoscopic or minimally
invasive thoracic surgery or to isolate one lung from another when
contamination from one lung to the other is undesirable [227]. In
the latter instance, patients are generally undergoing lung lobectomy
to remove the affected lobe [192,228–231]. Controlling the
distribution of ventilation in patients with a bronchopleural fistula,
pulmonary bullae, disruption of the tracheobronchial tree, or other
severe unilateral lung disease are less common indications for
isolation of the lungs during ventilatory support [227,229].
Theoretically, the need for ventilation of both lungs versus selective
ventilation of one lung influences what strategy is optimal for the
intended procedure. To achieve independent ventilation of the right
and left lungs, placement of a double-lumen endotracheal tube is
necessary. When ventilation of one lung and collapse of the
alternative lung will provide the necessary conditions, options
include selective endobronchial intubation using a single-lumen
endotracheal tube, placement of a double-lumen endotracheal tube,
or use of a bronchial blocker (Fig. 38.33) [227,232,233].
With some bronchial blockers and double-lumen endotracheal
tubes, it is also feasible to ventilate one lung and maintain static lung
inflation using CPAP with varying FI
O2 levels in the alternate
lung [227,229]. In veterinary medicine, determination of the best
strategy for an individual patient will be dependent on the size of the
patient, available equipment (endoscopic equipment and specialized
airway devices), surgical approach, and experience of the anesthesia
and surgical team. Irrespective of the type of equipment used,
fiberoptic 	bronchoscopy 	is 	recommended 	either 	during 	or
immediately following placement to ensure the correct location of the
double-lumen tube or blocker, although this may not be feasible in
very small patients. When the latter is not feasible, video-assisted
thoracoscopic verification of airway device placement has been used
and fluoroscopic guidance of airway devices suitable for OLV has been
described in an experimental setting [230,234]. A brief description of
the technique and physiologic consequences of selective lung
ventilation is provided below. Depending on the planned intervention,
patients may be placed in lateral recumbency, with the ventilated lung
in the dependent position, or dorsal recumbency.
As noted, placement of a double-lumen endotracheal tube creates
functional separation of the right and left lung, permitting either
independent ventilation of both lungs, ventilation of one lung, and
either application of CPAP or zero airway pressure on the alternative
lung. Several different double-lumen tube designs exist; however, due
to anatomical differences in humans and veterinary species, patient
size, and airway configuration, their use is generally limited to
medium-sized dogs (10–25 kg) that can be managed with standard
Pilot balloon
(A)
Wire–guided endobronchial blocker
Blocker catheter
Multiport airway adapter
Balloon
Guide loop
Endotracheal
tube connector
Ventilation port
Bronchoscope
(B) 	(C)
4
2	5
1
3
Figure 38.33 A. A wire-guided endobronchial blocker originally developed for one-lung ventilation in children can be used for one-lung ventilation
using a standard endotracheal tube in small animals. B. A multiport airway adapter (1) connects the breathing circuit (2) to the endotracheal tube (3).
The multiport adapter has two working channels used to insert a bronchoscope (4) and an endobronchial blocker (5). C. The endobronchial blocker has a
wire loop to attach its tip to the bronchoscope and a balloon that is inflated to occlude the bronchus after it is properly positioned under guidance of the
bronchoscope. Source: Fabila et al. [232], with permission from the Indian Journal of Anaesthesia; Wu et al. [233], Wolters Kluwer Health / CCBY 4.0.

-- 802 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	787
orotracheal tubes with internal diameters of 6.5 to 10 mm. Double-
lumen endotracheal tubes are supplied in varying configurations,
lengths, and internal and external diameters, variables that must be
considered on an individual patient basis. In general, left-sided
double-lumen tubes, which have a longer tube that fits into the left
mainstem bronchus and a shorter tube terminating above the carina,
are commonly used due to the anatomy of the right mainstem
bronchus and right apical lobe in humans as well as veterinary
species. Specifically, the short distance from the tracheal carina to the
right apical lobe, as well as anatomical variation between individual
patients, make consistent blocking of the right lung more challenging
and prone to failure in both humans and dogs [227,235].
Endobronchial blockers, which are also available in different
sizes and configurations, are long catheters with inflatable cuffs at
the distal tip designed to occlude an airway. The blocker can be
placed before the endotracheal tube so that they both reside within
the trachea independently, or it can be placed through an endotra-
cheal tube under bronchoscopic guidance once the patient is intu-
bated (Fig. 38.33). Verification of the position of the device is similar
to that described for double-lumen endotracheal tubes. Once in
place, the cuff on the blocker can be inflated, isolating the portion
of the lung distal to the endobronchial blocker cuff from the tra-
chea. Some blockers have a lumen within the catheter that permits
application of either negative pressure or positive pressure to the
isolated lung region. The former facilitates collapsing the lung and
the latter permits delivery of continuous airway pressure to maintain
lung volume without fluctuations in lung size. In cases where use of
a double-lumen tube or bronchial blocker is not possible (unsuitable
or unavailable), advancement of an endotracheal tube, of sufficient
length, into a mainstem bronchus can create isolation of a lung lobe
and OLV. This procedure has been described for use in large dogs
due to the limitations in length of double-lumen endotracheal tubes
and bronchial blockers [231].
The physiologic effect of separate lung ventilation strategies will
vary depending on how each lung is managed. While physiologic
effects of ventilation are anticipated to be equivalent to that
observed with traditional ventilation when independent ventilation
of both lungs is provided (e.g., with a double-lumen endotracheal
tube and two separate ventilators), a decrease in PaO2 is observed
when ventilation is limited to one lung [208,236–239]. The latter is
a result of continued perfusion of the non-ventilated lung (shunted
blood flow). As explained in Chapter 37, hypoxic pulmonary vaso-
constriction (HPV) can minimize the oxygenation impairment
caused by the increase in shunted flow during OLV because mixed-
venous blood is redirected from non-ventilated lung regions with
low PA
O2 to ventilated lung areas. Numerous factors have been
shown to reduce HPV during OLV, including underlying lung dis-
ease, sepsis, hypocapnia, hypothermia, Trendelenburg position,
and systemic vasodilators [235,240]. While inhalant anesthetic
agents were historically considered to be inhibitors of HPV, when
delivered at doses at or below 1 MAC they have been demonstrated
to result in a similar degree of intrapulmonary shunting compared to
injectable anesthetic regimens; therefore, they are no longer consid-
ered contraindicated for clinical use during OLV [235,239,240].
Factors that may potentiate HPV include hypercapnia, hyperthermia,
metabolic acidosis, and hypertension [235]. The clinical implications
of the latter variables in controlling HPV have not been studied in
veterinary medicine to date.
In addition to the continued perfusion of the non-ventilated
lung, alteration of V̇A
/Q̇ relationships in the ventilated lung can also
contribute to a reduction in PaO 2 in patients undergoing OLV. The
latter may be influenced by underlying disease, ventilatory strategy,
patient hemodynamics, and positioning [235,240,241]. One of the
best predictors of the ability of a patient to tolerate OLV, is their
PaO2 while receiving two-lung ventilation in the position required
for surgery [235]. Patients with severe lung dysfunction may not
have adequate capacity of the non-surgical lung to permit safe OLV.
Ensuring adequate PaO2 levels prior to initiation of OLV with arte-
rial blood gas analysis is highly recommended. The ventilatory
strategy used for the ventilated lung may also impact patient arterial
oxygen levels. A recruitment maneuver at the start of OLV is rec-
ommended in humans to minimize atelectasis in the ventilated
lung and has been used in clinical veterinary patients [229,235].
Decreased pulmonary perfusion due to hemodynamic causes (e.g.,
hypotension) may be associated with pre-existing V̇A /Q̇ abnormali-
ties in both lungs even before initiation of OLV, and this will further
impair gas exchange and exacerbate hypoxemia after the lung is iso-
lated. In terms of patient positioning, the incidence of hypoxemia is
higher when human patients are in a supine position (equivalent to
dorsal recumbency in quadrupeds) [235,240]. As the right lung is
larger (about 55% of the total volume) than the left lung (45%),
human patients that are positioned in right lateral recumbency for
OLV of the right lung (left thoracotomy) present better arterial oxy-
gen levels than individuals positioned in left lateral recumbency for
OLV of the left lung (right thoracotomy). Similar discrepancy in
lung sizes exists in animals, and it is anticipated that patients having
OLV of the right lung while positioned in right lateral recumbency
for left thoracotomy would be at less risk of hypoxemia compared to
animals positioned left lateral recumbency (ventilation of the left
lung) for right thoracotomy.
Investigations of the cardiopulmonary effects of closed-thorax
OLV have been carried out in healthy experimental dogs anesthetized
with isoflurane positioned in lateral recumbency, with and without
PEEP of the dependent ventilated lung [236–238]. Consistent with
reports in other species, including humans, a substantial decrease in
PaO2 is observed with initiation of OLV. These studies found that
tissue oxygen delivery was not significantly different during OLV
versus the control bilateral lung ventilation, despite the large increase
in P(A-a)O2 gradients, and the increase in venous admixture. The
maintenance of tissue oxygen supply occurred because CO was
maintained and because the use of 100% oxygen as the inhalational
carrier gas resulted in PaO2 levels during OLV that were high enough
to produce nearly full hemoglobin oxygen saturation, despite the
increase in P(A-a)O2 gradient. Similar findings have been reported
in normal dogs undergoing OLV with an open thoracic cavity [208].
Although it did not affect oxygen delivery in the healthy dogs studied,
the use of PEEP in the ventilated lung did improve PaO2 levels,
consistent with reducing intrapulmonary shunting and the inclusion
of PEEP was therefore recommended in clinical patients [238]. The
delivery of CPAP to the non-ventilated lung has also been shown
experimentally to maintain PaO2 in dogs undergoing OLV while
placed in right lateral recumbency [239].
In many of the experimental studies described to date, the V T and
respiratory rate were maintained at similar levels before and after
initiation of OLV with VCV and PaCO2 increased in all studies,
although the values remained within acceptable limits, an effect
likely due to the creation of increased deadspace ventilation with
the relatively large V T
s delivered to the one lung [208,236,237].
With PCV, as expected, conversion to OLV without changing venti-
latory variables resulted in an increase in PaCO 2 [239].
In veterinary medicine, numerous case series and case reports of
patients undergoing OLV for a variety of procedures, including

-- 803 of 1450 --

788 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
lung lobectomy for pulmonary mass removal, thymoma removal,
correction of persistent right aortic arch, and pericardial fenestra-
tion, have been published [182,183,228,229,231,242–244]. In clinical
patients, balanced anesthetic protocols that include local anesthesia
and injectable analgesics that permit inhalant anesthetics to be
maintained below 1 MAC or injectable anesthetic regimens
(propofol) are recommended. Ventilatory strategies that include
PEEP levels of 3–5 cmH 2
O and reduced V T
s (< 10 mL/kg) when
converting from two to OLV to prevent overinflation of the venti-
lated lung are suggested, although the specific V T should ideally be
adjusted to the individual patient based on gas exchange and
pulmonary mechanics measurements as discussed.
In the event of hypoxemia during OLV: (1) the FI
O2 to the venti-
lated lung should be maximized; (2) placement of the endobronchial
blocker/double-lumen endotracheal tube/endotracheal tube should
be verified; (3) patient hemodynamics should be supported
to achieve normotension; and (4) lung recruitment of the ventilated
lung with subsequent application of PEEP, if not in use, should be
initiated. If PaO2 levels do not increase to satisfactory levels (gener-
ally considered a PaO2 above 60 mmHg), two-lung ventilation
should be resumed. If a double-lumen endotracheal tube or bron-
chial blocker with lumen to the blocked lung is in place, CPAP can
be delivered to reduce atelectasis in the non-ventilated lung [229,239].
Complications reported during OLV in veterinary patients
include inability to achieve OLV or displacement of the airway
devices and subsequent failure of OLV during surgery, in addition
to inadequate PaO2 [180,227]. In some instances, surgical access
is inadequate despite OLV, and conversion to a thoracotomy is
required. Inadvertent entrapment of an endobronchial blocker tip
by a surgical stapler has also been reported [245].
Anesthetic management of patients
with respiratory disease
Patients with respiratory disease may require anesthesia for proce-
dures related or unrelated to their respiratory disease. Unfortunately,
sedation and anesthesia of these patients are associated with an
increased risk of anesthetic morbidity and mortality. To reduce
such risks, when developing an anesthetic plan, it is important for
clinicians to understand (1) the underlying pathophysiology of the
condition and its consequences as they relate to anesthesia; (2) the
presence and nature of any concurrent conditions; and (3) the pro-
posed diagnostic and/or therapeutic intervention and its potential
complications. Knowledge of the required positioning of the patient
during interventions will also assist with anesthetic preparation and
case management.
Patients presenting to a veterinary hospital in respiratory distress
may need to be triaged and supported prior to obtaining a history
and complete physical examination. In some instances, additional
specific information in the history relative to the respiratory disorder
is relevant to anesthesia as discussed below; otherwise, it is assumed
that standard history and physical examination are appropriate. In
general, proactive review and discussion of possible complications
and challenges among veterinary team members will increase pre-
paredness and improve patient outcomes. Respiratory diseases with
substantial implications related to anesthesia will be discussed in
detail below, and while all potential disorders are not covered, the
principles and practices applied to these conditions are often trans-
ferrable to other situations. As previously noted, when specific
aspects of anesthetic management are not discussed, it is assumed
standard practices including balanced anesthetic protocols with
appropriate supportive therapies and analgesic strategies are
appropriate.
Anesthesia and upper respiratory disease
Anesthesia may be indicated in patients with upper airway disease
or dysfunction for procedures that may or may not be associated
with their airway. In animals with upper airway disease, resistance
to airflow (R aw ) and the work of breathing are often increased.
These changes can be exacerbated due to the relaxation of the upper
airways induced by sedation and anesthesia. Of greatest concern is
the potential for severe hypoventilation and/or airway obstruction;
however, numerous other factors should be considered depending
on the patient’s underlying condition, as discussed below.
General approach to the management of animals with a
difficult airway
Securing an airway to maintain its patency, minimize the risk of
aspiration, and permit administration of oxygen, with or without
an inhalant anesthetic, is a key component of anesthetic manage-
ment. Differences in degree of difficulty in securing an airway exist
among species; however, access to appropriate equipment and pre-
anesthetic preparation result in successful airway management in
most patients. Unfortunately, challenges in establishing an airway
can occur in patients with normal airways due to laryngospasm or
in patients with abnormalities secondary to a variety of factors
including anatomic conformation (e.g., brachycephalic breeds),
foreign bodies, structural abnormalities (e.g., temporomandibular
joint disease), masses intrinsic or extrinsic to the airway, inflam-
mation, and/or fluid accumulation. Successful management of the
patient, including prevention of hypoxemia caused by induction of
anesthesia with injectable agents and rapidly securing a patent air-
way, may be impacted by preoperative planning and emergency
preparation.
The American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) has published
guidelines for the management of the difficult airway [246]. While
no definitive guidelines exist in veterinary medicine, the principles
of preparing in advance of anesthetic induction, providing oxygen
supplementation during attempts at establishing an airway, enlist-
ing assistance, and attempting alternative strategies or awakening
the patient can be applied to the veterinary situation. More detail on
management of the difficult airway can be found in Chapter 5.
Further recommendations for airway management of animals with
pre-existing respiratory diseases are discussed below.
Canine brachycephalic obstructive airway syndrome
Characteristics and pathophysiology
Individuals identified as being affected with brachycephalic airway
syndrome, or brachycephalic obstructive airway syndrome (BOAS),
have a combination of primary and secondary abnormalities that
result in a reduced airway diameter and partial to complete airway
obstruction [247,248]. Not all brachycephalic dogs are affected by
BOAS; however, a large percentage of dogs within certain breeds,
most notably English and French Bulldogs, Pugs, and Boston
Terriers, meet the criteria for classification as being affected by
BOAS [249–251]. Common primary abnormalities in dogs affected
with BOAS include stenotic nares, abnormal nasal turbinate mor-
phology, elongated soft palate, redundant pharyngeal soft tissues,
macroglossia, and hypoplastic trachea [250,251]. As anticipated
based on the turbulent airflow characteristics of the upper airways
and the relationship of luminal radius to resistance to airflow
(Chapter 37), the reduction in upper airway diameter results in a

-- 804 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	789
dramatic increase in airway resistance (R aw ) and the work of breath-
ing. To compensate for the upper airway obstruction, a greater
transpulmonary pressure gradient (Pao – P pl
) is required to generate
adequate inspiratory flow. Unfortunately, greater negative intralu-
minal pressure can exacerbate collapse of the upper airway struc-
tures into the air passages and further increase R aw
. Secondary
structural alteration to the airways as a result of the changes in
intraluminal pressure and flow that are observed in BOAS patients
include soft palate hyperplasia, pharyngeal hyperplasia, laryngeal
collapse, tonsillar hyperplasia, and eversion, eversion of laryngeal
saccules, and bronchial collapse [247,252–256].
Clinical signs reported in dogs with BOAS include increased
respiratory noise, snoring, stridor, inspiratory dyspnea, exercise
intolerance, heat intolerance, syncope, cyanosis, and collapse. Case
presentation to the veterinary hospital may vary tremendously.
In some instances, clinical signs may be evident during elective
physical examination with owners unaware of any abnormalities,
while in other instances, dogs may present on an urgent basis with
life-threatening hypoxemia and/or hyperthermia. An increase in
thoracic and abdominal muscular effort associated with inspiration
is often present at rest during physical examination and it is exac-
erbated with exercise or when the animal is placed in a stressful
environment. Longer inspiratory times, and shorter expiratory
times are also characteristic of the condition [257]. Severely affected
dogs may develop respiratory obstruction during sleep when
pharyngeal muscles relax, resulting in altered sleep patterns [258].
The latter has drawn comparisons between this condition and
obstructive sleep apnea in humans, with the English Bulldog
being considered a naturally occurring animal model of the human
condition [258].
The presence of lower airway or pulmonary parenchymal disease
is highly variable in dogs with BOAS. Although large prospective
studies have not been performed, higher PaCO2 and lower PaO2
values have been reported in French Bulldogs presenting for BOAS
surgery in one investigation as well as in a group of brachycephalic
dogs presenting to a referral hospital for a variety of procedures
[259,260]. In both studies, PaCO 2 was elevated above normal values
suggesting chronic habituation to hypoventilation while changes in
PaO 2 were relatively mild and consistent with reduced alveolar
ventilation. As mentioned, however, some dogs may present with
cyanosis, indicative of severe reductions in PaO 2 , which may be
secondary to reduced alveolar ventilation, V̇A
/Q̇ mismatch, or
intrapulmonary shunting associated with pulmonary parenchymal
disease [261]. Aspiration pneumonia was reported as an underlying
cause of hypoxemia in one retrospective study assessing brachyce-
phalic dogs admitted to a referral hospital [261]. Post-obstructive
pulmonary edema, also known as “negative-pressure pulmonary
edema,” as reported in other species, including humans and horses,
has also been suggested to be a contributing factor in cases with
acute severe hypoxemia [262]. Excessive negative airway pressures
caused by severe upper airway obstruction increase venous return
to the right side of the heart and increase pulmonary artery pressure.
This effect, in combination with decreased left heart function,
results in excessive increases in pulmonary capillary hydrostatic
pressures leading to pulmonary edema as fluid moves out of
pulmonary capillaries into the lung interstitial tissue and alveolar
lumen [262]. Early experimental models of upper airway
obstruction (nasal and laryngeal) in dogs reported impaired
oxygenation over several weeks postoperatively and it was
concluded that both hypoventilation and V̇A
/Q̇ disturbances
contributed to the hypoxemia [263]. In the latter study, however,
dogs were noted to have difficulty eating; therefore, aspiration
pneumonia may have contributed to the hypoxemia observed.
In addition to abnormalities related to the respiratory system,
gastrointestinal signs including gagging, ptyalism, regurgitation,
and vomiting are reported in many BOAS patients, with the severity
of signs correlating with the severity of respiratory compromise
[264–266]. The nature of the gastrointestinal abnormalities may
vary with breed, with French Bulldogs having a higher prevalence
of gastrointestinal signs compared to English Bulldogs and Pugs
[265–268]. Further investigation into the gastrointestinal dysfunc-
tion in this group of patients has shown the presence of gastritis,
esophagitis, gastroesophageal reflux, atony of the lower esophageal
sphincter, and sliding hiatal hernia [265,268,269]. Regurgitation
and vomiting are of particular concern in the perioperative period
as they are associated with aspiration pneumonia, esophagitis,
esophageal stricture, and airway obstruction [270–272]. Reported
incidence of regurgitation in patients hospitalized for surgical cor-
rection of BOAS ranged from 9.1% to 34.5% [264,267,273] with
postoperative rates being higher than preoperative rates in one ret-
rospective study [273]. Large negative intrathoracic pressure cre-
ated during inspiration secondary to partial airway obstruction is
believed to contribute to the increased incidence of gastrointestinal
dysfunction in this group of dogs [269]. Underlying gastroesopha-
geal junction abnormalities, hiatal hernia, and/or esophageal dys-
motility likely also contribute to the presence of gastrointestinal
disease [269,273–276]. Reduction in frequency of gastrointestinal
events, such as regurgitation and vomiting reported by owners, and
improvement in gastrointestinal lesions, as assessed by endoscopy,
following surgical interventions to alleviate the upper airway
obstruction have been reported, strengthening the relationship
between respiratory dysfunction and gastrointestinal disease in
dogs with BOAS [265–267,277].
Brachycephalic dogs have also been shown to have a higher rest-
ing vasovagal tone than dogs of other breeds, which may predispose
them to bradycardia [278]. In a sample of brachycephalic dogs,
arterial blood pressure assessed using an oscillometric technique
was demonstrated to be higher than in control dogs [259]. Others
have reported higher packed cell volume and indices compatible
with hypercoagulability, potentially due to the low PaO2 levels and
chronic inflammation [259]. Ocular conformation in brachycephalic
dogs, and particularly those with BOAS, predisposes them to
corneal injury [249,279].
Surgical interventions have consistently been shown to reduce
undesirable respiratory and gastrointestinal signs and improve
the quality of life, as judged by owners and physical examination
findings, in a large percentage of brachycephalic dogs [250,264,
267,280–283]. Techniques currently performed for BOAS include
staphylectomy, alarplasty, turbinectomy, vestibuloplasty, laryngeal
sacculectomy, and tonsillectomy [247]. Brachycephalic dogs have a
higher reported incidence of complications, including death, in the
perioperative period compared to non-brachycephalic breeds when
anesthetized for a variety of procedures [273,277,284–287]. The
reported perioperative morbidity and mortality associated with air-
way surgery in this patient population range from 6 to 51.1% and 0
to 6.6%, respectively [250,264,277,287–290]. English Bulldogs were
reported to have a higher anesthetic complication rate, including
death, when compared with other brachycephalic dogs in one
retrospective study [290]. Reports on the impact of brachycephalic
dog age on anesthetic outcomes associated with airway surgery
have been variable. Young dogs were reported to have a higher
incidence of regurgitation in one study, and a higher complication

-- 805 of 1450 --

790 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
rate in another; however, it is recognized that dogs with more severe
disease may present at a younger age [273,291]. Anesthetic risk in
brachycephalic dogs that had undergone corrective airway surgery
was reduced in one study; however, the risk relative to non-
brachycephalic dogs was not assessed prospectively and it may
remain higher in the brachycephalic population [287]. A preopera-
tive risk score, based on preoperative data, to predict the risk
of major complications or death for dogs presenting for surgical
treatment of BOAS syndrome was created based on retrospective
data from two centers and subsequently validated in a third
center [292]. Risk of a negative outcome was successfully predicted
based on a 10-point score (BRisk score), determined by assigning a
score to the animal’s breed (English or French Bulldog versus other
brachycephalic breeds), surgical history, procedures planned, body
condition score, level of compromise at admission, and rectal tem-
perature upon admission [292]. Based on highly accessible data,
the BRisk score, can help inform owners regarding the risk of a
negative outcome as well as prepare staff and resources prior to
corrective surgery [292].
Management of anesthesia
Overall, the specific concerns related to BOAS during the perianes-
thetic period include the potential development of respiratory
distress, hypoxemia, and/or airway obstruction (partial or complete),
and the predisposition to regurgitation and aspiration [262,293].
The surgical location also makes anesthetic monitoring of the
patient’s depth of anesthesia using jaw tone or eye reflexes more
challenging as well as poses a greater risk of unobserved airway
disconnection or gastric regurgitation. Maintaining hemodynamic
stability and preventing corneal trauma, are also of concern and
may prove more challenging than in non-BOAS patients. Having a
clearly communicated perioperative plan developed with the entire
veterinary team, that extends for at least 24 h postoperatively, is
highly recommended [262,277,294].
Prior to anesthesia, it is important that a thorough history,
including the owner’s perception of their animal’s condition is
obtained. Unfortunately, owners are often unaware of their dog’s
abnormalities and risks associated with surgery and anesthesia [279].
Specific questions regarding the dog’s respiratory noise, exercise
tolerance, activity levels, and gastrointestinal signs should therefore
be included rather than interpretive questions that rely on the
owner’s opinion regarding normal canine behavior (activity levels)
and physical symptoms (e.g., respiratory noise and heat tolerance).
Current medications including NSAIDs, corticosteroids, and
gastrointestinal medications are particularly relevant as they will
influence perioperative patient medical management.
Physical examination including auscultation of the laryngeal
region and thorax should be performed, although referred upper
airway sounds can make auscultation challenging in many dogs.
Inspiratory stridor over the laryngeal region is an indicator of
laryngeal dysfunction which may impact the ease of intubation as
well as the planned surgical intervention [295]. Hyperthermia may
be present in patients presenting in respiratory distress and should
be considered during initial patient stabilization; however,
acquisition of rectal temperature can be stressful, and it may be
prudent to stabilize the animal prior to obtaining this measurement.
Several investigators have used scoring systems to characterize
the severity of respiratory symptoms and facilitate prediction of
outcomes and/or complications following surgical intervention
[264,265,292]. The BRisk score provides risk of mortality or major
complications during the period of hospitalization [292]. Inclusion
of a 3-min trot test and evaluation of pulmonary mechanics using
whole-body plethysmography can provide further information
regarding the patient’s airflow obstruction [295,296]. The latter is
not routinely available for clinical use, but it has been used to objec-
tively assess other measures of respiratory dysfunction in BOAS
patients as well as the outcome associated with different surgical
and medical treatments [291,295,297].
Although patients may be systemically healthy, routine presurgi-
cal diagnostic testing should include a CBC, serum biochemistry,
and thoracic radiographs to screen for inflammatory lung disease
and to provide baseline values in the event of complications postop-
eratively. Additional tests such as esophageal contrast studies, ultra-
sound, or fluoroscopy are recommended based on individual
clinical signs. Patients showing a marked increase in respiratory
effort and/or signs of impaired oxygenation should have further
assessment of respiratory function performed. Arterial blood gas
sampling and analysis is ideal; however, if this is not feasible, meas-
urement of hemoglobin oxygen saturation with pulse oximetry is
informative in some patients. While the latter tool is readily availa-
ble, the limitations of pulse oximetry need to be considered when
interpreting individual patient measurements [298]. In patients
presenting with severe disease, an ECG and blood pressure meas-
urement may also provide additional useful information preopera-
tively. Because of the high incidence of pulmonary hypertension in
animals with clinical signs of BOAS, echocardiographic evaluation
should be considered. For elective procedures, overweight dogs
should have a nutritional consultation and weight loss plan imple-
mented prior to surgery as obesity has been associated with severity
of clinical signs in Bulldogs and Pugs with BOAS [296].
To date, no large prospective clinical study has been performed
to assess the optimal perioperative medical management of gastroin-
testinal dysfunction in BOAS patients. Due to the high prevalence of
gastric and esophageal disease in most dogs with BOAS, routine pre-
operative administration of a proton pump inhibitor is recom-
mended [269,299–301]. While the treatment may not prevent
gastroesophageal reflux and regurgitation in all dogs, it will increase
the gastric pH and may prevent secondary esophageal lesions from
developing. The duration of treatment may vary based on the
individual patient’s clinical signs as well as ease of treatment. Patients
with a history of regurgitation have an increased incidence of
perioperative regurgitation and may benefit from a longer preoperative
course of therapy if feasible [268,273]. The prokinetic cisapride has
shown positive effects in BOAS dogs and is currently recommended
over metoclopramide, which has shown variable effects on
gastroesophageal reflux and regurgitation; however, it may not be
readily available. Many clinicians include metoclopramide despite a
lack of strong evidence supporting its use at clinically recommended
doses [251,300,302]. Maropitant, a neurokinin-1 (NK1
) receptor
antagonist, is an effective antiemetic when administered prior to
preanesthetic medication and is therefore recommended in patients
with a history of vomiting [303–306]. Routine inclusion of histamine
type-2 (H2
) antagonists/proton pump inhibitors and mucosal
protectants, such as sucralfate, in the perioperative management of
BOAS patients is more controversial; however, when used on a short-
term basis, they have a low incidence of side effects and may offer
beneficial effects in patients with severe gastrointestinal disease.
Once a procedure is scheduled, it is recommended that the
brachycephalic patient be admitted on the day of surgery with
minimal wait time before premedication to minimize the impacts
of stress and anxiety. Prescribing oral behavioral modifying drugs
to reduce pre-appointment fear may also be considered [307].

-- 806 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	791
The impact of fasting time on the risk of regurgitation, gastroe-
sophageal reflux, and/or vomiting in both normal and dogs affected
with BOAS is not known at this time. At present, there is inadequate
data to make recommendations for a universal fasting period prior
to anesthesia [308,309]. Common recommendations include over-
night fasting (minimum fasting period of 6 h) and free access to
water until premedication.
Prior to administration of preanesthetic medication, the anes-
thesia workstation should be prepared. In addition to the standard
equipment, orotracheal tubes in a range of sizes, facemasks, and
monitors including a pulse oximeter should be readily available.
Laryngoscopes with different blade sizes and/or styles, should be
available to facilitate intubation. Despite the presence of an orotra-
cheal tube, the work of breathing in brachycephalic dogs will likely
be higher than in a non-brachycephalic dog of similar weight due to
their relatively small airway radius and tendency for overweight
body condition scores. As such, it is recommended that a suitable
mechanical ventilator be available and prepared for use. Equipment
that can be used to suction the oropharyngeal area should also be
readily available in the induction and recovery areas.
In general, the choice of premedication agents will be dependent
on the patient’s temperament and co-existing medical conditions,
planned diagnostic and/or surgical intervention, and clinician
preference. When patients are scheduled for relatively non-invasive
procedures such as airway surgery only, it is recommended that
μ-opioid receptor agonists are not used due to their association with
regurgitation and vomiting, particularly when administered alone via
the intramuscular (IM) or subcutaneous (SC) route [306,310–313].
In mature quiet dogs, low doses of sedative agents alone may be
sufficient, with opioid analgesic agents added if required once the
patient is anesthetized with a secure airway. If opioid analgesics
are included in the premedication, methadone or buprenorphine are
currently recommended options as they are associated with a lower
incidence of vomiting [313]. Panting is also associated with μ-opioid
receptor agonists, which can worsen airway obstruction in patients
with severe disease. Some authors have recommended the exclusion
of α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists due to concerns related to airway
obstruction associated with profound muscle relaxation. While high
doses of α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists should be avoided,
premedication with dexmedetomidine (2 μg/kg IM) in combination
with methadone (0.3 mg/kg IM) has been shown to provide good
sedation without an increase in complications in ASA I or II
brachycephalic dogs prior to anesthetic induction when compared
to acepromazine (0.02 mg/kg IM) and methadone (0.3 mg/kg
IM) [314]. When α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists are not included in
the premedication regimen, including anticholinergics such as
glycopyrrolate in the animal’s premedication offers the advantage of
maintaining heart rate and reducing oropharyngeal secretions.
While anticholinergics have not been demonstrated to increase the
risk of aspiration pneumonia, atropine has been shown to reduce
lower esophageal sphincter tone [270,315–318]. While the decision
to include anticholinergics prophylactically in the premedication
regimen remains controversial, their use to treat bradycardia once a
secure and sealed airway is established is warranted.
Induction of anesthesia using a rapidly acting injectable anesthetic
such as propofol or alfaxalone is ideal to ensure a rapid transition to
a secure and sealed airway; however, this should be performed
following preoxygenation for 3–5 min using a facemask. The latter
has been shown to prolong the time to hemoglobin desaturation
and will permit a brief airway examination prior to intubation
should the patient become apneic [39,40]. If preoxygenation using a
mask is not tolerated, preoxygenation using a flow-by technique
can be used; however, the time to desaturation will be shorter
compared to that obtained with a mask [40]. Irrespective of the
technique used, the patient’s eyes should be well lubricated prior to
induction to minimize risk of corneal abrasion.
Prior to intubation, a rapid oropharyngeal exam should be per-
formed. Further examination may be warranted in individual
patients with signs of laryngeal dysfunction. Orotracheal intuba-
tion is generally performed using direct visualization facilitated by
use of a laryngoscope while the patient is maintained in sternal
recumbency with the head and neck elevated. The cuff on the
orotracheal tube should be inflated to create a seal as soon as
the orotracheal tube is in place and the seal should intermittently
be verified throughout anesthesia. If standard placement of an
endotracheal tube is not possible due to challenges associated with
visualization, a stylet, such as a semi-rigid urinary catheter can be
used as a guide for the endotracheal tube to facilitate intubation.
Oxygen can be insufflated through the catheter while the endotra-
cheal tube is placed. If it is not possible to place an orotracheal tube,
the catheter can be used to provide oxygen while a tracheostomy is
performed. As the catheter is rigid, care must be taken to not
damage the airways and excessive flows should be avoided if severe
airway narrowing is present. If available, a small-diameter endo-
scope can also be used as a stylet for the endotracheal tube. Because
the trachea is often hypoplastic in dogs with BOAS, it may not be
possible to insert an endotracheal tube of the same size that would
be typically inserted in a non-brachycephalic dog of similar body
mass. For example, while a 9.5 mm internal diameter endotracheal
tube would easily fit in a 20 kg mongrel dog, an English Bulldog of
similar weight may allow placement of an endotracheal tube with
an internal diameter of only 6.5 mm (Fig. 38.34A). Inasmuch as the
endotracheal tube will further reduce diameter of an already nar-
rowed airway, resulting in greater increases in R aw and the work of
breathing, providing mechanical ventilatory support during anes-
thesia is strongly advised (Fig. 38.34B). Dog breeds that are typically
diagnosed with BOAS (e.g., English and French Bulldogs, Pugs, and
Boston Terriers) have a barrel-shaped chest and often are obese,
factors that are known to decrease CRS during anesthesia
(Fig. 38.34B) [118]. In these dogs, due to their increased R aw and
decreased C RS
, VCV or PCV volume-guaranteed may be preferred
over a standard PCV mode as previously discussed in the mechani-
cal ventilation section.
Once a secure airway is in place and oxygen supplementation
initiated, a variety of techniques and anesthetic agents can be used
to maintain anesthesia, including inhalant anesthetics, infusions of
injectable anesthetics, or a combination of both. The goal should be
to use a protocol that results in a smooth, excitement-free recovery
while minimizing residual sedation and upper airway relaxation.
In terms of inhalant anesthetics, some clinicians might prefer sevo-
flurane over isoflurane because the former has a pharmacokinetic
profile that favors faster recoveries from anesthesia. However,
clinical data shows that the quality and duration of recovery are
comparable between these inhalant anesthetics in canine species
[319,320]. Use of infusions of injectable anesthetics may result in
more prolonged anesthetic recoveries when compared to inhalant
anesthetics and therefore may be less desirable unless inhalant
anesthetics are contraindicated for other reasons. If constant rate
infusions of opioids are indicated to provide intraoperative analgesia
and reduce inhalant requirements, fentanyl and remifentanil are
suitable agents [321,322]. While remifentanil is the ideal agent for
prolonged infusions because it is devoid of cumulative effects [323],

-- 807 of 1450 --

792 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
fentanyl is still an effective drug for intraoperative use in dogs with
BOAS because, differently from humans, this opioid does not accu-
mulate during prolonged infusions in dogs (i.e., its plasma sensitive
half-life is unaltered by infusion duration in this species) [324].
If prolonged recoveries are attributed to residual effects of pure
μ-opioid receptor agonists, partial reversal with a μ-opioid receptor
antagonist (naloxone) or a μ-opioid antagonist/κ-opioid agonist
(butorphanol) should be considered.
Care should be taken when positioning the patient. Even with
optimal positioning such as sternal recumbency with head elevated,
or lateral recumbency with the oropharyngeal area elevated,
the oropharynx should be surveyed routinely for gastric contents.
This is particularly important when the patient is moved repeatedly
during anesthesia [325]. If reflux is noted, the oral cavity and esoph-
agus should be cleared immediately, and the esophagus and mouth
flushed with warm water followed by gentle suctioning prior to
recovery. Intraoperatively, monitoring of oxygenation, ventilation,
and thermoregulation should be performed on a regular basis in
addition to hemodynamic monitoring tailored to the patient. Pulse
oximetry and capnography can be monitored continuously; ideally,
blood gas analysis is performed intermittently to verify accuracy
and gain further insight into potential impairment of oxygenation
in critical patients.
Irrespective of the surgical or diagnostic procedures being
performed, addition of local anesthetic techniques should be
considered to reduce the reliance on opioid analgesics in the post-
operative period. Bilateral maxillary blocks may reduce the need for
additional opioid and anesthetic drug use intraoperatively in
patients undergoing BOAS-related airway procedures [326,327].
Unfortunately, inadvertent puncture of the maxillary artery resulting
in retrobulbar hemorrhage/hematoma is a potential complication
of this block [328]. Analgesic adjuncts such as intravenous lido-
caine (50 μg/kg/min) and ketamine (10 μg/kg/min) infusions can
also be added to opioid infusions to provide additional analgesia
and improve intraoperative stability during longer procedures if
necessary. Corticosteroids are often administered in patients under-
going airway surgery and may be administered prior to anesthesia
or in the perioperative period; however, their use will preclude the
administration of NSAIDs for postoperative analgesia because of
increased risk of toxicity.
Although there is not extensive objective evidence to support
their use, vasoconstrictors such as phenylephrine or oxymetazoline,
applied topically in the upper airways, may reduce swelling prior to
recovery. Depending on the surgical procedure, a system for deliv-
ering oxygen using nasal catheters or prongs may be placed prior to
extubation, and oxygen delivered via this route. The routine pre-
placement of nasotracheal catheters has also been described
[283,329]. Normothermia should be achieved prior to initiation of
recovery to prevent shivering associated with low body tempera-
ture. Although hypothermia is often observed following prolonged
anesthesia, hyperthermia should also be avoided during the
recovery phase as panting secondary to elevated body temperature
can worsen signs of upper airway obstruction in dogs with BOAS.
Recovery from anesthesia is a particularly critical phase in
animals with BOAS as most complications related to surgery and
anesthesia are observed during this period. Dogs with BOAS who
have not had airway surgery are still at increased risk of
postoperative complications. Adverse events frequently reported
in brachycephalic dogs in the postoperative period include
respiratory distress, hypoxemia, prolonged time to extubation,
airway obstruction (partial or complete), regurgitation, vomiting,
and aspiration [250,264,277,287–289]. The recovery period is
particularly challenging in brachycephalic patients following airway
surgery due to the associated soft tissue swelling. In some cases
where severe airway swelling is present, it is appropriate to place a
temporary tracheostomy tube prior to recovery. Potentially life-
threatening events, primarily related to the patency of the airway,
have been reported up to 24 h postoperatively; therefore, intensive
monitoring is currently recommended for at least this period
following airway surgery [277]. Having a clean set of orotracheal
tubes, laryngoscope, facemask, tracheostomy tubes, and additional
short-acting injectable anesthetic available prior to initiation of
recovery will permit rapid reestablishment of general anesthesia and
a patent airway if necessary. Recovering dogs with BOAS in sternal
recumbency following airway suctioning, with their tongue pulled
out of the oral cavity, and head and neck slightly elevated, may
improve their ability to ventilate with the least amount of respiratory
effort. Dogs with BOAS tolerate the presence of an orotracheal tube
at greater levels of wakefulness when compared with normal dogs,
probably because it provides an unobstructed airway and reduces
the work of breathing. Most clinicians recommend discontinuing
oxygen supplementation while the patient still has the orotracheal
tube in place to verify that an FI
O2 of 0.21 is tolerated, as judged by
the maintenance of oxygen hemoglobin saturation (Fig. 38.34C and
D). The orotracheal tube can be maintained in place until the dog
shows resistance to the tube by pawing at the mouth or chewing the
tube. Immediately following extubation, oxygen supplementation
using a facemask or flow-by technique can be provided to increase
the F I
O 2 which will help maintain oxygenation if mild
hypoventilation or V̇A
/Q̇ mismatching are present. Ideally,
oxygenation is assessed using arterial blood gas analysis in patients
at risk of hypoxemia in recovery; however, if arterial blood gas
analysis is not available or feasible during the immediate post-
extubation period, pulse oximetry is a suitable alternative as it may
still provide additional clinically relevant information during
recovery relative to visual observation of mucus membrane
color [298]. If an acute decrease in pulse oximetry hemoglobin
saturation (SpO2
) to values below 95% and the displayed heart rate
matches the pulse rate taken by other means (palpation or blood
pressure tracing), a change in management is indicated. While SpO2
/
FI
O2 ratio is advocated for monitoring critically ill patients, an
accurate FI
O2 is generally not available during recovery with either
facemask or flow-by oxygen delivery [330,331].
To reduce airway soft tissue swelling postoperatively, systemic
corticosteroids such as dexamethasone can be administered unless
there are specific contraindications [264,283]. Aerosolized epineph-
rine has also been shown to improve airflow in BOAS patients, with
Pugs showing a greater response relative to Bulldogs [297]. During
recovery from anesthesia, caution should be exerted to avoid
confusing an animal displaying dysphoric/excitatory behavior
associated with opioid administration from an animal that is
agitated because of an obstructed airway. If the dog becomes dys-
phoric, low doses of dexmedetomidine (1–2 μg/kg diluted in saline
and slowly titrated to effect) or acepromazine (0.01–0.02 mg/kg)
administered intravenously and titrated to effect are effective at
calming the patient; however, if the patient cannot achieve adequate
airflow, interventions are required immediately. Depending on the
facilities and clinician preference, dogs may be placed on non-
invasive ventilatory support using HFNOT, CPAP, or following oro-
tracheal 	intubation, 	traditional 	positive-pressure 	ventilation,
for a variable period to wait for airway inflammation to sub-
side [53,62,65,332,333]. Provision of CPAP in animals with

-- 808 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	793
inspiratory stridor after orotracheal tube removal may stent the air-
ways open and reduce signs of dyspnea. Helmets, originally devel-
oped for non-invasive ventilatory support in humans with
respiratory failure, are a potential alternative for providing CPAP
and oxygen-enriched air in dogs with signs of upper airway
obstruction after orotracheal tube removal. Helmets adjusted to
deliver CPAP of 5 cmH 2
O with ambient air (F I
O2 = 0.21) were
reported as an effective means of improving arterial oxygenation in
healthy dogs recovering from general anesthesia [53]. Computed
tomography assessment has shown that a CPAP of 5 cmH 2
O
provided by a helmet increases the internal diameter of the larynx
in normal healthy dogs [334], suggesting that this level of CPAP
might reduce inspiratory dyspnea and the work of breathing
commonly observed after extubation in dogs with BOAS. HFNOT
is another means of increasing F I
O2 along with low levels of CPAP
(up to 5 cmH 2
O) that may improve signs of respiratory distress in
dogs with BOAS recovering from anesthesia (Fig. 38.4) [56,62].
If means to provide prolonged non-invasive ventilatory support
(CPAP) are not available or airway patency does not improve over
time, placement of a nasotracheal catheter or tracheostomy tube are
alternative option to invasive mechanical ventilation. Tracheostomy
tubes, both temporary and permanent, are associated with high
complication rates; however, they can provide a useful strategy for
short- and long-term management in select cases [335,336].
Feline brachycephalic obstructive airway syndrome
Characteristics and pathophysiology
Brachycephaly is a characteristic of certain feline breeds but sub-
stantially less literature exists regarding its impact on the health and
welfare of this species relative to the canine [337,338]. To date, there
is little information regarding anesthetic morbidity and mortality in
cats affected with BOAS. Dyson et al. reported a higher anesthetic
complication rate in Himalayan cats, a breed characterized by
brachycephaly [284]. Persian, Himalayan, British Shorthair, Bernese,
Scottish Fold, and Exotic Shorthair cats are considered brachyce-
phalic breeds; however, Persian and Exotic Shorthair are considered
extreme brachycephalic breeds with associated severe symptoms
related to their altered facial conformation [339]. The reported
structural respiratory abnormalities in cats include stenotic nares
and abnormal nasal turbinates [251,340,341]. Unlike brachycephalic
dogs, an elongated soft palate appears to be very rare in cats [342].
Difficulty breathing, increased respiratory noise, sneezing, decreased
(A) 	(B)
(D)	(C)
Figure 38.34 A. Surgical correction of BOAS in an English Bulldog (body weight 20 kg) that allowed intubation with a 6.5 internal diameter tube.
B. Anesthesia was maintained with isoflurane and the animal received VCV (target V T 10 mL/kg) with a 40% inspiratory pause. The large gradient
between Ppeak and Pplat (5 mmHg) denotes increased R aw
. The CRS [V T
/(Pplat – PEEP)] indexed to body weight is low (0.9 mL/cmH2
O/kg) compared to
values reported in intermediate-chested dogs (1.3 mL/cmH2
O/kg). Source: Asorey et al. [118]. C. and D. Recovery in sternal recumbency with the
endotracheal tube in place and a pulse oximeter in the tongue. Hemoglobin saturation is 95% while animal is breathing ambient air. Notice that the animal
is awake (eyes opened) while still intubated and the endotracheal tube is protected by a mouth gag made of soft material to prevent the animal from tearing
the tube. VCV, volume-controlled ventilation; V T
, tidal volume; Ppeak , peak airway pressure; Pplat
, plateau pressure; R aw
, airway resistance; CRS
, respiratory
system compliance; PEEP, positive end-expired pressure.

-- 809 of 1450 --

794 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
airflow, nasal discharge, and reduced activity levels are reported
clinical signs associated with brachycephaly in cats [251,340,343].
Surgery to reduce the nasal obstruction to airflow has been
described with low rates of complication [344,345].
In addition to the respiratory abnormalities, ophthalmic disease
is very common with epiphora, corneal ulceration, corneal sequestra,
keratitis, and entropion being reported in a high percentage of
brachycephalic cats [338,343,346]. Dental malalignment, difficulty
with prehension, and hypersalivation are also reported at frequen-
cies greater than in non-brachycephalic cats, whereas regurgitation
and vomiting have not been associated with brachycephaly in the
feline [347].
To date, little information exists regarding the prevalence of
cardiovascular disease in brachycephalic cats. A report on disorders
and mortality in Persian cats under first-opinion veterinary care in
the UK reported renal disease, neoplasia, and tumor-associated
disorders as the major causes of death; however, the significance of
brachycephaly on their cat’s overall wellbeing is underappreciated
by owners [348].
Management of anesthesia
The major anesthetic concern for brachycephalic feline patients
is related to the risk of airway obstruction in the perioperative
period. Corneal trauma is also a significant risk due to their facial
conformation [346].
Preoperative history, work up, and preparation should be tailored
to the individual patient. Like brachycephalic dogs, obtaining a
thorough and complete history with client education regarding
underlying disease is recommended. Routine patient preanesthetic
preparation, including fasting times, is suitable based on the current
state of knowledge.
Prior to sedating a brachycephalic cat, the workstation should be
set up to include a variety of endotracheal tubes and facemasks. To
date, there are no comparative studies evaluating different anesthesia
protocols in brachycephalic cats and the associated outcomes. The
following recommendations therefore reflect current opinions based
on experience and the reader is referred to the literature on general
anesthetic management in feline patients [349]. The specific anesthetic
protocol should be tailored to the individual patient based on their
behavior, underlying disease(s), and proposed surgical intervention.
After premedication, cats should be monitored continuously for
respiratory obstruction. Preoxygenation will minimize the risk of
hypoxemia during oropharyngeal examination and placement of the
orotracheal tube. Anticholinergic agents decrease oropharyngeal
secretions and may indirectly reduce the incidence of laryngospasm
during induction of anesthesia; therefore, they should be considered as
part of a preanesthetic protocol if the patient is not receiving an α2
-
adrenergic receptor agonist and no other contraindications exist.
To minimize the risk of hypoxemia and laryngospasm during
induction of anesthesia brachycephalic cats should be preoxygenated
for at least 3 min with a face mask attached to a breathing circuit
with the oxygen flowmeter adjusted to deliver a high flow rate
(> 200 mL/kg/min). Intravenous agents such as propofol or alfax-
alone are suitable anesthetic induction agents as they have the
advantage of being rapid acting with a short duration of effect,
which permits titration to a suitable anesthetic depth of anesthesia
to permit intubation. Actual doses of intravenous anesthetics will
depend on the level of sedation/CNS depression achieved after pre-
medication and on the severity of systemic disease if present.
Topical administration of 2% lidocaine (0.1 mL) to the arytenoid
cartilages should be performed while visualizing the larynx with a
laryngoscope and the face mask repositioned while the anesthesi-
ologist waits for the latency period of topical lidocaine. Attempts
at intubation should only be performed once the patient is at an
appropriate depth of anesthesia. Clinical experience dictates that
intubation can be performed 45–60 s after topical lidocaine, which
appears to be the minimum latency to achieve desensitization of the
arytenoids. In the event of a failed intubation (e.g., due to anatomical
abnormalities), the anesthesiologist may attempt to pass a small
semi-rigid stylet through the arytenoids and use it as a guide for
inserting the endotracheal tube. If the cat develops laryngospasm,
the depth of anesthesia should be evaluated, and additional anes-
thetic administered if required before subsequent attempts at intu-
bation are repeated. Use of rocuronium (1 mg/kg) was reported to
reverse severe laryngospasm and produce appropriate conditions
for intubation in a cat [350], although this is rarely required if
appropriate intubation techniques are followed.
As in brachycephalic dogs, maintenance of anesthesia can be
achieved using a variety of techniques. General principles of reduc-
ing the need for intra- and postoperative opioid analgesics by incor-
porating local anesthetic techniques may offer the advantage of
reducing respiratory depression during recovery. Careful swabbing/
suctioning of the airway should be performed prior to initiation of
recovery and intensive monitoring should be performed until the
cat is showing control of the head and airflow is such that increased
inspiratory effort is not causing patient distress. To prevent laryn-
gospasm during recovery from anesthesia, extubation in the cat
should not be delayed as is practiced in the dog. Positioning the cat
in sternal or lateral recumbency with the tongue extended out of the
oral cavity and the mouth open following extubation often provides
optimal airflow until the animal has regained greater control of
laryngeal muscles. In some cases, the head may need manual sup-
port to prevent closing of the mouth. Supplemental oxygen should
be provided in the early post-extubation phase using a facemask
or by placing the cat in an oxygen-enriched environment. In
non- intubated, spontaneously breathing cats anesthetized with an
injectable regimen (intramuscular dexmedetomidine, ketamine,
and buprenorphine), non-invasive ventilatory support provided by
a helmet adjusted to deliver a CPAP of 5 cmH2
O with an FI
O2 of
0.21 improved arterial oxygen levels [351]. However, currently,
there are no studies evaluating the benefits and feasibility of CPAP
and oxygen supplementation provided by helmets in cats with
BOAS recovering from general anesthesia. Patients that have
undergone airway surgery may benefit from postoperative over-
night hospitalization with observation due to possible airway swell-
ing; however, there are no large-scale studies reporting details
related to complications following upper airway surgery in cats.
Canine laryngeal paralysis
Characteristics and pathophysiology
The upper respiratory tract, including the larynx, provides most of
the resistance to airflow at rest in the normal animal due to the
rapid (relative to that in lower airways) and turbulent airflow as
described in Chapter 37 [352]. Laryngeal dysfunction can dramati-
cally increase the resistance to breathing by reducing airway radius
and, when disease is bilateral, it can lead to complete airway
obstruction. During inspiration, contraction of the paired
cricoarytenoideus dorsalis muscle normally abducts the arytenoid
cartilages and vocal folds, thereby widening the glottis. During
swallowing, the arytenoid cartilages are adducted, and the vocal
folds are brought together though contraction of several internal
laryngeal muscles to prevent aspiration of material into the trachea.

-- 810 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	795
The caudal laryngeal nerve, a terminal branch of the recurrent
laryngeal nerve arising from the vagus nerve in the thorax,
innervates all intrinsic muscles of the larynx except for the
cricothyroideus muscle, which is innervated by the cranial laryngeal
nerve, arising from the vagus nerve in the proximal cervical region.
Congenital and acquired laryngeal paralysis have been described
in the canine [353,354]. A hereditary mode of transmission has
been reported in numerous breeds [353–355]. Acquired laryngeal
paralysis can result from damage to the neural control of the larynx
(central or peripheral lesions involving the nerves innervating the
larynx), disease affecting the laryngeal muscles, or neuromuscular
junction disorders [354]. For dogs in which a specific etiology is not
identified, the condition has historically been referred to as
“idiopathic laryngeal paralysis.” At present, Labrador Retrievers,
Golden Retrievers, Newfoundlands, Irish Setters, and Brittany
Spaniels are the most common breeds affected with acquired laryn-
geal paralysis of unknown cause [354]. More recently, it has been
recognized that, for many dogs, the disease is progressive with
generalized signs becoming evident as the dog ages. “Laryngeal
paralysis” associated with “generalized polyneuropathy,” “late-onset
laryngeal paralysis,” or “geriatric-onset laryngeal paralysis polyneu-
ropathy syndrome” are terms that are currently used to identify the
disease in dogs with progressive generalized disease [354,356].
Irrespective of the etiology, laryngeal paralysis is characterized by
impaired abduction and adduction of the arytenoid cartilages and
vocal folds, either unilaterally or bilaterally resulting in the vocal cords
assuming a paramedian position. Clinical signs of laryngeal paraly-
sis may include a change in phonation (bark), coughing, dysphagia,
or gagging, increased inspiratory sounds, decreased exercise toler-
ance, respiratory distress, cyanosis, hyperthermia, and col-
lapse [354]. Dogs are generally more severely affected in hot weather
and during or immediately after exercise; however, the severity of
symptoms associated with laryngeal paralysis can vary tremen-
dously [354]. Hypoxemia can be marked in severely affected dogs
with only minor changes in PaCO2 levels. Hypoventilation (elevated
PaCO2
) may be the underlying cause of impaired oxygenation and
cyanosis in some cases; however, pneumonia secondary to aspiration
or negative-pressure pulmonary edema caused by upper airway
obstruction may also contribute to hypoxemia by increasing the dif-
fusion barrier for oxygen at the alveolar–capillary level, V̇A
/Q̇ mis-
matching, and/or intrapulmonary shunting. As mentioned, several
other conditions may be responsible for acquired laryngeal paralysis
and dogs may have other clinically significant diseases related to
their primary condition. For example, generalized polyneuropathy
may be present and may be detected on neurological examination.
Esophageal dysmotility is present in many cases with late-onset
idiopathic laryngeal paralysis and may manifest as gastroesophageal
reflux, regurgitation, and/or aspiration pneumonia [357].
Clinical diagnosis of laryngeal paralysis is made based on laryn-
geal examination performed under heavy sedation or light planes of
general anesthesia. Examination may involve direct visual examina-
tion and/or video-endoscopy. A lack of abduction of arytenoid
cartilages during inspiration, laxity of the vocal cords, and edema of
the corniculate processes are supportive of the diagnosis [358].
Experimentally, insufflation of CO 2 to stimulate respiration with
assessment of laryngeal function using video-endoscopy through a
laryngeal mask airway has been demonstrated to be effective in
dogs with surgically created laryngeal paralysis [359]. As will be
discussed, anesthesia can influence the assessment of laryngeal
paralysis by inhibiting abduction of arytenoid cartilages and leading
to a false positive diagnosis.
Medical management including patient weight loss, anti-
inflammatory medication, and exercise restriction is recommended
for patients with unilateral laryngeal paralysis and/or mild clinical
signs. When laryngeal paralysis is bilateral and/or symptoms impact
a dog’s quality of life, surgery is recommended. Results may vary
with the underlying etiology of the disease, breed, and comorbidities
[356,360]. Unilateral arytenoid lateralization is the technique most
used currently as it has been shown to improve the quality of life in
dogs with significant presurgical symptoms [251,354,356,360–363].
The most common postsurgical complication is aspiration pneumo-
nia [361,362,364]. Rates of aspiration pneumonia of 18.6, 31.8, and
31.8% at 1, 3, and 4 years postoperatively were reported in a large
retrospective study of 232 dogs having unilateral arytenoid laterali-
zation [364]. In this study, factors predisposing to aspiration included
esophageal disease and use of opioids postoperatively [364].
Management of anesthesia
The presence of underlying respiratory disease that could predis-
pose the patient to hypoxemia, the potential for impaired airway
patency, and the risk of regurgitation and aspiration are the major
anesthetic concerns for patients with laryngeal paralysis in the peri-
operative period. As with patients with BOAS, the surgical location
makes anesthetic monitoring of patient’s depth of anesthesia using
jaw tone or eye reflexes more challenging. Surgical location also
poses a potentially greater risk of unobserved regurgitation and
disconnection or obstruction of the anesthetic breathing circuit.
A thorough history including exercise tolerance, concurrent
diseases, previous anesthetics, and current medications is required.
A physical examination including in-depth examination of the
respiratory and neurological systems is indicated. As discussed,
many patients have an associated progressive generalized neurologi-
cal disease. Megaesophagus, myasthenia gravis, hypothyroidism,
or neoplasia should be considered as possible concurrent condi-
tions [354]. CBC, serum biochemical profile, urinalysis, thyroid
function screening, and thoracic radiographs are considered
standard in mature patients. Further diagnostic procedures such as
video fluoroscopy and measurement of serum antibodies against
acetylcholine receptors to test for canine myasthenia gravis may be
indicated based on examination and preliminary diagnostic test
results.
Information to support a change in routine fasting times for
patients undergoing general anesthesia to diagnose and/or treat
laryngeal paralysis does not exist; therefore, a standard fasting
period is recommended. Medical management prior to anesthesia
to reduce the risk of aspiration pneumonia and/or gastrointestinal
complications includes antiemetics such as maropitant, proton
pump inhibitors, and prokinetics [300]. Maropitant administered
30 min to 1 h prior to preanesthetic medication has consistently
been shown to reduce the incidence of vomiting following
preanesthetic administration in healthy dogs [303,305,306]. The
prokinetic cisapride has been demonstrated to increase lower
esophageal pressure and reduce gastroesophageal reflux in normal
dogs [302,365]. It was also shown to reduce the incidence of aspi-
ration in clinical patients having unilateral arytenoid lateralization
in one relatively small study using historical controls [366]. In the
latter study, a total dose of 1 mg/kg of cisapride was administered by
an intravenous infusion over approximately 90 min prior to surgery
(increasing doses based on response to infusion). Of 50 dogs
receiving cisapride, three had reported adverse clinical signs
during the infusion; however, no further adverse effects were
reported. Metoclopramide, another prokinetic, has had variable

-- 811 of 1450 --

796 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
results on outcomes in dogs, with one study demonstrating a
reduction in gastroesophageal reflux while others have shown no
impact on gastroesophageal reflux or regurgitation and aspiration
[364,367,368]. To date, evidence to support routine administration
of metoclopramide in patients with the goal of reducing regurgita-
tion and aspiration is lacking [300,354,368].
Preoxygenation is recommended prior to and during anesthetic
induction to prevent hypoxemia during laryngeal examination.
Numerous studies, as recently reviewed by Ranninger et al. [369],
have been performed to determine the best anesthetic protocol to
permit assessment of laryngeal function by direct visualization or
video laryngoscopy. Direct comparison between studies is challeng-
ing due to differences in study design, study population, drug
doses, and drug administration techniques; however, in general,
premedication has been shown to be beneficial. This is potentially
due to reduced doses of injectable anesthetics subsequently required
to facilitate examination. The use of hydromorphone or morphine
is not recommended in patients with laryngeal dysfunction because
opioid-induced vomiting may increase the risk of aspiration.
However, methadone, butorphanol, or buprenorphine are frequently
used and have not been shown to have a deleterious effect on out-
comes. Recently, dexmedetomidine alone or in combination with
butorphanol or hydromorphone was shown to permit assessment
of laryngeal function by video laryngoscopy in normal dogs [370].
Specifically, following an initial dose of dexmedetomidine
(3 μg/kg IV), administered alone or in combination with an opioid
(0.3 mg/kg of butorphanol or 0.1 mg/kg of hydromorphone), addi-
tional dexmedetomidine (2 μg/kg doses) was administered (up to a
maximum of 15 μg/kg) to prevent jaw movement and permit evalu-
ation of the laryngeal function before and after intravenous doxapram
administration (1 mg/kg) [370]. Although no complications related
to vomiting and aspiration pneumonia were reported after
dexmedetomidine/hydromorphone in this study, it is still advisable
to avoid this opioid in dogs with laryngeal dysfunction. Vomiting is
commonly observed after dexmedetomidine in cats and emesis
may also occur following this drug in canine species and this
possibility should be considered by the anesthesiologist as it could
lead to aspiration pneumonia in animals with laryngeal paralysis.
In terms of anesthetic induction agents, thiopental was shown to
be superior to other injectable agents in early studies evaluating
impact on laryngeal function; however, it is not readily available
and propofol has consistently been shown to be a suitable alterna-
tive [371–373]. When alfaxalone has been compared to propofol,
the results have been variable with some showing equivalency while
others report a greater negative impact on laryngeal function rela-
tive to propofol [371,372,374–376]. Laryngeal function was shown
to be superior after a period of anesthesia maintained with isoflu-
rane following induction with propofol or alfaxalone relative to that
observed immediately following induction of anesthesia with either
intravenous agent, although maintenance of anesthesia with an
injectable regimen was not evaluated [377]. While assessment could
be delayed for a period after induction with injectables and orotra-
cheal intubation, the impact of intubation prior to assessment of
laryngeal function is unknown and the potential for environmental
contamination with inhalant agents should be considered.
Doxapram, a CNS stimulant, transiently increases respiratory rate
and V T in dogs and has been administered intravenously at 0.25 to
2.5 mg/kg to improve the assessment of laryngeal function in
dogs [370,372,376,378,379] (Fig. 38.35). As laryngeal obstruction
may worsen following administration of doxapram in dogs with
laryngeal dysfunction, the team should be prepared to quickly
intervene in this scenario [369,378]. Other reported side effects of
doxapram include tachycardia, hypertension, arrhythmias, muscle
rigidity, hyperthermia, and seizures; however, these would appear
to be rare events as they have not been reported in canine clinical
trials [369].
Following orotracheal intubation, anesthesia is generally
maintained with an inhalant anesthetic and adjunctive agents such
as systemically administered lidocaine and opioids when required
to achieve adequate analgesia and to decrease inhalant anesthetic
concentrations. As for patients undergoing BOAS-related surgery,
butorphanol, buprenorphine, or methadone are commonly recom-
mended analgesic agents with hydromorphone and morphine being
considered unsuitable due to their association with vomiting and
regurgitation. Use of NSAIDs should be based on the individual’s
history of corticosteroid use and gastrointestinal status. Prior to
discontinuing anesthesia, the oropharyngeal region should be
carefully examined and suctioned to remove any excess fluid. It is
important that the patient is normothermic to prevent shivering or
panting during recovery. Preplacement of a nasal oxygen catheter
prior to recovery should be considered in patients with underlying
lower airway or pulmonary parenchymal disease that may require
(A) 	(B)
Figure 38.35 A. Abduction of the arytenoid cartilages prior to administration of doxapram in a dog sedated with dexmedetomidine. B. Maximal
abduction of the arytenoid cartilages on inspiration of the same dog after intravenous doxapram administration (1 mg/kg). Source: DeGroot et al. [370],
with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

-- 812 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	797
oxygen supplementation. Patients are generally recovered in lateral
recumbency with the laryngeal region elevated. Sedation may be
required during recovery and low doses of acepromazine (0.02 mg/kg)
or dexmedetomidine (1 μg/kg, titrated to effect) are generally effec-
tive if there are no specific contraindications. Intensive monitoring
should continue for 12–24 h postoperatively to permit rapid inter-
ventions should regurgitation and aspiration occur.
Canine tracheal collapse
Characteristics and pathophysiology
Narrowing of the tracheal lumen can occur from numerous
causes, including trauma, intraluminal tracheal masses, compres-
sive extraluminal masses, tracheal hypoplasia, and tracheomalacia.
The most common form of tracheal collapse is characterized by
softened tracheal rings resulting in dorsoventral flattening of the
trachea with collapse of the dorsal tracheal membrane, which may
be weakened or redundant, into the tracheal lumen. The extratho-
racic (cervical) or intrathoracic trachea or both may be affected as
well as the bronchial walls [380]. Although less common, mal-
formed tracheal rings, with cartilage that deviates dorsally into the
trachea into what is described as a W shape, are also present in
some dogs [381]. The underlying cause of tracheal collapse is
unknown; however, it is likely multifactorial and may vary with the
specific characteristics (malformation versus tracheomalacia).
Based on breed prevalence, genetic factors likely play a role in com-
bination with infectious and environmental contributions. Breeds
most affected by tracheal collapse are toy or small breeds including
Yorkshire Terriers, Pomeranians, Toy Poodles, Chihuahuas, Maltese,
and Pugs [381].
Clinical signs may develop at any age; however, most studies
report onset at 6–8 years of age [381]. Coughing, which is often
described as “goose-honking,” gagging, stridor, reduced exercise
tolerance, and dyspnea are commonly reported clinical signs [381].
The severity of disease on presentation for veterinary examination
can vary tremendously with some dogs appearing normal on physical
examination. In these dogs, gentle tracheal palpation can generally
elicit a cough. Other dogs may present on an emergency basis with
severe dyspnea and cyanosis. The location of the tracheal collapse
will impact the timing of the obstruction to airflow observed on
physical examination. In dogs with dysfunction of the cervical por-
tion of the trachea, the negative airway pressure generated during
inspiration causes dynamic collapse of the airway. If the intratho-
racic portion of the airway is affected, the dynamic collapse will be
observed during forced exhalation, such as occurs during coughing.
Dogs with cervical tracheal obstruction therefore present with an
increase in inspiratory effort while dogs with thoracic tracheal
disease exhibit abnormal signs during expiration. Many dogs are
affected at multiple locations and therefore exhibit signs of dyspnea
during inspiration and expiration [382]. Laryngeal paralysis has
been documented as a complicating factor in up to 30% of cases
with tracheal collapse [383]. Bronchomalacia, small airway disease,
and pneumonia are also present in approximately 20% of dogs with
tracheal collapse. Chronic inflammation and impaired mucociliary
clearance likely contribute to the lower airway disease. Pulmonary
function testing may be available to further characterize the respira-
tory obstruction but is not routinely available.
Other comorbidities reported in dogs with tracheal collapse
include obesity, cardiomegaly, pulmonary hypertension, mitral
valve disease, hepatomegaly, and endocrinopathies [381,384]. A
causal association between tracheal collapse and the mentioned
comorbidities has not been established and concurrent diagnosis
likely reflects the age and breed predisposition for cardiovascular
and endocrine disease in these dogs.
Diagnosis of tracheal collapse is based on physical examination,
diagnostic imaging, and tracheobronchoscopy [381]. Fluoroscopic
examination of patients while awake is preferred to radiographic
examination due to the dynamic nature of the collapse. Computed
tomography if available may also provide additional information
regarding the severity and extent of airway dysfunction. During
tracheobronchoscopy, a bronchoalveolar lavage may be performed
to characterize the extent of lower airway disease.
Medical management of tracheal collapse, which is regarded as
palliative not curative, involves multimodal therapy aimed at reduc-
ing inflammation and the predisposition for coughing. Antitussives,
anti-inflammatories (steroidal drugs), anxiolytics, bronchodilators,
and antibiotics are often prescribed based on the patient’s severity
of disease following diagnostic work up. In addition to medical
management, interventions currently recommended in some patients
include extraluminal tracheal prostheses or intraluminal stent
placement. General anesthesia is typically required for both a thor-
ough diagnostic work up and for therapeutic interventions. Patients
with a confirmed or suspected diagnosis of tracheal collapse may
also be anesthetized for non-airway-related reasons (e.g., dental or
abdominal procedures).
Outcomes and mean survival times of dogs presenting with vary-
ing severity of disease and subsequent medical and/or interven-
tional surgical management have been reported [382,384–387]. In
general, the disease is progressive but dogs presenting with mild-to-
moderate clinical signs show an improvement in clinical symptoms
with medical management while dogs with severe clinical symp-
toms, as judged by respiratory noise, coughing, and dyspnea, have a
superior outcome when managed with an intervention such extra-
luminal prosthesis or intratracheal stent placement. Perioperative
mortality following extraluminal prosthesis is reported to occur in
approximately 5% of cases [385,387]. The reported rate of major
complications following extraluminal prosthesis or intratracheal
stent placement is approximately 40%. Tracheal tears, laryngeal
paralysis, and pneumonia are reported with extraluminal repair
and stent fracture, while tissue ingrowth, progressive tracheal col-
lapse, and stent dislodgement are reported following intraluminal
stent placement [382,385,387].
Management of anesthesia
The potential for impaired airway patency leading to marked
increases in R aw and the work of breathing, stimulation of the cough
reflex, and augmentation of hypoxemia due to underlying respiratory
disease are the major anesthetic concerns for patients with tracheal
collapse in the perioperative period. In patients undergoing intralu-
minal stenting, the need to share the airway during the stent place-
ment and to prevent post-procedural coughing are aspects that require
consideration. For patients with pre-existing laryngeal dysfunction
and those patients developing postsurgical laryngeal paralysis,
strategies to minimize risks discussed in the laryngeal paralysis
section are applicable.
Physical examination, CBC, biochemistry profile, urinalysis,
thoracic radiographs, as well as imaging performed to characterize
the tracheal disease, should be performed prior to anesthesia.
Auscultation of the upper airways should be included during the
physical examination to screen for laryngeal disease. Further
cardiovascular diagnostic tests such as ECG and cardiac ultrasound
should be recommended based on the physical examination
and thoracic radiographic results. Patients should be maintained on

-- 813 of 1450 --

798 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
their medical management regimen up to the perioperative period
to minimize coughing and inflammation of the airways. As noted
above, general anesthesia to permit tracheobronchoscopy and/or
airway sample collection (tracheal wash or bronchoalveolar lavage)
may be performed prior to stent placement. During the exam, the
degree and location of airway collapse can be assessed (Fig. 38.36).
After careful planning and treatment of underlying conditions,
animals may undergo a second anesthetic procedure for placement
of an intraluminal stent or placement of external ring prostheses
(Fig. 38.37) [388].
In addition to the standard workstation and monitoring
equipment set up, endotracheal tubes with embedded radiopaque
markings in various sizes and lengths should be available when
intraluminal stent placement is planned. Equipment to permit
oxygen insufflation during tracheobronchoscopy should be
available as discussed above (Anesthesia for bronchoscopy).
To date, there are no studies comparing outcomes with different
protocols in patients undergoing diagnostic or therapeutic proce-
dures related to tracheal collapse. Due to their antitussive properties,
opioid analgesics are routinely included with low doses of sedative
agents in the premedication regimen. Butorphanol provides
adequate analgesia for minimally invasive procedures (endoluminal
stent placement); however, when more invasive procedures such as
extraluminal prosthesis placement are planned, a μ-opioid receptor
agonist such as methadone is recommended for perioperative
analgesia. Adding an anticholinergic to the premedication is
recommended if there are no contraindications as airway secretions,
which can elicit coughing, will be reduced.
Preoxygenation and upper airway examination should be
performed before intubation. As in patients with BOAS or laryngeal
paralysis, the intravenous agents propofol or alfaxalone are suitable
anesthetic induction agents. Lidocaine administered intravenously
at 1–2 mg/kg intravenously prior to or during anesthetic induction
with propofol or alfaxalone with subsequent intubation has variable
impact on the frequency of coughing [389–392]. In dogs premedi-
cated with methadone or acepromazine, lidocaine at 1.5–2 mg/kg
was reported to reduce the incidence of cough while dogs that had
dexmedetomidine included in the premedication prior to 2 mg/kg
of lidocaine did not demonstrate a reduced incidence of cough-
ing [389,390]. Importantly, the incidence of cough reported in dogs
receiving lidocaine systemically at induction ranges from 7 to 52%
[389–393]. Fentanyl administered at 7 μg/kg IV was shown to be
superior to 2 mg/kg lidocaine IV at suppressing cough in dogs
receiving alfaxalone for induction of anesthesia; however, 9% of
dogs were reported to have coughed during intubation [393]. In
methadone-premedicated dogs where endotracheal intubation was
performed after achieving a moderate plane of anesthesia (propofol
titrated to abolish the medial palpebral reflex), co-administration
of lidocaine (2 mg/kg IV) resulted in a relatively low incidence of
coughing (7%) [390]. Anesthetic induction with propofol alone
(43% incidence of coughing) increased the likelihood of coughing
during endotracheal intubation by 10 times in comparison to
propofol and IV lidocaine [390]. Although no studies have been
completed to date in dogs with tracheal collapse, for those dogs who
have a history of coughing, recommendations include ensuring
antitussives are continued prior to anesthesia, opioid analgesics are
included in the premedication regimen, intubation is performed at
a moderate depth of anesthesia (injectable titrated until loss of
medial palpebral reflex), and lidocaine 1.5–2.0 mg/kg is adminis-
tered as part of the induction protocol.
During airway examination and endoluminal stent placement,
maintenance of anesthesia with injectable agents (propofol or
alfaxalone), administered as boluses or as an intravenous infusion,
will reduce the potential for environmental contamination as
maintaining a sealed airway with no leaks is difficult with inhalant
anesthetics. For patients with tracheal collapse that are undergoing
extraluminal stent placement or procedures unrelated to the airway,
maintenance of anesthesia with an inhalant anesthetic regimen is
suitable with ventilatory support provided as required. Ideally,
spontaneous breathing is maintained during anesthesia for
endoluminal stent placement as there may be periods when
positive-pressure ventilation is not feasible. In patients with cervical
tracheal collapse undergoing endoluminal stent placement through
the endotracheal tube, the endotracheal tube can be extended
Degree of tracheal collapse according
to endoscopic evalution:
(A)
Grade I (25%)
tracheal collapse
Grade II (50%)
tracheal collapse
Grade III (75%)
tracheal collapse
Normal
trachea Grade IV (90%)
tracheal collapse
(B)
(C) 	(D)
Figure 38.36 Classification of severity of tracheal collapse based on lumen reduction assessed by endoscopy/bronchoscopy. A. Grade I (25% loss of
tracheal lumen). B. Grade II (50% loss of tracheal lumen). C. Grade III (75% loss of tracheal lumen). D. Grade IV (90% or nearly complete loss of tracheal
lumen). Source: Reproduced from Tappin et al. [388], with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

-- 814 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	799
beyond the collapsed region if feasible initially, with subsequent
repositioning performed using fluoroscopy [394]. If the latter is not
available, the endotracheal tube can be inserted to the level of the
third rib as a guide. Alternatively, the procedure may be performed
with the endotracheal tube placed just beyond the larynx [394].
Lubricant should be placed on the tube and gentle cuff inflation
should be performed to minimize tracheal irritation which may
predispose the patient to coughing during recovery. When tracheal
procedures are being performed, the potential development of a
pneumothorax should be considered if deterioration in ventilation
or oxygenation develops.
Irrespective of the procedure undertaken, prior to anesthetic
recovery, the airway should be examined and carefully suctioned to
remove excess fluid or debris. Avoiding excitement and coughing in
addition to ensuring analgesia is critical during recovery. Low doses
of sedatives such as acepromazine (0.01 mg/kg) or dexmedetomidine
(1 μg/kg) can facilitate a smooth recovery. Butorphanol is a suitable
postoperative analgesic when minimally invasive procedures such as
bronchoscopy or endoluminal tracheal stenting are occurring or
when local anesthesia can be included in the protocol. Invasive
procedures such as extraluminal stent placement require the use of
opioid analgesics with greater analgesic efficacy such as methadone.
Including NSAIDs in the perioperative analgesic regimen if no
contraindications exist (for example, concurrent corticosteroids) is
recommended. Oxygen supplementation may be required during
anesthetic recovery. The technique used can be tailored to the
individual patient needs and resources available. As patients are
generally small, an oxygen-enriched environment created with an
oxygen hood or cage is often suitable. Patients with tracheal collapse
that are recovering from anesthesia but have not undergone airway
stabilization techniques may require oxygen supplementation during
recovery. In severe cases, nasotracheal catheterization and/or
emergency stent placement may be indicated.
Equine guttural pouch disease
Guttural pouches are extensions of the Eustachian tubes which
connect the pharynx to the middle ear. Of domesticated veterinary
species, the equine is the only species with guttural pouches. In the
adult horse, each pouch is approximately 500 mL in volume with
medial and lateral compartments. The pouches communicate with
the pharynx via a pharyngeal orifice located in the lateral and
caudal aspect of the pharynx, rostral and ventral to the dorsal
pharyngeal recess. The maxillary artery, internal and external
carotid arteries, and cranial nerves VII, IX, X, XI, and XII as well as
the mandibular nerve (branch of cranial nerve V), the sympathetic
trunk, and cranial cervical ganglion are either located in or adjacent
(A) 	(B)
(C) 	(D)
Figure 38.37 Radiographic assessment of tracheal collapse in an anesthetized animal (top images) and treatment options that involve general anesthesia in
dogs (bottom images). A. The radiographic image seems normal when taken during a positive-pressure breath (20 cmH 2 O) applied during inspiration,
which can be achieved by squeezing the reservoir bag with the pop-off (APL) valve closed. B. In contrast, the radiographic image taken at the end of
expiration shows tracheal collapse across the thoracic inlet. This animal would benefit from PEEP administration during anesthesia to minimize tracheal
collapse throughout the ventilatory cycle, except during radiographic assessment of tracheal collapse. C. External ring prostheses placed to support a
collapsing trachea. D. A tapered tracheal stent placed in an 11-year- old female Yorkshire terrier that also presented with bilateral bronchial collapse.
Source: Reproduced from Tappin et al. [388], with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

-- 815 of 1450 --

800 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
to the guttural pouches and can be affected by the primary disease
or have the potential to be damaged during interventions involving
the guttural pouches.
Equine guttural pouch tympany
Characteristics and pathophysiology Distention of the guttural
pouch, referred to as “tympany,” is generally reported in foals in the
first few weeks of life [395–400]. Arabian and Paint horse foals are
overrepresented in some regions; however, the condition has
been reported in a variety of breeds, including Warmbloods,
Thoroughbreds, Standardbreds, and Quarter horses [395–400].
Causes of the condition include alteration of the structure of the
pharyngeal opening of the pouch such that it acts as a one-way
valve to capture air and fluid within the pouch, upper airway
inflammation, persistent coughing, or pharyngeal muscle dysfunc-
tion [401]. The condition is usually unilateral but can be bilateral
and is more common in fillies than colts. A hereditary link has been
established in some breeds [401].
On physical examination, there is usually marked tympanic dis-
tention noted in the parotid region that is nonpainful on palpation.
Both sides can be affected even with unilateral disease as one pouch
may encroach medially on the other side. Stridor can range from
mild to severe depending on the degree of airway obstruction.
Severe distention can result in dyspnea and dysphagia, with secondary
aspiration pneumonia and empyema of the guttural pouches.
Diagnosis is performed by radiographic and endoscopic examination
of the pharynx and guttural pouches.
Initial patient management generally involves decompressing the
pouches by placing a catheter into the pharyngeal opening, a proce-
dure performed using endoscopy. Many patients can be managed
medically with an indwelling catheter placed into the affected
pouch; however, surgery may be required in some cases [401].
Traditional surgical techniques include creating a connection
between the affected and non-affected pouches, altering the open-
ing of the guttural pouch into the pharynx on the affected side, or
creating a new opening into the pharynx with the foal under
general anesthesia in dorsal or lateral recumbency. Alternatively, a
minimally invasive approach using transendoscopic electrocautery
or laser can be used. The latter may be performed with the foal
under general anesthesia or sedation [395,396,399]. Overall, success
following surgical interventions is high, although repeat surgeries
are frequently required to achieve complete resolution of the
condition [399,401].
Management of sedation and/or general anesthesia In addition to
standard perioperative concerns related to sedation and general
anesthesia, concerns for foals with guttural pouch tympany relate
to underlying respiratory disease, and potential development of
further compromise of upper airway airflow during the periopera-
tive period. Intraoperative damage to vessels with subsequent
hemorrhage or nerve injury is possible due to the location of major
vessels and nerves in the surgical field [397,401].
A standard history, including determination of current medica-
tions and information regarding the degree of respiratory compro-
mise and prior anesthetic events should be obtained. Preanesthetic
diagnostic work up in foals presenting with tympany should include
a thorough physical examination, CBC, biochemistry profile, and
radiographs of the pharyngeal region and thorax. Endoscopy is
generally performed as part of the diagnostic plan. In most cases,
surgery is not undertaken in the first few weeks of life; however, if
surgery is required in this period, serum IgG should be measured to
ensure adequacy of passive transfer of antibodies. In foals with
clinical signs related to pneumonia (fever, increased respiratory
effort, and/or impaired gas exchange), medical management should
be initiated, and if required, general anesthesia scheduled after res-
olution of pneumonia. Alternatively, surgery could be performed
under sedation if feasible.
Preoperative medications routinely administered include NSAIDs
such as flunixin meglumine in addition to antimicrobials. An intra-
venous catheter should be placed to facilitate sedative and analgesic
administration. Sedation with xylazine and butorphanol has been
reported to provide adequate conditions for surgery with laser in
some foals [395,396]. In patients undergoing general anesthesia,
surgery is ideally scheduled when the foal is not compromised due
to underlying pulmonary disease as previously mentioned. Medical
management, including decompression of the pouches using
indwelling catheters, can be considered while the patient is stabi-
lized. Immediately prior to general anesthesia, decompression of
tympany is recommended if pharyngeal distention is creating
upper airway obstruction. For cases undergoing general anesthesia,
preoxygenation is recommended prior to induction of general anes-
thesia if the foal has any pulmonary parenchymal disease. This can
be achieved using nasal catheters or a facemask connected to the
anesthetic breathing circuit once the foal is sedated and manually
restrained. Sedation can be accomplished with either a benzodiaz-
epine (midazolam or diazepam) or an α2
-adrenergic receptor agonist
based on the patient’s age and hemodynamic status [402]. Injectable
anesthetic induction techniques (ketamine or propofol titrated to
effect) are recommended over inhalational agents alone as the latter
has been associated with a higher morbidity in foals [403].
Maintenance of anesthesia can be achieved through a variety of
techniques including injectable, inhalant, or a combination of
techniques [398,399]. Opioids are typically used to provide intra-
operative analgesia. Monitoring of cardiovascular and respiratory
function throughout anesthesia is ideally performed with ECG,
direct blood pressure monitoring, capnography, and pulse oximetry
measured continuously, with intermittent arterial blood gas analy-
sis. As the surgical site is located near the head, the intra-arterial
catheter can be placed in the lateral metatarsal artery to facilitate
monitoring of blood pressure and sampling for gas analysis.
Monitoring of body temperature and use of warming devices to
prevent hypothermia are also recommended along with standard
fluid therapy protocols. Postoperative analgesia with an opioid
analgesic in combination with an NSAID is standard while corti-
costeroid administration may be required in some cases to reduce
soft tissue swelling [398–401]. Respiratory obstruction is generally
minimal following surgery, however, an orotracheal tube can be
maintained until the foal is standing to minimize the risk of inade-
quate airflow during recovery.
Equine guttural pouch mycosis
Characteristics and pathophysiology Mycotic infection located
within the guttural pouches can affect horses at any age but the
factors that predispose a horse to developing an infection are
unknown. [401]. Aspergillus is the most common fungus associated
with the condition. Lesions are typically located on the dorsal wall
of the guttural pouch and in most cases the disease is unilateral.
Clinical signs arise due to secondary mycotic erosion of tissues,
including nerves and vessels within and adjacent to the pouches.
Epistaxis is the most commonly reported clinical sign, however,
cranial nerve damage resulting in dysphagia, which may present as
coughing or nasal discharge with particulate food material and/or

-- 816 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	801
aspiration pneumonia is also reported either in isolation or with
epistaxis. Other clinical signs resulting from cranial nerve injury
include laryngeal hemiplegia, facial paralysis, and Horner’s syn-
drome. Pain in the head and cranial cervical region may be present.
Radiographs may reveal fluid in the guttural pouches. Definitive
diagnosis is generally determined by endoscopy.
The infection can spontaneously resolve, however, the mortality
associated with guttural pouch mycosis is high in horses with
epistaxis due to hemorrhage. Medical management involves treating
the fungal infection with oral and topical antifungal agents as well
as daily flushing of the pouches. Supportive therapy such as intrave-
nous balanced crystalloids and/or blood may be required in addition
to nutritional support and systemic anti-inflammatories to reduce
neuritis [401]. In horses with epistaxis, surgery may be undertaken
to occlude affected arteries using balloon catheters, microcoils, or
nitinol plugs with the goal of reducing the risk of mortality associ-
ated with hemorrhage [401,404]. Depending on the surgical tech-
nique used and individual circumstances, the procedures may be
performed with the horse standing or under general anesthesia.
Management of sedation and/or anesthesia The major concerns
related to sedation and/or general anesthesia of the horse with
guttural pouch mycosis for arterial occlusion relate to the hemo-
dynamic stability of the patient associated with hypovolemia,
the potential for hemorrhage, and/or neurological abnormalities
including ataxia, blindness, and collapse following arterial occlu-
sion [404–408]. In horses with dysphagia, underlying aspiration
pneumonia may be present and gas exchange impairment may be
aggravated once the horse is recumbent. Ataxia, blindness, weak-
ness, and laryngeal paralysis are all postoperative risks that could
impair recovery from general anesthesia.
In addition to a standard history including current medications
and prior surgeries, the number of episodes and the timing of any
epistaxis events should be obtained. Diagnostic work up of patients
presenting for sedation and general anesthesia should include a
thorough physical examination, CBC, and serum biochemistry.
Further work up such as thoracic radiography should be based
on results of the physical examination. In hypovolemic patients,
fluid therapy with crystalloids and blood products to reestablish
blood volume and ensure normal oxygen-carrying capacity of the
blood should be performed prior to surgery.
During sedation, restraining the head in an elevated position is
important to prevent increases in pressures in affected arteries
prior to ligation [409]. In general, sedation can be achieved by
titrating α2 -adrenergic receptor agonists to effect with an opioid
analgesic such as butorphanol or morphine included in the proto-
col. For standing procedures, additional α2 -adrenergic receptor
agonists can be administered as required by intermittent boluses or
via an infusion [405,410]. In general, infusions will reduce the total
dose of sedative administered and the variation in level of sedation.
An initial intravenous dose of detomidine (5–10 μg/kg) followed
by an intravenous infusion (5–10 μg/kg/h) provides good quality
sedation for standing surgery [411]. Opioid analgesics such as
morphine (0.05 mg/kg) or butorphanol (0.05 mg/kg) can also be
added to the protocol. While acepromazine is often administered
to horses prior to standing surgery in combination with α2 -
adrenergic receptor agonists, it should be avoided in any horse
with hypovolemia due to its vasodilating effect. Local anesthesia
can be delivered topically in the nostril to facilitate endoscopy as
well as infiltrated subcutaneously at the surgery site [405]. Horses
should be monitored throughout the procedure. The veterinary
team should be available to rapidly induce anesthesia in the horse
in the event of complications that could endanger the horse or per-
sonnel. Induction of general anesthesia may be required in an
emergency when hemorrhage cannot be controlled with the horse
standing.
For horses undergoing general anesthesia, standard anesthesia,
and supportive drug protocols are appropriate. ECG, direct arterial
blood pressure (lateral metatarsal site), capnography, and blood gas
analysis with repeated packed cell volume/total protein measure-
ments (if significant hemorrhage occurs intraoperatively) should be
included as part of the monitoring protocol. The anesthetist should
be prepared to adjust fluid therapy, including the need for a blood
transfusion, based on intraoperative blood loss.
Equine laryngeal paralysis
Characteristics and pathophysiology
Several different pathological conditions may affect the equine
laryngeal region; however, the most common condition resulting in
surgical intervention is recurrent laryngeal neuropathy. The disease
is characterized by progressive reduction in abduction and adduction
of the arytenoid cartilages, most commonly on left side, though it
can be bilateral. The severity of the laryngeal dysfunction is generally
scored using the Havermeyer laryngeal 1–4 grading system with 4
being the most severely affected. Although the cause is unknown,
progressive axonopathy, specifically loss of large, myelinated axons
in the recurrent laryngeal nerves, is responsible for neurogenic
atrophy of the musculature of the larynx [412]. Breeds commonly
reported to be affected include Thoroughbreds, Warmbloods, and
various draft breeds. Poor exercise performance and an increase in
exercise-induced stridor are typical clinical signs [413–416]. Horses
with recurrent laryngeal neuropathy generally do not have
concurrent medical conditions but laryngeal paralysis secondary to
guttural pouch mycosis, cervical trauma, neoplasia, or inflammatory
processes have been rarely described [416,417].
Definitive diagnosis of recurrent laryngeal neuropathy or
laryngeal dysfunction associated with other disease processes is
accomplished with endoscopy in the non-sedated horse at rest and/
or during exercise [416]. Both α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists and
acepromazine influence the scoring of laryngeal dysfunction via
endoscopy, therefore, physical restraint is recommended during the
initial assessment of laryngeal function at rest [418]. Ultrasound
has been added to the typical diagnostic work up of horses with
laryngeal paralysis to assess the degree of laryngeal muscle atrophy
and screen for concurrent laryngeal diseases [419].
In cases of recurrent laryngeal neuropathy, surgery may be
undertaken when performance is impaired. Laryngoplasty, ventri-
culectomy, ventriculocordectomy, reinnervation of the caudal
arytenoideus dorsalis muscle, and arytenoidectomy have all been
described with unilateral laryngoplasty and ventriculocordectomy
most commonly performed [420]. Traditionally, these procedures
are conducted during general anesthesia with the horse in lateral
recumbency. More recently, laryngoplasty and ventriculectomy
have been performed with the horse standing under sedation to
avoid the risks of general anesthesia, improve visibility, and
anatomical orientation, and permit more accurate assessment of
arytenoid abduction intraoperatively [413,421]. Overall, the
prognosis for return to performance after laryngoplasty is good,
although nonracing horses have a better prognosis. Postoperative
complications are numerous and include dysphagia leading to
coughing, chronic tracheitis and bronchitis, lung abscess formation,
and pneumonia [416].

-- 817 of 1450 --

802 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
Management of sedation and anesthesia
Preanesthetic preparation should include a thorough physical
examination with focus on the respiratory system. Standard preop-
erative diagnostic tests, such as a CBC or blood gas analysis with
packed cell volume, total protein, and blood urea nitrogen or creati-
nine are appropriate unless co-existing disease is detected on physi-
cal examination. Preoperative fasting time of 8 to 12 h with water
freely available is typically recommended. Non-steroidal anti-
inflammatories are routinely administered pre- and postoperatively.
As noted, there are several advantages to performing laryngeal
surgery with the horse standing, including the reduced risk of
neuropathy and myopathy associated with recumbency and gen-
eral anesthesia. Sedation protocols that include acepromazine
(0.03 mg/kg IV) followed by an α2 -adrenergic receptor agonist
administered as an infusion or intermittent boluses are typically
employed. Opioid analgesics, such as butorphanol (0.05 mg/kg) or
morphine (0.05 mg/kg), are added to improve the quality of seda-
tion and provide intraoperative analgesia. Local anesthesia of the
operative field can be achieved with either local infiltration of
the site or by performing a unilateral cervical plexus (C2 and C3)
block [413,422]. Placing ear plugs and a hood with a blinker on the
surgery side is also recommended [413].
In cases in which general anesthesia is required, routine anesthetic
protocols including standard monitoring and fluid therapy are suit-
able. Direct arterial pressure should be measured from the lateral
metatarsal artery and the anesthetist should ensure they have ready
access to an intravenous access port if using a jugular vein for fluid
and drug administration. Intubation can occasionally be difficult in
horses with unilateral laryngeal paralysis; therefore, the anesthetist
should be prepared to use a smaller endotracheal tube to minimize
trauma of the laryngeal structures during intubation in patients
with severe clinical signs. The surgical team may also request the use
of a small orotracheal tube if ventriculectomy is being performed to
assist with access to the surgical site. Alternatively, intermittent
extubation may be considered intraoperatively [416].
Anesthesia and lower airway disease
Patients may require sedation and/or general anesthesia for further
diagnostic work up of their airway disease or for unrelated condi-
tions. General considerations for patients undergoing bronchos-
copy are discussed above. In general, patients with lower airway
disease typically have an increase in lower airway resistance, which
may be exacerbated by anesthesia because of a decrease in muco-
ciliary clearance and accumulation of airway secretions. Feline and
equine asthma are discussed below in more detail; however, the
principles of anesthetic management also apply to canine patients
with chronic bronchitis.
Feline asthma
Characteristics and pathophysiology
Feline asthma is an inflammatory lower airway disease currently
estimated to affect 1–5% of cats [423]. Major characteristics of
asthma 	in 	cats 	include 	airway 	inflammation, 	airway
hyperresponsiveness, and airflow limitation. The etiology of the
disease is believed to be due to a Type I hypersensitivity to inhaled
allergens with genetic, epigenetic, and environmental factors
involved in the pathophysiology [424,425]. Cats generally present
for clinical signs, such as coughing, wheezing, or respiratory distress
at 4–5 years of age; however, more subtle signs may be evident in
younger cats [423]. Siamese cats may be overrepresented, but the
disease has been reported in all breeds [426,427]. Fluctuations in
clinical signs are relatively common and may correlate with exposure
to allergens. As with presenting complaints, physical examination
findings may vary considerably, with some cats being asymptomatic
and others exhibiting tachypnea, wheezing, increased expiratory
effort, and open-mouth breathing [428,429]. A cough can generally
be elicited with gentle tracheal palpation. A CBC may show elevated
total leukocyte and eosinophil counts and eosinophilic inflammation
is present in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid [428,429]. Radiographic
findings can also be highly variable with some cats having normal
radiographic findings while others have bronchial, interstitial,
bronchointerstitial, or alveolar patterns. Lobar collapse may be
present in some cats which is attributed to airway obstruction with
respiratory secretions [428]. Further diagnostic testing including
thoracic ultrasound, thoracic computed tomography, and pulmo-
nary function testing may help to characterize the degree of severity
of the disease and airflow obstruction, although the availability of
the latter is limited for clinical patients. Cats with chronic bronchitis,
pulmonary parasitic disease, or heartworm-associated respiratory
disease may be confounded with asthmatic cats, and the definitive
diagnosis of asthma may not be known when the patient requires
anesthesia, particularly when scheduled for bronchoscopy and
bronchoalveolar lavage [423,428,429]. Therapy of cats with mild-
moderate asthma includes environmental management, optimiza-
tion of body weight, glucocorticoids, and bronchodilators as
required. When cats present in respiratory distress, oxygen therapy,
bronchodilators, glucocorticoids, and in some cases, sedation may
be required [423].
As noted above, asthma is a relatively common airway disease in
cats therefore anesthesia may be required for routine procedures
that do not involve the airways. In addition, general anesthesia may
also be required to permit procedures such as bronchoscopy and/or
bronchoalveolar lavage to obtain a definitive diagnosis of asthma
and rule out other diseases involving the airways. In humans,
the risk of perioperative morbidity and mortality is higher in
patients with asthma, particularly when their condition is unstable;
however, this information is currently unknown for cats [430,431].
Bronchospasm is reported to occur in about 9% of human patients
with asthma during the perioperative period [432]. Although not
specific to asthma, in cats undergoing bronchoscopy and bron-
choalveolar lavage while receiving jet ventilation (180 breaths/min
delivered by a specialized jet ventilator) a 38% complication rate
was reported, with 24% of the complications considered mild [173].
Three percent of cats in the latter investigation were reported to
develop a pneumothorax during the procedure [173]. A similar
incidence of pneumothorax development was described in a more
recent retrospective study (2.5%) [172].
Management of anesthesia
General concerns for patients with asthma include the potential
development of bronchospasm, increased R aw leading to impaired
expiration/gas trapping within the lungs, and/or hypoxemia during
or after anesthesia [430,431]. Overall, perianesthetic goals should
include minimizing airway secretions, avoidance of airway
manipulation at light planes of anesthesia, and using strategies that
minimize the risk of laryngospasm and hypoxemia.
Prior to anesthesia, the patient should have a thorough history
with documentation of current medications, followed by a diagnostic
work up including a physical examination with pulmonary and
cardiac auscultation, CBC, serum biochemistry profile, and thoracic
radiographs. The latter will help rule out other cardiopulmonary
diseases and provide further information regarding the severity of

-- 818 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	803
lung involvement. As noted, clinical signs can fluctuate, and elective
procedures should be performed when the patient is not exhibiting
signs of significant respiratory dysfunction.
Preanesthetic 	administration 	of 	terbutaline 	systemically
(0.01 mg/kg IM or SC) may be considered prior to performing
bronchoscopy and/or bronchoalveolar lavage and in cats with
asthma undergoing anesthesia for non-airway procedures [423].
Although this treatment is thought to reduce the incidence of bron-
chospasm in cats undergoing bronchoalveolar lavage, to date, no
prospective study has evaluated its efficacy [172,173,423]. Similarly,
to date, there are no studies evaluating the outcome of different
anesthetic protocols in cats with naturally occurring asthma.
General recommendations include premedicating cats with opioids
such as butorphanol or methadone, and an anticholinergic. Due to
their potential association with histamine release, morphine and
meperidine are not recommended opioid analgesics in patients
with reactive airways. Although anticholinergics may increase the
viscosity of airway secretions, they are effective bronchodilators
and may reduce the risk of laryngospasm secondary to oropharyn-
geal secretions. Additional sedation can be achieved if required by
adding acepromazine, midazolam, or alfaxalone. Experimentally,
dexmedetomidine reduced histamine-induced bronchoconstric-
tion in healthy dogs and reduced indicators of airway inflammation
in a murine model of asthma [433,434]. Although α2
-adrenergic
receptor agonists may be suitable sedatives, their use in combination
with anticholinergics, without concurrent peripheral α2
-adrenergic
receptor antagonist administration is not recommended because of
a severe hypertensive response [435]. When used in combination
with opioid analgesics, α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists can reduce
arterial hemoglobin oxygen saturation in healthy animals breathing
room air and oxygen supplementation should be available [17,436].
Preoxygenation prior to anesthetic induction, if tolerated, will
minimize the risk of hypoxemia during anesthetic induction.
Ideally, monitoring of hemoglobin oxygen saturation (SpO 2 on a
peripheral site such as the paw) is initiated prior to induction of
anesthesia, along with ECG assessment of cardiac rhythm and
rate. Induction of anesthesia with an injectable anesthetic will
provide a smooth transition to general anesthesia and propofol is
often used in asthmatic patients as it produces airway smooth
muscle relaxation and reduces R aw [432]. Ketamine has also been
shown to result in relaxation of airway musculature and may be
preferred in some hemodynamically unstable patients. Ketamine
is typically combined with a benzodiazepine to improve muscu-
loskeletal relaxation and facilitate intubation [437]. The effects of
alfaxalone on airway smooth muscle have not been reported,
however, based on its clinical effects, it is anticipated to have
similar effects as propofol and ketamine. When endotracheal
intubation is performed, lidocaine should be applied topically to
the larynx 45–60 s before intubation is attempted to avoid
laryngospasm and endotracheal tube placement should not be
attempted if the patient is at a light plane of anesthesia [438]. In
cats with asthma, an endotracheal tube with the largest internal
diameter possible should be placed to minimize the impact of the
tube on overall R aw (Fig. 38.16). Use of a feline supraglottic airway
device may also be a suitable means to protect the airway in select
patients [172]. Isoflurane and sevoflurane both consistently pro-
duce bronchodilation and reduce R aw ; however, the latter may
offer slightly greater effect and it is therefore the preferred
inhalant agent in humans with asthma [432]. Desflurane is not
recommended as it may cause airway irritation and increase R aw
at higher concentrations (2 MAC) [432].
Anesthesia can be maintained under spontaneous ventilation.
Depending on the disease severity and the associated increase in
R aw
, work of breathing, or deficits in arterial oxygenation, mechani-
cal ventilatory support may be required. In such cases, the goal
should be to provide a long expiratory phase to prevent gas trapping
associated with lower airway obstruction. The latter can be accom-
plished by using a short inspiratory time (e.g., < 1.5 s) and a small
I:E ratio (e.g., ≥ 1:3). Extubation is recommended when patients
are still at a deep plane of anesthesia unless it is specifically con-
traindicated due to other concurrent conditions. If patients are
receiving glucocorticoids, NSAIDs are contraindicated, and alter-
native strategies must be employed to ensure adequate analgesia
postoperatively.
Signs of bronchospasm, which can occur at any time during the
perianesthetic period, include an increase in respiratory effort dur-
ing spontaneous ventilation. An increased R aw and reduced dynamic
CRS (V T
/[Ppeak – PEEP]) is indicated by an increase in P peak if the cat
is receiving VCV. If an advanced anesthesia ventilator is available,
adding an inspiratory pause during VCV may facilitate identifica-
tion of increased R aw by analyzing the gradient between Ppeak and
P plat (Fig. 38.16). Otherwise, it may be possible to qualitatively
appreciate increased R aw and decreased dynamic CRS during manual
compression of the reservoir bag, as higher P peak (recorded by the
manometer of the breathing circuit) is needed to achieve adequate
chest excursion. Impaired gas exchange will be evident as cyanosis,
a decrease in SpO 2 and PaO 2
, and an increase in PET
CO2 or
PaCO2 [176,432]. A classic obstructive expiratory pattern on the
capnograph may be observed: an obtuse α angle that can be
described as a “shark fin.” The plane of anesthesia should be assessed
and deepened if the patient’s hemodynamic status permits, and aero-
solized albuterol administered via the endotracheal tube. Additional
treatments include systemic terbutaline, corticosteroids, anticholin-
ergics, or a low dose of epinephrine (0.005–0.01 mg/kg, SC or IV).
Inspired gases should be supplemented with oxygen if the patient is
breathing room air. The decision to induce general anesthesia to
reestablish an airway in a conscious (i.e., post-extubation) patient
will be determined by the severity of gas exchange impairment and
the patient’s work of breathing.
Equine asthma (non-infectious lower airway disease)
Characteristics and pathophysiology
Lower airway disease in the equine is common, with etiologic factors,
including environmental and infectious factors [439]. Recently, the
term “equine asthma” has been proposed to include horses with a
spectrum of clinical signs ranging from mild inflammatory airway
disease to those exhibiting signs of recurrent airway obstruc-
tion [440]. Horses with asthma may have a variety of clinical signs,
including a cough, reduced performance, increased work of breath-
ing and, when severe, impaired gas exchange. Physical examination
findings may be very mild or may reveal nostril flaring while the ani-
mal is at rest, an increase in abdominal expiratory effort, nasal dis-
charge, expiratory wheezes, and inspiratory crackles. Pulmonary
function tests available in some referral centers can detect an increase
in R aw
, increased maximal change in pleural pressure (∆Ppl
), and a
reduced dynamic CRS [439]. The severity of the disease is often
episodic with clinical signs precipitated by exposure to specific
antigens such as moldy hay or pasture allergens [441]. Bronchoalveolar
lavage sampling typically reveals neutrophilic inflammation.
Treatment includes environmental modification to reduce allergen
exposure, corticosteroids, and bronchodilators. Therapeutics may be
administered systemically or via inhalation [439].

-- 819 of 1450 --

804 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
Management of anesthesia
Patients with severe airway disease may have impaired gas exchange
during episodes of airway inflammation and bronchospasm. An
increased P(A-a)O2 difference leading to lower-than-expected PaO2
levels due to atelectasis is not uncommon in normal horses during
general anesthesia; however, this may be exacerbated in horses with
pre-existing V̇A
/Q̇ mismatching associated with severe asthma. In
addition, increased R aw in cases of severe asthma contributes to an
increase in work of breathing which in turn may contribute to
reduced ventilation during general anesthesia in spontaneously
breathing horses.
Preanesthetic history should include the horse’s degree of respira-
tory compromise during rest and exercise as well as medications
being administered. If the patient is exhibiting clinical signs consist-
ent with impaired gas exchange, arterial blood gas analysis prior to
anesthesia in addition to routine preoperative physical examination
and diagnostics is recommended. Pulmonary function testing if
available can provide a method to trend an individual horse’s response
to therapy and characterize the severity of their disease. Horses with
acute exacerbations of clinical signs should not undergo elective proce-
dures until stabilized and in horses with continued gas exchange
impairment (hypercapnia and hypoxemia), procedures should be
performed with the horse standing using sedation and local/regional
anesthesia rather than general anesthesia whenever possible. As
dorsal recumbency is associated with the greatest risk of hypox-
emia [2,24], if general anesthesia is required, lateral recumbency is
the preferred position if feasible for the intended procedure.
Prior to anesthesia, patients should be maintained on medica-
tions and exposure to known allergens such as dusty hay or straw
eliminated to minimize the risk of relapse in their condition.
Fortunately, sedatives and general anesthetics routinely used in
horses result in relaxation of airway smooth muscle. Xylazine was
shown to reduce R aw and increase dynamic C RS in ponies exhibiting
lower airway obstruction following a challenge with dusty
hay [442]. Ketamine, isoflurane, and sevoflurane have also been
shown to produce bronchodilation as discussed above. Monitoring
of direct arterial blood pressure, arterial blood gas, ECG,
capnography, and respiratory mechanics is ideal for prolonged
procedures performed under general anesthesia. Ventilatory
support with low rates (6–7 breaths per min) and long expiratory
times (I:E ratio of 1:3 or 1:4) should be used to avoid gas trapping
in the lungs leading to dynamic hyperinflation/intrinsic PEEP
during expiration. Modern piston-driven large animal anesthesia
ventilators allow an inspiratory pause to be set in VCV mode
(Tafonius, Hallowell EMC). In horses with severe bronchospasm
secondary to asthma, the use of an inspiratory pause could
theoretically allow recognition of an increase in R aw by an increase
in the gradient between P peak and P plat . With either spontaneous or
positive-pressure 	ventilation, 	setting 	a 	target 	PaCO 2 	of
50–60 mmHg (permissive hypercapnia) can be adopted. In humans
with severe obstructive airway disease, the development of gas
trapping can occur due to inadequate/slow emptying of the lungs
during expiration. Increased P peak during VCV, decreased V T and
hypercapnia during PCV, and increased PEEP during the
expiratory phase are all indicators of increased R aw and gas trapping
caused by severe small airway disease in humans [443].
Strategies used to address hypoxemia during anesthesia
include employing lung recruitment maneuvers as discussed
above, supporting hemodynamics, and administering aero-
solized albuterol (salbutamol) via a metered dose inhaler into
the endotracheal tube [130,134,444,445]. Adverse side effects of
the latter treatment include sweating, ventricular tachycardia, and
hypotension; therefore, hemodynamics should be monitored
during treatment [444,446].
Anesthesia and pleural space disease
Pleural space disease is relatively common in veterinary species either
in isolation or in combination with other conditions, including
pulmonary parenchymal disease (contusions, neoplasia, pneumonia,
and bullae), mediastinal masses, esophageal disease (perforation),
infectious diseases such as feline infectious peritonitis, diaphragmatic
hernia, coagulopathies, and/or cardiovascular disease. The presence
of air or fluid in the thoracic cavity, or disruption of the normal
chest wall or diaphragm anatomy (penetrating chest wound or a
diaphragmatic hernia), can dramatically influence respiratory
function. Patients may present on an urgent basis and require
immediate intervention to address the underlying condition.
Pneumothorax and/or pleural effusion
In normal patients, the pleural space is under negative pressure
relative to the atmosphere, which maintains lung volume at end
expiration, facilitates venous return (Fig. 38.28A), and influences
myocardial performance. Air can enter the chest through the
thoracic wall, esophagus, or respiratory system creating a pneu-
mothorax. Traumatic pneumothorax or pneumothorax resulting
from an esophageal foreign body is generally detected during
physical examination and diagnosed with ultrasound and radio-
graphic imaging in patients presenting with a history of trauma or
inappropriate consumption of foreign objects. Spontaneous pneu-
mothorax can occur in association with inflammatory, infectious,
or neoplastic disease of the lung. In the dog, primary spontaneous
pneumothorax has also been reported with ruptured pulmonary
bullae or blebs leading to an air leak between the lung and pleural
space [191,447,448]. In large animals, spontaneous pneumothorax
has been reported in patients with pleuropneumonia or
bronchopneumonia, presumably secondary to air leaks from the
lung parenchyma [449,450]. Irrespective of the cause of the
pneumothorax, clinical signs are dependent on the volume of air
within the thoracic space, with some patients exhibiting only
minor changes in respiratory rate and effort, while others present
in respiratory distress. Additional clinical signs consistent with
pneumothorax include cyanosis, lack of lung sounds on
auscultation of the dorsal lung fields, fever, tachycardia,
depression, 	inappetence, 	exercise 	intolerance, 	and 	cough
[447,449,450]. Diagnosis of pneumothorax is generally based on
radiographic and ultrasonographic findings [191,449–451].
A small volume of fluid (0.1–0.3 mL/kg) resides in the intra-
pleural space; however, abnormal accumulation of fluid can result
from many different conditions with the categorization of the fluid
including transudates, modified transudates (e.g., chylous effusions),
or exudates (e.g., hemorrhagic effusions). Congestive heart failure,
neoplasia, and pleuropneumonia are a few of the more common
causes of pleural effusion in veterinary species [451,452]. Cytologic
evaluation with bacterial culture of pleural fluid acquired via
thoracocentesis is required to confirm the nature of the effusion.
Major concerns for patients that require anesthesia with air or
fluid accumulation in the chest include the nature of the underlying
disease, the presence of concurrent disease, and the impact of the
air or fluid within the pleural space on cardiopulmonary function.
In many instances, when anesthesia is required, an intrathoracic
intervention is planned; however, in some cases, such as a stable or

-- 820 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	805
resolving pneumothorax post-trauma, non- thoracic injuries may
require general anesthesia to permit intervention.
Management of anesthesia
The patient’s respiratory function, hemodynamic status, level of
hydration, and cardiac performance should all be critically evalu-
ated and appropriately managed prior to anesthesia. In many
instances, patients with pleural space disease will have undergone
an extensive diagnostic work up prior to anesthesia. Animals with a
history of trauma should have an ECG performed prior to induction
of anesthesia, if possible, to investigate potential arrhythmias [453].
Measurement of serum cardiac troponin I levels may also provide
information regarding the probability of subsequent arrhythmias in
dogs with blunt chest trauma [453].
In addition to oxygen supplementation and appropriate analgesic
therapy, preoperative preparation should include removal of pleural
fluid and/or air prior to induction of anesthesia. The specific anes-
thetic protocol used can be tailored to the individual patient. If pul-
monary contusions are present, it is generally preferrable for the
patient to maintain spontaneous ventilation during anesthesia, to
avoid further injury to the lung. A means to evacuate pleural fluid
or air is ideally established prior to and maintained during anesthe-
sia, with easy access to the system by the anesthesia team members
when the patient is not undergoing an intrathoracic procedure.
Development of pneumothorax during routine anesthesia in ani-
mals and humans is a rare event, but it may occur if emphysematous
bullae or smaller blebs in the pulmonary parenchyma are ruptured
by positive-pressure ventilation [454]. In animals with traumatic
pneumothorax and/or pulmonary contusions, anesthesia for cor-
rection of other problems (e.g., fractures) should be postponed
until there is an improvement in the clinical signs related to the
respiratory system. To minimize further complications in animals
with pre-existing pneumothorax, anesthesia should be maintained
under spontaneous ventilation and animals should receive an
inspired oxygen concentration close to 100%. When mechanical
ventilation is required, adjusting the ventilator to deliver a relatively
low V T (≤ 8 mL/kg) or adjusting the volume delivered by the
ventilator to result in a relatively low Ppeak (≤ 8 cmH2
O in small
animals) is advisable to minimize the risk of positive-pressure
ventilation causing pneumothorax secondary to rupture of a
previously injured area of the lung. Aggravation of a previously
existing pneumothorax or the development of pneumothorax
during anesthesia with VCV is noticed by progressive increases in
Ppeak as lung compliance rapidly worsens. A vicious cycle known as
“tension pneumothorax” may quickly develop. Specifically, lung
volume progressively decreases as positive-pressure ventilation
causes more gas to become entrapped into the pleural cavity, and
the animal will quickly become hypoxemic/cyanotic. If the
anesthesiologist faces this scenario, mechanical ventilation should
be interrupted, and thoracocentesis and/or rapid placement of a
chest tube should be completed to prevent a cardiac arrest.
Prior to anesthetic recovery, a system to provide oxygen
supplementation and thoracic drainage should be in place. In
general, patients with pleural space disease should be monitored
intensively for at least 24 h postoperatively.
Diaphragmatic hernia
In veterinary patients, defects or rents in the diaphragm are
commonly acquired secondary to trauma, such as motor vehicle
collisions, kicks, thoracic wounds, or falls [455–457]. Although less
common, congenital defects in the diagram, such as congenital
peritoneopericardial hernia, hiatal hernia, diaphragmatic diverticu-
lum, and retrosternal diaphragmatic hernia, are also encountered
[455,458,459]. Dyspnea and an abdominal breathing pattern second-
ary to severe lung collapse are common clinical signs in small animals
presenting with acute traumatic rupture of the diaphragm. The sever-
ity of clinical signs is generally related to the degree of lung compres-
sion caused by the migration of the abdominal viscera into the
thoracic cavity. Some animals present with a chronic diaphragmatic
hernia and a history of anorexia, vomiting, or exercise intoler-
ance [456,457]. In some instances, the defect is discovered inciden-
tally on imaging studies or during abdominal exploration, or when
clinical signs develop after a known traumatic event (sometimes
years later). Clinical signs only develop when abdominal organs are
displaced into the chest cavity resulting in impaired organ function,
respiratory compromise, and/or pain. Diaphragmatic defects in large
animals are usually identified when animals present for colic or
abdominal pain due to intestinal incarceration [455,460].
Thoracic imaging generally establishes a diagnosis of a diaphrag-
matic defect in dogs and cats. In large animals, diagnosis is chal-
lenging, and it is often determined intraoperatively [455,460,461].
Results of thoracic auscultation, thoracic radiography, thoracic
ultrasonography, and rectal examination in large animals may result
in a diagnosis or suggest diaphragmatic incarceration of abdominal
viscera in the thoracic cavity [455].
Surgical correction is generally performed through a standard mid-
line laparotomy with removal of incarcerated viscera from the thorax
back into the abdomen followed by closure of the diaphragmatic tear.
Successful thoracoscopic repair of a diaphragmatic rent, however, has
been reported in the equine [455]. In general, depending on concur-
rent injuries, survival rates for dogs and cats that undergo surgery for
correction of traumatic diaphragmatic hernias are good, with reported
survival to discharge of approximately 80–90% [456,457,462]. In the
equine, overall prognosis for horses presenting with diaphragmatic
defects is poor. In horses with operable lesions, the prognosis may be
fair (approximately 70%) for survival [460,461].
Major anesthetic concerns for patients with diaphragmatic hernia
include impaired respiratory function, in particular the ability to
oxygenate throughout the perianesthetic period, re-expansion
pulmonary edema, hemodynamic depression as a result of the pres-
ence of abdominal viscera within the thorax, induction of arrhyth-
mias associated with surgical manipulations within the thoracic
cavity, hemorrhage, viscera rupture, prolonged surgical time, and
presence of pneumothorax and pleural effusion following closure of
the defect [455,463].
Management of anesthesia
Hemodynamically unstable patients should be stabilized prior to
anesthesia with appropriate fluid therapy and sympathomimetics if
necessary. Patients with impaired oxygenation or an increased
respiratory effort should receive oxygen supplementation prior to
and during the induction of anesthesia. In small animal patients,
preoxygenation with a facemask may be effective unless there is
severe hypoxemia secondary to a large increase in intrapulmonary
shunting of blood [39,40]. Consideration should be given to
maintaining the patient in a head-up position throughout induction,
surgical preparation, and the surgical approach to minimize
compression atelectasis. In large animals, intranasal or intratracheal
insufflation with oxygen can be used prior to induction of anesthesia
[47,50,464]. Intensive monitoring of the patient’s hemodynamic
status is recommended throughout anesthesia, ideally with inva-
sive blood pressure techniques and an ECG. Patients can be

-- 821 of 1450 --

806 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
hemodynamically unstable during anesthesia and the use of bal-
anced anesthetic techniques with local anesthesia and inotropic/
vasopressor 	support 	is 	highly 	recommended 	to 	optimize
cardiovascular and respiratory status. Mechanical ventilation with
100% oxygen should be instituted immediately after orotracheal
intubation. If a VCV mode is chosen in small animals with abdominal
viscera herniated into the thoracic cavity, adjusting the ventilator to
deliver low V T
s (≤ 8 mL/kg) is initially recommended to minimize
the risk of excessive distension of pulmonary parenchyma that
remains functional/not collapsed. If a standard veterinary anesthesia
ventilator that does not allow precise measurement of V T is utilized,
it is advisable to adjust the volume delivered by the ventilator
according to the Ppeak monitored by the manometer measuring
pressure within the breathing circuit. Although there are no
published studies evaluating the clinical outcome of different
ventilation strategies in animals with diaphragmatic hernia, initially
limiting the Ppeak to 7–8 cmH2
O in cats or 10 cmH2
O in dogs should
be considered to reduce the risk of alveolar overdistention. If a
decelerating flow, pressure-targeted ventilation (PCV) mode is
adopted as a protective lung strategy, maximum airway pressures
can be adjusted as above.
In animals with acute lung collapse/atelectasis caused by the
displacement of abdominal viscera into the thoracic cavity, moderate
(hemoglobin saturation < 90%) to severe hypoxemia (hemoglobin
saturation < 75%) may persist despite the use of high FI
O2 (> 0.9) and
mechanical ventilation. Besides poor arterial oxygenation, the
presence of large areas of atelectasis (stiff lung) will also result in low
CRS
. Following removal of the abdominal organs from the thoracic
cavity (which may involve the stomach, liver, spleen, and segments of
the small intestine) the lungs should be gradually expanded by slowly
increasing maximum inspiratory pressure (directly or by small step-
wise increases in V T
; Fig. 38.26D) combined with progressively
increasing PEEP levels if possible. If an advanced anesthesia ventilator
is available for use in small animals, a cycling maneuver as described
in Figs. 38.26C and 38.27 can be performed [138,139]. A commercially
available piston-driven large animal ventilator (Tafonius, Hallowell
EMC) is also capable of performing ARMs through progressive
increases and decreases in PEEP in large animals [117]. Clinical
observations have indicated that cats with diaphragmatic hernia are
more sensitive to the cardiovascular depression-associated cycling
maneuvers; therefore, smaller stepwise increases in PEEP and
maximum inspiratory pressures (Pmax
) are preferred (e.g., 3 cm H2
O
instead of 5 cmH2
O) and the maximum increase in PEEP and Pmax in
this species can be initially limited to 10–12 cmH2
O and
20–25 cmH2
O, respectively. As explained above, slow progressive
increases in airway pressure, which can be achieved by cycling
maneuvers as previously described, are advisable to reopen collapsed
alveoli as opposed to sudden exposure of lung parenchyma to high
airway pressures (e.g., temporary administration of a CPAP of
30–40 cmH2
O; Fig. 38.26B), which could potentially lead to alveolar
rupture, lung inflammation/edema, and hemorrhage in diseased
lungs [101,125]. ARMs have been shown to improve pulmonary
oxygen gas exchange and respiratory mechanics (increased CRS
) in
healthy dogs and horses but their impact on outcomes has not been
evaluated in animals with a diaphragmatic hernia [38,117,130,134,13
6,138,139,465]. If the anesthesia ventilator in use does not incorporate
advanced methods of ventilation used in ARMs, the anesthesiologist
can manually perform a recruitment maneuver by closing the pop-
off (APL) valve and progressively increasing the airway pressures by
manually squeezing the rebreathing bag (Fig. 38.26A). This procedure
is ideally performed under the guidance of the surgeon observing the
expansion of collapsed lung areas. Contraindications of ARMs
include hemodynamic instability (e.g., hypotension), cor pulmonale
(right-sided heart failure), lung emphysema, and bronchopleural fis-
tula. If hypotension is present, animals should be properly stabilized
with fluids and sympathomimetics, if necessary, before an ARM is
initiated [466].
Following closure of the diaphragmatic rent, air should be
removed from the thorax, a procedure generally performed using a
catheter placed through the diaphragm. As oxygen supplementa-
tion and pleural fluid or air evacuation from the thorax may also be
required following recovery from anesthesia, appropriate systems
should be pre-placed prior to anesthetic recovery in small animals
and if feasible in large animals.
Anesthesia and pulmonary parenchymal disease
While general considerations related to bronchoscopy and thoracic
exploration are discussed above, further considerations related to
anesthetic management of patients with intrapulmonary masses,
lung lobe torsions, and pneumonia are provided below.
Intrapulmonary masses
Removal of primary lung tumors or metastatic lesions may be per-
formed for diagnostic purposes and to prolong and/or improve a
patient’s quality of life. Patients with intrapulmonary masses may
also require anesthesia for non-thoracic procedures. In either case,
when the type of lung cancer is known, it is recommended that
further information regarding the nature of the cancer is obtained
from current veterinary oncology texts and/or consultation with
veterinary oncologists.
Management of anesthesia
Anesthetic considerations for human patients with lung cancer
are summarized as the “4 Ms” which include (1) Mass effects;
(2) Metabolic effects; (3) Metastases; and (4) Medications [235],
which may provide a useful mnemonic to consider when presented
with veterinary patients with suspected lung cancer. In essence, a
thorough physical examination and diagnostic work up of any
patient with intrapulmonary disease scheduled for anesthesia
should be performed to detect concurrent disease including acid-
base/electrolyte abnormalities, anemia, and effects associated with
the size and location of the lung mass as well as any metastases.
In consultation with the surgical team, the surgical approach,
potential surgical complications, and perioperative analgesic plan
can be discussed and developed. Current medications should be
reviewed to determine if there are contraindications to any analge-
sics routinely used such as NSAIDs. Specific considerations related
to the intrathoracic procedure are discussed above.
Canine lung lobe torsion
Characteristics and pathophysiology
Torsion of a lung lobe along its long axis is a rare but life-threatening
disease reported in both dogs and cats [467–470]. Underlying
conditions that may predispose a patient to the condition include
pleural effusion, pneumonia, and pneumothorax; however, it may
also occur spontaneously in healthy animals. Most commonly,
middle-aged, large- breed, and deep-chested dogs such as Afghan
hounds are affected [467,471]. Pugs also appear to be predisposed
to the condition and juvenile dogs less than one year have been
reported with lung lobe torsions [472,473]. Presenting clinical signs
are variable and include lethargy, anorexia, coughing, hemoptysis,
dyspnea, vomiting, and exercise intolerance [467,469,473,474].

-- 822 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	807
Pyrexia, tachypnea, or dyspnea with increased respiratory effort
may be present on physical examination and auscultation may
reveal muffled heart sounds, harsh lung sounds, crackles and
wheezes, and decreased lung sounds over a portion of the lung
field [467,470,472–474]. Complete blood cell count, biochemistry
profile, and cytology of pleural fluid may be consistent with an
ongoing inflammatory process and/or reveal underlying concur-
rent disease. Diagnostic imaging routinely performed includes
radiography, ultrasonography, and computed tomography which
may identify the affected lobe and presence of pleural effusion.
Bronchoscopy may reveal an occluded bronchus. Diagnosis may be
challenging with differential conditions including pneumonia, neo-
plasia, and pulmonary thromboembolism, and definitive diagnosis
may occur during exploration of the thorax [475]. Surgical removal
of the affected lung lobe via an intercostal thoracotomy following
medical stabilization of the patient is required [475]. Survival for
dogs undergoing lung lobectomy appears to have risen with dis-
charge rates of up to 92% recently reported [467,474]. Cats may also
have a high rate of survival to discharge rate although fewer reports
are available [470].
Management of anesthesia
Oxygen supplementation should be provided to any patient with
signs of impaired oxygenation and thoracocentesis should be
performed to remove excess pleural fluid prior to anesthesia.
Hematology, serum chemistry, and blood gas analysis results should
be used to guide fluid and electrolyte therapy during patient stabili-
zation prior to and during anesthesia. If a large amount of pleural
fluid is present, it may be necessary to place a chest tube to achieve
adequate thoracic drainage.
Oxygen supplementation should be continued into the preanes-
thetic period. The general principles for intrathoracic procedures
discussed above should be followed with adjustments made based
on the individual patient. Ventilatory support with 100% oxygen
may be required immediately following induction of anesthesia,
due to the presence of pleural effusion. As the total lung volume
will be reduced due to loss of the affected lung lobe, V T
s that are
traditionally employed in small animal anesthesia (12–15 mL/kg
based on ideal body weight) may result in variables degrees of
hyperdistention of alveoli located in the remaining functional
lung areas. Therefore, if a VCV mode with an inspiratory pause is
adopted during anesthesia, it is suggested that the V T should be
adjusted to a normal driving pressure (gradient between P plat and
PEEP). Although there are no published studies specifically
evaluating the normal driving pressure during mechanical
ventilation in small animals, clinical experience has shown that
most healthy non-obese dogs receiving VCV with a target V T of
12–15 mL/kg require a driving pressure of approximately
7–10 cmH 2 O; healthy cats require a lower driving pressure
(5–7 cmH 2 O). Adjusting the V T according to a target driving
pressure is suggested as a means of avoiding overdistention of
aerated lung parenchyma in patients that have lost functional lung
areas due to lung lobe torsion of a lung tumor. If standard
veterinary equipment that does not allow accurate V T adjustment
is used, the volume delivered by the ventilator can be adjusted to
deliver a target P peak (limited to 7–8 cmH 2 O in cats and to 10
cmH 2 O in dogs) to minimize the risk of alveolar overdistension.
Reported intraoperative complications include cardiopulmonary
arrest, hypotension, and hemorrhage [472,474]. A thoracostomy
tube should be placed prior to recovery to facilitate removal of
pleural effusion in the postoperative period.
Pneumonia
In humans, postoperative respiratory dysfunction is extremely
common, particularly following intrathoracic surgery [476–478].
In this population, pre-existing pulmonary disease, duration of
anesthesia, advanced patient age, obesity, intrathoracic procedures,
and presence of a nasogastric tube postoperatively have been iden-
tified as significant risk factors for postoperative respiratory com-
plications [476,479]. A reduction in function of normal respiratory
defenses such as the mucociliary clearance mechanism, presence
of atelectasis, and stress- and drug-induced immunosuppression
likely all contribute to the development of impaired respiratory
function following general anesthesia and surgery [478,480]. Stress
and general anesthesia have been shown to cause immunomodula-
tion, most commonly immunosuppression, in animal models of
infectious disease [481].
Although there are no large clinical trials reporting outcomes in
veterinary patients with pre-existing pneumonia undergoing
anesthesia to date, general anesthesia, and elective surgery are not
recommended in these patients to minimize the risk of perioperative
respiratory dysfunction and potential exacerbation of disease
severity. Neonatal or pediatric equine and ruminant patients with
pneumonia may present for non-elective exploratory laparotomy,
patent urachal resection, or orthopedic procedures. Additional
comorbidities in these patients may include persistence of fetal
circulation and failure of passive transfer of colostral antibodies.
Small animals with upper airway and/or gastrointestinal disease
with pneumonia secondary to aspiration of foreign material
may 	require 	anesthesia 	for 	endoscopy 	or 	abdominal
procedures [271,354,482]. Pulmonary aspiration is defined as the
inhalation of oropharyngeal or gastric contents into the larynx and
lower respiratory tract [483]. The latter occurs due to suppression
or dysfunction of cough and laryngeal reflexes (laryngospasm).
Aspiration pneumonia associated with frequent regurgitation is a
common finding in dogs and cats with megaesophagus. Although
this condition is managed medically in most instances, animals may
need to undergo anesthesia to place a feeding tube. Thoracotomy
for surgical correction of a persistent fourth aortic arch is necessary
if the megaesophagus is caused by this congenital vascular ring
abnormality [484,485]. Animals with congenital or acquired cleft
palate frequently have pneumonia and may require surgical
correction of the defect. Drugs used in the perianesthetic period
can reduce tone in the lower and upper esophageal sphincters,
leading to regurgitation of stomach contents, thereby predisposing
the 	patient 	to 	this 	catastrophic 	anesthetic 	complication.
Epidemiologic data from a large multicenter study involving
approximately 140,000 canine patients reported that the incidence
of aspiration pneumonia following anesthesia and sedation in dogs
(1 case for every 590 procedures) was much higher than
the incidence reported in people (1 case for every 2000 to 7100
anesthetic procedures) [270,486]. Increased odds for aspiration
pneumonia after anesthesia in dogs were observed in the presence of
patient-related factors (megaesophagus or pre-existing respiratory
or neurologic disease), anesthesia-related factors (regurgitation
during anesthesia or the use of hydromorphone for induction), and
surgical factors (laparotomy, upper airway surgery, neurosurgery,
thoracotomy, and endoscopy) [270].
Management of anesthesia
In patients with pre-existing pneumonia, anesthesia should be
delayed until clinical signs have resolved to minimize the risk of
intra- and postoperative respiratory complications. In patients with

-- 823 of 1450 --

808 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
pneumonia that require anesthesia on an urgent basis, it is impor-
tant to evaluate their preoperative condition thoroughly to initiate
appropriate therapy, and plan for postoperative supportive therapy,
including oxygen supplementation. Physical examination with thor-
ough auscultation and percussion as well as appropriate laboratory
testing based on patient signalment is recommended. Assessment
of a patient’s fluid status is particularly important as dehydration
may be present in severely affected patients and may influence
prognosis [487]. Thoracic radiography and ultrasonography, pulse
oximetry, and/or arterial blood gas analysis can provide further
information about the severity and distribution of pulmonary
disease and the degree of gas exchange impairment. As explained in
Chapter 37, pneumonia may cause areas of low V̇A
/Q̇ ratio and
varying degrees of intrapulmonary shunt resulting in lower-than-
expected PaO2 values, and even hypoxemia, or signs of ARDS in
advanced cases. Inflammatory changes in the lung parenchyma
may alter pulmonary mechanics due to poor lung/respiratory system
compliance.
In some cases, local or neuraxial anesthesia may provide
adequate conditions to permit diagnostic or therapeutic proce-
dures to be performed and may reduce the risks associated
with general anesthesia, including the progression of pneumonia.
In patients requiring general anesthesia, the anesthetist should
utilize a protocol that includes preoxygenation, rapid intubation,
and oxygen supplementation with the ability to provide ventila-
tory support if required. When mechanical ventilation is uti-
lized, a protective ventilatory strategy described above should
be employed. In brief, low V T
s with adequate PEEP to prevent
alveolar collapse should be considered. In addition to routine
hemodynamic monitoring, assessment of gas exchange and air-
way pressures should be included. Planning for postanesthetic
respiratory support, such as oxygen supplementation and/or
mechanical ventilation, should be considered for patients with gas
exchange abnormalities. If hypoxemia is present, mechanical
ventilation and ARMs may be attempted to increase the PaO 2 /
FiO 2 ratio and improve C RS . Appropriate disinfection of anesthetic
equipment should be performed after anesthetizing a patient with
pneumonia to prevent disease transmission.
In animals at risk of aspiration that require general anesthesia,
general preventive strategies to minimize the risk of aspiration
include adhering to preoperative fasting periods, using premedica-
tion agents that minimize the risk of vomiting/regurgitation, using
rapid 	anesthetic 	induction 	techniques, 	optimizing 	patient
positioning during anesthesia, and maintaining a secure airway by
ensuring a properly inflated endotracheal tube cuff from anesthetic
induction through recovery. In adult animals, standard preoperative
fasting periods should be followed based on species. Shorter fasting
periods are currently recommended for neonatal, pediatric, and
diabetic animals, while longer fasting periods are adopted for
ruminants. Upon induction of anesthesia, it is crucial that the
animal is maintained in sternal recumbency with the neck and head
kept at an elevated position to minimize the risk of regurgitation.
After rapid placement of an endotracheal tube, the cuff should be
immediately inflated before the animal is moved to another position
(e.g., lateral or dorsal recumbency) to reduce the likelihood of
aspiration in case regurgitation occurs. To minimize the risk of
aspiration after endotracheal intubation, the animal’s head should
be angled to facilitate draining of any regurgitant fluid accumulated
in the oropharyngeal cavity throughout anesthesia. If regurgitation
occurs, lavage and suction of the fluid within the oropharynx
should be carefully performed. During anesthesia, the endotracheal
tube cuff pressure should be high enough to seal the airway and
prevent any regurgitant fluid from reaching the lower airways/
lungs. It is recommended that cuff pressure should be maintained
between 20–30 cm H2
O in humans, as pressures below this range
may result in a defective seal, allowing gastric contents and bacterially
colonized oral secretions to reach the lower airways and lungs;
conversely, excessively high cuff pressures may compromise the
microcirculation of the tracheal mucosa and lead to ischemic
lesions [488,489]. Excessively high cuff pressures have been
implicated as the causative factor of postanesthetic tracheal lesions
in dogs, cats, and horses, which may range from tracheal mucosal
inflammation/irritation to tracheal rupture/necrosis [490–494].
Although veterinary anesthesiologists may consider human
recommendations (cuff pressure between 20–30 cmH2
O) as
adequate for small animal patients, this pressure range applies only
to low-pressure/high-volume cuffs found in endotracheal tubes
designed for human use, where intracuff pressure approaches the
pressure exerted by the cuff on the lateral tracheal wall. Veterinary
endotracheal tubes available for medium-sized animals (e.g., swine
and foals) and for large animals (e.g., adult horses and cattle) are
equipped with high pressure/low volume cuffs, where the
correlation between intracuff pressure and the lateral tracheal wall
pressure is unknown [492,494]. In adult horses intubated with a
30 mm internal diameter endotracheal tube, a cuff pressure of
80–100 cmH 2
O reduced the extent of tracheal mucosal damage
compared to an intracuff pressure of 120 cmH 2
O, while providing
protection against aspiration of liquid into the lungs [492]. Although
there are no recommendations for cuff pressure in large animals,
placement of an endotracheal tube with a larger internal diameter
that can be easily passed through the larynx should be encouraged
because it will require a lower volume of air within the cuff to create
a seal and minimize damage to the tracheal mucosa.
Routine measurement of cuff pressure using specific devices
that allow cuff pressure adjustment is not common in veterinary
anesthesia. Especially during prolonged procedures, there is a
tendency for cuff pressure to decrease over time and such
monitoring would allow readjusting intracuff pressures to
adequate values. Instead of inflating the cuff to a target pressure
(e.g., 20–30 cmH 2 O), prevention of air leaks between the
endotracheal tube and the tracheal lumen can be achieved by
inflating the cuff using a minimum occlusive volume. This
technique is performed while the pop-off (APL) valve is
temporarily closed. The rebreathing bag is manually compressed
to create a positive airway pressure of 20 cmH 2 O and, if an audible
air leak is perceived, the cuff is progressively inflated by adding
relatively small volumes using a graduated syringe until leakage is
no longer perceived. According to a recent study in dogs
undergoing general anesthesia, adjustment of the minimum
occlusive volume according to the technique described above
resulted in cuff pressures within the target range of 20–30 cmH 2 O
in only 14% of animals, while cuff overinflation and underinflation
were observed in 76% and 14% of patients, respectively [495].
When feasible, animals at risk of aspiration should be recovered
in a sternal position with their head elevated above the shoulders.
Removal of the endotracheal tube should be delayed until the swal-
lowing reflex is present. To remove any foreign material that may
have accumulated in the trachea proximal to the endotracheal tube
cuff (and not removed by airway suctioning), it has traditionally
been recommended that the endotracheal tube cuff remain inflated
during extubation; however, evidence to support this strategy as
being effective is limited.

-- 824 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	809
Anesthesia and pulmonary hypertension
Detailed knowledge of pulmonary artery (PA) pressures at rest,
during exercise, and in disease states in different species is variable.
In dogs, pulmonary hypertension (PH) is defined as mean PA pres-
sure > 25 mmHg at rest, and similar values are currently used to
define PH in cats [496,497]. In large animals, a consensus on what
constitutes PH is not yet available; however, in the equine, mean PA
pressures > 35 mmHg at rest are considered consistent with
PH [498]. The three basic hemodynamic mechanisms that may
cause PH include: (1) increased PVR; (2) increased pulmonary
blood flow; and (3) increased pulmonary vein pressure. As
described in Chapter 37 (Fig. 37.17), PH caused by increased PVR
and increased pulmonary blood flow is classified according to its
anatomic location as precapillary PH, while postcapillary PH results
from increased pulmonary vein pressure caused by left-sided con-
gestive heart failure. On some occasions, PH can be of pre- and
postcapillary origin. Current canine guidelines divide PH into six
groups based on pathological etiology: Group 1: Pulmonary arterial
hypertension (caused by contraction of small arteries); Group 2: PH
caused by left heart disease; Group 3: PH caused by lung disease/
hypoxia; Group 4: PH caused by intraluminal PA obstruction
(pulmonary thromboembolism); 5: PH caused by parasitic disease;
and 6: PH resulting from unclear/multifactorial mechanisms [497].
PH in Groups 1, 3, 4, 5, and 6 have different etiologies, although
they share a common hemodynamic mechanism (increased PVR)
and anatomic location (precapillary PH). The primary hemodynamic
mechanism involved in group 2 PH is an increase in pulmonary
vein pressures. Therefore group 2 PH is also classified according to
its anatomic location as postcapillary PH, although an increase in
PVR (precapillary PH) might also be involved [496].
In animals with precapillary PH, increased PVR has most often
been attributed to respiratory disease, parasitic disease (canine
dirofilariasis), thromboembolic disease, or multifactorial/unclear
mechanisms [496]. Increased pulmonary blood flow/increased
PVR may occur in some congenital cardiovascular defects leading
to left-to- right shunting of blood within the circulation, including
persistent ductus arteriosus, atrial/ventricular septal defects, and
aortopulmonary window [496,498,499]. Increased PVR secondary
to pulmonary disease and/or hypoxia has been recognized as a
major causative factor of precapillary PH. Hypoxic pulmonary
vasoconstriction (HPV) is a physiologic mechanism whereby a
decrease in alveolar PO 2 causes constriction of adjacent arterioles.
Although HPV aims to maintain arterial oxygenation and V̇A /Q̇
matching by diverting pulmonary blood flow from poorly ventilated
(low V̇A
/Q̇) or non-ventilated (shunted flow) alveoli to better-
ventilated lung areas, in patients with chronic respiratory diseases,
HPV can cause an overall increase in PVR and lead to PH with the
subsequent development of right-sided heart failure [498,500,501].
Within the canine population, PH secondary to respiratory disease
has been more often identified in small-breed dogs and the more
common complaints include syncope (64%), cough (56%), and
respiratory difficulty (32%) [502]. Obstructive large airway
disorders (tracheal/mainstream bronchial collapse, bronchomalacia,
and BOAS), bronchiectasis, bronchiolar disease, emphysema,
pulmonary fibrosis, neoplasia, and other parenchymal lung diseases
have been associated with PH in dogs [503]. Definitive diagnosis of
the underlying respiratory disease in dogs presenting with PH may
be challenging in some cases because of the need for more
invasive procedures requiring general anesthesia, including
tracheobronchoscopy, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid cytology, and
histopathology (emphysema and pulmonary fibrosis).
The increase in pulmonary vein pressure observed in postcapillary
PH is commonly attributed to left heart disease (e.g., myxomatous
mitral valve disease [MMVD] and dilated cardiomyopathy in dogs)
or, more rarely, to compression of a large pulmonary vein, such as
could occur with the presence of an intrathoracic tumor [496,498].
The reported prevalence of PH in dogs with MMVD ranges from 14
to 53% [504–508]. In a retrospective study of 212 dogs with MMVD,
graded as B2 or C according to the American College of Veterinary
Internal Medicine, 39% of animals presented echocardiographic
signs of PH [504]. PH was more commonly observed in animals
with signs of congestive heart failure (grade C) and was associated
with poorer prognosis for long-term survival when compared to
animals with MMVD without PH [504]. Although PH has been
largely overlooked in cats, one study showed that 17% of cats with
left-sided heart disease (22 of 131 animals) also presented echocar-
diographic evidence of PH [509]. Cardiomyopathies (hypertrophic,
end-stage hypertrophic, restrictive, unclassified, and dilated cardio-
myopathy) accounted for most cases of PH in cats (n = 15), whereas
a smaller proportion of animals presented with PH associated with
congenital cardiac defects (n = 5), and the remaining two cats
showed evidence of PH associated with other causes [510].
While definitive recognition of PH may require invasive hemo-
dynamic monitoring using a PA (Swan–Ganz) catheter, echocardi-
ography is used to diagnose PH in companion animals and can
provide useful information regarding cardiac morphologic and
functional changes in the equine [496,498,510]. Diagnosis of and
classification of PH in dogs has been the focus of an American
College of Veterinary Internal Medicine consensus statement and
more recent articles have also called attention to PH in cats as a
frequently overlooked complication of several disease states [496,497].
Echocardiographic signs of PH in dogs include an abnormally
dilated PA and the presence of a pulmonic valve regurgitant jet
detected using color Doppler studies. The increase in RV afterload
caused by PH leads to eccentric dilation/hypertrophy of the right
ventricle and tricuspid valve dysplasia/regurgitation. Increased RV
afterload/pressure may cause flattening of the interventricular sep-
tum on short axis echocardiographic views. If tricuspid regurgitation
secondary to PH is present, measurement of peak tricuspid regurgita-
tion velocity (TRV) by placing the spectral Doppler over the regurgi-
tant jet ultimately allows estimation of systolic pulmonary artery
pressure (SPAP). Although SPAP derived from TRV has been tradi-
tionally used to grade the severity of PH in veterinary medicine, these
measurements are subject to several flaws and recent guidelines have
recommended using the peak TRV along with a number of different
anatomic sites with echocardiographic signs of PH (PA, ventricles,
and right atrium/vena cava) to classify the probability of PH [496].
Although data in the veterinary literature are lacking, 30-day
mortality rates in human patients with PH undergoing elective,
non-cardiac, and non- obstetric surgeries have been reported to
range between 3 and 18%, increasing to 5–50% for emergency pro-
cedures [511]. The major cause of death during the perianesthetic
period is related to RV failure. If anesthesia is to be performed in
patients with PH, outcomes may be improved by a multidisciplinary
approach aiming to provide proper preanesthetic risk assessment,
treatment optimization, and advanced perioperative planning [511].
Precapillary pulmonary hypertension
Management of anesthesia
A thorough preoperative assessment including CBC, biochemistry
profile, chest radiographs, ECG, and echocardiogram is recommended
in patients with suspected PH. In some patients, assessment of

-- 825 of 1450 --

810 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
coagulation status may also be indicated. In general, patients may be
receiving and should continue therapy prior to anesthesia to support
cardiovascular function and reduce PVR and PA pressures. Dogs
with previously diagnosed PH may be on treatment with sildenafil, a
phosphodiesterase type 5 enzyme inhibitor, which induces relaxation
of smooth muscle cells located in PA vessels, decreasing PVR and PA
pressures 	without 	significantly 	impacting 	systemic 	arterial
pressures [502,512,513]. According to one case series study, sildenafil
(target dose of 2–4 mg/kg a day) administered for 30 days in dogs
with PH associated with respiratory disease (n = 25) significantly
decreased the pressure gradient across the tricuspid valve in survi-
vors (from 83.0 ± 17.4 mmHg to 55.4 ± 17.4 mmHg) [502]. Despite
the elevated mortality rate associated with respiratory disease and
PH (32% after 1 month of therapy, 50% after 6 months, and 85%
after 5 years), and the lack of a placebo group not receiving sildena-
fil, quality-of-life scores assigned by the owners were improved after
30 days of sildenafil therapy [502]. Pimobendan has been combined
with sildenafil in the treatment of dogs that develop right-sided
heart failure secondary to PH of respiratory origin [514].
Pimobendan increases inotropism by sensitizing myocardial pro-
teins to calcium and has vasodilating properties via its actions as a
phosphodiesterase type 3 inhibitor. Although pimobendan was
shown to increase survival time and reduce the reoccurrence of pul-
monary edema in dogs with left-sided congestive heart failure
caused by MMVD [515,516], one study showed that pimobendan
combined with sildenafil in dogs with PH secondary to respiratory
disease (n = 16) did not impact long-term survival when compared
to dogs treated with sildenafil alone (n = 12) [514].
Because drugs used to treat PH and general anesthetics (e.g.,
isoflurane) can decrease SVR, the clinician should consider the use
of vasopressors to treat intra-anesthetic hypotension. Evidence sug-
gests that sildenafil, despite its pulmonary vasodilating properties,
does not appear to impact peripheral vascular tone and systemic
arterial pressure during anesthesia. In human patients with PH that
were anesthetized for valvular heart surgery, sildenafil (50 mg,
administered orally 10 min before induction of anesthesia) decreased
systolic and mean PA pressures 30 min after its administration,
without significantly altering mean arterial pressure or SVR in
comparison to a placebo control group [512]. Pimobendan has sys-
temic vasodilatory properties which could potentially contribute to
hypotension during anesthesia. A recent randomized crossover
study performed in six healthy Beagle dogs showed that one single
dose of pimobendan (0.15 mg/kg), administered intramuscularly
during isoflurane anesthesia, decreased SVR and diastolic blood
pressure in comparison to placebo controls [517]. However, these
results may not be extrapolated to the clinical scenario because ani-
mals with PH and right-sided heart failure are likely to be receiving
chronic treatment with oral pimobendan by the time anesthesia is
performed.
Table 38.3 summarizes the factors that can increase PVR and
aggravate PH, including management strategies for the perianes-
thetic period.. In addition to providing adequate sedation and anal-
gesia to avoid stress and pain, small animals should be preoxygenated
by delivery of 100% oxygen through a face mask for at least 3 min to
ensure significant increases in alveolar PO2
, to prevent hypoxemia
caused by hypoventilation during induction of anesthesia. Elevated
PaCO2 levels/respiratory acidosis are known to potentiate HPV
[500,518]. Although mechanical ventilation may prevent hyper-
capnia caused by anesthetic drugs, patients with PH may be less
tolerant of the hemodynamic effects of positive-pressure ventilation.
As discussed before (Fig. 38.29), positive-pressure breaths decrease
venous return by increasing P pl and increase RV afterload by
distending 	alveoli 	and 	compressing 	pulmonary 	capillaries.
Therefore, in patients with PH, positive-pressure ventilation has the
potential to further increase RV afterload and PVR, which could
precipitate cardiovascular collapse in a patient with right-sided
heart failure secondary to PH. To minimize the potential negative
impact of mechanical ventilation on RV function, human guide-
lines for anesthesia in patients with PH have recommended avoid-
ing high P plat and the use of low V T (5–7 mL/kg) and low PEEP
levels [511]. However, direct extrapolation of V T
s adopted in
humans to animal species might not be possible. As previously dis-
cussed, V T
s in the order of ≤ 8 mL/kg are more likely to approach
the airway deadspace volume of normal dogs and would likely
result in hypercapnia (which could also be detrimental in PH)
despite the use of high breathing rates. In the absence of veterinary
evidence, the use of a low P plat (or low P peak if only a volumetric ven-
tilator is available) is recommended in veterinary patients with PH.
Plateau pressure or P peak can be initially limited to 6–8 cmH2
O in
small animal species with PH. However, it must be acknowledged
that these adjustments may not prevent hypercapnia despite the use
of high breathing rates. Provided the animal is hemodynamically
stable, inspiratory pressures can be further increased to address
hypercapnia based on PET
CO 2 or, ideally, PaCO 2 values derived
from blood gas analysis.
Central venous pressure (CVP) monitoring has limited ability to
predict fluid responsiveness status. However, increased CVP
(> 6–8 mmHg in dogs) is expected to occur with RV failure sec-
ondary to PH, and with circulating volume overload. For more
invasive/prolonged procedures in patients with PH, insertion of a
central venous catheter for monitoring CVP along with invasive
blood pressure monitoring is advisable, as onset of hypotension/
tachycardia coinciding with increased CVP often indicates RV
failure and cardiovascular collapse [511]. Positive inotropes
(e.g., dobutamine and dopamine) may be used to treat hypotension
during anesthesia in animals with echocardiographic evidence of
right-sided heart failure [511].
Since low SVR, in addition to low cardiac output, may contribute
to hypotension during general anesthesia, and considering that
certain drugs used in the treatment of PH associated with heart
failure may also decrease SVR (e.g., pimobendan and angiotensin-
converting enzyme [ACE] inhibitors), vasopressor agents should
also be considered for treatment of hypotension. In vitro studies
support the use of vasopressin to treat hypotension during the
perioperative period because this agent does not elicit a contractile
response in the PA but is a potent vasoconstrictor of systemic arter-
ies [519,520]. However, if α1
- adrenergic receptor agonists such as
norepinephrine are used to increase SVR and treat hypotension,
their potential to increase PVR should be considered. Therefore,
α1
- adrenergic receptor agonists such as norepinephrine should
be carefully titrated to effect as higher doses may increase PVR
(Table 38.3).
General recommendations of anesthetic management should
be followed. Animals with PH secondary to respiratory disease
could present with variable degrees of respiratory distress/
hypoxemia. Therefore, mechanical ventilation with 100% oxygen
during anesthesia, along with oxygen supplementation during
the perianesthetic period is advisable. The clinician should also
consider that more invasive diagnostic procedures (e.g., bronchos-
copy and bronchoalveolar lavage) could aggravate or precipitate
hypoxemia due to limitations in providing oxygen supplementation
under these circumstances, particularly in very small patients. With
proper preanesthetic planning and discussion of the risks involved,
outcomes can be optimized.

-- 826 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	811
Postcapillary pulmonary hypertension
Management of anesthesia
Canine patients with MMVD may require anesthesia for a variety of
reasons. In these cases, it should be acknowledged that the presence
of PH is a hallmark of severe left-sided congestive heart failure,
where elevated LV filling pressures and retrograde blood flow
through the degenerated mitral valve cause excessive increases in
left atrial and pulmonary vein pressures, ultimately leading to
increased hydrostatic pressure within the pulmonary capillaries
and PH. Therefore, animals with PH secondary to MMVD may be
more likely to develop hydrostatic pulmonary edema associated
with fluid overload during anesthesia.
Besides conventional therapy with diuretics and ACE inhibitors,
animals with MMVD grade B2 or above commonly receive
pimobendan treatment. Randomized controlled studies performed
in animals with MMVD have shown that pimobendan combined
with conventional therapy, compared to animals receiving only
conventional therapy, increases survival time by 1.9 to 2.5 times,
and reduces the reoccurrence of pulmonary edema [515,516]. If
echocardiographic evidence of PH is also present, pimobendan
is frequently combined with sildenafil therapy with the aim of
decreasing pulmonary arterial pressures.
While the drugs described above can ameliorate signs of heart
disease and increase long-term survival, their potential impact on
anesthesia should be considered. The use of ACE inhibitors aims to
decrease LV afterload by causing arterial vasodilation. However, in
healthy dogs, administration of the ACE inhibitor benazepril for
one week, with the last dose administered 90 minutes before
anesthesia, was reported to increase the intensity of intra-anesthetic
hypotension and the number of interventions required to correct
moderate-to- severe hypotensive crises in comparison to a placebo
control treatment [521]. As previously discussed, one single dose of
pimobendan during isoflurane anesthesia could also result in
greater decreases in SVR and lower diastolic blood pressure com-
pared to a placebo control [517]. Considering the potential of drugs
used in the treatment of MMVD to aggravate hypotension during
general anesthesia, the clinician should be prepared to rapidly
intervene with vasopressor agents (e.g., norepinephrine) or drugs
with mixed vasopressor/inotropic action (e.g., ephedrine and
dopamine) if hypotension develops following induction of
anesthesia. Unless there is clear evidence of circulating volume
deficits, administration of fluid boluses with the aim of stabilizing
arterial blood pressure should be avoided in animals with PH asso-
ciated with heart disease.
In companion animals, preference is generally given to
premedication with opioids alone, which may result in adequate
sedation 	without 	significantly 	interfering 	with 	myocardial
contractility, but combination of opioids with low doses of other
drugs (e.g., acepromazine or dexmedetomidine) may be necessary
to achieve a satisfactory level of sedation in some patients.
Preoxygenation with 100% oxygen delivered though a face mask
for at least 3 min immediately before induction of anesthesia with
an injectable agent should be routinely performed. General
guidelines for maintenance of anesthesia include an inhalant
anesthetic, 	combined 	with 	locoregional 	anesthesia 	and/or
infusions of drugs that provide intraoperative analgesia and reduce
inhalant requirements. Monitoring should include ECG, arterial
blood pressure, pulse oximetry, and capnography, and use of
mechanical ventilation is advisable to optimize gas exchange and
to prevent hypercapnia. Although data is lacking, in large animal
patients with PH, locoregional anesthesia should be considered. If
general anesthesia is required, similar principles discussed above
should be considered.
References
1 Nyman G, Funkquist B, Kvart C, et al. Atelectasis causes gas exchange impairment in
the anaesthetised horse. Equine Vet J 1990; 22: 317–324.
2 Day TK, Gaynor JS, Muir WW III, et al. Blood gas values during intermittent
positive pressure ventilation and spontaneous ventilation in 160 anesthetized horses
positioned in lateral or dorsal recumbency. Vet Surg 1995; 24: 266–276.
3 Barton L. Respiratory muscle fatigue. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2002;
32: 1059–1071.
4 Haskins SC. Hypoxemia. In: Silverstein DC, Hopper K, eds. Small Animal Critical
Care Medicine, 2nd edn. St. Louis, MO: WB Saunders, 2015: 81–86.
5 Nunn JF. Applied Respiratory Physiology, 3rd edn. London, UK: Butterworth, 1987.
6 Benatar SR, Hewlett AM, Nunn JF. The use of iso-shunt lines for control of oxygen
therapy. Br J Anaesth 1973; 45: 711–718.
7 Steffey EP, Farver TB, Woliner MJ. Circulatory and respiratory effects of methoxy-
flurane in dogs: comparison of halothane. Am J Vet Res 1984; 45: 2574–2579.
8 Steffey EP, Howland D Jr. Isoflurane potency in the dog and cat. Am J Vet Res 1977;
38: 1833–1836.
9 Ambros B, Duke-Novakovski T, Pasloske KS. Comparison of the anesthetic efficacy and
cardiopulmonary effects of continuous rate infusions of alfaxalone-2-hydroxypropyl-
beta-cyclodextrin and propofol in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2008; 69: 1391–1398.
Table 38.3 Summary of factors that can increase pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) and their management during the anesthetic/perianesthetic period in patients with pre-
existing pulmonary hypertension.
Factors that may increase PVR 	Anesthetic/perianesthetic management for patients with pre-existing pulmonary hypertension
High sympathetic tone 	Avoid stress (provide adequate sedation) and pain (provide analgesia)
Low alveolar (PA
O2 ) and arterial (PaO2
) oxygen
partial pressures
Provide oxygen supplementation during the perianesthetic period
Use a high F I
O2 during anesthesia
Hypercapnia/respiratory acidosis 	Provide mechanical ventilation to maintain eucapnia if respiratory depression/hypercapnia is significant
High P plat and elevated PEEP levels during
mechanical ventilation
If mechanical ventilation is required, avoid the use of PEEP, and adjust ventilator to deliver a low Pplat (or low Ppeak
if using a volumetric ventilator)
Note that hypercapnia may increase PVR during protective mechanical ventilation
Vasopressor agents used to treat hypotension 	Avoid high doses of norepinephrine (> 0.5 μg/kg/min) which are more likely to increase PVR
Consider vasopressin constant rate infusion to increase SVR and arterial pressure without altering PVR
α2
- Adrenergic receptor agonists, ketamine 	Increased PVR and MPAP are observed with high doses of α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists, therefore avoid these
drugs, or use low doses, if necessary
Avoid high doses of ketamine
Low mixed-venous PO2 	Optimize tissue perfusion (inotropes, fluid therapy) to maintain mixed-venous (or central venous) PO2 > 40 mmHg
PVR, pulmonary vascular resistance; SVR, systemic vascular resistance; PEEP, positive end-expired pressure; Pplat
, plateau pressure; Ppeak
, peak pressure; MPAP, mean pulmonary
arterial pressure.

-- 827 of 1450 --

812 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
10 Mutoh T, Nishimura R, Kim HY, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of sevoflurane,
compared with halothane, enflurane, and isoflurane, in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1997; 58:
885–890.
11 Hikasa Y, Kawanabe H, Takase K, et al. Comparisons of sevoflurane, isoflurane, and
halothane anesthesia in spontaneously breathing cats. Vet Surg 1996; 25: 234–243.
12 Pypendop BH, Ilkiw JE. Hemodynamic effects of sevoflurane in cats. Am J Vet Res
2004; 65: 20–25.
13 Ingwersen W, Allen DG, Dyson DH, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of a ketamine
hydrochloride/acepromazine combination in healthy cats. Can J Vet Res 1988;
52: 1–4.
14 Staffieri F, De Monte V, De Marzo C, et al. Effects of two fractions of inspired
oxygen on lung aeration and gas exchange in cats under inhalant anaesthesia.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2010; 37: 483–490.
15 Staffieri F, Franchini D, Carella GL, et al. Computed tomographic analysis of the
effects of two inspired oxygen concentrations on pulmonary aeration in anesthe-
tized and mechanically ventilated dogs. Am J Vet Res 2007; 68: 925–931.
16 Haskins SC, Patz JD, Farver TB. Xylazine and xylazine-ketamine in dogs. Am J Vet
Res 1986; 47: 636–641.
17 Enouri SS, Kerr CL, McDonell WN, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of anesthetic
induction with thiopental, propofol, or a combination of ketamine hydrochloride
and diazepam in dogs sedated with a combination of medetomidine and hydro-
morphone. Am J Vet Res 2008; 69: 586–595.
18 Rolfe NG, Kerr CL, McDonell WN. Cardiopulmonary and sedative effects of the
peripheral α2-adrenoceptor antagonist MK 0467 administered intravenously or
intramuscularly concurrently with medetomidine in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2012; 73:
587–594.
19 Smith JA, Gaynor JS, Bednarski RM, et al. Adverse effects of administration of
propofol with various preanesthetic regimens in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993;
202: 1111–1115.
20 Hopper K, Haskins SC, Kass PH, et al. Indications, management, and outcome of
long-term positive-pressure ventilation in dogs and cats: 148 cases (1990–2001).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2007; 230: 64–75.
21 Campbell VL, King LG. Pulmonary function, ventilator management, and outcome
of dogs with thoracic trauma and pulmonary contusions: 10 cases (1994–1998).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000; 217: 1505–1509.
22 Lee JA, Drobatz KJ, Koch MW, et al. Indications for and outcome of positive-
pressure ventilation in cats: 53 cases (1993–2002). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2005;
226: 924–931.
23 Palmer JE. Ventilatory support of the critically ill foal. Vet Clin North Am Equine
Pract 2005; 21: 457–486.
24 Nyman G, Hedenstierna G. Ventilation-perfusion relationships in the anaesthetised
horse. Equine Vet J 1989; 21: 274–281.
25 Kerr CL, McDonell WN, Young SS. A comparison of romifidine and xylazine when
used with diazepam/ketamine for short duration anesthesia in the horse. Can Vet J
1996; 37: 601–609.
26 Kerr CL, McDonell WN, Young SS. Cardiopulmonary effects of romifidine/keta-
mine or xylazine/ketamine when used for short duration anesthesia in the horse.
Can J Vet Res 2004; 68: 274–282.
27 Cuvelliez SG, Eicker SW, McLauchlan C, et al. Cardiovascular and respiratory
effects of inspired oxygen fraction in halothane-anesthetized horses. Am J Vet Res
1990; 51: 1226–1231.
28 Steffey EP, Wheat JD, Meagher DM, et al. Body position and mode of ventilation
influences arterial pH, oxygen, and carbon dioxide tensions in halothane-
anesthetized horses. Am J Vet Res 1977; 38: 379–382.
29 Gleed RD, Dobson A. Improvement in arterial oxygen tension with change in
posture in anaesthetised horses. Res Vet Sci 1988; 44: 255–259.
30 Hall LW, Gillespie JR, Tyler WS. Alveolar-arterial oxygen tension differences in
anaesthetized horses. Br J Anaesth 1968; 40: 560–568.
31 Marntell S, Nyman G, Hedenstierna G. High inspired oxygen concentrations
increase intrapulmonary shunt in anaesthetized horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2005;
32: 338–347.
32 Staffieri F, Bauquier SH, Moate PJ, et al. Pulmonary gas exchange in anaesthetised
horses mechanically ventilated with oxygen or a helium/oxygen mixture. Equine
Vet J 2009; 41: 747–752.
33 Edmark L, Kostova-Aherdan K, Enlund M, et al. Optimal oxygen concentration
during induction of general anesthesia. Anesthesiology 2003; 98: 28–33.
34 Hedenstierna G, Edmark L. Mechanisms of atelectasis in the perioperative period.
Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2010; 24: 157–169.
35 Hubbell JA, Aarnes TK, Bednarski RM, et al. Effect of 50% and maximal inspired
oxygen concentrations on respiratory variables in isoflurane-anesthetized horses.
BMC Vet Res 2011; 7: 23.
36 Crumley MN, McMurphy RM, Hodgson DS, et al. Effects of inspired oxygen
concentration on ventilation, ventilatory rhythm, and gas exchange in isoflurane-
anesthetized horses. Am J Vet Res 2013; 74: 183–190.
37 Duggan M, Kavanagh BP. Pulmonary atelectasis: a pathogenic perioperative entity.
Anesthesiology 2005; 102: 838–854.
38 De Monte V, Grasso S, De Marzo C, et al. Effects of reduction of inspired oxygen
fraction or application of positive end-expiratory pressure after an alveolar recruit-
ment maneuver on respiratory mechanics, gas exchange, and lung aeration in dogs
during anesthesia and neuromuscular blockade. Am J Vet Res 2013; 74: 25–33.
39 McNally EM, Robertson SA, Pablo LS. Comparison of time to desaturation between
preoxygenated and nonpreoxygenated dogs following sedation with acepromazine
maleate and morphine and induction of anesthesia with propofol. Am J Vet Res
2009; 70: 1333–1338.
40 Ambros B, Carrozzo MV, Jones T. Desaturation times between dogs preoxygenated
via face mask or flow-by technique before induction of anesthesia. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2018; 45: 452–458.
41 Rousseau- Blass F, Pang DS. Hypoventilation following oxygen administration asso-
ciated with alfaxalone-dexmedetomidine-midazolam anesthesia in New Zealand
White rabbits. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47: 637–646.
42 Ramesh M, Thomovsky E, Johnson P. Conventional versus high-flow oxygen
therapy in dogs with lower airway injury. Can J Vet Res 2021; 85: 241–250.
43 Manning AM. Oxygen therapy and toxicity. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
2002; 32: 1005–1020.
44 Dunphy ED, Mann FA, Doham JR, et al. Comparison of unilateral versus bilateral
nasal catheters for oxygen administration in dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2002; 12:
245–251.
45 Wong DM, Alcott CJ, Wang C, et al. Physiologic effects of nasopharyngeal admin-
istration of supplemental oxygen at various flow rates in healthy neonatal foals.
Am J Vet Res 2010; 71: 1081–1088.
46 Gordon D, Clark- Price S, Keating S, et al. Evaluation of nasal oxygen administra-
tion at various flow rates and concentrations in conscious, standing adult horses.
J Equine Vet Sci 2023; 123: 104250.
47 Floriano D, Watkins AR, Hopster K. Intratracheal oxygen administration increases
FIO2 and PaO2 compared with intranasal administration in healthy, standing
horses. Am J Vet Res 2022; 83: 450–454.
48 Mann FA, Wagner-Mann C, Allert JA, et al. Comparison of intranasal and intratra-
cheal oxygen administration in healthy awake dogs. Am J Vet Res 1992; 53: 856–860.
49 Fitzpatrick RK, Crowe DT. Nasal oxygen administration in dogs and cats:
experimental and clinical investigations. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1986; 22: 293–300.
50 van Oostrom H, Schaap MW, van Loon JP. Oxygen supplementation before induc-
tion of general anaesthesia in horses. Equine Vet J 2017; 49: 130–132.
51 McMurphy RM, Cribb PH. Alleviation of postanesthetic hypoxemia in the horse.
Can Vet J 1989; 30: 37–41.
52 Hoffman AM, Viel L. A percutaneous transtracheal catheter system for improved
oxygenation in foals with respiratory distress. Equine Vet J 1992; 24: 239–241.
53 Staffieri F, Crovace A, De Monte V, et al. Noninvasive continuous positive airway
pressure delivered using a pediatric helmet in dogs recovering from general anes-
thesia. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2014; 24: 578–585.
54 Whitney J, Keir I. Clinical review of high-flow nasal oxygen therapy in human and
veterinary patients. Front Vet Sci 2023; 10: 1070881.
55 Wettstein RB, Shelledy DC, Peters JI. Delivered oxygen concentrations using
low-flow and high-flow nasal cannulas. Respir Care 2005; 50: 604–609.
56 Jagodich TA, Bersenas AME, Bateman SW, et al. Comparison of high flow nasal
cannula oxygen administration to traditional nasal cannula oxygen therapy in
healthy dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2019; 29: 246–255.
57 Corley A, Caruana LR, Barnett AG, et al. Oxygen delivery through high-flow nasal
cannulae increase end-expiratory lung volume and reduce respiratory rate in post-
cardiac surgical patients. Br J Anaesth 2011; 107: 998–1004.
58 Riera J, Pérez P, Cortés J, et al. Effect of high-flow nasal cannula and body position
on end-expiratory lung volume: a cohort study using electrical impedance tomog-
raphy. Respir Care 2013; 58: 589–596.
59 Milési C, Boubal M, Jacquot A, et al. High-flow nasal cannula: recommendations
for daily practice in pediatrics. Ann Intensive Care 2014; 4: 29.
60 Lenglet H, Sztrymf B, Leroy C, et al. Humidified high flow nasal oxygen during
respiratory failure in the emergency department: feasibility and efficacy. Respir
Care 2012; 57: 1873–1878.
61 Ward JJ. High-flow oxygen administration by nasal cannula for adult and perinatal
patients. Respir Care 2013; 58: 98–122.
62 Jagodich TA, Bersenas AME, Bateman SW, et al. Preliminary evaluation of the use
of high- flow nasal cannula oxygen therapy during recovery from general anesthesia
in dogs with obstructive upper airway breathing. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio)
2020; 30: 487–492.
63 Daly JL, Guenther CL, Haggerty JM, Keir I. Evaluation of oxygen administration with
a high-flow nasal cannula to clinically normal dogs. Am J Vet Res 2017; 78: 624–630.
64 de Jaureguizar Tesas MR, Matson H, Tappin S, Thomas E. The use of High-Flow
Nasal Oxygen Therapy in 4 dogs undergoing bronchoscopy. Front Vet Sci 2023;
10: 1088103.

-- 828 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	813
65 Jagodich TA, Bersenas AME, Bateman SW, et al. High-flow nasal cannula oxygen
therapy in acute hypoxemic respiratory failure in 22 dogs requiring oxygen support
escalation. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2020; 30: 364–375.
66 Keir I, Daly J, Haggerty J, Guenther C. Retrospective evaluation of the effect of high
flow oxygen therapy delivered by nasal cannula on PaO2 in dogs with moderate-to-
severe hypoxemia. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2016; 26: 598–602.
67 Pouzot-Nevoret C, Hocine L, Nègre J, et al. Prospective pilot study for evaluation of
high-flow oxygen therapy in dyspnoeic dogs: the HOT-DOG study. J Small Anim
Pract 2019; 60: 656–662.
68 Frischer R, Daly J, Haggerty J, Guenther C. High-flow nasal cannula improves
hypoxemia in dogs failing conventional oxygen therapy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2022;
261: 210–216.
69 Kallet RH, Matthay MA. Hyperoxic acute lung injury. Respir Care 2013; 58: 123–141.
70 Knight PR, Kurek C, Davidson BA, et al. Acid aspiration increases sensitivity to
increased ambient oxygen concentrations. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2000;
278: L1240–L1247.
71 Thiel M, Chouker A, Ohta A, et al. Oxygenation inhibits the physiological tissue-
protecting mechanism and thereby exacerbates acute inflammatory lung injury.
PLoS Biol 2005; 3: e174.
72 Aggarwal NR, D’Alessio FR, Tsushima K, et al. Moderate oxygen augments
lipopolysaccharide-induced lung injury in mice. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol
2010; 298: L371–L381.
73 Minkove S, Dhamapurkar R, Cui X, et al. Effect of low-to-moderate hyperoxia on
lung injury in preclinical animal models: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Intensive Care Med Exp 2023; 11: 22.
74 Barbateskovic M, Schjørring OL, Krauss SR, et al. Higher vs lower oxygenation
strategies in acutely Ill adults: a systematic review with meta-analysis and trial
sequential analysis. Chest 2021; 159: 154–173.
75 Hochberg CH, Semler MW, Brower RG. Oxygen toxicity in critically ill adults.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2021; 204: 632–641.
76 Fichtner F, Moerer O, Weber-Carstens S, et al. Clinical guideline for treating acute
respiratory insufficiency with invasive ventilation and extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation: evidence-based recommendations for choosing modes and setting
parameters of mechanical ventilation. Respiration 2019; 98: 357–372.
77 Chu DK, Kim LH, Young PJ, et al. Mortality and morbidity in acutely ill adults
treated with liberal versus conservative oxygen therapy (IOTA): a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Lancet 2018; 391: 1693–1705.
78 MacIntyre NR. Supporting oxygenation in acute respiratory failure. Respir Care
2013; 58: 142–150.
79 Martin DS, Grocott MP. Oxygen therapy in critical illness: precise control of arterial
oxygenation and permissive hypoxemia. Crit Care Med 2013; 41: 423–432.
80 Nishimoto K, Umegaki T, Ohira S, et al. Impact of permissive hypoxia and hyper-
oxia avoidance on clinical outcomes in septic patients receiving mechanical ventila-
tion: a retrospective single-center study. Biomed Res Int 2021; 2021: 7332027.
81 Girardis M, Busani S, Damiani E, et al. Effect of conservative vs conventional oxy-
gen therapy on mortality among patients in an intensive care unit: the Oxygen-ICU
Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 2016; 316: 1583–1589.
82 Slutsky AS. History of mechanical ventilation from vesalius to ventilator-induced
lung injury. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2015; 191: 1106–1115.
83 Brawn NMT. Negative pressure noninvasive ventilation (NPNIV): history, ration-
ale, and application. Nocturnal Non-Invasive Ventilation 2015 Oct 1: 27–71.
84 Wilkinson D. Evolution of the anaesthetic machine. Curr Anaesth Crit Care 1991;
2: 51–56.
85 Romero-Ávila P, Márquez-Espinós C, Cabrera Afonso JR. Historical development
of the anesthetic machine: from Morton to the integration of the mechanical venti-
lator. Braz J Anesthesiol 2021; 71: 148–161.
86 Topulos SP, Topulos GP, Abelson AL, et al. Predicting the effect of fresh gas flow on
tidal volume in volume-controlled mechanically ventilated dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg
2023; 50: 57–62.
87 Bokoch MP, Weston SD. Inhaled anesthetics: delivery systems. In: Gropper M,
Eriksson L, Fleisher L, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia, 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Elsevier, 2019: 572–637.
88 Forbat AF, Her C. Correction for gas compression in mechanical ventilators.
Anesth Analg 1980; 59: 488–493.
89 Standardization ISO. Standards 2023. www.iso.org/standards.html (accessed
June 2023).
90 Areti YK, Garcia ER. Anesthesia ventilators. In: Vancanti C, Sikka P, Urman RD,
et al., eds. Essential Clinical Anesthesia. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press,
2011: 138–143.
91 Jain RK, Swaminathan S. Anaesthesia ventilators. Indian J Anaesth 2013; 57:
525–532.
92 Eisenkraft JB. Monitoring pressure, volume, and flow in the anesthesia breathing
system. In: Press CU, ed. Monitoring in Anesthesia and Perioperative Care.
New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2011: 171–184.
93 Calice I, Moens Y. Modern spirometry supports anesthetic management in small
animal clinical practice: a case series. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2016; 52: 305–311.
94 Moens YP, Gootjes P, Ionita JC, et al. In vitro validation of a Pitot-based flow meter
for the measurement of respiratory volume and flow in large animal anaesthesia.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36: 209–219.
95 Moens YPS. Clinical application of continuous spirometry with a pitot-based flow
meter during equine anaesthesia. Equine Vet Educ 2010; 22: 354–360.
96 Cannon ML, Cornell J, Tripp-Hamel DS, et al. Tidal volumes for ventilated infants
should be determined with a pneumotachometer placed at the endotracheal tube.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000; 162: 2109–2112.
97 Castle RA, Dunne CJ, Mok Q, et al. Accuracy of displayed values of tidal volume
in the pediatric intensive care unit. Crit Care Med 2002; 30: 2566–2574.
98 Morgenroth S, Thomas J, Cannizzaro V, et al. Accuracy of near-patient vs. inbuilt
spirometry for monitoring tidal volumes in an in-vitro paediatric lung model.
Anaesthesia 2018; 73: 972–979.
99 Schena E, Massaroni C, Saccomandi P, et al. Flow measurement in mechanical
ventilation: a review. Med Eng Phys 2015; 37: 257–264.
100 Henderson WR, Sheel AW. Pulmonary mechanics during mechanical ventilation.
Respir Physiol Neurobiol 2012; 180: 162–172.
101 Ball L, Dameri M, Pelosi P. Modes of mechanical ventilation for the operating
room. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2015; 29: 285–299.
102 Bigatello L, Pesenti A. Respiratory physiology for the anesthesiologist.
Anesthesiology 2019; 130: 1064–1077.
103 Barberis L, Manno E, Guérin C. Effect of end-inspiratory pause duration on plateau
pressure in mechanically ventilated patients. Intensive Care Med 2003; 29: 130–134.
104 Kaczka DW, Chiitilian HV, Melo MFV. Respiratory monitoring. In: Gropper M,
Eriksson L, Fleisher L, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia, 9th edn. Philadelphia, PA:
Elsevier, 2019: 1298–1339.
105 Aydın V, Kabukcu HK, Sahin N, et al. Comparison of pressure and volume-
controlled ventilation in laparoscopic cholecystectomy operations. Clin Respir J
2016; 10: 342–349.
106 Campbell RS, Davis BR. Pressure-controlled versus volume-controlled ventila-
tion: does it matter? Respir Care 2002; 47: 416–424.
107 Assad OM, El Sayed AA, Khalil MA. Comparison of volume-controlled ventila-
tion and pressure- controlled ventilation volume guaranteed during laparoscopic
surgery in Trendelenburg position. J Clin Anesth 2016; 34: 55–61.
108 Fantoni DT, Ida KK, Lopes TF, et al. A comparison of the cardiopulmonary effects
of pressure controlled ventilation and volume controlled ventilation in healthy
anesthetized dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2016; 26: 524–530.
109 Schick V, Dusse F, Eckardt R, et al. Comparison of volume-guaranteed or -targeted,
pressure-controlled ventilation with volume-controlled ventilation during elective
surgery: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Clin Med 2021; 10: 1276.
110 Clement KC. Ventilator triggering. J Pediatr Intensive Care 2013; 2: 11–18.
111 Pettenuzzo T, Aoyama H, Englesakis M, et al. Effect of neurally adjusted ventila-
tory assist on patient-ventilator interaction in mechanically ventilated adults: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care Med 2019; 47: e602–e609.
112 Parthasarathy S, Jubran A, Tobin MJ. Cycling of inspiratory and expiratory muscle
groups with the ventilator in airflow limitation. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;
158: 1471–1478.
113 Hess DR. Ventilator waveforms and the physiology of pressure support ventila-
tion. Respir Care 2005; 50: 166–186.
114 Escolar JD, Escolar A. Lung hysteresis: a morphological view. Histol Histopathol
2004; 19: 159–166.
115 Harris RS. Pressure-volume curves of the respiratory system. Respir Care 2005;
50: 78–98.
116 Michard F. Changes in arterial pressure during mechanical ventilation.
Anesthesiology 2005; 103: 419–428.
117 Hopster K, Duffee LR, Hopster-Iversen CCS, et al. Efficacy of an alveolar recruit-
ment maneuver for improving gas exchange and pulmonary mechanics in anes-
thetized horses ventilated with oxygen or a helium-oxygen mixture. Am J Vet Res
2018; 79: 1021–1027.
118 Asorey I, Pellegrini L, Canfrán S, et al. Factors affecting respiratory system com-
pliance in anaesthetised mechanically ventilated healthy dogs: a retrospective
study. J Small Anim Pract 2020; 61: 617–623.
119 McDonell WN, Hall LW, Jeffcott LB. Radiographic evidence of impaired pulmo-
nary function in laterally recumbent anaesthetised horses. Equine Vet J 1979; 11:
24–32.
120 Sorenson PR, Robinson NE. Postural effects on lung volumes and asynchronous
ventilation in anesthetized horses. J Appl Physiol Respir Environ Exerc Physiol
1980; 48: 97–103.
121 Bradbrook CA, Clark L, Dugdale AH, et al. Measurement of respiratory system
compliance and respiratory system resistance in healthy dogs undergoing general
anaesthesia for elective orthopaedic procedures. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40:
382–389.

-- 829 of 1450 --

814 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
122 Lachmann B. Open up the lung and keep the lung open. Intensive Care Med 1992;
18: 319–321.
123 Amato MB, Barbas CS, Medeiros DM, et al. Effect of a protective-ventilation strat-
egy on mortality in the acute respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl J Med 1998;
338: 347–354.
124 Satalin J, Andrews P, Gatto LA, et al. “Open the lung and keep it open”: a homoge-
neously ventilated lung is a ‘healthy lung’. Ann Transl Med 2016; 4: 141.
125 Hartland BL, Newell TJ, Damico N. Alveolar recruitment maneuvers under general
anesthesia: a systematic review of the literature. Respir Care 2015; 60: 609–620.
126 Pensier J, de Jong A, Hajjej Z, et al. Effect of lung recruitment maneuver on
oxygenation, physiological parameters and mortality in acute respiratory distress
syndrome patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Intensive Care Med
2019; 45: 1691–1702.
127 Nielsen J, Nilsson M, Fredén F, et al. Central hemodynamics during lung recruit-
ment maneuvers at hypovolemia, normovolemia and hypervolemia. A study by
echocardiography and continuous pulmonary artery flow measurements in
lung- injured pigs. Intensive Care Med 2006; 32: 585–594.
128 Nielsen J, Østergaard M, Kjaergaard J, et al. Lung recruitment maneuver depresses
central hemodynamics in patients following cardiac surgery. Intensive Care Med
2005; 31: 1189–1194.
129 Jardin F, Vieillard-Baron A. Right ventricular function and positive pressure
ventilation in clinical practice: from hemodynamic subsets to respirator settings.
Intensive Care Med 2003; 29: 1426–1434.
130 Hopster K, Kästner SB, Rohn K, et al. Intermittent positive pressure ventilation
with constant positive end-expiratory pressure and alveolar recruitment manoeu-
vre during inhalation anaesthesia in horses undergoing surgery for colic, and its
influence on the early recovery period. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38: 169–177.
131 Hopster K, Jacobson B, Hopster-Iversen C, et al. Histopathological changes and
mRNA expression in lungs of horses after inhalation anaesthesia with different
ventilation strategies. Res Vet Sci 2016; 107: 8–15.
132 Auckburally A, Nyman G. Review of hypoxaemia in anaesthetized horses: predis-
posing factors, consequences and management. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44:
397–408.
133 Mosing M, Senior JM. Maintenance of equine anaesthesia over the last 50 years:
Controlled inhalation of volatile anaesthetics and pulmonary ventilation. Equine
Vet J 2018; 50: 282–291.
134 Hopster K, Rohn K, Ohnesorge B, et al. Controlled mechanical ventilation with
constant positive end-expiratory pressure and alveolar recruitment manoeuvres
during anaesthesia in laterally or dorsally recumbent horses. Vet Anaesth Analg
2017; 44: 121–126.
135 Tusman G, Böhm SH. Prevention and reversal of lung collapse during the intra-
operative period. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2010; 24: 183–197.
136 Di Bella C, Lacitignola L, Grasso S, et al. An alveolar recruitment maneuver fol-
lowed by positive end-expiratory pressure improves lung function in healthy dogs
undergoing laparoscopy. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45: 618–629.
137 Suarez-Sipmann F, Böhm SH, Tusman G, et al. Use of dynamic compliance for
open lung positive end-expiratory pressure titration in an experimental study. Crit
Care Med 2007; 35: 214–221.
138 García-Sanz V, Aguado D, Gómez de Segura IA, et al. Comparative effects of
open-lung positive end- expiratory pressure (PEEP) and fixed PEEP on respiratory
system compliance in the isoflurane anaesthetised healthy dog. Res Vet Sci 2019;
127: 91–98.
139 García-Sanz V, Canfrán S, Gómez de Segura IA, et al. Effect of recumbency and
body condition score on open-lung positive end-expiratory pressure and respira-
tory system compliance following a stepwise lung recruitment manoeuvre in
healthy dogs during general anaesthesia. Res Vet Sci 2020; 132: 177–185.
140 Wagner AE, Bednarski RM, Muir WW III. Hemodynamic effects of carbon
dioxide during intermittent positive-pressure ventilation in horses. Am J Vet Res
1990; 51: 1922–1929.
141 Khanna AK, McDonell WN, Dyson DH, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of hyper-
capnia during controlled intermittent positive pressure ventilation in the horse.
Can J Vet Res 1995; 59: 213–221.
142 Akça O, Doufas AG, Morioka N, et al. Hypercapnia improves tissue oxygenation.
Anesthesiology 2002; 97: 801–806.
143 Gelman S. Venous function and central venous pressure: a physiologic story.
Anesthesiology 2008; 108: 735–748.
144 Teixeira-Neto FJ, Valverde A. Clinical application of the fluid challenge approach
in goal-directed fluid therapy: what can we learn from human studies? Front Vet
Sci 2021; 8: 701377.
145 Mahmood SS, Pinsky MR. Heart-lung interactions during mechanical ventilation:
the basics. Ann Transl Med 2018; 6: 349.
146 Hernandez LA, Peevy KJ, Moise AA, et al. Chest wall restriction limits high airway
pressure-induced lung injury in young rabbits. J Appl Physiol (1985) 1989; 66:
2364–2368.
147 Dreyfuss D, Saumon G. Ventilator-induced lung injury: lessons from experimental
studies. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998; 157: 294–323.
148 Beitler JR, Malhotra A, Thompson BT. Ventilator-induced lung injury. Clin Chest
Med 2016; 37: 633–646.
149 Steinberg JM, Schiller HJ, Halter JM, et al. Alveolar instability causes early
ventilator-induced lung injury independent of neutrophils. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 2004; 169: 57–63.
150 Pavone L, Albert S, DiRocco J, et al. Alveolar instability caused by mechanical ven-
tilation initially damages the nondependent normal lung. Crit Care 2007; 11: R104.
151 Pavone LA, Albert S, Carney D, et al. Injurious mechanical ventilation in the
normal lung causes a progressive pathologic change in dynamic alveolar mechan-
ics. Crit Care 2007; 11: R64.
152 Ranieri VM, Rubenfeld GD, Thompson BT, et al. Acute respiratory distress
syndrome: the Berlin Definition. JAMA 2012; 307: 2526–2533.
153 Parsons PE, Eisner MD, Thompson BT, et al. Lower tidal volume ventilation and
plasma cytokine markers of inflammation in patients with acute lung injury.
Crit Care Med 2005; 33: 1–6.
154 Brower RG, Matthay MA, Morris A, et al. Ventilation with lower tidal volumes as
compared with traditional tidal volumes for acute lung injury and the acute
respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl J Med 2000; 342: 1301–1308.
155 Ranieri VM, Suter PM, Tortorella C, et al. Effect of mechanical ventilation on
inflammatory mediators in patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome: a
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 1999; 282: 54–61.
156 Wanderer JP, Ehrenfeld JM, Epstein RH, et al. Temporal trends and current
practice patterns for intraoperative ventilation at U.S. academic medical centers:
a retrospective study. BMC Anesthesiol 2015; 15: 40.
157 Bein T, Grasso S, Moerer O, et al. The standard of care of patients with ARDS:
ventilatory settings and rescue therapies for refractory hypoxemia. Intensive Care
Med 2016; 42: 699–711.
158 Tschumperlin DJ, Oswari J, Margulies AS. Deformation-induced injury of alveolar
epithelial cells. Effect of frequency, duration, and amplitude. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 2000; 162: 357–362.
159 Wolthuis EK, Choi G, Dessing MC, et al. Mechanical ventilation with lower tidal
volumes and positive end-expiratory pressure prevents pulmonary inflammation
in patients without pre-existing lung injury. Anesthesiology 2008; 108: 46–54.
160 Serpa Neto A, Cardoso SO, Manetta JA, et al. Association between use of lung-
protective ventilation with lower tidal volumes and clinical outcomes among
patients without acute respiratory distress syndrome: a meta-analysis. JAMA
2012; 308: 1651–1659.
161 Futier E, Constantin JM, Paugam-Burtz C, et al. A trial of intraoperative low-tidal-
volume ventilation in abdominal surgery. N Engl J Med 2013; 369: 428–437.
162 Young CC, Harris EM, Vacchiano C, et al. Lung-protective ventilation for the
surgical patient: international expert panel-based consensus recommendations.
Br J Anaesth 2019; 123: 898–913.
163 Araos J, Lacitignola L, de Monte V, et al. Evaluation of lung aeration and respira-
tory system mechanics in obese dogs ventilated with tidal volumes based on ideal
vs. current body weight. Front Vet Sci 2021; 8: 704863.
164 Levitzky MG. Alveolar ventilation. In: Pulmonary Physiology, 9th edn. New York,
NY: McGraw-Hill, 2018: 59–92.
165 Bumbacher S, Schramel JP, Mosing M. Evaluation of three tidal volumes (10, 12 and
15 mL kg(-1)) in dogs for controlled mechanical ventilation assessed by volumetric
capnography: a randomized clinical trial. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44: 775–784.
166 Gallivan GJ, McDonell WN, Forrest JB. Comparative ventilation and gas exchange
in the horse and the cow. Res Vet Sci 1989; 46: 331–336.
167 De Monte V, Bufalari A, Grasso S, et al. Respiratory effects of low versus high tidal
volume with or without positive end-expiratory pressure in anesthetized dogs
with healthy lungs. Am J Vet Res 2018; 79: 496–504.
168 Rodrigues RR, Ambrósio AM, Engbruch AM, et al. Intraoperative protective
mechanical ventilation in dogs: a randomized clinical trial. Front Vet Sci 2022; 9:
842613.
169 Martins ARC, Ambrósio AM, Fantoni DT, et al. Computed tomography assess-
ment of tidal lung overinflation in domestic cats undergoing pressure-controlled
mechanical ventilation during general anesthesia. Front Vet Sci 2022; 9: 842528.
170 Dantzker DR, Wagner PD, West JB. Proceedings: instability of poorly ventilated
lung units during oxygen breathing. J Physiol 1974; 242: 72.
171 Joyce CJ, Baker AB. What is the role of absorption atelectasis in the genesis of
perioperative pulmonary collapse? Anaesth Intensive Care 1995; 23: 691–696.
172 Tucker PK, MacFarlane P. Incidence of perianaesthetic complications experienced
during feline bronchoscopy: a retrospective study. J Feline Med Surg 2019; 21:
959–966.
173 Johnson LR, Drazenovich TL. Flexible bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage
in 68 cats (2001–2006). J Vet Intern Med 2007; 21: 219–225.
174 Bianco Z, Bukoski A, Masseau I, et al. Risk factors and outcomes in dogs with res-
piratory disease undergoing diagnostic airway lavage. Front Vet Sci 2020; 7: 165.

-- 830 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	815
175 Cooper ES, Schober KE, Drost WT. Severe bronchoconstriction after bronchoal-
veolar lavage in a dog with eosinophilic airway disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2005;
227: 1257–1262.
176 Perez TE, Tucker M, Grubb T, et al. Anesthesia case of the month inability to
ventilate due to feline asthma exacerbated by general anesthesia and bronchoal-
veolar lavage. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2015; 247: 605–609.
177 Hooi KS, Defarges AM, Sanchez AL, et al. Comparison of bronchoscopic and
nonbronchoscopic bronchoalveolar lavage in healthy cats. Am J Vet Res 2018; 79:
1209–1216.
178 Kirschvink N, Leemans J, Delvaux F, et al. Bronchodilators in bronchoscopy-
induced airflow limitation in allergen-sensitized cats. J Vet Intern Med 2005; 19:
161–167.
179 Dear JD, Johnson LR. Lower respiratory tract endoscopy in the cat: diagnostic
approach to bronchial disease. J Feline Med Surg 2013; 15: 1019–1027.
180 Scharf VF. Updates in thoracoscopy. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2022;
52: 531–548.
181 Matiasovic M, Halfacree ZJ, Moores A, et al. Surgical management of impalement
injuries to the trunk of dogs: a multicentre retrospective study. J Small Anim Pract
2018; 59: 139–146.
182 MacIver MA, Case JB, Monnet EL, et al. Video- assisted extirpation of cranial
mediastinal masses in dogs: 18 cases (2009–2014). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2017; 250:
1283–1290.
183 Nucci DJ, Hurst KC, Monnet E. Retrospective comparison of short-term outcomes
following thoracoscopy versus thoracotomy for surgical correction of persistent
right aortic arch in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2018; 253: 444–451.
184 Radlinsky MG. Complications and need for conversion from thoracoscopy to thora-
cotomy in small animals. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2009; 39: 977–984.
185 Plesman R, Johnson M, Rurak S, et al. Thoracoscopic correction of a congenital
persistent right aortic arch in a young cat. Can Vet J 2011; 52: 1123–1128.
186 Carey Beer AJ, Hernon T, Halfacree Z, et al. Complications associated with and
outcome of surgical intervention for treatment of esophageal foreign bodies in
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2022; 260: 622–627.
187 Vachon AM, Fischer AT. Thoracoscopy in the horse: diagnostic and therapeutic
indications in 28 cases. Equine Vet J 1998; 30: 467–475.
188 Malone ED, Farnsworth K, Lennox T, et al. Thoracoscopic-assisted diaphragmatic
hernia repair using a thoracic rib resection. Vet Surg 2001; 30: 175–178.
189 Hilton H, Aleman M, Madigan J, et al. Standing lateral thoracotomy in horses:
indications, complications, and outcomes. Vet Surg 2010; 39: 847–855.
190 Michaux H, Nichols S, Babkine M, et al. Description of thoracoscopy and associ-
ated short-term cardiovascular and pulmonary effects in healthy cattle. Am J Vet
Res 2014; 75: 468–476.
191 Dickson R, Scharf VF, Michael AE, et al. Surgical management and outcome of
dogs with primary spontaneous pneumothorax: 110 cases (2009–2019). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2021; 258: 1229–1235.
192 Bleakley S, Duncan CG, Monnet E. Thoracoscopic lung lobectomy for primary
lung tumors in 13 dogs. Vet Surg 2015; 44: 1029–1035.
193 Peroni JF, Robinson NE, Stick JA, et al. Pleuropulmonary and cardiovascular
consequences of thoracoscopy performed in healthy standing horses. Equine Vet J
2000; 32: 280–286.
194 Peroni JF, Horner NT, Robinson NE, et al. Equine thoracoscopy: normal anatomy
and surgical technique. Equine Vet J 2001; 33: 231–237.
195 Wormser C, Singhal S, Holt DE, et al. Thoracoscopic-assisted pulmonary surgery
for partial and complete lung lobectomy in dogs and cats: 11 cases (2008–2013).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2014; 245: 1036–1041.
196 Griffin MA, Sutton JS, Hunt GB, et al. Video-assisted thoracoscopic resection of a
noninvasive thymoma in a cat with myasthenia gravis using low-pressure carbon
dioxide insufflation. Vet Surg 2016; 45: O28–O33.
197 Mayhew PD, Pascoe PJ, Giuffrida MA, et al. Cardiorespiratory effects of variable
pressure thoracic insufflation in cats undergoing video-assisted thoracic surgery.
Vet Surg 2019; 48: O130–O137.
198 Mayhew PD, Pascoe PJ, Shilo-Benjamini Y, et al. Effect of one-lung ventilation
with or without low-pressure carbon dioxide insufflation on cardiorespiratory
variables in cats undergoing thoracoscopy. Vet Surg 2015; 44: 15–22.
199 Faunt KK, Cohn LA, Jones BD, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of bilateral hemithorax
ventilation and diagnostic thoracoscopy in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1998; 59: 1494–1498.
200 Daly CM, Swalec-Tobias K, Tobias AH, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of intratho-
racic insufflation in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2002; 38: 515–520.
201 Polis I, Gasthuys F, Gielen I, et al. The effects of intrathoracic pressure during
continuous two-lung ventilation for thoracoscopy on the cardiorespiratory
parameters in sevoflurane anaesthetized dogs. J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med
2002; 49: 113–120.
202 Bohaychuk-Preuss KS, Carrozzo MV, Duke-Novakovski T. Cardiopulmonary
effects of pleural insufflation with CO(2) during two-lung ventilation in dorsally
recumbent anesthetized horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44: 483–491.
203 Röcken M, Mosel G, Barske K, et al. Thoracoscopic diaphragmatic hernia repair
in a warmblood mare. Vet Surg 2013; 42: 591–594.
204 Yoshida H, Takaori M. Pulmonary gas exchange and ventilation-perfusion
relationships during hypocapnia and thoracotomy in anaesthetized dogs.
Can J Anaesth 1991; 38: 527–532.
205 Rustomjee T, Wagner A, Orton EC. Effect of 5 cm of water positive end-expiratory
pressure on arterial oxygen tension in dogs during and after thoracotomy. Vet Surg
1994; 23: 307–310.
206 Kudnig ST, Monnet E, Riquelme M, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of thoracos-
copy in anesthetized normal dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2004; 31: 121–128.
207 Kudnig ST, Monnet E, Riquelme M, et al. Effect of positive end-expiratory pres-
sure on oxygen delivery during 1-lung ventilation for thoracoscopy in normal
dogs. Vet Surg 2006; 35: 534–542.
208 Kudnig ST, Monnet E, Riquelme M, et al. Effect of one-lung ventilation on oxygen
delivery in anesthetized dogs with an open thoracic cavity. Am J Vet Res 2003; 64:
443–448.
209 Teixeira-Neto FJ, Carregaro AB, Mannarino R, et al. Comparison of a sidestream
capnograph and a mainstream capnograph in mechanically ventilated dogs.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2002; 221: 1582–1585.
210 Wagner AE, Gaynor JS, Dunlop CI, et al. Monitoring adequacy of ventilation by
capnometry during thoracotomy in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1998; 212: 377–379.
211 Mahfood S, Hix WR, Aaron BL, et al. Reexpansion pulmonary edema. Ann Thorac
Surg 1988; 45: 340–345.
212 Sohara Y. Reexpansion pulmonary edema. Ann Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2008;
14: 205–209.
213 Stampley AR, Waldron DR. Reexpansion pulmonary edema after surgery to repair
a diaphragmatic hernia in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993; 203: 1699–1701.
214 Pascoe PJ, Dyson DH. Analgesia after lateral thoracotomy in dogs. Epidural
morphine vs. intercostal bupivacaine. Vet Surg 1993; 22: 141–147.
215 Carregaro AB, Freitas GC, Lopes C, et al. Evaluation of analgesic and physiologic
effects of epidural morphine administered at a thoracic or lumbar level in dogs
undergoing thoracotomy. Vet Anaesth Analg 2014; 41: 205–211.
216 Steagall PVM, Simon BT, Teixeira-Neto FJ, et al. An update on drugs used for
lumbosacral epidural anesthesia and analgesia in dogs. Front Vet Sci 2017; 4: 68.
217 Pirsaharkhiz N, Comolli K, Fujiwara W, et al. Utility of erector spinae plane block
in thoracic surgery. J Cardiothorac Surg 2020; 15: 91.
218 Portela DA, Castro D, Romano M, et al. Ultrasound-guided erector spinae plane
block in canine cadavers: relevant anatomy and injectate distribution. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2020; 47: 229–237.
219 Ferré BMI, Drozdzynska M, Vettorato E. Ultrasound-guided bilateral erector
spinae plane block in dogs undergoing sternotomies anaesthetised with propofol-
dexmedetomidine continuous infusion. Vet Res Commun 2022; 46: 1331–1337.
220 Gómez Fernández L, Huuskonen V, Potter J. The combination of an ultrasound-
guided erector spinae plane (ESP) block and epidural morphine as effective intra-
operative adjuncts to opioid premedication in six dogs undergoing lateral
thoracotomy. Vet Rec Case Rep 2021; 9: e152.
221 Khalil AE, Abdallah NM, Bashandy GM, et al. Ultrasound-guided serratus
anterior plane block versus thoracic epidural analgesia for thoracotomy pain.
J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2017; 31: 152–158.
222 Freitag FA, Gaio TS, Dos Santos AA, et al. Ultrasound-guided superficial serratus
plane block in dog cadavers: an anatomical evaluation and volume dispersion
study. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47: 88–94.
223 Bosak VL, Piontkovsky RJ, Mazur Dos Santos A, et al. Ultrasound-guided super-
ficial serratus plane block in multimodal analgesia for three dogs undergoing
surgical correction of persistent ductus arteriosus. Vet Anaesth Analg 2022;
49: 330–332.
224 Thompson SE, Johnson JM. Analgesia in dogs after intercostal thoracotomy.
A comparison of morphine, selective intercostal nerve block, and interpleural
regional analgesia with bupivacaine. Vet Surg 1991; 20: 73–77.
225 Stobie D, Caywood DD, Rozanski EA, et al. Evaluation of pulmonary function and
analgesia in dogs after intercostal thoracotomy and use of morphine administered
intramuscularly or intrapleurally and bupivacaine administered intrapleurally.
Am J Vet Res 1995; 56: 1098–1109.
226 Bernard F, Kudnig ST, Monnet E. Hemodynamic effects of interpleural lidocaine
and bupivacaine combination in anesthetized dogs with and without an open
pericardium. Vet Surg 2006; 35: 252–258.
227 Pascoe PJ, Mayhew PD. Anesthesia for thoracoscopy. In: Fransson BA, Mayhew
PD, eds. Small Animal Laparoscopy and Thoracoscopy. Ames, IA: John Wiley and
Sons, Inc., 2015: 255–273.
228 Lansdowne JL, Monnet E, Twedt DC, et al. Thoracoscopic lung lobectomy for
treatment of lung tumors in dogs. Vet Surg 2005; 34: 530–535.
229 Adami C, Axiak S, Rytz U, et al. Alternating one lung ventilation using a double
lumen endobronchial tube and providing CPAP to the non-ventilated lung in a
dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38: 70–76.

-- 831 of 1450 --

816 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
230 Mayhew PD, Culp WT, Pascoe PJ, et al. Evaluation of blind thoracoscopic-assisted
placement of three double-lumen endobronchial tube designs for one-lung venti-
lation in dogs. Vet Surg 2012; 41: 664–670.
231 Mayhew PD, Hunt GB, Steffey MA, et al. Evaluation of short-term outcome after
lung lobectomy for resection of primary lung tumors via video-assisted thoraco-
scopic surgery or open thoracotomy in medium- to large-breed dogs. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2013; 243: 681–688.
232 Fabila TS, Menghraj SJ. One lung ventilation strategies for infants and children
undergoing video assisted thoracoscopic surgery. Indian J Anaesth 2013; 57:
339–344.
233 Wu C, Liang X, Liu B. Selective pulmonary lobe isolation with Arndt pediatric
endobronchial blocker for an infant: a case report. Med (Baltimore) 2019; 98:
e18262.
234 Mayhew PD, Chohan A, Hardy BT, et al. Cadaveric evaluation of fluoroscopy-
assisted placement of one-lung ventilation devices for video-assisted thoracoscopic
surgery in dogs. Vet Surg 2020; 49: O93–O101.
235 Slinger P, Campos JH. Anesthesia for thoracic surgery. In: Gropper MACN,
Eriksson LI, Fleisher LA, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia, 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Elsevier, 2020: 1648–1716.
236 Cantwell SL, Duke T, Walsh PJ, et al. One-lung versus two- lung ventilation in the
closed-chest anesthetized dog: a comparison of cardiopulmonary parameters.
Vet Surg 2000; 29: 365–373.
237 Riquelme M, Monnet E, Kudnig ST, et al. Cardiopulmonary changes induced
during one-lung ventilation in anesthetized dogs with a closed thoracic cavity.
Am J Vet Res 2005; 66: 973–977.
238 Riquelme M, Monnet E, Kudnig ST, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of positive
end-expiratory pressure during one-lung ventilation in anesthetized dogs with a
closed thoracic cavity. Am J Vet Res 2005; 66: 978–983.
239 Floriano BP, Trein TA, Wagatsuma JT, et al. Pulmonary hemodynamics and alveo-
lar oxygenation in healthy dogs anesthetized with propofol or isoflurane during
one- lung ventilation in a closed-thoracic experimental model. Am J Vet Res 2017;
78: 1117–1125.
240 Karzai W, Schwarzkopf K. Hypoxemia during one-lung ventilation: prediction,
prevention, and treatment. Anesthesiology 2009; 110: 1402–1411.
241 Campos JH, Feider A. Hypoxia during one-lung ventilation-a review and update.
J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2018; 32: 2330–2338.
242 Case JB, Maxwell M, Aman A, et al. Outcome evaluation of a thoracoscopic peri-
cardial window procedure or subtotal pericardectomy via thoracotomy for the
treatment of pericardial effusion in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2013; 242: 493–498.
243 Dupré GP, Corlouer JP, Bouvy B. Thoracoscopic pericardectomy performed
without pulmonary exclusion in 9 dogs. Vet Surg 2001; 30: 21–27.
244 Townsend S, Oblak ML, Singh A, et al. Thoracoscopy with concurrent esophago-
scopy for persistent right aortic arch in 9 dogs. Vet Surg 2016; 45: O111–O118.
245 Levionnois OL, Bergadano A, Schatzmann U. Accidental entrapment of an endo-
bronchial blocker tip by a surgical stapler during selective ventilation for lung
lobectomy in a dog. Vet Surg 2006; 35: 82–85.
246 Apfelbaum JL, Hagberg CA, Connis RT, et al. 2022 American Society of
Anesthesiologists practice guidelines for management of the difficult airway.
Anesthesiology 2022; 136: 31–81.
247 Dupré G, Heidenreich D. Brachycephalic syndrome. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 2016; 46: 691–707.
248 Liu NC, Troconis EL, Kalmar L, et al. Conformational risk factors of Brachycephalic
Obstructive Airway Syndrome (BOAS) in Pugs, French Bulldogs, and Bulldogs.
PLoS ONE 2017; 12: e0181928.
249 Ladlow J, Liu NC, Kalmar L, et al. Brachycephalic obstructive airway syndrome.
Vet Rec 2018; 182: 375–378.
250 Riecks TW, Birchard SJ, Stephens JA. Surgical correction of brachycephalic syn-
drome in dogs: 62 cases (1991–2004). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2007; 230: 1324–1328.
251 Phillips H. Updates in upper respiratory surgery. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 2022; 52: 339–368.
252 Heidenreich D, Gradner G, Kneissl S, et al. Nasopharyngeal dimensions from
computed tomography of Pugs and French Bulldogs with brachycephalic airway
syndrome. Vet Surg 2016; 45: 83–90.
253 Meola SD. Brachycephalic airway syndrome. Top Companion Anim Med 2013; 28:
91–96.
254 Auger M, Alexander K, Beauchamp G, et al. Use of CT to evaluate and compare
intranasal features in brachycephalic and normocephalic dogs. J Small Anim Pract
2016; 57: 529–536.
255 De Lorenzi D, Bertoncello D, Drigo M. Bronchial abnormalities found in a
consecutive series of 40 brachycephalic dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2009; 235:
835–840.
256 Yoon H, Yu J, An G, et al. CT and radiographic evaluation of bronchial collapsibil-
ity at forced expiration in asymptomatic brachycephalic dogs. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 2020; 61: 167–180.
257 Bernaerts F, Talavera J, Leemans J, et al. Description of original endoscopic
findings and respiratory functional assessment using barometric whole-body
plethysmography in dogs suffering from brachycephalic airway obstruction
syndrome. Vet J 2010; 183: 95–102.
258 Hendricks JC, Kline LR, Kovalski RJ, et al. The English Bulldog: a natural model
of sleep-disordered breathing. J Appl Physiol (1985) 1987; 63: 1344–1350.
259 Hoareau GL, Jourdan G, Mellema M, et al. Evaluation of arterial blood gases and
arterial blood pressures in brachycephalic dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2012; 26:
897–904.
260 Sławuta P, Nicpoń J, Domańska S. Influence of the wing-of- the-nostrils correction
procedure on the change of the acid-base balance parameters and oxygen concen-
tration in the arterial blood in French Bulldogs. Pol J Vet Sci 2011; 14: 77–80.
261 Hoareau GL, Mellema MS, Silverstein DC. Indication, management, and outcome
of brachycephalic dogs requiring mechanical ventilation. J Vet Emerg Crit Care
(San Antonio) 2011; 21: 226–235.
262 Downing F, Gibson S. Anaesthesia of brachycephalic dogs. J Small Anim Pract
2018; 59: 725–733.
263 Ogura JH, Nelson JR, Suemitsu M, et al. Relationship between pulmonary resist-
ance and changes in arterial blood gas tension in dogs with nasal obstruction, and
partial laryngeal obstruction. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1973; 82: 668–683.
264 Poncet CM, Dupré GP, Freiche VG, et al. Long-term results of upper respiratory
syndrome surgery and gastrointestinal tract medical treatment in 51 brachyce-
phalic dogs. J Small Anim Pract 2006; 47: 137–142.
265 Poncet CM, Dupré GP, Freiche VG, et al. Prevalence of gastrointestinal tract
lesions in 73 brachycephalic dogs with upper respiratory syndrome. J Small Anim
Pract 2005; 46: 273–279.
266 Kaye BM, Rutherford L, Perridge DJ, et al. Relationship between brachycephalic
airway syndrome and gastrointestinal signs in three breeds of dog. J Small Anim
Pract 2018; 59: 670–673.
267 Haimel G, Dupré G. Brachycephalic airway syndrome: a comparative study
between Pugs and French Bulldogs. J Small Anim Pract 2015; 56: 714–719.
268 Vangrinsven E, Broux O, Massart L, et al. Diagnosis and treatment of gastro-
oesophageal junction abnormalities in dogs with brachycephalic syndrome.
J Small Anim Pract 2021; 62: 200–208.
269 Freiche V, German AJ. Digestive diseases in brachycephalic dogs. Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 2021; 51: 61–78.
270 Ovbey DH, Wilson DV, Bednarski RM, et al. Prevalence and risk factors for canine
post-anesthetic aspiration pneumonia (1999–2009): a multicenter study. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2014; 41: 127–136.
271 Darcy HP, Humm K, Ter Haar G. Retrospective analysis of incidence, clinical fea-
tures, potential risk factors, and prognostic indicators for aspiration pneumonia in
three brachycephalic dog breeds. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2018; 253: 869–876.
272 Kogan DA, Johnson LR, Jandrey KE, et al. Clinical, clinicopathologic, and radio-
graphic findings in dogs with aspiration pneumonia: 88 cases (2004–2006). J Am
Vet Med Assoc 2008; 233: 1742–1747.
273 Fenner JVH, Quinn RJ, Demetriou JL. Postoperative regurgitation in dogs after
upper airway surgery to treat brachycephalic obstructive airway syndrome: 258
cases (2013–2017). Vet Surg 2020; 49: 53–60.
274 Reeve EJ, Sutton D, Friend EJ, et al. Documenting the prevalence of hiatal hernia
and oesophageal abnormalities in brachycephalic dogs using fluoroscopy. J Small
Anim Pract 2017; 58: 703–708.
275 Broux O, Clercx C, Etienne AL, et al. Effects of manipulations to detect sliding
hiatal hernia in dogs with brachycephalic airway obstructive syndrome. Vet Surg
2018; 47: 243–251.
276 Eivers C, Chicon Rueda R, Liuti T, et al. Retrospective analysis of esophageal
imaging features in brachycephalic versus non-brachycephalic dogs based on
videofluoroscopic swallowing studies. J Vet Intern Med 2019; 33: 1740–1746.
277 Lindsay B, Cook D, Wetzel JM, et al. Brachycephalic airway syndrome: manage-
ment of postoperative respiratory complications in 248 dogs. Aust Vet J 2020;
98: 173–180.
278 Doxey S, Boswood A. Differences between breeds of dog in a measure of heart rate
variability. Vet Rec 2004; 154: 713–717.
279 Packer RM, Hendricks A, Tivers MS, et al. Impact of facial conformation on
canine health: brachycephalic obstructive airway syndrome. PLoS ONE 2015;
10: e0137496.
280 Torrez CV, Hunt GB. Results of surgical correction of abnormalities associated
with brachycephalic airway obstruction syndrome in dogs in Australia. J Small
Anim Pract 2006; 47: 150–154.
281 Pohl S, Roedler FS, Oechtering GU. How does multilevel upper airway surgery
influence the lives of dogs with severe brachycephaly? Results of a structured pre-
and postoperative owner questionnaire. Vet J 2016; 210: 39–45.
282 Seneviratne M, Kaye BM, Ter Haar G. Prognostic indicators of short-term
outcome in dogs undergoing surgery for brachycephalic obstructive airway syn-
drome. Vet Rec 2020; 187: 403.

-- 832 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	817
283 Carabalona JPR, Le Boedec K, Poncet CM. Complications, prognostic factors, and
long-term outcomes for dogs with brachycephalic obstructive airway syndrome
that underwent H-pharyngoplasty and ala-vestibuloplasty: 423 cases (2011–2017).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2021; 260: S65–S73.
284 Dyson DH, Maxie MG, Schnurr D. Morbidity and mortality associated with anes-
thetic management in small animal veterinary practice in Ontario. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 1998; 34: 325–335.
285 Gaynor JS, Dunlop CI, Wagner AE, et al. Complications and mortality associated
with anesthesia in dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1999; 35: 13–17.
286 Gruenheid M, Aarnes TK, McLoughlin MA, et al. Risk of anesthesia-related
complications in brachycephalic dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2018; 253: 301–306.
287 Doyle CR, Aarnes TK, Ballash GA, et al. Anesthetic risk during subsequent anes-
thetic events in brachycephalic dogs that have undergone corrective airway surgery:
45 cases (2007–2019). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2020; 257: 744–749.
288 Ree JJ, Milovancev M, MacIntyre LA, et al. Factors associated with major compli-
cations in the short-term postoperative period in dogs undergoing surgery for
brachycephalic airway syndrome. Can Vet J 2016; 57: 976–980.
289 Fasanella FJ, Shivley JM, Wardlaw JL, et al. Brachycephalic airway obstructive syn-
drome in dogs: 90 cases (1991–2008). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2010; 237: 1048–1051.
290 Oda A, Wang WH, Hampton AK, et al. Perianesthetic mortality in English
Bulldogs: a retrospective analysis in 2010 – 2017. BMC Vet Res 2022; 18: 198.
291 Liu NC, Oechtering GU, Adams VJ, et al. Outcomes and prognostic factors of
surgical treatments for brachycephalic obstructive airway syndrome in 3 breeds.
Vet Surg 2017; 46: 271–280.
292 Tarricone J, Hayes GM, Singh A, Davis G. Development and validation of a brach-
ycephalic risk (BRisk) score to predict the risk of complications in dogs presenting
for surgical treatment of brachycephalic obstructive airway syndrome. Vet Surg
2019; 48: 1253–1261.
293 Grubb T. Anesthesia for patients with respiratory disease and/or airway compro-
mise. Top Companion Anim Med 2010; 25: 120–132.
294 Costa RS, Abelson AL, Lindsey JC, et al. Postoperative regurgitation and respira-
tory complications in brachycephalic dogs undergoing airway surgery before and
after implementation of a standardized perianesthetic protocol. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2020; 256: 899–905.
295 Riggs J, Liu NC, Sutton DR, et al. Validation of exercise testing and laryngeal aus-
cultation for grading brachycephalic obstructive airway syndrome in Pugs, French
Bulldogs, and English Bulldogs by using whole-body barometric plethysmogra-
phy. Vet Surg 2019; 48: 488–496.
296 Liu NC, Adams VJ, Kalmar L, et al. Whole-body barometric plethysmography
characterizes upper airway obstruction in 3 brachycephalic breeds of dogs.
J Vet Intern Med 2016; 30: 853–865.
297 Franklin PH, Liu NC, Ladlow JF. Nebulization of epinephrine to reduce the severity
of brachycephalic obstructive airway syndrome in dogs. Vet Surg 2021; 50: 62–70.
298 Farrell KS, Hopper K, Cagle LA, et al. Evaluation of pulse oximetry as a surrogate
for PaO(2) in awake dogs breathing room air and anesthetized dogs on mechani-
cal ventilation. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2019; 29: 622–629.
299 Panti A, Bennett RC, Corletto F, et al. The effect of omeprazole on oesophageal pH
in dogs during anaesthesia. J Small Anim Pract 2009; 50: 540–544.
300 Marks SL, Kook PH, Papich MG, et al. ACVIM consensus statement: support
for rational administration of gastrointestinal protectants to dogs and cats.
J Vet Intern Med 2018; 32: 1823–1840.
301 Lotti F, Twedt D, Warrit K, et al. Effect of two different pre-anaesthetic omeprazole
protocols on gastroesophageal reflux incidence and pH in dogs. J Small Anim
Pract 2021; 62: 677–682.
302 Kempf J, Lewis F, Reusch CE, et al. High-resolution manometric evaluation of the
effects of cisapride and metoclopramide hydrochloride administered orally on lower
esophageal sphincter pressure in awake dogs. Am J Vet Res 2014; 75: 361–366.
303 Hay Kraus BL. Efficacy of maropitant in preventing vomiting in dogs premedi-
cated with hydromorphone. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40: 28–34.
304 Hay Kraus BL. Efficacy of orally administered maropitant citrate in preventing
vomiting associated with hydromorphone administration in dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2014; 244: 1164–1169.
305 Claude AK, Dedeaux A, Chiavaccini L, et al. Effects of maropitant citrate or ace-
promazine on the incidence of adverse events associated with hydromorphone
premedication in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2014; 28: 1414–1417.
306 Johnson RA. Maropitant prevented vomiting but not gastroesophageal reflux in
anesthetized dogs premedicated with acepromazine-hydromorphone. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2014; 41: 406–410.
307 Erickson A, Harbin K, MacPherson J, et al. A review of pre-appointment medica-
tions to reduce fear and anxiety in dogs and cats at veterinary visits. Can Vet J
2021; 62: 952–960.
308 Viskjer S, Sjöström L. Effect of the duration of food withholding prior to anesthe-
sia on gastroesophageal reflux and regurgitation in healthy dogs undergoing elec-
tive orthopedic surgery. Am J Vet Res 2017; 78: 144–150.
309 Tsompanidou P, Robben JH, Savvas I, et al. The effect of the preoperative fasting
regimen on the incidence of gastro-oesophageal reflux in 90 dogs. Animals (Basel)
2021; 12: 64.
310 Valverde A, Cantwell S, Hernández J, et al. Effects of acepromazine on the inci-
dence of vomiting associated with opioid administration in dogs. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2004; 31: 40–45.
311 Wilson DV, Evans AT, Miller R. Effects of preanesthetic administration of
morphine on gastroesophageal reflux and regurgitation during anesthesia in dogs.
Am J Vet Res 2005; 66: 386–390.
312 Koh RB, Isaza N, Xie H, et al. Effects of maropitant, acepromazine, and electroa-
cupuncture on vomiting associated with administration of morphine in dogs.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2014; 244: 820–829.
313 Blancquaert JP, Lefebvre RA, Willems JL. Emetic and antiemetic effects of opioids
in the dog. Eur J Pharmacol 1986; 128: 143–150.
314 Petruccione I, Murison PJ, Flaherty D, et al. Comparison between dexmedetomi-
dine and acepromazine in combination with methadone for premedication in
brachycephalic dogs undergoing surgery for brachycephalic obstructive airway
syndrome. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48: 305–313.
315 Strombeck DR, Harrold D. Effects of atropine, acepromazine, meperidine, and
xylazine on gastroesophageal sphincter pressure in the dog. Am J Vet Res 1985; 46:
963–965.
316 Galatos AD, Raptopoulos D. Gastro-oesophageal reflux during anaesthesia in the
dog: the effect of preoperative fasting and premedication. Vet Rec 1995; 137:
479–483.
317 Sanmiguel CP, Hagiike M, Mintchev MP, et al. Effect of electrical stimulation of
the LES on LES pressure in a canine model. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol
2008; 295: G389–G394.
318 van der Hoeven CW, Attia A, Deen L, et al. The influence of anaesthetic drugs on
the lower oesophageal sphincter in propofol/nitrous oxide anaesthetized dogs.
Pressure profilometry in an animal model. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1995; 39:
822–826.
319 Johnson RA, Striler E, Sawyer DC, Brunson DB. Comparison of isoflurane with
sevoflurane for anesthesia induction and recovery in adult dogs. Am J Vet Res
1998; 59: 478–481.
320 Bennett RC, Fancy SP, Walsh CM, et al. Comparison of sevoflurane and isoflurane
in dogs anaesthetised for clinical surgical or diagnostic procedures. J Small Anim
Pract 2008; 49: 392–397.
321 Monteiro ER, Teixeira-Neto FJ, Campagnol D, et al. Effects of remifentanil on the
minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2010; 71:
150–156.
322 Williamson AJ, Soares JHN, Pavlisko ND, et al. Isoflurane minimum alveolar con-
centration sparing effects of fentanyl in the dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44:
738–745.
323 Hoke JF, Cunningham F, James MK, et al. Comparative pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics of remifentanil, its principle metabolite (GR90291) and alfen-
tanil in dogs. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1997; 281: 226–232.
324 Iizuka T, Nishimura R. Context-sensitive half- time of fentanyl in dogs. J Vet Med
Sci 2015; 77: 615–617.
325 Torrente C, Vigueras I, Manzanilla EG, et al. Prevalence of and risk factors for
intraoperative gastroesophageal reflux and postanesthetic vomiting and diarrhea
in dogs undergoing general anesthesia. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2017;
27: 397–408.
326 De Gennaro C, Vettorato E, Corletto F. Evaluation of bilateral maxillary nerve
block in dogs undergoing surgery for brachycephalic obstructive airway syn-
drome. Can Vet J 2022; 63: 67–73.
327 Cremer J, Sum SO, Braun C, et al. Assessment of maxillary and infraorbital nerve
blockade for rhinoscopy in sevoflurane anesthetized dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg
2013; 40: 432–439.
328 Loughran CM, Raisis AL, Haitjema G, et al. Unilateral retrobulbar hematoma fol-
lowing maxillary nerve block in a dog. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2016;
26: 815–818.
329 Senn D, Sigrist N, Forterre F, et al. Retrospective evaluation of postoperative
nasotracheal tubes for oxygen supplementation in dogs following surgery for brach-
ycephalic syndrome: 36 cases (2003–2007). J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio)
2011; 21: 261–267.
330 Carver A, Bragg R, Sullivan L. Evaluation of PaO2 /FiO2 and SaO2 /FiO2 ratios in
postoperative dogs recovering on room air or nasal oxygen insufflation. J Vet
Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2016; 26: 437–445.
331 Calabro JM, Prittie JE, Palma DA. Preliminary evaluation of the utility of comparing
SpO2 /FiO2 and PaO2 /FiO2 ratios in dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio)
2013; 23: 280–285.
332 Stabile M, Lacitignola L, Piemontese MR, et al. Comparison of CPAP and oxygen
therapy for treatment of postoperative hypoxaemia in dogs. J Small Anim Pract
2021; 62: 351–358.

-- 833 of 1450 --

818 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
333 Ceccherini G, Lippi I, Citi S, et al. Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP)
provision with a pediatric helmet for treatment of hypoxemic acute respiratory
failure in dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2020; 30: 41–49.
334 Rondelli V, Guarracino A, Iacobellis P, et al. Evaluation of the effects of helmet
continuous positive airway pressure on laryngeal size in dogs anesthetized with
propofol and fentanyl using computed tomography. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San
Antonio) 2020; 30: 543–549.
335 Stordalen MB, Silveira F, Fenner JVH, et al. Outcome of temporary tracheostomy
tube-placement following surgery for brachycephalic obstructive airway syn-
drome in 42 dogs. J Small Anim Pract 2020; 61: 292–299.
336 Gobbetti M, Romussi S, Buracco P, et al. Long-term outcome of permanent tra-
cheostomy in 15 dogs with severe laryngeal collapse secondary to brachycephalic
airway obstructive syndrome. Vet Surg 2018; 47: 648–653.
337 Geiger M, Schoenebeck JJ, Schneider RA, et al. Exceptional changes in skeletal
anatomy under domestication: the case of brachycephaly. Integr Org Biol 2021; 3:
obab023.
338 Farnworth MJ, Chen R, Packer RM, et al. Flat feline faces: is brachycephaly associ-
ated with respiratory abnormalities in the domestic cat (Felis catus)? PLoS ONE
2016; 11: e0161777
339 Plitman L, Černá P, Farnworth MJ, et al. Motivation of owners to purchase pedi-
gree cats, with specific focus on the acquisition of brachycephalic cats. Animals
(Basel) 2019; 9: 394.
340 Ginn JA, Kumar MS, McKiernan BC, et al. Nasopharyngeal turbinates in brachy-
cephalic dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2008; 44: 243–249.
341 Schlueter C, Budras KD, Ludewig E, et al. Brachycephalic feline noses: CT and
anatomical study of the relationship between head conformation and the nasolac-
rimal drainage system. J Feline Med Surg 2009; 11: 891–900.
342 Corgozinho KB, Pereira AN, Cunha SC, et al. Recurrent pulmonary edema
secondary to elongated soft palate in a cat. J Feline Med Surg 2012; 14: 417–419.
343 Anagrius KL, Dimopoulou M, Moe AN, et al. Facial conformation characteristics
in Persian and Exotic Shorthair cats. J Feline Med Surg 2021; 23: 1089–1097.
344 Trostel CT, Frankel DJ. Punch resection alaplasty technique in dogs and cats with
stenotic nares: 14 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2010; 46: 5–11.
345 Berns CN, Schmiedt CW, Dickerson VM, et al. Single pedicle advancement flap
for treatment of feline stenotic nares: technique and results in five cases. J Feline
Med Surg 2020; 22: 1238–1242.
346 Featherstone HJ, Sansom J. Feline corneal sequestra: a review of 64 cases (80 eyes)
from 1993 to 2000. Vet Ophthalmol 2004; 7: 213–227.
347 Sieslack J, Farke D, Failing K, et al. Correlation of brachycephaly grade with level
of exophthalmos, reduced airway passages and degree of dental malalignment in
Persian cats. PLoS ONE 2021; 16: e0254420.
348 O’Neill DG, Romans C, Brodbelt DC, et al. Persian cats under first opinion
veterinary care in the UK: demography, mortality and disorders. Sci Rep 2019;
9: 12952.
349 Robertson SA, Gogolski SM, Pascoe P, et al. AAFP feline anesthesia guidelines.
J Feline Med Surg 2018; 20: 602–634.
350 Doodnaught GM, Pang DS. Intubation following high-dose rocuronium in a cat
with protracted laryngospasm. JFMS Open Rep 2017; 3: 2055116917733642.
351 Di Bella C, Araos J, Lacitignola L, et al. Effects of continuous positive airway pres-
sure administered by a helmet in cats under general anaesthesia. J Feline Med Surg
2021; 23: 337–343.
352 Ewart SL. Overview of respiratory function: ventilation of the lungs. In: Klein BG,
ed. Cunningham’s Textbook of Veterinary Physiology, 6th ed. St. Louis, MO:
Elsevier, 2020: 518–531.
353 Millard RP, Tobias KM. Laryngeal paralysis in dogs. Compend Contin Educ Vet
2009; 31: 212–219.
354 MacPhail CM. Laryngeal disease in dogs and cats: an update. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 2020; 50: 295–310.
355 Letko A, Minor KM, Friedenberg SG, et al. A CNTNAP1 missense variant is
associated with canine laryngeal paralysis and polyneuropathy. Genes (Basel)
2020; 11: 1426.
356 Sample SJ, Stilin A, Binversie EE, et al. Late-onset laryngeal paralysis: owner
perception of quality of life and cause of death. Vet Med Sci 2020; 6: 306–313.
357 Tarvin KM, Twedt DC, Monnet E. Prospective controlled study of gastroesopha-
geal reflux in dogs with naturally occurring laryngeal paralysis. Vet Surg 2016; 45:
916–921.
358 Monnet E. Surgical treatment of laryngeal paralysis. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 2016; 46: 709–717.
359 Sakai DM, Martin-Flores M, Jones AK, et al. Laryngeal mask airway and transient
hypercapnic hyperpnea for video-endoscopic assessment of unilateral laryngeal
paralysis in dogs. Vet Surg 2018; 47: 543–548.
360 Bookbinder LC, Flanders J, Bookbinder PF, et al. Idiopathic canine laryngeal
paralysis as one sign of a diffuse polyneuropathy: an observational study of
90 cases (2007–2013). Vet Surg 2016; 45: 254–260.
361 Hammel SP, Hottinger HA, Novo RE. Postoperative results of unilateral arytenoid
lateralization for treatment of idiopathic laryngeal paralysis in dogs: 39 cases
(1996–2002). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2006; 228: 1215–1220.
362 Snelling SR, Edwards GA. A retrospective study of unilateral arytenoid lateralisa-
tion in the treatment of laryngeal paralysis in 100 dogs (1992–2000). Aust Vet J
2003; 81: 464–468.
363 Nelissen P, White RA. Arytenoid lateralization for management of combined
laryngeal paralysis and laryngeal collapse in small dogs. Vet Surg 2012; 41:
261–265.
364 Wilson D, Monnet E. Risk factors for the development of aspiration pneumonia
after unilateral arytenoid lateralization in dogs with laryngeal paralysis: 232 cases
(1987–2012). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2016; 248: 188–194.
365 Zacuto AC, Marks SL, Osborn J, et al. The influence of esomeprazole and cisapride
on gastroesophageal reflux during anesthesia in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2012; 26:
518–525.
366 Ogden J, Ovbey D, Saile K. Effects of preoperative cisapride on postoperative
aspiration pneumonia in dogs with laryngeal paralysis. J Small Anim Pract 2019;
60: 183–190.
367 Wilson DV, Evans AT, Mauer WA. Influence of metoclopramide on gastroesopha-
geal reflux in anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 2006; 67: 26–31.
368 Milovancev M, Townsend K, Spina J, et al. Effect of metoclopramide on the
incidence of early postoperative aspiration pneumonia in dogs with acquired
idiopathic laryngeal paralysis. Vet Surg 2016; 45: 577–581.
369 Ranninger E, Kantyka M, Bektas RN. The influence of anaesthetic drugs on the
laryngeal motion in dogs: a systematic review. Animals (Basel) 2020; 10: 530.
370 DeGroot WD, Tobias KM, Browning DC, et al. Examination of laryngeal function
of healthy dogs by using sedation protocols with dexmedetomidine. Vet Surg 2020;
49: 124–130.
371 Smalle TM, Hartman MJ, Bester L, et al. Effects of thiopentone, propofol and
alfaxalone on laryngeal motion during oral laryngoscopy in healthy dogs.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44: 427–434.
372 Labuscagne S, Zeiler GE, Dzikiti BT. Effects of chemical and mechanical
stimulation on laryngeal motion during alfaxalone, thiopentone or propofol
anaesthesia in healthy dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2019; 46: 435–442.
373 Brown MB, Dugat DR, Lyon SD, et al. Comparison of methohexital and propofol
as induction agents for evaluation of laryngeal function in healthy dogs. Vet Surg
2019; 48: 70–78.
374 Ambros B, Gaunt MC, Duke-Novakovski T, et al. Effects of alfaxalone, thiopental,
or propofol and diazepam on laryngeal motion in healthy dogs. Can Vet J 2018; 59:
791–795.
375 Norgate D, Ter Haar G, Kulendra N, et al. A comparison of the effect of propofol
and alfaxalone on laryngeal motion in nonbrachycephalic and brachycephalic
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45: 729–736.
376 Radkey DI, Hardie RJ, Smith LJ. Comparison of the effects of alfaxalone and
propofol with acepromazine, butorphanol and/or doxapram on laryngeal motion
and quality of examination in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45: 241–249.
377 Kapaldo N, McMurphy R, Hodgson D, et al. Laryngeal function in normal dogs
administered isoflurane following partial clearance of alfaxalone or propofol.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48: 493–500.
378 Tobias KM, Jackson AM, Harvey RC. Effects of doxapram HCl on laryngeal
function of normal dogs and dogs with naturally occurring laryngeal paralysis.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2004; 31: 258–263.
379 Miller CJ, McKiernan BC, Pace J, et al. The effects of doxapram hydrochloride
(dopram-V) on laryngeal function in healthy dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2002; 16:
524–528.
380 Johnson LR, Pollard RE. Tracheal collapse and bronchomalacia in dogs: 58 cases
(7 /2001–1 /2008). J Vet Intern Med 2010; 24: 298–305.
381 Della Maggiore A. An update on tracheal and airway collapse in dogs. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 2020; 50: 419–430.
382 Weisse C, Berent A, Violette N, et al. Short-, intermediate-, and long-term results
for endoluminal stent placement in dogs with tracheal collapse. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2019; 254: 380–392.
383 Johnson L. Tracheal collapse. Diagnosis and medical and surgical treatment.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2000; 30: 1253–1266.
384 Congiusta M, Weisse C, Berent AC, et al. Comparison of short-, intermediate-,
and long-term results between dogs with tracheal collapse that underwent
multimodal medical management alone and those that underwent tracheal endo-
luminal stent placement. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2021; 258: 279–289.
385 Chisnell HK, Pardo AD. Long-term outcome, complications and disease progres-
sion in 23 dogs after placement of tracheal ring prostheses for treatment of
extrathoracic tracheal collapse. Vet Surg 2015; 44: 103–113.
386 Jeung SY, Sohn SJ, An JH, et al. A retrospective study of theophylline-based ther-
apy with tracheal collapse in small-breed dogs: 47 cases (2013–2017). J Vet Sci
2019; 20: e57.

-- 834 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	819
387 Tinga S, Thieman Mankin KM, Peycke L, et al. Comparison of outcome after use
of extra-luminal rings and intra-luminal stents for treatment of tracheal collapse
in dogs. Vet Surg 2015; 44: 858–865.
388 Tappin SW. Canine tracheal collapse. J Small Anim Pract 2016; 57: 9–17.
389 Cerasoli I, Nannarone S, Schauvliege S, et al. The effects of intravenous lidocaine
before propofol induction in premedicated dogs. J Small Anim Pract 2016; 57:
435–440.
390 Thompson KR, Rioja E. Effects of intravenous and topical laryngeal lidocaine on
heart rate, mean arterial pressure and cough response to endotracheal intubation
in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43: 371–378.
391 Panti A, Cafrita IC, Clark L. Effect of intravenous lidocaine on cough response to
endotracheal intubation in propofol-anaesthetized dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016;
43: 405–411.
392 Jolliffe CT, Leece EA, Adams V, et al. Effect of intravenous lidocaine on heart rate,
systolic arterial blood pressure and cough responses to endotracheal intubation in
propofol-anaesthetized dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2007; 34: 322–330.
393 Bravo VR, Palomba N, Corletto F, et al. Comparison between intravenous lido-
caine and fentanyl on cough reflex and sympathetic response during endotracheal
intubation in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47: 481–489.
394 Clarke DL. Interventional radiology management of tracheal and bronchial
collapse. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2018; 48: 765–779.
395 Tate LP Jr., Blikslager AT, Little ED. Transendoscopic laser treatment of guttural
pouch tympanites in eight foals. Vet Surg 1995; 24: 367–372.
396 Blazyczek I, Hamann H, Deegen E, et al. Retrospective analysis of 50 cases of
guttural pouch tympany in foals. Vet Rec 2004; 154: 261–264.
397 Bell C. Pharyngeal neuromuscular dysfunction associated with bilateral guttural
pouch tympany in a foal. Can Vet J 2007; 48: 192–194.
398 Sparks HD, Stick JA, Brakenhoff JE, et al. Partial resection of the plica salpin-
gopharyngeus for the treatment of three foals with bilateral tympany of the auditory
tube diverticulum (guttural pouch). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2009; 235: 731–733.
399 Krebs W, Schmotzer WB. Laser fenestrated salpingopharyngeal fistulas for treatment
of bilateral guttural pouch tympany in a foal. Equine Vet Educ 2007; 19: 419–423.
400 Schambourg MA, Marcoux M, Celeste C. Salpingoscopy for the treatment of
recurrent guttural pouch tympany in a filly. Equine Vet Educ 2006; 18: 231–237.
401 Freeman DE. Update on disorders and treatment of the guttural pouch. Vet Clin
North Am Equine Pract 2015; 31: 63–89.
402 Kerr CL, Bouré LP, Pearce SG, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of diazepam-
ketamine-isoflurane or xylazine-ketamine-isoflurane during abdominal surgery
in foals. Am J Vet Res 2009; 70: 574–580.
403 Johnston GM, Eastment JK, Wood J, et al. The confidential enquiry into
perioperative equine fatalities (CEPEF): mortality results of Phases 1 and 2. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2002; 29: 159–170.
404 Lepage OM, Piccot-Crézollet C. Transarterial coil embolisation in 31 horses
(1999–2002) with guttural pouch mycosis: a 2-year follow-up. Equine Vet J 2005;
37: 430–434.
405 Genton M, Farfan M, Tesson C, et al. Balloon catheter occlusion of the maxillary,
internal, and external carotid arteries in standing horses. Vet Surg 2021; 50:
546–555.
406 Bonilla AG, Scansen BA, Hurcombe SD, et al. Potential for iatrogenic coil
embolization of the caudal cerebellar artery during treatment of internal carotid
artery bifurcation in two horses with guttural pouch mycosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2015; 247: 1427–1432.
407 Dobesova O, Schwarz B, Velde K, et al. Guttural pouch mycosis in horses: a retro-
spective study of 28 cases. Vet Rec 2012; 171: 561.
408 Greet V, Bode EF, Dukes-McEwan J, et al. Clinical features and outcome of dogs
and cats with bidirectional and continuous right-to-left shunting patent ductus
arteriosus. J Vet Intern Med 2021; 35: 780–788.
409 Caffey SR, Lund CM, Farnsworth KD, et al. Effects of head position on internal
and external carotid pressures in standing sedated horses. Can J Vet Res 2021; 85:
127–130.
410 Cousty M, Tricaud C, De Beauregard T, et al. Ligation of the ipsilateral common
carotid artery and topical treatment for the prevention of epistaxis from guttural
pouch mycosis in horses. Vet Rec 2016; 178: 44.
411 Cruz AM, Kerr CL, Bouré LP, et al. Cardiovascular effects of insufflation of the
abdomen with carbon dioxide in standing horses sedated with detomidine.
Am J Vet Res 2004; 65: 357–362.
412 Hahn CN, Matiasek K, Dixon PM, et al. Histological and ultrastructural evidence
that recurrent laryngeal neuropathy is a bilateral mononeuropathy limited to
recurrent laryngeal nerves. Equine Vet J 2008; 40: 666–672.
413 Rossignol F, Vitte A, Boening J, et al. Laryngoplasty in standing horses. Vet Surg
2015; 44: 341–347.
414 Hawkins JF, Tulleners EP, Ross MW, et al. Laryngoplasty with or without ventric-
ulectomy for treatment of left laryngeal hemiplegia in 230 racehorses. Vet Surg
1997; 26: 484–491.
415 Kraus BM, Parente EJ, Tulleners EP. Laryngoplasty with ventriculectomy or ven-
triculocordectomy in 104 draft horses (1992–2000). Vet Surg 2003; 32: 530–538.
416 Abdul-Rasool IH, Ward DS. Ventilatory and cardiovascular responses to sufentanil
infusion in dogs anesthetized with isoflurane. Anesth Analg 1989; 69: 300–306.
417 McCarrel TM, Woodie JB. Update on laryngeal disorders and treatment. Vet Clin
North Am Equine Pract 2015; 31: 13–26.
418 Lindegaard C, Husted L, Ullum H, et al. Sedation with detomidine and aceproma-
zine influences the endoscopic evaluation of laryngeal function in horses. Equine
Vet J 2007; 39: 553–556.
419 Chalmers HJ, Yeager AE, Cheetham J, et al. Diagnostic sensitivity of subjective
and quantitative laryngeal ultrasonography for recurrent laryngeal neuropathy in
horses. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2012; 53: 660–666.
420 Ducharme NG, Rossingnol F. Larynx. In: Auer JA, Stick JA, Kummerle JM, et al.,
eds. Equine Surgery, 5th edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2019: 568–590.
421 Cramp PA, Prange T, Nickels FA. Standing equine surgery of the upper respiratory
tract. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 2014; 30: 111–141.
422 Campoy L, Morris TB, Ducharme NG, et al. Unilateral cervical plexus block for
prosthetic laryngoplasty in the standing horse. Equine Vet J 2018; 50: 727–732.
423 Trzil JE. Feline asthma: diagnostic and treatment update. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 2020; 50: 375–391.
424 Reinero CR, DeClue AE, Rabinowitz P. Asthma in humans and cats: is there a
common sensitivity to aeroallegens in shared environments? Environ Res 2009;
109: 634–640.
425 van Eeden ME, Vientós-Plotts AI, Cohn LA, et al. Serum allergen-specific IgE
reactivity: is there an association with clinical severity and airway eosinophilia in
asthmatic cats? J Feline Med Surg 2020; 22: 1129–1136.
426 Moise NS, Wiedenkeller D, Yeager AE, et al. Clinical, radiographic, and bronchial
cytologic features of cats with bronchial disease: 65 cases (1980–1986). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 1989; 194: 1467–1473.
427 Adamama-Moraitou KK, Patsikas MN, Koutinas AF. Feline lower airway disease:
a retrospective study of 22 naturally occurring cases from Greece. J Feline Med
Surg 2004; 6: 227–233.
428 Lee EA, Johnson LR, Johnson EG, et al. Clinical features and radiographic find-
ings in cats with eosinophilic, neutrophilic, and mixed airway inflammation
(2011–2018). J Vet Intern Med 2020; 34: 1291–1299.
429 Grotheer M, Hirschberger J, Hartmann K, et al. Comparison of signalment, clini-
cal, laboratory and radiographic parameters in cats with feline asthma and chronic
bronchitis. J Feline Med Surg 2020; 22: 649–655.
430 Bayable SD, Melesse DY, Lema GF, et al. Perioperative management of patients
with asthma during elective surgery: a systematic review. Ann Med Surg (Lond)
2021; 70: 102874.
431 Woods BD, Sladen RN. Perioperative considerations for the patient with asthma
and bronchospasm. Br J Anaesth 2009; 103: i57–i65.
432 Evgenov OVL, Jiang Y, Blair JL. Pulmonary pharmacology and inhaled anesthetics.
In: Gropper M, Eriksson L, Fleisher L, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia, 9th edn.
Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier, 2020: 540–571.
433 Groeben H, Mitzner W, Brown RH. Effects of the alpha2-adrenoceptor agonist dex-
medetomidine on bronchoconstriction in dogs. Anesthesiology 2004; 100: 359–363.
434 Zhou Y, Du X, Wang Q, et al. Dexmedetomidine protects against Airway
Inflammation and Airway Remodeling in a Murine Model of chronic asthma
through TLR4/NF-κB signaling pathway. Mediators Inflamm 2023; 2023: 3695469.
435 Siao KT, Pypendop BH, Honkavaara J, et al. Hemodynamic effects of dexmedeto-
midine, with and without MK-467, following intramuscular administration in
cats anesthetized with isoflurane. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44: 1101–1115.
436 Selmi AL, Mendes GM, Lins BT, et al. Evaluation of the sedative and cardiorespi-
ratory effects of dexmedetomidine, dexmedetomidine-butorphanol, and
dexmedetomidine-ketamine in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2003; 222: 37–41.
437 DeYoung DW, Paddleford RR, Short CE. Dissociative anesthetics in the cat and
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1972; 161: 1442–1445.
438 Jones TL, Boyer K, Chapman K, et al. Evaluation of the time to desensitization of
the larynx of cats following topical lidocaine application. J Feline Med Surg 2021;
23: 563–567.
439 Wilson ME, Robinson NE. Recurrent airway obstruction and inflammatory
airway disease. In: Sprayberry KA, Robinson NE, eds. Robinson’s Current Therapy
in Equine Medicine 7. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2015: 257–261.
440 Couetil L, Cardwell JM, Leguillette R, et al. Equine asthma: current understanding
and future directions. Front Vet Sci 2020; 7: 450.
441 Mazan MR. Update on noninfectious inflammatory diseases of the lower airway.
Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 2015; 31: 159–185.
442 Broadstone RV, Gray PR, Robinson NE, et al. Effects of xylazine on airway function
in ponies with recurrent airway obstruction. Am J Vet Res 1992; 53: 1813–1817.
443 Hess DR, Kacmarek RM. Pressure and volume ventilation. In: Hess DR, Kacmarek
RM, eds. Essentials of Mechanical Ventilation, 4th edn. New York, NY: McGraw-
Hill Education, 2019: 61–72.

-- 835 of 1450 --

820 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
444 Robertson SA, Bailey JE. Aerosolized salbutamol (albuterol) improves PaO2 in
hypoxaemic anaesthetized horses – a prospective clinical trial in 81 horses.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2002; 29: 212–218.
445 Dupont J, Gougnard A, Salciccia A, et al. Comparison of single-breath continuous
positive airway pressure manoeuvre with inhaled salbutamol to improve oxygena-
tion in horses anaesthetized for laparotomy. Vet Anaesth Analg 2022; 49: 85–94.
446 Casoni D, Spadavecchia C, Adami C. Cardiovascular changes after administration
of aerosolized salbutamol in horses: five cases. Acta Vet Scand 2014; 56: 49.
447 Howes CL, Sumner JP, Ahlstrand K, et al. Long-term clinical outcomes following
surgery for spontaneous pneumothorax caused by pulmonary blebs and bullae in
dogs – a multicentre (AVSTS Research Cooperative) retrospective study. J Small
Anim Pract 2020; 61: 436–441.
448 Gilday C, Odunayo A, Hespel AM. Spontaneous pneumothorax: pathophysiology,
clinical presentation and diagnosis. Top Companion Anim Med 2021; 45: 100563.
449 Boy MG, Sweeney CR. Pneumothorax in horses: 40 cases (1980–1997). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2000; 216: 1955–1959.
450 Slack JA, Thomas CB, Peek SF. Pneumothorax in dairy cattle: 30 cases (1990–2003).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2004; 225: 732–735.
451 Cole L, Pivetta M, Humm K. Diagnostic accuracy of a lung ultrasound protocol
(Vet BLUE) for detection of pleural fluid, pneumothorax and lung pathology in
dogs and cats. J Small Anim Pract 2021; 62: 178–186.
452 Ruiz MD, Vessières F, Ragetly GR, et al. Characterization of and factors associated
with causes of pleural effusion in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2018; 253: 181–187.
453 Biddick AA, Bacek LM, Fan S, et al. Association between cardiac troponin I con-
centrations and electrocardiographic abnormalities in dogs with blunt trauma.
J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2020; 30: 179–186.
454 Haynes D, Baumann MH. Pleural controversy: aetiology of pneumothorax.
Respirology 2011; 16: 604–610.
455 Abu- Seida A. Diagnostic and treatment challenges for diaphragmatic hernia in
equids: a concise review of literature. J Equine Vet Sci 2021; 106: 103746.
456 Schmiedt CW, Tobias KM, Stevenson MA. Traumatic diaphragmatic hernia in
cats: 34 cases (1991–2001). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2003; 222: 1237–1240.
457 Legallet C, Thieman Mankin K, Selmic LE. Prognostic indicators for perioperative
survival after diaphragmatic herniorrhaphy in cats and dogs: 96 cases (2001–2013).
BMC Vet Res 2017; 13: 16.
458 Morgan KRS, Singh A, Giuffrida MA, et al. Outcome after surgical and conserva-
tive treatments of canine peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia: a multi-
institutional study of 128 dogs. Vet Surg 2020; 49: 138–145.
459 Burns CG, Bergh MS, McLoughlin MA. Surgical and nonsurgical treatment of
peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia in dogs and cats: 58 cases (1999–2008).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2013; 242: 643–650.
460 Romero AE, Rodgerson DH. Diaphragmatic herniation in the horse: 31 cases
from 2001–2006. Can Vet J 2010; 51: 1247–1250.
461 Hart SK, Brown JA. Diaphragmatic hernia in horses: 44 cases (1986–2006).
J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2009; 19: 357–362.
462 Gibson TW, Brisson BA, Sears W. Perioperative survival rates after surgery for
diaphragmatic hernia in dogs and cats: 92 cases (1990–2002). J Am Vet Med Assoc
2005; 227: 105–109.
463 Clutton RE, Boyd C, Richards DL, et al. Anaesthetic problems caused by diaphrag-
matic hernia in the horse: a review of four cases. Equine Vet J Suppl 1992; 11: 30–33.
464 Wilson DV, Schott HC II, Robinson NE, et al. Response to nasopharyngeal oxygen
administration in horses with lung disease. Equine Vet J 2006; 38: 219–223.
465 Canfrán S, Gómez de Segura IA, Cediel R, et al. Effects of a stepwise lung recruit-
ment manoeuvre and positive end-expiratory pressure on lung compliance and
arterial blood oxygenation in healthy dogs. Vet J 2012; 194: 89–93.
466 Canfrán S, Gómez de Segura IA, Cediel R, et al. Effects of fluid load on cardiovas-
cular function during stepwise lung recruitment manoeuvre in healthy dogs.
Vet J 2013; 197: 800–805.
467 Neath PJ, Brockman DJ, King LG. Lung lobe torsion in dogs: 22 cases (1981–1999).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000; 217: 1041–1044.
468 Schultz RM, Peters J, Zwingenberger A. Radiography, computed tomography and
virtual bronchoscopy in four dogs and two cats with lung lobe torsion. J Small
Anim Pract 2009; 50: 360–363.
469 Hambrook LE, Kudnig ST. Lung lobe torsion in association with a chronic dia-
phragmatic hernia and haemorrhagic pleural effusion in a cat. J Feline Med Surg
2012; 14: 219–223.
470 Benavides KL, Rozanski EA, Oura TJ. Lung lobe torsion in 35 dogs and 4 cats.
Can Vet J 2019; 60: 60–66.
471 Rossanese M, Wustefeld-Janssens B, Price C, et al. Long-term survival after
treatment of idiopathic lung lobe torsion in 80 cases. Vet Surg 2020; 49: 659–667.
472 Murphy KA, Brisson BA. Evaluation of lung lobe torsion in Pugs: 7 cases
(1991–2004). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2006; 228: 86–90.
473 Latimer CR, Lux CN, Sutton JS, et al. Lung lobe torsion in seven juvenile dogs.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2017; 251: 1450–1456.
474 Park KM, Grimes JA, Wallace ML, et al. Lung lobe torsion in dogs: 52 cases
(2005–2017). Vet Surg 2018; 47: 1002–1008.
475 Fossum TW. Surgery of the lower respriatory system. In: Fossum TW, ed. Small
Animal Surgery, 5th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier, 2019: 884–915.
476 Gallart L, Canet J. Postoperative pulmonary complications: understanding defini-
tions and risk assessment. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2015; 29: 315–330.
477 Kaufmann K, Heinrich S. Minimizing postoperative pulmonary complications in
thoracic surgery patients. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2021; 34: 13–19.
478 Kiefer J MM, Roizen MF, Fleisher LA. Anesthetic implications of concurrent
diseases. In: Gropper MA, Eriksson LI, Fleisher LA, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia,
9th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier, 2020: 999–1064.
479 Fisher BW, Majumdar SR, McAlister FA. Predicting pulmonary complications
after nonthoracic surgery: a systematic review of blinded studies. Am J Med 2002;
112: 219–225.
480 Ackerman RS, Luddy KA, Icard BE, et al. The effects of anesthetics and periopera-
tive medications on immune function: a narrative review. Anesth Analg 2021; 133:
676–689.
481 Layton R, Layton D, Beggs D, et al. The impact of stress and anesthesia on animal
models of infectious disease. Front Vet Sci 2023; 10: 1086003.
482 Sherman R, Karagiannis M. Aspiration pneumonia in the dog: a review.
Top Companion Anim Med 2017; 32: 1–7.
483 Marik PE. Aspiration pneumonitis and aspiration pneumonia. N Engl J Med 2001;
344: 665–671.
484 Fingeroth JM, Fossum TW. Late-onset regurgitation associated with persistent
right aortic arch in two dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1987; 191: 981–983.
485 Loughin CA, Marino DJ. Delayed primary surgical treatment in a dog with a
persistent right aortic arch. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2008; 44: 258–261.
486 Janda M, Scheeren TW, Nöldge-Schomburg GF. Management of pulmonary
aspiration. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2006; 20: 409–427.
487 Arroyo MG, Slovis NM, Moore GE, et al. Factors associated with survival in
97 horses with septic pleuropneumonia. J Vet Intern Med 2017; 31: 894–900.
488 Akça O. Endotracheal tube cuff leak: can optimum management of cuff pressure
prevent pneumonia? Crit Care Med 2007; 35: 1624–1626.
489 Hamilton VA, Grap MJ. The role of the endotracheal tube cuff in microaspiration.
Heart Lung 2012; 41: 167–172.
490 Alderson B, Senior JM, Dugdale AH. Tracheal necrosis following tracheal intuba-
tion in a dog. J Small Anim Pract 2006; 47: 754–756.
491 Mitchell SL, McCarthy R, Rudloff E, et al. Tracheal rupture associated with intubation
in cats: 20 cases (1996–1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000; 216: 1592–1595.
492 Touzot-Jourde G, Stedman NL, Trim CM. The effects of two endotracheal tube
cuff inflation pressures on liquid aspiration and tracheal wall damage in horses.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2005; 32: 23–29.
493 Wylie C, Foote A, Rasotto R, et al. Tracheal necrosis as a fatal complication of
endotracheal intubation. Equine Vet Edu 2015; 27: 170–175.
494 Ferreira TH, Allen M, De Gasperi D, et al. Impact of endotracheal tube size and
cuff pressure on tracheal and laryngeal mucosa of adult horses. Vet Anaesth Analg
2021; 48: 891–899.
495 Hung WC, Ko JC, Weil AB, et al. Evaluation of endotracheal tube cuff pressure
and the use of three cuff inflation syringe devices in dogs. Front Vet Sci 2020; 7: 39.
496 Reinero C, Visser LC, Kellihan HB, et al. ACVIM consensus statement guidelines
for the diagnosis, classification, treatment, and monitoring of pulmonary hyper-
tension in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2020; 34: 549–573.
497 Rolph KE, Cavanaugh SM. Feline pulmonary hypertension: are we overlooking an
important comorbidity? J Feline Med Surg 2022; 24: e636–e646.
498 Slack J. Pulmonary hypertension. In: Robinson NE, Sprayberry KA, eds. Current
Therapy in Equine Medicine 6. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2009: 216–220.
499 Jung S, Orvalho J, Griffiths LG. Aortopulmonary window characterized with
two- and three-dimensional echocardiogram in a dog. J Vet Cardiol 2012; 14:
371–375.
500 Tarry D, Powell M. Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction. Br J Anaesth Educ 2017;
17: 208–213.
501 Dixon PM. Pulmonary artery pressures in normal horses and in horses affected
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Equine Vet J 1978; 10: 195–198.
502 Johnson LR, Stern JA. Clinical features and outcome in 25 dogs with respiratory-
associated pulmonary hypertension treated with sildenafil. J Vet Intern Med 2020;
34: 65–73.
503 Jaffey JA, Wiggen K, Leach SB, et al. Pulmonary hypertension secondary to
respiratory disease and/or hypoxia in dogs: clinical features, diagnostic testing and
survival. Vet J 2019; 251: 105347.
504 Borgarelli M, Abbott J, Braz-Ruivo L, et al. Prevalence and prognostic importance
of pulmonary hypertension in dogs with myxomatous mitral valve disease.
J Vet Intern Med 2015; 29: 569–574.
505 Borgarelli M, Zini E, D’Agnolo G, et al. Comparison of primary mitral valve disease
in German Shepherd dogs and in small breeds. J Vet Cardiol 2004; 6: 27–34.

-- 836 of 1450 --

Chapter 38: Oxygen Therapy, Mechanical Ventilation, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Respiratory Disease 	821
506 Guglielmini C, Civitella C, Diana A, et al. Serum cardiac troponin I concentration
in dogs with precapillary and postcapillary pulmonary hypertension. J Vet Intern
Med 2010; 24: 145–152.
507 Schober KE, Hart TM, Stern JA, et al. Detection of congestive heart failure in dogs
by Doppler echocardiography. J Vet Intern Med 2010; 24: 1358–1368.
508 Serres FJ, Chetboul V, Tissier R, et al. Doppler echocardiography-derived evi-
dence of pulmonary arterial hypertension in dogs with degenerative mitral valve
disease: 86 cases (2001–2005). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2006; 229: 1772–1778.
509 Vezzosi T, Schober KE. Doppler-derived echocardiographic evidence of pulmo-
nary hypertension in cats with left-sided congestive heart failure. J Vet Cardiol
2019; 23: 58–68.
510 Kellihan HB, Stepien RL. Pulmonary hypertension in dogs: diagnosis and therapy.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2010; 40: 623–641.
511 Price LC, Martinez G, Brame A, et al. Perioperative management of patients with
pulmonary hypertension undergoing non-cardiothoracic, non-obstetric surgery: a
systematic review and expert consensus statement. Br J Anaesth 2021; 126: 774–790.
512 Shim JK, Choi YS, Oh YJ, et al. Effect of oral sildenafil citrate on intraoperative
hemodynamics in patients with pulmonary hypertension undergoing valvular
heart surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2006; 132: 1420–1425.
513 Bach JF, Rozanski EA, MacGregor J, et al. Retrospective evaluation of sildenafil
citrate as a therapy for pulmonary hypertension in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2006;
20: 1132–1135.
514 Murphy LA, Russell N, Bianco D, et al. Retrospective evaluation of pimobendan
and sildenafil therapy for severe pulmonary hypertension due to lung disease and
hypoxia in 28 dogs (2007–2013). Vet Med Sci 2017; 3: 99–106.
515 Häggström J, Boswood A, O’Grady M, et al. Effect of pimobendan or benazepril
hydrochloride on survival times in dogs with congestive heart failure caused
by naturally occurring myxomatous mitral valve disease: the QUEST study.
J Vet Intern Med 2008; 22: 1124–1135.
516 Mizuno M, Yamano S, Chimura S, et al. Efficacy of pimobendan on survival and
reoccurrence of pulmonary edema in canine congestive heart failure. J Vet Med Sci
2017; 79: 29–34.
517 Enokizono M, Mandour AS, Komeda S, et al. Hemodynamic effect of pimobendan
following intramuscular and intravenous administration in healthy dogs: a pilot
study. Front Vet Sci 2022; 9: 969304.
518 Ketabchi F, Egemnazarov B, Schermuly RT, et al. Effects of hypercapnia with and
without acidosis on hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction. Am J Physiol Lung Cell
Mol Physiol 2009; 297: L977–L983.
519 Price LC, Wort SJ, Finney SJ, et al. Pulmonary vascular and right ventricular dys-
function in adult critical care: current and emerging options for management:
a systematic literature review. Crit Care 2010; 14: R169.
520 Currigan DA, Hughes RJ, Wright CE, et al. Vasoconstrictor responses to vasopres-
sor agents in human pulmonary and radial arteries: an in vitro study. Anesthesiology
2014; 121: 930–936.
521 Coleman AE, Shepard MK, Schmiedt CW, et al. Effects of orally adminis-
tered enalapril on blood pressure and hemodynamic response to vasopressors
during isoflurane anesthesia in healthy dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43:
482–494.

-- 837 of 1450 --

39
822
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: T he Sixth Edition of L umb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
Anesthetic management of patients with neurological disorders
undergoing diagnostic and/or surgical procedures is common in vet-
erinary medicine. Knowledge of normal anatomy and physiology as
well as pathophysiology of the central, peripheral, somatic, and auto-
nomic nervous systems allows the anesthetic provider to understand
the impact of sedation and anesthesia on normal physiology as well
as disease processes. Whether a patient is anesthetized for evaluation
or management of neurologic conditions or suffers from comorbidi-
ties related to the nervous system, a solid foundational knowledge of
the nervous system is important to ensure appropriate and optimal
patient care while decreasing patient morbidity and mortality.
Anatomy of the nervous system
The nervous system is anatomically divided into the central nervous
system, containing the brain and spinal cord, and the peripheral nerv-
ous system, containing the cranial and spinal nerves. Functionally,
the nervous system can be divided into somatic and autonomic
nervous system components, each with afferent and efferent fibers.
Central nervous system
The central nervous system (CNS) contains the brain and spinal cord
and is made up of gray and white matter. Gray matter is composed of
neuronal cell bodies and is located more superficially in the brain and
more deeply (i.e., centrally) within the spinal cord. There are also
some deeper regions of gray matter within the brain known as
“nuclei.” White matter is composed of nerve fibers (axons) and is
located deeper within the brain and more superficially within the
spinal cord. The meninges are composed of three layers of connective
tissue within the CNS: the dura, arachnoid, and pia mater. The dura
mater is the most superficial layer and, in the vertebral column, the
space between the bone and the dura mater is the epidural space.
Within the skull, the dura mater is fused to the periosteum and,
therefore, is considered a potential space. Because there is no epidural
space intracranially, the venous sinuses are located within the dura
mater of the brain. The arachnoid is the middle layer of the meninges
while the pia mater is the innermost layer. The pia mater is only one
cell thick and is fused to the surface of the brain and the spinal cord.
Within the vertebral canal, the subarachnoid space is located between
the arachnoid and pia mater layers and contains cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF). The meninges extend around the spinal nerve roots with some
reaching the level of the intervertebral foramina.
When CSF collection is performed, a spinal needle is inserted
into the subarachnoid space either at the level of the cerebellomed-
ullary cistern cranially, or the lower lumbar region caudally. In dogs
and cats, the L5–L6 vertebral space is recommended for obtaining
CSF. In large-breed dogs, the L4–L5 vertebral space can often be
used if obtaining CSF from the L5–L6 space is unsuccessful. Local
anesthetic and analgesic agents may be administered either in the
epidural or subarachnoid spaces; species-specific descriptions of
these techniques may be found in the local anesthetic and analgesic
techniques chapters in this text.
Brain
Anatomically, the brain can be divided into five regions: the telen-
cephalon (cerebral cortex and basal ganglia), diencephalon (thalamus,
hypothalamus, epithalamus, subthalamus, and metathalamus),
39 Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic
Management of Patients with Neurologic
Disease
Tatiana H. Ferreira1 and Starr Cameron 2
1 Department of Surgical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, USA
2 Department of Medical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 822
Anatomy of the nervous system, 822
Central nervous system, 822
Peripheral nervous system, 825
Physiology of the central nervous system, 829
Brain physiology, 829
Spinal cord physiology, 832
Effects of vasoactive drugs, sedatives, and anesthetics, 832
Vasoactive drugs, 832
Sedatives and anesthetics, 832
Pathophysiology and anesthetic management of specific neurological
conditions, 835
Central nervous system conditions, 835
Peripheral nervous system conditions, 839
References, 840

-- 838 of 1450 --

Chapter 39: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Neurologic Disease 	823
mesencephalon (midbrain), metencephalon (pons and cerebellum),
and myelencephalon (medulla oblongata) (Fig. 39.1). Functionally
and clinically, the telencephalon and diencephalon together make up
the prosencephalon or forebrain. The midbrain, pons, and medulla
form the brainstem. There are 12 pairs of cranial nerves; a list of the
nerves and their innervation is provided in Table 39.1.
The cerebral cortex or telencephalon is where sensory informa-
tion from the environment is consciously perceived and voluntary
motor functions are initiated. The telencephalon is divided into
right and left hemispheres. In mammals, except mice and rats, the
cerebral cortex is composed of gyri and sulci and classified as
gyrencephalic. The brains of fish, reptiles, birds, mice, and rats are
smooth and lack these characteristic folds and are referred to as
lissencephalic. The presence of gyri allows a significantly increased
number of neurons without increasing the size of the cranium or
skull. The gyri are divided into lobes including the frontal, parietal,
Fornix
Corpus callosum
(Body)
Corpus callosum
(Genu)
Subcallosal gyrus
Olfactory bulb
Rostral commissure
Lamina
terminalis
Optic
chiasm 	Tuber
cinereum
Hypophysis
Mammillary body
Interpeduncular fossa 	Pons
Mesencephalic aqueduct
Rostral medullary velum
Medulla oblongata
Fourth ventricle
Cerebellum
Tectum
Caudal commissure
Transverse fissure
Corpus callosum
(Splenium)
Interthalamic adhesion
Callosal sulcus
Septum pellucidum
Midbrain
(Teg)
Figure 39.1 Sagittal section of the canine brain. Teg, tegmentum. Source: Jenkins [1], with permission.
Table 39.1 Cranial nerves and their innervation.
Cranial nerve number 	Cranial nerve name 	Classification 	Function/innervation
I 	Olfactory 	Sensory 	Olfaction
II 	Optic 	Sensory 	Vision
III 	Oculomotor 	Motor 	Somatic motor information to dorsal, medial, ventral rectus, ventral oblique, and
levator palpebrae superioris muscles of the eye
Parasympathetic innervation to pupil (constriction)
IV 	Trochlear 	Motor 	Somatic motor innervation to dorsal oblique muscle of eye
V 	Trigeminal 	Mixed 	Somatic motor innervation to muscles of mastication and tensor tympani muscle
Sensory innervation to most of the face and muzzle
VI 	Abducens 	Motor 	Somatic motor innervation to lateral rectus and retractor bulbi muscles of the eye
VII 	Facial 	Mixed 	Somatic motor innervation to muscles of facial expression and stapedius muscles
Sensory innervation of inner pinnae
Sensory innervation to rostral two-thirds of tongue
Parasympathetic innervation to salivary, lacrimal, palatine, and nasal glands
VIII 	Vestibulocochlear 	Sensory 	Vestibular function and hearing
IX 	Glossopharyngeal 	Mixed 	Somatic motor innervation to larynx and pharynx
Sensory innervation of pharynx and caudal third of tongue
Parasympathetic innervation of salivary glands (parotid and zygomatic)
X 	Vagus 	Mixed 	Somatic motor innervation to larynx and pharynx
Sensory innervation of pharynx
Parasympathetic innervation to viscera
XI 	Accessory 	Motor 	Somatic motor innervation to larynx
XII 	Hypoglossal 	Motor 	Somatic motor innervation to the tongue

-- 839 of 1450 --

824 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
temporal, and occipital lobes. The olfactory bulb is the most rostral
part of the telencephalon and is where the axons of the olfactory
nerves terminate.
The diencephalon, specifically the thalamus, receives all sensory
information (except olfaction) and projects to sensory areas of the
telencephalon. Efferent, or motor, pathways also course from the
cerebral cortex through the thalamus to the brainstem. The hypo-
thalamus is important in maintaining homeostasis as it is the neu-
rologic control center for the endocrine system and the autonomic
nervous system. The axons of cranial nerve II (optic nerve) termi-
nate within the diencephalon after coursing through the optic
chiasm.
The mesencephalon, or midbrain, is the most rostral part of the
brainstem. The midbrain contains sensory and motor tracts, as well
as the rostral and caudal colliculi, which are associated with visual
and auditory reflexes, respectively. The nuclei of cranial nerves III
(oculomotor nerve) and IV (trochlear nerve) are located within the
mesencephalon. The midbrain is connected to the cerebellum via
the rostral cerebellar peduncles.
The metencephalon, or pons, also contains sensory and motor
pathways and the nuclei associated with cranial nerve V (trigeminal
nerve). The cerebellum is also part of the metencephalon and is
located dorsal to the brainstem. The pons is connected to the
cerebellum via the middle cerebellar peduncles. The cerebellum
has two hemispheres and a centrally located vermis. It receives
sensory information directly from afferent pathways, including the
vestibular system, and motor information from the cerebral cortex.
While the cerebellum does not initiate movement, it is responsible
for integrating sensory and motor input to create smooth, controlled,
and coordinated movements.
The myelencephalon, or medulla, contains sensory and motor
tracts, as well as nuclei for the remaining pairs of cranial nerves VI
through XII, including cranial nerve X (vagus nerve), which inner-
vates organs within the thorax and abdomen. In addition, nerve
centers for vital body functions, including regulation of blood pres-
sure, heart rate, and respiration, are located within the medulla.
The blood–brain barrier (BBB) is a semipermeable membrane
made up of microvascular endothelial cells that restrict free move-
ment of particles from the blood into the brain parenchyma and
CSF. The BBB allows carbon dioxide, oxygen, small lipid-soluble
substances, and general anesthetics to cross from the blood into the
brain. The BBB is made up of pericytes, tight junctions between
capillary endothelial cells, a layer of astrocyte foot processes that
surround the capillaries, and the basal lamina (or basement mem-
brane). Several areas of the brain, including the hypothalamus, area
postrema, and the pineal gland, are outside the BBB as these regions
contain sensors for monitoring osmolarity, glucose levels, and pH,
and are important for providing information for maintenance of
homeostasis. While the BBB fulfills a protective function by pre-
venting possible toxins and limiting pathogens from entering the
CNS, it also limits therapeutic options by excluding many drugs
from entering. Permeability of the BBB may increase in the face of
inflammation or increased intracranial pressure.
The CSF is a clear, colorless fluid produced by the choroid plexus
and the ependymal lining cells within the ventricles of the brain and
is an ultrafiltrate of plasma. It is produced at a rate of 0.02 mL/min
in cats and 0.05 mL/min in dogs [2,3]. Compared to plasma, CSF
has a lower concentration of protein, glucose, calcium, and potassium
and a higher concentration of sodium, chloride, and magnesium [4].
The CSF is present within the lateral, third, and fourth ventricles of
the brain, and within the central canal and subarachnoid space of
the spinal cord. The CSF flows from the lateral ventricles, located
within the cerebral cortex, into the third ventricle, located between
the thalamus and hypothalamus. From here, it flows into the fourth
ventricle, located ventral to the cerebellum and dorsal to the
medulla. These ventricles can be clearly seen on magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) (Fig. 39.2). Caudally, the fourth ventricle becomes
continuous with the central canal of the spinal cord and bilateral
apertures within the ventricle allow CSF to flow into the subarach-
noid space. The CSF passes from the subarachnoid space through
arachnoid villi, which act as one-way valves, to the dural sinuses
where it is absorbed. The arachnoid villi are located within the
venous sinuses, as well as the spinal veins.
The blood supply to the arterial circle, or the “Circle of Willis” as
termed in human medicine, is the main arterial supply to the brain.
There are several anatomical species differences that can have clinical
implications. In dogs (and in humans), the arterial circle is formed
by the joining of the basilar artery and the left and right internal
carotid arteries. In the cow, the maxillary and vertebral arteries
form this arterial supply. In the cat and sheep, the maxillary artery,
via the rete mirabile, forms the arterial circle. The rete mirabile
is a network of branches of the maxillary artery located in the
(A) 	(B)
Figure 39.2 T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) sagittal views. A. Normal canine brain. B. Feline brain with signs of foramen magnum
(arrow) and transtentorial (arrowhead) herniation secondary to a large intracranial tumor. Source: Images courtesy of Dr. Starr Cameron.

-- 840 of 1450 --

Chapter 39: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Neurologic Disease 	825
cavernous sinus on the ventral surface of the calvarium. The blood
from the cavernous sinus drains from the nasal cavity. A counter-
current heat exchange mechanism between the rete mirabile
(arterial) and cavernous sinus (venous) may play a role in ther-
moregulation of the brain. Because of this anatomic variation, using
a spring-held mouth gag in cats may increase the risk of neurologic
complications associated with anesthesia, including cortical blind-
ness and hearing deficits [5–7]. One study identified changes in
electroretinogram (ERG) and brainstem auditory evoked responses
(BAER) in anesthetized cats when mouth gags were used compared
to no changes when mouth gags were not used [8]. From the arterial
circle, the rostral, middle, and caudal cerebral arteries supply the
prosencephalon. The blood supply to the brainstem arises as
branches from the basilar artery.
The venous system including the venous sinuses and veins of
the CNS is valveless, meaning blood can flow in either direction.
Associated vessels have thin walls without muscular layers and the
veins drain into the larger venous sinuses. The cerebral cortex
contains the dorsal and ventral cerebral veins as well as the great
cerebral vein which drains the deeper cortex. The major veins of
the brainstem include the dorsal and ventral cerebellar veins,
pontine veins, and medullary veins. The dorsal sagittal sinus, straight
sinus, and paired transverse sinuses are located dorsally. Paired
rostral and caudal cavernous sinuses, as well as the sigmoid, basilar,
and petrosal sinuses, are located ventrally within the calvarium.
The venous sinuses are located within the meninges and drain
into the internal jugular, maxillary, and vertebral veins and into
the venous plexus.
Spinal cord
Rostrally, the spinal cord is continuous with the myelencephalon, or
medulla, of the brainstem and is a complex network of ascending
and descending tracts. It is located within the spinal, or vertebral,
canal and is surrounded by the meninges, which are composed of
the dura mater, arachnoid, and pia mater. The epidural space contains
epidural fat, blood vessels, and lymphatics. The CSF passes through
the central canal of the spinal cord and flows around the spinal cord
within the subarachnoid space. The pia mater is one cell thick and
lies directly on the spinal cord.
Anatomically, the spinal cord is divided longitudinally into four
major regions: cervical, thoracic, lumbar, and sacral. The caudal
(coccygeal) segments are associated with the tail and contain
nerves. Each segment of the spinal cord has a pair (right and left) of
spinal nerves that exit through the intervertebral foramen. The dor-
sal root carries sensory (afferent) information and the ventral root
carries motor (efferent) information. Just inside the intervertebral
foramina, the dorsal and ventral roots combine and exit as the asso-
ciated spinal nerve for that segment of spinal cord. The number of
vertebrae and spinal cord segments varies with species. Spinal nerve
C1 exits through a foramen in C1 and the spinal nerves C2–C7 exit
cranial to the associated vertebrae. Spinal nerve C8 exits between
C7 and T1, and spinal nerves T1–L3 exit caudal to the associated
vertebrae. The vertebrae and spinal cord segments are misaligned
to varying degrees due to differential growth rates during develop-
ment. For example, in the lumbar region of the dog, spinal cord
segments L5, L6, and L7 all lie within the region of the L4 vertebra.
In medium to large-breed dogs, the spinal cord terminates at
approximately L6–L7, and in small-breed dogs and cats, the spinal
cord terminates at approximately S1. In large animals, including
horses, ruminants, and swine, the spinal cord terminates mid-
sacrum. These anatomic differences are important to note when
considering diagnostic and therapeutic procedures involving the
subarachnoid and epidural spaces.
Clinically and functionally, the spinal cord is divided into four
segments based on innervation: C1–C5, C6–T2, T3–L3, and L4–S3.
The cervical (C6–T2 segments) and lumbosacral (L4–S3 segments)
intumescences supply the lower motor neurons to the thoracic and
pelvic limbs, respectively. Lesions within the cervical segments
(C1–C5 and C6–T2) can cause tetraparesis, hemiparesis, tetraplegia,
or hemiplegia. Cervical pain is also common with lesions in this
region but may or may not be present. Lesions within the T3–L3 or
L4–S3 segments may cause paraparesis or paraplegia and, depend-
ing on the etiology, lesions may cause back pain (Fig. 39.3).
Caudal to the lumbar intumescence, the spinal cord tapers into a
region called the “conus medullaris,” which consists of sacral and
caudal segments. The filum terminale is a strand of glial and epend-
ymal cells that extends from the end of the spinal cord. This region
is covered by a dural sac, creating a space within the subarachnoid
space filled with CSF. As the sacral and caudal spinal roots move
caudally past the conus medullaris, each exits at an intervertebral
foramen. These roots are collectively known as the “cauda equina.”
The spinal cord has an H- or butterfly-shaped center of gray mat-
ter, which is divided into the dorsal, lateral, and ventral horns
(Fig. 39.4). The dorsal horn contains sensory neurons. The lateral
horn is located in the thoracolumbar (T1–L4, specifically) and sacral
segments and contains motor neurons that innervate the viscera.
The ventral horn contains cell bodies of somatic motor neurons,
which are also called lower motor neurons. The white matter
surrounds the gray matter of the spinal cord and is divided into three
funiculi. The dorsal funiculus contains only sensory fiber tracts in
several mammalian species including the dog, while the lateral and
ventral funiculi carry both sensory and motor fiber tracts.
Cranially, the subclavian artery branches to become the vertebral
artery, which enters the vertebral canal at the atlas (first cervical
vertebra). Segmental spinal arteries enter the spinal cord via
the intervertebral foramen where they divide into dorsal and
ventral branches. The ventral branches connect via the longitudinal
ventral spinal artery (which runs in the ventral median fissure of
the spinal cord) and supply the ventral gray matter and ventral
funiculus. The dorsal branch supplies the dorsal gray matter. Other
branches of the segmental spinal arteries supply the lateral funicu-
lus. Blood flow in the gray matter of the spinal cord is four times
that of the white matter, and blood flow to the thoracolumbar
region of the spinal cord has been shown to be 40% less compared
to the cervical and lumbosacral regions [9]. There is less gray matter
in the thoracolumbar region of the spinal cord, which accounts for
the reduced blood flow.
The venous system of the CNS is valveless and vertebral veins
communicate directly with the cranial venous sinus described
above. Lying ventral to the spinal cord is the internal vertebral
venous plexus, which extends the entire length of the spinal canal.
This flat, thin-walled valveless network is paired and is a frequent
source of hemorrhage during neurosurgery. The sinus diverges at
the intervertebral foramen and then converges over the vertebral
body. At the level of the intervertebral foramen, the sinus commu-
nicates with the intervertebral veins and exits the foramen with the
spinal nerve roots where they drain into larger vessels, including the
azygous vein and caudal vena cava.
Peripheral nervous system
The peripheral nervous system (PNS) is divided into afferent
(sensory) and efferent (motor) components. Sensory neurons receive

-- 841 of 1450 --

826 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
information from peripheral receptors and transmit this informa-
tion via action potentials to the CNS for integration and interpreta-
tion. Sensory neurons enter the intervertebral foramen as part of
the spinal nerve and then enter the dorsal horn of the spinal cord
via the dorsal nerve root. Efferent information leaves the ventral
horn of the spinal cord via the ventral nerve root before becoming
the spinal nerve and then motor neurons. There are two divisions of
motor neurons within the PNS: somatic motor neurons, which
innervate skeletal muscle, and autonomic motor neurons, which
innervate cardiac muscle, smooth muscle, and some glands.
Myelin, produced by oligodendrocytes within the CNS and by
Schwann cells within the PNS, insulates the axons of nerves and
expedites transmission of electrical activity. The nodes of Ranvier,
which are the spaces or gaps between myelin along the axon, allow
saltatory conduction to take place which greatly expedites signal
transmission. Therefore, nerves that are myelinated have consider-
ably faster conduction velocities compared to unmyelinated nerves.
In addition, large fiber nerves also have faster conduction velocities
compared to small fiber nerves. The largest and fastest nerve fibers
are called Type A and innervate somatic nerves. Type B fibers are
also myelinated but are smaller than Type A and make up the
preganglionic nerves of the autonomic nervous system. Type C
are small unmyelinated nerve fibers with the slowest conduction
velocity. Type C fibers transmit postganglionic information within
(A)
(B)
Figure 39.3 T2-weighted magnetic resonance image (MRI) sagittal views. A. Cervical spine in a cat with an intramedullary C1–C2 myelopathy (arrow)
most consistent with feline ischemic myelopathy. B. Thoracic spine in a dog with an acute intervertebral disc extrusion at the T13–L1 disc space (arrow).
Source: Images courtesy of Dr. Starr Cameron.
Spinous process
Epidural space
Pia mater
Arachnoid
Dura mater
Body of vertebra
Dorsal root
Denticulate ligament
Dorsal root ganglion
Dorsal division
Ventral division
Figure 39.4 Transverse section of the spinal cord within the vertebral
canal. Note the adipose tissue and blood vessels in the epidural space.
Source: Jenkins [1], with permission.

-- 842 of 1450 --

Chapter 39: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Neurologic Disease 	827
the autonomic nervous system, as well as sensory information
regarding temperature, pain, and touch.
Somatic nervous system
The somatic nervous system contains both afferent (sensory) and
efferent (motor) nerves. Afferent fibers transmit environmental
and peripheral sensory information regarding pain, temperature,
and pressure, as well as sight and hearing. The cutaneous region
innervated by one specific sensory spinal nerve is called a dermat-
ome, and the presence or absence of sensation in dermatomes can
be useful to isolate a particular sensory nerve that is affected by a
lesion. Skeletal muscles contain specialized sensory receptors.
Muscle spindles provide information on muscle length and are
located within the extrafusal fibers of skeletal muscles. Golgi tendon
organs provide information about muscle tension and are located
within the tendons. All of these are examples of the information
transmitted by the general somatic afferent system.
Neuromuscular junction transmission
Motor neurons are found in both cranial and spinal nerves and
form synapses with skeletal, smooth, or cardiac muscle fibers at the
neuromuscular junction. The motor endplate is the specific region
where the nerve meets the muscle, with most muscle fibers having
one neuromuscular junction per muscle fiber. The neurotransmit-
ter acetylcholine (ACh) is released from the presynaptic neuron and
crosses the synaptic cleft to bind to receptors on the postsynaptic
muscle membrane. Depending on the strength of the stimulus
and the amount of ACh released, this action potential may cause
muscle contraction. Even without action potentials, ACh is con-
stantly being released in small amounts which causes miniature
endplate potentials.
In a resting state, there is an excess of sodium ions outside the
muscle membrane and an excess of potassium ions inside the mus-
cle membrane, creating a negatively charged environment inside
the muscle. The electrical difference between the two sides of the
membrane is 90 mV. Once a nerve is stimulated, an action potential
travels down the axon and reaches the presynaptic terminal of the
nerve where ACh is present in small synaptic vesicles. These vesicles
fuse with the presynaptic membrane and ACh is released. ACh dif-
fuses across the cleft and reaches the postsynaptic muscle mem-
brane where it binds reversibly to nicotinic receptors. There are five
subunits of the nicotinic receptor, and when two ACh molecules
bind to the two α subunits, an allosteric change in conformation of
the membrane proteins occurs. Sodium ions flow into the muscle
membrane and potassium ions flow out of the muscle membrane,
causing a change in the electrical charge, which is called depolari-
zation. If the change in charge inside the muscle membrane is
greater than 45 mV, then muscle contraction usually occurs. There
is an overabundance of ACh released by an action potential into the
neuromuscular junction, which acts as a safety margin to ensure
adequate binding. Excess ACh is broken down by the enzyme ace-
tylcholinesterase into acetic acid and choline and then recycled and
returned to the presynaptic nerve. The impulses are transmitted
through the T-tubules of the sarcolemma of the muscle membrane,
causing a release of calcium from the sarcoplasmic reticulum and
muscle contraction.
In addition to the presynaptic nerve and postsynaptic muscle
receptors described above, there are other postsynaptic receptors
located outside the neuromuscular junction on the muscle mem-
brane and these are called extrajunctional (or extrasynaptic)
receptors. These receptors, which normally play a very small role in
neuromuscular transmission, proliferate after denervation or
muscle injury and may cause an exaggerated response that can be
detected after a depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agent
(i.e., succinylcholine) has been administered.
Autonomic nervous system
The autonomic nervous system (ANS) is responsible for regulating
the body’s internal environment and helping to maintain homeo-
stasis. Most of the functions of the ANS are under subconscious
control and include maintaining heart rate and blood pressure,
thermoregulation, controlling micturition, and managing gastroin-
testinal secretions, although the gastrointestinal tract does have
additional nervous system components. The ANS consists of afferent
pathways, CNS integration (brain and spinal cord), and two efferent
pathways: the sympathetic (flight or fight) and parasympathetic
(rest and digest) systems.
Within the diencephalon, the hypothalamus facilitates regulation
of both the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems,
along with the cerebral cortex and brainstem. Both systems are
always active, and activity can be increased or decreased to control
organ function and response. Most organs have both sympathetic
and parasympathetic innervation, creating reciprocal effects. For
example, the heart has sympathetic innervation which increases
heart rate and contractility, and parasympathetic innervation which
has opposing effects. Sympathetic innervation of the gastrointesti-
nal tract causes relaxation while parasympathetic innervation
causes contraction. Unlike the somatic system which has one effer-
ent neuron, efferent information from the ANS is conducted via
two (preganglionic and postganglionic) neurons. The preganglionic
neuron is within the CNS, and the postganglionic neuron is within
the PNS.
The general visceral afferent fibers carry afferent (sensory)
information to the CNS and that information is then used to control
internal homeostasis and bodily functions via the efferent compo-
nents of the ANS. Afferent information from cranial nerves VII, IX,
and X travels along the solitary tract within the medulla and
synapses within the solitary nucleus. Axons then travel to other
regions of the brainstem (parasympathetic system) or spinal cord
(sympathetic system) to control visceral functions or project to the
thalamus for conscious perception of sensory information. Afferent
information regarding taste travels via cranial nerves VII and IX.
Blood pressure and tissue oxygenation levels are monitored by
baroreceptors and chemoreceptors located in arteries and informa-
tion is transmitted to cranial nerves IX and X. Additionally, sensory
information from the olfactory and limbic regions is carried along
the solitary tract to the solitary nucleus to allow the ANS to respond
to smells and emotions, respectively.
ACh is the neurotransmitter for all preganglionic synapses within
the sympathetic and parasympathetic systems, as well as for post-
ganglionic synapse transmission in the parasympathetic system. In
postganglionic sympathetic synapses, norepinephrine is the main
neurotransmitter secreted; however, some sympathetic postgangli-
onic synapses, such as those that supply sweat glands and blood ves-
sels of skeletal muscles, secrete ACh. ACh receptors are either
nicotinic or muscarinic. Nicotinic receptors are found in all pregan-
glionic synapses of the ANS and at the somatic neuromuscular
junction. Muscarinic receptors are located in effector cells at post-
ganglionic synapses of the parasympathetic nervous system and in
cholinergic postganglionic synapses of the sympathetic nervous
system. A list of selected effects of sympathetic and parasympa-
thetic nervous system transmission can be found in Table 39.2.

-- 843 of 1450 --

828 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
Sympathetic nervous system
Often referred to as the “fight or flight system,” the sympathetic nerv-
ous system is most active during times of stress. It discharges as a unit,
and the effects are widespread and last longer than those of the para-
sympathetic system. ACh is the neurotransmitter between pregangli-
onic and postganglionic neurons within the sympathetic system.
Norepinephrine is the main neurotransmitter used between postgan-
glionic neurons and the effector organ within the sympathetic nerv-
ous system. Norepinephrine acts as an agonist at α1
-, α2
-, β1
-, and
β2
-adrenergic receptors. For sweat glands, the receptor is cholinergic,
except in horses where the receptor is β2
-adrenergic [10].
Visceral sensory (afferent) information travels along sympathetic
nerves to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. There, interneurons
receive information from visceral and somatic afferent nerves.
The sympathetic system has short preganglionic and long postgan-
glionic axons. The efferent preganglionic neurons of the sympathetic
nervous system are located within the gray matter of the thora-
columbar spinal cord, specifically the T1–L5 spinal cord segments
(Fig. 39.5). The axons leave via the ventral nerve root to join the
spinal nerve of the associated spinal cord segment and then synapse
in a ganglion at one of three locations. Some preganglionic neurons
synapse in the sympathetic chain ganglion located along the lateral
aspect of the vertebral column (paravertebral). These synapses can
occur within ganglia at the same segmental level of the chain, or they
may synapse rostrally or caudally which allows for multiple possible
synapses. This more diffuse distribution accounts for the widespread
effects of sympathetic innervation. The postganglionic neurons then
travel to innervate blood vessels, sweat glands, and pilomotor mus-
cles. Other preganglionic neurons travel through the sympathetic
chain without synapsing. These neurons then synapse on preverte-
bral ganglia that supply visceral organs and glands within the tho-
racic or abdominal cavities. The prevertebral ganglia include the
celiac, cranial, and caudal mesenteric ganglia.
Lastly, other preganglionic neurons of the sympathetic nervous
system travel from the thoracolumbar region of the spinal cord via
the splanchnic nerve to the adrenal medulla where they synapse on
chromaffin cells. These neurons release ACh which acts at nicotinic
receptors located on chromaffin cell membranes, stimulating
these cells to release epinephrine (80% in dogs, 60% in cats) and
norepinephrine (20% in dogs, 40% in cats) into circulation [11].
Epinephrine causes vasodilation within skeletal muscles and
bronchodilation within the airways, while norepinephrine causes
vasoconstriction, increased cardiac activity, and pupillary dilation.
Parasympathetic nervous system
The parasympathetic nervous system of the ANS also has pregan-
glionic and postganglionic neurons. In contrast to the sympathetic
preganglionic fibers, the efferent parasympathetic preganglionic
axons are long and tend to synapse either within or very near the
target organ, meaning that the postganglionic fibers are quite short.
The parasympathetic nervous system efferent nuclei are located
within the brainstem or sacral spinal cord segments, leading this
portion of the ANS to be referred to as the craniosacral component.
The preganglionic nuclei of the parasympathetic nervous system
are located within the nuclei of cranial nerves III, VII, IX, and X,
adjacent to the somatic nuclei of these cranial nerves (Fig. 39.5).
The preganglionic parasympathetic nucleus (often called the
“Edinger–Westphal nucleus”) of the oculomotor nerve (cranial
nerve III) is located within the midbrain. The postganglionic neu-
ron stimulates the iris (pupillary) sphincter and ciliary muscles of
the eye to cause pupillary constriction. Postganglionic fibers from
the facial and glossopharyngeal nerves (cranial nerves VII and IX,
respectively) innervate salivary glands. The parasympathetic
nucleus of the vagus nerve (cranial nerve X) provides efferent
control to the heart, lungs, gastrointestinal tract, liver, pancreas, and
gallbladder.
Table 39.2 Selected effects of sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system transmission.
Organ 	Sympathetic 	Parasympathetic
Action 	Receptor 	Action 	Receptor
Heart
Rate
Contractility
Increase
Increase
β1
β1
Decrease
Decrease
M
M
Blood vessels
Arteries
Veins
Skeletal muscle
Vasoconstriction
Vasoconstriction
Vasodilation
α1
α2
β2
Bronchioles 	Bronchodilation 	β2 	Bronchoconstriction 	M
Salivary glands 	Increase secretion 	α1 	Increase secretion
Gastrointestinal tract 	Relaxation 	α2 	Contraction 	M
Kidney 	Renin secretion 	β1
Ureter 	Contraction 	α1 	Relaxation 	M
Urinary bladder 	Relaxation 	β2 	Contraction 	M
Internal urethral sphincter 	Contraction 	α1 	Relaxation 	M
Uterus 	Contraction 	α1 	Variable
Eye
Iris dilator muscle
Iris sphincter muscle
Ciliary muscle
Contraction (mydriasis)
Relaxation
α1
β2
Contraction (miosis)
Contraction
M
M
Adipose tissue 	Lipolysis 	β1
Sweat glands 	Increase secretion 	α1
Hair follicles 	Contraction (piloerection) 	α1
M, muscarinic.
Source: Adapted from Hall and Hall [4]; Glick [12].

-- 844 of 1450 --

Chapter 39: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Neurologic Disease 	829
The sacral segments of the parasympathetic nervous system
regulate bladder control, the internal urethral sphincter, smooth
rectal muscles, and the reproductive organs. During micturition,
postganglionic parasympathetic neurons cause detrusor muscle
contraction and urethral relaxation for urine voiding.
Preganglionic neurons of the parasympathetic system release
ACh which acts on nicotinic receptors of the postganglionic neurons.
Postganglionic neurons also release ACh but the receptors at the
effector organs are mostly muscarinic.
Physiology of the central nervous system
Brain physiology
Cerebral perfusion pressure and intracranial pressure
According to the Monro–Kellie doctrine, the brain is enclosed in
the rigid structure of the skull and an equilibrium must exist
between the volumes of brain parenchyma, interstitial and CSF
fluid, and arterial/venous blood; therefore, an increase in one com-
ponent or the addition of another (e.g., hematoma, skull fracture,
and 	tumor) 	must 	cause 	a 	decrease 	in 	the 	remaining
components [13,14]. Additionally, an increase in the volume of any
constituent can result in an increase in intracranial pressure (ICP).
Blood and CSF are the main volume buffering components; thus,
initial compensatory mechanisms such as a decrease in cerebral
blood volume (CBV), and/or a shift of CSF from the brain into the
spinal canal, or even absorption of CSF will prevent major increases
in ICP [15]. This stage is often characterized as the compensated
state of increased ICP. While changes in cerebral venous volume
occur rapidly, “spatial compensation” of CSF happens more slowly,
so its ability to mitigate acute increases in ICP is limited [14,16].
Therefore, once these compensatory mechanisms are exhausted,
marked elevations in ICP can occur leading to decreased cerebral
perfusion pressure (CPP), defined as the difference between mean
arterial blood pressure (MAP) and ICP (i.e., CPP = MAP – ICP),
Piloerector m.
Sweat gland
Blood vessel
Paravertebral
Pylorus
Adrenal medulla
Ileocecal
valve
Anal sphincter
Detrusor
Trigone
Celiac
ganglion
Hypogastric
plexus
8
12
5
5
T1
L1
Superior cervical ganglion
I
n
f
e
r i
o r
c e r v i c a l (stella
t
e
)
M
i d d l e c e r v i c al
Ciliary mm. of eye
Pupillary sphincter
Lacrimal gland
Nasal glands
Submandibular
gland
Parotid gland
-Ciliary
Parasymphathetic ganglia:
Parasympathetic	Sympathetic
-Sphenopalatine
-Submandibular
-Otic
III
VII
V
IX
X
1 2 3 4
Figure 39.5 The sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems. Note the distribution of cranial nerves III, VII, V, IX, and X.

-- 845 of 1450 --

830 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
and increased risk of cerebral ischemia [14,15]. Significant increases
in ICP can also result in compression of brain tissue against the
tentorium, falx, and foramen magnum and potential brain hernia-
tion, which is characterized as the decompensated state of increased
ICP [15,16].
Some causes of increased ICP include space-occupying lesions
(i.e., intracranial hemorrhage, hematoma, tumor, abscess), cerebral
edema (i.e., due to head injury, or hypoxic or ischemic encepha-
lopathy), venodilation, and a decrease in venous drainage (i.e.,
head-down position, jugular vein obstruction/compression, and
increased right heart or intrathoracic pressures) [14–17]. In addi-
tion, increased CSF production (i.e., choroid plexus tumor) or
impeded CSF reabsorption or outflow (i.e., flow obstruction by
space-occupying lesions and Chiari malformation) can result in an
increase in CSF volume and ICP [14,15].
As a result of increased ICP, a physiologic response known as the
“Cushing reflex” occurs, which has classically been reported as an
increase in systolic blood pressure, bradycardia, and an irregular
(Cheyne–Stokes) breathing pattern [18–21]; however, subsequent
studies led to refinement of Cushing’s original findings [22].
Initially, both blood pressure and heart rate may rise due to sympa-
thetic activation [22–24] as MAP increases to maintain CPP. Over
time, hypertension persists in the face of elevated ICP, but heart rate
begins to decrease. The mechanism resulting in bradycardia contin-
ues to be debated with some suggesting it is a baroreceptor reflex
while others propose it is a result of intracranial compression of the
vagus nerve [24]. Finally, once the brainstem is compressed and
the respiratory center is compromised by increased ICP, irregular
breathing and even apnea (respiratory arrest) can ensue [24]. The
Cushing reflex has also been recognized in cases of decreased CPP
(< 15 mmHg) in humans [25]. As bradycardia is a late component
of the physiologic response, focusing on this symptom may result in
the patient being subjected to a prolonged period of intracranial
hypertension prior to intervention, resulting in a higher incidence
of complications [25]. Therefore, in the human literature, monitor-
ing for systemic hypertension and tachycardia as potential early
indicators of increased ICP and impaired brain perfusion has been
recommended to facilitate earlier intervention and improved
outcomes [25].
Regulation of cerebral blood flow
The brain is an organ with high metabolic demand. Despite this
high demand for energy substrates (mainly oxygen and glucose) to
maintain homeostasis, extreme fluctuations in cerebral blood flow
(CBF) are not tolerated due to the non-compliant cranium and
meninges. Thus, tight control and regulation of tissue pressure
(i.e., ICP) is required because increases in CBV will lead to increases
in ICP, and vice versa [26,27]. Several key factors contribute to
regulation of CBF including the arterial partial pressure of carbon
dioxide (PaCO2
), MAP, cerebral metabolic rate (CMR), and the
ANS [27]. For simplicity, regulators of CBF may be classified as
chemical, myogenic, and neurogenic factors [26].
Chemical regulation of cerebral blood flow
Chemical regulation involves changes in CMR, PaCO 2
, and arterial
partial pressure of oxygen (PaO 2 ). Increases in neuronal activity
lead to increased CMR, which is directly related to the change in
CBF, a phenomenon known as “flow-metabolism coupling” [26,28].
Flow-metabolism coupling is a complex physiologic process
involving metabolic, glial, neuronal, and vascular factors [26,28].
Local by-products, including potassium ions, hydrogen ions, lactate,
adenosine, and adenosine triphosphate modulate vascular tone and
likely contribute to the mechanism of neurovascular coupling [27,29].
It is thought that neurotransmitters, especially glutamate (released
with increased or excitatory neuronal activity), are the main factors
augmenting activity-induced blood flow due to the release of nitric
oxide leading to cerebral vasodilation [27,28,30]. Oxygen concen-
tration modulates the contribution of different signaling pathways,
and reduced oxygen concentration can lead to adenosine release,
contributing to vasodilation. Additionally, astrocytes also mediate
neurovascular coupling, and nerves innervating cerebral vessels
release neurotransmitters that may also be involved in this process
[26,27,30,31]. The CMR can also be influenced by the functional
state of the nervous system (i.e., awake versus sleep), and can be
extremely high during epileptic activity, for example.
A decrease in temperature will decrease CMR and CBF in ani-
mals [32–34]. More specifically, CMR decreases by 6% per degree
Celsius drop in temperature in dogs [35]. Hypothermia has been
shown to have a consistently beneficial effect on neurologic outcomes
in small and large animals after cardiac arrest [36]. Hyperthermia is
associated with the opposite effect on CMR and CBF [35]. As such,
modest hypothermia or, more importantly, the avoidance of hyper-
thermia may be a consideration in anesthetizing patients with
conditions in which elevations of CMR or CBF may be of concern.
The cerebrovasculature is uniquely and highly sensitive to
changes in PaCO2 [27,31]. An acute decrease in PaCO2 in healthy
animals leads to an increase in cerebral vascular resistance and a
decrease in CBF; conversely, an increase in PaCO2 has the opposite
effect but is of a higher magnitude (Fig. 39.6) [31]. In monkeys, a
linear relationship between both CBV and PaCO 2 and CBF and
PaCO2 was observed when PaCO2 ranged between 15–76 mmHg
[37]. In dogs, a potential maximal cerebral vasodilatory effect
occurred at between 60–70 mmHg; however, cerebrovascular
responsiveness to CO2 seems to vary depending on species, experi-
mental design, anesthetic drugs used, and CO2 levels [38].
Additionally, while a sustained decrease in PaCO2 due to prolonged
hyperventilation (approximately 5–6 h) lowers CBF to some extent,
it may return to baseline values over time because brain interstitial
pH is one of the major regulators of CBF. Brain interstitial pH ini-
tially rises with an acute decrease in PaCO2
, but then falls during
sustained hyperventilation as lactate accumulates and bicarbonate
falls [39–41]. As such, anesthetic management of intracranial
100
80
60
CBF (mL/100 g/min)
 
PaCO 2
MAP
PaO 2
40
20
30 	50 	70 	90 	110 	130
mmHg
150 	170 	190
Figure 39.6 Representation of the effects of arterial partial pressure of
oxygen (PaO 2
), arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2
), and
mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) on cerebral blood flow (CBF).

-- 846 of 1450 --

Chapter 39: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Neurologic Disease 	831
hypertension with modest hyperventilation (discussed later) may
only be employed as a relatively temporary strategy. Furthermore,
because of the metabolic changes associated with a decrease in
PaCO2
, patients subjected to sustained hyperventilation (hypocapnia)
may be at risk of developing intracranial hypertension with restora-
tion of normocapnia as this is accompanied by CSF acidosis,
significant increases in CBF, and ultimately increased ICP. Sustained
hypoventilation (hypercapnia), once corrected to normocapnia,
may result in a significant decrease in CBF, and the patient may,
theoretically, be at risk of ischemia [26]. The change in brain extra-
cellular pH and CBF after acute changes in PaCO 2 happens because
CO 2 diffuses across the BBB [27,31]. However, changes in pH due to
metabolic acidosis (instead of respiratory acidosis) have little effect
on CBF because hydrogen ions do not cross the BBB.
The cerebrovasculature is also sensitive to changes in PaO 2
but only in hypoxic conditions (PaO2 < 60 mmHg) (Fig. 39.6),
leading to cerebral vasodilation and a rapid increase in CBF (but
not CMR) [31]. This sensitivity to PaO 2 is dependent on the PaCO2
level. For instance, hypercapnia increases cerebrovascular sensi-
tivity to hypoxia, and both have synergistic effects, but the vasodi-
latory effect of hypoxia predominates over the vasoconstrictive
effect of hypocapnia [42]. Additionally, the changes in CBF due to
oxygen seem to be related to oxygen content rather than oxygen
tension (PaO 2 ) because decreases in oxygen content from anemia
and hemodilution also result in an increase in CBF [43,44].
The mechanism involved in hypoxia-mediated cerebral vasodila-
tion may involve neurogenic (neuraxial chemoreceptors) and local
humoral factors [26,31].
The impact of hematocrit (i.e., blood viscosity) on CBF is contro-
versial [45]. Anemia results in decreased cerebral vascular resist-
ance and an increase in CBF, but as mentioned above, this response
seems to be related to the decrease in oxygen content [43]. However,
a study in rats demonstrated that increased viscosity decreased
CBF, but only in conditions where CBF was already elevated
(i.e., not in control animals) [46].
Myogenic regulation of cerebral blood flow
Myogenic regulation of CBF is related to the local vascular smooth
muscle response to changes in intraluminal pressure in the cerebro-
vasculature. An increase in MAP leads to an increase in transmural
vessel tension resulting in depolarization of vascular smooth muscle
and a reduction in vascular diameter (i.e., constriction) [27]; con-
versely, vasodilation happens when MAP and transmural tension
decrease [16]. Autoregulation of CBF is classically defined as the
ability of the brain circulation to alter its resistance to maintain
constant CBF within a range of MAP [47]. The lower and upper
limits of CBF autoregulation likely occur at approximately 70 and
150 mmHg, respectively (Fig. 39.6). Above and below this MAP
range, CBF becomes pressure-dependent and will vary linearly with
CPP [26]. There is some controversy in the literature regarding the
lower limit of CBF autoregulation and values ranging from
50–70 mmHg of MAP have been suggested [27,31,48]. The initial
characterization of the lower limit of CBF autoregulation at approx-
imately 50–60 mmHg seems to originate from Lassen’s study in
1959 [47]. One complicating factor is that some authors use CPP
instead of MAP on the x-axis [31], which would naturally bring the
lower limit value down because CPP = MAP – ICP. There is also
significant variation between species as well as the conditions
(awake versus anesthetized) and drugs used during the studies
assessing the limits of cerebral autoregulation [49]; there is certainly
not enough evidence to form conclusions regarding all drugs and
drug combinations used clinically across all species. Furthermore,
significant interindividual variation has been reported [48,49], and
it is not valid to assume that autoregulation of CBF will be preserved
at a MAP as low as 50 mmHg in an individual, in a broader popula-
tion, or every anesthetic situation. In addition, in the normal CNS,
while there is a blood flow reserve that acts as a buffer and protects
against significant reductions in blood flow (i.e., hypotension), this
reserve may be compromised in some clinical situations [48]. As
such, defining the lower threshold of MAP below which a clinical
patient is at substantial risk of ischemic injury is not easy. The
authors prefer to use 70 mmHg as the lower limit of CBF autoregu-
lation for clinical case management (Fig. 39.6).
Newer evidence suggests this topic is much more complex than
commonly presented. Cerebral autoregulation does not always
maintain 	constant 	perfusion 	through 	the 	MAP 	range 	of
70–150 mmHg, but CBF is still directly affected by changes in per-
fusion pressure [31]. CBF is only kept constant (i.e., the “classic”
description of autoregulation) with gradual changes in blood pres-
sure, as in nocturnal MAP changes or changes due to treatment for
hypertension. For rapid changes in blood pressure (i.e., over min-
utes or seconds – such as those happening during surgery), CBF is
more unstable and can undergo large, rapid fluctuations [27]. Slow
changes in blood pressure and their effect on CBF align better with
the “static autoregulation” model, whereas the impact of faster
changes on CBF is more consistent with the “dynamic autoregula-
tion” model [27,31]. Therefore, despite normal autoregulatory
mechanisms, CBF may still vary with changes in blood pressure.
One common misconception is that chronic hypertension leads to
impairment of autoregulation (i.e., that brain vessels may become
dependent on higher MAP to maintain perfusion) but treatment to
lower MAP is not associated with a decrease in CBF [27].
Additionally, the effects of arterial blood gases and blood pres-
sure are interdependent in their regulation of CBF, and it is difficult
to determine the impact of each individual parameter when they
change simultaneously [31]. For instance, dogs with severe hypo-
tension showed no change in CBF following changes in PaCO2
because the vessels had already reached maximal dilation; there-
fore, blood pressure is a critical component of CBF [31,50].
Neurogenic regulation of cerebral blood flow
Neurogenic regulation of CBF contributes to cerebral autoregulation
and can buffer surges in perfusion pressure. The cerebrovasculature
is innervated by adrenergic fibers (with epinephrine, norepinephrine,
dopamine, and neuropeptide Y as transmitters), cholinergic fibers
(with ACh, and vasoactive intestinal peptide as transmitters), and
sensory fibers (with calcitonin gene-related peptide, substance P,
and pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide as transmit-
ters) as part of the sympathetic, parasympathetic, and trigeminal
nervous systems, respectively [27,31]. The exact influence of cere-
bral vasomotor nerves is not well understood. Despite some contro-
versies, the sympathetic nervous system generally prevents increases
in CBF during resting conditions and contributes to autoregulation
of CBF during rapid changes in blood pressure [27]. However, it is
difficult to assess the effects of the sympathetic nervous system in
isolation, as many other confounding variables are usually present.
Cholinergic innervation in the brain can lead to vasodilation and
further release of nitric oxide locally, but it does not seem to play a
major role in autoregulation [27]. The influence of the sympathetic
and parasympathetic nervous systems on CBF control seems to be
species-specific [31], so caution is advised when extrapolating
across species.

-- 847 of 1450 --

832 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
Luxury perfusion
Vasomotor paralysis, which is impaired ability of vessels to respond
to PaCO 2 and perfusion pressure, or a loss of regional CBF autoreg-
ulation can happen in some pathological conditions leading to
inadequate cerebral perfusion and hypoxia (i.e., ischemic stroke
and tumor) [51–53]. Therefore, regional CBF within ischemic areas
may become passively dependent on perfusion pressure, which can
result in excessive blood flow relative to local metabolic demands in
the face of normal or high perfusion pressure, a phenomenon called
“luxury perfusion syndrome” [51,54–56]. Additionally, paradoxical
flow responses can happen in some patients with these pathological
conditions following an increase or decrease in PaCO 2 [51,57].
In the case of decreased cerebral vascular resistance (i.e., increased
PaCO 2 or drugs that cause cerebral vasodilation), blood may be
shunted away from areas of vasomotor paralysis to normal areas of
the brain, a phenomenon called “intracerebral steal syndrome” [51].
On the other hand, an increase in cerebral vascular resistance
(i.e., decreased PaCO 2
) may lead to blood shunting into areas of
vasomotor paralysis, a phenomenon called “inverse intracerebral
steal” or “Robin Hood syndrome,” which could be deleterious to
normal areas of the brain [51,54].
Spinal cord physiology
The spinal cord extends rostrally from the brainstem and ends
caudally within the lumbar or sacral spinal segments, depending
on the species. Each segment of the spinal cord contains a pair
(right and left) of spinal nerves that contain both afferent (sensory)
and efferent (motor) information. Spinal cord blood flow (SCBF) is
maintained via autoregulation when MAP is between 60–150 mmHg
[58]. When MAP falls below 60 mmHg, SCBF is significantly
reduced in dogs. Interestingly, SCBF seems to decrease with dobu-
tamine infusions that increase MAP in healthy horses, which is
concerning as low spinal cord perfusion could predispose the
animal to myelopathy [59,60]. In healthy horses anesthetized with
isoflurane, a significant decrease in SCBF was found with MAP
levels of 100 mmHg, specifically in the thoracolumbar spinal cord
region [60]. Hemodilution increases SCBF if the patient is normo-
tensive; however, in cases of hypotension, there may be increased
risk of ischemia due to limited ability to vasodilate [45]. In situa-
tions of acute blood loss representing approximately 20% of total
blood volume, no changes in SCBF were detected; however, when
tetracaine was administered in the subarachnoid space, a signifi-
cant decrease in SCBF was detected [61].
The response of SCBF to oxygen and carbon dioxide levels is very
similar to that of the brain. Hypoxia significantly increases SCBF
with maximal flow reached at PaO2 levels of 30–40 mmHg [62].
Additionally, hypocapnia decreases SCBF while hypercapnia
increases SCBF, with PaCO2 levels of 85 mmHg resulting in double
the normocapnic SCBF [9,62].
Studies evaluating the relationship between CSF and SCBF
revealed no significant change in blood flow with changes in the
volume of CSF; however, elevations in CSF pressure significantly
reduced SCBF [63].
Effects of vasoactive drugs, sedatives,
and anesthetics
Vasoactive drugs
Most drugs used to decrease blood pressure (i.e., sodium nitroprus-
side and calcium channel blockers) lead to cerebral vasodilation
but CBF may increase or be maintained [64–66]. The effects of
catecholamine agonists and antagonists on cerebral physiology
depend on baseline blood pressure, the magnitude of changes in
blood pressure, autoregulation, and the status of the BBB [26]. In
general, in cases where autoregulation is preserved but baseline
blood pressure is outside autoregulatory limits, drug-induced
increases in blood pressure will typically increase CBF. If baseline
blood pressure is within the limits of autoregulation, drug-induced
increases in blood pressure may not significantly change CBF
because of activation of normal autoregulatory mechanisms [26].
There is also significant variation in drug effects on CBF (in various
species) reported in the literature. Differences in study methodology
undoubtedly contribute to this variation and should be taken into
consideration when reviewing studies and interpreting their results.
Like anesthetics, the effect of vasoactive agents may be species-
dependent. Use of phenylephrine does not seem to change CBF
or ICP in dogs but can increase CBF in rats, rabbits, and lambs
[64,67–73]. Use of norepinephrine and epinephrine resulted in no
significant change in CBF, ICP, and cerebral oxygen utilization, but
dopamine caused an increase in all these parameters in sheep [74].
However, CBF was not changed after dopamine administration in
young rabbits and monkeys [71]. Additionally, the effect of epineph-
rine and norepinephrine on CBF and cerebral metabolic rate of
oxygen (CMRO2
) was dependent on the status of the BBB in dogs,
where no change was noted with an intact BBB but increases in CBF
and CMRO 2 were observed with increased BBB permeability [75].
The effects of β-adrenergic agonists seem to be dose- and species-
dependent. At clinically relevant doses, dobutamine and dopamine
do not seem to change CBF and CMRO2 in monkeys but cause a
dose- dependent decrease in CBF in dogs [76,77].
Sedatives and anesthetics
Anesthetic and sedative drugs can negatively interfere with CBF,
CMR, and the electrophysiology of the brain; therefore, knowledge
of these effects and how to modify them to improve clinical
outcomes is crucial for better patient care. Typically, CBF and
CBV vary in parallel; however, there are some clinical situations
(i.e., cerebral ischemia) where they can change independently [78].
Furthermore, there are some cases where the magnitude of change
in CBF may be less than that of CBV [79]. Most acute anesthetic-
induced changes in ICP occur due to changes in CBV [80]. Thus, it
is important to note that anesthetic-mediated CBF changes do not
necessarily predict their impact on ICP because they may not be
accompanied by similar changes in CBV [80,81]. Ideally, under-
standing drug-related impacts on CPP is more important than
potential isolated changes in CBF and ICP. Generally, most anes-
thetic drugs cause decreases in CBF and CMR, and autoregulation
and CO2 responsiveness are maintained with injectable anesthetics.
Opioids
Usually, the direct effects of opioids on CBF, CMRO2
, CBV, and ICP
are minimal and CO 2 responsiveness is typically preserved [82–84].
Most opioids cause a decrease in CBF and CBV and a decrease or no
change in ICP [79,82,85–87]. However, there are conflicting results
in the literature regarding the effects of some opioids, such as sufen-
tanil and remifentanil. Some studies involving sufentanil demon-
strate a transient increase in CBF and CMRO2
, but minimal effects
or a decrease in ICP [88]; others describe a decrease or no change
in CBF and CMRO 2 with no change in ICP in veterinary species
[82,86]. In humans, a dose-dependent increase in regional CBF has
been shown with remifentanil [89]. The type of anesthetic protocol
or the lack of general anesthesia (e.g., use of opioid alone or opioid

-- 848 of 1450 --

Chapter 39: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Neurologic Disease 	833
with nitrous oxide only) may have contributed to some of this
variation and, in general, sufentanil and remifentanil are not
considered contraindicated in neuroanesthesia.
Nonetheless, indirect increases in ICP due to hypoventilation
and hypercapnia associated with opioid administration need to be
prevented in certain clinical neurological patients (i.e., traumatic
brain injury and space-occupying brain lesions). Sudden decreases
in MAP that may accompany bolus doses of potent opioids in
certain species should also be prevented or corrected as they may
be associated with transient reductions in CPP and increases
in ICP [90].
In addition, the systemic effects that may accompany administra-
tion of some opioids can have adverse impacts on the CNS. For
instance, histamine release associated with administration of mor-
phine or meperidine can result in cerebral vasodilation and an
increase in CBV and ICP, while vomiting associated with initial
administration of morphine or hydromorphone may lead to an
increase in ICP.
α2 - Adrenergic receptor agonists
Xylazine produces a dose-dependent and transient decrease in ICP
in dogs with increased ICP due to subarachnoid hemorrhage [69].
Xylazine did not change ICP in horses anesthetized with pentobar-
bital [91], and decreased ICP in conscious horses [92]. A more
recent study with normocapnic, healthy horses anesthetized with
isoflurane and lidocaine constant rate infusion demonstrated a
decrease in ICP and an increase in CPP following xylazine bolus
administration but no change in ICP following administration of
xylazine in conscious horses [93]. Lowering the head is a common
characteristic of sedation with α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists;
however, head height does not seem to correlate with ICP in the
conscious horse, likely due to active compensatory changes in cer-
ebral vascular resistance to maintain CBV and CBF [94]. In general,
one should prevent lowering of the head in anesthetized animals
because anesthetic drugs may impair normal physiologic regulation.
Lowering of the head below the level of the heart in the anesthetized
horse was associated with a significant increase in ICP and a
decrease in CBF, which could potentially predispose the animal to
ischemia; spinal cord blood flow values were very low, but unaf-
fected by head-down positioning in anesthetized horses [17].
Dexmedetomidine has been shown to decrease CBF with little to
no effect on CMRO2 in isoflurane-anesthetized dogs [95,96]. This
decrease in CBF is likely related to α2
- adrenergic receptor-mediated
vasoconstriction of cerebral vessels [95] and decreased cerebral
metabolism associated with reduced brain activity [97]. In healthy
piglets anesthetized with propofol–remifentanil total intravenous
anesthesia (TIVA), the addition of dexmedetomidine resulted in a
significant decrease in cerebral oxygenation when blood pressure
was low, but cerebral perfusion and oxygenation were not affected
when blood pressure was normal [98], again demonstrating the
importance of blood pressure on cerebral dynamics. In dogs anes-
thetized with isoflurane, no change in ICP and an increase in CPP
was reported following medetomidine administration [99].
The effects of α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists on CBF, CBV, ICP,
or CPP in animals with different underlying neurologic diseases
have not been well studied, but based on data from healthy animals,
their use seems reasonable. However, reversal with the α2
-adrenergic
receptor antagonist tolazoline has been shown to increase CBF and
ICP [69]; therefore, in situations where increased ICP is a concern,
α2 - adrenergic receptor agonists should be used with caution as
reversal of sedation may impact ICP.
Phenothiazines
The use of acepromazine in dogs with a history of seizures or those
prone to seizures (e.g., myelography) is controversial. Despite older
literature suggesting acepromazine is contraindicated in these
patients, recent studies using clinical doses of acepromazine in dogs
indicate no increased seizure risk [100–102]. However, the drug can
increase CBV (35–56% above control) in dogs [103], so its use
should be avoided in patients with high ICP. As with all anesthetic
agents, hemodynamic effects (i.e., vasodilation and hypotension)
are possible so blood pressure should be monitored, and hypoten-
sion treated to maintain MAP within a range consistent with physi-
ologic cerebral autoregulation.
Benzodiazepines
In general, benzodiazepines are considered to be safe agents with
few hemodynamic effects. At clinically relevant doses, midazolam
and diazepam decrease CBF (approximately 50–60% below control)
and EEG activity, and CMRO 2 either decreases or remains
unchanged depending on the species [87,104,105]. In a hypoxic
model in dogs, midazolam provided greater neuroprotection than
diazepam but less than pentobarbital [104].
The effects of the benzodiazepine antagonist flumazenil on CBF
and CMRO2 are transient (lasting only between 15–30 min) and
dose- dependent when administered following midazolam in
dogs [105]. At low doses (0.0025 mg/kg), administration resulted in
an increase in CSF pressure and reversal of the reduction in EEG
activity and CMRO2 produced by midazolam; while administration
of higher doses (0.01–0.16 mg/kg) resulted in decreased cerebral
vascular resistance, an increase in CBF and CSF pressure, but no
change in CPP [105]. Much higher doses of flumazenil (1 mg/kg)
can result in a more profound increase in CBF and ICP and a
decrease in MAP in dogs [106]. Use of flumazenil alone (i.e., inde-
pendent of midazolam) or in dogs that received midazolam but also
had high CSF pressure did not result in the changes noted
above [105]. In humans sedated with midazolam with traumatic
brain injury and poorly controlled ICP, flumazenil resulted in a
marked increase in ICP and a decrease in CPP [107]. Therefore,
flumazenil should be used with caution in patients for whom
increased ICP would be detrimental.
Lidocaine
Lidocaine administration results in dose-dependent decreases
in EEG activity and CMRO2 [108]. At a clinically relevant dose
(3 mg/kg), it has minimal effect on CBF and cerebral vascular
resistance and induces only a transient decrease in CMRO2 [108].
A lidocaine bolus can be used as an adjunct treatment to prevent
an acute increase in ICP during craniotomy and endotracheal tube
suctioning [109,110]. A cough reflex during endotracheal intuba-
tion may result in increased ICP [111]. In dogs, topical lidocaine
(0.4 mg/kg) applied to the larynx was insufficient to prevent the
cough reflex, but IV lidocaine (1.5–2 mg/kg) was effective [112–114];
however, IV fentanyl was superior to IV lidocaine for cough reflex
suppression [113]. In cats, an IV fentanyl bolus associated with topi-
cal laryngeal lidocaine application was more effective at decreasing
the cough reflex than topical lidocaine alone [115]. Despite the
cough-suppressing effect of lidocaine, a study in humans showed
that IV lidocaine was unable to completely prevent the increase
in ICP associated with endotracheal intubation in neurosurgical
patients [116].
Pretreatment with lidocaine has been shown to attenuate acute
hypertension and an increase in ICP, as well as increase the recovery

-- 849 of 1450 --

834 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
of neural function after acute cerebral ischemia induced by air
embolism in cats [117]. Intravenous lidocaine has also been shown
to have beneficial effects on cortical ischemia and electrophysiologic
activity in injured feline brains [118,119]. Careful attention to the
dose of lidocaine, with cautious consideration of species differences,
is necessary to avoid systemic toxicity and associated detrimental
CNS effects (i.e., seizures) [108].
Barbiturates
Barbiturates cause a decrease in CBF, CMRO2
, and ICP, and maintain
cerebrovascular reactivity to CO2
, but ventilation should be con-
trolled in patients where increases in ICP are contraindicated due to
the potential for hypoventilation/apnea leading to hypercapnia
and increased ICP [26,120–122]. Additionally, the anticonvulsant
properties of thiobarbiturates are potentially beneficial in epileptics
or in patients undergoing procedures such as myelography where
seizures are a possible complication [120]. However, barbiturate
anesthesia is commonly associated with longer recoveries from
anesthesia compared to other agents such as propofol, which may
be problematic in neurosurgical patients as it may significantly
delay postoperative neurologic evaluations.
Propofol
Propofol administration results in decreased EEG activity, CBF,
CMRO2
, and ICP, while maintaining cerebrovascular reactivity to
CO 2 similar to barbiturates [70,123–125]. However, at very high
infusion rates (0.8 mg/kg/min), propofol can result in decreased
CPP in dogs [70]. The decreased CBF and cerebrovascular reactiv-
ity to CO2 during a hypocapnic challenge from propofol was not
statistically significant when compared to isoflurane anesthesia in
dogs, though the authors suggested this could be due to small sam-
ple size [126]. In humans, a propofol bolus before endotracheal tube
suctioning in patients with severe brain disease reduced the cough
response, reduced the intracranial hypertensive response, and
improved long-term prognosis [127].
Propofol can cause myoclonus in dogs which may be related to its
antagonist actions at glycine receptors in the spinal cord and brain-
stem [128]. Propofol has been shown to be effective at managing
seizures following surgical treatment of portosystemic shunts and
may be effective at controlling status epilepticus resistant to con-
ventional therapy (i.e., benzodiazepines and barbiturates) in dogs
and cats [129,130].
The effect of different intravenous anesthetics including propofol
(as well as methohexital and ketamine) in two feline models of
brain edema revealed that all drugs studied were effective at
decreasing ICP in a space-occupying lesion model (mimicking
vasogenic brain edema), likely because a large volume of brain tis-
sue was still viable and the drug-induced decrease in CMRO2
resulted in vasoconstriction and a decrease in ICP [131]. However,
administration using a different model, cytotoxic brain edema with
diffuse intracellular damage, resulted in no drug-induced change in
ICP, likely because autoregulation of the cerebral vasculature was
impaired in this model.
Alfaxalone
Alfaxalone was previously manufactured in a formulation contain-
ing alfadolone in Cremophor EL®, and its use was discontinued
due to severe side effects. Most of the studies in the literature asso-
ciated with cerebral metabolism and dynamics involve this previ-
ous formulation and show decreases in CBF, CMRO 2
, and ICP
while maintaining cerebrovascular reactivity to CO 2 [111,132,133].
More recent studies using the current formulation of alfaxalone
(in cyclodextrin) also show a decrease in CBF [126,134]. The CBF
was significantly lower following alfaxalone total intravenous anes-
thesia (TIVA) when compared to anesthesia with isoflurane [126].
Additionally, alfaxalone TIVA was associated with greater cerebro-
vascular reactivity to CO2 during hypocapnic challenge compared
to isoflurane and propofol, which could represent an advantage
when adjustments in ventilation to decrease CO 2 are performed
under anesthesia in patients with increased ICP [126].
Etomidate
Etomidate administration results in significant decreases in CBF,
CMRO2 , and ICP, and maintenance of cerebrovascular reactivity
to CO 2 [132,135,136]. The cerebral metabolic effects (e.g., decreased
CMRO2 ) of etomidate are secondary to its effects on neuronal
function, like many other anesthetics including thiopental and
isoflurane [135,137,138]. In addition, etomidate seems to be a
potent direct cerebral vasoconstrictor, independent of its effect on
CMRO 2 [135].
Etomidate has the advantage of providing good hemodynamic
stability, seems to preserve the cerebral metabolic state even in
the face of hypotension [139], and is effective in decreasing ICP
with minimal change in CPP in patients with intracranial space-
occupying lesions and traumatic brain injury [132,140].
Myoclonus that may be observed during etomidate induction is
not associated with epileptiform activity on EEG in humans [141].
However, etomidate should be avoided in epileptic patients because
it can precipitate EEG epileptic activity in humans [142]. Furthermore,
myoclonus in some species may resemble retching, theoretically
leading to an increase in ICP. Co-administration with agents such
as benzodiazepines may prevent or attenuate these effects.
Ketamine
Compared to other intravenous anesthetics, ketamine produces
unique effects in various body systems (e.g., stimulation of the
cardiovascular system and minimal respiratory depression), and its
effects on cerebral metabolism and hemodynamics are no excep-
tion. Ketamine can cause increases in CBF, CMRO2
, and ICP but
autoregulation seems to be maintained and CO2 responsiveness
preserved [143–145]; however, its effects are not necessarily
straightforward. Increased CBF and ICP have only been demon-
strated in spontaneously ventilating animals; in animals where
ventilation was controlled, decreased CBF and variable effects
on CMRO2 (either decreased or increased) have been observed
[146–148]. In addition, when compared to other intravenous anes-
thetics such as alfaxalone, ketamine resulted in significantly higher
CBF in monkeys [134]. In healthy dogs, ketamine was reported to
increase CBF in some areas of the brain (parietal, occipital, and
thalamic regions) but not in others (frontal cortex) [149]; however,
increases and decreases in different brain regions have been reported
in various studies with different doses of ketamine in both dogs
and cats [150,151]. Regardless, potential increases in CMRO 2 and
decreases in CBF (i.e., dissociation of cerebral oxygen demand
and supply) could increase the risk of cerebral ischemia [152].
Despite the controversy in the literature regarding the impact of
ketamine on brain physiology and dynamics; some authors dis-
courage its use in patients with a history of seizures and patients
with space-occupying lesions, closed-head traumatic injuries, and
other conditions associated with high ICP [153]. However, a retro-
spective study in humans with increased ICP showed that use of
ketamine in these patients was associated with lower mortality rates

-- 850 of 1450 --

Chapter 39: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Neurologic Disease 	835
compared to etomidate and midazolam, and the authors suggested
that its use should be considered in these patients without concern
for worsening outcomes [154]. The combination of drugs that
depress cerebral metabolism, such as midazolam or thiopental,
with ketamine, prevented the increase in CBF, CMRO 2
, and ICP but
did not change ketamine’s effect on MAP or the EEG [143,152].
Additionally, subanesthetic doses of ketamine (2 mg/kg) did not
have any significant effects on CBF, CMRO 2 , or the EEG in mechan-
ically ventilated pigs [147] and were associated with decreased ICP
and increased CPP in a feline space-occupying lesion model of
brain edema [131]. Ketamine has neuroprotective properties and its
use in combination with other sedatives has recently been proposed
as a safe and effective protocol for sedation/anesthesia and analgesia in
neurocritical human patients (e.g., traumatic brain injury) [155,156].
EEG activity increases following ketamine administration [157].
Seizure-like activity has been reported when ketamine was used in
sedation/anesthetic protocols in dogs; however, it was not possible
to rule out other causes for this abnormal activity [158,159].
Conversely, in cats, ketamine did not induce convulsant activity but
had mild antiepileptic effects instead [157]. In fact, ketamine has
been reported as a treatment for status epilepticus and cluster
seizures in veterinary patients [160–162].
Inhalation anesthetics
Inhalation anesthetics generally result in dose-dependent decreases
in CMR, however, the net effect on CBF is a balance between
decreases caused by reduced CMR and increases due to direct cer-
ebral vasodilation. This varies depending on the inhalant anesthetic
used and the concentration delivered. Typically, with isoflurane,
there is minimal effect on CBF if the inhalant concentration
remains at or below the minimum alveolar concentration (MAC);
at concentrations above 1 MAC, vasodilatory effects predominate
and CBF may increase or remain unchanged despite CMR
decreases [163–166]. Additionally, inhalation anesthetics cause a
dose- dependent decrease in MAP and CPP in dogs, cats, and horses
[166–169]. The CO 2 responsiveness of the cerebral circulation
is preserved or enhanced with inhalant anesthetics [38,170]. The
addition of nitrous oxide to other inhalant anesthetics produces an
increase in CBF and ICP and either no change or an increase in
CMRO2 in animals [171–173].
The effect on ICP is variable depending on the inhalant anesthetic
used. Enflurane above 1 MAC produced EEG and motor evidence
of seizure activity [163]. In dogs, halothane and enflurane at
approximately 1 MAC increased CBV and ICP for over 3 h [174].
On the other hand, isoflurane at approximately 1 MAC also
increased CBV for over 3 h, but the increase in ICP was short-lived
(approximately 20 min) [79]. Additionally, in an intracranial mass
model in dogs, the CSF pressure-lowering effect of 4 h of hypocap-
nia was sustained with isoflurane but not with halothane or enflu-
rane [175]. Desflurane resulted in greater increases in CSF pressure
and CBF when compared to isoflurane during normocapnia
[176,177]. In a study comparing isoflurane and sevoflurane at dif-
ferent MAC multiples (1, 1.5, and 2 MAC) in normocapnic healthy
dogs, ICP did not change significantly at different MAC multiples
and was similar between the inhalants; however, at higher concen-
trations (2 MAC), CPP was better maintained with sevoflurane
compared to isoflurane [178]. Conversely, in rats with diffuse
brain injury, sevoflurane anesthesia resulted in higher ICP and
lower CPP values when compared to isoflurane [179]. Therefore,
isoflurane or sevoflurane may be better inhalant choices for patients
at risk of intracranial hypertension, but when ICP is persistently
increased, inhalation anesthetics should be replaced by intravenous
anesthetics [180]. Injectable anesthetics, such as propofol, preserve
autoregulation better when compared to inhalants (including
isoflurane, sevoflurane, and desflurane) [181,182]. Additionally,
when isoflurane anesthesia was compared to propofol TIVA in dogs
with intracranial disease, propofol anesthesia resulted in higher
MAP (and potentially higher CPP), decreased requirements for
dopamine, and better recovery quality [183].
Neuromuscular blocking agents
Nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents generally have
minimal direct effects on the CNS, although indirect effects may
occur. Laudanosine, a metabolite of atracurium, may be epilepto-
genic and is likely linked to the EEG evidence of cerebral arousal
noted in dogs following high dose of atracurium (1–2.5 mg/kg IV);
however, this cerebral stimulation was not accompanied by increases
in CBF, CMRO 2
, and ICP [184]. Atracurium has the potential to
stimulate histamine release and could, theoretically, decrease CPP
due to decreased MAP or increased ICP; however, this has not been
demonstrated in the literature [184,185]. Pancuronium, vecuronium,
and atracurium administration to anesthetized animals resulted in
no change in CBF, CMRO2
, ICP, and CPP [184,186,187]. Similarly,
rocuronium and vecuronium were not associated with changes in
ICP or CPP in human neurosurgical patients [188].
Depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents, such as succinyl-
choline and suxamethonium, can increase ICP due to muscle
fasciculations leading to increased CBF and CBV [187,189,190];
therefore, their use is contraindicated in patients at risk of intracra-
nial hypertension.
Pathophysiology and anesthetic management
of specific neurological conditions
Central nervous system conditions
Intracranial hypertension
Several neurological conditions including intracranial tumors, trau-
matic brain injury (TBI), meningoencephalitis, and hemorrhage can
present with intracranial hypertension or high ICP [191–195], and
restoration and maintenance of normal ICP and CPP are crucial to
improving outcomes [194,196]. A comprehensive discussion of the
prognostics, signs, and management of these patients is beyond the
scope of this chapter; however, the reader can find recent publica-
tions on these subjects elsewhere [193,194,197–199]. Anesthesia for
imaging and/or surgery is required for many of these patients. It is
important to note any changes in a patient’s neurological status
before anesthesia that may be indicative of increased ICP including
mentation (i.e., obtunded, stuporous, or comatose), brainstem
reflexes (i.e., abnormal pupillary light reflex with or without other
cranial nerve deficits), and gait abnormalities including opisthotonos
postures [3]. In addition, it is important to note cardiopulmonary
status in general (i.e., potential neurogenic pulmonary edema and
cardiovascular instability/arrhythmias) and measure preanesthetic
arterial blood pressure [197,200]. Often, but not always, patients
with intracranial hypertension will present with systemic hyperten-
sion (i.e., Cushing reflex, discussed earlier), which is a compensa-
tory mechanism to maintain CPP. Cerebral herniation may be
detected on magnetic resonance imaging and may occur at one of
several locations (foramen magnum, subfalcine, and rostral and
caudal transtentorial) or via a skull defect (Fig. 39.2B) [201].
Guidelines for managing blood pressure in anesthetized patients
with intracranial hypertension are scarce in the literature, especially

-- 851 of 1450 --

836 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
in veterinary medicine. In human patients following acute CNS
injury (i.e., TBI) or those with intracranial masses, it is recommended
to maintain CPP and MAP at normal or high-normal levels because
CBF may be low in certain regions of the brain and the autoregula-
tory response to hypotension may not be preserved in all areas [180].
Therefore, even MAP values in the range of 60–70 mmHg may
predispose these patients to cerebral ischemia, and higher blood
pressures may be required to ensure appropriate cerebral perfu-
sion [202–204]. On the other hand, arterial hypertension could pre-
dispose the patient to increased ICP, potential cerebral edema, and
in cases of intracranial procedures, hemorrhage in the perioperative
period [205–207].
Hypercapnia causes an increase in CBF, CBV, and ICP [37,38,
91,168]. Therefore, controlled ventilation of patients with high ICP
(to achieve low-normal PaCO 2 between 35 and 40 mmHg) is
important and should be instituted immediately after induction of
anesthesia and continued until extubation to prevent hypercapnia
and further increases in ICP with potential decreased CPP during
anesthesia. Controlled ventilation can be a useful tool to manage
ICP in patients with intracranial hypertension. Hyperventilation
(i.e., hypocapnia) can decrease CBF and ICP and help reduce acute
brain swelling, as well as prevent herniation or reduce brain bulk to
facilitate surgical access [153,180]. However, the use of hyperventi-
lation remains controversial, especially in hypotensive patients and
those with pathological brain conditions associated with inadequate
perfusion and hypoxia (i.e., ischemic stroke, tumor, and TBI).
Hyperventilation and hypocapnia can lead to increased cerebral
vascular resistance which may result in shunting of blood from
normal areas of the brain to affected areas (i.e., areas of vasomotor
paralysis); this is known as “inverse intracerebral steal” (discussed
earlier) and could potentially lead to ischemia of normal areas of
the brain [51,54,57,208]. Additionally, hyperventilation cannot
result in a sustained decrease in CBF as brain interstitial pH drops
during prolonged hyperventilation (5–6 h) due to increasing lactate
and decreasing bicarbonate levels, leading to a return of CBF to
baseline [39–41]. Furthermore, periods of sustained hyperventila-
tion may put the patient at risk of a significant increase in ICP upon
restoration of normocapnia, and the increase in PaCO2 should be
allowed to happen very gradually [180].
Along with preventing hypercapnia and maintaining adequate
blood pressure (i.e., avoiding both hypotension and hypertension),
other important strategies in patients with elevated ICP include
avoiding increases in CBF associated with inadequate oxygenation/
hypoxia which may exacerbate intracranial hypertension (Fig. 39.6).
Patients should be preoxygenated before induction of anesthesia
and administered oxygen supplementation post-extubation as
needed. In addition, mechanical increases in ICP should be avoided
through careful handling, positioning, and perianesthetic manage-
ment. This includes positioning the head above the heart, avoiding
flexion or rotation of the neck, avoiding pressure on the neck (e.g.,
neck leads or jugular venous occlusion), avoiding excessive positive
end-expiratory pressure during controlled ventilation, preventing
vomiting (after premedication and during recovery from anesthesia),
preventing coughing (during intubation, suctioning of airway,
and extubation), and providing a smooth anesthetic recovery
overall [14,17,42,111,197].
As discussed previously, most sedatives and injectable anesthetics
will contribute to decreases in CBF and ICP. In general, premedica-
tion with a non-emetogenic opioid and benzodiazepine is consid-
ered the safest option. There is some controversy regarding the use
of α2 - adrenergic receptor agonists in this patient population due to
their cardiovascular effects (i.e., bradycardia, hypertension, and
decreased cardiac output) [95,204,209]. However, dexmedetomi-
dine seems to have neuroprotective effects [210,211] and appears to
be safe in human neurocritical patients, including those with TBI
[212–214]. In dogs, dexmedetomidine has also been administered
during intracranial surgeries and resulted in similar outcomes
compared to opioid-based protocols [215]; however, further inves-
tigation in veterinary patients with high ICP is warranted.
For induction of anesthesia, the use of propofol is considered
safe in patients with high ICP; however, doses should be carefully
titrated to avoid hypotension, minimize respiratory depression,
and prevent prolonged recoveries, especially if propofol is used for
TIVA in cats [216]. While etomidate provides excellent cardiovas-
cular stability, it may cause cortisol suppression and potentially
induce myoclonus, nausea, and vomiting [217], which are undesirable
in this population of patients. Etomidate administration has also
been shown to increase the risk of cerebral hypoxia in the setting of
cerebral ischemia [218], so other options for induction of anesthe-
sia are recommended in such patients. Information on cerebral
dynamics following alfaxalone (with cyclodextrin) administration
is scarce. In a study involving healthy dogs, alfaxalone TIVA resulted
in similar CBF values to propofol TIVA and better-maintained CO2
responsiveness to hypocapnia [126]. However, further investigation
is required before alfaxalone can be recommended in veterinary
patients with high ICP. The use of ketamine remains controversial,
as described in the previous section. While not historically recom-
mended for use in this patient population, recent studies in humans
with neurological conditions causing high ICP (i.e., TBI) suggest
ketamine may be appropriate when combined with other sedatives/
anesthetics because of its positive cardiopulmonary effects, mini-
mal effect on ICP, and positive effect on CPP [155,156,209].
While more studies in veterinary medicine involving neurocritical
patients are warranted, subanesthetic doses of ketamine appear to
be safe [131,147,209].
Avoiding or minimizing agents that increase ICP and decrease
CPP (i.e., inhalation anesthetics) is advisable in patients with per-
sistently increased ICP (i.e., patients with large intracranial tumors
or signs of brain herniation and TBI patients with an expanding
mass lesion), and the use of TIVA for maintenance of anesthesia is
preferable. Administration of an IV lidocaine bolus (topical lido-
caine in cats) or IV fentanyl bolus prior to endotracheal intubation
to prevent coughing should be considered [112–115]. In addition,
the use of IV lidocaine as an adjunct intraoperatively has been
shown to prevent acute increases in ICP during craniotomy and has
other beneficial effects in models of cerebral ischemia [109,117–119].
Even though some analgesics, such as opioids, can cause respiratory
depression (hypercapnia) and an increase in ICP, it is important to
recognize that pain itself can contribute to increases in CBF and
potentially ICP, and analgesics such as opioids can attenuate this
effect [219]. Therefore, analgesics should not be withheld in painful
patients (i.e., TBI) and should be administered to those undergoing
painful procedures such as craniotomies.
Patient monitoring is critical as hypoventilation and/or hypoten-
sion resulting from the use of sedatives, analgesics, or injectable and
inhalation anesthetics could lead to further increases in ICP and
decreases in CPP [82,90,98]. Overall, use of short-acting drugs and/
or low, titrated doses in a balanced anesthetic technique is recom-
mended because some of these patients, especially those undergoing
long procedures such as craniotomies, may experience prolonged
recoveries and the antagonism of sedative agents (i.e., α2
- adrenergic
receptor agonists and benzodiazepines) may precipitate an increase

-- 852 of 1450 --

Chapter 39: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Neurologic Disease 	837
in ICP and a decrease in CPP [69,105–107]. Even if seizures were
not previously reported, it is important to monitor for signs of
seizure activity; patients with TBI, intracranial neoplasia, or any
intracranial disease process affecting the prosencephalon may
develop seizure activity in the perianesthetic period.
Diligent monitoring of patients with suspected or confirmed
intracranial hypertension during general anesthesia is essential, and
should include body temperature, electrocardiography, capnogra-
phy, pulse oximetry, and ideally invasive blood pressure and arterial
blood gases (PaCO2 and PaO2 ). Intravenous fluid administration to
maintain euvolemia is advisable but excessive fluid administration
(leading to increased central venous pressure, decreased venous
outflow, and potentially increased ICP and decreased CPP) and use
of fluids that reduce serum osmolarity should be avoided due to the
potential risk of cerebral edema [14,220]. In the case of intraopera-
tive hemorrhage requiring administration of large fluid volumes
(e.g., during a craniotomy), the combination of crystalloids with
colloids or blood products may be appropriate [180].
Hyperosmolar therapy with mannitol or hypertonic saline is the
primary tool for pharmacologic management of acute elevations
in ICP (e.g., TBI, edema secondary to tumor, or intracerebral hem-
orrhage). These osmotic agents decrease brain tissue volume by
removing free water from normal brain tissue [194,195]. Mannitol
can have several undesirable side effects including diuresis and
volume depletion, hypotension, electrolyte disturbances (transient
decreases in sodium and chloride, and increases in potassium), and
rebound cerebral edema. With repeated mannitol use, serum osmo-
lality should be monitored and maintained at or below 320 mOsm/L,
and its use should be avoided in patients with renal disease (due to
potential risk of acute renal failure), congestive heart failure, and
hypovolemia [194,195,221,222]. The ICP lowering dose of mannitol
is 0.5 to 1 g/kg over 10–20 min and no more than three boluses
should be administered in a 24-h period to minimize side
effects [195,222]. As mannitol may crystallize at room temperature,
crystalized preparations should be warmed to approximately 37 °C
(99 °F) and administered using an in-line filter or by using filter
needles [222].
Hypertonic saline is another hyperosmolar treatment option
with several advantages over mannitol including increased
MAP and CPP, enhanced microcirculation, and anti-inflammatory
effects [194,197]. However, it can also be associated with undesirable
side effects including electrolyte disturbances (sustained hyperna-
tremia and hyperchloremia), rebound cerebral edema, and hyper-
chloremic metabolic acidosis [194,195,221]. It should be avoided in
patients with congestive heart failure and renal failure [194,195].
The recommended dose of hypertonic saline is 4 mL/kg (7.2%) or
5.4 mL/kg (3%) over 15–20 min [195,204]. Comparison of these
two hyperosmolar agents for treatment of intracranial hypertension
in humans yielded mixed results regarding efficacy with no signifi-
cant difference in clinical neurological outcome between treatments
[223–226]. In summary, there is no consensus in the literature
regarding which hyperosmolar agent is the best choice in this
patient population, but hypertonic saline is usually recommended
over mannitol in hypovolemic patients [195,197,222,227]. In any
case, careful monitoring of volume status, electrolytes, and acid–
base parameters should be performed when using hyperosmolar
agents [197,221].
The use of steroids in patients with TBI has been associated with
increased mortality and is not recommended in this population
[197,228]. Steroids, however, can limit the formation of cerebral
edema and attenuate ICP increases in patients with intracranial
tumors and are indicated for this purpose, including in the periop-
erative period (i.e., during craniotomies) [229–231].
Seizures
Generalized seizure activity is associated with a marked increase in
CBF and CMR, with systemic and cerebral acidosis and potential
decreases in PaO2 and increases in PaCO2 and ICP [232–234].
While idiopathic epilepsy is the most common cause of seizures in
dogs, other etiologies including structural epilepsy and reactive
seizures are possible [235]. Structural epilepsy includes neoplasia,
infectious and immune-mediated disease, TBI, congenital malfor-
mations, vascular lesions (strokes), and degenerative diseases.
Reactive seizures include toxin ingestion, nutritional deficits, and
metabolic derangements. A comprehensive review of etiopathogen-
esis, treatment, and prognosis of patients with seizures is beyond
the scope of this chapter, but recent publications on these subjects
are available elsewhere [199,235–238].
Anesthesia for diagnostic imaging and/or surgery may be
required for patients with a history of seizures. While seizures can
happen at any point in the perianesthetic period, they are uncommon
during the maintenance phase of anesthesia [239,240]. It is impor-
tant to know which antiepileptic drugs the patient is receiving
before anesthesia and continue these medications in the perianes-
thetic period. Some older-generation antiepileptic drugs, such as
phenytoin, phenobarbital, and primidone, have important drug
interactions relevant to the anesthetist including the induction of
cytochrome P450 enzymes, but that is not the case for the newer
antiepileptic drugs, gabapentin and levetiracetam [240]. In addition
to understanding potential drug interactions, it is also important to
know the anticonvulsant properties of sedatives and anesthetics and
take this into account when designing anesthetic protocols for these
patients. Benzodiazepines, barbiturates, and propofol are safe drugs
to use in patients with a history of seizures, and they can be used
to treat status epilepticus [129,130,241]. As discussed earlier,
acepromazine use remains controversial in patients with a seizure
history, though it is generally considered to be safe. Many opioids
are associated with reports of myoclonus and/or seizures, especially
alfentanil [242–245]. Alfaxalone can produce myoclonus, but it has
been shown to have anticonvulsant effects [246,247]. Etomidate
should probably be avoided in patients with a history of seizures,
especially in epileptic patients [142,241]. The use of ketamine is
controversial, but in general, its use in patients with seizures appears
to be safe, and it can be used to treat status epilepticus and cluster
seizures [157,160–162]. Regarding inhalation anesthetics precipi-
tating seizure activity, enflurane has been most commonly impli-
cated [163]; however, seizure activity in humans has also been
reported following anesthesia with sevoflurane [248,249]. Thus,
isoflurane is probably the best choice of inhalation anesthetic in
patients with a history of seizures and has been utilized in cases of
refractory status epilepticus in humans [250].
A recent review did not find evidence to support a reduction in
the risk of late seizures or mortality rate with the prophylactic use of
anticonvulsants in humans following TBI [251]. There is no con-
sensus on this matter in veterinary medicine, but if seizures happen,
prompt treatment is required and can be accomplished with barbi-
turates, benzodiazepines, or other potent anticonvulsants such as
levetiracetam [238,240]. It is also important to ensure adequate
ventilation, oxygenation, and appropriate blood pressure to main-
tain CBF and CPP [180].
In cases where horses experience seizures in the anesthesia recov-
ery period, as may occur following myelography, administration of

-- 853 of 1450 --

838 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
benzodiazepines (0.1–0.2 mg/kg IV) and xylazine (0.1–0.2 mg/kg IV)
has been suggested as treatment. If seizures are not controlled
by these interventions, re-anesthetizing the animal has been
recommended [153,252].
Spinal cord injury and spine surgery
Specific considerations pertaining to the different advanced imag-
ing modalities are reviewed elsewhere and are largely centered
around individual patient comorbidities. Myelography can be per-
formed to confirm and localize the site of disk herniation [253]. In
these cases, the administration of contrast into the subarachnoid
space has been associated with potential seizures [102,254]. In gen-
eral, the anesthetic/sedative drug choices do not seem to influence
the likelihood of seizures post-myelography although a limited
number of drugs were used in a clinical assessment of myelography
complications [255]. Nonetheless, drugs that are associated with
seizure activity should be avoided or used with caution. Large-
breed dogs, cervical lesions, large total volumes of iohexol, and
injection into the cerebellomedullary cistern were associated with
higher risk of seizures following myelography [102,255]. The inci-
dence of seizures was also increased with shorter anesthesia times
and in dogs that did not have surgery after the myelogram, most
likely because the length of time between injection of contrast and
recovery from anesthesia was shorter [102]. Other complications
during anesthesia include apnea (likely due to contrast reaching
the brainstem), bradycardia, bradyarrhythmias, and asystole.
Complications in the postanesthetic period include intensification
of pre-existing neurologic signs, prolonged recovery, hyperthermia,
and vomiting [255,256]; therefore, vigilant monitoring of these
patients is warranted. Appropriate anesthetic depth to avoid patient
movement during manipulation of the needle is essential to prevent
further trauma to the spinal cord. In addition, hyperflexion of the
neck for cerebellomedullary cistern puncture can result in kinking
of the endotracheal tube and airway obstruction, so careful moni-
toring of ventilation is also important in these cases. After cervical
myelography, the head should be kept elevated to minimize cranial
flow of the contrast agent [257].
A discussion of the mechanisms of spinal injury, emergency care
procedures, diagnosis, and management of acute spinal cord injury
is beyond the scope of this chapter, but reviews of these topics in
dogs and cats are available elsewhere [258,259]. Some important
considerations for the anesthetist will be covered here.
In veterinary medicine, advanced imaging and/or surgery may
be required for several disease processes including intervertebral
disk herniation, fibrocartilaginous embolism, myelitis, spinal tumors,
and spinal trauma (fractures and luxation). While the location of
the lesion plays a role, general perianesthetic complications related
to spinal surgery include moderate to severe hemorrhage from the
vertebral sinus or vertebral artery and severe and/or persistent pain
(i.e., neuropathic pain) [254,260–264]. Pneumothorax/hemothorax
has been reported with surgeries in the thoracic region specifically
and careful intraoperative monitoring is necessary to identify
this complication and facilitate early intervention [260,261].
Complications specific to procedures involving a ventral cervical
approach include profound bradycardia and hypotension which
may be unresponsive to treatment (potentially due to the surgical
approach causing traction of carotid arteries and vagal trunks),
recurrent laryngeal nerve injury, aspiration pneumonia, airway
obstruction due to endotracheal tube compression by surgical
instruments, and hypoventilation leading to respiratory failure or
apnea [254,263,265–270]. Some of these complications may even
occur in anesthetized patients with cervical spinal lesions that are not
undergoing surgery. It is important to closely monitor these patients
throughout the anesthetic period and beyond recovery as many
complications may develop or worsen in the postoperative period.
Respiratory depression ranging from hypoventilation to com-
plete respiratory failure can occur in patients with cervical spinal
injuries (either on presentation or after surgery) or ascending
myelomalacia, necessitating mechanical ventilation [254,269–271].
Temporary tracheostomy may be considered for such patients as
this will allow mechanical ventilation for prolonged periods with
minimal sedation requirements [269]. The mechanisms of hypoven-
tilation are not well understood and are likely multifactorial. It is
possible that pathways (reticulospinal tracts) from the respiratory
centers in the brainstem to neurons innervating the muscles of res-
piration (diaphragm, intercostal, and extrathoracic airway muscles)
are disrupted by the spinal lesion, by surgery, or by progressive
postoperative edema from surgical manipulation [263,269,270,272].
Furthermore, the phrenic nerve may be compromised by the
pathology itself or by surgical trauma to its nerve roots leading to
impaired diaphragmatic function [263,269]. The phrenic nerve in
dogs arises from cervical spinal cord segments 5 through 7 (corre-
sponding to cervical vertebral bodies 4 through 6) [3,273]; because
projections from the reticulospinal tracts are bilateral, even unilat-
eral lesions may result in bilateral clinical manifestations of auto-
nomic motor dysfunction [273]. Patients with spinal cord lesions
cranial to the origin of motor neurons responsible for innervating
the muscles of respiration may be more likely to present with
clinical respiratory difficulties. In fact, dogs with lesions between
C2–C4 were more likely to need mechanical ventilation in a retro-
spective study [269]. In these cases, patients are unable to maintain
alveolar ventilation due to respiratory muscle paralysis or paresis
and hypoxemia develops secondary to hypoventilation [269,274].
Monitoring end-tidal carbon dioxide in the immediate postopera-
tive period while the patient remains intubated is indicated to
ensure normocapnia in patients with cervical lesions. Following
extubation, arterial blood gas assessment should be performed to
evaluate both PaCO2 and PaO2
. Additionally, patients with cervical
lesions may develop aspiration pneumonia. In such cases, the
ability to ventilate may not be compromised but patients will
present with abnormal gas exchange and hypoxemia due to lung
pathology [269,274].
Patients with severe spinal cord injuries can also experience
spinal shock, which occurs when both ascending and descending
nerve fibers caudal to the site of injury are affected, resulting in flac-
cid paralysis of the limbs and loss of reflexes [275,276]. In addition,
patients with cervical spinal cord injuries can experience impaired
sympathetic outflow (at the level of the cranial thoracic spine)
which disrupts the balance between sympathetic and parasympa-
thetic activity and results in increased parasympathetic tone. This
affects not only the respiratory system (resulting in cholinergic
bronchoconstriction and related respiratory complications), but
also the cardiovascular system leading to significant cardiovascular
instability (bradycardia, bradyarrhythmias, hypotension, ventricular
arrhythmias, and asystole) [263,270,277,278]. Therefore, in addi-
tion to complications associated with the surgical approach (traction
of carotid arteries and vagal trunks), impaired sympathetic outflow
constitutes another important cause of cardiovascular instability in
patients with cervical spinal cord injuries and may contribute to
morbidity and mortality [254,263,265,270].
Intraoperative management should be focused on addressing
individual complications as described while providing optimal,

-- 854 of 1450 --

Chapter 39: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Neurologic Disease 	839
multimodal analgesia. Careful attention should be paid to positioning
the patient prior to placement of surgical drapes to avoid positional
interference with monitoring equipment or the anesthetic breathing
system or predisposing the patient to neuropathy or myopathy.
Fluid therapy should be tailored to the patient with the goal of euv-
olemia; hemorrhage may be managed with fluid replacement as
indicated. Hypotension in this patient population can predispose to
impaired perfusion and ischemia of the spinal cord so blood pres-
sure should be closely monitored, and hypotension aggressively
treated if it occurs [180,254,259,279,280].
Patients with suspected vertebral fractures and/or luxation may
need to be immobilized in lateral recumbency on a backboard
before induction and intubation to minimize movement and further
injury to the spinal cord [259,281]. Discussion with the neurosur-
geon prior to immobilization and/or positioning and manipulation
of the patient for these procedures is warranted. Additional consid-
erations and complications are the same as those outlined above
and are specific to the region of the spinal cord affected. Analgesia
is an important component in management of any trauma patient
and in those with painful spinal cord injuries.
Horses and cervical spondylomyelopathy
Cervical spondylomyelopathy, also known as “wobbler syndrome,”
is a spinal cord condition in horses involving compression of the
spinal cord due to cervical vertebral malformation resulting in
ataxia, dysmetria, paresis, and an abnormal gait [282,283]. Horses
with this condition may undergo anesthesia for myelography
(with radiography, computed tomography, or magnetic resonance
imaging) and/or surgery [282,284–286]. Complications associated
with cervical myelography in horses include arrhythmias and dra-
matic changes in blood pressure (decrease or increase) during the
procedure, as well as worsening of ataxia, pneumonia, neck pain,
muscle fasciculations, seizures, hyperesthesia, head shaking, obtun-
dation or dull mentation, myopathies, prolonged recoveries, and
catastrophic recoveries with fracture [252,284,287–289]. Injection
of higher volumes of contrast agent and prolonged anesthesia time
has been associated with increased risk of adverse neurological
events in a multicenter retrospective study [287]. Reported postop-
erative complications of relevance to the anesthetist include verte-
bral fracture, implant failure or breakage, pain, spinal cord edema,
postanesthetic upper respiratory tract obstruction (and pulmonary
edema), and laryngeal hemiplegia; both latter complications required
tracheostomy [282,290]. Patient positioning with overextension of
the neck seems to be correlated to postanesthetic upper respiratory
tract obstruction [282]. Supplies for an emergent tracheostomy
procedure should be available near the recovery stall in addition to
supplies to re-induce anesthesia in the event of a fracture.
Careful cardiorespiratory monitoring (electrocardiography, inva-
sive arterial blood pressure, capnography, and arterial blood gases)
and controlled ventilation during cervical myelography is recom-
mended. Changes in the positioning of the patient during radio-
graphs, such as elevation of the head and extension and flexion of
the neck after contrast administration, may be required during the
procedure [252,291]. These positional changes can result in inad-
vertent extubation or anesthesia circuit disconnection, potential
airway obstruction (especially with flexion of the neck), tracheal
injury due to endotracheal tube movement during manipulation of
the neck, and exacerbation of spinal cord injury and neurological
signs due to anesthetic-induced muscle relaxation combined with
positional changes [252,289,292]. Careful positioning, avoiding
overinflation of the endotracheal tube cuff (and potentially
deflating the cuff before moving the head and neck), keeping the
head elevated as long as possible, and diligent post-myelography
patient monitoring are important considerations [252,284,287,292].
A variety of protocols have been reported in the literature for
anesthesia of horses undergoing cervical myelography, but no sys-
tematic comparison has been performed evaluating the quality of
induction and recovery as well as the incidence of complications.
Preanesthetic evaluation should include assessment of the patient’s
degree of ataxia. Light premedication (i.e., low, titrated doses) with
xylazine (0.2–0.5 mg/kg) with or without butorphanol (0.02 mg/kg)
is typically recommended to avoid excessive ataxia or recumbency
before anesthesia induction. However, higher doses of xylazine,
other α2 - adrenergic receptor agonists, and acepromazine have also
been reported as premedication before cervical myelography in
horses [284,285]. Some horses may have to be anesthetized in their
stalls and returned to the same location for recovery due to severe
ataxia and/or recumbency, but if the horse can be safely moved to
the induction area, this should be done before administration of
any sedatives. The use of guaifenesin in combination with barbitu-
rates (thiopental or thiamylal) or guaifenesin and/or ketamine and
a benzodiazepine (midazolam or diazepam) has been reported or
recommended by different authors for induction of anesthesia
[153,252,282,285,292]. Anesthesia induction protocols involving
propofol and ketamine have been shown to produce better recovery
qualities when compared to ketamine and midazolam induction in
healthy horses anesthetized for short periods (60 min) [293];
however, it is difficult to predict if this would be the case for horses
with wobbler syndrome. Maintenance of anesthesia with inhalant
agents (preferably isoflurane or sevoflurane) is most common;
however, use of TIVA (i.e., a combination of guaifenesin, ketamine,
and an α2
-adrenergic receptor agonist) for maintenance of anesthesia
has also been reported [284,285].
During recovery, the use of ropes or other methods of assistance,
padded recovery stalls, thick foam pads, and padded helmets have
been recommended to limit potential injuries in these patients
[252,284,285]. A sling recovery system could be considered in cases
of severe ataxia or for horses that are recumbent prior to anesthesia
[153,252]. Administration of non-steroidal anti-inflammatories or
steroids has been recommended by different authors to minimize
complications [153,252,288].
Peripheral nervous system conditions
Myasthenia gravis
Myasthenia gravis (MG) is an acquired autoimmune neuromuscu-
lar disease characterized by autoantibody-mediated destruction of
postsynaptic nicotinic ACh receptors at the neuromuscular junc-
tion [294–296]. A congenital form of MG, characterized by struc-
tural or functional defects at the neuromuscular junction (without
autoimmunity), is part of a larger clinically heterogeneous group of
disorders known as “congenital myasthenic syndromes” and is now
considered a separate entity [295,297]. Both diseases (autoimmune
and congenital) result in focal or generalized clinical muscle weak-
ness and fatigability [294,296]. The focus of this section will be
anesthetic management of patients with the more common autoim-
mune version of the disease.
Hyperthyroid cats receiving methimazole can develop drug-
induced autoimmune MG [298]. Some patients with MG (cats more
frequently than dogs) have concurrent thymoma and may need
anesthesia for surgical procedures and/or radiation therapy
[296,297,299,300]. Treatment of MG patients can involve anticho-
linesterase agents (also known as acetylcholinesterase inhibitors)

-- 855 of 1450 --

840 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
such as pyridostigmine to prolong the action of ACh at the
neuromuscular junction, as well as steroids [294,296,299]. Some
authors recommend continuation of the anticholinesterase agents
until the day of surgery to avoid respiratory distress postoperatively;
however, this is controversial [301,302]. A potential side effect of
anticholinesterase therapy in MG patients is excessive accumulation
of ACh at the neuromuscular junction resulting in weakness due to
desensitization of the postsynaptic membrane, known as “cholinergic
crisis” [294,296]. The ACh will also affect muscarinic receptors,
potentially leading to bradycardia, bronchospasm, miosis, intestinal
hyperperistalsis, and hypersalivation [302].
Aspiration pneumonia and respiratory failure are frequent causes
of death in cats and dogs with MG [294]. Patients with acute fulmi-
nant MG, those with worsening skeletal muscle weakness due to
surgical stress and anesthesia, or those with severe aspiration pneu-
monia may require intubation and mechanical ventilation in the
perioperative period [296]. Anesthesia for the MG patient carries a
high risk due to the presence of megaesophagus and potential
regurgitation, the risk of upper airway obstruction and aspiration
pneumonia (due to decreased laryngeal and pharyngeal muscle
function and protective airway reflexes), respiratory failure (due to
intercostal muscle and diaphragmatic weakness and/or aspiration
pneumonia), and potential drug interactions. Some drugs can
negatively affect neuromuscular transmission and should be
avoided in patients with MG including aminoglycoside, quinolone,
and macrolide antibiotics, β-adrenergic blockers, calcium channel
blockers, phenothiazines, iodinated contrast agents, quinidine and
procainamide, phenytoin, and magnesium salts [296,302,303].
Due to their compromised respiratory muscle strength and
decreased respiratory reserve, anesthetic considerations for MG
patients include selection of drugs associated with minimal res-
piratory depression, preoxygenation prior to induction of anesthe-
sia, prevention of hypothermia which can enhance neuromuscular
blockade, and provision of ventilatory monitoring and support dur-
ing and potentially after anesthesia [301,302]. Elevating the patient’s
head during induction of anesthesia, rapid endotracheal intubation
and inflation of the cuff to protect the airway, and suctioning the
esophagus as soon as possible are recommended to reduce the risk
of complications associated with regurgitation and aspiration. The
use of metoclopramide or histamine type-2 receptor antagonists
may be considered in these patients [301,302]. There is no consen-
sus in the human or veterinary medical literature on the ideal anes-
thetic protocol for MG patients to decrease the incidence of
complications or the need for ventilation in the postoperative
period [301,302,304].
Benzodiazepines can contribute to muscle weakness and their
use in MG patients is questionable [305]. Opioids provide excellent
analgesia with potential sedation but should be used cautiously.
Small doses of short-acting opioids with careful monitoring are rec-
ommended to reduce risks associated with respiratory depression
[301,302]. The use of intravenous anesthetics to rapidly induce
anesthesia and gain control of the airway (i.e., propofol, etomidate,
alfaxalone, or ketamine) is recommended [301,302]. While inhala-
tion anesthetics have potent neuromuscular blocking effects and
cause significant respiratory depressants, they facilitate rapid
adjustments in anesthetic depth and undergo rapid elimination,
making them good options for maintenance of anesthesia [306,307].
Locoregional and systemic adjunctive techniques (i.e., ketamine
constant rate infusion) can be considered to decrease inhalant
and opioid requirements. In general, local anesthetics decrease
the sensitivity of the postjunctional membrane to ACh, but
ester local anesthetics should be avoided in patients receiving
anticholinesterase agents because they are metabolized by plasma
cholinesterases. Therefore, the use of low doses of amide local
anesthetics are recommended in MG patients [301,302,305,308].
The use of anticholinergics is controversial. If an anticholinergic is
required intraoperatively to treat bradycardia in an MG patient,
atropine is recommended over glycopyrrolate because the latter
produces greater nicotinic receptor blockade and is, therefore, more
likely to affect neuromuscular transmission [309].
Neuromuscular blocking agents should generally be avoided in
MG patients as they are resistant to the effects of depolarizing
agents and potentially very sensitive to the effects of nondepolar-
izing agents, resulting in profound and prolonged blockade
[301,308,310]. If neuromuscular blockade is required, it is impor-
tant to use lower doses of a nondepolarizing agent and quantitative
monitoring of neuromuscular function (i.e., train of four with
acceleromyography) at the end of anesthesia to ensure that no
residual blockade persists [311,312]. The use of reversal agents
such as neostigmine to reverse nondepolarizing neuromuscular
blockade in MG patients is controversial [301,302].
Patients with MG are at risk of serious complications in the peri-
operative period. Cholinergic crisis, as described above, is related to
excessive accumulation of ACh (due to anticholinesterase agent
therapy) causing desensitization of the postsynaptic membrane.
Myasthenic crisis, caused by further reductions in ACh receptor
function with acute aggravation of muscular weakness, can happen
in the postoperative period due to surgery, anesthesia, pain, and
stress [301,302]. Both cholinergic and myasthenic crises result in
similar clinical signs (generalized muscle weakness and potential
respiratory failure) and emergency intubation and ventilatory sup-
port may be required. The use of an anticholinesterase agent test
(historically referred to as the “Tensilon test”) may help differenti-
ate between myasthenic and cholinergic crises because muscle
strength will improve in the case of myasthenic crisis. In the case of
a cholinergic crisis, the anticholinesterase agent test may lead to
muscle fasciculations, miosis, and exacerbation of respiratory
signs [301,302,308].
The patient’s ability to maintain appropriate spontaneous ventila-
tion with normal end-tidal carbon dioxide levels (and ideally PaCO2
)
should be assessed before extubation. Suction should always be
available in case of regurgitation. In the immediate postanesthetic
period, once the patient is extubated, the anesthetist should con-
tinue monitoring oxygenation and ventilation while watching for
signs of airway obstruction and assessing respiratory rate, breathing
pattern, appropriate chest excursions, pulse oximetry, and ideally,
arterial blood gases (PaO2 and PaCO2
). Anticholinesterase
agent therapy should be resumed as soon as possible [301,308].
Postoperative analgesia is critical, but caution is warranted to avoid
respiratory depression and exacerbation of muscle weakness;
therefore, use of balanced analgesic techniques with drugs such as
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents (if the patient is not receiv-
ing steroids), and regional anesthesia/analgesia to minimize opioid
use is important [305]. Other drugs with analgesic properties that
should be used with caution in MG patients include tricyclic
antidepressants, pregabalin, and gabapentin [305].
References
1 Jenkins TW. Functional Mammalian Neuroanatomy, 2nd edn. Philadelphia, PA:
Lea and Febiger, 1978: 480.
2 Becker S, Selby LA. Canine hydrocephalus. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 1980;
11(8): 647–652.

-- 856 of 1450 --

Chapter 39: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Neurologic Disease 	841
3 de Lahunta A, Glass E, Kent M. Cerebrospinal fluid and hydrocephalus. In: de
Lahunta A, Glass E, Kent M, eds. Veterinary Neuroanatomy and Clinical Neurology,
4th edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2014: 78–101.
4 Hall JE, Hall ME. Cerebral blood flow, cerebrospinal fluid, and brain metabolism.
In: Hall JE, Hall ME, eds. Guyton and Hall Textbook of Medical Physiology, 14th edn.
Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier, 2020: 777–786.
5 Jurk IR, Thibodeau MS, Whitney K, et al. Acute vision loss after general anesthesia
in a cat. Vet Ophthalmol 2001; 4(2): 155–158.
6 Stiles J, Weil AB, Packer RA, et al. Post-anesthetic cortical blindness in cats: twenty
cases. Vet J 2012; 193(2): 367–373.
7 Martin-Flores M, Scrivani PV, Loew E, et al. Maximal and submaximal mouth
opening with mouth gags in cats: implications for maxillary artery blood flow. Vet J
2014; 200(1): 60–64.
8 Barton-Lamb AL, Martin-Flores M, Scrivani PV, et al. Evaluation of maxillary arte-
rial blood flow in anesthetized cats with the mouth closed and open. Vet J 2013;
196(3): 325–331.
9 Marcus ML, Heistad DD, Ehrhardt JC, et al. Regulation of total and regional spinal
cord blood flow. Circ Res 1977; 41(1): 128–134.
10 Scott CM, Marlin DJ, Schroter RC. Quantification of the response of equine apocrine
sweat glands to beta2-adrenergic stimulation. Equine Vet J 2001; 33(6): 605–612.
11 Pohorecky L, Wurtman R. Adrenocortical control of epinephrine synthesis.
Pharmacol Rev 1971; 23(1): 1–35.
12 Glick D. The autonomic nervous system. In: Miller RD, Eriksson LI, Fleisher LA,
et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia, 8th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders, 2015:
346–386.
13 Mokri B. The Monro–Kellie hypothesis: applications in CSF volume depletion.
Neurology 2001; 56(12): 1746–1748.
14 Wilson MH. 2.0: the dynamic vascular and venous pathophysiological components
of intracranial pressure. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2016; 36(8): 1338–1350.
15 Shapiro HM. Intracranial hypertension: therapeutic and anesthetic considerations.
Anesthesiology 1975; 43(4): 445–471.
16 Tameem A, Krovvidi H. Cerebral physiology. Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain
2013; 13(4): 113–118.
17 Brosnan RJ, Esteller-Vico A, Steffey EP, et al. Effects of head-down positioning on
regional central nervous system perfusion in isoflurane-anesthetized horses. Am J
Vet Res 2008; 69(6): 737–743.
18 Fodstad H, Kelly PJ, Buchfelder M. History of the Cushing reflex. Neurosurgery
2006; 59(5): 1132–1137.
19 Cushing H. Some experimental and clinical observations concerning states of
increased intracranial tension. The Miitter Lecture for 1901. Am J Med Sci 1902;
124: 375–400.
20 Cushing H. Concerning a definite regulatory mechanism of the vaso-motor centre
which controls blood pressure during cerebral compression. Johns Hopkins Hosp
Bull 1901; 12: 290–292.
21 Cushing H. The blood pressure reaction of acute cerebral compression illustrated
by cases of intracranial hemorrhage: a sequel to the Miitter Lecture for 1901. Am J
Med Sci 1903; 125: 1017–1044.
22 Heymans C. The control of heart rate consequent to changes in the cephalic blood
pressure and in the intracranial pressure. Am J Physiol (Legacy Content) 1928; 85(3):
498–506.
23 Schmidt EA, Despas F, Pavy-Le Traon A, et al. Intracranial pressure is a determi-
nant of sympathetic activity. Front Physiol 2018; 9: 11.
24 Tsai YH, Lin JY, Huang YY, et al. Cushing response-based warning system for inten-
sive care of brain-injured patients. Clin Neurophysiol 2018; 129(12): 2602–2612.
25 Kalmar AF, Van Aken J, Caemaert J, et al. Value of Cushing reflex as warning sign
for brain ischaemia during neuroendoscopy. Br J Anaesth 2005; 94(6): 791–799.
26 Patel PM, Drummond JC, Lemkuil BP. Cerebral physiology and the effects of anes-
thetic drugs. In: Miller RD, Eriksson LI, Fleisher LA, et al., eds. Miller’s Anesthesia,
8th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders, 2015: 387–422.
27 Claassen JAHR, Thijssen DHJ, Panerai RB, et al. Regulation of cerebral blood flow
in humans: physiology and clinical implications of autoregulation. Physiol Rev
2021; 101(4): 1487–1559.
28 Papasilekas T, Themistoklis KM, Melanis K, et al. A brief review of brain’s blood
flow-metabolism coupling and pressure autoregulation. J Neurol Surg A Cent Eur
Neurosurg 2021; 82(3): 257–261.
29 Iadecola C. The neurovascular unit coming of age: a journey through neurovascu-
lar coupling in health and disease. Neuron 2017; 96(1): 17–42.
30 Attwell D, Buchan AM, Charpak S, et al. Glial and neuronal control of brain blood
flow. Nature 2010; 468(7321): 232–243.
31 Willie CK, Tzeng YC, Fisher JA, et al. Integrative regulation of human brain blood
flow. J Physiol 2014; 592(5): 841–859.
32 Michenfelder JD, Milde JH. The relationship among canine brain temperature,
metabolism, and function during hypothermia. Anesthesiology 1991; 75(1):
130–136.
33 Michenfelder JD, Theye RA. Hypothermia: effect on canine brain and whole-body
metabolism. Anesthesiology 1968; 29(6): 1107–1112.
34 Busija DW, Leffler CW. Hypothermia reduces cerebral metabolic rate and cerebral
blood flow in newborn pigs. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 1987; 253(4):
H869–H873.
35 Michenfelder JD, Milde JH, Katušić ZS. Postischemic canine cerebral blood flow is
coupled to cerebral metabolic rate. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 1991; 11(4): 611–616.
36 Arrich J, Herkner H, Müllner D, et al. Targeted temperature management after car-
diac arrest. A systematic review and meta-analysis of animal studies. Resuscitation
2021; 162: 47–55.
37 Grubb RL, Raichle ME, Eichling JO, et al. The effects of changes in PaCO2 on
cerebral blood volume, blood flow, and vascular mean transit time. Stroke 1974;
5(5): 630–639.
38 McPherson RW, Brian JE Jr., Traystman RJ. Cerebrovascular responsiveness to
carbon dioxide in dogs with 1.4% and 2.8% isoflurane. Anesthesiology 1989; 70(5):
843–850.
39 Raichle ME, Posner JB, Plum F. Cerebral blood flow during and after hyperventila-
tion. Arch Neurol 1970; 23(5): 394–403.
40 Kontos HA, Raper AJ, Patterson JL. Analysis of vasoactivity of local pH, PCO2 and
bicarbonate on pial vessels. Stroke 1977; 8(3): 358–360.
41 Albrecht RF, Miletich DJ, Ruttle M. Cerebral effects of extended hyperventilation in
unanesthetized goats. Stroke 1987; 18(3): 649–655.
42 Mardimae A, Balaban DY, Machina MA, et al. The interaction of carbon dioxide and
hypoxia in the control of cerebral blood flow. Pflüg Arch 2012; 464(4): 345–351.
43 Brown MM, Wade JP, Marshall J. Fundamental importance of arterial oxygen content
in the regulation of cerebral blood flow in man. Brain J Neurol 1985; 108: 81–93.
44 Jones MD, Traystman RJ, Simmons MA, et al. Effects of changes in arterial O2 con-
tent on cerebral blood flow in the lamb. Am J Physiol 1981; 240(2): H209–H215.
45 Crystal GJ, Czinn EA, Salem MR. The mechanism of increased blood flow in the
brain and spinal cord during hemodilution. Anesth Analg 2014; 118(3): 637–643.
46 Tomiyama Y, Brian JE, Todd MM. Plasma viscosity and cerebral blood flow. Am J
Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2000; 279(4): H1949–H1954.
47 Lassen NA. Cerebral blood flow and oxygen consumption in man. Physiol Rev
1959; 39(2): 183–238.
48 Drummond JC. Blood pressure and the brain: how low can you go? Anesth Analg
2019; 128(4): 759–771.
49 Drummond JC. The lower limit of autoregulation: time to revise our thinking.
Anesthesiology 1997; 86(6): 1431–1433.
50 Harper AM, Glass HI. Effect of alterations in the arterial carbon dioxide tension on
the blood flow through the cerebral cortex at normal and low arterial blood pres-
sures. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1965; 28(5): 449–452.
51 Lassen NA, Christensen MS. Physiology of cerebral blood flow. Br J Anaesth 1976;
48(8): 719–734.
52 Messick JM, Newberg LA, Nugent M, et al. Principles of neuroanesthesia for the
nonneurosurgical patient with CNS pathophysiology. Anesth Analg 1985; 64(2):
143–174.
53 Langfitt TW, Weinstein JD, Kassell NF. Cerebral vasomotor paralysis produced by
intracranial hypertension. Neurology 1965; 15: 622–641.
54 Sharma VK, Teoh HL, Paliwal PR, et al. Reversed Robin Hood syndrome in a
patient with luxury perfusion after acute ischemic stroke. Circulation 2011; 123(7):
e243–e244.
55 Lassen NA. The luxury-perfusion syndrome and its possible relation to acute
metabolic acidosis localised within the brain. Lancet Lond Engl 1966; 2(7473):
1113–1115.
56 Lassen NA. The luxury perfusion syndrome. Scand J Clin Lab Investig Suppl 1968;
102: X: A.
57 Smith AL, Wollman H. Cerebral blood flow and metabolism: effects of anesthetic
drugs and techniques. Anesthesiology 1972; 36(4): 378–400.
58 Griffiths IR. Spinal cord blood flow in dogs: the effect of blood pressure. J Neurol
Neurosurg Psychiatry 1973; 36(6): 914–920.
59 Trim CM. Postanesthetic hemorrhagic myelopathy or myelomalacia. Vet Clin North
Am Equine Pract 1997; 13(1): 73–77.
60 Brosnan RJ, Steffey EP, LeCouteur RA, et al. Effects of isoflurane anesthesia on
cerebrovascular autoregulation in horses. Am J Vet Res 2011; 72(1): 18–24.
61 Dohi S, Takeshima R, Naito H. Spinal cord blood flow during spinal anesthesia in
dogs: the effects of tetracaine, epinephrine, acute blood loss, and hypercapnia.
Anesth Analg 1987; 66(7): 599–606.
62 Griffiths IR. Spinal cord blood flow in dogs: 2. The effect of the blood gases.
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1973; 36(1): 42–49.
63 Kazama S, Masaki Y, Maruyama S, et al. Effect of altering cerebrospinal fluid
pressure on spinal cord blood flow. Ann Thorac Surg 1994; 58(1): 112–115.
64 Ong BY, MacIntyre C, Bose D, et al. Comparison of two methods of altering blood
pressures for assessing neonatal cerebral blood flow autoregulation. Can J Physiol
Pharmacol 1986; 64(7): 1023–1026.

-- 857 of 1450 --

842 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
65 Pearce WJ, Bevan JA. Diltiazem and autoregulation of canine cerebral blood flow.
J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1987; 242(3): 812–817.
66 Tanaka M, Yoshida Y, Mitomi A, et al. Effects of calcium antagonists, felodipine
and nicardipine, on cerebral circulation in dogs. Jpn J Pharmacol 1990; 52(2):
273–279.
67 Johnston WE, DeWitt DS, Vinten-Johansen J, et al. Phenylephrine does not reduce
cerebral perfusion during canine cardiopulmonary bypass. Anesth Analg 1994;
79(1): 14–18.
68 Chikovani O, Corkill G, McLeish I, et al. Effect on canine cerebral blood flow of two
common pressor agents during prolonged halothane anesthesia. Surg Neurol 1978;
9(3): 211–213.
69 McCormick JM, McCormick PW, Zabramski JM, et al. Intracranial pressure reduc-
tion by a central α2-adrenoreceptor agonist after subarachnoid hemorrhage.
Neurosurgery 1993; 32(6): 974–979.
70 Artru AA, Shapira Y, Bowdle TA. Electroencephalogram, cerebral metabolic, and
vascular responses to propofol anesthesia in dogs. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol 1992;
4(2): 99–109.
71 Koyama K, Mito T, Takashima S, et al. Effects of phenylephrine and dopamine on
cerebral blood flow, blood volume, and oxygenation in young rabbits. Pediatr
Neurol 1990; 6(2): 87–90.
72 Mutch WAC, Mato LA, Ringaert KRA. Phenylephrine increases regional cere-
bral blood flow following hemorrhage during isoflurane–oxygen anesthesia.
Anesthesiology 1989; 70(2): 276–279.
73 Patel PM, Mutch WA. The cerebral pressure-flow relationship during 1.0 MAC iso-
flurane anesthesia in the rabbit: the effect of different vasopressors. Anesthesiology
1990; 72(1): 118–124.
74 Myburgh JA, Upton RN, Grant C, et al. A comparison of the effects of norepineph-
rine, epinephrine, and dopamine on cerebral blood flow and oxygen utilisation.
Acta Neurochir 1998; 71(Suppl): 19–21.
75 Artru AA, Nugent M, Michenfelder JD. Anesthetics affect the cerebral metabolic
response to circulatory catecholamines. J Neurochem 1981; 36(6): 1941–1946.
76 Bandres J, Yao L, Nemoto EM, et al. Effects of dobutamine and dopamine on whole
brain blood flow and metabolism in unanesthetized monkeys. J Neurosurg
Anesthesiol 1992; 4(4): 250–256.
77 Tobata D, Takao K, Mochizuki M, et al. Effects of dopamine, dobutamine, amrinone
and milrinone on regional blood flow in isoflurane anesthetized dogs. J Vet Med Sci
2004; 66(9): 1097–1105.
78 Gibbs JM, Leenders KL, Wise RJ, et al. Evaluation of cerebral perfusion reserve in
patients with carotid-artery occlusion. Lancet 1984; 1(8370): 182–186.
79 Artru AA. Relationship between cerebral blood volume and CSF pressure during
anesthesia with isoflurane or fentanyl in dogs. Anesthesiology 1984; 60(6):
575–579.
80 Todd MM, Weeks J. Comparative effects of propofol, pentobarbital, and isoflurane
on cerebral blood flow and blood volume. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol 1996; 8(4):
296–303.
81 Todd MM, Weeks JB, Warner DS. The influence of intravascular volume expansion
on cerebral blood flow and blood volume in normal rats. Anesthesiology 1993;
78(5): 945–953.
82 Sheehan PB, Zornow MH, Scheller MS, et al. The effects of fentanyl and sufentanil
on intracranial pressure and cerebral blood flow in rabbits with an acute cryogenic
brain injury. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol 1992; 4(4): 261–267.
83 Yaster M, Koehler RC, Traystman RJ. Interaction of fentanyl and nitrous oxide on
peripheral and cerebral hemodynamics in newborn lambs. Anesthesiology 1994;
80(2): 364–371.
84 Milde LN, Milde JH, Gallagher WJ. Cerebral effects of fentanyl in dogs. Br J Anaesth
1989; 63(6): 710–715.
85 Hoffman WE, Cunningham F, James MK, et al. Effects of remifentanil, a new short-
acting opioid, on cerebral blood flow, brain electrical activity, and intracranial pres-
sure in dogs anesthetized with isoflurane and nitrous oxide. Anesthesiology 1993;
79(1): 107–113.
86 Werner C, Hoffman WE, Baughman VL, et al. Effects of sufentanil on cerebral
blood flow, cerebral blood flow velocity, and metabolism in dogs. Anesth Analg
1991; 72(2): 177–181.
87 Baughman VL, Hoffman WE, Albrecht RF, et al. Cerebral vascular and metabolic
effects of fentanyl and midazolam in young and aged rats. Anesthesiology 1987;
67(3): 314–319.
88 Milde LN, Milde JH, Gallagher WJ. Effects of sufentanil on cerebral circulation and
metabolism in dogs. Anesth Analg 1990; 70(2): 138–146.
89 Wagner KJ, Willoch F, Kochs EF, et al. Dose-dependent regional cerebral blood flow
changes during remifentanil infusion in humans: a positron emission tomography
study. Anesthesiology 2001; 94(5): 732–739.
90 Werner C, Kochs E, Bause H, et al. Effects of sufentanil on cerebral hemodynamics
and intracranial pressure in patients with brain injury. Anesthesiology 1995; 83(4):
721–726.
91 Moore RM, Trim CM. Effect of hypercapnia or xylazine on lateral ventricle and
lumbosacral cerebrospinal fluid pressures in pentobarbital-anesthetized horses.
Vet Surg 1993; 22(2): 151–158.
92 Moore RM, Trim CM. Effect of xylazine on cerebrospinal fluid pressure in
conscious horses. Am J Vet Res 1992; 53(9): 1558–1561.
93 Reed RA, Epstein KL, Bramski JH, et al. The effect of xylazine on intracranial
pressure in anesthetized and standing horses. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2021; 31(4):
476–482.
94 Brosnan RJ, LeCouteur RA, Steffey EP, et al. Direct measurement of intracranial
pressure in adult horses. Am J Vet Res 2002; 63(9): 1252–1256.
95 Zornow MH, Fleischer JE, Scheller MS, et al. Dexmedetomidine, an alpha
2-adrenergic agonist, decreases cerebral blood flow in the isoflurane-anesthetized
dog. Anesth Analg 1990; 70(6): 624–630.
96 Karlsson BR, Forsman M, Roald OK, et al. Effect of dexmedetomidine, a selective
and potent alpha2-agonist, on cerebral blood flow and oxygen consumption
during halothane anesthesia in dogs. Anesth Analg 1990; 71(2): 125–129.
97 Prielipp RC, Wall MH, Tobin JR, et al. Dexmedetomidine-induced sedation in
volunteers decreases regional and global cerebral blood flow. Anesth Analg 2002;
95(4): 1052–1059.
98 Mikkelsen MLG, Ambrus R, Rasmussen R, et al. The effect of dexmedetomidine
on cerebral perfusion and oxygenation in healthy piglets with normal and lowered
blood pressure anaesthetized with propofol-remifentanil total intravenous anaes-
thesia. Acta Vet Scand 2017; 59(1): 27.
99 Keegan RD, Greene SA, Bagley RS, et al. Effects of medetomidine administration
on intracranial pressure and cardiovascular variables of isoflurane-anesthetized
dogs. Am J Vet Res 1995; 56(2): 193–198.
100 Tobias KM, Marioni-Henry K, Wagner R. A retrospective study on the use of ace-
promazine maleate in dogs with seizures. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2006; 42(4):
283–289.
101 Drynan EA, Gray P, Raisis AL. Incidence of seizures associated with the use of
acepromazine in dogs undergoing myelography. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio)
2012; 22(2): 262–266.
102 da Costa RC, Parent JM, Dobson H. Incidence of and risk factors for seizures after
myelography performed with iohexol in dogs: 503 cases (2002–2004). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2011; 238(10): 1296–1300.
103 Tudorica A, Fang Li H, Hospod F, et al. Cerebral blood volume measurements by
rapid contrast infusion and T-weighted echo planar MRI. Magn Reson Med 2002;
47(6): 1145–1457.
104 Nugent M, Artru AA, Michenfelder JD. Cerebral metabolic, vascular and protec-
tive effects of midazolam maleate: comparison to diazepam. Anesthesiology 1982;
56(3): 172–176.
105 Artru AA. Flumazenil reversal of midazolam in dogs: dose-related changes in cer-
ebral blood flow, metabolism, EEG, and CSF pressure. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol
1989; 1(1): 46–55.
106 Fleischer JE, Milde JH, Moyer TP, et al. Cerebral effects of high-dose midazolam and
subsequent reversal with RO 15-1788 in dogs. Anesthesiology 1988; 68(2): 234–242.
107 Chiolero RL, Ravussin P, Anderes JP, et al. The effects of midazolam reversal by
RO 15-1788 on cerebral perfusion pressure in patients with severe head injury.
Intensive Care Med 1988; 14(3): 196–200.
108 Sakabe T, Maekawa T, Ishikawa T, et al. The effects of lidocaine on canine cerebral
metabolism and circulation related to the electroencephalogram. Anesthesiology
1974; 40(5): 433–441.
109 Bedford RF, Persing JA, Pobereskin L, et al. Lidocaine or thiopental for rapid con-
trol of intracranial hypertension? Anesth Analg 1980; 59(6): 435–437.
110 Donegan MF, Bedford RF. Intravenously administered lidocaine prevents intracranial
hypertension during endotracheal suctioning. Anesthesiology 1980; 52(6): 516–518.
111 Moss E, Powell D, Gibson RM, et al. Effects of tracheal intubation on intracranial
pressure following induction of anaesthesia with thiopentone or althesin in
patients undergoing neurosurgery. Br J Anaesth 1978; 50(4): 353–360.
112 Panti A, Cafrita IC, Clark L. Effect of intravenous lidocaine on cough response to
endotracheal intubation in propofol-anaesthetized dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016;
43(4): 405–411.
113 Bravo VR, Palomba N, Corletto F, et al. Comparison between intravenous lido-
caine and fentanyl on cough reflex and sympathetic response during endotracheal
intubation in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(4): 481–489.
114 Thompson KR, Rioja E. Effects of intravenous and topical laryngeal lidocaine on
heart rate, mean arterial pressure and cough response to endotracheal intubation
in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43(4): 371–378.
115 Martín Bellido V, Martínez I Ferré B, McDonald H, et al. Effect of intravenous
fentanyl on cough reflex and quality of endotracheal intubation in cats. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2023; 50(3): 230–237.
116 Samaha T, Ravussin P, Claquin C, et al. Prevention of increase of blood pressure
and intracranial pressure during endotracheal intubation in neurosurgery: esmolol
versus lidocaine. Ann Fr Anesth Réanimation 1996; 15(1): 36–40.

-- 858 of 1450 --

Chapter 39: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Neurologic Disease 	843
117 Evans DE, Kobrine AI, LeGrys DC, et al. Protective effect of lidocaine in acute
cerebral ischemia induced by air embolism. J Neurosurg 1984; 60(2): 257–263.
118 Nagao S, Murota T, Momma F, et al. The effect of intravenous lidocaine on experi-
mental brain edema and neural activities. J Trauma 1988; 28(12): 1650–1655.
119 Shokunbi MT, Gelb AW, Wu XM, et al. Continuous lidocaine infusion and focal
feline cerebral ischemia. Stroke 1990; 21(1): 107–111.
120 Ilkiw JE. Advantages and guidelines for using ultrashort barbiturates for induction
of anesthesia. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 1992; 22(2): 261–264.
121 Shores A. Neuroanesthesia: a review of the effects of anesthetic agents on cerebral
blood flow and intracranial pressure in the dog. Vet Surg 1985; 14(3): 257–263.
122 Quandt JE, Robinson EP, Rivers WJ, et al. Cardiorespiratory and anesthetic effects
of propofol and thiopental in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1998; 59(9): 1137–1143.
123 Wooten TL, Lowrie CT. Comparison of cerebrospinal fluid pressure in propofol-
and thiopental-anesthetized eucapnic dogs. Vet Surg 1993; 22(2): 148–150.
124 Haberer JP, Audibert G, Saunier CG, et al. Effect of propofol and thiopentone on
regional blood flow in brain and peripheral tissues during normoxia and hypoxia
in the dog. Clin Physiol 1993; 13(2): 197–207.
125 Werner C, Hoffman WE, Kochs E, et al. The effects of propofol on cerebral blood
flow in correlation to cerebral blood flow velocity in dogs. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol
1992; 4(1): 41–46.
126 Bini G, Bailey KM, Voyvodic JT, et al. Effects of alfaxalone, propofol and isoflu-
rane on cerebral blood flow and cerebrovascular reactivity to carbon dioxide in
dogs: a pilot study. Vet J 2023; 291: 105939.
127 Wu M, Yin X, Chen M, et al. Effects of propofol on intracranial pressure and prog-
nosis in patients with severe brain diseases undergoing endotracheal suctioning.
BMC Neurol 2020; 20(1): 394.
128 Cattai A, Rabozzi R, Natale V, et al. The incidence of spontaneous movements
(myoclonus) in dogs undergoing total intravenous anaesthesia with propofol.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2015; 42(1): 93–98.
129 Steffen F, Grasmueck S. Propofol for treatment of refractory seizures in dogs and
a cat with intracranial disorders. J Small Anim Pract 2000; 41(11): 496–499.
130 Heldmann E, Holt DE, Brockman DJ, et al. Use of propofol to manage seizure
activity after surgical treatment of portosystemic shunts. J Small Anim Pract 1999;
40(12): 590–594.
131 Nimkoff L, Quinn C, Silver P, et al. The effects of intravenous anesthetics on
intracranial pressure and cerebral perfusion pressure in two feline models of brain
edema. J Crit Care 1997; 12(3): 132–136.
132 Dearden NM, McDowall DG. Comparison of etomidate and althesin in the reduc-
tion of increased intracranial pressure after head injury. Br J Anaesth 1985; 57(4):
361–368.
133 Sari A, Maekawa T, Tohjo M, et al. Effects of althesin on cerebral blood flow and
oxygen consumption in man. Br J Anaesth 1976; 48(6): 545–550.
134 Li CX, Kempf D, Howell L, et al. Effects of alfaxalone on cerebral blood flow and
intrinsic neural activity of rhesus monkeys: a comparison study with ketamine.
Magn Reson Imaging 2021; 75: 134–140.
135 Milde LN, Milde JH, Michenfelder JD. Cerebral functional, metabolic, and hemo-
dynamic effects of etomidate in dogs. Anesthesiology 1985; 63(4): 371–377.
136 Renou AM, Vernhiet J, Macrez P, et al. Cerebral blood flow and metabolism
during etomidate anaesthesia in man. Br J Anaesth 1978; 50(10): 1047–1051.
137 Newberg LA, Milde JH, Michenfelder JD. The cerebral metabolic effects of
isoflurane at and above concentrations that suppress cortical electrical activity.
Anesthesiology 1983; 59(1): 23–28.
138 Michenfelder JD. The interdependency of cerebral functional and metabolic
effects following massive doses of thiopental in the dog. Anesthesiology 1974;
41(3): 231–236.
139 Frizzell RT, Meyer YJ, Borchers DJ, et al. The effects of etomidate on cerebral
metabolism and blood flow in a canine model for hypoperfusion. J Neurosurg
1991; 74(2): 263–269.
140 Modica PA, Tempelhoff R. Intracranial pressure during induction of anaesthesia
and tracheal intubation with etomidate-induced EEG burst suppression.
Can J Anaesth 1992; 39(3): 236–241.
141 Ghoneim MM, Yamada T. Etomidate: a clinical and electroencephalographic
comparison with thiopental. Anesth Analg 1977; 56(4): 479–485.
142 Ebrahim ZY, DeBoer GE, Luders H, et al. Effect of etomidate on the electroen-
cephalogram of patients with epilepsy. Anesth Analg 1986; 65(10): 1004–1006.
143 Dawson B, Michenfelder JD, Theye RA. Effects of ketamine on canine cerebral
blood flow and metabolism: modification by prior administration of thiopental.
Anesth Analg 1971; 50(3): 443–447.
144 Långsjö JW, Maksimow A, Salmi E, et al. S-ketamine anesthesia increases cerebral
blood flow in excess of the metabolic needs in humans. Anesthesiology 2005;
103(2): 258–268.
145 Långsjö JW, Kaisti KK, Aalto S, et al. Effects of subanesthetic doses of ketamine on
regional cerebral blood flow, oxygen consumption, and blood volume in humans.
Anesthesiology 2003; 99(3): 614–623.
146 Schwedler M, Miletich DJ, Albrecht RF. Cerebral blood flow and metabolism
following ketamine administration. Can Anaesth Soc J 1982; 29(3): 222–226.
147 Akeson J, Björkman S, Messeter K, et al. Cerebral pharmacodynamics of anaes-
thetic and subanaesthetic doses of ketamine in the normoventilated pig. Acta
Anaesthesiol Scand 1993; 37(2): 211–218.
148 Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, Benson GJ. Organ blood flow and distribution of
cardiac output in hypocapnic ketamine-anesthetized swine. Am J Vet Res 1983;
44(8): 1578–1582.
149 Vlerick L, Peremans K, Dockx R, et al. The long-term effects of single and repeated
subanaesthetic ketamine administration on regional cerebral blood flow in
healthy dogs measured with 99mTc-HMPAO SPECT. Psychiatry Res Neuroimaging
2019; 285: 18–24.
150 Waelbers T, Polis I, Vermeire S, et al. 5-HT 2A Receptors in the feline brain: 123 I-5-
I- R91150 kinetics and the influence of ketamine measured with micro-SPECT.
J Nucl Med 2013; 54(8): 1428–1433.
151 Waelbers T, Polis I, Vermeire S, et al. Effect of ketamine on the regional cerebral
blood flow and binding index of the 5-HT2A receptor radioligand 123I-R91150 in
the canine brain. J Vet Behav 2015; 10(4): 332–337.
152 Akeson J, Björkman S, Messeter K, et al. Low-dose midazolam antagonizes cere-
bral metabolic stimulation by ketamine in the pig. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1993;
37(6): 525–531.
153 Harvey RC, Greene SA, Thomas WB. Neurological disease. In: Tranquilli WJ,
Thurmon JC, Grimm KA, eds. Lumb & Jones’ Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia,
4th edn. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing, 2007: 903–914.
154 Cornelius BG, Webb E, Cornelius A, et al. Effect of sedative agent selection on
morbidity, mortality and length of stay in patients with increase in intracranial
pressure. World J Emerg Med 2018; 9(4): 256–261.
155 Godoy DA, Badenes R, Pelosi P, et al. Ketamine in acute phase of severe traumatic
brain injury “an old drug for new uses?” Crit Care 2021; 25(1): 19.
156 Rueda Carrillo L, Garcia KA, Yalcin N, et al. Ketamine and its emergence in the
field of neurology. Cureus 2022; 14(7): e27389.
157 Celesia GG, Chen RC. Effects of ketamine on EEG activity in cats and monkeys.
Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 1974; 37(4): 354–353.
158 Adami C, Spadavecchia C, Casoni D. Seizure activity occurring in two dogs after
S- ketamine-induction. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd 2013; 155(10): 569–572.
159 Lervik A, Haga HA, Becker M. Abnormal motor activity during anaesthesia in a
dog: a case report. Acta Vet Scand 2010; 52(1): 64.
160 Roynard P, Bilderback A, Dewey CW. Intravenous ketamine bolus(es) for the
treatment of status epilepticus, refractory status epilepticus, and cluster seizures: a
retrospective study of 15 dogs. Front Vet Sci 2021; 8: 547279.
161 Sánchez Fernández I, Goodkin HP, Scott RC. Pathophysiology of convulsive status
epilepticus. Seizure 2019; 68: 16–21.
162 Coles L, Rosenthal ES, Bleck TP, et al. Why ketamine. Epilepsy Behav EB 2023;
141: 109066.
163 Scheller MS, Nakakimura K, Fleischer JE, et al. Cerebral effects of sevoflurane in
the dog: comparison with isoflurane and enflurane. Br J Anaesth 1990; 65(3):
388–392.
164 Roald OK, Forsman M, Steen PA. The effects of prolonged isoflurane anaesthesia
on cerebral blood flow and metabolism in the dog. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1989;
33(3): 210–213.
165 Maekawa T, Tommasino C, Shapiro HM, et al. Local cerebral blood flow and
glucose utilization during isoflurane anesthesia in the rat. Anesthesiology 1986;
65(2): 144–151.
166 Todd MM, Drummond JC. A comparison of the cerebrovascular and metabolic
effects of halothane and isoflurane in the cat. Anesthesiology 1984; 60(4):
276–282.
167 Takahashi H, Murata K, Ikeda K. Sevoflurane does not increase intracranial
pressure in hyperventilated dogs. Br J Anaesth 1993; 71(4): 551–555.
168 Brosnan RJ, Steffey EP, LeCouteur RA, et al. Effects of ventilation and isoflurane
end-tidal concentration on intracranial and cerebral perfusion pressures in
horses. Am J Vet Res 2003; 64(1): 21–25.
169 Hans P, Dethier JC, Godin D, et al. Compared effects of enflurane and of halo-
thane on the intracranial pressure and the cerebral perfusion pressure in the dog.
Acta Anaesthesiol Belg 1980; 31(Suppl): 49–59.
170 Drummond JC, Todd MM. The response of the feline cerebral circulation to
PaCO2 during anesthesia with isoflurane and halothane and during sedation with
nitrous oxide. Anesthesiology 1985; 62(3): 268–273.
171 Kaieda R, Todd MM, Warner DS. The effects of anesthetics and PaCO2 on the
cerebrovascular, metabolic, and electroencephalographic responses to nitrous
oxide in the rabbit. Anesth Analg 1989; 68(2): 135–143.
172 Sakabe T, Kuramoto T, Inoue S, et al. Cerebral effects of nitrous oxide in the dog.
Anesthesiology 1978; 48(3): 195–200.
173 Tsai YC, Lin SS, Lee KC, et al. Cerebral effects of nitrous oxide during isoflurane-
induced hypotension in the pig. Br J Anaesth 1994; 73(5): 667–672.

-- 859 of 1450 --

844 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
174 Artru AA. Relationship between cerebral blood volume and CSF pressure during
anesthesia with halothane or enflurane in dogs. Anesthesiology 1983; 58(6):
533–539.
175 Artru AA. Reduction of cerebrospinal fluid pressure by hypocapnia: changes in
cerebral blood volume, cerebrospinal fluid volume and brain tissue water and
electrolytes. II. Effects of anesthetics. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 1988; 8(5):
750–756.
176 Artru AA, Powers K, Doepfner P. CSF, sagittal sinus, and jugular venous pressures
during desflurane or isoflurane anesthesia in dogs. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol 1994;
6(4): 239–248.
177 Holmström A, Akeson J. Cerebral blood flow at 0.5 and 1.0 minimal alveolar
concentrations of desflurane or sevoflurane compared with isoflurane in
normoventilated pigs. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol 2003; 15(2): 90–97.
178 Chohan AS, Greene SA, Keegan RD, et al. Intracranial pressure and cardiopulmo-
nary variables during isoflurane or sevoflurane anesthesia at various minimum
alveolar concentration multiples in normocapnic dogs. Am J Vet Res 2013; 74(3):
369–374.
179 Goren S, Kahveci N, Alkan T, et al. The effects of sevoflurane and isoflurane on
intracranial pressure and cerebral perfusion pressure after diffuse brain injury in
rats. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol 2001; 13(2): 113–119.
180 Lemkuil BP, Drummond JC, Patel PM, et al. Anesthesia for neurologic surgery and
neurointerventions. In: Gropper MA, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al., eds. Miller’s
Anesthesia, 9th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders, 2019: 1868–1910.
181 Strebel S, Lam AM, Matta B, et al. Dynamic and static cerebral autoregulation
during isoflurane, desflurane, and propofol anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1995; 83(1):
66–76.
182 McCulloch TJ, Visco E, Lam AM. Graded hypercapnia and cerebral autoregulation
during sevoflurane or propofol anesthesia. Anesthesiology 2000; 93(5): 1205–1209.
183 Caines D, Sinclair M, Valverde A, et al. Comparison of isoflurane and propofol for
maintenance of anesthesia in dogs with intracranial disease undergoing magnetic
resonance imaging. Vet Anaesth Analg 2014; 41(5): 468–479.
184 Lanier WL, Milde JH, Michenfelder JD. The cerebral effects of pancuronium and
atracurium in halothane-anesthetized dogs. Anesthesiology 1985; 63(6): 589–597.
185 Tarkkanen L, Laitinen L, Johansson G. Effects of d-tubocurarine on intracranial
pressure and thalamic electrical impedance. Anesthesiology 1974; 40(3): 247–251.
186 Giffin JP, Hartung J, Cottrell JE, et al. Effect of vecuronium on intracranial pressure,
mean arterial pressure and heart rate in cats. Br J Anaesth 1986; 58(4): 441–443.
187 Ducey JP, Deppe SA, Foley KT. A Comparison of the effects of suxamethonium,
atracurium and vecuronium on intracranial haemodynamics in swine. Anaesth
Intensive Care 1989; 17(4): 448–455.
188 Schramm WM, Strasser K, Bartunek A, et al. Effects of rocuronium and vecuro-
nium on intracranial pressure, mean arterial pressure and heart rate in neurosur-
gical patients. Br J Anaesth 1996; 77(5): 607–611.
189 Lanier WL, Milde JH, Michenfelder JD. Cerebral stimulation following succinyl-
choline in dogs. Anesthesiology 1986; 64(5): 551–559.
190 Thiagarajah S, Sophie S, Lear E, et al. Effect of suxamethonium on the ICP of cats
with and without thiopentone pretreatment. Br J Anaesth 1988; 60(2): 157–160.
191 Cherubini GB, Mantis P, Martinez TA, et al. Utility of magnetic resonance imaging
for distinguishing neoplastic from non-neoplastic brain lesions in dogs and cats.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2005; 46(5): 384–387.
192 Palmer AC, Malinowski W, Barnett KC. Clinical signs including papilloedema
associated with brain tumours in twenty-one dogs. J Small Anim Pract 1974; 15(6):
359–386.
193 Cameron S, Weltman JG, Fletcher DJ. The prognostic value of admission point-of-
care testing and modified Glasgow Coma Scale score in dogs and cats with trau-
matic brain injuries (2007–2010): 212 cases. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio)
2022; 32(1): 75–82.
194 Schizodimos T, Soulountsi V, Iasonidou C, et al. An overview of management of
intracranial hypertension in the intensive care unit. J Anesth 2020; 34(5): 741–757.
195 DiFazio J, Fletcher DJ. Updates in the management of the small animal patient with
neurologic trauma. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2013; 43(4): 915–940.
196 Seki S, Teshima K, Ito D, et al. Impact of intracranial hypertension on the short-
term prognosis in dogs undergoing brain tumor surgery. J Vet Med Sci 2019; 81(8):
1205–1210.
197 Kuo KW, Bacek LM, Taylor AR. Head trauma. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 2018; 48(1): 111–128.
198 Evans EK, Fernandez AL. Current trends in the management of canine traumatic
brain injury: an internet-based survey. Can Vet J 2019; 60(1): 73–79.
199 Nout-Lomas YS. Traumatic nervous system injury. Vet Clin North Am Equine
Pract 2022; 38(2): 363–377.
200 Chen HI. Hemodynamic mechanisms of neurogenic pulmonary edema.
Biol Signals 1995; 4(3): 186–192.
201 Bagley RS. Pathophysiologic sequelae of intracranial disease. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 1996; 26(4): 711–733.
202 El- Beheiry H. Protecting the brain during neurosurgical procedures: strategies
that can work. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2012; 25(5): 548–555.
203 Jellish WS. Anesthetic issues and perioperative blood pressure management in
patients who have cerebrovascular diseases undergoing surgical procedures.
Neurol Clin 2006; 24(4): 647–659.
204 Armitage-Chan EA, Wetmore LA, Chan DL. Anesthetic management of the head
trauma patient. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2007; 17(1): 5–14.
205 Kalfas IH, Little JR. Postoperative hemorrhage: a survey of 4992 intracranial
procedures. Neurosurgery 1988; 23(3): 343–347.
206 Hatashita S, Hoff JT, Ishii S. Focal brain edema associated with acute arterial
hypertension. J Neurosurg 1986; 64(4): 643–649.
207 Mayhan WG. Disruption of blood–brain barrier during acute hypertension in
adult and aged rats. Am J Physiol 1990; 258: H1735–H1738.
208 Harp JR, Wollman H. Cerebral metabolic effects of hyperventilation and deliber-
ate hypotension. Br J Anaesth 1973; 45(3): 256–262.
209 Flower O, Hellings S. Sedation in traumatic brain injury. Emerg Med Int 2012;
2012: 637171.
210 Maier C, Steinberg GK, Sun GH, et al. Neuroprotection by the alpha
2-adrenoreceptor agonist dexmedetomidine in a focal model of cerebral ischemia.
Anesthesiology 1993; 79(2): 306–312.
211 Cosar M, Eser O, Fidan H, et al. The neuroprotective effect of dexmedetomidine
in the hippocampus of rabbits after subarachnoid hemorrhage. Surg Neurol 2009;
71(1): 54–59.
212 Tsaousi GG, Lamperti M, Bilotta F. Role of dexmedetomidine for sedation in neu-
rocritical care patients: a qualitative systematic review and meta-analysis of cur-
rent evidence. Clin Neuropharmacol 2016; 39(3): 144–151.
213 Hatfield J, Soto AL, Kelly-Hedrick M, et al. Safety, efficacy, and clinical outcomes
of dexmedetomidine for sedation in traumatic brain injury: a scoping review.
J Neurosurg Anesthesiol 2023; 10.1097/ANA.0000000000000907.
214 Aryan HE, Box KW, Ibrahim D, et al. Safety and efficacy of dexmedetomidine in
neurosurgical patients. Brain Inj 2006; 20(8): 791–798.
215 Marquez-Grados F, Vettorato E, Corletto F. Sevoflurane with opioid or dexme-
detomidine infusions in dogs undergoing intracranial surgery: a retrospective
observational study. J Vet Sci 2020; 21(1): e8.
216 Pascoe PJ, Ilkiw JE, Frischmeyer KJ. The effect of the duration of propofol admin-
istration on recovery from anesthesia in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2006; 33(1): 2–7.
217 Forman SA. Clinical and molecular pharmacology of etomidate. Anesthesiology
2011; 114(3): 695–707.
218 Edelman GJ, Hoffman WE, Charbel FT. Cerebral hypoxia after etomidate admin-
istration and temporary cerebral artery occlusion. Anesth Analg 1997; 85(4):
821–825.
219 Lorenz IH, Kolbitsch C, Hinteregger M, et al. Remifentanil and nitrous oxide
reduce changes in cerebral blood flow velocity in the middle cerebral artery
caused by pain. Br J Anaesth 2003; 90(3): 296–299.
220 Tommasino C, Moore S, Todd MM. Cerebral effects of isovolemic hemodilution
with crystalloid or colloid solutions. Crit Care Med 1988; 16(9): 862–868.
221 Hoehne SN, Yozova ID, Vidondo B, et al. Comparison of the effects of 7.2% hyper-
tonic saline and 20% mannitol on electrolyte and acid–base variables in dogs with
suspected intracranial hypertension. J Vet Intern Med 2021; 35(1): 341–351.
222 Dewey CW. Emergency management of the head trauma patient. Principles and
practice. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2000; 30(1): 207–225.
223 Kamel H, Navi BB, Nakagawa K, et al. Hypertonic saline versus mannitol for the
treatment of elevated intracranial pressure: a meta-analysis of randomized clinical
trials. Crit Care Med 2011; 39(3): 554–559.
224 Wakai A, McCabe A, Roberts I, et al. Mannitol for acute traumatic brain injury.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013; 2013(8): CD001049.
225 Mortazavi MM, Romeo AK, Deep A, et al. Hypertonic saline for treating raised
intracranial pressure: literature review with meta-analysis. J Neurosurg 2012;
116(1): 210–221.
226 Chen H, Song Z, Dennis JA. Hypertonic saline versus other intracranial pressure-
lowering agents for people with acute traumatic brain injury. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 2020; 1(1): CD010904.
227 Carney N, Totten AM, O’Reilly C, et al. Guidelines for the management of severe
traumatic brain injury, fourth edition. Neurosurgery 2017; 80(1): 6–15.
228 Edwards P, Arango M, Balica L, et al. Final results of MRC CRASH, a randomised
placebo- controlled trial of intravenous corticosteroid in adults with head injury-
outcomes at 6 months. Lancet 2005; 365(9475): 1957–1959.
229 Hu H, Barker A, Harcourt-Brown T, et al. Systematic review of brain tumor treat-
ment in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2015; 29(6): 1456–1463.
230 Bebawy JF. Perioperative steroids for peritumoral intracranial edema: a review of
mechanisms, efficacy, and side effects. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol 2012; 24(3): 173–177.
231 Ryken TC, Kuo JS, Prabhu RS, et al. Congress of Neurological Surgeons systematic
review and evidence-based guidelines on the role of steroids in the treatment of
adults with metastatic brain tumors. Neurosurgery 2019; 84(3): E189–E191.

-- 860 of 1450 --

Chapter 39: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Neurologic Disease 	845
232 Plum F, Posner JB, Troy B. Cerebral metabolic and circulatory responses to
induced convulsions in animals. Arch Neurol 1968; 18(1): 1–13.
233 Bolwig TG, Quistorff B. In vivo concentration of lactate in the brain of conscious
rats before and during seizures: a new ultra-rapid technique for the freeze-
sampling of brain tissue. J Neurochem 1973; 21(5): 1345–1348.
234 Perlman JM, Volpe JJ. Seizures in the preterm infant: effects on cerebral blood
flow velocity, intracranial pressure, and arterial blood pressure. J Pediatr 1983;
102(2): 288–293.
235 Berendt M, Farquhar RG, Mandigers PJ, et al. International veterinary epilepsy
task force consensus report on epilepsy definition, classification and terminology
in companion animals. BMC Vet Res 2015; 11: 182.
236 Blades Golubovic S, Rossmeisl JH. Status epilepticus in dogs and cats, part 1:
etiopathogenesis, epidemiology, and diagnosis. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio)
2017; 27(3): 278–287.
237 Blades Golubovic S, Rossmeisl JH. Status epilepticus in dogs and cats, part 2: treat-
ment, monitoring, and prognosis. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2017; 27(3):
288–300.
238 Podell M, Volk HA, Berendt M, et al. 2015 ACVIM Small animal consensus state-
ment on seizure management in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2016; 30(2): 477–490.
239 Hymes JA. Seizure activity during isoflurane anesthesia. Anesth Analg 1985; 64(3):
367–368.
240 Perks A, Cheema S, Mohanraj R. Anaesthesia and epilepsy. Br J Anaesth 2012;
108(4): 562–571.
241 Reddy RV, Moorthy SS, Dierdorf SF, et al. Excitatory effects and electroencephalo-
graphic correlation of etomidate, thiopental, methohexital, and propofol. Anesth
Analg 1993; 77(5): 1008–1011.
242 Tortella FC. Endogenous opioid peptides and epilepsy: quieting the seizing brain?
Trends Pharmacol Sci 1988; 9(10): 366–372.
243 Saboory E, Derchansky M, Ismaili M, et al. Mechanisms of morphine enhance-
ment of spontaneous seizure activity. Anesth Analg 2007; 105(6): 1729–1735.
244 McGuire G, El-Beheiry H, Manninen P, et al. Activation of electrocorticographic
activity with remifentanil and alfentanil during neurosurgical excision of epilepto-
genic focus. Br J Anaesth 2003; 91(5): 651–655.
245 Shih CJ, Doufas AG, Chang HC, et al. Recurrent seizure activity after epidural
morphine in a post-partum woman. Can J Anaesth 2005; 52(7): 727–729.
246 Miziak B, Chrościńska-Krawczyk M, Czuczwar SJ. Neurosteroids and seizure
activity. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) 2020; 11: 541802.
247 Hansen SL, Sperling BB, Sánchez C. Anticonvulsant and antiepileptogenic
effects of GABAA receptor ligands in pentylenetetrazole-kindled mice. Prog
Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 2004; 28(1): 105–113.
248 Constant I, Seeman R, Murat I. Sevoflurane and epileptiform EEG changes.
Paediatr Anaesth 2005; 15(4): 266–274.
249 Mohanram A, Kumar V, Iqbal Z, et al. Repetitive generalized seizure-like activity dur-
ing emergence from sevoflurane anesthesia. Can J Anaesth 2007; 54(8): 657–661.
250 Zeiler FA, Zeiler KJ, Teitelbaum J, et al. Modern inhalational anesthetics for
refractory status epilepticus. Can J Neurol Sci 2015; 42(2): 106–115.
251 Thompson K, Pohlmann-Eden B, Campbell LA, et al. Pharmacological treatments
for preventing epilepsy following traumatic head injury. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 2015; 2015(8): CD009900.
252 Hodgson DS, Dunlop CI. General anesthesia for horses with specific problems.
Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 1990; 6(3): 625–650.
253 Israel SK, Levine JM, Kerwin SC, et al. The relative sensitivity of computed tomog-
raphy and myelography for identification of thoracolumbar intervertebral disk
herniations in dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2009; 50(3): 247–252.
254 Rossmeisl JH, White C, Pancotto TE, et al. Acute adverse events associated with
ventral slot decompression in 546 dogs with cervical intervertebral disc disease.
Vet Surg 2013; 42(7): 795–806.
255 Lewis DD, Hosgood G. Complications associated with the use of iohexol for mye-
lography of the cervical vertebral column in dogs: 66 cases (1988–1990). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 1992; 200(9): 1381–1384.
256 Carroll GL, Keene BW, Forrest LJ. Asystole associated with iohexol myelography
in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1997; 38(4): 284–287.
257 Widmer WR, Blevins W. Veterinary myelography: a review of contrast media,
adverse effects, and technique. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1991; 27(2): 163–177.
258 Olby NJ, Moore SA, Brisson B, et al. ACVIM consensus statement on diagnosis
and management of acute canine thoracolumbar intervertebral disc extrusion.
J Vet Intern Med 2022; 36(5): 1570–1596.
259 Park EH, White GA, Tieber LM. Mechanisms of injury and emergency care of
acute spinal cord injury in dogs and cats. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio)
2012; 22(2): 160–178.
260 Brisson BA, Moffatt SL, Swayne SL, et al. Recurrence of thoracolumbar interverte-
bral disk extrusion in chondrodystrophic dogs after surgical decompression with
or without prophylactic fenestration: 265 cases (1995–1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc
2004; 224(11): 1808–1814.
261 Bartels KE, Creed JE, Yturraspe DJ. Complications associated with the dorsolat-
eral muscle-separating approach for thoracolumbar disk fenestration in the dog.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1983; 183(10): 1081–1083.
262 Brisson BA, Holmberg DL, Parent J, et al. Comparison of the effect of single-site
and multiple-site disk fenestration on the rate of recurrence of thoracolumbar
intervertebral disk herniation in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2011; 238(12):
1593–1600.
263 Clark D. An analysis of intraoperative and early postoperative mortality associated
with cervical spinal decompressive surgery in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
1986; 22(6): 739–744.
264 Zidan N, Medland J, Olby N. Long-term postoperative pain evaluation in dogs
with thoracolumbar intervertebral disk herniation after hemilaminectomy. J Vet
Intern Med 2020; 34(4): 1547–1555.
265 Stauffer JL, Gleed RD, Short CE, et al. Cardiac dysrhythmias during anesthesia for
cervical decompression in the dog. Am J Vet Res 1988; 49(7): 1143–1146.
266 Lemarié RJ, Kerwin SC, Partington BP, et al. Vertebral subluxation following
ventral cervical decompression in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2000; 36(4):
348–358.
267 Pasternak JJ, Lanier WL. Neuroanesthesiology update 2010. J Neurosurg
Anesthesiol 2011; 23(2): 67–99.
268 Java MA, Drobatz KJ, Gilley RS, et al. Incidence of and risk factors for postopera-
tive pneumonia in dogs anesthetized for diagnosis or treatment of intervertebral
disk disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2009; 235(3): 281–287.
269 Beal MW, Paglia DT, Griffin GM, et al. Ventilatory failure, ventilator management,
and outcome in dogs with cervical spinal disorders: 14 cases (1991–1999).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2001; 218(10): 1598–1602.
270 Kube S, Owen T, Hanson S. Severe respiratory compromise secondary to cervical
disk herniation in two dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2003; 39(6): 513–517.
271 Okada M, Kitagawa M, Ito D, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging features and
clinical signs associated with presumptive and confirmed progressive myelomala-
cia in dogs: 12 cases (1997–2008). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2010; 237(10): 1160–1165.
272 Krieger AJ. Respiratory failure after ventral spinal surgery: a clinical and experi-
mental study. J Surg Res 1973; 14(6): 512–517.
273 King A. Autonomic components of the central nervous system. In: King A, ed.
Physiological and Clinical Anatomy of the Domestic Mammals. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press, 1987: 189–192.
274 Ramsey J, DeBlieux P. Respiratory failure. In: Ali J, Summer W, Levitzky M, eds.
Pulmonary Pathophysiology – a Clinical Approach, 3rd edn. New York, NY:
McGraw-Hill Medical, 2010: 227–247.
275 Atkinson PP, Atkinson JL. Spinal shock. Mayo Clin Proc 1996; 71(4): 384–389.
276 Ditunno JF, Little JW, Tessler A, et al. Spinal shock revisited: a four-phase model.
Spinal Cord 2004; 42(7): 383–395.
277 Spungen AM, Dicpinigaitis PV, Almenoff PL, et al. Pulmonary obstruction in
individuals with cervical spinal cord lesions unmasked by bronchodilator admin-
istration. Paraplegia 1993; 31(6): 404–407.
278 Dicpinigaitis PV, Spungen AM, Bauman WA, et al. Bronchial hyperresponsiveness
after cervical spinal cord injury. Chest 1994; 105(4): 1073–1076.
279 Griffiths IR, Trench JG, Crawford RA. Spinal cord blood flow and conduction
during experimental cord compression in normotensive and hypotensive dogs.
J Neurosurg 1979; 50(3): 353–360.
280 Olby N. The pathogenesis and treatment of acute spinal cord injuries in dogs.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2010; 40(5): 791–807.
281 Hawthorne JC, Blevins WE, Wallace LJ, et al. Cervical vertebral fractures in 56
dogs: a retrospective study. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1999; 35(2): 135–146.
282 Pezzanite LM, Easley JT, Bayless R, et al. Outcomes after cervical vertebral inter-
body fusion using an interbody fusion device and polyaxial pedicle screw and rod
construct in 10 horses (2015–2019). Equine Vet J 2022; 54(2): 347–358.
283 Mannaa M, Shamaa AA, Shawky A, et al. A novel surgical technique for treatment
of cervical vertebral stenotic myelopathy (wobbler syndrome) in a filly. J Equine
Vet Sci 2023; 126: 104493.
284 Gough SL, Anderson JDC, Dixon JJ. Computed tomographic cervical myelogra-
phy in horses: technique and findings in 51 clinical cases. J Vet Intern Med 2020;
34(5): 2142–2151.
285 Kondo T, Sato F, Tsuzuki N, et al. Characteristic computed tomographic myelog-
raphy findings in 23 Thoroughbred horses. J Vet Med Sci 2022; 84(4): 525–532.
286 Garrett KS. Special diagnostic techniques in equine neurology (radiography,
ultrasonography, computed tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging).
Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 2022; 38(2): 171–188.
287 Mullen KR, Furness MC, Johnson AL, et al. Adverse reactions in horses that
underwent general anesthesia and cervical myelography. J Vet Intern Med 2015;
29(3): 954–960.
288 Nelson BB, Goodrich LR, Barrett MF, et al. Use of contrast media in computed
tomography and magnetic resonance imaging in horses: techniques, adverse
events and opportunities. Equine Vet J 2017; 49(4): 410–424.

-- 861 of 1450 --

846 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
289 Hubbell JA, Reed SM, Myer CW, et al. Sequelae of myelography in the horse.
Equine Vet J 1988; 20(6): 438–440.
290 Moore BR, Reed SM, Robertson JT. Surgical treatment of cervical stenotic myelop-
athy in horses: 73 cases (1983–1992). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993; 203(1): 108–112.
291 Rantanen N, Gavin P, Barbee D, et al. Ataxia and paresis in horses. Part II.
Radiographic and myelographic examination of the cervical column. Compend
Contin Educ Pract Vet 1981; 3: S161–S171.
292 Rainger JE, Hughes KJ, Kessell A, Dart CM. Pleuropneumonia as a sequela of
myelography and general anaesthesia in a Thoroughbred colt. Aust Vet J 2006;
84(4): 138–140.
293 Jarrett MA, Bailey KM, Messenger KM, et al. Recovery of horses from general
anesthesia after induction with propofol and ketamine versus midazolam and
ketamine. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2018; 253(1): 101–107.
294 Mignan T, Targett M, Lowrie M. Classification of myasthenia gravis and congenital
myasthenic syndromes in dogs and cats. J Vet Intern Med 2020; 34(5): 1707–1717.
295 Shelton GD. Muscular disorders. In: Ettinger S, Feldman E, Côté E, eds. Textbook
of Veterinary Internal Medicine: Diseases of the Dog and the Cat, 8th edn. St. Louis,
MO: Elsevier Saunders, 2017: 2149.
296 Shelton GD. Myasthenia gravis and disorders of neuromuscular transmission.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2002; 32(1): 189–206.
297 Shelton GD. Myasthenia gravis and congenital myasthenic syndromes in dogs and
cats: a history and mini-review. Neuromuscul Disord 2016; 26(6): 331–334.
298 Shelton GD, Ho M, Kass PH. Risk factors for acquired myasthenia gravis in cats:
105 cases (1986–1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000; 216(1): 55–57.
299 Hague DW, Humphries HD, Mitchell MA, et al. Risk factors and outcomes in cats
with acquired myasthenia gravis (2001–2012). J Vet Intern Med 2015; 29(5):
1307–1312.
300 Smith AN, Wright JC, Brawner WR, et al. Radiation therapy in the treatment of
canine and feline thymomas: a retrospective study (1985–1999). J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 2001; 37(5): 489–496.
301 Muckler VC, O’Brien JM, Matson SE, et al. Perianesthetic implications and con-
siderations for myasthenia gravis. J Perianesthesia Nurs 2019; 34(1): 4–15.
302 Shilo Y, Pypendop BH, Barter LS, et al. Thymoma removal in a cat with acquired
myasthenia gravis: a case report and literature review of anesthetic techniques.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38(6): 603–613.
303 Howard JF Jr. Myasthenia Gravis – a Manual for the Health Care Provider.
Myasthenia Gravis Foundation of America. www.myasthenia.org (accessed August
2023).
304 Naguib M, el Dawlatly AA, Ashour M, et al. Multivariate determinants of the need
for postoperative ventilation in myasthenia gravis. Can J Anaesth 1996; 43(10):
1006–1013.
305 Haroutiunian S, Lecht S, Zur AA, et al. The challenge of pain management in
patients with myasthenia gravis. J Pain Palliat Care Pharmacother 2009; 23(3):
242–260.
306 Nilsson E, Muller K. Neuromuscular effects of isoflurane in patients with myas-
thenia gravis. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1990; 34(2): 126–131.
307 Vanlinthout LE, Booij LH, van Egmond J, et al. Effect of isoflurane and sevoflu-
rane on the magnitude and time course of neuromuscular block produced by
vecuronium, pancuronium and atracurium. Br J Anaesth 1996; 76(3): 389–395.
308 Abel M, Eisenkraft JB. Anesthetic implications of myasthenia gravis. Mt Sinai J
Med N Y 2002; 69(1–2): 31–37.
309 Brown J, Laiken N. Muscarinic receptor agonists and antagonists. In: Brunton L,
Chabner B, Knollmann B, eds. Goodman & Gilman’s the Pharmacological Basis of
Ttherapeutics, 12th edn. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2011: 219–238.
310 Paterson IG, Hood JR, Russell SH, et al. Mivacurium in the myasthenic patient.
Br J Anaesth 1994; 73(4): 494–498.
311 Jones RS, Sharp NJ. Use of the muscle relaxant atracurium in a myasthenic dog.
Vet Rec 1985; 117(19): 500–501.
312 Jones RS, Brown A, Watkins PE. Use of the muscle relaxant vecuronium in a
myasthenic dog. Vet Rec 1988; 122(25): 611.

-- 862 of 1450 --

Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of Lumb and Jones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
847
Introduction
The liver is centrally located between the diaphragm and abdominal
viscera and receives 20–30% of total cardiac output (CO) via the
portal vein and hepatic artery. The liver plays a vital role in homeo-
stasis and is responsible for the biotransformation and excretion of
endogenous and exogenous substances. Significant exogenous
physiologic support may be necessary for patients with clinically
relevant hepatic dysfunction. In addition, consideration must be
given to anesthetic and adjunct drug selection to avoid delayed
recovery. Anesthetic and surgical procedures involving the liver
may cause ischemia and reperfusion injury, inducing acute and
chronic hepatic dysfunction. Hence, it is crucial to maintain adequate
hepatic blood flow and oxygen delivery during general anesthesia.
Clinical application of anatomic and physiologic knowledge is
necessary to optimize anesthetic management during hepatic and
extrahepatic biliary disease interventions.
Functional anatomy and physiology
The liver is the largest gland in the body, comprising 1.5–4% of total
body weight, and is anatomically and physiologically similar among
species. The liver can be divided into four main lobes (left, right,
quadrate, and caudate lobes). The right and left lobes may be further
subdivided into separate lateral and medial lobes. A gallbladder is
present in most domestic species with the exception of the horse
and the rat, in which large bile ducts compensate for the absence of
the gallbladder. In some species, the bile duct terminates directly on
the duodenum (e.g., canine and bovine), but in others, it shares a
common duct with the pancreas (e.g., cat, horse, and small rumi-
nants). This can be of importance, as some hepatobiliary diseases
can also affect the pancreas of those species [1].
Structural organization of the liver
The hexagonal hepatic lobule is the basic anatomic unit of the liver.
Cylindrical plates of hepatocytes are separated by venous sinusoids
(fenestrated capillaries) and radiate around a central vein like
spokes in wheel. The portal triad (hepatic arterioles, portal venules,
bile canaliculi, lymphatics, and nerves) is present at each corner of
the hexagon. The perisinusoidal space (or space of Disse) lies
between the sinusoids and hepatocytes, containing plasma and
allowing hepatocytes to absorb nutrients and waste products.
Macrophage-derived Kupffer cells line the perisinusoidal space
(Fig. 40.1). These cells have phagocytic function and are active in
hepatic inflammatory responses. The hepatic arterial (HA) blood
40 Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic
Management of Patients with Hepatic Disease
Vaidehi V. Paranjape1 and Fernando Garcia-Pereira2
1 Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences, Virginia-Maryland College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Tech University,
Blacksburg, Virginia, USA
2 Pet Urgent Response and Emergency, Jacksonville, Florida, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 847
Functional anatomy and physiology, 847
Structural organization of the liver, 847
Hepatic blood flow, 848
Hepatic functions, 850
Assessment of hepatic function, 851
Biochemical derangements in liver pathology, 851
Interpretation of liver enzymes, 852
Assessment of coagulation, 852
Anesthetics and hepatic disease, 853
Sedatives, 853
Injectable anesthetic agents, 854
Inhalant anesthetic agents, 854
Neuromuscular blocking agents, 855
Hepatic pathophysiology and anesthetic management, 855
Hepatitis, 855
Portosystemic shunt, 856
Hepatic neoplasia, 856
Hepatic lobe torsion, 857
Gallbladder and extrahepatic biliary tract pathology, 857
Anesthetic considerations for diagnostic or minimally invasive
procedures, 857
Ultrasound-guided biopsy, 857
Laparoscopic procedures, 857
Laparotomy, 858
Interventional radiology, 858
Pain management in hepatobiliary diseases, 858
References, 858

-- 863 of 1450 --

848 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
enters the sinusoid either directly or through the peribiliary capil-
lary plexus and mixes with portal venous blood in the low-pressure
sinusoid microvasculature.
Although the hepatic lobule is the traditional organizational unit
of the liver, a more logical functional unit is the acinus, which com-
prises three different zones (Fig. 40.2). Zone 1, known as the peri-
portal area is centered around the portal triad, making it oxygen
rich due to its close proximity with the hepatic artery. Zone 1 is
most adaptable to hemodynamic stressors, least susceptible to
necrosis, and first to undergo regeneration. The hepatocytes in this
zone contain many mitochondria, and most oxidative metabolic
processes occur here. Zone 2 is a transitional zone between zones 1
and 3. Zone 3 is the pericentral zone, located in close proximity to
the central vein (centrilobular), where blood leaves the organ to
join the central circulation. This zone has the lowest oxygen ten-
sion, is most susceptible to hemodynamic and toxic stress, and is
the last to regenerate. The hepatocytes in this zone contain a large
amount of smooth endoplasmic reticulum and microsomal enzyme
activity, and therefore play a major role in drug detoxification, or
Phase I and II metabolism.
Hepatic blood flow
Afferent blood supply to the liver is composed of both arterial and
portal venous blood and all the blood exits the liver via the hepatic
veins. The arrangement of hepatic structures is centered on the cau-
dal vena cava and portal vein. The portal vein supplies 75% of the
hepatic blood flow (HBF) and is formed by blood returning from
the splanchnic circulation, including most of the gastrointestinal
tract and spleen (Fig. 40.3). The splenic vein contribution to the
portal blood is rich in pancreatic hormones and cytokines, while
the superior mesenteric vein brings nutrients, toxins, and bacteria
that are absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. The HA provides
the remaining 25% of HBF; however, it supplies 45–50% of the
liver’s oxygen requirements. Although the portal vein carries blood
with a lower oxygen content than the HA, its contribution to the
organ’s oxygenation is significant due to the large volume of blood
that it delivers [4].
HBF is regulated via intrinsic and extrinsic mechanisms. The
HA supplies arterial blood via a high-pressure system and mean
pressure in the HA is similar to that in the aorta. The HA possesses
α1 -, α2
- , and β2
- adrenergic receptors. Sympathetic activation con-
stricts HA smooth muscle, increases arterial resistance, and reduces
blood flow. β-Adrenergic stimulation vasodilates hepatic arterioles,
decreases vascular resistance, and increases flow through the HA.
However, this effect may be blocked by non-selective β-adrenergic
receptor antagonists administered to decrease portal pressure in
human patients with liver cirrhosis [5]. In contrast, the portal vein
contains α-adrenergic but not β2
-adrenergic receptors [6]. Minor
changes in hepatic venous tone and hepatic venous pressure can
result in large changes in hepatic blood volume, favoring the liver’s
ability to act as a blood reservoir. For example, during hemorrhage,
hepatic venous pressure decreases, shifting blood into the central
venous circulation and augmenting circulating blood volume.
Blood loss can be reduced during liver surgery by lowering the cen-
tral venous pressure, thereby reducing hepatic venous pressure and
hepatic blood volume.
The liver’s high blood flow is due to low vascular resistance in the
portal vein. Normally, the portal vein pressure is about 7–10 mmHg.
However, with hepatocellular injury, fibrous tissue can form in the
affected areas, impeding blood flow and causing portal hyperten-
sion [6]. An increase in portal pressure can promote neovasculari-
zation of splanchnic vasculature and development of acquired
portosystemic shunts. An increase in portal flow must be compen-
sated such that portal venous pressure is minimally affected. In
order to preserve adequate sinusoidal perfusion pressure while
maintaining low portal venous pressure, HBF is regulated by mech-
anisms targeting HA inflow, portal venous inflow, and the interrela-
tionship between HA and portal venous inflow circuits [7]. Several
Liver acinus
Sinusoid Central vein
Bile
canaliculus
Sinusoidal lumen
Septal branch
Kupffer cell
Hepatocyte
Kupffer
cell
Bile
canaliculi
Space of Disse
Hepatocyte
Dendritic
cell
Endothelial cell
with fenestrae
Stellate
cell
Bile duct
	Portal
vein
branch
Hepatic
artery
branch
Figure 40.1 Structures of the liver lobule and liver acinus. Source: Du et al. [2], with permission.

-- 864 of 1450 --

Chapter 40: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Hepatic Disease 	849
Zone 1
Cholangiocyte
Bile duct
Portal vein
Endothelial cell Hepatocyte
Central vein
Kupffer cell
Zone 3	Zone 2
Oxygen concentration
TG synthesis
β-oxidation
Lipogenesis/ Ketogenesis
Gluconeogenesis
Glycolysis
Glycogen synthesis (from lactate)
Ureagenesis
Bile duct
Portal vein
Hepatic artery
Portal triad
Glycogen synthesis (from glucose)
Zone 1
Stellate cell	Hepatic artery
Sinusoid
Zone 2
Zone 3
Central vein
(A) 	(B)
Figure 40.2 A. Microanatomy of the hepatic parenchyma within a hepatic lobule: Zone 1, periportal; zone 3, pericentral; zone 2, between zones 1 and 3.
B. A schematic representation of a liver acinus and the corresponding zonation of several metabolic processes across the acinus. The gradients depicted
below the scheme pertain to both essential hemostasis and metabolic processes along the acinus. Source: Trefts et al. [3], with permission.
Inferior caval vein
Hepatic
veins
Liver
Stomach
Spleen
Aorta
Pancreas
Small
intestines
Colon
	arterty
S
i
n
u
s
o
i
d
s
Port
a
l
v
e
i
n
H
e
p
a
t
i
c
a
r
t
e
r
y
I
n
f
e
r
i
o
r
m
e s e n t e
r
i
c
a
r
t
e
r
y
S
u
p
e
r
i
o
r
m
e
s
e
n
t
e
r
i
c
C
e
l
i
a
c
a
r
t
e
r
y
Figure 40.3 The splanchnic circulation. Source: Gelman and Mushlin [4], with permission.

-- 865 of 1450 --

850 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
intrinsic mechanisms are responsible for maintaining adequate
sinusoidal perfusion pressure while maintaining low portal venous
pressure, including (1) low basal resistance, (2) distensible pre-
and post-sinusoid resistance sites, (3) the myogenic constrictive
response of the HA, (4) the HA response to oxygen tension or pH of
portal venous blood, (5) the highly compliant hepatic vasculature,
and (6) the hepatic artery buffer response (HABR) [8]. These
unique mechanisms represent the ability of the hepatic artery to
produce compensatory flow changes in response to changes in
portal venous flow. The HABR is mechanistically associated with
adenosine because as portal blood flow decreases, adenosine accu-
mulates, causing vasodilation of nearby hepatic arterioles. This
dilation increases arterial blood flow and maintains hepatic perfu-
sion [8]. Other vasoactive mediators such as nitric oxide, carbon
monoxide, and hydrogen sulfide may be potential candidates to
affect HA flow and contribute to the HABR. Moreover, sensory
innervation (neurokinin-1) and sensory neuropeptides (calcitonin
gene- related peptide) may also be related to HABR [7].
Hepatic functions
The liver performs numerous functions affecting all systems of the
body (Table 40.1). It plays a major role in protein synthesis and deg-
radation, including albumin, coagulation proteins, and numerous
peptides. Glycogen storage, nutrient metabolism, detoxification,
and excretion of endogenous waste products and xenobiotics are
other important functions.
Protein homeostasis
Normally, plasma protein availability is abundant relative to daily
consumption. Albumin is the most abundant protein produced by
the liver and is involved in several homeostatic processes. Notably,
albumin is a major contributor to plasma oncotic pressure. Albumin
production is regulated (via feedback) in part through plasma
oncotic pressure in addition to its plasma concentration [10].
Albumin is a low-affinity/high-capacity major plasma transport
protein, and it plays a significant role in drug binding of acidic anes-
thetic drugs (e.g., barbiturates). In contrast, alpha-1 acid glycopro-
tein (AAG) represents a relatively smaller percentage of total plasma
proteins. It is considered a high-affinity/low-capacity plasma
protein, and mainly binds to basic drugs (e.g., local anesthetics). In
most disease states such as inflammation, infection, and neoplasia,
AAG levels have been shown to increase in humans and animals.
This promotes the utility of AAG as a clinical biomarker for disease
diagnosis and prognosis [11].
Coagulation
Several coagulation factors, such as fibrinogen (factor I), prothrom-
bin (factor II), factors V, VII, IX, X, XI, XII, and XIII, prekallikrein,
and high molecular weight kininogen are synthesized or activated
by the liver. The liver is also responsible for the synthesis of proteins
that modulate coagulation, such as plasminogen, plasminogen acti-
vator inhibitor-1, α2
- antiplasmin, antithrombin, and proteins C and
S. Furthermore, it performs vitamin K-dependent carboxylation of
prothrombin, factors VII, IX, and X, and proteins C and S [9].
Biotransformation and elimination of xenobiotics
The enzymatic systems involved in the biotransformation of sub-
stances are generally localized to the liver. However, other tissues,
such as the lungs, kidneys, and gastrointestinal tract, have signifi-
cant metabolic capabilities for some drugs. The route of administra-
tion and subsequent drug distribution to these sites must be
considered when administering sedatives, analgesics, and anesthet-
ics [12]. First-pass hepatic metabolism significantly reduces the
bioavailability of several drugs, especially after enteral, and in some
species rectal, administration.
Xenobiotic biotransformation can be divided into Phase I (oxida-
tion, reduction, or hydrolysis) and Phase II (conjugation) reactions.
Phase I transformation introduces a polar group (e.g., OH – and
NH2
–
) to the parent drug typically via the cytochrome P450 system
(CYPs). While such reactions often inactivate the drug, the addition
of these functional radicals may result in formation of active metab-
olites for some drugs, or cause activation of a prodrug. One example
of a prodrug is codeine, which is catalyzed by CYP2D6 and O-
demethylated to form morphine. Local codeine O-demethylation in
the central nervous system could explain the analgesic effect of
codeine despite relatively low plasma levels of morphine [13].
The CYP450 system is the most important group of metabolizing
enzymes in the body. They are found in several tissues, such as the
liver, kidney, and intestines, and are responsible for the oxidation
and reduction of xenobiotics and endogenous substances. These
reactions convert relatively lipophilic compounds into hydrophilic
metabolites to facilitate their elimination through the urine or bile.
They are mostly carried out intracellularly in the microsomes of the
smooth endoplasmic reticulum (i.e., microsomal enzymes). Zone 3
hepatocytes have the highest content of CYP450 enzymes. Their
localization is important in predicting the region where hepatic
damage will be most evident when a drug is metabolized to toxic
substances. An example is severe centrilobular necrosis and cholan-
giohepatitis observed in some cats following administration of oral
diazepam [14]. Although the same families and subfamilies of P450
enzymes are present in most domestic species, different individual
enzymes might be encountered in each species. Additionally, the
same enzyme may be present but act on a different substrate range
compared with humans [15]. Therefore, it becomes problematic to
extrapolate drug doses, intervals, effects, and metabolic fate from
human-derived data to veterinary species. Differences in CYP
activity exist not only among species but also among different
breeds and genders. For example, Beagles have greater propofol
hydroxylase activity (CYP2B) than Greyhounds [16]. Gender vari-
ability in dogs and cats for different CYP families has also been
described [17].
Table 40.1 Pertinent functions of the liver.
Metabolic 	Synthetic 	Homeostatic
Xenobiotic metabolism
Protein metabolism
(ammonia, urea)
Lipid metabolism
(triglyceride)
Glucose metabolism
(gluconeogenesis,
glycogenolysis, and
glycogenesis)
Carbohydrate metabolism
Nutrient metabolism (amino
acids, lipids, and vitamins)
Bile production and secretion
Biotransformation and biliary
excretion
Coagulation and
anticoagulation proteins
Plasma proteins (albumin,
alpha-1 acid glycoprotein)
Steroid hormones
(cholesterol)
Thrombopoietin
Angiotensinogen
Insulin-like growth factor
Fetal and extramedullary
hematopoiesis
Acute phase proteins
Plasma cholinesterases
Intravascular volume
regulation (RAAS)
Glucose homeostasis
Regulation of portal
blood flow (HABR)
Liver regeneration and
growth
Plasma oncotic pressure
Innate and adaptive
immunity
RAAS, renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system; HABR, hepatic artery buffer response.
Source: Adapted from Mulaikal and Emond [9].

-- 866 of 1450 --

Chapter 40: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Hepatic Disease 	851
Phase II reactions are responsible for conferring further hydro-
philicity to a drug, facilitating its excretion. These reactions occur
mostly in the cytosol. The domestic cat has been recognized to have
a reduced ability to form glucuronide conjugates of many xenobiot-
ics (e.g., propofol) [18]. Therefore, when low molecular weight phe-
nolic derivatives are given to cats, they are biotransformed slowly,
or are biotransformed and eliminated by other mechanisms [19].
Defects of the UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT)1A6 gene seem
to be responsible for the poor glucuronidation of some drugs in
cats, such as acetaminophen [20]. However, cats have other UGT
enzymes that can biotransform some xenobiotics [21].
Acting as the most diverse catalysts, CYPs contribute to interindi-
vidual variations in drug responses, resulting from genetic and epi-
genetic variants, as well as factors such as gender, age, nutritional
status, disease states, and pathophysiological states. The CYPs can be
inhibited or induced by concomitant drugs and circulating metabo-
lites, which can influence treatment outcomes through drug–drug
interaction, drug–gene interaction, and drug–drug–gene interac-
tion [22]. Some xenobiotics can induce CYP and glucuronosyltrans-
ferase activity. Ketamine can induce both enzyme types, contributing
to the development of its own tolerance in rats [23].
Reduced protein activity results in decreased removal of certain
drugs from brain to blood, and from blood to bile on the hepatocel-
lular surface in humans [24]. This may be related to some adverse
effects of ivermectins and morphine-like derivatives from brain to
systemic circulation in MDR1 (ABCB1) mutant dogs [25]. In the
last two decades, a large amount of information on the metabolism
and interaction of specific drugs in veterinary species has been pub-
lished [26]. However, further research is warranted to characterize
individual CYPs for each species and their substrates.
Immune and inflammatory response
The liver has a large role in host defenses. Of the nonparenchymal
cells in the liver, four types of antigen-presenting cells serve as
immunologic gatekeepers. These are Kupffer cells, dendritic cells,
stellate cells, and sinusoidal endothelial cells, all responsible for
innate immunity. Bacteria and toxins that gain access to the portal
circulation are routinely phagocytized and processed by Kupffer
cells in the sinusoids [27]. Kupffer cells are also scavengers of
inflammatory mediators, appearing to limit the extent of the
inflammatory response [28]. However, when an overwhelming
amount of endotoxin is present, activated Kupffer cells can produce
reductive oxygen radicals and cytokines. These processes allow
Kupffer cells to signal hepatocytes and endothelial cells, changing
their transcription products, in addition to recruiting circulating
neutrophils. This hepatic immunologic response can be responsible
for hepatocellular injury seen in some disease conditions. The close
interaction between the inflammatory response and coagulation
also plays a role in the pathogenesis of hepatic and multiorgan fail-
ure. For example, during endotoxemia and hypoperfusion, the acti-
vated hepatic cells (Kupffer cells, hepatocytes, and endothelial cells)
promote an inflammatory, hypercoagulable state [29].
Assessment of hepatic function
Whenever a patient’s hepatic function is questioned, a biochemical
profile, coagulation panel, and substrate metabolism tests should be
requested. However, a reduction of approximately 70–80% of
hepatic function must be present before observing abnormalities in
biochemical parameters; hence, these disturbances are not sensitive
indicators of hepatic dysfunction. Limitations of conventional
coagulation tests have led to increased interest in viscoelastic test-
ing systems and their use in global hemostasis assays.
Biochemical derangements in liver pathology
Substrate metabolism tests such as serum bilirubin, ammonia, and
pre- and postprandial bile acids are better indicators of hepatic
function 	than 	serum 	liver 	enzyme 	concentrations 	[30].
Hyperbilirubinemia can be caused by prehepatic disease (e.g.,
hemolysis), primary hepatic disease (e.g., decreased hepatocyte
function), and post-hepatic disease (e.g., extrahepatic biliary
obstruction). Hyperbilirubinemia is reported in approximately 50%
of dogs with chronic hepatitis (CH) and is a negative prognostic
indicator [31]. Measurement of serum conjugated (direct) and
unconjugated (indirect) bilirubin to distinguish between prehe-
patic, hepatic, or post-hepatic hyperbilirubinemia is not clinically
reliable [32]. A study evaluating the sensitivity and specificity of
fasting ammonia and serum bile acids for diagnosis of portosys-
temic shunt (PSS) in dogs and cats found the tests to have high sen-
sitivity and specificity in both species [33]. Indocyanine green and
sulfobromophthalein clearance tests are quantitative measures of
hepatic function, reflecting blood flow-dependent clearance, hepat-
ocyte uptake, and biliary excretion. Hepatic clearance of indocya-
nine green can change in direct proportion to variations in liver
blood flow, as seen in isoflurane-anesthetized dogs where a 63%
reduction in CO resulted in a 26% decline in clearance [34]. In
human patients, the hepatic metabolism of lidocaine is considered
as a dynamic liver function test. It is non-invasive, easy, and quick
to perform. Lidocaine is converted to monoethylglycinexylidide
(MEGX) and subsequently to glycinexylidide (GX) by the hepatic
cytochrome P450 enzyme system. As MEGX accurately reflects the
severity of hepatic dysfunction, it is valuable for quantitative evalu-
ation of liver dysfunction along with being a prognostic predictor of
liver disease in adults [35]. In dogs, MEGX testing has been shown
to successfully differentiate closed extrahepatic PSS from persistent
shunting after gradual attenuation surgery [36].
Hepatobiliary disease also results in decreased protein synthesis
as well as altered glucose, urea nitrogen, and lipid metabolism.
Because the liver normally produces albumin at one-third of its
capacity, hypoalbuminemia is seen only in severe cases of hepatic
dysfunction or severe protein loss [32]. Glomerular disease,
protein-losing enteropathies, and hemorrhage are non-hepatic
causes and should be ruled out when hypoalbuminemia is present.
Alpha and beta globulins may also be diminished with hepatic dys-
function. Reduction in plasma protein concentrations will decrease
the bound fraction of some drugs, which can result in changes in
volume of distribution, plasma concentration, and drug effect.
Patients with PSS or acute hepatic failure are often hypoglycemic, or
at risk for clinical hypoglycemia during the perianesthetic period.
Mechanisms of hypoglycemia in hepatic dysfunction include one or
a combination of the following: (1) decreased gluconeogenesis, (2)
decreased glycogen storage, and (3) diminished response to gluca-
gon. Monitoring and maintenance of normoglycemia should be a
priority during anesthesia.
Serum cholesterol concentrations can be increased, normal, or
decreased in patients with hepatobiliary disease. A recent canine
study identified a significant positive association between hyper-
lipidemia (specifically hypercholesterolemia), liver enzymes, and
total serum bile acid (TSBA) concentrations in dogs suffering from
CH [37]. Decreased concentrations of blood urea nitrogen and
cholesterol were seen to develop in approximately 40% of dogs
with CH, occurring most commonly in those with cirrhosis.

-- 867 of 1450 --

852 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
Hypoglycemia is rare in CH and is more often associated with acute
liver failure. The TSBA concentrations are uniformly increased
when portosystemic shunting is present, and their sensitivity for
detecting cirrhosis and the presence of an acquired PSS is high.
Dogs with cholestasis (i.e., hyperbilirubinemia) associated with
hepatic disease will always have increased TSBA concentrations.
Hyperammonemia has similar sensitivity for detection of CH or
cirrhosis and acquired PSS as TSBA and is somewhat more specific
because it is not affected by cholestasis [31].
Interpretation of liver enzymes
Enzyme concentration abnormalities are common, but their
relation to patient risk is often difficult to interpret. The serum
concentration of alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate ami-
notransferase (AST), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), lactate dehydro-
genase (LDH), and γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) are the most
commonly measured hepatocellular enzymes in biochemical pro-
files. Hepatobiliary tissue damage can cause cellular leakage, result-
ing in increased plasma concentration of hepatocellular enzymes.
However, this rise does not necessarily indicate the degree of
hepatic dysfunction. This is especially true for chronic liver dis-
eases, where reduced hepatocellular numbers secondary to fibrosis
may result in near-normal liver enzyme values in the face of severely
compromised function. Additionally, elevation of enzymes may
represent cellular insult, but may not correlate with any inability to
biotransform drugs used for anesthesia and pain management.
In several retrospective canine studies, serum ALT activity has
shown reliability during CH screening. However, histopathologic
evidence of CH can exist in the absence of increased serum liver
enzyme activity. As CH progresses and hepatic parenchyma
decreases, ALP and GGT activities increase compared to ALT [31].
Even though ALP can be associated with biliary obstruction or
injury, its elevation may originate in other locations such as pla-
centa (during pregnancy) and bone. Diagnostic efficacy of serum
ALP and GGT was higher (91%) when used together in dogs with
histologically confirmed hepatobiliary disease (e.g., cholesta-
sis) [38]. The position of the liver between the splanchnic and sys-
temic circulation creates the potential for diseases of other organ
systems to involve the liver, and consequently cause an increase in
circulating liver enzymes. Additionally, several enzymes are found
in tissue outside the liver (e.g., AST in skeletal muscle, heart, kid-
ney, pancreas, adipose tissue, and brain) and injury to these tissues
may be falsely interpreted as hepatic injury. Elevation of liver
enzymes, although highly sensitive for hepatocellular injury, is not
specific to liver dysfunction.
Assessment of coagulation
Coagulation status should be considered in patients with liver dis-
ease undergoing a surgical procedure, including laparoscopic liver
biopsy. CH patients may show no clinical signs of a coagulopathy
but may be hypocoagulable and be at a greater risk of coagulopathy
after an insult such as surgery [39]. Hepatobiliary disease can give
rise to complex alterations in coagulation. These alterations involve
changes in pro- and anticoagulants, as well as factors participating
in fibrinolysis. The net effect of this is that patients with liver dys-
function can have laboratory and clinical features of both hypo- and
hypercoagulability. This is well demonstrated in dogs with congeni-
tal PSS that can be in a hypercoagulable or hypocoagulable
state [40,41]. The concomitant changes in both pro- and anti-
hemostatic pathways result in a “rebalanced” hemostatic state in
these patients. This new hemostatic balance appears to be much
more fragile than the hemostatic balance in healthy individuals,
and hence, patients with liver disease can readily experience both
hemostasis-related bleeding and thrombotic events. These insights
into the hemostatic balance during liver disease warrant revised
recommendations for clinical management of hemostasis [42].
Emerging evidence states that such a “rebalanced” state of coagula-
tion also occurs in dogs with liver disease. Whether canine patients
have clinical bleeding or thrombosis depends on factors that shift
the coagulation state one way or the other. Hemorrhage can be
induced by uremia, infection, hypervolemia, or acidosis, whereas
thrombosis is precipitated with aggravated portal hypertension, use
of corticosteroids, proinflammatory states, or with simultaneously
occurring pro-thrombotic conditions [43].
Prolongations in prothrombin time (PT) and activated partial
thromboplastin time (aPTT) and bleeding from provocative proce-
dures suggest hypocoagulable tendencies. Increases in clot strength,
D-dimers, von Willebrand’s factor, and factor VIII activity;
decreases in antithrombin and protein C activity; and an increased
incidence of thrombosis in the splanchnic circulation suggest
hypercoagulable tendencies [44,45]. Fibrinogen also plays several
key roles in maintaining both primary and secondary hemostasis
and is converted by thrombin into an insoluble fibrin network
that, together with platelet aggregates, induces hemostasis in
response to rupture of the endothelium. In humans and dogs,
plasma fibrinogen concentration during liver cirrhosis progres-
sively decreased with worsening disease, indicating a close rela-
tionship between the severity of cirrhosis and hemostatic
changes [46,47]. Thrombocytopenia can develop with hepatic dis-
ease and is due to mechanisms including decreased platelet produc-
tion due to thrombopoietin deficiency and direct megakaryocyte
toxicity, decreased platelet half-life due to splenomegaly and hyper-
splenism, and possibly autoantibodies. Consumption of platelets by
intrahepatic or systemic platelet activation may also contribute to
decreased platelet counts [42]. In addition, vitamin K malabsorp-
tion may develop secondary to certain hepatic diseases (e.g., hepatic
lipidosis) or cholestasis (e.g., complete biliary obstruction). Vitamin
K acts as a cofactor for the enzyme γ-glutamyl carboxylase, which
activates coagulation factors II (prothrombin), VII, IX, and X.
Hence, hepatobiliary diseases can result in secondary hemostasis
defects through decreased vitamin K-mediated carboxylation of
coagulation factors [48]. Vitamin K supplementation may be rec-
ommended for some liver diseases and could be administered prior
to invasive procedures such as liver biopsy or feeding tube place-
ment, due to increased risk of bleeding.
Blood typing and crossmatching may be warranted if the coagu-
lation profile is abnormal or if a blood transfusion is anticipated.
Fresh frozen plasma (FFP) or cryoprecipitate may be transfused in
liver diseases both therapeutically and prophylactically to correct
deranged coagulation. However, as the etiology of coagulation
defects in liver disease is highly complex, the clinical benefit of pro-
phylactic administration of FFP on the basis of abnormal coagula-
tion tests alone, is questionable [49]. The constituents of FFP
include all coagulation factors that are essential to clot formation
(i.e., factors II, V, VII, VIII, IX, X, and XI). Repletion of coagulation
factors with FFP bypasses the need for vitamin K carboxylation in
the liver for coagulation factor formation. In spite of these benefits,
FFP transfusion comes with the risk of increasing portal hyperten-
sion, hypervolemia, and assorted other risks, including immune-
mediated reactions. Risk of exacerbating portal hypertension and
transfusion-related lung injury argues against routine use of FFP in
this population [50].

-- 868 of 1450 --

Chapter 40: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Hepatic Disease 	853
Other than the conventional coagulation tests, viscoelastic test-
ing systems (VETs) for clot detection are increasingly being used in
veterinary medicine for diagnosis of the hemostatic states: normo-
coagulable, hypercoagulable, hypocoagulable, excessive fibrinoly-
sis, or decreased fibrinolysis. These methods can also evaluate
platelet inhibition, functional fibrinogen measurement, and
fibrinolysis [51]. Because VETs assess cellular and protein compo-
nents of hemostasis (platelets and coagulation factors), as well as
fibrinolysis, they are referred to as the “global assays of hemostasis.”
The VETs provide (1) graphical and numerical results that reflect
the dynamic nature of fibrin formation and breakdown, and (2)
information on the time of onset of fibrin formation, rate of fibrin
formation, strength of fibrin clot, and fibrinolysis at defined inter-
vals. Currently, commercially available VETs include the Sonoclot®
Coagulation and Platelet Function Analyzer, thromboelastography
(TEG), and rotational thromboelastometry. A novel portable hand-
held analyzer, the Viscoelastic Coagulation Monitor (VCM Vet™)
has been recently introduced for use in dogs and cats to fulfill the
clinical need for bedside testing in emergency suites, intensive care
units, operating rooms, and field examinations [52,53]. In patients
suffering from hepatic disease, VETs may be a superior tool to pin-
point coagulation abnormalities, monitor hemostasis during resus-
citation of clinical bleeding disorders, evaluate anticoagulant use,
and optimize treatment plans. The diagnostic utility of TEG has
been recognized in dogs suffering from acute liver disease, gallblad-
der mucocele, congenital PSS, and chronic hepatopathies, as well as
in cats with cholestatic liver disease [41,43,45,54,55].
Anesthetics and hepatic disease
Sedatives
Frequently, opioid administration is sufficient to provide adequate
sedation and analgesia for diagnostic and surgical procedures in
obtunded patients suffering from liver disease. Hydromorphone,
oxymorphone, fentanyl, and methadone are full μ-opioid receptor
agonists that provide good sedation and analgesia. Compared with
morphine and meperidine, they present some potential advantages,
as they are not associated with elevations in plasma histamine con-
centrations and decreased blood pressure after intravenous admin-
istration [56,57]. Metabolic pathways for most opioids such as
oxidation via the CYP system (CYP2D6 and 3A4) or glucuronida-
tion can be impaired in the setting of severe liver disease. The CYP
system is not only affected by liver dysfunction but is also influ-
enced by malnutrition and suboptimal protein consumption, which
are common issues in cirrhotic patients [58].
Morphine is metabolized by the liver to morphine-6- glucuronide
(active metabolite with analgesic effects) and morphine-3-
glucuronide (inactive metabolite with potential neurotoxic effects),
which are then cleared renally. With reduced first-pass metabolism
in cirrhotic patients, morphine is likely more bioavailable and lower
oral doses are recommended. Human studies show that morphine
has a decreased plasma clearance and a prolonged elimination half-
life in patients with severe cirrhosis. Similarly, in cirrhotic patients,
the analgesic effects of codeine may be more variable due to reduced
conversion to morphine via CYP2D6 [58,59]. Drug elimination
capacity of other opioids can also decrease in liver disease, but drug
bioavailability may increase. These changes may be secondary to
reductions in HBF or reductions in CYP450 enzyme activity. In
clinical scenarios of hypoalbuminemia, alterations in opioid distri-
bution volumes will also impact drug accumulation [60]. Opioids
with short elimination half-lives such as fentanyl can be used as
intravenous infusions in the face of liver dysfunction, but careful
dose titration is required because the context-sensitive half-life of
opioid infusions will be longer than in normal patients. Remifentanil
is a synthetic opioid that allows for high clearance, rapid elimina-
tion, and recovery independent of dose or duration of infusion. It is
metabolized by plasma esterase and shows no accumulation after
continuous infusion in humans presenting with severe liver dis-
ease [61]. Other synthetic lipophilic opioids such as sufentanil and
alfentanil, although short-acting, may also pose risks for accumula-
tion due to extended half-lives during liver dysfunction [60]. The
reversibility of opioids is an advantage in the face of hepatic
dysfunction.
Most sedatives used in veterinary medicine can be categorized
into one of three groups: phenothiazines, benzodiazepines, and α2
-
adrenergic receptor agonists. Acepromazine may be used in patients
with liver disease, but careful assessment of the patient and con-
servative dosing is necessary. Acepromazine causes vasodilation
due to antagonism of α1
- adrenergic receptors. Acepromazine vaso-
dilation may be beneficial to increase renal blood flow in anesthe-
tized dogs [62], but experimental verification that it has the same
effect on the hepatic circulation is lacking. When a patient has
diminished intravascular oncotic pressure (e.g., hypoalbumine-
mia), hypovolemia and hypotension can be present even before
sedation. In these cases where preoperative volume resuscitation is
vital, acepromazine should be avoided due to its potent vasodilatory
effects. Acepromazine is also known to affect platelet aggregation in
dogs and should be avoided if significant coagulation abnormalities
are present [63]. Moreover, its long-lasting effects, which could be
further prolonged in the face of liver disease, as well as its irrevers-
ibility make acepromazine a less popular choice as a sedative in the
face of hepatic dysfunction.
Benzodiazepine sedative drugs are often advocated in cases
where there is significant disease because they tend to have fewer
adverse cardiovascular effects. However, their use in patients with
liver disease may be less advantageous. Advanced liver disease may
result in hepatic encephalopathy (HE) due to accumulation of
ammonium, N-methyl-D- aspartate (NMDA) receptor hyperactiv-
ity, 	and 	decreased 	adenosine 	triphosphate, 	among 	other
causes [64,65]. In humans, the benzodiazepine antagonist flumaze-
nil has been shown to minimize clinical signs associated with HE in
the short-term [66]. The use of benzodiazepines in veterinary
patients presenting with HE is controversial as they may exhibit
increased response to these drugs, resulting in profound sedation
and aggravation of the HE [64,67]. In the absence of HE, benzodi-
azepines can be used safely in patients with liver disease, although
hepatic elimination is likely reduced and prolonged effects may
occur [68,69]. Unwanted effects such as prolonged sedation can be
antagonized by flumazenil if needed.
Dexmedetomidine provides excellent sedative, analgesic, and
muscle relaxant effects yet may be associated with significant car-
diovascular depression characterized by decreases in CO of as
much as 50% [70]. Despite this, HBF is unchanged in normal dogs
after intravenous administration of up to 10 μg/kg, based on radio-
active microsphere methodology [71]. On the contrary, an increase
in HA blood flow was reported with increasing medetomidine con-
centrations in sheep, which was attributed to the significant reduc-
tion in CO causing a subsequent fall in portal vein blood flow [72].
Medetomidine and dexmedetomidine have been shown to decrease
hepatic enzymatic activity in vitro. It could be speculated that they
would have clinically relevant pharmacokinetic drug interactions
that would be more apparent in animals with liver disease. However,

-- 869 of 1450 --

854 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
it is likely that their sparing effects on doses of other anesthetic
agents (pharmacodynamic drug interaction) may be more clinically
relevant than any direct effects on liver metabolic capacity [73].
Antagonism of α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists can speed recovery
in animals with liver disease and would minimize the impact of
impaired metabolism on the duration of α2
- adrenergic receptor
agonist action. Keeping these factors in mind, authors of this chap-
ter cautiously use dexmedetomidine at doses of 0.5–2 μg/kg IV
titrable to effect, or 2–5 μg/kg IM, dependent on the level of seda-
tion required and severity of hepatic disease.
Injectable anesthetic agents
Numerous studies have evaluated the effects of inhalant anesthetics
on hepatic function and blood flow. However, relatively few studies
have examined the impact of injectable anesthetics. Ketamine
appears to cause a modest decrease in HBF compared to thiopental
and etomidate [74,75]. Propofol has been shown to maintain HBF
via arterial vasodilation in dogs and thiopental appears to have
similar effects [76,77]. In rabbits, propofol attenuated hepatic rep-
erfusion injury, caused oxidative radical formation, increased total
HBF, and preserved oxygen balance [78–80]. As a general rule,
most agents have minimal direct effects on HBF if systemic arterial
blood pressure is maintained within normal limits. Propofol clear-
ance exceeds HBF, suggesting an extra-hepatic site of metabolism
and making it a reasonable choice for patients with liver dis-
ease [81,82]. A retrospective study found no increase in morbidity
or mortality in cats with hepatic lipidosis that were anesthetized
with propofol for feeding tube placement [83]. However, like most
anesthetic drugs, it has dose-dependent cardiac depressant and sys-
temic vasodilatory effects that may alter HBF in some cases [84]. A
recent human study found no comparable differences in HBF with
propofol-based and sevoflurane-based anesthetic regimens [85].
On the other hand, there is a lack of literature on alfaxalone and its
effects on hepatic physiology. However, use of Althesin® (i.e., alfad-
olone and alfaxalone mixture) in Greyhounds was shown to
decrease HBF and hepatic oxygen supply despite relatively
unchanged hepatic oxygen consumption [75], while in humans it
was shown to negatively affect liver function tests [86].
Thiopental decreases HBF either from increased HA vascular
resistance or from reduced CO and blood pressure [75]. Thiopental
undergoes metabolism by the liver, has several active metabolites,
and its administration may result in the induction of microsomal
enzyme activity [87,88]. Termination of its anesthetic effects results
mostly from redistribution to non-target tissues, suggesting that it
may be acceptable to use it as a single bolus for induction.
Etomidate causes minimal cardiovascular effects compared with
propofol during anesthetic induction [84]. However, etomidate is in
a propylene glycol-based vehicle. Propylene glycol is a hyperosmo-
lar molecule and may cause erythrocyte rupture [89]. Because some
patients presenting with hepatobiliary disease may have bilirubine-
mia and icterus due to biliary obstruction or decreased hepatic con-
jugation, the potential hemolysis caused by etomidate could further
overload the liver. Although hemolysis does not appear to be sig-
nificant in normal dogs after a single bolus, the clinical conse-
quences in animals with liver disease have not been studied [90].
Etomidate clearance did not seem to change in human patients with
hepatic cirrhosis compared with healthy patients, but the volume of
distribution and elimination half-life doubled [91]. This increase in
volume of distribution can mostly be explained by the inverse cor-
relation between the plasma albumin concentration and protein
binding but may also be due to a slight decrease in albumin-binding
properties in the presence of hepatic cirrhosis or renal failure [92].
Etomidate has been demonstrated to inhibit cortisol synthesis by
inhibiting adrenal mitochondrial 11β-hydroxylase and is generally
not recommended in critical illness-related corticosteroid insuffi-
ciency of sepsis [93]. Human patients with non-septic acute and
chronic liver diseases have shown lower baseline and stimulated
cortisol levels (hepatoadrenal syndrome) [94]. Furthermore, when
ACTH stimulation tests were performed in these patients, the pres-
ence of etomidate in the anesthetic protocol increased the presence
of adrenal insufficiency from 38 to 57% [93]. Hepatoadrenal syn-
drome has not yet been reported in the veterinary literature; how-
ever, care should be taken regarding the presence of concomitant
adrenal insufficiency when using etomidate in liver patients.
Etomidate is primarily metabolized by esterase hydrolysis in the rat.
However, this route does not seem to play a significant role in the
drug’s breakdown in several other species studied, pointing to
hepatic metabolism [95]. Its hepatic extraction ratio is 0.5, or 50%
of the HBF, which indicates that small changes in HBF or function
will have only moderate effects on etomidate clearance [96].
Overall, etomidate seems to be a reasonable induction agent for
patient with hepatic dysfunction owing to its minimal cardiovascu-
lar effects, which preserve systemic and hepatic blood flow.
Dissociative anesthetics such as ketamine and tiletamine are
acceptable choices for the induction of anesthesia in patients with
hepatic disease, though dosing should be carefully titrated to effect.
The co-administration of a benzodiazepine (e.g., zolazepam with
tiletamine in Telazol®) may result in prolonged effects in animals
with impaired hepatic function. In dogs, dissociative anesthetics are
metabolized mostly by the liver; however, termination of effect
would be expected to be minimally affected after administration of
a single dose used for induction due to drug redistribution to mus-
cular and adipose tissues [97]. A study in rats and a report in
humans have shown ketamine infusions to cause hepatic injury
after prolonged use, especially when repeated within a short inter-
val between treatments [98,99]. The authors of the human report
recommended that liver enzymes be routinely measured during
chronic treatment using ketamine [98]. In dogs, ketamine did not
result in improved hepatic circulation, hepatic oxygen metabolism,
or hepatic mitochondrial redox state during serious hypox-
emia [100]. Also, ketamine increased HA blood flow in pigs [101]
and decreased hepatic oxygen delivery in Greyhounds [74].
Inhalant anesthetic agents
Inhalant anesthetics alter HBF in a dose-dependent fashion. In gen-
eral, inhalants impair autoregulatory mechanisms (i.e., HABR) that
would otherwise maintain total HBF. Studies in dogs have shown that
isoflurane, sevoflurane, and desflurane better maintain total HBF,
oxygen supply, and delivery–consumption ratios than halothane or
enflurane (Fig. 40.4) [102,103]. Although sevoflurane and desflurane
appear to have the least effect on HBF, it is important to note that,
among the commonly used agents (isoflurane, sevoflurane, and des-
flurane), these effects are dose-dependent. Consequently, efforts to
reduce the dose administered will have a significantly greater impact
than choice of inhalant anesthetic.
Halothane hepatotoxicity can be subdivided into type 1 (mild)
and type 2 (fulminant). The causes of type 1 and type 2 hepatotox-
icities are not fully understood but they are thought to be com-
pletely separate disease processes. Type 1 hepatotoxicity is much
more common and has a self-limiting course. The hypothesized
mechanism is that when halothane is broken down via the CYP450
system, it biotransforms into reactive intermediates. Metabolism

-- 870 of 1450 --

Chapter 40: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Hepatic Disease 	855
via oxidation and reduction are simultaneous via CYP2E1/
CYP2A6 and CYP3A4/CYP2A6 pathways, respectively, dependent
on oxygen tension. Metabolism via the reductive pathway causes
increased hepatocyte hypoxemia and subsequent injury. Free radi-
cal intermediates, chlorotrifluoroethane or chlorodifluoroethene,
are created in this pathway. These free radicals can lead to inactiva-
tion and destruction of CYP450, resulting in elevation of ami-
notransferases. Apart from type 1 hepatotoxicity, which occurs in
approximately 20–30% of patients, halothane may also induce ful-
minant hepatitis (i.e., type 2 hepatotoxicity). The immune system
plays a key role in the development of halothane hepatitis. Liver
trifluoroacetyl protein adducts are created via the oxidative bio-
transformation of halothane, resulting in an antibody-mediated
reaction triggering hepatitis [104].
Isoflurane in a lipid emulsion was demonstrated to have a protec-
tive effect on hepatic ischemia/reperfusion injury (IRI) when
injected intravenously into rats. The mechanism for such protec-
tion seemed to be related to Kupffer cell inhibition [105]. Conversely,
another study found protective effects of inhaling sevoflurane when
given before, during, and after injury, but failed to find any benefi-
cial effect of isoflurane administered by the same route on a rat
model of IRI [106]. Perhaps inhalant preconditioning may have
beneficial effects during hepatic surgery if IRI is predicted. For
infants with obstructive jaundice that had reduced portal blood
flow and compensatory increases in HA blood flow, sevoflurane
displayed a protective effect on HBF [107]. Moreover, it exhibited
anti-inflammatory and tissue-protective properties during liver
IRI [108].
Neuromuscular blocking agents
The disposition of neuromuscular blocking agents (NMBAs) may
be affected by liver disease. Vecuronium, rocuronium, and mivacu-
rium all have increased volumes of distribution, prolonged elimina-
tion half-lives, and prolonged durations of effect in human patients
with hepatic cirrhosis [109–111]. Atracurium and cisatracurium
undergo liver-independent elimination (by non-specific ester
hydrolysis or Hofmann elimination) and have similar pharmacoki-
netics and pharmacodynamics in both healthy and liver-diseased
patients [112,113]. A study evaluating cisatracurium found no
difference in onset and duration of action between healthy and PSS-
affected dogs [114]. Exclusion of liver from the circulation resulted
in significantly reduced requirement of rocuronium during ortho-
topic liver transplantation in humans; however, sugammadex could
rapidly reverse the blockade in patients with liver dysfunction
undergoing hepatic surgery [115,116].
Hepatic pathophysiology and anesthetic
management
The management of patients with hepatic dysfunction centers
around three main concerns: hepatic synthetic function (e.g., albu-
min, blood glucose, and coagulation proteins), hepatic metabolic
function (Phase I and II reactions), and maintenance of hepatic
oxygen delivery to avoid further hepatic insult. Preanesthetic evalu-
ation and diagnostic testing can help define the degree of impair-
ment and provide information about how the anesthetic plan
should be altered and how much anesthetic risk is increased.
Hepatitis
Patients with acute or chronic hepatitis (CH) can present clinical
signs and laboratory abnormalities that may be correlated with
prognosis. Generally, the clinical signs and laboratory results for
patients with liver dysfunction are non-specific (e.g., anorexia, diar-
rhea, weight loss, polyuria/polydipsia, fever, and fatigue). Jaundice,
coagulation abnormalities, HE, and ascites can also be present, rep-
resenting significant hepatic insufficiency. Ascites is a negative
prognostic factor in dogs and humans with hepatitis [117].
Interestingly, one study found no relationship between the bio-
chemical parameter results and severity of liver disease [118]. In
another study investigating CH in Labrador Retrievers, it was dem-
onstrated that 45% of these dogs presented with hyperbilirubinemia
and 21% with hypoalbuminemia. Also, it was shown that prolonga-
tion of PT and aPTT, thrombocytopenia, anorexia, and hypoglobu-
linemia were associated with shorter survival times [39]. Another
single-center study found that 57% of patients with hepatic diseases
had at least one abnormal coagulation parameter at presentation.
Furthermore, the presence of cirrhosis in addition to CH was asso-
ciated with the worst coagulation abnormalities among all liver
160
Halothane
Enflurane
Isoflurane
Sevoflurane
THBF
140
120
100
80
mL/min/100 g
	60
40
20
0
Control 	1 	1.5
MAC
2
* §
* §
* §
* §
* §
*
*
* * *
*
Figure 40.4 Effect of inhalant anesthetics on total
hepatic blood flow (THBF) in Greyhound dogs. Bars
marked with ⁎ are significantly different (p<0.05)
from their respective control group (awake dogs).
Bars marked with § are significantly different
(p<0.05) from THBF values for isoflurane and
sevoflurane at comparable minimum alveolar
concentration (MAC) levels. Source: Adapted from
Hartman et al. [102]; Frink et al. [103].

-- 871 of 1450 --

856 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
diseases. Most of the coagulation abnormalities found in this study
were related to a decrease in coagulation factor synthesis, and not
due to increased consumption of factors [119]. Therefore, the sim-
ple presence of hepatic disease demonstrated by biochemical
abnormalities with or without clinical signs should be taken into
consideration by the anesthetist, independent of the degree of
abnormality, as the blood work changes do not necessarily correlate
with disease severity. Also, in CH, coagulopathies are often absent,
probably due to the balanced decrease in pro- and anticoagulant
factors. However, in the presence of an insult, such as surgery,
decompensation can occur, and postoperative coagulopathy can
result. This is particularly problematic in hypotensive patients
where large volumes of fluid therapy are used to maintain perfu-
sion. Volume expansion dilutes circulating coagulation factors and
can cause decompensation and clinical abnormalities [120,121].
Portosystemic shunt
Portosystemic shunts (PSSs) are anomalous vessels flowing from
the portal circulation (e.g., splenic, phrenic, cranial mesenteric,
caudal mesenteric, gastric, or gastroduodenal veins) to the central
circulation (e.g., vena cava or azygous vein) without first passing
through the liver [122]. The blood bypassing the liver allows sub-
stances normally metabolized there (e.g., ammonia, bile acids, and
short-chain fatty acids) to accumulate in the systemic circula-
tion [123]. When shunts are present at birth, blood flow to the liver
is decreased and hepatotropic substances are not effectively deliv-
ered. This results in a liver that fails to develop normally and that is
often undersized with abnormal intrahepatic vascular structure.
PSS patients may present with non-specific signs such as hypo-
glycemia, hypoalbuminemia, coagulopathies, and altered response
to substances metabolized and excreted by the liver [122,123].
Hypoglycemia and prolonged recoveries from anesthesia were
reported in dogs with a congenital PSS [124], although postopera-
tive administration of acepromazine may have contributed to the
prolonged recoveries seen in those patients. Many patients are
undiagnosed until they are anesthetized for surgical sterilization
and fail to recover normally from anesthesia.
It has been hypothesized that refractory hypoglycemia in dogs
with PSS could be due to relative adrenal insufficiency, similar to
that commonly seen with sepsis. In one study, no difference was
found in preoperative baseline or post-ACTH stimulation testing
among healthy dogs presenting for ovariohysterectomy and dogs
with PSS. However, 30% of the PSS dogs presented with preopera-
tive hypoglycemia and over 40% developed hypoglycemia within 4
h after surgery. Although inadequate adrenal response was not
found in this population of PSS dogs, animals that presented with
postoperative refractory hypoglycemia or prolonged anesthetic
recoveries usually responded to the administration of dexametha-
sone (0.1 mg/kg, IV) [124].
Seizures and HE may occur in PSS cases and are considered poor
prognostic indicators [64]. Flumazenil has been used to improve
mental status in humans with HE and it is hypothesized that intrin-
sic benzodiazepine-like compounds are important in this syn-
drome [125]. However, in dogs with chronic HE 8 to 12 weeks after
placement of a portocaval shunt and 40% hepatectomy, sarmazenil
caused significant improvement of encephalopathy signs, while
flumazenil had no effect [126]. Recently, C-reactive protein plasma
levels were shown to be elevated in PSS dogs presenting with
HE [127]. These findings reinforce the similarities in the pathogen-
esis of HE in humans and PSS dogs and the involvement of an
inflammatory process in its pathogenesis.
In a prospective study, platelet count, packed cell volume, and
factor II, V, VII, and X concentrations were lower prior to surgery
and aPTT was prolonged in PSS dogs compared with healthy dogs.
The postoperative hemostatic profile revealed further alterations
such as an increase in PT and decrease in factor I, IX, and XI con-
centrations. However, when postoperative hemostatic values were
compared with those for a set of healthy patients undergoing ova-
riectomy, the only significant changes in the PSS group were pro-
longed PT and decreased platelet count. Additionally, even though
the absolute activities of factors II, V, VII, and X were lower in the
PSS group, the relative percentage changes from preoperative values
were different only for platelet count and factor II (prothrombin)
activity [128]. Although the in vitro coagulation tests of PSS patients
are commonly abnormal, clinical signs of bleeding disorders are
uncommon in these dogs during and after shunt attenuation.
Preoperative mortality in cats and dogs undergoing surgical cor-
rection of PSS is reported to be low. However, postoperative out-
comes have variable results in both species, including deterioration
of patients’ neurologic signs and death [129,130]. It is difficult to
determine what role the anesthetic technique plays in postoperative
outcomes. Many patients recover normally from anesthesia and
begin to experience problems in the same time frame as the
expected shunt closure, implying a greater role of altered blood flow
in producing neurologic signs and death.
Hepatic neoplasia
Severe and uncontrollable hemorrhage is a potentially catastrophic
complication during and following hepatic lobe resection.
Immediate availability of blood products, including plasma, packed
red blood cells, and whole blood, should be considered. Blood typ-
ing and cross-matching may be helpful in determining which
donors are suitable for emergency transfusion. Preoperative autolo-
gous blood transfusion is also a feasible alternative to allogenic
transfusions for dogs undergoing surgical procedures with a high
risk of intraoperative hemorrhage (e.g., liver lobectomy) [131].
Other blood-saving strategies incorporated to minimize intraoper-
ative blood loss during major surgery in human patients include use
of antifibrinolytics (e.g., tranexamic acid, ε-aminocaproic acid),
acute normovolemic hemodilution, cell salvage, surgical-site drains,
laparoscopic and robotic surgery, diathermy, and topical agents
(e.g., fibrin sealants, gelatin-thrombin matrices, and oxidized
cellulose) [114].
Neoplasia may be associated with preoperative hemoabdomen,
and a preanesthetic transfusion may be necessary to improve perfu-
sion and oxygen delivery during anesthesia. Quantification of the
volume of blood lost before hemostasis is achieved can be helpful in
determining the need for blood replacement, but the chronicity of
blood loss will usually result in varying hemodynamic conse-
quences. Therefore, decisions to transfuse are often based on sev-
eral factors, including hematocrit, rate of blood loss, volume of
blood loss, and hemodynamic stability. Blood flow and oxygen
uptake by the liver may be impaired by hemodynamic instability,
manipulation of the liver, endogenous and exogenous vasoconstric-
tors, and anesthetic agents. Central venous catheterization can be
helpful when substantial fluid shifts or large-volume transfusions
are anticipated.
The major goal of fluid therapy is to optimize tissue perfusion,
which is usually achieved by an increase in CO. Whether the latter
will occur after a fluid challenge depends mostly on where the indi-
vidual patient lies on the cardiac function (Frank–Starling) curve. If
the patient lies on the steep side of this curve, CO should increase

-- 872 of 1450 --

Chapter 40: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Hepatic Disease 	857
after preload augmentation (i.e., the patient is fluid-responsive).
However, after the plateau is reached, further increases in preload
do not lead to significant increases in CO (i.e., the patient is fluid
non-responsive). Thus, fluid loading in this setting may be hazard-
ous. Over the past two decades, many studies have been performed
in human and veterinary medicine to search for the best index to
predict fluid responsiveness in a variety of clinical situations and to
optimize volume resuscitation of critically ill patients undergoing
major surgeries. Dynamic indexes (e.g., pulse pressure variation,
stroke volume variation, systolic pressure variation, and superior
and inferior vena cava diameter variations) have been shown to
be clearly superior to the traditional static preload variables (e.g.,
pulmonary artery occlusion pressure and central venous pres-
sure) [132–134]. During hepatic retraction, compression of the
major abdominal vessels by the surgeon is possible. Effective com-
munication between the anesthetist and surgeon is extremely
important to facilitate diagnosis of major hemodynamic complica-
tions versus temporary insults necessary for surgical access. Both
hypo- and hypercarbia decrease portal blood flow, and vigilant
monitoring is necessary to prevent and promptly treat these com-
plications. Coagulopathies and poor liver function are often con-
founding factors in these surgical cases and prognosis worsens as
the percentage of hepatic mass excised increases.
Studies of the effects of general anesthesia and types of anesthet-
ics on surgical outcomes are lacking. General anesthesia is known
to cause dose-dependent cardiovascular and immune suppression.
In an attempt to minimize such complications, Yamamoto et al.
reported a case series in which all patients had partial hepatecto-
mies under only sedation and epidural anesthesia. After following
10 human patients, it was concluded that epidural techniques
can be used for partial hepatectomies and also for other abdominal
surgeries [135]. Recently, thoracolumbar epidural anesthesia with
lidocaine resulted in either steady or increased HBF compared to
saline control in propofol-anesthetized dogs, probably due to vaso-
dilation of the HA induced by selective blockade of sympathetic
ganglia [136].
Hepatic lobe torsion
Hepatic lobe torsion has been described in dogs, horses, cats, and
rabbits. The outcome is reported to be mostly favorable if recogni-
tion and surgical correction are made early. Canine patients may
show relatively mild non-specific clinical signs such as increased
liver enzymes. Similar to dogs, horses present with non-specific
clinical signs and laboratory results, including peritoneal fluid
accumulation, colic, inappetence, lethargy, and increased liver
enzymes, which makes diagnosis difficult, potentially resulting in
poor prognosis [137]. Surgical removal of the liver lobe is indicated,
and anesthetic management is similar to hepatic lobe resection
for neoplasia. In the rabbit, medical management may be viable, but
these patients may still need to be anesthetized for diagnostic
imaging [138].
Gallbladder and extrahepatic biliary tract
pathology
Extrahepatic biliary obstruction (EHBO) and cholecystectomy are
associated with relatively high perioperative morbidity and mortal-
ity. In one study, preoperative elevation of plasma creatinine and
hypotension in the immediate postoperative period were associated
with increased mortality, especially in the presence of pancreatitis
and septic bile peritonitis [139]. The earlier assumption of hypoco-
agulability in canine patients with EHBO should be re-evaluated.
Hypercoagulability in dogs with gallbladder mucoceles has also
been demonstrated by thromboelastography (TEG) [45]. As in
humans with EHBO, it is possible that either hyper- or hypocoagu-
lation can be present and should be investigated to provide the
appropriate support or treatment [140]. In a study investigating the
association of gallbladder mucoceles and endocrinopathies, dogs
with hyperadrenocorticism were 29 times more likely to have a
biliary mucocele [141]. These findings are important to the anes-
thesiologist as hyperadrenocorticism may also be associated with
hypercoagulable states.
Anesthetic considerations for diagnostic or
minimally invasive procedures
Liver biopsy may be necessary to determine the etiology and prog-
nosis of hepatic disease. Samples can be obtained by ultrasound
guidance, laparoscopy, and laparotomy. Laparoscopy and laparot-
omy can also be used for the staging and resection of neoplasia or
hepatobiliary repair. Knowledge of the specific implications of each
technique is vital for the anesthetist.
Ultrasound-guided biopsy
Biopsies can often be accomplished with sedation alone. For this
technique, the patient needs to lie still and not react to the sound or
sensation of device activation. There is a chance that bleeding will
occur after the biopsy, so the technique is not advisable in animals
with significant coagulation abnormalities. The patient’s clinical
signs and laboratory results, in addition to their demeanor and
mentation, will determine drug combination and dose selection.
Administration of an opioid alone or in combination with
midazolam or dexmedetomidine is often sufficient to facilitate
ultrasound-guided biopsies in a range of mildly to severely
obtunded patients. Flumazenil can be administered to reverse the
sedative effects of benzodiazepines if necessary. When dexmedeto-
midine is used, atipamezole administration usually results in rapid
and complete reversal of sedation and cardiovascular effects. In the
absence of pain, naloxone may be administered to improve menta-
tion and ventilation when opioid analgesia is no longer required or
desirable. Vasovagal hypotension shortly after percutaneous liver
biopsy has been reported [142]. Post-procedure monitoring for
signs of hemorrhage (e.g., mucous membrane color, blood pressure,
hematocrit, or repeat ultrasound) is warranted when the risk of
bleeding is significant.
Laparoscopic procedures
In addition to the possibility of bleeding and potential difficulties in
achieving hemostasis, laparoscopy introduces concerns related to
insufflation of gases into the abdomen. The infusion of carbon
dioxide to distend the abdomen and improve visualization can
decrease cardiac venous return and impair ventilation. Cranial dis-
placement of the diaphragm can make it more difficult for the
spontaneously breathing animal to maintain adequate minute ven-
tilation due to decreased pulmonary functional residual capacity
and tidal volume. Reduction in functional residual capacity may
also increase the risk of perianesthetic hypoxemia. Intermittent
positive-pressure ventilation (IPPV) may be required to maintain
adequate oxygenation and ventilation. The anesthetist should also
communicate with the surgeon to monitor the intra-abdominal
pressure, which should range from 10–16 mmHg with allowance
for species differences [143]. In dogs, pneumoperitoneum can cause
transient increases in hepatic transaminases that last up to 48 h

-- 873 of 1450 --

858 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
after desufflation. The increases in ALT and AST were directly pro-
portional to the intra-abdominal pressure and duration of insuffla-
tion [144]. The use of IPPV can decrease HBF, probably by
decreasing venous return and CO, so ventilator settings must be
vigilantly monitored. A reversed Trendelenburg position can help
to minimize the effect of carboperitoneum on ventilation; however,
body position is usually dictated by the need of the surgeon to
ensure adequate visualization. Capnography, although helpful, can
be misleading because the difference between end-tidal (PET
CO2
)
and arterial (PaCO 2
) carbon dioxide tensions can be significant due
to ventilation–perfusion mismatching in some patients. Arterial
blood gas analysis may be more indicative of ventilatory status.
Laparotomy
In addition to the concerns already mentioned for hepatic
patients (e.g., hypoglycemia, hypoproteinemia, coagulopathies, and
decreased drug metabolism), universal complications associated
with any general anesthetic episode and open abdominal surgery
must be taken into consideration. Hypothermia (which can exacer-
bate coagulopathies) is common in these cases and body tempera-
ture should be monitored and supportive measures instituted.
Interventional radiology
This technique uses fluoroscopy to guide an intravenous catheter to
the site where an anomalous vessel (PSS) joins the systemic circula-
tion. An expandable stent is placed in the caudal vena cava next to
the anomalous insertion. This stent will prevent the thrombotic coils
deployed into the shunt vessel from becoming lost in the systemic
circulation if they dislodge [145]. The challenge for the anesthetist is
to ensure complete immobilization of the patient at the critical stage
of stent placement. During general anesthesia, an NMBA (e.g., rocu-
ronium or atracurium) bolus or infusion can facilitate immobiliza-
tion if mechanical ventilation is available. In some situations, the
interventionalist may require an inspiratory hold to decrease the
patient’s abdominal movement during critical periods (e.g., measur-
ing the anomalous vessel and placement of the stent). Hypothermia
is a common problem, and the use of a radiolucent heating pad is
essential. Monitoring of cardiovascular (i.e., arterial blood pressure,
heart rate and rhythm, and central venous pressure) and respiratory
parameters (i.e., PET
CO2 and SpO2
) is required. Invasive arterial
blood pressure monitoring is ideal, but not mandatory, and central
venous pressure can be measured by connecting a sterile electronic
transducer to the jugular catheter used by the surgeon to place the
stent. Central venous pressure measurements will help assess patient
blood volume and guide fluid therapy based on trends, and also
inform the surgeon of the abdominal caval pressure as the catheter is
advanced. As in other patients with hepatic disease, volume, pressor,
and inotropic support may be needed.
Pain management in hepatobiliary diseases
The goals of analgesia during hepatic surgery are similar to other
types of surgery, but unique considerations such as altered pharma-
cokinetics and pharmacodynamics and altered mental status are
included in planning of the analgesic regimen. Opioids remain the
mainstay of analgesia in the perioperative period. Frequent assess-
ments of analgesia are required to determine appropriate adminis-
tration intervals. In humans, morphine can cause spasms of the
common bile duct by constriction of the sphincter of Oddi, which
increases the size and pressure in the gallbladder. This effect has not
been demonstrated or observed in veterinary patients [146].
Sufentanil, alfentanil, fentanyl, and remifentanil are shorter-acting
opioids with pharmacokinetics that are minimally affected by liver
disease. If a continuous infusion is not practical or desired, inter-
mittent administration of hydromorphone, morphine, buprenor-
phine, methadone, and oxymorphone can be used, but a reduced
dose or prolonged dosing interval may be needed. Opioid-induced
gastrointestinal disturbances (e.g., nausea, vomiting, gastrointesti-
nal reflux, and ileus) should be managed with antiemetics and
prokinetics.
Infiltration of the surgical incision or performing regional block-
ade using thoracic epidural analgesia, transversus abdominis plane
block, rectus sheath block, or quadratus lumborum block with
long-acting local anesthetics such as bupivacaine 0.25–0.5% or lipo-
somal bupivacaine suspension can be strategies for multimodal
analgesia for hepatic surgery. Benefits of regional techniques
include adequate postoperative pain management, enhanced recov-
ery and surgical outcomes, intraoperative inhalant-sparing effects,
and reduced need for opioids during the perioperative period [147].
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are also a viable
option, however, they have the potential to cause hepatic injury,
either intrinsically (e.g., aspirin and acetaminophen) or idiosyn-
cratically (e.g., COX-2- selective agents). Idiosyncratic toxic reac-
tions are rare, unpredictable, and not related to dose or pre-existing
liver disease. Clinical signs include inappetence, vomiting, and
icterus associated with elevations in serum hepatic enzymes and
bilirubin. Any unexplained increase in these biochemical parame-
ters after initiation of NSAID therapy should be investigated.
Additionally, NSAIDs may impair coagulation and hemostasis by
affecting clot formation and platelet aggregation. Owing to the
potential for adverse effects, the administration of NSAIDs to
patients with hepatic dysfunction, especially those with coagulopa-
thies, should be avoided or very closely monitored.
References
1 Weiss DJ, Gagne JM, Armstrong PJ. Relationship between inflammatory hepatic
disease and inflammatory bowel disease, pancreatitis, and nephritis in cats. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 1996; 209(6): 1114–1116.
2 Du Y, Li N, Long M. Liver sinusoid on a chip. In: Doh J, Fletcher D, Piel M, eds.
Methods in Cell Biology. Cambridge, MA: Elsevier, 2018; 146: 105–134.
3 Trefts E, Gannon M, Wasserman DH. The liver. Curr Biol 2017; 27(21):
R1147–R1151.
4 Charbon GA, Anderson MF. Hepatic haemodynamics as related to blood flow
through gut, spleen, and pancreas. Gut 1989; 30(2): 265–278.
5 Ljubicic N, Bilic A. The effects of selective and non-selective adrenoceptor blockade
on the portal blood flow in patients with liver cirrhosis. Scand J Gastroenterol 1991;
26(7): 751–757.
6 Gelman S, Mushlin PS. Catecholamine-induced changes in the splanchnic circula-
tion affecting systemic hemodynamics. Anesthesiology 2004; 100(2): 434–439.
7 Eipel C, Abshagen K, Vollmar B. Regulation of hepatic blood flow: the hepatic arte-
rial buffer response revisited. World J Gastroenterol 2010; 16(48): 6046–6057.
8 Lautt WW, Legare DJ, d’Almeida MS. Adenosine as putative regulator of hepatic
arterial flow (the buffer response). Am J Physiol 1985; 248(3 Pt 2): H331–H338.
9 Mulaikal T, Emond JC. Physiology and anatomy of the liver. In: Wagener G, ed.
Liver Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, 2nd edn. Switzerland: Springer
International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature, 2018: 3–18.
10 Schreiber G, Urban J. The synthesis and secretion of albumin. Rev Physiol Biochem
Pharmacol 1978; 82: 27–95.
11 Smith SA, Waters NJ. Pharmacokinetic and Pharmacodynamic considerations for
drugs binding to alpha-1-acid glycoprotein. Pharm Res 2018; 36(2): 30.
12 Hunter RP, Mahmood I, Martinez MN. Prediction of xenobiotic clearance in avian
species using mammalian or avian data: how accurate is the prediction? J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2008; 31(3): 281–284.
13 Sindrup SH, Brosen K. The pharmacogenetics of codeine hypoalgesia.
Pharmacogenetics 1995; 5(6): 335–346.
14 Center SA, Elston TH, Rowland PH, et al. Fulminant hepatic failure associated with oral
administration of diazepam in 11 cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1996; 209(3): 618–625.

-- 874 of 1450 --

Chapter 40: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Hepatic Disease 	859
15 Shimada T, Mimura M, Inoue K, et al. Cytochrome P450-dependent drug oxidation
activities in liver microsomes of various animal species including rats, guinea pigs,
dogs, monkeys, and humans. Arch Toxicol 1997; 71(6): 401–408.
16 Court MH, Hay-Kraus BL, Hill DW, et al. Propofol hydroxylation by dog liver
microsomes: assay development and dog breed differences. Drug Metab Dispos
1999; 27(11): 1293–1299.
17 van Beusekom CD, Schipper L, Fink-Gremmels J. Cytochrome P450-mediated
hepatic metabolism of new fluorescent substrates in cats and dogs. J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 2010; 33(6): 519–527.
18 Capel ID, Millburn P, Williams RT. The conjugation of 1- and 2-naphthols and
other phenols in the cat and pig. Xenobiotica 1974; 4(10): 601–615.
19 Capel ID, French MR, Millburn P, et al. Species variations in the metabolism of
phenol. Biochem J 1972; 127(2): 25P–26P.
20 Court MH, Greenblatt DJ. Molecular basis for deficient acetaminophen glucuroni-
dation in cats. An interspecies comparison of enzyme kinetics in liver microsomes.
Biochem Pharmacol 1997; 53(7): 1041–1047.
21 Ebner T, Schanzle G, Weber W, et al. In vitro glucuronidation of the angiotensin II
receptor antagonist telmisartan in the cat: a comparison with other species. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2013; 36(2): 154–160.
22 Zhao M, Ma J, Li M, et al. Cytochrome P450 enzymes and drug metabolism in
humans. Int J Mol Sci 2021; 22(23): 12808.
23 Livingston A, Waterman AE. The development of tolerance to ketamine in rats and
the significance of hepatic metabolism. Br J Pharmacol 1978; 64(1): 63–69.
24 Lee J, Boyer JL. Molecular alterations in hepatocyte transport mechanisms in
acquired cholestatic liver disorders. Semin Liver Dis 2000; 20(3): 373–384.
25 Mealey KL, Northrup NC, Bentjen SA. Increased toxicity of P-glycoprotein-
substrate chemotherapeutic agents in a dog with the MDR1 deletion mutation asso-
ciated with ivermectin sensitivity. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2003; 223(10): 1434,
1453–1455.
26 Fink- Gremmels J. Implications of hepatic cytochrome P450-related biotransforma-
tion processes in veterinary sciences. Eur J Pharmacol 2008; 585(2–3): 502–509.
27 Laskin DL. Nonparenchymal cells and hepatotoxicity. Semin Liver Dis 1990; 10(4):
293–304.
28 Katz S, Jimenez MA, Lehmkuhler WE, et al. Liver bacterial clearance following
hepatic artery ligation and portacaval shunt. J Surg Res 1991; 51(3): 267–270.
29 Dhainaut JF, Marin N, Mignon A, et al. Hepatic response to sepsis: interaction
between coagulation and inflammatory processes. Crit Care Med 2001; 29(7 Suppl):
S42–S47.
30 Center SA, Erb HN, Joseph SA. Measurement of serum bile acids concentrations
for diagnosis of hepatobiliary disease in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1995; 207(8):
1048–1054.
31 Webster CRL, Center SA, Cullen JM, et al. ACVIM consensus statement on the
diagnosis and treatment of chronic hepatitis in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2019; 33(3):
1173–1200.
32 Lawrence YA, Steiner JM. Laboratory evaluation of the liver. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 2017; 47(3): 539–553.
33 Ruland K, Fischer A, Hartmann K. Sensitivity and specificity of fasting ammonia
and serum bile acids in the diagnosis of portosystemic shunts in dogs and cats. Vet
Clin Pathol 2010; 39(1): 57–64.
34 Weiss M, Krejcie TC, Avram MJ. A physiologically based model of hepatic ICG
clearance: interplay between sinusoidal uptake and biliary excretion. Eur J Pharm
Sci 2011; 44(3): 359–365.
35 Ercolani G, Grazi GL, Calliva R, et al. The lidocaine (MEGX) test as an index of hepatic
function: its clinical usefulness in liver surgery. Surgery 2000; 127(4): 464–471.
36 Devriendt N, Serrano G, Croubels S, et al. Evaluation of serum lidocaine/monoeth-
ylglycylxylidide concentration to assess shunt closure in dogs with extrahepatic
portosystemic shunts. J Vet Intern Med 2021; 35(1): 261–268.
37 Assawarachan SN, Chuchalermporn P, Maneesaay P, et al. Changes in serum lipid
profiles among canine patients suffering from chronic hepatitis. Vet Sci 2021; 8(10):
221.
38 Center SA, Slater MR, Manwarren T, et al. Diagnostic efficacy of serum alkaline
phosphatase and gamma-glutamyltransferase in dogs with histologically confirmed
hepatobiliary disease: 270 cases (1980–1990). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992; 201(8):
1258–1264.
39 Shih JL, Keating JH, Freeman LM, et al. Chronic hepatitis in Labrador Retrievers:
clinical presentation and prognostic factors. J Vet Intern Med 2007; 21(1): 33–39.
40 Niles JD, Williams JM, Cripps PJ. Hemostatic profiles in 39 dogs with congenital
portosystemic shunts. Vet Surg 2001; 30(1): 97–104.
41 Kelley D, Lester C, DeLaforcade A, et al. Thromboelastographic evaluation of dogs
with congenital portosystemic shunts. J Vet Intern Med 2013; 27(5): 1262–1267.
42 Lisman T, Hernandez-Gea V, Magnusson M, et al. The concept of rebalanced
hemostasis in patients with liver disease: communication from the ISTH SSC work-
ing group on hemostatic management of patients with liver disease. J Thromb
Haemost 2021; 19(4): 1116–1122.
43 Fry W, Lester C, Etedali NM, et al. Thromboelastography in dogs with chronic
hepatopathies. J Vet Intern Med 2017; 31(2): 419–426.
44 Webster CR. Hemostatic disorders associated with hepatobiliary disease. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 2017; 47(3): 601–615.
45 Pavlick M, DeLaforcade A, Penninck DG, et al. Evaluation of coagulation parame-
ters in dogs with gallbladder mucoceles. J Vet Intern Med 2021; 35(4): 1763–1772.
46 Shao Z, Zhao Y, Feng L, et al. Association between plasma fibrinogen levels and
mortality in acute-on- chronic hepatitis B liver failure. Dis Markers 2015; 2015:
468596.
47 Elhiblu MA, Dua K, Mohindroo J, et al. Clinico-hemato-biochemical profile of
dogs with liver cirrhosis. Vet World 2015; 8(4): 487–491.
48 Girolami A, Ferrari S, Cosi E, et al. Vitamin K-dependent coagulation factors that
may be responsible for both bleeding and thrombosis (FII, FVII, and FIX). Clin
Appl Thromb Hemost 2018; 24(Suppl 9): 42S–47S.
49 Stanworth SJ. The evidence-based use of FFP and cryoprecipitate for abnormalities
of coagulation tests and clinical coagulopathy. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ
Program 2007: 179–186.
50 Shah NL, Intagliata NM, Northup PG, et al. Procoagulant therapeutics in liver dis-
ease: a critique and clinical rationale. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2014; 11(11):
675–682.
51 Wei H, Child LJ. Clinical utility of viscoelastic testing in chronic liver disease: a
systematic review. World J Hepatol 2020; 12(11): 1115–1127.
52 Buriko Y, Drobatz K, Silverstein DC. Establishment of normal reference intervals in
dogs using a viscoelastic point-of- care coagulation monitor and its comparison
with thromboelastography. Vet Clin Pathol 2020; 49(4): 567–573.
53 Rosati T, Jandrey KE, Burges JW, et al. Establishment of a reference interval for a
novel viscoelastic coagulometer and comparison with thromboelastography in
healthy cats. Vet Clin Pathol 2020; 49(4): 660–664.
54 Kelley D, Lester C, Shaw S, et al. Thromboelastographic evaluation of dogs with
acute liver disease. J Vet Intern Med 2015; 29(4): 1053–1062.
55 Kakar N, Daniel G, Fellman C, et al. Thromboelastography in cats with cholestatic
liver disease. J Feline Med Surg 2021; 23(2): 160–167.
56 Guedes AG, Papich MG, Rude EP, et al. Comparison of plasma histamine levels
after intravenous administration of hydromorphone and morphine in dogs. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2007; 30(6): 516–522.
57 Robinson EP, Faggella AM, Henry DP, et al. Comparison of histamine release
induced by morphine and oxymorphone administration in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1988;
49(10): 1699–1701.
58 Imani F, Motavaf M, Safari S, et al. The therapeutic use of analgesics in patients with
liver cirrhosis: a literature review and evidence-based recommendations. Hepat
Mon 2014; 14(10): e23539.
59 Rakoski M, Goyal P, Spencer-Safier M, et al. Pain management in patients with cir-
rhosis. Clin Liver Dis (Hoboken) 2018; 11(6): 135–140.
60 Soleimanpour H, Safari S, Shahsavari Nia K, et al. Opioid drugs in patients with
liver disease: a systematic review. Hepat Mon 2016; 16(4): e32636.
61 Dershwitz M, Hoke JF, Rosow CE, et al. Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics
of remifentanil in volunteer subjects with severe liver disease. Anesthesiology 1996;
84(4): 812–820.
62 Bostrom I, Nyman G, Kampa N, et al. Effects of acepromazine on renal function in
anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 2003; 64(5): 590–598.
63 Barr SC, Ludders JW, Looney AL, et al. Platelet aggregation in dogs after sedation
with acepromazine and atropine and during subsequent general anesthesia and sur-
gery. Am J Vet Res 1992; 53(11): 2067–2070.
64 Lidbury JA, Cook AK, Steiner JM. Hepatic encephalopathy in dogs and cats. J Vet
Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2016; 26(4): 471–487.
65 Palomero-Gallagher N, Zilles K. Neurotransmitter receptor alterations in hepatic
encephalopathy: a review. Arch Biochem Biophys 2013; 536(2): 109–121.
66 Als-Nielsen B, Gluud LL, Gluud C. Benzodiazepine receptor antagonists for hepatic
encephalopathy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2004; (2): CD002798.
67 Jones EA, Yurdaydin C, Basile AS. The role of endogenous benzodiazepines in
hepatic encephalopathy: animal studies. Alcohol Alcohol Suppl 1993; 2: 175–180.
68 Nishiyama T, Hirasaki A, Toda N, et al. Pharmacokinetics of midazolam in patients
with liver damage for hepatectomy. Masui 1993; 42(6): 871–875.
69 Bozkurt P, Kaya G, Suzer O, et al. Diazepam serum concentration-sedative effect
relationship in patients with liver disease. Middle East J Anaesthesiol 1996; 13(4):
405–413.
70 Flacke WE, Flacke JW, Bloor BC, et al. Effects of dexmedetomidine on systemic and
coronary hemodynamics in the anesthetized dog. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 1993;
7(1): 41–49.
71 Lawrence CJ, Prinzen FW, de Lange S. The effect of dexmedetomidine on nutrient
organ blood flow. Anesth Analg 1996; 83(6): 1160–1165.
72 Talke PO, Traber DL, Richardson CA, et al. The effect of alpha(2) agonist-induced
sedation and its reversal with an alpha(2) antagonist on organ blood flow in sheep.
Anesth Analg 2000; 90(5): 1060–1066.

-- 875 of 1450 --

860 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
73 Baratta MT, Zaya MJ, White JA, et al. Canine CYP2B11 metabolizes and is inhib-
ited by anesthetic agents often co-administered in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
2010; 33(1): 50–55.
74 Thomson IA, Fitch W, Campbell D, et al. Effects of ketamine on liver blood flow
and hepatic oxygen consumption. Studies in the anaesthetised greyhound. Acta
Anaesthesiol Scand 1988; 32(1): 10–14.
75 Thomson IA, Fitch W, Hughes RL, et al. Effects of certain i.v. anaesthetics on liver
blood flow and hepatic oxygen consumption in the greyhound. Br J Anaesth 1986;
58(1): 69–80.
76 Wouters PF, Van de Velde MA, Marcus MA, et al. Hemodynamic changes during
induction of anesthesia with eltanolone and propofol in dogs. Anesth Analg 1995;
81(1): 125–131.
77 Haberer JP, Audibert G, Saunier CG, et al. Effect of propofol and thiopentone on
regional blood flow in brain and peripheral tissues during normoxia and hypoxia
in the dog. Clin Physiol 1993; 13(2): 197–207.
78 Zhu T, Pang Q, McCluskey SA, et al. Effect of propofol on hepatic blood flow and
oxygen balance in rabbits. Can J Anaesth 2008; 55(6): 364–370.
79 Ye L, Luo CZ, McCluskey SA, et al. Propofol attenuates hepatic ischemia/reperfu-
sion injury in an in vivo rabbit model. J Surg Res 2012; 178(2): e65–e70.
80 Chan KC, Lin CJ, Lee PH, et al. Propofol attenuates the decrease of dynamic com-
pliance and water content in the lung by decreasing oxidative radicals released
from the reperfused liver. Anesth Analg 2008; 107(4): 1284–1289.
81 Zoran DL, Riedesel DH, Dyer DC. Pharmacokinetics of propofol in mixed-breed
dogs and Greyhounds. Am J Vet Res 1993; 54(5): 755–760.
82 Servin F, Farinotti R, Haberer JP, et al. Propofol infusion for maintenance of anes-
thesia in morbidly obese patients receiving nitrous oxide. A clinical and pharma-
cokinetic study. Anesthesiology 1993; 78(4): 657–665.
83 Posner LP, Asakawa M, Erb HN. Use of propofol for anesthesia in cats with pri-
mary hepatic lipidosis: 44 cases (1995–2004). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008; 232(12):
1841–1843.
84 Sams L, Braun C, Allman D, et al. A comparison of the effects of propofol and
etomidate on the induction of anesthesia and on cardiopulmonary parameters in
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35(6): 488–494.
85 van Limmen J, Wyffels P, Berrevoet F, et al. Effects of propofol and sevoflurane on
hepatic blood flow: a randomized controlled trial. BMC Anesthesiol 2020; 20(1):
241.
86 Blunnie WP, Zacharias M, Dundee JW, et al. Liver enzyme studies with continu-
ous intravenous anaesthesia. Anaesthesia 1981; 36(2): 152–156.
87 Sams RA, Muir WW. Effects of phenobarbital on thiopental pharmacokinetics in
Greyhounds. Am J Vet Res 1988; 49(2): 245–249.
88 Taylor JD, Richards RK, Tabern DL. Metabolism of S35 thiopental (Pentothal);
chemical and paper chromatographic studies of S35 excretion by the rat and mon-
key. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1952; 104(1): 93–102.
89 Nebauer AE, Doenicke A, Hoernecke R, et al. Does etomidate cause haemolysis?
Br J Anaesth 1992; 69(1): 58–60.
90 Moon PF. Acute toxicosis in two dogs associated with etomidate-propylene glycol
infusion. Lab Anim Sci 1994; 44(6): 590–594.
91 Bonnardot JP, Levron JC, Deslauriers M, et al. Pharmacokinetics of continuous
infusion of etomidate in cirrhotic patients. Ann Fr Anesth Reanim 1991; 10(5):
443–449.
92 Carlos R, Calvo R, Erill S. Plasma protein binding of etomidate in patients with
renal failure or hepatic cirrhosis. Clin Pharmacokinet 1979; 4(2): 144–148.
93 Molenaar N, Bijkerk RM, Beishuizen A, et al. Steroidogenesis in the adrenal dys-
function of critical illness: impact of etomidate. Crit Care 2012; 16(4): R121.
94 Hauser GJ, Brotzman HM, Kaufman SS. Hepatoadrenal syndrome in pediatric
patients with end-stage liver disease. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2012; 13(3):
e145–e149.
95 Calvo R, Carlos R, Erill S. Etomidate and plasma esterase activity in man and
experimental animals. Pharmacology 1979; 18(6): 294–298.
96 Van Hamme MJ, Ghoneim MM, Ambre JJ. Pharmacokinetics of etomidate, a new
intravenous anesthetic. Anesthesiology 1978; 49(4): 274–277.
97 Kaka JS, Hayton WL. Pharmacokinetics of ketamine and two metabolites in the
dog. J Pharmacokinet Biopharm 1980; 8(2): 193–202.
98 Noppers IM, Niesters M, Aarts L, et al. Drug-induced liver injury following a
repeated course of ketamine treatment for chronic pain in CRPS type 1 patients: a
report of 3 cases. Pain 2011; 152(9): 2173–2178.
99 Wai MS, Chan WM, Zhang AQ, et al. Long-term ketamine and ketamine plus
alcohol treatments produced damages in liver and kidney. Hum Exp Toxicol 2012;
31(9): 877–886.
100 Oohara K. Effect of ketamine on hepatic circulation and oxygen metabolism dur-
ing hypoxia in dog. Masui 1993; 42(10): 1440–1447.
101 Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, Benson GJ. Organ blood flow and distribution of
cardiac output in hypocapnic ketamine-anesthetized swine. Am J Vet Res 1983;
44(8): 1578–1582.
102 Hartman JC, Pagel PS, Proctor LT, et al. Influence of desflurane, isoflurane and
halothane on regional tissue perfusion in dogs. Can J Anaesth 1992; 39(8):
877–887.
103 Frink EJ Jr., Morgan SE, Coetzee A, et al. The effects of sevoflurane, halothane,
enflurane, and isoflurane on hepatic blood flow and oxygenation in chronically
instrumented greyhound dogs. Anesthesiology 1992; 76(1): 85–90.
104 Safari S, Motavaf M, Seyed Siamdoust SA, et al. Hepatotoxicity of halogenated
inhalational anesthetics. Iran Red Crescent Med J 2014; 16(9): e20153.
105 Lu H, Yang LQ, Yu WF, et al. Protection of liver against ischemia/reperfusion
injury by Kupffer cell mediated emulsified isoflurane preconditioning: experi-
ment with rats. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi 2007; 87(35): 2468–2471.
106 Bedirli N, Ofluoglu E, Kerem M, et al. Hepatic energy metabolism and the differ-
ential protective effects of sevoflurane and isoflurane anesthesia in a rat hepatic
ischemia-reperfusion injury model. Anesth Analg 2008; 106(3): 830–837, table of
contents.
107 Zhou ZJ, Wang X, Song Z, et al. Effect of sevoflurane anaesthesia on hepatic blood
flow in infants with obstructive hepatobiliary disease. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand
2016; 60(8): 1067–1074.
108 Granja TF, Kohler D, Schad J, et al. Adenosine receptor Adora2b plays a mechanis-
tic role in the protective effect of the volatile anesthetic sevoflurane during liver
ischemia/reperfusion. Anesthesiology 2016; 125(3): 547–560.
109 Lebrault C, Berger JL, D’Hollander AA, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
namics of vecuronium (ORG NC 45) in patients with cirrhosis. Anesthesiology
1985; 62(5): 601–605.
110 Devlin JC, Head-Rapson AG, Parker CJ, et al. Pharmacodynamics of mivacurium
chloride in patients with hepatic cirrhosis. Br J Anaesth 1993; 71(2): 227–231.
111 van Miert MM, Eastwood NB, Boyd AH, et al. The pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics of rocuronium in patients with hepatic cirrhosis. Br J Clin
Pharmacol 1997; 44(2): 139–144.
112 De Wolf AM, Freeman JA, Scott VL, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
namics of cisatracurium in patients with end-stage liver disease undergoing liver
transplantation. Br J Anaesth 1996; 76(5): 624–628.
113 Ward S, Neill EA. Pharmacokinetics of atracurium in acute hepatic failure (with
acute renal failure). Br J Anaesth 1983; 55(12): 1169–1172.
114 Adams WA, Mark Senior J, Jones RS, et al. cis-Atracurium in dogs with and
without porto-systemic shunts. Vet Anaesth Analg 2006; 33(1): 17–23.
115 Weng XC, Zhou L, Fu YY, et al. Dose requirements of continuous infusion of rocu-
ronium and atracurium throughout orthotopic liver transplantation in humans.
J Zhejiang Univ Sci B 2005; 6(9): 869–872.
116 Fujita A, Ishibe N, Yoshihara T, et al. Rapid reversal of neuromuscular blockade by
sugammadex after continuous infusion of rocuronium in patients with liver dys-
function undergoing hepatic surgery. Acta Anaesthesiol Taiwan 2014; 52(2): 54–58.
117 Raffan E, McCallum A, Scase TJ, et al. Ascites is a negative prognostic indicator in
chronic hepatitis in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2009; 23(1): 63–66.
118 Fuentealba C, Guest S, Haywood S, et al. Chronic hepatitis: a retrospective study
in 34 dogs. Can Vet J 1997; 38(6): 365–373.
119 Prins M, Schellens CJ, van Leeuwen MW, et al. Coagulation disorders in dogs with
hepatic disease. Vet J 2010; 185(2): 163–168.
120 118. Stellingwerff M, Brandsma A, Lisman T, et al. Prohemostatic interventions in
liver surgery. Semin Thromb Hemost 2012; 38(3): 244–249.
121 Rogers CL, O’Toole TE, Keating JH, et al. Portal vein thrombosis in cats: 6 cases
(2001–2006). J Vet Intern Med 2008; 22(2): 282–287.
122 Center SA, Magne ML. Historical, physical examination, and clinicopathologic
features of portosystemic vascular anomalies in the dog and cat. Semin Vet Med
Surg Small Anim 1990; 5(2): 83–93.
123 Vallarino N, Pil S, Devriendt N, et al. Diagnostic value of blood variables following
attenuation of congenital extrahepatic portosystemic shunt in dogs. Vet Rec 2020;
187(7): e48.
124 Holford AL, Tobias KM, Bartges JW, et al. Adrenal response to adrenocortico-
tropic hormone in dogs before and after surgical attenuation of a single congenital
portosystemic shunt. J Vet Intern Med 2008; 22(4): 832–838.
125 Aronson LR, Gacad RC, Kaminsky-Russ K, et al. Endogenous benzodiazepine
activity in the peripheral and portal blood of dogs with congenital portosystemic
shunts. Vet Surg 1997; 26(3): 189–194.
126 Meyer HP, Legemate DA, van den Brom W, et al. Improvement of chronic hepatic
encephalopathy in dogs by the benzodiazepine-receptor partial inverse agonist
sarmazenil, but not by the antagonist flumazenil. Metab Brain Dis 1998; 13(3):
241–251.
127 Gow AG, Marques AI, Yool DA, et al. Dogs with congenital porto-systemic shunting
(cPSS) and hepatic encephalopathy have higher serum concentrations of C-reactive
protein than asymptomatic dogs with cPSS. Metab Brain Dis 2012; 27(2): 227–229.
128 Kummeling A, Teske E, Rothuizen J, et al. Coagulation profiles in dogs with con-
genital portosystemic shunts before and after surgical attenuation. J Vet Intern
Med 2006; 20(6): 1319–1326.

-- 876 of 1450 --

Chapter 40: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Hepatic Disease 	861
129 Tisdall PL, Hunt GB, Youmans KR, et al. Neurological dysfunction in dogs follow-
ing attenuation of congenital extrahepatic portosystemic shunts. J Small Anim
Pract 2000; 41(12): 539–546.
130 Lipscomb VJ, Jones HJ, Brockman DJ. Complications and long-term outcomes of
the ligation of congenital portosystemic shunts in 49 cats. Vet Rec 2007; 160(14):
465–470.
131 Sharma S, Boston SE, Kotlowski J, et al. Preoperative autologous blood donation
and transfusion in dogs undergoing elective surgical oncology procedures with
high risk of hemorrhage. Vet Surg 2021; 50(3): 607–614.
132 Monnet X, Marik PE, Teboul JL. Prediction of fluid responsiveness: an update.
Ann Intensive Care 2016; 6(1): 111.
133 Araos J, Kenny JS, Rousseau-Blass F, et al. Dynamic prediction of fluid responsive-
ness during positive pressure ventilation: a review of the physiology underlying
heart-lung interactions and a critical interpretation. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020;
47(1): 3–14.
134 Boysen SR, Gommeren K. Assessment of volume status and fluid responsiveness
in small animals. Front Vet Sci 2021; 8: 630643.
135 Yamamoto K, Fukumori D, Yamamoto F, et al. First report of hepatectomy without
endotracheal general anesthesia. J Am Coll Surg 2013; 216(5): 908–914.
136 Iseri T, Nakamori M, Fujimoto Y. Effects of thoracolumbar epidural anesthesia
with lidocaine on the systemic hemodynamics and hepatic blood flow in propofol
anesthetized dogs. J Vet Med Sci 2021; 83(12): 1877–1884.
137 Tennent-Brown BS, Mudge MC, Hardy J, et al. Liver lobe torsion in six horses.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2012; 241(5): 615–620.
138 Sheen JC, Vella D, Hung L. Retrospective analysis of liver lobe torsion in pet rab-
bits: 40 cases (2016–2021). Vet Rec 2022: e1971.
139 Mehler SJ, Mayhew PD, Drobatz KJ, et al. Variables associated with outcome in
dogs undergoing extrahepatic biliary surgery: 60 cases (1988–2002). Vet Surg
2004; 33(6): 644–649.
140 Cakir T, Cingi A, Yegen C. Coagulation dynamics and platelet functions in
obstructive jaundiced patients. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2009; 24(5): 748–751.
141 Mesich ML, Mayhew PD, Paek M, et al. Gall bladder mucoceles and their associa-
tion with endocrinopathies in dogs: a retrospective case-control study. J Small
Anim Pract 2009; 50(12): 630–635.
142 Proot SJ, Rothuizen J. High complication rate of an automatic Tru-Cut biopsy gun
device for liver biopsy in cats. J Vet Intern Med 2006; 20(6): 1327–1333.
143 Mayhew PD. Advanced laparoscopic procedures (hepatobiliary, endocrine) in
dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2009; 39(5): 925–939.
144 Nesek-Adam V, Rasic Z, Kos J, et al. Aminotransferases after experimental pneu-
moperitoneum in dogs. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2004; 48(7): 862–866.
145 Bussadori R, Bussadori C, Millan L, et al. Transvenous coil embolisation for the
treatment of single congenital portosystemic shunts in six dogs. Vet J 2008; 176(2):
221–226.
146 Helm JF, Venu RP, Geenen JE, et al. Effects of morphine on the human sphincter
of Oddi. Gut 1988; 29(10): 1402–1407.
147 Dieu A, Huynen P, Lavand’homme P, et al. Pain management after open liver
resection: Procedure-Specific Postoperative Pain Management (PROSPECT) rec-
ommendations. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2021; 46(5): 433–445.

-- 877 of 1450 --

Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of Lumb and Jones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
41
862
Anatomy of the gastrointestinal tract
The gastrointestinal tract (GIT) of small animals is a continuous
multilayered tube with variations in size, shape, and function for
each organ. It includes the oropharynx, esophagus, stomach, small
intestine, colon, and rectum. The liver, biliary tract, and exocrine
pancreas are also part of the GIT; however, hepatic and pancreatic
function and disease are addressed in Chapters 40 and 42,
respectively.
The intestinal wall has four main layers (from inside to outside):
the mucosa, the submucosa, the muscularis with two layers of
smooth muscle (an inner circular layer and outer longitudinal layer),
and the serosa. The muscular layers of the esophagus are an excep-
tion to this basic structure. The entire esophagus of the dog is com-
posed of striated muscle, whereas cats, horses, pigs, and primates
have striated muscle in the proximal two-thirds and smooth muscle
in the distal portion, including the esophago–gastric junction. The
composition of the specialized epithelium of the mucosal layer var-
ies with each organ, but all organs perform transport, digestive,
secretory, and absorptive functions in addition to providing immune
protection and surveillance. Controlled rhythmic contractions of
the muscular layers mix and transport ingesta throughout the GIT.
The external serosal layer is a thin membrane made up of secretory
cells that produce and secrete serous fluid. This fluid lubricates the
surface, facilitating motility by decreasing friction due to contact
with itself and other abdominal organs [1–3].
The design of the control system of the GIT is remarkably large
and complex, with a total number of enteric neurons similar to that
of the spinal cord [2]. Intestinal function relies on input from both
the enteric nervous system (ENS) and the central nervous system
(CNS), as well as endocrine and immune support. The ENS has
extrinsic and intrinsic components that are supplied with parasym-
pathetic and sympathetic input via the autonomic nervous system
(ANS). The intrinsic component includes the myenteric and sub-
mucosal plexuses. The myenteric plexus controls intestinal motility
and is located between the circular and longitudinal muscle layers.
The submucosal plexus coordinates motion of the luminal epithe-
lium and is found between the submucosa and the inner circular
muscle layer. Other minor plexuses are also found within the mus-
cle and submucosal layers [1–4].
The extrinsic ENS consists of parasympathetic innervation to the
upper and lower GIT via the vagus and pelvic nerves, respectively,
and sympathetic innervation via spinal segments T1-L3. Both affer-
ent and efferent nerve fibers are contained within the same nerves.
Preganglionic parasympathetic neurons have long axons that synapse
with ganglia of the myenteric or submucosal plexuses within the GIT.
Whereas preganglionic sympathetic fibers synapse with ganglia just
outside the GIT, the postganglionic sympathetic neurons travel into
the GIT itself, synapsing with the intrinsic plexuses and/or directly
onto targets in the intestine. Acetylcholine (ACh) is the neurotrans-
mitter released by all preganglionic fibers. Postganglionic parasym-
pathetic neurons may utilize ACh, nitric oxide, adenosine
triphosphate, serotonin, or various peptides such as substance P, vas-
oactive intestinal peptide (VIP), neuropeptide Y (NPY), or gastrin-
releasing peptide (GRP). Postganglionic sympathetic neurons release
norepinephrine. In addition to the cholinergic, adrenergic, and pep-
tidergic receptors, many other receptor types are found in the GIT
41 Physiology, Pathophysiology,
and Anesthetic Management of Patients
with Gastrointestinal Disease
Jennifer G. Adams
Hull, Georgia, USA
Chapter contents
Anatomy of the gastrointestinal tract, 862
Effects of anesthetic agents on gastrointestinal function, 863
Nausea and vomiting, 864
Gastroesophageal reflux, 865
Esophagitis and esophageal stricture, 868
Aspiration, 868
Gastrointestinal motility/postoperative ileus, 869
Gastrointestinal conditions requiring anesthesia, 871
Laparotomy, 871
Megaesophagus, 873
Gastric dilation–volvulus, 874
Hemoabdomen, 876
Intestinal neoplasia, 877
Septic peritonitis, 879
Foreign body removal and other abdominal procedures, 882
References, 882

-- 878 of 1450 --

Chapter 41: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Gastrointestinal Disease 	863
that modify secretory, endocrine, and muscular activity. Receptors
for μ- and δ-opioids, several serotonin types, and histamine are just a
few. Gastrin, secretin, cholecystokinin, gastric inhibitory peptide,
motilin, and ghrelin are hormones with significant secretory and/or
motility effects within the GIT [1–7].
Intestinal motility relies on two major patterns of muscular activ-
ity, the migrating motor complexes (MMC) seen during fasting,
and a digestive pattern that begins when foodstuffs enter the stom-
ach. MMCs are seen in dogs and humans, but motility in cats is
controlled by a migrating spike complex pattern that is somewhat
weaker than the MMC. The interstitial cells of Cajal, located within
the myenteric plexuses, are specialized pacemaker cells that create
and maintain MMCs. These are so-called “slow waves” of depolari-
zation that spread via gap junctions between smooth muscle cells
over large sections of intestine but remain below the depolarization
threshold for propulsive contractions. This activity provides an
effective housekeeping function for the intestine, moving residual
fluid, mucus, bacteria, and cellular debris aborally during the inter-
digestive period. As a food bolus arrives, electrical activity increases,
and the digestive pattern begins. Sphincters and sections of intes-
tine in the path of the bolus relax to allow entry as other sections
contract in a segmental or propulsive fashion. Ingesta is mixed and
moved along the GIT using the circular and longitudinal muscles,
respectively. Feedback inhibition also occurs along the tract to
“brake” the intestine, providing longer and more thorough contact
for digestion. Both the digestive and interdigestive patterns are con-
trolled by the parasympathetic nervous system, with ACh and sub-
stance P responsible for contraction and VIP and nitric oxide
producing relaxation. Sympathetic input is primarily inhibitory,
seen during times of stress, excitement, anxiety, fear, or pain.
Numerous neurotransmitters and hormones are involved in the ini-
tiation and processing of the digestive phase, affecting motility,
secretion, digestion, absorption, and blood flow [1,2,4–7].
Effects of anesthetic agents
on gastrointestinal function
In healthy patients, the effects on the GIT of most anesthetic agents
are usually short-lived as normal function returns with the decline
of drug levels. Some adjunctive agents may have a longer duration,
so decisions about their use should be made with an understanding
of the primary GI problem, pre-existing or concurrent illness or
organ dysfunction, and effects of surgery since these may obscure
and/or compound the effects of the anesthetic drugs. Prolonged
effects into the postoperative period have the potential to affect out-
comes. Gastrointestinal disorders during or following anesthesia
are not infrequent in veterinary patients. Bloat and regurgitation in
ruminants, colic in horses, as well as anorexia, diarrhea, and ileus in
rabbits, are common [8–14]. Vomiting, regurgitation, and diarrhea
in dogs and cats are not common but do occur perioperatively.
Davies et al. [14] identified postoperative regurgitation and/or
vomiting (PORV) in 30/244 dogs (12.3%) presenting for non-
elective procedures. GI and neurologic surgery, the American
Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) score of 4, emergency presenta-
tion, history of vomiting or regurgitation, use of sevoflurane, and
intact gender were significantly associated with PORV.
Physiologic abnormalities encountered perioperatively may pro-
duce signs of GI dysfunction and can be confused with direct effects
of anesthetic drugs. These include dehydration, hypovolemia, hypo-
tension, anemia, protein and electrolyte abnormalities, acid–base
derangements, hypoxia, myocardial dysfunction, hypothermia, and
changes in ANS tone. Vomiting patients may be alkalotic due to loss
of H+ and Cl– but eventually become acidotic with significant vol-
ume loss and/or tissue ischemia. As with all patients, preanesthetic
evaluation of and treatment for any abnormalities of patient status
are necessary to minimize the effects of anesthesia and maximize the
potential for a positive outcome.
Effects of surgery that may significantly affect perioperative GI
function (and often anesthetic management) include tissue manip-
ulation/handling, hemorrhage, and correction of the underlying GI
problem (e.g., reperfusion of the stomach following derotation of a
gastric dilation and volvulus). The surgeon and anesthetist should
work together to minimize the effects of both surgery and anesthe-
sia on perioperative GI function.
The effects of anesthetic agents on the GIT include changes in
saliva and its production, nausea, vomiting, ileus, regurgitation,
gastroesophageal reflux (GER), constipation, reduced secretion or
alteration of digestive fluids, and aerophagia (associated with pant-
ing). Salivation and panting can lead to fluid loss and contribute to
hemoconcentration/dehydration. Although there is considerable
overlap of the effects of many drugs (e.g., opioids, α2
- adrenergic
receptor agonists, anticholinergics, and inhalants all reduce motil-
ity), some effects tend to be more specific (e.g., anticholinergics
reduce the volume of saliva but increase viscosity). Ileus can result
in tympany, especially if microbial gas production continues at a
high rate as seen in ruminants and equine patients. In small ani-
mals, some suggest that this could be a contributing factor to the
rare occurrence of gastric dilation (GD) or gastric dilation–volvulus,
(GDV) seen in dogs postoperatively. Anesthesia is often implicated
as a risk factor for the development of GDV, and anecdotal reports
are common. GD following sedation [15] or injectable anesthe-
sia [16] are reported, however, published reports of GDV following
anesthesia could not be found.
Concurrent or chronic illness may complicate the clinical pic-
ture. For example, diabetic patients may suffer from gastroparesis
and delayed gastric emptying secondary to autonomic neuropa-
thy [17] and may be more likely to develop reflux, esophagitis, and/
or vomiting postoperatively. Anemic or hypoproteinemic patients
present treatment challenges with fluid therapy, especially if hypo-
tension occurs. Stress of disease, pain, and hospitalization also pre-
dispose patients to GI dysfunction, especially anorexia, gastric
ulceration, digestive disturbance, and diarrhea [5,7,12]. If anes-
thetic drugs are the primary cause of GI dysfunction in patients,
many of these signs (e.g., ileus, nausea, vomiting) should resolve
relatively quickly following cessation of drug administration. If they
persist or are severe, further evaluation of the patient is warranted
to ensure that another cause is not present (e.g., acid–base or elec-
trolyte abnormalities, hypotension, GI foreign body, GDV, GI ulcer-
ation, and internal hemorrhage).
The most significant perianesthetic complications associated with
GI dysfunction include pulmonary aspiration and/or esophagitis
following vomiting, regurgitation or GER, and postoperative ileus
(POI). Aspiration may cause pneumonitis, pneumonia, and severe
hypoxemia, which can result in cardiac arrest. An episode of general
anesthesia is reported to be a very common risk factor for esophagi-
tis and aspiration pneumonia or pneumonitis in small animals.
Positioning and duration of anesthesia are reported risk factors for
the latter. When severe or unrecognized/untreated, stricture of the
esophageal mucosa can develop, which can lead to persistent vomit-
ing, regurgitation, dysphagia, weight loss, and debilitation [17–20].
POI greatly affects patient comfort following surgery and can
affect outcomes. A greater incidence of nausea and vomiting, poor

-- 879 of 1450 --

864 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
wound healing, and delayed oral intake and mobility are seen with
persistent ileus. The risk of respiratory and other system complica-
tions is increased; longer hospital stays are seen and subsequently,
greater financial burden [9,10,20–23].
Nausea and vomiting
Nausea and vomiting are common adverse effects of anesthetic
agents, especially in human patients. The underlying mechanisms
of emesis are complex, as several mechanisms result in vomiting,
and two target areas exist in the CNS. A humoral pathway is stimu-
lated by blood-borne substances that affect the chemoreceptor trig-
ger zone (CTZ), whereas the vomiting center (VC) is activated by a
neural pathway. Vomiting occurs when the VC is directly stimu-
lated by one or more neurotransmitters. Histamine, ACh, dopa-
mine, serotonin (5HT and 5HT 3
), and neurokinin-1 (NK 1 or
substance P) are important neurotransmitters in the VC. Dopamine,
serotonin, and α2
-adrenergic receptors are found in the CTZ.
Located outside the blood–brain barrier, the CTZ is sensitive to low
levels of emetic agents in the circulation. Input from the cerebral
cortex (anxiety and anticipation), the vestibular apparatus (motion
sickness), and local damage to the GIT stimulate the VC. Mucosal
irritation and damage or distention of GI tissues produce emesis via
the release of serotonin and/or stimulation of vagal afferent recep-
tors [6,24–28]. Vasopressin has also been shown to cause nausea
and 	vomiting, 	possibly 	via 	effects 	on 	central 	opioid
receptors [29–31].
While many opioids are associated with a high incidence of vom-
iting (e.g., morphine and hydromorphone), antiemesis has also
been reported. This effect is thought to occur when increased num-
bers of opioid receptors in the VC are stimulated, as with very lipo-
philic opioids (fentanyl and congeners) or when given intravenously,
especially at higher doses (butorphanol). This may also explain why
vomiting is seen primarily after the first dose of opioids and is
uncommon following subsequent doses [32,33].
The incidence of vomiting seen with anesthetic drugs is variable
and depends on species, drugs used, dosage, route and timing of
administration, presence/absence of pain, and concurrent medical
problems. Aerophagia and repeated swallowing of blood and saliva
(especially following dentistry procedures) can also significantly
increase the risk of vomiting during recovery. Most instances of
vomiting occur with premedication in dogs and cats. Since vomit-
ing is an active process, it usually does not occur during mainte-
nance of surgical anesthesia but can be seen during light planes or
at intubation as the vomiting reflex in dogs and cats is not abolished
until Stage 3/Plane II [34]. Inhalant anesthetics are a significant
cause 	of 	postoperative 	nausea 	and 	vomiting 	(PONV) 	in
humans [28,35,36], but this incidence is much lower in veterinary
species. Vomiting occurs occasionally at induction with propo-
fol [37] and often with etomidate [38] when used alone in dogs, and
in recovery following continuous infusion of propofol [39]. A clini-
cal study that compared the incidence of adverse effects in dogs
maintained with propofol versus isoflurane after propofol induc-
tion reported a very low incidence of vomiting or retching, with
4/91 in the isoflurane group and 1/58 in the propofol group.
However, a high incidence of hypersalivation was seen in recovery,
affecting just over 20% of both groups. No other signs of nausea
were seen, and the dogs did not appear painful. A cause for the sali-
vation was not identified [40]. Another study reported salivation in
7/40 (17.5%) and vomiting during recovery in 6/40 (15%) when
propofol was used for induction following four different premedi-
cation protocols. Most (12/13) of these were dogs not given
acepromazine. The one dog given acepromazine presented for
vomiting and had been anesthetized for gastroscopy [41].
Anticholinergics were not used in either study. Although emesis
occurred in one dog and one cat during field studies of Alfaxan® [42],
it is rarely seen clinically and was not reported in multi-dose
research studies in small animals [43,44].
α2 -Adrenergic receptor agonists and μ-opioid receptor agonists
cause vomiting in dogs and cats [32,45–50]. The incidence of
vomiting clinically appears to be more common at higher doses
and is generally greater in cats than dogs. Vomiting was not
reported with continuous infusions of very low doses of dexme-
detomidine or medetomidine in healthy dogs and cats [51–53].
There is minimal difference in the incidence of vomiting between
the different α2 -adrenergic receptor agonists; however, a signifi-
cant difference is seen with different opioids. Vomiting is less fre-
quent with lower dosages and when patients are fasted prior to
administration. Morphine, meperidine, and hydromorphone
(especially in cats), and to a lesser extent oxymorphone, are asso-
ciated with the highest risk of vomiting. Vomiting is much less
frequent with fentanyl and its derivatives, and is uncommon with
methadone, 	butorphanol, 	and 	buprenorphine 	[32,54,55].
However, two reports investigating the use of methadone in dogs
with local analgesia for stifle surgery showed an unexpected inci-
dence of vomiting. Although other mechanisms could not be
eliminated, both authors suggested that the analgesia produced by
the nerve blocks may have allowed this adverse effect of metha-
done to predominate, whereas when pain is present, side effects of
opioids are less common [56,57].
Acepromazine has a mild antiemetic effect via dopamine antago-
nism in the CTZ. It decreases vomiting significantly, especially
when given prior to opioids in dogs. Its antihistamine effects may
also contribute when morphine or meperidine is given concur-
rently [54,55,58]. The incidence of vomiting/nausea also varies
when different opioids are combined with α2
- adrenergic receptor
agonists. Eleven of 18 cats vomited after dexmedetomidine with
buprenorphine while only one of 19 given dexmedetomidine and
butorphanol vomited [59].
Adjunct drugs given during anesthesia may also cause vomit-
ing. Up to 75% of dogs administered a high dose of lidocaine (200
μg/kg/min) as a continuous infusion during sevoflurane anesthe-
sia vomited in recovery. When the dose was reduced (50 μg/kg/
min), vomiting did not occur postoperatively [60]. In contrast,
decreased nausea and vomiting were seen in humans treated with
a lidocaine continuous rate infusion (CRI) for abdominal
surgery [61,62].
Antiemetic therapy
Metoclopramide is a central dopamine (D2
) receptor antagonist
that has been used for many years as an antiemetic in dogs. It also
has prokinetic effects on the stomach, duodenum, and jejunum,
and has some muscarinic and serotonin receptor (5-HT 3 receptor
antagonist/5- HT 4 receptor agonist) actions at higher doses [7].
When given subcutaneously 30 min prior to premedication with
morphine and dexmedetomidine in dogs, metoclopramide pre-
vented nausea and vomiting and greatly reduced these signs when
given concurrently [63]. The serotonin antagonist group (e.g.,
ondansetron, dolasetron, and palonosetron) and the NK 1 receptor
antagonist, maropitant, have proven useful to prevent or decrease
emesis caused by chemotherapeutic agents [30,64,65], α2
- adrenergic
receptor agonists [66,67], and opioids [67–70]. Maropitant affects
receptors in both the VC and the CTZ, as well as in the GIT and

-- 880 of 1450 --

Chapter 41: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Gastrointestinal Disease 	865
other organs. It has been shown to reduce perioperative vomiting
and nausea very effectively in dogs and cats and is now widely used
in clinical practice. There is some evidence it produces inhalant
anesthetic-sparing effects and investigations into potential analge-
sic and anti-inflammatory effects are ongoing. The anti-nausea
effect of maropitant is reportedly not as strong as that produced
with ondansetron in dogs [30,67,71,72]. Swallow et al. did not find
improvement in signs of PONV when given to 24 dogs for ovariec-
tomy although the isoflurane requirement was reduced [73].
However, when given to 40 dogs for ovariohysterectomy, the inci-
dence of pre- and postoperative emesis was almost eliminated,
fewer patients required rescue analgesia, and improvement in appe-
tite and the quality of recovery was seen; the addition of omeprazole
did not provide any further benefit [74]. Hay-Kraus et al. and
Sharun et al. have published reviews of the many actions and uses of
maropitant in veterinary medicine [75,76].
Dexamethasone is an effective antiemetic in humans for the pro-
phylactic treatment of PONV [28,36,77]. It decreases the frequency
of vomiting in cats induced by xylazine, but only at high doses [78].
The anti-inflammatory, anti-immune, and adverse endocrine and
GI effects probably preclude its routine use as a prophylactic
antiemetic in veterinary patients.
Benzodiazepines, phenothiazines, and butyrophenones have
been shown to have antiemetic effects in humans. Formerly, drop-
eridol was used frequently in small animals as a sedative, especially
in combination with fentanyl (Innovar Vet®). Droperidol is consid-
ered a highly effective antiemetic in humans; however, the risk of
cardiac arrhythmias precluded its use for a time [28,36]. It has since
been determined that the cardiovascular effects are minimized
when lower doses are used [28]; however, other adverse effects such
as sedation, excitement, extrapyramidal effects, and the availability
of better alternatives preclude the routine use of butyrophenones as
antiemetics in veterinary patients.
Non-pharmacologic interventions for PONV in humans include
acupuncture or acupressure [28,36]. Needling at acupuncture point
Pericardium-6 (PC6) decreased the incidence of nausea and vomit-
ing with hydromorphone in dogs [79], while electroacupuncture at
PC6 was shown to prevent emesis induced by vasopressin in dogs.
Pretreatment with naloxone prevented antiemesis, suggesting that
opioid pathways may be involved [31].
Gastroesophageal reflux
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is a common syndrome in
humans. It is reported to occur in 5–20% of adults but may be as
high as 40% in some areas [80]. The proposed mechanisms of reflux
include abnormally low lower esophageal sphincter (LES) pressure
(LESP), increased frequency and duration of transient lower esoph-
ageal sphincter relaxations (TLSRs), and alteration of the anti-reflux
barrier. TLSRs are normal events that occur with swallowing and
vent gas formed in the stomach. They are most often seen following
ingestion of food. TLSRs do not occur during general anesthesia in
dogs and humans or during deep sleep in people. Relaxation of the
diaphragmatic crus and the LES must be present for normal TLSRs
to occur [80–85].
Although the specific mechanism of anesthetic-induced GER is
unclear, reflux occurs when intragastric pressure exceeds or
equals the LESP, and the barrier pressure normally present
between the two areas is lost [80–85]. Intra-abdominal and
intrathoracic pressure also contribute to LESP and the incidence
of GER. The anti-reflux barrier is created by the anatomical
arrangement of the LES, the right crus of the diaphragm, and the
oblique angle at the junction of the esophagus and the cardia. The
LES is actually located above and below the hiatus of the dia-
phragm and is several centimeters in length. Functionally, it is a
high-pressure zone just above the cardia created by a variable
arrangement of muscle layers in the distal esophagus in combina-
tion with the angle of the crura of the diaphragm. To prevent ret-
rograde flow of gastric contents, the LES remains in a tonically
contracted state until stimulated to relax via relaxation of the
upper esophageal sphincter and/or waves of peristaltic contrac-
tions higher in the esophagus [80–85].
Although primarily controlled by the parasympathetic nervous
system, numerous neurotransmitters and hormones are involved in
regulation of LES tone (Table 41.1) [1,83].
Clinical GERD is less common in dogs and cats than in humans
but has been identified in both species [86–89]. Brachycephalic
dog breeds are predisposed to GER [90–96]. Functional and ana-
tomical abnormalities of the esophagus and LES, and inflammatory
lesions of the upper GIT have been identified in brachycephalic
breeds [19,91,92]. Eivers et al. evaluated 26 dogs for esophageal dys-
function using videofluoroscopy and identified esophageal dysmo-
tility, GER, and hiatal hernia; 77% were brachycephalic [92]. GERD
is likely underdiagnosed since mild cases may not result in clinical
signs [86,88,89]. “Silent reflux” events are known to occur in people
without consequence [80]. These have recently been identified in
healthy dogs using nuclear scintigraphy [97].
Numerous anesthetic drugs and adjunct medications, including
sedatives, analgesics, induction agents, inhalants, and anticholinergics,
have been shown to decrease LESP in humans, dogs, and cats, predis-
posing anesthetized patients to GER (Table 41.2) [82,85,98–106].
Perioperative GER is common; incidence varies from 0 to 71% of
cases. Numerous studies have investigated the occurrence of GER
under many conditions and with many anesthetic and/or adjunct
agents (Table 41.3) [107–127].
GER is more frequent with intra-abdominal and orthopedic pro-
cedures in dogs and may be more common in dogs than
cats [12,101,104,116–118]. GER occurred in 9/27 cats anesthetized
for dental procedures [120], but was not more common during
intra-abdominal procedures in 44 cats compared to 30 con-
trols [121]. Vomiting associated with premedication prior to anes-
thesia was not associated with increased GER in dogs [123–125];
however, the occurrence of GER under anesthesia is variable and
unpredictable.
In spite of numerous investigations, the mechanism of GER seen
with general anesthesia has not been proven. Loss of the barrier
pressure (gastric pressure – LESP) between the distal esophagus
and the stomach must occur [80–85], but it is not clear what specifi-
cally triggers this phenomenon. Most cases of anesthesia-related
Table 41.1 Neurotransmitters and hormones that affect lower esophageal sphincter
(LES) tone.
Decrease LES tone 	Increase LES tone
Nitric oxide and nitrates 	Prostaglandin E
Vasoactive intestinal peptide 	Muscarinic M 2
, M3 receptor agonists
Nicotine 	Gastrin
β-Adrenergic receptor agonists 	Substance P
Dopamine 	α-Adrenergic receptor agonists
Cholecystokinin 	Prostaglandin Fα
Secretin 	Motilin
Calcitonin gene-related peptide
Adenosine
Source: Compiled from Washabau [1]; Hershcovici et al. [83].

-- 881 of 1450 --

866 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
GER in dogs and cats develop fairly soon following induction, usu-
ally before 30 min [116,117]. Choice of premedication plays a role
in some cases [126] but not in others [127]. GER is frequent with
opioids [112,127] especially μ-opioid receptor agonists such as
morphine and hydromorphone [116,123,126]. Dosage may also be
a factor, as higher doses of morphine cause more GER than lower
doses [123]. Induction with propofol has resulted in greater inci-
dence of GER in dogs [107,119] but not in cats [121]. Pharyngeal
stimulation may be a factor as it decreases pressure at the LES.
Minor pharyngeal stimulation elicited relaxation of the LES more
than 50% of the time in opossums anesthetized with pentobarbi-
tal [128], while subthreshold stimulus of the pharynx produced lon-
gitudinal esophageal muscle contraction and LES relaxation in
humans [129]. Interestingly, GER was seen in 50% of kittens man-
aged with an LMA versus 14% with an endotracheal tube [130].
Perhaps the combination of pharyngeal stimulation at induction
combined with the effects of multiple anesthetic drugs during the
transition into deeper levels of anesthesia is significant; however,
this does not explain episodes of reflux that occur later during anes-
thesia or in those without endotracheal intubation [121]. GER is
seen with virtually all inhalants; no difference was seen in dogs
anesthetized with halothane, isoflurane, or sevoflurane [125].
Numerous factors are certainly involved in the mechanism of GER;
specific triggers may be multiple and vary with patients, drugs used,
procedures, ASA status, and other circumstances.
In spite of the high frequency of GER detected using pH or
impedance monitoring in dogs and cats, the incidence of visible
regurgitation (i.e., oral drainage of fluid) is much lower. In a large
study of 4257 dogs at a referral practice over a 2-year period, regur-
gitation was visually confirmed in only 27 or 0.63% of cases, with
large dogs and orthopedic procedures at highest risk [131].
Table 41.2 Effects of various anesthetics, analgesics, sedatives, adjunct medications,
and miscellaneous factors on lower esophageal sphincter pressure (LESP) reported
in dogs, cats, and/or humans.
Decrease LESP 	Increase LESP 	No Change
β- Adrenergic agonists
Acepromazine
Alfaxalone–alfadoloneb
Aminophylline
Atropine, glycopyrrolate
Benzodiazepines
Calcium channel antagonists
Change from lateral to dorsal
recumbency
Cisapride
Cricoid pressure
Dexmedetomidine (high doses)
Dorsal versus lateral recumbency
Fentanyl–droperidol
Hiatal hernia
Inhalant anesthetics
Ketaminec
Laryngeal mask airway
Meperidine
Morphine
Nitroprusside
Nitrous oxidea
Obesity
Oxymorphone
Pregnancy
Propofol (high doses)
Residual neuromuscular blockade
Thiopental
Tricyclic antidepressants
Xylazine
Xylazine– ketaminec
α-Adrenergic agonists
Acetylcholine
Antacids
Anticholinesterases
Domperidone
Edrophonium
Gastric acidification
Histamine
Increased gastric or
abdominal pressure
Metoclopramide
Neostigmine
Pancuronium
Succinylcholine
Vecuronium (small
increase)
Atracurium
Dexmedetomidine
Histamine (H2
) antagonists
(cimetidine, ranitidine)
Metoprolol
Nitrous oxidea
NMBA reversal with
neostigmine and
glycopyrrolate
Propofol
Propranolol
Proton pump inhibitors
Remifentanil
NMBA, neuromuscular blocking agent.
a Conflicting results concerning nitrous oxide.
b Reported with Saffan®, not Alfaxan®
.
c Ketamine decreased LESP compared with awake values, but it remained much higher
compared to other drugs.
Source: Compiled from Cotton and Smith [85]; Ogunnaike and Whitten [98]; Open
Anesthesia [99]; Strombeck and Harrold [100]; Hall et al. [101]; Waterman and Hashim
[102]; van der Hoeven et al. [103]; Hashim and Waterman [104]; Hashim and
Waterman [105]; Hashim et al. [106].
Table 41.3 Anesthetic protocols, procedures, and other factors reported to impact
the incidence of regurgitation or gastroesophageal reflex (GER).
Increased incidence of GER No difference 	Decreased incidence of GER
Abdominal procedures
Brachycephalic breed
Dorsal recumbency
Esophageal disorders,
dysmotility
Gastric acidity
Hiatal hernia
Imaging studies
Large deep-chested dogs
(spinal surgery)
LMA compared to ET tube
(kittens)
Longer anesthetic duration
Medetomidine compared to
acepromazine–opioid
Morphine (increased incidence
with higher doses)
Neurologic surgery
Older dogs, sicker dogs
(ASA ≥ 3)
Orthopedic surgery
Prolonged fast
Propofol compared to
thiopental
Shorter fasting
Decreased fasting
times/small meal
Halothane versus
isoflurane versus
sevoflurane
Recumbency or
head tilt
Standard fast
compared to
short fast (17.3 h
versus 4.7 h)
Vomiting
following
premedication
Dexmedetomidine–
hydromorphone compared to
acepromazine–hydromorphone
Diazepam compared to
atropine–propionylpromazine
High-dose metoclopramide
infusion
Meperidine compared to
morphine
Short fast (3 h versus 10 h)
Factors associated with increased incidence of GER in humans
Altered consciousness
Full stomach
Late pregnancy
LMA (some types)
NSAID use
Other factors
Dogs that reflux early more often regurgitate
Increased gastric pH, no difference with gastric volume
Prolonged fasting increases gastric acidity
Type, volume of food
LMA, laryngeal mask airway; ET, endotracheal; NSAID, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drug.
Source: Compiled from Savvas et al. [107]; Savvas et al. [108]; Savvas et al. [109];
Galatos and Raptopoulos [110]; Savvas and Raptopoulos [111]; Wilson and Evans
[112]; Tsompanidou et al. [113]; Viskjer and Sjöström [114]; Anagnostou et al. [115];
Wilson [116]; Galatos and Raptopoulos [117]; Wilson et al. [118]; Raptopoulos and
Galatos [119]; Garcia et al. [120]; Sideri et al. [121]; Galatos et al. [122]; Wilson et al.
[123]; Wilson et al. [124]; Wilson et al. [125]; Costa et al. [126]; Flouraki et al. [127].

-- 882 of 1450 --

Chapter 41: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Gastrointestinal Disease 	867
Box 41.1 Recommendations for management of gastroesophageal reflex
(GER) in the perianesthetic period.
1 Observe patients following premedication, especially with heavy
sedation and drugs that cause emesis (e.g., morphine and α2
-
adrenergic receptor agonists).
2 Maintain sedated patients in sternal recumbency whenever possible
and attain a secure airway quickly following induction.
3 Select and place an appropriate endotracheal tube:
i. Correctly sized.
ii. Properly lubricated.
iii. Appropriate cuff inflation.
4 Recheck tube placement and cuff inflation, especially with transport
and re-positioning.
5 Keep head tipped downward to encourage drainage of GER away from
the airway.
6 Have supplies close by for suctioning and cleaning of the pharynx and
esophagus.
7 If vomiting or regurgitation occurs – direct the patient’s head
downward.
8 Manage recovery:
i. Examine pharynx before extubation.
ii. Lavage esophagus when large-volume GER has occurred.
iii. Extubate with the endotracheal tube cuff partially inflated.
iv. Position patient with head/nose down, lower than shoulder at all
times.
Regurgitation was observed in 75 or 1.3% of 5736 dogs in another
large study [132], where greater risk was seen with an ASA status ≥
3, abdominal or imaging procedures, long anesthetic duration, and
larger size. Dogs anesthetized for all types of procedures regurgi-
tated less than 1% of the time, even though GER was identified in
16.3 and 17.4% of cases in two other reports [110,117]. During
orthopedic procedures in dogs following administration of various
anesthetics agents, regurgitation occurred in 0–17% of the cases,
while GER was identified in 25–71% of the cases [114,118,123–
125]. In several studies involving cats, regurgitation was reported in
0, 2%, 0, and 0 cases with an incidence of GER of 18, 16, 33.3, and
50% [120–122,130].
Prevention of GER in anesthetized dogs has been investigated
with H 2 receptor antagonists, proton pump inhibitors (PPIs),
and prokinetic drugs. Although H 2 receptor antagonists increase
gastric pH in dogs, they are not as effective at maintaining
increased pH as PPIs; and even with PPIs, multiple doses are
required [133–137]. Omeprazole given preoperatively to 47 dogs
decreased the frequency of acidic reflux (4 with omeprazole ver-
sus 13 without); however, as lower esophageal pH was the only
parameter measured, some reflux events may have been
missed [136]. When two doses of omeprazole were given preop-
eratively to dogs, the incidence of GER was not different, but a
much higher pH of the reflux, 6.3 ± 1.5 versus 4.1 ± 1.5 versus
3.8 ± 1.1, was seen [137]. When dogs were given maropitant,
omeprazole, or both, no difference was seen in the occurrence of
GER or the pH of the reflux [138]. The incidence of GER was
significantly lower in cats given two doses of omeprazole, but
some treated cats still had multiple episodes of reflux [120]. A
study in 61 dogs using both impedance and pH monitors found
that esomeprazole alone increased pH, and the addition of cisap-
ride decreased the incidence of reflux significantly from
8/21 with placebo to 2/18 in the combination group [139]. When
an infusion of cisapride was given preoperatively to dogs anes-
thetized for surgical treatment of laryngeal paralysis fewer cases
of aspiration pneumonia were seen, which is thought to be
caused by GER [140].
Metoclopramide alone decreased the incidence of GER, but did
not completely prevent it in dogs. This effect was seen only when
given via continuous infusion at a high dose [141]. Intravenous
metoclopramide, and/or ranitidine prior to anesthesia followed by
a metoclopramide infusion, did not decrease the incidence of GER
in dogs anesthetized for ovariohysterectomy [142]. Maropitant
given prior to induction in combination with an infusion of meto-
clopramide for 24 h did not prevent clinical signs of GER in the
postoperative period [143].
The effect of several palliative treatments for GER has been
examined. Esophageal lavage in 32/48 dogs with reflux pH < 4
using water, or two bicarbonate solutions increased the pH to >
4 in 78.6% with water and 100% with bicarbonate. Interestingly,
the pH improved in 16/48 dogs without treatment [144]. Removal
of reflux fluid from the esophagus via suctioning in 10 dogs did
not significantly change the esophageal pH, lavage with tap water
increased the pH to > 4.0, and the infusion of a small volume of
sodium bicarbonate increased the pH to > 6.0, an effect that
lasted from 1.5 to 3 h [145]. Repeated suctioning and tap water
lavage followed by bicarbonate therapy were also evaluated in
dogs [146]. Lavage was determined to be unnecessary as the final
esophageal pH did not differ once bicarbonate was applied.
Bicarbonate therapy may not prevent further reflux/regurgitation
and may not help with non-acidic reflux. However, it could be
beneficial with acidic reflux to reduce the risk or severity of
esophagitis. Suctioning and lavage can be useful in cases with a
large volume of regurgitation.
Several authors have examined the effects of fasting duration and
types of food on the incidence of GER, gastric volume, and pH in
dogs, with somewhat variable results. Some have shown that a short
fast utilizing small volumes of canned food results in decreased
incidence of GER [108–111], higher gastric pH, and lower gastric
volume [106]. Others have not seen a difference with shorter fasting
times [112,113] and another found a greater incidence of GER and
regurgitation with a shorter fast and a higher pH with a longer fast-
ing time [114].
Actual fasting times are often much longer than recommended in
humans and animals. In people, fasting is associated with hunger,
thirst, decreased satisfaction, and sometimes nausea, vomiting, or
dehydration postoperatively. Because research has not shown a
decreased incidence of aspiration pneumonia with long fasting times,
the guidelines used by the ASA were revised in 2017 for healthy
patients [147]. The minimum fasting guidelines for adults and chil-
dren with a low risk of aspiration include: (1) clear liquids, 2 h; (2)
breast milk, 2 h; (3) milk-type liquids, 6 h; and (4) a light meal 6 h
prior to anesthesia. Eight hours or more is recommended if meat or a
fatty meal is ingested [147]. In 2023, further revision included the
recommendation that healthy adults should drink a carbohydrate-
type clear liquid up to 2 h prior to the procedure, and clear liquids in
children be allowed/encouraged up to 2 h prior to anesthesia as
well [148]. In 2020, the American Animal Hospital Association
(AAHA) published revised guidelines on fasting in a similar fashion.
Water is not withheld, and food is allowed up to 4–6 h prior to the
procedure in healthy adults. Very young (< 8 weeks) or small (< 2 kg)
patients should have food withheld for no more than 1–2 h [149].
Prevention of GER is difficult; however, vigilant monitoring to
identify when it has occurred and appropriate intervention will
minimize complications. General management recommendations
to treat GER in the perianesthetic period are summarized in
Box 41.1.

-- 883 of 1450 --

868 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
Esophagitis and esophageal stricture
Esophagitis can occur when the esophageal mucosa is exposed to
caustic substances for prolonged periods and/or when esophageal
defense mechanisms are impaired or overwhelmed. Esophageal
defense mechanisms include a superficial mucus/bicarbonate bar-
rier on the mucosal surface, tight junctions between epithelial cells,
and an intracellular and interstitial buffering capacity that is
dependent on blood flow. Lack of clearance of esophageal contents
via intermittent swallowing is also a factor in anesthetized patients.
Saliva is often decreased under anesthesia and, of course, anesthe-
tized patients cannot swallow. Saliva provides dilution, bicarbonate
to neutralize acid, and volume to flush the lumen of the esophagus.
Resistance to 30 min of exposure to acid has been demonstrated;
however, pepsin, trypsin, bile salts, and possibly other irritating or
caustic substances may be as important as acids in causing esopha-
geal damage. Exposure to acidic reflux also induces release of
inflammatory mediators that contact and damage nerve endings
resulting in decreased LESP, which predisposes to further GER and
perpetuates the cycle [18,19,81,150].
Esophagitis and subsequent esophageal stricture are secondary
illnesses, caused by damage from exposure to gastric/intestinal flu-
ids. GER, vomiting and/or regurgitation, ingestion of foreign bod-
ies or caustic substances (including some medications such as
doxycycline and clindamycin), motility disorders, congenital or
anatomic abnormalities (e.g., hiatal hernia and megaesophagus),
trauma, neoplasia, infection, neuromuscular disease, and any cause
of altered mentation are contributing factors. Hypergastrinemia
with resultant hyperacidity, delayed gastric emptying due to pyloric
outflow obstruction, pancreatitis, or diabetes are also reported
causes [18,19, 87,88,151–156]. An inflammatory cause of eosino-
philic esophagitis known to occur in people has been reported in a
dog and a kitten [157,158]. Cats with chronic gingivostomatitis
have also been found to have concurrent esophagitis [159].
A history of recent general anesthesia is very common in dogs
and cats diagnosed with esophagitis, with perianesthetic GER as the
most likely underlying cause. Retrospective studies have examined
the incidence, risk factors, and outcome of esophagitis/stric-
ture [87,89,151–158]. Leib et al. [89] identified 18 of 28 (64%),
Adamama-Moraitou et al. [160] found 13 of 20 (65%), and Kushner
and Shofer [161] reported 25 of 30 (83%) patients with esophageal
stricture diagnosed soon following general anesthesia. Overall
mortality in these reports was 21, 30, and 30%, respectively. Greater
risk of esophagitis was seen in patients anesthetized for intra-
abdominal 	procedures, 	especially 	ovariohysterectomy 	[160].
Manipulation of abdominal structures is presumed to increase gas-
tric pressure, while LESP is decreased by anesthetic agents.
Progesterone levels in intact females were thought to contribute to
decreased LESP; however, a study of barrier pressure and GER in
female dogs anesthetized during four different phases of their
reproductive cycle showed no effect of hormone levels on barrier
pressure, the incidence of GER, or esophagitis [162]. In contrast to
dogs, a study of esophageal disease in cats over a 7.5-year period
found anesthesia to be involved in only one of 33 cases [154]. This
may not reflect the true incidence in cats since signs may be readily
overlooked.
When all cases presented for anesthesia over a 10-year period
were examined retrospectively, a very low incidence of postanes-
thetic esophageal dysfunction was reported. Twenty-five patients
with esophageal stricture following anesthesia were identified at one
institution (0.1% of 23,295 cases) [161], 3 cases of esophagitis and 10
cases of esophageal stricture (13 total cases, 0.07% of caseload)
occurred over 8 years at another [163]. Mortality associated with the
esophageal complications was 30 and 23%, respectively. Vomiting
and regurgitation occurred postoperatively in most or all of these
patients. Four of the 13 dogs also had aspiration pneumonia. Weight
loss, debilitation, and chronic cough were seen in some dogs
(Fig. 41.1). A case report of two young cats that had exhibited vomit-
ing and/or regurgitation, and dysphagia soon after elective general
anesthesia developed rupture of the esophagus and were euthanized,
one at 6 days, the other at 14 days postoperatively [164].
Although esophageal dysfunction following anesthesia is uncom-
mon overall, the history of many cases includes an episode of gen-
eral anesthesia. This is a devastating complication with a high
mortality. Any patient that exhibits vomiting, regurgitation, nausea,
salivation, dysphagia, and/or anorexia postoperatively should be
monitored closely. When signs persist, these patients should be
thoroughly evaluated for esophageal disease.
Aspiration
Aspiration of GI contents can occur perioperatively following GER,
vomiting, and/or regurgitation. It can also occur during heavy seda-
tion that impairs protective airway reflexes. Respiratory complica-
tions 	following 	aspiration 	include 	hypoventilation 	and/or
hypoxemia, pneumonitis, bacterial pneumonia, and sometimes car-
diac arrest. The extent of airway pathology depends on the volume
and type of fluid aspirated. Three phases of damage have been iden-
tified. Stage 1 is immediate and is caused by direct damage to the
epithelium. This injury to the lung is actually like a chemical burn
due to the effect of gastric fluid on tissue, with greater damage seen
with low pH, even if the volume is small. Varying degrees of atelec-
tasis, decreased compliance, ventilation–perfusion mismatch, and
decreased oxygenation develop at this point. Stage 2 is an inflam-
matory reaction that follows within 4–6 h, causing pneumonitis. If
not severe, this lesion may resolve. However, with more significant
injury, alveolar macrophages and Type II pneumocytes release
cytokines that stimulate the influx of neutrophils, which release
other inflammatory mediators, causing acute lung injury even
without bacterial involvement. Surfactant is also altered by inflam-
mation, contributing to impairment of gas exchange. Stage 3 is seen
Figure 41.1 Patients with esophageal stricture may be debilitated due to
dysphagia and aspiration pneumonia. Source: Dr. Jennifer Adams, with
permission.

-- 884 of 1450 --

Chapter 41: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Gastrointestinal Disease 	869
when bacteria invade damaged tissue, producing aspiration pneu-
monia (AP) [19,165–167].
Incidents of aspiration are not commonly witnessed, but early rec-
ognition and intervention are paramount to limiting the severity of
pneumonitis/pneumonia. Signs of aspiration range from “silent” with
no apparent abnormalities to obvious airway obstruction following
visible regurgitation of gastric contents. Increased risk is seen with
anesthesia, especially in patients with laryngeal and esophageal disor-
ders, vomiting, neurologic disease, and GER [19,20,164–174]. People
with AP more often have altered mental status, dysphagia, and esoph-
ageal 	disorders 	as 	common 	pre-existing 	conditions 	[167].
Brachycephalic breeds are predisposed to aspiration due to an
increased incidence of GER, vomiting, and regurgitation that is com-
mon in these breeds. The underlying cause is likely an increased
negative pressure that is caused by the upper airway obstruction sec-
ondary to their brachycephalic anatomy [19,93,96,167,175].
Clinical signs in anesthetized patients include unexplained oxy-
gen desaturation, hypercarbia, tachypnea, dyspnea or irregular res-
piratory patterns, auscultable abnormalities, and blanching of
mucous membranes. Oxygen (100%) should be administered and
the patient immediately positioned with the head down for drain-
age of aspirated material; removal should be instituted as soon as
possible. Suction of the airways can be used for liquid aspiration,
but bronchoscopy is often required when particulate matter is pre-
sent. Bronchodilator therapy and mechanical ventilation with posi-
tive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) may be needed to improve
oxygenation. Prophylactic antibiotics are not usually recommended
for pneumonitis cases owing to the potential for emergence of
resistant bacteria [19,165,166,170]. Since bacterial colonization
occurs later in the process, in humans antibiotics are recommended
only in those with confirmed infection, especially in otherwise
healthy patients. However, patients with GI obstruction or on
chronic antacid therapy may be an exception owing to the potential
for enteric organisms to be found in reflux fluid [165,166,170]. It
can be difficult to document the presence of infection quickly in
veterinary patients, so antibiotic therapy is often instituted early in
the course of treatment [167,168].
A very large multicenter study evaluated the anesthesia caseload
at six veterinary institutions over an 11-year period to determine
the incidence and risk factors for AP following anesthesia or seda-
tion in dogs [20]. The criteria included radiographic or necropsy
evidence of AP within 72 h of sedation or general anesthesia.
Multivariate analysis of numerous patients, procedures, and anes-
thetic factors was performed for 240 cases along with 488 controls.
The incidence varied significantly between institutions, from 0.04–
0.26%, with an overall incidence of 0.17%. Of 12 dogs who were
given sedation only, three developed AP. Multivariate analysis
revealed the following to be associated with anesthetic-related AP:
(1) patient factors including megaesophagus (ME) and pre-existing
respiratory or neurologic disease; (2) procedural factors including
upper airway surgery, endoscopy, thoracotomy, laparotomy, and
neurosurgery; and (3) anesthetic events, including regurgitation
during or after anesthesia and hydromorphone given intravenously
at induction. Some factors were significantly associated with AP but
did not remain following the multivariate analysis (odds ratio, OR <
2). These included the male gender and increasing ASA patient
score, age, and body weight. Use of continuous infusion of analge-
sics or anesthetic agents was associated with a greater incidence of
AP (OR 1.8) when utilized during anesthesia but not when given
postoperatively. ME, in spite of a low occurrence, had the highest
OR of 22.3, and upper airway surgery was next with OR 9.2. No
specific breed was identified. Time of day, extubation during anes-
thesia, and the use of anticholinergics, positive-pressure ventilation,
or epidural analgesia were not associated with AP. Regurgitation
was witnessed in only two cases with AP. Forty-six of the 240 dogs
(19.2%) were euthanized or died prior to discharge. However, an
association of death with AP could not be identified from the avail-
able data, so mortality was not determined [20].
A smaller retrospective study found a 16% incidence of
anesthesia-associated AP in 125 dogs diagnosed over a 3.5-year
period. They also found AP following sedation in 16% of these
cases as well [176]. A retrospective case-control study examined AP
within 48 h of anesthesia in dogs with intervertebral disk disease.
Significant risk factors for postoperative AP included preanesthetic
tetraparesis, a cervical lesion, MRI study, multiple anesthetic epi-
sodes, longer duration of anesthesia, and postanesthetic vomiting
or regurgitation [171]. Although AP appears to be less common in
cats, it does occur. Levy et al. evaluated the cases of 28 cats diag-
nosed with AP that presented over a 12-year period. Vomiting was
the most common predisposing factor identified. Anesthesia was
important in 18%; enteral nutrition (18%), neurologic disease (7%),
and laryngeal disease (3.6%) were also identified [177]. In 33 cats
with AP, Dear et al. found that GI disease was the most common
risk factor (25/33); 27% (9) of these cats had been anesthetized
within 3 days of the diagnosis [178]. Dogs with laryngeal paralysis
often develop AP, especially following surgical intervention [174].
Even though the overall incidence of aspiration occurring perio-
peratively is low, predisposing factors are common and AP carries a
high risk of mortality. Vigilant monitoring for signs of aspiration is
necessary, especially since most cases are subclinical, similar to
GER and esophagitis. Perioperative management to prevent these
complications with appropriate intervention as soon as possible is
always indicated. These strategies are described in the GER section.
Cisapride may be useful as a preventive treatment for AP. The inci-
dence of AP was significantly less in dogs given a 90-min infusion
of cispride prior to laryngeal surgery [140]. Anesthetic manage-
ment with attention to preventive measures has shown good suc-
cess. Baetge et al. altered several aspects of the anesthetic protocol
for 149 patients that were repeatedly anesthetized for radiation
therapy. The incidence of pneumonia in 146 cases performed prior
to the modifications was 10 times greater than in the study group.
They kept patients in sternal as much as possible and always in
recovery, avoided anticholinergics, did not use μ-opioid receptor
agonists, kept the head elevated above the shoulders, maintained
endotracheal tube cuff inflation until just before extubation, and
aseptically handled all anesthesia supplies [179]. Of 105 geriatric
dogs given famotidine, maropitant, and fentanyl for anesthesia,
none vomited, four showed nausea, two regurgitated, and one
developed AP postoperatively [180].
Gastrointestinal motility/postoperative ileus
Rabbits, horses, ruminants, and humans appear to be especially
sensitive to the effects of anesthetic agents on GI motil-
ity [21,22,181–185]. Postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV)
and ileus are very common in humans, and postoperative ileus
(POI) is one of the most common reasons for prolonged hospitali-
zation in humans [21–24,185]. Although most frequent following
GI surgery, POI is seen with other procedures in humans [21] and
with many types of surgery in horses. It is also seen in critical care
patients that have not had anesthesia or surgery [5,7,186]. POI is
associated with increased mortality following colic surgery in
horses [23,183], while colic in general and cecal impaction, in

-- 885 of 1450 --

870 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
particular, are potentially serious complications seen following rou-
tine anesthesia and surgery in horses and may be associated with
the development of ileus [9,184]. Rabbits are prone to GI stasis fol-
lowing stressful situations, including anesthesia [13,181,182]. Dogs
and cats certainly suffer from disruption of normal motility during
and after anesthesia; however, related clinical problems are not fre-
quently reported. Numerous researchers have used the dog as a
model for the investigation of POI, but there are few specific reports
of the incidence seen in clinical patients [186]. In fact, POI is rarely
mentioned in veterinary surgery textbooks or reviews of abdominal
surgery in small animals. With the advent of intensive multimodal
pain management protocols and more diverse and challenging sur-
gical procedures, the potential of these interventions to negatively
affect motility has only increased.
Prolonged gastric emptying time has been identified in dogs dur-
ing hospitalization using a wireless capsule to measure intestinal
motility. Median emptying time was 17.6 h at home versus 71.8 h in
hospital. Other parts of the intestine were not affected in this
study [187]. Decreased motility in dogs that were fasted for 12–24 h
was identified using ultrasound [188]. Intestinal function is tempo-
rarily disrupted by most anesthetic/analgesic agents, including
anticholinergics, μ-opioid receptor agonists, α2 - adrenergic receptor
agonists, inhalants, nitrous oxide, and induction agents other than
ketamine [24,26,32,189–195]. Xylazine and medetomidine can
inhibit motility of the stomach, small intestine [191,192], and
colon [193] for hours in the dog. Anticholinergic drugs profoundly
reduce GI motility in most species [196–203]. The effects of opioids
on motility are many and varied. μ-Opioid receptor agonists given
systemically delay gastric emptying, increase sphincter tone, and
variably affect intestinal smooth muscle contraction. Propulsive
motility is inhibited and segmental contractions are enhanced,
especially in the colon; absorption is increased while secretion is
decreased. Constipation is a frequent complication with systemic
opioids, from the combined effects on fluid transport and pro-
longed transit time [32,195,203]. In contrast, when morphine is
administered epidurally, GI motility returns much faster in both
dogs and humans [204,205]. Following general anesthesia in
humans, motility generally returns to the small intestine first, then
the stomach, and eventually the colon, which may require 5 days or
more [206]. In experimental dogs with ileus, motility of the distal
intestine and colon recovered first, followed by the proximal intes-
tine and the stomach [207].
Torrente et al. evaluated 237 dogs that were anesthetized for diag-
nostics or surgery and found that 33.4% of these developed GI issues
post-anesthesia [12]. 17.3% had GER, 5.5% vomited, and 10.5% devel-
oped diarrhea. Duration of anesthesia, intra-abdominal surgery, and
positioning changes were significantly associated with GER; treat-
ment with colloids for hypotension, anesthetic duration, and altering
the mode of ventilation increased the risk of vomiting postoperatively.
Dogs that were given acepromazine for premedication vomited less
frequently. Diarrhea was seen more often with longer anesthetic dura-
tion, body position or mode of ventilation changes, and hypoxemia. A
recent report of 82 dogs anesthetized for emergency abdominal sur-
gery found that 50% were anorexic, 21% developed diarrhea, and 26%
had decreased motility postoperatively [208].
A 2014 investigation examined the effect of laparoscopy and pro-
longed sevoflurane anesthesia on propulsive motility and transit time
in dogs anesthetized for ovariohysterectomy [209]. Following oral
administration, a wireless sensor continuously measured intralumi-
nal pressure, pH, and temperature as it traversed the GIT. The pres-
sures created by gastric and small intestinal contractions and their
frequency were recorded, and a motility index and emptying or
transit time were calculated. The frequency of contraction was not
different from awake controls; however, changes in motility were
seen within 20 minutes of induction. The motility index and the
amplitudes of contraction of both the stomach and small bowel
decreased significantly. Emptying and transit times were prolonged,
with means of 49 and 11.5 hours and maxima of 59 and 14 h, respec-
tively. Laparoscopy and ovariohysterectomy were performed in all
the dogs, so it is unclear what specific effects these procedures may
have had on GI function. All dogs were given hydromorphone and
cephalexin for recovery, which could have affected the postoperative
results, especially the opioid. The results of this study found a decrease
in the force of intestinal contraction, inhibition of propulsive motility,
and prolonged gastric emptying and small intestinal transit time.
The mechanism of POI is multifactorial, with neural, hormonal,
inflammatory, and pharmacologic components, but the inflamma-
tory response seen in the muscularis externa is considered the most
important and likely the primary cause of prolonged POI. Activation
of the sympathetic nervous system via a reflex arc between splanch-
nic afferents and adrenergic neurons in the spinal cord inhibits
motility very soon following the surgical incision, but this effect is
short-lived without other insult to the GIT. Handling of the intes-
tine stimulates neural pathways that involve the brainstem and the
hypothalamus to inhibit motility with activation of the hypotha-
lamic–pituitary–adrenal axis. Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF),
calcitonin gene-related peptide, and substance P are released,
resulting in production of multiple inflammatory mediators. CRF
release in the hypothalamus affects function of the ANS in the
brain, resulting in decreased activity of vagal efferents, which inhib-
its GI motility. Tissue handling also incites a local inflammatory
response within the intestine that is proportional to the intensity of
intestinal damage. Mast cells, primarily located in the mucosa and
submucosa are activated as well as the resident macrophages that
are located near the myenteric plexus of the muscularis layer.
Activation of macrophages is an important step in the inflamma-
tory phase as influx of other leukocytes follows and release of
inflammatory mediators is stimulated. Enteric glial cells are very
sensitive to mechanical stimuli with direct handling of intestine,
pressure from distension, and tissue damage caused by edema and
inflammation. These cells are normally involved in modulation of
motility and glial dysfunction has been identified in many GI dis-
eases, including POI. Alteration of the intestinal microbiome also
occurs and contributes to the inflammation and loss of barrier
function seen with POI. Surgically induced peritoneal inflamma-
tion also occurs that contributes to the local and systemic effects
seen. POI is further exacerbated by the effects of anesthetic agents
on motility, the use of opioids, and also the presence of peritonitis
and sepsis [195,206,210–214].
Numerous interventions have been attempted in people to reduce
or ameliorate the incidence of POI. The Enhanced Recovery Society
has published guidelines for most every body system based on cur-
rent best practice protocols to prevent or minimize the occurrence
of POI following elective and emergent procedures. Good success
has been seen, with improved outcomes, shorter hospitalization,
decreased costs, and improved patient well-being and satisfaction
(Table 41.4). Enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) protocols
involve all members of the surgery/anesthesia/recovery team and
address all aspects of the perioperative period. Use of less-invasive
surgical techniques whenever possible, short fasting times, preanes-
thetic carbohydrate loading, avoidance of opioids, epidural anes-
thesia–analgesia, careful fluid therapy to avoid overhydration, early
ambulation, and enteral intake are just some of the components
of an ERAS protocol. Detailed descriptions can be found at

-- 886 of 1450 --

Chapter 41: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Gastrointestinal Disease 	871
https://erassociety.org. Campoy has reviewed the application of
ERAS protocols in veterinary medicine with an emphasis on local
anesthesia–analgesia [215].
Gastrointestinal conditions requiring
anesthesia
Many patients that require anesthesia for GI disease are emergent and/
or may be critically ill. Thorough preanesthetic evaluation and prepa-
ration prior to anesthesia help to minimize complications; however,
this is not always possible in extremely emergent patients.
Recommendations for a basic workup include measurement of hema-
tocrit, total protein, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, serum
alkaline phosphatase (ALP), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspar-
tate aminotransferase (AST), bilirubin, albumin, electrolytes, and total
carbon dioxide. Blood gas analysis and lactate are important in sick
patients. Additional diagnostics appropriate to the problem at hand
should be evaluated, such as radiographs or abdominal ultrasound.
Computed tomography or MRI is sometimes used in stable patients
for determination of diagnosis and prognosis prior to surgery.
General guidelines for the management of anesthesia for abdomi-
nal procedures are similar to those for other disease conditions.
Preservation of tissue oxygen delivery through the maintenance of
blood flow and avoidance of hypoxemia are paramount. Additional
consideration should be given to predictable complications (e.g.,
endotoxemia with damaged intestine, reperfusion injury following
derotation of twisted segments of intestine, cardiac dysrhythmias dur-
ing splenectomy, or GDV), and appropriate treatments planned/pre-
pared. Finally, administration of adjunctive drugs to provide pain
management, speed return of GI function, and limit adverse effects
such as nausea and vomiting will improve patient care and outcomes.
Laparotomy
The plan for an exploratory laparotomy varies more with the
patient’s condition than with the primary GI problem. All levels of
patient status using the ASA I–V +/- E classification may be seen.
Some patients are healthy (e.g., gastropexy) and their management
is similar to that of other elective abdominal procedures (e.g., ovari-
ohysterectomy). Other patients may be severely ill and require lapa-
rotomy as a life-saving intervention. Fluid deficits, electrolyte
abnormalities, and acid–base imbalance should be corrected as
much as is reasonable prior to induction. All equipment for anes-
thesia and monitoring should be assembled and tested for proper
function prior to induction.
Some patients may have pre-existing organ dysfunction that may
or may not be related to the reason for exploratory laparotomy.
Ketamine, especially as a prolonged continuous infusion, should
probably not be used in patients with renal dysfunction, especially
cats since they excrete ketamine and its metabolites to a significant
extent in the urine. Where available, thiopental should be avoided
in debilitated patients and those with severe liver dysfunction. It
should also not be used in sighthounds. Both thiopental and propo-
fol can sensitize the myocardium to catecholamine-associated
arrhythmias and should be used cautiously in patients with pre-
existing dysrhythmias or cardiac disease, or when arrhythmias are
highly likely such as with GDV or splenic masses. In both research
and clinical studies, alfaxalone has not been reported to cause
arrhythmias [43,44,223]. Etomidate is often preferred for patients
with pre-existing myocardial dysfunction (e.g., poor contractility)
who are otherwise healthy as it has minimal effects on cardiovascu-
lar function. A dose of midazolam or diazepam, 0.2 mg/kg IV, just
prior to etomidate will improve muscle relaxation and facilitate
intubation. Historically, etomidate was not recommended in sick
patients as it causes adrenal suppression and has been associated
with greater mortality in humans [224–227]. Some reports have not
found greater mortality when used only for induction [228,229],
however, a tendency toward adrenal insufficiency or hospital-
acquired pneumonia and sepsis has been identified [227–229]. Qin
et al. found significantly decreasing levels of cortisol and aldoster-
one during a 3-h infusion of etomidate in dogs [230]. Also, a recent
clinical study of etomidate for induction in healthy dogs was
stopped due to the development of pigmenturia [231]. Inhalant
Table 41.4 Recommendations for prevention and treatment of postoperative
ileus (POI).
Goal 	Interventions
Maintain intestinal blood
flow and oxygenation
Fluid therapy – goal-oriented, restricted (avoid
excessive volume)
Avoid saline, use balanced solutions ± colloids
Prevention, prompt treatment of hypotension
Prevention, treatment of low protein, albumin
Maintain oxygen therapy, use higher F I
O2 throughout
Perioperative analgesia 	Systemic opioid-sparing protocols
Thoracic epidural with local anesthetic – block
sympathetic input
Epidural morphine – less inhibition of motility
Peripheral nerve blocks – transverse abdominis
plane block
NSAIDs – COX- 2 inhibitorsa – reduce inflammation
Lidocaine infusion – anti-inflammatory, less/shorter POI
Dexmedetomidine infusion postoperatively
Electroacupuncture at ST36
Surgical techniques 	Minimize handling of intestine
Laparoscopy whenever possible – less inflammation,
shorter POI
• Helium is better – CO 2 promotes infection via
tissue acidosis
• Air actually stimulates inflammation
• Use lower insufflation pressure
Postoperative care 	Maintain oxygenation and blood volume/arterial
blood pressure
Enteral nutrition and ambulation as soon as possible
Avoid nasogastric tubes
Laxative therapy to treat, prevent constipation
Prokinetic medication/therapeutics
Alvimopan,
Methylnaltrexone
Peripheral opioid receptor antagonists
Erythromycin,
Azithromycin
Motilin/ghrelin receptor agonists
Metoclopramide 	Dopamine (D2 ) receptor antagonist, serotonin
receptor agonist (5HT4
)
Domperidone 	Dopamine (D 2 ) receptor antagonist
Ranitidine,
Nizatidine
H 2 receptor antagonists
Mosapride,
Prucalopride,
Cisapride
Act on serotonin receptors
No longer used in people but is used in animals,
compounded
Anti-inflammatory and
prokinetic
Daikenchuto – Japanese herbal preparation; ginger,
ginseng, zanthoxylum fruit
F I
O2
, inspired concentration of oxygen; NSAID, non- steroidal anti-inflammatory drug;
COX-2, prostaglandin synthase-2.
a COX- 2 inhibitors are avoided in patients where risk of anastomotic leakage or sepsis
is present.
Source: Compiled from Whitehead et al. [5]; Grocott et al. [21]; Mythen [185]; Boysen
[186]; DeHaven-Hudkins et al. [203]; Nakayoshi et al. [204]; Pöpping et al. [205];
Lubawski and Saclarides [206]; Sido et al. [210]; van Bree et al. [211]; Vather and
Bissett [212]; Hussain and Park [213]; Mazzotta et al. [214]; Campoy [215]; Yang et al.
[216]; Kaye et al. [217]; Chen et al. [218]; Cooke et al. [219]; Leslie et al. [220];
Rimbäck et al. [221]; Malone et al. [222].

-- 887 of 1450 --

872 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
induction is not recommended for exploratory laparotomy, espe-
cially in patients with frequent emesis. Following effective premedi-
cation, healthy patients and those in good overall condition (ASA I,
II) can be induced with titration of usual doses of ketamine, propo-
fol, and alfaxalone separately or in combination [232]. In healthy
dogs, ketamine increases heart rate, blood pressure, and cardiac
output, while these parameters are decreased by propofol and thio-
pental in a dose-dependent manner. Propofol interferes with baro-
receptor responses and is more often associated with bradycardia
and hypoxemia [226,233]. Alfaxalone increased heart rate and
decreased cardiac output, arterial blood pressure, and systemic vas-
cular resistance in healthy cats and dogs without premedica-
tion [43,44]; however, in clinical settings, hypotension following
induction is not common. No differences were found when induc-
tion with alfaxalone was compared to diazepam–fentanyl with or
without propofol in ASA III–V dogs [223]. Ketamine is often sug-
gested for induction due to its cardiovascular-stimulating effects.
However, since this is due to centrally mediated increases in sympa-
thetic tone, the opposite effect can be seen in very ill patients with
poor sympathetic reserve [233–235]. Intramuscular premedication
can be used in healthy patients anesthetized for elective procedures;
however, intravenous premedication is preferred for higher-risk
patients. Combination of a benzodiazepine and an opioid is most
often utilized. Midazolam or diazepam with hydromorphone,
methadone, oxymorphone, or fentanyl (or its congeners) are
titrated intravenously to effect. Since the incidence of vomiting is
greater with hydromorphone, other opioids should be used in
patients with frequent emesis. The pharmacokinetic profile of
remifentanil makes it a good choice for compromised patients. It is
used in dogs and cats [236,237]; however, it is quite expensive and
not available in some areas. To avoid traditional induction drugs
entirely in compromised patients, additional doses of premedicants
(opioid and benzodiazepine) can be titrated IV until intubation is
possible. Bradycardia and respiratory depression may be significant
following high doses of opioids used for induction, so supplies and
equipment for intubation, ventilation, and monitoring should be
immediately available.
Isoflurane or sevoflurane are preferred for maintenance of anes-
thesia for exploratory laparotomy over halothane as the latter sensi-
tizes the myocardium to arrhythmias and decreases tissue blood
flow to a greater extent. Desflurane can be useful for its rapid induc-
tion and recovery characteristics, however, it is not commonly used
and is unavailable in some countries. It requires a special heated
vaporizer to produce consistent concentration of vapor and is more
expensive. Nitrous oxide (N2
O) is not recommended since it diffuses
readily into intestinal organs, causing or exacerbating distention and
potentially compromising ventilation. N2
O also has significant side
effects in humans, including interference with vitamin B12 metabo-
lism, damage to the CNS, and abortion [238]. All the halogenated
anesthetics used currently have deleterious effects on the environ-
ment; however, those associated with N2
O and especially desflurane
are much greater. The “carbon footprint” of N2
O is reportedly 310
times that of CO2
, while desflurane is 2500 times. N2
O also contrib-
utes to depletion of the ozone layer in the atmosphere [238,239]. Use
of desflurane was recently banned by the National Health Service in
Scotland [240]. N2
O is not commonly used in veterinary medicine
and its use in people has greatly decreased.
The respiratory and cardiovascular effects of all the inhalants are
more pronounced in debilitated patients; hypoventilation and hypo-
tension are common. Pre-existing cardiovascular depression
decreases the minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) required to
maintain anesthetic depth. Vaporizer settings should be kept as low
as possible to minimize hypotension. Occasionally, discontinuation
of inhalant anesthesia and transition to injectable maintenance is
necessary to maintain blood pressure in patients with severe sepsis
that do not respond to fluid and/or inotropic and/or vasopressor
therapy. Patients with a distended GIT, especially those that are
obese, are more likely to become hypoxemic, especially in recovery
when oxygen is discontinued, due to hypoventilation and atelectasis.
Non-invasive monitoring of blood pressure should be initiated prior
to induction, arterial catheterization should be considered soon fol-
lowing induction. Monitoring of blood pressure and oxygen satura-
tion should be continued into recovery; oxygen supplementation is
often required postoperatively [172], and cardiovascular support
may sometimes be needed as well.
To minimize the amount of inhalant needed or if anesthetic depth
is inadequate, additional sedatives and/or analgesics are given inter-
mittently or as a CRI. Continuous infusion provides a more constant
level of drug delivery, and greatly reduces MAC. Infusions are ini-
tially set at a specific rate and the inhalant setting is varied to main-
tain the desired anesthetic depth, although infusion rates may be
varied as well. An opioid, lidocaine, and/or ketamine can be admin-
istered in combination or separately as CRIs [241–247], though lido-
caine is not recommended for use in cats [248]. α2
-Adrenergic
agonists can also be given as infusions. Dexmedetomidine has been
evaluated both during and after anesthesia in healthy small animals
and found to be useful and without serious side effects, although
close monitoring of cardiovascular parameters is warranted [247–
249]. Recent reviews of anesthesia of septic human patients do not
mention use of dexmedetomidine intraoperatively [229], however, it
is used routinely for sedation in critically ill patients, and has been
associated with improved outcomes in some cases [250].
In patients without hypovolemia, sepsis, coagulopathy, or dermati-
tis in the lumbosacral area, epidural administration of a local anes-
thetic with or without morphine can also provide intra- and
postoperative analgesia. Local anesthesia using transversus abdominis
plane blocks and/or intercostal blocks can be very helpful to provide
analgesia and minimize opioid use, especially in the postoperative
period [251–253].
Fluid therapy is continued during anesthesia; the type of fluids
and the rate necessary will vary depending on the patient’s status.
Regular assessment of fluid status is necessary as fluid overload has
deleterious effects on the efficacy of fluid exchange in the interstit-
ium, resulting in edema, dysfunction of the glycocalyx, and further
damage to tissues [254–257]. Hypotension is common in explora-
tory laparotomy cases and has been consistently associated with
greater mortality in patients with sepsis, peritonitis, and emergency
abdominal surgery [226,258–260]. The GIT lacks an autoregulatory
response to blood pressure as seen in the brain and kidney and pro-
longed hypotension can be more damaging to intestinal tissues and
should therefore be vigorously treated [226]. If hypotension persists
despite correction of volume deficits, infusions of inotropes such as
dobutamine and/or dopamine may increase cardiac output and
improve blood pressure. Vasopressors are considered when
decreased systemic vascular resistance is a significant component of
hypotension. Ephedrine is a sympathomimetic which can be given
as a bolus; it is effective primarily for mild transient decreases in
blood pressure. Phenylephrine, norepinephrine, vasopressin, and
epinephrine are given as infusions and titrated to effect. These
drugs are potent vasoconstrictors and should be used at the lowest
effective dose to minimize tissue ischemia despite improved blood
pressure [245,255,260–263] (see Chapter 21 for dosages).

-- 888 of 1450 --

Chapter 41: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Gastrointestinal Disease 	873
Figure 41.3 Mesenteric torsion in a dog presenting for acute onset of
abdominal discomfort/pain and profound depression. Manipulation and
derotation of ischemic bowel leads to release of inflammatory mediators
resulting in vasodilation and potential cardiac dysfunction. Source:. Dr.
Jane Quandt, Department of Small Animal Medicine and Surgery, College
of Veterinary Medicine, University of Georgia, Athens, GA.
Monitoring patients for exploratory laparotomy should include
the usual parameters of anesthetic depth, mucous membrane color
and refill time, heart rate and rhythm, respiratory rate/effort/pulse
strength, and arterial blood pressure. Invasive blood pressure meas-
urement is preferred by anesthesiologists for most laparotomies
since changes in cardiac output and pressure can be rapid and/or
severe. Pulse oximetry and capnography provide valuable informa-
tion on patient status with continuous real-time evaluation of ven-
tilation and gas exchange and are commonly used. Arterial blood
gas analysis is used to document respiratory and metabolic status
and to periodically evaluate the results of therapy. Lactate measure-
ment is an indirect estimate of tissue perfusion and oxygenation
status [264]. Changes in lactate lag behind alterations of tissue
metabolism, but measurement at presentation and over time is of
value in the evaluation of therapy and prognosis of patients with
severe disease [208,265–269]. Because of the variability of blood
pressure measurement in hypovolemic, unstable patients, measure-
ment of cardiac output would be very helpful in the assessment of
cardiovascular status; however, this is not commonly available for
clinical patients. Monitoring of the variation of the pulse pressure
or the systolic arterial pressure waveform during mechanical venti-
lation has been found to be a reliable parameter that infers the pres-
ence of hypovolemia [254,270,271], suggesting a need for fluid/
volume therapy (Fig. 41.2). Close attention to volume loss and the
actions of the surgeon during laparotomy helps to avoid hemody-
namic compromise by enabling the anesthetist to anticipate and
treat problems in a timely fashion. For example, cardiovascular
function is greatly affected by blood loss or removal of large vol-
umes of effusion, and with handling of large masses. Manipulation
and derotation of ischemic bowel leads to the release of numerous
inflammatory mediators that cause vasodilation and possibly car-
diac dysfunction (Fig. 41.3).
Monitoring should continue throughout anesthesia and into
recovery. Signs of anesthetic depth, heart and respiratory rate,
mucous membrane color and capillary refill time, temperature,
blood pressure, and electrocardiography should be periodically
evaluated. Postoperative pain management is important for the
comfort and the outcome of patients with GI disease. Opioids are
continued as intermittent boluses intravenously or intramuscularly,
or via continuous infusion. Infusions of lidocaine and/or ketamine
are also effective. Lidocaine causes nausea and vomiting in dogs at
high infusion rates [60,272] but was associated with improved out-
comes in humans following abdominal surgery [61,62,218,219],
and in dogs with GDV [273] and peritonitis [274]. Lidocaine given
intraoperatively has also been shown to decrease postoperative pain
in humans [61,62,218,219]. Higher dosing and use of multiple
modes of analgesia are often required in the first 24 h postopera-
tively. These should be decreased as soon as possible so that enteral
feeding and ambulation can be instituted and to minimize the inci-
dence of ileus. Infusions of low doses of α2
- adrenergic receptor ago-
nists can be useful, especially in patients with high analgesic
requirements or opioid dysphoria. Valtolina et al. found that dex-
medetomidine infusion provided effective postoperative analgesia
similar to morphine without significant adverse effects in ill
dogs [275]. However, infusions of α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists
can have significant cardiovascular side effects, so their use should
be carefully considered in the individual patient [249].
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are used in
human, ruminant, and equine patients following GI surgery with
minimal complications [220,276–283], although a greater risk of
dehiscence of anastomosis was associated with NSAID use in
humans [284]. Dogs and cats are relatively sensitive to the GI side-
effects of NSAIDs such as ulceration and hemorrhage [280–282].
Although useful in healthy patients anesthetized for elective proce-
dures such as gastropexy, the risks and benefits should be considered
and it may be best to avoid NSAIDs in patients with GI disease, renal
compromise, hypotension, liver disease, coagulopathy, and other con-
ditions that could be exacerbated by NSAID administration [283].
Megaesophagus
Regurgitation, food retention, and defective peristalsis of the esoph-
agus are seen in patients with primary esophageal dysmotility with-
out dilation or persistent megaesophagus (ME) [285]. ME is a
persistent dilation caused by damage to the esophageal musculature
Figure 41.2 Patient monitor showing systolic pressure (or pulse pressure)
variation of the arterial waveform in an anesthetized mechanically
ventilated dog. The presence of systolic pressure or pulse pressure variation
is associated with hypovolemia and fluid responsiveness. Source: Dr.
Juliana Figueiredo, VCA West Coast Specialty and Emergency Animal
Hospital, Fountain Valley, CA.

-- 889 of 1450 --

874 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
or defective peristalsis. Classified as congenital or acquired, regurgi-
tation is the most frequent clinical sign, with weight loss and poor
body condition in adults, intolerance of solid food, and failure to
thrive in young patients. Aspiration pneumonia (AP) is common,
and cough and abnormal lung sounds may be present. ME is rare in
cats but not uncommon in dogs. However, cats with dysautonomia,
an acquired abnormality of autonomic ganglia that leads to GI dys-
function, usually have ME. Congenital idiopathic ME has been
reported in several breeds of dogs and a few cats. A lack of vagal
sensory input is presumed to be the underlying mechanism.
Peristalsis of the esophagus does not occur because the presence of a
food bolus is not detected. Acquired ME is idiopathic, caused by
esophageal obstruction, and secondary to other diseases. Vascular
ring anomaly, esophageal stricture, hiatal hernia, tumor, granuloma,
and foreign bodies cause obstruction. With time, muscular damage
caused by dilation proximal to the lesion becomes irreversible.
Idiopathic ME is the most common cause of the acquired form in
adult dogs. The mechanism is thought to be similar to the congenital
form; with loss of normal motility, ingesta remains in the esophagus
and eventually results in dilation. Acquired ME is secondary to or
associated with peripheral neuropathy, neuromuscular disease,
laryngeal paralysis, severe esophagitis, lead poisoning, lupus myosi-
tis, and hypoadrenocorticism. Hypothyroidism is reported but has
been discounted by some authors [285–287]. Chronic or recurrent
gastric dilation with or without volvulus was also identified as a risk
factor in a retrospective evaluation of 136 dogs diagnosed with ME.
Evidence for concurrent hypothyroidism in these cases was evalu-
ated but was not found [287]. Myasthenia gravis (MG) is a very com-
mon cause of ME, reported to occur in 25–30% of cases. ME is often
the first clinical sign of MG in dogs [285,288]. MG is reported in
cats, but is more common in dogs likely due to the higher proportion
of striated muscle in the canine esophagus. ME is only rarely seen in
cats with MG [289]. A recent retrospective study of 99 dogs with ME
not associated with a structural lesion found a high proportion of
idiopathic cases; 10 were congenital, 89 were acquired, with 42.7% of
the latter idiopathic, and 38.2% due to MG [290]. Transient ME was
seen in three dogs with coral snake envenomation. All three dogs
had respiratory difficulty, two developed AP, and two required ven-
tilation [291]. An unusual outbreak of ME occurred in 398 dogs in
Latvia and Australia from 2014 to 2018. The feeding of two different
brands of dry dog food was incriminated in each country, although
a specific ingredient could not be identified and the underlying
physiologic defect was not determined [292].
Patients with ME may be anesthetized for diagnostics or treat-
ment, such as endoscopy, computed tomography, electromyogra-
phy, nerve conduction studies, muscle/nerve biopsy, bougienage,
foreign body removal, and vascular ring anomaly correction. ME
may also be a concurrent disease in patients anesthetized/sedated
for unrelated procedures such as dentistry or radiographs. Since
ME is often associated with neurologic disease, these patients
should be closely monitored for esophageal dysfunction and possi-
bly respiratory insufficiency [290]. GER, regurgitation, and aspira-
tion are the primary concerns when anesthetizing patients with
ME. Prolonged fasting is not advised as the dilation prevents com-
plete emptying of esophageal contents and an increased incidence
of GER has been seen with long fasting times in normal
dogs [110,111]. Some patients with chronic disease may be thin or
debilitated due to malnutrition and some may be dehydrated if
unable to retain adequate fluid intake. Many have repeated episodes
of AP and are at greater risk of hypoxemia perioperatively. Patients
should be stabilized prior to elective anesthesia with IV fluid
therapy and appropriate treatment for pneumonia. A dedicated
anesthetist is important for patients with ME, as airway manage-
ment and constant monitoring for leakage of esophageal contents
are necessary. Suction of esophageal contents should be performed
immediately after intubation and just before discontinuation of
anesthesia to reduce the risk of aspiration. Sternal recumbency and
elevation of the neck with the nose tipped down may also help
decrease the incidence. If regurgitation occurs, the nose and head
should be lowered immediately to allow drainage. Preoxygenation
is recommended for those with active pneumonia; these patients
should be restrained cautiously to avoid struggling and excessive
stress. Anesthetic drugs should be chosen based on the patient’s sta-
tus, with rapid IV induction and intubation necessary to secure and
protect the airway as quickly as possible. Avoidance of drugs that
cause vomiting such as some opioids (e.g., morphine or hydromor-
phone) and α2 - adrenergic receptor agonists is also recommended.
Reversible and shorter-acting agents are preferred. In recovery,
extubation should be delayed as long as possible, and oxygen should
be supplemented in recovery until oxygen saturation is consistently
normal. Gastroprotectants, antacids, and antiemetics given preop-
eratively are recommended.
Patients with ME due to MG may be treated with pyridostigmine
bromide, which increases levels of ACh by inhibiting anticholinester-
ase that would normally break down ACh. Cholinergic crisis is there-
fore possible, but this is rare. The effect of neuromuscular blocking
agents (NMBAs) is unpredictable in myasthenic patients and possibly
others with idiopathic ME. They do not respond to depolarizing
agents but are quite sensitive to nondepolarizing agents. Very low
doses of NMBAs should be utilized if paralysis is necessary. Specific
monitoring of the extent of blockade must be available. Sugammadex
is effective as a reversal agent for NMBAs [293].
Gastric dilation–volvulus
The incidence of gastric dilation–volvulus (GDV) at 50 emergency
clinics in the United Kingdom over a 17-month period was 0.64%
(492/77,088 cases) [294]. Approximately, 10 cases per clinic per
month is an underestimation, however, as it does not include cases
presenting during regular hours at day clinic practices. Acute GDV
is life-threatening, seen most often in adult large or giant breed
dogs, especially those with a deep-chested conformation. However,
it can occur in small breed dogs and puppies, and has been reported
in five cats, three with concurrent diaphragmatic hernias [295–
297]. Although an underlying motility disorder is presumed to be
important in the pathogenesis and altered motility patterns have
been identified after GDV in patients and research subjects with
created GDV, the actual pathogenesis of the condition has not been
elucidated [298–303]. The etiology is multifactorial with numerous
risk factors identified, including large/giant breed; deep-chested
conformation; “slim” body condition; middle to older age; close
relative that has experienced GDV; multiple diets, feeding, and
exercise routines; aerophagia; stress; hospitalization; nervous, anx-
ious, or aggressive demeanor; and gastric foreign body [294,295,304–
307]. Recent studies have identified specific genetic immune system
variants in Great Danes with GDV [308]. Inflammatory bowel dis-
ease and dysbiosis of the GI microbiome may also be associated
with increased risk of GDV [305,309]. Mortality has decreased
since the 1980s but is still high. Studies have reported mortality
rates of 10–26.8% [294,304,306,310–316], but these refer to dogs
treated surgically and do not reflect the actual case numbers seen.
Unfortunately, many cases are euthanized at presentation because
of prognosis, cost, or other factors [314,315]; clinical practices

-- 890 of 1450 --

Chapter 41: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Gastrointestinal Disease 	875
Figure 41.4 Preparation of a Great Dane with gastric dilation–volvulus,
(GDV) for anesthesia and surgery. Intravenous access has been secured
and fluid resuscitation initiated, ECG leads have been attached to evaluate
cardiac rhythm, and the degree of abdominal distension is assessed. Note
the salivation and depressed mentation of the dog. Source: Dr. Jennifer
Adams, with permission.
aimed at prevention and early recognition would likely have the
most significant effect overall [306,315]. Gastropexy has proven to
be preventive in dogs at high risk and those following GDV.
Reported recurrence rates are 0–5% with most developing dilation
but not volvulus [306,316,317]. Improved survival is likely associ-
ated with improvements in medical therapy, especially fluid resusci-
tation, early decompression of the stomach whenever possible, and
timely surgical intervention. Mortality is correlated with damage to
the stomach and surrounding organs, gastric perforation, sepsis,
peritonitis, the presence of cardiac dysrhythmias pre- or postopera-
tively, both hypo- and hyperthermia at presentation, postoperative
acute renal failure, hypotension at any time during hospitalization,
the duration from onset to presentation or surgery, the time from
presentation to surgery, and the severity of systemic compromise at
presentation [306,310–314]. Reperfusion injury has also been
implicated as a significant factor associated with mortality with
GDV [318–320].
GDV is always an emergency. Blood flow to the stomach and sur-
rounding organs is compromised as abdominal veins become
obstructed, greatly decreasing venous return to the heart, and pro-
ducing severe relative hypovolemia and distributive shock.
Distention of the stomach also restricts ventilation via interference
with diaphragmatic excursion. Early clinical signs include restless-
ness and anxiety, followed by hypersalivation, vomiting and/or
retching, and distention of the abdomen (Fig. 41.4) Eventually,
depression, weakness, and dyspnea develop if distention is not
relieved. Vomiting, salivation, and sequestration of hydrogen and
chloride ions that occur with gastric outflow obstruction initially
cause metabolic alkalosis. Metabolic acidosis develops later, sec-
ondary to the effects of ischemia and decreased hydration, with
increased lactate production and the release of inflammatory
mediators. Endotoxemia can also develop with damage to the por-
tal system. Reperfusion injury occurs when ischemia is reversed
with gastric decompression/derotation and redistribution of fluid
volume [306,318–320].
Intravenous fluid therapy and gastric decompression should be
initiated as quickly as possible. Baseline laboratory evaluation should
include packed cell volume (PCV), total solids (TS), electrolytes,
creatinine, and acid–base status. A clotting profile and venous lac-
tate are useful to evaluate prognosis and guide therapy but generally
should not delay surgical intervention if the owners would proceed
regardless of the results. Gastric necrosis is likely present when more
than one hemostatic test is abnormal and when lactate is greatly
elevated at presentation [321–323] and/or fails to decrease signifi-
cantly with fluid resuscitation. Increased lactate at presenta-
tion [265,321–324] and decreased clearance were associated with
higher mortality [265,325]. Radiography to distinguish between
dilation and dilation–volvulus, should be delayed until cardiovascu-
lar resuscitation is well under way. Anesthetic personnel, equipment,
and supplies should be made ready prior to arrival of the patient so
that surgical intervention may commence as soon as possible.
Previous emergent therapy was to administer “shock” doses (80–
90 mL/kg) of crystalloid solution via large-bore catheters, using
multiple venous access points. However, use of goal-directed resus-
citation guidelines to achieve appropriate clinical endpoints rather
than a specific volume avoids hypervolemia and tissue edema and
may improve outcomes [254,255,326–330]. Portions of the esti-
mated deficit are given over 15–30 min and the patient’s response is
determined. Clinical parameters to monitor include heart rate, arte-
rial blood pressure, mucous membrane color and perfusion, tissue
oxygenation, and mentation. PCV, TS or total protein, blood gases,
and venous oxygen saturation should be measured as needed. Use of
balanced crystalloid solutions is useful; however, faster and longer-
lasting resuscitation is achieved with the addition of small volumes
of hypertonic saline 7.5% at 2–4 mL/kg over 15 min, or colloids at
5–10 mL/kg over 30 min. Alternatively, a combination of colloid and
hypertonic saline is given at 4–6 mL/ kg [328]. This simultaneous
use of hypertonic saline and colloid has been shown to improve car-
diovascular status in both experimental and clinical cases of
GDV [331,332]. As previously mentioned, acute kidney injury has
been seen in people following treatment with colloids, so their use is
not recommended in human medicine.
Thoracic auscultation and electrocardiography should be performed
soon following presentation, as cardiac arrhythmias are common with
GDV. Most are ventricular in origin, although sinus tachycardia, atrial
fibrillation, and atrioventricular block can also occur, and the “R on T”
phenomenon is sometimes seen (Fig. 41.5) [304,306,311,333]. Specific
antiarrhythmic therapy may not be necessary if the dysrhythmia is of
minimal cardiovascular consequence or correction of hypovolemia,
hypoxemia, hypercarbia, acid–base status, and/or electrolyte abnor-
malities provide resolution. Treatment of ventricular tachycardia is
often needed when extrasystoles are numerous or multifocal, the sus-
tained rate is very high (> 160 beats/min), extrasystoles are very early
such that an “R on T” phenomenon is possible, and always when
hemodynamic status is affected by the arrhythmia. Lidocaine bolus is
given slowly IV at 1–2 mg/kg followed by CRI at 25–100 μg/kg/
min [334]. Postoperative therapy for cardiac arrhythmias is often nec-
essary. A lidocaine CRI is particularly useful as it decreases anesthetic
requirements in dogs by as much as 37–43% [60,335] and may have
positive effects on outcome. When lidocaine was given preemptively in
dogs with GDV, significantly fewer cases with cardiac dysrhythmias,
less renal impairment, and shorter hospitalization time were found as

-- 891 of 1450 --

876 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
compared to a historical control group [273]. Lidocaine has also been
shown to have numerous anti-inflammatory effects [336–338] and
may have prokinetic effects [61,218,221,222,339]. Improved survival
has also been seen in dogs with septic peritonitis [274] and horses
treated surgically for small intestinal colic [340].
Despite much research devoted to the effects of ischemia/reperfu-
sion injury and its prevention or treatment, few therapies have been
adopted in clinical practice. Avoidance of hyperoxia may be useful
since greater damage was seen following reperfusion in cardiac arrest
patients maintained at higher-than-normal PaO2 levels [341].
Inhibition of oxygen-free radical formation with antioxidants and
iron-chelating drugs such as deferoxamine has been shown to reduce
reperfusion injury in dogs with GDV [318,342]. Ethyl pyruvate has
been shown to preserve, protect, and even improve cellular function
in many tissues and species with ischemia/reperfusion injury and
may prove useful as a treatment for dogs with GDV or other ischemic
lesions [343].
Gastric lavage is sometimes necessary during correction of a
GDV. Considerations for lavage are similar to those for GER, upper
GI endoscopy, and ME. Leakage of gastric contents is common and
the endotracheal tube can be displaced. The head should be tipped
downwards to direct gastric contents away from the pharynx. The
pharynx should be examined and cleaned of any fluid or debris that
may have leaked around the nasogastric tube prior to recovery.
Postoperative dysmotility is reported in GDV patients; they should
be monitored closely in recovery for regurgitation, vomiting, ileus,
and aspiration [299,303,305,320].
Hemoabdomen
Causes of hemorrhage into the peritoneal cavity are traumatic or
atraumatic. Trauma is most often due to injury from impact with
motor vehicles or penetrating objects. It can also be caused by a fall
and during fights with other animals. Abdominal organs, especially
liver and spleen, vasculature, and/or the abdominal wall are
affected. Atraumatic lesions include hematoma or neoplasia of
abdominal organs, organ displacement or torsion, and coagulation
abnormalities (e.g., rodenticide toxicity and autoimmune thrombo-
cytopenia) [344–348]. Anaphylaxis was also recently reported as a
cause of hemoperitoneum in 11 dogs [349].
Coagulopathy can also result from acute trauma and has been sug-
gested to contribute to 25% of deaths due to uncontrolled hemorrhage
in people [350]. Initially, a hypocoagulable state caused by the inflam-
mation produced by tissue injury and shock develops, followed later
by hypercoagulation with thromboembolism and organ failure.
Hypothermia and acidemia are often present and contribute to coagu-
lopathy. Acute traumatic coagulopathy is diagnosed using routine
clotting profiles and viscoelastic measures such as thromboelastogra-
phy [344–346,350]. It was identified in 11/33 dogs with severe
trauma [351] and in 1/18 dogs and 1/19 cats with lesser injury [352].
Hemorrhage due to neoplasia is common, especially in dogs.
Potential sites include the liver, spleen, mesentery, and adrenal
glands, with the spleen being most often affected. Hemangiosarcoma
is the most common abdominal neoplasm in both dogs and cats
and usually affects the spleen and/or liver. Long-term prognosis is
guarded to poor [347,348,353], but a high percentage of canine
cases with abdominal hemorrhage survive anesthesia and surgery
to discharge [353]. A retrospective investigation of spontaneous
atraumatic hemoperitoneum in 65 cats found that 46% had abdom-
inal neoplasia and 54% had non-neoplastic disease; hepatic necrosis
and coagulopathy accounted for most of the latter cases. Only eight
of the cats (12.3%) survived to discharge [354].
Hemorrhage into the abdomen can be gradual or sudden, and can
quickly become life-threatening. Clinical signs are similar to blood
loss from any cause with progressive signs of hypovolemic shock
such as increasing tachycardia, pale mucous membranes, weak
pulses, weakness and/or lethargy, decreased mentation, and cold
extremities. Compensatory mechanisms such as splanchnic vaso-
constriction and reflex tachycardia may initially mask clinical signs
of hypovolemia; however, as blood loss approaches 30% of the blood
volume, these mechanisms are exhausted [345]. Hypothermia is
seen in dogs and is common in cats at presentation. Abdominal dis-
tention, a palpable fluid wave, abdominal pain, and subcutaneous
discoloration at the umbilicus and scrotum are also sometimes seen.
Radiography may show loss of abdominal detail with a “ground-
glass” appearance. Ultrasound will reveal the presence of free fluid
and may reveal a mass or metastatic disease. Abdominocentesis pro-
duces a bloody sample that does not clot and that has a PCV similar
to the systemic PCV is diagnostic for hemorrhage [344]. Peritoneal
lavage may be necessary with smaller volumes of blood loss or when
ultrasound is not available [347,348]; a PCV of 2–5% in lavage sam-
ples is indicative of hemorrhage [347]. Depending on the severity of
volume lost, the systemic PCV, TS/TP, and platelet count may be
normal or decreased, and, as lactate increases, base excess becomes
more negative, and central venous oxygen tension decreases [345].
Anesthetic considerations for hemoabdomen include hypov-
olemia, anemia, respiratory compromise associated with large
masses or fluid volumes compressing the diaphragm, and any organ
dysfunction that may be present. Ideally, the patient is stabilized
prior to surgery with intravenous fluids and sometimes transfusion.
The rate of blood loss is important, and some prefer to replace
erythrocyte losses after the source of bleeding is stopped if the
patient is stable enough to delay transfusion. It is not necessary to
correct the entire RBC deficit preoperatively; however, the patient
should be treated to achieve normovolemia and a PCV ≥ 30% in
dogs or 20% in cats, as oxygen delivery is usually adequate above
these levels. “Hypotensive” resuscitation to an endpoint less than
ideal, such as systolic arterial pressure of 90 mmHg or mean arterial
pressure of 60 mmHg, is sometimes pursued when control of the
source of hemorrhage can be achieved quickly [346]. Lower PCVs
are often tolerated during anesthesia when they are a result of
chronic blood loss rather than acute hemorrhage. Patients with ana-
phylaxis require treatment with an antihistamine and/or epineph-
rine and may not require surgical intervention [349].
The volume of prior and ongoing blood loss must be estimated
and replaced to limit effects on cardiac output. Estimating loss is
Figure 41.5 Ventricular tachycardia seen postoperatively in a dog
anesthetized for correction of gastric dilation–volvulus (GDV). Source: Dr.
Jennifer Adams, with permission.

-- 892 of 1450 --

Chapter 41: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Gastrointestinal Disease 	877
often difficult; techniques include weighing bloody sponges and
towels, tracking the volume of lavage fluid used, and estimating the
volume of blood and fluid collected in suction bottles.
Isotonic crystalloids are used for initial volume replacement.
The specific volume required is unknown and depends on the
speed of loss, but multiples of the volume lost are recommended
(e.g., 1.5–3 times the loss for acute hemorrhage and up to eight
times for gradual loss affecting the intracellular volume). When
intracellular volume is affected, replacement can proceed more
slowly than when acute hemorrhage is present. Boluses of
10–20 mL/kg for dogs and 5–10 mL/kg for cats are given, the
patient is reassessed, and boluses are repeated as needed up to
appropriate endpoints. Colloids were considered a rational replace-
ment for plasma loss, given at a ratio close to 1:1, if PCV and pro-
tein levels were adequate. However, concerns about renal damage
with colloid therapy have decreased their use [355–357]. Losses
greater than 20–30% of the patient’s total blood volume should be
replaced with whole blood, plasma and packed RBCs, or an RBC
substitute such as Oxyglobin®, if available, to ensure adequate oxy-
gen delivery. Autotransfusion is useful in some cases but not rec-
ommended with septic peritonitis, urinary rupture, and neoplastic
lesions. Catecholamine and inotrope infusions are used for other
procedures when needed, but vasopressin may produce better
results in patients with hemorrhagic shock [358].
TS or total protein levels should be maintained at greater than 4–4.5
g/dL. PCV and TS are measured intermittently to monitor the efficacy
of therapy and the speed of blood loss, realizing that hemodilution will
be present and that colloids will interfere with refractometer readings.
Response to volume restoration and increased oxygen-carrying capac-
ity (e.g., normalization of heart rate and blood pressure) are useful
guides to fluid therapy during anesthesia. Improvement of variation of
the systolic arterial pressure waveform or pulse pressure may also be
seen. Lactate is a useful indicator of tissue oxygen delivery as it
increases with severe hypovolemia and decreases as volume, cardio-
vascular function, and perfusion improve [264]. Although rapid vol-
ume replacement is sometimes necessary for extremely hypovolemic
patients, large volumes cause hypocoagulability and result in “dilu-
tional coagulopathy” [345,346,353].
Evacuation of blood and manipulation of organs or abdominal
masses can cause significant hemodynamic instability. Sequestration
of a portion of the blood volume in the exteriorized tissues and/or
redistribution of blood volume affects cardiac output and peripheral
perfusion. In humans, anesthetized for abdominal surgery, a syn-
drome of tachycardia, hypotension, and cutaneous hyperemia has
been reported, called “mesenteric traction syndrome” [98,358,359].
This has not been described or perhaps not investigated in animals,
but prostacyclin, histamine, and other vasoactive substances are
released, causing fluctuations in hemodynamic status when tension
is placed on mesenteric vasculature. The review of 38 studies with
1102 patients by Olsen et al. found mesenteric traction syndrome
developed in 76% of patients anesthetized for major abdominal sur-
gery that included procedures on the GIT, aorta, and large organs.
Cardiac arrhythmias are common with splenic masses and other
functional neoplasms (e.g., pheochromocytoma). Ventricular pre-
mature contractions and tachycardias are seen most often in dogs.
The cause is uncertain, and they may persist during recovery.
Predisposing factors such as hypovolemia, hypotension, hypox-
emia, hypercarbia, and electrolyte abnormalities are other causes of
dysrhythmias under anesthesia.
Anesthetic and analgesic drug choices are based on patient sta-
tus. Those with shorter duration and reversibility are preferred. The
MAC of inhalants is decreased with volume loss; vaporizer settings
should be as low as possible and decreased in anticipation of this
when sudden hemorrhage occurs. Although the use of dexmedeto-
midine in hemorrhaged dogs did not compromise global perfusion
significantly [360], it did prevent the pulse pressure variation nor-
mally associated with hypovolemia [361]. This effect could interfere
with monitoring and volume resuscitation of hemorrhaging
patients. Dogs in this study were also given atropine to block the
cardiac effects of dexmedetomidine and allow vascular effects to be
identified. Atropine is not recommended when dexmedetomidine
is used in clinical patients, so the effects of dexmedetomidine alone
are not known when hemorrhage is present. Consequently, this
drug should be avoided or used very judiciously in those with less
significant blood loss.
Intestinal neoplasia
Overall, cancer of the GIT is not common (< 10%) when compared
to all types of neoplasms in dogs and cats. Most patients are
middle-aged dogs or older cats, and many are male. Lymphoma,
carcinoma, leiomyoma, and gastrointestinal stromal tumors are
found in the GIT of dogs and cats and malignancy is very common.
Adenocarcinoma is most common in the lesser curvature and
pyloric area of the stomach and large intestine (especially the rec-
tum) of dogs. Lymphoma is most frequent in the small intestine but
adenocarcinoma and sarcomas, including GI stromal tumors and
leiomyosarcoma, also occur. Gastrointestinal stromal tumors are
also seen in the cecum and large intestine. In cats, lymphoma is the
most common intestinal neoplasm, primarily found in the jejunum
and ileum, but adenocarcinoma and mast cell tumors also occur.
Feline adenocarcinoma is an aggressive neoplasm that frequently
metastasizes to lymph nodes and lungs and sometimes results in
carcinomatosis [362–367].
Specific etiologies of GI neoplasia in animals have not been
determined. Risk factors for GI lymphoma in cats include exposure
to cigarette smoke, the presence of Helicobacter spp on biopsy, and
infection with feline leukemia (FeLV) and feline immunodeficiency
(FIV) viruses. Unlike other types of lymphoma, cats with GI lym-
phoma usually test negative for FeLV and FIV, but underlying retro-
viral infection is still suspect. Chronic inflammation as seen with
GERD and inflammatory bowel disease, disruption of hormonal
pathways as with gastrinomas, and chronic inflammation caused by
infection (Spirocerca lupi, Helicobacter spp) are proposed underly-
ing mechanisms. Hereditary predisposition to intestinal carcinoma
is reported in Chow, Staffordshire Terrier, and German and Belgian
Shepherd dogs, as well as in Siamese cats [363,364,366,368].
Esophageal neoplasia is rare in small animals; squamous cell carci-
noma, fibrosarcoma, osteosarcoma, and leiomyoma are seen. Squamous
cell carcinoma is most common in cats. Infection with S. lupi is reported
to cause fibrosarcoma, osteosarcoma, and other undifferentiated sarco-
mas. Melanoma is seen in the esophagus; it is more common in canine
breeds with black mucous membranes [362,363,369].
Rare neuroendocrine tumors (or carcinoids) arise from entero-
chromaffin cells found in the mucosa of the GIT. Previously called
“amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation tumors” (APUDomas),
carcinoids are rare in animals. Carcinoid syndrome occurs occasion-
ally in humans; one report of ventricular tachycardia and melena in
a Boxer dog was associated with an intestinal carcinoid [370].
Serotonin, histamine, substance P, various kinins, catecholamines,
and prostaglandins are just some of the chemicals secreted by carci-
noid tumors. Usually, these substances are transported to the liver
and metabolized; however, if they gain access to the circulation or

-- 893 of 1450 --

878 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
the lumen of the bowel, clinical signs of hemodynamic instability
and pulmonary and GI dysfunction follow. Arrhythmias, hypo- or
hypertension, vasodilation, bronchospasm, diarrhea, and hyperse-
cretion of intestinal fluid may occur. Anesthesia for such tumors
should avoid the use of drugs that encourage histamine release
such as morphine, meperidine, atracurium, and succinylcholine.
Dopamine, ephedrine, epinephrine, norepinephrine, histamine,
and isoproterenol have been associated with carcinoid episodes in
humans. Pretreatment with antihistamines and serotonin antago-
nists may be beneficial. Somatostatin receptors are found in some
carcinoid tumors; the somatostatin analog octreotide is used to
decrease secretion of serotonin and other substances. This has mini-
mized clinical signs in humans and allowed the use of sympathomi-
metics under anesthesia [98,362].
Clinical signs of GI neoplasia usually reflect the area affected;
malaise, weight loss, and anorexia may be the only signs. Vomiting,
diarrhea, and melena are also common with gastric and small
intestinal lesions. Regurgitation is frequent with esophageal disease.
Tenesmus, hematochezia, and constipation occur with lesions of
the rectum. Abdominal pain, distention, hemorrhage, obstruction,
perforation, and intussusception also occur with GI neoplasia [362,
363,365–367,369,370]. Mechanical effects of neoplasia may be seen
with large tumors potentially compromising diaphragmatic excur-
sion and causing or contributing to hypoventilation. Esophageal
masses may affect respiration via pressure on the trachea.
Anemia, hypoproteinemia, increased alkaline phosphatase, and
increased BUN are the most common laboratory abnormalities
seen with neoplasia of the GIT. Anemia can be due to multiple
mechanisms including blood loss, lack of red blood cell production,
or increased destruction of red cells. Protein-losing enteropathy is
common, causing hypoproteinemia due to hypoalbuminemia.
BUN increases with chronic intraluminal blood loss due to recy-
cling of protein [371]. Other enzyme changes are variable. White
blood cell counts vary from normal to extremely elevated in patients
with lymphoma and leukemia.
Abdominal palpation may suggest the presence of neoplasia.
Lesions are identified most often with radiography and ultrasonog-
raphy. Aspirates and/or biopsies needed for definitive diagnosis
may be obtained in conscious patients with ultrasound guidance;
however, endoscopy and/or laparotomy under general anesthesia
are sometimes necessary.
Paraneoplastic syndromes (PNS) sometimes occur with GI neo-
plasia and can affect anesthetic management. PNS are caused by
production of substances that affect tissues distant to the primary
tumor. Numerous PNS exist, but not all patients exhibit signs of
PNS. Some PNS are associated with a few particular types of neo-
plasia, others may be seen in many. A PNS may be the initial sign of
cancer in some patients and lead to the diagnosis. Improvement of
the PNS suggests a positive response to treatment, while recurrence
is seen with loss of remission [372,373].
In addition to general clinical signs of GI dysfunction, weight
loss is often seen with GI neoplasia. Although anorexia is an impor-
tant cause of weight loss, cachexia is also significant. Cachexia is a
loss of body condition in spite of a reasonable intake of calories.
Decreased appetite is due to direct effects of neoplastic tissue but is
also from inflammation that causes release of several cytokines,
including interleukin-1 (IL-1) and interleukin-6 (IL- 6), that affect
the balance between appetite stimulation and inhibition. Cachexia
is actually a destructive syndrome that alters fat and carbohydrate
metabolism and interferes with growth and anabolic pathways to
produce muscle wasting commonly seen in cancer patients. Effects
are again produced by mediators of inflammation including tumor
necrosis factor-α, IL-1, IL- 6, nuclear factor κB, and others. Even
though some patients may actually be overweight at diagnosis,
muscle wasting is often present and loss of body condition and
weight continues with time. Both body weight and low body condi-
tion score have been associated with non-survival in cancer
patients [372,373].
Hypercalcemia of malignancy in dogs is common with T-cell
lymphoma (35–55%) and anal sac apocrine gland adenocarcinoma
(25%) but is less frequent with GI adenocarcinoma. It is most com-
mon in cats with lymphoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and multi-
ple myeloma. Secretion of parathyroid hormone (PTH) or a
PTH-related-peptide affects pathways in bone and kidney, resulting
in increased serum calcium and eventually mineralization of tis-
sues, especially the kidney. Numerous other factors have also been
identified that contribute to hypercalcemia of malignancy, includ-
ing inflammatory cytokines and calcitriol. Osteolysis that occurs
with lesions of bone also increases serum calcium [372,373].
Hypoglycemia is seen with leiomyoma/leiomyosarcoma, lym-
phoma, and GI stromal tumors. It can be due to secretion of insulin,
but it is often from excessive use of glucose by neoplastic tissue,
and 	interference 	with 	gluconeogenesis 	and 	glycogenolysis.
Thrombocytopenia and/or coagulopathy are seen with hemangio-
sarcoma, lymphoma, and mast cell tumors. Histamine release from
mast cell tumors and gastrinomas can lead to gastric ulceration and
hemorrhage. Histamine release can also occur under anesthesia,
causing vasodilation and hypotension. Although most common
with renal tumors, erythrocytosis is reported with lymphoma and
hepatic tumors. Mucous membranes are erythematous and polydip-
sia and neurologic signs can be seen. The elevated PCV complicates
fluid therapy management, as patients are not necessarily hypov-
olemic or dehydrated and the PCV does not decrease as expected
with fluids. Hyperglobulinemia is seen with all types of myelomas.
Both erythrocytosis and hyperglobulinemia can cause hyperviscos-
ity syndrome, which alters blood flow in tissues, resulting in inade-
quate delivery of oxygen and nutrients. Coagulopathy and damage
to heart, brain, and ocular tissues may occur. Hypertrophic osteopa-
thy is sometimes seen with esophageal tumors, thought to be caused
by increased periosteal blood flow; the effects on bone can be
extremely painful [363,369,372,373].
Anesthetic management for patients with GI neoplasia is similar
to that described for laparotomy and hemoabdomen with attention
to therapy for hypoproteinemia and PNS. Plasma and/or colloid
administration may be needed when total protein is < 4.5 mg/dL or
albumin is < 2.0 mg/dL. Infusion of human albumin has been used
but severe side effects, including death, have been seen in some
dogs [374–378]. Although not without side effects, canine-specific
albumin is available and is a better choice than human albu-
min [379]. Hypercalcemia may cause muscle tremors or weakness
and arrhythmias, and can affect blood pressure. Correction of
hypercalcemia in animals displaying clinical signs is beneficial
prior to anesthesia; however, treatment is not pursued in asympto-
matic animals with minimal hypercalcemia. Therapy to decrease
calcium levels relatively quickly prior to surgery includes dilution
via fluid therapy using 0.9% sodium chloride, which also encour-
ages renal excretion, diuresis with furosemide, and calcitonin to
inhibit osteoclastic activity in bone. Glucocorticoids can also be
given; 	bisphosphonates 	are 	used 	for 	long-term 	manage-
ment [372,380]. Glucose should be monitored in patients with
hypoglycemia and dextrose administered as needed to maintain
serum glucose above 80 mg/dL. Intermittent monitoring of glucose

-- 894 of 1450 --

Chapter 41: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Gastrointestinal Disease 	879
is facilitated by use of an embedded monitor. This modality has
been used under anesthesia to evaluate the completeness of surgical
excision of functional tumors such as insulinoma [381]. See
Chapter 42 for further information on glucose and calcium therapy.
Treatment of anemia is described above in the hemoabdomen
section.
Patients with mast cell tumors should be premedicated with anti-
histamines and avoidance of drugs that stimulate histamine release,
such as morphine and meperidine, is recommended. Mechanical
effects on ventilation can be seen with obstructive intestinal lesions
or large abdominal masses due to compromise of diaphragmatic
excursions. Esophageal tumors can affect intubation and ventila-
tion via pressure on the trachea. Paraneoplastic fever is not uncom-
mon, especially with cancer of hematopoietic cells. The immune
response to antigens presented by neoplastic cells as well as inflam-
mation from necrotic tumors produces fever. Fever due to second-
ary infection may also occur in damaged tissue and must be
distinguished from paraneoplastic fever. Effects of chemotherapy
may also produce fever. Sepsis can occur with immunosuppression
and peritonitis caused by GIT cancers [372,373]. Hemorrhage is
common in patients with neoplasia and management is described
above in the hemoabdomen section.
Septic peritonitis
Several authors have reviewed septic peritonitis in dogs [382–384],
cats [267,385–389], or both [258,390–393]. It is categorized as
localized or diffuse, and primary, secondary, or tertiary depending
on the extent of disease and source of infection, respectively.
Tertiary peritonitis is the recurrence or persistence of infection fol-
lowing treatment via surgery and antibiotics for an initial episode.
Secondary peritonitis is most common in animals, due to perfora-
tion/leakage from the GIT. Foreign bodies, ulcers, obstruction,
ischemic lesions, abscess/infection of organs or masses, trauma
from motor vehicle impact, bite wounds, other penetrating injuries,
and sometimes blunt trauma are causes. Some injuries may not
break the skin but still damage intestine enough to cause leakage
and induce septic peritonitis. Iatrogenic causes include dehiscence
of intestinal anastamoses or incisions, inadvertent puncture of
intestine, leakage around feeding tubes, and contamination of the
abdomen at surgery. Spontaneous perforation of the GIT occurs
occasionally with steroid or NSAID therapy. Aseptic secondary
peritonitis is seen with leakage of urine, bile, gastric fluid, or pan-
creatic secretions. In primary septic peritonitis, an intra-abdominal
source of infection cannot be identified [386,387,390,391,393].
Variable mortality has been reported in small animals (31–
69%) [267,383,387–389]. Patients with secondary peritonitis treated
surgically have higher survival rates than those treated medically or
those with primary peritonitis [267,392]. Pre-existing peritonitis,
low albumin and protein levels, and intraoperative hypotension
were risk factors for postoperative septic peritonitis and death in
dogs [383]. A study of mortality and dehiscence in dogs following
GI surgery found that the rate of dehiscence was low at 5.3%
(9/170); however, ASA status ≥ 3 and high lactate concentration
were factors associated with dehiscence, septic peritonitis, and non-
survival [384]. A higher blood glucose level was associated with
increased mortality in one study [389]. Early use of antibiotics was
found to be associated with greater survival in a report of 83 cats
with septic peritonitis [388].
Anorexia, lethargy, and vomiting are the most common clinical
signs in dogs and cats. Diarrhea and abdominal pain are also seen in
dogs; discomfort is reported but often vague or inapparent in cats.
Signs of sepsis relate to the severity of abdominal contamination in
most cases. Unlike dogs, bradycardia and hypothermia are fre-
quently seen in cats with sepsis [385–387]. Diagnosis is suggested by
history and physical examination, while abdominal radiographs and
ultrasonography may reveal a specific lesion with or without effu-
sion [394]. Pneumoperitoneum is diagnostic for intestinal leakage or
infection with gas-forming bacteria [391,392]. A septic infiltrate
seen on cytology of peritoneal effusion or lavage fluid confirms the
diagnosis of septic peritonitis. Increased lactate can be seen in serum
and/or in the abdominal fluid. Peritoneal lactate and its comparison
to serum lactate was diagnostic in ≥ 90% of dogs, but not in
cats [395]. Although factors identified with prognosis vary, hypoten-
sion, hypoalbuminemia, and hyperlactatemia are consistently asso-
ciated with mortality [382–384,386,387,392,393,395,396].
Patients with peritonitis are some of the most challenging cases
presented for anesthesia. Clinical signs may suggest the presence of a
septic focus, and confirmation may be obtained prior to laparotomy
via diagnostics such as abdominocentesis, radiographs, and/or ultra-
sound. However, exploratory laparotomy can be a diagnostic as well
as a therapeutic procedure. Septic patients are more sensitive to the
depressant effects of anesthetic agents, so a thorough evaluation of
the severity of cardiovascular compromise should be performed.
Many cases are urgent or emergent, which may not permit a complete
diagnostic evaluation; however, clinical signs and laboratory param-
eters have been evaluated in combination to allow early identification
of sepsis. In 1991, human critical care physicians sought terminology
to better define and describe inflammation and sepsis in critically
ill patients. They agreed that systemic inflammation may occur
with any severe insult, including trauma, hemorrhage, ischemia,
and immune disease, as well as infection, and called it the “systemic
inflammatory response syndrome” (SIRS). Sepsis was defined as SIRS
in response to infection, most often bacterial, but fungal, protozoal,
and viral infections also occur [397–400]. Criteria developed to iden-
tify SIRS included heart rate, respiratory rate or PaCO2
, and tempera-
ture, combined with total white blood cell count (Table 41.5);
evaluation of the mucous membranes was added later as an estimate
of tissue perfusion. Sepsis was identified when two or more SIRS cri-
teria were present in response to infection. Severe sepsis was present
with poor perfusion, hypotension, and organ dysfunction. Septic
shock was described as persistent hypotension and elevated lactate in
spite of appropriate fluid resuscitation, requiring vasopressor ther-
apy [398–405]. Some patients may be normotensive but exhibit signs
of decreased perfusion such as cool extremities, poor capillary refill
time and abnormal mucous membrane color, lactic acidosis,
decreased urine output, and depressed mental status. While
Table 41.5 Criteria for systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS)/sepsis
in dogs, cats, and humans.
Parameter 	Dog 	Cat 	Human
Heart rate (beats/min) 	> 120 	< 140 or > 225 	> 90
Respiratory rate
(breaths/min)
> 40 	> 40 	> 20
or PaCO2 (mmHg) 	< 30 	< 32
Temperature (°F) 	< 100.4 or > 104.0 < 100 or > 104 	< 96.8 or > 100.4
Leukogram white blood
cells/μL
or % immature band cells
> 18,000 or
< 5000
> 19,000 or
< 5000
> 12,000 or
< 4000
> 5% 	> 5% 	> 10%
Prolonged CRT, abnormal mucous membrane color
Source: Compiled from Bone et al. [397]; Nunnally [399]; Singer et al. [401]; Rank and
Hansen [403]; Purvis and Kirby [404]; Hardie [405].

-- 895 of 1450 --

880 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
definitions have changed somewhat over the years, terminology has
returned to more simplified versions in some respects. According to
the “Sepsis 3” consensus conference in 2016 [401], “severe sepsis” has
been abandoned, while sepsis is now defined as “life-threatening
organ dysfunction caused by a dysregulated host response to infec-
tion.” Septic shock remains as “persisting hypotension requiring
vasopressors to maintain MAP ≥ 65 mmHg with a serum lactate level
> 2 mmol/L despite adequate volume resuscitation” [398–402].
The pathophysiology of sepsis and septic shock is quite complex,
and the knowledge base has vastly expanded since SIRS criteria were
first developed. The body’s response to an insult is designed to
ensure/restore oxygen delivery to vital tissues. Multiple systems par-
ticipate in the inflammatory response, and although some cases may
progress from SIRS to sepsis to multiple organ dysfunction syn-
drome (MODS), most do not proceed along a continuum. Early
accounts describe an immune response triggered by organisms,
their byproducts, and/or the resultant tissue damage, that then
injures the patient as well. The primary components that trigger an
inflammatory response are now called “pathogen-associated molec-
ular patterns” (PAMPs) and/or damage-associated molecular pat-
terns (DAMPs). PAMPs include the classic endotoxins and exotoxins
from gram-negative or gram-positive bacteria and many other sub-
stances that alert innate immune cells to a foreign presence. DAMPs
are endogenous structures/substances derived from damaged host
cells and can arise from non-infectious sources such as injury and
toxins. Pattern recognition receptors interact with PAMPs/DAMPs
to initiate the immune response, and are located inside or outside
cells, in the bloodstream or body fluids. Pattern recognition recep-
tors are located on neutrophils, macrophages, dendritic cells, plate-
lets, complement, natural killer cells, fibroblasts, some epithelial
cells including those of the GIT, and many others. Signaling path-
ways are triggered that result in activation of multiple genes to pro-
duce pro- and anti-inflammatory effects. If the source is eliminated,
the immune response subsides and saves appropriate information
for future insults. However, with sepsis, “dysregulation” develops.
Normal intrinsic responses are uncontrolled and proinflammatory
effects overwhelm anti-inflammatory activities; actual suppression
of the immune system also occurs [406]. A myriad of inflammatory
mediators is involved, including tumor necrosis factor-α, interleu-
kins, leukotrienes, prostaglandins, cytokines, various peptides, the
potent vasodilator nitric oxide (NO), oxygen radicals, and platelet-
activating factor. Any/all organ systems may suffer, but in addition
to the source location, the cardiovascular, respiratory, neurologic,
and hemostatic systems are most profoundly affected. The net result
is hypotension caused by vasodilation and a relative or absolute
hypovolemia with shifting of volume to the venous side of the circu-
lation. Damage to the glycocalyx occurs, causing loss of endothelial
barrier function. Fluid leaks into cells and the interstitium, resulting
in edema, cellular damage, and protein loss. Normal or increased
cardiac output is present initially, but myocardial contractility is
eventually impaired. Coagulopathy also develops that contributes to
tissue ischemia. Adrenal insufficiency and decreased endogenous
vasopressin levels also exacerbate hypotension. The net result is sep-
tic shock, also called “vasoplegic” or “distributive shock,” with hypo-
tension in spite of appropriate fluid resuscitation. Vasopressor
therapy is required as well as inotropic support for cardiac
dysfunction [255,398–400,402,407].
The GIT is the most common source of sepsis in animals and is
also the “shock organ” in dogs. However, it plays a role in the gen-
eration of SIRS/sepsis even when the intestinal serosa is intact or
the primary source is elsewhere. Inflammatory damage to the
barrier functions of the GI mucosa allows absorption of non-
microbial factors into the lymphatic system, which then drain into
the venous system via the thoracic duct. Ongoing SIRS is magni-
fied, and respiratory dysfunction/distress and multiple organ fail-
ure may ensue via this pathway. Translocation of bacteria and
bacterial products also occurs in some patients and is also thought
to occur via lymphatics rather than the portal system. However,
bacterial translocation is not necessary for the development of SIRS
and MODS [408,409]. There is also evidence that alteration of the
GI microbiome contributes to sepsis pathophysiology as well [410].
Although early identification of SIRS/sepsis is vital to survival,
SIRS is a clinical diagnosis. Signs are not always obvious in animals,
especially cats, and may overlap with non-septic illness. Anaphylaxis
causes similar signs with abnormal mucous membrane color, hypo-
tension, altered mentation, and so on and must be differentiated
from sepsis [349,411]. In humans, the SIRS criteria were ultimately
considered inadequate for many patients, and other scoring systems
were developed. The Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA)
score is used to screen patients for organ dysfunction. It includes
measures of neurologic, cardiovascular, renal, hepatic, and hemato-
logic function. A shorter variation, the quick-SOFA (qSOFA), elim-
inates laboratory data and focuses on mental status, low systolic
blood pressure, and increased respiratory rate. The Acute Patient
Physiologic and Laboratory Evaluation (APPLE) and its modifica-
tion, fastAPPLE, were developed to be used in hospitalized patients,
and include more laboratory parameters [402,412]. Other scoring
systems exist that apply to specific patient categories, but all are
designed to help identify sepsis, assess the severity of illness, and
infer risks of morbidity as well as mortality. SIRS criteria, SOFA,
APPLE, and modifications have been adapted and used in critically
ill dogs and cats [385,398,402,413–419]. They have all been shown
to perform well in some groups but no scoring system is 100% reli-
able. It is not recommended to rely on one scoring system alone to
infer the presence of sepsis [402,403,417,418,420]. However, their
use prompts clinicians to look more closely when a septic source is
not obvious and enables discussions of prognosis and survival with
owners and other veterinarians.
In 2002, the Surviving Sepsis Campaign (SSC) [421] was launched
globally to educate medical professionals and governments about
the increasing incidence of sepsis and offer guidelines for identifica-
tion and treatment. It also recommended methods for early diagno-
sis and provided guidance for management of these difficult cases.
Updates have been published periodically [421,422]; veterinary rec-
ommendations are similar [326,404], but further study is needed to
determine specific protocols for animals. The SSC promotes guide-
lines as care “bundles.” According to 2021 SSC guidelines [420,421],
the initial bundle should be instituted within 1 h of the recognition
of sepsis (Box 41.2). Collection of samples for blood cultures is per-
formed prior to administration of broad-spectrum antibiotics,
Box 41.2 Hour- 1 care bundle for septic patients.
When sepsis is likely, begin the following within 1 h of recognition:
1 Measure lactate level and recheck if initial measurement is > 2 mmol/L.
2 Obtain blood cultures and then administer antibiotics.
3 Begin IV crystalloid therapy at 30 mL/kg if hypotensive or lactate
≥ 4 mmol/L.
4 Initiate vasopressor therapy if hypotension persists and maintain MAP
≥ 65 mmHg.
MAP, mean arterial pressure.
Source: Adapted from the Surviving Sepsis Website [421].

-- 896 of 1450 --

Chapter 41: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Gastrointestinal Disease 	881
which should also be given within the first hour. Fluid resuscitation
should begin immediately with intravenous isotonic crystalloids.
Diagnostics to identify an infective source should begin as soon as
possible, and lactate should be measured at admission and repeated
intermittently to evaluate response to therapy. Goals of initial ther-
apy should be achieved within 3 h (Table 41.6), with central venous
oxygen saturation (ScvO2
) > 70%, urine output > 0.5 mL/kg/h, cen-
tral venous pressure of 8–12 mmHg, and mean arterial pressure
(MAP) of > 65 mmHg. This MAP is lower than previous recommen-
dations, as no difference in outcome was seen when a higher pres-
sure was used. Measurement of mixed venous oxygen saturation
(Sv̅O2
) requires catheterization of the pulmonary artery, but the use
of the central venous oxygen saturation (ScvO2
) from the cranial
vena cava is an acceptable alternative [423]. Lactate can also be used
to estimate oxygen delivery when central catheterization is not
available [420,423].
Elimination or treatment of an infective focus, or “source con-
trol,” should be pursued as soon as possible as well. This is often
where the anesthetist is needed. Prior to anesthesia, patients with
SIRS/sepsis have hopefully been stabilized via vigorous fluid resus-
citation and with vasopressors and/or inotropes when necessary to
correct hypovolemia/hypotension. Unfortunately, controversy still
exists as to appropriate fluid therapy protocols for septic patients.
Since the introduction of the SSC, there has been a switch to goal-
oriented therapy with clinical endpoints of fluid resuscitation pro-
tocols, as better outcomes were identified using lower rates of
crystalloids with earlier use of vasopressors [326,327,420]. Kuttab
et al. found greater mortality in septic patients that did not receive
the 30 mL/kg dose of fluids by 3 h as recommended by the 2016 SSC
guidelines [424]. However, recent clinical trials and meta-analyses
of restrictive versus liberal fluid therapy protocols in hypotensive
septic patients [425] and in patients anesthetized for major abdomi-
nal surgery [426] have not found differences in mortality. The latter
study also found fewer renal complications with higher fluid vol-
umes. Perhaps close attention to the entire bundle of recommenda-
tions has resulted in better outcomes rather than specific fluid rates,
however, this remains to be determined.
Isotonic 	crystalloids 	are 	preferred 	over 	saline 	or 	col-
loids [330,420,427]. The use of synthetic colloids in critically ill
patients is controversial. Meta-analyses of the use of hetastarch
(hydroxyethyl starch) in septic human patients have shown evidence
of acute kidney injury and greater mortality [355,356]; colloid or
gelatin use is not recommended by the SSC [420]. Studies in
dogs and cats have shown no difference or some negative
effects [330,357,428], but further study is required to make firm rec-
ommendations. Many still utilize synthetic colloids as alternatives,
such as albumin or plasma, are not always available or are expensive.
However, it is likely wise to avoid colloids whenever possible. The
volume-expanding effects of colloids are not as great as expected in
septic patients, they are associated with coagulopathy, and they may
actually result in greater tissue edema in ill patients [429]. The
long-standing concept that vascular permeability is dependent on
the balance between colloid osmotic and hydrostatic pressures on
either side of the endothelium has been challenged. Revision of the
Starling principle of fluid dynamics explains that permeability is
more dependent on the endothelial glycocalyx, which is a layer of
complex carbohydrates arranged in a thick gel-like mesh lining the
surface of the vascular endothelium. It is negatively charged and
traps albumin and proteins, and serves as a barrier to movement of
fluid and substances into the interstitium. It has been shown that the
differences between capillary blood and the glycocalyx, rather than
the interstitium, are most important. Damage to the glycocalyx that
occurs with inflammation, ischemia, and even high fluid rates
results in further tissue edema as the protection it normally provides
is compromised [429–434]. Macdonald et al. [434] found no correla-
tion between markers of endothelial glycocalyx shedding and total
volume of fluids administered over the first 24 h in septic patients,
while others have identified greater mortality with higher fluid vol-
umes and damage to the endothelial glycocalyx [435]. Infusion of
albumin or plasma is recommended when severe hypoalbumine-
mia/hypoproteinemia is present and when large volumes of crystal-
loids have been utilized [330,420], as these minimize damage to the
glycocalyx. Human albumin has been used in animals but adverse
effects, including anaphylaxis and death, are reported [330,374–
378,433]; canine-specific albumin is now available [380]. Albumin
can also be administered as a hypertonic solution to expand volume
but must be given slowly via a central line [328,379].
Vasopressors are administered when patients remain hypoten-
sive following fluid resuscitation. Norepinephrine is the first choice
in humans and small animals, followed by vasopressin, then epi-
nephrine [261–263,420]. As very potent vasoconstrictors, these
drugs should be given at the lowest effective dose to avoid ischemia
and masking of persistent hypovolemia. Inotropes are used when
myocardial dysfunction is identified or suspected, and dobutamine
is preferred over dopamine [420]. Inotropes are often necessary
during anesthesia to offset the depressant effects of inhalants.
Relative adrenal insufficiency also occurs in SIRS/sepsis [436–
438]. Corticosteroids are necessary for patients to respond to vaso-
pressor therapy; therefore, physiologic doses are recommended for
patients who are still hypotensive following volume replacement
and vasopressor therapy [420]. A recent Cochrane review found
treatment with corticosteroids reduced duration of intensive care,
overall length of hospitalization, and mortality in humans [439].
Reversal of hypotension was seen following corticosteroid treat-
ment in a dog with septic shock due to pneumonia [437]. A pro-
spective study of low-dose corticosteroid treatment in 21 dogs with
SIRS did not find an effect on survival [438]. Similarly, a retrospec-
tive study compared treatment with or without corticosteroids in 47
dogs with sepsis and did not find an effect on survival [440].
However, more of the treated patients were sicker, and likely had a
higher baseline risk of mortality. Further study is required to deter-
mine the effect of corticosteroid treatment in septic veterinary
patients. Septic patients may exhibit hyper- or hypoglycemia. A
blood glucose concentration > 180 mg/dL [420] is the trigger for
insulin therapy in humans which is higher than previous recom-
mendations. Hypoglycemia is treated with dextrose as needed [271]
and is discussed further in Chapter 42.
Anesthetic choices and management for patients with septic peri-
tonitis are similar to those described for exploratory laparotomy and
GDV. Dosage requirements are greatly decreased in these patients,
and combinations of low levels of inhalant with infusions of intrave-
nous agents and adjunctive medications are utilized, titrating to
Table 41.6 Goals of therapy for sepsis to achieve within 3 h of initiating treatment.
Parameter 	Goal
Mean arterial pressure (MAP) 	> 65 mmHg
Central venous oxygen saturation (ScvO2
) 	> 70%
Central venous pressure (CVP) 	8–12 mmHg
Urine output 	> 0.5 mL/kg/h
Source: Compiled from Butler [326]; Rivers et al. [327]; Nunnally [399]; Evans et al. [420].

-- 897 of 1450 --

882 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
effect at the lowest effective dose rates [234,235,271]. Ketamine is
suggested for induction since its sympathomimetic effects support
blood pressure; however, catecholamine depletion in severely ill
patients would negate this effect [234,235,271]. Combinations of
two drugs such as ketamine with propofol or alfaxalone may be use-
ful [232]. Etomidate has been combined with propofol for total
intravenous anesthesia in older humans with good results [441];
however, concerns about negative outcomes exist with use of etomi-
date [228,229]. Lidocaine has been shown to improve short-term
survival in dogs with peritonitis [274] and horses with small intesti-
nal lesions [340]; it has also been associated with better outcomes in
humans [61,62,219]. Close attention to clinical signs, oxygenation,
and perfusion is always necessary in anesthetized patients, but anes-
thetic management can directly affect outcomes in septic patients as
intraoperative hypotension has been repeatedly associated with
mortality [208,226,258]. Monitoring has been described previously
and, for septic patients in particular, measurement of cardiac output
is very useful. Lung injury is not uncommon in septic patients and
ventilator settings should be altered as needed, according to arterial
blood gas evaluation. Lower tidal volumes are recommended
(6–8 mL/kg) with a maximum end-inspiratory plateau pressure of
≤ 30 cmH2
O [234,271,420,442]. PEEP may also be needed.
Postoperatively, cardiovascular support and monitoring are contin-
ued, and oxygen insufflation or ventilatory support may be needed
in cases with inadequate gas exchange.
Foreign body removal and other abdominal
procedures
Anesthetic considerations for intestinal obstruction, removal or
biopsy of abdominal masses and/or the intestine, and colectomy are
similar to those for exploratory laparotomy discussed above.
Hemorrhage is often associated with removal of abdominal masses as
discussed previously; however, it may occur with dissection of adhe-
sions or fibrous tissue, which can be insidious and should be moni-
tored closely to identify significant blood loss. A non-linear foreign
body of the GIT was the most common reason for emergency abdom-
inal surgery in a retrospective analysis of 82 dogs over a three-year
period (31 dogs, 39%). Other reasons included pyometra (15 dogs,
18.3%), GDV (15 dogs, 18.3%), and hemoperitoneum (8 dogs, 6.5%);
only three dogs presented with a linear foreign body [208]. Surveys of
foreign body obstruction in dogs and cats consistently show overall
good outcomes with over 90% survival in both dogs and cats [443,444];
however, mortality was higher with linear foreign bodies and the need
for multiple intestinal procedures in one report [445].
Ischemic lesions of intestine also occur in dogs and cats. A report
of 153 dogs with small intestinal intussusception found that most
dogs were young, with a median age of 10 months. No cause was
identified in most cases, the most common location was ileocolic,
resection and anastomosis were required in 84%, and mortality was
6% after 14 days. Postoperative complications were seen in 35%,
most often diarrhea, regurgitation, and septic peritonitis [446]. Of
20 cats identified with intussusception, 10 were less than one year of
age and 9 were over six years of age. The most common location
was jejuno-jejunal; diagnosis was idiopathic in seven of the young
cats, while lymphoma or inflammatory bowel disease was identified
in seven of the older cats [447]. Some patients with intussusception
present with a prolonged history of vomiting, weight loss, and sig-
nificant debilitation as lesions may produce partial as opposed to
complete obstruction.
Anorexia, depression, nausea and persistent vomiting, and abdom-
inal pain are common clinical signs in patients with obstruction, with
subsequent fluid deficits and electrolyte abnormalities. Although
exploratory laparotomy for foreign body removal and other lesions of
the intestine is often straight forward, duration of these procedures
may be long, as meticulous dissection, multiple resections, and anas-
tamoses may be required. Perforation, dehiscence, or leakage are
common complications that can lead to or exacerbate peritonitis and
sepsis. Repeat laparotomy is sometimes required for treatment of
peritonitis and other complications. Some patients, especially dogs,
present repeatedly for foreign body removal. Hemorrhage can be
seen in these patients due to the presence of scar tissue. Periodic reas-
sessment of blood gases, PCV, TS, electrolytes, lactate, and glucose is
performed as needed. Overall fluid requirements must be considered
when duration is prolonged to avoid hypervolemia. Anesthetic man-
agement and postoperative concerns are similar to other laparotomy
patients, with attention to analgesia, and treatment and prevention of
vomiting, reflux, and aspiration.
References
1 Washabau RJ. Integration of gastrointestinal function. In: Washabau RJ, Day MJ,
eds. Canine and Feline Gastroenterology. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2013:
1–29.
2 Herdt TH. Regulation of gastrointestinal function. In: Klein BG, ed. Cunningham’s
Textbook of Veterinary Physiology, 6th edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2020: 284–292.
3 Bowen R. Fundamental physiology and anatomy of the digestive system. In:
Pathophysiology of the Digestive System. http://www.vivo.colostate.edu/hbooks/
pathphys/digestion/basics/gi_microanatomy.html (accessed June 2022).
4 Herdt TH. Motility patterns of the gastrointestinal tract. In: Klein BG, ed.
Cunningham’s Textbook of Veterinary Physiology, 6th edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders
Elsevier, 2020: 293–306.
5 Whitehead K, Cortes Y, Eirmann L. Gastrointestinal dysmotility disorders in criti-
cally ill dogs and cats. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2016; 26(2): 234–253.
6 Bowen R. Control of digestive system function. In: Pathophysiology of the Digestive
System. Colorado State University.http://www.vivo.colostate.edu/hbooks/pathphys/
digestion/basics/control.html (accessed June 2022).
7 Husnik R, Gaschen F. Gastric motility disorders in dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 2021; 51: 43–59.
8 Lin HC. Preanesthetic considerations. In: Lin HC, Passler T, Clark-Price S, eds.
Farm Animal Anesthesia: Cattle, Small Ruminants, Camelids, and Pigs, 2nd edn.
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, 2022: 1–4.
9 Jago RC, Corletto F, Wright IM. Peri-anaesthetic complications in an equine refer-
ral hospital: risk factors for post anaesthetic colic. Equine Vet 2015; 47: 635–640.
10 Mehra JM, Tolbert MK, Moore GE, et al. Clinical features and risk factors for gas-
trointestinal complications in dogs treated surgically for thoracolumbar interverte-
bral disc extrusion. Front Vet Sci 2021; 8: 785228.
11 Andersen MS, Clark L, Dyson SJ, et al. Risk factors for colic in horses after general
anaesthesia for MRI or nonabdominal surgery: absence of evidence of effect from
perianaesthetic morphine. Equine Vet J 2006; 38: 368–374.
12 Torrente C, Vigueras I, Manzanilla EG, et al. Prevalence of and risk factors for intraop-
erative gastroesophageal reflux and postanesthetic vomiting and diarrhea in dogs under-
going general anesthesia. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2017; 27: 397–408.
13 Lee HW, Machin H, Adami C. Peri-anaesthetic mortality and nonfatal gastrointes-
tinal complications in pet rabbits: a retrospective study on 210 cases. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2018; 45: 520–528.
14 Davies JA, Fransson BA, Davis AM. Incidence of and risk factors for postoperative
regurgitation and vomiting in dogs – 244 cases (2000–2012). J Am Vet Med Assoc
2015; 246: 327–335.
15 Totta E, Pavlidou K, Savvas I. Gastric dilatation during sedation in a Doberman
with intranasal malignancy. Hellen J Companion Anim Med 2020; 9: 111–117.
16 Savas I, Plevraki, Raptopoulos D. Aerophagia and gastric dilation following tileta-
mine/zolazepam anaesthesia in a dog. Vet Rec 2001; 149: 20–21.
17 Washabau RJ, Hall JA. Stomach: dysmotility. In: Washabau RJ, Day MJ, eds. Canine
and Feline Gastroenterology. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2013: 630–634.
18 Kook PH. Esophagitis in cats and dogs. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2021;
51: 1–15.
19 Grobman M. Aerodigestive disease in dogs. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
2021; 51: 17–32.
20 Ovbey DH, Wilson DV, Bednarski RM, et al. Prevalence and risk factors for canine
post-anesthetic aspiration pneumonia (1999–2009): a multicenter study. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2014; 41: 127–136.

-- 898 of 1450 --

Chapter 41: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Gastrointestinal Disease 	883
21 Grocott MP, Browne JP, Van der Meulen J, et al. The Postoperative Morbidity
Survey was validated and used to describe morbidity after major surgery. J Clin
Epidemiol 2007; 60: 919–928.
22 Buscail E, Deraison C. Postoperative ileus: a pharmacological perspective.
Br J Pharmacol 2022; 179: 3283–3305.
23 Hellstrom EA, Ziegler AL, Blikslager AT. Postoperative ileus: comparative patho-
physiology and future therapies. Front Vet Sci 2021; 8: 714800.
24 Washabau RJ. Vomiting: pathophysiology and mechanisms. In: Washabau RJ, Day
MJ, eds. Canine and Feline Gastroenterology. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2013:
167–169.
25 Bowen R. Physiology of vomiting. In: Pathophysiology of the Digestive System.
Colorado State University. http://www.vivo.colostate.edu/hbooks/pathphys/diges-
tion/stomach/vomiting.html (accessed February 2023).
26 Papich MG. Drugs affecting GI function. In: Riviere JE, Papich MG, eds. Veterinary
Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 9th edn. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009:
1247–1251.
27 Elwood C, Devauchelle P, Elliott J, et al. Emesis in dogs: a review. J Small Anim Pract
2010; 51: 4–22.
28 Shaikh SI, Nagarekha D, Hegade G, et al. Postoperative nausea and vomiting: a
simple yet complex problem. Anesth Essays Res 2016; 10: 388–396.
29 Henze L, Foth S, Meller S, et al. Ondansetron in dogs with nausea associated with
vestibular disease: a double-blinded, randomized placebo-controlled crossover
study. J Vet Int Med 2022; 36: 1726–1732.
30 Kenward H, Elliott J, Lee T, et al. Anti- nausea effects and pharmacokinetics of
ondansetron, maropitant and metoclopramide in a low-dose cisplatin model of
nausea and vomiting in the dog: a blinded crossover study. BMC Vet Res 2017;
13: 244.
31 Tatewaki M, Strickland C, Fukuda H, et al. Effects of acupuncture on vasopressin-
induced emesis in conscious dogs. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2005;
288: R401–R408.
32 KuKanich B, Papich MG. Opioid analgesic drugs. In: Riviere JE, Papich MG, eds.
Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 9th edn. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell,
2009: 308–319.
33 Johnston KD. The potential for mu-opioid receptor agonists to be anti-emetic in
humans: a review of clinical data. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2010; 54: 132–140.
34 Muir WW III. General considerations for anesthesia. In: Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon
JC, Grimm KA, eds. Lumb and Jones’ Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia, 4th edn.
Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing, 2007: 13–14.
35 Apfel CC, Kranke P, Katz MH, et al. Volatile anaesthetics may be the main cause of
early but not delayed postoperative vomiting: a randomized controlled trial of fac-
torial design. Br J Anaesth 2002; 88: 659–668.
36 Gan TJ, Belani KG, Bergese S, et al. Fourth consensus guidelines for the manage-
ment of postoperative nausea and vomiting. Anesth Analg 2020; 131: 411–448.
37 Redondo García JI. Clinical evaluation of a new formulation of propofol in a
medium-chain and long-chain triglycerides emulsion in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
2007; 30: 288–294.
38 Muir WW III, Mason DE. Side effects of etomidate in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1989; 194: 1430–1434.
39 Hall LW, Chambers JP. A clinical trial of propofol infusion anaesthesia in dogs.
J Small Anim Pract 1987; 28: 623–637.
40 Tsai YC, Wang LY, Yeh LS. Clinical comparison of recovery from total intravenous
anesthesia with propofol and inhalation anesthesia with isoflurane in dogs. J Vet
Med Sci 2007; 69: 1179–1182.
41 Smith JA, Gaynor JS, Bednarski RM, et al. Adverse effects of administration of
propofol with various preanesthetic regimens in dogs. J Am Vet Assoc 1993; 202:
1111–1118.
42 Alfaxan® Multidose Package Insert (Pdf Version). https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/
dailymed/getFile.cfm?setid=2a8e4d17-3ff3-4aa3-a990-7cb012a3123a&type=pdf
(accessed February 2023).
43 Lerche P, Wiese A, Nelson L, et al. The cardiorespiratory and anesthetic effects of
clinical and supraclinical doses of alfaxalone in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009;
36: 42–54.
44 Muir W, Lerche P, Wiese A, et al. Cardiorespiratory and anesthetic effects of clini-
cal and supraclinical doses of alfaxalone in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008;
5: 451–462.
45 Vaha-Vahe T. Clinical evaluation of medetomidine, a novel sedative and analgesic
drug for dogs and cats. Acta Vet Scand 1989; 30: 267–273.
46 Cullen LK. Medetomidine sedation in dogs and cats: a review of its pharmacology,
antagonism and dose. Br Vet J 1996; 152: 519–535.
47 Sinclair MD. A review of the physiological effects of α2 - agonists related to the clini-
cal use of medetomidine in small animal practice. Can Vet J 2003; 44: 885–897.
48 Posner LP, Burns P. Sedative agents: tranquilizers, alpha-2 agonists and related
agents. In: Riviere JE, Papich MG, eds. Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics,
9th edn. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009: 344.
49 Granholm M, McKusick BC, Westerholm FC, et al. Evaluation of the clinical effi-
cacy and safety of dexmedetomidine or medetomidine in cats and their reversal
with atipamezole. Vet Anaesth Analg 2006; 33: 214–223.
50 Zoetis Dexdomitor® (Dexmedetomidine) Package Insert. https://www.zoetisus.com/
content/_assets/docs/Petcare/dexdomitor05-pi.pdf (accessed February 2023).
51 Lamont L, Burton S, Caines D, et al. Effects of 2 different medetomidine infusion
rates on selected neurohormonal and metabolic parameters in dogs. Can J Vet Res
2012; 76: 143–144.
52 van Oostrom H, Doornenbal A, Schot A, et al. Neurophysiological assessment of
the sedative and analgesic effects of a constant rate infusion of dexmedetomidine in
the dog. Vet J 2010; 190: 338–344.
53 Ansah OB, Raekallio M, Vainio O. Correlation between serum concentrations
following continuous intravenous infusion of dexmedetomidine or medetomi-
dine in cats and their sedative and analgesic effects. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2000;
23: 1–8.
54 Valverde A, Cantwell S, Hernández J, et al. Effects of acepromazine on the incidence
of vomiting associated with opioid administration in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2004;
31: 40–45.
55 Monteiro ER, Junior AR, Assis HMQ, et al. Comparative study on the sedative
effects of morphine, methadone, butorphanol or tramadol, in combination with
acepromazine, in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36: 25–33.
56 Ryan AC, Murrell JC, Gurney MA. Post-Operative Nausea and Vomiting (PONV)
observed in a clinical study designed to assess the analgesic effects of intravenous
and subcutaneous methadone in dogs. Vet J 2022; 287: 105876
57 Bini G, Vettorato E, De Gennaro C, et al. A retrospective comparison of two anal-
gesic strategies after uncomplicated tibial plateau levelling osteotomy in dogs. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2018; 45: 557–565.
58 Karaccas Y, Teixeira-Neto FJ, Giordano T, et al. Incidence of emesis after different
doses of morphine and the effects of three phenothiazine premedications on mor-
phine induced vomiting in dogs. Presented at the World Congress of Veterinary
Anaesthesiology, Santos, Brazil, September 12–16, 2006.
59 Bhalla RJ, Trimble TA, Leece EA, et al. Comparison of intramuscular butorphanol
and buprenorphine combined with dexmedetomidine for sedation in cats. J Feline
Med Surg 2018; 20: 325–331.
60 Matsubara LM, Oliva VN, Gabas DT, et al. Effect of lidocaine on the minimum
alveolar concentration of sevoflurane in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009;
36: 407–413.
61 McCarthy GC, Megalla SA, Habib AS. Impact of intravenous lidocaine infusion on
postoperative analgesia and recovery from surgery: a systematic review of rand-
omized controlled trials. Drugs 2010; 70: 1149–1163.
62 Marret E, Rolin M, Beaussier M, et al. Meta- analysis of intravenous lidocaine and
postoperative recovery after abdominal surgery. Br J Surg 2008; 95: 1331–1338.
63 Brioschi FA, Gioeni D, Jacchetti A, et al. Effect of metoclopramide on nausea and
emesis in dogs premedicated with morphine and dexmedetomidine. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2018; 45: 190–194.
64 Rau SE, Barber LG, Burgess KE. Efficacy of maropitant in the prevention of delayed
vomiting associated with administration of doxorubicin to dogs. J Vet Intern Med
2010; 24: 12–17.
65 de la Puente-Redondo VA, Tilt N, Rowan TG, et al. Efficacy of maropitant for treat-
ment and prevention of emesis caused by intravenous infusion of cisplatin in dogs.
Am J Vet Res 2007; 68: 48–56.
66 Santos LCP, Ludders JW, Erb HN, et al. A randomized, blinded, controlled trial of
the antiemetic effect of ondansetron on dexmedetomidine-induced emesis in cats.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38: 320–327.
67 Martin-Flores M, Mastrocco A, Lorenzutti AM, et al. Maropitant administered
orally 2–2.5 h prior to morphine and dexmedetomidine reduces the incidence of
emesis in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2017; 19: 876–879.
68 Hay-Kraus BL. Efficacy of maropitant in preventing vomiting in dogs premedicated
with hydromorphone. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40: 28–34.
69 Burke JE, Hess RS, Silverstein DC. Effectiveness of orally administered maropitant
and ondansetron in preventing preoperative emesis and nausea in healthy dogs pre-
medicated with a combination of hydromorphone, acepromazine, and glycopyrro-
late. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2021; 260: S40–S45.
70 Mathis A, Lee K, Alibhai HI. The use of maropitant to prevent vomiting induced by
epidural administration of preservative free morphine through an epidural catheter
in a dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38: 516–517.
71 Claude AK, Dedeaux A, Chiavaccini L, et al. Effects of maropitant citrate or ace-
promazine on the incidence of adverse events associated with hydromorphone pre-
medication in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2014; 28: 1414–1417.
72 Foth S, Meller S, Kenward H, et al. The use of ondansetron for the treatment of
nausea in dogs with vestibular syndrome. BMC Vet Res 2021; 17: 222.
73 Swallow A, Rioja E, Elmer T, et al. The effect of maropitant on intraoperative isoflu-
rane requirements and postoperative nausea and vomiting in dogs: a randomized
clinical trial. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44: 785–793.

-- 899 of 1450 --

884 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
74 Lotti F, Boscan P, Twedt D, et al. Effect of oral maropitant and omeprazole on
emesis, appetite and anesthesia recovery quality in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018;
45: 855.e9.
75 Hay-Kraus BL. Spotlight on the perioperative use of maropitant citrate. Vet Med
(Auckl) 2017; 8: 41–51.
76 Sharun K, Jambagi K, Arya M, et al. Clinical applications of substance p (neurokinin-
1 receptor) antagonist in canine medicine. Arch Razi Inst 2021; 76: 1175–1182.
77 Karanicolas PJ, Smith SE, Kanbur B, et al. The impact of prophylactic dexametha-
sone on nausea and vomiting after laparoscopic cholecystectomy: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Ann Surg 2008; 248: 751–762.
78 Topal A, Gül NY. Effects of dexamethasone, metoclopramide or acepromazine on
emesis in cats sedated with xylazine hydrochloride. Acta Vet Brno 2006; 75:
299–303.
79 Scallan EM, Simon BT. The effects of acupuncture point Pericardium 6 on
hydromorphone-induced nausea and vomiting in healthy dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg
2016; 43: 495–501.
80 Fass R, Boeckxstaens GE, El-Serag H, et al. Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease. Nat
Rev Dis Primers 2021; 7: 55.
81 Holloway RH. The anti-reflux barrier and mechanisms of gastro-oesophageal
reflux. Clin Gastroenterol 2000; 14: 681–699.
82 Cox MR, Martin CJ, Dent J, et al. Effect of general anaesthesia on transient lower
oesophageal sphincter relaxations in the dog. Aust N Z J Surg 1988; 58: 825–830.
83 Hershcovici T, Mashimo H, Fass R. The lower esophageal sphincter.
Neurogastroenterol Motil 2011; 23: 819–830.
84 Martin CJ, Dodds WJ, Liem HH, et al. Diaphragmatic contribution to gastroe-
sophageal competence and reflux in dogs. Am J Physiol 1992; 263: G551–G557.
85 Cotton BR, Smith G. The lower oesophageal sphincter and anaesthesia. Br J
Anaesth 1984; 56: 37–46.
86 Muenster M, Hoerauf A, Vieth M. Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease in 20 dogs
(2012 to 2014). J Small Anim Pract 2017; 58: 276–283.
87 Han E, Broussard J, Baer KE. Feline esophagitis secondary to gastroesophageal
reflux disease: clinical signs and radiographic, endoscopic, and histopathological
findings. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2003; 39: 161–167.
88 Washabau RJ. Esophagus. In: Washabau RJ, Day MJ, eds. Canine and Feline
Gastroenterology. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2013: 580–594.
89 Leib MS, Dinnel H, Ward DL, et al. Endoscopic balloon dilation of benign esopha-
geal strictures in dogs and cats. J Vet Intern Med 2001; 15: 547–552.
90 Shaver SL, Barbur LA, Jimenez DA, et al. Evaluation of gastroesophageal reflux in
anesthetized dogs with brachycephalic syndrome. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2017; 53:
24–31.
91 Freiche V, German AJ. Digestive diseases in brachycephalic dogs. Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 2021; 51: 61–78.
92 Eivers C, Rueda RC, Liuti T, et al. Retrospective analysis of esophageal imaging
features in brachycephalic versus non-brachycephalic dogs based on videofluoro-
scopic swallowing studies. J Vet Intern Med 2019; 33: 1740–1746.
93 Downing F, Gibson S. Anaesthesia of brachycephalic dogs. J Small Anim Pract
2018; 59: 725–733.
94 Gruenheid M, Aarnes TK, McLoughlin MA, et al. Risk of anesthesia-related com-
plications in brachycephalic dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2018; 253: 301–306.
95 Oda A, Wang WH, Hampton AK, et al. Perianesthetic mortality in English
Bulldogs: a retrospective analysis in 2010–2017. BMC Vet Res 2022; 18: 198.
96 Poncet CM, Dupré GP, Freiche VG, et al. Prevalence of gastrointestinal tract
lesions in 73 brachycephalic dogs with upper respiratory syndrome. J Small Anim
Pract 2005; 46: 273–279.
97 Grobman ME, Maitz CA, Reinero CR. Detection of silent reflux events by nuclear
scintigraphy in healthy dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2020; 34: 1432–1439.
98 Ogunnaike BO, Whitten CW. Gastrointestinal disorders. In: Barash PG, Cullen
BF, Stoelting RK, et al., eds. Clinical Anesthesia, 6th edn. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 2009: 1221–1228.
99 Open Anesthesia. Anesthetic Drugs Affecting Lower Esophageal Sphincter Tone.
https://www.openanesthesia.org/keywords/anesthetic-drugs-affecting-lower-
esophageal-sphincter-tone (accessed March 2023).
100 Strombeck DR, Harrold D. Effects of atropine, acepromazine, meperidine and
xylazine on gastroesophageal sphincter pressure in the dog. Am J Vet Res 1985; 46:
963–965.
101 Hall JA, Magne ML, Twedt DC. Effect of acepromazine, diazepam, fentanyl-
droperidol, and oxymorphone on gastroesophageal sphincter pressure in healthy
dogs. Am J Vet Res 1987; 48: 556–557.
102 Waterman AE, Hashim MA. Effects of thiopentone and propofol on lower
oesophageal sphincter and barrier pressure in the dog. J Small Anim Pract 1992;
33: 530–533.
103 van der Hoeven CW, Attia A, Deen L, et al. The influence of anaesthetic drugs on
the LOS in propofol/nitrous oxide anaesthetized dogs. Pressure profilometry in an
animal model. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1995; 39: 822–826.
104 Hashim MA, Waterman AE. Effect of acepromazine, pethidine and atropine pre-
medication on lower oesophageal sphincter pressure and barrier pressure in
anaesthetized cats. Vet Rec 1993; 133:158–160.
105 Hashim MA, Waterman AE. Effects of thiopentone, propofol, alphaxalone-
alphadolone, ketamine and xylazine-ketamine on lower oesophageal sphincter
pressure and barrier pressure in cats. Vet Rec 1991; 129: 137–139.
106 Hashim MA, Waterman AE, Pearson H. Effect of body position on oesophageal and
gastric pressures in the anaesthetized dog. J Small Anim Pract 1995; 36: 196–200.
107 Savvas I, Pavlidou K, Anagnostou T, et al. factors affecting intraoperative gastro-
oesophageal reflux in dogs and cats. Animals (Basel) 2022; 12: 247.
108 Savvas I, Raptopoulos D, Rallis T. A “light meal” three hours preoperatively
decreases the incidence of gastro-esophageal reflux in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 2016; 52: 357–363.
109 Savvas I, Rallia T, Raptopoulos D. The effect of pre-anaesthetic fasting time and
type of food on gastric content volume and acidity in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg
2009; 36: 539–546.
110 Galatos A, Raptopoulos D. Gastro-oesophageal reflux during anaesthesia in
the dog: the effect of preoperative fasting and premedication. Vet Rec 1995; 137:
479–483.
111 Savvas I, Raptopoulos D. Incidence of gastro-oesophageal reflux during
anaesthesia, following two different fasting times in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2000;
27: 54–62.
112 Wilson DV, Evans AT. Effect of a short preanesthetic fast on risk of gastroesopha-
geal reflux during anesthesia in dogs. Presented at the Annual Meeting of the
American College of Veterinary Anesthesiologists, Chicago, IL, September 12–13,
2006.
113 Tsompanidou P, Robben JH, Savvas I. The effect of the preoperative fasting regi-
men on the incidence of gastro-oesophageal reflux in 90 dogs. Animals (Basel)
2021; 12: 64.
114 Viskjer S, Sjöström L. Effect of the duration of food withholding prior to anesthe-
sia on gastroesophageal reflux and regurgitation in healthy dogs undergoing elec-
tive orthopedic surgery. Am J Vet Res 2017; 78: 144–150.
115 Anagnostou TL, Kazakos GM, I Savvas I, et al. Gastro-oesophageal reflux in large-
sized, deep-chested versus small-sized, barrel-chested dogs undergoing spinal
surgery in sternal recumbency. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44: 35–41.
116 Wilson DV. Peri-anesthetic gastroesophageal reflux. Presented at the International
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Symposium, Nashville, TN, September
14–18, 2011.
117 Galatos A, Raptopoulos D. Gastro-oesophageal reflux during anaesthesia in the
dog: the effect of age, positioning and type of surgical procedure. Vet Rec 1995;
137: 513–516.
118 Wilson DV, Boruta DT, Dhanjal JK, et al. The prevalence of anesthetic-related
gastroesophageal reflux during fracture repair in dogs. Presented at the American
College of Veterinary Anesthesia Autumn Conference, International Veterinary
Emergency and Critical Care Symposium, Phoenix, AZ, September 18–21, 2008.
119 Raptopoulos D, Galatos AD. Gastro-oesophageal reflux during anaesthesia
induced with either thiopentone or propofol in the dog. J Vet Anaesth 1997; 24:
20–21.
120 Garcia RS, Belafsky PC, Maggiore AD, et al. Prevalence of gastroesophageal reflux
in cats during anesthesia and effect of omeprazole on gastric pH. J Vet Intern Med
2017; 31: 734–742.
121 Sideri AI, Galatos AD, Gouletsou PG, et al. Gastro-oesophageal reflux during
anaesthesia in the cat: the effect of intra-abdominal surgery. Presented at the
Association of Veterinary Anaesthetists Autumn meeting, September 3rd–4th, 2010.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38: 1–28.
122 Galatos AD, Savas I, Prassinos NN, et al. Gastro-oesophageal reflux during thio-
pentone or propofol anaesthesia in the cat. J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med
2001; 48: 287–294.
123 Wilson DV, Evans AT, Miller R. Effects of preanesthetic administration of mor-
phine on gastroesophageal reflux and regurgitation during anesthesia in dogs. Am
J Vet Res 2005; 66: 386–390.
124 Wilson DV, Evans AT, Mauer WA. Pre-anesthetic meperidine: associated vomit-
ing and gastroesophageal reflux during the subsequent anesthetic in dogs. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2007; 34: 15–22.
125 Wilson DV, Boruta DT, Evans AT. Influence of halothane, isoflurane, and sevoflu-
rane on gastroesophageal reflux during anesthesia in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2006;
67: 1821–1825.
126 Costa RS, Wetmore LA, Stein A. Randomized, blinded, controlled clinical trial to
assess gastroesophageal reflux and regurgitation in dogs undergoing general anes-
thesia after hydromorphone premedication with or without acepromazine or dex-
medetomidine. Am J Vet Res 2021; 82: 695–700.
127 Flouraki ES, Savvas I, Kazakos G, et al. The effect of premedication on the inci-
dence of gastroesophageal reflux in 270 dogs undergoing general anesthesia.
Animals 2022; 12: 2667.

-- 900 of 1450 --

Chapter 41: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Gastrointestinal Disease 	885
128 Paterson WG, Rattan S, Goyal RK. Experimental induction of isolated lower
esophageal sphincter relaxation in anesthetized opossums. J Clin Invest 1986;
77: 1187–1193.
129 Leslie E, Bhargava V, Mittal RK. A novel pattern of longitudinal muscle contrac-
tion with subthreshold pharyngeal stimulus: a possible mechanism of lower
esophageal sphincter relaxation. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2012; 302:
G542–G547.
130 Sideri AI, Apostolos D, Galatos AD, et al. Gastro-oesophageal reflux during anaes-
thesia in the kitten: comparison between use of a laryngeal mask airway or an
endotracheal tube. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36: 547–554.
131 Lamata C, Loughton V, Jones M, et al. The risk of passive regurgitation during
general anaesthesia in a population of referred dogs in the UK. Vet Anaesth Analg
2012; 39: 266–274.
132 De Miguel García C, Pinchbeck GL, Dugdale A, et al. Retrospective study of the
risk factors and prevalence of regurgitation in dogs undergoing general anaesthe-
sia. Open Vet Sci J 2013; 7: 6–11.
133 Mansfield CS, Hyndman T. Gastric cytoprotective agents. In: Washabau RJ, Day
MJ, eds. Canine and Feline Gastroenterology. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier,
2013: 500–504.
134 Bersenas AME, Mathews KA, Allen DG, et al. Effects of ranitidine, famotidine,
pantoprazole, and omeprazole on intragastric pH in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2005;
66: 425–431.
135 Tolbert K, Bissett S, King A, et al. Efficacy of oral famotidine and 2 omeprazole
formulations for the control of intragastric pH in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2011;
25: 47–54.
136 Panti A, Bennett RC, Corletto F, et al. The effect of omeprazole on oesophageal pH
in dogs during anaesthesia. J Small Anim Pract 2009; 50: 540–544.
137 Lotti F, Twedt D, Warrit K, et al. Effect of two different pre-anaesthetic omeprazole
protocols on gastroesophageal reflux incidence and pH in dogs. J Small Anim
Pract 2021; 62: 677–682.
138 Lotti F, Boscan P, Twedt D, et al. Effect of maropitant, maropitant with omeprazole
and esophageal lavage on gastroesophageal reflux in anesthetized dogs. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2018; 45: 885e8–885e9.
139 Zacuto AC, Marks SL, Osborn J, et al. The influence of esomeprazole and cisap-
ride on gastroesophageal reflux during anesthesia in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2012;
26: 518–525.
140 Ogden J, Ovbey D, Saile K. Effects of preoperative cisapride on postoperative aspi-
ration pneumonia in dogs with laryngeal paralysis. J Small Anim Pract 2019; 60:
83–190.
141 Wilson DV, Evans AT, Mauer WA. Influence of metoclopramide on gastroesopha-
geal reflux in anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 2006; 67: 26–31.
142 Favarato ES, Souza MV, Costa PR, et al. Evaluation of metoclopramide and raniti-
dine on the prevention of gastroesophageal reflux episodes in anesthetized dogs.
Res Vet Sci 2012; 93: 466–467.
143 Jones CT, Fransson BA. Evaluation of the effectiveness of preoperative administra-
tion of maropitant citrate and metoclopramide hydrochloride in preventing post-
operative clinical gastroesophageal reflux in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2019; 255:
437–445.
144 Lotti F, Boscan P, Warrit K, et al. Strongly acidic gastroesophageal reflux and
esophageal lumen pH before and after esophageal lavage with water or two bicar-
bonate concentrations in anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 2022; 83: 1–5.
145 Wilson DV, Evans AT. The effect of topical treatment on esophageal pH during
acid reflux in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2007; 34: 339–343.
146 Allison A, Italiano M, Robinson R. Comparison of two topical treatments of
gastro-oesophageal regurgitation in dogs during general anaesthesia. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2020; 47: 672–675.
147 Practice guidelines for preoperative fasting and the use of pharmacologic agents to
reduce the risk of pulmonary aspiration: application to healthy patients undergoing
elective procedures. An updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists
Task Force on Preoperative fasting and the use of pharmacologic agents to reduce
the risk of pulmonary aspiration. Anesthesiology 2017; 126: 376–393.
148 Joshi GP, Abdelmalak BB, Weigel WA, et al. 2023 American Society of
Anesthesiologists practice guidelines for preoperative fasting: carbohydrate-
containing clear liquids with or without protein, chewing gum, and pediatric fast-
ing duration – a modular update of the 2017 American Society of Anesthesiologists
practice guidelines for preoperative fasting. Anesthesiology 2023; 138: 132–151.
149 Grubb T, Sager J, Gaynor JS, et al. 2020 American Animal Hospital Association
(AAHA) Anesthesia and monitoring guidelines for dogs and cats. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 2020; 56: 59–82.
150 Evander A, Little AG, Riddell RH, et al. Composition of the refluxed material
determines the degree of reflux esophagitis in the dog. Gastroenterology 1987;
93: 280–286.
151 Glazer A, Walters P. Esophagitis and esophageal strictures. Compend Contin Educ
Vet 2008; 30: 281–292.
152 Han E. Diagnosis and management of reflux esophagitis. Clin Tech Small Anim
Pract 2003; 18: 231–238.
153 Sellon RK, Willard MD. Esophagitis and esophageal strictures. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 2003; 33: 945–967.
154 Frowde PE, Battersby IA, Whitley NT, et al. Oesophageal disease in 33 cats. J Feline
Med Surg 2011; 13: 564–569.
155 Gal A, Ridgway MD, Fredrickson RL. An unusual clinical presentation of a dog
with gastrinoma. Can Vet J 2011; 52: 641–644.
156 Bissett SA, Davis J, Subler K, et al. Risk factors and outcome of bougienage for
treatment of benign esophageal strictures in dogs and cats: 28 cases (1995–2004).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2009; 235: 844–850.
157 Mazzei MJ, Bissett SA, Murphy KM, et al. Eosinophilic esophagitis in a dog. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 2009; 235: 61–65.
158 Pera J, Palma D, Donovan TA. Eosinophilic esophagitis in a kitten. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 2017; 53: 214–220.
159 Kouki MI, Papadimitriou SA, Psalla D, et al. Chronic gingivostomatitis with
esophagitis in cats. J Vet Intern Med 2017; 31: 1673–1679.
160 Adamama-Moraitou KK, Rallis TS, Prassinos NN, et al. Benign esophageal stric-
ture in the dog and cat: a retrospective study of 20 cases. Can J Vet Res 2002;
66: 55–59.
161 Kushner LI, Shofer FS. Incidence of esophageal strictures and esophagitis after
general anesthesia. Presented at the World Congress of Veterinary Anaesthesiology,
Knoxville, TN, September 17–20, 2003.
162 Anagnostou TL, Savvas I, Kazakos GM, et al. Effect of endogenous progesterone
and oestradiol-17β on the incidence of gastro-oesophageal reflux and on the bar-
rier pressure during general anaesthesia in the female dog. Vet Anaesth Analg
2009; 36: 308–318.
163 Wilson DV, Walshaw R. Postanesthetic esophageal dysfunction in 13 dogs. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 2004; 40: 455–460.
164 Adami C, Di Palma S, Gendron K, et al. Severe esophageal injuries occurring after
general anesthesia in two cats: case report and literature review. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 2011; 47: 436–442.
165 Janda M, Scheeren TWL, Nöldge-Schomburg GF. Management of pulmonary
aspiration. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2006; 20: 409–427.
166 Marik PE. Pulmonary aspiration syndromes. Curr Opin Pulm Med 2011;
17: 149–154.
167 Sherman R, Karagiannis M. Aspiration pneumonia in the dog: a review. Top
Companion Anim Med 2017; 3: 21–27.
168 Dear JD. Bacterial pneumonia in dogs and cats: an update. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 2020; 50: 447–465.
169 Schulze HM, Rahilly LJ. Aspiration pneumonia in dogs: pathophysiology, preven-
tion, and diagnosis. Compend Contin Educ Vet 2012; 34: E5.
170 Schulze HM, Rahilly LJ. Aspiration pneumonia in dogs: treatment, monitoring,
and prognosis. Compend Contin Educ Vet 2012; 34: E1.
171 Java MA, Drobatz KJ, Gilley RS, et al. Incidence of and risk factors for postopera-
tive pneumonia in dogs anesthetized for diagnosis or treatment of intervertebral
disk disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2009; 235: 281–287.
172 Alwood AJ, Brainard BM, LaFond E, et al. Postoperative pulmonary complica-
tions in dogs undergoing laparotomy: frequency, characterization and disease-
related risk factors. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2006; 16: 176–183.
173 Kogan DA, Johnson LR, Sturges BK, et al. Etiology and clinical outcome in dogs
with aspiration pneumonia: 88 cases (2004–2006). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008; 233:
1748–1755.
174 Wilson D, Monnet E. Risk factors for the development of aspiration pneumonia
after unilateral arytenoid lateralization in dogs with laryngeal paralysis: 232 cases
(1987–2012). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2016; 248: 188–194.
175 Krainer D, Gilles Dupré G. Brachycephalic obstructive airway syndrome. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 2022; 52: 749–780.
176 Tart KM, Babski DM, Lee JA. Potential risks, prognostic indicators, and diagnostic
and treatment modalities affecting survival in dogs with presumptive aspiration
pneumonia: 125 cases (2005–2008). J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2010; 20: 319–329.
177 Levy N, Ballegeer E, Koenigshof A. Clinical and radiographic findings in cats with
aspiration pneumonia: retrospective evaluation of 28 cases. J Small Anim Pract
2019; 60: 356–360.
178 Dear JD, Vernau W, Johnson EG, et al. Clinicopathologic and radiographic fea-
tures in 33 cats with aspiration and 26 cats with bronchopneumonia (2007–2017).
J Vet Intern Med 2021; 35: 480–489.
179 Baetge C, Cummings KJ, Deveau M. Reduced risk of pneumonia after changes in
anesthetic procedures for dogs receiving repeated anesthesia for radiation treat-
ment. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2019; 60: 241–245.
180 Moyer AL, McKee TS, Bergman PJ, et al. Low incidence of postoperative nausea,
vomiting, regurgitation, and aspiration pneumonia in geriatric dogs receiving
maropitant, famotidine, and fentanyl as part of an anesthesia protocol. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2021; 260: S46–S51.

-- 901 of 1450 --

886 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
181 Flecknell P. Analgesia and post-operative care. In: Laboratory Animal Anesthesia,
3rd edn. San Diego, CA: Elsevier Academic Press, 2009: 171–172.
182 Hawkins MG, Pascoe PJ. Anesthesia, analgesia and sedation of small mammals.
In: Quesenberry KE, Carpenter JW, eds. Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents Clinical
Medicine and Surgery, 3rd edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2012: 430–445.
183 Morton AJ, Blikslager AT. Surgical and postoperative factors influencing short-
term survival of horses following small intestinal resection: 92 cases (1994–2001).
Equine Vet J 2002; 34: 450–454.
184 Senior JM, Pinchbeck GL, Allister R, et al. Post anaesthetic colic in horses: a pre-
ventable complication? Equine Vet J 2006; 38: 479–484.
185 Mythen MG. Postoperative gastrointestinal tract dysfunction: an overview of
causes and management strategies. Cleve Clin J Med 2009; 76(Suppl 4): S66–S71.
186 Boysen S. GI motility and ileus in the ICU: should we be worried about it?
Presented at the European Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Congress,
Ghent, Belgium, June 6–8, 2019.
187 Warrit K, Boscan P, Ferguson LE, et al. Effect of hospitalization on gastrointestinal
motility and pH in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2017; 251: 65–70.
188 Sanderson JJ, Boysen SR, McMurray JM, et al. The effect of fasting on gastrointes-
tinal motility in healthy dogs as assessed by sonography. J Vet Emerg Crit Care
(San Antonio) 2017; 27: 645–650.
189 Healy TE, Foster GE, Evans EF, et al. Effect of some i.v. anaesthetic agents on
canine gastrointestinal motility. Br J Anaesth 1981; 53: 229–233.
190 Steinbrook RA. Epidural anesthesia and gastrointestinal motility. Anesth Analg
1998; 86: 837–844.
191 Nakamura K, Hara S, Tomizawa N. The effects of medetomidine and xylazine on
gastrointestinal motility and gastrin release in the dog. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1997;
20: 290–295.
192 Hsu WH, McNeel SV. Effect of yohimbine on xylazine-induced prolongation of
gastrointestinal transit in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1983; 183: 297–300.
193 Maugeri S, Ferrè JP, Intorre L, et al. Effects of medetomidine on intestinal and
colonic motility in the dog. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1994; 17: 148–154.
194 Boscan P, Van Hoogmoed LM, Farver TB, et al. Evaluation of the effects of the
opioid agonist morphine on gastrointestinal tract function in horses. Am J Vet Res
2006; 67: 992–997.
195 Washabau RJ. Small intestine: dysmotility. In: Washabau RJ, Day MJ, eds. Canine
and Feline Gastroenterology. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2013: 707–709.
196 Washabau RJ. Gastrointestinal motility disorders and gastrointestinal prokinetic
therapy. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2003; 33: 1007–1028.
197 Ali-Melkkilä T, Kanto J, Iisalo E. Pharmacokinetics and related pharmacodynam-
ics of anticholinergic drugs. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1993; 37: 633–642.
198 Eger EI II. Atropine, scopolamine, and related compounds. Anesthesiology 1962;
23: 365–383.
199 Burger DM, Wiestner T, Hubler M, et al. Effect of anticholinergics (atropine, glyco-
pyrrolate) and prokinetics (metoclopramide, cisapride) on gastric motility in Beagles
and Labrador Retrievers. J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med 2006; 53: 97–107.
200 Braun U, Gansohr B, Haessig M. Ultrasonographic evaluation of reticular motility
in cows after administration of atropine, scopolamine and xylazine. J Vet Med A
Physiol Pathol Clin Med 2002; 49: 299–302.
201 Teixeira-Neto FJ, McDonell WN, Black WD, et al. Effects of glycopyrrolate on
cardiorespiratory function in horses anesthetized with halothane and xylazine.
Am J Vet Res 2004; 65: 456–463.
202 Short, CE, Paddleford, RR, Cloyd GD. Glycopyrrolate for prevention of pulmo-
nary complications during anesthesia. Mod Vet Pract 1974; 55: 194–196.
203 DeHaven-Hudkins DL, DeHaven RN, Little PJ, et al. The involvement of the mu-
opioid receptor in gastrointestinal pathophysiology: therapeutic opportunities for
antagonism at this receptor. Pharmacol Ther 2008; 117: 162–187.
204 Nakayoshi T, Kawasaki N, Suzuki Y, et al. Epidural administration of morphine
facilitates time of appearance of first gastric interdigestive migrating complex in
dogs with paralytic ileus after open abdominal surgery. J Gastrointest Surg 2007;
11: 648–654.
205 Pöpping DM, Elia N, Van Aken HK, et al. Impact of epidural analgesia on mortal-
ity and morbidity after surgery: systematic review and meta-analysis of rand-
omized controlled trials. Ann Surg 2014; 259: 1056–1067.
206 Lubawski J, Saclarides T. Postoperative ileus: strategies for reduction. Ther Clin
Risk Manag 2008; 4: 913–917.
207 Yokoyama T, Kitazawa T, Takasaki K, et al. Recovery of gastrointestinal motility
from post-operative ileus in dogs: effects of Leu13-motilin (KW-5139) and PGF2
alpha. Neurogastroenterol Motil 1995; 7: 199–210.
208 Fages A, Soler C, Fernández-Salesa N, et al. Perioperative outcome in dogs undergo-
ing emergency abdominal surgery: a retrospective study on 82 cases (2018–2020).
Vet Sci 2021; 8: 209.
209 Boscan P, Cochran S, Monnet E, et al. Effect of prolonged general anesthesia with
sevoflurane and laparoscopic surgery on gastric and small bowel propulsive motil-
ity and pH in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2014; 41: 73–81.
210 Sido B, Teklote JR, Hartel M, et al. Inflammatory response after abdominal sur-
gery. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2004; 18: 439–454.
211 van Bree SH, Nemethova A, Cailotto C, et al. New therapeutic strategies for post-
operative ileus. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2012; 9: 675–683.
212 Vather R, Bissett I. Management of prolonged post-operative ileus: evidence-
based recommendations. Aust N Z J Surg 2013; 83: 319–324.
213 Hussain Z, Park H. Inflammation and impaired gut physiology in post-operative
ileus: mechanisms and the treatment options. J Neurogastroenterol Motil 2022;
28: 517–530.
214 Mazzotta E, Villalobos-Hernandez EC, Fiorda-Diaz J, et al. Postoperative ileus
and postoperative gastrointestinal tract dysfunction: pathogenic mechanisms and
novel treatment strategies beyond colorectal enhanced recovery after surgery pro-
tocols. Front Pharmacol 2020; 11: 583422.
215 Campoy C. Development of Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) protocols
in veterinary medicine through a one-health approach: the role of anesthesia and
locoregional techniques. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2022; 260: 1751–1759.
216 Yang J-W, Shao J-K, Wang Y. Effect of acupuncture on postoperative ileus after
laparoscopic elective colorectal surgery: a prospective, randomised, controlled
trial. E Clinical Medicine 2022; 49: 101472.
217 Kaye AD, Chernobylsky DJ, Thakur P. Dexmedetomidine in Enhanced Recovery
after Surgery (ERAS) protocols for postoperative pain. Curr Pain Headache Rep
2020; 24: 21.
218 Chen P- C, Lai C-H, Fang C-J, et al. Intravenous infusion of lidocaine for bowel
function recovery after major colorectal surgery: a critical appraisal through
updated meta-analysis, trial sequential analysis, certainty of evidence, and meta-
regression. Front Med (Lausanne) 2022; 8: 759215.
219 Cooke C, Kennedy ED, Foo I. Meta-analysis of the effect of perioperative intrave-
nous lidocaine on return of gastrointestinal function after colorectal surgery. Tech
Coloproctol 2019; 23: 15–24.
220 Leslie JB, Viscusi ER, Pergolizzi JV Jr., et al. Anesthetic routines: the anesthesiolo-
gist’s role in GI recovery and postoperative ileus. Adv Prev Med 2011; 2011:
976904.
221 Rimbäck G, Cassuto J, Tollesson PO. Treatment of postoperative paralytic ileus by
intravenous lidocaine infusion. Anesth Analg 1990; 70: 414–419.
222 Malone E, Ensink J, Turner T, et al. Intravenous continuous infusion of lidocaine
for treatment of equine ileus. Vet Surg 2006; 35: 60–66.
223 Psatha E, Alibhai H IK, Jimenez-Lozano A, et al. Clinical efficacy and cardiorespi-
ratory effects of alfaxalone, or diazepam/fentanyl for induction of anaesthesia in
dogs that are a poor anaesthetic risk. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38: 24–36.
224 Chan CM, Mitchell AL, Shorr AF. Etomidate is associated with mortality and
adrenal insufficiency in sepsis: a meta-analysis. Crit Care Med 2012;
40: 2945–2953.
225 Gu W-J, Wang F, Tang L, et al. Single-dose etomidate does not increase mortality
in patients with sepsis: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized con-
trolled trials and observational studies. Chest 2015; 147: 335–346.
226 Duke-Novakovski T, Carr A. Perioperative blood pressure control and manage-
ment. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2015; 45: 965–981.
227 Pansiritanachot W, Ruangsomboon O, Limsuwat C. Independent risk factors of
mortality in patients with sepsis receiving single-dose etomidate as an induction
agent during rapid sequence intubation in a large tertiary emergency department
in Thailand. BMC Emerg Med 2022; 22: 94.
228 Cagliani JA, Ruhemann A, Molmenti E, et al. Association between etomidate use
for rapid sequence intubation and adrenal insufficiency in sepsis. Cureus 2021; 13:
e13445.
229 Weiss B, Schiefenhövel F, Grunow JJ, et al. Infectious complications after etomi-
date vs. propofol for induction of general anesthesia in cardiac surgery – results of
a retrospective, before-after study. J Clin Med 2021; 10: 2908.
230 Qin B, Hu H, Cao B, et al. Effects of continuous infusion of etomidate at various
dose rates on adrenal function in dogs. BMC Anesthesiol 2016; 8: 2.
231 Jones TL, Calbay R, da Cunha AF, et al. Descriptive assessment of adverse events
associated with midazolam-etomidate versus saline-etomidate in healthy hydro-
morphone premedicated dogs. J Small Anim Pract 2021; 62: 437–441.
232 Martinez-Taboada F, Leece EA. Comparison of propofol with ketofol, a propofol-
ketamine admixture, for induction of anaesthesia in healthy dogs. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2014; 41: 575–582.
233 Ilkiw JE. Injectable anesthesia in dogs – Part 2: comparative pharmacology. In:
Gleed R, Ludders J, eds. Recent Advances in Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia:
Companion Animals, updated July 18, 2002.
234 Bughrara N, Cha S, Safa R, et al. Perioperative management of patients with sepsis
and septic shock, part 1 – systematic approach. Anesthesiol Clinics 2020;
38: 107–122.
235 Quandt J. Anesthesia in the critically ill patient. In: Silverstein DC, Hopper K, eds.
Small Animal Critical Care Medicine, 3rd edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier,
2023: 778–786.

-- 902 of 1450 --

Chapter 41: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Gastrointestinal Disease 	887
236 Murahata Y, Hikasa Y, Hayashi S, et al. The effect of remifentanil on the minimum
alveolar concentration (MAC) and MAC derivatives of sevoflurane in dogs. J Vet
Med Sci 2018; 80: 1086–1093.
237 Steagall PVM, Aucoin M, Monteiro BP, et al. Clinical effects of a constant rate
infusion of remifentanil, alone or in combination with ketamine, in cats anesthe-
tized with isoflurane. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2015; 246: 976–981.
238 Brown SM, Sneyd JR. Nitrous oxide in modern anaesthetic practice. BJA Educ
2016; 16: 87–91.
239 Jones RS, West E. Environmental sustainability in veterinary anaesthesia. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2019; 46: 409–420.
240 National Health Service Scotland, Centre for Sustainable Delivery. News Release,
NHS Scotland First In World To ‘Clean Up’ Anaesthetic Gases. https://www.
nhscfsd.co.uk/news/nhs-scotland-first-in-world-to-clean-up-anaesthetic-gases
(accessed March 2023).
241 Duke T. Partial intravenous anesthesia in cats and dogs. Can Vet J 2013;
54: 276–282.
242 Aguado D, Benito J, Gómez de Segura IA. Reduction of the minimum alveolar
concentration of isoflurane in dogs using a constant rate of infusion of lidocaine-
ketamine in combination with either morphine or fentanyl. Vet J 2011;
189: 63–66.
243 Muir WW III, Wiese AJ, March PA. Effects of morphine, lidocaine, ketamine, and
morphine-lidocaine-ketamine drug combination on minimum alveolar concen-
tration in dogs anesthetized with isoflurane. Am J Vet Res 2003; 64: 1155–1160.
244 Wilson J, Doherty TJ, Egger CM, et al. Effects of intravenous lidocaine, ketamine,
and the combination on the minimum alveolar concentration of sevoflurane in
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35: 289–296.
245 Quandt J. Analgesia and constant rate infusions. In: Silverstein DC, Hopper K,
eds. Small Animal Critical Care Medicine, 3rd edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders
Elsevier, 2023: 787–794.
246 Pypendop BH, Ilkiw JE. Assessment of the hemodynamic effects of lidocaine
administered IV in isoflurane-anesthetized cats. Am J Vet Res 2005; 66: 661–668.
247 Pascoe PJ. The cardiopulmonary effects of dexmedetomidine infusions in dogs
during isoflurane anesthesia. Vet Anaesth Analg 2015; 42: 360–368.
248 Pypendop BH, Barter LS, Stanley SD. Hemodynamic effects of dexmedetomidine
in isoflurane-anesthetized cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38: 555–567.
249 Pypendop BH. α-Agonists and antagonists. In: Silverstein DC, Hopper K, eds. Small
Animal Critical Care Medicine, 3rd edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2023: 905–910.
250 Ramos D, Benavente R, Torres DH, et al. Dexmedetomidine improves cardiovas-
cular and ventilatory outcomes in critically ill patients: basic and clinical
approaches. Front Pharmacol 2020; 10: 1641.
251 Portelaa DA, Verdierb N, Oterob PE. Regional anesthetic techniques for the pelvic
limb and abdominal wall in small animals: a review of the literature and technique
description. Vet J 2018; 238: 27–40.
252 Viderman D, Aubakirova M, Abdildin YG. Transversus abdominis plane block in
colorectal surgery: a meta-analysis. Front Med (Lausanne) 2022; 8: 802039.
253 Cavaco JS, Otero PO, Ambrósio AM, et al. Analgesic efficacy of ultrasound-
guided transversus abdominis plane block in dogs undergoing ovariectomy. Front
Vet Sci 2022; 9: 1031345.
254 Boysen SR, Kris Gommeren K. Assessment of volume status and fluid responsive-
ness in small animals. Front Vet Sci 2021; 8: 630643.
255 Montealegre F, Lyons BM. Fluid therapy in dogs and cats with sepsis. Front Vet Sci
2021; 8: 622127.
256 Cooper ES, Silverstein DC. Fluid therapy and the microcirculation in health and
critical illness. Front Vet Sci 2021; 8: 625708.
257 Smart L, Silverstein DC. The endothelial surface layer. In: Silverstein DC, Hopper
K, eds. Small Animal Critical Care Medicine, 3rd edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders
Elsevier, 2023: 55–60.
258 King LG. Postoperative complications and prognostic indicators in dogs and cats
with septic peritonitis: 23 cases (1989–1992). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1994; 204:
407–414.
259 Anderson T, Beever L, Hall J, et al. Outcome following surgery to treat septic peri-
tonitis in 95 cats in the United Kingdom. J Small Anim Pract 2021; 62: 744–749.
260 Valverde A. Fluid resuscitation for refractory hypotension. Front Vet Sci 2021;
8: 621696.
261 Murphy KM, Rishniw M, Silverstein DC. Use of vasopressors for treatment of
vasodilatory hypotension in dogs and cats by Diplomates of the American College
of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio)
2022; 32: 714–722.
262 Hart S, Silverstein DC. Catecholamines. In: Silverstein DC, Hopper K, eds. Small
Animal Critical Care Medicine, 3rd edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2023:
855–860.
263 Silverstein DC, Hart S. Vasopressin. In: Silverstein DC, Hopper K, eds. Small
Animal Critical Care Medicine, 3rd edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2023:
861–866.
264 Pang DS, Boysen S. Lactate in veterinary critical care: pathophysiology and man-
agement. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2007; 43: 270–279.
265 Mooney E, Raw C, Hughes D. Plasma lactate concentration as a prognostic bio-
marker in dogs with gastric dilation and volvulus. Top Companion Anim Med
2014; 29: 71–76.
266 Cortellini S, Seth M, Kellett-Gregory LM. Plasma lactate concentrations in septic
peritonitis: a retrospective study of 83 dogs (2007–2012). J Vet Emerg Crit Care
(San Antonio) 2015; 25: 388–395.
267 Parsons KJ, Owen LJ, Lee K, et al. A retrospective study of surgically treated cases
of septic peritonitis in the cat (2000–2007). J Small Anim Pract 2009;
50: 518–524.
268 Blutinger AL, Zollo AM, Weltman J, et al. Prospective evaluation of plasma lactate
parameters for prognosticating dogs with shock. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San
Antonio) 2021; 31(3): 351–359.
269 Kohen CJ, Hopper K, Kass PH, et al. Retrospective evaluation of the prognostic
utility of plasma lactate concentration, base deficit, pH, and anion gap in canine
and feline emergency patients. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2018;
28: 54–61.
270 Dalmagro TL, Teixeira-Neto FJ, Celeita-Rodrıguez N, et al. Comparison between
pulse pressure variation and systolic pressure variation measured from a periph-
eral artery for accurately predicting fluid responsiveness in mechanically venti-
lated dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48: 501–508.
271 Patel A, Nunnally ME. The septic patient. Anesthesiol Clin 2020; 38: 889–899.
272 MacDougall LM, Hethey JA, Livingston A, et al. Antinociceptive, cardiopulmo-
nary, and sedative effects of five intravenous infusion rates of lidocaine in con-
scious dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36: 512–522.
273 Bruchim Y, Itay S, Shira BH, et al. Evaluation of lidocaine treatment on frequency
of cardiac arrhythmias, acute kidney injury, and hospitalization time in dogs with
gastric dilatation volvulus. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2012; 22: 419–427.
274 Bellini L, Seymour CJ. Effect of intraoperative constant rate infusion of lidocaine
on short-term survival of dogs with septic peritonitis: 75 cases (2007–2011). J Am
Vet Med Assoc 2016; 248: 422–429.
275 Valtolina C, Robben JH, Uilenreef J, et al. Clinical evaluation of the efficacy and
safety of a constant rate infusion of dexmedetomidine for postoperative pain man-
agement in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36: 369–383.
276 PROSPECT. Procedure Specific Postoperative Pain Management. https://
esraeurope.org/prospect/ (accessed April 2023).
277 Chapman SJ, Garner JJ, Drake, TM. Systematic review and meta-analysis of non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs to improve GI recovery after colorectal surgery.
Dis Colon Rectum 2019; 62: 248–256.
278 Lin HC. Pain management for farm animals. In: Lin HC, Passler T, Clark-Price S,
eds. Farm Animal Anesthesia: Cattle, Small Ruminants, Camelids, and Pigs,
2nd edn. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, 2022: 215–219.
279 Robertson SA, Sanchez LC. Treatment of visceral pain in horses. Vet Clin North
Am Equine Pract 2010; 26: 603–617.
280 KuKanich B, Bidgood T, Knesl O. Clinical pharmacology of nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39: 69–90.
281 Lascelles BD, Court MH, Hardie EM, et al. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
in cats: a review. Vet Anaesth Analg 2007; 34: 228–250.
282 Papich MG. An update on nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in
small animals. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2008; 38: 1243–1266.
283 Monteiro B, Steagall PV. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. In: Silverstein
DC, Hopper K, eds. Small Animal Critical Care Medicine, 3rd edn. St. Louis, MO:
Elsevier, 2023: 911–918.
284 Smith SA, Roberts DJ, Lipson ME, et al. Postoperative nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drug use and intestinal anastomotic dehiscence: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Dis Colon Rectum 2016; 59: 1087–1097.
285 Washabau RJ. Esophagus, dysmotility. In: Washabau RJ, Day MJ, eds. Canine and
Feline Gastroenterology. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2013: 591–595.
286 Mace S, Shelton GD, Eddlestone S. Megaesophagus. Compend Contin Educ Vet
2012; 34: E1–E8.
287 Gaynor AR, Shofer FS, Washabau RJ. Risk factors for acquired megaesophagus in
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1997; 211: 1406–1412.
288 Forgash JT, Chang YM, Mittelman NS. Clinical features and outcome of acquired
myasthenia gravis in 94 dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2021; 35: 2315–2326.
289 Hague DW, Humphries HD, Mitchell MA, et al. Risk factors and outcomes in
cats with acquired myasthenia gravis (2001–2012). J Vet Intern Med 2015;
29: 1307–1312.
290 Gomes SA, Van Ham L, Van Ham A. Canine nonstructural megaesophagus as a
clinical sign of potential neurological disease: 99 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
2020; 56: 7–16.
291 Heinz JA, Mankin J, Pashmakova M. Transient megaesophagus following coral
snake envenomation in three dogs (2013–2018). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2020;
56: 320.

-- 903 of 1450 --

888 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
292 Hurley KJ, Mansfield C, VanHoutan IM, et al. A comparative analysis of two unre-
lated outbreaks in Latvia and Australia of acquired idiopathic megaesophagus in
dogs fed two brands of commercial dry dog foods: 398 cases (2014–2018). J Am
Vet Med Assoc 2021; 259: 172–183.
293 Daum P, Smelt J, Ibrahim IR. Perioperative management of myasthenia gravis.
BJA Educ 2021; 21: 414–419.
294 O’Neill DG, Case J, Boag AK, et al. Gastric dilation-volvulus in dogs attending UK
emergency-care veterinary practices: prevalence, risk factors and survival. J Small
Anim Pract 2017; 58: 629–638.
295 Glickman L, Glickman NW, Perez CM. Analysis of risk factors for gastric dilata-
tion and dilatation-volvulus in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1994; 204: 23–31.
296 Leary ML, Sinnott-Stutzman V. Spontaneous gastric dilatation-volvulus in two
cats. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2018; 28: 346–355.
297 Formaggini L, Schmidt K, Lorenzi D. Gastric dilatation-volvulus associated with
diaphragmatic hernia in three cats: clinical presentation, surgical treatment and
presumptive aetiology. J Feline Med Surg 2008; 10: 198–201.
298 Brockman DJ, Holt DE, Washabau RJ. Pathogenesis of acute canine gastric
dilatation-volvulus syndrome: is there a unifying hypothesis? Compend Contin
Educ Vet 2000; 22: 1108–1114.
299 Hall JA, Solie TN, Seim HB III, et al. Gastric myoelectric and motor activity
in dogs with gastric dilatation-volvulus. Am J Physiol 1993; 265(4 Pt 1):
G646–G653.
300 Hall JA, Willer RL, Solie TN, Twedt DC. Effect of circumcostal gastropexy on
gastric myoelectric and motor activity in dogs. J Small Anim Pract 1997;
38: 200–207.
301 Coleman KA, Boscan P, Ferguson L, et al. Evaluation of gastric motility in nine
dogs before and after prophylactic laparoscopic gastropexy: a pilot study. Aust Vet
J 2019; 97: 225–230.
302 Gazzola KM, Nelson LL. The relationship between gastrointestinal motility and
gastric dilatation-volvulus in dogs. Top Companion Anim Med 2014; 29: 64–66.
303 Washabau RJ, Hall JA. Stomach: obstruction. In: Washabau RJ, Day MJ, eds.
Canine and Feline Gastroenterology. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2013:
624–628.
304 Brockman DJ, Washabau RJ, Drobatz KJ. Canine gastric dilatation/volvulus syn-
drome in a veterinary critical care unit: 295 cases (1986–1992). J Am Vet Med
Assoc 1995; 207: 460–464.
305 Bell JS. Inherited and predisposing factors in the development of gastric dilatation
volvulus in dogs. Top Companion Anim Med 2014; 29: 60–63.
306 Rosselli D. Updated information on gastric dilatation and volvulus and gastropexy
in dogs. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2022; 52: 317–337.
307 de Battisti A, Toscano MJ, Formaggini L. Gastric foreign body as a risk factor
for gastric dilatation and volvulus in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2012;
241: 1190–1193.
308 Harkey MA, Villagran AM, Venkataraman GM, et al. Associations between gas-
tric dilatation-volvulus in Great Danes and specific alleles of the canine immune-
system genes DLA88, DRB1, and TLR5. Am J Vet Res 2017; 78: 934–945.
309 Hullar MAJ, Lampe JW, Torok-Storb BJ, et al. The canine gut microbiome is asso-
ciated with higher risk of gastric dilatation-volvulus and high risk genetic variants
of the immune system. PLOS ONE 2018; 13: e0197686.
310 Brourman JD, Schertel ER, Allen DA, et al. Factors associated with perioperative
mortality in dogs with surgically managed gastric dilatation-volvulus: 137 cases
(1988–1993). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1996; 208: 1855–1858.
311 Beck J, Staatz A, Pelsue D, et al. Risk factors associated with short-term outcome
and development of perioperative complications in dogs undergoing surgery
because of gastric dilatation-volvulus: 166 cases (1992–2003). J Am Vet Med Assoc
2006; 229: 1934–1939.
312 Buber T, Saragusty J, Ranen E, et al. Evaluation of lidocaine treatment and risk
factors for death associated with gastric dilatation and volvulus in dogs: 112 cases
(1997–2005). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2007; 230: 1334–1339.
313 Mackenzie G, Barnhart M, Kennedy S, et al. A retrospective study of factors influ-
encing survival following surgery for gastric dilatation-volvulus syndrome in 306
dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2010; 46: 97–102.
314 Song KK, Goldsmid SE, Lee J, et al. Retrospective analysis of 736 cases of canine
gastric dilatation volvulus. Aust Vet J 2020; 98: 232–238.
315 Sharp CR, Rozanski EA, Finn E, et al. The pattern of mortality in dogs with gastric
dilatation and volvulus. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2020; 30: 232–238.
316 Przywara JF, Abel SB, Peacock JT, et al. Occurrence and recurrence of gastric
dilatation with or without volvulus after incisional gastropexy. Can Vet J 2014;
55: 981–984.
317 Allen P, Paul A. Gastropexy for prevention of gastric dilatation-volvulus in dogs:
history and techniques. Top Companion Anim Med 2014; 29: 77–80.
318 Lantz GC, Badylak SF, Hiles MC, et al. Treatment of reperfusion injury in dogs
with experimentally induced gastric dilatation-volvulus. Am J Vet Res 1992;
53: 1594–1598.
319 Sharp CR, Rozanski EA. Cardiovascular and systemic effects of gastric dilatation
and volvulus in dogs. Top Companion Anim Med 2014; 29: 67–70.
320 Bruchim Y, Kelmer E. Postoperative management of dogs with gastric dilatation
and volvulus. Top Companion Anim Med 2014; 29: 81–85.
321 de Papp E, Drobatz KJ, Hughes D. Plasma lactate concentration as a predictor of
gastric necrosis and survival among dogs with gastric dilatation-volvulus: 102
cases (1995–1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1999; 215: 49–52.
322 Santoro Beer KA, Syring RS, Drobatz KJ. Evaluation of plasma lactate concentra-
tion and base excess at the time of hospital admission as predictors of gastric necro-
sis and outcome and correlation between those variables in dogs with gastric
dilatation-volvulus: 78 cases (2004–2009). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2013; 242: 54–58.
323 Rauserova-Lexmaulova L, Vanova-Uhrikova I, Rehakova K. Acid–Base, electro-
lyte and lactate abnormalities as well as gastric necrosis and survival in dogs with
gastric dilation-volvulus syndrome. A retrospective study in 75 dogs. Top
Companion Anim Med 2020; 39: 100403.
324 Millis DL, Hauptman JG, Fulton RB Jr. Abnormal hemostatic profiles and gastric
necrosis in canine gastric dilatation-volvulus. Vet Surg 1993; 22: 93–97.
325 Zacher LA, Berg J, Shaw SP, et al. Association between outcome and changes in
plasma lactate concentration during presurgical treatment in dogs with gastric
dilatation-volvulus: 64 cases (2002–2008). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2010; 236: 892–897.
326 Butler AL. Goal-directed therapy in small animal critical illness. Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 2011; 41: 817–838.
327 Rivers EP, Katranji M, Jaehne KA, et al. Early interventions in severe sepsis and
septic shock: a review of the evidence one decade later. Minerva Anestesiol 2012;
78: 712–724.
328 Mazzaferro E, Powell LL. Fluid therapy for the emergent small animal patient:
crystalloids, colloids, and albumin products. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
2022; 52: 781–796.
329 Levinson AT, Casserly BP, Levy MM. Reducing mortality in severe sepsis and sep-
tic shock. Semin Resp Crit Care Med 2011; 32: 195–205.
330 Balakrishnan A, Silverstein DC. Shock fluids and fluid challenge. In: Silverstein
DC, Hopper K, eds. Small Animal Critical Care Medicine, 3rd edn. St. Louis, MO:
Elsevier, 2023: 402–408.
331 Allen DA, Schertel ER, Muir WW III, et al. Hypertonic saline/dextran resuscita-
tion of dogs with experimentally induced gastric dilatation-volvulus shock. Am J
Vet Res 1991; 52: 92–96.
332 Schertel ER, Allen DA, Muir WW, et al. Evaluation of a hypertonic saline-dextran
solution for treatment of dogs with shock induced by gastric dilatation-volvulus. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 1997; 210: 226–230.
333 Muir WW, Lipowitz AJ. Cardiac dysrhythmias associated with gastric dilatation-
volvulus in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1978; 172: 683–689.
334 Cole S, Drobatz K. Emergency management and critical care. In: Tilley LP, Smith
FWK Jr., Oyama MA, Sleeper MM, eds. Manual of Canine and Feline Cardiology,
4th edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2008: 352.
335 Valverde A, Doherty TJ, Hernández J, et al. Effect of lidocaine on the minimum
alveolar concentration of isoflurane in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2004; 31: 264–271.
336 Cook VL, Jones Shults J, McDowell MR, et al. Anti-inflammatory effects of intra-
venously administered lidocaine hydrochloride on ischemia-injured jejunum in
horses. Am J Vet Res 2009; 70: 1259–1268.
337 Lahav M, Levite M, Bassani L, et al. Lidocaine inhibits secretion of IL-8 and IL-1β
and stimulates secretion of IL-1 receptor antagonist by epithelial cells. Clin Exp
Immunol 2002; 127: 226–233.
338 Yardeni IZ, Beilin B, Mayburd E, et al. The effect of perioperative intravenous
lidocaine on postoperative pain and immune function. Anesth Analg 2009; 109:
24–29.
339 Torfs S, Delesalle C, Dewulf J, et al. Risk factors for equine postoperative ileus and
effectiveness of prophylactic lidocaine. J Vet Intern Med 2009; 23: 606–611.
340 Durket E, Gillen A, Kittwitz J. Meta-analysis of the effects of lidocaine on postop-
erative reflux in the horse. Vet Surg 2020; 49: 44–52.
341 Kilgannon JH, Jones AE, Shapiro NI, et al. Association between arterial hyperoxia
following resuscitation from cardiac arrest and in-hospital mortality. J Am Med
Assoc 2010; 303: 2165–2171.
342 Badylak SF, Lantz GC, Jeffries M. Prevention of reperfusion injury in surgically
induced gastric dilatation-volvulus in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1990; 51: 294–299.
343 Lu C, Wang C, Xiao H, et al. Ethyl pyruvate: a newly discovered compound against
ischemia-reperfusion injury in multiple organs. Pharm Res 2021; 171: 105757.
344 Pratschke K. Approach to haemoabdomen in small animal patients. In Pract 2020;
42: 5–19.
345 Hall K, Drobatz K. Volume resuscitation in the acutely hemorrhaging patient: his-
toric use to current applications. Front Vet Sci 2021; 8: 638104.
346 Boyd C, Smart L. Hemorrhagic shock In: Silverstein DC, Hopper K, eds. Small
Animal Critical Care Medicine, 3rd edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2023: 422–427.
347 Vinayak A, Krahwinkel DJ. Managing blunt trauma-induced hemoperitoneum in
dogs and cats. Compend Contin Educ Vet 2004; 26: 276–291.

-- 904 of 1450 --

Chapter 41: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Gastrointestinal Disease 	889
348 Herold LV, Devey JJ, Kirby R, et al. Clinical evaluation and management of hemo-
peritoneum dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2008; 18: 40–53.
349 Hnatusko AL, Gicking JC, Lisciandro GR. Anaphylaxis-related hemoperitoneum
in 11 dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2021; 31: 80–85.
350 Moore EE, Moore HB, Kornblith LZ, et al. Trauma-induced coagulopathy. Nat Rev
Dis Primers 2021; 7: 30.
351 Herrero Y, Schefer RJ, Muri BM, et al. Prevalence of acute traumatic coagulopathy
in acutely traumatized dogs and association with clinical and laboratory parame-
ters at presentation. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2021; 34: 214–222.
352 Gottlieb DL, Prittie J, Buriko Y, et al. Evaluation of acute traumatic coagulopathy
in dogs and cats following blunt force trauma. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio)
2017; 27: 35–43.
353 Lux CN, Culp WTN, Mayhew PD, et al. Perioperative outcome in dogs with hemo-
peritoneum: 83 cases (2005–2010). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2013; 242: 1385–1391.
354 Culp WT, Weisse C, Kellogg ME, et al. Spontaneous hemoperitoneum in cats: 65
cases (1994–2006). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2010; 236: 978–982.
355 Mutter TC, Ruth CA, Dart AB. Hydroxyethyl starch (HES) versus other fluid thera-
pies: effects on kidney function. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013; 7: CD007594.
356 Haase N, Perner A, Hennings LI, et al. Hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.38–0.45 versus
crystalloid or albumin in patients with sepsis: systematic review with meta-
analysis and trial sequential analysis. BMJ 2013; 346: f839.
357 Boyd CJ, Sharp CR, Claus MA. Prospective randomized controlled blinded clini-
cal trial evaluating biomarkers of acute kidney injury following 6% hydroxyethyl
starch 130/0.4 or Hartmann’s solution in dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio)
2021; 31: 306–314.
358 Avgerinos DV, Theoharides TC. Mesenteric traction syndrome or gut in distress.
Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol 2005; 18: 195–199.
359 Olsen AO, Bazancir LA, Dahl S, et al. Mesenteric traction syndrome-incidence,
impact, and treatment: a systematic scoping review of the literature. Anaesth Crit
Care Pain Med 2023; 42: 101162.
360 Cândido TD, Teixeira-Neto FJ, Diniz MS, et al. Effects of a dexmedetomidine con-
stant rate infusion and atropine on changes in global perfusion variables induced
by hemorrhage followed by volume replacement in isoflurane-anesthetized dogs.
Am J Vet Res 2014; 75: 964–973.
361 Diniz MS, Teixeira-Neto FJ, Cândido TD, et al. Effects of dexmedetomidine on
pulse pressure variation changes induced by hemorrhage followed by volume
replacement in isoflurane-anesthetized dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio)
2014; 24: 681–692.
362 Selmic LE, Selting KA, Reagan JK. Cancer of the gastrointestinal tract. In: Vail
DM, Thamm DH, Liptak JM, eds. Withrow and McEwen’s Small Animal Clinical
Oncology, 6th edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2020: 452–468.
363 Willard MD. Alimentary neoplasia in geriatric dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 2012; 42: 693–706.
364 Matsuyama A. Gastrointestinal Neoplasia in Dogs and Cats, Merck Veterinary
Manual. 	https://www.merckvetmanual.com/digestive-system/diseases-of-the-
stomach-and-intestines-in-small-animals/gastrointestinal-neoplasia-in-dogs-
and-cats (accessed February 2023).
365 Minami T. Stomach neoplasia. In: Washabau RJ, Day MJ, eds. Canine and Feline
Gastroenterology. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2013: 634–637.
366 Bergman PJ. Small intestine neoplasia. In: Washabau RJ, Day MJ, eds. Canine and
Feline Gastroenterology. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2013: 710–714.
367 Washabau RJ, Hall JA. Large intestine. In: Washabau RJ, Day MJ, eds. Canine and
Feline Gastroenterology. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2013: 764–767.
368 Sahora A, Khanna C. Cellular growth/neoplasia. In: Washabau RJ, Day MJ, eds.
Canine and Feline Gastroenterology. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2013:
61–69.
369 Willard MD. Esophagus: neoplasia. In: Washabau RJ, Day MJ, eds. Canine and
Feline Gastroenterology. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2013: 595–598.
370 Tappin S, Brown P, Ferasin L. An intestinal neuroendocrine tumour associated
with paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia and melena in a 10-year-old Boxer. J
Small Anim Pract 2008; 49: 33–37.
371 Tripathi NK, Gregory CR, Latimer KS. Urinary system. In: Latimer KS, ed.
Duncan and Prasse’s Veterinary Laboratory Medicine: Clinical Pathology, 5th edn.
Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2011: 275.
372 Bailey DB. Paraneoplastic syndromes. In: Vail DM, Thamm DH, Liptak JM, eds.
Withrow and McEwen’s Small Animal Clinical Oncology, 6th edn. St. Louis, MO:
Saunders Elsevier, 2020: 98–112.
373 Elliott J. Paraneoplastic syndromes in dogs and cats. In Pract 2014; 36: 443–452.
374 Trow AV, Rozanski EA, Delaforcade AM, et al. Evaluation of use of human albu-
min in critically ill dogs: 73 cases (2003–2006). J Am Vet Assoc 2008; 233:
607–612.
375 Mathews KA, Barry M. The use of 25% human serum albumin: outcome and effi-
cacy in raising serum albumin and systemic blood pressure in critically ill dogs
and cats. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2005; 15: 110–118.
376 Mathews KA. The therapeutic use of 25% human serum albumin in critically ill
dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2008; 38: 595–605.
377 Francis AH, Martin LG, Haldorson GJ, et al. Adverse reactions suggestive of type
III hypersensitivity in six healthy dogs given human albumin. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2007; 230: 873–879.
378 Powell C, Thompson L, Murtaugh RJ. Type III hypersensitivity reaction with
immune complex deposition in 2 critically ill dogs administered human serum
albumin. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2013; 23: 598–604.
379 Sahagian MJ, Mastrocco A, Weltman JG, et al. Retrospective analysis of the use of
canine-specific albumin in 125 critically ill dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San
Antonio) 2023; 33: 192–200.
380 Trepanier LA. Pharmacologic management of feline hyperthyroidism. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 2007; 37: 775–788.
381 Collgros NC, Bray JP. Blood glucose monitoring during surgery in dogs to assess
completeness of surgical resection of insulinoma: 11 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2022; 261: 229–236.
382 Bentley AM, Otto CM, Shofer FS. Comparison of dogs with septic peritonitis:
1988–1993 versus 1999–2003. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2007; 17: 391–398.
383 Grimes JA, Schmiedt CW, Cornell KK, et al. Identification of risk factors for septic
peritonitis and failure to survive following gastrointestinal surgery in dogs. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 2011; 238: 486–494.
384 Gill S, Buote NJ, Peterson NW, et al. Factors associated with dehiscence and mor-
tality rates following gastrointestinal surgery in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2019;
255: 569–573.
385 Brady CA, Otto CM, Van Winkle TJ, et al. Severe sepsis in cats: 29 cases (1986–
1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000; 217: 531–535.
386 Costello MF, Drobatz KJ, Aronson LR, et al. Underlying cause, pathophysiologic
abnormalities, and response to treatment in cats with septic peritonitis: 51 cases
(1990–2001). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2004; 225: 897–902.
387 Ruthrauff CM, Smith J, Glerum L. Primary bacterial septic peritonitis in cats: 13
cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2009; 45: 268–276.
388 Scotti KM, Koenigshof A, Sri-Jayantha LSH, et al. Prognostic indicators in cats
with septic peritonitis (2002–2015): 83 cases. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio)
2019; 29: 647–652.
389 Anderson T, Beever L, Hall J, et al. Outcome following surgery to treat septic perito-
nitis in 95 cats in the United Kingdom. J Small Anim Pract 2021; 62: 744–749.
390 Culp WT, Holt DE. Septic peritonitis. Compend Contin Educ Vet 2010; 32: E1–E14.
391 Ragetly GR, Bennett RA, Ragetly CA. Septic peritonitis: etiology, pathophysiol-
ogy, and diagnosis. Compend Contin Educ Vet 2011; 33: E1–E6.
392 Culp WT, Zeldis TE, Reese MS, et al. Primary bacterial peritonitis in dogs and
cats: 24 cases (1990–2006). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2009; 234: 906–913.
393 Tart K. Peritonitis. In: Silverstein DC, Hopper K, eds. Small Animal Critical Care
Medicine, 3rd edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2023: 701–704.
394 Anderson, KL, Feeney DA. Diagnostic imaging of the gastrointestinal tract. In:
Washabau RJ, Day MJ, eds. Canine and Feline Gastroenterology. St. Louis, MO:
Saunders Elsevier, 2013: 205–244.
395 Levin GM, Bonczynski JJ, Ludwig LL, et al. Lactate as a diagnostic test for septic
peritoneal effusions in dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2004; 40: 364–371.
396 Kenney EM, Rozanski EA, Rush JE, et al. Association between outcome and organ
system dysfunction in dogs with sepsis: 114 cases (2003–2007). J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2010; 236: 83–87.
397 Bone RC, Sibbald WJ, Sprung CL. The ACCP-SCCM Consensus Conference on
sepsis and organ failure. Chest 1992; 101: 1480–1483.
398 Gyawali B, Ramakrishna K, Dhamoon AS. Sepsis: the evolution in definition,
pathophysiology, and management. SAGE Open Med 2019; 7: 1–13.
399 Nunnally ME. Sepsis for the anesthetist. Br J of Anaesth 2016; 117: iii44–iii51.
400 Lambden S, Creagh-Brown BC, Hunt J, et al. Definitions and pathophysiology of
vasoplegic shock. Critical Care 2018; 2: 174.
401 Singer M, Deutschman CS, Seymour CW. The third international consensus defi-
nitions for sepsis and septic shock (Sepsis-3). JAMA 2016; 315: 801–810.
402 Boller EM, Silverstein DC. Sepsis and septic shock. In: Silverstein DC, Hopper K,
eds. Small Animal Critical Care Medicine, 3rd edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2023:
519–526.
403 Rank K, Hansen B. SIRS, MODS, and sepsis. In: Silverstein DC, Hopper K, eds. Small
Animal Critical Care Medicine, 3rd edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2023: 42–48.
404 Purvis D, Kirby R. Systemic inflammatory response syndrome: septic shock. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 1994; 24: 1225–1247.
405 Hardie EM. Life threatening bacterial infection. Compen Cont Educ Pract Vet
1995; 17: 763–778.
406 Hotchkiss RS, Monneret G, Payen D. Sepsis-induced immunosuppression: from
cellular dysfunctions to immunotherapy. Nat Rev Immunol 2013; 13: 862–874.
407 Montealegre-Golcher F. Surviving Sepsis in Veterinary Medicine. https://www.
isvma.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/SurvivingsepsisinVeterinary-Medicine.
pdf (accessed March 2023).

-- 905 of 1450 --

890 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
408 Deitch EA. Gut- origin sepsis: evolution of a concept. Surgeon 2012; 10: 350–356.
409 Assimakopoulos SF, Triantos C, Thomopoulos K, et al. Gut-origin sepsis in the
critically ill patient: pathophysiology and treatment. Infection 2018; 46: 751–760.
410 Adelman MW, Woodworth MH, Langelier C, et al. The gut microbiome’s role in
the development, maintenance, and outcomes of sepsis. Critical Care 2020;
24: 278.
411 Walters AM, O’Brien MA, Selmic LE. Comparison of clinical findings between
dogs with suspected anaphylaxis and dogs with confirmed sepsis. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2017; 251: 681–688.
412 Lambden S, Laterre PF, Levy MM, et al. The SOFA score-development, utility and
challenges of accurate assessment in clinical trials. Critical Care 2019; 23: 374.
413 Troìa R, Mascalzoni G, Calipa S, et al. Multiorgan dysfunction syndrome in feline
sepsis: prevalence and prognostic implication. J Feline Med Surg 2019; 21: 559–565.
414 Hayes G, Mathews K, Doig G, et al. The Acute Patient Physiologic and Laboratory
Evaluation (APPLE) score: a severity of illness stratification system for hospital-
ized dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2010; 24: 1034–1047.
415 Hayes G, Mathews K, Doig G, et al. The Feline Acute Patient Physiologic and
Laboratory Evaluation (Feline APPLE) Score: a severity of illness stratification
system for hospitalized cats. J Vet Intern Med 2011; 25: 26–38.
416 Summers AM, Vezzi N, Gravelyn T, et al. Clinical features and outcome of septic
shock in dogs: 37 Cases (2008–2015). J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2021;
31: 360–370.
417 Osgood AM, Hollenbeck D, Yankin I. Evaluation of quick sequential organ failure
scores in dogs with severe sepsis and septic shock. J Small Anim Pract 2022;
63: 739–746.
418 Ortolani JM, Bellis TJ. Evaluation of the quick Sequential Organ Failure Assessment
score plus lactate in critically ill dogs. J Small Anim Pract 2021; 62: 874–880.
419 Babyak JM, Sharp CR. Epidemiology of systemic inflammatory response syn-
drome and sepsis in cats hospitalized in a veterinary teaching hospital. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2016; 249: 65–71.
420 Evans L, Rhodes A, Alhazzani W, et al. Surviving sepsis campaign: international
guidelines for management of sepsis and septic shock. Intensive Care Med 2021;
47: 1181–1247.
421 Surviving Sepsis Campaign Website. www.sccm.org/SurvivingSepsisCampaign/
Home (accessed April 2023).
422 Dellinger RP, Rhodes A, Evans L, et al. Surviving Sepsis Campaign. Crit Care Med
2023; 51: 431–444.
423 Conti-Patara A, de Araújo Caldeira J, de Mattos-Junior E, et al. Changes in tissue
perfusion parameters in dogs with severe sepsis/septic shock in response to goal-
directed hemodynamic optimization at admission to ICU and the relation to out-
come. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2012; 22: 409–418.
424 Kuttab HI, Lykins JD, Hughes MD, et al. Evaluation and predictors of fluid resus-
citation in patients with severe sepsis and septic shock. Crit Care Med 2019;
47: 1582–1590.
425 Shapiro NI, Douglas IS, Brower RG, et al. Early restrictive or liberal fluid manage-
ment for sepsis-induced hypotension. N Engl J Med 2023; 388: 499–510.
426 Messina A, Robba C, Calabrò L, et al. Perioperative liberal versus restrictive fluid
strategies and postoperative outcomes: a systematic review and metanalysis on
randomised-controlled trials in major abdominal elective surgery. Crit Care 2021;
25: 205.
427 Stephens R, Mythen M. Resuscitation fluids and hyperchloraemic metabolic aci-
dosis. Trauma 2003; 5: 141–143.
428 Sigrist NE, Kälin N, Dreyfus A. Effects of hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.4 on serum
creatinine concentration and development of acute kidney injury in nonazotemic
cats. J Vet Intern Med 2017; 31: 1749–1756.
429 Smart L, Hughes D. The effects of resuscitative fluid therapy on the endothelial
surface layer. Front Vet Sci 2021; 8: 661660.
430 Milford EM, Reade MC. Resuscitation fluid choices to preserve the endothelial
glycocalyx. Crit Care 2019; 23: 77.
431 Woodcock TE, Michel CC. Advances in the starling principle and microvascular
fluid exchange; consequences and implications for fluid therapy. Front Vet Sci
2021; 8: 623671.
432 Adamik K- N, Yozova ID. Colloids Yes or No? - a “Gretchen Question” Answered.
Front Vet Sci 2021; 8: 624049.
433 Centola SJ. Colloid solutions. In: Silverstein DC, Hopper K, eds. Small Animal
Critical Care Medicine, 3rd edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2023: 391–395.
434 Macdonald S, Bosio E, Shapiro NI, et al. No association between intravenous fluid
volume and endothelial glycocalyx shedding in patients undergoing resuscitation
for sepsis in the emergency department. Sci Rep 2022; 12: 8733.
435 Hippensteel JA, Uchimido R, Tyler PD, et al. Intravenous fluid resuscitation is asso-
ciated with septic endothelial glycocalyx degradation. Crit Care 2019; 23: 259.
436 Martin LG. Critical illness-related corticosteroid insufficiency in small animals.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2011; 41: 767–782.
437 Peyton JL, Burkitt JM. Critical illness-related corticosteroid insufficiency in a dog
with septic shock. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2009; 19: 262–268.
438 Marchetti M, Pierini A, Favilla G, et al. Critical illness-related corticosteroid
insufficiency in dogs with systemic inflammatory response syndrome: a pilot
study in 21 dogs. Vet J 2021; 273: 105677.
439 Annane D, Bellissant E, Bollaert PE, et al. Corticosteroids for treating sepsis in
children and adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2019; 12: CD002243.
440 Summers AM, Culler C, Yaxley PE, et al. Retrospective evaluation of the use of
hydrocortisone for treatment of suspected critical illness-related corticosteroid
insufficiency (CIRCI) in dogs with septic shock (2010–2017): 47 cases. J Vet
Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2021; 31: 371–379.
441 Chen L, Liang X, Tan X, et al. Safety and efficacy of combined use of propofol and
etomidate for sedation during gastroscopy: systematic review and meta-analysis.
Med (Baltimore) 2019; 98: e15712.
442 Hopper K. Mechanical ventilation-core concepts. In: Silverstein DC, Hopper K,
eds. Small Animal Critical Care Medicine, 3rd edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2023:
185–192.
443 Kan T, Hess RS, Clarke DL. Clinical findings and patient outcomes following sur-
gical treatment of chronic gastrointestinal FB obstructions in dogs and cats:
72 cases (2010–2020). Can J Vet Res 2022; 86: 311–315.
444 Hobday MM, Pachtinger GE, Drobatz KJ, et al. Linear versus non-linear gastroin-
testinal foreign bodies in 499 dogs: clinical presentation, management and short-
term outcome. J Small Anim Pract 2014; 55: 560–565.
445 Hayes G. Gastrointestinal foreign bodies in dogs and cats: a retrospective study of
208 cases. J Small Anim Pract 2009; 50: 576–583.
446 Larose PC, Singh A, Giuffrida MA, et al. Clinical findings and outcomes of
153 dogs surgically treated for intestinal intussusceptions. Vet Surg 2020;
49: 870–878.
447 Burkitt JM, Drobatz KJ, Saunders HM, et al. Signalment, history, and outcome of
cats with gastrointestinal tract intussusception: 20 cases (1986–2000). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2009; 234: 771–776.

-- 906 of 1450 --

Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of Lumb and Jones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
891
Introduction
The endocrine system plays an important role in homeostasis through
secretion of hormones that function in metabolism, growth,
reproduction, and digestion. In patients with endocrine disorders, an
understanding of the physiology and pathophysiology of the disease
process is imperative to provide adequate perianesthetic management.
The endocrine system regulates the secretion of hormones from
several peripheral organs under the direction of the hypothalamus
together with the hypophysis (pituitary gland) (Fig. 42.1). Hormones
are substances secreted into the circulation in small amounts to
produce a biologic effect at distant target organs or cells. Hormones
may be proteins (corticotropin, growth hormone, and insulin),
peptides (oxytocin and vasopressin), steroids (glucocorticoids,
mineralocorticoids, and sex hormones), or amines (dopamine,
melatonin, and epinephrine). Other hypothalamic hormones
include oxytocin, and prolactin-releasing hormone, while other
pituitary hormones include gonadotropin (GH), somatostatin,
prolactin, luteinizing hormone, and follicle-stimulating hormone.
Anatomy and physiology
The hypothalamus is a small area located in the ventral aspect of the
diencephalon flanking each side of the third ventricle, almost
directly above the caudal pharynx. In addition to endocrine control
of metabolism, growth, and reproduction, the hypothalamus helps
to coordinate other vital aspects of mammalian physiology
including the autonomic nervous system, behavior, emotion, and
digestion [1]. A physiologic stress response may be activated during
sedation, anesthesia, or following noxious stimuli ultimately
activating the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis [2]. Activation
of this axis leads to release of cortisol and catecholamines from the
adrenal gland resulting in increases in heart rate, blood pressure,
and systemic vascular resistance. Increases in metabolic rate, oxygen
consumption, and hyperglycemia, as well as release of cytokines,
vasopressin, and insulin also occur [2].
The pituitary gland is located just below the hypothalamus. It has
two main lobes, distinct in both anatomic composition and
function: the adenohypophysis or anterior pituitary (AP) and the
neurohypophysis or posterior pituitary (PP).
The AP functions like a true endocrine gland, producing and
secreting peptide and glycoprotein hormones that target the
pancreas, thyroid gland, adrenal glands, reproductive organs, and
the intestine. These hormones regulate various cellular processes
including growth, metabolism, reproduction, and response to stress.
The AP has three distinct areas – the pars tuberalis, the pars
intermedia, and the pars distalis. Hypothalamic-releasing hormones,
such as thyrotropin-releasing hormone and corticotropin-releasing
hormone, regulate AP hormonal secretion. Once the hypothalamic
hormones reach their target cells in the AP, they may stimulate or
inhibit the synthesis and secretion of AP hormones (e.g., thyroid-
stimulating hormone [TSH]).
The PP is primarily a conduit between the hypothalamus and
the peripheral circulation. It is composed of the pars nervosa and
42 Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic
Management of Patients with Endocrine
Disease
Renata S. Costa1 , Teela Jones2 and Thomas K. Graves3
1 Section of Anaesthesia and Analgesia, School of Veterinary Medicine, Murdoch University, Murdoch, Western Australia, Australia
2 Summit Veterinary Referral Center, Tacoma, Washington, USA
3 Professor and Dean Emeritus, College of Veterinary Medicine, Midwestern University, Glendale, Arizona, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 891
Anatomy and physiology, 891
Adrenal gland, 893
Hypoadrenocorticism, 893
Hyperadrenocorticism, 895
Pheochromocytoma, 898
Pancreas and kidney, 900
Diabetes mellitus, 901
Diabetes insipidus, 904
Insulinoma, 906
Pancreatitis, 908
Thyroid gland, 908
Hypothyroidism, 908
Hyperthyroidism, 909
Thyroid neoplasia, 912
Parathyroid gland, 913
Hyperparathyroidism, 914
References, 915

-- 907 of 1450 --

5. 	1.
8.
Negative
feedback on AP
and
hypothalamus
Glucocorticoid
(cortisol) release
Mineralocorticoid
(aldosterone)
release
Na + and Cl –
reabsorption; K +
excretion
Plasma expansion
6.
Adrenal gland
1.
2.
3.
4. 5.
7.
6.
8.
TSH release from AP TRH
TSH
CRH
ACTH
ADH
ACTH release from AP
ADH
Water reabsorption
↑ Calcium
↑
↓
Calcium
↑
↑ glycogenesis, ↑
gluconeogenesis in
liver
Normal blood glucose
Blood glucose 	↑ Blood glucose
Glucose uptake
into fat cells
Pancreatic β cells
to release insulin
Pancreatic α cells
to release glucagon
Pancreas
Parathyroid hormone secretion
Renal vitamin D
activation
Intestinal calcium
resorption
Calcium
Renal
calcium
retention
Bone resorption of
calcium
Negative
feedback
4.
T3 and T4 release 	Calcitonin secretion
Inhibits renal
and intestinal
calcium
reabsorption
Promotes
deposition of
calcium into
bones
Calcium
Thyroid
Parathyroid
↑
Figure 42.1 Summary of important hormones in the hypothalamic–pituitary axis, target tissues, and physiologic responses [1–3]. 1. Hypothalamus; 2. Anterior pituitary gland (AP); 3. Posterior
pituitary gland; 4. Parathyroid gland; 5. Thyroid gland; 6. Pancreas; 7. Kidney; 8. Adrenal gland. TRH, thyrotropin-releasing hormone; CRH, corticotropin-releasing hormone; ADH, antidiuretic
hormone; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone (thyrotropin); ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone (corticotropin); PTH, parathyroid hormone. Source: Dr. Teela Jones; with permission.

-- 908 of 1450 --

Chapter 42: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Endocrine Disease 	893
infundibular stalk. Axons in the supraoptic and paraventricular
nuclei of the hypothalamus extend into the pars nervosa.
Hormones that are produced by the hypothalamus, such as
oxytocin and vasopressin, are secreted into the peripheral
circulation by these specialized neurosecretory cells [1]. In
contrast to the AP that produces hormones that stimulate the
production of other hormones, the PP secretes hormones that
directly affect target tissues [1]. For example, vasopressin or
antidiuretic hormone (ADH) acts on the kidneys to control water
reabsorption.
Relevant anatomy, physiology, and pathophysiology of common
endocrine disorders affecting the adrenal gland, pancreas, kidney,
thyroid gland, and parathyroid glands are described below. Specific
anesthetic considerations and appropriate perianesthetic manage-
ment of small animals presenting with endocrinopathies are also
discussed.
Adrenal gland
The two adrenal glands are located retroperitoneally; each gland is
craniomedial to the kidney. They are composed of a central medulla
and outer cortex. The medulla is densely innervated with pregangli-
onic sympathetic fibers and is considered part of the autonomic
nervous system. Its main cell type, the chromaffin cell, produces
epinephrine and norepinephrine, which are important in emergent
and stressful circumstances [3]. The adrenal cortex is an important
endocrine organ with three distinct zones (zona glomerulosa, zona
fasciculata, and zona reticularis). The zona glomerulosa is the most
superficial, and it secretes mineralocorticoids, mainly aldosterone.
Deep to this area is the zona fasciculata, which secretes glucocorti-
coid hormones, primarily cortisol in the dog and cat. The deepest
zone of the adrenal cortex is the zona reticularis, which secretes sex
hormones (Fig. 42.2) [3].
Aldosterone, secreted by the zona glomerulosa, stimulates
sodium and chloride reabsorption and potassium excretion in the
cortical collecting ducts of the renal tubules. Because water follows
sodium, it is also reabsorbed, which promotes plasma volume
expansion [4]. Cortisol, secreted by the zona fasciculata, affects
endothelial integrity, vascular permeability, and sensitivity to
catecholamines, ultimately regulating vascular tone and blood
pressure. Cortisol is also involved in the modulation of inflammation
by 	stabilizing 	lysosomal 	membranes, 	decreasing 	leukocyte
migration, reducing capillary permeability, and altering circulating
leukocyte levels and antibody production.
Hypoadrenocorticism
Diminished 	function 	of 	the 	adrenal 	cortex 	resulting 	in
glucocorticoid and/or mineralocorticoid deficiency produces
hypoadrenocorticism or Addison’s disease. Dogs with Addison’s
disease are usually presented for complications associated with
deficiency of both aldosterone and cortisol. However, a form of the
disease characterized by signs of cortisol deficiency only (“atypical”
hypoadrenocorticism) has been recognized [5].
Primary hypoadrenocorticism due to failure of the adrenal gland
is the most common form of the disease and most likely occurs due
to immune-mediated destruction of the adrenal cortex [6,7]. Causes
of secondary hypoadrenocorticism include lack of production of
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) by the pituitary gland,
iatrogenic disease following treatment for hyperadrenocorticism, or
when high-dose steroid therapy is abruptly withdrawn. Tertiary
hypoadrenocorticism 	caused 	by 	hypothalamic 	malfunction
also exists.
Hypoadrenocorticism occurs most often in young- to middle-
aged female dogs (median age 4 years). Most commonly affected
purebred dogs include Standard Poodles, West Highland White
Terriers, Great Danes, Rottweilers, and Portuguese Water Dogs.
There are no known breed predilections in cats, but most are also
middle-aged at the time of diagnosis [8].
Clinical presentation
Clinical signs of hypoadrenocorticism are usually non-specific and
may include anorexia, lethargy, vomiting, diarrhea, weight loss, and
polyuria/polydipsia (PU/PD). Whenever a patient, especially a
middle- aged female dog, is presented with vague gastrointestinal
clinical signs and/or lethargy, Addison’s disease should be sus-
pected. Signs of the disease range from mild to severe, and those
patients presenting in an acute Addisonian crisis are at risk of death.
Glucocorticoid deficiency is responsible for many of the vague,
chronic, waxing and waning clinical signs. Mineralocorticoid (e.g.,
aldosterone) deficiency leads to potassium retention and urinary
sodium and water loss. Hyperkalemia due to potassium retention
can lead to myocardial excitability, muscle weakness, inability to
Zona glomerulosa
Zona fasciculata
Zona reticularis
Cortex
Medulla
Mineralocorticoid
and glucocorticoid
production
Androgen
production
Catecholamine
production
Figure 42.2 Diagrammatic cross-section of the adrenal gland [3]. Source: Dr. Teela Jones; with permission.

-- 909 of 1450 --

894 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
retain bicarbonate and chloride, and loss of renal concentrating
ability. Impaired sodium retention can result in decreased
extracellular fluid and plasma volume, low cardiac output, and
impaired renal blood flow. When severe, these changes result in
dehydration, azotemia, hypotension, bradycardia, collapse, and
hypovolemic shock.
Clinical pathology
Anemia, lymphocytosis, or eosinophilia may be present on a
complete blood count (CBC). The lack of a stress leukogram in an
ill patient should also lead the clinician to suspect glucocorticoid
deficiency and possibly hypoadrenocorticism [9].
Serum biochemistry findings can include hyperkalemia and
hyponatremia (Na+
:K+ < 27:1), hypoalbuminemia, mild hypercalce-
mia, and, in dehydrated patients, prerenal azotemia due to decreased
blood flow to the kidneys [9]. Even though the azotemia is prerenal
in origin, a low urine specific gravity (i.e., < 1.030 in the dog and
< 1.040 in the cat) may be evident owing to the inability to retain
sodium [10,11]. Mild to moderate hypoglycemia may also be
apparent in some animals. This is mainly due to decreased levels of
glucocorticoid resulting in a reduction of gluconeogenesis and an
increased sensitivity to insulin.
Diagnosis and treatment
Definitive diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism requires measurement
of serum concentrations of cortisol before and after stimulation with
ACTH [12]; however, the CBC and serum biochemistry findings
listed above are helpful when a diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism is
suspected. Once the diagnosis is made, treatment carries a good
prognosis [6,7,13].
Dogs and cats in non-critical condition are treated with miner-
alocorticoid and glucocorticoid supplementation. Mineralocorticoid
treatment can be with injectable desoxycorticosterone pivalate
(DOCP) or oral fludrocortisone. Fludrocortisone has mild
glucocorticoid activity; thus, glucocorticoid supplementation is not
always needed. Patients treated with DOCP should also receive low
maintenance doses of a glucocorticoid.
Addisonian patients in adrenal crisis require intravenous (IV)
fluid therapy and monitoring of electrolytes. Normal saline ([Na+
]
154 mEq/L) is commonly administered for the initial treatment to
replace circulatory volume and sodium deficits [10,11]. However,
sodium concentrations should be raised gradually, not exceeding
0.5 mEq/kg/h, to avoid neurological signs caused by osmotic demy-
elination syndrome [14,15]. Note that the most appropriate fluid or
fluid combination to administer should be based on each animal’s
baseline sodium concentration. In cases of severe hyponatremia, a
balanced electrolyte solution such as Lactated Ringer’s solution
(LRS) ([Na+
] 130 mEq/L) may be a more appropriate treatment.
Although balanced electrolyte solutions such as LRS contain potas-
sium (4 mEq/L), it appears that fluid resuscitation and the increase
in glomerular filtration rate alone will still initiate kaliuresis [11].
Another important aspect of stabilization of an animal in
Addisonian crisis is evaluation of the electrocardiogram (ECG) and
management of hyperkalemia if necessary. Common treatments for
life-threatening hyperkalemia include administration of IV calcium
gluconate (as a cardioprotective agent) and dextrose, insulin, and
sodium bicarbonate (to lower serum potassium) [16]. Suggested
management of hyperkalemia is presented in Table 42.1.
Dexamethasone, 0.25 mg/kg IV, can be administered before the
completion of the ACTH stimulation test [16]. Hydrocortisone and
prednisolone cross-react with some cortisol assays and should be
withheld until after ACTH stimulation testing is complete.
Anesthetic considerations and management
Unstable or poorly controlled animals with hypoadrenocorticism
may require anesthesia for emergency procedures. These animals
must be evaluated for hyperkalemia and hyponatremia, prerenal
azotemia, hypovolemia and hypotension, metabolic acidosis, and
hypoglycemia [17–19]. These abnormalities should be managed
prior to anesthesia. A baseline blood pressure and ECG should
also be obtained. Goal-directed volume replacement can be
accomplished with IV isotonic crystalloids, and this may be
adequate to correct electrolyte abnormalities and stabilize vascular
volume and blood pressure. Electrocardiography may show
evidence of hyperkalemia including tall, narrow T waves, pro-
longed QRS complexes, and atrial standstill, usually when serum
concentrations exceed 5.5 mEq/L, although this is variable [20]. If
hyperkalemia persists, especially if bradycardia and/or arrhythmias
are present, specific therapy as described in the previous section is
warranted. After initial stabilization, sedation and anesthesia are
performed utilizing balanced anesthetic protocols and multimodal
analgesia. Premedication with intravenous opioids is commonly
Table 42.1 Suggested management of hyperkalemia.
Treatment 	Dose 	Mechanism 	Comments
Replacement crystalloid fluids 	Shock dose (dogs 90 mL/kg; cats 60 mL/kg)
in aliquots of ⅓ of total dose based on
patient reassessment
Correction of hypovolemia, dilution of
K+, and diuresis
K + in balanced crystalloids has not been
reported to exacerbate hyperkalemia
Calcium gluconate 10%
solution
0.5–1.5 mL/kg IV over 10–20 min 	Increases cardiac myocyte threshold
potential, restores normal gradient
between threshold potential and resting
membrane potential, reduces
myocardial irritability
Monitor ECG and slow/discontinue if
bradycardia or arrhythmias occur
Does not lower K +
; antagonizes effect of
hyperkalemia on myocardium
Rapid onset of action
Regular insulin followed by
dextrose
0.2–0.5 U/kg insulin IV followed by 4 mL
dextrose (12.5–25%) IV per unit of insulin
Insulin stimulates transport of glucose
and K + into cells
Rapid onset of action
Monitor blood glucose levels
Dextrose 	0.5–1 mL/kg IV bolus followed by dextrose
(2.5%–5%) IV CRI
May stimulate endogenous insulin
secretion
Monitor blood glucose levels
Sodium bicarbonate 	1–3 mEq/kg IV over 30 min 	Corrects metabolic acidosis; promotes
K + uptake into cell in exchange for H+
via Na+
-K+ ATPase
Reserved for severe metabolic acidosis;
controversial as first-line therapy
CRI, constant rate infusion.
Source: Koenig [4]; Lathan and Thompson [16]; Kintzer and Peterson [17]; Stafford and Bartges [18]; Koenig [19].

-- 910 of 1450 --

Chapter 42: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Endocrine Disease 	895
recommended. Butorphanol is often administered for non-painful
procedures, whereas full μ-opioid receptor agonists are preferred
for invasive or painful procedures. In these cases, short-acting full
μ-opioid receptor agonists may also be administered as a constant
rate infusion (CRI) to provide analgesia, dose-dependent sedation,
and minimum alveolar concentration (MAC)-sparing effects.
Anesthesia may be induced with drugs such as propofol, alfaxalone,
ketamine–benzodiazepine, and other combinations such as
propofol and midazolam. It is important to note that induction of
anesthesia with etomidate is usually avoided in animals with
hypoadrenocorticism, especially when critically ill, as cortisol
synthesis may be depressed from inhibition of 11β-hydroxylase in
dogs and cats [21–26].
Many animals with hypoadrenocorticism will undergo anesthesia
for surgical procedures unrelated to the disease and have been
previously managed with medical therapy at the time of
surgery [2,17]. The choice of anesthetic protocol in these patients is
not as critical as the perioperative medical management. However,
anesthetic protocol selection should reflect the patient’s health
status and stability, and procedure being performed. Provision of
locoregional anesthesia whenever possible is recommended due to
desirable effects such as reliable analgesia, decreased systemic drug
requirements, and MAC-sparing effects, which may help maintain
normal blood pressure intraoperatively. Even for animals with well-
controlled hypoadrenocorticism, it is recommended to assess
hydration status, blood pressure, and ECG prior to anesthesia.
The normal mineralocorticoid supplementation regimen of
animals with Addison’s disease undergoing anesthesia should be
continued. Glucocorticoid doses, however, may require adjustment
because these animals have inappropriate responses to stressful
situations including hospitalization, surgery, and anesthesia. In
addition 	to 	baseline 	steroid 	therapy, 	several 	preoperative
glucocorticoid supplementation protocols have been recommended
for people with hypoadrenocorticism to prevent adrenal crisis and
refractory hypotension in the perioperative period [27]. There have
been no studies proving the benefits of additional preoperative
steroid supplementation in dogs undergoing surgery; however, it
has been suggested that prednisone is doubled the day before and
1–2 days following the stressful event [16]. Recommended doses of
glucocorticoids include 0.1–0.5 mg/kg of dexamethasone sodium
phosphate IV or up to 1–2 mg/kg of prednisolone sodium succinate
IV, with lower doses repeated as necessary [4,28]. Postoperatively,
additional glucocorticoids are administered as needed.
Due to the negative fluid balance and electrolyte abnormalities,
hypotension is a common intraoperative complication of animals
with hypoadrenocorticism. Addisonian patients may not respond
adequately to basic interventions or may present in hypovolemic
shock; therefore, advanced monitoring techniques including invasive
(direct) blood pressure may be beneficial. If invasive blood pressure
is measured, variation in the amplitude of the systolic pressure
waveform during positive-pressure ventilation may be seen when
hypovolemia is present [29]. A balanced electrolyte solution should
be administered intraoperatively at a rate of 5–10 mL/kg/h. This
rate should be adjusted or supplemental boluses administered
depending on the patient’s hydration status [27,30]. Positive ino-
tropes may also be necessary to maintain adequate blood pressure
intraoperatively [27,30]. As previously discussed, insufficient
glucocorticoid secretion may result in cardiovascular consequences
including hypotension. Although there is little evidence in veterinary
medicine, hypotension refractory to vasopressor administration has
been successfully treated with hydrocortisone in a dog [31].
Hyperadrenocorticism
Excess 	circulating 	concentrations 	of 	cortisol 	produces
hyperadrenocorticism (HAC) or Cushing’s syndrome [32]. In
80–85% of spontaneous or naturally occurring cases, the disease is
due to increased secretion of ACTH from a pituitary tumor, usually
an adenoma of the corticotropes in the pars distalis of the pituitary,
resulting in bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasia and excessive
cortisol 	secretion. 	This 	is 	known 	as 	“pituitary-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism.” Albeit less common, a cortisol-secreting
tumor of the adrenal gland can also lead to hyperadrenocorticism.
Chronic administration of glucocorticoids may result in iatrogenic
Cushing’s syndrome [33,34].
Spontaneous HAC generally occurs in middle-aged and older
dogs. Although the literature is conflicting, female and neutered dogs
appear to be at a higher risk [35]. Any purebred or mixed-breed dog
can be affected, but Standard Schnauzers and Fox Terriers appear to
be predisposed. Although this chapter focuses on small animal
patients, it is important to note that HAC is also a common endocrine
disease of older horses and ponies and is referred to as “pituitary pars
intermedia dysfunction” (PPID) [36]. There is no sex predilection,
and the incidence has been reported as 15–30% in older horses [37].
Clinical presentation
Clinical signs of dogs with hyperadrenocorticism include bilaterally
symmetrical alopecia, comedones, recurrent skin infections, thin
skin, dermal hyperpigmentation, dermal and muscle atrophy, PU/
PD, polyphagia, pendulous abdomen, hepatomegaly, panting,
hypertension, and lethargy (Fig. 42.3) [32]. Albeit not common,
large pituitary tumors can result in neurological signs.
The clinical signs observed are due to the increased circulating
concentrations of cortisol. Cortisol stimulates gluconeogenesis, pro-
tein and fat catabolism, leading to redistribution of adipose tissue
both dorsally and within the abdomen and the resultant pendulous
abdomen. Polyuria occurs because cortisol inhibits ADH release.
Systemic hypertension may occur due to increased vascular respon-
siveness to catecholamines, increased activation of the renin–angio-
tensin system and increased angiotensin II, and decreased release of
vasodilatory prostaglandins and hyperaldosteronism [38,39].
Clinical pathology
Findings on CBC are non-specific, however, dogs with HAC often
exhibit changes consistent with a stress leukogram (neutrophilia,
monocytosis, lymphopenia, and eosinopenia) [32].
Serum 	biochemistry 	findings 	include 	increased 	alkaline
phosphatase (ALP) activity in 90% or more of cases, increased
alanine aminotransferase (ALT) activity, hypercholesterolemia, and
hyperglycemia [32,40]. ALP activity increases as a result of a steroid-
induced isoform of the enzyme. This steroid-induced ALP isoform
has not been demonstrated in cats. Hyperglycemia may be due to
increased 	gluconeogenesis 	and 	decreased 	peripheral 	tissue
utilization through insulin antagonists [38]. Excess glucocorticoid
secretion may result in concurrent diabetes mellitus characterized
by insulin resistance [41]. Serum phosphorus may be decreased due
to polyuria. Urinalysis typically reveals low urine specific gravity
with or without mild proteinuria. Concurrent urinary tract infection
is common in dogs with HAC [42].
Diagnosis and treatment
The diagnosis of HAC should be based on history and clinical find-
ings and can be confirmed by one or a combination of the following
screening tests: ACTH stimulation test, low-dose dexamethasone

-- 911 of 1450 --

896 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
suppression test (LDDS), urine cortisol:creatinine ratio (UCCR),
and dexamethasone-suppressed UCCR [43,44]. According to some
reports, the diagnostic accuracies of the dexamethasone-suppressed
UCCR and LDDS are greater than that of the ACTH stimulation
test and may, therefore, be preferred [45]. In addition to screening
tests for HAC, tests to differentiate the cause of the condition are
also recommended. High-dose dexamethasone suppression test can
confirm pituitary-dependent HAC, and adrenal tumors can be
investigated by abdominal ultrasound. Diagnostic imaging modali-
ties such as computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) can confirm the presence of a pituitary tumor.
Most canine patients with pituitary-dependent disease are treated
with the adrenocorticostatic drug, trilostane. Trilostane causes
reversible, 	competitive 	inhibition 	of 	the 	3β-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase enzyme necessary for the production of cortisol,
aldosterone, 	and 	androgens 	in 	the 	adrenal 	cortex. 	The
adrencorticolytic drug, mitotane, is still prescribed in some
cases [46,47]. Mitotane causes necrosis of the deeper zones of the
adrenal cortex, sparing the superficial mineralocorticoid-producing
zone. Both treatments can precipitate an acute Addisonian crisis
(see hypoadrenocorticism).
In addition to medical management, surgical resection of tumors
by transsphenoidal hypophysectomy [48] or adrenalectomy [49]
has been successful. For elective procedures, animals should be
treated with trilostane for 3–4 weeks prior to surgery in an effort to
reverse the metabolic derangements of HAC and minimize the risk
of complications associated with adrenalectomy [50]. Treating HAC
in cats is challenging and less predictable. Optimal treatments for
HAC in cats have not been established [51].
Animals with HAC are predisposed to hypertension [52], which
should be managed with antihypertensive drugs such as angiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, in conjunction with trilostane
or mitotane prior to surgery [2,53]. Hypertension may lead to
cardiac changes including pressure and volume overload, left
ventricular hypertrophy, and congestive heart failure. Persistent
high blood pressure can cause kidney injury, and volume
overload may occur due to renal sodium retention and increased
circulating volume. Hypercoagulability and subsequent pulmonary
thromboembolism resulting from excess production of vitamin
K- dependent clotting factors is a potentially life-threatening
complication of HAC [38]. However, it appears that only a small
subset of dogs with HAC develop thrombosis and current guidelines
only support antithrombotic therapy (i.e., heparin and clopidogrel)
if HAC is accompanied by other risk factors for thrombosis [54].
Anesthetic considerations
Dogs with pituitary-dependent HAC often require anesthesia for
other concurrent diseases [2], elective procedures, and diagnostic
imaging. These animals should be carefully evaluated and stabilized
prior to sedation or any anesthetic event. A CBC and serum
biochemistry are recommended to assess hydration status,
electrolytes, and hepatic and renal function, especially when dealing
with geriatric patients. A thorough physical examination should be
performed and baseline blood pressure measured to determine if
concurrent hypertension is present.
When adrenal neoplasia is suspected, the extent of local vascular
invasion is usually determined with abdominal ultrasound and/or
CT prior to the surgical procedure. Animals with cortisol-secreting
adrenocortical tumors may undergo adrenalectomy [17]. Blood
type should be determined and a crossmatch performed if the ani-
mal is to undergo an invasive procedure such as an adrenalectomy,
especially if the tumor is in close proximity to or is invading the
aorta or vena cava. Blood or packed red blood cells (RBCs) should
be 	available 	as 	excessive 	intraoperative 	hemorrhage 	may
occur [55,56].
Animals with HAC may be prothrombotic and hypercoagulable
and if hypercoagulability is suspected, thromboelastography (TEG)
can help guide the most appropriate treatment perioperatively.
When an antithrombotic agent is being administered, clotting times
should also be evaluated. Measurement of activated partial throm-
boplastin time (aPTT) may be indicated to ensure that the patient
is receiving an appropriate dose and is not at increased risk for
excessive bleeding during surgery. The goal is an (aPTT) that is
increased by no more than 1.5–2-fold [2,55,57–59].
If the patient is hypertensive and the planned procedure is elec-
tive, it should be postponed until this comorbidity is further
(A) 	(B)
Figure 42.3 A. Mixed-breed dog diagnosed with hyperadrenocorticism and diabetes mellitus with alopecia and abdominal distension. Patient is
placed on a conductive heating device and is being preoxygenated in preparation for induction of anesthesia. Source: Dr. Tanya Duke-Novakovski; with
permission. B. Mixed-breed dog with diabetes mellitus and hyperadrenocorticism exhibiting classic signs of pendulous abdomen, organomegaly, and
panting. Source: Dr. Renata S. Costa, with permission.

-- 912 of 1450 --

Chapter 42: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Endocrine Disease 	897
assessed and managed. Hypertensive dogs may be treated with ACE
inhibitors and, although there have been no studies investigating
the effects of withholding these agents prior to anesthesia, a study
with 12 healthy female Beagle dogs receiving oral enalapril 90 min
prior to isoflurane anesthesia showed an increase in the severity of
intraoperative hypotension [60]. Therefore, some anesthesiologists
discontinue ACE inhibitors 24 h prior to the scheduled procedure.
Animals with Cushing’s syndrome, even those undergoing medi-
cal management, may develop PU/PD. Reduced total water intake
attributed to both the stress of an unusual environment and fasting
could result in rapid dehydration in those animals. Hydration status
should be carefully assessed using both physical examination and
laboratory parameters (e.g., capillary refill time, mucous membrane
color, skin turgor, heart rate, blood pressure, and PCV/TS). Goal-
directed perianesthetic fluid therapy should be instituted to prevent
or treat dehydration and hypotension [2].
Animals treated with mitotane or trilostane may lack functional
adrenocortical reserve, and their lower cortisol levels may impair
their ability to handle stressful anesthetic or surgical events appro-
priately. These cases should be managed as iatrogenic Addisonians
and may require preoperative glucocorticoid supplementation with
0.1–0.2 mg/kg of dexamethasone sodium phosphate IV [4,28]. In
addition, serum sodium and potassium concentrations should be
monitored in these patients [2,16].
Anesthetic management
No specific anesthetic protocol is contraindicated for patients with
Cushing’s syndrome; however, drug choices should be based on the
patient’s health status and concurrent comorbidities. Patients may
be geriatric and/or in poor condition and lethargy is common [2];
therefore, intense sedation may not be required. The anesthesiologist
should aim to select drugs and dosages that allow for a smooth and
quick recovery to promote movement within 4 h of surgery to
improve blood flow. This is particularly important when thrombosis
is a concern [52].
Opioids are generally administered to provide analgesia and
because they induce minimal dose-dependent cardiorespiratory
effects. Sedatives and tranquilizers may not be needed, but a
benzodiazepine or a low dose of acepromazine may be administered
in conjunction with the opioid. Note that acepromazine may result
in worsening of intraoperative hypotension due to its vasodilatory
effects, especially in dogs managed with antihypertensive drugs;
thus, the authors usually reserve its administration to otherwise
healthy but nervous animals. α2
- Adrenergic receptor agonists
inhibit pancreatic β-cells resulting in a transient increase in blood
glucose [61–63]. Although their use is unlikely to cause clinically
relevant adverse effects, there are no published, evidence-based
guidelines for use of α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists in animals
with HAC or diabetes mellitus. As pain and stress will also result
in a physiological and transient increase in blood glucose, a
balanced anesthetic protocol is recommended. If α2
- adrenergic
receptor agonists are used in patients with concurrent diabetes
mellitus, judicious use of additional insulin is warranted to avoid
hypoglycemia once the effects of the α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists
have waned.
For patients undergoing adrenalectomies, administration of
hydrocortisone 2 mg/kg IV or dexamethasone 0.07–0.2 mg/kg IV
has 	been 	recommended 	immediately 	after 	induction 	of
anesthesia 	[64,65]. 	Administration 	of 	non-steroidal 	anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) is often avoided in HAC patients
owing to the potential risk of gastrointestinal ulceration,
nephropathy, and hepatopathy in dogs with high endogenous
cortisol concentrations [2,66,67]. Use of NSAIDs must be carefully
considered based on how well-controlled the disease is, the patient’s
clinical signs and cortisol levels, and potential concurrent renal or
hepatic disease.
If a dog with uncontrolled HAC and hypertension presents for an
emergency procedure, a balanced anesthetic and multimodal
analgesic protocol may reduce fluctuations in blood pressure
intraoperatively. Additionally, as in cases of pheochromocytomas,
sodium nitroprusside, β-adrenergic blockers, magnesium sulfate, or
increasing inhalant concentrations may be used to control
fluctuations 	in 	heart 	rate 	and 	blood 	pressure 	(see
pheochromocytoma) [68].
Animals with HAC often have thin skin and fragile veins, which
may present challenges for intravenous catheterization. They may
also have delayed primary wound healing and should be handled
gently. Minimal hair clipping is advised to reduce the risk of skin
trauma, which could become a source of infection, and to minimize
heat loss. However, there is limited evidence demonstrating the cor-
relation 	of 	area 	shaved 	and 	rectal 	temperature 	during
anesthesia [69].
Preoxygenation is indicated prior to induction, especially in
patients with large pendulous abdomens (Fig. 42.3A). Studies in
healthy patients have demonstrated prolongation of the time to
desaturation when oxygen is supplemented via face mask [70,71].
Dogs with HAC commonly hypoventilate during anesthesia due to
increased 	abdominal 	fat, 	hepatomegaly, 	respiratory 	muscle
weakness, and bladder distension [2]. Hypoventilation and poor
respiratory function may lead to ventilation–perfusion mismatch,
atelectasis, hypercapnia, and respiratory acidosis. Hypoxemia may
result if oxygen is not supplemented, especially during recovery.
These animals may also develop pulmonary mineralization and
pulmonary thromboembolism [38,72–74]. Animals with HAC may
also be more prone to developing hypothermia under anesthesia
due to muscle and dermal atrophy and alopecia. During anesthesia,
ventilatory support is often required using intermittent positive-
pressure ventilation, especially in animals positioned in dorsal
recumbency. Close monitoring of ventilation and oxygenation via
end-tidal carbon dioxide, pulse oximetry, and/or arterial blood gas
analysis is warranted. In the postoperative period, ventilation and
hemoglobin saturation should continue to be monitored, especially
if the animal is hypothermic. Severe hypothermia decreases cellular
metabolism and lowers carbon dioxide production, resulting in
diminished stimulation of ventilation and reduced respiratory
rate and tidal volume [75]. Rewarming results in increased
metabolic rate and oxygen consumption [76,77]; thus, oxygen
supplementation is recommended. Temperature should be monitored
and supplemental warming devices employed, but care must be
taken to avoid thermal burns.
Blood pressure should be monitored, and direct measurement via
an arterial line is recommended for animals anesthetized for inva-
sive procedures such as an adrenalectomy due to the high risk of
hemorrhage [2,27]. Furthermore, when an enlarged abdomen and/
or hepatomegaly is present, venous return to the heart may be com-
promised, which could result in intraoperative hypotension.
Hypotension may be exacerbated by the presence of hypovolemia,
the use of positive-pressure ventilation, and positioning in dorsal
recumbency [29].
Following adrenalectomy, especially with invasion of the vena
cava, animals are at even greater risk of thromboembolic
complications in recovery. Based on the rational use of

-- 913 of 1450 --

898 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
antithrombotics 	in 	veterinary 	critical 	care 	(CURATIVE)
guidelines [54], antithrombotic drugs should not be discontinued
prior to invasive procedures in animals at high risk for thrombosis;
however, these drugs may be withheld in animals at low-to-
moderate risk for thrombosis. In animals where antithrombotic
therapy was discontinued prior to surgery, therapy can be restarted
immediately after the procedure as long as there is no evidence
of ongoing bleeding. If signs of thrombosis develop at any point,
antithrombotic therapy should be initiated immediately. Clinical
signs of thromboembolic events are often non-specific and
highly variable [78]; however, acute onset of dyspnea, tachypnea,
cyanosis, and collapse should prompt suspicion of pulmonary
thromboembolism. Arterial blood gas analysis usually reveals
hypoxemia, hypocapnia, and an increased alveolar to arterial
oxygen gradient. Treatment is symptomatic and should be instituted
immediately, with increased inspired oxygen concentrations and
cardiovascular support as needed [2]. Postoperative dexamethasone
0.05–0.15 mg/kg IV has been administered to prevent the develop-
ment of hypoadrenocorticism [64,79]. Sodium and potassium
should also be monitored and mineralocorticoid therapy instituted
if the sodium:potassium ratio decreases dramatically [56].
Pheochromocytoma
Pheochromocytoma (PHEO) is a catecholamine-secreting tumor
that arises from chromaffin cells of the adrenal medulla. Chromaffin
cells synthesize, store, and release catecholamines in response to
sympathetic stimulation. In PHEO, catecholamine release may be
episodic or continuous and may or may not be related to physio-
logic stressors such as fear, stress, tumor manipulation, and
drugs [80]. This malignant or locally invasive tumor has been
reported in several species including dogs, cats, and people [81–83].
Approximately 15–38% of dogs with PHEO have neoplastic inva-
sion of the caudal vena cava; however, clinical signs are not associ-
ated with the extent or presence of vena caval invasion
(Fig. 42.4) [79,84,85]. Invasive PHEOs have been reported to affect
not only the vena cava, but also the aorta, renal veins, and hepatic
veins [4,86].
In veterinary species, there are limited data regarding the specific
catecholamines released from these tumors. Higher concentrations
of plasma metabolites of norepinephrine in comparison to
epinephrine have been reported in dogs [86]. In cats, norepinephrine
is typically the catecholamine released by PHEO [80].
PHEO tends to occur in older dogs (10–12 years), and there is no
known breed or sex predilection [82,86–89]. Note that many small
animals with PHEO may be asymptomatic, which explains the high
number of cases (48–80%) diagnosed postmortem or as an inciden-
tal finding on abdominal ultrasound [81,82].
Clinical presentation
Clinical signs of PHEO may be dramatic but are often intermittent
and paroxysmal due to the episodic release of catecholamines [17].
The most common signs are weakness, syncope, tachypnea,
tachyarrhythmia, hypertension, and seizures [4]. Underlying
disorders secondary to chronic hypertension may be observed
including retinal detachment, pulmonary venous congestion or
pulmonary edema, and congestive heart failure (82,83).
Animals 	with 	PHEO 	may 	also 	have 	other 	concurrent
endocrinopathies such as hyperadrenocorticism (HAC). Therefore,
this disorder should be ruled out and/or managed, especially in
dogs 	where 	HAC 	is 	more 	commonly 	seen 	(see
hyperadrenocorticism) [88,90].
Clinical pathology
Findings on CBC and serum biochemistry are usually non-specific.
Urinalysis in 10 out of 20 dogs with PHEO showed proteinuria,
likely caused by a hypertensive glomerulopathy [91]. If HAC is also
present, liver enzymes may be elevated, and a stress leukogram may
be present (see hyperadrenocorticism).
Diagnosis and treatment
Clinical signs of episodic weakness, collapse, hypertension, and
arrhythmias are suggestive of PHEO. Abdominal ultrasound is
commonly used to diagnose the presence of an adrenal mass, local
metastasis, and thrombi, as it is readily available and does not
require general anesthesia [91–94]. Contrast-enhanced ultrasonog-
raphy may aid in the differentiation of adrenal tumors [95].
Advanced imaging including CT and MRI can also be used and are
useful in evaluation of tumor architecture, metastasis, degree of
invasion, and thrombi [80,92,93].
Diagnosis of PHEO can be determined via biopsy, but this is
rarely performed owing to the difficulty in obtaining good samples
and the risk of hemorrhage or a hypertensive crisis. Additionally,
there is not clear evidence of histopathological features predictive of
metastasis [93]. Other diagnostic tools used to confirm PHEO in
dogs and cats include urinary catecholamines and the metanephrine-
to- creatinine ratio, and plasma metanephrine and normetanephrine
analysis [96,97]. However, these biomarkers may also be elevated in
dogs with HAC, due to non-adrenal illness, and other factors such
as excitement [97].
Definitive treatment for PHEO is surgical resection of the tumor.
To determine the feasibility and complexity of the surgery, it is
advised to assess the origin, architecture, vascularity, and invasive-
ness of the mass via CT or MRI [55,56,86,91–93].
Anesthetic considerations
Preoperative evaluation and stabilization is of the utmost
importance in animals with suspected PHEO. Thoracic radiographs
prior to surgery should be considered as metastasis to the lung
may occur [88]. Further advanced diagnostic imaging will help
determine the feasibility of surgical removal in addition to the
Figure 42.4 A 12-year-old Siberian husky with a pheochromocytoma
(10 cm × 7 cm × 6 cm) of the right adrenal gland severely compressing and
invading the caudal vena cava. Source: Dr. Jung Keun Lee, Diagnostic
Pathology Center, Midwestern University, Glendale, AZ; with permission.

-- 914 of 1450 --

Chapter 42: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Endocrine Disease 	899
probable 	need 	for 	crossmatching 	and 	blood 	transfusion
[55,56,86,91]. Preanesthetic blood pressure and ECG evaluation is
indicated, and medical management to stabilize these animals
should be performed prior to anesthesia.
Catecholamine-induced hypertension can be managed with
phenoxybenzamine, a long-acting non-competitive α1
-adrenergic
receptor antagonist with some α2
-adrenergic receptor antagonism. It is
recommended to start phenoxybenzamine treatment 1–2 weeks
before surgery. An oral dose of 0.25 mg/kg twice daily is often
prescribed, but higher doses may be required, up to 2.5 mg/kg twice
daily. Serial blood pressure measurements should be performed to
evaluate response to therapy [4,55,56,86,89,98,99]. It has been reported
that although preoperative administration of phenoxybenzamine did
not decrease the frequency or severity of perioperative hypertension
in dogs with PHEO, the mortality rate decreased from 43% to 13%.
This improved outcome may be due to the reduction in
vasoconstriction and improvement of intravascular volume [89].
Prazosin, a competitive, reversible α1
- adrenergic receptor
antagonist, is an alternative agent to manage catecholamine-
induced 	hypertension 	when 	phenoxybenzamine 	is 	not
available [100]. Oral doses range from 0.25 to 1 mg/kg twice daily.
In contrast to phenoxybenzamine, prazosin’s effects can be
overcome by high concentrations of catecholamines. Therefore,
phenoxybenzamine is considered the drug of choice for animals
undergoing surgery for PHEO excision. Doxazosin is another
alternative to phenoxybenzamine, but reports of its clinical use in
veterinary medicine are limited. [101,102]. Doxazosin has been
used at a dosage of 0.5 mg/kg orally every 24 h to manage
hypertension in an HAC dog with a PHEO [103].
Atrial and ventricular tachycardia and, less often, atrioventricular
block may occur with these tumors [2,86,104]. Severe tachycardia
can be treated with oral β-adrenergic receptor antagonists, such as
propranolol (0.2–1 mg/kg every 8 h) or atenolol (0.2–1 mg/kg every
12 h). However, better results are seen when α-adrenergic receptor
blockade, usually with phenoxybenzamine, is instituted first because
administration of a β-adrenergic receptor blocker alone may lead to
unopposed 	α-adrenergic 	receptor-mediated 	vasoconstriction,
which may exacerbate hypertension [2,17,27,86,105]. The risk of
bradyarrhythmias may also be reduced by preoperative manage-
ment of hypertension.
Cardiac evaluation is an important determinant of whether
surgical treatment for PHEO should be pursued. Third-degree
atrioventricular block in dogs with PHEO has been related to
myocardial damage and atrioventricular nodal fibrosis from
chronic catecholamine exposure [104].
Anesthetic management
Animals undergoing adrenalectomy are often classified as ASA III,
IV, or V, and risk factors associated with the surgical procedure
include significant hemorrhage, precipitation of a hypertensive cri-
sis, cardiac arrhythmias, and intraoperative/postoperative hypoten-
sion following tumor excision. A minimum database consisting of a
CBC, serum biochemistry profile, urinalysis, baseline ECG, and
blood pressure should be evaluated prior to anesthesia. Hydration
status should be assessed and appropriate preoperative fluid ther-
apy instituted to correct any signs of dehydration or hypovolemia.
Chronic sympathetic stimulation and vasoconstriction seen with
PHEO may cause intravascular volume depletion [17,86]. Factors
that could stimulate further catecholamine release such as fear,
stress, pain, hypothermia, shivering, hypoxia, and hypercapnia
should be minimized as much as possible.
Blood type should be determined and crossmatch considered
prior to surgery. There is significant potential for intraoperative
blood loss, particularly for tumors involving the right adrenal gland
due to its proximity to the caudal vena cava. Therefore, packed
RBCs, fresh frozen plasma, or whole blood should be available for
immediate volume resuscitation if needed [2,55,56,86,91,106]. LRS
and hypertonic saline can be used in the initial resuscitation of
hemorrhagic shock and may stabilize cardiovascular parameters
until a blood transfusion can be initiated [107,108]. Effects of
hypertonic saline outlast those of LRS [108]. Continuous ECG and
invasive arterial blood pressure measurement should be performed
to identify and manage cardiac arrhythmias and abrupt changes in
blood pressure [17,86]. Multiple intravenous access sites should be
available to promptly manage intraoperative complications. Central
venous access may be beneficial for intraoperative and postopera-
tive management.
Although most anesthetic drugs have been used in animals with
PHEO with some success, drugs with sympathomimetic or vago-
lytic effects, such as ketamine and anticholinergics, are often
avoided to prevent possible adverse hemodynamic responses.
Histamine release associated with morphine and atracurium
administration may result in sympathetic stimulation in response
to vasodilation. Thiobarbiturates and halothane, though no longer
available in many countries, have historically been avoided owing
to their tendency to cause ventricular arrhythmias, especially in the
presence of high catecholamine levels. Acepromazine may compli-
cate the treatment of hypotension due to its α-adrenergic receptor
blocking effects, particularly if the animal has been pretreated with
phenoxybenzamine [2,27,56,86].
Case reports in humans and dogs suggest that dexmedetomidine
could aid in controlling hypertensive surges during anesthesia of
patients undergoing PHEO excision. Catecholamine release and
sympathetic response may be reduced by dexmedetomidine bind-
ing to presynaptic α2
- adrenergic receptors resulting in inhibition of
norepinephrine release [109]. Based on the authors’ experience,
administration of dexmedetomidine (0.5–1 μg/kg/h) IV as a CRI is
helpful to stabilize blood pressure changes intraoperatively. There
is, however, a lack of controlled studies investigating the effects of
dexmedetomidine on physiological variables and perioperative out-
comes of animals undergoing adrenalectomies [110–113].
A suggested balanced anesthetic protocol for animals with PHEO
includes IV premedication with an opioid that does not promote
histamine release (e.g., hydromorphone, methadone, or fentanyl)
combined with a benzodiazepine. Induction of anesthesia may be
accomplished with IV propofol, alfaxalone, or etomidate [55,89,98].
Isoflurane or sevoflurane is preferred for anesthetic maintenance as
opposed to desflurane, which can cause sympathetic stimula-
tion [114]. Inhalant agents should be supplemented with a potent,
rapid-acting opioid CRI (e.g., fentanyl, sulfentanil, or remifentanil)
and potentially other MAC-sparing agents combined in a balanced
anesthetic protocol [2,86,89].
Drugs for the treatment of perioperative complications must be
readily available for administration when an emergency arises,
especially during induction of anesthesia or tumor manipulation.
The authors recommend calculation of all emergency drugs prior to
anesthesia, and it may be beneficial to prepare syringes of those
most likely to be needed in advance. Table 42.2 provides drug dos-
ages for antiarrhythmic therapy and blood pressure support.
Profound fluctuations in blood pressure are often observed during
PHEO surgery. Sodium nitroprusside, a direct-acting vasodilator, is
the agent of choice to treat severe hypertension due to its potency,

-- 915 of 1450 --

900 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
rapid onset, and short duration of action. Phentolamine, a short-
acting competitive α-adrenergic receptor antagonist and direct
vasodilator, is an alternative for the treatment of intraoperative
hypertension [17,27,55,86,89]. Another commonly administered
agent is magnesium sulfate (MgSO 4
). In human patients, MgSO 4
has been used for the treatment of hypertension and arrhythmias
during anesthesia. MgSO 4 inhibits the release of catecholamines
from the adrenal medulla and peripheral nerve terminals, reduces
the sensitivity of α-adrenergic receptors to catecholamines, is a
direct vasodilator, and has antiarrhythmic effects [4,27].
Arrhythmias are another common perioperative complication of
animals with PHEO. Tachyarrhythmias are usually managed with
lidocaine or β-adrenergic receptor antagonists. Esmolol, a β-
adrenergic blocker, has a rapid onset, a short duration of action, and
readily controls heart rate [2,4,17,27,86]. Supraventricular and ven-
tricular rhythm disturbances are sometimes managed with the class
III antiarrhythmic agent, amiodarone, that blocks potassium chan-
nels but also inhibits β-adrenergic receptors, calcium channels, and
sodium channels [115–117]. Reflex bradycardia may also occur
secondary to hypertension. Appropriate management of blood
pressure usually corrects the changes in heart rate. However, if
bradycardia is accompanied by hypotension, anticholinergics may
be required.
Intraoperative and postoperative hypotension following PHEO
excision is common. It is multifactorial due to an immediate
decrease in catecholamine concentrations, vasodilation from resid-
ual α-adrenergic receptor blockade caused by phenoxybenzamine,
impaired sympathetic reflexes, and hypovolemia. Treatment
includes reduction of inhalant concentration, reduction or discon-
tinuation of nitroprusside/phentolamine/magnesium sulfate, and
volume expansion with isotonic crystalloid or colloid fluids.
Vasopressor (e.g., phenylephrine and norepinephrine) and ino-
tropic drugs are used to treat refractory hypotension, although
patients treated with phenoxybenzamine may be less responsive to
vasopressor therapy [2,17,27,86,118]. Treatment with a non-
catecholamine pressor, such as vasopressin, may be necessary to
maintain adequate blood pressure [118].
To protect vital organs from reduced oxygen delivery, surface-
induced hypothermia to a temperature of 32 °C (89.6 °F) has been
advocated for animals requiring temporary vascular occlusion during
PHEO resection [55,89,119]. Additionally, during anesthesia, blood
pressure values should be maintained close to the animal’s baseline
blood pressure to prevent renal hypoperfusion and ischemia. If
bilateral adrenalectomy has been performed, glucocorticoid and
mineralocorticoid replacement therapy will be necessary. In addition,
blood glucose should be monitored postoperatively because
hypoglycemia may occur when plasma catecholamine concentrations
decrease suddenly. Continuous ECG and blood pressure monitoring
should be maintained for at least 24 h postoperatively [27,86].
During the recovery period, thromboembolic events may occur.
Antithrombotic drugs should not be discontinued in animals at
high risk for thrombosis; however, they may be withheld in cases of
low to moderate risk. In these cases, antithrombotic drugs can be
restarted immediately after the procedure if there is no evidence of
ongoing bleeding or if development of a thrombosis occurs [54].
Pancreas and kidney
The pancreas is a nodular, bilobed gland located within the mesen-
tery at the angle where the duodenum meets the stomach. The pan-
creas is composed of acini and pancreatic islets, previously known
as “islets of Langerhans.” The acinar cells produce and secrete diges-
tive enzymes via the pancreatic duct into the duodenum. Two pan-
creatic ducts are usually found in the dog but only one in the cat.
The pancreatic or dorsal duct drains the left lobe and joins the
main bile duct before entering the duodenum at the major duode-
nal papilla; the ventral or accessory duct drains the right lobe
into the duodenum at the minor duodenal papilla. The cat has
only the dorsal duct to drain both areas [120]. The pancreatic islets
secrete hormones such as insulin (β-cells), glucagon (α-cells),
somatostatin (δ-cells), and pancreatic polypeptide (pancreatic
polypeptide cells) into the bloodstream, thereby exerting critical
endocrine effects. Pancreatic endocrine disorders involving insulin
include diabetes mellitus and insulinoma.
Table 42.2 Treatments for intraoperative complications in animals with pheochromocytoma.
Complication 	Drug 	Dose 	Comments
Hypertension 	Nitroprusside
Phentolamine
Magnesium sulfate (MgSO4 )
0.1–10 μg/kg/min IV
0.1 mg/kg IV followed by at 1–2 μg/kg/
min CRI
50 mg/kg (diluted) over 15 min, followed by
15 mg/kg/h CRI
Dilates arterioles and veins independent of
catecholamines; direct BP monitoring preferred
Induces short-acting α-adrenergic blockade
Inhibits catecholamine release, induces α-adrenergic
blockade, directly dilates arterioles
Tachyarrhythmia 	Lidocaine
Esmolol
2 mg/kg IV, followed by 50–80 μg/kg/min
CRI
0.25–0.5 mg/kg IV over 1–2 min followed
by 10–200 μg/kg/min CRI
For management of ventricular arrhythmias
Only after α-adrenergic blockade or may precipitate
hypertensive crisis; induces short-acting β1 -adrenergic
blockade; for sinus or supraventricular tachycardia
Refractory hypotension 	Phenylephrine
Norepinephrine
Vasopressin
0.4–4 μg/kg/min CRI
0.05–1 μg/kg/min CRI
0.2–0.8 IU/kg IV and/or 0.002–0.006 IU/kg/
min CRI
Induces potent α1 -adrenergic agonism; may cause
vagally mediated bradycardia; use lowest effective
dose
Use lowest effective dose
Indicated if patient has reduced sensitivity to
catecholamines; works in acidic environment; use
lowest effective dose
BP, blood pressure; CRI, constant rate infusion.
Source: Veres-Nyéki [2]; Koenig [4]; Kyles et al. [55]; Santoro- Beer and Mandell [86]; Viilman and Vettorato [113]; Robinson [115]; Pedro et al. [116]; Nazari et al. [117].

-- 916 of 1450 --

Chapter 42: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Endocrine Disease 	901
The kidneys are essential for maintenance of extracellular fluid
homeostasis. When they are unable to adequately concentrate urine
and maintain fluid balance either due to impaired production of
ADH or impaired renal response to ADH, the resulting endocrine
disorder is known as “diabetes insipidus.”
Diabetes mellitus
Diabetes mellitus (DM) occurs due to inadequate insulin secre-
tion or resistance to the effects of insulin, which culminates in the
development of hyperglycemia. Hyperglycemia occurs following
impairment of glucose uptake into tissues and increased hepatic
gluconeogenesis. It results in fluid shifting from the intracellular
space into the intravascular space thus causing cellular
dehydration.
In dogs, the predominant form of DM is caused by β-cell destruc-
tion resulting in insulin deficiency and hyperglycemia. This is
homologous to type 1 DM in people [121,122]. In cats, insulin
resistance is most common. Insulin is available, but target tissues
have an impaired ability to respond to its metabolic effects, and
eventual exhaustion of β-cells ensues [123]. This is homologous to
type 2 DM in humans [121,123–125]. In approximately ¼ of cats,
DM is secondary to hypersomatotropism.
DM occurs most often in middle-aged or older animals. In dogs,
there is a female sex predilection, whereas in cats, it is more fre-
quently diagnosed in neutered males [121,123,126]. There are sev-
eral canine breeds at increased risk for DM, including the Australian
Terrier, Miniature and Standard Schnauzers, Samoyed, Miniature
and Toy Poodles, Cairn Terrier, Keeshond, Bichon Frise, and
Finnish Spitz [127]. Reports indicate that Burmese cats may be at a
higher risk in some geographical areas [123]. Because cats primarily
have the type 2 form, obesity increases the risk of diabetes dramati-
cally in this species [123,128].
Clinical presentation
The clinical presentation of animals with DM may be non-specific,
but a common reported sign is polyuria/polydipsia (PU/PD). When
the concentration of glucose in the plasma exceeds the renal
threshold for proximal tubular reabsorption of glucose from the
filtrate, glucosuria ensues, causing osmotic diuresis and PU/PD.
Animals may also be dehydrated or hypovolemic. Because DM is a
catabolic condition, dogs with insulin deficiency may have severe
depletion of both energy stores and protein mass. Clinical signs
such as lethargy, polyphagia, and weight loss may be seen. Older
cats (> 7 years) with weight loss and polyphagia should be tested for
hyperthyroidism as clinical signs of both diseases are similar and
can occur concurrently [129].
Other signs of DM depend on the severity and chronicity of
hyperglycemia. Cataracts are common in dogs with DM due to
disruption of normal lens metabolism (Fig. 42.5), and some cats
with chronic DM develop a peripheral neuropathy that results in a
plantigrade posture (Fig. 42.6).
In severe manifestations of DM such as diabetic ketoacidosis
(DKA) or hyperglycemic hyperosmolar syndrome (HHS), patients
can present in critical condition with clinical signs of vomiting,
anorexia, severe dehydration, depression, coma, or death. Ketones
are synthesized from fatty acids as a substitute form of energy
because glucose is not transported into the cells. Excess ketoacids
results in acidosis and severe electrolyte abnormalities, which can be
life-threatening. HHS is an uncommon form of diabetic crisis
marked by severe hyperglycemia, minimal or no urine ketones,
hypovolemia, decreased glomerular filtration rate (GFR), weakness,
and possible coma. Animals with DKA often have other concurrent
diseases such as acute pancreatitis, urinary tract infection, and
hyperadrenocorticism [130]. Animals with DKA and HHS should
be stabilized prior to undergoing sedation or anesthesia.
Clinical pathology
Findings on CBC are often normal, but dogs and cats with DKA
may present with a non-regenerative anemia. Leukocytosis may
occur in animals with concurrent infection, which is common in
DM and DKA.
The most important serum biochemistry finding in animals
with DM is hyperglycemia, but elevated liver enzyme activity
and hypercholesterolemia may also occur [131]. In dehydrated
patients, 	azotemia 	and 	electrolyte 	disorders 	including
hypokalemia, hypernatremia, hyponatremia, hypophosphatemia,
Figure 42.5 A 9-year- old diabetic Schnauzer with cataract-associated
uveitis. The dog required general anesthesia for phacoemulsification.
Source: Dr. Stephanie Pumphrey, Veterinary Ophthalmology, Cummings
School of Veterinary Medicine at Tufts University, North Grafton, MA;
with permission.
Figure 42.6 Plantigrade posture in a cat with DM is caused by peripheral
neuropathy. The posture itself may not represent a complicating factor for
anesthesia; however, it does suggest chronic and/or uncontrolled diabetes.
Serial measurements of blood glucose during anesthesia, ± insulin/
dextrose administration, are warranted perioperatively. Source: Dr. Todd
Green, Department of Small Animal Medicine and Surgery, St. George’s
University, St. George’s, Grenada; with permission.

-- 917 of 1450 --

902 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
and hypochloremia can be observed. Pseudohyponatremia may be
caused by hyperglycemia resulting in increased water retention in
the intravascular space.
Urinalysis should also be performed and glucosuria can be
identified when the blood glucose (BG) exceeds the renal threshold,
approximately 200 mg/dL in dogs and 250 mg/dL in cats [129,132].
Proteinuria and ketonuria may also be seen. Nitroprusside reagent
urine test strips do not detect the dominant ketone produced in
DKA, 3-hydroxybutyrate (3-HB); therefore, ketonuria may not be
detected [133]. A 3-HB ketone meter or serum 3-HB could be used to
identify the presence of this ketone. In dogs and cats with DKA, blood
gas analysis reveals a low concentration of bicarbonate and, with the
increased production of ketoacid anions, a high anion gap [134].
Diagnosis and treatment
The hallmarks of diagnosis of DM are persistent hyperglycemia (BG
> 200 mg/dL in dogs and > 270 mg/dL in cats with classic clinical
signs of hyperglycemia) and glucosuria. In cats, stress hyperglycemia
should be ruled out by reassessing BG in a calmer environment and/
or measuring serum fructosamine concentrations [129].
Although treatment protocols are constantly evolving, dogs are
commonly treated with either porcine lente (Vetsulin®) or neutral
protamine Hagedorn (NPH) insulin, and cats with either glargine
(Lantus®) or NPH insulin [129]. In cats, dietary management with
diets low in carbohydrates and high in protein has been
advocated [135]. Oral hypoglycemic drugs have been advocated to
control hyperglycemia in diabetic cats, but the use of these drugs is
not commonplace [136].
Treatment of DKA often requires hospitalization and critical care,
including IV fluid therapy, insulin CRI, and intensive monitoring of
acid–base status, fluid balance, glucose, and electrolytes [123,137,138].
Fluid therapy usually involves administration of an isotonic
crystalloid. In animals with hypernatremia, 0.9% sodium chloride
could be administered to minimize the risk of rapid sodium changes
(> 0.5 mEq/h) and transcellular fluid shifts; however, it may result in
increased chloride concentration and may not correct acidemia as
well as other balanced electrolyte solutions [133,139]. Fluids such as
Hartmann’s solution or polyionic hypotonic maintenance solution
may be advantageous due to a resultant increase in bicarbonate and
base excess [139]. LRS is avoided by some clinicians due to the
hepatic conversion of lactate to ketones, whereas the buffers in
Plasma-Lyte® and Normosol-R® are acetate and gluconate, which are
metabolized by skeletal muscle [133,139]. Rapid-acting insulins,
such as regular insulin, are usually administered as CRIs, and close
and regular monitoring of BG is required.
Monitoring treatment success is somewhat controversial, but
measurement of serum fructosamine concentrations may be used
to evaluate long-term control of hyperglycemia. Although serial BG
curves have traditionally been recommended to assess the effects of
insulin therapy, their use is called into question by studies in both
dogs and cats showing their poor reliability for predicting glycemic
control [140,141]. In cases of DKA and during anesthesia of ani-
mals with DM, serial BG measurements should be performed.
Continuous glucose monitors that measure rapid changes in inter-
stitial glucose levels have been used with success in dogs with DKA.
Anesthetic considerations
In well-regulated diabetic dogs, the BG concentration measured
within 1–4 h of insulin administration should be between 150 and
250 mg/dL. An early morning BG concentration greater than
300 mg/dL could suggest poor glycemic control. However, a single
measurement does not confirm this because BG concentrations
even in well-controlled diabetic dogs may vary throughout the day
and excursions of 400–600 mg/dL could be observed. In cases of
high BG levels, inadequate glycemic control is more likely present if
the fructosamine concentration is greater than 500 mg/dL [142].
Hyperglycemia has been associated with higher morbidity,
depression of leukocyte function, increased wound infections, and
decreased tissue perfusion in dogs and people [143,144].
Additionally, animals with unregulated diabetes can have marked
fluctuation of BG concentrations during anesthesia. Anesthesia for
elective procedures should be postponed in patients with poorly
regulated DM. One exception to this recommendation is intact
females with insulin resistance that require ovariohysterectomy
before the disease can be controlled [142].
Fluid therapy to correct water losses and electrolyte imbalances
should be instituted before anesthesia. In any hyperglycemic and
DKA animal, hydration status, acid–base status, and electrolyte
imbalances should be assessed and corrected as preoperative hyper-
glycemia can contribute to hyperosmolar diuresis with subsequent
dehydration, hypovolemia, and increased risk for intraoperative
hypotension [2,30,145].
When dogs and cats with diabetes require anesthesia for medical
and surgical procedures, these may not be directly related to DM or
may be due to comorbidities secondary to DM. For example, many
diabetic dogs develop cataracts, which require removal via phacoe-
mulsification under anesthesia [2]. Timely monitoring of serum BG
during the perioperative period and appropriate intervention (e.g.,
with regular insulin or dextrose administration) can help prevent
severe hyper- and hypoglycemia during the perioperative period.
Patients with DKA should not be anesthetized until clinical signs
have subsided and the animal has been stabilized.
Anesthetic management
Whenever possible, anesthetic procedures for patients with DM
should be performed early in the day to reduce the need for
prolonged fasting times, to allow for a rapid return to normal
activity and insulin regimen, and to allow for close monitoring
postoperatively. Although preoperative fasting times can vary,
food is often withheld after 10 pm for morning procedures. On
the day of anesthesia, numerous fasting and insulin administra-
tion protocols have been recommended (Table 42.3). Although
glycemic control was achieved with most protocols, withholding
insulin completely was associated with greater increases in
intraoperative BG levels [146,147]. In animals receiving basal
insulin, dose reduction prior to anesthesia may not be necessary.
However, intermediate-acting insulin dose may need to be
decreased pending fasting duration. Note that there is no consensus
statement in veterinary medicine on fasting times and insulin
regimens preoperatively. Additionally, there are no data on the
association between level of glycemic control and postprocedural
or long-term outcome.
Serial BG measurements before and after induction of anesthesia,
every 30–60 min throughout anesthesia, and postoperatively are
often required. However, the time and frequency of rechecks may
vary depending on the BG results obtained. If BG values are
consistently stable, measurements may be performed less often. If
BG fluctuations are moderate to severe, this should prompt the
clinician to monitor the values closely and undertake more frequent
sampling. Dextrose solutions may be provided to maintain BG
levels within the patient’s normal or clinically acceptable range. It is
important to remember that stress-induced increases in BG may

-- 918 of 1450 --

Chapter 42: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Endocrine Disease 	903
occur due to anesthesia and surgery and should also be taken into
consideration when evaluating BG levels.
Although continued insulin administration during preoperative
fasting potentially increases the risk of hypoglycemia, insulin
activity is important even during fasting to allow tissue uptake of
nutrients. In addition, stress associated with anesthesia and surgery
causes the release of hormones such as corticosteroids and
catecholamines. 	These 	hormones 	promote 	glycogenolysis,
gluconeogenesis, and ketogenesis, all of which increase the insulin
requirement. Therefore, perioperative insulin administration is
indicated to prevent severe hyperglycemia and minimize ketone
formation perioperatively [142]. It is imperative to resume the
patient’s usual insulin regimen and monitor clinical signs in the
days following the procedure to ensure appropriate management of
DM and prevent DKA.
Balanced anesthesia with reversible, short-acting drugs such as
full μ-opioid receptor agonists and benzodiazepines will allow for a
fast recovery after anesthesia [2]. Locoregional anesthesia should be
considered whenever possible due to its MAC-sparing effects,
reliability in managing intra- and postoperative pain, and minimal
systemic side effects. Local anesthetics are the only class of drugs
that block transduction and transmission of nociceptive input and
provide complete analgesia; thus, these techniques are an integral
part of a multimodal analgesic protocol. Ophthalmic nerve blocks
could be considered for animals undergoing anesthesia for ocular
procedures including enucleation, entropion, corneal laceration
repair, and phacoemulsification [148]. These local anesthetic
techniques need to be carefully performed by trained personnel to
minimize the risk of complications such as hemorrhage, globe
perforation, and nerve damage. The anesthetist should also be
aware of the risk of initiating the oculocardiac reflex; therefore,
heart rate and/or ECG should be monitored when performing
ophthalmic blocks. As previously mentioned, some animals with
DM may have peripheral neuropathies, and regional techniques
should not be performed on the affected limb(s). However, other
local blocks and techniques, including infiltration with liposome-
encapsulated bupivacaine (Nocita®), should still be considered. As
locoregional techniques are associated with few systemic effects,
they may help promote faster anesthetic recoveries. Other agents
that also provide analgesia and MAC-sparing effects should be
utilized if there are no contraindications. The authors routinely
administer ketamine as a CRI (loading dose 1–2 mg/kg IV followed
by 0.6–1.2 mg/kg/h) to dogs and cats undergoing invasive and
painful procedures [149]. In dogs, a lidocaine CRI can also be
administered (loading dose 1–2 mg/kg IV followed by 50 μg/kg/min)
to provide balanced anesthesia [150].
Table 42.3 Summary of suggested guidelines for preoperative insulin management of diabetic patients based on retrospective studies, clinical studies, and textbooks.
Fasting time 	Preoperative insulin regimen 	Dextrose administration 	Outcome and/or comments 	Reference
6 and 12 h 	½ usual insulin dose SC morning of
surgery
No dextrose administered 	Lower intraoperative increases in BG in
groups receiving insulin compared to group
where insulin was withheld;
No dogs became hypoglycemic
Adami C, et al., 2020 [146];
retrospective study
12 h 	Full insulin dose SC morning of
surgery
12 h 	No insulin morning of surgery
7–7.5 h 	¼ usual insulin dose SC morning of
surgery
ND or not administered 	No dogs became hypoglycemic;
Normoglycemia in 4% of samples;
Severe hyperglycemia in 58% of samples
Kronen P, et al., 2001 [147];
prospective clinical study
Full insulin dose SC morning of
surgery
Hypoglycemia in 25% of dogs;
Normoglycemia in 15% of samples;
Severe hyperglycemia in 57% of samples
6 h 	Full usual intermediate-acting insulin
dose SC in the afternoon prior to
surgery
No dextrose administered 	No dogs became hypoglycemic
intraoperatively; hyperglycemia
(> 300 mg/dL) in 65% of dogs
Norgate DJ, et al., 2021
[157], prospective clinical
study
12 h 	½ usual intermediate-acting insulin
dose SC morning of surgery
No dogs became hypoglycemic
intraoperatively; hyperglycemia (> 300 mg/
dL) in 67% of dogs
Recommendations from textbooks
ND 	BG < 100 mg/dL: administer no
insulin
2.5–5% dextrose infusion at
1–2 mL/kg/h
Monitor BG q 30 min 	Behrend E, et al., 2018 [129]
BG 100–200 mg/dL: administer ¼
usual dose
2.5–5% dextrose infusion at
1–2 mL/kg/h
Monitor BG q 30–60 min
BG > 200 mg/dL: administer ½
usual dose
If BG < 150 mg/dL: dextrose
infusion
Monitor BG q 30–60 min; may evaluate for
ketonuria
BG > 300 mg/dL: administer full
dose or regular insulin
Do not administer dextrose
infusion
Monitor BG q 30–60 min; may evaluate for
ketonuria
ND 	BG < 145 mg/dL: administer no
insulin
If BG < 145 mg/dL: 0.9%
saline with 5% dextrose;
If BG 145–250 mg/dL: 0.9%
saline with 2.5% dextrose;
If BG > 250 mg/dL: 0.9%
saline with no dextrose
Monitor BG q 30–60 min 	Veres-Nyéki KO, 2016 [2]
BG 145–270 mg/dL: administer ½
usual dose
BG > 270 mg/dL: administer full
usual dose
Food withheld
after 10 pm
BG < 100 mg/dL: administer no
insulin
2.5–5% dextrose infusion 	Monitor BG q 30–60 min;
Maintain BG between 150–250 mg/dL
(dextrose and insulin as needed)
Nelson RW, 2015 [142]
BG 100–200 mg/dL: administer ¼
usual dose
2.5–5% dextrose infusion
BG > 200 mg/dL: administer ½
usual dose
If BG < 150 mg/dL: dextrose
infusion
ND, no data; BG, blood glucose.

-- 919 of 1450 --

904 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
Although there are no absolute drug contraindications in diabetic
patients, anesthetic protocols should be chosen based on each
individual patient, their concurrent comorbidities, and the specific
procedure. For example, animals with DM undergoing ocular
procedures may have suspected or confirmed increased intraocular
pressures (IOP). Drugs known to cause a high incidence of vomiting,
such as hydromorphone and morphine, should be avoided as they
can further increase IOP. The anesthetist may also consider
administering an antiemetic drug such as maropitant prior to
premedication.
Extreme β-cell deficiency is often seen in diabetic dogs by the
time clinical disease is apparent; therefore, while the endocrine
effects of the α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists are unlikely to be clin-
ically relevant, they should be noted. α2
- Adrenergic receptor ago-
nists, such as dexmedetomidine, inhibit the release of insulin likely
via stimulation of islet β-cell α2 -adrenergic receptors, resulting in a
transient increase in plasma glucose [63,151]. Knowledge of this
possible endocrine effect of α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists may be
important when assessing BG levels in the intra- and postoperative
periods. Caution is advised when administering additional insulin
in this situation as hypoglycemia could develop once the effects of
the α2 -adrenergic receptor agonist wane.
Neuromuscular blocking agents (NMBAs) are commonly admin-
istered to animals with DM undergoing ophthalmic procedures to
provide centralization and immobilization of the globe. Differences
between NMBAs have been reported. Vecuronium appears to have
a shorter duration of action in patients with DM [152], whereas
atracurium’s duration is similar in diabetics and non-diabetic
dogs [153]. Higher infusion rates of rocuronium seem to be
required for neuromuscular blockade of diabetic versus non-
diabetic dogs undergoing phacoemulsification [154].
During anesthetic maintenance of any patient with DM, frequent
perioperative 	monitoring 	of 	BG 	is 	recommended 	every
30–60 min [2,147]. Fluctuations in BG concentration may be
affected by several factors including the efficacy of current medical
management and the complexity of surgery, preoperative
glucocorticoid administration, and the presence of infection [27].
As with preoperative fasting and insulin administration, multiple
protocols to control hypo- and hyperglycemia have been
recommended. It has been reported that if a BG concentration
greater than 300 mg/dL persists, regular insulin could be
administered IV or IM at 20% of the patient’s usual dosage of long-
acting insulin [142]. Subsequent doses of regular insulin should be
timed to avoid hypoglycemia, and the dosage should be adjusted
based on the effect of the first injection [142]. When BG is less than
100 mg/dL, IV dextrose may be required during anesthesia and BG
monitored every 30 min [129]. In the authors’ clinical experience,
persistent and severe hyperglycemia may be treated in accordance
with recommendations for stabilization of DKA patients with the
administration of 0.1 U/kg IM regular insulin [133]. Although the
optimal target for BG in the perioperative period has not been
defined, maintaining levels between 150 and 250 mg/dL until the
patient recovers and starts to eat is advised [142]. Dextrose
infusions are formulated by adding the appropriate amount of 50%
dextrose to an isotonic fluid such as LRS to obtain a final
concentration of 2.5–5% dextrose. At these concentrations,
dextrose can be administered via a peripheral vessel, but dextrose
concentrations higher than 5% should be administered via a
central line. Dextrose should be stopped when/if the BG reaches
250 mg/dL in dogs or 300 mg/dL in cats, as this level is likely to
promote glycosuria and diuresis [142].
The BP and ECG should be closely and continuously monitored
during anesthesia due to possible marked derangements intraoper-
atively [155]. It is also recommended to obtain a baseline BP prior
to anesthesia as diabetes is a risk factor for hypertension in dogs.
Another aspect to consider is that hypertensive animals may be
receiving BP medication, and the vasodilatory effects of these drugs
can predispose animals to developing severe and often refractory
hypotension during anesthesia [27,155]. In people with DM, the
cardiovascular effects of autonomic diabetic neuropathy can pre-
dispose these patients to developing perioperative dysrhythmias
and intraoperative hypotension [27]. In veterinary medicine, one
study concluded that there were differences in vagal tone between
diabetic and non-diabetic dogs [156]; however, it is unknown if this
condition is associated with intraoperative hypotension or other
cardiovascular complications. Diabetic dogs appear to be more
likely to become hypotensive than non-diabetic dogs undergoing
phacoemulsification. The increased incidence and severity of intra-
operative hypotension was attributed to hypovolemia secondary to
hyperglycemia and the resultant osmotic diuresis and not to any
systemic medication [145]. As mentioned previously, appropriate
goal-directed fluid therapy to correct dehydration and/or hypov-
olemia should be instituted. Intraoperative fluid rates of LRS at
5–10 mL/kg/h for dogs and 3–5 mL/kg/h for cats may be adequate
in most cases. The authors recommend that dextrose supplementa-
tion be performed using a separate syringe pump or separate fluid
bag to avoid iatrogenic hyperglycemia. The total amount of fluids
being administered should be calculated to remain within the rate
previously described. Also note that intraoperative hyperkalemia, a
potentially life-threatening complication, has been reported in dogs
with DM undergoing bilateral phacoemulsification [157]. If ECG
changes are noted, assessment of plasma potassium concentration
is recommended.
Hypoglycemia can result in prolonged anesthetic recovery and
central nervous system dysfunction. Lack of insulin or insulin
resistance may initiate energy production from fatty acids due to
insufficient glucose transport into the cell. Subsequent ketone
production may result in DKA. Several of the clinical signs
associated with these complications may go unnoticed until the end
of anesthesia [2]. In non-diabetic dogs, hyperglycemic patients had
longer 	hospital 	stays 	and 	higher 	incidence 	of 	septic
complications [144]. Other reports demonstrate a negative
association between hyperglycemia and disease states including
congestive heart failure and severity of head trauma. Therefore,
monitoring and management of BG levels are required. It is
recommended to feed the patient a small amount of food once
recovered from anesthesia and return to the routine schedule for
insulin administration the following day [2]. Continued monitoring
with dextrose and insulin administration as needed should be
continued for patients that are not eating [142].
Diabetes insipidus
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) or vasopressin is produced in the
hypothalamus and stored and released from the posterior pituitary
gland. This hormone is important for water, osmolar, and blood
pressure homeostasis. Increased plasma osmolality or decreased
blood volume stimulates the release of ADH into the bloodstream.
It then acts on the kidneys, specifically in the distal convoluted
tubule and collecting ducts controlling urinary water excretion. To
normalize plasma osmolality and increase blood volume, ADH
binds to vasopressin V2 receptors in the kidneys, increasing
expression of aquaporin-2 water channels. This allows water to

-- 920 of 1450 --

Chapter 42: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Endocrine Disease 	905
move down its concentration gradient, out of the nephron, and back
into the bloodstream. In high concentrations, ADH causes
vasoconstriction via binding of V 1 receptors in vascular smooth
muscle and activation of G-protein- coupled receptors. The
increased peripheral vascular resistance helps normalize blood
pressure [158].
Diabetes insipidus (DI) is an endocrine disorder characterized by
an inadequate renal response to ADH (nephrogenic DI) or impaired
hypothalamic production of ADH (central DI). Nephrogenic DI
may be primary/congenital possibly due to mutations in either vas-
opressin V 2 receptors or aquaporin-2 water channels [159]. It may
also be secondary to disorders such as hypoadrenocorticism, sepsis,
pyelonephritis, and liver insufficiency. This decreased renal
response to ADH may also be iatrogenic following glucocorticoid
and α2 -adrenergic receptor agonist administration, or secondary to
hypokalemia or hypercalcemia likely due to downregulation of
aquaporin-2 water channels in the kidney. Central DI may be a con-
genital disorder or manifest after damage to the hypothalamus or
pituitary gland (e.g., brain tumor and traumatic brain injury).
Central and nephrogenic DI are uncommon in dogs and rare in
cats. Familial or congenital DI has been reported in a family of
Siberian huskies, a Miniature Poodle, and a German Shepherd
Dog [160,161]. Secondary nephrogenic DI is often seen in critically
ill animals.
There is no known age or sex predilection. In a retrospective
study of 20 dogs, central DI was observed in middle-aged to older
animals [162]. In a case report of five cats with central DI, all
animals were under 3 years of age with a history of prior trauma
present or possible in all of them [163].
Clinical presentation
The most common clinical signs of DI are marked polyuria (urine
production of > 50 mL/kg/day) and polydipsia (water consumption
of > 100 mL/kg/day). Dehydration, urinary bladder distension,
lethargy, anorexia, and neurological signs such as seizures may also
occur. Neurological signs may occur due to acute and profound
hypernatremia [161].
Clinical pathology
Findings on CBC are often normal, but increases in hematocrit
and hyperproteinemia may be observed in dehydrated or
hypovolemic animals with DI. Serum biochemistry findings may
include prerenal azotemia, hypernatremia, and increased serum
osmolarity (> 375 mOsm/L). Decreased blood urea nitrogen
(BUN) concentration may be due to polyuria and ADH
deficiency [164]. Urine specific gravity (USG) often reveals
consistently low USG (hyposthenuria). In cats, hyposthenuria
with a USG between 1.003 and 1.006 has been reported [163]. In
dogs with central DI, consistently low USG, either hyposthenuria
or isosthenuria, may be seen due to the inability to concentrate
urine [162].
Diagnosis and treatment
Persistent inability to concentrate urine during a water deprivation
test and a history of severe PU/PD are diagnostic findings of DI.
Animals with central DI will be hyposthenuric despite being dehy-
drated due to the lack of ADH. A definitive diagnosis may be
obtained following a modified water deprivation test. Desmopressin
acetate (exogenous vasopressin, DDAVP®) is administered intra-
muscularly, and USG response is evaluated. An increase in USG
after desmopressin indicates central DI. Lack of response to
desmopressin is suggestive of nephrogenic DI [162,163]. Care
should be taken with these diagnostic tests to avoid side effects such
as severe dehydration and development of acute hypernatremia. A
maximum of 5% dehydration is advised. Diagnostic imaging (CT or
MRI) is recommended when central DI is suspected and may reveal
a mass or tumor near the pituitary gland [158,162]. Diagnosis of DI
may also be reached by ruling out common causes of PU/PD such
as DM and HAC. In addition to standard hematology and biochem-
istry, other tests commonly performed include measurement of
serum osmolality, urine electrolytes and culture, and thyroid, adre-
nal, and liver function tests.
Animals with DI may present with severe dehydration, evidence
of free fluid loss, and/or hypernatremia. Emergency treatment
includes aggressive fluid therapy, treatment of hypernatremia, and
possible administrations of desmopressin. Sodium concentrations
should be corrected slowly to prevent cellular swelling and neuronal
edema; mild to moderate and/or acute hypernatremia (Na+ <
180 mEq/L) should be corrected at a rate of < 1 mEq/L/h, and severe
and/or chronic hypernatremia (Na+ > 180 mEq/L) should be
corrected at a rate of < 0.5 mEq/L/h [165]. Free water deficits may
be corrected with 5% dextrose in water at a rate of 3–6 mL/kg/h or
0.45% dextrose in water administered at a rate relative to the
calculated free water loss [165,166]. If volume resuscitation is
required to treat hypovolemia, which may be the case with DI, a
crystalloid solution with a sodium concentration similar to the
patient’s sodium concentration is recommended. This may require
making a patient-specific solution by combining crystalloid fluids
and hypertonic saline [166]. Exogenous ADH can be provided in
the form of desmopressin, 1 drop (1.5–4 μL) of the 100 μg/mL nasal
spray, instilled into the conjunctival sac OU every 8–12 h; however,
this will be ineffective in patients with nephrogenic DI [167].
Plasma sodium concentrations should be monitored at least every 4
h 	and 	central 	nervous 	system 	(CNS) 	status 	monitored
continuously [165].
Treatment of animals with central DI is accomplished with
administration of desmopressin orally or by conjunctival
drops [166]. Treatment for nephrogenic DI involves treatment of
the underlying cause. Antidiuretic agents such as thiazides and
low-sodium and low-protein diets may be used in an attempt to
decrease serum sodium concentrations [159,166]. Avoid water
restriction in animals with DI to minimize the risk of dehydration
and hypovolemia.
Anesthetic considerations and management
Animals with DI may require anesthesia or sedation for elective or
urgent procedures not related to the primary disease process. When
anesthetizing or sedating animals with DI, animals should be
allowed free access to water until premedication to avoid dehydra-
tion, hypovolemia, and intraoperative hypotension. For animals
treated with desmopressin, the normal desmopressin regimen can
be administered prior to anesthesia [2]. Fluid therapy to correct
water losses and electrolyte imbalances is required based on the
patient’s hydration and electrolyte status (see above). Isotonic fluid
therapy to avoid development of water depletion and hyperna-
tremia (> 160 mEq/L) may be preferred in some cases.
Balanced anesthesia with reversible, short-acting drugs (e.g., full
μ-opioid receptor agonists and benzodiazepines) to allow for a fast
recovery after anesthesia is ideal [2]. Although there are no absolute
drug contraindications in patients with DI, anesthetic protocols
should be based on each individual patient, their comorbidities, and
the specific procedure. For example, animals with brain tumors or a

-- 921 of 1450 --

906 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
history of trauma may have or may develop increased intracranial
pressure (ICP). Techniques and agents considered neuroprotective
should be instituted, and care should be taken to minimize further
increases in ICP, for example, by avoiding drugs known to cause
vomiting such as hydromorphone. The clinical relevance of the
endocrine effects of α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists is unclear but
should be noted. α2
- Adrenergic receptor agonists, such as
medetomidine, induce often profound diuresis in dogs and cats
likely due to inhibition of ADH release from the CNS [167,168].
These agents should be avoided in hypovolemic or dehydrated
patients.
Blood pressure and ECG should be closely monitored as
electrolyte derangements are possible [155]. Note that desmopressin
does not act on vascular smooth muscle V1 receptors and, therefore,
should not cause excessive vasoconstriction and hypertension.
Ventilation should also be carefully monitored and end-tidal carbon
dioxide maintained in the low normal range (35–38 mmHg) when
there is any suspicion of trauma, a space-occupying brain lesion,
and/or when neurological signs such as seizures are present prior to
anesthesia. Additionally, recovery should occur in a quiet
environment, and drugs such as midazolam should be readily
available to treat neurological signs. Placement of a urinary catheter
before anesthesia or prior to recovery can facilitate accurate urinary
output quantification and assessment of hydration status. Hydration
status, plasma sodium concentrations, and neurologic status should
be closely monitored throughout recovery.
Insulinoma
Insulinoma is a functional tumor of pancreatic β-cells that secretes
insulin and is unresponsive to changes in BG [169]. The hyperse-
cretion of insulin leads to episodes of severe hypoglycemia and/or
chronic hypoglycemia. Hypoglycemia and accompanying clinical
signs can occur when BG is < 60 mg/dL. However, animals with
chronic hypoglycemia may have even lower BG concentrations and
remain asymptomatic. These tumors, which are often malignant,
tend to occur in either limb of the pancreas rather than in the body,
and most have metastasized at the time of diagnosis [169,170]. In
dogs, metastasis is often found within abdominal lymph nodes,
liver, and lungs [171–173].
Insulin-secreting tumors are rare in cats [174] and uncommon in
dogs [168,173]. In dogs, insulinomas often occur in middle-aged
and older dogs (8.5–10 years old) and with a mean bodyweight of >
25 kg [169,175–177]. Insulinoma is the most common pancreatic
tumor found in middle-aged and older ferrets (median 4 and 5
years old) [178–180].
Clinical presentation
Clinical signs of insulinoma are often non-specific, may occur
intermittently, and are due to severe and/or prolonged hypoglyce-
mia. Signs may be precipitated by fasting, excitement, or exercise.
Neurological signs are common and are due to cerebral hypoglyce-
mia (neuroglycopenia). Lack of clinical signs in animals with insu-
linoma may be due to chronic hypoglycemia resulting in
upregulation of cerebral glucose uptake.
The most commonly reported clinical signs associated with
insulinoma include seizures, weakness, and changes in consciousness
and behavior. Other signs such as collapse, obtundation, tremors,
and ataxia may also be observed [181,182]. In ferrets, clinical signs
include 	behavioral 	changes, 	irritability, 	ptyalism, 	and
weakness [181,183]. Seizures occur less commonly in this species
compared to dogs and usually only with severe hypoglycemia [184].
Clinical pathology
Hypoglycemia is the most consistent and often the only abnormality
noted in animals with insulinoma. Serial blood samples may be
required due to BG fluctuation throughout the day. BG
concentrations are affected by counter-regulatory mechanisms and
feeding. Another possible finding is non-specific increases in liver
enzyme activity. Additionally, hypokalemia due to insulin driving
potassium into cells may be observed [175,176,185].
Diagnosis and treatment
Fasting hypoglycemia is the hallmark for diagnosis of insulinoma. It
occurs due to hyperinsulinism resulting in increased glucose uptake
and decreased hepatic glucose output [186]. A normal or increased
serum insulin concentration during a hypoglycemic episode (BG <
60 mg/dL) is suggestive of an insulinoma. The insulin:glucose ratio
is no longer recommended for diagnosis of insulinoma because of
poor accuracy and the potential for abnormal ratios in animals with
other causes of hypoglycemia [175,176]. Once insulinoma is
suspected or confirmed, abdominal ultrasound and/or CT are
indicated for the identification of a pancreatic tumor [187].
Thoracic radiographs should be taken to screen for pulmonary
metastases.
Surgical removal of the pancreatic tumor is usually recommended
and may improve survival [188]. However, surgery is rarely curative
due to tumor malignancy. Metastases to lymph nodes and liver are
commonly observed. Overall survival rate reported in dogs
undergoing surgery is approximately 20 months (7–42 months),
while medically treated dogs have survival rates of approximately
8 months [170,188]. Survival rates for cats are thought to be
considerably lower. In ferrets, the mean survival rate reported in one
study was 668 days following pancreatic nodulectomy with partial
pancreatectomy and 186 days with medical management [188].
Medical management of animals with insulinoma focuses on
treating hypoglycemia and reducing the risk of hypoglycemic crisis.
Treatment 	includes 	feeding 	small, 	frequent 	meals, 	and/or
administering glucocorticoids. Prednisone is the most used
corticosteroid, and it is administered to antagonize the effects of
insulin and increase gluconeogenesis [173]. Other possible
treatments include administration of diazoxide, a benzothiadiazide,
that reduces insulin secretion by preventing closure of K+ ATP
channels on the β-cell plasma membrane, preventing depolarization
of the cell. Gastrointestinal side effects are common in dogs
receiving diazoxide. Streptozotocin, a nitrosourea compound that
is toxic to β-cells, has been used occasionally for medical treatment
of insulinoma in dogs [189]. Treatment of hypoglycemic crisis
involves administration of glucose at 0.5–1 mL/kg of 50% dextrose
diluted for IV administration. The typical dextrose dilution used is
2.5–5%, and this can be achieved by adding 50–100 mL of 50%
dextrose to a 1-L bag of crystalloids. However, care must be taken
to monitor response to therapy closely in animals with insulinoma.
Intravenous dextrose can stimulate further insulin secretion and
exacerbate hypoglycemia. Blood glucose concentration should be
monitored hourly to identify unpredictable changes in BG.
Intravenous infusion of glucagon has been reported to help
stabilize BG concentrations in a dog with an insulinoma-associated
hypoglycemic crisis [190].
Anesthetic considerations
Hypoglycemia should be managed prior to anesthesia. The target
BG concentration is 50–60 mg/dL [2,191,192], although animals
with insulinomas frequently tolerate resting BG concentrations of

-- 922 of 1450 --

Chapter 42: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Endocrine Disease 	907
30–40 mg/dL without clinical signs [30]. Preoperative hypoglycemia
can be managed with oral glucose supplementation (e.g., corn
syrup and dextrose) and/or IV supplementation with 2.5–5%
dextrose solution if clinical signs are observed [2]. Additionally,
infusion of glucagon at 5–40 ng/kg/min IV CRI following a bolus of
50 ng/kg IV [4,190] or in conjunction with infusion of a low
concentration of dextrose [56] could be considered.
Clinical signs of hypoglycemia may be masked by anesthesia and
only observed in the postoperative period [27]. Therefore, frequent
BG measurements are required when anesthetizing an animal with
insulinoma, 	starting 	with 	a 	baseline 	preoperative 	BG
concentration [30,169]. Serial intraoperative BG monitoring every
30–60 min is recommended [2,147]. The goal is to maintain
intraoperative BG concentrations at or near the baseline
concentration that prevented clinical signs associated with
neuroglycopenia prior to anesthesia [4,27]. It is important to note
that tumor manipulation during surgery may lead to insulin spikes,
which may exacerbate hypoglycemia [27]. However, these effects
are often transient, and treatment may not be required.
Anesthetic management
Prolonged preoperative fasting in animals with insulinoma must
be avoided, and a maximum 8 h fast should be adequate. Patients
should be closely monitored, and BG concentrations assessed [56].
Dextrose (< 5%) supplementation may be required perioperatively,
and BG concentrations should be increased gradually [2,4,191,193].
A separate fluid bag with added dextrose is recommended to
minimize the risk of delivering an inadvertent IV bolus. The
volume of other fluids administered should be decreased to
maintain the overall rate desired (usually 5–10 mL/kg/h of
crystalloid) and avoid fluid overload. Serial BG measurements and
dextrose titration are critical to avoid hypo- and hyperglycemia.
Hyperglycemia should be avoided so that the tumor is not
stimulated to release more insulin, which can result in refractory
hypoglycemia [2,4,30,169,190,194].
No specific anesthetic protocol is contraindicated for patients
with insulinoma, and drug choices should be based on patients’
health status and concurrent comorbidities. Adequate analgesia is
critical in animals with insulinoma because sympathetic stimulation
may result in hyperglycemia, tumor stimulation, and rebound
hypoglycemia [169]. Animals undergoing abdominal surgery,
including pancreatic tumor excision, require balanced anesthetic
and multimodal analgesic protocols. Full μ-opioid receptor agonists
are usually part of the premedication and are also administered
intraoperatively to provide analgesia and MAC-sparing effects.
Administration of low doses of α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists as
part of the premedication protocol may be considered. In one study
of dogs with insulinoma, a perioperative dose of 5 μg/kg of
medetomidine 	resulted 	in 	decreases 	in 	plasma 	insulin
concentrations and increases in BG concentrations. The study also
reported more stable BG and blood pressures intraoperatively and a
decrease in glucose supplementation required during anesthesia.
The stable blood pressure observed may be due to the analgesic
properties and anesthetic-sparing effects of the α2 - adrenergic
receptor agonist [194]. α2
- Adrenergic receptor agonists inhibit
pancreatic β-cells resulting in a transient increase in BG [63,151].
Care should be taken when evaluating BG levels after administration
of 	α2
-adrenergic 	receptor 	agonists. 	Locoregional 	anesthetic
techniques, such as epidurals and transversus abdominis plane
(TAP) blocks, should be considered to provide multimodal
analgesia and further anesthetic-sparing effects. NSAIDs may be
beneficial in patients that are not receiving glucocorticoids for
medical management. Concurrent administration of NSAIDs and
steroids is not recommended due to possible adverse renal and
gastrointestinal effects [195]. There are no specific contraindications
for induction agents or maintenance of anesthesia. Induction of
anesthesia can be performed with agents such as propofol,
alfaxalone, ketamine, and midazolam or diazepam, and maintenance
with inhalants such as isoflurane or sevoflurane is acceptable.
During anesthetic maintenance, blood pressure, heart rate, ECG,
hemoglobin saturation (SpO 2 ), respiratory rate, end-tidal carbon
dioxide, and temperature should be continuously monitored.
Maintenance of mean arterial blood pressure above 60 mmHg and
prevention of hypoxemia are anesthetic goals [191]. Neuroglycopenic
animals are prone to intraoperative hypotension [196–198].
Adequate organ perfusion may help reduce the risk of postoperative
complications such as pancreatitis, which is one of the most com-
mon complications following partial pancreatectomy. In addition to
hypoglycemia, 	hypothermia 	is 	another 	common 	complica-
tion [194], and active patient warming techniques are advised
(Fig. 42.7).
Serial BG measurement should be continued postoperatively.
Animals with advanced stages of the disease, with gross metastasis at
the time of surgery or with partially resected primary tumors, are
likely to have persistent signs of hypoglycemia postoperatively
[179,181,183,199]. 	Persistent 	postoperative 	hypoglycemia 	is
associated with decreased survival times in dogs and ferrets [181,199].
Transient hyperglycemia may also occur in some animals due to
atrophy of the remaining pancreatic β-cells, and it appears to be a
positive 	prognostic 	factor 	[172,181]. 	Temporary 	insulin
administration 	may 	be 	needed 	until 	BG 	concentrations
stabilize [169,191]. Development of DM following insulinoma
resection has also been reported and, in these cases, permanent
Figure 42.7 Ferret under inhalant anesthesia being monitored with
Doppler, oscillometric blood pressure, ECG, pulse oximetry, and
capnography. A circulating warm water blanket is used for
thermoregulatory support. Source: Dr. Teela Jones, with permission.

-- 923 of 1450 --

908 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
insulin treatment may be required [181]. Other potential
postoperative complications include duodenal necrosis due to
vascular compromise, ventricular arrhythmias, and CNS dysfunction
secondary to prolonged hypoglycemia [56,105,191].
Pancreatitis
Although pancreatitis is not considered a endocrinopathy per se, the
disease may affect both exocrine and endocrine pancreatic
functions. While patients are not frequently anesthetized for
surgical or medical intervention of pancreatitis, it may be necessary
to anesthetize or sedate an animal with concurrent pancreatitis.
Pancreatitis is a painful condition and multimodal analgesic
protocols are paramount. Sedation with an IV opioid and an
analgesic CRI including an opioid, lidocaine, and/or ketamine are
recommended. Advanced analgesic techniques may be required due
to uncontrolled or refractory pain. A continuous TAP block using
bupivacaine administered through a catheter was reported to
reduce pain scores in dogs with acute pancreatitis and abdominal
pain [200]. The authors routinely perform a combination of caudal
intercostal nerve blocks in conjunction with bilateral, cranial TAP
blocks and/or epidural regional anesthesia for animals with
refractory pain. In people, regional anesthesia with bupivacaine and
liposomal-encapsulated bupivacaine has shown promising results
for management of pancreatitis and postoperative pain [201–203].
Anecdotally, off-label use of liposomal bupivacaine (Nocita®) for
TAP and intercostal nerve blocks can provide efficient and longer
lasting analgesia in dogs and cats, but no published data are
currently available in veterinary medicine.
Thyroid gland
The thyroid gland has two lobes, one on each side of the trachea.
Each lobe is located distal to the larynx, ventrolateral to the trachea,
and extending from the fifth to eighth tracheal rings. The thyroid
gland is composed of numerous follicles lined by epithelial cells that
produce and secrete hormones. These follicles serve as a storage
area for precursors of thyroid hormones. Interspersed between the
follicles, clusters of parafollicular or C cells are found that produce
calcitonin. The parathyroid glands are located in very close proxim-
ity to the thyroid gland [3].
The thyroid gland is regulated by the hypothalamic–pituitary–
thyroid axis, which is an endocrine negative feedback loop. When
thyroid hormone (TH) is needed, the hypothalamus releases
thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) that triggers the anterior
pituitary gland to secrete thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
(also known as “thyrotropin”). TSH stimulates the thyroid gland
to release hormones, most importantly thyroxine (T4) and triio-
dothyronine (T3) (Fig. 42.1). In the liver, kidney, brain, and skeletal
muscle, T4 is converted to T3. T3 and, to a lesser extent, T4
control the secretion of TRH and TSH through negative feed-
back [204,205]. Physiologic concentrations of TH are anabolic
and vital to nervous system development, growth, basal metabo-
lism, and thermogenesis.
Hypothyroidism
Reduction of circulating concentrations of the active thyroid
hormones T3 and T4 results in hypothyroidism. This clinical
syndrome may be congenital or acquired and occurs due to a defect
in any part of the hypothalamic–pituitary–thyroid axis. Primary
hypothyroidism occurs commonly in dogs, where it is most often an
immune-mediated disease caused by lymphocytic infiltration of the
thyroid gland with eventual destruction of thyroid tissue [206].
Idiopathic atrophy of the thyroid gland, with no associated
inflammatory component, is also described in the dog as a cause of
clinical hypothyroidism [206].
Hypothyroidism occurs most often in middle-aged to older dogs
(median age 7 years) [206–208]. There is no known sex predilec-
tion [209]. Large purebred dogs such as Doberman Pinschers, Great
Danes, Irish Setters, English Setters, and Golden Retrievers appear
to be predisposed.
Clinical presentation
Clinical signs of hypothyroidism are caused by a decrease in meta-
bolic rate. Signs are vague and non-specific and include weight gain,
hair loss, dry skin and hair coat, and decreased activity [207,210].
Other abnormalities such as pyoderma, otitis, seizures, facial
paralysis, laryngeal paralysis, megaesophagus, and myopathies have
been anecdotally observed in animals with hypothyroidism [210,211].
In severe forms of the disease, myxedema can develop. Myxedema
occurs when abnormally high amounts of mucin accumulate in the
skin and other tissues resulting in edematous skin. Myxedema
coma is a rare syndrome characterized by myxedema, severe leth-
argy, hypotension, hypoventilation, and hypothermia [212].
Clinical pathology
Mild normocytic normochromic anemia is the most common
hematological abnormality present. It is likely due to decreased pro-
duction of erythropoietin and lack of TH effects on bone
marrow [207,210,213].
Serum biochemistry findings include hypercholesterolemia and
hypertriglyceridemia [207,210,213]. These abnormalities are com-
mon in hypothyroid dogs because inadequate TH levels impact
lipid metabolism, including impaired degradation (lipolysis).
Diagnosis and treatment
Routine screening tests to assess total T4 may not be reliable. Factors
such as systemic illness (i.e., euthyroid sick syndrome) or the
administration of drugs such as corticosteroids, carprofen, and
sulfonamides, may decrease total T4 concentrations resulting in an
erroneous diagnosis of hypothyroidism [214–216]. A more accurate
test is the evaluation of serum free T4 in combination with canine
thyroid-stimulating hormone (cTSH) concentrations. However,
considerable overlap of test results may still occur in dogs with
hypothyroidism compared to dogs with non-thyroid disease [217].
Circulating antibodies against thyroglobulin may be a marker for
lymphocytic thyroiditis and could help support the diagnosis [213].
Additionally, TSH stimulation testing could also be performed, but
the expense and unavailability of TSH limits the use of this test.
Treatment of hypothyroidism involves daily supplementation
with l-thyroxine (levothyroxine, synthetic T4). Follow-up measure-
ment of total T4 approximately 6 h postadministration can be used
to monitor treatment success [210]. Therapy may also be monitored
based on clinical response and normalization of hematological and
biochemical abnormalities.
Anesthetic considerations
Prior to sedation or anesthesia for elective procedures, hypothyroid
animals should be appropriately treated with synthetic hor-
mones [2]. Blood work should be performed to assess the possible
presence of mild to moderate anemia. In most cases, however, the
anemia observed in animals with hypothyroidism is not clinically
significant [218]. Severe hypothyroidism resulting in profound

-- 924 of 1450 --

Chapter 42: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Endocrine Disease 	909
cardiovascular and/or neurological effects is rare, but stabilization
of these patients prior to anesthesia is critical [4,218]. Stabilization
of cases of myxedema coma involves administration of IV thyroid
supplementation and cardiovascular support [219].
Muscle weakness and obesity are often present, which may
compromise the animal’s ability to ventilate spontaneously and
oxygenate appropriately during the perioperative period. Markedly
obese dogs have reduced function residual capacity and compression
and absorption atelectasis due to increased thoracic fat deposition
can exacerbate ventilation–perfusion (V/Q) mismatch during
anesthesia [220,221]. Positioning the patient in sternal recumbency
is recommended when feasible as dorsal recumbency may result in
further V/Q mismatch [222]. Ideally, mechanical ventilation should
be available to support ventilation intraoperatively when needed.
Hair thinning or alopecia is common in hypothyroid animals,
which may result in marked intraoperative hypothermia if
thermoregulatory support is not provided. Temperature should be
closely monitored, and active warming devices utilized.
Dogs with hypothyroidism may also have comorbidities such as
laryngeal paralysis and megaesophagus, making them more prone
to regurgitation and aspiration pneumonia [27]. Adequate fasting
prior to any procedure and rapid airway capture following induc-
tion of anesthesia is recommended. Appropriate equipment such as
suction canisters with tubing should be readily available to manage
regurgitation if it occurs.
Untreated and inadequately treated hypothyroid patients have
reduced metabolic rates and decreased hepatic metabolism of
drugs, which could potentially prolong recovery after sedation or
anesthesia [2,27]. Recoveries may be further delayed in hypother-
mic patients.
Anesthetic management
No specific drug protocol is contraindicated in well-managed,
otherwise healthy animals that are euthyroid at the time of
anesthesia. However, patients with poorly controlled or uncontrolled
hypothyroidism may present with comorbidities that necessitate
anesthesia. Short-acting drugs that are rapidly metabolized or
reversible are usually preferred. Especially in a lethargic geriatric
animal, an opioid such as methadone or hydromorphone combined
with a benzodiazepine such as midazolam generally produces
adequate preanesthetic sedation. Acepromazine is an irreversible
drug that can exacerbate hypotension and hypothermia; thus, it
should not be administered to hypovolemic and/or anemic animals.
α2
- Adrenergic 	receptor 	agonists 	may 	cause 	or 	exacerbate
hypothermia, bradyarrhythmias, and decreased cardiac output.
Since cardiac output may already be impaired in dogs with poorly
controlled hypothyroidism due to reduced myocardial contractility,
α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists are not usually a first-line choice in
these patients [209]. For stable, previously hypothyroid animals,
acepromazine and dexmedetomidine are often administered in
conjunction with an opioid.
In obese animals, body composition changes may affect the
pharmacokinetics 	and 	pharmacodynamics 	of 	administered
drugs [223]. Reduction of anesthetic drug dose or dose calculation
based on lean/ideal body weight should be considered in obese
hypothyroid dogs [224,225]. Heavy sedation in obese dogs results in
poor oxygenation variables and, thus, should be avoided [221], or
supplemental oxygen should be provided. Prior to induction of
anesthesia, preoxygenation of the hypothyroid dog is recommended.
Preoxygenation with a tight-fitting face mask has been shown to
prolong the time to desaturation [70,71].
Although it is likely that most anesthetic agents have been used in
hypothyroid animals without any perceived increase in anesthetic
risk, propofol or alfaxalone and inhalant agents are often
recommended 	for 	anesthetic 	induction 	and 	maintenance,
respectively [2]. Isoflurane produces similar dose-dependent
decreases in cardiac output and blood pressure in both euthyroid
and hypothyroid dogs and, thus, is a suitable anesthetic in these
patients. As with any patient, isoflurane-induced cardiovascular
depression can be minimized by using balanced anesthetic
techniques [226]. Halothane, though no longer available in many
countries, has direct myocardial depressant effects and should be
avoided to preserve cardiac output [2,227]. Studies have shown that
the MAC of halothane and isoflurane in both euthyroid and
hypothyroid dogs are clinically similar [226,228]. Anecdotally,
hypothyroid dogs appear to have reduced requirements for
anesthetic drugs. This clinical impression may be related to
hypothyroid dogs being more prone to hypothermia, which has
MAC-sparing effects, as well as inadvertent administration of
higher doses of injectable drugs in obese patients. Euthyroid obese
dogs have been shown to require smaller effective propofol doses
for induction of anesthesia compared to ideal weight dogs when the
dosage was calculated based on total body weight [226].
Continuous monitoring of heart rate and rhythm, blood pressure,
ventilation, oxygenation, and temperature is important for the
anesthetic management of these patients. Fluid therapy rate may be
adjusted based on ideal body weight in obese patients [229,230].
Sinus bradycardia, low QRS amplitude, inverted T waves, and
decreased left ventricular function have been observed in
hypothyroid dogs [210]. Bradycardia and hypotension are common
intraoperative 	complications 	and 	should 	be 	treated 	with
anticholinergics, crystalloid or synthetic colloid fluid therapy, and
positive inotropes [2,4]. Rewarming hypothermic patients may also
improve or correct bradycardia and hypotension. Hypoventilation
is common, especially when obesity is present, and mechanical
ventilation may be required to maintain normocapnia and adequate
oxygenation. Thermoregulatory support should be provided to
prevent and treat hypothermia.
Slow recoveries may occur as mentioned previously. Diligent
monitoring with pulse oximetry, provision of ventilatory support,
oxygen supplementation, and active warming, when indicated, are
vital during the recovery period. Patients with myxedema coma
may require IV hormone replacement therapy with l-thyroxine
postoperatively [27,231].
Hyperthyroidism
Excessive circulating concentrations of active T3 and T4 result in
hyperthyroidism. This clinical syndrome is usually caused by
poorly controlled hypersecretion of TH from autonomously hyper-
functional nodules of the thyroid gland [232]. The etiology of this
disease is unknown but, similar to human patients with toxic nodu-
lar goiter, activating mutations of TSH receptors may be
involved [233].
In cats, the most common thyroid gland disease resulting in
hyperthyroidism is benign adenomatous hyperplasia [234,235]. In
rare cases (only 1–2% of cats with thyrotoxicosis), thyroid carcinoma
is the cause. Hyperthyroidism occurs much less commonly in dogs
compared to cats, and thyroid carcinoma is the most common cause
in this species. Hyperthyroidism is documented in less than 20% of
dogs diagnosed with thyroid carcinoma [236]. In contrast to thyroid
adenomas in cats, thyroid carcinomas in dogs are usually large and
invasive [237].

-- 925 of 1450 --

910 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
Hyperthyroidism is one of the most common disorders of
middle- aged and older cats (mean age 12 years) [238,239]. There is
no sex or breed predilection [234,238,239].
Clinical presentation
Clinical signs of hyperthyroidism are multisystemic and caused
by pathologically high metabolism due to sustained excessive
circulating TH concentrations. High levels of TH are catabolic
and cause increased gluconeogenesis, protein breakdown, and
nitrogen wasting. Common clinical signs include weight loss with
normal or increased appetite, polyphagia, vomiting, diarrhea, PU/
PD, hyperactivity, and behavioral changes that can range from
depression to aggression.
Hypertension, myocardial hypertrophy, chronic cellular malnutri-
tion, hepatocellular stress, and decreased gastrointestinal transit time
are also observed in animals with hyperthyroidism [234,238,239].
Physical examination findings include poor body condition, tachy-
cardia, heart murmur, gallop rhythm, palpable unilateral or bilateral
thyroid nodules, and an unkempt hair coat (Fig. 42.8) [238,239].
Thyrotoxic storm, described as a syndrome of severe hyperthy-
roidism, occurs rarely in cats and dogs [240–242]. This life-
threatening manifestation of the disease results in severe
tachycardia, fever, gastrointestinal signs, and CNS signs. Thyrotoxic
storm is not well described in veterinary medicine, and specific
triggers are unknown.
Clinical pathology
Mild erythrocytosis is the most common hematological finding in
cats with hyperthyroidism [239]. This is likely mediated through
TH effects (β-adrenergic stimulation) on the bone marrow and an
increase in oxygen consumption resulting in increased erythropoi-
etin levels.
Serum biochemistry findings include mild to marked elevation
of liver-derived enzyme activity, a mild increase in BUN without a
concurrent increase in creatinine concentrations, and hypokalemia.
Elevations in alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and/or serum ALP
activity are found in approximately 75% of hyperthyroid cats. A
study of hyperthyroid cats with severe elevations in liver enzymes
showed normal liver function [243]. Increased BUN occurs due to
increased protein catabolism. Elevations in both BUN and creati-
nine levels may indicate the presence of concurrent renal dis-
ease [234,235,239,243,244]. Hypokalemia may be observed in
hyperthyroid cats due to movement of potassium from the extracel-
lular space into the intracellular space stimulated by high TH levels
and stress-induced release of catecholamines [245,246].
Animals with thyrotoxic storm have similar clinical pathology
findings to those described above. However, these animals also pre-
sent with extremely high concentrations of TH [242].
Diagnosis and treatment
Enlargement of one or both thyroid glands can be detected during
physical examination in many cats with hyperthyroidism; however,
this is not a pathognomonic finding. Diagnosis is based on clinical
presentation, as described above, and measurement of total
T4 levels. High serum total T4 concentration confirms the diagnosis
in most cases [247]. Some hyperthyroid cats may have occult
hyperthyroidism with normal total T4 concentrations. This may be
due to fluctuations in hormone concentrations or concurrent non-
thyroidal disease. In these cases, other diagnostic tests such as
measurement of free T4, repeated measurements of total T4, thyroid
scintigraphy, or T3 suppression testing may be required [247,248].
Heart murmurs and gallop sounds are often detected during
physical examination of cats with hyperthyroidism and concurrent
comorbidities such as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) may
be present. Therefore, thoracic imaging and echocardiography may
be useful in assessing the cardiovascular system of these patients.
(A)
(B)
Figure 42.8 A. A cat with hyperthyroidism presented with weight loss and
depression. These signs suggest that poorly controlled hyperthyroidism
and elective anesthesia should be delayed. Source: Dr. Todd Green,
Department of Small Animal Medicine and Surgery, St. George’s
University, St. George’s, Grenada; with permission. B. Thyroid nodule
palpation in a cat with hyperthyroidism. Source: Dr. Thomas Graves, with
permission.

-- 926 of 1450 --

Chapter 42: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Endocrine Disease 	911
The cardiac biomarkers N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide
(NTproBNP) and cardiac troponin I were elevated in cats with
hyperthyroidism before treatment but were not able to distinguish
between thyrotoxic myopathy and primary feline HCM [238]. In
hyperthyroid dogs, thoracic radiographs are recommended to
investigate the presence of pulmonary metastases. Abdominal
ultrasound may be performed in hyperthyroid cats to assess renal
architecture and size, although further renal testing may better
define renal function.
The treatment of choice for feline hyperthyroidism is radioiodine
therapy. It is non-invasive, has few side effects, and is effective in
most cases [249]. Another effective treatment option is medical
management with methimazole or carbimazole [250]. However,
these antithyroid drugs often cause side effects such as vomiting,
self-induced facial excoriation, and anorexia. Surgical thyroidectomy
is less common in cats but is still performed in some cases [246].
Surgical complications include iatrogenic hypoparathyroidism,
laryngeal paralysis, and hypothyroidism. Approximately 30% of cats
with hyperthyroidism develop mild but stable renal failure following
medical treatment [251]. β-Adrenergic receptor antagonists,
amlodipine, or ACE inhibitors may be used to manage tachycardia
and hypertension in cats with hyperthyroidism [27,156,252].
Management of thyroid carcinoma in dogs is dependent on the
size and stage of the tumor [236]. Surgery may be a viable option for
small non-invasive tumors. Large or non-resectable tumors may
require radiation and chemotherapy; however, treatment is rarely
curative.
Although uncommon, thyroid storm is usually treated with
antithyroid drugs to decrease hormone synthesis. TH secretion may
be inhibited by administration of iodine (oral potassium iodide,
oral ipodate, or IV sodium iodide). Additionally, corticosteroids
may be administered to inhibit the peripheral conversion of T4 to
the active hormone T3. Hyperthermia should be treated and fluid
therapy used to correct dehydration. If the patient presents in heart
failure, appropriate management (e.g., diuretic agents) should be
initiated. Tachyarrhythmias may be treated with β-adrenergic
blockers.
Anesthetic considerations
Whenever possible, hyperthyroidism should be treated prior to
sedation or general anesthesia. Medications including methimazole
can be administered on the morning of surgery. A preoperative
thyroid panel can confirm a euthyroid state. If total T4 or free T4
are above the reference range, elective procedures should be
postponed, and treatment with carbimazole or methimazole for
6–12 weeks may be indicated to minimize anesthetic and surgical
complications [253].
A thorough examination should be performed to assess the
cardiorespiratory system and hydration status. Blood work will help
assess hydration (PCV and TS) and renal function (BUN and
creatinine) and reveal any electrolyte abnormalities (e.g., potassium
and calcium) [156]. Baseline ECG and blood pressure measurements
should be obtained, especially if a heart murmur, gallop rhythm,
HCM, or azotemia is present or suspected. Hypertension may be
seen in animals with untreated or unregulated hyperthyroidism
and/or with chronic kidney disease (CKD). In hypertensive animals
with CKD, renal autoregulatory mechanisms that normally stabilize
GFR over a wide range of blood pressures (80–180 mmHg) may be
impaired and shifted to a higher range. Therefore, even mild
decreases in blood pressure during anesthesia may decrease renal
blood flow and GFR. The authors recommend maintaining the
arterial blood pressure within 20% of resting blood pressure
measurements as a goal. Additionally, preanesthetic fluids to restore
normovolemia and hydration may be considered [254], but caution
is advised in animals with cardiac abnormalities. Correcting
dehydration preoperatively and preserving cardiac output through
use of anesthetic-sparing techniques may help reduce episodes of
intraoperative hypotension.
Intraoperative hypotension may be exacerbated in hypertensive
animals treated with drugs such as atenolol, amlodipine, or ACE
inhibitors. A study in healthy dogs treated with enalapril showed
increased severity of intraoperative hypotension. Extrapolating
from these data, withholding ACE inhibitors for 24 h prior to the
scheduled procedure could be considered [60].
Hemorrhage during surgical excision of thyroid tumors may
occur. Many of these tumors are highly vascularized and, especially
in dogs, they are often large and invasive. Patients with larger
tumors should be blood typed and crossmatched prior to anesthe-
sia, and blood products should be readily available to manage intra-
operative blood loss.
A possible postoperative complication, especially following bilat-
eral thyroidectomy, is the development of transient hypocalcemia.
Hypocalcemia may occur due to removal, damage, or local edema of
the parathyroid glands. Postoperative measurement of calcium levels
is advised, and supplementation may be required [246,255,256].
Anesthetic management
If emergency surgery is required in an untreated hyperthyroid cat,
cardiovascular stabilization is paramount. Fluid resuscitation and
electrolyte supplementation may be required, especially in cats
experiencing PU/PD and vomiting. Cats with concurrent hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy, tachyarrhythmias, or hypertension should
be managed as described previously.
No specific drug protocol is contraindicated in treated, otherwise
healthy cats that are euthyroid on the time of anesthesia. However,
many cats with hyperthyroidism are presented with comorbidities
requiring specific anesthetic management. When sedating or
anesthetizing these animals, the goal should be to minimize
increases in oxygen consumption, hypertension, tachycardia, and
arrhythmias. Pain- and stress-induced catecholamine release should
be avoided or minimized; therefore, multimodal analgesia and low-
stress handling techniques are paramount.
Premedication 	of 	hyperthyroid 	cats 	generally 	includes
administration of an opioid. Opioids cause dose-dependent
decreases in heart rate and, thus, myocardial oxygen consumption. If
dogs and cats are undergoing non-painful procedures, butorphanol
is often the agent of choice. For surgical or painful procedures, a full
μ-opioid receptor agonist is generally used. Benzodiazepines or
acepromazine may be included in the preanesthetic protocol [257].
Benzodiazepines are good choices for sick, unstable animals due to
minimal cardiorespiratory effects, but in healthy animals, paradoxical
excitement or disinhibition may ensue. Acepromazine, an α-
adrenergic receptor antagonist, causes vasodilation and could help
counteract pre-existing hypertension. It may also reduce the
sensitivity of the myocardium to catecholamines thus decreasing the
occurrence of catecholamine-induced arrhythmias. Acepromazine,
however, has long-lasting, irreversible effects and may worsen
intraoperative hypotension. Its use should be avoided when the
patient is hypovolemic, on antihypertensive medication, or when
tumors are large or invasive with increased risk of blood loss. In cats
with HCM, acepromazine is usually avoided because it may reduce
preload and increase the pressure gradient across the left ventricular

-- 927 of 1450 --

912 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
outflow tract in these patients. Low doses of α2
-adrenergic receptor
agonists such as dexmedetomidine may increase preload, reduce
heart rate, and enhance diastolic filling in some patients with
HCM [258], but this must be weighed against the potential for
reduced cardiac output. In fractious cats, alfaxalone could be added
to the preanesthetic protocol to improve sedation. It causes dose-
dependent 	immobilization 	with 	minimal 	cardiorespiratory
depression [258–260].
Intravenous propofol or alfaxalone are common agents used to
induce anesthesia but can cause dose-dependent hypotension and
hypoventilation [261]. Etomidate can also be used, especially for
cats with advanced heart disease. This agent has minimal
cardiovascular effects and is usually co-administered with a
benzodiazepine. However, etomidate may not be the drug of choice
for systemically ill patients undergoing invasive procedures due to
its transient suppression of cortisol secretion. Propofol and
alfaxalone can also be co-administered with a benzodiazepine,
which reduces the required dose of the primary anesthetic agent,
potentially reducing side effects [262].
Induction doses of dissociative, sympathomimetic anesthetic
agents such as ketamine stimulate sympathetic output resulting in
an increase in heart rate and a decrease in ventricular filling [2,257].
Telazol® also increases sympathetic tone resulting in an increase in
heart rate and mean arterial pressure [263]. Drugs known to
increase heart rate and myocardial oxygen demand or consumption
should be avoided or used with caution in hyperthyroid cats, espe-
cially if HCM is also present. Chamber induction of anesthesia with
an inhalant agent is also not recommended due to the high stress
levels associated with this technique, environmental contamina-
tion, and limited monitoring ability.
Anesthesia is generally maintained with inhalant anesthetics
such as isoflurane or sevoflurane. Halothane, though no longer
available in many countries, was historically avoided in these
patients as it could sensitize the myocardium to catecholamines and
produce arrhythmias [264]. A balanced anesthesia protocol with
short-acting opioid infusions and locoregional anesthetic tech-
niques will help maintain adequate anesthetic depth, supplement
analgesia, and avoid exaggerated sympathetic nervous system
responses [27].
Blood pressure, heart rate, and ECG should be closely monitored.
Invasive (direct) blood pressure monitoring is considered the gold
standard and should be performed in patients that are critically ill,
have renal or cardiac disease, or are undergoing surgery for large or
invasive tumor resection. Fluid rates should be tailored to the
patients’ health status; they should be decreased in patients with
cardiac disease or congestive heart failure, or marginally increased
in patients with renal disease [265]. The increased metabolic rate
associated with feline hyperthyroidism increases demand for oxy-
gen and glucose, and production of carbon dioxide. This, combined
with poor body condition and possible muscle weakness, makes
these animals more prone to hypoxemia, hypercapnia, and hypo-
thermia. Preoxygenation, provision of thermoregulatory support,
continuous monitoring with pulse oximetry and capnography, and
ventilatory support are recommended.
Hyperthyroid animals, especially if receiving antihypertensive
drugs, may have refractory hypotension intraoperatively, requiring
positive inotropes. In cats with nonobstructive HCM, dopamine
was reported to increase cardiac output. However, in HCM cats with
outflow tract obstruction, positive inotropes may increase
obstruction to blood flow further decreasing cardiac output.
Management of hypotension in cats with HCM is often
challenging [266]. Phenylephrine was reported to increase blood
pressure in cats with HCM but did not increase cardiac output [266].
If profound bradycardia and hypotension persist despite adequate
anesthetic depth, normothermia, and provision of MAC-sparing
drugs, a low-dose dobutamine infusion or anticholinergic may be
required. Anticholinergics may reduce diastolic filling due to
tachycardia [267] and are usually avoided by the authors, except in
emergency situations. These agents cause parasympathetic blockade
leading to an increase in myocardial oxygen consumption and
increased arrhythmogenicity. Dobutamine in hypovolemic patients
or at high infusion rates may result in tachyarrhythmias and should
be used with caution. However, dobutamine may be a more
favorable option in this situation due to its short duration of action.
Anesthetic recovery should occur in a quiet place and sedation
may be administered. To smooth recovery and decrease stress-
related catecholamine release, a low dose of a sedative such as
acepromazine (0.005–0.01 mg/kg IV) may be administered if there
are no contraindications. Thyrotoxic storm may be seen in the
postanesthetic period. This is rare but may occur in untreated or
poorly managed hyperthyroid patients. Monitoring of heart rate
and rhythm, respiratory rate, blood pressure, body temperature,
and, ideally, pulse oximetry should be continued throughout
recovery.
Thyroid neoplasia
In dogs, most thyroid tumors are non-functional carcinomas, and
they do not secrete excessive TH. Pulmonary metastases are com-
mon, and local invasion of tissues such as the trachea, esophagus,
musculature, and vasculature may occur [268]. Dogs with thyroid
tumors usually present with a large space-occupying lesion in the
ventral cervical region (Fig. 42.9).
Clinical signs are associated with the size of the thyroid tumor
and secondary damage to the cervical tissues. These may include
stridor, dyspnea, coughing, gagging, dysphagia, anorexia, weight
loss, and concurrent laryngeal paralysis [268,269].
Diagnostic evaluation of thyroid tumors includes biopsy of the
mass and serum TH measurement. Thoracic radiographs are indi-
cated to identify pulmonary metastases [268]. Other imaging
modalities, such as CT or MRI, may identify the extent of local
invasion. Thyroidectomy is preferred for mobile, well-differentiated
tumors, whereas unresectable tumors can sometimes be treated
with radiation or radioactive iodine-131 [268].
Anesthetic considerations and management
Maintenance of a patent airway, provision of analgesia, and readi-
ness to manage possible sudden blood loss are the main goals of
anesthesia. Hemorrhage has been reported as the most common
intraoperative complication in thyroidectomies [268]. Blood prod-
ucts should be available and, ideally, preanesthetic evaluation
should include a coagulation panel, blood type, and cross-
match [270]. Aspiration pneumonia has been the most reported
postoperative complication following tumor resection [269].
Laryngeal paralysis may be identified postoperatively; therefore,
airway examination at the time of intubation and extubation is
warranted [269].
Combinations of dexmedetomidine or acepromazine with
hydromorphone or butorphanol have been studied for provision of
sedation 	while 	maintaining 	laryngeal 	function 	for 	airway
evaluation [271,272]. Heavy sedation should be performed
cautiously in patients with respiratory compromise, and equipment
for intubation along with an injectable induction agent, such as

-- 928 of 1450 --

Chapter 42: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Endocrine Disease 	913
propofol, should be readily available. Although full μ-opioid
receptor agonists can cause dose-related respiratory depression,
they are routinely administered for invasive and/or painful
procedures and are still considered the gold standard for analgesia.
However, 	opioids 	associated 	with 	high 	incidences 	of
gastroesophageal reflux and/or regurgitation, such as morphine and
hydromorphone [273,274], may be best avoided.
Prior to induction of anesthesia, preoxygenation is recom-
mended to prolong the time to desaturation [71]. If tracheal inva-
sion is present, multiple endotracheal tubes, guarded endotracheal
tubes, and tracheostomy supplies should be available. Propofol or
alfaxalone is often administered for induction of anesthesia, espe-
cially if airway evaluation is being performed prior to endotracheal
intubation [272]. Alternatively, a ketamine–benzodiazepine combi-
nation may be administered to induce anesthesia and will provide
additional analgesia. All induction agents should be administered
to effect as they cause dose-dependent respiratory depression.
Inhalant anesthetics such as isoflurane or sevoflurane are typically
used for maintenance of anesthesia.
Direct arterial blood pressure, pulse oximetry, ECG, and
capnography should be monitored intraoperatively. Volume
resuscitation during acute hemorrhage may include isotonic
crystalloids, artificial colloids, and/or blood products, preferably
whole blood transfusion, depending on the magnitude of blood
lost [106]. Hypertonic saline 7.5% (4 mL/kg IV over 10–20 min) has
been shown to improve hemodynamic performance without
inducing signs of volume overload in a canine model of hemorrhagic
shock 	[108]. 	Multimodal 	analgesia 	and 	anesthetic-sparing
techniques will allow reduction of delivered inhalant concentrations
and thereby minimize adverse cardiovascular side effects.
Alterations in renal blood flow and renal injury may occur in
patients 	receiving 	NSAIDs 	that 	experience 	hypotension/
hypovolemia during anesthesia [275]. Therefore, it is recommended
to delay NSAID administration until the postoperative period when
the patient’s hemodynamic status has been re-evaluated and
determined to be stable.
Complications during recovery may be related to laryngeal
paralysis, aspiration pneumonia, tracheal compression, and
hemorrhage. To reduce the incidence of aspiration pneumonia
during extubation and promote adequate ventilation, the patient
should recover in sternal recumbency with the head slightly
elevated. A strong swallow should be evident before removing the
endotracheal tube. If regurgitation is observed or suspected, leaving
the endotracheal tube cuff partially inflated during extubation may
further protect the airway from gastric contents. Supplies for
induction of anesthesia and rapid re-intubation should be readily
available in the event of airway obstruction.
Hypocalcemia may develop in cases where the parathyroid gland
was not preserved, requiring supplementation with calcium and
vitamin D [276]. Serial measurements of ionized calcium should be
considered in cases where preservation of the parathyroid gland
was not possible or is uncertain.
Parathyroid gland
The parathyroid glands are located near the thyroid gland [3]. Dogs
and cats have four parathyroid glands, two embedded near the cau-
domedial pole of each lobe of the thyroid and two external glands
typically on the cranial dorsolateral surface of the thyroid lobe.
Ectopic parathyroid tissue is common in cats, less so in dogs [277].
The parathyroid glands have densely packed cells surrounding cap-
illary vessels [3].
Parathyroid glands produce and secrete parathyroid hormone
(PTH) in response to decreased serum calcium concentrations. There
are no PTH releasing or stimulating hormones. PTH increases serum
calcium via three main mechanisms: (1) it stimulates activity of
(A) 	(B)
Figure 42.9 A. Although large thyroid masses are most common in dogs, cats are occasionally diagnosed with this disease. Large space-occupying masses
can be associated with respiratory distress prior to anesthesia and may represent a challenge for endotracheal intubation. Source: Dr. Robert Sherding,
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH; with permission. B. Large mass in the ventral neck compressing
the trachea. Airway obstruction may occur in recovery due to edema and hemorrhage. Source: Dr. Stephen Birchard, Circle City Veterinary Specialty and
Emergency Hospital, Carmel, IN; with permission.

-- 929 of 1450 --

914 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
osteoclasts to reabsorb bone; (2) it results in absorption of calcium
from the gastrointestinal tract (GIT) via the activated form of vitamin
D, which is produced in the kidney; and (3) it reduces excretion of
calcium in the urine [3]. In healthy animals, normal or increased
serum ionized calcium (iCa) concentrations have a strong negative
feedback effect on PTH secretion and also stimulate the thyroid to
release calcitonin which has opposite effects of PTH (Fig. 42.1).
Hyperparathyroidism
Increased concentrations of circulating PTH result in hyperparath-
yroidism. When excessive amounts of PTH are produced, persistent
hypercalcemia occurs and calcification of soft tissues, with resultant
dysfunction 	of 	affected 	structures 	or 	organs, 	ensues.
Hyperparathyroidism can be a primary or secondary disorder.
Primary hyperparathyroidism is generally caused by a singular
benign adenoma of an extracapsular parathyroid gland. Parathyroid
adenomas 	autonomously 	secrete 	PTH, 	causing 	hypercalce-
mia [278,279]. Parathyroid adenocarcinomas are very rare.
Secondary hyperparathyroidism is an adaptive increase in PTH
induced by hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia associated with
CKD or an unbalanced diet [280]. The following discussion is
focused on primary hyperparathyroidism in the dog.
Primary hyperparathyroidism is an uncommon disorder of
middle-aged and older dogs (mean age 10.2 years) and is a rare con-
dition in cats. There is no known breed or sex predilection [278,281–
283]. However, a genetic predisposition for parathyroid tumors has
been found in Keeshonds [284].
Clinical presentation
Clinical signs of primary hyperparathyroidism are often lacking. In
many cases, an incidental finding of increased total calcium (tCa)
concentration on routine blood work warrants further investigation
and measurement of ionized calcium (iCa) concentration. Ionized
calcium is the physiologic active form and is a superior measure-
ment compared with tCa in patients with hyperparathy-
roidism [285]. Furthermore, prediction of iCa based on tCa
concentration was less accurate in patients with concurrent diseases
such as CKD [285]. On physical examination, parathyroid adeno-
mas are small and rarely palpable in dogs, but they may be palpable
in cats [286,287]. Some animals may display mild clinical signs
because of severity or chronicity of hypercalcemia.
Polyuria and polydipsia are the most commonly reported clinical
signs. Hypercalcemia interferes with the ability of the kidneys to
concentrate urine resulting in polyuria. There is an impaired
response to ADH due to calcium interference with vasopressin V 2
receptors in the renal tubules. Activation of calcium-sensing recep-
tors decreases reabsorption of sodium, potassium, and chloride and
causes downregulation of aquaporin-2 water channels. Polydipsia
follows to compensate for fluid loss from frequent urina-
tion [278,288]. In severe cases, or with chronic hypercalcemia, ani-
mals may present dehydrated or hypovolemic.
Lower urinary tract inflammation and urolithiases (calcium-
containing urinary stones) in the bladder, ureters, or kidneys may
also be identified in animals with hyperparathyroidism. In addi-
tion, hypercalcemia affects intestinal function, and animals may
present for vomiting, weight loss, constipation, or anorexia.
Clinical pathology
Hypercalcemia is the most consistent finding in animals with
hyperparathyroidism. High calcium causes increased excretion of
other electrolytes such as phosphorus, sodium, and potassium.
Serum biochemistry may reveal hypophosphatemia and azotemia.
Urinalysis may reveal low USG. These findings may be due to the
diuretic effects of hypercalcemia; however, chronic hypercalcemia
may cause renal damage resulting in CKD in some dogs [27,279].
Acid–base status and urea and creatinine concentrations should be
assessed in patients with suspected CKD.
Diagnosis and treatment
Diagnosis of hyperparathyroidism is based on elevated iCa, a history
of PU/PD, a low or low-normal serum phosphorus concentration,
and an inappropriately high serum concentration of PTH. A “normal”
concentration of PTH in the presence of hypercalcemia is also
indicative of hyperparathyroidism because PTH secretion should
be suppressed by increased levels of calcium [289]. PTH has been
reported to be within the normal reference range in cats with
hyperparathyroidism [285]. Cervical ultrasonography correlates well
with direct tumor measurements and has been recommended [287,290].
Urinalysis and abdominal ultrasound often reveal urinary tract
infections, cystic calculi, and renal mineralization [278,287].
Initial 	treatment 	of 	hypercalcemia 	includes 	intravenous
administration of 0.9% sodium chloride (100–125 mL/kg/day)
aimed at improving GFR, increasing renal calcium and sodium
excretion, and thus decreasing calcium reabsorption [291,292].
Additionally, some animals may also be hypovolemic due to urinary
and gastrointestinal water losses, and fluid resuscitation is
paramount. Water ad libitum should be available to animals with
hypercalcemia. Once normovolemic, furosemide, a loop diuretic,
can be administered (2–4 mg/kg twice or three times daily) to help
increase renal calcium excretion. To further decrease calcium
concentrations 	in 	animals 	with 	persistent 	hypercalcemia,
prednisolone or dexamethasone may be used to reduce bone and
intestinal absorption of calcium and increase renal calcium
excretion (Table 42.4) [27,291,293]. In cases with life-threatening
hypercalcemia [tCa > 17–20 mg/dL (4.3–5.0 mmol/dL)], sodium
bicarbonate, administered IV as a slow bolus, can decrease iCa by
promoting binding of calcium to albumin [279].
Surgical parathyroidectomy is curative and is the most com-
monly performed treatment option. It allows for direct excision of
the tumor while sparing the thyroid gland and the remaining
healthy parathyroid gland. Ultrasound-guided ethanol ablation is a
minimally invasive alternative to surgical parathyroidectomy, but
Table 42.4 Treatments for hypercalcemia in dogs with hyperparathyroidism.
Treatment 	Dose 	Comments
0.9% saline 	90–120 mL/kg q 24 h IV 	Volume expansion dilutes serum
Ca2+
, extra Na+ in renal tubules
↓ Ca 2+ reabsorption
Furosemidea 	2–4 mg/kg q 8–12 h IV 	↑ Ca2+ loss in urine
↓ reabsorption in bone
Prednisone 	1–2 mg/kg q 12 h PO 	↓ intestinal absorption
Dexamethasone 0.1–0.2 mg/kg q 12 h IV 	↑ excretion in urine
Calcitonin 	4–6 IU/kg q 8–12 h SC 	↓ activity of osteoclasts
Pamidronate 	1.3–2 mg/kg in 150 mL of
0.9% NaCl IV over 2–4 h
Inhibits osteoclast-mediated bone
resorption
↑ Ca 2+ uptake by bone
Sodium
bicarbonate
1 mEq/kg IV slowly up to
4 mEq/kg
↑ binding of Ca2+ to albumin
Emergency situations only
↑, increase; ↓, decrease; q, every.
a Not all diuretics are useful; for example, thiazides should be avoided as they cause
acidosis which increases ionized Ca2+
.
Source: Schenk and Chew [291]; Green and Chew [293].

-- 930 of 1450 --

Chapter 42: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Endocrine Disease 	915
ethanol may not destroy the entire tumor and repeat administration
may be needed. Percutaneous ultrasound-guided radiofrequency
heat ablation has also been reported and resulted in few short- or
long- term complications [288,294]. Coughing, change in bark, and
Horner’s syndrome have been reported as postoperative complica-
tions after ethanol and heat ablation [294].
Anesthetic considerations and management
Although administration of calcitriol (active vitamin D metabolite)
3–5 days prior to anesthesia has been reported, a more recent
retrospective study found no protective value in its prophylactic
administration to prevent hypocalcemia in the postoperative period
(48 	h) 	after 	parathyroidectomy 	[279,295]. 	If 	calcitriol 	is
administered, careful monitoring of serum calcium and clinical
signs 	should 	be 	performed, 	and 	therapy 	discontinued 	if
hypercalcemia worsens [291].
A thorough preanesthetic evaluation is required, and hydration
status and electrolyte imbalances corrected. Serum calcium concen-
tration should be measured, and symptomatic animals treated
appropriately, as described above. Anesthesia should be postponed
when tCa is greater than 15–16 mg/dL (3.75–4 mmol/L) due to the
increased risk of side effects such as arrhythmias. Although there
are conflicting data regarding predictors of postoperative hypocal-
cemia, high iCa concentrations may increase the risk of postopera-
tive hypocalcemia after surgical removal or heat ablation in dogs
with primary hyperparathyroidism [283,291,296,297].
Absolute hypovolemia due to volume depletion in addition to the
relative hypovolemia caused by drug-induced vasodilation can
greatly affect maintenance of normal blood pressures intraopera-
tively. The presence or suspicion of CKD is another reason to main-
tain adequate hydration status and ensure normovolemia before
anesthesia [56]. Perioperatively, a calcium-free isotonic crystalloid
solution is preferred (e.g., Normosol-R®) in animals with high iCa.
If renal dysfunction is present, fluid rates up to 20–30 mL/kg/h dur-
ing anesthesia may be required [298,299]. The authors usually
maintain fluid rates at approximately 10 mL/kg/h. Especially in
dogs with higher preoperative calcium concentrations, renal failure
may be unmasked postoperatively, and renal values should be
closely monitored [279]. Consider placing a urinary catheter to
measure urine output intra- and postoperatively.
Anesthetic drug choices should be based on the animal health
status and concurrent comorbidities. There are no anesthetic drugs or
techniques specifically contraindicated for euvolemic dogs with
primary hyperparathyroidism undergoing elective procedures.
Animals with a history of vomiting may benefit from administration
of an antiemetic agent such as maropitant 30–60 min prior to opioid
premedication. Alternatively, opioids associated with lower incidences
of vomiting, such as methadone, meperidine, and fentanyl, could be
used as part of the premedication protocol. Full μ-opioid receptor
agonists are generally administered to provide appropriate
analgesia. α2
-Adrenergic receptor agonists, such as dexmedeto-
midine and medetomidine, benzodiazepines, and/or phenothiazines
(acepromazine), are often included in the intramuscular protocol to
provide sedation. Induction of anesthesia can be accomplished with
propofol, alfaxalone, ketamine–benzodiazepine, or etomidate, and
anesthesia is generally maintained with an inhalant anesthetic.
Constant rate infusions of lidocaine, dexmedetomidine, ketamine,
and/or short-acting full μ-opioid receptor agonists may be delivered
intraoperatively for MAC-sparing effects. For further multimodal
analgesia, NSAIDs may be beneficial in animals without renal
dysfunction and that are not receiving glucocorticoids. Although
there are no reports in the veterinary literature, humans with
hyperparathyroidism and hypercalcemia required higher doses of
vecuronium than patients without hyperparathyroidism [297].
However, non-depolarizing muscle relaxants are rarely required for
parathyroidectomies in veterinary patients.
Heart rate, ECG, and blood pressure should be closely monitored.
Hypercalcemia is associated with increased myocardial contractil-
ity and, in severe cases, can progress to incomplete or complete
atrioventricular block and cardiac arrest. ECG changes are charac-
terized by slowed conduction and include bradycardia, a prolonged
PR interval, a widened QRS complex, and a shortened QT inter-
val [291,293]. Blood gas analysis is warranted to monitor electro-
lytes and acid–base status and may be indicated intraoperatively if
ECG and/or blood pressure changes are noted.
Invasive (direct) blood pressure monitoring is preferred for
hemodynamically unstable patients, those with concurrent renal
disease, and those with large tumors. Respiratory rate and effort,
end-tidal carbon dioxide, and pulse oximetry should also be moni-
tored continuously. Although parathyroid tumors are usually not
large, hemorrhage and airway compromise are still possible compli-
cations of parathyroidectomy. Hypertonic saline and blood products
should be available to manage hemorrhage. Multiple large bore IV
catheters or a central line are recommended if a large or invasive
tumor is present. Ventilation should be closely monitored whenever
surgery is performed in the vicinity of the larynx or trachea. Damage
to the recurrent laryngeal nerve is possible due to its proximity to the
thyroid and parathyroid glands [300]. Pulse oximetry monitoring
should be continued until the animal is fully recovered.
Intraoperative PTH measurements can help confirm successful
tumor excision. A > 50% decrease in PTH concentrations 20–45 min
post-excision indicates removal of the affected tissue [301,302].
The most common complication following parathyroidectomy is
hypocalcemia due to hypercalcemia-induced atrophy of the remain-
ing parathyroid gland. Therefore, inadequate serum PTH concen-
tration results in hypocalcemia that is usually transient [283,296,297].
The median time to the lowest calcium concentration reported was
at 48 h and clinical hypocalcemia developed on average 4 days post-
operatively [303]. Mild postoperative hypocalcemia without clini-
cal signs is usually not treated. However, acute decreases in calcium
levels, tCa < 6 mg/dL (< 1.5 mmol/L), and development of clinical
signs such as muscle cramping or tremors, seizures, tetany, ano-
rexia, pain, and coma must be treated. Parenteral or oral calcium
supplementation and administration of calcitriol are common
treatments for animals with hypocalcemia [279,297]. Intravenous
calcium should be administered slowly to effect via a dedicated IV
catheter. Calcium gluconate (10%) solution can be administered at
0.5–1.5 mL/kg/h, while heart rate and ECG are closely monitored.
Infusion rates should be decreased or discontinued if bradycardia,
shortening of the QT interval, or development of arrhythmias is
observed. Frequent monitoring of iCa is required in these patients
postoperatively [291].
References
1 Petroff BK, Greco DS. The endocrine system. In: Klein BG, ed. Cunningham’s
Textbook of Veterinary Physiology, 6th edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2020:
378–393.
2 Veres-Nyéki KO. Endocrine disease. In: Duke-Novakovski T, de Vries M, Seymour
C, eds. BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline Anaesthesia and Analgesia, 3rd edn.
Quedgeley, UK: British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 2016: 375–390.
3 Petroff BK, Greco DS. The endocrine glands and their function. In: Klein BG, ed.
Cunningham’s Textbook of Veterinary Physiology, 6th edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders
Elsevier, 2020: 394–427.

-- 931 of 1450 --

916 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
4 Koenig A. Endocrine emergencies in dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 2013; 43: 869–897.
5 Thompson AL, Scott-Moncrieff JC, Anderson JD. Comparison of classic hypoad-
renocorticism with glucocorticoid-deficient hypoadrenocorticism in dogs: 46 cases
(1985–2005). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2007; 230: 1190–1194.
6 Klein SC, Peterson ME. Canine hypoadrenocorticism. Part I. Can Vet J 2010; 51:
63–69.
7 Klein SC, Peterson ME. Canine hypoadrenocorticism. Part II. Can Vet J 2010; 51:
179–184.
8 Peterson ME, Greco DS, Orth DN. Primary hypoadrenocorticism in ten cats. J Vet
Intern Med 1989; 3: 55–58.
9 Peterson ME, Kintzer PP, Kass PH. Pretreatment clinical and laboratory findings in
dogs with hypoadrenocorticism: 225 cases (1979–1993). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1996;
208: 85–91.
10 Tyler RD, Qualls CW Jr, Heald RD, et al. Renal concentrating ability in dehydrated
hyponatremic dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1987; 191: 1095–1100.
11 Burkitt Creedon JM. Hypoadrenocorticism. In: Silverstein D, Hopper K, eds. Small
Animal Critical Care Medicine, 2nd edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2015:
380–384.
12 Lathan P, Moore GE, Zambon S, et al. Use of a low-dose ACTH stimulation test for
diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism in dogs. J Vet Small Intern Med 2008; 22:
1070–1073.
13 Kintzer PP, Peterson ME. Treatment and long-term follow-up of 205 dogs with
hypoadrenocorticism. J Vet Intern Med 1997; 11: 43–49.
14 Brady CA, Vite CH, Drobatz KJ. Severe neurologic sequelae in a dog after treatment
of hypoadrenal crisis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1999; 215: 210, 222–225.
15 MacMillan KL. Neurologic complications following treatment of canine hypoad-
renocorticism. Can Vet J 2003; 44: 490–492.
16 Lathan P, Thompson AL. Management of hypoadrenocorticism (Addison’s disease)
in dogs. Vet Med: Res Rep 2018; 9: 1–10.
17 Kintzer PP, Peterson ME. Diseases of the adrenal gland. In: Birchard SJ, Sherding
RG, eds. Saunders Manual of Small Animal Practice, 3rd edn. St. Louis, MO:
Saunders Elsevier, 2006: 357–375.
18 Stafford JR, Bartges JW. A clinical review of pathophysiology, diagnosis and treat-
ment of uroabdomen in the dog and cat. J Vet Emergency Crit Care 2013; 23:
216–229.
19 Koenig A. Hypoglycemia. In: Silverstein and Hopper, eds. Small Animal Critical
Care Medicine, 2nd edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2015: 352–34.
20 Riordan LL, Shaer M. Potassium disorders. In: Silverstein and Hopper, eds. Small
Animal Critical Care Medicine, 2nd edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2015:
269–273.
21 Dodam JR, Kruse-Elliott KT, Aucoin DP, et al. Duration of etomidate-induced
adrenocortical suppression during surgery in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1990; 51:
786–788.
22 Moon PF. Cortisol suppression in cats after induction of anesthesia with etomi-
date, compared with ketamine–diazepam combination. Am J Vet Res 1997; 58:
868–871.
23 Sams L, Braun C, Allman D, et al. A comparison of the effects of propofol and eto-
midate on the induction of anesthesia and on cardiopulmonary parameters in dogs.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35: 488–494.
24 Qin B, Hu H, Cao B, et al. Effects of continuous infusion of etomidate at various
dose rates on adrenal function in dogs. BMC Anesthesiology 2016; 16: 1–6.
25 Van der Linden P, Schmartz D, Gilbart E, et al. Effects of propofol, etomidate, and
pentobarbital on critical oxygen delivery. Crit Care Med 2000; 28: 2492–2499.
26 Xu X, Wei Y, Dong Y, et al. A novel etomidate analog EL-0052 retains potent hyp-
notic effect and stable hemodynamics without suppressing adrenocortical func-
tion. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2021; 379: 324–330.
27 Zuo L, Dillman D. Endocrine disease. In: Hines RL, Jones SB, eds. Stoelting’s
Anesthesia and Co-Existing Disease, 8th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier,
2022: 439–464.
28 Scott-Moncrieff JC. Hypoadrenocorticism. In: Feldman EC, Nelson RW, Reusch C,
et al. eds. Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction, 4th edn. St. Louis,
MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2015: 485–520.
29 Berkenstadt H, Friedman Z, Preisman S, et al. Pulse pressure and stroke volume
variations during severe hemorrhage in ventilated dogs. Br J Anaesth 2005; 94:
721–726.
30 Pascoe PJ. Perioperative management of fluid therapy. In: DiBartola SP, ed. Fluid,
Electrolyte, and Acid–Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice, 4th edn. St. Louis,
MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2012: 405–435.
31 Peyton JL, Burkitt JM. Critical illness-related corticosteroid insufficiency in a dog
with septic shock. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2009; 19: 262–268.
32 Melián C, Perez-Alenza MD, Peterson ME. Hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. In:
Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, eds. Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7th edn. St.
Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2010: 1816–1840.
33 Behrend EN, Kennis R. Atypical Cushing’s syndrome in dogs: arguments for and
against. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2010; 40: 285–296.
34 Frank LA, Henry GA, Whittemore JC, et al. Serum cortisol concentrations in dogs
with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism and atypical hyperadrenocorti-
cism. J Vet Intern Med 2015; 29: 193–199.
35 Carotenuto G, Malerba A, Dolfini C, et al. Cushing’s syndrome – an epidemio-
logical study based on a canine population of 21, 821 dogs. Open Vet J 2019; 9:
27–32.
36 Perkins GA, Lamb S, Erb HN, et al. Plasma adrenocorticotropin (ACTH)
concentrations and clinical response in horses treated for quine Cushing’s disease
with cyproheptadine or pergolide. Equine Vet J 2002; 34: 679–685.
37 Hatazoe T, Kawaguchi H, Hobo S, et al. Pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction
(Equine Cushing’s disease) in a Thoroughbred stallion: a single report. J Equine Sci
2015; 26: 125–128.
38 Nichols R. Complications and concurrent disease associated with canine hyper-
adrenocorticism. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 1997; 27: 309–320.
39 Van der Pas R, van Esch JHM, de Bruin C, et al. Cushing’s disease and hypertension:
in vivo and in vitro study of the role of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
and effects of medical therapy. Eur J Endocrinol 2014; 170: 181–191.
40 Peterson ME. Diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 1984; 14: 731–749.
41 Ishino H, Hara Y, Teshima T, et al. Hypophysectomy for a dog with coexisting
Cushing’s disease and diabetes mellitus. J Vet Med Sci 2010; 72: 343–348.
42 Forrester SD, Troy GC, Dalton MN, et al. Retrospective evaluation of urinary tract
infection in 42 dogs with hyperadrenocorticism or diabetes mellitus or both. J Vet
Intern Med 1999; 13: 557–560.
43 Kooistra HS, Galac S. Recent advances in the diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome in
dogs. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2010; 40: 259–267.
44 Gilor C, Graves TK. Interpretation of laboratory tests for canine Cushing’s
syndrome. Top Compan Anim Med 2011; 26: 98–108.
45 Kooistra HS, Galac S. Recent advances in the diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome in
dogs. Top Compan Anim Med 2012; 27: 21–24.
46 Barker EN, Campbell S, Tebb AJ, et al. A comparison of the survival times of dogs
treated with mitotane or trilostane for pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism.
J Vet Intern Med 2005; 19: 810–815.
47 Brown CG, Graves TK. Hyperadrenocorticism: treating dogs. Compend Contin
Educ Pract Vet 2007; 29: 132–134.
48 Meij B, Voorhout G, Rijnberk A. Progress in transsphenoidal hypophysectomy for
treatment of pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism in dogs and cats. Mol Cell
Endocrinol 2002; 197: 89–96.
49 Jiménez Peláez M, Bouvy BM, Dupré GP. Laparoscopic adrenalectomy for treat-
ment of unilateral adrenocortical carcinomas: technique, complications, and results
in seven dogs. Vet Surg 2008; 37: 444–453.
50 Vaughan MA, Feldman EC, Hoar BR, et al. Evaluation of twice-daily, low-dose
trilostane treatment administered orally in dogs with naturally occurring hyper-
adrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008; 232: 1321–1328.
51 Graves TK. Hypercortisolism in cats (feline Cushing’s syndrome). In: Ettinger SJ,
Feldman EC eds. Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7th edn. St. Louis, MO:
Saunders Elsevier, 2010: 1840–1847.
52 Adin CA, Nelson RW. Adrenal glands. In: Tobias KM, Johnston SA, eds. Veterinary
Surgery: Small Animal. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2012: 2033–2042.
53 Behrend EN. Canine hyperadrenocorticism. In: Feldman EC, Nelson RW, Reusch
C, et al. eds. Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction, 4th edn. St. Louis,
MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2015: 377–451.
54 Goggs R, Blais M-C, Brainard BM, et al. American College of Veterinary Emergency
and Critical Care (ACVECC) consensus on the rational use of antithrombotics in
veterinary critical care (CURATIVE) guidelines: small animal. J Vet Emerg Crit
Care 2019; 29: 12–36.
55 Kyles AE, Feldman EC, De Cock HE, et al. Surgical management of adrenal gland
tumors with and without associated tumor thrombi in dogs: 40 cases (1994–2001).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2003; 223: 654–662.
56 de Brito Galvão JF, Chew DJ. Metabolic complications of endocrine surgery in
companion animals. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2011; 41: 847–868.
57 Scavelli TD, Peterson ME, Matthiesen DT. Results of surgical treatment for
hyperadrenocorticism caused by adrenocortical neoplasia in the dog: 25 cases
(1980–1984). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1986; 189: 1360–1364.
58 Anderson CR, Birchard SJ, Powers BE, et al. Surgical treatment of adrenocortical
tumors: 21 cases (1990–1996). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2001; 37: 93–97.
59 Schwartz P, Kovak JR, Koprowski A, et al. Evaluation of prognostic factors in the
surgical treatment of adrenal gland tumors in dogs: 41 cases (1999–2005). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2008; 232: 77–84.
60 Coleman AE, Shepard MK, Schmiedt CW, et al. Effects of orally administered
enalapril on blood pressure and hemodynamic response to vasopressors during
isoflurane anesthesia in healthy dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43: 482–494.

-- 932 of 1450 --

Chapter 42: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Endocrine Disease 	917
61 Burton SA, Lemke KA, Ihle SL, et al. Effects of medetomidine on serum insulin and
plasma glucose concentrations in clinically normal dogs. Am J Vet Res 1997; 58:
1440–1442.
62 Sinclair MD. A review of the physiological effects of alpha2-agonists related to the
clinical use of medetomidine in small animal practice. Can Vet J 2003; 44:
885–897.
63 Bouillon J, Duke T, Focken AP, et al. Effects of dexmedetomidine on glucose home-
ostasis in healthy cats. J Feline Med Surg 2020; 22: 344–349.
64 Peláez MJ, Bouvy BM, Dupré GP. Laparoscopic adrenalectomy for treatment of uni-
lateral adrenocortical carcinomas: technique, complications, and results in seven
dogs. Vet Surg 2008; 37: 444–453.
65 Naan EC, Kirpensteijn J, Dupré GP, et al. Innovative approach to laparoscopic adre-
nalectomy for treatment of unilateral adrenal gland tumors in dogs. Vet Surg 2013;
42: 710–715.
66 Trepanier LA. Drug interactions and differential toxicity of NSAIDs. In: Proceedings
of the 22nd Annual Veterinary Medical Forum – American College of Veterinary
Internal Medicine, 2004: 535–537.
67 KuKanich B. Outpatient oral analgesics in dogs and cats beyond nonsteroidal antii-
flammatory drugs: an evidence-based approach. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 2013; 43: 1109–1125.
68 Gupta A, Garg R, Gupta N. Update in perioperative anesthetic management of
pheochromocytoma. World J Anes 2015; 4: 83–90.
69 Isaza D, DiGangi BA, Isaza N, et al. Impact of surgical preparatory rinses with iso-
propyl alcohol or water on perioperative body temperature in pediatric female dogs
and cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48: 198–204.
70 McNally EM, Robertson SA, Pablo LS. Comparison of time to desaturation between
preoxygenated and nonpreoxygenated dogs following sedation with acepromazine
maleate and morphine and induction of anesthesia with propofol. Am J Vet Res
2009; 70: 1333–1338.
71 Ambros B, Carrozzo MV, Jones T. Desaturation times between dogs preoxygenated
via face mask or flow-by technique before induction of anesthesia. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2018; 45: 452–458.
72 Burns MG, Kelly AB, Hornof WJ, et al. Pulmonary artery thrombosis in three dogs
with hyperadrenocorticism. JAMA 1981; 178: 388–393.
73 Berry CR, Hawkins EC, Huerley KJ, et al. Frequency of pulmonary mineralization
and hypoxemia in 21 dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. J Vet
Intern Med 2000; 14: 151–156.
74 Dorrestein E, Peda A, Thrall MA, et al. Fatal pulmonary thromboembolism in a
two-year-old dog receiving long-term corticosteroid therapy. Vet Rec Case Rep
2019; 7: 1–4.
75 Beilin B, Shavit Y, Razumovsky J, et al. Effects of mild perioperative hypothermia
on cellular immune response. Anesthesiology 1998; 89: 1133–1140.
76 Oncken A, Kirby R, Rudloff E. Hypothermia in critically ill dogs and cats. Compend
Contin Educ Pract Vet 2001; 23: 506–520.
77 Armstrong SR, Roberts BK, Aronsohn M. Perioperative hypothermia. J Vet Emerg
Crit Care 2005; 15: 32–37.
78 Goggs R, Benigni L, Fuentes VL, et al. Pulmonary thromboembolism. J Vet Emerg
Crit Care (San Antonio) 2009; 19: 30–52.
79 Lang JM, Schertel E, Kennedy S, et al. Elective and emergency surgical management
of adrenal gland tumors: 60 cases (1999–2006). JAHA 2011; 47: 428–435.
80 Gunn-Moore D, Simpson K. Pheochromocytoma in cats. In: Rand J, ed. Clinical
Endocrinology of Companion Animals. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2013: 137–142.
81 Barthez PY, Nyland TG, Feldman EC. Ultrasonographic evaluation of the adrenal
gland in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1995; 207: 1180–1183.
82 Platt SR, Sheppard BJ, Graham J, et al. Pheochromocytoma in the vertebral canal of
two dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1998; 34: 365–371.
83 Reusch CE. Pheochromocytoma and multiple endocrine neoplasia. In: Feldman
EC, Nelson RW, Reusch C, et al., eds. Canine and Feline Endocrinology and
Reproduction, 4th edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2015: 521–554.
84 Bouayad H, Feeney DA, Caywood DD, et al. Pheochromocytoma in dogs: 13 cases
(1980–1985). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1987; 191: 1610–1615.
85 Santamarina G, Espino L, Vila M, et al. Aortic thromboembolism and retroperito-
neal hemorrhage associated with a pheochromocytoma in a dog. J Vet Intern Med
2003; 17: 917–922.
86 Santoro- Beer K, Mandell DC. Pheochromocytoma. In: Silverstein and Hopper, eds.
Small Animal Critical Care Medicine, 2nd edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders,
2015: 371–375.
87 Gilson SD, Withrow SJ, Wheeler SL, et al. Pheochromocytoma in 50 dogs. J Vet
Intern Med 1994; 8: 228–232.
88 Barthez PY, Marks SL, Woo J, et al. Pheochromocytoma in dogs: 61 cases (1984–
1995). J Vet Intern Med 1997; 11: 272–278.
89 Herrera MA, Mehl ML, Kass PH, et al. Predictive factors and the effect of phenoxy-
benzamine on outcome in dogs undergoing adrenalectomy for pheochromocy-
toma. J Vet Intern Med 2008; 22: 1333–1339.
90 Von Dehn J, Nelson RW, Feldman EC, et al. Pheochromocytoma and
hyperadrenocorticism in dogs: six cases (1982–1992). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1995;
207: 322–324.
91 Maher ER, McNiel EA. Pheochromocytoma in dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 1997; 27: 359–380.
92 Rosenstein DA. Diagnostic imaging in canine pheochromocytoma. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 2000; 41: 499–506.
93 Galac S, Korpershoek E. Pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas in humans
and dogs. Vet Comp Oncol 2017; 15: 1158–1170.
94 Besso JG, Penninck DG, Gliatto JM. Retrospective ultrasonographic evaluation of
adrenal lesions in 26 dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1997; 38: 448–455.
95 Bargellini P, Orlani R, Dentini A, et al. Use of contrast-enhanced ultrasound in the
differential diagnosis of adrenal tumors in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2016; 52:
132–143.
96 Gostelow R, Bridger N, Syme HM. Plasma-free metanephrine and free norme-
tanephrine measurement for the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma in dogs. J Vet
Intern Med 2013; 27: 83–90.
97 Quante S, Boretti FS, Kook PH, et al. Urinary catecholamine and metanephrine to
creatinine ratios in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism or pheochromocytoma, and
in healthy dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2010; 24: 1093–1097.
98 Massari F, Nicoli S, Romanelli G, et al. Adrenalectomy in dogs with adrenal
tumors: 52 cases (2002–2008). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2011; 239: 216–221.
99 Barrera J, Bernard F, Ehrhart EJ, et al. Evaluation of risk factors for outcome asso-
ciated with adrenal gland tumors with or without invasion of the caudal vena cava
and treated via adrenalectomy in dogs: 86 cases (1993–2009). J Am Vet Med Assoc
2013; 242: 1715–1721.
100 Fischer J, Lane IF, Cribb AE. Urethral pressure profile and hemodynamic effects of
phenoxybenzamine and prazosin in non-sedated male beagle dogs. Can J Vet Res
2003; 67: 30–38.
101 Ramakrishna H. Pheochromocytoma resection: current concepts in anesthetic
management. J Anaes Clin Pharm 2015; 31: 317–323.
102 Berends AMA, Kerstens MN, Lenders JWM, et al. Approach to the patient: perio-
perative management of the patient with pheochromocytoma or sympathetic
paraganglioma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2020; 105: 3088–3102.
103 Soler Arias EA, Castillo VA, Louiset E, et al. Cushing’s syndrome cause by intra-
adrenocortical adrenocorticotropic hormone in a dog. J Vet Intern Med 2021; 36:
264–271.
104 Mak G, Allen J. Simultaneous pheochromocytoma and third-degree atrioventric-
ular block in 2 dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2013; 23: 610–614.
105 Shimada A, Morita T, Ikeda N, et al. Hypoglycaemic brain lesions in a dog with
insulinoma. J Comp Pathol 2000; 122: 67–71.
106 Hall K, Drobatz K. Volume Resuscitation in the acutely hemorrhaging patient:
historic use to current applications. Front Vet Sci 2021; 8: 1–12.
107 Us MH, Ö zkan S, Oral L, et al. Comparison of the effects of hypertonic saline and
crystalloid infusions on haemodynamic parameters during haemorrhagic shock
in dogs. J Int Med Res 2001; 29: 508–515.
108 Seliskar A, Svete AN, Kozelj M. Haemodynamic and renal effects of resuscitation
of dogs from haemorrhagic shock with hypertonic saline or Lactated Ringer’s
solution combined with whole blood. Veterinarni Medicina 2011; 4: 187–201.
109 Ebert TJ, Hall JE, Barney JA. The effects of increasing plasma concentrations of
dexmedetomidine in humans. Anesthesiology 2000; 93: 382–394.
110 Wong AYC, Cheung CW. Dexmedetomidine for resection of a large phaeo-
chromocytoma with invasion into the inferior vena cava. Br J Anaesth 2004;
93: 873.
111 Polavarapu HV, Kurian AA, Josloff R. Is dexmedetomidine the agent of choice in
the resection of pheochromocytoma? Am Surg 2012; 78: 127–128.
112 Singh S, Singh A. Dexmedetomidine induced catecholamine suppression in pheo-
chromocytoma. J Nat Sci Biol Med 2014; 5: 182–183.
113 Viilman I, Vettorato E. Perioperative use of thoracic epidural anesthesia,
dexmedetomidine and magnesium sulphate infusion in a dog undergoing
neuroendocrine tumor resection. Vet Rec Case Rep 2021; 9: 1–6.
114 Clarke KW. Desflurane and sevoflurane: new volatile anesthetic agents. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 1999; 29: 793–810.
115 Robinson JL. Effect of vasopressin and phenylephrine on arterial blood pressure
and heart rate in conscious dogs. Am J Physiol 1986; 251: H253–H260.
116 Pedro B, López-Alvarez J, Fonfara S, et al. Retrospective evaluation of the use of
amiodarone in dogs with arrhythmias (from 2003 to 2010). J Small Anim Pract
2012; 53: 19–26.
117 Nazari MA, Rosenblum JS, Haigney MC, et al. Pathophysiology and acute man-
agement of tachyarrhythmias in pheochromocytoma. JACC review topic of the
week. J Amer Coll Cardiol 2020; 76: 451–464.
118 Augoustides JG, Abrams M, Berkowitz D, et al. Vasopressin for hemodynamic
rescue in catecholamine-resistant vasoplegic shock after resection of massive
pheochromocytoma. Anesthesiology 2004; 101: 1022–1024.

-- 933 of 1450 --

918 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
119 Moon PF, Ilkiw JE. Surface-induced hypothermia in dogs: 19 cases (1987–1989). J
Am Vet Med Assoc 1993; 202: 437–444.
120 Washabau RJ. Pancreas. In: Washabau RJ, Day MJ, eds. Canine and Feline
Gastroenterology. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2013: 799–802.
121 Hoenig M. Comparative aspects of diabetes mellitus in dogs and cats. Mol Cell
Endocrinol 2002; 197: 221–229.
122 Nelson RW. Canine diabetes mellitus. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, eds. Textbook
of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7th edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2010:
1782–1796.
123 Sparkes AH, Cannon M, Church D, et al. ISFM Consensus guidelines on the prac-
tical management of diabetes mellitus in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2015; 17:
235–250.
124 Reusch C. Feline diabetes mellitus. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, eds. Textbook of
Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7th edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2010:
1796–1816.
125 O’Brien TD. Pathogenesis of feline diabetes mellitus. Mol Cell Endocrinol 2002;
197: 213–219.
126 Mattin M, O’Neill D, Church D, et al. An epidemiological study of diabetes mel-
litus in dogs attending first opinion practice in the UK. Vet Rec 2014; 174: 349.
127 Guptill L, Glickman L, Glickman N. Time trends and risk factors for diabetes mel-
litus in dogs: analysis of veterinary medical data base records (1970–1999). Vet J
2003; 165: 240–247.
128 Rand JS, Fleeman LM, Farrow HA, et al. Canine and feline diabetes mellitus:
nature or nurture? J Nutr 2004; 134: 2072S–2080S.
129 Behrend E, Holford A, Lathan P, et al. 2018 AAHA diabetes managements guide-
lines for dogs and cats. J Amer Anim Hosp Assoc 2018; 54: 1–21.
130 Hume DZ, Drobatz KJ, Hess RS. Outcome of dogs with diabetic ketoacidosis:
127 dogs (1993–2003). J Vet Intern Med 2006; 20: 547–555.
131 Greco DS. Diagnosis of diabetes mellitus in cats and dogs. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 2001; 31: 845–853.
132 Kerl ME. Renal tubular disease. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, eds. Canine and
Feline Endocrinology, 4th edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders, 2015: 2062–2068.
133 Rudloff E. Diabetic ketoacidosis in the cat. Recognition and essential treatment. J
Feline Med Surg 2017; 19: 1167–1174.
134 Chong SK, Reineke EL. Point of care glucose and ketone monitoring. Top
Companion Anim Med 2016; 31: 18–26.
135 Frank G, Anderson W, Pazak H, et al. Use of high-protein diet in the management
of feline diabetes mellitus. Vet Ther 2001; 2: 238–246.
136 Palm CA, Feldman EC. Oral hypoglycemics in cats with diabetes mellitus. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 2013; 43: 407–415.
137 O’Brien MA. Diabetic emergencies in small animals. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 2010; 40: 317–333.
138 Malerba E, Cattani C, Del Baldo F, et al. Accuracy of a flash glucose monitoring
system in dogs with diabetic ketoacidosis. J Vet Intern Med 2020; 34: 83–91.
139 West E, Pettitt R, Jones RS, et al. Acid–base electrolyte balance following adminis-
tration of three crystalloid solutions in dogs undergoing elective orthopaedic sur-
gery. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40: 482–493.
140 Fleeman LM, Rand JS. Evaluation of day-to-day variability of serial blood glucose
concentration curves in diabetic dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2003; 222: 317–321.
141 Alt N, Kley S, Haessig M, et al. Day-to-day variability of blood glucose concentra-
tion curves generated at home in cats with diabetes mellitus. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2007; 230: 1011–1017.
142 Nelson RW. Canine diabetes mellitus. In: Feldman EC, Nelson RW, eds. Canine
and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction, 4th edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders
Elsevier, 2015: 213–257.
143 Nishikawa T, Ederlstein D, Brownlee M. The missing link: a single unifying mech-
anism for diabetic complications. Kidney Int Suppl 2000; 77: S26–S30.
144 Torre DM, deLaforcade AM, Chan DL. Incidence and clinical relevance of hyper-
glycemia in critically ill dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2007; 21: 971–975.
145 Oliver JA, Clark L, Corletto F, et al. A comparison of anesthetic complications
between diabetic and nondiabetic dogs undergoing phacoemulsification cataract
surgery: a retrospective study. Vet Ophthalmol 2010; 13: 244–250.
146 Adami C, Haynes RS, Sanchez RF, et al. Effect of insulin and fasting regimen on
blood glucose concentrations of diabetic dogs during phacoemulsification. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 2020; 56: 1–6.
147 Kronen PWM, Moon-Massat RF, Ludders JW, et al. Comparison of two insulin
protocols for diabetic dogs undergoing cataract surgery. Vet Anaesth Analg 2001;
28: 146–155.
148 Shilo-Benjamini Y. A review of ophthalmic local and regional anesthesia in dogs
and cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2019; 46: 14–27.
149 Pascoe PJ, Ilkiw JE, Craig C, et al. The effects of ketamine on the minimum alveo-
lar concentration of isoflurane in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2007; 34: 31–39.
150 Ortega M, Cruz I. Evaluation of a constant rate infusion of lidocaine for balanced
anesthesia in dogs undergoing surgery. Can Vet J 2011; 52: 856–860.
151 Restitutti F, Raekallio M, Vainiopää M, et al. Plasma glucose, insulin, free fatty
acids, lactate and cortisol concentration in dexmedetomidine-sedated dogs with
or without MK-467: a peripheral α-2 adrenoreceptor antagonist. Vet J 2012; 193:
481–485.
152 Clark L, Leece EA, Brearly JC. Diabetes mellitus affects the duration of action
vecuronium in dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39: 472–479.
153 Leece EA, Clark L. Diabetes mellitus does not affect the neuromuscular blocking
action of atracurium in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44: 697–702.
154 Haga HA, Bettembourg V, Lervik A. Rocuronium infusion: a higher rate is needed
in diabetic than nondiabetic dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2019; 46: 28–35.
155 Hopper K, Brown S. Hypertensive crisis. In: Silverstein D, Hopper K, eds. Small
Animal Critical Care Medicine, 2nd edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2015:
51–54.
156 Kenefick S, Parker N, Slater L, et al. Evidence of cardiac autonomic neuropathy in
dogs with diabetes mellitus. Vet Rec 2007; 161: 83–88.
157 Norgate DJ, Nicholss D, Gueddes RF, et al. Comparison of two protocols for insu-
lin administration and fasting time in diabetic dogs anaesthetized for phacoemul-
sification: a prospective clinical trial. Vet Rec 2021; 188: e81.
158 Cohen M, Post GS. Water transport in the kidney and nephrogenic diabetes insip-
idus. J Vet Intern Med 2002; 16: 510–517.
159 Wesche D, Deen PMT, Knoers NVAM. Congenital nephrogenic diabetes insipi-
dus: the current state of affairs. Pediatr Nephrol 2012; 27: 2183–2204.
160 Luzius H, Jans DA, Grünbaum EG, et al. A low affinity vasopressin V2-receptor in
inherited nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. J Recept Res 1992; 12: 351–368.
161 Goldstein RE. Diabetes insipidus. In: Silverstein DC, Hopper K, eds. Small
Animal Critical Care Medicine, 2nd edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2015:
357–362.
162 Harb MF, Nelson RW, Feldman EC, et al. Central diabetes insipidus in dogs: 20
cases (1986–1995). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1996; 209: 1884–1888.
163 Aroch I, Mazaki-Tovi M, Shemesh O, et al. Central diabetes insipidus in five cats:
clinical presentation, diagnosis and oral desmopressin therapy. J Feline Med Surg
2005; 7: 333–339.
164 Comtois R, Bertrand S, Beauregard H, et al. Low serum urea level in dehydrated
patients with central diabetes insipidus. Canadian Med Assoc J 1988; 139:
965–969.
165 Burkitt Creedon JM. Sodium disorders. In: Silverstein, DC, Hopper K, eds. Small
Animal Critical Care Medicine, 2nd edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders, 2015:
263–268.
166 Ueda Y, Hopper K. Sodium and water balance. In: Drobatz KJ, Hopper K, Rozanki
E, et al., eds. Textbook of Small Animal Emergency Medicine, I&II. Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley- Blackwell, 2019: 690–699.
167 Saleh N, Aoki M, Shimada T, et al. Renal effects of medetomidine in isoflurane-
anesthetized dogs with special reference to its diuretic action. J Vet Med Sci 2005;
67: 461–465.
168 Murahata Y, Hikasa Y. Comparison of the diuretic effects of medetomidine hydro-
chloride and xylazine hydrochloride in healthy cats. Am J Vet Res 2012; 73:
1871–1880.
169 Goutal CM, Brugmann BL, Ryan KA. Insulinoma in dogs: a review. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 2012; 48: 151–163.
170 Hess RS. Insulin-secreting islet cell neoplasia. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, eds.
Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7th edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders
Elsevier, 2010: 1779–1782.
171 Shahar R, Rousseaux C, Steiss J. Peripheral polyneuropathy in a dog with func-
tional islet B-cell tumor and widespread metastasis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1985; 187:
175–177.
172 Trifondou MA, Kirpensteijn J, Robben JH. A retrospective evaluation of 51 dogs
with insulinoma. Vet Q 1998; 20: 114–115.
173 Goutal CM, Brugmann BL, Ryan KA, et al. Insulinoma in dogs: a review. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 2012; 48: 151–163.
174 Greene SN, Bright RM. Insulinoma in a cat. J Small Anim Pract 2008; 49: 38–40.
175 Leifer CE, Peterson ME, Matus RE. Insulin-secreting tumor: diagnosis and medi-
cal and surgical management in 55 dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1986; 188: 60–64.
176 Caywood DD, Klausner JS, O’Leary TP, et al. Pancreatic insulin secreting neo-
plasms: clinical, diagnostic and prognostic features in 73 dogs. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 1988; 24: 577–584.
177 Polton GA, White RN, Brearley MJ. Improved survival in a retrospective cohort of
28 dogs with insulinoma. J Small Anim Pract 2007; 48: 151–156.
178 Li X, Fox JG, Padrid PA. Neoplastic diseases in ferrets: 574 cases (1968–1997). J
Am Vet Med Assoc 1998; 212: 1402–1406.
179 Weiss CA, Williams BH, Scott MV. Insulinoma in the ferret: clinical findings and
treatment comparison of 66 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1998; 34: 471–475.
180 Avallone G, Forlani A, Tecilla M, et al. Neoplastic diseases in the domestic ferret
(Mustela putorius furo) in Italy: classification and tissue distribution of 856 cases
(2000–2010). BMC Vet Res 2016; 12: 1–8.

-- 934 of 1450 --

Chapter 42: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Endocrine Disease 	919
181 Del Dusto I, German AJ, Treggiari E, et al. Incidence of postoperative complica-
tions and outcome of 48 dogs undergoing surgical management of insulinoma. J
Vet Intern Med 2020; 34: 1135–1143.
182 Ryan D, Pérez-Accino J, Gonçalves R, et al. Clinical findings, neurological mani-
festations and survival of dogs with insulinoma: 116 cases (2009–2020). J Small
Anim Pract 2021; 62: 531–539.
183 Ehrhart N, Withrow SJ, Ehrhart EJ, et al. Pancreatic beta cell tumor in ferrets: 20
cases (1986–1994). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1996; 209: 1737–1740.
184 Elie MS, Zerbe CA. Insulinoma in dogs, cats and ferrets. Compend Contin Educ
Pract Vet 1995; 17: 51–59.
185 Dunn JK, Bostock DE, Herrtage ME, et al. Insulin-secreting tumors of the canine
pancreas: clinical and pathological features of 11 cases. J Small Anim Pract 1993;
34: 325–331.
186 Idowu O, Heading K. Hypoglycemia in dogs: causes, management, and diagnosis.
Can Vet J 2018; 59: 642–649.
187 Robben JH, Pollak YW, Kirpensteijn J, et al. Comparison of ultrasonography,
computed tomography, and single-photon emission computed tomography for
the detection and localization of canine insulinoma. J Vet Intern Med 2005; 19:
15–22.
188 Cleland NT, Morton J, Delisser PJ. Outcomes after surgical management of canine
insulinoma in 49 cases. Vet Comp Oncol 2021; 19: 428–441.
189 Moore AS, Nelson RW, Henry CJ, et al. Streptozocin for treatment of pancreatic
islet cell tumors in dogs: 17 cases (1989–1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2002; 221:
811–818.
190 Fischer JR, Smith SA, Harkin KR. Glucagon constant-rate infusion: a novel strat-
egy for the management of hyperinsulinemic–hypoglycemic crisis in the dog. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2000; 36: 27–32.
191 Reine NJ, Bonczynski J. Pancreatic beta cell neoplasia. In: Birchard SJ, Sherding
RG, eds. Saunders Manual of Small Animal Practice, 3rd edn. St. Louis, MO:
Saunders Elsevier, 2006: 390–397.
192 Koenig A. Chapter 66: hypoglycemia. In: Silverstein D, Hopper K, eds. Small Animal
Critical Care Medicine, 2nd edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2015: 352–357.
193 Meleo KA, Peterson ME. Treatment of insulinoma in dogs, cats, and ferrets. In:
Bonagura JD, Twedt DC, eds. Kirk’s Current Veterinary Therapy XV. St. Louis,
MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2014: E130–E134.
194 Guedes AG, Rude EP. Effects of pre-operative administration of medetomidine on
plasma insulin and glucose concentrations in healthy dogs and dogs with insu-
linoma. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40: 472–481.
195 Narita T, Sato R, Motoishi K, et al. The interaction between orally administered
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and prednisolone in healthy dogs. J Vet
Med Sci 2007; 69: 353–363.
196 Meleo K. Management of insulinoma patients with refractory hypoglycemia.
Probl Vet Med 1990; 2: 602–609.
197 Dougherty TB, Cronau LH Jr. Anesthetic implications for surgical patients with
endocrine tumors. Int Anesthesiol Clin 1998; 36: 31–44.
198 Lurye JC, Behrend EN. Endocrine tumors. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
2001; 31: 1083–1110.
199 Caplan ER, Peterson ME, Mullen HS, et al. Diagnosis and treatment of insulin-
secreting pancreatic islet cell tumors in ferrets: 57 cases (1986–1994). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 1996; 209: 1741–1745.
200 Freitag FA, Bozak VL, do Carmo MP, et al. Continuous transverse abdominis
plane block for analgesia in three dogs with abdominal pain. Vet Anaesth Analg
2018; 45: 581–583.
201 Gress F, Schmitt C, Sherman S, et al. A prospective randomized comparison
of endoscopic, ultrasound- and computed tomography-guided celiac plexus
block for management chronic pancreatitis pain. Am J Gastroenterol 1999;
94: 900–905.
202 Morales R Jr, Mentz H III, Newall G, et al. Use of abdominal field block injection
with liposomal bupivacaine to control postoperative pain after abdominoplasty.
Aesthetic Surg J 2013; 33: 1148–1153.
203 Mojtaba F, Arnab M, Neupane R, et al. Efficacy of transversus abdominis plane
block with liposomal wall reconstruction. Am J Surg 2015; 212: 399–405.
204 Ortiga-Carvalho TM, Chiamolera MI, Pazos-Moura CC, et al. Hypothalamus-
pituitary-thyroid axis. Compr Physiol 2016; 6: 1387–1428.
205 Feldt- Rasmussen U, Effraimidis G, Klose M. The hypothalamus-pituitary-thyroid
(HPT)- axis and its roles in the physiology and pathophysiology of other
hypothalamus-pituitary function. Mol Cell Endocrinol 2021; 525: 1–5.
206 Mooney CT. Canine hypothyroidism: a review of aetiology and diagnosis. N Z Vet
J 2011; 59: 105–114.
207 Panciera DL. Hypothyroidism in dogs: 66 cases (1987–1992). J Am Vet Med Assoc
1994; 204: 761–767.
208 Dixon RM, Reid SWJ, Mooney CT. Epidemiological, clinical, haematological
and biochemical characteristics of canine hypothyroidism. Vet Rec 999; 145:
481–487.
209 Panciera D. Hypothyroidism in dogs. In: Rand J, Behrend E, Gunn-Moore D,
Campbell-Ward M, eds. Clinical Endocrinology of Companion Animals. Ames, IA:
Wiley-Blackwell, 2012: 263–272.
210 Scott- Moncrieff JC. Hypothyroidism. In: Feldman EC, Nelson RW, Reusch CE,
et al. eds. Canine and Feline Endocrinology, 4th edn St. Louis, MO: Saunders
Elsevier, 2015: 77–135.
211 Roopali B, Roy S, Ali SL. Haematological alteration in hypothyroidism dogs.
Pharm Innov J 2020; 9: 49–52.
212 Finora K, Greco D. Hypothyroidism and myxedema coma. Compend Contin Educ
Pract Vet 2007; 29: 19–31.
213 Ferguson DC. Testing for hypothyroidism in dogs. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 2007; 37: 647–669.
214 Daminet S, Ferguson DC. Influence of drugs on thyroid function in dogs. J Vet
Intern Med 2003; 17: 463–472.
215 Peterson ME, Melián C, Nichols R. Measurement of serum total thyroxine, triio-
dothyronine, free thyroxine, and thyrotropin concentrations for diagnosis of
hypothyroidism in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1997; 211: 1396–1402.
216 Scott-Moncrieff JC, Nelson RW, Bruner JM, et al. Comparison of serum concentra-
tions of thyroid-stimulating hormone in healthy dogs, hypothyroid dogs, and
euthyroid dogs with concurrent disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1998; 212: 387–391.
217 Kantrowitz LB, Peterson ME, Melián C, et al. Serum total thyroxine, total triiodo-
thyronine, free thyroxine, and thyrotropin concentrations in dogs with nonthyroi-
dal disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2001; 219: 765–769.
218 Panciera DL, Peterson ME, Birchard SJ. Diseases of the thyroid gland. In: Birchard
SJ, Sherding RG, eds. Saunders Manual of Small Animal Practice, 3rd edn. St.
Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2006: 327–342.
219 Pullen WH, Hess RS. Hypothyroid dogs treated with intravenous levothyroxine. J
Vet Intern Med 2006; 20: 32–37.
220 Bach JF, Rozanski EA, Bedenice D, et al. Association of expiratory airways dys-
function with marked obesity in healthy adult dogs. Am J Vet Res 2007; 68:
670–675.
221 Mosing M, German AJ, Holden SL, et al. Oxygenation and ventilation character-
istics in obese sedated dogs before and after weight loss: a clinical trial. Vet J 2013;
198: 367–371.
222 Sarlis NJ, Gourgiotis L. Thyroid emergencies. Rev Endocr Metab Disord 2003; 4:
129–136.
223 Love L, Cline MG. Perioperative physiology and pharmacology in the obese small
animal patient. Vet Anaesth Analg 2015; 42: 119–132.
224 Lemmens HJM. Perioperative pharmacology in morbid obesity. Curr Opin
Anaesthesiol 2010; 23: 485–491.
225 Correa Devito FC, Cristina G, Patricio F, et al. Comparative study of anaesthesia
induction in obese dogs using propofol dosages based on lean body weight of total
body weight. Vet Anim Sci 2020; 10: 1–5.
226 Berry SH, Panciera DL. The effect of experimentally induced hypothyroidism on
the isoflurane minimum alveolar concentration in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2015;
42: 50–54.
227 McMurphy RM, Hodgson DS, Bruyette DS, et al. Cardiovascular effects of 1.0, 1.5,
and 2.0 minimum alveolar concentrations of isoflurane in experimentally induced
hypothyroidism in dogs. Vet Surg 1996; 25: 171–178.
228 Babad AA, Eger EI II. The effects of hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism on
halothane and oxygen requirement in dogs. Anesthesiology 1968; 29: 1087–1093.
229 Jain AK, Dutta A. Stroke volume variation as a guide to fluid administration in
morbidly obese patients undergoing laparoscopic bariatric surgery. Obes Surg
2010; 20: 709–715.
230 Davis H, Jensen T, Johnson A, et al. American Animal Hospital Association
(AAHA); American Association of Feline Practitioners (AAFP; 2013). 2013
AAHA/AAFP fluid therapy guidelines for dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
2013; 49: 149–159.
231 Papi G, Corsello SM, Pontecorvi A. Clinical concepts on thyroid emergencies.
Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) 2014; 5: 102.
232 Mooney CT. Hyperthyroidism. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, eds. Textbook of
Veterinary Internal Medicine, 7th edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2010:
1761–1778.
233 Peterson ME, Ward CR. Etiopathologic findings of hyperthyroidism in cats. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2007; 37: 633–645.
234 Peterson ME, Kintzer PP, Cavanagh PG, et al. Feline hyperthyroidism: pretreat-
ment clinical and laboratory evaluation of 131 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1983;
183: 103–110.
235 Thoday KL, Mooney CT. Historical, clinical and laboratory features of 126 hyper-
thyroid cats. Vet Rec 1992; 131: 257–264.
236 Barber LG. Thyroid tumors in dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
2007; 37: 755–773.
237 Harari J, Patterson JS, Roenthal RC. Clinical and pathological features of thyroid
tumors in 26 dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1986; 188: 1160–1164.

-- 935 of 1450 --

920 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
238 Sangster JK, Panciera DL, Abbott JA, et al. Cardiac biomarkers in hyperthyroid
cats. J Vet Intern Med 2014; 28: 465–472.
239 Broussard JD, Peterson ME, Fox PR. Changes in clinical and laboratory findings
in cats with hyperthyroidism from 1983 to 1993. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1995; 206:
302–305.
240 Tolbert MK, Ward CR. Feline focus – feline thyroid storm: rapid recognition to
improve patient survival. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 2010; 32: E1–E6.
241 Klubo- Gwiezdzinska J, Wartofsky L. Thyroid emergencies. Med Clin North Am
2012; 96: 385–403.
242 Merkle JE, Boudreaux B, Langohr I, et al. Thyroid storm in a dog secondary to
thyroid carcinoma. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2021; 31: 428–431.
243 Berent AC, Drobatz KJ, Ziemer, et al. Liver function in cats with hyperthyroidism
before and after 131I therapy. J Vet Intern Med 2007; 21: 1217–1223.
244 Graves TK. Hyperthyroidism and the kidneys. In: August JR, ed. Consultations in
Feline Internal Medicine, 6th edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2010:
268–273.
245 Nemzek JA, Kruger JM, Walshaw R, et al. Acute onset of hypokalemia and muscu-
lar weakness in four hyperthyroid cats. J Am Vet Assoc 1994; 205: 65–67.
246 Naan EC, Kirpensteijn J, Kooistra HS, et al. Results of thyroidectomy in 101 cats
with hyperthyroidism. Vet Surg 2006; 35: 287–293.
247 Peterson ME. Diagnostic tests for hyperthyroidism in cats. Clin Tech Small Anim
Pract 2006; 21: 2–9.
248 Graves TK, Peterson ME. Diagnosis of occult hyperthyroidism in cats. Probl Vet
Med 1990; 2: 683–692.
249 Peterson ME. Radioiodine treatment of hyperthyroidism. Clin Tech Small Anim
Pract 2006; 21: 34–39.
250 Trepanier LA. Pharmacologic management of feline hyperthyroidism. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 2007; 37: 775–788.
251 Langston CE, Reine N. Hyperthyroidism and the kidney. Clin Tech Small Anim
Pract 2006; 21: 17–21.
252 Henik RA, Stepien RL, Wenholz LJ, et al. Efficacy of atenolol as a single antihyper-
tensive agent in hyperthyroid cats. J Feline Med Surg 2008; 10: 577–582.
253 Birchard SJ. Thyroidectomy in the cat. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 2006; 21:
29–33.
254 Robertson SA, Gogolski SM, Pascoe P, et al. AAFP feline anesthesia guidelines.
J Feline Med Surg 2018; 20: 602–634.
255 Welches CD, Scavelli TD, Matthiesen DT, et al. Occurrence of problems after three
techniques of bilateral thyroidectomy in cats. Vet Surg 1989; 18: 392–396.
256 Touhy JL, Worley DR, Withrow SJ. Outcome following simultaneous bilateral thy-
roid lobectomy for treatment of thyroid gland carcinoma in dogs: 15 cases (1994–
2010). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2012; 241: 95–103.
257 Robinson R, Borgeat K. Cardiovascular disease. In: Duke-Novakovski T, de Vries M,
Seymour C, eds. BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline Anaesthesia and Analgesia, 3rd
edn. Quedgeley, UK: British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 2016: 282–312.
258 Steinbacher R, Dörfelt R. Anesthesia in dogs and cats with cardiac disease – an
impossible endeavour or a challenge with manageable risk? Eur J Companion
Anim Pract 2013; 23: 4–22.
259 Ramoo S, Bradbury LA, Anderson GA, et al. Sedation of hyperthyroid cats with
subcutaneous administration of a combination of alfaxalone and butorphanol.
Aust Vet J 2013; 91: 131–136.
260 Tamura J, Ishizuka T, Fukui S, et al. Sedative effects of intramuscular alfaxalone
administered to cats. J Vet Med Sci 2015; 77: 897–904.
261 Warne LN, Beths T, Whittem T, et al. A review of the pharmacology and clinical
application of alfaxalone in cats. Vet J 2015; 203: 141–148.
262 Robinson R, Borer-Weir K. The effects of diazepam or midazolam on the dose of
propofol required to induce anaesthesia in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2015; 42:
493–501.
263 Saha DC, Saha AC, Malik G, et al. Comparison of cardiovascular effects of
tiletamine-zolazepam, pentobarbital, and ketamine-xylazine in male rats. J Amer
Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2007; 46: 74–80.
264 Purchase IFH. Cardiac arrhythmias occurring during halothane anaesthesia in
cats. Br J Anaesth 1966; 38: 13–22.
265 De Vries M, Putter G. Perioperative anaesthetic care of the cat undergoing dental
and oral procedures: key considerations. J Feline Med Surg 2015; 17: 23–36.
266 Wiese AJ, Barter LS, Kittleson MD, et al. Cardiovascular and respiratory effects of
incremental doses of dopamine and phenylephrine in the management of
isoflurane-induced hypotension in cats with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am J
Vet Res 2012; 73: 908–916.
267 Pang D, Rondenay Y, Héile P, et al. Sudden cardiac death associated with occult
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in a dog under anesthesia. Can Vet J 2005; 46:
1122–1125.
268 Campos M, Ductalle R, Rutteman G, et al. Clinical, pathologic, and immunohis-
tochemical prognostic factors in dogs with thyroid carcinoma. J Vet Intern Med
2014; 28: 1805–1813.
269 Reagan JK, Selmic LE, Fallon C, et al. Complications and outcomes associated
with unilateral thyroidectomy in dogs with naturally occurring thyroid tumors:
156 cases (2003–2015). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2019; 255: 926–932.
270 Liptak JM. Canine thyroid carcinoma. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 2007; 22:
75–81.
271 DeGroot WD, Tobias KM, Browning DC. Examination of laryngeal function of
healthy dogs by using sedation protocol with dexmedetomidine. Vet Surg 2020;
49: 124–130.
272 Radkey DI, Hardie RJ, Smith LJ. Comparison of the effects of alfaxalone and
propofol with acepromazine, butorphanol and/or doxapram on laryngeal motion
and quality of examination in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45: 241–249.
273 Wilson DV, Evans AT, Miller R. Effects of preanesthetic administration of mor-
phine on gastroesophageal reflux and regurgitation during anesthesia in dogs. Am
J Vet Res 2005; 66: 386–390.
274 Costa RS, Wetmore LA, Stein A. Randomized, blinded, controlled clinical trial to
assess gastroesophageal reflux and regurgitation in dogs undergoing general anes-
thesia after hydromorphone premedication with or without acepromazine or dex-
medetomidine. Am J Vet Res 2021; 82: 695–700.
275 KuKanich B, Bidgood T, Knesl O. Clinical pharmacology of nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39: 69–90.
276 Fukui S, Endo Y, Hirayama K, et al. Identification and preservation of the parathy-
roid gland during total thyroidectomy in dogs with bilateral thyroid carcinoma: a
report of six cases. J Vet Med Sci 2015; 77: 747.
277 Seguin B, Bronlee L. Thyroid and parathyroid glands. In: Tobias KN, Johnston SA,
eds. Veterinary Surgery Small Animal, 1st edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunder Elsevier,
2012: 2050–2053.
278 Feldman EC, Hoar B, Pollard R, et al. Pretreatment clinical and laboratory find-
ings in dogs with primary hyperparathyroidism: 210 cases (1987–2004). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2005; 227: 756–761.
279 Gear RN, Neiger R, Skelly BJ, et al. Primary hyperparathyroidism in 29 dogs: diag-
nosis, treatment, outcome and associated renal failure. J Small Anim Pract 2005;
46: 10–16.
280 Parker VJ, Gilor C, Chew DJ. Feline hyperparathyroidism: pathophysiology, diag-
nosis and treatment of primary and secondary disease. J Feline Med Surg 2015; 17:
427–439.
281 Bonczynski J. Primary hyperparathyroidism in dogs and cats. Clin Tech Small
Anim Pract 2007; 22: 70–74.
282 Schaefer C, Goldstein RE. Canine primary hyperparathyroidism. Compend
Contin Educ Pract Vet 2009; 31: 382–390.
283 Milovancev M, Schmiedt CW. Preoperative factors associated with postopera-
tive hypocalcemia in dogs with primary hyperparathyroidism that underwent
parathyroidectomy: 62 cases (2004–2009). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2013; 242:
507–515.
284 Goldstein RE, Atwater CZ, Cazolli DM, et al. Inheritance, mode of inheritance,
and candidate genes for primary hyperparathyroidism in Keeshonden. J Vet Intern
Med 2007; 21: 199–203.
285 Schenck PA, Chew DJ. Calcium: total or ionized? Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 2008; 38: 497–502.
286 Savary KCM, Price GS, Vaden SL. Hypercalcemia in cats: a retrospective study of
71 cases: (1991–1997). J Vet Intern Med 2000; 14: 184–189.
287 Sawyer ES, Northrup NC, Schmiedt CW, et al. Outcome of 19 dogs with parathy-
roid carcinoma after surgical excision. Vet Comp Oncol 2011; 10: 57–64.
288 Leal RO, Pascual LF, Hernandez J. The use of percutaneous ultrasound-guided
radiofrequency heat ablation for treatment of primary hyperparathyroidism in
eight dogs: outcome and complications. Vet Sci 2018; 5: 91.
289 Graves TK. When normal is abnormal: keys to laboratory diagnosis of hidden
endocrine disease. Top Comp Anim Med 2011; 26: 45–51.
290 Wisner ER, Penninck D, Biller DS, et al. High resolution parathyroid sonography.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1997; 38: 462–466.
291 Schenk PA, Chew DJ. Diseases of the parathyroid gland and calcium disorders. In:
Birchard SJ, Sherding RG, eds. Saunders Manual of Small Animal Practice, 3rd edn.
St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2006: 343–356.
292 Schenk PA, Chew DJ, Nagode LA, et al. Disorders of calcium: hypercalcemia
and hypocalcemia. In: DiBartola SP, ed. Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid–Base Disorders
in Small Animal Practice, 4th edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2012:
137–163.
293 Green T, Chew DJ. Calcium disorders. In: Silverstein D, Hopper K, eds. Small
Animal Critical Care Medicine. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2009: 233–239.
294 Rasor L, Pollard R, Feldman EC. Retrospective evaluation of three treatment
methods for primary hyperparathyroidism in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2007;
43: 70–77.
295 Armstrong AJ, Hauptman JG, Stanley BJ, et al. Effect of prophylactic calcitriol
administration of serum ionized calcium concentrations after parathyroidectomy:
78 cases (2005–2015). J Vet Intern Med 2018; 32: 99–106.

-- 936 of 1450 --

Chapter 42: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Endocrine Disease 	921
296 Arbaugh M, Smeak D, Monnet E. Evaluation of preoperative serum concentra-
tions of ionized calcium and parathyroid hormone as predictors of hypocalcemia
following parathyroidectomy in dogs with primary hyperparathyroidism: 17 cases
(2001–2009). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2012; 24: 233–236.
297 Roland EJL, Wierda JMKH, Eurin BG, et al. Pharmacodynamic behaviour of
vecuronium in primary hyperparathyroidism. Can J Anaesth 1994; 41: 694–698.
298 Dear JD, Kass PH, Della Maggiore AM, et al. Association of hypercalcemia before
treatment with hypocalcemia after treatment in dogs with primary hyperparathy-
roidism. J Vet Intern Med 2017; 31: 349–354.
299 Brezis M, Rosen S. Hypoxia of the renal medulla – its implications for disease.
N Engl J Med 1995; 332: 647–655.
300 Radlinsky MG. Thyroid surgery in dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 2007; 37: 789–798.
301 Ham K, Greenfield CL, Barger A, et al. Validation of a rapid parathyroid hormone
assay and intraoperative measurement of parathyroid hormone in dogs with
benign naturally occurring parathyroidism. Vet Surg 2009; 38: 122–132.
302 Graham KJ, Wilkinson M, Culvenor J, et al. Intraoperative parathyroid hormone
concentration to confirm removal of hypersecretory parathyroid tissue and time
to postoperative normocalcaemia in nine dogs with primary hyperparathy-
roidism. Aust Vet J 2012; 90: 203–209.
303 Burkhardt SJ, Sumner JP, Mann S. Ambidirectional cohort study on the agree-
ment of ultrasonography and surgery in the identification of parathyroid
pathology, and predictors of postoperative hypocalcemia in 47 dogs under-
going parathyroidectomy due to primary parathyroidism. Vet Surg 2021; 50:
1379–1388.

-- 937 of 1450 --

Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of Lumb and Jones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
43
922
Introduction
The kidneys receive and require 20–25% of cardiac output to
appropriately perform their intricate and multifaceted role in the
maintenance of physiologic homeostasis. By its nature, general
anesthesia alters hemodynamics and organ perfusion, thus
inherently posing specific potential risk to healthy kidneys and
even more so to diseased or compromised kidneys. Renal disease
and functional impairment occur frequently in veterinary patients,
particularly in geriatric ones, with a 1–3% overall prevalence in
cats, up to 20% of cats having chronic kidney disease (CKD)
during their lifetime, and 35–80% of cats older than 15 years
affected [1–3]. The prevalence of CKD in dogs is lower and has
been reported at 0.05–3.74% depending on inclusion criteria, with
the largest and most recent study reporting a 0.21–0.37% overall
prevalence [4]. Histopathologic examination of the kidneys of
nonazotemic cats shows chronic degenerative changes including
glomerulosclerosis, tubular atrophy, interstitial inflammation, and
fibrosis that increases in severity with age [5]. Similar chronic
changes have been shown in aged canine kidneys as well,
suggesting that geriatric patients may be at heightened risk of
renal damage from nephrotoxic drugs and hemodynamic shifts,
even when these patients are nonazotemic [6].
Equine and ruminant patients have a much lower overall
prevalence of renal disease than cats and will be discussed less
in this chapter. The overall prevalence of CKD in horses is
0.12% with a prevalence of 0.23% in horses older than 15 years of
age, increasing to 0.51% in stallions older than 15 years of age [7].
Acute kidney injury occurs more commonly than CKD in horses,
with 23% of horses presenting for colic having evidence of injury
and as many as 25% of neonatal foals presenting for intensive
care [8].
Because animals with renal disease will routinely require anesthesia,
clinicians must have a working knowledge of renal physiology and
pathophysiology, as well as a thorough understanding of both the
potential renal effects of the sedative, analgesic, and anesthetic drugs
they select and how best to protect kidney health and function during
their use.
Normal anatomy and physiology
A complete in-depth overview of the anatomy and physiology of
the renal system is beyond the scope of this chapter; the reader is
referred to medical anatomy and physiology textbooks for further
detailed descriptions [9–11].
43 Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic
Management of Patients with Renal Disease
Stuart C. Clark-Price1 and Julie R. Fischer2
1 Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama, USA
2 Veterinary Specialty Hospital of North County (Ethos Veterinary Health), San Marcos, California, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 922
Normal anatomy and physiology, 922
Anatomy of the urinary tract, 923
Physiologic function, 924
Testing and monitoring renal function, 926
Canine and feline, 926
Equine, 928
Ruminant, 929
Acute kidney injury/acute renal failure, 929
Etiology and pathogenesis, 929
Clinical features and diagnosis, 931
Chronic kidney disease, 931
Etiology and pathogenesis, 931
Clinical features and diagnosis, 932
Staging chronic kidney disease, 932
Further diagnostics and treatment, 932
Anesthetic drugs and renal disease, 933
Anesthetic management of patients with renal disease, 936
Adjunctive treatments for patients with renal disease, 936
Anesthetic management of patients with urethral or bilateral ureteral
obstruction, 937
Anesthetic management of patients with urinary bladder rupture
and uroabdomen, 938
Postanesthesia oliguria and acute kidney injury, 939
Acknowledgment, 939
References, 939

-- 938 of 1450 --

Chapter 43: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Renal Disease 	923
Anatomy of the urinary tract
Grossly, the urinary system can be divided into the kidneys, the
ureters, the urinary bladder, and the urethra. The kidney can be
further divided into the cortex, medulla, and renal pelvis. The renal
pelvis is essentially the expanded proximal portion of the ureters,
which carry urine from the kidney to the urinary bladder. Between
species, there are several anatomic differences that exist within the
kidney. Dogs, cats, horses, and small ruminants have unilobar
kidneys that contain a renal crest or basin within the renal pelvis
that collects urine and empties into the proximal urethra.
Additionally, gland-like structures in the wall of the horse’s renal
pelvis secrete a mucous-like substance that is responsible for
the cloudy and foamy nature of normal horse urine. Swine and
bovine kidneys are multilobar kidneys that contain renal papillae
(medullary extensions or pyramids) that empty into cup-like
calyces that then empty into the renal pelvis. The gross shape of the
kidney is fairly similar in that most species have the classic kidney
shape with a smooth surface and two poles. The exceptions are the
right kidney of the horse, which tends to have a heart-like shape,
and the lobulated kidneys of the bovine species, due to incomplete
fusion of the kidney lobes. The ureters are smooth muscle-lined
tubes that carry urine from the kidney to the bladder. The urinary
bladder can be anatomically divided into the body and the neck or
trigone region. The body consists of a compliant three-layered
muscular wall that can accommodate incoming urine for storage
and later voiding. This allows the bladder to vary greatly in shape,
size, and position within the pelvis and abdomen. The urethra is a
muscular tube that connects the bladder to the genitals, allowing
transit of urine from the bladder to the external environment.
Anatomic variations of the urethra exist based on gender
and species.
The functional units of the kidneys are nephrons (Fig. 43.1),
which consist of a renal corpuscle and associated tubule, span the
cortex and medulla of the kidney, and exist within a vital milieu
called the renal interstitium. The renal interstitium is composed
of cellular components (“interstitial cells”) residing in a loose
glycosaminoglycan matrix. The majority of interstitial cells are
specialized fibroblasts that structurally stabilize the kidney by
weaving around and between nephrons, and by connecting to each
other via intermediate-like junctions. These fibroblasts have very
well developed rough endoplasmic reticulum, ribosomes, and Golgi
apparatus to support their many synthetic functions. A smaller
population 	of 	marrow-derived 	cells 	migrates 	through 	the
interstitium; in healthy kidneys, most of these are major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II-expressing dendritic
cells, but in disease states, particularly inflammatory states, invasion
by other mononuclear cells (e.g., lymphocytes, monocytes/
macrophages, and other dendritic cells) is common. The interstitial
matrix is a living interconnection among the three chief functional
components of the kidney, that is, the vasculature, the tubules, and
the glomeruli, and serves as a thoroughfare between the renal
tubules and the peritubular capillaries. Solute and water transport
occurs from the tubular lumina through the interstitium and into
the peritubular capillaries, while oxygen and nutrients travel from
Connecting segment and
cortical collecting duct
Medullary collecting duct
Potassium reabsorption
or secretion
Final NaCl reabsorption
Distal tubule
Proximal tubule
Isosmotic reabsorption of 65–70%
of filtered water and NaCl
Reabsorption of 90%
of filtered HCO3
–
Major site of NH3 production
Reabsorption of almost all
filtered glucose and amino acids
Reabsorption of potassium,
phosphate, calcium, magnesium,
urea, and urate
Secretion of organic anions
and cations
Glomerulus
Filtration
Loop of Henle
Countercurrent multiplier
Reabsorption of 15–25% of
filtered NaCl
Active regulation of
magnesium excretion
Small amount of
NaCl reabsorbed
Active regulation of
calcium excretion
ADH-mediated water
and urea reabsorption
Aldosterone-mediated
potassium secretion by
principal cells
H + ion secretion by
α-intercalated cells
H + ion and NH3
secretion
Potassium reabsorption
by α-intercalated cells
ADH-mediated water
reabsorption
Figure 43.1 Anatomy and physiologic function of each portion of the nephron. Source: DiBartola [11], reproduced with permission of Elsevier.

-- 939 of 1450 --

924 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
the capillaries through the interstitium to nourish the tubular
cells [12].
Renal tubules are responsible for modification of plasma filtrate
into urine and are described in functional segments termed the
proximal tubule, loop of Henle, distal tubule, and collecting duct.
Tubules comprise the substantial majority of renal mass, with blood
vessels, interstitium, and renal corpuscles present in much smaller
quantities. The cortex contains the corpuscles, which are tight,
spherical convolutions of glomerular capillaries surrounded by a
specialized proximal tubular outpouching called Bowman’s capsule.
Initial filtration of plasma occurs at the glomerulus across the
glomerular filtration barrier (described later in the chapter); the
filtrate then flows into Bowman’s capsule and from there into the
proximal renal tubule. The cortical parenchyma consists of renal
tubules and capillaries packed around glomeruli in seemingly
random fashion, surrounded by small amounts of intercalated
interstitium. The medulla consists entirely of tubules, arterioles,
capillaries, and interstitium, packed tightly together with the
tubules and vessel networks arranged radially in near-parallel
formation within the parenchyma and in much more organized
fashion than in the cortex. The final tubular product, urine, flows
into the renal pelvis in transit to the ureter, which then propels the
urine by peristaltic waves into the bladder [13].
Physiologic function
The kidneys govern or play a significant role in a myriad of homeo-
static processes, chiefly maintaining water and electrolyte balance,
acid–base regulation, systemic blood pressure management, extra-
cellular fluid volume composition, excretion of dissolved foreign
substances and metabolic wastes, vitamin D production and calcium–
phosphorus balance, hormone secretion, metabolism and excre-
tion, erythrocyte production, and even gluconeogenesis. They
accomplish many of these functions through generation of urine by
the processes of filtration, reabsorption, and secretion and receive
about 25% of the cardiac output in order to do so. In fact, the renal
arteries branch directly from the caudal aorta, providing the high
percentage of cardiac output necessary to facilitate filtration and
maintain the kidneys’ high metabolic activity (i.e., very high oxygen
and substrate consumption). Kidneys, especially the proximal
tubules, are particularly susceptible to hypoxic damage and even
short-term renal ischemia can lead to acute kidney injury (AKI).
Renal blood flow (RBF) is regulated by extrinsic nervous and
hormonal control and by intrinsic autoregulation. The renal vascu-
lature is highly innervated by sympathetic constrictor fibers origi-
nating in the spinal cord segments between T4 and L1, yet the
kidneys lack sympathetic vasodilating fibers and parasympathetic
innervation. Dopamine receptors in the renal vasculature and
tubules help regulate vasodilation and blood flow. There are two
known subtypes of dopamine receptors, D 1 and D2
. Both of these
receptors have been identified in dogs, rats, rabbits, and other ani-
mals. It was thought that cats did not possess renal dopamine recep-
tors; however, in 2003, a D1
- like receptor was identified that is
considered to be different from receptors found in rats, dogs, or
humans [14]. Intrinsic autoregulation of RBF is demonstrated by a
constant flow when the mean arterial blood pressure ranges from
80 to 180 mmHg. When the mean arterial blood pressure is in this
range, the kidney can control blood flow via alteration of resistance
in the glomerular afferent arterioles. Although the exact mechanism
of renal autoregulation is not known, the phenomenon protects glo-
merular capillaries during hypertension and preserves renal func-
tion during hypotension. In addition to renal autoregulation,
extrinsic forces (e.g., neural, hormonal, and pharmacologic) and
intrinsic forces (e.g., kidney disease) may cause alterations in RBF.
Catecholamines are major hormonal regulators of RBF. Epinephrine
and norepinephrine cause dose-dependent changes in RBF. Low
doses increase arterial blood pressure and increase RBF through
increased cardiac output, whereas higher doses cause a decreased
RBF through increased vascular resistance. The renin–angiotensin–
aldosterone system, discussed later in this chapter, is also an
important regulator of RBF. In addition, prostaglandins play an
important role in the regulation of RBF. Prostaglandin-E 2 (PGE2
)
and prostaglandin-I 2 (PGI2 or prostacyclin) cause vasodilation
within the kidney. Generation of PGE2 and PGI2 occurs through the
upregulation of cyclo-oxygenase enzymes; in particular, the cyclo-
oxygenase-2 (COX-2) enzyme plays a largely constitutive and
protective role. The COX-2 enzyme is found mainly in the macula
densa but can also be found in other areas of the cortex and the
medulla. During low blood flow or hypotensive states, COX-2-
derived prostaglandins promote natriuresis, renin release, and vas-
odilation of afferent arterioles to preserve RBF.
Although the kidney receives a high percentage of the cardiac out-
put, blood flow is not evenly distributed throughout the kidney. The
renal cortex receives the majority of the blood (90–95%), thus leav-
ing the medulla relatively hypoperfused and hypoxic. This dichoto-
mous blood flow strategy maximizes flow-dependent activities in
areas of the kidney that specialize in high-efficiency filtration.
Hydrostatic pressure drives plasma filtration across the glomerular
filtration barrier and into the proximal convoluted tubules. The filtra-
tion barrier consists of the glomerular capillaries, the glomerular base-
ment membrane, and specialized epithelial cells called “podocytes.”
The glomerular capillaries consist of a single layer of endothelial cells
with small fenestrations that provide the filtration surface and allow
only fluid, very small proteins, and electrolytes to be filtered. Under
these cells is the glomerular basement membrane, an acellular, trilam-
inar structure composed of various proteins and proteoglycans, that
provides a scaffold for the epithelial cells and a negatively charged bar-
rier that excludes larger negatively charged molecules (chiefly pro-
teins). The last layer of the glomerular filtration barrier is formed by
the network of extensively branching podocytes that cover the entire
glomerular surface. The tiny spaces between the interdigitating pro-
cesses of these cells are specialized junctions called “slit pores” or “slit
diaphragms,” which provide the most size-restrictive portion of the
filtration barrier. With the exception of albumin and larger proteins,
the glomerular filtrate received by Bowman’s capsule is very similar in
composition to plasma (Table 43.1).
The rate of formation of the filtrate, or glomerular filtration rate
(GFR), is a measurable parameter that can be evaluated clinically to
determine renal excretory function. GFR is expressed as milliliters of
glomerular filtrate per kilogram of body weight formed per minute
(mL/kg/min). Blood flow into the glomeruli for filtration is under
pressure and is regulated by afferent (preglomerular) and efferent
(postglomerular) arterioles. The amount of filtrate formed is directly
related to the pressure across the capillaries, and this pressure can be
described mathematically using Starling’s equation:
Q 	K 	P 	P	f 	c 	i 	c 	i
where Q is the net fluid movement across the capillaries, Kf is the
filtration coefficient (which depends on the permeability and length
of the filtration surface), Pc is the capillary hydrostatic pressure, Pi is
the interstitial hydrostatic pressure, σ is the reflection or filtration
coefficient, πc is the capillary oncotic pressure, and πi is the
interstitial oncotic pressure. When measured at the afferent arteriole

-- 940 of 1450 --

Chapter 43: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Renal Disease 	925
end of the glomerulus, the net filtration pressure is about 10 mmHg,
resulting in a net outflow. When measured at the efferent arteriole
end of the glomerulus, the net filtration pressure is about 0 mmHg,
resulting in zero net outflow.
RBF and, thus, usually GFR are maintained within a consistent
range in spite of changes in systemic blood pressure by an
autoregulation system controlled in large part by the renin–
angiotensin–aldosterone hormone system (RAAS). When blood
pressure and subsequent renal perfusion decrease, the enzyme
renin is released from specialized juxtaglomerular cells located in
the walls of the afferent arterioles, just proximal to the glomeruli.
Renin acts on angiotensinogen (produced by the liver) to release
angiotensin I, which is swiftly converted to angiotensin II (AT-II, a
potent vasoconstrictor) by angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE).
This conversion occurs chiefly while blood flows through the small
vessels in the lungs, since most ACE is produced by the pulmonary
small vascular endothelium. The kidneys and other blood vessels
also produce some ACE and generate a smaller amount of AT-II
locally. AT-II directly increases blood pressure through constriction
of smooth muscle in arterioles but also has multiple endocrine and
paracrine effects. Locally within the kidney, AT-II activates sodium
uptake in the tubules of the nephron, promoting fluid retention and
increased blood volume. At the adrenal gland, AT-II increases
release of the steroid hormone aldosterone, which promotes sodium
conservation, potassium elimination, and increased fluid retention
and blood pressure. At the pituitary gland, AT-II enhances
vasopressin (also known as antidiuretic hormone) release, which
increases water reabsorption in the kidneys through the insertion
of water channels (aquaporin-2) into the membrane of the distal
tubules of the nephron. Vasopressin also has direct vasoconstrictive
properties through G-protein-coupled V receptors in vascular
endothelium. Additionally, AT-II induces intrarenal release of the
vasodilating prostaglandins PGE2 and prostacyclin (PGI2 ) that
counteract the vasoconstricting effects of AT-II, thereby preventing
excessive intrarenal vascular resistance and local ischemia. A
second intrinsic system, called “tubuloglomerular feedback,” also
contributes to the autoregulatory system that helps maintain GFR.
A distinct group of epithelial cells within the distal convoluted
tubule (DCT), the macula densa, contact the glomerulus between
the afferent and efferent arterioles as part of the juxtaglomerular
apparatus (JGA). Osmoreceptors within the macula densa cells
sense decreased sodium concentrations within the tubular lumen
and initiate a cascade of events resulting in renin release from the
juxtaglomerular cells. Alternatively, increased sodium chloride
concentrations result in an undefined cascade of events that
suppresses renin release and leads to production of vasoactive
factors (nitric oxide, adenosine triphosphate, prostaglandins) that
reduce GFR and promote free water conservation.
Filtered fluid that leaves the glomerulus next enters the proximal
convoluted tubules (PCTs). The major function of the PCT is to
reabsorb the majority of the filtrate; in fact, more than 60% of the
filtered substances are reabsorbed in the PCT. Transport across the
PCT membrane into the interstitial tissues and then into the vascu-
lar space occurs via both active and passive transport with Starling’s
forces dictating the passive phases. The majority of ions filtered at
the glomerulus (Na +
, K +
, Ca 2+
, Cl –
, and HCO 3
– ) are reabsorbed in
the PCT so that filtrate leaving the PCT and entering the loop of
Henle has lower levels of electrolytes than plasma. Water passively
follows the active reabsorption of electrolytes so that the osmolality
of the tubular fluid is similar to that of plasma at both ends of the
PCT. Organic low-molecular-weight proteins (insulin, glucagon,
parathyroid hormone, etc.) that were filtered are also actively reab-
sorbed in the PCT. Secretion of substances also occurs in the PCT.
Organic ionic wastes are eliminated via secretion into the filtrate;
these include protein-bound exogenous substances that are not fil-
tered at the glomerulus, for example, endotoxins, antibiotics, and
anesthetic and analgesic drugs such as morphine and ketamine, and
endogenous wastes such as bile salts, urates, and prostaglandins.
PCT secretion is exceptionally important for endogenous waste
removal in birds and reptiles. In mammals, one of the main waste
products from muscle metabolism is urea, which is freely filtered at
the glomerulus; however, uric acid is the waste product from mus-
cle metabolism in birds and reptiles. Uric acid is not filtered at the
glomeruli, and its removal is dependent upon active mechanisms in
the PCT in these species.
Next, the remaining filtrate enters the descending loop of Henle
(DloH). Metabolic activity within the DloH is minimal, and little to
no active transport process occurs. Pure water reabsorption and
minimal solute drag occur as the filtrate travels through the DloH
to the highly active ascending (AloH) or thick portion of the loop of
Henle.
The AloH is one of the most metabolically active parts of the
tubule and the entire kidney. It is composed of simple cuboidal
epithelium with many mitochondria, which provide the energy for
high-capacity active transport. Here, the filtrate is further modified
as the majority of electrolyte reabsorption within the loop of Henle
takes place in the AloH. An abundant concentration of Na +
- K+
ATPase pumps can be found on the luminal surface of the tubules,
which are responsible for the active transport of Na +
, K +
, and Cl−
into the cell and out of the filtrate. Other ions such as Mg 2+ and Ca 2+
move down a cation-selective paracellular pathway into the
interstitium. In the case of K + in particular, hyperkalemia can result
in electrical conduction pathology, and therefore, both apical and
basolateral K + channels exist to increase secretion into the filtrate
for eventual removal in the urine. As the AloH is highly metabolically
active, it has a high demand for substrates such as oxygen and,
Table 43.1 Major activity and filtrate composition in the nephron.
Nephron structure 	Major activity 	Filtrate composition 	Comments
Glomerulus 	Filtration of plasma 	Isotonic 	Cell-free filtrate containing only fluid, electrolytes,
and small proteins
Proximal convoluted tubule 	45–55% of filtrate is reabsorbed 	Isotonic 	90% of HCO 3
− is reabsorbed and filtrate becomes
acidic
Descending loop of Henle 	25–40% of filtrate H 2
O is reabsorbed 	Hypertonic 	H2
O reabsorption via osmosis
Ascending loop of Henle 	Major area of solute reabsorption 	Hypotonic 	Active transport via Na+- K+ ATPase, cells are
impermeable to H2 O
Distal convoluted tubule 	5% of filtrate is reabsorbed 	Hypotonic 	Less than 10% of originally filtered H2 O is present
Collecting duct 	0.5–10% of H 2
O reabsorption 	Hyper-, iso-, or hypotonic (urine) 	Under the influence of arginine vasopressin

-- 941 of 1450 --

926 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
therefore, has increased sensitivity to damage during hypoxemia or
hypotension. Additionally, several medications can exert their
effects both therapeutically and pathologically at the AloH. For
example, furosemide works as a diuretic by inhibiting Na+
- K+
ATPase pumps and preventing electrolyte and fluid reabsorption
while aminoglycoside antibiotics such as gentamicin can inhibit
protein synthesis and result in acute tubular necrosis in the PCT
and the AloH. The AloH is impermeable to water so that filtrate
entering the DCT is hypotonic; this is, in fact, how the kidney forms
dilute urine in the absence of antidiuretic hormone (ADH).
After the AloH, the highly modified hypotonic filtrate enters the
DCTs. Electrolyte and water reabsorption occurs to modify the
filtrate further; however, K + and H+ secretion is of major importance
in the DCT. Because the majority of HCO 3
− was reabsorbed in the
PCT, only a very small amount of HCO3
− remains, and therefore,
both K + and H + must be actively pumped into the lumen to counter
an imbalance between negatively and positively charged ions. This
can result in K + and H + competing with each other for secretion and
is often the reason why hyperkalemia is associated with acidemia.
Finally, the filtrate enters the collecting duct where it can be
modified one more time before being classified as urine. Collecting
duct tubular cells must be impermeable to water when patients are
overhydrated and permeable to H 2
O during dehydration. This is
accomplished via the actions of the hormone vasopressin (ADH).
When states of dehydration exist, vasopressin is released from the
neurohypophysis, stimulated by increased plasma osmolality, and
its presence at the level of the kidneys induces the translocation
and insertion of water channels (aquaporin-2) into the cells of the
DCT and collecting duct. Water is then allowed to be reabsorbed,
resulting in a more concentrated urine. Interestingly, α2
- adrenergic
receptor agonist drugs, such as xylazine, block the vasopressin
receptors located within the collecting ducts, preventing water
reabsorption. This can be observed clinically as animals voiding
large amounts of dilute urine after sedation with an α2
- adrenergic
receptor agonist and can result in worsening dehydration in animals
with a negative fluid balance.
On leaving the collecting duct, the filtrate is considered to be
urine, where it is gathered in the renal pelvis and transported to the
urinary bladder via the ureters for storage and voiding.
Testing and monitoring renal function
Canine and feline
Biochemical testing
Any determination of intrinsic renal dysfunction must start by
identifying/excluding and/or correcting any prerenal (i.e., anything
that decreases RBF) and postrenal (i.e., anything that blocks normal
transit of urine from the kidney to the urethral orifice) causes of
azotemia. Evaluation of blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and serum cre-
atinine concentrations in combination with urine specific gravity
has long served as the chief method of routine clinical diagnosis
and serial monitoring of renal function in dogs and cats. As GFR
declines, serum creatinine increases (though in nonlinear fashion)
and, since it is affected by fewer extrarenal factors than BUN, serum
creatinine measurement is the most commonly employed indirect
estimate of GFR. Unfortunately, neither BUN nor serum creatinine
is particularly sensitive or specific for intrinsic renal disease and, at
best, provides a rough index of GFR [15–19].
Decreased diagnostic accuracy for these analytes results in part
because BUN and serum creatinine generally do not rise out of the
reference range before roughly 75% of functional renal mass has
been lost; however, many other factors influence this as well. In dogs
and cats with CKD, compensatory hypertrophy and hyperfiltration
in the remaining functional nephrons can also mask the degree of
degeneration present. The relationship between GFR and the
inverse of serum creatinine concentration is logarithmic rather
than linear and can, therefore, lead to overestimation of renal
function in early CKD and underestimation in later-stage disease.
Because creatinine is a breakdown product of creatine phosphate
generated during normal myocyte metabolism, serum creatinine
concentration can vary greatly relative to an individual animal’s
muscle mass. Heavily muscled dogs, such as Greyhounds, may have
serum creatinine measurements that fall above the reference range
in spite of normal kidney function, while sarcopenic animals often
have serum creatinine measurements that significantly under-
represent the severity of kidney disease present. Total ingested
protein load, among other extrarenal factors, can markedly increase
BUN concentration (and to a lesser extent, serum creatinine), while
hepatic insufficiency or a very low protein diet may decrease it,
irrespective of kidney function.
The limitations of BUN and serum creatinine in assessing renal
function have led to investigation of other biomarkers for this pur-
pose, one of which is symmetric dimethylarginine (SDMA) [20,21].
This molecule is an endogenous product of intracellular protein
methylation and degradation that is chiefly renally excreted and
freely filtered at the glomerulus. Serum concentration of SDMA has
been shown by clearance studies in azotemic and nonazotemic
cats [17] and in dogs with hereditary nephropathy [18] to be
strongly inversely correlated with GFR (in linear fashion). Serum
SDMA concentration increases when approximately 40% of func-
tional renal mass is lost, making it a more sensitive marker of early
CKD in dogs and cats than serum creatinine, which increases after
approximately 75% functional decrement, as mentioned above.
Unlike serum creatinine, SDMA is not affected by increased or
decreased muscle mass in a given animal, and studies specifically
examining non-renal modifiers of SDMA in dogs have shown that
asymptomatic mitral regurgitation, age, breed, sex, and vigorous
exercise have no influence on serum SDMA concentrations [22,23].
On average, monitoring of SDMA permits detection of CKD
17 months earlier in cats and 9 months earlier in dogs than does
assessment of serum creatinine [19,21,24,25]. As with BUN and
creatinine, any process that results in decreased GFR can increase
SDMA concentration; thus, although it will also be elevated in ani-
mals with decreased GFR due to AKI, SDMA concentration cannot
be used to distinguish between AKI and CKD [26]. Currently, the
International Renal Interest Society (IRIS) recommends using both
serum creatinine and SDMA as complementary parameters in the
staging of CKD. Regardless of which biochemical parameters are
used, their longitudinal/serial monitoring in the same patient will
improve detection of declining renal function, even if values remain
within normal limits. For example, a serum creatinine concentra-
tion that increases from 0.6 to 1.2 mg/dL over time may indicate a
≥ 50% reduction in renal function (assuming that muscle mass has
not changed, and hydration status is normal).
Since normal kidneys regulate total body water by adjusting the
amount excreted in urine, measurement of urine specific gravity
(USG, comparison of the weight of a solution to the weight of
water) can help assess renal tubular function; however, like BUN
and serum creatinine, USG is neither a sensitive nor specific
measure of function. The normal dog kidney can produce a USG >
1.030, while a normal feline kidney can produce a USG of > 1.035,
depending on water balance at any given time, though a

-- 942 of 1450 --

Chapter 43: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Renal Disease 	927
physiologically appropriate USG can vary from 1.001 to up to
1.075 in the dog and 1.085 in the cat. When renal function declines
beyond a certain point, the kidneys lose the capacity to concentrate
and dilute filtrate; thus, the urine produced remains in a fixed
range called the isosthenuric range (1.008–1.012), which is the
USG range of unmodified glomerular filtrate entering the proximal
tubule. In dogs, decrements in urine-concentrating ability are not
detectable until approximately two-thirds of the nephrons are non-
functional. In cats, this proportion is thought to be higher, since it
is not uncommon for cats with renal azotemia (and thus more than
75% loss of renal function) to retain the ability to produce
significantly hypersthenuric urine. In addition to this lack of
sensitivity, 	extrarenal 	influences 	can 	compromise 	urine-
concentrating ability, as seen with decreased ADH secretion or
responsiveness 	(e.g., 	hypercalcemia, 	hyperadrenocorticism,
glucocorticoid exposure, etc.), use of diuretic medications, renal
medullary washout, significant glucosuria, and other causes.
Hypovolemia and consequent decreased GFR in these patients can
thus result in azotemia with inappropriate isosthenuria, in spite of
underlying normal renal functional capacity [27].
As an alternative or complement to standard clinicopathologic
tests, the detection and quantification of multiple urine biomarkers,
including clusterin, cystatin C, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT), N-
acetylglucosaminidase (NAG), and neutrophil gelatinase-associated
lipocalin (NGAL), have been proven able to indicate pre-azotemic
nephron damage in the dog [28–31]. These biomarkers may be
useful both in the acute (NAG, GGT, NGAL, cystatin C, and
clusterin), 	and 	chronic 	(cystatin 	C, 	NGAL, 	and 	SDMA)
setting [29,32,33]. Since some enzymes originate from specific
cellular organelles, those enzymurias mark damage to a specific
anatomic site. For example, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT)
originates from the proximal tubular brush border and N-
acetylglucosaminidase (NAG) is a lysosomal enzyme. Enzymuria
usually precedes azotemia and decreased urine-concentrating ability
associated with nephrotoxic proximal tubular injury by several days.
Urine GGT:creatinine and NAG:creatinine ratios have been shown
to reflect accurately 24-h urine GGT and NAG excretion in dogs, if
determined before the onset of azotemia [28]. Determination of
baseline urine GGT:creatinine and NAG:creatinine ratios, therefore,
could be considered in dogs with possible pre-existing acute renal
insult that are to receive potentially nephrotoxic drugs. Two- to
threefold increases in the GGT:creatinine or NAG:creatinine ratio
over the baseline are suggestive of clinically relevant tubular damage.
Drug therapy should be discontinued if this occurs.
The repeatable presence of renal proteinuria is both a marker of
renal disease and also a negative prognostic factor when identified in
animals with CKD [34–37]. Detection of greater than normal
amounts of protein in the urine, usually initially by dipstick analysis,
should prompt classification by identification of origin: physiologic
(e.g., from fever, extreme heat/cold, and seizure), prerenal (e.g., due
to hyperglobulinemia), postrenal (e.g., from genital or lower urinary
tract inflammation), or renal, due to intrinsic tubular or glomerular
disease. Significant proteinuria of renal origin is persistent (multiple
assessments above reference range, separated by 7–14 days) and
associated with a normal/inactive urine sediment. Urine protein
concentration is quantitated in a ratio with the concentration of
creatinine (urine protein:creatinine, UPC); a UPC > 0.4 is considered
abnormal in the cat and a UPC > 0.5 is considered abnormal in the
dog. Renal proteinuria can be associated with increased filtration
through damaged glomerular capillary walls (i.e., glomerular
proteinuria, UPC usually > 2.0) and/or decreased reabsorption by
tubular epithelial cells (i.e., tubular proteinuria, UPC usually < 2.0).
Tubular lesions in patients with AKI may result in proteinuria;
however, most often this is a transient finding directly related to
tubular epithelial damage and resolves with regeneration of the
tubular epithelium if the patient recovers. When renal proteinuria
is seen in patients with CKD, it is generally a chronic finding.
The sensitivity of renal proteinuria as a marker of CKD is high,
especially if the UPC or species-specific albuminuria is serially
monitored [35,36,38–40]. Documenting persistent renal proteinuria
with a UPC > 2.0 often signals the presence of glomerular disease,
full discussion of which is beyond the scope of this chapter, but renal
proteinuria of any magnitude above reference range can induce
ongoing tubulointerstitial inflammation and fibrosis, nephron loss,
and accelerated progression of CKD [36,40,41]. The variety of
mechanisms by which this happens are not fully understood, but
proximal renal tubular overload/damage from high-protein filtrate
and the resulting ongoing interstitial inflammation, renal oxidative
stress, and hypoxic renal environment are among them [42]. Patients
with significant renal proteinuria, even nonazotemic ones, should
thus be considered likely more vulnerable to renal damage from
nephrotoxic substances and abnormal hemodynamic states than
similar nonproteinuric patients would be.
Renal clearance and glomerular filtration rate
Renal clearance is the rate at which a substance is completely cleared
from a specified volume of plasma. Substances used to measure renal
clearance must be freely filtered by the glomerulus (not protein
bound) and not be affected by tubular reabsorption or secretion, or
by metabolism elsewhere in the body. In addition, the substance used
must not alter renal function. Measurement of GFR by clearance
studies, generally accepted as the most sensitive and specific method
to assess renal function, may be performed to achieve greater diag-
nostic accuracy than routine laboratory testing provides. This pro-
cess can be particularly useful when renal disease is suspected prior
to the onset of renal azotemia. Though GFR measurement using
plasma clearance of creatinine or iohexol, and also via technetium-
based renal scintigraphy, has been validated in dogs and cats and is
described below, these procedures are significantly more cumber-
some, time consuming, and expensive than standard blood and urine
testing, plus availability of nuclear medicine is particularly limited.
For those reasons, clearance studies are not commonly performed for
routine assessment of renal function, even at specialty centers.
Specific, detailed instructions for clinical GFR assessment via iohexol
or creatinine clearance can be found on the IRIS website.
Renal clearance of inulin is the gold standard method for the
determination of GFR; however, it is difficult to measure inulin
in plasma and urine. On the other hand, it is relatively easy and
therefore more practical to determine the renal clearance of
creatinine (CrCl) as an approximation of GFR. CrCl is the volume
of plasma cleared of creatinine per minute and is calculated by
multiplying the concentration of creatinine in urine by the rate of
urine production and then dividing the product by the serum
creatinine concentration:
CrCl mL / min urine creatinine mg/dL 	urine volume mL/ min
serum creatinine mg/dL
For example, if the urine creatinine concentration is 60 mg/dL,
urine production is 3 mL/min, and the serum creatinine con-
centration is 1.8 mg/ dL, then 100 mL of plasma is cleared of

-- 943 of 1450 --

928 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
creatinine per minute. This value is divided by the animal’s body
weight in kilograms and expressed in milliliters per minute per
kilogram. Note that prerenal and postrenal factors, and also
renal parenchymal lesions, will influence GFR. The major disad-
vantage of renal clearance studies is the requirement for timed
urine collections.
From a clinical standpoint, plasma clearance studies are less
invasive and less time consuming. For example, plasma clearance of
iohexol, an iodinated radiographic contrast agent, has been shown
to estimate GFR reliably in dogs and cats. Iohexol plasma clearance
is ideally performed in patients that are well hydrated and fasted for
12 h prior to the study. Iohexol is administered IV at a dosage of
300 mg iodine/kg body weight and then blood samples are collected
at 2, 3, and 4 h after the IV injection from a separate vein. Serum
from each blood sample is harvested (~1.5 mL of serum is needed
per sample) and then transported either chilled or frozen to the
specialized reference laboratory (e.g., Diagnostic Center for
Population and Animal Health, Toxicology Section, Michigan State
University) for measurement and calculation of GFR.
Renal scintigraphy using 99m
Tc-labeled diethylenetriamine-
pentaacetic acid also allows the GFR to be measured and is available
at several universities in the United States and at major referral
centers. This is a quick, non-invasive method that does not require
urine collection and has the advantage of being able to quantita-
tively evaluate individual kidney function. Disadvantages of this
procedure include its limited availability, exposure of the animal
to radioisotopes, the need for radioisotope disposal, and poorer
correlation with inulin clearance compared with plasma iohexol
clearance.
Urine output measurement
Measuring the volume of urine produced is most frequently used as
an aid in determining the maintenance fluid requirements of dogs
and cats with AKI. Since these patients can range from markedly
polyuric to completely anuric, actual quantification rather than
estimation of output increases precision of assessment and fluid
therapy. One major goal of fluid therapy in patients with AKI is to
restore and/or maintain euvolemia to assure appropriate tissue
(particularly renal) perfusion, while avoiding volume overload and
its clinical consequences. Fluid therapy should be tailored to match
urine volume plus other losses, including insensible losses (e.g.,
water loss due to respiration) and continuing losses (e.g., fluid loss
due to vomiting or diarrhea). Insensible losses are estimated at
20 mL/kg/day. Urine output is quantitated at 6–8-h intervals
(best accomplished with indwelling or intermittent urinary
catheterization) and that volume plus insensible loss is replaced
over an equivalent subsequent time period. The volume of fluid loss
due to vomiting and/or diarrhea may be estimated, and that amount
is added to the 24-h fluid needs of the patient. Fluid losses or gains
can also be indirectly estimated by weighing the patient two to three
times per day on the same scale.
Renal biopsy
Biopsy and histopathologic evaluation of renal tissue are valuable
diagnostic and prognostic tools, most often performed in cases of
significant renal proteinuria or AKI. Though most management
strategies for renal disease are broadly applicable to animals with
nephropathies based on laboratory and physiologic parameters
combined with measurable responses to therapy, applicability of
certain targeted treatments depends on direct tissue examination.
In addition, the prognosis for animals with renal disease will be
most accurate and clinically useful when severity of dysfunction,
renal histopathologic findings, and response to treatment can be
examined together. Renal biopsy should be considered only after
less invasive tests, often including response to therapies, have been
carried out and coagulation/hemostasis has been assessed.
Acquisition and examination of renal tissue is appropriate if the
diagnosis is in question (e.g., glomerulonephritis versus amyloido-
sis), if treatment may be altered based on results (e.g., confirmation
of and culture in bacterial pyelonephritis, immune-mediated versus
non-immune- mediated glomerulonephritis), or if the prognosis or
client inclination to pursue further treatment may vary depending
on findings (e.g., evidence of reversible tubular lesions in a dog or
cat with AKI or presence of extensive fibrosis). Contraindications to
renal biopsy include a solitary kidney, coagulopathy, severe systemic
hypertension, late stage 3 and stage 4 CKD, and renal lesions associ-
ated with fluid accumulation (e.g., hydronephrosis, renal cysts, and
abscesses). Very small patients (< 5 kg) may present additional chal-
lenge and risk for percutaneous biopsy procedures due to the
smaller biopsy target, proximity of large vessels, and greater clinical
impact of a given volume of hemorrhage [43]. Renal biopsy should
not be attempted by inexperienced clinicians or in animals that are
not adequately restrained.
Specimens can be obtained percutaneously using the keyhole
technique, or under laparoscopic or ultrasonographic guidance.
Frequently, the best way to obtain renal tissue is at laparotomy
when both kidneys can be visualized, postbiopsy hemorrhage
can be accurately assessed and treated, and an adequate biopsy
specimen assured. The cortical region of the kidney should be
biopsied to obtain an adequate number of glomeruli in the spec-
imen and to avoid renal nerves and major vessels at the corti-
comedullary junction and in the medullary region. Most animals
will have microscopic hematuria for 1–3 days after the biopsy
procedure, and transient gross hematuria is not uncommon.
Severe hemorrhage is rare and is almost always the result of
faulty technique.
The International Veterinary Renal Pathology Service (IVRPS)
housed at Texas A&M University is currently considered the
nephropathologic standard for veterinary renal biopsy analysis. The
IVRPS provides comprehensive sample analysis (light microscopy,
transmission 	electron 	microscopy, 	and 	immunofluorescence
evaluation), as well as histopathologic and clinical interpretation of
results 	and 	their 	implications 	by 	nephropathologists 	and
nephrologists. Information on ordering biopsy specimen collection
kits, determining adequacy of samples acquired, and proper sample
preparation and submission, as well as detailed information on
when and how to appropriately biopsy a kidney is available online.
Though they chiefly handle canine and feline samples, renal biopsies
from other species are accepted. Even if a different pathology
service is used, use of immunofluorescence and transmission
electron microscopic assessment in addition to light microscopy
is 	strongly 	recommended 	when 	evaluating 	renal 	tissue.
Communication with the laboratory pathologist prior to biopsy will
help determine which analytic modalities are available and which
fixatives should be used to maximize utility of the biopsy sample.
Equine
Prior to laboratory testing, physical exam findings can indicate
renal dysfunction in horses. Common findings in horses with CKD
include weight loss, polyuria/polydipsia, and ventral edema [8]. As
in small animal patients, serum creatinine is a commonly used
index to assess renal function (GFR). Similar to small animals, it is

-- 944 of 1450 --

Chapter 43: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Renal Disease 	929
expected that serum creatinine elevations associated with renal
lesions will not be observed until approximately 60–75% of the
nephrons become non-functional, and measurement of serum
creatinine in early renal disease is of little value [44]. Breed may play
a role in normal serum creatinine concentrations as heavily muscled
breeds such as quarter horses have a greater upper limit in their
normal reference range [44]. However, individual horses have
minimal variation in serum creatinine concentrations making
historical values particularly valuable for assessing change over
time [45]. BUN measurement as a single test of renal function in
horses has minimal diagnostic value. In horses, BUN is reabsorbed
after filtration at the collecting ducts in a rate-dependent manner
based on the rate of fluid movement. As fluid rates and volumes
increase in the collecting duct, less urea is reabsorbed; as fluid rates
decrease, more urea is reabsorbed independent of the filtration rate
of urea. Therefore, fluid therapy in horses with renal disease may
reduce BUN but not in a manner that reflects improvement in GFR.
Because serum creatinine is not reabsorbed, it is the most commonly
used single test of renal function in horses. Azotemia, elevated
serum creatinine and BUN, can be further divided into prerenal,
renal, and postrenal in origin. The use of a BUN to serum creatinine
(BUN:creatinine) ratio has been described for use in characterizing
azotemia in horses and to separate acute and chronic forms of renal
failure. The ratio is theoretically higher for prerenal azotemia
because of increased urea reabsorption due to dehydration and low
tubular flow rates compared with azotemia secondary to intrinsic
renal disease. In horses with acute renal failure, BUN:creatinine
ratios are less than 10:1, whereas in chronic disease, ratios can be
expected to be greater than 10:1 [46].
GFR can also be measured in equine patients, providing a
quantitative assessment of renal function; however, measurement of
urine output is challenging in horses as an indwelling urinary
catheter for urine collection is impractical.
Serum electrolyte concentration measurements should also be
considered in the diagnostic plan for horses with renal disease. Na+
and Cl – levels are often decreased in horses with renal disease,
whereas K+ can be elevated, decreased, or normal. Hyperkalemia is
most often observed with disease states associated with urine
outflow obstructions or urinary bladder ruptures and subsequent
uroperitoneum. Serum Ca2+ should also be monitored as horses
with AKI are often hypocalcemic whereas those with CKD are often
hypercalcemic.
Urine samples should be obtained from horses with suspected
renal disease for a complete urinalysis, including sediment
examination. As in small animal patients, specific gravity should be
measured along with microscopic examination for cells, casts, and
crystals. The brush borders of the proximal tubular cells are rich in
enzymes that play a role in the metabolic activity of the endothelium.
Measured urinary GGT has been used, as a ratio with urine
creatinine to determine and monitor the extent of acute tubular
damage. GGT to urine creatinine ratios greater than 100 IU/g are
considered to be clinically important, but lower ratios should be
interpreted with caution as GGT release from the proximal tubules
can occur with minor insults that may be clinically irrelevant.
Fractional clearance of electrolytes may hold better diagnostic
utility than urinary GGT for acute tubular damage [46]. The
nephrons, as a collective group, work to conserve more than 99% of
filtered Na+ and Cl− ions in the normal horse (supplemented salts or
intravenous fluid administration will artificially increase the
amount of excreted electrolytes in urine and, thus, complicate
the utility of fractional clearance calculations). Increases in
fractional clearance may be an indicator of early tubular damage.
Serum and urine samples are collected simultaneously, and Na+
,
Cl−, and creatinine levels are determined. Using the following
equation, a clearance value can be determined for sodium and
chloride:
Cl Cl	A 	Cr	/ serum Cr
urine Cr
urine A
serum A 100
where ClA
/ClCr is the fractional clearance ratio, [A] is the measured
electrolyte A (either Na + or Cl−), and [Cr] is creatinine
concentration.
Symmetric dimethylarginine assays have been validated for use
in horses, and reference ranges have been reported for adult horses
and neonatal foals [47–49]. However, clinical utility in horses con-
tinues to be investigated and, to date, SDMA has not gained wide-
spread use in equine patients.
Renal biopsy via ultrasound guidance is easily performed in
horses, and use of a needle biopsy instrument minimizes the risks
(e.g., hemorrhage, bowel penetration, and peritonitis). Biopsy and
histopathology can identify the type of lesion, location, and severity
and provide guidance for prognosis.
Ruminant
Many of the same diagnostic procedures performed in small ani-
mals and horses can be performed in ruminant species. However,
for economic concerns, renal function testing is often limited to
findings on routine chemistry analysis and urinalysis strips.
Acute kidney injury/acute renal failure
Etiology and pathogenesis
The two major causes of AKI are toxic and ischemic injury, and the
kidneys are highly susceptible to both due to their unique anatomic
and physiologic features. For example, the large RBF (approximately
20% of the cardiac output) results in the increased delivery of
bloodborne toxicants to the kidney compared to other organs.
Within the renal cortex, the epithelial cells of the proximal tubule
and thick ascending loop of Henle are most frequently affected
by ischemic and toxicant-induced injury. These particular
susceptibilities occur, respectively, due to the many transport
functions and consequent high metabolic rates of these cells, and
to increased exposure from the combination of disproportionately
high blood flow (the cortex receives 90% of the blood supplied by
the renal artery) and the large endothelial surface area created
by the glomerular capillaries. Toxicants disrupt the metabolic
pathways that generate ATP, and ischemia can rapidly deplete
cellular ATP stores. With the resulting loss of energy, the Na + -K +
pump fails, leading to cell swelling and death. By resorbing water
and electrolytes from the glomerular filtrate, tubular epithelial cells
may be exposed to increasingly higher concentrations of toxicants
within the tubular lumen. Toxicants that are either secreted or
resorbed by tubular epithelial cells (e.g., gentamicin) may
accumulate in high concentrations within these cells; similarly, the
countercurrent multiplier system may concentrate toxicants in the
medulla. Finally, the kidneys also play a role in the biotransformation
of many drugs and toxicants. This usually results in the formation
of metabolites that are less toxic than the parent compound;
however, in some cases (e.g., the oxidation of ethylene glycol to
glycolate and oxalate), the metabolites are more toxic than the
parent compound.

-- 945 of 1450 --

930 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
Toxic insults to the kidney are often caused by therapeutic agents,
in addition to nephrotoxicants such as ethylene glycol and grapes/
raisins. Similarly, ischemic insults to the kidney can occur in the
hospital setting in conjunction with anesthesia and surgery or with
the use of vasoactive agents or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs) [50]. Prolonged anesthesia with inadequate fluid
therapy in older animals with pre-existing, subclinical CKD is a fre-
quent cause of renal ischemia and AKI in the hospital setting.
Normal kidneys can maintain adequate renal perfusion pressure by
autoregulation provided that the mean arterial blood pressure
exceeds approximately 60–70 mmHg. This autoregulation may be
compromised, however, in patients with pre-existing CKD, espe-
cially during anesthesia. The resulting decline in RBF and perfusion
pressure can adversely affect GFR and delivery of oxygen and nutri-
ents to the metabolically active tubular epithelial cells. Tubular cell
swelling secondary to decreased Na +
- K+ pump activity occurs due
to osmotic extraction of water from the extracellular space, which,
in turn, can cause the amount of water in the plasma to decrease.
The consequences of decreased plasma water in the renal vascula-
ture are red blood cell aggregation and vascular congestion and sta-
sis, which tend to potentiate and perpetuate decreased glomerular
blood flow and decreased oxygen and nutrient delivery.
In AKI, tubular dysfunction and reduced glomerular filtration
occur at the individual nephron level as a result of a combination of
tubular obstruction, tubular backleak, renal arteriolar vasoconstric-
tion, and decreased glomerular capillary permeability. Specifically,
cellular debris within the tubule may inspissate and obstruct the
flow of filtrate through the nephron. Alternatively, interstitial
edema (e.g., secondary to overhydration) may compress and
obstruct renal tubules. Tubular backleak is enhanced by tubular
obstruction and consequent increased intratubular pressures proxi-
mal to the obstruction. The decreased reabsorption of solute and
water by damaged proximal tubule segments results in the increased
delivery of solutes and fluid to the distal nephron and macula densa
in many nephrons, which causes afferent glomerular arteriole con-
striction. The exact mediators of this vasoconstriction are not
known, but natriuretic factor, the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone
system, and thromboxane may be involved. A decrease in the per-
meability of the glomerular capillary wall also leads to a reduction
in glomerular filtration. The impaired glomerular capillary perme-
ability that occurs in AKI often persists after vasoconstriction and
RBF have been corrected.
Several classification systems have been developed for humans to
describe and stratify the continuum of renal injury represented by
AKI (e.g., RIFLE, AKIN, and KDIGO). Recently, IRIS has created a
similar staging system for use in dogs and cats based on serum
creatinine, urine production, and need for renal replacement
therapy (Table 43.2). Because AKI by its nature is a fluid, evolving
condition, this grading system is intended to characterize a point in
the course of disease, and a given patient’s grade of AKI is expected
to change as the disease state evolves over time. The IRIS CKD
staging system (described below) is intended to better characterize
and group veterinary patients with AKI to aid therapeutic
recommendations and prognostication. Patients who stabilize into
a chronically azotemic state can then be reclassified into a CKD
stage. A detailed description of the IRIS AKI grading system is
available online [51].
Acute tubular damage leading to AKI has four distinct phases:
(1) initiation; (2) extension; (3) maintenance; and (4) recovery. The
initiation phase includes the time of and immediately following
initial renal insult, when sublethal cellular insult has occurred but
the basement membrane remains unaffected and renal function
remains 	relatively 	normal. 	During 	initiation, 	therapeutic
interventions that remove or interrupt the inciting process and
reduce ongoing additional damage can prevent development of
established AKI. During the extension phase, original mechanisms
of cellular injury may be combined with or replaced by the
inflammation, ischemia, and direct tissue damage from release of
proteolytic enzymes and proinflammatory cytokines, decreased
endothelial nitric oxide, and many other mechanisms. The sublethal
injuries may then induce necrotic or apoptotic cellular death.
During extension, routine laboratory testing will begin to show loss
of concentrating ability and usually azotemia. The maintenance
phase is characterized by the development of a critical amount of
renal parenchymal damage; this phase is variable in length but
generally lasts 1–3 weeks. Endothelial cytoskeletal damage leads to
release of tight junctions and adhesion to the basement membrane,
resulting in cellular desquamation and backleak of filtrate through
the basement membrane into the interstitium where it causes
additional inflammatory response. Tubular epithelial cells and
cellular or granular casts are often seen at this point of the process.
The sloughed epithelial cells may obstruct tubules, leading to
oliguria or anuria. Although therapeutic interventions during
maintenance (whether supportive care, diuretics, or extracorporeal
renal replacement therapies) may be lifesaving, they cannot change
the severity of existing lesions, improve function, or hasten recovery.
The aim of patient management during maintenance is to create
stability for long enough that renal recovery has an opportunity to
occur. In the recovery phase, renal lesions are repaired and function
improves; in oligoanuric animals, this is usually heralded by
increasing urine output and in non-oliguric animals by decreasing
azotemia. Tubular damage may be reversible if the basement
membrane remains intact and viable epithelial cells are present to
repopulate the tubule. Although new nephrons cannot be produced
and irreversibly damaged nephrons cannot be repaired, functional
hypertrophy of surviving nephrons may sufficiently compensate for
Table 43.2 International Renal Interest Society (IRIS) acute kidney injury (AKI) grading
criteria.
AKI
grade
Serum
creatinine
(mg/dL)
Serum
creatinine
(μmol/L)
Clinical description
Grade I 	< 1.6 	< 140 	Nonazotemic AKI:
a. Documented AKI (historical, clinical,
laboratory, or imaging evidence of AKI,
clinical oliguria/anuria, volume
responsivenessa) and/or
b. Progressive nonazotemic increase
in blood creatinine; ≥ 0.3 mg/dL
(≥ 26.4 mmol/L) within 48 h
c. Measured oliguria (< 1 mL/kg/h) or
anuria over 6 h
Grade II 	1.7–2.5 	141–220 	Mild AKI:
a. Documented AKI and static or
progressive azotemia
b. Progressive azotemic increase in blood
creatinine; ≥ 0.3 mg/dL (≥ 26.4 mmol/L)
within 48 h, or volume responsivenessa
c. Measured oliguria (< 1 mL/kg/h) or
anuria over 6 h
Grade III 	2.6–5.0 	221–439 	Moderate to severe AKI:
a. Documented AKI and increasing severities
of azotemia and functional renal failure
Grade IV 	5.1–10.0 	440–880
Grade V 	> 10.0 	> 880
a Volume responsiveness is considered an increase in urine production to greater than
1 mL/kg/h over 6 h and/or a decrease in serum creatinine to baseline over 48 h.

-- 946 of 1450 --

Chapter 43: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Renal Disease 	931
the decrease in nephron numbers, so that even if renal functional
recovery remains incomplete, adequate function may be re-established.
Length of the recovery phase is also highly variable and may last for
weeks or many months [52–55].
Clinical features and diagnosis
Clinical signs of AKI are often non-specific and include lethargy,
depressed mentation, hypo/anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, and
dehydration; occasionally, uremic breath, oral ulcers, or tongue-tip
necrosis may be present. A diagnosis of AKI is suspected if azotemia
develops acutely and is associated with persistent isosthenuria or
minimally concentrated urine, or if progressive but nonazotemic
elevation of creatinine ≥ 0.3 mg/dL (≥ 26.4 mmol/L) within 48 h is
observed. Animals with AKI may initially have normal urine output
but usually become polyuric, oliguric, or anuric. Dehydration and
prerenal azotemia superimposed on an inability to concentrate
urine (e.g., Addison’s disease, hypercalcemia, or overzealous use of
furosemide) initially mimics renal failure; however, in these prerenal
cases, volume replacement results in resolution of the azotemia.
Acute renal failure occurs within hours or days of exposure to an
insult. Clinical signs and clinicopathologic findings more frequently
associated with AKI include enlarged or swollen kidneys,
hemoconcentration, good body condition, active urine sediment
(e.g., granular casts, renal epithelial cells, and pyuria), and relatively
severe hyperkalemia and metabolic acidosis (usually in the face of
oliguria/anuria). Clinical signs in an animal with AKI tend to be
severe relative to those seen in an animal with CKD and a similar
magnitude of azotemia. Renal ultrasound in dogs and cats with AKI
usually shows normal sized to enlarged kidneys, often with diffusely
normal to slightly hypoechoic renal cortices. In animals with grape/
raisin or lily toxicity, however, the renal cortices are often bright;
with calcium oxalate nephrosis associated with ethylene glycol
ingestion, this change is usually marked (with cortices hyperechoic
to normal splenic tissue). Kidneys of animals with pyelonephritis
usually have bilateral mild to moderate pyelectasia, often with
increased renal pelvic echogenicity and sometimes with mild
proximal ureteral dilation. In cases of ureteral obstruction, dilation
of both the renal pelvis and the ureter to the point of the obstruction
are often present. Perirenal fluid is often seen with leptospirosis
(dogs) or renal lymphoma (usually cats) and occasionally with
other causes of AKI as well [52,54,56].
A recent study found the ratio of renal cortical thickness to
abdominal aortic diameter (at the left renal arterial branch) to be
significantly increased in dogs with AKI compared with normal
dogs and dogs with CKD; thus, calculation of this ratio could serve
as a method of identifying AKI on ultrasound [57]. The resistive
index (ratio between the peak systolic velocity and the end diastolic
velocity) in renal interlobar arteries (renal resistive index; RRI) can
also be calculated via ultrasound and Doppler interrogation and is
significantly increased in both humans and dogs with AKI. A posi-
tive correlation between creatinine and RRI has been demonstrated
in dogs with AKI, as well as a correlation between reduction in RRI
and a favorable prognosis [58].
Renal biopsy specimens from dogs and cats with AKI show
proximal tubular cell degeneration, ranging from cloudy swelling to
necrosis, with edema and mononuclear and polymorphonuclear
leukocyte infiltration in the interstitium. Ethylene glycol and
melamine-associated nephrotoxicity are frequently associated with
intratubular crystals. Although toxicant-induced AKI cannot be
differentiated histopathologically from AKI caused by ischemia in
all cases, renal histologic findings are often helpful in establishing a
prognosis. Evidence of tubular regeneration (e.g., flattened,
basophilic epithelial cells with irregular nuclear size, mitotic figures,
and high nuclear-to- cytoplasmic ratios) and the finding of generally
intact tubular basement membranes are good prognostic findings
and may be observed as early as 3 days post-insult. Conversely, large
numbers of granular casts, extensive tubular necrosis, interstitial
mineralization and fibrosis, and disrupted tubular basement
membranes are poor prognostic indicators. In addition to the renal
histopathologic changes, the degree of functional impairment and,
even more importantly, the response to therapy should be
considered when formulating a prognosis.
Chronic kidney disease
Etiology and pathogenesis
Most of the time, the term “chronic kidney disease” (CKD) is
intended to mean self-perpetuating chronic tubulointerstitial
nephritis, though proteinuric and other types of kidney disease may
be involved as well. Interstitial diseases usually stem mechanistically
from injury to one of the other major functional components of the
kidney (tubules, vasculature, and glomeruli); injury to any one
component has the ready potential to affect the other two through
their common contact with the interstitium. Because of the
interdependence and physical intercalation of the vascular,
glomerular, tubular, and interstitial components of the kidney, the
endpoint of severe or ongoing damage to any of these components
will be marked interstitial fibrosis with varying degrees of
inflammation 	and 	will 	appear 	histopathologically 	as
indistinguishable end-stage tubulointerstitial nephritis and fibrosis.
For instance, as discussed above in AKI, direct tubular insult
(usually toxic or ischemic) results in renal tubular epithelial injury,
disruption of the barrier between the tubular lumen and the
interstitial space, and production of proinflammatory cytokines.
Cytokine production and backleak of ultrafiltrate from the tubule
into the interstitium lead to chemotaxis of proinflammatory cells
and, thus, to interstitial inflammation and eventual fibrosis.
Alternatively, initial direct injury to the vasculature results in
diminished interstitial perfusion and thus hypoxia, leading to
cellular swelling and death. The resulting edema and inflammation
lead eventually to interstitial fibrosis. Finally, primary glomerular
lesions classically cause decreased permselectivity and thus protein-
rich ultrafiltrate enters the tubule. Increased protein transit through
the interstitium occurs as the proximal renal tubular epithelial cells
reclaim as much of the filtered proteins as possible and return them
to the bloodstream. Increased protein trafficking through the
interstitium leads to production of proinflammatory cytokines,
interstitial inflammation, and eventually to interstitial fibrosis.
Interstitial diseases cause injury to the renal vasculature and tubules
chiefly by compromising perfusion and diffusion; they cause injury
to glomeruli by producing local inflammation. The final common
pathway of severe and/or enduring insult to any single renal
functional component is interstitial inflammation and fibrosis, with
consequent damage to the other functional components. The
nephrons of chronically diseased kidneys are morphologically
heterogeneous, with changes ranging from severe atrophy and
fibrous connective tissue replacement to marked hypertrophy. The
histopathologic changes, however, are not process-specific, and
thus, the underlying cause of chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis is
usually not elucidated by direct tissue examination [59–61].
The pathophysiology of CKD can be considered at both the
organ and systemic levels. At the level of the kidney, the fundamental

-- 947 of 1450 --

932 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
pathologic change that occurs is a loss of nephrons and decreased
GFR. The resulting derangements in water and electrolyte balance,
accumulation of normally renally excreted organic solutes, and
impaired renal hormone synthesis cumulatively result in the
variable clinical constellation known as “uremic syndrome.” The
most common signs associated with the uremic syndrome are
gastrointestinal (e.g., dysrexia, nausea, vomiting, halitosis, oral
ulceration, stomatitis, diarrhea, and melena); weight loss, lethargy,
hypothermia, hypertension, sarcopenia, anemia, and weakness
frequently also occur. Altered behavior or seizures may be present
secondary to uremic or hypertensive encephalopathy; less
commonly, pneumonitis, pericarditis, bleeding diatheses, or
osteodystrophy occur [1,59,62,63].
In addition to excreting metabolic wastes and maintaining fluid
and electrolyte balance, the kidneys function as endocrine organs
and also catabolize several peptide hormones; both hormonal
synthesis and catabolism are deranged in animals with CKD,
usually in proportion to severity of disease. For example, decreased
renal production of erythropoietin and calcitriol contributes to the
development of non-regenerative anemia and hyperparathyroidism,
respectively. Conversely, decreased metabolism and excretion of
parathyroid hormone and gastrin leads to increased serum
concentrations of these hormones, contributing to development
of hyperparathyroidism and gastritis, respectively. Some patho-
physiologic changes that occur in CKD are brought about by
initially physiologic compensatory mechanisms. The osteodystrophy
of CKD occurs secondary to hyperparathyroidism, which develops
in an attempt to maintain normal plasma calcium and phosphorus
concentrations. Similarly, the GFR of intact hypertrophied nephrons
increases in animals with CKD in an attempt to maintain adequate
renal function, but proteinuria and glomerulosclerosis consequent
to hyperfiltration in these individual nephrons cause additional
tubulointerstitial damage.
Clinical features and diagnosis
In contrast to AKI, CKD develops over a period of months or years,
and its clinical signs are often relatively mild for the magnitude of
the azotemia. Unique signs of CKD include a long-standing history
of weight loss, polyuria/polydipsia, poor body condition, non-
regenerative anemia, and small and irregularly shaped kidneys.
A diagnosis of CKD is usually based on a combination of compatible
historical, physical examination, and clinicopathologic findings.
Plain radiographs can confirm the presence of small kidneys in
small animal patients but is usually not feasible in larger horses and
ruminants. Renal ultrasonography will usually show diffusely
hyperechoic and often thinned renal cortices with loss of the
normal corticomedullary distinction and overall decrease in size;
mild pyelectasia is also a common finding [64,65]. The increased
cortical echogenicity results from replacement of the irreversibly
damaged nephrons with fibrous connective tissue. Chronic cortical
infarcts are common, appearing as radially oriented, hyperechoic
wedges or bands, extending from the corticomedullary junction to
the capsular surface. Frequently, the cortical collapse and fibrosis
associated with infarcts results in irregularity of renal shape.
Radiographic studies and ultrasonography can identify other
changes associated with CKD, such as cysts or mineralization and
can also help identify or rule out potentially treatable causes of
CKD, such as pyelonephritis and nephrolithiasis [65,66]. As
mentioned for AKI, the ratio of renal cortical thickness to abdominal
aortic diameter measured ultrasonographically may be useful in
identifying CKD, since this ratio was shown to be significantly
decreased in dogs with CKD compared with normal dogs and dogs
with AKI [57]. Renal biopsy is not routinely performed in animals
with CKD unless the diagnosis is in question and the disease is
not advanced. Renal histopathologic preparations will show some
combination of a loss of tubules with replacement fibrosis and
mineralization, glomerulosclerosis and glomerular atrophy, and foci
of mononuclear cells (small lymphocytes, plasma cells, and
macrophages) within the interstitium in association with fibrous
connective tissue replacement.
Staging chronic kidney disease
Once prerenal and/or postrenal azotemia are resolved and a
diagnosis of CKD has been established (i.e., the disease is stable),
staging is appropriate to help clinicians refine and focus diagnostic
and therapeutic efforts in a consistent fashion. Table 43.3 details the
staging system for canine and feline CKD developed by IRIS, with
initial staging determined by serum creatinine and ideally also
SDMA, and substaging delineated by the presence or absence of
proteinuria and systemic hypertension (Tables 43.4 and 43.5). The
classic diagnosis of CKD based on renal azotemia (persistent renal
azotemia superimposed on the inability to concentrate urine)
pertains to CKD stages 2–4. Stage 1 CKD (non-azotemic CKD) may
be diagnosed in cats and dogs with persistent proteinuria of renal
origin, urine-concentrating deficits due to renal parenchymal
disease, increases in serum creatinine or SDMA concentration over
time (even if values remain in the normal range), abnormal renal
palpation, or renal imaging abnormalities. A detailed description of
IRIS guidelines for staging dogs and cats with CKD as well as
condensed pocket guides may be found online [51].
Further diagnostics and treatment
In general, the diagnostic approach to a patient once CKD has been
identified and staged is focused on three areas: (1) characterization
of the renal disease; (2) characterization of the stability of the renal
disease and renal function; and (3) characterization of the patient’s
problems associated with the decreased renal function. Evaluation
of canine and feline CKD patients ideally includes identification/
quantification of proteinuria, measurement of systemic blood
pressure, urine culture, and kidney imaging. The stability of renal
Table 43.3 International Renal Interest Society (IRIS) chronic kidney disease (CKD) staging system for cats and dogs.
Stage 1 	Stage 2 	Stage 3 	Stage 4
Serum creatinine 	SDMA 	Serum creatinine 	SDMA 	Serum creatinine 	SDMA 	Serum creatinine 	SDMA
mg/dL 	μmol/L 	μg/dL 	mg/dL 	μmol/L 	μg/dL 	mg/dL 	μmol/L 	μg/dL 	mg/dL 	μmol/L 	μg/dL
Cats 	< 1.6 	< 140 	< 18 	1.6–2.8 	140–250 	18–25 	2.9–5.0 	251–440 	26–38 	> 5.0 	> 440 	> 38
Dogs 	< 1.4 	< 125 	< 18 	1.4–2.8 	125–250 	18–35 	2.9–5.0 	251–440 	36–54 	> 5.0 	> 440 	> 54

-- 948 of 1450 --

Chapter 43: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Renal Disease 	933
Table 43.6 Generalized effects of anesthetics on renal blood flow (RBF)
and glomerular filtration rate (GFR).
Drug 	RBF 	GFR
Acepromazine 	No change 	No change
α2 - Adrenergic agonists 	Decrease 	No change
Benzodiazepines 	No change 	No change
Isoflurane 	Slight decrease 	Decrease
Sevoflurane 	Slight decrease 	Decrease
Ketamine 	Increase 	Decrease or no change
Propofol 	No change 	No change
Alfaxalone 	– 	–
Etomidate 	No change 	No change
function may be assessed by serial monitoring of abnormalities
identified during the initial evaluation of renal disease. This
monitoring should always include serial serum biochemistry
profiles, 	urinalyses, 	surveillance 	for 	and 	quantification 	of
proteinuria (e.g., urine protein:creatinine [UPC]), fundic exam, and
measurement of blood pressure, but may also include follow-up
urine cultures and ultrasonographic examinations. Characterization
of the renal disease and its stability are most important in the earlier
stages of CKD when appropriate treatment has the greatest potential
to improve or stabilize renal function. Identification of mitigatable
sequela of CKD becomes the more important focus in later stages,
when clinical signs tend to be more severe. In the later stages of
CKD, diagnostic (and subsequent therapeutic) efforts should be
directed at the anorexia, vomiting, acidosis, hypokalemia,
hypertension, anemia, and other disease consequences that
adversely affect the patient’s quality of life.
Treatment recommendations for early-stage CKD focus on
proactive surveillance to identify and treat modifiable disease
factors (e.g., proteinuria, hypertension, urinary infection, and
urolithiasis) in an effort to preserve remaining renal function.
Discontinuation 	of 	potentially 	nephrotoxic 	medications,
maintenance of euhydration, and (generally at stage 2 disease)
institution of diets designed for renal disease are the cornerstones
of management. Renoprotective diets have been conclusively shown
to markedly decrease uremic crises and decrease mortality in both
dogs and cats with naturally occurring CKD [67]. These diets are
formulated to limit phosphorus and minimize the waste products
of protein catabolism, which are thought to play a primary role in
uremia. Fortification of these diets with omega-3 polyunsaturated
fatty acids and antioxidants decreases proteinuria, cholesterol,
number of renal lesions, and overall mortality in dogs. Other
modifications include increased B vitamins to replace increased
renal loss, buffers (e.g., potassium citrate and sodium bicarbonate)
to mitigate metabolic acidosis, potassium supplementation in feline
diets to counter renal losses, and avoidance of excess sodium to
potentially decrease risk of hypertension [59,62,67,68].
For animals with late stage 2–4 CKD, treatment focuses on
amelioration of the clinical consequences of further declining renal
function in addition to continuing the interventions already
recommended in earlier stages of disease. Usually, this entails the
use of antiemetics (e.g., ondansetron and maropitant) and appetite
stimulants (e.g., mirtazapine and capromorelin). Administration of
additional buffers (usually sodium bicarbonate) to mitigate
metabolic acidosis or ACE inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers,
and/or calcium channel blockers to manage hypertension may be
needed. Esophageal feeding tubes enable provision of low-stress
ideal nutrition, hydration, and medications to patients and can be
excellent life-improving and life-extending tools when patients
cannot maintain appropriate oral intake. Anemia of CKD develops
chiefly due to decreased numbers of erythropoietin-producing
renal fibroblasts, but gastric ulceration, uremia-induced platelet
dysfunction, 	and 	shortened 	erythrocyte 	lifespan 	are 	also
contributory factors, and timely administration of erythropoiesis-
stimulating agents (e.g., darbepoetin alfa) when anemia begins to
develop can improve appetite, energy, and quality of life, as well as
prevent need for transfusion [59,62,68,69]. Detailed stage-specific
CKD treatment recommendations for dogs and cats may be found
on the IRIS website [51].
Anesthetic drugs and renal disease
Renal disease and injury can result in alterations in the
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of drugs administered
during the perianesthetic period. Many of the drugs (or their
metabolites) commonly used have some degree of renal metabolism
and/or excretion (e.g., ketamine, benzodiazepines, and some
opioids), and potential alterations in pharmacokinetic parameters
should be considered in the anesthetic plan for these patients.
Additionally, comorbidities associated with renal diseases, including
azotemia, 	acid–base 	disturbances, 	electrolyte 	imbalances,
dehydration, 	anemia, 	coagulopathy, 	hypertension, 	and
encephalopathy, should be considered and appropriate alterations
made in drug and therapy choices.
Azotemia is often associated with a decrease in plasma pH and
can decrease plasma protein binding of administered drugs,
resulting in higher concentrations of active free drug and increased
risk of relative overdose. However, the clinical significance of this
effect may be of minor importance. Regarding the effects of
anesthetics on RBF, all anesthetics are likely to decrease the rate of
glomerular filtration. Anesthetic drugs may directly affect RBF, or
they may indirectly alter renal function via changes in cardiovascular
and/or neuroendocrine activity [70]. Sedative and analgesic drugs
have varying effects on RBF and GFR and generally relate to
individual drug effects on cardiac output and vasomotor tone. Most
anesthetics that decrease GFR do so as a consequence of decreased
RBF (Table 43.6). Anesthetics that alter catecholamine release and
systemic concentrations may have variable effects on RBF and, thus,
GFR and renal function. For example, intramuscular administration
of a combination of medetomidine and butorphanol increased GFR
in healthy dogs, whereas that of a combination of medetomidine,
butorphanol, and atropine did not [71]. However, in another study,
Table 43.4 International Renal Interest Society (IRIS) chronic kidney disease (CKD)
substaging for proteinuria in cats and dogs.
Urine protein:creatinine 	Substage
< 0.2 (cats and dogs) 	Nonproteinuric
0.2–0.4 (cats), 0.2–0.5 (dogs) 	Borderline proteinuric
> 0.4 (cats), > 0.5 (dogs) 	Proteinuric
Table 43.5 International Renal Interest Society (IRIS) chronic kidney disease (CKD)
substaging for hypertension for cats and dogs.
Systolic blood pressure
(mmHg)
Blood pressure
substage
Risk of target organ
damage
< 140 	Normotensive 	Minimal
140–159 	Prehypertensive 	Low
160–179 	Hypertensive 	Moderate
> 179 	Severely hypertensive 	High

-- 949 of 1450 --

934 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
medetomidine significantly decreased GFR in healthy dogs,
whereas a combination of xylazine, ketamine, and halothane or
propofol did not affect GFR [72].
Knowledge of the adverse effects of drugs used in the
perianesthetic period is essential; it is often the results of
magnification of these side effects in the face of renal disease that
poses the greatest risk for these patients. Phenothiazine tranquilizers
(e.g., acepromazine) produce dose-dependent hypotension by
antagonism of vascular α-adrenergic receptors. Phenothiazines
may also antagonize dopamine receptors and therefore may prevent
dopamine-induced increases in RBF during surgery. However, RBF
and GFR do not change significantly in the face of mild hypotension
and may actually impart protection of renal function after low-dose
acepromazine administration [73]. Additionally, the use of
phenothiazines as a renal preconditioning agent reduced the
histopathologic damage in kidneys subject to ischemia and
reperfusion [74]. A relatively low dose of acepromazine (0.01–
0.02 mg/kg) in patients with stable kidney disease has been
recommended [75]. Acepromazine use should probably be
restricted to patients with stable and compensated renal disease and
avoided in patients in acute crises or in which maintenance of
adequate perfusion pressure during anesthesia is a concern.
α2
- Adrenergic receptor agonist drugs, such as dexmedetomidine
and xylazine, can have significant dose-dependent depressant
effects on heart rate and cardiac output and increase systemic
vascular resistance. These effects could be expected to reduce RBF
and subsequently GFR; in fact, in a study using a short-term
controlled-rate infusion, dexmedetomidine was shown to decrease
RBF by up to 30% [76]. However, there is evidence that medetomidine
in combination with anticholinergic and opioid agents has minimal
effects on GFR in dogs [71]. Additionally, dexmedetomidine may be
renal protective in the face of ischemia and reperfusion injury.
Dexmedetomidine reduced metabolic activity and demonstrated
antioxidant effects in rabbits undergoing experimental renal
ischemia and reperfusion injury [77]. For patients at risk for acute
renal injury due to hypoperfusion, dexmedetomidine use may have
some benefit, but α2 -adrenergic receptor agonist administration is
accompanied by profound diuresis. The mechanism is likely
multifactorial, including inhibition of vasopressin release, inhibition
of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) formation in the
kidney, redistribution of aquaporin-2 receptors, inhibition of renin
release, increased atrial natriuretic peptide, inhibition of renal
sympathetic activity, osmotic diuresis due to increased plasma
glucose, and inhibition of tubular sodium reabsorption [78].
Interestingly, these mechanisms differ in importance between
individual agents and species [78–81]. For instance, xylazine had a
greater 	diuretic 	effect 	than 	medetomidine 	in 	dogs, 	and
medetomidine decreased plasma vasopressin whereas xylazine did
not [79]. The increased production of dilute urine may be
detrimental in patients with postrenal urinary tract obstruction or
dehydration and hypovolemia [80,81]. The addition of vatinoxan, a
peripheral α2
- adrenergic receptor antagonist, to a sedative protocol
utilizing dexmedetomidine may attenuate the hemodynamic effects
and maintain abdominal organ blood flow, including to the
kidneys [82].
Benzodiazepines are a commonly used class of drugs within
veterinary medicine, primarily for their muscle relaxant and mild
sedative properties. Diazepam and midazolam have minimal effects
on cardiac output, systemic vascular resistance, and blood pressure.
Consequently, their use has little impact on RBF and GFR. However,
benzodiazepines, like most injectable anesthetic and analgesic
drugs, are protein bound in the plasma, and their use in azotemic
patients may consequently result in more active free drug. Reduction
in initial dosage is probably warranted in patients with acute kidney
disease or those which are severely acidotic, azotemic, or
hypoproteinemic. Patients with stable disease may not need any
adjustment in dosage. Additionally, in patients with AKI, midazolam
may have reduced hepatic metabolism. Through an unknown
mechanism, as the severity and duration of AKI increases, the
activity of CYP3A, an enzyme associated with the P450 system in
the liver, is decreased, delaying metabolism and prolonging the
effect of drugs such as midazolam [83]. Diazepam and lorazepam
are not water soluble and, therefore, are delivered in propylene
glycol for injection. Propylene glycol can induce proximal renal
tubular cell injury and necrosis, particularly with drugs administered
as infusions [84–86]. Midazolam is water soluble and delivered in
an aqueous solution and may be a more appropriate benzodiazepine
for use in patients with significant kidney disease.
Anesthetic and analgesic protocols for patients with kidney
disease are often built around the use of opioids [75]. Opioids will
provide sedation and analgesia to patients with minimal impact on
cardiac output and thus RBF [87]. It should be noted, however, that
the pharmacokinetics of opioids can be altered in patients with
renal disease or failure [88]. Longer acting opioids with active
metabolites, such as morphine and meperidine (pethidine), should
be used with caution as the metabolites have a delayed clearance. In
humans, it has been recommended to avoid the use of agents such
as morphine and meperidine altogether in patients with renal
dysfunction to avoid prolonged narcosis [88]. However, species
differences in the metabolism of morphine may reduce the risk of
these drugs in veterinary patients. The pharmacokinetics of
buprenorphine, alfentanil, sufentanil, and remifentanil, at least in
human patients with renal dysfunction, are minimally changed.
Fentanyl, administered as a single dose, shows little change in its
pharmacokinetic profile; however, significant tissue accumulation
and prolonged effect can occur with continuous infusion [89].
Remifentanil is a short-acting opioid that undergoes complete
metabolism within the plasma and, although a metabolite GR90291
can accumulate in patients with renal failure, it does not produce
significant opioid effects. It is, therefore, one of the most
recommended opioids for use in human patients with renal
dysfunction [90]. Clinicians should also be cognizant of the fact
that opioids can cause urine retention when administered
systemically or as an epidural injection.
Injectable anesthetic agents can also have an effect on renal
parameters. Although rarely used in modern anesthesia, thiobarbi-
turates increase systemic vascular resistance but decrease renal vas-
cular resistance with no net change in RBF. Of interest, a serious
concern with barbiturates is the change in pharmacodynamics
associated with this class of drugs in patients with renal disease.
Barbiturates (like many other drugs) are highly protein bound, and
this protein binding can be altered in states of severe azotemia. It is
well documented that animals with azotemia have decreased pro-
tein binding of thiopental and are at a higher risk of relative over-
dose when using thiopental [91,92]. Additionally, the central
nervous system of azotemic animals is more susceptible to the
effects of thiopental when measured by electroencephalo-
gram [93,94]. This is thought to occur from allosteric endogenous
compounds that enhance thiopental effects that are normally inhib-
ited in nonazotemic animals. It is probably best practice to avoid the
use of thiopental in patients with azotemia or renal disease; how-
ever, if necessary, total dosages should be reduced.

-- 950 of 1450 --

Chapter 43: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Renal Disease 	935
Ketamine (and likely tiletamine) increases RBF and renal
vascular resistance [95]. Even though there can be an increase in
RBF, ketamine administration may result in an abnormal
distribution of blood flow within the kidney. Additionally, as the
dose of ketamine increases, renal sympathetic nerve activity
increases, RBF decreases, and renal vascular resistance increases [96].
Ketamine also directly inhibits dopamine transporter proteins in
the kidney, but the clinical relevance of this is unclear [97]. Ketamine
and its metabolites are highly dependent on renal excretion. In cats,
it has been said that the majority of the drug is excreted unchanged
and, therefore, should be avoided in cats with renal insufficiency [98].
In fact, ketamine is metabolized to norketamine, a first-step
metabolite, in the liver of cats; however, unlike in other species,
norketamine is not further metabolized [99]. Ketamine is 53%
protein bound, and higher levels of free drug can be expected in
azotemic animals, although the increase in free drug may be
clinically unimportant [100]. Interestingly, in humans after long-
term abuse, the development of two syndromes involving the
urinary system, ketamine-induced ulcerative cystitis and ketamine-
induced vesicopathy, has been reported [101,102].
Propofol is one of the most commonly used induction agents in
human and veterinary anesthesia. Propofol demonstrates a dose-
and rate-dependent reduction in arterial blood pressure. However,
it has minimal effects on RBF and GFR at low-to-moderate doses
and is frequently used for the induction of anesthesia in patients
with kidney disease [103,104]. In sheep, propofol caused minor
hemodynamic changes in RBF that were not considered to be
clinically important [105], and GFR was not significantly affected in
dogs administered propofol at clinically used dosages [72,106]. In
human patients with CKD and uremia, the pharmacokinetics of
propofol were similar to those of healthy control patients, and
recovery from propofol anesthesia was no different to that of
controls [108,109]. Propofol is considered to be a suitable agent for
induction and total intravenous anesthesia in human patients with
uremia, although reduced doses may be required [110].
While current studies that evaluate the direct effects of the current
formulation of alfaxalone on RBF and GFR are lacking, the hemody-
namic effects of this agent have been assessed. Administration of
alfaxalone to healthy patients results in hemodynamic effects that are
relatively insignificant [111–115]. Furthermore, like many anesthet-
ics, biotransformation occurs primarily via the liver, and renal insuf-
ficiency is not expected to result in substantial differences in
anesthetic recovery when used for induction. As such, titration of
alfaxalone for anesthetic induction or intramuscular administration
for sedation of patients would be an appropriate choice for patients
presenting with renal insufficiency.
Etomidate is an anesthetic agent known for its minimal effects on
heart rate, blood pressure, and cardiac output. Etomidate has also
been shown to have no significant effect on renal function and urine
output in anesthetized rats [116]. Like propofol, etomidate does not
significantly affect GFR in dogs [106]. However, as with diazepam,
propylene glycol is used as a solvent in most etomidate preparations.
Inhalant anesthetics can cause systemic hypotension, especially
during excessive depth, which can result in renal ischemia secondary
to reduced RBF and GFR. This is a result of one of the major side
effects of potent volatile anesthetics, peripheral vasodilation, in
addition to a dose-dependent depression of myocardial contractility
and cardiac output. Concurrently, inhalation anesthetics also tend
to decrease RBF and GFR in a dose-dependent manner. Light
planes of inhalation anesthesia preserve renal autoregulation of
blood flow, whereas deep planes are associated with depression of
autoregulation and decreases in RBF. Although isoflurane has minor
direct effects on RBF, it decreases GFR and urine output in dogs
under experimental conditions [117]. Sevoflurane, although not
well studied, seems to have similar effects to isoflurane on RBF [118].
However, when sevoflurane comes into contact with certain carbon
dioxide absorbents, it degrades to a nephrotoxic substance called
“compound A.” Compound A has been shown to cause permanent
damage to the kidneys of rats but has not been shown to cause
problems in humans with renal insufficiency or in dogs with normal
renal function [119,120]. Desflurane has no effect on RBF at
concentrations up to twice the minimum alveolar concentration
(MAC), but it decreases renal vascular resistance at concentrations
greater than 1.75 MAC [121]. For most human patients, and most
likely for veterinary patients, the effects of inhaled anesthetics on
renal function are reversed at the termination of anesthesia.
However, some patients may not regain the ability to regulate urine
production for several days [122]. Any patient that demonstrates
postanesthetic oliguria should be evaluated immediately for AKI.
As stated previously, COX-1 and COX-2 are necessary for the
normal functioning of the healthy kidney. In fact, of the two enzymes,
COX-2 may be more important for renal development and
preservation of RBF and GFR, particularly during hypovolemia [123].
NSAIDs exert their effects through suppression of these enzymes,
reducing the production of proinflammatory prostaglandins. Unfor-
tunately, NSAIDs also suppress the production of prostaglandins
necessary for constitutive functions. NSAIDs that preferentially
suppress COX-2 may be more detrimental to renal function than
more mixed-profile NSAIDs in patients with kidney disease [123]. In
healthy dogs, the use of perioperative carprofen or meloxicam did
not result in adverse effects or alterations of renal function [124].
Additionally, in dogs undergoing repair of traumatic fractures, the
administration of perioperative carprofen did not cause any clinically
relevant adverse effects. However, even in healthy patients, the use of
NSAIDs may result in fatal renal injury in dogs and cats [125,126].
Historically, the use of NSAIDs in cats with CKD was avoided.
However, newer research indicates that use in these cats may not be
as harmful as once believed. Long-term use of low-dose meloxicam
(0.02 mg/kg/day) in cats with CKD does not appear to result in
decreased renal function; however, proteinuria may increase [127]. In
cats with CKD (IRIS stage < 4), 4–12 weeks of oral robenacoxib was
no different than placebo in the number of adverse events that
occurred with no overall increase in risk [128]. When considering the
use of NSAIDs in animals with CKD, obtaining informed owner
consent and thorough patient monitoring are essential. A review of
this topic as well as recommendations for long-term therapy with
NSAIDs in cats with CKD has been published [129].
Anesthesia and the stress associated with surgery can cause the
release of aldosterone, vasopressin, renin, and catecholamines.
Accordingly, RBF and GFR (and, therefore, urine production) are
generally decreased with surgery in any patient. In fact, in a study
involving the administration of intravenous fluid (10 mL/kg/h) to
dogs with normal kidney function undergoing routine orthopedic
surgical procedures, evidence of both reduced urine output (below
the usual range of 1–2 mL/kg/h) and significant fluid retention was
documented [130]. This decrease in urine output may be a normal
compensatory mechanism that occurs during reduced metabolic
activity of the kidney or during a period when the kidneys are
working to conserve solutes and fluid during insults to the body. It
is, therefore, recommended to use additional parameters rather
than only urine output as an indicator of fluid balance and renal
function in anesthetized animals [130].

-- 951 of 1450 --

936 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
Anesthetic management of patients
with renal disease
Patients with suspected or known renal disease or dysfunction
should have a complete physical examination, biochemical testing,
baseline arterial blood pressure measurement, and renal function
evaluation prior to any anesthetic event. Additionally, renal diseases
are often accompanied by dysfunction of other organ systems and
should be considered in any anesthetic plan. Concomitant drug
therapy should also be accounted for and incorporated into the
anesthetic plan. For example, cats with hyperthyroidism may have
CKD, 	hypertension, 	and 	hypertrophic 	cardiomyopathy.
Antihypertensive and antiarrhythmic drugs can result in patients
having an increased response to drugs that affect the central nerv-
ous system, leading to relative overdose.
Preanesthetic stabilization of patients with renal disease may be
more critical to a successful outcome than the anesthetic drugs that
are administered. Overall, the most important parameters for a
patient with renal disease are hydration status and circulating blood
volume. Maintaining RBF and GFR through adequate hydration
will reduce the likelihood of further renal injury and preserve renal
function [131]. Hydration has been shown to be effective in the
treatment of renal injury and is a good strategy to prevent the
progression of early-stage kidney disease to more advanced-stage
kidney disease [132]. Azotemic patients can be administered intrave-
nous fluids before surgery to achieve euhydration and diuresis. If
azotemia is severe and is accompanied by electrolyte abnormalities or
acid–base imbalances, hospitalization and diuresis can be performed
over several hours prior to anesthesia. Anemic patients undergoing
anesthesia and procedures with the potential for blood loss should
have a red blood cell transfusion if the hematocrit is less than 18–20%.
Once a patient is deemed stable, anesthesia can be performed. In
order to minimize significant shifts in cardiac output, blood
pressure, and perfusion, a balanced anesthetic plan with agents that
have minimal effects on the cardiovascular system is recommended.
Premedication in small animal patients can be achieved with an
opioid–benzodiazepine combination, either intramuscularly or
titrated to effect intravenously; induction of anesthesia can be
accomplished with alfaxalone, propofol, etomidate, benzodiazepine-
dissociative, 	or 	benzodiazepine–opioid 	combinations. 	It 	is
important to remember that all of these anesthetic drugs can cause
some degree of reduced RBF and/or GFR and that using these drugs
“to effect” is recommended. Anesthesia can be maintained with
either isoflurane or sevoflurane. In addition, constant rate infusions
using opioid agonists such as remifentanil or fentanyl for inhalant
anesthetic reduction will reduce the dose-dependent side effects of
inhalant anesthetics and may improve RBF and GFR. In adult
horses, anesthetic premedication without an α2
- adrenergic receptor
agonist is impractical; hence, using reduced doses and combining
with butorphanol may allow for adequate sedation. Induction with
a benzodiazepine–ketamine or propofol–ketamine combination
can be performed. Using a reduced dose of ketamine may limit the
induction agent’s adverse effects on RBF and GFR. In smaller horses
or ponies, propofol can be used as an induction agent.
Continuing intravenous fluid therapy throughout the anesthetic
period is recommended to maintain fluid volume and hydration.
While optimal perianesthetic fluid administration rates in veterinary
patients have not been assessed in large-scale clinical studies, a good
starting point would be to administer an initial rate of 10 mL/kg for
the first hour followed by a rate of 5 mL/kg/h thereafter. These rates
may be altered based on the patient’s physiologic state and
comorbidities, including dehydration, hypovolemia, heart disease,
hypoproteinemia, or severe anemia. The choice of intravenous fluid
is based on the animal’s electrolyte and acid–base status. In general,
animals with mild-to-moderate renal insufficiency/failure that are
well prepared for surgery or anesthesia can be administered a
replacement crystalloid intravenous fluid. If there is potential for
urinary tract obstruction or the patient is anuric, intravenous fluids
should be used cautiously to prevent fluid overload until the
obstruction is relieved or the anuria resolves.
Vigilant monitoring of a patient will help the anesthetist to identify
hypotension, arrhythmias, hypoxemia, or hypoventilation that could
negatively impact renal function. Continuous electrocardiography
(ECG) can detect changes in cardiac electrical activity that can be
associated with electrolyte abnormalities such as hyperkalemia.
Arterial blood pressure (ABP) should be measured to detect systemic
hypotension and decreased renal perfusion pressure. Indirect ABP
measurement can be easily performed with an oscillometric or
Doppler technique; however, direct arterial catheterization is
preferred as it is a more accurate and immediate measurement.
Additionally, arterial blood gas samples can be obtained from the
arterial catheter for analysis. Mean ABP should be maintained above
70–80 mmHg. In patients exhibiting hypertension when evaluated
prior to anesthesia, maintenance of mean ABP closer to preanesthetic
levels (i.e., within ~20%) may be necessary to preserve renal
perfusion. Pulse oximetry (SpO2
) can be used to detect hemoglobin
desaturation rapidly and alert the anesthetist to the potential for a
decrease in tissue oxygen delivery. Continuous end-tidal carbon
dioxide (PET
CO2
) measurement can be used to detect hypoventilation
and the need for assisted ventilation. Excessive arterial carbon dioxide
can lead to acidemia, which may exacerbate acute renal disease [133].
Periodic arterial blood gas analysis can be useful for following trends
in pH, oxygen content, and electrolytes. Advanced monitoring can be
performed, particularly in critically ill animals. For example, central
venous pressure (CVP) can be measured via a jugular catheter as one
indirect measurement of blood volume to evaluate the rate of
intravenous fluid administration. Normal CVP should be between 3
and 5 cmH2
O in dogs and cats. If the CVP rises more than 10 cmH2
O,
fluid administration should be slowed or stopped. If the CVP falls
in response to the fluids being stopped, they may be resumed at a
slower rate. An elevated CVP of more than 10 cmH2
O indicates
inadequate myocardial function or volume overload. Cardiac output
measurement can give indications of preload, stroke volume,
system vascular resistance, and patient response to inotropic and
pressor agents that can have an effect on RBF and GFR. Less invasive
assessments of volume status, discussed elsewhere, may include pulse
pressure waveform analysis.
Adjunctive treatments for patients with renal disease
During the perianesthetic period, pharmacologic manipulation of
cardiovascular and renal physiology may be beneficial in renal dis-
ease patients. Dopamine infusions (3–20 μg/kg/min) have long been
considered useful in improving myocardial function and cardiac
output. In human patients with renal disease, lower (e.g., renal) doses
of dopamine (2 μg/kg/min) have historically been shown to increase
urinary output but do not improve overall outcome compared with
IV fluid therapy [132]. In dogs, low doses (1–3 μg/kg/min) were
once used to promote RBF and GFR, but studies showing benefit are
lacking and this strategy has fallen out of favor. Controversy exists
regarding the use of dopamine to improve renal function in cats.
Questions remain as to whether or not cats have appropriate dopa-
mine receptors in their kidneys and low-dose dopamine has not

-- 952 of 1450 --

Chapter 43: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Renal Disease 	937
been shown to have a diuretic effect in cats [134]. In fact, dopamine
infusions of 10–100 μg/kg/min may increase urine output without
changing GFR, suggesting that this diuresis is due to decreased tubu-
lar reabsorption and that dopamine receptors appear to have a mini-
mal role in RBF or GFR in cats [135]. Doses of dopamine above
approximately 10 μg/kg/min may cause α-adrenergic renal vasocon-
striction and decreased RBF. An alternative inotrope for use during
anesthesia is dobutamine (2–20 μg/kg/min). Dobutamine can
increase cardiac output and potentially blood pressure without sig-
nificant vasoconstrictive and dopaminergic actions.
Furosemide has also been investigated during anesthesia in patients
with renal dysfunction. As a loop diuretic, furosemide decreases the
metabolic activity of the renal tubules; however, furosemide infusion
has been shown to result in elevated creatinine levels in anesthetized
human patients, and its use is not recommended [132,136,137].
The osmotic diuretic mannitol has several potentially beneficial
effects on the kidney. Mannitol is freely filtered and not reabsorbed
by the kidney and, therefore, acts as an osmotic agent in the renal
tubules and also in the systemic circulation. Administration of
mannitol can induce renal arteriole dilation, decrease vascular
resistance and blood viscosity, and scavenge oxygen free radicals.
Mannitol has been used as a renal protective solution during kidney
transplant in humans leading to a lower incidence of acute renal
failure and delayed graft function [138]. Mannitol has also been
used to reduce the incidence of contrast-induced nephropathy by
preventing tubular necrosis [139,140]. RBF in cats may be improved
by administering an intravenous loading dose of mannitol (500 mg/
kg) and continuing a constant rate infusion (1 mg/kg/min) during
the anesthetic period [141]. In a canine study where dogs under-
went a 50% reduction in renal blood flow, mannitol (loading dose
500 mg/kg, infusion 20 mg/kg/min) improved RBF, GFR, and effec-
tive renal plasma flow [142]. However, in healthy dogs, a 500 mg/kg
bolus dose increased fractional excretion of both sodium and urea
but did not appear to increase GFR, even when followed by a 1 mg/
kg/min infusion [143]. Repeated boluses rather than an infusion
may be more clinically useful in dogs. In AKI, mannitol induced the
redistribution of systemic blood flow to the kidneys and increased
urine flow [144]. In an experimental model of hypoxia in rabbit
kidneys, mannitol reduced tubular cell swelling and prevented
proximal intratubular hypertension, resulting in improved blood
flow [145]. Mannitol should be used cautiously in patients that are
receiving other diuretics such as acetazolamide, as excessive use can
result in hyponatremic acute renal failure [146]. Additionally,
osmotic nephrosis has been reported with excessively high doses,
with administration to hypovolemic patients, when combined with
furosemide, or when administered to diabetic patients [147,148].
Fenoldopam is a dopamine receptor agonist at the D1 receptor
that has renal vasodilating properties. Fenoldopam has no effect on
D2 or α-adrenergic receptors that can cause vasoconstriction and
result in decreased RBF and GFR. In fact, fenoldopam increases RBF
and may assist in preserving renal function. Fenoldopam has been
shown to decrease creatinine and improve renal function in humans
at a dose of 0.1 μg/kg/min compared with dopamine infusion and
may be effective in decreasing renal hypoperfusion [149]. In dogs,
fenoldopam at a dose of 0.8 μg/kg/min resulted in a steady-state
plasma concentration of 20 ± 17 ng/mL. Heart rate and systolic
blood pressure were unaffected by the infusion in any of the
dogs [150]. However, in a canine model of rhabdomyolysis, fenoldo-
pam administration decreased creatinine clearance and increased
the severity of renal injury and, in dogs with AKI secondary to heat-
stroke, it failed to increase urine output, GFR, fractional excretion of
sodium, or odds of survival [151,152]. In awake, healthy cats,
fenoldopam at 0.5 μg/kg/min increased urine output only after 6 h of
infusion and increased sodium excretion. Additionally, fenoldopam
administration had a biphasic effect on GFR, decreasing in the first
6 h and then increasing subsequently [153].
Anesthetic management of patients
with urethral or bilateral ureteral obstruction
Species commonly presenting for obstruction and correction of
urethral obstruction are cats, dogs, sheep, and goats; however,
horses and cattle can also be affected. Cats are the species most
commonly affected by acute bilateral or sequential bilateral ureteral
obstruction. Both clinical conditions can cause mild to life-
threatening postrenal uremic crisis. These patients often present
with metabolic and acid–base abnormalities, including hyper-
kalemia, azotemia, acidemia, hyperphosphatemia, hyperglycemia,
hypocalcemia, hyponatremia, and hypochloremia. Hyponatremia
and hypochloremia are often associated with urine leakage into the
abdominal cavity, and any patient presenting with these abnormali-
ties should be examined for urinary tract rupture. Hyperkalemia is
perhaps of greatest concern and should be addressed immediately.
In general, patients having a serum potassium concentration greater
than 5.5–6.0 mEq/L should not be anesthetized until the potassium
levels can be normalized. Electrocardiographic abnormalities are
commonly observed with potassium concentrations exceeding
7 mEq/L. The presence of ECG abnormalities at a given plasma
concentration can also be related to the chronicity of the change,
suggesting that preanesthetic ECG may be of value any time potas-
sium abnormalities are present. The resting membrane potential of
cardiac muscle depends on the permeability and extracellular con-
centration of potassium (Fig. 43.2). During hyperkalemia, the
membrane’s resting potential is raised (partially depolarized), and
fewer sodium channels are available to participate in the action
potential. As the serum potassium concentration increases, repo-
larization occurs more rapidly and automaticity, conductivity, con-
tractility, and excitability are decreased. These changes produce the
classic ECG appearance of a peaked T wave with a prolonged PR
interval progressing to wide QRS complexes and loss of P waves.
Mild chronic hyperkalemia may not require treatment prior to
anesthesia. If treatment is instituted for chronic hyperkalemia, serum
potassium should be lowered gradually to allow intracellular potas-
sium time to reestablish physiological transmembrane concentration
gradients. If hyperkalemia is acute or ECG abnormalities are noted,
Ca
Ca
K
K
(millivolts)
TP
RP
Figure 43.2 Relationships between extracellular concentrations of potassium
and calcium and the resting potential (RP) and threshold potential (TP). An
action potential is generated when there is sufficient depolarization to reach
the TP. Increased extracellular potassium will result in raised (less negative)
RP, whereas increased extracellular calcium will result in raised TP.

-- 953 of 1450 --

938 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
treatment should be initiated prior to induction of anesthesia. The
most rapid treatment for the cardiac effects associated with hyper-
kalemia is 10% calcium chloride (0.1 mg/kg IV). Calcium will
increase the membrane’s threshold potential, resulting in increased
myocardial conduction and contractility. Because increased serum
potassium concentration causes the resting potential to be less nega-
tive (partially depolarized), the calcium ion-induced increase in
threshold potential temporarily restores the normal gradient between
resting and threshold potentials. It should be recognized that admin-
istration of calcium will not affect the serum potassium concentra-
tion, and its effects will, therefore, be short-lived. Regimens to
decrease the serum potassium concentration by shifting potassium
intracellularly include combined infusion of dextrose and insulin and
bicarbonate administration (Table 43.7). Because acidemia favors
extracellular movement of potassium and worsens hyperkalemia,
intermittent positive-pressure ventilation may be required to prevent
anesthetic drug-induced hypercapnia and respiratory acidosis.
In most appropriately restrained or sedated small animal patients,
decompressive percutaneous cystocentesis can be safely performed
by palpation or with ultrasound guidance to drain urine and reduce
patient discomfort. When complications occur, they are usually
associated with improper technique or inadequate patient restraint.
Although rare bladder injury and rupture and aortic laceration have
been reported, studies specifically examining the safety of this
procedure in cats with urethral obstruction did not demonstrate
clinically significant complications [154–158]. Intravenous fluid
therapy should be instituted to correct dehydration and acid–base
and electrolyte abnormalities. Once the patient is stabilized,
anesthesia can be provided with a protocol similar to that discussed
previously for small animal patients and small ruminants, and
standard protocols for larger patients. Horses with urethral
obstruction have been reported to rupture their bladder during
induction of anesthesia, presumably due to increased abdominal
compartment 	pressure 	from 	recumbency 	[159]. 	Perineal
urethrostomy can be performed in male horses using sedation and
epidural anesthesia to relieve the obstruction. Intravenous fluid
therapy using potassium-free fluids has been considered the
treatment of choice for animals with urethral obstruction. However,
particularly in cats, compared with physiologic saline (0.9% NaCl),
Lactated Ringer’s solution is a better choice as animals have a
decreased duration of metabolic and electrolyte imbalances after
the obstruction is cleared [160].
Cats with oligoanuric acute ureteral obstruction (usually from
stone disease, stricture, intraluminal concretions, or luminal
inflammation, edema, hypertrophy, or fibrosis) usually are pre-
sented with the same metabolic derangements as animals with ure-
thral obstruction and similar care is appropriate. Management is
complicated, however, by several factors including: (1) correction of
the obstruction usually requires surgical intervention (e.g., place-
ment of a ureteral stent or subcutaneous ureteral bypass system,
ureterotomy, or ureteral reimplantation); (2) oligoanuria may limit
the utility of intravenous fluid therapy; and (3) presurgical (and
sometimes also postsurgical) stabilization may require hemodialy-
sis. These cats also usually experience AKI secondary to the hemo-
dynamic, inflammatory, and apoptotic effects of the obstruction
and, consequently, frequently sustain some degree of permanent
loss of renal function after the obstruction is relieved [161–164].
In cats with mild or partial urethral obstruction, only sedation
may be needed to facilitate passing a urethral catheter and clearing
the obstruction. In these cases, after fluid therapy and stabilization,
an opioid can be administered for analgesia followed by subanes-
thetic doses of propofol (0.25–1.0 mg/kg, IV) for sedation.
Supplemental oxygen should be provided during propofol sedation.
In male cats, intraurethral administration of 4 mL of diluted atracu-
rium (0.5 mg/mL) significantly increased the chance and reduced
the time necessary to relieve an obstruction [165]. Another
approach is the use of a coccygeal epidural, described in Chapter 60,
with a local anesthetic such as lidocaine for reducing pain and dis-
comfort during and after unblocking of the urethra [166]. However,
intravesicular administration of lidocaine and sodium bicarbonate
has no beneficial effects and does not reduce the recurrence rate or
severity of clinical signs in cats with urethral obstruction [167].
Careful postanesthetic care of these patients is essential as
marked and/or prolonged diuresis after the obstruction has been
relieved is common. Urine output of greater than 2 mL/kg/h can be
expected in about 46% of cats within the first 6 h of treatment,
which will require higher fluid therapy rates that should be tapered
off over the following few days [168].
In sheep or goats with urethral obstruction, sedation or anesthe-
sia may be needed to extrude the penis and examine the urethral
process, one of the most common sites for urethral obstruction in
these species. Preanesthetic stabilization to correct acid–base, fluid,
and electrolyte imbalances should occur in a manner similar to that
mentioned previously for small animal patients. α2 -Adrenergic
receptor agonists, such as xylazine, should be avoided owing to
their diuretic effects [169]. A benzodiazepine in combination with
an opioid may provide adequate sedation for initial examination,
particularly in painful animals. Anesthesia can be induced with
injectable propofol or a benzodiazepine–dissociative combination,
or with an inhalant anesthetic delivered by face mask. Additionally,
adjunctive anesthesia can be provided with epidural administration
of a local anesthetic.
Anesthetic management of patients
with urinary bladder rupture and uroabdomen
Uroabdomen is defined as urine in the peritoneal cavity and can
occur in any species of animal. In small animals, uroabdomen is
most commonly caused by vehicular trauma but can also result
from rupture of ureters, bladder, or urethra secondary to obstruction
Table 43.7 Treatment options for patients with hyperkalemia.
Treatment 	Dosage 	Use 	Comments
Calcium chloride 	0.1 mg/kg, IV 	Raises threshold potential 	Administer slowly; temporary effect only
50% Dextrose 	1–2 mL/kg, IV 	Increases endogenous insulin release to drive K + into cells 	Dilute to 5–10% solution to reduce osmotic damage
Regular insulin 	0.25–1 U/kg, IV 	Drives K + into cells 	Administer with dextrose and monitor blood glucose to
prevent hypoglycemia
Sodium bicarbonate 	1–2 mEq/kg, IV 	Increases pH to cause exchange of intracellular H + for K+ 	Monitor ventilation; CO2 retention can result in worsening
of acidemia

-- 954 of 1450 --

Chapter 43: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Renal Disease 	939
or neoplasia, or from iatrogenic injury. In large animal species,
uroabdomen 	is 	most 	commonly 	associated 	with 	urethral
obstruction; however, in neonatal foals, it is most commonly found
in males and is thought to occur when the foal passes through the
birth canal with a full bladder or secondary to umbilical infection
and necrosis of the urachus [170].
In any species, it is important to recognize that uroabdomen is not
a surgical emergency. Correction of postrenal azotemia, acid–base,
and electrolyte abnormalities is paramount, and surgical correction
can usually be delayed for several hours until the patient is
stabilized [171]. Hyponatremia, hypochloremia, and hyperkalemia
are common abnormalities. Hyponatremia and hypochloremia
develop as a result of dilution from excess free water that is unable to
be excreted, and hyperkalemia develops because excess potassium
is unable to be excreted in the face of liberation from intracellular
stores, particularly during acidosis [172]. Fluid and electrolyte
replacement therapy is recommended, and hyperkalemia can be
treated as previously indicated. Abdominocentesis can be performed to
remove accumulating urine and reduce the azotemic and potassium
loads. Peritoneal fluid creatinine can be compared with serum
creatinine and ratios greater than 2:1 confirm uroperitoneum. Once
a patient’s serum abnormalities are normalized, and potassium in
particular is reduced, animals can be anesthetized with previously
mentioned protocols for surgical correction.
Postanesthesia oliguria and acute kidney
injury
Decreased urine output and AKI are important complications that
can develop after anesthesia and include the development of inci-
dental kidney disease in addition to acute progression of CKD.
Postanesthesia oliguria (< 0.5 mL/kg/h) can occur in patients after
prolonged anesthesia or after a major surgical procedure and should
prompt consideration and evaluation of causes of oliguria or
AKI [173]. Some degree of oliguria can be expected in patients that
have fluid or blood loss and secondary to the stress response of the
adrenal cortex. In human patients, increased aldosterone and vaso-
pressin release has been documented in the first 24 h after surgery.
These increases result in increased salt and water reabsorption,
thereby reducing urine production. However, this oliguria should
be temporary and generally does not last for more than 24 h.
Pathologic causes of postanesthesia oliguria and AKI can be
divided into prerenal, renal, and postrenal categories [173]. Prerenal
causes include hypotension and hypovolemia. Renal causes include
acute tubular necrosis (ischemia and reperfusion) and acute inter-
stitial nephritis (drug toxicity associated with NSAIDs, antibiotics,
or diuretics). Postrenal abnormalities can result from physical
obstruction of urine flow.
Techniques designed for the prevention of postanesthesia
oliguria and AKI are recommended, particularly in high-risk
patients. Physiologic monitoring of vital signs for identification of
hypotension and decreased perfusion includes mucous membrane
color, capillary refill time, measurement of blood pressure, pulse
oximetry, PET
CO2
, and electrocardiography. Advanced monitoring
techniques such as CVP and cardiac output measurements may be
warranted in critical patients. Administration of intravenous fluids
to maintain or expand intravascular volume is the mainstay of
therapy for the prevention of AKI [173]. Historically, synthetic
colloidal therapy with hydroxyethyl starch was considered
potentially 	beneficial 	in 	maintaining 	vascular 	expansion;
however, there is some evidence that it may be nephrotoxic [174].
As mentioned previously, the use of mannitol may be appropriate
for maintenance of RBF and GFR during anesthesia in cases with
high risk of postanesthetic oliguria or AKI. Techniques to maintain
mean arterial pressures greater than 60–65 mmHg in small animal
patients and smaller horses and ruminants and greater than
70–75 mmHg in adult horses and ruminants are of paramount
importance for adequate perfusion of the kidneys. The level of
acceptable hypotension is dependent on baseline blood pressure,
and mean arterial pressures may need to be maintained at higher
levels in patients with chronic hypertension [175]. In human
patients, it is recommended that mean arterial pressure be
maintained within 20% of awake baseline values, since this is within
the range of blood pressure drop during sleep [173,176]. The use of
inotropic agents or anesthetic-sparing techniques (MAC reduction)
to achieve these desired pressures should be standard practice for
patients with conditions that predispose to AKI.
Management of the postanesthetic patient in which oliguria or
AKI is diagnosed should start with determining the cause. Reversible
causes such as obstruction, hypotension, and hypovolemia should be
ruled out or corrected. Measurement of blood pressure and intrave-
nous fluid challenges can be useful. If the oliguria is determined to
be of renal origin (not pre- or postrenal), function and diagnostic
testing as described previously should be performed.
Treatment of postanesthesia oliguria and AKI is centered on
judicious and closely monitored intravenous fluid and electrolyte
therapy. The use of diuretic and vasoactive drugs is controversial.
Dopamine has traditionally been used in patients with oliguria and
AKI. Historically, lower doses ranging from 1 to 3 μg/kg/min had
been used to increase RBF, GFR, urine output, and sodium excre-
tion and decrease renal vascular resistance in several species [177].
In humans, low-dose dopamine therapy in patients with renal dys-
function resulted in transient improvements in urine output and
creatinine levels; however, mortality and long-term outcomes did
not improve [178]. The use of diuretics such as furosemide has also
failed to show any improvement in clinical outcomes and may even
worsen renal injury [168]. In hypovolemic patients, furosemide
may increase the nephrotoxicity of other drugs by increasing their
contact time in the renal tubules [179]. Diuretics may, however, be
useful in patients that develop pulmonary edema and fluid overload
secondary to AKI [180]. Mannitol, as stated previously, may have
beneficial effects in patients with AKI and can also be used in
patients with volume overload and pulmonary edema.
Once postanesthetic oliguria and AKI have been identified and
reversible conditions have been treated, the goal of therapy is to
minimize ongoing or long-term renal damage. Long-term monitor-
ing of renal function may be necessary.
Acknowledgment
The authors wish to acknowledge Dr. Gregory F. Grauer for his
contributions to the previous edition that have been carried forward
into this chapter.
References
1 Bartges JW. Chronic kidney disease in dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 2012; 42(4): 669–692.
2 Conroy M, Brodbelt DC, O’Neill D, et al. Chronic kidney disease in cats attending
primary care practice in the UK: a VetCompassTM study. Vet Rec 2019; 184(17): 526.
3 Roura X. Risk Factors in Dogs and Cats for Development of Chronic Kidney Disease.
International Renal Interest Society (IRIS), 2019. www.iris-kidney.com/education/
education/index.html (accessed July 2023).

-- 955 of 1450 --

940 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
4 O’Neill DG, Elliott J, Church DB, et al. Chronic kidney disease in dogs in UK
veterinary practices: prevalence, risk factors, and survival. J Vet Int Med 2013;
27(4): 814–821.
5 Quimby JM, McLeland SM, Cianciolo RE, et al. Frequency of histologic lesions in
the kidneys of cats without kidney disease. J Feline Med Surg 2022; 24(12):
e472–e480.
6 Cianciolo R, Hokamp J, Naabity M. Advances in the evaluation of canine renal dis-
ease. Vet J 2016; 215: 21–29.
7 Schott HC, Waldridge B, Bayly WM. Examination of the urinary system. In: Reed
SM, Bayly WM, Sellon DC, eds. Equine Internal Medicine, 4th edn. St. Louis, MO:
Saunders Elsevier, 2010: 888–990.
8 Olsen E, van Galen G. Chronic renal failure – causes, clinical findings, treatments
and prognosis. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 2022; 38(1): 25–46.
9 Rose DB, Post T, Stokes J. Clinical Physiology of Acid–Base and Electrolyte Disorders,
6th edn. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2013.
10 Hall JE, Hall ME. The urinary system: functional anatomy and urine formation by
the kidneys. In: Guyton and Hall Textbook of Medical Physiology, 14th edn.
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier, 2021: 321–330.
11 DiBartola SP. Applied renal physiology. In: DiBartola SP, ed. Fluid, Electrolyte, and
Acid–Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice, 4th edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders
Elsevier, 2012: 26–43.
12 Zeisberg M, Kalluri R. Physiology of the renal interstitium. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
2015; 10(10): 1831–1840.
13 Hall JE, Hall ME. Glomerular filtration, renal blood flow, and their control. In: Hall
JE, Hall ME, eds. Guyton and Hall Textbook of Medical Physiology, 14th edn.
Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier, 2021: 321–330.
14 Flournoy WS, Wohl JS, Albrecht-Schmitt TJ, et al. Pharmacologic identification of
putative D1 dopamine receptors in feline kidneys. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2003;
26(4): 283–290.
15 Boozer L, Cartier L, Sheldon S, et al. Lack of utility of laboratory "normal" ranges
for serum creatinine concentration for the diagnosis of feline chronic renal insuf-
ficiency. J Vet Intern Med 2002; 16: 354.
16 Nabity MB, Lees GE, Boggess M, et al. Week- to week variability of iohexol clear-
ance, serum creatinine, and symmetric dimethylarginine in dogs with stable
chronic renal disease. J Vet Intern Med 2013; 27(3): 734.
17 Braff J, Obare E, Yerramilli M, et al. Relationship between serum symmetric
dimethylarginine concentration and glomerular filtration rate in cats. J Vet Intern
Med 2014; 28(6): 1699–1701.
18 Nabity MB, Lees GE, Boggess M, et al. Symmetric dimethylarginine assay valida-
tion, stability, and evaluation as a marker for early detection of chronic kidney dis-
ease in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2015; 29(4): 1036–1044.
19 Grauer G. Early diagnosis of chronic kidney disease in dogs & cats: use of serum
creatinine & symmetric dimethylarginine. Today’s Vet Pract 2016; 6(2): 68–72.
20 Relford R, Robertson J, Clements C. Symmetric dimethylarginine: improving the
diagnosis and staging of chronic kidney disease in small animals. Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 2016; 46(6): 941–960.
21 Hall JA, Yerramilli M, Obare E, et al. Serum concentrations of symmetric dimethy-
larginine and creatinine in dogs with naturally occurring chronic kidney disease. J
Vet Intern Med 2016; 30(3): 794–802.
22 Pedersen LG, Tarnow I, Olsen LH, et al. Body size, but neither age nor asympto-
matic mitral regurgitation, influences plasma concentrations of dimethylarginines
in dogs. Res Vet Sci 2006; 80(3): 336–342.
23 Moesgaard SG, Holte AV, Mogensen T, et al. Effects of breed, gender, exercise, and
white-coat effect on markers of endothelial function in dogs. Res Vet Sci 2007;
82(3): 409–415.
24 Hall JA, Yerramilli M, Obare E, et al. Comparison of serum concentrations of sym-
metric dimethylarginine and creatinine as kidney function biomarkers in cats with
chronic kidney disease. J Vet Intern Med 2014; 28(6): 1676–1683.
25 Yerramilli M, Yerramilli M, Obare E, et al. Symmetric dimethylarginine (SDMA)
increases earlier than serum creatinine in dogs with chronic kidney disease (CKD).
J Vet Intern Med 2014; 28(3): 1084–1085.
26 Dahlem DP, Neiger R, Schweighauser A. Plasma symmetric dimethylarginine con-
centration in dogs with acute kidney injury and chronic kidney disease. J Vet Intern
Med 2017; 31(3): 799–804.
27 Peich TL, Wycislo KL. Importance of urinalysis. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 2019; 49(2): 233–245.
28 Grauer GF, Greco DS, Behrend EN, et al. Estimation of quantitative enzymuria in
dogs with gentamicin-induced nephrotoxicosis using urine enzyme/creatinine
ratios from spot urine samples. J Vet Intern Med 1995; 9(5): 324–327.
29 Adedeji AO, Sonee M, Chen Y, et al. Evaluation of novel urinary biomarkers in beagle
dogs with amphotericin B-induced kidney injury. Int J Toxicol 2023; 42(2): 146–155.
30 Ruiz P, Durán Á, Duque FJ, et al. Urinary cystatin C and N-acetyl-beta-D-
glucosaminidase (NAG) as early biomarkers for renal disease in dogs with leish-
maniosis. Vet Parasitol 2023; 318: 109930.
31 Ko HY, Kim J, Geum M, et al. Cystatin C and neutrophil gelatinase-associated
lipocalin as early biomarkers for chronic kidney disease in dogs. Top Companion
Anim Med 2021; 45: 100580.
32 Harjen HJ, Nicolaysen TV, Negard T, et al. Serial serum creatinine, SDMA and uri-
nary acute kidney injury biomarker measurements in dogs envenomated by the
European adder (Vipera berus). BMC Vet Res 2021; 17(1): 154.
33 Davis J, Rossi G, Cianciolo RE, et al. Early diagnosis of acute kidney injury
subsequent to severe hypotension and fluid resuscitation in anaesthetized dogs. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2022; 49(4): 344–353.
34 Jacob F, Polzin DJ, Osborne CA, et al. Evaluation of the association between initial
proteinuria and morbidity rate or death in dogs with naturally occurring chronic
renal failure. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2005; 226(3): 393–400.
35 Syme HM, Markwell PJ, Pfeiffer D, et al. Survival of cats with naturally occurring
chronic renal failure is related to severity of proteinuria. J Vet Intern Med 2006;
29(3): 528–535.
36 Grauer G. Measurement, interpretation, and implications of proteinuria and
albuminuria. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2007; 37(2): 283–295.
37 Wehner A, Hartmann K, Hirschberger J. Associations between proteinuria, sys-
temic hypertension and glomerular filtration rate in dogs with renal and nonrenal
diseases. Vet Rec 2008; 162(5): 141–147.
38 Lees GE, Brown SA, Elliott J, et al. Assessment and management of proteinuria in
dogs and cats; 2004 ACVIM Forum Consensus Statement (small animal). J Vet
Intern Med 2005; 19(3): 377–385.
39 Chakrabarti S, Syme HM, Elliott J. Clinicopathological variables predicting
progression of azotemia in cats with chronic kidney disease. J Vet Intern Med 2012;
26(2): 275–281.
40 Jepson RE, Brodbelt D, Vallance C, et al. Evaluation of predictors of the development
of azotemia in cats. J Vet Intern Med 2009; 23(4): 806–813.
41 Vaden SL. Glomerular diseases. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, Cote E, eds. Textbook
of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 8th edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 2017:
1959–1972.
42 Toblli JE, Bevione P, DiGennaro F, et al. Understanding the mechanisms of
proteinuria: therapeutic implications. Int J Nephrol 2012: 546039.
43 Lees GE, Cianciolo RE, Clubb FJ Jr. Renal biopsy and pathologic evaluation of glo-
merular disease. Top Companion Anim Med 2011; 26(3): 143–153.
44 Schott HC, Esser MM. The sick adult horse: renal clinical pathologic testing and
urinalysis. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 2020; 36(1): 121–134.
45 Hokamp JA, Nabity MB. Renal biomarkers in domestic species. Vet Clin Pathol
2016; 45(1): 28–56.
46 Schott HC. Chronic renal failure. In: Reed SM, Bayly WM, Sellon DC, eds. Equine
Internal Medicine, 3rd edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2010: 1183–1198.
47 Gough RL, McGovern KF. Serum symmetric dimthylarginine concentration in
healthy neonatal Thoroughbred foals. Equine Vet J 2022; 54(5): 958–964.
48 Bozorgmanesh R, Thornton J, Snyder J, et al. Symmetric dimethylarginine concen-
trations in healthy neonatal foals and mares. J Vet Intern Med 2021; 35(6):
2891–2896.
49 Schott HC, Gallant LR, Coyne M, et al. Symmetric dimethylarginine and creatinine
concentrations in serum of healthy draft horses. J Vet Intern Med 2021; 35(2):
1147–1154.
50 Surdyk KK, Sloan DL, Brown SA. Renal effects of carprofen and etodolac in
euvolemic and volume-depleted dogs. Am J Vet Res 2012; 73(9): 1485–1490.
51 International Renal Interest Society (IRIS) Guidelines. www.iris-kidney.com/
guidelines/index.html (accessed July 2023).
52 Ross L. Acute kidney injury in dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
2022; 52(3): 659–672.
53 Cowgill LD, Langston C. Acute kidney insufficiency. In: Bartges J, Polzin DJ, eds.
Small Animal Nephrology and Urology. West Sussex, UK: Wiley Blackwell, 2011:
472–523.
54 Langston C. Acute kidney injury. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, Cote E, eds. Textbook
of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 8th edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 2017:
1919–1934.
55 Hall JE, Hall ME. Acute kidney injury. In: Hall JE, Hall ME, eds. Guyton and Hall
Textbook of Medical Physiology, 14th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier, 2021: 429–432.
56 Huynh E, Berry CR. Ultrasonography of the urinary tract: kidneys and ureters.
Today’s Vet Pract 2017; 7(6): 31–45.
57 Choo D, Kim SS, Kwon D, et al. Ultrasonographic quantitative evaluation of acute
and chronic renal disease using the renal cortical thickness to aorta ratio in dogs.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2023; 64(1): 140–148.
58 Rohini BG, George A, Usha NP, et al. A retrospective study of acute kidney injury
in dogs with renal resistive index as a prognostic indicator. J Vet Anim Sci 2022;
53(4): 583–591.
59 Polzin DJ. Chronic kidney disease. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, Cote E, eds.
Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 8th edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders,
2017: 1938–1959.

-- 956 of 1450 --

Chapter 43: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Renal Disease 	941
60 Brown CA, Elliott J, Schmiedt CW, et al. Chronic kidney disease in aged cats:
clinical features, morphology, and proposed pathogeneses. Vet Pathol 2016; 53(2):
309–326.
61 Jepsen RE. Current understanding of the pathogenesis of progressive chronic kid-
ney disease in cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2016; 46(6): 1015–1048.
62 Quimby JM. Update on medical management of clinical manifestations of chronic
kidney disease. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2016; 46(6): 1163–1181.
63 Kabatchnick E, Langston C, Olson B, et al. Hypothermia in uremic dogs and cats. J
Vet Intern Med 2016; 30(5): 1648–1654.
64 Yan GY, Chen KY, Wang HC, et al. Relationship between ultrasonographically
determined renal dimensions and International Renal Interest Society stages in cats
with chronic kidney disease. J Vet Intern Med 2020; 34(4): 1464–1475.
65 Perondi F, Lippi I, Marchetti V, et al. How ultrasound can be useful for staging
chronic kidney disease in dogs: ultrasound findings in 855 cases. Vet Sci 2020;
7(4): 147.
66 Huguet EE, Berry CR, Cole CC. Ultrasonography for diagnosing chronic kidney
disease in dogs and cats. Today’s Vet Pract 2023; 2: 56–65.
67 Polzin DJ. A step-wise approach to managing chronic kidney disease: application of
evidence based medicine. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2013; 23(2): 205–215.
68 Parker VJ. Nutritional management for dogs and cats with chronic kidney disease.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2021; 51(3): 685–710.
69 Chalhoub S, Langston CE, Farrelly J. The use of darbepoetin to stimulate erythro-
poiesis in anemia of chronic kidney disease in cats: 25 cases. J Vet Intern Med 2012;
26(2): 363–369.
70 Hall JA. Renal effects of the inhalation agents. In: Faust RJ, ed. Anesthesiology
Review, 3rd edn. Philadelphia, PA: Churchill Livingstone, 2002: 103–104.
71 Grimm JB, Grimm KA, Kneller SK, et al. The effect of a combination of
medetomidine– butorphanol and medetomidine, butorphanol, atropine on
glomerular filtration rate in dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2001; 42(5): 458–462.
72 Fusellier M, Desfontis JC, Madec S, et al. Influence of three anesthetic protocols on
glomerular filtration rate in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2007; 68(8): 807–811.
73 Bostrom I, Nyman G, Kampa N, et al. Effects of acepromazine on renal function in
anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 2003; 64(5): 590–598.
74 Pazoki-Toroudi HR, Ajami M, Habibey R. Premedication and renal precondition-
ing: a role for alprazolam, atropine, morphine and promethazine. Fundam Clin
Pharmacol 2010; 24(2): 189–198.
75 Weil AB. Anesthesia for patients with renal/hepatic disease. Top Companion Anim
Med 2010; 25(2): 87–91.
76 Lawrence CJ, Prinzen FW, de Lange S. The effect of dexmedetomidine on nutrient
organ blood flow. Anesth Analg 1996; 83(6): 1160–1165.
77 Kilic K, Hanci V, Selek S, et al. The effects of dexmedetomidine on mesenteric arte-
rial occlusion-associated gut ischemia and reperfusion-induced gut and kidney
injury in rabbits. J Surg Res 2012; 178(1): 223–232.
78 Murahata Y, Hikasa Y. Comparison of the diuretic effects of medetomidine
hydrochloride and xylazine hydrochloride in healthy cats. Am J Vet Res 2012;
73(12): 1871–1880.
79 Talukder MH, Hikasa Y. Diuretic effects of medetomidine compared with xylazine
in healthy dogs. Can J Vet Res 2009; 73(3): 224–236.
80 Nunez E, Steffey EP, Ocampo L, et al. Effects of α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists on
urine production in horses deprived of food and water. Am J Vet Res 2004; 65(10):
1342–1346.
81 Saleh N, Aoki M, Shimada T, et al. Renal effects of medetomidine in isoflurane
anesthetized dogs with special reference to its diuretic action. J Vet Med Sci 2005;
67(5): 461–465.
82 Restitutti F, Laitinen MR, Raekallio MR, et al. Effect of MK-467 on organ blood
flow parameters detected by contrast-enhanced ultrasound in dogs treated with
dexmedetomidine. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40(6): e48–e56.
83 Kirwan CJ, MacPhee IA, Lee T, et al. Acute kidney injury reduces the hepatic
metabolism of midazolam in critically ill patients. Intensive Care Med 2012; 38(1):
76–84.
84 Yorgin PD, Theodorou AA, Al-Uzri A, et al. Propylene glycol-induced proximal
renal tubular cell injury. Am J Kidney Dis 1997; 30(1): 134–139.
85 Hayman M, Seidl EC, Ali M, et al. Acute tubular necrosis associated with propylene
glycol from concomitant administration of intravenous lorazepam and trimetho-
prim– sulfamethoxazole. Pharmacotherapy 2003; 23(9): 1190–1194.
86 Zar T, Yusufzai I, Sullivan A, et al. Acute kidney injury, hyperosmolality and metabolic
acidosis associated with lorazepam. Nat Clin Pract Nephrol 2007; 3(9): 515–520.
87 Cummings K, Naguib MA. Opioid agonists and antagonists. In: Flood P, Rathmell
JP, Shafer S, eds. Pharmacology and Physiology in Anesthetic Practice, 5th edn.
Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer, 2015: 217–256.
88 Hohne C, Donaubauer B, Kaisers U. Opioids during anesthesia in liver and renal
failure. Anaesthesist 2004; 53(3): 291–303.
89 Davies G, Kingswood C, Street M. Pharmacokinetics of opioids in renal
dysfunction. Clin Pharmacokinet 1996; 31(6): 410–422.
90 Hoke JF, Shulgman D, Dershwitz M, et al. Pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics of remifentanil in persons with renal failure compared with
healthy volunteers. Anesthesiology 1997; 87(3): 533–541.
91 Danhof M, Levy G. Kinetics of drug action in disease states. V. Acute effect of urea
infusion on phenobarbital concentrations in rats at onset of loss of righting reflex.
J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1985; 232(2): 430–434.
92 Ghoneim MM, Pandya H. Plasma protein binding of thiopental in patients with
impaired renal or hepatic function. Anesthesiology 1975; 42(5): 545–549.
93 Srivastava K, Hatanaka T, Katayama K, et al. Influence of plasma dialysate from
normal and renal dysfunction rats on the electroencephalogram and gamma-
aminobutyric acid A receptor complex modulation of thiopental. Biol Pharm Bull
1999; 22(3): 288–294.
94 Srirastava K, Hatanaka T, Katayama K, et al. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic
consequences of thiopental in renal dysfunction rats: evaluation with
electroencephalography. Biol Pharm Bull 1998; 21(12): 1327–1333.
95 Priano LL. Alteration of renal hemodynamics by thiopental, diazepam, and keta-
mine in conscious dogs. Anesth Analg 1928; 61(10): 853–862.
96 Chien CT, Cheng YJ, Chen CF, et al. Differentiation of ketamine effects on renal
nerve activity and renal blood flow in rats. Acta Anaesthesiol Taiwan 2004; 42(4):
185–189.
97 Nishimura M, Sato K. Ketamine stereoselectively inhibits rat dopamine
transporter. Neurosci Lett 1999; 274(2): 131–134.
98 Flecknell PA. Injectable anaesthetics. In: Hall LW, Taylor PM, eds. Anaesthesia of
the Cat. London, UK: Baillière Tindall, 1994: 129–156.
99 Waterman AE. Influence of premedication with xylazine on the distribution and
metabolism of intramuscularly administered ketamine in cats. Res Vet Sci 1983;
35(3): 285–290.
100 Baggott JD, Blake JW. Disposition kinetics of ketamine in the domestic cat. Arch
Int Pharmacodyn Ther 1976; 220(1): 115–124.
101 Morgan CJ, Curran HV. Ketamine use: a review. Addiction 2012; 107(1): 27–38.
102 Middela S, Pearce I. Ketamine-induced vesicopathy: a literature review. Int J Clin
Pract 2010; 65(1): 27–30.
103 Wouters PF, Van de Velde MA, Marcus MA, et al. Hemodynamic changes during
induction of anesthesia with eltanolone and propofol in dogs. Anesth Analg 1995;
81(1): 125–131.
104 Shiga Y, Minami K, Uezono Y, et al. Effects of the intravenously administered
anaesthetics ketamine, propofol, and thiamylal on the cortical renal blood flow in
rats. Pharmacology 2003; 68(1): 17–23.
105 Booke M, Armstrong C, Hinder F, et al. The effects of propofol on hemodynamics
and renal blood flow in healthy and in septic sheep, and combined with fentanyl
in septic sheep. Anesth Analg 1996; 82(4): 738–743.
106 Chang J, Kim S, Jung J, et al. Evaluation of the effects of thiopental, propofol, and
etomidate on glomerular filtration rate measured by the use of dynamic computed
tomography in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2011; 72(1): 146–151.
108 Kirvela M, Olkkola KT, Rosenberg PH, et al. Pharmacokinetics of propofol and
haemodynamic changes during induction of anaesthesia in uraemic patients.
Br J Anaesth 1992; 68(2): 178–182.
109 Nathan N, Debord J, Narcisse F, et al. Pharmacokinetics of propofol and its
conjugates after continuous infusion in normal and in renal failure patients: a
preliminary study. Acta Anaesthesiol Belg 1993; 44(3): 77–85.
110 de Gasperi A, Mazza E, Noe L, et al. Pharmacokinetic profile of the induction dose
of propofol in chronic renal failure patients undergoing renal transplantation.
Minerva Anesthesiol 1996; 62(1): 25–31.
111 Whittem T, Pasloske KS, Heit MC, et al. The pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
namics of alfaxalone in cats after single and multiple intravenous administration
of Alfaxan at clinical and supraclinical doses. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2008; 31(6):
571–579.
112 Taboada FM, Murison PJ. Induction of anaesthesia with alfaxalone or propofol
before isoflurane maintenance in cats. Vet Rec 2010; 167(3): 85–89.
113 Psatha E, Alibhai HI, Jimenez-Lozano A, et al. Clinical efficacy and cardiorespira-
tory effects of alfaxalone, or diazepam/fentanyl for induction of anaesthesia in
dogs that are a poor anaesthetic risk. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38(1): 24–36.
114 Warne LN, Beths T, Whittem T, et al. A review of the pharmacology and clinical
application of alfaxalone in cats. Vet J 2015; 203(2): 141–148.
115 Tamura J, Oyama N, Fukui S, et al. Comparison of the anesthetic effects between
5 mg/kg of alfaxalone and 10 mg/kg of propofol administered intravenously in
cats. J Vet Med Sci 2021; 83(1): 73–77.
116 Petersen JS, Shalmi M, Christensen S, et al. Comparison of the renal effects of six
sedating agents in rats. Physiol Behav 1996; 60(3): 759–765.
117 Gelman S, Fowler KC, Smith LR. Regional blood flow during isoflurane and
halothane anesthesia. Anesth Analg 1984; 63(6): 557–565.
118 Bernard JM, Doursout MF, Wouters P, et al. Effects of sevoflurane and isoflurane
on hepatic circulation in the chronically instrumented dog. Anesthesiology 1992;
77(3): 541–545.

-- 957 of 1450 --

942 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
119 Conzen PF, Kharasch ED, Czerner SFA, et al. Low-flow sevoflurane compared
with low-flow isoflurane anesthesia in patients with stable renal insufficiency.
Anesthesiology 2002; 97(3): 578–584.
120 Sun L, Suzuki Y, Takata M, et al. Repeated low-flow sevoflurane anesthesia: effects
on hepatic and renal function in beagles. Masui 1997; 46(3): 351–357.
121 Merin RG, Bernard JM, Doursout MF, et al. Comparison of the effects of isoflu-
rane and desflurane on cardiovascular dynamics and regional blood flow in the
chronically instrumented dog. Anesthesiology 1991; 74(3): 568–574.
122 Hayes MA, Goldenberg IS. Renal effects of anesthesia and operation mediated by
endocrines. Anesthesiology 1963; 24: 487–499.
123 Kramer BK, Kammerl MC, Komhoff M. Renal cyclooxygenase-2 (COX- 2).
Physiological, pathophysiological, and clinical implications. Kidney Blood Press
Res 2004; 27(1): 43–62.
124 Crandell DE, Mathews KA, Dyson DH. Effect of meloxicam and carprofen on
renal function when administered to healthy dogs prior to anesthesia and painful
stimulation. Am J Vet Res 2004; 65(10): 1384–1390.
125 Pages JP. Néphropathies dues aux anti-inflammatoires non stéroïdiens (AINS)
chez le chat: 21 observations (1993–2001). Prat Méd Chir Anim Compagnie 2005;
40: 177–181.
126 Dyer F, Diesel G, Cooles S, et al. Suspected adverse reactions, 2009. Vet Rec 2010;
167(4): 118–121.
127 KuKanich K, George C, Roush JK, et al. Effects of low-dose meloxicam in cats with
chronic kidney disease. J Feline Med Surg 2021; 23(2): 138–148.
128 King JN, Seewald W, Forster S, et al. Clinical safety of robenacoxib in cats with
chronic musculoskeletal disease. J Vet Intern Med 2021; 35(5): 2384–2394.
129 Monteiro B, Steagall PVM, Lascelles BDX, et al. Long-term use of non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs in cats with chronic kidney disease: from controversy to
optimism. J Small Anim Pract 2019; 60(8): 459–462.
130 Boscan P, Pypendop BH, Siao DT, et al. Fluid balance, glomerular filtration rate,
and urine output in dogs anesthetized for an orthopedic surgical procedure. Am J
Vet Res 2010; 71(5): 501–507.
131 Wagener G, Brentjens TE. Anesthetic concerns in patients presenting with renal
failure. Anesthesiol Clin 2010; 28(1): 39–54.
132 Lassnigg A, Donner E, Grubhofer G, et al. Lack of renoprotective effects of dopa-
mine and furosemide during cardiac surgery. J Am Soc Nephrol 2000; 11(1):
97–104.
133 Kazory A, Ducloux D. Successful management of respiratory failure can improve
renal function. Am J Crit Care 2009; 18(1): 10–11.
134 Wohl JS, Schwartz DD, Flournoy S, et al. Renal hemodynamic and diuretic effects
of low-dosage dopamine in anesthetized cats. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2007; 17(1):
45–52.
135 Clark KL, Roberson MJ, Drew GM. Do renal tubular dopamine receptors mediate
dopamine-induced diuresis in the anesthetized cat? J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 1991;
17(2): 267–276.
136 Langston CE. Acute kidney injury. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, Cote E, eds.
Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 8th edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2017:
1615–1633.
137 Ho KM, Power BM. Benefits and risks of furosemide in acute kidney injury.
Anaesthesia 2010; 65(3): 283–293.
138 Van de Laar SC, Schouten GN, Ijzermans JN, et al. Effect of mannitol on kidney
function after kidney transplantation: a systemic review and meta-analysis.
Transplant Proc 2021; 53(7): 2122–2132.
139 Yang B, Xu J, Fengying X, et al. Intravascular administration of mannitol for acute
kidney injury prevention: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS ONE 2014;
9(1): e85029.
140 Kalogirou TE, Meditoshou S, Davidopoulou S, et al. Investigating the possible
protective role of direct intra-arterial administration of mannitol and
N- acetylcysteine and Per Os administration of simvastatin against contrast-
induced nephropathy: an experimental study in a rabbit model. Cardiovasc
Intervent Radiol 2019; 42(12): 1777–1785.
141 McClellan JM, Goldstein RE, Erb HN, et al. Effects of administration of fluids and
diuretics on glomerular filtration rate, renal blood flow, and urine output in
healthy awake cats. Am J Vet Res 2006; 67(4): 715–722.
142 Behnia R, Koushanpour E, Brunner EA. Effects of hyperosmotic mannitol infu-
sion on hemodynamics of dog kidney. Anesth Analg 1996; 82(5): 902–908.
143 Segev G, Stafford C, Kirby J, et al. Sequential changes in urine production, glo-
merular filtration rate, and electrolyte excretion after mannitol administration.
J Vet Intern Med 2019; 33(3): 1362–1367.
144 Braqadottir G, Redfors B, Ricksten SE. Mannitol increases renal blood flow and
maintains filtration fraction and oxygenation in postoperative acute kidney
injury: a prospective interventional study. Crit Care 2012; 16(4): R159.
145 Bipat R, Steels P, Cuypers Y, et al. Mannitol reduces the hydrostatic pressure in the
proximal tubule of the isolated blood-perfused rabbit kidney during hypoxic
stress and improves its function. Nephron Extra 2011; 1(1): 201–211.
146 Tsai SF, Shu KH. Mannitol-induced acute renal failure. Clin Nephrol 2010; 74(1):
70–73.
147 Nair SM, Power NE, Coleman JA. Examining mannitol use in kidney cancer
surgery: a cautionary tale of extrapolated surgical data. Eur Urol Focus 2019; 5(6):
930–934.
148 Agarwal RC, Jain RK, Anurag Y. Prevention of perioperative renal failure. JAPI
2008; 56: 956–964.
149 Brienza N, Malcangi V, Dalfino L, et al. A comparison between fenoldopam and
low-dose dopamine in early renal dysfunction of critically ill patients. Crit Care
Med 2006; 34(3): 707–714.
150 Bloom CA, Labato MA, Hazarika S, et al. Preliminary pharmacokinetics and
cardiovascular effects of fenoldopam continuous rate infusion in six healthy dogs.
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2012; 35(3): 224–230.
151 Murray C, Markos F, Snow HM, et al. Effects of fenoldopam on renal blood flow
and its function in a canine model of rhabdomyolysis. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2003;
20(9): 711–718.
152 Segev G, Bruchim Y, Berl N, et al. Effects of fenoldopam on kidney function
parameters and its therapeutic efficacy in the management of acute kidney injury
in dogs with heatstroke. J Vet Intern Med 2018; 32(3): 1109–1115.
153 Simmons JP, Wohl JS, Schwartz DD, et al. Diuretic effects of fenoldopam in
healthy cats. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2006; 16(2): 96–103.
154 Buckely GJ, Aktay SA, Rozanski EA. Massive transfusion and surgical manage-
ment of iatrogenic aortic laceration associated with cystocentesis in a dog. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 2009; 235(3): 288–291.
155 Hall J, Hall K, Powell LL, et al. Outcome of male cats managed for urethral
obstruction with decompressive cystocentesis and urinary catheterization: 47 cats
(2009–2012). J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2015; 25(2): 256–262.
156 Reineke E, Cooper ES, Takacs JD, et al. Multicenter evaluation of decompressive
cystocentesis in the treatment of cats with urethral obstruction. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2021; 258(5): 483–492.
157 Cooper ES, Owens TJ, Chew DJ, et al. A protocol for managing urethral obstruc-
tion in male cats without urethral catheterization. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2010;
237(11): 1261–1266.
158 Gerken KK, Cooper ES, Butler AL, et al. Association of abdominal effusion with
a single decompressive cystocentesis prior to catheterization in male cats with ure-
thral obstruction. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2020; 30(1): 11–17.
159 Pankowski RL, Fubini SL. Urinary bladder rupture in a two-year-old horse: sequel
to a surgically repaired neonatal injury. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1987; 191(5):
560–562.
160 Cunha MG, Freitas GC, Carregaro AB, et al. Renal and cardiorespiratory effects of
treatment with lactated Ringer’s solution or physiologic saline (0.9% NaCl) solu-
tion in cats with experimentally induced urethral obstruction. Am J Vet Res 2010;
71(7): 840–846.
161 Adams LG. Ureteral disorders. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, Cote E, eds. Textbook
of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 8th edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 2017:
1985–1991.
162 Langston C, Eatroff A. Acute kidney injury. In: Little SE, ed. August’s Consultations
in Feline Internal Medicine, Vol. 7. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2016: 483–498.
163 Fischer JR. Acute ureteral obstruction. In: August JR, ed. Consultations in Feline
Internal Medicine, 5th edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Health Sciences, 2005:
379–386.
164 Fischer J, Lane I, Stokes J. Acute postrenal azotemia: etiology, clinicopathology,
and pathophysiology. Compend Contin Educ Vet 2009; 31(11): 520–533.
165 Galluzzi F, De Rensis F, Menozzi A, et al. Effect of intraurethral administration of
atracurium besylate in male cats with urethral plugs. J Small Anim Pract 2012;
53(7): 411–415.
166 O’Hearn AK, Wright BD. Coccygeal epidural with local anesthetic for catheteriza-
tion and pain management in the treatment of feline urethral obstruction. J Vet
Emerg Crit Care 2011; 21(1): 50–52.
167 Zezza L, Reusch CE, Gerber B. Intravesical application of lidocaine and sodium
bicarbonate in the treatment of obstructive idiopathic lower urinary tract disease
in cats. J Vet Intern Med 2012; 26(3): 526–531.
168 Francis BJ, Wells RJ, Rao S, et al. Retrospective study to characterize postobstructive
diuresis in cats with urethral obstruction. J Feline Med Surg 2010; 12(8): 606–608.
169 Saulez MN. Urolithiasis and obstructive disease. In: Smith BP, Van Metre DC,
Pusterla N, eds. Large Animal Internal Medicine, 6th edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier,
2020: 973.
170 Hardy J. Uroabdomen in foals. Equine Vet Educ 1998; 10(1): 21–25.
171 Divers TJ, Dawson-Soto DR, Fulz LE. Urinary system disorders in the foal. In:
Smith BP, Van Metre DC, Pusterla N, eds. Large Animal Internal Medicine, 6th
edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2020: 981.
172 Behr MJ, Hackett RP, Bentinck-Smith J, et al. Metabolic abnormalities associated
with rupture of the urinary bladder in neonatal foals. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1981;
178(3): 255.

-- 958 of 1450 --

Chapter 43: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Anesthetic Management of Patients with Renal Disease 	943
173 Chenitz KB, Lane-Fall MG. Decreased urine output and acute kidney injury in the
postanesthesia care unit. Anesthesiol Clin 2012; 30(3): 513–526.
174 Groeneveld AB, Navickis RJ, Wilkes MM. Update on the comparative safety of
colloids: a systemic review of clinical studies. Ann Surg 2011; 253(3): 470–483.
175 Venkataraman R, Kellum JA. Prevention of acute renal failure. Chest 2007; 131(1):
300–308.
176 Loredo JS, Nelesen R, Ancoli-Israel S, et al. Sleep quality and blood pressure
dipping in normal adults. Sleep 2004; 27(6): 1097–1103.
177 Schwartz LB, Bissell MG, Murphy M, et al. Renal effects of dopamine in vascular
surgical patients. J Vasc Surg 1988; 8(4): 367–374.
178 Friedrich JO, Adhikari N, Herridge MS, et al. Meta-analysis: low-dose dopamine
increases urine output but does not prevent renal dysfunction or death. Ann
Intern Med 2005; 142(7): 510–524.
179 Hastie MJ, Shanewise JS. Diuretics. In: Flood P, Rathmell JP, Shafer S, eds.
Pharmacology and Physiology in Anesthetic Practice, 5th edn. Philadelphia, PA:
Wolters Kluwer, 2015: 533–541.
180 Karajala V, Mansour W, Kellum JA. Diuretics in acute kidney injury. Minerva
Anestesiol 2009; 75(5): 251–257.

-- 959 of 1450 --

44
944
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The S ixth Edition of L umb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
The kidneys are responsible for numerous essential biological func-
tions, such as maintaining acid–base, electrolyte, and endocrine
balance, regulating blood pressure, and forming urine by filtering
hematologic nitrogenous end-products while retaining solutes,
proteins, and blood cells [1]. Acute kidney injury (AKI) and chronic
kidney disease (CKD) are common clinical entities that are associ-
ated with impaired kidney function (see Chapter 43). Depending
on etiology and chronicity, patients may exhibit clinical signs such
as vomiting, diarrhea, oral ulceration, anorexia, weight loss, poly-
dipsia, and urine output changes such as polyuria, oliguria, or anu-
ria. Patients also commonly present with electrolyte and acid–base
disturbances (e.g., hyperkalemia and metabolic acidosis) and/or
volume overload. To relieve these severe clinical signs, stabilize
patient condition, improve quality of life, and extend lifespan, renal
replacement therapies are utilized, especially if medical therapy has
been unsuccessful.
Renal replacement therapies include both intracorporeal (renal
transplantation and peritoneal dialysis [PD]) and extracorporeal
(intermittent hemodialysis [IHD] and continuous renal replace-
ment therapy [CRRT]) techniques. Although these therapies are
associated with significant financial, ethical, and emotional consid-
erations, they have progressed from non-traditional, infrequent
clinical entities to more common, progressive therapeutic options
for companion animals with renal impairment. In this chapter, first,
the unique principles used in the critical anesthetic management of
dogs and cats undergoing renal transplantation are discussed, fol-
lowed by a brief discussion of anesthetic considerations for specific
dialysis techniques.
Intracorporeal techniques
Renal transplantation
In the mid-1950s, Guild et al. performed the first successful renal
transplantation on identical twin humans [2]. Although the first
renal transplant in clinical veterinary medicine occurred in 1984,
only in the last few decades has renal transplantation gained popu-
larity in clinical veterinary medicine as a therapy for companion
animals with CKD [3]. Morbidity and mortality rates associated
with renal transplantation differ significantly between dogs and
cats. For example, mean survival time for clinical canine patients is
variable, reported to be from 18 days [4] up to 8 months [5]. In
contrast, 70–93% of cats are discharged after surgery [3], and mean
survival times in clinical feline patients are between 360 and
653 days, with 59–79% still alive after 6 months and 32–45% after 3
years [3,6–8]. The exact reasons for lower success rates in dogs
compared with cats are not entirely clear. However, strong canine
host immune responses require that potent immunosuppressive
therapy is administered to prevent rejection, thereby increasing the
possibility of adverse events [4,9–11]; thromboembolism, allograft
rejection, and respiratory, neurologic, skin, and urinary tract infec-
tions are commonly reported [3]. Although thromboembolism is
associated with immunosuppression (among other factors) and is
reported as a complication in human transplantation, it is infre-
quently seen in cats [11,12]. Increasing age of both canine and feline
patients is associated with decreased survival rates following trans-
plantation [4,8,13], whereas severe preoperative azotemia, hyper-
tension, and increased left ventricular wall thickness are also
associated with increased mortality in cats [8]. Thus, although renal
transplantation appears to be a promising treatment for CKD in
44 Anesthetic Considerations for Renal
Replacement Therapy
Rebecca A. Johnson
Department of Surgical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 944
Intracorporeal techniques, 944
Renal transplantation, 944
Peritoneal dialysis, 948
Extracorporeal techniques, 950
Intermittent hemodialysis and continuous renal replacement therapy, 950
References, 952

-- 960 of 1450 --

Chapter 44: Anesthetic Considerations for Renal Replacement Therapy 	945
animals, discriminant patient selection and preoperative risk
assessment may enhance the survival of kidney transplant recipi-
ents. Since the majority of current clinical patients undergoing
transplantation are cats, this chapter focuses on feline techniques.
Ethical considerations
Currently, debate exists concerning the ethics surrounding renal
transplantation in veterinary medicine (for review, see [14]
and [15]). For example, in 2003, the Royal College of Veterinary
Surgeons (RCVS) in the United Kingdom approved guidelines for
feline renal transplantation based on procedures being done in
other countries such as the United States, New Zealand, and
Australia [14]. The guidelines were set up using strict standards and
included using source animals that were siblings or cohorts screened
for compatibility to the recipient. However, in 2013, the procedure
was suspended in the UK pending review and in 2016 deliberations
were ongoing, as the RCVS began considering feline renal trans-
plantation as a possible “mutilation” procedure in the living source
cat making it less “cat-like.” In addition, the Royal Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals suggests that renal transplanta-
tion is potentially illegal as it causes unnecessary feline suffering,
among various other debatable issues [14]. The term “donor cat” is
also under debate by the RCVS as the source cat cannot freely make
the choice to give up the organ themself [15]. Thus, although renal
transplantation in cats appears to be medically feasible and advan-
tageous in some instances as cats may live longer following renal
transplantation when compared with cats medically managed for
CKD [8], many perspectives and much debate still exist regarding
its place in veterinary medicine.
Preoperative considerations
Many patients with CKD that present for renal transplantation will
have acid–base and electrolyte abnormalities. A complete blood
count and serum biochemistry should be performed as the magni-
tude of the elevations in blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine
levels is associated with increased mortality in cats [8], but not in
dogs [4]. In addition, urinalysis and urine culture, blood typing,
thoracic and abdominal radiographs, cardiac and abdominal ultra-
sound, and systemic blood pressure measurements should be per-
formed to screen for any pre-existing comorbidities and to ensure
compatible blood types. Comorbidities such as hypertension and
cardiovascular disease are common and are associated with a higher
postoperative mortality in feline patients as previously men-
tioned [8]. Thus, perioperative treatment of these disorders may
reduce complication rates and patients should be medically man-
aged before transplantation.
Preoperative patient preparation includes placement of a double-
or triple-lumen central venous catheter for chronic administration
of balanced electrolyte solutions to correct electrolyte and acid–
base abnormalities, to measure central venous pressure (CVP), and
to facilitate blood sampling (Fig. 44.1).
The right jugular is preferred in the event that an esophagos-
tomy tube is required to facilitate nutritional support following
surgery. Immunosuppressive and antihypertensive therapy may
also be instituted, and hemo- or peritoneal dialysis may be per-
formed prior to transplantation, particulary in anuric, profoundly
azotemic, and edematous cats (see below) [3]. Depending on
patient needs, red blood cell transfusion, whole blood transfusion,
or erythropoietin, replacement therapy may also be administered
to enhance oxygen-carrying capacity if the patient is severely ane-
mic (PCV < 20%). However, the transfusion trigger point for
patients with CKD is often lower than for healthier patients owing
to compensatory mechanisms associated with chronic disease;
therefore, patients should be assessed on an individual basis. The
use of autogenous mesenchymal stem cells to improve long-term
outcomes by reducing the possibility of acute rejection and/or sys-
temic infection is currently under investigation [3]. Although stem
cell work is promising in humans [16] and in vitro feline studies are
favorable [17], additional in vivo feline investigations are needed,
especially since complications associated with the addition of a
surgical harvesting procedure in an already compromised cat may
preclude its use [3].
Donor animals are routinely screened with a serum chemistry,
complete blood count, blood typing, urinalysis and culture, and infec-
tious disease testing (toxoplasmosis, feline leukemia virus, and feline
immunodeficiency virus in cats; heartworm in dogs). Computed
tomography to characterize renal tissue and vasculature is frequently
performed. Approximately 84% of feline donors had no associated
long-term effects associated with nephrectomy, whereas 7% devel-
oped renal insufficiency or died of urinary tract disease [18].
Anesthetic management
The ultimate goal of the anesthetic period is to provide acceptable
anesthesia, analgesia, and muscle relaxation to patients without
compromising existing renal function or function of the new kid-
ney. Hence, the anesthetic plan includes agents that have minimal
cardiovascular depression, are not directly nephrotoxic, and mini-
mally rely on the kidneys for their excretion. In addition, prudent
anesthetic techniques required for any patient anesthetized for pro-
longed periods such as adequate padding, generous and repeated
application of ocular lubricant, consistent core body temperature
monitoring, and active warming with a forced-air warmer to reduce
hypothermia should be employed for both the donor and the
Figure 44.1 An example of a triple-lumen intravenous catheter inserted in
the right jugular vein of a cat. These catheters may be placed preoperatively
under sedation using the Seldinger technique and are subsequently used
for hemodialysis techniques, fluid therapy, blood administration, and
blood sampling perioperatively. Source: Dr. Rebecca Johnson, with
permission.

-- 961 of 1450 --

946 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
recipient. All attempts to reduce anesthetic time should be made,
and good communication between the anesthetic and surgical
teams is imperative throughout the perioperative procedures as
prolonged anesthetic times (median = 300 min) are associated with
reduced overall survival rates in cats [13].
Kidney donor management
Currently, live kidney donors are already owned or are adopted by the
recipient’s owner prior to any surgical procedure. They are young,
healthy animals with normal cardiovascular and renal function; anes-
thetic procedures for kidney removal are generally routine and are
chosen based on the individual donor’s disposition and anesthetic
needs while minimizing any cardiovascular depression (Table 44.1).
Specific to the donor, acepromazine is frequently used pre- or
intraoperatively to promote renal vasculature dilation through
α1
-adrenergic receptor blockade [19,20]; any associated hypotension
must be quickly addressed to ensure that kidney perfusion pressure is
supported. Vasoconstrictive agents such as α2
-adrenergic receptor
agonists are avoided if possible to reduce potential increases in vascu-
lar resistance [21–26]. Appropriate analgesic techniques are used as
required; epidurals with preservative-free morphine, with or without
a local anesthetic such as bupivacaine or ropivacaine, and other sys-
temic μ-opioid receptor agonists are commonly used as adjunctive
analgesic agents. Other agents to improve renal perfusion such as
mannitol can also be administered. Anesthetic monitoring is routine
but focuses on the cardiovascular system; pulse oximetry, electrocar-
diography, direct (dorsal pedal, coccygeal, or femoral arterial catheter)
or indirect (oscillometric or Doppler ultrasonic) arterial blood pres-
sure, end-tidal carbon dioxide/anesthetic gases, and core body tem-
perature are monitored continuously. Blood gas analyses, including
electrolytes, and packed cell volumes are performed perioperatively.
Kidney recipient management
Kidney recipient anesthesia is handled similarly to that for other
patients with CKD (see Chapter 43). However, recipients present
unique challenges as they accept a new kidney (graft) that has been
removed from a donor and stored in hypoxic conditions for minutes
to hours (Fig. 44.2A) (for microsurgical and storage techniques,
see [3,4,27–30]). Although few currently used anesthetic agents are
directly nephrotoxic, and no specific anesthetic agents are associ-
ated with changes to short-term or overall survival rates [13], many
anesthetics alter renal function through decreases in cardiac output,
systemic vascular resistance and blood pressure, neuroendocrine
status, and renal blood flow (RBF), which will subsequently affect
the glomerular filtration rate (GFR). The stress response to surgery
can release aldosterone, vasopressin, renin, and endogenous cat-
echolamines, which can increase renal vascular resistance and sub-
sequently reduce GFR [31–33]. Hence, the objectives of the
anesthetic period include reducing patient stress and maintaining
systemic blood pressure (and, therefore, GFR) to the greatest extent
possible via the use of anesthetic agents with minimal cardiovascu-
lar depression.
Table 44.1 Suggested anesthetic and analgesic agents for renal replacement therapy
patients.
Agent 	Dose/Route
Preanesthetic sedatives/analgesics
Benzodiazepines 	Midazolam 	0.05–0.2 mg/kg IV, IM
Diazepam 	0.05–0.2 mg/kg IV
Opioids 	Fentanyl 	1.0–5.0 μg/kg IV
Hydromorphone 0.05–0.1 mg/kg IV, IM
Methadone 	0.2–0.5 mg/kg IV, IM
Induction agents
Propofol 	1.0–6.0 mg/kg IV to effect
Alfaxalone 	0.5–2.0 mg/kg IV to effect
Maintenance agents
Inhalants 	Desflurane 	Minimal concentrations to effect
Isoflurane
Sevoflurane
Opioids 	Fentanyl 	2–20 μg/kg/h IV
Postoperative analgesics
Opioids 	Fentanyl 	1–2 μg/kg/h IV with careful monitoring
Buprenorphine 	20–30 μg/kg IV, TM
Methadone 	0.2–0.5 mg/kg IV, IM
IV, intravenous; IM, intramuscular; TM, transmucosal.
(A) 	(B)
Figure 44.2 Intraoperative renal transplantation. A. Donor kidney (white arrow) placed in the abdomen of the recipient following extracorporeal storage.
Note the pale color of the stored kidney as the anastomoses are not yet completed in this photograph. B. Donor kidney (gray arrow) following renal artery
and vein anastomoses and application of chlorpromazine to the renal artery. Note the pink (perfused) color of the kidney compared with the kidney in A.
Source: Dr. Jon McAnulty, Department of Surgical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA, with permission.

-- 962 of 1450 --

Chapter 44: Anesthetic Considerations for Renal Replacement Therapy 	947
Similar to the kidney donor, anesthetic and analgesic agents must
be chosen according to the individual patient’s physiologic status
and signalment as each transplant patient is unique; there is no uni-
versal protocol that can be used for every patient. Preoperative
medication using a combination of the μ-opioid receptor agonist,
fentanyl, and a benzodiazepine is common since neither fentanyl
nor the benzodiazepine class of drugs substantially affects cardio-
vascular function at clinically acceptable doses (Table 44.1) [34–37].
For example, fentanyl or a fentanyl analog (including sufentanil,
alfentanil, and remifentanil) and midazolam are commonly used
intravenously to facilitate anesthetic induction, provide analgesia,
and reduce the stress response to surgery. Fentanyl is also advanta-
geous since it has a relatively short duration of action, which facili-
tates rapid adjustments, does not release histamine, and is minimally
excreted (< 10%) unchanged by the kidneys [38–40]. Although
other opioids, such as hydromorphone, may be acceptable for use as
analgesics, systemic morphine is not recommended. Systemic mor-
phine administration increases plasma histamine levels, which can
be associated with systemic hypotension [38]. In addition,
morphine-6-glucuronide is an active metabolic product of mor-
phine in dogs and humans, and delayed elimination of this metabo-
lite in patients with renal insufficiency may prolong drug
effects [41–45]. Although cats have low levels of glucuronyl trans-
ferase and morphine undergoes a different type of conjugation
reaction in this species, the pharmacokinetics of morphine are
somewhat similar to those of dogs and humans, but clearance rates
may be slightly slower [46–48]. Hence, systemic morphine admin-
istration in feline kidney recipients is not routinely recommended
when other opioids are available. Similarly, α2
-adrenergic receptor
agonists, such as dexmedetomidine, should be avoided as they
reduce cardiac output with increases in systemic vascular resist-
ance [21–26]. Phenothiazines are also not recommended as a rou-
tine premedication in recipients since administration can reduce
systemic vascular resistance and potentially decrease arterial blood
pressure in dogs and cats via peripheral α-adrenergic receptor
blockade [20,49,50].
Anesthetic induction can be accomplished with slow administra-
tion of small doses of propofol as it is rapidly metabolized by both
hepatic and extra-hepatic means and RBF and GFR are minimally
affected (Table 44.1) [51,52]. Although the effects of alfaxalone on
RBF and GFR are not specifically reported in cats, small boluses of
alfaxalone may also be used since postinduction cardiovascular
effects appear similar to those of propofol (for review, see [53]).
Although significantly metabolized in the liver, ketamine is usually
avoided since its active metabolite, norketamine, is excreted
unchanged by the kidney [54] and may contribute to prolonged
drug effects in animals with decreased renal function. If ketamine is
required as a premedication or induction agent (for example, due to
animal behavior or lack of an alternative), doses should be reduced
as much as possible by combination with appropriate coinduction
agents. Etomidate may be used but is not commonly recommended
since, although it has minimal cardiovascular effects, it induces
transient adrenal suppression, which has been associated with
increased postoperative mortality in critically ill humans [55,56].
Etomidate’s effect on postoperative mortality in compromised cats
is unknown.
During anesthetic maintenance (Table 44.1), most inhalant anes-
thetics reduce GFR (isoflurane, sevoflurane, and desflurane), and
attempts to reduce levels and maintain systemic blood pressure
should be made [52,57]. Therefore, it is common to use a constant
rate infusion of fentanyl or another fentanyl analog throughout the
surgical procedure to reduce inhalant levels and enhance antinoci-
ception [58–60]. In addition, an epidural containing preservative-
free morphine may be used; addition of local anesthetics to the
epidural is usually avoided to reduce any further hypotension from
profound decreases in vascular resistance due to sympathetic nerv-
ous system blockade. Following such epidural techniques, cats
should be closely monitored for associated hypotension. Although
there have been concerns that sevoflurane may not be safe for use in
AKI or CKD due to the production of potentially nephrotoxic com-
pound A (in rodents) and inorganic fluoride, no adverse effects
have been shown in clinical patients and sevoflurane can be used in
these patients, as can isoflurane and desflurane [57,61–63].
Intraoperative anesthetic monitoring is essential for the risk
management of renal transplant patients. For example, intraopera-
tive hypoxemia is associated with reduced overall survival rates [13].
Thus, monitoring includes pulse oximetry, capnometry, inhalant
agent levels, electrocardiography, and core body temperature. In
addition, intraoperative hemodynamic monitoring and manage-
ment are imperative to ensure reasonable organ perfusion pressure,
yet not subject the patient to fluid overload. Although CVP does
not always correlate well with the patient’s overall fluid status, acute
CVP changes may indicate impending fluid overload. However, this
relationship is still debated [64]. Pulse pressure variation or pleth
variability index may be better indices of fluid status in the mechan-
ically ventilated patient, although their usefulness in cats have not
been fully investigated [65]. Invasive blood pressure should be
closely monitored since patients may experience normo-, hypo-, or
hypertension throughout the procedure and into the postoperative
period. An arterial catheter should be placed in the dorsal pedal or
femoral artery; however, the descending aorta or its major branches
may be occluded during renal artery anastomosis, and the signal
will be lost during this period. The coccygeal artery may be used
but can be difficult to keep clean postoperatively, which may negate
its use in an immunosuppressed patient. Care in handling these
catheters is essential as patients may be purposely heparinized and
excessive bleeding at the puncture site may occur. Indirect blood
pressure measurement using an ultrasonic Doppler flow detector or
oscillometric technique applied to the front limb should be per-
formed concurrently with invasive monitoring as these indirect
techniques can be used during aortic occlusion and/or if an artery
cannot be catheterized; however, they can be less accurate depend-
ing on circumstances [66–70].
Intravenous fluid therapy in human transplant surgeries has
recently been addressed [71]. Large crystalloid volumes are not rec-
ommended, but accelerated fluid administration during the initial
period of graft ischemia may improve subsequent kidney function.
Thus, feline fluid rates of 3–5 mL/kg/h based on the individual
patient’s needs and comorbidities (e.g., heart disease) with small,
accelerated (3–5 mL/kg) fluid boluses over approximately 15 min as
needed during ischemia are recommended. These guidelines also
suggest that a balanced electrolyte solution should be used; 0.9%
sodium chloride is not recommended due to extracellular shifts in
serum potassium, increases in serum chloride, and a decrease in pH
(hyperchloremic acidosis) [71–74]. In fact, hyperkalemia does not
worsen with balanced solutions, and 0.9% sodium chloride can actu-
ally result in significant metabolic disorders [71–74]. Synthetic col-
loids such as hydroxyethyl starches should not be used due to
potential adverse effects such as coagulopathies, reticuloendothelial
system dysfunction, and delayed or impaired renal function [71,75].
If patients are normovolemic during surgery, yet remain hypo-
tensive under general anesthesia, β-adrenergic receptor agonists,

-- 963 of 1450 --

948 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
such as dobutamine, can be used to increase cardiac output. The use
of dopamine remains controversial because of species differences in
receptor pharmacology and potential increases in systemic vascular
resistance with higher doses [45]. If the patient cannot tolerate fur-
ther fluid loading, titrated vasopressors, such as norepinephrine,
may be considered to treat hypotension, despite the risk of renal
vasoconstriction. In humans, norepinephrine use does not have a
negative effect on recipient graft function since the harmful effects
of systemic hypotension likely outweigh the potential renal vaso-
constriction caused by norepinephrine [76,77]. However, this has
yet to be tested in clinical veterinary transplant patients.
During surgery, other pharmaceutical agents may be adminis-
tered to aid in graft survival. For example, mannitol (0.25–1.0 g/kg)
may be administered intravenously as the vascular anastomosis is
nearly completed to increase renal perfusion pressure, reduce
ischemia–reperfusion injury, and diminish the delay in graft func-
tion [4,45,78]. Heparin may be administered once adequate hemo-
stasis is maintained since patients are often prothrombotic due to
hypercoagulability and hypofibrinolysis [12,79]. If the newly anas-
tomosed renal artery exhibits profound vasoconstriction, chlor-
promazine may be used topically as a peripheral α-adrenergic
receptor antagonist and direct vascular smooth muscle relaxant to
initiate vasodilation of the artery and likely enhance RBF
(Fig. 44.2B) [80]. Prior to the end of the surgical procedure in cats,
the fentanyl infusion may be discontinued and buprenorphine
administered intravenously for postoperative analgesia (Table 44.1)
as reversal of pure μ-opioid receptor agonists increases 30-day sur-
vival rates [13]. Although buprenorphine is classified as a partial
opioid receptor agonist, partial receptor activation (versus antago-
nism) may reduce any cardiorespiratory depression associated
with full μ-opioid receptor agonists, yet still provide analgesia.
Alternatively, fentanyl (or fentanyl analog) infusions may be care-
fully titrated in cats, and also in dogs, at lower dosages for postop-
erative analgesia. However, intensive postoperative cardiovascular
monitoring is recommended if these agents are used. Non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs) are not recommended owing
to their potential nephrotoxic, hepatotoxic, and gastrointestinal
effects [81]. Appropriately placed local or regional anesthetic tech-
niques in the body wall using liposomal bupivacaine (≤ 5.3 mg/kg)
or bupivacaine solution (up to 1–2 mg/kg) may also be advanta-
geous as part of multimodal analgesia therapy, although they have
not been specifically studied in renal transplant patients.
Surgical recovery and complications
The recovery period requires intensive monitoring for associated
complications [3]. Patient stress should be minimized and the
patient kept warm as hypothermia is common in the postoperative
period. Electrolytes and packed call volume should be monitored
and imbalances corrected with fluid therapy and/or blood products
as needed. Patients should undergo frequent pain scoring with vali-
dated systems [82], and multimodal analgesic techniques used to
minimize side effects associated with any one analgesic agent.
Nutritional support is imperative; esophagostomy tubes can be
placed if required.
Hypertension can be present throughout the procedure or can
occur following vascular clamp removal from the new kidney. It
may persist or even worsen postoperatively [3,4,7,8,28,83,84]. The
pathogenesis of postoperative hypertension is likely multifactorial,
possibly due to a combination of primary renal disease and cal-
cineurin inhibitors (such as the immunosuppressive agent cyclo-
sporine), but it does not appear to be related to increased renin or
angiotensin II levels after kidney reperfusion [4,7,8,83–86].
Although intraoperative hypertension can be quickly managed with
increasing inhalant concentrations and/or nitroprusside infusions,
postoperative management is usually accomplished with the con-
tinued administration of antihypertensive agents such as hydrala-
zine, acepromazine, or amlodipine. Therefore, frequent or
continuous arterial blood pressure monitoring is essential in the
postoperative period, ideally with an arterial line. Indirect blood
pressures using an ultrasonic Doppler flow detector may also be
used if arterial catheterization is not possible or cannot be main-
tained [66–70]. Cats that have close monitoring and management
of postoperative blood pressure have reduced rates of postoperative
neurologic disease, including seizures, stupor, ataxia, and central
blindness [87], although no link was found in one study between
postoperative seizures and hypertension [8]. However, it is possible
that postoperative ischemic events may be likely in postoperative
hypertensive cats that lead to overt neurologic signs.
Other postoperative complications can include rejection, infec-
tion, retroperitoneal fibrosis, thromboembolic disease (dogs), con-
gestive heart failure, delayed graft function, neurologic disease,
uroabdomen, gingival hyperplasia associated with cyclosporine,
and intestinal intussusception [3,4,8]. In some cases, postoperative
hemodialysis can be used to manage delayed graft function, acute
rejection, pyelonephritis, and other complications until the prob-
lem is resolved [88]. Although these significant complications
remain, surgical and anesthetic techniques are consistently improv-
ing as additional information regarding preoperative patient stabi-
lization and the mechanisms underlying such complications
becomes available.
Peritoneal dialysis
Peritoneal dialysis (PD) is an alternative renal replacement therapy
used to temporarily remove solutes and excess fluid and to control
electrolyte and acid–base balance until renal function recovers suf-
ficiently, especially in AKI. Comprehensive reviews of the tech-
niques and equipment have been published [89–91]. In PD, the
exchange of solutes and fluid occurs between two compartments:
the peritoneal capillary blood and the dialysate placed in the perito-
neal cavity. Fluid and solutes are transported via diffusion and
osmosis/ultrafiltration, with a minor role played by convection
(Fig. 44.3) [92]. More specifically, solutes are removed as they dif-
fuse across the semipermeable peritoneal membranes, the rate
being determined by the membrane permeability of the molecules
(size and charge), available surface area, and concentration gradi-
ent. Fluids are removed by osmosis/ultrafiltration as water moves
from areas with low osmolar concentrations into the dialysate,
which has high osmolality (e.g., dextrose) or by using pressure gra-
dients. Convection of solutes also occurs as they are trapped in the
flow of water, although this process is more important in hemodi-
alysis (see the section titled “Extracorporeal techniques” later in
text) than in PD [92]. Overall transport across the peritoneal mem-
brane is commonly explained by the three-pore theory, where large
pores (100–200 Å in diameter) allow the transport of macromole-
cules such as albumin, small pores (20–25 Å) allow low-molecular-
weight substances such as urea, creatinine, and glucose to pass, and
ultrasmall pores (4–6 Å) transport only water [93].
Case selection
Typically, PD is used for veterinary patients with AKI associated
with oliguria or anuria refractory to fluid therapy and in patients
with severe acute uremia with BUN > 100 mg/dL or creatinine

-- 964 of 1450 --

Chapter 44: Anesthetic Considerations for Renal Replacement Therapy 	949
> 10 mg/dL [91,94]. PD is also used for the treatment of exposure
to diffusible toxins such as ethylene glycol and barbiturates, severe
metabolic abnormalities (e.g., hypercalcemia and hyperkalemia),
and extreme core body temperature derangements [91,93].
Although PD is less efficient than hemodialysis in reducing
uremia [93], several case reports have shown the efficacy of PD
in veterinary patients [95–98]. The advantages include minimal
technical skill required, no requirement for vascular access, good
cardiovascular tolerance, lack of expensive extracorporeal equip-
ment, and decreased risk of bleeding [91,99]. However, it is not
recommended for patients with severe coagulopathy, peritoneal
adhesions, peritonitis, diaphragmatic or abdominal hernias, or severe
hypoalbuminemia [89,91].
Procedures and equipment
PD is accomplished through a fill-and-drain system using an
indwelling peritoneal catheter (Fig. 44.4). The catheter and its
placement are absolutely critical for successful PD. The catheter
should allow sufficient inflow and outflow volumes, be biocompat-
ible, resist infection, and reduce leakage [91,93]. Catheters come in
various brands and types and can be aseptically placed percutane-
ously using the Seldinger technique, through a mini-surgical
approach, or by direct visualization through a laparotomy or lapa-
roscopy [89–93]. When using the percutaneous or mini-surgical
approach, the patient should be clipped and aseptically prepared;
sedation and a local anesthetic block of the skin ± peritoneum is
required (Table 44.1). Commonly, a μ-opioid receptor agonist such
as fentanyl, with or without a benzodiazepine such as midazolam,
administered intravenously is adequate to complete the procedure.
Intravenous buprenorphine, butorphanol, or hydromorphone may
alternatively be used. Lidocaine infiltration around the tube inser-
tion site is recommended. If surgical catheter implantation is
required, animals can be managed similarly to other AKI cases, tak-
ing care to maintain blood pressure without further fluid overload-
ing of the patient.
Following catheter placement, a variety of dialysates containing
glucose as an osmotic agent can be used for the exchange proce-
dures, each with their own advantages and disadvantages (for
reviews, see [89–93]). The goal is not to normalize the azotemia
immediately but gradually to correct the patient’s hemodynamic
status and acid–base and electrolyte derangements while reducing
BUN to 60–100 mg/dL and creatinine to 4.0–6.0 mg/dL over
24–48 h [94]. First, a small amount of fresh dialysate is initially
directed into the drainage bag, and the peritoneal cavity is drained so
that any contaminants introduced during the catheterization proce-
dure are flushed into the drainage bag and not the peritoneal cavity.
Dialysate
Fill
Bowel/omentum
Epidermis/dermis
Drain
Drain bag
Figure 44.4 Drain- and- fill technique for peritoneal dialysis. The peritoneal
cavity is initially infused by gravity or pump with fresh dialysate through a
preplaced peritoneal catheter. During the dwell time, neither the fresh
dialysate bag nor the drain bag is opened, and fluids and solutes are
exchanged from the blood within the peritoneal capillaries into the
dialysate across the semipermeable peritoneal membrane (dashed lines).
The dialysate is then drained from within the peritoneal cavity and
discarded.
Osmosis
ultrafiltration
Diffusion
Convection
(A)
(B)
(C)
Figure 44.3 Schematic representation of processes involved in dialysis
techniques. A. Diffusion. Diffusion occurs when solutes travel across a
semipermeable membrane based on their concentration gradient; solutes
move from a higher concentration to areas with lower concentrations.
B. Osmosis/ultrafiltration. Osmosis is the net movement of water (solvent)
across a semipermeable membrane into a region of higher solute
concentration in an attempt to equalize the relative solute concentration.
With ultrafiltration, hydrostatic pressure is used to force solvent across the
membrane. C. Convection. Convection occurs as the solute travels within
the mass movement of the solvent.

-- 965 of 1450 --

950 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
Warmed (38–39 °C) dialysate solution is placed in the peritoneal
cavity by gravity or infusion pump over 5–10 min, where it remains
for approximately 30–45 min (the “dwell time”). Following the
exchange of fluid and solutes across the membrane, the dialysis
fluid is removed over 15 min and discarded. This is repeated hourly
until the patient stabilizes [89]. Initial infusion volumes are small
(10–20 mL/kg) but may be increased after 24 h to 30–40 mL/kg.
Once the goals have been met, patients are frequently changed to
chronic dialysis protocols where the dialysate remains in the perito-
neal cavity for longer periods and three to four exchanges per day
are performed [91,93]. Patients should be continuously monitored
for acute blood volume and electrolyte changes. Catheter outflow
obstructions are common and body weight, systemic arterial blood
pressure, urine output, and pulmonary status are monitored
extremely closely. Other complications also occur but are usually
manageable, and include dialysate retention, subcutaneous seques-
tration of dialysate, hypoalbuminemia, peritonitis, and pleural effu-
sion (for reviews, see [89–91]).
In summary, PD is an effective tool in managing AKI or dialysa-
ble toxin exposure and may even be used in cases where hemodialy-
sis and/or transplantation are not feasible. The PD procedures
frequently require sedation, and/or general anesthesia and patients
should be treated similarly to others with renal impairment.
Extracorporeal techniques
Intermittent hemodialysis and continuous renal
replacement therapy
The first attempt at hemodialysis was performed in 1914 by Abel
et al., who removed blood from animals, passed it through a device
with semipermeable membranes, and then placed it back into the
animal [100]. They termed this process “vividiffusion,” which has
become the fundamental process upon which current hemodialysis
techniques are based. Both intermittent hemodialysis (IHD) and
continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) use hollow-fiber
semipermeable membranes. Historically, IHD was used to quickly
reduce small solutes (such as uremic toxins), whereas CRRT was
mainly used over a longer period of time and was particularly
applied to patients with hemodynamic instability (for review,
see [101]). Currently, a variety of dialyzer options are available, and
overlap exists between them; slower treatments can now be attained
on IHD machines and CRRT equipment can be used for intermit-
tent techniques as well.
Although four mechanisms are used to remove solutes (diffu-
sion, convection, adsorption, and separation), IHD mainly uses
the principle of diffusion to normalize acid–base and electrolyte
abnormalities and to remove uremic toxins from the blood
through a semipermeable membrane, thus improving clinical sta-
tus. The solute concentration gradient, molecular weight, and
membrane permeability all affect the rate of transfer across the
dialysis membrane [102]. Since the molecular size of the solute is
the main determinant of its ability to be removed by dialysis, con-
ventional dialyzers are most effective at removing low-molecular-
weight substances (< 500 Da) such as urea, creatinine, and
electrolytes. However, they can remove solutes up to 1000 Da,
while high-flux dialyzers can remove solutes up to 11,000 Da [103].
CRRT uses convection or combinations of diffusion/convection,
and to a lesser extent, adsorption, to remove solutes. Convection
(also called “solvent drag”), using a pressure gradient, physically
moves water and solutes across a membrane, which allows removal
of larger solvents (up to 40,000 Da) compared to diffusion alone.
In veterinary medicine, extracorporeal therapy is primary used in
AKI where renal function is expected to return quickly or as
indefinite renal replacement therapy during CKD [88,104,105].
Patients for extracorporeal therapy commonly present with
hypervolemia, refractory hyperkalemia with acidemia, and symp-
tomatic uremia (BUN > 80–120 mg/dL, creatinine > 6–8 mg/dL)
refractory to medical treatment [101]. IHD can also be performed
prior to renal transplantation to stabilize a high-risk patient fur-
ther [102,106–108]. Modified current human dialysis techniques
have been used in many diverse animal species, including tor-
toises, rabbits, sheep, and horses [109], but it is only routinely
used clinically in cats and dogs.
Procedures and equipment
A reliable, double- or triple-lumen intravenous jugular catheter (pref-
erably a dialysis catheter) is imperative for the success of IHD
(Fig. 44.1). These catheters can be temporary or permanent and have
been described in detail elsewhere [101,110]. The right jugular is pre-
ferred due to its straight path to the cranial vena cava, right atrium,
and caudal vena cava; the catheter tip should be located in the right
atrium [101]. Temporary (noncuffed, non-tunneled) catheters are
most commonly used for IHD and are routinely placed employing a
Seldinger or modified Seldinger technique using sedation (Table 44.1)
and a local anesthetic block of the catheter site. Ultrasound guidance
or a surgical approach may be required in patients with edema,
thrombosis, or changes in volume status. Permanent catheters are
often cuffed, with a portion located subcutaneously. Insertion often
requires a short period of general anesthesia and patients are treated
similarly to others with AKI or CKD (Table 44.1).
The dialyzer (i.e., artificial kidney) is a small, disposable, sealed
compartment containing thousands of hollow straws (called the
“hollow-fiber design”) (Fig. 44.5A) [102]. The blood flows within
the straws and the dialysate flows in a concurrent or countercurrent
direction around the straws. The membranes are semipermeable,
allowing transfer of fluid and solutes by diffusion and convec-
tion [102]. There are many types of dialyzer units, differing in cham-
ber, tubing, and pore size. The selection of the hemodialyzer is based
on the amount of extracorporeal blood volume and also on its dif-
fusive, connective, and biocompatibility features (Fig. 44.5B) [88]. In
some IHD machines, the extracorporeal circuit holds less blood vol-
ume than in some CRRT machines [101] and may be advantageous
in smaller patients. CRRT machines usually use prepackaged
dialysate and replacement fluid, allowing them to be more portable
but more expensive as well [101].
Anticoagulation is an essential part of extracorporeal therapy. It
is accomplished either by delivery of unfractionated heparin into
the extracorporeal circuit with an integrated syringe pump or by
adding sodium citrate to the circuit, thereby decreasing the ionized
calcium to < 0.4 mmol/L [101]. In the latter, patient hypocalcemia
is avoided by administering calcium citrate or gluconate at the
return/venous catheter site [101].
Hemodialysis machines (Fig. 44.6) come in several brands, are
fairly expensive, and have been reviewed elsewhere [111]. The
machine allows manipulations of blood flow rate, dialysate flow
rate, direction of blood flow and dialysate flow, dialysate composi-
tion, treatment length, sodium profiling to regulate plasma osmo-
lality, 	anticoagulant 	administration 	rate, 	returning 	blood
temperature, and fluid removal from the blood [102]. Although
these machines can remove wastes extremely efficiently and fairly
quickly, as previously mentioned, the goal is not to decrease BUN
and creatinine rapidly but to return the patient’s homeostasis

-- 966 of 1450 --

Chapter 44: Anesthetic Considerations for Renal Replacement Therapy 	951
gradually over multiple sessions. Sessions are usually planned at
two to three times per week and are 1–6 h in length, but can be
longer depending on patient need.
Patient monitoring
The ultimate goal for extracorporeal therapy is to either signifi-
cantly improve uremic states in AKI or to prolong patient survival
and improve patient stability in CKD, since, in most cases, renal
function 	does 	not 	recover 	without 	renal 	transplantation.
Individualized, intensive patient monitoring is imperative since
complications frequently occur. Coagulation testing, complete
blood counts, and serum chemistries, including hematocrit and
ionized calcium levels, should be performed. Critical parameters,
including blood pressure measurements, should be obtained prior
to, throughout, and following therapy. Pre-existing hypotension
should be corrected prior to dialysis, especially in patients where
the extracorporeal circuit volume is greater than 20% of the patient’s
blood volume. During treatment, patients may decompensate
quickly, potentially resulting in cardiac arrhythmias, hypotension,
and hypoxemia, among others, especially within the first 15 min of
dialysis. Following therapy, dialysis disequilibrium syndrome (and
corresponding neurologic dysfunction from cerebral edema) and
hemorrhage associated with anticoagulation are common issues
potentially leading to mortality. Although prolonged complications
are infrequently fatal, they do occur and consist of hypotension,
hypovolemia, venous thrombosis, pulmonary thromboembolism,
pulmonary edema, pleural effusion, anemia, thrombocytopenia,
leukopenia, nausea, vomiting, and inappetence [88,106,112–114].
Despite complications with the technique, extracorporeal therapies
appear to be a viable treatment modality to improve outcomes in
dogs and cats that do not respond adequately to medical manage-
ment of their renal impairment.
Pharmacologic agent clearance in dialysis
One goal of renal replacement therapy is to enhance the clearance
of potential endogenous or exogenous toxins within the blood.
However, plasma levels of drugs being administered to the patient
can also be affected by these therapies and can make dosing proto-
cols challenging. Although the type of dialysis technique chosen
affects the extent of drug removal from the blood, other factors,
such as membrane, solute, and patient characteristics, also affect
drug clearance [115].
Membrane properties
The filter age, material, surface area, and pore size influence drug
filtration, with higher permeability filters and filters with larger
surface areas allowing for more drug clearance in dialysis. The
effects are more pronounced for intermediate molecular weight
drugs [116]. In addition, the choice of dialysis technique will
affect the amount of drug removal. The ultrafiltration rate, dialy-
sis rate, blood flow rate, and, for convective processes, the selec-
tion of pre- versus postdialyzer replacement fluids can also change
drug clearance rates based on the protocol chosen for a specific
patient [117].
Drug characteristics
The solubility, volume of distribution, molecular weight, protein
binding, pKa
, and degree of renal and extrarenal elimination of the
specific drug will affect its clearance rate [117]. For example, drugs
with a large volume of distribution usually have a high affinity for
tissues with a smaller proportion found in the intravascular space.
The lower blood concentration results in a smaller concentration
gradient to drive clearance by dialysis. In contrast, drugs with
smaller volumes of distribution are more likely to remain intravas-
cular and be quickly cleared by dialysis techniques [118,119].
Blood
out
Dialysate
in
Dialyzer
Dialysate
out
Blood
in
(A) 	(B)
Blood
Dialysate
Figure 44.5 The hemodialyzer. A. An example of a
currently used hemodialyzer set (Prismaflex ® System
Hemofilter Set, Gambro, Lakewood, CO, USA). Sets are
sterile and prepackaged with all the necessary filtration
and tubing required by the hemodialysis machine.
Multiple types are commercially available that
can provide diffusion, convection and
adsorption, depending on the dialysis prescription.
Source: Dr. Rebecca Johnson, with permission. B.
Schematic representation of the “hollow-fiber” design
within the hemodialyzer. It consists of numerous straws
for blood transport separated from the dialysate by a
semipermeable membrane through which exchange of
solutes and water occurs. Dialyzed blood is then
returned to the patient through a centrally placed
intravenous catheter.

-- 967 of 1450 --

952 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
Highly protein-bound drugs are less likely to be removed by dialysis
than unbound drugs since bound drugs cannot cross dialysis mem-
branes as easily as free drugs [119]. An important caveat is that dis-
ease states such as uremia, hypoalbuminemia, and nephrotic
syndrome are associated with reduced protein binding of drugs,
potentially allowing for more to be cleared by dialysis [120]. In
addition, according to the Gibbs–Donnan effect, anionic proteins
within the blood decrease the availability of cationic drugs available
for clearance [118]. Therefore, if an anesthetic or analgesic drug has
a relatively small volume of distribution (e.g., alfentanil versus fen-
tanyl) and/or has relatively low protein binding (e.g., ketamine ver-
sus thiopental), its clearance may be hastened during dialysis.
Patient factors
Several patient factors affect drug clearance during dialysis. Patient
age, gender, residual renal function, and cardiovascular and liver
reserve function may directly or indirectly alter the amount of free
drug available for filtration by dialysis [121]. In addition, changes in
acid–base status of the animal that are associated with concurrent
(renal) disease also affect the ionization of some pharmacologic
agents, which can change the volume of drug distribution, protein
binding, and renal or hepatic drug clearance [117].
Many data have been collected on drug protocols in patients
undergoing renal replacement therapies, especially with regard to
antibiotics (for review, see [115]). However, studies on the disposi-
tion of anesthetic or analgesic agents, especially in veterinary
patients, are lacking. Since most dialysis techniques in veterinary
medicine are intermittent in nature (PD or IHD), it may be prudent
to administer analgesic agents immediately after the dialysis treat-
ment is completed to ensure that adequate levels are achieved before
the next dialysis treatment and to try to extend the time between
doses. Until detailed investigations on the pharmacokinetics of spe-
cific anesthetic and analgesic agents in veterinary patients undergo-
ing dialysis have been performed, we must extrapolate our drug
dosing schedules based on available human drug information,
monitor the patient’s status closely, and dose according to the indi-
vidual patient’s needs.
References
1 Syme HM, Jepson R. Clinical approach and laboratory evaluation of renal disease.
In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, Cote E, eds. Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine,
8th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier, 2017: 4603–4649.
2 Merrill JP, Murray JE, Harrison JH, et al. Successful homotransplantation of the
human kidney between identical twins. J Am Med Assoc 1956; 160(4): 1364–1380.
3 Aronson LR. Update on the current status of kidney transplantation for chronic
kidney disease in animals. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2016; 46(6):
1193–1218.
4 Hopper K, Mehl ML, Kass PH, et al. Outcome after renal transplantation in 26 dogs.
Vet Surg 2012; 41(3): 316–327.
5 Mathews KA, Holmberg DL. Kidney transplantation in dogs with naturally occur-
ring end-stage renal disease. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2000; 36(6): 475.
6 Mathews KA, Gregory CR. Renal transplants in cats: 66 cases (1987–1996). J Am
Vet Med Assoc 1997; 211(11): 1432–1436.
7 Adin CA, Gregory CR, Kyles AE, et al. Diagnostic predictors of complications and
survival after renal transplantation in cats. Vet Surg 2001; 30(6): 515–521.
8 Schmiedt CW, Holzman G, Schwartz T, et al. Survival, complications, and analysis
of risk factors after renal transplantation in cats. Vet Surg 2008; 37(7): 683–695.
9 Kyles AE, Gregory CR, Griffey SM, et al. Immunosuppression with a combination
of the leflunomide analog, FK778, and microemulsified cyclosporine for renal
transplantation in mongrel dogs. Transplantation 2003; 75(8): 1128–1133.
10 Bernsteen L, Gregory CR, Kyles A, et al. Microemulsified cyclosporine-based
immunosuppression for the prevention of acute renal allograft rejection in unre-
lated dogs: preliminary experimental study. Vet Surg 2003; 32(3): 213–219.
11 Gregory CR, Kyles A, Bernsteen L, et al. Results of clinical renal transplantation in 15
dogs using triple drug immunosuppressive therapy. Vet Surg 2006; 35(2): 105–112.
12 Friedman GS, Meier-Kriesche HU, Kaplan B, et al. Hypercoagulable states in renal
transplant candidates: impact of anticoagulation upon incidence of renal allograft
thrombosis. Transplantation 2001; 72(6): 1073–1078.
13 Snell W, Aronson L, Phillips H, et al. Influence of anesthetic variables on short-term
and overall survival rates in cats undergoing renal transplantation surgery. Am Vet
Med Assoc 2015; 247(3): 267–277.
14 Yeates JW. Ethical considerations in feline renal transplantations. Vet J 2014; 202(3):
405–407.
15 RCVS Council. Kidney transplants in cats: RCVS considers its guidance. Vet Record
2016 April 2: 332–333.
16 Tan J, Wu W, Xu X. Induction therapy with autologous mesenchymal stem cells in
living-related kidney transplants: a randomized controlled trial. J Am Med Assoc
2012; 307(11): 1169–1177.
17 Mumaw JL, Schmiedt CW, Breidling S, et al. Feline mesenchymal stem cells and
supernatant inhibit reactive oxygen species production in cultured feline neutro-
phils. Res Vet Sci 2015; 103: 60–69.
18 Wormser C, Aronson LR. Perioperative morbidity and long-term outcome of uni-
lateral nephrectomy in feline kidney donors: 141 cases (1998–2013). J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2016; 248(3): 275–281.
19 Popovic NA, Mullane JF, Yhap EO. Effects of acetylpromazine maleate on certain
cardiorespiratory responses in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1972; 33(9): 1819–1824.
Figure 44.6 The hemodialysis machine. This is an example of a
hemodialysis machine (Prismaflex ® System, Gambro, Lakewood, CO, USA)
that can accommodate the hemodialysis equipment described in Fig. 44.5.
The machine should be able to deliver a wide range of extracorporeal
blood purification therapies that can be individualized to each patient’s
needs and should be compatible with a range of hemofiltration sets
supplied by the specific company. Source: Dr. Rebecca Johnson, with
permission.

-- 968 of 1450 --

Chapter 44: Anesthetic Considerations for Renal Replacement Therapy 	953
20 Ludders JW, Reitan JA, Martucci R, et al. Blood pressure response to phenylephrine
infusion in halothane-anesthetized dogs given acetylpromazine maleate. Am J Vet
Res 1983; 44(6): 996–999.
21 Lawrence CJ, Prinzen FW, de Lange S. The effects of dexmedetomidine on nutrient
organ blood flow. Anesth Analg 1996; 83(6): 1160–1165.
22 Ansah OB, Raekallio M, Vainio O. Comparison of three doses of dexmedetomidine
with medetomidine in cats following intramuscular administration. J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 1998; 21(5): 380–387.
23 Pypendop BH, Verstegen JP. Hemodynamic effects of medetomidine in the dog: a
dose titration study. Vet Surg 1998; 27(6): 612–622.
24 Lamont LA, Bulmer BJ, Grimm KA, et al. Cardiopulmonary evaluation of the use
of medetomidine hydrochloride in cats. Am J Vet Res 2001; 62(11): 1745–1749.
25 Mendes GM, Selmi AL, Barbudo-Selmi GR, et al. Clinical use of dexmedetomidine
as premedicant in cats undergoing propofol–sevoflurane. J Feline Med Surg 2003;
5(5): 265–270.
26 Murrell JC, Hellebrekers LJ. Medetomidine and dexmedetomidine: a review of the
cardiovascular effects and antinociceptive properties in the dog. Vet Anaesth Analg
2005; 32(3): 117–127.
27 McAnulty JF. Hypothermic storage of feline kidneys for transplantation: successful
ex vivo storage up to 7 hours. Vet Surg 1998; 27(4): 312–320.
28 Bernsteen L, Gregory CR, Pollard RE, et al. Comparison of two surgical techniques
for renal transplantation in cats. Vet Surg 1999; 28(6): 417–420.
29 Bernsteen L., Gregory CR, Kyles A, et al. Renal transplantation in cats. Clin Tech
Small Anim Pract 2000; 15(1): 40–45.
30 Philips H, Aronson LR. Use of end-to-side arterial and venous anastomosis tech-
niques for renal transplantation in two dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2012; 240(3):
298–303.
31 Hayes MA, Goldenberg IS. Renal effects of anesthesia and operation mediated by
endocrines. Anesthesiology 1963; 24: 487–499.
32 Walker LA, Buscemi-Bergin M, Gellai M. Renal hemodynamics in conscious rats:
effects of anesthesia, surgery, and recovery. Am J Physiol 1983; 245(1): F67–F74.
33 Koepke JP. Renal responses to stressful environmental stimuli. Fed Proc 1985;
44(13): 2823–2827.
34 Chai CY, Wang CS. Cardiovascular actions of diazepam in the cat. J Pharmacol Exp
Ther 1966; 154(2): 271–280.
35 Freye E. Effect of high doses of fentanyl on myocardial infarction and cardiogenic
shock in the dog. Resuscitation 1974; 3(2): 105–113.
36 Liu W, Bidway AV, Stanley TH, et al. Cardiovascular dynamics after large doses of
fentanyl and fentanyl plus N2
O in the dog. Anesth Analg 1976; 55(2): 168–172.
37 Jones DJ, Stehling LC, Zauder HL. Cardiovascular responses to diazepam and
midazolam maleate in the dog. Anesthesiology 1979; 51(5): 430–434.
38 Rosow CE, Moss J, Philbin DM, et al. Histamine release during morphine and fen-
tanyl anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1982; 56(2): 93–96.
39 Peng P, Sandler AN. A review of the use of fentanyl analgesia in the management of
acute pain in adults. Anesthesiology 1999; 90(2): 576–599.
40 Cummings III K, Naguib MA. Opioid agonists and antagonists. In: Flood P, Rathmell
JP, Shafer S, et al., eds. Stoelting’s Pharmacology and Physiology in Anesthetic Practice,
5th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer Health, 2015: 217–256.
41 Chauvin M, Sandouk P, Scherrmann JM, et al. Morphine pharmacokinetics in renal
failure. Anesthesiology 1987; 66(3): 327–331.
42 Sear JW, Hand CW, Moore RA, et al. Studies on morphine disposition: influence of
general anesthesia on plasma concentrations of morphine and its metabolites. Br J
Anaesth 1989; 62(1): 22–27.
43 Sear JW, Hand CW, Moore RA, et al. Studies on morphine disposition: influence of
renal failure on the kinetics of morphine and its metabolites. Br J Anaesth 1989;
62(1): 22–27.
44 Osborne R, Joel S, Grebenik K, et al. The pharmacokinetics of morphine and mor-
phine glucuronides in kidney failure. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1993; 54(2): 158–167.
45 Schmidt S, Jungwirth B. Anesthesia for renal transplant surgery: an update. Eur J
Anesthesiol 2012; 29(12): 552–558.
46 Davis LE, Donnelly EJ. Analgesic drugs in the cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1968; 153(9):
1161–1167.
47 Faura CC, Collins SL, Moore RA, et al. Systematic review of factors affecting the
ratios of morphine and its major metabolites. Pain 1998; 74(1): 43–53.
48 Taylor PM, Robertson SA, Dixon MJ, et al. Morphine, pethidine and buprenor-
phine disposition in the cat. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2001; 24(6): 391–398.
49 Colby ED, Sanford TD. Blood pressure and heart and respiratory rates of cats under
ketamine/xylazine, ketamine/acepromazine anesthesia. Feline Pract 1981; 11(5):
19–21.
50 Stepien RL, Bonagura JD, Bednarski RM, et al. Cardiorespiratory effects of ace-
promazine maleate and buprenorphine hydrochloride in clinically normal dogs.
Am J Vet Res 1995; 56(1): 78–84.
51 Shiga Y, Minami K, Uezono Y, et al. Effects of the intravenously administered
anaesthetics ketamine, propofol and thiamylal on the cortical renal blood flow in
rats. Pharmacology 2003; 68(1): 17–23.
52 Schroeder CA. Renal disease. In: Johnson RA, Snyder LB, Schroeder CA, eds.
Canine and Feline Anesthesia and Coexisting Disease, 2nd edn. Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley & Sons, Inc, 2022: 202–224.
53 Chiu KW, Robson S, Devi JL, et al. The cardiopulmonary effects and quality of
anesthesia after induction with alfaxalone in 2-hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin in
dogs and cats: a systematic review. J Vet Phamacol Ther 2016; 39(6): 525–538.
54 Hanna RM, Borchard RE, Schmidt SL. Pharmacokinetics of ketamine HCl and
metabolite I in the cat: a comparison of i.v., i.m., and rectal administration. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 1988; 11(1): 84–93.
55 Kruse- Elliott KT, Swanson CR, Aucoin DP. Effects of etomidate on adrenocortical
function in canine surgical patients. Am J Vet Res 1987; 48(7): 1098–1100.
56 Albert SG, Ariyan S, Rather A. The effect of etomidate on adrenal function in criti-
cal illness: a systematic review. Intensive Care Med 2011; 37(6): 901–910.
57 Flood P, Shafer S. Inhaled anesthetics. In: Flood P, Rathmell JP, Shafer S, et al., eds.
Stoelting’s Pharmacology and Physiology in Anesthetic Practice, 5th edn. Philadelphia,
PA: Wolters Kluwer Health, 2015: 98–159.
58 Murphy MR, Hug CC Jr. The anesthetic potency of fentanyl in terms of its reduc-
tion of enflurane MAC. Anesthesiology 1982; 57(6): 485–488.
59 Ilkiw JE, Pascoe PJ, Fisher LD. Effect of alfentanil on the minimum alveolar concen-
tration of isoflurane in cats. Am J Vet Res 1997; 58(11): 1267–1273.
60 Murphy EJ. Acute pain management pharmacology for the patient with concurrent
renal or hepatic disease. Anaesth Intensive Care 2005; 33(3): 311–322.
61 Cronnelly R, Salvatierra O, Feduska NJ. Renal allograft function following halo-
thane, enflurane, or isoflurane anesthesia. Anesth Analg 1984; 63: 202.
62 Litz RJ, Hübler M, Lorenz W, et al. Renal responses to desflurane and isoflurane in
patients with renal insufficiency. Anesthesiology 2002; 97(5): 1133–1136.
63 Teixeira S, Costa G, Costa F, et al. Sevoflurane versus isoflurane: does it matter in
renal transplantation? Transplant Proc 2007; 39(8): 2486–2488.
64 Marik PE, Baram M, Vahid B. Does central venous pressure predict fluid respon-
siveness? A systematic review of the literature and the tale of seven mares. Chest
2008; 134(1): 172–178.
65 Sano H, Seo J, Wightman P, et al. Evaluation of pulse pressure variation and pleth
variability index to predict fluid responsiveness in mechanically ventilated
isoflurane-anesthetized dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2018; 28(4): 301–309.
66 Grandy JL, Dunlop CI, Hodgeson DS, et al. Evaluation of the Doppler ultrasonic
method of measuring systolic arterial blood pressure in cats. Am J Vet Res 1992;
53(7): 1166–1169.
67 Binns SH, Sisson DD, Buoscio DA, et al. Doppler ultrasonographic, oscillometric
sphygmomanometric, and photoplethysmographic techniques for noninvasive
blood pressure measurement in anesthetized cats. J Vet Intern Med 1995; 9(6):
405–414.
68 Caulkett NA, Cantwell SL, Houston DM. A comparison of indirect blood pressure
monitoring techniques in the anesthetized cat. Vet Surg 1998; 27(4): 370–377.
69 Bosiack AP, Mann FA, Dodam JR, et al. Comparison of ultrasonic Doppler flow
monitor, oscillometric, and direct arterial blood pressure measurements in ill dogs.
J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2010; 20(2): 207–215.
70 Shih A, Robertson S, Vigani A, et al. Evaluation of an indirect oscillometric blood
pressure monitor in normotensive and hypotensive anesthetized dogs. J Vet Emerg
Crit Care 2010; 20(3): 313–318.
71 Wagener G, Bezinover D, Wang C, et al. Fluid management during kidney trans-
plantation: a consensus statement of the Committee on Transplant Anesthesia of the
American Society of Anesthesiologists. Transplantation 2021; 105(8): 1677–1683.
72 O’Malley CM, Frumento RJ, Hardy MA, et al. A randomized, double-blind com-
parison of lactated Ringer’s solution and 0.9% NaCl during renal transplantation.
Anesth Analg 2005; 100(5): 1518–1524.
73 Hadimioglu N, Saadawy I, Saglam T, et al. The effect of different crystalloid solu-
tions on acid–base balance and early kidney function after kidney transplantation.
Anesth Analg 2008; 107(1): 264–269.
74 Khajavi MR, Etezadi F, Moharari RS, et al. Effects of normal saline vs. lactated
Ringer’s during renal transplantation. Ren Fail 2008; 30(5): 535–539.
75 Davidson IJ. Renal impact of fluid management with colloids: a comparative
review. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2006; 23(9): 721–738.
76 Bellomo R, Wan L, May C. Vasoactive drugs and acute kidney injury. Crit Care Med
2008; 36(Suppl 4): S179–S186.
77 Kim JM, Kim SJ, Joh JW, et al. Is it safe to use a kidney from an expanded criteria
donor? Transplant Proc 2011; 43(6): 2359–2362.
78 Schnuelle J, Johannes van der Woude F. Perioperative fluid management in renal
transplantation: a narrative review of the literature. Transpl Int 2006; 19(12):
947–959.
79 Irish A. Hypercoagulability in renal transplant recipients. Identifying patients at
risk of renal allograft thrombosis and evaluating strategies for prevention. Am J
Cardiovasc Drugs 2004; 4(3): 139–149.
80 Kwok J, Flood P. Drugs used for psychopharmacologic therapy. In: Flood P, Rathmell
JP, Shafer S, et al., eds. Staoelting’s Pharmacology and Physiology in Anesthetic
Practice, 5th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer Health, 2015: 822–844.

-- 969 of 1450 --

954 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
81 KuKanich B, Bidgood T, Knesl O. Clinical pharmacology of nonsteroidal antiin-
flammatory drugs in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39(1): 69–90.
82 Gruen ME, Lascelles BDX, Colleran E, et al. 2022 pain management guidelines for
dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2022; 58(2): 55–76.
83 Kyles AE, Gregory CR, Wooldridge JD, et al. Management of hypertension
controls postoperative neurologic disorders after renal transplantation in cats.
Vet Surg 1999; 28(6): 436–441.
84 Tutone VK, Mark PB, Stewart GA, et al. Hypertension, antihypertensive agents and
outcomes following renal transplantation. Clin Transplant 2005; 19(2): 181–192.
85 Schmiedt CW, Mercurio A, Glassman M, et al. Effects of renal autograft ischemic
and reperfusion associated with renal transplantation on arterial blood pressure
variables in clinically normal cats. Am J Vet Res 2009; 70: 1426–1432.
86 Schmiedt CW, Mercurio A, Vandenplas M, et al. Effects of renal autograftischemic
storage and reperfusion on intraoperative hemodynamic patterns andplasma
renin concentrations in clinically normal cats undergoing renal autotransplanta-
tion and contralateral nephrectomy. Am J Vet Res 2010; 71: 1220–1227.
87 Kyles AE, Gregory CR, Wooldridge JD, et al. Management of hypertension con-
trols postoperative neurologic disorders after renal transplantation in cats. Vet
Surg 1999; 28(6): 436–441.
88 Cowgill LD, Francey T. Hemodialysis and extracorporeal blood purification. In:
DiBartola SP, ed. Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid–Base Disorders in Small Animal
Practice, 4th edn. St Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2012: 680–709.
89 Bersenas AME. A clinical review of peritoneal dialysis. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2011;
21(6): 605–617.
90 Cooper RL, Labato MA. Peritoneal dialysis in veterinary medicine. Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 2011; 41(1): 91–113.
91 Vitalaru A. Peritoneal dialysis in dogs and cats. J Hell Vet Medical Soc 2021; 71(4):
2419–2424.
92 Blowey DL, Alon US. Dialysis principles for primary health-care providers. Clin
Pediatr 2005; 44(1): 19–29.
93 Ross LA, Labato MA. Peritoneal dialysis. In: DiBartola SP, ed. Fluid, Electrolyte,
and Acid–Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice, 4th edn. St Louis, MO:
Saunders Elsevier, 2012: 665–679.
94 Cowgill LD. Application of peritoneal dialysis and hemodialysis in the manage-
ment of renal failure. In: Osborne CA, ed. Canine and Feline Nephrology and
Urology. Baltimore, MD: Lee & Febiger, 1995: 573–584.
95 Fox LE, Grauer FG, Dubielzig RR, et al. Reversal of ethylene glycol-induced
nephrotoxicosis in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1987; 191(11): 1433–1435.
96 Crisp MS, Chew DJ, DiBartola SP, et al. Peritoneal dialysis in dogs and cats: 27
cases (1976–1987). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1989; 195(9): 1262–1266.
97 Beckel NF, O’Toole TE, Rozanski EA, et al. Peritoneal dialysis in the management
of acute renal failure in 5 dogs with leptospirosis. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2005;
15(3): 201–205.
98 Dorval P, Boysen SR. Management of acute renal failure in cats using peritoneal dialysis:
a retrospective study of six cases (2003–2007). Feline Med Surg 2009; 11(2): 107–115.
99 Gabriel DP, Nascimento GVR, Caramori JT, et al. Peritoneal dialysis in acute renal
failure. Renal Failure 2006; 28(6): 451–456.
100 Abel J, Rowntree L, Turner B. On the removal of diffusible substances from the
circulating blood of living animals by dialysis. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1914; 5(3):
275–316.
101 Foster JD. Extracorporeal therapies in the emergency room and intensive care
unit. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2020; 50(6): 1215–1236.
102 Bloom CA, Labato MA. Intermittent hemodialysis for small animals. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 2011; 41(1): 115133.
103 Ghannoum M, Roberts DM, Hoffman RS, et al. A stepwise approach for the man-
agement of poisoning with extracorporeal treatments. Semin Dial 2014; 27(4):
362–370.
104 Eatroff AE, Langston CE, Chalhoub S, et al. Long-term outcome of cats and dogs
with acute kidney injury treated with intermittent hemodialysis: 135 cases (1997–
2010). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2012; 241(11): 1471–1478.
105 Acierno MJ. Continuous renal replacement therapy in dogs and cats. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 2011; 41(1): 135–146.
106 Elliott DA. Hemodialysis. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 2000; 15(3): 136–148.
107 Langston C. Hemodialysis in dogs and cats. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 2002;
24(7): 540–549.
108 Groman R. Apheresis in veterinary medicine: therapy in search of a disease. In:
Proceedings of the Advanced Renal Therapies Symposium. New York, NY: Animal
Medical Center, 2010: 26–32.
109 Cowgill LD, Langston CE. History of hemodialysis in dogs and companion ani-
mals. In: Ing TS, Rahman MA, Kjellstrand CM, eds. Dialysis: History, Development
and Promise. Singapore: World Scientific, 2012: 901–914.
110 Chalhoub S, Langston CE. Vascular access for extracorporeal renal replacement
therapy in veterinary patients. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2011; 41(1):
147–161.
111 Poeppel K, Langston CE, Chalhoub S. Equipment commonly used in veterinary
renal replacement therapy. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2011; 41(1):
177–191.
112 Langston CE, Cowgill LD, Spano JA. Applications and outcomes of hemodialysis
in cats: a review of 29 cases. J Vet Intern Med 1997; 11(6): 348–355.
113 Fischer JR, Pantaleo V, Francey T, et al. Veterinary hemodialysis: advances in
management and technology. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2004; 34(4):
935–967.
114 Langston CE, Poeppel K, Mitelberg E. AMC DIALYSIS HANDBOOK. New York:
Animal Medical Center, 2010: 3.
115 Monaghan KN, Acierno MJ. Extracorporeal removal of drugs and toxins. Vet Clin
Noth Am Small Anim Pract 2011; 41(1): 227–238.
116 Joy MS, Matzke GR, Frye RF, et al. Determinants of vancomycin clearance by con-
tinuous venovenous hemofiltration and continuous venovenous hemodialysis.
Am J Kidney Dis 1998; 31(6): 1019–1027.
117 Bouman CS. Antimicrobial dosing strategies in critically ill patients with acute
kidney injury and high-dose continuous veno-venous hemofiltration. Curr Opin
Crit Care 2008; 14(6): 654–659.
118 Bugge JF. Pharmacokinetics and drug dosing adjustments during continuous
venovenous hemofiltration or hemodiafiltration in critically ill patients. Acta
Anaesthesiol Scand 2001; 45(8): 929–934.
119 Churchwell MD, Mueller BA. Drug dosing during continuous renal replacement
therapy. Semin Dial 2009; 22(2): 185–188.
120 Choi G, Gomersall CD, Tian Q, et al. Principles of antibacterial dosing in continu-
ous renal replacement therapy. Crit Care Med 2009; 37(7): 2268–2282.
121 Bayliss G. Dialysis in the poisoned patient. Hemodial Int 2010; 14(2): 158–167.

-- 970 of 1450 --

955
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth E dition of Lumb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
The ideal anesthetic protocol for pregnant or periparturient (usu-
ally defined as labor and the time within a few weeks of labor)
patients provides analgesia, muscle relaxation, and sedation/narco-
sis without endangering either mother or fetus. By their very nature,
anesthetics, analgesics, tranquilizers, and sedatives cross the blood–
brain barrier. The physicochemical properties that allow drugs to
cross the blood–brain barrier also facilitate placental transfer.
Factors in decision-making regarding anesthesia protocols in
these patients include the unique physiology of the mother during
pregnancy and labor, the impact of selected drugs on the mother
and fetus, carryover effects of administered drugs on the neonate
following separation from the mother, and the effect of commonly
observed anesthesia-related complications on the fetus and
mother. General anesthesia is needed for commonly performed
periparturient procedures, but it is not possible to selectively
anesthetize the mother because all agents that affect the maternal
central nervous system will also affect the fetus. All drugs that
change the maternal physiology will affect fetal homeostasis. This
is especially pertinent during anesthesia for cesarean section
when separation of the fetus from the uteroplacental attachment
occurs. A complete understanding of the physiologic changes
present in the gravid patient and the potential impact of anes-
thetic drugs is essential to navigate both mother and fetus safely
through the perioperative period.
Pregnancy-associated changes in maternal
physiology
Metabolic demands during gestation and parturition are met by
physiologic adaptation, which is unique to this period (Table 45.1).
Most of the data describing physiologic adaptation to pregnancy
has been obtained from humans and ewes. Although little work has
been done in other species, the changes should be comparable, if
not greater, in magnitude because birth weight expressed as a per-
centage of maternal weight for people, sheep, dogs, and cats is 5.7%,
11.4%, 16.1%, and 13.2%, respectively [1]. This suggests that the
physiologic burden and, therefore, physiologic adaptation may
actually be greater in animals than humans.
Cardiovascular
During pregnancy, maternal blood volume increases by approxi-
mately 40%; plasma volume increases by 40–50%, which is more
than the 20% increase in red cell mass, resulting in decreased
45 Anesthetic Considerations During Pregnancy
and for the Newborn
Marc R. Raffe1 and Elizabeth Goudie-DeAngelis2
1 Veterinary Anesthesia and Critical Care Associates, LLC, St. Paul, Minnesota, USA
2 Tristate Veterinary Anesthesia, PLLC, White Plains, New York, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 955
Pregnancy- associated changes in maternal physiology, 955
Cardiovascular, 955
Coagulation, 956
Pulmonary, 956
Gastrointestinal, 957
Liver and kidney, 957
Uterine blood flow, 957
Neuroendocrine, 957
Pharmacologic alterations induced by pregnancy, 957
Anesthesia during pregnancy, 958
Anesthetic drugs and cesarean section, 959
Anticholinergics, 959
Tranquilizers and sedatives, 959
Opioids, 959
Injectable anesthetics, 960
Dissociatives, 960
Neuroleptanalgesia, 960
Inhalation anesthetics, 960
Neuromuscular blocking agents, 961
Guaifenesin, 961
Local anesthetics, 961
Supplemental agents, 961
Anesthetic techniques for cesarean section, 961
General anesthesia, 961
Regional anesthesia, 964
Local anesthesia, 965
Care of the newborn, 965
Postoperative pain management, 965
References, 966

-- 971 of 1450 --

956 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
hemoglobin concentration and packed cell volume [2]. This results
in a dilutional physiologic anemia. Increased heart rate and stroke
volume cause cardiac output to increase 30–50% above nor-
mal [3,4]. Plasma estrogens decrease peripheral vascular resistance
producing an increase in cardiac output, while systolic and diastolic
blood pressures remain unchanged. Cardiac output is also influ-
enced during labor by body position, pain, and apprehension [2].
During labor, systolic pressure increases by 10–30 mmHg. Cardiac
output increases an additional 10–25% during labor and the imme-
diate postpartum period, as a result of blood extrusion from the
contracting uterus [5]. Although central venous pressure does not
change during pregnancy, it increases slightly (4–6 cmH2
O) during
labor and has been reported to increase by up to 50 cmH 2
O during
painful fetal extraction [6]. The posterior vena cava and aorta can
be compressed by the enlarged uterus and its contents during dorsal
recumbency. This can cause decreased venous return and cardiac
output with concurrent reduction in uterine and renal blood
flow [7,8]. Although this does not appear to be as serious a problem
in dogs and cats, time spent restrained or positioned in dorsal
recumbency should be kept to a minimum [7,8,9].
Because cardiac work is increased during pregnancy and parturi-
tion, cardiac reserve is decreased. Patients with previously well-
compensated heart disease may suffer pulmonary congestion and
heart failure caused by a gestation induced increase in cardiac work-
load and hemodynamic demand secondary to parturition-associated
pain [10]. In such patients, pain and anxiety control is a key compo-
nent of successful patient management during the periparturient
period. However, care must be taken to avoid additional cardiac
depression and decompensation induced by excessive doses of seda-
tives or anesthetics. The use of ecbolic agents during or after parturi-
tion can adversely affect cardiovascular function. Oxytocin in large
or repeated doses induces peripheral vasodilation and hypotension,
which can adversely affect both mother and fetus through decreased
tissue perfusion. Ergot derivatives used to control uterine bleeding
can induce vasoconstriction and hypertension [11].
Coagulation
In humans, major changes to the coagulation system occur
throughout pregnancy with the greatest changes noted at term [12].
There is often a mild, non-clinically significant thrombocytopenia
due to dilution, destruction, and consumption of platelets. The
concentrations of clotting factors VII, VIII, IX, X, XI, Von
Willebrand factor (VWF), and fibrinogen increase throughout
pregnancy, while factors XI and XIII decrease, leading to a nearly
doubling of coagulation activity at the end of pregnancy. Plasma
fibrinolytic activity decreases until after placental delivery then
returns to normal. There is a general increase in clotting ability at
the time of parturition, which may increase the risk of perianes-
thetic clot formation in the dam.
Pulmonary
In humans, increased serum progesterone concentration during
pregnancy increases respiratory center sensitivity to carbon diox-
ide. Increased minute volume during gestation produces a pro-
gressive reduction in PaCO 2 during gestation; this value
approaches 30 mmHg at parturition. Metabolic compensation for
respiratory alkalosis maintains arterial pH within normal values.
Hyperventilation may further be stimulated during labor by pain,
apprehension, and anxiety. During pregnancy, oxygen consump-
tion increases by 20% as a result of the demands imposed by the
developing fetus, placenta, uterine muscle, and mammary tissue.
Arterial oxygen tension remains unchanged [2].
Pregnancy also affects the mechanics of ventilation. Airway
conductance is increased and total pulmonary resistance is
decreased by progesterone-induced relaxation of bronchial
smooth muscle. Lung compliance is unaffected. Functional resid-
ual capacity (FRC) is decreased by displacement of the diaphragm
and abdominal organs by the gravid uterus. In addition, FRC fur-
ther decreases during labor because of increased pulmonary
blood volume secondary to uterine contraction. Because FRC is
reduced, small airway closure develops at end-exhalation in
approximately one-third of human parturients [2]. Tidal volume
increases by 45%, but total lung capacity and vital capacity are
unaltered [13]. In addition, hypoventilation produces hypoxemia
and hypercapnia more frequently in pregnant than non-pregnant
patients. Hypoxemia is exacerbated by increased oxygen con-
sumption during labor. Oxygen administration prior to anesthetic
induction increases oxygen reserve by facilitating pulmonary
denitrogenation [14]. Preoxygenation is advisable if the patient is
tolerant of this procedure.
Induction of anesthesia with inhalation agents is more rapid in
pregnant than non-pregnant patients. The equilibration rate
between inspired and alveolar anesthetic partial pressure is acceler-
ated by increased alveolar ventilation via increased minute ventila-
tion and decreased FRC.
In the fetus, gas exchange occurs via the placenta. Carbon diox-
ide and oxygen move across the placental barrier by passive diffu-
sion. Movement of carbon dioxide is facilitated by the Haldane
effect; as the maternal blood releases oxygen to the fetus, its carbon
dioxide carrying capacity is increased. As the fetal hemoglobin
releases the carbon dioxide, its hemoglobin then becomes more
able to bind to oxygen, referred to as the “double Haldane
effect” [15]. Oxygen movement is facilitated by the Bohr effect. As
maternal hemoglobin binds to carbon dioxide, the pH is decreased,
which causes a right shift of the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve.
On the fetal side, the release of carbon dioxide from fetal hemo-
globin results in a left shift of the oxyhemoglobin saturation curve,
thus enhancing its binding affinity for oxygen; this is called the
“double Bohr effect” [16]. In addition, fetal hemoglobin has a lower
P 50 than adult hemoglobin, enhancing its oxygen binding [17].
Table 45.1 Physiological alterations induced by pregnancy.
Variable 	Change
Heart rate 	↑
Cardiac output 	↑
Blood volume 	↑
Plasma volume 	↑
Packed cell volume, hemoglobin, and plasma protein ↓
Arterial blood pressure 	unchanged
Central venous pressure 	unchanged; ↑ during labor
Minute volume of ventilation 	↑
Oxygen consumption 	↑
pHa and PaO2 	unchanged
PaCO 2 	↓
Total lung and vital capacity 	unchanged
Functional residual capacity 	↓
Gastric emptying time and intragastric pressure 	↑
Gastric motility and pH of gastric secretions 	↓
Gastric chloride ion and enzyme concentration 	↑
AST, LDH, and BSP retention time 	↑
Plasma cholinesterase 	↓
Renal plasma flow and glomerular filtration rate 	↑
Blood urea nitrogen and creatinine 	↓
Sodium ion and water balance 	unchanged

-- 972 of 1450 --

Chapter 45: Anesthetic Considerations During Pregnancy and for the Newborn 	957
Gastrointestinal
A number of functional changes in gastrointestinal physiology
occur during gestation and parturition. Physical displacement of
the stomach by the gravid uterus, decreased gastric motility, and
changes in serum progesterone level contribute to delayed gastric
emptying and are most pronounced during the last trimester. Acid,
chloride, and enzyme concentrations in gastric secretions are
increased due to changes in hormone physiology present during
gestation. Lower esophageal sphincter tone is decreased, and intra-
gastric pressure is increased. Pain and anxiety during labor have
been shown to further decrease gastric motility [2].
These changes increase the risk of regurgitation (both active and
passive), and aspiration is increased in parturients [18]. Frequently,
patients presented for cesarean section have recently eaten or the
time of the last feeding is unknown. Parturients should be regarded
as having a full stomach, and anesthesia techniques should be
selected that produce rapid airway management and control to pre-
vent aspiration of foreign material. Because the risk of regurgitation
and aspiration is considered high in periparturient patients, pro-
phylactic measures are recommended. Metoclopramide and an H2
-
receptor antagonist drug (e.g., cimetidine, ranitidine, or famotidine)
may be administered as part of the preanesthetic protocol [19].
Prophylactic administration of antiemetics, such as maropitant and
ondansetron, is a common practice in companion animals.
Risk of vomiting increases with hypotension, hypoxia, and toxic
reactions to local anesthetics. Smooth induction of general anesthe-
sia and preventing hypotension during epidural anesthesia will
decrease the incidence of vomiting. Because silent regurgitation can
occur when the intragastric pressure is high, a cuffed endotracheal
tube with adequate airway seal is preferred for airway management
during general anesthesia. Passive regurgitation can be induced by
positive-pressure ventilation with a face mask or by manipulation of
abdominal viscera. Although atropine reduces the lower esophageal
sphincter (LES) pressure, it may decrease reflux by reducing the fre-
quency of LES relaxation, but it may also inhibit the actions of meto-
clopramide that increase gastric motility and emptying by sensitizing
gastric smooth muscle to acetylcholine [6,19]. The clinician should
always be cognizant that gastroesophageal reflux can occur in the
anesthetized patient (see Chapters 2 and 41 for further details).
Liver and kidney
Pregnancy induces minor changes in hepatic function. Plasma
protein concentration decreases slightly, but total plasma volume
is increased because of the increase in blood volume. Bilirubin
concentration is unaltered. Serum enzyme concentrations (serum
alanine aminotransferase and alkaline phosphatase) can be
slightly increased. Plasma cholinesterase (also known as pseudo-
cholinesterase) concentration decreases, which may lead to pro-
longed action of succinylcholine in pregnant patients, particularly
if they have been recently exposed to organophosphate parasiti-
cides (e.g., anthelmintics, flea collars, or dips). Despite these alter-
ations, overall liver function is generally well maintained [2].
Renal plasma flow and glomerular filtration rate are increased
by approximately 60% in pregnant patients; blood urea nitrogen
(BUN) and creatinine concentrations are lower than in non-
pregnant patients [6]. Sodium and water balance are unaffected.
Elevated BUN or creatinine levels may indicate renal pathology or
compromise in parturient patients. In these patients, drugs with
known nephrotoxic potential, such as aminoglycoside antibiotics,
and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), should be
avoided.
Uterine blood flow
Stable uteroplacental circulation is important to fetal and maternal
homeostasis and neonatal survival. Uterine blood flow is directly
proportional to systemic perfusion pressure and inversely propor-
tional to vascular resistance in myometrial blood vessels. Placental
perfusion is dependent on uteroplacental perfusion pressure, and
there is no significant autoregulation in the uteroplacental circula-
tion; however, placental vessels do have rudimentary mechanisms
for changing vascular resistance and contain α-adrenergic and β2
-
adrenergic receptors [20]. Placental perfusion is directly linked to
mean uterine perfusion pressure and uterine vascular resistance.
Anesthesia may decrease uterine blood flow; in addition, uterine
vascular resistance is increased by uterine contractions and hyper-
tonia (oxytocic response). Placental hypotension is associated with
hypovolemia, anesthetic-induced cardiovascular depression, or
sympathetic blockade resulting in reduced uterine perfusion pres-
sure. Uterine vasoconstriction is induced by endogenous sympa-
thetic discharge or by exogenous sympathomimetic drugs having
α1
- adrenergic effects (e.g., epinephrine, norepinephrine, methox-
amine, phenylephrine, and metaraminol) [2,20,21,22]. Hypotension
induced by adjunctive drugs combined with increased uterine tone
induced by ecbolics should be avoided.
Neuroendocrine
In humans, it has been reported that increased progesterone levels at
term contribute to reduced anesthesia requirements. This observation
may not be consistent in veterinary species; it is well-documented in
the dog and cat that progesterone levels decrease during gestation to
basal, or slightly above basal, levels at term [23–27]. Horses have low
blood progesterone levels at term; progesterone is undetectable in the
blood during the second half of gestation as its source shifts from the
corpus lutea in the ovary [28,29]. It is unlikely that progesterone has a
significant impact on anesthesia requirements if cesarean section is
warranted.
The fetus’ capacity for gluconeogenesis is very limited. Therefore,
as the fetal blood glucose source is from the mother, it is important
to maintain normal maternal blood glucose concentrations. In the
bitch, induction of labor results in a drop in core body temperature
of at least 1.2 °C [23].
Summary
Pregnant (gravid) patients are at greater anesthetic risk because of
pregnancy-associated physiologic alterations. Cardiac reserve
diminishes during pregnancy; high-risk patients can suffer acute
cardiac decompensation or failure. Gravid patients are prone to
hypoventilation, hypoxia, and hypercapnia because of altered pul-
monary function. The risk of embolism in the perianesthetic period
is greater for these patients. Anesthetic requirements may be
decreased, and the likelihood of a relative overdose and cardiorespi-
ratory depression is greater than in non-gravid patients. Emesis or
regurgitation and aspiration can occur if induction of anesthesia is
not immediately followed by rapid airway control.
Pharmacologic alterations induced
by pregnancy
Pregnancy affects the uptake, distribution, and disposition of anes-
thetic agents and adjuncts. The concentration of free (non-ionized,
unbound) drug in maternal plasma is affected by changes in protein
binding, placental transfer, distribution in fetal tissues, and biotrans-
formation by the maternal and fetal liver. The effect of pregnancy on

-- 973 of 1450 --

958 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
anesthetic agents has been studied [30]. The rate of barbiturate
biotransformation appears to be decreased in pregnancy [30].
Succinylcholine and procaine metabolism are decreased because of
decreased plasma cholinesterase concentration [30]. Increased renal
blood flow and glomerular filtration associated with pregnancy
favor renal drug excretion. In certain species, the minimum alveolar
concentration (MAC) is reduced for all volatile agents [31]. MAC
values are reduced in pregnant versus non-pregnant ewes but not in
canines [32]. Reduced MAC requirement coupled with a decreased
FRC results in rapid anesthetic induction requiring as little as one-
fourth to one-fifth of induction time compared to non-pregnant
patients [33]. Due to the increased rate of uptake, care must be taken
to prevent volatile agent overdose in pregnant patients.
The placenta is highly permeable to anesthetic drugs, and most
anesthetics and anesthetic adjuncts diffuse quickly across the pla-
cental barrier. Placental transfer of drugs can occur by four mecha-
nisms; the most important mechanism is simple diffusion (Fick’s law
of diffusion). Other mechanisms include facilitated diffusion (glu-
cocorticoids), active transport (norepinephrine and dopamine), and
pinocytosis [33]. Diffusion across the placenta is determined by the
drug’s molecular weight, the percentage of drug bound to maternal
plasma protein, lipid solubility, and degree of ionization. Drugs with
low molecular weight (MW < 500 Daltons [Da]), low degree of pro-
tein binding, high lipid solubility, and those that are non-ionized at
maternal blood pH diffuse rapidly across the placenta. Conversely,
drugs that are larger (MW > 1000 Da), are highly protein bound,
have low lipid solubility, and are mostly ionized generally cross the
placenta slowly [30,33,34]. Neuromuscular blocking drugs, unlike
other anesthetic and anesthetic adjunctive drugs, are highly ionized
and have low lipid solubility. Although they can be recovered from
fetal blood, they are generally regarded as having minimal placental
transfer and negligible fetal effect [31,33]. The placenta does not
appear to metabolize anesthetic drugs or adjuncts.
Physiochemical properties within the fetus and mother also
affect placental drug transfer [33]. The degree to which a drug is
ionized is determined by its pKa and the pH of the maternal body
fluids. Normal fetal pH is 0.1 unit less than that of the mother [30].
Drugs that are weak acids will be less ionized as pH decreases. For
example, thiopental is a weak acid with a pKa of 7.6. In acidemic
patients (pH < 7.4), a greater proportion of the administered dose is
in the non-ionized form. As the proportion of the non-ionized form
of the drug increases, the drug fraction that is protein bound is
reduced, thus effectively increasing the clinical response on a mil-
ligram per kg basis. As a result, it is well recognized that acidemia
decreases the required anesthetic dose of thiopental and other bar-
biturates. For weak basic drugs, lower fetal pH increases ionized
drug concentration, thereby reducing the maternal–fetal concen-
tration gradient and non-ionized drug transfer across the placenta
to the fetus. Weak basic drugs with pKa values near 7.4 such as opi-
oids and local anesthetics are more highly ionized at pH values less
than their pKa
. Local anesthetics move across the placenta but do
not easily diffuse back due to the lower pH of the fetus. Therefore,
they are found in higher concentrations in fetal tissues and plasma
compared to those of the mother because of “ion trapping.” Hence,
their effect on the mother and fetus is less on a milligram per kg
basis [30,33].
Fetal drug concentration is also affected by redistribution,
metabolism, and protein binding. Drug concentration in the umbili-
cal vein is greater than in fetal organs (brain, heart, and other vital
organs). Approximately 85% of umbilical venous blood initially
passes through the fetal liver where drugs may be sequestered or
metabolized. In addition, umbilical venous blood containing drug
enters the inferior vena cava via the ductus venosus and mixes with
drug-free blood returning from the lower extremities and pelvic vis-
cera [30,33] (Fig. 45.1). Due to these mechanisms, it appears that fetal
circulation buffers vital fetal tissues from sudden changes in drug
concentration. Drug binding to fetal proteins may also reduce free-
drug availability [30,33]. Drugs dynamically redistribute out of the
fetus into the mother as maternal plasma levels decrease, making
clinical estimation of fetal plasma concentrations difficult. Additional
variables in fetal drug concentration include slower drug metabolism
contributing to a prolonged in vivo drug presence. Toxicity can be
enhanced by fetal or maternal metabolism to more toxic metabolites
and by drug–metabolite and drug–drug interactions [34].
Administration of a fixed dose of drugs with rapidly decreasing
plasma concentration (e.g., thiopental, propofol, or succinylcho-
line) briefly exposes the fetus and placenta to a high maternal blood
drug concentration. This is in contrast to the sustained maternal
blood levels of drugs administered by continuous infusion or inha-
lation, which result in continuous placental transfer of drug to the
fetus [30,34].
Anesthesia during pregnancy
Maternal exposure to general anesthesia has potential consequences
for the unborn fetus. Fetal risks change during development and are
categorized by gestational trimester. General anesthesia during the
first trimester of pregnancy is associated with fetal teratogenesis,
spontaneous abortion, and fetal death. Anesthesia exposure during
J O
K
A 	B
M
D
E 	L
O
C
I
F
N
G
To
placenta
Superior vena cava
Left atrium
Foramen ovale
Right atrium
Right ventricle
Ductus venosus
Umbilical vein
Portal vein
Inferior vena cava
Ductus arteriosus
Pulmonary artery
Left ventricle
Aorta
Umbilical arteries
Pulmonary arteries
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
From
placenta
H
Figure 45.1 The direction of blood flow in the fetal vascular system is
indicated by arrows. The darkened vascular segments represent the
umbilical blood and its path of flow into the liver and inferior vena cava via
the ductus venosus. Blood flow through the foramen ovale and ductus
arteriosus provides a direct path to the arterial system, bypassing the lungs.
In neonates, the ductus arteriosus and foramen ovale close shortly after
birth. This functional closure redirects blood flow through the neonate’s
lungs where it is arterialized, as in the adult. The time required for
complete anatomic closure of the foramen ovale varies by species and
typically takes several months (but may require as many as 12 months in
foals).

-- 974 of 1450 --

Chapter 45: Anesthetic Considerations During Pregnancy and for the Newborn 	959
the middle trimester is generally considered the safest period of
gestation; however, spontaneous abortion and fetal death have been
reported during this period [35]. Anesthesia exposure during the
last trimester carries a risk of premature labor and fetal death. There
appears to be species variability with respect to anesthesia-
associated risk. This may be due to placental anatomy, uteroplacen-
tal perfusion, and maternal homeostasis. There does not appear
to be a specific drug-linked risk associated with increased fetal
morbidity/mortality [35].
Care must be taken to ensure that maternal physiology is main-
tained during the anesthesia episode. Critical attention to support
of maternal cardiorespiratory physiology, oxygen delivery, and
acid–base balance ensures undisturbed uteroplacental perfusion
and oxygen delivery; these are of paramount importance for
postanesthetic fetal viability. In the human literature, it is recom-
mended that NSAIDs be avoided after the first trimester to prevent
premature closure of the ductus arteriosus [36,37].
Anesthetic drugs and cesarean section
Anesthetic drugs should be carefully chosen and properly adminis-
tered to avoid excessive maternal depression and to maximize neo-
natal vigor and viability. As noted above, the specific characteristics
that make a drug an excellent anesthetic agent are also those that
facilitate rapid transplacental transfer and neonatal depression.
Therefore, it is prudent to consider that no agent should be used
unless distinctly indicated. A brief overview of anesthetic drug
classes in periparturient anesthesia follows.
Anticholinergics
Anticholinergic drugs, such as atropine and glycopyrrolate, have
been historically used to decrease salivation and inhibit excessive
vagal efferent activity that may occur when traction is applied to the
uterus [38]. Their risk-reducing value varies with species; they are
more effective in dogs and cats, with less impact in other species.
Glycopyrrolate may actually increase the viscosity of secretions via
its drying properties, resulting in viscous saliva [39]. Many expect-
ant mothers have eaten immediately before delivery. The presence
of gastric contents increases the likelihood of regurgitation, which
is enhanced by hypoxia or hypotension. The influence of anticho-
linergics upon emesis is variable [6,38]. In women, atropine has not
been shown to decrease the incidence of emesis at parturition [34].
Glycopyrrolate has been shown to be equivalent to ondansetron in
prevention of postoperative nausea and vomiting [39]. Additionally,
because glycopyrrolate does not readily cross the placenta, it does
not affect the fetus to the same extent as atropine.
Tranquilizers and sedatives
Because of their long duration of action, there is no indication for
the routine use of these agents in parturients [6,33]. They should be
restricted to markedly apprehensive or excited patients and only in
doses sufficient to induce a calming effect. Acepromazine can
induce significant maternal and fetal depression even at relatively
low doses. Diazepam and midazolam can induce neonatal depres-
sion characterized by the absence of vocalization, lethargy, hypoto-
nus, apnea, and hypothermia immediately following birth [40–42].
It has been suggested that these effects are dose related and can be
minimized by administering low doses of diazepam (< 0.14 mg/kg
IV), although no safe dose has been established in domestic ani-
mals [42]. Residual benzodiazepine-induced lethargy and muscle
relaxation in either the mother or neonate can be antagonized with
flumazenil, a specific benzodiazepine antagonist administered to
effect [43].
α2 -Adrenergic receptor agonists have significant effects on both
maternal and fetal homeostasis. Xylazine rapidly crosses the pla-
centa and induces both maternal and fetal respiratory and circula-
tory depression. When used with ketamine, xylazine produces
significant cardiopulmonary changes, resulting in decreased tissue
perfusion in healthy dogs [44]. The use of xylazine or xylazine–
ketamine combinations should be avoided in small animal patients
presented for cesarean section [45]. However, combinations of
xylazine and ketamine have often been used in mares presenting
with dystocia.
Detomidine appears to be well tolerated when administered to
pregnant mares at 20–60 μg/kg IV. Two studies demonstrated no
increase in drug-related change in uterine activity or increased inci-
dence of spontaneous abortion following repeated dosing [46,47].
Similar results have been reported in cattle [48]. Limited informa-
tion is available regarding the effect of medetomidine on pregnancy.
In dogs, there appears to be a dose-related effect on uterine muscle
activity that was documented during the parturient and immediate
post- parturient period [49]. A study in which medetomidine was
used as a premedicant in canine cesarean section reported a high
percentage of viable puppies following surgery [50]. All puppies
and bitches were prophylactically administered atipamezole follow-
ing delivery. Similar results were reported when dexmedetomidine
was used as a premedicant in canine cesarean section [51]. There
are case reports of dexmedetomidine use in human cesarean sec-
tion patients with good success [52]. Romifidine induces a transient
increase in intrauterine pressure following administration [53].
There is very little information on trazodone use in pregnancy;
one small multicenter study evaluating trazodone use in humans
during both the first trimester and throughout gestation did not
find a higher incidence of major malformations, but there may have
been an increase in spontaneous abortion [54]. There were no data
on neonatal vigor within this study. More data are available on
gabapentin; exposure both early and late in gestation resulted in
cardiac defects, increased risk of preterm birth, and increased need
for neonatal intensive care [55]. Gabapentin is minimally secreted
into milk with no side effects noted in suckling infants. Similarly,
studies of infants whose mothers were taking trazodone during
breastfeeding found very low levels within milk and few side effects
in the infants [56]. Both trazodone and gabapentin should be used
with caution during gestation and only as needed in the peripartu-
rient period.
Opioids
Opioids rapidly cross the placenta and can cause neonatal respira-
tory and neurobehavioral depression [34,57,58]. In addition, fetal
elimination may require 2–6 days. It appears that equianalgesic
doses of opioids induce an equal degree of central nervous system
depression. Therefore, choice is based on the desired duration of
opioid action. Commonly used μ-opioid receptor agonists include
morphine, fentanyl, meperidine, oxymorphone, hydromorphone,
and methadone [34]. Agents having opioid agonist–antagonist or
partial agonist activity include butorphanol and buprenorphine,
respectively. Butorphanol provides mild to moderate sedation but
less intense analgesia than a full agonist. Buprenorphine produces
mild sedation plus good to excellent analgesia.
One of the advantages of opioid agonists is that direct antagonists
are available to reverse their action. Of the antagonist agents, nalox-
one (0.04 mg/kg IV) appears to be the most effective. Naloxone is a

-- 975 of 1450 --

960 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
pure antagonist without agonist action. Nalorphine and levallor-
phan, two other antagonist agents, have opioid activity of their own
and can increase respiratory depression induced by other non-
opioid agents (e.g., barbiturates, phenothiazines, and inhalation
agents). Because all opioid antagonists rapidly cross the placenta,
maternal administration before delivery has been advocated to
reverse opioid induced neonatal depression. However, this tech-
nique deprives the mother of analgesia at the time when it is needed
most; therefore, antagonist agents should be administered directly to
neonates. Finally, because the action of naloxone is shorter than that
of most opioid agonists, renarcotization may occur as naloxone is
metabolized and excreted. Therefore, both mother and neonates
should be carefully monitored for recurring signs of narcosis after
opioid reversal with naloxone [34]. Should this occur, additional
naloxone can be given Additional information on opioids is availa-
ble in Chapter 23.
Injectable anesthetics
Intravenous propofol administration produces rapid induction of
anesthesia, suitable for intubation followed by inhalation anesthe-
sia. Propofol rapidly crosses the placenta but is rapidly cleared from
the neonatal circulation. In dogs, propofol followed by isoflurane
anesthesia resulted in newborn survival rates comparable to those
with epidural anesthesia and superior to those with general anes-
thesia induced with thiopental [59]. Cohort retrospective studies by
Moon et al. indicated that administration of propofol intravenously
followed by isoflurane resulted in good puppy vigor, vocalization,
and survival following delivery [42]. Their findings were similar to
those in a previously reported study [59]. Constant rate infusion of
propofol as a sole anesthetic agent in pregnant ewes demonstrated
maternal hemodynamics superior to those of isoflurane anesthe-
sia [60]. The uterine blood flow profile was similar in both tech-
niques. Propofol–sevoflurane anesthesia in pregnant ewes and
goats demonstrated that fetal physiology was maintained following
propofol administration, but hemodynamic indices decreased after
exposure to sevoflurane [60,61]. These studies support the use of
propofol in a balanced general anesthesia protocol for cesarean
section.
Etomidate is a short-acting non-barbiturate hypnotic. In dosages
suitable for anesthetic induction, etomidate induces rapid anesthe-
sia with minimal cardiovascular effects in dogs [62,63]. Etomidate
is rapidly redistributed and metabolized by hepatic microsomal
enzymes and by plasma esterase. Based on its rapid elimination
profile in cats, etomidate may be suitable for repeated intravenous
administration in low doses in this species [63]. However, repeated
administration of etomidate may also cause acute hemolysis, as has
been reported in dogs [64]. Etomidate frequently causes pain on
intravenous injection in non-premedicated patients [65]. In addi-
tion, myoclonus or involuntary movements can occur upon injec-
tion; these side effects can be prevented by premedication with
benzodiazepines and/or opioids; however, these drugs may exacer-
bate neonatal depression.
Alfaxalone is a widely used short-acting hypnotic used for anes-
thetic induction in companion animals. There have been a series of
reports comparing its use to propofol in cesarean section anesthe-
sia [66–70]. Several studies compare the use of either propofol or
alfaxalone in combination with inhalant (isoflurane, sevoflurane)
anesthesia. Puppy vigor immediately following delivery and two-
day survival are equal to, or better, with an alfaxalone-based proto-
col compared to a propofol-based protocol [66,69]. Greater puppy
depression and lower Apgar scores at time of delivery were noted
when alfaxalone was used as the sole anesthetic agent compared to
when it was used for induction and followed by isoflurane [68].
Dissociatives
Ketamine has been used in general anesthesia for cesarean section.
In women, doses of less than 1 mg/kg induced minimal neonatal
depression [38]. Alternatively, thiopental (2–3 mg/kg) and keta-
mine (0.5 mg/kg) have been co-administered to induce anesthesia
in parturient women [38]. Low doses of ketamine (3–5 mg/kg IV in
dogs, 2–4 mg/kg IV in cats, and 2 mg/kg IV in horses) may be used
for anesthetic induction [71,72]. Because effective induction doses
for these agents are higher in companion animals than humans,
neonatal depression is more likely to be associated with their use. A
retrospective cohort study in dogs indicated that ketamine use leads
to increased incidence of respiratory depression, apnea, decreased
vocalization, and increased mortality in newborn puppies [41,42].
For these reasons, ketamine should be used cautiously in this spe-
cies. A case report describes the use of ketamine for anesthesia in a
late-term gravid cow that required a metacarpal repair; anesthesia
was induced with 2 mg/kg ketamine IV and 0.6 mg/kg/h continu-
ous ketamine infusion (in combination with xylazine infusion and
isoflurane) and the dam delivered a healthy calf 1 month after the
procedure [73]. No data for comparative fetal viability are available
in other species.
Little information is available regarding the use of tiletamine–
zolazepam for cesarean section. Based on its pharmacologic profile,
the characteristics of this proprietary drug mixture are qualitatively
similar to those of other dissociative–benzodiazepine mixtures. In
vivo characteristics of these agents suggest that caution should be
exercised in companion animal cesarean section anesthesia because
of their rapid and extensive transplacental transfer and absence of a
specific dissociative antagonist.
Neuroleptanalgesia
The combination of opioid and tranquilizer class drugs can induce
anesthesia effectively in depressed and exhausted patients. As noted
above, both opioids and tranquilizers extensively cross the utero-
placental interface and may cause significant fetal depression. These
agents are usually used as an anesthetic supplement following fetal
removal, although they have been successfully used for induction
and maintenance prior to fetal extraction. If fetal depression is
noted after administration of these agents, sublingual or intranasal
administration of 0.4 mg/mL naloxone (10–20 μg, 1–2 drops) rap-
idly reverses opioid effects in neonates; alternatively, 0.1 mg/kg IV
or intraosseous can be administered. Continuous monitoring for
neonatal renarcotization is warranted [63].
Inhalation anesthetics
Inhalation anesthetics may be used to maintain general anesthesia.
These agents readily cross the placenta with rapid fetal and mater-
nal equilibration. The degree of neonatal depression is proportional
to the depth of anesthesia induced in the mother. Deep levels of
maternal anesthesia cause maternal hypotension, decreased uterine
blood flow, and fetal acidosis. Isoflurane, sevoflurane, and desflu-
rane are preferred because induction and recovery of mother and
neonate are more rapid. Nitrous oxide can be used to potentiate
their effects, thus decreasing the total amount of volatile agent
administered; however, this effect is less in animals compared to
humans because of the difference in the MAC of nitrous oxide. In
humans, nitrous oxide administered at 60% or less has minimal

-- 976 of 1450 --

Chapter 45: Anesthetic Considerations During Pregnancy and for the Newborn 	961
effect on fetal depression. Neonatal diffusion hypoxia does not
occur upon delivery [33,34].
Neuromuscular blocking agents
Neuromuscular blocking agents are infrequently used in veterinary
medicine during pregnancy or at parturition. These drugs cross the
placenta to a very limited extent and have little effect on neonates
when used in clinical doses. Because of this property, these drugs
can be useful in balanced anesthesia techniques for cesarean section
to facilitate rapid airway management and provide surgical site
relaxation [30,33,34]. If a neuromuscular blocking agent is selected,
atracurium and vecuronium are preferred due to their intermediate
duration of action. Long-acting agents, such as pancuronium and
doxacurium, are avoided because of their length of action com-
pared with procedure time [34]. Whenever neuromuscular block-
ing agents are administered, controlled positive-pressure ventilation
must be utilized and nondepolarizing agents should be reversed.
Guaifenesin
Guaifenesin is a centrally acting muscle relaxant used to relax skel-
etal muscle in horses, cattle, and small ruminants. Although reports
are limited, clinical impressions indicate that transplacental transfer
is minimal based on vigor of the newborn after delivery.
Local anesthetics
Local anesthetics are frequently used in combination with other
agents or as the sole anesthetic agent for regional techniques. Esters
of para-aminobenzoic acid (procaine or tetracaine) are metabolized
by maternal and fetal plasma cholinesterase (also known variably as
butyrylcholinesterase or pseudocholinesterase). Hence, there is lit-
tle accumulation of these agents in the fetus. Amide derivatives
(e.g., lidocaine, mepivacaine, bupivacaine, etidocaine, and ropiv-
acaine) are metabolized by hepatic microsomal enzymes. After
absorption from the injection site, blood levels decrease slowly but
can reach significant concentrations in the fetus. Neonatal blood
concentrations in excess of 3 μg/mL of lidocaine or mepivacaine
can cause neonatal depression at delivery. These concentrations
rarely occur after epidural administration but can occur with exces-
sive drug volumes when used for local infiltration [30].
Sympathetic blockade resulting in maternal hypotension and
decreased uteroplacental perfusion may occur after epidural injec-
tion. This can be controlled by judicious administration of IV fluids
to offset the increased capacity of the vascular system [74,75]. In
addition to IV fluids, vasopressors can be used to treat maternal
hypotension caused by sympathetic blockade. Because ephedrine
acts centrally and has minimal arterial vasoconstrictor properties
while increasing venous tone and preload, it can be used to treat
maternal hypotension, thus restoring uterine blood flow [75].
Mephentermine acts in a similar manner. Other agents with α1
-
adrenergic receptor activity increase maternal blood pressure by
increasing systemic vascular resistance. However, they may cause
uterine blood flow to decrease, and fetal deterioration often occurs.
In addition, these agents can stimulate hypertonic uterine contrac-
tions, further decreasing uteroplacental perfusion.
Supplemental agents
Antiemetics
Concerns regarding emesis or passive regurgitation immediately
following anesthesia induction have been reported in human
obstetric literature. This concern arises from recent food ingestion
coupled with delayed gastrointestinal transit time noted with
pregnancy. To reduce patient risk of regurgitation and aspiration,
several drug classes have been recommended. The recommended
drugs are targeted to modify one or more of the following: gastroe-
sophageal sphincter tone, gastric pH, downstream movement of
gastrointestinal contents, or the vomiting reflex. Currently, recom-
mendations for parturient human patients include administration
of an H 2
- receptor antagonist, non-particulate antacid, and a proki-
netic prior to anesthesia induction. Reports suggest that maropi-
tant, a central-acting antiemetic, is highly effective in reducing
emesis in dogs during the perioperative period [76]. Its application
in veterinary obstetric anesthesia is still not defined.
Inotropes and vasopressors
Inotropic and vasopressor agents may be required during general
anesthesia, especially in a physiologically compromised dam. A
meta-analysis from 2020 in humans evaluated several vasopressors
for the treatment of hypotension during cesarean section in humans
and found that norepinephrine better preserved umbilical acid–
base status compared with phenylephrine and ephedrine [74].
A previous meta-analysis demonstrated the superiority of phenyle-
phrine to ephedrine in maintenance of umbilical pH and fetal
acidosis [75]. These studies both support the use of norepineph-
rine or phenylephrine for maternal hypotension; however, norepi-
nephrine may be associated with better fetal outcomes.
Anesthetic techniques for cesarean section
Selection of an anesthetic protocol for cesarean section should pri-
oritize the safety of the mother and fetus, patient comfort, and the
veterinarian’s familiarity with the selected anesthetic drugs. A major
goal of drug selection should be to maintain maternal homeostasis
and minimize fetal depression. Fetal depression may result from
changes in placental perfusion associated with uterine contractions,
thereby increasing the risk of fetal hypoxemia, acidosis, and stress.
The veterinarian is faced with the dilemma of having to anesthetize
a physiologically compromised mother without adversely affecting
the fetus.
General anesthesia
Cesarean section anesthesia can be accomplished by either regional
or general anesthesia. General anesthesia is often selected for per-
forming cesarean sections in dogs, cats, and horses. Advantages of
general anesthesia include speed and ease of induction, reliability,
reproducibility, and control. General anesthesia provides optimum
operating conditions with relaxed immobile patients. Tracheal intu-
bation ensures control of the maternal airway, thereby preventing
aspiration of vomitus or regurgitated gastrointestinal tract contents.
In addition, it provides a route for maternal oxygen administration
and ventilation if needed. When general anesthesia is administered
and monitored properly, maternal cardiopulmonary function is
well maintained [38,72].
General anesthesia may be more appropriate than regional anes-
thesia in selected clinical situations. These include severe maternal
hypovolemia, prolonged dystocia in which the mother is exhausted
and the fetus is severely stressed, maternal cardiac disease or failure,
morbid obesity, brachycephalic dogs with upper airway obstruction,
and cases in which the mother is so aggressive or fractious as to pre-
clude regional anesthesia. Additionally, if the safety or value of the
mother is more important than that of the offspring to the client,
general anesthesia will likely allow more intensive anesthetic man-
agement of maternal problems. Finally, most veterinarians are more

-- 977 of 1450 --

962 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
confident in their ability to induce general anesthesia safely than to
use regional anesthesia techniques alone. Ideally, a combination of
general anesthesia with a local anesthetic technique is used.
General anesthesia does, however, have certain disadvantages. It
will likely produce greater neonatal depression than regional anes-
thesia. Inadequate anesthetic depth may induce maternal catechola-
mine release, which may result in hypertension and decreased
uteroplacental perfusion, leading to both maternal and fetal stress
and deterioration of cardiopulmonary function [30,41]. Loss of air-
way protective reflexes following anesthetic induction may result in
aspiration and airway management challenges if the trachea is not
properly intubated. Aspiration and inability to intubate the trachea
successfully are the leading causes of maternal mortality associated
with cesarean section in women. Fortunately, most dogs, cats, and
horses are relatively easy to intubate because of their anatomic fea-
tures. Brachycephalic breeds often pose a challenge due to anatomi-
cal abnormalities of the upper airway. Swine are relatively difficult to
intubate, and this may present a challenge to the anesthetist.
Horses
Dystocia in mares has a profound effect on the survival of foals [77–
79]. Foals are normally delivered within 20–30 min after chorioal-
lantoic membrane rupture. Few foals survive when the duration is
increased to 40 min, and none are likely to survive when the dura-
tion is 90 min or longer [78,79]. The time from chorioallantoic
rupture to delivery is significantly different in surviving versus non-
surviving foals [77,80]. This makes dystocia in mares more of an
emergency than it is for most species [78–80].
Physical examination, anesthetic induction, and delivery should
be accomplished in the shortest period possible when there is the
chance of delivering a live foal [78]. Time-consuming techniques
for anesthetic induction should be abandoned in favor of methods
that provide reliable sedation and smooth, controlled induction
with favorable recoveries. Goals for anesthesia are no different than
for performing cesarean section in other species, but with a greater
emphasis placed on rapid procedure completion. Laboring mares
are typically agitated and distressed prior to anesthetic induction;
good sedation is, therefore, important to ensure a smooth and safe
induction. Xylazine and detomidine will provide sufficient sedation
and can be reversed in the foal after delivery. Detomidine may cause
less increase in uterine tone than xylazine and has been suggested
by some as the sedative of choice in mares [47]. When butorphanol
is combined with xylazine or detomidine, reliable restraint and
analgesia occur. The dose of xylazine or detomidine can be lowered
when combined with butorphanol, minimizing potential side
effects of the α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists.
Anesthesia induction can be rapidly achieved with ketamine
and diazepam (Table 45.2). Anesthesia is then maintained with
isoflurane or sevoflurane in 100% oxygen [78]. While vaginal
delivery is attempted, the ventral abdomen is clipped and prepared
so that, if needed, cesarean section may be accomplished rapidly.
In one report, this approach to dystocia resulted in 94% of vaginal
delivery mares and 89% of cesarean section mares surviving to dis-
charge with a 42% delivery of live foals and nearly 30% of foals
surviving to discharge [81]. In this scenario, specific choice of
anesthetic agent is probably less important than the time to induc-
tion and delivery of the foal. Studies have been carried out compar-
ing the effects of isoflurane and halothane in pregnant mares, and
no marked differences in outcome were noted [82]. Less soluble
agents (such as isoflurane and sevoflurane) have the advantage
of being more rapidly cleared from foals after delivery than
halothane [83]. In pony mares premedicated with acepromazine,
butorphanol, and detomidine, induced with detomidine–ketamine,
and maintained with propofol, cardiovascular function was pre-
served in both the mare and the fetus [84]. In the field, where
equipment is not readily available for delivering inhalation anes-
thesia, a guaifenesin–ketamine–xylazine mixture has been infused
to effect for up to 1 h to maintain an adequate level of central nerv-
ous system depression [85].
Monitoring and support of an anesthetized pregnant mare are no
different than for any anesthetized horse. Care should be taken to
avoid maternal hypoxemia in order to preserve fetal oxygenation
until delivery; arterial blood gases should be assessed. Mechanical
ventilation should be considered to help offset the ventilation–
perfusion mismatching that occurs under general anesthesia.
Positive-pressure ventilation in a mare with severe abdominal dis-
tension has the potential to drastically decrease cardiac output and
to compromise perfusion of all tissues including the uterus and
placenta. Arterial blood pressure should be monitored directly
and ideally kept above a mean value of 70 mmHg by adjusting anes-
thetic depth, rate of fluid delivery, and judicious use of inotropes
and/or vasopressors when indicated.
Mares recovering from dystocia or cesarean section may have a
difficult time regaining the strength needed to stand. Special atten-
tion should be given to the condition of the recovery area. The
recovery floor should be cleaned of all obstetric lubricant and dried.
Mares should be placed on a well-padded surface and may be rope-
assisted during recovery when necessary.
Dogs and cats
Many general anesthesia techniques for cesarean section in dogs
and cats have been reported to be satisfactory (Table 45.2) [86,87].
All reported techniques have common strategies for successful
patient management, which include the following: (1) induction of
anesthesia must be smooth and rapid; (2) intubation should be
accomplished quickly, and ventilation supported to ensure adequate
oxygenation; and (3) the drugs and technique selected should
maintain fetal viability as much as possible.
As previously noted, studies have compared the outcome on
maternal safety and fetal vitality of several commonly used anesthe-
sia protocols used in cesarean section. The results of these studies
indicated that, in dogs, propofol or alfaxalone followed by isoflu-
rane anesthesia resulted in newborn survival rates comparable to
those using epidural anesthesia and superior to those with general
anesthesia induced with thiopental [41,42,67,69,70]. Sevoflurane
has also been reported to result in viable newborns when used in
cesarean section anesthesia protocols [88]. Comparable studies
have not been performed in cats; however, their maternal–fetal
anatomy and physiology support similar success with this
strategy [89].
Supplemental oxygen administration to the newborn can signifi-
cantly increase viability following surgical extraction. Supplemental
oxygen administration to the mother is not associated with a
decrease in uterine blood flow or fetal acidosis [34]. Fetal red blood
cells have a lower 2,3-diphosphoglycerate concentration than do
adult red blood cells; hence, fetal hemoglobin can carry more
oxygen at low oxygen tensions than can adult hemoglobin.
Physiologically, this is important because it ensures a higher level of
hemoglobin saturation at the normally low oxygen partial pressures
(PO2 of umbilical vein blood is 30 mmHg) to which the fetus is
exposed. Inspired oxygen concentrations of 50% or more during
general anesthesia result in more vigorous neonates because of

-- 978 of 1450 --

Chapter 45: Anesthetic Considerations During Pregnancy and for the Newborn 	963
(Continued)
Table 45.2 Selected anesthesia techniques for elective and emergency cesarean section anesthesia in common domestic species. Each case will require individual assessment
so that the most suitable protocol is chosen.
Drug or technique
Elective cesarean section 	Emergency cesarean section 	General comments
Dog 	1. Propofol 4–8 mg/kg
or
Alfaxalone 1.5–2.5 mg/kg
Isoflurane or sevoflurane
+/– Lumbosacral epidurala
Post-delivery analgesics
2. Fentanyl 3–5 μg/kg
Propofol 2–3 mg/kg
or
Alfaxalone 1–2 mg/kg
or
Etomidate 1–2 mg/kg
Isoflurane or sevoflurane
+/– Lumbosacral epidurala
Post-delivery analgesics
3. Dexmedetomidine 2 μg/kg
Propofol 2–3 mg/kg
or
Alfaxalone 1–2 mg/kg
or
Etomidate 1–2 mg/kg
Isoflurane or sevoflurane
+/– Lumbosacral epidurala
Post-delivery analgesics
1. +/– Sedation
Lumbosacral epidurala
2. Propofol 4–8 mg/kg
or
Alfaxalone 1.5–2.5 mg/kg
Isoflurane or sevoflurane
+/– Lumbosacral epidurala
Post-delivery analgesics
3. Fentanyl 3–5 μg/kg
Propofol 2–3 mg/kg
or
Alfaxalone 1–2 mg/kg
or
Etomidate 1–2 mg/kg
Isoflurane or sevoflurane
+/– Lumbosacral epidurala
Post-delivery analgesics
4. Dexmedetomidine 2 μg/kg
Propofol 2–3 mg/kg
or
Alfaxalone 1–2 mg/kg
or
Etomidate 1–2 mg/kg
Isoflurane or sevoflurane
+/– Lumbosacral epidurala
Post-delivery analgesics
Epidural patients not under general anesthesia may need to
be restrained by an assistant; induction of general anesthesia
may be required if the patient resists restraint
Preoxygenate mother if possible and administer oxygen to
neonates post-delivery
Minimal inhalant agent use until all fetuses are delivered
Reverse dexmedetomidine with sublingual atipamezole if fetal
depression is evident
Reverse fentanyl with sublingual naloxone if fetal depression
is evident
Cat 	1. Propofol 4–8 mg/kg
or
Alfaxalone 1.5–2.5 mg/kg
Isoflurane or sevoflurane
+/– Lumbosacral epidurala
Post-delivery analgesics
2. Fentanyl 3–5 μg/kg
Propofol 2–4 mg/kg
or
Alfaxalone 1–2 mg/kg
Isoflurane or sevoflurane
+/– Lumbosacral epidurala
Post-delivery analgesics
3. Ketamine 3 mg/kg
Propofol 2–4 mg/kg
or
Alfaxalone 1–2 mg/kg
Isoflurane or sevoflurane
+/– Lumbosacral epidurala
Post-delivery analgesics
1. Propofol 2–4 mg/kg
or
Alfaxalone 1–2 mg/kg
Lumbosacral epidurala
+/– Isoflurane or sevoflurane via face mask
2. Propofol 4–8 mg/kg
or
Alfaxalone 1.5–2.5 mg/kg
Isoflurane or sevoflurane
+/– Lumbosacral epidurala
Post-delivery analgesics
3. Fentanyl 3–5 μg/kg
Propofol 2–4 mg/kg
or
Alfaxalone 1–2 mg/kg
Isoflurane or sevoflurane
+/– Lumbosacral epidurala
Post-delivery analgesics
4. Ketamine 3 mg/kg
Propofol 2–4 mg/kg
or
Alfaxalone 1–2 mg/kg
Isoflurane or sevoflurane
+/– Lumbosacral epidurala
Post-delivery analgesics
Epidural patients not under general anesthesia may need to
be restrained by an assistant; induction of general anesthesia
may be required if the patient resists restraint
Preoxygenate mother if possible and administer oxygen to
neonates post-delivery
Minimal inhalant agent dose until all fetuses are delivered
Reverse fentanyl with sublingual naloxone if fetal depression
is evident
Drug or technique 	General comments
Horse 	1. +/– Xylazine 0.5 mg/kg
Guaifenesin to effect
Ketamine 2 mg/kg
Isoflurane or sevoflurane
Caudal epidural for pain management
2. Xylazine 0.8 mg/kg
Ketamine 2.2 mg/kg
Diazepam 0.08 mg/kg
Isoflurane or sevoflurane
Caudal epidural for pain management
Standing restraint and regional anesthesia is not performed in
cesarean section in horses
Postoperative pain management plan similar to that used for
colic patients

-- 979 of 1450 --

964 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
improved oxygenation [34]. Therefore, oxygen administration is
indicated regardless of the anesthetic protocol.
Tidal and minute ventilation must be critically evaluated during
the anesthetic period to avoid either hypoventilation or hyperventila-
tion. The overall effect of carbon dioxide on the fetus is not clear, but
passive hyperventilation of the mother causes hypocapnia with
decreased uterine artery blood flow [90]. Decreased placental perfu-
sion may result in fetal hypoxia, hypercapnia, and acidosis. When a
physiologically normal arterial oxygen level is present, a modest
increase in PaCO2 is well tolerated by the fetus [34]. Adequacy of ven-
tilation and oxygenation may be assessed by observing rate of respira-
tion, excursion of the chest wall and/or reservoir bag, and color of
mucous membranes, as well as monitoring hemoglobin saturation
using pulse oximetry, end-tidal CO2 using capnography, and arterial
PaO2 and PaCO2 measurement using blood gas analysis.
Maintaining hemodynamic perfusion indices is essential for the
safety and vitality of both the mother and fetus. Blood pressure
should be monitored and kept above a mean arterial pressure of
70 mmHg by adjusting anesthetic depth and rate of fluid delivery,
and by administering inotropes and vasopressors, as needed.
Regional anesthesia
Regional anesthesia techniques are well established for cesarean
section. There is increased sensitivity to, and distribution of,
local anesthetic agents during gestation and parturition. This is
due, in part, to changes in regional blood flow whereby verte-
bral venous sinuses assume an increased role in venous drain-
age compared to other veins closer to the gravid uterus.
Increased venous flow and distention results in reduced epi-
dural space volume, thereby increasing distribution of an equiv-
olume epidural injection to a greater area than in non-gravid
patients. Because of this change, the dose and/or volume of
local anesthetic for epidural or spinal anesthesia can be reduced
by approximately one-third in pregnant patients as compared
with non-parturients to achieve an equivalent distribution and
regional nerve block.
Neuraxial anesthesia (epidural or subarachnoid) has the advan-
tages of technique simplicity, minimal exposure of the fetus to
maternally administered drugs, and less intraoperative bleeding. In
addition, muscle relaxation and analgesia are optimal. Caudal spi-
nal anatomy in the lumbosacral region varies by species. The spinal
cord terminates at the level of the sixth lumbar vertebra in dogs,
reducing the risk of subarachnoid (true spinal) injection of the
anesthetic agent. The spinal cord terminates variably between L7
and mid-sacrum in cats, making subarachnoid injection a greater
possibility [89]. In swine and ruminants, the spinal cord terminates
at the mid-sacrum, making subarachnoid injection a possibility at
the lumbosacral junction.
Drug or technique 	General comments
Cattle 	1. Xylazine 10 mg
Distal paravertebral block
2. Xylazine 10 mg
Inverted L- block
3. Xylazine 10 mg
Incisional line block
4. Xylazine 10 mg
Guaifenesin to recumbency
Isoflurane or sevoflurane following intubation
Avoid recumbency with regional block
Reverse xylazine in newborns if depression is noted
Supplemental analgesia in postoperative period as warranted
Caudal epidural to decrease post-parturient “straining”
Sheep/ Goat 	1. Xylazine 0.05–0.1 mg/kg
or
Dexmedetomidine 5–20 μg/kg
Lumbosacral epidural
2. Xylazine 0.05–0.1 mg/kg
or
Dexmedetomidine 5–20 μg/kg
Incisional line block
3. Propofol 3–5 mg/kg
Isoflurane or sevoflurane following intubation
Variable and inconsistent response to opioids for pain
management
α2 - Adrenergic receptor agonists are frequently used for
supplemental analgesia
Pig 	1. Dexmedetomidine 5–20 μg/kg
or
Romifidine 60–100 μg/kg
Lumbosacral epidural
2. Dexmedetomidine 5–20 μg/kg
or
Romifidine 60–100 μg/kg
Incisional line block
3. Propofol 4–6 mg/kg
Isoflurane or sevoflurane
Will require sedation in addition to regional analgesia for
elective cesarean section in pigs
Good response to opioid analgesic agents following fetal
removal
Llama 	1. Guaifenesin to effect
Propofol 2–4 mg/kg
Isoflurane or sevoflurane following intubation
Limited reports in literature
Pain management following fetal removal
a Dog/cat lumbosacral epidural = 1 mg/kg lidocaine or 0.5 mg/kg bupivacaine + 0.1 mg/kg morphine
Table 45.2 (Continued)

-- 980 of 1450 --

Chapter 45: Anesthetic Considerations During Pregnancy and for the Newborn 	965
Disadvantages of epidural or subarachnoid anesthesia include
hypotension secondary to sympathetic blockade. Hypotension
induced by epidural anesthesia can be managed with IV fluid and
vasopressor administration. Lactated Ringer’s solution or 0.9 or
0.45% sodium chloride mixed with equal volumes of 5% dextrose
solution can be administered at approximately 20 mL/kg over
15–20 min to maintain arterial blood pressure. When hypotension
is severe (MAP < 60 mm Hg), vasopressors should be adminis-
tered [74,75]. Hypotension and visceral manipulation during the
procedure can cause nausea and vomiting. Because the mother
remains conscious, the forelimbs and head often move and may
interfere with surgery. Epidural or subarachnoid techniques cannot
be used in highly excited or fractious patients or in mares because
they panic when they are unable to stand.
The combination of an epidural with a general anesthetic tech-
nique allows for reduction in inhalant and analgesic or sedative
agent requirements resulting in a reduced incidence of hypotension,
bradycardia, and hypoventilation. In addition, the dam is provided
analgesia without the need for sedating agents in the postoperative
period allowing for more rapid nursing and discharge.
Dogs and cats
Epidural anesthesia has been successfully used in dogs and cats for
cesarean section anesthesia [77,78]. Traditionally, a short-acting
local anesthetic drug is administered at a dose of 1 mL per 3.25–
4.5 kg of body weight in the epidural space to provide surgical site
anesthesia. The local anesthetic may be supplemented with epidural
opioids and α2 -adrenergic receptor agonists to extend the postop-
erative analgesic period. Epidural morphine may also be adminis-
tered as a sole adjunct to general anesthesia to provide extended
analgesia in the postoperative period.
Pigs
Epidural and spinal techniques work well in sows. The technique is
well established and not difficult to perform (Chapter 66). When
using this technique, it is sometimes necessary to restrain the head
and forelimbs. If sows are sedated and restrained in lateral recum-
bency with the head extended, the soft palate may occlude the air-
way and the patient may suffocate. Because cesarean section in
swine is often viewed as a last-ditch effort by producers, it is often
delayed until the sow’s overall condition has severely deteriorated.
Therefore, a high percentage of sows presented for cesarean sec-
tion demonstrate hypovolemia and hypotension. Fluids can be
readily administered to sows via indwelling venous catheters
placed prior to anesthetic administration. This will restore circu-
lating volume and offset hypotension induced by neuraxial
techniques.
Cattle, sheep, and goats
Epidural anesthesia may be safely used in ewes, does, and cows.
Epidural and spinal anesthesia often induces recumbency, which is
undesirable in large ruminants. An alternative is to perform a
standing cesarean section in cattle using either a proximal or distal
paravertebral block or inverted L-block of the left flank
(Chapter 66) [91]. In cows that are in poor condition, exhausted, or
in shock, the distal technique is preferred because it does not
induce a scoliosis-like position and the cow is more likely to remain
standing throughout the procedure. Acepromazine does not cause
uterine contractions and can be used with or without xylazine for
minor sedation during standing procedures in cows [91]. In llamas
and alpacas, the majority of fetuses reside in the left uterine horn,
so the dam should be restrained in right lateral recumbency [92].
A combination of butorphanol with xylazine has been used suc-
cessfully [93]. An epidural, spinal, or local infusion technique
should be incorporated for analgesia.
Local anesthesia
An infiltrative “field block” technique may be used but has several
disadvantages compared with regional techniques. Infiltration
requires larger amounts of local anesthetic agent, which is systemi-
cally absorbed and can create fetal depression. In addition, muscle
relaxation and analgesia are not as profound or as uniform com-
pared with regional anesthesia. In many cases, field block anesthesia
is supplemented with heavy sedation or tranquilization and these
agents further contribute to maternal and fetal depression. For these
reasons, field block techniques are often abandoned for either gen-
eral or epidural anesthesia.
Care of the newborn
Following delivery, the newborn’s head and face are manually
cleared of fetal membranes, and the oropharynx is suctioned to
remove fluid. The umbilical vessels should be milked toward the
fetus to empty them of blood, clamped or ligated approximately
2–5 cm from the body wall, and severed from the placenta.
Neonates can then be gently rubbed with a towel to dry them and
stimulate breathing. Vigorous motion should be avoided to pre-
vent amniotic fluid displacement from the lungs as this is critical
for normal distribution of pulmonary surfactant in the alveoli. The
head and neck should be supported and not shaken to avoid whip-
lash and prevent cerebral injury [94]. Flow-by oxygen administra-
tion in the vicinity of the muzzle is helpful to increase heart rate
and oxygen delivery to tissues in distressed, exhausted neonates.
Reversal of opioids by sublingual or intranasal administration of
1–2 drops (10–20 μg) of naloxone is warranted in cases where opi-
oids were administered as part of the general anesthesia technique.
An oral dose of 2.5% dextrose (0.1–0.5 mL) is helpful to improve
energy substrates required for initial breathing effort in stressed
neonates. Finally, maintaining warmth is vital because hypother-
mia can occur rapidly after birth [95].
A small IV catheter may be used to intubate and deliver oxygen
in small neonates that do not begin to spontaneously breathe.
Ventilatory support can be provided by using a syringe as a ventila-
tor and three-way valve attached to an oxygen source. Oxygen is
aspirated into the syringe and the valve repositioned so that small
breaths can be given to the neonate. As a final option, doxapram can
be used to stimulate breathing in neonates. In puppies, a dosage of
1–5 mg (approximately 1–5 drops from a 20–22 gauge needle) is
topically administered onto the oral mucosa or injected intramus-
cularly or subcutaneously. In kittens, the dosage is 1–2 mg (approxi-
mately 1–2 drops from a 20–22 gauge needle). Airways must be
cleared before doxapram administration.
External thoracic compressions may be warranted if the heart
rate is slow and does not respond to support measures [95]. The use
of atropine in the neonate is controversial as neonatal bradycardia is
likely due to hypoxemia. The 2020 American Heart Association
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) guidelines for neonates do
not include the use of atropine but instead recommend epinephrine
if there is no response to basic life support measures. A rapid physi-
cal examination to identify potential genetic defects (i.e., cleft pal-
ate, chest deformity, or abdominal wall fusion) is also important to
determine viability of the neonate. Newborn puppy viability has
been correlated with umbilical vein blood lactate concentra-
tions [96]. Umbilical vein lactate levels > 5 mmol/L were correlated

-- 981 of 1450 --

966 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
with increased neonatal mortality within 48 h of delivery. Five-
minute Apgar scores have also been evaluated in puppies as a prog-
nostic indicator of early survival [97]. Puppies with scores in the
7–10 range had greater 48-h survival rates compared to those with
lower scores.
When general anesthesia is used in ruminants or horses, the oro-
pharynx can be cleared of fluid, and the trachea intubated after the
fetal head is delivered through the uterine incision. The fetus can
then be delivered and the umbilical cord severed. Because the uter-
oplacental and umbilical circulation is preserved until the airway is
secured, hypoxia is prevented. Once the fetus is delivered, ventila-
tion can be supported, if necessary, via a bag valve mask (Ambu®)
resuscitator.
After completion of surgery and recovery from anesthesia, the
newborn can be introduced to the mother. If introduction is
delayed, the neonates should be exposed briefly to the mother to
allow intake of colostrum and then kept in a warm environment
until anesthesia recovery is complete to avoid accidental crushing.
If regional anesthesia was used, newborns can be placed with their
mother as soon as the surgery is complete.
Postoperative pain management
This represents a challenge in cesarean section patients because of
concerns regarding transfer of anesthetic and analgesic drugs into
milk and its impact on neonates. This area has been extensively
studied in people and in food-producing species. Most of the cur-
rent information is from humans and cattle; however, because of
the similarity of the lactation process in all mammals, the informa-
tion may be extrapolated to other species.
Codeine, propoxyphene, and morphine are well tolerated by
newborns when used in maternal pain management, even when
repeat doses are administered over several days [98]. Meperidine
(pethidine) has been reported to cause decreased suckling behavior
and sedation when used in serial doses [98,99]. Fentanyl and sufen-
tanil are not detectable in breast milk after epidural administration
in humans [100].
NSAIDs appear to reach only limited levels in milk after mater-
nal administration. In humans, acetaminophen and aspirin are con-
sidered compatible with breastfeeding [98]. Studies evaluating
carprofen in cattle indicated that milk levels were below detectable
limits (< 0.022 μg/mL) after a single-dose administration. After
experimental induction of mastitis, carprofen was detected at low
levels (0.16 μg/mL) for 12 h following single-bolus administration
and decreased to undetectable levels (< 0.022 μg/mL) by 24 h [101].
Similar results have recently been reported in the dog [102].
Following a single dose of ketoprofen (3.3 mg/kg) in cattle, detect-
able but non- quantifiable concentrations were present in milk for
only 2 h [103]. Similar results have been reported in lactating
goats [104]. Meloxicam is approved in the European Union and
Canada for use in dairy cows [105]. Based on the evidence available,
there is no contraindication for NSAID use in postpartum dams
except where NSAIDs are contraindicated for other reasons (e.g.,
hypovolemia, renal disease). NSAID transfer from the dam to neo-
nates is minimal and clinically insignificant [102,105].
Interest in locoregional pain control for post-cesarean section
patients has gained momentum with the introduction of bupiv-
acaine liposome injectable suspension (BLIS). In humans, BLIS is
labeled for postoperative anesthesia in any surgical site [106]. It
is used for postoperative cesarean section analgesia with the
goals of extended duration pain control and reduced opioid
requirement [106–109]. A randomized controlled clinical study
found that BLIS wound infusion decreased incisional pain, motion
pain, and opioid consumption for the first 48 h following sur-
gery [110]. Another study evaluated BLIS use in transversus
abdominis plane (TAP) block with and without intrathecal mor-
phine for elective cesarean section in women. The combination of a
BLIS TAP block and intrathecal morphine was superior for pain
control at 24, 48, and 72 h compared to TAP block or intrathecal
morphine alone [111]. Currently, BLIS is labeled for orthopedic
procedures and onychectomy in companion animals [112]. Off-
label use for abdominal and thoracic surgery in small animal
patients is common in clinical practice.
Local anesthetic drugs (e.g., lidocaine and bupivacaine) and
first-generation bupivacaine metabolites are excreted in milk
after epidural administration in humans. Although these agents
are detectable in milk, their influence on neonates is negligible
based on maximum Apgar (activity, pulse, grimace, appearance,
and respiration) scores after delivery [113]. A prospective cohort
study evaluating the level of bupivacaine in breast milk after the
use of BLIS for postoperative TAP blocks following elective cesar-
ean sections found that bupivacaine was present in all plasma and
milk samples. However, it was calculated that neonates would
have consumed less than 1% of the maternal dose at any time
point during the 96 hour study and this was not considered to be
of clinical concern [114].
Based on current evidence, it appears that most commonly used
analgesic drug classes may be safely administered during the lacta-
tion period without adverse effects on newborns.
References
1 Dawes GS. Foetal and Neonatal Physiology: Comparative Study of the Changes at
Birth. Chicago, IL: Year Book Medical, 1968: 15.
2 Shnider SM. The physiology of pregnancy. In: Annual Refresher Course Lectures
American Society of Anesthesiologists. 1978: 1251–1258.
3 Kerr MG. Cardiovascular dynamics in pregnancy and labor. Br Med Bull 1968;
24(1): 19–24.
4 Ueland K, Parer JT. Effects of estrogens on the cardiovascular system of the ewe. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 1966; 96(3): 400–406.
5 Ueland K, Hansen JM. Maternal cardiovascular dynamics. II. Posture and uterine
contractions. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1969; 103(1): 1–7.
6 James EM. Physiologic changes during pregnancy. In: Annual Refresher
Course American Society of Anesthesiologists. 1980: 1251–1255.
7 Humphries A, Mirjalili SA, Tarr GP, et al. Hemodynamic changes in women with symp-
toms of supine hypotensive syndrome. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 2019; 99: 631–636.
8 Pei- Shan Zhao. Supine hypotensive syndrome: a comprehensive review of litera-
ture. Transl Perioper & Pain Med 2014; 1(2): 22–26.
9 Scott DB. Inferior vena caval occlusion in late pregnancy. Clin Anesth 1974; 10(2):
37–50.
10 Stoneham AE, Graham J, Rozanski EA, et al. Pregnancy-associated congestive heart
failure in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2006; 42(6): 457–461.
11 Lipton B, Hershey SC, Baez S. Compatibility of oxytocics with anesthetic agents.
JAMA 1962; 179(6): 410–416.
12 Katz D, Beilin Y. Disorders of coagulation in pregnancy. Br J Anaesth 2015;
115(Suppl 2): ii75–ii88.
13 LoMauro A, Aliverti A. Respiratory physiology of pregnancy: physiology master-
class. Breathe (Sheff) 2015; 11(4): 297–301.
14 Ambros B, Carrozzo MV, Jones T. Desaturation times between dogs preoxygenated
via face mask or flow-by technique before induction of anesthesia. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2018; 45(4): 452–458.
15 Thomas C, Lumb AB. Physiology of haemoglobin. Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care
& Pain 2012; 12: 251–256.
16 Benner A, Patel AK, Singh K, et al. Physiology, Bohr Effect. StatPearls 2022 PMID:
30252284.
17 Griffiths SK, Campbell JP. Placental structure, function and drug transfer. Contin
Educ Anaesth Crit Care & Pain 2015; 15: 84–89.
18 Anagnostou, TL, Savvas I, Kazakos GM, et al. The effect of the stage of the ovarian
cycle (anoestrus or dioestrus) and of pregnancy on the incidence of gastro-

-- 982 of 1450 --

Chapter 45: Anesthetic Considerations During Pregnancy and for the Newborn 	967
oesophageal reflux in dogs undergoing ovariohysterectomy. Vet Anaesth Analg
2015; 42(5): 502–511.
19 Paddleford RR. Anesthesia for cesarean section in the dog. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 1992; 22(2): 481–484.
20 Resch BE, Ducza E, Gáspár R, et al. Role of adrenergic receptor subtypes in the
control of human placental blood vessels. Mol Reprod Dev 2003; 66(2): 166–171.
21 Chooi C, Cox JJ, Lumb RS, et al. Techniques for preventing hypotension during
spinal anaesthesia for caesarean section. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017; 8(8):
CD002251.
22 Resch BE, Ducza E, Gáspár R, et al. Role of adrenergic receptor subtypes in the
control of human placental blood vessels. Mol Reprod Dev 2003; 66(2): 166–171.
23 Hoffmann B. Hormonal control of pregnancy and parturition in the dog. In:
Proceedings of the WSAVA. 2004: 1–4.
24 Concannon PW. Understanding and monitoring canine pregnancy. In: Proceedings
of the WSAVA. 2005: 1–7.
25 Verhage HG, Beamer NB, Brenner RM. Plasma levels of estradiol and progesterone
in the cat during polyestrus, pregnancy and pseudopregnancy. Biol Reprod 1976;
14(5): 579–585.
26 Root-Kustriz MV. Clinical management of pregnancy in cats. Theriogenology 2006;
66(1): 145–150.
27 Taverne M, Noakes DE. Parturition and the care of parturient animals and the new-
born. In: Noakes DE, Parkinson TJ, England GCW, eds. Veterinary Reproduction
and Obstetrics, 10th edn. St. Louis, MO: WB Saunders, 2018: 115–147.
28 Kelleman AA. Equine pregnancy and clinical applied physiology. In: Proceedings of
the American Association of Equine Practitioners. 2013; 59: 350–358.
29 Conley AJ. Review of the reproductive endocrinology of the pregnant and parturi-
ent mare. Theriogenology. 2016; 86(1): 355–365.
30 Alper MH. Perinatal pharmacology. In: Annual Refresher Course American Society
of Anesthesiologists. 1979: 1261–1267.
31 Palahniuk RJ, Shnider SM, Eger EI. Pregnancy decreases the requirement for
inhaled anesthetic agents. Anesthesiology 1974; 41(1): 82–83.
32 Kostakis C, Anagnostou T, Savvas I, et al. The effect of progesterone on the anes-
thetic and analgesic requirements for ovariohysterectomy in the dog. J Hel Vet Med
Soc 2019; 70(3): 1717–1726.
33 Einster M. Perinatal pharmacology. In: Annual Refresher Course Lectures American
Society of Anesthesiologists. 1980: 1261–1264.
34 Gutsche B. Perinatal pharmacology. In: Annual Refresher Course American Society
of Anesthesiologists. 1978: 1291–1299.
35 Rosen MA, Weiskopf RB. Management of anesthesia for the pregnant surgical
patient. Anesthesiology 1999; 91: 1159–1164.
36 Theis JCW. Acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) and non-steroidal drugs (NSAIDS) during
pregnancy: are they safe? Can Fam Physician 1996; 42: 2347–2349.
37 Malm H, Borisch C. Analgesics, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs),
muscle relaxants, and antigout medications. In: Schaefer C, Peters P, Miller R, eds.
Drugs During Pregnancy and Lactation Treatment Options and Risk Assessment, 3rd
edn. London, UK: Elsevier, 2015: 27–58.
38 Datta S, Alper MH. Anesthesia for cesarean section. Anesthesiology 1980; 53(2):
142–160.
39 Jain R, Sharma R. A comparative study of effects of glycopyrrolate and ondansetron
on nausea and vomiting in cesarean section under spinal anesthesia. Anesth Essays
Res 2015; 9(3): 348–352.
40 Moon PF, Erb HN, Ludders JW. Perioperative management and mortality rates of
dogs undergoing cesarean section in the United States and Canada. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 1998; 213(3): 365–369.
41 Moon P, Erb H, Ludders J, et al. Perioperative risk factors for puppies delivered by
cesarean section in the United States and Canada. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2000;
36(4): 359–368.
42 Moon-Massat PF, Erb HN. Perioperative factors associated with puppy vigor after
delivery by cesarean section. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2002; 38(1): 90–96.
43 Tranquilli WJ, Lemke KA, Williams LL, et al. Flumazenil efficacy in reversing diaz-
epam or midazolam overdose in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1992; 19: 65–68.
44 McDonnell W, Van Corder I. Cardiopulmonary effects of xylazine/ketamine in
dogs [Abstract]. In: Annual Scientific Meeting of the American College of Veterinary
Anesthesiologists, Las Vegas, NV, 1982.
45 Ryan SD, Wagner AE. Cesarean section in dogs: anesthetic management. Compend
Contin Educ Pract Vet 2006; 28(1): 44–45.
46 Terttu K, Oijala M. The effect of detomidine (Domosedan) on the maintenance of
equine pregnancy and foetal development: ten cases. Equine Vet J 1988; 20(5):
323–326.
47 Jedruch J, Gajewski Z, Kuussaari J. The effect of detomidine hydrochloride on the
electrical activity of the uterus in pregnant mares. Acta Vet Scand 1989; 30(3):
307–311.
48 Pyorala E, Koppinen J, Vainio O, et al. Detomidine in pregnant cows. Nord Vet Med
1986; 38(4): 237–240.
49 Jedruch J, Gajewski Z, Ratajska-Michalczak K. Uterine motor responses to an alpha
2-adrenergic agonist medetomidine hydrochloride in the bitches during the end of
gestation and the post-partum period. Acta Vet Scand Suppl 1989; 85: 129–134.
50 De Cramer KGM, Joubert KE, Nöthling JO. Puppy survival and vigor associated
with the use of low dose medetomidine premedication, propofol induction and
maintenance of anesthesia using sevoflurane gas-inhalation for cesarean section in
the bitch. Theriogenology 2017; 96: 10–15.
51 Groppetti D, Di Cesare F, Pecile A, et al. Maternal and neonatal wellbeing during
elective C-section induced with a combination of propofol and dexmedetomidine:
how effective is the placental barrier in dogs? Theriogenology 2019; 129: 90–98.
52 El-Tahan MR, Mowafi HA, Al Sheikh IH, et al. Efficacy of dexmedetomidine in
suppressing cardiovascular and hormonal responses to general anaesthesia for
cesarean delivery: a dose-response study. Int J Obstet Anesth 2012; 21(3):
222–229.
53 Schatzmann U, Josseck H, Stauffer J-L, et al. Effects of α2-agonists on intrauterine
pressure and sedation in horses: comparison between detomidine, romifidine and
xylazine. Zentralbl Veterinarmed A 1994; 41(7): 523–529.
54 Einarson A, Bonari L, Voyer- Lavigne S, et al. A multicentre prospective controlled
study to determine the safety of trazodone and nefazodone use during pregnancy.
Can J Psychiatry 2003; 48(2): 106–110.
55 Patomo E, Hernandez-Diaz S, Huybrechts KF, et al. Gabapentin in pregnancy and
the risk of adverse neonatal and maternal outcomes: a population-based cohort
study nested in the US Medicaid Analytic eXtract dataset. PLoS Med 2020; 17(9):
e1003322.
56 Davanzo R, Dal Bo S, Bua J, et al. Antiepileptic drugs and breastfeeding. Ital J
Pediatr 2013; 39: 50.
57 Palahniuk RJ. Obstetric anesthesia in the healthy parturient. In: Annual Refresher
Course American Society of Anesthesiologists. 1979: 1271–1274.
58 Hodgkinson R, Bhatt M, Wang CN. Double-blind comparison of the neurobehav-
iour of neonates following the administration of different doses of meperidine to
the mother. Can Anaesth Soc J 1978; 25(5): 405–411.
59 Funkquist PM, Nyman GC, Lofgren AJ, et al. Use of propofol-isoflurane as an anes-
thetic regimen for cesarean section in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1997; 211(3):
313–317.
60 Gaynor JS, Wertz EM, Alvis M, et al. A comparison of the haemodynamic effects of
propofol and isoflurane in pregnant ewes. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1998; 21(1):
69–73.
61 Setoyama K, Shinzato T, Misumi K, et al. Effects of propofol–sevoflurane anesthesia
on the maternal and fetal hemodynamics blood gases, and uterine activity in preg-
nant goats. J Vet Med Sci 2003; 65(10): 1075–1081.
62 Sams L, Braun C, Allman D, et al. A comparison of the effects of propofol and eto-
midate on the induction of anesthesia and on cardiopulmonary parameters in dogs.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35(6): 488–494.
63 Muir WW, Swanson CR. Principles, techniques, and complications of feline anes-
thesia and chemical restraint. In: Sherding R, ed. The Cat: Diseases and Clinical
Management. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone, 1989: 81–116.
64 Ko JCH, Thurmon JC, Benson GJ, et al. Acute haemolysis associated with
etomidate-propylene glycol infusion in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 1993; 20(2):
92–94.
65 Niedermirtl F, Eberhardt M, Namer B, et al. Etomidate and propylene glycol acti-
vate nociceptive TRP ion channels. Mol Pain 2018; 14: 1744806918811699.
66 Doebeli A, Michel E, Bettschart R, et al. Apgar score after induction of anesthesia
for canine cesarean section with alfaxalone versus propofol. Theriogenology 2013;
80(8): 850–854.
67 Metcalfe S, Hulands-Nave A, Bell M, et al. Multicentre, randomised clinical trial
evaluating the efficacy and safety of alfaxalone administered to bitches for induc-
tion of anaesthesia prior to cesarean section. Aust Vet J 2014; 92(9): 333–338.
68 Conde Ruiz C, Del Carro AP, Rosset E, et al. Alfaxalone for total intravenous anaes-
thesia in bitches undergoing elective caesarean section and its effects on puppies: a
randomized clinical trial. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43(3): 281–290.
69 Melandri M, Alonge S, Peric T, et al. Effects of alfaxalone or propofol on giant-
breed dog neonates’ viability during elective caesarean sections. Animals 2019;
9(11): 962.
70 Haythornthwaite B. Comparison of the safety of alfaxalone and propofol as anaes-
thetic induction agents in bitches undergoing C-section. Vet Evid 2020; 5(3).
71 Bidwell LA. Anesthesia for dystocia and anesthesia of the equine neonate. Vet Clin
North Am Equine Pract 2013; 29(1): 215–222.
72 Rankin D. Neonatal anesthesia. In: Greene SA, ed. Veterinary Anesthesia and Pain
Management Secrets. Philadelphia, PA: Hanley & Belfus, 2002: 229–233.
73 Martin Jurado O, Jud R, Muggli E, et al. Balanced anaesthetic approach in a late-
term gravid cow undergoing metacarpal fracture repair. Case Rep Vet 2011; 743827:
1–5.
74 Singh PM, Singh NP, Reschke M, et al. Vasopressor drugs for the prevention and
treatment of hypotension during neuraxial anaesthesia for Cesarean delivery: a

-- 983 of 1450 --

968 	Section 5: Physiology and Anesthetic Management
Bayesian network meta-analysis of fetal and maternal outcomes. Br J Anaesth 2020;
124(3): e95–e107.
75 Xu C, Liu S, Huang Y, et al. Phenylephrine vs. ephedrine in cesarean delivery under
spinal anesthesia: a systematic literature review and meta-analysis. Int J Surg 2018;
60: 48–59.
76 Hay Kraus BL. Efficacy of maropitant in preventing vomiting in dogs premedicated
with hydromorphone. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40(1): 28–34.
77 Youngquist RS. Equine obstetrics. In: Morrow DA, ed. Current Therapy in
Theriogenology, 2nd edn. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders, 1986: 693–699.
78 Byron CR, Embertson RM, Bernard WV, et al. Dystocia in a referral hospital set-
ting: approach and results. Equine Vet J 2010; 35(1): 82–85.
79 Embertson RM. Dystocia and caesarean sections: the importance of duration and
good judgment. Equine Vet J 1999; 31(3): 179–180.
80 Freeman DE, Hungerford LL, Schaeffer D, et al. Cesarean section and other meth-
ods for assisted delivery: comparison of effects on mare mortality and complica-
tions. Equine Vet J 1999; 31(3): 203–207.
81 Abernathy-Young KK, LeBlanc MM, Embertson RM, et al. Survival rates of mares
and foals and postoperative complications and fertility of mares after cesarean sec-
tion: 95 cases (1986–2000). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2012; 241(7): 927–934.
82 Daunt DA, Steffey EP, Pascoe JR. Actions of isoflurane and halothane in pregnant
mares. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992; 201(9): 1367–1374.
83 Wilson DV. Anesthesia and sedation for late-term mares. Vet Clin North Am Equine
Pract 1994; 10: 219–236.
84 Taylor PM, White KL, Fowden AL, et al. Propofol anaesthesia for surgery in late
gestation pony mares. Vet Anaesth Analg 2001; 28(4): 177–187.
85 Lin HC, Wallace RL, Harrison IW, et al. A case report on the use of guaifenesin–
ketamine–xylazine anesthesia for equine dystocia. Cornell Vet 1994; 84(1): 61–66.
86 Gilson SD. Cesarean section. In: Slatter D, ed. Slatter’s Textbook of Small Animal
Surgery, 3rd edn. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Science, 2003; 2: 1517–1520.
87 Ryan SD, Wagner AE. Cesarean section in dogs: anesthetic management. Compend
Contin Educ Pract Vet 2006; 28(1): 44–45.
88 Vilar JM, Batista M, Perez R, et al. Comparison of three anesthetic protocols for the
elective cesarean section in the dog: effects on the bitch and the newborn puppies.
Anim Reprod Sci 2018; 190: 53–62.
89 Hall LW, Taylor PM. Anaesthesia of the Cat. London, UK: Baillière Tindall, 1994.
90 Behrman RE, Parer JT, Novy MJ. Acute maternal respiratory alkalosis (hyperventi-
lation) in the pregnant rhesus monkey. Pediatr Res 1967; 1: 354–1363.
91 Seddighi R, Dougherty T. Field sedation and anesthesia of ruminants. Vet Clin
North Am Food Animal Pract 2016; 32(3): 553–570.
92 Ratto M, Urra F, Silva M. Laterality of ovulation and presence of the embryo do not
affect uterine horn blood flow during the first month of gestation in llamas. Front
Vet Sci 2020; 7: 598117.
93 Vermunt JJ, Parkinson TJ, Noakes DE. Defects of presentation, position and pos-
ture in livestock: delivery by cesarean hysterotomy. In: Noakes DE, Parkinson TJ,
England GCW, eds. Veterinary Reproduction and Obstetrics, 10th edn. St. Louis,
MO: WB Saunders, 2018: 291–314.
94 Goericke-Pesch S, Wehrend A. New method for removing mucus from the upper
respiratory tract of newborn puppies following cesarean section. Vet Rec 2012;
170(11): 289.
95 Traas AM. Resuscitation of canine and feline neonates. Theriogenology 2008; 70(3):
343–348.
96 Groppetti D, Pecile A, Del Carro AP, et al. Evaluation of newborn canine viability
by means of umbilical vein lactate measurement, Apgar score and uterine tocody-
namometry. Theriogenology 2010; 74(7): 1187–1196.
97 Veronesi MC, Panzani S, Faustini M, et al. An Apgar scoring system for routine
assessment of newborn puppy viability and short-term survival prognosis.
Theriogenology 2009; 72(3): 401–407.
98 Bar-Oz B, Bulkowstein M, Benyamini L, et al. Use of antibiotic and analgesic
drugs during lactation. Drug Saf 2003; 26(13): 925–935.
99 Wittels B, Glosten B, Faure EAM, et al. Postcesarean analgesia with both epidural
morphine and intravenous patient-controlled analgesia. Anesth Analg 1997; 85(3):
600–606.
100 Madej TH, Strunin L. Comparison of epidural fentanyl with sufentanil.
Anaesthesia 1987; 42(11): 1156–1161.
101 Lohuis JACM, Werven T, Brand A, et al. Pharmacodynamics and pharmacoki-
netics of carprofen, a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug, in healthy cows
and cows with Escherichia coli endotoxin-induced mastitis. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
1991; 14(3): 219–229.
102 Ferrari D, Lundgren S, Holmberg J, et al. Concentration of carprofen in the milk
of lactating bitches after cesarean section and during inflammatory conditions.
Theriogenology 2022; 181: 59–68.
103 De Graves FJ, Riddell MG, Schumacher J. Ketoprofen concentrations in plasma
and milk after intravenous administration in dairy cattle. Am J Vet Res 1996;
57(7): 1031–1034.
104 Musser JMB, Anderson KL, Tyczkowska KL. Pharmacokinetic parameters and
milk concentrations of ketoprofen after administration as a single intravenous
bolus dose to lactating goats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1998; 21(5): 358–363.
105 Warner R, Ydstie JA, Wulf LW, et al. Comparative pharmacokinetics of
meloxicam between healthy postpartum vs. mid-lactation dairy cattle. Front Vet
Sci 2020; 7: 548.
106 University of Illinois Chicago Monthly FAQs. What Efficacy Supports the Use
of Liposomal Bupivacaine for post-cesarean pain control? August 2020.
https://dig.pharmacy.uic.edu/faqs/2020- 2/august- 2020- faqs/what- efficacy-
supports- the- use-of-liposomal-bupivacaine-for-post-cesarean-pain-control/
(accessed May 2023).
107 Prabhu M, Clapp MA, McQuaid-Hanson E, et al. Liposomal bupivacaine block at
the time of cesarean delivery to decrease postoperative pain. Obstet Gynecol 2018;
132(1): 70–78.
108 United States National Library of Medicine, ClinicalTrials.gov. Efficacy and Safety
of EXPAREL versus Standard of Care (SoC) in Subjects Undergoing Elective
Cesarean Section (CHOICE). January 2020. www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT03853694 (accessed May 2023).
109 Pacira Bioscience News Release. EXPAREL Achieves Primary and Key Secondary
Endpoints in Phase 4 CHOICE Study in Cesarean Section Patients, January 2020.
www.globenewswire.com/en/news-release/2020/01/07/1967140/0/en/EXPAREL-
Achieves-Primary-and-Key-Secondary-Endpoints-in-Phase-4-CHOICE-Study-
in- Cesarean-Section-Patients.html (accessed May 2023).
110 United States National Library of Medicine, ClinicalTrials.gov. Evaluate the Safety
and Efficacy of EXPAREL When Administered via Infiltration into the TAP vs.
Bupivacaine Alone in Subjects Undergoing Elective C-Sections (C-Section). April
2019. www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03176459 (accessed May 2023).
111 Habib AS, Nedeljkovic SS, Horn J-L, et al. Randomized trial of transversus
abdominis plane block with liposomal bupivacaine after cesarean delivery with or
without intrathecal morphine. J Clin Anesth 2021; 75: 110527.
112 Nocita® Product Website. www.elanco.us/products-services/dogs/nocita (accessed
May 2023).
113 Ortega D, Viviand X, Lorec AM, et al. Excretion of lidocaine and bupivacaine in
breast milk following epidural anesthesia for cesarean delivery. Acta Anaesthesiol
Scand 1999; 43(4): 394–397.
114 Mustafa HJ, Wong HL, Al-Kofahi M, et al. Bupivacaine pharmacokinetics and
breast milk excretion of liposomal bupivacaine administered after cesarean birth.
Obstet Gynecol 2020; 136(1): 70–76.

-- 984 of 1450 --

SECTION 6
Nociception and Pain

-- 985 of 1450 --



-- 986 of 1450 --

971
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of Lumb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
Pain is a complex, multidimensional experience involving sensory
and affective components. In layperson terms, “pain is not just
about how it feels, but how it makes you feel,” and it is the unpleas-
ant feelings that cause the suffering we associate with pain. Pain is a
uniquely individual experience in humans, the pain that one indi-
vidual feels associated with an injury may differ greatly from that
experienced by another, both in its intensity and in how it is per-
ceived and felt. This is evidenced from almost every clinical trial
report of a new analgesic regimen, even when confounding factors
are well controlled.
Pain is officially defined by the International Association for the
Study of Pain (IASP) as an unpleasant sensory and emotional experi-
ence associated with, or resembling that associated with, actual or
potential tissue damage. The definition is expanded upon with the
addition of six key notes and etymology of the word pain for further
context [1]. Furthermore, the nature of pain is variable across many
situations. The stories of pain experienced in traumatic situations
clearly illustrate that the time course of pain and its impact on our
feelings and how we behave are not directly linked in time. This is
well explored by Patrick Wall in Pain: The Science of Suffering [2].
Among many illustrations of the complexities of pain, he describes
the experience of Harry Beecher, a young medical officer treating
wounded troops admitted to a hospital on the beachhead at Anzio
in 1944 during the Second World War. Seriously wounded soldiers
admitted to the hospital over a period of 4 months were asked “are
you in pain; do you want something for it.” The answer was “no” to
both questions in 70% of cases. Later, after the War, he asked
the same two questions of a group of age-matched men who had
undergone surgery at the Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston
and 70% answered “yes” to both questions. He concluded that
something about the context in which tissue damage occurred
46 Physiology and Pathophysiology of Pain
Kate L. White
School of Veterinary Medicine and Science, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
Chapter contents
Introduction, 971
Receipt, encoding, and transmission of nociceptive information, 972
Biology of sensory transduction, 972
Sensitization, 972
Initiation of a generator potential, 973
Transmission of the action potential, 973
Anatomy of the dorsal horn, 973
Pharmacology of descending controls, 976
Norepinephrine, 976
Serotonin (5-HT), 976
Dopamine, 976
The role of the opioids, 976
Endocannabinoids, 977
GABA and glycine, 977
Tonic control, 977
The spino-bulbo- spinal loop, 977
Models of nociception and analgesic testing, 977
Limitations of current animal models, 978
Experimental animal (subject), 978
Nociceptive assay, 978
Biomarkers, 978
Translational pain models, 978
Nociceptive and pain assays, 978
Phasic pain tests, 978
Stimulus modalities, 979
Site of stimulus application, 979
Outcome measures, 979
Behavior, 979
Neurophysiologic endpoints, 979
Ethical considerations, 983
Maximum stimulus intensity, 984
Measurement of nociceptive withdrawal thresholds in companion
animals, 984
Pain models – tonic tests, 984
Induced pain models, 985
Behavior, 985
Abdominal muscle contraction, 990
Physiologic responses, 990
Neuronal activity, 990
Naturally occurring disease models, 990
Recent trends in pain evaluation in rodents, 990
Place preference paradigm, 990
Operant response paradigms, 990
Assessment of spontaneous behaviors, 991
Facial expression, 991
References, 991

-- 987 of 1450 --

972 	Section 6: Nociception and Pain
influenced the degree of pain suffered. The lack of pain in the early
time course of some traumatic injuries is often followed by pain
reports within 24 hours; pain is rarely absent over time. The well-
known phenomenon of phantom limb pain reveals the contrary
position – in a large percentage of people who have amputations,
pain is present chronically in the area of the amputated limb,
although healing is complete. Clearly, the onset of disease and pain
as a consequence of this is less dramatic and immediate than in the
traumatic situations described above and reflects the more com-
mon triggers and causes of pain in humans.
The nature of pain is equally complex in animals, although all
aspects of its experience and expression are not likely to be identi-
cal. The physiology and pathophysiology of pain are remarkably
similar and well conserved across mammalian species, and the
capacity of animals to suffer as sentient creatures is well established
and enshrined in law in many countries.
Receipt, encoding, and transmission
of nociceptive information
Biology of sensory transduction
The majority of pain experiences stem from activity in nociceptive
primary afferent (sensory) neurons caused by thermal, mechanical,
or/and chemical stimuli. The membrane of the peripheral terminal
is populated with transduction proteins capable of responding to
the stimuli. Transduction is defined as the process where a harmful
stimulus is converted into an electrical signal [3–6]. The transduc-
ers or ionotropic receptors can crudely be described by the type and
origin of stimulus (mechanical, thermal, and chemical), their tissue
type association, and whether they are extrinsic or intrinsic to the
primary afferent. However, thereafter the classification breaks
down because these transducers lack a single criterion to reliably
identify them [7,8]. Additionally, as a population they share ana-
tomical, biochemical, physical, and functional heterogeneity, which
may have hindered efficacy of therapy and contributed to a failure
of translation of preclinical data to clinical use.
So, for example, a selection of the mechanosensory and ther-
mosensory transduction channels in mammalian skin is outlined
in Table 46.1. The activators and modality of the channels is char-
acterized in the table but in vivo the activator may also initiate
other types of cells to release chemicals and the functional implica-
tions of these concurrent events are still to be properly understood.
This area of research is rapidly expanding, and the polymodality of
receptors makes classification challenging. Chemical or chemo
tranducers are well characterized, numerous, and can respond to
exogenous and endogenous compounds. The direct form of chem-
otransducer is an ion channel that has a binding site for a ligand;
also known as ionotropic receptors. An indirect form known
as a metabotropic receptor also exists, which is slower, with the
chemotransduction driven by an intracellular signaling cascade [9];
see below.
The cloning of the transient receptor potential cation vanilloid
subfamily member 1 (TRPV1) was pivotal not only in furthering
the understanding of chemotransduction in nociceptive afferents,
but also in thermotransduction [10,11]. Other mammalian tran-
sient receptor potential (TRP) family receptors, TRP subfamily
ankyrin (TRPA), and TRP subfamily melastatin (TRPM), share
a thermotransduction role with a number of the two-pore potas-
sium channels (K2P) [12,13], as well as the Nav
1.8 channel [14].
Despite the overwhelming evidence that mechanosensation is the
most common component of somatosensation, it is the least well
understood. The transducers known to play a role in mammalian
mechanotransduction include the Piezo channels, TRPA1 and
TRPV4, transient Ca2+ channels, and at least three K2P chan-
nels [15–20]. There will be overlap of the contribution of the mech-
anosensitive properties with the chemosensitive properties as
chemicals are released from cells in response to mechanical stimuli.
This overlap and lack of transducer specificity makes interpretation
from intact preparations difficult.
Sensitization
The definition of sensitization is a decreased threshold for response,
and/or can also be characterized by an increased response to a
suprathreshold stimulus. Additionally, an increase in spontaneous
activity can occur in the nociceptors, and an increase in receptor
field size in the dorsal horn can be detected [21,22]. Peripheral sen-
sitization refers to an increased responsiveness in the nociceptive
neurons in the periphery, whereas central sensitization refers to an
increased responsiveness of nociceptive neurons in the central
nervous system (CNS) to their normal or subthreshold afferent
input. It is within these spinal neurons that “wind-up” (the progres-
sive repeated stimulation of C fibers) occurs [23,24]. All primary
afferents release glutamate, and the three inotropic receptors for
glutamate (N-methyl-D- aspartate [NMDA], α-amino-3- hydroxy-
5- methyl- 4- isoxazoleproprionic acid [AMPA], and kainate) are
present in the dorsal horn. Wind-up can be considered a product of
the temporal summation of NMDA and neurokinin-1 (NK1
)
receptor-mediated cumulative depolarizations caused by primary
afferent release of glutamate and the excitatory neuropeptide sub-
stance P, respectively [25–27]. Temporal summation describes an
increased perception of pain in response to repetitive painful stimuli.
Sensitization is a neurophysiological construct that can only
definitively be determined if both the neural input and output are
known. Clinically, the term sensitization is inferred in cases of
reported allodynia (pain due to a stimulus that would not normally
provoke pain) and hyperalgesia (increased pain from a stimulus
that normally provokes pain). Both these terms do not infer a
mechanism per se [28,29].
In inflammatory states, a large number of endogenous factors
released in the vicinity of the free endings of the nociceptors can
cause sensitization [25]. The nociceptors express characteristic
patterns of the different inflammatory mediator receptors; gua-
nine nucleotide binding protein- (G- protein) coupled receptors
(GPCRs), ligand-gated ion channels, tyrosine kinase, or cytokine
receptors in response to the inflammation. These indirect forms
of chemotransducers known as metabotropic receptors operate
more slowly (compared to the inotropic receptors), with the chem-
otransduction driven by an intracellular signaling cascade [9]. The
commonest example of this metabotropic receptor is the GPCR,
which includes the μ-, κ-, and δ-opioid receptors, which can be tar-
geted for pain relief [30]. There is plentiful evidence of chemicals
being released from thermally and mechanically stimulated tissue
too, making this an overlapping and complicated area of study that
is being fervently researched. There is an ever-increasing list of
metabotropic receptors in the sensory neurons. These include
receptors for cytokines, chemokines, and neurotrophins, albeit the
number normally active is small, including those for bradykinin (B 1
and B 2
) [31], histamine (H1 ) [32], ATP [33,34], endothelin-1 [35],
proteases (PAR-2) [36], and prostacyclin (PGI 2
) [37]. This area of
study is further complicated by the fact that a neuron can express
ionotropic and metabotropic receptors for the same ligand [38].

-- 988 of 1450 --

Chapter 46: Physiology and Pathophysiology of Pain 	973
Initiation of a generator potential
The resting potential of the nociceptive afferent is −40 mV,
decreasing to between −50 and −75 mV at the cell body. The action
potential (AP) threshold range is between −35mV and −55mV [72].
For the sensory information to be propagated to the CNS, an AP
must be generated by membrane depolarization caused by the
transduction process. This event is termed a “generator potential”
(GP) and can be initiated in three main different ways. First, via the
opening of an ion channel which pushes the membrane potential
above threshold and causes an AP that can be propagated toward
the CNS. One such example of this is the TRPV1 channel, which
can be activated by both thermal and chemical stimuli [7,73].
Second, the GP can be indirectly elicited by the closing of K + chan-
nels (potassium family subfamily K member 2 (TREK-1), potas-
sium family subfamily K member 3 (TASK-1), and others) normally
responsible for hyperpolarizing currents. TREK-1 channels can be
activated by mechanical stimulation, hydrogen ions, and warm
temperature demonstrating their polymodal behavior [63]. Third,
also indirectly, via activation of low-threshold voltage-gated ion
channels that are in close association with ion channels capable of
driving membrane depolarization [74].
Transduction at the nociceptor terminal results in a GP that
travels passively to the spike initiation zone. At this point, an AP
can be generated that is transmitted via nociceptive afferents.
Transmission of the action potential
Propagation of the AP along the axon of the nociceptor is caused by
the initial depolarization that spreads in one direction as adjacent
voltage-gated sodium channels (VGSCs) open. Primary sensory
neurons exhibit a rich heterogenous morphology and the most
common way to classify these neurons is based upon their speed of
conduction [75]. The Aα/β group are myelinated axons with the
fastest speed of conduction (33–75 m/s). The Aδ group are thinner
myelinated fibers with an intermediate speed (5–30 m/s), and the C
fibers are the smallest unmyelinated fibers with the slowest con-
ducting speed (0.5–2 m/s). Most of the neurons conducting within
the Aα/β group do not encode noxious stimuli but respond to
innocuous mechanical stimuli and are classified as low-threshold
mechanoreceptors. Most of the Aδ and C fibers encode noxious
stimuli and are classified as nociceptors.
Anatomy of the dorsal horn
The dorsal horn is divided into parallel laminae based on the pack-
ing density of the neurons [76]. The termination of the primary
afferents in the dorsal horn laminae is determined by fiber diameter
and receptive field modality [77,78]. Smaller diameter nociceptive
afferents synapse with nociceptive-specific (NS) cells in laminae I–II
of the superficial dorsal horn, with a small number terminating
Table 46.1 A selection of mammalian mechanosensory and thermosensory transduction channels associated with the skin.
Family 	Identity 	Modality 	Activators 	Temperature range 	Location 	References
TRPA 	TRPA1 	Thermal,
Mechanical
Isothiocyanates, Ca 2+
, icilin 	< 18 °C 	C fibers 	[39,40]
TRPC 	TRPC1
TRPC5
Mechanical
Thermal
Receptor/store-operated
Thioredoxin
N/A
25–37 °C
C and Aδ fibers 	[41,42]
[43]
TRPM 	TRPM3
TRPM8
Thermal 	Pregnenolone sulfate
Menthol, icilin
> 30 °C
< 28 °C
C and Aδ fibers
C fibers
[44]
[45–48]
TRPV 	TRPV1
TRPV2
TRPV3
TRPV4
Thermal, Osmotic
Thermal, Osmotic,
Mechanical
Thermal
Thermal,
Osmotic,
Mechanical (in injury)
Capsaicin, H +
Endocannabinoids, diphenyl compounds
2-aminoethoxydiphenyl borate
Camphor, carvacrol, diphenyl compounds
PUFAs, 4αPDD, epoxyeicosatrienoic acids
> 42 °C
> 52 °C
> 34–39 °C
> 27–34 °C
C and Aδ fibers, keratinocytes
Aδ and Aβ fibers, immune cells
C fibers, keratinocytes
C and Aδ fibers, keratinocytes,
Merkel cells
[49–51]
[52,53]
[54]
[15,55]
DEG/
ENaC
ASIC1
ASIC2
ASIC3
Mechanical (touch) 	H + 	N/A 	Aδ, Aβ, and C fibers 	[56,57]
[58,59]
[60]
K2P
channel
TREK-1
TREK- 2
TRAAK
Thermal,
Mechanical
PUFAs, H + 	Noxious cold and
noxious heat
40–46 °C
20–25 °C
Noxious cold and
noxious heat
Aδ and C fibers, Aβ?
C fibers
Dorsal root ganglia
C fibers
Dorsal root ganglia
[61–63]
[47,64]
[13,65]
VGNC 	Na v 1.8 	Thermal 	No subfamily activator 	Noxious cold 	C fibers
Dorsal root ganglia
[66–68]
Piezo 	Piezo 1
Piezo 2
Mechanical 	Pyrazine? 	N/A 	Dorsal root ganglia (less than
Piezo 2)
Merkel cells
Dorsal root ganglia
Aδ fibers
[69–71]
TRP, transient receptor potential; TRPA, transient receptor potential subfamily ankyrin; TRPC, transient receptor potential subfamily canonical; TRPM, transient receptor
potential subfamily melastatin; TRPV, transient receptor potential subfamily vanilloid; DEG/ENaC, degenerin/epithelial sodium channel; ASIC, acid-sensing ion channel;
VGNC, voltage-gated sodium channel; PUFA, polyunsaturated fatty acid; 4αPDD, 4α-phorbol 12,13-didecanoate; K2P channel, two-pore domain potassium channel; TREK,
TWIK subfamily K (where TWIK, tandem of P-domains in a weak inward rectifying channel); TRAAK, TWIK subfamily K member 4; H + , protons. Source: Adapted from
Lumpkin and Caterina [7].

-- 989 of 1450 --

974 	Section 6: Nociception and Pain
deeper in the spinal cord. Lamina I neurons contribute to the spi-
nothalamic and spinoreticular tracts both responsible for process-
ing pain and temperature information [79,80]. Lamina II (substantia
gelatinosa) is the major site for nociceptive inputs (C and Aδ fibers)
arriving at the spinal cord [81] and consists mainly of densely
packed unmyelinated interneurons [82]. Lamina II has been shown
to have explicit organization of modules of neurons that differen-
tially modify and transmit the afferent input from the Aδ and C
fibers [83]. Lamina II central neurons, with C fiber input, were
shown to excite lamina II vertical neurons with Aδ input. Lamina II
outer vertical neurons with Aδ input excited lamina I neurons [84].
The function of this arrangement is postulated to be an ability of the
afferent input to be amplified or modulated. C fibers can be divided
into two groups, based on phenotype and sensitivity to neurotro-
phins, although functionally the differentiation is less clear. One
group is sensitive to nerve growth factor (NGF) and usually con-
tains substance P, calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), and
galanin (peptidergic fibers); the second group is distinguished by
binding sites for lectin isolectin B4 and usually possesses the
purinergic receptors P2X 3 and P2Y 1 (non-peptidergic fibers) [85–
87]. The central projections of these two populations of C fibers
differ in their arborization, the peptidergic C fibers branching in
lamina I and the outer portion of lamina II with a small number
extending to deeper terminals. The non-peptidergic fibers project to
the central portion of lamina II [88]. The non-peptidergic C fibers
are chiefly associated with the superficial layers of the skin [89],
whereas peptidergic fibers tend to innervate other tissues in addi-
tion to the deeper layers of the skin [90]. In summary, the simplistic
classification of C and A fiber nociceptors on morphology and con-
duction speed fails to capture the extensive diversity of primary
afferents.
Laminae III–VI are known as the deep dorsal horn and receive
less nociceptive input. Transmission of innocuous stimuli is pre-
dominantly through large diameter, myelinated Aβ fibers, which
terminate in laminae III–VI, hence within these laminae are pro-
prioceptive neurons responding exclusively to touch [78]. In addi-
tion to the NS and the proprioceptive neurons, a third class of spinal
neurons is described, known as wide dynamic range (WDR). The
WDR neurons can receive noxious or non-noxious input from Aδ,
Aβ, or C fibers and respond in a graded manner (i.e., frequency of
APs) from low through to high threshold noxious input. The WDR
neurons (also known as trigger, lamina V type, Class 2, multi-
receptive, or convergent neurons) are found in superficial layers
but more so in lamina V and include interneurons involved in the
polysynaptic reflexes and projection neurons [91]. For Aδ fibers
terminating in lamina V, the interneurons they synapse with decus-
sate and ascend in the spinothalamic tract, while those terminating
more superficially synapse with interneurons forming the spinopa-
rabrachial tract (Fig. 46.1). The ventral and intermediate laminae
are less important in terms of inputs from primary afferents.
Laminae VII and X receive a proportion of nociceptive input that is
mainly visceral in origin [92,93]. Muscle afferents feed into laminae
V, VI, and VII.
The primary afferents form excitatory synapses with either
WDR projection cells (convey information to various parts of the
brain) or interneurons (responsible for local circuitry within the spi-
nal cord; an example is represented in Fig. 46.1 connecting the
WDR neurons of lamina V with the superficial dorsal horn). All
primary afferents use glutamate as their primary excitatory synap-
tic transmitter, although arrangements do differ. Interneurons can
be classified as either excitatory (predominantly glutaminergic) or
inhibitory (mainly γ-aminobutyric acid- (GABA-) or glycinergic).
The morphology of the interneurons has been most closely studied
in lamina II, with a classification scheme that includes islet, central,
radial, and vertical interneurons [83,94–96].
An alternative approach to classification is to use immunocyto-
chemistry and stratify the interneurons based on neuropeptide and
protein localization [97,98]. Many neuropeptides have been identi-
fied, and consequently, several neuropeptide receptors expressed
by the interneurons are being studied, including the tachykinin
receptors, neurokinin-1 (NK1
) and neurokinin-3 (NK3
); the μ-opioid
receptor-1 (MOR- 1); the somatostatin-2A receptor (sst 2A
); and
the neuropeptide Y-1 receptor (Y 1 ). It is not possible to use the
neuropeptides to definitively define populations of interneurons,
although some markers show a restricted distribution. The dorsal
horn also receives input from axons descending from various parts
of the brain (Fig. 46.1). All three glutamate receptors (AMPA,
NMDA, and kainate) are found in the dorsal horn. The GABA A and
glycine receptors are distributed throughout the spinal cord and are
most likely expressed on all dorsal horn neurons. Many studies do
not distinguish between the interneurons and the projection neu-
rons when describing receptors for glutamate, GABA, and glycine.
GABA is present in ~25%, 30%, and 40% of neurons in laminae I, II,
and III, respectively [99]. Spinal cord wiring is complex and little
understood, the main spinal signaling pathways in the rodent are
comprehensively reviewed elsewhere [100].
It is within the spinal cord that substantial transformation and
modulation of the nociceptive signal can occur before it ascends to
higher centers [101], due to the discrete populations of intrinsic
interneurons that can alter responses of NS and WDR neurons,
with astrocytes and microglia also modulating, particularly in dis-
ease states [102–104]. Superficially in lamina I of the dorsal horn,
there is a large population of projection neurons, which preferen-
tially express the NK1 receptor for substance P [105,106] and are
thereby nociceptive neurons. These neurons project to the periaq-
ueductal gray (PAG), thalamus, and particularly the parabrachial
area (PA). These cells also project to the rostral ventral medulla
(RVM) and can influence descending controls [107,108].
The ascending tracts are typically named according to where
they terminate in the brain [109]. The spinothalamic tract (termi-
nating in the thalamus) integrates the thalamic traffic (and other
signals) and is responsible for the discriminative/localization
component of pain via projections to the sensorimotor cortex,
insular cortex, and the anterior cingulate originating mainly from
laminae I, IV, V, and X [110,111]. The spinobulbar tract (terminat-
ing in both the hindbrain and midbrain regions associated with
pain processing) conveys the affective/intensity component, and
projects to the amygdala and hypothalamus via the parabrachial
nucleus [112]. This spinobulbar pathway can influence and recruit
descending pathways via the PAG, pontine locus coeruleus (LC),
and RVM, thereby dictating the output passing through the spinal
cord [113,114] (Fig. 46.1).
The PAG is one of the most important structures associated with
the descending pain control system [115,116] and receives informa-
tion from the somatosensory and cingulate cortices, the thalamus,
amygdala, and hypothalamus, and from the ascending pathways.
The PAG–RVM exerts a degree of selective inhibition of C fiber-
mediated nociceptive impulses but preserves A fiber messages cod-
ing sensory and discriminatory information [117–119] and the
RVM can be considered the final relay point through which facilita-
tion or inhibition of the nociceptive message passes [120,121]. The
degree of inhibition or facilitation is controlled in the RVM by at

-- 990 of 1450 --

Chapter 46: Physiology and Pathophysiology of Pain 	975
least two different types of neurons known as “ON cells” and “OFF
cells.” Briefly, the ON, OFF, and neutral cells are defined by their
response to nociceptive input [123]. The ON cells show a burst of
activity prior to nociceptive input and are considered a component
of excitatory drive. The OFF cells show a short-lived decrease in
firing rate before nociceptive input and are considered inhibitory.
Neutral cells do not respond to nociceptive input. The role of these
cells may be more complicated than previously thought [124–126].
The RVM can be considered a relay station but requires a forebrain
loop [127]. Furthermore, the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)
projections regulating spinal neurons [128,129] can also modulate
the pain experience. The ACC potentially offers a further target for
manipulating the pain signature but understanding its role requires
more sophisticated paradigms. The role of the ACC and pain
processing has been comprehensively described [130].
In the mature adult rat, descending inhibition is targeted to spi-
nal neurons with a strong afferent C fiber input. However, in the
first few weeks postnatally, the system is controlled differently with
greater descending facilitation particularly targeted to the A fiber
input [131]. The evolutionary reason proposed for this A fiber
input is to provide the dorsal horn with low-level, non-noxious,
tactile input, thereby promoting the development of the animal’s
sensory networks. The switch from facilitation to inhibition as the
animal matures is primarily dependent on endogenous opioid lev-
els in the RVM [132] with GABA and endocannabinoid levels also
playing a role [133,134]. It is possible that immature nervous sys-
tems could be at risk of excessive sensory overload and peripheral
injury in the first few weeks of life where facilitation is favored [135].
In summary, this balance of inhibition and facilitation of
descending pathways is a dynamic product of the afferent evoked
activity, the age of the animal, but also the excitability of the dorsal
horn cell [131]. The descending pathways appear to lack specificity,
influencing all portions of the spinal cord and it is this widespread
and intrinsic influence that is responsible for the ability to facilitate
or inhibit transmission but other senses too, potentially explain-
ing why some chronic pain states have clinical signs distinct from
pain alone but can manifest with debilitating effects on sleep and
other emotions [136,137]. Moreover, the perception of pain is
sensitive to many mental processes therefore not exclusively
driven by or maintained by the noxious input [138]; heightened
anxiety and fear, for example, can then often exacerbate the suf-
fering of pain [139].
RVM
Limbic system
Cerebral
cortex
Thalamus
PAG
RVM
LC
3
C
e
r
e
b
r
a
l
c
o
rt
e
x
Thalamus
1
LS
LS 	LS
LS
1 2 3
PAG
2
C
e
r
e
b
r
a
l
c
o
r
t
e
x
I
IIo
IIi
III
IV
V
VI
VII
X
IX	VIII
High intensity
noxious
stimuli
Low intensity
non-noxious
stimuli	WDR
NS
LC
	N o r a d r e n e r g i c
s
p
i
n
a
l
p
r
o
j
e
c
t
i
o
n
s
S e r o t o n e r g i c
s
p
i
n
a
l
p
r
o
j
e
c
t
i
o
n
s
S p i n o t h a l a m i c t r a c t
C
e
r
e
b
r
a
l
	c
o
r
t
e
x
S p i n o b u l b a r t r a c t
PA
PA 	PA
Aβ
Aδ
C
Spinal ganglion
Figure 46.1 Schematic diagram of pain pathway from periphery to brain including sagittal midline T2 weighted MRI images from a dog brain with
selected transverse images at the level of the (1) thalamus, (2) midbrain, and (3) rostral medulla annotated to indicate the anatomical localization of
regions involved in descending modulation. Primary afferent fibers (Aβ, Aδ, and C fibers) transmit impulses from the periphery (osteoarthritic hip joint)
to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. Secondary NS cells are predominantly located in the superficial dorsal horn (laminae I–II), with most WDR neurons
located in the deeper dorsal horn (e.g., lamina V). Lamina V neurons in particular project to the thalamus (via the spinothalamic tract) where there are
subsequent neuronal projections to various cortical regions that form part of a “pain matrix” (primary and secondary somatosensory, insular, anterior
cingulate, and prefrontal cortices). The descending pathways originate from brainstem nuclei such as the rostral ventromedial medulla (RVM) and the
locus coeruleus (LC), which are directly influenced by the ascending spinobulbar projections and higher centers to modulate spinal processing.
PAG, periaqueductal gray; DRG, dorsal route ganglion; RVM, rostroventromedial medulla; LC, locus coeruleus; LS, limbic system; NS,
nociceptive-specific; PA, parabrachial nucleus; WDR, wide dynamic range. Source: White et al. [122], with permission from Elsevier.

-- 991 of 1450 --

976 	Section 6: Nociception and Pain
Pharmacology of descending controls
The 	monoamines 	norepinephrine 	(noradrenaline) 	and
5- hydroxytryptamine (serotonin, 5HT) are the major transmitters
in the descending controls [127,140]. These bidirectional mono-
aminergic systems modulate the outputs of the dorsal horn neu-
rons. The inhibition or facilitation has been shown to be mediated
by distinctly different receptors [141–143], but the output is
determined by the type of noxious input and the response to it. The
pharmacology involved in the descending controls is comprehen-
sively covered elsewhere [127].
Norepinephrine
Norepinephrine is the major neurotransmitter released by sympa-
thetic postganglionic nerve fibers and is involved in autonomic
regulation of numerous organs. These noradrenergic cell groups
were mapped in 1964 and are prefixed by the letter A (for aminer-
gic) [144]. Areas A1 to A7 inclusive contain norepinephrine; areas
A8 to A14 contain dopamine. Group A1 is located in the caudal
ventrolateral part of the medulla and is responsible for aspects of
body fluid metabolism [145], group A2 plays a role in stress and
food intake and is located in the solitary nucleus [146]. Group A5
(close to the superior olivary complex) and A7 (in the pontine retic-
ular formation) project to the spinal cord [147].
Norepinephrine plays a major role in modulating nociception
[148–150]; the majority of descending projections originating from
the pontine nucleus LC contain norepinephrine (areas A6 and
adjoining A4) and microstimulation of this nucleus was shown to
produce antinociceptive effects via spinal α2
-adrenergic recep-
tors [151]. In healthy subjects, the noradrenergic system serves to
regulate pain thresholds, with its role becoming more prominent in
cases of injury or inflammation [150]. Norepinephrine released
from the LC is also involved in the regulation of vigilance, attention,
and cognitive functions but it is still not possible to surmise the
net effect of the noradrenergic system on supraspinal structures;
evidence exists for both antinociceptive and pronociceptive
actions [152]. However, in the LC-spinal descending pathway, the
central noradrenergic system inhibits pain, and drugs acting on the
α2
-adrenergic receptor (alone or as an adjuvant) have proven effec-
tive to varying degrees as analgesics. In humans, topically applied
α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists may have a role in treating neuropa-
thies [153], and intra-articular administration has reduced postop-
erative knee pain [154]. Patients with intractable cancer pain have
benefited from intrathecal administration [155]. The α2
-adrenergic
receptor agonists are widely utilized in wild, domestic, and labora-
tory animals for sedation, analgesia, and muscle relaxation. In gen-
eral, spinally administered α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists have an
enhanced antinociceptive potency in animal models with a persis-
tent injury [156–158], and the intensity, duration, and type of
noxious injury will ultimately determine the response [159–162].
Likewise, altered noradrenergic activity (for example, a reduction
in the inhibitory influences) can lead to the hypersensitivity seen in
models of both acute inflammation and nerve injury [158,163–165],
hence the interest in targeting this system. This central role is further
evidenced by studies that have demonstrated restoration of dimin-
ished noradrenergic control after use of intrathecal reboxetine, a
selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor, following the develop-
ment of a neuropathic pain phenotype [166].
Serotonin (5-HT)
Serotonin is commonly considered one of the most important neu-
rotransmitters. Studies have shown that ~20% of the neurons in the
RVM are serotonergic, and there was early evidence for 5-HT
involvement in descending modulation [167]. These descending
pain modulatory pathways influence nociception through activa-
tion of different serotonergic receptors in the spinal cord [168].
Both acute and chronic noxious stimuli can activate these RVM
5-HT neurons and increase the expression of 5-HT receptors in the
spinal cord [169,170]. The 5-HT neurons can also influence non-
serotonergic neurons. The collaterals of the 5-HT neurons have
been shown to regulate the bidirectional control from the ON and
OFF cells in the RVM [171]. The serotonergic/5-HT system is more
complex than the adrenergic system with pain inhibition or facilita-
tion attributable to different subtypes of 5-HT receptors [172–174]
with facilitation assuming more influence than inhibition.
Importantly, tonic activation of 5-HT (and non- 5- HT)- mediated
brainstem facilitatory influences is one of the contributors to the
development and maintenance of central sensitization [175,176].
Dopamine
The monoamine dopamine is also involved in descending con-
trols [140] with mesolimbic, mesocortical, and nigrostriatal dopa-
minergic pathways able to inhibit primarily the affective component
of nociception [177,178]. The dopamine system is embedded in the
pain matrix circuitry [179] but is also needed for movement [180]
and is associated with reward [181], learning, and cognition
[182,183]. Studies have shown that dopamine therapies may offer
promise as analgesics but efforts to develop therapies are compli-
cated by its intrinsic role in so many other modalities [184,185].
The role of the opioids
The descending pathways can also be considered components of
an opioid-sensitive matrix. Experiments have shown that numer-
ous drugs interacting with components of the descending pathways
can influence or mimic the production of endogenously produced
opioids, indeed there is evidence of a bulbospinal opioidergic
pathway [186].
The PAG is one of the major sources of opioid-mediated inhibi-
tion of ascending nociceptive impulses [187]. Cortical inputs syn-
apse at the PAG mediating a “top-down” endogenous pain inhibition
system. The projections from the PAG extend to the RVM and
noradrenergic pontine nuclei which in turn modulate nociceptive
input at the spinal cord through the release of norepinephrine and
serotonin. The dorsal-dorsolateral portions of the PAG play a role
in stress-induced analgesia, which is independent of opioids but
depends on endocannabinoids, whereas the lateral-ventrolateral
portions of the PAG are implicated in analgesia induced by opioids
and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) [188].
The placebo effect is one example of this “top-down” modulating
pathway. This refers to an analgesic construct that can be elicited in
certain people that has its mechanisms associated with activation of
the μ-opioid receptor and changes in blood flow to the rostral ante-
rior and pregenual cingulate cortices, the dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex, and anterior insular cortex [189,190]. In the case of placebo,
it is now apparent that a complex web of interwoven processes is
responsible rather than the once simplistic view that the μ-opioid
receptor was solely responsible [191]. The opioidergic descending
tracts are also implicated in distraction and hypnosis and offer
potential for developing further analgesic interventions. Functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies have shown (particu-
larly in placebo and nocebo studies) that the descending pathways
are the conduits through which the cognitive influences affect a
pain experience. This experience is also subsequently modulated by
the individual’s control and ongoing response to the pain experi-
ence exerted by prefrontal limbic brain regions [138,192]. The exact

-- 992 of 1450 --

Chapter 46: Physiology and Pathophysiology of Pain 	977
mechanisms involved in the descending controls are not yet fully
understood, but a consensus on their importance is without doubt,
and research into recruitment of their endogenous modulating
attributes is ongoing.
Endocannabinoids
The endocannabinoids are involved in the processing of nocicep-
tive inputs [193]. The expression of endocannabinoid receptors
and the presence of ligands and metabolites are dynamic and
dependent on the type of pain being expressed. The system offers
attractive targets for analgesic opportunities, although the isola-
tion of the analgesic properties of molecules without psychoactive
side effects is a challenging conundrum. The analgesia produced
by NSAIDs in the descending pain control system also requires
activation of the cannabinoid-1 (CB 1 ) receptor [188]. Furthermore,
numerous experiments suggest that opioids, NSAIDs, and the
cannabinoids in the PAG and RVM interact to potentially decrease
GABAergic inhibition and thus enhance the descending flow of
impulses that inhibit pain as a mechanism of analgesia [194–196].
The endocannabinoid system can adapt in the face of persistent
pain states such as osteoarthritis offering a potential target of
spinal hyperexcitability [197]. However, the drugs trialed so far
modulate the affective component but not the sensory component
of the pain [198].
GABA and glycine
GABA and glycine are inhibitory transmitters and influence nocic-
eption via their presence within interneurons [199–201]. These
GABAergic or glycinergic projections can inhibit noxious inputs
into the dorsal horn of the spinal cord and the neurons can express
either or both neurotransmitters [202]. Studies have also demon-
strated that the ON, OFF, and neutral cells have varying expression
of GABA and glycine, but the expression is determined by the con-
text of the pain experience; for example, in one study using a model
of peripheral inflammation, the gene expression and the phenotype
of the ON and OFF cells was altered [203].
Tonic control
In the absence of nociceptive input, spinal nociceptive neurons are
under both tonic and stimulus-evoked (phasic) descending con-
trols [204,205]. Characterization of the receptors involved in the
tonic control mechanisms has been undertaken [206–208]. One
important caveat to these experiments involving discrete lesions
and anesthesia is they may inadvertently overlook the contribution
of the plasticity of the spinal cord in response to inflammation, or
indeed the differences in the free-ranging conscious animal com-
pared to the anesthetized animal, and these should be considered
when drawing conclusions.
The spino-bulbo-spinal loop
Pain consists of a somatosensory component and a psychological,
affective component. The term “nociception” refers to the neural
activity in the peripheral and central nervous systems caused by a
painful stimulus and the term “pain” itself is used to describe both
this and the emotional and autonomic responses to the insult.
These different components of pain are processed in separate, dis-
crete areas of the brain. The nociceptive insult is the cause of pain,
but in some cases this insult is absent, and its magnitude is not
linearly related to the pain that is reported or behaviors that are
displayed [209]. This is, in part, a consequence of a feedback loop
between the brain and spinal cord. This spino-bulbo-spinal loop
can alter the extent to which pain signals are amplified or inhib-
ited within the spinal cord.
Models of nociception and analgesic testing
Although significant advances have been made in the basic under-
standing of pain processing and modulation in recent years, large
gaps in our knowledge remain, particularly in the fields of ana-
tomic, biochemical, and physiologic mechanisms of pain. The cur-
rent situation in animals with respect to adequacy of pain
management is less well documented. Drugs with proven efficacy
for the treatment of acute surgical pain are available for companion
animals (e.g., licensed opioids and NSAIDs). However, with the
exception of NSAIDs, the repertoire of licensed drugs for the man-
agement of chronic pain (e.g., pain caused by degenerative joint
disease) in companion animals is very limited. Acute and chronic
pain remain poorly treated in farm animals and exotic species.
It is widely accepted that research in animals is pivotal to an
increased understanding of nociceptive and pain mechanisms and
the development of new analgesic drugs, for both humans and ani-
mals. Pain studies in humans generally focus on characterizing pain
states, with few studies investigating underlying pain mechanisms,
and studies in humans are inevitably hampered by ethical con-
straints. Although in humans the advent of advanced neuroimaging
techniques allows the in vivo study of patterns of CNS activity con-
current with self-report of pain perception, ethical considerations
surrounding induced pain models in humans, combined with cur-
rent technological limitations, means that neuroimaging cannot
replace the need for animal pain models. In addition, neuroimaging
lacks cellular resolution and poor temporal resolution; fMRI may
not distinguish between very high levels of neuronal activity in the
brain (and therefore may not be sensitive to different pain intensi-
ties) because the blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) signal can
reach a ceiling. Neuroimaging does not allow the interrogation of
small areas of the CNS such as the dorsal horn of the spinal cord or
the peripheral nervous system with any precision, as the technique
relies on integrating electrical signals across large sampling regions
such as the brain.
Two main approaches have been adopted when studying pain in
animals. The first approach is to study responses to brief noxious
stimuli (defined as stimuli that are damaging to, or threaten to dam-
age, normal tissues) in naive animals. In other words, brief phasic
noxious thermal, electrical, or mechanical stimuli are delivered to
healthy animals and the magnitude of the stimulus threshold
required to elicit a response is measured (e.g., nociceptive threshold
testing), or changes in neuronal activity, animal behavior, or body
systems are studied during delivery of the stimulus. Response to
brief phasic stimuli is commonly utilized as the outcome measure
in analgesic drug testing (i.e., as an integral component of pain
models), although it should be viewed as having limited applicabil-
ity owing to the previously naive (normal) state of the nervous sys-
tem and singular nociceptive modality (e.g., thermal nociceptors),
which differs from most clinical pain syndromes.
The second approach is to induce pain in the animal by delivery
of a tonic, sustained noxious stimulus that induces peripheral or
central sensitization and subsequently to study pain mechanisms
(e.g., by recording changes in behavioral or neuronal activity) or
test analgesic drugs. In this chapter, the broad term “pain model” is
used to refer to the second approach. There is interest in using com-
panion animals with naturally occurring disease conditions that
cause pain (e.g., spontaneous osteoarthritis [OA] in dogs) [210] to

-- 993 of 1450 --

978 	Section 6: Nociception and Pain
study pain mechanisms and evaluate analgesic drug efficacy for
both humans and animals. However, there are disadvantages when
using nonhuman subjects in analgesic studies, such as the lack of
verbal feedback about the “feelings” of the patient’s pain and the
vulnerability to observer bias.
Within any pain model, there are three distinct components that
must be differentiated [211]. First, there is the study subject (varia-
bles include species, strain, sex, and age); second, there is the stimu-
lus or type of tissue damage that is used to initiate pain (e.g., an
injection of an irritant substance into a joint versus measuring cuta-
neous thermal threshold); and third, there is the outcome measure
(e.g., behavior or physiological parameter) used as the surrogate
biomarker for pain. Significant interest has arisen recently in trying
to improve pain biomarkers in animal models with the recognition
that endpoints such as a tail flick in response to a noxious stimulus
may be largely reflexive and not an indicator of higher brain percep-
tion. This is of particular relevance in the development of pain
models for analgesic drug development.
Limitations of current animal models
Despite significant efforts in analgesic drug discovery, there has
been limited success in developing and marketing new analgesic
drugs with efficacy and acceptable adverse effect profiles for clinical
patients with pain. Putative new analgesic drugs undergo screening
and preclinical testing in animal models; therefore, it is important
that the performance of a new analgesic in animal models is suc-
cessfully translated to the human pain model and clinical patients.
Although the reasons for failure of new drugs at the preclinical–
clinical interface are multifactorial, there is a general agreement
that limitations of available animal models play a major role in the
current bottleneck in analgesic drug development. Recognized gen-
eral limitations of animal pain models occur at the level of the
experimental animal (subject) and the pain assay or biomarker used
to assess pain.
Experimental animal (subject)
The majority of preclinical pain research is carried out in young
adult, healthy, intact male laboratory mice and rats of a specific
strain. Although useful as a cost-effective and rapid screening
method for in vivo testing of candidate molecules, this does not
always translate well to the clinical population of pain patients.
Therefore, it has been recommended that pain studies include more
diverse and heterogeneous groups of animals comprising both gen-
ders and a variety of strains [212].
Nociceptive assay
Many nociceptive (pain) assays are currently available that aim to
model nociceptive, inflammatory, and neuropathic pain. However,
it is immediately apparent that there is a mismatch between the
underlying pathophysiologic changes induced in experimental
assays and the etiology of clinical pain conditions. For example,
nerve ligation is commonly used as a model of neuropathic pain,
yet diseases associated with neuropathic pain in humans rarely
result from complete nerve ligation or nerve compression. There
are often co-existing abnormalities that also contribute to the per-
ceived pain, such as neuropathy and inflammation. Most pain
assays do not mimic the complexity of clinical pain states. Induced
models of OA in rats and mice usually focus on the stifle joint and
are induced by sterile inflammation or surgical disruption of the
joint, leading to a rapid progression of OA that does not consider
the effect(s) of aging itself on perceived pain [213].
Biomarkers
Until recently, most behavioral biomarkers used to measure analgesic
drug effect in animal pain models relied on either evoked spinal
reflexes (e.g., limb withdrawal from a von Frey filament) or innate
behaviors such as vocalization or guarding that can also be performed
by decerebrate animals [214]. Evoked withdrawal responses detect
hyperalgesia and allodynia (although the two are difficult to distin-
guish from each other in animals) and therefore only provide informa-
tion on the sensory and discriminative components of pain. They do
not provide information about the emotional (affective) component,
which is critical to the experience of pain in humans and animals,
although more difficult to define in the latter. Although many patients
with chronic neuropathic pain experience hyperalgesia and allodynia,
they commonly report spontaneous pain (i.e., non-evoked pain) as the
most debilitating and distressing aspect of their condition [215].
Therefore, unless biomarkers that evaluate spontaneous pain are
employed in an assay, the effect on spontaneous pain may go unde-
tected. New biomarkers sensitive to spontaneous pain that can detect
changes in behavior associated with emotion are being developed.
Translational pain models
In recent years, the importance of translational approaches to animal
research, which aim to bridge gaps between basic animal research
and medical practice, has been recognized. As such, efforts are
under way to develop assays and biomarkers that directly translate to
experimental human pain models. This increases the likelihood that
analgesics found to be effective in preclinical studies will remain effi-
cacious in human clinical trials. Currently, there are very few assays
that are translatable, although intradermal or cutaneous application
of capsaicin and the ultraviolet B (UVB) pain model are notable
exceptions. The use of spontaneous disease models in companion
animals is another approach to improving translatability of pain
assays between humans and animals. Experimental pain studies in
humans rely largely on psychophysics to quantify pain and therefore
analgesic drug efficacy, but self-reporting of pain is inherently sub-
jective. Commonly used behavioral biomarkers such as reflex with-
drawal are also vulnerable to observer subjectivity. Considerable
variability of reported results among researchers and laboratories is
therefore common. Clearly, objective biomarkers directly translata-
ble to humans that reflect the underlying neurobiology of perceived
pain are needed to improve pain models.
Nociceptive and pain assays
In the following sections, the term “pain” is used to describe all
assays carried out in awake animals; if the animal is anesthetized
during the assay, the term “nociception” is used.
Phasic pain tests
Brief noxious (phasic) stimuli are widely used to elicit responses in
order to study nociceptive pathways and increase the understanding
of the neurobiology of pain in experimental animals and also for the
purposes of analgesiometry (i.e., measuring changes in biomarkers to
study the action of analgesic drugs). Broadly, “nociceptive threshold
testing” in animals and “quantitative sensory testing” (QST) in
humans are the terms used to describe the application of tests utilizing
brief phasic stimuli. The stimuli might be applied to naive animals or
animals with induced pain, thus allowing the study of nociceptive
pathways and drug efficacy in normal animals and animals with
altered pain sensitivity caused by central and/or peripheral sensitiza-
tion. For a complete review of phasic pain tests, see Le Bars et al. [216].

-- 994 of 1450 --

Chapter 46: Physiology and Pathophysiology of Pain 	979
Beecher [217] was one of the first authors to set out ideal criteria
for producing acute pain experimentally, and some of the optimal
characteristics are as follows:
• The stimulus is applied to a body part where neurohistologic
variations are at a minimum between different individuals and
the stimulus can be measured and closely associated with the
changes that produce pain.
• Quantitative data can be collected in response to a given stimulus
under given conditions.
• There is little tissue damage at the pain threshold level and the
hazard to the subject is small at high intensities.
• There is a relationship between the magnitude of the stimulus
and the intensity of the pain experienced.
• It is possible to carry out repeat measurements without interfer-
ing with subsequent measurements.
• The stimulus is easy to apply and there is a clearly identifiable
endpoint.
• The test should be applicable to both humans and animals.
Stimulus modalities
Four modalities of noxious stimulation are commonly used in phasic
acute nociceptive tests: electrical, thermal, mechanical, and chemical.
The advantages and disadvantages of these different modalities when
used to generate acute pain are shown in Table 46.2. Chemical stimu-
lation is considered separately because it causes a slower, progressive,
and non-escapable noxious stimulus. Commonly used phasic tests in
awake animals are described in Table 46.3 (thermal stimuli),
Table 46.4 (mechanical stimuli), and Table 46.5 (electrical stimuli).
Site of stimulus application
For practical reasons, phasic nociceptive stimuli are usually applied
to the skin to activate cutaneous nociceptors, although stimuli are
also applied to viscera in some models. The predominance of tests
involving cutaneous nociceptors reflects the ease of access to the skin
and the ability to stimulate the skin with minimal restraint of the ani-
mal. In awake laboratory animals, the plantar surface of the hind paw
is often used as the site of stimulation because it is readily accessible
for application of heat and mechanical stimuli. Awareness of the dif-
ferences in cutaneous sensitivity between haired (found on most of
the body) and glabrous skin (the plantar paw) in laboratory animals
is important as it alters the translatability of pain tests between rats
and humans [218]. The tail is commonly used as the site of stimulus
application in acute pain tests in rats (e.g., thermal nociceptive stim-
uli). However, the tail is also essential for thermoregulation and bal-
ance, which can influence threshold responses measured following
stimulation [216]. Concurrent noxious stimulation of more than one
body part at the same time recruits endogenous inhibitory mecha-
nisms and confounds measured threshold responses, so is best
avoided [219]. Another consideration is the potential for repeated
stimulation of the same body site to cause peripheral and central sen-
sitization, thereby causing a reduction in threshold over time.
Outcome measures
Behavior
Laboratory animals generate a range of behavioral responses to
delivery of phasic noxious stimuli classified by the underlying noci-
ceptive pathways that are activated. The endpoints classically used
for each assay are detailed below; however, a few general comments
are outlined here. Many phasic tests rely on the detection of motor
withdrawal responses; therefore, impaired motor function (e.g.,
during administration of analgesic drugs that have concurrent
effects on locomotion) will confound threshold responses. It is
important to differentiate between withdrawal responses that are
reflex (governed predominantly by spinal mechanisms) and more
complex behaviors such as escape, avoidance, or licking of the body
part where the stimulus was applied. The complexity of the endpoint
behavior will to some extent reflect recruitment of underlying noci-
ceptive or pain mechanisms and therefore are commonly differen-
tially sensitive to analgesic drugs [220]. Endpoint behaviors used in
nociceptive tests should ideally be nociceptive specific, reliable,
reproducible, and sensitive to administration of analgesic drugs.
Neurophysiologic endpoints
Neurophysiologic techniques are increasingly important in studies
to elucidate ascending pain pathways and cortical representation of
pain [221–223]. Techniques that afford a direct window on the func-
tion of the CNS, such as electroencephalography, provide a unique
insight into pain processing and how activation of nociceptive path-
ways results in pain perception in a conscious animal. The electro-
encephalogram (EEG) is the electrical activity recorded from
electrodes placed at various locations on the scalp (human) or head
(other species) [224–226]. It consists of the summated electrical
activity of populations of neurons together with a contribution from
the glial cells. Neurons are excitable cells with intrinsic electrical
properties that result in the production of electrical and magnetic
fields. These fields may be recorded at a distance from their sources
and are termed “far-field potentials.” Fields recorded a short distance
from their source are termed “near-field” or “local field potentials.”
Activity recorded from the surface of the cortex is described as the
electrocorticogram (ECoG), whereas electrical activity recorded
from the scalp is the EEG. The EEG and ECoG are both far-field
potentials. An evoked potential (EP) is generated by recording the
EEG time-locked to a sensory stimulus, such as presentation of an
auditory tone. Averaging the EEG over a sequence of responses
allows the electrical activity specific to the stimulus to be extracted
and presented by a plot of voltage (amplitude) against time.
Somatosensory-evoked potentials (SEPs) recorded from the dura at
various loci in animals in response to repetitive noxious stimuli are
used extensively to study pain and analgesia. Table 46.6 outlines the
advantages and limitations of EEG and EPs in phasic pain tests.
Nociceptive withdrawal reflexes (NWRs) are an established neu-
rophysiologic measure used in rodent models as a direct measure of
spinal cord hyperexcitability and thus a biomarker of central sensi-
tization [227,228]. They have also been translated to humans to
quantify spinal cord excitability in patients with chronic pain,
including pain caused by OA [229]. The NWR threshold is defined
as the magnitude of the stimulus (e.g., electrical current) that is
required to elicit an electromyographic (EMG) response remem-
bering that central sensitization causes a decrease in this threshold.
Temporal summation (amplification of the magnitude of the EMG
signal in response to repetitive noxious stimulation) of the NWR is
also measured to probe changes in the spinal nociceptive process-
ing. Use of these techniques in rodents requires anesthesia. NWR
thresholds and temporal summation have been measured in awake
dogs and horses using electrical stimuli and used to characterize the
antinociceptive effects of analgesic drugs [230–232].
The third major neurophysiologic endpoint used in phasic pain tests
in laboratory animals is direct recording of neuronal activity during
stimulus application, for example, recording from peripheral afferent
sensory fibers or dorsal horn neurons using in vivo electrophysiology.
These studies are usually carried out under terminal anesthesia.

-- 995 of 1450 --

980 	Section 6: Nociception and Pain
Table 46.2 Advantages and disadvantages of different stimulus modalities used to study acute pain.
Stimulus modality 	Characteristics of the stimulus 	Advantages 	Disadvantages
Electrical 	Direct activation of all nerve
fibers, thereby bypassing
transduction mechanisms at the
peripheral nociceptor.
1. Quantifiable.
2. Brief; controlled onset and offset.
3. Reproducible.
4. Non-invasive.
5. Bypasses peripheral nociceptor transduction
mechanisms that may be advantageous in the
study of central pain mechanisms.
6. Elicits a synchronized pattern of neuronal
activity that is sufficient to generate reflex
responses.
7. Graded behavioral responses to increasing
stimulus intensities.
8. Translatable between humans and animals.
1. Not a natural stimulus.
2. Indiscriminate activation of all fiber types
(therefore not selective for Aδ or C fibers).
3. Bypasses peripheral nociceptor transduction
mechanisms, therefore of limited use for the
study of peripheral pain mechanisms.
4. Elicits a synchronized pattern of neuronal
activity that does not replicate patterns of
activity that occur in clinical pain states.
5. Impedance of the tissue will determine the
magnitude of the delivered stimulus – care must
be taken to standardize the stimulus magnitude
as much as possible.
Thermal: general
comments
Selective activation of cutaneous
thermosensitive and nociceptive
fibers.
Rate of heating can be altered to
selectively activate Aδ or C fibers.
1. Natural stimulus.
2. Most thermal stimuli deliver slow rates of
heating of nociceptors and therefore selectively
activate C fibers; efficient for revealing the
activity of opioid analgesics.
1. Surface skin temperature can be measured
easily, but more difficult to measure the temper-
ature at the level of the nociceptor. Thermo-
couples placed in the deeper tissues to measure
temperature often disturb heat transfer.
2. Thermal hyperalgesia is clinically less problematic
than mechanical hyperalgesia in clinical pain
patients.
Thermal: radiant heat
source
Conventional radiant heat
sources emit light in the visible or
adjacent infrared spectra.
1. Easy to build.
2. Selective; no concurrent stimulation of
non-nociceptive neurons (e.g., low-threshold
mechanosensitive neurons).
1. Conventional radiant heat sources often lack
power to cause synchronized neuronal activity
and therefore generate reflex responses.
2. Infrared light sources in the wavelengths
generated by radiant heat sources are poorly
absorbed by skin.
3. Variability in stimulus magnitude determined by:
a. reflectance, transmittance, and absorption;
properties of the skin and the electromag-
netic spectrum emitted by the source of
radiation,
b. conduction properties of the skin,
c. initial temperature of the skin,
d. the amount of caloric energy delivered to the
surface of the skin.
Thermal: contact
thermode
Heat thermosensitive receptors by
means of the conduction
properties of the skin.
1. Can deliver a slope of heating that grows
linearly with time and can be precisely con-
trolled.
2. Difficult to secure laboratory animals, widely
used in companion and farm animals.
1. Concurrent activation of low-threshold non-
nociceptive nerves that exert an inhibitory
influence on pain mechanisms.
2. Thermode surface is usually flat and rigid and
therefore does not conform very well to the skin
surface.
3. Rate of thermal transfer is dependent on the
quality of the thermode–skin contact.
Thermal: immersion in a
temperature-controlled
water bath
1. Rapid, although not instantaneous increase in
skin temperature.
Thermal: CO2 laser 	Long-wavelength infrared source
of radiation.
1. Near-total absorption of the light by the skin,
irrespective of skin pigmentation or radiation
from the skin surface.
2. Thermal energy is maintained in the superficial
surface of the skin where thermosensitive nerve
terminals are located, limiting damage and
therefore pain in deeper tissues.
3. A highly focused beam can be generated, good
spatial discrimination.
4. Very rapid rates of heating can be achieved,
allowing rapid onset and offset of the stimulus
while meeting target temperature.
5. No contact between the laser and the skin is
necessary, therefore there is no concurrent
activation of mechanosensitive non-nociceptive
nerves.
1. Expensive to buy.
2. Safety precautions must be adopted during use
(e.g., humans should wear protective eye
goggles to prevent retinal damage from stray
laser light).
Mechanical 	Activation of Aδ and C fiber
mechanoreceptors (e.g., von Frey
filaments).
Visceral pain can also be
triggered by mechanical
distension (e.g., colonic
distension with a balloon).
1. Mechanical hyperalgesia is a cardinal feature
of chronic pain, therefore testing mechanical
sensitivity is clinically relevant.
1. Low- threshold mechanoreceptors are always
co-stimulated; therefore, the stimulus is not
specific.
2. Conventional mechanical stimuli, e.g., von Frey
filaments, do not allow delivery of brief
mechanical stimuli with a rapid onset and offset.
3. Difficult to apply in a controlled manner to
laboratory animals.

-- 996 of 1450 --

Chapter 46: Physiology and Pathophysiology of Pain 	981
(Continued )
Table 46.3 Phasic tests utilizing thermal stimuli.
Test 	Brief description of methods
including activation of
nociceptive/ pain pathways
Species in
which tests
are commonly
applied
Behavioral endpoint 	“Cut-Off” 	Advantages 	Disadvantages
Tail-flick test
(radiant heat)
Radiant heat applied to a small
area on the tail; reaction time
before a tail flick occurs is
measured (“tail-flick latency”).
Radiant heat emission can be
controlled to adjust tail-flick
latency to alter sensitivity of the
assay.
A photoelectric cell timer
switches off the lamp (heat
source) when the tail is
withdrawn.
Selective activation of cutaneous
thermosensitive and nociceptive
fibers.
Rodents 	Tail-flick.
Generally considered to
be a spinal reflex when
high-intensity power is
used to generate the
radiant heat and the
tail-flick latency is short.
Will be subject to control
by supraspinal structures.
When the rate of heating
is slower, then tail flick
probably involves higher
neural structures.
Maximum latency
(usually estimated
to be 4–5 times
the latency in
naive animals)
Simple to carry out.
Clearly identifiable
endpoint response,
limits variability
between animals
under controlled
experimental
conditions.
Tail is the predominant
organ of thermoregulation
in the rat.
Factors that can affect
tail-flick latency and must be
controlled for within an
experiment include:
1. The rate of heating
(determined by the
power of the radiant
heat source),
2. The area of tail stimulated
(including site, proximal or
distal, and total area).
Prone to habituation (i.e.,
increase in latency) with
shortened inter-stimulus
interval and increased
stimulus intensity.
Tail-flick test
(immersion
method)
Immersion of the tail in a hot
liquid to produce a very rapid
and linear increase in tail
temperature.
Greater area of the tail
stimulated than for the radiant
heat method.
Latency to tail movement is
measured.
A noxious cold stimulus can be
used instead of a heat stimulus.
Selective activation of cutaneous
thermosensitive and nociceptive
fibers.
Rodents
Monkeys
Sudden movement of the
tail that may be associated
with whole-body
movements.
Maximum latency
(see above)
Simple to carry out.
Reflexes and higher
neural structures
generate the endpoint
behavior.
Capability to change
the temperature of
the water bath and
therefore alter the
sensitivity of the test
(e.g., to study
analgesics of different
efficacies).
Tail is the predominant
organ of thermoregulation
in the rat.
Latency will be modulated
by the surface area of the
tail stimulated.
Paw
withdrawal
test
Radiant heat is applied to the
plantar surface of the hind paw.
Latency to paw withdrawal is
measured, a photoelectric cell
timer switches off the lamp
(heat source) when the paw is
withdrawn.
Termed the “Hargreaves test”
when combined with
inflammation to study
hyperalgesia.
Selective activation of cutaneous
thermosensitive and nociceptive
fibers.
Rodents
Dogs
Paw withdrawal.
Complex behavioral
response.
Maximum latency
(see above)
Simple.
Animal is freely
moving, readily able
to perform withdrawal
responses.
Baseline temperature of the
skin will affect the latency to
withdrawal.
Freely moving animal,
background level of activity
in the flexor muscles of the
leg varies with the position
of the animal and this can
alter speed of withdrawal
response.
Radiant heat 	Heat source applied to a distinct
body part on the animal, e.g.,
coronary band in horses, flank
in pigs.
Radiant heat may be generated
by a light source or CO 2 laser.
Selective activation of cutaneous
thermosensitive and nociceptive
fibers.
Horses
Pigs
Cats
Withdrawal response to
move the body part away
from the stimulus, e.g.,
foot lift.
Maximum latency
(see above)
Simple. 	Some restraint is necessary
to allow the heat to be
focused on the selected
body part.
Baseline temperature of the
skin will affect the latency to
withdrawal.
Hot-plate test Animal is introduced to an
open-ended cylindrical space
with a floor consisting of a
metallic plate that is heated to a
constant temperature (most
commonly by a thermode).
Reaction time (latency) to a
behavioral response is measured.
Activation of cutaneous
thermosensitive and nociceptive
fibers, coactivation of
low-threshold
mechanoreceptors.
Rodents
Birds (adapted,
e.g., heated
perch)
Paw licking.
Jumping.
Other complex behaviors
such as sniffing or
washing may be observed.
Complex behavioral
responses that are
supraspinally integrated.
Maximum latency
(see above)
Various behavioral
endpoints may be
differentially sensitive
to analgesic drugs
(increases sensitivity of
the assay).
Stimulates all four limbs and
the tail simultaneously; may
therefore recruit descending
endogenous analgesia
mechanisms.
Complexity of behavioral
responses that vary between
animals can make it difficult
to define the endpoint.
Reaction times decrease with
increased testing of the same
animal, therefore difficult to
obtain a stable baseline.

-- 997 of 1450 --

982 	Section 6: Nociception and Pain
Table 46.3 (Continued)
Test 	Brief description of methods
including activation of
nociceptive/ pain pathways
Species in
which tests
are commonly
applied
Behavioral endpoint 	“Cut-Off” 	Advantages 	Disadvantages
Contact
thermode
secured to
the skin of
the animal
over a body
part that is
relatively flat
to ensure
sustained
contact at the
same pressure
Conventional thermodes have
slow (< 1 ºC/s) rates of heating
and selectively activate C fibers
rather than Aδ fibers.
Temperature at which a
behavioral response occurs is
the “threshold” temperature.
Activation of cutaneous
thermosensitive and nociceptive
fibers, coactivation of
low-threshold
mechanoreceptors.
Horses
Cats
Dogs
Birds
Reptiles
Nature of the response
varies between species,
time of the response (early
or late), and the site of
application of the stimulus.
Repertoire of behavioral
endpoints may be
documented, e.g., skin
twitch, head turn,
movement to try to avoid
the stimulus, leg lift (if
stimulus is applied to the
distal limb).
Reflex and organized
complex responses occur.
Maximum
temperature
varies depending
on species and
type of thermode
Equipment is relatively
simple to build.
Can apply to freely
moving animal and
well tolerated.
Nature of the endpoint may
vary between animals, can
be difficult to compare data
between animals and
between different
experimenters.
Limited sites of application
of the thermode dependent
on species.
Threshold temperature
affected by factors such as
starting skin temperature
and environmental
temperature.
Cold (rarely
used in phasic
tests of acute
pain in naive
animals,
commonly
used to assess
neuropathic
pain)
Application of a droplet of
acetone or ethyl chloride spray
to the hind paw to provide
localized cooling of the skin.
Use of ice-water baths (tail or
foot immersion) or cold plates
(e.g., Peltier cooled plate) on
which the animal stands.
Rodents
Dogs
Behavioral response (e.g.,
withdrawal) from the cold
stimulus is typically
observed, such as foot
lifting, latency to lift the
paw from a cold plate.
Maximum latency
(usually estimated
to be 4–5 times
the latency in
naive animals)
Abnormal sensory
responses to cold are
a common feature of
clinical neuropathic
pain states in humans.
Magnitude of the cold
stimulus is difficult to control
and is affected by the
ambient temperature and
the temperature of the
animal’s skin.
Table 46.4 Phasic tests utilizing mechanical stimuli.
Test 	Brief description of methods
including activation of
nociceptive/pain pathways
Species in
which tests
are
commonly
applied
Behavioral endpoint 	“Cut-Off” 	Advantages 	Disadvantages
von Frey 	von Frey filaments are blunt-ended
plastic hairs of various diameters on
fixed applicators. They are applied
locally (most commonly to the plantar
surface of the hind paw in rats) until
they bend, at which point they exert a
calibrated pressure. Filaments may
also be used to assess responses to
dynamic mechanical stimuli (e.g.,
brush allodynia). Automated and
electronic von Frey devices are also
available that provide a continuous
scale of application (e.g., electronic
esthesiometer). Site of application is
variable in animals other than rodents.
Activates Aδ and C fibers (depending
on filament diameter), coactivation of
low-threshold mechanoreceptors.
Rodents
Dogs
Horses
Cattle
Sheep
Withdrawal response
to move away from the
stimulus.
May be accompanied
by behaviors such as
licking (e.g., of the
paw) in animals with
inflammatory or
neuropathic pain
arising from the
stimulated area.
The von Frey filament
weight or the pressure
applied by an electronic
device required to elicit
withdrawal is recorded.
Manual von Frey filament
systems do not employ a
“cut-off,” although this may
be imposed by the
experimenter.
Automated devices allow a
maximum preset pressure to
be attained and the stimulus
application is stopped.
Maximum force (usually
estimated to be 4–5 times the
force in naive animals)
Easy to apply.
May evaluate
mechanical
hyperalgesia and
allodynia
(although
difficult to
distinguish
between them).
Widely used,
large body of
published
reference data.
No “gold standard”
protocol for application,
data generated between
different experimenters
and labs are very variable.
Not nociceptive specific
due to coactivation of
low-threshold
mechanoreceptors.
Debate about whether
stimulus application elicits
pain or nociception/
mechanical sensations
(e.g., touch) only.
Rate of application of
force not standardized in
manual von Frey testing.
Randall–
Selitto test
Hind paw is placed between a fixed
element (e.g., surface or blunt point)
and a mobile blunt point exerting
controlled pressure. The pressure is
usually provided by a sliding
counterweight system.
Activates predominantly Aδ fibers,
coactivation of low-threshold
mechanoreceptors.
Rats 	Threshold (in grams) for
appearance of a given
behavior.
The behavior may be a
reflex withdrawal,
struggling, or
vocalization depending
on the protocol.
Imposed by the experimenter,
should be below the level at
which stimulus application
causes tissue damage (usually
estimated to be 4–5 times the
force in naive animals)
When carried
out correctly, can
give reproducible
and reliable
readings.
Requires the animal to be
restrained in an unnatural
position, which requires
training and
prehabituation.
Strain
gauges
Strain gauges are fixed on blunt forceps.
The animal is loosely restrained, the
forceps are placed around the hind paw
and an incremental force is applied
until the paw is withdrawn.
Predominantly activates Aδ fibers
(dependent on probe type),
coactivation of low-threshold
mechanoreceptors.
Rats 	Withdrawal response. 	Imposed by the experimenter,
should be below the level at
which stimulus application
causes tissue damage (usually
estimated to be 4–5 times the
force in naive animals)
When carried
out correctly, can
give reproducible
and reliable
readings.
Rate of application of
force is variable depending
on the experimenter;
careful standardization is
required.

-- 998 of 1450 --

Chapter 46: Physiology and Pathophysiology of Pain 	983
Ethical considerations
It is widely acknowledged that studies in animals have played, and
will continue to play, a pivotal role in advancing knowledge and
developing new analgesic molecules in pain research. However, the
majority [233] of pain studies require the delivery of painful stimuli
to the animal, and therefore are associated with ethical concerns
and constraints that must be respected by the research community.
The IASP published guidelines on the ethical use of animals in pain
research and the updated ARRIVE 2.0 guidelines for reporting
research are good reference sources for those working in this
field [233]. The key points of the guidelines with respect to ethics in
pain research are summarized as follows:
• Understand moral and ethical issues and arguments associated
with the use of animals in experimentation.
• Understand how to design experiments that minimize the num-
bers of animals used, that maximize statistical inferences, and
Table 46.4 (Continued)
Test 	Brief description of methods
including activation of
nociceptive/pain pathways
Species in
which tests
are
commonly
applied
Behavioral endpoint 	“Cut-Off” 	Advantages 	Disadvantages
Mechanical
devices
used in
species
other than
rodents
A variety of devices have been
described, in general, force is applied
to a body part via a blunt-ended pin/
probe that is advanced against the
skin and tissues using pneumatic
devices that may be manually or
electronically controlled.
Nociceptive fiber activation will be
determined by the type of pin/probe;
sharp tips are more likely to activate
Aδ fibers, larger diameter blunt-ended
pins will more likely activate C fibers,
coactivation of low-threshold
mechanoreceptors.
Dogs
Cats
Horses
Chickens
Withdrawal response.
Stimuli commonly
applied to the limb
hence limb withdrawal
is a common endpoint.
Imposed by the experimenter,
should be below the level at
which stimulus application
causes tissue damage (usually
estimated to be 4–5 times the
force in naive animals)
Devices are
secured to the
animal allowing
it to move freely.
Well tolerated by
animals.
Rate of
application of
force can be
controlled.
Prehabituation may be
required to give
repeatable responses
within the same
individual.
Repertoire of behavioral
responses may be shown
that signal the “endpoint”
of the test, can lead to
variability between
different experimenters.
Table 46.5 Phasic tests utilizing electrical stimuli.
Test 	Brief description of methods
including activation of
nociceptive/pain pathways
Species in
which tests
are commonly
applied
Behavioral endpoint 	“Cut-Off” 	Advantages 	Disadvantages
Application of
long-lasting
trains of
electrical stimuli
applied to the
tail and/or paw
Electrical stimuli of gradually
increasing intensities are delivered
in trains lasting hundreds of
milliseconds using subcutaneous
electrodes or via the floor of a cage
in which the animal is placed.
Rodents 	Sequence of responses
depending on intensity from
reflex movement/
withdrawal, vocalization
during stimulation, and
vocalization that persists
after the end of the stimulus.
Responses are organized on a
hierarchical basis dependent
on the level of integration of
the nociceptive and pain
pathways.
Maximum
current intensity
(estimated to be
4–5 times the
intensity in naive
animals)
Complex
behavioral
responses can be
elicited.
Concurrent stimulation of
the paws and tail (electrical
stimulation delivered
through the floor) will
likely recruit endogenous
analgesia mechanisms.
Use of single
shocks or short
chains of
electrical
stimulation of
the tail
Threshold current intensity at
which a defined behavioral
response is displayed (± latency to
the response).
Stimuli delivered via subcutaneous
electrodes.
Rodents
Monkeys
Sequence of behaviors;
twitching, escape behaviors,
vocalizations, and biting of
the electrodes that are
hierarchically organized (see
above).
Vocalizations may be recorded
electronically and analyzed
(e.g., spectrum, reaction time,
threshold to vocalization).
Maximum
current intensity
(estimated to be
4–5 times the
intensity in naive
animals)
Complex
behavioral
responses can be
elicited.
Electrical
stimulation of
the dental pulp
Some evidence to indicate that most
of the afferent nerve fibers in dental
pulp are nociceptive, thus allowing
selective activation of nociceptive
fibers using electrical stimuli.
The experimental paradigm varies
depending on the physiology of
the tooth being stimulated (i.e.,
whether the tooth is continuously
erupting, e.g., rat incisors, or has
limited growth, e.g., cat and dog).
Rodents
Dogs
Cats
Monkeys
Disynaptic jaw-opening
reflex that can be recorded
electromyographically from
the digastric muscle in
awake animals.
Coordinate behavioral
responses such as licking,
chewing, or changes in facial
expression.
Maximum
current intensity
(estimated to be
4–5 times the
intensity in naive
animals)
Reflex response is
easily quantifiable.
Can reveal the
activity of
non-opioid
analgesics that
cannot be
detected by the
hot-plate test.
Debate over the selectivity
of the electrical stimulus to
activate nociceptive fibers.
Not sensitive to the
effects of NSAIDs.

-- 999 of 1450 --

984 	Section 6: Nociception and Pain
that maximize the recording of variables relevant to the assess-
ment of pain experienced by animals.
• Know how to employ a nociceptive stimulus or condition that is
minimal in intensity and duration (tested on the investigator when
possible) so as to shorten the duration of an experiment consistent
with the attainment of justifiable, ethical research objectives.
• Know reasons why unanesthetized animals should be minimally
exposed to nociceptive stimuli from which they cannot escape or
which they cannot avoid or terminate.
• Know reasons why pharmacologically paralyzed animals are
anesthetized or rendered neurosurgically insensate.
Maximum stimulus intensity
All phasic pain tests should incorporate a maximum stimulus inten-
sity that is not exceeded in any test and is below the threshold inten-
sity for that stimulus modality that is sufficient to cause lasting tissue
damage. This is fundamental to carrying out pain experiments ethi-
cally in animals. It is important to maintain the physiologic well-
being of the animal to ensure that collected data are valid, since
tissue damage at the site of stimulation will induce peripheral and
central sensitization that will result in a change in responsiveness in
the pain test over time. The time interval between the application of
each repeat test should be selected in order to prevent upregulation
of nociceptive pathways. These factors are particularly important in
tests involving the administration of analgesic drugs, where behavio-
ral responses to the assay may be obtunded until high stimulus
intensities would be otherwise attained.
Measurement of nociceptive withdrawal
thresholds in companion animals
In recent years, numerous studies have been published in which
nociceptive withdrawal thresholds were utilized to investigate the
analgesic efficacy of drugs in companion animals [234–238] and to
probe upregulation of nociceptive processes in clinical conditions
causing pain (e.g., after surgery or as a result of chronic inflamma-
tory diseases such as foot rot in sheep) [239–242]. Undoubtedly,
measurement of nociceptive withdrawal thresholds to assess anal-
gesic drug efficacy has a number of advantages. However, the effect
of confounding factors must be understood in order to maximize
the quality of the collected data. For example, environmental tem-
perature, skin temperature, and level of distraction of the animal
can all affect measured thresholds. Some advantages of the meas-
urement of nociceptive withdrawal thresholds to quantify analgesic
drug efficacy include the following:
• It is applied to naive animals to study the test drug in the target
species.
• It is an objective measure of drug effect against a standardized
noxious stimulus, thereby eliminating the variability associated
with measuring drug effect in a clinical pain model.
• The methodology is ethically acceptable; imposing a maximum
stimulus intensity below the level required to cause tissue damage
prevents lasting harm.
However, there are several important limitations associated with
the measurement of nociceptive withdrawal thresholds that must
be considered during data interpretation:
• The technique relies on the detection of an endpoint behavior that
may be reflexive (e.g., skin twitch) or more complex (whole-body
movement away from the stimulus). When measuring responses to
analgesic drug administration, it is important that the endpoint
response is standardized to reduce variability in the collected data.
• It is problematic to relate a change in threshold to the clinical
efficacy of the drug with any certainty.
• Owing to the requirement to impose a maximum stimulus intensity,
data are very commonly censored following administration of an
analgesic drug, so that the relative efficacies of different drugs (where
censorship occurs for more than one drug) cannot be determined.
• There is a minimal time interval required between subsequent
tests in order to prevent sensitization, which is problematic for
pharmacokinetic–pharmacodynamic studies where frequent
measurement of nociceptive thresholds is advantageous.
• Measurement of nociceptive withdrawal thresholds in naive ani-
mals allows the measurement of the analgesic effect of the drug
(e.g., analgesic efficacy of opioids) but does not allow the assess-
ment of the antihyperalgesic effects of drugs such as NSAIDs
unless an inflammatory focus is introduced.
Pain models – tonic tests
Some pain models induce pain created by tissue or nerve injury and
are therefore associated with medium- to long-lasting pain. Naturally
occurring disease models of pain in animals are attractive because
of their greater translatability to clinical pain conditions in humans;
however, the number of conditions for which a well-characterized,
spontaneous pain model exists is currently limited.
Table 46.6 Advantages and limitations of neurophysiologic techniques used
to measure pain in awake animals.
Technique 	Advantages 	Limitations
Raw
electroencephalogram
(EEG)
Flexible; the user can
manipulate the
recording equipment
in order to optimize
signal quality.
All EEG data are
retained, allowing
comprehensive and
detailed analysis.
Data are recorded in
real time rather than
provision of
discontinuous data
points.
Large quantities of data are generated
that can hinder interpretation.
Data require complex mathematical
processing after collection;
therefore, they cannot be
immediately interpreted.
Definition of an endpoint to a
ramped stimulus is therefore
problematic.
A basic understanding of EEG
recording is required.
Subcutaneous needle electrodes or
surface electrodes usually give a
poor signal-to-noise ratio in awake
animals; implantation of dural
electrodes for awake recordings is
invasive.
Evoked potentials,
e.g., somatosensory-
evoked potentials
(SEPs)
Evoked potentials
generated from
high-intensity
noxious stimuli
provide specific
information on the
neural processing of
noxious stimuli.
Targeted placement
of electrodes at
specific intracerebral
loci allows the brain
structures involved
in the neural
processing of pain to
be identified.
The SEP waveform is
relatively easy to
interpret.
Signal averaging is required to
generate a SEP; therefore, noxious
stimuli must be repeatedly applied.
The amplitude of the SEP signal is
small compared with the EEG or
electrical noise. Some skill is
required to generate a SEP with an
acceptable signal-to-noise ratio.
The stimuli used to generate a
SEP should only stimulate
nociceptive fibers or the SEP will
include non-nociceptive
components. This is challenging
and has only been achieved using
radiant heat generated by lasers.
Laser-evoked potentials reflect
predominately Aδ fiber-mediated
activity rather than C fiber activity.
Owing to the difficulties in
generating a noxious stimulus
that is time-locked to allow EEG
recording, SEPs are most
commonly generated by heat
(laser-evoked potentials) or
electrical stimuli only.

-- 1000 of 1450 --

Chapter 46: Physiology and Pathophysiology of Pain 	985
Animal models of pain should fulfill a multidimensional set of cri-
teria of validity to be considered relevant for human pathophysiology,
of which face, mechanistic, and predictive validity are considered piv-
otal [243]. Face validity is the similarity of what is observed in the
animal model to the human and is considered in terms of both etho-
logic validity (i.e., similarity in behaviors) and biomarker validity
(i.e., the function of the biomarker in representing underlying neuro-
biological mechanisms). Mechanistic validity assesses the similarity
of the mechanism working in the animal model to the mechanism
that is presumed to be working in the human disease, referring at the
same time to the mechanism that is considered to produce changes in
a biological biomarker and the mechanism that is sensitive to the
action of effective therapeutic agents. Predictive validity is the perfor-
mance of a therapeutic agent in the animal model compared with the
therapeutic efficacy in clinical patients. It is widely acknowledged
that current animal pain models fail to meet these criteria fully.
Induced pain models
Many different pain models have been developed with the primary
aim of increasing understanding and treatment of clinical pain states.
The majority of these have been developed in rodents, but some have
been translated to companion and farm animals. Models are broadly
divided into inflammatory or neuropathic pain models, although
some newer models trigger both inflammatory and neuropathic pain
mechanisms because it is recognized that many clinical pain condi-
tions in humans have both a neuropathic and an inflammatory com-
ponent [244]. Induced disease models have also been developed to
replicate some disease conditions in humans, such as painful diabetic
neuropathy and postherpetic neuralgia [245–247]. A large repertoire
of biomarkers is used to assay pain in animal models. Broadly, these
biomarkers can be classified based on whether the biomarker involves
(1) measurement of phasic responses to acute noxious stimuli in
awake animals (see above); (2) measurement of changes in spontane-
ous behavior; (3) assessment of affective state in more complex
behavioral tests; or (4) measurements conducted in anesthetized ani-
mals (e.g., nociceptive withdrawal reflexes [NWRs]).
Models of inflammatory pain
Most models of inflammatory pain involve the injection of inflam-
matory mediators themselves or of chemical substances that provoke
an immune response. The substances may be injected intrader-
mally or subcutaneously, intraperitoneally, or into the joint capsule.
Common cutaneous models of inflammatory pain and their advan-
tages and disadvantages are shown in Table 46.7. Recognition that
pain elicited from muscle has different characteristics from cutane-
ous pain has led to the development of models of muscle pain and
hyperalgesia to better understand the mechanisms underlying the
development of chronic muscle pain. Stimuli used to elicit muscle
pain include injection of low-pH saline (pH 5.2–6.9), carrageenan,
cytokines (e.g., tumor necrosis factor-α and interleukin-6), mustard
oil, zymogen, and hypertonic saline.
Arthritis is one of the most prevalent chronic health conditions and
is a leading cause of disability in humans. Therefore, arthritis pain has
long been a major area of research in biomedical science and different
animal models of arthritis are available for the assessment of joint pain
and analgesic drug effects. Commonly the knee (stifle) joint is studied
in OA models. Animal models of OA include spontaneous OA in spe-
cific strains of mice and guinea pigs, intra-articular injections of com-
pounds to induce joint inflammation, or surgical disruption of the
joint. Common models of arthritis (OA and rheumatoid arthritis) and
their advantages and disadvantages are summarized in Table 46.8.
Common methods of assessing arthritic knee joint pain are given in
Table 46.9, including their advantages and disadvantages.
Models of neuropathic pain
Neuropathic pain is characterized by sensory abnormalities such as
unpleasant abnormal sensation (dysesthesia), hyperalgesia, and allo-
dynia. A battery of neuropathic pain models have been developed in
animals in an attempt to simulate the diverse etiology of clinical neu-
ropathic pain conditions in humans. These models cause substantial
suffering to the animal, in terms of both pain severity and duration.
As such, predefined endpoints are usually imposed that can be used
to indicate when euthanasia of the animal is required. These end-
points are often relatively crude and relate to the general health sta-
tus of the animal, for example, weight loss. There are no translational
neuropathic pain models because the nerve damage required to pro-
duce neuropathic pain is irreversible. Table 46.10 gives an overview
of the characteristics of commonly used models of neuropathic pain,
with their advantages and disadvantages. Until recently, neuropathic
pain in these models was most commonly assessed by application of
phasic pain tests and assessment of behavior.
Models of visceral pain
Visceral pain, particularly arising from the bowel, is one of the most
common reasons for medical presentation in humans and an area of
unmet clinical need. Models of visceral pain in animals have been
developed to better understand both the underlying neurophysiology
of visceral pain pathways as well as the dysregulations of visceral
hypersensitivity that occur with functional bowel disorders, such as
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). However, modeling IBS is particularly
challenging because it is a functional disorder and therefore lacks sig-
nificant pathology around which an animal model is based. An over-
view of methods used to induce visceral pain or visceral sensitivity in
animals is given in Table 46.11. These methods are broadly divided
into phasic stimuli that cause transient visceral stimulation (e.g., colo-
rectal distension) and methods that produce tonic pain by inducing
sensitization of the viscera (e.g., injection of irritant substances into
the peritoneum or sensitization of the gut via instillation of irritant
substances into the gut lumen). A range of different outcome meas-
ures is used to evaluate visceral pain in animals, ranging from behav-
ior in awake animals to evoked reflexes and physiologic responses.
Behavior
Behavioral endpoints that are species-specific have been developed
to quantify visceral nociception. The behavior of the rat has been
scored during colorectal distension [248], where a graded score is
given dependent on whether behavioral responses are confined to a
brief head movement followed by immobility (score 1) through to
body arching and lifting of pelvic structures (score 4). Referred
somatic hyperalgesia associated with a noxious visceral stimulus is
also used as a criterion for visceral pain, evaluated by, for example,
application of von Frey hairs to the abdomen and scoring of subse-
quent behavioral responses. Owing to the prevalence of colic as a
clinical manifestation of visceral pain in the horse, a number of
methods are used to evaluate visceral pain in this species following
visceral distension. Endpoint behaviors include expulsion of the
balloon from the rectum (colorectal distension) associated with
flank watching [249,250] and signs of abdominal pain such as
pawing at the ground, kicking of the abdomen, and weight shifting
of the hind limbs following duodenal distension [251]. Writhing

-- 1001 of 1450 --

986 	Section 6: Nociception and Pain
Table 46.7 Common models of cutaneous inflammatory pain.
Name 	Model description 	Species 	Biomarker 	Advantages 	Disadvantages
Formalin test 0.5–0.1 5% formalin (37% formaldehyde) is
injected intradermally (in rodents it is injected
into the dorsal surface of the rat forepaw).
Injection initially activates nociceptors (phase
1, 3 minutes after injection); the late phase
(phase 2, 20–30 min after injection) involves
a period of sensitization during which
inflammatory phenomena (including paw
edema) occur.
Both phase 1 and 2 are considered to be
triggered by peripheral mechanisms; phase
2 involves central sensitization.
Rodents 	Change in complex
behaviors (licking, paw
lifting).
Behavioral reaction is
biphasic, accompanying the
biphasic nature of the
underlying neurophysiologic
mechanisms that evoke
pain.
Application of phasic pain
tests.
Paw volume.
Neurophysiology is well
understood.
Widely used as a pain assay,
a large database to describe
effects of different analgesics
in the formalin model is
available.
Pain is of short duration
(1–2 h), although
inflammation may persist
for a longer period.
Difficult to quantify the
pain-related behaviors,
therefore outcome
assessment can be variable
between experimenters.
Short-duration
inflammatory pain model
only.
Carrageenan Carrageenan is made from sulfated
polysaccharides extracted from red seaweed.
It is injected to elicit localized inflammation
through induction of an immune response
and activation of nociceptors.
Rodents (commonly
injected intradermally
in the paw).
Cats, horses (tissue
cage models)
Behavioral changes
associated with inflammatory
pain, generally less well
defined than following
injection of formalin.
Application of phasic pain
tests.
Paw volume.
Well-established pain model.
Does not elicit a systemic
immune response.
Site of injection may remain
thickened for a long
duration, precluding repeat
testing at the same site.
Difficult to solubilize; thick,
viscous substance that can
make injection difficult.
Complete
Freund’s
adjuvant
(CFA)
Suspension of heat-killed Mycobacterium
butyricum or Mycobacterium tuberculosum
in an adjuvant.
Doses used in rodent pain models produce
cutaneous inflammation that appears in
minutes to hours and peaks within 5–8 h;
duration of inflammation is ~ 24 h,
hyperalgesia can persist for 1–2 weeks.
Rodents (commonly
injected intradermally
in the paw)
See carrageenan 	See carrageenan 	See carrageenan
Mustard oil 	Elicits inflammatory pain by activating
transient receptor potential cation channel,
subfamily A (TRPA1), an excitatory ion
channel of primary afferent nociceptors.
Usually applied topically to the skin; effects
are of short duration.
Rodents 	See carrageenan
Zymogen 	A glucan from the cell walls of yeast;
activates primary afferent nociceptors.
Rodents 	See carrageenan
Kaolin 	A suspension of kaolin is injected
subcutaneously; may be mixed with
carrageenan.
Duration of inflammatory pain is ~ 1–2 days.
Cats
Rodents
Application of phasic pain
tests.
Well-established pain model. See carrageenan
Capsaicin 	Pungent component of chilies that activates
the transient receptor potential vanilloid
type 1 (TRPV1), a heat-sensitive cation on
nociceptor terminals.
Used to study neurogenic inflammation and
hyperalgesia. Intradermal injection of
capsaicin results in a flare reaction
(neurogenic inflammation), allodynia, and
hyperalgesia, the areas of which extend
beyond the injection site.
Duration of thermal and mechanical
hyperalgesia is dose-dependent but can be
up to 24 h.
Rodents
Humans
Application of phasic pain
tests.
Area of flare.
Translational.
Well-established pain model,
underlying neurophysiologic
mechanisms are well
described.
Poor relationship between
underlying pain mechanisms
following capsaicin and
clinical pain states.
Repeated application of
capsaicin results in
desensitization of
nociceptors to capsaicin
and other noxious stimuli
(which is reversible).
At high concentrations,
capsaicin will cause sensory
neuron toxicity and cell
death.
Skin incision 	A surgical skin incision is used to generate
inflammation.
Rodents 	Application of phasic pain
tests.
Behavioral changes
associated with
inflammatory pain.
Triggers inflammatory pain
mechanisms that are
identical to those triggered
by surgical trauma.
Invasive.
Cannot repeat in individual
animals.
Care must be taken to
ensure asepsis.
Surgery (e.g.,
castration
and OHE)
Animals undergoing routine neutering are
recruited for analgesia studies.
Cats
Dogs
Horses
Deer (e.g., velvet
antler removal)
Behavior.
Application of phasic pain
tests.
EEG and EPs.
Animals would be undergoing
surgery regardless, therefore
adheres to the experimental
principle of reduction.
Clinically relevant pain model
to allow study of pain
mechanisms and efficacy of
analgesic drugs.
Magnitude of the surgical
stimulus may vary
depending on patient
factors and the skill of the
surgeon.
Requires case recruitment
(i.e., owner consent).
UVB
irradiation
Exposure to a UVB light source to produce a
localized burn injury characterized by sterile
inflammation.
Rats
Pigs
Application of phasic pain
tests.
Translational.
Induces central and
peripheral sensitization.
Characteristics of the skin
will affect the magnitude
of the injury induced by a
standardized exposure to
UVB radiation.
UVB, ultraviolet B.

-- 1002 of 1450 --

Table 46.9 Common methods of assessing knee joint pain in arthritis.
Name 	Brief description of the biomarker 	Species in which the
outcome measure is
commonly utilized
Advantages 	Disadvantages
Weight bearing
on the hind paws
Weight distribution between the two hind paws
is measured as the force exerted by each hind
limb on a transducer plate in the floor over a
given period.
Weight borne by each hind limb is expressed as
a percentage of bodyweight.
A weight-bearing deficit on the affected limb is
taken as an indicator of pain.
Rodents 	Simple.
Translational.
Requires restraint of the animal and
does not assess weight distribution
to the forelimbs as occurs with hind
limb arthritis.
Indirect measure of knee pain.
Weight bearing
across all four
paws
Weight load is detected while the animal is
walking across four pairs of force sensor plates
on the floor of an enclosed walkway.
Rodents
Dogs
Assessment of arthritis
in other joints in
chickens, cats, horses
Simple.
Does not require restraint of the
animal although a constant
walking speed is usually necessary
to facilitate data interpretation.
Translational.
Animals are required to move,
which can be affected by
motivation (and is integrally linked
to pain).
Posture and gait
analysis
Static and dynamic behaviors have been
quantified using subjective rating scales.
Gait analysis using kinematic techniques.
Rodents
Large animal species,
including dogs, cats,
horses, chickens
Subjective scales are simple to use
and cost-effective.
Gait analysis techniques are
objective.
Translational.
Subjective scales are inherently
variable and unvalidated.
Gait analysis data can be difficult to
interpret and requires the animal to
walk at a constant speed.
Willingness to walk is affected by
motivation (and is integrally linked
to pain).
(Continued )
Table 46.8 Models of osteoarthritis (OA) and rheumatoid arthritis.
Name 	Model description 	Species 	Advantages 	Disadvantages
Spontaneous OA in
specific (e.g., Hartley
albino) guinea pig
strains
Bilateral disease of the knee joint that involves
cartilage degeneration, subchondral sclerosis, and
bone cysts. The pathogenesis is not fully
understood.
Guinea pigs 	Predictable onset and
progression of the disease.
Many similarities in disease
progression to human OA.
The strains of guinea pigs are expensive
to buy and must be housed for a long
period before severe OA changes
develop (up to 2 years).
Spontaneous OA in
other laboratory
animals
See above 	Hamsters
Mice
See above 	See above, although progression of the
disease will be more rapid in animals
with a shorter life span, such as mice.
Surgically induced OA 	Surgically induced trauma to the joint caused by
creation of a meniscal tear or meniscectomy.
Progressive changes in the knee joint occur relatively
rapidly post-surgery
Rats
Mice
Guinea pigs
Dogs
Rabbits
Reproducible.
Mimics pathologic changes
and pain of OA in humans.
Depending on the size of the animal
(species), the surgery can be
technically challenging.
Rapid progression of lesions after
surgery, therefore insensitive in the
detection of new compounds with
protective effects against the
development of OA.
Intra-articular
monosodium
iodoacetate (MIA)
injection into the
knee
Induces degeneration of cartilage by inhibition of
aerobic glycolysis, which kills chondrocytes.
Joint pathology is characterized by chondrocyte
necrosis resulting in decreased thickness of articular
cartilage and fibrillation of the cartilage surface,
separation of necrotic cartilage from the underlying
bone, and exposure of subchondral bone.
Can be induced
in many species,
commonly used
in rats
Induced pathology is similar
to human OA.
Arthritic changes take several weeks
to develop.
Inflammatory
monoarthritis (knee
joint)
Injection of kaolin and carrageenan into the joint to
produce an aseptic use-dependent monoarthritis
with damage to the cartilage, inflammation of the
synovia, and synovial fluid exudate.
Other irritants that may be injected include zymosan
and complete Freund’s adjuvant (CFA).
Predominantly
rats and mice;
cats, primates.
Joint inflammation develops
rapidly and persists for
weeks.
Large database relating to
use of the model in
laboratory animals.
Only mimics the acute inflammatory
phase of human OA.
Rheumatoid arthritis 	Polyarthritis induced by injection of immunogenic
adjuvants (e.g., CFA). The adjuvant is usually injected
intradermally or subcutaneously into the footpad or
base of the tail to generate a polyarthritis.
Predominantly
rats and mice
Well established and
reproducible.
Systemic nature of the arthritis can
affect the overall condition and
well-being of the animals and
confound pain assessment.
Immunogenic adjuvant arthritis induced by
intradermal injection of cartilage-derived proteins.
Rats
Mice
See above 	See above
Non-immunogenic adjuvant arthritis induced by
injection of compounds that do not contain major
histocompatibility complex-binding peptides but
involve T-cell activation, e.g., mineral oil injected
intradermally or subcutaneously.
Rats
Mice
See above 	See above
Gouty arthritis 	Injection of monosodium urate crystals dissolved in
saline or uric acid or suspended in mineral oil into
the knee joint to produce acute inflammation.
Rats
Mice
Dogs
Chickens
Cats
Acute synovitis generated
within a few hours that
resolves rapidly (within
3–7 days).
No signs of systemic disease.

-- 1003 of 1450 --

988 	Section 6: Nociception and Pain
Name 	Brief description of the biomarker 	Species in which the
outcome measure is
commonly utilized
Advantages 	Disadvantages
Spontaneous
mobility
Automated systems are available (e.g., biotelemetry,
activity boxes for rodents, or continuous video of
behavior and pattern recognition).
Collar-mounted accelerometers to track
movement over time along three axes.
Assessment of willingness to perform
spontaneous behavioral tasks, e.g., willingness
of dogs to walk upstairs or cats to jump up or
down from a raised surface.
Rodents
Large animal species
including dogs, cats,
horses, chickens
Objective.
Use of automated systems speeds
and simplifies data analysis.
Willingness to move is affected by
motivation (and is integrally linked
to pain).
Mechanical or
heat sensitivity of
the paw
See phasic pain tests (Tables 46.3 and 46.4).
Mechanical
sensitivity of the
knee
Knee joint is compressed using calibrated
forceps equipped with force transducers.
Force required to evoke a reflex withdrawal is
measured.
Rats
Mice
Measures sensitivity of the knee
joint that is not confounded by the
hind paw.
Translational.
Requires restraint of the animal.
Struggling
threshold angle
of knee extension
Tibia is extended until the animal displays
struggling behavior while the femur is held in
position; the extension angle is then calculated.
Rats 	Measures sensitivity of the knee
joint that is not confounded by the
hind paw.
Requires restraint of the animal.
Vocalizations
evoked by
compression of
the knee
Audible and ultrasonic vocalizations are
measured, representing nociceptive and
emotional-affective responses, respectively.
Rats
Mice
Ultrasonic vocalizations may give a
better indication of joint pain than
other reflexive measures such as
withdrawal thresholds.
Use of vocalizations has not been
fully validated in rodent OA models.
Neurophysiologic
measures
Measurement of nociceptive withdrawal
reflexes to electrical and mechanical stimuli in
anesthetized animals to measure upregulation
of central pain pathways.
Direct recording from dorsal horn neurons to
map peripheral receptive field size and neuronal
activity (threshold and firing frequency) in
response to non-noxious and noxious stimuli
applied in the receptive field of the cell.
Recording of spontaneous firing in peripheral
sensory nerve fibers.
Rats
Mice
Allows detailed investigation of
the neurophysiologic changes
accompanying pain caused by OA.
Requires anesthesia; experiments
are non-recovery.
Technically challenging.
Table 46.9 (Continued)
Table 46.10 Examples of common models of neuropathic pain, all of which are commonly induced in rats and mice.
Name 	Model description 	Induced behavioral changes 	Advantages 	Disadvantages
Peripheral nerve injury models
Axotomy
model
Complete transection of the sciatic
nerve at the mid-thigh level
combined with lesioning of the
saphenous nerve to induce complete
denervation of the hind limb.
A neuroma develops at the proximal
nerve stump.
Pain is produced in the absence
of any sensory input to the area.
Autotomy is often observed,
although whether this is an
indication of spontaneous pain
or a result of excessive
grooming in the absence of
sensory feedback is debated.
Complete nerve transection is
uncommon in humans.
Severe ethical issues associated
with autotomy.
Chronic
constriction
injury
3–4 loose silk ligatures are placed
around the sciatic nerve.
Constriction of the sciatic nerve is
associated with intraneural edema,
focal ischemia, and Wallerian
degeneration.
Mild-to- moderate autotomy,
guarding, excessive licking, and
altered weight bearing.
These features persist for at
least 7 weeks after surgery.
Clinical features correspond to complex
regional pain syndrome in humans and
the model has been used extensively
for research on spontaneous pain and
abnormal sensations.
Variable outcomes between
different animals likely associated
with the tightness of the ligatures
placed around the nerve and type
of suture material.
Partial sciatic
nerve ligation
Tight ligation of half to one-third of
the sciatic nerve using a single
ligature.
Paw guarding and licking, not
associated with autotomy.
Immediate onset and long-lasting
duration of allodynia and hyperalgesia
parallel pain in humans with causalgia.
Spared nerve
injury
The tibial and common peroneal
nerves are tightly ligated followed by
axotomy of the distal nerve, the sural
nerve remains undamaged (hence
spared nerve injury model).
Allows the comparison of difference
in mechanical and thermal
sensitivities of non-injured skin
territories adjoining denervated
areas.
See above 	Surgical model is relatively easy to
create compared with other models
and has lesser variability in the degree
of damage.
Allows simultaneous investigational
changes in both injured primary
sensory neurons and unharmed
sensory neurons so that their relative
contribution to the pathophysiology of
pain can be determined.

-- 1004 of 1450 --

Chapter 46: Physiology and Pathophysiology of Pain 	989
Name 	Model description 	Induced behavioral changes 	Advantages 	Disadvantages
Sciatic
inflammatory
neuritis
A catheter is implanted around the
sciatic nerve (under anesthesia),
which is used to inject zymosan in
awake, freely moving rats.
See above 	Human neuropathies are commonly
caused by inflammation or infection
rather than trauma, and inflammatory
events occur after trauma.
This model may better mimic many human
conditions causing neuropathic pain.
Cuffing of
the sciatic
nerve
Placement of a polyethylene cuff
around the sciatic nerve.
See above 	High reproducibility associated with a
more consistent magnitude of nerve injury
compared with nerve ligation or axotomy.
Central pain models
Weight drop
or contusion
model
Spinal cord is exposed at the
thoracolumbar level and a constant
weight is dropped on the spinal cord
to induce injury.
Severe paraplegia and complete
segmental necrosis.
Dysthesia, spontaneous, and
evoked pain.
Ethical considerations associated
with paraplegia.
Excitotoxic
spinal cord
injury
Intraspinal injections of excitatory
amino acids to simulate injury-
induced elevations of excitatory
amino acids.
See above 	Progressive pathologic changes
associated with the injection closely
resemble those induced by ischemic
and traumatic spinal cord injury.
Spinal
hemisection
Spinal cord is hemisected just cranial
to L1 with a blade.
See above 	Number and type of injured fibers are
controlled in each animal.
The injured and intact sides of the
animal are completely separated.
Drug-induced neuropathy models
Drug- induced
neuropathy
Systemic injection of drugs that
induce neuropathy such as vincristine
and cisplatin.
Induce neuropathy; the clinical
features are determined by the
nerve type targeted by the drug.
Non-surgical. 	Drugs often produce concurrent
effects on the general health of
the animal that can confound pain
assessment.
Disease-induced neuropathy models
Diabetes-
induced
neuropathy
Diabetes is induced in the animal,
e.g., by administration of pancreatic
β-cell toxins such as streptozotocin
(STZ) or use of transgenic animals
(mice) with type I and II diabetes.
Induce a peripheral neuropathy
with associated signs of
neuropathic pain.
Depending on the model can replicate
clinical signs associated with painful
diabetic neuropathy in humans.
Animals develop other metabolic
derangements associated with
diabetes that can confound pain
assessment.
Cancer pain
models, e.g.,
bone cancer
pain
Bone cancer is induced in the animal,
e.g., by inoculation of osteolytic
fibrosarcoma cells into the femur of
specific strains of mice.
Produce behavioral changes
attributed to neuropathic and
inflammatory pain.
Demonstrate the distinct pharmacologic
and neurochemical aspects of cancer
pain, suggesting the involvement of
inflammatory, neuropathic, and
tumorigenic components in the
pathogenesis of pain.
May induce systemic changes in
the animal associated with tumor
growth that can compromise
well-being and confound pain
assessment.
Table 46.10 (Continued)
Table 46.11 Common models of visceral pain.
Name 	Model description 	Advantages 	Disadvantages
Visceral distension 	Overfilling the bladder with fluid,
pressure distension of the colon,
duodenum, esophagus, or ureter.
Distension pressure is usually
controlled by a barostat (computer-
controlled pump).
“Natural”’ type of stimulus.
Mechanical distension is relatively easy
to control.
Challenging to develop devices that provide a
rapid distension (square-wave stimulus);
increasing ramp distension profile is more
common.
Type and predictability of the distension predict
outcome, independent of the distension pressure.
Repeated distension does not result in visceral
hypersensitivity; therefore, cannot replicate pain
and the heightened visceral sensitivity that occurs
in people with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
Chemical irritation to induce
hypersensitivity of the colon
prior to mechanical distension
Application of chemical irritants to the
colon (e.g., instillation of acetic acid,
mustard oil, turpentine, zymosan).
Induce peripheral and central
sensitization and increase responses to
mechanical distension.
Debate over whether chemical irritation prior to
distension induces changes similar to the
functional changes that occur in people with IBD.
Chronic irrigation of the
bladder to induce cystitis using
compounds such as mustard
oil and cyclophosphamide
Acute or chronic instillation of
compounds that are known irritants.
Chronic administration of compounds
causes histologic and neurophysiologic
bladder changes that are similar to
pathologic changes induced by clinical
conditions resulting in chronic cystitis.
Intraperitoneal injections of
irritant agents, e.g., acetic or
hydrochloric acid, bradykinin,
mustard oil
Well-established pain model. 	Parietal peritoneum receives somatic innervation;
therefore, model causes visceral and somatic pain.
Latency to writhing and duration are dependent
on the chemical properties of the injected irritant.
Models of acute pancreatitis
pain
Induction of pancreatic damage using
systemic injection (IV) of dibutyltin
dichloride; pancreatic injection of
capsaicin or bradykinin.
Histologic changes resembling acute
pancreatitis in humans develop.
There are almost no models of chronic
pancreatitis.

-- 1005 of 1450 --

990 	Section 6: Nociception and Pain
(i.e., stereotyped abdominal contractions, movements of the whole
body, twisting of the dorsoabdominal muscles, reduction in motor
activity, and motor incoordination) are evoked in response to intra-
peritoneal administration of irritants and are collectively used as
the outcome measure in the abdominal writhing test (rodents). The
movements are considered reflex responses and are quantified in
terms of their frequency. However, the frequency of cramps decreases
spontaneously over time and therefore the writhing test is not used to
assess the duration of action of putative analgesics. The number of
cramps is also extremely variable between individual animals.
Abdominal muscle contraction
A common endpoint in rodent studies of visceral nociception is
contraction of the abdominal muscles in response to colorectal dis-
tension, usually recorded using electromyography in both awake
(by prior implantation of EMG wires) and anesthetized ani-
mals [252,253]. There is a correlation between the distending pres-
sure and the integrated EMG signal or the number of spike bursts
during the period of distension. EMG responses in neck muscles
can also be recorded as a measure of nociceptive response to gastric
distension. To avoid implanting EMG wires in muscles, abdominal
contraction following balloon distension can be detected by ampli-
fying rapid changes in pressure that are induced in the balloon.
Physiologic responses
In awake rats, visceral distension causes an increase in blood pres-
sure and tachycardia, whereas, during deep anesthesia, a depressor
response and bradycardia are generally noted (although the magni-
tude of the depressor/bradycardia response is modulated by the
anesthetic agent used) [254].
Neuronal activity
The most direct approach to evaluate the effects of visceral distension is
the recording of the neuronal activity of afferent or second-order
neurons in anesthetized animals in acute electrophysiologic studies.
Longer-term neuronal responses are also evaluated by measuring c-fos
expression in different areas of the spinal cord in response to mechanical
distension. Visceral evoked potentials (EPs) following colorectal disten-
sion are used to evaluate visceral nociception in awake rats [254,255].
Naturally occurring disease models
The study of naturally occurring or spontaneous diseases in animals
has great potential because the underlying etiopathogenesis of the
pain more likely replicates the mechanisms that result in clinical pain
states in humans. With the exception of spontaneous OA in some
species of guinea pigs and rodents, spontaneous disease models are
most relevant to large animals. Spontaneous OA in the dog is a com-
monly used and appropriate (although perhaps not ideal) model for
translational and comparative studies based on animal size, anatomy,
disease mechanisms, clinical similarities, and response to therapy.
OA in dogs occurs as a result of trauma, degenerative changes, and
overuse, as it does in humans [256]. There is also interest in exploit-
ing naturally occurring OA in cats as a translational model for human
OA. However, with the exception of OA in dogs, there are few other
naturally occurring animal disease models that are validated as trans-
latable pain models for human clinical pain conditions. Bone cancer
pain (dogs) [257] and pain caused by idiopathic cystitis in cats [258] are
notable exceptions. Using naturally occurring diseases in companion
animals requires that validated outcome measures to assess pain are
available (e.g., Canine Brief Pain Inventory) [259,260]. This approach
overcomes the ethical considerations associated with creating
experimental pain in animals. However, limitations include: (1) ethi-
cal constraints imposed by studying pet dogs, and (2) lack of homo-
geneity of the disease processes. Companion animal disease models
are likely to be most useful as an intermediate step to study pain
mechanisms or analgesic drug efficacy that sit between preclinical
rodent models and experimental pain studies in humans.
Recent trends in pain evaluation in rodents
There is a growing trend in preclinical research to develop better
methods for assessing pain rather than nociception in rodents, thus
attempting to record and “take into account” the affective or emo-
tional component of pain in pain measurement. Although this area of
research is still in its infancy, significant efforts have been made to
develop novel measures of animal affect, many of them developed
from the fields of ethology and animal welfare science. Some examples
of new approaches to measuring pain in rodents are described below.
Place preference paradigm
The (conditioned) place preference paradigm is commonly used to
evaluate the affective/motivational properties of drugs. The para-
digm involves the pairing of a drug state with environments that have
distinctive stimuli (i.e., a place). During a period of learning, the ani-
mal learns to associate one environment with treatment and the test
drug and a second environment with a control treatment (e.g., saline).
Subsequently, the animal’s place preference is determined by allowing
the animal to choose between these two environments, with the
choice being made when the animal has not received the drug treat-
ment. This paradigm is used to evaluate the effect of analgesic drugs
on animals in chronic pain, with the underpinning rationale that ani-
mals in chronic pain should show a place preference for the environ-
ment that is paired with an analgesic drug. Place preference tests
require animal training and must be carried out carefully to avoid
confounding factors, for example, ensuring there are no factors
inherent in the test environment that might induce a place preference
other than the drug treatment. This type of test has been used to show
the analgesic effects of different classes of drugs in the complete
Freund’s adjuvant (CFA) inflammatory pain model in rats, bladder
cancer model in mice [261,262], and analgesic effects of butorphanol
in chickens with naturally occurring keel bone fractures [263] and in
calves undergoing disbudding [264,265].
Operant response paradigms
Operant response paradigms are commonly used in behavioral phar-
macology and have been adapted to study the analgesic efficacy of dif-
ferent drugs in rodents. Operant conditioning relies on training
animals to associate making a particular response with receiving either
a reward (e.g., a sugar pellet) or a punishment (e.g., a foot shock).
Operant paradigms allow the animal to exert control over the outcome,
which is one of the key differences between operant and Pavlovian con-
ditioning, where an outcome is associated with a stimulus over which
the animal has no control. An example of an operant paradigm is one
that gives a rat a choice between receiving a reward (e.g., sweet con-
densed milk) or preventing receipt of an aversive painful stimu-
lus [266–268]. To receive the reward, the animal must poke its nose
through an opening equipped with a thermode, so that the aversive
stimulus (e.g., heat or cold) is obtained at the same time as the reward.
Reward-seeking behavior is reduced following peripheral inflamma-
tion, an observation that is reversed with analgesic drugs. The operant
behavior paradigms allow the observation of more spontaneous types
of behaviors when compared with stimulus-evoked studies but require
considerable training and also have a motivational component that can
complicate the interpretation of pain-related behavior.

-- 1006 of 1450 --

Chapter 46: Physiology and Pathophysiology of Pain 	991
Assessment of spontaneous behaviors
Quantification of spontaneous behavior has long been recognized as
a useful tool for studying pain severity and analgesic drug efficacy in
rodents [269]. However, traditional behavioral analysis is limited
because it is extremely time-consuming, so only a limited range of
behaviors tend to be studied for a short period. The recent develop-
ment of automated systems to quantify behaviors in rodents has sig-
nificantly enhanced the capability of behavioral analysis in the study
of pain. These systems have the capacity to collect data continuously
and in a standardized way so that variation and error are minimized,
to provide information about the movement of individual animals,
and to track complex changes in behavior. Therefore, they offer the
opportunity to detect very subtle changes in the behavior of indi-
vidual animals in terms of both mobility and interactive behaviors
such as play, nesting, and lying with cage mates. This significantly
increases the sensitivity of behavioral assessment to detect pain and
the effects of analgesic drug administration.
Willingness to burrow (rats and mice) and to build nests in the
home cage (mice) are used as pain bioassays in experimental mod-
els of pain in these species. These tests use the principle that rodents
are highly motivated to perform these behaviors in their home cage
if given the means to do so (i.e., burrowing and nesting substrate);
therefore, quantifying an altered willingness to carry out these
behaviors offers a means to probe changes in affective state follow-
ing pain induction and subsequent administration of analgesic
drugs. Spontaneous burrowing behavior in rats is reduced by
peripheral nerve injury or inflammatory pain and the effect is
reversed by the administration of some analgesic drugs, showing
the utility of this assay in assessing pain-associated behavior [270].
Similar studies have been carried out in mice using burrowing
behavior [271] and nest-making [272], although not all pain
models result in burrowing deficits [273] and the administration of
analgesics minimally affects the complexity of nest building [274].
Facial expression
Emotions are associated with specific facial expression signatures
in humans and this premise has been translated to animals to
quantify changes in facial expression as a biomarker for pain.
Langford et al. [275] were the first group to formally develop a
facial coding scale for pain in mice (Mouse Grimace Scale [MGS]).
The scale was developed by capturing still images of mouse faces
before and after induction of abdominal pain caused by peritoneal
injection of acetic acid. Facial action units that were altered by pain
included orbital tightening, nose bulge, cheek bulge, ear position,
and whisker change. Importantly, following a formal training
session, blinded observers were able to discriminate between “in
pain” and “no pain” mice using the MGS. Langford et al. applied
the MGS to mice that had undergone different nociceptive tests
and found that the MGS was sensitive for some nociceptive assays
but not others. Noxious stimuli of moderate duration (10 min to 4
h) were most likely to be associated with a “pain face,” whereas very
brief noxious stimuli (e.g., phasic pain tests) and neuropathic pain
states were not detected by the MGS. This may reflect the nocicep-
tive nature of phasic pain tests, and the fact that pain of a longer
duration is not accompanied by a persistent change in facial
expression. Importantly, chemical lesioning of the rostral anterior
insula, a structure that is activated in humans by pain with an
important emotional component, produced attenuation of the pain
face. Pain scales using facial expressions have been extended to
other experimental animals, including rats, rabbits, horses, cows,
and pigs [276–280], and have been incorporated into clinical pain
assessment by many clinicians.
References
1 Raja SN, Carr DB, Cohen M, et al. The revised International Association for the
Study of Pain definition of pain: concepts, challenges, and compromises. Pain 2020;
161(9): 1976–1982.
2 Wall PD. Pain: The Science of Suffering. New York, NY: Columbia University Press, 2000.
3 Cesare P, McNaughton P. A novel heat-activated current in nociceptive neurons and
its sensitization by bradykinin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996; 93(26): 15435–15439.
4 Reichling DB, Levine JD. Heat transduction in rat sensory neurons by calcium-dependent
activation of a cation channel. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997; 94(13): 7006–7011.
5 Thut PD, Wrigley D, Gold MS. Cold transduction in rat trigeminal ganglia neurons
in vitro. Neuroscience 2003; 119(4): 1071–1083.
6 Gold MS, Gebhart GF. Nociceptor sensitization in pain pathogenesis. Nat Med
2010; 16(11): 1248–1257.
7 Lumpkin EA, Caterina MJ. Mechanisms of sensory transduction in the skin. Nature
2007; 445(7130): 858–865.
8 Jordt SE, McKemy DD, Julius D. Lessons from peppers and peppermint: the molec-
ular logic of thermosensation. Curr Opin Neurobiol 2003; 13(4): 487–492.
9 Goudet C, Magnaghi V, Landry M, et al. Metabotropic receptors for glutamate and
GABA in pain. Brain Res Rev 2009; 60(1): 43–56.
10 Messeguer A, Planells-Cases R, Ferrer-Montiel A. Physiology and pharmacology of
the vanilloid receptor. Curr Neuropharmacol 2005; 4: 1–15.
11 Holzer P, Izzo AA. The pharmacology of TRP channels. Br J Pharmacol 2014; 171:
2469–2473.
12 Nikolaev YA, Cox CD, Ridone P, et al. Mammalian TRP ion channels are insensitive
to membrane stretch. J Cell Sci 2019; 132: jcs238360.
13 Noël J, Zimmermann K, Busserolles J, et al. The mechano-activated K+ channels TRAAK
and TREK-1 control both warm and cold perception. EMBO J 2009; 28: 1308–1318.
14 Zimmermann K, Leffler A, Babes A, et al. Sensory neuron sodium channel Nav1.8
is essential for pain at low temperatures. Nature 2007; 447: 855–858.
15 Liedtke W. TRPV4 as osmosensor: a transgenic approach. Pflugers Arch 2005;
451(1): 176–180.
16 Gottlieb PA, Sachs F. Piezo1: properties of a cation selective mechanical channel.
Channels (Austin) 2012; 6(4): 214–219.
17 Woo SH, Lukacs V, De Nooij JC, et al. Piezo2 is the principal mechanotransduction
channel for proprioception. Nat Neurosci 2015; 18(12): 1756–1762.
18 Amato V, Viña E, Calavia MG, et al. TRPV4 in the sensory organs of adult zebrafish.
Microsc Res Tech 2012; 75(1): 89–96.
19 François A, Schüetter N, Laffray S, et al. The low-threshold calcium channel Cav3.2
determines low-threshold mechanoreceptor function. Cell Rep 2015; 10(3): 370–382.
20 Maingret F, Fosset M, Lesage F, et al. TRAAK is a mammalian neuronal mechano-
gated K+ channel. J Bio Chem 1999; 274(3): 1381–1387.
21 Cook AJ, Woolf CJ, Wall PD, et al. Dynamic receptive field plasticity in rat spinal cord
dorsal horn following C-primary afferent input. Nature 1987; 325(7000): 151–153.
22 Woolf CJ, King AE. Dynamic alterations in the cutaneous mechanoreceptive fields
of dorsal horn neurons in the rat spinal cord. J Neurosci 1990; 10(8): 2717–2726.
23 Cuellar JM, Dutton RC, Antognini JF, et al. Differential effects of halothane and
isoflurane on lumbar dorsal horn neuronal windup and excitability. Br J Anaesth
2005; 94(5): 617–625.
24 Staud R, Cannon RC, Mauderli AP, et al. Temporal summation of pain from
mechanical stimulation of muscle tissue in normal controls and subjects with fibro-
myalgia syndrome. Pain 2003; 102(1–2): 87–95.
25 Herrero JF, Laird JMA, Lopez-Garcia JA. Wind-up of spinal cord neurones and
pain sensation: much ado about something? Prog Neurobiol 2000; 61(2): 169–203.
26 Dickenson AH, Sullivan AF. Evidence for a role of the NMDA receptor in the fre-
quency dependent potentiation of deep rat dorsal horn nociceptive neurones fol-
lowing C- fibre stimulation. Neuropharmacology 1987; 26(8): 1235–1238.
27 Davies SN, Lodge D. Evidence for involvement of N-methylaspartate receptors in “wind-
up” of class 2 neurones in the dorsal horn of the rat. Brain Res 1987; 424(2): 402–406.
28 International Association for the Study of Pain (IASP) Revised Definition of Pain,
2020. www.iasp-pain.org/resources/terminology/#pain (accessed June 2023).
29 Treede RD, Rief W, Barke A, et al. A classification of chronic pain for ICD-11. Pain
2015; 156(6): 1003–1007.
30 Malfait AM, Miller RJ. Emerging targets for the management of osteoarthritis pain.
Curr Osteoporos Rep 2016; 14(6): 260–268.
31 Maurer M, Bader M, Bas M, et al. New topics in bradykinin research. Allergy 2011;
66(11): 1397–1406.
32 Mobarakeh JI, Sakurada S, Katsuyama S, et al. Role of histamine H1 receptor in
pain perception: a study of the receptor gene knockout mice. Eur J Pharmacol 2000;
391(1–2): 81–89.
33 Burnstock G. Purinergic mechanisms and pain – an update. Eur J Pharmacol 2013;
716(1–3): 24–40.
34 Bodin P, Burnstock G. Purinergic signalling: ATP release. Neurochem Res 2001;
26(8–9): 959–969.
35 Gokin AP, Fareed MU, Pan HL, et al. Local injection of endothelin-1 produces pain-like
behavior and excitation of nociceptors in rats. J Neurosci 2001; 21(14): 5358–5366.

-- 1007 of 1450 --

992 	Section 6: Nociception and Pain
36 Rattenholl A, Steinhoff M. Role of proteinase-activated receptors in cutaneous biol-
ogy and disease. Drug Dev Res 2003; 59(4): 408–416.
37 Smith JAM, Amagasu SM, Eglen RM, et al. Characterization of prostanoid receptor-
evoked responses in rat sensory neurones. Br J Pharmacol 1998; 124(3): 513–523.
38 Nandigama R, Bonitz M, Papadakis T, et al. Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor subtypes
expressed by mouse bladder afferent neurons. Neuroscience 2010; 168(3): 842–850.
39 Bandell M, Story GM, Hwang SW, et al. Noxious cold ion channel TRPA1 is acti-
vated by pungent compounds and bradykinin. Neuron 2004; 41: 849–857.
40 Karashima Y, Damann N, Prenen J, et al. Bimodal action of menthol on the tran-
sient receptor potential channel TRPA1. J Neurosci 2007; 27: 9874–9884.
41 Garrison SR, Dietrich A, Stucky CL. TRPC1 contributes to light-touch sensation
and mechanical responses in low-threshold cutaneous sensory neurons. J
Neurophysiol 2012; 107: 913–922.
42 Maroto R, Raso A, Wood TG, et al. TRPC1 forms the stretch-activated cation chan-
nel in vertebrate cells. Nat Cell Biol 2005; 7: 179–185.
43 Zimmermann K, Lennerz JK, Hein A, et al. Transient receptor potential cation
channel, subfamily C, member 5 (TRPC5) is a cold-transducer in the peripheral
nervous system. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011; 108: 18114–1819.
44 Paricio-Montesinos R, Schwaller F, Udhayachandran A, et al. The sensory coding of
warm perception. Neuron 2020; 106: 830–841.
45 Tajino K, Hosokawa H, Maegawa S, et al. Cooling-sensitive TRPM8 is thermostat
of skin temperature against cooling. PLoS One 2011; 6: e17504.
46 McKemy DD, Neuhausser WM, Julius D. Identification of a cold receptor reveals
a general role for TRP channels in thermosensation. Nature 2002; 416: 52–58.
47 Acosta C, Djouhri L, Watkins R, et al. TREK2 expressed selectively in IB4-binding
C-fiber nociceptors hyperpolarizes their membrane potentials and limits spontaneous
pain. J Neurosci 2014; 34: 1494–1509
48 Bautista DM, Siemens J, Glazer JM, et al. The menthol receptor TRPM8 is the
principal detector of environmental cold. Nature 2007; 448: 204–209.
49 Caterina MJ, Julius D. The vanilloid receptor: a molecular gateway to the pain
pathway. Annu Rev Neurosci 2001; 24: 487–517.
50 Woodbury CJ, Zwick M, Wang S, et al. Nociceptors lacking TRPV1 and TRPV2 have
normal heat responses. J Neurosci 2004; 24: 6410–6415.
51 Szallasi A, Cruz F, Geppetti P. TRPV1: a therapeutic target for novel analgesic
drugs? Trends Mol Med 2006; 12: 545–554.
52 Lee H, Caterina MJ. TRPV channels as thermosensory receptors in epithelial cells.
Pflugers Arch 2005; 151: 160–167.
53 Peier AM, Moqrich A, Hergarden AC, et al. A TRP channel that senses cold stimuli
and menthol. Cell 2002; 108: 705–715.
54 Moqrich A, Hwang SW, Earley TJ, et al. Impaired thermosensation in mice lacking
TRPV3, a heat and camphor sensor in the skin. Science 2005; 307: 1468–1472.
55 Güler AD, Lee H, Iida T, et al. Heat-evoked activation of the ion channel, TRPV4.
J Neurosci 2002; 22: 6408–6414.
56 Page AJ, Brierley SM, Martin CM, et al. The ion channel ASIC1 contributes to vis-
ceral but not cutaneous mechanoreceptor function. Gastroenterology 2004; 127:
1739–1747.
57 Calavia MG, Montaño JA, García-Suárez O, et al. Differential localization of acid-
sensing ion channels 1 and 2 in human cutaneus pacinian corpuscles. Cell Mol
Neurobiol 2010; 30: 841–848.
58 Drew LJ, Rohrer DK, Price MP, et al. Acid- sensing ion channels ASIC2 and ASIC3
do not contribute to mechanically activated currents in mammalian sensory
neurones. J Physiol 2004; 556: 691–710.
59 Bianchi L, Driscoll M. Protons at the gate: DEG/ENaC ion channels help us feel and
remember. Neuron 2002; 34: 337–340.
60 Mogil JS, Breese NM, Witty MF, et al. Transgenic expression of a dominant-negative
ASIC3 subunit leads to increased sensitivity to mechanical and inflammatory
stimuli. J Neurosci 2005; 25: 9893–9901.
61 Maingret F. TREK- 1 is a heat-activated background K+ channel. EMBO J 2000; 19:
2483-2491.
62 Franks NP, Honoré E. The TREK K2P channels and their role in general anaesthesia
and neuroprotection. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2004; 25: 601-608.
63 Honoré E. The neuronal background K2P channels: focus on TREK1. Nat Rev
Neurosci 2007; 8(4): 251–261.
64 Pereira V, Busserolles J, Christin M, et al. Role of the TREK2 potassium channel in cold
and warm thermosensation and in pain perception. Pain 2014; 155: 2534–2544.
65 Schneider ER, Anderson EO, Gracheva EO, et al. Temperature sensitivity of two-
pore (K2P) potassium channels. Curr Top Membr 2014; 74: 113–115.
66 Luiz AP, MacDonald DI, Santana-Varela S, et al. Cold sensing by Na V 1.8-positive and
Na V 1.8-negative sensory neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2019; 116: 3811–3816.
67 Wood JN, Boorman JP, Okuse K, et al. Voltage-gated sodium channels and pain
pathways. J Neurobiol 2004; 61: 55–71.
68 Akopian AN, Souslova V, England S, et al. The tetrodotoxin-resistant sodium
channel SNS has a specialized function in pain pathways. Nat Neurosci 1999; 2:
541–548.
69 Parpaite T, Coste B. Piezo channels. Curr Biol 2017; 27: R250–R252.
70 Coste B, Mathur J, Schmidt M, et al. Piezo1 and Piezo2 are essential components of
distinct mechanically activated cation channels. Science 2010; 330: 55–60.
71 Volkers L, Mechioukhi Y, Coste B. Piezo channels: from structure to function.
Pflugers Arch 2014; 467: 95–99.
72 Baccaglini PI, Hogan PG. Some rat sensory neurons in culture express characteris-
tics of differentiated pain sensory cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1983; 80(2): 594–598.
73 Caterina MJ, Schumacher MA, Tominaga M, et al. The capsaicin receptor: a heat-
activated ion channel in the pain pathway. Nature 1997; 389(6653): 816–824.
74 Liu B, Linley JE, Du X, et al. The acute nociceptive signals induced by bradykinin in
rat sensory neurons are mediated by inhibition of M-type K+ channels and activa-
tion of Ca2+-activated Cl– channels. J Clin Invest 2010; 120(4): 1240–1252.
75 Koerber HR, Druzinsky RE, Mendell LM. Properties of somata of spinal dorsal root
ganglion cells differ according to peripheral receptor innervated. J Neurophysiol
1988; 60(5): 1584–1596.
76 Rexed B. The cytoarchitectonic organization of the spinal cord of the cat. J Comp
Neurol 1952; 96(3): 415–495.
77 Wall PD. The laminar organization of dorsal horn and effects of descending
impulses. J Physiol 1967; 188(3): 403–423.
78 Light AR, Perl ER. Spinal termination of functionally identified primary afferent neu-
rons with slowly conducting myelinated fibers. J Comp Neurol 1979; 186(2): 133–150.
79 Ikeda H, Heinke B, Ruscheweyh R, et al. Synaptic plasticity in spinal lamina I pro-
jection neurons that mediate hyperalgesia. Science 2003; 299(5610): 1237–1240.
80 Craig AD, Kniffki KD. Spinothalamic lumbosacral Lamina I cells responsive to skin
and muscle stimulation in the cat. J Physiol 1985; 365: 197–221.
81 Swett JE, Woolf CJ. The somatotopic organization of primary afferent terminals in
the superficial laminae of the dorsal horn of the rat spinal cord. J Comp Neurol
1985; 231(1): 66–77.
82 Woodbury JC, Ritter AM, Koerber HR. Central anatomy of individual rapidly adapt-
ing low-threshold mechanoreceptors innervating the “Hairy” skin of newborn mice:
early maturation of hair follicle afferents. J Comp Neurol 2001; 436(3): 304–323.
83 Lu Y, Perl ER. Modular organization of excitatory circuits between neurons of the
spinal superficial dorsal horn (laminae I and II). J Neurosci 2005; 25(15): 3900–3907.
84 Lu Y, Perl ER. A specific inhibitory pathway between substantia gelatinosa neurons
receiving direct C-fiber input. J Neurosci 2003; 23(25): 8752–8758.
85 Zhang X, Ju G, Elde R, et al. Effect of peripheral nerve cut on neuropeptides in
dorsal root ganglia and the spinal cord of monkey with special reference to galanin.
J Neurocytol 1993; 22(5): 342–381.
86 Zhang X, Ji RR, Nilsson S, et al. Neuropeptide Y and galanin binding sites in rat and
monkey lumbar dorsal root ganglia and spinal cord and effect of peripheral axot-
omy. Eur J Neurosci 1995; 7(3): 367–380.
87 Molliver DC, Radeke MJ, Feinstein SC, et al. Presence or absence of TrKA protein
distinguishes subsets of small sensory neurons with unique cytochemical charac-
teristics and dorsal horn projections. J Comp Neurol 1995; 361(3): 404–416.
88 Saeed AW, Ribeiro-da-Silva A. Non-peptidergic primary afferents are presynaptic
to neurokinin- 1 receptor immunoreactive lamina I projection neurons in rat spinal
cord. Mol Pain 2012; 8: 64.
89 Taylor AMW, Peleshok JC, Ribeiro-Da-Silva A. Distribution of P2X3-immunoreactive
fibers in hairy and glabrous skin of the rat. J Comp Neurol 2009; 514(6): 555–566.
90 Perry MJ, Lawson SN. Differences in expression of oligosaccharides neuropeptides,
carbonic anhydrase and neurofilament in rat primary afferent neurons retrogradely
labelled via skin, muscle or visceral nerves. Neuroscience 1998; 85(1): 293–310.
91 Le Bars D, Cadden SW. What is a Wide-Dynamic-Range cell? Pain 2010; 5: 331–338.
92 Sugiura Y, Terui N, Hosoya Y. Difference in distribution of central terminals between
visceral and somatic unmyelinated (C) primary afferent fibers. J Neurophysiol 1989;
62(4): 834–840.
93 Olivar T, Cervero F, Laird JMA. Responses of rat spinal neurones to natural and
electrical stimulation of colonic afferents: effect of inflammation. Brain Res 2000;
866(1–2): 168–177.
94 Grudt TJ, Perl ER. Correlations between neuronal morphology and electro-
physiological features in the rodent superficial dorsal horn. J Physiol 2002; 540(Pt 1):
189–207.
95 Maxwell DJ, Belle MD, Cheunsuang O, et al. Morphology of inhibitory and excita-
tory interneurons in superficial laminae of the rat dorsal horn. J Physiol 2007;
584(Pt 2): 521–533.
96 Yasaka T, Tiong SYX, Hughes DI, et al. Populations of inhibitory and excitatory
interneurons in lamina II of the adult rat spinal dorsal horn revealed by a combined
electrophysiological and anatomical approach. Pain 2010; 151(2): 475–588.
97 Todd AJ, Spike RC. The localization of classical transmitters and neuropeptides
within neurons in laminae I-III of the mammalian spinal dorsal horn. Prog
Neurobiol 1993; 41(5): 609–645.
98 Todd AJ. Neuronal circuitry for pain processing in the dorsal horn. Nat Rev
Neurosci 2010; 11(12): 823–836.
99 Polgár E, Hughes DI, Riddell JS, et al. Selective loss of spinal GABAergic or glycinergic
neurons is not necessary for development of thermal hyperalgesia in the chronic con-
striction injury model of neuropathic pain. Pain 2003; 104(1–2): 229–239.

-- 1008 of 1450 --

Chapter 46: Physiology and Pathophysiology of Pain 	993
100 Chédotal A. Roles of axon guidance molecules in neuronal wiring in the develop-
ing spinal cord. Nat Rev Neurosci 2019; 20(7): 380–396.
101 Kayalioglu G. Projections from the spinal cord to the brain. In: Watson C, Paxinos
G, Kayalioglu G, eds. The Spinal Cord: A Christopher and Dana Reeve Foundation
Text and Atlas, 3rd edn. New York, NY: Elsevier/Academic Press, 2009: 148–167.
102 Hains BC, Waxman SG. Activated microglia contribute to the maintenance of
chronic pain after spinal cord injury. J Neurosci 2006; 26(16): 4308–4317.
103 Scholz J, Woolf CJ. The neuropathic pain triad: neurons, immune cells and glia.
Nat Neurosci 2007; 10(11): 1361–1368.
104 Ji RR, Berta T, Nedergaard M. Glia and pain: is chronic pain a gliopathy? Pain
2013; 154(Suppl 1): S10–S28.
105 Todd AJ. Anatomy of primary afferents and projection neurones in the rat spinal
dorsal horn with particular emphasis on substance P and the neurokinin 1 recep-
tor. Exp Physiol 2002; 87(2): 245–249.
106 Doyle CA, Hunt SP. Substance P receptor (neurokinin-1)- expressing neurons in
lamina I of the spinal cord encode for the intensity of noxious stimulation: a c-Fos
study in rat. Neuroscience 1999; 89(1): 17–28.
107 Suzuki R, Morcuende S, Webber M, et al. Superficial NK1-expressing neurons
control spinal excitability through activation of descending pathways. Nat
Neurosci 2002; 5(12): 1319–1326.
108 Gauriau C, Bernard JF. Pain pathways and parabrachial circuits in the rat. Exp
Physiol 2010; 87(2): 251–258.
109 Dostrovsky J, Craig A. Ascending projection systems. In: McMahon S, Koltzenburg
M, Tracey I, Turk D, eds. Textbook of Pain, 6th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier
Saunders, 2013: 182–197.
110 Dum RP, Levinthal DJ, Strick PL. The spinothalamic system targets motor and sen-
sory areas in the cerebral cortex of monkeys. J Neurosci 2009; 29(45): 14223–14235.
111 Sengul G, Watson C. Ascending and descending pathways in the spinal cord. In: Paxinos
G, ed. The Rat Nervous System, 4th edn. New York, NY: Academic Press, 2014: 115–130.
112 Craig AD. Pain Mechanisms: labeled lines versus convergence in central process-
ing. Annu Rev Neurosci 2003; 26: 1–30.
113 Waters AJ, Lumb BM. Descending control of spinal nociception from the periaq-
ueductal grey distinguishes between neurons with and without C-fibre inputs.
Pain 2008; 134(1–2): 32–40.
114 Benarroch EE. Descending monoaminergic pain modulation: bidirectional con-
trol and clinical relevance. Neurology 2008; 71(3): 217–221.
115 Keay KA, Bandler R. Periaqueductal gray. In: Paxinos G, ed. The Rat Nervous
System. New York, NY: Elsevier, 2015: 207–221.
116 Behbehani MM. Functional characteristics of the midbrain periaqueductal gray.
Prog Neurobiol 1995; 46(6): 575–605.
117 Lu Y, Sweitzer SM, Laurito CE, et al. Differential opioid inhibition of C- and A
delta- fiber mediated thermonociception after stimulation of the nucleus raphe
magnus. Anesth Analg 2004; 98: 414-419.
118 McMullan S, Lumb BM. Midbrain control of spinal nociception discriminates
between responses evoked by myelinated and unmyelinated heat nociceptors in
the rat. Pain 2006; 124: 59-68.
119 Heinricher MM, Tavares I, Leith JL, et al. Descending control of nociception:
Specificity, recruitment and plasticity. Brain Res Rev 2009; 60: 214-225.
120 Villanueva L, Le Bars D. The activation of bulbo-spinal controls by peripheral noci-
ceptive inputs: Diffuse noxious inhibitory controls. Biol Res 1995; 28: 113-125.
121 Calejesan AA, Kim SJ, Zhuo M. Descending facilitatory modulation of a behavio-
ral nociceptive response by stimulation in the adult rat anterior cingulate cortex.
Eur J Pain 2000; 4: 83- 96.
122 White K, Targett M, Harris J. Gainfully employing descending controls in acute
and chronic pain management. Vet J 2018; 237: 16–25.
123 Fields HL, Vanegas H, Hentall ID, et al. Evidence that disinhibition of brain stem
neurones contributes to morphine analgesia. Nature 1983; 306(5944): 684–686.
124 Cleary DR, Neubert MJ, Heinricher MM. Are opioid-sensitive neurons in the rostral
ventromedial medulla inhibitory interneurons? Neuroscience 2008; 151(2): 564–571.
125 Lau BK, Vaughan CW. Descending modulation of pain: the GABA disinhibition
hypothesis of analgesia. Curr Opin Neurobiol 2014; 29: 159–164.
126 Salas R, Ramirez K, Vanegas H, et al. Activity correlations between on-like and off-like
cells of the rostral ventromedial medulla and simultaneously recorded wide-dynamic-
range neurons of the spinal dorsal horn in rats. Brain Res 2016; 1652: 103–110.
127 Millan MJ. Descending control of pain. Prog Neurobiol 2002; 66(6): 355–474.
128 Gu L, Uhelski ML, Anand S, et al. Pain inhibition by optogenetic activation of
specific anterior cingulate cortical neurons. PLoS ONE 2015; 10(2): e0117746.
129 Kang SJ, Kwak C, Lee J, et al. Bidirectional modulation of hyperalgesia via the
specific control of excitatory and inhibitory neuronal activity in the ACC. Mol
Brain 2015; 8(1): 81.
130 Fuchs PN, Peng YB, Boyette-Davis JA, et al. The anterior cingulate cortex and pain
processing. Front Integr Neurosci 2014; 8: 35.
131 Koch SC, Fitzgerald M. The selectivity of rostroventral medulla descending con-
trol of spinal sensory inputs shifts postnatally from A fibre to C fibre evoked activ-
ity. J Physiol 2014; 592(7): 1535–1544.
132 Hathway GJ, Koch S, Low L, et al. The changing balance of brainstem-spinal cord
modulation of pain processing over the first weeks of rat postnatal life. J Physiol
2009; 587(Pt 12): 2927–2935.
133 Li MH, Suchland KL, Ingram SL. GABAergic transmission and enhanced modu-
lation by opioids and endocannabinoids in adult rat rostral ventromedial medulla.
J Physiol 2015; 593(1): 217–230.
134 Hathway GJ, Vega- Avelaira D, Fitzgerald M. A critical period in the supraspinal
control of pain: opioid-dependent changes in brainstem rostroventral medulla
function in preadolescence. Pain 2012; 153(4): 775–783.
135 Schwaller F, Kwok C, Fitzgerald M. Postnatal maturation of the spinal-bulbo-spinal
loop: brainstem control of spinal nociception is independent of sensory input in
neonatal rats. Pain 2016; 157(3): 677–686.
136 Tracey I. Getting the pain you expect: mechanisms of placebo, nocebo and reap-
praisal effects in humans. Nat Med 2010; 16(11): 1277–1283.
137 Zhuo M. Neural mechanisms underlying anxiety-chronic pain interactions.
Trends Neurosci 2016; 39(3): 136–145.
138 Wiech K, Ploner M, Tracey I. Neurocognitive aspects of pain perception. Trends
Cogn Sci 2008; 12(8): 306–313.
139 Wiech K, Tracey I. The influence of negative emotions on pain: behavioral effects
and neural mechanisms. Neuroimage 2009; 47(3): 987–994.
140 Bannister K, Dickenson AH. What do monoamines do in pain modulation? Curr
Opin Support Palliat Care 2016; 10(20): 143–148.
141 Zhuo M, Gebhart G. Characterization of descending inhibition and facilitation
from the nuclei reticularis-gigantocellularis and gigantocellularis pars alpha in the
rat. Pain 1990; 42(3): 337–350.
142 Zhuo M, Gebhart GE. Spinal cholinergic and monoaminergic receptors mediate
descending inhibition from the nuclei reticularis gigantocellularis and gigantocel-
lularis pars alpha in the rat. Brain Res 1990; 535(1): 67–78.
143 Zhuo M, Gebhart GF. Spinal serotonin receptors mediate descending facilitation
of a nociceptive reflex from the nuclei reticularis gigantocellularis and gigantocel-
lularis pars alpha in the rat. Brain Res 1991; 550(1): 35–48.
144 Dahlstroem A, Fuxe K. Evidence for the existence of monoamine-containing neu-
rons in the central nervous system. I. Demonstration of monoamines in the cell
bodies of brain stem neurons. Acta Physiol Scand Suppl 1964; 232(Suppl): 1–55.
145 Antunes-Rodrigues J, De Castro M, Elias LLK, et al. Neuroendocrine control of
body fluid metabolism. Physiol Rev 2004; 84(1): 169–208.
146 Rinaman L. Hindbrain noradrenergic A2 neurons: diverse roles in autonomic,
endocrine, cognitive, and behavioral functions. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp
Physiol 2011; 300(2): R222–R235.
147 Felten DL, Sladek JR. Monoamine distribution in primate brain V. Monoaminergic
nuclei: anatomy, pathways and local organization. Brain Res Bull 1983; 10(2): 171–284.
148 Pertovaara A. Noradrenergic pain modulation. Prog Neurobiol 2006; 80(2): 53–83.
149 Gyires K, Zádori ZS, Török T, et al. Alpha(2) Adrenoceptor subtypes-mediated
physiological, pharmacological actions. Neurochem Int 2009; 55(7): 447–453.
150 Pertovaara A. The noradrenergic pain regulation system: a potential target for
pain therapy. Eur J Pharmacol 2013; 716(1–3): 2–7.
151 Jones SL, Gebhart GF. Characterization of coeruleospinal inhibition of the nocic-
eptive tail-flick reflex in the rat: mediation by spinal alpha 2-adrenoceptors. Brain
Res 1986; 364(2): 315–330.
152 Llorca-Torralba M, Borges G, Neto F, et al. Noradrenergic locus coeruleus path-
ways in pain modulation. Neuroscience 2016; 338: 93–113.
153 Wrzosek A, Woron J, Dobrogowski J, et al. Topical clonidine for neuropathic pain.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015; 8(8): CD010967.
154 Al-Metwalli RR, Mowafi HA, Ismail SA, et al. Effect of intra-articular dexmedeto-
midine on postoperative analgesia after arthroscopic knee surgery. Br J Anaesth
2008; 101(3): 395–399.
155 Eisenach JC, DuPen S, Dubois M, et al. Epidural clonidine analgesia for intracta-
ble cancer pain. Pain 1995; 61(3): 391–399.
156 Yaksh TL, Pogrel JW, Lee YW, et al. Reversal of nerve ligation-induced allodynia by
spinal alpha-2 adrenoceptor agonists. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1995; 272(1): 207–214.
157 Mansikka H, Idänpään-Heikkilä JJ, Pertovaara A. Different roles of α2-adrenoceptors
of the medulla versus the spinal cord in modulation of mustard oil-induced central
hyperalgesia in rats. Eur J Pharmacol 1996; 297(1): 19–26.
158 Xu M, Kontinen VK, Kalso E. Endogenous noradrenergic tone controls symptoms
of allodynia in the spinal nerve ligation model of neuropathic pain. Eur J Pharmacol
1999; 366(1): 41–45.
159 Poree LR, Guo TZ, Kingery WS, et al. The analgesic potency of dexmedetomidine
is enhanced after nerve injury: a possible role for peripheral alpha-2-adrenoceptors.
Anesth Analg 1998; 87(4): 941–948.
160 Kingery WS, Guo TZ, Davies MF, et al. The α(2A) adrenoceptor and the sympa-
thetic postganglionic neuron contribute to the development of neuropathic heat
hyperalgesia in mice. Pain 2000; 85(3): 345–358.
161 Malmberg AB, Hedley LR, Jasper JR, et al. Contribution of α 2 receptor subtypes
to nerve injury-induced pain and its regulation by dexmedetomidine. Br J
Pharmacol 2001; 132(8): 1827–1836.

-- 1009 of 1450 --

994 	Section 6: Nociception and Pain
162 Lähdesmäki J, Scheinin M, Pertovaara A, et al. The α2A-adrenoceptor subtype is
not involved in inflammatory hyperalgesia or morphine-induced antinociception.
Eur J Pharmacol 2003; 468(3): 183–189.
163 Green GM, Lyons L, Dickenson AH. Alpha-2- Adrenoceptor antagonists enhance
responses of dorsal horn neurones to formalin induced inflammation. Eur J
Pharmacol 1998; 347(2–3): 201–204.
164 Rahman W, D’Mello R, Dickenson AH. Peripheral nerve injury-induced changes
in spinal alpha(2)-adrenoceptor-mediated modulation of mechanically evoked
dorsal horn neuronal responses. J Pain 2008; 9(4): 350–359.
165 De Felice M, Sanoja R, Wang R, et al. Engagement of descending inhibition from
the rostral ventromedial medulla protects against chronic neuropathic pain. Pain
2011; 152(12): 2701–2709.
166 Hughes S, Hickey L, Donaldson LF, et al. Intrathecal reboxetine suppresses evoked
and ongoing neuropathic pain behaviours by restoring spinal noradrenergic
inhibitory tone. Pain 2015; 156(2): 328–334.
167 Le Bars D. Serotonin and pain. In: Osborne NN, Hamon M, eds. Neuronal
Serotonin. New York, NY: Wiley, 1988: 171–229.
168 Dogrul A, Ossipov MH, Porreca F. Differential mediation of descending pain
facilitation and inhibition by spinal 5HT-3 and 5HT-7 receptors. Brain Res 2009;
1280: 52–59.
169 Zhang YQ, Gao X, Huang YL, et al. Expression of 5-HT1A receptor mRNA in rat
dorsal raphe nucleus and ventrolateral periaqueductal gray neurons after periph-
eral inflammation. Neuroreport 2000; 11(15): 3361–3365.
170 Cai YQ, Wang W, Hou YY, et al. Optogenetic activation of brainstem serotonergic
neurons induces persistent pain sensitization. Mol Pain 2014; 10: 70.
171 Braz JM, Basbaum AI. Genetically expressed transneuronal tracer reveals direct and indi-
rect serotonergic descending control circuits. J Comp Neurol 2008; 507(6): 1990–2003.
172 Suzuki R, Rahman W, Hunt SP, et al. Descending facilitatory control of mechani-
cally evoked responses is enhanced in deep dorsal horn neurones following
peripheral nerve injury. Brain Res 2004; 1019(1–2): 68–76.
173 Dogrul A, Ossipov MH, Porreca F. Differential mediation of descending pain facilitation
and inhibition by spinal 5HT-3 and 5HT-7 receptors. Brain Res 2009; 1280: 52–59.
174 Viguier F, Michot B, Hamon M, et al. Multiple roles of serotonin in pain control
mechanisms-implications of 5-HT₇ and other 5-HT receptor types. Eur J Pharmacol
2013; 716(1–3): 8–16.
175 Urban MO, Gebhart GF. Supraspinal contributions to hyperalgesia. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 1999; 96(14): 7687–7692.
176 Porreca F, Ossipov MH, Gebhart GF. Chronic pain and medullary descending
facilitation. Trends Neurosci 2002; 25(6): 319–325.
177 Magnusson JE, Fisher K. The involvement of dopamine in nociception: the role of D1
and D2 receptors in the dorsolateral striatum. Brain Res 2000; 855(2): 260–266.
178 Gao X, Zhang Y, Wu G. Effects of dopaminergic agents on carrageenan hyperalgesia
after intrathecal administration to rats. Eur J Pharmacol 2001; 418(1–3): 73–77.
179 Wood PB. Role of central dopamine in pain and analgesia. Expert Rev Neurother
2008; 8(5): 781–797.
180 Cenci MA. Dopamine dysregulation of movement control in l-DOPA-induced
dyskinesia. Trends Neurosci 2007; 30(5): 236–243.
181 Baik JH. Dopamine signaling in reward-related behaviors. Front Neural Circuits
2013; 7: 152.
182 Robbins TW, Arnsten AFT. The neuropsychopharmacology of fronto-executive
function: monoaminergic modulation. Annu Rev Neurosci 2009; 32: 267–287.
183 Werlen E, Jones MW. Modulating the map: dopaminergic tuning of hippocampal
spatial coding and interactions. Prog Brain Res 2015; 219: 187–216.
184 Evans MS, Lysakowski C, Tramèr MR. Nefopam for the prevention of postopera-
tive pain: quantitative systematic review. Br J Anaesth 2008; 101(5): 610–617.
185 Park HJ, Park JU, Yoo W, et al. Analgesic effects of nefopam in patients undergoing
bimaxillary osteotomy: a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study. J
Craniomaxillofac Surg 2016; 44(2): 210–214.
186 Gjerstad J, Tjølsen A, Svendsen F, et al. Inhibition of spinal nociceptive responses
after intramuscular injection of capsaicin involves activation of noradrenergic and
opioid systems. Brain Res 2000; 859(1): 132–136.
187 Waters AJ, Lumb BM. Inhibitory effects evoked from both the lateral and ventro-
lateral periaqueductal grey are selective for the nociceptive responses of rat dorsal
horn neurones. Brain Res 1997; 752(1–2): 239–249.
188 Vanegas H, Vazquez E, Tortorici V. NSAIDS, opioids, cannabinoids and the control
of pain by the central nervous system. Pharmaceuticals 2010; 3(5): 1335–1347.
189 Zubieta J-K, Bueller JA, Jackson LR, et al. Placebo effects mediated by endogenous
opioid activity on μ-opioid receptors. J Neurosci 2005; 25(34): 7754–7762.
190 Petrovic P, Kalso E, Petersson KM, et al. A prefrontal non-opioid mechanism in
placebo analgesia. Pain 2010; 150(1): 59–65.
191 Eippert F, Bingel U, Schoell ED, et al. Activation of the opioidergic descending
pain control system underlies placebo analgesia. Neuron 2009; 63(4): 533–543.
192 Krummenacher P, Candia V, Folkers G, et al. Prefrontal cortex modulates placebo
analgesia. Pain 2010; 148(3): 368–374.
193 Jenkins S, Worthington M, Harris J, et al. Differential modulation of withdrawal
reflexes by a cannabinoid in the rabbit. Brain Res 2004; 1012(1–2): 146–153.
194 Tham SM, Angus JA, Tudor EM, et al. Synergistic and additive interactions of the
cannabinoid agonist CP55,940 with μ opioid receptor and alpha2-adrenoceptor
agonists in acute pain models in mice. Br J Pharmacol 2005; 144(6): 875–884.
195 Guindon J, Beaulieu P. Antihyperalgesic effects of local injections of anandamide,
ibuprofen, rofecoxib and their combinations in a model of neuropathic pain.
Neuropharmacology 2006; 50(7): 814–823.
196 Guindon J, Hohmann AG. The endocannabinoid system and pain. CNS Neurol
Disord Drug Target 2009; 8(6): 403–421.
197 Sagar DR, Staniaszek LE, Okine BN, et al. Tonic modulation of spinal hyperexcit-
ability by the endocannabinoid receptor system in a rat model of osteoarthritis
pain. Arthritis Rheum 2010; 62(12): 3666–3676.
198 Lötsch J, Weyer-Menkhoff I, Tegeder I. Current evidence of cannabinoid-based
analgesia obtained in preclinical and human experimental settings. Eur J Pain
2018; 22(3): 471–484.
199 McLaughlin BJ, Barber R, Saito K, et al. Immunocytochemical localization of glu-
tamate decarboxylase in rat spinal cord. J Comp Neurol 1975; 164(3): 305–321.
200 Harvey RJ, Rigo J-M. Glycinergic transmission: physiological, developmental and
pathological implications. Front Mol Neurosci 2010; 3: 115.
201 Harvey R, Depner U, Wässle H, et al. GlyR alpha3: an essential target for spinal
PGE2-mediated inflammatory pain sensitization. Science 2004; 304(5672): 884–887.
202 Hossaini M, Goos JAC, Kohli SK, et al. Distribution of glycine/GABA neurons in
the ventromedial medulla with descending spinal projections and evidence for an
ascending glycine/GABA projection. PLoS ONE 2012; 7(4): e35293.
203 Miki K, Zhou QQ, Guo W, et al. Changes in gene expression and neuronal pheno-
type in brain stem pain modulatory circuitry after inflammation. J Neurophysiol
2002; 87(2): 750–760.
204 Sandkuhler J, Fu QG, Zimmermann M. Spinal pathways mediating tonic or
stimulation-produced descending inhibition from the periaqueductal gray or
nucleus raphe magnus are separate in the cat. J Neurophysiol 1987; 58(2): 327–341.
205 Gilbert AK, Franklin KBJ. GABAergic modulation of descending inhibitory sys-
tems from the rostral ventromedial medulla (RVM). Dose-response analysis of
nociception and neurological deficits. Pain 2001; 90(1–2): 25–36.
206 Soja PJ, Sinclair JG. Evidence that noradrenaline reduces tonic descending inhibi-
tion of cat spinal cord nociceptor-driven neurones. Pain 1983; 15(1–4): 71–81.
207 Rivot JP, Calvino B, Besson JM. Is there a serotonergic tonic descending inhibition
on the responses of dorsal horn convergent neurons to C-fibre inputs? Brain Res
1987; 403(1): 142–146.
208 Clarke RW, Harris J. The organization of motor responses to noxious stimuli.
Brain Res Rev 2004; 46(2): 163–172.
209 Loeser JD, Treede RD. The Kyoto protocol of IASP basic pain terminology. Pain
2008; 137(30): 473–477.
210 Garner B, Stoker A, Kuroki K, et al. Using animal models in osteoarthritis bio-
marker research. J Knee Surg 2011; 24(40): 251–264.
211 Mogil JS. Animal models of pain: progress and challenges. Nat Rev Neurosci 2009;
10(4): 283–294.
212 Rice ASC, Cimino-Brown D, Eisenach JC, et al. Animal models and the prediction
of efficacy in clinical trials of analgesic drugs: a critical appraisal and call for uni-
form reporting standards. Pain 2008; 139(2): 243–247.
213 Vincent TL, Williams RO, Maciewicz R, et al. Arthritis Research UK animal mod-
els working group. Mapping pathogenesis of arthritis through small animal mod-
els. Rheumatology 2012; 51(11): 1931–1941.
214 Matthies BK, Franklin KBJ. Effects of partial decortication on opioid analgesia in
the formalin test. Behav Brain Res 1995; 67(1): 59–66.
215 Backonja MM, Stacey B. Neuropathic pain symptoms relative to overall pain rat-
ing. J Pain 2004; 5(9): 491–497.
216 Le Bars D, Gozariu M, Cadden SW. Animal models of nociception. Pharmacol Rev
2001; 53(4): 597–652.
217 Beecher HK. The measurement of pain; prototype for the quantitative study of
subjective responses. Pharmacol Rev 1957; 9(1): 59–209.
218 Treede RD. Neurophysiological studies of pain pathways in peripheral and central
nervous system disorders. J Neurol 2003; 250(10): 1152–1161.
219 Villanueva L, Peschanski M, Calvino B, et al. Ascending pathways in the spinal
cord involved in triggering of diffuse noxious inhibitory controls in the rat. J
Neurophysiol 1986; 55(1): 34–55.
220 Barrot M. Tests and models of nociception and pain in rodents. Neuroscience
2012; 211: 39–50.
221 Valeriani M, Pazzaglia C, Cruccu G, et al. Clinical usefulness of laser evoked
potentials. Neurophysiol Clin 2012; 42(5): 345–353.
222 Baumgärtner U, Greffrath W, Treede RD. Contact heat and cold, mechanical, elec-
trical and chemical stimuli to elicit small fiber-evoked potentials: merits and limi-
tations for basic science and clinical use. Neurophysiol Clin 2012; 42(5): 267–280.
223 Garcia-Larrea L. Objective pain diagnostics. Neurophysiol Clin 2012; 42(4): 187–197.

-- 1010 of 1450 --

Chapter 46: Physiology and Pathophysiology of Pain 	995
224 Murrell JC, Johnson CB. Neurophysiological techniques to assess pain in animals.
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2006; 29(5): 325–335.
225 van Oostrom H, Stienen PJ, van den Bos R, et al. Somatosensory- evoked poten-
tials indicate increased unpleasantness of noxious stimuli in response to increas-
ing stimulus intensities in the rat. Brain Res Bull 2007; 71(4): 404–409.
226 van Oostrom H, Stienen PJ, van den Bos R, et al. Development of a rat model to
assess the efficacy of the somatosensory-evoked potential as indicator of analge-
sia. Brain Res Protoc 2005; 15(1): 14–20.
227 Kimura S, Tanabe M, Honda M, et al. Enhanced wind-up of the C-fiber-mediated
nociceptive flexor reflex movement following painful diabetic neuropathy in
mice. J Pharmacol Sci 2005; 97(2): 195–202.
228 Kelly S, Dobson KL, Harris J. Spinal nociceptive reflexes are sensitized in the
monosodium iodoacetate model of osteoarthritis pain in the rat. Osteoarthritis
Cartilage 2013; 21(9): 1327–1335.
229 Courtney CA, Witte PO, Chmell SJ, et al. Heightened flexor withdrawal response
in individuals with knee osteoarthritis is modulated by joint compression and
joint mobilization. J Pain 2010; 11(2): 179–185.
230 Peterbauer C, Larenza PM, Knobloch M, et al. Effects of a low dose infusion of
racemic and S-ketamine on the nociceptive withdrawal reflex in standing ponies.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35(5): 414–423.
231 Rohrbach H, Korpivaara T, Schatzmann U, et al. Comparison of the effects of the
alpha-2 agonists detomidine, romifidine and xylazine on nociceptive withdrawal
reflex and temporal summation in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36(4): 384–395.
232 Spadavecchia C, Arendt-Nielsen L, Spadavecchia L, et al. Effects of butorphanol
on the withdrawal reflex using threshold, suprathreshold and repeated subthresh-
old electrical stimuli in conscious horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2007; 34(1): 48–58.
233 Percie du Sert N, Hurst V, Ahluwalia A, et al. The ARRIVE guidelines 2.0: updated
guidelines for reporting animal research. PLoS Biol 2020; 18(7): e3000410.
234 Hoffmann MV, Kästner SBR, Kietzmann M, et al. Contact heat thermal threshold
testing in beagle dogs: baseline reproducibility and the effect of acepromazine,
levomethadone and fenpipramide. BMC Vet Res 2012; 8: 206.
235 Slingsby LS, Taylor PM, Monroe T. Thermal antinociception after dexmedetomi-
dine administration in cats: a comparison between intramuscular and oral trans-
mucosal administration. J Feline Med Surg 2009; 11(10): 829–834.
236 Pypendop B, Siao K, Ilkiw JE. Thermal antinociceptive effect of orally adminis-
tered gabapentin in healthy cats. Am J Vet Res 2010; 71(9): 1027–1032.
237 Love EJ, Murrell J, Whay HR. Thermal and mechanical nociceptive threshold test-
ing in horses: a review. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38(1): 3–14.
238 Ambros B, Duke T. Effect of low dose rate ketamine infusions on thermal and
mechanical thresholds in conscious cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40(6): e76–e82.
239 Ley SJ, Livingston A, Waterman AE. The effect of chronic clinical pain on thermal
and mechanical thresholds in sheep. Pain 1989; 39(3): 353–357.
240 Ley SJ, Waterman AE, Livingston A. A field study of the effect of lameness on
mechanical nociceptive thresholds in sheep. Vet Rec 1995; 137(4): 85–87.
241 Slingsby LS, Jones A, Waterman-Pearson AE. Use of a new finger-mounted device
to compare mechanical nociceptive thresholds in cats given pethidine or no medi-
cation after castration. Res Vet Sci 2001; 70(3): 243–246.
242 Lascelles BD, Cripps PJ, Jones A, et al. Efficacy and kinetics of carprofen, admin-
istered preoperatively or postoperatively, for the prevention of pain in dogs under-
going ovariohysterectomy. Vet Surg 1998; 27(6): 568–582.
243 Willner P. The validity of animal models of depression. Psychopharmacology 1984;
83(1): 1–16.
244 Sacerdote P, Franchi S, Moretti S, et al. Cytokine modulation is necessary for effi-
cacious treatment of experimental neuropathic pain. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol
2013; 8(1): 202–211.
245 Fleetwood-Walker S, Quinn J, Wallace C, et al. Behavioural changes in the rat fol-
lowing infection with varicella-zoster virus. J Gen Virol 1999; 80(Pt 9):
2433–2436.
246 Lynch JL, Gallus NJ, Ericson ME, et al. Analysis of nociception, sex and peripheral
nerve innervation in the TMEV animal model of multiple sclerosis. Pain 2008;
136(3): 293–304.
247 Lee BH, Seong J, Kim UJ. Behavioral characteristics of a mouse model of cancer
pain. Yonsei Med J 2005; 46(2): 252–259.
248 Al-Chaer ED, Kawasaki M, Pasricha PJ. A new model of chronic visceral hyper-
sensitivity in adult rats induced by colon irritation during postnatal development.
Gastroenterology 2000; 119(5): 1276–1285.
249 Sanchez LC, Merritt AM. Colorectal distention in the horse: visceral sensitivity,
rectal compliance and effect of i.v. xylazine or intrarectal lidocaine. Equine Vet J
2005; 37(1): 70–74.
250 Robertson SA, Sanchez LC, Merritt AM, et al. Effect of systemic lidocaine on visceral
and somatic nociception in conscious horses. Equine Vet J 2005; 37(2): 122–127.
251 Sanchez L, Elfenbein JR, Robertson SA. Effect of acepromazine, butorphanol, or
N-butylscopolammonium bromide on visceral and somatic nociception and duo-
denal motility in conscious horses. Am J Vet Res 2008; 69(5): 579–585.
252 Willis WD, Al-Chaer ED, Quast MJ, et al. A visceral pain pathway in the dorsal
column of the spinal cord. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999; 96(14): 7675–7679.
253 Laird JMA, Martinez-Caro L, Garcia-Nicas E, et al. A new model of visceral pain
and referred hyperalgesia in the mouse. Pain 2001; 92(3): 335–342.
254 Ness TJ, Gebhart GF. Colorectal distension as a noxious visceral stimulus: physi-
ologic and pharmacologic characterization of pseudaffective reflexes in the rat.
Brain Res 1988; 450(1–2): 153–169.
255 Hultin L, Nissen TD, Kakol-Palm D, et al. Colorectal distension-evoked potentials
in awake rats: a novel method for studies of visceral sensitivity. Neurogastroenterol
Motil 2012; 24(10): 964–e466.
256 Cook JL, Kuroki K, Visco D, et al. The OARSI histopathology initiative – recom-
mendations for histological assessments of osteoarthritis in the dog. Osteoarthritis
Cartilage 2010; 18(3): 66–79.
257 Brown DC, Boston R, Coyne JC, et al. A novel approach to the use of animals
in studies of pain: validation of the canine brief pain inventory in canine bone
cancer. Pain Med 2009; 10(1): 133–142.
258 Hague DW, Stella JL, Buffington CAT. Effects of interstitial cystitis on the acoustic
startle reflex in cats. Am J Vet Res 2013; 74(1): 144–147.
259 Brown DC, Boston RC, Coyne JC, et al. Ability of the Canine Brief Pain Inventory
to detect response to treatment in dogs with osteoarthritis. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2008; 233(8): 1278–1283.
260 Brown DC, Boston RC, Farrar JT. Comparison of force plate gait analysis and
owner assessment of pain using the Canine Brief Pain Inventory in dogs with
osteoarthritis. J Vet Intern Med 2013; 27(1): 22–30.
261 Roughan JV, Coulter CA, Flecknell PA, et al. The conditioned place preference test
for assessing welfare consequences and potential refinements in a mouse bladder
cancer model. PLoS ONE 2014; 9: 103362.
262 Sufka KJ. Conditioned place preference paradigm: a novel approach for analgesic
drug assessment against chronic pain. Pain 1994; 58(3): 355–366.
263 Nasr MAF, Murrell J, Nicol CJ. The effect of keel fractures on egg production, feed
and water consumption in individual laying hens. Br Poult Sci 2013; 54(2): 165–170.
264 Adcock SJJ, Tucker CB. Conditioned place preference reveals ongoing pain in
calves 3 weeks after disbudding. Sci Rep 2020; 10(1): 3849.
265 Ede T, von Keyserlingk MAG, Weary DM. Conditioned place aversion of caustic
paste and hot-iron disbudding in dairy calves. J Dairy Sci 2020; 103(12):
11653–11658.
266 Rossi HL, Vierck CJ, Caudle RM, et al. Characterization of cold sensitivity and
thermal preference using an operant orofacial assay. Mol Pain 2006; 2: 37.
267 Nolan TA, Hester J, Bokrand-Donatelli Y, et al. Adaptation of a novel operant
orofacial testing system to characterize both mechanical and thermal pain. Behav
Brain Res 2011; 217(2): 477–480.
268 Neubert JK, Widmer CG, Malphurs W, et al. Use of a novel thermal operant
behavioral assay for characterization of orofacial pain sensitivity. Pain 2005;
116(3): 386–395.
269 Flecknell PA. Refinement of animal use-assessment and alleviation of pain and
distress. Lab Anim 1994; 28(3): 222–231.
270 Zhang XY, Barakat A, Diaz-Delcastillo M, et al. Systematic review and meta-
analysis of studies in which burrowing behavior was assessed in rodent models of
disease-associated persistent pain. Pain 2022; 163(11): 2076–2102.
271 Deacon RMJ. Burrowing in rodents: a sensitive method for detecting behavioral
dysfunction. Nat Protoc 2006; 1(1): 118–121.
272 Deacon R. Assessing burrowing, nest construction, and hoarding in mice. J Vis
Exp 2012; 59: e2607.
273 Shepherd AJ, Cloud ME, Cao YQ, et al. Deficits in burrowing behaviors are associ-
ated with mouse models of neuropathic but not inflammatory pain or migraine.
Front Behav Neurosci 2018; 12: 124.
274 Jirkof P, Fleischmann T, Cesarovic N, et al. Assessment of postsurgical distress and
pain in laboratory mice by nest complexity scoring. Lab Anim 2013; 47(3): 153–161.
275 Langford DJ, Bailey AL, Chanda ML, et al. Coding of facial expressions of pain in
the laboratory mouse. Nat Methods 2010; 7(6): 447–449.
276 Gleerup KB, Andersen PH, Munksgaard L, et al. Pain evaluation in dairy cattle.
Appl Anim Behav Sci 2015; 171: 25–32.
277 Sotocinal SG, Sorge RE, Zaloum A, et al. The Rat Grimace Scale: a partially auto-
mated method for quantifying pain in the laboratory rat via facial expressions.
Mol Pain 2011; 7: 55.
278 Keating SCJ, Thomas AA, Flecknell PA. Evaluation of EMLA cream for preventing
pain during tattooing of rabbits: changes in physiological, behavioral and facial
expression responses. PLoS ONE 2012; 7(9): e44437.
279 Dalla Costa E, Minero M, Lebelt D, et al. Development of the Horse Grimace Scale
(HGS) as a pain assessment tool in horses undergoing routine castration. PLoS
ONE 2014; 9(3): e92281.
280 Vullo C, Barbieri S, Catone G, et al. Is the Piglet Grimace Scale (PGS) a useful
welfare indicator to assess pain after cryptorchidectomy in growing pigs? Animals
2020; 10(3): 412.

-- 1011 of 1450 --

47
996
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: T he Sixth Edition of L umb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
There is an ever-increasing understanding of the signs associated
with acute and chronic pain as well as ways in which these phenom-
ena can be measured. There is also now a plethora of validated tools
to measure acute and chronic pain although the evidence suggests that
they have not been widely adopted in general practice. This is unfor-
tunate because unless pain is quantified it is very difficult to treat it
effectively without falling into the trap of over or undertreating
pain, with both scenarios having a negative impact on the animal.
Recognition of acute pain
The various methods available to recognize acute pain are discussed
below. Table 47.1 provides a summary of the principal advantages
and disadvantages of each.
Changes in behavior
Changes in spontaneous behavior form the cornerstone of methods
to recognize acute pain across species. Behavioral changes can be
used to detect both the sensory (e.g., how much does it hurt? and
where does it hurt?) and the emotional component (e.g., depression,
anxiety) of pain. The detection of behavioral changes is facilitated
if the normal (pain-free) behavior of the animal is known, therefore
pet owners or carers can play a key role in the detection of acute pain.
Similarly, animal care staff such as veterinary nurses or technicians
who spend a lot of time with the animal can be pivotal to detecting
changes in behavior throughout the day and in response to the
administration of analgesic drugs. Formal assessment of behavior
can be achieved by using an ethogram (a catalog of behaviors) spe-
cifically related to pain in the species being observed, however, care-
ful observation of behavior is also sufficient to detect signs of pain.
Characteristic changes in behavior associated with different
types of pain have been described. Behavioral changes that have
been described in dogs with abdominal pain include a hunched
appearance and adoption of a praying position where the animal
appears to stretch out with the front legs positioned near the ground
and the back legs in a more upright position (Fig. 47.1, Video 47.1).
Dogs with abdominal pain do not look comfortable and relaxed and
often cannot sleep, showing an inability to settle and a tense abdo-
men when palpated. Cats with abdominal pain also show a tense
abdomen on palpation and a hunched appearance (Fig. 47.2).
Behavioral changes have also been noted in cats by owners in the
three days following surgery for ovariohysterectomy and include
decreased playfulness, increased time spent sleeping, and an altered
47 Recognition and Quantification of Acute
and Chronic Pain
Jo C. Murrell
Bristol Veterinary Specialists, Severn Beach, Bristol, UK
Chapter contents
Introduction, 996
Recognition of acute pain, 996
Changes in behavior, 996
Physiological parameters, 998
Electroencephalogram, 999
Functional magnetic resonance imaging, 999
Infrared thermography, 1000
Accelerometry and step-counts, 1000
Recognition of chronic pain, 1000
Changes in behavior, 1000
Physiological parameters, 1000
Visual observation of gait, 1001
Force plate gait analysis, 1001
Kinematic gait analysis, 1001
Accelerometry, 1001
Quantification of acute pain, 1001
Unidimensional pain assessment scales, 1002
Simple descriptive scales, 1002
Numerical rating scale, 1002
Visual analog scale, 1002
Multidimensional pain assessment scales, 1003
Grimace scales, 1003
How often should you conduct acute pain assessment in animals?, 1003
Who should conduct pain assessment?, 1005
Factors confounding use of pain assessment tools, 1005
Quantification of chronic pain, 1005
References, 1007

-- 1012 of 1450 --

Chapter 47: Recognition and Quantification of Acute and Chronic Pain 	997
Table 47.1 Summary of the advantages and disadvantages of different methods used to recognize acute pain.
Method to recognize acute pain 	Advantages 	Disadvantages
Behavior 	Can provide a good insight into how the
animal “feels” about their pain
“Gold standard” measure of acute pain
Can be time consuming to collect data
Presence of an observer may influence the behavior of an animal
Risk of confounding factors changing the behavior of an animal
Physiology 	Objective means to measure pain 	Many biomarkers are related to stress and are not pain-specific
Some biomarkers are invasive to measure e.g., blood samples for serum cortisol
Electroencephalogram 	Direct assessment of brain activity may provide
insights into pain perception
Objective means to measure pain
Generates a large amount of data that can be difficult to interpret
Requires knowledge of data acquisition and signal-processing techniques
Anesthesia can facilitate a high signal-to-noise ratio for the data but may also
influence the recorded data
Functional magnetic resonance
imaging
Direct assessment of brain activity may provide
insights into pain perception
Changes in brain activity may not be specific to pain
Currently requires anesthesia for pain studies in animals
Requires access to an appropriate scanner
Infrared thermography 	Quick to carry out
Non-invasive
Skin surface temperature can be affected by stress and is not specific to pain
Accelerometry 	Accelerometers are inexpensive to purchase
Easy to use
Placing them on the animal is unlikely to
change the behavior of the animal
Generates a large amount of data
Activity may be increased for reasons that are not specific to pain e.g., during
administration of potent opioids to horses
(B)	(A)
Figure 47.1 In dogs, adoption of a “praying posture” is suggestive of abdominal pain. A. Praying position in a dog diagnosed with acute pancreatitis. B.
Praying position in a dog that had undergone surgery for a splenectomy. Source: Dr. Sheilah Robertson, with permission.
(B)	(A)
Figure 47.2 In cats, a hunched or “tucked up” posture is suggestive of abdominal pain. This cat had undergone an elective ovariohysterectomy 6 h earlier.
Source: Dr. Sheilah Robertson, with permission.

-- 1013 of 1450 --

998 	Section 6: Nociception and Pain
way of moving, suggestive of abdominal pain [1]. Horses with colic
may be restless, depressed, show flank watching, weight shifting,
kicking of the abdomen, pawing at the ground (Fig. 47.3), and
stretching [2].
An important part of behavioral assessment of pain is interaction
with the animal, particularly the application of gentle pressure around
any wound or painful area in order to detect secondary hyperalgesia
and allodynia. This should be done gently so as not to cause the ani-
mal more pain, but it is an essential part of behavioral pain assess-
ment and is included as part of many tools used to quantify pain.
Changes in facial expression have received a significant amount
of attention as a biomarker for acute pain across species. This has
largely stemmed from work in neonates which showed that reliable
changes in facial expression could be detected during painful inter-
ventions such as heel lancing for blood sample collection [3]. The
first work in animals was carried out in mice and led to the develop-
ment of the Mouse Grimace Scale [4]. The detection of pain using
facial expression across species largely relies on recognizing changes
in facial action units, which are a set of facial muscle movements
which correspond to a displayed emotion. Typically, changes in ear
position and eye-opening are included in the scoring system, with
other changes being largely species-dependent. Details of specific
grimace scales used to quantify pain are given later in this chapter.
Changes in complex patterns of behavior such as burrowing and
nest-making have been used in rats and mice, respectively, as indi-
cators of pain that may be a more sensitive biomarker of affective
state or how the animal is feeling about their pain than traditional
nociceptive tests. These tests use the principle that rodents are
highly motivated to perform these behaviors in their home cage if
given the means to do so (i.e., burrowing and nesting substrate);
therefore, quantifying an altered willingness to carry out these
behaviors offers a means to probe changes in affective state following
pain induction and subsequent administration of analgesic drugs.
Spontaneous burrowing behavior in rats is reduced by peripheral
nerve injury or inflammatory pain [5], an effect that is reversed
by the administration of analgesic drugs, showing the utility of this
assay in analgesic drug development. Similar studies have been
carried out in mice using burrowing behavior [6]. The complexity
of nest- making has been shown to relate to postoperative pain in
mice, although the complexity of nest-making was not restored by
treatment with carprofen [7], suggesting that it may not be a good
biomarker for efficacy of analgesic treatment.
Advantages of using behavior to assess pain are that it may
provide direct insight into how the animal is feeling and therefore
how painful the animal is. Disadvantages include that it is time con-
suming to carry out and requires careful observation of the animal.
The presence of an observer may also change the behavior of the
animals being observed. Questions have also been raised about the
objectivity of behavior as a tool to recognize pain. However, behav-
ior can be an objective means depending on how it is measured.
Factors confounding behavioral assessment of acute pain
Although behavior can be a reliable tool to assess acute pain, a
number of confounding factors can interfere with behavioral pain
assessment, especially in the immediate postoperative period during
recovery from anesthesia. A full bladder can make animals restless
and unwilling to settle and this can confound pain assessment.
Similarly, it is difficult to behaviorally assess a fear-aggressive animal,
especially because interaction with such animals is often limited.
Sedation is a big confounder of behavioral pain assessment; animals
that are sedated can appear very comfortable and settled, but it is
important to be aware that sedation does not necessarily equate to
adequate analgesia. It is advisable to wait until 30–40 min after the
end of anesthesia to assess pain when the patient is more rousable
and less sedated. Emergence delirium and dysphoria from the over-
zealous use of opioids during anesthesia can also cause behavioral
changes such as agitation and vocalization that can be confused
with pain.
Physiological parameters
Changes in physiological parameters such as heart rate, blood
pressure, respiratory rate, and cortisol have been widely used as a
biomarker for acute pain, particularly in farm animal studies where
changes in these parameters have been used to assess pain caused
by husbandry procedures such as castration [8,9]. Generally, pain
can cause an increase in heart rate, blood pressure, and respiratory
rate through stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system due to
an interaction between pathways that transmit sensory information
and the central autonomic nervous system in the brain. Pain also
causes activation of the hypothalamo–pituitary–adrenal axis, which
is the neuroendocrine stress pathway. Cortisol is one of the end
products of this pathway and therefore has been widely used as a
biomarker for stress caused by acute pain in farm animals, particu-
larly pain caused by castration in lambs and calves and tail docking
in lambs [10]. Another neuroendocrine biomarker of pain that has
been studied is β-endorphin [11]. Blood biomarkers of pain and
distress are considered objective biomarkers of pain. However, a big
caveat to their use is that neuroendocrine biomarkers are primarily
indicators of stress, and although pain is a stressor, other stressors
such as handling to collect a blood sample can cause elevations in
their concentrations. In horses, anesthesia alone will cause marked
elevations in neuroendocrine biomarkers, so that the capacity for
further increases due to pain associated with surgery is limited [12].
Cortisol is also subject to circadian rhythms in secretion and there
Figure 47.3 This horse is pawing at the ground, a behavior that is related to
abdominal pain. Source: Dr. Sheilah Robertson, with permission.

-- 1014 of 1450 --

Chapter 47: Recognition and Quantification of Acute and Chronic Pain 	999
may be a ceiling effect on cortisol secretion. Heart rate, respiratory
rate, and blood pressure, although relatively easy to measure, are
also considered to be non-specific for pain. Blood pressure and
heart rate may change intraoperatively due to blood loss or the
effects of surgical manipulation of nerves such as the vagus nerve,
rather than being specific biomarkers of nociception. Similarly,
postoperative changes in these parameters may indicate stress
caused by factors other than pain.
Heart rate variability assesses beat-to- beat variability in the tim-
ing between one heartbeat and the next [13]. Heart rate variability
is used to investigate the balance between sympathetic and para-
sympathetic nervous system activity, with a decrease in heart rate
variability shown with nociception or pain due to a shift in balance
toward sympathetic nervous system activity. Heart rate variability
data are generally analyzed using frequency domain measures cal-
culated using fast Fourier transformation, such as high- and low-
frequency power and the low-frequency/high-frequency ratio [13].
Monitors designed to detect intraoperative nociception have
been developed for animals based on heart rate variability data,
for example, the Parasympathetic Tone Activity (PTA) monitor
(MDoloris Medical Systems, Loos, France) [14].
Production parameters such as average daily weight gain have
been used to assess pain following castration in calves [10]; how-
ever, they are often too imprecise to detect acute changes in pain
after castration. Furthermore, weight gain after castration may be
negatively influenced by a decrease in testosterone after removal of
the testes [15].
Electroencephalogram
The electroencephalogram (EEG) can be recorded from the surface
of the head of animals and has been widely used as a measure of
acute pain following surgical interventions such as castration.
Fig. 47.4 shows EEG recording in an anesthetized deer. Measurement
of the EEG relies on recording the summated electrical activity
of populations of neurons together with glial cells (for a review
see Murrell and Johnson [16]). These electrical potentials can be
recorded from the surface of the head using electrodes connected to
amplifiers and an EEG recording system, including an analog-to-
digital converter. The raw EEG signal is recorded in real time, but
this can be difficult to interpret and generates a large amount of
data in a short space of time. Commonly, fast Fourier transforma-
tion is applied to raw EEG data, off-line at the end of an experiment,
changing the signal from the time domain to the frequency domain
to produce a power spectrum. Simple descriptors can be derived
from the power spectrum, including the median frequency, spectral
edge frequency 95%, and total power. EEG changes during nocicep-
tion are frequently reported as percentage changes in these descrip-
tors compared with an unstimulated baseline period [17,18].
Commonly a change in the level of synchronization of the EEG is
described. Desynchronization is characterized as increased high-
frequency activity and decreased power in the low-frequency bands
of the EEG and is associated with an increased level of arousal due
to noxious stimuli. Conversely, synchronization refers to an EEG
pattern of high-amplitude, low-frequency activity. In human
studies, the frequency of EEG activity has been denoted by δ (0–4 Hz),
θ (4–8 Hz), α (8–12 Hz), and β (> 12 Hz), and the relative amount
of activity in each frequency band is reported. These frequency
bands also have functionality associated with them in man, and this
method has been adopted by some authors investigating EEG in
animals [19]. However, it is important to be aware that the division
of the EEG into these frequency bands in animals is completely
arbitrary and may be inappropriate in animals as compared to
humans. Advantages of using the EEG as a marker of nociception in
animals include its objectivity and the fact that signals are being
recorded directly from the brain, which can be considered the seat
of pain perception. Disadvantages include the need to understand
the complex nature of the EEG acquisition equipment and the
underlying signal-processing techniques. It can also be difficult to
record high-quality EEG signals in awake animals while anesthesia
may interfere with EEG data acquisition depending on the anes-
thetic agent used [20]. Many of the studies investigating EEG
changes with nociception in anesthetized animals have been carried
out using halothane as an inhalant anesthetic agent because it is
less depressant to the EEG compared with isoflurane or
sevoflurane [20–22].
Functional magnetic resonance imaging
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) uses blood oxygen
level-dependent imaging (BOLD) to detect changes in blood flow
to different regions of the brain. Hemoglobin is diamagnetic when
oxygenated but paramagnetic when deoxygenated. This difference
in magnetic properties leads to small differences in the magnetic
resonance signal of blood depending on the degree of oxygenation.
When areas of the brain are activated, such as during application of
a noxious stimulus, blood flow to these areas will usually increase,
which can be seen on the fMRI image. There are many studies in
humans that have investigated which areas of the brain are activated
during application of noxious thermal and mechanical stimuli [23].
These studies have led to identification of the so-called “pain
matrix,” the complex pattern of areas of the brain that are activated
when a noxious stimulus is processed [24]. However, it is important
to be aware that the pain matrix may not be specific to pain and
similar areas of the brain may be activated by loud auditory,
startling visual, and salient non-painful mechanical stimuli [25].
This has led to the suggestion that the pain matrix is in fact a
saliency detection system [25]. Although there have been numerous
studies elucidating path pathways in rats and mice using fMRI,
studies using fMRI to detect pain or noxious stimuli in companion
and farm animals are currently nonexistent. This is largely because
of difficulties associated with training an animal to lie still in the
scanner while a noxious or painful stimulus is delivered.
Figure 47.4 This image shows EEG recording in an anesthetized deer. The
needle electrodes are placed subcutaneously and attached to pre-amplifiers
(the metal boxes in the foreground of the picture). Source: Dr. Jo Murrell,
with permission.

-- 1015 of 1450 --

1000 	Section 6: Nociception and Pain
Infrared thermography
Infrared thermography can be used to measure changes in skin
surface temperature before and after a noxious intervention such as
castration. It is hypothesized that release of hormones such as epi-
nephrine and norepinephrine associated with noxious stimulation
causes peripheral vasoconstriction and therefore a decrease in skin
temperature that can be quantified using a thermal imaging cam-
era. Eye temperature has also been used as a biomarker for pain,
with a decrease in eye temperature noted after castration without
local anesthetic in calves, attributed to sympathetically driven
changes in tone in the eye capillary beds [26]. Changes in comb
temperature have been measured in poultry and the temperature
changes in the head, snout, and vulva have been measured in
pigs [27]. Although monitoring of skin surface temperature at dif-
ferent sites is non-invasive and quick to conduct it also has limita-
tions. Thermal imaging cameras are expensive to purchase and the
area which has to be measured must be defined and analyzed in a
standardized way. Skin surface temperature is affected by stress and
disease; therefore, it is a measure that is non-specific for pain.
Accelerometry and step-counts
Accelerometry has been widely used as a measure of acute pain in
calves following castration or dehorning [28,29]. They have also
been used as a marker of acute postoperative pain after ovario-
hysterectomy in dogs [30]. Triaxial accelerometers estimate
acceleration along the x, y, and z axes, allowing measurement of
position relative to the ground, and the direction and speed of
movement. Some accelerometers will allow measurement of time
spent standing, lying, and walking as well as giving an accurate step
count. Advantages of accelerometry are that it is non-invasive,
accelerometers are relatively inexpensive to purchase, and they can
record high-resolution data over a relatively long period of time.
Attaching pedometers is also unlikely to influence the behavior
of the animal because they are small and lightweight to wear.
Step-counts can also be used as a surrogate marker for pain, meas-
ured using pedometers. Like accelerometers, these are inexpensive
to purchase, and can be easily attached and used. Fig. 47.5 shows a
pedometer attached to a horse’s forelimb.
Recognition of chronic pain
Detection of chronic pain is challenging across all species and is
probably more difficult than the detection of acute pain. Behavioral
changes can be very subtle and vary according to the species, pain
condition, and individual. Many of the techniques used to assess
acute pain are not appropriate for the detection of chronic pain in
animals or have not been trialed for this purpose. The reason for
this may be that, unlike acute pain where established clinical pain
models exist (e.g., castration or tail docking), common clinical
chronic pain models are lacking. Exceptions to this may be osteoar-
thritis, Chiari-like malformation and syringomyelia in dogs, or
laminitis in horses, which are relatively well-characterized clinical
models of chronic pain. A summary of the advantages and disad-
vantages of the various methods to recognize chronic pain that are
discussed below is provided in Table 47.2.
Changes in behavior
Changes in behavior associated with osteoarthritis have been char-
acterized in dogs and cats and there is evidence that these behavioral
changes can be detected by owners [31,32], although the detected
changes in behavior may not always be attributed to osteoarthritis
by the owner. Enomoto et al. [31] have developed a checklist for
owners of cats which asks questions about whether their cat can
jump up normally, jump down normally, the ability of the cat to
climb up and down stairs, run, and chase objects. The role of own-
ers in detecting chronic pain caused by osteoarthritis in cats and
dogs is emphasized by the importance of clinical metrology instru-
ments in measuring pain caused by this condition as discussed later
in this chapter. Chiari-like malformation and syringomyelia are
common conditions in small and toy breed dogs such as the Cavalier
King Charles Spaniel. They commonly co-exist and are believed to
cause clinical signs indicative of neuropathic pain such as allodynia
or dysesthesia. Dogs appear to dislike being touched over areas of
skin around the neck and may not tolerate a neck collar. Phantom
scratching, where dogs appear to scratch the air without making
skin contact, sometimes while walking may be suggestive of dys-
esthesia [33]. Chronic laminitis is a painful and debilitating con-
dition in horses that results in severe pain with a neuropathic
component [34]. Characteristic behavioral changes associated with
laminitis in horses include lameness, which most commonly affects
at least two limbs, leaning back onto the heels to take the weight
off the painful toe area, and shifting weight between feet when
resting.
Physiological parameters
Generally, physiological biomarkers are less helpful in the recogni-
tion of chronic pain than they are for the recognition of acute pain.
Changes in heart rate, respiratory rate, and blood pressure do not
Figure 47.5 A pedometer attached to the forelimb of a horse to measure
step count. Source: Dr. Jo Murrell, with permission.

-- 1016 of 1450 --

Chapter 47: Recognition and Quantification of Acute and Chronic Pain 	1001
persist in chronic pain states and changes in neuroendocrine
biomarkers have largely not been assessed in chronic states.
An exception may be heart rate variability which has been shown to
return to more normal resting conditions when horses with lamini-
tis were treated with analgesics [35].
Visual observation of gait
Visual observation of gait, or lameness scoring is commonly used
to assess lameness in companion animals. Techniques to facilitate
visual observation of lameness include choosing a surface for
observation that is even and flat, observing the animal at a walk
and trot, watching the animal both going away from and coming
toward you, and when it moves in a circle. Generally, an animal
that is lame on the forelimb will shift weight caudally and lift the
head on the lame limb, or “nod” the head down on the sound limb.
With hindlimb lameness, weight tends to be shifted cranially with
the head and neck lowered and extended to offset weight from the
hind end. Numerical rating scales and visual analog scales are used
to quantify lameness, although visual observation is recognized to
be less sensitive at detecting lameness than force plate or kinematic
gait analysis techniques [36].
Force plate gait analysis
With force plate gait analysis metal plates are mounted on the floor
or walkway to measure ground reaction forces. Force plate gait
analysis is viewed as the gold standard for evaluation of lameness
with peak vertical force (PVF) (maximal force applied during the
stance phase) in the vertical axis the most commonly used variable
to assess lameness [37]. The vertical impulse (VI) can be derived by
calculating the area under the vertical force curve over time. In
general, a lame animal has a lower PVF and VI in the lame limb.
Although force plate gait analysis is more sensitive than observation
to detect lameness there are limitations to this technique. These
include an inability to measure stride or step length, the need for
the animal to transverse the force plate at a constant velocity, the
need for a long walkway, multiple trials, and the complexity of
software and data analysis.
Kinematic gait analysis
Kinematic gait analysis quantifies the positions, velocities, accelera-
tion, and deceleration, and angles of anatomical structures in space.
Generally, kinematic gait analysis systems use colored or reflective
markers that identify specific anatomical landmarks, and these
markers are tracked as the animal moves by a series of cameras.
Outputs from kinematic gait analysis include displacement, which
is the distance recorded when a marker changes position; angular
velocity, which is the speed at which this change occurs; and range
of motion, which is calculated from the displacement of a specific
joint. Kinematic gait analysis has been applied to dogs, horses, and
chickens; in the latter, it was used to quantify gait abnormalities
associated with lameness in broiler chickens and identify evolution-
ary gait differences between broiler chickens and jungle fowl [38].
Limitations of kinematic gait analysis include the potential for skin
movement altering marker placement, accuracy, and repeatability
of marker placement, as well as the complexity of software and data
analysis.
Accelerometry
In addition to its role in acute pain assessment, accelerometry has
been widely used to assess pain associated with osteoarthritis in
cats [39] and dogs [40], and to document a treatment effect when
animals are administered an analgesic [41]. Advantages of acceler-
ometry for chronic pain are similar to those for acute pain.
Quantification of acute pain
A number of different tools have been developed to try and meas-
ure acute pain across different species. However, where data are
available, it shows that adoption of these tools in general practice is
low. In a 2021 study in Australia, only 14% of respondents in small
Table 47.2 Summary of the advantages and disadvantages of different methods used to recognize chronic pain.
Method to recognize
chronic pain
Advantages 	Disadvantages
Behavior 	Can provide a good insight into how the
animal “feels” about their pain
“Gold standard” measure of chronic pain
Can be time consuming to collect data
Presence of an observer may influence the behavior of an animal
Risk of confounding factors changing the behavior of an animal
Physiology 	Objective means to measure pain 	Less helpful in the assessment of chronic compared to acute pain
May be invasive
Force plate gait analysis 	Objective means to measure pain
associated with lameness
Cannot measure step or stride length
More useful when the animal has a single-limb lameness
Requires an understanding of the complex software required for
data analysis
Kinematic gait analysis 	Objective means to measure pain
associated with lameness
Requires an understanding of the complex software required for
data analysis
Markers on the body can shift in position rendering data
collection inaccurate
Accelerometry 	Accelerometers are inexpensive to
purchase
Easy to use
Placing them on the animal is unlikely to
change the behavior of the animal
Generates a large amount of data
Activity may be increased for reasons that are not specific to pain
e.g., during administration of potent opioids to horses

-- 1017 of 1450 --

1002 	Section 6: Nociception and Pain
animal practices used validated pain scales to quantify pain [42].
This finding is also supported by an older study in the UK where
only 14% of small animal general practitioners were using pain
assessment tools [43]. Interestingly the percentage of respondents
using pain assessment tools was significantly higher (60–80%)
among respondents who were members of the Association of
Veterinary Anaesthetists [43].
There are a number of excellent reasons to use tools to try and
quantify pain across different species. Unless you use a pain
assessment tool it is difficult to know what level of pain the animal
is experiencing and therefore treat it appropriately with analgesics.
It is also difficult to objectively assess the response to analgesic
drug administration to determine whether it has been adequate or
whether more analgesic drugs are required. Tools also help with
the actual assessment of pain, because using a structured instru-
ment to assess pain aids in coming to some sort of conclusion
about whether the animal is experiencing pain or not. They also
help standardize the process of pain assessment between individ-
uals in a clinical setting so that when more than one person is
assessing pain in an individual animal interobserver variability
should be reduced.
It is essential that tools used for the quantification of acute and
chronic pain are validated. Validity provides evidence that the tool
is measuring what it is intended to measure; there are a number of
different types of validity that are outlined below.
• Criterion validity is assessed by statistically testing a new meas-
urement technique against a “gold standard.” However, with pain
scales in animals, this can often be problematic because no gold
standard exists, that is, it is impossible to know how much pain an
animal is experiencing because self-report is not possible.
• Content validity relates to the appropriateness and completeness
of the items comprising the instrument. Generally, content validity
is assessed using expert judgment, whereby experts are requested
to rate the relevance and clarity of items using a rating scale.
These ratings are then used to calculate a content validity index
for the scale, which objectively allows the developers of the scale
to remove items that are not relevant.
• Construct validity is the extent to which the new instrument or
pain scale behaves in a way that is consistent with theoretical
hypotheses. For example, you would expect pain scores on a new
scale to decrease after the administration of analgesics. This is
termed a “known groups approach” to construct validation.
• Reliability of a measurement instrument is the extent to which it
yields consistent reproducible estimates of what is assumed to be
an underlying true score. Inter-rater reliability is when two indi-
viduals measure the same subject at the same time and intra-rater
reliability is when an unchanging subject is measured at two time
points by the same individual; both forms of reliability are impor-
tant for a pain assessment tool. Cronbach’s alpha is also a measure
of reliability. It measures internal consistency or how closely a set
of items are related as a group.
• Responsiveness is the property of a clinical instrument that
ensures that it can detect differences in pain that are important to
the clinician or the patient. If the instrument is not very respon-
sive, it may not be able to detect clinically relevant changes in
pain level.
• Clinical utility is the final property of an instrument that should
be considered. This can be described as the “user-friendliness” of
the tool. For example, to be useful in practice a pain assessment
tool must be easy to use and quick to complete, otherwise it is not
likely to be widely adopted.
Unidimensional pain assessment scales
Unidimensional pain scales take into account the “How much does
it hurt?” aspect of pain but are very poor at measuring the emo-
tional component of pain. They are useful because they are easy to
understand and quick to use but they have typically not undergone
any of the different methods of validation described above. In clini-
cal practice, they have been largely superseded by the application of
multidimensional pain scales which measure both the sensory and
emotional components of pain.
Simple descriptive scales
Simple descriptive scales (SDSs) are basic and highly subjective
pain scales that typically have four or five descriptors. These scale
types do not demonstrate sensitivity in detecting small changes in
pain intensity, but they are simple and quick to use.
Numerical rating scale
The numerical rating scale (NRS) uses numbers rather than
descriptors to score pain. This scale type is discontinuous with
unequal weighting between the categories (sometimes leading to
incorrect statistical analysis of research data). It is often used when
scoring individual behavioral characteristics within multidimensional
scales. Although numerical scales are quick to use and complete,
they tend to show greater intra- and interobserver variability than
composite pain scales [2].
Visual analog scale
The visual analog scale (VAS) is a simple continuous scale that is
widely used and consists of a 100 mm line anchored at either end
with (0) no pain and (100) worst imaginable pain (for this proce-
dure or condition). The observer places a mark on the line at a point
that correlates with their assessment of the pain. Training is necessary
to reduce variation between assessors. One of the much-debated
questions about the VAS is the linearity of the scale (e.g., Does a
score of 60 mm represent twice as much pain as 30 mm?). This is
obviously important when determining an appropriate statistical
test for evaluating the data generated. One survey demonstrated
that approximately 50% of studies involving VAS measurements
applied parametric statistics [44]. However, other researchers
advocate the use of nonparametric statistics for nonlinear data.
Use of confidence intervals may assist in the interpretation of
the data from a VAS but do not solve the problem of violation of the
underlying assumptions of the statistical test [44,45].
Studies have shown significant observer variability with all three
of the aforementioned scales [46]. Hewetson et al. investigated the
use of an NRS and verbal rating scale to describe lameness in horses
and found 55–60% interobserver variability with the two scales [47].
Intraobserver variability was of a similar magnitude of 58–60%.
This highlights the subjective nature of the lameness examination
and the variability that occurs when using these subjective scales.
When one trained observer performs all observations, the NRS
becomes a more reliable scale.
Lascelles et al. reported the refinement of the VAS, which involves
a dynamic and interactive assessment of the patient (DIVAS).
Numerous studies adopted this approach [48,49]. This additional
component of the VAS involves observing the animal from a
distance, then approaching and interacting with the patient, and
finally palpating the wound and surrounding area. VAS scales for
questionnaires have also been investigated for assessing pain and
lameness in dogs [50].

-- 1018 of 1450 --

Chapter 47: Recognition and Quantification of Acute and Chronic Pain 	1003
Multidimensional pain assessment scales
A large number of multidimensional or composite pain scales have
been developed for use in different species. Many of these scales
have undergone a significant degree of validation making them pre-
ferred tools over unidimensional pain scales. The first composite
pain scale to be developed was the Glasgow Composite Pain
Scale- Canine and its Short Form [51] which was developed using a
psychometric approach. The instrument requires that the observer
looks at the dog from outside of the kennel, then goes inside the
kennel and interacts with the dog, palpates around any wound or
painful area, and finally asks questions about comfort level and
demeanor. The maximum possible score is dependent on whether
the dog can be walked outside or not; if the dog is nonambulatory
the maximum possible score is 20, while if it can be walked then the
maximum possible score is 24. An intervention level has been
established as 5 or greater out of 20 or 6 or greater out of 24 [52].
This scale has also been translated and validated in the Italian
language [53]. The Short Form of the Glasgow Composite Pain
Scale-Canine is quick and simple to use, giving it good clinical
utility. However, it is important to note that sedation is a big
confounder to the scale, with dogs that are heavily sedated scoring
highly. It is advisable to wait until dogs are fully recovered from
anesthesia before the scale is applied. A recent review suggested that
although the English version of the scale had been widely used in
research studies it was sometimes modified, or the intervention
level was adjusted, invalidating the scale [54].
The same research group that developed the canine Glasgow
scale has also developed a multidimensional scale to assess acute
pain in cats; the Glasgow Composite Pain Scale-Feline [55]
(Web resource 47.1). This scale has been validated in cats and has a
similar look and feel to the composite scoring system in dogs, with
the same pattern of looking at the cat from outside of the cage,
interacting with the cat, and palpating gently around any wound or
painful area. One difference from the dog instrument is the inclu-
sion of facial expressions in the cat scale. The maximum possible
score for the scale is 20, with an intervention level defined as a score
of 5 or greater out of 20 [56]. One recent study suggested that training
in using the scale did not significantly change analgesia decision-
making, suggesting that scale is still relatively robust to use, even by
naive individuals [57]. Videos 47.2, 47.3, and 47.4, along with their
accompanying score sheets, illustrate how the Glasgow Composite
Pain Scale-Feline is used.
The UNESP-Botucatu multidimensional pain scale for cats is an
alternative to the Glasgow Composite Pain Scale-Feline. It was first
developed in 2011 [58], and although only validated in cats under-
going ovariohysterectomy, it was found to be reliable, but the clinical
utility of the instrument was poor, being time consuming to com-
plete. It also required measurement of blood pressure which may
not be practicable in a clinical setting. More recently, a short form
of the UNESP-Botucatu scale has been developed [59]. This was
evaluated in cats undergoing various orthopedic and soft tissue
procedures and showed good construct validity, responsiveness
reliability, and sensitivity and specificity for feline acute pain assess-
ment. The short form also showed good clinical utility, being easier
to use than the original longer version.
A number of different composite pain scales have been
validated in horses for different types of pain. The first scale to
be developed and validated was an instrument to measure ortho-
pedic pain [60]. Later, this pain scale was also validated for
acute pain after gastrointestinal surgery [61]. van Loon and
van Dierendonck [62] developed the EQUUS-COMPASS pain
scale for measurement of pain caused by acute colic in horses.
This scale showed good sensitivity and specificity for discrimina-
tion between healthy controls and horses with acute colic, as well
as good reproducibility. It also showed good clinical utility. Other
composite pain scales in horses include the UNESP-Botucatu
multidimensional pain scale for assessing pain in horses after
castration [63].
For an overview of multidimensional pain scales that have been
developed for measurement of acute pain in different species and
their validation see Table 47.3.
Grimace scales
The use of grimace scales to quantify pain has risen in popularity
recently, largely because the scales are quick and simple to use and
many of them have undergone validation. They also do not require
interaction with the animal and assessments can be made from a
distance, which can be helpful for wild or feral animals. Facial
Action Coding Systems (FACS) were originally developed in
humans as a methodology to formally interrogate facial expres-
sions. FACS provides a systematic methodology to identify and
code facial expressions on the basis of underlying muscle move-
ment. These may be used to determine whether a combination of
facial action units is involved in a certain type of emotion such as
the expression of pain. The Equine Facial Action Coding System
has been described [64]. However, in the context of pain, what has
been more commonly described rather than FACS, is facial expres-
sions or grimace scales associated with pain. Grimace scales exist
for mice [65], rats [66], rabbits [67], horses [68], lambs [69],
sheep [70,71], piglets [72], ferrets [73], cats [74], and donkeys [75].
A recent systematic review evaluated the measurement properties
(reliability, validity, and responsiveness) of these grimace scales [76].
The instruments that demonstrated a high level of evidence for
measurement properties were the grimace scales developed for the
mouse, rat, horse, and cat. A moderate level of evidence was shown
for the rabbit, lamb, sheep [71], ferret, and piglet grimace scales,
while a low level of evidence was shown for the other sheep [70] and
donkey grimace scales. The most reported measurement property
for the grimace scales in general was construct validity followed
by responsiveness to analgesic interventions. However, reliability,
internal consistency, and criterion validity have been less widely
reported for the grimace scales. For a summary of grimace scales
that have been developed for different species see Table 47.4.
Fig. 47.6 shows a “feline pain face.” This can be scored using the
Feline Grimace Scale [74]. Guidance on using the Feline Grimace
Scale can be found at: www.felinegrimacescale.com.
How often should you conduct acute pain
assessment in animals?
The frequency of acute pain assessment in the perioperative period
depends on a number of factors. It is important not to assess pain too
frequently or the animal may not be able to rest, although this is less
of a problem when using grimace scales because direct interaction
with the animal is not necessary. However, pain assessment needs to
be frequent enough to detect an animal that is in pain. Assessing
pain every 4 h is reasonable, and this correlates with the duration of
action of methadone, a commonly used analgesic in cats and
dogs. In these species, assessing pain 30 min after administration of
methadone is sensible to detect animals that are experiencing

-- 1019 of 1450 --

1004 	Section 6: Nociception and Pain
Table 47.3 List of multidimensional pain scales developed for quantification of acute pain.
Species 	Scale
abbreviation
Scale name 	Reference(s) 	Outcome
measures
Type of pain assessed 	Validation studies
conducted
Cats 	CSU-FAPS 	Colorado State University Feline
Acute Pain Scale
Shipley et al. 2021 [77] 	Behavior 	Acute 	No
UNESP-Botucatu-
MCPS
UNESP-Botucatu-multidimensional
composite pain scale
Brondani et al. 2011 [58] 	Behavior,
Physiology
Acute 	Yes
UNESP-Botucatu-
MCPS- SF
UNESP-Botucatu-multidimensional
composite pain scale-Short Form
Belli et al. 2021 [59] 	Behavior 	Acute 	Yes
GCPS-F 	Glasgow Composite Pain
Scale-Feline
Calvo et al. 2014 [55] 	Behavior 	Acute 	Yes
Dogs 	Melbourne 	University of Melbourne Pain Scale 	Firth and Haldane 1999 [78] 	Behavior,
Physiology
Acute 	No
GCPS-C 	Glasgow Composite Pain
Scale-Canine
Holton et al. 2001 [51] 	Behavior 	Acute 	Yes
GCPS-C- SF 	Glasgow Composite Pain
Scale-Canine – Short Form
Reid et al. 2007 [52] 	Behavior 	Acute 	Yes
4A Vet Pain Scale 	4A Vet Pain Scale 	Holopherne-Doran et al.
2010 [79]
Behavior 	Acute 	Yes
CSU 	Colorado State University Canine
Acute Pain Scale
Behavior 	Acute 	No
Horses 	ECPS 	Equine Composite Measure Pain
Scale
Bussieres et al. 2008 [60] 	Behavior,
Physiology
Acute – orthopedic and
colic
Yes
CMPS 	Composite Measure Pain Scale 	Gleerup and Lindegaard
2016 [80]
Behavior 	Acute – LPS-induced
transient synovitis
No
PASPAS 	Post Abdominal Surgery Pain
Assessment Scale
Graubner et al. 2011 [81] 	Behavior,
Physiology
Acute – post-
abdominal surgery
Yes
EAAPS 	Equine Acute Abdominal Pain Scale 	Sutton et al. 2013 [2] 	Behavior 	Acute colic 	Yes
EQUUS-
COMPASS
EQUUS- Composite Pain Assessment 	van Loon and van
Dierendonck 2015 [62]
Behavior,
Physiology
Acute colic 	Yes
UNESP-Botucatu 	UNESP-Botucatu 	Taffarel et al. 2015 [63] 	Behavior 	Acute – post-castration 	Yes
Donkeys 	EQUUS-DONKEY-
COMPASS
EQUUS- Donkeys-Composite Pain
Assessment
Van Dierendonck 2020 [75] 	Behavior 	Acute – colic and
orthopedic
Yes
Cattle 	UNESP-Botucatu 	UNESP-Botucatu 	De Oliveira et al. 2014 [82] 	Behavior 	Acute 	Yes
Sheep 	UNESP-Botucatu 	UNESP-Botucatu 	Silva et al. 2020 [83] 	Behavior 	Acute 	Yes
Pigs 	UPAPS 	UNESP-Botucatu Pig Composite
Acute Pain Scale
Luna et al. 2020 [84] 	Behavior 	Acute 	Yes
Rabbits 	CANCRS 	Composite Pain Scale for assessment
and quantification of pain in rabbits
Banchi et al. 2020 [85] 	Behavior,
Physiology
Acute 	Yes
BRPS 	Bristol Rabbit Pain Scale 	Benato et al. 2021 [86] 	Behavior 	Acute 	Yes
Table 47.4 List of facial grimace scales developed for quantification of acute pain.
Species 	Scale
abbreviation
Scale name 	Reference(s) 	Outcome
measures
Type of pain assessed 	Validation studies
conducted
Cats 	FGS 	Facial Grimace Scale 	Evangelista et al. 2019 [74] 	Facial expressions 	Acute 	Yes
Horses 	HGS 	Horse Grimace Scale 	Dalla Costa et al. 2014,
2016 [87,88]
Facial expressions 	Acute – post-castration
and laminitis
Yes
EPF 	Equine Pain Face 	Gleerup et al. 2015 [89] 	Facial expressions 	Acute – clinical and
experimental pain
No
EquiFACS 	Facial Action Coding System 	Wathan et al. 2015 [64] 	Facial expressions 	Not evaluated in acute
pain states
Not applicable
RHpE 	Facial Expressions of Ridden
Horses
Dyson et al. 2018 [90] 	Facial expressions
and head carriage
Acute – orthopedic pain 	No
EQUUS-FAP 	EQUUS Facial Expression of
Pain
van Loon and van
Dierendonck 2017 [91]
Facial expressions 	Acute – colic and
head-related
Yes
EQUUS-FAP- FOALS 	EQUUS Facial Expression of
Pain in Foals
van Loon et al. 2020 [92] 	Facial expressions 	Acute 	No
Donkeys 	EQUUS-DONKEY- FAP 	EQUUS-Donkeys-Facial
Assessment of Pain
van Dierendonck 2020 [75] 	Facial expressions 	Acute – head-related 	No
Sheep 	SGS 	Sheep Grimace Scale 	Hager et al. 2017 [70] 	Facial expressions 	Acute 	Yes
Facial expression for pain in
lambs
Guesgen et al. 2016 [69] 	Facial expressions 	Acute 	No
Sheep facial expression scale 	McLennan et al. 2016 [71] 	Facial expressions 	Acute 	No
Pigs 	Piglet Grimace Scale 	Viscardi et al. 2017, [72] 	Facial expressions 	Acute 	No
Ferrets 	Ferret Grimace Scale 	Reijgwart et al. 2016 [73] 	Facial expressions 	Acute 	Yes
Rabbits and
rodents
RbtGS 	Rabbit facial grimace scale 	Keating et al. 2011 [67] 	Facial expressions 	Acute 	Yes
RGS 	Rat grimace scale 	Sotocinal et al. 2011 [66] 	Facial expressions 	Acute 	Yes
MGS 	Mouse grimace scale 	Langford et al. 2010 [65] 	Facial expressions 	Acute 	Yes

-- 1020 of 1450 --

Chapter 47: Recognition and Quantification of Acute and Chronic Pain 	1005
breakthrough pain. If analgesia is only to be administered on the
basis of quantification of pain, then an interval of every 2 h is recom-
mended. Although this is time consuming and labor-intensive, this
frequency is important to ensure that animals that become painful do
not get missed and become painful between assessments. If a rescue
dose of analgesic is required, then it is important to check that a single
dose of analgesic is sufficient by reassessing pain 30 min later and
giving further doses of analgesic if required.
Who should conduct pain assessment?
Individuals conducting pain assessments should be trained in
applying the tool that they are using to score pain. However, it is
important to note that for many pain quantification tools, formal
training does not exist. Exceptions are the Feline Grimace Scale
(FGS) for which a website is available with training in using
the tool (www.felinegrimacescale.com, accessed June 2023), and
the Botucatu Multidimensional pain scale for which training in
using the tool is also available on a website (www.animalpain.
org/en/home-en/, accessed June 2023). Veterinary surgeons are
not necessarily the best placed to conduct pain scoring and often
this task is better delegated to animal care staff or veterinary
nurses or technicians. The animal care staff generally spend more
time with the animals than veterinary surgeons and are therefore
better placed to detect changes in behavior over time and with
administration of analgesic drugs. Use of the FGS by owners has
been formally evaluated and it was found to be a reliable tool for
owners to score acute pain in cats, with good agreement with
pain scores assigned by veterinary surgeons. This makes the FGS
a useful tool for owners to use to assess pain in cats after dis-
charge from the hospital [93].
Factors confounding use of pain assessment tools
The factors confounding use of pain assessment tools are similar to
those confounding behavioral assessments of pain and were dis-
cussed previously.
Quantification of chronic pain
Similar to acute pain, quantification of chronic pain is also impera-
tive to measure the impact of pain on the animal and monitor the
effect of analgesic treatment. Unless pain is measured it cannot be
treated and managed effectively. It is also important to monitor
Quality of Life (QoL) in animals with chronic pain because living
with a painful condition long-term can have an enormous negative
impact on QoL.
Tools devised for assessment of chronic pain are heavily depend-
ent on owner assessment with interpretation and decision-making
done in conjunction with the veterinarian. The same caveats about
using a pain scale that is validated and reliable apply to chronic pain
assessment as acute pain assessment. In fact, recent studies demon-
strate little correlation between the owner assessment and force
plate gait analysis when evaluating response to treatment in osteo-
arthritic dogs [37]. This is not to suggest that sophisticated evalua-
tion methods are not useful but emphasizes that treatment efficacy
in the eyes of the owners likely includes overall QoL [94].
A number of tools or clinical metrology instruments have been
developed for the measurement of chronic pain and QoL in dogs
[95,96]. These have been designed to some extent from existing
QoL instruments for humans and mainly focus on the measure-
ment of pain caused by osteoarthritis. QoL assessments aid in
decision-making with respect to painful treatment interventions
and the need for euthanasia [97,98]. QoL is an abstract construct
used in human medicine that seems wholly appropriate when
applied to the welfare of animals [99,100], although there is no
general consensus on the definition of QoL in veterinary medi-
cine [101]. One proposed definition is that it represents the aspects
of an animal’s life that make life better or worse for that specific
animal [101]. Health-Related Quality of Life (HRQoL) is a nar-
rower term that defines the specific effect of a medical condition
on an individual’s health [102].
Recently, a framework for assessment of HRQoL in dogs has
been constructed [103]. The aim of this work was to inform the
development of reliable instruments to measure HRQoL in dogs
with osteoarthritis that are applicable to general veterinary prac-
tice and can be used to assess treatment outcomes in clinical
veterinary studies. The four domains of HRQoL which were
suggested were capability (e.g., lameness, stiffness, difficulty
jumping), physical appearance (e.g., abnormal posture), mood
(e.g., quiet and withdrawn), and behavior (e.g., attention seeking).
All four categories were considered to be influenced by pain
caused by osteoarthritis.
A web-based tool has also been developed to measure HRQoL in
dogs [104]. The instrument comprises 22 items with four domains
identified in this tool: energetic/enthusiastic, happy/content, active/
comfortable, and calm/relaxed. The tool showed good discrimina-
tive ability to differentiate between healthy and sick dogs. One
limitation to this tool is that it requires a fee to access it which may
prevent widespread adoption in clinical practice.
Since there is no “gold standard” of chronic pain assessment with
which to compare QoL or other clinical metrology instrument
scales, psychometric testing of various scales has been undertaken.
The Liverpool Osteoarthritis in Dogs (LOAD) scale, the Helsinki
Chronic Pain Index (HCPI), and the Canine Brief Pain Inventory
(CBPI) were comparatively evaluated in 222 dogs with OA [105].
There were moderate correlations between all instruments,
implying construct validity for all of them. Significant but weak
Figure 47.6 This cat is displaying changes in its facial expression indicative
of pain. Using the Feline Grimace Scale this cat scores 6 or 7 out of 10,
indicating that rescue analgesia is required. Source: Dr. Jo Murrell.

-- 1021 of 1450 --

1006 	Section 6: Nociception and Pain
correlations were found between LOAD scores and “symmetry
index” (calculated from force-platform analysis for peak vertical
force) and between CBPI scores and symmetry index. The CBPI is
a multifactorial tool composed of a Pain Severity Score, Pain
Interference Score, and an Overall Quality of Life Score. Studies by
Walton et al. [105] and others addressed criterion validity for the
CPBI, as did a study by Brown et al. comparing the CPBI with force
plate analysis [37]. For the CBPI, meaningful treatment differences
have been defined as a decrease of ≥ 1 in Pain Severity Score and
a decrease of ≥ 2 in Pain Interference Score [37], with Pain
Interference Score being more sensitive at detecting treatment suc-
cess than Pain Severity Score. The authors hypothesized that this is
because the questions in the pain interference score section are
more specific, relating to the dog’s activity and playfulness, rather
than the questions in the Pain Severity Score section that are more
difficult to define.
The HCPI is an 11-item single-construct index of chronic
pain [106]. Changes in the HCPI correlated well with changes in
QoL and mobility VAS. It appears to provide a valid, reliable, and
responsive method of assessing treatment response in osteoarthritic
dogs. The HCPI has criterion validity on the basis of a correlation
between HCPI and a QoL score on a VAS [107]. Interestingly, when
the VAS and HCPI were compared using owner evaluation of pain
in arthritic dogs, the conclusion was that a VAS was a poor tool for
untrained owners because of poor face validity (i.e., owners could
not identify their dogs’ behavior as signs of pain). Only after the
owners had seen pain diminish and then return (after completing a
course of NSAIDs) did the VAS have face validity. The HCPI did
not correlate with symmetry index from force plate analysis in
the study undertaken by Walton et al. [105]. The reasons for this are
unclear, but likely a function of wording and the weighting of
descriptors.
An alternative to using a structured questionnaire to measure
pain caused by osteoarthritis in dogs and cats is to use a tool called
the Client-Specific Outcome Measures (CSOM) scale [108]. The
CSOM uses three items tailored to each animal that the owners
are asked to follow and assess. At the first appointment, the pet
owner decides on the activity and rates the difficulty in perform-
ing the activity and these activities are then tracked over time.
This approach can overcome the limitations of some questions in
structured questionnaires, which may not apply to all animals
(e.g., whether the animal can walk upstairs when the owner lives
in a one-story home).
The feline musculoskeletal pain index (FMPI) is a client ques-
tionnaire with good readability, internal consistency–reliability, and
repeatability [109,110]. The FMPI did not, however, demonstrate
responsiveness or criterion validity in subsequent testing [111].
Responsiveness describes whether changes in a parameter can be
detected following treatment, ideally in a blinded placebo-controlled
design. The lack of responsiveness may have been a result of many
factors, such as a large placebo effect. In a novel study, Gruen
et al. [112] used the FMPI and CSOM and were able to circumvent
the placebo effect by demonstrating recurrence of clinical signs
after withdrawal of treatment compared with placebo. Criterion
validity describes whether the results generated correlate with
another validated measure. The FMPI did not show criterion valid-
ity either; however, this was correlated with activity measured
by accelerometry [110]. This lack of correlation challenges the
assumption that degenerative joint disease decreases activity, and
that cats receiving NSAIDs are motivated to increase activity. Some
owners are unconcerned about the activity levels per se in their
elderly cats and are more concerned about other potential indica-
tors of pain. These findings highlight a need to include both active
and non-active terms to assess cat pain and QoL better.
As well as the FMPI, another instrument has recently been devel-
oped to quantify pain in cats with osteoarthritis; the MI-CAT (C)
was developed for owners or caregivers to assess pain [113] while
the MI-CAT (V) has been developed for veterinarians [114]. The
tool for veterinarians contains 25 items involving body posture,
gait, willingness, and ease of horizontal movements, jumping, and a
general lameness score. A commercial company has also initially
validated a tool to measure HRQoL in cats [115], although this tool
requires payment of a fee to use it which may limit widespread
uptake of the scoring system.
Multidimensional scales do not exist for all species and may not
be appropriate in some cases. Some unidimensional scales have
been used for chronic pain with some success. For example, Welsh
et al. used the VAS and SDS to assess pain from “footrot” lameness
in sheep [116].
One problem with clinical metrology instruments, in general, is
a large placebo effect when completed by owners. In clinical
research studies assessing new analgesics, this hinders the ability of
an instrument to demonstrate a treatment effect which is disad-
vantageous, with placebo effects of up to nearly 50% for treatment
success in some studies of dogs with osteoarthritis [117]. This also
highlights the importance of including a placebo in analgesia stud-
ies of chronic pain using currently available tools to quantify pain.
There are a number of recommendations that have been made to
encourage accurate results when an owner is completing a clinical
metrology instrument. First, it is important that the person who
spends most time with the animal completes the instrument
because they are likely to know the animal best. Second, the instru-
ment should be completed before the consultation with the veteri-
narian because this avoids biasing the results. For example, if the
veterinarian says they think the animal looks good today, then this
may bias the results of the owner. Third, in order to avoid regres-
sion to the mean, it is recommended to omit the first pain assess-
ment score on recruitment to clinical trials. This is because animals
are often recruited to clinical trials by their owners when pain lev-
els are high. This gives an initial high score for the instrument,
then over time, due to the waxing and waning nature of chronic
pain, scores will naturally decrease. Unless the first score is dis-
carded, this will falsely show an effect of treatment. A similar effect
can be seen with the CSOM [108]. Another reason that could con-
tribute to the regression to the mean with the CSOM is that when
the owners go home and track the three chosen activities over
time, the owner realizes that the pet is not as impaired at perform-
ing the activities as they initially thought [108]. There is some dis-
cussion over whether to use a dependent or non-dependent
interviewing technique with clinical metrology instruments [108].
Independent interviewing is when a questionnaire is answered
without access to previous questionnaire data, whereas dependent
interviewing is when access to previous answers is allowed. There
is some evidence that dependent interviewing may increase treat-
ment effect and effect size which would be advantageous in a
clinical trial [108].
For an overview of different scales that have been developed to
measure chronic pain and their validation see Table 47.5.

-- 1022 of 1450 --

Chapter 47: Recognition and Quantification of Acute and Chronic Pain 	1007
References
1 Vaisanen MA-M, Tuomikoski SK, Vainio OM. Behavioral alterations and severity
of pain in cats recovering at home following elective ovariohysterectomy or castra-
tion. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2007; 231(2): 236–242.
2 Sutton GA, Paltiel O, Soffer M, et al. Validation of two behavior-based pain scales
for horses with acute colic. Vet J 2013; 197(3): 646–650.
3 Grunau RVE, Craig KD. Pain expression in neonates: facial action and cry. Pain
1987; 28(3): 395–410.
4 Langford DJ, Bailey AL, Chanda AL, et al. Coding of facial expressions of pain in
the laboratory mouse. Nat Methods 2010; 7(6): 447–449.
5 Andrews N, Legg E, Lisak D, et al. Spontaneous burrowing behavior in the rat is
reduced by peripheral nerve injury or inflammation associated pain. Eur J Pain
2012; 16(6): 485–495.
6 Jirkof P. Burrowing and nest building behavior as indicators of well-being in mice.
J Neurosci Methods 2014; 234: 139–146.
7 Jirkof P, Fleischmann T, Cesarovic N, et al. Assessment of postsurgical distress and
pain in laboratory mice by nest complexity scoring. Lab Anim 2013; 47(3):
153–161.
8 Lester SJ, Mellor DJ, Holmes RJ, et al. Behavioral and cortisol responses of lambs to
castration and tailing using different methods. NZ Vet J 1996; 44(2): 45–54.
9 Olson ME, Ralston B, Burwash L, et al. Efficacy of oral meloxicam suspension for
prevention of pain and inflammation following band and surgical castration in
calves. BMC Vet Res 2016; 12(1): 102.
10 Stafford KJ, Mellor DJ. The welfare significance of the castration of cattle: a review.
NZ Vet J 2005; 53(5): 271–278.
11 Shutt DA, Fell LR, Connell R, et al. Stress responses in lambs docked and castrated
surgically or by the application of rubber rings. Aust Vet J 1988; 65(1): 5–7.
12 Taylor PM. Equine stress responses to anesthesia. Br J Anaesth 1989; 63(6): 702–709.
13 Von Borell E, Langbein J, Despres G, et al. Heart rate variability as a measure of
autonomic regulation of cardiac activity for assessing stress and welfare in farm
animals – a review. Physiol Behav 2007; 92(3): 293–316.
14 Mansour C, Mocci R, Santangelo B, et al. Performance of the Parasympathetic Tone
Activity (PTA) index to predict changes in mean arterial pressure in anaesthetized
horses with different health conditions. Res Vet Sci 2021; 139: 43–50.
15 King BD, Cohen RD, Guenther CL, et al. The effect of age and method of castration
on plasma cortisol in beef calves. Can J Anim Sci 1991; 71: 257–263.
16 Murrell JC, Johnson CB. Neurophysiological techniques to assess pain in animals.
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2006; 29(5): 325–335.
17 Murrell JC, Johnson CB, White KL, et al. Changes in the EEG during castration in
horses and ponies anaesthetized with halothane. Vet Anaesth Analg 2003; 30(3):
138–146.
18 Murrell JC, White KL, Johnson CB. Investigation of the EEG effects of intravenous
lidocaine during halothane anesthesia in ponies. Vet Anaesth Analg 2005; 32(4):
212–221.
19 Otto KA, Voigt S, Piepenbrock S, et al. Differences in quantitated electroencepha-
lographic variables during surgical stimulation of horses anaesthetized with isoflu-
rane. Vet Surg 1996; 25(3): 249–255.
20 Murrell JC, Waters D, Johnson CB. Comparative effects of halothane, isoflurane,
sevoflurane and desflurane on the electroencephalogram of the rat. Lab Anim 2008;
42(2): 161–170.
21 Lehmann HS, Musk GC, Laurence M, et al. Mitigation of electroencephalographic and
cardiovascular responses to castration in Bos indicus bulls following the administra-
tion of either lidocaine or meloxicam. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(6): 1341–1352.
22 McIlhone AE, Beausoleil NJ, Kells NJ, et al. Effects of halothane on the electroen-
cephalogram of the chicken. Vet Med Sci 2018; 4(2): 98–105.
23 Iannetti GD, Mouraux A. From the neuromatrix to the pain matrix (and back).
Exp Brain Res 2010; 205(1): 1–12.
24 Fomberstein K, Qadri S, Ramani R. Functional MRI and pain. Curr Opin
Anaesthesiol 2013; 26(5): 588–593.
25 Legrain V, Ianetti GD, Plaghki L, et al. The pain matrix reloaded: a salience detec-
tion system for the body. Prog Neurobiol 2011; 93(1): 111–124.
26 Stewart M, Stafford KJ, Dowling SK, et al. Eye temperature and heart rate variability
of calves disbudded with our without local anaesthetic. Physiol Behav 2008; 93(4–5);
789–797.
27 Baysinger A, Webb SR, Brown J, et al. Proposed multidimensional pain outcome
methodology to demonstrate analgesic drug efficacy and facilitate future drug
approval for piglet castration. Anim Health Res Rev 2021; 22(2): 163–176.
28 Heinrich A, Duffield TF, Lissemore KD, et al. The effect of meloxicam on behavior
and pain sensitivity of dairy calves following cautery dehorning with local anaes-
thetic. J Dairy Sci 2010; 93(6): 2450–2457.
29 Coetzee JF, Mosher RA, KuKanich B, et al. Pharmacokinetics and effects of intrave-
nous meloxicam in weaned Holstein claves following scoop dehorning without
local anesthesia. BMC Vet Res 2012; 8: 153.
30 Culp WTN, Mayhew PD, Brown DC. The effect of laparoscopic versus open
ovariectomy on postsurgical activity in small dogs. Vet Surg 2009; 38(7): 811–817.
31 Enomoto M, Lascelles BDX, Gruen ME. Development of a checklist for the detec-
tion of degenerative joint disease-associated pain in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2020;
22(12): 1137–1147.
32 Belshaw Z, Dean R, Asher L. Could it be osteoarthritis? How dog owners and vet-
erinary surgeons describe identifying canine osteoarthritis in a general practice
setting. Prev Vet Med 2020; 185: 105198.
33 Rusbridge C, Jeffery ND. Pathophysiology and treatment of neuropathic pain asso-
ciated with syringomyelia. Vet J 2008; 175(2): 164–172.
34 Driessen B, Bauquier SH, Zarucco L. Neuropathic pain management in chronic
laminitis. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 2010; 26(2): 315–337.
35 Rietmann TR, Stauffacher M, Bernasconi P, et al. The association between heart
rate, heart rate variability, endocrine and behavioral pain measures in horses suffer-
ing from laminitis. J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med 2004; 51(5): 218–225.
36 Evans R, Horstman C, Conzemius M. Accuracy and optimization of force platform
gait analysis in Labradors with cranial cruciate disease evaluated at a walking gait.
Vet Surg 2005; 34(5): 445–449.
37 Brown DC, Boston RC, Farrar JT. Comparison of force plate gait analysis with
owner assessment of pain using the Canine Brief Pain Inventory in dogs with osteo-
arthritis. J Vet Intern Med 2013; 27(1): 22–30.
Table 47.5 List of clinical metrology instruments and pain scales, including quality of life assessments, developed for quantification of chronic pain.
Species 	Scale
abbreviation
Scale name 	Reference(s) 	Outcome measures 	Type of pain
assessed
Validation studies
conducted
Dogs 	HCPI 	Helsinki Chronic Pain Index 	Hielm-Björkman et al.
2009 [106]
Behavior,
Locomotion
Orthopedic 	Yes
CBPI 	Canine Brief Pain Inventory 	Brown et al. 2007 [96] 	Behavior,
Locomotion
Orthopedic and
bone cancer
Yes
LOAD 	Liverpool Osteoarthritis in Dogs 	Walton et al. 2013 [105] 	Behavior,
Locomotion
Orthopedic 	Yes
HRQL instruments 	Health-Related Quality of Life
Instruments
Reid et al. 2013 [118] 	Behavior 	– 	No
Short form- HRQL
instruments
Short form-Health-Related Quality
of Life Instruments
Reid et al. 2018 [104] 	Behavior 	– 	Yes
COAST 	Canine Osteoarthritis Staging Tool 	Cachon et al. 2018 [119] 	Clinical metrology instrument,
clinical examination, radiography
Orthopedic 	Yes
Cats 	FMPI 	Feline Musculoskeletal Pain Index 	Benito et al. 2013 [110] 	Behavior,
Locomotion
Orthopedic 	Yes
MI-Cat (V) 	Montreal Instrument for Cat
Arthritis Testing-Veterinarian
Klinck et al. 2018 [114] 	Behavior 	Orthopedic 	Yes
MI-Cat (C) 	Montreal Instrument for Cat
Arthritis Testing-Caretaker/Owner
Klinck et al. 2017 [113] 	Behavior 	Orthopedic 	Yes
HRQL instruments 	Health-Related Quality of Life
Instruments
Noble et al. 2019 [115] 	Behavior 	– 	Yes

-- 1023 of 1450 --

1008 	Section 6: Nociception and Pain
38 Caplen G, Hothersall B, Murrell JC, et al. Kinematic analysis quantified gait abnor-
malities associated with lameness in broiler chickens and identifies evolutionary
gait differences. PLoS ONE 2012; 7(7): e40800.
39 Gruen ME, Alfaro-Cordoba M, Thomson AE, et al. The use of functional data
analysis to evaluate activity in a spontaneous model of degenerative joint disease
associated pain in cats. PLoS ONE 2017; 12(1): e0169576.
40 Smith M, Mendl M, Murrell JC. Associations between osteoarthritis and duration
and quality of night-time rest in dogs. Appl Anim Behav Sci 2022; 253: 105661.
41 Muller C, Gines JA, Conzemius M, et al. Evaluation of the effect of signalment and
owner-reported impairment level on accelerometer-measured changes in activity
in osteoarthritic dogs receiving a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory. Vet J 2018; 242:
48–52.
42 Rae L, MacNab N, Bidner S, et al. Attitudes and practices of veterinarians in Australia
to acute pain management in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2022; 24(8): 715–725.
43 Hunt JR, Knowles TG, Lascelles BD, et al. Prescription of perioperative analgesics
by UK small animal veterinary surgeons in 2013. Vet Rec 2015; 176(19): 493.
44 Mantha S, Thisted R, Foss J, et al. A proposal to use confidence intervals for visual
analog scale data for pain measurement to determine clinical significance. Anesth
Analg 1993; 77(5): 1041–1047.
45 Coulter CA, Flecknell PA, Leach MC, et al. Reported analgesic administration to
rabbits undergoing experimental surgical procedures. BMC Vet Res 2011; 7: 12.
46 Holton LL, Scott EM, Nolan AM, et al. Comparison of three methods used for
assessment of pain in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1998; 212(1): 61–66.
47 Hewetson M, Christley RM, Hunt ID, et al. Investigations of the reliability of obser-
vational gait analysis for the assessment of lameness in horses. Vet Rec 2006;
158(25): 852–858.
48 Lascelles B, Cripps P, Mirchandani S, et al. Carprofen as an analgesic for postopera-
tive pain in cats: dose titration and assessment of efficacy in comparison to pethi-
dine hydrochloride. J Small Anim Pract 1995; 36(12): 535–541.
49 Slingsby L, Waterman-Pearson A. Comparison of pethidine, buprenorphine and
ketoprofen for postoperative analgesia after ovariohysterectomy in the cat. Vet Rec
1998; 143(7): 185–189.
50 Hudson JT, Slater MR, Taylor L, et al. Assessing repeatability and validity of a visual
analogue scale questionnaire for use in assessing pain and lameness in dogs.
Am J Vet Res 2004; 65(12): 1634–1643.
51 Holton L, Reid J, Scott EM, et al. Development of a behavior-based scale to measure
acute pain in dogs. Vet Rec 2001; 148(17): 525–531.
52 Reid J, Nolan AM, Hughes JML, et al. Development of the short-form Glasgow
Composite Measure Pain Scale (CMPS-SF) and derivation of an analgesic interven-
tion score. Anim Welf 2007; 16(S): 97–104.
53 Della Rocca G, Colpo R, Reid J, et al. Creation and validation of the Italian version
of the Glasgow Composite Measure Pain Scale-Short Form (ICMPS-SF). Vet Ital
2018; 54(3): 251–260.
54 Testa B, Reid J, Scott ME, et al. The Short Form of the Glasgow Composite Measure
Pain Scale in post-operative analgesia studies in dogs: a scoping review. Front Vet
Sci 2021; 8: 751949.
55 Calvo G, Holden E, Reid J, et al. Development of a behavior-based measurement
tool with defined intervention level for assessing acute pain in cats. J Small Anim
Pract 2014; 55(12): 622–629.
56 Reid J, Scott EM, Calvo G, et al. Definitive Glasgow acute pain scale for cats: valida-
tion and intervention level. Vet Rec 2017; 180(18): 449.
57 Moody CM, Niel L, Pang DJ. Is training necessary for efficacious use of the Glasgow
Feline Composite Measure Pain Scale. Can Vet J 2022; 63(6): 609–616.
58 Brondani JT, Luna SPL, Padovani CR. Refinement and initial validation of a multi-
dimensional composite scale for use in assessing acute postoperative pain in cats.
Am J Vet Res 2011; 72(2): 174–183.
59 Belli M, de Oliveira AR, de Lima MT, et al. Clinical validation of the short and long
UNESP- Botucatu scales for feline pain assessment. Peer J 2021; 9: e11225.
60 Bussieres G, Jacques C, Lainay O. Development of a composite orthopaedic pain
scale in horses. Res Vet Sci 2008; 85(2): 294–306.
61 van Loon JP, Jonckheer-Sheehy VS, Back W, et al. Monitoring equine visceral pain
with a composite pain scale score and correlation with survival after emergency
gastrointestinal surgery. Vet J 2014; 200(1); 109–115.
62 van Loon JP, Van Dierendonck MC. Monitoring acute equine visceral pain with the
Equine Utrecht University Scale for Composite Pain Assessment (EQUUS-
COMPASS) and the Equine Utrecht University Scale for Facial Assessment of Pain
(EQUUS-FAP): a scale construction study. Vet J 2015; 206(3): 356–364.
63 Taffarel MO, Luna SP, de Oliveira FA, et al. Refinement and partial validation of the
UNESP-Botucatu multidimensional composite pain scale for assessing postopera-
tive pain in horses. BMC Vet Res 2015; 11: 83.
64 Wathan J, Burrows AM, Waller BM, et al. EquiFACS: the Equine Facial Action
Coding System. PLoS ONE 2015; 10: e0131738.
65 Langford DJ, Bailey AL, Chanda ML, et al. Coding of facial expressions of pain in
the laboratory mouse. Nat Methods 2010; 7(6): 447–449.
66 Sotocinal SG, Sorge RE, Zaloum A, et al. The Rat Grimace Scale: a partially
automated method for quantifying pain in the laboratory rat via facial expressions.
Mol Pain 2011; 7: 55.
67 Keating SCJ, Thomas AA, Flecknell PA, et al. Evaluation of EMLA cream for pre-
venting pain during tattooing of rabbits: changes in physiological, behavioral and
facial expression responses. PLoS ONE 2012; 7(9): e44437.
68 Dalla Costa E, Dai F, Lecchi C, et al. Towards and improved pain assessment in
castrated horses using facial expressions (HGS) and circulating miRNAs. Vet Rec
2021; 188(9): e82.
69 Guesgen MJ, Beausoleil NJ, Leach M, et al. Coding and quantification of a facial
expression for pain in lambs. Behav Processes 2016; 132: 49–56.
70 Hager C, Biernot S, Buettner M, et al. The Sheep Grimace Scale as an indicator of
post-operative distress and pain in laboratory sheep. PLoS ONE 2017; 12(4):
e0175839.
71 McLennan K, Mahmoud M. Development of an Automated Pain Facial Expression
Detection System for sheep (Ovies Aries). Animals (Basel) 2019; 9(4): 196.
72 Viscardi AV, Hunniford M, Lawlis P, et al. Development of a Piglet Grimace Scale to
evaluate piglet pain using facial expressions following castration and tail docking: a
pilot study. Front Vet Sci 2017; 4: 51.
73 Riejgwart ML, Schoemaker NJ, Pascuzzo R, et al. The composition and initial vali-
dation of a grimace scale in ferrets after surgical implantation of a telemetry probe.
PLoS ONE 2017; 12(11): e0187986.
74 Evangelista MC, Watanabe R, Leung V, et al. Facial expressions of pain in cats: the
development and validation of a Feline Grimace Scale. Sci Rep 2019: 9(1): 19128.
75 van Dierendonck MC, Burden FA, Rickards K, et al. Monitoring acute pain in don-
keys with the Equine Utrecht University Scale for Donkeys Composite Pain
Assessment (EQUUS-DONKEY-COMPASS) and the Equine Utrecht University
Scale for Donkey Facial Assessment of Pain (EQUUS-DONKEY-FAP). Animals
(Basel) 2020; 10(2): 354.
76 Evangelista MC, Monteiro BP, Steagall PV. Measurement properties of grimace
scales for pain assessment in nonhuman mammals: a systematic review. Pain 2022;
163(6): e697–e714.
77 Shipley H, Guedes A, Graham L, et al. Preliminary appraisal of the reliability and
validity of the Colorado State University Feline Acute Pain Scale. J Feline Med Surg
2021; 21(4): 335–339.
78 Firth AM, Haldane SL. Development of a scale to evaluate postoperative pain in
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1999; 214(5): 651–659.
79 Holopherne-Doran D, Laboissiere B, Gogny M. Validation of the 4A-VET postop-
erative pain scale in dogs and cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2010; 37(4): 383 (abstract).
80 Gleerup KB, Lindegaard C. Recognition and quantification of pain in horses: a
tutorial review. Equine Vet Educ 2016; 28: 47–57.
81 Graubner C, Gerber V, Doherr M, et al. Clinical application and reliability of a post
abdominal surgery pain assessment scale (PASPAS) in horses. Vet J 2011; 188(2):
178–183.
82 de Oliveira FA, Luna SP, do Amaral JB, et al. Validation of the UNESP-Botucatu
unidimensional composite pain scale for assessing postoperative pain in cattle.
BMC Vet Res 2014; 10: 200.
83 Silva NEOF, Trindade PHE, Oliveira AR, et al. Validation of the UNESP-Botucatu
composite scale to assess acute postoperative abdominal pain in sheep (USAPS).
PLoS ONE 2020; 15(10): e0239622.
84 Luna SPL, Lucelia de Araujo A, da Nobrega Neto PI, et al. Validation of the UNESP-
Botucatu pig composite acute pain scale (UPAPS). PLoS ONE 2020; 15(6): e0233552.
85 Banchi P, Quaranta G, Ricci A, et al. Reliability and construct validity of a compos-
ite pain scale for rabbits (CANCRS) in a clinical environment. PLoS ONE 2020;
15(4): e0221377.
86 Benato L, Murrell J, Knowles TG, et al. Development of the Bristol Rabbit Pain
Scale (BRPS): a multidimensional composite pain scale specific to rabbits
(Oryctolagus caniculus). PLoS ONE 2021; 16(6): e0252417.
87 Dalla Costa E, Minero M, Lebelt D, et al. Development of the Horse Grimace Scale
(HGS) as a pain assessment tool in horses undergoing routine castration. PLoS
ONE 2014; 9(3): e92281.
88 Dalla Costa E, Stucke E, Dai F, et al. Using the Horse Grimace Scale (HGS) to assess
pain associated with acute laminitis in horses (Equus caballus). Animals (Basel)
2016; 6(8): 47.
89 Gleerup KB, Forkman B, Lindegaard C, et al. An equine pain face. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2015; 42(1): 103–114.
90 Dyson S, Berger J, Ellis A, et al. Development of an ethogram for a pain scoring
system in ridden horses and its application to determine the presence of musculo-
skeletal pain. J Vet Behav Clin Appl Res 2018; 23: 47–57.
91 van Loon JP, Van Dierendonck MC. Monitoring equine head related pain with the
Equine Utrecht University Scale for Facial Assessment of Pain (EQUUS-FAP). Vet J
2017; 220: 88–90.
92 van Loon JP, Verhaar N, van den Berg, et al. Objective assessment of acute pain in
foals using a facial expression-based pain scale. Animals (Basel) 2020; 10(9): 1610.

-- 1024 of 1450 --

Chapter 47: Recognition and Quantification of Acute and Chronic Pain 	1009
93 Evangelista MC, Steagall PV. Agreement and reliability of the Feline Grimace Scale
among cat owners, veterinarians, veterinary students and nurses. Sci Rep 2021;
11(1): 5262.
94 Hercock CA, Pinchbeck G, Giejda A, et al. Validation of a client-based clinical
metrology instrument for the evaluation of canine elbow arthritis. J Small Anim
Pract 2009; 50(6): 266–271.
95 Wiseman-Orr ML, Nolan AM, Reid J, et al. Development of a questionnaire to
measure the effects of chronic pain on health-related quality of life in dogs. Am J
Vet Res 2004; 65(8): 1077–1084.
96 Brown DC, Royston RC, Coyne JC, et al. Development and psychometric testing
of an instrument designed to measure chronic pain in dogs with osteoarthritis.
Am J Vet Res 2007; 68(6): 631–637.
97 Lynch S, Savary-Bataille L, Leeuw B, et al. Development of a questionnaire assess-
ing health-related quality-of-life in dogs and cats with cancer. Vet Comp Oncol
2011; 9(3): 172–182.
98 Noli C, Minafo G, Galzerano M. Quality of life of dogs with skin diseases and their
owners. Part 1: development and validation of a questionnaire. Vet Dermatol 2011;
22(4): 335–343.
99 Birnbacher D. Quality of life – evaluation or description? Ethical Theory Moral
Pract 1999; 2(1): 25–36.
100 Wiseman-Orr ML, Scott EM, Reid J, et al. Validation of a structured questionnaire
as an instrument to measure chronic pain in dogs on the basis of effects on health-
related quality of life. Am J Vet Res 2006; 67(11): 1826–1836.
101 Belshaw Z, Yeates J. Assessment of quality of life and chronic pain in dogs. Vet J
2018; 239: 59–64.
102 Cella DF. Quality of life: the concept. J Palliat Care 1992; 8(3): 8–13.
103 Roberts C, Armson B, Bartram D, et al. Construction of a conceptual framework
for assessment of quality of life in dogs with osteoarthritis. Front Vet Sci 2021; 8:
741864.
104 Reid J, Wiseman-Orr L, Scott M. Shortening of an existing generic online health-
related quality of life instrument for dogs. J Small Anim Pract 2018; 59(6):
334–342.
105 Walton MB, Cowderoy E, Lascelles D, et al. Evaluation of construct and criterion
validity for the “Liverpool Osteoarthritis in dogs” (LOAD) clinical metrology
instrument and comparison to two other instruments. PLoS ONE 2013; 8(3):
e58125.
106 Hielm-Björkman AK, Rita H, Tulamo RM. Psychometric testing of the Helsinki
Chronic Pain Index by completion of a questionnaire in Finnish by owners of dogs
with chronic signs of pain caused by osteoarthritis. Am J Vet Res 2009; 70(6):
727–734.
107 Hielm-Björkman AK, Kapatkin AS, Rita HJ. Reliability and validity of a visual
analogue scale used by owners to measure chronic pain attributable to osteoar-
thritis in their dogs. Am J Vet Res 2011; 72(5): 601–607.
108 Muller C, Gaines B, Gruen M, et al. Evaluation of clinical metrology instrument in
dogs with osteoarthritis. J Vet Intern Med 2016; 30(3): 836–846.
109 Zamprogno H, Hansen BD, Bondell HD. Item generation and design testing of a
questionnaire to assess degenerative joint disease-associated pain in cats. Am J Vet
Res 2010; 71(12): 1417–1424.
110 Benito J, Depuy V, Hardie E, et al. Reliability and discriminatory testing of a client-
based clinical metrology instrument, feline musculoskeletal pain index (FMPI)
for the evaluation of degenerative joint disease associated pain in cats. Vet J 2013;
196(3): 368–373.
111 Benito J, Hansen B, Depuy V, et al. Feline musculoskeletal pain index: responsive-
ness and testing of criterion validity. J Vet Intern Med 2013; 27(3): 474–482.
112 Gruen ME, Griffith E, Thomson A, et al. Detection of clinically relevant pain relief
in cats with degenerative joint disease associated pain. J Vet Intern Med 2014;
28(2): 346–350.
113 Klinck MP, Gruen ME, Del Castillo JRE, et al. Development and preliminary
validity and reliability of the Montreal Instrument for Cat Arthritis Testing, for use
by Caretaker/Owner, MI-CAT(C), via a randomized clinical trial. Appl Anim
Behav Sci 2017; 200: 96–105.
114 Klinck MP, Monteiro BP, Lussier B, et al. Refinement of the Montreal Instrument
for Cat Arthritis Testing, for use by veterinarians: detection of naturally occurring
osteoarthritis in laboratory cats. J Feline Med Surg 2018; 20(8): 728–740.
115 Noble CE, Wiseman-Orr LM, Scott ME, et al. Development, initial validation, and
reliability testing of a web-based generic feline health-related quality-of- life
instrument. J Feline Med Surg 2019; 21(2): 84–94.
116 Welsh EM, Gettinby G, Nolan AM. Comparison of a visual analogue scale and a
numerical rating scale for assessment of lameness, using sheep as a model. Am J
Vet Res 1993; 54(6): 976–983.
117 Rausch-Derra L, Huebner M, Wofford J, et al. A prospective, randomized, masked,
placebo-controlled multisite clinical study of grapiprant, an EP4 Prostaglandin
Receptor Antagonist (PRA) in dogs with osteoarthritis. J Vet Intern Med 2016;
30(3): 756–763.
118 Reid J, Wiseman-Orr ML, Scott EM, et al. Development, validation and reliability
of a web-based questionnaire to measure health-related quality of life in dogs.
J Small Anim Pract 2013; 54(5): 227–233.
119 Cachon T, Frykman O, Innes JF, et al. Face validity of a proposed tool for staging
canine osteoarthritis: Canine Osteoathritis Staging Tool (COAST). Vet J 2018;
235: 1–8.

-- 1025 of 1450 --

48
1010
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of L umb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
According to the International Association for the Study of Pain
(IASP), pain is “an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience
associated with, or resembling that associated with, actual or poten-
tial tissue damage” [1]. This definition has been subtly but critically
altered from its previous 1979 definition, which implied through
words such as “described” instead of “associated,” that the ability to
speak was a prerequisite for pain. The current definition includes
the accompanying note: “verbal description is only one of several
behaviors to express pain; inability to communicate does not negate
the possibility that a human or a nonhuman animal experiences pain.”
It is beyond the scope of a single chapter to address the clinical
management and pharmacologic treatment of pain in its entirety.
As such, this chapter focuses on initiatives to “anticipate, assess, and
alleviate pain” [2]. The goals of the chapter are to:
1 Define a proactive/preventive [3] and multimodal approach to
pain, and highlight the most effective approach utilizing the
entire veterinary team and the owner.
2 Introduce a recently proposed “tiered decision tree” to help pri-
oritize the use of evidence-based therapies [3].
3 Critically evaluate the differences in approach to treatment plans
among common companion animal species.
Anticipation of pain
The concept of proactive pain management begins with acknowledg-
ing that pain is a sequela to many invasive and even some minimally
invasive procedures. It is now accepted that proactivity is essential
to effectively advocate for the patient. Harnessing the power of pro-
activity allows the clinician to engage in a plan to address pain
before it occurs, rather than simply reacting to its presence.
Education of the entire veterinary team is a key component in this
strategy and different approaches are required depending on the
type of pain being addressed. Foundational understanding of acute
(adaptive) versus chronic (maladaptive) pain management allows us
to employ an approach that is suitable for each patient. For example,
acute pain is best managed as early as possible in the process. For
elective procedures, such as castration or ovariohysterectomy, pain
management is instituted prior to the start of surgery. However, in
other situations, proactivity includes identifying diseases, such as
osteoarthritis (OA) or laminitis, which are likely to cause long-term
pain and implementing a pain mitigation strategy as early as possible,
with a focus on improving quality of life.
Each member of the pain management team has a different role
to play in the educational continuum with contributions from
researchers, clinicians, and educators leading to enhanced standards
of care for veterinary patients. While experts publish evidence-based
information to validate pain assessment and alleviation strategies,
everyone must be well-informed regarding current developments
and continually update themselves so information can be dissemi-
nated to those directly responsible for patient care. This requires
good communication skills, a structured approach, and a founda-
tion of evidence-based information.
Suggestions for providing a coordinated pain management
framework include having a case coordinator, for example, a trained
technician or nurse, who is responsible for reaching out to follow-up
48 Clinical Management and Pharmacologic
Treatment of Pain
Carolyn M. McKune
Mythos Veterinary, LLC, Gainesville, Florida, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 1010
Anticipation of pain, 1010
Assessment of pain, 1011
Alleviation of pain, 1011
Decision-making tools, 1011
Tiers of the decision-making tree, 1011
First-tier, acute pain, 1011
First-tier, chronic pain, 1013
Second tier, 1014
Third tier, 1016
Evidence for agents that modify osteoarthritis in companion animals, 1016
Evidence for biologic agents in companion animals, 1017
Novel concept drugs, 1017
References, 1017

-- 1026 of 1450 --

Chapter 48: Clinical Management and Pharmacologic Treatment of Pain 	1011
on a patient’s progress and facilitate additional re-checks as neces-
sary [3]. Successful pain management also includes education of the
owner about the characteristics of their animal that may predispose
them to chronic pain (e.g., breed, diet, body weight, body condition
score, and age), the behavioral indicators of pain they should
look for, and the importance of administering prescribed pain
medications.
Assessment of pain
Assessment of pain is critically important and this is covered in
detail in Chapter 47. Pain assessment using validated tools is an
essential outcome measure of any pain management protocol.
Unfortunately, validated pain assessment tools are not available for
all species, including most captive species in zoos, wildlife, fish, and
amphibians. In the absence of a validated pain assessment tool, the
practitioner must use their familiarity with these animals, including
their natural behaviors, to make an educated assessment.
Alleviation of pain
The practitioner should prepare analgesic plans with a realistic goal
in mind. In many cases, reduction of pain so that quality of life is
improved is achievable, whereas complete absence of pain is not.
The plan is deemed effective if reassessment of pain, using a chosen
outcome measure, confirms this goal.
Analgesic plans for acute pain are often successful because the
animal usually has a diagnosis, a planned procedure, or known
trauma, which allows targeted interventions. Inflammation is a core
component of acute pain, and this is amenable to preventive or
preemptive therapy. Preventive and preemptive analgesia, while
often used interchangeably, are not the same. Preemptive analgesia
alludes to the timing of analgesic administration – usually prior to
noxious stimuli occurring [4]. Katz et al. [5] describe preventive
analgesia as “minimizing the deleterious immediate and long-term
effects of noxious perioperative afferent input.” The key to this con-
cept is preventing peripheral and central sensitization, which will
reduce pain and analgesic requirements.
Analgesic plans should match the degree (intensity) of anticipated
or existing pain and its duration. Patients are assessed and reas-
sessed for pain while in the clinic and after discharge by hospital staff
(preferably the case coordinator) and owners, respectively. Treatment
plans should also address patient anxiety. Children may experience
significant anxiety related to painful medical procedures resulting in
a greater perception of pain with subsequent procedures [6]. To
reduce procedural pain and anxiety both pharmacologic (analgesics,
anxiolytics, and sedatives) and non-pharmacologic (distraction
and play) interventions are used, many of which could be adapted
for veterinary patients.
Chronic pain is challenging in that it must start with an acknowl-
edgment that it may be present, and it should be assessed or
screened for during physical examinations. For example, older dogs
and cats should be screened for OA and owners educated that
changes in behavior can be due to pain and not the pet slowing
down with age. Managing chronic pain can be challenging due to
its complex etiology, lack of efficacious therapies, and potential
limitations related to the owner’s ability to care for the animal due
to financial, time, and physical constraints. As with acute pain,
anxiety should be addressed. Fig. 48.1 demonstrates the challenges
owners may face when caring for pets with chronic pain and other
comorbidities.
Decision-making tools
Gruen et al. [3] have proposed an evidence-based “decision-making
tree” for the treatment of acute and chronic pain in dogs and cats
(Fig. 48.2).
While Fig. 48.2 focuses on canine and feline patients, a similar
approach can be used in other species based on species-specific
evidence (treatments in the first tier have robust evidence support-
ing use in that species, treatments in the second tier have moderate
evidence, and those in the third tier have limited evidence).
Additional information on pain management in particular species
is available in species-specific chapters elsewhere in this book.
Tiers of the decision- making tree
First-tier, acute pain
When acute pain is present, but a definitive diagnosis is not con-
firmed, the clinician most often relies on first-tier drugs, which will
provide reliable analgesia with minimal side effects. For small
companion animal species (e.g., dogs, cats, and some pocket pets),
opioids are a logical choice (see Chapter 23). For large animal species,
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (see Chapter 24)
and α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists (Chapter 22) are commonly used;
opioids are administered by both systemic and epidural routes [7–9].
For acute pain of a known cause, the first tier of therapy often
includes analgesia that targets the source of pain. For example,
acute pain that is inflammatory in nature (e.g., a skin incision) will
respond well to an NSAID. There are very few patients that do not
benefit from a local anesthetic block and many techniques are
applicable to surgical procedures. Please refer to other chapters
dedicated to local anesthetic techniques in specific species for more
information on these techniques. Supportive and nursing care,
including nutrition, keeping patients warm and dry, and ensuring
dressings are comfortable and clean are also important components
of patient care. The International Society of Feline Medicine and the
American Association of Feline Practitioners have created nursing
care guidelines specific to the needs of cats [10]. Certain modalities,
such as cold therapy, are also appropriate in many species [11–13].
Further information on non-pharmacologic management of pain is
available in Chapter 49.
Figure 48.1 This image shows the medication box for a single canine
patient with chronic otitis externa. Not pictured are the refrigerated
medications, such as the allergy injections. In the background, there are
also pills for the other household pets with osteoarthritis. The owner of this
patient hired a separate care giver just to assist with the mid-day routine
and basic care of the patient. Not all owners have this financial freedom.
Source: Dr. Carolyn McKune, with permission.

-- 1027 of 1450 --

1012 	Section 6: Nociception and Pain
Acute pain of
unknown initial
cause
Cat/dog
Opioids
Supportive care
	1ST Tier
2ND T Tier
3RD T Tier
Cold therapy/
nursing care
Omega-3 supplements,
environmental
modifications, encouraging
activity, weight
optimization, surgery
Omega-3 supplements,
environmental
modifications, exercise,
weight optimization,
surgery
NSAIDs,
opioids, local
anesthetics
NSAIDs, antiNGF mAbs 	NSAIDs, antiNGF mAbs
Cat/dog
Ketamine, α2s
Physical
modalities
(No additional
drugs
recommended)
Anti-
inflammatory
diets
Pharmacologic
Non-omega-3 nutritional
supplements, salvage
surgery
IA biologics (PRP, stem
cells), non-omega-3
supplements, ambulation
assistance (braces,
wheelchairs, slings),
salvage surgery
Tramadol
Legend
Tramadol
Amantadine, Gabapentin,
PSGAGs, TCAs, steroids,
disease specific drug
therapies
Physical modalities;
therapeutic exercise and
rehabilitation; palliative
radiation; disease specific
therapies
Physical modalities;
therapeutic exercise and
rehabilitation; palliative
radiation; disease specific
therapies
Amantadine, Gabapentin,
Acetaminophen, steroids, IA
steroids, PSGAGs, disease
specific drug therapies
Cat 	Dog
Acute pain of
known initial
cause
Chronic
Non-pharmacologic 	High burden on owner 	High impact
All other
treatments
require a
diagnosis
and/or more
information
on the health
status of the
patient prior
to prescribing
additional
modalities
Figure 48.2 Decision tree for prioritizing pain management therapies. This figure outlines a tiered approach to pain management in cats and dogs for
acute and chronic pain. Tiers are presented from highest recommendation (most evidence for effectiveness) to lowest, although all therapies presented
have some evidence to support their use. Physical modalities include laser therapy, pulsed electromagnetic field therapy, acupuncture, and transcutaneous
electrical nerve stimulation. Surgical procedures for chronic pain include top-tier treatments such as dental procedures, removal of painful lesions, joint
stabilization and replacement, and amputation; lower-tier (salvage) procedures include arthrodesis, denervation, and excision arthroplasty. NSAIDs,
non-steroidal anti-inflammatories; antiNGF mAbs, anti-nerve growth factor monoclonal antibodies; α2s, α 2
-adrenergic receptor agonists; PSGAGs,
polysulfated glycosaminoglycans; TCAs, tricyclic antidepressants; IA; intra-articular; PRP, platelet-rich plasma. Source: Gruen et al. [3], with permission
of the American Animal Hospital Association.

-- 1028 of 1450 --

Chapter 48: Clinical Management and Pharmacologic Treatment of Pain 	1013
First- tier, chronic pain
NSAIDs have traditionally been used as first-line drugs for chronic
pain such as OA in many species. Chapter 24 provides information
on the pharmacology of NSAIDs, and Chapter 71 is dedicated
specifically to management of canine and feline OA patients.
There is evidence to support the use of omega-3- fatty acids,
which contain alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), eicosapentaenoic acid
(EPA), and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), for some types of chronic
pain, with their mode of action presumed to be via reducing
oxidative stress [14]. Cats with degenerative joint disease that
were fed a diet high in EPA and DHA (which also included
glucosamine–chondroitin sulfate and green-lipped mussel extract)
demonstrated significant improvement in activity compared to a
control group [15,16], as did dogs in a similar study [17]. Omega-3
fatty acid- supplemented diets have been shown to improve weight
bearing in dogs with OA [18]. A range of omega-3- fatty acid dos-
ages are reported in the literature, and it is important to follow rec-
ommended doses [19]. Evidence for the benefits of omega-3 fatty
acids is strong and, in some studies, they have allowed a reduction
in NSAID dosage [20]. A comprehensive meta-analysis reviewing
the quality and efficacy of omega-3 fatty acid supplementation
supported its use for both canine and feline OA [16]. Omega-3 fatty
acids may also be beneficial in horses. In vitro studies suggest
equine synoviocytes readily incorporate omega-3 fatty acids to
modulate inflammatory responses [21].
Locally administered corticosteroids have been used in horses
with chronic joint pain for many years for their anti-inflammatory
effects [22,23]. In horses, evidence suggests that steroids may help
them to return to normal function [24–26]. However, the specific
steroid used was a significant factor, with horses administered
methylprednisolone in the sacroiliac joint more likely to return to
work than those administered triamcinolone [24]. Conversely,
methylprednisolone leads to more cartilage damage in articular
joints than triamcinolone [27]. There is less evidence supporting
this intervention in other species and this class of drug is considered
“second tier” in dogs and cats.
Anti-nerve growth factor monoclonal antibodies (anti-NGF
mAbs) are a breakthrough therapy for the control of OA pain in
dogs and cats. Nerve growth factor (NGF), which is essential during
development of the nervous system, appears to alter neuronal
plasticity in conditions of chronic pain after the nervous system has
matured [28]. In response to noxious stimuli, peripheral NGF pro-
tein is produced and released to facilitate binding to tropomyosin-
receptor kinase A (TrkA) receptors, which are present in nerve
endings in subchondral bone [29]. Once this binding occurs, the
complex becomes internalized and is transported to the dorsal root
ganglion where, through binding to a multitude of different recep-
tors, it ultimately leads to central sensitization. Peripherally, the
binding of NGF to the TrkA receptor results in inflammatory medi-
ator release, including histamine from mast cells and serotonin, as
well as other pro-inflammatory effects [30]. Synovial fluid from
dogs with OA demonstrates increased NGF concentrations [31].
Pharmacotherapies, in the form of biological agents, target this
growth factor peripherally. Anti-NGF monoclonal antibodies are
not chemically synthesized, but rather derived from natural sources.
Specifically, monoclonal antibodies are produced through recom-
binant engineering or single B-lymphocyte clones in laboratory
animals [30] and, as they are species-specific, they are recognized as
native. A proposed benefit and important feature of anti-NGF mAbs
is that they do not block endogenous signaling as is seen with
traditional analgesics [32]. NGF controls various endogenous ion
channels, receptors, and signaling molecules and if anti-NGF
mAbs were to block these pathways, undesirable side effects could
result [33]. In clinical trials, some human patients receiving anti-
NGF mAbs developed rapidly progressing OA, characterized by
increased pain and radiographic changes. This adverse effect was
linked to high doses of anti-NGF mAbs or their combination with
NSAIDs [34]; as a result, anti-NGF mAbs are not currently approved
for use in humans. These adverse effects have not been reported
in animals.
Bedinvetmab is a commercially available anti-NGF mAb formu-
lation for use in dogs. It is administered subcutaneously at a dose of
1 mg/kg and has a terminal elimination half-life of 9.5 ± 1.8 days,
primarily due to antibody recycling at the FcRn receptor [35]. It is
intended as a once- a-month therapeutic and this duration of action
is corroborated by a study evaluating another anti-NGF mAb
(ranevetmab) where owners used a clinical metrology instrument
(the Canine Brief Pain Inventory) to score pain in their dogs for a
period of four weeks following an injection of the anti-NGF mAb
versus saline [36]. Another study involving 26 dogs included an
objective measurement of function (accelerometry) in addition to
clinical metrology instruments. Compared to the placebo group,
dogs administered ranevetmab showed significant improvement
versus pretreatment based on pain scores as well as activity meas-
ured by an accelerometer [37]. Previous anti-NGF mAbs were asso-
ciated with a reduction in inflammatory pain in a canine kaolin
model [38]. In studies looking at the safety of bedinvetmab, the
drug was well tolerated in Beagle dogs over a period of 6 months.
Clinical evaluations, including neurologic, ophthalmic, and joint
evaluations found no adverse effects, nor were there any concerns
with a two-week concurrent administration of NSAIDs [35].
Treatment-related immunogenicity has not been reported [35].
Frunevetmab is a felinized anti-NGF mAb labeled for the control
of OA-related pain in cats. Minimum dosage is 1 mg/kg, adminis-
tered subcutaneously, although significantly higher doses (up to
28 mg/kg) are well tolerated [39]. In a multicenter, randomized,
placebo- controlled, double-blinded study of 275 cats, significant
improvement was noted in client-specific outcome measures as well
as owner-assessed global treatment response with frunevetmab
versus placebo. Three doses were given 28 days apart and cats were
assessed on days 28 and 56. Veterinarians assessed joint pain as
improved, although this was not significant until later in the evalua-
tion process at days 56 and 84 [40]. These improvements were con-
sistent with reports from pilot studies looking at frunevetmab [41,42].
In the same study, evaluating 275 cats, adverse events did not differ
between placebo and treatment groups, except for a variety of derma-
tologic issues, including dermatitis, alopecia, pruritis, and scabbing,
which occurred significantly more frequently in cats that received
frunevetmab [40]. This was also noted in the pilot study [42]. At the
time of writing, areas in need of further research include the degree
and duration of analgesic effect a patient may have from frunevetmab,
as well as the necessary time to determine possible adverse events
and/or immunogenicity, which may occur [30]. Future studies may
expand the list of painful conditions that respond to anti-NGF mAbs.
Non-pharmacologic tier-one strategies for the management
of chronic pain include encouraging activity, environmental modi-
fication, and weight management (Fig. 48.2). The approach to
chronic pain management is integrative; therefore, the reader is
encouraged to combine treatment strategies from this chapter with
those described in Chapter 49.

-- 1029 of 1450 --

1014 	Section 6: Nociception and Pain
Second tier
Second-tier pain management treatments are best used in addi-
tion to tier-one modalities or when first-tier modalities do not
meet the needs of the patient. It is appropriate that a more defini-
tive diagnosis of the origin of pain is confirmed before these
methods are employed. Suggestions for second-tier modalities
have less robust data to support their use and this section will
review the information that is available. Evidence for second-tier
drugs used for chronic pain is particularly difficult to evaluate
because chronic pain is complex and has many unique clinical
presentations. For example, chronic pain can originate from mul-
tiple different organs, have a variety of stages, involve multiple
pathways, and create varying degrees of emotional distress and
reduction in quality of life. More than one chronic condition can
exist at one time, so it is unlikely we will ever find a single “silver
bullet” to use in these patients. We have an ethical obligation to
use agents, which we currently have access to, and which have
potential benefits with limited adverse effects when administered
appropriately [43].
Ketamine, a N-methyl- D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antago-
nist, is a versatile drug with a place in anesthesia and pain manage-
ment. In people, ketamine has been used to manage acute and
chronic pain, in burn and cancer patients, and for alleviation of
neuropathic pain [44–48]. Ketamine is often regarded as a more
effective analgesic for somatic rather than visceral pain [49], espe-
cially when pain is inflammatory in origin. In people, the dose of
ketamine required for analgesia is much lower than that required
for anesthesia, especially when it is combined with an opioid [50].
These low doses do not appear effective in the cat or dog when
assessed by mechanical and thermal threshold testing in non-
painful animals [51,52]. This may reflect the pain model used as, in
the absence of clinical pain, it is unlikely that NMDA receptors were
activated. Ketamine has been disappointing as a sole analgesic agent
when administered as a constant rate infusion (CRI) [51,53], with
only a single study in the dog [54] and cat [55] showing benefit, and
several studies showing none. However, with the difficulty in recent
years of accessing opioids reliably in some countries, ketamine infu-
sions combined with lidocaine and/or opioids and/or α2-adrenergic
receptor agonists, have become commonplace in veterinary anes-
thesia, providing perioperative analgesia for a variety of proce-
dures [56–61]. Clinical studies suggest that ketamine in combination
with lidocaine is superior to tramadol alone [62]. However, when
compared to a local anesthetic nerve block for patients undergoing
cranial cruciate repair, the combination of an opioid, ketamine, and
lidocaine was not as effective as the block for postoperative analge-
sia [63], thus reinforcing the importance of first-tier analgesic
choices (e.g., local blocks). This theory is also supported in one
study in cats, where the addition of targeted local blocks to an
anesthesia protocol that included ketamine showed benefits [64].
In addition to analgesic benefits, low-dose infusions of ketamine
appear to have few adverse cardiopulmonary effects in dogs [65,66].
No data exists on the cardiac effects of ketamine when used as a
CRI in cats, leaving some clinicians unsure of its role in this species
given the prevalence of subclinical cardiac disease [67,68]. However,
when ketamine was administered at 23 μg/kg/min after a 2 mg/kg
loading dose, to reduce propofol CRI requirements in a small
number of cats, cardiovascular variables were not changed [69].
In the cat, ketamine is a component of various popular injectable
drug combinations used to produce general anesthesia (e.g., “kitty
magic”) [70], and likely contributes a degree of analgesia to these
protocols [71].
Non-traditional routes of administration of ketamine have been
studied including its use as a regional and topical analgesic [72,73],
or given in the epidural space [74–77]; however, these techniques
are not common in clinical practice.
In the horse, subanesthetic doses of ketamine combined with
tramadol provided analgesia in cases of chronic laminitis [78],
although caution is warranted when gastrointestinal transit time is
a concern [79].
A large meta-analysis of human studies concluded that magne-
sium, likely through its antagonism at NDMA receptors and cal-
cium channels, reduced postoperative opioid use and resulted in
lower pain scores [80]; however, the evidence supporting this is
modest at best [81]. It is therefore not surprising that there is little
work to support the use of magnesium as an analgesic strategy in
animals.
Two oral NMDA receptor antagonists, amantadine and meman-
tine (an amantadine derivative), have been studied for their poten-
tial analgesic properties. Further information about these drugs is
available in Chapter 25.
In addition to targeted administration, systemic administration
of local anesthetics for provision of analgesia has been studied with
varying results. In conscious dogs, there was no change in nocicep-
tive threshold using electrical cutaneous stimulation over a range of
doses of systemically administered lidocaine [82]; however, this
may reflect the model used in the study. Investigators using a
thermal threshold model reported that systemically administered
lidocaine had variable and species-specific effects [83]. Clinical
procedures, which may serve as better models, yield different results
with systemic lidocaine administration [84]. Similarly, work done
by Tsai et al. suggests that systemic administration of lidocaine pro-
vided comparable analgesia to meloxicam in dogs undergoing
ovariohysterectomy [85]. In a meta-analysis of human patients who
received systemic lidocaine, the evidence was weak to moderate for
pain reduction, and the studies that reported an effect found this
only during early time points; however, the same meta-analysis
suggested that gastrointestinal recovery from anesthesia was posi-
tively impacted by use of systemic lidocaine [86]. Some veterinary
patients (particularly those at risk for decreased gastrointestinal
transit time or ileus, such as horses) may benefit from the proki-
netic effects of systemic lidocaine [87]. By minimizing development
of ileus, which is painful, lidocaine may have indirect analgesic
effects. Unfortunately, the use of lidocaine did not translate into
improved survival for horses with small intestinal lesions [88],
and may indeed negatively impact their recovery from anesthesia
[89–91]. Therefore, careful patient selection and judicious use of
lidocaine in horses is advised.
At the dose necessary for reduction of inhalant requirements in
cats, significant cardiovascular depression occurs [92], and although
there may be analgesic benefits [55], the risks of lidocaine infusions
in cats may outweigh the benefits.
Topical administration of eutectic mixtures of local anesthetics
produces analgesia and reduces inflammation, with minimal sys-
temic uptake [93–96]. Novel formulations of bupivacaine, including
liposome-encapsulated bupivacaine, which is released over 72 h,
may be useful in multiple species [97–99]. The utility of this formu-
lation is limited to infiltrative techniques using a moving-needle
injection technique in order to infiltrate deep and superficial layers
of the surgical site. The product license in the United States is limited
to regional analgesia for feline onychectomy and infiltration for
canine stifle surgery [98], but continued research may expand its
clinical application.

-- 1030 of 1450 --

Chapter 48: Clinical Management and Pharmacologic Treatment of Pain 	1015
Targeted nerve blocks, such as the transversus abdominis plane
(TAP) block, showed no additional benefit of using liposome-
encapsulated bupivacaine compared to a dexmedetomidine–
bupivacaine infiltration, although both techniques resulted in
lower pain scores compared to the control group which did not
receive a TAP block [100]. Caution is advised with incorporation of
liposome-encapsulated bupivacaine into targeted blocks that may
impact critical neurologic pathways, as prolonged effects may
occur [101]. For example, a brachial plexus block performed bilat-
erally with liposome-encapsulated bupivacaine could last up to 72
h. If the drug diffused rostrally and desensitized cervical spinal
nerves C3–C5, blockade of the phrenic nerve could necessitate the
use of mechanical ventilation. In addition to patient side effects,
client communication is equally important. For example, owners
may perceive a reduction in motor function as detrimental, when in
fact the extended effect of the block may contribute to better
pain relief.
There are case reports of side effects when blocks were performed
with unencapsulated bupivacaine, such as Horner’s syndrome
secondary to a brachial plexus block [102].
α2
- Adrenergic receptor agonists are discussed in greater detail
in Chapter 22. Xylazine, detomidine, romifidine, medetomidine,
and dexmedetomidine are commercially available veterinary
α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists that provide analgesia in a variety of
species [103–107]. A relatively new agent is a combination of the
α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist, medetomidine, and a peripheral
antagonist, vatinoxan, with the aim of eliminating the unwanted
effects of medetomidine, such as vasoconstriction and bradycardia.
Further work is necessary to assess this combination as an analgesic
since α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists mediate analgesia both periph-
erally and centrally [108–112].
Benefit versus risk must be assessed before including any drugs
in a pain management plan. In certain patients, the benefits of
α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists are significant. In horses, xylazine
provides significant relief of visceral and somatic pain, perhaps even
more so than opioids or NSAIDs [113,114]. This species difference
may be the result of α2
-adrenergic receptor distribution in the central
nervous system [115]. Calves undergoing castration had a reduction
in serum cortisol (one physiologic marker of pain) and improved
behavior when a combination of low-dose xylazine and ketamine
was administered prior to the procedure [116]. Antinociception was
improved in llamas receiving tiletamine–zolazepam when xylazine
was concurrently administered [117]. Alternative routes of admin-
istration may provide varied benefits, such as the caudal epidural
administration of detomidine in horses [118].
Regurgitant cardiac disease, which is prevalent in older dogs,
is an example of a situation where there may be more risk than
benefit to using α2 -adrenergic receptor agonists. Likewise, in a
critically ill patient who is already obtunded, the use of systemic
α2 -adrenergic receptor agonists may not be appropriate. When used
as a component of an analgesic plan, this class of drug is more
suited to healthy patients. The medetomidine–vatinoxan combina-
tion may help to ameliorate these concerns; however, as stated pre-
viously, the analgesic properties of this combination have not been
studied.
Gel oromucosal formulations of α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists
(e.g., dexmedetomidine and detomidine) are available and labeled
for use in several species for noise aversion in dogs and sedation in
horses, respectively. At the time of writing, the use of these agents as
analgesic adjuvants has not been reported. In human patients, topi-
cal clonidine has undergone a Cochrane review and was found to
have limited efficacy [119]; therefore, it warrants little attention as
an analgesic in veterinary medicine.
Acetaminophen (paracetamol) is used in dogs and horses as a
primary or adjunct analgesic. Unlike traditional NSAIDs, acetami-
nophen may target a COX-1 splice variant (COX-3). In equine
patients [120], acetaminophen has a high oral bioavailability
[121,122], with clinical reports suggesting it provides analgesia.
Inhibitors of soluble epoxide hydrolase are a new class of non-
NSAID anti- inflammatory and analgesic drugs, which increase
endogenous concentrations of epoxy fatty acids by blocking their
hydrolysis [123]. Epoxy fatty acids are analgesic and anti-
inflammatory signaling molecules, thus applicable to inflammatory
diseases such as OA. The inhibitor with the most stability and
potency across species seems to be trans-4- {4- [3- (4- trifluromethoxy-
phenyl)-ureido]-cyclohexyloxy}-benzoic acid (t-TUCB) [123]. In
horses, reduced lameness after intravenous injection of t-TUCB has
been demonstrated [124,125]. Pharmacokinetic work in the horse
suggests that a dose of 1 mg/kg is most suitable to achieve an anti-
inflammatory effect [126], although in a small study, a dose of
0.1 mg/kg resulted in statistically significant improvement in pain
scores for horses with chronic and severe laminitis [127]. The drug
is relatively well tolerated, but gas colic was reported in a single
horse [127]. There can be large species variations in drug bioavail-
ability and metabolism, and inhibitors of soluble epoxide hydrolase
are no exception [128]. Studies suggest a high oral bioavailability in
dogs [129] and, when administered orally, they appear to reduce
pain in dogs with naturally occurring arthritis [130]. While this
work is preliminary, further investigation is warranted. Little to no
clinical data is available regarding these agents in cats.
Bisphosphonates decrease osteoclast activity by reducing devel-
opment of osteoclast progenitors as well as by increasing osteoclast
apoptosis [131]. This limits bone resorption and may have positive
effects in horses with arthritis, lumbar spinal pain from cauda
equina syndrome, and navicular disease [132–135]. Bisphosphonates
also resulted in improved lameness scores in horses with bone fra-
gility disease [136]. However, because of the effects on osteoclast
activity, bisphosphonates can also perpetuate or exacerbate microf-
ractures, and have detrimental effects in juvenile horses [131].
Dogs appear to tolerate the bisphosphonate zoledronic acid used
for bone pain [137], although a small number developed azotemia
[138,139]. Other bisphosphonates, such as tiludronate, also appear
to improve bone pain in dogs [140,141]. This is an improvement
over the historic use of pamidronate, which provided modest to no
improvement for pain in dogs associated with diseases such as oste-
osarcoma [142–144]. Zoledronate was well tolerated in cats [145];
however, at the time of writing, there is no clinical data evaluating
the drug’s efficacy in cancer-associated pain. A comprehensive
review and species comparison is available [146].
Canine patients may benefit from intra-articular injections of
steroids or other agents [147,148]. Small-scale studies evaluating
slow-release triamcinolone acetonide show encouraging results
in dogs [149]. Comprehensive reviews on this topic are availa-
ble [150], and additional reading is imperative because novel
therapies with promise receive approval intermittently and may
offer effective pain relief for challenging conditions. One such
intervention is 117m Sn radiocolloid, which appears effective for
debilitating conditions such as low to intermediate-grade elbow
OA in dogs [151,152].
Additional drugs in the second tier include amitriptyline, nor-
triptyline, pregabalin, and gabapentin. These drugs and evidence
for their role in pain management are reviewed in Chapter 25.

-- 1031 of 1450 --

1016 	Section 6: Nociception and Pain
Third tier
Third-tier agents have either minimal evidence for their use, or
evidence suggests they are unlikely to be useful. Tramadol use in
dogs falls into this category, with a recent systematic review and
meta-analysis finding low to very low analgesic benefits [153].
Maropitant, a neurokinin-1 (NK1
) receptor antagonist is an excellent
anti-emetic, but there is limited evidence to support any anti-
inflammatory or analgesic effect [154].
Other third-tier agents include polysulfated glycosaminoglycans
(PSGAGs), chondroitin, hyaluronic acid (HA) and high molecular
weight derivatives, pentosan polysulfate, polyacrylamide hydrogel,
avocado–soybean unsaponifiables (ASUs), eggshell membrane
(ESM), and Boswellia serrata, among others. As with chondroitin
sulfate, the theoretical benefits of glucosamine stem from its role in
the regulation of collagen synthesis and its contribution to glycosa-
minoglycan and proteoglycan synthesis [155]. Chondroitin sulfate
also contributes to the cartilage matrix and enhances its resistance
and elasticity [156]. However, because both of these agents fall
outside the jurisdiction of regulatory agencies (e.g., government
drug regulatory bodies), which require accountability for claims,
formulations are highly variable in their concentrations and com-
positions; this may be the reason the information on their use in
veterinary patients is inconsistent. These agents, despite their mixed
efficacy, are unlikely to have adverse gastrointestinal, renal, or
hepatic effects. However, if one is choosing a supplement on this
basis, it may be more beneficial to choose marine-based fatty acid
compounds, which demonstrate subjective and objective improve-
ment in OA measures [16]. Side effects of PSGAGs are considered
mild [43]. Both HA and polyacrylamide hydrogel reduce the force
of impact on joints as well as provide lubrication, preventing
further deterioration of the joint. ASUs appear to provide their
beneficial effect through inhibition of inflammatory mediators,
thus promoting cartilage repair [157]. Eggshell membrane, which
is found between the albumin and outer calcified layer of chicken
eggs, may be beneficial to joints. The proposed benefits stem
from the membranes being a Type I collagen, as well as contain-
ing some of the glycosaminoglycans discussed here. Additionally,
they may also reduce pro-inflammatory cytokines [158]. Boswellia
serrata has been used for its anti-inflammatory properties for
many years [159].
Evidence for agents that modify
osteoarthritis in companion animals
PSGAGs have been studied extensively in the horse with various
in vivo, ex vivo, in vitro, and in situ models with either clinical or
histological outcomes as metrics for improvement or lack thereof.
Most studies involved relatively few subjects. Reported results
vary from minimal effects [160], to mixed effects [161], to
improvement [162–165]. Combination administration (rather
than administration of a single agent) is considered most effective
for prophylaxis or treatment for OA in horses, although the cost of
this approach limits its practical application [166]. Newer formu-
lations of HA, including functionalized nanogels [167,168], have
shown promise in bench-top experiments. Prolonged residence
time has been demonstrated, which has built on the foundation
of success in arthritis treatment that HA is known for [169,170].
Pentosan polysulfate has limited evidence to support its use.
A small study of 18 horses [171] suggested efficacy, while other
small studies showed limited improvement but minimal harm [172],
as long as dosage was appropriate [173]. Although it has limited
evidence for use in the horse, it continues to be popular [166].
Likewise, there is in vitro work suggesting polyacrylamide hydro-
gel is efficacious in improving joint disease [174]. There was also
significant long-term improvement in clinical patients [175,176]
and this conclusion was supported by meta-analysis of the litera-
ture [169]. ASUs have shown promise in some studies looking at
inflammatory mediator reduction [177–179], although clinical
pain was not significantly reduced in an experimental model of
OA in the horse [180]. While B. serrata appears safe as a feed
additive for horses [181], no clinical studies of its efficacy were
available at the time of writing.
Like the horse, a significant amount of canine work evaluating
PSGAGs is in vitro work and results are mixed. Some cell prepara-
tion studies demonstrated characteristics that may be beneficial in
OA [182,183], while others reported less conclusive results [184,185].
Older clinical studies demonstrate improvement in lameness
scores [186]. Route of administration makes a difference, with
parenteral administration having more positive outcomes than
enteral administration [187,188]. Although the evidence is weak,
when using a mixture of these agents as dietary supplements,
improvement in clinical signs was reported [189]. In a double-
blind, randomized prospective clinical trial, dogs with OA receiving
intra-articular high molecular weight hyaluronic acid showed
greater improvement than those receiving allogenic mesenchymal
stromal cells [190]. At least one other study supports improvement
in function and reduced impairment after HA injection [191].
Alternative methods for HA administration include the oral route,
and there was an increase in HA concentration in synovial fluid in
patients administered oral HA [192]. These studies add to the data
that supports the use of HA in dogs with joint disease [193,194].
Bench work supports the use of pentosan polysulfate in
dogs [182,195,196]. In a canine cruciate model, pentosan polysul-
fate had favorable effects [187], with minimal side effects. Work
done in dogs with ASUs suggests dosage is an important factor for
improvement, with dogs dosed at 10 to 12 mg/kg/day [197,198]
demonstrating more positive outcomes than those given 5 mg/kg/
day [199]. Studies have evaluated osteochondral defects [200], as
well as the potentiating effects of anti-inflammatory drugs with
these agents [201]. Clinical studies involving eggshell membranes
that assessed anti-inflammatory effects and clinical improvement
came close, but failed, to show statistically relevant bene-
fits [202,203]. This could be related to dosage, as dogs with hip dys-
plasia experienced clinical improvement with these agents [204].
The majority of work with B. serrata has been done with dogs.
Unfortunately, optimum dosing is unknown. Clinical studies show
efficacy at a dosage of 40 mg/kg/day [205], although no pharma-
cokinetic data is available to confirm if more or less is appropriate.
This is further complicated by a lack of regulation ensuring
supplements of B. serrata contain what they claim to, and studies
demonstrate a huge range of concentrations within various formu-
lations [206]. There is also work demonstrating efficacy when it is
used as part of a combination of interventions [189,207–209].
Work done with PSGAGs in cats is unimpressive, with a strong
placebo effect demonstrating improvement in both control and
treatment groups [210]. Pentosan polysulfate was also evaluated in
the cat for obstructive feline idiopathic cystitis and was found to
have no impact on recurrence of the obstruction or clinical
signs [211]. Pentosan polysulfate use in the cat is not benign, as
evidenced by a single report of a 14-year-old cat developing acute
and spontaneous subcutaneous and intramuscular hemorrhage
after administration [212].

-- 1032 of 1450 --

Chapter 48: Clinical Management and Pharmacologic Treatment of Pain 	1017
Evidence for biologic agents in companion
animals
Intra-articular biologic agents, such as stem cell therapies or
platelet- rich plasma, reside in the third tier due to limited evidence
for their efficacy and (unlike orally administered disease-modifying
agents) the inherent risks associated with intra-articular adminis-
tration [213,214]. This inferior risk-to-benefit ratio places these
agents lower on a list of recommendations. Issues such as variability
in their preparation make quantifying improvements challenging
[215–217]. In horses, there is evidence for improvement with stem
cells both in case reports and large studies [218,219]. The source of
the biologics made a difference as some patients worsened after
repeated exposure to products from an allogenic source versus an
autologous source [220–222]. These agents appear to have minimal
adverse events in multiple species; in fact, many of the studies suggest
they are well tolerated but fall short of reporting evidence of improve-
ment [223–225]. At low doses, biologics such as adult mesenchymal
stem cells may be enhanced by concomitant use of steroids [226].
Owners reported an improvement in dogs receiving stem cells
after intra-articular injections, although objective analysis such as
orthopedic examination, radiographs, synovial fluid analysis, and
pressure plate analysis could not demonstrate a benefit [227]. One
study examining owner outcome measures as well as scoring by a
veterinarian demonstrated improvement in dogs receiving stem
cells [228]. For specific disorders, such as trochlear groove reconstruc-
tion for patellar ligament deviation or in combination with surgery
for lumbosacral spinal cord disease, stem cells could prove beneficial
[229,230]. However, dogs with OA showed a greater improvement
with intra-articular HA as opposed to allogenic stem cells [231].
Autologous stem cell therapy may yield better results [232]. Little to
no information is available on feline subjects using intra-articular
biologic therapies. A comprehensive review is available for those with
interest in implementing stem therapy in their canine patients [233].
Autologous conditioned serum has been used as a therapy in
horses with OA to improve lameness scores through generation of
interleukin-1 receptor antagonist (IRAP), which inhibits the
cytokine interleukin-1 [234–237]. Like many biologic products,
preparation had a significant impact on the consistency of the
product [238–240]. There was no clear evidence that IRAP was
more beneficial than treatment with corticosteroids and HA [147],
as all patients improved in one study comparing the two agents.
Retrospective studies that looked at long-term improvement
(six months after therapy) did not demonstrate an effect of
IRAP [241]. Modest, gradual reductions in lameness and joint
pathology in horses were found in one study [242] in the short
term, with another small clinical study of 16 horses also suggesting
improvement [243] over the course of 35 days. While in vitro studies
in dogs suggest autologous serum may be useful [244], more clinical
work is necessary to draw any conclusions. No work is available on
use of this modality in cats.
Novel concept drugs
There are several drugs that have gained recent attention for their
potential role in pain management, including those that act in the
endocannabinoid system. Until more information is widely availa-
ble, it is difficult to assign these agents to a tier.
Other non-pharmacologic options, such as acupuncture, correc-
tive shoeing, fractionated radiation, and salvage procedures are dis-
cussed in other chapters. Further information on non-pharmacologic
management of pain is available in Chapter 49.
References
1 Raja SNC, Cohen M, Finnerup NB, et al. The revised International Association for
the Study of Pain definition of pain: concepts, challenges, and compromises. Pain
2020; 161(9): 1976–1982.
2 Schug SA. 2011 – the global year against acute pain. Anaesth Intensive Care 2011;
39(1): 11–14.
3 Gruen ME, Lascelles BDX, Colleran E, et al. 2022 AAHA pain management guide-
lines for dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2022; 58(2): 55–76.
4 Rosero EB, Joshi GP. Preemptive, preventive, multimodal analgesia: what do they
really mean? Plast Reconstr Surg 2014; 134(4 Suppl 2): 85S–93S.
5 Katz J, Clarke H, Seltzer Z. Review article: preventive analgesia: quo vadimus?
Anesth Analg 2011; 113(5): 1242–1253.
6 Sajeev MF, Kelada L, Yahya Nur AB, et al. Interactive video games to reduce paedi-
atric procedural pain and anxiety: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J
Anaesth 2021; 127(4): 608–619.
7 Van Hoogmoed LM, Galuppo LD. Laparoscopic ovariectomy using the endo-GIA
stapling device and endo-catch pouches and evaluation of analgesic efficacy of epi-
dural morphine sulfate in 10 mares. Vet Surg 2005; 34(6): 646–650.
8 Bennett R, Steffey E. Use of opioids for pain and anesthetic management in horses.
Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 2002; 18(1): 47–60.
9 Martin-Flores M, Campoy L, Kinsley MA, et al. Analgesic and gastrointestinal
effects of epidural morphine in horses after laparoscopic cryptorchidectomy under
general anesthesia. Vet Anaesth Analg 2014; 41(4): 430–437.
10 Carney HC, Little S, Brownlee- Tomasso D, et al. AAFP and ISFM feline-friendly
nursing care guidelines. J Feline Med Surg 2012; 14(5): 337–349.
11 von Freeden N, Duerr F, Fehr M, et al. Comparison of two cold compression ther-
apy protocols after tibial plateau leveling osteotomy in dogs. Tierarztl Prax Ausg K
Kleintiere Heimtiere 2017; 45(4): 226–233.
12 Luethy D. Cryotherapy techniques: best protocols to support the foot in health and
disease. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 2021; 37(3): 685–693.
13 Wang ZR, Ni GX. Is it time to put traditional cold therapy in rehabilitation of soft-
tissue injuries out to pasture? World J Clin Cases 2021; 9(17): 4116–4122.
14 Barrouin-Melo SM, Anturaniemi J, Sankari S, et al. Evaluating oxidative stress,
serological- and haematological status of dogs suffering from osteoarthritis, after
supplementing their diet with fish or corn oil. Lipids Health Dis 2016; 15(1): 139.
15 Lascelles BD, DePuy V, Thomson A, et al. Evaluation of a therapeutic diet for feline
degenerative joint disease. J Vet Intern Med 2010; 24(3): 487–495.
16 Barbeau-Gregoire M, Otis C, Cournoyer A, et al. A 2022 Systematic review and
meta- analysis of enriched therapeutic diets and nutraceuticals in canine and feline
osteoarthritis. Int J Mol Sci 2022; 23(18): 10384.
17 Roush JK, Dodd CE, Fritsch DA, et al. Multicenter veterinary practice assessment
of the effects of omega-3 fatty acids on osteoarthritis in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2010; 236(1): 59–66.
18 Roush JK, Cross AR, Renberg WC, et al. Evaluation of the effects of dietary sup-
plementation with fish oil omega-3 fatty acids on weight bearing in dogs with
osteoarthritis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2010; 236(1): 67–73.
19 Fritsch DA, Allen TA, Dodd CE, et al. Dose-titration effects of fish oil in osteoar-
thritic dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2010; 24(5): 1020–1026.
20 Fritsch DA, Allen TA, Dodd CE, et al. A multicenter study of the effect of dietary
supplementation with fish oil omega-3 fatty acids on carprofen dosage in dogs with
osteoarthritis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2010; 236(5): 535–539.
21 Caron JP, Gandy JC, Brown JL, et al. Omega-3 fatty acids and docosahexaenoic acid
oxymetabolites modulate the inflammatory response of equine recombinant
interleukin1beta-stimulated equine synoviocytes. Prostaglandins Other Lipid
Mediat 2019; 142: 1–8.
22 Brommer H, Schipper P, Barneveld A, et al. Systemic or intrasynovial medication as
singular or as combination treatment in horses with (peri-)synovial pain. Vet Rec
2012; 171(21): 527.
23 Mangal D, Uboh CE, Soma LR, et al. Inhibitory effect of triamcinolone acetonide on
synthesis of inflammatory mediators in the equine. Eur J Pharmacol 2014; 736: 1–9.
24 Ellis KL, Seabaugh K, King MR. Retrospective analysis of horses with ultrasound
evaluation of the sacroiliac region and response to local corticosteroid injection:
42 cases. J Equine Vet Sci 2021; 102: 103634.
25 Marsh CA, Schneider RK, Sampson SN, et al. Response to injection of the navicular
bursa with corticosteroid and hyaluronan following high-field magnetic resonance
imaging in horses with signs of navicular syndrome: 101 cases (2000–2008). J Am
Vet Med Assoc 2012; 241(10): 1353–1364.
26 de Grauw JC, Visser-Meijer MC, Lashley F, et al. Intra-articular treatment with
triamcinolone compared with triamcinolone with hyaluronate: a randomised
open- label multicentre clinical trial in 80 lame horses. Equine Vet J 2016; 48(2):
152–158.
27 McIlwraith CW, Lattermann C. Intra-articular corticosteroids for knee pain – what
have we learned from the equine athlete and current best practice. J Knee Surg 2019;
32(1): 9–25.

-- 1033 of 1450 --

1018 	Section 6: Nociception and Pain
28 Lewin GR, Rueff A, Mendell LM. Peripheral and central mechanisms of
NGF-induced hyperalgesia. Eur J Neurosci 1994; 6(12): 1903–1912.
29 Michael GJ, Kaya E, Averill S, et al. TrkA immunoreactive neurones in the rat spinal
cord. J Comp Neurol 1997; 385(3): 441–455.
30 Enomoto M, Mantyh PW, Murrell J, et al. Anti- nerve growth factor monoclonal
antibodies for the control of pain in dogs and cats. Vet Rec 2019; 184(1): 23.
31 Isola M, Ferrari V, Miolo A, et al. Nerve growth factor concentrations in the syno-
vial fluid from healthy dogs and dogs with secondary osteoarthritis. Vet Comp
Orthop Traumatol 2011; 24(4): 279–284.
32 Cheppudira BP, Trevino AV, Petz LN, et al. Anti-nerve growth factor antibody
attenuates chronic morphine treatment-induced tolerance in the rat. BMC
Anesthesiol 2016; 16(1): 73.
33 Mantyh PW, Koltzenburg M, Mendell LM, et al. Antagonism of nerve growth
factor-TrkA signaling and the relief of pain. Anesthesiology 2011; 115(1): 189–204.
34 Miller RE, Block JA, Malfait AM. Nerve growth factor blockade for the manage-
ment of osteoarthritis pain: what can we learn from clinical trials and preclinical
models? Curr Opin Rheumatol 2017; 29(1): 110–118.
35 Krautmann M, Walters R, Cole P, et al. Laboratory safety evaluation of bedinvetmab,
a canine anti-nerve growth factor monoclonal antibody, in dogs. Vet J 2021;
276: 105733.
36 Webster RP, Anderson GI, Gearing DP. Canine Brief Pain Inventory scores for dogs
with osteoarthritis before and after administration of a monoclonal antibody
against nerve growth factor. Am J Vet Res 2014; 75(6): 532–535.
37 Lascelles BD, Knazovicky D, Case B, et al. A canine-specific anti-nerve growth fac-
tor antibody alleviates pain and improves mobility and function in dogs with
degenerative joint disease-associated pain. BMC Vet Res 2015; 11: 101.
38 Gearing DP, Virtue ER, Gearing RP, et al. A fully caninised anti-NGF monoclonal
antibody for pain relief in dogs. BMC Vet Res 2013; 9: 226.
39 Gearing DP, Huebner M, Virtue ER, et al. In vitro and in vivo characterization of a
fully felinized therapeutic anti-nerve growth factor monoclonal antibody for the
treatment of pain in cats. J Vet Intern Med 2016; 30(4): 1129–1137.
40 Gruen ME, Myers JAE, Tena JS, et al. Frunevetmab, a felinized anti-nerve growth
factor monoclonal antibody, for the treatment of pain from osteoarthritis in cats.
J Vet Intern Med 2021; 35(6): 2752–2762.
41 Gruen ME, Thomson AE, Griffith EH, et al. A feline-specific anti-nerve growth
factor antibody improves mobility in cats with degenerative joint disease-associated
pain: a pilot proof of concept study. J Vet Intern Med 2016; 30(4): 1138–1148.
42 Gruen ME, Myers JAE, Lascelles BDX. Efficacy and safety of an anti-nerve growth
factor antibody (frunevetmab) for the treatment of degenerative joint disease-
associated chronic pain in cats: a multisite pilot field study. Front Vet Sci 2021;
8: 610028.
43 Varcoe G, Tomlinson J, Manfredi J. Owner perceptions of long-term systemic use of
subcutaneous administration of polysulfated glycosaminoglycan. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 2021; 57(5): 205–211.
44 Kosharskyy B, Almonte W, Shaparin N, et al. Intravenous infusions in chronic pain
management. Pain Physician 2013; 16(3): 231–249.
45 Elia N, Tramèr MR. Ketamine and postoperative pain – a quantitative systematic
review of randomised trials. Pain 2005; 113(1–2): 61–70.
46 White PF, Way WL, Trevor AJ. Ketamine – its pharmacology and therapeutic uses.
Anesthesiology 1982; 56(2): 119–136.
47 Bell RF. Ketamine for chronic non-cancer pain. Pain 2009; 141(3): 210–214.
48 Leppert W. Ketamine in the management of cancer pain. J Clin Oncol 2013;
31(10): 1374.
49 Alam S, Saito Y, Kosaka Y. Antinociceptive effects of epidural and intravenous keta-
mine to somatic and visceral stimuli in rats. Can J Anaesth 1996; 43(4): 408–413.
50 Ahern TL, Herring AA, Stone MB, et al. Effective analgesia with low-dose ketamine
and reduced dose hydromorphone in ED patients with severe pain. Am J Emerg
Med 2013; 31(5): 847–851.
51 Bergadano A, Andersen OK, Arendt-Nielsen L, et al. Plasma levels of a low-dose
constant-rate-infusion of ketamine and its effect on single and repeated nociceptive
stimuli in conscious dogs. Vet J 2009; 182(2): 252–260.
52 Ambros B, Duke T. Effect of low dose rate ketamine infusions on thermal and
mechanical thresholds in conscious cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40(6): e76–e82.
53 Sarrau S, Jourdan J, Dupuis-Soyris F, et al. Effects of postoperative ketamine infu-
sion on pain control and feeding behaviour in bitches undergoing mastectomy.
J Small Anim Pract 2007; 48(12): 670–676.
54 Wagner AE, Walton JA, Hellyer PW, et al. Use of low doses of ketamine adminis-
tered by constant rate infusion as an adjunct for postoperative analgesia in dogs.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2002; 221(1): 72–75.
55 Correa JMX, Niella RV, Oliveira JNS, et al. Antinociceptive and analgesic effect of
continuous intravenous infusion of maropitant, lidocaine and ketamine alone or in
combination in cats undergoing ovariohysterectomy. Acta Vet Scand 2021; 63(1): 49.
56 Skelding AM, Valverde A, Kilburn G. Evaluation of the analgesic effect of fentanyl-
ketamine and fentanyl-lidocaine constant rate infusions in isoflurane-anesthetized
dogs undergoing thoracolumbar hemilaminectomy. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021;
48(3): 407–414.
57 Van Wijnsberghe AS, Marolf V, Claeys S, et al. Effects of fentanyl-lidocaine-
ketamine versus sufentanil-lidocaine-ketamine on the isoflurane requirements in
dogs undergoing total ear canal ablation and lateral bulla osteotomy. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2020; 47(5): 595–603.
58 Lewis KA, Bednarski RM, Aarnes TK, et al. Postoperative comparison of four peri-
operative analgesia protocols in dogs undergoing stifle joint surgery. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2014; 244(9): 1041–1046.
59 Steagall PV, Aucoin M, Monteiro BP, et al. Clinical effects of a constant rate infusion
of remifentanil, alone or in combination with ketamine, in cats anesthetized with
isoflurane. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2015; 246(9): 976–981.
60 Gutierrez-Blanco E, Victoria-Mora JM, Ibancovichi-Camarillo JA, et al. Evaluation
of the isoflurane-sparing effects of fentanyl, lidocaine, ketamine, dexmedetomi-
dine, or the combination lidocaine-ketamine-dexmedetomidine during ovariohys-
terectomy in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40(6): 599–609.
61 Gutierrez-Blanco E, Victoria-Mora JM, Ibancovichi-Camarillo JA, et al. Postoperative
analgesic effects of either a constant rate infusion of fentanyl, lidocaine, ketamine,
dexmedetomidine, or the combination lidocaine-ketamine-dexmedetomidine after
ovariohysterectomy in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2015; 42(3): 309–318.
62 Kaka U, Rahman NA, Abubakar AA, et al. Pre- emptive multimodal analgesia with
tramadol and ketamine-lidocaine infusion for suppression of central sensitization
in a dog model of ovariohysterectomy. J Pain Res 2018; 11: 743–752.
63 Kalamaras AB, Aarnes TK, Moore SA, et al. Effects of perioperative saphenous and
sciatic nerve blocks, lumbosacral epidural or morphine-lidocaine-ketamine infu-
sion on postoperative pain and sedation in dogs undergoing tibial plateau leveling
osteotomy. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(3): 415–421.
64 Fudge JM, Page B, Mackrell A, et al. Evaluation of targeted bupivacaine for reducing
acute postoperative pain in cats undergoing routine ovariohysterectomy. J Feline
Med Surg 2020; 22(2): 91–99.
65 de Moura RS, Bittar IP, Gomes JH, et al. Plasma concentration, cardiorespiratory
and analgesic effects of ketamine-fentanyl infusion in dogs submitted to mastec-
tomy. BMC Vet Res 2022; 18(1): 225.
66 Franco LG, Wilges CHM, Junior DP, et al. Effects of ketamine constant rate infu-
sions on cardiac biomarkers and cardiac function in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018;
45(3): 250–259.
67 Payne JR, Brodbelt DC, Luis Fuentes V. Cardiomyopathy prevalence in 780 appar-
ently healthy cats in rehoming centres (the CatScan study). J Vet Cardiol 2015;
17(Suppl 1): S244–S257.
68 Paige CF, Abbott JA, Elvinger F, et al. Prevalence of cardiomyopathy in apparently
healthy cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2009; 234(11): 1398–1403.
69 Ilkiw JE, Pascoe PJ. Cardiovascular effects of propofol alone and in combination with
ketamine for total intravenous anesthesia in cats. Am J Vet Res 2003; 64(7): 913–917.
70 Gates MC, Littlewood KE, Kongara K, et al. Cross-sectional survey of anaesthesia
and analgesia protocols used to perform routine canine and feline ovariohysterec-
tomies. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(1): 38–46.
71 Kalchofner Guerrero KS, Reichler IM, Schwarz A, et al. Alfaxalone or ketamine-
medetomidine in cats undergoing ovariohysterectomy: a comparison of intra-
operative parameters and post-operative pain. Vet Anaesth Analg 2014; 41(6):
644–653.
72 Kumar A, Sharma D, Datta B. Addition of ketamine or dexmedetomidine to
lignocaine in intravenous regional anesthesia: a randomized controlled study.
J Anaesthesiol Clin Pharmacol 2012; 28(4): 501–504.
73 Uzaraga I, Gerbis B, Holwerda E, et al. Topical amitriptyline, ketamine, and lido-
caine in neuropathic pain caused by radiation skin reaction: a pilot study. Support
Care Cancer 2012; 20(7): 1515–1524.
74 Gómez de Segura IA, De Rossi R, Santos M, et al. Epidural injection of ketamine for
perineal analgesia in the horse. Vet Surg 1998; 27(4): 384–391.
75 DeRossi R, Benites A, Ferreira J, et al. Effects of lumbosacral epidural ketamine and
lidocaine in xylazine-sedated cats. J S Afr Vet Assoc 2009; 80(2): 79–83.
76 Rojas AC, Alves JG, Moreira E Lima R, et al. The effects of subarachnoid adminis-
tration of preservative-free S(+)-ketamine on spinal cord and meninges in dogs.
Anesth Analg 2012; 114(2): 450–455.
77 Song XJ, Zhao ZQ. NMDA and non-NMDA receptors mediating nociceptive and
non- nociceptive transmission in spinal cord of cat. Zhongguo Yao Li Xue Bao 1993;
14(6): 481–485.
78 Guedes AG, Matthews NS, Hood DM. Effect of ketamine hydrochloride on the
analgesic effects of tramadol hydrochloride in horses with signs of chronic
laminitis-associated pain. Am J Vet Res 2012; 73(5): 610–619.
79 Hocking G, Cousins MJ. Ketamine in chronic pain management: an evidence-
based review. Anesth Analg 2003; 97(6): 1730–1739.
80 Albrecht E, Kirkham KR, Liu SS, et al. Peri-operative intravenous administration of
magnesium sulphate and postoperative pain: a meta-analysis. Anaesthesia 2013;
68(1): 79–90.

-- 1034 of 1450 --

Chapter 48: Clinical Management and Pharmacologic Treatment of Pain 	1019
81 Morel V, Pickering ME, Goubayon J, et al. Magnesium for pain treatment in 2021?
State of the art. Nutrients 2021; 13(5).
82 MacDougall LM, Hethey JA, Livingston A, et al. Antinociceptive, cardiopulmo-
nary, and sedative effects of five intravenous infusion rates of lidocaine in
conscious dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36(5): 512–522.
83 Pypendop BH, Ilkiw JE, Robertson SA. Effects of intravenous administration of
lidocaine on the thermal threshold in cats. Am J Vet Res 2006; 67(1): 16–20.
84 Smith LJ, Bentley E, Shih A, et al. Systemic lidocaine infusion as an analgesic for
intraocular surgery in dogs: a pilot study. Vet Anaesth Analg 2004; 31(1): 53–63.
85 Tsai TY, Chang SK, Chou PY, et al. Comparison of postoperative effects between
lidocaine infusion, meloxicam, and their combination in dogs undergoing ovario-
hysterectomy. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40(6): 615–622.
86 Kranke P, Jokinen J, Pace NL, et al. Continuous intravenous perioperative lido-
caine infusion for postoperative pain and recovery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2015; (7): CD009642.
87 Cook VL, Blikslager AT. Use of systemically administered lidocaine in horses with
gastrointestinal tract disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008; 232(8): 1144–1148.
88 Salem SE, Proudman CJ, Archer DC. Has intravenous lidocaine improved the
outcome in horses following surgical management of small intestinal lesions in a
UK hospital population? BMC Vet Res 2016; 12(1): 157.
89 Valverde A, Gunkelt C, Doherty TJ, et al. Effect of a constant rate infusion of lido-
caine on the quality of recovery from sevoflurane or isoflurane general anaesthesia
in horses. Equine Vet J 2005; 37(6): 559–564.
90 Wagner AE, Mama KR, Steffey EP, et al. Comparison of the cardiovascular effects
of equipotent anesthetic doses of sevoflurane alone and sevoflurane plus an intra-
venous infusion of lidocaine in horses. Am J Vet Res 2011; 72(4): 452–460.
91 Valverde A, Rickey E, Sinclair M, et al. Comparison of cardiovascular function
and quality of recovery in isoflurane-anaesthetised horses administered a constant
rate infusion of lidocaine or lidocaine and medetomidine during elective surgery.
Equine Vet J 2010; 42(3): 192–199.
92 Pypendop B, Ilkiw J. Assessment of the hemodynamic effects of lidocaine admin-
istered IV in isoflurane-anesthetized cats. Am J Vet Res 2005; 66(4): 661–668.
93 Crisi PE, De Santis F, Giordano MV, et al. Evaluation of eutectic lidocaine/prilocaine
cream for jugular blood sampling in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2021; 23(2): 185–189.
94 Gibbon K, Cyborski J, Guzinski M, et al. Evaluation of adverse effects of EMLA
(lidocaine/prilocaine) cream for the placement of jugular catheters in healthy cats.
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2003; 26(6): 439–441.
95 Keating SC, Thomas AA, Flecknell PA, et al. Evaluation of EMLA cream for pre-
venting pain during tattooing of rabbits: changes in physiological, behavioural and
facial expression responses. PLoS ONE 2012; 7(9): e44437.
96 Wagner K, Gibbon K, Strom T, et al. Adverse effects of EMLA (lidocaine/
prilocaine) cream and efficacy for the placement of jugular catheters in hospitalized
cats. J Feline Med Surg 2006; 8(2): 141–144.
97 Gordon-Evans WJ, Suh HY, Guedes AG. Controlled, non-inferiority trial of bupi-
vacaine liposome injectable suspension. J Feline Med Surg 2020; 22(10): 916–921.
98 Reader RC, McCarthy RJ, Schultz KL, et al. Comparison of liposomal bupivacaine
and 0.5% bupivacaine hydrochloride for control of postoperative pain in dogs
undergoing tibial plateau leveling osteotomy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2020; 256(9):
1011–1019.
99 Richard BM, Newton P, Ott LR, et al. The safety of EXPAREL (R) (bupivacaine
liposome injectable suspension) administered by peripheral nerve block in rabbits
and dogs. J Drug Deliv 2012; 2012: 962101.
100 Campoy L, Martin-Flores M, Boesch JM, et al. Transverse abdominis plane injec-
tion of bupivacaine with dexmedetomidine or a bupivacaine liposomal suspension
yielded lower pain scores and requirement for rescue analgesia in a controlled,
randomized trial in dogs undergoing elective ovariohysterectomy. Am J Vet Res
2022; 83(9).
101 Campoy L, Martin-Flores M, Gleed RD, et al. Block duration is substantially
longer with a liposomal suspension of bupivacaine than with 0.5% bupivacaine
HCl potentiated with dexmedetomidine following an ultrasound-guided sciatic
nerve block in Beagles. Am J Vet Res 2022; 83(8).
102 Santoro F, Kaartinen J. Ultrasound-guided brachial plexus block and suspected
Horner’s syndrome in an alpaca (Vicugna pacos) undergoing traumatic scapulo-
humeral luxation reduction and articular capsule reconstruction. Open Vet J 2022;
12(6): 1035–1038.
103 Valverde A. Alpha-2 agonists as pain therapy in horses. Vet Clin North Am Equine
Pract 2010; 26(3): 515–532.
104 Kästner SB. A2-agonists in sheep: a review. Vet Anaesth Analg 2006; 33(2): 79–96.
105 Murrell JC, Hellebrekers LJ. Medetomidine and dexmedetomidine: a review of
cardiovascular effects and antinociceptive properties in the dog. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2005; 32(3): 117–127.
106 Meyer H, Starke A, Kehler W, et al. High caudal epidural anaesthesia with local
anaesthetics or alpha(2)-agonists in calves. J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med
2007; 54(7): 384–389.
107 Slingsby L, Taylor P, Monroe T. Thermal antinociception after dexmedetomidine
administration in cats: a comparison between intramuscular and oral transmu-
cosal administration. J Feline Med Surg 2009; 11(10): 829–834.
108 Paalzow L. Analgesia produced by clonidine in mice and rats. J Pharm Pharmacol
1974; 26(5): 361–363.
109 Fehrenbacher JC, Loverme J, Clarke W, et al. Rapid pain modulation with nuclear
receptor ligands. Brain Res Rev 2009; 60(1): 114–124.
110 Ishii H, Kohno T, Yamakura T, et al. Action of dexmedetomidine on the substantia
gelatinosa neurons of the rat spinal cord. Eur J Neurosci 2008; 27(12): 3182–3190.
111 Guo TZ, Jiang JY, Buttermann AE, et al. Dexmedetomidine injection into the
locus ceruleus produces antinociception. Anesthesiology 1996; 84(4): 873–881.
112 Dogrul A, Coskun I, Uzbay T. The contribution of alpha-1 and alpha-2 adreno-
ceptors in peripheral imidazoline and adrenoceptor agonist-induced nociception.
Anesth Analg 2006; 103(2): 471–477.
113 Pippi NL, Lumb WV. Objective tests of analgesic drugs in ponies. Am J Vet Res
1979; 40(8): 1082–1086.
114 Muir WW, Robertson JT. Visceral analgesia: effects of xylazine, butorphanol,
meperidine, and pentazocine in horses. Am J Vet Res 1985; 46(10): 2081–2084.
115 Hellyer PW, Bai L, Supon J, et al. Comparison of opioid and alpha-2 adrenergic
receptor binding in horse and dog brain using radioligand autoradiography.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2003; 30(3): 172–182.
116 Coetzee JF, Gehring R, Tarus-Sang J, et al. Effect of sub-anesthetic xylazine and
ketamine (‘ketamine stun’) administered to calves immediately prior to castration.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2010; 37(6): 566–578.
117 Seddighi R, Elliot SB, Whitlock BK, et al. Physiologic and antinociceptive effects
following intramuscular administration of xylazine hydrochloride in combination
with tiletamine–zolazepam in llamas. Am J Vet Res 2013; 74(4): 530–534.
118 Goodrich LR, Nixon AJ, Fubini SL, et al. Epidural morphine and detomidine
decreases postoperative hindlimb lameness in horses after bilateral stifle arthros-
copy. Vet Surg 2002; 31(3): 232–239.
119 Serednicki WT, Wrzosek A, Woron J, et al. Topical clonidine for neuropathic pain
in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2022; 5: CD010967.
120 Kohn CW, Muir WW. Selected aspects of the clinical pharmacology of visceral
analgesics and gut motility modifying drugs in the horse. J Vet Intern Med 1988;
2(2): 85–91.
121 West E, Bardell D, Morgan R, et al. Use of acetaminophen (paracetamol) as a
short-term adjunctive analgesic in a laminitic pony. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011;
38(5): 521–522.
122 Tavanaeimanesh H, Azarnoosh A, Ashar FS, et al. Comparison of analgesic effects
of a constant rate infusion of both tramadol and acetaminophen versus those of
infusions of each individual drug in horses. J Equine Vet Sci 2018; 64: 101–106.
123 Shihadih DS, Harris TR, Kodani SD, et al. Selection of potent inhibitors of soluble
epoxide hydrolase for usage in veterinary medicine. Front Vet Sci 2020; 7: 580.
124 Carlson A, Johnson PJ, Lei Z, et al. Anti- nociceptive efficacy of the soluble epoxide
hydrolase inhibitor t-TUCB in horses with mechanically induced lameness. Res
Vet Sci 2022; 152: 504–509.
125 Guedes AG, Morisseau C, Sole A, et al. Use of a soluble epoxide hydrolase inhibi-
tor as an adjunctive analgesic in a horse with laminitis. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013;
40(4): 440–448.
126 Guedes AGP, Aristizabal F, Sole A, et al. Pharmacokinetics and antinociceptive
effects of the soluble epoxide hydrolase inhibitor t-TUCB in horses with experi-
mentally induced radiocarpal synovitis. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2018; 41(2):
230–238.
127 Guedes A, Galuppo L, Hood D, et al. Soluble epoxide hydrolase activity and phar-
macologic inhibition in horses with chronic severe laminitis. Equine Vet J 2017;
49(3): 345–351.
128 McReynolds CB, Yang J, Guedes A, et al. Species differences in metabolism of
soluble epoxide hydrolase inhibitor, EC1728, highlight the importance of clini-
cally relevant screening mechanisms in drug development. Molecules 2021;
26(16): 5034.
129 Tsai HJ, Hwang SH, Morisseau C, et al. Pharmacokinetic screening of soluble
epoxide hydrolase inhibitors in dogs. Eur J Pharm Sci 2010; 40(3): 222–238.
130 McReynolds CB, Hwang SH, Yang J, et al. Pharmaceutical effects of inhibiting the
soluble epoxide hydrolase in canine osteoarthritis. Front Pharmacol 2019; 10: 533.
131 Vergara-Hernandez FB, Nielsen BD, Colbath AC. Is the use of bisphosphonates put-
ting horses at risk? An osteoclast perspective. Animals (Basel) 2022; 12(13): 1722.
132 Kamm L, McIlwraith W, Kawcak C. A review of the efficacy of tiludronate in the
horse. J Equine Vet Sci 2008; 28(4): 209–214.
133 Gough MR, Thibaud D, Smith RKW. Tiludronate infusion in the treatment of
bone spavin: a double blind placebo-controlled trial. Equine Vet J 2010; 42(5):
381–387.
134 Hadgaonkar S, Patwardhan S, Bhilare P, et al. A polyostotic Paget’s Disease involv-
ing lumbar spine presenting with cauda equina syndrome: an unusual entity. J
Orthop Case Rep 2021; 11(10): 1–5.

-- 1035 of 1450 --

1020 	Section 6: Nociception and Pain
135 Coudry V, Thibaud D, Riccio B, et al. Efficacy of tiludronate in the treatment of
horses with signs of pain associated with osteoarthritic lesions of the thoracolum-
bar vertebral column. Am J Vet Res 2007; 68(3): 329–337.
136 Katzman SA, Nieto JE, Arens AM, et al. Use of zoledronate for treatment of a bone
fragility disorder in horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2012; 240(11): 1323–1328.
137 Fan TM, de Lorimier LP, Garrett LD, et al. The bone biologic effects of zoledronate
in healthy dogs and dogs with malignant osteolysis. J Vet Intern Med 2008; 22(2):
380–387.
138 Brewer DJ, Macfarlane M, O’Connell E, et al. Toxicity of zoledronic acid after
intravenous administration: a retrospective study of 95 dogs. J Vet Intern Med
2022; 36(1): 253–258.
139 Vidal SA, Skorupski KA, Willcox JL, et al. Retrospective evaluation of acute kid-
ney injury after zoledronic acid administration to dogs with malignant osteolysis.
Front Vet Sci 2021; 8: 647846.
140 Rialland P, Otis C, Moreau M, et al. Association between sensitisation and pain-
related behaviours in an experimental canine model of osteoarthritis. Pain 2014;
155(10): 2071–2079.
141 Moreau M, Rialland P, Pelletier JP, et al. Tiludronate treatment improves structural
changes and symptoms of osteoarthritis in the canine anterior cruciate ligament
model. Arthritis Res Ther 2011; 13(3): R98.
142 Fan TM, de Lorimier LP, Charney SC, et al. Evaluation of intravenous pamidronate
administration in 33 cancer-bearing dogs with primary or secondary bone
involvement. J Vet Intern Med 2005; 19(1): 74–80.
143 Fan TM, de Lorimier LP, O’Dell-Anderson K, et al. Single-agent pamidronate for
palliative therapy of canine appendicular osteosarcoma bone pain. J Vet Intern
Med 2007; 21(3): 431–439.
144 Fan TM, Charney SC, de Lorimier LP, et al. Double-blind placebo-controlled trial
of adjuvant pamidronate with palliative radiotherapy and intravenous doxoru-
bicin for canine appendicular osteosarcoma bone pain. J Vet Intern Med 2009;
23(1): 152–160.
145 Lundberg AP, Tran Hoang C, Billhymer A, et al. Combining radiation therapy
with zoledronate for the treatment of osteo-invasive feline oral squamous cell
carcinoma. Vet Comp Oncol 2022; 20(4): 788–796.
146 Suva LJ, Cooper A, Watts AE, et al. Bisphosphonates in veterinary medicine: the
new horizon for use. Bone 2021; 142: 115711.
147 Franklin SP, Franklin AL. Randomized controlled trial comparing autologous pro-
tein solution to hyaluronic acid plus triamcinolone for treating hip osteoarthritis
in dogs. Front Vet Sci 2021; 8: 713768.
148 Kinzel S, Hein S, Buecker A, et al. Diagnosis and treatment of arthrosis of cervical
articular facet joints in Scottish Deerhounds: 9 cases (1998–2002). J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2003; 223(9): 1311–1315.
149 Tellegen A, Beukers M, Rudnik-Jansen I, et al. Intra-articular slow-release
triamcinolone acetonide from polyesteramide microspheres as a treatment for
osteoarthritis. Pharmaceutics 2021; 13(3): 372.
150 Lotsikas PJ. Intra-articular injectates: what to use and why. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 2022; 52(4): 967–975.
151 Donecker J, Fabiani M, Gaschen L, et al. Treatment response in dogs with natu-
rally occurring grade 3 elbow osteoarthritis following intra-articular injection of
117mSn (tin) colloid. PLoS ONE 2021; 16(7): e0254613.
152 Lattimer J, Fabiani M, Gaschen L, et al. Clinical effectiveness and safety of intraar-
ticular administration of a (117m) Tin radiocolloid (Synovetin OA(TM)) for
treatment of early and intermediate grade osteoarthritis of the elbow in a dose
finding study conducted in 44 dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2023; 64(2): 351–359.
153 Donati PA, Tarragona L, Franco JVA, et al. Efficacy of tramadol for postoperative
pain management in dogs: systematic review and meta-analysis. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2021; 48(3): 283–296.
154 Kinobe RT, Miyake Y. Evaluating the anti-inflammatory and analgesic properties
of maropitant: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Vet J 2020; 259–260:
105471.
155 Anderson CC, Cook JL, Kreeger JM, et al. In vitro effects of glucosamine and
acetylsalicylate on canine chondrocytes in three-dimensional culture. Am J Vet
Res 1999; 60(12): 1546–1551.
156 Henrotin Y, Sanchez C, Balligand M. Pharmaceutical and nutraceutical manage-
ment of canine osteoarthritis: present and future perspectives. Vet J 2005; 170(1):
113–123.
157 Christensen R, Bartels EM, Astrup A, et al. Symptomatic efficacy of avocado–
soybean unsaponifiables (ASU) in osteoarthritis (OA) patients: a meta-analysis of
randomized controlled trials. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 2008; 16(4): 399–408.
158 Ruff KJ, DeVore DP, Leu MD, et al. Eggshell membrane: a possible new natural
therapeutic for joint and connective tissue disorders. Results from two open-label
human clinical studies. Clin Interv Aging 2009; 4: 235–240.
159 Hosain NA, Ghosh R, Bryant DL, et al. Isolation, structure elucidation, and
immunostimulatory activity of polysaccharide fractions from Boswellia carterii
frankincense resin. Int J Biol Macromol 2019; 133: 76–85.
160 Kawcak CE, Frisbie DD, McIlwraith CW. Effects of extracorporeal shock wave
therapy and polysulfated glycosaminoglycan treatment on subchondral bone,
serum biomarkers, and synovial fluid biomarkers in horses with induced osteoar-
thritis. Am J Vet Res 2011; 72(6): 772–779.
161 Frean SP, Cambridge H, Lees P. Effects of anti-arthritic drugs on proteoglycan
synthesis by equine cartilage. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2002; 25(4): 289–298.
162 Verde C, Ferrante M, Simpson MI, et al. Efficacy of intramuscular polysulfated
glycosaminoglycan in a controlled study of equine carpitis. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
2010; 33(4): 357–362.
163 Moraes JR, Facco GG, Moraes FR, et al. Effects of glycosaminoglycan polysulphate
on the organisation of collagen fibres in experimentally induced tendonitis in
horses. Vet Rec 2009; 165(7): 203–205.
164 Frisbie DD, Kawcak CE, McIlwraith CW, et al. Evaluation of polysulfated glycosa-
minoglycan or sodium hyaluronan administered intra-articularly for treatment of
horses with experimentally induced osteoarthritis. Am J Vet Res 2009; 70(2):
203–209.
165 Kristiansen KK, Kold SE. Multivariable analysis of factors influencing outcome of 2
treatment protocols in 128 cases of horses responding positively to intra-articular
analgesia of the distal interphalangeal joint. Equine Vet J 2007; 39(2): 150–156.
166 Kramer CM, Tsang AS, Koenig T, et al. Survey of the therapeutic approach and
efficacy of pentosan polysulfate for the prevention and treatment of equine osteo-
arthritis in veterinary practice in Australia. Aust Vet J 2014; 92(12): 482–487.
167 Cullier A, Casse F, Manivong S, et al. Functionalized nanogels with endothelin-1
and bradykinin receptor antagonist peptides decrease inflammatory and cartilage
degradation markers of osteoarthritis in a horse organoid model of cartilage.
Int J Mol Sci 2022; 23(16): 8949.
168 Porcello A, Gonzalez-Fernandez P, Jordan O, et al. Nanoforming hyaluronan-
based thermoresponsive hydrogels: optimized and tunable functionality in osteo-
arthritis management. Pharmaceutics 2022; 14(3): 659.
169 da Silva Xavier AA, da Rosa PP, de Brum Mackmill L, et al. An assessment of the
effectiveness of hyaluronic acid and polyacrylamide hydrogel in horses with osteoar-
thritis: systematic review and network meta-analysis. Res Vet Sci 2021; 134: 42–50.
170 de Souza AF, Paretsis NF, De Zoppa A. What is the evidence of hyaluronic acid
and polyacrylamide hydrogel in intra-articular therapy in equines? Systematic lit-
erature review. J Equine Vet Sci 2020; 86: 102909.
171 McIlwraith CW, Frisbie DD, Kawcak CE. Evaluation of intramuscularly adminis-
tered sodium pentosan polysulfate for treatment of experimentally induced
osteoarthritis in horses. Am J Vet Res 2012; 73(5): 628–633.
172 Kwan C, Bell R, Koenig T, et al. Effects of intra-articular sodium pentosan polysul-
fate and glucosamine on the cytology, total protein concentration and viscosity of
synovial fluid in horses. Aust Vet J 2012; 90(8): 315–320.
173 Dart A, Perkins N, Dowling P, et al. The effect of three different doses of sodium
pentosan polysulphate on haematological and haemostatic variables in adult
horses. Aust Vet J 2001; 79(9): 624–627.
174 Vishwanath K, McClure SR, Bonassar LJ. Polyacrylamide hydrogel lubricates car-
tilage after biochemical degradation and mechanical injury. J Orthop Res 2023;
41(1): 63–71.
175 de Clifford LT, Lowe JN, McKellar CD, et al. A double-blinded positive control
study comparing the relative efficacy of 2.5% polyacrylamide hydrogel (paag)
against triamcinolone acetonide (ta) and sodium hyaluronate (ha) in the manage-
ment of middle carpal joint lameness in racing Thoroughbreds. J Equine Vet Sci
2021; 107: 103780.
176 Tnibar A, Schougaard H, Camitz L, et al. An international multi-centre prospec-
tive study on the efficacy of an intraarticular polyacrylamide hydrogel in horses
with osteoarthritis: a 24 months follow-up. Acta Vet Scand 2015; 57: 20.
177 Grzanna MW, Au RY, Au AY, et al. Avocado/soybean unsaponifiables, glucosa-
mine and chondroitin sulfate combination inhibits proinflammatory COX-2
expression and prostaglandin e2 production in tendon-derived cells. J Med Food
2020; 23(2): 139–146.
178 Ownby SL, Fortuno LV, Au AY, et al. Expression of pro-inflammatory mediators is
inhibited by an avocado/soybean unsaponifiables and epigallocatechin gallate
combination. J Inflamm (Lond) 2014; 11(1): 8.
179 Heinecke LF, Grzanna MW, Au AY, et al. Inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2 expression
and prostaglandin E2 production in chondrocytes by avocado soybean unsaponi-
fiables and epigallocatechin gallate. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 2010; 18(2): 220–227.
180 Kawcak CE, Frisbie DD, McIlwraith CW, et al. Evaluation of avocado and soybean
unsaponifiable extracts for treatment of horses with experimentally induced oste-
oarthritis. Am J Vet Res 2007; 68(6): 598–604.
181 Bampidis V, Azimonti G, de Lourdes Bastos M, et al. Safety and efficacy of a feed
additive consisting of an extract of olibanum from Boswellia serrata Roxb. ex
Colebr. for use in dogs and horses (FEFANA asbl). EFSA J 2022; 20(3): e07158.
182 Akaraphutiporn E, Bwalya EC, Kim S, et al. Effects of pentosan polysulfate on cell
proliferation, cell cycle progression and cyclin-dependent kinases expression in
canine articular chondrocytes. J Vet Med Sci 2020; 82(8): 1209–1218.

-- 1036 of 1450 --

Chapter 48: Clinical Management and Pharmacologic Treatment of Pain 	1021
183 Sevalla K, Todhunter RJ, Vernier-Singer M, et al. Effect of polysulfated glycosami-
noglycan on DNA content and proteoglycan metabolism in normal and osteoar-
thritic canine articular cartilage explants. Vet Surg 2000; 29(5): 407–414.
184 Bwalya EC, Kim S, Fang J, et al. Effects of pentosan polysulfate and polysulfated
glycosaminoglycan on chondrogenesis of canine bone marrow-derived mesen-
chymal stem cells in alginate and micromass culture. J Vet Med Sci 2017; 79(7):
1182–1190.
185 de Haan JJ, Goring RL, Beale BS. Evaluation of polysulfated glycosaminoglycan
for the treatment of hip dysplasia in dogs. Vet Surg 1994; 23(3): 177–181.
186 Fujiki M, Shineha J, Yamanokuchi K, et al. Effects of treatment with polysulfated
glycosaminoglycan on serum cartilage oligomeric matrix protein and C-reactive
protein concentrations, serum matrix metalloproteinase-2 and -9 activities, and
lameness in dogs with osteoarthritis. Am J Vet Res 2007; 68(8): 827–833.
187 Budsberg SC, Bergh MS, Reynolds LR, et al. Evaluation of pentosan polysulfate
sodium in the postoperative recovery from cranial cruciate injury in dogs: a rand-
omized, placebo-controlled clinical trial. Vet Surg 2007; 36(3): 234–244.
188 Innes JF, Barr AR, Sharif M. Efficacy of oral calcium pentosan polysulphate for the
treatment of osteoarthritis of the canine stifle joint secondary to cranial cruciate
ligament deficiency. Vet Rec 2000; 146(15): 433–437.
189 Martello E, Bigliati M, Adami R, et al. Efficacy of a dietary supplement in dogs
with osteoarthritis: a randomized placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical trial.
PLoS ONE 2022; 17(2): e0263971.
190 Kim S, Elam L, Johnson V, et al. Intra-articular injections of allogeneic mesenchymal
stromal cells vs. high molecular weight hyaluronic acid in dogs with osteoarthritis:
exploratory data from a double-blind, randomized, prospective clinical trial.
Front Vet Sci 2022; 9: 890704.
191 Alves JC, Santos A, Jorge P, et al. Intraarticular triamcinolone hexacetonide, stano-
zolol, Hylan G-F 20 and platelet concentrate in a naturally occurring canine osteo-
arthritis model. Sci Rep 2021; 11(1): 3118.
192 Serra Aguado CI, Ramos-Pla JJ, Soler C, et al. Effects of oral hyaluronic acid
administration in dogs following tibial tuberosity advancement surgery for cranial
cruciate ligament injury. Animals (Basel) 2021; 11(5): 1264.
193 Chen LH, Xue JF, Zheng ZY, et al. Hyaluronic acid, an efficient biomacromolecule
for treatment of inflammatory skin and joint diseases: a review of recent develop-
ments and critical appraisal of preclinical and clinical investigations. Int J Biol
Macromol 2018; 116: 572–584.
194 Aragon CL, Hofmeister EH, Budsberg SC. Systematic review of clinical trials of
treatments for osteoarthritis in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2007; 230(4): 514–521.
195 Wijekoon HMS, Bwalya EC, Fang J, et al. Inhibitory effects of sodium pentosan
polysulfate on formation and function of osteoclasts derived from canine bone
marrow. BMC Vet Res 2018; 14(1): 152.
196 Bwalya EC, Kim S, Fang J, et al. Pentosan polysulfate inhibits IL-1β- induced iNOS,
c-Jun and HIF-1α upregulation in canine articular chondrocytes. PLoS ONE 2017;
12(5): e0177144.
197 Altinel L, Saritas ZK, Kose KC, et al. Treatment with unsaponifiable extracts of
avocado and soybean increases TGF-beta1 and TGF-beta2 levels in canine joint
fluid. Tohoku J Exp Med 2007; 211(2): 181–186.
198 Boileau C, Martel-Pelletier J, Caron J, et al. Protective effects of total fraction of
avocado/soybean unsaponifiables on the structural changes in experimental dog
osteoarthritis: inhibition of nitric oxide synthase and matrix metalloproteinase-
13. Arthritis Res Ther 2009; 11(2): R41.
199 Scott RM, Evans R, Conzemius MG. Efficacy of an oral nutraceutical for the treat-
ment of canine osteoarthritis. A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled
prospective clinical trial. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2017; 30(5): 318–323.
200 Altinel L, Sahin O, Kose KC, et al. Healing of osteochondral defects in canine knee
with avocado/soybean unsaponifiables: a morphometric comparative analysis.
Eklem Hastalik Cerrahisi 2011; 22(1): 48–53.
201 Grzanna MW, Secor EJ, Fortuno LV, et al. Anti-inflammatory effect of carprofen is
enhanced by avocado/soybean unsaponifiables, glucosamine and chondroitin sul-
fate combination in chondrocyte microcarrier spinner culture. Cartilage 2020;
11(1): 108–116.
202 Muller C, Enomoto M, Buono A, et al. Placebo-controlled pilot study of the effects
of an eggshell membrane-based supplement on mobility and serum biomarkers in
dogs with osteoarthritis. Vet J 2019; 253: 105379.
203 Ruff KJ, Kopp KJ, Von Behrens P, et al. Effectiveness of NEM((R)) brand eggshell
membrane in the treatment of suboptimal joint function in dogs: a multicenter, ran-
domized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Vet Med (Auckl) 2016; 7: 113–121.
204 Aguirre A G-QE, Fenaux M, Sanchez N, et al. The efficacy of Ovopet® in the treat-
ment of hip dysplasia in dogs. J Vet Med Anim Health 2018; 10: 198–207.
205 Reichling J, Schmokel H, Fitzi J, et al. Dietary support with Boswellia resin in canine
inflammatory joint and spinal disease. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd 2004; 146(2): 71–79.
206 Miscioscia E, Shmalberg J, Scott KC. Measurement of 3-acetyl-11-keto-beta-boswellic
acid and 11-keto-beta-boswellic acid in Boswellia serrata Supplements Administered
to Dogs. BMC Vet Res 2019; 15(1): 270.
207 Gabriele V, Bisanzio D, Riva A, et al. Long-term effects of a diet supplement
containing Cannabis sativa oil and Boswellia serrata in dogs with osteoarthritis
following physiotherapy treatments: a randomised, placebo-controlled and
double-blind clinical trial. Nat Prod Res 2022: 1–5.
208 Caterino C, Aragosa F, Della Valle G, et al. Clinical efficacy of Curcuvet and
Boswellic acid combined with conventional nutraceutical product: an aid to
canine osteoarthritis. PLoS ONE 2021; 16(5): e0252279.
209 Omura Y, Horiuchi N, Jones MK, et al. Temporary anti-cancer & anti-pain effects
of mechanical stimulation of any one of 3 front teeth (1st incisor, 2nd incisor, &
canine) of right & left side of upper & lower jaws and their possible mechanism, &
relatively long term disappearance of pain & cancer parameters by one optimal
dose of DHEA, Astragalus, Boswellia serrata, often with press needle stimulation
of True ST. 36. Acupunct Electrother Res 2009; 34(3–4): 175–203.
210 Cunningham R, Gruen ME, Thomson A, et al. Evaluation of a nutritional supple-
ment for the alleviation of pain associated with feline degenerative joint disease: a
prospective, randomized, stratified, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical
trial. J Feline Med Surg 2022; 24(10): 962–974.
211 Delille M, Frohlich L, Muller RS, et al. Efficacy of intravesical pentosan polysulfate
sodium in cats with obstructive feline idiopathic cystitis. J Feline Med Surg 2016;
18(6): 492–500.
212 Tong MX, Romine JF, Hardcastle MR. Acute and severe haemorrhage following
pentosan polysulfate injection in a Cornish Rex. JFMS Open Rep 2021; 7(2):
20551169211058650.
213 Bertoni L, Branly T, Jacquet S, et al. Intra-articular injection of 2 different dosages
of autologous and allogeneic bone marrow- and umbilical cord-derived mesen-
chymal stem cells triggers a variable inflammatory response of the fetlock joint on
12 sound experimental horses. Stem Cells Int 2019; 2019: 9431894.
214 Ursini TL, Amelse LL, Elkhenany HA, et al. Retrospective analysis of local injection
site adverse reactions associated with 230 allogenic administrations of bone marrow-
derived mesenchymal stem cells in 164 horses. Equine Vet J 2019; 51(2): 198–205.
215 Rowland AL, Burns ME, Levine GJ, et al. Preparation technique affects recipient
immune targeting of autologous mesenchymal stem cells. Front Vet Sci 2021; 8:
724041.
216 Bertoni L, Jacquet-Guibon S, Branly T, et al. Evaluation of allogeneic bone-
marrow-derived and umbilical cord blood-derived mesenchymal stem cells to
prevent the development of osteoarthritis in an equine model. Int J Mol Sci 2021;
22(5): 2499.
217 De Francesco F, Riccio V, Biswas R, et al. In vitro characterization of canine micro-
fragmented adipose tissue non-enzymatically extracted from the thigh and lum-
bar regions. Animals (Basel) 2021; 11(11): 3231.
218 Melotti L, Carolo A, Elshazly N, et al. Case report: repeated intralesional injections
of autologous mesenchymal stem cells combined with platelet-rich plasma for
superficial digital flexor tendon healing in a show jumping horse. Front Vet Sci
2022; 9: 843131.
219 Marinas-Pardo L, Garcia-Castro J, Rodriguez-Hurtado I, et al. Allogeneic adipose-
derived mesenchymal stem cells (Horse Allo 20) for the treatment of osteoarthritis-
associated lameness in horses: characterization, safety, and efficacy of intra-articular
treatment. Stem Cells Dev 2018; 27(17): 1147–1160.
220 Joswig AJ, Mitchell A, Cummings KJ, et al. Repeated intra-articular injection of
allogeneic mesenchymal stem cells causes an adverse response compared to autol-
ogous cells in the equine model. Stem Cell Res Ther 2017; 8(1): 42.
221 Frisbie DD, McCarthy HE, Archer CW, et al. Evaluation of articular cartilage pro-
genitor cells for the repair of articular defects in an equine model. J Bone Joint Surg
Am 2015; 97(6): 484–493.
222 Pigott JH, Ishihara A, Wellman ML, et al. Inflammatory effects of autologous,
genetically modified autologous, allogeneic, and xenogeneic mesenchymal stem
cells after intra-articular injection in horses. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2013;
26(6): 453–460.
223 Van Hecke L, Magri C, Duchateau L, et al. Repeated intra-articular administration
of equine allogeneic peripheral blood-derived mesenchymal stem cells does not
induce a cellular and humoral immune response in horses. Vet Immunol
Immunopathol 2021; 239: 110306.
224 Depuydt E, Broeckx SY, Van Hecke L, et al. The evaluation of equine allogeneic
tenogenic primed mesenchymal stem cells in a surgically induced superficial digi-
tal flexor tendon lesion model. Front Vet Sci 2021; 8: 641441.
225 Mocchi M, Bari E, Dotti S, et al. Canine mesenchymal cell lyosecretome produc-
tion and safety evaluation after allogenic intraarticular injection in osteoarthritic
dogs. Animals (Basel) 2021; 11(11): 3271.
226 Marycz K, Smieszek A, Grzesiak J, et al. Effects of steroids on the morphology and
proliferation of canine and equine mesenchymal stem cells of adipose origin –
in vitro research. Acta Vet Hung 2014; 62(3): 317–333.
227 Daems R, Van Hecke L, Schwarzkopf I, et al. A feasibility study on the use of
equine chondrogenic induced mesenchymal stem cells as a treatment for natural
occurring osteoarthritis in dogs. Stem Cells Int 2019; 2019: 4587594.

-- 1037 of 1450 --

1022 	Section 6: Nociception and Pain
228 Harman R, Carlson K, Gaynor J, et al. A Prospective, randomized, masked, and
placebo-controlled efficacy study of intraarticular allogeneic adipose stem cells
for the treatment of osteoarthritis in dogs. Front Vet Sci 2016; 3: 81.
229 He S, Zhang J, Chen W, et al. Umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells promote the
repair of trochlear groove reconstruction in dogs. Front Vet Sci 2022; 9: 922390.
230 Chen CC, Yang SF, Wang IK, et al. The long-term efficacy study of multiple allo-
geneic canine adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells transplantations
combined with surgery in four dogs with lumbosacral spinal cord injury. Cell
Transplant 2022; 31: 9636897221081487.
231 Kim S, Elam L, Johnson V, et al. Intra- articular injections of allogeneic mesenchy-
mal stromal cells vs. high molecular weight hyaluronic acid in dogs with osteoar-
thritis: exploratory data from a double-blind, randomized, prospective clinical
trial. Front Vet Sci 2022; 9: 890704.
232 Sanghani-Kerai A, Black C, Cheng SO, et al. Clinical outcomes following intra-
articular injection of autologous adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells for the
treatment of osteoarthritis in dogs characterized by weight-bearing asymmetry.
Bone Joint Res 2021; 10(10): 650–658.
233 Brondeel C, Pauwelyn G, de Bakker E, et al. Review: mesenchymal stem cell ther-
apy in canine osteoarthritis research: "Experientia Docet" (Experience Will Teach
Us). Front Vet Sci 2021; 8: 668881.
234 Evans CH, Chevalier X, Wehling P. Autologous conditioned serum. Phys Med
Rehabil Clin N Am 2016; 27(4): 893–908.
235 Frisbie DD, McIlwraith CW. Evaluation of gene therapy as a treatment for equine
traumatic arthritis and osteoarthritis. Clin Orthop Relat Res 2000; (379 Suppl):
S273–S287.
236 Nixon AJ, Grol MW, Lang HM, et al. Disease-modifying osteoarthritis treatment
with interleukin-1 receptor antagonist gene therapy in small and large animal
models. Arthritis Rheumatol 2018; 70(11): 1757–1768.
237 Pelletier JP, Caron JP, Evans C, et al. In vivo suppression of early experimental
osteoarthritis by interleukin-1 receptor antagonist using gene therapy. Arthritis
Rheum 1997; 40(6): 1012–1019.
238 Muir SM, Reisbig N, Baria M, et al. The concentration of plasma provides addi-
tional bioactive proteins in platelet and autologous protein solutions. Am J Sports
Med 2019; 47(8): 1955–1963.
239 Lasarzik de Ascurra J, Ehrle A, Einspanier R, et al. Influence of incubation time
and incubation tube on the cytokine and growth factor concentrations of autolo-
gous conditioned serum in horses. J Equine Vet Sci 2019; 75: 30–34.
240 Watson Levings RS, Broome TA, Smith AD, et al. Gene therapy for osteoarthritis:
pharmacokinetics of intra-articular self-complementary adeno-associated virus
interleukin-1 receptor antagonist delivery in an equine model. Hum Gene Ther
Clin Dev 2018; 29(2): 90–100.
241 Bertuglia A, Basano I, Pagliara E, et al. Effect of intravenous tiludronate disodium
administration on the radiographic progression of osteoarthritis of the fetlock
joint in Standardbred racehorses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2021; 259(6): 651–661.
242 Watson Levings RS, Smith AD, Broome TA, et al. Self-complementary adeno-
associated virus-mediated interleukin-1 receptor antagonist gene delivery for the
treatment of osteoarthritis: test of efficacy in an equine model. Hum Gene Ther
Clin Dev 2018; 29(2): 101–112.
243 Frisbie DD, Kawcak CE, Werpy NM, et al. Clinical, biochemical, and histologic
effects of intra-articular administration of autologous conditioned serum in
horses with experimentally induced osteoarthritis. Am J Vet Res 2007; 68(3):
290–296.
244 Huggins SS, Suchodolski JS, Bearden RN, et al. Serum concentrations of canine
interleukin-1 receptor antagonist protein in healthy dogs after incubation using an
autologous serum processing system. Res Vet Sci 2015; 101: 28–33.

-- 1038 of 1450 --

1023
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The S ixth Edition of L umb and J ones	. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
Treatment of pain, both the acute self-limiting and especially the
longer- duration or ongoing varieties, greatly benefits from thera-
pies that alter the body’s potent homeostatic and neuroimmune
modulatory capacity. Non-pharmacologic therapies target the
extensive and effective endogenous analgesic systems housed within
the nervous system as well as the myofascial system.
Understanding the physiology of neuroimmune and fascial
modulation facilitates applying discrete therapies to augment the
pharmacologic treatment of pain conditions. These therapies may
be machine-based, practitioner-applied, or self-applied through
directed forms of motion. Although most of these therapies lack the
research base of pharmacologic therapies, they are firmly rooted in
the science of physiology, and are potent tools for comprehensive
treatment of pain in veterinary medicine.
Physiology of non-pharmacologic
pain medicine
Physiology provides a complex, multifaceted tapestry for both
pain sensing and modification of transmitted signals. Non-
pharmacologic interventions for the treatment of pain interface
with these pre-existing structures and receptors in many of the
same ways as pharmaceuticals, including but not limited to endog-
enous opioids, 5-hydroxytryptamine, glutamate, norepinephrine
(noradrenaline), dopamine, γ-aminobutyric acid, endocannabinoids,
acetylcholine, and purines [1]. Understanding the physiology of
nervous system wiring, which is reviewed in Chapter 46, is the
first step toward understanding methods to intervene in these
endogenous systems and help modify them toward homeostasis.
In addition to modification of pain, there is overlap between the
nervous system and other endogenous, homeostatic systems such
as the immune state, gastrointestinal motility and enteric control,
vasomotor tone and fluid balance, and hormonal and reproductive
balance [2–4]. Due to their global (entire organism) effects, non-
pharmaceutical therapies often have overlapping actions on several
homeostatic systems.
The database for non-pharmacologic treatments is rapidly
expanding in the wake of scientific discovery and the response to
the human opioid epidemic [5,6]. At the time of writing, the most
researched and accepted techniques of non-pharmacologic pain
control can be grouped into those that influence peripheral cutane-
ous sensory tissues through delivery of energy (light or acoustic) or
sensory stimuli [7], those that modify central (spinal and supraspi-
nal) neurotransmitters, including modulation of vagal activity and
other components of the autonomic nervous system [1,8,9], and
those that utilize the physiology of mechanosensitive tissues to
elicit physiologic changes [9,10]. Most modalities work through a
combination of these mechanisms.
In addition to provision of non-pharmacologic therapies to
patients, compelling data suggests their overall metabolic state is
also important. Obesity is a proinflammatory state, and there is
strong evidence that appropriate body condition is integral to pain
control [11]. Similarly, dietary management may reduce proinflam-
matory products, and administration of omega-3 fatty acids may
reduce inflammatory states in dogs [12].
49 Non- Pharmacologic Management of Pain
Bonnie D. Wright
MistralVet, Johnstown, Colorado, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 1023
Physiology of non-pharmacologic pain medicine, 1023
Peripheral cutaneous sensory receptors, 1024
Temperature-related modalities, 1024
Acupuncture – peripheral neuromodulation, 1024
Massage, touch, stretching, exercise, 1024
Photobiomodulation therapy, 1025
Electromagnetic therapies, 1025
Extracorporeal shockwave therapies, 1025
Central neuromodulation – spinal and supraspinal locations, 1025
Mechanotransduction, 1025
Metabolism, blood flow, and immune modulation, 1026
Body weight and obesity, 1026
References, 1026

-- 1039 of 1450 --

1024 	Section 6: Nociception and Pain
Peripheral cutaneous sensory receptors
Temperature-related modalities, such as application of ice and heat,
work primarily through peripheral cutaneous sensory tissues and
transient receptor potential (TRP) channels [7]. Other sources of
peripheral cutaneous tissue modulation include acupuncture, mas-
sage, stretching, photobiomodulation, electromagnetic therapies,
and extracorporeal shockwave therapy (ESWT).
While much focus is placed on the nociceptive role of cutaneous
innervation, it is important to note that many peripheral analgesic
modalities also work through sensory receptors other than nocice-
ptors, which underlies the importance of touch in the treatment of
pain [13].
Temperature- related modalities
Applying cold to skin decreases temperature up to a depth of 2–4 cm.
This results in decreased activation of tissue nociceptors and slows
conduction velocity along peripheral axons (cold-induced neuro-
praxia) [14]. Specific cold-sensitive ion channels, TRPM8 channels,
contribute to analgesia by decreasing signaling through other pain-
sensitizing channels as well as reducing incoming painful stimuli
via central inhibitory interneurons [15]. Cold therapy also decreases
edema formation via sympathetically mediated vasoconstriction
and decreased delivery of inflammatory mediators to injured tissues.
Another contribution to pain relief comes from reduced muscle
spasms. Cold applied directly to muscles inhibits the motor reflex
loops that maintain contraction and spasticity, thereby reducing the
latter and relieving muscle spasms [16]. Muscle spasm may be pre-
sent in patients with both acute and chronic pain and is a major
cause of discomfort [14]. Ice is generally considered for acute inju-
ries (up to three days postoperatively or postinjury) but, due to its
analgesic effects, may also be used long term [7].
Unlike coolness, heat (or chemical mediators such as capsaicin
or ginger) is not considered directly analgesic at the level of nerve
endings but, because it increases blood flow and collagen distensi-
bility (which reduces stiffness), it may provide some analgesia [17].
TRPV1 channels on afferent nerve endings sense heat. This can result
in a proinflammatory or anti-inflammatory state via interleukin
(IL)-6 in muscle tissue [18]. In general, heat is used more frequently
for chronic conditions associated with fibrous or musculotendinous
restrictions, or to help drain edema after it has formed which usu-
ally occurs on approximately the third day after an injury [17].
Acupuncture – peripheral neuromodulation
Acupuncture and related therapies utilize discrete neuroanatomic
points on the body. These have effects in each of the three physio-
logic pathways described in this chapter: neuromodulation at
peripheral, spinal, dorsal root ganglion, and supraspinal levels;
myofascial mechanotransduction; and temperature-related changes.
The cutaneous sensory system is critical to efficacy, as many studies
have shown that these effects are abolished by local anesthetic
drugs [19]. Most recognized acupuncture points are anatomically
rich and characterized by myelinated and unmyelinated nerves,
low-threshold mechanoreceptors (LTMRs), fibroblasts and the
collagen matrix, mast cells, and microcirculatory complexes [20].
Needle placement causes direct nerve stimulation as well as second-
ary stimulation through mechanical forces applied to the fascia and
cellular milieu in the region surrounding the point.
It has long been recognized that acupuncture points are found in
cutaneous regions that show high levels of diverse innervation [20].
This occurs where groups of nerves emerge through bone, muscle,
and fascia from their origins, where they branch or join, and where
they attenuate distally. These nerve fibers are made up of Aβ and Aγ
(myelinated) and C (non-myelinated) fibers, as well as autonomic
fibers; acupoints generally have greater neural density compared to
non-acupoint regions [21].
In general, myelinated somatic sensory fibers are most prevalent
near acupuncture points, with most being Aβ and Aγ fibers, except
in strong motor or Golgi tendon points. While there is often a focus
in acupuncture research on the modification of high-threshold
(HT) pain-sensing nerve types, it is likely that LTMRs play an
important role in this modality [13]. Acupuncture needle sensation
is seldom painful, and many of the sensations typically associated
with acupuncture (such as warmth, coolness, pressure, and move-
ment) are probably associated with LTMR activation and the
engagement of TRP channels, rather than nociceptor activation.
These peripheral components, which are located in the skin and
along peripheral nerve bundles, help explain why neuromodulation
is the primary mechanism mediating acupuncture analgesia.
Acupuncture stimulates afferent nerve fibers, and this has been
demonstrated with manual acupuncture as well as with electroacu-
puncture. Both manual and electrical forms of stimulation activate
all four types of nerves, Aα, Aβ, Aδ, and C fibers, although at unique
discharge frequencies [22].
Acupuncture effects may also be enhanced by the reflex activity
of axons, providing a cutaneous autocrine response at afferent sen-
sory nerves simultaneous with the signal traveling along the previ-
ously recognized prodromal nerve pathway. This provides a potential
anatomic explanation for the sensation of energy moving along
“meridians,” which are the sensory pathways long recognized in
traditional acupuncture [9,21].
When evaluating the similarities and divergent characteristics
between the recognized acupuncture points on the body, an impor-
tant consideration is the global position of the point on the patient.
For example, stimulation of distal points tends to be associated with
greater homeostatic effects, such as regulation of immune function,
organ function, and sympathetic/parasympathetic balance. This
observation is partially explained by the fact that autonomic fiber
density increases in the distal limbs and in association with nerves
and blood vessels, and these areas are replete with acupuncture
points. Many of these peripheral autonomic fibers are sympathetic
noradrenergic fibers which play key roles in neuroimmune homeo-
stasis [9,21]. At the point of an acupuncture needle, the release of
neurochemicals such as purines and histamines contribute to this
small, local response, which is amplified and ultimately results in sys-
temic, homeostasis-modifying, gene transcription-modifying effects.
Massage, touch, stretching, exercise
Non-painful touch, body movement, and exercise can invoke
analgesia through peripheral mechanisms [13,23–25]. Peripheral
neuromodulation through various touch-related sensory receptors,
Aβ and low-threshold C fibers, and TRP channels all play a role in
reducing painful input from the peripheral nervous system. The
autonomic nervous system is also deeply involved in pain and
immune processing [26,27]. Exercise is one of several physical med-
icine methods utilized for pain reduction and its ability to modify
autonomic nervous system activity appears to be one of the poten-
tial explanations for its hypoalgesic effects [28]. A discussion of the
various types, methods, and limitations of therapeutic exercise is
beyond the scope of this chapter.

-- 1040 of 1450 --

Chapter 49: Non- Pharmacologic Management of Pain 	1025
Photobiomodulation therapy
When photobiomodulation (PBMT) is applied to peripheral nerves,
depolymerization of the microtubules in Aδ and C fibers occurs,
and the electrophysiological gradient within nociceptive nerves is
degraded [29].
Nociceptor activity is decreased within 10 to 20 minutes of
treatment. Reductions in proinflammatory mediators such as
prostaglandin-E2 (PGE2 ), IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNFα)
occur, and reductions in acetylcholine decrease muscle spasm activ-
ity. Increased blood flow and stimulation of mitochondria contribute
to the tissue healing effects of PBMT at clinically appropriate doses.
Electromagnetic therapies
Various therapies use electrical or magnetic frequencies to reduce
pain and manage increased pain states [30]. The precise mecha-
nisms are not fully elucidated, but interference with the electrical
transmission of pain signals is postulated [31]. This field of treat-
ment is based on both the ability of living cells to produce electrical
fields (as measured by electrocardiography, electroencephalogra-
phy, and bioimpedance), as well as respond to exogenously applied
electrical fields. Direct healing effects have been documented and
are attributed to mitochondrial activation, chemical changes (medi-
ated by receptors including calcitonin gene-related peptide, nerve
growth factor, and substance P), mechanotransduction, and ther-
mal effects [32]. These changes, as with tissue deformation, have
been found at the cellular, tissue, spinal segmental, and supraspinal
levels. Electromagnetic fields may reduce acute and chronic pain
and can be provided in a targeted manner with transcutaneous or
percutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS or PENS), pulsed
electromagnetic field (PEMF) loops or beds, as well as other larger
devices that provide a field of energy to the entire patient [33].
Implanted electromagnetic stimulators are being used to treat
various chronic pain conditions in humans [34].
Extracorporeal shockwave therapies
Similar to other forms of movement for reduced pain transmission,
extracorporeal shockwave therapies (ESWT) may be effective for
both acute and chronic pain conditions. Local tissue effects on
peripheral nerve endings mediate a portion of this effect, and
ESWT therapies also work through tissue mechanotransduction to
increase neurochemical mediators of pain and immunity [10,35].
Central neuromodulation – spinal
and supraspinal locations
Neuromodulation is such a large category that it encompasses
nearly all non-pharmaceutical therapies but includes modalities
that modify pain homeostasis through recognized nervous system
receptors and autonomic activities. Most of the modalities discussed
under the peripheral nervous system will also induce upstream
changes in the central nervous system at spinal and supraspinal
locations. The modalities that have been studied that act on specific
central pain receptors include acupuncture, PBMT, electromagnetic
therapies, touch, stretching, and exercise [1,9,28]. Management of
stress and modalities that reduce negative experiences also work
through neuromodulation at the level of central pain regulation [36].
Drugs and management techniques that reduce anxiety can
reduce pain sensitivity and awareness through their central effects. A
variety of soothing olfactory and auditory tools have been studied to
reduce pain and anxiety in hospitalized veterinary patients [37–39].
Mechanotransduction
Mechanotransduction is emerging as an important regulator of
pain, metabolic, and cellular activity [35]. The effects can be seen
directly in pain sensitivity in osteoarthritis where motion, stretching,
and movement-based therapies are hypoalgesic [28]. This modula-
tory system also contributes to the supportive role of exercise and
weight-bearing on cartilage health, bone and tendon formation,
and the effects of acupuncture on the nervous system [17,40,41].
While there is considerable overlap between mechanotransduction
in peripheral tissues and cutaneous sensory processing, this section
will be limited to the effects of cellular mechanotransduction sepa-
rate from those influencing the peripheral nervous system, which
was covered previously.
Tissue traction or mobilization is a powerful modulator of
intrinsic healing in soft tissues such as skin, muscle, ligaments,
tendons, fascia, cartilage, and periosteum. When tissue is
deformed, growth factors and a variety of proteins and neuro-
transmitters are released, leading to changes in pain processing,
metabolic processes, inflammation, blood flow, and healing capac-
ity [42]. Various methods such as provider-applied techniques
(acupuncture, massage, and myofascial trigger point release), self-
applied motion (stretching, exercise, and physical therapy), and
mechanical devices (ESWT) depend heavily on these physiologic
networks. Changes in the “loose” connective tissue of the body
have a dramatic influence on fluid movement through tissues as
reticular connective tissue forms the structural framework of the
lymphatic system. The lymphatic system is central to immune
homeostasis as demonstrated by the coalescing of lymphocytes
and other immune cells into lymph nodes along these lymphatic
chains. Thus, connective tissue fibroblasts are integral to both
immune and neural homeostasis and these cells may be stimulated
by acupuncture.
As an example of fascial mechanotransduction, when an acu-
puncture needle is placed, a dynamic and self-sustaining change
occurs in the fascia that can be identified microscopically, but also
by measuring chemical mediators and gene transcription [42]. This
change radiates along the fascial network of an organism, creating
far-reaching effects. Of note, these impacts are self-sustaining as
fibroblasts exert force on their neighbors, which changes the local
neurochemistry and creates a new population of activated fibro-
blasts, which exert similar effects on cells in a widening radius,
thereby spreading the signal over both space and time.
Meanwhile, fascia is integral to the movement of fluid through
the tissues. Fascia surrounding organs and appendicular structures
form fluid highways and even exert regulatory functions over the
movement of this fluid [43]. Fascia has also been found to have sig-
nificant independent innervation, allowing it to provide a proprio-
ceptive, body-wide sense of awareness [44]. Furthermore, fascia is
involved in coordination of movement, both protecting joints from
uncoordinated stresses as well as integrating communication
between similar muscle groups that are not in direct muscular con-
tact (such as coordinating extension between the quadriceps and
gastrocnemius muscles) [27].
Thus, fascia plays a critical role in the efficacy of many non-
pharmacologic movement-based treatments. In the periphery,
this is primarily tied to the microcirculation and microscopic
nerve and vasodilatory influences. Elsewhere in the body, this is
related to macroscopic structures through integration of nerve and
motor communication, body awareness, and facilitation of delivery
and removal of life-sustaining fluids to extravascular body
compartments.

-- 1041 of 1450 --

1026 	Section 6: Nociception and Pain
Metabolism, blood flow, and immune
modulation
A discussion of metabolism, blood flow, and immunity previously
seemed unrelated to the discussion of pain. Through recent
advances in the study of the neuroimmune–inflammatory axis,
however, these homeostatic systems are now considered part of a
larger central regulatory syncytium [26]. Pain influences the auto-
nomic nervous system, and the autonomic nervous system influences
pain. Likewise, treatment of the peripheral loci of the autonomic
nervous system through the fascia (home of the lymphatics and
extracellular fluid space) and the peripheral sensory system will
influence the autonomic nervous system, and thus the intrinsic
pain regulatory systems of the body [44]. It is not possible to sepa-
rate out non-pharmacologic treatment of pain from modulation
of the autonomic nervous system, and the endogenous ability to
inhibit and stimulate these inseparable homeostatic systems.
Body weight and obesity
Osteoarthritis studies in dogs and cats have consistently shown a
high correlation between obesity and clinical lameness. Adipose
cells are proinflammatory and may change the kinematics of motion
leading to worsening of pain conditions. Likewise, adipose-related
systemic inflammation has been shown to contribute to signs
associated with intervertebral disk disease. Thus, weight loss and
exercise are critical components of non-pharmacologic pain manage-
ment, both for their direct effects on the neuroimmune–endocrine
system, and for their role in reducing inflammation [45].
References
1 Chen T, Zhang WW, Chu YX, et al. Acupuncture for pain management: molecular
mechanisms of action. Am J Chin Med 2020; 48(4): 793–811.
2 Yeater TD, Cruz CJ, Cruz-Almeida Y, et al. Autonomic nervous system dysregula-
tion and osteoarthritis pain: mechanisms, measurement, and future outlook.
Curr Rheumatol Rep 2022; 24(6): 175–183.
3 Jacobson A, Yang D, Vella M, et al. The intestinal neuroimmune axis: crosstalk
between neurons, immune cells, and microbes. Mucosal Immunol 2021; 14(3):
555–565.
4 Pavlov VA, Chavan SS, Tracey KJ. Molecular and functional neuroscience in immu-
nity. Annu Rev Immunol 2018; 36: 783–812.
5 Ghai B, Jafra A, Bhatia N, et al. Opioid sparing strategies for perioperative pain
management other than regional anaesthesia: a narrative review. J Anaesthesiol Clin
Pharmacol 2022; 38(1): 3–10.
6 Tick H, Nielsen A, Pelletier KR, et al. Evidence-based nonpharmacologic strategies
for comprehensive pain care: The Consortium Pain Task Force White Paper.
Explore (NY) 2018; 14(3): 177–211.
7 Wright B, Kronen PW, Lascelles D, et al. Ice therapy: cool, current and complicated.
J Small Anim Pract 2020; 61(5): 267–271.
8 Huntingford JL, Petty MC. Evidence-based application of acupuncture for pain
management in companion animal medicine. Vet Sci 2022; 9(6): 252.
9 Wright BD. Acupuncture for the treatment of animal pain. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 2019; 49(6): 1029–1039.
10 Simplicio CL, Purita J, Murrell W, et al. Extracorporeal shock wave therapy mecha-
nisms in musculoskeletal regenerative medicine. J Clin Orthop Trauma 2020;
11(Suppl 3): S309–S318.
11 Marshall W, Bockstahler B, Hulse D, et al. A review of osteoarthritis and obesity:
current understanding of the relationship and benefit of obesity treatment and pre-
vention in the dog. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2009; 22(5): 339–345.
12 Tsuruta K, Backus RC, DeClue AE, et al. Effects of parenteral fish oil on plasma
nonesterified fatty acids and systemic inflammatory mediators in dogs following
ovariohysterectomy. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2017; 27(5): 512–523.
13 Zimmerman A, Bai L, Ginty DD. The gentle touch receptors of mammalian skin.
Science 2014; 346(6212): 950–954.
14 Malanga GA, Yan N, Stark J. Mechanisms and efficacy of heat and cold therapies for
musculoskeletal injury. Postgrad Med 2015; 127(1): 57–65.
15 Liu B, Fan L, Balakrishna S, et al. TRPM8 is the principal mediator of menthol-
induced analgesia of acute and inflammatory pain. Pain 2013; 154(10):
2169–2177.
16 Lee SU, Bang MS, Han TR. Effect of cold air therapy in relieving spasticity: applied
to spinalized rabbits. Spinal Cord 2002; 40(4): 167–173.
17 Millis DL, Ciuperca IA. Evidence for canine rehabilitation and physical therapy. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2015; 45(1): 1–27.
18 Obi S, Nakajima T, Hasegawa T, et al. Heat induces interleukin-6 in skeletal muscle
cells via TRPV1/PKC/CREB pathways. J Appl Physiol (1985) 2017; 122(3):
683–694.
19 Dundee JW, Ghaly G. Local anesthesia blocks the antiemetic action of P6 acupunc-
ture. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1991; 50(1): 78–80.
20 Zhang ZJ, Wang XM, McAlonan GM. Neural acupuncture unit: a new concept for
interpreting effects and mechanisms of acupuncture. Evid Based Complement
Alternat Med 2012; 2012: 429412.
21 Zhao ZQ. Neural mechanism underlying acupuncture analgesia. Prog Neurobiol
2008; 85(4): 355–375.
22 Kagitani F, Uchida S, Hotta H. Afferent nerve fibers and acupuncture. Auton
Neurosci 2010; 157(1–2): 2–8.
23 Fidanza F, Polimeni E, Pierangeli V, et al. A better touch: C-tactile fibers related
activity is associated to pain reduction during temporal summation of second pain.
J Pain 2021; 22(5): 567–576.
24 Tomschi F, Lieverkus D, Hilberg T. Exercise-induced hypoalgesia (EIH) in response
to different exercise intensities. Eur J Appl Physiol 2022; 122(10): 2213–2222.
25 Stove MP, Hirata RP, Palsson TS. The tolerance to stretch is linked with endogenous
modulation of pain. Scand J Pain 2021; 21(2): 355–363.
26 Yeater TD, Cruz CJ, Cruz-Almeida Y, et al. Autonomic nervous system dysregula-
tion and osteoarthritis pain: mechanisms, measurement, and future outlook. Curr
Rheumatol Rep 2022; 24(6): 175–183.
27 Zügel M, Maganaris CN, Wilke J, et al. Fascial tissue research in sports medicine:
from molecules to tissue adaptation, injury and diagnostics: consensus statement.
Br J Sports Med 2018; 52(23): 1497.
28 Naugle KM, Fillingim RB, Riley JL III. A meta-analytic review of the hypoalgesic
effects of exercise. J Pain 2012; 13(12): 1139–1150.
29 DE Oliveira MF, Johnson DS, Demchak T, et al. Low-intensity LASER and LED
(photobiomodulation therapy) for pain control of the most common musculoskel-
etal conditions. Eur J Phys Rehabil Med 2022; 58(2): 282–289.
30 Paolucci T, Pezzi L, Centra AM, et al. Electromagnetic field therapy: a rehabilitative
perspective in the management of musculoskeletal pain – a systematic review.
J Pain Res 2020; 13: 1385–1400.
31 Vuka I, Marcius T, Dosenovic S, et al. Neuromodulation with electrical field stimu-
lation of dorsal root ganglion in various pain syndromes: a systematic review with
focus on participant selection. J Pain Res 2019; 12: 803–830.
32 Gaynor JS, Hagberg S, Gurfein BT. Veterinary applications of pulsed electromag-
netic field therapy. Res Vet Sci 2018; 119: 1–8.
33 Hellyer PW, Crump K, Shafford HL, et al. The use of pulsed electromagnetic field
(PEMF) therapy to provide post-operative analgesia in the dog. Vet Anaesth Analg
2000; 27(2): 104.
34 Knotkova H, Hamani C, Sivanesan E, et al. Neuromodulation for chronic pain.
Lancet 2021; 397(10289): 2111–2124.
35 Murthy SE, Loud MC, Daou I, et al. The mechanosensitive ion channel Piezo2 medi-
ates sensitivity to mechanical pain in mice. Sci Transl Med 2018; 10(462): eaat9897.
36 Hernández- Avalos I, Flores-Gasca E, Mota-Rojas D, et al. Neurobiology of
anesthetic-surgical stress and induced behavioral changes in dogs and cats: a
review. Vet World 2021; 14(2): 393–404.
37 Frank D, Beauchamp G, Palestrini C. Systematic review of the use of pheromones
for treatment of undesirable behavior in cats and dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2010;
236(12): 1308–1316.
38 Lindig AM, McGreevy PD, Crean AJ. Musical dogs: a review of the influence of
auditory enrichment on canine health and behavior. Animals (Basel) 2020; 10(1):
127.
39 Lefman SH, Prittie JE. Psychogenic stress in hospitalized veterinary patients: causa-
tion, implications, and therapies. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2019; 29(2):
107–120.
40 Murthy SE, Loud MC, Daou I, et al. The mechanosensitive ion channel Piezo2
mediates sensitivity to mechanical pain in mice. Sci Transl Med 2018; 10(462):
eaat9897.
41 Bramson MTK, Van Houten SK, Corr DT. Mechanobiology in tendon, ligament,
and skeletal muscle tissue engineering. J Biomech Eng 2021; 143(7): 070801.
42 Langevin HM, Nedergaard M, Howe AK. Cellular control of connective tissue
matrix tension. J Cell Biochem 2013; 114(8): 1714–1719.
43 Findley TW. Fascia research from a clinician/scientist’s perspective. Int J Ther
Massage Bodywork 2011; 4(4): 1–6.
44 Langevin HM. Fascia mobility, proprioception, and myofascial pain. Life (Basel)
2021; 11(7): 668.
45 Frye CW, Shmalberg JW, Wakshlag JJ. obesity, exercise and orthopedic disease. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2016; 46(5): 831–841.

-- 1042 of 1450 --

SECTION 7
Comparative Anesthesia
and Analgesia

-- 1043 of 1450 --



-- 1044 of 1450 --

1029
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of L umb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Dogs
Range of sizes
The domestic dog has been manipulated by selective breeding into a
bewildering variety of shapes and sizes, originally with some
functional purpose, but more recently with appearance as a major
driving force of breed standards. This has led to an array of adult dog
weights ranging from < 1 kg (e.g., teacup Yorkshire terrier) to >
100 kg (e.g., St. Bernard). Clinical experience suggests that smaller
dogs generally require larger doses, on a mg/kg basis, of many drugs
used in the perioperative period compared with large dogs. However,
there is no scientific basis for calculating these relative dose rates. One
common approach to this issue is to use an exponent based on meta-
bolic activity. Within a species, this is usually thought to be two-
thirds, and a common formula used for calculation of body surface
area (BSA) based on body mass (BM) is as follows: BSA (m2
) = 0.101
× (BM in kg)2/3
. This formula has been criticized and a number of
other multipliers and exponents have been proposed [1]. The use of
BSA is historical; BSA happens to also vary as a function of BM2/3
, so
BSA started being used to index various functions. While its exact
calculation has been, and still is, debated, it is actually irrelevant to
allometric scaling, including scaling of drug dose. The relevant infor-
mation is the slope of the relationship between size (i.e., BM) and the
variable to be corrected (e.g., dose); this slope is determined by the
exponent, and therefore scaling to BM0.67 instead of BSA would be as
effective (provided that dose actually varies with that function of
body size) and would avoid the criticism that exact BSA may not be
known. Nevertheless, use of BSA to adjust dose has been used
extensively with chemotherapeutic agents but this does not reduce
the toxic side effects of these drugs, as smaller dogs seem to be more
likely to suffer from adverse effects [2]. The inclusion of a body length
factor may help to reduce the variability associated with different
breeds and a recent study using computerized tomography (CT)
scanning included this in their final model to calculate BSA [3]. The
manufacturers of medetomidine and dexmedetomidine decided to
use BSA and the product monograph for the dog provides doses in
mg/m2
. Using their recommendation, a 1 kg dog would receive 37 μg/
kg and an 80 kg dog would get 9 μg/kg of dexmedetomidine admin-
istered intravenously (IV). In clinical practice, many people have
found that the dose for the bigger dogs is inadequate, suggesting that
BM0.67 may not be the correct function of BM for these drugs. Most
drugs used for anesthesia and sedation are targeting the central nerv-
ous system and are metabolized in the liver. When we use drugs IV,
they are distributed to the body by the cardiac output and when we
use inhalants, they are taken up through the lungs. Accordingly,
should drug dose be scaled to brain mass, hepatic metabolism, car-
diac output, lung capacity, or some complex interaction of these body
attributes that also accounts for the lipid solubility or hydrophobicity
of the drug, assuming the latter would affect uptake by many of the
tissues mentioned [1]? Table 50.1 shows how the dose might be
affected by scaling it to some of these different tissues and attributes.
Perhaps a more rational approach would be to base it on pharmacoki-
netics using virtual parameters to define the passage and distribution
of a drug throughout the body. While the “central compartment,” as
defined in a pharmacokinetic analysis, is likely to include the blood
50 Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia –
Dogs and Cats
Peter J. Pascoe1 and Bruno H. Pypendop2
1 Emeritus Professor, Department of Surgical and Radiological Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California–Davis,
Davis, California, USA
2 Department of Surgical and Radiological Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California–Davis, Davis, California, USA
Chapter contents
Dogs, 1029
Range of sizes, 1029
Sighthounds, 1030
Other breed sensitivities to anesthesia, 1031
Histamine release, 1031
Brachycephalic breeds, 1032
Tracheal collapse, 1032
Red blood cell potassium, 1033
Cats, 1033
Handling and behavior, 1033
Drug metabolism in cats, 1034
Inhalant anesthetics, 1034
Opioids, 1034
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, 1035
Endotracheal intubation, 1035
Cortical blindness, 1035
Fluid therapy and blood volume, 1036
Blood groups, 1036
Dopamine and dopamine receptors, 1036
References, 1036

-- 1045 of 1450 --

1030 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
volume and some of the vessel-rich tissues (e.g., brain, kidney, and
heart), empirical pharmacokinetic models do not try to relate com-
partment volumes to actual, physical volumes in the body, and use
changes in plasma concentration to describe the movement of the
drug in the body. Initial distribution of a drug is into this central com-
partment and that appears to generally scale to body weight [4].
Because at least some drugs used in anesthesia, in particular the
induction agents, but possibly also some of the analgesics, produce an
effect with a rapid onset and short duration, concentrations immedi-
ately after administration (i.e., after dilution in the central compart-
ment) are likely highly relevant to the effect [5]. Based on these
considerations, it would appear that, at least for these drugs, calcula-
tion of the dose based on body weight is most appropriate. The rela-
tionship between dose and body size, and between dosing interval
and body size is more complicated, as other pharmacokinetic param-
eters, such as clearance, appear to scale to a range of functions (expo-
nents) of body weight, depending on the drug [4].
A further complication for both canine and feline patients is the
current increase in pet obesity with estimates that over 50% of cats
and dogs are overweight or obese [6–8]. This presents a challenge
for the anesthetist because the brain of the animal is still the same
size as that of the lean animal but there are no simple techniques
available to estimate what that lean weight would be. Although adi-
pose tissue has a low blood supply, it will obviously begin to affect
the volume of distribution of a drug if there is a large amount in the
body and it is likely that the blood volume of the animal may have
increased as well [9]. Experience in humans indicates that the dose
of induction drugs is greater than the dose expected for the pre-
dicted lean body weight but not as high as the dose required for the
actual body weight of the patient. For example, in a study of propo-
fol dose in obese and non-obese children, the total dose for the
obese children was only 7% greater, even though the average weight
of the obese children was 170% of the non-obese children [10]. In
dogs, propofol was infused at 2.5 mg/kg/min and the dose at loss of
consciousness was compared between a control group (Body
Condition Score [BCS] 4–5 on a nine-point scale) and an obese
group (BCS 8–9). The total dose was 19% higher in the obese group
when these animals weighed 170% of the non-obese dogs [11]. The
dose of propofol adjusted to an estimate of lean BM was not statisti-
cally different from the control group. This study was performed in
dogs less than 10 kg so the data may not apply to larger obese dogs.
Such relative changes in dose can be accounted for, in clinical
practice, by titrating the drug to the desired effect. Obesity has
many other medical implications for our patients that need to be
addressed before and during anesthesia [12,13].
Sighthounds
These are dogs that hunt based on being able to see their prey rather
than using scent. Phenotypically these dogs are deep-chested and
have long legs and relatively narrow bodies. The muscles on the pel-
vic limbs are well developed and powerful to provide the thrust
required to attain the high speeds necessary to outrun their prey. As
hunters, they are also very lean animals. In an article on anesthesia
in sighthounds, the Afghan, Borzoi, Saluki, Greyhound, Italian
Greyhound, Whippet, Irish Wolfhound, Scottish Deerhound, Ibizan
hound, Basenji, and Rhodesian Ridgeback, as well as a number of
other rarer breeds were included [18]. However, it is now clear, on
the basis of genetic analysis, that these breeds do not all share the
same lineage [19]. In the most recent analysis, the sighthounds can
be split into two groups. The first group includes the Greyhound,
Italian Greyhound, Whippet, Borzoi, Deerhound, and Irish
Wolfhound, while the Saluki, Afghan Hound, Ibizan Hound, and
Pharoah Hound comprise a distinctly different genetic group.
Published studies related to the topic of anesthesia and sighthounds
relate specifically to the Greyhound and show that these dogs have a
longer recovery from thiobarbiturates than other breeds [20,21].
There are also data showing slightly longer recoveries following both
propofol and alfaxalone in Greyhounds [22,23]. This was initially
ascribed to the phenotype of these dogs with regard to their large
muscle mass and minimal adipose tissue and hence the generaliza-
tion to all sighthounds. However, more recent data have suggested
that the Greyhound may have some relative deficiencies in hepatic
metabolism. One study examined the pharmacokinetics of thiopen-
tal in Greyhounds and showed that the plasma concentrations pla-
teaued after an initial distribution phase. The Greyhounds were then
administered phenobarbital in order to increase hepatic microsomal
enzymes and then given thiopental again. The plasma concentra-
tions of thiopental decreased at rates similar to those of mixed-breed
dogs after this treatment [24]. These data do not prove that there is a
hepatic deficiency in this breed, they merely show that if the rate of
hepatic metabolism is increased, it will lead to a more rapid recovery.
However, it has now been shown that Greyhounds have poly-
morphisms in their CYP2B11 cytochrome gene (H2, H3) that
lead to slower metabolism of substrates for this enzyme. This
Table 50.1 Doses of a drug scaled to various metabolic activities or organ weights based on a 20 μg/kg dose for a 20 kg dog.
kg 	BSA dose
(dose/kg)
BMR dose
(dose/kg)
Renal clearance
dose (dose/kg)
Kidney weight
dose
(dose/kg)
Hepatic blood
flow dose
(dose/kg)
Liver weight
dose
(dose/kg)
Hepatic
function dose
(dose/kg)
Heart weight
dose
(dose/kg)
Brain
weight
dose
(dose/kg)
Formula 0.0484 × BM0.67 3.8 × BM0.734 4.2 × (BMx1000)0.69 0.0212 × (BM × 1000)0.85 0.0554 × BM0.894 0.037 × BM0.849 0.00816 × BM0.885 0.0066 × (BM × 1000)0.98 39 × BM0.27
1 	54 (54) 	44 (44) 	51 (51) 	31 (31) 	27 (27) 	31 (31) 	28 (28) 	21 (21) 	178 (178)
5 	158 (32) 	145 (29) 	154 (31) 	123 (25) 	116 (23) 	123 (25) 	117 (23) 	103 (21) 	275 (55)
10 	251 (25) 	240 (24) 	248 (25) 	222 (22) 	215 (22) 	222 (22) 	217 (22) 	203 (21) 	332 (33)
20 	400 (20) 	400 (20) 	400 (20) 	400 (20) 	400 (20) 	400 (20) 	400 (20) 	400 (20) 	400 (20)
30 	525 (18) 	539 (18) 	529 (18) 	565 (19) 	575 (19) 	564 (19) 	573 (19) 	595 (20) 	446 (15)
50 	739 (15) 	784 (16) 	753 (15) 	872 (17) 	907 (18) 	871 (17) 	900 (18) 	982 (20) 	512 (10)
80 	1013 (13) 	1107 (14) 	1041 (13) 	1300 (16) 	1381 (17) 	1298 (16) 	1364 (17) 	1556 (19) 	582 (7)
100 	1176 (12) 	1303 (13) 	1214 (12) 	1571 (16) 	1686 (17) 	1569 (16) 	1662 (17) 	1937 (19) 	618 (6)
BM, body mass in kg; BSA, body surface area; BMR, basal metabolic rate.
The scaling factors are drawn from [14–17]. Note that the exponent (slope) contains the relevant information, as identical doses would be calculated by the relationships with
similar exponents, regardless of the difference in the multiplier (e.g., kidney weight and liver weight doses). Values in parentheses are the equivalent dose/kg for that body weight
to illustrate the decreasing dose/kg with increase in body mass.

-- 1046 of 1450 --

Chapter 50: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Dogs and Cats 	1031
polymorphism has been shown to be highest in the American
Kennel Club-registered Greyhounds but is present in sighthounds in
the first group above, but not the second group. This implies that this
delayed recovery is less likely to affect the second group despite
their lean body type. There are no published reports of significantly
delayed anesthetic recoveries in sighthounds other than Greyhounds,
although there are many anecdotes regarding such events. With this
in mind, and until we have better information, it is probably best to
avoid the use of thiobarbiturates in group one sighthounds and
expect slightly longer recoveries from other anesthetic induction
agents. Some drugs have been used to inhibit CYP2B11 in order to
prolong the activity of known substrates for this enzyme. An exam-
ple of this is the inclusion of fluconazole with methadone, which can
increase the peak plasma concentration of methadone 17- to 30-fold
and prolong its duration of action from minutes to hours [25].
Other breed sensitivities to anesthesia
Information obtained from the World Wide Web suggests that many
purebred dogs have increased “sensitivity” to anesthetics. This is a
subject that is constantly referred to by clients in veterinary practice
who have been advised by a breeder or have looked up information
themselves [26]. The origin of these “sensitivities” is unclear and very
few of them have been consistently reported in any particular breed.
An abnormal response to an anesthetic could be related to an indi-
vidual strain within a breed whereby a particular breeder or group of
breeders have produced animals that have a characteristic that they
want to promote at the expense of alterations in response to anesthet-
ics. Such a trait may not be present in all members of the breed, but
the breed may earn that reputation. An abnormal response could also
be related to a genetic trait that has been promoted over time and has
become more generalized. The multidrug resistance (MDR)-1 or
ABCB1 gene polymorphism has been found in a number of herding
breeds and some others (http://prime.vetmed.wsu.edu/2021/10/19/
breeds-commonly-affected-by-mdr1-mutation/). This gene controls
the production of P-glycoprotein, which is an intracellular trans-
porter protein that removes substances from the inside of the cell.
This is a member of the adenosine-5′-triphosphate (ATP) binding
cassette (ABC) family of proteins and so is one of several proteins
that perform this function [27]. These proteins are found in many
areas of the body but their presence in the intestine and the blood–
brain barrier are most important for the anesthetist. Some drugs
inhibit the action of P-glycoprotein and so may be associated with
increased uptake of other drugs, others are removed from the cell by
P-glycoprotein and so an animal with minimal production of this
protein may show increased sensitivity to that drug. Acepromazine is
a P-glycoprotein inhibitor, so even under normal circumstances, it
may enhance the uptake of other drugs into the brain or through the
intestine following oral administration. It is also suggested that it will
cause more profound sedation in dogs with the ABCB1 (MDR1)
mutation. Many of the opioids interact with P-glycoprotein and so
their uptake into the brain is increased in ABCB1-deficient dogs.
From experiments in ABCB1-deficient mice, there is about a 25%
increase in the uptake of morphine and fentanyl and more than a
twofold increase in the uptake of methadone [28,29]. Meperidine
does not appear to interact with P-glycoprotein [30]. In vitro
data would suggest that sufentanil, alfentanil, oxymorphone,
and butorphanol [29,31] do not have significant interactions with
P-glycoprotein, although it has been suggested that butorphanol may
have some increased effect in ABCB1-deficient dogs. Buprenorphine
appears to have minimal interaction with P-glycoprotein but its
metabolite, norbuprenorphine, is ejected from the brain by this
transporter. Norbuprenorphine is a potent respiratory depressant
and so repeated administration of buprenorphine to ABCB1-
deficient dogs may increase the risk of this adverse event [32]. The
drugs used for the induction and maintenance of anesthesia do not
appear to interact with P-glycoprotein.
Other breed “sensitivities” may have more to do with prevalent
pathology in that breed rather than something inherent in the breed
as a whole. Boxers appear to be sensitive to the effects of aceproma-
zine, something that has been “well known” without any documented
information (it is often quoted as being restricted to British Boxers
but these authors have seen problems in North American Boxers too).
This sensitivity tends to take the form of collapse following aceproma-
zine and has been associated with profound bradycardia (authors’
observations) but it is not known if this is related to the prevalence of
arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy in this breed or an
enhancement of a vagal response to the drug, as reported in a number
of brachycephalic breeds [33]. The authors have also observed greater
than expected sedation in Boxers administered acepromazine. Given
the plethora of other drugs available for premedication, it seems
unnecessary to use acepromazine in this breed or, if used, it seems
prudent to administer very low doses (0.01–0.03 mg/kg) in combina-
tion with an anticholinergic (to prevent bradycardia) and monitor the
animal carefully after administration.
The sense from the internet is that most breeds are “sensitive” to
anesthetics yet very few anesthesiologists recognize such differences
in purebred animals. However, a number of breeds have emerged
from morbidity/mortality studies as having higher risks based on
univariate analysis. These effects did not appear to survive a multi-
variate analysis indicating that other factors may have more strongly
influenced the observed complication rate (e.g., a greater incidence
of complications in small breed dogs) [34,35]. In one study, the “pas-
toral” or herding dogs were found to have a high mortality rate and
it is possible that this is related to the ABCB1 (MDR1) gene poly-
morphism mentioned above [34]. Obviously, breeds that have a pre-
disposition to cardiac disease may have greater risks for anesthesia.
Despite the unreliability of internet reports of breed sensitivities, it is
incumbent on the anesthetist to investigate specific concerns that are
presented by an owner. If the last two of the owner’s same-breed dogs
died under anesthesia, it would be foolhardy to dismiss this without
obtaining more details of the circumstances.
Histamine release
This appears to be greater in dogs than in other species, but the spe-
cific mechanism is unclear. The most notorious example of this was
the spectacular release of histamine following the administration of
alfaxalone–alfadolone in its original Cremophor base. This resulted
in the deaths of a number of dogs [36] before pretreatment with
antihistamines was advocated [37]. The drug in this formulation
was never licensed for use in dogs, although many practitioners con-
tinued to use it in conjunction with antihistamines [38]. Morphine
and meperidine are two opioids known to release histamine and,
although it is difficult to make direct comparisons between species,
the plasma concentrations of histamine in dogs appear to be consid-
erably higher than those found in humans [39–41]. Of note in one
experiment in humans is that the hemodynamic effects of the hista-
mine release were not entirely blocked by administration of H1 or H2
blockers but were abolished when both were co-administered [41].
Cetirizine appears to be more effective than diphenhydramine at
preventing the effect of histamine in a skin wheal but this was after
a 6-day course of the drug so it is not known if this would be true
with a single dose [42]. Recently, a study tested the histamine release

-- 1047 of 1450 --

1032 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
in dogs with mast cell tumors (MCT) administered 0.5 mg/kg
morphine intramuscular (IM) and in two MCT cell lines [43].
Unsurprisingly, there was no statistical difference in histamine
release, but the authors concluded that morphine administration
would be “safe” in dogs with MCT. However, their study only
included 10 animals and they did not include the route of adminis-
tration in this statement. This is an unfortunate overstatement of
their results.
Brachycephalic breeds
Of the breeds in this class, there are various degrees of the manifesta-
tion of the typical brachycephalic obstructive airway syndrome
(BOAS) – stenotic nares, elongated soft palate, everted lateral ventri-
cles, hypoplastic trachea, and bronchial collapse [44]. The addition
of conchal shortening to these anatomical abnormalities, with
effects on both rostral and caudal obstruction of the nasal passages,
has been described [45]. This constellation of anatomic changes
leads to a higher-than-normal potential for airway obstruction,
especially if the animal is not fully conscious and it is likely that
these dogs suffer from something similar to sleep apnea in humans.
Brachycephalic dogs have been shown to have higher PaCO2 and
lower PaO2 values than meso- or dolicocephalic dogs [46]. Important
considerations for the anesthetist are summarized in Box 50.1.
These authors’ preference is that any brachycephalic dog that is to
be anesthetized should have its upper airway examined immediately
after induction and surgical correction performed if deemed
necessary. Ideally, this should be done before any other procedure so
that any bleeding has stopped by the time the animal is recovering.
This reduces the risk of postoperative airway obstruction by remov-
ing some of the contributing factors.
Tracheal collapse
Some breeds such as Yorkshire Terriers are well known for this, and
it can be very difficult to manage. Clinical signs include coughing,
honking, hacking, wheezing, and dyspnea, although some dogs can
have a degree of collapse with no clinical signs other than exercise
intolerance. Tracheal collapse is also commonly associated with col-
lapse in the lower airways making it even more difficult to manage
perioperatively [47]. In theory, an extrathoracic tracheal collapse
should be associated with increased inspiratory effort while an
intrathoracic collapse is associated with an increased expiratory
effort, but clinically, this is often not that distinct. Although, tradi-
tionally, radiographs have been used as part of the diagnostic
workup for these cases, it has been shown that this is a relatively
insensitive test compared with bronchoscopy [47]. Tidal breathing
flow–volume loops are also a useful diagnostic tool and can be used
to separate those dogs with and without tracheal collapse and those
with severe collapse compared with mild/moderate disease. The
variables used in this diagnosis are (1) the expiratory time divided
by the inspiratory time, (2) the inspiratory time divided by the
total respiratory time, and (3) the expiratory flow at end-tidal
volume plus 75% end-tidal volume divided by the same inspiratory
variable [48].
Medical management of these patients is often possible with the
use of antibiotics to treat respiratory infections, weight loss, antise-
cretory agents, antitussives, and diuretics [49]. Anabolic steroids
such as stanozolol may also improve the airway of these animals
and could be used as a preoperative treatment to decrease the risk
to these patients [50]. However, mean survival times have been much
greater with the addition of a stent than with medical management
alone [51].
The anesthetic management of these patients is, in many ways,
similar to that used for brachycephalic breeds. In setting up for
these animals, it is important to have endotracheal tubes (ETTs)
available that are long enough to reach the carina if there is expected
to be intrathoracic tracheal collapse. Once an airway has been
secured and the tracheal collapse bypassed the patient may breathe
spontaneously or be put on positive-pressure ventilation with or
without continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP)/positive end-
expiratory pressure (PEEP) if there is bronchomalacia involved.
Recovery is the most dangerous period if the airway has not been
stented, as collapse may reoccur and cause airway obstruction. It is
therefore important to try to provide a calm recovery with a slow
return to consciousness so that there are no sudden increases in
activity that require increased respiratory effort or that will stimu-
late coughing. Antitussives, acepromazine, and α2
- adrenergic
receptor agonists can be extremely helpful if administered close to
the time of extubation. In order to reduce the risk of coughing, it
may be prudent to remove the ETT earlier than normal. A tech-
nique for applying CPAP via facemask has been described, which
may prove useful for these patients [52].
Many extra- or intra-luminal stents have been inserted in dogs
with tracheal collapse [53]. With the placement of extraluminal
stents, the anesthetic management is as above. For intraluminal
stents, the dog must be intubated initially for tracheal size measure-
ment. This is achieved by placing an ETT just past the larynx and
inflating the lungs to 20 cm H 2 O. The relevant tracheal diameter is
Box 50.1 Important considerations for anesthetic management
of brachycephalic breeds.
1 Avoid oversedation in the preanesthetic period since this may increase
the likelihood of airway obstruction.
2 Have a range of endotracheal tubes (ETTs) available down to some very
small diameters in relation to the size of the animal. For example, it is
not unusual, in a 25 kg English Bulldog, to find that a 6.5 mm ETT, is
the largest one that can be used (compared to a 10–12 mm ETT in a
similar-sized non-brachycephalic dog).
3 Preoxygenate the patient if possible.
4 Use an induction technique that provides the shortest time between
the start of injection and the ability to intubate. A mask induction with
an inhalant is not recommended.
5 Use induction and maintenance drugs that allow for a rapid return of
consciousness.
6 Maintain the airway for as long as possible during recovery. As the
dentition of these animals is also abnormal, it is rare for a brachyce-
phalic dog to be able to really damage an ETT with its teeth, so it is
relatively safe to leave an ETT in place when the animal starts to chew,
compared with most other dogs. In the authors’ experience, these
animals also take longer to recover than normal dogs, possibly because
of their sleep apnea, making them stay asleep when they have a clear
airway.
7 Observe the patient for paradoxical ventilation immediately after
extubation to diagnose obstruction as quickly as possible. When the
airway is obstructed, the thorax will collapse during inspiration while
the abdomen expands.
8 Attempt to clear the airway by placing the animal in sternal recum-
bency and extending the head, opening the mouth, and pulling the
tongue forward. Sometimes just propping the head up so that the neck
is extended will be enough to maintain an open airway during the early
period after extubation. The authors have also used an oral airway
(consisting of a large bore ETT that has been cut off to a length that
will reach the larynx but not enter it) in dogs that tolerate it.
9 Reintubate the patient and wait longer if the animal obstructs when
the ETT is first removed. Sometimes it can take an hour or more beyond
the point where the dog has tongue tone and can swallow.

-- 1048 of 1450 --

Chapter 50: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Dogs and Cats 	1033
then measured using known measurement markers in the image
(e.g., fluoroscopy with image capture). In small patients, it is not
possible to deploy the stent through the ETT so anesthesia must be
maintained using injectable anesthetics such as propofol or alfax-
alone and oxygen supplemented by insufflation or jet ventilation
during placement.
Red blood cell potassium
Dogs are unusual in having low potassium concentrations in their
erythrocytes. Concentrations around 5–6 mmol/L are usually
found in most canine erythrocytes but there are a number of breeds,
including the Akita, Shiba Inu, and some other Japanese breeds,
that may have high potassium concentrations. This only becomes
a concern when blood is stored. In citrate-phosphate-dextrose-
adenine (CPDA-1) stored canine blood, plasma potassium
increased to over 8 mmol/L after 30 days of storage but in human
stored red cells (where the erythrocytes contain higher concentra-
tions of potassium), the plasma potassium increased to 30 mmol/L
at 3 weeks and to 44 mmol/L by 6 weeks [54,55]. Even with these
higher concentrations of potassium, it is unlikely to significantly
raise plasma potassium during a single unit transfusion in
humans but when multiple units are used, it can result in
hyperkalemia [56].
Cats
Handling and behavior
Recommendations for feline-friendly handling have been devel-
oped by the American Association of Feline Practitioners and
the International Society of Feline Medicine and endorsed by
the American Animal Hospital Association [57,58]. In particular,
handling a fearful or aggressive cat may be challenging. Recom-
mendations for managing these cats include training prior to the
visit to get them used to the cat carrier and being in the vehicle.
A number of drugs have been used to calm animals prior to trans-
portation and these include gabapentin, trazodone, α2
-adrenergic
receptor agonists, acepromazine, alprazolam, and melatonin [59,60]
(Table 50.2). Gabapentin has been examined in a number of studies
and has been shown to reduce the stress of transport, sedate the cat,
and facilitate handling at the clinic [61–63]. The pharmacokinetics
of the drug are significantly altered in cats with chronic kidney
disease, suggesting that lower doses should be used in these ani-
mals [64]. Presedating a cat with gabapentin does not appear to
alter acute antinociception [65]. Gabapentin administered IV to
cats did not appear to affect inhalant anesthetic minimum alveolar
concentration (MAC), but oral administration resulted in a 32%
reduction in MAC [66,67]. These different results may be simply
due to dose, although this is deemed unlikely. The highest plasma
concentration in the IV study maintained the peak plasma concen-
tration expected after approximately 25 mg/kg orally for the duration
of MAC determination. Although the oral study used 30 mg/kg,
the plasma concentration would be expected to gradually decrease
below its peak over time, likely resulting in limited differences
between the IV and oral studies at the time of MAC measure-
ment [66]. A dose of 10–20 mg/kg can be used as a starting point
and it has been suggested that it be given the night before and on the
day of the visit, ideally 2–3 h before travel. Trazodone can also
decrease anxiety associated with transportation and entering the
clinic and it may ensure that the cat is easier to manage in the
clinic [68]. A number of behavioral side effects are reported with
trazodone, including vomiting, diarrhea, hypersalivation, excita-
tion, and ataxia. Dexmedetomidine, in the form of Sileo® gel for
mucosal application, which is licensed in dogs to treat fear of loud
noises, has been used off-label in cats. Use of the injectable solution
of dexmedetomidine for buccal administration has also been exam-
ined [69]. As with any α2
-adrenergic receptor agonist, it can pro-
duce profound sedation and may induce vomiting. Alprazolam is a
benzodiazepine but there are no studies in cats showing its value in
this setting. Although it is classified as an anxiolytic, excitation has
been reported with the use of two other benzodiazepines in cats
(midazolam and diazepam), so it may not be the most reliable drug
to use for this purpose [70]. Acepromazine is usually criticized by
behaviorists as not being an anxiolytic, but it is an ataractic that
tends to decrease the animal’s awareness of its surroundings. It is
best to use the injectable solution for buccal administration, which
facilitates administration by the owner. Although the sedation with
Table 50.2 Drugs used for decreasing anxiety and/or causing sedation in cats in preparation for visits to a veterinary hospital.
Medication 	Form and concentration 	Feline dose and route 	Onset 	Duration 	Adverse effects
Dexmedetomidine 	Injectable solution
0.5 mg/mL
20–40 μg/kg
Buccal
30–40 min 	1.5–2 h 	Vomiting
Hypersalivation
Dexmedetomidine 	Gel
(Sileo ® 0.1 mg/mL)
20–40 μg/kg
Buccal
30–40 min 	1.5–2 h 	Vomiting
Hypersalivation
Trazodone 	Tablets
50 or 100 mg
50–100 mg per cat
Oral
90–150 min 	3–4 h 	Ataxia
Vomiting, gagging, diarrhea
Salivation
Paradoxical excitation
Behavioral disinhibition
Gabapentin 	Capsules
100 or 300 mg
100 mg/cat (may increase to 30 or
40 mg/kg if needed)
Oral
90–180 min 	8 h 	Ataxia
Vomiting
Salivation
Alprazolam 	Tablets
0.25 mg
0.0125–0.025 mg/kg
0.125 mg/cat
Oral
30–60 min 	Not reported 	Ataxia
Paradoxical excitation
Behavioral disinhibition
Melatonin 	Tablets
1, 3, or 5 mg
3–5 mg/cat
Oral
Not reported
Acepromazine 	Injectable solution
10 mg/mL
0.01–0.05 mg/kg
Buccal
20–30 min 	Variable

-- 1049 of 1450 --

1034 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
acepromazine in cats is rarely profound, it may decrease the animal’s
reactiveness to transportation and examination, but there are no
studies supporting this application. Acepromazine may decrease
the dose of drug needed for induction and maintenance of anesthe-
sia [71]. Melatonin has been shown to have a calming effect in some
cats [72]. One group has been using a combination of gabapentin
and melatonin for preoperative sedation and has anecdotally
reported positive effects with this combination [59].
Fractious cats may require sedation prior to handling. Several
agents and combinations have been reported to be effective. In par-
ticular, α2 -adrenergic receptor agonists alone or combined with
opioids or dissociative anesthetics, and dissociative anesthetics
usually combined with acepromazine or a benzodiazepine, appear
to produce consistent, dose-dependent sedation in cats [73–79]. α2 -
Adrenergic receptor agonist–ketamine combinations have been
shown to be effective following oral administration [80–82] and
tiletamine–zolazepam produced profound sedation following buc-
cal administration [83]. Alfaxalone alone or in combination with
α2 -adrenergic receptor agonists, ketamine, midazolam, and/or opi-
oids produces sedation following intramuscular administration,
although the quality of sedation may be variable [84–89].
Behaviors associated with acute and chronic pain may be diffi-
cult to detect in cats. Particular attention should be given to loss of
normal behavior, such as decreased appetite, decreased grooming,
or decreased activity; expression of abnormal behaviors, such as
inappropriate elimination, vocalization, aggression, altered facial
expression, or hiding; and reaction to touch or palpation of the
painful area [90]. A few tools for the assessment of acute pain have
recently been validated in cats. These include the short and long
UNESP-Botucatu scales for feline pain assessment, the Feline
Grimace Scale, and the Glasgow composite measure pain scale –
feline [91–93]. All have limitations that are important to recognize
when making decisions on whether analgesic treatment is
warranted [94].
Drug metabolism in cats
It is documented that important metabolic differences exist
between cats and dogs or humans; dose extrapolation from these
latter species to cats should therefore be done with caution. In par-
ticular, the activity of UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT), an
enzyme involved in the conjugation of many substrates, is much
lower in cats than in dogs and humans [95–97]. This results, for
example, in a reduced ability to eliminate acetaminophen (paracet-
amol), with a high potential for toxicity. The genetic cause for this
low enzymatic activity has been identified; cats have a non-
functional pseudogene for UGT1A6 [95]. In addition, cats may also
have reduced Phase I metabolism (oxidation, reduction, and
hydrolysis) compared to other species, due to lower activity of some
hepatic cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes. It has been reported that
the activities of CYP1A, CYP2C, CYP2D, CYP2E, and CYP3A were
lower in feline than in canine and human hepatic microsomes, but
the activity of CYP2B was comparable [98]. This may contribute to
the differences in drug metabolism observed in cats, compared to
dogs or humans. For example, a study on the pharmacokinetics of
tramadol, reported that the rate at which O-desmethyltramadol
(the metabolite likely responsible for the opioid effect of tramadol)
was produced appeared to be similar to that of humans deficient in
CYP2D6, who get less pain relief from this drug compared to “good
metabolizers” [99]. Another example of interest in anesthesia is
propofol. The clearance of propofol was reported to be at least twice
as fast in dogs than in cats [100–102]. Propofol is metabolized
through glucuronidation by UGT and hydrolysis by CYP2B6 and
CYP2C in humans [103]; in dogs, the rate-limiting step was
reported to be mediated by CYP2B11 [104]. It is therefore unclear,
based on the study cited above reporting similar activities of CYP2B
in dogs and cats, why cats clear propofol much more slowly than
dogs. The differences in metabolism of propofol may have clinical
consequences, as increasing the duration of propofol infusion has
been reported to significantly prolong recovery in cats [105].
Inhalant anesthetics
The potency of inhalant anesthetics, as characterized by their MAC,
tends to be higher in cats than in many other species, including dogs
and horses [67,106–117]. Nitrous oxide was found to decrease the
MAC of halothane, but when combined with isoflurane, the effect
was inconsistent [107,117]. While, to these authors’ knowledge,
there is no study directly comparing the effects of inhalant anesthet-
ics in dogs and cats, clinical experience suggests that at similar anes-
thetic depth, blood pressure tends to be lower in cats than in dogs.
Some evidence for this can be found by comparing studies in which
inhalant anesthetics were administered at similar multiples of their
MAC in both species. Such studies show that, at moderate inhalant
anesthetic concentrations, blood pressure and cardiac index are
more depressed in cats than in dogs [115,118–121].
Opioids
In cats, opioids cause pupillary dilation and sometimes excita-
tion [122]. Opioid-induced manic behavior in cats is only seen fol-
lowing administration of very high doses, that are not clinically
relevant. In one study, the intraperitoneal administration of morphine
at 1 mg/kg did not induce manic response, whereas 5, 10, and 20 mg/kg
induced excitement in 1, 2, and 5 out of 5 cats, respectively [123]. At
clinical doses, opioids cause analgesia and euphoria, and sometimes
dysphoria [124–126]. It has been suggested that the effects of high-
dose morphine may be characterized by a non-opioid receptor-
mediated effect [127]. There is evidence that the manic response in
cats is not due to the action of opioids per se but related to the release
of monoamines [123].
Opioids may have biphasic effects on the cardiovascular system
in cats. At low doses, they may lower heart rate and blood pressure,
while large doses increase heart rate, cardiac output, and blood
pressure [122,128]. These latter effects seem to be related to
increased concentrations of circulating catecholamines, and do not
occur in adrenalectomized cats [122,129]. Catecholamine-induced
hemodynamic effects appear to be mediated centrally through opi-
oid receptors, as they are prevented by naloxone [130].
Hyperthermia following opioid administration has been reported
in cats [131–134]. Severe hyperthermia has been defined as a body
temperature greater than 41.7 °C [133]. The effect may be dose-
dependent and appears more consistent when higher doses are
administered. In a retrospective clinical study, the administration of
hydromorphone at doses between 0.05 and 0.1 mg/kg was strongly
associated with rectal temperatures > 40 °C; this association was
confirmed in a prospective clinical study [131,132]. In the research
setting, a prospective study showed that clinically relevant doses of
several opioids result in increased body temperature; however, in
that study, the increase was mild-to-moderate, and body tempera-
ture remained < 40 °C in most cases [133].
Opioids decrease the dose of inhalant anesthetic required to
produce immobility in cats [135]. However, the magnitude of the
effect of full μ-opioid receptor agonists appears to be smaller in cats
than in some other species and may be inconsistent; to the authors’

-- 1050 of 1450 --

Chapter 50: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Dogs and Cats 	1035
knowledge, the largest reduction in MAC of an inhalant anesthetic
induced by a full μ-opioid receptor agonist in cats was approxi-
mately 35%, following administration of alfentanil to produce very
high plasma concentrations (500 ng/mL) [136]. For comparison,
plasma alfentanil concentrations close to half the value targeted in
the cat study (223 ng/mL) reduced MAC by 68.5% in dogs [137].
While different inhalant anesthetics were used in the dog and cat
studies (enflurane and isoflurane, respectively), the difference in
effect suggests a large difference in potency of alfentanil in the two
species. Moreover, 35% was the maximum MAC reduction observed
in cats (higher plasma concentrations did not result in a further
decrease in MAC), whereas in dogs, the maximum mean MAC
reduction induced by alfentanil was 72.5%. The variability in MAC
reduction may also be larger in cats than in dogs, as illustrated by
the fact that studies on the effect of the same opioid do not consist-
ently detect a decrease in MAC [126,138]. A study comparing the
effects of high plasma concentrations of fentanyl, alfentanil, and
sufentanil on the MAC of isoflurane in cats found significant MAC
reduction only during administration of alfentanil; the effect was
antagonized by administration of naltrexone, suggesting that it is
mediated by opioid receptors [139]. It has been suggested that this
small effect of full μ-opioid receptor agonists on MAC may be
related to the central sympathetic stimulation mentioned above, as
combining fentanyl with acepromazine (a dopamine and α1
-
adrenergic receptor antagonist) results in a large MAC reduction
that is at least partially reversible with naltrexone [140]. In addition,
butorphanol, a κ-opioid receptor agonist and μ-opioid receptor
antagonist was reported to produce a plasma concentration-
dependent reduction in MAC by up to 68% [141]. Butorphanol does
not appear to result in sympathetic stimulation, providing addi-
tional support to the hypothesis that such stimulation is responsible
for the limited effect of μ-opioid receptor agonists on MAC in cats.
Buprenorphine is commonly used in cats, based on studies
reporting good efficacy and initial data suggesting excellent bioa-
vailability and efficacy following buccal administration and oral
transmucosal absorption [142–144]. However, more recent studies
have reported lower bioavailability and limited efficacy of buccal
buprenorphine in nociceptive threshold models [145]. Subcutaneous
administration of low to moderate doses of buprenorphine is
reported to result in erratic absorption [146]. However, subcutane-
ous administration of a high dose of a concentrated (1.8 mg/mL)
formulation of buprenorphine (Simbadol®) to cats resulted in con-
sistent and prolonged absorption, providing antinociception for a
minimum of 24 h [147]. The label dose of this formulation appears
to result in a high incidence of hyperthermia [148]. We have also
observed a high incidence of dysphoria. A transdermal buprenor-
phine formulation (Zorbium®) was approved in the United States in
2022 for the control of postoperative pain in cats. A single adminis-
tration results in analgesia with an onset of 2 h and a duration of up
to 4 days. This formulation appears to result in a high incidence of
hyperthermia, although the clinical significance of this finding has
been questioned [149–151].
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
The use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in cats
has been reviewed [152–155]. These drugs are commonly used in
cats for their anti-inflammatory and analgesic properties; however,
caution is recommended, since glucuronide conjugation is a major
metabolic pathway for many of these drugs [153]. The incidence of
adverse effects (renal injury, hepatotoxicity, gastrointestinal ulcera-
tion, and abnormal hemostasis) in cats may therefore be higher
than in some other species, due to larger exposure following a given
dose. The use of prostaglandin synthase-2 (COX-2) selective or
specific agents may decrease the risk for some, but not all of these
adverse effects. Nevertheless, there is favorable evidence for the
short-term, typically perioperative use of several NSAIDs in cats,
including carprofen [156–163], ketoprofen [156,159,164–166],
tolfenamic acid [156,167,168], and robenacoxib [164,165,169–171].
With the exception of carprofen, these drugs are licensed for
repeated administration in cats in some countries; in the United
States, meloxicam is licensed for single administration, and robena-
coxib for up to 3 days in that species.
Recommendations have been issued by a panel of experts on
the long-term use of NSAIDs in cats [152]. A retrospective study
suggested that meloxicam could be administered long term to
cats at 0.02 mg/kg once daily, even if they have stable chronic kid-
ney disease [172]. In that study, there was less progression of kidney
disease in treated cats than in untreated cats. A few studies have
evaluated the use of grapiprant, an EP4 prostaglandin receptor
antagonist in cats [173,174]. Analgesic efficacy appeared inferior to
that of carprofen following ovariohysterectomy [174].
Endotracheal intubation
The Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Small Animal Fatalities
found that endotracheal intubation increased the odds of anesthetic-
related death in cats by a factor of approximately two [175]. Previous
studies have also suggested that endotracheal intubation was associ-
ated with major complications in cats [176,177]. The reasons for
these findings are not entirely clear; however, they may be related to
the small size of the cat’s upper airway, and to the laryngeal respon-
siveness to mechanical stimulation in that species. Laryngeal
spasms can be produced in anesthetized and decerebrate cats by
mechanical stimulation of the soft palate, pharynx, larynx, and tra-
chea [178,179]. It has been recommended to desensitize the larynx
with a local anesthetic or to use a short-acting neuromuscular
blocking agent prior to intubation in cats in order to decrease the
incidence of laryngeal spasm [180–182]; nevertheless, it is possible
that improper intubation technique would be more likely to cause
complications in cats than in dogs.
Tracheal avulsion or rupture and bronchial rupture have been
reported in cats [183–188]. In the majority of cases, tracheal rup-
ture was associated with intubation. It was hypothesized that cuff
overinflation, possibly in combination with multiple position
changes, was likely the mechanism. Associated clinical signs were
subcutaneous emphysema, coughing, gagging, dyspnea, anorexia,
and fever. Surgical and conservative management were successful
unless the injury extended to the carina.
Cortical blindness
Postanesthetic cortical blindness has been reported in cats [189,190].
According to one case series, the blindness is temporary in the
majority of cases, and the use of mouth gags may be a risk factor for
postanesthetic blindness, due to cerebral ischemia [189]. A study
evaluating blood flow in the maxillary artery (the main source of
blood supply to the retinae and brain) in anesthetized cats using
imaging techniques showed that the use of spring-loaded mouth
gags to open the mouth maximally resulted in alterations in blood
flow and the electroretinogram in some cats [191]. The authors con-
cluded that mechanical occlusion of blood flow through the maxil-
lary artery during maximal opening of the mouth may contribute to
the pathogenesis of postanesthetic blindness due to reduced blood
flow to the retina.

-- 1051 of 1450 --

1036 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
Fluid therapy and blood volume
The Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Small Animal
Fatalities suggested that the administration of intravenous fluids
during anesthesia resulted in an approximately fourfold increase in
the risk of death [175]. While the reasons for this finding are not
entirely clear, excessive fluid administration resulting in fluid over-
load was suspected to be at least partly responsible. Cats may be at
higher risk of fluid overload and/or excessive dilution of blood
components than dogs, particularly when large amounts of fluids
are rapidly administered, because their blood volume is somewhat
smaller. Blood volume in cats has been reported to be 56–67 mL/kg
[192–194]. Rapid fluid administration during inhalant anesthesia
may also be more frequent in cats than in dogs, since blood pres-
sure tends to be lower at similar anesthetic concentrations (see
inhalant anesthetics above). Moreover, due to their small size, cats
may be more likely to inadvertently receive excessive fluid volumes
than larger species. Rate of fluid administration is typically based
on body weight; based on the considerations above, it may be
preferable to adjust these rates based on some fraction of blood
volume. Expert consensus recommendations of 3 mL/kg/h of
isotonic crystalloid for fluid therapy during anesthesia have been
published [195].
Blood groups
Three blood groups – A, B, and AB – have been identified in
cats [196,197]. Cats with type B blood have naturally occurring,
strong hemagglutinating antibodies against type A cells, whereas
cats with type A blood have naturally occurring, weak hemolyzing
and hemagglutinating antibodies against type B cells [198]. Severe
transfusion reactions of the anaphylactic type, with almost immedi-
ate destruction of the transfused red blood cells, are therefore com-
monly observed if type A blood is transfused to a cat with type B
blood; cats with type A blood receiving type B blood typically only
develop mild transfusion reactions [198,199]. In addition, naturally
occurring antibodies against a common antigen, Mik, has been
found to be involved in acute hemolytic transfusion reactions
following an AB-matched transfusion [200]. Typing and cross-
matching are therefore essential prior to blood transfusion in
cats [201,202]. Consensus statements on prevention and monitor-
ing of transfusion reactions have been developed [203,204].
Prevalence of the different blood types has been reported for
various geographical locations [197,198,205–218]. Type A blood
has the highest prevalence, ranging from 62 to 99.6%; in the United
States, close to 100% of domestic cats are type A. The prevalence of
type B blood ranges from 0.4 to 36%, the latter being reported for
the Sydney area of Australia. Cats with type AB blood are rare, rep-
resenting 5% or less of the feline population (less than 0.2% in
North America).
Prevalence of B blood is moderate-to-high (15–60%) in some cat
breeds, including British shorthair, Abyssinian, Birman, Devon Rex,
Himalayan, Persian, Scottish Fold, Somali, Angora, and Turkish
Van, whereas it is very low (close to 0%) in other breeds, including
American shorthair, Siamese, and Norwegian Forest [198,211,219].
Dopamine and dopamine receptors
Dopamine is commonly used in anesthetized cats to treat hypoten-
sion. Within the range of clinical doses, its effect is believed to be
due to an increase in cardiac contractility, mediated by activation of
β1 - adrenergic receptors. A study demonstrated increases in cardiac
index without significant increase in vascular resistance at doses,
ranging from 2.5 to 20 μg/kg/min [220]. Another, more
controversial indication for low doses of dopamine is to increase
renal blood flow, particularly in acute renal failure. The effect is
postulated to be due to activation of dopamine D1 receptors, caus-
ing renal vasodilation and increased renal blood flow. It is unclear
whether cats would respond to dopamine in that manner. D1 recep-
tors have been identified in feline kidneys; however, they appear
different from the human and canine D 1 receptors [221]. Regardless,
studies in humans have failed to demonstrate benefits of low-dose
dopamine in acute renal failure and suggest that some effects may
actually be detrimental [222,223]. In cats with renal failure, the use
of dopamine may be indicated at doses that increase cardiac output,
particularly during hypotension, rather than at doses targeting D 1
receptors.
References
1 Price GS, Frazier DL. Use of body surface area (BSA)-based dosages to calculate
chemotherapeutic drug dose in dogs: I. Potential problems with current BSA
formulae. J Vet Intern Med 1998; 12(4): 267–271.
2 Coffee C, Roush JK, Higginbotham ML. Carboplatin-induced myelosuppression as
related to body weight in dogs. Vet Comp Oncol 2020; 18(4): 804–810.
3 Girens R, Bukoski A, Maitz CA, et al. Use of computed tomography and radiation
therapy planning software to develop a novel formula for body surface area calcula-
tion in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2019; 33(2): 792–799.
4 Mahmood I. Application of allometric principles for the prediction of pharmacoki-
netics in human and veterinary drug development. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2007;
59(11): 1177–1192.
5 Krejcie TC, Avram MJ. What determines anesthetic induction dose? It’s the front-
end kinetics, doctor! Anesth Analg 1999; 89(3): 541–544.
6 McGreevy PD, Thomson PC, Pride C, et al. Prevalence of obesity in dogs examined
by Australian veterinary practices and the risk factors involved. Vet Rec 2005;
156(22): 695–702.
7 Scarlett JM, Donoghue S, Saidla J, et al. Overweight cats: prevalence and risk
factors. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 1994; 18(Suppl 1): S22–S28.
8 Association for Prevention of Pet Obesity. https://petobesityprevention.org/2018
9 Kaltman AJ, Goldring RM. Role of circulatory congestion in the cardiorespiratory
failure of obesity. Am J Med 1976; 60(5): 645–653.
10 Olutoye OA, Yu X, Govindan K, et al. The effect of obesity on the ED(95) of propo-
fol for loss of consciousness in children and adolescents. Anesth Analg 2012; 115(1):
147–153.
11 Devito FC, Patricio GCF, Flor PB, et al. Comparative study of anaesthesia induction
in obese dogs using propofol dosages based on lean body weight or total body
weight. Vet Anim Sci 2020; 10: 100131.
12 Clutton RE. The medical implications of canine obesity and their relevance to
anaesthesia. Brit Vet J 1988; 144(1): 21–28.
13 Love L, Cline MG. Perioperative physiology and pharmacology in the obese small
animal patient. Vet Anaesth Analg 2015; 42(2): 119–132.
14 Davidson IW, Parker JC, Beliles RP. Biological basis for extrapolation across mam-
malian species. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 1986; 6(3): 211–237.
15 Adolph EF. Quantitative relations in the physiological constitutions of mammals.
Science 1949; 109(2841): 579–585.
16 Boxenbaum H. Interspecies variation in liver weight, hepatic blood flow, and anti-
pyrine intrinsic clearance: extrapolation of data to benzodiazepines and phenytoin.
J Pharmacokinet Biopharm 1980; 8(2): 165–176.
17 Bronson RT. Brain weight-body weight scaling in breeds of dogs and cats. Brain
Behav Evol 1979; 16(3): 227–236.
18 Court MH. Anesthesia of the sighthound. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 1999; 14(1):
38–43.
19 Parker HG, Kim LV, Sutter NB, et al. Genetic structure of the purebred domestic
dog. Science 2004; 304(5674): 1160–1164.
20 Bogan J. Factors affecting duration of thiopentone anaesthesia in dogs, with par-
ticular reference to greyhounds. Proc Assoc Vet Anaesth Gr Br Ir 1970; 1: 18–24.
21 Sams RA, Muir WW, Detra RL, et al. Comparative pharmacokinetics and anesthetic
effects of methohexital, pentobarbital, thiamylal, and thiopental in Greyhound dogs
and non- Greyhound, mixed-breed dogs. Am J Vet Res 1985; 46(8): 1677–1683.
22 Pasloske K, Sauer B, Perkins N, et al. Plasma pharmacokinetics of alfaxalone in
both premedicated and unpremedicated Greyhound dogs after single, intravenous
administration of Alfaxan at a clinical dose. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2009; 32(5):
510–513.
23 Zoran DL, Riedesel DH, Dyer DC. Pharmacokinetics of propofol in mixed-breed
dogs and greyhounds. Am J Vet Res 1993; 54(5): 755–760.

-- 1052 of 1450 --

Chapter 50: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Dogs and Cats 	1037
24 Sams RA, Muir WW. Effects of phenobarbital on thiopental pharmacokinetics in
greyhounds. Am J Vet Res 1988; 49(2): 245–249.
25 KuKanich B, KuKanich K, Rankin D, et al. The effect of fluconazole on oral metha-
done in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2019; 46(4): 501–509.
26 Hofmeister EH, Watson V, Snyder LB, et al. Validity and client use of information
from the World Wide Web regarding veterinary anesthesia in dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2008; 233(12): 1860–1864.
27 Tournier N, Decleves X, Saubamea B, et al. Opioid transport by ATP-binding cas-
sette transporters at the blood–brain barrier: implications for neuropsychopharma-
cology. Curr Pharm Des 2011; 17(26): 2829–2842.
28 Hassan HE, Myers AL, Coop A, et al. Differential involvement of P-glycoprotein
(ABCB1) in permeability, tissue distribution, and antinociceptive activity of metha-
done, buprenorphine, and diprenorphine: in vitro and in vivo evaluation. J Pharm
Sci 2009; 98(12): 4928–2940.
29 Dagenais C, Graff CL, Pollack GM. Variable modulation of opioid brain uptake by
P-glycoprotein in mice. Biochem Pharmacol 2004; 67(2): 269–276.
30 Hassan HE, Mercer SL, Cunningham CW, et al. Evaluation of the P-glycoprotein
(ABCB1) affinity status of a series of morphine analogs: comparative study with
meperidine analogs to identify opioids with minimal P-glycoprotein interactions.
Int J Pharm 2009; 375(1–2): 48–54.
31 Groenendaal D, Freijer J, Rosier A, et al. Pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic
modelling of the EEG effects of opioids: the role of complex biophase distribution
kinetics. Eur J Pharm Sci 2008; 34(2–3): 149–163.
32 Brown SM, Campbell SD, Crafford A, et al. P-glycoprotein is a major determinant
of norbuprenorphine brain exposure and antinociception. J Pharmacol Exp Ther
2012; 343(1): 53–61.
33 Popovic NA, Mullane JF, Yhap EO. Effects of acetylpromazine maleate on certain
cardiorespiratory responses in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1972; 33(9): 1819–1824.
34 Brodbelt DC, Pfeiffer DU, Young LE, et al. Results of the Confidential Enquiry into
Perioperative Small Animal Fatalities regarding risk factors for anesthetic-related
death in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008; 233(7): 1096–1104.
35 Dyson DH, Maxie MG, Schnurr D. Morbidity and mortality associated with anes-
thetic management in small animal veterinary practice in Ontario. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 1998; 34(4): 325–335.
36 Denton TG, Du Toit DF, Reece-Smith H. Reactions to Althesin in dogs. Anaesthesia
1980; 35(6): 615–616.
37 Bomzon L. A limited trial of Saffan in the dog. J Small Anim Pract 1981; 22(12):
769–773.
38 Corbett HR. The use of Saffan in the dog. Aust Vet Pract 1977; 7(3): 184–188.
39 Robinson EP, Faggella AM, Henry DP, et al. Comparison of histamine release
induced by morphine and oxymorphone administration in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1988;
49(10): 1699–1701.
40 Flacke JW, Flacke WE, Bloor BC, et al. Histamine release by four narcotics: a
double-blind study in humans. Anesth Analg 1987; 66(8): 723–730.
41 Philbin DM, Moss J, Rosow CE, et al. Histamine release with intravenous narcotics:
protective effects of H1 and H2-receptor antagonists. Klin Wochenschr 1982;
60(17): 1056–1059.
42 Banovic F, Denley T, Blubaugh A, et al. Effect of diphenhydramine and ceti-
rizine on immediate and late-phase cutaneous allergic reactions in healthy
dogs: a randomized, double-blinded crossover study. Vet Dermatol 2020; 31(4):
256–258.
43 Curley TL, Thamm DH, Johnson SW, et al. Effects of morphine on histamine
release from two cell lines of canine mast cell tumor and on plasma histamine con-
centrations in dogs with cutaneous mast cell tumor. Am J Vet Res 2021; 82(12):
1013–1018.
44 De Lorenzi D, Bertoncello D, Drigo M. Bronchial abnormalities found in a con-
secutive series of 40 brachycephalic dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2009; 235(7):
835–840.
45 Oechtering TH, Oechtering GU, Noller C. Structural characteristics of the nose in
brachycephalic dog breeds analysed by computed tomography. Tierarztl Prax Ausg
K Kleintiere Heimtiere 2007; 35(3): 177–187.
46 Hoareau GL, Jourdan G, Mellema M, et al. Evaluation of arterial blood gases and
arterial blood pressures in brachycephalic dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2012; 26(4):
897–904.
47 Johnson LR, Pollard RE. Tracheal collapse and bronchomalacia in dogs: 58 cases (7
/2001–1 /2008). J Vet Intern Med 2010; 24(2): 298–305.
48 Pardali D, Adamama-Moraitou KK, Rallis TS, et al. Tidal breathing flow-volume
loop analysis for the diagnosis and staging of tracheal collapse in dogs. J Vet Intern
Med 2010; 24(4): 832–842.
49 White RAS, Williams JM. Tracheal collapse in the dog – is there really a role for
surgery? A survey of 100 cases. J Small Anim Pract 1994; 35(4): 191–196.
50 Adamama-Moraitou KK, Pardali D, Athanasiou LV, et al. Conservative manage-
ment of canine tracheal collapse with stanozolol: a double blinded, placebo control
clinical trial. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol 2011; 24(1): 111–118.
51 Congiusta M, Weisse C, Berent AC, et al. Comparison of short-, intermediate-, and
long-term results between dogs with tracheal collapse that underwent multimodal
medical management alone and those that underwent tracheal endoluminal stent
placement. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2021; 258(3): 279–289.
52 Briganti A, Melanie P, Portela D, et al. Continuous positive airway pressure admin-
istered via face mask in tranquilized dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2010; 20(5):
503–508.
53 Sun F, Uson J, Ezquerra J, et al. Endotracheal stenting therapy in dogs with tracheal
collapse. Vet J 2008; 175(2): 186–193.
54 Karon BS, van Buskirk CM, Jaben EA, et al. Temporal sequence of major biochemi-
cal events during blood bank storage of packed red blood cells. Blood Transfus 2012;
10(4): 453–461.
55 Maede Y, Amano Y, Nishida A, et al. Hereditary high-potassium erythrocytes with
high Na, K-ATPase activity in Japanese shiba dogs. Res Vet Sci 1991; 50(1):
123–125.
56 Vraets A, Lin Y, Callum JL. Transfusion-associated hyperkalemia. Transfus Med Rev
2011; 25(3): 184–196.
57 Rodan I, Sundahl E, Carney H, et al. AAFP and ISFM feline-friendly handling
guidelines. J Feline Med Surg 2011; 13(5): 364–375.
58 Rodan I, Dowgray N, Carney HC, et al. 2022 AAFP/ISFM cat friendly veterinary
interaction guidelines: approach and handling techniques. J Feline Med Surg 2022;
24(11): 1093–1132.
59 Karas A. Reducing patient anxiety: orally administered agents for reducing the
impact of hospital visits. IVECCS 2021 (Abtract); 39–43.
60 Erickson A, Harbin K, MacPherson J, et al. A review of pre-appointment medica-
tions to reduce fear and anxiety in dogs and cats at veterinary visits. Can Vet J 2021;
62(9): 952–960.
61 Allen ME, LeBlanc NL, Scollan KF. Hemodynamic, echocardiographic, and seda-
tive effects of oral gabapentin in healthy cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2021; 57(6):
278–284.
62 van Haaften KA, Forsythe LRE, Stelow EA, et al. Effects of a single preappointment
dose of gabapentin on signs of stress in cats during transportation and veterinary
examination. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2017; 251(10): 1175–1181.
63 Hudec CP, Griffin CE. Changes in the stress markers cortisol and glucose before
and during intradermal testing in cats after single administration of pre-
appointment gabapentin. J Feline Med Surg 2020; 22(2): 138–145.
64 Quimby JM, Lorbach SK, Saffire A, et al. Serum concentrations of gabapentin in
cats with chronic kidney disease. J Feline Med Surg 2022; 24(12): 1260–1266.
65 Pypendop BH, Siao KT, Ilkiw JE. Thermal antinociceptive effect of orally adminis-
tered gabapentin in healthy cats. Am J Vet Res 2010; 71(9): 1027–1032.
66 Chen H, Yang H, Li M, et al. Effect of oral administration of gabapentin on the
minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in cats. Front Vet Sci 2023; 10:
1117313.
67 Reid P, Pypendop BH, Ilkiw JE. The effects of intravenous gabapentin administra-
tion on the minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in cats. Anesth Analg
2010; 111(3): 633–637.
68 Stevens BJ, Frantz EM, Orlando JM, et al. Efficacy of a single dose of trazodone
hydrochloride given to cats prior to veterinary visits to reduce signs of transport-
and examination-related anxiety. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2016; 249(2): 202–207.
69 Slingsby LS, Taylor PM, Monroe T. Thermal antinociception after dexmedetomidine
administration in cats: a comparison between intramuscular and oral transmucosal
administration. J Feline Med Surg 2009; 11(10): 829–834.
70 Ilkiw JE, Suter CM, Farver TB, et al. The behaviour of healthy awake cats following
intravenous and intramuscular administration of midazolam. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
1996; 19(3): 205–216.
71 Heard DJ, Webb AI, Daniels RT. Effect of acepromazine on the anesthetic
requirement of halothane in the dog. Am J Vet Res 1986; 47(10): 2113–2115.
72 Ruviaro Tuleski GL, Silveira MF, Bastos RF, et al. Behavioral and cardiovascular
effects of a single dose of gabapentin or melatonin in cats: a randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial. J Feline Med Surg 2022; 24(12): e524–e534.
73 Biermann K, Hungerbuhler S, Mischke R, et al. Sedative, cardiovascular, haemato-
logic and biochemical effects of four different drug combinations administered
intramuscularly in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39(2): 137–150.
74 Selmi AL, Mendes GM, Lins BT, et al. Evaluation of the sedative and cardiores-
piratory effects of dexmedetomidine, dexmedetomidine-butorphanol, and
dexmedetomidine-ketamine in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2003; 222(1): 37–41.
75 Nagore L, Soler C, Gil L, et al. Sedative effects of dexmedetomidine,
dexmedetomidine-pethidine and dexmedetomidine-butorphanol in cats. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2013; 36(3): 222–228.
76 Navarrete R, Dominguez JM, Granados Mdel M, et al. Sedative effects of three
doses of romifidine in comparison with medetomidine in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg
2011; 38(3): 178–185.
77 Selmi AL, Barbudo-Selmi GR, Mendes GM, et al. Sedative, analgesic and cardiores-
piratory effects of romifidine in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2004; 31(3): 195–206.

-- 1053 of 1450 --

1038 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
78 Ansah OB, Raekallio M, Vainio O. Comparison of three doses of dexmedetomi-
dine with medetomidine in cats following intramuscular administration. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 1998; 21(5): 380–387.
79 Dyson DH, Atilola M. A clinical comparison of oxymorphone-acepromazine and
butorphanol-acepromazine sedation in dogs. Vet Surg 1992; 21(5): 418–421.
80 Santos LC, Ludders JW, Erb HN, et al. Sedative and cardiorespiratory effects of
dexmedetomidine and buprenorphine administered to cats via oral transmucosal
or intramuscular routes. Vet Anaesth Analg 2010; 37(5): 417–424.
81 Grove DM, Ramsay EC. Sedative and physiologic effects of orally administered
alpha 2-adrenoceptor agonists and ketamine in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000;
216(12): 1929–1932.
82 Wetzel RW, Ramsay EC. Comparison of four regimens for intraoral administra-
tion of medication to induce sedation in cats prior to euthanasia. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 1998; 213(2): 243–245.
83 Nejamkin P, Cavilla V, Clausse M, et al. Sedative and physiologic effects of
tiletamine–zolazepam following buccal administration in cats. J Feline Med Surg
2020; 22(2): 108–113.
84 Deutsch J, Jolliffe C, Archer E, et al. Intramuscular injection of alfaxalone in com-
bination with butorphanol for sedation in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(4):
794–802.
85 Lazzarini E, Martinelli E, Brioschi FA, et al. Intramuscular alfaxalone and metha-
done with or without ketamine in healthy cats: effects on sedation and echocar-
diographic measurements. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(5): 621–630.
86 Tamura J, Ishizuka T, Fukui S, et al. Sedative effects of intramuscular alfaxalone
administered to cats. J Vet Med Sci 2015; 77(8): 897–904.
87 Rodrigo-Mocholi D, Belda E, Bosmans T, et al. Clinical efficacy and cardiorespira-
tory effects of intramuscular administration of alfaxalone alone or in combination
with dexmedetomidine in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43(3): 291–300.
88 Cremer J, Ricco CH. Cardiovascular, respiratory and sedative effects of intramus-
cular alfaxalone, butorphanol and dexmedetomidine compared with ketamine,
butorphanol and dexmedetomidine in healthy cats. J Feline Med Surg 2018;
20(10): 973–979.
89 Wheeler EP, Abelson AL, Lindsey JC, et al. Sedative effects of alfaxalone and
hydromorphone with or without midazolam in cats: a pilot study. J Feline Med
Surg 2021; 23(12): 1109–1116.
90 Hellyer P, Rodan I, Brunt J, et al. AAHA/AAFP pain management guidelines for
dogs and cats. J Feline Med Surg 2007; 9(6): 466–480.
91 Belli M, de Oliveira AR, de Lima MT, et al. Clinical validation of the short and
long UNESP-Botucatu scales for feline pain assessment. Peer J 2021; 9: e11225.
92 Evangelista MC, Watanabe R, Leung VSY, et al. Facial expressions of pain in cats: the
development and validation of a Feline Grimace Scale. Sci Rep 2019; 9(1): 19128.
93 Reid J, Scott EM, Calvo G, et al. Definitive Glasgow acute pain scale for cats: vali-
dation and intervention level. Vet Rec 2017; 180(18): 449.
94 Steagall PV, Monteiro BP. Acute pain in cats: recent advances in clinical assess-
ment. J Feline Med Surg 2019; 21(1): 25–34.
95 Court MH, Greenblatt DJ. Molecular genetic basis for deficient acetaminophen
glucuronidation by cats: UGT1A6 is a pseudogene, and evidence for reduced
diversity of expressed hepatic UGT1A isoforms. Pharmacogenetics 2000; 10(4):
355–369.
96 Court MH, Greenblatt DJ. Molecular basis for deficient acetaminophen glucuroni-
dation in cats. An interspecies comparison of enzyme kinetics in liver microsomes.
Biochem Pharmacol 1997; 53(7): 1041–1047.
97 Court MH, Greenblatt DJ. Biochemical basis for deficient paracetamol glucuroni-
dation in cats: an interspecies comparison of enzyme constraint in liver
microsomes. J Pharm Pharmacol 1997; 49(4): 446–449.
98 van Beusekom CD, Schipper L, Fink-Gremmels J. Cytochrome P450-mediated
hepatic metabolism of new fluorescent substrates in cats and dogs. J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 2010; 33(6): 519–527.
99 Pypendop BH, Ilkiw JE. Pharmacokinetics of tramadol, and its metabolite
O-desmethyl-tramadol, in cats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2008; 31(1): 52–59.
100 Cleale RM, Muir WW, Waselau AC, et al. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacody-
namic evaluation of propofol administered to cats in a novel, aqueous, nano-
droplet formulation or as an oil-in- water macroemulsion. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
2009; 32(5): 436–445.
101 Hughes JM, Nolan AM. Total intravenous anesthesia in greyhounds: pharmacoki-
netics of propofol and fentanyl-- a preliminary study. Vet Surg 1999; 28(6):
513–524.
102 Cockshott ID, Douglas EJ, Plummer GF, et al. The pharmacokinetics of propofol
in laboratory animals. Xenobiotica 1992; 22(3): 369–375.
103 Restrepo JG, Garcia-Martin E, Martinez C, et al. Polymorphic drug metabolism in
anaesthesia. Curr Drug Metab 2009; 10(3): 236–246.
104 Hay Kraus BL, Greenblatt DJ, Venkatakrishnan K, et al. Evidence for propofol
hydroxylation by cytochrome P4502B11 in canine liver microsomes: breed and
gender differences. Xenobiotica 2000; 30(6): 575–588.
105 Pascoe PJ, Ilkiw JE, Frischmeyer KJ. The effect of the duration of propofol admin-
istration on recovery from anesthesia in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2006; 33(1): 2–7.
106 Brown BR Jr., Crout JR. A comparative study of the effects of five general anesthet-
ics on myocardial contractility. I. Isometric conditions. Anesthesiology 1971; 34(3):
236–245.
107 Steffey EP, Gillespie JR, Berry JD, et al. Anesthetic potency (MAC) of nitrous oxide
in the dog, cat, and stump-tail monkey. J Appl Physiol 1974; 36(5): 530–532.
108 Drummond JC, Todd MM, Shapiro HM. Minimal alveolar concentrations for
halothane, enflurane, and isoflurane in the cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1983; 182(10):
1099–1101.
109 Webb AI, McMurphy RM. Effect of anticholinergic preanesthetic medicaments on
the requirements of halothane for anesthesia in the cat. Am J Vet Res 1987; 48(12):
1733–1735.
110 Steffey EP, Howland D Jr., Giri S, et al. Enflurane, halothane, and isoflurane
potency in horses. Am J Vet Res 1977; 38(7): 1037–1039.
111 Doi M, Yunoki H, Ikeda K. The minimum alveolar concentration of sevoflurane
in cats. J Anesth 1988; 2(1): 113–114.
112 McMurphy R, Hodgson D. The minimum alveolar concentration of desflurane in
cats. Vet Surg 1995; 24(5): 453–455.
113 Barter LS, Ilkiw JE, Steffey EP, et al. Animal dependence of inhaled anaesthetic
requirements in cats. Br J Anaesth 2004; 92(2): 275–277.
114 Pypendop BH, Ilkiw JE. The effects of intravenous lidocaine administration on
the minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in cats. Anesth Analg 2005;
100(1): 97–101.
115 Pypendop BH, Ilkiw JE. Hemodynamic effects of sevoflurane in cats. Am J Vet Res
2004; 65(1): 20–25.
116 Escobar A, Pypendop BH, Siao KT, et al. Effect of dexmedetomidine on the mini-
mum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in cats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2012;
35(2): 163–168.
117 Imai A, Ilkiw JE, Pypendop BH, et al. Nitorus oxide does not consistently reduce
isoflurane requirement in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2002; 19(2): 98.
118 Mutoh T, Nishimura R, Kim HY, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of sevoflurane,
compared with halothane, enflurane, and isoflurane, in dogs. Am J Vet Res 1997;
58(8): 885–890.
119 Grandy JL, Hodgson DS, Dunlop CI, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of halothane
anesthesia in cats. Am J Vet Res 1989; 50(10): 1729–1732.
120 Hodgson DS, Dunlop CI, Chapman PL, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of anesthe-
sia induced and maintained with isoflurane in cats. Am J Vet Res 1998; 59(2):
182–185.
121 McMurphy R, Hodgson D. Cardiopulmonary effects of desflurane in cats. Am J
Vet Res 1996; 57(3): 367–370.
122 Wallenstein MC. Biphasic effects of morphine on cardiovascular system of the cat.
Eur J Pharmacol 1979; 59(3–4): 253–260.
123 Dhasmana KM, Dixit KS, Jaju BP, et al. Role of central dopaminergic receptors in
manic response of cats to morphine. Psychopharmacologia 1972; 24(3): 380–383.
124 Robertson SA, Wegner K, Lascelles BDX. Antinociceptive and side-effects of
hydromorphone after subcutaneous administration in cats. J Feline Med Surg
2009; 11(2): 76–81.
125 Lascelles BD, Robertson SA. Antinociceptive effects of hydromorphone, butor-
phanol, or the combination in cats. J Vet Intern Med 2004; 18(2): 190–195.
126 Brosnan RJ, Pypendop BH, Siao KT, et al. Effects of remifentanil on measures of
anesthetic immobility and analgesia in cats. Am J Vet Res 2009; 70(9): 1065–1071.
127 Yaksh TL, Harty GJ, Onofrio BM. High dose of spinal morphine produce a nono-
piate receptor-mediated hyperesthesia: clinical and theoretic implications.
Anesthesiology 1986; 64(5): 590–597.
128 Pascoe PJ, Ilkiw JE, Fisher LD. The cardiovascular effects of equipotent isoflurane and
alfentanil/isoflurane MAC multiple in cats. Am J Vet Res 1997; 58(11): 1274–1279.
129 Pascoe PJ, Ilkiw JE, Fisher LD. Cardiovascular effects of equipotent isoflurane and
alfentanil/isoflurane minimum alveolar concentration multiple in cats. Am J Vet
Res 1997; 58(11): 1267–1273.
130 Gaumann DM, Yaksh TL, Tyce GM, et al. Sympathetic stimulating effects of
sufentanil in the cat are mediated centrally. Neurosci Lett 1988; 91(1): 30–35.
131 Niedfeldt RL, Robertson SA. Postanesthetic hyperthermia in cats: a retrospective
comparison between hydromorphone and buprenorphine. Vet Anaesth Analg
2006; 33(6): 381–389.
132 Posner LP, Gleed RD, Erb HN, et al. Post-anesthetic hyperthermia in cats. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2007; 34(1): 40–47.
133 Posner LP, Pavuk AA, Rokshar JL, et al. Effects of opioids and anesthetic drugs on
body temperature in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2010; 37(1): 35–43.
134 Clark WG, Cumby HR. Hyperthermic responses to central and peripheral injections
of morphine sulphate in the cat. Br J Pharmacol 1978; 63(1): 65–71.
135 Ilkiw JE, Pascoe PJ, Tripp LD. Effects of morphine, butorphanol, buprenorphine,
and U50488H on the minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in cats. Am J
Vet Res 2002; 63(8): 1198–1202.

-- 1054 of 1450 --

Chapter 50: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Dogs and Cats 	1039
136 Ilkiw JE, Pascoe PJ, Fisher LD. Effect of alfentanil on the minimum alveolar con-
centration of isoflurane in cats. Am J Vet Res 1997; 58(11): 1274–1279.
137 Hall RI, Szlam F, Hug CC Jr. The enflurane-sparing effect of alfentanil in dogs.
Anesth Analg 1987; 66(12): 1287–1291.
138 Ferreira TH, Aguiar AJ, Valverde A, et al. Effect of remifentanil hydrochloride
administered via constant rate infusion on the minimum alveolar concentration of
isoflurane in cats. Am J Vet Res 2009; 70(5): 581–588.
139 Brosnan RJ, Pypendop BH, Stanley SD. Phenylpiperidine opioid effects on isoflu-
rane minimum alveolar concentration in cats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2020; 43(6):
533–537.
140 Brosnan RJ, Pypendop BH. Evaluation of whether acepromazine maleate causes
fentanyl to decrease the minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in cats. Am
J Vet Res 2021; 82(5): 352–357.
141 Pypendop BH, Goich M, Shilo-Benjamini Y. Effect of intravenous butorphanol
infusion on the minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in cats. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2022; 49(2): 165–172.
142 Robertson SA, Lascelles BD, Taylor PM, et al. PK-PD modeling of buprenorphine
in cats: intravenous and oral transmucosal administration. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
2005; 28(5): 453–460.
143 Robertson SA, Taylor PM, Sear JW. Systemic uptake of buprenorphine by cats
after oral mucosal administration. Vet Rec 2003; 152(22): 675–678.
144 Robertson SA, Taylor PM, Lascelles BD, et al. Changes in thermal threshold
response in eight cats after administration of buprenorphine, butorphanol and
morphine. Vet Rec 2003; 153(15): 462–465.
145 Steagall PV, Monteiro BP, Lavoie AM, et al. Preliminary investigation of the ther-
mal antinociceptive effects of codeine in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2015; 17(12):
1061–1064.
146 Steagall PV, Pelligand L, Giordano T, et al. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacody-
namic modelling of intravenous, intramuscular and subcutaneous buprenorphine
in conscious cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40(1): 83–95.
147 Doodnaught GM, Monteiro BP, Benito J, et al. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacody-
namic modelling after subcutaneous, intravenous and buccal administration of a
high-concentration formulation of buprenorphine in conscious cats. PLoS ONE
2017; 12(4): e0176443.
148 Martin-Flores M, Lorenzutti AM, Nugen SA, et al. High-dose buprenorphine
results in a greater occurrence of postoperative hyperthermia than morphine in a
randomized clinical trial in cats undergoing ovariohysterectomy. Am J Vet Res
2022; 83(6).
149 Freise KJ, Reinemeyer C, Warren K, et al. Single- dose pharmacokinetics and bio-
availability of a novel extended duration transdermal buprenorphine solution in
cats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2022; 45(Suppl 1): S31–S39.
150 Clark TP, Linton DD, Freise KJ, et al. Multicentered masked placebo-controlled
phase 3 clinical study of an extended duration transdermal buprenorphine solu-
tion for post-operative pain in cats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2022; 45(Suppl 1):
S52–S66.
151 Clark TP, Linton DD, Freise KJ, et al. Margin of safety of extended-duration trans-
dermal buprenorphine solution following multiple-dose administrations to cats.
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2022; 45(Suppl 1): S67–S84.
152 Sparkes AH, Heiene R, Lascelles BD, et al. ISFM and AAFP consensus guidelines:
long-term use of NSAIDs in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2010; 12(7): 521–538.
153 Lascelles BD, Court MH, Hardie EM, et al. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
in cats: a review. Vet Anaesth Analg 2007; 34(4): 228–250.
154 Robertson SA. Managing pain in feline patients. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 2008; 38(6): 1267–1290, vi.
155 Gruen ME, Lascelles BDX, Colleran E, et al. 2022 AAHA Pain management guide-
lines for dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2022; 58(2): 55–76.
156 Slingsby LS, Waterman-Pearson AE. Postoperative analgesia in the cat after ovari-
ohysterectomy by use of carprofen, ketoprofen, meloxicam or tolfenamic acid.
J Small Anim Pract 2000; 41(10): 447–450.
157 Polson S, Taylor PM, Yates D. Analgesia after feline ovariohysterectomy under
midazolam-medetomidine-ketamine anaesthesia with buprenorphine or butor-
phanol, and carprofen or meloxicam: a prospective, randomised clinical trial.
J Feline Med Surg 2012; 14(8): 553–559.
158 Taylor PM, Steagall PV, Dixon MJ, et al. Carprofen and buprenorphine prevent
hyperalgesia in a model of inflammatory pain in cats. Res Vet Sci 2007; 83(3):
369–375.
159 Tobias KM, Harvey RC, Byarlay JM. A comparison of four methods of analgesia in
cats following ovariohysterectomy. Vet Anaesth Analg 2006; 33(6): 390–398.
160 Mollenhoff A, Nolte I, Kramer S. Anti-nociceptive efficacy of carprofen,
levomethadone and buprenorphine for pain relief in cats following major ortho-
paedic surgery. J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med 2005; 52(4): 186–198.
161 Al-Gizawiy MM, Rudé EP. Comparison of preoperative carprofen and postopera-
tive butorphanol as postsurgical analgesics in cats undergoing ovariohysterectomy.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2004; 31(3): 164–174.
162 Balmer TV, Irvine D, Jones RS, et al. Comparison of carprofen and pethidine as
postoperative analgesics in the cat. J Small Anim Pract 1998; 39(4): 158–164.
163 Lascelles BD, Cripps P, Mirchandani S, et al. Carprofen as an analgesic for postop-
erative pain in cats: dose titration and assessment of efficacy in comparison to
pethidine hydrochloride. J Small Anim Pract 1995; 36(12): 535–541.
164 Sano T, King JN, Seewald W, et al. Comparison of oral robenacoxib and ketoprofen
for the treatment of acute pain and inflammation associated with musculoskeletal
disorders in cats: a randomised clinical trial. Vet J 2012; 193(2): 397–403.
165 Giraudel JM, Gruet P, Alexander DG, et al. Evaluation of orally administered
robenacoxib versus ketoprofen for treatment of acute pain and inflammation
associated with musculoskeletal disorders in cats. Am J Vet Res 2010; 71(7):
710–719.
166 Morton CM, Grant D, Johnston L, et al. Clinical evaluation of meloxicam versus
ketoprofen in cats suffering from painful acute locomotor disorders. J Feline Med
Surg 2011; 13(4): 237–243.
167 Murison PJ, Tacke S, Wondratschek C, et al. Postoperative analgesic efficacy of
meloxicam compared to tolfenamic acid in cats undergoing orthopaedic surgery.
J Small Anim Pract 2010; 51(10): 526–532.
168 Benito-de-la-Vibora J, Lascelles BD, Garcia- Fernandez P, et al. Efficacy of
tolfenamic acid and meloxicam in the control of postoperative pain following
ovariohysterectomy in the cat. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35(6): 501–510.
169 Kamata M, King JN, Seewald W, et al. Comparison of injectable robenacoxib ver-
sus meloxicam for peri-operative use in cats: results of a randomised clinical trial.
Vet J 2012; 193(1): 114–118.
170 Pelligand L, House AK, Summers BA, et al. Development and validation of a tissue
cage model of acute inflammation in the cat. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2012; 35(3):
239–248.
171 Giraudel JM, King JN, Jeunesse EC, et al. Use of a pharmacokinetic/pharmacody-
namic approach in the cat to determine a dosage regimen for the COX-2 selective
drug robenacoxib. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2009; 32(1): 18–30.
172 Gowan RA, Lingard AE, Johnston L, et al. Retrospective case-control study of the
effects of long-term dosing with meloxicam on renal function in aged cats with
degenerative joint disease. J Feline Med Surg 2011; 13(10): 752–761.
173 Rausch-Derra LC, Rhodes L. Safety and toxicokinetic profiles associated with
daily oral administration of grapiprant, a selective antagonist of the prostaglandin
E2 EP4 receptor, to cats. Am J Vet Res 2016; 77(7): 688–692.
174 Teixeira LG, Vaccarin CV, Schimites PI, et al. Grapiprant or carprofen following
ovariohysterectomy in the cat: analgesic efficacy, hematological, biochemical and
urinalysis evaluation. J Feline Med Surg 2022; 24(8): e153–e162.
175 Brodbelt DC, Pfeiffer DU, Young LE, et al. Risk factors for anaesthetic-related
death in cats: results from the Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Small
Animal Fatalities (CEPSAF). Brit J Anaesth 2007; 99(5): 617–623.
176 Dyson DH, Maxie MG, Schnurr D. Morbidity and mortality associated with anes-
thetic management in small animal veterinary practice in Ontario. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 1998; 34(4): 325–335.
177 Clarke KW, Hall LW. A survey of anaesthesia in small animal practice: AVA/
BSAVA report. J Assoc Vet Anaesth 1990; 17(1): 4–10.
178 Rex MA. Laryngospasm and respiratory changes in the cat produced by mechani-
cal stimulation of the pharynx and respiratory tract: problems of intubation in the
cat. Br J Anaesth 1971; 43(1): 54–57.
179 Rex MA. A review of the structural and functional basis of laryngospasm and a
discussion of the nerve pathways involved in the reflex and its clinical significance
in man and animals. Br J Anaesth 1970; 42(10): 891–899.
180 Jones TL, Boyer K, Chapman K, et al. Evaluation of the time to desensitization of
the larynx of cats following topical lidocaine application. J Feline Med Surg 2021;
23(6): 563–567.
181 Moreno-Sala A, Ortiz-Martinez R, Valdivia AG, et al. Use of neuromuscular
blockade with rocuronium bromide for intubation in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg
2013; 40(4): 351–358.
182 Sakai DM, Zornow KA, Campoy L, et al. Intravenous rocuronium 0.3 mg/kg
improves the conditions for tracheal intubation in cats: a randomized, placebo-
controlled trial. J Feline Med Surg 2018; 20(12): 1124–1129.
183 White RN, Oakley MR. Left principal bronchus rupture in a cat. J Small Anim
Pract 2001; 42(10): 495–498.
184 White RN, Burton CA. Surgical management of intrathoracic tracheal avulsion in
cats: long-term results in 9 consecutive cases. Vet Surg 2000; 29(5): 430–435.
185 Mitchell SL, McCarthy R, Rudloff E, et al. Tracheal rupture associated with intuba-
tion in cats: 20 cases (1996–1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000; 216(10): 1592–1595.
186 Hardie EM, Spodnick GJ, Gilson SD, et al. Tracheal rupture in cats: 16 cases
(1983–1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1999; 214(4): 508–512.
187 White RN, Milner HR. Intrathoracic tracheal avulsion in three cats. J Small Anim
Pract 1995; 36(8): 343–347.
188 Lawrence DT, Lang J, Culvenor J, et al. Intrathoracic tracheal rupture. J Feline Med
Surg 1999; 1(1): 43–51.

-- 1055 of 1450 --

1040 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
189 Stiles J, Weil AB, Packer RA, et al. Post-anesthetic cortical blindness in cats: twenty
cases. Vet J 2012; 193(2): 367–373.
190 Jurk IR, Thibodeau MS, Whitney K, et al. Acute vision loss after general anesthesia
in a cat. Vet Ophthalmol 2001; 4(2): 155–158.
191 Barton-Lamb AL, Martin-Flores M, Scrivani PV, et al. Evaluation of maxillary
arterial blood flow in anesthetized cats with the mouth closed and open. Vet J
2013; 196(3): 325–331.
192 Breznock EM, Strack D. Effects of the spleen, epinephrine, and splenectomy on
determination of blood volume in cats. Am J Vet Res 1982; 43(11): 2062–2066.
193 Breznock EM, Strack D. Blood volume of nonsplenectomized and splenectomized
cats before and after acute hemorrhage. Am J Vet Res 1982; 43(10): 1811–1814.
194 Spink RR, Malvin RL, Cohen BJ. Determination of erythrocyte half life and blood
volume in cats. Am J Vet Res 1966; 27(119): 1041–1043.
195 Davis H, Jensen T, Johnson A, et al. 2013 AAHA/AAFP fluid therapy guidelines
for dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2013; 49(3): 149–159.
196 Eyquem A, Podliachouk L, Millot P. Blood groups in chimpanzees, horses, sheep,
pigs, and other mammals. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1962; 97: 320–328.
197 Griot- Wenk ME, Callan MB, Casal ML, et al. Blood type AB in the feline AB blood
group system. Am J Vet Res 1996; 57(10): 1438–1442.
198 Giger U, Bucheler J. Transfusion of type-A and type-B blood to cats. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 1991; 198(3): 411–418.
199 Lanevschi A, Wardrop KJ. Principles of transfusion medicine in small animals.
Can Vet J 2001; 42(6): 447–454.
200 Weinstein NM, Blais MC, Harris K, et al. A newly recognized blood group in domes-
tic shorthair cats: the Mik red cell antigen. J Vet Intern Med 2007; 21(2): 287–292.
201 Taylor S, Spada E, Callan MB, et al. 2021 ISFM consensus guidelines on the collec-
tion and administration of blood and blood products in cats. J Feline Med Surg
2021; 23(5): 410–432.
202 McClosky ME, Cimino Brown D, Weinstein NM, et al. Prevalence of naturally
occurring non-AB blood type incompatibilities in cats and influence of cross-
match on transfusion outcomes. J Vet Intern Med 2018; 32(6): 1934–1942.
203 Davidow EB, Blois SL, Goy-Thollot I, et al. Association of Veterinary Hematology
and Transfusion Medicine (AVHTM) Transfusion Reaction Small Animal
Consensus Statement (TRACS). Part 1: definitions and clinical signs. J Vet Emerg
Crit Care (San Antonio) 2021; 31(2): 141–166.
204 Davidow EB, Spada E, Proverbio D. Editorial: blood groups in companion ani-
mals. Front Vet Sci 2021; 8: 792720.
205 Bagdi N, Magdus M, Leidinger E, et al. Frequencies of feline blood types in
Hungary. Acta Vet Hung 2001; 49(4): 369–375.
206 Medeiros MA, Soares AM, Alviano DS, et al. Frequencies of feline blood types in
the Rio de Janeiro area of Brazil. Vet Clin Pathol 2008; 37(3): 272–276.
207 Giger U, Kilrain CG, Filippich LJ, et al. Frequencies of feline blood groups in the
United States. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1989; 195(9): 1230–1232.
208 Zheng L, Zhong Y, Shi Z, et al. Frequencies of blood types A, B, and AB in non-
pedigree domestic cats in Beijing. Vet Clin Pathol 2011; 40(4): 513–517.
209 Hubler M, Arnold S, Casal M, et al. The blood group distribution in domestic cats
in Switzerland. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd 1993; 135(8): 231–235.
210 Jensen AL, Olesen AB, Arnbjerg J. Distribution of feline blood types detected in
the Copenhagen area of Denmark. Acta Vet Scand 1994; 35(2): 121–124.
211 Knottenbelt CM, Addie DD, Day MJ, et al. Determination of the prevalence of
feline blood types in the UK. J Small Anim Pract 1999; 40(3): 115–118.
212 Mylonakis ME, Koutinas AF, Saridomichelakis M, et al. Determination of the
prevalence of blood types in the non-pedigree feline population in Greece. Vet Rec
2001; 149(7): 213–214.
213 Ruiz de Gopegui R, Velasquez M, Espada Y. Survey of feline blood types in the
Barcelona area of Spain. Vet Rec 2004; 154(25): 794–795.
214 Silvestre-Ferreira AC, Pastor J, Almeida O, et al. Frequencies of feline blood types
in northern Portugal. Vet Clin Pathol 2004; 33(4): 240–243.
215 Malik R, Griffin DL, White JD, et al. The prevalence of feline A/B blood types in
the Sydney region. Aust Vet J 2005; 83(1–2): 38–44.
216 Arikan S, Gurkan M, Ozaytekin E, et al. Frequencies of blood type A, B and AB in
non-pedigree domestic cats in Turkey. J Small Anim Pract 2006; 47(1): 10–13.
217 Forcada Y, Guitian J, Gibson G. Frequencies of feline blood types at a referral
hospital in the south east of England. J Small Anim Pract 2007; 48(10):
570–573.
218 Marques C, Ferreira M, Gomes JF, et al. Frequency of blood type A, B, and AB in
515 domestic shorthair cats from the Lisbon area. Vet Clin Pathol 2011; 40(2):
185–187.
219 Arikan S, Duru SY, Gurkan M, et al. Blood type A and B frequencies in Turkish
Van and Angora cats in Turkey. J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med 2003; 50(6):
303–306.
220 Pascoe PJ, Ilkiw JE, Pypendop BH. Effects of increasing infusion rates of dopa-
mine, dobutamine, epinephrine, and phenylephrine in healthy anesthetized cats.
Am J Vet Res 2006; 67(9): 1491–1499.
221 Flournoy WS, Wohl JS, Albrecht-Schmitt TJ, et al. Pharmacologic identification of
putative D1 dopamine receptor in feline kidneys. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2003;
26(4): 283–290.
222 Jones D, Bellomo R. Renal-dose dopamine: from hypothesis to paradigm to
dogma to myth and, finally, superstition? J Intensive Care Med 2005; 20(4):
199–211.
223 Schenarts PJ, Sagraves SG, Bard MR, et al. Low-dose dopamine: a physiologically
based review. Curr Surg 2006; 63(3): 219–225.

-- 1056 of 1450 --

1041
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: T he Sixth E dition of L umb and J ones	. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
Over the past 10 years, the scope of medicine practiced within
animal shelters and other settings within the animal welfare indus-
try has greatly evolved, as evidenced by the establishment of shelter
medicine as an American Board of Veterinary Practitioners spe-
cialty in 2014 [1]. Veterinarians working in animal shelters and
associated clinics provide care to a variety of patients, including
animals in the shelter, newly adopted animals, and animals belong-
ing to members of the public, as well as animals involved in cruelty
investigations. Within shelter populations, many animals present
with unknown health status and a range of behavior challenges such
as fear, anxiety, and aggression. Patients may include victims of ani-
mal cruelty or neglect. Spay and neuter of shelter animals prior to
adoption is standard policy, and these patients include pediatric
and juvenile as well as geriatric patients [2–8]. The care provided
must balance the needs of the individual animal with those of the
entire population, often while working with budget or equipment
limitations.
High-quality high- volume spay-neuter
In addition to caring for shelter animals, many organizations also
provide low-cost spay and neuter services for members of the pub-
lic [9]. Most organizations employ high-quality high-volume spay-
neuter (HQHVSN) practice which the Association of Shelter
Veterinarians (ASV) defines as “efficient surgical initiatives that
meet or exceed veterinary medical standards of care in providing
accessible, targeted sterilization of large numbers of cats and dogs to
reduce their overpopulation and subsequent euthanasia [10].”
While many spay or neuter patients are young and healthy (ASA I),
members of the public may also present higher risk patients such as
geriatric or brachycephalic dogs and cats for surgery. Morbidity and
mortality rates in sterilization programs are remarkably low [11],
due to thorough staff training, short procedure times, and the large
numbers of young and healthy patients, although the impact of a
balanced anesthesia protocol cannot be discounted. Thoughtful,
practical, and reliable protocols for all aspects of the patient’s peri-
anesthetic care are essential to allow safe and efficient processing of
large numbers of patients [10,12].
HQHVSN programs can be successful in a variety of settings
including standing clinics, “MASH style” or mobile units, and field
clinics, and operate both domestically and internationally (Fig. 51.1).
In such settings, the available equipment may be limited, and
flexibility and creativity are often required to maximize the patient
experience while minimizing resource utilization. Available drugs
may also be limited. Many HQHVSN programs rely on total
injectable anesthesia [13–18].
Clinical situations requiring anesthesia
Whether in the shelter or at a community clinic, a variety of patients
present for anesthesia in shelter medicine.
HQHVSN – healthy dogs, cats, and rabbits
A large proportion of the patients in shelter medicine anesthesia are
healthy dogs, cats, and rabbits presenting for elective spaying or
neutering. It is the standard of care for shelter animals to be steri-
lized prior to adoption and this policy may even be legally required
in some states. In addition, spay-neuter outreach to local communi-
ties as well as Trap Neuter Return (TNR) programs for free roaming
cats are essential to reduce shelter intake and thus shelter euthana-
sia [9]. The ASV has published guidelines for spay-neuter pro-
grams [11,12], and a textbook devoted to HQHVSN practice is also
available [19].
51 Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia –
Community Medicine Settings
Emily McCobb
Department of Clinical Sciences, Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine, Tufts University, North Grafton, Massachusetts, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 1041
High- quality high- volume spay- neuter, 1041
Clinical situations requiring anesthesia, 1041
HQHVSN – healthy dogs, cats, and rabbits, 1041
Spay- neuter for higher risk patients, 1045
Anesthesia for non-spay- neuter procedures in shelters, 1045
References, 1046

-- 1057 of 1450 --

1042 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
Preoperative considerations
Each program determines which patients are suitable candidates for
the spay-neuter clinic, depending on staff training and clinic capa-
bilities. According to the ASV guidelines, a veterinarian should
make the final decision regarding acceptance of any patient for sur-
gery based on historical and physical examination findings [10].
Veterinarians must weigh the risks and benefits of anesthetizing
patients with mild infectious or noninfectious medical conditions,
such as upper respiratory tract disease, parasite infestation, or sub-
clinical heartworm infection against the risk of the animal not
returning for surgery. Patient history should include current health
status, current clinical signs of disease, current medications and
supplements, previous vaccinations, pre-existing medical condi-
tions, and previous adverse reactions. In addition, clients should be
instructed to appropriately withhold food from their animals prior
to surgery. Fasting times and other preanesthetic recommendations
are the same as for patients of similar species and age presenting for
anesthesia in other clinical settings. Clients must be informed of
surgical and anesthetic risks and must consent to the anticipated
procedures.
Prior to anesthesia, a brief screening physical exam should be
performed on every patient with a focus on the cardiorespiratory
systems. Animals that are anxious or unsocialized should be sedated
as soon as the physical examination is completed. Feral animals are
examined after anesthesia induction. Routine preanesthetic labora-
tory screening is not generally performed in HQHVSN clinics for
apparently healthy patients and indeed is likely unnecessary for
healthy patients presenting for anesthesia in most circum-
stances [20]. Routine laboratory screening testing for patients with
normal physical exam findings is unlikely to change the patient’s
ASA status, recommended anesthetic protocol, or affect patient
outcome after anesthesia [20,21]. Using a spectrum of care
approach [22], the costs of any diagnostic tests must be carefully
weighed against potential benefits.
Drug protocols for HQHVSN
Selecting an appropriate protocol for an HQHVSN program
depends on several factors such as the number and type of patients
presenting each day, technician skill level, drug availability, and the
timing of and competence in performing various surgical and anes-
thetic techniques. A variety of protocols are safe, humane, efficient,
and cost effective but all must provide the following: (1) analgesia,
(2) stress reduction or anxiolysis, (3) immobility and muscle relaxa-
tion, and (4) controlled, reversible depression of the central nervous
system resulting in unconsciousness. Numerous cost-effective pro-
tocols, combining multiple anesthetic and analgesic drugs, includ-
ing injectable and inhalant agents, exist for achieving balanced
anesthesia in pediatric and adult patients [13–17,23–35]. A few
examples of common protocols are given in Table 51.1. Anesthetic
drugs should be calculated for each individual patient using an
actual or estimated (for intractable patients) body weight. The use
of a chart that expresses drug doses as a function of body weight
may help prevent calculation errors [10]. However, when using a
dose chart, caution is advised for patient weights at both extremes
of the range provided (i.e., very small and very large patients). In
these cases, dosing based on body surface area or metabolic scaling
is recommended to improve accuracy (i.e., larger patients usually
require lower drug doses on a per weight basis). For situations in
which an accurate body weight cannot be obtained prior to drug
administration, such as programs serving community cats, safety is
increased by using reversible agents, avoiding drugs that result in
marked cardiorespiratory depression, and estimating body weight
as accurately as possible. Close physical monitoring of the patients
following drug administration can also allow timely recognition of
adverse physiologic side effects.
Equipment
The anesthesia equipment used in HQHVSN clinics is generally the
same as that used in any veterinary practice setting. However, in a
high-volume setting, special consideration should be given to
equipment use and maintenance to enhance patient safety. All anes-
thesia equipment including endotracheal tubes, laryngoscopes,
anesthesia machines, and monitors should be prepared and checked
daily prior to use [40,41]. A machine safety checklist is available in
Chapter 6. Any time the anesthesia circuit is changed (such as
switching back and forth from a rebreathing to a non-rebreathing
system), the machine checklist should be repeated to ensure that
the circuit has been connected correctly. Anesthesia equipment in
Figure 51.1 Mobile spay-neuter clinic.

-- 1058 of 1450 --

Chapter 51: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Community Medicine Settings 	1043
high- volume programs undergoes intense use, often by multiple
personnel, which can put additional strain on equipment. Heavily
used equipment in high-volume programs should be serviced fre-
quently. Anesthesia machines and monitors should be maintained
in accordance with manufacturers’ recommendations through reg-
ularly performed in-house procedures or outsourcing to equipment
service companies [41].
Carbon dioxide absorbents should be checked and changed
regularly; high patient volumes dictate increased frequency for
changing and cleaning of canisters. Soda lime should be changed
after an appropriate period of use according to canister size.
Anesthesia circuits, masks, and endotracheal tubes should be
cleaned by soaking in a dilute chlorhexidine solution, taking care
to rinse thoroughly. A waste gas scavenging system should be
used; both active and passive systems are acceptable. Use of char-
coal canisters in high-volume clinics is discouraged as they are
acceptable for only short periods of time, typically < 6–8 h or as
determined by the weight gain of the canister, and are variably
effective [10,42].
Monitoring and patient support
Each individual patient should be carefully monitored from the
time of drug administration until recovery. Identification of changes
in vital parameters is essential for accurate assessment [43]. The
most reliable means to ensure ongoing patient assessment and
safety during anesthesia is vigilant “hands-on” observation by
trained staff [10]. Monitoring should involve assessment of various
combinations of vital parameters using an objective means of moni-
toring in accordance with current veterinary anesthesia monitoring
guidelines [44,45]. Options include but are not limited to pulse
detection via palpation or Doppler ultrasound, auscultation of the
heartbeat, pulse oximetry, capnography, and blood pressure moni-
toring. The use of pulse oximetry is highly encouraged because this
modality provides an objective auditory and visual means of deter-
mining the presence of a pulse, pulse rate, and adequacy of oxy-
genation [46]. Use of pulse oximetry monitors has been associated
with a decreased risk of anesthetic death in cats [47].
While some patients will oxygenate adequately while breathing
room air, oxygen supplementation, including pre- and postopera-
tively, is recommended for high-risk patients such as brachyce-
phalic animals as well as those that are frail, ill, or in advanced
stages of pregnancy. In addition, oxygen supplementation should
be immediately available as needed for all heavily sedated or anes-
thetized patients. Ventilation can be accomplished in anesthetized
patients by connecting the anesthesia machine to a rebreathing
circuit with a functional carbon dioxide absorbent or to a non-
rebreathing 	circuit 	with 	appropriate 	oxygen 	flow 	rates.
Alternatively, a manual resuscitator (e.g., Ambu® bag) connected to
an oxygen source with a regulator can be used as a means of oxygen
supplementation and ventilation. Ventilation is compromised
when carbon dioxide absorbents are depleted or exhausted; there-
fore, vigilance in monitoring carbon dioxide absorbent adequacy is
necessary. Capnography is a useful tool for judging adequacy of
ventilation, detecting carbon dioxide absorbent exhaustion or
other causes of rebreathing, and assessing patient circulatory
status [48].
General anesthesia may be maintained using a mask, endotra-
cheal tube, or laryngeal mask airway device. When balanced anes-
thesia is achieved using injectable drug protocols, routine intubation
of all patients undergoing spay-neuter surgery should be consid-
ered [10]. However, the benefits of intubation (i.e., protection of the
airway, ability to ventilate, and reduced waste gas exposure for staff)
should be weighed against the risks, particularly airway trauma,
with some species being more likely to sustain tracheal injuries
(rabbits, cats). If intubation is performed as a standard part of an
anesthetic protocol, having an anesthesia team that possesses the
required skills for this maneuver is critical to success [49]. The abil-
ity to perform intubation when medically indicated, including
rapid intubation in emergency situations, is a requirement for all
spay-neuter programs [10,49–52]. The anesthetist must verify the
placement of the endotracheal tube by direct visualization or via
capnography. Specific patients that may benefit from intubation
include all brachycephalic breeds, overweight or obese patients,
animals in advanced stages of gestation, patients with pre-existing
severe upper respiratory disease, and patients for which procedures
are anticipated to require a long duration of anesthesia (e.g., greater
than 30 min).
Intravenous (IV) access is typically obtained in patients undergo-
ing general anesthesia by placement of an IV catheter, which allows
for the immediate administration of resuscitation drugs, IV fluids,
reversal agents, and supplemental doses of analgesics or anesthetics
if necessary. However, in HQHVSN settings where surgery times
are very short and especially when general anesthesia is induced via
intramuscular injection, an IV catheter is often not placed. In all
Table 51.1 Common injectable anesthesia protocols used in HQHVSN clinics.
Protocol 	Dose/Recipe 	Comments 	Reference
Hydromorphone–
acepromazine
Hydromorphone 0.1 mg/kg,
Acepromazine 0.05 mg/kg IM
Common premedication for dogs; can also be used for cats
Induction can be via Telazol®
, propofol, or ketamine–midazolam
combinations
[36]
TTDex 	Combine 2.5 mL Butorphanol (10 mg/mL) and 2.5 mL
Dexmedetomidine (0.5 mg/mL) into one bottle of Telazol®
Administer at 0.035 mL/kg IM to provide surgical anesthesia
Used for cats and dogs
Dose recommendations range from 0.01 mL/kg to 0.035 mL/kg
IM, depending on level of sedation/anesthesia required
[37,38]
DKB 	Dexmedetomidine 10–20 μg/kg,
Ketamine 3–10 mg/kg,
Buprenorphine 0.01–0.02 mg/kg IM
Many variations for cats, rabbits, and dogs
Butorphanol can also be substituted for buprenorphine which
provides superior sedation but less analgesia
[17,38]
TKX 	Combine 4 mL of Ketamine (100 mg/mL) and 1 mL
of Xylazine (100 mg/mL) into one bottle of Telazol®
Administer 0.25 mL IM per “average” (~ 4 kg) cat
May be used in some feral cat programs
Does not provide lasting analgesia
[39]
Quad combination 	Ketamine 60 mg/m 2 ,
Midazolam 3 mg/m2
,
Buprenorphine μg/m2 ,
Dexmedetomidine 300 μg/m2 IM
Common protocol for cats in the UK
Body surface area = (10.4 × BW0.67
)/100 (a smart phone
app is available)
[14]

-- 1059 of 1450 --

1044 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
cases, the team should be prepared to obtain IV access in an emer-
gency. IV fluid administration is not required for all elective surgi-
cal procedures especially when surgical times are brief [10,53]. For
routine fluid support for many patients, subcutaneous administra-
tion may be adequate. IV fluid supplementation is recommended
for high-risk patients, such as those that may be presented for ovari-
ohysterectomy in advanced stages of pregnancy or with evidence of
pyometra, and when significant blood loss or prolonged surgery
times are anticipated or encountered.
Patient temperature should be monitored to prevent hypo- or
hyperthermia. Prewarming patients prior to administration of
premedication and anesthetic agents may reduce perioperative
hypothermia [54]. Contact with cold surfaces should be mini-
mized to the extent possible. The use of low oxygen flow rates
with rebreathing anesthetic circuits can also help conserve body
heat. Intraoperative heat loss can be further minimized by limit-
ing body cavity exposure, increasing environmental temperature,
and providing additional insulation for the patient (e.g., by wrap-
ping extremities in materials such as bubble wrap, newspaper,
and polystyrene) [55]. Active patient warming can be achieved
using heated surgical tables, semiconductive polymer fabric heat-
ing blankets, circulating warm water blankets, and warm air
blankets [56,57]. Warmth in the patient’s microenvironment can
be provided by use of carefully protected warmed containers. In
contrast, unprotected contact with or careless use of blow dryers,
heat lamps, drying cages, electric heating pads, and hot water or
heated 	materials 	must 	be 	avoided 	to 	prevent 	thermal
injury [10,55].
Recovery
Patients should be continuously attended while intubated. Many
programs use a “beach style” (Fig. 51.2) setup for recovery, which
consists of a warm padded area where groups of patients can be
placed. Precautions for biosecurity and patient safety are important
when using a recovery beach. Once patients are extubated and/or
capable of maintaining their airway, they can be returned to their
home cage, a clinic cage, or a carrier. Patients should be alert, ori-
ented, warm, ambulatory, and pain-free prior to discharge from the
clinic. Many clinics use reversal agents for α2 - adrenergic receptor
agonists that are part of the anesthetic protocol. At least one study
demonstrated that α2
- adrenergic receptor antagonists can hasten
recovery without decreasing the quality of analgesia when full μ-
opioid receptor agonists and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs) are also administered [58].
Analgesia for spay-neuter programs
Published guidelines for spay-neuter programs state explicitly that
appropriate analgesia must be provided [10]. Acceptable choices
include opioids, α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists, NSAIDs, and
local anesthetics [59–83]. Multimodal analgesia involves the use of
multiple analgesic agents with different pharmacologic mecha-
nisms to control pain and should include the use of local blocks [84].
Additional information about local blocks is provided in Table 51.2.
The use and timing of NSAID administration should be based on
the specific drug and individual patient. In particular, considera-
tion should be given to patient hydration status and the presence of
pre-existing hepatic, renal, or gastrointestinal disease, or clotting
Figure 51.2 “Beach style” setup consisting of a warm padded area for managing recovery of multiple patients simultaneously in an HQHVSN program.

-- 1060 of 1450 --

Chapter 51: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Community Medicine Settings 	1045
abnormalities [85]. If objective monitoring is limited or lacking
(e.g., blood pressure), it may be safest to wait and administer
NSAIDs in the recovery period while preemptively managing pain
with opioids, local anesthetics, and adjuncts such as ketamine.
Administration of NSAIDs to patients that are clinically or subclini-
cally dehydrated should be avoided due to the increased risk of
adverse effects including nephrotoxicity.
Additional analgesics to be given after discharge are not always
required for spay-neuter surgeries when incisions are small and a
multimodal preventive protocol with an NSAID is used periopera-
tively. However, all patients are individuals and clinicians should
consider that some patients may require continued analgesia after
discharge. For example, patients such as very large dogs or those
having additional surgeries in combination with spay-neuter (mass
removals, etc.) are likely to be more painful postoperatively than a
routine puppy or kitten patient might be. Options for discharge
medications are presented in Table 51.3.
Spay-neuter for higher risk patients
Higher risk patients may present for spay-neuter surgery at a high-
volume or shelter clinic. Within shelter populations, neutering
before adoption policies generally apply regardless of patient age.
Pediatric spay-neuter is routine in HQHVSN clinics and surgery
in patients as young as 6 weeks is supported by published guide-
lines [10]. Information on anesthesia for pediatric patients is
available in Chapter 68 as well as in numerous other arti-
cles [2,23,24,31–35]. Special attention is also warranted for geriat-
ric patients who present for spaying or neutering due to the
increased risk of underlying disease. Shelter or welfare clinics may
also have other higher risk patients present for neutering such as
patients with pyometra or brachycephalic airway disease. Other
patients may have been victims of cruelty or neglect and have pre-
existing pain and/or be in poor condition. Community clinic pro-
grams are encouraged to develop individualized anesthesia
protocols for higher risk patients. For example, protocols with
large doses of α2 -adrenergic receptor agonists may not be appro-
priate for geriatric patients or those with advanced underlying car-
diac disease [92]. Veterinarians should communicate with the pet
owner or legal agents for these animals about the increased risk of
anesthesia. However, despite this increased risk, most patients can
be neutered successfully with attention to detail and close
monitoring.
Anesthesia for non-spay-neuter procedures
in shelters
Shelter animals and patients at community clinics may present for
surgeries other than spay or neuter. For example, traumatized
animals often require surgeries such as fracture repair, enucleation,
limb amputation, or femoral head ostectomy. As shelter popula-
tions age (due to decreasing need for euthanasia) and more under-
served pets are able to access veterinary care, a need for low-cost
dentistry procedures under anesthesia has also emerged. While
most of these cases are not inherently different from those
Table 51.2 Suggested local blocks for surgeries common in shelter medicine.
Procedure 	Regional block 	Dose 	Reference
Enucleation 	Peribulbar block 	Bupivacaine 2 mg/kg total dose
Cats: dilute with saline to 3.5–4 mL total volume for “average” (~ 4 kg) cat
Dogs: dilute with saline to 0.2–0.8 mL/kg total volume for dogs
[86]
Dental extractions 	Infraorbital, mandibular, and
maxillary blocks
Bupivacaine 1–2 mg/kg total dose 	[87]
Femoral head and neck osteotomy
or hindlimb amputation
Lumbosacral epidural 	Morphine (preservative-free) 0.1 mg/kg or
Buprenorphine 0.005 mg/kg combined with
Bupivacaine 0.5 mg/kg
[86]
Perineal urethrostomy 	Caudal epidural 	Bupivacaine 0.25 mg/kg, dilute 1:1 with saline 	[88]
Castration 	Intratesticular block 	Lidocaine 1–4 mg/kg or
Bupivacaine 2 mg/kg
[89]
Ovariohysterectomy 	Intraperitoneal block 	Bupivacaine 2 mg/kg, dilute to 1 mL/kg with saline 	[89]
Total ear canal ablation 	Auricular block 	Bupivacaine 2 mg/kg 	[90]
General soft tissue or orthopedic
surgery
Infiltrative block 	Bupivacaine 2 mg/kg infused in all layers of closure 	[86,91]
Infiltrative block 	Liposome-encapsulated bupivacaine (Nocita®
) 5.3 mg/kg, can be diluted 1:1
with saline or 0.5% bupivacaine
Wound soaker catheter 	Bupivacaine 1–2 mg/kg q 6–8 hours or
Lidocaine 1.5–3 mg/kg/hour
Table 51.3 Analgesic and anxiolytic medication options for discharge.
Class 	Medication 	Notes
NSAIDs 	Carprofen 	Dogs only (in the United States)
Oral and injectable formulations available
Meloxicam 	Cats and dogs
Oral and injectable formulations available
Recommend dosing at lower than label
recommendations (0.1 mg/kg once
perioperatively for cats)
Robenacoxib 	Cats and dogs
Oral and injectable formulations available
Local
anesthetics
Liposome-encapsulated
bupivacaine
Nocita ® can be diluted 1:1 with saline or
0.5% bupivacaine
Anxiolytics Gabapentin 	10–20 mg/kg q8 hours, orally
Trazodone 	5–10 mg/kg q6 hours, orally
Opioids 	Oral transmucosal
(OTM) buprenorphine
0.02–0.04 mg/kg
Either “standard” (0.3 mg/mL) or
concentrated (1.8 mg/mL; Simbadol®
)
formulations can be administered via this route
OTM administration can be used in both cats
and dogs but absorption of buprenorphine
via this route is lower in dogs versus cats
Subcutaneous
concentrated
buprenorphine
Simbadol® 0.12–0.24 mg/kg SC, for use in
cats only at this high dose
Topical buprenorphine 	Zorbium® for use in cats only
Fentanyl transdermal
patch
1–4 μg/kg/hour
Can prescribe a box of five patches from a
pharmacy
Tramadol 	2–10 mg/kg q8 hours, orally
May not provide effective analgesia in dogs
Over the
counter
Acetaminophen 	15–30 mg/kg q8 hours, orally
For use in dogs only

-- 1061 of 1450 --

1046 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
presenting to regular general practice, they require additional time
and attention in a resource scarce environment where staff are more
used to protocol-based medicine.
Patients presenting for non-spay-neuter surgery should be
worked up as much as clinic equipment and resources allow. The
preanesthetic work up for such cases generally includes laboratory
work and imaging as indicated where available. Each patient should
receive an individually designed anesthetic protocol with balanced
anesthesia and appropriate analgesia. For most surgical procedures,
a pure μ-opioid receptor agonist such as hydromorphone or metha-
done is indicated, in accordance with current pain management
guidelines [85]. IV catheters should be placed, and anesthesia can
be induced with any number of medications commonly available in
shelters such as Telazol®, ketamine, or propofol [37,38]. For analge-
sia, a balanced protocol should include appropriate local blocks.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications should be given
unless contraindicated [85]. Patients undergoing invasive or longer
(greater than 30 min) procedures should be individually monitored
according to American College of Veterinary Anesthesia and
Analgesia monitoring guidelines [45].
References
1 Nolen RS. A specialty whose time has come – shelter medicine recognized as veteri-
nary specialty. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2014; 244(11): 1219–1221.
2 Bushby P, Griffin B. An Overview of Pediatric Spay and Neuter Benefits and
Techniques. DVM 360, February 1, 2011. www.dvm360.com/view/overview-
pediatric-spay-and-neuter-benefits-and- techniques (accessed June 2023).
3 Howe LM. Short term results and complications of prepubertal gonadectomy in
cats and dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1997; 211(1): 57–62.
4 Howe LM, Slater MR, Boothe HW, et al. Long term outcome of gonadectomy per-
formed at an early age or traditional age in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000; 217(11):
1661–1665.
5 Joyce A, Yates D. Help stop teenage pregnancy! Early-age neutering in cats. J Feline
Med Surg 2011; 13(1): 3–10.
6 Root Kustritz MV. Early spay-neuter: clinical considerations. Clin Tech Small Anim
Pract 2002; 17(3): 124–128.
7 Spain CV, Scarlett JM, Houpt KA. Long term risks and benefits of early age neuter-
ing in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2004; 224(3): 372–380.
8 Kustritz MVR. Determining the optimal age for gonadectomy of dogs and cats.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2007; 231: 1665–1675.
9 Griffin B. High-quality, high-volume sterilization programs. Clin Theriogenol 2013;
5: 183–189.
10 Griffin B, Bushby PA, McCobb E, et al. The Association of Shelter Veterinarians’
2016 veterinary medical care guidelines for spay-neuter programs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2016; 249(2): 165–188.
11 Levy JK, Bard KM, Tucker SJ, et al. Perioperative mortality in cats and dogs under-
going spay- or castration at a high-volume clinic. Vet J 2017; 224: 11–15.
12 Looney A, Bohling MW, Bushby PA, et al. The Association of Shelter Veterinarians
veterinary medical care guidelines for spay-neuter programs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2008; 223(1): 74–86.
13 Ko JCH, Abbo LA, Weil AB, et al. A comparison of anesthetic and cardiorespiratory
effects 	of 	tiletamine-zolazepam-butorphanol 	and 	tiletamine-zolazepam-
butorphanol-medetomidine in cats. Vet Ther 2007; 8: 164–176.
14 Polson S, Taylor PM, Yates D. Analgesia after feline ovariohysterectomy under
midazolam-medetomidine-ketamine anaesthesia with buprenorphine or butorph-
anol, and carprofen or meloxicam: a prospective, randomized clinical trial. J Feline
Med Surg 2012; 14: 553–559.
15 Barletta M, Austin BR, Ko JC, et al. Evaluation of dexmedetomidine and ketamine
in combination with opioids as injectable anesthesia for castration in dogs. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2011; 238: 1159–1167.
16 Krimins RA, Ko JC, Weil AB, et al. Evaluation of anesthetic, analgesic, and cardi-
orespiratory effects in dogs after intramuscular administration of dexmedetomidine-
butorphanol-tiletamine-zolazepam or dexmedetomidine-tramadol-ketamine drug
combinations. Am J Vet Res 2012; 73: 1707–1714.
17 Harrison KA, Robertson SA, Levy JK, et al. Evaluation of medetomidine, ketamine
and buprenorphine for neutering feral cats. J Feline Med Surg 2011; 13: 896–902.
18 Posner LP, Applegate J, Cannedy A, et al. Total injectable anesthesia of dogs and cats
for remote location veterinary sterilization clinic. BMC Vet Res 2020; 16: 304.
19 White S. High-Quality, High-Volume Spay and Neuter and Other Shelter Surgeries.
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell, 2020.
20 Alef M, Von Praun F, Oechtering G. Is routine pre-anaesthetic haematological and
biochemical screening justified in dogs? Vet Anaesth and Analg 2008; 35(2):
132–140.
21 Del Mar Díaz M, Kaartinen J, Allison A. Preanaesthetic blood tests in cats and dogs
older than 8 years: anaesthetists’ prediction and peri-anaesthetic changes. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(6): 854–860.
22 Brown CR, Garrett LD, Gilles WK, et al. Spectrum of care: more than treatment
options. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2021; 259(7): 712–717.
23 Faggella AM, Aronsohn MG. Anesthetic techniques for neutering 6- to
14-week-old-kittens. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993; 202: 56–62.
24 Faggella AM, Aronsohn MG. Evaluation of anesthetic protocols for neutering 6- to
14- week-old pups. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1994; 205: 308–314.
25 Selmi AL, Mendes GM, Lins BT, et al. Comparison of xylazine and medetomidine
as premedicants for cats being anaesthetized with propofol-sevoflurane. Vet Rec
2005; 157: 139–143.
26 Joubert RM. Routine veterinary anaesthetic management practices in South Africa.
J S Afr Vet Assoc 2000; 71: 166–172.
27 Joubert RM. Anaesthesia and analgesia for dogs and cats in South Africa undergo-
ing sterilisation and with osteoarthrities – an update from 2000. J S Afr Vet Assoc
2006; 77: 224–228.
28 Mendes GM, Selmi AL, Barbudo-Selmi GR, et al. Clinical use of dexmedetomidine
as premedicant in cats undergoing propofol-sevoflurane anaesthesia. J Feline Med
Surg 2003; 5: 265–270.
29 O’Hagan B, Pasloske K, McKinnon C, et al. Clinical evaluation of alfaxalone as an
anaesthetic induction agent in dogs less than 12 weeks of age. Aust Vet J 2012; 90:
346–350.
30 O’Hagan BJ, Pasloske K, McKinnon C, et al. Clinical evaluation of alfaxalone as an
anaesthetic induction agent in cats less than 12 weeks of age. Aust Vet J 2012; 90:
395–401.
31 Patel CM, Yates D. Evaluation of an anesthetic protocol for the neutering of eight to
twelve week-old puppies. Vet Rec 2003; 152(14): 439–440.
32 Polson S, Taylor PM, Yates D. Effects of age and reproductive status on postopera-
tive pain after routine ovariohysterectomy in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2014; 16:
170–176.
33 Porters N, deRooster H, Moons CPH, et al. Prepubertal gonadectomy in cats: dif-
ferent injectable anesthetic combinations and comparison with gonadectomy at
traditional age. J Feline Med Surg 2015; 17(6): 458–467.
34 Robertson SA, Levy J, Gunkel C, et al. Comparison of isoflurane and butorphanol
with medetomidine, ketamine and buprenorphine for anesthesia of 7–12 week old
kittens for surgical sterilization (abstract). In: Proceedings of the Association
Veterinary Anaesthetists Spring Meeting. Doorwerth, Netherlands; May 27–30, 2003.
35 Robertson SA. Anaesthesia and analgesia for kittens and puppies. In: Proceedings of
the European Veterinary Conference. Voorjaarsdagen, Amsterdam, Netherlands;
April 27–29, 2007.
36 ASPCApro. Pharmacology for Spay/Neuter Clinics. www.aspcapro.org/resource/
pharmacology-spayneuter-clinics (accessed June 2023).
37 Ko JC, Berman, AG. Anesthesia in shelter medicine. Top Companion Anim Med
2010; 25(2): 92–97.
38 Ko JC, Krimins RA. Anesthesia in shelter medicine and high-volume/high-quality
spay and neuter programs. In: Ko JC, ed. Small Animal Anesthesia and Pain
Management, 2nd edn. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press/Taylor and Francis Group,
2019: 419–427.
39 Williams LS, Levy JK, Robertson SA, et al. Use of the anesthetic combination of
tiletamine, zolazepam, ketamine, and xylazine for neutering feral cats. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2002; 220(10): 1491–1495.
40 American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA). Recommendations for Pre-Anesthesia
Checkout, 2008. www.asahq.org/standards-and-practice-parameters/2008-asa-
recommendations-for-pre-anesthesia-checkout (accessed February 2023).
41 Dorsch JA, Dorsch SE. Equipment checkout and maintenance. In: Dorsch JA,
Dorsch SE, eds. Understanding Anesthesia Equipment, 5th edn. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 2008: 931–954.
42 Smith JC, Bolon B. Comparison of three commercially available activated charcoal
canisters for passive scavenging of waste isoflurane during conventional rodent
anesthesia. Contemp Top Lab Anim Sci 2003; 42: 10–15.
43 Haskins SC. Monitoring the anesthetized patient. In: Grimm K, Lamont L,
Tranquilli W, et al., eds. Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia, 5th edn. Ames, IA:
Wiley Blackwell, 2015: 86–113.
44 Grubb T, Sager J, Gaynor JS, et al. 2020 AAHA Anesthesia and monitoring
guidelines for dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2020; 56: 59–82.
45 American College of Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia (ACVAA). Small
Animal Monitoring Guidelines. www.acvaa.org/veterinarians/guidelines (accessed
June 2023).

-- 1062 of 1450 --

Chapter 51: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Community Medicine Settings 	1047
46 Robertson SA. Oxygenation and ventilation. In: Green SA, ed. Veterinary Anesthesia
and Pain Management Secrets. Philadelphia, PA: Hanley and Belfus, 2002: 15–20.
47 Brodbelt DC, Pfeiffer DU, Young LE, et al. Risk factors for anaesthetic-related death
in cats: results from the Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Small Animal
Fatalities (CEPSAF). Br J Anaesth 2007; 99: 617–623.
48 Dorsch JA, Dorsch SE. Gas monitoring. In: Dorsch JA, Dorsch SE, eds.
Understanding Anesthesia Equipment, 5th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer
Health-Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2007: 685.
49 McKelvey D. Anesthetic problems and emergencies. In: McKelvey D, Hollingshead
KS, eds. Small Animal Anesthesia and Analgesia, 2nd edn. St. Louis, MO: Mosby,
2000: 225–251.
50 The Reassessment Campaign on Veterinary Resuscitation (RECOVER) initiative.
RECOVER Guidelines. www.recoverinitiative.org/cpr-guidelines/current-recover-
guideline (accessed March 2023).
51 Cole SG, Otto CM, Hughes D. Cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation in small
animals – a clinical practice review Part II. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2003; 13: 13–23.
52 Muir WW. Cardiovascular emergencies. In: Muir WW, Hubbell JAE, Skarda RT, eds.
Handbook of Veterinary Anesthesia, 4th edn. St. Louis, MO: Mosby, 2007: 557–575.
53 Davis H, Jensen T, Johnson A, et al. 2013 AAHA/AAFP fluid therapy guidelines for
dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2013; 49: 149–159.
54 Andrzejowski J, Hoyle J, Eapen G, et al. Effect of prewarming on post-induction
core temperature and the incidence of inadvertent perioperative hypothermia in
patients undergoing general anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth 2008; 101: 627–631.
55 Harvey RC. Hypothermia. In: Greene SA, ed. Veterinary Anesthesia and Pain
Management Secrets. Philadelphia, PA: Hanley and Belfus, 2002: 149–152.
56 Clark-Price SC, Dossin O, Jones KR, et al. Comparison of three different methods
to prevent heat loss in healthy dogs undergoing 90 minutes of general anesthesia.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40: 280–284.
57 Machon RG, Raffe MR, Robinson EP. Warming with a forced air warming blanket
minimizes anesthetic-induced hypothermia in cats. Vet Surg 1999; 28: 301–310.
58 Hasiuk MM, Brown D, Cooney C, et al. Application of fast-track surgery principles
to evaluate effects of atipamezole on recovery and analgesia following ovariohyster-
ectomy in cats anesthetized with dexmedetomidine-ketamine-hydromorphone.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2015; 246(6): 645–653.
59 Dobbins S, Brown NO, Shofer FS. Comparison of the effects of buprenorphine,
oxymorphone hydrochloride, and ketoprofen for postoperative analgesia after
onychectomy or onychectomy and sterilizatioin in cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
2002; 38: 507–514.
60 Campbell VL, Drobatz KJ, Perkowski SZ. Postoperative hypoxemia and hypercar-
bia in healthy dogs undergoing routine ovariohysterectomy or castration and
receiving butorphanol or hydromorphone for analgesia. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2003;
222: 330–336.
61 Ko JC, Mandsager RE, Lange DN, et al. Cardiorespiratory responses and plasma
cortisol concentrations in dogs treated with medetomidine before undergoing
ovariohysterectomy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000; 217: 509–514.
62 Al- Gizawiy MM, P Rudé E. Comparison of preoperative carprofen and postopera-
tive butorphanol as postsurgical analgesics in cats undergoing ovariohysterectomy.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2004; 31: 164–174.
63 Caulkett N, Read M, Fowler D, et al. A comparison of the analgesic effects of butor-
phanol with those of meloxicam after elective ovariohysterectomy in dogs. Can Vet
J 2003; 44: 565–570.
64 Dzikiti TB, Joubert KE, Venter LJ, et al. Comparison of morphine and carprofen
administered alone or in combination for analgesia in dogs undergoing overiohys-
terectomy. J S Afr Vet Assoc 2006; 77: 120–126.
65 Fresno L, Moll J, Peñalba B, et al. Effects of preoperative administration of meloxi-
cam on whole blood platelet aggregation, buccal musocal bleeding time, and hae-
matological indices in dogs undergoing elective ovariohysterectomy. Vet J 2006;
170: 138–140.
66 Lobetti RG, Joubert KE. Effect of administration of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs before surgery on renal function in clinically normal dogs. Am J Vet Res 2000;
61: 1501–1507.
67 Leece EA, Brearley JC, Harding EF. Comparison of carprofen and meloxicam for 72
hours following ovariohysterectomy in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2005; 32: 184–192.
68 Lemke KA, Runyon CL, Horney BS. Effects of preoperative administration of keto-
profen on anesthetic requirements and signs of postoperative pain in dogs under-
going elective ovariohysterectoomy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2002; 221: 1268–1275.
69 Slingsby LS, Waterman-Pearson AE. The post-operative analgesic effects of
ketamine after canine ovariohysterectomy – a comparison between pre- or post-
operative administration. Res Vet Sci 2000; 69: 147–152.
70 Slingsby LS, Waterman-Pearson AE. Postoperative analgesia in the cat after ovario-
hysterectomy by use of carprofen, ketoprofen, meloxicam or tolfenamic acid.
J Small Anim Pract 2000; 41: 447–450.
71 Slingsby LS, Waterman-Pearson AE. Comparison between meloxicam and carpro-
fen for postoperative analgesia after feline ovariohysterectomy. J Small Anim Pract
2002; 43: 286–289.
72 Carpenter RE, Wilson DV, Evans AT. Evaluation of intraperitoneal and incisional
lidocaine or bupivacaine for analgesia following ovariohysterectomy in the dog. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2004; 31: 46–52.
73 Wilson DV, Barnes KS, Hauptman JG. Pharmacokinetics of combined intraperito-
neal and incisional lidocaine in the dog following ovariohysterectomy. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2004; 27: 105–109.
74 Tobias KM, Harvey RC, Byarlay JM. A comparison of four methods of analgesia in
cats following ovariohysterectomy. Vet Anaesth Analg 2006; 33: 390–398.
75 Huuskonen V, Hughes JM, Estaca Banon E, et al. Intratesticular lidocaine
reduces the response to surgical castration in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40:
74–82.
76 Moldal ER, Eriksen T, Kirpensteijn J, et al. Intratesticular and subcutaneous lido-
caine alters the intraoperative haemodynamic responses and heart rate variability
in male cats undergoing castration. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40: 63–73.
77 Morgaz J, Navarrete R, Munoz-Rascon P, et al. Postoperative analgesic effects of
dexketoprofen, buprenorphine and tramadol in dogs undergoing ovariohysterec-
tomy. Res Vet Sci 2013; 95: 278–282.
78 Staffieri F, Centonze P, Gigante G, et al. Comparison of the analgesic effects of robe-
nacoxib, buprenorphine and their combination in cats after ovariohysterectomy.
Vet J 2013; 197: 363–367.
79 Steagall PV, Taylor PM, Rodrigues LC, et al. Analgesia for cats after ovariohysterec-
tomy with either buprenorphine or carprofen alone or in combination. Vet Rec
2009; 164: 359–363.
80 Giordano T, Steagall PV, Ferreira TH, et al. Postoperative analgesic effects of
intravenous, intramuscular, subcutaneous or oral transmucosal buprenorphine
administered to cats undergoing ovariohysterectomy. Vet Anaesth Analg 2010; 37:
357–366.
81 Shih AC, Robertson S, Isaza N, et al. Comparison between analgesic effects of
buprenorphine, carprofen, and buprenorphine with carprofen for canine ovario-
hysterectomy. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35: 69–79.
82 Ko JC, Freeman LJ, Barletta M, et al. Efficacy of oral transmucosal and intravenous
administration of buprenorphine before surgery for postoperative analgesia in dogs
undergoing ovariohysterectomy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2011; 238: 318–328.
83 Stevens BJ, Posner, LP, Jones CA, et al. Comparison of the effect of intratesticular
lidocaine/bupivacaine vs. saline placebo on pain scores and incision site reactions
in dogs undergoing routine castration. Vet J 2013; 196(3): 499–503.
84 Corletto F. Multimodal and balanced analgesia. Vet Res Commun 2007; 31: 59–63.
85 Epstein ME, Rodan I, Griffenhagen G, et al. AAHA/AAFP pain management
guidelines for dogs and cats. J Feline Med Surg 2015; 17: 251–272.
86 Campoy L, Read M. Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia. Ames, IA:
Wiley-Blackwell, 2013.
87 Beckman B, Legendre L. Regional nerve blocks for oral surgery in companion ani-
mals. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 2002; 24(6): 429–444.
88 Pratt CL, Blakrishna A, McGowan E, et al. A prospective randomized, double-
blinded clinical study evaluating the efficacy and safety of bupivacaine versus
morphine- bupivacaine in caudal epidurals in cats with urethral obstruction. J Vet
Emerg Crit Care 2020; 30(2): 170–178.
89 Steagall PVM, Benito J, Monteiro B, et al. Intraperitoneal and incisional analgesia
in small animals: simple, cost-effective techniques. J Small Anim Pract 2020; 61:
19–23.
90 Gaynor J, Muir WW. Handbook of Veterinary Pain Management, 3rd edn. St. Louis,
MO: Elsevier Health Sciences, 2015.
91 Abelson AA, McCobb E, Shaw S, et al. Use of wound soaker catheters for the
administration of local anesthetic for post-operative analgesia: 56 cases. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2009; 36(6): 597–602.
92 Lemke KA. Perioperative use of selective alpha-2 agonists and antagonists in small
animals. Can Vet J 2004; 45(6): 475–480.

-- 1063 of 1450 --

52
1048
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The S ixth Edition of L umb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
Equine anesthesia has always been associated with greater patient
risk compared to other common domestic species. Delivery of
anesthesia is complicated by many factors including the large
patient size range, the need to induce controlled recumbency
during anesthetic induction, specialized equipment requirements,
perfusion issues related to large body mass, and instinctive behav-
iors. In addition, drug dosages are often extrapolated from those
of other species and many of the drugs are used in an extra-label
manner. Understanding the unique factors associated with equine
anesthesia compared to other species is the first step in improving
patient safety.
Anesthetic risk
The risk of anesthetic mortality is greater in equine species com-
pared to other domestic animals. Studies have reported overall
mortality rates between 0.24% and 2.24% for horses [1–7] com-
pared to the widely reported rates for dogs (0.05%) and cats
(0.11%) [8]. However, other smaller studies from other countries
have reported higher small animal mortality rates that are similar to
those reported for equine patients [9–11]. A mortality rate of 1% is
commonly referenced in most surgical facilities when discussing
the risk of anesthesia with horse owners; however, the percentage
can increase considerably with metabolically unstable patients such
as those with colic, where mortality has been reported to be as high
as 38.3% [12]. The primary complications associated with death are
cardiac arrest, orthopedic injuries in recovery, and myopathy or
neuropathy in the postanesthesia period. Complication rates as
high as 17.5% have been reported [13]. Postanesthetic colic is an
additional concern. The use of opioid analgesics, time of surgery,
choice of anesthetics, breed, and concurrent use of certain antibiot-
ics have been implicated as risk factors for developing postoperative
colic, although specific mechanisms have not been definitively
determined [13–19].
Variation in size
Horses come in a broad range of sizes. A miniature horse foal
can weigh less than 10 kg, while a draft horse used for competition
pulling can weigh up to 1300 kg. Because of this size variation, spe-
cific equipment must be purchased to move these animals, deliver
anesthetic, and assist or control ventilation. A small animal anes-
thetic machine can be used for most miniature horses, neonates,
and foals up to 150 kg, but large animal anesthetic systems must be
purchased for older foals and horses. The limiting factors with most
small animal systems include the volume of the carbon dioxide
absorbent canister, the volume of the reservoir bag, and the diame-
ter of the breathing system tubing and adaptor that connects to the
endotracheal tube. Endotracheal tubes, reservoir bags, and anes-
thetic tubing are specifically designed for equine patients and are,
therefore, more expensive than equipment used in small animal
patients (much of which is repurposed from the human market).
Much of the monitoring equipment designed for human patients
can be adapted for use on larger species. One common problem is
that human monitors often consider normal heart rates in adult
horses to be bradycardic with default alarms set for rates below
40 beats/min.
Surgical tables and hoisting mechanisms must be designed spe-
cifically for equine or large animal patients. If a practice regularly
sees large draft breed horses, it is wise to purchase a 2-ton hoist
rather than the typical 1-ton hoist as larger horses can overstress
52 Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia –
Horses
Lori A. Bidwell
East West Equine Sports Medicine, Lexington, Kentucky, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 1048
Anesthetic risk, 1048
Variation in size, 1048
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation, 1049
Considerations for equine induction, 1049
Effect of recumbency in equine patients, 1049
Heart rate considerations, 1049
Equine neonate versus foal, 1049
The pregnant mare, 1050
Fluid therapy considerations, 1050
Recovery, 1050
References, 1050

-- 1064 of 1450 --

Chapter 52: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Horses 	1049
inappropriate equipment. In addition, the typical surgical table
designed for an adult equine is not big enough to support the mass
of a 1000 kg patient for a procedure requiring lateral recumbency.
Therefore, two surgical tables may need to be used together to pro-
vide adequate support. If two tables are not available, the use of
stacked pads or mats can substitute under limbs, head, and neck.
Many of the draft breeds do not have long enough tails to attach a
rope for assisted recovery. Fortunately, most draft horses are rela-
tively cooperative regarding recovery.
Size is also a factor in determining peripheral (skeletal muscle)
perfusion. Mean arterial blood pressure requirements increase as
muscle mass (and muscle compartment/compression pressure)
increases [5]. The risk of postanesthetic neuropathy and myopathy
is higher in equine patients, particularly draft and large warmblood
breeds. While recommendations on minimum mean arterial pres-
sures during anesthesia vary, this author recommends a minimum
mean arterial blood pressure in horses greater than 500 kg of at least
80 mmHg based on personal experience. Maintaining a mean arte-
rial blood pressure of greater than 70 mmHg in normal adult horses
has been shown to minimize postoperative complications associ-
ated with hypotension [20,21]. Neonates and foals have lower nor-
mal resting mean arterial blood pressure (47–50 mmHg in neonates
and 55–70 mmHg in foals), but there has been a report of a neonate
developing postanesthetic myositis after an anesthetic event with
average mean arterial blood pressure between 45 and 65 mmHg [22].
Therefore, the goal with all ages and sizes of horses should be to
maintain blood pressure above 60 mmHg in foals and 70–80 mmHg
in adults depending on body size. Adjuncts to increase mean arte-
rial blood pressure include inotropes, vasopressors, and catechola-
mines. Dobutamine is used most often in equine patients, but
dopamine, ephedrine, phenylephrine, vasopressin, norepinephrine,
epinephrine, and calcium salts are alternative options if used appro-
priately. Of the inotropes, dobutamine has been found to be the
most useful for increasing mean arterial blood pressure in neonates,
foals, and adult horses under general anesthesia [23–28].
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
Anatomic variation complicates cardiopulmonary resuscitation. An
equine neonate or older foal can be managed similar to a canine but
adult equine ribs are narrow and impossible to separate by hand if
open chest cardiac compressions are required. A rib resection is
required for open chest compressions, and this is not practical in
most situations. Therefore, chest compressions on an adult equine
patient require use of the anesthetist’s full body weight concentrated
on either both knees or feet. External chest compressions must be
performed at a minimum of 80 compressions/min in an adult to
produce a cardiac output near 50% of that of a deeply anesthetized
horse [29]. However, external compressions of 20/min in ponies
have been shown to produce a cardiac output of approximately 50%
normal baseline values [30]. As an alternative to external compres-
sions, when a horse suffers cardiopulmonary arrest during general
anesthesia for abdominal exploration, the surgeon can make an
incision through the diaphragm and perform direct cardiac
compression.
Although cardiac arrhythmias are common in horses during
exercise and after anesthesia, ventricular fibrillation is uncommon
in horses prior to arrest [31–33]. Even if ventricular fibrillation is
present, most electrical cardiac defibrillators are not designed to
deliver a large enough electrical output required to defibrillate an
adult equine heart.
Considerations for equine induction
Inducing recumbency in horses from the standing position can be
dangerous. In order to minimize the risk, appropriate sedation
and muscle relaxation should be administered prior to induction.
Ketamine is one of the primary induction drugs used in horses,
but it has minimal muscle relaxant properties. Muscle relaxation
and induction quality can be improved by increasing the dose of
premedication, adding an opioid or phenothiazine to an α2 -
adrenergic receptor agonist, and/or administering ketamine with
a coinduction agent (commonly either a benzodiazepine or
propofol) [34–37].
There are differences in induction doses between horses, don-
keys, and mules. Donkeys are typically less affected by premedica-
tion and induction drugs when compared to horses. Mules appear
to be intermediate between donkeys and horses. A starting point for
dosing drugs for donkeys can be based on 1.5 times the dose of a
horse. The exception to this rule is guaifenesin, as donkeys are more
sensitive to the central effects of the drug, resulting in hypotension
and apnea with bolus administration. The difference in response to
drugs in donkeys appears to be due to variation in body water dis-
tribution and drug metabolism [38,39].
Effect of recumbency in equine patients
Prolonged recumbency in equine patients is not benign.
Ventilation–perfusion mismatch and shunting are inevitable when
an equine patient is recumbent. Lateral recumbency results in ate-
lectasis of the dependent lung and dorsal recumbency results in
progressive atelectasis of the dorsal lung fields [40]. Controlled ven-
tilation can improve arterial oxygenation, but in a patient with
abdominal distension associated with colic, ruptured bladder, or
pregnancy, cardiac output can be compromised during periods of
high intrathoracic pressure. In contrast to small animal patients, a
recent study performed with horses found that decreasing the
inspired oxygen concentration to 50% from > 95% resulted in sig-
nificant reductions in arterial oxygen saturation; therefore, the use
of lower inspired oxygen concentrations to reduce atelectasis is not
recommended [41–45].
Heart rate considerations
Sedation with an α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist in horses results in
bradycardia. This can be further compounded by the concurrent
administration of many anesthetic drugs. However, the dissociative
agents ketamine and tiletamine have sympathomimetic properties
and administration often produces transient increases in heart rate.
Typically, once heart rate returns to baseline levels under anesthe-
sia, there are no peaks or large changes in heart rate that are indica-
tive of arousal as is seen in small animal patients. Increased heart
rate in response to surgical stimulation is unusual in the healthy
adult equine under general anesthesia.
Equine neonate versus foal
A neonate is less equipped to alter stroke volume in response to
hypovolemia and bradycardia. In neonates, heart rate has a primary
function in controlling cardiac output. The most commonly used
agents for premedication in horses are α2
- adrenergic receptor ago-
nists, and one effect associated with these drugs is bradycardia.
Therefore, it seems prudent to minimize the use of α2
- adrenergic

-- 1065 of 1450 --

1050 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
receptor agonists in neonates or compromised older foals. Older
foals can have variable responses to drugs and should be dosed
individually based on behavior [46,47].
The pregnant mare
A pregnant mare presenting for an emergency procedure requiring
general anesthesia has several physiologic differences that challenge
the anesthetist. Vasodilation induced by inhalant anesthetic is
enhanced by circulating hormones induced by pregnancy and par-
turition [48]. In human females, endothelial-derived hyperpolariz-
ing factor and nitric oxide are responsible for decreased vascular
tone [49]. Oxygenation in the mare is complicated by the gravid
uterus and abdominal contents placing pressure on the diaphragm,
resulting in reduced functional residual capacity. Controlled or
assisted ventilation is often necessary to allow the mare to receive
an appropriate tidal volume. Tipping the mare slightly off dorsal
recumbency also facilitates venous return by reducing direct com-
pression of the caudal vena cava. In order to appropriately ventilate
the pregnant mare, airway pressures often exceed 30 cmH2
O, par-
ticularly when the mare is in the Trendelenburg position for manip-
ulation of the fetus. In this situation, airway pressures reaching
60 cmH 2
O are often required to deliver a tidal volume of 10 mL/kg.
In addition to ventilation concerns, endotracheal intubation is rec-
ommended to prevent aspiration of gastrointestinal contents. Due
to the emergency nature of dystocia or cesarean section, fasting
prior to the procedure rarely occurs. In human medicine, elevated
intragastric pressure, delayed gastric emptying, and circulating pro-
gesterone relaxing the gastroesophageal sphincter are blamed for
the increased risk of aspiration pneumonia [50–51].
Fluid therapy considerations
A discussion involving fluid therapy in horses under general anes-
thesia can be controversial. The traditional thought process regard-
ing fluid therapy involves administration of isotonic fluids at a rate
of 5–15 mL/kg/h with fluid boluses delivered as needed during
periods of hypotension. This rate of administration has been found
to be ineffective in preventing hypotension induced by inhaled
anesthetics [52]. The plasma volume expansion from crystalloids
is less than 20–25% of the volume administered. In addition, the
traditional practice of administering crystalloids for blood loss in a
3:1 ratio is not as effective as once thought. Rather than using a
prescribed fluid rate for every patient, crystalloids and colloids
should be administered on a patient-specific basis by using
goal-directed fluid therapy endpoints (e.g., blood gases, capillary
refill time, mucous membrane color, and pulse variation) for
evaluation [53–55].
Recovery
The true challenge of equine anesthesia compared to other domes-
tic species is safely returning the patient to the standing position
without injury. The role of the anesthetist continues through the
recovery period by appropriate selection of sedatives and often
assisting the horse in attempts to stand. Horses have a flight instinct
that prevents most of them from remaining recumbent in the recov-
ery stall. In addition, some patients will prematurely attempt to
stand because of the need to urinate following administration of
large volumes of intravenous fluids and increased urine production
following α2 -adrenergic receptor agonist administration.
The transition of a horse receiving anesthetic in 100% oxygen
with vascular and ventilatory support to a recovery stall without
monitoring or oxygen supplementation is not one in which heavy
sedation is recommended. However, sedation may smooth the
recovery from inhalant anesthesia. It is important to use a balance
of technique and sedation for a safe recovery. Ideally, the adult
horse should be maintained in recumbency until there is loss of
nystagmus, response to sound, and return of menace and tongue
tone in response to gentle traction. Menace response is a learned
behavior, so foals typically will not respond to stimulation over
the eye unless there is direct contact with the lids or cornea (the
latter is not recommended unless in an emergency situation).
Sedation can be administered just prior to moving the horse into
recovery. Depending on the depth of anesthesia, 50–150 mg of
xylazine or 5–20 mg of romifidine or detomidine, with or without
2–5 mg of acepromazine, can be administered intramuscularly
prior to moving the horse into recovery. An additional small dose
of a sedative can be administered intravenously if needed [56–59].
A towel over the eyes and cotton in the ears aids in minimizing
stimulation from outside the stall, particularly in horses that are
sound sensitive.
There are several recovery techniques that can be utilized
depending on the specific case: unassisted recovery or “self-
recovery,” rope recovery utilizing ropes on the halter and tail as a
pulley system through rings on the walls, pool recovery, sling recov-
ery, and recovery on a tilt table [60]. Personnel safety should be
considered when developing a recovery plan for any particular situ-
ation [61]. Self-recovery is practical for young healthy horses after
elective procedures. Rope, pool, sling, and tilt table recovery are
utilized for patients in whom instability or weakness is a concern.
Rope recovery requires a stall with rings in the walls, strong cotton
or web rope and two people to pull the ropes to assist the horse at
the appropriate time, but may reduce the number of attempts at
standing [62,63]. Some finesse is needed in that the head rope
should be used for support and the tail rope is used for the majority
of assistance (where the most effort is required by the handler).
Horses need to have freedom in their front end to get momentum to
stand; therefore, the head rope should not be pulled tightly until the
horse is standing. Pool, sling, and tilt table recovery are typically
reserved for fractures and horses with neurologic concerns.
Recovering a foal from anesthesia is a very different process from
that of adults. Foals should be assisted in recovery until approxi-
mately 5–6 months of age.
References
1 Johnston GM, Taylor PM, Holmes MA, et al. Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative
Equine Fatalities (CEPEF-1): preliminary results. Equine Vet J 1995; 27: 193–200.
2 Bidwell LA, Bramlage LR, Rood WA. Equine perioperative fatalities associated
with general anesthesia at a private practice: a retrospective case series. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2007; 34: 23–30.
3 Johnston GM, Eastman JK, Wood JL, et al. The Confidential Enquiry into
Perioperative Equine Fatalities (CEPEF): mortality results of Phases 1 and 2. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2002; 29: 159–170.
4 Young SS, Taylor PM. Factors influencing the outcome of equine anaesthesia:
a review of 1,314 cases. Equine Vet J 1993; 25: 147–151.
5 O’Donovan KA, Aarnes TK, Hubbell JA, et al. Risk of anesthesia-related complications in
draft horses: a retrospective, single-center analysis. Vet Anaesth Analg 2023; 50: 157–162.
6 Gozalo-Marcilla M, Bettschart-Wolfensberger R, Johnston M, et al. Data collection for
the fourth multicentre confidential enquiry into perioperative equine fatalities (CEPEF4)
study: new technology and preliminary results. Animals (Basel) 2021; 11: 2549.
7 Laurenza C, Ansart L, Portier K. Risk factors of anesthesia-related mortality and
morbidity in one equine hospital: a retrospective study on 1,161 cases undergoing
elective or emergency surgeries. Front Vet Sci 2020; 6: 514.

-- 1066 of 1450 --

Chapter 52: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Horses 	1051
8 Brodbelt DC, Bissitt KJ, Hammond RA, et al. The risk of death: the confidential enquiry
into perioperative small animal fatalities. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35: 365–373.
9 Bille C, Auvigne V, Libermann S, et al. Risk of anaesthetic mortality in dogs and cats:
an observational cohort study of 3546 cases. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39: 59–68.
10 Gil L, Redondo JI. Canine anaesthetic death in Spain: a multicentre prospective
cohort study of 2012 cases. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40: e57–e67.
11 Itami T, Aida H, Asakawa M, et al. Association between preoperative characteristics
and risk of anaesthesia-related death in dogs in small-animal referral hospitals in
Japan. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44: 461–472.
12 Adami C, Westwood-Hearn H, Bolt DM, et al. Prevalence of electrolyte distur-
bances and perianesthetic death risk factors in 120 horses undergoing colic surgery.
J Equine Vet Sci 2020; 84: 102843.
13 Jago RC, Corletto F, Wright IM. Peri-anaesthetic complications in an equine refer-
ral hospital: risk factors for post anaesthetic colic. Equine Vet J 2015; 47: 635–640.
14 Nelson BB, Lordan EE, Hassel DM. Risk factors associated with gastrointestinal
dysfunction in horses undergoing elective procedures under general anaesthesia.
Equine Vet J Suppl 2013; 45: 8–14.
15 Senior JM, Pinchbeck GL, Allister R, et al. Post anaesthetic colic in horses: a pre-
ventable complication? Equine Vet J 2006; 33: 479–484.
16 Little D, Redding WR, Blikslager AT. Risk factors for reduced perioperative fecal
output in horses: 37 cases (1997–1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2001; 218: 414–420.
17 Mircica E, Clutton RE, Kyles KW, et al. Problems associated with perioperative
morphine in horses: a retrospective cases analysis. Vet Anaesth Analg 2003; 30:
147–155.
18 Senior JM, Pinchbeck G, Dugdale AHA, et al. A retrospective study of the risk
factors and prevalence of colic in horses after orthopaedic surgery. Vet Rec 2004;
155: 321–325.
19 Anderson MS, Clark L, Dyson S, et al. Risk factors for colic in horses after general
anaesthesia for MRI or nonabdominal surgery: absence of evidence of effect from
perianaesthetic morphine. Equine Vet J 2006; 38: 368–374.
20 Duke T, Filzek U, Read MR, et al. Clinical observations surrounding an increased
incidence of postanesthetic myopathy in halothane-anesthetized horses. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2006; 33: 122–127.
21 Grandy JL, Steffey EP, Hodgson DS, et al. Arterial hypotension and the develop-
ment of postanesthetic myopathy in halothane-anesthetized horses. Am J Vet Res
1987; 48: 192–197.
22 Manning M, Dubielzig R, McGuirk S. Postoperative myositis in a neonatal foal: a
case report. Vet Surg 1996; 24: 69–72.
23 Craig CA, Haskens SC, Hildebrand SV. The cardiopulmonary effects of dobu-
tamine and norepinephrine in isoflurane-anesthetized foals. Vet Anaesth Analg
2007; 34: 377–387.
24 Valverde A, Giguere S, Sanchez LC, et al. Effects of dobutamine, norepinephrine
and vasopressin on cardiovascular function in anesthetized neonatal foals with
induced hypotension. Am J Vet Res 2006; 67: 1730–1737.
25 deVries A, Brearly JC, Taylor PM. Effects of dobutamine on cardiac index and arte-
rial blood pressure in isoflurane-anesthetized horses under clinical conditions. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2009; 32: 353–358.
26 Dancker C, Hopster K, Rohn K, et al. Effects of dobutamine, dopamine, phenyle-
phrine and noradrenaline on systemic haemodynamics and intestinal perfusion in
isoflurane anaesthetised horses. Equine Vet J 2018; 50: 104–110.
27 Schier MF, Raisis AL, Secombe CJ, et al. Effects of dobutamine hydrochloride on
cardiovascular function in horses anesthetized with isoflurane with or without ace-
promazine maleate premedication. Am J Vet Res 2016; 77: 1318–1324.
28 Ohta M, Kurimoto S, Ishikawa Y, et al. Cardiovascular effects of dobutamine and
phenylephrine infusion in sevoflurane-anesthetized Thoroughbred horses. J Vet
Med Sci 2013; 75: 1443–1448.
29 Hubbell JA, Muir WW, Gaynor JS. Cardiovascular effects of thoracic compression
in horses subjected to euthanasia. Equine Vet J 1993; 25: 282–284.
30 Frauenfelder HC, Fessler JF, Latshaw HS, et al. External cardiovascular resuscita-
tion of the anesthetized pony. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1981; 179: 673–676.
31 Morgan RA, Raftery AG, Cripps P, et al. The prevalence and nature of cardiac
arrhythmias in horses following general anaesthesia and surgery. Acta Vet Scand
2011; 23: 53–62.
32 Buhl R, Meldgaard C, Barbesgaard L. Cardiac arrhythmias in clinically healthy
showjumping horses. Equine Vet J 2010; 38(Suppl): 196–201.
33 Barbesgaard L, Buhl R, Meldgaard C. Prevalence of exercise-associated arrhythmias
in normal performing dressage horses. Equine Vet J 2010; 38(Suppl): 202–207.
34 Mantrell S, Nyman G. Effects of additional premedication on romifidine and keta-
mine anesthesia in horses. Acta Vet Scand 1996; 37: 315–325.
35 Hubbell JA, Hinchcliff KW, Schmall LM, et al. Anesthetic, cardiorespiratory and
metabolic effects of four intravenous anesthetic regimens induced in horses imme-
diately after maximal exercise. Am J Vet Res 2000; 61: 1545–1552.
36 Posner LP, Kasten JI, Kata C. Propofol with ketamine following sedation with
xylazine for routine induction of general anaesthesia in horses. Vet Rec 2013 Dec 7;
173(22): 550.
37 Jarrett MA, Bailey KM, Messenger KM, et al. Recovery of horses from general anes-
thesia after induction with propofol and ketamine versus midazolam and ketamine.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2018 Jul 1; 253(1): 101–107.
38 Maloiy GMO. Water economy of the Somali donkey. Am J Physiol 1970; 219: 1522–1527.
39 Matthews NS, Taylor TS, Hartsfield SM, et al. Pharmacokinetics of ketamine in mules
and mammoth asses premedicated with xylazine. Equine Vet J 1994; 26: 241–243.
40 Nyman G, Funkquist B, Kyart C, et al. Atelectasis causes gas exchange impairment
in the anaesthetized horse. Equine Vet J 1990; 22: 317–324.
41 Gonçalves Dias LG, Nunes N, Lopes PC, et al. The effects of 2 levels of inspired
oxygen fraction in blood gas variables in propofol-anesthetized dogs with high
intracranial pressure. Can J Vet Res 2009; 73: 111–116.
42 Crumley MN, McMurphy RM, Hodgson DS, Kreider SE. Effects of inspired oxygen
concentration in ventilation, ventilatory rhythm, and gas exchange in isoflurane-
anesthetized horses. Am J Vet Res 2013; 74: 183–190.
43 Calero Rodriguez A, de Grauw JC, van Loon JPAM. Effect of different inspired
fractions of oxygen on F-shunt and arterial partial pressure of oxygen in isoflurane-
anaesthetized and mechanically ventilated Shetland ponies. Vet Anaesth Analg
2021; 48: 930–934.
44 Savvas I, Pavlidou K, Braun C, et al. Evaluation of the effect of the inspired oxygen
fraction on blood oxygenation during inhalant anaesthesia in horses: a systematic
review with meta-analysis. Animals (Basel) 2021; 11: 2245.
45 Schauvliege S, Savvas I, Gasthuys F. The effect of the inspired oxygen fraction on
arterial blood oxygenation in spontaneously breathing, isoflurane anaesthetized
horses: a retrospective study. Vet Anaesth Analg 2015; 42: 280–285.
46 O’Connor SJ, Gardner DS, Ousey JC, et al. Development of baroreflex and endo-
crine responses to hypotensive stress in newborn foals and lambs. Pflurgers Arch
2005; 450: 298–306.
47 Lombard CW, Evans M, Martin L, et al. Blood pressure, electrocardiogram and
echocardiogram measurements in the growing pony foal. Equine Vet J 1984; 16:
342–347.
48 Fowden AL, Forhead AJ, Ousey JC. The endocrinology of equine parturition. Exp
Clin Endocrinol Diabetes 2008; 116: 393–403.
49 Morton JS, Davidge ST. Arterial endothelium-derived hyperpolarization – poten-
tial role in pregnancy adaptations and complications. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 2013;
61: 197–203.
50 American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. ACOG Technical Bulletin:
pulmonary disease in pregnancy. J Gynecol Obstet 1996; 54: 187–196.
51 Baggish MS, Hooper S. Aspiration as a cause of maternal death. Obstet Gynecol
1974; 43: 327–336.
52 Valverde A, Gianotti G, Rioja-Garcia E, et al. Effects of high-volume, rapid fluid
therapy on cardiovascular function and hematological values during isoflurane-
induced hypotension in healthy dogs. Can J Vet Res 2012; 76: 99–108.
53 Muir WW III, Wiese AJ. Comparison of lactated Ringer’s solution and a physiologi-
cally balanced 6% hetastarch plasma expander for the treatment of hypotension
induced via blood withdrawal in isoflurane-anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 2004;
65: 1189–1194.
54 Jacob M, Chappell D, Homann-Kiefer K, et al. The intravascular volume effect of
Ringer’s lactate is below 20%: a prospective study in humans. Crit Care 2012; 16: R86.
55 Araos J, Kenny JS, Rousseau-Blass F, et al. Dynamic prediction of fluid responsiveness
during positive pressure ventilation: a review of the physiology underlying heart-lung
interactions and a critical interpretation. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47: 3–14.
56 Oijala M, Katila T. Detomidine (Domosedan) in foals: sedative and analgesic
effects. Equine Vet J 1988; 20: 327–330.
57 Valverde A, Black B, Cribb NC, et al. Assessment of unassisted recovery from
repeated general isoflurane anesthesia in horses following post-anesthetic adminis-
tration of xylazine or acepromazine or a combination of xylazine and ketamine. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2013; 40: 3–12.
58 Woodhouse KJ, Brosnan RJ, Nguyen KQ, et al. Effects of postanesthetic sedation
with romifidine or xylazine on quality of recovery from isoflurane anesthesia in
horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2013; 15: 242–244.
59 Loomes K, Louro LF. Recovery of horses from general anaesthesia: a systematic
review (2000–2020) of risk factors and influence of interventions during the recov-
ery period. Equine Vet J 2022; 54: 201–218.
60 Banquler SH, Kona-Brown JJ. Comparison of the effects of xylazine and romifidine
administered perioperatively on the recovery of anesthetized horses. Can Vet J
2011; 52: 987–993.
61 de Miguel Garcia C, Campoy L, Parry S, et al. Questionnaire on the process of
recovering horses from general anesthesia and associated personnel injury in
equine practice. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48: 223–229.
62 Arndt S, Hopster K, Sill V, et al. Comparison between head-tail-rope assisted and
unassisted recoveries in healthy horses undergoing general anesthesia for elective
surgeries. Vet Surg 2020; 49: 329–338.
63 Louro LF, Robson K, Hughes J, et al. Head and tail rope-assisted recovery improves
quality of recovery from general anaesthesia in horses undergoing emergency
exploratory laparotomy. Equine Vet J 2022; 54: 875–884.

-- 1067 of 1450 --

53
1052
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of L umb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
Special considerations exist for general anesthesia in farm animals,
such as cattle, small ruminants, camelids, and pigs, due to their
unique anatomy and physiology as well as their normal behaviors.
Cattle, sheep, and goats have a stomach that is divided into four com-
partments, whereas llamas and alpacas have three compartments.
Though anatomically different, the digestive system of these animals
functions similarly. Significant size and body weight differences exist,
varying from 2–3 kg immediately after birth to 500–1000 kg when
fully grown. Accurate dosing of injectable drugs and appropriately
sized anesthetic equipment and accessories should be available.
Ruminants are generally docile and tolerate physical restraint well,
allowing many minor surgical procedures to be performed in the
conscious patient with regional anesthesia. Because camelids and
swine are less tolerant of physical restraint, general anesthesia is more
frequently performed for even minor surgical procedures.
Farm animals share nociceptive pathway anatomy and physiol-
ogy with other mammals and, therefore, have the ability to process
information similarly. Analgesia is an essential part of surgical
and anesthetic management. When surgical procedures require
general anesthesia, balanced anesthetic techniques should be
employed to provide unconsciousness, amnesia, and muscle relaxa-
tion. Minimizing the stress response induced by handling, surgery,
and anesthesia is also important.
Anesthesia and surgery can be costly relative to the value of the
animal whose ultimate purpose is slaughter for human consump-
tion. In addition, anesthetics, sedatives, and analgesics commonly
used in farm animal practice may not have regulatory approval for
use in ruminants, camelids, and swine [1,2]. In the United States,
the Animal Medicinal Drug Use Clarification Act (AMDUCA) of
1994 codifies the requirements for extra-label drug use (ELDU). In
general, ELDU is permitted when animal health is threatened or
death may result if a condition is untreated; however, the prescrib-
ing veterinarian is responsible for advising owners to ensure that no
residual drug reaches processors or consumers [3].
Many anesthetics have short plasma elimination half-lives (t½
)
and achieve general anesthesia at low tissue concentrations due to
their potency. Nevertheless, veterinarians should consult the Food
Animal Residual Avoidance Databank (FARAD) for guidance on
estimated meat and milk withdrawal intervals for ELDU of analge-
sics, tranquilizers, and injectable anesthetics as well as for updates
on drugs where extra-label use is prohibited [1,2,4,5] (Table 53.1).
Practitioners working outside the United States should consult the
appropriate regulations for their practice area to determine the spe-
cific requirements for drug use in animals intended for food pro-
duction. Camelids are considered fiber animals, so concerns for
withdrawal times and violative drug residues are minimal.
In addition to use as food, farm animal species of all types are
often kept as companion animal pets. In particular, pot-bellied pigs
have become popular house pets in the last two decades. There are
many anatomic and physiologic characteristics of pigs that make
anesthetic management challenging. Although the commercial
value of these pets may not be extraordinary, their owners are often
willing to spend more for veterinary care. Although it is unlikely for
a companion animal to end up in the food chain, the possibility of a
pot-bellied pig being slaughtered for food consumption does
53 Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia –
Ruminants and Swine
HuiChu Lin
Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 1052
Drug administration, 1054
Positioning during anesthesia, 1056
Cardiovascular system, 1056
Respiratory system, 1057
Gastrointestinal tract, 1057
Ruminal tympany, 1057
Regurgitation, 1057
Salivation, 1058
Endotracheal intubation, 1058
Thermoregulation, 1060
Hypothermia, 1060
Malignant hyperthermia, 1060
Species differences in anesthetic dose requirements, 1061
Airway management during recovery, 1061
Acknowledgment, 1062
References, 1062

-- 1068 of 1450 --

Table 53.1 The recommended withdrawal interval for ruminants for single and multiple treatments of anesthetic and analgesic drugs.
Drug 	Species 	Dose (mg/kg) 	Milk withdrawal
interval (hours)
Meat withdrawal
interval (days)
Country
Acepromazine 	Cattle, sheep, goats 	≤ 0.13 IV
≤ 0.44 IM
48 	7 	United States
Acepromazine 	Swine 	≤ 0.055 IV
≤ 0.44 IM
– 	7 	United States
Acepromazine 	Cattle 	0.13 IV
0.27 IM
48 	2 	Australia
Acepromazine 	Cattle 	0.055 IV
0.13–0.44 IM
0.13–0.26 PO
48 	7 	Canada
Acepromazine 	Swine 	≤ 0.13 IM 	– 	7 	Canada
Aspirin 	Cattle, sheep, goats 	≤ 100 q 12 h 	24 	1 	United States
Atropine 	Cattle, sheep, goats 	Anesthetic adjunct 	24 	7 	United States
Atropine 	Cattle
Sheep
0.03–0.06 IV, IM, SC, q 24 h
0.08–0.16 IV, IM, SC, q 24 h
Multiple doses, ≤ 0.2 mg/kg
72
144
14
28
United Kingdom
Antidote
Atropine 	Swine 	0.02–0.04 IV, IM, SC, q 24 h
Multiple doses, ≤ 0.2 mg/kg
72
144
14
28
United Kingdom
Antidote
Bupivacaine 	Cattle
Sheep, goats
0.05
1.5–1.8
Cleared rapidly 	Cleared rapidly 	United States
Butorphanol 	Cattle 	0.02–0.25 IV 	72 	4 or 5 	United States
Butorphanol 	Sheep 	0.022–0.05 IV, IM 	48 	2 	United States
Detomidine 	Cattle, sheep, goats 	≤ 0.08 IV or IM 	72 	3 	United States
Detomidine 	Cattle 	0.02–0.08 IV or IM 	72 	1 	Switzerland
Diazepam 	Cattle, sheep, goats 	≤ 0.1 IV 	10 	United States
DMSO 	Cattle, sheep, goats 	Not specified 	96 	4 	United States
Fentanyl 	Goats 	50 μg/h, transdermal patch 	48–96 	2–4 	United States
Flunixin meglumine 	Cattle 	≤ 2.2 IV q 24 h for ≤ 3 days
≤ 2.2 IV once
≤ 2.2 IM, SC, PO, once
≤ 2.2 IM, SC, PO, multiple doses
36
84
96
≤ 60
4
7
10
–
United States
Flunixin meglumine 	Swine 	2.2 IM
2.2 IV or PO, ≥ 1 dose
2.2 IM, if product not labeled for swine
12
21
13–15
– 	United States
Guaifenesin 	Cattle, sheep, goats 	≤ 100 IV 	48 	3 	United States
Guaifenesin 	Cattle 	60–100 IV 	Not specified 	Not specified 	Switzerland
Ketamine 	Cattle, sheep, goats 	≤ 2 IV
10 IM
48 	3 	United States
Ketamine 	Swine 	≤ 10 IV or IM
20
– 	2
4
United States
Ketamine 	Cattle 	5 IV
10–20 IM
0 	0 	France
Ketamine 	Cattle 	Adult: 2 IV
Calves: ≤ 10 IV
72 	1 	Switzerland
Ketoprofen 	Cattle, sheep, goats 	≤ 3.3 q 24 h for ≤ 3 days 	24 	7 	United States
Lidocaine (with
epinephrine)
Cattle, sheep, goats 	Infiltration epidural 	24 	1 	United States
Lidocaine (2%) 	Cattle 	≤ 15 mL epidural
≤ 100 mL SC
24
72
1
4
United States
Meloxicam 	Cattle 	0.5 IM, SC 	120 	15 	European countries
Meloxicam 	Swine 	– 	– 	5 	European countries
Meloxicam 	Cattle, sheep, goats 	0.5–1 PO, single dose
≤ 1 PO, multiple doses
1 PO, single dose
21
30
15
– 	United States
Meloxicam 	Cattle
Sheep
Injectable formulation 	96
11 days
20
11
Australia, New Zealand
Meloxicam 	Swine 	Injectable formulation 	– 	5 	Australia, New Zealand
Meloxicam 	Cattle
Sheep
Injectable formulation 	96
11 days
20
11
Canada
Meloxicam 	Cattle (not in lactating
animals)
Oral formulation 	– 	35 	Canada
Meloxicam 	Swine 	Injectable formulation 	– 	5 	Canada
Meperidine 	Cattle, sheep, goats 	2–4 	48–96 	2–4 	United States
Morphine 	Cattle, sheep, goats 	0.1 once, IV, IM, epidural 	48 	14 	United States
Phenylbutazone 	Cattle, sheep, goats 	Not recommended, prolonged excretion. In
the United States, it is illegal to use
phenylbutazone in female dairy cattle ≥
20 months of age.
– 	– 	United States
(Continued)

-- 1069 of 1450 --

1054 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
exist [6]. Therefore, it is important that owners be educated about
the potential drug residues in the meat. Special considerations for
laboratory swine are discussed extensively elsewhere [7,8].
Drug administration
Oral administration of a tranquilizer or sedative is sometimes
needed to facilitate capture and/or reduce stress associated with
restraint. In ruminants and camelids, oral medication is absorbed
primarily via the rumen. Absorption is affected by motility and the
pH of the ruminal fluid. Reticuloruminal motility is primarily con-
trolled by the medullary gastric center in the brain. Physical condi-
tions like central nervous system depression, pain, fear, excitement,
pyrexia, endotoxemia, hypocalcemia, and extreme wall distension
(e.g., rumen tympany) tend to reduce rumen motility. Analgesics
and anesthetics like opioids, α2 -adrenergic receptor agonists, and
general anesthetics also decrease gastric motility, resulting in pro-
longed gastric emptying time and enhanced drug absorption [13].
The pH difference of saliva (8.2), plasma (7.4), and ruminal con-
tents (5.5–6.5) affects drug absorption by altering drug ionization.
Ionization and the amount of drug in saliva, plasma, and the rumen
are constantly changing, making it difficult to predict bioavailabil-
ity and distribution of orally administered drugs (e.g., tranquilizers,
sedatives, or injectable anesthetics) [13]. In monogastric animals
like pigs, the pH in the stomach is acidic (1.5–2.5) [14]. As a result,
absorption from the gastrointestinal tract is more predictable in
these species leading to greater bioavailability of orally adminis-
tered sedative drugs. Oral administration of trazodone (8–10 mg/
kg) and gabapentin (20 mg/kg) can be given to pet miniature pigs
the night before and again 2 h prior to the veterinary visit to reduce
stress and ease restraint for minor procedures such as hoof
trim [15]. Intranasal administration of a sedative such as mida-
zolam (0.4 mg/kg) has been reported to produce calming effects in
pigs with a bioavailability of 64% and a terminal t½ of 145 min, com-
pared to 158 min following intravenous (IV) administration. Rapid
anxiolytic effects and sedation occurred within 3–4 min following
administration of either 0.2 or 0.4 mg/kg [16].
The external jugular veins of ruminants are easily palpable and
visualized when occluded. A 14 gauge, 2–3 inch needle can be
placed in the jugular vein of adult cattle for administration of inject-
able anesthetics and fluids during surgery. A 14 gauge, 5¼-inch
over- the- needle indwelling catheter may be placed and secured
for longer duration IV medication or fluid therapy. A surgical cut-
down can be performed to facilitate insertion of the catheter
through the thick skin of adult cattle. A 16 or 18 gauge IV catheter
is appropriate for calves and small ruminants. The technique for IV
catheterization in smaller ruminant species is similar to that used in
calves. However, skin incision is generally not needed in smaller
ruminants and the jugular vein is easily visualized when occluded.
Venipuncture and catheterization can be difficult in camelids
because these animals have thick fiber coats and neck skin. More
importantly, they do not have a jugular furrow, and the external jugu-
lar veins lie deep to the sternomandibularis and brachiocephalicus
muscles, ventral to the cervical vertebral transverse processes, and
superficial to the carotid artery and vagosympathetic trunk within
the carotid sheath for most of their length [17–21]. External jugular
veins of camelids are not always visible even with occlusion of the
vessels, particularly in adult males. Camelids, like other long-necked
animals, have four or five jugular vein valves located at irregular
intervals to prevent blood pooling in the head when the animal
grazes. The presence of these valves can hinder the advancement of
an IV catheter, even when correct catheter placement is confirmed by
blood flowing into the stylet of the catheter. The right external jugular
vein is preferred for venipuncture and catheterization to avoid dam-
age to the esophagus, which runs on the left side of the neck. The
landmarks for venipuncture in camelids are the cranial portion of the
neck at the level of the mandible, on the caudoventral aspect of the
neck, medial to the fifth cervical vertebral transverse process [19]
(Fig. 53.1). Care should be taken to verify that a catheter is not acci-
dentally placed in the carotid artery before injection of medications.
Venous blood of camelids appears to be bright red and, thus, may
be mistaken for arterial blood. It has been suggested that the adap-
tations essential to high altitude existence are responsible for the
bright red color of camelid venous blood, including the elliptical
Table 53.1 (Continued)
Drug 	Species 	Dose (mg/kg) 	Milk withdrawal
interval (hours)
Meat withdrawal
interval (days)
Country
Propofol 	Calves 	3 IV 	Cannot be determined 	3 	United States
Telazol® 	Swine 	≤ 2 IM 	30 	– 	United States
Tolazoline 	Cattle 	2–4 IV 	48 	8 	New Zealand, United
States
Ultrashort-acting
barbiturates
Cattle, sheep, goats 	Thiamylal: ≤ 5.5
Thiopental: ≤ 9.4
24 	1 	United States
Xylazine 	Cattle
Sheep
Goats
0.016–0.1 IV
0.05–0.3 IM
0.2 IM
72
24
120
5
4
10
United States
Xylazine 	Cattle 	0.11–0.33 IM 	48 	3 	Canada
Xylazine 	Cattle 	0.025–0.15 IV
0.025–0.3 IM
0 	2 	France
Xylazine 	Cattle 	0.016–0.1 IV
0.01–0.3 IM
1.2–2 IM
72
120
3
7
Germany
Xylazine 	Cattle 	0.05–0.4 IM 	24 	4 	New Zealand
Xylazine 	Cattle 	0.016–0.1 IV
0.05–0.3 IM
72 	3 	Switzerland
Xylazine 	Cattle 	0.05–0.3 IM 	48 	14 	United Kingdom
Yohimbine 	Cattle, sheep, goats 	≤ 0.3 IV 	72 	7 	United States
IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; PO, per os; SC, subcutaneous.
Source: Craigmill et al. [1]; Fajt [5]; Coetzee [9]; Haskel et al. [10]; Valverde and Doherty [11]; Passler [12].

-- 1070 of 1450 --

Chapter 53: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Ruminants and Swine 	1055
shape of their red blood cells, the relatively high concentration of
hemoglobin in red cells, and a left-shifted oxygen–hemoglobin dis-
sociation curve [22]. Attention to an absence of characteristic pul-
satile arterial flow will help prevent inadvertent carotid arterial
injection [19]. A 14 gauge indwelling catheter is appropriate for
adult camelids, and a 16 or 18 gauge catheter is suitable for crias.
The catheter should be secured with suture or a bandage. Skin cut-
down is helpful in passing the catheter into the jugular vein [23,24].
Distension of the jugular vein with sterile saline facilitates
advancement. If distension of the vessel is unsuccessful, relocate
the placement site 1–2 cm cranially or caudally from the previous
site [24]. The auricular (ear) vein is an alternative site for IV injec-
tion using a 25 gauge needle or butterfly catheter to deliver a small
volume of sedative drug to cooperative camelids.
Pigs usually resist physical restraint. They are easily stressed when
restrained and generally respond by constant struggling and vocali-
zation [25–27]. Preanesthetic physical examination and evaluation
should be as stress-free as possible, especially since some pigs are
susceptible to the genetic disorder, malignant hyperthermia (MH),
or porcine stress syndrome (see below). Hog boards or crowd/sort-
ing boards (36.5 × 30.5 inches) can be used to confine a pig to a small
area in order to facilitate physical examination or drug administra-
tion by limiting the pig’s movement. A “forking” technique has been
used in pigs to reduce anxiety, produce calming effects, and mini-
mize stress prior to intramuscular (IM) injection of drugs [28]. IM
administration of midazolam (0.1–0.5 mg/kg) [15,29]; midazolam
(0.1–0.3 mg/kg) and butorphanol (0.1–0.3 mg/kg) [30]; midazolam
(0.2 mg/kg), butorphanol (0.2–0.4 mg/kg), and xylazine (1 mg/
kg) [29]; or dexmedetomidine (0.01–0.04 mg/kg) [30] have been
administered for preanesthetic chemical restraint and sedation.
In general, rapid IM administration tends to be less stressful than
IV administration for pigs. Most pigs have a thick layer of subcuta-
neous fat, especially pot-bellied pigs. The adipose tissue layers in
the neck and rump are particularly thick. Accurate deposition of
preanesthetics or anesthetics into the muscle layer requires a needle
of adequate length. Too short a needle will result in depositing the
drug into the adipose tissue and slowed onset of action. It is recom-
mended that the IM injection be made in the divot behind the base
of the ear near the lateral aspect of the second cervical vertebra
where the fat layer overlying the muscle is thin [31]. This author
prefers a 23 gauge, 1½ inch needle for IM injection in these muscles
as it appears to induce less pain and pigs often do not respond. At
the cervical or thoracic areas of the trapezius muscle, at least a
2 inch long needle will be required to ensure drug injection into
muscle tissue. Inconsistent effects are observed more frequently if
shorter needles are used in these areas [25]. Alternatively, IM injec-
tion can be made at the semimembranosus and semitendinosus
muscles located just above the hock or in the caudal portion of the
biceps femoris muscle [25]. In pigs intended as food, IM injection
into the “ham” muscles including gluteal, semimembranosus, and
semitendinosus muscles is not recommended because of the poten-
tial for muscle inflammation and fibrosis [32].
IV injection of preanesthetics or anesthetics in pigs can be very
difficult, particularly in pot-bellied pigs, because of the lack of visi-
ble superficial veins. On occasion, an auricular vein can be used for
IV injection if the pig cooperates or is easily restrained (Fig. 53.2).
Ideally, deep sedation and immobilization is achieved first with IM
injection. The jugular vein or anterior vena cava can be used for IV
injection, but this technique is difficult due to the thick neck and
abundant jowls.
Auricular veins, especially lateral auricular veins, are common
sites for IV injection because they are superficial and easily accessi-
ble. However, in dark-colored ears, IV injection remains challenging
(e.g., pot-bellied pigs). In larger adults, the central dorsal auricular
vein is often utilized. An 18 or 20 gauge, 1–1½ inch hypodermic
needle, indwelling catheter, or butterfly catheter can be used, while a
21 or 23 gauge needle is suitable for smaller ears. A butterfly catheter
has a shorter needle and tends to stay in the vessel better than hypo-
dermic needles, especially when the animal struggles during the
injection. An indwelling catheter can be placed in an auricular,
cephalic, or superficial abdominal/mammary vein if postoperative
IV medication and/or fluid therapy are needed. In debilitated pigs,
when repeated administration of medications or continuous fluid
therapy is required, a central venous catheter can be placed in the
jugular vein via the Seldinger technique using a large animal long-
term venous catheterization kit (e.g., Mila International Inc.) with
the pig under general anesthesia (Fig. 53.3) [33].
Intramedullary cannulation has been used for fluid and drug
administration when other vascular access cannot be established.
An 18 gauge cannula can be placed into either the greater tubercle
of the humerus or the trochanteric fossa of the femur. Although this
technique is performed easily in immature pigs, rate of fluid admin-
istration may be limited in older pigs due to the presence of fat and
fibrosis of the medullary canal [34].
Figure 53.2 Intravenous injection in the auricular vein in a pig. Source:
Dr. HuiChu Lin, with permission.
Figure 53.1 Intravenous catheterization in a llama. Source: Dr. HuiChu
Lin, with permission.

-- 1071 of 1450 --

1056 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
Positioning during anesthesia
Neuromyopathy has been associated with improper positioning
and inadequate padding of the surgery table. Myopathy does not
occur readily in large ruminants, but nerve paralysis has been
observed. Adult cattle should be placed on a 10-cm- thick high-
density foam pad, whereas a 5-cm- thick foam pad is sufficient for
calves, small ruminants, and camelids. When placing adult cattle in
dorsal recumbency, the animal should be balanced squarely on its
back with the gluteal areas bearing equal weight. All limbs should
be flexed and relaxed. In lateral recumbency, an automotive inner
tube (valve stem pointed down) can be placed under the elbow of
the dependent (lower) forelimb to prevent radial nerve paralysis.
The dependent forelimb is placed through the inner tube and the
tube positioned directly under the shoulder, which prevents pres-
sure on the radial nerve as it traverses the musculospiral groove of
the humerus. The bony point of the shoulder should be positioned
within the hollow center of the inner tube. Non-elastic or duct tape
can be wrapped over the part of the inner tube not under the weight
of the shoulder (opposite the valve stem) to prevent the tube from
collapsing under the shoulder thereby ensuring support.
Once the inner tube is in place, pull the dependent forelimb ante-
riorly so the weight of the thorax rests on the triceps but not the
humerus. Both uppermost limbs (front and hindlimbs) should be
elevated and parallel to the table surface to minimize the pressure
on the radial, femoral, or peroneal nerve of the dependent limb and
prevent nerve paralysis. The head and neck should be at a slightly
extended position (Figs. 53.4 and 53.5). The dependent eye needs
to be protected by administration of ophthalmic ointment and
ensuring closure of the eye to minimize the risk of corneal
ulcer [35,36]. For camelids, similar precautions should be instituted
to prevent radial nerve paralysis. A padded, supporting “H block”
made of styrofoam with duct tape around the exterior can be used
to support the upper, non-dependent limbs and keep pressure off
the lower, dependent limbs. In dorsal recumbency, overflexion or
overstretching of the limbs to clear the limbs from the operative site
with ropes should be avoided. Camelids have prominent eyes and
administration of ophthalmic ointment and additional padding
with gauze or soft towels under the dependent eye will minimize
the potential for corneal laceration or ulceration [37].
Cardiovascular system
Cardiopulmonary depression associated with commonly used
anesthetics tends to result in hypoventilation and hypoxemia [38].
Furthermore, compression of the great vessels such as the vena
cava by the weight of abdominal viscera while in lateral or dorsal
recumbency can result in decreased venous return, cardiac output,
arterial blood pressures, and tissue perfusion [39]. Studies have
shown that ventilation, cardiac output, and arterial blood pressure
are better maintained when animals are positioned in sternal
recumbency [40,41]. Unfortunately, many surgical procedures per-
formed under general anesthesia require the animal to be placed in
lateral or dorsal recumbency for easy surgical access. Nevertheless,
arterial blood pressure in cattle in most instances is maintained
within acceptable limits during anesthesia [35].
In calves during isoflurane anesthesia, heart rate was reported to
be 92 beats/min, and systolic, mean, and diastolic arterial blood
pressures were 87, 63, and 49 mmHg, respectively [42]. These
values were similar to those reported in calves anesthetized with
xylazine–ketamine and isoflurane [43]. In 8–12-week-old Holstein
calves anesthetized with sevoflurane, heart rate was 72 beats/min
with a mean arterial blood pressure of 91 mmHg [44], whereas
in calves anesthetized with desflurane, heart rate was 87 beats/min
and mean arterial blood pressure was 75 mmHg [45]. Arnes et al.
reported that invasive (direct) measurements of systolic, mean, and
diastolic arterial blood pressures in isoflurane-anesthetized sheep
Figure 53.3 Jugular catheterization in a pig. Source: Dr. HuiChu Lin, with
permission.
Figure 53.4 Positioning of the head and neck during lateral recumbency in
a bull. Source: Dr. HuiChu Lin, with permission.
Figure 53.5 Supportive H block and inner tube to prevent neuromyopathy
during lateral recumbency in a bull. Source: Dr. HuiChu Lin, with
permission.

-- 1072 of 1450 --

Chapter 53: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Ruminants and Swine 	1057
and goats, cattle < 150 kg, and cattle > 150 kg were 101, 78, and
64 mmHg; 116, 91, and 74 mmHg; and 131, 107, and 91 mmHg,
respectively [46]. This report demonstrated that non-invasive oscil-
lometric blood pressure measurements did not accurately represent
the true blood pressure and, thus, cannot be used to predict directly
measured arterial blood pressures. Therefore, it is important to
monitor direct arterial blood pressure using invasive blood pressure
techniques whenever possible in clinical practice. The auricular
artery in ruminants and camelids can be used for arterial catheter
placement for direct arterial blood pressure measurements. In pot-
bellied pigs, arterial catheterization may be more difficult due to the
small size of the auricular artery. However, a small gauge catheter
(e.g., 22 gauge) may be placed successfully.
Hypertension is sometimes observed in bulls and adult cows
positioned in lateral recumbency during inhalational anesthesia
with systolic blood pressures > 200 mmHg and diastolic pressures >
120 mmHg [47,48]. This hypertension was observed frequently
when thiopental was used for induction of anesthesia in healthy
adult cattle. The animals appeared to be under an appropriate plane
of anesthesia and no intervention was undertaken (personal obser-
vation). Administration of xylazine or acepromazine preanestheti-
cally or as part of the induction anesthetic regimen tends to decrease
arterial blood pressures [49].
Respiratory system
Positional changes required for anesthesia and surgery can result
in significant mismatching of ventilation and perfusion and cattle
tend to have greater differences between alveolar and arterial O 2
partial pressures (PA
O 2 – PaO 2 ) than horses, particularly if placed
in dorsal recumbency (even in the conscious state) [50–52]. This is
a result of gravity and the weight of the chest wall on pulmonary
blood flow and alveolar ventilation [50,51]. Normal, conscious cat-
tle breathe with a smaller tidal volume and faster respiratory rate
than do horses. Factors thought to be responsible for this include
smaller and completely separated bovine lung lobes [53]; lower
work of breathing due to a greater maximum change in pleural
pressure and the non-elastic work of breathing as well as lower
dynamic lung compliance [54,55]; decreased breathing efficiency
due to a diaphragm that is flatter and more vertical in conforma-
tion [56]; a large, easily expandable stomach which sits immedi-
ately caudal to the diaphragm and, when filled to its maximum,
occupies three-quarters of the abdominal cavity [57–59]; and,
finally, a tendency to greater alveolar ventilation and higher O 2
consumption [60].
Lateral or dorsal recumbency causes the weight of the abdominal
viscera to shift downward and forward, pushing the diaphragm fur-
ther into the thoracic cavity, resulting in decreased functional resid-
ual capacity. The rumen of adult cattle is a large fermentation
chamber with a capacity of 115–150 L or 250–300 g/kg of body
weight. Preanesthetic fasting may reduce the degree of fermentation,
but fermentation continues during anesthesia and gas accumulates
in the rumen due to prohibition of eructation, resulting in increased
intragastric pressure. As a result, lung compliance, tidal volume, and
minute ventilation decrease significantly. This, in turn, increases the
degree of ventilation–perfusion mismatch and the subsequent
development of hypoventilation and hypoxemia [40,41].
Lateral recumbency has been reported to cause a significant
decrease in PaO 2 in conscious sheep [61]. Severe hypoxemia and
pulmonary edema have been implicated as the cause of death in
sheep that die under anesthesia when xylazine has been adminis-
tered [62–64]. Hypoxemia has also been observed in standing
sheep during xylazine sedation [65,66]. All α2 -adrenergic recep-
tor agonists cause significant decreases in PaO 2 in sheep without
affecting PaCO 2 [67]. Increased airway pressure [68], severe pul-
monary parenchymal damage [69], as well as bronchospasm and
venospasm [70] occur as a result of peripheral α2 -adrenergic
stimulation 	and 	activation 	of 	pulmonary 	intravascular
macrophages.
Gastrointestinal tract
Ruminal tympany
Ruminal tympany may occur during general anesthesia of rumi-
nants because fermentation continues in anesthetized animals.
Postprandial gas production of an average of 30 L/h has been
reported in cattle [71]. Normal, conscious animals are able to
relieve the gas produced by fermentation through the esophagus.
However, sedatives, anesthetics, and some body positions inhibit
gastrointestinal motility and inhibit eructation. Placement of an
orogastric tube helps to minimize accumulation of gas and bloat-
ing as a result of fermentation and ruminal tympany during
anesthesia.
Regurgitation
Regurgitation and aspiration of stomach contents can occur in rumi-
nants and camelids during anesthesia, particularly in non-fasted ani-
mals. The chance of regurgitation decreases significantly when water
is restricted for 6–12 h and feed withheld for 12–24 h prior to anes-
thesia. Adult cattle have a large rumen that is usually full of liquid
material and does not empty completely even after 24–48 h of fasting.
Regurgitation tends to occur more frequently when animals are in
left lateral compared to right lateral recumbency. It can occur during
either light (active regurgitation) or deep (passive regurgitation)
anesthesia in spite of preanesthetic fasting and water withholding.
Active regurgitation occurs during light anesthesia and is character-
ized by explosive discharge of large quantities of ruminal material.
Passive regurgitation occurs during deep planes of anesthesia when
the esophageal muscles and transluminal pressure gradients relax. If
the airway is not protected, a large amount of ruminal material can be
inhaled into the trachea and reach the small airways. Consequences
of aspiration of acidic ruminal content may include aspiration pneu-
monia. Aspiration pneumonia is often characterized by reflex airway
closure, bronchospasm, destruction of type II alveolar cells and pul-
monary capillary lining cells, pulmonary edema and hemorrhage,
dyspnea, hypoxemia, and cyanosis.
The prognosis following aspiration depends on the amount and
the pH of the ruminal material [71]. Pigs tend to have very acidic
stomach contents with pH values as low as 1.5–2.5 [10], but pH
values remain between 5.5 and 6.5 for the rumen [13] and between
6.4 and 7.0 for the C-1 compartment of camelids [37]. Thus, in
ruminants and camelids, the impact of aspiration depends more on
the amount of bacterial microflora and solid food materials aspi-
rated, whereas in pigs the acidity of the aspirate is directly damaging
to pulmonary tissues. Nevertheless, reflex airway constriction,
mechanical airway obstruction, and aspiration of bacteria occur
and can be life threatening in ruminants [71]. In extreme cases,
the animal dies before an endotracheal tube can be placed to pro-
tect the airway. Preoperative withholding of feed and water and
keeping the animal in sternal recumbency with the head elevated
until an endotracheal tube is securely in place and the cuff inflated
following induction are recommended in all anesthetized ruminants
and camelids. Active suction can be used to remove regurgitant
from the oral cavity if necessary.

-- 1073 of 1450 --

1058 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
Pigs are monogastric, and regurgitation does not occur as com-
monly as in ruminants. However, vomiting can result if pigs are not
fasted before anesthesia and following the administration of xyla-
zine. Maropitant, a neurokinin-1 receptor antagonist, is licensed for
use as an antiemetic drug in dogs and cats. Maropitant has oral bio-
availability of 20% and 50% in dogs and cats, respectively [72]. In
addition, maropitant infusions reduce the minimum alveolar con-
centration of sevoflurane [73,74]. Maropitant is reported to prevent
vomiting effectively in dogs and cats [72,75,76]. However, its effec-
tiveness for postoperative nausea and vomiting in dogs is contro-
versial [77,78]. In cats receiving 0.44 mg/kg of xylazine, maropitant
was reported to be effective in reducing emesis and motion sickness
by 76%, 90%, and 100%, following SC, PO, and IV administration,
respectively [72]. There are no reports of the use of maropitant in
pigs, but its administration may be useful in preventing vomiting
during the perianesthetic period. In pigs, withholding food for 12 h
is sufficient for most elective surgeries, while 24 h may be required
for stomach or small intestinal surgeries [27,79]. Water can be
allowed until the time of preanesthetic administration although
some authors recommend withholding water for 2 h for most elec-
tive surgeries [80] and 4–6 h for stomach or small intestinal surger-
ies [79,81]. It has been recommended to remove hay, alfalfa, or
straw from the diet and environment for a minimum of 2–3 days
prior to anesthesia to avoid prolonged gastric emptying time and
minimize the potential for postoperative vomiting.
Salivation
Ruminants normally salivate profusely during anesthesia. Total
amounts of salivary secretion in conscious adult cattle and sheep
have been reported to be 50 and 6–16 L per 24 h, respectively [82,83].
If the trachea is left unprotected during anesthesia, aspiration of
large amounts of saliva can cause complications. Thus, tracheal
intubation with appropriate inflation of the cuff should be insti-
tuted immediately following induction. For large ruminants, posi-
tioning the animal on the surgery table in a way that the throat latch
is elevated relative to the mouth and thoracic inlet helps to drain
and prevent pooling of saliva and regurgitant in the oral cavity (see
Fig. 53.4). Placing a sandbag or rolled towel under the neck of
smaller ruminants or camelids to elevate the throat latch allows
saliva and regurgitant to flow away from the airway opening [84]
(Fig. 53.6). In addition, active suction can be used to remove exces-
sive saliva from the oral cavity and avoid accumulation and poten-
tial aspiration of the saliva and/or regurgitant.
Endotracheal intubation
Tracheal intubation is relatively difficult to accomplish in farm ani-
mals. Blind intubation, as performed in horses, is less likely to suc-
ceed. For large ruminants, this author’s preference is to use the
digital palpation technique to guide the endotracheal tube into the
trachea with the animal in either sternal or lateral recumbency
immediately following induction of anesthesia. Another technique
is to use a stomach tube as stylet and, with the aid of digital palpa-
tion, to place the stomach tube in the trachea. The anesthetist then
threads the endotracheal tube into the trachea and removes the
stomach tube once the endotracheal tube is in place.
In calves, intubation is easier when the animal is placed in sternal
recumbency and an assistant pulls the mouth open by placing a
loop of gauze around the upper jaw and a second loop around the
lower jaw. An assistant should lift the head up and keep the head
and the neck in a straight line to allow visualization of the epiglottis
and the larynx. If the larynx cannot be visualized, the neck should
be extended further. A laryngoscope with a long blade (250–
350 mm) can be used to depress the tongue base and the epiglottis
to enable visualization of the larynx. A “guide tube” or “stylet” (e.g.,
two 10 French, 22 inch long polyethylene canine urethral catheters
taped together to make up three times the length of the endotra-
cheal tube) can be used (Figs. 53.7 and 53.8). A cuffed endotracheal
tube will prevent regurgitation and aspiration of ruminal contents,
and the calf should be maintained in sternal recumbency until the
cuff is inflated.
Intubation in small ruminants and camelids is more difficult
when compared to carnivores, because their jaws cannot be opened
as widely, their intermandibular space is narrow, and the laryngeal
opening is invisible behind the thick base of the tongue. In addition,
the elongated soft palate may be situated either ventral or dorsal to
the epiglottis in llamas and alpacas [37]. In general, the technique
used for tracheal intubation of small ruminants and camelids is
similar to that used in calves. With the animal in sternal recum-
bency, intubation is accomplished with the help of a guide tube or
stylet and a long-bladed laryngoscope (250–350 mm) as described
for calves previously. Hyperextending the animal’s neck is some-
times helpful in visualizing the larynx (see Figs 53.7 and 53.8). If
difficulty is encountered in advancing the endotracheal tube
through the larynx into the trachea, repositioning of the head, fix-
ing the larynx from the exterior, and gently rotating the tube 360°
while advancing the tube are recommended. Most importantly, the
animal must be adequately anesthetized, and lidocaine may be
Figure 53.6 Elevation of the throat latch during lateral recumbency in a
goat. Source: Dr. HuiChu Lin, with permission.

-- 1074 of 1450 --

Chapter 53: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Ruminants and Swine 	1059
applied to the arytenoids to prevent laryngospasms. Similar to
calves, a cuffed endotracheal tube should be used, and the animal
should be maintained in sternal recumbency until the cuff is
inflated appropriately. Blind intubation, similar to that used in
horses, has been used for intubation in sheep and goats. However,
this technique may require multiple attempts in order to success-
fully place the endotracheal tube in the trachea.
Another technique described as “stick intubation” has been used
effectively in small ruminants in the field. With the animal in lateral
recumbency, a small-diameter rod made of wood or stainless steel
can be used as a stylet to stiffen the endotracheal tube, with one
hand occluding the esophagus, while the other hand manipulates
the endotracheal tube into the trachea (Fig. 53.9). Care and gentle
maneuvering should always be used to prevent laryngeal spasm and
minimize trauma to the oral mucous membranes.
Of all domestic species, endotracheal intubation has proven to be
most difficult in pigs because the mouth cannot be widely opened,
the epiglottis is often entrapped behind the soft palate, the promi-
nent dorsal protrusion of the base of the tongue obstructs the view
for direct visualization of the larynx, the small larynx slopes down-
ward creating an acute angle to the tracheal opening (ventral floor
fornix), and they are prone to laryngeal spasm. Vomiting can also
occur if intubation is attempted when the pig is under a light plane
of anesthesia, especially when the animal is not appropriately fasted
prior to anesthesia. Application of a small amount of a local anes-
thetic (e.g., 2% lidocaine solution) to desensitize the larynx may
reduce the potential for laryngeal spasm. In larger or adult pigs, tra-
cheal intubation is easier to accomplish with the pig in sternal
recumbency. Using the same technique as in small ruminants and
camelids with the aid of a laryngoscope and stylet, the epiglottis and
laryngeal aperture can be visualized. Keeping in mind the acute
angle between the larynx and tracheal opening, it is helpful to put
some dorsal pressure at the end of the endotracheal tube as it enters
the larynx. This technique keeps the tip of the tube slightly elevated
Figure 53.7 Endotracheal intubation of a llama. Source: Dr. HuiChu Lin,
with permission.
Figure 53.8 Endotracheal tracheal tube, “guide tube” (stylet), and
laryngoscope used for calves, small ruminants, camelids, and pigs.
Source: Dr. HuiChu Lin, with permission.
Figure 53.9 “Stick intubation” technique in a goat. Source: Dr. HuiChu Lin,
with permission.

-- 1075 of 1450 --

1060 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
as it advances into the trachea. Other helpful tips for successful
endotracheal intubation in pigs are to spin the tube 180° or use a
screw-like approach and advance it in a dorsal direction as the tube
passes through the arytenoid cartilages and enters the trachea
[8,25,85,86]. Correct placement of the tube in the trachea should be
confirmed by capnography.
Thermoregulation
Hypothermia
Decreased heat production and increased heat loss are the primary
causes of hypothermia observed during anesthesia and surgery [87].
Hypothermia is a common anesthetic complication in small com-
panion animals but is rarely an issue for adult cattle and camelids
because of their large body mass to surface area ratio. The body
temperature of adult cattle and camelids seldom drops more than
0.5 °C during anesthesia if none of the major body cavities are
opened. However, hypothermia can be a significant problem in
small ruminants, particularly in pediatric patients. Hypothermia
results in reduction of anesthetic requirements and prolonged
recoveries [88]. Although often obese, pigs lack an insulating hair
coat and, thus, are prone to hypothermia and must be protected
from temperature extremes and insensible heat loss during anesthe-
sia [27]. In pediatric pigs, a long duration of anesthesia without sup-
plemental heat has resulted in hypothermia with body temperatures
of 92 °F/33 °C and subsequent prolonged recovery (personal obser-
vation). Therefore, supplemental heat with a forced warm air unit,
circulating warm water blanket, or resistive foam electric heating
pad (e.g., HotDog Patient Warming System) can be used to mini-
mize reduction of body temperature. Supplemental heat sources
specifically designed for use in anesthetized patients should be used
to reduce the risk of thermal burns.
Malignant hyperthermia
Malignant hyperthermia (MH), also referred to as “porcine stress
syndrome,” is a genetic disorder with mutation of the ryanodine
receptor gene (RyR1), which encodes calcium channels in the sar-
coplasmic reticulum of skeletal muscles [89–91]. The presence of
mutated ryanodine receptors allows a massive amount of calcium to
be released from the sarcoplasmic reticulum into the cytoplasm,
resulting in excessive generalized skeletal muscle contraction [92].
MH has been reported in other animal species, but pigs and humans
seem overrepresented [89,91,92]. Certain breeds of pigs, such as
Pietrain, Poland China, and Landrace, have a higher prevalence of
this syndrome compared to other breeds, such as Large White,
Yorkshire, and Hampshire, where the incidence is much less [79,93].
In pigs, the clinical signs of MH syndrome are manifested as
a sudden and dramatic rise in body temperature and end-tidal car-
bon dioxide (PET
CO2 ) followed by excessive muscle fasciculations,
muscle rigidity, tachypnea, tachycardia, arrhythmias, myoglobinu-
ria, metabolic acidosis, renal failure, and often death. Prognosis
is usually poor once the episode is initiated in spite of immediate
aggressive treatments. The triggering agents of MH include stress
(induced by excitement, transportation, or preanesthetic handling
and restraint), halogenated inhalational anesthetics (e.g., halothane,
isoflurane, sevoflurane, and desflurane), and succinylcholine.
Lidocaine and ketamine have been suggested as triggering agents,
but there is no evidence to support this theory [94]. Treatments for
MH are primarily symptomatic. Early recognition of symptoms
(e.g., muscle rigidity, sudden rise in body temperature and PET
CO2 )
and aggressive treatments (e.g., immediate discontinuation of
inhalation anesthetics and institution of ice packs and alcohol
baths) are the foundations of therapy. Dantrolene sodium has been
effective as a treatment (1–3 mg/kg IV) and prophylaxis (5 mg/kg
PO) for MH [34]. In 1981, McGrath et al. [95] reported that
acepromazine at 1.1 mg/kg IM and 1.65 mg/kg IM reduced the
incidence of MH by 40% and 73%, respectively. A lower dose of
0.55 mg/kg IM was only able to delay but not prevent the onset of
the episode.
Halogenated inhalational anesthetics are a known trigger for
MH, and halothane is most frequently reported as an initiator in
pigs [96]. Only one incidence of isoflurane-induced MH has been
reported in a pot-bellied pig [97]. The pig received isoflurane for
induction and maintenance of anesthesia. A significant increase in
heart rate and intense shivering occurred 90 min after induction.
The pig recovered from anesthesia and was standing within 10 min.
However, intense shivering persisted, and rectal temperature rose
from 99 °F/37.2 °C to 104 °F/40.1 °C. Oral dantrolene (5 mg/kg)
was administered. The rectal temperature continued to rise to 106.7
°F/41.5 °C over the next 30 min but decreased to 100.4 °F/53 °C and
103.4 °F/39.7 °C over the next 18 h. Administration of oral dant-
rolene continued for 24 h (5 mg/kg, q8h). Body temperature
returned to normal 24 h after recovery from anesthesia and
remained normal for the remainder of hospitalization. The pig was
discharged and sent home with close observation. Physical exami-
nation of the pig performed two weeks after the episode appeared to
be normal and MH was not confirmed with genetic testing [97]. In
an isoflurane-anesthetized Angus bull, an MH episode with fatal
outcome was reported [98]. Progressive increases in heart rate,
PET
CO2
, as well as PaCO2 were observed 76 min after induction of
anesthesia. Isoflurane was discontinued and another anesthesia
machine was used to provide 100% O 2 and continuation of resusci-
tation. Heart rate and PET
CO2 continued to rise, and the body tem-
perature also increased from 103.1 °F/39.5 °C to 110.3 °F/43.5 °C at
140 min following induction. The resuscitation effort was unsuc-
cessful, and the bull developed ventricular fibrillation followed by
asystole. The clinical signs of the MH episode in the pot-bellied pig
and the bull described here are unlike the clinical signs typically
observed in pigs in which muscle rigidity, and sudden increases in
body temperature and PET
CO2 normally develop within minutes
after exposure to a triggering agent. Clinical signs of MH were not
observed until 90 min in the pot-bellied pig and 75 min in the
Angus bull after initiation of isoflurane. This delayed onset of clini-
cal signs has been reported in horses [99], dogs [100], and cats [101].
There are no reports of sevoflurane-induced MH episodes in
cattle. Analysis of muscular contracture in frogs showed that the
augmentation of caffeine-induced contractures of sartorius muscle
by isoflurane is three times, enflurane is four times, and halothane
is 11 times baseline [102]. A human study showed that in a total
of 75 MH cases, 42 were isoflurane-related, 12 were sevoflurane-
related, 11 were halothane-related, and 8 were enflurane-related [103].
The lower incidence associated with halothane in humans likely
represents its limited use in people. Definitive diagnosis of MH
susceptibility in pigs requires in vitro contracture testing, which is
based on the contracture of muscle fibers in the presence of halo-
thane or caffeine. This technique is expensive and requires a
surgical muscle biopsy and sophisticated equipment [104]. The
halothane–succinylcholine challenge was employed by direct
administration of 3–5% halothane via face mask for 3–5 min to
young pigs. Positive results were indicated by appearance of muscle
rigidity of the hindlimbs, hyperthermia, or death [105]. Formerly,
the halothane challenge test was used in the field (barnyard

-- 1076 of 1450 --

Chapter 53: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Ruminants and Swine 	1061
halothane challenge) to guide appropriate culling from swine
breeding herds [106]. Seeler et al. [107] further recommended that
animals that did not react to 5 min of halothane be given a dose of
succinylcholine (0.75 mg/kg IV), another trigger of MH, along with
halothane and positive-pressure ventilation for 8 min. A negative
response to this challenge confirmed that the pig was not an MH
carrier [107]. At the time, the halothane–succinylcholine challenge
test was considered to be the best way to accurately identify poten-
tial carriers of MH, and producers were able to eliminate suscepti-
ble pigs from their breeding herds. Recently, the development of a
DNA-based polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test allows for defini-
tive diagnosis of the gene mutation in skeletal muscle ryanodine
receptors in MH-susceptible pigs. This DNA test requires the pro-
ducer to collect a blood sample in a sterile-heparinized test tube or
on a specialized absorbent card. As a result, swine producers are
able to separate carriers of the mutated gene from non-carriers and
successfully eliminate MH from their breeding stock. Therefore,
fewer cases of MH have been reported recently [108–110]. The
DNA test is commercially available and is inexpensive, costing
US$20–35 per sample. At the time of publication, Marsfield Clinic
in Wisconsin, PE AgGen in California, Prairie State Semen in
Illinois [111], and NEOGEN in Michigan [112] all perform this
DNA test.
Species differences in anesthetic dose
requirements
Xylazine is a potent sedative, analgesic, and muscle relaxant that is
frequently used as a preanesthetic agent or anesthetic adjunct in
ruminants and camelids. Cattle require only one-tenth of the dose
needed in horses to produce equipotent sedation [113]. It appears
that Brahmans have the lowest dose requirement, Herefords are
intermediate, and Holsteins are the least sensitive [114,115].
Administration of xylazine to pregnant ruminants in the final
trimester may cause altered uterine motility and may be associated
with 	premature 	parturition 	and 	retention 	of 	fetal 	mem-
branes [116,117]. In pregnant dairy cows during late gestation,
administration of xylazine (0.04 mg/kg IV) resulted in a significant
increase in uterine vascular resistance (118–156%) and a decrease
in uterine blood flow (25–59%) which resulted in a significant
decrease in O2 delivery (59%) [118]. Therefore, the use of xylazine
during late gestation in pregnant ruminants is not routinely recom-
mended to avoid detrimental effects to the fetus.
Pronounced and prolonged responses have been observed
when xylazine was administered to cattle under high ambient
temperature [119]. Interestingly, camelids require more xylazine
than ruminants, so higher doses are required to produce similar
sedation and the dose requirement is even higher for alpacas
than llamas. Compared to other farm animal species, pigs have
the highest dose requirement for α2 -adrenergic agonist-induced
sedation. α2 -Adrenergic receptor agonists alone may not produce
adequate sedation in some pigs. Pigs also appear less responsive to
the pharmacologic effects of opioids [120,121]. Though benzodi-
azepines may not consistently produce sedation in other species,
they are reliably effective in pigs [26].
Ruminants and camelids require less tolazoline (an α2
-adrenergic
receptor antagonist) than other species [122,123]. Lower doses of
tolazoline at 0.5–1.5 mg/kg IV are recommended for use in rumi-
nants. Others have suggested that IV administration of tolazoline
should be avoided, except in emergency situations, to prevent
adverse effects such as hypotension and cardiac asystole [124].
Statements by owners and breeders regarding anesthetic man-
agement such as “injectable anesthetics should not be used in young
pigs” and “ketamine in particular should not be used in pot-bellied
pigs of any age” are common [125]. These statements are not sup-
ported by controlled, scientific studies. Furthermore, the clinical
experiences of this author and most practicing veterinarians indi-
cate otherwise.
Ruminants recover gradually but smoothly from Telazol® anes-
thesia as a result of the slower metabolism and longer lasting effect
of zolazepam [126,127]. Pigs, on the other hand, often experience
prolonged and rough recoveries characterized by swimming
motions with repeated attempts to right themselves when recover-
ing from Telazol® anesthesia, similar to that observed when keta-
mine is used alone [26,128]. Tiletamine and zolazepam are
eliminated more slowly in pigs than in other species [128] and tile-
tamine apparently has a longer effect than zolazepam in pigs [127].
Ruminants reportedly have extremely low levels of pseudocho-
linesterase, the enzyme responsible for metabolism and inactiva-
tion of depolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs such as
succinylcholine. Therefore, administration of succinylcholine to
ruminants often results in prolonged duration of muscle paralysis
and is contraindicated [129].
Airway management during recovery
Prior to removal of the endotracheal tube, manual removal of
regurgitant material and saliva from the buccal cavity or by lavaging
with water may be performed. During recovery, displacement of the
soft palate can occur in camelids, causing the soft palate to situate
dorsally to the epiglottis and hinder air flow into the larynx. This is
a serious condition and may result in upper airway obstruction and
eventually cardiac arrest since camelids are obligate nasal breathers.
If the animal has regained consciousness and the swallowing reflex,
the problem can be corrected by encouraging the animal to swal-
low. Otherwise, the animal needs to be reintubated until the swal-
lowing reflex returns [130].
Prolonged duration of dorsal recumbency in camelids often
results in severe nasal edema, which can cause airway obstruction
following extubation during recovery [131]. Keeping the animal
in sternal recumbency with the head elevated, administration of a
nasal spray containing phenylephrine, and providing O 2 insuffla-
tion with a demand valve should be instituted until the nasal
edema diminishes and adequate air flow through the nasal cavity
resumes.
Pigs are more difficult to intubate until one becomes accus-
tomed to their anatomic differences. Laryngeal edema and laryn-
gospasm caused by failed intubation attempts can potentially result
in airway obstruction in lightly anesthetized pigs. Topical lidocaine
applied to the larynx and an adequate plane of anesthesia during
the intubation process will allow smooth and successful intubation
and minimize laryngeal trauma [132]. In sows receiving spinal
anesthesia and placed in lateral recumbency for cesarean section,
restraint of the head with rope may be necessary to prevent head
movement. Care should be taken to avoid placing the head in
extension. Unlike most other species, extension of the head can
complicate rather than resolve upper airway obstruction in swine.
Similar to camelids, dorsal displacement of soft palate resulting in
airway obstruction and suffocation has been reported in swine due
to their long soft palate engaging the larynx [132]. This complica-
tion occurs in non-intubated pigs during anesthesia or following
extubation as a result of dorsal displacement of the long soft

-- 1077 of 1450 --

1062 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
palate [130]. Noisy respiration after extubation indicates possible
laryngeal spasm or upper airway obstruction and should be inves-
tigated immediately [25].
Acknowledgment
Portions of this chapter also appear in the text Farm Animal
Anesthesia: Cattle, Small Ruminants, Camelids, and Pigs.
References
1 Craigmill AL, Rangel-Lugo M, Damian P, et al. Extralabel use of tranquilizers and
general anesthetics. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1997; 211: 302–304.
2 Davis JL, Smith GW, Baynes RE, et al. Update on drug prohibited for extralabel use
in food animals. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2009; 235: 528–534.
3 US Food and Drug Administration. Animal Medicinal Drug Use Clarification
Act of 1994 (AMDUCA). www.fda.gov/animal-veterinary/guidance-regulations/
animal-medicinal-drug- use-clarification-act-1994-amduca 	(accessed 	January
2023).
4 Papich MG. Drug residue considerations for anesthetics and adjunctive drugs in
food-producing animals. Vet Clin North Am Food Animal Pract 1996; 12: 693–706.
5 Fajt VR. Label and extralabel drug use in small ruminants. Vet Clin North Am Food
Anim Pract 2001; 17: 403–420.
6 Lord LK, Wittum T. Survey of humana organizations and slaughter plants regarding
experiences with Vietnamese potbellied pigs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1997; 211:
562–565.
7 Smith AC, Ehler W, Swindle MM. Anesthesia and analgesia in swine. In: Kohn DH,
Wixson SK, White WJ, Benson GJ, eds. Anesthesia and Analgesia in Laboratory
Animals. New York, NY: Academic Press, 1997: 313–336.
8 Swindle MM. Anesthesia and analgesia. In: Surgery, Anesthesia, and Experimental
Techniques in Swine. Ames, IA: Iowa State University Press, 1998: 33–63.
9 Coetzee JF. A review of pain assessment techniques and pharmacological approach
to pain relief after bovine castration: practical implications for cattle production
within the United States. Appl Anim Behav Sci 2011; 135: 192–213.
10 Haskel SRR, Gehing R, Payne MA, et al. Update on FARAD food animal drug with-
holding recommendation. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2003; 223: 1277–2003.
11 Valverde A, Doherty TJ. Pain management in cattle and small ruminants. In:
Anderson DE, Rings DM, eds. Current Veterinary Therapy: Food Animal Medicine,
5th edn. St Louis, MO: Saunders/Elsevier, 2009: 534–574.
12 Passler T. Regulatory and legal considerations of anesthetics and analgesics used in
food-producing animals. In: Lin HC, Walz P, eds. Farm Animal Anesthesia: Cattle,
Small Ruminants, Camelids, and Pigs. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2014: 228–247.
13 Hinchcliff KW, Jernigan AD, Upson DW, et al. Ruminant pharmacology. Vet Clin
North Am Food Anim Pract 1991; 7: 633–649.
14 DeRouchey J, Goodband B, Tokach M, et al. Digestive system of the pig – anatomy
and function. Proceedings of the North American Veterinary Conference, 2009:
375–376.
15 Mozzachio C. Handling and Restraint and Routine Veterinary Care of the Miniature
Pigs. LafeberVet AAVSB RACE Provider #776-36251, https://lafeber.com/vet/wp-
content/uploads/2019/04/Routine- Vet- Care- Mini- Pig- LV- reduced- size.pdf
(updated April 8, 2019).
16 Lacoste L, Bouquet S, Ingrand P, et al. Intranasal midazolam in piglets: pharmaco-
dynamics (0.2 vs 0.4 mg/kg) and pharmacokinetics (0.4 mg/kg) with bioavailiabil-
ity determination. Lab Anim 2000; 34: 29–35.
17 Fowler ME. The jugular vein (Lama peruna): a clinical note. J Zoo Anim Med 1983;
14: 77–78.
18 Fowler ME. Anatomy information. Camelid Medicine Workshop Syllabus 1984:
5–16.
19 Amsel SI, Kainer RA, Johnson LW. Choosing the best site to perform venipuncture
in a llama. Vet Med 1987; 82: 535–536.
20 Riebold TW, Kaneps AJ, Schmotzer WB. Anesthesia in the llama. Vet Surg 1989; 18:
400–404.
21 Pugh DG, Navarre CB, Ruffin DC, et al. A review of diagnostic procedures in lla-
mas and alpacas. Vet Med 1999; 94: 654–659.
22 Grint N, Dugdale A. Brightness of venous blood in South American camelids:
implications for jugular catheterization. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36: 63–66.
23 Heath RB. Llama anesthetic programs. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 1989; 5:
71–80.
24 Davis IA, McGaffin JR, Kuchinka GD. Intravenous catheterization of the external
jugular vein in llamas. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 1996; 18: 330–335.
25 Ko JCH, Thurmon JC, Tranquilli WJ, et al. Problems encountered when anesthetiz-
ing potbellied pigs. Vet Med 1993; 88: 435–440.
26 Moon PF, Smith LJ. General anesthetic techniques in swine. Vet Clin North Am
Food Anim Pract 1996; 12: 663–691.
27 Wolff P. Pet pig problems. Proceedings of the North American Veterinary Conference
2009: 416–419.
28 ‘Forking Technique’ to Minimize Stress and Facilitate Injection in Pigs. http://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=p6LiZVgk6nc
29 Lin HC. Standing sedation and chemical restraint. In: Lin HC, Walz P, eds. Farm
Animal Anesthesia: Cattle, Small Ruminants, Camelids, and Pigs. Ames, IA: Wiley-
Blackwell, 2014: 39–59.
30 Lin HC. Injectable anesthetics and field anesthesia. In: Lin HC, Walz P, eds. Farm
Animal Anesthesia: Cattle, Small Ruminants, Camelids, and Pigs. Ames, IA: Wiley-
Blackwell, 2014: 60–94.
31 SOP: Intramuscular Injection in Swine. University Veterinarian and Animal
Resources, Virginia Tech Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, December
12, 	2017. 	https://ouv.vt.edu/content/dam/ouv_vt_edu/sops/large-animal/sop-
swine-intramuscular-injection.pdf
32 Ivany JM, Muir WW. Farm animal anesthesia. In: Fubini SL, Ducharme NG, eds.
Farm Animal Surgery. St. Louis, MO: Saunders, 2004: 97–112.
33 Maxwell H, Kennedy S. Technique for jugular catheterization of swine using the
Seldinger technique. Proceedings of the Auburn University CVM Annual Conference,
Auburn, AL. Virtual, 2020.
34 Anderson DE, St. Jean G. Anesthesia and surgical procedures in swine. In:
Zimmerman JJ, Karriker LA, Ramirez A, et al., eds. Diseases of Swine, 10th edn.
Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2012: 119–140.
35 Thurmon JC, Benson GJ. Anesthesia in ruminants and swine. In: Howard JC, ed.
Current Veterinary Therapy: Food Animal Practice, 3rd edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB
Saunders, 1993: 58–76.
36 Riebold TW. Ruminants. In: Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, Grimm KA, eds. Lumb
and Jones’ Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia, 4th edn. Ames, IA: Blackwell
Publishing, 2007: 731–746.
37 Fowler ME. Anesthesia. In: Medicine and Surgery of Camelids, 3rd edn. Ames, IA:
Wiley-Blackwell, 2010: 111–127.
38 Lin HC, Tyler JW, Welles EG, et al. Effects of anesthesia induced and maintained by
continuous intravenous administration of guaifenesin, ketamine, and xylazine in
spontaneously breathing sheep. Am J Vet Res 1993; 54: 1913–1916.
39 Klein L, Fisher N. Cardiopulmonary effects of restraint in dorsal recumbency on
awake cattle. Am J Vet Res 1988; 49: 1605–1608.
40 Musewe VO, Gillepsie JR, Berry JD. Influence of ruminal insufflation on pulmo-
nary function and diaphragmatic electromyography in cattle. Am J Vet Res 1979; 40:
26–31.
41 Desmecht D, Linden A, Lekeux P. Pathophysiological response of bovine dia-
phragm function to gastric distension. J Appl Physiol 1995; 78: 1537–1546.
42 Kerr CL, Windeyer C, Bouré LP, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of administration
of a combination solution of xylazine, guaifenesin and ketamine or inhaled isoflu-
rane in mechanically ventilated calves. Am J Vet Res 2007; 68: 1287–1293.
43 Offinger J, Meyer H, Fischer J, et al. Comparison of isoflurane inhalation anaesthe-
sia, injection anaesthesia and high volume caudal epidural anaesthesia for umbili-
cal surgery in calves; metabolic, endocrine and cardiopulmonary effects. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2012; 39: 123–136.
44 Greene SA, Keegan RD, Valdez RA, et al. Cardiovascular effects of sevoflurane in
Holstein calves. Vet Anaesth Analg 2002; 29: 59–63.
45 Keegan RD, Greene SA, Valdez RA, et al. Cardiovascular effects of desflurane in
mechanically ventilated calves. Am J Vet Res 2006; 67: 537–391.
46 Aarnes TK, Hubbell JAE, Lerche P, et al. Comparison of invasive and oscillometric
blood pressure measurement techniques in anesthetized sheep, goats, and cattle.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2015; 41: 174–185.
47 Semrad SD, Trim CM, Hardee GE. Hypertension in bulls and steers anesthetized
with guaifenesin-thiobarbiturate-halothane combinations. Am J Vet Res 1985; 47:
1477–1582.
48 Clarke KW, Trim CM, Hall LW. Anaesthesia of cattle. In: Clarke KW, Trim CM, Hall
LW, eds. Veterinary Anaesthesia, 11th edn. Edinburgh: Saunders/Elsevier. 2014:
313–343.
49 Warren RG, McDonell W, Adetuni A, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of xylazine/
halothane anesthesia in mature cows. Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the
American College of Veterinary Anesthesiologists 1983: 35–36.
50 McDonell W. Respiratory system. In: Thurmon JC, Tranquilli WJ, Benson GJ, eds.
Lumb and Jones’ Veterinary Anesthesia, 3rd edn. Baltimore, MD: Williams &
Wilkins, 1996: 115–147.
51 Tagawa M, Okano S, Sako T, et al. Effect of change in body position on cardiopul-
monary function and plasma cortisol in cattle. J Vet Med Sci 1994; 56: 131–134.
52 Wagner AE, Muir WW, Brospitch BJ. Cardiopulmonary effects of position in con-
scious cattle. Am J Vet Res 1990; 51: 7–10.
53 McLaughlin RF, Tyler WS, Canada RO. A study of the subgross pulmonary anat-
omy in various mammals. Am J Vet Res 1961; 108: 149–165.

-- 1078 of 1450 --

Chapter 53: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Ruminants and Swine 	1063
54 Musewe VO. Respiration mechanics, breathing patterns, ventilation, and diaphrag-
matic electromyogram (EMG) in normal, unsedated adult, domestic cattle (Bos
Taurus) breathing spontaneously in the standing and the sternal-recumbent body
positions, and during inflation of the rumen with air. PhD thesis. Davis, CA:
University of California Davis, 1978.
55 Gallivan GJ, McDonell WN, Forrest JB. Comparative pulmonary mechanics in the
horse and the cow. Res Vet Sci 1989; 46: 322–330.
56 Lumb AB. Pulmonary ventilation: mechanisms and the work of breathing.
In: Lumb AB, ed. Nunn’s Applied Respiratory Physiology. Oxford: Butterworth
Heinemann, 2000: 112–137.
57 Dyce KM, Sack WO, Wensing CJG. The abdomen of the ruminants. In: Textbook of
Veterinary Anatomy. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 1987: 633–656.
58 Habel RE. Ruminant digestive system. In: Getty R, ed. Sisson and Grossman’s The
Anatomy of the Domestic Animals, 5th edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 1975:
861–915.
59 Kesler EM, Ronning M, Knodt CB. Functional and structural development of the
ruminant forestomach. J Anim Sci 1951; 10: 969–975.
60 Gallivan GJ, McDonell WN, Forrest JB. Comparative ventilation and gas exchange
in the horse and the cow. Res Vet Sci 1989; 46: 331–336.
61 Mitchell B, Williams JT. Respiratory function changes in sheep associated with
lying in lateral recumbency and with sedation by xylazine. Proceedings of the
Association of Veterinary Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland, 1976–77; 6:
30–36.
62 Hsu WH, Schaffer DD, Hanson CE. Effects of tolazoline and yohimbine on xylazine
induced central nervous system depression, bradycardia, and tachypnea in sheep.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1987; 190: 423–426.
63 Hsu WH, Hanson CE, Hembrough FB, et al. Effects of idazoxan, tolazoline, and
yohimbine on xylazine-induced respiratory changes and central nervous system
depression in ewes. Am J Vet Res 1989; 50: 1570–1573.
64 Lin HC, Tyler JW, Wallace SS, et al. Telazol and xylazine anesthesia in sheep. Cornell
Vet 1993; 83: 117–124.
65 Doherty TJ, Ballinger JA, McDonnell WN, et al. Antagonism of xylazine-induced
sedation by a new alpha-2 adrenergic receptor antagonist idazoxan. Can J Vet Res
1987; 55: 244–248.
66 Waterman AE, Nolan A, Livingston A. Influence of idazoxan on respiratory blood
gas changes induced by alpha-2 adrenergic receptor adrenoceptor agonist drugs in
conscious sheep. Vet Rec 1987; 121: 105–107.
67 Celly CS, McDonell WN, Black WD. The comparative hypoxaemic effect of four
alpha-2 adrenergic receptor adrenoceptor agonists (xylazine, romifidine, detomi-
dine, and medetomidine) in sheep. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1997; 20: 464–471.
68 Nolan A, Livingston A, Waterman A. The effects of alpha-2 adrenoceptor agonists
on airway pressure in anaesthetized sheep. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1986; 9: 157–163.
69 Celly CS, Atwal OS, McDonell WN, et al. The histopathologic alterations induced
in the lungs of sheep by use of alpha-2 adrenergic receptor-adrenergic receptor ago-
nists. Am J Vet Res 1999; 60: 154–161.
70 Kästner SBR. Alpha-2 adrenergic receptor-agonists in sheep: a review. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2006; 33: 79–96.
71 Steffey EP. Some characteristics of ruminants and swine that complicate manage-
ment of general anesthesia. Vet Clin North Am Food Animal Pract 1986; 2:
507–516.
72 Hickman MA, Cox SR, Mahabir S, et al. Safety, pharmacokinetics and use of the
novel NK-1 receptor antagonist maropitant (Cerenia) for the prevention of emesis
and motion sickness in cats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2008; 31: 220–229.
73 Boscan P, Monnet E, Mama K, et al. Effect of maropitant, a neurokinin-I receptor
antagonist, on anesthetic requirement during noxious visceral stimulation of the
ovary in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2011; 72: 1576–1579.
74 Niyom S, Boscan P, Twedt DC, et al. Effect of maropitant, a neurokinin-I receptor
antagonist, on the minimum alveolar concentration of sevoflurane during stimula-
tion of the ovarian ligament in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40: 435–431.
75 de la Puente-Redondon VA, Siedek EM, Benchaoui HA, et al. The antiemetic effi-
cacy of maropitant (Cerenia) in the treatment of ongoing emesis caused by a wide
range of underlying clinical aetiologies in canine patients in Europe. J Small Anim
Pract 2007; 48: 93–98.
76 Ramsey DS, Kincaid K, Watkins JA, et al. Safety and efficacy of injectable and oral
maropitant, a selective neurokinin I receptor antagonist, in a randomized clinical
trial for treatment of vomiting in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2008; 31: 553–543.
77 Swallow A, Rioja E, Elmer T, et al. The effect of maropitant on intraoperative isoflu-
rane requirements and postoperative nausea and vomiting in dogs : a randomized
clinical trial. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44: 785–793.
78 McCormack R, Olley L, Glanemann B, et al. Prospective observational study of the
use of omeprazole and maropitant citrate in veterinary specialist care. Sci Rep 2020;
10: 15727.
79 Thurmon JC, Benson GJ. Special anesthesia considerations of swine. In: Short CE,
ed. Principles & Practice: Veterinary Anesthesia. Baltimore, MD: Williams &
Wilkins, 1987: 308–322.
80 Clarke KW, Trim CM, Hall LW. Anesthesia of the pig. In: Clarke KW, Trim CM,
Hall LW, eds. Veterinary Anaesthesia, 11th edn. Edinburgh, UK: Saunders/
Elsevier, 2014: 535–403.
81 Malavasi LM. Swine. In: Grimm KA, Lamont LA, Tranquilli WJ, et al., eds.
Lumb & Jones’ Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia, 5th edn. Ames, IA:
Wiley-Blackwell, 2015: 928–940.
82 Somers M. Saliva secretion and its functions in ruminants. Aust Vet J 1957; 33:
297–301.
83 Kay RNR. The rate of flow and composition of various salivary secretion in sheep
and calves. J Physiol 1960; 150: 515–537.
84 Thurmon JC, Benson GJ. Anesthesia in ruminants. In: Howard JL, ed. Current
Veterinary Therapy: Food Animal Practice. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 1983:
58–81.
85 Swindle MM. Anesthetic and Perioperative Techniques in Swine. Andover, MA:
Charles River Laboratories, 1991.
86 Wilbers AM. Routine veterinary care of pot-bellied pigs. Proceedings of the North
American Veterinary Conference, 2009: 410–412.
87 Haskins SC. Monitoring the anesthetized patients. In: Short CE, ed. Principles &
Practice: Veterinary Anesthesia. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins, 1987:
455–477.
88 Hall LW, Clarke KW. Accident and emergencies associated with anesthesia.
In: Veterinary Anaesthesia, 8th edn. London: Baillière Tindall: London, 1983:
367–538.
89 Fuji J, Otsu K, Zorzato F, et al. Identification of a mutation in porcine ryanodine
receptor associated with malignant hyperthermia. Science 1991; 253: 448–451.
90 Geer R, Decanniere C, Ville H, et al. Identification of halothane gene carriers by
use of an in vivo 3IP nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy in pigs. Am J Vet
Res 1992; 53: 1711–1714.
91 Houde A, Pomnier SA, Roy R. Detection of the ryanodine receptor mutation asso-
ciated with malignant hyperthermia in purebred swine populations. J Anim Sci
1993; 71: 1414–1418.
92 Stoelting RK, Dierdorf SF, McCammon RL. Pediatric patients. In: Anesthesia and
Coexisting Disease, 2nd edn. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone, 1988:
807–883.
93 Jorgensen JS, Cannedy AL. Physiologic and pathologic considerations for
ruminants and swine anesthesia. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 1996; 12:
481–500.
94 Hildebrand SV. Hyperthermia, malignant hyperthermia, and myopathy.
In: Short CE, ed. Principles & Practice: Veterinary Anesthesia. Baltimore, MD:
Williams & Wilkins, 1987: 517–532.
95 McGrath CJ, Rempel WE, Addis PB, et al. Acepromazine and droperidol inhibi-
tion of halothane-induced malignant hyperthermia (porcine stress syndrome) in
swine. Am J Vet Res 1981; 42: 195–198.
96 Stoelting RK, Hillier SC. Inhaled anesthetics. In: Pharmacology & Physiology in
Anesthetic Practice, 4th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
2005: 42–86.
97 Claxton-Gill MS, Cornick-Seahorn JL, Gamboa JC, et al. Suspected malignant
hyperthermia syndrome in a miniature pot-bellied pig anesthetized with isoflu-
rane. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993; 203: 1434–1436.
98 Skelding A, Valverde A. Intra-operative hyperthermia in a young Angus bull with
a fatal outcome. Can Vet J 2017; 58: 614–616.
99 Aleman M, Nieto J, Magdesian K. Malignant hyperthermia associated with ryano-
dine receptor 1 (C7360G) mutation in quarter horses. J Vet Int Med 2009; 23:
329–334.
100 Chohan A, Greene S. Anesthesia case of the month: malignant hyperthermia.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2011; 239: 936–940.
101 Thomas S, Burton C, Armitage-Chan E. Intra-operative hyperthermia in a cat
with a fatal outcome. Vet Anaesth Analg 2014; 41: 290–296.
102 Reed SB, Strobel GE. An in vitro model of malignant hyperthermia: differential
effects of inhalation anesthetics on caffeine-induced muscle contractures.
Anesthesiology 1978; 48: 254–259.
103 Hopkins PM. Malignant hyperthermia: pharmacology of triggering. Br J Anaesth
2011; 107: 48–56.
104 Hildebrand SV. Hyperthermia, malignant hyperthermia, and myopathy. In: Short
CE ed. Principle & Practice of Veterinary Anesthesia. Baltimore, MD: Williams &
Wilkins, 1987: 517–532.
105 McGrath CJ, Lee JC, Rempel WE. Halothane testing for malignant hyperthermia
in swine: dose-response effects. Am J Vet Res 1984; 45: 1734–1736.
106 Webb AI, Gordon CHC. Halothane sensitivity as a field test for stress susceptibil-
ity in the pig. Anim Prod 1978; 26: 157–168.
107 Seeler DC, McDonnell WN, Basrur PK. Halothane and halothane succinylcholine
induced malignant hyperthermia (porcine stress syndrome) in a population of
Ontario boars. Can J Comp Med 1983; 47: 284–290.
108 Monin G, Larzul C, le Roy P, et al. Effects of the halothanegenotype and slaughter
weight on texture of pork. J Anim Sci 1999; 77: 408–415.

-- 1079 of 1450 --

1064 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
109 Wendt M, Bickhardt K, Herzog A, et al. Porcine stress syndrome and PsE meat:
clinical symptoms, pathogenesis, etiology and animal right aspects. Berlinber und
Münchener Tierärztliche Wochenschrift 2000; 113: 173–190.
110 Lahucky R, Baulain U, Henning M, et al. In vivo PNMR studies on biopsy skeletal
muscle samples compared with meat quality of normal and heterozygous malig-
nant hyperthermia in pigs. Meat Sci 2002; 61: 233–241.
111 Stalder K. Porcine Stress Syndrome and its Effects on Maternal, Feedlot and
Carcass Quantitatives and Qualitative Traits. Agriculture Extension Service,
University of Tennessee. www.extension.tennessee.edu/publications/Documents/
PB1606.pdf
112 Neogen Corporation Website. Porcine Stress Syndrome (PSS) Testing. www.neogen.
com/categories/livestock-genetic- traits- conditions/porcine-stress-syndrome/
113 Greene SA, Thurmon JC. Xylazine – a review of its pharmacology and use in
veterinary medicine. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1988; 11: 295–313.
114 Raptopoulos D, Weaver BMQ. Observations following intravenous xylazine
administration in steers. Vet Rec 1984; 114: 567–569.
115 Trim CM. Special anesthesia considerations in the ruminant. In: Short CE, ed.
Principles & Practice: Veterinary Anesthesia. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins,
1987: 285–300.
116 LeBlanc MM, Hubbell JAE, Smith HC. The effect of xylazine hydrochloride on
intrauterine pressure in the cow and the mare. Proceedings of the Annual Meeting
of the Society of Theriogenology 1984: 211–220.
117 Jansen CAM, Lowe KC, Nathanielsz PW. The effects of xylazine on uterine activ-
ity, fetal and maternal oxygenation, cardiovascular function, and fetal breathing.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1984; 148: 386–390.
118 Hodgson DS, Dunlop CI, Chapman PL, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of xylazine and
acepromazine in pregnant cows in late gestation. Am J Vet Res 2002; 63: 1695–1699.
119 Fayed AH, Abdalla EB, Anderson RR, et al. Effect of xylazine in heifers under
thermoneutral or heat stress conditions. Am J Vet Res 1989; 50: 151–153.
120 Steffey EP, Baggot JD, Eisele JH, et al. Morphine- isoflurane interaction in dogs,
swine and Rhesus monkeys. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1994; 17: 202–210.
121 Moon PF, Scarlett JM, Ludders JW, et al. The effect of fentanyl on the minimum
alveolar concentration of isoflurane in swine. Anesthesiology 1995; 83: 535–542.
122 Read MR, Duke T, Towes AR. Suspected tolazoline toxicosis in a llama. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2000; 216: 227–229.
123 Lin HC, Riddell MG. Tolazoline: dose responses and side effects in non-sedated
Holstein calves. Bov Practitioner 2008; 42: 86–92.
124 Anderson DE. New methods for chemical restraint and field anesthesia in cattle.
Proceedings of the North American Veterinary Conference 2011: 6–11.
125 Pigs 4 Ever Website. www.pigs4ever.com/pot_belly_pig_information (accessed
September 2014).
126 Lin HC, Thurmon JC, Benson GJ, et al. The hemodynamic response of calves to
tiletamine-zolazepam anesthesia. Vet Surg 1989; 18: 328–334.
127 Lin HC, Thurmon JC, Benson GJ, et al. Telazol – a review of its pharmacology and
use in veterinary medicine. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1992; 16: 383–418.
128 Kumar AH, Mann J, Remmel RP. Pharmacokinetics of tiletamine and zolazepam
(Telazol) in anesthetized pigs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2006; 129: 587–589.
129 Adams HR. Cholinergic pharmacology: neuromuscular blocking agents. In:
Booth NH, McDonald LE, eds. Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 6th
edn. Ames, IA: Iowa State University Press, 1998: 137–151.
130 Riebold TW. Management of intraoperative and postoperative anesthetic compli-
cations in ruminants and swine. Vet Clin North Am Food Animal Pract 1986; 2:
665–676.
131 Abrahamsen EJ. Chemical restraint, anesthesia, and analgesia for camelids. Vet
Clin North Am Food Animal Pract 2009; 25: 455–494.
132 Benson GJ. Anesthetic management of ruminants and swine with selected patho-
physiologic alteration. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 1986; 2: 677–691.

-- 1080 of 1450 --

1065
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: T he S ixth Edition of Lumb and J ones	. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
With up to 100 million animals used in research annually worldwide,
including 1 million animals anesthetized annually in the
United Kingdom alone [1], laboratory animal medicine and anes-
thesia are an important area requiring veterinary involvement.
With the implementation of the principles of the 3Rs – Reduction,
Replacement, Refinement [2] – and increased awareness of the
importance of the public’s perception of the use of animal models
for research, the involvement of veterinary anesthetists in this field
has been steadily increasing. There is now a general acceptance of
the need to refine experiments, that is, to reduce to a minimum the
pain and distress that might be experienced when animals are used
in research. However, a 2009 survey indicated that less than 25% of
laboratory rodents received postoperative analgesics, while less than
40% were anesthetized with agents likely to have some analgesic
properties [3]. Encouraging greater use of postoperative analgesics
and implementing improvements in anesthesia and intraoperative
care require veterinary anesthetists to become aware of the unique
challenges posed by working in a research environment. In addition
to working with less familiar species, under constraints that are
specific to the research project and the local legislative framework,
the anesthetist may also be asked to work with agents that are
not usually encountered in clinical practice (e.g., chloralose and
urethane), to advise researchers on the most appropriate anesthetic
and analgesic protocols in light of study goals, to accommodate
animals with appropriate anesthesia lasting as short as a few seconds
or as long as a few days, and to provide expertise on the ethical
aspects of research projects. Although dealing with these issues may
seem daunting, the involvement of veterinary anesthetists is essential
to help promote improvements in anesthesia and perioperative care
as well as enhancing the standards of animal welfare.
Anesthetics and analgesics
Commonly used drug doses for laboratory animals are listed in
Tables 54.1–54.3. Unless specified below, the reader should assume
that the drugs’ pharmacokinetics in laboratory animals are broadly
similar to those described in companion animals. Some particularly
relevant properties of commonly used sedative, anesthetic, and
analgesic agents are described in this section.
Inhalant anesthetics
Inhalants (mainly isoflurane and sevoflurane) continue to be popu-
lar in laboratory animal anesthesia for a number of reasons. Their
adverse effects are well documented, they can be administered to
all commonly used laboratory rodents, and one agent (isoflurane)
undergoes virtually no biotransformation [10]. Consequently,
isoflurane represents a good option for most commonly used
research protocols when avoidance of metabolic confounding fac-
tors is required. Second, using inhalants allows rapid induction and
54 Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia –
Laboratory Animals
Henri G.M.J. Bertrand1 and Aurélie A. Thomas2
1 Agenda Veterinary Services, Kingston Upon Hull, East Riding of Yorkshire, UK
2 Clinical Pharmacology and Safety Sciences, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK
Chapter contents
Introduction, 1065
Anesthetics and analgesics, 1065
Inhalant anesthetics, 1065
Injectable anesthetics, 1067
Opioids, 1068
Anti-inflammatory drugs, 1069
Local and regional analgesia and anesthesia, 1069
Gabapentin and pregabalin, 1070
Laboratory rodents and lagomorphs, 1070
Anatomic and physiologic considerations, 1070
Handling, restraint, and drug administration, 1070
Airway management, 1070
Breathing systems, 1071
Fluid therapy, 1072
Maintenance of body temperature, 1072
Postoperative care, 1072
Non- human primates, 1073
Anesthetic considerations, 1073
Preanesthetic considerations, 1073
Endotracheal intubation, 1073
Equipment and monitoring, 1073
Recovery, 1073
Non-human primates in neuroscience, 1074
Pain assessment and management, 1074
References, 1074

-- 1081 of 1450 --

1066 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
Table 54.3 Neuromuscular junction blocking agents and dosages for selected laboratory animal species.
Mice 	Rats 	Guinea pigs 	Rabbits 	Non-human primates 	References
Alcuronium 	?? 	?? 	?? 	0.1–0.2 mg/kg IV 	?? 	[4]
Atracurium 	?? 	?? 	?? 	?? 	0.3–0.6 mg/kg IV 	[4]
Pancuronium 	?? 	2 mg/kg IV 	0.06 mg/kg IV 	0.1 mg/kg, IV 	0.08–0.1 mg/kg IV 	[4]
Vecuronium 	?? 	1 mg/kg IV 	?? 	?? 	0.04–0.06 mg/kg IV 	[4]
IV, intravenous; ??, unknown.
Table 54.1 Commonly used drugs and dosages in commonly encountered small mammals.
Mice 	Rats 	Guinea pigs 	Rabbits 	Comments 	References
Atropine 	0.04 mg/kg SC 	0.05 mg/kg IP, SC 	0.05 mg/kg IM, IP 	50–250 μg/kg IM, SC 	[4]
Glycopyrrolate 	?? 	0.5 mg/kg IM 	?? 	0.1 mg/kg IM, IV 	[4]
Acepromazine 	2–5 mg/kg IP, SC 	2.5 mg/kg IM, IP 	0.5–1 mg/kg IM 	1 mg/kg IM 	[4]
Xylazine 	5–10 mg/kg IP 	1–5 mg/kg IP 	5 mg/kg IP 	2–5 mg/kg IM, SC 	[4]
Medetomidine 	30–100 μg/kg SC 	30–100 μg/kg SC 	0.5 mg/kg IM, IP 	0.1–0.5 mg/kg IM, SC 	[4]
Dexmedetomidine 	15–50 μg/kg SC 	15–50 μg/kg SC 	0.25 mg/kg IM, IP 	50–250 μg/kg, IM, SC 	[4]
Diazepam 	5 mg/kg IP 	2.5–5 mg/kg IP 	2.5 mg/kg IP, IM 	1–2 mg/kg IM 	[4]
Midazolam 	5 mg/kg IP 	5 mg/kg IP 	5 mg/kg IP 	0.5–2 mg/kg IV, IM, IP 	[4]
Alfaxalone 	80 mg/kg IP 	2–5 mg/kg IV,
20 mg/kg IP
40 mg/kg IM, IP 	9–12 mg/kg IM 	[4–6]
Ketamine 	100–200 mg/kg IM 	50–100 mg/kg IM, IP 	40–100 mg/kg IM, IP 	25–50 mg/kg IM 	[4]
Ketamine plus
acepromazine
100 mg/kg,
5 mg/kg IP
75 mg/kg,
2.5 mg/kg IP
100 mg/kg,
5 mg/kg IP
50 mg/kg,
1 mg/kg IM
Light anesthesia 	[4]
Ketamine plus
dexmedetomidine
100 mg/kg,
0.25 mg/kg IP
60–75 mg/kg,
0.125–0.25 mg/kg IP
40 mg/kg,
0.25 mg/kg IP
15 mg/kg,
0.125 mg/kg SC
Surgical plane of anesthesia, but
more variable effects in mice
[4]
Medetomidine plus
midazolam plus
fentanyl
0.5 mg/kg,
5 mg/kg,
50 μg/kg SC
0.15 mg/kg,
2 mg/kg,
5 μg/kg SC
0.2 mg/kg,
1 mg/kg,
25 μg/kg SC
0.2 mg/kg,
1 mg/kg,
20 μg/kg IM
[4]
Alfaxalone plus
dexmedetomidine
30 mg/kg,
0.3 mg/kg IP
30 mg/kg,
0.05 mg/kg IP
?? 	6 mg/kg,
0.2 mg/kg IM
[4,7]
Urethane 	?? 	1000 mg/kg IP 	1500 mg/kg IV, IP 	1000–2000 mg/kg IV 	Non-recovery procedures only 	[4]
IM, intramuscular; IP, intraperitoneal; IV, intravenous; SC, subcutaneous; ??, unknown.
Table 54.2 Commonly used drugs and dosages for selected primate species.
Macaque spp 	Marmosets 	Comments 	References
Atropine 	0.04 mg/kg SC 	0.05 mg/kg IP, SC 	[4]
Glycopyrrolate 	?? 	0.5 mg/kg IM 	[4]
Diazepam 	5 mg/kg IP 	2.5–5 mg/kg IP 	[4]
Xylazine 	5–10 mg/kg IP 	1–5 mg/kg IP 	[4]
Medetomidine 	30–100 μg/kg SC 	30–100 μg/kg SC 	[4]
Dexmedetomidine 	15–50 μg/kg SC 	15–50 μg/kg SC 	[4]
Ketamine 	5–25 mg/kg IM 	15–50 mg/kg IM 	Immobilization 	[4,8]
Ketamine plus
dexmedetomidine
5–10 mg/kg,
0.01–0.03 mg/kg IM
5 mg/kg,
0.05 mg/kg IM
Light to moderate anesthesia 	[4]
Ketamine plus
xylazine
10 mg/kg,
0.15–0.5 mg/kg IM
10 mg/kg,
0.15–0.5 mg/kg IM
Light to moderate anesthesia 	[4]
Alfaxalone 	1–3 mg/kg IV (after initial ketamine sedation) 	10 mg/kg IM, 2–5 mg/kg IV 	Immobilization (IM), light–medium anesthesia 	[4]
Medetomidine plus
midazolam plus
alfaxalone
0.02 mg/kg,
0.3 mg/kg,
2 mg/kg SC
?? 	[9]
Medetomidine plus
midazolam plus
fentanyl
0.02 mg/kg,
0.5 mg/kg,
10 μg/kg SC
?? 	[4]
IM, intramuscular; IP, intraperitoneal; IV, intravenous; SC, subcutaneous; ??, unknown.

-- 1082 of 1450 --

Chapter 54: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Laboratory Animals 	1067
easy adjustment of the anesthetic depth to a standard, predeter-
mined level, therefore reducing the variation between subjects and
subsequently minimizing the number of animals to be used in a
particular study. Third, inhalants are commonly used for induction
of small mammals in an anesthetic chamber (Fig. 54.1), a simple
and easy method of anesthesia induction. Finally, recovery from
isoflurane and sevoflurane anesthesia is usually rapid compared to
injectable anesthetic combinations given by subcutaneous (SC) or
intramuscular (IM) injection.
Minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) values in smaller
mammals are broadly similar to those in other species, with relatively
little variation across rodent inbred strains or genotypes [11].
Although modern inhalant agents are widely considered to be both
effective and non-irritant [12,13], they vary in their pungency, and
this may affect an animal’s willingness to breathe normally [14,15].
Apneic episodes can occur in rabbits with all of the commonly used
agents, and this, coupled with possible catecholamine release, could
increase the anesthetic risk and also introduce some intersubject
variability. When inducing anesthesia in rabbits with a face mask,
briefly removing the mask if an episode of apnea occurs and replacing
the mask when respiration resumes will avoid the risks associated
with prolonged breath holding. Some degree of aversion to volatile
agents has been demonstrated in rats and mice, with isoflurane
being more aversive than sevoflurane or halothane [16], and sevo-
flurane less aversive than isoflurane [17]. This aversion increases
with repeated exposure to volatile anesthetics [18,19].
Isoflurane appears particularly irritant to guinea pigs, triggering
pronounced ocular and nasal discharge. In the authors’ experience,
sevoflurane appears less irritating but still causes lacrimation.
Halothane is much less irritating in guinea pigs, but this needs to be
balanced against the risk of other adverse effects [20,21]. The man-
ufacture of halothane was discontinued in most Western countries
such as the Unites States; however, it remains available from specialist
sources for use in defined research projects. In all species, stress
associated with induction of anesthesia can be minimized by use of
preanesthetic medication.
Inhalants anesthetic agents are fluorocarbons and act like
greenhouse gases, contributing to global warming. Isoflurane has a
100-year Global Warming Potential (GWP100
) of 510, and vaporiza-
tion of one 250 mL bottle of isoflurane has a similar global warming
effect as 190 kg of CO2 [22]. The environmental impact of inhalants
can be mitigated by using low-flow anesthesia techniques (with a
precise rodent flowmeter) and combining the use of inhalants with
injectable agents for their “MAC-sparing” effects.
Injectable anesthetics
Ketamine remains the agent most widely used for anesthetizing
laboratory rodents. It is most frequently used in combination with
sedatives or sedative–analgesics, because when administered as the
sole agent to rodents, it does not produce even light anesthesia. In
combination with xylazine and acepromazine, ketamine produces a
safe, long-lasting (e.g., 54 ± 6 min (mean ± SEM)), and stable surgical
plane of anesthesia in mice [23]. When ketamine is combined with
either medetomidine or dexmedetomidine, the depth of anesthesia
is less consistent than in other non-rodent species, but this is still
a useful combination in many mouse strains [23,24]. The most
reliable combination for producing a surgical plane of anesthesia in
rats and most other rodents is ketamine in combination with an α2
-
adrenergic receptor agonist [4].
Unlike in other species, ketamine used alone in non-human pri-
mates (NHPs) produces heavy sedation (10 mg/kg) to light surgical
anesthesia (25 mg/kg) [4], with good relaxation of skeletal and
laryngeal muscles. Repeated use of ketamine in NHPs, however,
raises a few concerns. First, ketamine has been shown to be associ-
ated with long-term cognitive impairment in NHPs if administered
during a sensitive period for brain development (in utero or during
the first week of life) [25,26]. This is a significant concern given that
most NHPs are used as animal models for neuroscience studies.
Repeated ketamine administrations are associated with anesthetic
tolerance. Anesthetic doses administered for three consecutive days
are sufficient to increase the time to recumbency by approximately
35% [27], and this is comparable with human data. Ketamine has
also been reported to cause local myotoxic effects in New World
primates [28], such that other injectable agents such as alfaxalone
may be preferred for IM injection in these species.
Alternatives to ketamine use in primates (using α2 -adrenergic
receptor agonists, benzodiazepines, and/or opioids) have been
described [29–31]. Although the magnitude of sedation may be
unsuitable for surgical procedures, a combination of fentanyl–
midazolam–medetomidine (10 μg/kg, 0.5 mg/kg, and 20 μg/kg,
respectively) administered IM provides reliable sedation and can be
easily reversed with atipamezole–naloxone (0.2 mg/kg and 10 μg/kg,
respectively), providing rapid and good quality recovery [31]. It is of
interest that NHPs are notably resistant to sedation with benzodiaz-
epines. Doses as high as 3 mg/kg, administered orally, merely produce
light sedation and anxiolysis, without inducing recumbency [30].
Most injectable anesthetic agents have similar properties in small
rodents and companion animals and, therefore, are not discussed
in depth here. One noteworthy difference relating to the use
of injectable anesthetics in small rodents is the difficulty of obtain-
ing intravenous access. This results in anesthetic combinations
being administered as a single injection by the intraperitoneal (IP),
SC, or IM route, rather than intravenously, to effect. Although this
is a simple and rapid means of producing anesthesia, it has inevita-
ble consequences in relation to the safety of certain anesthetic
agents, especially those with a narrow safety margin. Since there is
considerable variation between different strains of rodents in their
response to injectable anesthetic agents, anesthetic combinations
that have a broad safety margin or are wholly or partially reversible
are preferred. If a neuroleptanalgesic combination is used (typically,
fentanyl combined with either medetomidine/dexmedetomidine or
acepromazine), fentanyl can be partially antagonized with small
doses of buprenorphine, butorphanol, or even nalbuphine instead
of complete reversal with naloxone [32]. By doing so, the respiratory
Figure 54.1 Induction chamber for use with small (< 100 g) mammals.
The chamber size is appropriate to the size of animal, allowing the
concentration of anesthetic agent to be increased rapidly without the use
of high fresh gas flows.

-- 1083 of 1450 --

1068 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
depressant effects and some of the sedative effects induced by the
potent μ-opioid receptor agonist are reversed, but some analgesia is
preserved for the immediate recovery period. Note that the formu-
lation Hypnorm® (fentanyl–fluanisone) is not readily commercially
available anymore.
As in other species, the potent, short-acting opioids (e.g., phenyl-
piperidines including alfentanil, sufentanil, and remifentanil) are
effective agents for multimodal anesthesia in laboratory animals
and can significantly reduce required inhalant anesthetic concentra-
tions. However, their respiratory depressant effects may necessitate
respiratory support (i.e., intubation and ventilation), which can be
more challenging in rodents. When suitable apparatus and expertise
are available, their use combined with medetomidine can constitute
a refinement to more classic injectable protocols in rats [33].
Alfaxalone, a neurosteroid, has attracted attention in laboratory
animal anesthesia. Laboratory mice and rats administered alfax-
alone alone IP or SC never reached a surgical plane of anesthesia
and the addition of opioids and/or α2 - adrenergic receptor agonists
is necessary to facilitate invasive procedures. It is important to note
that doses and effects of alfaxalone vary greatly between sex and
rodent strain and pilot studies are highly recommended to refine
the anesthesia protocol before initiating the experiment [5,34–36].
In NHPs, similar effects of a single dose of alfaxalone have been
observed, and co-administration with other anesthetics is necessary
to induce deep sedation or general anesthesia [9,37,38]. Alfaxalone
does not produce muscle damage, as does ketamine, and this can be
very beneficial in small primates [39].
Some injectable anesthetic agents remain in research settings
due to scientific reasons or ease of use but are no longer used in
veterinary clinical practice. Urethane is an ethyl carbamate produc-
ing long-lasting and stable (6–10 h) surgical anesthesia with few
adverse cardiovascular or respiratory effects [40,41]. Urethane is still
used for non-recovery procedures involving recording of certain
central nervous system (CNS) responses and for neuropharmacol-
ogy studies. Spinal reflexes are depressed, but it has virtually no
depressant action on the brain itself (EEG comparable to sleep pat-
terns), and most autonomic reflexes are well preserved [42]. It is a
water-soluble compound metabolized by the liver into ethanol and
carbamic acid before renal excretion. Despite initial studies suggest-
ing that urethane mainly acts on GABAA receptors, it is now estab-
lished that only 23% of urethane’s action is GABAA mediated.
Urethane interacts at a multitude of receptors including the
α1
-glycine receptor (agonist, 33%), the NMDA and AMPA receptors
(antagonist, 10% and 18%, respectively), and possibly acetylcholine
receptors, but with only weak effects at each target [43]. When
administered IP, it has profound endocrine and metabolic effects,
producing peritonitis, necrosis of the abdominal contents, and mas-
sive leakage of plasma into the peritoneal cavity [41], so must only be
used for non-recovery procedures. Urethane is a carcinogen and
protective equipment should be worn when it is handled [44].
α- Chloralose is an anesthetic that has numerous dose-dependent
CNS effects, both excitatory and inhibitory. It provides long-lasting
light anesthesia (8–10 h), with minimal cardiovascular side effects.
However, induction and recovery are very prolonged and accompa-
nied by excitement, so the agent is usually restricted to terminal
procedures after induction of anesthesia with another agent (typically
an inhalant). A further disadvantage of chloralose is that anesthetic
depth is not usually sufficient for surgical manipulations to be per-
formed, and it has poor analgesic properties.
Chloral hydrate is used occasionally in rodent anesthesia for
neuropharmacology studies. Surgical depth of anesthesia can be
achieved [40], but in some strains of rats, chloral hydrate causes
postanesthetic ileus that can be fatal [45]. Using a dilute solution of
chloral hydrate may help reduce the incidence of ileus.
Tribromoethanol is used primarily in mice although its popu-
larity has declined markedly because of undesirable side effects.
If incorrectly prepared or stored, administration is associated with
high mortality. This can also occur when freshly prepared solutions
are used [46]. The incidence of adverse effects varies greatly in
different research facilities, perhaps due to the agent itself not being
supplied as a commercial pharmaceutical product. For this reason,
decisions as to whether to use the agent should be made on a case-
by-case basis. When used successfully, tribromoethanol produces
15–20 min of surgical anesthesia, with reasonably rapid recovery.
Opioids
Despite growing emphasis on animal welfare and refinement of
animal models, less than 25% of laboratory rodents undergoing
surgical procedures are given analgesic drugs (35% of those that are,
receive buprenorphine [3]). This might be partially explained by a
number of largely unfounded concerns related to potential interac-
tions of opioids and other analgesics and specific types of research
projects. For example, despite a lack of convincing clinical data in
humans, opioids are commonly associated with immunodepression
in critical care patients. This has led to concerns that use of these
agents in a research setting could cause immunomodulation, and
this could introduce confounding factors in some research models.
In laboratory animals, this phenomenon is subject to major inter-
strain variability [47], and immunodepression is only evident when
animals receive doses that are significantly greater than those used
for postoperative pain relief (e.g., 300 mg/kg morphine) for pro-
longed periods of time [48–50]. Opioids have also been shown to
influence tumor growth and metastasis, and this has been consid-
ered a contraindication for their use when implanting or trans-
planting tumors for cancer research studies. Published data are
conflicting in this area, suggesting that morphine can either promote
or slow down tumor growth and metastatic spread. The mecha-
nisms involved remain poorly understood and, in addition to their
potential immunomodulating effects, opioids may impact tumor
cell aggressiveness and angiogenesis [51].
In each of these examples, a proper appraisal of the available lit-
erature in consultation with the researchers involved should lead to
an evidence-based decision as to whether to use opioids or whether
an alternative analgesic strategy should be adopted. When making
these decisions, it is also important to include a consideration of the
various effects of unalleviated pain. In the authors’ experience,
there are almost no circumstances in which an analgesic regimen of
some type cannot be implemented and untreated pain can be a
greater confounder of scientific results [52,53].
Among the opioids, buprenorphine remains the analgesic
agent most frequently administered to laboratory animals, both to
rodents [3] and to larger species [54]. Buprenorphine is 35 times
more potent than morphine when administered IM in rats [55] and
has a long duration of action (3–5 h in mice, 6–8 h in rats). Its poor
oral bioavailability (5–10%), coupled with a significant hepatic first-
pass metabolism, renders oral administration of buprenorphine of
limited value in rodents as its duration of action decreases to 1–2 h
(0.5 mg/kg, rats) [56], although this may still provide sufficient
analgesia following some surgical procedures [57]. Although use of
buprenorphine in palatable oral formulations remains popular, we
recommend it is only given by this route when effective methods of
pain assessment are being used.

-- 1084 of 1450 --

Chapter 54: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Laboratory Animals 	1069
Buprenorphine’s ceiling effect has been well-described in the
literature and occurs only when doses exceeding about 3 mg/kg
are administered in rats [58]; therefore, it is of little concern when
using this agent for postoperative pain relief. Clinically relevant
adverse effects of opioids are similar to those in other animal spe-
cies. Interestingly, studies in rats showed that even at large IV doses,
buprenorphine failed to produce clinically significant respiratory
depression [59,60]. An unusual effect of opioids in rodents is the
production of pica behavior. This is thought to be analogous to
vomiting in other species and has been reported following use of
buprenorphine in rats [61]. The incidence of pica appears to be low,
but, if noted, analgesia should be provided using a non-opioid
analgesic.
Other opioids can be used in laboratory animals. Methadone,
for instance, has proven antinociceptive properties in mice and
rats [62] and was shown to attenuate signs of neuropathic pain for
2 h in mice (3 mg/kg SC) [63]. This effect may be due to μ-opioid
receptor agonist actions on peripheral opioid receptors [62], in
combination with antagonism of NMDA receptors. Although
species-specific studies documenting the efficacy of this agent in
alleviating postsurgical pain are lacking, methadone has been used
by the authors in NHPs (0.3–0.5 mg/kg IM) when the surgical
procedure renders the animal at risk of experiencing chronic or
neuropathic pain. Compared to other full μ-opioid receptor agonists,
methadone seems to produce less sedation and inappetence.
Managing pain in laboratory rodents can be difficult because
of the large numbers of animals that may need to be treated
(e.g., 20–30 animals all undergoing surgery in one day). In addition,
the relatively short action of some analgesics requires repeated
handling and injections, which in itself can be stressful. Possible
approaches to these problems are the use of slow-release prepara-
tions and transdermal delivery (e.g., cutaneous patch) technology.
Fentanyl patches or transdermal solutions can be used in larger
laboratory animals, with the same concerns and indications for use
as in other species. It is important to securely attach the patch to
the animal to reduce the risk of ingestion. Ingestion of a patch can
be fatal since fentanyl is readily absorbed by the oropharyngeal
mucosa [64]. Alternatively, if the patch is rapidly ingested with min-
imal oropharyngeal contact, there may be few clinical signs since
there appears to be a high first-pass metabolism following gastroin-
testinal absorption. Transdermal fentanyl diffuses well into the milk
of pregnant rats. It can be an alternative route to administer analge-
sic to pups, but high doses (200 μg/kg/h) can result in slower growth
and corneal opacity [65]. A few studies documented that the appli-
cation of transdermal fentanyl solution relieved pain in a paw inci-
sional model and complete Freund’s adjuvant-induced arthritis, but
the duration of efficacy was variable [66,67]. In smaller rodents, the
use of transdermal fentanyl may be limited for practical reasons.
Slow-release formulations of a number of analgesics have been
compounded (e.g., Buprenorphine SR®, Veterinary Technologies,
LLC, Windsor, CO, United States). This formulation appears to
provide sustained release for up to 72 h in rats and mice. Preliminary
studies suggested up to 12 h of pain reduction can be provided
in mice [68] and a longer duration in rats [69]. The latter study
did not report any problems with pica, but up to 40% of the rats
developed some skin irritation following SC injection. A modified
formulation appears to have resolved problems of irritancy follow-
ing injection. Pharmacokinetic studies performed in NHPs suggest
that Buprenorphine SR® plasma concentrations remain above a pos-
sible analgesic threshold for approximately 5 days, but no pharmaco-
dynamics tests were performed [70]. As with rats, injection site
reactions have been reported in NHPs, but they can be limited by the
administration of a highly concentrated solution (10 mg/mL) [71].
Anti-inflammatory drugs
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are the second
most commonly administered agents for pain relief in rodents
and other laboratory animal species [3,54]. All of the NSAIDs
licensed for use in animals or people can be administered in labora-
tory rodent and NHP species. Of the agents available, the oral prep-
aration of meloxicam is of particular value as it is highly palatable to
many small rodents and to NHPs, particularly if added to their
favorite foodstuff. The efficacy of NSAIDs in relieving postopera-
tive pain in rodents has been widely reported [57,72,73], but their
duration of action remains uncertain. Carprofen and meloxicam
appear to have a duration of at least 8 and possibly 24 h. The general
considerations related to their use in other veterinary species apply
equally to laboratory animal species; however, since most laboratory
animals undergoing surgery are young, healthy adults, concerns
related to pre-existing diseases are usually reduced.
Specific concerns related to the use of NSAIDs in animal models
are sparse and poorly understood. Given the link between inflam-
mation and carcinogenesis, recent studies have attempted to
characterize the relationship between NSAIDs and cancer models.
The results suggest that, in addition to the mechanism of action
(degree of COX-1 versus COX-2 inhibition), the type of cancer and
the dose and frequency of NSAID administration (U-shaped
response curve) correlate to efficacy [74–76].
A meta-analysis of clinical studies suggested that steroids might
be useful adjuncts to a multimodal analgesic approach to managing
surgical pain. A single preoperative dose of dexamethasone, admin-
istered to people, contributed to a reduction in postoperative pain
as well as opioid consumption, without any steroid-associated
adverse effects [77]. The analgesic mechanism of dexamethasone
remains obscure and may be related to its general anti-inflammatory
properties as well as interactions with opioid receptors [78]. Since
steroids may be administered routinely to laboratory animals fol-
lowing neurosurgery procedures, it may be necessary to factor their
potential analgesic effects into a postoperative care protocol. When
not indicated for other purposes, steroids may not be a first-line
choice of analgesia provision because of their negative effect on
wound healing and immunomodulation [79].
Local and regional analgesia and anesthesia
Local anesthetic techniques are underutilized in laboratory species,
and regional analgesia (spinal or epidural techniques) have been used
primarily as research techniques [80]. The same general principles
and approaches used in larger species can be applied in laboratory
rodents, but their small size makes overdose more likely. Local
anesthesia is most often used in conjunction with general anesthesia,
since small rodents are likely to be stressed by the physical restraint
needed if local anesthesia is used alone. Use of local anesthetics ena-
bles the dosage of general anesthetic agents to be reduced, usually
minimizing adverse effects and potential interactions with research
variables. Infiltration of the surgical site can be a means of prolong-
ing the duration of surgical anesthesia, rather than administering
additional doses of injectable anesthetic agents. Aside from local
infiltration, topical local anesthesia (e.g., using local anesthetic
creams) can be used to prevent pain or discomfort associated with
venipuncture [81] or to provide anesthesia for minor procedures
(e.g., ethyl chloride for tail biopsy in mice) [82]. Maximum safe
doses of local anesthetics have not been well documented but,

-- 1085 of 1450 --

1070 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
as a guide, total dose should not exceed 10 mg/kg of lidocaine or
2 mg/kg of bupivacaine.
Gabapentin and pregabalin
Despite their abundant use in animal models of chronic pain, very
few studies have looked at the benefit of gabapentin and pregabalin in
laboratory animals as part of postsurgical pain management. A study
anecdotally reports prolonged analgesia in a mouse model of fibro-
myalgia 4 days after gabapentin administration [83]. More recently,
the MAC-sparing effect of gabapentin was demonstrated in rats with
both sevoflurane and isoflurane [84,85]. There appear to be no
reports of the use of these drugs for clinical pain relief in NHPs.
Laboratory rodents and lagomorphs
Anatomic and physiologic considerations
In order to anesthetize these species safely and effectively, and to
manage their perioperative care, it is important to become familiar
with their normal behavior, anatomy, and physiology. Rats, mice, and
hamsters are active primarily during the dark phase of their photo-
period, while rabbits are most active at dawn and dusk (i.e., crepuscu-
lar). This should be remembered when assessing normal behavior
during what would usually be an inactive phase of their diurnal
rhythm. Almost all feeding and drinking by rats and mice occurs
during the dark phase and postsurgical pain or stress following pro-
cedures undertaken during the light phase can suppress these activi-
ties. Consequently, voluntary oral intake may not resume for 24 h or
more. This can have significant detrimental effects in these small ani-
mals, since relatively short periods of fasting can result in hypoglyce-
mia and moderate dehydration. For similar reasons, preanesthetic
fasting should be avoided, and since these species do not vomit, fast-
ing does not reduce the incidence of aspiration.
Withholding food from rabbits and guinea pigs should also be
avoided, since it can result in gastrointestinal disturbances, which
can have serious consequences (e.g., alterations to gut flora, ileus,
and enterotoxemia). Since these species do not vomit, there is no
advantage to withholding food. All of these species exhibit a degree
of neophobia, so their normal diet should always be offered post-
surgically along with palatable high-energy and high-water content
supplements. All of these species are coprophagic, a normal activity
that is important for adequate nutrition. Inadvertent prevention of
this activity by use of Elizabethan collars, to prevent interference
with wounds, for example, should be avoided.
The small size of rodents makes clinical examination difficult,
and since these species often regard people as a threat, they often
show elevated heart and respiratory rates. These rates may exceed
200–250 breaths or heart beats per minute, so they are too fast to
accurately record on clinical examination (Table 54.4). The small
size also restricts venous access, except in the rabbit where access
via the marginal auricular, saphenous, or cephalic veins is relatively
easy. The most important consequence of the small size of these
animals is their high surface-area- to- body-weight ratio, which
greatly increases heat loss during anesthesia. Even short periods of
anesthesia are associated with significant cooling unless efforts are
made to minimize hypothermia.
The metabolic rate of most species varies with body mass raised
to the three-quarters power. Small mammals have a high metabolic
rate resulting in a relatively high dose requirement of many of the
agents commonly used in anesthesia and pain management. For
example, the commonly recommended dose of buprenorphine
in a dog is 0.01–0.03 mg/kg, whereas in a mouse, the dose rate is
0.05–0.1 mg/kg [55]. Calculations of a dose for mice, based on the
dose in dogs, using allometric scaling provides a similar dose
(0.05 mg/kg). If a validated dose rate is not available, a calculation
using allometric scaling is more likely to provide an appropriate
dose than simple extrapolation based on the animal’s weight.
Handling, restraint, and drug administration
General principles of good handling should be applied to rodents
and lagomorphs. It is currently well recognized in rodents that
tunnel handling for husbandry and observation purposes decreases
overall animal anxiety [86]. This handling method uses tunnels,
usually made of plastic or cardboard, that form part of the animals’
cage enrichment and can be used to gently pick up mice. However,
as the administration of anesthetics may require transient restraint
of the animals, it is important that the anesthetist or an assistant is
familiar with restraint methods to prevent unnecessary suffering
and distress. Illustrations of methods of restraint are widely availa-
ble (e.g., www.researchanimaltraining.com). Drug administration
is safer and easier if an assistant restrains the animal, while a second
person administers the drug. IM injections are best avoided if
a large volume of agent is required since it can cause muscle
damage [87]. IP administration of injectable anesthetics is widely
practiced in research facilities. It is simple and convenient but is
associated with a relatively high failure rate because of inadvertent
drug delivery into the fat, SC, or gut tissue [88]. When possible, it is
preferable to use the SC route, which is simple to undertake in all of
these species. Common sites for SC injection are either in the scruff
or the flank. As in other species, the volume administered should be
the lowest possible, and suggested doses are listed in Table 54.1.
Airway management
In most research facilities, oxygen and volatile anesthetics are deliv-
ered to small rodents and rabbits using a face mask. This makes
support of ventilation difficult to achieve, and where there is a need
for this, endotracheal intubation should be considered. With prac-
tice, intubation is straightforward in rabbits [4], but more difficult
Table 54.4 Normal physiologic parameter values for common laboratory animal species.
Mice 	Rats 	Guinea
pigs
Rabbits 	Non-human
primates (rhesus)
References
Heart rate (beats/min) 	570 	350 	155 	220 	150 	[4]
Respiratory rate (breaths/min) 	180 	80 	120 	55 	35 	[4]
Body temperature 	37 °C 	38 °C 	38 °C 	38 °C 	39 °C 	[4]
Adult body weight 	30–40 g 	250–450 g 	500–1500 g 	0.5–8 kg 	6–12 kg 	[4]
Food consumption (complete
pelleted diet)
10–20 g/100 g 	10 g/100 g 	6 g/100 g 	5 g/100 g 	– 	[4]
Water consumption 	10–20 mL/100 g 	10–12 mL/100 g 	100 mL/kg 	120 mL/kg 	50–100 mL/kg 	[4]

-- 1086 of 1450 --

Chapter 54: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Laboratory Animals 	1071
in guinea pigs and small rodents. It is made easier if a purpose-
designed apparatus is used (Figs. 54.2 and 54.3), which allows direct
visualization of the larynx during intubation. Since rats are obligate
nasal breathers, the use of a nose cone tightly applied on the nose
can be an alternative to intubation when mechanical ventilation is
required [89] and intubation unsuccessful.
Breathing systems
Once intubated, the animal should be connected to a breathing
system. Unmodified Bain circuits and T-pieces can be used when ani-
mals are breathing spontaneously, but care must be taken to minimize
equipment deadspace. It is reasonable to assume that tidal volume is
approximately 5–10 mL/kg (e.g., a mouse will have a tidal volume of
only 0.2–0.3 mL). Significant rebreathing of expired gases can only be
avoided by using low-deadspace connectors for the breathing system.
Fresh gas flow rates needed to minimize rebreathing can be
calculated for these breathing systems using standard formulas;
however, in many research facilities, flow rates when using face
masks are often greatly in excess of requirements (e.g., 1–2 L/min
for a mouse, rather than 30–50 mL/min). This may be because the
vaporizer is not accurate at very low flows, but additional reasons
include the use of active scavenging systems (Fig. 54.4) that over-
extract from the mask, drawing in room air. Delivered anesthetic
gas (concentration) dilution results in animals becoming inade-
quately anesthetized at lower fresh gas flows. These problems can
be avoided by using specifically designed low-flow, passive scav-
enged masks (Fig. 54.5) or purpose-designed equipment such as
that shown in Fig. 54.6.
The low tidal volumes of rodents often require use of purpose-
designed ventilators although “T-piece occluder” designs can
Figure 54.2 Visualization of the larynx in a rat using a modified otoscope
speculum (Hallowell EMC) to enable intubation. A nasal catheter is used
to deliver oxygen or volatile anesthetic during the procedure.
Figure 54.3 Fiberoptic guide for intubation of rats and mice (Kent Scientific).
An intravenous catheter is used as the endotracheal tube.
Figure 54.4 Rodent face mask with active scavenge system. The outer mask
is attached to an extraction system.
Figure 54.5 Low- deadspace passively scavenged rodent mask (Advanced
Anesthesia Specialists). Side view showing metal block that stabilizes the
mask and provides warming of the anesthetic gases (top). View of mask to
show gas delivery and scavenging ports (lower left). Mask with rubber
membrane in place, to provide a seal around the mouse’s nose (lower right).

-- 1087 of 1450 --

1072 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
function well. In larger species such as rabbits, ventilators and
breathing systems used in cats can be used successfully. A wide
range of rodent ventilators are available from specialist suppliers. As
in other species, key factors to consider are the range of tidal volumes
and respiratory frequencies that can be delivered, whether positive
end- expiratory pressure (PEEP) is required, whether the ventilator
requires a compressed gas source to operate, whether it is mechani-
cally driven, and what safety features and alarms are provided. As
in other species, the ability to alter the inspiratory:expiratory (I:E)
ratio is useful. When breathing normally, rodents have a 1:1 I:E
ratio [90]; however, extending this to 1:2 or 1:3 to minimize the
effects of positive-pressure ventilation on the cardiovascular system
can be an advantage. The use of mechanical ventilation by inexperi-
enced operators may cause ventilator-induced lung injury, and the
anesthetist should advise researchers about the potential influence
of this outcome on scientific results [91].
Fluid therapy
General principles of fluid therapy apply to rodents and lagomorphs.
However, small patient size limits the use of intravenous fluid
administration. If animals are not clinically dehydrated, then
absorption of fluids following IP or SC administration occurs over
4–6 h. If more rapid fluid administration is needed, either a periph-
eral vein can be catheterized using an over-the-needle catheter or an
intraosseous catheter can be placed [92]. Infusion pumps capable of
delivering appropriate rates are readily available from a number of
equipment manufacturers. During prolonged general anesthesia,
hypoglycemia is a frequent complication [93], and the administra-
tion of dextrose 5% solution as fluid therapy is advisable [94].
Maintenance of body temperature
Hypothermia is a frequent complication of anesthesia, especially
in small mammals due to their high surface-area- to- mass ratio.
Preventing hypothermia early and aggressively is required; other-
wise, mice can lose several degrees of core temperature within the
first 15 min after induction of anesthesia [95]. Electrical heating
pads suitable for use in small rodents are available, as well as circu-
lating warm water blankets and thermogenic pads. Devices that
adjust the temperature of the blanket depending upon the body
temperature of the animal are preferred, but it is important to check
that the temperature sensor probe tip is sufficiently small for use in
rodents. It is also advisable to monitor the temperature of the blan-
ket directly, using an additional thermometer. Forced air warming
systems can be used in rabbits but are usually impractical for use in
mice and rats. Following anesthesia, animals should be placed in a
suitable incubator to maintain body temperature during recovery.
Postoperative care
Postsurgical pain management, together with other supportive care,
is essential if recovery from surgery and anesthesia is to be rapid
and uneventful. When dealing with laboratory animals, anesthetists
must be aware of the additional considerations that arise as a result
of the particular use of these animals. When devising protocols for
postoperative pain relief, the potential interactions of the agents
chosen on research protocols can be minimized by use of appropri-
ate dose rates for an appropriate period of time. This requires accu-
rate assessment of the degree of pain that is present and its duration
in order to determine the efficacy of analgesic therapy.
A number of pain assessment tools have been developed, includ-
ing those which track simple and objective clinical measures such
as body weight and food and water consumption [96], complex
behavioral measures such as nest building [97], or specific pain-
related behaviors [72,73]. Rodents express a series of pain behaviors
specific to the surgery they have undergone. Those behaviors
constitute an ethogram validated for pain assessment in rats and
mice and used to assess the efficacy of analgesic therapy [98]. The
changes in facial expression can be scored (Grimace scales) to
assess laboratory animal pain, and this has been a rapidly growing
field of study [99–101]. Grimace scales have been used successfully
to assess pain and the efficacy of analgesics in pain studies across
species [102,103]; however, their use for clinical cage-side assess-
ments in rodents has limitations. It is recognized that observers
tend to underestimate pain, and adjustments must also be made to
account for the significant variations in baseline (pain-free) scores
across different strains and between sexes [104]. In light of these
factors, it is preferable to use facial expression instruments alongside
other measures such as clinical or behavioral scoring [105].
Once the need for analgesic therapy has been established, all of
the options used in veterinary clinical practice can be applied in
rodents and lagomorphs. Many of the analgesic agents used in
humans, dogs, and cats were originally assessed for efficacy and
safety in laboratory rodents, so a great deal of basic information is
available to guide clinical decision-making. In addition, there are a
growing number of clinical trials that provide more reliable clinical
data (Table 54.5). In addition to the use of NSAIDs and opioids by
injection, oral preparations have been recommended, but when
dosing via food or drinking water, care must be taken to ensure
animals consume sufficient amounts at appropriate time intervals.
As discussed above, since animals often do not eat during the light
phase of their photoperiod, this may interfere with effective medi-
cation. Recording body weight preoperatively, and monitoring it in
the postoperative period, is a simple means of assessing the ade-
quacy of fluid and food intake and, thus, drug administration.
Analgesia can also be provided by infiltration of the surgical site
with local anesthetic, and by epidural and intrathecal administra-
tion of analgesics, although practical constraints may limit this
approach in small rodents [106,107].
Figure 54.6 Rodent electronic vaporizer, mask, and ventilator system
(Kent Scientific).

-- 1088 of 1450 --

Chapter 54: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Laboratory Animals 	1073
Non-human primates
A variety of non-human primates (NHPs) are used worldwide
for biomedical research. The species used range from New World
primates (capuchins, marmosets, squirrel monkeys) to Old World
primates (macaques, baboons). NHPs are used in a wide range of
biomedical studies, primarily for neuroscience, immunology, and
infectious diseases research [109]. Given the highly sensitive nature
of NHPs for biomedical research, any proposed project should take
particular care to apply the 3Rs principle to minimize potential pain
and distress caused by the experiments.
Anesthetic considerations
Handling any conscious NHP should be avoided not only because
of the stress caused to the animal, but also because of the risk of
physical injuries to the operator (mainly bites and scratches).
In addition to the risk of traumatic injury, NHPs can carry several
hazardous and, in some cases, potentially fatal zoonotic diseases
(i.e., herpes B virus) [110]. Appropriate personal protective equip-
ment, usually comprising gloves, eye protection, and a laboratory
coat or gown, should be worn when working with NHPs.
Preanesthetic considerations
Primates are social animals and should be group housed whenever
possible in a cage containing retreat areas. Assessing the health con-
dition of a freely moving primate in its home cage is challenging,
reducing any preanesthetic examination to a simple visual check.
Consequently, the preanesthetic physical examination is commonly
performed under sedation (usually ketamine based) [108]. Intravenous
access is achieved via superficial veins (e.g., cephalic or saphenous
veins) using a 20–22 gauge catheter. The caudal (tail) vein is a more
suitable option for New World monkeys using a 22–24 gauge catheter.
Endotracheal intubation
Primates should be fasted 6–12 h prior to anesthesia because of
their ability to regurgitate or vomit. Following induction, intubation
is recommended to prevent aspiration. In NHPs, the descent of the
larynx causes a large part of the tongue to be in the hypopharynx,
potentially restricting visualization of the entrance to the larynx.
The larynx is richly vascularized and seems to be particularly prone
to tissue trauma compared to non-primate species, so care should
be taken while introducing the endotracheal tube. The diameter of
the larynx and trachea is smaller in primates than in other species
of equivalent weight. For instance, a 3–3.5 mm outer diameter (OD)
endotracheal tube is appropriate for a 6 kg macaque, and a 5.5 mm
OD tube would be suitable for an adult male macaque (15 kg).
In New World monkeys, the animal is best placed in dorsal
recumbency on a tilting table to maximize the alignment of the oral
cavity with the larynx. Marmosets or capuchins are best intubated
with a modified over-the-needle catheter mounted on a stylet
(Fig. 54.7) [111]. Marmosets, like pigs, have a pronounced laryn-
gotracheal angle, and the tube should be gently rotated 180° once it
has passed between the vocal folds [111]. Lastly, special attention
should be paid to the length of the tube, as NHPs have shorter
tracheas than other species. The distal end of the tube should not
be advanced past the points of the scapula on a macaque to avoid
endobronchial intubation or trauma to the carina [112]. In marmo-
sets, the length of the trachea can be predicted by multiplying the
craniosacral length of the marmoset by a factor of 0.42 [111].
Equipment and monitoring
New World monkeys often appear heavier than they actually are
(by a few hundred grams). In these smaller species, a rodent ventilator,
breathing system, and monitoring devices are appropriate. Larger
primate species can easily be anesthetized and monitored with
similar apparatus to that used in cats and small dogs. Physiological
support during anesthesia is similar to other domestic species.
A mixture of medical air and oxygen for prolonged anesthesia will
prevent complications arising from oxygen toxicity.
Recovery
Recovery from anesthesia should be as rapid and smooth as possible.
Gentle extubation is usually performed as soon as protective reflexes
Figure 54.7 Modified catheter for intubation of marmosets or other small
primates. The silastic tubing provides a seal at the larynx, and also reduces
the risk of kinking of the catheter at the hub. A Seldinger catheter guidewire,
anchored in a syringe, is used to aid intubation (Hallowell EMC).
Table 54.5 Analgesic drugs and dosages for common laboratory animal species.
Mice 	Rats 	Guinea pigs 	Rabbits 	Non-human primates 	References
Buprenorphine 	0.05–0.1 mg/kg IP,
SC q6–8 h
0.01–0.05 mg/kg IP,
SC q6–8 h
0.05 mg/kg IP, SC q6–8 h 	0.01–0.05 mg/kg SC,
IM q6–8 h
0.005–0.05 mg/kg SC,
IM q6–12 h
[4,108]
Butorphanol 	1–2 mg/kg IP, SC q2 h 	1–2 mg/kg IP, SC q2 h 	1–2 mg/kg IP, SC q3 h 	0.1–0.5 mg/kg SC q3 h 	0.1 mg/kg SC, IM q3 h 	[4]
Carprofen 	5 mg/kg SC, PO q12 h 	5 mg/kg SC, PO q12 h 	4 mg/kg SC q24 h 	4 mg/kg SC q24 h 	3–4 mg/kg SC q24 h 	[4]
Meloxicam 	5 mg/kg SC q24 h 	1 mg/kg IP, SC, PO q24 h 	0.5–1.0 mg/kg SC q24 h 	0.6 mg/kg SC, IM q24 h 	0.1–0.2 mg/kg IP, SC, PO
q24 h
[4]
Morphine 	2.5 mg/kg IP, SC q2–4 h 	2.5 mg/kg IP, SC q2–4 h 	2.5 mg/kg IP, SC q2–4 h 	2–5 mg/kg SC, IM q2–4 h 	1–2 mg/kg SC, IM q2–4 h 	[4]
Tramadol 	5 mg/kg IP, SC q6–12 h 	5 mg/kg IP, SC q6–12 h 	?? 	?? 	1–2 mg/kg SC, IM q2–4 h;
2 mg/kg PO q12 h
[4]
IM, intramuscular; IP, intraperitoneal; SC, subcutaneous; PO, oral; ??, unknown.

-- 1089 of 1450 --

1074 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
begin to return and hemoglobin saturation remains within normal
limits without supplemental oxygen. Primates are usually recovered
in purpose-built cages at high ambient temperature to prevent hypo-
thermia. The recovery cage design should minimize the risk of the
anesthetist or nursing staff being bitten while monitoring the ani-
mal’s recovery. Important benchmarks of anesthetic recovery in
NHP’s include the ability to maintain a sitting position and recovery
of motor coordination. Food and water should be gradually reintro-
duced over the first several hours following extubation. Keeping the
NHP separate from its social group for 6–12 h is preferable to ensure
that all anesthetic effects have dissipated to prevent social conflict.
However, the decision to prolong separation should be carefully
assessed in light of potential negative impacts on the group struc-
ture, animal welfare, and scientific results [113,114].
Non-human primates in neuroscience
Most of the primates undergoing surgery are used for neuroscience
research projects. Surgical procedures may involve craniotomies
and implantation of permanent neuroelectrodes with the inherent
risk of CNS edema or seizure during the postoperative period. Any
increase in intracranial pressure should be avoided by controlling
the arterial partial pressure of CO 2 and the mean arterial pressure.
Using steroids to prevent and treat cerebral edema is controversial
as they are associated with higher mortality [115]. The use of hyper-
tonic crystalloid solutions is the recommended approach to prevent
cerebral edema and decrease intracranial hypertension [116]. If
electrical recordings from the CNS during anesthesia are part of the
experimental protocol, the anesthetist should inquire as to the exact
nature of the recordings since some of the currently used anesthetic
agents (i.e., propofol and isoflurane) are known to modulate spe-
cific types of CNS activity [117,118]. Finally, the anesthetist may be
asked to maintain a primate in a stable plane of anesthesia for pro-
longed non-recovery procedures (> 24 h). During these prolonged
periods of anesthesia, special care should be taken to avoid negative
energy balance and electrolyte disturbances, and support urinary
voiding by catheterization, as for non-experimental species.
Pain assessment and management
Humane and ethical concerns, as well as animal welfare regulations,
stipulate the use of appropriate analgesics for procedures that may
cause pain or distress to laboratory animals. However, no scale
definitively assesses pain in NHPs in a clinical setting. Both clinical
impression and numerical pain scores (usually visual analogue or
numerical rating scales) are used despite the paucity of validation
studies. As in any other species, behavioral indicators of pain are
expected (e.g., decreased food intake and activity) and are attenu-
ated by the administration of analgesics [119,120]. Primates tend to
hide behavioral signs of mild or moderate pain from unfamiliar
observers, so animals are best assessed by a familiar handler or
remotely via cameras. The development of the Facial Action Coding
System for the macaque [121] and common marmoset [122] has
introduced the possibility of using facial expressions to assess
pain in these species [108,123,124]. It is important to note that the
available scales were validated by retrospectively analyzing images
or recorded videos, and their value for cage-side pain assessment
requires further study.
All of the commonly available analgesics can be used in primates,
but long-lasting drugs/formulations are preferred to avoid the stress
induced by repeated physical restraint and drug injection (see
Table 54.5). Because of the lack of validated methods for assessing
pain, a wide range of doses and frequencies have been reported in
the literature [108]. The use of a fentanyl transdermal formulation
has proven to adequately diffuse and distribute systemically
[125,126]. In the authors’ experience, fentanyl patches can be
applied to NHPs to provide relief from moderate to severe pain.
Applied fentanyl patches should be protected (e.g., protective
jacket), and the primate group should be closely monitored to
avoid the risk of fentanyl overdose following oral ingestion of the
patch [64]. As in other species, multimodal analgesic approaches
combining opioids and NSAIDs appear to be particularly useful in
controlling postsurgical pain [108].
References
1 Great Britain Home Office. Statistics of Scientific Procedures on Living Animals,
2021. http://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/statistics-of- scientific-procedures-
on- living- animals-great-britain-2021
2 Russel W, Burch L. The Principles of Humane Experimental Technique. London, UK:
Universities Federation for Animal Welfare, 1992.
3 Stokes EL, Flecknell PA, Richardson CA. Reported analgesic and anaesthetic
administration to rodents undergoing experimental surgical procedures. Lab Anim
2009; 43(2): 149–154.
4 Flecknell P. Laboratory Animal Anaesthesia and Analgesia, 5th edn. London, UK:
Academic Press, 2023.
5 West SE, Lee JC, Johns TN, et al. Intraperitoneal alfaxalone and alfaxalone-
dexmedetomidine anesthesia in Sprague-Dawley rats (Rattus norvegicus). J Am
Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2020; 59(5): 531–538.
6 Siriarchavatana P, Ayers JD, Kendall LV. Anesthetic activity of alfaxalone compared
with ketamine in mice. J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2016; 55(4): 426–430.
7 Bradley MP, Doerning CM, Nowland MH, et al. Intramuscular administration of
alfaxalone alone and in combination for sedation and anesthesia of rabbits
(Oryctolagus cuniculus). J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2019; 58(2): 216–222.
8 Goodroe A, Fitz C, Bakker J. Current topics in marmoset anesthesia and analgesia.
ILAR J 2020; 61(2): 218–229.
9 Bertrand HGMJ, Sandersen C, Murray J, et al. A combination of alfaxalone,
medetomidine and midazolam for the chemical immobilization of rhesus macaque
(Macaca mulatta): Preliminary results. J Med Primatol 2017; 46(6): 332–336.
10 Eger EI. Isoflurane: a review. Anesthesiology 1981; 55(5): 559–576.
11 Sonner JM, Gong D, Eger EI. Naturally occurring variability in anesthetic potency
among inbred mouse strains. Anesth Analg 2000; 91(3): 720–726.
12 Atkinson RS, Rushman GB. Lee’s Synopsis of Anesthesia. Oxford, UK: Butterworth
Heinemann, 1993.
13 Jones RM. Desflurane and sevoflurane: inhalation anaesthetics for this decade?
Br J Anaesth 1990; 65(4): 527–536.
14 Flecknell PA, Liles JH. Halothane anaesthesia in the rabbit: a comparison of the
effects of medetomidine, acepromazine and midazolam on breath-holding during
induction. J Vet Anaesth 1996; 23(1): 11–14.
15 Hedenqvist P, Roughan JV, Antunes L, et al. Induction of anaesthesia with desflu-
rane and isoflurane in the rabbit. Lab Anim 2001; 35(2): 172–179.
16 Leach MC, Bowell VA, Allan TF, et al. Measurement of aversion to determine
humane methods of anaesthesia and euthanasia. Anim Welf 2004; 13(S1): S77–S86.
17 Guedes SR, Valentim AM, Antunes LM. Mice aversion to sevoflurane, isoflurane
and carbon dioxide using an approach-avoidance task. Appl Anim Behav Sci 2017;
189: 91–97.
18 Frost K, Shah M, Leung VSY, et al. Aversion to desflurane and isoflurane in
Sprague-Dawley rats (Rattus norvegicus). Animals (Basel) 2020; 10(6): 950.
19 Kulkarni S, Hickman D. Isoflurane and carbon dioxide elicit similar behavioral
responses in rats. Animals (Basel) 2020; 10(8): 1–18.
20 Furst SM, Luedke D, Gaw HH, et al. Demonstration of a Cellular immune response
in halothane-exposed guinea pigs. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 1997; 143(2): 245–255.
21 Shenton JM, Chen J, Uetrecht JP. Animal models of idiosyncratic drug reactions.
Chem Biol Interact 2004; 150(1): 53–70.
22 Campbell M, Pierce JMT. Atmospheric science, anaesthesia, and the environment.
BJA Educ 2015; 15(4): 173–179.
23 Arras M, Autenried P, Rettich A, et al. Optimization of intraperitoneal injection
anesthesia in mice: drugs, dosages, adverse effects, and anesthesia depth. Comp Med
2001; 51(5): 443–456.
24 Burnside WM, Flecknell PA, Cameron AI, et al. A comparison of medetomidine
and its active enantiomer dexmedetomidine when administered with ketamine in
mice. BMC Vet Res 2013; 9(1): 48.
25 Paule MG, Li M, Allen RR, et al. Ketamine anesthesia during the first week of life
can cause long-lasting cognitive deficits in rhesus monkeys. Neurotoxicol Teratol
2011; 33(2): 220–230.

-- 1090 of 1450 --

Chapter 54: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Laboratory Animals 	1075
26 Slikker W Jr, Zou X, Hotchkiss CE, et al. Ketamine-induced neuronal cell death in
the perinatal rhesus monkey. Toxicol Sci 2007; 98(1): 145–158.
27 Settle TL, Rico PJ, Lugo-Roman LA. The effect of daily repeated sedation using
ketamine or ketamine combined with medetomidine on physiology and anesthetic
characteristics in rhesus macaques. J Med Primatol 2010; 39(1): 50–57.
28 Davy CW, Trennery PN, Edmunds JG, et al. Local myotoxicity of ketamine hydro-
chloride in the marmoset. Lab Anim 1987; 21(1):60–67.
29 Miyabe T, Nishimura R, Mochizuki M, et al. Chemical restraint by medetomidine
and medetomidine-midazolam and its reversal by atipamezole in Japanese
macaques (Macaca fuscata). Vet Anaesth Analg 2001; 28(3): 168–174.
30 Pulley ACS, Roberts JA, Lerche NW. Four preanesthetic oral sedation protocol for
rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta). J Zoo Wildl Med 2004; 35(4): 497–502.
31 Bertrand HGMJ, Ellen YC, O’Keefe S, et al. Comparison of the effects of ketamine
and fentanyl-midazolam-medetomidine for sedation of rhesus macaques (Macaca
mulatta). BMC Vet Res 2016; 12(1): 93.
32 Hu C, Flecknell PA, Liles JH. Fentanyl and medetomidine anaesthesia in the rat and
its reversal using atipamazole and either nalbuphine or butorphanol. Lab Anim
1992; 26(1): 15–22.
33 Ter Horst EN, Krijnen PAJ, Flecknell P, et al. Sufentanil-medetomidine anaesthesia
compared with fentanyl/fluanisone-midazolam is associated with fewer ventricular
arrhythmias and death during experimental myocardial infarction in rats and lim-
its infarct size following reperfusion. Lab Anim 2018; 52(3): 271–279.
34 Arenillas M, Gomez de Segura IA. Anaesthetic effects of alfaxalone administered
intraperitoneally alone or combined with dexmedetomidine and fentanyl in the rat.
Lab Anim 2018; 52(6): 588–598.
35 Erickson RL, Blevins CE, De Souza Dyer C, et al. Alfaxalone-xylazine anesthesia in
laboratory mice (Mus musculus). J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2019; 58(1): 30–39.
36 Ferrini E, Mecozzi L, Corsi L, et al. Alfaxalone and dexmedetomidine as an
alternative to gas anesthesia for micro-CT lung imaging in a bleomycin-induced
pulmonary fibrosis murine model. Front Vet Sci 2020; 7: 588592.
37 Wada S, Koyama H, Yamashita K. Sedative and physiological effects of alfaxalone
intramuscular administration in cynomolgus monkeys (Macaca fascicularis).
J Vet Med Sci 2020; 82(7): 1021–1029.
38 Marion BM, Ghering JM, Dixon BC, et al. Comparison of alfaxalone-midazolam,
tiletamine-zolazepam, and ketamine-acepromazine anesthesia during plethys-
mography in cynomolgus macaques (Macaca fascicularis) and rhesus macaques
(Macaca mulatta). Comp Med 2022; 72(4): 248–256.
39 Bakker J, Uilenreef JJ, Pelt ERJ, et al. Comparison of three different sedative-
anaesthetic protocols (ketamine, ketamine-medetomidine and alphaxalone) in
common marmosets (Callithrix jacchus). BMC Vet Res 2013; 9: 113.
40 Field KJ, White WJ, Lang M, et al. Anaesthetic effects of chloral hydrate, pentobar-
bitone and urethane in adult male rats. Lab Anim 1993; 27(3): 258–269.
41 Maggi CA, Meli A. Suitability of urethane anesthesia for physiopharmacological
investigations in various systems. Part 1: general considerations. Experientia 1986;
42(2): 109–114.
42 Pagliardini S, Gosgnach S, Dickson CT. Spontaneous sleep-like brain state alterna-
tions and breathing characteristics in urethane anesthetized mice. PLoS ONE 2013;
8(7): e70411.
43 Hara K, Harris RA. The anesthetic mechanism of urethane: the effects on
neurotransmitter-gated ion channels. Anesth Analg 2002; 94(2): 313–318.
44 Field KJ, Lang CM. Hazards of urethane (ethyl carbamate): a review of the litera-
ture. Lab Anim 1988; 22(3): 255–262.
45 Fleischman RW, McCracken D, Forbes W. Adynamic ileus in the rat induced by
chloral hydrate. Lab Anim Sci 1977; 27(2): 238–243.
46 Lieggi CC, Artwohl JE, Leszczynski JK, et al. Efficacy and safety of stored and
newly prepared tribromoethanol in ICR mice. Contemp Top Lab Anim Sci 2005;
44(1): 17–22.
47 Eisenstein TK, Meissler JJ, Rogers TJ, et al. Mouse strain differences in immunosup-
pression by opioids in vitro. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1995; 275(3): 1484–1489.
48 Chao CC, Hu S, Molitor TW, et al. Morphine potentiates transforming growth
factor-beta release from human peripheral blood mononuclear cell cultures.
J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1992; 262(1): 19–24.
49 MacFarlane AS, Peng X, Meissler JJ, et al. Morphine increases susceptibility to oral
Salmonella typhimurium infection. J Infect Dis 2000; 181(4): 1350–1358.
50 Wang J, Barke RA, Charboneau R, et al. Morphine induces defects in early response
of alveolar macrophages to Streptococcus pneumoniae by modulating TLR9-NF-
kappa B signaling. J Immunol 2008; 180(5): 3594–3600.
51 Afsharimani B, Cabot P, Parat MO. Morphine and tumor growth and metastasis.
Cancer Metastasis Rev 2011; 30(2): 225–238.
52 Jirkof P. Side effects of pain and analgesia in animal experimentation. Lab Anim
(NY) 2017; 46(4): 123–128.
53 Lofgren J, Miller AL, Lee CCS, et al. Analgesics promote welfare and sustain
tumour growth in orthotopic 4T1 and B16 mouse cancer models. Lab Anim 2018;
52(4): 351–364.
54 Coulter CA, Flecknell PA, Richardson CA. Reported analgesic administration to
rabbits, pigs, sheep, dogs and non-human primates undergoing experimental
surgical procedures. Lab Anim 2009; 43(3): 232–238.
55 Roughan JV, Flecknell PA. Buprenorphine: a reappraisal of its antinociceptive
effects and therapeutic use in alleviating post-operative pain in animals. Lab Anim
2002; 36(3): 322–343.
56 Leach MC, Forrester AR, Flecknell PA. Influence of preferred foodstuffs on the
antinociceptive effects of orally administered buprenorphine in laboratory rats.
Lab Anim 2010; 44(1): 54–58.
57 Roughan JV, Flecknell PA. Evaluation of a short duration behaviour-based
post- operative pain scoring system in rats. Eur J Pain 2003; 7(5): 397–406.
58 Raffa RB, Ding Z. Examination of the preclinical antinociceptive efficacy of
buprenorphine and its designation as full- or partial-agonist. Acute Pain 2007; 9(3):
145–152.
59 Ohtani M, Kotaki H, Nishitateno K, et al. Kinetics of respiratory depression in rats
induced by buprenorphine and its metabolite, norbuprenorphine. J Pharmacol Exp
Ther 1997; 281(1): 428–433.
60 Gueye PN, Borron SW, Risède P, et al. Buprenorphine and midazolam act in
combination to depress respiration in rats. Toxicol Sci 2002; 65(1): 107–114.
61 Clark JA, Myers PH, Goelz MF, et al. Pica behavior associated with buprenorphine
administration in the rat. Lab Anim Sci 1997; 47(3): 300–303.
62 He L, Kim J, Ou C, et al. Methadone antinociception is dependent on peripheral
opioid receptors. J Pain 2009; 10(4): 369–379.
63 Erichsen HK, Hao JX, Xu XJ, et al. Comparative actions of the opioid analgesics
morphine, methadone and codeine in rat models of peripheral and central neuro-
pathic pain. Pain 2005; 116(3): 347–358.
64 Deschamps JY, Gaulier JM, Podevin G, et al. Fatal overdose after ingestion of a
transdermal fentanyl patch in two non-human primates. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012;
39(6): 653–656.
65 Dutriez-Casteloot I, Emmanuelli V, Wiart JF, et al. Long-lasting analgesia with
transdermal fentanyl: a new approach in rat neonatal research. Front Pharmacol
2022; 13: 798011.
66 Clemensen J, Rasmussen LV, Abelson KSP. Transdermal fentanyl solution provides
long- term analgesia in the hind- paw incisional model of postoperative pain in male
rats. In Vivo 2018; 32(4): 713–719.
67 Berke MS, Colding-Jørgensen P, Pedersen LG, et al. Effects of transdermal fentanyl
treatment on acute pain and inflammation in rats with adjuvant-induced monoar-
thritis. Comp Med 2022; 72(5): 320–329.
68 Carbone ET, Lindstrom KE, Diep S, et al. Duration of action of sustained-release
buprenorphine in 2 strains of mice. J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2012; 51(6): 815–819.
69 Foley PL, Liang H, Crichlow AR. Evaluation of a sustained-release formulation of
buprenorphine for analgesia in rats. J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2011; 50(2): 198–204.
70 Nunamaker EA, Halliday LC, Moody DE, et al. Pharmacokinetics of 2 formulations
of buprenorphine in macaques (Macaca mulatta and Macaca fascicularis).
J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2013; 52(1): 48–56.
71 Haertel AJ, Schultz MA, Colgin LM, et al. Predictors of subcutaneous injection site
reactions to sustained-release buprenorphine in rhesus macaques (Macaca
mulatta). J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2021; 60(3): 329–336.
72 Wright-Williams SL, Courade JP, Richardson CA, et al. Effects of vasectomy
surgery and meloxicam treatment on faecal corticosterone levels and behaviour in
two strains of laboratory mouse. Pain 2007; 130(1–2): 108–118.
73 Roughan JV, Flecknell PA. Behavioural effects of laparotomy and analgesic effects
of ketoprofen and carprofen in rats. Pain 2001; 90(1–2): 65–74.
74 Nadda N, Setia S, Vaish V, et al. Role of cytokines in experimentally induced lung
cancer and chemoprevention by COX-2 selective inhibitor, etoricoxib. Mol Cell
Biochem 2013; 372(1–2): 101–112.
75 Williams JL, Ji P, Ouyang N, et al. NO-donating aspirin inhibits the activation of
NF-kappaB in human cancer cell lines and Min mice. Carcinogenesis 2008; 29(2):
390–397.
76 Shukoor MI, Tiwari S, Sankpal UT, et al. Tolfenamic acid suppresses cytochrome
P450 2E1 expression in mouse liver. Integr Biol (Camb) 2012; 4(9): 1122–1129.
77 De Oliveira GS, Almeida MD, Benzon HT, et al. Perioperative single dose systemic
dexamethasone for postoperative pain: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials. Anesthesiology 2011; 115(3): 575–588.
78 Pieretti S, Di Giannuario A, Domenici MR, et al. Dexamethasone-induced selective
inhibition of the central mu opioid receptor: functional in vivo and in vitro evi-
dence in rodents. Br J Pharmacol 1994; 113(4): 1416–1422.
79 Durmus M, Karaaslan E, Ozturk E, et al. The effects of single-dose dexamethasone
on wound healing in rats. Anesth Analg 2003; 97(5): 1377–1380.
80 Fairbanks CA. Spinal delivery of analgesics in experimental models of pain and
analgesia. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2003; 55(8): 1007–1041.
81 Flecknell PA, Liles JH, Williamson HA. The use of lignocaine-prilocaine local
anaesthetic cream for pain-free venepuncture in laboratory animals. Lab Anim
1990; 24(2): 142–146.

-- 1091 of 1450 --

1076 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
82 Jones CP, Carver S, Kendall LV. Evaluation of common anesthetic and analgesic
techniques for tail biopsy in mice. J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2012; 51(6): 808–814.
83 Nishiyori M, Ueda H. Prolonged gabapentin analgesia in an experimental mouse
model of fibromyalgia. Mol Pain 2008; 4: 52.
84 Boruta DT, Sotgiu G, Golder FJ. Effects of intraperitoneal administration of
gabapentin on the minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in adult male
rats. Lab Anim 2012; 46(2): 108–113.
85 Aguado D, Abreu M, Benito J, et al. The effects of gabapentin on acute opioid
tolerance to remifentanil under sevoflurane anesthesia in rats. Anesth Analg 2012;
115(1): 40–45.
86 Henderson LJ, Dani B, Serrano EMN, et al. Benefits of tunnel handling persist
after repeated restraint, injection and anaesthesia. Sci Rep 2020; 10(1): 14562.
87 Smiler KL, Stein S, Hrapkiewicz KL, et al. Tissue response to intramuscular and
intraperitoneal injections of ketamine and xylazine in rats. Lab Anim Sci 1990;
40(1): 60–64.
88 Gaines Das R, North D. Implications of experimental technique for analysis and
interpretation of data from animal experiments: outliers and increased variability
resulting from failure of intraperitoneal injection procedures. Lab Anim 2007;
41(3): 312–320.
89 Krutrök N, Pehrsson S, Van Zuydam N, et al. Ventilation via nose cone results in
similar hemodynamic parameters and blood gas levels as endotracheal intubation
during open chest surgery in rats. Lab Anim 2022; 56(2): 157–164.
90 Schwarte LA, Zuurbier CJ, Ince C. Mechanical ventilation of mice. Basic Res
Cardiol 2000; 95(6): 510–520.
91 Wolthuis EK, Vlaar APJ, Choi G, et al. Mechanical ventilation using non-injurious
ventilation settings causes lung injury in the absence of pre-existing lung injury in
healthy mice. Crit Care 2009; 13(1): R1.
92 Briscoe JA, Syring R. Techniques for emergency airway and vascular access in
special species. Semin Avian Exot Pet Med 2004; 13(3): 118–131.
93 Albrecht M, Henke J, Tacke S, et al. Effects of isoflurane, ketamine-xylazine and a
combination of medetomidine, midazolam and fentanyl on physiological variables
continuously measured by telemetry in Wistar rats. BMC Vet Res 2014; 10: 198.
94 Navarro KL, Huss M, Smith JC, et al. Mouse anesthesia: the art and science. ILAR
J 2021; 62(1–2): 238–273.
95 Caro AC, Hankenson FC, Marx JO. Comparison of thermoregulatory devices
used during anesthesia of C57BL/6 mice and correlations between body tempera-
ture and physiologic parameters. J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2013; 52(5): 577–583.
96 Liles JH, Flecknell PA. The influence of buprenorphine or bupivacaine on the
post-operative effects of laparotomy and bile-duct ligation in rats. Lab Anim 1993;
27(4): 374–380.
97 Pham TM, Hagman B, Codita A, et al. Housing environment influences the need
for pain relief during post-operative recovery in mice. Physiol Behav 2010; 99(5):
663–668.
98 Roughan JV, Flecknell PA. Behaviour-based assessment of the duration of
laparotomy-induced abdominal pain and the analgesic effects of carprofen and
buprenorphine in rats. Behav Pharmacol 2004; 15(7): 461–472.
99 Langford DJ, Bailey AL, Chanda ML, et al. Coding of facial expressions of pain in
the laboratory mouse. Nat Methods 2010; 7(6): 447–449.
100 Keating SCJ, Thomas AA, Flecknell PA, et al. Evaluation of EMLA cream for pre-
venting pain during tattooing of rabbits: changes in physiological, behavioural and
facial expression responses. PLoS ONE 2012; 7(9): e44437.
101 Leach MC, Klaus K, Miller AL, et al. The assessment of post-vasectomy pain in
mice using behaviour and the Mouse Grimace Scale. PLoS ONE 2012; 7(4): e35656.
102 Faller KME, McAndrew DJ, Schneider JE, et al. Refinement of analgesia following
thoracotomy and experimental myocardial infarction using the Mouse Grimace
Scale. Exp Physiol 2015; 100(2): 164–172.
103 Roughan JV, Bertrand HGMJ, Isles HM. Meloxicam prevents COX-2- mediated
post-surgical inflammation but not pain following laparotomy in mice. Eur J Pain
2016; 20(2): 231–240.
104 Miller AL, Leach MC. The Mouse Grimace Scale: a clinically useful tool?
PLoS ONE 2015; 10(9): e0136000.
105 Mota-Rojas D, Olmos-Hernández A, Verduzco-Mendoza A, et al. The utility of
grimace scales for practical pain assessment in laboratory animals. Animals
(Basel) 2020; 10(10): 1838.
106 Thomas AA, Detilleux J, Sandersen CF, et al. Minimally invasive technique for
intrathecal administration of morphine in rats: practicality and antinociceptive
properties. Lab Anim 2017; 51(5): 479–489.
107 Thomas A, Miller A, Roughan J, et al. Efficacy of intrathecal morphine in a model
of surgical pain in rats. PLoS ONE 2016; 11(10): e0163909.
108 Bertrand HGMJ, Sandersen C, Flecknell PA. Reported analgesic and anaesthetic
administration to non-human primates undergoing experimental surgical
procedure: 2010–2015. J Med Primatol 2018; 47(4): 217–225.
109 Carlsson HE, Schapiro SJ, Farah I, et al. Use of primates in research: a global
overview. Am J Primatol 2004; 63(4): 225–237.
110 Jiang X, Fan Z, Li S, et al. A review on zoonotic pathogens associated with non-
human primates: understanding the potential threats to humans. Microorganisms
2023; 11(2): 246.
111 Thomas AA, Leach MC, Flecknell PA. An alternative method of endotracheal intu-
bation of common marmosets (Callithrix jacchus). Lab Anim 2012; 46(1): 71–76.
112 Murphy KL, Baxter MG, Flecknell PA. Anesthesia and analgesia in nonhuman
primates. In: Abee CR, Mansfield K, Tardif SD, Morris T, eds. Nonhuman Primates
in Biomedical Research, 2nd edn. Philadelphia, PA: Academic Press, 2012:
403–435.
113 Truelove MA, Martin AL, Perlman JE, et al. Pair housing of macaques: a review of
partner selection, introduction techniques, monitoring for compatibility, and
methods for long-term maintenance of pairs. Am J Primatol 2017; 79(1): 1–15.
114 Hannibal DL, Bliss-Moreau E, Vandeleest J, et al. Laboratory rhesus macaque
social housing and social changes: implications for research. Am J Primatol 2017;
79(1): 1–14.
115 Edwards P, Arango M, Balica L, et al. Final results of MRC CRASH, a randomised
placebo-controlled trial of intravenous corticosteroid in adults with head injury-
outcomes at 6 months. Lancet 2005; 365(9475): 1957–1959.
116 Rangel-Castillo L, Gopinath S, Robertson CS. Management of intracranial hyper-
tension. Neurol Clin 2008; 26(2): 521–541.
117 Bovill JG, Antognini JF, Atherley R, et al. Isoflurane action in spinal cord
indirectly depresses cortical activity associated with electrical stimulation of the
reticular formation. Anesth Analg 2003; 96(4): 999–1003.
118 Mahon S, Deniau JM, Charpier S. Relationship between EEG potentials and intra-
cellular activity of striatal and cortico-striatal neurons: an in vivo study under
different anesthetics. Cereb Cortex 2001; 11(4): 360–373.
119 Allison SO, Halliday LC, French JA, et al. Assessment of buprenorphine,
carprofen, and their combination for postoperative analgesia in olive baboons
(Papio anubis). J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2007; 46(3): 24–31.
120 Descovich KA, Richmond SE, Leach MC, et al. Opportunities for refinement in
neuroscience: indicators of wellness and post-operative pain in laboratory
macaques. ALTEX 2019; 36(4): 535–554.
121 Parr LA, Waller BM, Burrows AM, et al. Brief communication: MaqFACS: a
muscle-based facial movement coding system for the rhesus macaque. Am J Phys
Anthropol 2010; 143(4): 625–630.
122 Correia-Caeiro C, Burrows A, Wilson DA, et al. CalliFACS: the common marmo-
set Facial Action Coding System. PLoS ONE 2022; 17(5): e0266442.
123 Gris VN, Broche N, Kaneko A, et al. Investigating subtle changes in facial expres-
sion to assess acute pain in Japanese macaques. Sci Rep 2022; 12(1): 19675.
124 Paterson EA, O’Malley CI, Moody C, et al. Development and validation of a
cynomolgus macaque grimace scale for acute pain assessment. Sci Rep 2023;
13(1): 3209.
125 Smith AA, Halliday LC, Lindeblad MO, et al. Evaluation of analgesic patches in
cynomolgus macaques (Macaca fascicularis). J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2019;
58(3): 356–361.
126 Carlson AM, Kelly R, Fetterer DP, et al. Pharmacokinetics of 2 formulations of
transdermal fentanyl in cynomolgus macaques (Macaca fascicularis). J Am Assoc
Lab Anim Sci 2016; 55(4): 436–442.

-- 1092 of 1450 --

1077
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The S ixth Edition of L umb and J ones	. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
Chemical immobilization of free-ranging wildlife can be challenging.
The nature of the procedure dictates that veterinarians must alter or
even ignore many of the principles that underlie good anesthetic
practice in other settings. It is generally not possible to access
the patients for a preanesthetic physical examination or laboratory
work. Physical status of the patients cannot be accurately assessed,
and animals are usually assumed to be healthy. Even if physical
status and anesthetic risk could be determined, generally only a few
effective protocols are available [1–3].
Induction of anesthesia in wildlife can be extremely stressful, and
stress-related conditions or injuries can result. Free-ranging wildlife
are subject to environmental hazards and are often at risk for hypo-
thermia or hyperthermia. Appropriate supportive care, such as con-
trolled ventilation, intravenous (IV) fluid therapy, or inotropic
support, is often not possible in field situations. Veterinarians may
be required to work on species for which there is very little informa-
tion about their physiology or pharmacologic response to drugs.
Extrapolation between similar species may be required but can
result in unexpected complications. Issues of human safety must
also be considered. Given the challenges that are encountered
during wildlife capture, it is not surprising that morbidity and
mortality of animals can be high and injury to people engaged in
the capturing procedure more common.
This chapter focuses on the major principles of wildlife capture
and handling. It is beyond the scope of a single chapter to provide
complete dose recommendations for terrestrial mammals. The
Handbook of Wildlife Chemical Immobilization [1] and Zoo Animal
and Wildlife Immobilization and Anesthesia [3] can be used to find
detailed drug and dose information for individual species.
Field anesthesia
General considerations
Wildlife capture is often required for both research and manage-
ment purposes. Capture events should be carefully planned because
complications can often be anticipated and responses better pre-
pared. Capture sites may be chosen based on their suitability and
the timing chosen in an appropriate season of the year when envi-
ronmental hazards are minimized. For example, ungulates may be
captured in late winter or spring to decrease the risk of hyperther-
mia and enable tracking in snow or visualization of animals in
55 Comparative Immobilization and Anesthesia –
Free- Ranging Terrestrial Mammals
Nigel Caulkett1 and Jon M. Arnemo2
1 Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada
2 Inland Norway University of Applied Sciences, Campus Evenstad, Norway and Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Umeå, Sweden
Chapter contents
Introduction, 1077
Field anesthesia, 1077
General considerations, 1077
Weather, 1078
Equipment, 1078
Capture technique, 1078
Hazards, 1079
Remote drug delivery equipment, 1079
Darts, 1080
Pharmacology, 1080
Ideal drug combination for wildlife capture, 1080
Opioids, 1081
Opioid antagonists, 1082
Cyclohexamines, 1082
α2
-Adrenergic receptor agonists,1083
α2
-Adrenergic receptor antagonists, 1083
Neuroleptic drugs, 1084
Neurosteroids (alfaxalone), 1084
Drug combinations, 1084
The capture event, 1084
Precapture planning, 1084
Induction, 1085
Monitoring and supportive care, 1085
Recovery, 1087
Complications related to wildlife capture, 1087
Physical trauma, 1087
Hyperthermia, 1087
Hypothermia, 1088
Exertional myopathy, 1088
Respiratory depression and hypoxemia, 1088
Capture-associated mortality, 1088
Protocols and doses, 1088
References, 1088

-- 1093 of 1450 --

1078 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
deciduous forest. Often individual animals do not have to be tar-
geted in management projects, and the capture team can choose any
animal in a relatively safe capture environment. It is generally pos-
sible to adhere to strict pursuit time limits. If it is not absolutely
necessary to capture the target animal, pursuit can be terminated to
decrease the risk of stress-related disease, such as exertional myopa-
thy. Current literature and experts in the field can be consulted
prior to the capture event to ensure that the most suitable technique
is used. It may also be possible to close areas to the public where
wildlife are captured. Finally, appropriate equipment for monitor-
ing and supportive care should be obtained and taken into the field
when possible.
Weather
Weather conditions may dictate whether wildlife capture is possi-
ble. Safe helicopter flight is generally not possible in high winds or
foggy conditions. Snow and rain can lead to hypothermia, particu-
larly if wind is also present to enhance convective heat loss. Smaller
mammals may be particularly prone to hypothermia. Hyperthermia
is a serious complication that can be difficult to treat in field situa-
tions. Several of the drug regimens used for wildlife capture can
impede thermoregulation and lead to hypothermia or hyperther-
mia [3,4]. When possible, captures should be planned for the cooler
hours of the day during summer months. In remote locations, sud-
den changes in weather may also be a hazard to personnel. It is
important to keep track of current and forecasted conditions during
planned events. Capture for management purposes may occur at
any time. Provisions should be made to prevent heat loss and
actively cool animals, if required.
Equipment
Logistics generally dictate what type of equipment can be carried in
a field situation. It is often difficult to carry all but the most neces-
sary pieces. Fortunately, there are compact ambulatory monitors
suitable for field use.
Equipment should withstand field use and be as lightweight and
compact as possible. Hypoxemia is a common complication of
wildlife anesthesia, particularly with ruminants [3–7]. Oxygen is
fundamental supportive care during field anesthesia. Aluminum E
and D cylinders, combined with a sturdy regulator and flowmeter,
are ideal for field use (Fig. 55.1). Oxygen concentrators may provide
an attractive alternative to compressed oxygen cylinders as they do
not require refilling and eliminate many of the risks of working with
compressed gas [8] (Fig. 55.2). Often, nasal insufflation of oxygen is
adequate to treat hypoxemia. However, equipment for airway man-
agement and ventilatory support is recommended for many sce-
narios. It is difficult to carry a wide range of emergency drugs or an
adequate volume of crystalloid fluids to treat shock, but a basic
emergency kit containing epinephrine, atropine, lidocaine, and
reversal agents should always be carried. Ruminants are predis-
posed to ruminal tympany, so a suitably sized tube to desufflate the
rumen should be available. Equipment should also be carried to
treat lacerations and other incidental injuries during capture.
Capture technique
An animal may be captured initially by physical or chemical means.
The choice of capture technique depends on the species, the terrain,
the facilities, and the experience of the capture crew. Many species
of ungulates can be effectively captured and handled by experi-
enced teams with physical techniques such as net guns [4,9].
Physical restraint can be very stressful for wild animals, but
sedatives or anesthetics can be used to decrease the stress of
handling once animals have been netted [4,9].
Net gunning can cause high rates of mortality if it is performed
by inexperienced personnel. The risk to capture personnel can also
be high. During a 10-year period in New Zealand, there were 127
helicopter crashes and 25 human fatalities during net gun capture of
red deer [10]. These figures stress the need for experienced pilots
and capture personnel.
The use of physical restraint will confine an animal’s movements
during the induction of anesthesia, which may be a positive when
terrain dictates a limited escape route. Physical restraint can induce
Figure 55.1 Oxygen delivery via intranasal supplementation in a brown
bear
Figure 55.2 Portable oxygen concentrators can be used instead of
compressed gas cylinders in field situations. They have some advantages
for use in remote locations.

-- 1094 of 1450 --

Chapter 55: Comparative Immobilization and Anesthesia – Free-Ranging Terrestrial Mammals 	1079
greater stress than chemical restraint [11]. Generally, physical
restraint should be of brief duration to avoid stress-related
complications.
Hazards
A number of hazards can be encountered during anesthesia of free-
ranging wildlife. It is important to perform a risk assessment prior
to embarking on a project to identify and minimize the risks. The
target species can pose a risk to personnel. In addition to the obvi-
ous risks of serious personnel injury from carnivores, ungulates can
also act aggressively. Many deer species undergo a period of rut
during the breeding season, during which stags are often more
aggressive. Injury may also occur from flailing limbs or heads in
lightly anesthetized animals. It is important to know how a species
will act in a stressful situation, and to leave an exit for the animal
(and for the capture personnel) if things do not go according to
plan. The best way to avoid injury is to work with people who are
familiar with animal behavior. Many species carry zoonotic disease,
so capture personnel should be aware of this potential and handle
the animal appropriately.
During capture, the focus tends to be on the captured animal. It
is always important to be aware of the surrounding environment
because other animals may approach. This is particularly important
with social carnivores, such as lions. It is also important with bears,
particularly if members of a family group are captured. In these
situations, an armed lookout should be posted to protect the cap-
ture team.
A firearm backup is important with more dangerous species. The
primary person performing the backup should be trained and expe-
rienced in the use of firearms, and an appropriate firearm should be
used. If firearms are commonly used, all members of the capture
team should receive firearm safety training. Similar training is
advisable for people using dart rifles or pistols. Pepper spray may be
considered as a non-lethal alternative to firearms. Recent studies
have demonstrated that pepper spray is as effective as a firearm in
many situations [12] (Fig. 55.3).
The environment itself can be hazardous since capture may occur
in remote and rugged locations. In these situations, personnel must
be prepared to look after themselves if they cannot return to a base
area. A method of communication with rescue services should be
established. In some environments, weather can change rapidly and
often dictates whether capture should take place. There are hazards
specific to the terrain and region; for instance, capture personnel
should receive avalanche training before working in mountainous
regions during winter when there is an avalanche risk. It is impor-
tant to anticipate risks in any environment.
Pharmaceuticals used for wildlife immobilization and anesthesia
can present a serious human health hazard because of their high
potency and concentrated formulations. Handling of potent opi-
oids, such as etorphine and thiafentanil, carries the risk of lethal
toxicity in people [1,13]. These drugs must be handled with extreme
caution. Protective clothing, such as disposable gloves and face
shields, should be used to prevent skin or mucous membrane con-
tact. A pharmacologic antagonist should be available to treat human
exposure. Potent opioids receive a great deal of attention, but any
concentrated sedative or anesthetic must also be handled carefully.
Medetomidine can be formulated at a concentration of 40 mg/mL
for use in wildlife. Dexmedetomidine, which is used at a dose of
0.5–1 μg/kg IV in people [14], is twice as potent as medetomi-
dine [15]. This dose is equivalent to 1–2 μg of medetomidine per
1 kg of body weight or a total of 75–150 μg in a 75 kg person. The
high end of this dose range is equivalent to a 0.0038 mL volume of
concentrated medetomidine. Obviously, there is serious risk of tox-
icity from exposure to a very low volume of a 40 mg/mL medetomi-
dine formulation. Tiletamine–zolazepam is another immobilizing
mixture that can be delivered in a concentrated form and therefore
must be handled with caution. Everyone working on a capture team
should be trained in first aid, and equipment should be available to
provide respiratory and airway support.
Wildlife anesthesia should never be performed by a single per-
son. At least two trained people should be present whenever
potent drugs are handled. Loading and charging of darts is a time
of high risk for exposure to drugs. Darts should be charged under
a protective cover to decrease the risk of accidental drug exposure.
Antagonists, such as naloxone or naltrexone, should always be
immediately available in case of inadvertent human exposure.
Dart delivery equipment should be handled with care and only
by trained individuals. Darts have the potential to induce signifi-
cant tissue injury and death. Firearm safety rules apply to darting
equipment, and individuals handling this equipment should be
appropriately trained.
Helicopters present a significant hazard. Wildlife capture requires
a very skilled pilot to decrease the risk of injury to the target animal
and the capture personnel. Anyone working around a helicopter
must receive training in helicopter safety [16].
Prior to any capture, it is advisable to meet with local medical
personnel and discuss an evacuation and treatment plan in case
of inadvertent human exposure. A meeting of this nature will
familiarize physicians and emergency medical services personnel
with the drugs that are being used and the potential treatments.
In the event of an emergency, this can save valuable time and
someone’s life.
Remote drug delivery equipment
Wildlife capture often requires drug delivery over relatively long
distances. Generally, it is difficult to deliver drugs accurately at dis-
tances greater than 40 m, but there have been major advances in the
equipment available for remote drug delivery. It is important to
realize that these systems have the potential to produce serious
Figure 55.3 Pepper spray has been proven to effectively deter bear attacks.
It is a potential less-lethal option for personal defense against dangerous
wildlife.

-- 1095 of 1450 --

1080 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
injury or death if they are used inappropriately. The major sources
of injury arise from dart impact trauma, high-velocity injection of
dart contents, and inaccurate dart placement.
Dart impact trauma results from dispersion of energy on dart
impact. Impact kinetic energy (KE) is represented by the following
equation:
2
	KE 	½M V
where M is mass (kg), and V is velocity (m/s) [1]. High velocity is
the major factor that will cause trauma. A good general rule is to use
the lowest velocity that will provide an accurate trajectory at a given
distance. Practice with a darting system at a variety of distances is
vital to minimize velocity. The other major factor is the mass of the
dart. Darts with a lower mass will have less impact energy at a given
velocity. This should be a consideration in the choice of a darting
system, particularly when dealing with smaller animals that are
more prone to trauma.
Inaccurate dart placement can cause injury. This most frequently
occurs if the dart penetrates the abdomen, thorax, or other vital
structures of the head and neck. The major factors that can lead to
inaccurate dart placement include lack of practice with the darting
system, an attempt to place a dart over an excessive range, inherent
inaccuracy of the darting system, and wind, including down-wash
from the helicopter rotor during aerial darting.
The final source of injury is related to high-velocity injection of
dart contents. Systems that expel drug via an explosive charge can
disrupt tissue and produce trauma. These systems should only be
used on large, well-muscled animals (Fig. 55.4). Injection volume
should be minimized to decrease the degree of tissue trauma. When
possible, the use of darts that deliver their contents via compressed
air should be considered. The choice of system depends on the
range required, the dart size, and individual characteristics of the
target animal. A more complete review and manufacturer informa-
tion can be found elsewhere [1,3,16].
Darts
Darts must deliver their contents into a muscle group on impact for
induction to be rapid and smooth. Choice of a system will depend
on the situation and the size of the animal.
Explosive discharge mechanisms
Darts that use an explosive discharge mechanism can produce con-
siderable muscle trauma and should be reserved for large, well-
muscled animals. These darts have an aluminum or plastic body
into which a small explosive cap is placed between the plunger and
the tail. Upon impact, a firing pin inside the cap is forced forward,
against the resistance of a spring, detonating the charge. The
expanding gas pushes the plunger forward and the drug is expelled
through the needle. The short duration of injection (e.g., 0.001 s)
can result in high injectate velocity, which may cause tissue dam-
age [16]. The explosive caps are very sensitive to moisture and must
be kept dry. When placed in the dart, the cap must have its open end
against the tail. If it is turned around, detonation and expulsion of
the drug will occur at the moment the projector is fired.
If reusable darts are used, the fit of the dart should be tested by
inserting the dart in the muzzle. If it slides in and out with ease, the
dart is not significantly deformed, and it can be reloaded. If the dart
jams in the muzzle, the dart should not be reused. With repeated
use, the dart body may expand to the point where the aluminum is
weakened by the threads cut into it. This is caused by the high pres-
sure created in the dart when gases from the explosive charge push
the plunger forward.
All of the darts with explosive discharge mechanisms inject
through the tip of the needle. The needle should be barbed so that
it stays in the animal during injection. If there is no barb or if the
barb is removed, the force of the frontal expulsion of the drug is
often sufficiently powerful to drive the dart out of the animal,
resulting in only partial injection.
Air-activated mechanisms
These darts consist of an aluminum or plastic body into which com-
pressed air is introduced through a one-way valve in the tail piece. At
impact, a silicone seal is displaced, exposing a port in the side of the
needle. The plunger is pushed forward by air pressure, and the drug
is expelled through the open port. Depending on the type and usage,
plastic darts can be used repeatedly, but will eventually begin to leak
or lose air pressure. In extreme cold, the drug may freeze inside the
dart; therefore, darts should be kept warm in a secure container
placed in an inside pocket or in a heated vehicle or helicopter.
Pharmacology
Ideal drug combination for wildlife capture
Wildlife immobilization has progressed a great deal in recent years.
A variety of drugs are available to facilitate capture and handling,
and new techniques continue to develop. An ideal drug or combi-
nation thereof would possess the following properties.
Rapid onset of activity
A rapid effect is one of the most important attributes required in a
capture drug. The induction period is a hazardous time. Handlers
and bystanders may be at risk of injury if induction is prolonged.
Rapid onset will limit the risks of trauma, hyperthermia, and pos-
sibly capture myopathy. Ideally, the animal should be immobilized
within 1–5 min after injection. Practically, most current combina-
tions can take longer than 5 min to induce anesthesia.
High margin of safety
Drugs used for wildlife capture must have a high margin of safety. It
is difficult to transport supportive equipment into the field so cap-
ture drugs should produce minimal cardiopulmonary depression.
Figure 55.4 Dart-induced trauma in a lynx; note the extensive
subcutaneous hemorrhage at the dart site.

-- 1096 of 1450 --

Chapter 55: Comparative Immobilization and Anesthesia – Free-Ranging Terrestrial Mammals 	1081
Wild animals are not weighed prior to capture, and it is common
to overestimate weight. Capture drugs must have high safety
margins or therapeutic indices to decrease the risk of mortality
from overdose.
Handler safety
Precautions must always be taken to avoid human exposure to
drugs. Ideally, drugs should be relatively safe to handle, with mini-
mum risks of intoxication if the handler contacts the drug. The abil-
ity to antagonize the effects of any drug is also desirable in field
situations.
Small volume of delivery
Capture drugs should be potent and concentrated enough to facili-
tate delivery at low volumes, ideally less than 3 mL. This decreases
the risk of injection trauma from high-velocity injection and facili-
tates accurate dart flight.
Level of central nervous system effect
The animal should rapidly lose motor function and ideally become
unconscious and unaware of its surroundings.
Ability to antagonize immobilization
Free-ranging wildlife often live in an environment full of potential
hazards, so they must be cared for until they are fully awake. A
pharmacologic antagonist will speed recovery and is also of value in
emergency situations. Because it can be difficult to provide sup-
portive care, complications such as hyperthermia can quickly
become life-threatening and drug antagonism may be the only via-
ble option in managing unexpected complications.
Species versatility
Wildlife managers often deal with a variety of species. Thus, an
ideal drug or combinations thereof should have predictable effects
in a wide range of species. The use of a single protocol in a variety
of species limits the variety of drugs required to be kept on hand
and increases familiarity with the pharmacodynamics of the drug
or drug combination.
Drug stability
Wildlife capture may need to be performed in a wide range of ambi-
ent temperatures. Ideally, drugs should remain stable, in solution,
over a wide range of temperatures.
Analgesia
It has become more common to perform potentially painful
procedures during wildlife handling. These procedures can include
ear tagging, tooth removal, biopsies, and even surgery for abdomi-
nal or subcutaneous implant placement. These procedures dictate
that appropriate intraoperative and postoperative analgesia be
provided.
Opioids
A variety of opioids have been used for wildlife capture. Opioids
can be used in a wide range of species but are particularly effective
in ungulates. The opioids produce analgesia and sedation but lack
muscle-relaxant properties. They have been used alone or, more
often, with a neuroleptic agent, the inclusion of which potentiates
the opioid’s sedative effects, resulting in a smoother induction and
decreased muscle rigidity. Opioids are predictable, act relatively
fast, and can be reversed with the administration of a suitable
antagonist. If not reversed, the duration of immobilization is
lengthy, often several hours, during which the animal is at risk from
opioid-induced respiratory depression, thermoregulatory prob-
lems, and environmental hazards. Underdosing of opioids can
result in a prolonged induction time characterized by central nerv-
ous system (CNS) excitation, which can cause hyperthermia,
exhaustion, lost animals, and/or death of the animal. The adverse
effects of opioid-induced immobilization include:
1 Excitation after administration, resulting in aimless running,
pacing, or walking, which may lead to hyperthermia or capture
myopathy [17]
2 Regurgitation of ruminal content or vomiting; the risk of regur-
gitation appears increased when an opioid is combined with
xylazine [18]
3 Severe respiratory depression and hypoxemia [7,8]
4 Muscle rigidity [17]
5 Resedation [17]
Potent opioids, such as etorphine and thiafentanil, are several
thousand times more potent than morphine in humans and must
be handled carefully to avoid accidental exposure [1–3,13].
Carfentanil
Carfentanil was used for capture of free-ranging ungulates and
some large carnivores beginning in the early 1980s but is no longer
available due to human drug abuse.
Etorphine
Etorphine has been used successfully in many species, but has been
particularly effective in ungulates, rhinoceroses, and elephants.
Etorphine can be used alone or in combination with a suitable neu-
roleptic or sedative agent. Induction course and immobilization
duration are dose dependent. Underdosing can cause excitation
with its associated problems. At optimum doses, the first effects
may be observed 3–8 min after intramuscular (IM) injection. The
full effect may be reached in 20–30 min. Recovery is slow (up to 7
or 8 h) if no antagonist is given. When an antagonist is adminis-
tered, animals will recover in 1–3 min after IV injection and in
5–10 min following IM injection. The most serious adverse effect
is respiratory depression. For that reason, an animal should not
be kept immobilized longer than necessary, and drug effect
should be reversed as soon as possible. Other side effects are often
dose or species dependent and may include excitement, muscle
tremors, convulsions, regurgitation, bloat, bradycardia, tachycardia,
hypertension, hyperthermia, and resedation.
Thiafentanil
Thiafentanil has some potential advantages over etorphine, such as
rapid induction, greater therapeutic index, shorter half-life, lower
incidence of resedation, and less respiratory and cardiac depres-
sion [19]. Thiafentanil is commercially available only in South
Africa and the United States, but its use has been described in a
variety of species [1,3,19]. It has been used alone or in combina-
tion with an α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist. Reports have detailed
the use of thiafentanil combined with medetomidine and keta-
mine [20]. This is a promising drug combination that appears to
be efficacious and have fewer side effects than high-dose single
opioid immobilization [3,20].
Butorphanol
Butorphanol has agonist activity at the κ-opioid receptor and is
generally antagonistic at μ-opioid receptors. It is commercially

-- 1097 of 1450 --

1082 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
available in concentrations of 30 and 50 mg/mL. These high-
concentration formulations greatly increase the utility of this drug
for remote delivery. In North America, butorphanol is commonly
used in combination with medetomidine and azaperone for capture
of wild ungulates [21–25]. The combination of butorphanol–azap-
erone–medetomidine is known as “BAM” and has the advantage of
a small volume for remote drug delivery, and the ability to antago-
nize sedation with naltrexone and atipamezole [21–26]. The major
adverse side effect is hypoxemia [24]. Supplemental inspired oxy-
gen can offset hypoxemia [24]. This combination has proven to be
reliable in most ungulate species, however, some challenges have
been encountered with helicopter-based capture of bison [25].
BAM has been used successfully for immobilization of black
bears [26]. Its use has not been described in larger more dangerous
bear species, and it may be advisable to incorporate a dissociative
anesthetic, such as tiletamine, into the protocol to decrease the risk
of sudden arousal from sedation. Butorphanol administered in
combination with etorphine improved ventilatory function and
oxygenation during immobilization of rhinos [7,27].
Opioid antagonists
A major advantage of opioid-based immobilization is the ability to
antagonize the opioid. To be effective, the antagonist’s effect should
outlast the agonist drug’s sedation, and ideally be highly selective
for the desired receptor type(s). The three drugs commonly used
for this purpose are naltrexone, naloxone, and diprenorphine.
Naltrexone is probably the most versatile drug, with the lowest risk
of resedation. Naloxone and naltrexone are the preferred antago-
nists for opioid overdose in humans.
Naltrexone
Naltrexone is commercially available in a 50 mg/mL concentration. It is
a pure opioid antagonist (i.e., it has no known agonistic properties) that
will produce rapid antagonism of opioid receptor agonists. The major
advantage of naltrexone is that it will produce reliable antagonism due
to its long duration of action [1,3]. Naltrexone has been recommended
at a dose of 10–30 mg per 1 mg of etorphine or thiafentanil admin-
istered. The drug is effective following IM and IV administration. A
more rapid antagonism will occur if it is administered intravenously.
Naloxone
Naloxone is also a pure opioid antagonist. It may be used to reverse
the effects of all the aforementioned opioids, and reversal occurs
within 1–3 min of IV injection. Naloxone has a short half-life so
animals may revert to a state of motor impairment within a few
hours due to resedation and require repeated treatment.
Diprenorphine
Diprenorphine used to be the antagonist for reversal of the effects
of etorphine. While it does have agonistic properties of its own, when
given following etorphine, diprenorphine acts as an antagonist.
Reversal is rapid following IV injection, with animals becoming ambu-
latory in 1–3 min. If the antagonist is injected intramuscularly, reversal
takes longer (up to 15–20 min). Adverse effects are rare, although
overdosing may cause continued immobilization because of its partial
agonist activity. The preferred opioid antagonist is now naltrexone.
Cyclohexamines
This class of drugs produce a state of dissociative anesthesia.
When used alone, the cyclohexamines produce muscle rigidity
or twitching. Other adverse effects are hyperthermia, excessive
salivation, catecholamine release, and convulsions. The cyclohex-
amines act fast, have a relatively wide margin of safety, and depress
respiration and circulation only moderately at optimum doses.
Laryngeal reflexes are somewhat preserved with these agents.
Cyclohexamines are used in combination with a benzodiazepine
or α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist, which will be additive or syner-
gistic, produce a smoother induction and recovery, and alleviate the
muscle rigidity common with dissociative anesthetics [3]. Potent
selective α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists, such as medetomidine or
dexmedetomidine, used at high doses will significantly reduce the
dose requirements of cyclohexamines. The reduced cyclohexamine
dose will result in more rapid and better-quality recoveries follow-
ing antagonism of the α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist drug [1,3].
The cyclohexamines have been used in a wide variety of species,
but are particularly known for their effectiveness in carnivores,
primates, and birds. There are no known antagonists for this class
of drugs. The drugs in this category include ketamine and the
tiletamine–zolazepam combination.
Ketamine
Ketamine is commercially available aqueous solutions up to
200 mg/mL. Ketamine should never be used as the sole immobiliz-
ing agent. A tranquilizer/sedative should be co-administered in
almost all cases to reduce or prevent its hypertonic effects. Ketamine
has been used successfully in many species, and doses vary widely
from one species to another. Induction time and immobilization
duration are dose and species dependent. At optimum doses, the
first effects are observed in 2–5 min following IM injection, with
the full effects usually attained in 5–10 min. Immobilization usually
lasts from 45 min to 2 h.
Adverse effects of ketamine may include convulsions, catatonia,
apnea, excessive salivation, and hyperthermia. Many of these effects
can be negated by adding a benzodiazepine or α2 - adrenergic recep-
tor agonist. Medetomidine–ketamine combinations have some
advantages over xylazine use because a lower dose of ketamine is
usually required [1,3,28]. This will result in smaller injection vol-
umes and the ability to antagonize medetomidine with fewer
adverse side effects from the remaining ketamine. It is noteworthy
that ketamine-based combinations are unreliable in bears. Sudden
recoveries have been encountered with xylazine–ketamine and
medetomidine–ketamine in brown and polar bears [29].
Tiletamine–zolazepam
A commercial preparation of tiletamine, a dissociative anesthetic,
and zolazepam, a benzodiazepine agonist, is available as a freeze-
dried powder product. It is effective in a variety of species and
at optimum doses its first effects may be noticeable within 1 or
2 min following IM injection. Full effects can be reached within
15–30 min. The onset is usually smooth, with good muscle relaxa-
tion and somatic analgesia. The duration of effect, quality of emer-
gence, and duration of recovery vary with species because tiletamine
and zolazepam are metabolized at different rates in various species.
Recovery occurs in 3–8 h in most cases but may be prolonged in
some species.
The tiletamine–zolazepam combination may cause hypertension
and increase heart rate and cardiac output. Other effects are
salivation, occasional muscle rigidity and ataxia, and hyperthermia
(particularly if the mixture is combined with an α2
- adrenergic
receptor agonist) [29–32]. Tiletamine–zolazepam has been used
alone in a variety of species [33]. It is effective in carnivores, and
recovery tends to be smooth, but can be prolonged. The use of this

-- 1098 of 1450 --

Chapter 55: Comparative Immobilization and Anesthesia – Free-Ranging Terrestrial Mammals 	1083
combination alone in ungulates can result in rough recoveries.
Reconstitution of tiletamine–zolazepam with an α2 - adrenergic
receptor agonist will decrease the volume injected, enhance analge-
sia, and decrease recovery times following antagonism of the α2
-
adrenergic receptor agonist [29–32,34–37].
α2 - Adrenergic receptor agonists
α2
- Adrenergic receptor agonists are CNS depressants with sedative,
muscle-relaxant, and analgesic properties. Used alone, α2
-adrenergic
receptor agonists produce unreliable immobilization in most wild
species. They are best used in combination with opioids or dissocia-
tive anesthetics. When used in high doses, α2
-adrenergic receptor ago-
nists may critically depress respiration and circulation. Commonly
encountered adverse effects include hypoxemia in ungulates and
hypertension with or without bradycardia [5,6,22–25,28–32,35–37].
These agents can also contribute to ruminal tympany and regurgi-
tation in ungulates [18,35]. In very excited animals (capture situa-
tions), they do not produce a predictable level of immobilization.
They also disrupt thermoregulatory mechanisms, leading to hyper-
thermia or hypothermia [28,29,38]. Recovery without reversal from
high doses is usually prolonged and difficult. In field situations, it is
generally recommended that the effects of α2 -adrenergic receptor
agonists be antagonized at the completion of the procedure to help
minimize adverse physiologic actions and capture outcomes.
There are five α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists on the market:
xylazine, romifidine, detomidine, medetomidine, and dexmedeto-
midine. The difference in potency between these drugs is species
dependent [1]. Xylazine and medetomidine have been widely used
in wildlife.
Xylazine
Xylazine is commonly available in 20 and 100 mg/mL aqueous solu-
tions. It is also available in powder form and as a 300 mg/mL
solution specifically for use in wildlife capture. The 20 mg/mL
solution is too dilute to be useful for remote injection.
When administered alone, xylazine does not produce reliably
immobilized free-ranging wildlife. It may appear to induce a recum-
bent, sleep-like state but stimulation may cause rapid arousal with
defense responses intact. In calm animals, the initial sedative effect
may be seen within 4–5 min of IM injection, with full effect reached
within 15–20 min. Adverse effects can include hypoxemia, brady-
cardia, hypotension, ruminal tympany, and decreased thermoregu-
latory ability.
Xylazine has been used effectively in combination with opioids
and cyclohexamines. The response to high doses of xylazine may
conceal a recovery from the primary immobilizing drug and place
workers at risk if the animal is suddenly aroused by noises, touch, or
other stimulation.
The effects of xylazine may be reversed with the administration
of several α2 - adrenergic receptor antagonists. Approximately 1 mg
of atipamezole administered intramuscularly is required to antago-
nize 10 mg of xylazine. If xylazine is used in combination with a
cyclohexamine, its effects should not be reversed before the animal
has metabolized a significant fraction of the latter in an attempt to
minimize the adverse effects of the cyclohexamine.
Xylazine is typically used intramuscularly for wildlife immobi-
lization. Intranasal administration can be beneficial to decrease
stress and struggling following net gun capture [9]. This route has
a relatively rapid onset of activity and is simple to administer in
physically restrained animals [9].
Detomidine
Detomidine is commercially available in a 10 mg/mL solution. The
effects of detomidine have been well studied in horses, but informa-
tion on its use for immobilization of captive and free-ranging
equids and wild animals is limited. It has been combined with etor-
phine in rhinoceros and has proven to be effective in zebras when
combined with carfentanil and ketamine [39,40]. The action of
detomidine is much like that of xylazine. Its effects may be reversed
by an appropriate α2
- adrenergic receptor antagonist. In general,
5 mg of atipamezole, administered by IM injection, should be used
to antagonize 1 mg of detomidine.
Medetomidine
Medetomidine is a potent α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist that has
proven useful for wildlife capture. The 1 mg/mL formulation suitable
for use in small mammals is too dilute for use in larger species.
Medetomidine is also commercially available in 10, 20, and 40 mg/mL
concentrations, which are more adequate for capture of most large
land mammals. Medetomidine will produce sedation, analgesia, and
muscle relaxation. Medetomidine should not be used alone because,
as with xylazine, immobilization is unreliable. Medetomidine can be
combined with a low dose of ketamine or tiletamine–zolazepam. A
relatively low dose of the dissociative drug is required in combination
with medetomidine, and antagonism of medetomidine with ati-
pamezole (at three to five times the medetomidine dose) will hasten
recovery [1,28]. Similar to all α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists, adverse
effects of medetomidine include hypertension, bradycardia, and
hypoxemia [6,24,28–30,35,37]. Hypoxemia may be particularly
pronounced in ruminants [6,41]. Medetomidine can also impair
thermoregulatory ability, resulting in hyperthermia [28,29,38].
Dexmedetomidine
Dexmedetomidine is approximately twice as potent as medetomi-
dine; currently, it is commercially available only in 0.5 mg/mL for
small animal use, but compounded formulations of up to 20 mg/mL
can be sourced. It can be used interchangeably with medetomidine
at approximately half the dose (on a microgram basis) [42].
α2
- Adrenergic receptor antagonists
The utility of α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist-induced sedation is
greatly increased by the availability of specific antagonists.
Atipamezole is the most selective of the three currently available
antagonists and can be used in all species. There are apparent
species-dependent differences in response to yohimbine and tola-
zoline but less so with atipamezole. Yohimbine, for example, is not
particularly effective in wild bovids, and either tolazoline or ati-
pamezole reversal is preferred in these species. Antagonists should
generally be administered intramuscularly unless the situation is an
emergency. CNS excitement, tachycardia, and hypotension fol-
lowed by hypertension may be seen with IV antagonist administra-
tion [28,41]. Animals may arouse rapidly and without warning
from immobilization following IV administration of atipame-
zole [29,35,37]. With potentially dangerous species, this may not
allow adequate time to retreat to a safe distance.
Vatinoxan (MK-467) is an α2
- adrenergic receptor antagonist that
does not cross the blood–brain barrier, i.e., the agent might be used
to antagonize peripheral effects of new α2
- adrenergic receptor
agonists. Studies in wildlife indicate that vatinoxan has potential
for preventing cardiovascular and other side effects of α2 - adrenergic
receptor agonists, without significantly compromising their analge-
sic or sedative effects [43].

-- 1099 of 1450 --

1084 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
Neuroleptic drugs
Neuroleptic agents, such as acepromazine and droperidol, have
been used as adjunctive agents in wildlife capture for many years.
Typically, they have been used in combination with potent opioids
such as etorphine. A more recent application of these agents is the
use of long-acting tranquilizers to facilitate translocation of wild
animals. Long-acting neuroleptics have been developed to treat
human psychosis. Depending on the formulation, these drugs may
have effects for days to weeks. They will produce an overall reduc-
tion in stress of handling, which should decrease the incidence of
trauma and myopathy and facilitate adaptation to a novel environ-
ment. Typically, these agents are of the phenothiazine, butyrophe-
none, or benzodiazepine drug classes [44,45]. A short-acting agent,
such as haloperidol, may be combined with a long-acting agent,
such as perphenazine enanthate, to produce a rapid onset of action
and prolonged activity [45].
Perphenazine enanthate
Perphenazine is a slow-onset, long-acting phenothiazine derivative
formulated in a sesame oil vehicle. The onset of perphenazine is
12–16 h, and its effects can last up to 10 days. The use of this drug
has been reported in a variety of species, including red deer and
Przewalski’s horses [45,46]. Flight distance is decreased in red deer,
and animals maintain better body condition than controls during
changes in environment [46]. In Przewalski’s horses, the drug has
been used to effectively decrease dominance aggression during the
establishment of a bachelor herd [46].
Zuclopenthixol acetate
This drug is a thioxanthine derivative that has been used in a variety
of species with effects lasting up to 3–4 days [47–50]. Treated ani-
mals have a decreased flight distance and are easier to manipulate.
Animals spend more time eating and drinking compared with con-
trols and spend less time pacing. A dose of 1 mg/kg IM has been
used in most studies. Occasionally, extrapyramidal signs have been
noted [49] but typically resolved without treatment [49]. A study in
caribou demonstrated that zuclopenthixol acetate could be used to
decrease stress and mortality during translocation [50]. In this
study, three animals demonstrated side effects within 24 h of dosing
(backing up when walking, rapid jaw movement, excessive pawing,
panting, muscle twitches, and low head carriage). These symptoms
rapidly resolved following IM administration of midazolam at a
dose of 0.2 mg/kg [50].
Azaperone
This butyrophenone drug has classically been used for tranquiliza-
tion of swine. It has been used in combination with α2
-adrenergic
receptor agonists and opioids for anesthesia and immobilization of
wild and farmed ungulates [47]. In pigs, it has a duration of approx-
imately 6 h. Its duration of action has not been reported in wildlife
species. Azaperone has been used in wild ungulates to provide tran-
quilization for short translocations.
Neurosteroids (alfaxalone)
Alfaxalone is a neuroactive steroid formulated in 2-hydroxypropyl-
β- cyclodextrin. Alfaxalone is typically used as an induction agent
or as an anesthetic agent in total IV anesthesia protocols. When
administered via the IM route, it will induce dose-dependent effects
ranging from sedation to anesthesia. Alfaxalone has the advantage
of being useful in a wide variety of wildlife species and is often
combined with other drugs to facilitate chemical restraint or light
anesthesia. It has been successfully used in combination with
medetomidine and azaperone to successfully immobilize wild mule
deer and bighorn sheep [51,52]. The major side effects of this com-
bination are hypoxemia and respiratory depression [51–53]. A
major limitation of alfaxalone is that the current commercially
available formulation has a concentration of 10 mg/mL, necessitat-
ing the use of large drug volumes that may not be suitable for
remote drug delivery in some species. A novel formulation at a con-
centration of 40 mg/mL has been developed and effectively used in
wild bighorn sheep [53]. Once it is commercially available, it should
prove to be useful for immobilization of a variety of wildlife
species.
Drug combinations
As stated previously, it is uncommon to use single agents for
wildlife capture. Typically, agents are combined either for their
synergistic immobilizing effects or to counter adverse physiologic
effects of singular agents. The combination of an opioid with an
α2 -adrenergic receptor agonist has already been discussed.
Xylazine–ketamine has been used for many years and has the
advantage of versatility (i.e., it is effective in many ungulate and
carnivore species). Medetomidine–ketamine shares the versatility
of xylazine–ketamine, with the advantages of decreased volume
and lower ketamine requirement. Antagonism of medetomidine
will likely cause fewer side effects from residual ketamine, because
its dose requirement is lower [1,3,28].
Medetomidine–ketamine is useful in a wide range of species.
Nevertheless, it should always be used cautiously. Its use is even
avoided in bears, because sudden recoveries have been reported in
brown and polar bears [29]. Xylazine–tiletamine–zolazepam and
medetomidine–tiletamine–zolazepam can be delivered in small
volumes and are useful in a wide range of wildlife species, as well.
Antagonism of the α2 - adrenergic receptor agonist will hasten
recovery. Time to sternal recumbency and standing is generally
more rapid after antagonism of medetomidine compared with
xylazine because of the lower dose requirement of tiletamine–
zolazepam when combined with medetomidine [29–32].
The combination of butorphanol, azaperone, and medetomidine
(BAM) has been used to successfully capture a variety of wild and
captive species [21–26]. Sedation is reversible with atipamezole and
naltrexone in combination.
Alfaxalone is typically used in combination with other
drugs [51–53]. The utility of alfaxalone for wildlife capture will be
increased once a more concentrated formulation becomes readily
available [53].
The capture event
Precapture planning
Before undertaking any wildlife capture, an appropriate plan of
action must be devised. The target species should be researched to
determine the most effective and current techniques. A decision
needs to be made as to the use of physical or chemical restraint.
Logistical considerations are important and include establishing
communication and evacuation plans. Equipment must be carefully
selected for use in the field. Drug needs must be anticipated, and it
is generally wise to budget for at least 50% more drug than is actu-
ally needed. This will help to offset any drug wasted from lost darts
or poor dart placement.

-- 1100 of 1450 --

Chapter 55: Comparative Immobilization and Anesthesia – Free-Ranging Terrestrial Mammals 	1085
In the immediate precapture period, the target animal is located,
and weight is estimated. The terrain, weather, and other factors
must be evaluated to determine whether capture should be
attempted. Occasionally, the drug dart is loaded after the target ani-
mal has been located and observed; however, in most situations, it
is more practical to load the darts beforehand. Drug doses may be
calculated for specific sizes or age groups, and the darts are
preloaded and marked accordingly. However, metal darts should
not be kept loaded for longer than a 12 h period because of the pos-
sibility that corrosive action of the drugs may impair the injection
mechanism. Preloaded darts with air-activated discharge mecha-
nisms should not be pressurized because they have a tendency to
lose pressure if armed for an extended period.
Generally, the animal will need to be approached to within a dis-
tance of 30–40 m for accurate dart delivery. There are many meth-
ods to facilitate approaching to within this distance. Animals may
be stalked, baited, approached in a vehicle or helicopter, or trapped
or snared prior to approach. Trapping has the advantage of limiting
movement during the capture event, but it may prove to be more
stressful than helicopter capture [11]. Pursuit of animals should
generally be limited to no more than 2–5 min. The incidence of
capture myopathy, hyperthermia, and trauma will increase with
prolonged chase times. In management situations, pursuit may
often be required until the animal is captured. It is beyond the scope
of this chapter to thoroughly discuss species-specific considera-
tions. It is advisable to include experienced personnel on the cap-
ture team and to consult with experienced wildlife managers,
biologists, and veterinarians to determine anticipated complica-
tions, animal behavior when stressed, and the current approaches
to dealing with the target species.
Induction
Many factors may influence induction time. These include the drug
dose received, the animal’s physical condition, its age and gender,
and its sensitivity to the immobilizing drug. Dart placement is
probably the most important determinant of induction time. To
facilitate quick absorption of the drug, the muscle masses of the
neck, shoulder, or hindquarter must be injected (Fig. 55.5). Animals
that are excited or stressed can have induction times that are con-
siderably longer than in calm animals.
Some animals will put on considerable fat deposits prior to den-
ning and fasting and must be dealt with in a different manner
during these periods of the year. Brown bears, for example, can gen-
erally be darted in the hindquarter when they emerge from spring
dens. In the fall, these animals have considerable fat deposits over-
lying the rump and must be darted in the shoulder or neck. As soon
as the dart is placed, the time should be recorded, and the animal
must be carefully observed to ensure that it is not lost during the
induction period.
The initial approach to a darted animal can be dangerous. The
animal should be observed from a safe distance to determine that
there is no purposeful movement. When α2
-adrenergic receptor
agonist-based protocols are used (e.g., medetomidine–ketamine or
xylazine–tiletamine–zolazepam), the animal’s head or limbs should
not move prior to approach. If tiletamine–zolazepam alone or opi-
oids are used, there may be some involuntary movement in ade-
quately immobilized animals.
Once it has been determined that the animal is immobilized, it
should be cautiously approached accompanied by a firearm backup
if necessary. It is important to leave safe exits for the capture team
and the animal. To gauge the animal’s response, auditory stimula-
tion such as clapping or shouting should be employed. If there is no
response to auditory stimulation, the response to tactile stimulation
should be gauged. It is advisable to use a stick or pole syringe to
extend reach when stimulating the animal (Fig. 55.6). When it is
safe, the palpebral reflex and airway can be checked. A set of vital
signs, including rectal temperature, respiratory rate, and heart rate,
should be monitored. The animal’s eyes can be lubricated with an
ophthalmic solution or gel, and a blindfold can be placed to decrease
visual stimulation. At this point, hobbles may be considered to limit
movement in the event of sudden recovery in ungulates.
Monitoring and supportive care
Following capture, the animal should be positioned to avoid pres-
sure points and ensure optimum ventilation in a recumbent animal.
Carnivores may be positioned in lateral or sternal recumbency, but
ruminants should be positioned in sternal recumbency whenever
possible. The head and neck should be extended to maintain a pat-
ent airway. A stretcher system may be employed to facilitate move-
ment of the animal and to keep it elevated above the ground. Vital
signs should be monitored every 5–10 min. Painful procedures
such as tooth extraction or biopsies should be performed soon after
induction when the animal is in the deepest plane of anesthesia.
Figure 55.5 Correct dart placement in a brown bear. The dart has been
placed into the well-muscled hindquarter of the bear.
Figure 55.6 Cautious approach to a bear. It is important to extend your
reach and have an escape route planned during the initial approach to
dangerous wildlife.

-- 1101 of 1450 --

1086 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
If animals are manipulated to determine body mass, it is best to do
this during a deeper plane of immobilization–anesthesia because
stimulus can hasten arousal [54].
Hypoxemia is common during wildlife immobilization and anes-
thesia [1–6]. Hypoxemia in the face of hyperthermia is particularly
serious. Hyperthermia and increased metabolic rate increase tissue
oxygen demand. This can increase the risk of inducing exertional
myopathy or even cause acute mortality. Hypoxemia can often be
prevented or treated in the field with the administration of supple-
mental oxygen. The animal should ideally be monitored with a
pulse oximeter. Normal hemoglobin saturation should be 95–98%.
If a pulse oximeter is not available, the mucous membranes should
be monitored closely for cyanosis. Severely hypoxemic animals are
often tachycardic. Tachycardia followed by severe bradycardia
(heart rate < 30 beats/min) is often a warning sign that hypoxemia
is very severe. The occurrence of hypoxemia has been linked to pro-
longation of recovery times in ungulates [55,56].
Portable equipment is available to facilitate oxygen delivery.
An ambulatory regulator and an aluminum D cylinder are light-
weight, portable, and sturdy. They can provide a 10 L/min flow for
up to 30 min. An E cylinder will provide this flow for 1 h or more.
Portable oxygen concentrators have been used effectively as well.
A nasal catheter can be used for insufflation in most animals. The
catheter should be threaded as far as the medial canthus of the eye.
The flow rate should be adjusted to maintain a saturation of greater
than 95% (Fig. 55.7).
Heart rate and pulse quality should be monitored every 5–10 min.
The auricular artery is easily palpated in many ungulate species but
if it cannot be palpated, a femoral pulse can usually be used.
Equipment is available to measure direct or indirect blood pressure
and electrocardiographic status in the field (Figs. 55.8 and 55.9).
In ruminants, sternal recumbency will help to prevent ruminal
tympany. If ruminal tympany is a problem, the animal may be
rocked gently to stimulate eructation. A tube passed nasally or
orally to the rumen can be used but may predispose to regurgitation
and aspiration. Generally, if ruminal tympany is severe, it is advis-
able to finish the procedure quickly and antagonize the anesthetic
agents. If α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists have been used, the
administration of tolazoline, yohimbine, or atipamezole will help to
reinitiate ruminal activity and facilitate the correction of tympany.
Rectal temperature should be monitored every 5–10 min.
Ungulates are particularly prone to hyperthermia, especially after a
long chase. Planning immobilization during cooler periods of the
day or at cooler times of the year should be considered. A rectal
temperature ≥ 2 °C greater than normal is cause for concern, and
attempts should be made to cool the animal. Cold water sprayed
on the animal or snow packed into the inguinal and axillary
regions may help lower body temperature. A rectal temperature
≥ 3 °C greater than normal is an emergency and should be treated
aggressively.
Figure 55.7 Pulse oximeter used to measure percent hemoglobin
saturation in a brown bear.
Figure 55.8 Placement of an arterial catheter into the auricular artery of a
white- tailed deer.
Figure 55.9 Direct pressure measurement in a brown bear. The arterial
catheter has been placed in the femoral artery of the bear.

-- 1102 of 1450 --

Chapter 55: Comparative Immobilization and Anesthesia – Free-Ranging Terrestrial Mammals 	1087
Loud noises increase the risk of sudden arousal, especially the
vocalizations of distressed offspring. Other factors to consider are
movement (i.e., changing the body position of a bear or location of
the anesthetized animal) or degree of painful stimuli. Signs for
assessing CNS depression will depend on the agent used. As drug
effects lessen, spontaneous blinking will occur. Carnivores often
develop chewing and paw movements. They will start to lift their
head and may attempt to raise themselves with their forelimbs.
Animals with significant head movement generally require a “top-
up” dose of tiletamine–zolazepam or ketamine unless they are to be
left to recover. Small additional doses of tiletamine–zolazepam can
significantly prolong recovery and should be used only if longer
than 30 min of additional immobilization is required. Ketamine is a
better “top-up” choice if only 5–20 min of additional time is needed.
With xylazine–ketamine, or medetomidine–ketamine, immobi-
lization, head lifting or limb movement signals that the animal is
minimally obtunded and should not be approached or manipu-
lated. Increased intensity of the palpebral reflex or nystagmus are
generally good indicators that CNS depression is lessening. When
procedures are completed, the area should be cleared of equipment,
and personnel should retreat to a safe area and observe the
recovery.
Recovery
Considerations for recovery vary depending on the drugs used and
the circumstances at hand. If a reversible drug combination was not
used, the animal should be observed until it can ambulate. The ani-
mal should be placed in a comfortable position and its airway
cleared. A final set of vital signs are obtained. Typically, two people
remain with the animal to administer the reversal drug(s).
Antagonists are typically administered IM unless there is an imme-
diate physiologic need for rapid IV drug reversal.
Complications related to wildlife capture
Physical trauma
During immobilization and capture, physical injuries such as con-
tusions, lacerations, abrasions, punctures, and fractures may occur.
Minor injuries can be treated successfully in the field, but fractures
and other serious conditions are difficult to treat effectively and
often require that the animal be euthanized.
Minor lacerations may be cleaned, treated with a topical antibi-
otic ointment, and protected with an insect repellant. An appropri-
ate antibiotic may be given intramuscularly to help prevent
infection. Closure may be considered for large lacerations, which
should be cleaned and debrided as much as possible. These lacera-
tions are often contaminated and, if they are closed, appropriate
drainage and administration of long-acting antibiotics must be
considered.
The potential for physical trauma may be reduced by taking care-
ful notice of any hazard in the environment that may increase the
likelihood of injury during capture. Traps, snares, nets, or other
forms of manual restraint should be appropriate for the species and
set by trained individuals.
Hyperthermia
The most immediate sign is a critical rise in rectal temperature to
above 40–41 °C (depending on the species). It is important to note
that rectal temperature measurement has been shown to underesti-
mate core temperature by up to 1 °C [57]. This should be taken into
consideration when deciding if hyperthermia should be treated.
Symptoms of severe hyperthermia include rapid shallow breathing,
panting, and weak, rapid, or irregular heart rate. Treatment includes
moving the animal into shade or spraying it with cold water. Room
temperature IV fluid administration and/or cold water enemas may
also be indicated [38] (Fig. 55.10). Packing ice or snow around the
animal in the winter may also be helpful. Antagonism of α2
-
adrenergic receptor agonists should also be considered to normal-
ize body temperature [38].
The risk of hyperthermia may be reduced by avoiding warm
days, limiting activities to the coolest part of the day, avoiding pro-
longed pursuits, and minimizing physical restraint (Fig. 55.11).
Figure 55.10 Catheter placed into the lateral saphenous vein of a mountain
caribou. Venous access is recommended to facilitate intravenous fluid
administration to treat hypovolemia or hyperthermia.
Figure 55.11 Active cooling of a hyperthermic wolverine. In a field
situation, immersion in cold water can be a good option to treat severe
hyperthermia in smaller wildlife species.

-- 1103 of 1450 --

1088 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
Hypothermia
Hypothermia is of most concern when ambient temperatures are low.
It occurs most commonly in young animals, animals with small body
mass, and those in poor body condition. Hypothermia is generally
characterized by a rectal temperature ≥ 2 °C below normal. It may
result in prolonged recovery, acidosis, coagulopathies, and arrhyth-
mias. Supportive procedures consist of drying and covering the ani-
mal and providing external heat sources such as hot water bottles.
Exertional myopathy
Most free-ranging animals exert themselves infrequently. They are
not conditioned for running at full effort over long distances.
Chasing wild animals with a helicopter or motor vehicle imposes a
tremendous amount of stress. The effects of sympathetic exhaus-
tion from sustained stress combined with intense muscular exer-
tion can cause a life-threatening syndrome known as “exertional
myopathy” [3,58].
Intense sustained muscular exertion leads to the production and
buildup of lactate in muscle cells and metabolic acidosis. Severe lac-
tate accumulation may cause metabolic dysfunction or death of
skeletal muscle cells, resulting in the release of intracellular potas-
sium ions (K +
), calcium ions (Ca 2+
), and myoglobin. High plasma
concentrations of myoglobin and ultrafiltrate within the renal
tubules can cause acute renal failure. Hyperkalemia and acidosis
cause acute arrhythmias and circulatory failure.
Exertional myopathy is difficult to treat, so prevention is of the
utmost importance. Chase time should be limited to 2 min and, if
the capture effort fails, it should not be resumed for at least 1 day. In
situations where several individuals from the same herd require
capture (often the situation with net gunning), it is advisable to have
enough handlers to capture multiple individuals at the same time
rather than repeatedly stressing the herd. Visual and auditory stim-
ulation, handling, and restraint of the captured animal should be
kept to a minimum. Four common clinical syndromes of exertional
myopathy have been identified: acute death syndrome, delayed
peracute death syndrome, ataxic-myoglobinuric syndrome, and
muscle rupture syndrome.
Respiratory depression and hypoxemia
Major causative factors include immobilizing agents (particularly
potent opioids), ventilation–perfusion mismatching, and airway
obstruction.
The best technique for preventing hypoventilation is endotracheal
intubation and controlled ventilation with supplemental inspired
oxygen. This can be difficult in field situations, however, particularly
with larger animals. The partial reversal of opioids has been used to
treat respiratory depression when intubation was impractical [7,27].
Hypoxemia due to hypoventilation and/or ventilation–perfusion
mismatch generally responds to supplemental inspired oxygen
delivery [3,8,24,55,56], although arterial CO 2 partial pressure can
increase and respiratory acidemia often becomes more severe dur-
ing the administration of supplemental inspired oxygen [56,59].
Other causes of acute respiratory compromise include aspiration
and pneumothorax (secondary to dart penetration of the thoracic
cavity). Pneumothorax requires thoracocentesis, so equipment to
perform this procedure should be available if at all possible.
Capture-associated mortality
There is no doubt that the chemical immobilization of free-ranging
mammals is a minimal form of veterinary anesthesia conducted
under the most extreme circumstances. Anesthetic risk is influenced
by the capture protocols chosen to meet the challenges unique
to each species and its environment. Typically, most deaths are
observed in the early phase of a large capture project before immo-
bilization methods have been refined, drug doses have been adjusted,
and team members are experienced. Moreover, an increased risk
of mortality accompanies health evaluation of animals under
environmental or pathogenic stress. Overall, capture mortality of
free-ranging mammals can be grouped into three categories:
1 Direct effects of the immobilizing drug itself (e.g., respiratory
depression, shock, hyperthermia, and asphyxia caused by
tympany or vomiting)
2 Indirect effects (e.g., drowning, pneumothorax due to mis-
placement of darts, and trauma from dart impact) or indirect
consequences of the drug used (e.g., etorphine often induces
hyperthermia, which may cause the animal to seek water for
cooling, with drowning as a possible sequela)
3 Secondary effects caused by the capture process itself (e.g., trauma
from traps, long-term effects from chasing or stress, separation of
family groups, and various problems with radio collars or implant-
able transmitters). Secondary effects have nothing to do with the
anesthetic risk per se and should be treated as a separate entity.
By using immobilizing drugs and doses with proven safety,
proper remote drug delivery systems, and established capture
methods and techniques, an experienced capture team decreases
the risk of mortality [2].
Protocols and doses
Readers are referred to the Handbook of Wildlife Chemical
Immobilization and Zoo Animal and Wildlife Immobilization and
Anesthesia for complete dosing information and a reference list by
species [1,3]. It should be appreciated that doses required for immo-
bilization of free-ranging animals are generally higher than those
required in captive individuals [1,60]. This factor must be kept in
mind when doses are planned for wildlife capture, or a relative
underdose may occur. Obviously, injection site and method of drug
delivery also affect dose requirements. Comparison of hand injec-
tion versus dart delivery demonstrated that 50% more drug was
required when animals were darted [61]. Dart needle length also
has a major impact on induction times and time to retrieval of the
darted animal, with longer 40 mm needles resulting in more rapid
induction when compared to 30 mm needles in ground darted
fallow deer [62]. It is important to consider these factors when
attempting to extrapolate doses used in captive wildlife to dose
requirements in free-ranging animals.
References
1 Kreeger TJ, Arnemo JM. Handbook of Wildlife Chemical Immobilization, 5th edn.
South Freeport, ME: Center for Wildlife Studies Press, 2018.
2 Chinnadurai SK, Strahl-Heldreth D, Fiorello CV, et al. Best-practice guidelines
for field-based surgery and anesthesia of free-ranging wildlife. I. Anesthesia and
analgesia. J Wildl Dis 2016; 52: 14–27.
3 West G, Heard D, Caulkett NA, eds. Zoo Animal and Wildlife Immobilization and
Anesthesia, 2nd edn. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2014.
4 Lian M, Evans AE, Beckmen KB, et al. Restraint and immobilization. In: Tryland M,
Kutz S, eds. Reindeer and Caribou. Health and Disease. Boca Raton, FL: Taylor &
Francis Group, 2019: 465–491.
5 Read MR. A review of alpha-2 adrenoceptor agonists and the development of
hypoxemia in domestic and wild ruminants. J Zoo Wildl Med 2003; 34: 134–138.
6 Lakhdhir S, Caulkett N, Duke-Novakovski T, et al. Evaluation of intramuscular sodium
nitroprusside injection to improve oxygenation in medetomidine-alfaxalone-azaperone
anesthetized white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus). J Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48:
65–73.

-- 1104 of 1450 --

Chapter 55: Comparative Immobilization and Anesthesia – Free-Ranging Terrestrial Mammals 	1089
7 Buss P, Miller M, Fuller A, et al. Postinduction butorphanol administration alters
oxygen consumption to improve blood gases in etorphine-immobilized white
rhinoceros. J Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45: 57–67.
8 Fahlman Å, Caulkett N, Arnemo JM, et al. Efficacy of a portable oxygen concentra-
tor with pulsed delivery for treatment of hypoxemia during anesthesia of wildlife.
J Zoo Wildl Med 2012; 43: 67–76.
9 Cattet MRL, Caulkett NA, Wilson C, et al. Intranasal administration of xylazine to
reduce stress in elk captured by net gun. J Wildl Dis 2004; 40: 562–565.
10 Jessup DA, Clark RK, Weaver RA, et al. The safety and cost-effectiveness of net-gun
capture of desert bighorn sheep (Ovis canadensis nelsoni). J Zoo Anim Med 1988;
19: 208–213.
11 Cattet MRL, Christison K, Caulkett NA, et al. Physiologic responses of grizzly bears
to different methods of capture. J Wildl Dis 2003; 39: 649–654.
12 Smith T, Herrero S, Debruyn T, et al. Efficacy of bear deterrent spray in Alaska.
J Wildl Manage 2008; 72: 640–645.
13 Haymerle A, Fahlman Å, Walzer C. Human exposures to immobilizing agents:
results of an online survey. Vet Rec 2010; 167: 327–332.
14 Hoy SM, Keating GM. Dexmedetomidine: a review of its use for sedation in
mechanically ventilated patients in an intensive care setting and for procedural
sedation. Drugs 2011; 71: 1481–1501.
15 Kallio A, Ponkilainen R, Scheinin H. Effects of dexmedetomidine, a selective alpha-
2 adrenoceptor agonist on hemodynamic control mechanisms. Clin Pharmacol Ther
1989; 46: 33–42.
16 Kock MD, Burroughs R, eds. Chemical and Physical Restraint of Wild Animals.
A Training and Field Manual for African Species, 2nd edn. Greyton, South Africa:
International Wildlife Veterinary Services, 2012.
17 Haigh JC. Opioids in zoological medicine. J Zoo Wildl Med 1990; 21: 391–413.
18 Kreeger TJ. Xylazine-induced aspiration pneumonia in Shira’s moose. Wildl Soc
Bull 2000; 28: 751–753.
19 Lance BR, Kenny DE. Thiafentanil oxalate (A3080) in domestic ungulate species.
In: Miller RE, Fowler ME, eds. Fowler’s Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine, vol. 7.
St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2012: 589–595.
20 Grobler D, Bush M, Jessup D, et al. Anaesthesia of gemsbok (Oryx gazelle) with a
combination of A3080, medetomidine and ketamine. J S Afr Vet Assoc 2001; 72:
81–83.
21 Miller BF, Osborn DA, Lance WR, et al. Butorphanol-azaperone-medetomidine for
immobilization of captive white-tailed deer. J Wildl Dis 2009; 45: 457–467.
22 Siegal-Willet JSB, Citino SB, Wade S, et al. Butorphanol, azaperone and medetomi-
dine anesthesia in free-ranging white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus) using
radio transmitter darts. J Wildl Dis 2009; 45: 468–480.
23 Wolfe LL, Fisher MC, Davis TR, et al. Efficacy of a low-dosage combination of
butorphanol, azaperone, and medetomidine (BAM) to immobilize Rocky Mountain
elk. J Wildl Dis 2014; 50: 676–680.
24 Mich PH, Wolfe LL, Sirochman TM, et al. Evaluation of intramuscular butorpha-
nol, azaperone, and medetomidine and nasal oxygen insufflation for the chemical
immobilization of white-tailed deer (Odocoilius virginianus). J Zoo Wildl Med 2008;
39: 480–487.
25 Harms JN, Jung TS, Hallock M, et al. Efficacy of a butorphanol, azaperone, and
medetomidine combination for helicopter-based immobilization of bison (Bison
bison). J Wildl Dis 2018; 54: 819–824.
26 Williamson RH, Muller LI, Blair CD. The use of xylazine-ketamine or butorphanol-
azaperone-medetomidine to immobilize American black bears (Ursus americanus).
J Wildl Dis 2018; 54: 503–510.
27 Miller M, Buss P, Joubert J, et al. Use of butorphanol during immobilization of free-
ranging white rhinoceros (Ceratotherium simum). J Zoo Wildl Med 2013; 44: 55–61.
28 Jalanka HH, Roeken BO. The use of medetomidine, medetomidine-ketamine com-
binations, and atipamezole in nondomestic mammals: a review. J Zoo Wildl Med
1990; 21: 259–282.
29 Cattet MRL, Caulkett NA, Polischuk SC, et al. Anesthesia of polar bears with
zolazepam-tiletamine, medetomidine-ketamine, and medetomidine-zolazepam-
tiletamine. J Zoo Wildl Med 1999; 30: 354–360.
30 Caulkett NA, Cattet MRL, Caulkett JM, et al. Comparative physiological effects of
Telazol, medetomidine-ketamine, and medetomidine-Telazol in polar bears (Ursus
maritimus). J Zoo Wildl Med 1999; 30: 504–509.
31 Cattet MRL, Caulkett NA, Lunn NJ. Anesthesia of polar bears using xylazine-
zolazepam- tiletamine or zolazepam-tiletamine. J Wildl Dis 2003; 39: 655–664.
32 Cattet MRL, Caulkett NA, Stenhouse GB. Anesthesia of grizzly bears using xyla-
zine- zolazepam-tiletamine or zolazepam-tiletamine. Ursus 2003; 14: 88–93.
33 Schobert E. Telazol use in wild and exotic animals. Vet Med 1987; 82: 1080–1088.
34 Murray SSL, Monfort SL, Ware L, et al. Anesthesia in female white-tailed deer using
Telazol and xylazine. J Wildl Dis 2000; 36: 670–675.
35 Caulkett NA, Cattet MRL, Cantwell S, et al. Anesthesia of wood bison with
medetomidine-Telazol and xylazine-Telazol combinations. Can Vet J 2000; 41:
49–53.
36 Millspaugh JJ, Brundige GC, Jenks JA, et al. Immobilization of Rocky Mountain elk
with Telazol and xylazine hydrochloride, and antagonism by yohimbine hydrochlo-
ride. J Wildl Dis 1995; 31: 259–262.
37 Caulkett NA, Cattet MRL. Physiological effects of medetomidine-zolazepam-
tiletamine immobilization in black bears (Ursus americanus). J Wildl Dis 1997; 33:
618–622.
38 Ozeki LM, Caulkett N, Stenhouse G, et al. Effect of active cooling and alpha-2
adrenoceptor antagonism on core temperature in anesthetized brown bears (Ursus
arctos). J Zoo Wildl Med 2015; 46: 279–285.
39 Kock MD, Morkel P, Atkinson M, et al. Chemical immobilization of free-ranging
white rhinoceros (Ceratotherium simum simum) in Hwange and Matobo National
Parks, Zimbabwe, using combinations of etorphine (M99), fentanyl, xylazine and
detomidine. J Zoo Wildl Med 1995; 26: 207–219.
40 Klein L, Citino SB. Comparison of detomidine/carfentanil/ketamine and medeto-
midine/ ketamine anesthesia in Grevy’s zebra. In: Proceedings of the Joint
Conference of the American Association of Zoo Veterinarians, Wildlife Disease
Association, and American Association of Wildlife Veterinarians, East Lansing, MI:
1995: 290–293.
41 Caulkett NA, Duke T, Cribb PH. Cardiopulmonary effects of medetomidine-
ketamine in domestic sheep (Ovis ovis) maintained in sternal recumbency. J Zoo
Wildl Med 1996; 27: 217–226.
42 Fandos Esteruelas N, Cattet M, Zedrosser A, et al. A double-blinded, randomized
comparison of medetomidine-tiletamine-zolazepam and dexmedetomidine-
tiletamine-zolazepam in free-ranging brown bears (Ursus arctos). PLoS ONE 2017;
12: e0170764.
43 Einwaller J, Painer J, Raekallio M, et al. Cardiovascular effects of intravenous
vatinoxan (MK-467) in medetomidine–tiletamine–zolazepam anaesthetised red
deer (Cervus elaphus). J Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47: 518–527.
44 Ebedes H. The use of long-acting tranquilizers in captive wild animals. In:
McKenzie A, ed. The Capture and Care Manual: Capture, Care, Accommodation
and Transportation of Wild African Animals. Pretoria, South Africa: Wildlife
Decision Services and the South African Veterinary Foundation, 1993: 71–99.
45 Diverio S, Goddard PJ, Gordon IJ, et al. The effect of management practices on
stress in farmed red deer (Cervus elaphus) and its modulation by long-acting
neuroleptics: behavioural responses. Appl Anim Behav Sci 1993; 36: 363–376.
46 Atkinson MW, Blumer ES. The use of a long-acting neuroleptic in the Mongolian
wild horse (Equus przewalskii przewalskii) to facilitate the establishment of a bach-
elor herd. In: Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the American Association of
Zoo Veterinarians, Houston, TX, 1997: 199–200.
47 Shury TK. Use of azaperone with zuclopenthixol acetate for tranquilization of free
ranging wood bison and immobilization with carfentanil and xylazine. In:
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the American Association of Zoo Veterinarians,
Omaha, NE: 1998: 408–409.
48 Clippinger TL, Citino SB, Wade S. Behavioral and physiologic response to an
intermediate- acting tranquilizer, zuclopenthixol, in captive Nile lechwe (Kobus
megaceros). In: Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the American Association of
Zoo Veterinarians, Omaha, NE: 1998: 38–40.
49 Read M, Caulkett N, McCallister M. Evaluation of zuclopenthixol acetate to
decrease handling stress in wapiti. J Wildl Dis 2000; 36: 450–459.
50 Slater O, Backwell A, Cook R, et al. The use of a long-acting tranquilizer (zuclopen-
thixol acetate) and live video monitoring for successful long-distance transport of
caribou (Rangifer tarandus). Rangifer 2021; 41: 13–26.
51 Mathieu A, Caulkett N, Stent PM, et al. Capture of free-ranging mule deer
(Odocoileus hemonius) with a combination of medetomidine-azaperone and
alfaxalone. J Wildl Dis 2017; 53: 296–303.
52 Williams M, Caulkett N, Neuhaus P, et al. Comparison of the efficacy and safety of
medetomidine-ketamine versus medetomidine-alfaxalone-azaparone combination
in free-ranging Rocky Mountain Bighorn Sheep (Ovis Canadensis). J Zoo Wildl
Med 2018; 49: 662–670.
53 Patterson M, Caulkett N, Neuhaus P, et al. The utility of a novel formulation
of alfaxalone in a remote delivery system. J Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48: 537–540.
54 Cattet MRL, Caulkett NA, Streib KA, et al. Cardiopulmonary response of
anesthetized polar bears to suspension by net and sling. J Wildl Dis 1999; 35:
548–556.
55 Risling TE, Fahlman Å, Caulkett NA, et al. Physiological and behavioral effects of
hypoxemia in reindeer immobilized with xylazine-etorphine. Anim Prod Science
2011; 51: 1–4.
56 Paterson JM, Caulkett NA, Woodbury MR. Physiologic effects of nasal oxygen or
medical air administered prior to and during carfentanil-xylazine anesthesia in
North American elk (Cervus canadensis manitobensis). J Zoo Wildl Med 2009; 40:
39–50.
57 Ozeki L, Fahlman A, Stenhouse G, et al. Evaluation of the accuracy of different
methods of monitoring body temperature in anesthetized brown bears (Ursus
arctos). J Zoo Wildl Med 2014; 45: 819–824.

-- 1105 of 1450 --

1090 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
58 Breed D, Meyer L, Steyl J, et al. Conserving wildlife in a changing world: under-
standing capture myopathy – a malignant outcome of stress during capture and
translocation. Conserv Physiol 2019; 7: coz027.
59 Lian M, Björck S, Arnemo J, et al. Severe hypoxemia in muskoxen (Ovibos moscha-
tus) immobilized with etorphine and xylazine corrected with supplemental nasal
oxygen. J Wildl Dis 2017; 53: 356–360.
60 Heard DJ. Chemical immobilization of felids, ursids, and small ungulates. Vet Clin
North Am Exot Anim Pract 2001; 4: 267–298.
61 Ryeng KA, Arnemo JM, Larsen S. Determination of optimal immobilizing doses
of a medetomidine hydrochloride and ketamine hydrochloride combination in
captive reindeer. Am J Vet Res 2001; 62: 119–126.
62 Bergvall UA, Kjellander P, Ahlqvist P, et al. Chemical immobilization of free-
ranging fallow deer (Dama dama): effect of needle length on induction time.
J Wildl Dis 2015; 51: 484–487.

-- 1106 of 1450 --

1091
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: T he Sixth E dition of L umb and J ones	. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
Marine mammals are a diverse group of mammals that have evolved
physically and physiologically to survive and thrive in varied
marine environments, often at extremes of temperature, water
depth, and pressure, and in limited daylight. Marine mammals are
classified into four different taxonomic groups: cetaceans (whales,
dolphins, and porpoises), pinnipeds (seals, sea lions, and walruses),
sirenians (manatees and dugongs), and marine fissipeds (polar
bears and sea otters). Anesthetic considerations for fissipeds (car-
nivorous mammals with separated toes) are discussed elsewhere.
The ancestors of Cetacea developed on land, returning to the
water 55 million years ago to evolve anatomically, physiologically,
and behaviorally for a completely aquatic existence today [1]. Most
clinical experience has been with the bottlenose dolphin (Tursiops
truncatus, Tursiops truncatus gilli, and Tursiops truncatus aduncus),
the most common cetacean managed in research, exhibit, and reha-
bilitation facilities. Other odontocete species have also been suc-
cessfully managed in zoos and aquaria for many years, including
killer whales (Orcinus orca), beluga or white whales (Delphinapterus
leucas), Pacific white-sided dolphins (Lagenorhynchus obliquidens),
false killer whales (Pseudorca crassidens), rough-toothed dolphins
(Steno bredanensis), as well as several hybrid delphinoid spe-
cies [2,3]. With increasing longevity in managed care, dolphins 50
years of age or older are not uncommon, with a median age of 32.0
years versus 19.9 years in free-ranging counterparts, demonstrating
the overall health of managed care populations [4,5].
Pinnipeds are aquatic, carnivorous marine mammals with
streamlined torpedo-shaped bodies, and limbs modified into flip-
pers (pinniped meaning “feather” or “wing”-footed). The living
representatives of the order Pinnipedia include three families:
Phocidae, the earless or “true” seals, Otariidae, the eared seals (fur
seals and sea lions), and Odobenidae, the tusked seals (walruses).
Pinnipeds are quite variable in body conformation with head-to-
tail lengths ranging from 1.5 m to 6.5 m and body weights ranging
from 35 to 3500 kg. Most clinical experience has been with the har-
bor seal (Phoca vitulina), the California sea lion (Zalophus califor-
nianus), and Pacific walrus (Odobenus rosmarus divergens), as these
are the most common species in managed populations [6].
Fortunately, these species are not at conservation risk, and most
pinnipeds in captivity are not captured from the wild, but rather the
result of managed care breeding programs [7]. Many other pinni-
peds species have been successfully managed in zoos and aquaria as
part of conservation efforts, including gray seals, harp seals,
Hawaiian monk seals, Stellar sea lions, and Atlantic walruses, to
name a few. Unfortunately, anesthetic expertise is lacking for the
many other species that will likely require conservation measures in
the future.
Sirenians, commonly called “sea cows,” are fully aquatic marine
mammals comprised of three species of manatees (Trichechidae)
and one species of dugong (Dugongidae), distributed throughout
fresh, brackish, and marine tropical waters of North and South
America, Africa, and Australia [8,9]. These hindgut fermenters,
56 Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia –
Marine Mammals
Julie A. Balko1 and James E. Bailey2
1 Department of Molecular Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA
2 Innovative Veterinary Medicine, Inc., Ponte Vedra, Florida, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 1091
Breathing, sleep, and ventilation, 1092
Breathing, 1092
Sleep, 1093
Ventilation, 1093
Preanesthetic assessment and planning, 1095
Protocol selection, 1097
Sedation and anesthesia, 1097
Cetacean anesthesia, 1098
Pinniped anesthesia, 1098
Sirenian anesthesia, 1099
Vascular access, 1099
Cetacean vascular access, 1099
Pinniped vascular access, 1101
Manatee vascular access, 1102
Airway management, 1102
Cetacean intubation, 1103
Pinniped intubation, 1104
Manatee intubation, 1104
Monitoring and support, 1105
Dive reflex, 1106
Anesthetic recovery, 1106
Acknowledgment, 1107
References, 1107

-- 1107 of 1450 --

1092 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
genetically related to elephants, are the sole obligate herbivores of
the marine mammal world, although they have been observed to
ingest invertebrates [10]. Sirenians are currently listed internation-
ally as vulnerable or threatened, with some species considered
endangered [9–13]. Habitat loss, natural disease, and human inter-
action mishaps (e.g., boat strikes) have resulted in this state of
duress for the species and have, at times, necessitated advanced sur-
gical and anesthetic intervention.
Advancements in medical and surgical interventions for man-
aged marine mammals have necessitated increasingly frequent
application of sedation and general anesthesia in this cohort. While
this has improved the longevity and well-being of this mature
and relatively closed population, it has also resulted in a growing
amount of clinical anesthesia experience. As these techniques
develop and translate to application in a field setting, free-living
marine mammals too will benefit.
Breathing, sleep, and ventilation
As the 1956 Nobel laureate in Medicine, Dr. Dickenson Richards,
once said, “Breathing is truly a strange phenomenon of life, caught
midway between the conscious and the unconscious, and peculiarly
sensitive to both” [14]. Too often, anesthesia textbooks are dedi-
cated to drug combinations and protocols rather than understand-
ing the consequences of those choices and the management of
expected (and unexpected) physiologic fallout. Of particular
importance to marine mammal species is an understanding of the
influence of drug choices on breathing and ventilation.
Breathing
Pinnipeds, cetaceans, and sirenians have an apneustic breathing
pattern; the normal conscious breathing pattern of many marine
mammals involves exhalation followed immediately by inhalation
and a breath-hold or apneustic interval. The rhythm for breathing is
generated by a complex neural network in the brainstem involving
both excitatory and inhibitory circuits. The medulla oblongata is
the lower half of the brainstem and contains the dorsal and ventral
respiratory groups. In vivo and in vitro experiments suggest a site
in the rostral ventrolateral medulla, the preBötzinger Complex
(preBötC), as the site of excitatory neurons both driving inspiration
and generating the respiratory pattern [15,16]. Expiratory activity is
regulated primarily by the Bötzinger complex (BötC), also located
in the rostral ventrolateral medulla; in contrast, it contains mostly
inhibitory neurons. The BötC has direct projections to and from the
preBötC. The retrotrapezoid nucleus (RTN) of the central respira-
tory network, which has direct connection to the BötC, contains
pH-sensitive neurons. These neurons express the transcription fac-
tor paired-like homeobox 2B (Phox2B); subjects with naturally
occurring or induced mutations of Phox2B do not respond to CO2
or the pH change induced by CO 2 [17]. As such, these Phox2B-
expressing neurons are fundamental to the generation and coordi-
nation of inspiration and expiration related to chemosensory
control of breathing. Although the overall central respiratory net-
work is far more complex than described here, it should be clear
that perturbations of the function of this network severely disrupt
breathing.
Inhalation anesthetic agents alter the folding, localization, and
aggregation of the Phox2B protein structure, thus affecting its
ability to trigger breathing in response to rising blood CO2 concen-
trations [18,19]. Phox2B has been identified in the medulla of a
wide variety of species [20,21], but it is theorized that the degree of
expression, intrinsic functionality, degree of protein structural
change, and localization when exposed to anesthetic agents may
vary by species. As a result, this may alter each species’ CO 2 respon-
siveness during equipotent anesthetic exposure.
Inhalation anesthetic agents produce dose-dependent depression
of respiration, with a decrease in responsiveness to blood CO2 con-
centrations as the anesthetic concentration rises; this appears to
relate to RTN responsiveness to changes in CO2 (or associated pH
changes) [22]. This depression varies with species and clinically
appears to follow the trend: human ~ canid < equid < otariid <
phocid ~ cetacean [23]. The shift in the response to CO 2 is such
that, anecdotally, anesthetized otariids will not spontaneously ven-
tilate until the arterial partial pressure of CO2 (PaCO2 ) is
60–80 mmHg. This appears even more pronounced in phocids,
cetaceans, and sirenians, which are unlikely to spontaneously ven-
tilate at equipotent levels of anesthetic exposure, even when the
PaCO2 rises to the point of becoming anesthetic itself (PaCO 2 ≥
90–95 mmHg). Additionally, these species are likely to be apneic at
light planes of anesthesia, where even gross purposeful movement
may be evident.
It has long been recognized that exogenously administered opi-
oids are potent depressants of ventilation [24]. This is the result of a
number of mechanisms, mainly activation of μ-opioid receptors at
multiple neuronal sites including BötC, preBötC, and other loca-
tions within the central respiratory network. The end result is
decreased respiratory rate, tidal volume, and response to hypercap-
nia and hypoxemia, as well as loss of upper airway control (i.e.,
swallowing and prevention of aspiration); these effects are reversi-
ble with μ-opioid receptor antagonists [25,26]. Interestingly, the
respiratory depression of inhalation anesthetic agents is, at least in
part, due to the influence of endogenous opioids [26]. As marine
mammal species are anecdotally sensitive to opioids and prone to
respiratory depression, further investigation of the endogenous opi-
oid systems (β-endorphins, enkephalins, and dynorphins) and their
receptors (μ or MOR, δ or DOR, and κ or KOR) is warranted.
γ- Aminobutyric acid (GABA) is the most abundant inhibitory
neurotransmitter in the mammalian central nervous system (CNS)
with GABA A receptors distributed throughout cortical and subcor-
tical areas. Considering its bounty, the receptor’s importance to
memory, awareness, and consciousness becomes evident. Generally
speaking, most modern anesthetic agents enhance the function of
GABA and GABA A receptors which is important to anesthesia and
emergence [27,28]. GABA A receptors are also present in the
preBötC and stimulation can depress breathing, in part explaining
the respiratory depressive effects of GABA agonist anesthetic drugs
seen in some species [29]. Similar to terrestrial mammals, this effect
appears to be both rate- and dose-dependent in many marine mam-
mal species, and overly rapid delivery of most modern anesthetic
agents may cause apnea prior to sufficient relaxation of the jaw and
upper airway, complicating intubation.
Not all anesthetic agents exert their effect through action on
GABA and GABAA receptors. While ketamine possesses some GABA
effects, it primarily acts through the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
glutamate receptors. Clinically, ketamine commonly alters the res-
piratory pattern, but infrequently interrupts spontaneous breathing
at clinically relevant dosages. Ketamine has been successfully used
to induce anesthesia of pinnipeds, mainly in free-ranging settings.
However, it has rarely been used in cetaceans and sirenians [30,31];
this is likely due to historical investigators’ needs to emulate sleep,
as ketamine enhances cortical cholinergic tone and alters electro-
encephalographic (EEG) activity, interfering with sleep studies.

-- 1108 of 1450 --

Chapter 56: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Marine Mammals 	1093
As ketamine likely produces less respiratory depression than opi-
oids in marine mammals and modulates pain through NMDA glu-
tamate receptor inhibition, it remains a candidate for further
investigation in marine mammals.
To summarize, anesthetic agents depress the adequacy of sponta-
neous, involuntary ventilation in marine mammals, and even sub-
anesthetic dosages may cause significant respiratory depression or
apnea, especially in phocids, cetaceans, and sirenians.
Sleep
Biologists and veterinarians have long been fascinated by the inter-
play of sleep and breathing in fully aquatic mammals. Sleep might
be simply defined as a state of immobility that is rapidly reversible
and is best conducted in a place perceived as comfortable and safe.
The superficial appearance of sleep and anesthesia led many inves-
tigators to equate drug-induced unconsciousness with sleep; how-
ever, significant differences between the two states exist. Sleep
involves the brainstem and frontal lobe function, while anesthetic
drugs, such as propofol, have widespread or global influence on the
brain [32]. In the 1960s, John Lilly observed that bottlenose dol-
phins slept with one eye open [33]. While he never produced any
EEGs to support this hypothesis, he proposed from these observa-
tions what we now know as unihemispheric sleep. Unfortunately, he
also misinterpreted barbiturate-induced respiratory depression as
the absence of involuntary breathing in cetaceans, leading to
death [34]. Misinformed and misguided, many still reference Lilly
believing that dolphins only breathe voluntarily, only undergo uni-
hemispheric sleep, and must “wake” for every breath. Instead, the
existing literature supports the conclusion that ventilation in
marine mammals is automatic or involuntary, albeit sensitive to
anesthetic drugs, and marine mammals are capable of bihemi-
spheric sleep in the aquatic environment.
Bihemispheric (both cerebral hemispheres) slow-wave sleep is
the traditional sleep pattern of most mammals in which both eyes
are shut and both halves of the brain are simultaneously uncon-
scious. In contrast, unihemispheric slow-wave sleep is a sleep pat-
tern in which one-half of the brain is at rest while the other half
remains vigilant. The concept of sleep, breathing, thermoregula-
tion, and vigilance while in action was first described in birds “on
the wing” [35] and has since been documented in marine mam-
mals. In the 1970s, Serafetinides reported the first EEG evidence of
unihemispheric sleep in cetaceans using subcutaneous needle elec-
trodes in a pilot whale (Globicephala scammoni) [36]. Mukhametov
used screw electrodes that allowed a degree of free movement
around a small, shallow pool to record EEG readings of multiple,
isolated dolphins over 24-h periods [37,38]. These dolphins dem-
onstrated that the vast majority of their slow waves were unihemi-
spheric (with the contralateral eye held open), appearing first in one
hemisphere and then the other. Remarkably, each hemisphere
appeared to accumulate a separate sleep debt and when deprived of
slow-wave sleep for several days, only that hemisphere showed the
typical sleep rebound; the non-deprived hemisphere continued to
alternate its slow-wave sleep in the usual amount [39]. Using a small
implantable telemetry unit, Ridgway replicated these earlier uni-
hemispheric EEG findings and also recorded symmetrical EEG
readings in both hemispheres during anesthesia and the recovery
period after thiopental and halothane [40]. Short periods of EEG
slow waves were identified days later in both hemispheres in the
unanesthetized state.
Pinnipeds can sleep on land and in water, with species differ-
ences in time spent sleeping in the water. Pinnipeds demonstrate a
slower respiratory frequency when in water and when compared
with terrestrial mammals of similar size [41]. Respiration during
sleep, both in the water and on land, has been examined in a num-
ber of pinniped species including the gray seal, walrus, northern fur
seal, southern sea lion, northern elephant seals, and Caspian
seals [38,42–49]. The first variant of sleep in pinnipeds, and the pre-
dominant pattern for pinniped sleep studied on land, is bilaterally
symmetrical slow-wave sleep (BSWS) and rapid eye movement
(REM) sleep, similar to that observed in terrestrial mam-
mals [45,47]. The second pattern is characterized by a striking
interhemispheric EEG asymmetry during slow-wave sleep (SWS)
and a very small amount of REM sleep. This pattern is recorded
when fur seals sleep in water and is somewhat similar to cetacean
unihemispheric slow-wave sleep [36–40,50]. Sleep varies signifi-
cantly between otariids and phocids; for example, respiratory
pauses increase significantly during sleep of some phocids (e.g.,
ringed seal) [51]. Generally speaking, it has been theorized these
differences relate to their respective ecological niches or range of
living conditions.
Although previous reports in the Antillean manatee (Trichechus
manatus manatus) demonstrated bilateral δ waves with no unihem-
ispheric sleep, a later study in a separate species, the Amazonian
manatee (Trichechus inunguis) using EEG readings collected over a
longer period of time (5 days) demonstrated a different pattern [52].
That is, unihemispheric slow waves occupied approximately one-
quarter of all waves, and bihemispheric slow waves characterized
the majority of sleep. Sleep was characterized by short arousals for
the act of respiration, followed by a rapid return to sleep during
respiratory pauses. Overall, results demonstrated a circadian
rhythm for sleep and wakefulness, and similar slow-wave sleep to
that evident in other aquatic species.
In humans, home methods have been developed to study sleep as
laboratory settings are uncomfortable and produce a barrier to
accurate study [53]. Unfortunately, historic marine mammal labo-
ratory sleep studies were often performed in wild-caught subjects
which were minimally acclimated, held in isolation in a very
restricted space, had surgically implanted wires, and were fre-
quently under the influence of barbiturates, benzodiazepines, or
propofol to induce a “sleeplike” state. Even in these suboptimal con-
ditions, marine mammal subjects clearly demonstrated bihemi-
spheric and slow-wave sleep for a portion of the time and none
experienced respiratory arrest.
In short, marine mammals are capable of both unihemispheric
and bihemispheric sleep and appear to be involuntary breathers
that can bring breathing under voluntary control as needed, similar
to terrestrial mammals. Unihemispheric sleep affords them the
benefits of sleep, breathing, thermoregulation, and vigilance while
remaining in their aquatic environment.
Ventilation
Unfortunately, there is limited evidence-based data on the respiratory
mechanics of anesthetized marine mammals. The elastic properties
of excised lungs of marine mammals have been examined and the
static inflation and deflation, pressure–volume curves have been
measured. Inflation curves of excised dolphin and sea lion lungs were
similar to dog lungs [54–56]. However, the deflation curves for the
dolphin demonstrated greater recoil with smaller residual volumes
compared with terrestrial mammals [54,57]. This may be due to the
greater abundance of elastic fibers and muscle in the supportive tis-
sue of the lung and conducting airways in the dolphin; however, pos-
sible biochemical differences must still be examined. Pulmonary

-- 1109 of 1450 --

1094 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
morphology and mechanics of actively breathing dolphins have
been reviewed [58], but data on the mechanics of ventilation for the
unconscious and anesthetized dolphin remains unstudied.
In general, there is a tendency for the lungs and chest wall of
mammals to return to their original shape after being inflated
mechanically, secondary to elastance. For air to flow into the lungs,
the elastic resistance of the lungs and the chest wall must be over-
come. This elastic impedance of the lungs and chest wall is additive.
The inverse of elastance is compliance, or the ease with which the
chest wall and lungs are distended. When the chest wall and lungs
are very stiff and resist expansion (low compliance), there is a
greater tendency for the lungs and thorax to collapse, and extra
work is necessary to deliver a normal volume of air to the apneic
patient when using a mechanical ventilator. In marine mammals,
the extensive cartilaginous reinforcement of the airways from the
trachea to the level of the alveolar sac (respiratory bronchioles are
absent) should allow higher flow rates and faster gas exchange dur-
ing the brief surface intervals of these animals [56]; however, this
also contributes to elastic recoil and alters total compliance in the
anesthetized, mechanically ventilated animal. This overall elastic
recoil is so profound that it is the sole driving force for expiration in
the surfacing pilot whale [59]. Others have recently noted that the
chest wall of larger marine mammals appears to be much less com-
pliant than terrestrial large animals [54,60]. Although studies are
needed to confirm these observations of low total compliance, low
compliance is particularly evident in anesthetized dolphins when
out of water (beached). Specific respiratory mechanical data of
unconscious marine mammals, in both beached and neutral buoy-
ant states, is needed. It is theorized that total compliance will be
significantly increased where large marine mammals, particularly
cetaceans, can be maintained near-neutral buoyant under anesthe-
sia, such as applied in the past [61]. Investigations into methods of
neutral buoyant (simulated microgravity) anesthesia are underway.
Controlled mechanical ventilation (CMV) is the mechanical ven-
tilation method available on nearly all veterinary anesthesia ventila-
tors. It has often been treated as merely a convenience, taking the
place of squeezing the anesthetic reservoir bag by hand to deliver a
breath. However, new modes of ventilation, previously used only in
intensive care units, are becoming available not only to mechani-
cally ventilate the anesthetized patient, but to be used as therapeutic
tools. The conventional CMV mode begins the ventilator cycle at a
baseline (ambient) airway pressure and elevates it to deliver a result-
ant tidal volume (Fig. 56.1). Disadvantages of CMV include the
need for application of relatively high peak inspiratory pressures
(PIP) compared with other ventilation methods. This may lead to
reduced venous return and cardiac output, and poor distribution of
inspired gas flow with subsequent development of atelectasis and
ventilation–perfusion mismatch. The addition of extrinsic positive
end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) to CMV in an attempt to reopen
small airways and collapsed alveoli has been applied to large animal
patients, but has proven minimally effective except at very high
pressures that consequently significantly reduce cardiac output [62].
Early research in dolphins attempted to overcome the inadequacy
of CMV for dolphin anesthesia by mimicking the normal respira-
tory pattern of dolphins with apneustic plateau ventilation (APV)
[61,63–69]. With this mode, a prolonged inspiratory pause
(apneustic plateau) is used and airway pressures then return to
ambient pressure (0 cmH 2
O) at the end of expiration. Though a sig-
nificant improvement in ventilation methodology, APV still failed
to mitigate the development of significant atelectasis by allowing
excessive time for lung deflation at ambient pressure [66].
Unlike CMV, airway pressure release ventilation (APRV) employs
an elevated baseline pressure followed by a drop in airway pressure
to accomplish tidal ventilation. As first described in 1987, APRV
involves continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) with an
Figure 56.1 A. Schematic idealized illustrations of observed pressure, flow,
and volume versus time waveforms for controlled mechanical ventilation
(CMV) and apneustic anesthesia ventilation (AAV). The gray background
indicates periods of tidal ventilation corresponding to inspiratory time
during CMV and the time (Tlow
) at the low-pressure setting (Plow
) during
AAV. The white background indicates expiratory time during CMV and the
time (Thigh
) of applied high pressure (Phigh
) during AAV. CMV intermittently
raises pressure from ambient to peak inspiratory pressure with most of the
cycle time spent at ambient pressure. AAV intermittently releases pressure
from Phigh to Plow to preserve lung volume. Importantly, the duration of each
AAV release (Tlow
) is limited to prevent expiratory flow stagnation (i.e., an
expiratory flow of zero). Above, the first AAV release illustrates proper
limitation of release time whereas the second illustrates excessively long
release time with flow stagnation (arrow). B. Theoretical schematic
illustration of dynamic pressure–volume curves (thin lines) for controlled
mechanical ventilation (CMV) and apneustic anesthesia ventilation (AAV)
superimposed on individual pressure–volume curves (bold lines) for the
respiratory system. AAV was designed to preserve lung architecture and
compliance in the anesthetized human by periodically releasing airway
pressure from a high to low level while maintaining lung volume at or above
functional residual capacity (FRC). By contrast, CMV ventilates the lung
from below FRC leading to the development of atelectasis, shifting of the
pressure–volume curve to the right, and lower compliance. In this scenario,
higher pressures are required during CMV to achieve the same tidal
volume. Source: Dr. James Bailey, Innovative Veterinary Medicine Inc.,
2023; with permission.
CMV
Volume
(L)
Pressure
	(cmH
2O)
Flow
(L/minute)
AAV
Tlow
Time (seconds)
	(A)
Thigh
Alveoli
Total lung
capacity
Functional
residual
capacity
Residual
volume
atelectasis 	under inflation 	over inflation
Zone of
volutrauma
Zone of
atelectrauma
AAV
Volume
Pressure
CMV
(B)

-- 1110 of 1450 --

Chapter 56: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Marine Mammals 	1095
intermittent pressure release phase [70,71]. More specifically, APRV
is better described as applying continuous airway pressure (Phigh
)
identical to CPAP to maintain adequate lung volume and promote
alveolar recruitment, with a time-cycled release phase to a lower pres-
sure (Plow
) very transiently. Mechanically, this is not too dissimilar
from the early APV mode used on dolphins, however, APV uses a Plow
of 0 cmH2
O and time sufficient for alveoli to collapse. APRV was
developed to maintain functional residual capacity (FRC, the volume
of gas remaining in the lung after a normal expiration) at a level that
would optimize gas exchange and lung compliance in the spontane-
ously ventilating patient in respiratory failure. Unfortunately, when
APRV is applied to the unconscious, non-spontaneously ventilating
patient (e.g., marine mammals), it allows lung volume to drop below
FRC and may promote the development of atelectasis.
Apneustic anesthesia ventilation (AAV) was developed to
maintain lung volume at a level slightly greater than FRC. In this
mode of ventilation, tidal ventilation occurs when airway pressure
is transiently reduced from P high (CPAP) to P low (the release pres-
sure), allowing lung volume to decrease to no lower than FRC and
supporting partial inflation of alveoli (Fig. 56.1). Immediate reap-
plication of P high leads to the alveoli remaining partially inflated
(at a volume above FRC) prior to the lung volume increase. This
intermittent pressure release and reapplication permits tidal
breathing to occur without allowing development of atelectasis.
Target P high and P low are determined by optimizing compliance and
the desired tidal volume. Note that mechanically, AAV and APV
modes of ventilation are similar. However, the key distinction is
that exhalation to lower airway pressures for a longer duration
during APV can result in atelectasis, decreased compliance,
derangement of ventilation and perfusion (V/Q mismatch), and
hypoxemia. During AAV application, V/Q matching is main-
tained at baseline levels in anesthetized patients, and lung
mechanics are normalized [72–74]. Of note, published studies in
horses indicate AAV should not be applied in a static mode and is
best used clinically as a dynamic mode of ventilation involving
regular adjustments [74]. That said, it might better be described as
a continuum of recruitment maneuvers. When applied in this
dynamic mode, the advantages of AAV over other modes of venti-
lation include lower mean intrathoracic (pleural) pressure, aug-
mented venous return, improved cardiovascular performance,
and better distribution of inspired gas flow resulting in improved
ventilation–perfusion matching [75]. The AAV mode is specifi-
cally indicated in patients with low lung and thoracic compliance,
as may be the case in large marine mammal species, particularly
the “beached,” anesthetized dolphin.
APV, APRV, and AAV will each mimic the breathing patterns of
conscious, actively breathing marine mammals, and live subject test-
ing is needed to elucidate their role in the target marine mammal
population. Of these modes, AAV would be anticipated to provide
superior ventilatory support to the anesthetized, non-spontaneously
ventilating marine mammal and is actively under evaluation in
California sea lions and bottlenose dolphins [76]. Additional testing
of these modes of ventilation, including the evaluation of lower
inspired oxygen concentrations, is currently underway and is pro-
ducing promising results in both terrestrial and marine mammal
species [68,74,76,77].
Permissive or intentional hypercapnia
In theory, “lung protective” ventilation strategies that utilize lower
tidal volumes may limit alveolar overdistension and minimize
lung injury; however, they will concurrently lead to hypercapnia,
commonly referred to as “permissive hypercapnia” in medical lit-
erature [78]. Fundamentally, when properly performed, AAV will
produce a degree of intentional hypercapnia. Both intentional
hypercapnia (whereby hypercapnia is intentionally implemented as
part of the ventilation mode such as in AAV) and permissive hyper-
capnia (whereby hypercapnia is accepted in avoidance of poten-
tially negative ventilatory effects) are generally well tolerated and
are described in greater detail elsewhere in this textbook.
Allowing a degree of intentional or permissive hypercapnia will
allow implementation of lung protective ventilatory strategies and
can both increase cardiac output and promote offloading of oxygen
to tissues if held to a reasonable level. Although one may rationalize
a degree of benefit of hypercapnia, recent work has suggested that
high levels of CO2 are not beneficial to pinnipeds and indicate a
need for enhanced monitoring and support [79]. If intentional or
permissive hypercapnia is used, the following parameters are sug-
gested limits: PaCO2 < 80 mmHg; pH > 7.20; and PaO2 > 80 mmHg.
The authors apply both intentional hypercapnia and eucapnia, situ-
ationally dependent. Since hypercapnia increases cardiac output
and blood pressure, individuals accustomed to use of permissive
hypercapnia who achieve eucapnia, as a choice or out of necessity,
may need to be prepared to manage hypotension they may not rou-
tinely observe. Additionally, hypercapnia may increase pulmonary
vascular resistance of the ventilated lung, which can result in
increased shunt fraction. Interestingly, sea lions appear to undergo
hypoxic pulmonary vasodilation rather than vasoconstriction, per-
haps increasing shunt fraction in improperly ventilated marine
mammal species under anesthesia [80].
Preanesthetic assessment and planning
The first step in any sedation or anesthetic event is determination
of whether chemical restraint is even necessary. Many minimally
invasive procedures (e.g., blood sampling and diagnostic imaging)
can be completed under behavioral control alone and addition of
simple local anesthetic blocks may even facilitate more invasive
procedures (e.g., tissue biopsy). If needed, this can be combined
with mild sedation for short, minimally invasive procedures.
Immobilization or general anesthesia will be warranted for longer
or more invasive procedures (e.g., surgery), in free-ranging species
or those without behavioral control, or with large, potentially haz-
ardous marine mammal subjects. While true anesthetic risk is still
largely unknown for the vast majority of marine mammal species,
it is likely higher than traditional domestic species due to a number
of factors, including unknown health status, extrapolated phar-
macology, and challenges with monitoring; a single retrospective
study reported a perianesthetic mortality rate of 4.3% for free-
ranging pinnipeds undergoing sedation or anesthesia at a renowned
rescue and rehabilitation facility [81].
In managed populations where a voluntary preanesthetic health
assessment is feasible, examination and laboratory tests can provide
an overview of the animal’s current health status and identify con-
current disease states. This is especially relevant when considering
that many anesthetic procedures in managed populations are per-
formed on geriatric patients. Where possible, this should include, at
minimum, a physical examination, complete blood count and
serum chemistry panel with a urinalysis, and imaging (e.g., radio-
graphs, abdominal ultrasound, and echocardiography) performed
where appropriate. Trainers must be vigilant to maintain necessary
medical behaviors, but the anesthetist must recognize how disease
(e.g., decreased vision), pain, and medications (e.g., preoperative

-- 1111 of 1450 --

1096 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
opioids) can alter or lead to loss of medical behaviors. In situations
in which a preanesthetic health assessment is limited (e.g., behavio-
rally non-compliant patients, and free-ranging subjects), visual
inspection from a distance and interview of the managing trainers
and veterinarians where possible should be performed. A limited
preanesthetic assessment could put subjects at greater risk for nega-
tive outcomes and the anesthetist should prepare accordingly.
When tailoring an anesthetic protocol, the anesthetist must con-
sider the species, size, age, demeanor, training, as well as the work-
ing environment. Anesthesia of marine mammals requires a balance
of behavioral, mechanical (physical), and chemical restraint.
Though often useful, excessive reliance on mechanical restraint
may lead to physical injury to the patient (e.g., improper desensiti-
zation, “off behaviors” due to illness), hyperthermia, or exertional
myopathic conditions [82]. Similarly, even though darting an ani-
mal with ultrapotent anesthetic agents to cause immobilization can
be efficacious, it may result in severe negative physiologic effects.
As such, emphasis should be placed on preprocedural behavioral
training for voluntary medical procedures whenever time and
resources exist, as these may reduce the need for mechanical or
aggressive chemical restraint. When mechanical restraint is needed,
desensitization training to mechanical restraint devices, such as
netting, slings, and squeeze cages is recommended. With proper
desensitization training and chemical sedation, mechanical devices
may be used to improve the safety of anesthetic procedures for both
the patient and personnel, without undue added risk.
The choices of anesthetic and perianesthetic drugs applied to
marine mammal species have actually been rather limited, yet have
been reviewed many times over the years, with focus primarily
on immobilization cocktails and field applications of anesthetic
drugs [83–90]. Induction of anesthesia of marine mammals requires
a balance of behavioral, mechanical, and chemical restraint (Fig. 56.2).
For instance, the process of anesthesia for pinnipeds has ranged
from heavy mechanical restraint by lasso of juvenile Stellar sea lions
followed by dowel and board squeeze/entrapment and mask induc-
tion with inhalation anesthetic alone [91,92], to solely chemical
Marine
mammal
Marine mammal
in managed care
Behaviors
Voluntary IM
sedation
IV or inhalant
anesthetic
IV or inhalant
anesthetic
IV or inhalant
anesthetic
INTUBATION
INCREASING RISK
IM sedation Mechanical
restraint
Mechanical
restraint
Remote
sedation
Remote
immobilization
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES	YES
YES
Marine mammal
free range
Figure 56.2 Anesthesia of marine mammal species requires a balance of behaviors, mechanical restraint, and chemical restraint. Behaviors are useful
responses taught to marine mammals by qualified trainers. Although free-living subjects may have natural behaviors that can be leveraged for capture,
behavioral control will be poor. Mechanical restraint is the physical control of the subject by devices such as nets, slings, husbandry boxes, or squeeze
cages. Chemical restraint is the application of pharmacologic agents (drugs) to bring the subject to a manageable state by producing tranquilization,
sedation, neuroleptanalgesia, immobilization, or anesthesia. Sedation is not immobilization; however, immobilization is anesthesia. Immobilization
cocktails should be considered higher risk. Risk increases as we move from behavioral control to chemical immobilization, particularly delivered by
remote means leading to lack of proximity to the subject and delayed support. Source: Dr. James Bailey, Innovative Veterinary Medicine Inc., 2023;
with permission.

-- 1112 of 1450 --

Chapter 56: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Marine Mammals 	1097
restraint by various potent and efficacious combinations of anes-
thetic agents delivered by dart, to remarkable behavior control by
training for mask induction with an inhalation anesthetic agent
alone under trainer command. In any situation, the concept of bal-
anced anesthesia (use of a combination of drugs and techniques at
lower individual doses to minimize dose-dependent side effects)
should be employed. Additionally, for marine mammals, a balanced
approach to anesthesia usually includes considerations beyond
anesthetic drug selection. For example, with sufficient personnel, it
is feasible to manually restrain small cetaceans and sirenians, but
pinnipeds of size will require additional tools for restraint.
The rationale for the anesthetic protocol begins with assessment
of behaviors. Behaviors are useful responses taught to marine mam-
mals by qualified trainers. Desensitization training and voluntary
medical behaviors contribute in no small part to more positive out-
comes in managed populations, eliminating the need for aggressive
restraint methods or potent cocktails with severe physiologic conse-
quences. Skilled trainers and animal handlers are necessary to sup-
port safe anesthesia, and they must be given both the opportunity
and time required for training where possible. Examples of useful
medical behaviors are holding on target for injections by hand, toler-
ance of mechanical restraint in a squeeze cage, self-beaching of dol-
phins, or acceptance of an anesthetic mask for inhalation anesthetic
delivery. Even in subjects that could be very difficult to restrain, such
behaviors can be sufficiently robust to allow free-standing applica-
tion of anesthetic agents without physical restraint. Without medical
behaviors, there is greater reliance on both mechanical restraint,
which can become dangerous and lead to injury, and chemical
restraint, which often needs to be more profound.
With chemical restraint, ut est rerum omnium magister usus or,
experience is the best teacher [93]. Anesthesia methods applied to
free-living subjects are highly variable and often depend on the
experience of the personnel, as well as the historical success of the
method applied. For example, though less commonly used in man-
aged species, the combination of tiletamine and zolazepam (Telazol®
or Zoletil®) is still the preferred immobilization method for free-
living elephant seals. As most free-living subjects are anesthetized
to facilitate study of the species as a whole, these subjects are usually
healthy individuals that may better tolerate the physiological chal-
lenges of a broader range of necessary mechanical and chemical
restraint methods. On the contrary, rescued free-living subjects are
often debilitated or otherwise unhealthy and are at greater risk of
negative outcomes in the face of immobilization methods necessary
for the safety of human caretakers. The authors recognize the broad
range of sedation and anesthesia methods applied to the wide vari-
ety of marine mammal species over the past many decades, and
offer only to provide some general, repeatable methods in hopes of
improved outcomes for all the species under our care, particularly
the growing geriatric populations.
Protocol selection
Historically, drugs used in the anesthetic and perianesthetic period
in marine mammals have been quite limited. These have been
extensively reviewed in other texts and primarily focus on immobi-
lization cocktails and field applications of anesthetic drugs [83–86].
To tabulate that historical information again here would not serve
the anesthetist well and, instead, a brief summary of common drug
choices for each species is provided below. As noted previously,
anesthesia of marine mammals requires a balance of behavioral,
physical/mechanical, and chemical restraint, although various
combinations of the above have been used. Managed populations
do not generally require aggressive restraint methods or potent
cocktails for induction, especially if preprocedural behavioral train-
ing is implemented. When selecting an anesthetic protocol, the
risk-benefit ratio for each drug and technique should be carefully
considered and the anesthetist should be reminded that, “There are
no safe anesthetic agents; there are no safe anesthetic procedures;
there are only safe anesthetists” (Robert Smith) [94,95]. The impor-
tance of vigilant perianesthetic monitoring and support in conjunc-
tion with any anesthetic protocol cannot be overstated and will be
discussed further.
While specific drugs will not be discussed in detail, α2 - adrenergic
receptor agonist use in pinnipeds warrants discussion. One of the
most commonly administered drug combinations in this cohort
involves various combinations of midazolam, butorphanol, and
medetomidine, and has proven effective in field immobilization of
young, healthy otariids for short procedures [96]. While useful in
certain situations, the authors have anecdotally appreciated a higher
incidence of negative outcomes in some managed populations with
use of an α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist. Medetomidine was used in
> 50% of induction protocols reported in a retrospective assessment
of anesthetic mortality in a cohort of rescued, untrained, free-living
otariids of variable disease condition and severity; perianesthetic
mortality in that study was 4.3% [81]. Additionally, a high negative
outcome rate (e.g., ciliary body hemorrhage, hyphema, and death)
was anecdotally reported in pinnipeds following medetomidine or
dexmedetomidine administration for ophthalmologic procedures.
In a series of 13 prolonged ophthalmologic procedures on geriatric
California sea lions (median age 22.5 years) immobilized with a
combination of midazolam, butorphanol, and dexmedetomidine,
one subject vomited, two had arrhythmias, two had prolonged
recoveries, and three died during anesthesia or within 72 h of recov-
ery [86,97]. For these reasons, α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists,
despite their reversibility, may not be a reasonable choice in geriat-
ric marine mammals or those undergoing lengthy procedures, and
would be ill-advised in phocids and odobenids [98]. This is not to
say the α2 - adrenergic receptor agonists are not effective or on occa-
sion necessary; however, the anesthetist must recall Maslow’s
Axiom that “it is tempting, if the only tool you have is a hammer, to
treat everything as if it were a nail” [99]. While it is easy, and some-
times necessary, to dart an animal with potent efficacious anesthetic
agents (including α2 -adrenergic receptor agonists), all options
should be explored and the physiologic consequences for this con-
venience should be considered. That being said, more judicious use
of α2 - adrenergic receptor agonists may yet prove beneficial.
Sedation and anesthesia
Relatively few pharmacologic agents have gained acceptance for use
in managed populations of marine mammals. In brief, benzodiaz-
epines (diazepam 0.05–0.3 mg/kg PO, IM, IV; midazolam 0.05–
0.3 mg/kg IM, IV) are commonly used, often in combination with
opioids (butorphanol 0.1–0.4 mg/kg IM; meperidine 0.1–2 mg/kg
IM) to produce sedation or neuroleptanalgesia. Immobilization can
be achieved with the addition of medetomidine (0.01–0.03 mg/kg
IM) or dexmedetomidine (0.002–0.01 mg/kg IM) in some otariid
pinnipeds, but not cetaceans or sirenians. Concentrated versions of
midazolam, butorphanol, and medetomidine assist with remote
delivery by dart or pole syringe by minimizing volume. Alternatively,
alfaxalone (0.5–2 mg/kg IM, IV) has been introduced for immobili-
zation where larger volumes or multiple intramuscular injections are
feasible in pinnipeds. An experimental, concentrated (40 mg/mL)

-- 1113 of 1450 --

1098 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
alfaxalone formulation, RD0387, which allows for reduced volumes
has recently been used successfully for immobilization of large otari-
ids in lieu of medetomidine [100]. Other parenteral anesthetic agents
have been used for immobilization or induction of general anesthe-
sia. The cyclohexamines, ketamine (1–10 mg/kg IM, IV), or tileta-
mine (in Telazol® or Zoletil®; 1–2 mg/kg IM, IV), have been used but
are not reversible and are less favored. The phenolic compound
propofol (1–6 mg/kg IV) is used routinely in the extradural vein for
induction of anesthesia of phocids and odobenids for rapid airway
control and ease of intubation in preference over slower mask induc-
tion with inhalation anesthetics. Behaviorally non-compliant patients
can be injected remotely by pole syringe or dart, but it is imperative
the drug is delivered into muscle and not fat, or uptake will be poor.
Repeat dosing from presumed “failed delivery” can lead to eventual
cumulative drug uptake and overdose with sudden onset of CNS
depression and respiratory depression.
Inhalation anesthetics (e.g., isoflurane and sevoflurane) have
been used successfully in marine mammals. They are low-solubility
agents and are minimally metabolized. For mask induction, sevo-
flurane has a faster onset and lesser pungency, thus, it has become
preferred. The minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) of inhalant
anesthetics has not yet been determined for any marine mammal
species, making comparison of equipotent concentrations to other
species imprecise. However, the effect of inhalation anesthetic
agents is well preserved over the wide variety of mammalian species
tested, so the dose of inhalation anesthetic for marine mammals
will likely differ little from other mammalian species. Anecdotally,
the authors use MAC estimations of 1.3% for isoflurane and 2.3%
for sevoflurane. In the authors’ experience performing marine
mammal anesthesia over the past decade, with similar preanes-
thetic drugs (i.e., benzodiazepine and opioid), the end-expired
sevoflurane concentration usually needs to be maintained at
approximately 1.8 to 2.0% to prevent gross, purposeful movement
in response to a surgical stimulus.
An in-depth discussion of anesthetic agents and their effects to
be used for all orders of marine mammals is beyond the scope of
this chapter. Instead, a brief summary of commonly used agents
and their administration in each order is presented below.
Cetacean anesthesia
The first attempt to anesthetize a dolphin was made in the 1930s in
which a dolphin was administered “ether by cone” over the blowhole,
became apneic, and died [101]. After concurrent dolphin deaths
associated with intraperitoneal barbiturate anesthesia [102], Nagel
successfully developed an endotracheal intubation method and
induced a state where the dolphins were “largely insensitive to nox-
ious stimuli” with nitrous oxide (N2
O) and O2 (70%:30%) delivered
by a ventilator and using neuromuscular blockade with succinylcho-
line [63,69]. Although this method appeared “safe,” it was inadequate
for major surgery. Ridgway and McCormick used combinations of
inhaled halothane and intravascular thiopental for induction and
maintenance of anesthesia sufficient for major surgery [65,66].
However, uncertain about the effects of injectable agents, the early
successful anesthetic inductions involved manual restraint and con-
scious intubation followed by halothane administered via endotra-
cheal tube. This produced excitement and dysphoria characterized by
significant swimming motions, a physical response less commonly
observed with current methods of balanced anesthesia.
In managed care settings, cetacean sedation and anesthesia are
heavily supported by behavioral training. These intelligent species
are amenable to desensitization or other behavioral training and,
ideally, this is incorporated into routine medical or husbandry train-
ing. Fasting of food for at least 12 h duration is typically practiced as
regurgitation can occur. The target animal is often separated from
conspecifics and preanesthetic sedation is often used to reduce stress
and facilitate patient compliance. Currently, benzodiazepines alone
(either diazepam 0.25 mg/kg PO or midazolam 0.08 mg/kg IM) or in
combination with opioids (butorphanol 0.1 mg/kg IM or meperi-
dine 0.1 mg/kg IM) are used for preanesthetic sedation. Midazolam
0.1 mg/kg IM (0.05–0.2 mg/kg IM) with butorphanol 0.1 mg/kg IM
(0.1–0.3 mg/kg IM) has provided sedation for minor procedures in
bottlenose dolphins, killer whales, and even 20,000 kg North Atlantic
right whales (Eubalaena glacialis) [103,104]. Propofol (2–3 mg/kg
IV) is used, often with supplemental midazolam (0.02 mg/kg IV) for
induction of anesthesia in the lateral caudal subcutaneous vein
(LCSV). Anesthesia of dolphins has been maintained with the
inhalation anesthetics halothane, isoflurane, and more recently,
sevoflurane in oxygen [31,64,65,105–108]. Controlled mechanical
ventilation (CMV) has been applied with variable success, as well as
the alternative mode, apneustic anesthesia ventilation (AAV), which
is currently undergoing clinical trials.
Pinniped anesthesia
Phocid anesthesia
Similar to other marine mammals, desensitization and behavioral
training when possible are keys to phocid health in managed care;
this includes desensitization to use of a “blood collection box” for
extradural anesthetic drug administration and, for larger pinni-
peds, use of a squeeze cage. In brief, benzodiazepines are very effec-
tive in tranquilizing phocids. In wild captures, intravenous
diazepam 0.25 mg/kg in combination with mechanical restraint
using a simple hoop-net prior to mask induction with inhalation
anesthetic is not uncommon. In managed populations, subjects can
be trained to accept an intramuscular injection of midazolam and
inhalation anesthetic via mask under behavioral restraint alone.
Free-living phocids remain somewhat excitable with a concurrent
elevated respiratory rate, resulting in successful mask induction
using inhalant anesthetics. In contrast, animals in managed popula-
tions tend to breath-hold, which can delay induction. These sub-
jects can also become apneic from anesthetic exposure before
sufficiently relaxed for smooth intubation, thus, induction with IV
anesthetic agents is often pursued. This usually includes behavioral
or mechanical restraint (e.g., blood collection box) for extradural
venous puncture and IV administration of propofol (1–2 mg/kg
titrated to effect); this is often in combination with IM premedica-
tion (e.g., midazolam 0.2 mg/kg IM and butorphanol 0.2 mg/kg IM)
to reduce induction drug requirements. Butorphanol is often suffi-
cient for the purpose of control without significant respiratory
depression; however, full μ-opioid receptor agonists (e.g., meperi-
dine) have been used for greater sedation of larger phocid species
where there is inadequate behavioral control. Due to the likelihood
of apnea following any induction protocol, the anesthetist should be
prepared for prompt intubation, usually performed under direct
laryngoscopy. In field settings where inhalation anesthesia may not
be readily available, heavy sedation can be maintained for longer
procedures with repeated dosing of midazolam, butorphanol, and
ketamine IV, alone or in combination.
Otariid anesthesia
Training robust medical behaviors is crucial to reducing anesthetic
risk in otariids. Behaviors, such as free-standing anesthetic induc-
tion by mask, have been trained even in extremely large otariid

-- 1114 of 1450 --

Chapter 56: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Marine Mammals 	1099
species. Benzodiazepines are anxiolytic, but further sedation with
opioids is generally needed for most otariid subjects, even when
properly trained for mechanical restraint. A scissor-style squeeze
cage is commonly used for mechanical restraint in managed popu-
lations, and has been used for some free-living capture and longer-
term holding situations [109,110]. Subjects are trained to accept
temporary restraint by squeeze allowing for injection of sedative
agents. Accurate intramuscular delivery of drugs is necessary, or
uptake will be poor. The intramuscular sedative combination
(midazolam 0.2 mg/kg and butorphanol 0.2 mg/kg or meperidine
2 mg/kg) is administered, and time allowed for uptake and full
effect (20–25 min). Sedation is followed with mechanical restraint
by squeeze to facilitate mask induction. Mechanical restraint sig-
nificantly enhances control and human safety but is not without
risk. Inadequately trained or sedated subjects may attempt to resist
mask induction or bite at the bars, the latter of which can break
teeth and fracture jaws. Even subjects known to tolerate a squeeze
cage can become intolerant when ill. Only properly designed
squeeze cages with padded bars should be used for this method of
restraint. Boat bumpers and rolled towels can be used to center the
head for mask induction and act as safe bite “toy.” It is preferred
that the anesthetic mask be malleable to move between cage bars,
if necessary, mold to the face of the subject, and tolerate biting
without injury to the subject. A modified traffic cone has proven
ideal for this purpose [111]. The combination of intramuscular
midazolam (0.2–0.3 mg/kg) and meperidine (1–2 mg/kg) may
produce neuroleptanalgesia in some species, such as southern sea
lions, and result in marked sedation. A squeeze cage is not always
available or may be of inadequate size for larger subjects making
mechanical restraint impractical and improvised squeezes have
been created, but efficacy and response are often variable. Large
custom walrus restraint nets can be effective for large sea lions and
fur seals. Where mechanical restraint is not possible, a greater reli-
ance is placed on pharmacologic agents. A combination of concen-
trated intramuscular midazolam 0.2 mg/kg, butorphanol 0.2 mg/
kg, and medetomidine 0.01 mg/kg is commonly used, but results in
bradycardia, vasoconstriction, and a reduction in cardiac output,
complicating vascular access and challenging debilitated and geri-
atric patients physiologically. A combination of medetomidine and
the peripheral α2 -adrenergic receptor antagonist vatinoxan
(Zenalpha®) has recently been used in otariids, but clear benefit is
not yet evident. Alternatively, the combination of concentrated
intramuscular midazolam 0.2 mg/kg, butorphanol 0.2 mg/kg, and
alfaxalone 1 mg/kg is currently under review with promising
results [100].
Odobenid anesthesia
Walrus subjects in managed population can be very well trained
such that delivery of intramuscular midazolam (0.2 mg/kg) or even
direct extradural or saphenous venous needle placement for deliv-
ery of propofol (2–4 mg/kg) can be performed under behavioral
control. However, most walruses will need additional intramuscu-
lar sedation and analgesia using an opioid, particularly when not
participating in medical behaviors due to illness and/or discomfort;
meperidine (2 mg/kg) is often chosen, but butorphanol (0.2 mg/kg)
has also been used. In young patients, the combination of mida-
zolam and meperidine can produce a state of neuroleptanalgesia
sufficient to permit intubation. If this combination is not sufficient
for intubation, the authors have used a low dose of alfaxalone (<
0.5 mg/kg) to bridge control, but further evaluation is needed
before recommending this drug. As noted previously, induction is
performed using propofol (0.5–4 mg/kg) delivered in the extradural
or saphenous vein. Intubation is performed blindly via manual pal-
pation and, as these species often experience apnea following
propofol administration, the anesthetist must be well prepared for
intubation.
Sirenian anesthesia
To our knowledge, no dugong has ever undergone anesthesia and
most anesthesia experience has been with the Florida manatee
(Trichechus manatus latirostris). Many manatees needing anesthesia
for surgical procedures come from rescue and rehabilitation facili-
ties that perform lifesaving work on untrained subjects. It is recom-
mended that only trained personnel participate in the handling and
restraint of sirenians, and we emphasize here that quality trainers
and animal handlers are necessary for safe anesthesia of these
marine mammals. The strong thrust of sirenian tails and large body
size make injury to both handlers and animals possible. For this
reason, it is preferred that manatees are removed from the water for
procedures and personnel wear helmets for safety. In captive envi-
ronments, physical restraint is accomplished by corralling the ani-
mal using nets, dry-docking within a pool by draining the water, or
raising a medical pool floor above the water level; the animal is then
placed within a stretcher for transport.
As the sole obligate herbivores of the marine mammal world,
preanesthetic fasting is often extended to 24 h. Historically, mana-
tees were sedated with midazolam (0.08 mg/kg IM) and mask
induced with isoflurane via a modified 5-gallon plastic water bot-
tle [112,113], but this was tedious and time consuming. Currently,
midazolam (0.05–0.2 mg/kg IM) has been used in combination
with butorphanol (0.05–0.15 mg/kg IM) to achieve neuroleptanal-
gesia sufficient to facilitate conscious nasotracheal intubation.
When necessary, this can be supplemented with sevoflurane via a
nasal mask, as manatees are obligate nasal breathers. Meperidine
(0.05–0.2 mg/kg) had been used in place of butorphanol for greater
analgesia but has fallen from favor as, anecdotally, there has been
prolongation in the time to achieve a level of recovery sufficient for
the manatee to raise its head to breathe when submerged.
Vascular access
Cetacean vascular access
There are several peripheral sites from which blood may be col-
lected in the cetacean. The arteriovenous nature of the peripheral
vasculature in these species, however, means very few of these sites
allow rapid drug or fluid administration or clear differentiation of
arterial and venous blood. Consequently, true venous and arterial
access are desirable, and have become increasingly attainable as
imaging and vascular access methodology have improved. In this
section, we describe common clinically accessible sites for blood
sampling and both arterial and venous catheter placement.
Braun’s 1905 angiograms of the arteries of the fluke and pectoral
flipper of the harbor porpoise helped begin documentation of the
extensively branching network of the peripheral vasculature of ceta-
ceans [114]. In 1941, the complex arterial and venous blood supply
of the dolphin and manatee were described [115] and, in 1951,
Tomilin first described the closely adhering venous reticulum asso-
ciated with the arteries involved in temperature regulation which he
called “complex vessels” [116]. We now know these as the periarte-
rial vascular rete (PAVR). Shortly thereafter, the countercurrent
heat exchange function of this “artery-within-vein arrangement” of
the PAVR was first hypothesized [117]. The radiographic, gross,

-- 1115 of 1450 --

1100 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
and histologic anatomy of the PAVR was further detailed via
corrosion casting of its architecture (Fig. 56.3C) [118].
Armed with this knowledge, it must be noted that when per-
forming “venipuncture” at a PAVR location, it is the artery (sur-
rounded by the venous reticulum, the periarterial venous rete) that
is most probably penetrated by the needle. This may be evidenced
by rapid passive outflow of blood. Depending on the location and
angle of incidence, the needle lumen may communicate with the
artery, venous reticulum, or the perivascular space or channels
through the firm collagenous matrix surrounding the PAVR. This
imprecise positioning, and the likelihood of needle migration, can
result in blood source mixing and possible perivascular leakage.
With proper aseptic technique, this is an acceptable location for
blood collection and delivery of isotonic crystalloid fluids, but cau-
tion is advised in delivering other medication. Arteries are muscu-
lar and will respond to changes in pH or osmolarity, direct
cytotoxicity, or known vasopressor activity through vasospasm,
thrombosis, or direct vascular injury. Accordingly, there are a num-
ber of anecdotal reports of fluke injury and circumferential slough-
ing after delivery of medications, such as insufficiently diluted
antibiotics, into the peduncle or fluke PAVR [119]. As noted above,
it is documented that drugs of extreme pH (e.g., the barbiturate
anesthetic thiopental) will cause vascular injury and severe compli-
cations when injected into arteries [120]. That said, thiopental
delivery has been reported (10 mg/kg IV, 50 mg/mL) in the pedun-
cle PAVR without complication on multiple occasions [61,64–66].
However, it should be noted that these injections were usually deliv-
ered in crystalloid perianesthetic fluids, thus, diluting the drug
prior to entry into the PAVR [personal communication: Dr. Sam H.
Ridgway, 2020]. Common anesthetic drugs administered intravas-
cularly in cetaceans include midazolam and propofol. There are
some reports of vasculitis and vascular impairment after
intraarterial delivery of the midazolam in human subjects, but
symptoms resolved without sequelae with no specific intervention.
Propofol is well known to cause pain on injection, but it has not
been associated with any vascular injury when inadvertently deliv-
ered intraarterial. If true venous access is not acquired for anes-
thetic drug delivery, we advise careful drug selection and use of
crystalloid fluids during induction for the purpose of dilution. True
venous access in the lateral caudal subcutaneous vein as described
below is now routine and will enhance safety.
Lateral caudal subcutaneous vein
First proposed in 1997 and attempted in 1998 [107,121], catheteri-
zation of the lateral caudal subcutaneous vein (LCSV), also known
as “lateral subcutaneous caudal vein” and historically referred to as
the “caudal ventral peduncle,” “caudal superficial peduncle,” “super-
ficial caudal peduncle vein,” or “superficial lateral peduncle vein,”
was not perfected until 2011 [122]. The LCSV is now the first choice
for true venous access in the dolphin and catheterization of this ves-
sel is a routine procedure. It is commonly performed with the ani-
mal in modified sternal recumbency, with the peduncle tilted
approximately 10–15 degrees from midline to expose the area of
interest (Fig. 56.3B). The authors have had the greatest success cath-
eterizing the LCSV with ultrasound guidance using a linear trans-
ducer (10-5 MHz) and a single lumen, 4 to 5 French micro-introducer
catheter kit utilizing a modified Seldinger method [123]. When
necessary, longer peripherally inserted central catheters (PICCs)
with one or more lumens can be placed. In a transverse ultrasound
view, the ventral branch of the LCSV lies just dorsolateral to the
levator ani (pubocaudalis) muscle and ventromedial to the hypaxi-
alis lumborum (supracoccygeus) muscle. In the longitudinal view,
the vein travels caudal to cranial under the blubber, becoming
larger and diving deeper as it travels craniad. Further caudad, as the
MA
(A) 	(B) 	(C)
DP
LCSV FP
FV
PP
VR
A
N
LCSV
Figure 56.3 Bottlenose dolphin vascular access locations. A. Illustrates angiography of the median artery (MA) in the pectoral flipper. B. Illustrates a
longitudinal plane ultrasound image of the lateral caudal subcutaneous vein (LCSV) with an echogenic needle (N) placed. C. Illustrates the periarterial
venous rete (VR) surrounding an artery (A) together comprising the periarterial vascular rete (PAVR). DP, dorsal fin PAVR; LCSV, lateral caudal
subcutaneous vein; FP, fluke PAVR; FV, fluke veins; PP, peduncle PAVR. Source: A. Adapted and modified from Fawcett [115]; Dr. James Bailey,
Innovative Veterinary Medicine Inc., 2023. C. Adapted and modified from Elsner et al. [118]; Dr. James Bailey, Innovative Veterinary Medicine Inc., 2023.

-- 1116 of 1450 --

Chapter 56: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Marine Mammals 	1101
vessel diameter becomes smaller, the subdermal sheath connective
tissue thickens, making catheter placement more difficult. The
optimal catheter placement site should be a balance between vessel
depth (more superficial), vessel diameter (larger), and minimized
perivascular connective tissue. Even in more cranial locations,
perivascular connective tissue is quite dense, making a stiffened
micro-introducer dilator cannula preferred for placement. For
patient comfort and compliance, a local anesthetic block (subcuta-
neous lidocaine) with or without sedation is used prior to catheter
placement. Pressure cranial to the site of venipuncture may help
increase the diameter of the vessel and facilitate cannulation as can
warm wet towels placed over the vessel. Attempts have been made
to maintain an LCSV catheter in the postanesthetic aquatic envi-
ronment, with some limited success [124].
Median artery
It is feasible to catheterize many arteries of the cetacean PAVR.
Used for collection of blood in early studies, the median artery of
the pectoral flipper of dolphins is now a commonly acceptable loca-
tion for cannulation [125,126]. The median artery sits snuggly
between the radius and ulna, slightly palmar, under the dense con-
nective tissue of the flipper (Fig. 56.3A). Doppler flow probes
and ultrasound can facilitate identification and cannulation of the
median artery, but the location is also digitally palpable. The authors
have had the greatest success catheterizing the median artery
with ultrasound guidance using a linear transducer (10-5 MHz) and a
4 to 5 French micro-introducer catheter kit utilizing a modified
Seldinger method similar to those used for venous access. For
placement, the dolphin is positioned in lateral recumbency, and the
dependent pectoral flipper is pulled laterally and slightly cranial
for placement. In a transverse view across the palmar surface of
the flipper, the artery sits slightly superficial to the notch formed
by the convergence of the radius and ulna. To maintain patency of
the cannula, 2–5 unit/mL of heparinized 0.9% NaCl is used to regu-
larly flush the catheter. Modern disposable blood pressure trans-
ducers with integrated, pressurized flush mechanisms can be used
to simplify maintenance of the catheter. The transducer is zeroed to
the level of the right atrium (physiologic zero) and invasive blood
pressures are continuously monitored. Blood can also be collected
from this site for analysis of arterial blood gases or other hemato-
logic or biochemical indices.
Pinniped vascular access
Vascular access is feasible in pinnipeds, with ultrasound facilitating
visualization in the majority of locations. Venipuncture of the
extradural vein of phocids and odobenids can be performed using
a spinal or Tuohy needle inserted perpendicularly between the
dorsal spinous processes of lumbar vertebrae 3 and 4. The needle
can be maintained throughout a procedure or converted to a small-
diameter cannula using commercially available epidural catheter
kits. Though small in diameter, thus limiting fluid volume delivery,
such extradural venous catheters have been aseptically maintained
for up to a week postoperatively for drug delivery. Venous access of
the external jugular vein, though visible on smaller subjects, is facil-
itated by ultrasound and is more commonly performed in otariids
than phocids and odobenids (Fig. 56.4A). Commercially available
longer PICCs may be more easily maintained in the jugular vein of
larger subjects. Cannulation of pectoral and pelvic flipper veins is
also possible and most often performed with the animal positioned
in lateral or modified dorsal recumbency. Visualization of the pec-
toral flipper antebrachial vein (also referred to as the “brachial vein”
or “superficial palmar vein”) and occasionally the cephalic vein do
not require ultrasound, but this tool can be useful, especially in
hypotensive, hypovolemic, or smaller patients (Fig. 56.4B).
Branches of the pelvic flipper medial saphenous veins (Fig 56.4C),
particularly in phocids and odobenids, are best visualized with
(A)
MA
AV
SA
SV
(B) 	(C)
Figure 56.4 Pinniped jugular, pectoral flipper, and pelvic flipper vasculature. A. Transverse ultrasound image of the external jugular vein (EJ), internal
jugular vein (IJ), and carotid artery (C). B. Diagram of the median artery (MA) and antebrachial vein (AV). C. Diagram of the saphenous artery (SA) and
plantar branches of the saphenous vein (SV). Source: Adapted with permission from St. Pierre [127]; Dr. James Bailey, Innovative Veterinary Medicine
Inc., 2023.

-- 1117 of 1450 --

1102 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
ultrasound guidance on the plantar aspect of the limb. The median
artery is positioned at the convergence of the radius and ulna (as
described for dolphins) and, anecdotally, is best accessed at the
junction between the haired and non-haired portion of the pectoral
flipper. Doppler flow probes and ultrasound can facilitate identifi-
cation and cannulation of the median artery, but the location is also
digitally palpable. Standard over-the-needle catheters can be used
to cannulate both arteries and veins to reduce cost, but modern
micro-introducer kits using a modified Seldinger technique sim-
plify and expedite cannulation. Venous cannulation of pinnipeds,
ultrasound-guided or otherwise, may be complicated by α2
-adrenergic
receptor agonist administration, hypovolemia, disease, or drug-
induced hypotension.
Manatee vascular access
As Fawcett wrote, “The most characteristic feature of the circula-
tory system of the manatee is the complete subdivision of the larger
arteries, usually near their sources, into great numbers of small
arteries which run parallel for considerable distances without any
significant diminution in caliber.” This is “most highly developed in
the vascularization of the pectoral limb” and “resembles rather the
arrangement of a broom” [115]. As such, the typical site for blood
sampling in manatees of all ages is the interosseous space between
the radius and ulna, which contains a vascular bundle of veins and
arteries (Fig 56.5B). It can be accessed from the medial or lateral
sides of the pectoral flippers, usually based on personal preference,
using an 18 gauge, 5 cm (2 inch) needle in adults or a 20 gauge,
3.75 cm (1.5 inch) needle in juveniles [128]. Cannulation of the bra-
chial vascular bundle is complicated by the perpendicular place-
ment of the needle relative to the arteriovenous plexus. A vascular
bundle is also available for venipuncture under the fluke (paddle) in
the ventral vertebral arch. This technique is particularly useful in
younger animals where pectoral vessels are small, but has also been
used in anesthetized adult manatees using spinal or Tuohy needles.
While these techniques have been used in conscious individuals,
subjects can move and displace the needle or produce explosive for-
ward thrust of the fluke and injure the phlebotomist as well as the
vascular bundle. Perivascular leakage of drugs can also occur in
these vascular bundle venipuncture sites, potentially resulting in
local tissue inflammation or necrosis.
“Cephalic” and “caudal” veins have also been described and dia-
gramed for the pectoral flipper of manatee (Fig. 56.5A) [129]. The
cephalic vein was cannulated using a “cut-down” technique and a
standard over-the-needle catheter during anesthesia of one Florida
manatee [113]. However, in recent years, transcutaneous cannula-
tion has become feasible in the palmar digital veins, as well as the
median artery of the manatee pectoral flipper (Fig. 56.5D). Similar
to other discussed species, the median artery sits snuggly in the
interosseous space between the radius and ulna, slightly palmar on
the flipper, under the thick dermis and connective tissue. Doppler
flow probes or ultrasound are mandatory to facilitate identification
and cannulation of the artery, as it is not externally palpable. The
authors have had success catheterizing the median artery of six
adult Florida manatees with ultrasound guidance using a linear
transducer (10-5 MHz) and a 4 to 5 French micro-introducer cath-
eter kit utilizing a modified Seldinger technique, similar to methods
used for vascular access in other marine mammals.
Airway management
Orotracheal or nasotracheal intubation should be considered in
every immobilized or anesthetized marine mammal for reasons
similar to other species, including maintenance of airway patency,
delivery of assisted ventilation, and protection from regurgitation.
Unique risk factors in marine mammal species, including redun-
dant pharyngeal tissue and risk of apnea with induction agents, fur-
ther emphasize the importance of rapid intubation. This is especially
true if using remotely delivered drugs or mechanical restraint
A
B
C
u 	r
A
B
C
E
D
u
r
Figure 56.5 Florida manatee (Trichechus manatus latirostris) pectoral flipper vasculature position including caudal vein (A), brachial vascular bundle (B),
cephalic vein (C), median artery (D), median nerve (E), radius (r), and ulna (u). On the right is a cross-sectional view with the palmar surface facing
down. Source: Adapted with permission from White [129]; Rommel and Caplan [130]; Dr. James Bailey, Innovative Veterinary Medicine Inc., 2023.

-- 1118 of 1450 --

Chapter 56: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Marine Mammals 	1103
devices that may logistically delay “hands-on” access to the patient
or in situations in which airway patency is compromised. Regardless
of induction technique, careful observation for both continued
spontaneous ventilation and airway patency is necessary and will
guide the urgency of intubation. Proper airway management
requires consideration of the logistics of anesthetic induction,
knowledge of airway anatomy and the physical condition of the tar-
get species, as well as preparation of necessary equipment. Many
species are obligate nasal breathers (e.g., Cetaceans and manatees),
which may influence the approach to both intubation and extuba-
tion. Tools used in intubation such as elongated laryngoscopes,
malleable stylets, and flexible fiberoptic bronchoscopes must be
available as required; in some species, alternate methods of airway
management, such as nasotracheal intubation, must also be consid-
ered. Similarly, as many marine mammals may become apneic prior
to sufficient relaxation for simple intubation, advanced planning for
and experience in alternative options for airway management is
necessary.
Cetacean intubation
Endotracheal intubation of adult bottlenose dolphins and larger
odontocete species is usually performed using an oral approach to
the larynx (Fig. 56.6). While less ideal, this can be accomplished in
a conscious animal in an emergency situation, but is preferably
performed following heavy sedation or anesthetic induction. Size
16 to 30 mm ID endotracheal tubes with inflatable, high-volume,
low- pressure cuffs are appropriate for most adult bottlenose dol-
phins. Soft, rolled towels are used to hold open the mandible and
maxilla and the larynx is accessed blindly by palpation. The elon-
gated epiglottal and cricoarytenoid cartilages of the larynx (“goose-
beak”) are manually displaced from their connection to the
nasopharyngeal sphincter and oriented in a rostral direction. Two
fingers of one hand are placed into the glottis and, using the other
hand, the endotracheal tube is guided through the glottis. Care
should be taken to shield the cuff with the palm and forearm when
advancing the endotracheal tube to prevent cuff damage by the
sharp teeth. Tracheal intubation should be confirmed using a cap-
nograph. The trachea is very short in most odontocetes and a right-
sided accessory bronchus precedes the carina [131]; awareness of
the depth of insertion is necessary to prevent blockade of this bron-
chus. Use of a flexible endoscope can both facilitate intubation and
assure proper depth of insertion. Once positioned in place, similar
to terrestrial mammals, the tube should be secured to the maxilla
using a tie, and the cuff inflated to a minimum occlusive volume.
Intubation through the blowhole is possible, but usually reserved
for smaller odontocetes in which the oral approach is prohibitive
due to their small mouth and oropharynx. Similar to orotracheal
intubation, this technique can be performed in conscious, sedated,
(A)
(B)
(C)
Figure 56.6 Endotracheal intubation of a dolphin in sternal recumbency. Blowhole response to touch, palpebral reflex, and jaw tone are vigilantly
monitored during anesthetic induction. Classically, two soft, towels are placed between the mandible and maxilla to hold the mouth open. A hand of the
anesthetist is inserted into the oropharynx. A. The larynx resembling the beak of a goose (“goosebeak’) is gently grasped and pulled cranioventrally from
its location in the nasopharynx. B. Classically, one or two fingers are inserted into the glottis to guide endotracheal tube placement, as the endotracheal
tube is passed over the palm of the hand. The endotracheal tube is pushed forward and advanced by the second hand still outside the mouth. Using two
fingers, the anesthetist can spread the fingers apart to open the larynx further. This method may be mandatory for conscious or inadequately anesthetized
patients having excessive muscular control of the larynx. Unfortunately, this approach involves fingers that in part obstruct the larynx and, thus, may limit
endotracheal tube size options. C. Alternatively, in the adequately relaxed patient, a single digit can depress the epiglottis without entering the larynx. This
author depresses the epiglottis with the fourth digit (ring finger) as the first, second, and third digits (thumb, index, and middle fingers, respectively)
control the tip of the endotracheal tube to redirect and position the beveled edge of the tube and facilitate advancement through the larynx. Keeping
fingers out of the larynx may allow for larger endotracheal tube placement. The endotracheal tube can be rotated to position the Murphy eye of the tube to
the right of the patient to minimize the likelihood of obstructing the accessory bronchus. The “x-ray’ view above demonstrates this positioning relative to
the trachea and lungs. Source: Dr. James Bailey, Innovative Veterinary Medicine Inc. 2023; with permission.

-- 1119 of 1450 --

1104 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
and anesthetized animals. In all situations, a relatively smaller
endotracheal tube is inserted into the blowhole and advanced
through the left or right nasal cavity into the trachea. This approach
is greatly facilitated by the use of a flexible endoscope for both visu-
alization of the laryngeal opening and as a stylet to guide advance-
ment of the tube. While this method seems straightforward, it is
subjectively more complicated than oral intubation due to redun-
dant tissue and muscular folds between the blowhole and larynx
that are used for vocalization and echolocation. Not surprisingly,
this limits the size of the tube that can be used. While it has not been
attempted to the authors’ knowledge, theoretically, intubation of the
blowhole could be maintained in a conscious animal beyond anes-
thetic recovery if necessitated by the animal’s medical needs. That
said, prolonged blowhole intubation could create inflammation or
result in abnormal blowhole function, which would be problematic
once the animal is returned to the water. Blowhole intubation has
been used in small dolphins (Stenella styx and Delphinus delphis)
under experimental conditions at sea [132]. To facilitate laryngeal
anesthesia for conscious intubation, lidocaine (2%) was applied to
the blowhole, nasal passages, and larynx using a small metal can-
nula prior to passing the uncuffed endotracheal tube.
Pinniped intubation
Subjectively, compared to other marine mammal species, the ade-
quately anesthetized pinniped is less difficult to intubate since the
larynx can be visualized and the vocal cords are relatively immobile.
Cuffed endotracheal tubes of sizes 8 to 22 mm ID are suitable. An
oral approach is used. After induction of anesthesia, the patient is
positioned in sternal recumbency with the mandible and maxilla
pulled apart with rope or webbing material and the neck extended
in a straight orientation. Care should be taken not to twist the head
or neck as this can distort the normal anatomy, particularly in larger
pinnipeds. A laryngoscope should be used, but a good light source
(e.g., headlamp) can be useful. The laryngoscope blade is placed
underneath the epiglottis at the base of the tongue and gently forced
downward; this stretches the hypoepiglottic ligament, dropping the
epiglottis and exposing the glottic opening. If needed, a second
laryngoscope blade rotated 180 degrees or similar device (e.g., sili-
cone spatula) can be used to push upwards on the soft palate and
improve visualization; this can also be achieved with the tip of the
endotracheal tube. Advancement of the tube timed with inspiration
(e.g., abduction of the arytenoid cartilages) may ease the process.
Larger pinnipeds often have excessive soft palate and pharyngeal
tissues and physically heavy heads, both of which can impede posi-
tioning and visualization. In these situations, blind intubation via
palpation is usually selected and is similar to intubation of domestic
large animal species such as cattle. An appropriate level of anesthe-
sia is crucial for safety, but a bite block can also be used to protect
the individual’s arm. With the animal positioned as described
above, the anesthetist’s hand is cupped around the distal aspect of
the endotracheal tube and inserted into the oropharynx. The epi-
glottis is digitally retracted, the arytenoids are identified, and the
endotracheal tube is manually guided into the trachea. In larger
species or with smaller arms, this can be accomplished using a two-
hand technique and the digits can be used to gently hold the aryte-
noids open. In lieu of this palpation method, fiberoptic intubation
scopes can be used to improve human safety, but may be logistically
complicated. Using either technique, tracheal insertion should be
confirmed with a capnograph. If unavailable, bilateral thoracic aus-
cultation should be performed to confirm placement and concur-
rently rule out one-lung intubation. The tube should also be secured
to the maxilla using a tie and the cuff inflated to a minimum occlu-
sive volume.
Manatee intubation
The manatee has several anatomic characteristics that make visuali-
zation of the caudal pharynx and larynx using an oral approach
extremely difficult, including a curved angle of the tongue, a nar-
row buccal cavity, and a long soft palate. As a result, oral intubation
is generally unsuccessful and, instead, the glottis and trachea are
best accessed from the nasal cavities. While nasotracheal tubes have
occasionally been passed blindly with success, dependable tracheal
intubation is best accomplished with endoscopic assistance
(Fig. 56.7). This visualization helps in wild sirenians which are
(A)
(B)
(C)
Figure 56.7 Endoscopic-assisted nasal intubation of the Florida manatee (Trichechus manatus latirostris). A. and B. Endoscope placement through the
nasal passage allows visualization of the glottis to time intubation with glottal opening. C. Note the final positioning of the endotracheal tube tip cranial
to the carina after advancement of the endotracheal tube into the trachea. Source: Dr. James Bailey, Innovative Veterinary Medicine Inc., 2023; with
permission.

-- 1120 of 1450 --

Chapter 56: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Marine Mammals 	1105
commonly infested with nasopharyngeal trematodes and occasion-
ally have severe rhinitis or tracheitis [133,134]. Use of a scope can
also aid in maneuvering around caudal pharyngeal tissue which can
impede glottal visualization, especially during breath-holding in
heavily sedated manatees. Stylets may be used to assist passage of
the endotracheal tube through the glottis if using the scope sepa-
rately, though preplacing the endotracheal tube over the end of a
scope usually results in quicker intubation and confirmation of
accurate placement [128,135]. Application of lidocaine gel or spray
to the nares and glottis prior to intubation attempts can also be
helpful. In Florida manatees, it is recommended to use relatively
long cuffed endotracheal tubes (8 to 14 mm ID) designed for foals.
Due to the short length of the manatee trachea, intubation of a sin-
gle bronchus can occur; bronchoscopy can confirm proper posi-
tioning of the endotracheal tube cranial to the carina. Once placed,
the nasotracheal tube should be secured in place and the cuff
inflated to a minimum occlusive volume.
Monitoring and support
The importance of vigilant monitoring during marine mammal
anesthesia cannot be overstated and this extends throughout all
four phases of the anesthetic episode (premedication, induction,
maintenance, and recovery), during any sedation episode, and dur-
ing any period of mechanical/physical restraint. Monitoring is a
challenging, complex process which requires superb critical think-
ing skills and should involve at least one dedicated anesthetist.
Arguably, the most important monitor is the anesthetist themself as
a wealth of information can be collected using the human eyes and
ears and a basic stethoscope (e.g., anesthetic depth, mucous mem-
brane color, respiratory rate and effort, and auscultation). Even dur-
ing situations of limited patient access, observation of the thoracic
wall can confirm both ventilation and myocardial contraction (e.g.,
apex beat). Productive ventilation and a patent airway are impor-
tant to confirm, particularly when using aggressive immobilization
cocktails, with physically large species, or with fully aquatic species
(cetaceans, sirenians) that are “beached,” as partial or complete air-
way obstruction can occur. In some situations, subjects will flare
their nostrils and attempt to move their diaphragm and thoracic
wall, but ventilation will be suboptimal and consistent with partial
or complete airway obstruction. Thus, ventilation with evidence of
air flow must be monitored from the time of first handling to after
full recovery. Monitoring should be continuously performed, and
physiologic values ideally recorded every 5 min. The anesthetist
should understand acceptable or “normal” physiologic parameters
for the target species prior to the anesthetic event. Historically, most
anesthetic monitoring in marine mammal anesthesia was non-
invasive in nature. While this is appropriate in some situations (e.g.,
sedation), advances in technology and vascular access techniques
have laid the groundwork for routine use of more invasive monitor-
ing techniques (e.g., invasive blood pressure and arterial blood gas
analysis).
In addition to visual assessment of the patient as discussed above,
additional non-invasive monitoring tools (i.e., electrocardiogram,
pulse oximetry, temperature, end-tidal gas analysis, and non-
invasive blood pressure) should be considered for every sedation or
anesthetic event. The decision to exclude a monitoring tool should
be based on patient compliance and the consideration for personnel
safety, among other factors. A 3-lead electrocardiogram allows
assessment of heart rate and rhythm and should be placed as soon
as access to the patient is safe. The marine mammals discussed here
have a type 2/category B cardiac conduction system, similar to the
horse, with a diffuse Purkinje network and an overall axis of depo-
larization that is different than domestic dogs and cats [78]. As
such, a modified base apex lead is frequently used in larger subjects
to simplify electrode placement and optimize the ECG tracing.
Pulse oximetry probes provide an assessment of the oxygen satura-
tion of hemoglobin; as this technology relies on pulsatile arterial
flow, a concurrent pulse rate is also obtained and should always be
compared to the heart rate generated on an ECG. Reusable clip-
type transmittance probes (originally designed for the human ear)
are frequently placed on the tongue or mucous membranes of the
oral or urogenital regions with reflectance probes allowing place-
ment in additional areas (e.g., dorsal aspect of the rectal cavity).
Hypoxemia is a potential anesthetic complication, especially in
spontaneously ventilating or larger marine mammals, thus, contin-
uous assessment of oxygenation is a necessity. Monitoring of tem-
perature is paramount in both managed care and free-ranging
settings as hypo- or hyperthermia can frequently occur. Temperature
probes should be inserted at least 30 cm into the esophagus or rec-
tum and, thus, hand-held style thermometers common in domestic
animal anesthesia are usually not sufficient. While often forgotten
until well into the anesthetic episode, prioritization of temperature
assessment and thermoregulatory support should occur. End-tidal
gas analysis (i.e., CO2
, O2
, and inhalant concentration) can provide
a wealth of information (e.g., confirm intubation, assess ventilation
and perfusion, and guide vaporizer management during induction,
maintenance, and recovery) and is discussed in detail in
Chapters 14, 15, and 16. Both intubated and non-intubated patients
should have a gas analyzer attached between the breathing circuit
and the patient, as even a tight-fitting facemask will usually allow
assessment of ventilatory trends through gas analysis. Blood pres-
sure measurement is performed to obtain an objective measure-
ment of systemic perfusion and is standard of care in veterinary
anesthesia. Non-invasive blood pressure assessment is limited by
patient size and limb anatomy, among other factors. While non-
invasive blood pressure monitors have yet to be validated in marine
mammal species, the use of oscillometric cuffs on the pectoral and
occasionally pelvic flippers of small to medium-sized pinnipeds
have been used to identify trends and contribute to assessment of
the overall clinical picture. With that in mind, if an appropriate cuff
size is available (i.e., width of the cuff approximately 40% of the
circumference of the limb) for the target species, the authors
encourage its use in pinnipeds. Even in situations in which invasive
blood pressure monitoring is planned, cannulation of an artery
takes time and may not always be successful, thus, non-invasive
blood pressure measurement should still be used. Unfortunately, no
non- invasive blood pressure measurement has yet proven success-
ful in cetaceans or sirenians. “Normal” arterial blood pressure val-
ues in marine mammal species are largely unknown, but the authors
anecdotally define hypotension as a mean arterial pressure (MAP)
< 70 mmHg in pinnipeds and sirenians and < 90–100 mmHg in
cetaceans (conscious MAP range 115–142 mmHg) [136,137].
Invasive blood pressure monitoring has become a standard of care
for marine mammals in managed care, but can be technically chal-
lenging in manatees and small phocids [137]. Placement of arterial
catheters is discussed in the vascular access section of this chapter.
This monitoring tool should be used whenever possible in immobi-
lized or anesthetized marine mammals, especially for longer proce-
dures, compromised or geriatric patients, or when significant
anesthetic or procedural complications are expected (e.g., hypoxemia
and hemorrhage). Principles of hypotension management are similar

-- 1121 of 1450 --

1106 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
to domestic species and include a reduction in inhalant delivery,
techniques for MAC reduction, volume loading where appropriate,
and intravenous use of inotropes (e.g., dobutamine 0.2–2 μg/kg/min,
ephedrine 0.05–0.1 mg/kg) or vasopressors (e.g., phenylephrine
0.1–1 μg/kg/min, norepinephrine 0.01–0.1 μg/kg/min).
Similar to invasive blood pressure monitoring, blood gas, elec-
trolyte, and lactate analyses should be used whenever possible in
immobilized or anesthetized marine mammals, especially for
lengthy anesthetic procedures, in compromised or geriatric sub-
jects, or when significant anesthetic or procedural complications
are expected (e.g., hypoxemia and hypotension). Interpretation of
blood gas data is reviewed elsewhere in this textbook. However,
early testing of even venous blood can warn of excessive exertion
during the process of anesthetic induction and the potential for
developing rhabdomyolysis [82].
Cushioning with thick (4 to 8 inch) medium-density, open-cell
foam padding similar to that used for large terrestrial mammals is
necessary to minimize development of myopathy and neuropathy,
especially during longer procedures [138]. Waterproof closed-cell
foam padding provides minimal cushioning and should be reserved
for short procedures. The insulating effect of foam padding also
minimizes conductive heat loss. As discussed previously, thermoreg-
ulatory support is necessary as hypo- or hyperthermia may occur.
Control of environmental temperature (if possible), minimization of
stress or excitement in the preanesthetic period, use of external
patient warming devices (i.e., circulating warm water or forced air
blankets), and dry-docking or towel-drying patients prior to anes-
thesia can be useful adjuncts. For cetaceans, near-neutral buoyant
liquid suspension systems have been used [61] and are currently
being reevaluated for positioning support and thermoregulation.
Dive reflex
When discussing the dive reflex or dive response in marine mam-
mals handled for sedation and anesthesia, it is generally directed at
concerns for breath-holding and circulatory adjustments, specifi-
cally apnea, bradycardia, and regional vasoconstriction. Studies
have convincingly proven that pinnipeds demonstrate a profound
“dive reflex” when forced to dive [139]. Furthermore, these same
animals when allowed to dive voluntarily do not demonstrate the
same degree of bradycardia as when forced into a dive [140–142].
As such, the normal dive response of pinnipeds appears to be more
graded and under conscious control while the response is more
exaggerated if the animal does not know when the dive will end.
Importantly, none of the studied animals died as a result of the dive
reflex during forced or voluntary dives, and there is no evidence to
suggest this is a potential outcome (as long as they are allowed the
opportunity to surface and breathe). There is also no evidence that
the dive reflex remains intact in pinnipeds during chemically
induced unconsciousness. On the contrary, there is evidence that
anesthesia depresses or eliminates the dive reflex [143,144]. A
wealth of anecdotal evidence supports the notion that the heart rate
of a marine mammal stabilizes during general anesthesia when
proper physiologic support is provided. Although activation of the
dive reflex has quite often been blamed for negative outcomes in
marine mammal anesthesia over many decades, it is more likely
that the lack of a dive response is the issue. That is, during drug- and
disease-induced physiologic derangements (e.g., apnea, hypoxemia,
vasodilation, and hypoperfusion), the lack of this elegant reflex
control and lack of ability to direct blood flow to vital organs may
precipitate negative consequences. Indeed, an intact dive response
might well enhance the probability of positive outcomes in anesthe-
tized pinnipeds. This significantly underscores the need for mind-
ful anesthetic monitoring and support of sedated or anesthetized
marine mammals.
There are some physiologic reflexes, including the laryngeal,
oculocardiac, and other trigeminocardiac and vagally induced
reflexes that may occur in the anesthetized marine mammal, espe-
cially at light planes of anesthesia (e.g., induction and recovery).
Occurrence of these reflexes and resultant bradycardia may well be
confused with a “dive reflex.” Bradycardia during sedation, immo-
bilization, or anesthesia can also result from inadequate respiratory
support in that severe hypoxemia and myocardial hypoxia can
cause terminal bradycardia. While the true occurrence of a “dive
reflex” during general anesthesia of marine mammals is questiona-
ble, monitoring for bradycardia of any etiology or other physiologic
disturbances is important.
Anesthetic recovery
Anesthetic vigilance, monitoring, and support do not end just
because the anesthetic vaporizer has been turned off as anesthetic
complications can occur into and beyond the recovery period. This
is especially important to highlight in situations involving free-
ranging or dangerous animals where monitoring capabilities and
human safety are sometimes at odds. Ventilatory support (e.g.,
mechanical ventilator, manual resuscitator bag, and demand valve)
may be necessary well into recovery. As alluded to earlier, monitor-
ing the end-expired anesthetic concentration in recovery can guide
administration of reversal agents. More specifically, the authors
administer reversal agents when the inhalant anesthetic is at a con-
centration that is expected to produce minimal effect on awareness
(approximate MAC awake of isoflurane < 0.4%, sevoflurane < 0.8%);
this strategy theoretically promotes arousal at a timepoint when
unwanted dysphoria from the inhalant is minimal.
Limited pharmacokinetic data on opioids and non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs in marine mammals suggest the half-life of
many useful anesthetic and perianesthetic drugs will have a surpris-
ingly long duration of action when compared to terrestrial spe-
cies [145–148]. For this reason, it is preferable to use anesthetic
drugs that can be eliminated easily without metabolism (i.e., inhala-
tion anesthetics) or are reversible. As such, it is common to reverse
benzodiazepines, opioids, and α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists to
speed recovery and promote the return of effective spontaneous
ventilation in marine mammals.
Full reversal of clinically used benzodiazepines, on a milligram-
for-milligram basis, requires 1 part flumazenil for every 13 parts of
midazolam or every 26 parts diazepam [149]. The functional half-
life of flumazenil can be estimated from terrestrial animal models as
at least one hour. As intravenous administration may result in an
abrupt and excitable recovery and large volumes are often needed,
the authors recommend half the calculated dose of flumazenil be
delivered intramuscularly and, 5 min later, half the calculated dose
is administered intravenously. The response is then evaluated
before any redosing.
Full reversal of opioids can be achieved with naloxone 0.01 mg/
kg or naltrexone 0.05–0.1 mg/kg (0.5–1 mg/kg for ultrapotent opi-
oids). The half-life of naloxone is variable in terrestrial species but
can be approximated at 20–30 min, where naltrexone can be antici-
pated to have a much longer species-dependent half-life of 7–8 h
and a slow terminal elimination-phase half-life of around 24 h.
Naloxone can be used at a full or partial dosage to attenuate the

-- 1122 of 1450 --

Chapter 56: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Marine Mammals 	1107
level of opioid-induced postoperative depression, theoretically
allowing return of residual opioid analgesia. Where analgesia is not
necessary, or the subject is perceived to have excessive opioid-
induced respiratory depression, naltrexone can be used to provide
sustained reversal of opioid effects. The authors use a partial IM
and IV strategy as described above for flumazenil. As, anecdotally,
opioid reversal tends to greatly increase arousal, it is usually admin-
istered as the final drug in any IV reversal strategy.
Reversal of concentrated medetomidine is dependent on the
ratio of milligrams of antagonist drug to milligrams of α2 - adrenergic
receptor agonist, not the volume. Atipamezole is delivered at 5
and 10 times the milligram dose of medetomidine and dexmedeto-
midine, respectively, for full reversal via the intramuscular route
to avoid rapid arousal and/or potential hypotension. When
α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists are absolutely necessary for induc-
tion of anesthesia, but the cardiovascular effects of the α2 - adrenergic
receptor agonists are deemed undesirable for the target patient, the
authors will administer atipamezole after achieving an appropriate
end-expired anesthetic level and, preferably, after gaining vascular
access for provision of necessary support.
The endotracheal tube should be maintained in the airway as
long as possible within the safety guidelines for the species involved.
Protective contact restrictions for large pinnipeds can influence this
decision-making process in favor of human safety. Subjects will
routinely attempt to extubate prematurely or cough and inadvert-
ently extubate as they regain reflex control of their airway. Given
the respiratory depressant effect of anesthetic agents in marine
mammals, it is possible for these species to extubate prematurely
and either develop airway obstruction or become apneic; this is par-
ticularly true of phocids, cetaceans, and sirenians. For this reason,
the authors try to maintain IV access as long as safely possible into
the recovery period as reintubation may not be possible without
reinduction of anesthesia. It is also advisable to have an additional
endotracheal tube (usually one size smaller) on hand as well as both
drugs and tools for reintubation. Phenylephrine (0.5–1%) nasal
spray can be used to reduce nasal cavity edema that can develop
from recumbency and endotracheal tube ties around the muzzle.
Respiratory stimulants, such as the nonspecific central nervous
stimulant doxapram (1 mg/kg IM, IV), are generally unnecessary,
but worthy of mention as a tool for managing respiratory depres-
sion when there is lack of airway control in a semi-conscious ani-
mal. Unfortunately, this only increases cerebral oxygen consumption
in the face of inadequate ventilation and may do more harm than
good in most instances.
Acknowledgment
The authors would like to extend sincere thanks to Ms. Julia Hudson
for her work creating the illustrations that appear in this chapter.
References
1 Gingerich PD, Wells NA, Russell DE, et al. Origin of whales in epicontinental
remnant seas: new evidence from the early eocene of Pakistan. Science 1983; 220:
403–405.
2 Nishiwaki M, Tobayama T. Morphological study of the hybrid between Tursiops and
Pseudorca. Sci Rep Whales Res Inst 1982; 34: 109–121.
3 Zornetzer HR, Duffield DA. Captive-born bottlenose dolphin × common dolphin
(Tursiops truncatus × Delphinus capensis) intergeneric hybrids. Can J Zool 2003;
81(10): 1755–1762.
4 Venn-Watson S, Jensen ED, Ridgway SH. Effects of age and sex on clinicopathologic
reference ranges in a healthy managed Atlantic bottlenose dolphin population. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 2007; 231(4): 596–601.
5 Venn-Watson SK, Jensen ED, Ridgway SH. Evaluation of population health among
bottlenose dolphins (Turiops truncatus) at the United States Navy Marine Mammal
Program. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2011; 238(3): 356–360.
6 Lawson P, Buck EH. Marine Mammals in Captivity: Background and Management
Issues in the United States. Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, 1997:
1–19.
7 Corkeron P. Captivity. In: Corkeron P, ed. Encyclopedia of Marine Mammals,
2nd edn. New York, NY: Elsevier, 2009: 183–188.
8 Domning DP, Hayek LC. Interspecific and intraspecific morphological variation
in manatees (Sirenia: Trichechus). Mar Mammal Sci 1986; 2(2): 87–144.
9 Reynolds JE, Odell DK. Manatees and Dugongs. New York, NY: Facts on File, 1991:
1–192.
10 Courbis SS, Worthy GAJ. Opportunistic carnivory by Florida manatees (Trichechus
manatus latirostris). Aquat Mamm 2003; 29(1): 104–107.
11 Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES). Appendices I,
II and III. www.cites.org/sites/default/files/eng/app/2023/E-Appendices-2023- 02-
23.pdf (accessed July 2023).
12 International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). Redlist of Threatened
Species 2022. www.iucnredlist.org (accessed April 2023).
13 Environmental Conservation Online System (ECOS). United States Fish & Wildlife
Service, 2023. https://ecos.fws.gov/ecp/species/4469 (accessed July 2023).
14 Richards DW Jr. The Lewis A. Conner memorial lecture, the nature of cardiac and
of pulmonary dyspnea. Circulation 1953; 7(1): 15–29.
15 Smith JC, Ellenberger HH, Ballanyi K, et al. Pre-Bötzinger complex: a brainstem
region that may generate respiratory rhythm in mammals. Science 1991; 254(5032):
726–729.
16 Kam K, Worrell JW, Janczewski WA, et al. Distinct inspiratory rhythm and pattern
generating mechanisms in the preBötzinger complex. J Neurosci 2013; 33(22):
9235–9245.
17 Marina N, Abdala AP, Trapp S, et al. Essential role of Phox2b-expressing ventrolat-
eral brainstem neurons in the chemosensory control of inspiration and expiration.
J Neurosci 2010; 30(37): 12466–12473.
18 Dubreuil V, Barhanin J, Goridis C, et al. Breathing with Phox2b. Philos Trans R Soc
Lond B Biol Sci 2009; 364: 2477–2483.
19 Coghlan M, Richards E, Shaik S, et al. Inhalational anesthetics induce neuronal
protein aggregation and affect ER trafficking. Sci Rep 2018; 8: 5275.
20 Albersheim-Carter J, Blubaum A, Ballagh IH, et al. Testing the evolutionary
conservation of vocal motoneurons in vertebrates. Respir Physiol Neurobiol 2016;
224: 2–10.
21 Nomaksteinsky M, Kassabov S, Chettouh Z, et al. Ancient origin of somatic and
visceral neurons. BMC Biol 2013; 11: 53.
22 Munson Edwin S, Larson Philip C, Babad Arthur A, et al. The effects of halothane,
fluroxene and cyclopropane on ventilation: a comparative study in man. Anesthesiology
1966; 27(6): 716–728.
23 Colitz CMH, Bailey JE. Lens diseases and anesthetic considerations for ophthalmologic
procedures in pinnipeds. In: Miller RE, Lamberski N, Calle PP, eds. Fowler’s Zoo and
Wild Animal Medicine Current Therapy, Vol. 9. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2019: 610–617.
24 Weil JV, McCullough RE, Kline JS, et al. Diminished ventilatory response to
hypoxia and hypercapnia after morphine in normal man. N Engl J Med 1975;
292(21): 1103–1106.
25 Pattinson KT. Opioids and the control of respiration. Br J Anaesth 2008; 100(6):
747–758.
26 Dahan A, Sarton E, Teppema L, et al. Anesthetic potency and influence of
morphine and sevoflurane on respiration in μ-opioid receptor knockout mice.
Anesthesiology 2001; 94(5): 824–832.
27 Garcia PS, Kolesky SE, Jenkins A. General anesthetic actions on GABA(A)
receptors. Curr Neuropharmacol 2010; 8(1): 2–9.
28 Kelz MB, García PS, Mashour GA, et al. Escape from oblivion: neural mechanisms
of emergence from general anesthesia. Anesth Analg 2019; 128(4): 726–736.
29 Montandon G, Wu H, Liu H, et al. Delta-subunit containing GABA(A) receptors
modulate respiratory networks. Sci Rep 2017; 7(1): 18105.
30 Walsh M RT, McBain J, Dalton L, et al. Sedation and anesthesia techniques in
cetaceans. In: Proceedings of the American Association of Zoo Veterinarians Annual
Conference. Tampa, FL, 2006.
31 Reidarson T. Cetacean medicine. In: Fowler M, Miller ER, eds. Zoo and Wild
Animal Medicine, 5th edn. Orlando, FL: WB Saunders, 2003: 442–459.
32 Li Y, Wang S, Pan C, et al. Comparison of NREM sleep and intravenous sedation
through local information processing and whole brain network to explore the
mechanism of general anesthesia. PLoS ONE 2018; 13(2): e0192358.
33 Lilly JC. Animals in aquatic environments: adaptation of mammals to the ocean. In:
Baker PT, ed. Handbook of Physiology: Adaptation to the Environment. Washington,
DC: American Physiology Society, 1964: 741–747.
34 Bailey J, Ridgway S, Dold C. Cetaceans. In: West G, Heard D, Caulkett N, eds.
Zoo Animal and Wildlife Immobilization and Anesthesia, 2nd edn. Ames, IA: Wiley,
2014: 679–692.

-- 1123 of 1450 --

1108 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
35 Edwards A. Swifts. Nature 1887; 36(939): 605.
36 Serafetinides EA, Shurley JT, Brooks RE. Electroencephalogram of the pilot whale,
Globicephala scammoni, in wakefulness and sleep: lateralization aspects. Int J
Psychobiol 1972; 2(2): 129–135.
37 Mukhametov LM, Supin AY, Polyakova IG. Interhemispheric asymmetry of the
electroencephalographic sleep patterns in dolphins. Brain Res 1977; 134: 581–584.
38 Mukhametov LM. Sleep in marine mammals. Exp Brain Res 1984; 8: 227–238.
39 Oleksenko A, Mukhametov L, Polyakova I, et al. Unihemispheric sleep deprivation
in bottlenose dolphins. J Sleep Res 1992; 1(1): 40–44.
40 Ridgway SH. Asymmetry and symmetry in brain waves from dolphin left and right
hemispheres: some observations after anesthesia, during quiescent hanging behav-
ior, and during visual obstruction. Brain Behav Evol 2002; 60(5): 265–274.
41 Mortola JP, Limoges M-J. Resting breathing frequency in aquatic mammals: a com-
parative analysis with terrestrial species. Respir Physiol Neurobiol 2006; 154:
500–514.
42 Ridgway SH, Harrison RJ, Joyce PL. Sleep and cardiac rhythm in the grey seal.
Science 1975; 187: 553–554.
43 Lyamin OI, Kosenko PO, Vyssotski AL, et al. Study of sleep in a walrus. Dokl Biol
Sci 2012; 444: 188–191.
44 Pryaslova JP, Lyamin OI, Siegel JM, et al. Behavioral sleep in the walrus. Behav
Brain Rese 2009; 201: 80–87.
45 Mukhametov LM, Lyamin OI, Polyakova IG. Interhemispheric asynchrony of the
sleep EEG in northern fur seals. Experientia 1985; 41(8): 1034–1035.
46 Lapierre JL, Kosenko PO, Lyamin OI, et al. Cortical acetylcholine release is lateral-
ized during asymmetrical slow-wave sleep in northern fur seals. J Neurosci 2007;
27(44): 11999–12006.
47 Lyamin OI, Lapierre JL, Kosenko PO, et al. Electroencephalogram asymmetry and
spectral power during sleep in the northern fur seal. J Sleep Res 2008; 17: 154–165.
48 Lyamin OI, Mukhametov LM, Chetyrbok IS, et al. Sleep and wakefulness in the
southern sea lion. Behav Brain Res 2002; 128: 129–138.
49 Kendall-Bar JM, Williams TM, Mukherji R, et al. Brain activity of diving seals
reveals short sleep cycles at depth. Science 2023; 380(6642): 260–265.
50 Lyamin OI, Kosenko PO, Lapierre JL, et al. Fur seals display a strong drive for bilat-
eral slow-wave sleep while on land. J Neurosci 2008; 28(48): 12614–12621.
51 Matishov GG, Voynov VB, Verbitsky EV, et al. The cardiorespiratory function and
electrical activity of the brain of the ringed seal during the transition from wakeful-
ness to sleep. Dokl Biol Sci 2012; 442: 1–6.
52 Mukhametov LM, Lyamin OI, Chetyrbok IS, et al. Sleep in an Amazonian manatee,
Trichechus inunguis. Experientia 1992; 48(4): 417–419.
53 Zancanella E, do Prado LF, de Carvalho LB, et al. Home sleep apnea testing: an
accuracy study. Sleep Breath 2022; 26(1): 117–123.
54 Fahlman A, Loring SH, Ferrigno M, et al. Static inflation and deflation pressure–
volume curves from excised lungs of marine mammals. J Exp Biol 2011; 214(22):
3822–3828.
55 Denison D, Warrell DA, West JB. Airway structure and alveolar emptying in the
lungs of sea lions and dogs. Respir Physiol 1972; 13: 253–261.
56 Ponganis PJ. Diving mammals. Compr Phys 2011; 1(1): 447–465.
57 Kooyman GL, Sinnett EE. Mechanical properties of the harbor porpoise lung,
Phocoena phocoena. Respir Physiol 1979; 36: 287–300.
58 Piscitelli M, Raverty SA, Lillie MA, et al. A review of cetacean lung morphology and
mechanics. J Morphol 2013; 274: 1425–1440.
59 Olsen CR, Hale FC, Elsner R. Mechanics of ventilation in the pilot whale. Respir
Physiol 1969; 7: 137–149.
60 Moore MJ, Hammar T, Arruda J, et al. Hyperbaric computed tomographic meas-
urement of lung compression in seals and dolphins. J Exper Biol 2011; 214:
2390–2397.
61 Ridgway SH, McCormick JG, Wever EG. Surgical approach to the dolphin’s ear.
J Exp Zool 1974; 188: 265–276.
62 Kerr CL, McDonell WN. Oxygen supplementation and ventilatory assist devices.
In: Muir WH, Hubbell JAE, eds. Equine Anesthesia: Monitoring and Emergency
Therapy, 2nd edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2009: 332–352.
63 Nagel EL, Morgane PJ, McFarland WL. Anesthesia for the bottlenose dolphin.
Science 1964; 146: 1591–1593.
64 Ridgway SH. Medical care of marine mammals. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1965; 147(10):
1077–1085.
65 Ridgway SH, McCormick JG. Anesthetization of porpoises for major surgery.
Science 1967; 158(3800): 510–512.
66 Ridgway SH, McCormick JG. Anesthesia of the porpoise. In: Soma LR, ed. Textbook
of Veterinary Anesthesia. Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins Co, 1971:
394–403.
67 Nagel EL, Morgane PJ, McFarland WL. Anesthesia for the bottlenose dolphin. Vet
Med Small Anim Clin 1966; 61(3): 6.
68 McCormick JG, Ridgway SH. History of the development of anesthesia for the dol-
phin: a quest to study a brain as large as man’s. Anesthesiology 2018; 129(1): 11–21.
69 Nagel EL, Morgane PJ, McFarland WL. Anesthesia for the bottlenose dolphin,
Tursiops truncatus. Surv Anesthesiol 1966; 10(2): 149.
70 Downs JB, Stock MC. Airway pressure release ventilation: a new concept in ventila-
tory support. Crit Care Med 1987; 15(5): 459–461.
71 Stock MC, Downs JB, Frolicher DA. Airway pressure release ventilation. Crit Care
Med 1987; 15(5): 462–466.
72 Bratzke E, Downs JB, Smith RA. Intermittent CPAP: a new mode of ventilation
during general anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1998; 89(2): 334–340.
73 Downs JB, Robinson LA, Steighner ML, et al. Open lung ventilation optimizes pul-
monary function during lung surgery. J Surg Res 2014; 192(2): 242–249.
74 Bukoski A, Hodgson D, Downs J, et al. An implementation of apneustic anesthesia
ventilation in the horse: comparison with conventional mechanical ventilation.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2022; 49(4): 372–381.
75 Downs John B, inventor. Method and apparatus for breathing during anesthesia.
Patent WO1998010818A1. 1996.
76 Bailey J, Ridgway S. Anesthesia ventilator for Atlantic bottlenose dolphins and
California sea lions. Navy STTR FY2014A-Topic N14A-T015. Office of Naval
Research, 2020.
77 Le-Bert C, Bukoski A, Downs J, et al. Comparison of cardiopulmonary effects of
controlled mechanical ventilation and apneustic anesthesia ventilation in bottle-
nose dolphins, Tursiops truncatus and California sea lions, Zalophus californianus.
In: Proceedings of the 52nd Annual American Association of Zoo Veterinarians
Conference. Nashville, TN, 2020.
78 Bailey J, Pablo LS. Anesthetic and physiologic considerations for veterinary endo-
surgery. In: Freeman LJ, ed. Veterinary Endosurgery. St. Louis, MO: Mosby, 1999.
79 Ponganis PJ, McDonald BI, Tift MS, et al. Effects of inhalational anesthesia on
blood gases and pH in California sea lions. Mar Mammal Sci 2017; 33(3): 1–12.
80 Olson KR, Whitfield NL, Bearden SE, et al. Hypoxic pulmonary vasodilation: a
paradigm shift with a hydrogen sulfide mechanism. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp
Physiol 2010; 298(1): R51–R60.
81 Stringer EM, Van Bonn W, Chinnadurai SK, et al. Risk factors associated with
perianesthetic mortality of stranded free-ranging California sea lions (Zalophus
californianus) undergoing rehabilitation. Zoo and Wildl Med 2012; 43(2): 233–239.
82 Bailey JE, Flanagan C, Meegan J, et al. Cogent evidence of rhabdomyolysis in
a California sea lion (Zalophus californianus) and a South African fur seal
(Arctocephalus pusillus pusillus) during anesthesia. In: Proceedings of the 43rd
Annual International Association for Aquatic Animal Medicine Conference. Atlanta,
GA, 2012.
83 Haulena M, Heath RB. Marine mammal anesthesia. In: Dierauf LA, Gulland FMD,
eds. Marine Mammal Medicine, 2nd edn. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2001: 655–688.
84 Brunson DB. Comparative anesthesia and analgesia of aquatic mammals. In:
Grimm KA, Lamont LA, Tranquilli WJ, et al., eds. Veterinary Anesthesia and
Analgesia, 5th edn. Ames, IA: Wiley Blackwell, 2015: 777–783.
85 Haulena M. Otariid seals. In: West G, Heard D, Caulkett N, eds. Zoo Animal and
Wildlife Immobilization and Anesthesia. Ames, IA: Wiley Blackwell, 2007:
469–478.
86 Gulland FMD, Dierauf LA, Whitman KL, eds. CRC Handbook of Marine Mammal
Medicine. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2018.
87 Brunson DB. Walrus. In: West G, Heard D, Caulkett N, eds. Zoo Animal and
Wildlife Immobilization and Anesthesia. Ames, IA: Wiley Blackwell, 2007:
479–483.
88 Chittick EJ, Walsh MT. Sirenians (Manatees and Dugongs). In: West G, Heard D,
Caulkett N, eds. Zoo Animal and Wildlife Immobilization and Anesthesia. Ames, IA:
Wiley Blackwell, 2007: 497–505.
89 Dold C, Ridgway SH. Cetaceans. In: West G, Heard D, Caulkett N, eds. Zoo Animal
and Wildlife Immobilization and Anesthesia. Ames, IA: Wiley Blackwell, 2007:
485–496.
90 Lynch M, Bodley K. Phocid seals. In: West G, Heard D, Caulkett N, eds. Zoo
Animal and Wildlife Immobilization and Anesthesia. Ames, IA: Wiley Blackwell,
2007: 459–468.
91 McAllister D, ed. Underwater capture of juvenile Steller sea lions with scuba: a nar-
rated video presentation. 21st Annual Scientific Diving Symposium of the American
Academy of Underwater Sciences. Seward, Alaska, 2001.
92 Mellish J, Calkins DG, Christen DR, et al. Temporary captivity as a research tool:
comprehensive study of wild pinnipeds under controlled conditions. Aquat Mamm
2006; 32(1): 58.
93 Dinter, B. Gaius Julius Caesar. Commentarii de bello civili. Leipzig, Germany:
B.G. Teubner, 1876.
94 Muir WW, Hubbell JAE, Bednarski RM. Handbook of Veterinary Anesthesia,
4th edn. Maryland Heights, MO: Mosby Elsevier, 2000.
95 Smith RM. Anesthesia for Infants and Children. St. Louis, MO: Mosby, 1959.
96 Spelman LH. Reversible anesthesia of captive California sea lions (Zalophus califor-
nianus) with medetomidine, midozolam, butorphanol, and isoflurane. J Zoo Wildl
Med 2004; 35(1): 65–69.

-- 1124 of 1450 --

Chapter 56: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Marine Mammals 	1109
97 Colitz CMH, Bailey JE. Lens diseases and anesthetic considerations for ophthal-
mologic procedures in pinnipeds. In: Miller RE, Lamberski N, Calle PP, eds.
Fowler’s Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine Current Therapy, Vol. 9. St. Louis, MO:
Elsevier, 2019: 610–617.
98 Li J. Comparison of anaesthetic protocols and outcomes in largha seals (Phoca
largha), harbor seals (Phoca vitulina) and California sea lions (Zalophus cailfor-
nianus) at Ocean Park Hong Kong. In: Proceedings of the 54th Annual International
Association for Aquatic Animal Medicine Conference. Salt Lake City, UT, 2023.
99 Maslow AH. The Psychology of Science, a Reconnaissance. New York, NY:
Harper & Row, 1966.
100 Madden CBJ, Johnson SP, Pasloske K. Case series evaluating the efficacy of
alfaxalone 4% injection in pinnipeds. In: Proceedings of the 14th World Congress
of Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia. Sydney, Australia, 2023.
101 Langworthy OR. A description of the central nervous system of the porpoise
(Tursiops truncatus). J Comp Neurol 1932; 52(2): 437–498.
102 Lilly JC. My first experiments with dolphins. In: Man and Dolphin. New York, NY:
Doubleday & Company, 1961: 48–61.
103 Moore M, Walsh M, Bailey J, et al. Sedation at sea of entangled North Atlantic
right whales (Eubalaena glacialis) to enhance disentanglement. PLoS ONE 2010;
5(3): e9597.
104 Moore M, Andrews R, Austin T, et al. Rope trauma, sedation, disentanglement,
and monitoring-tag associated lesions in a terminally entangled North Atlantic
right whale (Eubalaena glacialis). Mar Mammal Sci 2012; 29(2): E98–E113.
105 Medway W, McCormick JG, Ridgway SH, et al. Effects of prolonged halothane
anesthesia on some cetaceans. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1970; 157(5): 576–582.
106 Linnehan R, MacMillan A. Propofol/isoflurane anesthesia and debridement
of a corneal ulcer in an Atlantic bottlenose dolphin (Tursiops truncatus). In:
Proceedings of the American Association of Zoo Veterinarians. Calgary, AB, 1991.
107 Dover SR, Beusse D, Walsh T, et al. Laparoscopic techniques for the bottlenose
dolphin (Tursiops truncatus). In: Proceedings of the 30th Annual International
Association for Aquatic Animal Medicine Conference. 1999; 30: 128–129.
108 Bailey J. Cetacean anesthesia: a review of 10 clinical anesthesia events, lessons
learned and future plans. In: Proceedings of the 47th Annual International
Association for Aquatic Animal Medicine Conference. Virginia Beach, VA, 2016.
109 Ridgway SH, Simpson JG. Anesthesia and restraint for the California sea lion,
Zalophus californianus. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1969; 155: 1059–1063.
110 Skinner JP, Tuomi PA, Mellish JA. The influence of time in captivity, food intake
and acute trauma on blood analytes of juvenile Steller sea lions, Eumetopias juba-
tus. Conserv Physiol 2015; 3(1): cov008.
111 Heath RB, DeLong R, Jameson V, et al. Isoflurane anesthesia in free ranging sea
lion pups. J Wildl Dis 1997; 33(2): 206–210.
112 Walsh M, Webb A, Bailey J, et al. Sedation and anesthesia of the Florida manatee.
Int Assoc Aquat Anim Med 1997.
113 Bailey J, Walsh MT, Webb AI, et al. Anesthesia of the Florida manatee (Trichechus
manatus). In: Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Meeting of the American College of
Veterinary Anesthesiology. Orlando, FL, 1998.
114 Braun M. Einiges über phocaena communis less. [harbour porpoise]. Zoologischer
Anzeiger 1905; 29(5): 145–149.
115 Fawcett D. A comparative study of blood vascular bundles in the Florida manatee
(Trichechus latirostris) and in certain cetaceans and edentates. J Morphol 1942; 71:
105–124.
116 Tomilin AG. Temperature regulation in cetaceans. Priroda 1951; 6: 55–58.
117 Scholander PF, Schevill WE. Counter-current vascular heat exchange in the fins of
whales. J App Physiol 1955; 8(3): 279–282.
118 Elsner R, Pirie J, Kenney DD, et al. Functional circulatory anatomy of cetacean
appendages. In: Harrison RJ, ed. Functional Anatomy of Marine Mammals,
2nd edn. London, UK: Academic Press, 1974: 143–159.
119 Lowenstine LJ, Groff J, Rideout B, et al. Necropsy findings in two juvenile beaked
whales (Mesoplodon spp.) maintained in captivity for rehabilitation after strand-
ing. In: Proceedings of the 21st Annual International Association for Aquatic Animal
Medicine Conference. Vancouver, British Columbia, 1990.
120 Sen S, Chini EN, Brown MJ. Complications after unintentional intra-arterial
injection of drugs: risks, outcomes, and management strategies. Mayo Clin Proc
2005; 80(6): 783–795.
121 Stetter MD, McClave C, Cook RA. Marine mammal intravenous catheterization
techniques. In: Proceedings of the 29th Annual American Association of Zoo
Veterinarians Conference. Houston, TX, 1997.
122 Ivančić M, Johnson S, Costidis AM, et al. A technique for ultrasound-guided
catheterization of a peripheral vein in the bottlenose dolphin (Tursiops truncatus).
In: Proceedings of the 46th Annual American Association of Zoo Veterinarians
Conference. Chicago, IL, 2015.
123 Seldinger SI. Catheter replacement of the needle in percutaneous arteriography: a
new technique. Acta Radiologica 1953; 39(5): 368–376.
124 Daly A, Mooney L, Peters B, et al. Catheter fixation and isolation in bottlenose
dolphins (Tursiops truncatus). In: Proceedings of the 44th Annual International
Association for Aquatic Animal Medicine Conference. Sausalito, CA, 2013.
125 Medway W, Geraci JR. Hematology of the bottlenose dolphin (Tursiops truncatus).
Am J Physiol 1964; 207: 1367–1370.
126 Ivančić M, Bailey JE, Costidis AM. Technique for ultrasound-guided arterial cathe-
ter placement in the pectoral flipper of the bottlenose dolphin (Tursiops truncatus).
In: Proceedings of the 46th Annual International Association for Aquatic Animal
Medicine Conference. Chicago, IL, 2014.
127 St. Pierre H. The topographical splanchnology and the superficial vascular system
of the harp seal (Pagophilus groenlandicus) (Erxleben JCP, 1777). In: Harrison RJ,
ed. Functional Anatomy of Marine Mammals, Vol. 2. London, UK: Academic
Press, 1974: 161–195.
128 Murphy D. Sirenia. In: Fowler ME, ed. Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine, 5th edn.
St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Science, 2003: 476–482.
129 White JR. Manatee biology and medicine. In: Dierauf LA, ed. CRC Handbook of
Marine Mammal Medicine: Health, Disease, and Rehabilitation. Boca Raton, FL:
CRC Press, 1990: 601–623.
130 Rommel SA, Caplan H. Vascular adaptations for heat conservation in the tail of
Florida manatees (Trichechus manatus latirostris). J Anat 2003; 202(4): 343–353.
131 Green R. Observations on the anatomy of some cetaceans and pinnipeds. In:
Ridgeway SH, ed. Mammals of the Sea: Biology and Medicine. Springfield, IL:
Charles C. Thomas Publishers, 1972: 247–297.
132 Rieu M, Gautheron B. Preliminary observations concerning a method for
introduction of a tube for anaesthesia in small delphinids. Life Sci 1968; 7:
1141–1146.
133 Beck C, Forrester D. Helminths of the Florida manatee, Trichechus manatus latiro-
stris, with a discussion and summary of the parasites of sirenians. J Parasit 1988;
74: 628–637.
134 Bossart GD. Manatees. In: Dierauf LA, Gulland FMD, eds. Marine Mammal
Medicine, 2nd edn. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2001: 939–960.
135 Walsh MT. Manatee medicine. In: Fowler ME, Miller ER, eds. Zoo & Wild Animal
Medicine, Current Therapy, 4th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Company, 1999:
507–516.
136 Sommer L, McFarland W, Galliano R, et al. Hemodynamic and coronary angio-
graphic studies in the bottlenose dolphin (Tursiops truncatus). Amer J Physiol-
Legacy Content 1968; 215(6): 1498–1505.
137 Bailey J. Arterial blood pressure monitoring of select pinnipeds: multi-case pres-
entation. In: Proceedings of the 44th Annual International Association for Aquatic
Animal Medicine Conference. Sausalito, CA, 2013.
138 Bednarski R. Anesthesia equipment. In: Muir WH, Hubbell JAE, eds. Equine
Anesthesia: Monitoring and Emergency Therapy. St. Louis, MO: Mosby Year Book,
1991: 325–351.
139 Irving L, Scholander PF, Grinnell SW. Significance of the heart rate to the diving
ability of seals. J Cell Comp Physiol 1941; 18(3): 283–297.
140 Thompson D, Fedak MA. Cardiac responses of grey seals during diving at sea.
J Exp Biol 1993; 174: 139–154.
141 Kooyman GL, Ponganis PJ. The physiological basis of diving to depth: birds and
mammals. Annu Rev of Physiol 1998; 60: 19–32.
142 Davis RW, Castellini MA, Kooyman GL, et al. Renal glomerular filtration rate and
hepatic blood flow during voluntary diving in Weddell seals. Am J Physiol 1983;
245(5): R743–R748.
143 Whayne T, Smith N, Eger E, et al. The effects of halothane anesthesia on reflex
cardiovascular responses to simulated diving and the Valsalva maneuver.
Anesthesiology 1971; 34(3): 262–270.
144 Elsner R, Franklin DL, Van Citters RL, et al. Cardiovascular defense against
asphyxia. Science 1966; 153: 941–949.
145 Nutter FB, Haulena, M, Bai SA. Preliminary pharmacokinetics of single-dose intra-
muscular butorphanol in elephant seals (Mirounga angustirostris). In: Proceedings
of the 30th Annual American Association of Zoo Veterinarians Conference. Omaha,
NE, 1998.
146 Molter CM, Barbosa L, Johnson S, et al. Pharmacokinetics of a single subcutane-
ous dose of sustained release buprenorphine in northern elephant seals (Mirounga
angustirostris). J Zoo Wildl Med 2015; 46(1): 52–61.
147 Trumbull E. Comparative pharmacokinetics of a single dose of meloxicam in the
California sea lion (Zalophus californianus) and Pacific harbor seal (Phoca vitulina
richardii). In: Proceedings of the 54th Annual International Association for Aquatic
Animal Medicine Conference. Salt Lake City, UT, 2023.
148 Simeone CA, Nollens HH, Meegan JM, et al. Pharmacokinetics of single dose oral
meloxicam in bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus). J Zoo Wildl Med 2014;
45(3): 594–599.
149 Pawson P. Sedatives. In: Maddison JE, Page SW, Church DB, eds. Small Animal
Clinical Pharmacology, 2nd edn. Edinburgh, UK: WB Saunders, 2008: 113–125.

-- 1125 of 1450 --

57
1110
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: T he Sixth E dition of L umb and J ones	. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
Reptiles, amphibians, and fishes are unique animal classes
encountered in veterinary medicine and are very different in
terms of anatomy, physiology, and behavioral adaptations from
the more familiar mammals. Regardless of the differences among
these animal classes, by using sound anesthetic principles reason-
ably safe and effective anesthesia can be performed, even in the
absence of species-specific information. In the following sections,
emphasis has been placed on providing comparative anatomic
and physiologic information relevant to the anesthetic manage-
ment of each class of animals. A comprehensive review of the
anesthetic and analgesic literature is beyond the scope of this text
but is available elsewhere and should be consulted for additional
detail [1–6].
Reptile anesthesia
Anesthetic management of reptiles is associated with many chal-
lenges. Reptilia represents a diverse class of animals in terms of
size, environmental requirements, behavior, physiology, and
anatomy. There are over 7800 species represented by four main
orders (Crocodylia, Testudines, Squamata, and Rhynchocephalia).
Compounding the difficulties created by these inherent species
differences, historically there was relatively little peer-reviewed
research investigating anesthesia and analgesia in reptiles and
much of the earlier literature is anecdotal in nature and persists as
accepted fact despite contradictory evidence. Fortunately, there
has been considerable interest in this area recently and scientific
studies investigating anesthesia and analgesia in reptiles are
becoming more available.
Applying generalized anesthetic recommendations to such a
large and varying group of animals is difficult. Clinical application
of various techniques is often ascribed to one of the three principal
orders: the crocodilians (crocodiles and alligators), the chelonians
(tortoises and turtles), and the squamates (snakes and lizards). An
understanding of normal physiology, pathophysiology, the action
and disposition of anesthetic and related drugs, and a familiarity
with the design and use of related anesthetic equipment are impor-
tant considerations. A thorough preanesthetic assessment and care-
fully designed anesthetic plan with attention to premedication,
induction, maintenance, monitoring, supportive care, recovery, and
ongoing postoperative support and analgesia all contribute to the
reduction of risk associated with anesthesia.
Anatomy and physiology
Reptiles have long been considered to be the class of vertebrates
that reflect the evolutionary transition between the aquatic and
amphibious ectothermic vertebrates, and endothermic birds
and mammals. Reptiles arguably represent one of the most ancient,
successful, and well-adapted classes of animals, with some species
surviving essentially unchanged for hundreds of millions of years.
Recent investigations recognize reptilian physiologic evolutionary
57 Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia –
Reptiles, Amphibians, and Fishes
Sathya K. Chinnadurai1 and Cornelia I. Mosley2
1 Chicago Zoological Society/Brookfield Zoo, Brookfield, Illinois, USA
2 Elanco Animal Health, Mississauga, Ontario, Canada
Chapter contents
Introduction, 1110
Reptile anesthesia, 1110
Anatomy and physiology, 1110
Metabolism and thermoregulation, 1111
Cardiovascular system, 1111
Pulmonary system, 1112
Renal system, 1113
Hepatic system, 1113
Clinical anesthesia, 1114
Pain, nociception, and analgesia, 1114
Amphibian anesthesia, 1116
Anatomy and physiology, 1117
Clinical anesthesia, 1118
Anesthetic agents, 1118
Monitoring, 1119
Recovery, 1119
Fish anesthesia, 1120
Anatomy and physiology, 1120
Overview of clinical anesthesia of fish, 1122
References, 1123

-- 1126 of 1450 --

Chapter 57: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Reptiles, Amphibians, and Fishes 	1111
adaptations as “optimal or advantageous,” enabling exothermic
animals to inhabit almost all of the available non-polar ecological
niches.
Although many aspects of reptilian physiology are similar
to those of endothermic vertebrates, significant differences are
present. Such differences may alter both the action and disposition
of anesthetics and analgesics.
Metabolism and thermoregulation
The ectothermic nature of reptiles and their generally lower meta-
bolic rates are probably the two most striking differences between
mammals and reptiles that impede extrapolation of anesthetic prin-
ciples and practices between the two groups. Reptiles derive much
of their body heat from the surrounding environment and use
behaviors such as basking or burrowing to regulate their body tem-
peratures. Reptiles can also alter their body temperature through
changes in their cardiovascular physiology. During periods of
warming, some reptiles increase their heart rate and the degree of
right-to- left cardiac shunting to increase the fraction of blood flow
that is directed to the periphery for heating and ultimate return to
the body core [7]. This adaptation facilitates more rapid and effi-
cient warming of the animal.
Reptiles will tend to choose a preferred optimal temperature
zone (POTZ) maintaining a body temperature that is presumably
ideal for the animal. In most instances, reptiles undergoing anesthe-
sia should be maintained at the average or the high end of their
POTZ to ensure optimal metabolic function. Species-specific
ranges can often be found in general husbandry references or
extrapolated from known species, which are found in similar natu-
ral habitats. In general, 20–25 °C is recommended for most aquatic
and temperate reptile species, and 25–35 °C for most tropical
species [8].
Although ambient temperature is one of the main determinants
of metabolic rate in resting reptiles, and consequently the metabo-
lism and excretion of drugs [9], there are significant interspecies
and intraindividual variations. Minimum and maximum oxygen
consumption rates of individual reptilian species range from almost
zero to values similar to a resting mammal [10]. The oxygen con-
sumption of any individual is a function of the species, the tempera-
ture, and the individual. In general, the varanid and lacertid lizards
tend to have relatively high metabolic rates, and boid snakes and
chelonians have lower rates. Surface-dwelling squamates have
higher metabolic rates than burrowing species, and species of liz-
ards that eat insects or other vertebrates have higher metabolic rates
than herbivorous species [11]. Those species with higher inherent
metabolic rates may be expected to more rapidly metabolize and
excrete drugs compared to those with lower metabolic rates, but
this has not been demonstrated conclusively.
Cardiovascular system
The non-crocodilian reptile heart has three chambers: two com-
pletely separate atria and a single anatomically continuous ventri-
cle. The crocodilian heart is more typical of that seen in mammals
and birds with two completely divided atria and two ventricles. In
the crocodilian heart, the foramen of Panizza allows for some intra-
vascular shunting under circumstances of breath holding, such as
diving. In non-crocodilian reptiles, the ventricle is divided into two
main chambers by a septum-like structure called the “Muskelleiste”
or “muscular ridge” (Fig. 57.1). This ridge originates from the ven-
tral ventricular wall and runs from the ventricular apex to the base,
dividing the ventricle into two anatomically defined but connected
chambers: the cavum pulmonale and the cavum dorsale [12,13],
comparable in function to the right and left ventricles of mammals,
respectively. The cavum dorsale is sometimes further subdivided
into the cavum venosum and cavum arteriosum. The dorsolateral
border of the muscular ridge is free, permitting the flow of blood
between the cavum pulmonale and cavum dorsale. However, dur-
ing ventricular systole, the muscular ridge presses against the dorsal
wall of the ventricle and separates the cavum pulmonale from the
cavum dorsale; thus, in a functional sense, the heart is capable of
acting as a two-circuit pump. The pulmonary artery arises from the
cavum pulmonale, and two aortic arches arise from the cavum
venosum of the cavum dorsale. The left aortic arch becomes the
dorsal aorta while the right aortic arch forms the subclavian and
carotid arteries and a third branch joins the dorsal aorta. However,
there is considerable anatomic variation among species.
Cardiac shunting occurs commonly in reptiles [14–16]. Cardiac
shunts can occur in both directions, and under some circum-
stances may occur simultaneously in both directions [14,17,18].
The direction of the net shunt determines whether the systemic or
pulmonary circulation receives the majority of the cardiac output.
Intracardiac shunting has three important functions. First, shunting
serves to stabilize the oxygen content of the blood during respira-
tory pauses. Second, the right-to- left shunt is partly responsible for
facilitating heating by increasing systemic blood flow. Third, a
right-to- left shunt directs blood away from the lungs during breath
holding.
During anesthesia, cardiac shunting can affect systemic arterial
oxygen content and the uptake and elimination of inhaled anes-
thetics. The size and direction of the shunts are ultimately con-
trolled by pressure differences between the pulmonary and
systemic circulations and the washout of blood remaining in the
cavum venosum (an anatomic subchamber of the cavum dorsale
described in many reptiles) [14,16,18,19]. The pressure differ-
ences are principally controlled by cholinergic and adrenergic fac-
tors that regulate the vascular resistance of the pulmonary and
systemic circulation [14,20–25].
Left aortic arch
Right aortic arch
Right atrium
Pulmonary artery
Muscular ridge
Cavum pulmonale
Left atrium
Cavum venosum
Cavum dorsale
Cavum arteriosum
Vertical septum
Figure 57.1 A generalized schematic demonstrating the anatomy and
separation of blood flow in the non-crocodilian reptile heart. The cavum
venosum is the region of the heart where mixing of oxygenated and
deoxygenated blood may occur. Deoxygenated blood returning to the heart
via the right atrium passes through the cavum venosum to the cavum
pulmonale. The volume of blood remaining in the cavum venosum after
the muscular ridge contacts the dorsal wall of the heart (during systole),
relative to the volume of oxygenated blood in the cavum arteriosum, will
determine the magnitude of the shunted fraction of blood. The shunt
fraction is ultimately controlled by pressure differences between the
systemic and pulmonary circulations resulting in larger or smaller volumes
of deoxygenated blood remaining in the cavum venosum during systole.

-- 1127 of 1450 --

1112 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
Large right- to- left shunts limit the amount of anesthetic uptake
early in the anesthetic period and slow anesthetic elimination at the
end of anesthesia. Such shunts can delay the induction to and recov-
ery from inhaled anesthesia. Changes in the level and direction of
shunts may account for the unexpected awakening seen in some
reptiles anesthetized with inhalant anesthetics. Intracardiac shunts
also have implications for patient monitoring, in particular airway
gas monitoring and pulse oximetry.
Blood pressure in reptiles is controlled by mechanisms similar to
those described in mammals [26]. The cardiovascular system of
reptiles responds to both cholinergic and adrenergic stimulation in
a manner similar to mammals and the presence of a baroreceptor
reflex has been described [27]. The resting blood pressures of rep-
tiles tend to be stable in the absence of external stimuli but may vary
with temperature, activity, or state of arousal [28,29]. In contrast to
mammals, systemic arterial blood pressures vary greatly among
various reptilian species, making it difficult to identify a “normal”
arterial blood pressure [26]. “Normal” blood pressure in reptiles
may be more profoundly affected by environmental stresses such as
habitat and temperature, species activity level, and size compared to
the role of these factors in influencing blood pressure in mammals.
This greater variability may originate from a reptile’s poor ability to
regulate normal homeostasis independent of temperature and
environment.
Chelonians tend to have the lowest mean arterial pressures (15–
30 mmHg) while some varanids have resting arterial pressures
similar to mammals (60–80 mmHg) [30]. In the green iguana, nor-
mal resting mean arterial blood pressures are reported to be in the
range of 40–50 mmHg while mean pulmonary arterial pressures are
in the range of 15–30 mmHg [30]. The systemic blood pressures in
snakes correspond to the gravitational stress they are likely to expe-
rience [31–33]. Snakes from arboreal habitats tend to have higher
arterial pressures than those that are primarily aquatic. An allomet-
ric relationship between arterial blood pressure and body mass has
also been described in snakes. As body mass increases, so does
blood pressure. Several anesthetics, such as sevoflurane, isoflurane,
halothane, propofol, tiletamine–zolazepam, and ketamine, have
been shown to induce cardiopulmonary changes in reptiles similar
to those seen in mammals [34–42].
Pulmonary system
The most significant difference between the respiratory physiology
of reptiles, mammals, and birds is the lower oxygen consumption
rate of reptiles. This difference reflects the lower reptilian metabolic
rate. Both reptile respiratory anatomy and physiology vary mark-
edly across species. The lungs of non-crocodilian reptiles are sus-
pended freely in the common pleuroperitoneal cavity and are not
located in a closed pleural space. In reptiles, the lungs tend to be
sac-like with varying degrees of partitioning (Fig. 57.2). Highly
aerobic species such as the varanids tend to have highly partitioned
lungs with numerous septae and invaginations that increase the
surface area for gas exchange. Chelonians and lizards tend to have
paired lungs while most snakes have a single functional right lung.
The functional units of the lung are referred to as “ediculi” and
“faveoli,” which are structures analogous to mammalian alveoli.
Most reptile lungs exhibit areas of both types of parenchyma. There
is little detail regarding the trachea and extrapulmonary bronchial
tree system in reptiles. The tracheal rings of chelonians tend to be
complete, necessitating care when placing an endotracheal tube. In
addition, the trachea may bifurcate quite proximally, so inadvertent
endobronchial intubation may occur (Fig. 57.3). Many snakes also
possess a tracheal lung, the significance of which is unclear. The
lungs of reptiles tend to have a smaller respiratory surface area rela-
tive to lung volume.
Because reptiles lack a diaphragm, they rely on the thoracic mus-
culature for ventilation. Both inspiration and expiration are active
processes so the respiratory depression associated with anesthesia
may be more profound than that observed in mammalian species
where expiration is a passive process. Because the muscles of
Figure 57.2 The lungs of many reptiles tend to be “sac-like” with a
comparatively low respiratory surface area relative to total lung volume.
However, lung structure varies markedly among species with highly
aerobic species having more partitions and invaginations to increase
respiratory surface area. The image shows the dissection of the lung in a
boid snake demonstrating the sac-like structure.
Figure 57.3 The trachea of many chelonians bifurcates quite proximally,
increasing the risk of unilateral bronchial intubation.

-- 1128 of 1450 --

Chapter 57: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Reptiles, Amphibians, and Fishes 	1113
ventilation include many of the same muscles used for locomotion,
these two functions are relatively incompatible. Chelonians are
faced with additional respiratory challenges since expansion of the
thoracic cavity by movement of the ribs is not possible. The dorsal
surface of the lungs is attached to the carapace and the ventral sur-
face is attached to the abdominal viscera. Inspiration is accom-
plished by enlarging the visceral cavity, and expiration occurs by
forcing the viscera up against the lungs, driving air out. This is
accomplished by contraction of various posterior abdominal mus-
cles and several pectoral girdle muscles.
Control of respiration
The control of respiration in reptiles is poorly understood. Both
peripheral receptor and centrally mediated control have been pro-
posed. It seems most likely that there is an interaction between a
central system, which generates the pattern of respiration and affer-
ent chemoreceptor input [43,44]. Both carbon dioxide partial pres-
sure and pH appear important for stimulating normal ventilation
but there is evidence that oxygen tension may play a role in normal
ventilation, even under normoxic conditions [45]. Although there
are some species variations, reptiles are generally viewed as episodic
breathers [46–48]. Breathing occurs in respiratory “bursts” of activ-
ity followed by a pause of varying duration. Pulmonary vascular
perfusion is also intermittent and changes in perfusion are in con-
cert with respiratory rate and rhythm [22,49,50]. Ambient tempera-
ture has variable effects on the frequency, tidal volume, and minute
ventilation [51] and due consideration should be given to maintain-
ing the optimal temperature for a particular species.
Effects of inspired carbon dioxide and oxygen
The response of reptiles to inspired carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) is quite
variable. Inspiration of greater than 4% CO2 in snakes and lizards
produces an increase in tidal volume, a decrease in respiratory fre-
quency, and an overall decrease in minute ventilation [52,53]. In
turtles, specifically Pseudemys scripta and Chrysemys picta, the
response to an increase in CO 2 is an increase in minute ventilation
as a result of increases in both respiratory frequency and tidal vol-
ume [26,54–56]. In turtles, breathing less than 21% but more than
10% oxygen produces little change in the respiratory pattern. At
fractional inspired oxygen concentrations below 10%, some species
increase ventilation while others retain their resting minute ventila-
tion. Others may decrease ventilation [48,52,57–59]. In those spe-
cies in which minute ventilation decreases or remains unchanged,
metabolic oxygen consumption decreases.
During anesthesia, most reptiles are maintained using an inhal-
ant anesthetic delivered in nearly 100% oxygen. The delivery of a
high oxygen concentration may further compound respiratory
depression by blunting the contribution of oxygen for the stimula-
tion of normal ventilation. In several reptile species, exposure to
100% oxygen significantly decreases minute ventilation [52,54,60–
62], suggesting that high inspired oxygen may be responsible for at
least some of the respiratory depression seen during anesthesia. The
magnitude of this effect is likely small compared to the effects of
anesthetics on central control of respiration and the muscles of res-
piration. However, there is some evidence that in the green iguana,
recoveries from isoflurane anesthesia may be faster when the ani-
mal is breathing room air rather than 100% oxygen, possibly by
improving ventilation and the subsequent removal of the inhalant
from the body [63]. Interestingly, in studies using Dumeril’s moni-
tors (Varanus dumerili) and bearded dragons (Pogona vitticeps), no
significant differences in recovery times from either isoflurane or
sevoflurane anesthesia were found between animals ventilated with
room air or those ventilated with 100% oxygen [64].
A newer method described to shorten the time of anesthetic
recovery from inhalant anesthesia is administration of intramuscu-
lar epinephrine. Epinephrine administered at 0.1 mg/kg IM was
shown to significantly reduce the time from cessation of inhalant
anesthesia to spontaneous ventilation and recovery in snapping tur-
tles [65]. The authors of these studies proposed that the sympatho-
mimetic effects of epinephrine may speed inhalant expulsion from
the lungs, by reducing cardiopulmonary shunting. These findings
may be relevant to other reptilian taxa.
Renal system
Reptiles cannot produce urine more concentrated than plasma,
making the excretion of nitrogenous wastes more challenging for
terrestrial reptiles. Most reptiles excrete nitrogenous waste as uric
acid (uricotelic). Some turtles and crocodilians can also excrete
urea. Uric acid is produced in the liver, and, unlike ammonia and
urea, it is very insoluble in water and is excreted as a semi-solid in
dilute urine. In the reptilian kidney tubule, urine is very dilute so
uric acid remains in solution. The cloaca forms a common conduit
for products of the urogenital and gastrointestinal systems. It is
often described as three distinct compartments but the actual
degree of anatomic separation of these compartments varies by spe-
cies. The most craniad portion is the coprodeum, which is a con-
tinuation of the terminal colon followed by the urodeum that
receives connections from the urogenital system and urinary blad-
der (if present; not all reptiles have a urinary bladder, e.g., snakes)
and the proctodeum, which is the most caudal section also com-
monly described as the vent. Dilute urine empties into the urodeum
and then into the bladder or large intestine (via the coprodeum)
where water is reabsorbed causing the uric acid to precipitate. This
results in the excretion of nitrogenous waste with relatively little
water. The bladder of some reptiles can be used for the storage of
water. Reptilian urine is not a good indicator of renal function.
Many reptiles also have specialized salt-excreting glands that
allow for the excretion of very high concentrations of sodium,
potassium, and chloride. Many reptiles living in extremely arid
locations can tolerate the marked fluctuations in total body water
and plasma osmolarity that can occur in these environments. When
faced with limited water supplies, plasma osmolarity can rise to lev-
els higher than those known in any other vertebrate species. Many
reptiles also have a renal portal system where blood from the hind
legs and tail will pass through the kidneys before returning to the
heart [66]. The effect of this system on the pharmacokinetics of
drugs seems to be of little clinical significance in healthy animals.
However, it is probably still best to avoid injection of nephrotoxic
drugs or those that are likely to be significantly metabolized by the
kidney into the hindlimbs and tail of reptiles [67].
Hepatic system
The reptilian liver appears to be similar in structure and function to
the liver of other vertebrates. Although there is little detail known
about the reptilian liver, it is assumed that it probably plays impor-
tant roles in tolerance to anaerobic metabolism, hypothermia, and
adaptation to the physical environment. The liver of reptiles has a
lower metabolic capacity compared to mammalian livers [68] and
the metabolic rate is very sensitive to changes in temperature [69].
The lower metabolic rates for the reptilian liver probably account
for at least some of the prolonged effects commonly seen with drugs
such as antibiotics. The lower metabolic capacity of the liver may

-- 1129 of 1450 --

1114 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
partly contribute to the prolonged anesthetic recoveries seen when
using drugs that require extensive hepatic metabolism for termina-
tion of their clinical effect.
Clinical anesthesia
Detailed information regarding clinical anesthesia in reptiles has
been reviewed elsewhere and the reader should consult these
references for specific information on anesthetic and analgesic
techniques, drugs, dosage, and patient monitoring recommen-
dations [1–6]. A few general concepts regarding reptile anesthe-
sia will be presented below.
Patient presentation/assessment
Regardless of species or procedure, a preanesthetic assessment
should be performed on all patients. Patient assessment should
include a complete history, species identification, and physical
examination. Any additional diagnostic tests such as blood work
and imaging should be performed as indicated. Because most anes-
thetics produce some degree of cardiopulmonary depression, ani-
mals should be physiologically stable prior to the induction of
anesthesia if possible. In some reptiles, the size, disposition, or
anatomy may prevent the performance of a physical examination.
In these animals, an assessment of body weight and general appear-
ance may assist in determining the general health status of the ani-
mal. Species identification and information on their natural habitat
may be useful. All animals should be kept at their preferred body
temperature (PBT) throughout the anesthetic period and recovery.
Performing anesthetic procedures early in the day allows animals
predisposed to prolonged recoveries to recover during regular
working hours rather than late into the night when support staff
and patient supervision may be reduced.
Routes of drug administration
Intramuscular drug administration is most common in reptiles.
Historically, hindlimb and tail sites have been avoided because of
concerns related to the first-pass effect associated with passage of
administered drugs through the kidneys via the renal portal system
during absorption. However, studies in some reptiles (turtles and
green iguanas) suggest that this may be more of a theoretical than
practical concern because only a small fraction of blood from the
hindlimbs and tail passes through the kidney [66,67]. However, it is
probably best to avoid hindlimb and tail administration of nephro-
toxic drugs. The epaxial muscles provide a suitable injection site in
most snakes. In lizards, the muscle mass of the forelimb (triceps and
biceps), hindlimb (quadriceps, semimembranosus, and semitendi-
nosus), and tail can be used. Caution should be used in species
known to autotomize (drop) their tails (many geckos), because it is
possible for an animal to “shed” their tail during handling. In chelo-
nians, injections are most often administered in the triceps muscle.
The cranial surface of the foreleg should be avoided since the prox-
imity of the radial nerve to injection sites in this area increases the
risk of damage to this nerve. The pectoral muscles can also be used,
though in many chelonian species, there is a lack of significant mus-
cle mass in this area.
While intravenous drug administration is not always feasible in
reptiles, the combination of good technique, practice, appropriate
patient selection, and skilled physical restraint can facilitate pre-
dictable access to the ventral coccygeal vein in even very small
snakes and lizards and the dorsal coccygeal vein in tortoises and
freshwater turtles. In sea turtles, the dorsal cervical sinus has
also been used for intravenous administration of drugs [70].
Intravascular injection decreases the latency of onset of action of an
administered drug. It also decreases the variability in uptake and
tissue irritation that is associated with intramuscular injections in
reptiles. Techniques for catheterization of the coccygeal vein in
both lizards and crocodilians have been described [71].
Intravenous catheterization of the coccygeal or abdominal veins
is most often performed without direct visualization. In some spe-
cies of turtles and tortoises, the jugular vein can be visualized but
this technique often requires a skin incision and blunt dissection.
Venous sinus sites are not ideal for intravenous catheter placement,
but over-the-needle catheters can be used. A small gauge wire stylet
through a needle (Seldinger technique) can be used to facilitate dif-
ficult catheterization. When required, cut-down procedures should
be performed in conjunction with a local or general anesthetic.
Lidocaine diluted down to a 1% solution with sterile saline can be
used for local infiltration. Although toxic doses have not been
determined in reptiles, it is probably best to use less than 8–10 mg/
kg. The most common sites for vascular access and associated tech-
nical tips are presented in Box 57.1.
Intraosseous catheterization has been described in the green
iguana (Iguana iguana), sea turtles, and desert tortoises [72–75].
Studies in green iguanas found similar renal uptake of the radioac-
tive substance whether administered intraosseously or intrave-
nously [72]. In desert tortoises, intraosseous administration via the
humerus resulted in delivery to the systemic circulation (84%) that
was similar to jugular administration, followed by the femur, plas-
tocarpacial junction, and the gular region of the plastron [75]. This
suggests that intraosseous drug administration is a suitable alterna-
tive to intravenous administration. To the authors’ knowledge,
propofol is the only anesthetic drug that has been studied with
intraosseous administration, but many other anesthetic and non-
anesthetic drugs have been administered successfully via this route.
Endotracheal intubation
Intubation is easily accomplished in most reptiles because the glot-
tis is in a relatively rostral position in the mouth at the base of the
tongue. A small drop of lidocaine (diluted to 1%) can be used to
desensitize the glottis and may facilitate tracheal intubation. In
some aquatic reptiles, anatomic modifications of glottal folds may
obscure direct visualization. The animal should be intubated with
the largest diameter tube that can be placed easily. The mucus of
reptiles tends to be very viscous and mucoid plugs can form in
endotracheal tubes during longer procedures. It is important that
this be recognized quickly as an inability of the lungs to fully deflate
during expiration will occur. The trachea of some chelonians bifur-
cates quite rostrally, and endobronchial intubation is possible. The
tracheal rings in chelonians and crocodiles are complete, and in
most reptiles cuffed endotracheal tubes are avoided to prevent acci-
dental overinflation and damage to the tracheal structures.
Pain, nociception, and analgesia
Analgesic management of reptiles is challenging as a result of their
unique physiologic, anatomic, and behavioral adaptations. Reptile
pain and nociception have not been extensively studied, although
there is compelling evidence that reptiles are capable of nocicep-
tion. However, the sensory significance of nociception to the indi-
vidual is poorly understood. Pain is normally defined as “an
unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated with, or
resembling that associated with, actual or potential tissue dam-
age” [76]. By this definition, pain is essentially an emotional experi-
ence. Arguably, it is impossible to describe this experience in

-- 1130 of 1450 --

Chapter 57: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Reptiles, Amphibians, and Fishes 	1115
reptiles given our current level of understanding and available tech-
nology. However, undoubtedly reptiles experience noxious insults
as some sort of negative event and modify their behavior to escape
such insults. A more robust and inclusive definition of pain may be
more appropriate when describing pain in non-human animals.
For example, the following definition of pain would avoid the emo-
tional aspects associated with the human definition and yet is
suitably robust to encompass a range of experiences reasonably
expected to result in what we might refer to as pain in a human: “a
sensory experience representing awareness of damage or the poten-
tial for tissue damage that results in a behavioral and physiologic
response to minimize/prevent the recurrence and promote healing
of damage” (modified from Molony [77]). The experience of pain in
non-human animals may be similar to the experience in humans
but it is important to consider that among classes and species of
animals, pain may differ quantitatively and qualitatively.
There are many gaps present in our understanding of reptile
nociception, pain, consciousness, and suffering and although
tempting, extrapolation from other vertebrate lineages should be
undertaken cautiously. Reptiles have undergone millions of years
of independent biologic evolution, separate from other vertebrate
classes. While it is appealing to assume that all lineages of
vertebrates have evolved similar survival strategies, it may also
be somewhat presumptuous. It is true that the ability to sense
noxious stimulus or potentially damaging stimuli is arguably
necessary for the survival of all animals (invertebrates and verte-
brates), but it is the significance of this sensation to the individual
that remains less clear. Does the ability to perceive and suffer from
pain, as defined in human terms, offer an evolutionary or biologic
advantage to all animals or only some animals (i.e., humans)?
Unfortunately, this is a complex and elusive question but one that
nonetheless merits investigation. Regardless of an animal’s ability
to experience pain and suffering as a negative emotional response,
the aim should be to limit the biologic perturbations associated
with the physiologic (nociceptive) processing accompanying a
noxious stimulus.
Evidence for pain in reptiles
Various criteria have been used to evaluate the balance of evidence
for the presence or absence of pain in animals. These criteria as they
pertain to reptiles are briefly described below.
Presence of nociceptors
The origination of the sensation associated with a noxious stimulus,
transduction, occurs in specialized sensory nerve endings called
“nociceptors.” Primarily nociceptive neurons (slowly adapting poly-
modal C fibers) have not been identified in reptiles. However, there
is no evidence in the literature that they have been sought and not
found but rather no one has looked specifically for these types of
fibers. However, high-threshold Aδ mechanical nociceptors [78]
Box 57.1 Sites for intravascular access in reptiles.
Squamates (snakes)
• The coccygeal vein is located on the ventral midline of the tail. The needle
should be inserted sufficiently caudal to the vent in order to avoid the
hemipenes and anal sacs. The vessel is entered via a ventral midline
approach and the needle is advanced with gentle suction until either the
vein or the vertebral body is contacted.
• The jugular vein can be used but requires a skin incision to visualize. An
incision is made 4–7 scutes cranial to the heart at the junction of the
ventral scutes and lateral body scales. The vein is then identified using
blunt dissection just medial to the tips of the ribs.
• The palatine vein is easily visualized in larger snakes and is located medial
to the palatine teeth in the roof of the mouth. The technique is greatly
facilitated by short-term anesthesia, but it is possible to collect blood from
these vessels in awake animals using a mouth speculum.
• Use of the heart for drug administration is not recommended except for
emergency situations.
• There are to our knowledge no intraosseous sites described for drug
administration in snakes.
Squamates (lizards)
• The coccygeal vein is located on the ventral midline of the tail. The needle
should be inserted sufficiently caudal to the vent in order to avoid the
hemipenes. The vessel can be entered from either a ventral midline
approach or laterally. The ventral approach is simple to perform: the needle
is advanced with gentle suction until the vein, or a vertebral body is
contacted. The lateral technique involves inserting the needle just ventral
to the transverse process of the vertebral body and walking the needle
ventral until the vein is contacted.
• The ventral abdominal vein is located on the ventral midline of the
abdomen and can be entered percutaneously or via a small skin incision
for direct visualization of the vessel.
• The cephalic vein is located on the dorsal surface of the distal foreleg.
A skin incision is generally required for visualization.
• The jugular vein is located on the lateral surface of the neck at about the
level of the tympanum. It may be palpated in some species but is generally
difficult to visualize. A small skin incision is often required for direct
visualization. The jugular veins tend to be located more dorsal than those
in mammals. There is a large lymphatic sinus close to the vein and
contamination with this lymph fluid occurs frequently.
• Intraosseous techniques have been described for the distal femur, proximal
tibia, and proximal humerus. The techniques are similar to those described
for other small animal patients.
Chelonians (turtles and tortoises)
• The dorsal coccygeal vein is located midline dorsal to the coccygeal
vertebrae. It is a technique requiring minimal restraint. The needle is
introduced in a craniad direction at a 45–90º angle from the skin.
• The dorsal cervical sinus (supravertebral) is located on the dorsolateral
aspect of the neck in sea turtles. It is located one-third the distance from
the carapace to the head, cranial to the cranial edge of the carapace. The
head is directed forward and down, and the needle is introduced lateral to
the midline on either side.
• The occipital venous sinus has been described in freshwater turtles and is
located on midline ventral to the supraoccipital crest. It requires that the
head be restrained firmly and in an extended ventroflexed (45–90º angle
from the carapace) position. The needle is then introduced midline just
caudal to the occiput and nearly perpendicular to the spine. Lymph
contamination is a possibility.
• The subcarpacal sinus or supravertebral sinus is located under the carapace,
just caudal to the last cervical vertebra and craniad to the first thoracic
vertebra. This sinus can be approached by pressing the head into the shell
and palpating for the first thoracic vertebra (incorporated into the carapace).
The needle should be directed through the skin just caudal to the juncture of
the last cervical vertebra up toward the carapace and first thoracic vertebra.
• The jugular veins are located on the lateral sides of the neck at about the
level of the tympanum. In some species, venipuncture of the jugular vein is
relatively straightforward and can be visualized or a small skin incision can
be made to facilitate direct visualization. Unfortunately, this technique
requires the neck to be fully extended, and in uncooperative animals, a
short-acting anesthetic or tranquilizer may be required.
• Intraosseous techniques have been described using the plastron/plastron
bridge, but needles/catheters may end up in an intracoelomic rather than
intraosseous position. The technique is described as passing a needle at an
angle through the bony bridge between the plastron and carapace.

-- 1131 of 1450 --

1116 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
and C fiber mechanical nociceptors [79] have been identified in one
species of snake. These fibers are nociceptors capable of transmit-
ting nociceptive information.
Ascending transmission pathways
Spinothalamic projections analogous to the neospinothalamic (fast
pain) and paleospinothalamic (slow pain) tracts have been identi-
fied [80] in reptiles and are presumed to be capable of transmitting
nociceptive information from the body to the brain. Trigeminal
tracts have also been identified [78,81] that may be capable of trans-
mitting pain from the head to the brain. Unfortunately, there are no
functional studies examining the role of these pathways in nocicep-
tive processing.
Brain structures
Reptiles appear to possess brain structures necessary for experi-
encing pain (neocortex) and morphologically there are direct
spinal connections to the brainstem and dorsal thalamus in the
midbrain. However, once again functional studies are lacking,
and it is possible and even likely that brain processing of informa-
tion may occur differently in different animals. For example, in
some animals, smell and vision are highly developed and vast
regions of the brain are dedicated to these activities, possibly pro-
ducing sensations far beyond those a human could experience or
even imagine.
It has been suggested that differences in reptiles’ brain systems
compared to birds and mammals may be ones of degrees of elabora-
tion rather than presence or absence [82]. It is possible that the
response to a noxious stimulus in reptiles is associated with less
fidelity and scope compared to mammals. Perhaps a reptile’s “emo-
tions” and the experience of pain are an “all or none” phenomena
(rage or no rage, pain or no pain) rather than the graded experi-
ences of human emotions (rage, anger, irritation, discontent, neu-
tral, happiness, etc.). Certainly, humans describe a range of painful
experiences from those that are simply a mild irritant to those that
are intolerable.
Nociceptive receptors and substances
The opioid system has been well studied in reptiles and the
presence of opioid receptors and endogenous opioids has been
described [83–85]. Their exact role, receptor subtypes present,
and their anatomic locations are somewhat less clear. Although
opioids are important for modulating the neural processing of
noxious stimuli, they also play roles in many other body systems,
such as the reproductive, thermoregulatory, gastrointestinal, and
circadian systems. In addition, several nociceptive-related neuro-
peptides (i.e., glutamate, substance P, and calcitonin gene-related
peptide) have been identified in reptiles but their functions are
not well elucidated.
Known analgesic actions on nociceptive or nocifensive behaviors
It is important to note that behavioral evidence does not always sug-
gest awareness or conscious recognition of the nociceptive stimulus
(i.e., pain perception). Many of the tests used to examine an ani-
mal’s response to a known or presumptive analgesic are actually
measuring the effect the substance has on the animal’s nociceptive
or nocifensive response. “Nocifensive” is a poorly defined term that
is sometimes used to describe the unconscious withdrawal or
movement away from a noxious stimulus. It is a response that can
occur below the level of consciousness and hence differs from the
response associated specifically with pain perception.
Several experimental studies have examined the response of
reptiles to substances known to be analgesic in mammals, primarily
opioids. These studies have involved evaluating responses to vari-
ous types of noxious stimuli, including thermal, mechanical, and
chemical irritation. In general, these studies suggest that opioids
reduce the response to some of these stimuli, although there is
inconsistency among the different experimental nociceptive mod-
els used, the response of different reptile species to similar testing
situations, and the drugs themselves.
It must be noted that the inability to demonstrate a reduction in
the nociceptive responses of an animal when administered a sub-
stance known to be analgesic in humans, or other animals, does
not necessarily mean the substance has no effect on nociception,
only that it did not have an effect given the specific experimental
design used. There are numerous factors (i.e., dose, specific nocic-
eptive model used, species, personnel involved, and experimental
conditions) that can affect the results, and broad generalizations
based on a single experiment should be made cautiously. For
example, when reptiles are in the presence of something or some-
one that might be perceived as a threat (e.g., human), the reptile
may appear to “ignore” or minimize the significance of the noxious
stimulus (e.g., heat) and hence their measurable responses to this
insult. Tonic immobility is often used to describe the antipredator
behavior demonstrated by many prey species. This response is
associated with modulation of ascending nociceptive pathways
that appear to have an antinociceptive effect [86–88]. The lack of
normal response to a noxious stimulus could certainly influence
the results of an experiment and should be considered when
designing and evaluating experiments. However, with accumulat-
ing work and evidence, some trends useful for clinical decision-
making are being discovered.
Avoidance learning
There are no known studies of avoidance learning in response to a
noxious stimulus in reptiles.
Suspension of normal behavior
Although there are no specific studies that have examined the
suspension of normal behaviors in reptiles, experiencing what one
might call pain, there is reasonable anecdotal information from cli-
nicians and reptile owners. These experiences suggest that a reptile’s
normal behaviors (eating, basking, and social interaction) are
altered by animal pain and the provision of an appropriate analgesic
will hasten the resumption of these normal behaviors compared to
allowing the animal’s discomfort to diminish naturally. Of course,
this is anecdotal, and the observations are undoubtedly influenced
by preconceived biases and beliefs, including a belief that analgesics
can hasten recovery from pain.
Amphibian anesthesia
Providing anesthesia and analgesia for amphibians is a challenge for
most clinicians but due to the growing popularity of amphibians as
pets, it is an increasingly needed service. Amphibians are also used
extensively in laboratory research and display exhibitions and from
an animal welfare aspect, it is necessary to provide this service with
knowledge and skill. A solid understanding of anatomy and physi-
ology of the wide variety of species in this group of animals is essen-
tial for providing good perioperative anesthesia care.
The class Amphibia has three orders with over 4500 species and
newly discovered species are added every year [89,90]. The order

-- 1132 of 1450 --

Chapter 57: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Reptiles, Amphibians, and Fishes 	1117
Anura represents frogs and toads (over 3500 living species), the
order Caudata (around 375 species) includes salamanders, newts,
and sirens, and the order Gymnophiona includes the caecilians (88
species) [89]. Each species has its own anatomic and physiologically
unique features and extrapolations from one species to the other are
not always possible. In addition, there are a limited number of stud-
ies to help guide anesthesia and pain management in amphibians.
Anatomy and physiology
Metamorphosis
Amphibians change significantly throughout their life with a meta-
morphosis from strictly aquatic egg and larval stages to an adult
stage that can be terrestrial, semi-aquatic, or aquatic [91]. This
metamorphosis includes the loss of the tail and gills, development
of lungs, transformation from a two-chambered to a three-
chambered heart, and development of four legs [91–93]. The
unique features that stand out in amphibians are the multiple forms
of breathing (gills, lungs, skin, and buccopharyngeal), the three-
chambered heart, semipermeable skin, a renal portal system, and
ectothermic temperature regulation.
Metabolism and thermoregulation
Amphibians are ectotherms. Each species has a preferred optimum
temperature and has limited tolerance to temperature changes.
Changes will affect metabolism, fluid regulation, and activity lev-
els [94]. In general, amphibians require cooler temperatures than
reptiles, and ambient temperatures of 23.8–26.7 °C (75–80 °F) are
reported to be an acceptable range for most species during the peri-
anesthetic period [92,94]. Species-specific needs (tropical versus
subtropical species) should be identified, and temperatures
adjusted. To optimize ambient humidity, levels should be main-
tained above 70% [92].
Cardiovascular system
The cardiovascular system of adult amphibians is composed of a
three-chambered heart, an arterial/venous vascular system, and an
extensive lymphatic system, in comparison to tadpoles that only
have a two-chambered heart and a single loop circulation system,
similar to fish [93]. The adult amphibian heart has two atria and one
ventricle and is considered to have an incomplete double circula-
tion [95,96]. The heart lies internally underneath the pectoral girdle
and sternum and a heartbeat can be visualized on the ventral surface
(midline just caudal to the level of the animal’s shoulder) [91,93].
The right atrium is larger than the left atrium in all amphibians and
the ventricle is thick-walled with numerous trabeculae found in
many species [93]. In caudatans, the interatrial septum can be
incomplete (fenestrated) but in anurans it is complete [92,93].
All of the venous blood arrives at the sinus venosus and enters
the right atrium [95,96]. The arterialized blood flows into the left
atrium and both atria empty into the one ventricle. During ven-
tricular systole, the blood is pumped into the bulbus cordis from
where three main arteries leave (carotid artery, aorta, and pulmocu-
taneous artery) [95–97]. The carotid artery sends oxygenated blood
to the head, the aorta sends oxygenated mixed blood to the body,
and the pulmocutaneous artery sends mostly venous blood to
skin and lungs to pick up oxygen [96–98]. The ventricle in frogs,
toads, and salamanders is anatomically one ventricle but is func-
tionally divided due to the slit-like trabecular meshwork, that keeps
arterial (oxygenated) blood on the left side of the ventricle and
venous (desaturated) blood on the right side by creating a laminar
flow pattern and preventing mixing during contraction [96–100].
Additionally, a spiral valve in the bulbus cordis will create spiral
streaming of blood flow and direction of more oxygenated blood to
the carotid artery and aorta from the left side of the ventricle, while
the pulmocutaneous arteries receive more venous blood [96]. The
septa between the three different arteries also help guide the blood
flow, depending on cardiac output [96,100].
The amphibian lymphatic system is characterized by a high rate
of lymph production and flow and functions to drain fluid from
tissues and return it to the circulation [101]. The lymphatic system
includes lymph hearts that lie in junctions of veins, and which beat
irregularly or synchronously at 50–60 beats per min depending on
the fluid status of the animal [101]. Various numbers of lymph
hearts are present depending on species. Frogs and salamanders
have fewer (i.e., 4–20) than caecilians (i.e., 100–200) [93]. These
lymph hearts function to preserve unidirectional flow of lymph
back to the heart and to return proteins to the circulation [93,101].
Lymph is mainly formed from plasma filtration as well as transcu-
taneous water uptake. Lymph collects in large subcutaneous lymph
sacs (especially in anurans) and flows through afferent pores into
the lymph hearts [101]. The lymph sacs can give indications of dis-
ease and fluid load when enlarged [92,94,101].
Both salamanders and anurans have a renal portal system and a
hepatic portal system [93,94,97,102]. For the renal portal system,
the veins from the hindlegs of the animal unite into the Jacobson’s
veins, which are paired and flow through the kidneys before enter-
ing the postcaval vein. Blood that flows through the hepatic portal
vein system will flow from the ventral abdominal vein through the
liver before entering the postcaval vein and returning to the heart.
The factors that regulate the renal portal system are not fully under-
stood, but the renal portal and hepatic portal systems may impact
the pharmacokinetics of drugs that are administered in the hindlegs
or tail (first-pass effect), so anesthetics are in some instances prefer-
entially injected into the front end of the animal.
Specific vessels for venipuncture in amphibians are the ventral
abdominal vein, the femoral and lingual veins (lingual venous
plexus on underside of tongue in anurans), and the tail vein in cau-
datans [90,103]. Depending on the size of the animal, these can be
used for blood collection or administration of anesthetic agents.
Respiratory system
Adult amphibians have up to four different modes of respiration.
Most prominent are pulmonic and cutaneous gas exchange and
buccopharyngeal (gular or guttural) breathing [93]. Aquatic sala-
manders also breathe via external gills (branchial mode) [93]. The
buccal cavity and pharynx are used for gas exchange and can either
be viewed as an extension of cutaneous respiration or its own entity
due to its specific muscular pumping activity and unique vascular
supply [93]. Cutaneous respiration is possible due to a large surface
area (often increased via skinfolds), a very thin and semi-permeable
epidermis, and a dermis that is highly vascularized [93]. This form
of breathing is important as it is an efficient form of respiration dur-
ing anesthesia.
The anatomic lungs in amphibians come in various shapes and
sizes from small simple sac-like structures (aquatic species) to sac-
culated forms with alveoli in the anterior lung area (terrestrial spe-
cies) [93]. The lungs are located cranially in amphibians following a
short trachea with cartilaginous rings. The lungs have pulmonic
epithelium that can easily be damaged with overventilation, or an
endotracheal tube placed too far distally [91,104]. Endotracheal
tubes should be advanced just past the larynx [90,91,93,104]. The
mode of respiration may change in various species depending on

-- 1133 of 1450 --

1118 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
environmental oxygen and carbon dioxide tensions [103,105].
When administered 100% oxygen, the animal commonly stops
breathing through their lungs or via the buccopharyngeal move-
ments and primarily relies on cutaneous respiration [103]. This
complicates assessment of anesthetic depth, ventilation, and oxy-
genation. For cutaneous respiration to be efficient, the skin must be
kept moist [94]. The permeability of the skin for gas exchange varies
in different species (toads have thicker and less permeable skin).
Cutaneous system and fluid regulation
Amphibian skin is an important organ for immune functions and
water regulation [92]. Evaporation through the skin is a major con-
tributing factor to water loss (particularly on the dorsal sur-
face) [92,94]. Uptake of water from the environment is managed
from the ventral surface, including a functional structure in the pel-
vic area called the “drinking patch,” which contributes 80% of water
uptake in anurans [94]. Only a very small percentage of water intake
is from gastrointestinal uptake; therefore, oral fluid supplementation
will be less effective than keeping an animal moist by soaking in an
appropriate fluid (e.g., isotonic or hypotonic water) [92,94].
Osmolality of the environmental fluid is particularly important in
aquatic amphibians as the difference between external fluid and
plasma osmolality will determine water regulation and movement.
Amphibians can change the composition of their plasma to tolerate
fluctuations in water osmolality, but an imbalance can lead to vol-
ume overload when the kidneys are compromised [94]. The high
permeability of amphibian skin allows for absorption of exogenous
compounds such as drugs and toxic substances.
Clinical anesthesia
Preanesthetic considerations
Species- specific knowledge about the particular amphibian patient
is helpful for anesthesia planning and delivery. Using hypothermia
is outdated and providing adequate anesthesia and analgesia is the
standard of care. There is still a need for species-specific studies for
amphibians as well as clinical anesthesia publications.
Physical examination and restraint
The amphibian patient should be evaluated before anesthesia, similar
to any other species, to detect abnormalities that may increase the
risk of anesthetic complications. Observation in its enclosure will
provide information on general activity level and demeanor, breath-
ing pattern, and hydration. Due to the sensitivity of the amphibian
skin, premoistened and talc-free latex or nitrile gloves should be
worn when handling to reduce the risk of skin damage and transfer of
pathogens and toxins to or from both handler and animal [90,92,103].
Secretion of toxins from the skin is common in many amphibian spe-
cies and can lead to irritation, various degrees of illness, and poten-
tially death (some poisonous frogs can produce lethal toxins) [92,103].
Other skin secretions of some species can be gluey or foul-smelling,
which are difficult to remove from the handler and cause discom-
fort [103]. Some species are able to expel their secretion over quite a
distance and protective eyewear should be considered [103].
The water/fluids used to moisten the gloves and the water used to
keep the animal wet should be distilled and dechlorinated to pre-
vent chlorine uptake via the skin [90–92,103]. Some handlers also
suggest coating the gloves with a non-toxic water-soluble gel to pro-
vide better skin protection in species with delicate skin [103].
Amphibians often show an instinctive flight response and should
be gently restrained to prevent falling or escape. Restraint should be
as brief, efficient, stress-free, comfortable, and safe for the animal as
possible. Some species struggle, others cease in resignation,
although a potential sudden burst of activity to escape should
always be anticipated [103]. In animals that seem very stressed and
difficult to restrain, a clear plastic or glass jar or plastic bag can be
used to facilitate the handling. Many anurans tend to fill themselves
with air when they are stressed, which can make a physical exami-
nation more difficult [92]. Often amphibians urinate when stressed
or handled and the lack of this behavior may be an indication of
dehydration [92]. Dehydrated amphibians show skin tenting and
sunken eyes, feel tacky, and show decreased activity and mentation,
so rehydration is important before attempting anesthesia [92].
Restraint is successfully performed in caudatans by encircling the
animal behind their forelimbs with the index finger and thumb
with the remaining fingers enclosing the body [90,103]. Salamanders
have a tail autotomy reflex so the tail should be handled with
care [90,103]. Some anurans can bite, and bigger species can be held
by grasping them on a skinfold on their back behind the front legs
or by holding them immediately anterior to the hindlegs with one
hand and around the front legs with the second hand [90,103].
Sometimes chemical immobilization is necessary for a thorough
physical examination.
Hypocalcemia is a common problem in amphibians and the
hypocalcemic animal may present with tetany, muscle fasciculations,
paresis, gastrointestinal stasis, and bloating [94]. Hypocalcemia can
be treated with calcium gluconate in a bath as calcium is readily taken
up via the skin [92,94]. Blood chemistry analysis is not generally done
before anesthesia to minimize stress of restraint but can be done after
induction if a more thorough clinical evaluation is desired.
Fasting
In general, fasting is not necessary as amphibians can maintain a
closed larynx and risk of aspiration is minimal. Fasting is reserved
for species that eat large rodent prey, and recommendations are to
fast these species for 24–48 h prior to anesthesia to decrease risk of
ileus and facilitate visualization during coelomic procedures [91].
Anesthetic agents
There are various anesthetic drugs that can be used in amphibians.
Selection depends on the procedure to be performed, level of
immobilization needed, and duration of anesthesia. Options for
topical/cutaneous administration include immersion in tricaine
methanesulfonate (MS-222), clove oil and its derivatives, volatile
anesthetics, and less commonly, benzocaine. Injectable agents,
including alfaxalone, have gained popularity and allowed for a con-
trolled administration of individual bolus doses.
MS-222 is the most commonly used immersion agent and seems
to have a wide margin of safety in most species. Due to the acidic
pH of MS-222, it does require buffering with sodium bicarbonate in
amphibians to avoid pain or tissue damage [91,106,107]. Despite
the wide use of MS-222 in anurans, objective evaluation of the
drug’s physiologic effects is limited. In African clawed frogs
(Xenopus laevis), MS- 222 at 1 g/L provided surgical anesthesia for
30 min and 2 g/L for 60 min. Both concentrations caused pro-
nounced respiratory depression, but no decrease in heart rate or
oxygen saturation and no histological organ damage [108].
Clove oil and its derivative compounds eugenol and isoeugenol
exhibit different species-specific responses in amphibians [109]. A
common side-effect is gastric prolapse, which might be due to the
pungent taste of clove oil [110]. Clove oil is administered via immer-
sion and might cause cutaneous necrosis in some species when
administered directly on the skin of the animal [111].

-- 1134 of 1450 --

Chapter 57: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Reptiles, Amphibians, and Fishes 	1119
When comparing the effects of MS-222, clove oil, and ketamine–
diazepam on the stress response in cane toads (Rhinella
marina) [112], it was noted that clove oil resulted in a much greater
elevation in serum corticosterone compared to the other two proto-
cols. When comparing clove oil (450 ppm) to injectable propofol
(25 or 35 mg/kg intracoelomic) in tiger salamanders (Ambystoma
tigrinum), both drugs provided surgical anesthesia, while clove oil
had a faster onset of action and longer duration [110]. When propo-
fol (35 mg/kg intracoelomic) was compared to MS-222 (1 g/L as a
bath) in Sonoran desert toads (Bufo alvarius), MS- 222 produced
surgical anesthesia in 100% of toads, whereas propofol produced
surgical anesthesia in 11% [113].
Topical (cutaneous) administration of various agents such as
sevoflurane or isoflurane liquid mixed in KY jelly has been reported
and seems to have species-specific variability in effect [114].
Isoflurane can also be bubbled through the water via an anesthetic
delivery system (routine anesthesia machine) [114]. This method
has the disadvantage of high exposure levels of waste gases for
humans in the surrounding environment. To decrease the risk,
sealed containers should be used, which conversely makes handling
the patient difficult. Induction times are slow and recovery times
are rapid as soon as the patient is removed from the bath [91].
Parenteral injections of propofol, alfaxalone, ketamine, or α2
-
adrenergic receptor agonists have been reported, but show wide
species- specific variability, unpredictable inductions and recover-
ies, and undesirable mortality rates [91,115]. Propofol can be used
in the form of an immersion bath for chemical restraint and seda-
tion (but not surgical anesthesia) [116]. In recent years, alfaxalone
anesthesia has had considerable appeal to amphibian anesthetists
due to the ease of intramuscular administration and short duration
of action. In American bullfrogs, intramuscular alfaxalone pro-
duced immobilization in frogs but did not provide sufficient anes-
thesia to prevent response to noxious stimuli. In the same study,
bath immersion in alfaxalone (2 g/L) for up to 30 min did not result
in anesthesia [115]. Neither propofol nor alfaxalone are appropriate
sole agents for painful procedures and additional analgesic drugs
should be used. Premedication can be done in some species but is
not routinely performed. However, the administration of an analge-
sic with or without a sedative before induction may be beneficial,
particularly in larger species.
Monitoring
Heart rate (HR), respiration rate, and anesthetic depth are most
commonly monitored during amphibian anesthesia. As normal
HRs differ between species, a baseline HR should ideally be
obtained in the individual before anesthesia. If this is not practical
due to stress on the animal, a baseline HR should be taken immedi-
ately after induction so trends can be identified. HR can be obtained
by visualization or with the help of a small Doppler probe placed
over the heart (at the xiphoid process of the sternum). An electro-
cardiogram can show good tracings of electrical events, but care
should be taken to avoid skin damage with alligator clips or elec-
trode patches. Hypodermic needles (27 gauge) can be inserted
through the skin and alligator clips then fastened to the needles.
The esophageal ECG (single probe) is an excellent alternative to the
external ECG set up [107]. Knowledge of normal HRs in specific
amphibian species is limited, although it is generally accepted that,
overall, amphibians have relatively low HR values (approximately
50 beats per min) [94].
Under anesthesia, HR trends will provide information about the
animal’s status. A sudden drop or a slow decrease in HR over time
suggests an increase in depth and adjustments to anesthetic admin-
istration should be made. Adjustments are made by changing the
anesthetic concentration of the bath (diluting or, in case of a desired
increase in depth, concentrating the anesthetic agent in the solu-
tion). Alternatively, syringes filled with desired anesthetic concen-
trations can be premade and used as needed to lighten or deepen
the anesthetic depth via flushing the solution over the skin of the
amphibian [91].
The stages of anesthesia have been reported by various clini-
cians [91,103,104]. Cessation of movement and loss of the righting
reflex is often the first indication that anesthetic induction is com-
plete. A light stage is assumed when the righting reflex is lost, and
abdominal breathing movement stopped. Surgical anesthetic depth
is reached when the withdrawal reflex is lost (e.g., no response to
toe pinch in hindleg) and no gular respiration is present. Gular res-
piration can be visualized as the movement under the mandible and
along the ventral neck. Although apnea is common (i.e., no visible
gular and/or abdominal breathing), cutaneous respiration is still
present as long as the dermis is kept moist to enable gas
exchange [91]. Intubation is commonly not necessary unless it is a
larger species with poor permeability of the dermis or other con-
cerns about oxygenation are present [91]. A narrow glottis can
make intubation challenging [107]. Due to the short trachea, the
endotracheal tube should not be advanced too far beyond the lar-
ynx. Pulse oximetry has not yet been validated in amphibians, so it
is primarily used to monitor trends (Fig. 57.4). Intraoperative sup-
port is provided by assuring that adequate thermal support, ade-
quate fluid uptake, and adequate analgesia for painful procedures
are addressed.
Recovery
The recovery phase in amphibians can be prolonged and close
monitoring may reduce complications. Any residual topical anes-
thetic should be rinsed off and the animal should be recovered on
room air. The surface and skin should be kept moist with fluid.
Withdrawal reflexes will return first with an increase in gular respi-
ration. The righting reflex should strengthen, and the animal should
start moving around with improving coordination. Most recoveries
are smooth and rather slow, but some amphibians may go through
a phase of excitement and erratic movements and require monitor-
ing to prevent injuries. The animal should only be returned to its
normal environment when fully recovered to prevent accidental
drowning [90,107].
Analgesia is an important aspect of adequate anesthesia manage-
ment in any species, including amphibians. Research has demon-
strated that amphibians have a well-established endogenous opioid
system and that opioids are effective in providing pain relief [117–
120]. Behavior studies demonstrate an alteration of behavior and
avoidance of painful stimuli, suggesting that amphibians have a
sense of discomfort [121,122]. The nociceptive structures and path-
ways present in some amphibian species are comparable to those in
mammals [123,124]. The afferent sensory fibers of frogs show the
same characteristics as mammalian sensory afferent fibers: large
and medium myelinated A fibers, small myelinated B fibers, and
small unmyelinated C fibers, [122,123,125]. The sensory afferent
fibers then connect in the dorsal area of the frog’s spinal
cord [123,126]. Neurotransmitters associated with nociceptive
transmission (e.g., substance P and glutamate) and endorphinergic
neurons to inhibit the release of substance P are also present in the
amphibian spinal cord. It has also been recognized that peripheral
sensitization to noxious stimuli can occur [122,127,128]. Opioid

-- 1135 of 1450 --

1120 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
receptors and endogenous opioid peptides are highly evolved in the
amphibian brain and spinal cord [120,122,123,129].
Dermorphin is a potent amphibian-specific opioid compound
that is present in the skin of certain South American frog spe-
cies [122,130–132]. It is considered to be 40 times more potent than
morphine with its main activity as a full μ-opioid receptor ago-
nist [131]. Deltorphine, another endogenous opioid peptide pro-
duced in the skin of another frog genus, acts as a potent δ- opioid
receptor agonist [131]. The functional role of dermorphin in
amphibians is not clear, but it has been speculated to play a role in
protection from predators or be involved in hibernation.
The ascending nociceptive pathways from the spinal cord to
the brain are not fully understood in amphibians [123] and the
projection to the telencephalon seems less organized but is recog-
nized [107]. The perception of pain and subsequent suffering in
amphibians is an ongoing debate due to the lack of a cerebral and/
or limbic cortex [122,123,125]. Independent of that debate, noci-
ception appears to be well developed and analgesics should be
used when painful procedures are performed to prevent any
physiologic and pathophysiologic consequences of the upregula-
tion of the nociceptive pathway, including a significant stress
response.
Various studies have been performed to assess efficacy of differ-
ent analgesic agents [92,121,124,133–137]. Most recommenda-
tions come from studies conducted with acetic acid applied to the
skin as the noxious stimulus [124]. Very little research has focused
on clinical analgesia, but some recommendations have been made
by clinicians who perform amphibian anesthesia in clinical set-
tings. It should be kept in mind that species-specific differences
are likely present and that extrapolation from one species to the
next may be associated with varying effects in onset, duration, and
efficacy.
All opioids (including butorphanol, morphine, buprenorphine,
and fentanyl) seem to have a dose-dependent effect with relatively
long durations and lower margins of safety at high doses compared
to other domesticated species [92,121,124,133,134]. The α2
-
adrenergic receptor agonists (e.g., xylazine and dexmedetomidine)
also provide long-lasting analgesia and can be used without pro-
ducing immobilization [124,135–137].
Fish anesthesia
There have been significant advances in fish anesthesia over the
past 15 to 20 years with enhanced understanding of species-specific
physiology in response to anesthesia [138,139]. To date, there are
over 30,000 different species of fish with dissimilar anatomy and
physiology that are adapted to various diverse aquatic ecosystems.
Their classification is constantly changing but currently, 4500 gen-
era, 515 families, and 62 orders are recognized.
The teleosts (jawed fish) are the biggest group among fish. Other
less common groups are the ray-finned fishes (Acinopteryii), lobe-
finned fishes (Sarcopterygii), and jawless fishes (Agnatha) [139,140].
A daunting number of differences in relation to water temperature,
water quality and salinity, behavior, and response to drugs make
anesthesia in fish a challenge [139].
Anatomy and physiology
Respiratory system
Most fish use gills for respiration, but various adaptations have been
made in many fish species depending on oxygen (O2
) availability
and demand. The gills are located behind the head in the buccal
cavity and are covered by a sturdy flap (e.g., the operculum in bony
fish) for protection. A gill consists of a gill arch, a filament, and a
comprehensive vascular system. These highly folded, highly vascu-
lar, and very thin membranes make for efficient gas exchange. The
vascular anatomy consists of a branchial basket, that arises from the
aorta, and afferent branchial arteries that branch off to supply the
arch and bifurcate further into afferent filamental arteries, which
end at the tip of the filament [141]. The afferent filamental arteries
then branch into afferent lamellar arterioles to supply the lamella.
Blood flows through the lamella via various channels and blood
gases (O 2 and CO 2
) are variably exchanged depending on maximal
surface area contact, changes in blood flow velocity, and optimal O2
gradient tensions. The short efferent lamellar arterioles arise and
provide blood flow back into efferent filamental arteries and at the
base of the filament the blood flows into the efferent branchial
arteries that later form the lateral aorta [141]. These vessels are the
arterio-arterial circulation. A countercurrent system to optimize
oxygen uptake is present in many fish. The venous blood moves in
the opposite direction to the water, to create a more favorable
Figure 57.4 Surgical monitoring of a Smokey jungle frog (Leptodactylus pentodactylus). A two-lead ECG is used to monitor heart rate and rhythm, and a
pulse oximeter has been placed on the left hind foot for approximation of hemoglobin oxygen saturation. The animal is tracheally intubated and
monitored with capnography. Capnography and pulse oximetry have not yet been validated for many reptile and amphibian species, but have been used to
monitor trends. Source: Dr. Sathya Chinnadurai, with permission.

-- 1136 of 1450 --

Chapter 57: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Reptiles, Amphibians, and Fishes 	1121
gradient between the oxygen in the blood and water to maximize
uptake [141]. The fish will draw in water through its mouth (flap
over the gills is closed) and the water is pushed out over the gills by
closing the mouth and opening the gill cover. Some species force
water over the gills to achieve more efficient ventilation for
increased metabolic demand and varying degrees of this ram venti-
lation are used in specific species (rhythmic movements of lower
jaw and opercula or consistent movement through water) [139,142].
The number of gills varies in different species (e.g., 3–7 arches).
Additional functions of the gills include osmoregulation, nitrogen
excretion, hormone metabolism, and acid–base regulation [141].
The skin also functions as a respiratory organ. Highly vascular
skin, particularly in the young, can facilitate diffusion of gases.
This ability is species-dependent but can constitute up to 30% of
respiration in some [143]. Therefore, skin should be handled
carefully and with wet gloves to prevent damage. Various other
modifications and adaptations have evolved in different fish spe-
cies and a thorough knowledge of these species-specific respira-
tory functions is crucial to understand their potential impact on
anesthesia [139].
Cardiovascular system
The cardiovascular system in fish is considered a single-cycle closed-
loop circulation system. This means that the four-chambered heart
pumps blood in a single circuit through the body, picking up oxygen
on the way through the gills. The heart itself consists of a sinus veno-
sus, a single atrium, a ventricle, and a bulbus arteriosus. It is com-
monly referred to as a “two-chambered heart” or a “four-chambered
heart arranged in series” [144]. Blood is pumped out of the single-
chambered ventricle into the bulbus arteriosus through a pair of
ventricular-bulbar valves at the ventricular-bulbar junction. The
bulbus arteriosus in most fish is non-contractile but elastic and
resembles a bulge at the base of the aorta [144]. In sharks, this bulbus
arteriosus is called the “conus arteriosus” with contractile cardiac
muscle fibers and several rows of valves [144]. Blood flows from the
aorta to the gills for oxygenation and then to the body. The hepatic
and the common cardinal veins drain blood returning from the
body into the sinus venosus (a sac-like contractile structure) [144]
before blood flows into the atrium. At the sinoatrial junction, the
atrium and the sinus venosus are separated by a sinoatrial valve that
regulates the flow into the atrium. From the thin-walled but muscu-
lar atrium, the blood is pumped back into the ventricle through a
pair of atrioventricular valves at the atrioventricular junction. The
valves ensure unidirectional blood flow [144].
On an ECG (pre- and postcordial leads), the P wave represents
the onset of atrial (auricular) contraction. The QRS represents
depolarization of the ventricle, with the P-R interval corresponding
to the time for the impulse to cross the atrium and the atrioven-
tricular junction. The T wave represents repolarization of the ven-
tricle [145]. Fish do seem to have a baroreceptor reflex that slows
HR when arterial blood pressure increases [145]. A branchiocar-
diac reflex exists (increasing HR with increasing respiratory rate) to
ensure optimal oxygen uptake. This reflex can be utilized with the
described “buccal flow/HR reflex,” which increases HR by increas-
ing water flow rate through the buccal cavity (either by moving fish
through the water or flowing anesthetic-free water through the buc-
cal cavity/gills to hasten elimination of anesthetics) [139,146,147].
Nervous system
Fish, like vertebrates, have a peripheral and a central nervous sys-
tem. The peripheral nervous system can be functionally divided
into a somatic division (responsible for motor and sensory activity)
and an autonomic division, which includes sympathetic, parasym-
pathetic, and enteric nervous systems [148]. The central nervous
system includes a spinal cord, medulla oblongata, and a brain that
has a telencephalon, diencephalon (epithalamus, thalamus, and
hypothalamus), mesencephalon, and cerebellum. Fish possess
an archipallium but, like amphibians, lack a neopallium in the
cerebrum [148].
Fish are easily stressed, resulting in high morbidity and mortal-
ity [148–150]. Main stressors are water quality changes (e.g., tem-
perature, pH, and nitrogenous waste concentration), handling,
transportation, disease, noise and light abnormalities, inadequate
nutrition, stocking, and many more [148]. Fish react to stress via
a neuroendocrine response that includes the adrenergic system
and the hypothalamic–pituitary–interrenal axis [148]. Various
factors and neurotransmitters play a role, including corticotropin-
releasing factor, adrenocorticotropic hormone, catecholamines,
etc. [148]. Fish show three stages of the stress response depending
on duration and intensity of the stressing factor (e.g., primary,
secondary, and tertiary stress response) [148,151,152]. The pri-
mary response is similar to mammals via a neuroendocrine path-
way resulting in a fight or flight response through catecholamine
release [148,153]. With persistent stress, consistent circulation of
cortisol and catecholamines will lead to the secondary response
resulting in increases in cardiac output, metabolic rate, respira-
tion, lactic acid, and fatty acids [148,154]. Continuing chronic
stress leads to the tertiary stress response, which manifests as
physiologic exhaustion, including decreased immune function,
reproduction, growth rate, changes in behavior, and increased
mortality [148,151,152,155].
Nociception in fish is considered a stress factor that elicits a
strong response. After reception of nociceptive signals from
nociceptors, signals travel via the peripheral nerves (C or Aδ
fibers, depending on species and pain stimulus) [148]. Similar to
mammals, the signal is sent via the spinothalamic and trigeminal
tracts to the brain. Fish have a functional endogenous opioid
system and all four opioid receptor types have been identi-
fied [117,119,148,154,156–158]. Ongoing debate continues to
drive research into whether fish are able to experience pain or a
pain-like state [148,159–164]. Even though this question remains
largely unanswered, it is accepted that fish have a functional
nociceptive system and are capable of nociception and respond
with stress to a noxious stimulus [147,148,160]. Since this
response to noxious stimulation is evident, scientists and clini-
cians should aim to provide analgesia to alleviate the stress
response [148,165–167]. Recommendations have been published
for analgesics used in fish that undergo surgical procedures.
Focus has been on NSAIDs, local anesthetics, and opioids [104,
139,148,149,168,169].
Thermoregulation
Almost all fish are ectothermic, meaning that anesthesia is impacted
when water temperatures are outside their optimal temperature
ranges. Induction time and recovery are usually prolonged in lower
temperatures due to decreased respiratory rates and cardiac output,
and slower metabolism [168,170]. Acidosis and hypercapnia occur
at higher temperatures, leading to hyperventilation and subse-
quently decreased induction and recovery times [170]. Tuna and
some shark species have developed the ability of endothermy by
conserving heat and increasing body temperature above ambient
water temperatures.

-- 1137 of 1450 --

1122 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
Overview of clinical anesthesia of fish
Mylniczenko et al. have provided an excellent description of fish
anesthesia in Zoo Animal and Wildlife Immobilization and
Anesthesia, 2nd edn. [139], with detailed species-specific drug
information. The following will provide a general overview of fish
anesthesia and the reader is directed to the above chapter for spe-
cific details on bony fish anesthesia.
Considerations for fish anesthesia
All fish are anesthetized or sedated in water. Anesthesia is com-
monly performed via immersion in a water bath and subsequently
maintained in flow-by systems. In larger species, injectable anesthe-
sia can be used to facilitate smooth induction. It is important that all
water quality parameters are similar to the water of the fish’s normal
environment. This includes the water temperature, salinity, pH, and
mineral composition (hardness) [167]. Water from the fish’s tank
(environment) is commonly used for induction and anesthesia.
The equipment, drug concentrations, and dosing depend on the
species, size, and condition. Similar to mammals, bigger fish need
less drug per unit weight.
Anesthetic drugs used for fish anesthesia include tricaine meth-
anesulfonate (MS-222), benzocaine, metomidate, isoeugenol,
2-pheoxyethanol, and quinaldine. Simplistically, MS-222 is a local
anesthetic that blocks voltage-gated sodium channels leading to the
inhibition of action potentials and nerve conduction [171]. Its anes-
thetic mechanism of action is not fully understood but has been
attributed to peripheral and central effects of Na+ channel and, to a
lesser extent, K + and Ca2+ channel blockade, as well as activation of
second messengers via membrane-bound protein activation [171].
Muscle relaxation, sedation, and cardiovascular and respiratory
depression occur in a dose-dependent manner. MS-222 is adminis-
tered by immersion and uptake is via the gills and skin. MS-222 is
rapidly biotransformed via acetylation into polar and non-polar
metabolites [172] and is excreted via the gills and kidneys. Continual
administration of MS-222 via flow-through to the gills can be used
to maintain anesthesia. The concentration can be changed to adjust
depth of anesthesia. MS-222 is water soluble and the dissolution of
the drug into water may decrease pH. Depending on the optimal
water pH for a specific fish species, water may need to be buffered
to ensure ideal water quality. Buffer requirements depend on the
anesthetic concentration used and the alkalinity of the water
source [173]. Salt water is usually more alkaline and has a natural
buffering capacity [169]. MS-222 is the only United States Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) approved anesthetic for fish with a
withdrawal time of 21 days [174].
Benzocaine is also a local anesthetic but has the disadvantage that
it needs to be dissolved in an organic solvent (ethanol or acetone)
before adding it to water to use as an immersion anesthetic.
Metomidate is a non-barbiturate hypnotic that inhibits GABAA
receptors. Metomidate decreases cortisol release by blocking
activation of the hypothalamus–pituitary–interrenal axis [175].
Administration of metomidate is by immersion or oral administra-
tion. Isoeugenol is a compound of clove oil and has become a com-
monly used fish anesthetic (Aqui-STM
). Its use is associated with
cardiorespiratory depression and induction of a stress response and
the agent has been controversial due to its potential carcinogenic
properties.
Combinations of drugs have been explored to decrease the
adverse effects associated with the use of a single anesthetic in
higher doses. Adjunctive drugs that have been combined with the
anesthetic agents include benzodiazepines, opioids, and NSAIDs.
Morphine has been used as an analgesic in fish and shows promis-
ing effectiveness in some species. It appears to have a long duration
of action [176–178]. Butorphanol and buprenorphine appear to
have limited analgesic effects in the species studied [165,179].
Parenteral administration of anesthetic agents (intravenous,
intramuscular, and intracoelomic), in addition to enteral (oral)
administration, can be used as an alternative to immersion in some
larger species. The most practical method with the least potential
for damage is intramuscular administration. The ideal injection site
in most species is the dorsal saddle area, which is located around
the dorsal fin [138]. Problems associated with intramuscular anes-
thetic use include unreliable response, prolonged recovery, and the
need for ventilatory support [147,169,180]. These problems may be
influenced by health conditions, age, stress, body condition, and
others, that can lead to varying degrees of response. This form of
anesthetic administration can help in circumstances where tank
induction is not practical (big species, big holding facilities, and
personal safety requirements such as for sharks, rays, etc.) [180,181].
Injections can be performed with a pole syringe or an underwater
dart gun, or by hand injection [182]. Injectable anesthetic agents
used are species-dependent and include azaperone, medetomidine,
or dexmedetomidine with ketamine, alfaxalone, or propofol.
Preanesthetic considerations
Fasting fish for 12–24 h is recommended when possible to reduce
the amount of nitrogenous waste production (ammonia and
nitrite). High levels of nitrogenous waste compounds may decrease
oxygenation, lead to acidemia and methemoglobinemia, and may
affect uptake and metabolism of anesthetic agents [147]. The risk of
regurgitation can be reduced when the fish is fasted. Regurgitation
can lead to obstruction of gills [147,183].
Anesthetic depth can be monitored by assessing muscle relaxa-
tion via jaw tone and body muscle tone in addition to monitoring
HR and respiratory rate. Evaluating loss of righting reflex and
responsiveness to stimuli is also important. Fish show similar signs
and stages of anesthetic depth as mammals and various descrip-
tions have been published throughout the literature [147,167,184].
In general, fish anesthesia is subdivided into three levels or stages
(light, surgical, and deep). Depending on the fish species, the char-
acteristics of a specific level might have different attributes. Surgical
anesthesia will be associated with a loss of equilibrium, loss of reac-
tion to pressure on the peduncle, and loss of reaction to emersion
with no activity and relaxed muscles. Respiratory rate and HR con-
sistently decrease with increasing depth. Heart beats can be directly
visualized in thin body-walled species, but most species require a
Doppler probe or an ECG to evaluate HR. The Doppler probe can
be placed directly over the heart or into the opercular slit. ECG clips
can be placed on the fins or attached to hypodermic needles placed
through the skin. ECG electrode patches are not recommended due
to concern for damaging the skin. Respiratory rate is monitored by
observing gill movements. With increasing depth of anesthesia
movements will become reduced. If cardiac output is adequate,
flow-by of water through the gills will provide adequate gas
exchange, but it is recommended to decrease the anesthetic concen-
tration. Flowing water through the gills is easily achieved by mov-
ing the fish through the water, but in most situations where surgery
is performed, a recirculating water system is required to allow pro-
cedures on the fish while it remains out of the water.
The technique for performing flow-by anesthesia of fish can
vary with the available equipment, but in general, fish are induced
in a tank with anesthetic added to the water. After achieving

-- 1138 of 1450 --

Chapter 57: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Reptiles, Amphibians, and Fishes 	1123
adequate depth of anesthesia, the fish is taken out of the water
tank and placed on an elevated foam holder or padded fenestrated
shelf inside a container, which can collect circulated water. The
buccal cavity is intubated with a bifurcated plastic tube (size
depending on species) and connected to a non-recirculating or
recirculating system (dependent on fish size) to supply aerated
water containing anesthetics. Recirculating systems will reuse the
collected water via a submersible variable-flow aquarium pump or
manually via a syringe.
An example of a non-recirculating system is an intravenous fluid
bag filled with water, which contains anesthetic and an air stone for
aeration. The bag (reservoir) is connected with a drip-set to tubing
inserted into the buccal cavity [104,139,140,147]. Recommended
flow rates are influenced by drug concentration, but 1–3 L/kg/min
is common to ensure the gills remain wet for optimal gas exchange
but prevent gastric dilation which can occur at higher flows [147].
The fish’s skin and cornea remain moistened by gently spraying
water over the fish with a syringe.
At the end of the procedure, the depth of anesthesia is lightened.
Providing the fish has strong pulses and is ventilating well by itself,
it is placed into a dedicated aerated recovery tank void of any anes-
thetics. The fish is held in an upright position and moved through
the water to provide flow of oxygenated water across the gills for
washout. The fish will gradually be able to hold itself up and start
swimming with decreasing degrees of incoordination. The fish
should be monitored during recovery to prevent injury.
References
1 Sladky KK, Mans C. Clinical anesthesia in reptiles. J Exot Pet Med 2012; 21:
17–31.
2 Fleming GJ. Crocodilians (crocodiles, alligators, caimans, gharial). In: West G,
Heard DJ, Caulkett N, eds. Zoo Animal and Wildlife Immobilization and Anesthesia,
2nd edn. Ames, IA: Wiley Blackwell, 2014: 325–336.
3 Bertelsen MF. Squamates (snakes and lizards). In: West G, Heard DJ, Caulkett N,
eds. Zoo Animal and Wildlife Immobilization and Anesthesia, 2nd edn. Ames, IA:
Wiley Blackwell, 2014: 351–364.
4 Vigani A. Chelonians (turtles, tortoises, and terrapins). In: West G, Heard DJ,
Caulkett N, eds. Zoo Animal and Wildlife Immobilization and Anesthesia, 2nd edn.
Ames, IA: Wiley Blackwell, 2014: 365–387.
5 Schumacher J, Yelen T. Anesthesia and analgesia. In: Mader DR, ed. Reptile
Medicine and Surgery, 2nd edn. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, 2006: 442–452.
6 Schumacher J, Mans C. Anesthesia. In: Mader DR, Divers SJ, eds. Current Therapy
in Reptile Medicine and Surgery. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders, 2014: 134–153.
7 Baker LA, White FN. Redistribution of cardiac output in response to heating in
Iguana iguana. Comp Biochem Physiol 1970; 35: 253–262.
8 Varga M. Captive maintenance and welfare. In: Girling SJ, Raiti P, eds. BSAVA
Manual of Reptiles, 2nd edn. Gloucester, UK: BSAVA Press, 2004: 6–17.
9 Preston DL, Mosley CA, Mason RT. Sources of variability in recovery time from
methohexital sodium anesthesia in snakes. Copeia 2010; 3: 496–501.
10 Ultsch GR, Jackson DC. Long-term submergence at 3 degrees C of the turtle
Chrysemys picta bellii in normoxic and severely hypoxic water. III. Effects of
changes in ambient PO2 and subsequent air breathing. J Exp Biol 1982; 97: 87–99.
11 Andrews RM, Pough FH. Metabolism of squamate reptiles: allometric and ecologi-
cal relationships. Physiol Zool 1985; 58: 214–231.
12 Van Mierop LHS, Kutsche M. Some aspects of comparative anatomy of the heart.
In: Johansen K, Burggren WW, eds. Cardiovascular Shunts: Phylogenetic, Ontogenic
and Clinical Aspects. Copenhagen, Denmark: Munksgaard, 1985: 38–56.
13 Van Mierop LHS, Kutsche M. Comparative anatomy of the ventricular septum. In:
Wenick ACG, ed. The Ventricular Septum in the Heart. Boston, MA: Martinus
Nijhoff, 1981: 35–46.
14 Comeau SG, Hicks JW. Regulation of central vascular blood flow in the turtle.
Am J Physiol 1994; 267: R569–R578.
15 Herman J, Wang T, Smits AW, et al. The effects of artificial lung inflation on pulmo-
nary blood flow and heart rate in the turtle Trachemys scripta. J Exp Biol 1997; 200:
2539–2545.
16 Hicks JW, Ishimatsu A, Molloi S, et al. The mechanism of cardiac shunting in
reptiles: a new synthesis. J Exp Biol 1996; 199: 1435–1446.
17 Ishimatsu A, Hicks JW, Heisler N. Analysis of intracardiac shunting in the lizard,
Varanus niloticus: a new model based on blood oxygen levels and microsphere dis-
tribution. Respir Physiol 1988; 71: 83–100.
18 Heisler N, Neumann P, Maloiy GM. The mechanism of intracardiac shunting in the
lizard Varanus exanthematicus. J Exp Biol 1983; 105: 15–31.
19 Hicks JW, Malvin GM. Mechanism of intracardiac shunting in the turtle Pseudemys
scripta. Am J Physiol 1992; 262: R986–R992.
20 Luckhardt AB, Carlson AJ. Studies on the visceral sensory nervous system.
Am J Physiol 1921; 56: 72–112.
21 White FN. Circulation. In: Gans C, Dawson WR, eds. Biology of the Reptilia,
Physiology A. New York, NY: Academic Press, 1976: 275–334.
22 Burggren WW, Glass ML, Johansen K. Pulmonary ventilation: perfusion relation-
ships in terrestrial and aquatic chelonian reptiles. Can J Zool 1977; 55: 2024–2034.
23 Milsom WK, Langille BL, Jones DR. Vagal control of pulmonary vascular resistance
in the turtle Chrysemys scripta. Can J Zool 1977; 55: 359–367.
24 Berger PJ, Burnstock G. Autonomic nervous system. In: Gans C, ed. Biology of the
Reptilia. New York, NY: Academic Press, 1979: 1–57.
25 Lillywhite HB, Donald JA. Pulmonary blood flow regulation in an aquatic snake.
Science 1989; 245: 293–295.
26 Burggren W, Farrell A, Lillywhite HB. Vertebrate cardiovascular systems. In:
Dantzler WH, ed. Handbook of Physiology. New York, NY: Oxford University Press,
1997: 254–267.
27 Berger PJ. The reptilian baroreceptor and its role in cardiovascular control. Am Zool
1987; 27: 111–120.
28 Stinner JN. Cardiovascular and metabolic responses to temperature in Coluber
constrictor. Am J Physiol 1987; 253: R222–R227.
29 Stinner JN, Ely DL. Blood pressure during routine activity, stress, and feeding in
black racer snakes (Coluber constrictor). Am J Physiol 1993; 264: R79–R84.
30 Farrell AP. Introduction to cardica scope in lower vertebrates. Can J Zool 1991; 69:
1981–1984.
31 Seymour RS, Lillywhite HB. Blood pressure in snakes from different habitats.
Nature 1976; 264: 664–666.
32 Lillywhite HB, Pough FH. Control of arterial pressure in aquatic sea snakes. Am J
Physiol 1983; 244: R66–R73.
33 Lillywhite HB, Gallagher KP. Hemodynamic adjustments to head-up posture in the
partly arboreal snake, Elaphe obsoleta. J Exp Zool 1985; 235: 325–334.
34 Bennett RA, Schumacher J, Hedjazi-Haring K, et al. Cardiopulmonary and anes-
thetic effects of propofol administered intraosseously to green iguanas. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 1998; 212: 93–98.
35 Schumacher J, Lillywhite HB, Norman WM, et al. Effects of ketamine HCl on car-
diopulmonary function in snakes. Copeia 1997: 395–400.
36 Custer RS, Bush M. Physiologic and acid–base measures of gopher snakes during
ketamine or halothane-nitrous oxide anesthesia. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1980; 177:
870–874.
37 Bonath K. Halothane inhalation anaesthesia in reptiles and its clinical control.
Int Zoo Yearb 1979; 19: 112–125.
38 Rooney MB, Levine G, Gaynor J, et al. Sevoflurane anesthesia in desert tortoises
(Gopherus agassizii). J Zoo Wildl Med 1999; 30: 64–69.
39 Stirl R, Bonath KH. Cardiovascular, pulmonary and acid–base measurements in
boa constrictors during tiletamine-zolazepam sedation. In: Proceedings of the 5th
International Congress of Veterinary Anesthesia, 1994.
40 Arena PC, Richardson KC, Cullen LK. Anaesthesia in two species of large
Australian skink. Vet Rec 1988; 123: 155–158.
41 Anderson NL, Wack RF, Calloway L, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects and efficacy of
propofol as an anesthetic in brown tree snakes (Boiga irregularis). Bull Assoc Reptil
Amphib Vet 1999; 9: 9–15.
42 Mosley CA, Dyson D, Smith DA. The cardiovascular dose-response effects of iso-
flurane alone and combined with butorphanol in the green iguana (Iguana iguana).
Vet Anaesth Analg 2004; 31: 64–72.
43 Milsom WK. Mechanoreceptor modulation of endogenous respiratory rhythms in
vertebrates. Am J Physiol 1990; 259: R898–R910.
44 Smatresk NJ. Chemoreceptor modulation of endogenous respiratory rhythms in
vertebrates. Am J Physiol 1990; 259: R887–R897.
45 Wang T, Smits AW, Burggren W. Pulmonary function in reptiles. In: Gans C, Gaunt
AS, eds. Biology of the Reptilia. Ithaca, NY: Society for the Study of Amphibians and
Reptiles, 1998: 319.
46 Wood SC, Lenfant CJM. Respiration: mechanics, control and gas exchange. In:
Gans C, Dawson WR, eds. Biology of the Reptilia, Physiology A. New York, NY:
Academic Press, 1976: 225–274.
47 Shelton G, Jones DR, Milsom WK. Control of breathing in ectothermic vertebrates.
In: Geiger SR, Widdicombe JG, eds. Handbook of Physiology. Section 3: The
Respiratory System. Bethesda, MD: American Physiological Society, 1986.
48 Glass ML, Wood SC. Gas exchange and control of breathing in reptiles. Physiol Rev
1983; 63: 232–260.

-- 1139 of 1450 --

1124 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
49 Johansen K, Hanson D, Lenfant C. Respiration in a primitive air breather, Amia
calva. Respir Physiol 1970; 9: 162–174.
50 Shelton G, Burggren W. Cardiovascular dynamics of the chelonia during apnoea
and lung ventilation. J Exp Biol 1976; 64: 323–343.
51 Perry SF. Structure and function of the reptilian respiratory system. In: Lenfant C,
Wood CM, eds. Comparative Pulmonary Physiology. Current Concepts. New York,
NY: Marcel Dekker, 1989: 193–236.
52 Glass ML, Johansen K. Control of breathing in Acrochordus javanicus, an aquatic
snake. Physiol Zool 1976; 49: 328–340.
53 Templeton JR, Dawson WR. Respiration in the lizard Crotaphytus collaris. Physiol
Zool 1963; 36: 104–121.
54 Glass ML, Burggren W, Johansen K. Ventilation in an aquatic and a terrestrial
helonian reptile. J Exp Biol 1978; 72: 165–179.
55 Jackson DC, Palmer SE, Meadow WL. The effects of temperature and carbon diox-
ide breathing on ventilation and acid–base status of turtles. Respir Physiol 1974; 20:
131–146.
56 Jackson DC, Kraus DR, Prange HD. Ventilatory response to inspired CO2 in the sea
turtle: effects of body size and temperature. Respir Physiol 1979; 38: 71–81.
57 Boyer DR. Comparative effects of hypoxia on respiratory and cardiac function in
reptiles. Physiol Zool 1966; 39: 307–316.
58 Jackson DC. Ventilatory response to hypoxia in turtles at various temperatures.
Respir Physiol 1973; 18: 178–187.
59 Hitzig BM, Allen JC, Jackson DC. Central chemical control of ventilation and
response of turtles to inspired CO2. Am J Physiol 1985; 249: R323–R328.
60 Benchetrit G, Armand J, Dejours P. Ventilatory chemoreflex drive in the tortoise,
Testudo horsfieldi. Respir Physiol 1977; 31: 183–191.
61 Benchetrit G, Dejours P. Ventilatory CO2 drive in the tortoise Testudo horsfieldi.
J Exp Biol 1980; 87: 229–236.
62 Frankel HM, Spitzer A, Blaine J, et al. Respiratory response of turtles (Pseudemys
scripta) to changes in arterial blood gas composition. Comp Biochem Physiol 1969;
31: 535–546.
63 Diethelm G. The effect of oxygen content of inspiratory air (FIO2) on recovery times
in the green iguana (Iguana iguana). Doctor of Veterinary Medicine thesis,
University of Zurich, 2001.
64 Bertelsen MF, Mosley CA, Crawshaw GJ, et al. Inhalation anesthesia in Dumeril’s
monitor (Varanus dumerili) with isoflurane, sevoflurane, and nitrous oxide: effects
of inspired gases on inducion and recovery. J Zoo Wildl Med 2005; 36: 62–68.
65 Goe A, Shmalberg J, Gatson B, et al. Epinephrine or GV-26 electrical stimulation
reduces inhalant anesthestic recovery time in common snapping turtles (Chelydra
serpentina). J Zoo Wildl Med 2016; 47:501–507.
66 Holz P, Barker IK, Crawshaw GJ, et al. The anatomy and perfusion of the renal
portal system in the red-eared slider (Trachemys scripta elegans). J Zoo Wildl Med
1997; 28: 378–385.
67 Holz P, Barker IK, Burger JP, et al. The effect of the renal portal system on pharma-
cokinetic parameters in the red-eared slider (Trachemys scripta elegans). J Zoo Wildl
Med 1997; 28: 386–393.
68 Berner NJ. Oxygen consumption by mitochondria from an endotherm and an ecto-
therm. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol 1999; 124: 25–31.
69 Penick DN, Paladino FV, Steyermark AC, et al. Thermal dependence of tissue
metabolism in the green turtle (Chelonia mydas). Comp Biochem Physiol 1996;
113A: 293–296.
70 Chittick EJ, Stamper MA, Beasley JF, et al. Medetomidine, ketamine, and sevoflu-
rane for anesthesia of injured loggerhead sea turtles: 13 cases (1996–2000). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2002; 221: 1019–1025.
71 Wellehan JFX, Lafortune M, Gunkel C, et al. Coccygeal vascular catheterization in
lizards and crocodilians. J Herpetol Med Surg 2004; 14: 26–28.
72 Maxwell LK, Jacobson ER. Allometric scaling of kidney function in green iguanas.
Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol 2004; 138: 383–390.
73 Bennett RA. Reptile anesthesia. Semin Avian Exot Pet Med 1998; 7: 30–40.
74 Whitaker BR, Krum H. Medical management of sea turtles. In: Fowler ME, Miller RE,
eds. Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine, 4th edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 1999: 217.
75 Young BD, Stegeman N, Norby B, et al. Comparison of intraosseous and peripheral
venous fluid dynamics in the desert tortoise (Gopherus agassizii). J Zoo Wildl Med
2012; 43: 59–66.
76 International Association for the Study of Pain (IASP) Terminology. www.iasp-
pain.org/resources/terminology/ (accessed September 2022).
77 Molony V. Comments on Anand and Craig, PAIN, 67 (1996) 3–6. Pain 1997; 70: 293.
78 Liang YF, Terashima S, Zhu AQ. Distinct morphological characteristics of touch,
temperature, and mechanical nociceptive neurons in the crotaline trigeminal
ganglia. J Comp Neurol 1995; 360: 621–633.
79 Terashima S, Liang YF. C mechanical nociceptive neurons in the crotaline
trigeminal ganglia. Neurosci Lett 1994; 179: 33–36.
80 Kevetter GA, Willis WD. Collateralization in the spinothalamic tract: new method-
ology to support or deny phylogenetic theories. Brain Res 1984; 319: 1–14.
81 Desfilis E, Font E, Garcia-Verdugo JM. Trigeminal projections to the dorsal thala-
mus in a lacertid lizard, Podarcis hispanica. Brain Behav Evol 1998; 52: 99–110.
82 Butler AB, Cotterill RM. Mammalian and avian neuroanatomy and the question
of consciousness in birds. Biol Bull 2006; 211: 106–127.
83 De la Iglesia JA, Martinez-Guijarro FI, Lopez-Garcia C. Neurons of the medial
cortex outer plexiform layer of the lizard Podarcis hispanica: Golgi and immuno-
cytochemical studies. J Comp Neurol 1994; 341: 184–203.
84 Lindberg I, White L. Reptilian enkephalins: implications for the evolution of
proenkephalin. Arch Biochem Biophys 1986; 245: 1–7.
85 Ng TB, Hon WK, Cheng CH, et al. Evidence for the presence of adrenocortico-
tropic and opiate-like hormones in the brains of two sea snakes, Hydrophis cyan-
ocinctus and Lapemis hardwickii. Gen Comp Endocrinol 1986; 63: 31–37.
86 Mauk MD, Olson RD, LaHoste GJ, et al. Tonic immobility produces hyperalgesia
and antagonizes morphine analgesia. Science 1981; 213: 353–354.
87 Porro CA, Carli G. Immobilization and restraint effects on pain reactions in
animals. Pain 1988; 32: 289–307.
88 Tambeli CH, Fischer L, Monaliza SL, et al. The functional role of ascending
nociceptive control in defensive behavior. Brain Res 2012; 1464: 24–29.
89 Wright KM. Taxonomy of amphibians kept in captivity. In: Wright KM, Whitaker
BR, eds. Amphibian Medicine and Captive Husbandry. Malabar, FL: Krieger, 2001:
3–14.
90 Mitchell MA. Anesthetic considerations for amphibians. J Exot Pet Med 2009; 18:
40–49.
91 Baitchman E, Stetter MD. Amphibians. In: West G, Heard DJ, Caulkett N, eds. Zoo
Animal and Wildlife Immobilization and Anesthesia, 2nd edn. Ames, IA: Wiley
Blackwell, 2014: 303–311.
92 Clayton LA, Gore SR. Amphibian emergency medicine. Vet Clin North Am Exot
Anim Pract 2007; 10: 587–620.
93 Wright KM. Anatomy for the clinician. In: Wright KM, Whitaker BR, eds.
Amphibian Medicine and Captive Husbandry. Malabar, FL: Krieger, 2001: 15–30.
94 Wright KM. Applied physiology. In: Wright KM, Whitaker BR, eds. Amphibian
Medicine and Captive Husbandry. Malabar, FL: Krieger, 2001: 31–34.
95 Haberich FJ. Demonstration of the functional separation of venous and arterial
blood in the frog circulation by x-ray angiography. Pflugers Arch Gesamte Physiol
Menschen Tiere 1967; 293: 193–198.
96 Haberich FJ. The functional separation of venous and arterial blood in the univen-
tricular frog heart. Ann NY Acad Sci 1965; 127: 459–475.
97 Heinz- Taheny KM. Cardiovascular physiology and disease of amphibians. Vet
Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract 2009; 12: 39–50.
98 Langille BL, Jones DR. Dynamics of blood flow through the hearts and arterial
systems of anuran amphibia. J Exp Biol 1977; 68: 1–17.
99 Johansen K, Hanson D. Functional anatomy of the hearts of lungfishes and
amphibians. Am Zool 1968; 8: 191–210.
100 Johansen K. Cardiovascular dynamics in the amphibian Amphiuma tridactylum
Cuvier. Acta Physiol Scand 1964; 217: 1–82.
101 Jones JM, Wentzell LA, Toews DP. Posterior lymph heart pressure and rate and
lymph flow in the toad Bufo marinus in response to hydrated and dehydrated con-
ditions. J Exp Biol 1992; 169: 207–220.
102 Duellman WE, Trueb L. Biology of Amphibians. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1994.
103 Wright KM. Restraint techniques and euthanasia. In: Wright KM, Whitaker BR,
eds. Amphibian Medicine and Captive Husbandry. Malabar, FL: Krieger, 2001:
111–122.
104 Stetter MD. Fish and amphibian anesthesia. Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract
2001; 4: 69–82.
105 West NH, van Vliet BH. Sensory mechanism regulaing the cardiovascular and
respiratory systems. In: Feder ME, Burggren WW, eds. Environmental Physiology
of the Amphibians. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1992: 151–182.
106 Downes U. Tricaine (MS222) is a safe anesthetic compound compared to benzo-
caine and pentobarbital to induce anesthesia in leopard frogs (Rana pipiens).
Pharmacol Rep 2005; 57: 467–474.
107 Guenette SA, Giroux MC, Vachon P. Pain perception and anaesthesia in research
frogs. Exp Anim 2013; 62: 87–92.
108 Lalonde-Robert V, Beaudry F, Vachon P. Pharmacologic parameters of MS-222
and physiologic changes in frogs (Xenopus laevis) after immersion at anesthetic
doses. J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2012; 51: 464–468.
109 Goulet F, Vachon P, Helie P. Evaluation of the toxicity of eugenol at anesthetic
doses in African clawed frogs (Xenopus laevis). Toxicol Pathol 2011; 39: 471–477.
110 Mitchell MA, Riggs S, Singleton B. Evaluating the clinical and cardiopulmonary
effects of clove oil and propofol in tiger salamanders (Ambystoma tigrinum).
J Exot Pet Med 2009; 18: 50–56.
111 Ross A, Guenette SA, Helie P, et al. Case of cutaneous necrosis in African clawed
frogs Xenopus laevis after the topical application of eugenol. Can Vet J 2006; 47:
1115–1117.

-- 1140 of 1450 --

Chapter 57: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Reptiles, Amphibians, and Fishes 	1125
112 Hernández SE, Sernia C, Bradley AJ. The effect of three anaesthetic protocols on
the stress response in cane toads (Rhinella marina). Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39(6):
584–590.
113 Wojick KB, Langan JN, Mitchell MA. Evaluation of MS-222 (Tricaine
Methanesulfonate) and propofol as anesthetic agents in Sonoran desert toads
(Bufo alvarius). J Herpetol Med Surg 2010; 20(2): 79–83.
114 Stetter MD, Raphael B, Indiviglio F, et al. Isoflurane anesthesia in amphibians:
comparison of five application methods. In: Proceedings of the American
Association of Zoo Veterinarians, 1996; 255–257.
115 Posner LP, Bailey KM, Richardson EY, et al. Alfaxalone anesthesia in bullfrogs
(Lithobates catesbeiana) by injection or immersion. J Zoo Wildl Med 2013; 44:
965–971.
116 Guenette SA, Beaudry F, Vachon P. Anesthetic properties of propofol in African
clawed frogs (Xenopus laevis). J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2008; 47: 35–38.
117 Rosenblum PM, Peter RE. Evidence for the involvement of endogenous opioids in
the regulation of gonadotropin secretion in male goldfish, Carassius auratus. Gen
Comp Endocrinol 1989; 73: 21–27.
118 Stevens CW, Klopp AJ, Facello JA. Analgesic potency of mu and kappa opioids
after systemic administration in amphibians. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1994; 269:
1086–1093.
119 Rosenblum PM, Callard IP. Endogenous opioid peptide system in male brown
bullhead catfish, Ictalurus nebulosus Lesueur: characterization of naloxone bind-
ing and the response to naloxone during the annual reproductive cycle. J Exp Zool
1988; 245: 244–255.
120 Stevens CW. Opioid research in amphibians: an alternative pain model yielding
insights on the evolution of opioid receptors. Brain Res Brain Res Rev 2004; 46:
204–215.
121 Koeller CA. Comparison of buprenorphine and butorphanol analgesia in the east-
ern red- spotted newt (Notophthalmus viridescens). J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2009;
48: 171–175.
122 Machin KL. Amphibian pain and analgesia. J Zoo Wildl Med 1999; 30: 2–10.
123 Stevens CW. Analgesia in amphibians: preclinical studies and clinical applications.
Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract 2011; 14: 33–44.
124 Duncan A. Reptile and amphibian analgesia. In: Fowler ME, Miller RE, eds. Zoo
and Wild Animal Medicine, 7th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier, 2012: 247–253.
125 Machin KL. Fish, amphibian, and reptile analgesia. Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim
Pract 2001; 4: 19–33.
126 Nikundiwe AM, de Boer-van Huizen R, ten Donkelaar HJ. Dorsal root projections
in the clawed toad (Xenopus laevis) as demonstrated by anterograde labeling with
horseradish peroxidase. Neuroscience 1982; 7: 2089–2103.
127 Echlin F, Propper N. ‘Sensitization’ by injury of the cutaneous nerve endings in the
frog. J Physiol 1937; 88: 388–400.
128 Habgood JS. Sensitization of sensory receptors in the frog’s skin. J Physiol 1950;
111: 195–213.
129 Stevens CW. Opioid antinociception in amphibians. Brain Res Bull 1988; 21:
959–962.
130 Braga PC, Tiengo M, Biella G, et al. Dermorphin, a new peptide from amphibian
skin, inhibits the nociceptive thalamic neurons firing rate evoked by noxious
stimuli. Neurosci Lett 1984; 52: 165–169.
131 Erspamer V. The opioid peptides of the amphibian skin. Int J Devl Neuroscience
1992; 10: 3–30.
132 Stevens CW, Yaksh TL. Spinal action of dermorphin, an extremely potent opioid
peptide from frog skin. Brain Res 1986; 385: 300–304.
133 Mettam JJ, Oulton LJ, McCrohan CR, et al. The efficacy of three types of analgesic
drugs in reducing pain in the rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss. Appl Anim
Behav Sci 2011; 133: 265–274.
134 Mohan S, Stevens CW. Systemic and spinal administration of the mu opioid,
remifentanil, produces antinociception in amphibians. Eur J Pharmacol 2006; 534:
89–94.
135 Brenner GM, Klopp AJ, Deason LL, et al. Analgesic potency of alpha adrenergic
agents after systemic administration in amphibians. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1994;
270: 540–545.
136 Stevens CW, MacIver DN, Newman LC. Testing and comparison of non-opioid
analgesics in amphibians. Contemp Top Lab Anim Sci 2001; 40: 23–27.
137 Willenbring S, Stevens CW. Thermal, mechanical and chemical peripheral sensa-
tion in amphibians: opioid and adrenergic effects. Life Sci 1996; 58: 125–133.
138 Neiffer DL, Stamper MA. Fish sedation, analgesia, anesthesia, and euthanasia:
considerations, methods, and types of drugs. ILAR J 2009; 50: 343–360.
139 Mylniczenko ND, Neiffer DL, Clauss TM. Boney fish (lungfish, sturgeon, teleosts).
In: West G, Heard DJ, Caulkett N, eds. Zoo Animal and Wildlife Immobilization and
Anesthesia, 2nd edn. Ames, IA: Wiley Blackwell, 2014: 209–260.
140 Harms CA. Anesthesia in fish. In: Fowler ME, Miller RE, eds. Zoo and Wild
Animal Medicine, 5th edn. St. Louis, MO: WB Saunders, 2003: 2–20.
141 Olson KR. Vascular anatomy of the fish gill. J Exper Zool 2002; 293: 214–231.
142 Bushnell PG, Jones DR. Cardiovascular and respiratory physiology of tuna: adap-
tations for support of exceptionaly high metabolic rates. Environ Biol Fishes 1994;
40: 303–318.
143 Bruecker P, Graham M. The effects of the anesthetic ketamine hydrochloride on
oxygen consumption rates and behaviour in the fish Heros (Cichlasoma) citrinel-
lum. Comp Biochem Physiol 1993; 104C: 57–59.
144 Sherrill J, Weber ES, Marty GD, et al. Fish cardiovascular physiology and disease.
Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract 2009; 12: 11–38.
145 Satchell GH. The reflex co-ordination of the heart beat with respiration in the
dogfish. J Exp Biol 1960; 37: 719–731.
146 Ross L, Ross B. Anaesthetic and Sedative Techniques for Aquatic Animals, 3rd edn.
Oxford, UK: Wiley Blackwell, 2008.
147 Neiffer DL, Stamper MA. Fish sedation, analgesia, anesthesia, and euthanasia:
considerations, methods, and types of drugs. ILAR J 2009; 50: 343–360.
148 Weber ES. Fish analgesia: pain, stress, fear aversion, or nociception? Vet Clin
North Am Exot Anim Pract 2011; 14: 21–32.
149 Weber EP III, Weisse C, Schwarz T, et al. Anesthesia, diagnostic imaging, and
surgery of fish. Compend Contin Educ Vet 2009; 31: E11.
150 Laitinen M, Valtonen T. Cardiovascular, ventilatory and total activity responses of
brown trout to handling stress. J Fish Biol 1994; 45: 933–942.
151 Barton BA, Iwama G. Physiological changes in fish from stress in aquaculture with
emphasis on the response and effects of corticsterioids. Annu Rev Fish Dis 1991; 1:
3–26.
152 Barton BA, Morgan JD, Vijayan MN. Physiological and condition-related indicators
of environmental stress in fish. In: Adams SM, ed. Biological Indicators of Aquatic
Ecosystem Stress. Bethesda, MD: American Fisheries Society, 2002: 111–148.
153 Donaldson EM. The pituitary–interrenal axis as an indicator of stress in fish. In:
Pickering AD, ed. Stress and Fish. London, UK: Academic Press, 1981: 11–47.
154 Ackerman PA, Forsyth RB, Mazur CF, et al. Stress hormones and the cellular stress
response in salmonids. Fish Physiol Biochem 2000; 23: 327–336.
155 Gregory TR, Wood CM. The effects of chronic plasma cortisol elevation on the
feeding behavior, growth, competitive ability, and swimming performance of juve-
nile rainbow trout. Physiol Biochem Zool 1999; 72: 286–295.
156 Dreborg S, Sundstrom G, Larsson TA, et al. Evolution of vertebrate opioid recep-
tors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008; 105: 15487–15492.
157 McDonald LK, Joss JM, Dores RM. The phylogeny of Met-enkephalin and
Leuenkephalin: studies on the holostean fish Lepisosteus platyrhincus and the
Australian lungfish, Neoceratodus forsteri. Gen Comp Endocrinol 1991; 84: 228–236.
158 Vallarino M. Occurrence of β-endorphin-like immunoreactivity in the brain of
the teleost, Boops boops. Gen Comp Endocrinol 1995; 60: 63–69.
159 Posner LP. Introduction: pain and distress in fish: a review of the evidence. ILAR J
2009; 50: 327–328.
160 Sneddon LU. Pain perception in fish: indicators and endpoints. ILAR J 2009; 50:
338–342.
161 Sneddon LU, Braithwaite VA, Gentle MJ. Do fishes have nociceptors? Evidence for
the evolution of a vertebrate sensory system. Proc Biol Sci 2003; 270: 1115–1121.
162 Sneddon LU. Evolution of nociception in vertebrates: comparative analysis of
lower vertebrates. Brain Res 2004; 46: 123–130.
163 Rose JD. The neurobehavioral nature of fishes and the question of awareness of
pain. Rev Fish Sci 2002; 10: 1–38.
164 Rose D, Woodbury CJ. Animal models of nociception and pain. In: Conn PM, ed.
Sourcebook of Models for Biomedical Research. Totoway, NJ: Humana Press, 2008:
333–339.
165 Harms CA, Lewbart GA, Swanson CR, et al. Behavioral and clinical pathology
changes in koi carp (Cyprinus carpio) subjected to anesthesia and surgery with
and without intra-operative analgesics. Comp Med 2005; 55: 221–226.
166 Smith SA. Pain and distress in fish. ILAR J 2009; 50: 327–415.
167 Sneddon LU. Clinical anesthesia and analgesia in fish. J Exot Pet Med 2012; 21:
32–43.
168 Neiffer DL, Stamper MA. Fish sedation, analgesia, anesthesia, and euthanasia:
considerations, methods, and types of drugs. ILAR J 2009; 50: 343–360.
169 Harms CA. Anesthesia in fish. In: Fowler ME, Miller RE, eds. Zoo and Wild
Animal Medicine, Current Therapy, 4th edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders,
1999: 158–163.
170 Aguiar LH, Kalinin AL, Rantin FT. The effects of temperature on the cardio-
respiratory function of the neotropical fish Piaractus mesopotamicus. J Therm Biol
2002; 27: 299–308.
171 Butterworth JF IV, Strichartz GR. Molecular mechanisms of local anesthesia: a
review. Anesthesiology 1990; 72: 711–734.
172 Wayson KA, Downes H, Lynn RK, et al. Studies on the comparative pharmacology
and selective toxicity of tricaine methanesulfonate: metabolism as a basis of the
selective toxicity in poikilotherms. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1976; 198: 695–708.
173 Carter KM, Woodley CM, Brown RS. A review of tricaine methanesulfonate for
anesthesia of fish. Rev Fish Biol Fisheries 2011; 21: 51–59.

-- 1141 of 1450 --

1126 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
174 Rub AM, Jepsen N, Liedtke TL, et al. Surgical insertion of transmitters and
telemetry methods in fisheries research. Am J Vet Res 2014; 75: 402–416.
175 Davis KB, Griffin BR. Physiological responses of hybrid striped bass under
sedation of several anesthetics. Aquaculture 2004; 233: 531–548.
176 Baker TR, Baker BB, Johnson SM, et al. Comparative analgesic efficacy of
morphine sulfate and butorphanol tartrate in koi (Cyprinus carpio) undergoing
unilateral gonadectomy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2013; 243: 882–890.
177 Newby NC, Gamper AK, Stevens ED. Cardiorespiratory effects and efficacy of
morphine sulfate in winter flounder (Pseudopleuronectes americanus). Am J Vet
Res 2007; 68: 592–597.
178 Newby NC, Wilkie MP, Stevens ED. Morphine uptake, disposition, and analgesic
efficacy in the common goldfish (Carassius auratus). Can J Zool 2009; 87: 388–399.
179 Davis MR, Mylniczenko N, Storm T, et al. Evaluation of intramuscular ketoprofen
and butorphanol as analgesics in chain dogfish (Scyliorhinus rotifer). Zoo Biol
2006; 25: 491–500.
180 Mylniczenko ND, Clauss TM, Stamper MA. Elasmobranchs and holocephalans.
In: West G, Heard DJ, Caulkett N, eds. Zoo Animal and Wildlife Immobilization
and Anesthesia, 2nd edn. Ames, IA: Wiley Blackwell, 2014: 261–301.
181 Flemming GJ, Heard DJ, Floyd RF, et al. Evaluation of propfol and medetomidine-
ketamine for short-term immobilization of Gulf of Mexico sturgeon (Acipenser
oxyrinchus de soti). J Zoo Wildl Med 2003; 34: 153–158.
182 Harvey B, Denny C, Kaiser S, et al. Remote intramuscular injection of immobiliz-
ing drugs into fish using a laser-aimed underwater dart gun. Vet Rec 1988; 122:
174–177.
183 Harms CA, Bakal RS. Techniques in fish anesthesia. J Sm Exot Anim Med 1995;
3: 19–25.
184 Oikawa S, Takeda T, Itazawa Y. Scale effects of MS-222 on a marine teleost, porgy
Pagrus major. Aquaculture 1994; 121: 369–379.

-- 1142 of 1450 --

1127
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: T he S ixth E dition of Lumb and J ones	. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
The class Aves consists of 27 Orders, 168 Families, and approximately
10,000 species worldwide. Birds, regarded as the only clade of
dinosaurs that survived the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction
event 66 million years ago [1], inhabit every continent on this planet
and live in a wide range of environmental niches. For example,
emperor penguins (Aptenodytes forsteri) live in the Antarctic, and
one study recorded an individual ocean dive record of 540 m
(1772 ft) lasting 18 min [2]. A Ruppell’s griffon (Gyps rueppelli), the
highest-flying bird, encountered a jet at 11,485 m (37,900 feet) over
the west African country of Côte d’Ivoire. Bar-headed geese (Anser
indicus) routinely fly over the Himalayas, some as high as 7290 m
(23,917 ft), when migrating between central and south Asia [1]. The
burrowing owl (Athene cunicularia) nests underground while wan-
dering albatrosses spend most of their life in soaring flight over the
Southern Ocean. The weight and size of birds vary greatly. Bee
hummingbirds (Mellisuga helenae) measure 5–6 cm (2–2.4 in) in
length and weigh 1.6–2 g while the ostrich (Struthio camelus) has a
height of 2.75 m (9 ft) and weighs up to 145 kg.
Throughout time, humans have had a practical interest in birds
as a source of food. In domesticating and selecting for desirable
production characteristics, such as rapid weight gain or high egg
production, a number of structural and functional changes have
occurred in domesticated species, changes not seen in their wild
relatives. For example, domesticated turkeys and chickens have
smaller lung volumes and less gas exchange surface area compared
to their wild counterparts.
The tremendous diversity in form, function, and mode of life
existing across avian orders and between wild and domesticated
species, as well as variation that exists within any given species, pose
challenges to the anesthetic management of birds. Indeed, the risk
of anesthesia-related death of birds is as high as 3.9% [3–5].
Challenges associated with anesthetizing birds can be lessened by
considering and applying basic principles of avian anatomy, physi-
ology, and pharmacology.
Respiratory system
The avian respiratory system consists of two separate and distinct
functional components: one for ventilation (larynx, trachea, syrinx,
bronchi, air sacs, thoracic skeleton, muscles of respiration), and one
for gas exchange (parabronchial lung). These two components can
be used to advantage when anesthetizing birds, especially when
using inhalant anesthetics.
58 Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia –
Birds
John W. Ludders1 and David Sanchez-Migallon Guzman2
1 Emeritus Professor, Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA
2 Department of Medicine and Epidemiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California–Davis, Davis, California, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 1127
Respiratory system, 1127
Ventilation components, 1128
Gas exchange component, 1129
Control of ventilation, 1134
Cardiovascular system, 1134
Renal portal system, 1134
Preanesthetic patient evaluation and preparation, 1135
Physical restraint, 1135
Physical examination, 1135
Fasting, 1135
General pharmacologic considerations, 1135
Routes of drug administration, 1135
Allometric scaling and pharmacokinetics, 1136
Drugs used for analgesia and anesthesia, 1137
Opioids, 1137
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, 1139
Local anesthetics, 1141
Injectable induction drugs, 1141
Inhalant anesthetics, 1142
Adjuncts to general anesthesia, 1143
Drugs of historical interest, 1143
Anesthetic management, 1144
Airway management, 1144
Breathing circuits and fresh gas flows, 1144
Induction methods, 1144
Monitoring and support, 1145
Recovery, 1148
References, 1148

-- 1143 of 1450 --

1128 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
Ventilation components
Larynx, trachea, syrinx
The avian larynx is located at the base of the tongue and protrudes
into the pharynx as a somewhat heart-shaped mound [6]. Birds do
not have an epiglottis, so when the tongue is pulled gently forward
the larynx is easily visualized in most birds (Fig. 58.1). A notable
exception is the flamingo with its ventroflexed beak and large fleshy
tongue that make it difficult to visualize the larynx.
The avian trachea, which consists of complete cartilaginous
rings, conducts air from the nares and mouth to the bronchi while
warming, moisturizing, and screening particulate matter from
inspired gas [6]. From one avian class to another, there are tracheal
anatomical differences that have significant implications for venti-
lation. For example, emu and ruddy ducks have an inflatable sac-
like diverticulum that opens from the trachea. In emu of both sexes,
the sac arises from the ventral surface of the trachea approximately
three-quarters of the way down the neck where the tracheal rings
are incomplete and form a slit-like opening (Fig 58.2) [6]. This sac
is responsible for the characteristic booming call of the emu. In
male ruddy ducks, the sac opens in a depression on the dorsal wall
of the trachea immediately caudal to the larynx, thus lying between
the trachea and esophagus [6]. The sac may act as a sounding board
for the bill-drumming display of the males [6].
Some penguins and petrels possess a double trachea consisting of
a median septum dividing part of the trachea into right and left
channels [6]. In both groups of birds, the septum extends cranially
from the bronchial bifurcation, but its length is variable; in the jack-
ass penguin (Spheniscus demersus), it extends to within a centimeter
of the larynx [7], whereas in the rockhopper penguin (Eudyptes
spp.), the septum is only 5 mm in length [6].
Other classes of birds have complex tracheal loops or coils in
the caudal neck, within the keel, or within the thorax and keel
(Fig. 58.3). Studies in cranes (Grus spp.) have demonstrated that
tracheal coiling enables these birds to produce extremely loud calls
using very low driving pressures [8].
Birds generally have relatively long necks, not to mention tra-
cheal loops and coils, which affect tracheal deadspace, an important
consideration during general anesthesia. The typical avian trachea
is 2.7 times longer than that of comparably sized mammals, but it is
1.29 times wider, so tracheal resistance to gas flow is comparable in
birds and mammals [6]. Tracheal deadspace volume in birds is
about 4.5 times larger than that of comparably sized mammals, but
the relatively low respiratory frequency (about one-third that of
mammals) and larger tidal volume of birds (about four times larger
than in a comparably sized mammal) ensure that the effect of the
larger tracheal deadspace volume is decreased [6]. The net effect is
that avian tracheal minute ventilation is only about 1.5 to 1.9 times
that of mammals [6].
The syrinx, the sound-producing organ in birds, is located at the
junction of the trachea and mainstem bronchi and the details of
its structure vary among avian species. Its location and structure
(a number of variably ossified cartilages, muscles, and vibrating
soft structures) explain why gas flowing through the trachea,
especially during positive-pressure ventilation, can produce sound
in an anesthetized, intubated bird.
Primary and secondary bronchi
Mammals have 23 orders of bronchial branching leading to the gas
exchange area of the lung (the alveoli), but birds have only three
orders of branching before reaching gas exchange tissue [9]. The
avian bronchial system consists of a primary bronchus (extrapul-
monary and intrapulmonary), secondary bronchi, and tertiary
Figure 58.1 Larynx of a chicken.
Figure 58.2 Tracheal slit of an emu (Dromaius novaehollandiae).
Source: Dr. Julie A. Smith, with permission.
Black swan
White spoonbill 	Whooping crane
Helmeted curassow
Whooper swan
Figure 58.3 Different forms of tracheal loops: black swan (Cygnus atratus);
whooper swan (Cygnus cygnus); white spoonbill (Platalea leucorodia);
whooping crane (Grus americana); helmeted curassow (Crax Pauxi).
Source: Adapted from McLelland [6].

-- 1144 of 1450 --

Chapter 58: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Birds 	1129
bronchi (referred to as “parabronchi”). The parabronchi and their
surrounding mantle of tissue (the peri-parabronchial mantle) is
where gas exchange occurs [6,9].
The primary bronchus enters the lung ventrally and obliquely at
the junction of the cranial and middle thirds of the lung, then passes
dorsolaterally to the lung surface where it turns caudally in a dor-
sally curved direction until, at the caudal lung margin, it opens into
the abdominal air sac [10]. The primary bronchi have low colum-
nar, pseudostratified epithelium overlying a well-developed inter-
nal circular smooth muscle layer, and longitudinally oriented
smooth muscles [11] that can change the internal diameter of the
primary bronchus. Acetylcholine, pilocarpine, and histamine con-
tract bronchial smooth muscles; atropine blocks the effects of these
drugs but has no effect when given alone [12].
A secondary bronchus is any bronchus arising from a primary
bronchus; for a short distance, they have the same histologic struc-
ture as the primary bronchus, but subsequently develop simple
squamous epithelium [13,14]. In most birds, the secondary bronchi
are arranged into four groups: medioventral, mediodorsal,
lateroventral, and laterodorsal secondary bronchi [15]. The medio-
ventral secondary bronchi arise from the primary intrapulmonary
bronchus close to where it enters the lung and occupy the ventral
surface of the lung [16]. The mediodorsal, lateroventral, and latero-
dorsal secondary bronchi arise from the caudal curved portion of
the primary intrapulmonary bronchus. Many medioventral and lat-
eroventral secondary bronchi open through ostia into the cervical,
clavicular, cranial thoracic, caudal thoracic, and abdominal air sacs.
Air sacs
With a few notable exceptions, most birds have nine pulmonary air
sacs that connect to the lungs: two cervical, an unpaired clavicular,
two cranial and two caudal thoracic, and two abdominal air sacs.
Some exceptions include storks, where each caudal thoracic air sac
is divided in two, making 11 air sacs; domestic fowl, where the cer-
vical air sacs are fused, making eight air sacs; songbirds, where the
cranial thoracic air sacs are fused to the single median clavicular
sac, making seven air sacs in all; and turkeys, where the caudal tho-
racic air sacs are absent and they have a fused cervicoclavicular air
sac, making seven definitive air sacs [15]. In contrast to the pulmo-
nary air sacs, the cervicocephalic air sacs are not connected to the
lung and are divided into cephalic and cervical portions; they
connect to caudal aspects of the infraorbital sinus. Extensive cervi-
cocephalic air sac development has been noted in budgerigars,
cockatiels, conures, Amazon parrots, macaws, and cockatoos.
Air sacs are thin-walled, vessel-poor structures composed of
simple squamous epithelium; they do not significantly contribute
to gas exchange [17,18]. In chickens (Gallus gallus domesticus),
adrenergic and cholinergic nerve plexuses have been described in
the walls of air sacs, along with vasoactive intestinal peptide and
fibers containing substance P, somatostatin, and enkephalin-
immunoreactive fibers [18]. To a varying extent, depending upon
the species, diverticula from the pulmonary air sacs aerate the
cervical vertebrae, some of the thoracic vertebrae, vertebral ribs,
sternum, humerus, pelvis, and head and body of the femur [15].
The pulmonary air sacs functionally provide a flow of air to
the relatively rigid avian lung which changes in volume by only
1.4% [19]. Based on their bronchial connections, air sacs are
grouped into a cranial group consisting of the cervical, clavicular,
and cranial thoracic air sacs, and a caudal group consisting of
the caudal thoracic and abdominal air sacs [20]. The volume is
distributed approximately equally between the cranial and caudal
groups [21]. During ventilation, all air sacs are effectively venti-
lated, with the possible exception of the cervical air sacs; the ratio of
ventilation to volume is similar for each air sac [21,22].
Muscles of respiration and the thoracic skeleton
In birds, unlike in mammals, inspiration and expiration are active
processes requiring muscular activity. Birds lack a muscular dia-
phragm, so pressures do not differ between the thoracic and
abdominal cavities [11,15,16,23]. Inspiration and expiration occur
through movement of the sternum by contraction of the cervical,
thoracic, and abdominal muscles [16,23]. As the inspiratory mus-
cles contract, the internal volume of the thoracoabdominal cavity
increases (Fig. 58.4). Since air sacs are the only volume-compliant
structures in the body cavity [19], pressure within the air sacs
becomes negative relative to ambient atmospheric pressure, and air
flows from the atmosphere into the pulmonary system, specifically
into the pulmonary air sacs and across the gas exchange surfaces of
the lungs. During expiration, pressure within the air sacs becomes
positive relative to ambient atmospheric pressure, and air flows
from the air sacs and pulmonary system to the environment.
Gas exchange component
Tertiary bronchi (parabronchi) and air capillaries
A parabronchus (tertiary bronchus) and its mantle of surrounding
tissue, consisting of air capillaries and blood capillaries, is the basic
unit of gas exchange. Paleopulmonic parabronchi are long, narrow
tubes that anastomose and connect the medioventral to the
Back
Vertebral ribs
(unicate
processes
removed)
Sternal
ribs
Sternum
Furcula Coracoid
Sternum
Sternal
ribs
Vertebral
column
Vertebral ribs
(unicate processes
removed)
Figure 58.4 Changes in the position of the thoracic skeleton
during breathing in a bird. The solid lines represent the
thoracic position at the end of expiration while the dotted
lines show the thoracic position at the end of inspiration.
Source: Fedde MR. Respiration. In: Sturkie PD, ed. Avian
Physiology, 4th edn. New York, NY: Springer-Verlag, 1986;
191–220.

-- 1145 of 1450 --

1130 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
mediodorsal secondary bronchi; the neopulmonic parabronchi
profusely interconnect mainly the laterodorsal and lateroventral
secondary bronchi [19] (Fig. 58.5A and B). There is a network of
smooth muscle surrounding the entrances to the parabronchi; elec-
trical stimulation of the vagus nerve causes the smooth muscle to
contract, thus narrowing the parabronchial openings [24]. The
inner surfaces of the tubular parabronchi are pierced by numerous
openings into chambers called “atria” that are separated from each
other by inter-atrial septa (Fig. 58.6A and B) covered by a thin epi-
thelial layer with a core of densely packed bundles of smooth mus-
cle framing the atrial openings [15]. Since the avian lung is richly
innervated with vagal and sympathetic nerves, it is possible that
afferent and efferent neural pathways exist for controlling pulmo-
nary smooth muscle, thus varying airflow through the parabron-
chial lung in response to a variety of stimuli [20].
Arising from the abluminal floor of each atrium are funnel-
shaped ducts (infundibulae) that lead to air capillaries measuring 3
to 20 μm in diameter, and which are globular in shape, not tubular
as previously alleged, and that interconnect via short, narrow pas-
sageways; the blood capillaries with which the air capillaries
entwine consist of segments that are about as long as they are wide
and form an anastomosing three-dimensional network spatially
arranged in the exchange tissue [19]. It is in this highly compact
tissue of air and blood capillaries that gas exchange occurs [19]
(Fig. 58.7A–C).
The law of Laplace (P = γ/r; where P is opening pressure, γ is
surface tension, and r is radius of tubule) applied to small-diameter
tubules, such as air capillaries, indicates that high surface tensions
result and generate significant negative pressure across the blood–
gas barrier that could lead to influx of fluid or collapse the
tubules [25]. However, air and blood capillaries possess innate
structural elements that preserve their anatomic and gas exchange
integrity [26]. These elements form an interdependent, tightly cou-
pled network of tension and compression – a tensegrity state – in
the avian lung that gives the lungs their shape while strengthening
the air and blood capillaries, thus preserving their function [19].
Paleopulmonic and neopulmonic parabronchi: lung
volumes and direction of gas flow
There are two types of parabronchial tissue: (1) paleopulmonic
parabronchial tissue (paleopulmonic lung), found in all birds, con-
sisting of parallel stacks of profusely anastomosing parabronchi;
and (2) neopulmonic parabronchial tissue (neopulmonic lung), a
meshwork of anastomosing parabronchi located in the caudolateral
portion of the lung, the degree of development of which is species-
dependent (Fig. 58.8A–C). Penguins and emu have only paleopul-
monic parabronchi. Pigeons, ducks, and cranes have both
paleopulmonic and neopulmonic parabronchi with the neopulmo-
nic parabronchi accounting for 10–12% of the total lung volume. In
fowl-like and song birds, the neopulmonic parabronchi are more
developed and may account for 20–25% of total lung volume.
Paleopulmonic and neopulmonic parabronchi are histologically
indistinguishable from each other [19].
Compared to mammals, specific total lung volume in birds is
about 27% smaller, but specific surface area of the blood–gas (tis-
sue) barrier is ~15% greater; the ratio of the tissue surface area to
the volume of the exchange tissue is 170–305% greater [27]. The
harmonic mean thickness of the tissue barrier in birds is 56–67%
less (less resistance to gas diffusion) and the pulmonary capillary
blood volume is 22% greater. With the exception of specific total
lung volume, these morphometric parameters favor the gas
exchange capacity of birds [27].
The specific volume (respiratory gas volume per unit body mass)
of the avian pulmonary system is between 100 and 200 mL/kg, but
the volume of gas in the parabronchi and air capillaries where gas
exchange occurs accounts for only 10% of the total specific vol-
ume [21]. By comparison, a dog’s specific volume is 45 mL/kg, and
the pulmonary gas volume in the mammalian lung is 96% of the
total specific volume. Because the ratio of residual gas volume (i.e.,
gas in the lungs) to tidal volume is so much smaller in birds than in
mammals, it has been suggested that cyclic changes in the direction
of parabronchial gas flow (i.e., tidal flow) could produce significant
and intolerable cyclic changes in gas exchange analogous to breath
Ventrobronchial connection
to cervical air sac
Mesobronchial
connection to trachea
Laterobronchial
connection to caudal
thoracic air sac
Mesobronchial
connection to
abdominal air sac
Connection to trachea
Connection to cranial
thoracic air sac
Ventrobronchi
Mesobronchus
Dorsobronchi
Parabronchi
Connection to
abdominal air sac
Connection to cervical air sac	Ventrobronchial connection to cranial
thoracic and clavicular air sacs
Parabronchi
Dorsal
(A) 	(B)
Figure 58.5 Two views of secondary bronchi and parabronchi in the right lung of a goose. A. Medial view. B. Dorsal view. Source: Brackenbury, JH.
Ventilation of the lung-air sac system. In: Seller TJ, ed. Bird Respiration, Vol I. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1987; with permission.

-- 1146 of 1450 --

Chapter 58: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Birds 	1131
holding [28]. The unidirectional flow of gas within the paleopulmo-
nic lung solves this problem.
Direction of gas flow and gas exchange
During a respiratory cycle, the direction of gas flow in the paleopul-
monic parabronchi is caudocranial, continuous, and unidirectional,
but in the neopulmonic parabronchi it is tidal (i.e., the direction of
flow changes during the respiratory cycle [19] (Fig. 58.9A and B).
The exact course of inspired air through the avian respiratory sys-
tem has been debated for years, but now a general consensus exists
on its route during respiratory cycles [19]. It takes two inspiratory
and two expiratory cycles for inspired air to pass through the lung–
air sac system [19]. During the first inspiratory cycle, the air flows
through the trachea and the extrapulmonary and intrapulmonary
primary bronchi (mesobronchus) and then the caudal air sacs; in
the next breathing cycle (the first expiratory cycle), the air is
expelled from the caudal air sacs and directed into the parabron-
chial system of the lung via the mediodorsal secondary bronchi;
during the next breathing cycle, (the second inspiratory cycle), the
air in the parabronchial system moves to the cranial air sacs; and in
the subsequent breathing cycle (the second expiratory cycle), the air
in the cranial air sacs is expelled to the outside through the extrapul-
monary primary bronchus and the trachea. The unidirectional flow
of gas through the paleopulmonic parabronchi is probably due to
aerodynamic valves, not mechanical valves [19]. Although poorly
understood, the mechanisms involved probably include the orien-
tation of secondary bronchial and air sac orifices to the direction of
gas flow, elastic pressure differences between the cranial and caudal
group of air sacs, and gas convective inertial forces [18].
Cross-current model of gas exchange
The movement of gas within the parabronchi and outwards into the
atria and infundibulae is by convective flow and then by diffusion
into the air capillaries [29,30]. Blood flows from the periphery via
the interparabronchial artery and arterioles, ultimately flowing into
the blood capillaries where it meets the outward-moving air capil-
laries. The cross-current model and its multicapillary serial arteri-
alization system best describe gas exchange in the avian lung. The
multicapillary serial arterialization system increases the duration
over which the respiratory media (air and blood) are exposed to
each other [18]. Thus, the quantity of oxygen and carbon dioxide in
the oxygenated blood that ultimately returns to the heart via the
pulmonary vein is derived from an aggregate effect of very small
quantities exchanged at the infinitely many points where the air and
blood capillaries contact [19]. Reversing the direction of air or
blood flow in a multicapillary serial arterialization system only
changes the sequence in which the blood is arterialized in the blood
capillaries; the overall amount of oxygen that is exchanged does not
change [19]. Within the avian lung is a counter-current system cre-
ated by the centripetal (inward) flow of deoxygenated blood and the
centrifugal (radial, outward) flow of air from the parabronchial
lumen [18,19]. However, since the air and blood capillaries entwine
very closely, at any one point they contact over very short distances
that may fall far short of the critical lengths needed for efficient gas
exchange in a “conventional counter-current system.” (Fig. 58.10).
The significance of this counter-current system for gas exchange
under normal physiologic conditions is uncertain; under extreme
conditions (flight at altitude), such an arrangement may contribute
to gas exchange.
The efficiency of the avian lung can be put into perspective by
considering what happens to the partial pressures of carbon dioxide
(A)
(B)
Figure 58.6 Three-dimensional drawings of a parabronchus and an atrium.
A. Sagittal section of a parabronchus. On the left side are atria with
infundibula departing from them and the three-dimensional air capillary
meshwork arising from the infundibula. On the right side within the
interparabronchial septa are the arterioles (dense stippling) from which the
capillaries originate and run radially to the lumen. The infundibula lie
between the capillaries which are surrounded by a well-developed
three-dimensional air capillary network. B. Atrium and infundibulum. At
the left, two of the circular smooth muscle bundles surrounding the lumen
of the parabronchus are shown in cross-section. The atria are separated by
septa running horizontally and vertically. Originating from each atrium a
few infundibula pass perpendicularly into the parabronchial mantle. At the
right, an infundibulum is shown in longitudinal section with air capillaries
arising from it at all levels. The air capillaries cross-link and interlace,
making up a three-dimensional meshwork around the blood capillaries.
The very thin epithelium of the air capillaries and its surfactant film are
shown as a single dark line. Source: Duncker [11], reproduced with
permission from Elsevier.

-- 1147 of 1450 --

1132 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
(A) 	(B) 	(C)
Figure 58.7 Three-dimensional reconstruction showing the intimate intertwining of blood and air capillaries in the paleopulmonic lung of the ostrich
(Struthio camelus). A. Combined three-dimensional reconstructions of the blood capillary (BC, red) and air capillary (AC, cyan) systems. B. Three-
dimensional reconstruction of the blood capillaries. C. Three-dimensional reconstruction of the air capillaries. Scale bars = 20 μm. Source: Maina JN,
Woodward JD. Three-dimensional serial section computer reconstruction of the arrangement of the structural components of the parabronchus of the
ostrich, Struthio camelus lung. Anat Rec (Hoboken) 2009; 292(11): 1685–1698, with permission.
Paleopulmonic
parabronchi
(A)
(C)
(B)
Medioventral
secondary
bronchus
Cervical
air sac
Trachea 	Clavicular
air sac
Cranial thoracic
air sac
Lateroventral
secondary bronchus
Caudal thoracic
air sac
Intrapulmonary primary
bronchus
Abdominal
air sac
Mediodorsal
secondary bronchi
Paleopulmonic
parabronchi
Medioventral
secondary
bronchus
Cervical
air sac
Trachea 	Clavicular
air sac
Cranial thoracic
air sac
Caudal thoracic
air sac
Abdominal
air sac
Neopulmonic parabronchi
Mediodorsal
secondary bronchi
Paleopulmonic
parabronchi
Medioventral
secondary
bronchus
Cervical
air sac
Trachea 	Clavicular
air sac
Cranial thoracic
air sac
Caudal thoracic
air sac
Abdominal
air sac
Neopulmonic
parabronchi
Mediodorsal
secondary bronchi
Figure 58.8 Diagram of paleopulmonic and neopulmonic lungs. A. The paleopulmonic lung found in penguins and emus. B. The paleopulmonic and
neopulmonic lung found in storks, ducks, and geese. C. The paleopulmonic and the more highly developed neopulmonic lung found in chickens,
sparrows, and other songbirds. Source: Fedde [20], with permission of Elsevier.

-- 1148 of 1450 --

Chapter 58: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Birds 	1133
(CO2
) and oxygen (O 2 ) both in respired gas flowing through the
lung and in blood perfusing the lung. As gas flows along a para-
bronchus, it receives CO 2 and gives off O 2 such that gas at the inflow
end of the parabronchus has the lowest partial pressure of CO 2
,
while gas at the outflow end has the highest partial pressure of CO 2
;
the reverse is true of O 2
. The overall result, under hypoxic condi-
tions and during exercise, is that the partial pressure of CO 2 in
end- parabronchial gas (PE CO2
) can exceed the partial pressure of
CO 2 in arterial blood (PaCO2 ), and the partial pressure of O2 in
end-parabronchial gas (PE
O2
) can be lower than the partial pressure
of O 2 in arterial blood (PaO 2
) [31–33]. This potential overlap of
blood and gas partial pressure ranges for both CO 2 and O 2 demon-
strates the high gas exchange efficiency of the avian lung [31,32].
Thus, there is no equivalent of alveolar gas because parabronchial
(A)
(B)
Ventrobronchi 	Dorsobronchi
Intraclavicular
sac
Trachea
Syrinx Primary
bronchus
Segmentum
accelerans
Cranial
thoracic
sac
Caudal
thoracic
sac
Laterobronchus
Abdominal
sac
Ventrobronchi 	Dorsobronchi
Intraclavicular
sac
Trachea
Syrinx Primary
bronchus
Segmentum
accelerans
Cranial
thoracic
sac
Caudal
thoracic
sac
Laterobronchus
Abdominal
sac
P
a
l
e
o
p
u
l
m
o
n
i
c
p
a
r
a
b
r
o
n
c
h
i
I
n
t
r
a
p
u
l
m
o
n
a
r
y
b
r
o
n
c
h
u
s
P
a
l
e
o
p
u
l
m
o
n
i
c
p
a
r
a
b
r
o
n
c
h
i
I
n
t
r
a
p
u
l
m
o
n
a
r
y
b
r
o
n
c
h
u
s
Figure 58.9 Schematic representation of gas flow through the avian pulmonary system during inspiration and expiration. The neopulmonic lung has been
removed for clarity. A. Inspiration. B. Expiration. Source: Adapted from Brown et al. [9]; Fedde [20].

-- 1149 of 1450 --

1134 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
gas continuously changes in composition as it flows along the
length of the parabronchus [34]. Practically speaking, this means
the avian lung can extract 40 cm3 of oxygen from each liter of
inspired air, whereas the mammalian lung can extract 30 cm3 of
oxygen [19].
Control of ventilation
Birds have many of the same physiologic components for respira-
tory control as mammals, such as a central respiratory pattern gen-
erator, central chemoreceptors sensitive to PCO2
, and many similar
peripheral chemoreceptors [35]. Birds have a unique group of
peripheral receptors located in the lung called “intrapulmonary
chemoreceptors” (IPCs) that are vagal respiratory afferents inhib-
ited by high lung PCO2 and excited by low lung PCO2 , thus provid-
ing phasic feedback for the control of breathing, specifically rate
and depth of breathing [35–38]. They are not mechanoreceptors
and they are insensitive to hypoxia [39,40]. However, IPCs are not
the sole receptors stimulated by inhaled gas containing low partial
pressures of CO 2
; arterial and central chemoreceptors are also
stimulated [41].
There may be species differences in CO 2 responsiveness depend-
ing upon the ecologic niche a given species occupies. The CO2
responsiveness of IPCs in chickens, ducks, emus, and pigeons is
greater than that of burrowing owls that live underground where
the CO 2 concentration is higher than that of above-ground- dwelling
birds [42,43].
Cardiovascular system
The avian heart is a four-chambered muscular pump that separates
venous blood from arterial blood. Birds have larger hearts, larger
stroke volumes, lower heart rates, and higher cardiac output than
mammals of comparable body mass [44]. Birds also have higher
blood pressure than mammals [44,45]. The atria and ventricles are
innervated by sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves [46], and
norepinephrine and epinephrine are the principal sympathetic neu-
rotransmitters while acetylcholine is the principal parasympathetic
neurotransmitter.
The conduction system of the avian heart consists of the sinoatrial
node, the atrioventricular node and its branches, and Purkinje fib-
ers [46]. Two groups of animals can be identified by the depth and
degree to which Purkinje fibers ramify within the ventricular myo-
cardium, and the pattern of ramification is classified as type 1 or 2
(or category A or B) [47]. The pattern of Purkinje fiber distribution
within the ventricular myocardium is responsible for QRS mor-
phology. In birds, Purkinje fibers completely penetrate the ventric-
ular myocardium from endocardium to epicardium and the pattern
of ventricular activation is described as type 2b, a pattern that may
facilitate synchronous beating at high heart rates [48].
Renal portal system
The avian kidney receives venous blood from the legs via the renal
portal circulation, and arterial blood via the arterial circula-
tion [49,50]. The flow of afferent venous blood, unlike in other
Interparabronchial artery
(deoxygenated blood)
Intraparabronchial
artery 	Blood capillary 	Air capillary
Parabronchial lumen
Multicapillary serial artezialization system
Exchange tissue
Medioventral
secondary
bronchus
Mediodorsal
secondary
bronchus
Inspired air
Multicapillary serial arterialization
system
Counter-current system	Cross-current system
Expired air
Blood capillary
(deoxygenated blood)
Air capillary
(air)
Parabronchial lumen
(air)
Blood capillary
(deoxygenated blood)
Parabronchus lumen
Interparabronchial artery
Air and blood
capillaries
Intraparabronchial
vein
Interparabronchial vein
(oxygenated blood)
Figure 58.10 Diagram depicting the three intertwined systems involved in gas exchange in the avian parabronchus: cross-current, counter-current, and
multicapillary serial arterialization. The cross-current system consists of air flowing in the parabronchial lumen at right angles to that of deoxygenated
blood flowing from the periphery of the parabronchus (small pink arrows). The counter-current system is formed by the centripetal flow of deoxygenated
blood in the blood capillaries relative to the centrifugal diffusion of air in the air capillaries (black dashed arrows). The multicapillary serial arterialization
system is formed by multiple successive contacts between the air and blood capillaries in the gas exchange tissue (dashed yellow circles). For clarity, the
atria and infundibula are not shown. The shading of blood from blue to red in the intraparabronchial vein reflects the increasing oxygenation of blood as
it passes through the parabronchial gas exchange tissue. Source: Maina [19], with permission.

-- 1150 of 1450 --

Chapter 58: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Birds 	1135
non- mammalian vertebrates, is not obligatory; venous blood can
either perfuse the renal parenchyma or bypass it and enter the cen-
tral circulation. A unique valve-like structure, the shape of which
varies from species to species, is located within the external iliac
vein where the efferent renal vein joins it [49]. The valve contains
smooth muscle innervated by adrenergic and cholinergic nerves.
Epinephrine causes the valve to relax (open) and venous blood
from the legs enters the central circulation, whereas acetylcholine
causes it to contract (close) and venous blood perfuses the kid-
ney [49,51]. The control of renal valve activity is complex and its
effects on drug uptake are not fully understood.
Preanesthetic patient evaluation
and preparation
Physical restraint
Proper physical restraint of a bird is a crucial aspect of anesthetic
management. In general, a bird is restrained so that its wings and
legs are controlled and not allowed to flap or kick about. For long-
necked birds such as herons and cranes, the neck must be gently
controlled so that the bird does not suffer head, eye, or neck trauma;
restraining the bird’s head and neck also protects the handler.
Improper restraint can cause a variety of problems for a bird,
including physical trauma (wing or leg fractures), or physiological
stress with increased levels of catecholamines, especially epinephrine,
which may predispose to cardiovascular instability [46,52]. Physical
restraint can cause significant changes in heart and respiratory
rates, and body temperature.
Because birds cannot dissipate heat through the skin, they can
become stressed and easily overheated with prolonged restraint. For
example, during 15 min of restraint of Amazon parrots (Amazona
spp.), the average cloacal temperature increased significantly by
4.3 °F while mean respiratory rates increased significantly from
129 to 252 breaths/min [53]. This emphasizes the importance of
limiting restraint time and watching for tachypnea, even in healthy
birds, so as to avoid potentially life-threatening increases in body
temperature [53]. However, in restrained birds, the behavioral
indicators of stress – increased respiratory and heart rates – may
vary by species.
In barred owls (Strix varia), heart and respiratory rates decreased
significantly during 15 min of restraint while body temperature sig-
nificantly increased [54]. In a study of red-tailed hawks (Buteo
jamaicensis) manually restrained for 15 min while hooded or not
hooded, heart and respiratory rates decreased significantly while
cloacal temperature increased significantly regardless of hooding;
when hooded, the hawks had significantly lower heart and respira-
tory rates than when not hooded [55]. Thus, hooding amplified the
decrease in heart rate and respiratory rate compared to nonhooding
but had no effect on stress-induced hyperthermia [55]. It would seem
that barred owls and red-tailed hawks cope differently with restraint-
associated stress when compared to psittacine species [54].
In a study of geese conditioned over several weeks to 5 min of
physical restraint, the humoral indices of stress – catecholamines,
corticosterone, and lactate – significantly increased within 2 min
after the start of physical restraint despite weeks of conditioning to
restraint and the fact that the birds appeared outwardly calm [56].
Thus, the absence of stress cannot be deduced from behavioral
observations only [56].
Anesthesia and sedation may ameliorate the humoral stress
response. Awake and manually restrained Hispaniolan Amazon
parrots had significantly higher serum corticosterone levels
(33.7 ± 2.83 ng/mL) than when anesthetized with isoflurane
(19.8 ± 1.97 ng/mL) [57]. In manually restrained Hispaniolan
Amazon parrots (Amazona ventralis) administered midazolam
(2 mg/kg) intranasally, the mean rate of cloacal temperature increase
was significantly slower and remained significantly lower in birds
that received midazolam compared with controls [58].
Understanding the physical characteristics and defense mecha-
nisms birds possess is crucial for effective restraint that protects
both the bird and handler. Each avian species has its own unique
and effective means of defense and attack. Birds of prey will use
their talons and inflict severe physical trauma on a handler or assis-
tant, and the risk of infection from such wounds is quite real.
Although most birds of prey do not bite, they can and will use their
talons and beak to great effect. Psittacines have very strong beaks
that can cause severe soft tissue injury. Cranes and herons use their
long, pointed beaks in a spearing manner, and they tend to strike at
eyes, a reason for wearing eye protection when working with these
birds. Cranes and ratites, such as emus and ostriches, also will jump
and strike forward with their legs and clawed feet; an adult ratite
can produce a very powerful and dangerous strike-kick.
Physical examination
Every bird should be given a thorough physical examination prior
to anesthesia. A number of excellent texts describe in detail the
techniques for physical examination and what to look for in specific
avian species [59–61]. In general, quiet observation of a bird in its
cage will provide a great deal of information. A bird’s awareness of
and attention to its surrounding environment, body form, and pos-
ture, feather condition, and respiratory rate provide clues to its
physical condition. Birds should be removed from their cage and
examined, with particular attention given to the respiratory and
cardiovascular systems. For small species, a stethoscope with a
pediatric head should be used for cardiopulmonary examinations.
For those species with a crop, it should be palpated in the thoracic
inlet to make sure it is empty. The pectoral muscles over the keel
should be assessed as they are a good indicator of body condition.
Fasting
A reasonable approach for healthy birds is to withhold food long
enough for the upper gastrointestinal tract to empty, usually over-
night in large birds and 4 to 6 h in smaller birds [62]. For raptorial
species, a 24 h fast is recommended. In an emergency, a bird with a
full crop should be held upright during induction with a finger
positioned just below the mandible so as to block the esopha-
gus [62]. Once the bird is anesthetized, the crop can be emptied by
placing a finger covered with gauze over the choanal slits to prevent
food from entering the nasal cavity and then milking the food con-
tents out of the crop and esophagus [62]. At the end of anesthesia,
the oral cavity should be checked for and cleaned of food material
to prevent aspiration.
General pharmacologic considerations
Routes of drug administration
Sedation offers numerous benefits in avian medicine, including
attenuation of stress responses caused by manual restraint and
ease of diagnostic sample collection and imaging, and it may
decrease the risk of morbidity and mortality in critically ill
patients [63,64]. There are a number of routes by which sedative
and anesthetic drugs can be administered to birds. Subcutaneous
injection sites include the area over the back between the
wings, the wing web, and the skin fold in the inguinal region.

-- 1151 of 1450 --

1136 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
Intramuscular injections can be made in the pectoral and thigh
muscles. In birds, drugs injected intramuscularly in the hind limb
or caudal body might be carried in the blood through the renal
portal system and perfuse the kidneys such that some portion of
the injected drug may be excreted by the kidney without reaching
the general systemic circulation, or it may bypass the kidneys and
undergo first-pass hepatic metabolism [65]. In great horned owls
administered butorphanol either via the jugular vein or the
medial metatarsal vein, the AUC 0→∞ after medial metatarsal vein
administration was significantly less than the AUC 0→∞ after jugu-
lar vein administration of the drug, results indicating a possible
renal portal first-pass effect, but no other kinetic parameters
were significantly different [66]. In a pharmacokinetic study of
florfenicol, an antibiotic, there was no evidence of an influence of
the renal portal system on its kinetic parameters when injected
into the leg muscles [65].
For intravenous injections as well as for catheterization, the
ulnar vein, dorsal metatarsal vein, and jugular vein can be used;
the right jugular vein is larger and easier to visualize than the left
jugular vein. The ulnar vein can be catheterized in birds as small
as cockatiels. An alternative non-invasive route that is safe and
rapidly induces sedation in birds (first effect within 3–5 min) is
the intranasal route [64]. When using this route, tissue trauma
associated with IM injections and subsequent elevations of mus-
cle enzymes in clinical chemistry tests are avoided, and it is not
painful. Its limitations are that there may be incomplete drug
delivery to a bird due to sneezing, physiologically narrowed nos-
trils, such as in cockatoos, and upper airway disease, such as
blocked or stenotic nostrils [64]. Intranasal delivery of drugs is
made with either an insulin syringe (0.5 mL) or tuberculin
syringe (1.0 mL) [64].
The intranasal route (IN) has been used to administer a variety
of sedative and analgesic drugs to facilitate minor therapeutic pro-
cedures in a variety of birds. Xylazine, diazepam, and midazolam
have been administered IN to budgerigars (Melopsittacus undulatus)
and finches [67,68], and juvenile ostriches (Struthio camelus)
weighing 50–61 kg and aged 4–5 months [69]. Midazolam, deto-
midine, or combinations of midazolam, xylazine, and ketamine
have been administered IN to ring-necked parakeets and success-
fully reversed with flumazenil, yohimbine, or atipamezole [70].
Intranasal midazolam and diazepam produced rapid and effective
sedation in canaries, and xylazine and detomidine produced seda-
tion but not sustained recumbency; specific antagonists (flumaze-
nil and yohimbine) effectively reversed sedation [71]. In pigeons,
a combination of midazolam and dexmedetomidine administered
IN produced an effective degree of immobilization lasting 20 to
30 min, which was partially antagonized with atipamezole 10 min
after its application [72]. In wild blue-and-yellow macaws (Ara
ararauna), midazolam (2 mg/kg) divided into two equal volumes,
was administered IN over 3–5 s via a 24 gauge catheter inserted
approximately 2–5 mm into each nostril; sedation occurred in
77% of the macaws and lasted on average 20 min without adverse
side effects [73]. In a project involving implantation of intracoe-
lomic satellite transmitters in female surf scoters (Melanitta per-
spicillata), 26 were administered midazolam (4.6–5.9 mg/kg)
intranasally, and the same volume of saline (1 mL) was given to
another 26 adult female surf scoters [74]. The odds of presumed
death in the saline group were 5.3 times higher than in the
midazolam-treated group; the presumed mortality at 30 days for
the midazolam group (23%) was lower than for the saline group
(61%) [74].
Allometric scaling and pharmacokinetics
There is a large number of avian species, each one of which has
species-specific pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic profiles
for each injectable drug [52]. Recognizing this reality, the following
discussion of anesthetic and analgesic drugs will highlight a few key
pharmacological realties pertaining to birds and focus primarily on
drugs for which there are pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic
data. The rational use of drugs is based primarily on our under-
standing of pharmacokinetic behavior coupled with information on
pharmacodynamic activity, an approach that advances avian anes-
thesia and analgesia [75]. The reader is referred elsewhere for a
more comprehensive review of anesthetic and analgesic drugs used
in birds [76].
There are many reasons for using injectable drugs for anesthesia
and analgesia in birds, including low cost, ease of use, rapidity of
anesthetic inductions, no need for expensive equipment to deliver
or maintain anesthesia, minimal if any anesthetic pollution of the
work environment, and possible reduction of inhalant anesthetic
requirements when used in combination. However, injectables also
have inherent disadvantages including: (1) difficulty in delivering a
safe volume to small birds, (2) ease in overdosing by any route, (3)
difficulty in maintaining surgical anesthesia without severe cardio-
pulmonary depression, (4) the potential for prolonged, violent
recoveries, and (5) significant variation in dose and response among
and within species [52,77].
Allometric scaling has been used to determine doses of drugs
used in birds [78–81]. Indeed, in the absence of pharmacokinetic
data for a drug, general principles of allometric scaling may serve as
a rational basis for understanding how body mass or metabolic rate
affects drug doses, but there are limitations in its application.
Allometric equations, with some exceptions, are based on the
assumption that all birds are pharmacologically similar, and only
distinguish between two large groups of birds – passerines and non-
passerines – a distinction that ignores the many structural and
functional differences in the kidneys of birds within these two
groups [51]. Drugs used in birds are formulated primarily for mam-
mals. Differences in anatomy and physiology of the two classes of
animals make it difficult to achieve pharmacokinetic equivalency
between birds and mammals using allometric equations that do not
take these differences into consideration [51,82]. Using allometric
scaling, it may be possible to derive some pharmacokinetic param-
eters for a drug, but not all necessary parameters that would allow
for safe administration of a drug [83,84]. Allometric scaling is not
useful for extrapolating doses of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs) between avian species [85]. The pharmacologic
reality is that for safe use of drugs in birds, we need pharmacoki-
netic and pharmacodynamic data.
Early pharmacodynamic studies identified significant differ-
ences in response among avian species administered the same
drug [52,86,87]. For example, the commercially available form of
ketamine, which consists of a racemic mixture of S(+)- and R(−)-
enantiomers, produces poor-quality chemical restraint and anes-
thesia in great horned and snowy owls [87]. When great horned
owls receive only the S(+)-enantiomer of ketamine, anesthesia
induction is smoother and there are fewer cardiac arrhythmias,
whereas the R(−)-enantiomer is associated with inadequate
muscle relaxation, cardiac arrhythmias, and excitement during
recovery [87]. It is unknown whether these differences are due to
differing metabolic pathways among birds, production of phar-
macologically active metabolites, or differences in types of recep-
tors or receptor sensitivity.

-- 1152 of 1450 --

Chapter 58: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Birds 	1137
Drugs used for analgesia and anesthesia
Opioids
Recognizing and assessing pain in birds can be difficult because it
relies on an understanding of species and individual normal behav-
iors that could be masked in the presence of an observer. Birds tend
to respond to noxious stimuli with a fight-or-flight response (i.e.,
escape reactions, vocalization, and excessive movement), and/or
conservation–withdrawal responses (i.e., no escape attempts or
minimal vocalization and immobility). Pain can change a bird’s
social interactions, such as perching away from the flock, reduction
in social grooming, or interactions with the owner. Grooming
activity may decrease when a bird is painful, but conversely over-
grooming and feather-destructive behaviors have been associated
with chronic pain, which may include neuropathic pain [88]. These
behavioral signs coupled with studies involving psittacines, raptors,
domestic fowl, and pigeons, and using a variety of analgesiometric
techniques and pharmacokinetic studies, have been used to deter-
mine the plasma concentrations of drugs that produce analgesia in
birds (for examples, see [89–94]).
Few studies have been conducted regarding the distribution, quan-
tity, structure, and function of each opioid receptor type in birds. In an
earlier study in pigeons, the regional distribution of μ (mu), κ (kappa),
and δ (delta) opioid receptors in the forebrain and midbrain were
similar to mammals, but the κ- and δ-opioid receptors were more
prominent in the pigeon forebrain and midbrain than μ-opioid recep-
tors and 76% of opioid receptors in the forebrain were determined to
be κ-type [95]. These findings, together with earlier studies in opioids
in birds, led to a paradigm in which κ-opioid receptor agonists such as
butorphanol were considered the drugs of choice for pain manage-
ment in birds. More recent studies of opioid receptors in chicks [96],
pigeons, and cockatiels [97] challenge this paradigm and suggest that
μ-opioid receptor agonist drugs might actually be better choices for
some avian species when treating pain. The results of recent studies
are described in the following paragraphs. Interestingly, when looking
at the structure of opioid receptors (μ, κ, and δ) in the peregrine falcon
(Falco peregrinus), snowy owl (Bubo scandiacus), and blue-fronted
Amazon parrot (Amazona aestiva), nucleotide homologies with
humans ranging from 77–82% were found, which might account for
some of the differences seen in the efficacy of these drugs [98]. Most
importantly, the large variability in pharmacokinetics and pharmaco-
dynamics between species, and in some cases significant age- and sex-
dependent variability, has clearly shown that making pharmacologic
generalizations across the class Aves, and extrapolating drug doses
from one avian species to another must be exercised cautiously [75].
Butorphanol
Butorphanol has been studied in gray parrots and Timneh parrots
(Psittacus erithacus and Psittacus timneh) [89], domestic pigeons [99],
red-tailed hawks (Buteo jamaicensis) and great horned owls (Bubo
virginianus) [66], Hispaniolan Amazon parrots (Amazona ventra-
lis) 	[90,100–104], 	broiler 	chickens 	(Gallus 	gallus 	domesti-
cus) [105,106], Indian peafowl (Pavo cristatus) [107], sulphur-crested
cockatoos and yellow-crested cockatoos (Cacatua galerita, Cacatua
sulphurea cintrinocristata and Cacatua sulphurea sulphurea) [108],
green-cheeked conures (Pyrrhura molinae) [101], American kestrels
(Falco sparverius) [109], and orange-winged Amazon parrots
(Amazona amazonica) [104]. Most of these studies have evaluated
the pharmacokinetics of the standard butorphanol tartrate formula-
tion and some sustained-release formulations, but only a few have
evaluated the potential analgesic effects. The pharmacokinetic stud-
ies have shown that butorphanol has excellent parenteral and poor
oral bioavailability (less than 10%), is quickly absorbed following SC
and IM injection, and has a very short half-life (e.g., Hispaniolan
Amazon parrots 0.51 h, red-tailed hawks 0.93 h, great horned owls
1.78 h, American kestrels 1.48 h, and chickens 1.19 h), which makes
frequent intermittent administration (every 2–3 h) or administra-
tion by constant rate infusion (CRI) necessary. Pharmacodynamic
studies have shown that relatively high doses are required in psittac-
ines (e.g., 1 mg/kg in gray parrots when assessed using electrical
antinociception and 5 mg/kg in Amazon parrots when using ther-
mal antinociception) and are associated with a very short duration
of action (between 20 min and 1.5 h) and a relatively small effect;
however, studies are lacking to evaluate the effect of different doses.
A study involving gray parrots, white cockatoos (Cacatua alba),
and blue-fronted Amazon parrots (Amazona aestiva aestiva) and
using the minimum anesthetic concentration (MAC)-sparing tech-
nique to determine the analgesic properties of butorphanol (1 mg/
kg IM) resulted in a reduction of isoflurane MAC in cockatoos and
gray parrots, but not in the blue-fronted Amazon parrots indicating
species variability to either the dose or the drug itself [110]. In white
cockatoos, butorphanol significantly reduced isoflurane MAC from
1.44 ± 0.07% to 1.08 ± 0.05% [108,110]. Based upon these studies,
doses of 1–5 mg/kg have been recommended in psittacines [111].
In raptors, results of the only pharmacodynamic study of butor-
phanol have been very different from those in psittacines. In
American kestrels, doses of 1, 3, and 6 mg/kg IM had no thermal
antinociceptive effects and males showed hyperalgesia at the higher
dose [109]. These results discourage the use of butorphanol for
analgesia in American kestrels and other birds of the Falco genus; it
is unknown if these findings can be extrapolated to other raptors.
Lame broiler chickens receiving butorphanol 2 mg/kg IV fin-
ished an obstacle course faster than the control group, and together
with the latency-to- lie results reported in the same study, this sug-
gests that butorphanol may be analgesic for up to 2 h [106]. The
butorphanol sustained- release formulations used with osmotic
pumps, while promising, unfortunately, are not readily available to
clinicians and are not frequently used.
Nalbuphine
Nalbuphine has been studied in Hispaniolan Amazon parrots with
standard and sustained-release formulations. The pharmacokinetic
studies have shown that the standard formulation of nalbuphine
hydrochloride has a similar profile as butorphanol, with a slightly
shorter half-life. The pharmacodynamic studies using thermal
antinociception resulted in significant results at 12.5 mg/kg for
up to 3 h, while higher doses of 25 and 50 mg/kg were not differ-
ent from control [92,112]. A sustained-release formulation of
nalbuphine had a longer half-life and duration of effect (up to
12 h) [113], but it is not readily available at this time.
Hydromorphone
Hydromorphone has been studied in American kestrels, cockatiels,
and orange-winged Amazon parrots. The pharmacokinetic studies
demonstrated that hydromorphone has good parenteral (IM) bioa-
vailability, is quickly absorbed, and has a longer half-life (e.g., 1.26 h
in American kestrels [114], 0.99 h in cockatiels [115], and 1.74 h in
orange-winged Amazon parrots [116]) than butorphanol in these
species, indicating that frequent administration (approximately
every 3–6 h) would be required. The analgesiometry studies have
shown that relatively high doses are required in psittacines when
compared to raptors. In raptors, the studies in American kestrels
have shown that hydromorphone at 0.1, 0.3, and 0.6 mg/kg IM had

-- 1153 of 1450 --

1138 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
a dose-dependent effect using the thermal antinociception
model [117]. In psittacines, in contrast, studies in cockatiels using
the same antinociceptive dose as in kestrels showed no significant
effect [115]. In orange-winged Amazon parrots, higher doses of
hydromorphone at 1 and 2 mg/kg showed thermal antinociception
for 3–6 h, respectively [118]. Agitation, nausea-like behavior (includ-
ing vomiting in one bird), ataxia, and pupillary constriction were
observed following administration of the 1 and 2 mg/kg hydromor-
phone doses which suggest that lower doses be used in this species.
Morphine
Morphine has been evaluated in multiple studies involving chickens
(Gallus gallus domesticus). The only pharmacokinetic study has fol-
lowed IV administration of 2 mg/kg IV and resulted in a half-life of
68 min, with a large volume of distribution and rapid clear-
ance [119]. Pharmacodynamic results from earlier studies have
been conflicting and difficult to interpret likely due to the high
doses evaluated, but more recent studies suggest that morphine
might have analgesic and MAC-sparing effects in avian species. In
an early study, 200 mg/kg of morphine was injected to suppress
nociception in chicks using the toe pinch test [120], but in a later
study using noxious electrical stimulation, morphine produced
analgesia in chicks at 30 mg/kg [121]. Further investigations using
noxious thermal stimulation reported strain-dependent analgesic
effects of morphine, requiring doses of 15, 30, and 100 mg/kg for
two different White Leghorn lines and a cross of Rhode Island Red
× Light Sussex, respectively [122]; analgesic and hyperalgesic effects
were reported with a 30 mg/kg dose in the Rhode Island Red cross,
and White Leghorn and Cal White strains, respectively [123]. In a
MAC reduction study in chickens, three doses of morphine injected
IV caused a dose-dependent decrease in isoflurane MAC in all
birds. The baseline isoflurane MAC of 1.24 ± 0.05% was reduced
15.1 ± 2.7%, 39.7 ± 3.1%, and 52.4 ± 4.0% at doses of 0.1, 1.0, and
3.0 mg/kg, respectively [124]. In a recent study evaluating the anal-
gesic efficacy of morphine, lame broiler chickens underwent an
obstacle course and latency-to- lie test before and at 30 min and 2 h
after injection of 2 mg/kg IV of morphine to assess their walking
and standing abilities [106]. Morphine treatment caused sedation
even in the sound chickens and resulted in an increased time to fin-
ish the obstacle course as the chicks tended to sit down rather than
walk thereby confounding assessment of its analgesic effects [106].
Fentanyl
Fentanyl has been evaluated in white cockatoos [125], red-tailed
hawks [75,126], helmeted guineafowl (Numida meleagris) [127],
chickens [128,129], and Hispaniolan Amazon parrots [75,130]. The
pharmacokinetic studies have shown significant differences in the
half-life, ranging from 30–90 min, a fact that discourages extrapo-
lating drug doses between avian species. In chickens, 25 μg/h trans-
dermal fentanyl patches have a large variability in plasma
concentrations, but all chickens reached the human target plasma
concentrations of 0.2–1.2 ng/mL within 2–4 h and maintained con-
centrations above that target for 72 h with a rapid decrease in
plasma concentrations following removal of the patch [129]. The
transdermal veterinary formulation evaluated in helmeted guinea-
fowl was discontinued [127]. Pharmacodynamic studies have
shown that significantly higher fentanyl doses or rates of infusion
are needed to achieve desired analgesic or MAC-sparing effects in
psittacines as compared to other species. However, adverse effects
occur at these higher doses or rates, such as agitation in awake
white cockatoos receiving 0.2 mg/kg IM [125], or dose-dependent
decreases in heart rate and blood pressure in anesthetized Hispaniolan
Amazon parrots [130].
In raptors, the findings have been very different, and the rates
required to achieve the same MAC-sparing effects have been 17 times
lower than in psittacines, and without any significant negative effects
on heart rate or blood pressure. Rates of 10–30 μg/kg/h IV decreased
isoflurane MAC in a dose-dependent manner by 31–55% [126].
Methadone
Methadone has been studied in orange-winged Amazon par-
rots [118] and chickens [131,132]. The pharmacokinetic studies
have shown a longer half-life than other opioid drugs but with differ-
ences between species (e.g., orange-winged Amazon parrots 2.3 h,
chickens under anesthesia 3 h). The pharmacodynamic study assess-
ing thermal antinociception suggests that relatively high doses are
required in orange-winged Amazon parrots with an IM dose of
6 mg/kg, but not 1 or 3 mg/kg, resulting in thermal antinociception.
Agitation, ataxia, and nausea-like behavior were observed following
administration, and consideration of lower doses for clinical use in
this species is warranted. In chickens, isoflurane MAC-sparing
effects were documented after IM administration of 6 mg/kg, but
not 3 mg/kg, with reductions of 29%, 27%, and 10% noted at 15, 30,
and 45 min after methadone administration, respectively [132].
Buprenorphine
Buprenorphine has been studied in gray parrots [89,133], domestic
pigeons [99], American kestrels [134–137], red-tailed hawks [138],
cockatiels [94], and orange-winged Amazon parrots [Guzman,
unpublished data]. The pharmacokinetic studies have been per-
formed with standard, sustained-released, and concentrated formu-
lations. Those studies have shown major differences in the half-life
between species (e.g., 1.5 h in American kestrels [135] and 6.23 h in
red- tailed hawks [138]). In red-tailed hawks, 0.3 mg/kg and 1.8 mg/
kg doses using concentrated buprenorphine resulted in plasma con-
centrations being maintained above 1 ng/mL for at least 24 and 48
h, respectively [138]. Results of pharmacodynamic studies in psit-
tacines have been discouraging because of the lack of significant
effect with electrical and thermal antinociception in the species and
doses evaluated (e.g., 0.1 mg/kg IM in gray parrots [89] and 0.6, 1.2,
and 1.8 mg/kg IM in cockatiels [94]). Recent unpublished studies
have shown a small but significant effect in orange-winged Amazon
parrots following 2 mg/kg IM, but not at 1 and 0.1 mg/kg doses
[Guzman, unpublished data]. In contrast, pharmacodynamic stud-
ies in raptors have shown a longer duration of action than other
opioids (e.g., up to 6 to 9 h in American kestrels following 0.6 mg/
kg IM [134]) with mild sedation. High doses have been shown to be
well tolerated and provide longer analgesic effects with moderate
sedation. Sustained-release formulations are commercially availa-
ble (e.g., Buprenorphine SR-LABTM
) and have also been shown to be
well tolerated and associated with prolonged effects (e.g., 24 h fol-
lowing 1.8 mg/kg SC in American kestrels), thus minimizing han-
dling and the need for repeated injections [137].
Tramadol
Tramadol has been evaluated in bald eagles (Haliaeetus leucocepha-
lus) [139], peafowl (Pavo cristatus) [140], red-tailed hawks [141],
Hispaniolan Amazon parrots [142–145], American kestrels [146],
African penguins (Spheniscus demersus) [147], and Muscovy ducks
(Cairina moschata domestica) [148]. Tramadol half-life varies signifi-
cantly between avian species (e.g., red-tailed hawks 1.3 h versus
African penguins 7.3 h). In those species for which pharmacokinetics
studies have been published, the primary active metabolite O-
desmethyltramadol (M1
) has also been measured and at concentra-
tions that would be analgesic in other species; in most cases, it also
has a longer half-life than the parent drug. As there are large

-- 1154 of 1450 --

Chapter 58: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Birds 	1139
differences in oral bioavailability between species, such as 24% in
Hispaniolan Amazon parrots [144] and almost 98% in bald
eagles [139], pharmacokinetic realities must be taken into considera-
tion when extrapolating doses between studies and routes of admin-
istration. Following oral administration, pharmacodynamic studies
of psittacine and raptor species have shown large differences in the
doses required for thermal antinociception, which could be explained
by differences in pharmacokinetics alone. For example, Hispaniolan
Amazon parrots showed thermal antinociception at 30 mg/kg PO
and 5 mg/kg IV [144], but not at 10 or 20 mg/kg PO [145]. On the
other hand, American kestrels treated with 5 mg/kg PO had signifi-
cant antinociception while higher doses of 15 and 30 mg/kg PO
resulted in a shorter duration of action and gastrointestinal adverse
effects in a few birds [146]. No sedation or agitation was seen in these
psittacine and raptor studies. In Muscovy ducks, 30 mg/kg PO effec-
tively improved a number of pain-associated variables in a temporary
intertarsal joint arthritis model as assessed by ground-reactive forces
measured by a pressure-sensitive walkway system [148].
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Over the past two decades the advances in avian pharmacology,
especially pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, have been
impressive. Studies of analgesics have provided insights as to which
drugs in which species are efficacious, and which drugs are ineffec-
tive or potentially toxic. This reality is especially true of non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). To present a laundry
list of NSAIDs and their doses would detract from the central mes-
sage of this section which is that NSAIDs can be effective analgesics
in birds, but they have potential for toxicity. This spectrum of
activity varies with the drug, the dose, and the avian species in ques-
tion. The following provides a historical perspective of NSAIDs and
discusses a few select drugs that highlight the challenges inherent to
their use in birds.
A 2004 report in Nature documented that > 95% of old-world
vultures (Gyps spp.) died in India, Nepal, and Pakistan as a result
of consuming carcasses of animals dosed with the veterinary drug
diclofenac, an NSAID [149–151]. Cows are sacred in India and
Hindu religion, and they often die naturally rather than being
slaughtered for meat; open disposal of livestock carcasses is
the norm. Scavengers, including vultures which are considered
nature’s most successful scavengers and provide an array of eco-
logical, economic, and cultural services [150], have year-round
widespread access to carrion. Studies of the vulture deaths subse-
quently documented that the carcasses contained high levels of
diclofenac and other NSAID residues [151] that cause renal
failure in birds. NSAID toxicity has been reported for raptors,
storks, cranes, and owls, suggesting that the potential conserva-
tion impact of NSAIDs may extend beyond Gyps vultures and
could be significant for New World vultures [152]. However, there
are no reported mortalities for the NSAID meloxicam, which has
been administered to over 700 birds from 60 species, a finding
that supports other studies indicating the suitability of this NSAID
to replace diclofenac in Asia [152].
Meloxicam
Meloxicam, the most frequently used NSAID in birds, has a highly
variable elimination half-life among avian species when adminis-
tered orally or intravenously (Tables 58.1 and 58.2) [82,85,153,154].
Table 58.1 Pharmacokinetic parameters of a single dose of meloxicam administered orally to a variety of avian species.
Group and species 	Cmax
(μg/mL)
Tmax
(h)
t1/2el
(h)
AUC 0–last
(μg·h/mL)
AUC 0–∞
(μg·h/mL)
Oral
bioavailability (%)
Reference
Psittacines
Hispaniolan Amazon parrots
(n = 8; 1 mg/kg)
3.7 ± 1.1 	5.0 ± 3.2 	15.8 ± 8.6 	102 	113 ± 71 	49 to 75
(range)
[155]
Gray parrots
(n = 6; 1 mg/kg)
4.69 ± 0.75 	13.2 ± 3.5 	33.3 ± 3.1 	81.0
(SE 5.73)
97.3 	38.1 ± 3.6 	[156]
Cockatiels
(n = 24; 1 mg/kg)
0.102
(0.019)a
1.27
(17.32)a
0.90
(32.34)a
– 	0.295
(0.019)a
11 	[82]
Raptors
Great horned owls
(n = 5; 0.5 mg/kg)
0.36 ± 0.08 	7.8 ± 4.2 	5.07 ± 4.5 	– 	– 	62 ± 0.15 	[157]
Red-tailed hawks
(n = 5; 0.5 mg/kg)
0.18 ± 0.16 	0.73 ± 0.23 	3.97 ± 3.32 	– 	– 	74 ± 0.48 	[157]
Poultry
White Leghorn
(n = 8; 1 mg/kg)
7.21 ± 3.29 	2.0 ± 0.92 	2.79 ± 1.01 	– 	37.92 ± 6.91 	– 	[158]
Wyandotte
(n = 8; 1 mg/kg)
6.25 ± 1.53 	3.25 ± 2.12 	5.53 ± 1.37 	– 	61.84 ± 14.92 	– 	[158]
Bilgorajska geese
(n = 8; 0.5 mg/kg)
5.19 ± 1.25 	2 (1-4) 	3.65 ± 1.74 	– 	38.1 ± 20.0 	64.2 ± 24.0 	[159]
Other
African penguins
(n = 8; 1 mg/kg)
10.8b
(7.06–21.98)
12.0b
(8.0–24.0)
28.6b
(25.4–60.6)
432.3b
(345.5–763.7)
520.7b
(354.1–856.7)
– 	[160]
American flamingos
(n = 14; 1.0 mg/kg)
1.00 ± 0.88 	1.33 ± 1.32 	3.83 ± 2.64 	– 	2.54 ± 1.48 	– 	[161]
Caribbean flamingos
(n = 5; 3 mg/kg)
1.52b
(0.84–2.38)
3.0b
(1.0–4.0)
1.85b
(0.90–3.24)
– 	– 	[162]
Brown pelicans
(n = 6; 0.2 mg/kg)
1.22
(SE 0.25)
24 	36.3c 	81.0
(SE 5.73)
44.7 	[163]
All data are mean ± SD unless otherwise indicated.
a Population pharmacokinetic study using a sparse sampling protocol; fixed effect parameter; no measurement of individual variability.
b Data are median (min–max).
c Longest elimination half-life reported to date in any avian species.
Cmax
, maximum concentration; Tmax
, time to maximum concentration; t1/2 el
, elimination half-life; AUC, area under the curve.

-- 1155 of 1450 --

1140 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
For example, the elimination half-life (t1/2el
) after oral administra-
tion of meloxicam (1 mg/kg) ranges from a low of 3.83 h in
American flamingos to a high of 36.3 h in brown pelicans [155–
157,160,163]. The clearance (in L/kg/h) of meloxicam can also vary
significantly within the same species. For example, IV administra-
tion to three different age groups of emus yielded significantly
faster clearance in emu chicks (1.32 L/kg/h) compared to adults
(0.387 L/kg/h) [164]. Thus, from species to species and within spe-
cies, there are clinically significant variations in meloxicam metab-
olism and elimination. As previously stated, this large variability in
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics from one avian species
to another, and even significant age- and sex-dependent variability,
show that making pharmacologic generalizations across the class
Aves must be exercised cautiously [75].
The renal and analgesic effects of meloxicam have been evaluated
in gray and Hispaniolan Amazon parrots [165,166]. In gray parrots,
no significant differences were found between hematologic and
plasma biochemical values before and after 14 days of treatment
with meloxicam (0.5 mg/kg IM every 12 h); renal lesions were
absent in 9 of 10 representative post-treatment biopsy sam-
ples [165]. In another study involving gray parrots, the pharma-
cokinetic and long-term renal effects of meloxicam were assessed
via several treatment regimens: 1 mg/kg IM every 24 h for 7 days;
1 mg/kg PO every 24 h for 12 days; and 1.6 mg/kg IM every 24 h for
7 days. Meloxicam plasma concentrations were maintained at val-
ues greater than effective analgesic concentrations described for
other avian species and no adverse clinical renal effects were
detected in this population [166]. However, the authors expressed
concern about the clinical relevance of plasma drug accumulation
and stated that this issue needs further investigation to assess the
safety of prolonged treatment with meloxicam in gray parrots and
other avian species [166].
In gray parrots, the pharmacokinetics of meloxicam (1 mg/kg)
were determined following single IV, IM, and PO administra-
tions [156]. Oral administration resulted in slower absorption (Tmax
of 13.2 ± 3.5 h, and Cmax of 4.69 ± 0.75 μg/mL), and lower bioavail-
ability (38.1 ± 3.6%) compared to the IM route (78.4 ± 5.5%) [156].
At 24 h, plasma concentrations following IV, IM, and PO adminis-
trations were higher than those reported for Hispaniolan Amazon
parrots at 12 h with predicted analgesic effects [156].
Hispaniolan parrots with experimentally induced arthritis had
significantly better return to baseline weight bearing on the arthritic
pelvic limb when treated with meloxicam (1 mg/kg IM) than
control parrots or parrots treated with lower doses of meloxicam.
All fecal samples collected from the parrots following induction of
arthritis and treatment with meloxicam were negative for occult
blood [91].
A pharmacokinetic study in Hispaniolan Amazon parrots admin-
istered meloxicam (1 mg/kg IV, IM, and PO) resulted in mean
plasma concentrations of 3.7 ± 2.5 μg/mL following IV administra-
tion and 3.5 ± 2.2 μg/mL following IM administration [155]. Six
hours after oral administration, the peak mean plasma concentra-
tion was 3.5 ± 1.2 μg/mL. The authors speculated that a mean plasma
concentration of 3.5 μg/mL would provide analgesia in Hispaniolan
Amazon parrots, but the individual variation that was observed may
result in some birds having low plasma meloxicam concentrations
after IV, IM, or oral administration [155].
Carprofen
Much of the literature concerning carprofen describes its
positive analgesic effects in poultry with husbandry-associated
painful conditions [167–171] or experimentally induced arthritis
[172,173].
A few articles have described its effects in non-poultry species. In
Hispaniolan parrots with microcrystalline sodium urate-induced
arthritis, carprofen by itself did not provide effective analge-
sia [174]. Pigeons administered carprofen at 2, 5, or 10 mg/kg IM
once daily for 7 days had increased aspartate aminotransferase and
alanine aminotransferase enzyme concentrations, gross lesions in
muscle injection sites and liver, and histologic lesions in liver and
muscle [175]. The results of a survey of veterinarians and zoos doc-
umented the outcomes of NSAID treatments of over 870 scavenging
birds from 79 species; carprofen was associated with 13% mortality
of treated birds [152].
Grapiprant
Grapiprant is classified as a prostaglandin-E2 receptor antagonist
that does not inhibit COX enzymes and is approved for use in
dogs [154,176]. The pharmacokinetics of grapiprant have been
determined in fasted and fed red-tailed hawks [154,177]. In fasted
birds treated with grapiprant (30 mg/kg PO, and advanced to the
crop), plasma grapiprant concentrations were > 164 ng/mL, which
is a level considered to be therapeutic in dogs with osteoarthri-
tis [154]. Adverse effects included some regurgitation during the
initial phase of the study to determine an effective dose for grap-
iprant, but no regurgitation during the single-dose phase of the
study. Food consumption was reduced in five of the six red-tailed
hawks over the course of the study and was managed by force-
feeding the hawks. In a follow-up study of the hawks when the drug
was administered orally with food, plasma grapiprant mean Cmax
Table 58.2 Pharmacokinetic parameters of meloxicam in plasma after intravenous administration of 0.5 mg/kg in ostriches, ducks, turkeys, pigeons, and chickens (n = 6), and
1 mg/kg in Hispaniolan Amazon parrots (n = 11) and gray parrots (n = 6).
Parameter 	Ostriches 	Ducks 	Turkeys 	Pigeons 	Chickens 	Hispaniolan Amazon parrots 	Gray parrots
AUC (mg·h/L) 	0.73 ± 0.18 	8.38 ± 1.32 	9.40 ± 1.60 	18.35 ± 9.84 	40.79 ± 5.87 	0.104 ± 0.054 	0.024 ± 0.002
Cl (L/h·kg) 	0.72 ± 0.2 	0.06 ± 0.010 	0.05 ± 0.011 	0.03 ± 0.030 	0.01 ± 0.002 	0.012 ± 0.014 	0.002
Vd(area) (L/kg) 	0.58 ± 0.19 	0.06 ± 0.017 	0.07 ± 0.015 	0.14 ± 0.10 	0.05 ± 0.005 	0.232 ± 0.22 	0.091 ± 0.004
t1/2 el (h) 	0.5 	0.72 	0.99 	2.40 	3.21 	15.9 	31.4
kel 	6.09 ± 4.58 	1.62 ± 0.61 	1.45 ± 0.79 	0.29 ± 0.10 	0.22 ± 0.04 	– 	–
MRT (h) 	0.41 ± 0.25 	0.77 ± 0.20 	1.47 ± 0.27 	3.89 ± 1.49 	4.41 ± 0.84 	– 	49.9 ± 5.7
Data are mean ± SD.
AUC, area under the curve; Cl, clearance; Vd
, volume of distribution; t1/2 el
, elimination half-life (harmonic mean); kel
, elimination constant; MRT, mean resident time.
Source: Adapted from Baert and De Backer [85] (ostriches, ducks, turkeys, pigeons, chickens), Molter et al. [155] (Hispaniolan Amazon parrots), and Montesinos et al. [156]
(gray parrots).

-- 1156 of 1450 --

Chapter 58: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Birds 	1141
was 88% lower and median Tmax was 16 h, about eight times longer
than when the hawks were fasted [177]. The analgesic effects of
grapiprant have not yet been determined in birds.
Local anesthetics
In the past, local anesthetics used in avian species, especially in
small birds, had unfortunate consequences including seizures and
cardiac arrest due to the use of high doses [77,178]. For example,
0.1 mL of 2% lidocaine administered intramuscularly or subcutane-
ously to a 30 g parakeet is equivalent to 67 mg/kg, a toxic dose in
any animal. More recent studies of lidocaine and bupivacaine
indicate that these drugs can be used safely and effectively in birds,
even at doses higher than previously thought to be safe [179]. For
example, in a study in which bupivacaine was administered IV to
isoflurane-anesthetized chickens, the median effective dose (ED50
)
of 1.96 mg/kg was associated with a 50% probability of causing
clinically relevant cardiovascular effects, defined as ≥ 30% change
in heart rate or mean arterial pressure [180].
Lidocaine and bupivacaine have been assessed for their efficacy
in producing brachial plexus blockade. In chickens, lidocaine
(20 mg/kg), or bupivacaine (5 mg/kg), both with epinephrine, were
injected after nerve stimulator localization of the brachial plexus;
only 66% of 18 blocks produced sensory blockade [181]. In
isoflurane-anesthetized female mallard ducks (Anas platyrhynchos),
axillary and dorsal approaches to the brachial plexus were evaluated
after either bupivacaine (2 or 8 mg/kg), or a combination of lido-
caine (15 mg/kg) and epinephrine (3.8 μg/kg) were injected around
the brachial plexus following nerve stimulator localization [182].
Blockade was assessed using electrodiagnostic methods and by
monitoring birds for the presence of wing droop and change in
motor function on recovery from anesthesia. Results were highly
variable for all techniques. No technique significantly affected elec-
trodiagnostic results or produced consistent wing droop [182].
Brachial plexus blockade using either a palpation-guided technique
or an ultrasound-guided technique and administering lidocaine
(2 mg/kg) in a total volume of 0.3 mL, was attempted in isoflurane-
anesthetized Hispaniolan Amazon parrots, but neither technique
produced an effective block at the lidocaine doses used [183].
Although the brachial plexus blockades of these three reports were
unsuccessful, none of the birds had adverse effects attributable to
the local anesthetic drug doses.
Lidocaine (8 mg total dose) was used to provide additional anal-
gesia to an isoflurane-anesthetized mallard duck (Anas platyrhyn-
chos) undergoing surgical repair of a pelvic limb fracture. Using
both ultrasound and nerve stimulator localization techniques, lido-
caine was injected around the femoral nerve (0.4 mL, 2% solution)
when extension of the stifle was observed, and around the sciatic
nerve (0.3 mL, 2% solution) when flexion of the stifle was elic-
ited [184]. No adverse drug effects were reported.
Bupivacaine doses as high as 10 mg/kg were used in a field study
involving implantation of satellite transmitters in male and female
free-ranging spectacled eiders (Somateria fischeri), king eiders
(Somateria spectabilis), and common eiders (Somateria mollissima),
where all received propofol, bupivacaine, and postoperative keto-
profen for analgesia [185]. None of the female spectacled or com-
mon eiders, and only 1 of the 5 female king eiders died during the
postoperative period, but 4 of 10 male spectacled eiders and 5 of
6 male king eiders died within 1–4 days after surgery [185]. Based
on histopathologic findings, the authors reported that the periop-
erative use of ketoprofen caused lethal renal damage in the male
eiders, and that bupivacaine did not cause the deaths [185].
Spinal anesthesia with lidocaine or bupivacaine has been reported
in chickens [186,187]. An anatomic study identified the space
between the synsacrum and first free coccygeal vertebra (synsacro-
coccygeal space) as the most suitable site for spinal injection. At this
location, the dura mater adheres to the internal wall of the spinal
canal and the subarachnoid space is large, so injections at this site
are into the subarachnoid space, not the epidural space [186].
Subarachnoid injections of lidocaine (0.5, 1, or 2 mg/kg) resulted
in analgesia that was similar for all doses; the authors deemed this
a feasible, practical, inexpensive, and simple technique for peri-
cloacal regional anesthesia [186]. A subsequent study reported the
spinal effects of lidocaine (2 mg/kg) and bupivacaine (0.1, 0.25, and
0.5 mg/kg) with both drugs administered using the loss of resist-
ance technique. The highest dose of bupivacaine (0.5 mg/kg) had a
slower onset of action (3.33 ± 1.23 min) compared to lidocaine
(1.37 ± 0.52 min) and resulted in a longer duration of spinal anes-
thesia (54 ± 6.08 min) compared to that provided by lidocaine
(17.87 ± 3.18 min) [187].
Although local anesthetics may provide sufficient local analgesia
in birds, they do not relieve the stress associated with physical
restraint of an awake bird. In all of the studies cited above, all birds
were sedated prior to general and local anesthesia.
Injectable induction drugs
Propofol
Propofol has been used clinically in a variety of avian species includ-
ing a barn owl [188], domestic pigeons [189], red-tailed hawks and
great horned owls [190], Hispaniolan parrots [191], mallard and
canvasback ducks [192,193], eiders [185], mute swans [194], chick-
ens [195,196], wild turkeys [197], rheas [198], a king penguin under-
going magnetic resonance imaging [199], and in field research
involving bar-tailed godwits and bristle-thigh curlews [200]. These
studies demonstrate that propofol can be a useful injectable anes-
thetic, but with two important caveats: it is devoid of antinociceptive
properties so it cannot be used as the sole anesthetic for painful pro-
cedures and must be used with appropriate analgesic drugs and tech-
niques, either pre-, intra-, or postoperatively. It can produce apnea of
sufficient duration as to cause death so being prepared to intubate
and assist ventilation is a requirement and, when possible, providing
oxygen-enriched inspired gas is strongly encouraged. In a pharma-
cokinetic study of propofol in great horned owls, the induction dose
was lower than typically used for dogs, pigs, rats, and rabbits, a find-
ing explained by the lower volume of the central compartment [190].
In an orthopedic research project, the propofol-sparing effects of
methadone, fentanyl, or nalbuphine were investigated in domestic
chickens undergoing ulnar osteotomy [196]. Methadone and nal-
buphine, but not fentanyl, significantly decreased the propofol infu-
sion rate required to maintain anesthesia [196].
Alfaxalone
Alfaxalone (Alfaxan®), a neuroactive steroid anesthetic with activity
at γ- aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors, is a re-formulation of
alfaxalone and alfadolone, a drug combination released as Saffan
in 1970 for veterinary use. The solubilizing agent in that drug com-
bination was polyethylated castor oil which accounted for its
adverse effects in mammals and birds, including cardiac arrhyth-
mias and allergic reactions, that subsequently led to its withdrawal
from the market. Alfaxalone, the new formulation, is water soluble
and available as an injectable solution that can be administered IV,
IM, or SC in birds, and produces dose-dependent immobilization

-- 1157 of 1450 --

1142 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
without analgesia [63]. It has been used in parakeets [201–203],
Quaker parrots (Myiopsitta monachus) [204], black-cheeked love-
birds (Agapornis nigrigenis) [205], chickens [206,207], pea-
fowl [208], ducks [209], mute swans (Cygnus olor) [210], and
common buzzards (Buteo buteo) [211]. When used alone it can
have a rapid onset of action, a short duration of effect, and produce
variable degrees of hyperactivity during induction and recovery.
Alfaxalone has been administered IM to parakeets at doses rang-
ing from 5 to 20 mg/kg. Sedation without and with recumbency was
achieved with 5 mg/kg and 10 mg/kg doses, respectively [202]. In
one study, the sedative effects of alfaxalone (15 mg/kg IM) were
compared to those of butorphanol–midazolam [201] and alfax-
alone produced a shorter but more consistent duration of sedation
(28 ± 6 min) than butorphanol–midazolam (72 ± 57 min) [201]. In
another study, 15 mg/kg produced mild to moderate sedation while
20 mg/kg produced moderate to profound sedation; both doses
caused statistically significant but clinically mild cardiorespiratory
effects and a significant decrease in body temperature [203].
A majority of black-cheeked lovebirds administered only alfaxalone
(12.6 ± 0.9 mg/kg SC) had rough inductions and recoveries, effects the
authors believed could have been minimized if the birds had been
placed in a more confined space [205]. The authors further stated
that alfaxalone provided nearly 1 h of stable, non-analgesic sedation
appropriate for non-invasive procedures in this species [205].
Hyperexcitement and muscle tremors also occurred in Quaker par-
rots when alfaxalone (10 or 25 mg/kg IM) was administered as the
sole sedative agent, and these effects were attenuated by combining
alfaxalone (10 mg/kg IM) with midazolam (1 mg/kg IM) [204].
In chickens, alfaxalone administered IV for anesthesia was associ-
ated with hyperactivity during induction and recovery [206,212],
effects that may be lessened by premedicating with butorphanol–
midazolam [212] or ketamine or xylazine [207]. In an LD50 intraperi-
toneal injection model involving chicks, the ED50 of alfaxalone was
32.9 mg/kg and the LD50 was 102.4 mg/kg; the ED50 was decreased by
combining alfaxalone with ketamine or xylazine [207].
Alfaxalone in mute swans [210] and buzzards [211] has been
described as producing acceptable sedation or anesthesia with a few
notable caveats. In the swan study, the anesthetic effects of alfaxalone
were compared to those of ketamine–xylazine, and a greater inci-
dence of postinduction apnea and a higher incidence of agitation on
recovery were reported with alfaxalone compared to ketamine–
xylazine [210]. In the buzzard study, alfaxalone produced good to
excellent anesthesia characterized by rapid induction of anesthesia,
excellent muscle relaxation, unresponsiveness to noxious stimuli, and
smooth, uneventful recovery. Hypoventilation and apnea were
uncommon at clinically relevant doses but became important adverse
effects when larger doses were administered rapidly IV [211].
In peafowl [208] and mallard ducks [209], alfaxalone when used
alone did not produce acceptable anesthesia. Whether this is a dose
issue or species issue remains to be determined.
Inhalant anesthetics
Inhalant anesthetics possess several advantages for patient manage-
ment, including rapid induction and recovery of anesthesia, more
precise control of anesthetic depth, concurrent provision of oxygen
for respiratory support, and recovery that is not dependent on meta-
bolic or excretory pathways. A disadvantage is the need for special
equipment such as a source of oxygen, a vaporizer, a breathing
circuit, and a mechanism for scavenging waste anesthetic gases.
Currently, isoflurane and sevoflurane are considered the inhalant
anesthetics of choice for use in birds, with the latter providing faster
induction and recovery times [213–215]. In bald eagles, isoflurane
administration resulted in tachycardia, hypertension, and more
arrhythmias compared with sevoflurane [213]. In red-tailed hawks,
isoflurane significantly depressed spontaneous ventilation compared
to hawks anesthetized with sevoflurane [214]. Cardiopulmonary
differences between isoflurane and sevoflurane have not been fully
evaluated in psittacine birds. Desflurane has been used in birds, but
less so than isoflurane or sevoflurane. Sevoflurane has a less pun-
gent odor than isoflurane and is generally better tolerated during
mask induction, but it is more expensive than isoflurane.
Minimum anesthetic concentration
The concepts guiding our use of inhalant anesthetics are as applica-
ble to birds as they are to mammals. One such concept is the mini-
mum alveolar concentration (MAC) of an inhalant anesthetic that
prevents gross purposeful movement in 50% of anesthetized mam-
mals exposed to a maximal noxious stimulus. MAC provides a
description of concentration and effect across a wide range of ani-
mal species, allows us to quantify factors which influence anesthetic
requirements, and is equally applicable to all inhalation anesthet-
ics [216]. The term, as defined, is not appropriate in discussions
concerning birds because they do not have an alveolar lung. For
birds, “MAC” has been defined as the “minimum anesthetic con-
centration” required to prevent gross purposeful movement in
response to a painful stimulus [217], and it is usually determined
via a bracketing technique.
MAC values of halothane, isoflurane, and sevoflurane in birds
are shown in Table 58.3 and are similar to MAC values reported for
Table 58.3 Minimum anesthetic concentration (MAC) for halothane, isoflurane,
and sevoflurane in birds.
Species 	Halothane 	Isoflurane 	Sevoflurane
Amazon parrot
(Amazona aestiva)
– 	– 	2.4% [220]
Blue-fronted Amazon parrot
(Amazona aestiva aestiva)
– 	1.46% [110] 	–
Cockatoos
(Cacatua spp.)
– 	1.44% [108] 	–
Hispaniolan Amazon parrot
(Amazona ventralis)
– 	2.09% [130] 	–
Thick-billed parrot
(Rhynchopsitta pachyrhyncha)
– 	1.07% [221] 	2.39–3.94%a [222]
White- eyed parakeet
(Psittacara leucophthalmus)
– 	2.47%a [223] 	–
Quaker parrot
(Myiopsitta monachus)
– 	2.52%a224] 	–
Chicken
(Gallus gallus)
0.85% [225] 1.25% [226]
1.1% [132]
2.21% [227]
Cinereous vulture
(Aegypius monachus)
– 	1.06% [228] 	–
Crested serpent eagle
(Spilornis cheela hoya)
– 	1.46% [215] 	2.03% [215]
Red-tailed hawk
(Buteo jamaicensis)
– 	2.05% [126] 	–
Duck
(Anas platyrhynchos)
1.05% [229] 1.32% [230] 	–
Guineafowl
(Numida meleagris)
– 	– 	2.90% [231]
Rock pigeon
(Columba livia)
– 	– 	3.0% [232]
Sandhill crane
(Grus canadensis)
– 	1.35% [217] 	–
a MAC determined using a cross-over design.

-- 1158 of 1450 --

Chapter 58: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Birds 	1143
mammals [218,219]. This lends support to the observation that dif-
ferent classes or species of animals do not show large variations in
effective concentrations of inhalant anesthetics [216].
Hypoventilation makes it difficult to control the plane of anes-
thesia, and it can have a variety of adverse effects on cardiac func-
tion. For example, unifocal and multifocal cardiac arrhythmias
occurred in 50% of ducks anesthetized and maintained at a constant
end-tidal halothane concentration of 1.5%, and in which PaCO2
was varied from 40 to 80 mm Hg through addition of CO 2 to the
inspired oxygen [233]. The mean PaCO2 at which arrhythmias
developed was 67 ± 12 mm Hg; in five of six ducks, the arrhythmias
disappeared after CO 2 inhalation was terminated [233]. To avoid
the adverse effects of hypercarbia on cardiac function in anesthe-
tized birds, ventilation should be supported by maintaining a light
plane of anesthesia and, when possible, by assisting or controlling
ventilation.
Adjuncts to general anesthesia
Nitrous oxide
Nitrous oxide can be used as an adjunct to general anesthesia but is
not suitable as the sole anesthetic [234]. Nitrous oxide (50%) may
decrease the concentration of isoflurane necessary to maintain a
suitable plane of anesthesia by only 11% [235]. As with other anes-
thetic gases and vapors, nitrous oxide is not uniquely sequestered or
concentrated in the air sacs. The considerations for using nitrous
oxide are the same as for its use in mammals, such as adequate pul-
monary function and delivery of sufficient oxygen to meet the
patient’s metabolic demands. Thirty percent oxygen is generally
accepted as the minimum fraction of inspired oxygen that should
be provided. Nitrous oxide may pose problems in some birds with
normal subcutaneous air pockets [236]. For example, pelicans have
subcutaneous pockets of air that do not communicate with the
respiratory system and the use of N 2 O in these birds can result in
subcutaneous emphysema [237].
Neuromuscular blocking drugs
Neuromuscular paralytic drugs have two purposes in birds: whole-
body skeletal muscle paralysis to facilitate surgical procedures,
and to produce mydriasis. The neuromuscular and cardiovascular
effects of atracurium used as a muscle paralytic, have been reported
in chickens [238]. The effective dose associated with 95% twitch
depression in 50% of the birds (ED 95/50 ) was 0.25 mg/kg IV, and the
ED 95/95 was calculated by probit analysis to be 0.46 mg/kg IV. The
duration of action for the 0.25 mg/kg and 0.45 mg/kg doses was
34.5 ± 5.8 and 47.8 ± 10.3 min, respectively, and these durations
are similar to those reported in dogs [239,240]. Edrophonium
(0.5 mg/kg IV) reversed muscle paralysis. There were small but
statistically significant changes in cardiovascular variables (i.e.,
heart rate decreased, and blood pressure increased) after adminis-
tering atracurium, but these changes were considered clinically
unimportant [238].
Avian pupillary diameter is controlled primarily by skeletal muscles
and neuromuscular blocking drugs may be applied topically to
produce mydriasis with two notable exceptions, alcuronium and
pancuronium, which do not produce safe or consistently effective
mydriasis in some species [241]. In adult cockatoos (Cacatua sul-
phurea), gray parrots (Psittacus erithacus), and blue-fronted Amazon
parrots (Amazona aestivate), vecuronium (injectable formulation;
0.8 mg/mL) alone and diluted in sterile sodium chloride solution
(0.9% NaCl), consistently produced the greatest pupillary dilation,
and did so with few systemic side effects with one notable excep-
tion – a cockatoo collapsed and died soon after a combination of
vecuronium and saponin (a surface-acting penetrating agent) was
topically applied to its eye [242]. This suggests that vecuronium
administered topically as a mydriatic should not be combined with
an agent that promotes corneal penetration, as enhanced systemic
uptake may have potentially fatal effects. It also reinforces the real-
ity that avian species differ significantly in their responses to any
given drug. For neuromuscular blocking drugs, a contributing fac-
tor may be the tremendous variation in acetylcholinesterase levels
from one avian species to another: from 0.87 μmol of substrate
hydrolyzed/min/mL in cormorants to 7.89 μmol of substrate hydro-
lyzed/min/mL in mallard ducks [243].
In juvenile double-crested cormorants (Phalacrocorax auritus),
vecuronium alone or in combination with atropine and phenyle-
phrine was evaluated as a mydriatic [244]. The drug combination
produced the most consistent and greatest dilation and longest aver-
age duration; no side effects from vecuronium were observed [244].
However, in a study involving adult double-crested cormorants,
vecuronium by itself produced much better dilation than was
observed in the juvenile double-crested cormorants [244]. The
difference between the juvenile birds and the adults was the very
blue irides of the adults compared to the brown irides of the young
cormorants; the authors speculated that the ability of melanin to
bind drugs may explain the difference in response [244]. Indeed, a
study investigating the mydriatic effect of rocuronium in pigeons
reported that the iris of birds with grayish brown-colored irides
(“bull eye”) did not dilate after a single application of rocuronium
and only two out of eight did so after a second application [245].
In European kestrels (Falco tinnunculus), rocuronium (0.12 mg
in each eye) [246], or vecuronium (4 mg/mL; two drops in each eye,
three times, at 15-min intervals) [241], effectively produced mydri-
asis. Rocuronium has been shown to be effective in a number of
raptorial species, including common buzzards (Buteo buteo;
0.40 mg in each eye), little owls (Athene noctua; 0.20 mg in each
eye) [247], tawny owls (Strix aluco; single topical administration of
0.35 mg in each eye) [248], and scops owls (Otus scops; 0.15 mg in
each eye) [249]. Rocuronium also significantly decreases intraocu-
lar pressure in kestrels and little owls [250].
Rocuronium produces mydriasis in Hispaniolan Amazon par-
rots (Amazona ventralis) [251,252]. In the study by Baine et al.,
topically applied rocuronium (0.15 mg per eye) rapidly produced
mydriasis and had a prolonged duration of action; 24 h after treat-
ment 2 of the 10 birds had superficial corneal ulceration as deter-
mined by fluorescein staining [251]. The authors speculated that
the low pH of the rocuronium solution could account for the ulcer-
ation. In the Petritz et al. study, rocuronium (20 μL/eye, 10 mg/mL
solution) applied topically produced mydriasis lasting up to
360 min after drug administration with minimal adverse effects
noted other than three birds having transient inferior eyelid paresis
that resolved within 24 h [252]. Baine speculated that in addition to
acidic pH, eyelid paresis could be a contributing causative factor of
the corneal ulceration [251].
Drugs of historical interest
In the past, barbiturates, the combination drug Equithesin, and
α-chloralose have been used for sedating or anesthetizing birds,
sometimes in clinical settings, but more often in research or field
situations. Surgical anesthesia can be maintained for relatively long
periods of time (1 to 12 h) by using intermediate- to long-acting
barbiturates or combinations of drugs with intermediate durations
of effect. Pentobarbital, when injected intravenously, requires 10 to
15 min for full onset of action and produces anesthesia lasting sev-
eral hours [178]. Because of its slow onset of action, the drug should

-- 1159 of 1450 --

1144 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
be administered initially as a bolus consisting of half the total dose
and the remainder titrated over several minutes until the desired
plane of anesthesia is achieved. Phenobarbital is a long-acting bar-
biturate that produces anesthesia lasting up to 24 h when adminis-
tered intravenously [178]. Its onset of action is very slow, requiring
as much as 30 min before surgical anesthesia is achieved.
Equithesin is a combination of pentobarbital, chloral hydrate,
and magnesium sulfate. It does not produce a surgical plane of
anesthesia when used alone but produces surgical anesthesia lasting
as long as 90 min when combined with diazepam [253].
α-Chloralose, a general depressant and tranquilizer, is used to
capture birds in the wild, such as cranes, crows, storks, wild turkeys,
and Canada geese. The drug is usually mixed with a bait that is
attractive to the birds to be captured. When using corn to capture
cranes, each kernel is drilled out and the α-chloralose is packed into
the kernel, not sprinkled on top of the corn as the cranes will not eat
it. The amount of drug mixed with the bait depends on the avian
species to be captured and the number of birds at the bait site that
are likely to eat the baited food. For some species, date, time of day,
temperature, and humidity must be taken into consideration when
planning bait-and-capture sessions [254–256]. Capture myopathy
has occurred after α-chloralose baiting and physical capture of san-
dhill cranes during a banding study [257].
Anesthetic management
Airway management
Intubation may be difficult in species with unique oropharyngeal
anatomy, or very small birds. For example, psittacine species, such
as budgerigar parakeets (Melopsittacus undulatus), can be difficult
to intubate because of the difficult-to-visualize location of the glot-
tis at the base of the humped, fleshy tongue [258]. Appropriately
sized Cole endotracheal tubes can be used in small birds, and com-
mercially manufactured (Jorgensen Labs®) endotracheal tubes as
small as 1.0 mm ID for budgerigars and 1.5 mm ID for lovebirds do
exist. Red-rubber catheters can also be cut-to-size and used for
intubation. However, compliant tubes < 2 mm ID are often highly
flexible and kink easily, so they must be secured properly to prevent
occlusion. Intravenous catheters can be used as endotracheal
tubes [259] but are a less desirable alternative for intubating and
delivering inhalant anesthetics to very small birds because of their
lack of flexibility that can cause tracheal trauma. If an IV catheter is
used for intubation it must be appropriately sized and secured to the
head with the neck extended to prevent injury to the trachea [259].
Another hazard of small-diameter endotracheal tubes is the
resistance they impose on gas flow, a hazard that increases when
tubes become partially or completely obstructed as a result of
mucus accumulation or plugs. Resistance to flow through a tube is
inversely proportional to the tube’s radius raised to the fourth
power. For example, decreasing the radius from 3 to 2 mm or 2 to
1 mm would increase resistance approximately 5 and 15 times,
respectively. Mucus production during anesthesia can be copious
and the cold, non-humidified fresh gas used to deliver inhalant
anesthesia has a drying effect that makes the mucus thick and tena-
cious. Endotracheal tube obstruction can be detected by observing
the bird’s pattern of ventilation. As the airway becomes progres-
sively occluded, the expiratory phase becomes prolonged. An artifi-
cial sigh of the bird usually confirms the presence of an obstruction
because the keel will move and the abdominal wall will expand in
a seemingly normal manner, but they will return slowly or not at
all to their end-expiratory positions. Airway noises, especially
gurgling, may be heard as the tube becomes more obstructed with
mucus. Airway obstructions must be corrected quickly either by
extubating the bird, cleaning the tube, and re-inserting it, by replac-
ing it with a fresh tube, or by gently suctioning it with a small red-
rubber tube. An anticholinergic, such as atropine (0.04 mg/kg) or
glycopyrrolate (0.01 mg/kg), administered intramuscularly, may
reduce mucus production and lessen the risk of developing mucus
plugs, but it may also increase mucus viscosity thus making it
harder to clear secretions from the tube.
If a cuffed endotracheal tube is used, the cuff should either not be
inflated or must be inflated with extreme caution; in small birds, it
is better not to inflate the cuff. Because of the complete cartilagi-
nous tracheal rings, an overly inflated cuff will injure the tracheal
mucosa, or rupture the tracheal rings at the site of the cuff; when a
cuff is over inflated, the tracheal rings tend to rupture longitudi-
nally rather than circumferentially. On average, intubation-induced
tracheal trauma and obstruction becomes evident 16 days post-
intubation when the processes of healing and fibrotic narrowing of
the trachea cause signs of dyspnea [260].
As mentioned previously, flamingos with their ventroflexed
beaks and large fleshy tongues, can be difficult to intubate. One
strategy is to reduce the amount of equipment in the mouth during
intubation. This can be accomplished by shining a transilluminator
light from the outside of the mouth into the oral cavity; a cotton-
tipped applicator can be used to bring the tongue forward so as to
visualize the laryngeal opening into which the endotracheal tube is
inserted [personal communication: Dr. Noha Abou-Madi, Cornell
University; November 1, 2012].
The double trachea in jackass penguins (Spheniscus demersus)
poses a challenge for intubation. One technique for intubating these
birds is to use two Cole tubes attached to a double-pronged circuit
adapter, the type used for double-lumen endotracheal tubes [per-
sonal communication: Dr. Frank Golder; July 2, 2013]. Ostriches
can be intubated using endotracheal tubes with internal diameters
of 10 to 18 mm, while emus generally require endotracheal tubes
measuring 9 to 14 mm [261]. Careful inflation of the cuff is usually
necessary to enable effective ventilation of adult ratites. The tra-
cheal cleft in emus does not complicate intubation, but makes
effective positive-pressure ventilation difficult, a problem overcome
by wrapping a towel snuggly around the middle and distal thirds of
the neck [261].
Breathing circuits and fresh gas flows
Nonrebreathing circuits, such as the Bain circuit or Norman elbow,
rather than circle breathing circuits, are ideal for use in small birds
with small tidal volumes because they do not have to overcome
the resistance to ventilation imposed by unidirectional valves. An
additional advantage of all-plastic nonrebreathing circuits is their
light weight, a desirable feature when used in very small birds.
Oxygen flow for a nonrebreathing circuit should be two to three
times minute ventilation, or 150 to 200 mL/kg/min. For larger
birds, such as ratites, the breathing circuit should be commensu-
rate with the size of the bird. Emus and ostriches weighing less
than 130 kg can be maintained on a small animal breathing circuit
while larger ostriches can be maintained on a large animal breathing
circuit [261].
Induction methods
The number and variety of techniques for inducing gas anesthesia
in birds are only limited by the anesthetist’s imagination. Birds can
be induced with commercially available small animal masks, or

-- 1160 of 1450 --

Chapter 58: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Birds 	1145
with homemade masks fabricated from plastic bottles, syringe
cases, syringes, or breathing hose connectors. Mask induction tech-
niques can be used in a wide variety and sizes of birds, from the very
small up to and including the emu. Mask inductions are unsatisfac-
tory in adult ostriches [261].
Other techniques include the use of plastic bags or chambers.
Birds can be induced by inserting their heads into plastic bags (pref-
erably clear plastic) into which oxygen and anesthetic vapor are
introduced via a nonrebreathing circuit. Plastic bags have been used
to completely enclose a bird cage in order to induce anesthesia in a
difficult-to- manage bird [262].
An anesthetic chamber can be used to induce anesthesia. A
disadvantage of this technique is that the anesthetist is not in
physical contact with the bird and is unable to get a feel for how
the bird is responding to the anesthetic. In addition, birds
can injure themselves as they pass through stage 2 (involuntary
excitement) anesthesia.
Whatever technique is used, the anesthetist must take precau-
tions to control and eliminate anesthetic gas pollution in the work
environment. If a mask is used it should fit snugly over the bird’s
beak and face, or over its entire head. If a plastic bag or chamber is
used, it should be free of leaks. Once induction is completed, the
bag or chamber must be removed from the area without the con-
tents being released into the workplace environment.
Monitoring and support
The 2008 Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Small Animal
Fatalities provided some data regarding perianesthetic mortality in
birds [3]. In that study, the perianesthetic mortality rate was 3.94 %
for parrots which is approximately 20 times higher than rates for
dogs and cats. The mortality rate was 16.3% for budgerigars, and
1.76% for “other birds.” That study did not provide further informa-
tion as to what species were included as “other birds,” the health
status of the patients, anesthetic protocols, or degree of monitoring
and support during the procedures. A subsequent study found that
3.4% of birds died during anesthesia [4]. Unfortunately, none of the
variables investigated in that study were associated with an
increased risk of anesthesia-related death; absent such information
makes it difficult to predict which birds might have an anesthesia-
related death [4]. A 2021 study defined anesthesia-related mortality
in birds as those deaths occurring during anesthesia and up to
7 days post anesthesia; by this definition, anesthesia-related mortal-
ity was 3.88% [5]. Birds with an abnormal health status had a 15.53-
fold increased risk of death compared with those with a normal
health status. The duration of anesthesia was a statistically signifi-
cant risk factor in the univariable analysis, but not when combined
with health status [5]. A more recent study looked at avian mortal-
ity rate based on ASA physical status [263] and found that patients
assigned an ASA status of I and II had a rate of 0% (95% CI 0.0–0.2)
and 0.6% (CI 0.2–1.3), respectively, while patients assigned a status
of III, IV, and V had rates of 5.9% (CI 4.3–8.0), 18.8% (CI 13.4–
25.7), and 50.0% (CI 29.9–70.1), respectively. Investigation into
timing of death showed that the majority of patients died following
cessation of general anesthesia (81.48%), with a majority of postan-
esthetic deaths occurring within 3 h of anesthetic recovery.
Avian anesthesia is fraught with challenges, not the least of which
is size; it is difficult to obtain preoperative blood work, secure the
airway, obtain IV access, and monitor blood pressure in very small
patients. Nonetheless, the above-cited studies make a strong case
for monitoring birds during and following anesthesia. Physiologic
variables to monitor include respiratory rate and tidal volume,
oxygenation, expired CO2
, heart rate and rhythm, body tempera-
ture, and muscle relaxation.
Central nervous system
Anesthetic depth can be assessed by checking muscle tone and vari-
ous reflexes. The loss of muscle tone in the legs or wings can denote
transition from a light to a medium plane of anesthesia. The with-
draw reflex in response to a toe pinch is lost when the bird is in a
medium (surgical) plane of anesthesia. Palpebral reflexes are usu-
ally lost at a medium plane of anesthesia, but corneal reflexes persist
until a deep plane of anesthesia. Heart and respiratory rates increase
when birds experience pain, or when the depth of anesthesia is too
light; conversely, they may decrease at a deep plane of anesthesia,
signaling the need to lighten the plane of anesthesia.
Respiratory system
The gas exchange efficiency of the avian lung is not limited to O 2
and CO 2
, but also applies to the exchange of inhalant anesthetics.
The avian lung lacks a significant functional residual volume, a
feature that limits how long a bird can remain apneic during anes-
thesia. This is a concern during induction of anesthesia of birds,
especially waterfowl, because apnea and bradycardia can occur and
may last for up to five minutes. Although referred to as a “dive
response,” in diving ducks under experimental conditions it is a
stress response mediated by stimulation of trigeminal receptors in
the beak and nares [264–267]. Anesthetic gases are not required to
elicit this response as it can be triggered by placing a mask snugly
over a bird’s beak and face. During this stress response, blood flow is
preferentially distributed to the kidneys, heart, and brain [268,269].
This stress response makes safe induction of anesthesia challenging
and raises the question, would premedicants such as butorphanol or
midazolam ameliorate or eliminate the dive response and shorten
the time to intubation in birds likely to experience a dive response,
such as waterfowl? In non-divers, specifically adult Hispaniolan
Amazon parrots (Amazona ventralis), butorphanol did not shorten
the time between induction with sevoflurane and intubation com-
pared to birds not sedated with butorphanol [100]. Other indicators
of stress in birds due to manual restraint include increases in body
temperature and respiratory rate. Using those measures of stress,
Hispaniolan Amazon parrots sedated with midazolam (2 mg/kg)
administered intranasally had a slower rate of rise in cloacal tem-
perature compared to the same birds when administered saline, and
mean respiratory rates were significantly lower for up to 12 min [58].
In mammalian species, it is well recognized that anesthetics,
through their effects on the central nervous system and peripheral
chemoreceptors, significantly depress ventilatory responses to hypoxia
and hypercapnia [270–272]. Since birds have many of the same mech-
anisms for controlling ventilation, one must assume that anesthetics
will similarly depress avian ventilatory control mechanisms. Several
studies have shown that inhalants depress the responsiveness of
a number of peripheral control mechanisms in birds, including
intrapulmonary chemoreceptors, that directly or indirectly affect
ventilation [273–275].
General anesthesia disrupts ventilatory control mechanisms
in birds, thus whenever possible a bird’s ventilation should be
assisted or controlled so as to minimize or prevent anesthesia-
induced hypoventilation. During positive-pressure ventilation, the
direction of gas flow within the avian lung may be reversed, but
the efficiency of the cross-current and multicapillary serial arteri-
alization system is independent of the direction of air flow relative
to blood flow [19]. Studies of mechanically, bi-directionally

-- 1161 of 1450 --

1146 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
ventilated birds from which arterial blood samples were collected
and analyzed, did not show adverse effects of mechanical ventila-
tion on gas exchange [217,276,277].
Because of the flow-through nature of the avian pulmonary sys-
tem, it is possible to ventilate birds by flowing a continuous stream of
gas through the trachea and lungs, and out through a ruptured or
cannulated air sac [217,276–279]. It is also possible to cannulate an
abdominal or caudal thoracic air sac and flow inhalant anesthetic
through the air sac, across the lung, and out via the trachea. This
same technique can be used to induce and maintain anesthesia in
birds [269,278,280,281] and offers a unique, effective means by
which to maintain anesthesia for procedures that require full, unim-
peded access to the head. This technique has been used in birds as
small as zebra finches [282]. In one study of ducks in which arterial
blood gases were compared before and after cannulation of the clav-
icular air sac, both PaO2 and PaCO2 remained unchanged, but tidal
volume increased, and minute ventilation doubled [283]. However, a
study involving sulphur-crested cockatoos (Cacatua galerita)
reported that anesthesia could not be maintained in this species
when isoflurane was insufflated through the clavicular air sac [280].
This suggests that there may be species differences as to which air
sac is best cannulated for delivery of inhalant anesthetics.
Monitoring respiratory rate and tidal volume by visually observing
the frequency and degree of motion of the sternum or movements
of the breathing circuit reservoir bag, give a general sense of the ade-
quacy of ventilation and the depth of anesthesia. However, assessing
the adequacy of ventilation solely on respiratory frequency can be
misleading. High respiratory frequencies in an anesthetized bird do
not necessarily indicate the bird is light and hyperventilating but are
often associated with small tidal volumes and a greater proportion
of deadspace ventilation than effective ventilation [217].
In general, halothane, isoflurane, and sevoflurane, in a dose-
dependent manner, depress ventilation in birds [217,225,229,230,
284–287]. The anesthetic or apneic index (AI) is a measure of the
tendency of an inhalant anesthetic to cause respiratory depression
and apnea. It is derived by dividing the end-tidal concentration of
an anesthetic at apnea by the MAC for the anesthetic [288]. The
lower the AI for an anesthetic, the greater its depressant effect on
ventilation. In ducks anesthetized with halothane the AI was
1.51 [229] and for isoflurane it was 1.65 [230], values considerably
lower than those reported for dogs (2.5) and cats (2.4) [289], and
horses (2.3) [290]. This suggests that isoflurane depresses ventilation
more in birds than in mammals. However, in a study of isoflurane
in chickens (Gallus gallus domesticus), AI was similar to that reported
for mammals [291]. Species differences (ducks versus chickens)
or differences in how apnea was assessed may account for the
differences in results.
Capnography should be used to monitor ventilation in anesthe-
tized birds, while understanding its limitations. In birds, capnogra-
phy measures the partial pressure of end-expired carbon dioxide
(PE CO2
), not end-tidal carbon dioxide (PET
CO2
), and it provides
information regarding ventilatory status. Accurate sampling of air-
way gas may require adjustments in sampling flow rate or tech-
nique [292]. In intubated birds during positive-pressure ventilation,
there is acceptable correlation between PE CO2 and PaCO 2 , with
PE CO2 slightly exceeding PaCO 2 [292,293]. A PE CO2 of 30 to 45 mm
Hg indicates adequate ventilation during inhalation anesthesia in
most birds and approximates a normal physiologic range of 25 to
40 mmHg for PaCO 2 in awake birds. In contrast, during air sac
insufflation anesthesia of chickens, PE
CO2 was not strongly associ-
ated with PaCO 2 [294]. This latter study also demonstrated that
PE CO2 cannot be used to determine optimum insufflation gas flow
rates solely based on weight and previously derived values for min-
ute ventilation [294]. When feasible, arterial blood gases, specifi-
cally PaCO2
, should be the preferred method for monitoring CO2
during air sac insufflation anesthesia to verify patient ventilation
(Table 58.4).
Respiratory pauses longer than 10 to 15 s should be treated by
lightening the plane of anesthesia and, when possible, ventilating
the bird by either periodically squeezing the reservoir bag or using
a positive-pressure mechanical ventilator. Intermittent positive-
pressure ventilation (IPPV) is recommended at 2 breaths/min in
spontaneously ventilating birds, and 10–20 breaths/min in apneic
birds. A maximum pressure of 10–20 cm H2
O is recommended to
prevent air sac volutrauma. If used in combination with capnogra-
phy, IPPV rate should be adjusted to maintain PE CO2 between 30
and 45 mmHg.
Pulse oximetry can be used to monitor oxygenation, but typical
pulse oximeters are designed to measure oxygenated and deoxygen-
ated mammalian hemoglobin, not avian hemoglobin. Critical inci-
dents in birds, such as cardiac dysrhythmias, severe blood loss, or
movement artifacts, cause fluctuations and discontinuity of dis-
played values and failure to record actual values [296]. Oximeters
also tend to underestimate oxygenation levels at high oxygen satu-
ration levels and overestimate oxygenation levels at lower saturation
levels [296]. Recent development of pulse oximeters for use in small
animals, such as mice, has addressed some of the shortcomings of
early pulse oximeters [297]. The adequacy of cardiopulmonary
function and oxygenation can also be assessed visually by noting
the color and capillary refill time of mucous membranes, the color
of the cere, beak, or bill, as well as coloration on the head where
there is a lack of feathers.
An early study reported that dorsal recumbency of anesthetized
chickens, especially of “heavy breeds,” may adversely affect ventila-
tion [298]. At least two factors may explain this phenomenon:
(1) the weight of the abdominal viscera may compress the abdomi-
nal air sacs thereby effectively reducing a bird’s tidal volume; and
(2) during anesthesia there is some degree of muscle relaxation such
Table 58.4 Arterial blood gases in birds spontaneously breathing air (FI
O2 = 21%)
unless otherwise indicated.
Species 	pHa 	PaCO2
(mmHg)
PaO 2
(mmHg)
Chicken – Domestic (Gallus spp.)a 	7.48–7.53 	29–33 	82
Duck – Mallard (Anas platyrhynchos)a 	7.56 	31 	81
Duck – Muscovy (Cairina moschata)a 	7.46–7.49 	37–38 	82–96
Duck – Pekin (Anas platyrhynchos)a 	7.46–7.48 	28–34 	94–100
Duck – Pekin (Anas platyrhynchos)b 	7.40 	40 	84
Emu (Dromaius novaehollandiae)a 	7.45 	34 	100
Falcon – Gyrfalcon (Falco rusticolus)b 	7.42 	37 	204
Goose – Bar-headed (Anser indicus)a 	7.47 	32 	93
Goose – Domestic (Anser anser)a 	7.52 	32 	97
Hawk – Red-tailed (Buteo jamaicensis)a 	7.49 	27 	108
Owl – Burrowing (Athene cunicularia)a 	7.46 	33 	98
Parrot – Amazon (Amazona aestiva)c 	7.43–7.46 	22 	96–100
Penguin – Adelie (Pygoscelis adeliae)a 	7.51 	37 	84
Penguin – Chinstrap (Pygoscelis antarctica)a 	7.52 	37 	89
Penguin – Gentoo (Pygoscelis papua)a 	7.49 	41 	77
Pigeon (Columba livia)a 	7.50 	30 	95
Swan – Mute (Cygnus olor)a 	7.5 	27 	91
a Not anesthetized; data derived from Powell [22] (various species).
b Anesthetized; data derived from Rode et al. [283] (duck) and Raghav et al. [295]
(gyrfalcon; FI
O2 > 95%).
c Not anesthetized; data derived from de Paula et al. [220] (parrot).

-- 1162 of 1450 --

Chapter 58: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Birds 	1147
that a bird with large, heavy pectoral muscles may not be able to
generate sufficient muscular effort to lift the keel against gravity,
again reducing tidal volume. In a computed tomographic study of
isoflurane-anesthetized red-tailed hawks (Buteo jamaicensis), one
that did not measure physiologic variables, such as PaCO 2 and
PaO2 , mean partial air sac volume was smallest in dorsal recum-
bency compared to lateral and sternal recumbency [299]. Sternal
recumbency resulted in the greatest lung and air sac volumes and
lowest lung density compared to right lateral or dorsal recum-
bency [299]. In another study that measured respiratory rate and
volume as well as physiologic variables in isoflurane-anesthetized
red-tailed hawks, dorsal recumbency did not compromise minute
ventilation or oxygen transport more than when the birds were in
lateral recumbency [300]. However, the birds hypoventilated
in both positions, and PaCO 2 differed with time, and the position
by time interaction. Despite similar minute ventilation in both
positions, birds in dorsal recumbency hypoventilated more yet
maintained higher PaO 2 , suggesting parabronchial ventilatory or
pulmonary blood flow distribution changes with position [300].
The effect of body position has also been investigated in isoflurane-
anesthetized Humboldt penguins (Spheniscus humboldti) where air
sac volume was lowest in dorsal recumbency, and lung density was
highest compared to lateral recumbency [301]. All of these studies
suggest that body position during anesthesia may affect the avian
pulmonary system. Thus, as with any anesthetized patient, to over-
come ventilation problems in birds associated with anesthesia-
induced muscle relaxation, it is reasonable to provide IPPV.
Cardiovascular system
The heart is an electromechanical pump. Its function can be
assessed by monitoring heart rate and rhythm, mucous membrane
color and refill time, palpation of peripheral pulses, ECG monitor-
ing, and indirect or direct arterial blood pressure monitoring.
A stethoscope can be used to monitor heart rate and rhythm, and
an esophageal stethoscope can facilitate this mode of cardiac moni-
toring. The esophageal probe should be inserted into the thoracic
esophagus using digital manipulation to bypass the crop. The ultra-
sonic Doppler flow detector can be used to monitor heart rate and
rhythm by placing the sensor over one of several arteries: the cra-
nial tibial artery, palpable on the cranial aspect of the hock joint; the
superficial ulnar artery, palpable on the ventral surface of the elbow
joint; the deep radial artery, palpable on the ventral surface of the
distal radius near the carpal joint; or the palatal artery in the dorsal
oropharynx.
Standard bipolar and augmented limb leads can be used to moni-
tor and record the avian ECG. To assure adequate skin contact for
an interference-free signal, ECG clips can be attached to hypoder-
mic needles inserted through the skin at the base of each wing and
through the skin at the level of each stifle. An alternative technique
is to attach the ECG clips to stainless steel wires that have been
inserted through the prepatagium of each wing and the skin at the
lateral side of each stifle. The wire size selected depends on the size
of the bird. 20 or 22 gauge wire can be used in birds larger than 500 g.
Appropriately sized hypodermic needles are used to insert the wires
through the skin.
The morphometry of the normal avian ECG has been mistaken
for ventricular tachycardia (Fig. 58.11) [48] so it is incumbent on an
anesthetist to be familiar with avian electrocardiograms in order
to distinguish between normal and abnormal cardiac rhythms
encountered during anesthesia. Electrocardiograms have been
described for a number of avian species, including gray (Psittacus
erithacus) and Amazon (Amazona spp.) parrots [302], Pekin
duck [303], peregrine falcon (Falco peregrinus brookei) [304],
Eurasian kestrel, griffon vulture, little owl, and Eurasian eagle
owl [305], and golden (Chrysolophus pictus) and silver (Lophura
nycthemera) pheasants [306].
The effect of halothane on blood pressure can be variable. In
chickens and ducks, increasing concentrations of halothane can
cause a decrease in mean arterial blood pressure [225,307], or no
change [229]. In contrast, isoflurane appears to consistently cause
a 	dose-dependent 	decrease 	in 	mean 	arterial 	blood 	pres-
sure [217,230,307,308], possibly because of isoflurane-associated
peripheral vasodilation. Sevoflurane has been reported to decrease
blood pressure in chickens in a dose-dependent manner during
controlled ventilation [227,286], but not during spontaneous
ventilation probably because of hypercapnia due to hypoventila-
tion [286]. In crested caracara (Caracara plancus), sevoflurane
moderately depressed blood pressure and did so without producing
cardiac arrhythmias [284]. In red-tailed hawks anesthetized with
sevoflurane, blood pressure was significantly lower compared to
when they were awake and physically restrained [309].
In mammals, positive-pressure ventilation depresses mean arte-
rial blood pressure by creating positive intrathoracic pressures that
compress the great vessels, thus impeding the venous return of
blood to the heart. In sandhill cranes anesthetized with isoflurane,
mean arterial blood pressure was actually higher during positive-
pressure ventilation than during spontaneous ventilation [217].
Blood pressure can be monitored and measured either indirectly
or directly, but avian anatomy and physiology make either tech-
nique challenging. Indirect methods include using a Doppler flow
probe (Parks Electronics, Aloha, Oregon, USA) to monitor pulsa-
tile blood flow in small birds, or blood pressure when used with
a sphygmomanometer in either moderate or large-size birds.
However, in awake birds representing 17 commonly kept psittacine
species weighing between 230 and 1263 g, Doppler-derived blood
P–R
segment
P–R
interval
P
R
T
Q–T
interval
S
QRS
0.005
0.05 	seconds
Tawave
S–T
seg.
Millivolts
	1 cm.1mV
0.1
Figure 58.11 An ECG from a pigeon. The ECG trace from a normal bird
may have the appearance of ventricular tachycardia primarily because of
the large negative S wave. Source: Nap et al. [302], Taylor & Francis.

-- 1163 of 1450 --

1148 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
pressure measurements were imprecise [310]. Attempts to meas-
ure blood pressure with an oscillometric device in Hispaniolan
Amazon parrots (Amazona ventralis) proved unsuccessful [311].
In those same birds, there was substantial disagreement between
indirectly measured blood pressure obtained with a Doppler device
and directly measured systolic arterial blood pressure [311]. In
anesthetized and awake red-tailed hawks, the results of a study
comparing Doppler and oscillometric methods of indirect blood
pressure measurement with direct arterial measurement indicated
that the oscillometric technique was unreliable [309]. Using a
Doppler device and a cuff of 40–50% of limb circumference, meas-
urements obtained from either the pectoral or pelvic limbs yielded
values closer to mean arterial blood pressure than systolic arterial
blood pressure [309].
Arterial catheterization is required for direct arterial blood pres-
sure monitoring. For birds less than 200 g, the preferred catheteri-
zation site is the superficial ulnar artery, one that is prominent but
very mobile where it crosses the elbow, thus making catheteriza-
tion technically challenging without causing a hematoma [312].
Furthermore, the anatomy of the wing makes it difficult to secure a
catheter at this location. For medium to large birds, the deep radial
artery is the preferred site [312,313] due to its minimal mobility as
it lies between the tendons of the extensor digitorum longus and the
flexor digitorum profundus in the distal wing of most birds [312].
Catheterization should occur where the artery is most superficial at
the ulnar carpal bone or the distal head of the ulna [312]. For
aquatic or long-legged birds, the cranial tibial or dorsal metatarsal
arteries can be catheterized [313]. The external carotid artery can
be catheterized, but surgical dissection is required for visualization
and catheterization [294].
Monitoring a physiological variable such as arterial blood pres-
sure implies that action will be taken if blood pressure differs from
the expected. This touches on the concept of action limits: in an
anesthetized patient, what blood pressure requires intervention?
What constitutes hypotension, and what constitutes hypertension?
For birds, there are no clear answers since cited blood pressures
vary across avian species. For example, direct blood pressure meas-
urements are higher in psittacines, cranes, raptors, and owls than
in pigeons, chickens, and ducks [314]. In chickens, normal mean
arterial blood pressure (MAP) is approximately 84 ± 13 mm Hg,
and in conscious red-tailed hawks, it is 187 ± 42 mm Hg [314]. In
humans, a 30% decrease from baseline MAP is one indicator of
hypotension [315], and this metric has been used to define hypo-
tension in birds [314]. As such, hypotension in chickens would be
a MAP ≤ 59 mmHg, and ≤ 131 mmHg in red-tailed hawks, both of
which would require intervention, such as lightening the plane of
anesthesia, administering fluids, and cardiac inotropes, including
dopamine or dobutamine.
In general, birds tend to have a higher plasma osmolality
compared to mammals [316]. For this reason, fluids with an osmo-
larity close to 300–320 mOsm/L, such as Normosol®-R, Plasma-
Lyte®-R, Plasma-Lyte®-A, and 0.9% NaCl, have been recommended
for fluid therapy in birds, specifically parrots [178], and are reason-
able choices for fluid support of any bird during anesthesia [316].
In a dose-dependent manner, dobutamine at 5, 10, and 15 μg/kg/
min and dopamine at 5, 7, and 10 μg/kg/min increased arterial
blood pressure in Hispaniolan Amazon parrots [314]. However,
4 out of 12 parrots receiving dobutamine at 15 μg/kg/min devel-
oped marked second-degree atrioventricular block accompanied
by a dramatic decrease in blood pressure, a situation that quickly
resolved after the dobutamine infusion was discontinued [314].
Body temperature
Body temperature must be monitored as hypothermia is the most
commonly encountered problem during anesthesia [317]. The
stress associated with anesthesia and surgery is minimized when
birds are maintained at or near their normal body temperature
which is 40 to 41 °C (104 to 106 °F) [318]. During anesthesia, it is
not unusual to see major fluctuations in body temperature, but
hypothermia decreases the amount of anesthetic needed to main-
tain anesthesia, causes cardiac instability, and prolongs recovery.
In well-insulated birds (feathers, drapes, and warming devices),
hyperthermia can also occur and cause cardiac instability and
increased oxygen demand. Body temperature can be monitored
with an electronic thermometer and a long flexible thermistor
probe inserted into the esophagus to the level of the heart.
Temperature monitored via the cloaca can vary significantly over
time owing to cloacal movements that affect the position of the
thermometer or thermistor probe.
Methods for warming birds during anesthesia include convective
(forced warm air), conductive, and radiant heat sources. In anesthe-
tized Hispaniolan Amazon parrots (Amazona ventralis) covered
with a clear plastic drape, a forced air warming device was used to
maintain body temperature. The device did not prevent an initial
drop in core body temperature, but it maintained body temperature
within a clinically acceptable range [319]. A disadvantage to using a
forced air warming device is that it can blow air into the surgical
site. The type of anesthetic delivery system, with or without heated
air, does not appear to affect core body temperature in isoflurane-
anesthetized pigeons [320]. Electric heating pads and gloves filled
with hot water are not appropriate warming methods for birds as
they can cause thermal injury.
Recovery
Precautions should be taken to protect birds while they recover
from anesthesia. During recovery, birds should be in a warm (25
°C/77 °F) incubator until fully recovered. Birds must be kept from
flopping around, as this can lead to serious neck, wing, or leg inju-
ries. Struggling and flopping behavior can be prevented by lightly
wrapping a bird with a towel but wrapping poses its own hazards. If
a bird is wrapped too tightly, sternal movements will be impeded,
and breathing will be difficult if not impossible. Wrapping can lead
to excessive retention of body heat and cause hyperthermia. If a bird
has not been fasted prior to anesthesia, regurgitation can occur dur-
ing recovery. Keeping a bird intubated during the recovery phase
helps to maintain a patent airway.
References
1 Scott GR, Hawkes LA, Frappell PB, et al. How bar-headed geese fly over the
Himalayas. Physiology 2015; 30(2): 107–115.
2 Handrich Y, Bevan RM, Charrassin JB, et al. Hypothermia in foraging king
penguins. Nature 1997; 388(6637): 64–67.
3 Brodbelt DC, Blissitt KJ, Hammond RA, et al. The risk of death: the Confidential
Enquiry into Perioperative Small Animal Fatalities. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35(5):
365–373.
4 Seamon AB, Hofmeister EH, Divers SJ. Outcome following inhalation anesthesia in
birds at a veterinary referral hospital: 352 cases (2004–2014). J Am Vet Med Assoc
2017; 251(7): 814–817.
5 Dobbs P, Moittié S, Liptovszky M. Avian anaesthesia related mortality and the associ-
ated risk factors in a UK zoological collection. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(6):
922–929.
6 McLelland J. Larynx and trachea. In: King AS, McLelland J, eds. Form and Function
in Birds, 4th edn. London, UK: Academic Press, 1989: 69–103.
7 Zeek PM. Double trachea in penguins and sea lions. Anat Rec 1951; 111(3): 327–343.

-- 1164 of 1450 --

Chapter 58: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Birds 	1149
8 Gaunt AS, Gaunt SLL, Prange HD, et al. The effects of tracheal coiling on the vocal-
izations of cranes (Aves; Gruidae). J Comp Physiol 1987; 161(1): 43–58.
9 Brown RE, Brain JD, Wang N. The avian respiratory system: a unique model for
studies of respiratory toxicosis and for monitoring air quality. Environ Health
Perspect 1997; 105(2): 188–200.
10 Duncker HR. Structure of avian lungs. Respir Physiol 1972; 14(1): 44–63.
11 Duncker HR. Structure of the avian respiratory tract. Respir Physiol 1974; 22(1–2):
1–19.
12 King AS, Cowie AF. The functional anatomy of the bronchial muscle of the bird.
J Anat 1969; 105: 323–336.
13 Hodges RD. The Histology of the Fowl. London, UK: Academic Press, 1974: 648.
14 King AS, McLelland J. Birds – Their Structure and Function, 2nd edn. London, UK:
Bailliere Tindall, 1984: 334.
15 McLelland J. Anatomy of the lungs and air sacs. In: King AS, McLelland J, eds. Form
and Function in Birds, 4th edn. London, UK: Academic Press, 1989: 221–279.
16 Scheid P, Piiper J. Gas exchange and transport. In: Seller TJ, ed. Bird Respiration,
1st edn. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1987: 97–129.
17 Magnussen H, Willmer H, Scheid P. Gas exchange in air sacs: contribution to
respiratory gas exchange in ducks. Respir Physiol 1976; 26(1): 129–146.
18 Maina JN. Development, structure, and function of a novel respiratory organ, the
lung-air sac system of birds: to go where no other vertebrate has gone. Biol Rev
Camb Philos Soc 2006; 81(4): 545–579.
19 Maina JN. Pivotal debates and controversies on the structure and function of the
avian respiratory system: setting the record straight. Biol Rev Camb Philos Soc 2017;
92(3): 1475–1504.
20 Fedde MR. Structure and gas-flow pattern in the avian respiratory system. Poult Sci
1980; 59(12): 2642–2653.
21 Scheid P, Piiper J. Respiratory mechanics and air flow in birds. Form and Function
in Birds, 4th edn. London, UK: Academic Press, 1989: 369–391.
22 Powell FL. Respiration. In: Scanes CG, Sturkie PD, eds. Sturkie’s Avian Physiology,
6th edn. London, UK: Academic Press/Elsevier, 2014: 301–336.
23 Duncker HR. The lung air sac system of birds. A contribution to the functional anat-
omy of the respiratory apparatus. Ergeb Anat Entwicklungsgesch 1971; 45(6): 7–171.
24 Barnas GM, Mather FB, Fedde MR. Response of avian intrapulmonary smooth mus-
cle to changes in carbon dioxide concentration. Poult Sci 1978; 57(5): 1400–1407.
25 Bernhard W, Gebert A, Vieten G, et al. Pulmonary surfactant in birds: coping with
surface tension in a tubular lung. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2001;
281(1): R327–R337.
26 Maina JN, Jimoh SA, Hosie M. Implicit mechanistic role of the collagen, smooth
muscle, and elastic tissue components in strengthening the air and blood capillaries
of the avian lung. J Anat 2010; 217(5): 597–608.
27 Maina JN, King AS, Settle G. An allometric study of pulmonary morphometric
parameters in birds, with mammalian comparisons. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol
Sci 1989; 326(1231): 1–57.
28 Scheid P. Mechanisms of gas exchange in bird lungs. Rev Physiol Biochem Pharmacol
1979; 86: 138–186.
29 Crank WD, Gallagher RR. Theory of gas exchange in the avian parabronchus.
Respir Physiol 1978; 35(1): 9–25.
30 Woodward JD, Maina JN. Study of the structure of the air and blood capillaries of
the gas exchange tissue of the avian lung by serial section three-dimensional recon-
struction. J Microsc 2008; 230(Pt 1): 84–93.
31 Piiper J, Scheid P. Gas exchange in avian lungs: models and experimental evidence.
In: Bolis L, Schmidt-Nielsen K, Maddrell SHP, eds. Comparative Physiology.
Amsterdam, NL: North-Holland Publishing Company, 1973.
32 Powell FL, Scheid P. Physiology of gas exchange in the avian respiratory system. In:
King AS, McLelland J, eds. Form and Function in Birds, 4th edn. London, UK:
Academic Press, 1989: 393–437.
33 Powell FL, Shams H, Hempleman SC, et al. Breathing in thin air: acclimatization to
altitude in ducks. Respir Physiol Neurobiol 2004; 144(2–3): 225–235.
34 Scheid P, Piiper J. Analysis of gas exchange in the avian lung: theory and experi-
ments in the domestic fowl. Respir Physiol 1970; 9(2): 246–262.
35 Gleeson M, Molony V. Control of breathing. In: King AS, McLelland J, eds. Form
and Function in Birds, 4th edn. London, UK: Academic Press, 1989; 439–484.
36 Hempleman SC, Adamson TP, Begay RS, et al. CO2 transduction in avian intrapul-
monary chemoreceptors is critically dependent on transmembrane Na+/H+ exchange.
Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2003; 284(6): R1551–R1559.
37 Hempleman SC, Rodriguez TA, Bhagat YA, et al. Benzolamide, acetazolamide, and
signal transduction in avian intrapulmonary chemoreceptors. Am J Physiol Regul
Integr Comp Physiol 2000; 279(6): R1988–R1995.
38 Shoemaker JM, Hempleman SC. Avian intrapulmonary chemoreceptor discharge rate
is increased by anion exchange blocker ‘DIDS’. Respir Physiol 2001; 128(2): 195–204.
39 Barnas GM, Mather FB, Fedde MR. Are avian intrapulmonary CO2 receptors
chemically modulated mechanoreceptors or chemoreceptors? Respir Physiol 1978;
35(2): 237–243.
40 Hempleman SC, Burger RE. Receptive fields of intrapulmonary chemoreceptors in
the Pekin duck. Respir Physiol 1984; 57(3): 317–330.
41 Fedde MR, Nelson PI, Kuhlmann WD. Ventilatory sensitivity to changes in inspired
and arterial carbon dioxide partial pressures in the chicken. Poult Sci 2002; 81(6):
869–876.
42 Hempleman SC, Burger RE. Comparison of intrapulmonary chemoreceptor
response to PCO2 in the duck and chicken. Respir Physiol 1985; 61(2): 179–184.
43 Kilgore DL, Faraci FM, Fedde MR. Static response characteristics of intrapulmo-
nary chemoreceptors in the pigeon and burrowing owl, a species with a blunted
ventilatory sensitivity to carbon dioxide. Fed Proc 1984; 43: 638.
44 Grubb BR. Allometric relations of cardiovascular function in birds. Am J Physiol
1983; 245: H567–H572.
45 Sturkie PD. Heart and circulation: anatomy, hemodynamics, blood pressure, blood
flow. In: Sturkie PD, ed. Avian Physiology, 4th edn. New York, NY: Springer-Verlag,
1986: 130–166.
46 Sturkie PD. Heart: contraction, conduction, and electrocardiography. In: Sturkie
PD, ed. Avian Physiology, 4th edn. New York, NY: Springer-Verlag, 1986: 167–190.
47 O’Callaghan MW. Regulation of heart beat. In: Phillipson AT, Hall LW, Pritchard
WR, eds. Scientific Foundations of Veterinary Medicine. London, UK: William
Heinemann Medical Books Limited, 1980: 303–312.
48 Keene BW, Flammer K. ECG of the month. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1991; 198(3):
408–409.
49 Burrows ME, Braun EJ, Duckles SP. Avian renal portal valve: a reexamination of its
innervation. Am J Physiol 1983; 245(4): H628–H634.
50 Palmore WP, Ackerman N. Blood flow in the renal portal circulation of the turkey:
effect of epinephrine. Am J Vet Res 1985; 46(7): 1589–1592.
51 Frazier DL, Jones MP, Orosz SE. Pharmacokinetic considerations of the renal
system in birds: Part I. anatomic and physiologic principles of allometric scaling.
J Avian Med Surg 1995; 9(2): 92–103.
52 Hawkins MG, Paul-Murphy JR. Avian analgesia. Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim
Pract 2011; 14(1): 61–80.
53 Greenacre CB, Lusby AL. Physiologic responses of Amazon Parrots (Amazona
species) to manual restraint. J Avian Med Surg 2004; 18(1): 19–22.
54 Doss GA, Mans C. The effect of manual restraint on physiological parameters in
barred owls (Strix varia). J Avian Med Surg 2016; 31(1): 1–5.
55 Doss GA, Mans C. Changes in physiologic parameters and effects of hooding in
red-tailed hawks (Buteo jamaicensis) during manual restraint. J Avian Med Surg
2016; 30(2): 127–132.
56 Le Maho Y, Karmann H, Briot D, et al. Stress in birds due to routine handling and a
technique to avoid it. Am J Physiol 1992; 263(4 Pt 2): R775–R781.
57 Heatley JJ, Oliver JW, Hosgood G, et al. Serum corticosterone concentrations in
response to restraint, anesthesia, and skin testing in Hispaniolan Amazon parrots
(Amazona ventralis). J Avian Med Surg 2000; 14(3): 172–176.
58 Mans C, Guzman DS, Lahner LL, et al. Sedation and physiologic response to man-
ual restraint after intranasal administration of midazolam in Hispaniolan Amazon
parrots (Amazona ventralis). J Avian Med Surg 2012; 26(3): 130–139.
59 Cooper JE. Birds of Prey: Health and Disease, 3rd edn. Oxford, UK: Blackwell
Science, 2002: 345.
60 Miller RE, Fowler ME. Fowler’s Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine Current Therapy,
7th edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier/Saunders, 2012.
61 Ritchie BW, Harrison GJ, Harrison LR. Avian Medicine: Principles and Application.
Lake Worth, FL: Wingers Publishing, 1994: 1384.
62 Sinn LC. Anesthesiology. In: Zantop DW, ed. Avian Medicine: Principles and
Application. Lake Worth, FL: Wingers Publishing, 1997: 589–599.
63 Doss G, Mans C. Avian sedation. J Avian Med Surg 2021; 35(3): 253–268.
64 Mans C. Sedation of pet birds. J Exot Pet Med 2014; 23(2): 152–157.
65 Bello A, Poźniak B, Smutkiewicz A, et al. The influence of the site of drug
administration on florfenicol pharmacokinetics in turkeys. Poult Sci 2022; 101(1):
101536.
66 Riggs SM, Hawkins MG, Craigmill AL, et al. Pharmacokinetics of butorphanol
tartrate in red-tailed hawks (Buteo jamaicensis) and great horned owls (Bubo
virginianus). Am J Vet Res 2008; 69(5): 596–603.
67 Bigham AS, Zamani Moghaddam AK. Finch (Taeneopygia guttata) sedation with
intranasal administration of diazepam, midazolam or xylazine. J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 2013; 36(1): 102–104.
68 Sadegh AB. Comparison of intranasal administration of xylazine, diazepam, and
midazolam in budgerigars (melopsittacus undulatus) clinical evaluation. J Zoo Wildl
Med 2013; 44(2): 241–244.
69 Araghi M, Azizi S, Vesal N, et al. Evaluation of the sedative effects of diazepam,
midazolam, and xylazine after intranasal administration in juvenile ostriches
(Struthio camelus). J Avian Med Surg 2016; 30(3): 221–226.
70 Vesal N, Eskandari MH. Sedative effects of midazolam and xylazine with or without
ketamine and detomidine alone following intranasal administration in ring-necked
parakeets. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2006; 228(3): 383–388.

-- 1165 of 1450 --

1150 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
71 Vesal N, Zare P. Clinical evaluation of intranasal benzodiazepines, alpha-agonists
and their antagonists in canaries. Vet Anaesth Analg 2006; 33(3): 143–148.
72 Hornak S, Liptak T, Ledecky V, et al. A preliminary trial of the sedation induced by
intranasal administration of midazolam alone or in combination with dexmedeto-
midine and reversal by atipamezole for a short-term immobilization in pigeons.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2015; 42(2): 192–196.
73 Schaffer DP, Raposo AC, Liborio FA, et al. Intranasal administration of midazolam
in blue-and- yellow macaws (Ara araruana): evaluation of sedative effects. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2016; 43(4): 459–460.
74 Net RL, Mulcahy DM, Santamaria-Bouvier A, et al. Intranasal administration of
midazolam hydrochloride improves survival in female surf scoters (melanitta per-
spicillata) surgically implanted with intracoelomic transmitters. J Zoo Wildl Med
2019; 50(1): 167–175.
75 Pascoe PJ, Pypendop BH, Pavez Phillips JC, et al. Pharmacokinetics of fentanyl after
intravenous administration in isoflurane-anesthetized red-tailed hawks (Buteo
jamaicensis) and Hispaniolan Amazon parrots (Amazona ventralis). Am J Vet Res
2018; 79(6): 606–613.
76 Sanchez-Migallon Guzman D, Beaufrère H, Welle KR, et al. Birds. In: Carpenter
JW, Harms CA, eds. Carpenter’s Exotic Animal Formulary, 6th edn. Philadelphia,
PA: Saunders/Elsevier, 2022.
77 Franchetti DR, Klide AM. Restraint and anesthesia. In: Fowler ME, ed. Zoo and
Wild Animal Medicine. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 1978: 359–364.
78 Boxenbaum H. Interspecies scaling, allometry, physiological time, and the ground
plan of pharmacokinetics. J Pharmacokinet Biopharm 1982; 10(2): 201–227.
79 Dorrestein GM. The pharmacokinetics of avian therapeutics. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 1991; 21(6): 1241–1264.
80 Schmidt- Nielsen K. Scaling, Why is Animal Size so Important? Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 1984.
81 Sedgwick CJ, Pokras MA. Extrapolating rational drug doses and treatment periods
by allometric scaling. In: Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the American
Animal Hospital Association, 1988: 156–161.
82 Dhondt L, Devreese M, Croubels S, et al. Comparative population pharmacokinetics
and absolute oral bioavailability of COX-2 selective inhibitors celecoxib, mavacoxib
and meloxicam in cockatiels (Nymphicus hollandicus). Sci Rep 2017; 7(1): 12043.
83 Pinheiro BC, A Silva Dantas Lima D, Lima WC, et al. Allometric scaling for chemi-
cal restraint in greater rheas (Rhea americana) with tiletamine and zolazepam.
BMC Vet Res 2014; 10: 66–72.
84 Waxman S, Prados AP, De Lucas JJ, et al. Evaluation of allometric scaling as a tool
for extrapolation of the enrofloxacin dose in American black vultures (Coragyps
atratus). Am J Vet Res 2019; 80(8): 727–735.
85 Baert K, De Backer P. Comparative pharmacokinetics of three non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs in five bird species. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol
2003; 134(1): 25–33.
86 Dorrestein GM, van Miert AS. Pharmacotherapeutic aspects of medication of birds.
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1988; 11(1): 33–44.
87 Redig PT, Larson AA, Duke GE. Response of great horned owls given the optical
isomers of ketamine. Am J Vet Res 1984; 45(1): 125–127.
88 Hawkins MG, Paul-Murphy J, Sanchez-Migallon Guzman D. Recognition, assess-
ment and management of pain in birds. In: Speer BL, ed. Current Therapy in Avian
Medicine and Surgery, 1st edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2016: 616–630.
89 Paul-Murphy JR, Brunson DB, Miletic V. Analgesic effects of butorphanol and
buprenorphine in conscious African grey parrots (Psittacus erithacus erithacus and
Psittacus erithacus timneh). Am J Vet Res 1999; 60(10): 1218–1221.
90 Sladky KK, Krugner-Higby L, Meek-Walker E, et al. Serum concentrations and
analgesic effects of liposome-encapsulated and standard butorphanol tartrate in
parrots. Am J Vet Res 2006; 67(5): 775–781.
91 Cole GA, Paul-Murphy JR, Krugner-Higby L, et al. Analgesic effects of intramuscu-
lar administration of meloxicam in Hispaniolan parrots (Amazona ventralis) with
experimentally induced arthritis. Am J Vet Res 2009; 70(12): 1471–1476.
92 Sanchez-Migallon Guzman D, KuKanich B, Keuler NS, et al. Antinociceptive
effects of nalbuphine hydrochloride in Hispaniolan Amazon parrots (Amazona
ventralis). Am J Vet Res 2011; 72(6): 736–740.
93 Desmarchelier M, Troncy E, Fitzgerald G, et al. Analgesic effects of meloxicam
administration on postoperative orthopedic pain in domestic pigeons (Columba
livia). Am J Vet Res 2012; 73(3): 361–367.
94 Guzman DSM, Houck EL, Knych HKD, et al. Evaluation of the thermal antinocic-
eptive effects and pharmacokinetics after intramuscular administration of
buprenorphine hydrochloride to cockatiels (Nymphicus hollandicus). Am J Vet Res
2018; 79(12): 1239–1245.
95 Mansour A, Khachaturian H, Lewis ME, et al. Anatomy of CNS opioid receptors.
Trends Neurosci 1988; 11(7): 308–314.
96 Csillag A, Bourne RC, Stewart MG. Distribution of mu, delta, and kappa opioid recep-
tor binding sites in the brain of the one-day-old domestic chick (Gallus domesticus): an
in vitro quantitative autoradiographic study. J Comp Neurol 1990; 302(3): 543–551.
97 Fousse SL, Golsen BM, Sanchez-Migallon Guzman D, et al. Varying expression of
Mu and kappa opioid receptors in cockatiels (Nymphicus hollandicus) and domes-
tic pigeons (Columba livia domestica). Front Genet 2020; 11: 549558.
98 Duhamelle A, Raiwet DL, Langlois I, et al. Preliminary findings of structure and
expression of opioid receptor genes in a peregrine falcon (Falco peregrinus), a
snowy owl (Bubo scandiacus), and a blue-fronted Amazon parrot (Amazona aes-
tiva). J Avian Med Surg 2018; 32(3): 173–184.
99 Gaggermeier B, Henke J, Schatzmann U, eds. Investigations on analgesia in
domestic pigeons (C. livia) using buprenorphine and butorphanol. Proceedings of
European Association of Avian Veterinarians. Munich, Germany: German
Veterinary Medical Society, March 7–10, 2001.
100 Klaphake E, Schumacher J, Greenacre C, et al. Comparative anesthetic and cardio-
pulmonary effects of pre- versus postoperative butorphanol administration in
Hispaniolan Amazon Parrots (Amazona ventralis) anesthetized with sevoflurane.
J Avian Med Surg 2006; 20(1): 2–7.
101 Paul-Murphy JR, Krugner-Higby LA, Tourdot RL, et al. Evaluation of liposome-
encapsulated butorphanol tartrate for alleviation of experimentally induced
arthritic pain in green-cheeked conures (Pyrrhura molinae). Am J Vet Res 2009;
70(10): 1211–1219.
102 Guzman DS, Flammer K, Paul-Murphy JR, et al. Pharmacokinetics of butorpha-
nol after intravenous, intramuscular, and oral administration in Hispaniolan
Amazon parrots (Amazona ventralis). J Avian Med Surg 2011; 25(3): 185–191.
103 Laniesse D, Guzman DSM, Knych HK, et al. Pharmacokinetics of butorphanol tar-
trate in a long-acting poloxamer 407 gel formulation administered to Hispaniolan
Amazon parrots (Amazona ventralis). Am J Vet Res 2017; 78(6): 688–694.
104 Laniesse D, Sanchez-Migallon Guzman D, Smith DA, et al. Evaluation of the ther-
mal antinociceptive effects of subcutaneous administration of butorphanol tar-
trate or butorphanol tartrate in a sustained-release poloxamer 407 gel formulation
to orange-winged Amazon parrots (Amazona amazonica). Am J Vet Res 2020;
81(7): 543–550.
105 Singh PM, Johnson C, Gartrell B, et al. Pharmacokinetics of butorphanol in
broiler chickens. Vet Rec 2011; 168(22): 588.
106 Singh PM, Johnson CB, Gartrell B, et al. Analgesic effects of morphine and butor-
phanol in broiler chickens. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(3): 538–545.
107 Clancy MM, KuKanich B, Sykes JM. Pharmacokinetics of butorphanol delivered
with an osmotic pump during a seven-day period in common peafowl (Pavo cris-
tatus). Am J Vet Res 2015; 76(12): 1070–1076.
108 Curro TG, Brunson DB, Paul-Murphy JR. Determination of the ED50 of isoflu-
rane and evaluation of the isoflurane-sparing effect of butorphanol in cockatoos
(Cacatua spp.). Vet Surg 1994; 23(5): 429–433.
109 Guzman DS, Drazenovich TL, Kukanich B, et al. Evaluation of thermal antinocicep-
tive effects and pharmacokinetics after intramuscular administration of butorphanol
tartrate to American kestrels (Falco sparverius). Am J Vet Res 2014; 75(1): 11–18.
110 Curro TG, ed. Evaluation of the isoflurane-sparing effects of butorphanol and flu-
nixin in Psittaciformes. Proceedings of Association of Avian Veterinarians. Reno,
NV: Association of Avian Veterinarians, 1994.
111 Lichtenberger M, Lennox A, Chavez W, et al. The use of butorphanol constant rate
infusion in psittacines. Proceedings of Association of Avian Veterinarians.
Milwaukee, WI: Association of Avian Veterinarians, 2009.
112 Keller DL, Sanchez-Migallon Guzman D, Klauer JM, et al. Pharmacokinetics of
nalbuphine hydrochloride after intravenous and intramuscular administration to
Hispaniolan Amazon parrots (Amazona ventralis). Am J Vet Res 2011; 72(6):
741–745.
113 Sanchez-Migallon Guzman D, Braun JM, Steagall PV, et al. Antinociceptive effects of
long-acting nalbuphine decanoate after intramuscular administration to Hispaniolan
Amazon parrots (Amazona ventralis). Am J Vet Res 2013; 74(2): 196–200.
114 Guzman DS, KuKanich B, Drazenovich TL, et al. Pharmacokinetics of hydromor-
phone hydrochloride after intravenous and intramuscular administration of a single
dose to American kestrels (Falco sparverius). Am J Vet Res 2014; 75(6): 527–531.
115 Houck EL, Guzman DS, Beaufrère H, et al. Evaluation of the thermal antinocicep-
tive effects and pharmacokinetics of hydromorphone hydrochloride after intra-
muscular administration to cockatiels (Nymphicus hollandicus). Am J Vet Res
2018; 79(8): 820–827.
116 Sanchez-Migallon Guzman D, Knych H, Douglas J, et al. Pharmacokinetics of
hydromorphone hydrochloride after intramuscular and intravenous administra-
tion of a single dose to orange-winged Amazon parrots (Amazona amazonica).
Am J Vet Res 2020; 81(11): 894–898.
117 Guzman DS, Drazenovich TL, Olsen GH, et al. Evaluation of thermal antinocicep-
tive effects after intramuscular administration of hydromorphone hydrochloride
to American kestrels (Falco sparverius). Am J Vet Res 2013; 74(6): 817–822.
118 Guzman DSM, Douglas JM, Beaufrère H, et al. Evaluation of the thermal
antinociceptive effects of hydromorphone hydrochloride after intramuscular
administration to orange-winged Amazon parrots (Amazona amazonica). Am J
Vet Res 2020; 81(10): 775–782.

-- 1166 of 1450 --

Chapter 58: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Birds 	1151
119 Singh PM, Johnson C, Gartrell B, et al. Pharmacokinetics of morphine after
intravenous administration in broiler chickens. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2010; 33(5):
515–518.
120 Schneider C. Effects of morphine-like drugs in chicks. Nature 1961; 191: 607–608.
121 Bardo MT, Hughes RA. Brief communication. Shock-elicited flight response in
chickens as an index of morphine analgesia. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 1978; 9(1):
147–149.
122 Fan SG, Shutt AJ, Vogt M. The importance of 5-hydroxytryptamine turnover
for the analgesic effect of morphine in the chicken. Neuroscience 1981; 6(11):
2223–2227.
123 Hughes RA. Codeine analgesic and morphine hyperalgesic effects on thermal
nociception in domestic fowl. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 1990; 35(3): 567–570.
124 Concannon KT, Dodam JR, Hellyer PW. Influence of a Mu- and kappa-opioid
agonist on isoflurane minimal anesthetic concentration in chickens. Am J Vet Res
1995; 56(6): 806–811.
125 Hoppes S, Flammer K, Hoersch L, et al. Disposition and analgesic effects of fenta-
nyl in white cockatoos (Cacatua alba). J Avian Med Surg 2003; 17(3): 124–130.
126 Pavez JC, Hawkins MG, Pascoe PJ, et al. Effect of fentanyl target-controlled
infusions on isoflurane minimum anaesthetic concentration and cardiovascular
function in red-tailed hawks (Buteo jamaicensis). Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38(4):
344–351.
127 Waugh L, Knych H, Cole G, et al. Pharmacokinetic evaluation of a long-acting
fentanyl solution after transdermal administration in helmeted guineafowl
(Numida meleagris). J Zoo Wildl Med 2016; 47(2): 468–473.
128 da Rocha RW, Escobar A, Pypendop BH, et al. Effects of a single intravenous bolus
of fentanyl on the minimum anesthetic concentration of isoflurane in chickens
(Gallus gallus domesticus). Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(3): 546–554.
129 Delaski KM, Gehring R, Heffron BT, et al. Plasma concentrations of fentanyl achieved
with transdermal application in chickens. J Avian Med Surg 2017; 31(1): 6–15.
130 Hawkins MG, Pascoe PJ, DiMaio Knych HK, et al. Effects of three fentanyl plasma
concentrations on the minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in Hispaniolan
Amazon parrots (Amazona ventralis). Am J Vet Res 2018; 79(6): 600–605.
131 Escobar A, Barletta M, Pypendop BH, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
namics of methadone administered intravenously and intramuscularly to
isoflurane-anesthetized chickens. Am J Vet Res 2021; 82(3): 181–188.
132 Escobar A, da Rocha RW, Pypendop BH, et al. Effects of methadone on the mini-
mum anesthetic concentration of isoflurane, and its effects on heart rate, blood
pressure and ventilation during isoflurane anesthesia in hens (Gallus gallus domes-
ticus). PLoS ONE 2016; 11(3): e0152546.
133 Paul-Murphy J, Hess JC, Fialkowski JP. Pharmacokinetic properties of a single
intramuscular dose of buprenorphine in African grey parrots (Psittacus erithacus
erithacus). J Avian Med Surg 2004; 18(4): 224–228.
134 Ceulemans SM, Guzman DS, Olsen GH, et al. Evaluation of thermal antinocicep-
tive effects after intramuscular administration of buprenorphine hydrochloride to
American kestrels (Falco sparverius). Am J Vet Res 2014; 75(8): 705–710.
135 Gustavsen KA, Guzman DS, Knych HK, et al. Pharmacokinetics of buprenorphine
hydrochloride following intramuscular and intravenous administration to
American kestrels (Falco sparverius). Am J Vet Res 2014; 75(8): 711–715.
136 Guzman DS, Knych HK, Olsen GH, et al. Pharmacokinetics of a sustained
release formulation of buprenorphine after intramuscular and subcutaneous
administration to American kestrels (Falco sparverius). J Avian Med Surg 2017;
31(2): 102–107.
137 Guzman DSM, Ceulemans SM, Beaufrère H, et al. Evaluation of the thermal
antinociceptive effects of a sustained-release buprenorphine formulation after
intramuscular administration to American kestrels (Falco sparverius). J Avian
Med Surg 2018; 32(1): 1–7.
138 Gleeson MD, Guzman DSM, Knych HK, et al. Pharmacokinetics of a concen-
trated buprenorphine formulation in red-tailed hawks (Buteo jamaicensis). Am J
Vet Res 2018; 79(1): 13–20.
139 Souza MJ, Martin-Jimenez T, Jones MP, et al. Pharmacokinetics of intravenous
and oral tramadol in the bald eagle (Haliaeetus leucocephalus). J Avian Med Surg
2009; 23(4): 247–252.
140 Black PA, Cox SK, Macek M, et al. Pharmacokinetics of tramadol hydrochloride
and its metabolite O-desmethyltramadol in peafowl (Pavo cristatus). J Zoo Wildl
Med 2010; 41(4): 671–676.
141 Souza MJ, Martin-Jimenez T, Jones MP, et al. Pharmacokinetics of oral
tramadol in red-tailed hawks (Buteo jamaicensis). J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2011;
34(1): 86–88.
142 Souza MJ, Gerhardt L, Cox S. Pharmacokinetics of repeated oral administration of
tramadol hydrochloride in Hispaniolan Amazon parrots (Amazona ventralis). Am
J Vet Res 2013; 74(7): 957–962.
143 Geelen S, Sanchez-Migallon Guzman D, Souza MJ, et al. Antinociceptive effects of
tramadol hydrochloride after intravenous administration to Hispaniolan Amazon
parrots (Amazona ventralis). Am J Vet Res 2013; 74(2): 201–206.
144 Souza MJ, Sanchez-Migallon Guzman D, Paul-Murphy JR, et al. Pharmacokinetics
after oral and intravenous administration of a single dose of tramadol hydrochlo-
ride to Hispaniolan Amazon parrots (Amazona ventralis). Am J Vet Res 2012;
73(8): 1142–1147.
145 Sanchez-Migallon Guzman D, Braun JM, Cox SK, et al. Antinociceptive effects
after oral administration of tramadol hydrochloride in Hispaniolan Amazon
parrots (Amazona ventralis). Am J Vet Res 2012; 73(8): 1148–1152.
146 Guzman DS, Drazenovich TL, Olsen GH, et al. Evaluation of thermal antinocicep-
tive effects after oral administration of tramadol hydrochloride to American
kestrels (Falco sparverius). Am J Vet Res 2014; 75(2): 117–123.
147 Kilburn JJ, Cox SK, Kottyan J, et al. Pharmacokinetics of tramadol and its primary
metabolite O-desmethyltramadol in African penguins (Spheniscus demersus).
J Zoo Wildl Med 2014; 45(1): 93–99.
148 Bailey RS, Sheldon JD, Allender MC, et al. Analgesic efficacy of tramadol com-
pared with meloxicam in ducks (Cairina moschata domestica) evaluated by
ground-reactive forces. J Avian Med Surg 2019; 33(2): 133–140.
149 Oaks JL, Gilbert M, Virani MZ, et al. Diclofenac residues as the cause of vulture
population decline in Pakistan. Nature 2004; 427(6975): 630–633.
150 Ogada DL, Keesing F, Virani MZ. Dropping dead: causes and consequences of
vulture population declines worldwide. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2012; 1249: 57–71.
151 Naidoo V, Mompati KF, Duncan N, et al. The Pied Crow (Corvus albus) is insensi-
tive to diclofenac at concentrations present in carrion. J Wildl Dis 2011; 47(4):
936–944.
152 Cuthbert R, Parry-Jones J, Green RE, et al. NSAIDs and scavenging birds: poten-
tial impacts beyond Asia’s critically endangered vultures. Biol Lett 2007; 3(1):
90–93.
153 Miller KA, Hill NJ, Carrasco SE, et al. Pharmacokinetics and safety of intramuscu-
lar meloxicam in zebra finches (Taeniopygia guttata). J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci
2019; 58(5): 589–593.
154 Rodriguez P, Paul-Murphy JR, Knych HK, et al. Pharmacokinetics of grapiprant
administered to red-tailed hawks (Buteo jamaicensis) after food was withheld for
24 hours. Am J Vet Res 2021; 82(11): 912–919.
155 Molter CM, Court MH, Cole GA, et al. Pharmacokinetics of meloxicam after intra-
venous, intramuscular, and oral administration of a single dose to Hispaniolan
Amazon parrots (Amazona ventralis). Am J Vet Res 2013; 74(3): 375–380.
156 Montesinos A, Ardiaca M, Gilabert JA, et al. Pharmacokinetics of meloxicam after
intravenous, intramuscular and oral administration of a single dose to African
grey parrots (Psittacus erithacus). J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2017; 40(3): 279–284.
157 Lacasse C, Gamble KC, Boothe DM. Pharmacokinetics of a single dose of intrave-
nous and oral meloxicam in red-tailed hawks (Buteo jamaicensis) and great
horned owls (Bubo virginianus). J Avian Med Surg 2013; 27(3): 204–210.
158 Souza MJ, Gerhardt LE, Shannon L, et al. Breed differences in the pharmacokinet-
ics of orally administered meloxicam in domestic chickens (Gallus domesticus).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2021; 259(1): 84–87.
159 Sartini I, Łebkowska-Wieruszewska B, Lisowski A, et al. Pharmacokinetic profiles
of meloxicam after single IV and PO administration in Bilgorajska geese.
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2020; 43(1): 26–32.
160 Morrison J, Greenacre CB, George R, et al. Pharmacokinetics of a Single dose of
oral and intramuscular meloxicam in African penguins (Spheniscus demersus).
J Avian Med Surg 2018; 32(2): 102–108.
161 Boonstra JL, Cox SK, Martin-Jimenez T. Pharmacokinetics of meloxicam after
intramuscular and oral administration of a single dose to American flamingos
(Phoenicopertus ruber). Am J Vet Res 2017; 78(3): 267–273.
162 Lindemann DM, Carpenter JW, KuKanich B. Pharmacokinetics of a single dose of
oral and subcutaneous meloxicam in Caribbean flamingos (Phoenicopterus ruber
ruber). J Avian Med Surg 2016; 30(1): 14–22.
163 Horgan MD, Knych HK, Siksay SE, et al. Pharmacokinetics of a single dose of oral
meloxicam in rehabilitated wild brown pelicans (Pelecanus occidentalis). J Avian
Med Surg 2020; 34(4): 329–337.
164 Castineiras D, Armitage L, Lamas LP, et al. Perioperative pharmacokinetics
and pharmacodynamics of meloxicam in emus (Dromaius novaehollandiae) of
different age groups using nonlinear mixed effect modelling. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
2021; 44(4): 603–618.
165 Montesinos A, Ardiaca M, Juan-Sallés C, et al. Effects of meloxicam on hemato-
logic and plasma biochemical analyte values and results of histologic examination
of kidney biopsy specimens of African grey parrots (Psittacus erithacus). J Avian
Med Surg 2015; 29(1): 1–8.
166 Montesinos A, Encinas T, Ardiaca M, et al. Pharmacokinetics of meloxicam dur-
ing multiple oral or intramuscular dose administration to African grey parrots
(Psittacus erithacus). Am J Vet Res 2019; 80(2): 201–207.
167 McGeown D, Danbury TC, Waterman-Pearson AE, et al. Effect of carprofen on
lameness in broiler chickens. Vet Rec 1999; 144(24): 668–671.
168 Danbury TC, Weeks CA, Chambers JP, et al. Self-selection of the analgesic drug
carprofen by lame broiler chickens. Vet Rec 2000; 146(11): 307–311.

-- 1167 of 1450 --

1152 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
169 Caplen G, Colborne GR, Hothersall B, et al. Lame broiler chickens respond to
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs with objective changes in gait function: a
controlled clinical trial. Vet J 2013; 196(3): 477–482.
170 Nasr MA, Nicol CJ, Wilkins L, et al. The effects of two non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs on the mobility of laying hens with keel bone fractures. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2015; 42(2): 197–204.
171 Riber AB, Herskin MS, Foldager L, et al. Are changes in behavior of fast-growing
broilers with slight gait impairment (GS0-2) related to pain? Poult Sci 2021;
100(3): 100948.
172 Hocking PM, Robertson GW, Gentle MJ. Effects of non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs on pain-related behaviour in a model of articular pain in the
domestic fowl. Res Vet Sci 2005; 78(1): 69–75.
173 Caplen G, Baker L, Hothersall B, et al. Thermal nociception as a measure of non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drug effectiveness in broiler chickens with articular
pain. Vet J 2013; 198(3): 616–619.
174 Paul-Murphy JR, Sladky KK, Krugner-Higby LA, et al. Analgesic effects of carpro-
fen and liposome-encapsulated butorphanol tartrate in Hispaniolan parrots
(Amazona ventralis) with experimentally induced arthritis. Am J Vet Res 2009;
70(10): 1201–1210.
175 Zollinger TJ, Hoover JP, Payton ME, et al. Clinicopathologic, gross necropsy, and
histologic findings after intramuscular injection of carprofen in a pigeon
(Columba livia) model. J Avian Med Surg 2011; 25(3): 173–184.
176 Sartini I, Giorgi M. Grapiprant: a snapshot of the current knowledge. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2021; 44(5): 679–688.
177 Rodriguez P, Paul-Murphy JR, Knych HK, et al. Absorption of grapiprant in red-
tailed hawks (Buteo jamaicensis) is decreased when administered with food. Am J
Vet Res 2022; 83(6).
178 Fedde MR. Drugs used for avian anesthesia: a review. Poult Sci 1978; 57(5):
1376–1399.
179 DiGeronimo PM, da Cunha AF. Local and regional anesthesia in zoological
companion animal practice. Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract 2022; 25(1):
321–336.
180 DiGeronimo PM, da Cunha AF, Pypendop B, et al. Cardiovascular tolerance of
intravenous bupivacaine in broiler chickens (Gallus gallus domesticus) anesthe-
tized with isoflurane. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(2): 287–294.
181 Figueiredo JP, Cruz ML, Mendes GM, et al. Assessment of brachial plexus block-
ade in chickens by an axillary approach. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35(6): 511–518.
182 Brenner DJ, Larsen RS, Dickinson PJ, et al. Development of an avian brachial
plexus nerve block technique for perioperative analgesia in mallard ducks (Anas
platyrhynchos). J Avian Med Surg 2010; 24(1): 24–34.
183 da Cunha AF, Strain GM, Rademacher N, et al. Palpation- and ultrasound-guided
brachial plexus blockade in Hispaniolan Amazon parrots (Amazona ventralis).
Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40(1): 96–102.
184 Trujanovic R, Otero PE, Larenza-Menzies MP. Ultrasound- and nerve
stimulation-guided femoral and sciatic nerve block in a duck (Anas platyrhyn-
chos) undergoing surgical fixation of a tibiotarsal fracture. Vet Anaesth Analg
2021; 48(2): 277–278.
185 Mulcahy DM, Tuomi P, Larsen SR. Differential mortality for male spectacled
eiders (Somateria fischeri) and king eiders (Somateria spectabilis) subsequent to
anesthesia with propofol, bupivacaine, and ketoprofen. J Avian Med Surg 2003;
17(3): 117–123.
186 Kazemi-Darabadi S, Akbari G, Shokrollahi S. Development and evaluation of
a technique for spinal anaesthesia in broiler chickens. N Z Vet J 2019; 67(5):
241–248.
187 Khamisabadi A, Kazemi-Darabadi S, Akbari G. Comparison of anesthetic efficacy
of lidocaine and bupivacaine in spinal anesthesia in chickens. J Avian Med Surg
2021; 35(1): 60–67.
188 Mama KR, Phillips LG Jr., Pascoe PJ. Use of propofol for induction and mainte-
nance of anesthesia in a barn owl (Tyto alba) undergoing tracheal resection. J Zoo
Wildl Med 1996; 27(3): 397–401.
189 Fitzgerald G, Cooper JE. Preliminary studies on the use of propofol in the domes-
tic pigeon (Columba livia). Res Vet Sci 1990; 49(3): 334–338.
190 Hawkins MG, Wright BD, Pascoe PJ, et al. Pharmacokinetics and anesthetic and
cardiopulmonary effects of propofol in red-tailed hawks (Buteo jamaicensis) and
great horned owls (Bubo virginianus). Am J Vet Res 2003; 64(6): 677–683.
191 Langlois I, Harvey RC, Jones MP, et al. Cardiopulmonary and anesthetic effects of
isoflurane and propofol in Hispaniolan Parrots (Amazona ventralis). J Avian Med
Surg 2003; 17(1): 4–10.
192 Machin KL, Caulkett NA. Cardiopulmonary effects of propofol and a
medetomidine-midazolam-ketamine combination in mallard ducks. Am J Vet Res
1998; 59(5): 598–602.
193 Machin KL, Caulkett NA. Evaluation of isoflurane and propofol anesthesia for
intraabdominal transmitter placement in nesting female canvasback ducks. J
Wildl Dis 2000; 36(2): 324–334.
194 Muller K, Holzapfel J, Brunnberg L. Total intravenous anaesthesia by boluses or by
continuous rate infusion of propofol in mute swans (Cygnus olor). Vet Anaesth
Analg 2011; 38(4): 286–291.
195 Lukasik VM, Gentz EJ, Erb HN, et al. Cardiopulmonary effecs of propofol anes-
thesia in chickens (Gallus gallus). J Avian Med Surg 1997; 11: 93–97.
196 Santos EA, Monteiro ER, Herrera JR, et al. Total intravenous anesthesia in domes-
tic chicken (Gallus gallus domesticus) with propofol alone or in combination with
methadone, nalbuphine or fentanyl for ulna osteotomy. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020;
47(3): 347–355.
197 Schumacher J, Citino SB, Hernandez K, et al. Cardiopulmonary and anesthetic
effects of propofol in wild turkeys. Am J Vet Res 1997; 58(9): 1014–1017.
198 Clippinger TL, Platt SR, Bennett RA, et al. Electrodiagnostic evaluation of periph-
eral nerve function in rheas and barred owls. Am J Vet Res 2000; 61(4): 469–472.
199 Bigby SE, Carter JE, Bauquier S, et al. Use of propofol for induction and mainte-
nance of anesthesia in a king penguin (Aptenodytes patagonicus) undergoing mag-
netic resonance imaging. J Avian Med Surg 2016; 30(3): 237–242.
200 Mulcahy DM, Gartrell B, Gill RE, et al. Coelomic implantation of satellite trans-
mitters in the bar-tailed godwit (Limosa lapponica) and the bristle-thighed curlew
(numenius tahitiensis) using propofol, bupivacaine, and lidocaine. J Zoo Wildl Med
2011; 42(1): 54–64.
201 Escalante GC, Balko JA, Chinnadurai SK. Comparison of the sedative effects of
alfaxalone and butorphanol–midazolam administered intramuscularly in budg-
erigars (Melopsittacus undulatus). J Avian Med Surg 2018; 32(4): 279–285.
202 Balko JA, Lindemann DM, Allender MC, et al. Evaluation of the anesthetic and
cardiorespiratory effects of intramuscular alfaxalone administration and isoflu-
rane in budgerigars (Melopsittacus undulatus) and comparison with manual
restraint. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2019; 254(12): 1427–1435.
203 Romano J, Hasse K, Johnston M. Sedative, cardiorespiratory, and thermoregula-
tory effects of alfaxalone on budgerigars (Melopsittacus undulatus). J Zoo Wildl
Med 2020; 51(1): 96–101.
204 Whitehead MC, Hoppes SM, Musser JMB, et al. The use of alfaxalone in Quaker
parrots (Myiopsitta monachus). J Avian Med Surg 2019; 33(4): 340–348.
205 Greunz EM, Limon D, Bertelsen MF. Alfaxalone sedation in black-cheeked love-
birds (Agapornis nigrigenis) for non-invasive procedures. J Avian Med Surg 2021;
35(2): 161–166.
206 White DM, Martinez-Taboada F. Induction of anesthesia with intravenous alfax-
alone in two Isa brown chickens (Gallus gallus domesticus). J Exot Pet Med 2019;
29: 119–122.
207 Alatrushi AN, Naser AS. The safety profile of the anesthetic effect of alfaxalone
and its interaction with xylazine and ketamine in chick’s model (Gallus gallus
domesticus). Mac Vet Rev 2021; 44(2): 203–209.
208 Hasse K, Crawford A, Gustafson D, et al. Plasma concentration and pharmacody-
namics of intramuscular administration of alfaxalone in Indian peafowl (Pavo
cristatus). J Zoo Wildl Med 2022; 53(1): 108–115.
209 Kruse TN, Messenger KM, Bowman AS, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmaco-
dynamics of alfaxalone after a single intramuscular or intravascular injection in
mallard ducks (Anas platyrhynchos). J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2019; 42(6): 713–721.
210 Baldrey V, Stanford M, Bacon H. A comparison of the pharmacodynamic effects of
intravenous ketamine–xylazine with alfaxalone in mute swans (Cygnus olor) pre-
senting at a wildlife veterinary hospital. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(5): 716–724.
211 Kilic N. Clinical evaluation of alfaxalone in cyclodextrin as an intravenous anes-
thetic in the common buzzards (Buteo buteo). Iran J Vet Surg 2021; 16(1): 24–28.
212 Mastakov A, Henning J, de Gier R, et al. Induction of general anesthesia with
alfaxalone in the domestic chicken. J Avian Med Surg 2021; 35(3): 269–279.
213 Joyner PH, Jones MP, Ward D, et al. Induction and recovery characteristics and
cardiopulmonary effects of sevoflurane and isoflurane in bald eagles. Am J Vet Res
2008; 69(1): 13–22.
214 Granone TD, de Francisco ON, Killos MB, et al. Comparison of three different
inhalant anesthetic agents (isoflurane, sevoflurane, desflurane) in red-tailed
hawks (Buteo jamaicensis). Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39(1): 29–37.
215 Chan FT, Chang GR, Wang HC, et al. Anesthesia with isoflurane and sevoflurane
in the crested serpent eagle (Spilornis cheela hoya): minimum anesthetic concen-
tration, physiological effects, hematocrit, plasma chemistry and behavioral effects.
J Vet Med Sci 2013; 75(12): 1591–1600.
216 Quasha AL, Eger EI II, Tinker JH. Determination and applications of MAC.
Anesthesiology 1980; 53(4): 315–334.
217 Ludders JW, Rode J, Mitchell GS. Isoflurane anesthesia in sandhill cranes (Grus
canadensis): minimal anesthetic concentration and cardiopulmonary dose-response
during spontaneous and controlled breathing. Anesth Analg 1989; 68(4): 511–516.
218 Eger EI. Isoflurane: A Compendium and Reference. Madison, WI: Anaquest, a
Division of BOC, 1985: 143.
219 Steffey EP. Inhalation anesthetics. In: Thurmon JC, Tranquilli WJ, Benson GJ, eds.
Lumb & Jones’ Veterinary Anesthesia, 3rd edn. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins,
1996: 297–329.

-- 1168 of 1450 --

Chapter 58: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia – Birds 	1153
220 de Paula VV, Otsuki DA, Auler Jo J, et al. The effect of premedication with keta-
mine, alone or with diazepam, on anaesthesia with sevoflurane in parrots
(Amazona aestiva). BMC Vet Res 2013; 9(1): 142.
221 Mercado JA, Larsen RS, Wack RF, et al. Minimum anesthetic concentration of
isoflurane in captive thick-billed parrots (Rhynchopsitta pachyrhyncha). Am J Vet
Res 2008; 69(2): 189–194.
222 Phair KA, Larsen RS, Wack RF, et al. Determination of the minimum anesthetic
concentration of sevoflurane in thick-billed parrots (Rhynchopsitta pachyrhyn-
cha). Am J Vet Res 2012; 73(9): 1350–1355.
223 Escobar A, da Rocha RW, Midon M, et al. Effects of tramadol on the minimum
anesthetic concentration of isoflurane in white-eyed parakeets (psittacara leucoph-
thalmus). J Zoo Wildl Med 2017; 48(2): 380–387.
224 Zaheer OA, Sanchez A, Beaufrère H. Minimum anesthetic concentration of
isoflurane and sparing effect of midazolam in Quaker parrots (Myiopsitta mona-
chus). Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(3): 341–346.
225 Ludders JW, Mitchell GS, Schaefer SL. Minimum anesthetic dose and cardiopul-
monary dose response for halothane in chickens. Am J Vet Res 1988; 49(6):
929–932.
226 Naganobu K, Hagio M. Dose-related cardiovascular effects of isoflurane in
chickens during controlled ventilation. J Vet Med Sci 2000; 62(4): 435–437.
227 Naganobu K, Fujisawa Y, Ohde H, et al. Determination of the minimum anes-
thetic concentration and cardiovascular dose response for sevoflurane in chickens
during controlled ventilation. Vet Surg 2000; 29(1): 102–105.
228 Kim YK, Lee SS, Suh EH, et al. Minimum anesthetic concentration and cardiovas-
cular dose-response relationship of isoflurane in cinereous vultures (Aegypius
monachus). J Zoo Wildl Med 2011; 42(3): 499–503.
229 Ludders JW. Minimal anesthetic concentration and cardiopulmonary dose-
response of halothane in ducks. Vet Surg 1992; 21(4): 319–324.
230 Ludders JW, Mitchell GS, Rode J. Minimal anesthetic concentration and cardio-
pulmonary dose response of isoflurane in ducks. Vet Surg 1990; 19(4): 304–307.
231 Escobar A, Valadao CA, Brosnan RJ, et al. Effects of butorphanol on the minimum
anesthetic concentration for sevoflurane in guineafowl (Numida meleagris). Am J
Vet Res 2012; 73(2): 183–188.
232 Botman J, Gabriel F, Dugdale AH, et al. Anaesthesia with sevoflurane in pigeons:
minimal anaesthetic concentration (MAC) determination and investigation of
cardiorespiratory variables at 1 MAC. Vet Rec 2016; 178(22): 560–565.
233 Naganobu K, Hagio M, Sonoda T, et al. Arrhythmogenic effect of hypercapnia in
ducks anesthetized with halothane. Am J Vet Res 2001; 62(1): 127–129.
234 Arnall L. Anaesthesia and surgery in cage and aviary birds (I). Vet Rec 1961; 73: 139.
235 Korbel R, Burike S, Erhardt W, et al. Effects of nitrous oxide application in racing
pigeons (Columbia livia gmel., 1789, var. dom.) A study using the air sac perfusion
technique. Israel J Vet Med 1996; 51(3/4): 133–139.
236 Hawkins MG, Guzman DS-M, Beaufrère H, et al. Birds. In: Carpenter JW,
Marion CJ, eds. Exotic Animal Formulary, 5th edn: WB Saunders, 2018: 167–375.
237 Reynold WT. Unusual anesthetic complication in a pelican. Vet Rec 1983; 113: 204.
238 Nicholson A, Ilkiw JE. Neuromuscular and cardiovascular effects of atracurium in
isoflurane-anesthetized chickens. Am J Vet Res 1992; 53(12): 2337–2342.
239 Martin-Flores M, Lau EJ, Campoy L, et al. Twitch potentiation: a potential source
of error during neuromuscular monitoring with acceleromyography in anesthe-
tized dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38(4): 328–335.
240 McMurphy RM, Davidson HJ, Hodgson DS. Effects of atracurium on intraocular
pressure, eye position, and blood pressure in eucapnic and hypocapnic isoflurane-
anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 2004; 65(2): 179–182.
241 Mikaelian I, Paillet I, Williams D. Comparative use of various mydriatic drugs in
kestrels (Falco tinnunculus). Am J Vet Res 1994; 55(2): 270–272.
242 Ramer JC, Paul-Murphy JR, Brunson D, et al. Effects of mydriatic agents in cocka-
toos, African gray parrots, and Blue-fronted Amazon parrots. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1996; 208(2): 227–230.
243 Thompson HM. Avian serum esterases: species and temporal variations and their
possible consequences. Chem Biol Interact 1993; 87(1–3): 329–338.
244 Loerzel SM, Smith PJ, Howe A, et al. Vecuronium bromide, phenylephrine and
atropine combinations as mydriatics in juvenile double-crested cormorants
(Phalacrocorax auritus). Vet Ophthalmol 2002; 5(3): 149–154.
245 Susanti L, Kang S, Lee E, et al. Efficacy of topical rocuronium bromide as a
mydriatic agent in domestic pigeons (Columba livia). J Vet Med Sci 2021; 83(3):
501–506.
246 Barsotti G, Briganti A, Spratte JR, et al. Safety and Efficacy of Bilateral Topical
Application of Rocuronium Bromide for Mydriasis in European kestrels (Falco tin-
nunculus). J Avian Med Surg 2012; 26(1): 1–5.
247 Barsotti G, Briganti A, Spratte JR, et al. Bilateral mydriasis in common buzzards
(Buteo buteo) and little owls (Athene noctua) induced by concurrent topical
administration of rocuronium bromide. Vet Ophthalmol 2010; 13(Suppl): 35–40.
248 Barsotti G, Briganti A, Spratte JR, et al. Mydriatic effect of topically applied rocu-
ronium bromide in tawny owls (Strix aluco): comparison between two protocols.
Vet Ophthalmol 2010; 13(Suppl): 9–13.
249 Cantero F, Ortillés Á, Peña MT, et al. Safety and efficacy of unilateral topical appli-
cation of rocuronium bromide in healthy scops owls (Otus scops). Vet Ophthalmol
2021; 24(2): 169–176.
250 Barsotti G, Asti M, Giani E, et al. Effect of topical ophthalmic instillation of rocu-
ronium bromide on the intraocular pressure of kestrels (Falco tinnunculus) and
little owls (Athene noctuae). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2019; 255(12): 1359–1364.
251 Baine K, Hendrix DV, Kuhn SE, et al. The efficacy and safety of topical
rocuronium bromide to induce bilateral mydriasis in Hispaniolan Amazon
parrots (Amazona ventralis). J Avian Med Surg 2016; 30(1): 8–13.
252 Petritz OA, Guzman DS, Gustavsen K, et al. Evaluation of the mydriatic effects of
topical administration of rocuronium bromide in Hispaniolan Amazon parrots
(Amazona ventralis). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2016; 248(1): 67–71.
253 Christensen J, Fosse RT, Halvorsen OJ, et al. Comparison of various anesthetic
regimens in the domestic fowl. Am J Vet Res 1987; 48(11): 1649–1657.
254 Belant JL, Seamans TW. Comparison of three formulations of alpha-chloralose for
immobilization of Canada geese. J Wildl Dis 1997; 33(3): 606–610.
255 Belant JL, Seamans TW. Alpha-chloralose immobilization of rock doves in Ohio.
J Wildl Dis 1999; 35(2): 239–242.
256 Hartup BK, Schneider L, Engels JM, et al. Capture of sandhill cranes using alpha-
chloralose: a 10-year follow-up. J Wildl Dis 2014; 50(1): 143–145.
257 Businga NK, Langenberg J, Carlson L. Successful treatment of capture myopathy
in three wild greater sandhill cranes (Grus canadensis tabida). J Avian Med Surg
2007; 21(4): 294–298.
258 Sedgwick CJ. Anesthesia of caged birds. In: Kirk R, ed. Current Veterinary
Therapy VII, 7th edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 1980: 653–656.
259 Roberson DW, Alosi JA, Messana EP, et al. Endotracheal isoflurane anesthesia for
chick auditory surgery. Hear Res 2000; 141: 165–168.
260 Sykes JM, Neiffer D, Terrell S, et al. Review of 23 cases of postintubation tracheal
obstructions in birds. J Zoo Wildl Med 2013; 44(3): 700–713.
261 Ludders JW, Matthews N. Avian anesthesia. In: Thurmon J, Benson J, Tranquilli W,
eds. Lumb and Jones’ Veterinary Anesthesia, 3rd edn. Baltimore, MD: Williams &
Wilkins, 1996: 645–669.
262 Bednarski RM, Ludders JW, LeBlanc PH, et al. Isoflurane-nitrous oxide-
oxygen anesthesia in an Andean condor. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1985; 187(11):
1209–1210.
263 Hollwarth AJ, Pestell ST, Byron-Chance DH, et al. Mortality outcomes based on
ASA grade in avian patients undergoing general anesthesia. J Exot Pet Med 2022;
41: 14–19.
264 Butler PJ. The exercise response and the "classical" diving response during natural
submersion in birds and mammals. Can J Zool 1988; 66: 29–39.
265 Furilla RA, Jones DR. The contribution of nasal receptors to the cardiac response
to diving in restrained and unrestrained redhead ducks (Aythya americana). J Exp
Biol 1986; 121(1): 227–238.
266 Jones DR, Furilla RA, Heieis MRA, et al. Forced and voluntary diving in ducks:
cardiovascular adjustments and their control. Can J Zool 1988; 66(1): 75–83.
267 Woakes AJ. Metabolism in diving birds: studies in the laboratory and the field.
Can J Zool 1988; 66: 138.
268 Jones DR, Bryan RM, West NH, et al. Regional distribution of blood flow during
diving in the duck (Anas platyrhynchos). Can J Zool 1979; 57(5): 995–1002.
269 Wijnberg ID, Lagerweij E, Zwart P. Inhalation anaesthesia in birds through
the abdominal air sac, using a unidirectional, continuous flow. 4th International
Congress of Veterinary Anaesthesia. Utrecht, NL, 1991.
270 Hirshman CA, McCullough RE, Cohen PJ, et al. Hypoxic ventilatory drive in dogs
during thiopental, ketamine, or pentobarbital anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1975;
43(6): 628–634.
271 Hirshman CA, McCullough RE, Cohen PJ, et al. Depression of hypoxic ventila-
tory response by halothane, enflurane and isoflurane in dogs. Br J Anaesth 1977;
49(10): 957–963.
272 Pavlin EG, Hornbein TF. Anesthesia and the control of ventilation. In: Cherniak NS,
Widdicombe JG, eds. Handbook of Physiology: The Respiratory System. Bethesda, MA:
American Physiological Society, 1986: 972.
273 Bagshaw RJ, Cox RH. Baroreceptor control of heart rate in chickens (Gallus
domesticus). Am J Vet Res 1986; 47: 293.
274 Molony V. Classification of vagal afferents firing in phase with breathing in Gallus
domesticus. Respir Physiol 1974; 22(1–2): 57–76.
275 Pizarro J, Ludders JW, Douse MA, et al. Halothane effects on ventilatory responses
to changes in intrapulmonary CO2 in geese. Respir Physiol 1990; 82(3): 337–347.
276 Pettifer GR, Cornick-Seahorn J, Smith JA, et al. The comparative cardiopulmo-
nary effects of spontaneous and controlled ventilation by using the Hallowell
EMC Anesthesia Work Station in Hispaniolan Amazon parrots (Amazona
ventralis). J Avian Med Surg 2002; 16(4): 268–276.
277 Piiper J, Drees F, Scheid P. Gas exchange in the domestic fowl during spontaneous
breathing and artificial ventilation. Respir Physiol 1970; 9: 234.
278 Burger RE, Lorenz FW. Artificial respiration in birds by unidirectional air flow.
Poult Sci 1960; 39: 236–237.

-- 1169 of 1450 --

1154 	Section 7: Comparative Anesthesia and Analgesia
279 Burger RE, Meyer M, Graf W, et al. Gas exchange in the parabronchial lung of
birds: experiments in unidirectionally ventilated ducks. Respir Physiol 1979; 36(1):
19–37.
280 Jaensch SM, Cullen L, Raidal SR. Air sac functional anatomy of the sulphur-
crested cockatoo (Cacatua galerita) during isoflurane anesthesia. J Avian Med Surg
2002; 16(1): 2–9.
281 Whittow GC, Ossorio N. A new technic for anesthetizing birds. Lab Anim Care
1970; 20(4 Pt 1): 651–656.
282 Nilson PC, Teramitsu I, White SA. Caudal thoracic air sac cannulation in zebra
finches for isoflurane anesthesia. J Neurosci Methods 2005; 143(2): 107–115.
283 Rode J, Bartholow S, Ludders JW. Ventilation through an air sac cannula during
tracheal obstruction in ducks. J Assoc Avian Vet 1990; 4(2): 98–102.
284 Escobar A, Thiesen R, Vitaliano SN, et al. Some cardiopulmonary effects of sevo-
flurane in crested caracara (Caracara plancus). Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36(5):
436–441.
285 Jaensch SM, Cullen L, Raidal SR. Comparative cardiopulmonary effects of halo-
thane and isoflurane in galahs (Eolophus roseicapillus). J Avian Med Surg 1999;
13(1): 15–22.
286 Naganobu K, Ise K, Miyamoto T, et al. Sevoflurane anaesthesia in chickens during
spontaneous and controlled ventilation. Vet Rec 2003; 152(2): 45–48.
287 Seok SH, Jeong DH, Hong IH, et al. Cardiorespiratory dose-response relationship
of isoflurane in Cinereous vulture (Aegypius monachus) during spontaneous ven-
tilation. J Vet Med Sci 2017; 79(1): 160–165.
288 Regan MJ, Eger EI. Effect of hypothermia in dogs on anesthetizing and apneic
doses of inhalation agents. Determination of the anesthetic index (Apnea/MAC).
Anesthesiology 1967; 28(4): 689–700.
289 Steffey EP, Howland D Jr. Isoflurane potency in the dog and cat. Am J Vet Res 1977;
38(11): 1833–1836.
290 Steffey EP, Howland D Jr., Giri S, et al. Enflurane, halothane, and isoflurane
potency in horses. Am J Vet Res 1977; 38(7): 1037–1039.
291 Midon M, Escobar A, Yamada DI, et al. Isoflurane respiratory anesthetic index in
chickens (gallus gallus domesticus). J Zoo Wildl Med 2021; 52(1): 327–331.
292 Edling TM, Degernes LA, Flammer K, et al. Capnographic monitoring of anesthe-
tized African grey parrots receiving intermittent positive pressure ventilation.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2001; 219(12): 1714–1718.
293 Desmarchelier M, Rondenay Y, Fitzgerald G, et al. Monitoring of the ventilatory
status of anesthetized birds of prey by using end-tidal carbon dioxide measured
with a microstream capnometer. J Zoo Wildl Med 2007; 38(1): 1–6.
294 Pare M, Ludders JW, Erb HN. Association of partial pressure of carbon dioxide in
expired gas and arterial blood at three different ventilation states in apneic chick-
ens (Gallus domesticus) during air sac insufflation anesthesia. Vet Anaesth Analg
2013; 40(3): 245–256.
295 Raghav R, Middleton R, Ahamed R, et al. Analysis of arterial and venous blood
gases in healthy Gyr Falcons (Falco rusticolus) under anesthesia. J Avian Med Surg
2015; 29(4): 290–297.
296 Schmitt PM, Gobel T, Trautvetter E. Evaluation of pulse oximetry as a monitoring
method in avian anesthesia. J Avian Med Surg 1998; 12(2): 91–99.
297 Ivy CM, York JM, Lague SL, et al. Validation of a pulse oximetry system for high-
altitude waterfowl by examining the hypoxia responses of the Andean goose
(Chloephaga melanoptera). Physiol Biochem Zool 2018; 91(3): 859–867.
298 King AS, Payne DC. Normal breathing and the effects of posture in Gallus domes-
ticus. J Physiol 1964; 174: 340–347.
299 Malka S, Hawkins MG, Jones JH, et al. Effect of body position on respiratory sys-
tem volumes in anesthetized red-tailed hawks (Buteo jamaicensis) as measured via
computed tomography. Am J Vet Res 2009; 70(9): 1155–1160.
300 Hawkins MG, Malka S, Pascoe PJ, et al. Evaluation of the effects of dorsal versus
lateral recumbency on the cardiopulmonary system during anesthesia with isoflu-
rane in red-tailed hawks (Buteo jamaicensis). Am J Vet Res 2013; 74(1): 136–143.
301 Nevitt BN, Langan JN, Adkesson MJ, et al. Comparison of air sac volume, lung
volume, and lung densities determined by use of computed tomography in con-
scious and anesthetized Humboldt penguins (Spheniscus humboldti) positioned in
ventral, dorsal, and right lateral recumbency. Am J Vet Res 2014; 75(8): 739–745.
302 Nap AMP, Lumeij JT, Stokhof AA. Electrocardiogram of the African grey
(Psittacus erithacus) and Amazon (Amazona spp.) parrot. Avian Pathol 1992;
21(1): 45–53.
303 Cinar A, Bagci C, Belge F, et al. The electrocardiogram of the Pekin duck. Avian
Dis 1996; 40(4): 919–923.
304 Rodriguez R, Prieto-Montana F, Montes AM, et al. The normal electrocardiogram
of the unanesthetized peregrine falcon (Falco peregrinus brookei). Avian Dis
2004; 48(2): 405–409.
305 Talavera J, Guzman MJ, del Palacio MJ, et al. The normal electrocardiogram of
four species of conscious raptors. Res Vet Sci 2008; 84(1): 119–125.
306 Hassanpour H, Zarei H, Nasiri L, et al. Electrocardiogram analysis of the golden
(Chrysolophus pictus) and silver (Lophura nycthemera) pheasants. J Zoo Wildl Med
2018; 49(4): 881–886.
307 Goelz MF, Hahn AW, Kelley ST. Effects of halothane and isoflurane on mean arte-
rial blood pressure, heart rate, and respiratory rate in adult Pekin ducks. Am J Vet
Res 1990; 51(3): 458–460.
308 Greenlees KJ, Clutton RE, Larsen CT, et al. Effect of halothane, isoflurane, and
pentobarbital anesthesia on myocardial irritability in chickens. Am J Vet Res 1990;
51(5): 757–758.
309 Zehnder AM, Hawkins MG, Pascoe PJ, et al. Evaluation of indirect blood pressure
monitoring in awake and anesthetized red-tailed hawks (Buteo jamaicensis):
effects of cuff size, cuff placement, and monitoring equipment. Vet Anaesth Analg
2009; 36(5): 464–479.
310 Johnston MS, Davidowski LA, Rao S, et al. Precision of repeated, Doppler-derived
indirect blood pressure measurements in conscious psittacine birds. J Avian Med
Surg 2011; 25(2): 83–90.
311 Acierno MJ, da Cunha A, Smith J, et al. Agreement between direct and indirect
blood pressure measurements obtained from anesthetized Hispaniolan Amazon
parrots. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008; 233(10): 1587–1590.
312 Schnellbacher R, da Cunha A, Olson EE, et al. Arterial catheterization, interpreta-
tion, and treatment of arterial blood pressures and blood gases in birds. J Exot Pet
Med 2014; 23(2): 129–141.
313 Comolli J, d’Ovidio D, Adami C, et al. Technological advances in exotic pet anes-
thesia and analgesia. Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract 2019; 22(3): 419–439.
314 Schnellbacher RW, da Cunha AF, Beaufrère H, et al. Effects of dopamine and
dobutamine on isoflurane-induced hypotension in Hispaniolan Amazon parrots
(Amazona ventralis). Am J Vet Res 2012; 73(7): 952–958.
315 Brady K, Hudson A, Hood R, et al. Personalizing the definition of hypotension to
protect the brain. Anesthesiology 2020; 132(1): 170–179.
316 Beaufrère H, Acierno MJ, Mitchell M, et al. Plasma osmolality reference values in
African grey parrots (Psittacus erithacus erithacus), Hispaniolan Amazon parrots
(Amazona ventralis), and red-fronted macaws (Ara rubrogenys). J Avian Med Surg
2011; 25(2): 91–96.
317 Hawkins MG, Griffenhagen GM. Raptor sedation and anesthesia. Vet Clin North
Am Exotic Anim Pract 2022; 25(1): 135–161.
318 Phalen DN, Mitchell ME, Cavazos-Martinez ML. Evaluation of three heat sources
for their ability to maintain core body temperature in the anesthetized avian
patient. J Avian Med Surg 1996; 10(3): 174–178.
319 Rembert MS, Smith JA, Hosgood G, et al. Comparison of traditional thermal sup-
port devices with the forced-air warmer system in anesthetized Hispaniolan
Amazon parrots (Amazona ventralis). J Avian Med Surg 2001; 15(3): 187–193.
320 Boedeker NC, Carpenter JW, Mason DE. Comparison of body temperatures of
pigeons (Columba livia) anesthetized by three different anesthetic delivery sys-
tems. J Avian Med Surg 2005; 19(1): 1–6.

-- 1170 of 1450 --

SECTION 8
Anesthesia and Analgesia
for Domestic Species

-- 1171 of 1450 --



-- 1172 of 1450 --

1157
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth E dition of Lumb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
The selection of a particular anesthetic plan is predicated upon the
patient’s physical status and temperament, the type of procedure for
which anesthesia is being considered, anticipated degree of periop-
erative pain, the familiarity of the anesthetist with the anesthetic
drugs, the type of facility and equipment available, the personnel
available for assistance, and the cost of anesthetic drugs [1,2]. There
is no single best method for anesthetizing dogs or cats, and famili-
arity with just one anesthetic technique at best limits a veterinarian’s
ability to perform the myriad of surgical and diagnostic procedures
commonly performed in a modern veterinary practice and at worst
results in unnecessary risk to the patient. A debilitated dog or cat
undergoing extensive repair of a fractured limb will require a differ-
ent anesthetic regimen than one undergoing routine neutering, one
requiring short-term restraint for radiography, or a geriatric patient
requiring extensive dental surgery.
General anesthesia is characterized by muscle relaxation, uncon-
sciousness, amnesia, and analgesia. It is difficult for a single drug to
provide all of these elements without causing significant distur-
bances to patient homeostasis. Inhalant anesthetics come closest to
satisfying all of these conditions, but even they are more useful when
co-administered with anesthetic adjunctive drugs such as sedatives,
opioids, local anesthetics, or hypnotics. As a general rule, when
formulating an anesthetic plan, it is best to consider using relatively
low doses of several different drugs rather than a large dose of a sin-
gle drug. For example, apnea resulting from a large bolus of propofol
can be eliminated, or its duration shortened, by prior administration
of opioids, acepromazine, benzodiazepines, or α2
-adrenergic receptor
agonists, which allows administration of a lower propofol dose [3].
The opioid drugs, while important components of modern anes-
thetic regimens, by themselves do not produce general anesthe-
sia [4]. Muscle rigidity, salivation, and long recoveries associated
with large dosages of ketamine can be lessened when the latter is
combined in reduced doses with opioids, α2
-adrenergic receptor
agonists, and hypnotic drugs such as benzodiazepines [5].
Any plan for procedural sedation or general anesthesia must
include a provision to control pain if it is present or anticipated. A
good analgesic regimen should include drugs sufficient to ensure
analgesia during and after the procedure. The one aspect that
should not vary among anesthetic procedures is the degree of vigi-
lance associated with monitoring an anesthetized dog or cat. Early
warning of impending anesthetic difficulty is the single most
important factor responsible for decreasing anesthetic-related
morbidity and mortality.
Consideration should also be given to the use of anesthetic
checklists to improve patient outcomes [1].
59 Dogs and Cats
Carolina H. Riccó Pereira and Phillip Lerche
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 1157
Preanesthetic considerations, 1158
Signalment, 1158
History, 1158
Physical examination, 1158
Laboratory evaluation, 1158
Physical status, 1159
Patient preparation, 1159
Fasting, 1159
Patient stabilization, 1159
Anesthetic and analgesic plan, 1159
Short-term anesthesia (less than 15 min), 1159
Intermediate- term anesthesia (15 min to 1 h), 1162
Long- term anesthesia (longer than 1 h), 1162
Premedication, 1162
Induction, 1162
Chamber or mask inhalant induction, 1163
Intravenous high-dose opioid induction, 1163
Anesthetic maintenance, 1163
The anesthetic record, 1163
Perioperative analgesia, 1163
Recovery, 1164
Delayed anesthetic recovery, 1164
Acknowledgment, 1165
References, 1165

-- 1173 of 1450 --

1158 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
Preanesthetic considerations
Recording a thorough history and conducting the physical and
laboratory evaluation are the most important components of a
preanesthetic evaluation. Even young, seemingly healthy, animals
presenting for routine procedures, such as neutering, require both.
These animals may have never been examined previously by a
veterinarian, and congenital disorders, severe parasitism, or heart-
worm disease may be discovered.
Signalment
Review of patient signalment is a key preanesthetic consideration
(Box 59.1). Anesthesiologists are often questioned about “sensitivity
to anesthesia” in a variety of dog and cat breeds. Although several
breed-associated anesthesia concerns (e.g., predisposition to heredi-
tary diseases that increase anesthetic risk) have been documented, all
breeds have been successfully anesthetized by using standard anes-
thetic regimens, and most reports of “sensitivities” are anecdotal. An
assessment of the validity of information relating to anesthesia in
dogs on the World Wide Web reported that information was often
incomplete, and that breed sensitivities mentioned were not sup-
ported by scientific evidence [6]. One well-documented breed-
associated anesthetic concern is the altered pharmacokinetics of
barbiturates and propofol in certain sighthounds, which is associated
with a mutation in cytochrome P450 CYB2B11 enzyme expres-
sion [7–9]. Another is brachycephalic breeds and their associated
airway anatomic malformations. This presents a concern for ensur-
ing a patent airway throughout the perianesthetic period. There is
also evidence that these breeds possess greater resting vagal tone,
heightening the concern for anesthetic-induced bradycardia [10].
Anesthetic risk has been shown to increase in these breeds as body
weight decreases and as duration of anesthetic increases, with the
incidence of intra- and postoperative complications being 1.6 and 4.3
times greater than in non-brachycephalic dogs, respectively [11].
Since toy breeds have a greater surface area to body mass ratio and
have a relatively greater metabolic rate, they require careful attention
to maintenance of body heat and blood glucose concentrations.
Additionally, they require a relatively greater dose of drugs on a per-
kilogram basis than larger dogs. Reduced doses of some drugs (ace-
promazine, butorphanol, maropitant, and ondansetron) should be
used in breeds that are known to have the ABCB1 gene (formerly
known as “MDR1”) [12]. Further information about canine breed-
specific anesthetic considerations is available in Chapter 50.
Generally, there are no sex-related differences in the response to
anesthesia. However, a history of the estrus cycle will often identify
recent estrus and thus alert the clinician to the concerns associated
with an enlarged and vascularized uterus. This would potentially
cause concern regarding blood loss during an ovariohysterectomy.
Additionally, the owner of an intact female animal should be queried
about the possibility of their animal being pregnant because the stress
of surgery and anesthesia may adversely affect the fetus(es), and preg-
nancy can affect multiple body systems (see Chapter 45).
Age is an important anesthetic consideration. Generally, the very
young (less than 8 weeks old) and the aged (more than 80% of their
expected lifespan) do not metabolize anesthetic drugs as rapidly as
healthy adult animals [13]. Healthy geriatric patients may only
require 25–50% of the dose of sedatives, hypnotics, tranquilizers,
and opioids given to comparable young, healthy animals.
History
In addition to questions concerning organ system function
(Box 59.1), the owner should also be asked about any previous anes-
thetic episodes, past and present illnesses, and past and current
medication history, including history of heartworm prophy-
laxis [14]. The time elapsed since the last feeding should be noted.
Physical examination
The preanesthetic physical examination should be thorough, with
all body systems considered (Box 59.2). Any abnormality discov-
ered by physical examination or suggested by the medical history
should be followed with appropriate laboratory or other suitable
diagnostic testing. The assessment of an animal’s temperament is
critical. Vicious or aggressive animals will require a different
approach to anesthesia than quiet, cooperative individuals.
Laboratory evaluation
There is no objective evidence supporting age-based or American
Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) physical-status-based (see
below) 	minimum 	laboratory 	evaluation 	requirements 	[1].
Regardless, the minimum preanesthetic laboratory data suggested
for young, healthy dogs are hematocrit and plasma protein. These
tests are easy, quick, and inexpensive to perform. Hematocrit is an
indicator of hemoglobin concentration, which directly relates to the
ability of the blood to transport oxygen to tissues. As a general rule,
a hematocrit of less than 20% indicates the need for perioperative
administration of blood. Hemoglobin concentration (g/dL) can be
approximated by dividing the hematocrit by three.
For elective procedures in middle-aged to older animals, or ani-
mals treated chronically with medications that could alter liver or
renal function (e.g., non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, pheno-
barbital, or antineoplastic chemotherapeutics), a complete blood
count, urinalysis, and biochemistry profile is recommended. Other
laboratory tests should be performed (e.g., thoracic radiographs and/
or echocardiography, abdominal radiographs, and/or ultrasound) if
the history or physical examination suggests specific organ system
disease. A minimum laboratory database prior to emergency anes-
thesia for a debilitated dog or cat should include packed cell volume,
total protein, and electrolytes (sodium, potassium, and chloride).
Box 59.1 Signalment and history, including questions of organ system
function.
1 Signalment
i Age
ii Breed
iii Sex
2 Body weight
3 Duration of ongoing complaint
4 Concurrent medications
i Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
ii H 2 blockers
iii Antibiotics: aminoglycosides
iv Cardiac glycosides
v Phenobarbital
vi Non- steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
vii Calcium channel blockers
viii β- blockers
ix Tricyclic antidepressants
5 Signs of organ system disease
i Diarrhea
ii Vomiting
iii Polyuria–polydipsia
iv Seizures and personality change
v Exercise intolerance
vi Coughing and stridor
vii Weight loss and loss of body condition
6 Previous anesthesia and allergies
7 Duration since last meal

-- 1174 of 1450 --

Chapter 59: Dogs and Cats 	1159
Physical status
Many factors (e.g., age, breed, concurrent disease, surgical proce-
dure, surgeon skill, and available equipment) contribute to the over-
all anesthetic risk for a given patient. One risk factor is the physical
status of the patient. A convenient system of status classification for
veterinary patients has been adapted from the ASA [1]. In general,
physical status I and II patients appear to be at less risk for anes-
thetic complications. Physical statuses III–V are usually at greater
anesthetic risk. However, this is not to imply that category I and II
patients are at no risk from unanticipated anesthetic mishaps
(Table 59.1).
Patient preparation
Fasting
Healthy dogs and cats should be fasted for 4–6 h prior to being anesthe-
tized, if possible [1]. Water can be allowed until just prior to anesthesia
for most procedures. Dogs and cats less than 8 weeks old should not be
fasted longer than 1–2 h because they are at a greater risk for perianes-
thetic hypoglycemia. They should receive dextrose-containing intrave-
nous (IV) fluids during any prolonged anesthesia (longer than 15 min)
and/or serial blood glucose measurements until fully recovered.
Patient stabilization
When possible, life-threatening physiological disturbances should
be medically addressed prior to anesthesia (Box 59.3). This may,
however, not always be possible, and anesthesia should never be
delayed if immediate surgical or medical intervention is needed to
save the patient’s life.
Anesthetic and analgesic plan
Several aspects should be considered when formulating an anes-
thetic plan (Box 59.4). In general, techniques for procedural seda-
tion or general anesthesia rely primarily on local anesthesia,
injectable anesthesia, or inhalation anesthesia. Regardless, these pri-
mary techniques are typically supplemented with some degree of
drug-induced sedation and systemically administered analgesics.
Techniques frequently overlap. For example, inhalant anesthesia is
usually initiated with injectable anesthetics. Local anesthetic nerve
blocks are typically performed under general anesthesia or
sedation.
The remainder of the discussion regarding the choice of anes-
thetic and analgesic drugs assumes that the reader has reviewed
and is familiar with the clinical pharmacology of the various anes-
thetic drugs as presented elsewhere in this text. Although the drug
combinations described are suitable for a variety of patients, the
reader should refer to the appropriate sections of this text or con-
sult a veterinary anesthesiologist if questions remain about how to
anesthetize and monitor specific patients. Drug availability can be
an issue, so it is best to become familiar with a variety of
techniques.
Short-term anesthesia (less than 15 min)
By themselves, sedative–opioid combinations are suitable for
short-term restraint for minimally invasive procedures or those
procedures not requiring general anesthesia, such as radiography
or physical examination in an intractable animal (Tables 59.2
and 59.3). An advantage is that one or both of these components are
reversible, allowing a rapid return to preanesthetic mentation and
Table 59.1 Physical status classification of veterinary patients.
ASA physical statusa 	Patient description
I 	Normal healthy patient
II 	Non-incapacitating systemic disease (e.g., obesity, mild
dehydration, and simple fractures)
III 	Severe systemic disease not incapacitating (e.g.,
compensated renal insufficiency, stable congestive heart
failure, controlled diabetes mellitus, or cesarean section)
IV 	Severe systemic disease that is a constant threat to life
(e.g., gastric dilation and volvulus)
V 	Moribund, not expected to live 24 h irrespective of
intervention (e.g., severe uncompensated systemic
disturbance)
ASA, American Society of Anesthesiologists.
a Procedures performed under emergency conditions are denoted by placing an E after
the physical status number.
Box 59.2 Preanesthetic physical examination.
1 Body weight and body condition
i Obesity
ii Cachexia
iii Dehydration
2 Cardiopulmonary
i Heart rate and rhythm
ii Respiratory rate and effort
iii Auscultation
a Heart sounds and murmurs
b Breath sounds
iv Capillary refill time
v Mucous membrane color
a Pallor
b Cyanosis
vi Pulse character
3 Central nervous system and special senses
i Temperament
ii Seizure, coma, and stupor
iii Vision and hearing
4 Gastrointestinal
i Parasites
ii Abdominal palpation
5 Hepatic
i Icterus
ii Abnormal bleeding
6 Renal
i Palpation of kidneys and bladder
7 Integument
i Tumors
ii Flea infestation
8 Musculoskeletal
i Lameness
ii Fractures
9 Pain assessment
10 Patient temperament
Box 59.3 List of conditions that should be corrected prior to anesthesia.
1 Severe dehydration
2 Anemia or hypoproteinemia
i Packed cell volume < 20% with acute blood loss
ii Serum albumin concentration < 2.0 g/dL
3 Acid–base and electrolyte disturbances
i pH < 7.2
ii Serum potassium concentration < 2.5–3.0 or > 6.0 mEq/L
4 Pneumothorax
5 Cyanosis
6 Oliguria or anuria
7 Congestive heart failure
8 Severe, life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias

-- 1175 of 1450 --

1160 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
function (Table 59.4). Any of the short-term injectable drugs dis-
cussed below can be added to the sedative–opioid regimen when
complete immobilization or general anesthesia is necessary. If
potentially painful surgical procedures are attempted under heavy
sedation (e.g., laceration repair following dexmedetomidine–
butorphanol), a local anesthetic should be incorporated in the plan
to reduce the risk of animal arousal due to surgical stimulation.
Several drugs are available for procedural sedation or short-term
anesthesia (Tables 59.2, 59.3, 59.5, 59.6, and 59.7). Immobilization for
a short duration where strong analgesia is not required (e.g., radiog-
raphy, suture removal, and otoscopic examination) can be performed
most simply with IV injectable drugs such as propofol, alfaxalone,
ketamine–propofol, ketamine–midazolam, tiletamine–zolazepam,
or etomidate. These drugs induce rapid and predictable short-term
loss of consciousness. The duration of action following a single-bolus
dose of these drugs is generally less than 15 min, except tiletamine–
zolazepam which provides approximately 30 min of chemical
restraint, with animals becoming ambulatory 30–60 min post admin-
istration. Prior administration of sedative or tranquilizer drugs gen-
erally improves the quality of immobilization [15,16].
Table 59.2 Sedatives and tranquilizers for procedural sedation or premedication.
Drug 	Dosage (mg/kg)a 	Comments
Dexmedetomidine 	Dogs, 0.002–0.02 IV, IM
Cats, 0.003–0.04 IV, IM
Moderate to deep sedation
Duration 60–180 min
Medetomidine–
vatinoxan (Zenalpha®
)
Dogs, 0.01–0.03 IM 	Moderate to deep sedation
Duration 30–90 min
Acepromazine 	Dogs, 0.02–0.1 IV, IM, SC
(3 mg maximum)
Cats, 0.02–0.1 IV, IM
(1 mg maximum)
Mild to moderate sedation
Duration 30–90 min
Midazolam 	Dogs, 0.1–0.3 IV, IM
(7 mg maximum)
Cats, 0.1–0.2 IV, IM
Minimal sedation
Most useful when combined
with other sedatives, opioids,
or ketamine
Can cause excitation when
given as the sole agent
IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; SC, subcutaneous.
a Generally the low end of the dosage range is used IV and in sick or debilitated patients.
Box 59.4 Considerations for selecting an anesthetic plan.
1 Procedure to be performed
i Duration
a < 15 min
b 15 min – 1 h
c > 1 h
ii Type of procedure
a Minor medical or surgical
b Major invasive surgery
iii Anticipated perioperative pain
2 Available assistance and equipment
i Assistance
a Ventilatory assist or control
b Restraint
ii Equipment
a Anesthetic machine
b Ventilator
iii Type of inhalant anesthetic
iv Appropriate monitoring and supportive care devices
3 Patient’s temperament
i Quiet, relaxed, or calm
ii Nervous and/or excitable
iii Vicious
iv Moribund or comatose
4 Physical status
i ASA category I through V
5 Breed
i Sighthound
ii Brachycephalic
iii Toy/giant breed
Table 59.3 Opioids and sedative–opioid combinations.
Drug(s) 	Dosage (mg/kg) 	Comments
Morphine 	Dogs and catsa,
0.1–0.5 IV (slow), IM, SC
Duration 3–5 h
Vomiting
Mild sedation
Dysphoria can occur when
used alone in young, healthy
dogs or cats
Can precipitate histamine
release
Hydromorphone 	Dogs and catsa,
0.1–0.2 IV, IM, SC
Duration 3–5 h
Vomiting
Mild sedation
Dysphoria can occur when
used alone in young, healthy
dogs or cats
Oxymorphone 	Dogs and catsa,
0.05–0.1 IV, IM, SC
Same as for hydromorphone;
less incidence of vomiting
Methadone 	Dogs and catsa,
0.3–0.5 IV, IM, SC
Same as for oxymorphone;
minimal incidence of vomiting
Butorphanol 	Dogs and cats,
0.2–0.4 IV, IM, SC
Duration 1 hour in dogs; up
to 2–3 h in cats
Opioid agonist–antagonist
Minimal sedation when used
alone
Buprenorphine (various
formulations)
Partial opioid agonist
0.3 mg/mL injectable Dogs and cats,
0.01–0.02 IV, IM, SC;
oral transmucosal (cats)
Duration 6–8 h
Simbadol ® 1.8 mg/mL
injectable (cats only)
Cats,
0.24 mg/kg SC
Duration 24 h
Zorbium ® 20 mg/mL
topical/transdermal
(cats only)
Cats,
1.2–3 kg: 0.4 mL (8 mg);
3–7.5 kg: 1 mL (20 mg),
topically
Duration 4 days
See manufacturer’s guidelines
for administration and safe
handling practices of this
product
Dexmedetomidine–
opioidb
Dogs,
0.002–0.007 IV, IM
Cats,
0.003–0.01 IV, IM
Duration of sedation
30–90 min
Both drugs are reversible
Can be combined in the same
syringe
Observe for bradycardia
Useful for immobilization of
fractious or vicious animals
Acepromazine–opioidb 	Dogs,
0.02–0.1 IV, IM
Cats,
0.02–0.1 IV, IM
Duration of sedation
30–120 min
Can be combined in the same
syringe
Useful for immobilization of
fractious or vicious animals
Midazolam–opioidb 	Dogs,
0.1–0.3 IV, IM
Cats,
0.1–0.2 IV, IM
Duration of sedation 40 min
Can be combined in the same
syringe
Generally produces poor
results in young, healthy
animals
Not recommended for
immobilization of fractious or
vicious animals
Better quality restraint in older
or debilitated animals
IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; SC, subcutaneous.
a Use lower end of dosage for this opioid in cats.
b Use dosage ranges for opioids listed above.

-- 1176 of 1450 --

Chapter 59: Dogs and Cats 	1161
Currently, propofol is widely used for short-term immobilization
in cats and dogs. Because of its rapid plasma clearance, multiple
boluses of propofol, or a propofol constant rate infusion (CRI), can
be used to prolong the duration of restraint without significantly
prolonging the duration of recovery [15]. Respiratory depression
may be significant and ventilatory assistance should be available.
Alfaxalone is a neurosteroid anesthetic drug that produces hypnosis
and muscle relaxation by enhancing conduction of the GABAA recep-
tor. Immobilization is characterized by excellent muscle relaxation
and hypnosis in dogs and cats. Although labeled in the United States
for IV induction of anesthesia, it can also be administered intramus-
cularly (IM) for sedation of dogs and cats. Alfaxalone administered
either as a single agent (IM or IV) or combined with other sedatives at
higher dosages (5 mg/kg IM) is not recommended given its poor
recovery quality [17–19]. However, when lower dosages (1–3 mg/kg
IM) combined with additional sedatives are used, these effects are
much improved [20–22]. Its duration of action is dose-dependent, and
it provides good cardiovascular stability in healthy patients [23,24].
Like propofol, it is compatible for use following commonly used pre-
anesthetic sedatives and tranquilizers to maintain general anesthesia
as a CRI [25,26]. Respiratory depression may, however, be significant,
and ventilatory assistance should be available [25,26].
A combination of ketamine and midazolam produces less muscle
relaxation than propofol, alfaxalone, or propofol–ketamine. In dos-
ages typically used, ketamine–midazolam is also associated with
increased salivation and dysphoria upon recovery [5]. However,
dissociative anesthetic combinations generally produce less respira-
tory and cardiovascular depression than other available short-
acting injectable anesthetics. Muscle relaxation and recovery quality
are improved, and salivation is lessened when dissociatives are
given with, or preceded by, a sedative or tranquilizer [5].
Table 59.4 Antagonists of various classes of anesthetic drugs.
Drug class being
antagonized
Antagonist
drug
Dosage (mg/kg)
α2 - Adrenergic
receptor agonists
Yohimbine
Atipamezole
0.1 IM
Dogs, equal volume of administered dosea of
medetomidine or dexmedetomidine, IM
Cats, half the volume of administered dose of
medetomidine or dexmedetomidine, IM
Benzodiazepines 	Flumazenil 	0.01–0.2b IV
Opioids 	Naloxone 	0.002–0.02c IV, IM
IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous.
a Dosage in milligrams equals 5 times the previously administered dosage of
medetomidine or 10 times the previously administered dosage of dexmedetomidine
and Zenalpha®
.
b Begin with lowest dosage and repeat, if necessary, to effect.
c Use lowest dosage for “partial” reversal and highest dosage for complete reversal
(see text for explanation).
Table 59.5 Injectable anesthetic drugs.
Drug 	Dosage (mg/kg) Comments
Propofol 	4.0–6.0 IV to
effect
Duration 5–10 min after single- bolus dose
Apnea for several minutes with rapid injection
0.2–0.8 mg/kg/
min CRI
Can be used for maintenance of anesthesia as
part of a TIVA protocol
Alfaxalone 	1.0–5.0 IV, IM 	Duration 5–10 min after single- bolus dose
Use lower end of dosage IV after
premedication and for anesthetic induction
Use larger dosages IM for longer- term
immobilization
0.1–0.2 mg/kg/
min CRI
Can be used for maintenance of anesthesia as
part of a TIVA protocol
Etomidate 	0.5–2.0 IV 	Duration 5–10 min
Myoclonus, gagging/retching
Ketaminea 	5.0–10 IV, IM 	Duration 10–20 min
Typically combined with a benzodiazepine for
muscle relaxation (diazepam or midazolam
0.25–0.5 mg/kg)
Telazol ®
(tiletamine–
zolazepam)a
1.0–4.0 IV, IM 	Duration 30–60 min
Muscle relaxation, emergence delirium,
hypersalivation, tachycardia
Propofol,
Ketamine
2.0 IV,
2.0 IV
Duration 5–10 min after single- bolus dose
Less hypotension than with propofol alone
Thiopentalb 	8.0–20.0 IV 	Use lower dosage after premedication
Methohexitalc 3.0–8.0 IV 	Duration 3–5 min
Muscle rigidity
Best if preceded by a sedative or tranquilizer
IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; CRI, constant rate infusion; TIVA, total intravenous
anesthesia.
a Intramuscular ketamine and Telazol®- based combinations for use in cats are provided
in Table 59.7.
b Thiopental is no longer available in a number of countries, including the United
States; it is listed here for completeness.
c Methohexital is not commonly used in veterinary anesthesia in the United States; it is
listed here for completeness.
Table 59.6 Options for premedication in healthy dogs and catsa.
Patient type 	Premedication
Young, normal,
healthy
Acepromazine
Dexmedetomidine
Either of the above sedatives with an opioid agonist if
moderate to severe perioperative pain is anticipated, or for
moderate restraint
Either of the above with buprenorphine if less intense pain is
anticipated, or for moderate restraint
Either of the above with butorphanol if minimal pain is
anticipated, or for moderate restraint
Aggressive/
unpredictable
behaviorb
Acepromazine–opioid agonist combination
Dexmedetomidine–opioid agonist combination
Geriatric 	Acepromazine (low end of dosage range)–opioid combination
Midazolam–opioid combination
Painful procedures 	Acepromazine–opioid agonist combination
Dexmedetomidine–opioid agonist combination
Midazolam–opioid agonist combination
a These drugs or drug combinations should be administered intramuscularly 15 to
30 min prior to anesthetic induction.
b Can add ketamine 2–5 mg/kg IM to these combinations for additional restraint.
Table 59.7 Examples of intramuscular injectable anesthesia in cats.
Drug 	Dosage (mg/kg) 	Comments
Telazol®
,
Dexmedetomidine,
Buprenorphine,
± Ketamine
(for very aggressive cats)
1–3,
0.005–0.02,
0.01–0.02,
3–5
Duration 30–60 min
Adequate protocol for short invasive
procedures (ovariohysterectomy,
laceration repair, enucleation,
wound cleaning, etc.)
May result in residual drowsiness for
over 24 h
Ketamine,
Dexmedetomidine,
Opioid,
(e.g., Buprenorphine)
5–10,
0.01–0.02,
0.01–0.02
Duration 15–30 min
Adequate protocol for minor surgical
procedures (castration, small
laceration repair, suture removal,
etc.), diagnostic procedures
(radiographs, ultrasound, blood
draw, computed tomography, skin
biopsy, etc.), or physical exams in
aggressive patients
May result in excitement/
hyperactivity during recovery phase

-- 1177 of 1450 --

1162 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
While thiopental is no longer available in a number of countries,
including the United States, it is relatively inexpensive and suitable
for short-term restraint of most healthy dogs and cats. A disadvan-
tage to its use as a sole anesthetic is that relatively large doses are
required, full recovery can take up to 1 h, and recovery can be
associated with ataxia and disorientation. These undesirable char-
acteristics are reduced when its administration is preceded by a
tranquilizer such as acepromazine or a sedative such as dexmedeto-
midine. Another disadvantage is that it must be administered IV, a
problem with fractious or uncooperative animals. Perivascular thi-
opental administration is associated with local tissue inflammation,
pain, and potential tissue necrosis. Perivascular administration
should be attended to by infiltrating the area with a crystalloid fluid
(e.g., 0.9% sodium chloride) at a volume equal to 3–5 times the vol-
ume of perivascularly administered thiopental. Additionally, a local
anesthetic such as lidocaine and an anti-inflammatory (e.g., meth-
ylprednisolone) may be infiltrated near the site of perivascular
injection. Another important side effect of thiopental is the signifi-
cant respiratory depression that can accompany its use.
The relatively cumbersome nature of inhalation anesthetic deliv-
ery makes it inconvenient for use in very short procedures, and its use
solely for routine induction of unconsciousness and anesthesia is not
recommended. On occasion, it can prove useful for chamber induc-
tion of feral or fractious cats. It can also be useful for short-term
anesthesia in neonates or those animals with severe organ system
compromise and a reduced ability to clear drugs through the kidney
or liver. Mask induction with inhalant anesthetics should be preceded
by preanesthetic administration whenever possible to reduce the
stress and anxiety (and catecholamine release) associated with ini-
tial inspiration of high concentrations of inhalant anesthetics. Care
should also be taken to minimize environmental contamination and
subsequent exposure of veterinary staff to inhalant anesthetic.
Intermediate-term anesthesia (15 min to 1 h)
For procedures of intermediate duration that do not require
significant analgesia, the previously discussed drugs suitable for
short-term restraint can be used and re-dosed to effect. Typically,
one-third to half of the induction dose is administered slowly to pro-
long the anesthetic effect. Thiopental and ketamine–midazolam
should not be re-dosed multiple times. Their initial duration of
action following bolus administration depends primarily on redis-
tribution away from the brain to other tissues, such as muscle.
However, when these tissues are saturated with drug, redistribution
greatly slows, and metabolism becomes the rate-limiting factor for
awakening. Propofol and alfaxalone, because of their relatively rapid
clearances and large volumes of distribution, can be administered
repeatedly to dogs by using small boluses or by CRI (Table 59.5).
Invasive surgical procedures such as canine and feline gonadec-
tomy typically require 15 min to 1 h of anesthesia, accompanied by
good perioperative analgesia. Several options are available. Total
injectable anesthesia, where a drug combination is injected IV or
IM and will last for the duration of the procedure, is suitable for
short-term anesthesia in healthy animals, and is frequently used in
cats for procedures such as castration and wound care (Table 59.7).
A combination of Telazol®, ketamine, and xylazine is suitable for
cats, although its use has been associated with relatively prolonged
recoveries and it provides minimal postoperative analgesia [27].
An alternative is the combination of dexmedetomidine, ketamine,
and an opioid agonist. Inclusion of dexmedetomidine in the combi-
nation facilitates antagonism of the α2
- adrenergic agonist’s hypnotic
and analgesic effects with atipamezole, if required. Inhalation
anesthesia following sedation and induction of anesthesia with a
rapidly acting injectable drug such as propofol is also appropriate
for procedures of intermediate duration and may be the most con-
venient and most controllable option. Inhalant anesthetic delivery
of this duration usually requires endotracheal intubation and care-
ful monitoring but offers the benefit of enabling a rapid adjustment
of anesthetic depth should anesthetic conditions change unexpect-
edly (e.g., loss of blood or respiratory arrest).
Long-term anesthesia (longer than 1 h)
Long procedures are best managed by maintenance with inhalation
anesthesia. Awakening from sevoflurane and isoflurane anesthesia
is predictably rapid. Even sick and debilitated patients recover from
prolonged periods of inhalation anesthesia relatively quickly, and
liver or renal impairment does not preclude drug clearance. As an
alternative, injectable anesthesia using drugs administered IM or
IV has been described (see above) [25–31].
Total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) can also be used for longer-
term anesthetic maintenance. Techniques that involve infusion of
propofol or alfaxalone, often in combination with opioids and/or
reversible sedatives, are most suited for prolonged anesthesia
because propofol and alfaxalone undergo rapid and predictable
clearance. Techniques involving infusion or repeated administra-
tion of longer-acting, non-reversible drugs, such as Telazol®, are less
suited for long procedures as they result in protracted recoveries.
Most anesthetic techniques are associated with some degree of res-
piratory depression and a loss of the protective swallowing reflex, so
tracheal intubation and a means to assist ventilation are essential for
reducing anesthetic risk.
Premedication
While inhalation anesthesia can be initiated without premedica-
tion, administration of a sedative or tranquilizer often in combina-
tion with an opioid is recommended prior to induction of anesthesia
(Tables 59.2 and 59.3). Preanesthetic drugs aid in restraint, reduce
apprehension, decrease the quantity of potentially more depressant
drugs used to produce general anesthesia, facilitate induction,
enhance perioperative analgesia, and reduce arrhythmogenic auto-
nomic reflex activity. Premedications are usually administered IM
or SC 15–30 min before induction. The choice of premedication
depends on signalment, temperament, physical status, concurrent
disease, the procedure to be performed, drug availability, and per-
sonal preference (Table 59.6). For procedures associated with post-
operative pain, premedication should include an analgesic such as
an opioid and possibly a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug.
Fewer analgesics are typically needed postoperatively when analge-
sics are administered preemptively [32]. Repeated and frequent
patient assessment following surgery is needed to assess the ade-
quacy of analgesia. Additional analgesics should be administered
when needed (see Chapter 47).
Induction
Induction of anesthesia is most easily accomplished in most cats
and dogs with propofol, alfaxalone, ketamine–midazolam, propofol–
ketamine, or etomidate (Table 59.5). Advantages of an IV method of
induction include rapid loss of consciousness and ability to intubate
the trachea quickly. Alternatives to these rapid IV induction
protocols include administration of a higher dose IM dissociative
(cyclohexamine) anesthetic–benzodiazepine combination (e.g.,

-- 1178 of 1450 --

Chapter 59: Dogs and Cats 	1163
Telazol®), chamber or mask inhalant induction, or high-dose IV
opioid induction. These techniques can be useful in special circum-
stances, but for routine use in healthy dogs and cats, their disadvan-
tages generally outweigh their advantages.
Chamber or mask inhalant induction
One disadvantage to chamber and mask induction is the associated
waste-gas pollution. Another is the struggling and associated stress
that some animals experience during the induction phase [33]. Mask
induction is most easily accomplished in moribund animals and
small tractable dogs. Prior tranquilization or sedation enhances the
quality and speed of induction, as does the use of a non-rebreathing
system to deliver the anesthetic agent initially [34]. Chamber induc-
tion is most useful in intractable cats and very small dogs. Isoflurane
and sevoflurane are the most suitable inhalants for this technique
because they produce a relatively rapid induction [35]. Relatively
high oxygen flow rates (4 L/min for chamber and 3 L/min for mask)
and vaporizer settings (3–5% isoflurane and 5–7% sevoflurane in
healthy animals) are used. The use of nitrous oxide is not necessary
during chamber or mask induction with currently used agents [36].
With chamber induction, once the animal has lost its righting reflex
and is unresponsive to the chamber being tilted from side to side, it
is removed from the chamber and induction is continued using an
appropriately sized mask. Mask induction is begun by exposing the
animal to the mask and oxygen. The inhalation concentration is
slowly increased to 3–5% for isoflurane and 5–7% for sevoflurane.
This is accomplished with a non-rebreathing or rebreathing circuit by
gradually increasing the vaporizer setting over 2–4 min. Use of a non-
rebreathing anesthetic system to deliver gas to the chamber or mask
will facilitate rapid induction because exchange of the room air,
which is present in the reservoir bag, breathing circuit, and carbon
dioxide absorber prior to starting induction, with anesthetic-laden
gas from the vaporizer is not necessary.
Intravenous high-dose opioid induction
A disadvantage to opioid induction is the accompanying relatively
slow loss of consciousness. Advantages include good cardiovascular
stability (although severe bradycardia may be seen when anticho-
linergics are not co-administered) and the attenuation of the stress
response associated with anesthesia and surgery. Opioid induction
works best in debilitated dogs and is not recommended in cats or
young, healthy dogs that are not well sedated. Incremental doses of
an opioid agonist (Table 59.3) are alternated with small incremental
doses of midazolam (Table 59.2) until the dog can be intubated.
This technique does not always result in a patient that can be intu-
bated; therefore, an IV induction agent should be available, and
given to effect if needed.
Anesthetic maintenance
The maintenance phase of anesthesia begins when unconsciousness
is induced and ends with discontinuation of anesthetic delivery.
After the loss of consciousness, a properly sized, cuffed endotra-
cheal tube or alternative airway (e.g., supraglottic airway device) is
usually inserted to allow assisted ventilation, if necessary, and pro-
tect against aspiration of oropharyngeal contents. Adequate cardio-
vascular function is rapidly verified, and the anesthetic vaporizer is
turned on. The initial and subsequent anesthetic vaporizer settings
(percentage concentration of inhalant) vary with the condition of
the patient, the type of breathing circuit used, and the fresh-gas flow
rate (Table 59.8). The relatively high fresh-gas flow rate and
vaporizer setting that are initially used after induction are decreased
to maintenance settings when the patient nears the desired anes-
thetic plane (usually when palpebral reflexes disappear, and the
heart rate begins to decrease). The vaporizer setting is adjusted
according to signs of anesthetic depth. The most useful signs of
anesthetic depth in dogs and cats include a combination of ocular
signs (palpebral reflex and position of the globe), muscle tone
(assessed by opening the mouth to its full extent), heart and respira-
tory rates, and systemic arterial blood pressure. Other monitors
that may be used include a pulse oximeter and a capnometer. Pulse
oximetry non-invasively provides an estimate of hemoglobin’s oxy-
gen saturation (normal is greater than 95%). This information
along with packed cell volume or hemoglobin concentration indi-
cates the oxygen content of arterial blood. A capnometer non-
invasively assesses ventilation by monitoring respiratory rate and
end-tidal expired carbon dioxide (CO 2
) partial pressure, which is
related to arterial CO2
. End- tidal CO2 monitors can also identify
problems with the gas delivery system such as rebreathing due to
malfunctioning one-way valves and exhausted CO 2 absorbent,
especially when graphic display of the CO 2 time profile is provided
(i.e., a capnogram). Additional information on patient monitoring
is available in Chapters 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16.
The anesthetic record
This is part of the patient’s permanent record and should include
notation of patient status, the anesthetic drugs used (including time
of administration, dose, and effect), duration of the surgery, and
notation of significant perioperative events. Ideally, heart rate, res-
piratory rate, blood pressure, and any other variables monitored
should be recorded at regular intervals (every 5 min). Recording
these data at regular intervals creates a visual aid that assists in deter-
mining the change in patient status during the anesthetic period. For
example, a steadily increasing heart rate accompanied by a steadily
decreasing blood pressure during a 15-min interval could signal
hypotension caused by fluid loss or excessive anesthetic depth. This
is easily observed on the anesthetic record but may not be noticed
without the visual prompt of the data recorded over time.
Perioperative analgesia
Concurrent administration of various analgesic drugs during inha-
lation anesthesia is useful to enhance intraoperative and postopera-
tive analgesia. These drugs can be continued into the postanesthetic
period to maintain analgesia. Infusions of low doses of ketamine,
lidocaine, opioids, and their combinations have been described as
adjuncts to inhalation anesthesia [37–39] (Table 59.9). When using
these drugs, the concentration of inhalant anesthetic can often be
significantly reduced. Increased respiratory depression is a concern,
Table 59.8 Vaporizer settingsa.
Drug 	Induction phase (%) 	Maintenance phase (%)
Isoflurane 	3 	1–3
Sevoflurane 	4–5 	2–4
a Listed vaporizer settings are for a rebreathing (circle) system assuming a fresh gas
flow rate of 1–2 L/min during the inhalant induction phase (i.e., the first several
minutes following anesthetic induction with an injectable drug), and a fresh-gas flow
rate of at least 10 mL/kg/min during the maintenance phase. Vaporizer settings for
closed rebreathing systems are typically 1–2% higher. See the text for discussion of
mask or chamber induction.

-- 1179 of 1450 --

1164 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
and the adequacy of ventilation should be closely monitored, with
ventilation being assisted as needed.
Local and regional anesthetic techniques can and should be used
when indicated to enhance analgesia and decrease general anes-
thetic requirements intraoperatively. Many different techniques are
available for dogs and cats with reasonable safety and efficacy and
are presented in Chapter 60.
Recovery
Recovery begins when the procedure for which a patient has been
anesthetized is finished and the anesthetic drugs have been
discontinued. Patient status should be monitored regularly during
recovery until the patient is conscious and extubated, and heart
rate, respiratory rate, and body temperature have returned to
normal. Young, healthy animals undergoing routine procedures
usually do not need supplemental oxygen during recovery,
although it should always be immediately available. Continuous
use of pulse oximetry is helpful to identify unexpected
postanesthetic hypoxemia. Hypoxemia caused by respiratory
depression, atelectasis-related ventilation–perfusion mismatch,
and/or rapidly decreased fraction of inspired oxygen (e.g., near
100% oxygen when attached to an anesthetic breathing system to
21% when breathing room air) is easily addressed if detected early.
If nitrous oxide was used during anesthetic maintenance, the
breathing system should be repeatedly filled with oxygen, and the
patient allowed to breathe an oxygen-enriched gas mixture for
5–10 min after discontinuation of nitrous oxide. This helps
prevent the diffusion hypoxia that can develop if the inspired
oxygen concentration suddenly decreases while nitrous oxide is
rapidly moving from the blood into the alveolar gas. Sick or
debilitated dogs and cats benefit from supplemental oxygen
during recovery, particularly if hypothermic, because shivering
can significantly increase oxygen consumption. The endotracheal
tube cuff should be partially deflated and endotracheal tube
untied when a patient is disconnected from the anesthetic
machine. This permits extubation in the event that the patient
rapidly awakens and begins chewing, but care should be exercised
when moving the animal to the recovery area so premature
accidental extubation does not occur. At this time the animal’s
nose should be positioned downwards slightly to allow drainage
of any accumulated oral or pharyngeal fluid that accumulated
during the procedure. If an esophageal stethoscope or temperature
probe was used, it should be removed prior to terminating
anesthetic delivery. Dogs and cats should be extubated as soon as
swallowing occurs, unless there is a specific contraindication to
removing the endotracheal tube at this time (e.g., brachycephalic
airway syndrome). Dogs and cats should never be left to recover
unobserved. Patients should recover in a well-ventilated area to
minimize pollution of the workspace by exhaled anesthetic gas.
Occasionally, a dog or cat will suddenly awaken from anesthesia
disoriented and will vocalize, paddle, and appear incoherent. This
sudden arousal can be caused by emergence delirium, opioid dys-
phoria, or pain, and it is important to distinguish between them.
Emergence delirium occurs most frequently in poorly or non-
premedicated animals and in particular those awakening rapidly
from inhalant anesthesia. With emergence delirium, the dog or cat
will become quiet and more comfortable, usually within 10 min.
A quiet, reassuring voice and gentle restraint can guide the animal
through this period of excitement. Alternatively, a low dosage of
IV propofol (0.25–1 mg/kg) can dramatically lessen the dysphoric
behavior, allowing a smooth recovery. Occasionally, a low dose of
dexmedetomidine (0.5–1 μg/kg IV) or acepromazine (0.005–0.02
mg/kg IV) is necessary to quiet an excited, dysphoric animal. If pain
is believed to be the cause of the rough recovery, rapidly acting opi-
oid analgesics (e.g., fentanyl) should be administered IV.
Postoperative pain control is managed best with preanesthetic
analgesic administration of relatively long-lasting analgesics, perio-
perative analgesic infusion, local anesthetics, and attention to signs
of pain. Dogs and cats can become dysphoric during recovery,
related to perioperative opioid administration [40]. Opioid dyspho-
ria can be diminished with partial opioid reversal using the opioid
antagonist naloxone (1–2 μg/kg IV).
Dogs or cats receiving perioperative fluids can develop a fully
distended or overdistended urinary bladder that can cause signs of
discomfort. If a full bladder is palpated, it can be gently expressed
prior to recovery.
Delayed anesthetic recovery
Occasionally, a dog or cat that received several drugs (especially
opioids) during the anesthetic episode will remain mildly
hypothermic and unresponsive. In these instances, consideration
should be given to antagonism of reversible drugs (α2 -adrenergic
receptor agonists or opioids) that were given as part of the
anesthetic regimen. Relatively small IV boluses of naloxone (1–2
μg/kg) can be used to reverse the central nervous system (CNS)
and thermoregulatory depression associated with the opioids
Table 59.9 Drugs and drug combinations administered by constant rate infusion (CRI)
to enhance intraoperative analgesia.
Drug(s) 	Infusion rate (IV) 	Comments
Ketamine 	0.6–1.2 mg/kg/h 	Useful as an adjunct to other
perioperative analgesics
Fentanyl 	5–15 μg/kg/h 	Useful alone or with other perioperative
analgesics
Remifentanil 	4–60 μg/kg/h 	Has a very short half-life, therefore once
CRI is terminated additional opioids are
likely to be needed to control pain
Hydromorphone 	0.02–0.04 mg/kg/h 	Useful alone or with other perioperative
analgesics
Lidocainea 	1.5–4.5 mg/kg/h 	Useful alone or with other perioperative
analgesics; first administer a loading
dose of 2 mg/kg
Morphine,
Lidocainea
,
Ketamine
0.24 mg/kg/h,
3.0 mg/kg/h,
0.6 mg/kg/h
Useful alone or with other perioperative
analgesics; first administer loading doses
of 2 mg/kg lidocaine, 0.5 mg/kg
ketamine, and 0.1 mg/kg morphineb IV
Delivery of each drug separately via
syringe pumps facilitates individual
adjustment of drug infusion rates
without impacting IV fluid delivery
Alternatively, all three drugs can be
added to a bag of isotonic crystalloids
(LRS, Plasma-Lyte®, 0.9% NaCl, etc.) and
administered at 5 mL/kg/h as follows:
• To a 500 mL bag of IV fluids, add
24 mg of morphine, 300 mg of
lidocaine, and 60 mg of ketamine.
• To a 1 L bag of IV fluids, add 48 mg
of morphine, 600 mg of lidocaine,
and 120 mg of ketamine.
Drug concentrations in the bag need to
be adjusted to facilitate changes to the
delivered fluid and/or drug infusion rate
a Avoid lidocaine in cats.
b A morphine loading dose is not necessary if a full agonist opioid was administered
during premedication.

-- 1180 of 1450 --

Chapter 59: Dogs and Cats 	1165
while leaving opioid analgesia mostly intact. Atipamezole can
be used to reverse α2 -adrenergic receptor agonist-related CNS
depression.
Severe hypoglycemia is an easily corrected problem that can
result in delayed anesthetic recovery. Blood glucose concentration
should be measured if hypoglycemia is suspected, and IV dextrose-
containing fluids given until blood glucose concentrations normal-
ize. Arterial hypotension associated with blood loss or poor cardiac
function can cause altered mentation and slow recovery. Periodic
measurement of arterial blood pressure during recovery, especially
in debilitated patients, is warranted. Hypercapnia (PaCO 2 approach-
ing 100 mmHg) associated with respiratory-depressant anesthetic
and adjunctive drugs may cause severe mental impairment and
possibly respiratory arrest. Use of capnometry or arterial blood gas
analysis during the anesthetic maintenance and recovery period
helps facilitate early detection and correction of respiratory depres-
sion. Occasionally, animals with undiagnosed, compensated CNS
disease (e.g., hydrocephalus) may decompensate under anesthesia,
resulting in impaired brain function. Prevention of hypercapnia,
hypoxemia, and hypotension, and rapid implementation of resusci-
tative measures (e.g., mannitol and controlled positive-pressure
ventilation) may limit brain injury and speed recovery. Many prob-
lems that lead to delayed recovery from anesthesia can be prevented
or otherwise managed with appropriate patient monitoring during
and after anesthetic drug delivery.
Acknowledgment
The authors would like to acknowledge the invaluable contribution
of our colleague, Richard M. Bednarski, whose original work serves
as the foundation for this chapter.
References
1 Grubb T, Sager J, Gaynor JS, et al. AAHA anesthesia and monitoring guidelines for
dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2020; 56(2): 59–82.
2 Robertson SA, Gogolski SM, Pascoe P, et al. AAFP feline anesthesia guidelines. J
Feline Med Surg 2018; 20: 602–634.
3 Kojima K, Nishimura R, Mutoh T, et al. Effects of medetomidine-midazolam,
acepromazine-butorphanol, and midazolam-butorphanol on induction dose of
thiopental and propofol and on cardiopulmonary changes in dogs. Am J Vet Res
2002; 63: 1671–1679.
4 Hall R, Szlam F, Hug C. The enflurane sparing effect of alfentanil in dogs. Anesth
Analg 1987; 66: 1287–1291.
5 Haskins S, Farver T, Patz J. Cardiovascular changes in dogs given diazepam and
diazepam-ketamine. Am J Vet Res 1986; 47: 795–798.
6 Hofmeister EH, Watson V, Snyder LBC, et al. Validity and client use of information
from the World Wide Web regarding veterinary anesthesia in dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2008; 233: 1860–1864.
7 Robinson EP, Sams RA, Muir WW. Barbiturate anesthesia in greyhound and mixed
breed dogs: comparative cardiopulmonary effects, anesthetic effects, and recovery
rates. Am J Vet Res 1986; 47: 2105–2112.
8 Hay Kraus BL, Greenblatt DJ, Venkatakrishnan K, et al. Evidence for propofol
hydroxylation by cytochrome P4502B11 in canine liver microsomes: breed and
gender differences. Xenobiotica 2000; 30: 575–588.
9 Martinez SE, Andresen MC, Zhu Z, et al. Pharmacogenomics of poor drug metabo-
lism in Greyhounds: cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2B11 genetic variation, breed distri-
bution, and functional characterization. Sci Rep 2020; 10: 69.
10 Doxey S, Boswood A. Differences between breeds of dog in a measure of heart rate
variability. Vet Rec 2004; 154: 713–717.
11 Grunheid M, Aarnes TK, McLoughlin MA, et al. Risk of anesthesia-related compli-
cations in brachycephalic dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2018; 253: 301–306.
12 Washington State University Clinical Pharmacology Laboratory. Drugs that Have
Been Documented to Cause Problems in Dogs with the MDR1 Mutation. Available
at: www.vcpl.vetmed.wsu.edu/problem-drugs (accessed June 2022).
13 Tavoloni N. Postnatal changes in hepatic microsomal enzyme activities in the
puppy. Biol Neonate 1985; 47: 305–316.
14 Seahorn J, Robertson S. Concurrent medications and their impact on anesthetic
management. Vet Forum 2002; 119: 50–67.
15 Nolan AM, Reid J. Pharmacokinetics of propofol administered by infusion in dogs
undergoing surgery. Br J Anaesth 1993; 70: 546–551.
16 Smith JA, Gaynor JS, Bednarski RM, et al. Adverse effects of administration of
propofol with various preanesthetic regimens in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993;
202: 1111–1115.
17 Grubb TL, Greene SA, Perez TE. Cardiovascular and respiratory effects, and quality
of anesthesia produced by alfaxalone administered intramuscularly to cats sedated
with dexmedetomidine and hydromorphone. J Feline Med Surg 2013; 15: 858–865.
18 Tamura J, Ishizuka T, Fukui S, et al. The pharmacological effects of the anesthetic alfax-
alone after intramuscular administration in dogs. J Vet Med Sci 2015; 77: 289–296.
19 Rodrigo-Mocholi D, Belda E, Bosmans T, et al. Clinical efficacy and cardiorespira-
tory effects of intramuscular administration of alfaxalone alone or in combination
with dexmedetomidine in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43: 291–300.
20 Khenissi L, Nikolayenkova-Topie O, Broussaud S, et al. Comparison of intramuscu-
lar alfaxalone and ketamine combined with dexmedetomidine and butorphanol for
castration in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2017; 19: 791–797.
21 Cremer J, Riccó CH. Cardiovascular, respiratory and sedative effects of intramuscu-
lar alfaxalone, butorphanol and dexmedetomidine compared with ketamine, butor-
phanol and dexmedetomidine in healthy cats. J Feline Med Surg 2018; 20: 973–979.
22 Murdock MA, Riccó Pereira CH, Aarnes TK, et al. Sedative and cardiorespiratory effects
of intramuscular administration of alfaxalone and butorphanol combined with ace-
promazine, midazolam, or dexmedetomidine in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2020; 81: 65–76.
23 Ribas T, Bublot I, Junot S, et al. Effects of intramuscular sedation with alfaxalone
and butorphanol on echocardiographic measurements in healthy cats. J Feline Med
Surg 2015; 17: 530–536.
24 Lazzarini E, Martinelli E, Brioschi FA, et al. Intramuscular alfaxalone and metha-
done with or without ketamine in healthy cats: effects on sedation and echocardio-
graphic measurements. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47: 621–630.
25 Suarez MA, Dzikit BT, Stegmann FG, et al. Comparison of alfaxalone and propofol
administered as total intravenous anesthesia for ovariohysterectomy in dogs. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2012; 39: 236–244.
26 Herbert GL, Bowlt KL, Ford-Fennah V, et al. Alfaxalone for total intravenous anes-
thesia in dogs undergoing ovariohysterectomy: a comparison of premedication
with acepromazine and dexmedetomidine. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40: 124–133.
27 Williams LS, Levy JK, Robertson SA, et al. Use of the anesthetic combination of
tiletamine, zolazepam, ketamine, and xylazine for neutering feral cats. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2002; 220: 1491–1495.
28 Hughes JM, Nolan AM. Total intravenous anesthesia in greyhounds: pharmacoki-
netics of propofol and fentanyl – a preliminary study. Vet Surg 1999; 28: 513–524.
29 Ilkiw JE, Pascoe PJ. Effect of variable-dose propofol alone and in combination with
two fixed doses of ketamine for total intravenous anesthesia in cats. Am J Vet Res
2003; 64: 907–912.
30 Ilkiw JE, Pascoe PJ. Cardiovascular effects of propofol alone and in combination
with ketamine for total intravenous anesthesia in cats. Am J Vet Res 2003; 64:
913–915.
31 Mendes G, Selmi A. Use of a combination of propofol and fentanyl, alfentanil, or
sufentanil for total intravenous anesthesia in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2003; 223:
1608–1613.
32 Woolf CF, Chong M. Preemptive analgesia: treating postoperative pain by prevent-
ing the establishment of central sensitization. Anesth Analg 1993; 77: 362–379.
33 Mutoh T, Nishimura R, Kim H. Rapid inhalation induction of anesthesia by halo-
thane, enflurane, isoflurane, and sevoflurane and their cardiopulmonary effects in
dogs. J Vet Med Sci 1995; 57: 1007–1013.
34 Mutoh T, Nishimura R, Sasaki N. Effects of medetomidine-midazolam, midazolam-
butorphanol, or acepromazine-butorphanol as premedicants for mask induction of
anesthesia with sevoflurane in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2002; 63: 1022–1028.
35 Lerche P, Muir WW, Grubb T. Mask induction of anaesthesia with isoflurane or
sevoflurane in premedicated cats. J Small Anim Pract 2002; 43: 12–15.
36 Mutoh T, Nishimura R, Sasaki N. Effects of nitrous oxide on mask induction of
anesthesia with sevoflurane or isoflurane in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2001; 62:
1727–1733.
37 Wagner A, Walaton J, Hellyer P, et al. Use of low doses of ketamine administered by
constant rate infusion as an adjunct for postoperative analgesia in dogs. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2002; 221: 72–75.
38 Muir W, Wiese A, March P. Effects of morphine, lidocaine, ketamine, and
morphine-lidocaine-ketamine drug combination on minimum alveolar concentra-
tion in dogs anesthetized with isoflurane. Am J Vet Res 2003; 64: 1155–1160.
39 Nunes de Moraes A, Dyson D, O’Grady M, et al. Plasma concentrations and cardio-
vascular influence of lidocaine infusions during isoflurane anesthesia in healthy
dogs and dogs with subaortic stenosis. Vet Surg 1998; 27: 486–497.
40 Becker WM, Mama KR, Rao S, et al. Prevalence of dysphoria after fentanyl in dogs
undergoing stifle surgery. Vet Surg 2013; 42: 302–307.

-- 1181 of 1450 --

1166
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of Lumb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
Local and regional (locoregional) anesthetic and analgesic techniques
are a cornerstone of modern veterinary anesthetic and analgesic
protocols. However, the relevance of locoregional anesthesia
extends beyond the perioperative setting to include applications in
interventional pain management, both acute and chronic. Due to
their unique mechanism of action targeting voltage-gated sodium
channels along nerve fibers, local anesthetics interrupt transmis-
sion of neural impulses along axons and contribute significantly
to decreasing nociceptive traffic along the pain pathways in
both the peripheral and central nervous systems. The benefits of
incorporating local or regional blocks into analgesic protocols are
many, ranging from profound surgical anesthesia and analgesia,
inhibition of central sensitization, a decreased reliance on systemi-
cally administered opioids and their associated adverse effects, low-
ering of inhaled anesthetic requirements for maintenance of a
desired surgical plane of anesthesia and, ultimately, a potential for
better surgical outcomes with a significant decrease in patient mor-
bidity and mortality.
Locoregional anesthetic techniques range in complexity, from
simple local infiltration techniques needing minimal equipment
and training (e.g., ventral midline infiltration or “line blocks,” ring
60 Canine and Feline Local Anesthetic
and Analgesic Techniques
Raphaël Vézina Audette1 , Alexander C.S. Thomson2 , Ciara A. Barr3
, Luis Campoy4 , Matt Read5
and Santiago Peralta4
1 Portland Veterinary Emergency and Specialty Care, Portland, Maine, USA
2 City University of Hong Kong Veterinary Medical Centre, Hong Kong SAR, China
3 Department of Clinical Sciences and Advanced Medicine, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA
4 Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA
5 MedVet Columbus, Worthington, Ohio, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 1166
Classification of locoregional anesthesia, 1167
Topical anesthesia, 1167
Local infiltration, 1167
Intravenous regional anesthesia, 1167
Neuraxial anesthesia, 1168
Peripheral nerve blocks, 1168
Physiology of nerve blockade, 1168
Anatomy of the peripheral nerve, 1168
Local anesthetic pharmacology, 1169
Differential blockade, 1169
Local anesthetic additives, 1169
Patient preparation, 1169
Equipment, 1170
Needles, 1170
Catheters, 1171
Injection pressure monitors, 1172
Peripheral nerve stimulators, 1172
Ultrasound, 1173
Blocks of the head, 1174
Maxillary techniques, 1174
Mandibular techniques, 1175
Local tissue dental blocks, 1177
Anesthesia for ophthalmic procedures, 1177
Auricular techniques, 1178
Trigeminal nerve block, 1178
Blocks of the thorax and abdomen, 1178
Thoracic paravertebral block, 1179
Intercostal nerve block, 1179
Interpleural regional analgesia, 1181
Fascial plane block techniques, 1182
Blocks of the thoracic limb, 1185
Anatomy of sensory innervation, 1185
Cervical paravertebral block, 1186
Subscalenic brachial plexus block, 1186
Axillary brachial plexus block, 1186
Proximal radial, ulnar, median, and musculocutaneous nerve block, 1187
Distal radial, ulnar, median, and musculocutaneous nerve block, 1188
Radial, ulnar, and median nerve block (ring block), 1188
Blocks of the pelvic limb, 1188
Anatomy, 1188
Lumbar plexus block, 1188
Femoral/saphenous nerve block, 1189
Sciatic nerve block, 1190
Intra-articular blocks, 1191
Neuraxial techniques, 1192
Contraindications, 1192
Anatomy, 1192
Epidural technique, 1194
Catheter placement, 1197
Intrathecal (spinal) anesthesia, 1197
Complications of locoregional anesthesia, 1197
Local anesthetic systemic toxicity, 1198
Neuronal damage, 1198
References, 1198

-- 1182 of 1450 --

Chapter 60: Canine and Feline Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1167
blocks, and testicular blocks), to more complex ultrasound-guided
regional anesthesia techniques requiring advanced training and
mastery of applied functional musculoskeletal and neuroanatomy.
Ultrasound guidance has recently been described for a wide variety
of peripheral nerve and fascial plane block techniques, allowing for
a more precise and targeted delivery of local anesthetic solutions
and decreased risks of nerve injury or vascular puncture. In some
techniques, ultrasound guidance may be used in conjunction with
peripheral neurostimulation to provide further confirmation that
targeted structures are properly identified. In veterinary medicine,
species-specific anatomic studies are needed to determine the rele-
vance and safety of various locoregional anesthetic techniques.
Extrapolating from descriptions of blocks described in human
medical textbooks, or even from one animal species to another, may
lead to treatment failures since the comparative neuroanatomy
often contains important differences. Preliminary cadaveric studies
assessing distribution of injectate and staining of target nerve fibers
must be followed by well-designed, blinded, randomized, con-
trolled clinical trials to evaluate analgesic efficacy. The past decade
has seen exponential growth in the number of publications on
locoregional anesthesia in veterinary medicine. The low cost of
local anesthetics and the positive impact of these techniques on
patient welfare make locoregional anesthesia a vital component of
many balanced anesthetic protocols.
Classification of locoregional anesthesia
Topical anesthesia
Topical anesthesia is the oldest form of locoregional anesthesia and
refers to the direct application of a local anesthetic agent to skin or
mucosa to produce superficial desensitization. Topical anesthesia is
still commonly used in companion animals; proparacaine and tet-
racaine are used for short-term corneal desensitization, and atom-
ized lidocaine is routinely used to desensitize the arytenoids prior
to tracheal intubation, particularly in cats [1,2]. However, applica-
tion of local anesthetics to intact skin is complicated by the pres-
ence of the stratum corneum, which limits absorption. Skin
preparations of local anesthetics may contain higher concentrations
and permeation enhancers such as eucalyptol or propylene gly-
col [3]. Application of heat, ultrasonic waves, and electrical energy
has also been reported to increase absorption of local anesthetics
across the skin [3].
In companion animals, a eutectic mixture of lidocaine and prilo-
caine (EMLA™ cream) is commonly used for venipuncture and
superficial skin procedures. The combination of local anesthetics
reduces the melting point of each, permitting a higher local anes-
thetic concentration in the liquid phase. The efficacy and depth of
desensitization are dependent on contact time; placing an occlusive
dressing over the application site is often recommended to enhance
absorption. The use of EMLA™ cream has been reported to signifi-
cantly reduce stress in cats when applied 30 min prior to jugular
venipuncture [4]. In dogs, application of EMLA™ cream 60 min
before IV catheter placement reduced behavioral reactions without
affecting catheter placement success rate [5].
Transdermal lidocaine patches have been evaluated in dogs, cats,
and horses [6–11]. Human studies have demonstrated an analgesic
effect and reduced postoperative opioid consumption in patients
with lidocaine patches applied [12,13]. However, extrapolation of
human data to animals is tenuous due to differences in skin compo-
sition that may affect drug absorption and controlled clinical trials
have not yet demonstrated a significant analgesic benefit in
veterinary patients [8]. Lidocaine patches appear to be well toler-
ated in dogs and cats with few side effects, low systemic absorption,
and a low risk of systemic toxicity [6,9]. It is important to note,
however, that the systemic absorption of lidocaine from patches
increases in the presence of surgical wounds compared to intact
skin [14].
Local infiltration
Local infiltration is the deposition of local anesthetic into and around
a surgical site, rather than targeting specific neural structures. It may
be particularly useful when a regional nerve block is difficult or con-
traindicated, or when the required equipment for more advanced
techniques is not available. However, local infiltration may result in
incomplete blockade of sensory fibers supplying the target site due to
imprecision and the inhibitory effect of tissue inflammation on local
anesthetic efficacy. As a result, clinical studies evaluating the anal-
gesic efficacy of incisional and peri-incisional blocks in companion
animals have demonstrated mixed results [15–19].
Local infiltration is most commonly delivered by injection, but
multi-fenestrated catheters (i.e., “soaker catheters”) may be
implanted for repeated or continuous infiltration of a surgical site.
In humans, local anesthetic wound infiltration has been associated
with a reduction in postoperative opioid requirements, reduced
postoperative nausea and vomiting, and a reduced length of hospi-
tal stay [20]. A retrospective study in dogs identified catheter dis-
connection, seroma formation, and local anesthetic systemic
toxicity (LAST) as potential complications associated with infiltra-
tion catheters but did not find an increased incidence of surgical
site infection compared to historical controls [21]. However, con-
troversy remains about the effect of high concentrations of local
anesthetics on wound healing. This effect may vary by the specific
local anesthetic used, as well as the stage of wound healing. For
example, some studies have indicated no effect of lidocaine on
wound healing, while levobupivacaine may have a beneficial effect
in the early phase and a detrimental effect thereafter [22]. The clini-
cal implications of these studies are unclear in companion animals
but, in general, local infiltration appears to be well tolerated with a
low incidence of adverse effects.
Tumescent anesthesia is a type of local infiltration first developed
for liposuction in humans. A large volume of dilute local anesthetic,
combined with epinephrine and sodium bicarbonate, is infused into
the subcutaneous tissues by a blunt-ended, multi-fenestrated Klein
cannula [23]. Though high total doses of local anesthetic may be
used (up to 55 mg/kg lidocaine in obese humans), the addition of a
vasoconstrictor to the tumescent solution limits systemic absorption
and reduces the risk of LAST [24]. Tumescent anesthesia has been
reported in dogs and cats undergoing mastectomy [25–27]. Dogs
receiving 15 mL/kg of a tumescent solution containing 0.16% lido-
caine with epinephrine showed no difference in physiologic param-
eters from dogs receiving an epidural and intercostal nerve block;
neither group required rescue analgesia for at least 6 h after sur-
gery [27]. Similarly, tumescent anesthesia consisting of 15 mL/kg of
0.32% lidocaine with epinephrine was effective and well tolerated in
a study of 12 cats [26]. The total lidocaine doses reported for tumes-
cent anesthesia were 24 mg/kg in dogs and 48 mg/kg in cats.
Intravenous regional anesthesia
Intravenous regional anesthesia (IVRA), also known as a Bier block,
involves administration of local anesthetic into a peripheral vein,
where it is distributed to the tissues served by the local venous
drainage. Once the target vein has been catheterized, the limb is

-- 1183 of 1450 --

1168 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
elevated, and a tight bandage is placed to exsanguinate the area.
A tourniquet is applied proximal to the bandage and the area to be
anesthetized and the bandage is removed. Lidocaine 0.5% (0.6 mL/kg)
is then injected into the catheter, resulting in desensitization of
tissues distal to the tourniquet.
IVRA can be used for short (< 90 min) procedures of the distal
extremities, particularly when minimal hemorrhage is desirable. In
one canine study, IVRA with lidocaine was found to provide equiv-
alent intraoperative analgesia to a brachial plexus block for carpal
arthrodesis [28]; however, IVRA is better suited to surgeries of
shorter duration, such as digit amputation.
Application of the tourniquet itself may be a source of pain, par-
ticularly ischemic pain transmitted by sympathetic fibers in the
adventitia of major arteries [29]. In addition, once the tourniquet is
released, transient increases in local anesthetic plasma concentra-
tions can result in signs of systemic toxicity. Strategies to minimize
or prevent these complications include limiting the time the tourni-
quet is in place, releasing the tourniquet slowly at the end of the
procedure, and avoiding the use of cardiotoxic local anesthetics
such as bupivacaine for this technique.
Neuraxial anesthesia
Neuraxial anesthesia dates back to 1885, when neurologist James
Corning injected 26 mg of cocaine into the space between two ver-
tebrae of a young dog, resulting in anesthesia of the pelvic limbs
lasting 4 h [30]. Further refinement of this experiment led to the
development of techniques for administering anesthetic agents into
the epidural or subarachnoid spaces. These techniques remain in
wide use today in both human and veterinary anesthesia.
Epidural anesthesia and analgesia refer to administration of anes-
thetic agents into the space immediately superficial to the dura
mater of the spinal cord. This space is normally occupied by loose
connective tissue, adipose tissue, blood vessels, and lymphatics.
Subarachnoid anesthesia, also known as spinal or intrathecal anes-
thesia, refers to administration of drug into the subarachnoid space,
between the arachnoid membrane and the pia mater. Unlike the epi-
dural space, the subarachnoid space contains cerebrospinal fluid.
Both epidural and subarachnoid anesthesia work by bathing the
spinal nerve roots in anesthetic as they leave the spinal cord, inhibiting
neural transmission. The magnitude and duration of analgesia are
dependent on the physical and chemical characteristics of the anes-
thetics used, as well as their concentration. However, the mechanism
of drug distribution differs between epidural and spinal anesthesia.
Whereas the distribution of anesthesia from an epidural injection pre-
dominantly depends on the injection site and the volume injected, the
distribution of a spinal injection is also dependent on patient position-
ing and the baricity of the injectate. Baricity refers to the density of the
solution compared to the density of cerebrospinal fluid.
While commonly performed in veterinary medicine, neuraxial
anesthesia requires operator skill and is reliant on somewhat sub-
jective criteria for determining correct placement of the needle,
which may vary based on conformation and body condition. As a
result, epidural failure rates of 12–30% have been estimated in com-
panion animals [31]. A variety of techniques have been investigated
for improving epidural success rate, including use of a nerve stimu-
lator and ultrasound guidance [32–34].
Peripheral nerve blocks
Nerve blocks involve the administration of a local anesthetic
adjacent to a peripheral nerve to block conduction. This results
in sensory and/or motor deficits, depending on the nerve fiber
composition, in the targeted anatomic region due to loss of both
afferent and efferent nerve function. A variety of techniques may be
used to identify the location of the target nerve(s), including palpa-
tion, anatomical landmarks, nerve stimulators, or ultrasound guid-
ance. Although regional anesthesia may be provided utilizing any of
these techniques, ultrasound guidance has been shown to improve
the anatomical accuracy and success rate of a variety of nerve blocks
in both human and veterinary medicine [35–38].
Fascial plane blocks are a relatively new subset of regional anes-
thetic techniques that involve deposition of a local anesthetic solu-
tion in between two layers of fascia, relying on spread of injectate
volume within a fascial plane that contains nerves, rather than iden-
tification of and injection around discrete nerves [39]. The mecha-
nism by which fascial plane blocks provide analgesia is still not well
understood as studies in human medicine have found significant
variability in the distribution of analgesia, sometimes even at sites
distant from the expected distribution [40]. While most evidence
clearly supports an analgesic benefit of fascial plane blocks, these
results may indicate additional mechanisms of action are at play,
such as systemic absorption of large doses of local anesthetic [41].
When successful, nerve blocks provide complete analgesia by
preventing transmission of nociceptive signals to the central nerv-
ous system. Due to their superior analgesic effect, regional anes-
thetic techniques are associated with a greater reduction in the
surgical stress response and improved postoperative analgesia when
compared to opioid-based protocols [42–45]. A variety of excellent
texts and other tools are available for teaching and learning regional
anesthetic techniques in veterinary patients.
Physiology of nerve blockade
Anatomy of the peripheral nerve
Nerve impulses are carried by axons (often referred to as fibers)
which are long, thin projections of neurons whose cell bodies reside
in the sensory/dorsal root ganglia (afferent neurons) or brainstem/
spinal cord (efferent neurons). Axons vary in diameter and myeli-
nation based on their function and required conduction speed. For
example, the Aδ fibers responsible for fast, sharp pain are myeli-
nated and much larger in diameter than the unmyelinated C fibers
responsible for slow, aching pain. Each axon is surrounded by a
loose, elastic connective tissue structure called the endoneurium,
which consists mostly of collagen. Axons are bundled together in
fascicles, which are surrounded by a more robust connective tissue
sheath called the perineurium. Fascicles divide and converge with
each other every few millimeters along the length of the nerve [46].
The outer sheath of the nerve, a continuation of the dura mater con-
taining the nerve’s blood supply, is the epineurium.
The relevance of this microanatomy to locoregional anesthesia
has been the subject of much research and debate. Intraneural, extra-
fascicular injection of local anesthetic is associated with extensive
longitudinal spread along the nerve without significant nerve dam-
age [47–49]. However, intrafascicular injection of volumes as low as
0.05 mL have been associated with fascicular rupture, demyelination,
and nerve damage in rodent models [50], and larger volumes injected
proximally may cause inadvertent spinal anesthesia [47]. Though
intraneural, extrafascicular injection may result in profound, long-
lasting nerve block, it is not recommended due to the risk of inad-
vertent intrafascicular injection, as well as the risk of disrupting
epineurial blood vessels and compromising nerve perfusion.
Nerves are loosely mobile and contain elastic elements, so they can
be stretched without damaging the individual axons. They are loosely

-- 1184 of 1450 --

Chapter 60: Canine and Feline Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1169
connected to surrounding structures by a connective tissue mesh-
work called the paraneurium. Blunt instruments, such as nerve
block needles, will often push nerves to the side rather than perforat-
ing them. When performing a peripheral nerve block, it is prefera-
ble to avoid unnatural positioning that stretches the nerve, as this
may increase the risk of inadvertent nerve puncture.
Local anesthetic pharmacology
A more in-depth discussion of local anesthetics is presented in
Chapter 29. In short, local anesthetics are amphipathic molecules
that exert their effects through use-dependent blockade of voltage-
gated sodium channels. The sodium channels NaV
1.7, NaV
1.8, and
NaV
1.9 are implicated in propagating action potentials along nocic-
eptive nerve axons [51], although local anesthetics do not bind
exclusively to these subtypes. The relative affinity of local anesthet-
ics for off-target receptors, such as cardiac ion channels, accounts
for the differences in their pharmacologic and toxic effects [52].
Local anesthetics are weak bases with pKa values greater than 7.4,
meaning they are partially ionized at physiologic pH. Because
uncharged local anesthetic molecules must cross the lipid mem-
brane to access their intracellular binding sites on sodium ion chan-
nels, their onset of action is influenced by pKa
. For example, local
anesthetics with a high pKa
, such as bupivacaine (pKa = 8.1), have a
longer onset time than those with a low pKa
, such as lidocaine (pKa
= 7.8). Molecular weight, concentration, and lipid solubility also
contribute to local anesthetic onset time and potency. High concen-
tration, lipid solubility, and low molecular weight facilitate diffu-
sion across cell membranes, decreasing onset time [52].
Duration of local anesthetic effect is determined by several fac-
tors, including protein binding, site of injection, vasoactivity, and
regional vascularity. Drugs with a long duration of action often
have a long onset time. Mixing different local anesthetics together
to produce both short onset time and long duration has occasion-
ally been advocated, particularly with dental nerve blocks. However,
this practice results in unpredictable blockade, as the concentration
and pH of each local anesthetic in the mixture are altered. Most lit-
erature evaluating local anesthetic mixtures has demonstrated a
reduction in block duration without an appreciable improvement in
onset time, and this practice is therefore of little value and is not
recommended [53,54].
Differential blockade
Differential blockade describes the phenomenon that different
types of nerve fibers demonstrate variable susceptibility to local
anesthetics. This was first demonstrated by Gasser and Erlanger in
1929, who found that sensory fibers were more easily depressed by
cocaine than motor fibers [55]. While this effect was initially attrib-
uted to the smaller size of sensory fibers, subsequent research
demonstrated that A fibers are more susceptible to local anesthetic
block than C fibers, seemingly at odds with clinical observa-
tions [56,57]. In practice, sympathetic fibers are most susceptible to
blockade, followed by pain, touch/proprioception, and finally
motor fibers. This indicates that several factors besides fiber diam-
eter contribute to local anesthetic susceptibility, including the posi-
tion of the fibers within the nerve (mantle effect), myelination, and
density of ion channels in the axonal membrane. Small, unmyeli-
nated nerve fibers may have a shorter critical length of local anes-
thetic exposure required to produce conduction block [58]. In
addition, some local anesthetics, such as bupivacaine and ropiv-
acaine, exhibit intrinsic differential blocking properties at low con-
centrations, preferentially producing sensory blockade [59,60].
Local anesthetic additives
Adjunctive medications may be added to local anesthetic to poten-
tiate or prolong sensory blockade or reduce the total dose or con-
centration of local anesthetic required for locoregional anesthetic
techniques. High total doses and concentrations of local anesthetics
are associated with increased incidence of nerve block-associated
complications and neurotoxicity, so multimodal perineural analge-
sia is desirable [61]. A wide variety of different drugs, such as opi-
oids, adrenergic agonists, corticosteroids, buffers, ketamine, and
hyaluronidase have been studied as local anesthetic adjuvants.
Opioids
Opioid receptors are synthesized in the dorsal root ganglia and
transported peripherally along the axons of afferent nerves, espe-
cially after inflammation or tissue injury [62]. These peripheral opi-
oid receptors may serve as analgesic targets for locoregional
anesthetic techniques since their activation decreases the excitabil-
ity of nociceptor terminals. However, not all opioids are equally
effective in prolonging the duration of peripheral nerve blocks.
Lipid solubility and ionization state likely influence the ability of a
particular opioid to penetrate the nerve sheaths and access opioid
receptors at the axonal membrane [63]. Buprenorphine, a highly
lipid-soluble opioid, has been demonstrated to significantly pro-
long the effect of peripheral nerve blocks in humans [64–66]; how-
ever, opioids with lower lipid solubility, such as morphine, or a
higher degree of ionization, such as fentanyl, are less likely to be
effective. The synergistic effect of buprenorphine may also be
attributable to its local anesthetic effects, as it produces use-
dependent blockade of voltage-gated sodium ion channels [67].
Adrenergic agonists
Epinephrine has a long history as an additive to local anesthetics. Its
vasoconstrictive effect counteracts the vasodilation produced by
many local anesthetics, therefore decreasing systemic absorption
and prolonging the duration of blockade. It may also contribute
directly to analgesia through activation of α2 - adrenergic receptors
in the axons of peripheral nerves. Epinephrine is commonly added
in a concentration of 2.5–5 μg/mL. In combination with local anes-
thetics, epinephrine may reduce blood flow to peripheral nerves,
although this effect varies with the dose and specific local anes-
thetic used [68]. It should be used with caution in extremities as, in
rare cases, local vasoconstriction may impair perfusion in areas
with limited collateral circulation [69].
α2
- Adrenergic receptor agonists are commonly added to local
anesthetics. While α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists may also
produce local vasoconstriction, plasma concentrations of local
anesthetic are similar with and without the addition of an α2
-
adrenergic receptor agonist, suggesting similar systemic absorp-
tion [70]. Additional mechanisms, such as direct suppression of
A and C fiber activity, likely account for their synergistic analgesic
effect [71]. Clonidine is widely used in human regional anesthetic
techniques and is associated with improved quality and duration of
blockade [70–72]. Dexmedetomidine is more commonly used in
veterinary medicine and has demonstrated similar beneficial effects
in human patients [73].
Patient preparation
The majority of nerve blocks in dogs and cats are performed
under either sedation or general anesthesia. Patients should be
relaxed, easy to manipulate and position, and either minimally or

-- 1185 of 1450 --

1170 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
completely unresponsive to needle advancement, electrolocation,
and injection. Patient positioning is an important aspect of any
regional anesthetic procedure since nerves are flexible structures
whose locations can vary depending on the patient’s position.
Recommended approaches for different nerve blocks may or may
not be possible depending on the patient’s position and, in some
instances, patient positioning may also influence the distribution of
drugs following injection. Using described and standardized posi-
tioning may minimize complications.
Thorough medical history-taking and physical examination
should be performed prior to sedation or anesthesia on candidates
for regional anesthetic techniques to document any pre-existing
condition that may complicate or contraindicate locoregional
blocks, such as known or presumed hypersensitivities, peripheral
neuropathies or, in the case of neuraxial blocks, hypovolemia, coag-
ulation disorders, or infection or neoplasia involving the puncture
site. Clinicians should evaluate sensory and motor function prior to
performing any nerve block. An overview of the regional anesthesia
technique should be provided to the patient’s owners when obtain-
ing informed consent. The anesthetist should also discuss the risk
of potential complications with the members of the healthcare
team, including the patient’s owners. Injection sites should be asep-
tically prepared to decrease the risk of infection. Equipment and
agents for the locoregional technique should be selected and read-
ied ahead of time to limit unnecessary delays and improve patient
safety.
Equipment
Historically, equipment for companion animal regional anesthesia
has often been sourced from human medical supply companies.
However, as interest in advanced pain management techniques for
animals expands, specialized equipment designed for veterinary
use is becoming more commonly available. A wide variety of equip-
ment may be encountered in veterinary practice, with variable price
and quality. Continued development of veterinary-specific prod-
ucts is likely to improve utility and patient safety.
Needles
Needles are used to deliver local anesthetic and other drugs, but
they may serve additional purposes, such as aiding in nerve loca-
tion or catheter implantation. The utility of a particular needle for
these purposes is dependent on its design and physical characteris-
tics. Needles are available in many different lengths and gauges with
varying tip designs and, in the case of ultrasound-guided tech-
niques, echogenicity. They may be insulated or non-insulated,
depending on whether they have a plastic, non-conducting sheath
coating the shaft of the needle. In general, longer needles are used
when targeting deeper structures, but they may be more challeng-
ing to manipulate and prone to bending. Selecting a larger gauge
needle reduces the flexibility of the needle, but larger gauges are
associated with more tissue trauma and injury of nerves that are
inadvertently punctured [74,75]. Smaller needles may be prone to
breaking or bending, especially if manufacturing defects are pre-
sent, the patient moves during the procedure, or an incorrect tech-
nique is used [76,77].
The design of the needle tip may aid the anesthetist in estimating
the position of the needle (Fig. 60.1). Hypodermic needles have
long, acutely angled (12–15°) bevels designed to easily cut through
tissue. This is not a desirable feature of a needle used for peripheral
nerve blocks since this tip design provides little tactile feedback and
is more likely to injure delicate nerves [78]. Needles designed for
peripheral nerve blocks have short, blunt (30–45°) bevels that
encounter variable resistance as the needle is advanced through tis-
sue layers. This design is less likely to cut or puncture through the
perineurium if a nerve is accidentally contacted [79]. The tip of
Tuohy needles is blunt and rounded which, when used to perform
an epidural injection, may convey a popping sensation when the
needle passes through the ligamentum flavum and enters the epi-
dural space.
Insulated stimulating needles are coated with a non-conducting
material along the entire length of the shaft, which allows precise
application of electrical current at the tip of the needle for nerve
location. Whereas a non-insulated needle may cause muscle or
nerve stimulation along the entire length of its shaft, an insulated
needle only stimulates structures in close proximity to the tip. Non-
insulated needles are therefore less precise in terms of confirming
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
(E)
(F)
Figure 60.1 Needle tips at 25× magnification. A. and B. 22 gauge
hypodermic needle; C. and D. 20 gauge insulated nerve block needle;
E. and F. 20 gauge Tuohy needle. Note the short bevel of the insulated
needle and the round, blunt tip of the Tuohy needle when compared with
the hypodermic needle.

-- 1186 of 1450 --

Chapter 60: Canine and Feline Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1171
that the tip is close to the target nerve and require a higher
threshold stimulation current to elicit a motor response. Stimulating
needles are manufactured with a cable that connects to a nerve
stimulator and often have an extension line that may be connected
to a syringe.
During ultrasound-guided procedures, visualization of the nee-
dle is important both for the success of the nerve block and patient
safety. Poor visibility of the needle tip may result in inadvertent
damage to the nerve or other nearby structures. Various methods of
mechanical and optical needle guidance have been developed to
improve accuracy, such as needle guides that attach directly to the
ultrasound transducer. Echogenic needles have etched textures
along their shafts, providing multiple reflective angles that increase
ultrasonic visibility [80]. This is particularly helpful when a steep
insertion angle is required to reach the target nerve, since visibility
decreases as ultrasound waves are reflected away from the trans-
ducer [81]. Advances in both ultrasound and needle technology
promise further improvement in needle visualization. Ultrasound-
actuated needles that vibrate and produce a color Doppler signal are
currently under investigation [82]. A photoacoustic needle that
produces its own ultrasound waves via pulsed laser and an intralu-
minal optical fiber has also been reported [83].
Spinal needles are designed to puncture the dura mater and
access the subarachnoid space for delivery of drugs or to sample
cerebrospinal fluid. While more blunt than hypodermic needles,
spinal needles are sharper than needles that are specifically designed
for epidural use; therefore, using spinal needles for epidural injec-
tion may increase the risk of inadvertent dural puncture depending
on the site of injection. Most spinal needles contain a close-fitting
stylet that prevents occlusion of the lumen with a tissue plug as the
needle is advanced. The hub of a spinal needle is usually transpar-
ent, allowing the operator to watch for the appearance of spinal
fluid or blood as the needle is advanced. Many different tip designs
have been developed, but the most common currently in use are
Quincke, Sprotte, and Atraucan® spinal needles. The Quincke nee-
dle, first developed by German surgeon Heinrich Quincke in 1891,
has a short V-shaped cutting bevel [84]. It remains the most com-
mon spinal needle in use today but may be associated with a higher
incidence of post-dural puncture headache due to transdural fluid
leakage [85]. The Sprotte needle is a modification of the earlier
Whitacre (or pencil-point) spinal needle, and has a long, blunt con-
ical shape tapering to a sharp point. The distal orifice is on the side
of the tip, rather than at the point, and is larger than the original
Whitacre design. This design is intended to separate dural fibers
laterally, rather than cutting through them, allowing them to seal
over the puncture site when the needle is withdrawn [86]. However,
because the distal orifice is proximal to the tip of the needle, it is
possible for the tip and the orifice to be located in separate com-
partments, especially in very small patients. The Atraucan® spinal
needle is a proprietary Huber-type design introduced in 1993. The
Atraucan® needle produces a small, linear cut in the dura, rather
than the V-shaped cut produced by Quincke needles, resulting in
less transdural fluid leakage. Unlike the Sprotte needle, the distal
orifice of the Atraucan® needle is located at the tip. However, it has
a sharp, delicate tip that is prone to being damaged [86].
Tuohy needles are designed specifically for epidural use, but they
can also be used for peripheral nerve blocks or catheter insertion.
As with spinal needles, Tuohy needles have a close-fitting remova-
ble stylet and a transparent hub. Tuohy needles have a curved, blunt
bevel and are typically marked every 10 mm along the shaft. This
design provides high-fidelity tactile feedback, minimizes the risk of
inadvertent dural puncture, and directs catheter insertion. Both
uninsulated and insulated Tuohy needles are available. The Weiss
epidural needle is a modification of the Tuohy needle that adds
wings to the needle hub. These wings are grasped between the
thumb and index finger during placement to stabilize and direct the
needle. Some needle designs have removable wings that slot into
place on the hub.
Catheters
Many different types and brands of catheters are available for con-
tinuous or intermittent locoregional anesthetic techniques. They
may be characterized by their material, length, gauge, method of
insertion, number of fenestrations, and additional functions such as
electrical stimulation.
Most catheters used in locoregional anesthesia are through-the-
needle, but over-the-needle catheters are also commercially availa-
ble, as well as systems that use an over-the-needle cannula as an
introducer for the catheter. A variety of needle types and designs are
used as described above. Once inserted using aseptic technique, the
needle is removed, and the catheter is connected to an injection
port and 0.2 μm bacterial filter, secured with suture, and covered
with a protective dressing. The catheter may be tunneled subcuta-
neously near the insertion site for additional security.
Complications related to the use of catheters in locoregional
anesthesia may be equipment- or drug-related. Catheter dislodge-
ment, disconnection, and occlusion are relatively minor incidents
that may require removal or replacement of the catheter. Breakage
of catheters is a rare but potentially problematic complication,
although surgical removal of the broken fragment is not usually
indicated if the fragment is sterile and inert [87]. Withdrawing a
catheter through the needle during placement may increase the risk
of catheter breakage, since the catheter may shear on the needle
bevel. Drug-related complications may be more serious, especially
if cumulative local anesthetic doses exceed toxic doses. Careful cal-
culation and confirmation of local anesthetic doses is essential to
minimize these risks and, although it is a rare event, care providers
should be well versed in the signs and treatments for local anes-
thetic systemic toxicity (LAST).
Modern epidural catheters are often composed of materials with
high melting points, high tensile strength, and low friction, such as
nylon blends or polytetrafluoroethylene (Teflon). Most are radio-
paque, and some brands contain coiled wire for added strength and
kink resistance [88]. MRI compatibility varies by manufacturer.
Epidural catheters are often supplied in kits containing the catheter
itself, a Tuohy needle, an adapter, an injection port, and a bacterial
filter. Epidural catheters are usually long and thin, so resistance to
injection is much higher than would be expected with a normal epi-
dural injection. Microcatheters are available for spinal use; however,
continuous spinal anesthesia is less commonly performed due to
the higher risk of neurotoxicity and detrimental hemodynamic
effects [89].
Continuous nerve block catheters evolved from epidural cathe-
ters, and share similar qualities of heat resistance, strength, and low
friction. Like epidural catheters, these catheters are commonly sup-
plied in kits containing all necessary equipment for implantation.
Some kits contain an insulated needle with an attached port through
which the catheter can be passed. This allows simultaneous nerve
stimulation, injection, and feeding of the catheter without discon-
necting the extension line and potentially moving the position of
the needle. Nerve block catheters may have additional features,
such as incorporated stimulating wires to verify correct positioning

-- 1187 of 1450 --

1172 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
and echogenic reflectors to improve ultrasound visibility. Self-
coiling “pigtail” catheters have been described for some types of
continuous nerve blocks to prevent displacement of the catheter
from the target injection site [90].
Multi-fenestrated catheters have many small openings at the dis-
tal end of the catheter, providing better dispersion of local anes-
thetic in the target area. Dispersion is primarily dependent on the
number, size, and position of fenestrations [91]. Rate of drug
administration may also affect dispersion, as bolus doses tend to
disperse more homogeneously than slow infusions [92].
Wound soaker catheters are typically long, flexible, closed-end
polyurethane catheters with multiple side fenestrations to allow for
wide distribution of injected local anesthetic. They allow for con-
tinuous or intermittent delivery of local anesthetic as part of a mul-
timodal postoperative analgesic strategy [21]. In dogs, the use of
bupivacaine through wound soaker catheters has been associated
with lower pain scores and analgesic requirements and improved
appetite compared to a saline control [93]. Typically, wound soaker
catheters are implanted with the tip positioned in the deepest layer
of the surgical site during closure, with the proximal end exiting
dorsally through a separate skin incision. However, they may be
placed in a variety of locations, including subcutaneous, subfascial,
intra-articular, periosteal, and peripleural. While purpose-made
wound soaker catheters are commercially available, they can also be
improvised from red rubber and other similar catheters by heat
sealing the distal opening and creating fenestrations with a small
(25–27 gauge) needle. However, cutting additional fenestrations
into a red rubber catheter may compromise its structural integrity,
increasing the risk of breakage within the patient.
Injection pressure monitors
While injection pressure is partially dependent on equipment vari-
ables such as needle gauge and length, changes in injection pressure
may be associated with injection into different tissues [94]. Nerve
injury due to intrafascicular injection has been associated with high
injection pressure (25–45 psi), while perineural and epidural injec-
tions are associated with relatively low injection pressure [95–97].
Therefore, monitoring injection pressure may be useful for both
safety and accuracy of locoregional techniques. Three major types of
injection pressure monitors are currently available [98]. The first is
the loss of resistance syringe, which relies on Boyle’s law where the
compression of a known volume of air in the syringe is used to esti-
mate injection pressure; greater bubble compression is associated
with higher injection pressure [98]. This method is commonly used
for epidural techniques, as a significant drop in injection pressure
occurs as the tip of the needle crosses the ligamentum flavum and
enters the epidural space. Saline is commonly added to the syringe as
well to prevent injection of air into the epidural space, which may be
associated with complications such as venous air embolism or nerve
root compression [99]. The second type of injection pressure moni-
tor is the electronic manometer in syringe pumps; these devices are
primarily used to detect occlusions during constant rate infusions
and may have adjustable alarm thresholds. A syringe pump designed
for regional anesthesia procedures, the Medovate SAFIRA®, is oper-
ated by a foot pedal and injects local anesthetic automatically while
monitoring injection pressure. The third category of injection pres-
sure monitors is inline devices. Two inline pressure monitors that
are commercially available are the B. Braun B-Smart™ and the
PAJUNK® NerveGuard. Both devices are attached between the
syringe and the extension line of the needle. The B-Smart™ consists
of a rising piston which displays the approximate pressure in psi,
while the NerveGuard has a spring device that automatically blocks
injection once a threshold pressure is exceeded. An injection pres-
sure monitor integrated into the needle tip has been described but is
not yet commercially available [100].
Peripheral nerve stimulators
Peripheral nerve stimulators deliver intermittent square-wave elec-
trical currents via stimulating needles, eliciting specific muscular
twitch responses to aid nerve location. They can be used in con-
junction with ultrasound guidance. The minimum current required
to elicit a response depends on the distance between the tip of the
needle and the nerve. This relationship is described by Coulomb’s
law, where the required stimulating charge is related to the
electrode-to- nerve distance [101]. Therefore, as the tip of the stim-
ulating needle approaches the nerve, a lower current is required to
stimulate it, and current can be used to approximate needle-to-
nerve distance. It was previously thought that intraneural injections
could be avoided by closely monitoring the minimum stimulating
current. However, studies evaluating simultaneous nerve stimula-
tion and ultrasound guidance have found that the minimum stimu-
lating current actually increases when the needle is in direct contact
with the nerve; therefore, relatively high minimum stimulating
currents do not rule out the possibility of intraneural injection
[102–104]. Current channeling has been proposed as an explana-
tion for this phenomenon [105].
The susceptibility of a particular nerve fiber to stimulation
can be described by two basic properties, rheobase and chronaxie.
Rheobase is the minimum electrical current required to produce a
sustained action potential and reflects membrane excitability.
Chronaxie is the minimum impulse duration required to stimulate
the nerve at a current twice the rheobase. Because chronaxie is
influenced by axon diameter and myelination, chronaxie is typically
shorter for motor fibers compared to sensory fibers. This difference
allows peripheral nerve stimulators to selectively stimulate motor
fibers using short-duration impulses. Impulse duration delivered by
most peripheral nerve stimulators used for locoregional anesthesia
is approximately 0.1 ms.
Peripheral nerve stimulators should have an easily readable
display and the ability to adjust the current (0.1–1.0 mA) and
frequency of stimulation. Some peripheral nerve stimulators
incorporate a remote control or foot pedal to allow the operator to
make adjustments without breaking sterility. Because currents as
low as 0.2–0.3 mA may be used when locating peripheral nerves,
nerve stimulators used for monitoring neuromuscular blockade
may not be suitable for use in regional anesthesia.
Terminology describing the polarity of peripheral nerve stimula-
tor components may be confusing and counterintuitive at first.
Peripheral nerve stimulators use cathodal stimulation, meaning the
negative electrode (cathode) is the searching electrode (i.e., the
stimulating needle or catheter), and the positive electrode (anode)
is the returning electrode. Current in the form of electrons flows
from the cathode to the anode; as the cathode approaches the nerve,
the density of negative charges on the outer surface axonal mem-
brane increases, inducing nerve depolarization. If the electrodes
were reversed, hyperpolarization of the nerve would occur due to
accumulation of positive extracellular charge [106]. In the case of
modern peripheral nerve stimulators, the cathode and anode have
non-interchangeable connectors to prevent them from being inad-
vertently switched.
The electrical resistance encountered by the stimulating needle
changes as it passes through body tissue. Therefore, peripheral

-- 1188 of 1450 --

Chapter 60: Canine and Feline Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1173
nerve stimulators must continuously adjust their voltage to main-
tain a constant current in accordance with Ohm’s law. However, the
electrical characteristics and performance of commercially availa-
ble peripheral nerve stimulators are highly variable, and anesthe-
tists should be aware of the limitations of the equipment they are
using [107–109]. Error often increases with high resistance and low
current [109]. Modern peripheral nerve stimulators often incorpo-
rate a flashing light or audible tone change if the circuit is discon-
nected or for some other reason the indicated current cannot be
delivered [106].
Peripheral nerve stimulators should be used with insulated nee-
dles so that the application of electrical current is precise. The nega-
tive electrode (i.e., black, cathode) connects to the stimulating
needle, while the positive electrode (i.e., red, anode) attaches to the
patient’s skin, usually by an alligator clip or electrode patch. With
modern nerve stimulators, the positive electrode can be attached
anywhere on the patient provided good contact is achieved. The
frequency of the nerve stimulator should be set to 2 Hz if the stimu-
lator is being used alone, or 1 Hz if used in conjunction with an
ultrasound to minimize disruption of the image.
The insulated needle is inserted through the skin using anatomic
landmarks or ultrasound guidance, depending on the specific tech-
nique being used. The initial current should be set to 1.0–1.5 mA,
depending on the depth of the targeted structure. The needle is then
slowly advanced, while observing for the desired muscular
response(s); twitches elicited by direct muscle stimulation should
not be interpreted as success. If no twitches are observed, the needle
is withdrawn to the level of the skin and redirected. Once a twitch is
obtained, the current is slowly decreased to zero, making small
adjustments to maintain the muscular response. The current is then
slowly increased until a minimum stimulating current of < 0.5 mA
is achieved, at which point the local anesthetic can be delivered. The
syringe is gently aspirated to check for blood and local anesthetic
solution is injected, monitoring closely for high injection pressure.
If blood is aspirated or resistance to injection is encountered, the
needle should be repositioned before injecting.
As local anesthetic solution is injected, the conductive area
around the tip of the needle expands, and the low current used for
stimulation is dispersed. This usually leads to a loss of the muscular
response and does not indicate that the block has taken immediate
effect.
Ultrasound
Nerve blockade performed using visual ultrasound guidance was
first reported in 1994 when Kapral et al. used the technique for
supraclavicular brachial plexus block in humans [110]. Since then,
ultrasound guidance has revolutionized the field of locoregional
anesthesia, improving the safety and accuracy of many different
nerve blocks in both human and veterinary medicine. Ultrasound is
now commonly used to identify peripheral nerves, as well as other
anatomic landmarks such as blood vessels, bones, muscles, and fas-
cial planes. It may be used in conjunction with nerve stimulation to
further enhance safety and accuracy. Besides regional anesthesia,
ultrasound has many useful roles in anesthesia, such as aiding vas-
cular access, assessment of cardiac and diaphragmatic function,
diagnosis of pneumothorax or effusions, and others. However, its
utility is dependent on selection of an appropriate ultrasound
machine, transducer, and settings, as well as the skill and ability of
the operator to correctly identify anatomy.
Ultrasound transducers convert electrical energy into sound
waves using piezoelectric materials, such as quartz crystals, that
vibrate when current is applied. These sound waves are transmitted
into the body at a particular frequency and are then reflected back
toward the transducer. The reflected information is simultaneously
processed to create an image [111]. Transducers may be linear or
curved, and are available in a wide variety of frequencies, shapes,
and widths. Frequency is directly related to axial resolution and
inversely related to penetration depth [111]. High-frequency linear
transducers are most commonly used to perform ultrasound-
guided nerve blocks, as they produce high-resolution images; how-
ever, lower-frequency curved transducers are occasionally used
when targeting deeper structures.
Conventional B-mode ultrasound generates an image based on a
single beam angle at a frequency designated by the transducer.
However, this mode of imaging is particularly susceptible to speckle,
reflection, and shadowing artifacts [112]. These artifacts may make
small structures difficult or impossible to distinguish when ultra-
sound machines that employ conventional B-mode imaging are
used. Advances in ultrasound technology have led to the creation of
spatial compound and tissue harmonic imaging to reduce artifacts
and improve image quality. Spatial compound imaging acquires
overlapping frames from multiple frequencies or beam angles, col-
lating them into a single image. In practice, this leads to an averag-
ing of artifacts across the multiple images acquired, reducing noise
and clutter in the compound image. Tissue harmonic imaging col-
lects information from harmonic frequencies, which are multiples
of the fundamental transducer frequency [113]. Combining tissue
harmonic and compound imaging produces better axial resolution
and image quality than either modality alone [114–116].
Doppler ultrasonography uses shifts in ultrasound wave fre-
quency to detect movement, as with blood flow in vascular struc-
tures or spread of local anesthetic during injection. It is displayed as
a color signal overlying the grayscale ultrasound image, with the
color indicating the direction of movement with respect to the
transducer. Doppler ultrasound is often used in regional anesthesia
to identify vascular structures and distinguish them from nerves;
however, it may reduce temporal resolution due to its low frame
rate. Reducing the size of the color window may minimize this
effect [111]. To reduce color artifact, Doppler velocity should be set
between 15 and 35 cm/s [112].
Ultrasound transducers should be held with a low grip to facilitate
fine movements. Hydrophilic gel or alcohol is used for acoustic cou-
pling, and enough pressure should be applied to maintain adequate
contact without collapsing veins or distorting anatomic landmarks.
Movements to scan the anatomy may include sliding, rotating, or
tilting the transducer [117]. The ultrasound machine should be
positioned ergonomically within the operator’s direct line of vision.
Depending on the specific technique used, the needle may be intro-
duced in-plane, in which the long axis of the needle is aligned with
the transducer, or out-of-plane, in which the long axis of the needle
is perpendicular to the transducer. Shallow insertion angles provide
better needle visualization than steep angles due to reflection of
more ultrasound waves back toward the transducer [118].
The region of interest should be positioned in the center of the
ultrasound image, where surrounding structures and their spatial
relationships can be seen clearly, and within the transducer’s focal
zone. The gain, or brightness of the image, should be adjusted to
provide the best contrast between the nerve and surrounding struc-
tures. Peripheral nerves are variable in appearance on ultrasound,
but generally consist of a hyperechoic epineurium surrounding a
hypoechoic center. The short axis may be round, oval, or spindle-
shaped, depending on the location and the nerve. Individual

-- 1189 of 1450 --

1174 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
hypoechoic nerve fascicles surrounded by hyperechoic perineu-
rium are sometimes seen with high-resolution ultrasound. Nerves
often lie in close proximity to blood vessels, which are readily iden-
tifiable with color Doppler. Anatomic variation and imaging arti-
facts may be disorienting to novice operators; therefore, a thorough
understanding of regional anatomy and familiarity with ultrasound
imaging is essential for the safety and success of ultrasound-guided
techniques [119,120].
Blocks of the head
Oral, maxillofacial, ophthalmic, and auricular diseases requiring
surgical intervention are common in small animals. Nerve blocks
are widely used and indicated for the prevention and relief of pain
associated with maxillofacial and dental surgery [121,122].
Correctly administered regional anesthesia reduces systemic anes-
thetic and analgesic requirements and is associated with improved
postoperative analgesia and attenuation of the surgical stress
response [44,123,124]. Common indications for local and regional
anesthesia of the head in small animals include dental and oral sur-
gery, maxillomandibular fracture repair, and ophthalmic surgery.
The implementation of local and regional anesthesia requires a
thorough understanding of the relevant anatomy. The majority of
sensory innervation to the head is supplied by the trigeminal nerve
(cranial nerve V), with small caudal contributions from branches of
the facial nerve (cranial nerve VII), and cervical spinal nerves [125].
The trigeminal nerve divides into the ophthalmic (V1
), maxillary
(V2
), and mandibular (V3
) branches. The sensory innervation to the
oral cavity, including all the intraoral structures, is provided by the
mandibular and maxillary divisions and their corresponding
branches (Fig. 60.2). Selection of a regional anesthetic technique
should be predicated on the procedure and anatomy of the individ-
ual patient. Advanced imaging, such as computed tomography, may
aid in both surgical planning and the selection of a regional anes-
thetic technique. As with any technique, care should be taken to
avoid passing the needle through diseased or neoplastic tissue. All
patients receiving regional anesthesia should be monitored for signs
of systemic local anesthetic toxicity, though it is rare with appropri-
ate dosing and aspiration to avoid intravascular injection [126].
Needle sizes ranging from 1 to 1.5 inch, 25 to 27 gauge, have been
recommended [121]; needles should be flexible and ideally have a
short, atraumatic bevel [127]. Because the tips of these needles
become easily blunt or bent, the needle that is used to draw the
anesthetic from the vial should not be used to administer the
block [128]. Additionally, a new needle should be used for each site
when performing more than one block.
Maxillary techniques
Anatomy
The maxillary nerve provides sensory innervation to the maxillary
teeth and associated hard and soft tissues, hard and soft palates,
nose, and lower eyelids. It exits the cranium via the round foramen
and courses rostrally along the dorsal surface of the medial ptery-
goid muscle toward the pterygopalatine fossa (Fig. 60.3). At that
point, the zygomatic and pterygopalatine nerves arise, and the max-
illary nerve continues its course as the infraorbital nerve, entering
the infraorbital canal via the maxillary foramen. The pterygopala-
tine nerve gives rise to the minor and major palatine nerves. These
Figure 60.2 Distribution of the maxillary (V2
) and mandibular (V3
) branches of the trigeminal nerve (cranial nerve V).

-- 1190 of 1450 --

Chapter 60: Canine and Feline Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1175
emerge at the palatal area via the corresponding foramina, and pro-
vide innervation to the soft and hard palate, respectively [125]. The
caudal, middle, and rostral superior alveolar nerves arise from
the infraorbital nerve. The caudal superior alveolar nerves arise in the
pterygopalatine fossa before the infraorbital nerve enters the canal,
and they supply the first and second molar teeth. Within the infraor-
bital canal, the middle and rostral superior alveolar nerves emerge;
these nerves supply the rostral premolars via numerous foramina
located on the floor of the canal, and the canine and incisor teeth via
the maxillary incisive canal. The infraorbital nerve exits the infraor-
bital canal via the infraorbital foramen, and gives rise to the external
nasal, internal nasal, and superior labial branches [125].
Indications
When the maxillary nerve is blocked, the entire ipsilateral maxil-
lary quadrant is anesthetized, including all teeth, associated gingiva,
alveolar bone, dental pulp, and the hard and soft palates. Other
maxillofacial structures anesthetized include part of the nasal
mucosa (excluding the septal mucosa served by the ethmoidal
nerve) and the upper lip [129–131]. The indications for a maxillary
block or rostral blockade of the infraorbital nerve depend on the
area of desired local anesthetic coverage and include ipsilateral
maxillary dental extractions, oral surgery, and endodontic therapy,
maxillectomy, incisivectomy, rhinotomy, rhinoscopy, and palatal
surgery [121,132].
Technique
Several techniques have been described to block the maxillary
nerve and its more distal branches and detailed descriptions are
provided elsewhere [121,130,132]. Some of the techniques approach
the nerve extraorally while others utilize an intraoral approach.
Dependent on the technique utilized, the patient may be positioned
in dorsal, sternal, or lateral recumbency.
A subzygomatic approach to the maxillary nerve has been
described; however, the authors recommend caution with this
advanced technique due to the risk of salivary gland and maxillary
artery puncture, as well as nerve trauma, associated with the per-
pendicular approach to the nerve [121,131,133]. Similarly, the
approach to the maxillary nerve via the maxillary tuberosity (or
caudal intraoral) approach is associated with risks of accidental
penetration of the orbit, possible perpendicular contact with the
maxillary nerve, and injury to the maxillary artery and zygomatic
salivary gland [132]. There are no clinical studies documenting the
efficacy and safety of the maxillary tuberosity technique.
The rostral branches of the maxillary nerve can also be blocked
using an infraorbital approach. The infraorbital foramen may be pal-
pated extra- or intraorally. In dogs, the foramen is consistently located
dorsal to the maxillary third premolar tooth and is easily palpated as
an oval-shaped structure. In cats, the foramen is located immediately
medial to the prominent rostral end of the zygomatic arch [121,134].
After the infraorbital foramen has been identified, the dominant
hand is used to advance the needle caudally on a horizontal plane,
maintaining it parallel to the hard palate (Fig. 60.4A) [132]. Following
careful aspiration to ensure an absence of vascular puncture, a vol-
ume ranging from 0.1–1 mL, dependent upon size and conforma-
tion, of 0.5% bupivacaine may be injected. In cats and brachycephalic
dogs, a short needle is recommended. Larger dogs may have a canal
longer than 2 cm, so a longer needle or catheter is necessary to reach
the targeted area [121]. It is important to note that insertion of the
needle into the full length of the infraorbital canal should be avoided
due to the risk of damage to the vascular structures within the canal
or, in the case of brachycephalic or feline patients, orbital structures.
One safe alternative is to advance an intravenous catheter off the
stylet following entrance into the canal to deliver local anesthetic
(Fig. 60.4B).
The infraorbital approach offers several advantages over other
techniques used to block the maxillary nerve. First, it ensures that
the needle is advanced accurately to the desired location. Also, the
tip of the needle advances parallel to nerves, decreasing the risk of
nerve damage by avoiding perpendicular contact. Moreover,
because the canal guides the needle, damage to the zygomatic sali-
vary gland is unlikely. Evidence suggests that this technique is safer
and more effective than the lateral approach in both cats and dogs;
however, the infraorbital approach may not consistently anesthetize
the maxillary molar area if the anesthetic agent is deposited in the
infraorbital canal and not in the pterygopalatine fossa [121,135]. It
is also possible that this is due to collateral innervation to the asso-
ciated alveolar mucosa and gingiva via the buccal nerve (branch of
the mandibular nerve) [129]. A technique to block the buccal nerve
in small animals has not been documented. Hematoma formation
at the infraorbital foramen area is a frequent but usually minor
complication that results from accidental laceration of the
infraorbital artery or one of its branches, or the accompanying
vein [121,134]. Immediate treatment is usually limited to applying
manual pressure over the area to promote hemostasis.
Mandibular techniques
Anatomy
The mandibular nerve exits the cranium via the oval foramen and
courses rostrally on the medial aspect of the temporomandibular
joint, giving rise to the buccal and masticatory nerves. The mastica-
tory nerve provides motor innervation to the rostral belly of the
digastricus muscle; the buccal nerve crosses the pterygoid muscles
toward the lateral aspect of the ramus and provides sensory
Figure 60.3 Caudal view of the pterygopalatine fossa. The maxillary
foramen is the larger oval-shaped foramen in the center of the fossa and
represents the caudal opening of the infraorbital canal.

-- 1191 of 1450 --

1176 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
innervation to the vestibular mucosa and skin ventral to the zygo-
matic bone. As the mandibular nerve continues its course rostrally,
it gives rise to the lingual, mylohyoid, and inferior alveolar nerves.
The mylohyoid nerve supplies the rostral belly of the digastricus
muscle and the mylohyoid muscle. The lingual nerve supplies the
rostral two-thirds of the tongue while the sublingual nerve, a branch
of the lingual nerve, supplies the sublingual mucosa. On the lateral
aspect of the medial pterygoid muscle, the mandibular nerve
becomes the inferior alveolar nerve, coursing rostrally toward the
mandibular foramen. At that point, the inferior alveolar nerve pen-
etrates the mandibular canal via the mandibular foramen, where it
provides sensory fibers to the teeth before further ramifying into
the caudal, middle, and rostral mental nerves, which exit the man-
dibular canal via the corresponding mental foramen [125].
Indications
Blocking the inferior alveolar nerve provides regional anesthesia to
the ipsilateral mandibular quadrant, including teeth, alveolar bone,
and gingiva. The indications for an inferior alveolar nerve block
include ipsilateral mandibular dental extractions and oral surgery,
endodontic therapy, biopsies, and mandibulectomy [121,132]. The
mental nerves supply the lower lip and rostral intermandibular
area [125].
Technique
Ideally, the patient should be placed in dorsal or lateral recum-
bency to allow for successful palpation of landmarks as well as nee-
dle advancement. The mandibular foramen can be palpated
intraorally using the index finger of the non-dominant hand
(Fig. 60.5). The foramen is located on the medial and ventral por-
tion of the ramus, between the third mandibular molar tooth and
the angular process (Fig. 60.6). Alternatively, gentle palpation can
be used to identify the inferior alveolar nerve and artery before
it enters the canal [121,132]. While maintaining the index finger
on the mandibular foramen, the other hand is used to advance
the needle. The needle can be introduced intraorally under the
mucosa, or extraorally through the skin of the ventral aspect of
the mandible (Fig. 60.7). For both techniques, the needle must be
slowly advanced along the medial aspect of the mandible until the
tip is located over the mandibular foramen and 0.1–0.5 mL of 0.5%
bupivacaine is injected [121]. Hematoma formation at the man-
dibular foramen may be a frequent but usually minor complication
that results from laceration of the local blood vessels [134].
Immediate treatment is applying manual pressure over the area to
promote hemostasis. Another reported, but apparently infrequent,
complication is self-mutilation of the tongue during recovery from
general anesthesia [133]. It has been suggested that this is due to
diffusion of the local anesthetic solution onto the lingual nerve
when attempting an inferior alveolar block using the caudal
approach [121]. Deep tongue lacerations can occur very quickly
and may bleed profusely; if severe, the patient may require imme-
diate surgical repair under general anesthesia.
(A) 	(B)
Figure 60.4 A. Caudal view of the infraorbital canal with a hypodermic needle inserted into the canal. B. Lateral view of the infraorbital canal with an
intravenous catheter threaded into the canal for single delivery of local anesthetics. Source: Dr. Raphaël Vézina Audette.
Figure 60.5 Palpation of the mandibular foramen of a dog cadaver. The
index finger of the nondominant hand is used to locate the foramen
intraorally at a point between the mandibular third molar tooth and the
angular process, on the medial aspect of the ramus.

-- 1192 of 1450 --

Chapter 60: Canine and Feline Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1177
The rostral approach consists of blocking the inferior alveolar
nerve directly in the mandibular canal via the middle mental fora-
men (Fig. 60.8). The area anesthetized is variable and likely depends
on how caudal within the canal the local anesthetic agent dif-
fuses [136–138]. In general, the applicability of this technique may
be limited to the rostral premolar, canine, and incisor teeth, and the
rostral area of the lower lip. The middle mental foramen is palpated
either intra- or extraorally using the non-dominant hand. The fora-
men is typically located between the roots of the canine and the first
premolar teeth. Intraorally, the area is covered by the labial frenu-
lum; it may be necessary to displace it rostrally or caudally. Owing
to its small size, the middle mental foramen is generally not palpa-
ble in small dogs and cats. Once the foramen has been identified, a
needle is introduced at a 45° angle and advanced until it is engaged
in the mental foramen and 0.1–0.3 mL of 0.5% bupivacaine is
injected; this can be done intra- or extraorally. Significant needle
manipulation may be necessary, and damage to the middle mental
and inferior alveolar nerve and artery is possible.
Local tissue dental blocks
Local dental infiltrative blocks are routinely used in human
dentistry either as the sole means to achieve anesthesia for dental
and oral procedures or to supplement regional anesthesia tech-
niques [139]. Common local block techniques include intraosse-
ous, intraligamentary (periodontal ligament), supraperiosteal, and
intrapulpal injection [121,132]. Local anesthesia for dental proce-
dures in dogs and cats has been reviewed in several publica-
tions [129,140]; however, no published clinical data are available
on the use of these techniques in dogs and cats. Some local block
techniques (e.g., intraligamentary) have been tested in dogs under
experimental conditions [141], while others (e.g., supraperiosteal)
are hypothetically considered ineffective owing to the thickness
of the associated cortical bone [132]. Some local blocks require
specialized equipment, representing an additional cost [141]. In
addition, the duration of action of local dental blocks is shorter than
that of regional blocks [132]. As a result, local dental blocks are
infrequently used in dogs and cats.
Anesthesia for ophthalmic procedures
Anatomy
The orbit and surrounding tissues receive sensory innervation
from the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve (V 1 ), which
emerges through the orbital fissure and divides into the frontal,
lacrimal, and nasociliary nerves. The lower eyelid receives sen-
sory innervation from the zygomatic nerve, which branches from
the maxillary division of the trigeminal nerve (V 2 ) [125]. Motor
innervation to the globe is provided by the oculomotor, trochlear,
and abducens nerves. These nerves and their branches are located
within the retrobulbar musculofascial cone, a tapering structure
behind the globe consisting of the four rectus muscles and their
associated connective tissues. The musculofascial cone tapers
posteriorly to the annular tendon, which surrounds the optic
nerve as it emerges from the skull through the optic foramen.
Ophthalmic nerve blocks in this region are indicated for the pre-
vention and relief of ophthalmic pain and to prevent the oculocar-
diac reflex during procedures involving the eye [142–144].
Preoperative administration of a retrobulbar nerve block is asso-
ciated with a reduced incidence of the oculocardiac reflex during
enucleation and superior analgesia when compared to an intraop-
erative splash block [144,145].
Figure 60.6 Location of the mandibular foramen, located on the medial
and ventral portion of the ramus, between the third mandibular molar
tooth and the angular process. Source: Dr. Raphaël Vézina Audette.
Figure 60.7 Extraoral caudal approach to the inferior alveolar nerve of a
cat cadaver. The needle is introduced through the skin of the ventral
mandibular area and is slowly advanced along the medial aspect of the
ramus toward the mandibular foramen, where the anesthetic agent will be
deposited.
Figure 60.8 Insertion of a hypodermic needle into the mental foramen for
blockade of the inferior alveolar nerve. Source: Dr. Raphaël Vézina
Audette.

-- 1193 of 1450 --

1178 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
Techniques
Several different techniques have been described to provide regional
anesthesia of the eye and orbital tissues, which vary in their ability
to produce akinesia of the globe. These techniques may be classified
as extraconal or intraconal (outside or within the musculofascial
cone), or retrobulbar or peribulbar (behind or around the eye).
Retrobulbar blocks are more invasive and carry a risk of damaging
the optic nerve; therefore, they are almost exclusively performed for
enucleation, while less invasive peribulbar techniques or topical
anesthesia are preferred for other types of ophthalmic procedures.
Classically, a retrobulbar block is performed by inserting a
curved needle at the junction of the middle and temporal third of
the lower eyelid, directing the tip behind the globe until a popping
sensation is appreciated and the eye rolls dorsally, indicating punc-
ture into the musculofascial cone. Volume of injectate is dependent
on the size of the patient, ranging from approximately 2–3 mL of
0.5% bupivacaine [143]. Alternatively, a supratemporal approach
modeled on the technique used in horses has also been developed
in dogs [146]. In this technique, the needle is inserted between the
posterior aspect of the orbital ligament and the zygomatic process
of the temporal bone and advanced ventromedially until the mus-
culofascial cone is punctured. Deposition of local anesthetic within
the musculofascial cone results in complete analgesia and akinesia
of the globe. It is important to note that the optic nerve sheath con-
tains cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) that is contiguous with intracranial
CSF; accidental injection of local anesthetic within the optic nerve
sheath can result in severe complications, such as total brainstem
anesthesia [147–149]. As with all regional anesthetic techniques,
cautious needle advancement and aspiration prior to injection of
local anesthetic should be used.
Peribulbar and extraconal techniques are less invasive than intra-
conal techniques and carry a lower risk of damage to the optic
nerve. They rely on diffusion of local anesthetic from the extraconal
space into the intraconal space and may produce akinesia less reli-
ably than intraconal techniques. Using a blind technique, the needle
is inserted percutaneously at the anterior dorsomedial and ventro-
lateral margins of the eye and advanced until the tip of the needle is
level with the equator of the globe, being careful not to puncture the
globe itself [150]. Ultrasound guidance may aid the operator in
positioning the needle within the extraconal space. An ultrasound-
guided in- plane peribulbar technique has been described in canine
cadavers, in which the ultrasound transducer is positioned caudal
to the orbital ligament, and the needle is introduced caudally, guid-
ing the tip into the extraconal space. Peribulbar spread of injectate
was successful in all attempts [151]. A similar posterior ultrasound-
guided approach with the transducer oriented transversely was less
consistent in delivering injectate to the targeted structures [152].
Sub-Tenon’s anesthesia refers to infiltration of local anesthetic
within Tenon’s capsule, the fibrous sheath surrounding the eyeball.
It requires a specialized sub-Tenon’s cannula, several different types
of which have been described with similar characteristics [153].
Sub-Tenon’s anesthesia, described in depth elsewhere, has been
reported to produce analgesia and akinesia for cataract surgery in
dogs [154].
Auricular techniques
Anatomy
Nerve blocks of the auricular region may be indicated for pain
management or surgeries involving the ear canal, tympanic bulla,
or pinna. Sensory innervation of the external ear canal is provided
by the auriculotemporal nerve and the auricular branches of the
facial nerve, while the pinna is innervated by the caudal auricular
and the greater occipital nerves [150]. The auriculotemporal nerve
arises from the mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve (V 3 ),
running cranially to the external ear canal along the caudodorsal
border of the masseter muscle and in close proximity to the facial
nerve. The caudal auricular nerve is a branch of the facial nerve,
and the greater occipital nerve is the largest branch of the second
cervical spinal nerve.
Techniques
A blind approach to the great auricular nerve has been described in
which the needle is inserted ventral to the transverse process of the
atlas and advanced 0.3 cm ventromedially toward the jugular
groove [155]. The auriculotemporal nerve can be blocked by insert-
ing a needle perpendicular to the skin at the caudolateral border of
the zygomatic arch and advancing toward the temporomandibular
junction [155]. Alternatively, ultrasound guidance may be used to
block the auriculotemporal and caudal auricular nerves; an ultra-
sound transducer is positioned in the coronal plane over the parotid
salivary gland, perpendicular to the ramus of the mandible [150].
The auriculotemporal and caudal auricular nerves can be visualized
between the external acoustic meatus and parotid salivary gland
caudally and the condyloid process of the mandible cranially. The
needle is introduced out-of- plane ventral to the transducer and
advanced dorsomedially at an approximately 45° angle until the tip
is positioned caudal to the condyloid process. The great auricular
nerve is located superficially, cranial to the bifurcation of the jugu-
lar vein into the maxillary and linguofacial veins. It is easily visual-
ized on ultrasound with the transducer oriented in the transverse
plane at the level of the atlas. The great auricular nerve is a small,
oval structure dorsal to the maxillary vein and mandibular salivary
gland. Blocking the great auricular nerve provides analgesia to the
skin overlying the caudal ramus of the mandible and on the dorsal
surface of the pinna. Akinesia of the eyelid is possible due to the
relationship between the auriculotemporal nerve and the facial
nerve and should be treated with ophthalmic lubricants until palpe-
bral function has returned.
Trigeminal nerve block
Ultrasound-guided trigeminal nerve block has been reported in a
dog undergoing extensive head surgery involving exenteration,
caudal maxillectomy, and zygomatic arch resection [156]. Proximal
blockade of the trigeminal nerve provides a broad area of desensiti-
zation in a single injection site, including areas innervated by the
ophthalmic branch (V1
) such as the orbit and nasal septum.
However, the block is technically challenging compared to more
peripheral techniques. The needle is introduced in-plane to the
ultrasound transducer immediately caudal to the orbital ligament
and advanced ventrally toward the caudal pterygopalatine fossa,
where the three branches of the trigeminal nerve and the maxillary
artery can be visualized lateral to the frontal bone and overlying the
sphenoid bone [150,156]. Doppler ultrasonography can aid in iden-
tification of the maxillary artery. The volume delivered is 0.1 mL/cm
of the cranium length from the inion to the nasion.
Blocks of the thorax and abdomen
Dependent upon the region that requires blockade, there are a
number of techniques that may be used to provide regional anes-
thesia to the thoracic walls, with or without visceral analgesia. In
general, the innervation of the thorax and abdomen is provided by

-- 1194 of 1450 --

Chapter 60: Canine and Feline Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1179
branches of spinal nerves. Dorsal branches of thoracic spinal nerves
extend dorsally and divide into medial and lateral branches to
innervate the epaxial muscles and the skin near the dorsal midline.
The sensory innervation of the lateral and ventral thoracic wall is
provided by the ventral branches of the thoracic spinal nerves via
the intercostal nerves [125]. The skin of the thorax is innervated
by dorsal, lateral, and ventral cutaneous branches of the spinal
nerves [157].
Thoracic paravertebral block
The thoracic paravertebral space in dogs has been described as a
wedge-shaped area bordered ventrally by the parietal pleura, medi-
ally by the vertebral bodies, intervertebral discs, and foramina, lat-
erally by the intercostal muscles, and dorsally incompletely by the
costotransverse ligament [158]. Ventral branches of the spinal
nerves travel distally via the dorsal compartment of the thoracic
paravertebral space. Before the advent of technologies such as neu-
rostimulation or ultrasonography to guide injections of local anes-
thetics, the standard approach to the thoracic paravertebral space
consisted of a blind technique guided by anatomical land-
marks [159]. Loss of resistance to injection performed with a loss of
resistance syringe and the characteristic pop-like feeling perceived
by the operator once the endothoracic fascia is pierced by the tip of
a Tuohy needle were long considered confirmatory for locating the
thoracic paravertebral space. Portela et al. described a nerve
stimulator-guided method for injections into the thoracic paraver-
tebral space; however, this technique was associated with a compli-
cation rate of 20%, which included instances of epidural spread and
intrapleural migration of injectate from accidental puncture of the
parietal pleura [158]. This technique, though imperfect, brought
about a level of objectivity beyond that of blind injections where the
subjective pop-like feeling of the needle through the internal inter-
costal membrane guided the injection. The sonoanatomy of the
canine thoracic paravertebral space in dog cadavers was subse-
quently described, along with a method to perform a thoracic para-
vertebral block with ultrasound guidance, further decreasing risks
associated with the thoracic paravertebral block [160,161]. In addi-
tion to enabling the use of a lower volume of injectate, ultrasound
guidance afforded a superior level of safety as direct visualization of
the needle during injection prevented the puncture of the parietal
pleura. Single injection points of diluted dye injectate in cadaveric
studies resulted in staining beyond the thoracic paravertebral space
despite correctly located injections, suggesting that local anesthetic
spread outside of the immediate paravertebral space may play a role
in the regional anesthesia observed with this technique. Based on
inconsistent staining of multiple levels of spinal nerves under
cadaveric conditions, complete thoracic anesthesia may require
injection at multiple spaces.
Another canine cadaveric study suggests the utility of this tech-
nique may extend beyond the thorax. Spinal nerves originating
from T10 to L1 contribute sensory innervation to the cranial
abdomen; caudal thoracic paravertebral spaces can also be
injected to provide somatic and visceral analgesia at the level of
the cranial abdomen [162]. Though this technique was associated
with mediastinal contamination in 80% of injections, no other
complications were noted.
Clinically, a single injection at the level of the caudal thoracic para-
vertebral space has been shown to provide adequate analgesia in radi-
cal mastectomy [163], lateral thoracotomy [164], and adrenalectomy
via midline laparotomy [165]. The thoracic paravertebral block
was also described in other animal species (Vulpes vulpes) [166].
Together, the evidence suggests thoracic paravertebral blocks are
useful for the provision of perioperative analgesia in thoracic and
cranial abdominal surgeries. It is important to note that ultrasound-
guided thoracic paravertebral block is a technically challenging
technique and is recommended for more advanced practitioners of
ultrasound-guided regional anesthesia.
Intercostal nerve block
Caudal to each rib, the intercostal nerve runs as part of a neurovas-
cular bundle that also includes the intercostal artery and vein
(Figs. 60.9 and 60.10). The neurovascular bundles are bordered by
the endothoracic fascia medially and the internal intercostal mus-
cles laterally [125]. The intercostal nerves provide sensory and
motor innervation to the parietal pleura and lateral thoracic body
wall and give rise to the lateral and ventral cutaneous branches that
supply the skin of the mid- to ventral thorax [157]. Intercostal nerve
blocks have been described as a technique to provide superior anal-
gesia for dogs undergoing thoracic surgery [167–169].
The safety and utility of intercostal blocks is well supported in the
literature. Berg and Orton compared the effects of different analge-
sic modalities on the respiratory function of dogs following thora-
cotomies [170]. Intravenous administration of opioids caused
significant respiratory depression in dogs due to a concomitant
decrease in minute volume and respiratory frequency and led to
clinically significant hypoventilation and hypoxemia; however, a
treatment group that received intercostal nerve blocks with bupiv-
acaine exhibited no such respiratory depression in the immediate
postoperative period. Similarly, Thompson and Johnson compared
selective intercostal nerve blocks to interpleural instillation of bupi-
vacaine and systemic morphine administration in dogs undergoing
lateral thoracotomies and assessed respiratory function and analge-
sia postoperatively [168]. Dogs treated with systemic opioids expe-
rienced more complications than dogs in the other treatment
groups such as perioperative hypothermia, with slower return to
normal temperature and blood gas alterations suggestive of poor
respiratory function. Though all groups showed a downward trend
in PaO2 , only the morphine and interpleural bupivacaine groups
had significantly lower PaO 2 compared to baseline. Another study
of the effect of intercostal nerve blocks on arterial blood gas ten-
sions in dogs that underwent thoracotomies noted that PaO 2 and
PaCO 2 were not different before and after treatment at 4 and 8 h
postoperatively, suggesting that intercostal nerve blocks with bupi-
vacaine afforded postoperative analgesia sufficient to normalize
respiratory function in dogs [169].
As innervation of the cranial abdomen involves thoracic dermat-
omes, the addition of selective (e.g., T8–T10) intercostal nerve
blocks may provide adjunctive coverage to other abdominal
regional anesthetic techniques. A study comparing the analgesic
efficacy of a combination of intercostal nerve blocks and spinal
anesthesia to a sufentanil constant rate infusion in cats undergoing
unilateral radical mastectomies showed that both intraoperative
and postoperative analgesia was superior in patients that received
locoregional anesthesia as part of their anesthetic protocol [171].
The sternum and associated tissues may be blocked via various
ultrasound-guided parasternal blocks, described elsewhere [172,173]
These techniques aim to desensitize the terminal branches of the
intercostal nerves, distal to where the lateral cutaneous branches
bifurcate off the intercostal nerves, thus providing analgesia solely at
the level of the thoracic ventral midline (i.e., for median sternoto-
mies). In theory, this technique would be expected to spare intercos-
tal muscle function and preserve ventilatory function, though

-- 1195 of 1450 --

1180 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
a
7 	6 	5 	4 	3
b
c
d
e
g	h	i	j
f
Figure 60.9 Needle placement for inducing intercostal nerve blocks in a dog, showing the lateral aspect and the sagittal section. Inset: (a) skin,
(b) subcutaneous tissue, (c) intercostal muscles, (d) rib, (e) subcostal space, (f) parietal pleura and fascia, (g) interpleural space, (h) visceral pleura,
(i) intercostal artery, vein, and nerve, and (j) lung.
a
1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7
b
h	g 	j	i
c
d
e
f
Figure 60.10 Needle placement for inducing intercostal nerve blocks in a cat, showing the lateral aspect and the sagittal section. Inset: (a) skin,
(b) subcutaneous tissue, (c) intercostal muscles, (d) rib, (e) subcostal space, (f) parietal pleura and fascia, (g) intercostal vein, (h) intercostal artery,
(i) intercostal nerve, and (j) lung.

-- 1196 of 1450 --

Chapter 60: Canine and Feline Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1181
clinical trials have yet to be conducted to assess the clinical efficacy
of this technique in veterinary patients.
In order to decrease the risks of block failure secondary to inac-
curacy of blind injections and reduce the risks of complications
associated with potential pleural puncture, Thomson et al. studied
the sonoanatomy of the intercostal space and described a novel
ultrasound-guided technique for intercostal nerve blocks [35].
Though slightly more time consuming than blind injections, the
authors reported a significant improvement in the accuracy of
intercostal nerve staining with ultrasound guidance compared with
the blind technique with 68/70 (97%) successful injections versus
45/70 (64%).
Interpleural regional analgesia
Interpleural regional analgesia involves infiltration of a local anes-
thetic solution into the potential space between the parietal and
visceral pleura. Multiple studies in dogs have shown that inter-
pleurally administered local anesthetics work by diffusion across
the parietal pleura to block the underlying intercostal nerves,
resulting in multidermatomal blockade [174]. The distribution of
blockade is gravity-dependent and corresponds with the lowermost
part of pleural space where pooling of the local anesthetic solution
occurs [175]. Interpleural administration of local anesthetics has
proven useful for providing pain relief not only for thoracic surger-
ies, but also for painful disorders of the cranial abdomen (e.g.,
pancreatitis) [176].
While effective, it is important to note the possible complications
of this technique. The large surface area of the pleura can potentially
result in rapid absorption of the administered local anesthetic solu-
tion and high plasma levels of the local anesthetic can result, poten-
tially leading to local anesthetic systemic toxicity (LAST) [177]. No
adverse cardiovascular effects were reported when local anesthetic
was administered interpleurally to patients with or without an open
pericardium [178]. While direct lung trauma is unlikely with careful
technique, a small volume of air can be aspirated into the pleural
space due to the negative intrathoracic pressure. This can result in an
insignificant pneumothorax and is not considered to be of clinical
significance. Potentially more significant is a potential loss of dia-
phragmatic function on the injection side after administration of
interpleural bupivacaine [179]. Dogs that received bilateral blockade
demonstrated paradoxical respirations and generated negative intra-
abdominal pressures upon inspiration. Patients at increased risk of
cardiovascular and respiratory complications may be better treated
with alternative methods of pain relief (e.g., intercostal nerve blocks
and thoracic epidural anesthesia).
With the patient positioned in lateral recumbency, an over-the-
needle catheter connected to a syringe filled with 2–3 mL of saline
via a three-way stopcock is advanced onto the lateral aspect of the
seventh or eighth rib at its midpoint between the dorsal and ventral
midline. The needle is then walked off the cranial border of the rib
until it can be advanced through the intercostal space. Entering the
thorax at the cranial border of the rib helps minimize the risk of
traumatizing the intercostal nerve and vascular bundle that lies cau-
dal to each rib. Once the parietal pleura has been penetrated (often
with a palpable “pop” or “click”), the column of saline in the syringe
will slowly decrease in volume as the negative interpleural pressure
aspirates the saline into the interpleural space. Once the needle tip
has been confirmed to be in the interpleural space, the catheter is
gently advanced off the needle stylet into the interpleural space
(Fig. 60.11). The preloaded syringe with local anesthetic solution is
then attached to the catheter and the calculated volume of local
anesthetic is slowly injected over 1–2 min into the interpleural
space. Following injection of the local anesthetic, the catheter is
withdrawn and the patient is positioned with the operative side
down for at least 10 min, allowing the local anesthetic to pool and
block the underlying intercostal nerves.
a
b
c
d
e
g	h	i	j	k	l
f
Figure 60.11 Interpleural catheter placement in a dog. Inset: (a) skin, (b) subcutaneous tissue, (c) intercostal muscles, (d) rib, (e) subcostal space,
(f) parietal pleura and fascia, (g) interpleural space, (h) visceral pleura, (i) catheter, (j) Tuohy needle, (k) lung, and (l) intercostal artery, vein, and nerve.

-- 1197 of 1450 --

1182 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
Alternatively, an indwelling catheter or chest tube can be placed
into the interpleural space to facilitate repeated injections. Catheter
dislodgement can occur whenever an indwelling catheter is placed
at any site in the body; after correctly positioning the catheter in the
interpleural space, it should be secured to the patient by means of
adhesive patches, tissue glue, suture, and/or bandages. Subcutaneous
tunneling of larger gauge interpleural catheters can be used as a fur-
ther means to reduce the likelihood of dislodgment and to prevent
air from inadvertently entering the interpleural space around the
catheter. A C-clamp or other similar device may be used to reduce
the possibility of air being aspirated through the chest tube or cath-
eter following inadvertent dislodgment or other issues.
Fascial plane block techniques
Fascial plane blocks represent a relatively novel class of ultrasound-
guided regional anesthetic techniques in veterinary medicine. They
rely on the deposition of higher volumes of dilute local anesthetic
into a fascial plane that contains nerves, rather than targeting dis-
crete nerves. In both human and veterinary medicine, there has
been an explosion of descriptions of novel techniques with accom-
panying cadaveric studies. In most cases, prospective, controlled
trials are lacking yet many practitioners of regional anesthesia uti-
lize these techniques frequently as part of a balanced analgesic plan.
Each technique described below has been detailed in initial cadav-
eric studies; the reader is directed to the referenced literature for
more complete descriptions of individual techniques.
Serratus plane block
The serratus plane block, also known as the serratus ventralis or
serratus anterior plane block, is a fascial plane block that was origi-
nally proposed in human patients as an alternative method to pro-
viding locoregional anesthesia to the thoracic body wall via
desensitization of the lateral cutaneous branches of T2 to T9 [180].
A veterinary adaptation of this ultrasound-guided technique has
been described in canine cadavers [181]. The technique consists of
injecting a volume of local anesthetic solution in the fascial plane
between the serratus ventralis thoracis and the latissimus dorsi
muscles or, in the alternative deep technique, between the serratus
ventralis thoracis and the external intercostal muscles. As it is usu-
ally recommended to desensitize up to two dermatomes cranial and
caudal to the site of surgery due to the significant overlap in recep-
tive fields on the thorax, the serratus plane block is expected to only
produce partial thoracic anesthesia involving the cranial thoracic
dermatomes based on spread of injectate in cadaver subjects.
Despite questionable efficacy for complete thoracic anesthesia in
cadaveric studies, there is clinical evidence that suggests effective
perioperative analgesia may be afforded by a combination of the
transversus abdominis plane block with the serratus plane block in
dogs undergoing unilateral radical mastectomy [182]. While pro-
spective randomized clinical trials evaluating the clinical efficacy of
this technique in thoracic surgery are lacking, two case series
describe the effective use of serratus plane block as part of a multi-
modal analgesic protocol for lateral thoracotomies for a variety of
surgical conditions [183,184]. Prospective blinded and appropri-
ately controlled studies are needed to assess the utility of this locore-
gional technique in veterinary species.
Quadratus lumborum block
Upon exiting through their respective intervertebral foramina, the
ventral rami of the twelfth and thirteenth thoracic spinal nerves
(T12, T13) run within the bundles of the quadratus lumborum
(QL) muscle while the first three lumbar spinal nerves (L1–L3)
course between the QL muscle and the psoas muscle. Lumbar spi-
nal nerves course through the transverse fascia that separates the
retroperitoneum from the sublumbar musculature. They penetrate
the transversus abdominis muscle to continue their course within
the fascial plane that exists between the transversus abdominis
muscle and the internal abdominal oblique muscle. Together with
the caudal thoracic spinal nerves (T9–T13), these lumbar spinal
nerves provide motor and sensory innervation to the abdomen. In
addition, sympathetic ganglia are present alongside the vertebral
bodies from T13–L5 and are responsible for autonomic innerva-
tion of the abdominal viscera [185]. There are several different
approaches that may be utilized to deposit local anesthetic into the
fascial planes that surround the QL muscle to provide regional
anesthesia suitable for abdominal procedures. These have been
described extensively in the human literature and have more
recently been described and evaluated in veterinary patients.
An initial canine cadaveric study provided a thorough assess-
ment of the anatomy and sonoanatomy of the canine QL plane and
evaluated the feasibility of an in-plane ultrasound-guided injection
technique [185]. Injections of 0.3 mL/kg of dye–lidocaine injectate
performed at the level of L1 were associated with successful cranial
lumbar nerve and splanchnic nerve staining. However, inconsistent
staining was found for more cranial (i.e., T13) spinal nerve seg-
ments, indicating that surgery of the cranial abdomen may require
either a higher volume of injectate or that the QL block would need
to be combined with another technique. Furthermore, injections
into the intermuscular plane between the psoas major and the QL
muscles using the described technique were less likely to be feasible
in larger breed dogs due to the excessive depth. Two alternative
approaches to delivering injections lateral to the QL were then
assessed, the transverse or longitudinal needle approaches [186].
The authors determined that a transverse approach to the lateral QL
plane with 0.3 mL/kg of injectate per hemiabdomen was feasible
and resulted in more consistent spread of injectate. No complica-
tions such as intra-abdominal or epidural contamination were
noted in either technique. In both studies, the approach to the QL
was performed from a ventrolateral to dorsomedial direction.
Due to concern about the risk of making an intra-abdominal
injection or causing inadvertent injury to adjacent abdominal
organs, another approach to the QL block was described whereby
the needle was advanced in a dorsolateral to ventromedial trajec-
tory targeting the medial aspect of the QL [187]. This technique
yielded results similar to those described previously and no ectopic
abdominal or epidural injectate was observed. When assessed by
CT, however, there were important differences noted in the cranio-
caudal injectate spread. Another study evaluated use of a higher
volume of injectate consisting of dye and a radiopaque contrast
agent (0.6 mL/kg) and also found distinct patterns of reach as
assessed by anatomic dissection and CT evaluation [188]. These
findings illustrate how different evaluation methods (e.g., dissec-
tion versus advanced imaging) or injectate solution types (e.g., dye
versus local anesthetic combined with contrast agent) can be an
important source of variation in studies of ultrasound-guided
blocks, and that the relationship between cadaveric studies involv-
ing contrast media or tissue dyes may not equate to clinical block
efficacy when techniques are performed in live patients using dif-
ferent local anesthetic solutions.
Cadaveric studies in cats have also been performed and, similar
to previous studies in dogs, the results varied between assessment
techniques and found staining that could potentially be associated

-- 1198 of 1450 --

Chapter 60: Canine and Feline Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1183
with incomplete regional anesthesia of the abdomen [189,190]. A
QL block as part of multimodal analgesia protocol was described in
a case report involving a cat undergoing exploratory laparotomy
and cystotomy [191]. Those authors reported the need for intraop-
erative administration of rescue analgesia at the beginning of sur-
gery, but none thereafter, and the patient was reportedly comfortable
with pain scores consistently below the suggested intervention
threshold using a validated pain scoring instrument. Like many fas-
cial plane techniques, no clinical studies have been published to
date evaluating the efficacy of QL blocks in companion animals for
perioperative analgesia, and more research is needed to bridge the
gap between the findings of laboratory cadaveric studies and pain
management in clinical cases.
Transversus abdominis plane block
The abdominal wall is innervated by thoracolumbar spinal nerves
including T9 to T12, the costoabdominalis nerve (T13), and the
three most cranial lumbar nerves (iliohypogastricus cranialis
nerve [L1], iliohypogastricus caudalis nerve [L2], and ilioingui-
nalis nerve [L3]). Nerves course along the fascial plane in between
the internal abdominal oblique muscle and the transversus
abdominis muscle, underneath a thin sheet of connective tissue
that is tightly adhered to the transversus abdominis muscle [192].
Thus, sensory blockade to the abdominal wall can be achieved by
injecting local anesthetic solution in the intermuscular plane
known as the transversus abdominis plane (TAP). Occasionally,
additional thoracic nerves located more cranially may be found in
the TAP.
Several cadaveric studies aimed at characterizing the spread of
injectates within the TAP have been published [193–196]. Variable
staining of sensory nerve fibers with even the highest volumes of
injectate tested (0.25–1 mL/kg of 0.25% bupivacaine and dye solu-
tions) suggest that a combination of a subcostal and mid or caudal
abdominal approach may be necessary to effectively desensitize
the ventral abdominal midline. Interestingly, most studies appear
to indicate that a ceiling effect exists. While craniocaudal spread
increases up to a volume of 0.5 mL/kg; doubling the volume to
1 mL/kg does not result in a greater reach. Interestingly, one study
reported no significant difference in number of ventral spinal
nerves stained between dogs receiving a single-point TAP block
per side as compared to two injections per side, though the area of
injectate spread did differ significantly between groups [197].
Beyond the volume of the injectate, variables that may affect
spread include cadaver condition, position, and duration between
injection and dissection. Additionally, the composition of the dye
may account for interstudy variability since the physical and
chemical properties of the solutions may change their ability to
penetrate tissues [198]. Different injection techniques have also
revealed different patterns of staining, with a combination of
subcostal and lateral injections yielding a better craniocaudal
staining pattern than a combination of cranial and caudal lateral
injections [199].
To perform an ultrasound-guided TAP block in canine and feline
patients undergoing exploratory laparotomy with incisions extend-
ing from the xiphoid to the caudal abdomen, the authors recom-
mend a four-point technique combining the lateral and subcostal
approaches. The authors’ preference is to draw up 0.35 mL/kg of
bupivacaine 0.5%, diluted in a 1:1 ratio with sterile saline 0.9%.
Dexmedetomidine can be added to the final solution in a ratio of
1 μg/mL of solution. The resulting solution is split evenly to per-
form a total of four injections.
For the lateral approach, a linear high-frequency transducer is
placed in either a transverse or longitudinal orientation, midway
between the last rib and the iliac crest, and midway between the
ventral and dorsal midline (Fig. 60.12). The body wall is identified
as the first hyperechoic line superficial to the peritoneum. The
muscle immediately superficial to the peritoneum is the trans-
versus abdominis which lies deep to the internal abdominal
oblique muscle. The TAP is the potential space between these two
muscles, appearing as a hyperechoic line that can be hydrodissected
by injecting a local anesthetic. The procedure is repeated on
both sides.
For the subcostal approach, the transducer is placed in a trans-
verse orientation, perpendicular to the linea alba just caudal to the
xiphoid process. The probe is then rotated 10–15° with the marker
located cranially. The resulting position of the transducer is parallel
to the costal arch and oblique to the midline. The rectus abdominis
and transversus abdominis muscles are visualized, and the perito-
neum is again identified as a thick hyperechoic structure separating
the peritoneal cavity and the body wall. The overlying transversus
abdominis muscle is separated from the more superficial rectus
abdominis muscle by the fascia of the transversus abdominis mus-
cle (superficial), which can be identified as a characteristic triangle.
When these structures have been identified, the needle is inserted
from the cranial aspect of the transducer, using an in-plane tech-
nique, with a 20° angle, so that the tip is located in the fascial plane
between the rectus abdominis and transversus abdominis muscles.
The first report of clinical use of a TAP block in a veterinary spe-
cies described an uneventful anesthetic event to facilitate the surgical
excision of a gastrointestinal foreign body in a Canadian lynx [200].
In that report, the bilateral TAP block was performed with one
injection of 0.4 mL/kg of 0.125% bupivacaine on each side (a total of
1 mg/kg) as part of a multimodal analgesic plan. The patient exhib-
ited no signs of discomfort up to 10 h postoperatively. A retrospective
study evaluated the use of a cranial and caudal TAP block (0.3 to
0.35 mL/kg per injection) combined with intercostal nerve blocks in
dogs undergoing mastectomy [201]. The combination of TAP and
intercostal blocks as part of a balanced multimodal analgesic protocol
in combination with low doses of systemic opioids produced ade-
quate intraoperative and immediate postoperative analgesia. In an
assessment of duration of analgesic effect, TAP blocks were per-
formed with either a liposome-encapsulated formulation of bupiv-
acaine or 0.25% bupivacaine potentiated with dexmedetomidine
[202]. The authors did not find a significant advantage to liposome-
encapsulated bupivacaine in that the duration of analgesia afforded
by the technique was equivalent in each group and was limited to
approximately 24 h. It is important to consider that, given the low
fraction of free bupivacaine in the commercially available liposome-
encapsulated bupivacaine suspension, its use in preoperative locore-
gional blocks may not provide sufficient intraoperative analgesia.
Consequently, consideration may be given to mixing the suspension
with standard bupivacaine (though no other agents should be com-
bined with liposomal formulations of bupivacaine).
Though locoregional blocks are best performed in the context of
preemptive analgesia, TAP blocks may be performed postopera-
tively in certain situations where time is of the essence and perfor-
mance of a preoperative block is not feasible (e.g., such as emergent
celiotomies for rapidly bleeding abdominal masses or cesarean sec-
tions where fetal stress is documented) or when ultrasound equip-
ment is not readily available. However, in such cases, the presence
of a pneumoperitoneum may cause a mirroring artifact that would
make the identification of the TAP more difficult and may lead to

-- 1199 of 1450 --

1184 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
abdominal puncture and/or organ damage if the artifact is not
correctly recognized [120]. An alternative to ultrasound-guided
blocks consists of an open surgeon-assisted approach where local
anesthetic solution is injected at the level of the aponeurosis of the
transversus abdominis muscle [203].
Erector spinae plane block
Motor and sensory innervation to the epaxial muscles and dorsum
is provided by the dorsal rami of the thoracic and lumbar spinal
nerves while the lateral branches of the dorsal rami provide motor
innervation to the longissimus thoracis, levatores costarum, and
iliocostalis thoracis muscles. These lateral extensions are known as
dorsal cutaneous branches, and they supply sensory innervation
from the dorsal midline to the lateral axillary limit of the thoracic
body wall [157]. Motor innervation to the transversospinalis
muscle group and sensory innervation to the vertebral laminae,
ligaments, and facet joints are derived from the medial branches of
the dorsal rami of the spinal nerves [204].
The erector spinae plane (ESP) block is a fascial plane block in
which a local anesthetic is deposited deep to the erector spinae
muscles, resulting in spread of local anesthetic solution in the
epaxial compartment that involves the lateral and medial branches
of the dorsal rami [205]. The original landmark for ESP injections
is the dorsolateral edge of the transverse process, which corre-
sponds to the ventromedial aspect of the longissimus thoracis mus-
cle. Single injections along the thoracolumbar spine result in
variable and unpredictable craniocaudal spread according to the
results of various cadaver studies [206–208]. Medial and lateral
Figure 60.12 Ultrasound probe positioning for the lateral approach to the transversus abdominis plane (TAP) block in either A. transverse, or
B. longitudinal positioning. C. Ultrasound image of local anesthetic solution within the transversus abdominis plane, between the transversus abdominis
(TA) and internal abdominal oblique (IO) muscles. Source: Dr. Carrie Schroeder (A); Dr. Raphaël Vézina Audette (B and C.).
(A) 	(B)
(C)

-- 1200 of 1450 --

Chapter 60: Canine and Feline Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1185
branches of the dorsal rami are consistently targeted by ESP injec-
tions and the injectate appears to remain confined to the epaxial
compartment. More recently, a cadaveric study comparing injec-
tions aimed at the lateral process or mamillary processes of the
thoracolumbar spine caudal to T11 indicated that medial branches
of the dorsal branches of the spinal nerves were more reliably
stained when the needle is directed at the mamillary processes [209].
This technique is thus preferred since innervation of the vertebral
laminae, facet joints, and epaxial muscles of dogs comes from the
medial branches. Cadaveric canine studies of the ESP block have
only rarely identified hypaxial spread of injectate, and epidural and/
or thoracic paravertebral space contamination have not been
reported in cadaveric studies involving thoracic ESP blocks [206–
208]. Epidural migration was observed in 11.7% of cadavers injected
with a transverse approach to the L4 vertebra [208] and may be
responsible for rare complications such as sympathetic blockade
and subsequent sinus arrest when performed at the T13 or L1 seg-
ment in dogs [210]. It is thus anticipated that ESP blocks would
provide regional anesthesia to the dorsolateral aspect of the body
wall and would be a suitable technique to use in the context of neu-
rosurgery such as hemilaminectomies. This is supported by the
findings of a retrospective study in dogs in which there was a sig-
nificant reduction of perioperative opioid administration and more
stable cardiovascular status in patients undergoing hemilaminecto-
mies that received an ESP block [211].
Further support for application of this block comes from a case
report of a dog undergoing opioid-free anesthesia for hemilaminec-
tomy surgery [212]. The ESP block may also prove useful in the
context of interventional pain management practice for treatment
of chronic pain associated with vertebral articular facet degenera-
tion [207]. The potential versatility of this block was highlighted in
a case report involving a dog with acute pancreatitis and intractable
pain despite systemic infusions of fentanyl, lidocaine, ketamine,
and dexmedetomidine that responded favorably to ESP block [213].
A small retrospective study evaluating the addition of ultrasound-
guided ESP block at T5–T9 to multimodal analgesic protocols in
dogs undergoing median sternotomies suggested the technique
may also be of some benefit in this context [214]. Since anatomic
studies have not identified a clear path for distribution of injectate
toward the ventral branches of the spinal nerves, the exact mecha-
nism whereby the ESP block may provide analgesia for cranial
abdominal pain remains unknown.
Blocks of the thoracic limb
Anatomy of sensory innervation
Spinal nerves emerge from the intervertebral canals of the cervical,
thoracic, and lumbar vertebral column as postganglionic fibers that
contain both sensory and motor nerves that originate from the dor-
sal and ventral horns of the spinal cord, respectively. Except in the
thoracic region, the ventral branches of the spinal nerves form
plexi, networks of nerve fibers that ultimately combine to form the
specific motor and sensory peripheral nerves that serve the thoracic
and pelvic limbs.
While species and individual variations may exist, the brachial
plexus is generally formed by the ventral branches of the C6 to T1
spinal nerves [215]. Although early anatomic studies of the canine
brachial plexus identified occasional contributions from the C5 and/
or T2 nerves, more recent studies have failed to corroborate these
observations [216]. The brachial plexus includes the following nerves
(with respective contributing cervical ventral rami): pectoral (C6),
suprascapular (C6 and C7), subscapular (C6 and C7), musculocuta-
neous (C7 and C8), axillary (C7 and C8), radial (C7, C8, and T1),
median (C7, C8, and T1), ulnar (C7, C8, and T1), long thoracic (C7),
thoracodorsal (C8 and T1), and lateral thoracic (T1) nerves [215,216].
Various approaches may be utilized to provide regional anesthesia to
the brachial plexus and its distal branches (Fig. 60.13).
The brachial plexus provides motor, sensory, and autonomic
innervation to the thoracic limb, including four extrinsic muscles.
The ventral rami of the cervical spinal nerves emerge from their
respective intervertebral foramina and pass through the intertrans-
versarius muscles to course distally between the scalenus and sub-
scapularis muscles. The phrenic nerve, which supplies motor
innervation to the diaphragm, primarily originates from the ventral
branches of C5, C6, and C7 and thus is anatomically related to the
brachial plexus [125]. The spinal nerve T1 emerges from the first
thoracic intervertebral space and contributes a primary branch to
the brachial plexus that innervates the elbow and antebrachium, and
a minor branch that innervates the first intercostal space. The T2
spinal nerve rarely contributes fibers to the brachial plexus. Instead,
its ventral ramus forms the intercostobrachial nerve that innervates
the pectoral ventral dermatomes and its dorsal ramus innervates the
caudal cervical region. Lateral cutaneous branches of T2 provide
sensory innervation to the lateral aspect of the shoulder.
The radial, ulnar, musculocutaneous, and median nerves course
distally through the axilla in a sheath of connective tissue bordered
cranially by the biceps brachii and coracobrachialis muscles, medi-
ally by the pectoralis muscle, and laterally by the triceps muscle.
Within the axillary sheath, multiple layers of connective tissues
separate individual components of the neurovascular bundle.
Beyond the proximal third of the humerus, the radial nerve sepa-
rates from the median, ulnar, and musculocutaneous nerves to
assume its final position between the brachialis muscle and the tri-
ceps. The median, ulnar, and musculocutaneous nerves remain
with the brachial artery and vein, deep to the pectoralis muscles and
the thin fibrous sheet that serves as an insertion tendon to the
humerus for the deep pectoralis, latissimus dorsi, cutaneous trunci,
and tensor fascia antebrachii muscles, medial to the triceps.
Paravertebral
Subscalenic
Axillary
Proximal RUMM
Distal RUMM
RUM
Intercostobrachialis
C6
R
UMM
C7
C8 & T1
Figure 60.13 Various approaches to the brachial plexus and distal branches.
RUMM, radial, ulnar, median, and musculocutaneous nerves; RUM, radial,
ulnar, and median nerves. Source: Otero et al. [253], with permission.

-- 1201 of 1450 --

1186 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
Mid- humerus, the musculocutaneous nerve innervates the coraco-
brachialis, biceps brachii, and brachialis muscles and, at the level of
the forearm, gives off the medial cutaneous antebrachial nerve. At
the level of the forearm, the radial nerve courses superficially and
branches into a medial and a lateral superficial radial nerve on
either side of the cephalic vein. The median nerve travels alongside
the median artery and vein, caudal to the pronator teres, and cranial
to the flexor carpi radialis. The ulnar nerve courses laterocaudally
deep to the flexor carpi ulnaris and gives off lateral and palmar
branches at the carpus to innervate the dorsolateral and palmar
aspects of the manus.
Cervical paravertebral block
The cervical paravertebral block in dogs is an advanced-level tech-
nique originally described by Lemke and Dawson that provides sur-
gical anesthesia to the thoracic limb’s most proximal structures
including the scapula, the shoulder, and the humerus which cannot
be blocked with the traditional axillary approach to the brachial
plexus [130]. Since then, revised techniques have been proposed
using alternative landmarks, neurostimulation, and ultrasound
guidance, but most have failed to yield significant improvements in
accuracy and safety [217–226]. Overall, the technique appears to be
associated with an unacceptably high rate of complications relative
to the potential benefits of the block. Anatomic landmark (i.e.,
“blind” approaches) and nerve stimulator-guided techniques are
associated with inherent risks, including technical failure, nerve
damage from direct needle trauma, or inadvertent puncture of blood
vessels in the area. Although ultrasound guidance allows for direct
visualization of the target nerves and surrounding structures and
thus may be considered safer, ultrasound-guided paravertebral bra-
chial plexus blocks can be associated with Horner’s syndrome
(caused by epidural spread of local anesthetic or blockade of the cer-
vicothoracic ganglia); in addition, extraneous injectate spread
involving the mediastinum or the phrenic nerve is also possible
leading to hemidiaphragmatic paralysis [224,225]. Potentially dele-
terious complications include epidural spread of injectate, intravas-
cular injection with associated local anesthetic toxicity, and
pneumothorax secondary to needle penetration into the thoracic
inlet. Based on these risks and the ability to use other, safer tech-
niques to achieve comparable levels of anesthesia and/or analgesia
for procedures of the thoracic limb, use of cervical paravertebral
blocks is not recommended.
Subscalenic brachial plexus block
Before reaching the axillary space, the ventral branches of the C6,
C7, C8, and T1 spinal nerves course caudoventrally within a fascial
plane that is bordered by the scalenus muscle and the longus colli
muscle. Using ultrasound guidance, the more proximal aspect of the
brachial plexus can be blocked by injecting local anesthetic solution
within the fascial plane at this location with minimal risk of epi-
dural, mediastinal, or intrapleural spread [227]. The extent of block-
ade would be expected to include all parts of the thoracic limb distal
to the scapulohumeral joint; indications for this technique may
include forelimb amputation and surgical approaches to the humerus
and elbow. Potential risks of this technique include incidental block-
ade of the phrenic nerve and Horner’s syndrome [228].
Axillary brachial plexus block
The traditional “blind” approach to performing a brachial plexus
block consists of manually palpating the axillary artery and the
greater tubercle of the humerus and injecting a solution of local
anesthetic in the general vicinity of the nerves that make up the bra-
chial plexus. This technique was originally described by Tufvesson
in 1951 [229]. Many years later, Futema et al. described the use of
nerve stimulator guidance to perform axillary brachial plexus blocks
in dogs undergoing surgical procedures of the mid-humerus [230].
A prospective, randomized, controlled study demonstrated that suc-
cessful surgical anesthesia of the thoracic limb could be achieved in
dogs undergoing carpal arthrodesis or surgery of the radius/ulna
following nerve stimulator-guided axillary brachial plexus blocks
with mixtures of local anesthetics [231]. Dogs that received brachial
plexus blocks with a local anesthetic required lower postoperative
rescue analgesia and lower intraoperative opioid administration
guided by autonomic nociceptive responses or absence thereof.
Following these landmark studies, assessments of nerve stimulation
to guide brachial plexus blockade continued to develop. The neuro-
stimulation of individual nerves of the brachial plexus and associ-
ated muscular responses were meticulously mapped in dogs [232]. A
subsequent evaluation of nerve staining with different volumes of a
lidocaine and methylene blue solution injected via neurostimulation
guidance in the axillary space revealed satisfactory staining of the
target nerves with the use of at least 0.3 mL/kg in medium-sized
dogs (16–40 kg, median 22 kg) [233]. Indeed, in a comparison of the
clinical features of nerve stimulator-guided brachial plexus block
with a traditional approach guided by anatomical landmarks, it was
concluded that neurostimulation improved the success rate of this
block in dogs [234].
Subsequently, Campoy et al. performed a terminal prospective
study to describe a new combined nerve stimulator- and ultrasound-
guided technique to block the brachial plexus at the level of the
axilla [235]. Their technique differed from previous descriptions in
that the dogs were positioned in dorsal recumbency and the needle
inserted in a craniocaudal direction, in-plane with the ultrasound
probe (Fig. 60.14). With this technique, though the nerve roots of
C7 to T1 were consistently stained with a low volume of lidocaine
and methylene blue solution (0.15 mL/kg), the root of C6 was
missed or insufficiently stained in most cases. A subsequent ana-
tomic (i.e., “blind technique”) evaluation of the axillary brachial
plexus performed via anatomic landmarks with twice the volume
of dye–local anesthetic solution only achieved complete staining of
main nerves (musculocutaneous, ulnar, median, and radial) or of
the ventral nerve rami from which these nerves originate (C7, C8,
and T1) in 58% of cases [216]. These findings support the use of
ultrasound guidance to increase success rates as well as reduce the
volumes of local anesthetic that are required to achieve successful
axillary brachial plexus blocks.
The sonoanatomy of the brachial plexus is dependent on patient
positioning because neurovascular bundles that course through
sheaths of connective tissue between musculofascial planes are
somewhat mobile [236]. In a study assessing the location of the
nerves of the brachial plexus with canine subjects positioned in
dorsal recumbency, the radial nerve was located caudolateral to the
axillary artery, the median and ulnar nerves caudomedial to the
axillary artery (in more than 90% of cases), and the musculocutane-
ous nerve was consistently located cranial to the axillary artery.
These findings highlight the importance of patient positioning
when it comes to successful ultrasound identification of nerves and
the advantage of placing patients in dorsal recumbency rather than
lateral recumbency for this block as the musculocutaneous nerve
was more easily identified. Similarly in cats, despite direct visualiza-
tion of the nerve roots by ultrasound, patient positioning was found
to significantly impact the success of the block. Axillary brachial

-- 1202 of 1450 --

Chapter 60: Canine and Feline Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1187
plexus blockade in cats positioned in dorsal recumbency with the
limb held in abduction at a 90° angle had more success as compared
to positioning in dorsal recumbency with the thoracic limbs
extended caudally [237].
Clinically, the axillary approach to the brachial plexus can also be
performed with the use of anatomic landmarks, without advanced
equipment such as ultrasound or nerve stimulators, yielding clini-
cally acceptable success rates when higher volumes of local anes-
thetics are used [238]. The increase in sophistication of the
technique may come at the cost of efficiency when inexperienced
operators perform the techniques, but evidence toward increased
safety such as decreased risks for vascular puncture or direct nerve
trauma supports the use of combined techniques. Akasaka et al.
compared ultrasound-guided and nerve stimulator-guided axillary
brachial plexus blocks in dogs and found that though the success
rates did not differ between each group, ultrasound guidance
resulted in faster blocks compared to nerve stimulator guid-
ance [239]. Complications may still occur despite ultrasound guid-
ance or nerve stimulation. There are isolated reports of serious
complications including life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias fol-
lowing nerve stimulator-guided axillary brachial plexus block [240],
in addition to pneumothorax [241], and phrenic nerve blockade
with resulting hemidiaphragmatic paralysis [237]. More likely
potential complications include direct nerve damage or vascular
puncture with subsequent hematoma formation. As with all tech-
niques, diligent patient monitoring during and after the block is
performed is recommended.
As duration of motor blockade may last longer than sensory
blockade, inference of the analgesic effects of nerve blocks should
not be made on the basis of continued motor deficits. Rather, pain
scoring using a validated pain assessment instrument is recom-
mended. To provide an extended duration of analgesia, catheteriza-
tion of the axillary brachial plexus has been described in awake
dogs; though feasible, concerns about dislocation of the catheter
and evidence of local anesthetic channeling resulting in uneven dis-
tribution among target nerves have curbed the enthusiasm of clini-
cians for this technique [242].
Proximal radial, ulnar, median,
and musculocutaneous nerve block
The radial, ulnar, median, and musculocutaneous (RUMM) nerves
can be blocked at the level of the proximal medial humerus within
the axilla (proximal RUMM block or distal brachial plexus block).
This provides motor and sensory block of the elbow and distal tho-
racic limb. At this location, these four nerves are contained within a
connective tissue sheath, the axillary sheath, that is derived from
the deep cervical fasciae. In a preliminary cadaver study, due to the
presence of the axillary sheath, the four target nerves contained
within the sheath were adequately stained without extravasation of
the dye solution into the surrounding tissues or complications such
as phrenic nerve or intrathoracic contamination [243]. In a cohort
of 15 client-owned dogs, an in- plane approach to an ultrasound-
guided injection of local anesthetic solution (0.15 mL/kg of 0.5%
ropivacaine) provided intraoperative analgesia associated with sig-
nificant opioid-sparing effects and postoperative analgesia for up to
8 h [243]. The approach described in this study is performed distal
to the axillary brachial plexus block and specifically targets the
RUMM nerves as opposed to the spinal nerve roots located more
proximally.
In cats, an ultrasound-guided lateral approach to block the
radial, ulnar, median, and musculocutaneous nerves was recently
described. A single injection technique was unsuccessful at consist-
ently blocking the musculocutaneous nerve when the tip of the nee-
dle was directed at the radial nerve, and a second injection directed
at the musculocutaneous nerve proved necessary due to the pres-
ence of interrupted layers of connective tissue that separate the
different components of the neurovascular bundle [244].
Figure 60.14 Ultrasound-guided regional anesthesia of the brachial plexus
using the axillary approach. A. The patient is positioned in dorsal
recumbency with the needle inserted using an in-plane approach. B. Prior
to needle insertion, nerve roots of C6–T1 can be visualized surrounding
the axillary artery (AA) on the ultrasound image. Cr, cranial; Cd, caudal.
Source: Dr. Carrie Schroeder.
(A)
(B)

-- 1203 of 1450 --

1188 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
Distal radial, ulnar, median, and musculocutaneous
nerve block
An alternative to the traditional axillary brachial plexus block con-
sists of targeting individual RUMM nerves at the level of the mid- to
distal humerus (distal RUMM block). This technique was initially
evaluated in dogs in a study that involved anatomic evaluation of
injectate distribution in canine cadavers followed by a placebo-
controlled, prospective, crossover clinical evaluation of the tech-
nique [245]. The radial nerve courses laterally and separates from
the ulnar, median, and musculocutaneous nerves at the level of the
proximal third of the humerus and thus, this technique was
described as two separate injections in order to successfully reach
all of the target nerves. Though their pilot study demonstrated ade-
quate staining of all but one of targeted nerves when sufficient vol-
umes of injectate were used (0.1 mL/kg and 0.15 mL/kg for the
lateral and medial approach, respectively), complete sensory block-
ade was not obtained in all limbs tested. They found that the degree
and duration of sensory deficits varied across the different dermat-
omes that were tested and the extent and duration of motor deficits
differed from the sensory blockade.
The distal RUMM block technique can be performed with nerve
stimulation guidance; the successful application of this technique
was described in a clinical case report as part of a multimodal anal-
gesic plan consisting of systemic opioids and regional anesthesia
(0.5% bupivacaine) for a muscle biopsy in the distal thoracic limb
of a dog in which general anesthesia was considered to have an
increased risk of complications [246]. Descriptions of ultrasound-
guided mid-humeral RUMM block techniques in dogs undergoing
distal limb surgical procedures have also been published [247,248].
An ultrasound-guided lateral approach to the RUMM block in
cats has been described and found that target nerves were more
successfully stained with 0.4 mL of methylene blue using an in-
plane approach [249]. The clinical efficacy of the technique remains
to be confirmed in cats.
Radial, ulnar, and median nerve block (ring block)
To selectively block structures distal to the elbow, perineural injec-
tions of local anesthetics around the radial, ulnar, and median
(RUM) nerves can be performed anywhere along the course of the
nerves. However, surgical procedures involving the manus and/or
digits do not require the entire thoracic limb to be blocked. While
regional anesthetic techniques applied more proximally will result
in acceptable analgesia, they typically also result in motor blockade,
which is often unnecessary for procedures involving the distal limb
and can result in trauma due to decreased mobility and propriocep-
tive deficits.
The somatic organization of individual nerve fibers within plexi
is such that afferent nerve fibers from the distalmost aspects of a
limb are found in the center of nerves, while the more peripheral
fibers innervate more proximal dermatomes. Furthermore, the size
of nerves can adversely influence the success and duration of sen-
sory blocks. This theoretically raises the issue that attempting to
block the manus with a brachial plexus or proximal RUMM block
may carry a greater risk of failure, though no study exists compar-
ing the intensity or duration of analgesia at the distal limb with ring
blocks versus more proximal blocks [250]. For this reason, the
radial, ulnar, and median nerves are commonly blocked at a loca-
tion immediately proximal to the carpus by means of a four-point
block that will selectively desensitize the superficial branches of the
radial nerve (dorsomedially), the dorsal branch of the ulnar nerve
(laterally), the palmar branch of the ulnar nerve (palmaromedially),
and the median nerve (palmarolaterally) (RUM block). The tech-
nique can be simplified to a ring block where the target nerves are
all successfully blocked following a circumferential subcutaneous
infiltration of local anesthetic proximal to the carpus, as previously
described [251,252].
Blocks of the pelvic limb
Until relatively recently, local anesthetic techniques for the pelvic
limb of small companion animals were limited mainly to epidural
or spinal anesthesia or intra-articular injections. However, periph-
eral nerve blockade can provide highly effective analgesia with
potentially less morbidity than neuraxial anesthesia [254]. When
compared with epidural anesthesia, peripheral nerve blockade of
the pelvic limb for orthopedic surgery provided similar require-
ments for postoperative analgesia with a lower incidence of intra-
operative hypotension and postoperative urinary retention in
dogs [254,255].
Bupivacaine (0.5%) with or without dexmedetomidine (0.5–2
μg/mL of injectate solution) is commonly used to provide surgical
anesthesia, although 0.5% ropivacaine may also be used. The addi-
tion of 50 μg of dexmedetomidine to a 50 mL vial of 0.5% bupiv-
acaine will create a solution that contains 0.5% bupivacaine and
dexmedetomidine at a concentration of 1 μg/mL. When bupiv-
acaine alone (0.15 mL/kg) was used for femoral and sciatic nerve
blocks, the duration of action for sensory blockade was found to be
15 and 10 h, respectively [256]. The addition of dexmedetomidine
may further prolong sensory blockade; however, this has not been
demonstrated in all studies [257,258].
Anatomy
The pelvic limb is served by two nerve plexi (lumbar and sacral)
and both must be partly or entirely blocked to provide surgical
anesthesia and analgesia to the entire pelvic limb (including the
hemipelvis). The lumbar plexus supplies the lateral femoral cutane-
ous nerve (L3, L4), the genitofemoral nerve (L3, L4), the femoral
nerve (L4, L5, L6), and the obturator nerve (L4, L5, L6) [259]. The
sacral plexus supplies the sciatic nerve (L6, L7, S1), the cranial and
caudal gluteal nerves (L6, L7, S1), and the caudal cutaneous femoral
nerve (S1, S2) [256].
Blocking the femoral nerve (or its distal sensory continuation,
the saphenous nerve) will provide anesthesia of the femur (mid-
diaphysis to distal), the femorotibial joint (medial aspect of the
femorotibial joint capsule and intra-articular structures), the skin of
the dorsomedial tarsus, and the first digit. Blocking the sciatic nerve
alone is sufficient to perform surgery involving the foot or hock.
Components of both nerves (femoral and sciatic) must be blocked
for almost any stifle or proximal tibial surgical procedure (e.g., tib-
ial plateau leveling osteotomy).
Lumbar plexus block
The lumbar plexus is formed via the ventral branches of L4, L5, and
L6 within the psoas compartment, a sheath formed by the iliopsoas
and psoas minor muscles [260]. Regional blockade of the nerves of
the lumbar plexus can be achieved using either nerve stimulator or
ultrasound guidance [42,45]. When a psoas compartment block is
combined with a parasacral lumbosacral trunk block, regional
anesthesia to the entire limb can result, sufficient for pelvic limb
amputation, hip surgery, or femur surgery [259].
Three different approaches to nerve stimulation-guided lumbar
plexus blocks have been described: a single-injection paravertebral

-- 1204 of 1450 --

Chapter 60: Canine and Feline Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1189
approach [233], a three-point paravertebral approach [261], and a
lateral pre-iliac approach [260]. Using the single-injection paraver-
tebral approach, a stimulating needle is introduced through the
epaxial muscles at the L5–L6 intervertebral level toward the iliop-
soas muscle until a quadriceps femoris muscle twitch is elic-
ited [233]. Epidural and abdominal spread of contrast injected at
this location occurred in a small proportion of subjects [233];
indeed, in a retrospective study examining this technique, one of 95
cases showed bilateral motor deficit, consistent with epidural
spread [262].
While the single-injection approach utilizes a large volume of
local anesthetic (0.4 mL/kg) to desensitize the lumbar plexus, the
three-point approach aims to utilize a smaller volume (0.05 mL/kg)
at each of three sites to block the individual ventral branches of the
L4, L5, and L6 nerve roots prior to them forming the lumbar
plexus [261]. Using this approach, when combined with a parasa-
cral lumbosacral trunk block, less rescue analgesia was needed for
pelvic limb amputations in dogs [42].
The lateral pre-iliac approach aims to block the femoral nerve
caudally within the psoas compartment where it is further from the
vasculature [260]. This approach utilizes a stimulating needle
inserted through the lateral aspect of the lumbar muscles, cranial to
the wing of the ilium. Comparison of the effect of blocking the lum-
bar plexus via the sagittal paravertebral or lateral pre-iliac approach
in dogs undergoing pelvic limb orthopedic surgery failed to show a
statistically significant difference in success rate (74.7% versus
82.3%) or rescue analgesia (33.7% versus 27.1%), although the vol-
ume used for the paravertebral approach was lower than that previ-
ously described (0.15 mL/kg versus 0.4 mL/kg) [262]. The
lumbosacral plexus block, when combined with sciatic nerve block,
has also been shown to be effective in cats undergoing hindlimb
orthopedic procedures [263].
The lumbar plexus block can also be achieved via combined
ultrasound–nerve stimulator guidance or under ultrasound guid-
ance alone. In either situation, a linear, high-frequency transducer
is positioned on the ventral aspect of the abdomen and lumbar
muscles, cranial to the iliac crest. At this location, the femoral
nerve can be identified as a hypoechoic, round structure within the
body of the iliopsoas muscle [259]. The needle can be advanced
toward the femoral nerve using several different approaches in
dogs; however, when introduced from the lateral aspect of the lum-
bar muscles there is less risk of inadvertent vascular puncture (e.g.,
the external iliac artery) [264]. When combined with a sciatic
nerve block, ultrasound-guided lumbar plexus block improves
analgesia and recovery quality for dogs undergoing tibial plateau
leveling osteotomy [265].
Using nerve stimulation and/or ultrasound guidance, the sciatic
nerve may also be blocked more proximally utilizing a parasacral
approach at the lumbosacral trunk. At this location, anesthesia/
analgesia can be provided to the proximal femur and pelvis that is
sufficient for hind limb amputation and hip and femur surgery
when combined with a lumbar plexus block [42,259].
Femoral/saphenous nerve block
At the caudal aspect of the iliopsoas muscle, the femoral nerve exits
the muscle and courses across the femoral triangle (Fig. 60.15). The
femoral triangle is demarcated by the iliopsoas muscle cranially, the
pectineus muscle caudally, and the sartorius muscle cranially. Within
the triangle, the femoral nerve is located cranial to the femoral artery
and vein, running deep to the caudal belly of the sartorius muscle. At
this level, the femoral nerve gives rise to the saphenous nerve and
the lateral circumflex vessels originate from the femoral artery and
vein. These vessels cross the femoral triangle in a craniocaudal
direction, disappearing between the vastus medialis and rectus fem-
oris muscles. The femoral nerve then continues distally, entering the
quadriceps muscle between the vastus medialis and rectus femoris.
The saphenous nerve is the sensory branch of the femoral nerve and,
when it is blocked in combination with a sciatic nerve block, anes-
thesia for stifle surgery will be achieved while still preserving quadri-
ceps muscle function [259]. While other branches of the femoral and
obturator nerve may contribute some sensory innervation to the
stifle in dogs [266], a recent retrospective analysis found no differ-
ence in intraoperative or postoperative analgesic requirements
between a saphenous–sciatic and a lumbar plexus–sciatic nerve
block in dogs undergoing stifle surgery [254].
For nerve stimulator-guided blockade of the femoral nerve, the
patient should be positioned in lateral recumbency with the limb to be
blocked positioned uppermost. The limb should be abducted 90° and
extended caudally, making it easier to palpate and identify the
pectineus and iliopsoas muscles and to palpate the pulse of the femo-
ral artery. Since the femoral nerve will be located cranial to the femoral
artery, the puncture site is located cranial to the femoral artery within
the femoral triangle (Fig. 60.16). An insulated needle (e.g., 22 gauge,
50 mm) is advanced toward the iliopsoas muscle, maintaining a
20–30° angle with respect to the skin. As the needle is advanced, the
fascia iliaca will be penetrated (a “pop” can usually be appreciated).
Once the tip of the needle is near the femoral nerve, contractions of
the quadriceps muscle will result in stifle extension. Bupivacaine
(0.5%, 0.1 mL/kg) combined with dexmedetomidine (0.5 μg/mL) pro-
vides approximately 14 (range 6–24) h of effect until rescue analgesia
may be needed following stifle surgery [255,267,268].
Alternatively, nerve stimulation can be combined with ultra-
sound with the transducer placed over the femoral triangle in a
craniocaudal direction. Doing this will provide a short-axis view of
the femoral artery and the nerve. Since it is usually compressed by
the pressure that is being exerted by the ultrasound transducer, the
femoral vein is rarely seen adjacent to the artery (Fig. 60.17). The
femoral nerve is located cranial and deep to the femoral artery and
is identifiable as a small, hyperechoic structure directly beneath the
thin caudal belly of the sartorius muscle and the fascia iliaca
Figure 60.15 Dissection of the femoral triangle of the left pelvic limb of a
dog cadaver. The caudal belly of the sartorius muscle has been displaced
cranially to allow for visualization of the femoral nerve. Note the anatomic
relationship of the femoral vessels to the femoral nerve.

-- 1205 of 1450 --

1190 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
(which appears as a thin hyperechoic line superficial to the femoral
nerve). The rectus femoris muscle can be seen cranial to the femo-
ral nerve. The puncture site is located in the proximal and cranial
aspect of the thigh (cranial belly of the sartorius muscle) in-plane
with the transducer (Fig. 60.18). The recommended volume to be
injected is 0.1 mL/kg [235]. However, the final injection volume can
be assessed by monitoring the ultrasound image.
The saphenous nerve may be blocked distally along the medial
femur to minimize motor blockade of the quadriceps. As this nerve
is sensory, nerve stimulator-guidance is not feasible. Instead, the
saphenous nerve may be identified under ultrasound guidance at the
level of the middle-third of the femur, in a triangular fascial plane
located immediately cranial to the femoral artery (Fig. 60.19) [36,123].
Sciatic nerve block
The sciatic nerve courses from its points of origin distally down
the pelvic limb between the greater trochanter of the femur and the
ischiatic tuberosity (Fig. 60.20). In this region, the sciatic nerve
gives rise to muscular branches that supply the semitendinosus
and semimembranosus muscles. The caudal gluteal vessels lie just
caudal to these muscular branches and must be avoided when the
needle is placed close to the sciatic nerve at this location.
Immediately distal to the greater trochanter and ischiatic tuberos-
ity, the sciatic nerve lies between the biceps femoris muscle later-
ally, and the semimembranosus/semitendinosus muscles caudally,
and the adductor muscle medially. The sciatic nerve then divides
into its two main branches, the tibial nerve medially and the com-
mon peroneal nerve laterally. The location of this division is vari-
able and can occur anywhere from the level of the hip joint to just
proximal to the stifle joint.
Sciatic nerve blocks may be performed utilizing nerve stimula-
tion and/or ultrasound guidance. For either technique, the patient
should be positioned in lateral recumbency with the limb to be
blocked positioned uppermost in a natural position. For a nerve
stimulator-guided approach, the greater trochanter and ischiatic
tuberosity should first be identified. The puncture site is located at
a point between the cranial and the middle thirds of a line that
could be drawn between these two bony landmarks. An insulated
needle (22 gauge, 50 mm) is inserted through the skin and is
advanced ventromedially at a 45° angle to the skin (Fig. 60.21).
Once the tip of the needle is near the sciatic nerve, dorsiflexion or
plantar extension of the foot will be elicited. The recommended
volume to be injected is 0.1 mL/kg. Contractions of the semimem-
branosus or semitendinosus muscles should not be considered an
acceptable endpoint. If stimulation of the hamstring muscles is
observed without movement of the foot, the needle is likely stimu-
lating the muscular branches of the sciatic nerve and not the sciatic
nerve itself. Injection of a local anesthetic at this location will miss
the sensory components of the sciatic nerve and may result in
block failure.
If performing the sciatic nerve block using ultrasound guidance,
the transducer should be placed in a craniocaudal orientation
over the biceps femoris muscle on the lateral aspect of the thigh,
distal to the ischiatic tuberosity (Fig. 60.22). Using this approach, a
short-axis view of the sciatic nerve should be obtained (Fig. 60.23).
An insulated needle (22 gauge, 50–100 mm) will enter the skin from
the caudal aspect of the thigh, in-plane with the ultrasound trans-
ducer. The needle should be advanced toward the sciatic nerve in a
Figure 60.16 Performance of a right-sided femoral nerve block in a dog
using a femoral triangle approach. The stimulating needle is inserted
cranial to the femoral artery and advanced toward the iliopsoas muscle,
maintaining a 20–30º angle to the skin.
Figure 60.17 Ultrasonographic cross-sectional (short-axis) view of the
femoral triangle of a dog. FA, femoral artery; Cr, cranial; Cd, caudal.
Source: Dr. Carrie Schroeder.
Figure 60.18 Performance of a left-sided femoral nerve block in a dog. The
ultrasound transducer is positioned to visualize the femoral triangle in
short- axis in the inguinal area, and the stimulating needle is advanced
in- plane in a cranial-to- caudal direction through the sartorius and rectus
femoris muscles toward the femoral nerve.

-- 1206 of 1450 --

Chapter 60: Canine and Feline Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1191
caudo-cranial direction through the semimembranosus muscle,
medial to the fascia of the biceps femoris muscle. As is the case with
all ultrasound-guided blocks, the needle tip should be kept in the
field of view at all times. If nerve stimulation is used along with
ultrasound guidance, plantar extension (from tibial nerve stimula-
tion), or dorsiflexion (from peroneal nerve stimulation) of the
foot will be elicited when the needle approaches the sciatic nerve.
The recommended volume of local anesthetic to be injected is
0.1 mL/kg, although the final injection volume can be assessed by
monitoring the ultrasound image [235].
Intra-articular blocks
An additional strategy for pain management following joint surgery
is the intra-articular administration of analgesics such as local anes-
thetics or opioids. The intra-articular injection of local anesthetics
desensitizes intra-articular structures only and may reduce the dose
and interval for administering supplemental analgesic therapy [269].
Stifle technique
The patient is positioned in dorsal or lateral recumbency. The stifle
joint is held in a flexed position. The needle is inserted lateral to the
patellar ligament, midway between the cranial pole of the patella
and the tibial tuberosity, and the hub of the needle is observed for
the presence of synovial fluid (confirming correct needle position).
However, absence of synovial fluid does not necessarily rule out
Figure 60.19 Ultrasound-guided saphenous nerve block. A. The
saphenous nerve may be identified under ultrasound guidance at the level
of the middle-third of the femur. B. It is visualized in a triangular fascial
plane (*) located immediately cranial to the femoral artery. Cr, cranial; Cd,
caudal. Source: Dr. Raphaël Vézina Audette (A); Dr. Carrie Schroeder (B).
(A)
(B)
Figure 60.20 Dissection of lateral thigh of a canine cadaver showing the
right sciatic nerve. The biceps femoris muscle has been reflected caudally
and the gluteal muscle has been transected to allow for easier visualization
of the sciatic nerve and its surrounding structures. Methylene blue dye has
been used to stain the proximal aspect of the sciatic nerve.
Figure 60.21 Performance of a right-sided sciatic nerve block in a dog
using the lateral approach. The index and middle fingers of the
nondominant hand are used to palpate the greater trochanter and ischiatic
tuberosity. The puncture site is located one-third of the distance from the
greater trochanter to the ischiatic tuberosity.

-- 1207 of 1450 --

1192 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
correct needle location. Depending on the size of the patient,
1–6 mL of local anesthetic solution may be injected into the joint.
Lack of resistance during injection confirms correct intra-articular
position of the needle tip and excludes injection into periarticular
soft tissue or a fat pad.
The stifle may also be blocked utilizing ultrasound-guided local
anesthetic injection of the popliteal fossa utilizing the “infiltrating
around genicular structures” or “FLAGS” technique, described in
dogs [270]. This technique may provide sufficient analgesia for sti-
fle surgery while maintaining motor function; however, further
studies are needed to assess its clinical safety and utility.
Coxofemoral joint technique
The patient should be positioned in lateral recumbency with the
coxofemoral joint to be injected uppermost; the limb should be
slightly flexed, with the stifle in a neutral position. The puncture
site is located cranial and proximal to the greater trochanter. Once
the needle has entered the joint, the hub of the needle should be
observed for evidence of synovial fluid to confirm correct needle
positioning. However, absence of synovial fluid does not rule out
correct needle positioning. Depending on the size of the patient,
1–6 mL of local anesthetic solution can be injected into the
joint [271]. Lack of resistance during injection confirms correct
intra-articular position of the needle tip and excludes injection into
periarticular soft tissue or a fat pad.
Neuraxial techniques
The administration of agents with analgesic properties via the
epidural or spinal routes provides effective anesthesia and analgesia
for procedures involving the pelvis and pelvic limbs, as well as the
tail, perineum, and caudal abdomen. In addition, the use of epi-
dural anesthesia for blockade of thoracic segments in dogs has been
extensively studied [272]. Epidural analgesia can also be extended
by using an indwelling catheter.
The lumbosacral approach (L7–S1) to performing epidural anes-
thesia in dogs and cats is technically straightfoward to perform
owing to the relatively wide intervertebral space at this location,
although more cranial approaches in dogs have also been
described [273,274]. Alternatively, a sacrococcygeal approach to the
epidural space has been described in cats to minimize the risk of
dural puncture and help facilitate urethral catheterization in
blocked cats [275,276] and a sacrococcygeal approach in dogs has
been described to minimize the risk of accidental dural puncture, as
a high frequency of “subarachnoid contamination of contrast” was
reported in one study of lumbosacral epidurals [31]. Under experi-
mental conditions in canine cadavers, the cranial extent of contrast
spread in the epidural space appears similar between the lumbosa-
cral and sacrococcygeal locations [277].
Contraindications
There are several contraindications to the use of epidural anesthesia
in small animal patients. Alternatives to epidural anesthesia should
be considered in patients with bleeding disorders (e.g., thrombocy-
topenia). Since placing a needle in the vertebral canal can result in
inadvertent puncture of an epidural venous sinus, hemorrhage may
result in the formation of an epidural hematoma compressing neu-
ral structures such as the cauda equina, different spinal nerve roots,
dural sac, or even the spinal cord. Epidural anesthesia using a local
anesthetic should be avoided in patients with uncorrected hypov-
olemia and hypotension since they will be at further risk due to
vasodilation following sympathetic nerve blockade. Opioids may
continue to be used in these patients. Finally, epidural anesthesia
should be avoided in patients with skin infections or presence of
neoplasia or other lesions at the site of injection. In these patients,
alternative routes for performing the epidural injection (e.g., sacro-
coccygeal route) or selection of a different regional anesthetic tech-
nique should be considered. Potential complications associated
with neuraxial administration (single dose or continuous infusion)
and strategies to avoid them are summarized in Table 60.1.
Anatomy
The vertebral canal contains the epidural space and the intrathecal
structures. The roof of the canal is formed by the vertebral laminae
and the interarcuate ligament (also known as the ligamentum fla-
vum or yellow ligament). This ligament widens at the level of the
intervertebral openings. The epidural space in the dog is largest
at the lumbosacral level where the dural sac tapers (Fig. 60.24).
Figure 60.22 Performance of a left-sided sciatic nerve block in a dog. The
ultrasound transducer is placed over the area immediately distal to the
greater trochanter and ischiatic tuberosity. The stimulating needle follows a
caudo-cranial direction toward the sciatic nerve through the
semimembranosus muscle, medial to the fascia of the biceps femoris
muscle. Source: Dr. Carrie Schroeder.
Figure 60.23 Ultrasonographic cross-sectional (short-axis) view of the
sciatic nerve deep to the biceps femoris muscle. Cr, cranial; Cd, caudal.
Source: Dr. Carrie Schroeder.

-- 1208 of 1450 --

Sympathetic trunk
Sympathetic ganglion
Rami communicantes
Spinal nerve 	Dorsal spinal branch
Ventral spinal branch
(C)
Vertebral canal Interarcuate ligament
Epidural space
Spinal cord
L5 	L6
L7
Sacrum
Internal vertebral
venous plexus
L7
L7
Arachnoid membrane
Subdural space
Dura mater Sacrum
Filum terminale
Spinal ganglion
(A) 	(B)
Figure 60.24 A. and B. Spinal anatomy at the lumbosacral level. Note that the interarcuate ligament is also known as the ligamentum flavum.
C. Sympathetic trunk and its relationship to the vertebrae.
Table 60.1 Potential complications associated with neuraxial techniques.
Complication 	Possible explanation 	Comments and strategies for avoidance
Related to the technique
Accidental drug administration 	Correct syringe labeling and implementation of “time-outs/
checklists” are recommended to prevent this type of operator
error from occurring
Neural damage/neurotoxicity 	Appropriate techniques and equipment should be used to
minimize tissue trauma
The use of preservative-free, “for epidural use” solutions is
recommended
Infections 	Strict adherence to best practice and standard of care in terms of
skin preparation and technique is recommended
Inadvertent subarachnoid/spinal or
subdural injection
Subarachnoid (intrathecal, spinal) needle location 	Check for absence of CSF and deliver a test dose before
delivering the full dose to rule out intrathecal or subdural needle
insertion
Inadvertent intravascular injection 	Intravascular needle location such as the ventral
venous plexus
Check for absence of blood and deliver a test dose before
delivering the full dose to rule out intravascular needle insertion
Related to local anesthetic solutions
Hypotension/bradycardia 	Sympathetic blockade 	Intravenous fluids, vasopressors, and anticholinergic drugs should
be used as needed
Horner’s syndrome 	Blockade of sympathetic trunk at cervical dermatomes 	Can be observed if local anesthetic reaches cervical dermatomes
Respiratory depression 	Extensive migration of the injectate, resulting in intercostal
nerve blockade, and rarely, anesthetic effects on the
brainstem or phrenic nerve
Avoid excessive cranial migration of local anesthetic
Opioids can cause delayed respiratory depression
Total spinal anesthesia 	Local anesthetic-induced depression of the cervical spinal
cord and the brainstem
Excessive spread of an intrathecal injection of local
anesthetic
Inadvertent spinal injection
Avoid excessive cranial migration of local anesthetic
Local anesthetic systemic toxicity 	Careful calculation of drug dosing
Aspiration prior to local anesthetic administration to avoid
intravascular administration
Related to opioids
Urinary retention 	Detrusor muscle relaxation, interruption of sacral
parasympathetic outflow, bladder atony
Patients should be monitored over the first 24–48 h following
epidural morphine, and treated symptomatically as needed
Urinary catheterization or bladder expression, as needed

-- 1209 of 1450 --

1194 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
At this level (L7–S1), the supraspinous and interspinous ligaments
are relegated to the fibrous and connective tissue in between where
the two epaxial muscles meet. Caudally, the spinal cord tapers into
a conical structure called the conus medullaris. In most dogs, the
dural sac typically ends at the level of L6–L7 while the conus medul-
laris is located at the lumbosacral space in smaller breeds and
younger patients. In cats, however, the dural sac extends caudally as
far as the first sacral segment. The dorsal and ventral rootlets
emerge bilaterally from each segment of the spinal cord and bind
together to form the dorsal and ventral roots. Each root progresses
separately toward the intervertebral foramen, at which point the
dorsal and ventral roots merge to form the corresponding spinal
nerve. The dura mater (dura mater spinalis) forms a cylindrical
tube with lateral extensions accompanying the roots and spinal
nerves as they exit the vertebral canal through intervertebral foram-
ina. Each spinal nerve divides into dorsal and ventral branches and
(in the region of T1–L4) two rami communicantes that join the
sympathetic trunk.
The epidural space is located between the dura mater and the
boundaries of the vertebral canal. It contains adipose tissue, con-
nective tissue, and the internal vertebral venous plexus. The cauda
equina comprises a bundle of nerve fibers formed by the roots of
the sacrum and caudal segments and is located within and caudal
to the dural sac around the filum terminale. The pelvic limb is
supplied by the spinal nerves at the level of L3–S1 (lumbosacral
plexus). Therefore, segmental blockade at this level is necessary to
block the entire pelvic limb. Innervation to the canine abdominal
wall and peritoneum is provided by the branches of T11, T12,
and T13 cranially and branches of L1, L2, and L3 caudally via sym-
pathetic and ilioepigastric–ilioinguinal nerves (Fig. 60.25) [125].
Innervation of the thorax is provided by the branches of the
T2–T13 spinal nerves. The sympathetic chain arises from the
T1–L4 segments of the spinal cord (outward and inward rami
communicantes) (Fig. 60.24C).
Spinal nerve roots become blocked when they are surrounded by
a local anesthetic solution as it spreads through the epidural
space [278]. Cranial migration of a solution administered in the
epidural space is related to the injected volume of local anesthetic
solution [279–281]. However, several studies have reported that
the same total drug mass administered epidurally in different con-
centrations and volumes produces a similar spread of sensory
blockade; this has been observed in humans [282,283] and in
dogs [284,285]. It appears that once a sufficient volume of drug has
reached a particular location (dermatome), the intensity and dura-
tion of the resulting block will depend on the concentration of
the local anesthetic administered. Put simply, once the nerves are
blocked, a greater concentration serves to increase the intensity and
duration of effect. These effects include sensory and motor block-
ade; additionally, preganglionic sympathetic blockade will result
in vasodilation in the blocked dermatomes and, in some cases, may
contribute to arterial hypotension. The degree of sympathetic nerve
blockade caused by epidural anesthesia is related to the extent of
local anesthetic spread.
Epidural technique
To perform an epidural injection, the patient may be placed in
either sternal or lateral recumbency, depending on the patient’s
medical condition and the clinician’s preference (Fig. 60.26). With
respect to body position, laterality may impact local anesthetic
spread and effect. For instance, dogs that were maintained in right
lateral recumbency for up to 40 min after injection experienced sig-
nificantly greater migration of injectate on the right side compared
with dogs that were turned from left to right lateral recumbency
after epidural injections [280]. Further studies are needed to evalu-
ate the shortest amount of time required to achieve a significant
laterality of the block since a 40-min waiting period is unacceptable
in clinical situations.
In dogs, the standard lumbosacral puncture site is located
between the dorsal spinous processes of L7 and S1 (medial sacral
crest) (Fig. 60.26). The needle (spinal or Tuohy) is advanced
through the skin and into the subcutaneous tissue (Fig. 60.27).
Usually, there should not be any resistance to needle advancement
through these tissues. The needle is then engaged into the supra-
sinous ligament, the stylet removed, and further advanced through
the supraspinous and interspinous ligaments (Fig. 60.28). Resistance
to needle advancement may be appreciated as the needle penetrates
these ligaments. If during any of these manipulations, the needle
comes into contact with bony structures, it should be withdrawn
slightly and redirected cranial or caudal as appropriate in a gentle
and controlled manner. Several methods have been developed for
identifying the epidural space, including the use of a “hanging
drop,” “loss of resistance,” electrostimulation, and ultrasonography.
In cats, since the dural sac extends caudally beyond the lumbosacral
space, the authors recommend performing sacrococcygeal epidur-
als to avoid complications. If lumbosacral injection is desired, cau-
tious and slow advancement of the needle should be utilized to
C
3
C
2
C
4
C
5
C
6
C
7
T
2 T
3
T
4
T
5
T
6
T
7
T
8
T
9 T
10 T
11
T
12
T
13
L
1
L
2
L
3
L
4 L
5
L
6 	L
7
S
1
S
2 S
3
Co
1
Co
2
Co3
Co4	Co5
C8
T1
Figure 60.25 Dermatome map of sensory innervation to the skin in the dog.

-- 1210 of 1450 --

Chapter 60: Canine and Feline Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1195
Medial sacral crest
Spinous process of L7
Figure 60.26 The typical puncture site for
performing epidural anesthesia in the dog is located
between the spinous process of L7 and the medial
sacral crest of S1.
Figure 60.27 A Tuohy needle is advanced toward
the epidural space at the lumbosacral space of a
dog. Note that the index fingers and thumbs of each
hand are used to hold the wings while the middle
fingers are used to stabilize the needle shaft.
Interspinous
ligament
Interarcuate
ligament
Figure 60.28 Illustration showing a Tuohy needle entering the epidural space at the lumbosacral junction. Note the recoil of the interarcuate ligament
(ligamentum flavum).

-- 1211 of 1450 --

1196 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
avoid dural puncture. The typical doses that are recommended for
epidural anesthesia in dogs and cats are presented in Tables 60.2
and 60.3.
Hanging drop
To perform an epidural with the hanging drop technique, a drop
of saline or local anesthetic solution is placed in the hub of a spi-
nal or Tuohy needle; as the needle penetrates the epidural space,
it will usually be aspirated into the needle. In dogs, pressure
within the epidural space has been reported to be anywhere from
–6 to +15 mmHg [287]. It seems that gravity and the possible
subatmospheric pressure within the epidural space and mainly
the recoil of the ligamentum flavum when pierced by a blunt nee-
dle such as a Tuohy needle may play a role in the efficacy of this
technique. One study reported 100% false negatives (i.e., the nee-
dle tip is located within the epidural space, but saline remains in
the hub) with the hanging drop technique when the spinal needle
was placed during lateral recumbency, compared with a positive
aspiration in seven out of eight dogs positioned in sternal
recumbency [288].
Loss of resistance
Resistance to injection of air or fluid may be felt while the needle is
advanced through the intervertebral ligaments. If slight pressure is
being applied to the plunger of a “loss of resistance” (LOR) syringe,
a sudden loss of resistance to injection will be appreciated when the
needle punctures the ligamentum flavum and enters the epidural
space (Fig. 60.29). A false-positive result may ensue if the needle is
located within the intervertebral fat. It is also possible to obtain a
false-negative result (correct placement but no LOR) if foreign
material (blood clots, fat, periosteum, skin) fills the needle bore and
causes obstruction. If air is used for the LOR technique, a very small
volume should be injected since the use of air (0.3 mL/kg) may be
associated with significantly less spread of the injected solution,
uneven cranial distribution of the solution, and occasional com-
pression of the spinal cord [289].
Running-drip technique
The running-drip technique relies on hydrostatic pressure to
allow a saline drip to run reliably once the epidural space is
entered [290]. The technique has been recently described in dogs
and was found to be a suitable alternative to the hanging drop
technique, especially when the patient is positioned in lateral
recumbency [291]. The running-drip technique utilizes a 100 mL
bag of 0.9% saline attached to a 20 drop/mL drip set attached via
a three-way stopcock to a Tuohy needle. The drip set chamber is
then elevated 60 cm above the dog and opened. Once an unequiv-
ocal increase in the dripping rate is observed, the three-way stop-
cock is opened to the atmosphere and examined for the presence
of CSF or blood. This technique has also been shown to identify
entry of the needle into epidural space at the sacrococcygeal space
in dogs [32].
Electrolocation
Several studies have demonstrated that each layer of the spinal
cord requires a different threshold current to elicit a motor
response [292,293]. Nerve stimulation may, therefore, be useful for
identifying the lumbosacral epidural space in dogs. When the needle
tip is located in the epidural space, twitches in the pelvic limbs and
tail will be observed [294,295]. Nerve stimulation can also be helpful
in identifying the epidural space when performing sacrococcygeal
epidural injections in both dogs and cats, with a distinctive tail twitch
appreciated when the needle is located in the epidural space [34].
Ultrasound-guided
Ultrasound-guided approaches to the epidural space have been
described in both cats and dogs [296–298]. Ultrasonography can be
used to identify the correct location, especially in obese patients, as
well as to confirm epidural injections in real time [296,299]. Using
a transverse view of the spinal canal at the level of the lumbosacral
space, one can confirm epidural injection of a solution via collapse
of the dural sac, enlargement of the epidural space, and/or a positive
color flow Doppler signal [297,298].
Regardless which of the above techniques is used, the needle
should be inspected for the presence of CSF or blood after entering
the epidural space. If either fluid is observed, the needle should be
removed and the procedure should be repeated. If desired, an exten-
sion set can be attached to the needle to make drug administration
easier. At this point, the calculated drug volume can be administered
partially (if a catheter will subsequently be placed) or totally.
Table 60.2 Volumes of local anesthetics used for epidural anesthesia in dogs.
Drug 	Puncture site Dermatome 	Volume
(mL/kg)
Reference
Bupivacaine 0.25% Lumbosacral 	L3 	0.2 	[281]
Bupivacaine 0.5% 	Lumbosacral 	Adequate for
ovariohysterectomya
0.36 	[286]
Bupivacaine 0.25% Lumbosacral 	T9 	0.4 	[281]
a The ovaries are supplied by the sympathetic chain via the hypogastric nerves (T10–L1).
Figure 60.29 During performance of epidural anesthesia, a “loss of
resistance” (LOR) syringe can be used to identify when the epidural
space is entered.
Table 60.3 Volumes of local anesthetics (based on dye-staining studies) used
for epidural anesthesia in cats.
Drug 	Puncture site 	Dermatome 	Volume (mL/kg)
Methylene blue solution 	Lumbosacral 	L1–L2 	0.2
Methylene blue solution 	Lumbosacral 	Up to T7 	0.3
Methylene blue solution 	Lumbosacral 	T6–T10 	0.4
Source: Adapted from Lee et al. [279].

-- 1212 of 1450 --

Chapter 60: Canine and Feline Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1197
Catheter placement
An indwelling catheter may be placed into the epidural space to
facilitate drug administration. Epidural catheters are typically
found in a commercially available kit that may contain a Touhy
needle, epidural catheter, threading assist guide, catheter connec-
tor, and bacterial filter. When using a Tuohy needle, the bevel of
the needle should be directed cranially to assist with placement of
the catheter. Once in the epidural space, if the needle hub is tipped
caudally, it will further facilitate the catheter exiting the needle
and being advanced into the epidural space. A threading assist
guide can be attached to the needle hub to aid with catheter inser-
tion. The epidural catheter should be threaded with the dominant
hand through the needle, paying attention to the depth markings
on the catheter (four solid marks indicate the point at which the
catheter should be exiting the needle tip) (Fig. 60.30). Slight
resistance to advancement may be appreciated as the catheter is
passing beyond the tip of the needle. The catheter should be
advanced (1 cm at a time) past the final desired location to account
for needle withdrawal. In most cases, the catheter should not be
advanced into the epidural space more than 5 cm owing to the risk
of the catheter curling back on itself. The catheter should never be
withdrawn with the needle left in place owing to the risk of shear-
ing the catheter with the bevel of the needle. If the catheter is acci-
dentally sheared off or broken, it is usually left in place and
surgical retrieval is not usually recommended. To withdraw the
needle, the catheter is held at its point of entry between the thumb
and index fingers while the needle is removed. The catheter
should be sterilely secured via a preferred technique; subcutane-
ous tunneling of the catheter several centimeters away from its
point of entry provides good fixation while at the same time mini-
mizing potential catheter site contamination. After having
checked for the absence of spontaneous flow of CSF or blood from
the catheter when the end of the catheter is held in a dependent
position, a catheter connector and a bacterial filter can be attached.
Following negative aspiration, the remainder of the initial bolus of
solution can be administered.
Drugs for continuous epidural anesthesia and analgesia
The analgesics that are most frequently used by the authors for con-
tinuous epidural anesthesia are bupivacaine (0.06%–0.25%) with or
without the addition of morphine (0.1 mg/kg per 12–24 h),
buprenorphine (4 μg/kg in a total volume of 0.2 mL/kg), or fentanyl
(2–4 μg/mL solution with 20–40 μg of fentanyl per 10 mL of
bupivacaine mixed in the same syringe). The recommended infu-
sion rate through the catheter is 0.02–0.05 mL/kg/h. If analgesia is
inadequate, a bolus of a more concentrated solution can be given
(e.g., 0.5% bupivacaine) and the rate of the infusion can be increased
while maintaining the original concentrations. If the extension of
blockade is found to be excessive, the rate should be subsequently
reduced. If signs of muscle weakness appear, the concentration is
reduced while maintaining the same infusion rate. If signs of deep
sedation appear, the opioid dose can be reduced. Alternatively,
bolus dosing of the catheter may be utilized using similar agents
and volumes to single-injection techniques. Note that the tip of the
epidural catheter may be located several segments more cranially
than with typical lumbosacral injection, depending on the length of
the catheter threaded into the epidural space.
Intrathecal (spinal) anesthesia
While epidural anesthesia is commonly used for hind limb proce-
dures in small animals, recent literature has documented the use of
intrathecal anesthesia as an alternative, where a more profound
blockade with a shorter duration of effect may be preferable [300].
A direct comparison of epidural to spinal anesthesia for pelvic limb
orthopedic surgery in dogs found a lower procedural failure rate
and decreased intraoperative rescue analgesia requirement in dogs
receiving intrathecal anesthesia [300]. Typically, the dose of local
anesthetic is reduced by 30% as compared to epidural administra-
tion [300]. Utilization of a hyperbaric local anesthetic solution can
be useful to produce unilateral blockade with reduced hemody-
namic impact by placing the patient with the affected side down
following intrathecal injection [301]. While a large study in humans
has documented increased serious complication rates, such as car-
diac arrest and neurologic damage, associated with spinal anesthe-
sia as compared to epidural anesthesia [302], no such studies exist
in veterinary medicine. A retrospective study examining the effects
of intrathecal bupivacaine or levobupivacaine in 82 dogs found
minimal side effects, with the most common being hypotension
(29%) [303]. Less common side effects reported were bradycardia
(8.5%), hypersalivation (7%), and urinary retention (5%). In a simi-
lar retrospective study of 58 cats, hypotension (50%) and bradycar-
dia (39%) were the only reported complications [304].
In dogs, intrathecal anesthesia can be performed at the level of
L5–L6 using a spinal needle. The needle is advanced slowly into the
subarachnoid space, at which point CSF outflow becomes visible in
the hub of the needle. In cats, intrathecal anesthesia can be performed
either with a median approach at L7–S1 or a paramedian approach
with cephalad angulation at L5–6 or L6–L7 [304]. The paramedian
approach at L5–L6 or L6–L7 may have a higher success rate in cats as
compared to the median approach at L7–S1 due to lower CSF pres-
sure needed for CSF outflow into the hub of the spinal needle.
Complications of locoregional anesthesia
While the use of locoregional anesthesia has many benefits and
is gaining traction in small animal practice, one must be aware
of the potential complications associated with these procedures.
Unfortunately, there are no large-scale multicenter studies in small
animals demonstrating the incidence of complications related to the
use of locoregional anesthesia. Smaller scale studies documenting side
effects associated with epidural, intrathecal, and regional anesthesia
reported a low incidence of complications [254,303–306]. Serious
complications associated with locoregional anesthesia include local
Figure 60.30 An epidural catheter is advanced into the hub of a Tuohy
needle. Four solid marks are used to indicate the point at which the
catheter should be exiting the needle tip.

-- 1213 of 1450 --

1198 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
anesthetic systemic toxicity, neuronal damage, inadvertent trauma
to surrounding structures, and infection. Additional side effects asso-
ciated with neuraxial blockade are presented in Table 60.1.
Local anesthetic systemic toxicity
High plasma concentrations can result in local anesthetic systemic
toxicity (LAST) which can be manifested as central nervous system
(CNS) and cardiovascular complications, including nystagmus,
twitching, seizures, CNS depression, hypotension, arrhythmias,
and cardiac arrest. Typically, the onset of CNS complications occurs
first; however, these can be masked by anesthesia, leading to pro-
gression to cardiovascular compromise. Elevated plasma concen-
trations can occur due to local anesthetic overdose or inadvertent
intravascular injection. The total amount of local anesthetic to be
used should be calculated to remain below the toxic dose and
aspiration prior to injections should be performed to reduce the
likelihood of intravascular injection.
While LAST symptoms are likely to occur shortly after injection
of local anesthetic, with a median time of 53 s (interquartile range
30–180 s) in one human study, some cases may present over 15 min
later, thus it is important to continue to closely monitor patients
following locoregional anesthesia [307]. Should unexplained signs
of cardiovascular compromise such as progressive hypotension,
bradycardia, or ventricular arrhythmia develop following local
anesthetic administration, LAST should be considered as a likely
diagnosis. LAST should be treated with lipid emulsion therapy
(1.5 mL/kg of 20% lipid emulsion) while providing supportive care
to maintain cardiovascular function, oxygenation, and prevent sei-
zures. If not already intubated, the patient should be intubated and
ventilated with 100% oxygen to prevent hypoxia and acidosis which
can potentiate LAST [307]. If seizures occur, they should be treated
with benzodiazepines. Should cardiac arrest occur, the RECOVER
CPR protocol should be followed in addition to the administration
of lipid emulsion, however, amiodarone and not lidocaine should
be administered to treat ventricular tachycardia [307]. The
American Society of Regional Anesthesia (ASRA) provides multi-
ple resources for providers of regional anesthesia, including LAST
treatment guidelines.
Neuronal damage
Neurologic injury can range from short-term complications such
as temporary dysesthesias to long-term neuropraxia. Neuronal
damage is thought to result from mechanical trauma, neuronal
ischemia, neurotoxicity, and/or infection. Neuronal trauma can
result from excessive pressures exerted from subdural hematoma
formation during neuraxial anesthesia or due to intraneural injec-
tion peripherally. While subepineural injections can result in pro-
longed blockade, these are not associated with long-term neuronal
damage [95,308,309]. However, intraneural (within the perineu-
rium) injection, typically associated with high injection pressures,
results in nerve damage [95]. While a retrospective study in dogs
receiving sciatic nerve blocks showed no neurologic complications
at 6 weeks [305], larger scale studies in humans reported a rate of
long-term injury of 2–4 per 10,000 blocks [310]. Although these
appear to be rare complications, the consequences are severe, so
one should attempt to minimize risk by avoiding high-pressure
injections, utilizing specialized needles, and ultrasound guidance
when possible [311]. While the use of nerve stimulation may also
help guide proximity to the nerve, thereby reducing the chances of
intraneural injection, studies have demonstrated that low current
intensities (< 0.3 mA) may not always elicit a motor response and
thus nerve stimulation alone does not appear sufficient to detect
nerve contact and intraneural injection [312].
References
1 Kim J, Kim NS, Lee KC, et al. Effect of topical anesthesia on evaluation of corneal
sensitivity and intraocular pressure in rats and dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 2013; 16(1):
43–46.
2 Jones TL, Boyer K, Chapman K, et al. Evaluation of the time to desensitization of
the larynx of cats following topical lidocaine application. J Feline Med Surg 2021;
23(6): 563–567.
3 Kumar M, Chawla R, Goyal M. Topical anesthesia. J Anaesthesiol Clin Pharmacol
2015; 31(4): 450–456.
4 Crisi PE, De Santis F, Giordano MV, et al. Evaluation of eutectic lidocaine/prilocaine
cream for jugular blood sampling in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2021; 23(2): 185–189.
5 van Oostrom H, Knowles TG. The clinical efficacy of EMLA cream for intravenous
catheter placement in client-owned dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45(5): 604–608.
6 Ko J, Weil A, Maxwell L, et al. Plasma concentrations of lidocaine in dogs following
lidocaine patch application. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2007; 43(5): 280–283.
7 Bidwell LA, Wilson DV, Caron JP. Lack of systemic absorption of lidocaine from 5%
patches placed on horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2007; 34(6): 443–446.
8 Re Bravo V, Aprea F, Bhalla RJ, et al. Effect of 5% transdermal lidocaine patches on
postoperative analgesia in dogs undergoing hemilaminectomy. J Small Anim Pract
2019; 60(3): 161–166.
9 Ko JC, Maxwell LK, Abbo LA, et al. Pharmacokinetics of lidocaine following the appli-
cation of 5% lidocaine patches to cats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2008; 31(4): 359–367.
10 Weiland L, Croubels S, Baert K, et al. Pharmacokinetics of a lidocaine patch 5% in
dogs. J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med 2006; 53(1): 34–39.
11 Merema DK, Schoenrock EK, Le Boedec K, et al. Effects of a transdermal lidocaine
patch on indicators of postoperative pain in dogs undergoing midline ovariohyster-
ectomy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2017; 250(10): 1140–1147.
12 Saber AA, Elgamal MH, Rao AJ, et al. Early experience with lidocaine patch for
postoperative pain control after laparoscopic ventral hernia repair. Int J Surg 2009;
7(1): 36–38.
13 Habib AS, Polascik TJ, Weizer AZ, et al. Lidocaine patch for postoperative analgesia
after radical retropubic prostatectomy. Anesth Analg 2009; 108(6): 1950–1953.
14 Joudrey SD, Robinson DA, Kearney MT, et al. Plasma concentrations of lidocaine in
dogs following lidocaine patch application over an incision compared to intact skin.
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2015; 38(6): 575–580.
15 McFadzean WJM, Macfarlane P, Granger N, et al. Influence of peri-incisional epaxial
muscle infiltration with bupivacaine pre- or post-surgery on opioid administration in
dogs undergoing thoraco-lumbar hemilaminectomy. Vet J 2021; 270: 105622.
16 Kiriaki PP. The effect of pre-emptive incisional bupivacaine block on postoperative
pain after coeliotomy in dogs. Veterinary Evidence 2021; 6(1).
17 Campagnol D, Teixeira-Neto FJ, Monteiro ER, et al. Effect of intraperitoneal or
incisional bupivacaine on pain and the analgesic requirement after ovariohysterec-
tomy in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39(4): 426–430.
18 Savvas I, Papazoglou LG, Kazakos G, et al. Incisional block with bupivacaine for
analgesia after celiotomy in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2008; 44(2): 60–66.
19 Fitzpatrick CL, Weir HL, Monnet E. Effects of infiltration of the incision site with
bupivacaine on postoperative pain and incisional healing in dogs undergoing ovari-
ohysterectomy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2010; 237(4): 395–401.
20 Whiteman A, Bajaj S, Hasan M. Novel techniques of local anaesthetic infiltration.
Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain 2011; 11(5): 167–171.
21 Abelson AL, McCobb EC, Shaw S, et al. Use of wound soaker catheters for the
administration of local anesthetic for post-operative analgesia: 56 cases. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2009; 36(6): 597–602.
22 Zeren S, Kesici S, Kesici U, et al. Effects of levobupivacaine on wound healing.
Anesth Analg 2013; 116(2): 495–499.
23 Klein JA. Tumescent technique for local anesthesia improves safety in large-volume
liposuction. Plast Reconstr Surg 1993; 92(6): 1085–1098, discussion 99–100.
24 Klein JA. Anesthetic formulation of tumescent solutions. Dermatol Clin 1999;
17(4): 751–759, v–vi.
25 Credie Lde F, Luna SP, Futema F, et al. Perioperative evaluation of tumescent
anaesthesia technique in bitches submitted to unilateral mastectomy. BMC Vet Res
2013; 9: 178.
26 Moreira CM, Oliveira RL, Costa GA, et al. Evaluation of tumescent local anesthesia
in cats undergoing unilateral mastectomy. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(1): 134–141.
27 Sanches MC, Maroneze BP, Salame JP, et al. Tumescent anesthesia or epidural anes-
thesia combined with intercostal block in bitches submitted to mastectomy. Ciência
Animal Brasileira 2020; 21(4): e53552.
28 De Marzo C, Crovace A, De Monte V, et al. Comparison of intra-operative analgesia
provided by intravenous regional anesthesia or brachial plexus block for pancarpal
arthrodesis in dogs. Res Vet Sci 2012; 93(3): 1493–1497.

-- 1214 of 1450 --

Chapter 60: Canine and Feline Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1199
29 Boezaart A, Smith C, Zasimovich Y, et al. Femoral artery block: the relationship
between visceral and ischemic pain. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2022; 47(1): 70–71.
30 Looseley A. Corning and cocaine: the advent of spinal anaesthesia. Grand Rounds
2009; 9: L1–L4.
31 Liotta A, Busoni V, Carrozzo MV, et al. Feasibility of ultrasound-guided epidural
access at the lumbo-sacral space in dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2015; 56(2):
220–228.
32 Martinez-Taboada F, Otero PE, Laredo F, et al. Identification of the sacrococcygeal
epidural space using the nerve stimulation test or the running-drip method in dogs.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(3): 385–390.
33 Credie L, Luna SPL. Real-time ultrasound-guided lumbosacral epidural anaesthe-
sia in obese or appropriate body condition score dogs: a randomized clinical trial.
Vet J 2022; 280: 105791.
34 Verdier N, Martinez-Taboada F, Otero PE, et al. Evaluation of electrical nerve stim-
ulation to confirm sacrococcygeal epidural needle placement in dogs. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2021; 48(4): 612–616.
35 Thomson ACS, Portela DA, Romano M, et al. Evaluation of the effect of ultrasound
guidance on the accuracy of intercostal nerve injection: a canine cadaveric study.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(2): 256–263.
36 Costa-Farre C, Blanch XS, Cruz JI, et al. Ultrasound guidance for the performance
of sciatic and saphenous nerve blocks in dogs. Vet J 2011; 187(2): 221–224.
37 Sala-Blanch X, De Andres J. Image-guided techniques for peripheral nerve blocks.
Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2004; 17(5): 409–415.
38 Marhofer P, Greher M, Kapral S. Ultrasound guidance in regional anaesthesia. Br J
Anaesth 2005; 94(1): 7–17.
39 Chin KJ, Versyck B, Elsharkawy H, et al. Anatomical basis of fascial plane blocks.
Reg Anesth Pain Med 2021; 46(7): 581–599.
40 Chin KJ, Lirk P, Hollmann MW, et al. Mechanisms of action of fascial plane blocks:
a narrative review. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2021; 46(7): 618–628.
41 Byrne K, Smith C. Erector spinae plane block: systemic local anesthetic by proxy?
Reg Anesth Pain Med 2021; 46(7): 639–640.
42 Congdon JM, Boscan P, Goh CSS, et al. Psoas compartment and sacral plexus block
via electrostimulation for pelvic limb amputation in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017;
44(4): 915–924.
43 Mosing M, Reich H, Moens Y. Clinical evaluation of the anaesthetic sparing effect
of brachial plexus block in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2010; 37(2): 154–161.
44 Romano M, Portela DA, Breghi G, et al. Stress-related biomarkers in dogs admin-
istered regional anaesthesia or fentanyl for analgesia during stifle surgery. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2016; 43(1): 44–54.
45 Portela D, Melanie P, Briganti A, Breghi G. Nerve stimulator-guided paravertebral
lumbar plexus anaesthesia in dogs. Vet Res Commun 2008; 32(Suppl 1): S307–S310.
46 Stewart JD. Peripheral nerve fascicles: anatomy and clinical relevance. Muscle Nerve
2003; 28(5): 525–541.
47 Selander D, Sjostrand J. Longitudinal spread of intraneurally injected local
anesthetics. An experimental study of the initial neural distribution following
intraneural injections. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1978; 22(6): 622–634.
48 Jeng CL, Rosenblatt MA. Intraneural injections and regional anesthesia: the known
and the unknown. Minerva Anestesiol 2011; 77(1): 54–58.
49 Bigeleisen PE. Nerve puncture and apparent intraneural injection during
ultrasound-guided axillary block does not invariably result in neurologic injury.
Anesthesiology 2006; 105(4): 779–783.
50 Whitlock EL, Brenner MJ, Fox IK, et al. Ropivacaine-induced peripheral nerve
injection injury in the rodent model. Anesth Analg 2010; 111(1): 214–220.
51 Cummins TR, Sheets PL, Waxman SG. The roles of sodium channels in nocicep-
tion: implications for mechanisms of pain. Pain 2007; 131(3): 243–257.
52 Becker DE, Reed KL. Local anesthetics: review of pharmacological considerations.
Anesth Prog 2012; 59(2): 90–101; quiz 2–3.
53 Ribotsky BM, Berkowitz KD, Montague JR. Local anesthetics. Is there an advantage
to mixing solutions? J Am Podiatr Med Assoc 1996; 86(10): 487–491.
54 Sepehripour S, Dheansa BS. Is there an advantage in onset of action with mixing
lignocaine and bupivacaine? J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg 2017; 70(12): 1782.
55 Gasser HS, Erlanger J. The role of fiber size in the establishment of a nerve block
by pressure or cocaine. Am J Physiol Legacy Content 1929; 88(4): 581–591.
56 Gokin AP, Philip B, Strichartz GR. Preferential block of small myelinated sensory
and motor fibers by lidocaine: in vivo electrophysiology in the rat sciatic nerve.
Anesthesiology 2001; 95(6): 1441–1454.
57 Gissen AJ, Covino BG, Gregus J. Differential sensitivities of mammalian nerve fib-
ers to local anesthetic agents. Anesthesiology 1980; 53(6): 467–474.
58 Raymond SA, Steffensen SC, Gugino LD, et al. The role of length of nerve exposed
to local anesthetics in impulse blocking action. Anesth Analg 1989; 68(5): 563–570.
59 Liu SS, Ware PD. Differential sensory block after spinal bupivacaine in volunteers.
Anesth Analg 1997; 84(1): 115–119.
60 Oda A, Ohashi H, Komori S, et al. Characteristics of ropivacaine block of Na+ channels
in rat dorsal root ganglion neurons. Anesth Analg 2000; 91(5): 1213–1220.
61 Krishna Prasad GV, Khanna S, Jaishree SV. Review of adjuvants to local anesthetics
in peripheral nerve blocks: current and future trends. Saudi J Anaesth 2020; 14(1):
77–84.
62 Stein C. Targeting pain and inflammation by peripherally acting opioids. Front
Pharmacol 2013; 4: 123.
63 Bazin JE, Massoni C, Bruelle P, et al. The addition of opioids to local anaesthetics in
brachial plexus block: the comparative effects of morphine, buprenorphine and
sufentanil. Anaesthesia 1997; 52(9): 858–862.
64 Schnabel A, Reichl SU, Zahn PK, et al. Efficacy and safety of buprenorphine in
peripheral nerve blocks: a meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Eur J
Anaesthesiol 2017; 34(9): 576–586.
65 Candido KD, Winnie AP, Ghaleb AH, et al. Buprenorphine added to the local anes-
thetic for axillary brachial plexus block prolongs postoperative analgesia. Reg
Anesth Pain Med 2002; 27(2): 162–167.
66 Candido KD, Hennes J, Gonzalez S, et al. Buprenorphine enhances and prolongs
the postoperative analgesic effect of bupivacaine in patients receiving infragluteal
sciatic nerve block. Anesthesiology 2010; 113(6): 1419–1426.
67 Leffler A, Frank G, Kistner K, et al. Local anesthetic-like inhibition of voltage-
gated Na(+) channels by the partial mu-opioid receptor agonist buprenorphine.
Anesthesiology 2012; 116(6): 1335–1346.
68 Neal JM. Effects of epinephrine in local anesthetics on the central and peripheral
nervous systems: neurotoxicity and neural blood flow. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2003;
28(2): 124–134.
69 Zhu AF, Hood BR, Morris MS, et al. Delayed-onset digital ischemia after local anes-
thetic with epinephrine injection requiring phentolamine reversal. J Hand Surg Am
2017; 42(6): 479 e1–e4.
70 Nishikawa T, Dohi S. Clinical evaluation of clonidine added to lidocaine solution
for epidural anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1990; 73(5): 853–859.
71 Eisenach JC, De Kock M, Klimscha W. Alpha(2)-adrenergic agonists for regional
anesthesia. A clinical review of clonidine (1984–1995). Anesthesiology 1996; 85(3):
655–674.
72 Popping DM, Elia N, Marret E, et al. Clonidine as an adjuvant to local anesthetics
for peripheral nerve and plexus blocks: a meta-analysis of randomized trials.
Anesthesiology 2009; 111(2): 406–415.
73 El-Boghdadly K, Brull R, Sehmbi H, et al. Perineural dexmedetomidine is more
effective than clonidine when added to local anesthetic for supraclavicular brachial
plexus lock: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Anesth Analg 2017; 124(6):
2008–2020.
74 Steinfeldt T, Graf J, Schneider J, et al. Histological consequences of needle-nerve
contact following nerve stimulation in a pig model. Anesthesiol Res Pract 2011;
2011: 591851.
75 Steinfeldt T, Nimphius W, Werner T, et al. Nerve injury by needle nerve perforation
in regional anaesthesia: does size matter? Br J Anaesth 2010; 104(2): 245–253.
76 Ethunandan M, Tran AL, Anand R, et al. Needle breakage following inferior alveo-
lar nerve block: implications and management. Br Dent J 2007; 202(7): 395–397.
77 Shapiro DM, Ye Y, Burnett G, et al. Broken peripheral nerve block needles with
considerations and recommendations. J Clin Anesth 2020; 60: 17–18.
78 Prakash S, Kumar A. Needle tip and peripheral nerve blocks. J Anaesthesiol Clin
Pharmacol 2018; 34(1): 129–130.
79 Steinfeldt T, Nimphius W, Wurps M, et al. Nerve perforation with pencil point or short
bevelled needles: histological outcome. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2010; 54(8): 993–999.
80 Munirama S, Joy J, Columb M, et al. A randomised, single-blind technical study
comparing the ultrasonic visibility of smooth-surfaced and textured needles in a
soft embalmed cadaver model. Anaesthesia 2015; 70(5): 537–542.
81 Hebard S, Hocking G. Echogenic technology can improve needle visibility during
ultrasound-guided regional anesthesia. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2011; 36(2): 185–189.
82 Jiang T, Zhu X, Jiao Y, et al. Localization accuracy of ultrasound-actuated needle
with color Doppler imaging. Diagnostics (Basel) 2020; 10(12): 1020.
83 Watanabe K, Tokumine J, Lefor AK, et al. Photoacoustic needle improves needle tip
visibility during deep peripheral nerve block. Sci Rep 2021; 11(1): 8432.
84 Quincke H. Die lumbalpunction des hydrocephalus. Berliner Klinische Wochenschrift
1891; 28: 929–933.
85 Morrison LM, McCrae AF, Foo I, et al. An in vitro comparison of fluid leakage after
dural puncture with Atraucan, Sprotte, Whitacre, and Quincke needles. Reg Anesth
1996; 21(2): 139–143.
86 Calthorpe N. The history of spinal needles: getting to the point. Anaesthesia 2004;
59(12): 1231–1241.
87 Usar P, Kar AA, Citak G, et al. Breakage of an epidural catheter inserted for labor
analgesia. Turk J Anaesthesiol Reanim 2015; 43(4): 282–284.
88 Toledano RD, Tsen LC. Epidural catheter design: history, innovations, and clinical
implications. Anesthesiology 2014; 121(1): 9–17.
89 Moore JM. Continuous spinal anesthesia. Am J Ther 2009; 16(4): 289–294.
90 Luyet C, Seiler R, Herrmann G, et al. Newly designed, self-coiling catheters for
regional anesthesia-- an imaging study. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2011; 36(2): 171–176.

-- 1215 of 1450 --

1200 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
91 Campolo M, Molin D, Rawal N, et al. Protocols to compare infusion distribution
of wound catheters. Med Eng Phys 2012; 34(3): 326–332.
92 Mowat I, Tang R, Vaghadia H, et al. Epidural distribution of dye administered via
an epidural catheter in a porcine model. Br J Anaesth 2016; 116(2): 277–281.
93 Hardie EM, Lascelles BDX, Meuten T, et al. Evaluation of intermittent infusion
of bupivacaine into surgical wounds of dogs postoperatively. Vet J 2011; 190(2):
287–289.
94 Claudio R, Hadzic A, Shih H, et al. Injection pressures by anesthesiologists during
simulated peripheral nerve block. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2004; 29(3): 201–205.
95 Hadzic A, Dilberovic F, Shah S, et al. Combination of intraneural injection and
high injection pressure leads to fascicular injury and neurologic deficits in dogs.
Reg Anesth Pain Med 2004; 29(5): 417–423.
96 Son WG, Jang M, Yoon J, et al. The effect of epidural injection speed on epidural
pressure and distribution of solution in anesthetized dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg
2014; 41(5): 526–533.
97 Kapur E, Vuckovic I, Dilberovic F, et al. Neurologic and histologic outcome after
intraneural injections of lidocaine in canine sciatic nerves. Acta Anaesthesiol
Scand 2007; 51(1): 101–107.
98 Gadsden J. Current devices used for the monitoring of injection pressure during
peripheral nerve blocks. Expert Rev Med Devices 2018; 15(8): 571–578.
99 Saberski LR, Kondamuri S, Osinubi OY. Identification of the epidural space: is loss
of resistance to air a safe technique? A review of the complications related to the
use of air. Reg Anesth 1997; 22(1): 3–15.
100 Quadri C, Saporito A, Capdevila X. Real-time continuous monitoring of injection
pressure at the needle tip for peripheral nerve blocks: description of a new method.
Anaesthesia 2018; 73(2): 187–194.
101 Urmey WF. Using the nerve stimulator for peripheral or plexus nerve blocks.
Minerva Anestesiol 2006; 72(6): 467–471.
102 Sauter AR, Dodgson MS, Stubhaug A, et al. Ultrasound controlled nerve stimula-
tion in the elbow region: high currents and short distances needed to obtain motor
responses. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2007; 51(7): 942–948.
103 Perlas A, Niazi A, McCartney C, et al. The sensitivity of motor response to nerve
stimulation and paresthesia for nerve localization as evaluated by ultrasound. Reg
Anesth Pain Med 2006; 31(5): 445–450.
104 Chan VW, Brull R, McCartney CJ, et al. An ultrasonographic and histological
study of intraneural injection and electrical stimulation in pigs. Anesth Analg
2007; 104(5): 1281–1284.
105 Ben- David B, Chelly JE. Current channeling: a theory of nerve stimulator failure.
Anesth Analg 2003; 96(5): 1531–1532.
106 Klein SM, Melton MS, Grill WM, et al. Peripheral nerve stimulation in regional
anesthesia. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2012; 37(4): 383–392.
107 Barthram CN. Nerve stimulators for nerve location – are they all the same?
A study of stimulator performance. Anaesthesia 1997; 52(8): 761–764.
108 Jochum D, Iohom G, Diarra DP, et al. An objective assessment of nerve stimula-
tors used for peripheral nerve blockade*. Anaesthesia 2006; 61(6): 557–564.
109 Hadzic A, Vloka J, Hadzic N, et al. Nerve stimulators used for peripheral nerve
blocks vary in their electrical characteristics. Anesthesiology 2003; 98(4): 969–974.
110 Kapral S, Krafft P, Eibenberger K, et al. Ultrasound-guided supraclavicular approach
for regional anesthesia of the brachial plexus. Anesth Analg 1994; 78(3): 507–513.
111 Ng A, Swanevelder J. Resolution in ultrasound imaging. Cont Educ Anaesth Crit
Care Pain 2011; 11(5): 186–192.
112 Xu D, De Meirsman S, Schreurs R. Optimizing an ultrasound image. In: Hadzic A,
ed. Hadzic’s Textbook of Regional Anesthesia and Acute Pain Management, 2nd
edn. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education, 2017.
113 Chan V, Perlas A. Basics of ultrasound imaging. In: Narouze S, ed. Atlas of
Ultrasound-Guided Procedures in Interventional Pain Management. New York, NY:
Springer, 2010: 13–19.
114 Oktar SO, Yucel C, Ozdemir H, et al. Comparison of conventional sonography,
real- time compound sonography, tissue harmonic sonography, and tissue har-
monic compound sonography of abdominal and pelvic lesions. Am J Roentgenol
2003; 181(5): 1341–1347.
115 Bozzato A, Loika A, Hornung J, et al. Comparison of conventional B-scan, tissue
harmonic imaging, compound imaging and tissue harmonic compound imaging
in neck lesion characterisation. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol 2010; 267(10):
1593–1598.
116 Yen CL, Jeng CM, Yang SS. The benefits of comparing conventional sonography,
real-time spatial compound sonography, tissue harmonic sonography, and tissue
harmonic compound sonography of hepatic lesions. Clin Imaging 2008; 32(1):
11–15.
117 Marhofer P, Chan VW. Ultrasound-guided regional anesthesia: current concepts
and future trends. Anesth Analg 2007; 104(5): 1265–1269.
118 Chin KJ, Perlas A, Chan VW, et al. Needle visualization in ultrasound-guided
regional anesthesia: challenges and solutions. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2008; 33(6):
532–544.
119 Sites BD, Brull R, Chan VW, et al. Artifacts and pitfall errors associated with
ultrasound-guided regional anesthesia. Part I: understanding the basic principles
of ultrasound physics and machine operations. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2007; 32(5):
412–418.
120 Romano M, Portela DA, Otero PE, et al. Mirroring artefact [sic] during postop-
erative transversus abdominis plane (TAP) block in two dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg
2020; 47(5): 727–728.
121 Pascoe PJ. Anesthesia and pain management. In: Verstraete FJM, Lommer MJ,
eds. Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery in Dogs and Cats. Oxford, UK: W.B. Saunders,
2012: 23–42.
122 Bellows J, Berg ML, Dennis S, et al. 2019 AAHA Dental Care Guidelines for dogs
and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2019; 55(2): 49–69.
123 Kalamaras AB, Aarnes TK, Moore SA, et al. Effects of perioperative saphenous
and sciatic nerve blocks, lumbosacral epidural or morphine-lidocaine- ketamine
infusion on postoperative pain and sedation in dogs undergoing tibial plateau lev-
eling osteotomy. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(3): 415–421.
124 Tavakoli A, Tazik ME, Abbasi A. Comparison of production of pain and oxidative
stress after induction of local nerve block or use of NSAIDs following painful
dental procedures in dogs. Iran J Vet Surg 2021; 16(1): 29–33.
125 Hermanson JW, de Lahunta A. Miller and Evans’ Anatomy of the Dog, 5th ed.
New York, NY: Elsevier Health Sciences, 2018.
126 Aprea F, Vettorato E, Corletto F. Severe cardiovascular depression in a cat follow-
ing a mandibular nerve block with bupivacaine. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38(6):
614–618.
127 Selander D, Dhuner KG, Lundborg G. Peripheral nerve injury due to injection
needles used for regional anesthesia. An experimental study of the acute effects of
needle point trauma. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1977; 21(3): 182–188.
128 Rout PG, Saksena A, Fisher SE. An investigation of the effect on 27-gauge needle
tips following a single local anaesthetic injection. Dent Update 2003; 30(7):
370–374.
129 O’Morrow C. Advanced dental local nerve block anesthesia. Can Vet J 2010;
51(12): 1411–1415.
130 Lemke KA, Dawson SD. Local and regional anesthesia. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 2000; 30(4): 839–857.
131 Viscasillas J, Seymour CJ, Brodbelt DC. A cadaver study comparing two
approaches for performing maxillary nerve block in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013;
40(2): 212–219.
132 Rochette J. Regional anesthesia and analgesia for oral and dental procedures.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2005; 35(4): 1041–1058, viii–ix.
133 Chau A. Tongue lacerations in a geriatric dog after bilateral inferior alveolar nerve
blocks with bupivacaine. Vet Rec Case Rep 2017; 5: e000433.
134 Woodward TM. Pain management and regional anesthesia for the dental patient.
Top Companion Anim Med 2008; 23(2): 106–114.
135 Shilo-Benjamini Y, Letz S, Peery D, et al. Comparison of three regional anaesthetic
techniques for infraorbital or maxillary nerve block in cats: a cadaveric study.
J Feline Med Surg 2022; 24(4): 322–327.
136 Gross ME, Pope ER, O’Brien D, et al. Regional anesthesia of the infraorbital and
inferior alveolar nerves during noninvasive tooth pulp stimulation in halothane-
anesthetized dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1997; 211(11): 1403–1405.
137 Gross ME, Pope ER, Jarboe JM, et al. Regional anesthesia of the infraorbital and
inferior alveolar nerves during noninvasive tooth pulp stimulation in halothane-
anesthetized cats. Am J Vet Res 2000; 61(10): 1245–1247.
138 Krug W, Losey J. Area of desensitization following mental nerve block in dogs.
J Vet Dent 2011; 28(3): 146–150.
139 Reader ANJ, Hargreave K, Cohen S. Local anesthesia in endodontics. In:
Hargreaves KM, Cohen S, Berman LH, eds. Cohen’s Pathways of the Pulp, 10th edn.
St. Louis, MO: Mosby Elsevier, 2011: 671–719.
140 Gracis M. The oral cavity. In: Campoy LR, Read MR, eds. Small Animal Regional
Anesthesia and Analgesia. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2013: 119–140.
141 Moore PA, Cuddy MA, Cooke MR, et al. Periodontal ligament and intraosseous
anesthetic injection techniques: alternatives to mandibular nerve blocks. J Am
Dent Assoc 2011; 142(Suppl 3): 13S–18S.
142 Accola PJ, Bentley E, Smith LJ, et al. Development of a retrobulbar injection
technique for ocular surgery and analgesia in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2006;
229(2): 220–225.
143 Myrna KE, Bentley E, Smith LJ. Effectiveness of injection of local anesthetic into
the retrobulbar space for postoperative analgesia following eye enucleation in
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2010; 237(2): 174–177.
144 Vézina-Audette R, Steagall PVM, Gianotti G. Prevalence of and covariates associ-
ated with the oculocardiac reflex occurring in dogs during enucleation. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2019; 255(4): 454–458.
145 Zibura AE, Posner LP, Ru H, et al. A preoperative bupivacaine retrobulbar block
offers superior antinociception compared with an intraoperative splash block in
dogs undergoing enucleation. Vet Ophthalmol 2020; 23(2): 225–233.

-- 1216 of 1450 --

Chapter 60: Canine and Feline Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1201
146 Chiavaccini L, Micieli F, Meomartino L, et al. A novel supra-temporal approach to ret-
robulbar anaesthesia in dogs: preliminary study in cadavers. Vet J 2017; 223: 68–70.
147 Kostadinov I, Hostnik A, Cvenkel B, et al. Brainstem anaesthesia after retrobulbar
block. Open Med (Wars) 2019; 14: 287–291.
148 Tolesa K, Gebreal GW. Brainstem anesthesia after retrobulbar block: a case report
and review of literature. Ethiop J Health Sci 2016; 26(6): 589–594.
149 Javitt JC, Addiego R, Friedberg HL, et al. Brainstem anesthesia after retrobulbar
block. Ophthalmology 1987; 94(6): 718–724.
150 Klaumann PR, Menzies RA, Briganti A, et al. Perineural anesthesia of the head, eye
and ear. In: Otero PE, Portela DA, eds. Manual of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia,
2nd edn. Buenos Aires, Argentina: Editorial Inter-Médica, 2019: 313–374.
151 Foster A, Medina-Serra R, Sanchis-Mora S, et al. In-plane ultrasound-guided
peribulbar block in the dog: an anatomical cadaver study. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021;
48(2): 272–276.
152 Viscasillas J, Everson R, Mapletoft EK, et al. Ultrasound-guided posterior extra-
conal block in the dog: anatomical study in cadavers. Vet Anaesth Analg 2019;
46(2): 246–250.
153 Kumar CM, Dodds C, McLure H, et al. A comparison of three sub-Tenon’s
cannulae. Eye (Lond) 2004; 18(9): 873–876.
154 Bayley KD, Read RA. Sub-Tenon’s anesthesia for canine cataract surgery. Vet
Ophthalmol 2018; 21(6): 601–611.
155 Stathopoulou TR, Pinelas R, Haar GT, et al. Description of a new approach for
great auricular and auriculotemporal nerve blocks: a cadaveric study in foxes and
dogs. Vet Med Sci 2018; 4(2): 91–97.
156 Viscasillas J, Ter Haar G. Ultrasound-guided trigeminal nerve block as local
anaesthetic technique for exenteration and excision of the zygomatic arch with
partial caudal maxillectomy in a dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(3): 688–690.
157 Bailey CS, Kitchell RL, Haghighi SS, et al. Cutaneous innervation of the thorax
and abdomen of the dog. Am J Vet Res 1984; 45(9): 1689–1698.
158 Portela DA, Otero PE, Sclocco M, et al. Anatomical and radiological study of the
thoracic paravertebral space in dogs: iohexol distribution pattern and use of the
nerve stimulator. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39(4): 398–408.
159 Santoro F, Franci P, Grandis A, et al. Distribution of injectates in the thoracic
paravertebral space of the dog and cat: a cadaveric study. Open Vet J 2021; 11(1):
27–35.
160 Portela DA, Campoy L, Otero PE, et al. Ultrasound-guided thoracic paravertebral
injection in dogs: a cadaveric study. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(3): 636–645.
161 Ferreira TH, Teixeira LBC, Schroeder CA, et al. Description of an ultrasound-
guided thoracic paravertebral block technique and the spread of dye in dog cadav-
ers. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45(6): 811–819.
162 Serra RM, Jimenez CP, Monticelli P, et al. Assessment of an ultrasound-guided
technique for catheterization of the caudal thoracic paravertebral space in dog
cadavers. Open Vet J 2019; 9(3): 230–237.
163 Santoro F, Debidda P, Franci P. Single-injection caudal thoracic paravertebral
block improves pain control and recovery quality in female dogs undergoing uni-
lateral radical mastectomy: a randomized controlled trial. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2021; 260(S1): S53–S58.
164 Garbin M, Bertolizio G, Portela DA. Thoracic paravertebral block for an opioid-
free thoracotomy in a dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(4): 622–623.
165 Lopez-Ramis V, Canfran S, Gomez de Segura IA. Caudal thoracic paravertebral
block in a dog undergoing surgical adrenalectomy. Vet Anaesth Analg 2022; 49(2):
219–220.
166 Monticelli P, Jones I, Viscasillas J. Ultrasound-guided thoracic paravertebral block:
cadaveric study in foxes (Vulpes vulpes). Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(4): 968–972.
167 Pascoe PJ, Dyson DH. Analgesia after lateral thoracotomy in dogs. Epidural mor-
phine vs. intercostal bupivacaine. Vet Surg 1993; 22(2): 141–147.
168 Thompson SE, Johnson JM. Analgesia in dogs after intercostal thoracotomy.
A comparison of morphine, selective intercostal nerve block, and interpleural
regional analgesia with bupivacaine. Vet Surg 1991; 20(1): 73–77.
169 Flecknell PA, Kirk AJ, Liles JH, et al. Post-operative analgesia following thoracot-
omy in the dog: an evaluation of the effects of bupivacaine intercostal nerve block
and nalbuphine on respiratory function. Lab Anim 1991; 25(4): 319–324.
170 Berg RJ, Orton EC. Pulmonary function in dogs after intercostal thoracotomy:
comparison of morphine, oxymorphone, and selective intercostal nerve block.
Am J Vet Res 1986; 47(2): 471–474.
171 Cicirelli V, Debidda P, Maggio N, et al. Use of spinal anaesthesia with anaesthetic
block of intercostal nerves compared to a continuous infusion of sufentanyl [sic]
to improve analgesia in cats undergoing unilateral mastectomy. Animals (Basel)
2021; 11(3): 887.
172 Zublena F, Briganti A, De Gennaro C, et al. Ultrasound-guided parasternal injec-
tion in dogs: a cadaver study. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(4): 563–569.
173 Escalante GE, Ferreira TH, Hershberger-Braker KL, et al. Evaluation of
ultrasound-guided pecto-intercostal block in canine cadavers. Vet Anaesth Analg
2022; 49(2): 182–188.
174 Stobie D, Caywood DD, Rozanski EA, et al. Evaluation of pulmonary function and
analgesia in dogs after intercostal thoracotomy and use of morphine administered
intramuscularly or intrapleurally and bupivacaine administered intrapleurally.
Am J Vet Res 1995; 56(8): 1098–1109.
175 Riegler FX, VadeBoncouer TR, Pelligrino DA. Interpleural anesthetics in the dog:
differential somatic neural blockade. Anesthesiology 1989; 71(5): 744–750.
176 Dravid RM, Paul RE. Interpleural block – part 1. Anaesthesia 2007; 62(10):
1039–1049.
177 Kushner LI, Trim CM, Madhusudhan S, et al. Evaluation of the hemodynamic
effects of interpleural bupivacaine in dogs. Vet Surg 1995; 24(2): 180–187.
178 Bernard F, Kudnig ST, Monnet E. Hemodynamic effects of interpleural lidocaine
and bupivacaine combination in anesthetized dogs with and without an open
pericardium. Vet Surg 2006; 35(3): 252–258.
179 Kowalski SE, Bradley BD, Greengrass RA, et al. Effects of interpleural bupivacaine
(0.5%) on canine diaphragmatic function. Anesth Analg 1992; 75(3): 400–404.
180 Blanco R, Parras T, McDonnell JG, et al. Serratus plane block: a novel ultrasound-
guided thoracic wall nerve block. Anaesthesia 2013; 68(11): 1107–1113.
181 Freitag FA, Gaio TS, Dos Santos AA, et al. Ultrasound-guided superficial serratus
plane block in dog cadavers: an anatomical evaluation and volume dispersion
study. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(1): 88–94.
182 Teixeira LG, Pujol DM, Pazzim AF, et al. Combination of Transversus abdominis
plane block and Serratus plane block anesthesia in dogs submitted to masctetomy.
Pesquisa Veterinária Brasileira 2018; 38(2): 315–319.
183 Asorey I, Sambugaro B, Bhalla RJ, et al. Ultrasound-guided serratus plane block as
an effective adjunct to systemic analgesia in four dogs undergoing thoracotomy.
Open Vet J 2021; 10(4): 407–411.
184 Bosak VL, Piontkovsky RJ, Mazur Dos Santos A, et al. Ultrasound-guided superfi-
cial serratus plane block in multimodal analgesia for three dogs undergoing surgical
correction of persistent ductus arteriosus. Vet Anaesth Analg 2022; 49(3): 330–332.
185 Garbin M, Portela DA, Bertolizio G, et al. Description of ultrasound-guided quad-
ratus lumborum block technique and evaluation of injectate spread in canine
cadavers. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(2): 249–258.
186 Garbin M, Portela DA, Bertolizio G, et al. A novel ultrasound-guided lateral quad-
ratus lumborum block in dogs: a comparative cadaveric study of two approaches.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(6): 810–818.
187 Viscasillas J, Terrado J, Marti-Schaffhausen R, et al. A modified approach for the
ultrasound-guided quadratus lumborum block in dogs: a cadaveric study. Animals
(Basel) 2021; 11(10): 2945.
188 Marchina-Goncalves A, Gil F, Laredo FG, et al. Evaluation of high-volume injec-
tions using a modified dorsal quadratus lumborum block approach in canine
cadavers. Animals (Basel) 2021; 12(1): 18.
189 Dos- Santos JD, Ginja M, Alves-Pimenta S, et al. A description of an ultrasound-
guided technique for a quadratus lumborum block in the cat: a cadaver study. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(5): 804–808.
190 Dos- Santos JD, Ginja M, Alves-Pimenta S, et al. Comparison of dorsoventral and
ventrodorsal approaches for ultrasound-guided quadratus lumborum block in
cats: a cadaver study. Vet Anaesth Analg 2022; 49(5): 481–489.
191 Argus APV, Freitag FAV, Bassetto JE, et al. Quadratus lumbar block for intraopera-
tive and postoperative analgesia in a cat. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(3): 415–417.
192 Castaneda-Herrera FE, Buritica-Gaviria EF, Echeverry-Bonilla DF. Anatomical
evaluation of the thoracolumbar nerves related to the transversus abdominis
plane block technique in the dog. Anat Histol Embryol 2017; 46(4): 373–377.
193 Schroeder CA, Snyder LB, Tearney CC, et al. Ultrasound-guided transversus
abdominis plane block in the dog: an anatomical evaluation. Vet Anaesth Analg
2011; 38(3): 267–271.
194 Bruggink SM, Schroeder KM, Baker-Herman TL, et al. Weight-based volume of
injection influences cranial to caudal spread of local anesthetic solution in
ultrasound-guided transversus abdominis plane blocks in canine cadavers. Vet
Surg 2012; 41(4): 455–457.
195 Zoff A, Laborda-Vidal P, Mortier J, et al. Comparison of the spread of two different
volumes of contrast medium when performing ultrasound-guided transversus
abdominis plane injection in dog cadavers. J Small Anim Pract 2017; 58(5): 269–275.
196 Drozdzynska M, Monticelli P, Neilson D, et al. Ultrasound-guided subcostal
oblique transversus abdominis plane block in canine cadavers. Vet Anaesth Analg
2017; 44(1): 183–186.
197 Freitag FAV, Muehlbauer E, Gaio TD, et al. Evaluation of injection volumes for the
transversus abdominis plane block in dog cadavers: a preliminary trial. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(1): 142–146.
198 de Miguel Garcia C, Whyte M, St James M, et al. Effect of contrast and local anes-
thetic on dye spread following transversus abdominis plane injection in dog
cadavers. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(3): 391–395.
199 Romano M, Portela DA, Thomson A, et al. Comparison between two approaches
for the transversus abdominis plane block in canine cadavers. Vet Anaesth Analg
2021; 48(1): 101–106.

-- 1217 of 1450 --

1202 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
200 Schroeder CA, Schroeder KM, Johnson RA. Transversus abdominis plane block
for exploratory laparotomy in a Canadian lynx (Lynx canadensis). J Zoo Wildl Med
2010; 41(2): 338–341.
201 Portela DA, Romano M, Briganti A. Retrospective clinical evaluation of
ultrasound-guided transverse abdominis plane block in dogs undergoing mastec-
tomy. Vet Anaesth Analg 2014; 41(3): 319–324.
202 Campoy L, Martin-Flores M, Boesch JM, et al. Transverse abdominis plane injection
of bupivacaine with dexmedetomidine or a bupivacaine liposomal suspension
yielded lower pain scores and requirement for rescue analgesia in a controlled,
randomized trial in dogs undergoing elective ovariohysterectomy. Am J Vet Res
2022; 83(9): ajvr.22.03.0037.
203 Harfoush M, Wilson D, Kim SY, Claude A. Open approach to the ventral transver-
sus abdominis plane in the dog: evaluation and injectate dispersion in cadavers.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(5): 767–774.
204 Forsythe WB, Ghoshal NG. Innervation of the canine thoracolumbar vertebral
column. Anat Rec 1984; 208(1): 57–63.
205 Otero PE, Fuensalida SE, Russo PC, et al. Mechanism of action of the erector spi-
nae plane block: distribution of dye in a porcine model. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2020;
45(3): 198–203.
206 Ferreira TH, St James M, Schroeder CA, et al. Description of an ultrasound-
guided erector spinae plane block and the spread of dye in dog cadavers. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2019; 46(4): 516–22.
207 Portela DA, Castro D, Romano M, et al. Ultrasound-guided erector spinae plane
block in canine cadavers: relevant anatomy and injectate distribution. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2020; 47(2): 229–237.
208 Medina-Serra R, Foster A, Plested M, et al. Lumbar erector spinae plane block: an
anatomical and dye distribution evaluation of two ultrasound-guided approaches
in canine cadavers. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(1): 125–133.
209 Cavalcanti M, Teixeira JG, Medina-Serra R, et al. Erector spinae plane block at the thora-
columbar spine: a canine cadaveric study. Vet Anaesth Analg 2022; 49(6): 656–663.
210 Sambugaro B, Campbell N, Drozdzynska MJ. Two cases of sinus arrest following
erector spinae plane block in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2022; 49(5): 510–511.
211 Portela DA, Romano M, Zamora GA, et al. The effect of erector spinae plane block
on perioperative analgesic consumption and complications in dogs undergoing
hemilaminectomy surgery: a retrospective cohort study. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021;
48(1): 116–124.
212 Zannin D, Isaka LJ, Pereira RH, et al. Opioid-free total intravenous anesthesia with
bilateral ultrasound-guided erector spinae plane block for perioperative pain control in
a dog undergoing dorsal hemilaminectomy. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(5): 728–731.
213 Bartholomew KJ, Ferreira TH. Ultrasound-guided erector spinae plane block as
part of a multimodal analgesic approach in a dog with acute pancreatitis. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(4): 629–632.
214 Ferre BMI, Drozdzynska M, Vettorato E. Ultrasound-guided bilateral erector spi-
nae plane block in dogs undergoing sternotomies anaesthetised with propofol-
dexmedetomidine continuous infusion. Vet Res Commun 2022; 46(4): 1331–1337.
215 Allam MW, Lee DG, Nulsen FE, et al. The anatomy of the brachial plexus of the
dog. Anat Rec 1952; 114(2): 173–179.
216 Skelding A, Valverde A, Sinclair M, et al. Anatomical characterization of the bra-
chial plexus in dog cadavers and comparison of three blind techniques for block-
ade. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45(2): 203–211.
217 Hofmeister EH, Kent M, Read MR. Paravertebral block for forelimb anesthesia in
the dog-an anatomic study. Vet Anaesth Analg 2007; 34(2): 139–142.
218 Podsiedlik M, Hofmeister EH, Duke-Novakovski T. Comparison of 2 blind
approaches to the paravertebral brachial plexus regional block in canine cadavers.
Can J Vet Res 2022; 86(1): 20–26.
219 Lemke KA, Creighton CM. Paravertebral blockade of the brachial plexus in dogs.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2008; 38(6): 1231–1241.
220 Guilherme S, Benigni L. Ultrasonographic anatomy of the brachial plexus and major
nerves of the canine thoracic limb. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2008; 49(6): 577–583.
221 Bagshaw HS, Larenza MP, Seiler GS. A technique for ultrasound-guided paraverte-
bral brachial plexus injections in dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2009; 50(6): 649–654.
222 Rioja E, Sinclair M, Chalmers H, et al. Comparison of three techniques for paraver-
tebral brachial plexus blockade in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39(2): 190–200.
223 Choquette A, Del Castillo JRE, Moreau M, et al. Comparison of lidocaine and
lidocaine-epinephrine for the paravertebral brachial plexus block in dogs.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(2): 317–328.
224 Monticelli P, Fitzgerald E, Viscasillas J. A sonographic investigation for the
development of ultrasound-guided paravertebral brachial plexus block in dogs:
cadaveric study. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45(2): 195–202.
225 Benigni L, Lafuente P, Viscasillas J. Clinical comparison of two techniques of
brachial plexus block for forelimb surgery in dogs. Vet J 2019; 244: 23–27.
226 Evangelista MC, Monteiro BP, Doodnaught GM, et al. Paravertebral brachial
plexus blockade in cats: a cadaver study. J Feline Med Surg 2018; 20(6): 591–595.
227 Portela DA, Romano M, Otero PE. Locoregional anesthesia of the thoracic limbs
and thorax in small animals. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2019; 49(6):
1063–1083.
228 Chohan A. Anesthesia case of the month. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2019; 255(9):
1016–1018.
229 Tufvesson G. Anestesi av plexus brachialis. Nord Vet Med 1951; 3: 183–193.
229 Nutt P. Brachial plexus analgesia in dog. Vet Rec 1962; 74: 874–876.
230 Futema F, Fantoni DT, Auler JO Jr., et al. A new brachial plexus block technique in
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2002; 29(3): 133–139.
231 Wenger S, Moens Y, Jaggin N, et al. Evaluation of the analgesic effect of lidocaine
and bupivacaine used to provide a brachial plexus block for forelimb surgery in 10
dogs. Vet Rec 2005; 156(20): 639–642.
232 Mahler SP, Adogwa AO. Anatomical and experimental studies of brachial plexus,
sciatic, and femoral nerve-location using peripheral nerve stimulation in the dog.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35(1): 80–89.
233 Campoy L, Martin-Flores M, Looney AL, et al. Distribution of a lidocaine-
methylene blue solution staining in brachial plexus, lumbar plexus and sciatic
nerve blocks in the dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35(4): 348–354.
234 Sakonju I, Maeda K, Maekawa R, et al. Relative nerve blocking properties of bupi-
vacaine and ropivacaine in dogs undergoing brachial plexus block using a nerve
stimulator. J Vet Med Sci 2009; 71(10): 1279–1284.
235 Campoy L, Bezuidenhout AJ, Gleed RD, et al. Ultrasound-guided approach for
axillary brachial plexus, femoral nerve, and sciatic nerve blocks in dogs. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2010; 37(2): 144–153.
236 da Silva LC, Futema F, Cortopassi SR. Ultrasonographic study of a modified axil-
lary approach to block the major branches of the brachial plexus in dogs. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(1): 82–87.
237 Anson A, Laredo FG, Gil F, et al. Comparison of two techniques for ultrasound-
guided axillary brachial plexus blockade in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2015; 17(6):
476–485.
238 Skelding A, Valverde A, Aguilera R, et al. Comparison of 3 blind brachial plexus
block techniques during maintenance of anesthesia and postoperative pain scores
in dogs undergoing surgical procedures of the thoracic limb. Can J Vet Res 2019;
83(3): 197–205.
239 Akasaka M, Shimizu M. Comparison of ultrasound- and electrostimulation-
guided nerve blocks of brachial plexus in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(3):
625–635.
240 Adami C, Studer N. A case of severe ventricular arrhythmias occurring as a com-
plication of nerve-stimulator guided brachial plexus location. Vet Anaesth Analg
2015; 42(2): 230–231.
241 Bhalla RJ, Leece EA. Pneumothorax following nerve stimulator-guided axillary
brachial plexus block in a dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 2015; 42(6): 658–659.
242 Moens NM, Caulkett NA. The use of a catheter to provide brachial plexus block in
dogs. Can Vet J 2000; 41(9): 685–689.
243 Tayari H, Otero P, Rossetti A, et al. Proximal RUMM block in dogs: preliminary
results of cadaveric and clinical studies. Vet Anaesth Analg 2019; 46(3): 384–394.
244 Otero PE, Fuensalida SE, Sanchez F, et al. Development of a lateral ultrasound-
guided approach for the proximal radial, ulnar, median and musculocutaneous
(RUMM) nerve block in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(5): 686–693.
245 Trumpatori BJ, Carter JE, Hash J, et al. Evaluation of a midhumeral block of the
radial, ulnar, musculocutaneous and median (RUMM block) nerves for analgesia
of the distal aspect of the thoracic limb in dogs. Vet Surg 2010; 39(7): 785–796.
246 Bortolami E, Love EJ, Harcourt-Brown TR, et al. Use of mid-humeral block of the
radial, ulnar, musculocutaneous and median (RUMM block) nerves for extensor
carpi radialis muscle biopsy in a conscious dog with generalized neuro-muscular
disease. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39(4): 446–447.
247 Portela DA, Raschi A, Otero PE. Ultrasound-guided mid-humeral block of the
radial, ulnar, median and musculocutaneous (RUMM block) nerves in a dog with
traumatic exposed metacarpal luxation. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40(5): 552–554.
248 Castineiras D, Viscasillas J, Seymour C. A modified approach for performing
ultrasound-guided radial, ulnar, median and musculocutaneous nerve block in a
dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 2015; 42(6): 659–661.
249 Leung JBY, Rodrigo-Mocholi D, Martinez-Taboada F. In-plane and out-of-plane
needle insertion comparison for a novel lateral block of the radial, ulnar, median
and musculocutaneous nerves in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2019; 46(4): 523–528.
250 Enomoto M, Lascelles BD, Gerard MP. Defining the local nerve blocks for feline
distal thoracic limb surgery: a cadaveric study. J Feline Med Surg 2016; 18(10):
838–845.
251 Douglas H, Welsh S, Barr C. Clinical techniques in veterinary dermatology:
regional anaesthesia of the canine and feline distal limb. Vet Dermatol 2021; 32(1):
90–e17.
252 Grubb T, Lobprise H. Local and regional anaesthesia in dogs and cats: descriptions
of specific local and regional techniques (Part 2). Vet Med Sci 2020; 6(2): 218–234.

-- 1218 of 1450 --

Chapter 60: Canine and Feline Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1203
253 Otero PE, Fuensalida SE, Verdier N, et al. Peripheral nerve blocks of the tho-
racic limb. In: Otero P, Portela DA, eds. Manual of Small Animal Regional
Anesthesia, Illustrated Anatomy for Nerve Stimulation and Ultrasound-Guided
Nerve Blocks, 2nd edn. Cuidad Autonoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina: Editorial
Inter-Médica, 2019
254 Ferrero C, Borland K, Rioja E. Retrospective comparison of three locoregional
techniques for pelvic limb surgery in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(4):
554–562.
255 Campoy L, Martin-Flores M, Ludders JW, et al. Comparison of bupivacaine femo-
ral and sciatic nerve block versus bupivacaine and morphine epidural for stifle
surgery in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39(1): 91–98.
256 Portela DA, Verdier N, Otero PE. Regional anesthetic techniques for the pelvic
limb and abdominal wall in small animals: a review of the literature and technique
description. Vet J 2018; 238: 27–40.
257 Cathasaigh MO, Read MR, Atilla A, et al. Blood concentration of bupivacaine and
duration of sensory and motor block following ultrasound-guided femoral and
sciatic nerve blocks in dogs. PLoS ONE 2018; 13(3): e0193400.
258 Trein TA, Floriano BP, Wagatsuma JT, et al. Effects of dexmedetomidine com-
bined with ropivacaine on sciatic and femoral nerve blockade in dogs. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2017; 44(1): 144–153.
259 Evangelista MC, Doodnaught GM, Fantoni DT, et al. Sciatic and femoral nerve
blockade using bupivacaine alone, or in combination with dexmedetomidine or
buprenorphine in cats. Vet Rec 2017; 180(24): 592.
260 Portela DA, Otero PE, Briganti A, et al. Femoral nerve block: a novel psoas com-
partment lateral pre-iliac approach in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40(2):
194–204.
261 Portela DA, Otero PE, Tarragona L, et al. Combined paravertebral plexus block
and parasacral sciatic block in healthy dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2010; 37(6):
531–541.
262 Vettorato E, De Gennaro C, Okushima S, et al. Retrospective comparison of two
peripheral lumbosacral plexus blocks in dogs undergoing pelvic limb orthopaedic
surgery. J Small Anim Pract 2013; 54(12): 630–637.
263 Vettorato E, Corletto F. Retrospective assessment of peripheral nerve block tech-
niques used in cats undergoing hindlimb orthopaedic surgery. J Feline Med Surg
2016; 18(10): 826–833.
264 Mahler SP. Ultrasound guidance to approach the femoral nerve in the iliopsoas
muscle: a preliminary study in the dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39(5): 550–554.
265 Warrit K, Griffenhagen G, Goh C, et al. Comparison of ultrasound-guided lumbar
plexus and sciatic nerve blocks with ropivacaine and sham blocks with saline on
perianesthetic analgesia and recovery in dogs undergoing tibial plateau leveling
osteotomy surgery. Vet Anaesth Analg 2019; 46(5): 673–681.
266 O’Connor BL, Woodbury P. The primary articular nerves to the dog knee. J Anat
1982; 134(Pt 3): 563–572.
267 Bartel AK, Campoy L, Martin-Flores M, et al. Comparison of bupivacaine and
dexmedetomidine femoral and sciatic nerve blocks with bupivacaine and
buprenorphine epidural injection for stifle arthroplasty in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg
2016; 43(4): 435–443.
268 Campoy L, Martin-Flores M, Gleed RD, et al. Block duration is substantially
longer with a liposomal suspension of bupivacaine than with 0.5% bupivacaine
HCl potentiated with dexmedetomidine following an ultrasound-guided sciatic
nerve block in Beagles. Am J Vet Res 2022; 83(8): ajvr.22.01.0007.
269 Day TK, Pepper WT, Tobias TA, et al. Comparison of intra-articular and epidural
morphine for analgesia following stifle arthrotomy in dogs. Vet Surg 1995; 24(6):
522–530.
270 Gingold BM, Milloway MC, Morgan MJ. A novel motor-sparing locoregional
nerve block technique for stifle surgery in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(5):
731–732.
271 Saunders WB, Hulse DA, Schulz KS. Evaluation of portal locations and periarticu-
lar structures in canine coxofemoral arthroscopy: a cadaver study. Vet Comp
Orthop Traumatol 2004; 17(04): 184–188.
272 Hotvedt R, Platou ES, Refsum H. Effects of thoracic epidural analgesia on cardio-
vascular function and plasma concentration of free fatty acids and catecholamines
in the dog. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1984; 28(2): 132–137.
273 Valverde A. Epidural analgesia and anesthesia in dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 2008; 38(6): 1205–1230.
274 Zhang D, Nishimura R, Nagahama S, et al. Comparison of feasibility and safety of
epidural catheterization between cranial and caudal lumbar vertebral segments in
dogs. J Vet Med Sci 2011; 73(12): 1573–1577.
275 Maierl J, Reindl S, Knospe C. Observations on epidural anesthesia in cats from the
anatomical viewpoint. Tierarztl Prax 1997; 25(3): 267–270.
276 O’Hearn AK, Wright BD. Coccygeal epidural with local anesthetic for catheteriza-
tion and pain management in the treatment of feline urethral obstruction. J Vet
Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2011; 21(1): 50–52.
277 Vesovski S, Makara M, Martinez-Taboada F. Computer tomographic comparison
of cranial spread of contrast in lumbosacral and sacrococcygeal epidural injec-
tions in dog cadavers. Vet Anaesth Analg 2019; 46(4): 510–515.
278 Liu SS, Bernards CM. Exploring the epidural trail. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2002;
27(2): 122–124.
279 Lee I, Yamagishi N, Oboshi K, et al. Distribution of new methylene blue
injected into the lumbosacral epidural space in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2004;
31(3): 190–194.
280 Gorgi AA, Hofmeister EH, Higginbotham MJ, et al. Effect of body position on
cranial migration of epidurally injected methylene blue in recumbent dogs. Am J
Vet Res 2006; 67(2): 219–221.
281 Freire CD, Torres ML, Fantoni DT, et al. Bupivacaine 0.25% and methylene blue
spread with epidural anesthesia in dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 2010; 37(1): 63–69.
282 Nakayama M, Yamamoto J, Ichinose H, et al. Effects of volume and concentration
of lidocaine on epidural anaesthesia in pregnant females. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2002;
19(11): 808–811.
283 Duggan J, Bowler GM, McClure JH, et al. Extradural block with bupivacaine:
influence of dose, volume, concentration and patient characteristics. Br J Anaesth
1988; 61(3): 324–331.
284 Otero PE, Tarragona L, Ceballos M, et al. Epidural cephalic spread of a local
anaesthetic in dogs: a mathematical model using the column length [Abstract].
Vet Anaesth Analg 2010; 37(3): P1–P88.
285 Otero PE, Tarragona L, Waxman Dova S. Effects of epidurally administered ropi-
vacaine at three different concentrations in dogs [Abstract]. Vet Anaesth Analg
2006; 34(4): 69.
286 Almeida TF, Fantoni DT, Mastrocinque S, et al. Epidural anesthesia with bupiv-
acaine, bupivacaine and fentanyl, or bupivacaine and sufentanil during intrave-
nous administration of propofol for ovariohysterectomy in dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2007; 230(1): 45–51.
287 Iff I, Moens Y, Schatzmann U. Use of pressure waves to confirm the correct place-
ment of epidural needles in dogs. Vet Rec 2007; 161(1): 22–25.
288 Naganobu K, Hagio M. The effect of body position on the ’hanging drop’ method
for identifying the extradural space in anaesthetized dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg
2007; 34(1): 59–62.
289 Iseri T, Nishimura R, Nagahama S, et al. Epidural spread of iohexol following the use
of air or saline in the ’loss of resistance’ test. Vet Anaesth Analg 2010; 37(6): 526–530.
290 Baraka A. Identification of the peridural space by a running infusion drip. Br J
Anaesth 1972; 44(1): 122.
291 Martinez-Taboada F, Redondo JI. Comparison of the hanging drop technique and
running- drip method for identifying the epidural space in dogs. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2017; 44(2): 329–336.
292 Tsui BC, Gupta S, Finucane B. Detection of subarachnoid and intravascular epi-
dural catheter placement. Can J Anaesth 1999; 46(7): 675–678.
293 Tsui BCH, Wagner A, Cave D, et al. Threshold current for an insulated epidural
needle in pediatric patients. Anesth Analg 2004; 99(3): 694–696.
294 Garcia- Pereira FL, Hauptman J, Shih AC, et al. Evaluation of electric neurostimu-
lation to confirm correct placement of lumbosacral epidural injections in dogs.
Am J Vet Res 2010; 71(2): 157–160.
295 Read MR. Confirmation of epidural needle placement using nerve stimulation in
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2005; 32(4): 13.
296 Gregori T, Viscasillas J, Benigni L. Ultrasonographic anatomy of the sacrococcy-
geal region and ultrasound-guided epidural injection at the sacrococcygeal space
in dogs. Vet Rec 2014; 175(3): 68.
297 Credie L, Luna S. The use of ultrasound to evaluate sacrococcygeal epidural injec-
tions in cats. Can Vet J 2018; 59(2): 143–146.
298 Otero PE, Verdier N, Zaccagnini AS, et al. Sonographic evaluation of epidural and
intrathecal injections in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43(6): 652–661.
299 Castro D, Portela DA, Otero PE. Positive color flow Doppler test used to confirm
sacrococcygeal epidural injection in a dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(2):
280–281.
300 Sarotti D, Rabozzi R, Franci P. Comparison of epidural versus intrathecal anaes-
thesia in dogs undergoing pelvic limb orthopaedic surgery. Vet Anaesth Analg
2015; 42(4): 405–413.
301 Di Cianni S, Rossi M, Casati A, et al. Spinal anesthesia: an evergreen technique.
Acta Biomed 2008; 79(1): 9–17.
302 Auroy Y, Narchi P, Messiah A, et al. Serious complications related to regional anesthe-
sia: results of a prospective survey in France. Anesthesiology 1997; 87(3): 479–486.
303 Sarotti D, Rabozzi R, Corletto F. Efficacy and side effects of intraoperative analge-
sia with intrathecal bupivacaine and levobupivacaine: a retrospective study in 82
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38(3): 240–251.
304 Sarotti D, Cattai A, Franci P. Combined spinal and general anaesthesia in 58 cats
undergoing various surgical procedures: description of technique and retrospec-
tive perioperative evaluation. J Feline Med Surg 2019; 21(12): 1127–1133.

-- 1219 of 1450 --

1204 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
305 Vettorato E, Bradbrook C, Gurney M, et al. Peripheral nerve blocks of the pelvic
limb in dogs: a retrospective clinical study. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2012;
25(4): 314–320.
306 Kalchofner Guerrero KS, Guerrero TG, Schweizer-Kolliker M, et al. Incidence of
delayed hair re-growth, pruritus, and urinary retention after epidural anaesthesia
in dogs. Tierarztl Prax Ausg K Kleintiere Heimtiere 2014; 42(2): 94–100.
307 Neal JM, Bernards CM, Butterworth JFT, et al. ASRA practice advisory on local
anesthetic systemic toxicity. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2010; 35(2): 152–161.
308 Sala-Blanch X, Ribalta T, Rivas E, et al. Structural injury to the human sciatic
nerve after intraneural needle insertion. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2009; 34(3):
201–205.
309 Sala- Blanch X, Lopez AM, Pomes J, et al. No clinical or electrophysiologic evi-
dence of nerve injury after intraneural injection during sciatic popliteal block.
Anesthesiology 2011; 115(3): 589–595.
310 Neal JM, Kopp SL, Pasternak JJ, et al. Anatomy and pathophysiology of spinal cord
injury associated with regional anesthesia and pain medicine: 2015 update. Reg
Anesth Pain Med 2015; 40(5): 506–525.
311 Boselli E, Hopkins P, Lamperti M, et al. European Society of Anaesthesiology and
Intensive Care guidelines on peri-operative use of ultrasound for regional anaes-
thesia (PERSEUS regional anesthesia): peripheral nerves blocks and neuraxial
anaesthesia. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2021; 38(3): 219–250.
312 Portela DA, Otero PE, Biondi M, et al. Peripheral nerve stimulation under ultra-
sonographic control to determine the needle-to-nerve relationship. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2013; 40(6): e91–e99.

-- 1220 of 1450 --

1205
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of Lumb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
General anesthesia in horses is challenging. Nevertheless, a recent
multicenter [1] and some single-center surveys [2–4] indicate that
general-anesthesia-related mortality has decreased compared to
studies performed 20 years ago [5]. To avoid the risks of general
anesthesia, there is a growing tendency to perform as many surgical
interventions as possible in standing sedated horses [6]. Sedative
techniques, along with better local anesthetic techniques, have been
developed for this purpose. The risks of standing surgeries, how-
ever, remain to be determined and compared to those of general
anesthesia [1,7]. There are still many unstudied and unanswered
questions about how to best perform equine anesthesia for an opti-
mal outcome. This chapter aims to provide an overview of peculi-
arities associated with horses and a focus on the management of
anesthesia and solutions for common problems.
Preanesthetic considerations
Guidelines on how adult horses should be prepared prior to anes-
thesia, including transport, fasting, and behavioral considerations,
have varied, and little evidence-based guidance addressing these
concerns is available. Horses that were transported the morning
before surgery showed higher cortisol levels than horses that were
kept in the clinic the night before [8], so stress might be reduced if
preoperative transport of the animal is avoided.
In adult horses, the patient’s nutritional status before elective
general anesthesia may influence intraoperative oxygenation and
potentially impact the risk of postoperative colic. Postoperative
colic is a significant problem [9,10], but the literature is mostly ret-
rospective, and reported effects are confounded by the many factors
involved. In horses where mainly dissociative-based anesthesia
induction protocols (e.g., ketamine) are used, unlike in other spe-
cies, regurgitation and aspiration of gastric contents is uncommon
as long as the horse is not suffering from colic. Since horses typi-
cally browse for their food, prolonged fasting can cause stress in
individual horses, which will negatively influence motility of the gas-
trointestinal tract [11] or potentiate ulceration [12]. A negative energy
balance might impair normal metabolism and derange oxygen–
glucose physiology during the perioperative period, although that
is usually not a concern for healthy adult horses. In foals up to about
4 weeks of age, however, fasting is best avoided.
Preanesthetic fasting also has potential benefits. Less material in
the gastrointestinal (GI) tract places less pressure on the major
abdominal vessels and causes less cranial displacement of the dia-
phragm. This may lessen impairment of venous return to the heart
and improve ventilation via an increase in functional residual
capacity, likely providing better oxygenation and oxygen delivery to
the tissues. Further, ongoing microbial gas production within the
GI tract is probably decreased in fasted horses. Since postoperative
colic can be a major complication following anesthesia and surgery
in horses, reduced gas production can limit ileus. This effect on
61 Horses
Regula Bettschart- Wolfensberger
Department of Diagnostics and Clinical Sciences, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland
Chapter contents
Introduction, 1205
Preanesthetic considerations, 1205
Standing sedation, 1206
Preanesthetic sedation, 1206
Induction of anesthesia, 1206
Maintenance of general anesthesia, 1208
α2
- Adrenergic receptor agonists, 1208
Lidocaine, 1209
Ketamine, 1209
Opioids, 1209
Muscle relaxants – benzodiazepines and guaifenesin, 1209
Field anesthesia, 1210
Monitoring, 1210
Adequate cardiovascular function and tissue oxygenation, 1210
Anesthesia recovery, 1211
Environmental considerations, 1211
Timing of recovery, 1212
Additional sedation and analgesia, 1212
Recovery assist systems, 1213
References, 1214

-- 1221 of 1450 --

1206 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
colic rates has been shown in fasted in comparison with unfasted
horses [10]. However, the use of a muzzle to limit oral intake of
solid feed has been associated with more postoperative colic than
the simple avoidance of preoperative feeding while allowing the
horse to consume some of its bedding [13]. Many anesthesiologists
are convinced that preoperative overnight fasting for 8–12 h is ben-
eficial for most horses. Easy access to water is important and may be
impaired by a muzzle; however, for certain horses, this will neces-
sitate limiting the amount of edible bedding available.
Horses instinctively tend to flee when they are threatened or
frightened. Therefore, the periods immediately before losing and
after regaining consciousness can be difficult to manage in horses
unaccustomed to close human contact, those experiencing injuries,
or simply due to the unusual environment. Once a horse is excited
or frightened, it can be very difficult to calm it down again. Often,
higher sedative doses (with potentially more untoward side effects)
will be needed. Therefore, it is important to avoid excitement and
reduce pain and stress through proper use of sedative and analgesic
drugs before anesthesia induction and during the recovery period.
In addition to the judicious use of sedatives, common principles
of physical restraint should be applied to the handling of horses.
Some degree of physical restraint is combined with appropriate
sedatives to yield a tractable horse. The method of physical restraint
will be based on a number of factors, including the size and tem-
perament of the horse, the availability of personnel, and the dura-
tion or type of procedure.
Standing sedation
Sedation of horses for physical examination or standing procedures
is commonly performed using readily available sedatives and anal-
gesics (Table 61.1). Intravenous (IV) administration of α2
-adrenergic
receptor agonists (e.g., xylazine, detomidine, romifidine, medeto-
midine, or dexmedetomidine) forms the basis of most drug combi-
nations used to achieve moderate or heavy sedation in horses. Their
combination with opioid analgesic drugs will lead to more reliable
sedation and, therefore, is strongly recommended. Sublingual
administration of detomidine (Dormosedan Gel®, Zoetis) may be
useful for horses that cannot be given injections. For standing sur-
geries, use of sedation is combined with administration of both sys-
temic and local analgesics. Epidural injection of local anesthetics in
combination with xylazine or detomidine at the first intercoccygeal
space is recommended for perineal surgeries. Various combinations
of epidural α2 - adrenergic receptor agonists, local anesthetics, and
opioids have been proposed for perioperative pain control for
surgeries distal to the thoracic region [14].
Preanesthetic sedation
For most cases, it is possible to catheterize a jugular vein using local
anesthetic infiltration with or without prior administration of a
sedative. Intramuscular (IM) acepromazine (e.g., 0.03–0.05 mg/kg)
at least 30 min before placement of an IV catheter may help calm
some horses [17]. In uncooperative animals where catheter place-
ment is difficult, acepromazine alone at the above-mentioned dose
rates does not usually result in adequate sedation. In those horses, it
can be beneficial to sedate them with IM injection of a longer acting
α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist (e.g., 0.04 mg/kg romifidine, or
0.01 mg/kg detomidine) and subsequently add an opioid such as
butorphanol (0.02 mg/kg). Yearlings, thoroughbreds, and Arabians
tend to need higher dosages and, in very difficult horses, doubling
the initial dose of the sedative will avoid the repetitive stress of
injection and resulting stimulation. Most important is to leave
horses given IM sedation (detomidine at least 20 min, and romifi-
dine 30 min) in an undisturbed environment to allow peak effects
to develop before handling. If further doses of sedatives are needed
to achieve satisfactory calming effects, long-lasting cardiopulmo-
nary effects dominated by reduced cardiac output, peripheral vaso-
constriction and reduced tissue perfusion may result [18,19]. This
might be detrimental in the case of general anesthesia. Myopathies
and neuropathies are a consequence of inadequate tissue blood flow
and contribute to the incidence of equine perioperative fatali-
ties [20]. As acepromazine is relatively long acting, cannot be antag-
onized, and has numerous potential adverse effects, the anesthetist
should avoid its use in cases involving pre-existing hypotension,
anemia, hypothermia, or moderate to severe liver impairment.
Following catheter placement, unsedated horses are ideally left
undisturbed for at least 5–10 min. Stress-free transfer of the horse
to the surgical area is facilitated by administering approximately
one-third of the total intended IV dose of chosen α2
- adrenergic
receptor agonist. (Table 61.1). As soon as some sedation becomes
apparent, horses can usually be walked into the anesthesia induc-
tion area with minimal resistance.
Once in the induction area, the remainder of the sedative is admin-
istered slowly to reach the desired depth of sedation (i.e., the horse
becomes unresponsive to surrounding stimuli). In horses that do not
become heavily sedated within 5–10 min, depending on the choice of
α2
-adrenergic receptor agonist, an additional injection of approxi-
mately 25% of the initial dose may be administered, or an opioid may
be added, to enhance sedation and analgesia. Generally, reduction of
the dose of α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists is reserved only for
severely compromised horses that cannot be stabilized before anes-
thesia induction. In such patients, a higher dose of benzodiazepine
during anesthesia induction (up to 0.1 mg/kg instead of 0.02 mg/kg)
or the use of guaifenesin may improve muscle relaxation.
Some veterinarians consider sedation before general anesthesia
with shorter acting α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists such as xylazine
(0.5–1.0 mg/kg), medetomidine (7 μg/kg), or dexmedetomidine
(3–5 μg/kg) safer. Their untoward cardiopulmonary effects are
shorter lasting than those associated with detomidine or romifidine,
and peak intensity of adverse effects is less pronounced [21,22].
Some anesthetists prefer to combine sedatives with opioids. The
combination of α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists with an opioid recep-
tor agonist improves quality of sedation [23–25], and better analgesia
is provided. In horses, the minimum alveolar concentration (MAC)
of inhaled anesthetics is not consistently decreased following opi-
oids [26], but if α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists are used together
with opioids, the effect of the α2
-adrenergic receptor agonist on MAC
is consistent and more pronounced [27]. Opioids might contribute to
respiratory depression caused by general anesthetics [28] and also
carry the potential to reduce fecal output and predispose to colic after
anesthesia [29]. However, evidence supporting this contention is
poor [30], and a more recent study showed that hydromorphone did
not increase incidence of postoperative colic [31]. Still, some anesthe-
tists do not routinely administer opioids before anesthesia induction,
and intraoperative analgesia is provided by other means.
Induction of anesthesia
For most veterinarians, the preferred anesthetic induction agent
in horses is ketamine. Other induction drugs are available and
may be used in horses (Table 61.2). When used appropriately, the

-- 1222 of 1450 --

Table 61.1 Drugs used for standing chemical restraint, for analgesia, or as preanesthetics in horses.
Drug 	Dose and route 	Onset of optimal effect 	Comments
Sedatives
Acepromazine 	0.02–0.05 mg/kg, IM, IV 	30–40 min 	Only sedative that causes no ataxia
Very long-acting (dose-dependent duration of 2–4 h)
Causes sequestration of erythrocytes in spleen, vasodilation, and
decreased arterial blood pressure
Avoid use in neonates, hypotensive, hypothermic, or stressed horses
Ideally combine with α2 - adrenergic receptor agonists
α2
- Adrenergic receptor agonists
Cause dose-dependent ataxia, analgesia, peripheral vasoconstriction, and bradycardia (less during CRI)
Negative impact on digestion
Increased urine output, hyperglycemia
Detomidine 	0.01–0.02 mg/kg, IV 	3–5 min 	Relatively long-acting sedative, head-down posture
0.02–0.04 mg/kg, IM 	20 min 	Start with a low dose, repeat as needed (but not before 20 min)
Allow adequate time for onset; can also be given orally
0.0125–0.0198 mg/kg/h, IV CRI 	Use after bolus 	Some authors suggest reducing the dose over time
Dexmedetomidine 	0.003–0.005 mg/kg, IV 	3–5 min 	Shortest acting sedative, premedication dose
0.00175–0.002 mg/kg/h, IV CRI 	Use after bolus 	Produces excellent analgesia during general anesthesia
Medetomidine 	0.005–0.007 mg/kg, IV 	3–5 min 	Relatively short-acting sedative, premedication dose; marginally
longer duration than dexmedetomidine
0.0035–0.005 mg/kg/h, IV CRI 	Use after bolus 	Produces excellent analgesia during general anesthesia
Romifidine 	0.04–0.1 mg/kg, IV 	5–10 min 	Relatively long-acting sedative; produces head-down posture
0.08–0.12 mg/kg, IM 	15–25 min 	Start with a low dose, repeat as needed (but not before 30 min)
0.018–0.040 mg/kg/h, IV CRI 	Use after bolus
Xylazine 	0.5–1.0 mg/kg, IV 	3–5 min 	Relatively short-acting sedative, head-down posture
Analgesics
Opioids
Produce potent to very potent analgesia
Potential for behavioral side effects if used without sedatives or at excessive dose rates
More potent opioids will impair ventilation dose-dependently
Negative influence on propulsive gastrointestinal motility
Butorphanol 	0.01–0.03 mg/kg, IV 	3–5 min 	Analgesic; usually given in combination with a sedative
Buprenorphine 	0.005–0.01 mg/kg, IV 	Analgesic; sedate with α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist prior
to administration
0.06 mg/kg, SL 	Longer acting than other opioids, can be administered SL
Morphine 	0.1–0.2 mg/kg, IM, IV 	3–5 min 	Analgesic; sedate with α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist prior
to administration
Has potential for excitation, especially in non-painful horses
or at higher dose rates
Methadone 	0.2–0.5 mg/kg, IM, IV 	Similar to morphine
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatoriesa
Reduce inflammation and produce analgesia
Can cause gastrointestinal ulceration and impair maintenance of renal perfusion (avoid use in dehydrated horses)
May impair bone healing
Phenylbutazone 	1.1–4.4 mg/kg, IV, PO 	8–12–24 h 	Analgesic; extreme perivascular irritant
Flunixin meglumine 	1.1 mg/kg, IV, IM, PO
0.25 mg/kg, IV
12–24 h
8 h
Analgesic; local tissue reactions when administered IM; negative
effect on mucosal repair
Meloxicam 	0.6 mg/kg, IV, PO 	24 h 	Does not impede mucosal repair; well tolerated by foals
Ketoprofen 	2.2 mg/kg, IV 	24 h 	Less effective for orthopedic pain than phenylbutazone
Firocoxib 	0.09 mg/kg, IV 	24 h 	Well tolerated by foals
0.1 mg/kg, PO 	24 h 	Start with a loading dose of 0.3 mg/kg to reach steady state
within 1 day
IV, intravenous; IM, intramuscular; PO, oral; CRI, constant rate infusion; SL, sublingual.
a [15,16].
Table 61.2 Drugs used for induction and maintenance of anesthesia in sedated horses.
Drug 	Dose and route 	Comments
Diazepam 	0.02–0.06 mg/kg, IV 	Used for muscle relaxation; combined with ketamine
Guaifenesin 	50 mg/kg, IV to effect 	Muscle relaxant, must be used in combination with anesthetics such as ketamine or propofol
Ketamine 	2.0–3.0 mg/kg, IV 	Requires maximal sedation prior to administration to induce anesthesia
Midazolam 	0.02–0.06 mg/kg, IV 	Used for muscle relaxation; combined with ketamine
Tiletamine–zolazepam 	0.7–1.0 mg/kg, IV 	Requires maximal sedation prior to administration to induce anesthesia; may be reconstituted with
ketamine and either xylazine or detomidine in various combinations of “TKX” or “TKD”
Recovery quality often not ideal
“Triple drip” 	1–2 mL/kg/h 	Mixture of guaifenesin 5%, ketamine 0.1–0.2%, and xylazine 0.05%
Xylazine can be replaced with detomidine (10 mg in 500 mL)
Do not use to induce anesthesia in adult horses
Used for extending injectable anesthesia induced by xylazine–ketamine

-- 1223 of 1450 --

1208 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
horse will slowly assume sternal and then lateral recumbency.
A significant disadvantage of ketamine in comparison with other
alternatives (propofol, alfaxalone, and barbiturates) is poor mus-
cle relaxation and hypnosis when used alone. To minimize these
undesirable effects, horses should be deeply sedated before anes-
thetic induction with ketamine. Additionally, the use of centrally
acting muscle relaxants significantly enhances the quality of
equine anesthesia induction. Guaifenesin (35–50 mg/kg) can be
given intravenously to effect (until the horse becomes ataxic and
buckles its knees) just prior to the bolus of ketamine (with or
without additional muscle relaxants such as the benzodiazepines,
diazepam or midazolam). These drugs reduce muscle hypertonus
and reflex activity, which facilitates endotracheal intubation.
Guaifenesin administration can be cumbersome in adult horses as
effective dosages result in the need for relatively large volumes to
be administered. Furthermore, it can cause phlebitis even if used
at a relatively low concentration of 5% [32]. For this reason, many
prefer to use a benzodiazepine for muscle relaxation. An addi-
tional advantage of benzodiazepine use is the availability of an
antagonist, flumazenil. It has not been extensively studied or rou-
tinely used in equine anesthesia because of expense, but in cases of
emergency a dose of 0.02 mg/kg IV can reverse the respiratory
side effects of benzodiazepines and eventually shorten recov-
ery [33]. A more recent study compared the use of ketamine in
combination with propofol (0.5 mg/kg) or midazolam (0.1 mg/kg)
for anesthesia induction [34] and found slightly better recoveries
with propofol following 1 h of isoflurane anesthesia.
Some anesthetists prefer to keep the dose of the benzodiazepines
for co-induction low (0.02 mg/kg), which minimizes the impact on
respiration and reduces ataxia during recovery. An IV bolus of keta-
mine of 2–3 mg/kg in combination with diazepam or midazolam
results in recumbency within 1.5–2 min and is associated with rela-
tively deep anesthesia for about 8–15 min. Nevertheless, for surgical
manipulations, the use of additional local or systemic analgesia is
advised. If the surgical procedure is not successfully performed
within this time frame, or if the trachea is intubated and mainte-
nance of anesthesia with an inhalation agent is begun, additional
ketamine (1–1.5 mg/kg IV) may be administered. If a short-acting
α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist was used for sedation (xylazine,
medetomidine, or dexmedetomidine), it should also be readminis-
tered at 50% of the initial dose.
Following anesthesia induction with ketamine, some animals
will have rapid nystagmus, limb movements, or muscle tremors.
Under such circumstances, additional anesthetic drug(s) should
be given without delay to prevent emergence from anesthesia dur-
ing critical periods such as hoisting onto the surgical table. As
short-acting barbiturates have the fastest onset of action, many
anesthetists prefer thiopental for this purpose when it is available.
A dose of 0.5 mg/kg in most horses will relax muscles without
causing apnea, and intubation can be easily performed. Other
alternatives to barbiturates with good hypnotic properties that
have been described for anesthesia in horses are alfaxalone and
propofol. Propofol induction of an adult horse requires a large
volume of drug that may prove cost prohibitive [35]. Alfaxalone
(1 mg/kg IV) has been compared with ketamine or thiopental for
induction of anesthesia [36] and showed similar induction and
recovery qualities; however, in another study, horses receiving
alfaxalone had a higher incidence (5/6 horses) of muscle tremors
during induction [37]. Similar to the use of propofol, alfaxalone
induction requires administration of a large volume, and, to date,
this remains expensive.
Maintenance of general anesthesia
The use of several drugs in combination is called “balanced
anesthesia” if their net effects produce unconsciousness, muscle
relaxation, amnesia, and antinociception. In modern equine prac-
tice, there are multiple combinations that can achieve this balance.
The use of inhalant-only anesthesia for maintenance has largely
been replaced by the use of inhalation anesthesia in combination
with sedatives, analgesics, and muscle relaxants, given either by
infusion or by repetitive bolus administration. This type of anesthe-
sia is called “partial intravenous anesthesia” (PIVA). If no inhalation
agent is used and only IV drugs are administered, it is called “total
intravenous anesthesia” (TIVA).
The aim of PIVA is to provide analgesia and reduce inhalation
anesthetic requirements. By modulating antinociception intraop-
eratively, a balanced anesthesia protocol is expected to reduce post-
operative pain while better maintaining cardiopulmonary function
compared to inhalation anesthesia alone. While PIVA with lido-
caine [38] compared to pure inhalant anesthesia did not result in
improved cardiopulmonary function, there is general agreement
among practitioners that PIVA is, under most circumstances, supe-
rior to the use of inhalation anesthesia alone. Preliminary results of
a large multicenter study (CEPEF 4) reported that the use of PIVA
has increased from 38% to 62% over the last two decades [1]. For
surgeries where the surgical field can be locally or regionally anes-
thetized, the use of PIVA is not mandatory. However, the use of
such techniques is limited in horses compared to other species
because regional desensitization of extremities persisting into the
recovery phase can result in injuries during the horse’s attempts to
stand.
For PIVA, lidocaine, ketamine, different α2
-adrenergic receptor
agonists, and various opioids (alone or in combination with each
other) have been used as adjuncts to inhalation anesthesia [39,40].
Some anesthetists have also advocated additional midazolam or
guaifenesin to enhance muscle relaxation, although the impact of
muscle relaxants on recovery needs to be considered carefully. The
problem with all these polypharmacy combinations is that the phar-
macokinetic and pharmacodynamic interactions can be difficult to
predict in individual animals [41]. During clinical anesthesia, plasma
levels cannot be rapidly measured, so some drugs with a narrow ther-
apeutic window (e.g., lidocaine) might result in toxic levels when
standard dose rates are used under certain circumstances [41,42], for
example in colics with compromised hepatic blood flow.
The half-life of most drugs will be prolonged with increased infu-
sion time (so-called “context-sensitive half-life”). Also, the patho-
physiologic status of the individual horse can influence half-lives of
drugs, in particular differences in cardiac output and hepatic blood
flow. Metabolites with pharmacological activity, such as norketa-
mine, that are metabolized more slowly than the parent drug [43],
can potentially accumulate and influence recovery after longer
infusions. If PIVA is used, the anesthetist has to be aware of the
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamics effects of all the drugs
used.
A discussion of some of the drugs that are used for PIVA and
important aspects of their use follows. Additional reviews, includ-
ing dose rates for common drugs, are available [39,40,44].
α2 - Adrenergic receptor agonists
All available α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists have been used suc-
cessfully for PIVA in horses and cause reliable sedation, good anal-
gesia, and inhalant anesthetic dose reduction. Accumulation will
not lead to excitement in recovery but to prolonged sedation,

-- 1224 of 1450 --

Chapter 61: Horses 	1209
eventually leading to a longer but smoother recovery phase. α2
-
Adrenergic receptor agonists are used for sedation prior to induc-
tion of anesthesia in almost all horses, and this acts as an effective
loading dose, thereby reducing the time required to achieve a target
plasma concentration without the need to administer an intraop-
erative loading dose.
Dexmedetomidine, medetomidine, and xylazine [45,46] are
shorter acting than detomidine or romifidine [47], making them
better suited for titration of effect during PIVA. Numerous PIVA
studies involving α2 - adrenergic receptor agonists have been pub-
lished. Because dose and study designs varied widely, with only two
different protocols compared or only successful use of a single pro-
tocol reported [48,49], it remains difficult to determine which α2
-
adrenergic receptor agonist is superior. Interestingly, most reports
involve dexmedetomidine or medetomidine, both of which are not
licensed for horses in Europe or North America.
Anesthesia-associated fatalities in horses are mostly related to
recovery from general anesthesia. Studies investigating the effects
of anesthesia protocols on recovery are important to consider.
PIVA, including medetomidine infusion, has been shown to result
in better recovery quality compared with a lidocaine [50] or S(+)-
ketamine infusion [51] and similar quality, but longer duration
recovery, than with xylazine constant rate infusion (CRI) [45,52]. In
one study, recovery quality was better with dexmedetomidine CRI
compared to medetomidine CRI [46]. No accumulation of medeto-
midine (3.5 μg/kg/h) or its metabolites has been noted [53], even
with CRIs up to 9 h, resulting in recoveries (time to standing) no
longer than 1.5 h [54]. Clinical use of a dexmedetomidine CRI (1–2
μg/kg/h) administered at half of the dose of a medetomidine CRI
appears to have similar adjunctive anesthetic properties in horses
undergoing inhalant anesthesia.
An IV bolus of an α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist causes vasocon-
striction, bradycardia, and a decrease in cardiac output – adverse
effects that can be undesirable during equine anesthesia. However,
during CRI of lower doses of xylazine or medetomidine, these
adverse cardiopulmonary effects are minimized [21,55]. In one
study involving experimental horses administered dexmedetomi-
dine CRIs, reduced cardiopulmonary function and oxygen delivery
were noted compared to isoflurane alone [56]. However, a clinical
study was not able to identify any negative effects associated with
dexmedetomidine PIVA [57]. In the future, the use of peripherally
acting α2 - adrenergic receptor antagonists may reduce vasoconstric-
tion and optimize perfusion of the anesthetized horse [58].
Urine production is increased with administration of α2
-adrenergic
receptor agonists; therefore, placement of a urinary catheter during
surgeries lasting longer than 30 min is recommended to avoid overd-
istension of the bladder intraoperatively and to prevent urination
during the recovery period. Replacement of fluids lost via increased
urine production should be included in the fluid therapy plan.
Different opioids have been used for balanced anesthesia in com-
bination with medetomidine and dexmedetomidine CRIs [41].
Whereas butorphanol (25 μg/kg IV loading dose followed by 25 μg/
kg/h CRI) during isoflurane-medetomidine anesthesia failed to
show any effect other than prolonged time to swallowing following
anesthesia [59], morphine (0.15 mg/kg bolus followed by 0.1 mg/
kg/h) in combination with a dexmedetomidine CRI resulted in a
67% decrease in inhalant anesthetic requirements [60].
Lidocaine
Lidocaine is frequently used as part of balanced anesthesia in horses
due to its numerous useful effects [39]. Cardiovascular safety seems
to be good, as the horse is not particularly prone to adverse
cardiovascular effects of low-dose lidocaine [61]. The inhalant
anesthetic requirement (MAC) decreases in a dose-dependent fash-
ion [62], and at clinically used dose rates (1.2 mg/kg bolus given
over 10 min, followed by 35–60 μg/kg/min) the MAC reduction is
about 25–27% [63], with resultant plasma lidocaine levels of around
2000 ng/mL. Since plasma levels of 1850–4530 ng/mL have been
associated with visual dysfunction, tremors, or ataxia [61], lido-
caine administration should be stopped 30 min before the end of
inhalation anesthesia to minimize problems in recovery [64].
Lidocaine clearance is reduced by general anesthesia and some dis-
ease processes [41,42], so careful or reduced dosing is advocated in
compromised horses.
Ketamine
Ketamine is a dissociative anesthetic and analgesic that is a non-
competitive antagonist at N-methyl-D- aspartate (NMDA) recep-
tors and is, therefore, potentially useful as an analgesic in cases of
chronic or neuropathic pain [65]. Ketamine can cause sympathetic
nervous system stimulation rather than the depression that is seen
with most other anesthetic drugs, and its use in patients with car-
diovascular compromise is reasonable in many cases. Ketamine in
PIVA (0.6–1.0 mg/kg/h) can reduce inhalant requirements by up to
25%. A potential problem during prolonged infusions of ketamine
(e.g., longer than 2 h) is the accumulation of active metabolites,
including norketamine [43], with considerably longer half-lives
than ketamine. Even if ketamine administration is stopped before
the inhalation agent is turned off, some residual effects causing
excitement during recovery may persist. A reduction in inhalant
anesthetic requirement of up to 49% has been achieved when keta-
mine was combined with lidocaine [66,67], although the influence
on recovery following prolonged use (> 2 h) remains to be tested.
Opioids
There is no doubt that μ-opioid receptor agonists are analgesics in
horses as in other species, but they do not provide a reliable intra-
operative effect [26]. Morphine has been shown to improve recov-
ery [28,68] if the dose used is not too high (0.1 mg/kg IM).
Therefore, some clinicians choose to administer morphine before
recovery. The sole use of morphine for PIVA does not seem advan-
tageous [69], but if it is combined with dexmedetomidine, a dra-
matic and probably beneficial reduction in MAC was reported [60].
Also, when shorter acting opioids such as fentanyl were tested for
PIVA in clinical cases [70], no MAC-sparing effect was reported.
Only an experimental study involving relatively high dose rates of
fentanyl reported a consistent MAC-reducing effect [71]; however,
another report showed no reliable MAC reduction but a very high
incidence of poor recoveries [72]. On the other hand, when
remifentanil [73] and fentanyl [74] were combined with medetomi-
dine or dexmedetomidine for PIVA, the outcome was good. More
studies are needed before this can be recommended. Intra-articular
morphine is safe and causes good and long-lasting pain relief [75]
and may also be administered to provide postoperative analgesia
following arthroscopic procedures.
Muscle relaxants – benzodiazepines
and guaifenesin
Various reports have included benzodiazepines or guaifenesin as
adjuncts during equine anesthesia. Benzodiazepines can provide
MAC reduction [76], and intraoperative anesthesia is improved by
muscle relaxation without a negative impact on cardiovascular

-- 1225 of 1450 --

1210 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
function. Midazolam CRI (0.5 mg/kg/h) in combination with
ketamine, medetomidine, and sevoflurane has been advocated
because of its minimal effects on cardiopulmonary function com-
pared with other protocols [77]. Guaifenesin, ketamine, and
medetomidine in combination with sevoflurane have resulted in
similar outcomes [78]. However, midazolam or guaifenesin CRIs
during inhalation anesthesia may result in severe ataxia and diffi-
cult recoveries after prolonged surgeries (e.g., longer than 2 h).
Field anesthesia
Common protocols for providing anesthesia to horses and ponies
under field conditions include combinations of ketamine and an
α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist [79]. Topping off xylazine–ketamine
anesthesia by administering one-quarter to half the induction dose
of each is a common practice. Addition of butorphanol (0.02 mg/kg
IV) or an IV infusion of guaifenesin may aid in attaining appropri-
ate levels of analgesia or skeletal muscle relaxation, respectively.
Guaifenesin should not be given as the sole agent to horses because
it provides no analgesic effect and has minimal hypnotic effect.
Alternatively, diazepam (0.1 mg/kg IV) and midazolam (0.1 mg/kg
IV) have been used to replace guaifenesin when enhanced skeletal
muscle relaxation is desired.
The combination of guaifenesin, ketamine, and xylazine (often
referred to as “triple drip”) has been described when IV mainte-
nance of anesthesia is needed for a longer procedure [80]. Briefly,
solutions of 0.1% or 0.2% ketamine, 0.05% xylazine, and 5%
guaifenesin are prepared. Alternatively, other α2
-adrenergic recep-
tor agonists may be substituted for xylazine. The mixture is admin-
istered to horses already anesthetized with xylazine and ketamine
(or a similar protocol using another α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist
and ketamine) in order to extend anesthesia following attainment
of recumbency. Typical doses of triple drip for field anesthesia are
1–2 mL/kg/h IV. Some anesthetists prefer to administer 50–100 mL
of triple drip after every 7–10 min of anesthesia. If the respiration
rate increases, it indicates that the anesthetic plane is lightening and
a shorter interval between boluses is needed. Deeper or slower res-
pirations indicate that the interval between boluses should be
increased. For most horses weighing around 450 kg, approximately
1 h of general anesthesia is provided by 1 L of triple drip. For simple
“topping off ” of xylazine–ketamine anesthesia, triple drip solution
offers a satisfactory alternative. Intubation and availability of sup-
plemental oxygen are prudent during triple drip anesthesia.
Respiratory depression and bradycardia may occur during admin-
istration; hence, respiration and heart rate should be monitored
closely during anesthesia.
Monitoring
Monitoring of anesthesia in horses, distilled to its essence, consists of
the collection of data that allows the anesthetist to judge whether the
depth of anesthesia (requiring both hypnosis and analgesia) is suffi-
cient and cardiopulmonary function is adequate to meet the oxygen
demands of all tissues. To ascertain the level of anesthesia that is
ideal for an individual horse can be difficult since the two (anes-
thetic depth versus cardiopulmonary function) are often competing.
Inhalation anesthetics dose-dependently depress cardiopulmonary
function, which is why anesthetists attempt to maintain anesthesia at
as light a level as possible. However, unstable anesthesia dominated
by repetitive movement of the horse followed by hasty drug admin-
istration should be avoided. During inhalation-based anesthesia, a
sluggish palpebral reflex should usually be present without nystagmus.
However, some horses will not retain palpebral reflexes despite
being at a light anesthetic level. In spontaneously breathing horses,
respiration should be regular and not influenced by surgical stimula-
tion. During TIVA with alfaxalone- or propofol-based protocols,
judgment of depth of anesthesia is similar to that for inhalation
anesthesia. Ketamine-based anesthesia is influenced by concur-
rently administered drugs but may be more difficult to assess as ocu-
lar reflexes often are stronger (spontaneous blinking), and the
presence of nystagmus is not necessarily indicative of insufficient
anesthetic depth. Ketamine-anesthetized horses should show no
reaction to surgical stimulation and should have a regular breathing
pattern, although apneustic breathing may be seen.
Various parameters can be measured for assessment of cardio-
pulmonary function during anesthesia [81]. Commonly monitored
parameters include heart rate, arterial blood pressures, respiratory
rate, hemoglobin saturation (measured by pulse oximetry), and
end-tidal CO 2
. Modern monitoring during equine anesthesia
should also include the composition of inspired and expired gases,
capnometry, body temperature, and urine production. Capillary
refill time, mucous membrane color, heart rate, respiration rate and
pattern, as well as pulse quality are useful measures that can be eas-
ily assessed under field conditions. In addition, the use of a pulse
oximeter, at a minimum, is strongly encouraged in the field. Arterial
blood gases, pH, packed cell volume, plasma proteins, lactate, or
relevant electrolytes can be measured repeatedly, especially during
long or complicated anesthesia. Although these parameters have
ranges that are considered clinically acceptable, a single normal
value does not necessarily assure that oxygenation of vital tissues is
adequate. The measurement of cardiac output, muscle lactate con-
centration [82], or tissue perfusion [83,84] is not currently routine,
but improved technology may improve their clinical utility in the
future and may give more insight as to what is happening at the tis-
sue level.
Adequate cardiovascular function and tissue
oxygenation
It is well recognized that one of the most important aspects of
equine anesthesia is maintenance of adequate cardiovascular func-
tion and tissue oxygenation. Optimal positioning of horses on soft
padding will evenly distribute the horse’s weight and prevent focal
areas of hypoperfusion. Care should be taken to avoid positioning
that might stretch or compress nerves (such as flexing limbs under
tension or extending the neck in dorsal recumbency). Most studies
investigating factors affecting the development of postanesthetic
myopathy were performed using halothane anesthesia [85,86].
From these studies, it was learned that minimal mean arterial blood
pressures of ≥ 70 mmHg appear important to maintain perfusion of
large muscles during recumbency. Since halothane is not a vasodila-
tor like modern inhalation anesthetics (e.g., isoflurane and sevoflu-
rane), tissue perfusion is likely maintained at slightly lower mean
arterial blood pressures with the more modern agents, provided
that local compression of tissues does not prevent flow. This is logi-
cal since perfusion is also a function of cardiac output and vascular
resistance, not arterial blood pressure alone.
Under clinical circumstances, arterial blood pressure is usually
the primary cardiovascular parameter measured, even though it
does not allow direct assessment of tissue perfusion. This is due to
the ease with which relatively accurate data can be gathered and the
relationship between arterial blood pressure and tissue blood flow

-- 1226 of 1450 --

Chapter 61: Horses 	1211
(although many confounders exist). When mean arterial blood
pressure is low (< 60 mmHg), interventions are required in any
case. However, if the mean arterial pressure is 70 mmHg or greater,
it does not necessarily ensure that all tissues are well perfused.
Other parameters should be assessed concurrently (e.g., mucous
membrane color, heart rate, serum lactate, and fluid status) to
determine whether vasoconstriction may be impairing tissue perfu-
sion despite “normal” arterial pressures at or above 70 mmHg.
Impaired cardiopulmonary function will result in decreased
peripheral tissue oxygenation. Cardiopulmonary function is usu-
ally reduced more as the dose of inhalation agent increases [87].
Therefore, careful titration of inhalation anesthetics is warranted.
Despite adequate fluid therapy and a light depth of anesthesia, per-
fusion may not be adequate, requiring administration of sympatho-
mimetics, especially in critically ill horses [88]. Dobutamine (up to
1.5 μg/kg/min) can increase arterial blood pressures and cardiac
output with minimal undesired effects such as tachyarrhythmias. In
the case of low systemic vascular resistance (e.g., endotoxemia),
ephedrine (0.06 mg/kg), norepinephrine (0.1–0.5 μg/kg/min), and
phenylephrine (0.25–2 μg/kg/min) are reasonable options [88].
However, the use of vasoconstrictors without concurrent increases
in cardiac output may raise blood pressure but decrease tissue per-
fusion [84], so careful titration and monitoring are important with
their use. Once more advanced cardiovascular monitoring equip-
ment becomes available and practical for clinical use in horses,
goal-directed vasopressor and fluid therapy will hopefully help fur-
ther optimize anesthetic management and outcome [89].
Another important factor for the anesthetist to monitor and
manage is ventilation. Two thorough reviews have recently been
published [90,91]. Adequate ventilation is crucial to maintain arte-
rial oxygenation and elimination of carbon dioxide. However,
indiscriminate use of mechanical ventilation may have detrimental
cardiovascular ramifications. During spontaneous ventilation,
mean intrapleural pressures are subatmospheric, which facilitates
venous return, cardiac output, and oxygen delivery. In contrast,
controlled mechanical ventilation using intermittent positive-
pressure ventilation, especially using high airway pressures and
short expiratory times, can induce the opposite.
Anesthesia of spontaneously ventilating horses often results in
relatively 	high 	arterial 	CO2 	partial 	pressures 	(PaCO2 	>
65 mmHg) [92]. The level of acceptable hypercapnia in horses is
debatable and may depend on several factors, including cardiovas-
cular function and acid–base status. One study in mechanically
ventilated horses reported beneficial cardiopulmonary stimulation
with moderate (PaCO 2 ~60 mmHg) and severe (PaCO 2 > 80 mmHg)
hypercapnia (i.e., permissive hypercapnia) [93]. However, other
anesthetists have stated that a PaCO2 above 70 mmHg is unaccept-
ably high in most patients [94]. In a prospective study of elective
clinical cases, no difference in cardiopulmonary function (includ-
ing cardiac output measurements) between spontaneous and con-
trolled 	ventilation 	groups 	could 	be 	demonstrated 	(PaCO2
50–60 mmHg in both groups) [92]. Yet, others have reported car-
diovascular function and muscle perfusion to be clearly worse with
controlled ventilation in comparison with spontaneous breath-
ing [95]. In clinical practice where cardiac output is usually not
measured, it is sometimes difficult to decide whether controlled or
spontaneous ventilation is best. In horses with poor cardiovascular
function that cannot be stabilized before anesthesia, or in colic
cases with severe abdominal distension resulting in reduced venous
return that is further exacerbated by dorsal recumbency, it may be
better to allow spontaneous ventilation in an effort to maintain
cardiac output. In athletic horses and thoroughbreds, however,
mechanical ventilation is often necessary. If mechanical ventilation
is planned, it should be initiated soon after induction of anesthesia
with the goal of reducing the alveolar–arterial oxygen gradient
(P(a-a)O 2
) [96]. To optimize ventilation further, various positive
end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) levels (5–30 cmH2 O) have been
used in horses [91]. PEEP should be initiated at the outset of anes-
thesia to reduce the intrapulmonary shunt fraction and increase
functional residual capacity; however, pharmacologic support of
the cardiovascular system is needed to counteract reductions in car-
diac output and impaired tissue oxygen delivery [91]. When PEEP
(10 cmH2
O) was combined with repetitive recruitment maneuvers
in horses with colic, arterial oxygenation improved, but PEEP’s
influence on oxygen delivery was not evaluated as cardiac output
was not measured [97]. Continuous positive airway pressure
(CPAP) of 8 cmH 2 O in spontaneously breathing horses increased
arterial oxygenation, but its influence on oxygen delivery remains
to be thoroughly evaluated [91].
Anesthesia recovery
Recovery is a multifactorial event [98]. It is the result of both factors
that are fixed and others that can be influenced. Important factors
include the construction and size of the recovery box, the personnel
and equipment available, the type and duration of surgery per-
formed, as well as the age, sex, breed, behavior, and the health status
of the horse. Also, intraoperative factors such as hypotension,
hypoxemia, body temperature, and drugs used for anesthesia
induction, maintenance, and recovery all play key roles. The follow-
ing paragraphs aim at giving some guidelines to optimize recovery.
Environmental considerations
For optimal recovery, it is important to provide the horse with a
warm and quiet environment. For foals, the best recovery option
may be in the stall with its mother (Fig. 61.1). It is usually not ben-
eficial for horses to recover in a dimly lit recovery stall [99], but the
eyes can be covered with a towel to reduce light stimuli if desired
(Fig. 61.2). This allows the horse to see once it achieves sternal
recumbency. Ear plugs (either commercially available or made of
cotton) may reduce auditory stimuli or, more commonly, ambient
noise is kept to a minimum. With the aid of a soft, deflatable pillow
Figure 61.1 Foal recovering in the stall with its mother.

-- 1227 of 1450 --

1212 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
or mattress, horses can to some extent be discouraged from attempting
to stand too early [100].
By allowing additional time for anesthetic drug elimination, bet-
ter and more coordinated recoveries are usually achieved. Most
horses do not readily accept the endotracheal tube remaining in
place once they have begun to regain consciousness, although vari-
ous techniques have been used to maintain airway patency and allow
oxygen administration during the recovery phase. Delayed extuba-
tion may be associated with increased risk of laryngeal spasm and
this should be weighed against the benefit of maintaining an airway
during recovery. In fasted horses, some clinicians prefer to extubate
slightly before swallowing is expected (especially in young, difficult
horses). The administration of 0.25% phenylephrine [101] into the
nasal passages results in rapid local vasoconstriction, decongestion,
and improved air flow. Upper airway obstruction may lead to pul-
monary edema [102], possibly with fatal consequences. If there is
any potential for upper airway obstruction (due to, for example,
laryngeal surgery or long recumbency in combination with low
plasma albumin concentration), the cuffed endotracheal tube can be
fixed to the mandible and extubation delayed until the horse is
standing. Care should be taken that nothing can be aspirated
through the tube. If horses have a nasogastric tube in place (as is
often the case in patients undergoing colic surgery), this should be
removed before recovery to prevent complications [103].
Timing of recovery
The optimal timing of recovery is dependent on the anesthetic and
the surgery performed. Recumbency is often irksome to the horse
and is usually kept to a minimum. However, following general
anesthesia lasting 1 h or longer, a horse may take 30–45 min to
eliminate the anesthetic adequately. Ideally, the horse assumes a
sternal position and then waits a further 10–15 min to stand up. If
it chooses to remain in sternal recumbency longer, this is not
harmful. However, if the horse is still in lateral recumbency after
60 min, it should be carefully evaluated, and necessary measures
taken to minimize the risk of neuropathy or myopathy. If there is
no obvious explanation for the prolonged period of recumbency or
inability to maintain sternal recumbency, hand clapping or other
stimuli may persuade it to rise.
Additional sedation and analgesia
Optimal sedation and analgesia facilitate a good recovery. All
aspects named in the following paragraph have been described
recently in more detail [98]. Horses will recover better with postan-
esthetic sedation, and this effect seems to be dose dependent. All
sedatives impair cardiopulmonary function to some extent. During
recovery when the cardiopulmonary effects of other anesthetic
agents are rapidly dissipating, the effects of α2
- adrenergic receptor
agonists are well tolerated, provided that low doses are used and
administration is slow (over 3–5 min). In one study utilizing
research horses, no differences among recovery parameters were
demonstrated between xylazine (0.1 mg/kg IV), detomidine (2 μg/
kg IV), and romifidine (8 μg/kg IV) [104]. However, a clinical study
in healthy horses comparing xylazine (0.1 or 0.2 mg/kg IV) with
romifidine (10 or 20 μg/kg IV) following isoflurane anesthesia
demonstrated that 20 μg/kg romifidine resulted in the best quality
recoveries, and it was speculated that higher dose rates could be
beneficial in difficult horses [105]. Other experimental studies have
also investigated if a 15–30-min prolongation of anesthesia with
ketamine or propofol in combination with xylazine after discon-
tinuation of inhalant anesthetic administration would result in
improved recovery [106,107]. In those studies, the use of injectable
anesthesia at the end of anesthesia improved recovery quality; how-
ever, propofol combinations resulted in apnea and low arterial oxy-
genation, which was deemed a significant complication. A single
bolus of xylazine in comparison with xylazine combined with keta-
mine following isoflurane anesthesia resulted in better recoveries in
another group of experimental horses [108]. This study also tested
acepromazine (0.02 mg/kg IV), which resulted in a similar recovery
quality to xylazine–ketamine.
The ideal time to administer the sedative is dependent on the
status and character of the horse, the duration of anesthesia, and the
drug selected as the time to achieve a maximal effect differs between
various α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists (e.g., romifidine takes
longer than xylazine) [109]. If the sedative is given too early in
recovery or at too high a dose, and significant levels of inhalant
anesthetic remain, spontaneous ventilation might be impaired. On
the other hand, if a difficult horse has already started to move, it will
be more difficult to prevent attempts to stand with only a small
Figure 61.2 Horse positioned for recovery from general anesthesia. Source: Dr. Tania Perez, Veterinary Teaching Hospital, Washington State University,
Pullman, WA, with permission.

-- 1228 of 1450 --

Chapter 61: Horses 	1213
bolus of an α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist. Of course, the optimum
time point of administration of the sedative is also dependent on
the inhalant anesthetic used and the use of other concurrent drugs.
Following isoflurane or sevoflurane anesthesia, the horse can be
allowed to breathe oxygen for about 3–5 min. When the first signs
of a reduced depth of anesthesia become apparent (spontaneous
blinking, slow nystagmus, and increased respiratory rate), xylazine,
dexmedetomidine, or medetomidine can be given. If romifidine is
chosen, it is administered as soon as spontaneous breathing is pre-
sent owing to the longer onset of action. Horses that show nystag-
mus or limb movements can be given the sedative without delay.
Although opioids provide good analgesia, their effect on recov-
ery seems dependent on the type of opioid, the dose used, and the
study design [98]. The use of morphine (0.1 or 0.2 mg/kg IM given
20 min after induction of anesthesia) in a clinical setting involving
short duration upper airway surgery was shown to improve recov-
ery quality. However, it also reduced arterial oxygenation in sponta-
neously breathing horses [28]. Therefore, some anesthetists prefer
to administer morphine (0.1 mg/kg IM) 10 min before the end of
surgery.
Recovery assist systems
Catastrophic injuries during recovery lead to the majority of equine
anesthetic fatalities. Horses with long bone fractures, geriatric
horses, and exhausted horses (such as pregnant mares or horses
with colic following extensive surgeries) often do not have the
strength to safely resume standing and may require assistance.
Several systems aimed at helping horses during this crucial phase
have been tested. Evidence has shown that average recovery quality
is better if horses are helped with head and tail ropes, but in no
report was the fatality rate reduced with assisted recovery [98]. On
the contrary, one report involving horses recovering from colic sur-
gery detected an increased risk of fatal trauma [110] when head and
tail ropes were used compared to no help during recovery. The deci-
sion whether to assist recovery or not should be made based on
recovery box design, availability of trained personnel, availability of
adequate assist systems, and the severity of surgery along with the
horse’s weight, age, temperament, and fitness status.
Numerous systems have been described. Tail ropes with or with-
out head ropes can be used to assist most horses. Experienced per-
sonnel will aid in success since timing is important to avoid pulling
the horse off balance. The ropes can be used to stabilize the horse
but should not be used to attempt to lift it. For recovery of horses
with specific concerns (e.g., long bone fractures), slings or nets have
been used [111]. Ideally, the horse would be made accustomed to
such a device before anesthesia to increase acceptance during
recovery. Hydropools [112] (Figs. 61.3 and 61.4) or pools with a
supporting raft system [113] are other options for safe recovery of
horses that are not capable of regaining a standing position without
risk of severe injury.
Figure 61.3 Horse recovering from general anesthesia in a hydropool.
Figure 61.4 Standing horse after hydropool floor has been raised to
ground level.

-- 1229 of 1450 --

1214 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
References
1 Gozalo-Marcilla M, Bettschart-Wolfensberger R, Johnston M, et al. Data collection
for the fourth multicentre Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Equine Fatalities
(CEPEF4) study: new technology and preliminary results. Animals 2021; 11(9):
2549.
2 Bidwell LA, Bramlage LR, Rood WA. Equine perioperative fatalities associated with
general anaesthesia at a private practice – a retrospective case series. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2007; 34(1): 23–30.
3 Dugdale AHA, Obhrai J, Cripps PJ. Twenty years later: a single-centre repeat retro-
spective analysis of equine perioperative mortality and investigation of recovery
quality. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43(2): 171–178.
4 Laurenza C, Ansart L, Portier K. Risk factors of anesthesia-related mortality and
morbidity in one equine hospital: a retrospective study on 1161 cases undergoing
elective or emergency surgeries. Front Vet Sci 2020; 6: 514.
5 Johnston GM, Eastment JK, Wood JL, et al. The Confidential Enquiry into
Perioperative Equine Fatalities (CEPEF): mortality results of Phases 1 and 2. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2002; 29(4): 159–170.
6 Lesté- Lasserre C. Standing fast: standing surgeries for horses. The Horse [Internet],
May 26, 2020. www.thehorse.com/171463/standing-fast- standing-surgeries-for-
horses/
7 Vigani A, Garda-Pereira FL. Anesthesia and analgesia for standing equine surgery.
Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 2014; 30(1): 1–7.
8 Fujiyama M, Jones T, Duke-Novakovski T. Evaluation of the perioperative stress
response from dexmedetomidine infusion alone with butorphanol bolus or
remifentanil infusion compared with ketamine and morphine infusions in
isoflurane-anesthetized horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(3): 344–355.
9 Bailey PA, Hague BA, Davis M, et al. Incidence of post-anesthetic colic in non-
fasted adult equine patients. Can Vet J 2016; 57(12): 1263–1266.
10 Senior JM, Pinchbeck GL, Allister R, et al. Post anaesthetic colic in horses: a pre-
ventable complication? Equine Vet J 2006; 38(5): 479–484.
11 Hospes R, Bleul U. The effect of extended preoperative fasting in mares undergoing
surgery of the perineal region. J Equine Vet Sci 2007; 27(12): 542–545.
12 Murray MJ, Eichorn ES. Effects of intermittent feed deprivation, intermittent feed
deprivation with ranitidine administration, and stall confinement with ad libitum
access to hay on gastric ulceration in horses. Am J Vet Res 1996; 57(11): 1599–1603.
13 Jones RS, Edwards GB, Brearley JC. Commentary on prolonged starvation as a fac-
tor associated with post operative colic. Equine Vet Educ 1991; 3(1): 16–18.
14 Natalini C, Driessen B. Epidural and spinal anesthesia and analgesia in the equine.
Clin Tech Equine Pract 2007; 6: 145–153.
15 Cook VL, Blikslager AT. The use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in criti-
cally ill horses. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2015; 25(1): 76–88.
16 Knych HK. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug use in horses. Vet Clin North Am
Equine Pract 2017; 33(1): 1–15.
17 Driessen B, Zarucco L, Kalir B, et al. Contemporary use of acepromazine in the
anaesthetic management of male horses and ponies: a retrospective study and opin-
ion poll. Equine Vet J 2011; 43(1): 88–98.
18 Daunt DA, Dunlop CI, Chapman PL, et al. Cardiopulmonary and behavioral-
responses to computer-driven infusion of detomidine in standing horses. Am J Vet
Res 1993; 54(12): 2075–2082.
19 Edner A, Nyman G, Essen-Gustavsson B. The relationship of muscle perfusion and
metabolism with cardiovascular variables before and after detomidine injection
during propofol-ketamine anaesthesia in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2002; 29(4):
182–199.
20 Raisis AL. Skeletal muscle blood flow in anaesthetized horses Part II: effects of
anaesthetics and vasoactive agents. Vet Anaesth Analg 2005; 32(6): 331–337.
21 Ringer SK, Schwarzwald CC, Portier KG, et al. Effects on cardiopulmonary func-
tion and oxygen delivery of doses of romifidine and xylazine followed by constant
rate infusions in standing horses. Vet J 2013; 195(2): 228–234.
22 Yamashita K, Tsubakishita S, Futaok S, et al. Cardiovascular effects of medetomi-
dine detomidine and xylazine in horses. J Vet Med Sci 2000; 62(10): 1025–1032.
23 Ringer SK, Portier KG, Fourel I, et al. Development of a xylazine constant rate infu-
sion with or without butorphanol for standing sedation of horses. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2012; 39(1): 1–11.
24 Ringer SK, Portier KG, Fourel I, et al. Development of a romifidine constant rate
infusion with or without butorphanol for standing sedation of horses. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2012; 39(1): 12–20.
25 Gozalo-Marcilla M, Luna SP, Crosignani N, et al. Sedative and antinociceptive
effects of different combinations of detomidine and methadone in standing horses.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(5): 1116–1127.
26 Bennett RC, Steffey E. Use of opioids for pain and anesthetic management in
horses. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 2002; 18(1): 47–60.
27 Gozalo-Marcilla M, Hopster K, Gasthuys F, et al. Minimum end-tidal sevoflurane
concentration necessary to prevent movement during a constant rate infusion of
morphine or morphine plus dexmedetomidine in ponies. Vet Anaesth Analg 2014;
41(2): 212–219.
28 Love EJ, Lane JG, Murison PJ. Morphine administration in horses anaesthetized for
upper respiratory tract surgery. Vet Anaesth Analg 2006; 33(3): 179–188.
29 Senior JM, Pinchbeck GL, Dugdale AHA, et al. Retrospective study of the risk fac-
tors and prevalence of colic horses after orthopaedic surgery. Vet Rec 2004; 155:
321–325.
30 Mackenzie C. Do opioids cause colic? Equine Vet Educ 2017; 29(7): 401–402.
31 Skrzypczak H, Reed, R, Barletta M, et al. A retrospective evaluation of the effect of
perianesthetic hydromorphone administration on the incidence of postanesthetic
signs of colic in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(6): 757–762.
32 Herschl MA, Trim CM, Mahaffey EA. Effects of 5 % and 10 % guaifenesin infusion
on equine vascular endothelium. Vet Surg 1992; 21: 494–497.
33 Douglas H, Hopster K, Cerullo M, et al. The effects of flumazenil on ventilatory and
recovery characteristics in horses following midazolam-ketamine induction and
isoflurane anaesthesia. Equine Vet J 2021; 53(6): 1257–1267.
34 Jarrett MA, Bailey KM, Messenger KM, et al. Recovery of horses from general anes-
thesia after induction with propofol and ketamine versus midazolam and ketamine.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2018; 253(1): 101–107.
35 Brosnan RJ, Steffey EP, Escobar A, et al. Anesthetic induction with guaifenesin and
propofol in adult horses. Am J Vet Res 2011; 72(12): 1569–1575.
36 Wakuno A, Aoki M, Kushiro A, et al. Comparison of alfaxalone, ketamine and thio-
pental for anaesthetic induction and recovery in Thoroughbred horses premedi-
cated with medetomidine and midazolam. Equine Vet J 2017; 49(1): 94–98.
37 Keates HL, van Eps AW, Pearson MRB. Alfaxalone compared with ketamine for
induction of anaesthesia in horses following xylazine and guaifenesin. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2012; 39(6): 591–598.
38 Wagner AE, Mama KR, Steffey EP, et al. Comparison of the cardiovascular effects
of equipotent anesthetic doses of sevoflurane alone and sevoflurane plus an intrave-
nous infusion of lidocaine in horses. Am J Vet Res 2011; 72(4): 452–460.
39 Gozalo- Marcilla M, Gasthuys F, Schauvliege S. Partial intravenous anaesthesia in
the horse: a review of intravenous agents used to supplement equine inhalation
anaesthesia Part 1: lidocaine and ketamine. Vet Anaesth Analg 2014; 41(4):
335–345.
40 Gozalo- Marcilla M, Gasthuys F, Schauvliege S. Partial intravenous anaesthesia in
the horse: a review of intravenous agents used to supplement equine inhalation
anaesthesia Part 2: opioids and alpha-2 adrenoceptor agonists. Vet Anaesth Analg
2015; 42(1): 1–16.
41 Feary DJ, Mama KR, Wagner AE, et al. Influence of general anesthesia on pharmacoki-
netics of intravenous lidocaine infusion in horses. Am J Vet Res 2005; 66: 574–580.
42 Feary DJ, Mama KR, Thomasy SM, et al. Influence of gastrointestinal tract disease
on pharmacokinetics of lidocaine after intravenous infusion in anesthetized horses.
Am J Vet Res 2006; 67: 317–322.
43 Lankveld DPK, Driessen B, Soma LR, et al. Pharmacodynamic effects and pharma-
cokinetic profile of a long-term continuous rate infusion of racemic ketamine in
healthy conscious horses. J Vet Pharmacol Therap 2006; 29: 477–488.
44 Valverde A. Balanced anesthesia and constant-rate infusions in horses. Vet Clin
North Am Equine Pract 2013; 29(1): 89–122.
45 Wiederkehr A, Barbarossa A, Ringer SK, et al. Clinical randomized comparison of
medetomidine and xylazine for isoflurane balanced anesthesia in horses. Front Vet
Sci 2021; 8: 603695.
46 Sacks M, Ringer SK, Bishofberger AS, et al. Clinical comparison of dexmedetomi-
dine and medetomidine for isoflurane balanced anaesthesia in horses. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2017; 44(5): 1128–1138.
47 England GC, Clarke KW. Alpha 2 adrenoceptor agonists in the horse – a review. Br
Vet J 1996; 152(6): 641–657.
48 Wagner AE, Dunlop CI, Heath RB, et al. Hemodynamic function during neurec-
tomy in halothane-anesthetized horses with or without constant dose detomidine
infusion. Vet Surg 1992; 21(3): 248–255.
49 Devisscher L, Schauvliege S, Dewulf J, et al. Romifidine as a constant rate infusion
in isoflurane anaesthetized horses: a clinical study. Vet Anaesth Analg 2010; 37(5):
425–433.
50 Ringer SK, Kalchofner K, Boller J, et al. A clinical comparison of two anaesthetic
protocols using lidocaine or medetomidine in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2007;
34(4): 257–268.
51 Menzies MPL, Ringer SK, Conrot A, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects and anaesthesia
recovery quality in horses anaesthetized with isoflurane and low-dose S-ketamine
or medetomidine infusions. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43(6): 623–634.
52 Kalin I, Henze IS, Ringer SK, et al. Comparison of recovery quality following
medetomidine versus xylazine balanced isoflurane anaesthesia in horses: a retro-
spective analysis. Animals 2021; 11(8): 2440.
53 Bettschart-Wolfensberger R, Clarke KW, Vainio O, et al. Pharmacokinetics of
medetomidine in ponies and elaboration of a medetomidine infusion regime which
provides a constant level of sedation. Res Vet Sci 1999; 67(1): 41–46.
54 Kalchofner KS, Ringer SK, Boller J, et al. Clinical assessment of anesthesia with
isoflurane and medetomidine in 300 equidae. Pferdeheilkunde 2006; 22(3):
301–308.

-- 1230 of 1450 --

Chapter 61: Horses 	1215
55 Bettschart-Wolfensberger R, Bettschart R, Vainio O, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects
of a two hour infusion of medetomidine and its reversal by atipamezole in horses
and ponies. Vet Anaesth Analg 1999; 26: 8–12.
56 Risberg AI, Ranheim B, Krontveit RI, et al. The cardiovascular status of isoflurane-
anaesthetized horses with and without dexmedetomidine constant rate infusion
evaluated at equivalent depths of anaesthesia. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43(4):
412–423.
57 Marcilla MG, Schauvliege S, Segaert S, et al. Influence of a constant rate infusion of
dexmedetomidine on cardiopulmonary function and recovery quality in isoflurane
anaesthetized horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39(1): 49–58.
58 Neudeck S, Twele L, Kopp V, et al. Pharmacodynamics and plasma concentrations
of dexmedetomidine with or without vatinoxan as a constant-rate infusion in
horses anaesthetized with isoflurane – a pilot study. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2021;
44(5): 754–765.
59 Bettschart-Wolfensberger R, Dicht S, Vullo C, et al. A clinical study on the effect in
horses during medetomidine-isoflurane anaesthesia, of butorphanol constant rate
infusion on isoflurane requirements, on cardiopulmonary function and on recov-
ery characteristics. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38(3): 186–194.
60 Gozalo-Marcilla M, Hopster K, Gasthuys F, et al. Minimum end-tidal sevoflurane
concentration necessary to prevent movement during a constant rate infusion of
morphine or morphine plus dexmedetomidine in ponies. Vet Anaesth Analg 2014;
41(2): 212–219.
61 Meyer GA, Lin HC, Hanson RR, et al. Effects of intravenous lidocaine overdose on
cardiac electrical activity and blood pressure in the horse. Equine Vet J 2001;
33: 434–437.
62 Doherty TJ, Frazier DL. Effect of intravenous lidocaine on halothane minimum
alveolar concentration in ponies. Equine Vet J 1998; 30: 300–303.
63 Rezende ML, Wagner AE, Mama KR, et al. Effects of intravenous administration of
lidocaine on the minimum alveolar concentration of sevoflurane in horses. Am J
Vet Res 2011; 72(4): 446–451.
64 Valverde A, Gunkel C, Doherty TJ, et al. Effect of a constant rate infusion of lido-
caine on the quality of recovery from sevoflurane or isoflurane general anaesthesia
in horses. Equine Vet J 2005; 37: 559–564.
65 Muir WW. NMDA receptor antagonists and pain: ketamine. Vet Clin North Am
Equine Pract 2010; 26(3): 565–578.
66 Enderle AK, Levionnois OL, Kuhn M, et al. Clinical evaluation of ketamine and
lidocaine intravenous infusions to reduce isoflurane requirements in horses under
general anaesthesia. J Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35: 297–305.
67 Villalba M, Santiago I, Gomez de Segura IA. Effects of constant rate infusion of
lidocaine and ketamine with or without morphine on isoflurane MAC in horses.
Equine Vet J 2011; 43(6): 721–726.
68 Clark L, Clutton RE, Blissitt KJ, et al. The effects of morphine on recovery of horses
from halothane anaesthesia. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35: 22–29.
69 Gozalo-Marcilla M, Steblaj B, Schauvliege S, et al. Comparison of the influence of
two different constant-rate infusions (dexmedetomidine versus morphine) on
anaesthetic requirements, cardiopulmonary function and recovery quality in iso-
flurane anaesthetized horses. Res Vet Sci 2013; 95(3): 1186–1194.
70 Dmitrovic P, Vanaga J, Dupont J, et al. Effect of fentanyl infusion on heart rate vari-
ability and anaesthetic requirements in isoflurane-anaesthetized horses. Animals
2021; 11(10): 2922.
71 Thomasy SM, Steffey EP, Mama KR, et al. The effects of i.v. fentanyl administration
on the minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in horses. Br J Anaesth 2006;
97(2): 232–237.
72 Knych HK, Steffey EP, Mama KR, et al. Effects of high plasma fentanyl concentra-
tions on minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in horses. Am J Vet Res
2009; 70(10): 1193–1200.
73 Benmansour P, Duke-Novakovski T. Prolonged anesthesia using sevoflurane remifen-
tanil and dexmedetomidine in a horse. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40(5): 521–526.
74 Mizobe F, Wakuno A, Okada J, et al. Clinical usefulness of intravenous constant rate
infusion of fentanyl and medetomidine under sevoflurane anesthesia in
Thoroughbred racehorses undergoing internal fixation surgery. J Equine Sci 2017;
28(4): 143–147.
75 Di Salvo A, Chiaradia E, Nannarone S, et al. Intra-articular use of analgesic/antin-
flammatory drugs in dogs and horses. Res Vet Sci 2021; 134: 159–170.
76 Matthews NS, Dollar NS, Shawley RV. Halothane-sparing effect of benzodiazepines
in ponies. Cornell Vet 1990; 80(3): 259–265.
77 Kushiro T, Yamashita K, Umar MA, et al. Anesthetic and cardiovascular effects of
balanced anesthesia using constant rate infusion of midazolam-ketamine-
medetomidine with inhalation of oxygen-sevoflurane (MKM-OS anesthesia) in
horses. J Vet Med Sci 2005; 67(4): 379–384.
78 Yamashita K, Satoh M, Umikawa A, et al. Combination of continuous intravenous
infusion using a mixture of guaifenesin-ketamine-medetomidine and sevoflurane
anesthesia in horses. J Vet Med Sci 2000; 62(3): 229–235.
79 Lerche P. Total intravenous anesthesia in horses. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract
2013; 29(1): 123–129.
80 Davidson GS. Equine anesthesia: triple drip. Int J Pharm Compd 2008; 12(5):
402–404.
81 Dagnall C, Khenissi L, Love E. Monitoring techniques for equine anaesthesia.
Equine Vet Edu 2021: 13581.
82 Edner AH, Essen-Gustavsson B, Nyman GC. Metabolism during anaesthesia and
recovery in colic and healthy horses: a microdialysis study. Acta Veterinaria
Scandinavica 2009; 51(1): 10.
83 Raisis AL. Skeletal muscle blood flow in anaesthetized horses Part I: measurement
techniques. Vet Anaesth Analg 2005; 32(6): 324–330.
84 Dancker C, Hopster K, Rohn K, et al. Effects of dobutamine, dopamine, phenyle-
phrine, and noradrenaline on systemic haemodynamics and intestinal perfusion
in isoflurane anaesthetised horses. Equine Vet J 2018; 50(1): 104–110.
85 Duke T, Filzek U, Read MR, et al. Clinical observations surrounding an increased
incidence of postanaesthetic myopathy in halothane-anaesthetized horses.
Pferdeheilkunde 2006; 22(4): 467–467.
86 Grandy JL, Steffey EP, Hodgson DS, et al. Arterial hypotension and the develop-
ment of postanesthetic myopathy in halothane-anesthetized horses. Am J Vet Res
1987; 48(2): 192–197.
87 Brosnan RJ. Inhaled anesthetics in horses. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 2013;
29(1): 69–87.
88 Schauvliege S, Gasthuys F. Drugs for cardiovascular support in anesthetized
horses. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 2013; 29(1): 19–49.
89 Teixeira- Neto FJ, Valverde A. Clinical application of the fluid challenge approach
in goal-directed fluid therapy: what can we learn from human studies? Front in Vet
Sci 2021; 8: 701377.
90 Stefanik E, Drewnowska O, Lisowka B, et al. Causes, effects and methods of moni-
toring gas exchange disturbances during equine general anaesthesia. Animals
(Basel) 2021; 11(7): 2049.
91 Mosing M, Senior JM. Maintenance of equine anaesthesia over the last 50 years:
controlled inhalation of volatile anaesthetics and pulmonary ventilation. Equine
Vet J 2018; 50(3): 282–291.
92 Kalchofner KS, Picek S, Ringer SK, et al. A study of cardiovascular function under
controlled and spontaneous ventilation in isoflurane-medetomidine anaesthe-
tized horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36(5): 426–435.
93 Khanna AK, McDonell WN, Dyson DH, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of hyper-
capnia during controlled intermittent positive pressure ventilation in the horse.
Can J Vet Res 1995; 59(3): 213–221.
94 Moens Y. Mechanical ventilation and respiratory mechanics during equine anes-
thesia. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 2013; 29(1): 51–67.
95 Edner A, Nyman G, Essen-Gustavsson B. The effects of spontaneous and mechan-
ical ventilation on central cardiovascular function and peripheral perfusion dur-
ing isoflurane anaesthesia in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2005; 32(3): 136–146.
96 Nyman G, Funkquist B, Kvart C, et al. Atelectasis causes gas exchange impairment
in the anaesthetised horse. Equine Vet J 1990; 22(5): 317–324.
97 Hopster K, Lastner SBR, Rohn K, et al. Intermittent positive pressure ventilation
with constant positive end-expiratory pressure and alveolar recruitment manoeu-
vre during inhalation anaesthesia in horses undergoing surgery for colic and its
influence on the early recovery period. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38(3): 169–177.
98 Gozalo-Marcilla M, Ringer SK. Recovery after general anaesthesia in adult horses:
a structured summary of the literature. Animals 2021; 11(6): 1777.
99 Clark-Price SC, Posner L, Gleed RD. Recovery of horses from general anesthesia
in a darkened or illuminated recovery stall. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35(6):
473–479.
100 Ray-Miller WM, Hodgson DS, McMurphy RM, et al. Comparison of recoveries
from anesthesia of horses placed on a rapidly inflating-deflating air pillow or the
floor of a padded stall. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2006; 229(5): 711–716.
101 Lukasik VM, Gleed RD, Scarlett JM, et al. Intranasal phenylephrine reduces post
anesthetic upper airway obstruction in horses. Equine Vet J 1997; 29(3): 236–238.
102 Senior M. Post- anaesthetic pulmonary oedema in horses: a review. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2005; 32(4): 193–200.
103 Veres-Nyeki KO, Graubner C, Aloisio F, et al. Pulmonary edema at recovery after
colic operation with in-situ nasogastric tube in a horse. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd
2011; 153(9): 401–404.
104 Santos M, Fuente M, Garcia-Iturralde R, et al. Effects of alpha-2 adrenoceptor
agonists during recovery from isoflurane anaesthesia in horses. Equine Vet J 2003;
35(2): 170–175.
105 Woodhouse KJ, Brosnan RJ, Nguyen KO, et al. Effects of postanesthetic sedation
with romifidine or xylazine on quality of recovery from isoflurane anesthesia in
horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2013; 242(4): 533–539.
106 Wagner AE, Mama KR, Steffey EP, et al. Evaluation of infusions of xylazine with
ketamine or propofol to modulate recovery following sevoflurane anesthesia in
horses. Am J Vet Res 2012; 73(3): 346–352.
107 Steffey EP, Mama KR, Brosnan RJ, et al. Effect of administration of propofol and
xylazine hydrochloride on recovery of horses after four hours of anesthesia with
desflurane. Am J Vet Res 2009; 70(8): 956–963.

-- 1231 of 1450 --

1216 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
108 Valverde A, Black B, Cribb NC, et al. Assessment of unassisted recovery from
repeated general isoflurane anesthesia in horses following post-anesthetic admin-
istration of xylazine or acepromazine or a combination of xylazine and ketamine.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40(1): 3–12.
109 Ringer SK, Portier K, Torgerson PR, et al. The effects of a loading dose followed by
constant rate infusion of xylazine compared with romifidine on sedation, ataxia
and response to stimuli in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40(2): 157–165.
110 Rüegg M, Bettschart-Wolfensberger, Hartnack, et al. Comparison of non-assisted
and tail rope-assisted recovery after abdominal surgery in horses. Pferdeheilkunde
2016; 32: 469–478.
111 Steffey EP, Brosnan RJ, Galuppo LD, et al. Use of propofol-xylazine and the
Anderson Sling Suspension System for recovery of horses from desflurane anes-
thesia. Vet Surg 2009; 38(8): 927–933.
112 Picek S, Kalchofner KS, Ringer SK, et al. Anaesthetic management for hydropool
recovery in 50 horses. Pferdeheilkunde 2010; 26: 515–522.
113 Sullivan EK, Klein LV, Richardson DW, et al. Use of a pool-raft system for recovery
of horses from general anesthesia: 393 horses (1984–2000). J Am Vet Med Assoc
2002; 221(7): 1014–1018.

-- 1232 of 1450 --

1217
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: T he Sixth Edition of Lumb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
“Colic” is a term used to describe abdominal pain in the horse.
The underlying pathology typically occurs in the gastrointestinal
tract but can also be caused by disease in the kidneys, bladder, or
other viscera. Colic is a significant cause of morbidity and mortal-
ity in equine practice. Most horses with colic are treated with med-
ical management, and only a minority of cases require surgical
intervention. In a 1997 epidemiological study, approximately 11
colic cases occurred for every 100 horse-years. While 75% of these
were mild and resolved with no treatment or a single farm visit, 4%
of all cases needed surgical intervention [1]. The percentage
increases when considering horses hospitalized for colic. Of 1588
horses with colic presenting to a veterinary hospital in Denmark
for inpatient care, 31% needed exploratory laparotomy [2].
Similarly, in another study on 649 horses hospitalized for colic,
28% received abdominal surgery [3]. Recent epidemiological stud-
ies have found an average survival to discharge rate of 42–54% for
colic surgery [2,4]. Patients that present with colic that require sur-
gical intervention represent a high-risk population that necessi-
tates careful preparation and intensive perioperative management.
This chapter will focus on the anesthetic management of surgical
colic cases, including the practical and theoretical aspects of preparing
for an emergent exploratory laparotomy. After discussing the
management concerns and anticipated anesthetic complications,
the authors will describe the stabilization of the patient and
selection of an appropriate anesthetic protocol.
Endotoxemia and systemic inflammatory
response syndrome
Endotoxemia in the colic horse presents a significant challenge to
the anesthetist. Recent studies estimate that 30% of all horses with
colic [5,6] and 55% of horses needing colic surgery [6] meet sys-
temic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) criteria. The clini-
cal effects of sepsis, often exacerbated during general anesthesia due
to sympathetic suppression and the pharmacologic effects of anes-
thetic drugs, underlie many anticipated anesthetic complications
encountered in horses undergoing colic surgery. Therefore, the
anesthetist should understand the etiopathogenesis and the thera-
peutic strategies to manage the endotoxemic horse.
Endotoxemia occurs when gram-negative bacteria or their cell
wall components, such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS), enter the
bloodstream. With strangulating colic lesions, the impaired blood
supply to the entrapped bowel leads to segments of ischemic gastro-
intestinal mucosa and consequent impairment of epithelial
integrity that allow for translocation of these bacterial compo-
nents [7,8]. LPS is bound by circulating LPS-binding protein; this
complex then binds to the CD14 protein on the surface of
62 Horses with Colic
Ludovica Chiavaccini1 and Lauren R. Duffee 2
1 Department of Comparative, Diagnostic and Population Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA
2 Massachusetts Veterinary Referral Hospital, Woburn, Massachusetts, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 1217
Endotoxemia and systemic inflammatory response syndrome, 1217
Preanesthetic considerations, 1218
Clinical history, 1218
Physical examination, 1219
Diagnostics, 1219
Anesthetic risks and anticipated complications, 1219
Hypotension, 1219
Impaired ventilation–perfusion matching, 1220
Arrhythmias, 1221
Postanesthetic myopathy and neuropathy, 1221
Preparation of the surgical area, 1221
Stabilization and fluid resuscitation, 1222
Anesthetic protocol, 1224
Premedication, 1224
Induction and intubation, 1224
Maintenance of anesthesia, 1225
Adjunct agents, 1225
Locoregional anesthesia, 1227
Monitoring, 1227
Ventilation strategies, 1228
Recovery, 1228
References, 1229

-- 1233 of 1450 --

1218 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
circulating macrophages. Activated macrophages then secrete
numerous proinflammatory cytokines that initiate a signaling cas-
cade, leading to the onset of SIRS [9,10]. Interleukin-1 (IL-1)
induces fever, increases circulating neutrophils, reduces albumin
synthesis, and increases acute phase protein production. Tumor
necrosis factor-α (TNFα) stimulates further IL-1 production, neu-
trophil adhesion, and extravasation and plays a role in the coagu-
lopathy seen during endotoxemia. Interleukin-6 (IL-6) leads to the
differentiation of B-lymphocytes into antibody-producing cells and
increases the production of acute phase proteins [7]. The release of
epinephrine and norepinephrine into the systemic circulation is
triggered by LPS, which increases cardiac output and causes tachy-
cardia, pulmonary hypertension, arterial hypoxemia, and tachyp-
nea. Splenic contraction contributes to hemoconcentration in dogs
and, likely, in horses [11]. Myocardial dysfunction, characterized by
biventricular dilation and reduced ejection fraction, is attributed to
increased circulating TNFα [12]. The release of reactive oxygen
species by neutrophils increases circulating inflammatory cytokines,
like TNFα, and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), leading to
endothelial glycocalyx degradation. Degradation of the glycocalyx
increases vascular permeability to fluid and plasma proteins [12,13].
Circulating inflammatory mediators also result in vascular dysreg-
ulation and decreased systemic vascular resistance, leading to sys-
temic hypotension [12]. Increased lactate concentrations, metabolic
acidosis, and perfusion-dependent oxygen consumption suggest
disruptions in oxygen delivery and cellular metabolism, although
the mechanism is not entirely understood [12]. Thus, septic shock
has hypovolemic, cardiogenic, and distributive components, con-
tributing to a state of hypoperfusion. Hyperglycemia first occurs
due to increased hepatic gluconeogenesis, but glycogen depletion
and inhibition of gluconeogenesis lead to hypoglycemia over time.
Decreased capillary blood flow and pooling of blood in capillary
beds lead to the characteristic congestion of mucous membranes,
slow capillary refill time (CRT), and cold extremities commonly
found on physical examination [14]. The microvascular clotting
induced by acidosis and stagnant circulation, consumption of coag-
ulation factors, and fibrinolysis results in coagulopathy that can
evolve into disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) [15]. If
left untreated, endotoxemia culminates in multiple organ dysfunc-
tion syndrome, with the kidney, liver, lung, and heart most vulner-
able to failure [7].
No official consensus has defined the clinical features of SIRS in
the horse. However, most clinicians have adopted the definition
established for human patients [16]. A 2017 study determined the
diagnostic criteria for SIRS in the horse through statistical mode-
ling of physical examination and hematological variables. It was
found that a heart rate (HR) > 52 beats/min, respiratory rate > 20
breaths/min, leukopenia < 5.0 × 109 cells/L or leukocytosis > 12.5 ×
10 9 cells/L, and a rectal temperature < 37 °C or > 38.5 °C were asso-
ciated with higher mortality [6]. Based on this definition, research-
ers found that 30 out of 55 surgical colic horses presenting for
emergency laparotomy met the SIRS definition criteria and had
almost sevenfold mortality risk than surgical colics that did not
meet these criteria. There are several biomarkers used in human
medicine to detect sepsis and SIRS. Recently, molecular biomarkers
such as MMP-9 [17], protein carbonyl content [18], serum amyloid
A [19,20], soluble CD14 [21,22], adrenomedullin, and procalci-
tonin [23] have been studied in the horse.
Treatment for patients with endotoxemia includes removing the
source of infection (including LPS), fluid therapy and cardiovascular
support, and inhibition of the inflammatory response. Administration
of immunoglobulins against LPS with hyperimmunized J5 equine
plasma helps accelerate the clearance of LPS and gram-negative bac-
teria from the bloodstream [24,25]. Hyperimmunized plasma may
also contain acute phase proteins that help inhibit the proinflamma-
tory cytokine cascade, as it seems to reduce TNFα activity [26].
However, at present, there is conflicting evidence of the clinical effi-
cacy and improved survival rate of endotoxemic horses treated with
hyperimmunized plasma [27–29]. Polymyxin B is an antimicrobial
that is effective against gram-negative bacteria. Its utility lies in its
ability to neutralize circulating endotoxin by binding to the lipid A
region of LPS, forming a stable, covalently bound compound [30].
Polymyxin B also reduces circulating TNFα, is an antipyretic, and
improves tachycardia [31]. However, its use may be limited due to its
neurotoxic and nephrotoxic effects [32]. Administration of up to
6000 U/kg intravenously (IV) did not cause changes in adult horses’
γ-glutamyl transferase (GGT):creatinine ratio [31,33]. In an in vitro
endotoxemia model, pentoxifylline, a phosphodiesterase inhibitor,
inhibited the activity of TNFα and IL-6 [34]. Horses challenged with
LPS after pentoxifylline administration (7.5 mg/kg bolus followed by
a 3-h infusion of 3 mg/kg/h) recorded significantly lower rectal tem-
peratures and respiratory rates than the control group [35].
Additionally, when pentoxifylline (8 mg/kg IV) was combined with
flunixin meglumine (1.1 mg/kg IV), horses had fewer cardiovascular
changes 	after 	LPS 	administration 	[36]. 	Non-steroidal 	anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are commonly utilized as a part of the
treatment of endotoxemia due to their ability to reduce circulating
prostaglandins levels [25]. Flunixin meglumine reduces clinical signs
of endotoxemia and reduces the peripheral vascular effects of
LPS [37]. The “antiendotoxic dose” (0.25 mg/kg IV) inhibits eicosa-
noid production without masking clinical signs of colic pain [38].
However, because flunixin meglumine has been shown to inhibit
repair of the epithelial barrier in the ischemic bowel via the inhibition
of both COX-1 and COX-2 isoenzymes [39], other COX-2 selective
NSAIDs, such as meloxicam (0.6 mg/kg IV) [40] and firocoxib, may
become preferred alternatives. These NSAIDs cause less intestinal
permeability to LPS than flunixin meglumine [41]. Glucocorticoids,
such as dexamethasone and prednisolone, inhibit activation of
nuclear factor κ-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-κB)
signaling pathways. However, due to the suspected dysregulation of
the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis, high cortisol levels in foals
with sepsis [42], and conflicting results from human literature, they
are not routinely used to manage the septic horse [25]. Ethyl pyruvate
inhibits the formation of reactive oxygen species and has anti-
inflammatory properties [25,43]. Administration of ethyl pyruvate
decreased production of TNFα, IL-8, and COX-2 expression in an
in vitro experimental model [44]. In experimentally induced endo-
toxemia, ethyl pyruvate (150 mg/kg in 1 L of Lactated Ringer’s solu-
tion [LRS] infused over 1 h) significantly decreased pain scores and
reduced proinflammatory cytokines compared to the control group
that received flunixin meglumine (1.1 mg/kg IV) alone [45]. Despite
the lack of detrimental effects of ethyl pyruvate in normal horses, it is
not widely used in equine colic surgery.
Preanesthetic considerations
Clinical history
The anesthetist should familiarize themselves with the pertinent details
of the case. The duration of clinical signs, diagnostics performed, and
therapies performed by the referring veterinarian should be reviewed.
The timeline and dosages of all medications should be listed. Prior sur-
gical or anesthetic history should be reviewed if available.

-- 1234 of 1450 --

Chapter 62: Horses with Colic 	1219
Physical examination
The anesthetist should perform a physical examination of the horse
prior to induction of anesthesia. Evaluation of vital signs, ausculta-
tion of cardiopulmonary structures, and gastrointestinal borbo-
rygmi, pulse palpation, and visual examination of mucous
membrane color and CRT provide essential information for the
anesthetist. In addition, palpation of the ear tips and distal extremi-
ties provide insight into perfusion status, as cold limbs and ears are
consistent with centralization of circulation seen with septic shock.
The degree of pain and colic behavior should be evaluated in
light of the sedative and analgesic agents already administered.
Several pain scales can be used to evaluate the horse affected by
colic [46–48]. While most horses can be violently painful with
ischemic bowel lesions, draft breeds are more likely to behave stoi-
cally and mask disease severity within the abdomen. In the authors’
experience, horses that initially present with severe pain followed
by a sudden decrease in intensity of colic signs are at high risk of
gastric or intestinal rupture.
Diagnostics
The anesthetist should be aware of the findings on rectal palpation,
the volume of nasogastric reflux, and abnormalities detected via
abdominal ultrasound and abdominocentesis. Critical laboratory
parameters to evaluate include packed cell volume (PCV) and total
solids (TS), lactate, blood glucose, creatinine, complete blood count
(CBC), and electrolytes (sodium, potassium, calcium, and magne-
sium). Hemoconcentration is common in horses with colic.
However, a divergence of the PCV and TS, where the PCV is ele-
vated in the face of reduced TS (e.g., PCV 60%, TS 3.4 g/dL), is
suggestive of septic shock and more severe disease [13]. Lactate is
an important biomarker of the severity of intestinal disease and
may provide important prognostic information. Type A lactic aci-
dosis occurs from increased lactate production following hypoper-
fusion and reduced oxygen delivery, as seen in colic horses due to
dehydration, hypovolemia, and shock. Simultaneously, type B lactic
acidosis may occur in septic horses due to reduced lactate clearance
by the liver [49]. While single lactate values are unreliable prognos-
tic indicators, sequentially increasing lactate values in the face of
fluid resuscitation have been associated with increased mortal-
ity [50]. Comparison of peritoneal and peripheral lactate values can
help diagnose a strangulating versus a non-strangulating lesion.
Horses with strangulating lesions have significantly higher perito-
neal fluid lactate values than horses with non-strangulating obstruc-
tions [51,52]. There is a significantly greater risk of ischemic bowel
and mortality when the abdominal fluid has a higher lactate value
than the peripheral blood [52–54].
Anesthetic risks and anticipated
complications
Given the critical and emergent nature of the surgical colic and
the high risk for morbidity, it is crucial to contemplate the poten-
tial problems facing the anesthetist. While the basic anesthetic
principles of equine anesthesia remain, certain complications are
more commonly observed in the horse undergoing exploratory
laparotomy.
Hypotension
Hypotension, defined as a systolic arterial pressure less than
90 mmHg (12 kPa) or a mean arterial pressure (MAP) less than
60 mmHg (8 kPa), is a complication commonly observed in horses
undergoing emergency exploratory laparotomy. Hypotension has
been recognized as a negative predictor of survival to anesthetic
recovery [55,56]. Therefore, all horses undergoing colic surgery
should have an arterial catheter placed for invasive blood pressure
monitoring. This will provide continuous blood pressure measure-
ment and will allow for waveform analysis. Evaluation of the arte-
rial 	waveform 	and 	the 	plethysmograph 	waveform 	during
mechanical ventilation can assist the anesthetist in evaluating the
severity of the volume deficits and patient fluid responsiveness [57].
A more comprehensive discussion on waveform interpretation and
fluid management of the horse undergoing colic surgery is provided
later in this chapter.
Many horses undergoing colic surgery arrive at induction dehy-
drated and hypovolemic, increasing the likelihood of hypotension
after induction. Those horses that received prolonged medical
management are more likely to be fully fluid resuscitated before
induction. However, the violently painful colic patient often does
not allow adequate fluid resuscitation before surgery. Endotoxemia
and septic shock may also contribute to hypotension in the horse
undergoing colic surgery. The vasomotor paralysis with endotox-
emia can lead to significant vasodilation and subsequent hypoten-
sion [12]. Horses severely endotoxemic at the time of induction are
likely to be hypotensive throughout the anesthetic event. Some
horses may experience endotoxemic “showers” or episodes as the
strangulating lesion is released and blood flow to the ischemic
bowel resumes. As a severe drop in blood pressure can happen with
surgical correction, the surgical and anesthetic teams should com-
municate to help anticipate and respond quickly to large swings in
the patient’s cardiovascular stability.
Iatrogenic cardiovascular depression is an important cause of
intraoperative hypotension in colic patients. Horses presented for
surgical colic are often sedated and premedicated with α2 - adrenergic
receptor agonists like xylazine and detomidine. These agents cause
bradycardia and eventually prolonged vasodilation with a signifi-
cant reduction in the cardiac output [58,59]. Once the horse loses
consciousness and the sympathetic drive is inhibited by anesthetic
agents, the negative cardiovascular effects of these drugs can
become readily apparent. Unfortunately, for the safety of the patient
and surgical personnel, and given the lack of reliable sedative alter-
natives, α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists are a mainstay in equine
anesthesia. It is well established that maintenance with inhalant
anesthetics contributes significantly to hypotension through their
vasodilative and negative inotropic effects [60,61]. Therefore, there
is an emphasis on incorporating inhalant-sparing agents in a bal-
anced anesthetic protocol that helps limit the amount of inhalant
anesthetic required to maintain a surgical plane of anesthesia. The
reader is referred to the section entitled “Adjunct agents” in this
chapter.
Another critical factor contributing to hypotension is the com-
pression of vasculature when the horse is placed in dorsal recum-
bency [62,63]. Tilting the table to Trendelenburg or reverse
Trendelenburg positioning does not appear to have a significant
effect on arterial blood pressure [64]. In the authors’ experience, the
adverse effects of recumbency are more severe when the horse is
not adequately fluid loaded. While dorsal recumbency is unavoid-
able in the horse undergoing colic surgery, precious time can be
saved by starting to clip and surgically prepare the patient while it is
standing or in lateral recumbency.
Intermittent positive-pressure ventilation (IPPV) is yet another
contributing factor to hypotension. The positive intrathoracic pres-
sures created with the inspiratory phase compromise venous return

-- 1235 of 1450 --

1220 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
of blood to the heart [57,65]. The impairment involves the large
veins returning to the right atrium and the pulmonary capillaries. It
is reasonable to assume that the severity of the cardiovascular
effects of IPPV increases with higher airway pressures and longer
inspiratory times. However, there is conflicting evidence in the lit-
erature [66,67]. Therefore, the anesthetist must wisely balance the
need for mechanical ventilation and its negative impact on cardio-
vascular function. The decision regarding which system to prior-
itize will vary from case to case and should be consistently
re-evaluated as the case progresses.
Despite fluid administration and position changes, positive ino-
tropes and vasopressors are often needed to maintain acceptable
blood pressure in the horse undergoing colic surgery. Dobutamine
can be used as an infusion (0.25–2 μg/kg/min) to increase cardiac
output, stroke volume, and blood pressure [68,69]. In response to
severe vasodilation, phenylephrine (0.25–1 μg/kg/min) or norepi-
nephrine (0.1–1 μg/kg/min) can increase blood pressure through
vasoconstriction, increasing the diastolic pressure and reducing
venous blood pooling. Norepinephrine may be preferred over phe-
nylephrine as a vasopressor as it may better preserve cardiac out-
put [68,69]. Evaluation of intestinal perfusion demonstrated
sustained blood flow through the small intestines, large intestines,
and stomach with norepinephrine compared to phenylephrine
infusion [69]. During the transition from the induction area to the
operating table and from the table to the recovery area, ephedrine
(0.05–0.1 mg/kg IV) can be a useful tool to provide both inotropic
and vasomotor support, as it is a mixed β1 - and α1 - adrenergic recep-
tor agonist [70]. Ephedrine is effective as a single injection and has
a 10–15-min clinical effect. However, the pressure-increasing effect
of ephedrine is transient due to its indirect sympathomimetic activ-
ity, and it may become ineffective if used in infusion for a prolonged
period [71]. In addition, the reader should be aware that ephedrine
does cross the blood–brain barrier and may decrease the anesthetic
plane of the horse. Adrenergic agent efficacy is reduced in the face
of acidemia [72], and vasopressin may be required to increase sys-
temic vascular resistance in this circumstance.
Impaired ventilation–perfusion matching
Absolute or relative hypoxemia is a commonly encountered anes-
thetic complication in equine anesthesia [73]. In a recent retrospec-
tive study, horses undergoing colic surgery were over six times more
likely to develop hypoxemia (defined as PaO2 less than 80 mmHg or
10.6 kPa) than horses undergoing elective procedures [74]. Despite
the frequent occurrence of severe blood gas derangements, no study
has established a clear association between hypoxemia and an
increased risk of mortality in horses [73]. It is worth noting that the
above-mentioned retrospective study reported that 32.47% of
horses undergoing a hypoxemic event during general anesthesia did
not survive discharge from the hospital, compared to 15.49% of
those that did not develop hypoxemia [74]. It appears that the gas-
trointestinal system can tolerate moderate hypoxemia. A recent
study found that an arterial hemoglobin saturation with oxygen
(SaO 2
) of less than 90% led to an initial increase in oxygen extrac-
tion to maintain cellular metabolism. However, tissue oxygenation
markedly declined when the SaO2 decreased below 80% [75]. There
is conflicting evidence on whether intraoperative hypoxemia
increases the risk of surgical site infection in horses undergoing
colic surgery. While one study found no link between low PaO2 and
incisional complications [76], another study found that horses with
PaO 2 values less than 80 mmHg (10.6 kPa) and anesthesia times
longer than 2 h had a greater risk for surgical site infections [77].
Finally, hypoxemia may be associated with higher risk of poor
recovery after colic surgery [78].
The underlying cause for the reduced gas exchange in horses
undergoing colic surgery is likely multifactorial but primarily due
to ventilation–perfusion (V/Q) mismatch and atelectasis [73,79].
Atelectasis can be classified as either compression atelectasis or
absorption atelectasis. By nature of the procedure, horses undergo-
ing colic surgery are dorsally recumbent for the duration of surgery.
In dorsal recumbency, the abdominal viscera impose significant
pressure on the diaphragm [80–82]. This, combined with the
reduced inspiratory muscle tone during general anesthesia, results
in cranial displacement of the diaphragm causing compression ate-
lectasis [83]. The abdominal distension that accompanies many
colic cases exacerbates the compressive effects of dorsal recum-
bency. Therefore, horses undergoing surgery for large intestinal
lesions are at higher risk of developing hypoxemia [74]. Exteriorizing
the distended colon is often followed by significant improvements
in the PaO2 [84]. Reverse Trendelenburg position failed to show a
benefit on the PaO2 of horses positioned in dorsal recum-
bency [64,85,86]. The only exception may be in horses weighing
more than 600 kg [86]. Several authors have investigated the effect
of lower inspired oxygen fractions (F I
O2
) to reduce the formation of
absorption atelectasis [87–90]. From the current body of literature,
we can conclude that the use of a higher F I
O2 in horses during inha-
lation anesthesia results in a higher PaO 2
, but also (and unsurpris-
ingly) a greater alveolar–arterial difference (P(a- a)O2 gradient) [91].
More evidence is needed to confirm or deny the benefit of reduced
F I
O2 in managing horses undergoing colic surgery.
While a low V/Q ratio is likely the most significant contributor to
hypoxemia in the dorsally recumbent horse, areas of increased alve-
olar dead space, and thus high V/Q ratios, also contribute to poor
pulmonary gas exchange. Alveolar dead space increases with poor
pulmonary perfusion, seen in reduced cardiac output states [92].
The combination of hypovolemia, cardiovascular side effects from
sedatives and anesthetics, and septic shock all contribute to a state
of hypoperfusion. Adding an inspiratory pause of 30% of the inspir-
atory time may improve dead space in dorsally recumbent horses,
but its clinical value is still unclear [93].
The anesthetist should prepare to monitor the patient for the
onset and progression of hypoxemia and gather the necessary
equipment to intervene if hypoxemia arises. Pulse oximetry is a
widely available and non-invasive tool for measuring hemoglobin
saturation and should be routinely used. Though there are spe-
cies differences in the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve [94], a
SpO 2 reading of 90% corresponds approximately to a PaO 2 of
60 mmHg (8 kPa). As the SpO 2 drops further, arterial oxygen
content precipitously decreases, warranting intervention [73].
The pulse oximeter is a sensitive and valuable monitoring tool to
detect hypoxemia when the horse is breathing room air (as occurs
before connection to the anesthesia machine or during the recov-
ery phase). However, when the animal is under general anesthe-
sia and maintained with an F I O 2 of 1.0 (100%), the pulse oximeter
only signals if the problem is already severe. As a result, it is rec-
ommended to routinely perform serial arterial blood gas analysis
in the horse undergoing colic surgery. General guidelines suggest
an arterial blood sample should be taken 30 min after induction
and then every 90–120 min in a stable case or every 45–60 min in
a metabolically unstable case [95]. The PaO 2 value obtained by
blood gas analysis provides an objective measure of pulmonary
gas exchange that can be tracked over time and used to evaluate
the effectiveness of various interventions.

-- 1236 of 1450 --

Chapter 62: Horses with Colic 	1221
Most treatments for hypoxemia aim to improve V/Q matching.
A quick laparotomy incision and exteriorization of the colon
reduce the compressive forces of the abdomen and limit the fur-
ther development of compression atelectasis [84]. The open lung
ventilation technique combines IPPV with intermittent alveolar
recruitment maneuvers and positive end-expiratory pressure
(PEEP) [96,97]. In 30 warmblood horses anesthetized for colic
surgery, 15 were mechanically ventilated with a 15–20 mL/kg
tidal volume, 1:2 inspiratory to expiratory time (I:E) ratio and a
peak inspiratory pressure (PIP) of 30–45 cmH 2 O, while 15
received similar ventilation with the addition of 15–25 cmH 2 O
PEEP and intermittent alveolar recruitment maneuvers up to
80 cmH 2 O (open lung concept). Horses receiving open lung con-
cept ventilation recorded significantly higher PaO 2 values (300–
450 mmHg; 40–60 kPa) compared to the control group
(100–240 mmHg; 13.3–32 kPa) [98]. In an additional study per-
formed on 24 warmblood horses anesthetized for colic surgery,
the treatment group that received IPPV with 10 cmH 2 O PEEP
and intermittent alveolar recruitment maneuvers recorded sig-
nificantly higher PaO 2 values and shorter recovery times than the
control group [96].
Aerosolized albuterol can be utilized in the hypoxemic colic
patient. An earlier study found a twofold increase in PaO 2 within
20 min of a 2 μg/kg albuterol dose administered via the endotracheal
tube in horses with an initial PaO2 less than 70 mmHg (9.3 kPa) [99].
However, the reader should be aware that the improvement in PaO2
is inconsistent [100]. The underlying mechanism is poorly under-
stood and could be attributed to bronchodilation (via β2
- adrenergic
stimulation), improved cardiac output (via β1 - adrenergic stimula-
tion), or a combination of both effects. Finally, pulsed inhaled nitric
oxide (NO) has shown promising results. Inhaled NO is delivered
to the actively ventilated alveoli, causing selective pulmonary vaso-
dilation and improving V/Q matching at its source [101,102]. An
inhaled dose of 2000 ppm NO in nitrogen reduced the pulmonary
shunt fraction and improved horses’ PaO 2 [103,104]. Unfortunately,
the delivery of inhaled NO is not widely available in most equine
hospitals at this time.
Arrhythmias
There is limited research on the occurrence of cardiac arrhyth-
mias in horses undergoing colic surgery. Sinus tachycardia (HR >
55 beats/min) is the most common arrhythmia encountered in
colic patients and has several underlying causes, including disten-
sion of the viscera, pain, and endotoxemia [7]. While hypovolemia
and decreased cardiac return are common causes of sinus tachy-
cardia in other species, the literature suggests that the HR in the
anesthetized horse is less responsive to acute blood volume
changes [105]. A 2014 study evaluated the cardiac rhythm in con-
scious 	colic 	horses 	over 	a 	24-h 	hospitalization 	period.
Atrioventricular (AV) block and atrial premature complexes
(APCs) occurred in both colic and healthy horses, although ven-
tricular premature complexes (VPCs) only occurred in horses
experiencing colic [106]. In a model of experimentally induced
endotoxemia, VPCs were observed after the LPS injection [107].
Though not completely understood, VPCs are likely the result of
increased 	sympathetic 	tone 	and 	circulating 	inflammatory
cytokines [108]. Sporadic VPCs are self-limiting and rarely
require intervention, but in the case of runs of VPCs or multifocal
VPCs, treatment with lidocaine should be initiated. Bradycardia
and AV blocks are sometimes observed under general anesthesia
in colic horses, most commonly at the beginning of the anesthetic
event. They are usually attributed to α2 -adrenergic receptor ago-
nist administration and are typically self-limiting. If severe brady-
cardia (HR < 20 beats/min) is accompanied by hypotension, an
anticholinergic like atropine (0.01–0.02 mg/kg IV), glycopyrrolate
(0.005–0.01 mg/kg IV), or hyoscine N-butylbromide (0.05–0.1
mg/kg IV) [109] can be administered. However, long- lasting
anticholinergics should generally be avoided in the horse due to
the potential for impaired gastrointestinal motility [110].
Dobutamine can also be utilized as a positive chronotrope,
although this requires higher dose rates (> 5 μg/kg/min) than are
typically used for hemodynamic support [111].
Postanesthetic myopathy and neuropathy
An early study showed that one of 84 horses (1.2%) undergoing
colic surgery developed postoperative myopathy [112]. In a 2016
retrospective analysis concerning mortality rates associated with
equine anesthesia for elective and emergency cases, one horse was
euthanized for postanesthetic myopathy/neuropathy, and nine
horses had non-fatal myopathy/neuropathy, accounting for 7% of
fatal and 20% of non-fatal recovery complications, respec-
tively [113]. This study did not explore the relative risk of postanes-
thetic myopathy in emergency cases compared to elective cases.
However, postoperative myopathy tends to occur with prolonged
recumbency, typically combined with muscle hypoperfusion [114].
For this reason, horses undergoing colic surgery may be at higher
risk of developing neuromyopathies compared to horses undergo-
ing elective procedures. Prevention of postanesthetic myopathy and
neuropathy is more effective than treatment. Horses undergoing
prolonged anesthesia in a supine position should be placed on pro-
tective cushioned padding, the nose should be slightly elevated to
minimize development of nasal edema, and the head, limbs, and
pressure points should be properly padded. Proper positioning on
the operating table and ensuring the hind limbs are not left in an
extended position can help reduce the risk of peroneal and femoral
nerve injury [112]. Postsurgical myopathy significantly hinders
successful recovery, and such horses may need to be recovered with
a sling. Treatment is mainly based on medical management and
supportive care. In the worst cases, euthanasia may be the only
remaining option.
Preparation of the surgical area
The time between the colic horse’s arrival to the hospital and the
decision to proceed with colic surgery can be very short.
Therefore, it should come as no surprise that thorough prepara-
tion by the anesthetist prior to the horse’s arrival is required to
keep the process organized and efficient. An induction station or
room should be designated as an emergency area reserved for
patients with colic and, if possible, should be distinct from the
area used for orthopedic cases to prevent contamination. This
area can be set up ahead of time with everything needed
(Box 62.1). The anesthesia machine should be left pressure
checked, the inhalant anesthetic refilled, and the carbon dioxide
absorbent should be fresh. The ventilator should be assembled,
and a PEEP valve at hand. Positive inotropes and vasopressors
should be ready in small fluid bags, attached to primed fluid sets,
and assembled in volumetric pumps if available. A large bore
fluid administration set and 5 L crystalloid fluid bags should be
readily available. All material, including endotracheal tubes,
catheters, fluids, arterial line supplies, etc., should be prepared to
save valuable time once the horse arrives.

-- 1237 of 1450 --

1222 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
Stabilization and fluid resuscitation
Fluid administration should be started before anesthesia induction
(or immediately after) to correct fluid, acid–base, and electrolyte
derangements. In critically ill patients, the authors prefer to place at
least one large-gauge (10–14 gauge) jugular catheter per side before
induction of anesthesia. A second jugular venous catheter can be
used to maximize the fluid administration rate or to administer
blood products, like hyperimmunized plasma. While not com-
monly used, the lateral thoracic vein may be another valuable access
point for rapid administration of fluids during anesthesia. The lat-
eral branch of the saphenous vein can be catheterized in the neona-
tal foal [115]. The anesthetist should address two questions when
administering fluids:
1 Which fluid type should be used for resuscitation?
2 How much volume should be administered?
The type of fluids relies on the anesthetist’s final goal and a single
fluid type alone is rarely used. For example, crystalloids can be used
for tissue rehydration and correction of acid–base and electrolyte
abnormalities. Synthetic colloids (e.g., 6% Hetastarch [HES]) can be
used for increasing the colloid osmotic pressure (COP). Guidelines
set by the Surviving Sepsis Campaign (SSC) in 2021 suggest that at
least 30 mL/kg of IV isotonic crystalloid fluid should be given
within the first 3 h of resuscitation in human patients with sepsis-
induced hypoperfusion or septic shock. The guidelines also caution
against the use of saline for resuscitation, as the resulting hyper-
chloremic metabolic acidosis has been associated with increased
mortality [116]. The prescribed volume corresponds to approxi-
mately 15 L for a 500 kg horse, which may be logistically difficult to
achieve prior to anesthesia. Instead, small-volume resuscitation
using hypertonic saline solution (HSS), usually at concentrations
between 7.2–7.5%, followed by a colloid can achieve similar or
superior volume expansion utilizing much smaller volumes than
crystalloids alone. The rationale involves using the high osmolality
of HSS (2400 mOsm/L) to draw fluids from the extravascular space
into the circulation, causing rapid volume expansion and restoring
preload while improving cardiac output and perfusion [117,118].
Other effects of HSS beneficial to the horse undergoing colic sur-
gery include protection against inflammation, injury, and impaired
intestinal transit [119]. While beneficial, the effect of HSS is short-
lived because, as a crystalloid, it redistributes in the extravascular
space within 60–120 min [120]. The addition of a colloid is intended
to prolong the plasma expansion effects of HSS through the
improvement of the COP [121–124]. Increased COP persisted for
up to 24 h after administration of 8–10 mL/kg of HES in hypopro-
teinemic horses [124] and the effect was slightly longer in healthy
horses [123]. More recent studies suggest that the plasma expansion
effect of colloids is not a result of fluid resorption from the intersti-
tial space but rather due to interaction with the non-circulating
portion of the intravascular fluid, the glycocalyx. Colloids bind to
the glycocalyx increasing its COP and limiting the transendothelial
flow of fluids [125]. For this reason, the effectiveness of colloids as
plasma volume expanders is thought to be dependent on an intact
glycocalyx. This means that under conditions of increased perme-
ability such as sepsis, the plasma expansion effect of colloids is
reduced. Controversies still exist regarding the clinical effectiveness
of colloids versus crystalloids for fluid resuscitation in horses. It is
known that in horses undergoing colic surgery, COP decreases pro-
portionally with the decrease in total protein throughout anesthesia
with the administration of 15–25 mL/kg/h of LRS [126]. In a recent
clinical study comparing the effects of 6 mL/kg of pentastarch (10%
HES) to an equal volume of LRS in horses undergoing elective sur-
gical procedures, 10% HES improved hemodilution, corrected the
decreased COP observed with LRS administration, and maintained
better blood pressures through anesthesia [122]. However, an early
study comparing resuscitation after experimentally induced endo-
toxemia using 5 mL/kg or 60 mL/kg of a balanced polyionic crystal-
loid solution, or 5 mL/kg of HSS followed by 10 mL/kg of 6% HES
failed to show a difference in cardiovascular and pulmonary effects
between the three treatments [127]. These findings corroborate the
theory that the effectiveness of colloids as plasma expanders is less
apparent in diseased horses than in healthy horses. In the 2016 SSC,
a strong recommendation was issued against using starches for
resuscitation, as they increased the risk of renal replacement ther-
apy and death in adult patients with sepsis or septic shock [128].
But a recent human systemic review found little to no difference in
the mortality rate in critically ill patients (including trauma, burns,
and sepsis) using synthetic colloids or crystalloids for fluid volume
resuscitation [129]. No strong evidence exists for horses undergo-
ing colic surgery. In one report, long-term postoperative mortality
in horses undergoing emergency exploratory laparotomy was not
statistically different following preoperative 10% HES administra-
tion versus HSS [130]. Other risks associated with the use of syn-
thetic colloids are the potential for allergic reactions and
coagulopathy. In an early study in healthy ponies receiving 6% HES,
decreases in fibrinogen concentration, von Willebrand factor anti-
gen, and factor VIII were reported; counterintuitively, reductions in
both activated partial thromboplastin time and prothrombin time
were also documented [131]. In healthy horses, tetrastarch (6%
HES 130/0.4) showed fewer adverse effects and affected platelet
function for a shorter period compared to hetastarch (6% HES
670/0.75) [123]. However, there is no mention of bleeding tendency
or clinically relevant changes in coagulation parameters in any of
the equine reports. The 2021 SSC suggested using albumin in
patients that received a large volume of crystalloids instead of using
crystalloids alone [128]. Little evidence exists on the use of natural
colloids in horses. In one small study, 8 mL/kg of 5% equine albu-
min solution in 0.9% saline did not significantly change the COP of
Box 62.1 Minimal anesthetic equipment to prepare in advance for the
horse to be anesthetized for emergent exploratory laparotomy (i.e., colic).
• Anesthesia machine and ventilator set up and pressure checked
• Multiparameter monitor, including ECG, SpO2
, IBP, PET
CO2 , and (if
available) agent analysis and temperature
• A bucket of water and large syringe
• Induction halter and ropes
• Appropriate size endotracheal tubes, mouth gag and water based
lubricant
• Hoist hobbles
• Several IV catheters including arterial (18–22 gauge) and intravenous
(10–14 gauge) catheter supplies
• Primed pressure transducer
• Preheparinized syringes for arterial blood gas sampling
• Blood gas analyzer
• Several 5 L bags of balanced crystalloid fluids
• Large bore fluid administration sets
• Hypertonic saline
• Synthetic colloids (if available)
• Calcium gluconate
• Potassium chloride
• Aerosolized albuterol
• Dobutamine and norepinephrine infusions. The drip rates for the
inotropic and vasopressor infusions should be precalculated or the
volumetric pump should be programmed and left in standby

-- 1238 of 1450 --

Chapter 62: Horses with Colic 	1223
horses with colic compared to a control group [130]. The authors
prefer to administer 2–4 mL/kg of HSS before or immediately after
induction of general anesthesia, along with a balanced polyionic
crystalloid solution, then add colloids (5–10 mL/kg of 6% HES or
plasma), to reduce the total volume needed for resuscitation.
For a long time, there was a tendency to treat horses undergoing
colic surgery with very aggressive fluid therapy rates. The concept of
fluid overload, while commonly recognized as an issue in human
and small animal anesthesia, has been largely ignored in equine
anesthesia. We now know that aggressive fluid therapy is associated
with tissue edema (including pulmonary edema), impaired wound
healing, compromised renal function, and increased mortality in
septic and postoperative patients [132]. Muzzle and periorbital
edema were observed in 83% of horses with experimentally induced
endotoxemia that received high infusion rates of an isotonic poly-
ionic crystalloid solution compared to none of the horses that
received HSS–HES [127]. Moreover, a recent case-control retrospec-
tive study suggested that larger volumes of fluids administered
under anesthesia may be associated with developing postoperative
reflux in horses undergoing colic surgery [133]. In human and small
animal fluid therapy, the concept of Early Goal-Directed
Resuscitation has been embraced [134]. The idea behind it is the
stepwise administration of fluids until normalization of perfusion
indicators such as pulse rate and quality, CRT, central venous pres-
sure (CVP), MAP, and urine output. Microvascular variables include
pH, base excess/base deficit (BE/BD) systemic lactate, and central
venous oxygen saturation (SvO2
). While some of these variables can
be easily assessed in the horse undergoing general anesthesia for
exploratory laparotomy, others are not routinely measured. In addi-
tion, it is worth noting that some of these variables (e.g., CVP and
urine output) are affected by general anesthesia and mechanical ven-
tilation; hence, their clinical value is reduced in the anesthetized
compared to the awake horse. The fluid therapy plan needs to
account for: (1) the horse’s daily needs, (2) the hydration status, (3)
the ongoing fluid losses, and (4) any acid–base derangement.
In an adult horse, fluid requirements are usually estimated to be
2–4 mL/kg/h (or 40–60 mL/kg/day) [135]. The maintenance fluid
requirement for a neonatal foal is higher than an adult and can be
estimated at 3–5 mL/kg/h [136]. In equids, the gastrointestinal tract
serves as a large reservoir of body water, accounting for approxi-
mately 20% of the total body water content [137]. As such, gastroin-
testinal derangement can cause significant and rapid water losses.
Water losses through dehydration are estimated as percent dehy-
dration. Physical examination parameters such as mucous mem-
brane moisture, skin turgor, and relative position of the globe are
used to estimate the degree of dehydration. Several charts and tables
exist to estimate dehydration based on clinical parameters
(Table 62.1). However, more recent findings have questioned the
validity of such clinical and behavioral methods for assessing water
losses [138,139]. In addition to these needs, any patient experienc-
ing ongoing losses, such as nasogastric reflux, diarrhea, or third-
space losses, will require replacement of these volumes to maintain
normal fluid balance.
Metabolic acidosis occurs frequently in horses with gastrointesti-
nal dysfunction. Severe acidosis can result in myocardial dysfunc-
tion, decreased cardiac output, and hypotension [140]. It also
inhibits the binding of norepinephrine to adrenergic recep-
tors [140,141]. Chloride deficient metabolic alkalosis can also be
observed in horses experiencing abundant nasogastric reflux. Acid–
base and electrolyte imbalances should be corrected before or dur-
ing anesthesia. Metabolic acidosis can improve with administration
of polyionic balanced crystalloid solutions. Sodium bicarbonate
(NaHCO3
) administration in the face of metabolic acidosis that is
not caused by bicarbonate loss is controversial and is unlikely to
improve survival [142]. However, if the total HCO3 is less than
12 mmol/L or BE is less than –11 mmol/L, bicarbonate therapy is
indicated. The amount of NaHCO3 needed to correct acidosis can be
calculated (Table 62.2). A quarter to half the calculated dose should
be administered over 30 min to 1 h, and acid–base status should be
reassessed. The authors prefer to correct pH to 7.2, to avoid overcor-
rection or side effects like paradoxical brain acidosis, reduced car-
diac contractility, hypernatremia, and hyperosmolarity. In a study
comparing electrolyte derangements in colic versus healthy horses,
the colic group recorded significantly lower potassium, ionized cal-
cium, and magnesium concentrations [143]. Hypocalcemia occurs
in 53–86% of horses undergoing colic surgery [143–145]. Suspected
underlying causes include endotoxemia, reduced feed intake, fluid
therapy, and metabolic acidosis [145,146]. Hypocalcemia contrib-
utes to myocardial dysfunction and reduced vasomotor tone, requir-
ing more aggressive vasopressor therapy than in normocalcemic
patients [147]. Hypocalcemia can cause muscle weakness, tachycar-
dia, hypotension and may contribute to postoperative ileus
(POI) [148]. Calcium administration remains controversial. While
some studies have demonstrated improved cardiac function with
calcium supplementation in a rodent model of sepsis, others have
shown increased mortality with no significant difference in cardio-
vascular performance [149–151]. Therefore, the authors usually
advocate 	treatment 	when 	ionized 	calcium 	drops 	below
1–1.2 mmol/L. Calcium gluconate 10% can be administered at a
dose ranging between 0.1 and 0.5 mL/kg (or calcium gluconate 23%
at 0.05–0.2 mL/kg). Hypokalemia has been reported in 30% of
horses presenting for colic surgery [144]. Horses with obstructive or
ischemic bowel had significantly lower potassium values than the
Table 62.1 Estimation of dehydration of the horse based on clinical signs.
Clinical signs 	Mild (4–6%) 	Moderate (7–9%) 	Severe (> 10%)
Capillary refill time 	1–2 s 	2–4 s 	>4 s
Mucous membranes 	Fair 	Tacky 	Dry
Skin tenting 	2–3 s 	3–5 s 	>5 s
PCV (%) 	40–50 	50–65 	>65
TP (g/dL) 	6.5–7.5 	7.5–8.5 	>8.5
Table 62.2 Recommendations for calculating isotonic polyionic crystalloid solution
administration and electrolyte replacement.
Factor 	Formula 	Example for a
500 kg horse
Daily maintenance 	2–4 mL/kg/h (or 40–60 mL/kg/day)
Increase to 75–80 mL/kg/day for a
neonatal foal
500 × 50 mL/kg/day
= 25 L
Dehydration 	Body weight (kg) × % dehydration 	500 × 7% = 35 L
Ongoing fluid
losses
Estimate the volume (L) lost to
nasogastric reflux, diarrhea, or
third-space losses and add it to the
total volume to be replaced
Bicarbonate
administration
Body weight (kg) × (24 – HCO 3 ) ×
0.3 or 1–2 mEq/kg
500 × (24 – 15) ×
0.3 = 1350 mEq of
NaHCO 3
KCl (2 mEq/mL) 	20–40 mEq/L of crystalloids
Not to exceed 0.5 mEq/kg/h
Calcium gluconate
10% (23%)
0.1–0.5 (0.05–0.2) mL/kg over
30–60 min
Monitor heart rate

-- 1239 of 1450 --

1224 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
control group [143]. Potassium can be reduced due to anorexia,
pain, gastrointestinal reflux, enterocolitis, and sodium-induced diu-
resis [148,152]. Because potassium is an intracellular electrolyte, if
potassium is low in the face of acidosis, the total deficit is likely to be
severe. Hypokalemia can be treated with 0.04–0.08 mEq/kg/L (or
adding 20–40 mEq of KCl in each L of balanced crystalloids solu-
tion). The dose should not exceed 0.5 mEq/kg/h. Guidelines for iso-
tonic polyionic crystalloid solution administration and electrolyte
correction are summarized in Table 62.2.
Anesthetic protocol
There is no unique or standardized anesthetic protocol for horses
undergoing colic surgery. The circumstances, familiarity of use and
personal preference, availability, and the critical status of the patient
will primarily dictate the protocol to use. The anesthetist’s goal is to
induce unconsciousness, myorelaxation, and surgical antinocicep-
tion while reducing cardiopulmonary compromise and improving
perioperative outcome. For more information about the pharma-
cology of specific sedative or anesthetic drugs, the reader is referred
elsewhere in this book. The current chapter focuses on the specific
situation of the horse undergoing general anesthesia for emergent
exploratory laparotomy.
Premedication
An α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist, with or without an opioid, is
almost universally used for the premedication of adult horses with
colic. Xylazine or detomidine can provide relief to horses experi-
encing mild to moderate colic pain, and for this reason, these drugs
are often used during the perioperative management of the colic
patient. In cases of severe colic pain, however, α2 -adrenergic recep-
tor agonists are often not adequate. Furthermore, repeated doses of
α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists may cause excessive sedation, fur-
ther cardiovascular depression, and a prolonged decrease in gastro-
intestinal motility in horses undergoing general anesthesia [153–156].
However, a recent study demonstrated no association between the
drugs used for premedication and the incidence of postoperative
gastrointestinal dysfunction in horses undergoing general anesthesia
for elective procedures [157]. A little more controversial is the use
of perioperative opioids, and this is rooted in three main concerns:
the possibility that opioids may cause excitation; the fear that the
use of perioperative full μ-opioid receptor agonists may decrease
gastrointestinal motility; and the insufficient or conflicting data on
the analgesic efficacy of full μ-opioid receptor agonists in horses
with naturally occurring colic. Excitation, ranging from “muzzle
tremors, muscle twitching, head jerks, head pressing” to “pacing,
vocalizing, rearing and kicking,” has been seen in pain-free
horses [158–161]. In the authors’ experience, these excitatory
effects are uncommonly seen at clinically relevant doses, in painful
animals, with concurrent administration of an α2
- adrenergic recep-
tor agonist. While both full μ-opioid receptor agonists and κ-opioid
receptor agonists have been associated with decreased fecal output
or fecal weight or both [160,162,163], postanesthetic signs of colic
or POI have never been clearly associated with the use of periopera-
tive opioids [157,164]. Finally, early experimental studies assessing
the analgesic effects of opioids in non-painful horses relied on
motor responses as the experimental endpoint and, as such, these
studies were probably confounded by opioid excitatory behavior in
this species [158]. Studies using electrophysiologic methods, such
as 	nociceptive 	withdrawal 	reflex 	and 	temporal 	summa-
tion [165,166], or quantitative sensory testing have demonstrated
analgesic properties of full μ-opioid receptor agonists in conscious
horses [161,162,167]. In the authors’ experience, the perioperative
use of morphine, hydromorphone, or methadone in horses under-
going colic surgery may improve perioperative analgesia with mini-
mal gastrointestinal effects and without affecting the quality of
recovery.
Induction and intubation
Various methods are used to induce and intubate horses undergo-
ing emergency exploratory laparotomy. Swinging gates to help hold
the horse against a wall and free fall with human support of the
head are probably the most common current techniques used.
However, some hospitals still use a vertical tilting table (Fig. 62.1).
Figure 62.1 Purpose-built equine tilting tables were historically popular and may remain in some equine hospitals. The horse is sedated and strapped to
the table before induction. This system, while cumbersome, is meant to reduce trauma and injuries during induction. Source: Dr. Alessia Cenani, with
permission.

-- 1240 of 1450 --

Chapter 62: Horses with Colic 	1225
Immediate induction of anesthesia may be necessary in severely
painful horses. Based on the clinician’s preference, the nasogastric
tube will be left in place or not. Some clinicians believe that leaving
the nasogastric tube in place reduces the risk of gastric rupture
caused by increased pressure within the stomach when the horse
becomes recumbent. However, other clinicians believe that gastric
rupture is still likely, and the risk of regurgitation increases if the
tube is left in place, because of disruption of the lower esophageal
sphincter seal. These authors prefer to reflux the horse one last time
immediately before induction and then pull the nasogastric tube.
Combinations of ketamine (2.2–3 mg/kg) with a myorelaxant,
either a benzodiazepine (midazolam or diazepam, 0.05–0.1 mg/kg)
or guaifenesin, are commonly used to induce anesthesia in horses
undergoing exploratory laparotomy. Thiopental is no longer avail-
able in the United States but is still used for equine induction in
other countries. Due to the long half-life of midazolam in
horses [168], diazepam and propofol (0.5 mg/kg) [169] have been
proposed as alternatives to reduce the risk of postoperative ataxia
on recovery. Evidence supporting the use of one protocol over
another is weak [170,171]. In addition, reversal of midazolam with
either low- or high-dose flumazenil did not improve recovery qual-
ity in a recent study [172]. Some clinicians prefer to maintain the
horse in sternal recumbency until the trachea is intubated and the
endotracheal tube cuff is inflated (Fig. 62.2). The rationale is to
secure the airway against passive gastric reflux [173]. After securing
the airway, the anesthetist should quickly confirm the patient’s
pulse or HR as cardiac arrest is not uncommon in horses with colic.
Maintenance of anesthesia
Some surgeons still elect to roll horses in an attempt to correct a left
dorsal colon displacement (nephrosplenic entrapment). This proce-
dure is commonly performed using total intravenous anesthesia
(TIVA). Different protocols have been published and the selection of
one drug combination over another depends largely on the comfort
level of the anesthetist, drug availability, personnel and equipment
available and, importantly, the expected duration of the procedure.
A combination of ketamine and an α2
-adrenergic receptor agonist,
with or without a myorelaxant (guaifenesin or midazolam) is com-
monly used. In these cases, phenylephrine is administered prior to
anesthesia to cause splenic contraction and facilitate correc-
tion [174]. In one study, the spleen was reduced to 28% of baseline,
with acceptable cardiovascular side effects, after the administration
of phenylephrine at 3 μg/kg/min over 15 min [175].
In the vast majority of cases, after induction, horses undergoing
exploratory laparotomy are connected to the anesthetic breathing
circuit and maintained with inhalation agents with or without
adjunct drugs. The choice of inhalant anesthetic agent is usually at
the discretion of the anesthetist. While hemodynamic and pulmo-
nary indices during sevoflurane and isoflurane anesthesia appear
similar in horses [176], in 39 horses undergoing elective procedures
in lateral recumbency, less dobutamine was required to maintain
MAP > 70 mmHg (9.3 kPa) during sevoflurane anesthesia when
compared to isoflurane anesthesia [177].
The recommendations on correct positioning and appropriate
padding apply to any horse undergoing general anesthesia, and espe-
cially to horses undergoing colic surgery. In addition, COP decreases
linearly during anesthesia for colic surgery, reaching the lowest point
at the end of anesthesia with a mean COP of 11.6 ± 1.6 mmHg (1.55
± 0.21 kPa) [126,178]. This change may predispose the horse to nasal
edema and tissue edema. For this reason, it is important to elevate
the head above the heart level and to administer phenylephrine or
another nasal decongestant before recovery [179]. If reflux around
the nasogastric tube is noted, the tip of the nose should be directed
down toward the ground to facilitate drainage and the animal should
be recovered with the endotracheal tube in place.
Adjunct agents
Adjunct agents have been long used in horses with three main
goals: to reduce inhalant requirements in an attempt to improve
cardiovascular function and hasten recovery; to provide additional
analgesia; and to improve recovery quality.
Benzodiazepines, like midazolam or diazepam, demonstrate a
consistent minimum alveolar concentration (MAC)-sparing effect
effect in the horse and lack significant cardio-depressant effects [180].
However, they lack analgesic properties and may weaken recovery
attempts [169,171].
Lidocaine causes dose-dependent MAC reduction of inhaled
anesthetics in both ponies [181] and horses [181–184]. However,
under experimental conditions, lidocaine infusion showed contra-
dictory effects on the cardiovascular performance of horses at com-
parable anesthetic depths [184–187]. Adverse effects were not
mentioned in any of the aforementioned studies; nonetheless there
is evidence that lidocaine infusions alone may lower the quality of
recovery [188]. This could be a consequence of the fact that lido-
caine reaches higher plasma concentrations than predicted in anes-
thetized horses under experimental conditions or those undergoing
emergent exploratory laparotomy [186,189,190]. Consequently, the
dose of lidocaine should be reduced in the horse anesthetized for
colic surgery (especially when the horse is severely dehydrated or
Figure 62.2 Sternal intubation allows the anesthetist to secure the airway
against passive gastric reflux before the horse is hoisted to the surgical
table. Source: Dr. Ludovica Chiavaccini, with permission.

-- 1241 of 1450 --

1226 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
has compromised cardiovascular function), and the infusion should
be discontinued 30 min before the end of anesthesia [188,189]. IV
lidocaine administration produces analgesia in various pain states,
such as neuropathic and acute pain. Proposed mechanisms of
action and potential therapeutic benefits of lidocaine in horses have
been recently reviewed [191,192], and its clinical pharmacology is
presented in Chapter 29. The visceral analgesic effects of lidocaine
have been demonstrated in rats [193,194] and humans [195,196].
Somatic antinociception, but only mild visceral antinociception,
was observed in conscious horses receiving systemic lidocaine infu-
sion [197]. However, the investigators pointed out that the horses in
the study had normal gastrointestinal tracts with no inflammation
or sensitization, and the methodology or the dose used may have
not been appropriate. For a long time, lidocaine has been advocated
to improve intestinal motility and treat POI; however, studies inves-
tigating the prokinetic properties of lidocaine have reported con-
flicting results. Perioperative lidocaine administration to horses
undergoing colic surgery was associated with better postoperative
jejunal cross-sectional area scores, jejunal diameter scores, and
intestinal ultrasound index, compared to the saline treatment, sug-
gesting that lidocaine may have some beneficial effects in this pop-
ulation [198]. However, the study did not look specifically at horses
with small intestinal lesions or gastroesophageal reflux. In one
study comparing lidocaine to placebo in 32 horses affected by POI
or enteritis, a higher proportion of horses treated with lidocaine
than with placebo stopped refluxing within 30 h. Horses that
responded to lidocaine passed feces within 16 h from the beginning
of the infusion and had shorter hospitalizations [199]. In a recent
retrospective study, however, the use of perioperative lidocaine did
not affect the total reflux volume or duration of reflux in horses
undergoing colic surgery [200]. Despite the conflicting evidence, a
survey of European Equine Internal Medicine and Surgery
Diplomates reported that lidocaine was the drug used most com-
monly in the postoperative period to prevent POI (used by 67% of
respondents) and was also the drug of choice for management of
POI (used by 79% of respondents) [201]. Finally, lidocaine has well-
known anti-inflammatory properties [202–204]. The mechanism
by which lidocaine decreases neutrophil activation and transmigra-
tion is not fully understood but may go beyond the blockade of
voltage-gated sodium channels. In horses with experimentally
induced ischemia of the jejunum, lidocaine mitigated the inhibitory
effects of flunixin meglumine on recovery of the ischemia injured
mucosa [205] and reduced neutrophil infiltration compared to flu-
nixin alone [206]. However, a recent equine experimental study
failed to demonstrate that lidocaine was consistently able to reduce
neutrophil infiltration both at the site of ischemic injury and in
remote non-manipulated intestine [207].
Balanced anesthesia techniques in horses often include using α2
-
adrenergic receptor agonists (xylazine, romifidine, medetomidine,
dexmedetomidine, or detomidine). Among α2
-adrenergic receptor
agonists, the short half-lives of medetomidine and dexmedetomi-
dine, and their lack of accumulation, make them ideal candidates for
perianesthetic infusions [208,209]. At clinically relevant doses, α2
-
adrenergic receptor agonists can reduce the MAC of inhalant anes-
thetics by up to 40% [210,211]. This is in contrast to opioid agonists
both in terms of consistency and magnitude of effect. A clinical
study of 20 healthy horses undergoing elective procedures showed
that an intraoperative dexmedetomidine infusion at 1.75 μg/kg/h
produced more stable anesthetic depth, reduced isoflurane require-
ments, and provided better quality recoveries when compared to a
morphine infusion at 0.1 mg/kg/h [212]. Moreover, α2
-adrenergic
receptor agonists reduce global perfusion, global oxygen delivery,
and intestinal perfusion while maintaining intestinal oxygena-
tion [213], whereas both perfusion and oxygenation of the gastroin-
testinal tract decrease rapidly when end-expiratory isoflurane
concentrations increase above 2%. It is still controversial whether
the MAC-sparing effects of α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists result in
better cardiovascular function compared to volatile anesthetics
alone at equipotent doses [210,211,214–218]. More attractive prop-
erties of α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists for horses undergoing colic
surgery are their visceral analgesic qualities and the potential benefi-
cial effects on the systemic inflammatory response. The visceral
analgesic properties of α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists are well
known [219] and involve all three α2
-adrenergic receptor subtypes
(α2A
, α2B
, and α2C
) [220]. In a multicenter clinical study involving 152
horses presenting with colic, detomidine proved to be a more effec-
tive analgesic than xylazine, butorphanol, and flunixin meglu-
mine [221]. The analgesia in horses with gastrointestinal disease
may be partly due to suppression of gastroenteric motility, and this
profound effect must be considered when quick recovery of intesti-
nal contractility is warranted [222]. Dexmedetomidine has also
gained attention for its anti-inflammatory and antiapoptotic proper-
ties after ischemia-reperfusion injury in multiple tissues, including
the equine small intestine [223–226]. Xylazine showed similar ben-
eficial effects at clinically relevant doses in an experimental model of
equine jejunal ischemia [227]. In addition, a dexmedetomidine infu-
sion, accompanied by a 40% reduction in sevoflurane MAC,
appeared to maintain cardiopulmonary and intestinal hemodynam-
ics and improve acid–base status in anesthetized horses with experi-
mentally induced endotoxemia [211].
Ketamine is a well-known noncompetitive antagonist of the N-
methyl-D- aspartate (NMDA) receptor in the central nervous sys-
tem. In addition, ketamine acts on many other non-NMDA
pathways, including opioid receptors, nicotinic and muscarinic
cholinergic receptors, high-affinity D 2 dopamine receptors, and
L-type voltage-gated calcium channels; it also blocks sodium and
potassium channels and facilitates γ-aminobutyric acid receptor
subtype A (GABA A ) signaling. All of these different pathways may
contribute variably to the drug’s analgesic effects [228,229].
Ketamine alone or in combination with lidocaine and opioid anal-
gesics reduces the MAC of inhalant anesthetics up to 50% [230]. In
addition, although ketamine exerts direct myocardial depression,
clinically administered doses of racemic ketamine are associated
with better cardiovascular performance [230,232]. The antihyperal-
gesic effects of ketamine have been demonstrated in both awake
and anesthetized equids [233–235], making it a helpful adjunct
analgesic in horses undergoing colic surgery. However, the anesthe-
tist should be aware that ketamine infusion was associated with
increased gastrointestinal transit time and decreased fecal output in
healthy conscious horses [236]. Like α2
- adrenergic receptor ago-
nists, ketamine’s immunomodulatory effects have recently gained
the attention of anesthetists and may have promising applications in
the equine septic patient. While ketamine infusion failed to reduce
TNFα and thromboxane-B2 in 19 mares experimentally treated
with LPS [237], ketamine reduced LPS-induced TNFα and IL-6 for-
mation in an equine macrophage cell line [238]. More prospective
studies are warranted at this time. One of the authors often includes
a constant infusion of lidocaine, dexmedetomidine, and ketamine
during anesthesia for colic surgery.
Unlike other species, in horses, there is little research surround-
ing intraoperative infusion of opioids [239]. The majority of the
equine opioid literature concerns their potential adverse effects on

-- 1242 of 1450 --

Chapter 62: Horses with Colic 	1227
gastrointestinal motility [163,164,240]. Probably for this reason, opi-
oid infusions are rarely used in horses undergoing colic surgery, and
there is currently conflicting evidence on whether the use of full μ-
opioid receptor agonists in the perioperative period may increase the
risk of postoperative colic in horses undergoing elective procedures
or exploratory laparotomies [164,241]. In addition, opioids have an
inconsistent MAC-sparing effect in the horse. Morphine, for exam-
ple, has been reported to have either MAC-sparing or MAC-
increasing effects [242,243]. Despite their variable effect on anesthetic
requirements, it is these authors’ opinion that opioid agonists should
still be considered in a multimodal anesthetic plan for a colic patient.
Locoregional anesthesia
Consideration should be given to locoregional anesthetic tech-
niques as part of a multimodal perioperative analgesic strategy for
horses undergoing colic surgery. The epidural injection of local
anesthetics, α2 - adrenergic receptor agonists, opioids, or their com-
binations proved effective in providing visceral analgesia during
standing laparoscopic ovariectomy [244,245] and laparoscopic
cryptorchidectomy 	under 	general 	anesthesia 	[246] 	without
adversely affecting gastrointestinal motility in horses. However,
performing a sacrococcygeal epidural injection is not often possible
in horses undergoing emergent exploratory laparotomy. The 10th
to 17th thoracic spinal nerves (T10–T17) and the costoabdominal
nerve innervate the equine abdominal wall. Therefore, the peri-
pheral blockade of these nerves before surgery may provide perio-
perative analgesia. Peripheral blocks can be easily performed with
the horse under general anesthesia and in dorsal recumbency as
surgical preparation is occurring. Different techniques have been
described. The injection of 5–10 mL of 0.5% bupivacaine at the cau-
dal aspect of the 10th through 18th ribs is referred to as Caudal
Intercostal Block for Abdominal Surgery (CIBAS). It seems to pro-
vide 12 h of analgesia in horses undergoing emergent laparot-
omy [247]. A transversus abdominis plane (TAP) block has been
described in both ponies and horses. With a 6–13 MHz linear ultra-
sonic probe positioned in a transverse plane mid-abdomen and
with a one-point injection of 0.5 mL/kg 1:1 solution of 1% methyl-
ene blue and 0.5% bupivacaine, the 16th thoracic (T16) to the 2nd
lumbar (L2) nerves were stained [248]. A modified subcostal
approach [249] or a three-point injection technique [250] may be
required to produce consistent anesthesia of the ventral abdominal
wall in horses.
Monitoring
In addition to depth of anesthesia, the anesthetist should continu-
ously monitor the cardiorespiratory function of the horse undergo-
ing exploratory laparotomy and record values at least every 5 min,
including:
• Pulse rate and quality
• Mucous membrane color and CRT
• Electrocardiogram (ECG)
• Direct blood pressure (systolic, diastolic, mean) and arterial
waveform
• Pulse oximetry
• Capnography
• Ventilatory settings
The pulse quality and peripheral mucous membrane color help
estimate peripheral perfusion, but the anesthetist should under-
stand the possible confounding effects of anesthetic drugs. Direct
blood pressure measurement is considered the standard of care in
horses undergoing inhalant anesthesia due to the lack of accuracy
of commercially available non-invasive pressure measurement
devices in this species [251,252]. Interestingly, one study showed
poor agreement between invasive blood pressure measurements
taken from horses’ facial, transverse facial, and metatarsal arter-
ies [253]. The increase in intrathoracic pressure during IPPV causes
dynamic changes of the arterial pressure waveform, mainly through
decreased preload. Systolic pressure variation (SPV) and pulse pres-
sure variation (PPV) can be manually calculated by measuring the
difference between the highest and lowest systolic blood pressure or
pulse pressure within a respiratory cycle. They have been used to
predict fluid responsiveness in many species [57]. A cut-off of 4%
and 14–16%, respectively, has been suggested to discriminate
responders from non-responders in healthy and septic dogs receiv-
ing a 5–15 mL/kg fluid challenge under general anesthesia [254–
257]. However, SPV and PPV showed poor correlation when
manually calculated from three consecutive breathing cycles in
healthy horses [258]. Patient monitors with advanced digital soft-
ware allow easy calculation of other cardiovascular dynamic
changes from the arterial pressure waveform. Although the maxi-
mal rate of rise in pressure (dP/dtmax
) may be affected by peripheral
arterial factors, this parameter has been used to identify changes in
cardiac contractility in human and animal species [259,260] and
could be used to assess dynamic cardiac function in horses under-
going colic surgery. While cardiac output is not routinely measured
in horses undergoing colic surgery, new minimally invasive tech-
niques have been studied, with transesophageal or transthoracic
Doppler echocardiography [261], lithium dilution techniques with
and without pulse contour analysis [262–264], and carbon dioxide
breath analysis currently available [265]. The pulse wave transit
time, calculated as the time from the electrocardiogram R-wave
peak to the rise point of the pulse oximeter or arterial blood pres-
sure wave performed poorly for estimating cardiac output in
isoflurane-anesthetized dogs [266]. It may, however, detect changes
in stroke volume over time or after interventions.
Pulse oximetry and capnography are commonly used to estimate
SaO2 and partial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide (PaCO2 ); how-
ever, these devices have limitations. Pulse oximetry is affected by a
reduction in peripheral perfusion, such as venous engorgement,
vasoconstriction, etc. An inaccurate pulse oximeter HR display
usually correlates with inaccurate SaO2 readings. Pulse oximetry
has been reported to underestimate SaO 2 in horses with
colic [267,268]. The partial pressure of end-tidal carbon dioxide
(PET
CO2
) can be much lower than the PaCO2 in horses undergoing
colic surgery due to increased V/Q mismatch and physiological
dead space resulting from abdominal distension and poor perfu-
sion [267]. However, interpretation of the capnographic waveform
still provides essential information about ventilation and cardiovas-
cular function, correct intubation, and anesthesia machine mal-
function, and these authors recommend its application.
When IPPV is utilized, at a minimum, tidal volume (VT), res-
piratory rate, I:E ratio, peak inspiratory ratio (PIP), inspiratory
pause, and PEEP should be recorded.
Hypothermia is associated with delayed recovery [269], tissue
hypoperfusion, 	incisional 	infections, 	and 	hypocoagulabil-
ity [270]. Obtaining an accurate core temperature is difficult in
horses. Only a probe placed deep within the esophagus or the
rectum would be accurate. Conventionally, temperature is meas-
ured with a rectal thermometer, which may only read anal tem-
perature and may be affected by preoperative rectal palpation
and by the presence of feces, or a nasal thermistor. Additionally,
warming a horse during anesthesia may be challenging, but an

-- 1243 of 1450 --

1228 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
attempt could be made with forced air warming devices, especially
in smaller horses or ponies [271].
PCV and TS, blood gases, electrolytes, and lactate should be reg-
ularly measured in horses undergoing colic surgery. The frequency
of measurement depends on the patient’s physiologic derangements
and a reevaluation should be performed after each intervention.
Hypomagnesemia and hypocalcemia have been associated with
POI [145]. Consequently, ionized magnesium and calcium should
be monitored and promptly corrected if needed.
Ventilation strategies
There are different schools of thought regarding IPPV initiation.
IPPV, the use of PEEP, and alveolar recruitment maneuvers all
increase intrathoracic pressure, decrease venous return, and may
exacerbate cardiovascular compromise [272]. In addition, airway
pressures higher than 60 mmHg (8 kPa) can be elicited even with a
target TV delivery of 10–15 mL/kg, raising concerns of barotrauma
to the lungs and organs (e.g., gastric rupture). Consequently, some
investigators advocate waiting until the horse’s colon is decom-
pressed or surgically exteriorized before beginning IPPV. However,
horses undergoing exploratory laparotomy for acute colic are at a
higher risk of developing low V/Q mismatch and severe hypox-
emia [74,273]. There is limited but convincing evidence that IPPV
associated with low levels of PEEP applied from the beginning of
anesthesia may help maintain smaller P(a-a)O 2 and higher PaO2
with minimal cardiovascular consequences [96,274,275]. Shorter
recoveries with fewer attempts to stand were observed in horses
undergoing colic surgery ventilated with PEEP combined with
intermittent recruitment maneuvers compared to controlled
mechanical ventilation only [96]. Moreover, horses undergoing
colic surgery often present with metabolic acidosis that will be
superimposed on the respiratory acidosis that follows hypoventila-
tion and hypercapnia. Therefore, the authors prefer to start IPPV
with 10 cmH 2
O of PEEP immediately after induction but maintain
an I:E ratio above 1:4 to maximize venous return during exhalation
and mitigate some of the side effects of high airway pressure, until
the cardiovascular status of the patient can be better assessed.
Recovery
Recovery remains a very delicate phase of equine anesthesia. In a
recent survey, when asked what area of equine anesthesia was per-
ceived as needing improvement, about 24% of respondents men-
tioned recovery. The fear of a poor recovery leads equine
practitioners to perform standing procedures whenever possible.
However, general anesthesia cannot be avoided in horses undergo-
ing colic surgery. Nicolaisen et al. [276] showed that colic horses are
at higher risk to die during recovery when compared to elective and
non-emergent abdominal procedures. Similarly, in an earlier study,
recoveries were worse after emergency exploratory laparotomies
than after elective surgeries in dorsal recumbency [84]. A recent
retrospective study identified high intraoperative dobutamine
doses, poor premedication quality, and a prolonged time to stand as
risk factors for unsatisfactory recovery quality in 313 horses under-
going anesthesia for colic surgery [277].
The anesthetist should remove the nasogastric tube before recov-
ery, as the mechanical opening of the lower esophageal sphincter
may increase the risk of regurgitation and, consequently, aspiration
in the horse positioned in lateral recumbency. Some anesthetists
advise removing the nasogastric tube in the operating room before
the end of anesthesia so that the horse’s head can be lowered in the
event of nasal bleeding [173]. In addition to aspiration pneumonia,
upper airway obstruction is a possible complication during recov-
ery [278,279]. Hence, the endotracheal tube should either be left in
place and taped so that the tube exits from the mouth through the
interdental space, or removed only after the horse is breathing
spontaneously and the swallowing reflex has been regained. There
is currently no evidence supporting one practice over the other, and
the decision to remove the endotracheal tube before the horse is
standing will be influenced by the hospital management and the
anesthetist’s preference or experience. Nasal phenylephrine [179]
and placement of nasal tubes if an obstruction is suspected can pre-
vent fatal outcomes.
It is well recognized that hypoxemia occurs during recovery if
oxygen is not supplemented [280,281]. It has recently been shown
that simply hoisting an adult horse at the end of isoflurane anesthe-
sia causes a decrease in arterial oxygenation that persists during the
recovery phase [282]. Only supplementation with 100% oxygen at
the rate of 50 L/min through a demand valve produced PaO 2 ten-
sions similar to those in standing awake horses [281]. In addition, a
high flow of oxygen during recovery allows for a more rapid wash-
out of inhaled gases. For this reason, the authors prefer to maintain
a high flow of oxygen through a demand valve throughout the
entire period the horse remains intubated in the recovery stall and
then continue with 15 L/min insufflated via the ventral meatus fol-
lowing extubation as long as the horse will tolerate it.
Equine recovery can be classified as assisted or unassisted based
on the degree of personnel involvement. Only 40–53% of equine
practitioners today consistently assist recovery after general anes-
thesia [283,284]; more commonly, assisted recovery is reserved for
emergency exploratory laparotomies or lengthy procedures, or ani-
mals considered to be in poor health [284]. Several methods exist
for assisting the horse during recovery with foam mattresses, head-
and- tail ropes either from inside or outside the stall, and inflatable/
deflatable mattresses being the most commonly used today [283].
Interestingly, a survey by de Miguel Garcia et al. in 2021 showed
that, despite the perception of equine practitioners, fatalities associ-
ated with equine recovery were significantly more common (49%)
in hospitals that routinely assisted equine recoveries than in hospi-
tals reporting to never or rarely assist recoveries (16%; p <
0.006) [283]. On the other hand, personnel injury was reported by
25% of practitioners routinely assisting horses in recoveries com-
pared with 10% of practitioners that generally carry out unassisted
recoveries (p < 0.06) [283]. Whether assisting recovery after colic
surgery improves the quality of recovery is controversial. However,
what is clear is that head-and-tail ropes do not entirely prevent the
occurrence of fatal injuries during recovery in horses undergoing
emergency procedures [78,276].
Despite their widespread use [284], there is conflicting evidence
that sedation with α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists improves the
quality of recovery following equine anesthesia [285,286]. Number
of attempts to stand and recovery scores were not different in horses
receiving a 0.2 mg/kg bolus of xylazine or placebo after desflurane
anesthesia [287]. Following isoflurane anesthesia, xylazine (0.2 mg/
kg IV) and dexmedetomidine (0.875 μg/kg IV) led to similar recov-
ery quality in healthy horses [288]. Similarly, following sevoflurane
anesthesia, recovery scores and time to standing were not signifi-
cantly different between horses receiving either dexmedetomidine
(1 μg/kg IV) or romifidine (20 μg/kg IV) [285]. In another study,
painful procedures, longer anesthesia times, and the Arabian horse
breed were associated with poorer recovery scores. After adjusting
for these factors, a postoperative bolus of romifidine (20 μg/kg IV)

-- 1244 of 1450 --

Chapter 62: Horses with Colic 	1229
improved the quality of recovery compared to xylazine [286]. Based
on the current body of the literature, the authors cannot recom-
mend the use of one particular α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist over
another for improving the recovery of horses undergoing colic sur-
gery, and the equine anesthetist will likely base the choice on per-
sonal preference or clinical experience.
References
1 Tinker MK, White NA, Lessard P, et al. Prospective study of equine colic incidence
and mortality. Equine Vet J 1997; 29(6): 448–453.
2 Christophersen MT, Dupont N, Berg-Sorensen KS, et al. Short-term survival and
mortality rates in a retrospective study of colic in 1588 Danish horses. Acta Vet
Scand 2014; 56: 20.
3 van der Linden MA, Laffont CM, Sloet van Oldruitenborgh-Oosterbaan MM.
Prognosis in equine medical and surgical colic. J Vet Intern Med 2003; 17(3):
343–348.
4 Wormstrand BH, Ihler CF, Diesen R, et al. Surgical treatment of equine colic – a retro-
spective study of 297 surgeries in Norway 2005–2011. Acta Vet Scand 2014; 56: 38.
5 Epstein KL, Brainard BM, Gomez-Ibanez SE, et al. Thrombelastography in horses
with acute gastrointestinal disease. J Vet Intern Med 2011; 25(2): 307–314.
6 Roy MF, Kwong GP, Lambert J, et al. Prognostic value and development of a scoring
system in horses with systemic inflammatory response syndrome. J Vet Intern Med
2017; 31(2): 582–592.
7 Morris DD. Endotoxemia in horses. A review of cellular and humoral mediators
involved in its pathogenesis. J Vet Intern Med 1991; 5(3): 167–181.
8 Senior JM, Proudman CJ, Leuwer M, et al. Plasma endotoxin in horses presented to
an equine referral hospital: correlation to selected clinical parameters and out-
comes. Equine Vet J 2011; 43(5): 585–591.
9 Nieto JE, MacDonald MH, Braim AE, et al. Effect of lipopolysaccharide infusion
on gene expression of inflammatory cytokines in normal horses in vivo. Equine Vet
J 2009; 41(7): 717–719.
10 Tadros EM, Frank N. Effects of continuous or intermittent lipopolysaccharide
administration for 48 hours on the systemic inflammatory response in horses. Am J
Vet Res 2012; 73(9): 1394–1402.
11 Guntheroth WG, Felsenfeld AJ. Splenic constriction with endotoxin shock in the
dog. J Appl Physiol 1971; 30(4): 517–520.
12 Parrillo JE. Pathogenetic mechanisms of septic shock. N Engl J Med 1993; 328(20):
1471–1477.
13 Uchimido R, Schmidt EP, Shapiro NI. The glycocalyx: a novel diagnostic and thera-
peutic target in sepsis. Crit Care 2019; 23(1): 16.
14 Burrows GE. Equine Escherichia coli endotoxemia: comparison of intravenous and
intraperitoneal endotoxin administration. Am J Vet Res 1979; 40(7): 991–998.
15 Dallap Schaer BL, Epstein K. Coagulopathy of the critically ill equine patient. J Vet
Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2009; 19(1): 53–65.
16 Bone RC, Balk RA, Cerra FB, et al. Definitions for sepsis and organ failure and
guidelines for the use of innovative therapies in sepsis. The ACCP/SCCM
Consensus Conference Committee. American College of Chest Physicians/Society
of Critical Care Medicine. Chest 1992; 101(6): 1644–1655.
17 Barton AK, Richter IG, Ahrens T, et al. MMP-9 Concentration in peritoneal fluid is
a valuable biomarker associated with endotoxemia in equine colic. Mediators
Inflamm 2021; 2021: 9501478.
18 Nocera I, Bonelli F, Meucci V, et al. Evaluation of protein carbonyl content in
healthy and sick hospitalized horses. Front Vet Sci 2020; 7: 582886.
19 Barr B, Nieman NM. Serum amyloid A as an aid in diagnosing sepsis in equine
neonates. Equine Vet J 2022; 54(5): 922–926.
20 Pihl TH, Scheepers E, Sanz M, et al. Influence of disease process and duration on
acute phase proteins in serum and peritoneal fluid of horses with colic. J Vet Intern
Med 2015; 29(2): 651–658.
21 Fogle J, Jacob M, Blikslager A, et al. Comparison of lipopolysaccharides and soluble
CD14 measurement between clinically endotoxaemic and nonendotoxaemic
horses. Equine Vet J 2017; 49(2): 155–159.
22 Silva A, Wagner B, McKenzie HC, et al. An investigation of the role of soluble CD14 in
hospitalized, sick horses. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 2013; 155(4): 264–269.
23 Bonelli F, Meucci V, Divers TJ, et al. Plasma procalcitonin concentration in healthy
horses and horses affected by systemic inflammatory response syndrome. J Vet
Intern Med 2015; 29(6): 1689–1691.
24 Wells MT, Gaffin SL, Gregory M, et al. Properties of equine anti-lipopolysaccharide
hyperimmune plasma: binding to lipopolysaccharide and bactericidal activity
against gram-negative bacteria. J Med Microbiol 1987; 24(3): 187–196.
25 Werners AH. Treatment of endotoxaemia and septicaemia in the equine patient.
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2017; 40(1): 1–15.
26 Forbes G, Church S, Savage CJ, et al. Effects of hyperimmune equine plasma on
clinical and cellular responses in a low-dose endotoxaemia model in horses. Res Vet
Sci 2012; 92(1): 40–44.
27 Spier SJ, Lavoie JP, Cullor JS, et al. Protection against clinical endotoxemia in horses
by using plasma containing antibody to an Rc mutant E. coli (J5). Circ Shock 1989;
28(3): 235–248.
28 Morris DD, Whitlock RH, Corbeil LB. Endotoxemia in horses: protection provided
by antiserum to core lipopolysaccharide. Am J Vet Res 1986; 47(3): 544–550.
29 Peek SF, Semrad S, McGuirk SM, et al. Prognostic value of clinicopathologic varia-
bles obtained at admission and effect of antiendotoxin plasma on survival in septic
and critically ill foals. J Vet Intern Med 2006; 20(3): 569–574.
30 Morrison DC, Jacobs DM. Binding of polymyxin B to the lipid A portion of bacte-
rial lipopolysaccharides. Immunochemistry 1976; 13(10): 813–818.
31 Barton MH, Parviainen A, Norton N. Polymyxin B protects horses against induced
endotoxaemia in vivo. Equine Vet J 2004; 36(5): 397–401.
32 Falagas ME, Kasiakou SK. Toxicity of polymyxins: a systematic review of the evi-
dence from old and recent studies. Crit Care 2006; 10(1): R27.
33 Morresey PR, Mackay RJ. Endotoxin-neutralizing activity of polymyxin B in blood
after IV administration in horses. Am J Vet Res 2006; 67(4): 642–647.
34 Barton MH, Moore JN. Pentoxifylline inhibits mediator synthesis in an equine
in vitro whole blood model of endotoxemia. Circ Shock 1994; 44(4): 216–220.
35 Barton MH, Moore JN, Norton N. Effects of pentoxifylline infusion on response of
horses to in vivo challenge exposure with endotoxin. Am J Vet Res 1997; 58(11):
1300–1307.
36 Baskett A, Barton MH, Norton N, et al. Effect of pentoxifylline, flunixin meglu-
mine, and their combination on a model of endotoxemia in horses. Am J Vet Res
1997; 58(11): 1291–1299.
37 Moore JN, Garner HE, Shapland JE, et al. Prevention of endotoxin-induced arterial
hypoxaemia and lactic acidosis with flunixin meglumine in the conscious pony.
Equine Vet J 1981; 13(2): 95–98.
38 Semrad SD, Hardee GE, Hardee MM, et al. Low dose flunixin meglumine: effects
on eicosanoid production and clinical signs induced by experimental endotoxae-
mia in horses. Equine Vet J 1987; 19(3): 201–206.
39 Cook VL, Meyer CT, Campbell NB, et al. Effect of firocoxib or flunixin meglumine
on recovery of ischemic-injured equine jejunum. Am J Vet Res 2009; 70(8):
992–1000.
40 Naylor RJ, Taylor AH, Knowles EJ, et al. Comparison of flunixin meglumine and
meloxicam for post operative management of horses with strangulating small intes-
tinal lesions. Equine Vet J 2014; 46(4): 427–434.
41 Ziegler AL, Freeman CK, Fogle CA, et al. Multicentre, blinded, randomised clinical
trial comparing the use of flunixin meglumine with firocoxib in horses with small
intestinal strangulating obstruction. Equine Vet J 2019; 51(3): 329–335.
42 Gold JR, Divers TJ, Barton MH, et al. Plasma adrenocorticotropin, cortisol, and
adrenocorticotropin/cortisol ratios in septic and normal-term foals. J Vet Intern
Med 2007; 21(4): 791–796.
43 Johnson LM, Holcombe SJ, Shearer TR, et al. Multicenter placebo-controlled rand-
omized study of ethyl pyruvate in horses following Surgical Treatment for >/= 360
degrees large colon volvulus. Front Vet Sci 2020; 7: 204.
44 Cook VL, Holcombe SJ, Gandy JC, et al. Ethyl pyruvate decreases proinflammatory
gene expression in lipopolysaccharide-stimulated equine monocytes. Vet Immunol
Immunopathol 2011; 141(1–2): 92–99.
45 Jacobs CC, Holcombe SJ, Cook VL, et al. Ethyl pyruvate diminishes the inflamma-
tory response to lipopolysaccharide infusion in horses. Equine Vet J 2013; 45(3):
333–339.
46 Sutton GA, Atamna R, Steinman A, et al. Comparison of three acute colic pain
scales: reliability, validity and usability. Vet J 2019; 246: 71–77.
47 Van Dierendonck MC, van Loon JP. Monitoring acute equine visceral pain with the
Equine Utrecht University Scale for Composite Pain Assessment (EQUUS-
COMPASS) and the Equine Utrecht University Scale for Facial Assessment of Pain
(EQUUS- FAP): a validation study. Vet J 2016; 216: 175–177.
48 van Loon JP, Jonckheer-Sheehy VS, Back W, et al. Monitoring equine visceral pain
with a composite pain scale score and correlation with survival after emergency
gastrointestinal surgery. Vet J 2014; 200(1): 109–115.
49 Allen SE, Holm JL. Lactate: physiology and clinical utility. J Vet Emerg Critic Care
2008; 18(2): 123–132.
50 Tennent- Brown BS, Wilkins PA, Lindborg S, et al. Sequential plasma lactate con-
centrations as prognostic indicators in adult equine emergencies. J Vet Intern Med
2010; 24(1): 198–205.
51 Latson KM, Nieto JE, Beldomenico PM, et al. Evaluation of peritoneal fluid lactate
as a marker of intestinal ischaemia in equine colic. Equine Vet J 2005; 37(4):
342–346.
52 Peloso JG, Cohen ND. Use of serial measurements of peritoneal fluid lactate con-
centration to identify strangulating intestinal lesions in referred horses with signs
of colic. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2012; 240(10): 1208–1217.

-- 1245 of 1450 --

1230 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
53 DeLaurier GA, Cannon RM, Johnson RH Jr., et al. Increased peritoneal fluid lactic
acid values and progressive bowel strangulation in dogs. Am J Surg 1989; 158(1):
32–35.
54 Thoefner MB, Ersboll AK, Hesselholt M. Prognostic indicators in a Danish
hospital-based population of colic horses. Equine Vet J Suppl 2000; 32: 11–18.
55 Espinosa P, Le Jeune SS, Cenani A, et al. Investigation of perioperative and anes-
thetic variables affecting short-term survival of horses with small intestinal stran-
gulating lesions. Vet Surg 2017; 46(3): 345–353.
56 Kelleher ME, Brosnan RJ, Kass PH, et al. Use of physiologic and arterial blood gas
variables to predict short-term survival in horses with large colon volvulus. Vet Surg
2013; 42(1): 107–113.
57 Araos J, Kenny JS, Rousseau-Blass F, et al. Dynamic prediction of fluid responsive-
ness during positive pressure ventilation: a review of the physiology underlying
heart-lung interactions and a critical interpretation. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(1):
3–14.
58 Kerr DD, Jones EW, Huggins K, et al. Sedative and other effects of xylazine given
intravenously to horses. Am J Vet Res 1972; 33(3): 525–532.
59 Dezfouli MRM, Tavanaeimanesh H, Houshangi AF, et al. Effects of xylazine and ace-
promazine on echocardiographic parameters in the healthy horse. Pferdeheilkunde
2020; 36: 37–42.
60 Steffey EP, Howland D Jr. Comparison of circulatory and respiratory effects of
isoflurane and halothane anesthesia in horses. Am J Vet Res 1980; 41(5):
821–825.
61 Steffey EP, Mama KR, Galey FD, et al. Effects of sevoflurane dose and mode of
ventilation on cardiopulmonary function and blood biochemical variables in
horses. Am J Vet Res 2005; 66(4): 606–614.
62 Scott VH, Williams JM, Mudge MC, et al. Effect of body position on intra-
abdominal pressures and abdominal perfusion pressures measured at three sites in
horses anesthetized with short-term total intravenous anesthesia. Am J Vet Res
2014; 75(3): 301–308.
63 Youngblood CD, Hodgson DS, Beard WL, et al. Effect of position on transdia-
phragmatic pressure and hemodynamic variables in anesthetized horses. Can J Vet
Res 2020; 84(3): 205–211.
64 Binetti A, Mosing M, Sacks M, et al. Impact of Trendelenburg (head down) and
reverse Trendelenburg (head up) position on respiratory and cardiovascular func-
tion in anaesthetized horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45(6): 760–771.
65 Hodgson DS, Steffey EP, Grandy JL, et al. Effects of spontaneous, assisted, and con-
trolled ventilatory modes in halothane-anesthetized geldings. Am J Vet Res 1986;
47(5): 992–996.
66 Mizuno Y, Aida H, Hara H, et al. Cardiovascular effects of intermittent positive
pressure ventilation in the anesthetized horse. J Vet Med Sci 1994; 56(1): 39–44.
67 Kalchofner KS, Picek S, Ringer SK, et al. A study of cardiovascular function under
controlled and spontaneous ventilation in isoflurane-medetomidine anaesthetized
horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36(5): 426–435.
68 Ohta M, Kurimoto S, Ishikawa Y, et al. Cardiovascular effects of dobutamine and
phenylephrine infusion in sevoflurane-anesthetized Thoroughbred horses. J Vet
Med Sci 2013; 75(11): 1443–1448.
69 Dancker C, Hopster K, Rohn K, et al. Effects of dobutamine, dopamine, phenyle-
phrine and noradrenaline on systemic haemodynamics and intestinal perfusion in
isoflurane anaesthetised horses. Equine Vet J 2018; 50(1): 104–110.
70 Kobayashi S, Endou M, Sakuraya F, et al. The sympathomimetic actions of
l-Ephedrine and d-Pseudoephedrine: direct receptor activation or norepinephrine
release? Anesth Analg 2003; 97(5): 1239–1245.
71 Chen HC, Sinclair MD, Dyson DH. Use of ephedrine and dopamine in dogs for the
management of hypotension in routine clinical cases under isoflurane anesthesia.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2007; 34(5): 301–311.
72 Kimmoun A, Novy E, Auchet T, et al. Hemodynamic consequences of severe lactic
acidosis in shock states: from bench to bedside. Crit Care 2015; 19: 175.
73 Hubbell JA, Muir WW. Oxygenation, oxygen delivery and anaesthesia in the horse.
Equine Vet J 2015; 47(1): 25–35.
74 Hovda T, Love L, Chiavaccini L. Risk factors associated with hypoxaemia in horses
undergoing general anaesthesia: a retrospective study. Equine Vet J 2022; 54(6):
1055–1063.
75 Hopster K, Wittenberg-Voges L, Geburek F, et al. Effects of controlled hypoxemia or
hypovolemia on global and intestinal oxygenation and perfusion in isoflurane anesthe-
tized horses receiving an alpha-2-agonist infusion. BMC Vet Res 2017; 13(1): 361.
76 Robson K, Cripps P, Bardell D. Lack of association between arterial oxygen tensions
in horses during exploratory coeliotomy and post-operative incisional complica-
tions: a retrospective study. Vet J 2016; 210: 24–29.
77 Costa-Farre C, Prades M, Ribera T, et al. Does intraoperative low arterial partial
pressure of oxygen increase the risk of surgical site infection following emergency
exploratory laparotomy in horses? Vet J 2014; 200(1): 175–180.
78 Rüegg M, Bettschart-Wolfensberger R, Hartnack S, et al. Comparison of non-
assisted versus head and tail rope-assisted recovery after emergency abdominal
surgery in horses. Pferdeheilkunde 2016; 32: 469–478.
79 Nyman G, Funkquist B, Kvart C, et al. Atelectasis causes gas exchange impairment
in the anaesthetised horse. Equine Vet J 1990; 22(5): 317–324.
80 Nyman G, Hedenstierna G. Ventilation–perfusion relationships in the anaesthe-
tised horse. Equine Vet J 1989; 21(4): 274–281.
81 Sorenson PR, Robinson NE. Postural effects on lung volumes and asynchronous
ventilation in anesthetized horses. J Appl Physiol Respir Environ Exerc Physiol
1980; 48(1): 97–103.
82 Auckburally A, Nyman G. Review of hypoxaemia in anaesthetized horses: predis-
posing factors, consequences and management. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(3):
397–408.
83 Froese AB, Bryan AC. Effects of anesthesia and paralysis on diaphragmatic
mechanics in man. Anesthesiology 1974; 41(3): 242–255.
84 McCoy AM, Hackett ES, Wagner AE, et al. Pulmonary gas exchange and plasma
lactate in horses with gastrointestinal disease undergoing emergency exploratory
laparotomy: a comparison with an elective surgery horse population. Vet Surg
2011; 40(5): 601–609.
85 Trenholme HN, Barletta M, Quandt JE, et al. Arterial oxygenation in anesthetized
horses placed in a 5-degree reverse Trendelenburg position. Res Vet Sci 2021; 135:
304–309.
86 Schauvliege S, Binetti A, Duchateau L, et al. Cardiorespiratory effects of a 7
degrees reverse Trendelenburg position in anaesthetized horses: a randomized
clinical trial. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45(5): 648–657.
87 Crumley MN, McMurphy RM, Hodgson DS, et al. Effects of inspired oxygen con-
centration on ventilation, ventilatory rhythm, and gas exchange in isoflurane-
anesthetized horses. Am J Vet Res 2013; 74(2): 183–190.
88 Cuvelliez SG, Eicker SW, McLauchlan C, et al. Cardiovascular and respiratory
effects of inspired oxygen fraction in halothane-anesthetized horses. Am J Vet Res
1990; 51(8): 1226–1231.
89 Hubbell JA, Aarnes TK, Bednarski RM, et al. Effect of 50% and maximal inspired
oxygen concentrations on respiratory variables in isoflurane-anesthetized horses.
BMC Vet Res 2011; 7: 23.
90 Portier K, Crouzier D, Guichardant M, et al. Effects of high and low inspired frac-
tions of oxygen on horse erythrocyte membrane properties, blood viscosity and
muscle oxygenation during anaesthesia. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36(4): 287–298.
91 Savvas I, Pavlidou K, Braun C, et al. Evaluation of the effect of the inspired oxygen
fraction on blood oxygenation during inhalant anaesthesia in horses: a systematic
review with meta-analysis. Animals (Basel) 2021; 11(8): 2245.
92 Wagner PD. Causes of a high physiological dead space in critically ill patients.
Crit Care 2008; 12(3): 148.
93 Portela DA, Di Franco C, Chiavaccini L, et al. Effect of end-inspiratory pause on
airway and physiological dead space in anesthetized horses. Vet Anaesth Analg
2023; 50(4): 363–371.
94 Clerbaux T, Gustin P, Detry B, et al. Comparative study of the oxyhaemoglobin
dissociation curve of four mammals: man, dog, horse and cattle. Comp Biochem
Physiol Comp Physiol 1993; 106(4): 687–694.
95 Hughes J, Bardell D. Determination of reference intervals for equine arterial
blood-gas, acid–base and electrolyte analysis. Vet Anaesth Analg 2019; 46(6):
765–771.
96 Hopster K, Kästner SB, Rohn K, et al. Intermittent positive pressure ventilation
with constant positive end-expiratory pressure and alveolar recruitment manoeu-
vre during inhalation anaesthesia in horses undergoing surgery for colic, and its
influence on the early recovery period. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38(3): 169–177.
97 Lachmann B. Open up the lung and keep the lung open. Intensive Care Med 1992;
18(6): 319–321.
98 Schürmann P, Hopster K, Rohn K, et al. Optimized gas exchange during inhalant
anaesthesia in horses using "open lung concept" ventilation. Pferdeheilkunde 2008;
24(2): 236–242.
99 Robertson SA, Bailey JE. Aerosolized salbutamol (albuterol) improves PaO2 in
hypoxaemic anaesthetized horses – a prospective clinical trial in 81 horses.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2002; 29(4): 212–218.
100 Gunkel CI, Valverde A, Robertson SA, et al. Treatment for a severe reaction to
intravenous administration of diatrizoate in an anesthetized horse. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2004; 224(7): 1143–1146.
101 Grubb TL, Lord PF, Berger M, et al. Effects of pulse-delivered inhaled nitric oxide
administration on pulmonary perfusion and arterial oxygenation in dorsally
recumbent isoflurane-anesthetized horses. Am J Vet Res 2014; 75(11): 949–955.
102 Nyman G, Grubb TL, Heinonen E, et al. Pulsed delivery of inhaled nitric oxide
counteracts hypoxaemia during 2.5 hours of inhalation anaesthesia in dorsally
recumbent horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39(5): 480–487.
103 Wiklund M, Granswed I, Nyman G. Pulsed inhaled nitric oxide improves arterial
oxygenation in colic horses undergoing abdominal surgery. Vet Anaesth Analg
2017; 44(5): 1139–1148.
104 Wiklund M, Kellgren M, Wulcan S, et al. Effects of pulsed inhaled nitric oxide on
arterial oxygenation during mechanical ventilation in anaesthetised horses undergo-
ing elective arthroscopy or emergency colic surgery. Equine Vet J 2020; 52(1): 76–82.

-- 1246 of 1450 --

Chapter 62: Horses with Colic 	1231
105 Wilson DV, Rondenay Y, Shance PU. The cardiopulmonary effects of severe blood
loss in anesthetized horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2003; 30(2): 81–87.
106 Hesselkilde EZ, Almind ME, Petersen J, et al. Cardiac arrhythmias and electrolyte
disturbances in colic horses. Acta Vet Scand 2014; 56(1): 58.
107 Nostell K, Brojer J, Hoglund K, et al. Cardiac troponin I and the occurrence
of cardiac arrhythmias in horses with experimentally induced endotoxaemia.
Vet J 2012; 192(2): 171–175.
108 Shahreyar M, Fahhoum R, Akinseye O, et al. Severe sepsis and cardiac arrhyth-
mias. Ann Transl Med 2018; 6(1): 6.
109 Loomes K. The use of hyoscine N-butylbromide to treat intraoperative bradycar-
dia during isoflurane anaesthesia in a Thoroughbred horse. Vet Anaesth Analg
2020; 47(6): 847–849.
110 Ducharme NG, Fubini SL. Gastrointestinal complications associated with the use
of atropine in horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1983; 182(3): 229–231.
111 Frye MA, Bright JM, Dargatz DA, et al. A comparison of dobutamine infusion to
exercise as a cardiac stress test in healthy horses. J Vet Intern Med 2003; 17(1):
58–64.
112 Hunt JM, Edwards GB, Clarke KW. Incidence, diagnosis and treatment of postop-
erative complications in colic cases. Equine Vet J 1986; 18(4): 264–270.
113 Dugdale AH, Obhrai J, Cripps PJ. Twenty years later: a single-centre, repeat retro-
spective analysis of equine perioperative mortality and investigation of recovery
quality. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43(2): 171–178.
114 Raisis AL. Skeletal muscle blood flow in anaesthetized horses. Part II: effects of
anaesthetics and vasoactive agents. Vet Anaesth Analg 2005; 32(6): 331–337.
115 Higgins J. Preparation, supplies, and catheterization. In: Fielding CL, Magdesian
KG, eds. Equine Fluid Therapy. Ames, IA: Wiley, 2015: 127–141.
116 Evans L, Rhodes A, Alhazzani W, et al. Executive summary: surviving sepsis cam-
paign: international guidelines for the management of sepsis and septic shock
2021. Crit Care Med 2021; 49(11): 1974–1982.
117 Fielding CL, Magdesian KG. A comparison of hypertonic (7.2%) and isotonic
(0.9%) saline for fluid resuscitation in horses: a randomized, double-blinded,
clinical trial. J Vet Intern Med 2011; 25(5): 1138–1143.
118 Nakayama S, Sibley L, Gunther RA, et al. Small-volume resuscitation with hyper-
tonic saline (2400 mOsm/liter) during hemorrhagic shock. Circ Shock 1984; 13(2):
149–159.
119 Attuwaybi B, Kozar RA, Gates KS, et al. Hypertonic saline prevents inflammation,
injury, and impaired intestinal transit after gut ischemia/reperfusion by inducing
heme oxygenase 1 enzyme. J Trauma 2004; 56(4): 749–758; discussion 58–59.
120 Schmall LM, Muir WW, Robertson JT. Haemodynamic effects of small volume
hypertonic saline in experimentally induced haemorrhagic shock. Equine Vet J
1990; 22(4): 273–277.
121 Bellezzo F, Kuhnmuench T, Hackett ES. The effect of colloid formulation on col-
loid osmotic pressure in horses with naturally occurring gastrointestinal disease.
BMC Vet Res 2014; 10(Suppl 1): S8.
122 Brünisholz HP, Schwarzwald CC, Bettschart-Wolfensberger R, et al. Effects of
10% hydroxyethyl starch (HES 200/0.5) solution in intraoperative fluid therapy
management of horses undergoing elective surgical procedures. Vet J 2015;
206(3): 398–403.
123 Epstein KL, Bergren A, Giguère S, et al. Cardiovascular, colloid osmotic pressure,
and hemostatic effects of 2 formulations of hydroxyethyl starch in healthy horses.
J Vet Intern Med 2014; 28(1): 223–233.
124 Jones PA, Bain FT, Byars TD, et al. Effect of hydroxyethyl starch infusion on col-
loid oncotic pressure in hypoproteinemic horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2001;
218(7): 1130–1135.
125 Rehm M, Zahler S, Lötsch M, et al. Endothelial glycocalyx as an additional barrier
determining extravasation of 6% hydroxyethyl starch or 5% albumin solutions in
the coronary vascular bed. Anesthesiology 2004; 100(5): 1211–1223.
126 Boscan P, Steffey EP. Plasma colloid osmotic pressure and total protein in horses
during colic surgery. Vet Anaesth Analg 2007; 34(6): 408–415.
127 Pantaleon LG, Furr MO, McKenzie HC II, et al. Cardiovascular and pulmonary
effects of hetastarch plus hypertonic saline solutions during experimental endo-
toxemia in anesthetized horses. J Vet Intern Med 2006; 20(6): 1422–1428.
128 Evans L, Rhodes A, Alhazzani W, et al. Surviving sepsis campaign: international
guidelines for management of sepsis and septic shock 2021. Intensive Care Med
2021; 47(11): 1181–1247.
129 Lewis SR, Pritchard MW, Evans DJ, et al. Colloids versus crystalloids for fluid
resuscitation in critically ill people. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2018; 8(8):
Cd000567.
130 Dugdale AH, Barron KE, Miller AJ, et al. Effects of preoperative administration of
hypertonic saline or pentastarch solution on hematologic variables and long-term
survival of surgically managed horses with colic. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2015;
246(10): 1104–1111.
131 Jones PA, Tomasic M, Gentry PA. Oncotic, hemodilutional, and hemostatic effects
of isotonic saline and hydroxyethyl starch solutions in clinically normal ponies.
Am J Vet Res 1997; 58(5): 541–548.
132 Malbrain M, Langer T, Annane D, et al. Intravenous fluid therapy in the periop-
erative and critical care setting: executive summary of the International Fluid
Academy (IFA). Ann Intensive Care 2020; 10(1): 64.
133 Hoaglund EL, Hess AM, Hassel DM. Retrospective evaluation of the effect of
intravenous fluid administration on development of postoperative reflux in horses
with colic (2004–2012): 194 horses. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2018;
28(6): 566–572.
134 Rivers E, Nguyen B, Havstad S, et al. Early goal-directed therapy in the treatment
of severe sepsis and septic shock. N Engl J Med 2001; 345(19): 1368–1377.
135 Crabtree NE, Epstein KL. Current concepts in fluid therapy in horses. Front Vet Sci
2021; 8: 648774.
136 Holcombe SJ. Colic in foals. In: Robinson NE, Wilson MR, eds. Current Therapy
in Equine Medicine, 5th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders, 2003: 680–686.
137 Kasirer-Izraely H, Choshniak I, Shkolnik A. Dehydration and rehydration in don-
keys: the role of the hind gut as a water reservoir. J Basic Clin Physiol Pharmacol
1994; 5(1): 89–100.
138 Pritchard JC, Barr AR, Whay HR. Validity of a behavioural measure of heat stress
and a skin tent test for dehydration in working horses and donkeys. Equine Vet J
2006; 38(5): 433–438.
139 Pritchard JC, Burn CC, Barr AR, et al. Validity of indicators of dehydration in
working horses: a longitudinal study of changes in skin tent duration, mucous
membrane dryness and drinking behaviour. Equine Vet J 2008; 40(6): 558–564.
140 Luft FC. Lactic acidosis update for critical care clinicians. J Am Soc Nephrol 2001;
12(Suppl 17): S15–S19.
141 Adrogue HJ. Metabolic acidosis: pathophysiology, diagnosis and management.
J Nephrol 2006; 19(Suppl 9): S62–S69.
142 Forsythe SM, Schmidt GA. Sodium bicarbonate for the treatment of lactic acido-
sis. Chest 2000; 117(1): 260–267.
143 Navarro M, Monreal L, Segura D, et al. A comparison of traditional and quantita-
tive analysis of acid–base and electrolyte imbalances in horses with gastrointesti-
nal disorders. J Vet Intern Med 2005; 19(6): 871–877.
144 Adami C, Westwood-Hearn H, Bolt DM, et al. Prevalence of electrolyte distur-
bances and perianesthetic death risk factors in 120 horses undergoing colic sur-
gery. J Equine Vet Sci 2020; 84: 102843.
145 Garcia-Lopez JM, Provost PJ, Rush JE, et al. Prevalence and prognostic impor-
tance of hypomagnesemia and hypocalcemia in horses that have colic surgery. Am
J Vet Res 2001; 62(1): 7–12.
146 Dart AJ, Snyder JR, Spier SJ, et al. Ionized calcium concentration in horses with
surgically managed gastrointestinal disease: 147 cases (1988–1990). J Am Vet Med
Assoc 1992; 201(8): 1244–1248.
147 Desai TK, Carlson RW, Thill-Baharozian M, et al. A direct relationship between
ionized calcium and arterial pressure among patients in an intensive care unit. Crit
Care Med 1988; 16(6): 578–582.
148 Zimmel DN. Management of pain and dehydration in horses with colic. In:
Robinson NE, Wilson MR, eds. Current Therapy in Equine Medicine, 5th edn.
St. Louis, MO: Saunders, 2003: 115–120.
149 Kovacs A, Courtois MR, Barzilai B, et al. Reversal of hypocalcemia and decreased
afterload in sepsis. Effect on myocardial systolic and diastolic function. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 1998; 158(6): 1990–1998.
150 Zaloga GP, Sager A, Black KW, et al. Low dose calcium administration increases
mortality during septic peritonitis in rats. Circ Shock 1992; 37(3): 226–229.
151 Carlstedt F, Eriksson M, Kiiski R, et al. Hypocalcemia during porcine endotox-
emic shock: effects of calcium administration. Crit Care Med 2000; 28(8):
2909–2914.
152 Gennari FJ. Hypokalemia. N Engl J Med 1998; 339(7): 451–458.
153 Boesch JM. Anesthesia for the horse with colic. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract
2013; 29(1): 193–214.
154 Doherty TJ, Andrews FM, Provenza MK, et al. The effect of sedation on gastric
emptying of a liquid marker in ponies. Vet Surg 1999; 28(5): 375–379.
155 Elfenbein JR, Sanchez LC, Robertson SA, et al. Effect of detomidine on visceral
and somatic nociception and duodenal motility in conscious adult horses.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36(2): 162–172.
156 Freeman SL, England GC. Effect of romifidine on gastrointestinal motility,
assessed by transrectal ultrasonography. Equine Vet J 2001; 33(6): 570–576.
157 Nelson BB, Lordan EE, Hassel DM. Risk factors associated with gastrointestinal
dysfunction in horses undergoing elective procedures under general anaesthesia.
Equine Vet J Suppl 2013; 45: 8–14.
158 Clutton RE. Opioid analgesia in horses. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 2010;
26(3): 493–514.
159 Carregaro AB, Luna SP, Mataqueiro MI, et al. Effects of buprenorphine on nocic-
eption and spontaneous locomotor activity in horses. Am J Vet Res 2007; 68(3):
246–250.
160 Chiavaccini L, Claude AK, Lee JH, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynam-
ics comparison between subcutaneous and intravenous butorphanol administra-
tion in horses. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2015; 38(4): 365–374.

-- 1247 of 1450 --

1232 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
161 Reed RA, Knych HK, Barletta M, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
of hydromorphone after intravenous and intramuscular administration in horses.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(2): 210–218.
162 Reed R, Barletta M, Mitchell K, et al. The pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
namics of intravenous hydromorphone in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2019; 46(3):
395–404.
163 Boscan P, Van Hoogmoed LM, Farver TB, et al. Evaluation of the effects of the
opioid agonist morphine on gastrointestinal tract function in horses. Am J Vet Res
2006; 67(6): 992–997.
164 Skrzypczak H, Reed R, Barletta M, et al. A retrospective evaluation of the effect of
perianesthetic hydromorphone administration on the incidence of postanesthetic
signs of colic in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(6): 757–762.
165 Spadavecchia C, Spadavecchia L, Andersen OK, et al. Quantitative assessment of
nociception in horses by use of the nociceptive withdrawal reflex evoked by trans-
cutaneous electrical stimulation. Am J Vet Res 2002; 63(11): 1551–1556.
166 Spadavecchia C, Andersen OK, Arendt-Nielsen L, et al. Investigation of the facili-
tation of the nociceptive withdrawal reflex evoked by repeated transcutaneous
electrical stimulations as a measure of temporal summation in conscious horses.
Am J Vet Res 2004; 65(7): 901–908.
167 Studer N, Bernal SD, Thormann W, et al. Antinociceptive effects of levometha-
done in standing horses sedated with romifidine. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(3):
451–460.
168 Hubbell JA, Kelly EM, Aarnes TK, et al. Pharmacokinetics of midazolam after
intravenous administration to horses. Equine Vet J 2013; 45(6): 721–725.
169 Jarrett MA, Bailey KM, Messenger KM, et al. Recovery of horses from general
anesthesia after induction with propofol and ketamine versus midazolam and
ketamine. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2018; 253(1): 101–107.
170 de Vries A, Thomson S, Taylor PM. Comparison of midazolam and diazepam as
co-induction agents with ketamine for anaesthesia in sedated ponies undergoing
field castration. Vet Anaesth Analg 2015; 42(5): 512–517.
171 Gangl M, Grulke S, Detilleux J, et al. Comparison of thiopentone/guaifenesin,
ketamine/guaifenesin and ketamine/midazolam for the induction of horses to be
anaesthetised with isoflurane. Vet Rec 2001; 149(5): 147–151.
172 Douglas H, Hopster K, Cerullo M, et al. The effects of flumazenil on ventilatory
and recovery characteristics in horses following midazolam-ketamine induction
and isoflurane anaesthesia. Equine Vet J 2021; 53(6): 1257–1267.
173 Trimm CM, Shepard MK. Horses with Colic. In: Grimm KA, Lamont LA,
Tranquilli WJ, et al., eds. Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia, 5th edn. of Lumb
and Jones. Ames, IA: Wiley Blackwell, 2015: 867–885.
174 Kalsbeek HC. Further experiences with non-surgical correction of nephrosplenic
entrapment of the left colon in the horse. Equine Vet J 1989; 21(6): 442–443.
175 Hardy J, Bednarski RM, Biller DS. Effect of phenylephrine on hemodynamics and
splenic dimensions in horses. Am J Vet Res 1994; 55(11): 1570–1578.
176 Grosenbaugh DA, Muir WW. Cardiorespiratory effects of sevoflurane, isoflurane,
and halothane anesthesia in horses. Am J Vet Res 1998; 59(1): 101–106.
177 Driessen B, Nann L, Benton R, et al. Differences in need for hemodynamic
support in horses anesthetized with sevoflurane as compared to isoflurane.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2006; 33(6): 356–367.
178 Raftery AG, Morgan RA, MacFarlane PD. Perioperative trends in plasma colloid
osmotic pressure in horses undergoing surgery. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San
Antonio) 2016; 26(1): 93–100.
179 Lukasik VM, Gleed RD, Scarlett JM, et al. Intranasal phenylephrine reduces post
anesthetic upper airway obstruction in horses. Equine Vet J 1997; 29(3): 236–238.
180 Matthews NS, Dollar NS, Shawley RV. Halothane-sparing effect of benzodiaz-
epines in ponies. Cornell Vet 1990; 80(3): 259–265.
181 Doherty TJ, Frazier DL. Effect of intravenous lidocaine on halothane minimum
alveolar concentration in ponies. Equine Vet J 1998; 30(4): 300–303.
182 Rezende ML, Wagner AE, Mama KR, et al. Effects of intravenous administration
of lidocaine on the minimum alveolar concentration of sevoflurane in horses.
Am J Vet Res 2011; 72(4): 446–451.
183 Dzikiti TB, Hellebrekers LJ, van Dijk P. Effects of intravenous lidocaine on isoflu-
rane concentration, physiological parameters, metabolic parameters and stress-
related hormones in horses undergoing surgery. J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin
Med 2003; 50(4): 190–195.
184 Enderle AK, Levionnois OL, Kuhn M, et al. Clinical evaluation of ketamine and
lidocaine intravenous infusions to reduce isoflurane requirements in horses under
general anaesthesia. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35(4): 297–305.
185 Wagner AE, Mama KR, Steffey EP, et al. Comparison of the cardiovascular effects
of equipotent anesthetic doses of sevoflurane alone and sevoflurane plus an intra-
venous infusion of lidocaine in horses. Am J Vet Res 2011; 72(4): 452–460.
186 Cruz Benedetti IC, Nottrott K, Fourel I, et al. Comparison of the effects of an
intravenous lidocaine infusion combined with 1% isoflurane versus 2% isoflurane
alone on selected cardiovascular variables and recovery characteristics during
equine general anaesthesia. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(1): 63–69.
187 Nóbrega Neto PI, Luna SP, Queiroz-Williams P, et al. Cardiorespiratory and antino-
ciceptive effects of two different doses of lidocaine administered to horses during a
constant intravenous infusion of xylazine and ketamine. BMC Vet Res 2013; 9: 199.
188 Valverde A, Gunkel C, Doherty TJ, et al. Effect of a constant rate infusion of lido-
caine on the quality of recovery from sevoflurane or isoflurane general anaesthesia
in horses. Equine Vet J 2005; 37(6): 559–564.
189 Feary DJ, Mama KR, Thomasy SM, et al. Influence of gastrointestinal tract disease
on pharmacokinetics of lidocaine after intravenous infusion in anesthetized
horses. Am J Vet Res 2006; 67(2): 317–322.
190 Feary DJ, Mama KR, Wagner AE, et al. Influence of general anesthesia on pharma-
cokinetics of intravenous lidocaine infusion in horses. Am J Vet Res 2005; 66(4):
574–580.
191 Doherty TJ, Seddighi MR. Local anesthetics as pain therapy in horses. Vet Clin
North Am Equine Pract 2010; 26(3): 533–549.
192 Freeman DE. Is there still a place for lidocaine in the (postoperative) management
of colics? Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 2019; 35(2): 275–288.
193 Kurabe M, Furue H, Kohno T. Intravenous administration of lidocaine directly
acts on spinal dorsal horn and produces analgesic effect: an in vivo patch-clamp
analysis. Sci Rep 2016; 6: 26253.
194 Ness TJ. Intravenous lidocaine inhibits visceral nociceptive reflexes and spinal
neurons in the rat. Anesthesiology 2000; 92(6): 1685–1691.
195 Song X, Sun Y, Zhang X, et al. Effect of perioperative intravenous lidocaine infu-
sion on postoperative recovery following laparoscopic cholecystectomy – a rand-
omized controlled trial. Int J Surg 2017; 45: 8–13.
196 Weibel S, Jokinen J, Pace NL, et al. Efficacy and safety of intravenous lidocaine for
postoperative analgesia and recovery after surgery: a systematic review with trial
sequential analysis. Br J Anaesth 2016; 116(6): 770–783.
197 Robertson SA, Sanchez LC, Merritt AM, et al. Effect of systemic lidocaine on vis-
ceral and somatic nociception in conscious horses. Equine Vet J 2005; 37(2):
122–127.
198 Brianceau P, Chevalier H, Karas A, et al. Intravenous lidocaine and small-intestinal
size, abdominal fluid, and outcome after colic surgery in horses. J Vet Intern Med
2002; 16(6): 736–741.
199 Malone E, Ensink J, Turner T, et al. Intravenous continuous infusion of lidocaine
for treatment of equine ileus. Vet Surg 2006; 35(1): 60–66.
200 Salem SE, Proudman CJ, Archer DC. Has intravenous lidocaine improved the out-
come in horses following surgical management of small intestinal lesions in a UK
hospital population? BMC Vet Res 2016; 12(1): 157.
201 Lefebvre D, Pirie RS, Handel IG, et al. Clinical features and management of equine
postoperative ileus: survey of diplomates of the European Colleges of Equine
Internal Medicine (ECEIM) and Veterinary Surgeons (ECVS). Equine Vet J 2016;
48(2): 182–187.
202 Lahav M, Levite M, Bassani L, et al. Lidocaine inhibits secretion of IL-8 and IL-
1beta and stimulates secretion of IL-1 receptor antagonist by epithelial cells. Clin
Exp Immunol 2002; 127(2): 226–233.
203 Lan W, Harmon D, Wang JH, et al. The effect of lidocaine on in vitro neutrophil
and endothelial adhesion molecule expression induced by plasma obtained during
tourniquet-induced ischaemia and reperfusion. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2004; 21(11):
892–897.
204 Berger C, Rossaint J, Van Aken H, et al. Lidocaine reduces neutrophil recruitment
by abolishing chemokine-induced arrest and transendothelial migration in septic
patients. J Immunol 2014; 192(1): 367–376.
205 Cook VL, Jones Shults J, McDowell M, et al. Attenuation of ischaemic injury in the
equine jejunum by administration of systemic lidocaine. Equine Vet J 2008; 40(4):
353–357.
206 Cook VL, Jones Shults J, McDowell MR, et al. Anti-inflammatory effects of intra-
venously administered lidocaine hydrochloride on ischemia-injured jejunum in
horses. Am J Vet Res 2009; 70(10): 1259–1268.
207 Bauck AG, Grosche A, Morton AJ, et al. Effect of lidocaine on inflammation in
equine jejunum subjected to manipulation only and remote to intestinal segments
subjected to ischemia. Am J Vet Res 2017; 78(8): 977–989.
208 Ranheim B, Risberg AI, Spadavecchia C, et al. The pharmacokinetics of dexme-
detomidine administered as a constant rate infusion in horses. J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 2015; 38(1): 93–96.
209 Grimsrud KN, Mama KR, Steffey EP, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
namics of intravenous medetomidine in the horse. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39(1):
38–48.
210 Risberg AI, Ranheim B, Krontveit RI, et al. The cardiovascular status of isoflurane-
anaesthetized horses with and without dexmedetomidine constant rate infusion
evaluated at equivalent depths of anaesthesia. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43(4):
412–423.
211 Hector RC, Rezende ML, Nelson BB, et al. Cardiopulmonary function and intesti-
nal blood flow in anaesthetised, experimentally endotoxaemic horses given a con-
stant rate infusion of dexmedetomidine. Equine Vet J 2022; 54(4): 820–828.

-- 1248 of 1450 --

Chapter 62: Horses with Colic 	1233
212 Gozalo- Marcilla M, Steblaj B, Schauvliege S, et al. Comparison of the influence of
two different constant-rate infusions (dexmedetomidine versus morphine) on
anaesthetic requirements, cardiopulmonary function and recovery quality in iso-
flurane anaesthetized horses. Res Vet Sci 2013; 95(3): 1186–1194.
213 Hopster K, Wittenberg-Voges L, Kästner SBR. Xylazine infusion in isoflurane-
anesthetized and ventilated healthy horses: effects on cardiovascular parameters
and intestinal perfusion. Can J Vet Res 2017; 81(4): 249–254.
214 Valverde A. Balanced anesthesia and constant-rate infusions in horses. Vet Clin
North Am Equine Pract 2013; 29(1): 89–122.
215 Yamashita K, Satoh M, Umikawa A, et al. Combination of continuous intravenous
infusion using a mixture of guaifenesin-ketamine-medetomidine and sevoflurane
anesthesia in horses. J Vet Med Sci 2000; 62(3): 229–235.
216 Marcilla MG, Schauvliege S, Segaert S, et al. Influence of a constant rate infusion
of dexmedetomidine on cardiopulmonary function and recovery quality in isoflu-
rane anaesthetized horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39(1): 49–58.
217 Creighton CM, Lemke KA, Lamont LA, et al. Comparison of the effects of xyla-
zine bolus versus medetomidine constant rate infusion on cardiopulmonary func-
tion and depth of anesthesia in horses anesthetized with isoflurane. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2012; 240(8): 991–997.
218 Schauvliege S, Marcilla MG, Verryken K, et al. Effects of a constant rate infusion
of detomidine on cardiovascular function, isoflurane requirements and recovery
quality in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38(6): 544–554.
219 Sanchez LC, Merritt AM. Colorectal distention in the horse: visceral sensitivity,
rectal compliance and effect of i.v. xylazine or intrarectal lidocaine. Equine Vet J
2005; 37(1): 70–74.
220 Philipp M, Brede M, Hein L. Physiological significance of alpha(2)-adrenergic
receptor subtype diversity: one receptor is not enough. Am J Physiol Regul Integr
Comp Physiol 2002; 283(2): R287–R295.
221 Jochle W, Moore JN, Brown J, et al. Comparison of detomidine, butorphanol, flu-
nixin meglumine and xylazine in clinical cases of equine colic. Equine Vet J 1989;
21(S7): 111–116.
222 Merritt AM, Burrow JA, Hartless CS. Effect of xylazine, detomidine, and a combi-
nation of xylazine and butorphanol on equine duodenal motility. Am J Vet Res
1998; 59(5): 619–623.
223 Kocoglu H, Ozturk H, Ozturk H, et al. Effect of dexmedetomidine on ischemia-
reperfusion injury in rat kidney: a histopathologic study. Ren Fail 2009; 31(1):
70–74.
224 Gu J, Sun P, Zhao H, et al. Dexmedetomidine provides renoprotection against
ischemia-reperfusion injury in mice. Crit Care 2011; 15(3): R153.
225 König KS, Verhaar N, Hopster K, et al. Ischaemic preconditioning and pharmaco-
logical preconditioning with dexmedetomidine in an equine model of small intes-
tinal ischaemia-reperfusion. PLoS ONE 2020; 15(4): e0224720.
226 VanderBroek AR, Engiles JB, Kästner SBR, et al. Protective effects of dexmedeto-
midine on small intestinal ischaemia-reperfusion injury in horses. Equine Vet J
2021; 53(3): 569–578.
227 Verhaar N, Pfarrer C, Neudeck S, et al. Preconditioning with lidocaine and xyla-
zine in experimental equine jejunal ischaemia. Equine Vet J 2021; 53(1):
125–133.
228 Cohen SP, Bhatia A, Buvanendran A, et al. Consensus guidelines on the use of intra-
venous ketamine infusions for chronic pain from the American Society of Regional
Anesthesia and Pain Medicine, the American Academy of Pain Medicine, and the
American Society of Anesthesiologists. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2018; 43(5): 521–546.
229 Muir WW. NMDA receptor antagonists and pain: ketamine. Vet Clin North Am
Equine Pract 2010; 26(3): 565–578.
230 Pöppel N, Hopster K, Geburek F, et al. Influence of ketamine or xylazine supple-
mentation on isoflurane anaesthetized horses – a controlled clinical trial. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2015; 42(1): 30–38.
231 Villalba M, Santiago I, Gomez de Segura IA. Effects of constant rate infusion of
lidocaine and ketamine, with or without morphine, on isoflurane MAC in horses.
Equine Vet J 2011; 43(6): 721–726.
232 Muir WW III, Sams R. Effects of ketamine infusion on halothane minimal alveo-
lar concentration in horses. Am J Vet Res 1992; 53(10): 1802–1806.
233 Knobloch M, Portier CJ, Levionnois OL, et al. Antinociceptive effects, metabolism
and disposition of ketamine in ponies under target-controlled drug infusion.
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2006; 216(3): 373–386.
234 Peterbauer C, Larenza PM, Knobloch M, et al. Effects of a low dose infusion of
racemic and S-ketamine on the nociceptive withdrawal reflex in standing ponies.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35(5): 414–423.
235 Levionnois OL, Menge M, Thormann W, et al. Effect of ketamine on the limb
withdrawal reflex evoked by transcutaneous electrical stimulation in ponies
anaesthetised with isoflurane. Vet J 2010; 186(3): 304–311.
236 Elfenbein JR, Robertson SA, Corser AA, et al. Systemic effects of a prolonged con-
tinuous infusion of ketamine in healthy horses. J Vet Intern Med 2011; 25(5):
1134–1137.
237 Alcott CJ, Sponseller BA, Wong DM, et al. Clinical and immunomodulating
effects of ketamine in horses with experimental endotoxemia. J Vet Intern Med
2011; 25(4): 934–943.
238 Lankveld DP, Bull S, Van Dijk P, et al. Ketamine inhibits LPS-induced tumour
necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-6 in an equine macrophage cell line. Vet Res
2005; 36(2): 257–262.
239 Sellon DC, Roberts MC, Blikslager AT, et al. Effects of continuous rate intravenous
infusion of butorphanol on physiologic and outcome variables in horses after celi-
otomy. J Vet Intern Med 2004; 18(4): 555–563.
240 Kohn CW, Muir WW III. Selected aspects of the clinical pharmacology of visceral
analgesics and gut motility modifying drugs in the horse. J Vet Intern Med 1988;
2(2): 85–91.
241 Bowen IM, Redpath A, Dugdale A, et al. BEVA primary care clinical guidelines:
analgesia. Equine Vet J 2020; 52(1): 13–27.
242 Steffey EP, Eisele JH, Baggot JD. Interactions of morphine and isoflurane in
horses. Am J Vet Res 2003; 64(2): 166–175.
243 Clark L, Clutton RE, Blissitt KJ, et al. Effects of peri-operative morphine adminis-
tration during halothane anaesthesia in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2005; 32(1):
10–15.
244 Van Hoogmoed LM, Galuppo LD. Laparoscopic ovariectomy using the endo-GIA
stapling device and endo-catch pouches and evaluation of analgesic efficacy of
epidural morphine sulfate in 10 mares. Vet Surg 2005; 34(6): 646–650.
245 Virgin J, Hendrickson D, Wallis T, et al. Comparison of intraoperative behavioral
and hormonal responses to noxious stimuli between mares sedated with caudal
epidural detomidine hydrochloride or a continuous intravenous infusion of deto-
midine hydrochloride for standing laparoscopic ovariectomy. Vet Surg 2010;
39(6): 754–760.
246 Martin- Flores M, Campoy L, Kinsley MA, et al. Analgesic and gastrointestinal
effects of epidural morphine in horses after laparoscopic cryptorchidectomy
under general anesthesia. Vet Anaesth Analg 2014; 41(4): 430–437.
247 Gingold BMC, Hassen KM, Milloway MC, et al. Caudal intercostal block for
abdominal surgery in horses. Vet Rec 2018; 183(5): 164–165.
248 Baldo CF, Almeida D, Wendt-Hornickle E, et al. Transversus abdominis plane
block in ponies: a preliminary anatomical study. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45(3):
392–396.
249 Freitag FAV, Amora DDS Jr., Muehlbauer E, et al. Ultrasound-guided modified
subcostal transversus abdominis plane block and influence of recumbency posi-
tion on dye spread in equine cadavers. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(4): 596–602.
250 Kuls N, Trujanovic R, Otero PE, et al. Ultrasound-guided transversus abdominis
plane block in shetland ponies: a description of a three-point injection technique
and evaluation of potential analgesic effects. J Equine Vet Sci 2020; 90: 102994.
251 Radhakrishnan S, Lorenzutti AM, Araos JD, et al. Evaluation of noninvasive blood
pressure in horses: bias, limits of agreement, and comparative detection of a pre-
determined mean blood pressure warranting treatment. Can Vet J 2021; 62(9):
994–998.
252 Yamaoka TT, Flaherty D, Pawson P, et al. Comparison of arterial blood pressure
measurements obtained invasively or oscillometrically using a Datex S/5 Compact
monitor in anaesthetised adult horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(3): 492–501.
253 Wilson KAT, Raisis AL, Drynan EA, et al. Agreement between invasive blood
pressures measured in three peripheral arteries in anaesthetized horses under
clinical conditions. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45(3): 338–344.
254 Skouropoulou D, Lacitignola L, Di Bella C, et al. Intraoperative assessment of fluid
responsiveness in normotensive dogs under isoflurane anaesthesia. Vet Sci 2021;
8(2): 26.
255 Gonçalves LA, Otsuki DA, Pereira MA, et al. Comparison of pulse pressure varia-
tion versus echocardiography-derived stroke volume variation for prediction of
fluid responsiveness in mechanically ventilated anesthetized dogs. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2020; 47(1): 28–37.
256 Fantoni DT, Ida KK, Gimenes AM, et al. Pulse pressure variation as a guide for
volume expansion in dogs undergoing orthopedic surgery. Vet Anaesth Analg
2017; 44(4): 710–718.
257 Muehlestein MB, Steblaj B, Joerger FB, et al. Evaluation of the ability of haemo-
dynamic variables obtained with minimally invasive techniques to assess fluid
responsiveness in endotoxaemic Beagles. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(5):
645–653.
258 Fielding CL, Stolba DN. Pulse pressure variation and systolic pressure variation in
horses undergoing general anesthesia. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2012;
22(3): 372–375.
259 Monge Garcia MI, Jian Z, Settels JJ, et al. Performance comparison of ventricular
and arterial dP/dt(max) for assessing left ventricular systolic function during dif-
ferent experimental loading and contractile conditions. Crit Care 2018; 22(1): 325.
260 Tartiere JM, Logeart D, Beauvais F, et al. Non-invasive radial pulse wave assess-
ment for the evaluation of left ventricular systolic performance in heart failure.
Eur J Heart Fail 2007; 9(5): 477–483.

-- 1249 of 1450 --

1234 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
261 Corley KT, Donaldson LL, Durando MM, et al. Cardiac output technologies with
special reference to the horse. J Vet Intern Med 2003; 17(3): 262–272.
262 Hopster K, Ambrisko TD, Kästner SBR. Influence of catecholamines at different
dosages on the function of the LiDCO sensor in isoflurane anesthetized
horses. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2017; 27(6): 651–657.
263 Hopster K, Ambrisko TD, Stahl J, et al. Influence of xylazine on the function of the
LiDCO sensor in isoflurane anaesthetized horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2015; 42(2):
142–149.
264 Shih AC, Queiroz P, Vigani A, et al. Comparison of cardiac output determined by
an ultrasound velocity dilution cardiac output method and by the lithium dilution
cardiac output method in juvenile horses with experimentally induced hypov-
olemia. Am J Vet Res 2014; 75(6): 565–571.
265 Valverde A, Giguère S, Morey TE, et al. Comparison of noninvasive cardiac output
measured by use of partial carbon dioxide rebreathing or the lithium dilution
method in anesthetized foals. Am J Vet Res 2007; 68(2): 141–147.
266 Sano H, Chambers JP. Ability of pulse wave transit time to detect changes in stroke
volume and to estimate cardiac output compared to thermodilution technique in
isoflurane-anaesthetised dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(5): 1057–1067.
267 Koenig J, McDonell W, Valverde A. Accuracy of pulse oximetry and capnography
in healthy and compromised horses during spontaneous and controlled ventila-
tion. Can J Vet Res 2003; 67(3): 169–174.
268 Matthews NS, Hartsfield SM, Sanders EA, et al. Evaluation of pulse oximetry in
horses surgically treated for colic. Equine Vet J 1994; 26(2): 114–116.
269 Voulgaris DA, Hofmeister EH. Multivariate analysis of factors associated with
post-anesthetic times to standing in isoflurane-anesthetized horses: 381 cases.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36(5): 414–420.
270 Reynolds L, Beckmann J, Kurz A. Perioperative complications of hypothermia.
Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2008; 22(4): 645–657.
271 Tomasic M. Temporal changes in core body temperature in anesthetized adult
horses. Am J Vet Res 1999; 60(5): 556–562.
272 Wilson DV, McFeely AM. Positive end-expiratory pressure during colic surgery in
horses: 74 cases (1986–1988). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1991; 199(7): 917–921.
273 Pascoe PJ, McDonell WN, Trim CM, et al. Mortality rates and associated factors in
equine colic operations – a retrospective study of 341 operations. Can Vet J 1983;
24(3): 76–85.
274 Day TK, Gaynor JS, Muir WW III, et al. Blood gas values during intermittent posi-
tive pressure ventilation and spontaneous ventilation in 160 anesthetized horses
positioned in lateral or dorsal recumbency. Vet Surg 1995; 24(3): 266–276.
275 Moens Y. Mechanical ventilation and respiratory mechanics during equine anes-
thesia. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 2013; 29(1): 51–67.
276 Nicolaisen A-SK, Bendix Nygaard A, Christophersen MT, et al. Effect of head and
tail rope-assisted recovery of horses after elective and emergency surgery under
general anaesthesia. Equine Vet Educ 2020; 34: 13397.
277 Santiago-Llorente I, López-San Román FJ, Villalba-Orero M. Demographic, pre-
operative and anaesthesia-related risk factors for unsatisfactory recovery quality
in horses undergoing emergency abdominal surgery. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021;
48(6): 882–890.
278 Tute AS, Wilkins PA, Gleed RD, et al. Negative pressure pulmonary edema as a
post-anesthetic complication associated with upper airway obstruction in a horse.
Vet Surg 1996; 25(6): 519–523.
279 Borer KE. Pulmonary oedema associated with anaesthesia for colic surgery in a
horse. Vet Anaesth Analg 2005; 32(4): 228–232.
280 Andrade FS, Facó LL, Ida KK, et al. Effects of 12 and 17 cmH2
O positive end-
expiratory pressure applied after alveolar recruitment maneuver on pulmonary
gas exchange and compliance in isoflurane-anesthetized horses. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2019; 46(1): 64–73.
281 Mason DE, Muir WW, Wade A. Arterial blood gas tensions in the horse during
recovery from anesthesia. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1987; 190(8): 989–994.
282 Cerullo M, Driessen B, Douglas H, et al. Changes in arterial blood pressure and
oxygen tension as a result of hoisting in isoflurane anesthetized healthy adult
horses. Front Vet Sci 2020; 7: 601326.
283 de Miguel Garcia C, Campoy L, Parry S, et al. Questionnaire on the process of
recovering horses from general anesthesia and associated personnel injury in
equine practice. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(2): 223–229.
284 Wohlfender FD, Doherr MG, Driessen B, et al. International online survey to
assess current practice in equine anaesthesia. Equine Vet J 2015; 47(1):
65–71.
285 Hector RC, Rezende ML, Mama KR, et al. Recovery quality following a single
post-anaesthetic dose of dexmedetomidine or romifidine in sevoflurane anaesthe-
tised horses. Equine Vet J 2020; 52(5): 685–691.
286 Woodhouse KJ, Brosnan RJ, Nguyen KQ, et al. Effects of postanesthetic sedation
with romifidine or xylazine on quality of recovery from isoflurane anesthesia in
horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2013; 242(4): 533–539.
287 Aarnes TK, Bednarski RM, Bertone AL, et al. Recovery from desflurane anes-
thesia in horses with and without post-anesthetic xylazine. Can J Vet Res 2014;
78(2): 103–109.
288 Guedes A, Knych H, Tucker L, et al. Pharmacokinetics and clinical effects of
xylazine and dexmedetomidine in horses recovering from isoflurane anesthesia.
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2020; 43(4): 369–376.

-- 1250 of 1450 --

1235
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of Lumb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
In horses, many diagnostic and surgical procedures can be performed
safely and humanely by combining local anesthetic techniques with
sedation and/or physical restraint. In conjunction with a good
physical examination, and thorough palpation of the limbs includ-
ing tendons and joints, one of the most important techniques for
the equine practitioner to master is local and regional anesthesia
and analgesia of the limbs. Use of these techniques can aid in local-
izing lameness, provide analgesia and anesthesia for standing pro-
cedures or diagnostics, and provide intra- or postoperative
analgesia. Mastery of other techniques (e.g., epidural and craniofa-
cial nerve blocks) will facilitate procedures on standing patients,
avoiding the relatively high morbidity and mortality associated with
general anesthesia of the equine patient.
Choice of local anesthetic agent
The choice of which local anesthetic(s) to be used is usually made
based on the onset and duration of action of the individual agent(s)
and the desired result. Improper injection technique or misidentifi-
cation of the landmarks can result in incomplete block and other
complications. Aseptic preparation of the skin is recommended for
local anesthetic injection sites, especially when injecting into a joint
or the epidural or subarachnoid space. Desired anesthetic effects
without complications are obtained by using proper techniques,
including aspiration before injection to avoid intravenous or intra-
arterial administration, and avoidance of injections through or into
inflamed tissues.
The blocks described in this chapter are most commonly accom-
plished with lidocaine (with the exception of the diagnostic blocks
for lameness examination) unless specified otherwise. Lidocaine
has a rapid onset of action and a relatively short duration of effect
(approximately 1 h). Where a longer duration of action is desired
(for analgesia), mepivacaine, bupivacaine, or ropivacaine may be
substituted. Local anesthesia of the limbs for diagnostic nerve
blocks is usually accomplished with mepivacaine because it has a
slightly longer duration of effect than lidocaine (up to 2 h), but
lidocaine may be substituted at the same volume if needed.
Dexmedetomidine added to mepivacaine has been shown to double
the duration of action of mepivacaine alone in a peripheral nerve
block if a longer block is needed [1]. For more in-depth information
on the pharmacology (metabolism, elimination, toxicity, and indi-
vidual medication profiles) of local anesthetics, see Chapter 29.
63 Equine Local Anesthetic and Analgesic
Techniques
Rachael E. Carpenter1 and Christopher R. Byron2
1 Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences, Virginia-Maryland College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Tech University,
Blacksburg, Virginia, USA
2 Department of Large Animal Clinical Sciences, Virginia-Maryland College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Tech University,
Blacksburg, Virginia, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 1235
Choice of local anesthetic agent, 1235
Anesthesia of the head, 1236
Infraorbital nerve block, 1236
Maxillary nerve block, 1236
Mandibular nerve block, 1236
Mental nerve block, 1236
Anesthesia for ocular procedures, 1237
Topical anesthesia, 1237
Auriculopalpebral nerve block, 1237
Sensory nerve blocks, 1237
Anesthesia of the limbs, 1239
Perineural anesthesia of the limbs, 1240
Intra-articular and intrabursal anesthesia of the limbs, 1245
Anesthesia for laparotomy/laparoscopy, 1250
Infiltration anesthesia, 1251
Paravertebral thoracolumbar anesthesia, 1251
Anesthesia for urogenital procedures, 1251
Anesthesia for castration, 1252
Anesthesia for ovariectomy, 1253
Anesthesia of the perineum, 1253
Anesthesia of the penis or vulva, 1253
Neuraxial anesthesia/analgesia, 1253
Indications and contraindications, 1253
Caudal epidural anesthesia/analgesia, 1254
Continuous caudal epidural anesthesia/analgesia, 1254
Epidural medications, 1254
Complications, 1257
Novel regional analgesic techniques, 1258
Transversus abdominis plane block, 1258
Caudal intercostal block for abdominal surgery, 1258
Continuous delivery of local anesthetics for lower limb analgesia, 1258
References, 1258

-- 1251 of 1450 --

1236 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
Anesthesia of the head
Local anesthesia of the head is most commonly used clinically for
dental and sinus surgery, ocular examinations, and laceration
repair. A recent study assessing complications associated with
regional nerve blocks in dental patients identified eight complica-
tions out of 270 regional nerve blocks performed resulting in a
2.96% incidence of complication. Complications included supraor-
bital hematoma, local hematoma, lingual self-trauma, and nerve
block failure [2].
Infraorbital nerve block
The infraorbital nerve block facilitates surgery of the nasal area or
incisors. Desensitization of the upper lip and nose is achieved by
injecting 5 mL of local anesthetic with a 1 inch (2.5 cm) 20 gauge
needle over the infraorbital nerve as it emerges from the infraorbi-
tal canal (Fig. 63.1g). The infraorbital canal can be palpated after
displacing the flat levator labii superioris muscle dorsally and then
palpating with the index finger approximately half the distance and
2.5 cm dorsal to a line connecting the nasomaxillary notch and the
rostral end of the facial crest.
To desensitize the teeth as far as the first molar, the maxillary
sinus, the roof of the nasal cavity, and the skin almost to the medial
canthus of the eye, 5 mL of local anesthetic is deposited within the
infraorbital foramen using a 2 inch (5.0 cm) 20 gauge needle
(Fig. 63.1h) [3]. The local anesthesia produced by this technique is
generally not sufficient to allow standing extraction of the premo-
lars or trephination of the maxillary sinus but may be a useful
adjunct to general anesthesia in those cases. A study using com-
puted tomography (CT) and contrast injections examined two
alternative techniques for infiltration of the infraorbital nerve
within the pterygopalatine fossa in the hopes of refining the tech-
nique for better analgesia of the cheek teeth [4]. Both techniques
were successful in achieving distribution of contrast medium
around the infraorbital nerve.
There is evidence to suggest that idiopathic head shaking may be
a facial pain syndrome resulting from trigeminal neuropathy.
Idiopathic head shaking is a diagnosis without a conclusive diag-
nostic test, but one study has suggested utilizing desensitization of
the infraorbital nerve as a diagnostic tool for this disorder [5].
Maxillary nerve block
Desensitization of the maxilla, premaxilla, paranasal sinuses, and
sinus cavity can be achieved by blocking the maxillary nerve at the
pterygopalatine fossa (where the nerve enters the infraorbital
canal). Two methods of infiltration have been described. In the
first, a 3.5 inch (8.9 cm) 20–22 gauge spinal needle is inserted on
the ventral border of the zygomatic process of the temporal bone at
the narrowest point of the zygomatic arch and directed rostromedi-
ally and ventrally in the direction of the sixth cheek tooth on the
contralateral maxillary arcade [6]. The second approach is accom-
plished by inserting the needle at a 90° angle to the head so that it
enters the pterygopalatine fossa just caudal to the maxillary tuber-
osity [7]. A cadaver study evaluated the accuracy of methods used
to infiltrate the maxillary nerve and determined that using an angu-
lated needle placement or a perpendicular needle placement were
equally accurate [8]. To further improve the accuracy of maxillary
nerve blocks, recent investigations are exploring the possibility that
ultrasound-guided blocks may be more accurate than blocks done
using surface landmarks [9].
Mandibular nerve block
Blocking the mandibular nerve will desensitize the ipsilateral side
of the mandible and the associated dental structures. The mandibu-
lar nerve can be blocked as it enters the mandibular canal at the
mandibular foramen where it becomes the inferior alveolar nerve.
The location of the mandibular foramen may be approximated
using the intersection of a line passing vertically downward from
the lateral canthus of the eye and a line extending backward from
the table of the mandibular molar teeth. A 6 inch (15.24 cm)
20–22 gauge needle is inserted at the ventral border of the ramus,
just rostral to the angle of the mandible and then advanced to the
location of the mandibular foramen. In that location, 15–20 mL of
local anesthetic may be injected. The second approach involves
inserting the needle at the caudal border of the ventral ramus of the
mandible about 3 cm ventral to the temporomandibular joint and
then advancing the needle to the approximate location of the man-
dibular foramen, taking care to stay as close to the medial aspect of
the mandible as possible. To perform the block, 15–20 mL of local
anesthetic is injected into the area. One study examined the accu-
racy of the two approaches to the inferior alveolar nerve block and
found that both the traditional approaches were accurate, but that
currently recommended doses of local anesthetics may be exces-
sive [10]. An intraoral approach to the inferior alveolar nerve has
also been described. The authors of one study found that this
approach could potentially reduce the dose of local anesthetic
needed by allowing the anesthetist to deposit the local anesthetic
closer to the inferior alveolar nerve, which could reduce the risk of
desensitizing the lingual nerve and causing self-trauma to the
tongue [11].
Mental nerve block
To desensitize the lower lip, the mental nerve is blocked with 5 mL
of local anesthetic rostral to the mental foramen (Figs. 63.1i
and 63.2i). After the tendon of the depressor labii inferioris is dis-
placed, the lateral border of the mental foramen is palpated at the
horizontal ramus of the mandible in the middle of the interdental
space [12].
The lower incisors and premolars can be desensitized by insert-
ing a 3 inch (7.5 cm) 20 gauge spinal needle into the mental fora-
men as far as possible in a ventromedial direction and depositing
10 mL of local anesthetic to desensitize the mandibular alveolar
e
f
g
h
k
i
a
Figure 63.1 Sites for needle placement for local anesthesia of the head. a,
supraorbital nerve; e and f, auriculopalpebral nerve; g and h, infraorbital
nerve; i, mental nerve; k, alveolar mandibular nerve.

-- 1252 of 1450 --

Chapter 63: Equine Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1237
nerve. This technique is difficult and is probably best used as an
adjunct to general anesthesia for extraction of teeth.
As many sedated patients do not tolerate placement of local anes-
thetic into the mental foramen, one study investigated an intraoral
technique and found that local anesthetic could be deposited into
the mental foramen via this approach [13].
Anesthesia for ocular procedures
Because of the strength with which the horse can close its eyelids
and keep them closed, some form of sedation and local anesthesia is
generally required for a complete ophthalmic examination. These
same techniques will often allow satisfactory completion of minor
diagnostic and surgical procedures. In addition to the specific
blocks listed below, a line block (local anesthetic deposited along
the superior and/or inferior orbital rims) and infiltration anesthesia
may be used to facilitate surgical procedures and placement of sub-
palpebral lavage catheters.
Topical anesthesia
Topical anesthesia is usually required for examination of an eye that
is a source of pain. In addition, topical anesthesia will facilitate
minor diagnostic and surgical procedures of the cornea and con-
junctiva such as collection of samples for cytologic examination,
removal of superficial corneal foreign bodies, and subconjunctival
injections.
Proparacaine and tetracaine are the most commonly used topical
ophthalmic anesthetics. Preservative-free ophthalmic formulations
are preferred for topical ocular use because preservatives can dam-
age the corneal epithelium. Although proparacaine and tetracaine
are generally interchangeable, tetracaine is more irritating to the
cornea than proparacaine. Other local anesthetics that have been
used topically include lidocaine, mepivacaine, and bupivacaine.
In humans, the onset of action of proparacaine is approximately
15 s, and the duration of action is approximately 15–30 min [14]. In
horses, using two drops of 0.5% tetracaine increases the duration of
maximal anesthetic effects from 5.5 to 16 min, and increasing the
concentration to 1% tetracaine increases the duration of maximal
anesthetic effects from 5.5 to 15.25 min [15]. A study in horses com-
pared the efficacy and duration of topically applied proparacaine
ophthalmic solution, lidocaine injectable solution, mepivacaine
injectable solution, and bupivacaine injectable solution and concluded
that bupivacaine may be most appropriate for procedures requiring
longer periods of corneal anesthesia. In that study, corneal sensitivity
was decreased for 35 min following topical application of 0.5% propa-
racaine and 2% mepivacaine, for 45 min following 2% lidocaine, and
for 60 min following 0.5% bupivacaine [16]. Another study compared
0.5% bupivacaine, 2% lidocaine, and 0.4% oxybuprocaine and
showed that corneal sensitivity was decreased for 45 min with bupiv-
acaine, 55 min for lidocaine, and 65 min for oxybuprocaine [17].
Topical lidocaine gel has been studied as a topical ophthalmic
anesthetic in horses. One study found that 0.2 mL of 2% lidocaine
gel applied topically produced a marked reduction in corneal sensi-
tivity for up to 75 min. Some corneal irregularities were seen in
treated eyes, but all resolved without treatment within 24 h. The
authors concluded that this may be a useful topical anesthetic for
minor ophthalmic procedures performed in the standing sedated
horse [18].
Repeated use of topical anesthesia can reduce Schirmer tear test
values, cause mild corneal epithelial damage, and suppress wound
healing with prolonged use. Because of these potential adverse
effects, topical anesthetics should not be prescribed as analgesic
agents for painful ocular conditions.
Auriculopalpebral nerve block
The most important nerve block used in ocular examinations to
prevent closure of the eyelid is the auriculopalpebral nerve block.
This block primarily affects the motor innervation to the orbicu-
laris oculi muscle, without affecting the sensory innervation to
the eyelids.
The auriculopalpebral nerve is usually blocked where the nerve
is easily palpable along the most dorsal aspect of the zygomatic arch
(Fig. 63.3e) or the depression caudal to the mandible at the ventral
edge of the temporal position of the zygomatic arch (Fig. 63.3f). In
each location, the needle is placed subcutaneously in the area where
the nerve is palpated and 1–2 mL of local anesthetic is injected over
the nerve [12,19].
Auriculopalpebral nerve blocks will diminish the blink reflex, so
artificial tears should be applied to the cornea to prevent drying,
and care should be exercised to protect the eye from accidental
trauma or debris until recovery is complete. While auriculopalpe-
bral nerve block does decrease intraocular pressure (IOP), the dif-
ference in IOP between blocked versus unblocked eyes is not
clinically significant [20].
Sensory nerve blocks
The supraorbital nerve block will desensitize the majority of the
upper eyelid and can be used to facilitate minor surgical procedures
of the nasal portion of the upper lid (Fig. 63.2a). The nerve emerges
through the supraorbital foramen, which can be easily palpated
with the index finger about 5–7 cm dorsal to the medial canthus
and in the center of an imaginary triangle formed by grasping the
supraorbital process of the frontal bone with the thumb and middle
finger and sliding medially (Fig. 63.4A). Approximately 2 mL of
local anesthetic is injected subcutaneously over the foramen, 1 mL
as the needle is inserted into the foramen, and 2 mL as the needle is
inserted to its full depth (2.5 cm) into the foramen (Fig. 63.4B).
Successful completion of this block will desensitize the forehead,
including the middle two-thirds of the upper eyelid, and since this
block will also desensitize some of the terminal branches of the
auriculopalpebral nerve, motor function of the orbicularis oculi
muscle may be affected [21].
a
b
c d
g
i
Figure 63.2 Area of skin desensitization after blocking various nerves of
the head. a, supraorbital nerve; b, lacrimal nerve; c, infratrochlear nerve; d,
zygomatic nerve; g, infraorbital nerve; i, mental nerve.

-- 1253 of 1450 --

1238 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
For more complete desensitization of the eyelids, the supraorbital
block may be combined with techniques that block the lacrimal, infra-
trochlear, and zygomatic nerves. The lacrimal nerve is desensitized by
inserting a needle percutaneously at the lateral canthus of the eye and
directing it medially along the dorsal rim of the orbit (Fig. 63.3b).
Deep injection of 2–3 mL of anesthetic at this site desensitizes the lateral
canthus, lateral aspect of the upper eyelid, lacrimal gland, local con-
nective tissue, and temporal angle of the orbit (Fig. 63.2b) [19,21].
Anesthesia of the medial canthus, lacrimal glands, nictitans, and
connective tissues (Fig. 63.2c) is achieved by injecting 2–3 mL of
a
c
d
b
e
f
Figure 63.3 Needle placement for periocular nerve blocks. a, supraorbital nerve; b, lacrimal nerve; c, infratrochlear nerve; d, zygomatic nerve; e and f,
auriculopalpebral nerve.
(A) 	(B)
Figure 63.4 A. Palpation of the supraorbital nerve. B. Insertion of a 2.5 cm, 25 gauge needle into the supraorbital foramen.

-- 1254 of 1450 --

Chapter 63: Equine Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1239
local anesthetic around the infratrochlear nerve. The needle is
inserted through the bony notch or the palpable irregularity on the
dorsal rim of the orbit near the medial canthus (Fig. 63.3c) [19,21].
To infiltrate the zygomatic nerve and desensitize the lower two-
thirds of the lower eyelid, skin, and connective tissue (Fig. 63.2d),
the needle is placed subcutaneously on the lateral aspect of the bony
orbit and supraorbital portion of the zygomatic arch and 3–5 mL of
local anesthetic is injected (Fig. 63.3d) [19,21].
If general anesthesia is contraindicated or financially undesira-
ble, standing enucleation may be an option. Standing enucleation
may be accomplished with sedation in addition to blockade of the
auriculopalpebral, 	infratrochlear, 	lacrimal, 	and 	zygomatic
nerves [22], or with blockade of the supraorbital, infratrochlear,
lacrimal, and zygomatic nerves [23]. One study reviewed the use
of auriculopalpebral, supraorbital, lacrimal, zygomatic, and infra-
trochlear nerve blocks in addition to a retrobulbar block and
sedation for enucleation and orbital implant placement in 20
horses. The authors concluded that the standardized periopera-
tive protocol described provided a safe effective alternative to gen-
eral anesthesia [24].
Anesthesia of the limbs
Various techniques may be used to desensitize specific structures of
the equine limb for diagnostic or therapeutic purposes. These
include perineural, intra-articular, and intrabursal injection tech-
niques and local infiltration (e.g., ring blocks and line blocks) of
local anesthetic. These techniques are frequently used therapeuti-
cally to provide temporary relief from pain or to facilitate proce-
dures for treatment or diagnosis of diseases. In addition, local
anesthesia techniques are an integral part of the procedures used to
diagnose lameness in horses. The blocks used for therapeutic and
diagnostic purposes are similar. However, clinicians should keep in
mind that blocks performed for diagnosis of lameness should be car-
ried out in a manner that desensitizes the most specific region pos-
sible (to allow identification of the affected structures with
confidence), whereas blocks performed for therapeutic relief from
pain or to allow performance of a procedure (e.g., surgery) may be
applied so that a larger (i.e., less specific) area is desensitized.
Therefore, the goal of the local anesthesia procedure should be con-
sidered when performing these techniques. In general, perineural
injections performed as distally as possible using the smallest effec-
tive amount of local anesthetic increase the specificity of such blocks.
Skin at injection sites should be cleaned and prepared prior to
needle insertion to reduce the likelihood of infection of deeper tis-
sues. Such preparation may include the use of alcohol only or
povidone-iodine or chlorhexidine gluconate scrub followed by a
sterile water, saline solution, or alcohol rinse. Skin should also be
aseptically prepared prior to insertion of a needle in a synovial
structure, and the use of sterile gloves, syringes, needles, and
unopened bottles of local anesthetic is recommended owing to the
potential for septic arthritis. Clipping of hair prior to aseptic prepa-
ration for injection of synovial structures is often performed; how-
ever, clients may object to this. Removal of hair prior to preparing
the skin may not be necessary; the number of bacterial colony-
forming units on skin over midcarpal and distal interphalangeal
joints after a povidone-iodine and 70% alcohol scrub is not signifi-
cantly different between areas that are clipped and those that are
not clipped to remove hair [25]. Removal of hair in horses with
thick coats (i.e., hirsute horses or during cold weather), for horses
with soiled coats, and to aid identification of landmarks for select
injections may be warranted. Clipping of hair with an electric clipper
and a size 40 clipper blade decreases contamination of joints with
tissue debris and hair after needle insertion [26]. In addition, the use
of stylets for spinal needles, 22 gauge needles rather than 20 gauge
needles, and angled needle insertion reduces joint contamination
when hair is not clipped [26]. Aseptic preparation is typically not
necessary before performing perineural blocks; however, the skin
should be clean and the area should be briefly scrubbed or wiped
with alcohol. As a precaution, the skin should be thoroughly pre-
pared whenever there is a risk of inadvertent puncture of a synovial
structure. In addition, needles should only be handled on the outside
surface of the hub when sterile gloves are not worn.
Depending on the block performed, injections may be performed
with the limb in a weight-bearing or flexed position. Changes in
position may aid the identification of anatomic landmarks before
needle insertion. Restraint of the horse by a capable handler should
be applied in all instances; the use of a twitch is typically warranted.
The ipsilateral or a contralateral limb may be held by an assistant if
the horse is reluctant to stand still during a block. However, the
handler must exercise extreme care in such instances so that neither
the clinician nor the assistant is injured; this is particularly impor-
tant when the contralateral limb is held and should not be attempted
with fractious horses. Sedation may be necessary to perform a
block; however, this should be avoided when the horse must be
walked or trotted as part of a lameness examination. Sedation of
horses with detomidine may not alter the severity of lameness but
can alter the pattern of locomotion [27]. In another study evaluat-
ing the effects of xylazine, detomidine, and romifidine alone or in
combination with butorphanol, xylazine alone had the least impact
on objective lameness measures [28]. Use of low-dose detomidine
may minimize effects on coordination but does have an impact on
other objective gait parameters [29]. Therefore, xylazine may have
the least effect on lameness and be the best choice when light seda-
tion is necessary during lameness examination.
Intra-articular blocks may be best performed with mepivacaine
because the severity of toxic effects of that local anesthetic on
equine articular chondrocytes is less than that with lidocaine and
markedly less than that with bupivacaine [30]. Although not in
common use for horses, there is evidence that ropivacaine may have
lower chondrotoxicity than mepivacaine [31].
Choice of needle gauge is based primarily on personal preference.
However, 20 gauge needles are useful for a wide variety of injections.
Use of smaller (22–25 gauge) needles can be advantageous for peri-
neural injections and local anesthesia of superficial synovial struc-
tures in the distal aspects of limbs because they may reduce the horse’s
reaction and can be easier to place precisely. Use of larger (18–
19 gauge) needles is typically warranted for injections performed
with long (greater than 1.5 inch or 3.8 cm) needles, through thick
fascia or muscle, or when movement of the horse may cause bending
and breakage of the needle. Choice of needle length should be made
with consideration of the location of the structure to be injected and
the locations of other deeper structures that may sustain iatrogenic
damage during needle insertion. For horses that are prone to move
during an injection or in instances during which motion of the needle
may cause deposition of local anesthetic outside the region of inter-
est, extension set tubing may be used between the syringe and needle.
For perineural injections, the needle may be directed in a proximal to
distal direction or a distal to proximal direction. Use of a distal to
proximal direction may decrease the risk of needle breakage if the
horse moves, particularly for small gauge needles. Use of a proximal
to distal direction may aid retention of the needle at the site of

-- 1255 of 1450 --

1240 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
insertion if the horse moves. For nerves within a perineural sheath,
deposition of local anesthetic inside the sheath may be required to
ensure effective desensitization [32]. Confirmation of needle place-
ment can be made via ultrasonography.
The efficacy of a perineural block is typically confirmed by detec-
tion of loss of skin sensation distal to the site where the block was
performed. However, this may not be a reliable indication of effi-
cacy in all instances, and the use of other signs (e.g., improvement
in lameness or loss of response to hoof tester pressure or limb flex-
ion) should also be used to assess the block further. Loss of skin
sensation is not a reliable indicator of the efficacy of perineural
blocks performed in the proximal aspect of a limb. When checking
skin sensation, a blunt object that will not cause skin trauma should
be used and light to moderate pressure should be applied. Horses
may move because of the presence and movements of the clinician;
for such horses, it may be helpful to check skin sensation from the
contralateral side or to have an assistant cover the horse’s eyes.
Perineural anesthesia of the limbs
Palmar or plantar digital nerve block
The digital neurovascular bundles are located in the palmar or plan-
tar aspect of the pastern region (between the coronary band and
metacarpophalangeal joint) medial and lateral to the deep digital
flexor tendon. The digital nerves are the most palmar or plantar
structures in these neurovascular bundles (Figs. 63.5a and 63.6a).
Local anesthesia of these nerves may be performed with the limb in a
weight-bearing or flexed position. Digital nerve blocks are typically
performed with a 1 inch (2.5 cm) 22 gauge needle or a ⅝ inch (1.5 cm)
25 gauge needle. The needle is advanced through the skin, and
approximately 1.5 mL of local anesthetic is injected perineurally. The
palmar or plantar aspect of the foot (including the heel bulbs, sole,
and navicular bursa, and associated structures) is desensitized start-
ing within 5–10 min after performance of the block (Fig. 63.7A).
Digital nerve blocks do not significantly reduce the response of
non-lame horses to flexion of the distal limbs [33]; therefore, clini-
cians should keep in mind that these blocks may not improve distal
limb flexion responses in lame horses. Digital nerve blocks should
be performed just proximal to the collateral cartilages of the foot to
reduce the likelihood that proximal interphalangeal joint pain
would be alleviated by the block [34]. Local anesthesia of palmar
digital nerves may alleviate lameness attributable to pain of the sole
of the foot [35] or the distal interphalangeal joint [36]. Local anes-
thesia of palmar digital nerves affects kinematic gait analysis varia-
bles in horses with navicular disease [37].
Palmar digital nerve blocks performed with mepivacaine are
fully effective between 15 min and 1 h after the block, and effects
h 	h
g 	g
f 	f
e	e
d 	d
c
Lateral 	Palmar 	Medial
c
a/b 	a/b
Figure 63.5 Needle placement for left distal forelimb nerve blocks. a, lateral and medial palmar digital nerves; b, dorsal branches; c, lateral and medial
palmar digital nerves (basisesamoid); d and g, lateral and medial palmar nerves; e, lateral and medial palmar metacarpal nerves; f, communicating branch;
h, location of high suspensory block.

-- 1256 of 1450 --

Chapter 63: Equine Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1241
may persist for more than 2 h [38]. Mepivacaine appears to be more
reliable and has a longer duration than lidocaine for diagnostic local
anesthesia [39]. Results of another study indicate that the onset of
desensitization is similar among local anesthetics for palmar digital
nerve blocks in horses; lidocaine has a significantly shorter dura-
tion than bupivacaine, which in turn has a shorter duration than
prilocaine or mepivacaine in this application [40]. The combination
of dexmedetomidine and mepivacaine greatly increases the dura-
tion of sensory blockade compared with mepivacaine alone; peri-
neural dexmedetomidine alone does not significantly affect the
mechanical nociceptive threshold [1]. The addition of epinephrine
to lidocaine has been shown to increase the duration of palmar digi-
tal nerve block local anesthesia [41]. Liposomal bupivacaine is also
an effective agent for local anesthesia of palmar digital nerves [42].
Block of the dorsal branches of the digital nerves
Structures of the dorsal aspect of the foot and pastern region can be
desensitized by blocking the medial and lateral dorsal branches of
the palmar or plantar digital nerves (Figs. 63.5b and 63.6b). This
block is typically performed in addition to the digital nerve block; a
1–1.5 inch (2.5–3.8 cm) 20–22 gauge needle is used to inject
1.5–3 mL of local anesthetic subcutaneously as the needle is passed
in a dorsal direction from the site of injection of the palmar or plan-
tar digital nerves; the needle should be inserted up to the hub.
Performing the block in the proximal aspect of the pastern provides
analgesia for a larger area than is provided when the block is per-
formed in the distal aspect of the pastern; therefore, use of a distal
location yields a block that is more specific for structures of the
dorsal region of the foot and dorsodistal aspect of the pastern.
Abaxial sesamoid (basisesamoid) block
The medial and lateral palmar or plantar digital nerves (includ-
ing dorsal branches) can be blocked at the level of the distal abax-
ial aspect of the proximal sesamoid bones (Figs. 63.5c and 63.6c);
3–5 mL of local anesthetic is injected perineurally with a 1 inch
(2.5 cm) 22 gauge needle or a ⅝ inch (1.5 cm) 25 gauge needle.
Local anesthesia at this level provides analgesia of the foot and
the palmar or plantar aspect of the pastern region. As with digital
nerve blocks, abaxial sesamoid nerve blocks may not have an
effect on lameness that is exacerbated by flexion of the distal
aspect of a limb [33]. In a substantial number of horses, local
anesthetic may diffuse proximally after this block [43]. Although
liposomal bupivacaine is an effective perineural local anesthetic
in this location, the duration does not seem to be significantly
longer than bupivacaine hydrochloride [44]. The use of ketamine
hydrochloride as a sole agent in a basisesamoid block has been
assessed; use in this peripheral location did not significantly
improve lameness [45].
h
g 	g
f 	f
e 	e
d 	d
c 	c
a/b 	a/b
h
Lateral 	Plantar 	Medial
Figure 63.6 Needle placement for left distal rear limb nerve blocks. a, lateral and medial plantar digital nerves; b, dorsal branches; c, lateral and medial
plantar digital nerves (basisesamoid); d and g, lateral and medial plantar nerves; e, lateral and medial plantar metatarsal nerves; f, communicating branch;
h, location of high suspensory block

-- 1257 of 1450 --

1242 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
Low palmar or plantar (low four-point) nerve block
The medial and lateral palmar or plantar nerves and palmar
metacarpal or palmar metatarsal nerves are desensitized with this
block (Figs. 63.5d,e and 63.6d,e). For palmar or plantar nerves, local
anesthetic is injected between the suspensory ligament and the
deep digital flexor tendon. Because of the proximity to the digital
flexor tendon synovial sheath, the area should be thoroughly pre-
pared, the hub of the needle should be checked to ensure that syno-
vial fluid is not obtained, and the injection should be performed at a
level approximately 1 cm proximal to the distal ends of the splint
bones. For the palmar metacarpal or plantar metatarsal nerves, local
anesthetic is injected between the third metacarpal or metatarsal
bone and the suspensory ligament at a level just distal to the distal
extent of the splint bones. Because of the proximity to the palmar or
plantar pouch of the fetlock joint, the area should be thoroughly pre-
pared and the hub of the needle checked to ensure that synovial fluid
is not obtained. If synovial fluid is obtained, the needle should be
withdrawn and redirected. Although this block may be performed
with the limb in a weight-bearing or elevated position, elevation
of the limb may increase the risk of digital flexor tendon sheath
puncture [46]. These blocks provide analgesia for most structures of
the fetlock joint and structures distal to that joint (Fig. 63.7B).
Subcutaneous injection of additional local anesthetic in a dorsal
direction may be necessary to provide complete analgesia.
Local anesthetic diffusion in a proximal direction is minimal
after performance of a low palmar nerve block [47], and diffusion is
unlikely to cause a decrease in the severity of lameness attributable
to pain in the proximal aspect of the metacarpal region [48].
Proximal metacarpal or metatarsal region blocks
The high palmar or plantar (high four-point) block desensitizes the
medial and lateral palmar or plantar nerves and palmar metacarpal
or plantar metatarsal nerves in the proximal aspect of the metacar-
pal region proximal to the communicating branch of the medial
and lateral palmar or plantar nerves (Figs. 63.5f–h and 63.6f–h).
The palmar or plantar nerves are desensitized between the suspen-
sory ligament and the deep digital flexor tendon; this area is typically
easiest to palpate with the limb in a weight-bearing position. The
palmar metacarpal or plantar metatarsal nerves are desensitized via
injection of local anesthetic along the axial aspects of the splint
bones; this is easiest to accomplish with the limb in a flexed posi-
tion. For complete analgesia of the dorsal aspect of the limb in this
region, local anesthetic should be injected subcutaneously in a ring
block to the dorsal midline of the limb (Fig. 63.7C). The palmar
aspect of the carpometacarpal joint may be entered when perform-
ing this block [49]; therefore, the area should be thoroughly pre-
pared and suction applied after connection of the syringe to the
needle to ensure that synovial fluid is not obtained. Inadvertent
injection of the carpometacarpal joint would provide anesthesia to
the middle carpal joint, which could lead to erroneous conclusions
during a lameness examination. The origin of the suspensory liga-
ment may not be completely desensitized with this block. Gas may
be introduced into tissues while performing this block and can tem-
porarily interfere with ultrasonographic examination of structures
of the proximal palmar metacarpal region [50].
The origin of the suspensory ligament may be desensitized via
direct injection of the structure with local anesthetic. The block is
performed with the limb in a flexed position. The needle is advanced
into the proximal aspect of the suspensory ligament along the axial
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
Dorsal	Lateral 	Palmar/plantar 	Medial
Dorsal	Lateral 	Palmar/plantar 	Medial
Dorsal	Lateral 	Palmar/plantar 	Medial
Dorsal	Lateral 	Palmar/plantar 	Medial
Figure 63.7 Desensitized subcutaneous area after various lower limb nerve
blocks. A. Palmar/plantar digital nerve block. B. Low palmar/plantar (low
four-point) nerve block. C. High palmar/plantar (high four-point) nerve
block plus ring block to desensitize the dorsal metacarpal/metatarsal
region. D. Proximal metacarpal/metatarsal (high suspensory) nerve block.

-- 1258 of 1450 --

Chapter 63: Equine Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1243
aspect of the splint bone, and local anesthetic is injected in several
sites in a fan-shaped pattern. The injection may be performed from
the medial and lateral aspects, or just the lateral aspect of the limb
(particularly in hind limbs, where injection from the medial side
may be difficult). Use of an 18–19 gauge needle may prevent inad-
vertent needle breakage if the horse moves while performing this
block.
The lateral palmar nerve can be desensitized at the level of the
accessory carpal bone to provide analgesia for the deep structures
of the palmar aspect of the forelimb, including the proximal aspect
of the suspensory ligament. The block can be performed from the
lateral or medial aspect of the limb. For the lateral approach, local
anesthetic is deposited perineurally between the distal aspect of the
accessory carpal bone and the proximal aspect of the fourth meta-
carpal (lateral splint) bone; this can be performed with the limb in
a weight-bearing position or with the carpus flexed. Use of a medial
approach to the nerve may prevent inadvertent injection of the car-
pal synovial sheath [51]. This technique is performed with the limb
in a weight-bearing position. A ⅝ inch (1.5 cm) 25 gauge needle is
inserted in a groove in the flexor retinaculum fascia at the palmaro-
medial aspect of the accessory carpal bone. The needle is directed
in a mediolateral direction until it contacts bone, and then, local
anesthetic is injected.
Local anesthesia of the deep branch of the lateral plantar nerve
provides analgesia of the proximal aspect of the suspensory liga-
ment in the hind limb. A 1.5 inch (3.8 cm) 18–19 gauge needle is
inserted 1.5–2 cm distal to the head of the fourth metatarsal bone
(lateral splint bone) and directed axial to that bone [52,53]. The
needle may be directed either proximodorsally or dorsally; inser-
tion of the needle in a proximodorsal direction may provide more
specific local anesthesia of the deep branch of the lateral plantar
nerve and lead to less diffusion of the local anesthetic versus insertion
of the needle in a dorsal direction [53]. It is important to note that
anesthesia of the lateral plantar nerve is also likely when blocking
the deep branch of the lateral plantar nerve, so the procedure is not
strictly specific to the suspensory ligament origin [54]. Because of a
small risk of tarsometatarsal joint and tarsal sheath puncture, the
skin should be thoroughly prepared before performing the block.
The tarsal sheath and tarsometatarsal joint are inadvertently entered
in 16% and 6% of horses, respectively, during performance of this
block [55].
Median, ulnar, and medial cutaneous antebrachial
nerve blocks
Performance of these blocks in combination provides analgesia for
structures of the antebrachium, carpus, and distal aspect of the
forelimb. These blocks may be performed before a procedure or for
diagnostic purposes. Local anesthesia of the median nerve is per-
formed just distal to the superficial pectoral muscle at the caudo-
medial aspect of the radius, cranial to the flexor carpi radialis
muscle (Fig. 63.8a); approximately 10 mL of local anesthetic is
injected. The ulnar nerve is desensitized approximately 10 cm
proximal to the accessory carpal bone at the caudal aspect of the
limb in a palpable groove between the flexor carpi ulnaris and
ulnaris lateralis muscles (Fig. 63.8b); a 1 inch (2.5 cm) 20 gauge
needle should be inserted to the hub, and approximately 10 mL of
local anesthetic injected as the needle is withdrawn. The medial
cutaneous antebrachial nerve is desensitized just cranial to the
cephalic vein at the dorsomedial aspect of the middle of the radius
(Fig. 63.8c); approximately 5 mL of local anesthetic is injected.
The medial cutaneous antebrachial nerve provides analgesia only
for skin, so the block is not required for diagnostic purposes.
b
c
a
a
c
b
c
a	b
Dorsal	Lateral 	Palmar	Medial
Figure 63.8 Needle placement for proximal forelimb nerve blocks. a, median nerve; b, ulnar nerve; c, medial cutaneous antebrachial nerve. Inset:
cross-sections and desensitized subcutaneous areas of left forelimb.

-- 1259 of 1450 --

1244 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
The median and ulnar nerve blocks are not commonly performed
for diagnostic purposes; however, these blocks can be very useful
for determining a diagnosis in horses with forelimb lameness that is
not affected by intra-articular blocks or perineural blocks of the dis-
tal aspect of a limb. As such, the median and ulnar nerve blocks can
be useful for the diagnosis of problems causing pain in the carpal
bones or the distal aspect of the radius and pain attributable to soft
tissue problems between the distal aspect of the antebrachium and
proximal aspect of the metacarpus. Although the median nerve
block site is close to the cubital joint, performance of this block
does not improve lameness originating in that joint and is unlikely
to confound interpretation of results in horses with complex upper
forelimb lameness [56].
Use of ultrasound guidance may aid accurate perineural injec-
tion of local anesthetic for median and ulnar nerve blocks [57]. The
authors have also found ultrasound guidance useful for medial
cutaneous antebrachial nerve blocks. When performing these nerve
blocks for therapeutic purposes, a solution of 2% lidocaine with
epinephrine has similar duration of efficacy as 2% mepivacaine and
seems to be a suitable alternative [58]. Buffering mepivacaine
with sodium bicarbonate results in faster onset and greater reduc-
tion in lameness compared with non-buffered mepivacaine [59].
Performance of median and ulnar nerve blocks with 3% chloropro-
caine results in faster and more complete resolution of lameness
versus 2% mepivacaine [60].
Tibial, peroneal, and saphenous nerve blocks
Local anesthesia of the tibial and peroneal nerves desensitizes bone
and soft tissues of the distal aspect of the tibia, the hock, and struc-
tures distal to the hock. For local anesthesia of the tibial nerve, a
1.5 inch (3.8 cm) 20 gauge needle is inserted 10 cm proximal to the
tuber calcis caudal to the deep digital flexor muscle (Fig. 63.9a);
15–20 mL of local anesthetic is injected. Although the nerve is
located medially, the injection may be performed from the medial
side or from the lateral side. When performing the block from the
lateral side, the needle should be inserted to a depth sufficient to
ensure deposition of local anesthetic perineurally without penetra-
tion of the skin on the medial side of the limb. Ultrasound guidance
may improve accuracy of tibial nerve blocks [61,62]. Because it is
difficult to maintain contact between the syringe and needle when
the horse moves, it may be useful to connect extension set tubing
between the needle and syringe. The superficial and deep peroneal
nerves are desensitized by insertion of a 3.5 inch (8.9 cm) 18 gauge
needle 10 cm proximal to the tuber calcis in a palpable groove
between the long and lateral digital extensor muscles on the lateral
aspect of the limb (Fig. 63.9c). The needle is inserted until the cau-
dolateral edge of the tibia is contacted, and 20–30 mL of local anes-
thetic is injected as the needle is withdrawn to desensitize both the
deep and superficial peroneal nerves. A subcutaneous ring block
may be necessary to provide complete skin analgesia for surgery.
After performing these blocks, horses may drag their toe; caution
should be used during lameness examination of such horses. As for
the median and ulnar nerve blocks in the forelimb, these blocks are
not commonly performed but may help reach a diagnosis in horses
with lameness that is not affected by intra-articular blocks or distal
perineural blocks.
The saphenous nerve is desensitized by injection of 5 mL of local
anesthetic perineurally near the saphenous vein approximately
10 cm proximal to the tibiotarsal joint with a 1 inch (2.5 cm) 20 or
22 gauge needle (Fig. 63.9b). This block is useful for providing anal-
gesia to the skin of the medial aspect of the limb. It is not performed
for diagnostic analgesia during a lameness examination.
c a
b b
a
c
a
c
b
Dorsal	Lateral 	Plantar	Medial
Figure 63.9 Needle placement for proximal rear limb nerve blocks. a, tibial nerve; b, saphenous nerve; c, peroneal nerve. Inset: cross sections
and desensitized subcutaneous areas of left rear limb.

-- 1260 of 1450 --

Chapter 63: Equine Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1245
Intra-articular and intrabursal anesthesia of the
limbs
Navicular (podotrochlear) bursa
Several techniques can be used for injection of the navicular bursa.
However, an approach from the distal palmar aspect of the limb in
which the position of the navicular bursa is determined on the basis
of external anatomic landmarks may yield the highest success
rate [63,64]. This technique is typically performed with the foot on
an inclined wooden block to position the distal aspect of the limb in
a flexed position. The position of the navicular bone can be pre-
dicted to be at a location 1 cm distal to the coronary band at the
midpoint between the most dorsal and most palmar aspect of the
coronary band. Injection of 1–2 mL of local anesthetic subcutane-
ously at the needle insertion site may decrease movement of the
horse while performing this block. A 3.5 inch (8.9 cm) 18–20 gauge
needle is inserted at the midpoint between the heel bulbs just
proximal to the coronary band and advanced toward the predicted
position of the navicular bone (Fig. 63.10a). After the navicular
bone is encountered, the needle is withdrawn slightly. Correct nee-
dle placement can be confirmed by aspiration of a small amount of
synovial fluid (which is rarely obtained) or via radiography. Then,
3–5 mL of local anesthetic is injected. An alternate technique intro-
ducing the needle from the lateral aspect of the limb just proximal
to the collateral cartilages of the foot under ultrasonographic guid-
ance avoids penetration and possible damage of the deep digital
flexor tendon [65]. Improvement of lameness within 10 min after
injection suggests that the lameness is caused by pain in the navicu-
lar bursa or associated structures [66,67]; however, distal inter-
phalangeal joint pain may be improved by local anesthesia of the
navicular bursa 20–30 min after injection [67]. Mepivacaine can
diffuse between the navicular bursa and the distal interphalangeal
joint [68]. Analgesia of the navicular bursa may improve lameness
caused by pain in the dorsal aspect of the sole of the foot [69].
Distal interphalangeal (coffin) joint
For local anesthesia of the distal interphalangeal joint, a 1.5 inch
(3.8 cm) 20 gauge needle is inserted 1 cm proximal to the coronary
band and 2 cm lateral to the dorsal midline aspect of the limb
(Fig. 63.10b). The needle is directed distomedially toward the pal-
mar or plantar lateral aspect of the extensor process of the third pha-
lanx (coffin bone). Alternatively, the needle may be inserted into the
dorsoproximal pouch of the joint on the dorsal midline aspect of the
limb, 1 cm proximal to the coronary band and directed in a palmar
or plantar direction either parallel to the ground or distally toward
the solar surface of the foot. The horse should be in a weight-bearing
position while performing this block. Injection of 6 mL of local anes-
thetic into the distal interphalangeal joint may desensitize the dorsal
aspect (toe) of the sole of the foot, whereas injection of 10 mL may
also desensitize the angles (heel) of the sole [70]. Therefore, injection
of a maximum of 6 mL is recommended to increase the specificity of
the block when it is performed for diagnostic purposes. Because
mepivacaine can diffuse between the distal interphalangeal joint and
the navicular bursa [68], intra-articular distal interphalangeal joint
blocks may not be specific for problems of that joint.
Proximal interphalangeal (pastern) joint
The proximal interphalangeal joint is desensitized via insertion of a
1.5 inch (3.8 cm) 20 gauge needle into the palpable joint space
under the extensor tendon on the dorsal aspect of the limb in a
lateral to medial or medial to lateral direction (Fig. 63.10c). This
approach is typically performed with the limb in a weight-bearing
position. Alternatively, the joint may be entered at the palmar or
plantar lateral aspect with the limb in a flexed position. The needle
is inserted dorsal to the digital neurovascular bundle toward a pal-
pable depression between the distal aspect of the first phalanx and
the proximal aspect of the second phalanx; 5–10 mL of local anes-
thetic is injected. It is important to note that results of a recent study
in cadaver limbs suggest performance of the dorsal approach with
the limb flexed or use of the palmar approach may decrease iatro-
genic cartilage damage [71].
Metacarpophalangeal or metatarsophalangeal (fetlock)
joint
Fetlock joints may be injected via a dorsomedial or dorsolateral
approach or various palmar or plantar approaches. For the dorsal
approach, a 1.5 inch (3.8 cm) 20 gauge needle is inserted into the
palpable joint space proximal to the first phalanx under the exten-
sor tendon; this approach is performed with the limb in a weight-
bearing position. The palmar or plantar joint pouch may be entered
from the lateral aspect of the limb in three locations. The proximal
aspect of the palmar or plantar pouch may be entered in an area
bound by the third metacarpophalangeal or metatarsophalangeal
(cannon) bone dorsally, suspensory ligament (palmarly or plantarly),
distal end of the splint bone (proximally), and apical aspect of the
b
a
e
d
c
Figure 63.10 Needle placement for distal limb intra-articular and
intrabursal blocks. a, navicular (podotrochlear) bursa; b, distal
interphalangeal (coffin) joint; c, proximal interphalangeal (pastern) joint;
d, volar pouch of the fetlock joint capsule; e, digital flexor tendon sheath.

-- 1261 of 1450 --

1246 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
lateral proximal sesamoid bone distally (Fig. 63.10d). The palmar or
plantar pouch may also be entered through the collateral ligament
of the lateral proximal sesamoid bone between the cannon bone
and the proximal sesamoid bone; this may be the easiest approach
to obtain hemorrhage-free synovial fluid and inject the fetlock
joint, particularly in a horse without synovial effusion. Alternately,
the palmar or plantar aspect of the joint may be entered at the dis-
tolateral aspect in a space bounded by the digital neurovascular
bundle (palmarly or plantarly), the distal aspect of the lateral proxi-
mal sesamoid bone (proximodorsally), and the proximal aspect of
the proximal phalanx (distodorsally). The palmar or plantar
approaches are best performed with the distal aspect of the limb in
a flexed position. The fetlock joint is injected with 10 mL of local
anesthetic.
Digital flexor tendon sheath
When distended with synovial fluid, the digital flexor tendon
sheath can be desensitized via approaches to the proximal or distal
aspects. For the proximal approach, a 1 inch (2.5 cm) 20 gauge nee-
dle is inserted into the sheath 1 cm proximal to the palmar or plan-
tar annular ligament and 1 cm palmar or plantar to the lateral
branch of the suspensory ligament (Fig. 63.10e). For the distal
approach, the needle is inserted into the sheath in the palmar or
plantar aspect of the pastern between the proximal and distal digital
annular ligaments; care should be taken to avoid puncture of the
deep digital flexor tendon at this location. These blocks may be per-
formed with the limb in a weight-bearing or non-weight- bearing
position. As an alternative, the distal aspect of the limb may be
flexed and the needle can be inserted into the sheath on the pal-
maro- or plantarolateral aspect of the limb just distal to the lateral
proximal sesamoid bone between the proximal annular ligament
and proximal digital annular ligament. In addition, a palmar or
plantar axial sesamoidean approach can be used [72]. The limb is
held in flexion and a 1 inch (2.5 cm) 20 gauge needle is inserted at
the level of the middle aspect, 3 mm axial to the palmar or plantar
border of the lateral proximal sesamoid bone and dorsal to the
flexor tendons. The needle is directed at a 45° angle to the sagittal
plane toward the intersesamoidean ligament. That technique is pre-
ferred for horses without substantial synovial effusion of the sheath.
Local anesthesia of the digital flexor tendon sheath appears to be
specific for that structure because it is unlikely to improve lameness
attributable to pain in the sole of the foot, distal interphalangeal
joint, or navicular bursa [73]. Although local anesthetics diffuse
into other local synovial structures, concentrations are insufficient
to induce analgesia [74].
Carpal joint blocks
The radiocarpal (antebrachiocarpal) joint can be entered on the
dorsal aspect with the limb lifted off the ground and the carpus
flexed. A 1 inch (2.5 cm) 20 gauge needle is inserted in the palpable
depression of the joint either medial or lateral to the extensor carpi
radialis tendon; 5–10 mL of local anesthetic is injected. Alternatively,
the needle may be directed into the palmar aspect of the joint
between the lateral digital extensor and ulnaris lateralis tendons in
a palpable V-shaped depression bordered by the caudolateral aspect
of the radius and ulnar carpal bone and the proximal aspect of the
accessory carpal bone with the limb in a weight-bearing position
(Figs. 63.11a and 63.12a,c).
The middle carpal joint can be entered on the dorsal aspect with
the limb held off the ground with the carpus flexed. The needle is
inserted on the medial or lateral side of the extensor carpi radialis
tendon, in a manner similar to that for injection of the radiocarpal
joint. Alternatively, the palmar aspect of this joint may be injected
via insertion of the needle palmar to the articulation of the ulnar
and fourth carpal bones and distal to the accessory carpal bone
(Figs. 63.11b and 63.12b,d). The middle carpal joint communicates
with the carpometacarpal joint; therefore, both of these joints are
desensitized.
Carpal canal block
The carpal canal is most easily identified from the lateral aspect of
the forelimb when synovial effusion is present. It is important to
differentiate carpal sheath effusion from effusion of the carpal
joints. The carpal sheath may be entered with a 1 inch (2.5 cm)
20 gauge needle between the lateral digital extensor and ulnaris lat-
eralis tendons 1–3 cm proximal to the accessory carpal bone; 15 mL
of local anesthetic is injected. Another approach is to place the nee-
dle in the sheath 1.5 cm distal to the accessory carpal bone at the
dorsolateral aspect of the deep digital flexor tendon. For diagnostic
carpal canal blocks, results should be interpreted within 15 min and
subsequent blocks distal to the carpus should be delayed for at least
3 h because there is a likelihood of distal limb desensitization as
early as 30 min after injection [75].
a
b
Figure 63.11 Needle placement for right carpal intra-articular blocks. a,
radiocarpal joint; b, intercarpal joint.

-- 1262 of 1450 --

Chapter 63: Equine Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1247
Elbow joint block
The elbow joint may be blocked at the cranial or caudal edge of the
lateral collateral ligament, two-thirds of the distance distally
between the palpable lateral epicondyle of the humerus and the lat-
eral tuberosity of the proximal aspect of the radius (Fig. 63.13a). A
1.5 inch (3.8 cm) 18–20 gauge needle is inserted perpendicular to
the skin, and 20 mL of local anesthetic is injected. It is important to
ensure that local anesthetic is injected into the joint; this is con-
firmed by aspirating synovial fluid prior to injection. Injection of
local anesthetic periarticularly after insertion of the needle cranial
to the lateral collateral ligament can lead to temporary radial nerve
paralysis [76]. The caudal pouch of the elbow joint may also be
entered with a 3.5 inch (8.9 cm) 18–20 gauge needle inserted in a
distal, cranial, and medial direction in the palpable depression bor-
dered by the olecranon (caudally) and the distal aspect of the
humerus (cranially).
Olecranon bursa block
The olecranon bursa is injected with a 1.5 inch (3.8 cm) 20 gauge
needle directed into the bursa over the caudal aspect of the olecra-
non (Fig. 63.13b). This block is rarely indicated.
Bicipital bursa block
For local anesthesia of the bicipital bursa, a 3.5 inch (8.9 cm)
18 gauge needle is inserted at the cranial aspect of the humerus,
3.5 cm distal to the prominence on the craniolateral aspect of the
greater tubercle (Fig. 63.13c). The needle is directed along the cranial
surface of the humerus in a proximomedial direction; 10–15 mL of
local anesthetic is injected. Radiographic examination after injec-
tion of radiopaque contrast medium may be necessary to confirm
successful entry into the bicipital bursa [77]. Ultrasonographic
guidance may improve the accuracy of needle placement for local
anesthesia of the bicipital bursa [78].
Shoulder joint block
For local anesthesia of the shoulder joint, the depression between
the cranial and caudal prominences of the lateral tuberosity of
the humerus is palpated cranial to the infraspinatus tendon.
An 18 gauge needle at least 3.5 inch (8.9 cm) long is inserted into
the center of the depression and directed in a caudomedial direc-
tion at a 45° angle (Fig. 63.13d); 20 mL of local anesthetic is injected.
Correct placement of the needle can typically be confirmed by aspi-
ration of synovial fluid. Temporary suprascapular nerve anesthesia
and subsequent supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscle dysfunc-
tion are a rare complication of this block [76]. Ultrasonographic
a
b
c
d
g
f
e
Figure 63.12 Needle placement for left carpal
intra-articular blocks. a and c, radiocarpal joint; b and
d, intercarpal joint; e, lateral digital extensor tendon;
f, tendon of ulnaris lateralis muscle; g, accessory
carpal bone.
d
c
a
b
Figure 63.13 Needle placement for left proximal forelimb intra-articular
and intrabursal blocks. a, elbow joint; b, olecranon bursa; c, bicipital bursa;
d, shoulder joint.

-- 1263 of 1450 --

1248 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
guidance may improve the accuracy of needle placement in the
shoulder joint [78].
Cunean bursa block
The cunean bursa may be desensitized by inserting a 1 inch (2.5 cm)
22 gauge needle between the cunean tendon and the bones of the
distal aspect of the tarsus (Figs 63.14a and 63.15). The needle is
inserted from the distal aspect of the cunean tendon, and 5–10 mL
of local anesthetic is injected.
Tarsal joint blocks
Tarsal joints are typically injected with the limb in a weight-bearing
position. The tarsometatarsal joint is most reliably entered from the
plantarolateral aspect of the limb in a palpable depression 1 cm
proximal to the head of the lateral fourth metatarsal (splint) bone
(Figs. 63.14b and 63.16). A 1–1.5 inch (2.5–3.8 cm) 20 gauge needle
is directed in a distomedial direction. Synovial fluid is typically
obtained, and 3–4 mL of local anesthetic should be injected without
substantial resistance. This joint may be entered from the dorsal
aspect of the limb (Fig. 63.14d); however, this approach is typically
only used if the plantarolateral approach is unavailable because of
skin damage or if an additional portal is necessary for joint lavage.
The distal intertarsal (centrodistal) joint is desensitized by inserting
a 1 inch (2.5 cm) 22 gauge needle in a small palpable joint depres-
sion on the medial aspect of the limb just ventral to the cunean
tendon (Fig. 63.14c); 3–5 mL of local anesthetic is injected.
Accuracy of injection into the tarsometatarsal joint is high (96%),
but only 42% of distal intertarsal joint injections are successful [79].
The tibiotarsal (tarsocrural) joint is large and easily injected in the
dorsomedial pouch 2–3 cm distal to the tibia and medial to the per-
oneus tertius and tibialis cranialis tendons (Fig. 63.14e); 15 mL of
local anesthetic is injected. Care should be taken to avoid the saphe-
nous vein, which typically courses over the center of the dorsome-
dial pouch of the joint. When synovial effusion is present, this joint
can be approached from the plantarolateral aspect. For this
approach, the needle is inserted in the center of the palpable dis-
tended joint pouch bordered by the tuber calcis (caudally), distal
aspect of the tibia (cranially), and talus (ventrally). The proximal
intertarsal joint communicates with the tibiotarsal joint and
becomes desensitized after performing this block.
Horses have variable communication among the tarsal joints. A
substantial percentage (up to 38%) of horses has communication
between the tarsometatarsal and distal intertarsal joints [80–83].
b
d
c
e
a
Figure 63.14 Needle placement for left tarsal intra-articular and
intrabursal blocks (medial aspect). a, cunean bursa; b and d,
tarsometatarsal space; c, distal metatarsal space; e, tibiotarsal space.
Figure 63.15 Injection of local anesthetic (10 mL) into the cunean bursa of
the right rear limb (medial aspect).

-- 1264 of 1450 --

Chapter 63: Equine Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1249
Infrequently, injection of the distal tarsal joints may cause entry of
local anesthetic into the proximal intertarsal and tarsometatarsal
joints [80] or the tarsal sheath [81]. High injection pressures may
increase the frequency of tarsometatarsal and distal intertarsal joint
communication [83].
Calcaneal bursae blocks
Calcaneal bursae in horses include the subcutaneous calcaneal
bursa (subcutaneous superficial to the superficial digital flexor ten-
don plantar to the calcaneus), intertendinous calcaneal bursa
(between the gastrocnemius and superficial digital flexor tendons),
and gastrocnemius calcaneal bursa (just proximal to the calcaneus
and dorsal to the gastrocnemius tendon) [84]. The intertendinous and
gastrocnemius calcaneal bursae communicate; the subcutaneous
bursa communicates with the other calcaneal bursae in 39% of
studied limbs of horses. A 1.5 inch (3.8 cm) 20 gauge needle may be
inserted into the bursae, which are palpable when synovial effusion
is present; 10 mL of local anesthetic is injected.
Tarsal sheath block
The tarsal sheath extends from the proximal aspect of the calcaneus
to the proximal aspect of the metatarsal region. The sheath sur-
rounds the deep digital flexor tendon as it courses over the susten-
taculum tali of the calcaneus, medial to the body of the bone. The
sheath is easiest to identify when it is distended with synovial fluid.
The tarsal sheath may be desensitized at its proximal or distal
aspects via insertion of a 1.5 inch (3.8 cm) 20 gauge needle, and
injection of 15 mL of local anesthetic.
Stifle joint blocks
The stifle joint includes the femoropatellar and medial and lateral
femorotibial articulations. In horses, communication among these
joint compartments is variable. The most common communication
is between the medial femorotibial and femoropatellar compart-
ments, which is detected in 60–80% of limbs with normal stifle
joints [85,86]. Communication among other stifle joint compart-
ments is detected less frequently. The pattern of communication is
typically bilaterally symmetrical; however, communication among
compartments may be affected by joint disease and the location cho-
sen for joint injection. Therefore, for diagnostic and therapeutic pur-
poses, each compartment should be considered a separate entity and
injected independently. However, clinicians should be aware that
mepivacaine can diffuse among stifle joint compartments and detection
of an improvement in lameness after local anesthesia of an individ-
ual articulation may not be specific [87], although blockade of an
articulation containing a lesion is more specific than injection into
one of the surrounding articulations [88]. Because lameness attrib-
utable to stifle joint problems may be caused by extra-synovial struc-
tures (such as collateral and cruciate ligaments), improvement may
not be observed until 20 min or longer after injection of local anes-
thetic. Some horses may have partial improvement of distal limb
lameness after local anesthesia of all three stifle articulations [88].
Each compartment is typically desensitized with 20 mL of local
anesthetic by use of a 1.5 inch (3.8 cm) 18 gauge needle.
The femoropatellar compartment is injected distal to the patella,
medial, or lateral to the middle patellar ligament (Fig. 63.17a). The
needle is advanced perpendicular to the skin or in a slightly proxi-
mal direction. Alternatively, the lateral cul-de-sac of the femoropa-
tellar compartment may be injected [89]; the needle is inserted
5 cm proximal to the lateral tibial plateau caudal to the lateral patel-
lar ligament and lateral trochlear ridge of the femur. The needle is
directed perpendicular to the long axis of the femur until bone is
contacted and then withdrawn slightly before injection of local
anesthetic. The lateral approach to the femoropatellar compartment
may allow collection of a greater amount of synovial fluid and result
in less cartilage injury than the cranial approach [90].
For injection of the medial femorotibial compartment, the needle
is inserted 1.5 cm proximal to the medial plateau of the tibia
between the medial patellar ligament and the medial collateral liga-
ment of the stifle joint (Fig. 63.17b). The needle is directed perpen-
dicular to the skin. The medial meniscus, which is slightly distal
and caudal to the injection site, should be avoided. Another
approach is to insert the needle 1.5 cm proximal to the medial tibial
plateau in a palpable depression between the medial patellar liga-
ment and the tendon of insertion of the sartorius muscle [91]. The
needle is directed parallel to the ground in a cranial to caudal direc-
tion in a sagittal plane. It is important that the horse stands squarely
on the limb while performing this block. This approach may allow
the collection of a greater volume of synovial fluid and reduce the
risk of iatrogenic cartilage and medial meniscus injury compared
with the approach between the medial patellar ligament and medial
collateral ligament.
The lateral femorotibial compartment may be injected by various
approaches. These include needle insertion sites caudal to the lat-
eral patellar ligament and 1 cm proximal to the lateral tibial plateau
(Fig. 63.17c); proximal to the tibia and caudal to the tendon of
Figure 63.16 Collection of fluid from the tarsometatarsal joint (left rear leg).

-- 1265 of 1450 --

1250 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
origin of the long digital extensor muscle; and between the long
digital extensor tendon and the extensor groove at the proximal
aspect of the tibia. However, insertion of the needle directly through
the long digital extensor tendon 1–4 cm distal to the lateral tibial
plateau is the most successful technique for injection of the lateral
femorotibial compartment of the stifle joint [92].
Coxofemoral (hip) joint block
The coxofemoral joint is difficult to inject, particularly in large
horses, because of the depth of the joint from the skin surface.
Before insertion of the needle, it is important to ensure that the
horse is standing squarely, with the limbs perpendicular to the ground.
An 18 gauge needle at least 6 inches (15 cm) long should be used.
Because of the risk of needle breakage or bending attributable to the
length of the needle and depth of the joint, adequate physical
restraint is important, and subcutaneous injection of local anesthetic
at the needle insertion site and sedation of the horse may be neces-
sary. The site of needle insertion is in a palpable depression between
the large caudal and small cranial parts of the major trochanter
of the proximal aspect of the femur (Fig. 63.18a). The needle is
directed medially in a slightly cranioventral direction along the
neck of the femur. Proper needle placement should be confirmed
via aspiration of synovial fluid before injection; 20 mL of local anes-
thetic is injected. Ultrasonographic guidance may aid placement of
the needle in the coxofemoral joint [93]. An alternate ultrasound-
guided cranioventral approach may be used in horses with marked
synovial effusion [94].
Trochanteric bursa block
The trochanteric bursa is located between the tendon of the medial
gluteal muscle and the cranial part of the greater trochanter of the
femur. The bursa is located via palpation of the greater trochanter
and a 1.5–3.5 inch (3.8–8.9 cm) 18 gauge needle is inserted perpen-
dicular to the skin until bone is contacted (Fig. 63.18b); 5–10 mL of
local anesthetic is injected. Positioning the limb caudally with the
foot in a non-weight-bearing position on a block and use of ultra-
sonographic guidance may facilitate accurate insertion of the needle
into the trochanteric bursa [95].
Sacroiliac region block
Injection of local anesthetics in the vicinity of the sacroiliac joint of
horses is a controversial procedure. It can be useful for diagnosis of
sacroiliac region pain [96]. Various approaches have been described,
including insertion of the needle cranial, craniomedial, medial, or cau-
dal to the tuber sacrale [97]. The cranial and caudal approaches require
ultrasonographic guidance, whereas the craniomedial and medial
approaches may be performed with either ultrasonographic guidance
or blindly via landmark identification. Diffusion of local anesthetic can
anesthetize the sciatic nerve caudal to the sacroiliac joint resulting in
hindlimb paresis and recumbency for up to 3 h [98]. In particular, the
caudal approach is more likely to cause this severe complication [99].
Local anesthesia using a blind dorsal approach similar to the described
dorsocranial and dorsal approaches has a complication rate of less
than 1% [100]. In this approach, a spinal needle (18 gauge, 3.5 inch or
8.9 cm) is introduced axial to the cranial aspect of the tuber sacrale,
contralateral to the sacroiliac joint of interest. The needle is advanced to
the hub, aiming perpendicular to the tuber sacrale and toward the
caudal aspect of the tuber coxae. A total of 20 mL is deposited at four
locations (at the deepest insertion and 0.5–1 cm superficial, along the
initial insertion path and after redirection 20° caudad).
Anesthesia for laparotomy/laparoscopy
Regional anesthesia may be useful for standing laparotomy when
general anesthesia is not an option for financial or other reasons.
Standing laparoscopy is commonly used for several standing
abdominal procedures, including ovariectomy, nephrectomy, embryo
transfer, castration of abdominal cryptorchids, and liver or kidney
biopsy. Four techniques have been described for standing abdominal
procedures: infiltration anesthesia, paravertebral thoracolumbar
anesthesia, segmental dorsolumbar epidural anesthesia, and segmen-
tal thoracolumbar subarachnoid anesthesia. Segmental dorsolumbar
epidural anesthesia and segmental thoracolumbar subarachnoid
anesthesia are infrequently used and will not be discussed here;
a
b
c
Figure 63.17 Needle placement for stifle intra-articular blocks. a,
femoropatellar pouch; b, medial femorotibial pouch; c, lateral femorotibial
pouch.

-- 1266 of 1450 --

Chapter 63: Equine Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1251
however, interested readers are directed to previous editions of this
book for complete and thorough descriptions [101].
Infiltration anesthesia
The most commonly used local anesthetic technique for standing
abdominal procedures in horses is simple infiltration of the incision
(line block). For most standing procedures, the incisions will be
small, and infiltration anesthesia will be sufficient when combined
with restraint and systemic sedation and analgesia. A 1 inch
(2.5 cm) 20–22 gauge needle is used to deposit 1 mL of local anes-
thetic for each centimeter of incision. For laparoscopy, the small
incision sites required for insertion of the camera and instruments
may be desensitized individually, whereas for laparotomy, a larger
area of desensitization will be required.
Pain is minimized (and cooperation of the patient maximized)
if the injections are slow and deliberate, and the needle is advanced
through the edge of the desensitized skin. This technique assures
that the horse senses only the initial needle insertion. A 10–15 mL
injection of local anesthetic is usually sufficient for desensitization
of the skin and subcutaneous tissues. Depending on the local anes-
thetic used, at least 15 min should be allowed for maximum anes-
thetic effect.
After the superficial structures are desensitized, the deeper layers
of muscle and peritoneum can be desensitized with a 3–4 inch
(7.5–10 cm) 18 gauge needle; 50–150 mL of local anesthetic may be
required depending on the area of desensitization needed. In an
average 500 kg (1100 lb) adult horse, dosages of less than 250 mL of
2% lidocaine are not expected to cause toxicity [102].
Local infiltration is easy to perform and requires no knowledge
about specific nerve location. Disadvantages include disruption of
normal tissue architecture, incomplete anesthesia (especially of the
peritoneum), incomplete muscle relaxation of the abdominal wall,
toxicity after inadvertent injection into the peritoneal cavity, and
increased cost and time involved with long incisions. A recent study
compared local portal blocks to paravertebral nerve blocks for laparo-
scopic closure of the nephrosplenic space. The time needed to com-
plete the blocks, the requirements for sedation, the overall outcome
scores, and total surgery time was similar in both groups leading the
authors to conclude that both could be used interchangeably [103].
Paravertebral thoracolumbar anesthesia
When long incisions are required in patients where general anes-
thesia is not an option, paravertebral thoracolumbar anesthesia
(paravertebral block) can be used as an alternative to infiltration
anesthesia [104]. Even though this block is technically difficult, it
can be performed in thin-muscled horses with easily palpable land-
marks. To perform the block, the last thoracic (T18) and first and
second lumbar (L1 and L2) spinal nerves are desensitized approxi-
mately 10 cm from the dorsal midline, after they have emerged
from the intervertebral foramina and have split into their dorsal
and ventral branches and medial and lateral ramifications, respec-
tively (Fig. 63.19).
The sites for desensitization are palpated by locating the third
lumbar transverse process, which is on a line between the most cau-
dal extension of the last rib and perpendicular to the long axis of the
spinal vertebrae. The distance between the injection sites is 3–6 cm
(Fig. 63.20). After the skin is desensitized, the ventral branches of
T18, L1, and L2 are blocked using a 3 inch (7.5 cm) 18 gauge needle.
The needle is advanced to the peritoneum (where there will be a
loss of resistance or a slight sucking sound as air enters the needle)
and then withdrawn to a retroperitoneal position, where 15 mL of
local anesthetic is injected (Fig. 63.19b) [104].
Advantages of paravertebral anesthesia over infiltration anesthe-
sia include smaller doses of local anesthetic, a wide area of desensi-
tization, muscle relaxation, and the absence of local anesthetic in
the incision (minimizing hematomas, edema, and possible interfer-
ence with healing). The main disadvantages are the difficulty in
performing the block and the fact that in a horse with a good body
condition score and muscle coverage, the landmarks are extremely
difficult to palpate. There is also a chance that the third lumbar spi-
nal nerve may be inadvertently desensitized, which causes loss of
motor control to the ipsilateral pelvic limb.
Anesthesia for urogenital procedures
Many urogenital procedures including castrations, episioplasties,
repair of recto-vaginal fistulas, ovariectomies, and perineal ure-
throstomies, can be performed in the standing sedated horse when
combined with appropriate regional anesthetic techniques.
a
b
a
Figure 63.18 Needle placement for proximal rear
limb intra-articular and intrabursal blocks. a,
coxofemoral joint; b, trochanteric bursa.

-- 1267 of 1450 --

1252 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
Anesthesia for castration
Castration is one of the most common surgical procedures
performed in equine practice. For older horses or horses that are
intractable, general anesthesia is generally recommended owing to
potential complications such as hemorrhage. Even when general
anesthesia is used, intratesticular injection of 15 mL of 2% lidocaine
per testicle will decrease intraoperative blood pressure responses
and cremaster muscle tension and can be a beneficial supplement to
general anesthesia [106]. In another study, incisional, intratesticular,
and intrafunicular lidocaine was found to be an effective adjunct to
intravenous anesthesia [107].
In standing horses, restraint of the horse’s head and sedation are
required in addition to local anesthesia. The use of stocks is gener-
ally not recommended for standing castration, owing to the poten-
tial for injury to the surgeon. A twitch may be used to aid restraint
and, for safety reasons, the person holding the twitch should stand
on the same side as the surgeon. The skin of the scrotum and pre-
puce should be aseptically prepared and then the block can be done
with one of three techniques.
In the most commonly used technique, a 3 inch (7.5 cm) 20 gauge
needle is inserted perpendicularly through the tensed skin of the
scrotum, and local anesthetic is injected until the testicle is turgid
(approximately 20–30 mL) (Fig. 63.21). After approximately 10 min,
the castration can usually be performed painlessly, with no further
need for the twitch.
In the second technique, a 1 inch (2.5 cm) 20 gauge needle may
be inserted into the spermatic cord percutaneously as close to the
external inguinal ring as possible. At that point, 20–30 mL of local
anesthetic is injected in a fan-shaped manner without perforating
the skin, spermatic artery, or vein. The incision site into the scrotum
must still be infiltrated subcutaneously with 5–10 mL of local anes-
thetic since the skin of the scrotum is not desensitized by the deposi-
tion of the local anesthetic into the spermatic cord. The procedure
must then be repeated on the other side. Infiltration of the spermatic
cord is not as effective as infiltration directly into the testicle.
In the third technique, a 6 inch (15 cm) 18 gauge needle is
inserted into the testicle and directed into the spermatic cord
a
b
c 	d
Figure 63.19 Needle placement for paravertebral nerve blockade showing a
cranial, transected view of the first lumbar vertebra at the location of the
intervertebral foramen. a, needle placement for subcutaneous infiltration; b,
needle placement for retroperitoneal infusion. c, dorsal branch of the L1
vertebral nerve; d, ventral branch of the L1 vertebral nerve. Inset: desensitized
subcutaneous area after blockade of T18, L1, and L2 vertebral nerves.
L2 	L1
R18
Figure 63.20 Right thoracolumbar area of a standing adult horse with
injection sites (arrows) for distal paravertebral block. R18, last rib; L1,
spinous process of the first lumbar vertebra; L2, spinous process of the
second lumbar vertebra. The dotted line transects the corresponding
interspaces between spinous and transverse processes. Subcutaneous
injection of L2 is shown. Source: Skarda [105].
Figure 63.21 Needle placement for right intratesticular injection in a
standing horse.

-- 1268 of 1450 --

Chapter 63: Equine Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1253
while 30 mL of local anesthetic are being injected. Prior to begin-
ning the surgery, the skin of the scrotum at the incision sites is also
desensitized.
Cryptorchid castration is more commonly performed under
general anesthesia by laparotomy or laparoscopy, but in one study,
intratesticular or mesorchial infiltration of lidocaine combined
with administration of a non-steroidal anti- inflammatory drug
(NSAID) and caudal epidural injection of detomidine provided
adequate analgesia in standing stallions undergoing laparoscopic
cryptorchidectomy [108].
Anesthesia for ovariectomy
Ovariectomy is commonly performed in standing, sedated horses
with laparoscopy. One portion of the surgery that can be very stim-
ulating to the standing horse after the skin and muscle layers are
blocked is removal of the ovaries. Blocking the ovaries with local
anesthesia can help blunt the temporary stimulation while the
ovaries are removed. A recent investigation assessed the topical
application of mepivacaine to the ovarian pedicle versus injection
of mepivacaine into the pedicle prior to removal. The authors con-
cluded that topical application of mepivacaine provided intraopera-
tive analgesia similar to injection into the ovarian pedicle, which
could reduce the risk of inadvertent trauma to the pedicle or other
visceral organs during standing laparoscopy [109].
Anesthesia of the perineum
While caudal epidural anesthesia (described below under neuraxial
anesthesia) is commonly used to facilitate perineal surgeries,
including urethrostomy, in standing horses, regional anesthesia of
the perineum may also be used. To perform regional anesthesia
of the area, the superficial and deep (subfascial) branches of the
perineal nerves must be desensitized. A 1 inch (2.5 cm) 22 gauge
needle is inserted approximately 2.5 cm dorsal to the ischial arch
and 2.5 cm lateral to the anus so that 5 mL of local anesthetic may
be injected subcutaneously. After directing the needle dorsally
0.5–1 cm, a deeper subfascial injection of 5–7 mL is made, and then,
the procedure is repeated on the opposite side [110].
Anesthesia of the penis or vulva
The penis may be desensitized by blocking the pudendal nerves at
the ischium (Fig. 63.22). This will desensitize the penis and the
internal lamina of the prepuce in addition to relaxing the penis and
allowing it to be extruded. To perform the block, a 1.5 inch (3.8 cm)
20 gauge needle is inserted on the right and left side of the anus,
about 2 cm dorsal to the ischial arch and lateral to the anus and is
angled ventrally toward the midline. The needle is advanced until
the point contacts the ischial arch where the pudendal nerves
course around the ischium. Then, 5 mL of local anesthetic is
deposited adjacent to each nerve, which results in the penis being
extruded within about 5 min of a successful block.
While a line block with local anesthetic is still commonly utilized
for desensitization of the vulva, the technique described above may
also be used. It is interesting to note that one study has suggested that
use of lidocaine–prilocaine topical anesthetic cream is as effective as
lidocaine infiltration in providing local anesthesia when performing
episioplasty in mares and caused less anatomic disruption [111].
Pudendal nerve block using a peripheral nerve locator has also
been described. During electrolocation, the pudendal nerve was
approached effectively when both anal and perineal twitches were
elicited. The technique was successfully used during perineoplasty,
urethroplasty, clitorectomy in mares, and penile examination,
phallectomy and urethrostomy in geldings, leading the authors to
conclude that this was a safe and effective alternative for epidural
and general anesthesia for these procedures [112].
Neuraxial anesthesia/analgesia
In horses, neuraxial anesthesia and analgesia most often involves
the epidural route of administration. Epidural anesthesia combined
with systemic sedation and standing restraint facilitates procedures
involving the anus, perineum, rectum, vulva, vagina, urethra, and
bladder. Additionally, epidural analgesia can provide good adjunc-
tive analgesia for painful conditions involving the stifles and hocks.
In the horse, the spinal cord ends at the level of the caudal half of the
second sacral vertebra, so caudal epidural injection or catheteriza-
tion, as described below, may be performed without risk of spinal
(subarachnoid) injection.
While techniques have been previously described that involve
accessing the epidural or subarachnoid space at the lumbosacral
junction for a single injection or to advance a catheter either rostrally
to deliver drug segmentally at the thoracolumbar level, or caudally to
deliver drug at level of the sacrum [113], these techniques are not
routinely performed. For detailed descriptions of lumbosacral epi-
dural or spinal (subarachnoid) anesthesia/analgesia techniques, the
reader is referred to previous editions of this book [102].
Indications and contraindications
The choice of drugs placed epidurally will dictate whether anesthesia
or analgesia is produced, and the specific medication and volume
chosen will determine the spread. Indwelling epidural catheters can
also be placed when repeated administration of analgesic or anes-
thetic drugs are anticipated. Indications for caudal epidural injec-
tion of drugs in horses include anesthesia of the perineum, rectum,
anus, tail, urethra, bladder, vulva, or vagina for surgery in the stand-
ing horse. Other indications include relief of tenesmus, correction
of uterine torsion, and fetotomy. Additionally, epidural analgesia/
anesthesia may be used as an adjunct to general anesthesia for sur-
gery involving these same structures and the hindlimbs to reduce
the minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) of inhalants [114,115].
Epidural analgesia can be used postoperatively for pain management
a
b
Figure 63.22 Topographic anatomy for perineal and pudendal nerve block.
a, palpable ischiatic arch; b, palpable ischiatic tuberosity (both marked).
Infiltration of the left pudendal nerve with local anesthetic is shown.
Source: Skarda [105].

-- 1269 of 1450 --

1254 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
of these same areas, as an adjunct to systemic medications, and for
alleviation of pain related to septic joints.
Contraindications to epidural anesthesia/analgesia in horses
include infection at the puncture site, sepsis, uncorrected hypov-
olemia, bleeding disorders, anticoagulation therapy (potentially
used in horses with laminitis), spinal cord disease, and anatomic
abnormalities. This technique may also be contraindicated in weak
or ataxic patients that are at risk for becoming recumbent after
epidural drug administration.
Caudal epidural anesthesia/analgesia
Caudal epidural anesthesia and/or analgesia, performed at the
sacrococcygeal or the first intercoccygeal (Co1–Co2) space, is the
preferred and most commonly used technique in the horse as it
is safer and easier to perform than lumbosacral epidural or suba-
rachnoid anesthesia and requires no specialized equipment.
The site for injection is either the sacrococcygeal or the first
intercoccygeal space [116]. In some horses, the last sacral and first
coccygeal vertebrae are fused and the first movable space may be
the first coccygeal interspace. The space is palpated while moving
the tail up and down; it is the first movable space caudal to the
sacrum, which is generally 2.5–7.5 cm cranial to the origin of the
tail hairs. The tail may be raised and lowered, or some people prefer
a “pump handle” motion to identify the space.
After aseptic preparation, 1 mL of 2% lidocaine may be injected
to desensitize the skin if desired. There are two commonly used
techniques for a one-time injection into the caudal epidural space.
In the first, a 1.5 inch (3.8 cm) 18 gauge needle is inserted at the
center of the palpated space perpendicular to the skin (Fig. 63.23a).
The “hanging drop” technique can be utilized where the hub of the
needle is filled with saline before advancing the needle, and then,
when the needle enters the epidural space, the negative pressure will
pull the drop into the epidural space. A “popping” sensation may
also be appreciated as the needle penetrates the interarcuate liga-
ment (ligamentum flavum). The depth of the space from the skin is
approximately 3.5–8 cm in adult horses. When the needle is thought
to be in the epidural space, aspiration will confirm lack of blood or
cerebrospinal fluid, and a test dose of saline may be made to con-
firm loss of resistance to injection. In the second technique, a
5–7.5 inch (12.7–19 cm) 18 gauge spinal needle is inserted at the
caudal part of the interspace, at approximately 30° parallel to the
horizontal plane (Fig. 63.23b). This technique can be useful for epi-
dural injection if the horse has previously had epidural injections,
which can result in development of fibrous tissue.
While epidural puncture has traditionally been confirmed by
aspiration of a fluid drop (i.e., hanging drop), or lack of resistance
on injection, these methods are not always reliable and alternative
techniques of confirmation may be used. For instance, the human
medical literature has described the use of acoustic devices to detect
a pressure drop by means of an audible signal when the ligamentum
flavum is perforated [117]. A similar acoustic device has been used
to identify the extradural space in standing horses [118].
Continuous caudal epidural anesthesia/analgesia
For repeated and long-term administration of epidural medications,
epidural catheters are recommended. Epidural catheterization can
be used successfully for repeated epidural delivery of analgesics and
anesthetics in horses with various clinical conditions, including
fractures, lacerations, septic arthritis, myositis, perineal injuries,
and cellulitis [119]. One study showed that long-term epidural
administration of a morphine–detomidine combination was not
associated with adverse systemic effects in horses even though
localized inflammation and fibrosis was seen [120].
After aseptic preparation and optional desensitization of the
skin, the needle is introduced at an angle of approximately 45° to
the skin (Fig. 63.23c). Once the needle is determined to be in the
epidural space, the catheter may be introduced 10–30 cm into the
epidural space by advancing it with the opening of the needle fac-
ing cranially. Once the catheter is placed, it is held in place while
removing the needle and then secured to the skin with adhesive
and suture material; the entire catheter may then be covered with
an adhesive dressing. The injection port should be aseptically pre-
pared prior to each injection, and a bacterial filter may be used
between the catheter and the injection port.
Epidural medications
Depending on the desired effect and duration of action, local anes-
thetics, α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists, opioids, and other addi-
tives have been shown to be effective at providing anesthesia and
analgesia when administered epidurally.
Local anesthetics
Epidural local anesthetics provide regional anesthesia by preventing
depolarization of the nerve membrane and conduction of nerve
impulses. The most common local anesthetics used for epidural
application in horses are 2% lidocaine and 2% mepivacaine.
The dose of lidocaine required to effectively desensitize the anus,
perineum, rectum, vulva, vagina, urethra, and bladder is 6–8 mL of
a 2% solution in a 450 kg mare (0.26–0.35 mg/kg). The cranial
spread and intensity of analgesia are dose-dependent, but generally,
sensory and motor blockade ranging from the coccyx to the second
sacral vertebra is produced within 5–15 min and lasts 60–90 min.
Redosing should be performed with caution since inadvertent over-
dose can cause profound ataxia, recumbency, and hypoten-
sion [121,122]. One study evaluated the use of midazolam in
addition to lidocaine, which would reduce the volume of lidocaine
required and decrease the chance of ataxia or recumbency.
Midazolam (0.05 mg/kg) and lidocaine (0.1 mg/kg of 2% lidocaine)
produced satisfactory analgesia and cervical dilation for endome-
trial biopsy for at least 60 min [123].
Another study looked at adding bicarbonate to lidocaine for
caudal epidural anesthesia. It was found that 7 mL of 2% lidocaine
with epinephrine (1:200,00) combined with 2.3 mL of sterile water
for injection and 0.7 mL of 8.4% sodium bicarbonate decreased
the average onset time of nociception by 40% and decreased the
duration of ataxia by 33% when compared to 2% lidocaine with
epinephrine alone [124].
Mepivacaine (2%) acts very similarly to lidocaine when used as
an epidural agent in horses. Like lidocaine, the extent of the desen-
sitized area is determined by the volume of local anesthetic injected
(Fig. 63.24). Analgesia usually reaches peak effect in 20 min and
lasts approximately 80 min [125].
Caudal epidural injection of hyperbaric bupivacaine (0.5%,
0.06 mg/kg) produces bilateral perineal analgesia in horses, with a
rapid onset of action (< 6 min) and a long duration (> 5 h) [126]. Heart
and respiratory rates, arterial blood pressure, and rectal temperature
were not changed after epidural administration of bupivacaine.
Ropivacaine is a more recently investigated local anesthetic for
local and regional anesthesia in horses. Various doses and concen-
trations have been evaluated ranging from 0.1 mg/kg of 0.5%

-- 1270 of 1450 --

d
L6 	S1
Co1 	Co2
a
c
b
Figure 63.23 Caudal epidural anesthesia and catheter placement for continuous caudal epidural anesthesia in the horse. a and b, needle placement for
caudal epidural injection; c, epidural catheter placement via the first intercoccygeal space for continuous caudal epidural anesthesia (commonly
performed); d, epidural catheter placement via the lumbosacral space for continuous caudal epidural anesthesia (rarely performed). L6, dorsal spinous
process of the sixth lumbar vertebra; S1, dorsal spinous process of the first sacral vertebra; Co1 and Co2, first and second coccygeal vertebrae.
Inset: Desensitized subcutaneous area after successful caudal epidural anesthesia.
sn
sn
a
a
b
b
c
c
(A) 	(B)
Figure 63.24 Dorsocaudal and lateral views illustrating desensitized areas 20 min after caudal epidural injection of various volumes of 2% mepivacaine
using a 5.9 inch (15 cm) 18 gauge spinal needle inserted at the third intercoccygeal space. a, extent of block with 6 mL; b, extent of block with 8 mL; c,
extent of block with 10 mL; sn, spinal needle with stylet. Source: Skarda [105].

-- 1271 of 1450 --

1256 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
ropivacaine (8 mL/500 kg) [127] to 0.02 mg/kg of 0.5% ropivacaine
(5 mL/500 kg) [128]. Epidural ropivacaine has a rapid onset
(approximately 10 min) and can last approximately 3 h. Low-dose
lumbosacral epidural ropivacaine has been shown to provide
effective analgesia in conscious and anesthetized ponies without
affecting motor function to the pelvic limbs [129].
Epinephrine can be added to local anesthetic solutions at a con-
centration of 5 μg/mL (1:200,000) to hasten the onset, prolong the
duration, and improve the quality of epidural anesthesia.
α2- Adrenergic receptor agonists
Following epidural administration, α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists
bind to receptors in the substantia gelatinosa layer of the spinal
cord and produce analgesia, which can be reversed by intravenous
administration of α2 -adrenergic receptor antagonists such as ati-
pamezole (0.1 mg/kg) [130] and yohimbine (0.05 mg/kg) [131].
α2 -Adrenergic receptor agonists deposited as described for a cau-
dal epidural must diffuse cranially to affect receptors in the spinal
cord. If signs of ataxia or sedation develop after caudal epidural
administration of α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists, the horse should
be supported with a tail-tie or in stocks until normal motor func-
tion has been regained. Horses that become recumbent after epidural
administration of α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists may require
heavy sedation or general anesthesia to keep them from panicking
until their motor function has returned.
As noted above, specific antagonists may be used to reverse
undesirable effects of epidurally administered α2
-adrenergic receptor
agonists. Intravenous yohimbine reduced epidural detomidine-
induced perineal analgesia, reversed head ptosis, improved pelvic
limb position, terminated sweating and diuresis, and antagonized
detomidine-induced decreases in heart rate and cardiac output but
did not affect detomidine-induced decreases in respiratory rate [131].
Xylazine
Xylazine has been used at a dose of 0.17 mg/kg diluted to 10 mL
with 0.9% saline [132]. The duration of analgesia is approximately
2.5 h, and hindlimb ataxia is uncommon. Sedation is minimal and
cardiovascular and respiratory variables as well as core and rectal
temperatures do not change appreciably [133].
In horses under general anesthesia, epidural xylazine (0.15 mg/kg)
reduced the MAC of halothane by 35% with noxious stimulation of
the thoracic limbs and by 40% with stimulation of the pelvic
limbs [115]. A second study did not reproduce this effect, but horses
that had been given epidural xylazine (0.15 mg/kg diluted to
0.15 mL/kg with saline) required less halothane and inotropic sup-
port to maintain mean arterial blood pressure above 60 mmHg and
had a higher cardiac index than horses anesthetized with halothane
alone [134].
In general, xylazine is a more desirable α2
- adrenergic receptor
agonist for epidural use than detomidine since it produces a more
potent antinociceptive action in the perineal dermatomes, with
minimal cardiovascular depression, head ptosis, changes in pelvic
limb position, and diuresis [135].
Detomidine
Detomidine has been used in caudal epidurals at a dose of 60 μg/kg
diluted to 10 mL with sterile water [136]. The analgesia from
this technique can be variable, with bilateral spread from the coc-
cyx to as far cranially as T14 in some horses. Analgesia is accompa-
nied by mild ataxia, some buckling of the pelvic limbs and deep
sedation. The onset of action is about 5 min, and the duration is
approximately 3 h. Because of the systemic side effects, an initial
dose of no more than 20 μg/kg should be used in debilitated horses.
Dexmedetomidine
A recent study compared caudal epidural injection of bupivacaine
(0.04 mg/kg of 0.25%), dexmedetomidine (2 μg/kg), and the combi-
nation of the two (0.02 mg/kg bupivacaine and 1 μg/kg dexme-
detomdine) in mares. Dexmedetomidine alone produced analgesia
of the tail, perineum, and upper hind limbs for 240 min while dex-
medetomidine and bupivacaine produced analgesia lasting 200 min,
and bupivacaine alone produced analgesia for 97 min [137].
Another study has looked at the effects of epidural dexmedetomi-
dine compared to epidural xylazine in donkeys. Epidural dexmedeto-
midine (5 μg/kg, diluted to 5 mL with normal saline) produced
complete bilateral perineal analgesia in approximately 6 min with a
duration of action of 105 min (which was faster and longer acting than
xylazine). The donkeys became moderately sedate for about 165 min.
The authors concluded that epidural dexmedetomidine induced faster
and longer perineal analgesia than xylazine in donkeys [138].
Other α2 - adrenergic receptor agonists
Medetomidine (15 μg/kg diluted to 8 mL with 0.9% saline) and
romifidine (80 μg/kg diluted to 8 mL with 0.9% saline) did not pro-
duce surgical analgesia in the perineal region of adult horses when
injected into the caudal epidural space [139,140]. Based on these
results, medetomidine and romifidine do not appear to be as effec-
tive as xylazine, detomidine, and dexmedetomidine.
Opioids
Epidural opioids have been extensively studied and can produce
long-lasting analgesia when used alone or in combination with
local anesthetics, α2 -adrenergic receptor agonists, and/or ketamine.
They have been used for acute and chronic pain and are effective
when administered preemptively, intraoperatively, or postoperatively.
Morphine
Epidural morphine has long been considered a reasonable alterna-
tive for treating pain that does not respond to standard medication
protocols such as systemic NSAIDs. In an early case report,
epidural morphine was used to relieve the pain associated with a
luxated fetlock and comminuted fracture of the first phalanx in a
pregnant horse; the onset of action seemed to be approximately
30 min after injection and lasted for 8–16 h based on the behavior
of the mare [141].
Morphine is commonly used at a dose of 0.1 mg/kg diluted to a
volume of 20 mL with sterile water and administered by caudal epi-
dural injection for the relief of pain. It will induce segmental anal-
gesia from the coccyx to the thoracic dermatomes [142]. The
analgesic action is greatest at the dermatomes closest to the epidural
injection site and lasts approximately 5 h [142].
In previous studies, morphine was shown to be an effective anal-
gesic for experimentally induced forelimb pain [143]. It has also
produced analgesic and antihyperalgesic effects in horses with
acute synovitis [144]. In a study in mares undergoing laparoscopic
ovariectomy, epidural morphine administration lowered the
requirements for systemic sedation and local anesthesia [145].
Although there are concerns about systemic opioids and gastroin-
testinal side effects in horses, epidural morphine did not cause
clinical signs of colic, although it temporarily reduced gastrointesti-
nal motility [146].

-- 1272 of 1450 --

Chapter 63: Equine Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1257
Methadone
When the effects of caudal epidural methadone (0.1 mg/kg) were
compared with those of lidocaine (0.35 mg/kg) using a thermal stim-
ulation model, perineal analgesia was apparent within 15 min after
injection [147]. The perineal analgesia from methadone lasted 5 h
after injection compared with 3 h with lidocaine. Unlike lidocaine,
methadone did not cause ataxia. In a recent study, methadone
(0.4 mg/kg) was used to validate lumbosacral spinal cord somatosen-
sory evoked potentials as a tool to assess nociception in horses [148].
Butorphanol
Despite the widespread use of butorphanol in horses as a systemic
analgesic, it has not been shown to increase avoidance behavior to
noxious stimuli [142] or to affect the MAC of halothane [114] after
caudal epidural administration.
Epidural medication combinations
Xylazine and lidocaine
Xylazine (0.17 mg/kg of a 2% solution) and lidocaine (0.22 mg/kg of
a 2% solution) can be safely used for long-lasting caudal epidural
anesthesia in healthy adult horses [122]. The combination provides
up to 5 h of perineal anesthesia, whereas each drug alone has a
duration of only about 3 h. There may be some ataxia with the com-
bination, but heart and respiratory rates are minimally affected.
Although there appears to be a large margin of safety with this com-
bination, it is worth noting that there is one report of a Thoroughbred
mare undergoing sudden collapse in the hindquarters 90 min after
completion of the epidural injection for urogenital surgery [149].
A recent paper in mules evaluated the efficacy and safety of epi-
dural lidocaine and xylazine for standing ovariectomy. The mares
were sedated with 0.05 mg/kg acepromazine IM, 1.3 mg/kg xylazine
and 0.02 mg/kg butorphanol IV, and 0.6 mg/kg/h xylazine IV. The
paralumbar fossae were infiltrated with 30 mL of 2% lidocaine, and
a caudal epidural was performed with 0.2 mg/kg lidocaine and
0.17 mg/kg xylazine. Sedation and analgesia were satisfactory in six
out of eight mules, and the standing ovariectomy was successful in
all eight. The authors concluded that additional studies are needed
to establish doses that allow for reliable abdominal analgesia in
mules for standing ovariectomy [150].
Nalbuphine and lidocaine
In donkeys, one study looked at adding nalbuphine (an opioid
agonist/antagonist) to lidocaine for epidural anesthesia. The authors
found that the combination of the two drugs (2% lidocaine at
0.11 mg/kg and nalbuphine at 0.2 mg/kg) produced a faster onset of
analgesia (7 min) but a shorter duration of action (147 min) than
nalbuphine alone [151].
Morphine and detomidine
Morphine and detomidine provided profound hindlimb analgesia
in horses with experimentally induced lameness [152]. Epidural
morphine (0.2 mg/kg) combined with detomidine (30 μg/kg) also
significantly decreased lameness after bilateral stifle arthroscopy
in horses [153]. A more recent study found that the analgesic
effects of epidural buprenorphine (0.005 mg/kg) plus detomidine
(0.15 mg/kg) were equivalent to those after epidural morphine plus
detomidine in horses undergoing bilateral stifle arthroscopy [154].
Morphine and romifidine
Caudal epidural romifidine (30–60 μg/kg) combined with morphine
(0.1 mg/kg) produces moderate analgesia for 60–90 min depending
on the dose of romifidine used. Intense sedation, moderate ataxia of
the hindlimbs, and a decrease in heart and respiratory rates were
noted during the 4 h observation period [155].
Tramadol and lidocaine
Tramadol (0.5 mg/kg) combined with lidocaine (0.2 mg/kg of a 2%
solution) was shown to extend the duration of perineal analgesia, as
measured using a pinprick and thermal stimulation, over lidocaine
alone when administered by caudal epidural injection. The dura-
tion of action of lidocaine alone was 70 min and that of tramadol
with lidocaine was 210 min [156].
Neostigmine and lidocaine
The addition of neostigmine to lidocaine for caudal epidural anes-
thesia has been shown to prolong lidocaine’s duration of action.
Lidocaine (0.2 mg/kg of a 2% solution) was administered by caudal
epidural injection alone or in combination with 1 or 2 μg/kg of
neostigmine. The combination of neostigmine with lidocaine
induced perineal analgesia lasting 2.5 h with a low prevalence of
adverse effects in standing horses [157].
Ketamine combinations
Ketamine (1.0 mg/kg) and xylazine (0.5 mg/kg) have been used in
combination for caudal epidural administration in horses and have
been shown to produce good analgesia of the tail, perineal region, anus,
and vulva [158]. The onset of action is 5–9 min and the duration aver-
ages 120 min. There is some systemic sedation with this combination.
Epidural bupivacaine alone (0.02 mg/kg of a 0.25% solution), bupi-
vacaine with morphine (0.02 mg/kg with 0.1 mg/kg), and bupivacaine
with ketamine (0.02 mg/kg with 0.5 mg/kg) have been compared for
their ability to provide analgesia in conscious horses [159]. The onset
of action was 5 min for bupivacaine, 10 min for bupivacaine with mor-
phine, and 15 min for bupivacaine with ketamine. The duration of
action was 315 min for bupivacaine with morphine, 210 min for
bupivacaine, and 240 min for bupivacaine with ketamine. While
morphine and ketamine may be effective adjuncts to bupivacaine for
caudal epidurals, bupivacaine with morphine may be preferable to a
high dose of bupivacaine alone or to bupivacaine with ketamine.
Complications
There are several reported complications associated with epidural
injections. Poor technique, anatomic abnormalities, and previous
epidural injections causing development of fibrous tissue at the site
can cause failure of anesthesia/analgesia. Overdose of local anesthet-
ics and/or α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists can cause excessive ataxia
and possibly recumbency. If recumbency results from inadvertent
overdose of epidural anesthetics, it may be necessary to keep the
horse sedated or anesthetized until motor function to the hindlimbs
returns. One recent report detailed the collapse of a 559 kg mare
given 13 mL of 2% lidocaine in a caudal epidural for standing
treatment of gluteal compartment syndrome. Unfortunately, the
mare was unable to stand after being maintained under anesthesia
until the effects of the lidocaine epidural were presumed to have
worn off and the owners elected humane euthanasia [160].
Sedation and cardiovascular depression may be associated with
systemic uptake of medications (especially α2
- adrenergic receptor
agonists) used epidurally. There have also been rare reports of
systemic pruritis in horses after epidural morphine [161–163].
A recent case report described generalized seizure activity in a show
pony mare administered a high-volume (50 mL) caudal epidural
containing morphine and detomidine to provide analgesia to the

-- 1273 of 1450 --

1258 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
thoracic limbs. The pony recovered rapidly without intervention,
and no residual neurological deficits were observed [164].
Novel regional analgesic techniques
Transversus abdominis plane block
Reports of the application of ultrasound-guided regional anesthetic
techniques, described more in-depth in Chapter 60, are beginning
to emerge in horses. One such technique, the transversus abdominis
plane (TAP) block has been described for use in surgical procedures
in many species including humans, dogs, cats, rabbits, llamas, pigs,
and more. Recently, a study was done to determine if this block
could be utilized in horses as an alternate analgesic strategy for colic
surgery. Advantages of using TAP blocks could include decreasing
adverse effects associated with systemically administered analgesics
such as cardiovascular depression, ileus, and ataxia. During this ini-
tial study, Shetland ponies were determined to have sensory block-
ade for up to 2 h after bilateral TAP block with bupivacaine as
compared to saline [165]. Further investigation is needed to deter-
mine if TAP blocks are an effective analgesic adjunct for colic sur-
gery in horses.
Caudal intercostal block for abdominal surgery
An intercostal nerve block that can desensitize the ventral and lateral
abdominal and thoracic wall (caudal intercostal block for abdominal
surgery [CIBAS]) has been described. It may relive postoperative
celiotomy pain but will not completely desensitize the caudal ventral
abdomen. The horse can be standing or in dorsal recumbency and
the block can be performed blindly or with ultrasound or nerve
stimulator guidance. Further investigation is needed to determine
situations where this block will be most useful [166].
Continuous delivery of local anesthetics for lower
limb analgesia
A technique has been described for the continuous delivery of local
anesthetics for lower limb analgesia [167]. The technique for place-
ment of the catheters was first developed in cadaver limbs with the
catheter being inserted 2–4 cm distal to the accessory carpal bone
medially and laterally and then passing it so that the tip was adja-
cent to the communicating branch of the medial and lateral palmar
nerves. The catheters were well tolerated by the test horses, but after
1–2 days there was significant limb swelling in horses receiving
local anesthetic infusions, but not in the horses receiving saline
infusion. A second study compared continuous peripheral neural
blockade (CPNB) with bupivacaine with intermittent peripheral
neural blockade (IPNB) with bupivacaine in experimentally
induced tendonitis pain [168]. CPNB provided better analgesia
than IPNB when lameness was scored, and behavioral and physio-
logic signs of pain were monitored. This study used the CPNB cath-
eters for 3 days, and further investigation is needed to determine if
this technique is useful for longer-term treatment.
References
1 Nichols CL, Doherty TJ, Schumacher J, et al. Dexmedetomidine prolongs the duration
of action of mepivacaine on anesthesia of the palmar digital nerves of horses. Am J
Vet Res 2021; 83(2): 114–118.
2 Tanner RB, Hubbell JAE. A retrospective study of the incidence and management of
complications associated with regional nerve blocks in equine dental patients. J Vet
Dent 2019; 36(1): 40–45.
3 Edwards JF. Regional anaesthesia of the head of the horse: an up-to-date survey. Vet
Rec 1930; 10: 873–975.
4 Staszyk C, Bienert A, Baumer W, et al. Stimulation of local anaesthetic nerve block
of the infraorbital nerve within the pterygopalatine fossa; anatomical landmarks
defined by computed tomography. Res Vet Sci 2008; 85: 399–406.
5 Roberts VLH, Perkins JD, Skarlina E, et al. Caudal anaesthesia of the infraorbital
nerve for diagnosis of idiopathic headshaking and caudal compression of the
infraorbital nerve for its treatment, in 58 horses. Equine Vet J 2013; 45: 107–110.
6 Newton SA, Knottenbelt DC, Eldridge PR. Headshaking in horses: possible aeti-
opathogenesis suggested by the results of diagnostic tests and several treatment
regimes used in 20 cases. Equine Vet J 2000; 32: 208–216.
7 Schumacher J, Schumacher J, Wilhite R. Anesthesia of the head and neck. In:
Doherty T, Valverde A, Reed RA, eds. Manual of Equine Anesthesia and Analgesia,
2nd edn. Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons, 2022: 355.
8 Bardell D, Iff I, Mosing M. A cadaver study comparing two approaches to perform
a maxillary nerve block in the horse. Equine Vet J 2010; 42: 721–725.
9 Stauffer S, Cordner B, Dixon J, et al. Maxillary nerve blocks in horses: an experi-
mental comparison of surface landmark and ultrasound-guided techniques. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(4): 951–958.
10 Harding PG, Smith RL, Barakzai SZ. Comparison of two approaches to performing
an inferior alveolar nerve block in the horse. Aust Vet J 2012; 90: 146–150.
11 Henry T, Pusterla N, Guedes AGP, et al. Evaluation and clinical use of an intraoral
inferior alveolar nerve block in the horse. Equine Vet J 2014; 46(6): 706–710.
12 Lindsay WA, Hedberg EB. Performing facial nerve blocks, nasolacrimal catheteri-
zation and paranasal sinus centesis in horses. Vet Med 1991; 86: 72–83.
13 Eckert RE, Griffin E, Cohen ND, et al. Investigation into intraoral approach for nerve block
injection at the mental foramen in the horse. Equine Vet Educ 2019; 31(6): 328–334.
14 Kyei S, Abaka Dadzie NY, Zaabaar E, et al. Age and sex variation in the duration of
action and corneal touch threshold (CTT) following instillation of 0.5% topical oph-
thalmic proparacaine and tetracaine hydrochlorides. J Ophthalmol 2021: 8661098.
15 Monclin SJ, Farnir F, Grauwels M. Duration of corneal anaesthesia following multi-
ple doses and two concentrations of tetracaine hydrochloride eyedrops on the
normal equine cornea. Equine Vet J 2011; 43: 69–73.
16 Pucket JD, Allbaugh RA, Rankin AJ, et al. Comparison of efficacy and duration of
effect on corneal sensitivity among anesthetic agents following ocular administra-
tion in clinically normal horses. Am J Vet Res 2013; 74: 459–464.
17 Makra Z, E, Eördögh R, Fábián I, et al. Evaluation of corneal anaesthesia after the
application of topical 0.5% bupivacaine, 2% lidocaine and 0.4% oxybuprocaine in
normal horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(6): 972–976.
18 Regnier A, Berton I, Concordet D, et al. Effect of topical application of 2% lidocaine
gel on corneal sensitivity of clinically normal equine eyes. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018;
45(2): 158–164.
19 Merideth RE, Wolf ED. Ophthalmic examination and therapeutic techniques in the
horse. Compend Contin Educ 1981; 3: S426–S433.
20 Diehl K, Bowden AC. Effect of auriculopalpebral nerve block on equine intraocular
pressure measured by rebound tonometry (TonoVet®). Vet Ophthalmol 2020; 23(2):
368–373.
21 Manning JP, St Clair LE. Palpebral frontal and zygomatic nerve blocks for examination
of the equine eye. Vet Med 1976; 71: 187–189.
22 Pollock PJ, Russell T, Hughes TK, et al. Transpalpebral eye enucleation in 40 standing
horses. Vet Surg 2008; 37: 306–309.
23 Hewes CA, Keoughan GC, Gutierrez-Nibeyro S. Standing enucleation in the horse:
a report of 5 cases. Can Vet J 2007; 48: 512–514.
24 Betbeze CM, Dray SM, Fontenot RL. Subconjunctival enucleation with orbital
implant placement in standing horses: 20 cases (2014–2017). J Am Vet Med Assoc
2021; 258(6): 661–667.
25 Hague BA, Honnas CM, Simpson RB, et al. Evaluation of skin bacterial flora before
and after aseptic preparation of clipped and nonclipped arthrocentesis sites in
horses. Vet Surg 1997; 26: 121–125.
26 Wahl K, Adams SB, Moore GE. Contamination of joints with tissue debris and hair
after arthrocentesis: the effect of needle insertion angle, spinal needle gauge, and
insertion of spinal needles with and without a stylet. Vet Surg 2012; 41: 391–398.
27 Buchner HH, Kübber P, Zohmann E, et al. Sedation and antisedation as tools in
equine lameness examination. Equine Vet J 1999; (Suppl 30): 227–230.
28 Moorman VJ, Bass L, King MR. Evaluation of the effects of commonly used alpha2
-
adrenergic agonists alone and in combination with butorphanol tartrate on objective
measurements of lameness in horses. Am J Vet Res 2019; 80(9): 868–877.
29 Calvo-Santesmases A, Manso-Diaz G, Fores P, et al. Kinematic patterns in horses
sedated with low doses of detomidine: an accelerometric evaluation. J Equine Vet
Sci 2021; 107: 103–107.
30 Park J, Sutradhar BC, Hong G, et al. Comparison of the cytotoxic effects of bupiv-
acaine, lidocaine, and mepivacaine in equine articular chondrocytes. Vet Anesth
Analg 2011; 38: 127–133.
31 Silva GB, De La Corte FD, Brass KE, et al. Viability of equine chondrocytes
after exposure to mepivacaine and ropivacaine in vitro. J Equine Vet Sci 2019; 77:
80–85.

-- 1274 of 1450 --

Chapter 63: Equine Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1259
32 Schumacher J, Cole RC, DeGraves FJ, et al. Comparison of speed of onset and
analgesic effect of 2% mepivacaine hydrochloride deposited within or outside the
neurovascular bundle at the level of the proximal sesamoid bones in horses with
naturally occurring forefoot-related lameness. Am J Vet Res 2020; 81(5): 394–399.
33 Kearney CM, van Weeren PR, Cornelissen BP, et al. Which anatomical region
determines a positive flexion test of the distal aspect of a forelimb in a nonlame
horse? Equine Vet J 2010; 42: 547–551.
34 Schumacher J, Livesey L, DeGraves FJ, et al. Effect of anaesthesia of the palmar digi-
tal nerves on proximal interphalangeal joint pain in the horse. Equine Vet J 2004;
36: 409–414.
35 Schumacher J, Steiger R, Schumacher J, et al. Effects of analgesia of the distal inter-
phalangeal joint or palmar digital nerves on lameness caused by solar pain in
horses. Vet Surg 2000; 29: 54–58.
36 Easter JL, Watkins JP, Stephens SL, et al. Effects of regional anesthesia on experi-
mentally induced coffin joint synovitis. Proc Annu Conv Am Assoc Equine Pract
2000; 46: 214–216.
37 Keegan KG, Wilson DJ, Wilson DA, et al. Effects of anesthesia of the palmar digital
nerves on kinematic gait analysis in horses with and without navicular disease. Am
J Vet Res 1997; 58: 218–223.
38 Bidwell LA, Brown KE, Cordier A, et al. Mepivacaine local anaesthetic duration in
equine palmar digital nerve blocks. Equine Vet J 2004; 36: 723–726.
39 Hoerdemann M, Smith RL, Hosgood G. Duration of action of mepivacaine and
lidocaine in equine palmar digital perineural blocks in an experimental lameness
model. Vet Surg 2017; 46(7): 986–993.
40 Harcourt MM, Smith RL, Hosgood G. Duration of skin desensitization following
palmar digital nerve blocks with lidocaine, bupivacaine, mepivacaine and prilo-
caine. Aust Vet J 2021; 99(12): 541–546.
41 Alvarez AV, Schumacher J, Degraves FJ. Effect of the addition of epinephrine to
a lidocaine solution on the efficacy and duration of palmar digital nerve blocks
in horses with naturally occurring forefoot lameness. Am J Vet Res 2018; 79(10):
1028–1034.
42 McCracken MJ, Schumacher J, Doherty TJ, et al. Efficacy and duration of effect for
liposomal bupivacaine when administered perineurally to the palmar digital nerves
of horses. Am J Vet Res 2020; 81(5): 400–405.
43 Nagy A, Bodo G, Dyson SJ, et al. Diffusion of contrast medium after perineural
injection of the palmar nerves: an in vivo and in vitro study. Equine Vet J 2009; 41:
379–383.
44 Le KM, Caston SS, Hossetter JM, et al. Comparison of analgesic and tissue effects of
subcutaneous perineural injection of liposomal bupivacaine and bupivacaine
hydrochloride in horses with forelimb lameness induced via circumferential clamp.
Am J Vet Res 2020; 81(7): 551–556.
45 Schumacher J, DeGraves F, Cesar F, et al. Efficacy of ketamine hydrochloride
administered as a basilar sesamoid nerve block in alleviating foot pain in horses
caused by natural disease. Equine Vet J 2014; 46(5): 639–641.
46 Maia BT, do Proda Vendruscolo C, de Souza AF, et al. Anatomical position of the
palmar/plantar nerves at the metacarpal/metatarsal distal level in horses: an in vivo
study by means of ultrasonography. Anat Histol Embryol 2022; 51(2): 236–243.
47 Seabaugh KA, Selberg KT, Valdes-Martinez A, et al. Assessment of the tissue diffu-
sion of anesthetic agent following administration of a low palmar nerve block in
horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2011; 239: 1334–1340.
48 Nagy A, Bodo G, Dyson SJ, et al. Distribution of radiodense contrast medium after
perineural injection of the palmar and palmar metacarpal nerves (low 4-point nerve
block): an in vivo and ex vivo study in horses. Equine Vet J 2010; 42: 512–518.
49 Nagy A, Bodo G, Dyson SJ. Diffusion of contrast medium after four different tech-
niques for analgesia of the proximal metacarpal region: an in vivo and in vitro
study. Equine Vet J 2012; 44: 668–673.
50 Zekas LJ, Forrest LJ. Effect of perineural anesthesia on the ultrasonographic appear-
ance of equine palmar metacarpal structures. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2003; 44: 59–64.
51 Castro FA, Schumacher JS, Pauwels F, et al. A new approach for perineural injection
of the lateral palmar nerve in the horse. Vet Surg 2005; 34: 539–542.
52 Hughes TK, Eliashar E, Smith RK. In vitro evaluation of a single injection technique
for diagnostic analgesia of the proximal suspensory ligament of the equine pelvic
limb. Vet Surg 2007; 36: 760–764.
53 Gayle GM, Redding WR. Comparison of diagnostic anaesthetic techniques of the
proximal plantar metatarsus in the horse. Equine Vet Educ 2007; 19: 222–224.
54 Hinnigan G, Milner P, Talbot A, et al. Is anaesthesia of the deep branch of the lateral
plantar nerve specific for the diagnosis of proximal metatarsal pain in the horse?
Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2014; 27(5): 351–357.
55 Claunch KM, Eggleston RB, Baxter GM. Effects of approach and injection volume on
diffusion of mepivacaine hydrochloride during local analgesia of the deep branch of
the lateral plantar nerve in horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2014; 245(10): 1153–1159.
56 McGlinchey L, Agne G, Passler T, et al. An objective assessment of the effect of
anesthetizing the median nerve on lameness caused by pain in the cubital joint.
J Equine Vet Sci 2019; 75: 9–13.
57 Souto MTM, Fantoni DT, Hamaji A, et al. Ultrasound-guided continuous block of
median and ulnar nerves in horses: development of the technique. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2020; 47(3): 405–413.
58 Boorman S, DeGraves F, Schumacher J, et al. Comparison of 2% mepivacaine and a
solution of 2% lidocaine/epinephrine administered for median and ulnar nerve
blocks in horses with naturally occurring forelimb lameness. Vet Surg 2022; 51(2):
279–285.
59 Boone LH, Schumacher J, DeGraves F, et al. Buffering mepivacaine with sodium
bicarbonate speeds and potentiates analgesia of median and ulnar nerve blocks
performed on horses. Vet Rec 2019; 184(5): 155.
60 Boone LH, DeGraves FJ, Klein CE, et al. Effect of 3% chloroprocaine hydrochloride
when used for median and ulnar regional nerve blocks in lame horses. Am J Vet Res
2020; 81(1): 13–16.
61 Van der Laan M, Raes E, Oosterlink M. Cadaveric comparison of the accuracy of
ultrasound-guided versus ’blind’ perineural injection of the tibial nerve in horses.
Vet J 2021; 269: 105–106.
62 Denoix J-M, Beaumont AB, Bertoni L. Ultrasonographic guided block of the tibial
nerve. Equine Vet Educ 2020; 32(7): 372–377.
63 Schramme MC, Boswell JC, Hamhougias K, et al. An in vitro study to compare 5
different techniques for injection of the navicular bursa in the horse. Equine Vet J
2000; 32: 263–267.
64 Piccot-Crézollet C, Cauvin ER, Lepage OM. Comparison of two techniques for
injection of the podotrochlear bursa in horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2005; 226:
1524–1528.
65 Nottrott K, De Guio C, Khairoun A, et al. An ultrasound-guided, tendon-sparing,
lateral approach to injection of the navicular bursa. Equine Vet J 2017; 49: 655–661.
66 Dyson SJ, Kidd L. A comparison of responses to analgesia of the navicular bursa
and intra-articular analgesia of the distal interphalangeal joint in 59 horses. Equine
Vet J 1992; 25: 93–98.
67 Schumacher J, Schumacher J, Gillette R, et al. The effects of local anaesthetic solu-
tion in the navicular bursa of horses with lameness caused by distal interphalangeal
joint pain. Equine Vet J 2003; 35: 502–505.
68 Gough MR, Mayhew G, Munroe GA. Diffusion of mepivacaine between adjacent
synovial structures in the horse. Part 1: forelimb foot and carpus. Equine Vet J 2002;
34: 80–84.
69 Schumacher J, Schumacher J, DeGraves F. A comparison of the effects of local anal-
gesic solution in the navicular bursa of horses with lameness caused by solar toe or
solar heel pain. Equine Vet J 2001; 33: 386–389.
70 Schumacher J, Schumacher J, DeGraves F, et al. A comparison of the effects of two
volumes of local analgesic solution in the distal interphalangeal joint of horses with
lameness caused by solar toe or solar heel pain. Equine Vet J 2001; 33: 265–268.
71 Mereu M, Hawkes C, Cuddy LC, et al. Evaluation of four techniques for injection of
the proximal interphalangeal joint in horses. Vet Surg 2019; 48: 1437–1443.
72 Hassel DM, Stover SM, Yarbrough TB, et al. Palmar–plantar axial sesamoidean
approach to the digital flexor tendon sheath in horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000;
217: 1343–1347.
73 Harper J, Schumacher J, DeGraves F, et al. Effects of analgesia of the digital flexor
tendon sheath on pain originating in the sole, distal interphalangeal joint, or navic-
ular bursa of horses. Equine Vet J 2007; 39: 535–539.
74 Jordana M, Martens A, Duchateau L, et al. Diffusion of mepivacaine to adjacent
synovial structures after intrasynovial analgesia of the digital flexor tendon sheath.
Equine Vet J 2016; 48(3): 326–330.
75 Miagkoff L, Bonilla AG. Desensitization of the distal forelimb following intrathecal
anesthesia of the carpal sheath in horses. Equine Vet J 2021; 53(1): 167–176.
76 Lewis RD. Techniques for arthrocentesis of the equine shoulder, elbow, stifle and
hip joints. Proc Annu Conv Am Assoc Equine Pract 1996; 42: 55–63.
77 Schumacher J, Livesey L, Brawner W, et al. Comparison of 2 methods of centesis
of the bursa of the biceps brachii tendon of horses. Equine Vet J 2007; 39:
356–359.
78 Schneeweiss W, Puggioni A, David F. Comparison of ultrasound-guided vs. ‘blind’
techniques for intra-synovial injections of the shoulder area in horses: scapulo-
humeral joint, bicipital and infraspinatus bursae. Equine Vet J 2012; 44: 674–678.
79 Seabaugh KA, Selberg KT, Mueller POE, et al. Clinical study evaluating the accuracy
of injecting the distal tarsal joints in the horse. Equine Vet J 2017; 49(5): 668–672.
80 Bell BT, Baker GJ, Foreman JH, Abbott LC. In vivo investigation of communication
between the distal intertarsal and tarsometatarsal joints in horses and ponies.
Vet Surg 1993; 22: 289–292.
81 Dyson SJ, Romero JM. An investigation of techniques for local analgesia of the
equine distal tarsus and proximal metatarsus. Equine Vet J 1993; 25: 30–35.
82 Kraus-Hansen AE, Jann HW, Kerr DV, et al. Arthrographic analysis of communica-
tion between the tarsometatarsal and distal intertarsal joints of the horse. Vet Surg
1992; 21: 139–144.
83 Sack WO, Orsini PG. Distal intertarsal and tarsometatarsal joints in the horse:
communication and injection sites. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1981; 179: 355–359.

-- 1275 of 1450 --

1260 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
84 Post EM, Singer ER, Clegg PD. An anatomic study of the calcaneal bursae in the
horse. Vet Surg 2007; 36: 3–9.
85 Vacek JR, Ford TS, Honnas CM. Communication between the femoropatellar and
medial and lateral femorotibial joints in horses. Am J Vet Res 1992; 53:
1431–1434.
86 Reeves MJ, Trotter GW, Kainer RA. Anatomical and functional communications
between the synovial sacs of the equine stifle joint. Equine Vet J 1991; 23:
215–218.
87 Gough MR, Munroe GA, Mayhew G. Diffusion of mepivacaine between adjacent
synovial structures in the horse. Part 2: tarsus and stifle. Equine Vet J 2002; 34:
85–90.
88 Tóth F, Schumacher J, Schramme MC, et al. Effect of anesthetizing individual
compartments of the stifle joint in horses with experimentally induced stifle joint
lameness. Am J Vet Res 2014; 75(1): 19–25.
89 Hendrickson DA, Nixon AJ. A lateral approach for synovial fluid aspiration and
joint injection of the femoropatellar joint of the horse. Equine Vet J 1992; 24:
397–398.
90 Hendrickson DA, Nixon AJ. Comparison of the cranial and a new lateral approach
to the femoropatellar joint for aspiration and injection in horses. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 1994; 205: 1177–1179.
91 Swiderski CE, Cooke E, Linford R. How to inject the medial femorotibial joint: an
alternate approach. Proc Annu Conv Am Assoc Equine Pract 2005; 51: 476–480.
92 Schumacher J, Schumacher J, Wilhite R. Comparison of four techniques of arthro-
centesis of the lateral compartment of the femorotibial joint of the horse. Equine
Vet J 2012; 44: 664–667.
93 David F, Rougier M, Alexander K, et al. Ultrasound-guided coxofemoral arthro-
centesis in horses. Equine Vet J 2007; 39: 79–83.
94 Whitcomb MB, Vaughan B, Katzman S, et al. Ultrasound-guided injections in
horses with cranioventral distention of the coxofemoral joint capsule: feasibility
for a cranioventral approach. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2016; 57(2): 199–206.
95 Tóth F, Schumacher J, Scramme M, Hecht S. Evaluation of four techniques for
injecting the trochanteric bursa of horses. Vet Surg 2011; 40: 489–493.
96 Dyson S, Murray R. Pain associated with the sacroiliac joint region: a clinical
study of 74 horses. Equine Vet J 2003; 35(3): 240–245.
97 Engeli E, Haussler KK. Review of injection techniques targeting the sacroiliac
region in horses. Equine Vet Educ 2012; 24(10): 529–541.
98 Garcia-Lopez JM. Neck, back, and pelvic pain in sport horses. Vet Clin North
Amer 2018; 34(2): 235–251.
99 Denoix J-M, Jacquet S. Ultrasound-guided injections of the sacroiliac area in
horses. Equine Vet Educ 2008; 20(4): 203–207.
100 Offord SCJ, Read RM, Pudney CJ, et al. Complications following equine sacroiliac
region analgesia are uncommon: a study in 118 horses. PLoS ONE 2021; 16(3):
e0247781.
101 Skarda RT, Tranquilli WJ. Local and regional anesthetic and analgesic techniques:
horses. In: Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, Grimm KA, eds. Lumb and Jones’
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia, 4th edn. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing,
2007: 605–642.
102 Heavner JE. Local anesthetics. Vet Clin North Am Large Anim Pract 1991; 3:
209–211.
103 Delli- Rocili MM, Cribb NC, Trout DR, et al. Effectiveness of a paravertebral nerve
block versus local portal blocks for laparoscopic closure of the nephrosplenic
space: a pilot study. Vet Surg 2020; 49(5): 1007–1014.
104 Moon PF, Suter CM. Paravertebral thoracolumbar anaesthesia in 10 horses.
Equine Vet J 1993; 25: 304–308.
105 Skarda RT. Practical regional anesthesia. In: Mansmann RA, McAllister ES, Pratt
PW, eds. Equine Medicine and Surgery, vol. 1, 3rd edn. Santa Barbara, CA:
American Veterinary Publications, 1982: 229–238.
106 Haga HA, Lykkjen S, Revold T, Ranheim B. Effect of intratesticular injection of
lidocaine on cardiovascular responses to castration in isoflurane anesthetized stal-
lions. Am J Vet Res 2006; 67: 403–408.
107 Portier KG, Jaillardon L, Leece EA, Walsh CM. Castration of horses under total
intravenous anaesthesia: analgesic effects of lidocaine. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36:
173–179.
108 Joyce J, Hendrickson DA. Comparison of intraoperative pain responses following
intratesticular or mesorchial injection of lidocaine in standing horses undergoing
laparoscopic cryptorchidectomy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2006; 229: 1779–1783.
109 Koch DW, Easley JT, Hatzel JN, et al. Prospective randomized investigation of
topical anesthesia during unilateral laparoscopic ovariectomy in horses. Vet Surg
2020; 49( Suppl 1): O54–O59.
110 Magda JJ. Local anesthesia in operations on the male perineum in horses.
Veterinariya 1948; 25: 34–36.
111 Erkert RS, MacAllister CG, Campbell G, et al. Comparison of topical lidocaine/
prilocaine anesthetic cream and local infiltration of 2% lidocaine for episioplasty
in mares. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2005; 28: 299–304.
112 Gallacher K, Santos LC, Campoy L, et al. Development of a peripheral nerve
stimulator-guided technique for equine pudendal nerve blockade. Vet J 2016; 217:
72–77.
113 Skarda RT, Muir WW. Segmental thoracolumbar spinal (subarachnoid) analgesia
in conscious horses. Am J Vet Res 1982; 43: 2121–2128.
114 Doherty TJ, Geiser DR, Rohrbach BW. Effect of high volume epidural morphine,
ketamine and butorphanol on halothane minimum alveolar concentration in
ponies. Equine Vet J 1997; 29: 370–373.
115 Doherty TJ, Geiser DR, Rohrbach BW. The effect of epidural xylazine on halothane
minimum alveolar concentration in ponies. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1997; 20: 246–248.
116 Greene SA, Thurmon JC. Epidural anesthesia and sedation for selected equine
surgeries. Equine Pract 1985; 7: 14–19.
117 Lechner TJ, van Wijk MG, Maas AJ, et al. Clinical results with the acoustic punc-
ture assist device, a new acoustic device to identify the epidural space. Anesthes
Analg 2004; 96: 1183–1187.
118 Iff I, Mosing M, Lechner T, Moens Y. The use of an acoustic device to identify the
extradural space in standing horses. Vet Anesth Analg 2010; 37: 57–62.
119 Martin CA, Kerr CL, Pearce SG, et al. Outcome of epidural catheterization for
delivery of analgesics in horses: 43 cases (1998–2001). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2003;
222: 1394–1398.
120 Sysel AM, Pleasant RS, Jacobson JD, et al. Systemic and local effects associated
with long-term epidural catheterization and morphine–detomidine administra-
tion in horses. Vet Surg 1997; 26: 141–149.
121 Skarda RT, Muir WW. Segmental and subarachnoid analgesia in conscious horses:
a comparative study. Am J Vet Res 1983; 44: 1870–1876.
122 Grubb TL, Riebold TW, Huber MJ. Comparison of lidocaine–xylazine, and
xylazine–lidocaine for caudal epidural analgesia in horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1992; 201: 1187–1190.
123 Sampaio BFB, DeRossi R, Menezes PHN, et al. Effects of a caudal epidural anes-
thesia using midazolam with or without lidocaine to perform an endometrial
biopsy in mares. J Equine Vet Sci 2017; 59: 110–117.
124 Duarte PC, Paz CFR, Oliveira APL, et al. Caudal epidural anesthesia in mares after
bicarbonate addition to a lidocaine-epinephrine combination. Vet Anaesth Analg
2017; 44(4): 943–950.
125 Skarda RT, Muir WW, Ibrahim AL. Plasma mepivacaine concentrations after cau-
dal epidural and subarachnoid injection in the horse: comparative study. Am J Vet
Res 1984; 45: 1967–1971.
126 DeRossi R, Breno FB, Varela JV, et al. Perineal analgesia and hemodynamic effects
of the epidural administration of meperidine or hyperbaric bupivacaine in con-
scious horses. Can Vet J 2004; 45: 42–47.
127 Ganidalgi S, Cetin H, Biricik HS, et al. Comparison of ropivacaine with a combi-
nation of ropivacaine and fentanyl for the caudal epidural anaesthesia of mares.
Vet Rec 2004; 154: 329–332.
128 Skarda RT, Muir WW. Analgesic, hemodynamic and respiratory effects of caudally
epidurally administered ropivacaine hydrochloride in mares. Vet Anesth Analg
2001; 28: 61–74.
129 van Loon JPAM, Menke ES, Doornebal A, et al. Antinociceptive effects of low dose
lumbosacral epidural ropivacaine in healthy ponies. Vet J 2012; 193: 240–245.
130 Skarda RT, Muir WW. Influence of atipamezole on effects of midsacral subarach-
noidally administered detomidine in mares. Am J Vet Res 1998; 59: 468–478.
131 Skarda RT, Muir WW. Effects of intravenously administered yohimbine on antin-
ociceptive, cardiorespiratory, and postural changes induced by epidural adminis-
tration of detomidine hydrochloride solution in healthy mares. Am J Vet Res 1999;
60: 1262–1270.
132 LeBlanc PH, Caron JP, Patterson JS, et al. Epidural injection of xylazine for per-
ineal analgesia in horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1988; 193: 1405–1408.
133 Skarda RT, Muir WW. Analgesic, hemodynamic and respiratory effects of caudally
epidurally administered xylazine hydrochloride solution in mares. Am J Vet Res
1996; 57: 193–200.
134 Teixeria Neto FJ, McDonell W, Pearce S, et al. Evaluation of anesthesia maintained
with halothane and epidural xylazine for hind limb surgery in horses. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2001; 28: 107.
135 Skarda RT, Muir WW. Comparison of antinociceptive, cardiovascular, and res-
piratory effects, head ptosis, and position of pelvic limbs in mares after caudal
epidural administration of xylazine and detomidine hydrochloride solution.
Am J Vet Res 1996; 57: 1338–1345.
136 Skarda RT, Muir WW. Caudal analgesia induced by epidural or subarachnoid
administration of detomidine hydrochloride solution in mares. Am J Vet Res 1994;
55: 670–680.
137 Sampaio BFB, DeRossi R, Vieira N, et al. Dexmedetomidine and bupivacaine
association in caudal epidural injection in mares. J Equine Vet Sci 2020; 91: 103015.
138 Hamed MA, Abouelnasr KS, Ibrahim HMM, et al. Comparative, sedative, and
analgesic effects of epidural dexmedetomidine and xylazine in donkeys (Equus
asinus). J Equine Vet Sci 2017; 59:104–109.

-- 1276 of 1450 --

Chapter 63: Equine Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1261
139 Kariman A, Ghamsari SM, Mokhber-Dezfooli MR. Evaluation of analgesia
induced by epidural administration of medetomdine in horses. J Fac Vet Med
Tehran Univ 2001; 56: 49–51.
140 Kariman A. Cardiorespiratory and analgesic effects of epidurally administered
romifidine in the horse. In: Proceedings of the Seventh World Congress on Veterinary
Anaesthesiology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland, 2000: 55.
141 Valverde A, Little CB, Dyson DH, Motter CH. Use of epidural morphine to relieve
pain in a horse. Can Vet J 1990; 31: 211–212.
142 Natalini CC, Robinson EP. Evaluation of the effects of epidurally administered
morphine, alfentanil, butorphanol, tramadol and U50488H in horses. Am J Vet
Res 2000; 61: 1579–1586.
143 Freitas GC, Carregaro AB, Gehrcke MI, et al. Epidural analgesia with morphine or
buprenorphine in ponies with lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced carpal synovitis.
Can J Vet Res 2011; 75: 141–146.
144 van Loon JPAM, Menke ES, L’Ami J, et al. Analgesic and anti-hyperalgesic effects
of epidural morphine in an equine LPS-induced acute synovitis model. Vet J 2012;
193: 464–470.
145 Van Hoogmoed LM, Galuppo LD. Laparoscopic ovariectomy using the endo-GIA
stapling device and endo-catch pouches and evaluation of analgesic efficacy of
epidural morphine sulfate in 10 mares. Vet Surg 2005; 34: 646–650.
146 Sano H, Martin- Flores M, Santos LCP, et al. Effects of epidural morphine
on gastrointestinal transit in unmedicated horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011;
38: 121–126.
147 Olbrich VH, Mosing M. A comparison of the analgesic effects of caudal epidural
methadone and lidocaine in the horse. Vet Anaesth Analg 2003; 30: 156–164.
148 van Loon JPAM, van Oostrom H, Doornenbal A, et al. Lumbosacral spinal cord
somatosensory evoked potentials for quantification of nociception in horses.
Equine Vet J 2010; 42: 255–260.
149 Chopin JB, Wright JD. Complication after the use of a combination of lignocaine
and xylazine for epidural anesthesia in a mare. Aust Vet J 1995; 72: 354–355.
150 Vullo C, Tambella AM, Meligrana M, et al. Analgesic and sedative effects of epi-
dural lidocaine–xylazine in elective bilateral laparoscopic ovariectomy in standing
mule mares. Animals (Basel) 2021; 11(8): 2419.
151 Torad FA, Hassan EA. Epidural lidocaine, nalbuphine, and lidocaine–nalbuphine
combination in donkeys. J Equine Vet Sci 2016; 37: 1–5.
152 Sysel AM, Pleasant RS, Jacobson JD, et al. Efficacy of an epidural combination of
morphine and detomidine in alleviating experimentally induced hindlimb lame-
ness in horses. Vet Surg 1996; 25: 511–518.
153 Goodrich LR, Nixon AJ, Fubini SL, et al. Epidural morphine and detomidine
decreases postoperative hindlimb lameness in horses after bilateral stifle arthros-
copy. Vet Surg 2002; 31: 232–239.
154 Fischer BL, Ludders JW, Asakawa M, et al. A comparison of epidural buprenor-
phine plus detomidine with morphine plus detomidine in horses undergoing
bilateral stifle arthroscopy. Vet Anesth Analg 2009; 36: 67–76.
155 Natalini CC, Paes SD, Polydoro AS. Analgesic and cardiopulmonary effects of
epidural romifidine and morphine combination in horses. J Equine Vet Sci 2021;
102: 103459.
156 DeRossi R, Modolo TJC, Maciel FB, et al. Efficacy of epidural lidocaine combined
with tramadol or neostigmine on perineal analgesia in the horse. Equine Vet J
2013; 45: 497–502.
157 DeRossi R, Maciel FB, Modolo TJC, et al. Efficacy of concurrent epidural admin-
istration of neostigmine and lidocaine for perineal analgesia in geldings. Am J Vet
Res 2012; 73: 1356–1362.
158 Kariman A, Nowrouzian I, Bakhtiari J. Caudal epidural injection of a combination
of ketamine and xylazine for perineal analgesia in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2000;
27: 115.
159 DeRossi R, Modolo TJC, Pagliosa RC, et al. Comparison of analgesic effects of cau-
dal epidural 0.25% bupivacaine with bupivacaine plus morphine or bupivacaine plus
ketamine for analgesia in conscious horses. J Equine Vet Sci 2012; 32: 190–195.
160 Carrozzo MV, Ambros B. Collapse in a mare during standing sedation with a fatal
outcome. Vet Rec Case Rep 2020; 8(1): e000829.
161 Haitjema H, Gibson KT. Severe pruritis associated with epidural morphine and
detomidine in a horse. Aust Vet J 2001; 79: 248–250.
162 Kalchofner KS, Kummer M, Price J, Bettschart-Wolfensberger R. Pruritis in two
horses following epidurally administered morphine. Equine Vet Educ 2001; 19:
590–594.
163 Burford JH, Corley KT. Morphine-associated pruritis after single extradural
administration in a horse. Vet Anaesth Analg 2001; 33: 193–198.
164 Tallon R, McMillan M, Dunkel B. Presumed generalised seizure following caudal
epidural administration of morphine and detomidine in a pony. Equine Vet Educ
2021; 33(10): e372–e375.
165 Küls N, Trujanovic R, Otero P, et al. Ultrasound-guided transversus abdominis
plane block in Shetland ponies: a description of a three-point injection technique
and evaluation of potential analgesic effects. J Equine Vet Sci 2020; 90: 102994.
166 Gingold BMC, Hassen KM, Milloway MC, et al. Caudal intercostal block for
abdominal surgery in horses. Vet Rec 2018; 183: 164–165.
167 Driessen B, Scandella M, Zarucco L. Development of a technique for continuous
perineural blockade of the palmar nerves in the distal equine thoracic limb.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35: 432–448.
168 Watts AE, Nixon AJ, Reesink HL, et al. Continuous peripheral neural blockade to
alleviate signs of experimentally induced severe forelimb pain in horses. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2011; 238: 1032–1039.

-- 1277 of 1450 --

1262
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth E dition of L umb and J ones	. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
As in other species, sedation and anesthesia are often required for
surgical or diagnostic procedures in ruminants. Most procedures in
ruminants can be done during standing sedation with the aid of
physical restraint tools and locoregional anesthesia to avoid poten-
tial complications from general anesthesia. The decision to induce
general anesthesia may be influenced by a ruminant’s temperament,
its specific anatomic and physiologic characteristics, and the type of
procedure to be performed. Diagnostic and surgical procedures
that are more complex require general anesthesia.
In addition to discussing techniques for cattle, goats, and sheep,
anesthetic techniques for South American camelids, primarily
llamas and alpacas, are discussed. South American camelids do not
accept restraint as well as domestic ruminants and often require
sedation before local or regional anesthesia. Although they have
some unique species characteristics regarding anesthesia, many
of the principles and techniques used in food animal and equine
anesthesia also apply to South American camelids. Except for
differences in size and the fact that alpacas can require approxi-
mately 10% greater doses of sedatives, anesthetic management of
alpacas and llamas is similar.
Preanesthetic preparation
Considerations for preanesthetic preparation include preanesthetic
physical examination, estimation of body weight, assessment of
hematologic and blood chemistry values, fasting, venous catheteri-
zation, and the need for patient stabilization. During preanesthetic
physical examination, subjects should be visually examined first
and then restrained properly for the “hands-on” portion of the
physical examination to ensure the safety of personnel. Occasionally,
depending on the patient’s temperament and demeanor, a complete
physical examination is not possible. The components of the prean-
esthetic physical examination are similar to those of other domestic
species. The chest should be auscultated for evaluation of heart rate
and rhythm, as well as for respiratory rate and the character of
64 Ruminants
Chiara E. Hampton1 and Thomas W. Riebold2
1 Large Animal Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee, USA
2 Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 1262
Preanesthetic preparation, 1262
Sedation/chemical restraint, 1264
Anticholinergics, 1264
Acepromazine and azaperone, 1264
α2
- Adrenergic receptor agonists, 1265
α2
- Adrenergic receptor antagonists, 1266
Doxapram, 1267
Benzodiazepines, 1267
Opioids, 1267
Alfaxalone, 1267
Other sedatives, 1267
Common combinations for chemical restraint, 1267
Induction, 1268
Barbiturates/thiobarbiturates, 1268
Ketamine, 1268
Guaifenesin, 1269
Tiletamine–zolazepam, 1269
Propofol, 1270
Alfaxalone, 1270
Intubation, 1270
Maintenance, 1271
Injectable, 1271
Inhalation, 1272
Intraoperative analgesia, 1273
Supportive therapy, 1273
Patient positioning, 1273
Fluid administration, 1273
Respiratory supportive therapy, 1274
Cardiovascular supportive therapy, 1275
Monitoring, 1275
Recovery, 1278
Intraoperative complications, 1278
Postoperative complications, 1278
Analgesia, 1279
References, 1279

-- 1278 of 1450 --

Chapter 64: Ruminants 	1263
respiratory sounds. This is particularly important in camelids
where a wide variety of congenital cardiac abnormalities have been
reported [1], as well as in small ruminants, which often present with
subclinical pulmonary disease of bacterial, viral, or fungal origin.
Synchronicity of peripheral pulses can be evaluated via palpation
of the femoral pulse in camelids, small ruminants, and calves.
In large cattle, the coccygeal or facial arteries can be used for this
purpose [2]. Conjunctival or buccal mucous membranes can be
evaluated for color and moisture level. Capillary refill time should
take approximately 2 s. The FAMACHA © scoring system can be
used in goats and sheep to detect the presence and the severity of
anemia [3]. The frequency of ruminal contractions is an important
vital sign to evaluate as ruminal atony may be present in cases of
lactic acidosis and endotoxemia. A summary of normal findings
of species-specific scoring systems and vital signs is provided
in Table 64.1.
For accurate drug administration, body weight must be estimated
or determined by weighing the animal. It is easy to overestimate the
body weight of camelids because they are fairly tall, and their long
haircoat obscures their body condition. Adult male llamas usually
weigh 140–175 kg, occasionally reaching or exceeding 200 kg.
Adult female llamas usually weigh 100–150 kg but may occasionally
exceed 200 kg. Adult male alpacas usually weigh 60–100 kg, and
adult female alpacas usually weigh 50–80 kg. The body weight of
crias and small ruminants may be determined on a bathroom scale.
Hematologic and blood chemistry values should be evaluated
before anesthesia when possible, and the results should be compared
with instrument-specific reference values [8–11]. The Heska Element
POC blood gas and electrolyte analyzer shows good performance
with camelid blood and can be useful in the clinical setting,
although complete agreement with automated chemistry analyzers
was not documented [12].
Domestic ruminants have a multicompartment stomach with
a large rumen that does not empty completely. South American
camelids have a stomach divided into three compartments [13].
Each species, therefore, is susceptible to complications associated
with recumbency and anesthesia with arterial hypoxemia, tympany,
regurgitation, and aspiration pneumonia due to accidental aspira-
tion of ruminal contents being the most common. To reduce risks
associated with these potential complications, older calves, sheep,
goats, and camelids should be fasted for 12–18 h and deprived of
water for 8–12 h prior to anesthesia. Juvenile calves should be fasted
and water withheld for no longer than 6–12 h. Fasting of neonates is
not advisable because the rumen remains underdeveloped and
hypoglycemia may result. Adult cattle are commonly fasted for
18–24 h and deprived of water for 12–18 h prior to general anesthesia,
but definitive evidence-based guidelines are currently lacking.
Evidence in preslaughtered steers showed that decreasing the fasting
time from 23–29 h to 2–6 h prevented hemoconcentration and
dehydration associated with decreased water consumption during
the fasting period and resulted in an overall improvement in animal
welfare [14]. Furthermore, a 36-h fast resulted in subclinical acute
ruminal acidosis [15]. Fasting and water deprivation may decrease
the likelihood of tympany by decreasing the volume of fermentable
ingesta compared to non-fasted cattle, reduce the incidence of
hypoxemia [16], and preserve better pulmonary functional residual
capacity [17]. However, regurgitation seems more common with
prolonged fasting [16,18]. In cattle, fasting for 48 h is associated
with bradycardia [19], which seems to persist for at least 48 h after
resumption of food intake [20]. Due to the hormonal and metabolic
changes associated with mobilization of energy substrates after
prolonged fasting (> 24 h) in cattle [21], and the adverse events
observed with 48-h fasting, further studies to elucidate optimal
fasting times in ruminants are warranted and needed. Until
evidence-based practices are built, practitioners are advised to
observe fasting times that take into consideration and balance the
advantages and disadvantages of short and prolonged fasting times.
Although gas does not appear to accumulate in the first compart-
ment of anesthetized camelids, these precautions may decrease the
incidence of regurgitation in these species. In non-elective cases,
fasting for the suggested times is often not possible, and precautions
should be taken to avoid aspiration of gastric fluid and ingesta. Even
with these precautions, some ruminants will become tympanitic,
and others will regurgitate.
Venipuncture and catheterization of the jugular vein are often
performed prior to anesthesia. Adult cattle require 12–14 gauge
catheters for catheterization of the jugular vein. If difficulties
in accessing the jugular vein are present, an auricular catheter
(16–20 gauge) can be placed for administration of sedatives or
induction agents in cattle restrained in a chute. Similar sized cath-
eters are appropriate for adult camelids, calves, and large goats and
sheep, and 18 gauge catheters are appropriate for juvenile camelids,
sheep, and goats. South American camelids possess anatomical
features that make jugular catheterization technically challenging.
A detailed description of the venipuncture and catheterization
techniques is provided elsewhere [22–24]. Physical restraint during
venipuncture or catheterization varies and can consist of a handler
holding the animal’s halter or use of head gates and chutes for adult
cattle and llamas. If a camelid is fractious, performing ear twitching
by squeezing the base of the ear may be helpful [25]. Turning
the animal’s head excessively to either side may hinder venipuncture
and catheter placement in goats and camelids, and may increase the
likelihood of carotid arterial puncture in camelids. Infiltration of a
small amount of local anesthetic such as lidocaine at the site of
catheterization is recommended.
Camelids lack a jugular groove, and their jugular vein lies deep
to the sternomandibularis and brachiocephalicus muscles, ventral
to cervical vertebral transverse processes and superficial to the carotid
artery and vagosympathetic trunk within the carotid sheath for
most of its length [22–24]. Beginning at a point about 15 cm caudal
Table 64.1 Summary of normal physical examination findings in domestic ruminants and camelids.
Alpaca/Llama 	Goat 	Sheep 	Cattle
Body condition score 	5 (range 1–9)a 	2.5–4 (range 0–5)c 	3 (range 0–5)d 	3 (range 1–5)e
Heart rate (beats/min) 	60–90a 	70–90b 	70–90b 	60–80b
Respiratory rate (breaths/min) 	10–30a 	25–35b 	10–20b 	10–30b
Rectal temperature (°F) 	99.5–102a 	103.0b 	102.0b 	101.5b
Ruminal contractions (F/min) 	3–5a 	1b 	1b 	1b
Data compiled from: a Kaplan et al. [4]; b Constable et al. [2]; c Ghosh et al. [5]; d Phythian et al. [6]; e Wildman et al. [7].

-- 1279 of 1450 --

1264 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
to the ramus of the mandible, the rostral course of the jugular vein
is separated from the carotid artery by the omohyoideus muscle.
The bifurcation of the jugular vein is located at the intersection of a
line drawn caudally along the ventral aspect of the body of the
mandible and another line connecting the base of the ear and
the lateral aspect of the cervical transverse processes. Venipuncture
or catheterization can be performed at the bifurcation or at any
point caudal to it. Because of the close proximity of the carotid
artery to the jugular vein, one must confirm that the vein has been
catheterized and not the artery. After occlusion of the vessel,
one will often be unable to see the jugular vein distend; however,
the vein can be palpated particularly rostrally and more easily in
females and castrated males because their skin is thinner. On occa-
sion, one will be able to see the jugular vein distend on crias and
juvenile camelids. Camelids can have four to five jugular venous
valves that prevent flow of venous blood into the head when the
head is lowered during grazing [23]. Contact with jugular venous
valves may prevent catheterization; a site caudal to the point where
the valve was contacted should be used. Finally, repeated unsuccess-
ful attempts to place a jugular venous catheter have been associated
with collapse and death. If a camelid begins to mouth-breathe dur-
ing catheterization, it is highly recommended to discontinue the
procedure and allow the animal time to recover from the stress
before proceeding.
Stabilization of the patient should be performed prior to the
anesthetic episode according to the animal’s health status. The
extent of enophthalmos (recession of the globe), along with capillary
refill time, mucous membrane color, packed cell volume, and plasma
total solids can be used to estimate the patient’s fluid deficit [26].
Anecdotally, a reduction in the volume of the hump can be seen
during dehydration in Brahman cattle, which regains volume with
replacement of fluid deficits. Calculations for fluid replacement
should include the existing deficit, metabolic water consumption,
and ongoing losses. Attempts should be made to replace this volume,
as well as fluids lost during the anesthetic episode through salivation
and regurgitation. Anemia is not uncommon in small ruminants
and South American camelids and should be addressed and treated
as appropriate before surgical intervention.
Sedation/chemical restraint
Ruminants do not necessarily require sedation prior to induction of
anesthesia as other species do, mostly due to their temperament.
While atraumatic physical restraint may be used in lieu of sedatives
in some circumstances, sedation may be indicated in certain ani-
mals (primarily fractious adult cattle) to facilitate safe handling
during the induction period. Sedation has been shown to decrease
stress and increase the quality of collected semen of goats during
electroejaculation [27]. This, along with the associated anesthetic-
sparing effects documented in several species, makes sedative
administration beneficial, even in tractable animals. Because rumi-
nants seldom experience emergence delirium, sedation during the
recovery period is rarely required, in contrast to horses where
this is common practice. In addition to the reduction in anesthetic
requirements, preanesthetic sedation in ruminants may tend to
lengthen the recovery period from general anesthesia [28] and
increase the likelihood of regurgitation [29].
Drugs used to tranquilize and/or sedate ruminants include
phenothiazines and butyrophenones, α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists
(xylazine, detomidine, romifidine, medetomidine, and dexmedeto-
midine), dissociative agents (ketamine and tiletamine), pentobarbital,
chloral hydrate, benzodiazepines (diazepam, midazolam, and
zolazepam), and opioids (butorphanol, nalbuphine, hydromorphone,
and morphine). Most of these drugs, when given alone or in combi-
nation at doses sufficient to induce recumbency, have been shown
to cause arterial hypoxemia. Therefore, oxygen supplementation is
highly recommended throughout the sedation/immobilization
period if this practice is tolerated by the animal.
Anticholinergics
Anticholinergics are usually not administered to domestic rumi-
nants as premedication agents. Their antisialagogue properties are
inconsistent in these species unless used in very high doses and fre-
quently repeated. Anticholinergics, while decreasing the volume of
secretions, may make them more viscous and more difficult to clear
from the trachea. In the authors’ experience, camelids are prone
to increased vagal discharge during intubation or with painful
stimuli during surgery. Consequently, administration of atropine
(0.02 mg/kg IV or 0.04 mg/kg IM) is recommended to prevent
bradyarrhythmia in these species [30]. Alternatively, glycopyrrolate
(0.005–0.01 mg/kg IM or 0.002–0.005 mg/kg IV) may be substi-
tuted for atropine [31,32].
Acepromazine and azaperone
Acepromazine is a phenothiazine devoid of analgesic properties.
It is not commonly used in ruminants but can be used in a manner
similar to its use in horses, although lower doses are required for
cattle (0.01–0.03 mg/kg IM) compared to horses. The usual doses of
acepromazine in sheep and goats are 0.03–0.05 mg/kg IV and
0.05–0.1 mg/kg IM, which may increase the risk of regurgitation
during anesthesia [29]. Tranquilizing effects may last for up to 8 h,
although usually do not exceed 4 h. The combination of aceproma-
zine (0.05 mg/kg IV) with methadone (0.5 mg/kg IV), morphine
(0.5 mg/kg IV), or tramadol (5 mg/kg IV) failed to improve the level
of sedation observed with acepromazine alone in sheep [33].
In llamas, acepromazine (0.05 mg/kg IM) with or without
butorphanol (0.1 mg/kg IM) did not produce sedative effects, but
prolonged antinociception produced by tiletamine–zolazepam [34].
Acepromazine should not be injected into the coccygeal vein. The
close proximity of the coccygeal artery makes the risk of inadvert-
ent intra-arterial injection possible, with the potential loss of the tail
[personal communication: John C. Thurmon, 1970]. Acepromazine
can also cause priapism and is not recommended for sedation in
mature bulls with reproductive value. Prolapse of the penis during
recovery increases the risk of injury to that organ as the animal
stands. Acepromazine (0.035 mg/kg IV) is preferred over xylazine
for endoscopic evaluation of the upper airways and laryngeal
function in cattle if the procedure cannot be carried out without
sedation [35]. Uterine blood flow and oxygen delivery to the fetus is
preserved by acepromazine in cows during late gestation, in con-
trast to xylazine, which may critically impair delivery of oxygen
to the fetus [36]. Finally, acepromazine is best avoided in newborn
or neonatal patients, as well as in systemically ill and/or hypov-
olemic patients due to its hypotensive effects and depression of
thermoregulation [37].
Azaperone is a butyrophenone that has been successfully used in
combination with opioids (e.g., butorphanol and etorphine) and an
α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist (e.g., xylazine and medetomidine) to
sedate and immobilize several captive and wild ruminant species
[28,38,39]. Its best use is in neuroleptoanalgesic combinations
administered via the IM route.

-- 1280 of 1450 --

Chapter 64: Ruminants 	1265
α2 - Adrenergic receptor agonists
Xylazine, detomidine, romifidine, medetomidine, and dexmedeto-
midine cause sedation by stimulating central α2
- adrenergic recep-
tors. The degree of sedation or chemical restraint produced by
α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists depends on the dose administered
and the animal’s temperament and species. These drugs act
synergistically with opioids in producing sedation and analgesia.
In cattle, the α2D
- adrenergic receptor subunit was considered
predominant, which would partly explain the increased sensitivity
of cattle to the sedative effects of these agents [40]. However, con-
trasting evidence found no difference in α2A/D
- adrenergic receptor
subunit expression in bovine brain compared to pigs and rats [41].
Instead, this study found that the slope of the inhibition binding
curve when G-protein coupling was diminished was considerably
lower in cattle for xylazine compared to detomidine, and this differ-
ence was not identified in swine or rats [41]. This species difference
at the G-protein level or further downstream in the receptor cascade
may explain the higher sensitivity of cattle to xylazine compared
to detomidine. In goats, activation of the α2D
- adrenergic receptor
subunit produces better analgesia compared to the α2B
- and
α2C
- adrenergic receptor subunits, whereas the α2C
- adrenergic recep-
tor subunit seems to be involved in thermoregulation [42].
Xylazine
Xylazine is often used to sedate or, in higher doses, restrain rumi-
nants by producing recumbency and light planes of general anes-
thesia. As previously mentioned, there appears to be significant
interspecies and intraspecies variation in the biological response to
this drug. Overall, xylazine is much more potent in ruminants than
it is in horses [43]. Among ruminants, goats appear to be more sen-
sitive to xylazine than sheep [29,32,44], and cattle appear to be
intermediate in sensitivity when compared to sheep and goats.
South American camelids appear to be less sensitive than cattle but
more sensitive than horses to the effects of xylazine; and among
camelids, alpacas appear to be less sensitive to xylazine than are lla-
mas. Hereford cattle are anecdotally reported to be more sensitive
to xylazine than are Holstein cattle [45], and Brahmans are perhaps
the most sensitive of all cattle breeds [46]. Extreme environmental
conditions can cause cattle to have a pronounced and prolonged
response to xylazine [47].
Low doses of xylazine (0.015–0.025 mg/kg IV or IM) typically
provide sedation without recumbency in domestic ruminants
[31,32,48]. Higher doses (0.1–0.2 mg/kg IV) provide sedation with-
out recumbency in camelids [49]. Higher doses of xylazine will
induce restraint with recumbency, heavy sedation, or possibly light
planes of general anesthesia in domestic ruminants and camelids.
Xylazine in goats (0.05 mg/kg IV or 0.1 mg/kg IM) [29,32,44], in
sheep (0.1–0.2 mg/kg IV or 0.2–0.3 mg/kg IM) [29,32,44], and in
cattle (0.1 mg/kg IV or 0.2 mg/kg IM) [46] will induce recumbency
for approximately 1 h. Xylazine at 0.3–0.4 mg/kg IV usually induces
20–30 min of recumbency in llamas [23,24,30,50]. Alpacas have
been reported to be less sensitive to xylazine compared to llamas
and may require an approximately 10–20% increase in dose to
achieve the same result [51]. In cattle undergoing claw treatments,
xylazine (0.05 mg/kg IV) used alone has been shown to decrease
hormonal and metabolic stress responses and potentiate the effects
of local anesthetics, but worsened ventilation and oxygenation in
laterally recumbent cows [52,53]. In 8-day old calves, administra-
tion of xylazine (0.3 mg/kg IV) produced a similar degree of seda-
tion compared to medetomidine (30 μg/kg IV), with a shorter
duration of action. Cardiopulmonary effects included decreases in
heart rate, cardiac index, and arterial oxygen tension (PaO 2
) when
compared to baseline, and increases in central venous pressure,
arterial carbon dioxide tension (PaCO2
), and pulmonary arterial
pressures. Interestingly, arterial blood pressures and vascular resist-
ance increased with medetomidine but were decreased by xyla-
zine [54]. The subcutaneous route is a viable and efficacious
alternative to intramuscular administration of xylazine to neonatal
Holstein calves, with similar onset and duration of action [55].
Variation in response to the analgesic effects of xylazine between
breeds of sheep has been reported [56,57]. Mechanical and thermal
thresholds for limb withdrawal are increased by administration of
0.05 mg/kg IV xylazine for a short amount of time (60 and 30 min,
respectively) [58–60]. Xylazine causes hyperglycemia and hypoin-
sulinemia in cattle and sheep [61–66]. Ruminal tympany has
been observed after administration of xylazine [67], likely induced
by ruminal hypomotility [68]. Hypoxemia and hypercapnia are
common side effects in domestic ruminants [29,45,69,70]. Dose-
dependent arterial hypoxemia and pulmonary edema can be seen
in sheep after administration of all α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists
[71,72]. In this species, activation of α2
- adrenergic receptors results
in pathophysiologic changes including increase airway pressure
[73,74], vasoconstriction and redistribution of pulmonary blood
flow, and activation of pulmonary intravascular macrophages,
which release a range of vasoactive mediators and cytokines [75].
In vitro contraction of tracheal smooth muscle [76] and in vivo
smooth muscle contraction [73,74,77] have also been demonstrated,
leading to bronchoconstriction. Histopathology of the lung reveals
capillary rupture with endothelial damage, alveolar hemorrhage
with damage to type I alveolar cells, and interstitial and alveolar
edema [77,78]. These pathophysiologic consequences can be
completely prevented in sheep by the administration of atipame-
zole, tolazoline, and idazoxan administered within 5–10 min of
xylazine, but not with administration of yohimbine [76,79–81]. Not
surprisingly, though, administration of tolazoline and idaxozan was
also reported to shorten the duration of xylazine-induced recum-
bency in this species [81]. Xylazine has an oxytocin-like effect on
the uterus of pregnant cattle [82] and sheep [83] and should be used
with caution during late gestation as it may cause premature partu-
rition and retention of fetal membranes [84]. In vitro exposure of
isolated bovine uterine stripes to lidocaine after xylazine decreased
the tonic effect induced by xylazine on bovine pregnant uteri [85].
Poorly trained or agitated male camelids tend to be less responsive,
and debilitated individuals are more responsive to sedative doses of
xylazine. Although complete data are not available on the cardio-
vascular and respiratory effects of xylazine in camelids, bradycardia
[69] typically occurs as it does in other species [45,86–88].
Xylazine (0.2 and 0.4 mg/kg IM) has been shown to increase
the duration of antinociception in llamas anesthetized with
tiletamine–zolazepam [89].
Detomidine
Detomidine, like other α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists other than
xylazine, is used less frequently in domestic ruminants. As in all
species, detomidine is more potent than xylazine, but this differ-
ence in potency is less pronounced in ruminants compared to other
species. Compared to xylazine, cattle appear to be less sensitive
(more tolerant) to the sedating effects of detomidine and doses
closer to those used in horses may be appropriate. Interestingly,
detomidine may not have the same effect on the gravid uterus as
xylazine does in cattle [90]. Detomidine can be given at 2.5–10 μg/kg
IV in cattle [32,48,90,91] and at 10–20 μg/kg in sheep [29] to

-- 1281 of 1450 --

1266 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
provide standing sedation for approximately 30–60 min. A high
dose of detomidine (30 μg/kg IV) will produce recumbency in
sheep. This dose is equivalent to xylazine at 0.15 mg/kg IV, medeto-
midine at 10 μg/kg IV, or romifidine at 50 μg/kg IV [71]. Sublingual
detomidine (80 μg/kg) has been shown to produce adequate seda-
tion in dairy calves prior to infiltration of lidocaine for disbud-
ding [92]. In llamas, detomidine at doses as high as 40 μg/kg IV
provides mild sedation but not chemical restraint [49]. In alpacas,
the pharmacokinetic and sedative effects of detomidine gel admin-
istered intravaginally (200 μg/kg) were compared to intravenous
administration of the injectable solution (70 μg/kg) [93]. Although
bioavailability of intravaginal detomidine was only 20%, the degree
of sedation (characterized as mild) and the duration of sedation
were similar with both routes of administration [93]. The hypergly-
cemic effect of detomidine is greater than that produced by xylazine
and medetomidine in sheep [94].
Romifidine
Romifidine has been used at 40, 80, and 120 μg/kg IV in Old World
camels. Profound sedation and bradycardia of 4 h duration occurred
with the highest dose [95]. Initial doses of 50–60 μg/kg IV are
appropriate for South American camelids.
Medetomidine and dexmedetomidine
As the stereoisomer of medetomidine, dexmedetomidine can be
substituted for medetomidine at 50% of the medetomidine dose.
Medetomidine given at 10 μg/kg IV induces recumbency in cattle
[91]. Doses of 5 μg/kg IV in cattle [91] or 10 μg/kg IM in llamas [96]
produce brief periods of standing sedation with minimal analgesia.
When medetomidine is given at 30 μg/kg IV, it causes bradycardia,
decreased PaO2
, recumbency of 4 h duration, and sedation of 7 h
duration in calves [54]. In non-pregnant ewes, dexmedetomidine (5
μg/kg IV) and medetomidine (10 μg/kg IV) were equipotent when
effects on isoflurane requirements and cardiopulmonary parame-
ters were evaluated [72]. The addition of vatinoxan, a peripheral
α2 - adrenergic receptor antagonist, to intramuscular medetomidine
and ketamine for sedation in sheep ameliorated the negative cardio-
pulmonary effects produced by medetomidine and ketamine alone.
The level of sedation produced and its subsequent reversal with ati-
pamezole were not affected by concurrent administration of vati-
noxan [97]. When given at 20–30 μg/kg IM to llamas, medetomidine
provides profound sedation and recumbency lasting up to
120 min [96]. In alpacas anesthetized with IM tiletamine–zolazepam,
the addition of dexmedetomidine dose-dependently increased the
duration of lack of motor response to claw clamping to a maximum
of 40 min with a 20 μg/kg dose [98]. Transient hypoxemia was
observed but judged to be clinically unimportant by the authors,
but oxygen supplementation was recommended. In calves, dexme-
detomidine (5 μg/kg IV) had a rapid onset of action (2.7 min) and
produced a degree of sedation similar to xylazine (0.2 mg/kg IV)
with a similar recovery time (80 min) [99]. Higher doses of all α2
-
adrenergic receptor agonists can be expected to induce longer peri-
ods of recumbency in all species.
α2 - Adrenergic receptor antagonists
Sedation following administration of α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists
can be reversed by α2
-adrenergic receptor antagonists. These include
atipamezole and yohimbine, which are specific to the α2 - adrenergic
receptor, and tolazoline that has both α2
- and α1
-adrenergic receptor
antagonist activity. The dose of antagonist is dependent on the
amount of agonist given and the interval between agonist and antago-
nist administration. The longer the interval between administration
of the agonist and antagonist, the lower the dose of antagonist that
is needed, as more metabolism of the agonist should have occurred.
Giving the full dose of antagonist after significant metabolism of
the agonist has occurred increases the likelihood that excitement
will result, particularly if the antagonist is given IV. One could also
consider giving the antagonist IM to make reversal more gradual.
Yohimbine
When yohimbine is given at 0.12 mg/kg IV, its efficacy varies in cat-
tle [100,101]. Low doses of yohimbine are ineffective in sheep [81],
but higher doses (1 mg/kg IV) will generally reverse xylazine
sedation [102]. Yohimbine (0.12 mg/kg IV) has been used in llamas
in combination with 4-aminopyridine (0.3 mg/kg IV) to produce
complete recovery from xylazine sedation [69]. Its use singly in
camelids is also effective, and it can be administered at 0.12 mg/kg
IV [49]. If sufficient arousal does not occur, additional yohimbine
can be titrated to achieve the desired effect.
Tolazoline
Tolazoline is usually given at 0.5–2 mg/kg IV [100], but at the upper
end of this dose range, it can cause hyperesthesia in unsedated cat-
tle [103,104]. Following a 2 mg/kg IV dose, opisthotonus can occur
in some animals; however, after excitement subsides, recovery is
usually uneventful. A safety study on increasing doses of tolazoline
(0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 4, 8, and 10 mg/kg IV) was conducted in unsedated
Holstein calves, with the highest dose producing “bright red con-
junctival mucous membranes, coughing, nasal discharge, salivation,
increased breathing effort, central nervous system depression, signs
of abdominal pain, straining, head pressing, restlessness, increased
frequency of defecation and diarrhea,” but no fatalities were
reported [105]. Tolazoline can induce unwanted cardiovascular
effects in calves such as transient bradycardia, sinus arrest, and
hypotension [106]. Lower doses of tolazoline (0.5–1.5 mg/kg IV)
have been recommended in ruminants and camelids, whereas
others have suggested that the IV route should be avoided except in
emergency situations [84]. Regardless, if tolazoline is to be given
intravenously, it should be administered slowly to effect.
Caution is advised when the recommended equine dose of
tolazoline is administered to camelids, as severe complications
including transitory apnea, cardiac arrest, seizure-like activity,
depression, and vague signs of abdominal pain have been observed,
followed by death within 24 h. In a case report, serious complica-
tions ensued after administering a total dose of 6.4 mg/kg of
tolazoline to a llama resulting in tachycardia, cardiac arrhythmias,
hypotension, and gastrointestinal tract hypermotility [107].
One method of administering tolazoline to healthy camelids is to
slowly give 50% of the calculated 1–2 mg/kg IV dose initially, and
the remainder if reversal is inadequate [49]. In most instances, the
initial dose (0.5–1 mg/kg IV) of tolazoline is adequate to provide
sufficient arousal.
Idazoxan
Idazoxan can be given at doses of 0.05 mg/kg IV to sheep [81] and
calves to reverse xylazine sedation [108].
Atipamezole
Atipamezole at doses ranging from 20 to 60 μg/kg IV has been used
to reverse medetomidine sedation in calves [32]. In sheep, atipamezole

-- 1282 of 1450 --

Chapter 64: Ruminants 	1267
has been used at a total dose of 125 μg/kg, administered either
entirely IV or 50% of the dose given IV and 50% given IM, to reverse
sedation produced by 20–25 μg/kg of medetomidine [109,110]. In
sheep administered intrathecal xylazine and detomidine, atipame-
zole reversed side effects but not analgesia based on the assessment
of pain thresholds in response to an electrical stimulus [111].
Reduced feed consumption and ruminal contractions produced by
medetomidine, romifidine, and detomidine in dwarf goats are com-
pletely antagonized by atipamezole [112]. Atipamezole given at
30 μg/kg IV will reverse xylazine sedation in camelids.
Vatinoxan
Vatinoxan (formerly known as “MK-467” and “L-659,066”) is a
peripheral α2
- adrenergic receptor antagonist which is devoid of
central effects due to its inability to cross the blood–brain barrier.
Currently, ruminant-specific literature about vatinoxan is limited to
the ovine species. The restriction of vatinoxan binding to peripheral
α2
- adrenergic receptors means that it is able to ameliorate the
negative cardiovascular effects accompanying administration of
α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists without impacting central sedative
effects. Vatinoxan’s peripheral selectivity has been confirmed in
sheep, where cerebrospinal fluid and brain concentrations of the
drug were minimal compared to those in plasma [113]. In sheep,
administration of vatinoxan (0.75 mg/kg) prior to xylazine
(0.5 mg/kg) improved PaO 2 and SpO 2 by preventing α2
-adrenergic
receptor agonist-induced effects on the ovine lung [114]. Prevention
of dexmedetomidine-induced bronchoconstriction, pulmonary
edema, and arterial hypoxemia have been documented with vati-
noxan (0.15 mg/kg IV) pretreatment in sheep anesthetized with
sevoflurane [115]. Further investigation of the histopathologic
changes seen with vatinoxan is needed as microscopic interstitial
alveolar edema and hemorrhage were observed [114].
Doxapram
Doxapram, an analeptic agent, can be used to enhance the response
to yohimbine or tolazoline. When administered at 1 mg/kg IV,
doxapram was somewhat effective in cattle [116], but when admin-
istered at 2 mg/kg IV, it was ineffective in llamas [69]. For more
information about doxapram, the reader is referred to Chapter 25.
Benzodiazepines
Diazepam, 0.25–0.5 mg/kg IV, injected slowly will provide 30 min
of sedation without analgesia in sheep and goats [29,44]. This drug,
at a dose of 0.2–0.5 mg/kg IV, has been shown to preserve normal
rumen motility compared to xylazine, which reduced motility at
0.05 mg/kg, and caused complete atony at 0.125 mg/kg IV [117].
The pharmacokinetic profile of midazolam (0.5 mg/kg IM or IV)
has been described in sheep [118] and alpacas [119]. Midazolam,
0.4–0.6 mg/kg IM [118,120,121] or 0.3–0.6 mg/kg IV [122,123],
will provide sedation and recumbency in sheep and goats for
10–20 min with minor cardiorespiratory effects that are reversible
with flumazenil (0.02 mg/kg IV). In alpacas, onset of sedation fol-
lowing 0.5 mg/kg midazolam is 0.4 min after IV administration and
15 min after IM administration [119]. Midazolam given at 1 mg/kg
IM [120] or 0.6 mg/kg IV [122] can induce recumbency and
profound sedation in goats. Increasing the dose to 1.2 mg/kg IV
lengthens recumbency, lasting up to 30 min [121]. Midazolam
given at 0.5 mg/kg IM to alpacas provides sedation without recum-
bency of approximately 100 min duration, whereas when given IV
at the same dose, it provided sedation with recumbency for the
same amount of time [124].
Opioids
Butorphanol acts as a κ-opioid receptor agonist and μ-opioid recep-
tor antagonist and provides sedation and mild analgesia in camelids
and domestic ruminants. It is often given at doses of 0.05–0.5 mg/kg
IM in sheep and goats [29,125,126] and 0.1–0.2 mg/kg IM in came-
lids [127], and produces analgesia for up to 2 h [128]. Ataxia and
dysphoria have been reported following butorphanol administra-
tion (0.1–0.2 mg/kg IV) in sheep [126]. In the authors’ experience,
camelids remain standing following butorphanol administration
but may experience mild dysphoria. In isoflurane-anesthetized
alpacas, butorphanol (0.1 mg/kg IV) induces minimal cardiovas-
cular changes, mainly via decreased systemic vascular resist-
ance [129]. The addition of morphine (0.5 mg/kg IV), methadone
(0.5 mg/kg IV), or tramadol (5 mg/kg IV) to xylazine (0.1 mg/kg
IV) has been shown to induce similar cardiopulmonary changes to
those of xylazine alone, but the quality of sedation was improved for
up to 30 min after administration [130]. Nalbuphine (0.5 mg/kg IV)
in combination with ketamine (5 mg/kg IV) in goats premedicated
with xylazine (0.07 mg/kg IV) may produce adequate analgesia for
left flank laparotomy [131].
Alfaxalone
The use of an earlier preparation of alfaxalone (Saffan®, a combina-
tion of alfaxalone and alfadolone solubilized in saline and
Cremophor EL®) was investigated in ruminants in the late 1970s
and early 1980s before the product was discontinued [132]. In 2015,
alfaxalone was released in the United States in a different formula-
tion (2-hydroxypropyl- β-cyclodextrin), and over the last decade, it
has been investigated in sheep, goats, and alpacas. Although the
current cyclodextrin-based formulation of alfaxalone is labeled for
intravenous use in dogs and cats, it has been used successfully as a
sedative when administered intramuscularly in several species
[133–135]. The sedative properties of intramuscular alfaxalone in
ruminants and camelids are yet to be investigated. A new formula-
tion (40 mg/mL) of alfaxalone is been currently investigated in wild
ruminants for remote immobilization [136] and may have future
applications in domestic ruminants.
Other sedatives
Pentobarbital (2 mg/kg IV) has been used in cattle for standing
sedation and tranquilization [137]. Caution must be exercised
to avoid inducing excitement. Pentobarbital provides moderate
sedation for 30 min and mild sedation for an additional 60 min.
Chloral hydrate or chloral hydrate-magnesium sulfate solutions can
also be used to sedate ruminants [46]. Extravasation of these drugs
will cause tissue necrosis, so they should be administered through a
catheter confirmed to be placed within the vein.
Common combinations for chemical restraint
Combinations of xylazine and butorphanol have been used in
domestic ruminants and camelids to produce neuroleptanalgesia.
In domestic ruminants, doses are 0.01–0.02 mg/kg IV of each
drug administered separately [personal communication: John C.
Thurmon, 1993], and in camelids, 0.2 mg/kg IV of xylazine is
administered with 0.02–0.04 mg/kg IV of butorphanol [personal
communication: Michael J. Huber, 2013]. The duration of action is
approximately 1 h. Combinations of midazolam (0.1 mg/kg IV) and
butorphanol (0.1 mg/kg IV) given simultaneously provide restraint
of short duration [138].
Combinations of butorphanol, ketamine, and xylazine have also
been used to restrain camelids [138]. The combination is prepared

-- 1283 of 1450 --

1268 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
by combining 10 mg (1 mL) of butorphanol, 1000 mg (10 mL) of
ketamine, and 100 mg (1 mL) of xylazine. It is administered at
1 mL/18 kg IM to alpacas and at 1 mL/23 kg IM to llamas [138].
Recumbency occurs within 5 min and lasts approximately 25 min.
Other combinations of xylazine, ketamine, and butorphanol
(“Ketamine Stun”) have also been used in ruminants [48] and
camelids [138]. Ruminant doses for the IV route of the Ketamine
Stun are lower compared to IM, and onset of action for the IV route
is shorter compared to the IM route. Typically, xylazine at
0.025–0.05 mg/kg, ketamine at 0.3–0.5 mg/kg, and butorphanol at
0.05–0.1 mg/kg are administered IV [48]. Animals will become
recumbent for 15–25 min and administration of an additional par-
tial dose of ketamine (50% of the original dose) will lengthen the
duration of analgesia. If venous access is not feasible, the upper end
of the doses cited above can also be administered IM or subcutane-
ously to achieve a longer but less intense form of chemical restraint.
Alternatively, a combination of xylazine (0.05 mg/kg), butorphanol
(0.025 mg/kg), and ketamine (0.1 mg/kg) can also be given IM to
render ruminant patients more cooperative [48]. Onset occurs
within 10 min, and duration of action is approximately 45 min with
an additional 30 min needed to resume standing. In calves, 0.1 mg/kg
of ketamine and 0.05 mg/kg of xylazine administered IV have been
shown to be efficacious and safe when administered to aid with
surgical castration [139]. Given IV, the combination of xylazine
at 0.22–0.33 mg/kg, ketamine at 0.22–0.33 mg/kg, and butorphanol
at 0.08–0.11 mg/kg induces more predictable restraint in camelids
[138]. Animals will become recumbent and analgesia lasts for
15–20 min. Administration of an additional partial dose of ketamine
will lengthen the duration of analgesia. When given IM to camelids,
the dose range is increased to xylazine at 0.22–0.55 mg/kg, ketamine
at 0.22–0.55 mg/kg, and butorphanol at 0.08–0.11 mg/kg [138].
Onset occurs within 10 min and duration of action is extended to
approximately 45 min.
Induction
General anesthesia can be induced by either injectable or inhalation
techniques. Widely available drugs include ketamine, guaifenesin,
tiletamine–zolazepam, propofol, alfaxalone, pentobarbital, isoflurane,
and sevoflurane. If available, the thiobarbiturates and halothane
could also be used. In small ruminants weighing less than 50–100 kg,
anesthesia can be induced using isoflurane or sevoflurane delivered
by face mask, or with an injectable technique. If desired, calves and
sheep can be intubated nasally while awake or following sedation
using a technique similar to that used in foals and then connected
to the anesthesia circuit for induction [140]. In larger ruminants,
anesthesia is commonly induced using an IV technique but, if the
animal’s temperament dictates it, the IM route is also possible. In
small or debilitated camelids, or in camelids restrained with xylazine–
ketamine, tiletamine–zolazepam, or other injectable combinations,
anesthesia can be induced with isoflurane or sevoflurane by face
mask. Mask induction in healthy untranquilized adult camelids is
usually not attempted because application of the mask may provoke
spitting. The addition of nitrous oxide (50% of total flow) to the
inspired gas mixture will speed induction; however, administration
of nitrous oxide to ruminants and camelids beyond induction may
cause distension of gas-containing organs, resulting in tympany.
Barbiturates/thiobarbiturates
When available, the thiobarbiturates thiopental and thiamylal
were used extensively in veterinary anesthesia, both alone and in
combination with guaifenesin. Used alone, they quickly induce
anesthesia. Muscle relaxation is relatively poor but still sufficient to
accomplish intubation. The acid–base status and physical status of
patients affect the actions of these drugs. Acidemia increases the
non-ionized fraction (i.e., the active portion) of the drug, increas-
ing its activity and thus decreasing the dose required [141]. Because
patients in shock are often acidemic, altered pharmacokinetics
and hemodynamics may cause a relative overdose. In addition,
the heart, brain, and other vital organs receive a larger portion of
cardiac output when patients are in shock [142].
Recovery from induction doses of thiobarbiturates is based on
redistribution of the drug from the brain to other tissues in the
body. Metabolism of the agent continues for some time following
recovery until final elimination occurs. Maintenance of anesthesia
with thiobarbiturates is not recommended because saturation of
tissue depots causes recovery to become dependent on metabolism
resulting in prolongation. Concurrent use of non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may delay recovery as thiobarbiturate
is displaced from protein [143]. Drug interactions appear to be
minimal in most instances.
Thiopental can be given at 6–10 mg/kg IV to unsedated animals
and will provide approximately 10–15 min of anesthesia. Camelids
often require additional thiopental for tracheal intubation [30].
Thiamylal is administered in a similar fashion although in slightly
lower doses, usually 25–30% less.
Pentobarbital has been used to anesthetize domestic ruminants
but is no longer commonly used. If a situation arises in which it is
used, the dose is 20–25 mg/kg IV, half given rapidly and the remain-
der to effect. When given at an anesthetic dose, pentobarbital causes
profound respiratory depression and is not an effective analgesic.
Sheep appear to metabolize pentobarbital more quickly than other
species [29]. Recovery in domestic ruminants is usually prolonged,
and other anesthetic techniques are more appropriate.
Ketamine
Ketamine is a very versatile drug that has been used in many
species. It is an N- methyl-D- aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist
and acts by disrupting the signal pathway between the thalamus
and the cortex, causing a dissociated state. It causes cardiovascular
stimulation due to sympathetic discharge and can cause dysphoria,
hallucinations, and excitement, in addition to tonic-clonic muscle
activity when used alone in horses. Those same traits characterize
its use in ruminants, although perhaps not to the same extent.
Ketamine in single and repeated IV doses has been shown to
increase plasma cortisol in calves premedicated with xylazine [144].
Although ketamine, when used as a sole agent, does not eliminate
the swallowing reflex, tracheal intubation can be accomplished
in most ruminants. However, co-administration of a sedative
(e.g., benzodiazepines, α2 -adrenergic receptor agonists, and/or
guaifenesin) to improve muscle relaxation is recommended, but
may abolish the swallowing reflex.
Ketamine will induce immobilization and incomplete analgesia
when given alone, but it is usually combined with a sedative or
tranquilizer. Most commonly, xylazine or a benzodiazepine is
recommended. Xylazine at 0.1–0.2 mg/kg IM can be given first,
followed by ketamine at 10–15 mg/kg IM in small domestic
ruminants [29,44,145]. In goats, it is preferable to use the lower dose
of xylazine followed by ketamine [29,44]. Anesthesia usually lasts
about 45 min and can be prolonged by injection of 3–5 mg/kg IM
or 1–2 mg/kg IV of ketamine. The longer duration of action of
xylazine obviates the need for its readministration in most cases.

-- 1284 of 1450 --

Chapter 64: Ruminants 	1269
Alternatively, xylazine at 0.03–0.05 mg/kg IV followed by ketamine
at 3–5 mg/kg IV, or xylazine at 0.1 mg/kg IM in goats or 0.2 mg/kg
IM in sheep, followed by ketamine at 3–5 mg/kg IV, can provide
anesthesia lasting 15–20 min [29]. Adult cattle can by anesthetized
with xylazine at 0.1–0.2 mg/kg IV followed by ketamine at 2 mg/kg
IV [146]. The lower dose of xylazine is used when cattle weigh more
than 600 kg [146]. Anesthesia lasts approximately 30 min but can be
prolonged for 15 min with additional ketamine at 0.75–1.25 mg/kg
IV [146]. When evaluated in sheep, xylazine at 0.1 mg/kg IV and
ketamine at 7.5 mg/kg IV provided anesthesia lasting 25 min and
caused a decrease in cardiac output, mean arterial pressure,
and peripheral vascular resistance [147]. Medetomidine has been
combined with ketamine to induce anesthesia in calves. Because
medetomidine (20 μg/kg IV) is much more potent than xylazine,
lower doses of ketamine (0.5 mg/kg IV) can be used [148]. However,
a local anesthetic at the surgical site may be required when ketamine
is used at this dose [148]. Anesthesia can be reversed completely
with α2 - adrenergic receptor antagonists without excitement occur-
ring during recovery. Using lidocaine (2 mg/kg IV) in conjunction
with ketamine (2.5 mg/kg IV) in calves premedicated with xylazine
and butorphanol increases sedation but fails to decrease ketamine
requirements for endotracheal intubation [149].
Diazepam (0.1 mg/kg IV) or midazolam (0.1 mg/kg IV)
immediately followed by ketamine (4.5 mg/kg IV) can be used
in domestic ruminants. Muscle relaxation is usually adequate for
tracheal intubation, although the swallowing reflex may not be
completely obtunded. Anesthesia usually lasts 10–15 min following
benzodiazepine–ketamine administration, with recumbency of up
to 30 min. Higher doses of diazepam (0.25–0.5 mg/kg IV) with
ketamine (4–7.5 mg/kg IV) have also been used in sheep and
provide the same duration of anesthesia [29,44,147]. Investigations
into the cardiopulmonary effects of diazepam (0.375 mg/kg IV) and
ketamine (7.5 mg/kg IV) in sheep have shown a decrease in cardiac
output and an increase in peripheral vascular resistance without
affecting arterial pressure [147]. Midazolam can be substituted for
diazepam in goats and given at 0.4 mg/kg IM followed by ketamine
at 4 mg/kg IV after recumbency occurs (approximately 15 min).
Anesthesia lasts approximately 15 min [120].
Xylazine (0.25–0.35 mg/kg IM) and ketamine (6–10 mg/kg IM)
administered 15 min later usually provides 30–60 min of recum-
bency in camelids [23,30]. One disadvantage of this technique is
that larger adult llamas require a relatively large injection volume.
Simultaneous administration of xylazine (0.44 mg/kg IM) and keta-
mine (4 mg/kg IM) usually provides restraint for 15–20 min [50,150].
Higher doses of xylazine (0.8 mg/kg IM) and ketamine (8 mg/kg IM)
given simultaneously usually induce sedation/anesthesia within
5 min that lasts 30 min [150]. Depth of anesthesia varies with the
amount given and the camelid’s temperament but is usually suffi-
cient for minor procedures such as suturing lacerations, draining
abscesses, or applying casts. When any of these combinations pro-
vides insufficient anesthetic depth, supplemental local anesthesia
may be required in order to complete the procedure. Tracheal intu-
bation may not be possible. However, these combinations heavily
sedate and immobilize the animals, facilitating venipuncture and
administration of additional anesthetic agent or application of a
face mask to increase the depth of anesthesia when necessary. If
desired, xylazine (0.25 mg/kg IV) and ketamine (3–5 mg/kg IV) may
be administered 5 min apart to obtain a more uniform response
and sufficient depth of anesthesia for tracheal intubation in
camelids [23]. Diazepam (0.1–0.2 mg/kg IV) or midazolam
(0.1–0.2 mg/kg IV) and ketamine (4.5 mg/kg IV), as used for
domestic ruminants, produces recumbency that lasts approximately
20 min and should provide enough muscle relaxation for tracheal
intubation in camelids.
Guaifenesin
Guaifenesin is a centrally acting skeletal muscle relaxant that exerts
its effect at the internuncial neurons in the spinal cord and at poly-
synaptic nerve endings [151]. It can be used alone to induce recum-
bency in domestic ruminants and camelids but is not recommended
because it imparts little, if any, analgesia [152]. The addition of
ketamine, or historically a thiobarbiturate, to a guaifenesin solution
improves induction quality and decreases the volume required
for induction. Muscle relaxation is improved compared with induc-
tion with ketamine or thiobarbiturates given alone. Typically,
5% guaifenesin solutions are used as hemolysis can occur with
10% guaifenesin solutions in ruminants [153]. Commonly, these
solutions are given rapidly to effect, either by gravity and a large
gauge catheter or by pressurizing the bag or bottle, in either tran-
quilized or untranquilized patients. The volume of the calculated
dose when using 5% guaifenesin solution is 2 mL/kg. The amount
of ketamine added to guaifenesin varies but is commonly 1 g per
50 g of guaifenesin. The amount of thiobarbiturate added to
guaifenesin varies but is commonly 2 g per 50 g of guaifenesin.
For convenience, guaifenesin-based mixtures may be injected with
large (60–140 mL) syringes rather than administered by infusion
to camelids and small ruminants to allow greater control over
administration. If desired, xylazine can also be added to ketamine–
guaifenesin solutions for induction and maintenance of anesthesia
in cattle [146,154,155] and sheep [156]. Final concentrations
are guaifenesin 50 mg/mL, ketamine 1–2 mg/mL, and xylazine
0.1 mg/mL. This solution is infused at 0.5 to 1 mL/kg IV for induc-
tion. For more information about guaifenesin, the reader is referred
to Chapter 25.
Tiletamine–zolazepam
Tiletamine–zolazepam is a combination of equal parts of tiletamine
and zolazepam available for use as an anesthetic agent in cats and
dogs. When used alone, tiletamine induces poor muscle relaxation
and causes excitement during recovery. The addition of zolazepam
to tiletamine modifies these effects. As with ketamine, the swallow-
ing reflex remains but may be obtunded. Like ketamine, this combi-
nation provides slight cardiovascular stimulation, causing the heart
rate to increase [157]. Elimination of tiletamine and zolazepam is
not uniform, with variation occurring in each drug’s clearance
between species. Differential clearance of the two drugs can affect
recovery quality [157].
In many respects, tiletamine–zolazepam can be considered to be
similar to ketamine premixed with diazepam or midazolam. When
used alone in horses, it provides unsatisfactory anesthesia [158].
Muscle relaxation is poor and recovery is characterized by excite-
ment. However, when combined with a sedative such as xylazine, it
can be used successfully in horses. Because of differences in tem-
perament between horses and domestic ruminants and camelids,
tiletamine–zolazepam can be used successfully with or without
xylazine in these species. However, the addition of xylazine to
tiletamine–zolazepam will lengthen the effect.
Tiletamine–zolazepam given at 4 mg/kg IV in untranquilized
calves caused minimal cardiovascular effects and provided anes-
thesia that lasted 45–60 min [159]. Xylazine (0.1 mg/kg IM)
followed immediately by tiletamine–zolazepam at 4 mg/kg IM pro-
duced onset of anesthesia within 3 min, and anesthesia that lasted

-- 1285 of 1450 --

1270 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
approximately 1 h [160]. Calves were able to stand approximately
130 min after injection. Increasing xylazine to 0.2 mg/kg IM
increased the duration of anesthesia and recumbency and the inci-
dence of apnea, necessitating intubation and ventilatory support
[160]. Xylazine can also be administered at 0.05 mg/kg IV followed
by tiletamine–zolazepam at 1 mg/kg IV [146].
Tiletamine–zolazepam given at 12 mg/kg IV in sheep provides
approximately 2.5 h of surgical anesthesia, with a total recumbency
time of 3.2 h [161]. More recent investigations in sheep have shown
that tiletamine–zolazepam, given at 12–24 mg/kg IV, causes cardio-
pulmonary depression with anesthesia of approximately 40 min [162].
The addition of xylazine (0.11 mg/kg IV) to tiletamine–zolazepam
(13.2 mg/kg IV), improved muscle relaxation and prolonged the
duration of anesthesia and analgesia by 2.5 times [163]. Rather than
using these relatively large doses, it is more appropriate to decrease
the initial dose of tiletamine–zolazepam to 2–4 mg/kg IV and
administer additional drug as required to prolong anesthesia.
Butorphanol at 0.5 mg/kg IV combined with tiletamine–zolazepam
at 12 mg/kg IV given either simultaneously or 10 min apart induces
25–50 min of anesthesia in sheep, with mild cardiopulmonary
depression [164]. Tiletamine–zolazepam at 4 mg/kg IM can immo-
bilize llamas for up to 2 h [165]. The length of recumbency is unaf-
fected by administration of flumazenil, indicating that the duration
of action is more likely influenced by tiletamine rather than zolaz-
epam [165]. Cardiovascular function is preserved although hyper-
capnia and hypoxemia can occur in some animals. Airway reflexes
are maintained. Local anesthesia may be required for some surgical
procedures [165]. Tiletamine–zolazepam at 2 mg/kg IM can immo-
bilize llamas for approximately 1 h [34] and can be combined with
acepromazine, butorphanol, or xylazine which will lengthen the
duration of immobilization [34,89]. Furthermore, the combination
of both xylazine (0.15 mg/kg IM) and morphine (0.5 mg/kg IM)
administered with tiletamine–zolazepam to llamas has been
shown to produce antinociception for longer than when it is com-
bined with either xylazine or morphine alone [166]. In camelids,
tiletamine–zolazepam (2 mg/kg IV) can provide 15–20 min of
anesthesia and 25–35 min of recumbency. Depth of anesthesia is
adequate for nasal intubation, but muscle relaxation is poor and
oral intubation is difficult.
Propofol
Propofol is a non-barbiturate, non-steroidal hypnotic agent
used to provide brief periods (5–10 min) of anesthesia. The dose is
4–6 mg/kg IV for induction in unsedated ruminants [29,167–169].
Induction is smooth, as is recovery. If injected too rapidly, apnea
may occur but slow administration will reduce the incidence of this
complication. Propofol can also be used at 4 mg/kg IV following
acepromazine at 0.05 mg/kg IM and papaveretum at 0.4 mg/kg
IM [170]. Anesthesia can be induced in unsedated camelids with
2 mg/kg IV [171]. However, tracheal intubation is often difficult or
impossible at this dose and additional propofol is usually needed.
Anesthesia can be maintained with propofol at 0.2–0.3 mg/kg/min
IV and ketamine at 0.1–0.2 mg/kg/min [170]. Recovery to standing
occurs within 15 min [170].
Alfaxalone
Alfaxalone given at 2 mg/kg IV to unsedated sheep provided brief
periods of anesthesia with less effect on cardiopulmonary variables
than thiopental and propofol [172]. Anesthesia has also been
induced in unsedated sheep with medetomidine at 2 μg/kg IV
administered simultaneously with alfaxalone at 2 mg/kg IV [173].
Muscle relaxation was sufficient to allow intubation and duration
of recumbency was brief, lasting less than 10 min [173]. Alfaxalone
has been evaluated as a sole anesthetic agent in unsedated alpacas
[174]. It is given at 2 mg/kg IV and provides sufficient depth of anes-
thesia to allow intubation. Duration was brief, lasting 10–15 min.
Recovery to standing was complete within 35 min and was charac-
terized as poor [174]. Use of alfaxalone would be improved in
camelids by sedating the patient before induction or by using it as
an induction agent to be followed by inhalant anesthesia.
Intubation
Tracheal intubation is recommended in all ruminants and camelids
because it provides a secure airway and prevents aspiration of sali-
vary secretions and ruminal contents if active or passive regurgita-
tion occurs. In lightly anesthetized ruminants, active regurgitation
can occur during intubation [30,146], whereas passive regurgita-
tion can occur at any time during anesthesia due to relaxation of the
cardia. Because rumen contents contain more solid material than
do the gastric contents of monogastric animals, there is greater
potential for ingesta to obstruct the larynx while the more fluid
portion will drain from the mouth. Thus, patients that are not intu-
bated are at high risk throughout the anesthetic period, and intubated
animals that have regurgitated during anesthesia are at risk follow-
ing extubation. Treatment involves removal of ingesta from the
buccal cavity or buccal lavage prior to extubation. If active regurgi-
tation occurs during intubation, anesthetic depth should be rapidly
increased and the airway quickly protected to prevent aspiration.
Several techniques can be used for intubation. Adult cattle can be
intubated blindly or with digital palpation. Following insertion of a
mouth speculum or the use of gauze loops, the animal’s head and
neck are hyperextended to make the orotracheal axis approach 180°.
An endotracheal tube of appropriate size is inserted and manipu-
lated into the larynx (Table 64.2).
When that technique is unsuccessful, the anesthetist’s hand
should be inserted into the mouth with the tube. After the epiglottis
has been located and depressed, a finger can be placed between
the arytenoid cartilages and the tube inserted into the trachea. If
desired, an equine nasogastric tube can be inserted into the larynx
and serve as a guide for the endotracheal tube. Depending on the
size of the animal and the individual’s arm, airway obstruction may
occur; hence, it is important that intubation is performed promptly.
If the technique requires more than one min, the hand and arm
should be withdrawn from the oral cavity to allow the animal to
ventilate before continuing to attempt intubation.
When blind orotracheal intubation is unsuccessful in calves, a
laryngoscope with a 250–350 mm blade is required for laryngoscopy.
Table 64.2 Sizes of endotracheal tubes needed for ruminants and camelids of various
body weights.
Body weight (kg) 	Endotracheal tube size (internal diameter, mm)
Orotracheal 	Nasotracheal
< 30 	4–7 	4–6
30–60 	8–10 	6–8
60–100 	10–12 	8–10
100–200 	12–14 	10–12
200–300 	14–16
300–400 	16–22
400–600 	22–26
> 600 	26

-- 1286 of 1450 --

Chapter 64: Ruminants 	1271
Herbivores’ mouths do not open widely and can be held open by an
assistant using gauze loops. Visibility of the pharynx and larynx will
be improved by using an equine mouth speculum. Some effort is
needed to keep the upper bar of the speculum against the dental
pad, but use of the speculum will allow an assistant to open the
mouth more widely than can be otherwise accomplished and allow
much better visibility of the larynx. Visibility of the larynx is also
improved by hyperextending the animal’s head and neck to make
the orotracheal axis approach 180°. Using suction or gauze on a
sponge forceps to swab the pharynx will improve visibility if secre-
tions are an impediment. Attempting intubation when the anesthetic
plane is insufficient may provoke active regurgitation. With ade-
quate depth of anesthesia, this reflex is eliminated. The epiglottis is
depressed to visualize the larynx. The endotracheal tube should be
placed in the oropharynx and inserted into the larynx during inspi-
ration. If desired, a stylet (e.g., a 1 m × 0.5 cm stylet) [175], a large
male dog urinary catheter, or an endotracheal tube exchanger
(Cook® Airway Exchange Catheters, Cook Medical, Bloomington,
IN, USA) can be inserted through the endotracheal tube and
extended beyond the endotracheal tube tip to facilitate intubation.
The length of the stylet should be about 1.5–2 times that of the
endotracheal tube. The stylet is placed through the larynx, and
the endotracheal tube is then passed into the trachea.
Blind oral intubation is more difficult in sheep and goats,
and intubation is best performed with laryngoscopy. To perform
blind oral intubation, the animal’s head and neck are extended after
placement of the endotracheal tube in the oral pharynx. The larynx
can be palpated and the tube directed into the larynx [44]. Members
of both of these species have active laryngeal reflexes that can be
obtunded by topical application of 2% lidocaine. This can be
performed with an adjustable pattern plant sprayer [176] or with a
syringe. Use of Cetacaine® is not recommended because overdosage
can easily occur and because benzocaine-based local anesthetics
can cause methemoglobinemia [177]. After desensitization of the
larynx, intubation can be performed with the same technique as used
in calves. The technique for oral intubation in camelids is similar to
that used in domestic ruminants. Blind oral intubation is usually
unsuccessful, and laryngoscopy with a 250–350 mm laryngoscope
is recommended. Desensitization of the larynx is usually not required.
Blind nasotracheal intubation has been described in awake or
mildly sedated calves, although it requires an endotracheal tube one
size smaller than that used orally [140]. The technique in calves is
very similar to that described for foals and is useful for induction of
inhalation anesthesia or to facilitate oral surgery. Particular attention
is needed to ensure that the tube is directed into the ventral meatus.
Following placement of the tube in the nasopharynx, the calf ’s head
and neck are extended to facilitate passage into the larynx. The tube
is secured in place and connected to the anesthesia machine.
In addition to calves [140], nasotracheal intubation is also possi-
ble in sheep and goats due to the relatively large size of their inferior
meatus [178]. In adult cattle undergoing procedures involving the
oral cavity requiring greater visibility and access, the authors have
performed nasotracheal intubation using a 20–22 mm ID endotra-
cheal tube in a standard size cow. This technique is also feasible in
camelids [179]. In all mentioned species, an endotracheal tube
approximately one size smaller than that used orotracheally will be
needed. Camelids are prone to epistaxis, and use of a lubricant that
contains phenylephrine is recommended. Blind nasal intubation is
technically easier than blind oral intubation, but nasal intubation
under laryngoscopic control is technically more difficult than oro-
tracheal intubation. Even though nasotracheal intubation can be
more difficult, it offers the option of recovering the animal with the
endotracheal tube in place as a method of preventing airway
obstruction during recovery. The endotracheal tube is advanced
with slow, gentle pressure through the external nares into the ven-
tral meatus. An obstruction encountered at approximately 10 cm in
adults is usually due to placement of the tube in the middle meatus.
If an obstruction is encountered more caudally, approximately
25 cm in adult llamas, the tube is likely in the nasopharyngeal diver-
ticulum [179]. In either case, the tube should be partially or com-
pletely withdrawn and redirected. If the endotracheal tube cannot
be redirected past the nasopharyngeal diverticulum, placement of a
pre-bent stylet into the tube to direct its tip ventrally is usually
effective. After the endotracheal tube has been advanced into the
nasopharynx, the camelid’s head and neck should be extended and
the tube manipulated into the larynx. If the tube will not enter the
larynx, placement of a pre-bent stylet into the tube will help direct
its tip ventrally into the larynx instead of into the esophagus.
Although visibility of the larynx is somewhat limited, oral laryngo-
scopy can aid intubation and confirm correct placement of the
nasotracheal tube [179]. A retrograde technique that involves the
use of a nested trocar into the cervical trachea for intubation of
llamas has also been described [180]. In brief, the nested trocar and
cannula are percutaneously placed into the cervical trachea, and a
stylet is advanced in a retrograde direction through the cannula and
into the mouth. As the stylet exits the mouth, the endotracheal tube
is slid over the stylet, which is used as a guide for orotracheal tube
placement. The investigator found no difference in the time needed
to accomplish intubation between anterograde and retrograde
intubation techniques, but fewer attempts were needed with the
retrograde technique.
Endotracheal intubation can be confirmed with several tech-
niques. Initially, they include visualization of the endotracheal tube
passing into the larynx. When transparent endotracheal tubes are
used, condensed water vapor will appear and then disappear during
each breath. One can feel gas being expelled from the tube during
exhalation and, when the endotracheal tube is connected to the
anesthesia machine, observation of synchrony between movement
of the breathing bag and the thorax will be noted. If a suction bulb
is evacuated and connected to the endotracheal tube, it will
re-expand if the tube is in the trachea and will remain collapsed if
the tube is in the esophagus, providing immediate confirmation of
correct or incorrect placement of the tube (Fig. 64.1). Finally, if a
capnograph is available, carbon dioxide will be noted in exhaled gas.
Maintenance
Anesthesia in ruminants and camelids can be maintained with
intravenous agents, commonly ketamine–guaifenesin–xylazine,
and less commonly propofol or alfaxalone, or with inhalant agents.
Injectable
Because ruminants may regurgitate during xylazine–ketamine–
guaifenesin anesthesia, intubation is highly recommended. It is also
often recommended that duration of anesthesia be limited to 60 min
to limit recovery time and complications. The use of infusion pumps
facilitates administration of the drugs and improves convenience
and precision. Following induction, xylazine–ketamine–guaifenesin
solutions can be used for maintenance of anesthesia in cattle
[147,154,155] and sheep [156]. Final concentrations are xylazine
0.1 mg/mL, ketamine 1–2 mg/mL, and guaifenesin 50 mg/mL, and
it should be emphasized that this formulation differs from the one

-- 1287 of 1450 --

1272 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
used in horses in which the concentration of xylazine is five times
higher. Anesthesia is maintained by infusion of the mixture at
1.5 mL/kg/h for calves [154,155], 2 mL/kg/h for adult cattle [146],
and 2 mL/kg/h for sheep [156], although the final administration
rate will vary with case requirements. If the procedure requires
more than 2 mL/kg of the xylazine–ketamine–guaifenesin mixture
in order to complete the procedure, the amount of xylazine added
should be decreased by at least 50% because its duration of action is
longer than that of the other two agents [personal communication:
John C. Thurmon, 1993]. Alternatively, a solution with final con-
centrations of xylazine 0.05 mg/mL, ketamine 1 mg/mL, and guaifen-
esin 50 mg/mL can be formulated and infused at 2 mL/kg/h IV for
maintenance to avoid the cumulative effects of xylazine. Following
induction, xylazine–ketamine–guaifenesin solutions may be used
for maintenance of anesthesia in llamas [104]. Final concentrations
are xylazine 0.1–0.2 mg/mL, ketamine 2 mg/mL, and guaifenesin
50 mg/mL. Anesthesia is maintained by infusion of the mixture at
1.2–2.4 mL/kg/h, although the final administration rate will vary
with case requirements.
Propofol has been successfully used for induction and maintenance
of anesthesia in small ruminants and calves (4–6 mg/kg) [181,182].
In calves in which anesthesia was maintained with a propofol infu-
sion (0.6–0.8 mg/kg/min IV) for 60 min, subjects showed increased
total antioxidant capacity [183]. Following induction in sedated
sheep with propofol, anesthesia can be maintained with propofol at
0.3–0.5 mg/kg/min IV [170]. Recovery to standing occurs within
15 min [170]. The approximate time from discontinuation of
propofol infusion to sternal recumbency is 10–15 min [171].
Following induction of anesthesia in sedated sheep with propofol
and ketamine, anesthesia can be maintained with propofol at
0.2–0.3 mg/kg/min and ketamine at 0.1–0.2 mg/kg/min IV [170].
Recovery to standing occurs within 15 min [170]. A light plane of
anesthesia can be maintained in unsedated llamas with a constant
infusion of propofol at 0.4 mg/kg/min IV [171]. In goats undergo-
ing magnetic resonance imaging, maintenance with propofol
(0.3 mg/kg/min) and ketamine (0.03 mg/kg/min) IV produced a
degree of immobility and cardiovascular effects comparable to
sevoflurane [184].
Anesthesia can also be maintained with alfaxalone at 0.17 mg/kg/
min IV in unsedated sheep following induction with alfaxalone at
2 mg/kg IV. Hemodynamic variables are acceptable, although mild
respiratory depression for up to 15 min after induction may require
ventilatory support [185]. Recovery following 70 min of anesthesia
occurs within 25 min [186]. Alfaxalone can also be infused as an
adjunct to inhalation anesthesia [186].
Inhalation
Inhalant agents that have been used historically in ruminants
include methoxyflurane and halothane, but isoflurane and sevoflu-
rane are the inhalant agents of choice in contemporary practice.
While methoxyflurane was utilized in small domestic ruminants
and camelids, inductions and recoveries were prolonged. Liver fail-
ure was reported in hyperimmunized goats subjected to halothane
anesthesia [187], but another study performed in young, healthy
goats showed that neither halothane nor isoflurane was likely to
cause hepatic injury [188]. Reports of renal failure associated with
flunixin meglumine administration immediately before or after
methoxyflurane administration in dogs [189] caution against the
use of this combination of drugs in ruminants.
Conventional small animal anesthesia machines can be used to
anesthetize ruminants weighing less than 60 kg. Conventional
human anesthesia machines or small animal machines with expanded
carbon dioxide absorbent (e.g., soda lime) canisters are adequate
for animals weighing up to 200 kg. Conventional large animal anes-
thesia machines can be used to anesthetize cattle weighing over
250 kg. The piston-driven Tafonius® ventilator offers flexibility in
ventilating ruminants over a wide range of sizes and ventilatory
patterns, with or without the addition of positive end-expiratory
pressure. Anesthesia is usually induced with 3–5% isoflurane or
4–6% sevoflurane and an oxygen flow rate of 20 mL/kg/min.
Anesthesia is usually maintained with 1.5–2.5% isoflurane or
2.5–3.5% sevoflurane with an oxygen flow rate of 12 mL/kg/min,
with a minimum flow rate of 1 L/min being adequate. These vapor-
izer settings correspond to end-expired anesthetic concentrations
of 1.25–1.5 minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) and should be
adequate for ruminants that were not sedated prior to induction.
Ruminants that have been sedated prior to induction can usually be
maintained on end-expired anesthetic concentrations of 1–1.25 MAC,
although final concentrations may vary depending on the sedative
used. Because domestic ruminants have a respiratory pattern char-
acterized by a rapid respiratory rate and a small tidal volume, higher
vaporizer settings may be required to maintain anesthesia in spon-
taneously breathing patients. If monitoring of inhalant anesthetic
gas concentrations is available, delivery can be titrated based on the
agent’s MAC value. The MAC of isoflurane is 1.13 ± 0.03 to 1.63 ±
0.17% in goats [190–192], 1.01–1.58% in sheep [193,194], 1.14% in
cattle [195], 1.47% in calves, and 1.05 ± 0.17% in adult male llamas
[196]. During spontaneous breathing, the MAC of sevoflurane is
2.29 ± 0.14% in llamas, 2.33 ± 0.09% in alpacas [197], 2.33 ± 0.15%
in goats [198], and 3.3% in sheep [199]. The MAC of desflurane is
lower in llamas and alpacas (7.99 ± 0.58% and 7.83 ± 0.51%, respec-
tively) [200] than in sheep (8.6–9.81%) [201,202]. MACs of sevoflu-
rane and desflurane have not been determined in cattle. In neonatal
calves, isoflurane and sevoflurane have been used successfully with
comparable cardiorespiratory performance and recovery times [203].
Midazolam infusions at 1.7, 5.0, and 15.0 μg/kg/min IV reduce MAC
of isoflurane in goats by 16.8%, 35.1%, and 54.7%, respectively [191].
Nitrous oxide administered in concentrations of 70% of the inspired
gas along with sevoflurane to sheep produced a 37% reduction in
MAC [204]. Interestingly, the sparing effect of nitrous oxide was
reversed by the administration of atipamezole, confirming the
Simulated tracheal placement
Simulated esophageal placement
Figure 64.1 Evacuated bulbs attached to endotracheal tubes simulating
esophageal (bottom) and tracheal (top) placement of the tube. The evacuated
bulb will fill when attached to a correctly placed endotracheal tube.

-- 1288 of 1450 --

Chapter 64: Ruminants 	1273
involvement of α2 -adrenergic receptor agonism in the MAC-
sparing effect on sevoflurane. The sparing effect of oxymorphone
(0.05 mg/kg) and hydromorphone (0.1 mg/kg) in sheep anesthe-
tized with desflurane is clinically unimportant compared to effects
reported in other species [202].
Intraoperative analgesia
Infusions of ketamine and lidocaine have been used to provide
analgesia in large and small animal patients. Ketamine is effective in
small animal patients when administered at a loading dose of
0.5 mg/kg IV followed by an infusion at 10 μg/kg/min [205].
Ketamine has also been given alone at 6.6–13.3 μg/kg/min IV in
horses [206] and at 25 μg/kg/min IV after a loading dose of 1 mg/kg
[192]. Ketamine can be given at 40 μg/kg/min IV to awake camelids
without untoward behavioral effects and will reduce anesthetic
requirements by 35% when given to anesthetized camelids [207].
Fentanyl can be administered to sheep at a rate of 0.17 μg/kg/min
IV without significant cardiorespiratory effects [208], whereas the
application of a fentanyl transdermal patch (75 μg/h) applied 15 h
before anesthesia can reduce the MAC of sevoflurane by approxi-
mately 25% and aid in providing perioperative analgesia [209].
Lidocaine administration has been effective in reducing overall
anesthetic requirements in animals under inhalation anesthesia
[190,210,211]. The reported lidocaine loading dose ranges from
2 to 5 mg/kg IV followed by an infusion of 50–100 μg/kg/min IV
[190,210]. Starting at the lower end of the range for both loading
and infusion doses is recommended. The infusion should be dis-
continued 30 min prior to recovery to avoid prolonged recoveries.
In calves premedicated with xylazine, and administered ketamine,
midazolam, and isoflurane for induction and maintenance of anes-
thesia, lidocaine infusion at a rate of 100 μg/kg/min following a
2 mg/kg bolus IV caused decreased heart rate compared to the con-
trol group without affecting other cardiovascular parameters [212].
The pharmacokinetics of morphine (0.08 μg/kg/min), lidocaine
(35 μg/kg/min), and ketamine (7 μg/kg/min) administered IV for a
24-h period have been established in calves undergoing hernior-
rhaphy [213]. These infusions provided adequate postoperative
analgesia 4 h after starting the infusion [213]. In sheep, infusion
of the same drug combination at different IV dosages (morphine
3.3 μg/kg/min, lidocaine 50 μg/kg/min, and ketamine 10 μg/kg/min)
caused a 75% decrease in anesthetic requirements of isoflurane
compared to a control group [214].
Systemic administration of analgesic drugs can be continued
in the postoperative period to provide continuing analgesia and
improve patient comfort. Dose regimens can be adjusted to obtain
analgesia and minimize sedation.
Supportive therapy
Supportive therapy is an important part of anesthetic practice. As
duration and difficulty of the procedure increases, the likelihood of
complications can also increase. Attention to supportive therapy in
anesthetized ruminants and camelids can decrease the incidence of
complications and improve outcome. Supportive therapy includes
patient positioning, fluid administration, mechanical ventilation,
cardiovascular support, and good monitoring techniques.
Patient positioning
Improper positioning and padding of anesthetized horses has
been implicated as one cause of postanesthetic myopathy and
neuropathy [215]. A similar situation may occur in adult cattle.
Postanesthetic myopathy does not appear to occur in calves, goats,
sheep, and South American camelids. Anesthetized ruminants
should be positioned on a smooth, flat, padded surface. Adult cattle
require water beds, dunnage bags, or 10–15 cm foam pads. Pads
5 cm thick are sufficient for sheep, goats, and South American
camelids. Patients positioned in dorsal recumbency should be bal-
anced squarely on their back with both gluteal areas bearing equal
weight. The forelimbs and hindlimbs should be relaxed in a flexed
position. External support should be placed under the maxilla to
prevent hyperextension of the neck.
Adult cattle in lateral recumbency should have an automobile
inner tube (valve stem pointed down) placed under the shoulder of
the dependent foreleg to help minimize pressure on the radial nerve
as it traverses the musculospiral groove of the humerus. The point
of the elbow should be positioned at 5 o’clock in the inner tube for
cattle in right lateral recumbency or at seven o’clock for cattle in left
lateral recumbency. In addition, the dependent foreleg is drawn
anteriorly so that the weight of the thorax rests on the triceps rather
than on the humerus. Non-elastic tape covering the portion of the
inner tube not under the shoulder will prevent overexpansion of
that section of inner tube and collapse of the inner tube under
the shoulder and helps ensure that shoulder support remains
(Fig. 64.2A and B). The other three legs are positioned perpendicu-
lar to the body, with the uppermost legs elevated and parallel to the
table surface. Support of these legs will improve venous drainage
and prevent injury to the brachial plexus. The head and neck are
maintained in a slightly extended position, with the head resting on
a pad or towel (Fig. 64.3). If possible, the patient’s head should be
positioned so that salivary secretions and gastric contents, if regur-
gitation occurs, will drain from the mouth and not wick between
the animal’s head and the pad and contact the eye. The dependent
eye should be closed prior to placing the head on the padding, and
ophthalmic ointment should be instilled in both eyes. Camelids
have prominent eyes, and special attention should be given to the
dependent eye to avoid injury. Use of circulating warm water heat-
ing blankets or convective warm air blowers should be considered
to prevent hypothermia in juvenile cattle, sheep, camelids, and
goats. Use of active warming devices may be required to prevent
hypothermia during the anesthetic episode and during recovery.
Fluid administration
Fluid administration during anesthesia is important to correct pre-
existing dehydration, if present, provide volume to offset anesthesia-
related vasodilation, and provide maintenance needs. A balanced
electrolyte solution is preferred. Lactated Ringer’s solution, Plasma-
Lyte®, Normosol-R®, or equivalent are most commonly used and are
administered rapidly (10–25 mL/kg/h) in hypotensive patients.
After hypotension is corrected, fluid administration may be slowed
to 4–6 mL/kg/h. Although ruminants salivate copiously while
anesthetized, replacement of bicarbonate is usually not required.
Other fluids (e.g., saline) may be given when indicated. To increase
the fluid delivery rate when needed, two administration sets can be
connected to one catheter with a Y-connector, multiple catheters
can be placed, a peristaltic pump can be used, or the fluid source
may be pressurized. For convenience, fluids packaged in 3 or 5 L
bags can be used for large-volume administration. When adminis-
tering large volumes of fluid, serial determinations of hematocrit
and plasma total solids should be performed to prevent hemodilu-
tion and decreased oncotic pressure. Hematocrit should remain
above 25% and plasma total solids above 4 g/dL. The use of plasma

-- 1289 of 1450 --

1274 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
or whole blood transfusion should be considered for hypoproteine-
mic or anemic individuals. In light of the challenges identifying
blood donors and collecting sufficient volumes of blood from small
ruminants, xenotransfusion of whole blood, packed red blood cells,
and/or plasma can be used to correct anemia and improve circulat-
ing volume in goats [216] and wildebeests [217]. Administration of
sodium bicarbonate should be considered for correction of severe
metabolic acidosis only.
Respiratory supportive therapy
Although anesthetized South American camelids ventilate well,
domestic ruminants tend to hypoventilate while anesthetized.
Hypoventilation is a function of both anesthetic-induced medullary
depression and cranial compression and displacement of the
diaphragm by the rumen during dorsal recumbency. Mechanical
ventilation should be considered when the procedure will exceed
90 min and is indicated to prevent hypoventilation in individuals
that will not maintain sufficient alveolar ventilation. To minimize
the effects of mechanical ventilation on the cardiovascular system,
the inspiratory time should be no more than 2–3 s, the inspiratory
pressure should be 20–25 cmH2
O, the tidal volume should be
between 13 and 18 mL/kg, and the respiratory rate should be 6–10
breaths/min. Mechanical ventilation should be titrated to achieve
normocapnia using capnography (i.e., end-tidal carbon dioxide
[PET
CO2
] values in the range of 35–45 mmHg) or blood gas analysis.
Hypocapnia can cause bradycardia and, in the absence of PET
CO2 or
PaCO2 values, minute volume should be decreased if unexplained
bradycardia occurs.
During intravenous sedation and anesthesia, ruminants also
benefit from supplemental oxygen. If the animal is intubated,
the endotracheal tube can be connected to a demand valve. This
piece of equipment is connected to an oxygen source that enables
the patient to breathe spontaneously [218]. Compression of a button
on the demand valve enables the anesthetist to “sigh” the patient.
(A)
(B)
Figure 64.2 A. Diagram showing appropriate positioning and support for anesthetized cattle in lateral recumbency. The table is padded and an
automobile inner tube is placed under the dependent forelimb and that leg is drawn cranially. Additional support is placed under the non-dependent
forelimb and hindlimb so they are parallel to the table. B. Photograph of an anesthetized bull in left lateral recumbency showing the inner tube under the
left forelimb and support of the non-dependent limbs (in this case, the patient is undergoing scrotal surgery so the non-dependent hindlimb is elevated
beyond parallel to facilitate surgical access). Source: Dr. Chiara E. Hampton, with permission.

-- 1290 of 1450 --

Chapter 64: Ruminants 	1275
Intubated ruminants can also be insufflated with oxygen (5 L/min
for small ruminants and 15 L/min for adult cattle). A flowmeter is
connected to an oxygen source, and the tubing from the flowmeter
is then inserted into the endotracheal tube [219]. In steers anes-
thetized with sevoflurane, the reverse Trendelenburg position
(5° and 10°) failed to improve ventilation and oxygenation compared
with no tilt, and cardiovascular performance was adversely affected
at the 10° tilt [82].
Cardiovascular supportive therapy
Hypotension has been implicated as another cause of postanes-
thetic myopathy/neuropathy [215,220]. To help avoid this postan-
esthetic complication in ruminants, normotension should be
maintained during anesthesia. Hypotension may often be corrected
by adjusting anesthetic depth. Although vasopressors can be used to
correct hypotension, expansion of vascular volume with rapid fluid
administration and/or augmentation of stroke volume and cardiac
output with inotropic therapy are better alternatives. Calcium glu-
conate or borogluconate (23% solution) may also increase myocar-
dial contractility and vascular smooth muscle tone and can be given
as a slow infusion (0.2–1 mL/kg/h IV) to effect. Calcium adminis-
tration can cause bradycardia, however, necessitating the use of a
chronotrope if hypotension due to bradycardia persists. Ephedrine,
a sympathomimetic drug with mixed α- and β-adrenergic receptor
activity, can be used at 0.02–0.06 mg/kg IV to increase mean arterial
pressure through an increase in cardiac contractility [221]. Lack of
response at low doses can indicate excessive depth of anesthesia.
Dobutamine, a synthetic β-adrenergic receptor agonist, can also be
used as an infusion to improve cardiac output. At low doses, it
increases myocardial contractility and, at higher doses, heart rate is
also increased [222]. Dobutamine is preferred over dopamine
because improvements in hemodynamic function are achieved with
smaller increases in heart rate [223]. Dobutamine is infused at
1–5 μg/kg/min IV to effect [223]. Use of an infusion pump is
recommended for convenience and consistency. After correction of
hypotension, the infusion rate can often be decreased to maintain
normotension.
Monitoring
As with any species, good anesthetic techniques require monitoring
to ensure that drug administration meets the animal’s requirements
and to prevent excessive insult to the cardiovascular, respiratory,
central nervous, and musculoskeletal systems, thereby decreasing
the risk of complications. Monitoring includes techniques that
require the tactile, visual, and auditory skills of the anesthetist, as
well as more sophisticated techniques that require instrumentation.
Attention is directed to three organ systems: the cardiovascular, the
respiratory, and the central nervous systems. Ideally, one monitors
variables that respond rapidly to changes in anesthetic depth, which
gives the anesthetist sufficient time to alter anesthetic administra-
tion before the anesthetic plane becomes either excessive or insuf-
ficient. In many instances, monitoring equipment is used to aid the
evaluation of physiologic responses to anesthesia and, therefore,
anesthetic depth. Use of these instruments can make evaluation
more precise and the selection of ancillary drugs more rational.
While monitoring is done constantly, most variables are recorded at
5-min intervals. The use of software designed for veterinary anes-
thesia records (e.g., VetDAR®) can improve patient safety by
reminding the individual to enter current vital signs data at pre-
scribed intervals and alerting the individual when data for the
patient’s vital signs fall outside of the normal range.
Variables that can be used to monitor the cardiovascular system
are heart rate, pulse pressure (pulse strength), mucous membrane
color, and capillary refill time. In healthy anesthetized adult cattle,
the heart rate is usually 60–90 beats/min. Animals that have
received an anticholinergic will have an increased heart rate. The
normal heart rate for calves, sheep, and goats varies with age.
Juveniles will have a heart rate of 90–120 beats/min, which decreases
as they mature. The normal heart rate for adult anesthetized came-
lids after administration of an anticholinergic is 80–100 beats/min,
and for anesthetized juvenile camelids after the administration of
an anticholinergic, it is 100–125 beats/min. Heart rate may exceed
the normal range at the beginning of anesthesia because of excite-
ment associated with induction or hypotension but most often
returns to the normal range within 10–20 min. In compromised
patients, the heart rate begins to approach the normal range during
anesthesia as oxygen, fluid, and analgesic support begin to stabilize
the patient. The heart rate usually decreases as the depth of anesthe-
sia increases, although that response is dependent on the agent used
and can be masked by prior administration of anticholinergics.
Pulse pressure can be ascertained at several locations and should
be full and bounding. However, a bounding pulse does not guaran-
tee normotension. The common digital, caudal auricular, radial,
and saphenous arteries are commonly palpated. The facial artery
can be palpated in young calves, but it becomes more difficult to do
so as the animal ages. Pulse pressure should be strong and palpated
at different locations for comparison. Noting the amount of turgor
present in the vessel during diastole can give an indication of dias-
tolic pressure. If the vessel is easily collapsed by digital pressure dur-
ing diastole, then diastolic pressure and, therefore, systolic and
mean pressure can be assumed to be low even though the pulse
pressure may feel adequate. While a variety of non-invasive blood
pressure monitors are available that are suitable for patients the size
of most ruminants and camelids, their accuracy is disappointing
and invasive techniques are generally recommended [224,225].
Mucous membranes should be pink, although those of some
ruminants and camelids are pigmented, making assessment diffi-
cult. The presence of cyanosis must also be noted, although animals
breathing oxygen and an inhalation agent may be apneic for several
Figure 64.3 Position of the head and neck to enable fluid to drain from the
oral cavity. Source: Lin et al. [84], with permission from John Wiley &
Sons, Inc.

-- 1291 of 1450 --

1276 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
minutes before cyanosis occurs. Because at least 5 g/dL of reduced
hemoglobin is required before cyanosis can be detected, severely
anemic animals may not show this sign. Flushed mucous mem-
branes are associated with vasodilation, which can be caused by
hypercapnia, halothane, α2
- adrenergic receptor antagonists, or
histamine release, or may be associated with postural hypostatic
congestion [226]. Brick red mucous membranes are associated with
endotoxic shock. Following digital compression to blanch an area
of the gum, capillary refill should occur in 1–2 s. Both of these vari-
ables give an imprecise indication of tissue perfusion. Excessive
depth of anesthesia will cause the mucous membranes to become
pale and the capillary refill time to increase.
The respiratory system is evaluated by monitoring respiratory
rate, tidal volume, end-tidal carbon dioxide (PET
CO2
), and percent
hemoglobin saturation (SpO 2 ). Spontaneous breathing rates are
usually 20–30 breaths/min or higher in adult cattle; calves, sheep,
and goats usually have respiratory rates of 20–40 breaths/min.
Awake cattle have a decreased tidal volume compared with
horses [227]. This relationship persists in anesthetized cattle and
other domestic ruminants in that they have a decreased tidal vol-
ume compared with other species. Tidal volume is estimated by
observing the decrease in size of the rebreathing bag during inspi-
ration. Increasing depth of anesthesia can usually be expected to
cause a decrease in tidal volume and eventually a decrease in res-
piratory rate. Normal values for respiratory rate in anesthetized
camelids are 15–30 breaths/min for adults and 20–35 breaths/min
for juveniles. Camelids tend to ventilate reasonably well when
breathing spontaneously as judged by blood gas and respiratory gas
analysis during sevoflurane and isoflurane anesthesia. Capnography
is commonly available in many practices, and PET
CO2 monitoring is
useful for assessing ventilation in ruminants. Since CO 2 and other
gases are produced during fermentation, the effect of these non-
respiratory sources of gas should be assessed on each capnometer
before use.
The central nervous system can be monitored by observation of
ocular reflexes. The palpebral reflex disappears with minimal depth
of anesthesia in cattle, sheep, and goats and is usually of no value
during anesthesia. Rotation of the globe will occur as anesthetic
depth changes in cattle (Fig. 64.4) [17,91,228]. The eyeball is nor-
mally centered between the palpebrae in awake cattle in lateral
recumbency. As anesthesia is induced, the eyeball rotates ventrally,
with the cornea being partially obscured by the lower eyelid.
As the depth of anesthesia increases, the pupil becomes completely
hidden by the lower eyelid; this sign indicates that the patient is at
stage 3, plane II–III anesthesia. A further increase in anesthetic
depth is accompanied by dorsal rotation of the eyeball. Dorsal
movement is complete when the cornea is centered between the
palpebrae; this sign indicates deep surgical anesthesia with pro-
found muscle relaxation. During recovery, the eyeball rotates in
reverse order to that during induction [17,91,228]. Rotation of the
globe does not occur in response to changes in the depth of anes-
thesia in goats, sheep, or South American camelids. Usually, the
palpebral reflex of the dorsal eyelid of camelids remains intact dur-
ing surgical anesthesia. However, if the camelid can move its ventral
eyelid without tactile stimulation, anesthetic depth is decreasing
and eventually limb movement will occur. Nystagmus usually does
not occur during anesthesia of domestic ruminants or camelids.
When it does occur, it cannot be correlated with changes in anes-
thetic depth. The corneal reflex should always be present.
Some ruminants will display involuntary swallowing motions
under anesthesia without exhibiting other signs of insufficient
anesthetic depth. While this reflex may accompany a reduction
in anesthetic depth, it does not necessarily indicate inadequate
depth. Response to pain from the surgical procedure can also be
used to estimate depth of anesthesia. In some instances, camelids
may respond by showing a more active palpebral reflex. Purposeful
movement in all species indicates insufficient depth of anesthesia.
A mild temporary increase in arterial pressure associated with
surgical manipulation does not necessarily indicate inadequate
anesthesia if purposeful movement does not occur.
Electrocardiography (ECG) is used with either standard limb
leads (i.e., I, II, and III) or a dipole (augmented) lead for detection
of cardiac rate and rhythm disturbances. The lead that has the larg-
est amplitude is usually selected. A recorder is optional and useful
because it enables one to record an ECG at the beginning of the case
for future reference. Most ECG units emit an audible tone when a
QRS complex is detected. Anesthetists should learn to always listen
to the audible rhythm in the background during the case, especially
during distractions. Because an ECG gives no information regarding
blood pressure or pulse strength, emphasis should be placed on
monitoring pulse and arterial pressure instead of relying solely on
the ECG. In calves and cattle, atrial repolarization (Ta waves) may
be visible on the ECG following the P wave and preceding the QRS
complex. Ta waves are low-amplitude deflections in the opposite
direction of the P wave and are generated by the large atrial mass
often present in large species like cattle and horses. Ta waves
have been found to increase in amplitude in calves with hyper-
kalemia [229]. U waves can sometimes be appreciated following the
completion of ventricular repolarization (T wave), and they are
believed to represent repolarization of M cells and Purkinje fibers
[230]. The amplitudes of both Ta and U waves may be increased by
electrolyte imbalances, especially of calcium and potassium.
Pulse oximetry is a well-established non-invasive method of
measuring hemoglobin saturation with oxygen (SpO 2
) and pulse
rate. It is considered a key monitoring modality to evaluate cardio-
vascular and the respiratory systems via oxygenation, and its use is
recommended during all phases of anesthesia, including recovery,
according to the monitoring guidelines of the American College of
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia [231]. Transmission or reflec-
tance probes can be used in ruminants, preferably on non-pigmented
tissues. As occurs in other species, displayed values below 90–92%
must be investigated as they may indicate the presence of hypox-
emia (PaO 2 < 60 mmHg). However, it should be noted that different
Figure 64.4 Ocular rotation in a ventral direction is indicative of a light
plane of surgical anesthesia.

-- 1292 of 1450 --

Chapter 64: Ruminants 	1277
ruminant species have different P50 values (the partial pressure of
oxygen at which 50% of hemoglobin is saturated). The P50 in cattle
and goats is 25 and 28.6 mmHg, respectively, whereas in sheep
this value has been reported to be between 41.8 and 44.1 mmHg.
This has important implications in clinical practice as this would
mean that a pulse oximeter calibrated based on a human oxyhemo-
globin dissociation curve (P 50 = 26.6 mmHg) will likely overesti-
mate the PaO 2 of a cow, slightly underestimate that of a goat, and
grossly underestimate the PaO 2 of a sheep. The Masimo Signal
Extraction Technology® pulse oximeter has been found to underes-
timate oxyhemoglobin saturation compared to CO-oximetry, with
a bias of −2% but an overall reasonable accuracy and precision
when SpO2 values were above 75% [232]. Modern pulse oximeters
can also incorporate technology that allows for the measurement of
perfusion index (PI) and plethysmography variability index (PVI).
The former is the ratio of pulsatile blood flow to non-pulsatile
blood in the tissue being monitored, and it can be used as an indica-
tor of tissue perfusion. The latter measures the change in PI during
one respiratory cycle and can be used as an indirect indicator of
patient responsiveness to fluid administration. Further investiga-
tions are needed in ruminants before definitive recommendations
can be made for the use of PI and PVI to aid in clinical decision-
making. Additional information on pulse oximetry and perfusion
indices can be found in Chapters 12 and 15.
Mean arterial pressure provides an accurate variable for assessing
anesthetic depth. In most instances, changes in anesthetic depth
become evident quickly through increases or decreases in blood
pressure. Additionally, it is a more definitive variable than assessing
pulse pressure alone. Pulse pressure is defined as the difference
between systolic and diastolic pressures. An animal with systolic
and diastolic pressures of 120/90 mmHg will have pulse pressure
similar to that of another with pressures of 90/60 mmHg. However, a
large difference exists in mean arterial pressure or perfusion pressure.
The former case will have a mean pressure of about 100 mmHg,
whereas the latter will have a mean pressure of about 70 mmHg.
Since animals with low mean pressure during anesthesia are more
at risk of developing complications, identification of this situation is
important [220,233]. Normal arterial systolic, diastolic, and mean
pressures in anesthetized cattle are 120–150 mmHg, 80–110 mmHg,
and 90–120 mmHg, respectively; these values are typically greater
than those measured in standing cattle [234]. Normal arterial
systolic, diastolic, and mean pressures in sheep, goats, and camelids
are 90–120, 60–80, and 75–100 mmHg, respectively, and similar to
those obtained in horses [235]. However, if camelids are aroused by
painful stimuli, mean arterial pressure may approach 150 mmHg.
Arterial pressure can be monitored either indirectly or directly.
Indirect methods of determining arterial pressure require the use of
various infrasonic and ultrasonic devices to detect blood flow in
peripheral arteries. A Doppler ultrasonic system or an oscillometric
device (e.g., Cardell®) can be used with cuffs wrapped around the
tail of cattle and the limbs of sheep and goats [46], or around the tail
or the limbs of South American camelids [50]. The cuff diameter
should be 40% of the limb or tail circumference [226]. Unfortunately,
there can be lack of agreement between pressures obtained with
indirect and direct methods in domestic ruminants [224] and in
camelids [225], and the use of direct techniques is recommended
when feasible.
Direct methods require catheterization of an artery and use of a
pressure transducer and amplifier or an aneroid manometer to
determine pressure values. A transducer system determines systolic,
diastolic, and mean arterial pressures. An aneroid manometer can
be substituted for the pressure transducer and amplifier, but only
mean pressure can be obtained [236]. However, changes in mean
pressure occur rapidly in response to changes in anesthetic depth,
and use of this system enables anesthetists to initiate appropriate
responses.
Percutaneous arterial catheterization is easily performed in
most ruminants and is relatively free of complications [236,237].
The caudal auricular, saphenous, and common digital arteries are
the most commonly catheterized vessels. Over-the- needle catheters
are preferred. Passage of this type of catheter through the unbroken
skin will often damage the catheter, making arterial placement dif-
ficult. Therefore, incising the skin or piercing it with a slightly larger
needle at the catheterization site prior to introducing the catheter is
recommended [237]. A skin incision is usually unnecessary when
the caudal auricular artery is catheterized, because the skin is rela-
tively thin in that location and the artery is often inadvertently
pierced because the skin is relatively immobile in that area. For
adult cattle, 3–5 cm, 20 gauge catheters are used, and for calves,
sheep, goats, and camelids, 2.5–3 cm, 20–22 gauge catheters are
appropriate. An extension set with stopcock is used to connect the
arterial catheter to a syringe containing heparinized (2 IU/mL)
saline and a piece of non-compliant tubing attached to the pressure
transducer or aneroid manometer. Two cases of iatrogenic cerebral
air embolism have been reported in calves after accidental entrain-
ment of air in the catheter placed in the auricular artery [238].
Therefore, care should be taken in ensuring that connections are
tight and that air does not enter the arterial circulation, even in
small volumes. After the arterial catheter has been removed, digital
pressure is maintained at the site to prevent hematoma formation.
If desired, a pressure bandage can be used.
Central venous pressure can be determined to assess venous
return, myocardial function, and the need for fluid replacement. It
can be used along with serial determinations of hematocrit, plasma
total solids, and urine production, in evaluating fluid replacement
and vascular tone, but provides little information regarding changes
in anesthetic depth. Normal values are 5–10 cmH2
O, which approx-
imate right atrial pressures.
Normal values for arterial blood gas analysis are similar to those
for other species [9,10], with more positive base excess values,
which are variable based on diet. Respiratory gas analysis can
determine PET
CO2 and anesthetic agent concentrations. Because
domestic ruminants have a respiratory pattern characterized by
small tidal volume, end-expired gas may not be sufficiently repre-
sentative of alveolar gas and accurate results might not be obtained.
Capnography is more accurate when assessing carbon dioxide
during controlled ventilation. Anesthetic agent analyzers that
use optical low-spectrum infrared measurement (i.e., measuring
absorption in the lower region of the infrared spectrum) cannot
distinguish between methane and halothane in the expired gas
of herbivores and will report falsely increased concentrations of
halothane, and to a lesser extent isoflurane, in the anesthetic
circuit [239]. The presence of methane does not affect analyzers
that use high-spectrum infrared measurement or piezoelectric
measurement [239]. Analyzers that use low-spectrum infrared
measurement can be used in herbivores by intermittently (i.e.,
every 15–30 min) placing a small container of activated charcoal
in the sample path to adsorb the inhalant agent [240]. Methane will
pass through the charcoal without adsorption and be measured.
After removing the charcoal container from the sample path, one
can subtract the concentration of background methane from the
displayed value to determine the inhalant agent concentration.

-- 1293 of 1450 --

1278 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
Recovery
Ruminants and South American camelids recover well from general
anesthesia and seldom experience emergence delirium, make pre-
mature attempts to stand, or sustain injuries. When an α2
- adrenergic
receptor agonist is used as part of the anesthetic regimen, an
α2
- adrenergic receptor antagonist can be used to hasten recovery
[32,69,91,100,101,104,148,175,241].
Domestic ruminants should not be extubated until the laryngeal
reflex has returned. If the patient has regurgitated, the buccal cavity
and pharynx should be lavaged to prevent aspiration of the mate-
rial. In these instances, the endotracheal tube should be withdrawn
with the cuff inflated in an attempt to remove any material that may
have entered the trachea. Since camelids are obligate nasal breathers
[242], gas exchange must be confirmed after extubation. Airway
obstruction can commonly occur in camelids during the transition
from oral endotracheal intubation to nasal breathing and, in severe
cases, can necessitate tracheotomy. Orally intubated camelids
should not be extubated until the animal is swallowing, coughing,
and actively trying to expel the endotracheal tube to decrease the
incidence of this complication. Precautions should be taken to pre-
vent the camelid from damaging or aspirating the endotracheal
tube during “awake” extubation. The endotracheal tube of nasally
intubated camelids can be removed after they stand. Although
ruminants recover well from general anesthesia with minimal assis-
tance, an attendant should be available.
Intraoperative complications
Fortunately, major complications do not often occur during or
following well-planned anesthesia in ruminants. However, one
must be vigilant so that the unexpected occurrence of a complication
can be recognized and effectively treated. As is the case in anesthe-
sia of all species, potential complications are better prevented than
treated, and therefore, emphasis should be placed on formation and
implementation of a rational anesthetic regimen. Airway obstruc-
tion, apnea, and hypothermia are diagnosed and treated in a manner
similar to other domestic species as described elsewhere in this
edition. A case of presumptive malignant hyperthermia of unknown
origin with fatal outcome in a 9-month-old black Angus bull has
been reported [243]. It remains unclear if the subject actually
expressed the genetic mutation for definitive confirmation of
malignant hyperthermia.
Although anesthetized camelids do not appear to become tympa-
nitic, fermentation of ingesta and the animal’s inability to eructate
under anesthesia often cause ruminal tympany during anesthesia of
domestic ruminants. As tympany develops, more pressure is placed
on the diaphragm, decreasing functional residual capacity and
impeding ventilation [244]. In addition, tympany increases the risk
of regurgitation. Therapy involves passage of a stomach tube to
decompress the rumen. On occasion, one will be unable to pass the
stomach tube into the rumen. In these difficult cases, placing the
animal in sternal recumbency will aid the procedure. When that is
not possible, the rumen can be decompressed with a 12 gauge
needle inserted through the abdominal wall. Fortunately, ruminal
tympany is usually of the non-frothy type, and decompression is
easily accomplished. External pressure placed on the rumen will
help expel gas from the orogastric tube. Ruminal tympany can also
occur during the use of nitrous oxide, which tends to accumulate in
organs prefilled with gas [245]. Discontinuation of nitrous oxide
administration and decompression of the rumen are recommended.
Connective tissue is not as fibrous in the lungs of ruminants, and
therefore, excessive airway pressure can cause pneumothorax and
emphysema more easily than in horses [246]. Signs include dyspnea
and increased resistance to inspiration because of tension pneumo-
thorax. Pneumothorax is treated by placement of a chest tube and
aspiration of the gas. It is much easier to prevent than treat. Excessive
airway pressure (i.e., pressures > 25 cmH2
O) should not be used
when “sighing” animals or when using controlled ventilation.
Cardiac arrhythmias usually do not occur in anesthetized rumi-
nants. Atrial fibrillation can occur in cattle as a sequela to metabolic
derangement secondary to another problem, most often gastroin-
testinal obstruction. The arrhythmia can be diagnosed with ECG
and usually resolves when the primary problem is corrected.
Because cattle are amenable to physical restraint and local anesthe-
sia, corrective surgery can often be performed without general
anesthesia. Electrolyte imbalances can contribute to morbidity and
mortality under general anesthesia and should be monitored in ill
patients. In a case report, hyperkalemia due to uroperitoneum lead
to cardiac arrest in a calf [247]. The oculocardiac reflex is a well-
recognized reflex in most animals and can be treated similarly in
ruminants. Cardiac arrest would be treated with similar techniques
used in horses [248–250].
Postoperative complications
Because ruminants and camelids tend to recover well from general
anesthesia, long-bone fractures, cervical fractures, or other cata-
strophic injuries seldom occur. Should they occur, therapy is based
on severity of the fracture and the economic value of the animal.
Postoperative myopathy/neuropathy can occur in larger cattle but is
not a common complication in calves, sheep, goats, or camelids.
The problem is recognized when muscle weakness or motor nerve
dysfunction is observed, with some animals being unable to stand.
Commonly affected nerves are the radial, the femoral, and the
sciatic. Therapy is symptomatic, with IV fluids administered to
maintain hydration, acid–base status, and electrolyte balance, along
with analgesics and NSAIDs as indicated. Depending on the type of
sling used, slinging the animal may be helpful or could increase
muscle injury. Myopathy may take several days to resolve and can
be life-threatening. Again, it is better to prevent muscle or nerve
injury by positioning anesthetized animals properly and avoiding
excessive depth of anesthesia.
Recovery from anesthesia can be delayed by hypothermia.
Provision of thermal support to the patient with various warming
devices including circulating warm water pads and pumps, forced
air warmers, and resistive foam warming blankets will help maintain
normothermia.
A less common cause of delayed recovery is muscle weakness
caused by neuromuscular blockade. Because ruminants have
very low levels of plasma cholinesterase (also known as “pseudo-
cholinesterase”), metabolism of succinylcholine is slow, causing
prolonged effects of the drug. Neuromuscular blockade may also be
caused by interaction of anesthetics and aminoglycoside antibiotics
[139] or by incomplete reversal of nondepolarizing muscle relax-
ants [251]. Muscle relaxants are rarely administered to ruminants in
clinical practice, but may be more common in research settings.
Thrombophlebitis can occur after perivascular injection of irri-
tating compounds, although usually not with the frequency or
severity that occurs in horses, and is treated similarly [252]. Corneal
ulcers can also occur following anesthesia and should be managed
as in other species.

-- 1294 of 1450 --

Chapter 64: Ruminants 	1279
Aspiration pneumonia occurs after regurgitation of rumen or
gastric contents and subsequent inhalation of the material. Active
regurgitation may cause the material to be inhaled deeply into the
pulmonary tree, initiating bronchospasm and physical obstruction
of the airways. Signs include dyspnea and, depending on severity,
cyanosis. If the patient survives the initial insult, pneumonia is cer-
tain. Broad-spectrum antibiotic and anti-inflammatory therapy are
indicated [253]. Silent or passive regurgitation can occur with the
same results, except that there usually is not as much particulate
material in the regurgitant. Similar treatment is instituted. Because
of the potential severity of this complication, prevention must be
emphasized. Tracheal intubation is recommended and, if not pos-
sible, the occiput should be elevated to encourage fluids to drain
from the mouth rather than into the trachea (Fig. 64.3) [178].
Analgesia
Providing postoperative analgesia is an important component of
veterinary anesthesia. Pain-specific and species-specific pain
assessment tools should be employed to evaluate the patient and
guide administration of analgesic drugs. The reader is directed to
Chapter 47 for further information on recognition and assessment
of pain. There are very few approved drugs for provision of analge-
sia in domestic ruminants and none approved for use in South
American camelids. Drugs that have been used in other species
include the NSAIDs carprofen, firocoxib, flunixin, ketoprofen,
meloxicam, phenylbutazone, and robenacoxib; the opioids butor-
phanol, buprenorphine, fentanyl, and morphine; the local anesthetic
lidocaine; and ketamine. Although α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists
can provide analgesia, their behavioral effects usually limit their use
in ruminants. When applicable, local anesthetic agents can be used
to desensitize structures and tissue [254]. Long-acting local anes-
thetic agents, bupivacaine, ropivacaine, and liposomal bupivacaine
(Nocita®), would be preferred. Epidural administration of local anes-
thetic agents and opioids may be appropriate for some procedures.
Flunixin can be given at 1.1–2.2 mg/kg IV daily. Carprofen
can be given at 0.7 mg/kg IV daily [255]. When given at 4 mg/kg,
therapeutic levels are maintained for at least 72 h [255]. Carprofen
(1.4 mg/kg) administered 1 h before umbilical surgery in calves
lowered serum cortisol and systemic vascular resistance, which is
speculated to indicate a reduced response to surgical stress [256].
Ketoprofen can be dosed at 3.3 mg/kg IV daily [255]. Phenylbutazone
is recommended at a dose of 2.2 mg/kg orally every 48 h [255];
however, its off-label use is prohibited in some populations of food
animals. As of 2003, the United States Food and Drug Administration
Center for Veterinary Medicine instituted a ban on phenylbutazone
in female dairy cattle 20 months of age and older due to serious
concerns about public health [257]. Consequently, its use in dairy
cattle in the United States, and many other jurisdictions, is illegal.
Meloxicam is given at 0.5 mg/kg IV every 12 h to sheep or at 1 mg/kg
orally every 24 h following a loading dose of 2 mg/kg orally
[258–260]. Meloxicam is given at 0.5 mg/kg IV every 8 h to goats or
at 0.5 mg/kg orally every 24 h following a loading dose of 2 mg/kg
orally [258–260]. Except for flunixin, withdrawal times following
NSAID use in ruminants are not well defined either for meat or for
milk, and caution must be exercised to prevent residues from enter-
ing the food supply [255]. More latitude is available when adminis-
tering NSAIDs to ruminants used in biomedical research.
The use of all NSAIDs carries the risk of ulcer formation in the
third gastric compartment of South American camelids. When
extended use of these agents is anticipated, it is recommended that
dose and frequency be decreased after the desired effect is obtained
in an effort to determine the minimal dose needed to provide anal-
gesia. Flunixin is commonly used for analgesia in South American
camelids. The dose range is 0.5–1.1 mg/kg IV given once daily
[258–261]. Flunixin has been given at 1.1 mg/kg twice daily in some
instances. Meloxicam is given at 0.5 mg/kg IV or at 1 mg orally
every 3 days to camelids [258–261]. Phenylbutazone is less com-
monly used in camelids. When used, it is administered in a manner
similar to that in domestic ruminants (i.e., 2.2 mg/kg orally every
48 h) [262]. Ketoprofen has also been used in llamas at a dose of
1–2 mg/kg IV once daily [263]. Firocoxib can be given at 0.5 mg/kg
IV or orally as a single dose [260].
Opioids have been used to provide analgesia to domestic
ruminants and South American camelids. Most commonly, either
butorphanol (0.05–0.2 mg/kg IM every 6 h) or morphine
(0.05–0.1 mg/kg IM every 6 h) has been recommended [32].
Morphine (0.4 mg/kg IV) administered to cattle induced variable
analgesia measured via thermal thresholds without changes in loco-
motor behavior or adverse effects [264]. The use of other opioids,
such as buprenorphine, fentanyl (both injectable and transdermal),
hydromorphone, and oxymorphone, may be considered in dosages
similar to those used in canine or equine patients [265–267].
Transdermal fentanyl patches have been used in llamas [268],
goats [269], and sheep, and the patch should be placed on the lateral
aspect of the shaved foreleg rather than on the thorax [270]. The
dose of opioids may need to be adjusted if the behavioral effects
cause problems (i.e., too much sedation, dysphoria, or excessive
locomotor activity).
Epidural opioids have been used extensively to provide analgesia
in companion animals [265,266,271,272] and in horses [273].
Morphine, which is the most commonly used agent, is typically
administered at a dose of 0.1 mg/kg to treat postoperative abdomi-
nal and orthopedic pain and to prevent tenesmus in horses [273]
and camelids. Analgesia begins in 30–60 min with duration of
action lasting 12–24 h. Injection is typically through the sacrocau-
dal space but can also be made at the lumbosacral space in anesthe-
tized ruminants. A ruminant or camelid that becomes recumbent
following sacrocaudal injection should be placed in sternal recum-
bency. As in other species, the lumbosacral space is caudal to a line
connecting the anterior border of the wings of the ilium. In camel-
ids, the spinous process of the last lumbar vertebra is usually easily
palpable; the needle is directed caudally to enter the space. The
spinous process of the first sacral vertebra is much smaller than that
of the last lumbar vertebra and is difficult to palpate. Usually, a
7 cm, 18 gauge spinal needle is adequate. If the injection is made
at the lumbosacral space, one must aspirate prior to injection
to ensure that the intrathecal space has not been entered. Dose
requirements of local anesthetics are 50–70% less when an agent
is given intrathecally compared with epidural injection. If cere-
brospinal fluid is obtained, the local anesthetic dose must be
decreased or the needle must be withdrawn for epidural placement
of the drug.
References
1 Cebra C, Sisson D. Diseases of the cardiovascular and hemolymphatic systems. In:
Cebra C, Anderson DE, Tibary A, et al., eds. Llama and Alpaca Care: Medicine,
Surgery, Reproduction, Nutrition, and Herd Health. St. Louis, MO: WB Saunders,
2014: 393–421.
2 Constable PD, Hinchcliff KW, Done SH, et al. Veterinary Medicine: A Textbook of the
Diseases of Cattle, Horses, Sheep, Pigs and Goats, 11th edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier
Health Sciences, 2016.

-- 1295 of 1450 --

1280 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
3 Kaplan R, Burke J, Terrill T, et al. Validation of the FAMACHA© eye color chart for
detecting clinical anemia in sheep and goats on farms in the southern United States.
Vet Parasitol 2004; 123: 105–120.
4 Johnson LW. Physical examination and conformation. In: Cebra C, Anderson DE,
Tibary A, et al., eds. Llama and Alpaca Care: Medicine, Surgery, Reproduction,
Nutrition, and Herd Health. St. Louis, MO: WB Saunders, 2014: 328–337.
5 Ghosh C, Datta S, Mandal D, et al. Body condition scoring in goat: impact and
significance. J Entomol Zool 2019; 7: 554–560.
6 Phythian C, Hughes D, Michalopoulou E, et al. Reliability of body condition
scoring of sheep for cross-farm assessments. Small Rumin Res 2012; 104: 156–162.
7 Wildman E, Jones G, Wagner P, et al. A dairy cow body condition scoring system
and its relationship to selected production characteristics. J Dairy Sci 1982;
65: 495–501.
8 Lassen E, Pearson E, Long P, et al. Clinical biochemical values of llamas: reference
values. Am J Vet Res 1986; 47: 2278–2280.
9 Latimer K, Mahaffey E, Prasse K. Duncan and Prasse’s Veterinary Laboratory
Medicine, Clinical Pathology, 4th edn. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2003: 149–156.
10 Kaneko JJ, Harvey JW, Bruss ML. Clinical Biochemistry of Domestic Animals,
6th edn. San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 2008.
11 Kramer J. Normal hematology of cattle, sheep and goats. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG,
Jain NC, et al., eds. Schalm’s Veterinary Hematology, 5th edn. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 2000: 1075–1084.
12 Viesselmann LC, Videla R, Flatland B. Verification of the Heska Element Point-of-
Care blood gas instrument for use with venous blood from alpacas and llamas, with
determination of reference intervals. Vet Clin Pathol 2018; 47: 435–447.
13 Vallenas A, Cummings J, Munnell J. A gross study of the compartmentalized
stomach of two new-world camelids, the llama and guanaco. J Morphol 1971; 134:
399–423.
14 Clariget J, Banchero G, Luzardo S, et al. Effect of pre-slaughter fasting duration on
physiology, carcass and meat quality in beef cattle finished on pastures or feedlot.
Res Vet Sci 2021; 136: 158–165.
15 Rabaza A, Banchero G, Cajarville C, et al. Effects of feed withdrawal duration on
animal behaviour, rumen microbiota and blood chemistry in feedlot cattle: impli-
cations for rumen acidosis. Animal 2020; 14: 66–77.
16 Blaze C, LeBlanc P, Robinson N. Effect of withholding feed on ventilation and the
incidence of regurgitation during halothane anesthesia of adult cattle. Am J Vet Res
1988; 49: 2126–2129.
17 Tranquilli WJ. Techniques of inhalation anesthesia in ruminants and swine.
Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 1986; 2: 593–619.
18 Weaver A. Complications in halothane anaesthesia of cattle. Zentralbl Veterinarmed
A 1971; 18: 409–416.
19 Clabough DL, Swanson CR. Heart rate spectral analysis of fasting-induced brady-
cardia of cattle. Am J Physiol 1989; 257: R1303–R1306.
20 McGuirk S, Bednarski R, Clayton M. Bradycardia in cattle deprived of food.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1990; 196: 894–896.
21 Ward J, Henricks D, Jenkins T, et al. Serum hormone and metabolite concentrations
in fasted young bulls and steers. Domest Anim Endocrinol 1992; 9: 97–103.
22 Cebra C. Fluid therapy. In: Cebra C, Anderson DE, Tibary A, et al., eds. Llama and
Alpaca Care: Medicine, Surgery, Reproduction, Nutrition, and Herd Health. St. Louis,
MO: WB Saunders, 2014: 350–356.
23 Fowler M. Medicine and Surgery of Camelids, 3rd edn. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell,
2010: 89–109.
24 Amsel S, Kainer R, Johnson L. Choosing the best site to perform venipuncture in a
llama. Vet Med 1987; 82: 535.
25 Jones ML. Ear squeeze (Ear Twitch). In: Anderson DE, Jones ML, Miesner MD, eds.
Veterinary Techniques for Llamas and Alpacas. Ames, IA: John Wiley & Sons, 2013:
27–28.
26 Constable PD, Walker PG, Morin DE, et al. Clinical and laboratory assessment of
hydration status of neonatal calves with diarrhea. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1998; 212:
991–996.
27 Abril-Sánchez S, Crosignani N, Freitas-de-Melo A, et al. Sedation or anaesthesia
decrease the stress response to electroejaculation and improve the quality of the
collected semen in goat bucks. Animal 2018; 12: 2598–2608.
28 Williams M, Caulkett N, Neuhaus P, et al. Comparison of the efficacy and safety of
medetomidine-ketamine versus medetomidine-azaperone-alfaxalone combination
in free- ranging rocky mountain bighorn sheep (Ovis canadensis). J Zoo Wildl Med
2018; 49: 662–670.
29 Taylor PM. Anaesthesia in sheep and goats. In Practice 1991; 13: 31–36.
30 Riebold T, Kaneps A, Schmotzer W. Anesthesia in the llama. Vet Surg 1989;
18: 400–404.
31 Short CE. Preanesthetic medications in ruminants and swine. Vet Clin North Am
Food Anim Pract 1986; 2: 553–566.
32 Carroll GL, Hartsfield SM. General anesthetic techniques in ruminants. Vet Clin
North Am Food Anim Pract 1996; 12: 627–661.
33 Nishimura LT, Villela IOJ, Carvalho LL, et al. The effect of acepromazine alone or
in combination with methadone, morphine, or tramadol on sedation and selected
cardiopulmonary variables in sheep. Vet Med Int 2017: 7507616.
34 Prado TM, Doherty TJ, Boggan EB, et al. Effects of acepromazine and butorphanol
on tiletamine–zolazepam anesthesia in llamas. Am J Vet Res 2008; 69: 182–188.
35 Anderson D, Gaughan E, DeBowes R, et al. Effects of chemical restraint on the
endoscopic appearance of laryngeal and pharyngeal anatomy and sensation in adult
cattle. Am J Vet Res 1994; 55: 1196–2000.
36 Hodgson DS, Dunlop CI, Chapman PL, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of xylazine
and acepromazine in pregnant cows in late gestation. Am J Vet Res 2002; 63:
1695–1699.
37 Rankin DC. Sedatives and tranquilizers. In: Grimm KA, Lamont LA, Tranquilli WJ,
et al., eds. Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia, 5th edn. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell,
2015: 196.
38 Buss PE. The pharmacodynamics of etorphine, and its combination with xylazine
or azaperone in Boer goats (Capra hircus). Unpublished thesis dissertation,
University of Pretoria, 2000.
39 Lapid R, Shilo-Benjamini Y. Immobilization of captive Nubian ibex (Capra
nubiana) with butorphanol-midazolam-medetomidine or butorphanol-azaperone-
medetomidine and atipamezole reversal. J Zoo Wildl Med 2015; 46: 291–297.
40 Posner L, Burns P. Sedative agents: tranquilizers, alpha-2 agonists, and related
agents. In: Riviere JE, Papich MG, eds. Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics,
9th edn. Ames, IA; Wiley-Blackwell, 2009: 337–380.
41 Torneke K, Bergstrom U, Neil A. Interactions of xylazine and detomidine with
α 2-adrenoceptors in brain tissue from cattle, swine and rats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
2003; 26: 205–211.
42 Xu M, Zhang Q, Wang Q, et al. The characteristics and distribution of α2 D- , α2 B-
and α2
C-adrenoceptor subtypes in goats. Animals (Basel) 2022; 12: 664.
43 Greene S, Thurmon J. Xylazine – a review of its pharmacology and use in veterinary
medicine. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1988; 11: 295–313.
44 Gray P, McDonell W. Anesthesia in goats and sheep. II. General anesthesia.
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 1986; 8(Suppl): S127–S135.
45 Raptopoulos D, Weaver B. Observations following intravenous xylazine adminis-
tration in steers. Vet Rec 1984; 114: 567–569.
46 Trim C. Special anesthesia considerations in the ruminant. In: Short CE, ed.
Principles and Practice of Veterinary Anesthesia. Baltimore, MA: Williams and
Wilkins, 1987: 285–300.
47 Fayed A, Abdalla E, Anderson R, et al. Effect of xylazine in heifers under thermon-
eutral or heat stress conditions. Am J Vet Res 1989; 50: 151–153.
48 Abrahamsen EJ. Chemical restraint and injectable anesthesia of ruminants. Vet Clin
North Am Food Anim Pract 2013; 29: 209–227.
49 Riebold T. Anesthesia in south American camelids. In: Greene SA, ed. Veterinary
Anesthesia and Pain Management Secrets. Philadelphia, PA: Hanley & Belfus, 2002:
263–272.
50 Heath R. Llama anesthetic programs. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 1989; 5:
71–80.
51 Cebra C, Tornquist S. Meta-analysis of glucose tolerance in llamas and alpacas. In:
Gerken M, Renieri C, eds. South American Camelids Research, vol. 1. Göttingen,
Germany: Wageningen Academic, 2006: 161–165.
52 Rizk A, Herdtweck S, Meyer H, et al. Effects of xylazine hydrochloride on hormo-
nal, metabolic, and cardiorespiratory stress responses to lateral recumbency and
claw trimming in dairy cows. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2012; 240: 1223–1230.
53 Rizk A, Herdtweck S, Offinger J, et al. The use of xylazine hydrochloride in an
analgesic protocol for claw treatment of lame dairy cows in lateral recumbency on
a surgical tipping table. Vet J 2012; 192: 193–198.
54 Rioja E, Kerr CL, Enouri SS, et al. Sedative and cardiopulmonary effects of medeto-
midine hydrochloride and xylazine hydrochloride and their reversal with atipam-
ezole hydrochloride in calves. Am J Vet Res 2008; 69: 319–329.
55 Ede T, von Keyserlingk M, Weary D. Efficacy of xylazine in neonatal calves via
different routes of administration. Vet J 2019; 247: 57–60.
56 Ley S, Waterman A, Livingston A. Variation in the analgesic effects of xylazine in
different breeds of sheep. Vet Rec 1990; 126: 508.
57 O’Hair K, McNeil J, Phillips Y. Effects of xylazine in adult sheep. Lab Anim Sci 1986;
36: 563.
58 Nolan A, Waterman A, Livingston A. The analgesic activity of alpha2 adrenoceptor
agonists in sheep: a comparison with opioids. Vet Anaesth Analg 1986; 14: 14–15.
59 Nolan A, Livingston A, Morris R, et al. Techniques for comparison of thermal and
mechanical nociceptive stimuli in the sheep. J Pharmacol Methods 1987; 17: 39–49.
60 Nolan A, Livingston A, Waterman A. Antinociceptive actions of intravenous
a2- adrenoceptor agonists in sheep. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1987; 10: 202–209.
61 Symonds H. The effect of xylazine upon hepatic glucose production and blood flow
rate in the lactating dairy cow. Vet Rec 1976; 99: 234–236.
62 Symonds H, Mallinson C. The effect of xylazine and xylazine followed by insulin on
blood glucose and insulin in the dairy cow. Vet Rec 1978; 102: 27–29.

-- 1296 of 1450 --

Chapter 64: Ruminants 	1281
63 Eichner R, Prior R, Kvasnicka W. Xylazine-induced hyperglycemia in beef cattle.
Am J Vet Res 1979; 40: 127–129.
64 Brockman R. Effect of xylazine on plasma glucose, glucagon and insulin concentra-
tions in sheep. Res Vet Sci 1981; 30: 383–384.
65 Muggaberg J, Brockman R. Effect of adrenergic drugs on glucose and plasma gluca-
gon and insulin responses to xylazine in sheep. Res Vet Sci 1982; 33: 118–120.
66 Thurmon J, Nelson D, Hartsfield S, et al. Effects of xylazine hydrochloride on urine
in cattle. Aust Vet J 1978; 54: 178–180.
67 Ruckebusch Y, Allal C. Depression of reticulo-ruminal motor functions through
the stimulation of alpha 2-adrenoceptors. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1987; 10: 1–10.
68 Toutain P, Zingoni M, Ruckebusch Y. Assessment of alpha-2 adrenergic antagonists
on the central nervous system using reticular contraction in sheep as a model.
J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1982; 223: 215–218.
69 Riebold T, Kaneps A, Schmotzer W. Reversal of xylazine-induced sedation in
llamas, using doxapram or 4-aminopyridine and yohimbine. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1986; 189: 1059–1061.
70 Hopkins T. The clinical pharmacology of xylazine in cattle. Aust Vet J 1972; 48:
109–112.
71 Celly C, McDonell W, Young S, et al. The comparative hypoxaemic effect of four
α2 adrenoceptor agonists (xylazine, romifidine, detomidine and medetomidine) in
sheep. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1997; 20: 464–471.
72 Kästner S, Von Rechenberg B, Keller K, et al. Comparison of medetomidine and
dexmedetomidine as premedication in isoflurane anaesthesia for orthopaedic sur-
gery in domestic sheep. J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med 2001; 48: 231–241.
73 Papazoglou L, Raptopoulos D, Kokolis N. Increased airway pressure in response to
xylazine is inhibited by both atipamezole and atropine in sheep. Zentralbl
Veterinarmed A 1994; 41: 568–572.
74 Nolan A, Livingston A, Waterman A. The effects of alpha2 adrenoceptor agonists
on airway pressure in anaesthetized sheep. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1986; 9: 157–163.
75 Staub NC. Pulmonary intravascular macrophages. Annu Rev Physiol 1994; 56: 47–67.
76 Papazoglou L, Raptopoulos D, Kounenis G. The effect of xylazine on the isolated
sheep trachea. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1995; 18: 216–219.
77 Bacon P, Jones J, Taylor P, et al. Impairment of gas exchange due to alveolar oedema
during xylazine sedation in sheep; absence of a free radical mediated inflammatory
mechanism. Res Vet Sci 1998; 65: 71–75.
78 Celly C, Atwal O, McDonell W, et al. Histopathologic alterations induced in the lungs of
sheep by use of alpha2-adrenergic receptor agonists. Am J Vet Res 1999; 60: 154–161.
79 Doherty T, Pascoe PJ, McDonell W, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of xylazine and
yohimbine in laterally recumbent sheep. Can J Vet Res 1986; 50: 517–521.
80 Eisenach JC. Intravenous clonidine produces hypoxemia by a peripheral alpha-2
adrenergic mechanism. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1988; 244: 247–252.
81 Hsu W, Hanson CE, Hembrough F, et al. Effects of idazoxan, tolazoline, and
yohimbine on xylazine-induced respiratory changes and central nervous system
depression in ewes. Am J Vet Res 1989; 50: 1570–1573.
82 Araújo MA, Deschk M, Wagatsuma JT, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of reverse
Trendelenburg position at 5 and 10 in sevoflurane-anesthetized steers. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2017; 44: 854–864.
83 Jansen C, Lowe K, Nathanielsz P. The effects of xylazine on uterine activity, fetal and
maternal oxygenation, cardiovascular function, and fetal breathing. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 1984; 148: 386–390.
84 Lin H. Preanesthetic considerations. In: Lin HC, Passler T, Clark-Price S, eds. Farm
Animal Anesthesia: Cattle, Small Ruminants, Camelids, and Pigs, 2nd edn. Hoboken,
NJ: Wiley-Blackwell, 2022: 1–15.
85 Piccinno M, Rizzo A, Mutinati M, et al. Lidocaine decreases the xylazine-evoked
contractility in pregnant cows. Res Vet Sci 2016; 107: 267–272.
86 Aouad J, Wright E Jr., Shaner T. Anesthesia evaluation of ketamine and xylazine in
calves. Bov Pract 1981; 2: 22–31.
87 Campbell K, Klavano P, Richardson P, et al. Hemodynamic effects of xylazine in the
calf. Am J Vet Res 1979; 40: 1777–1780.
88 Freire A, Gontijo R, Pessoa J, et al. Effect of xylazine on the electrocardiogram of
the sheep. Br Vet J 1981; 137: 590–595.
89 Seddighi R, Elliot SB, Whitlock BK, et al. Physiologic and antinociceptive effects
following intramuscular administration of xylazine hydrochloride in combination
with tiletamine–zolazepam in llamas. Am J Vet Res 2013; 74: 530–534.
90 Jedruch J, Gajewski Z. The effect of detomidine hydrochloride (Domosedan) on the
electrical activity of the uterus in cows. Acta Vet Scand Suppl 1986; 82: 189–192.
91 Greene SA. Protocols for anesthesia of cattle. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract
2003; 19: 679–693.
92 Hokkanen A, Raekallio MR, Salla K, et al. Sublingual administration of detomidine
to calves prior to disbudding: a comparison with the intravenous route. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2014; 41: 372–377.
93 Chow NS, Seddighi R, Knych HK, et al. Sedative effects and pharmacokinetics of
detomidine when administered intravenously and intravaginally as a gel in alpacas.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47: 773–780.
94 Malhi M, Kachiwal A, Soomro S, et al. Comparison of effects of xylazine,
detomidine and medetomidine on heart rate, respiratory rate and blood glucose
level in sheep. Pak J Agric Agric Eng Vet Sci 2015; 31: 93–101.
95 Marzok M, El-Khodery S. Sedative and analgesic effects of romifidine in camels
(Camelus dromedarius). Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36: 352–360.
96 Waldridge B, Lin H, DeGraves F, et al. Sedative effects of medetomidine and its
reversal by atipamezole in llamas. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1997; 211: 1562–1565.
97 Adam M, Raekallio MR, Salla KM, et al. Effects of the peripherally acting
α2
-adrenoceptor antagonist MK-467 on cardiopulmonary function in sheep sedated
by intramuscular administration of medetomidine and ketamine and reversed by
intramuscular administration of atipamezole. Am J Vet Res 2018; 79: 921–932.
98 Seddighi R, Doherty TJ. Effect of dexmedetomidine hydrochloride on tiletamine
hydrochloride–zolazepam hydrochloride anesthesia in alpacas. Am J Vet Res 2016;
77: 1057–1063.
99 Cagnardi P, Villa R, Ravasio G, et al. Pharmacokinetics and sedative effects of
dexmedetomidine in dairy calves. N Z Vet J 2017; 65: 14–18.
100 Thurmon J, Lin H, Tranquilli W, et al. A comparison of yohimbine and talazoline
as antagonists of xylazine sedation in calves. Vet Surg 1989; 18: 170–171.
101 Kitzman J, Booth N, Hatch R, et al. Antagonism of xylazine sedation by
4-aminopyridine and yohimbine in cattle. Am J Vet Res 1982; 43: 2165–2169.
102 Ko J, McGrath C. Effects of atipamezole and yohimbine on medetomidine-
induced central nervous system depression and cardiorespiratory changes in
lambs. Am J Vet Res 1995; 56: 629–632.
103 Ruckebusch Y, Toutain P. Specific antagonism of xylazine effects on reticulo-
rumen motor function in cattle. Vet Med Rev 1984; 1: 1–12.
104 Young D, Shawley R, Barron S. Tolazoline reversal of xylazine–ketamine anesthe-
sia in calves. Vet Surg 1988; 18: 171.
105 Lin H-C, Riddell MG. Tolazoline. Bov Practitioner 2008; 42: 86–92.
106 Lewis CA, Constable PD, Huhn JC, et al. Sedation with xylazine and lumbosacral
epidural administration of lidocaine and xylazine for umbilical surgery in calves.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1999; 214: 89–95.
107 Read MR, Duke T, Toews AR. Suspected tolazoline toxicosis in a llama. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2000; 216: 227–229.
108 Doherty T, Ballinger J, McDonell W, et al. Antagonism of xylazine induced
sedation by idazoxan in calves. Can J Vet Res 1987; 51: 244–248.
109 Laitinen O. Clinical observations on medetomidine/ketamine anaesthesia in
sheep and its reversal by atipamezole. J Assoc Vet Anaesth 1990; 17: 17–19.
110 Tulamo R, Raekallio M, Ekblad A. Cardiovascular effects of medetomidine-
ketamine anaesthesia in sheep, with and without 100% oxygen, and its reversal
with atipamezole. Vet Anaesth Analg 1995; 22: 9–14.
111 Haerdi-Landerer MC, Schlegel U, Neiger-Aeschbacher G. The analgesic effects of
intrathecal xylazine and detomidine in sheep and their antagonism with systemic
atipamezole. Vet Anaesth Analg 2005; 32: 297–307.
112 Van Miert A, Faghihi S, Van Duin C. Food intake and rumen motility in dwarf
goats. Effects of atipamezole on the inhibitory effects induced by detomidine,
medetomidine and romifidine. Vet Res Commun 1994; 18: 457–469.
113 Adam M, Lindén J, Raekallio M, et al. Concentrations of vatinoxan and xylazine
in plasma, cerebrospinal fluid and brain tissue following intravenous administra-
tion in sheep. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48: 900–905.
114 Adam M, Lindén J, Raekallio M, et al. Effects of vatinoxan on xylazine-induced
pulmonary alterations in sheep. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2022; 45: 117–125.
115 Adam M, Huuskonen V, Raekallio MR, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of vati-
noxan in sevoflurane-anaesthetised sheep receiving dexmedetomidine. Vet J 2018;
238: 63–69.
116 Zahner J, Hatch R, Wilson R, et al. Antagonism of xylazine sedation in steers by
doxapram and 4- aminopyridine. Am J Vet Res 1984; 45: 2546–2551.
117 Waite SJ, Cater JE, Waghorn GC, et al. Effect of sedatives on rumen motility in
sheep. Small Rumin Res 2021; 196: 106284.
118 Simon BT, Scallan EM, Odette O, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
of midazolam following intravenous and intramuscular administration to sheep.
Am J Vet Res 2017; 78: 539–549.
119 Aarnes TK, Fry PR, Hubbell JA, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
of midazolam after intravenous and intramuscular administration in alpacas.
Am J Vet Res 2013; 74: 294–299.
120 Stegmann G. Observations on the use of midazolam for sedation, and induction
of anaesthesia with midazolam in combination with ketamine in the goat.
J S Afr Vet Assoc 1998; 69: 89–92.
121 Stegmann G, Bester L. Sedative-hypnotic effects of midazolam in goats after intra-
venous and intramuscular administration. Vet Anaesth Analg 2001; 28: 49–55.
122 Kyles A, Waterman A, Livingston A. Antinociceptive activity of midazolam in
sheep. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1995; 18: 54–60.
123 Yavuz Ü, Yener K, Şahan A. The effect of midazolam and its reversal flumazenil on
sedative and cardiopulmonary variables in sheep. Kafkas Univ Vet Fak Derg 2021;
27: 771–779.

-- 1297 of 1450 --

1282 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
124 Aarnes TK, Fry PR, Hubbell JA, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
of midazolam after intravenous and intramuscular administration in alpacas.
Am J Vet Res 2013; 74: 294–299.
125 O’Hair K, Dodd K, Phillips Y, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of nalbuphine
hydrochloride and butorphanol tartrate in sheep. Lab Anim Sci 1988; 38: 58–61.
126 Waterman A, Livingston A, Amin A. Analgesic activity and respiratory effects of
butorphanol in sheep. Res Vet Sci 1991; 51: 19–23.
127 Barrington GM, Meyer T, Parish S. Standing castration of the llama using
butorphanol tartrate and local anesthesia. Equine Pract 1993; 15: 35–39.
128 Carroll G, Boothe D, Hartsfield S, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
of butorphanol in llamas following intravenous and intramuscular administra-
tion. Vet Anaesth Analg 2002; 29: 97–112.
129 Garcia Pereira F, Greene S, Keegan R, et al. Cardiovascular effects of butorphanol
in isoflurane-anesthetized alpacas. Vet Anaesth Analg 2005; 32: 8–9.
130 de Carvalho LL, Nishimura LT, Borges LP, et al. Sedative and cardiopulmonary
effects of xylazine alone or in combination with methadone, morphine or trama-
dol in sheep. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43: 179–188.
131 Abouelfetouh MM, Salah E, Liu L, et al. Immediate postoperative analgesia of
nalbuphine-ketamine combination compared with ketamine alone in xylazine-
sedated goats undergoing left flank laparotomy. Animals 2022; 12: 509.
132 Camburn M. Use of alphaxalone-alphadolone in ruminants. Vet Rec 1982; 111:
166–167.
133 Kischinovsky M, Duse A, Wang T, et al. Intramuscular administration of alfax-
alone in red-eared sliders (Trachemys scripta elegans)- effects of dose and body
temperature. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40: 13–20.
134 Huynh M, Poumeyrol S, Pignon C, et al. Intramuscular administration of alfax-
alone for sedation in rabbits. Vet Rec 2015; 176: 255.
135 Tamura J, Ishizuka T, Fukui S, et al. Sedative effects of intramuscular alfaxalone
administered to cats. J Vet Med Sci 2015; 77: 897–904.
136 Patterson M, Caulkett N, Neuhaus P, et al. The utility of a novel formulation of
alfaxalone in a remote delivery system. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48: 537–540.
137 Valverde A, Doherty TJ, Dyson D, et al. Evaluation of pentobarbital as a drug for
standing sedation in cattle. Vet Surg 1989; 18: 235–238.
138 Abrahamsen EJ. Chemical restraint, anesthesia, and analgesia for camelids.
Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 2009; 25: 455–494.
139 Coetzee JF, Gehring R, Tarus-Sang J, et al. Effect of sub-anesthetic xylazine and
ketamine (’ketamine stun’) administered to calves immediately prior to castration.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2010; 37: 566–578.
140 Quandt J, Robinson E. Nasotracheal intubation in calves. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1996; 209: 967–968.
141 Rouse S. Pharmacodynamics of thiobarbiturates. Vet Anesth 1978; 5: 22–26.
142 Pascoe PJ. Emergency care medicine. In: Short CE, ed. Principles and Practice of
Veterinary Anesthesia. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins, 1987: 558–598.
143 Chaplin M, Roszkowski A, Richards R. Displacement of thiopental from plasma
proteins by nonsteroidal anti- inflammatory agents. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1973;
143: 667–671.
144 Steckeler P, Fux D, Metzner M, et al. The course of plasma cortisol concentration
after three different doses of ketamine in xylazine-premedicated calves.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2019; 46: 335–343.
145 Blaze C, Holland R, Grant A. Gas exchange during xylazine–ketamine anesthesia
in neonatal calves. Vet Surg 1988; 17: 155–159.
146 Thurmon J, Benson G. Anesthesia in ruminants and swine. In: Howard, JC, ed.
Current Veterinary Therapy 3: Food Animal Practice, 3rd edn. Philadelphia, PA:
WB Saunders, 1993: 58–76.
147 Coulson N, Januszkiewicz A, Dodd K, et al. The cardiorespiratory effects of
diazepam-ketamine and xylazine–ketamine anesthetic combinations in sheep.
Lab Anim Sci 1989; 39: 591–597.
148 Raekallio M, Kivalo M, Jalanka H, et al. Medetomidine/ketamine sedation in
calves and its reversal with atipamezole. Vet Anaesth Analg 1991; 18: 45–47.
149 Lauper J, Marolf V, Levionnois O, et al. Does systemic lidocaine reduce ketamine
requirements for endotracheal intubation in calves? Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44:
281–286.
150 DuBois WR, Prado TM, Ko JC, et al. A comparison of two intramuscular doses of
xylazine–ketamine combination and tolazoline reversal in llamas. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2004; 31: 90–96.
151 Grandy J, McDonell W. Evaluation of concentrated solutions of guaifenesin for
equine anesthesia. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1980; 176: 619–622.
152 Thurmon JC. Injectable anesthetic agents and techniques in ruminants and swine.
Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 1986; 2: 567–591.
153 Wall R, Muir WW III. Hemolytic potential of guaifenesin in cattle. Cornell Vet
1990; 80: 209–216.
154 Kerr CL, Windeyer C, Bouré LP, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of administration
of a combination solution of xylazine, guaifenesin, and ketamine or inhaled isoflu-
rane in mechanically ventilated calves. Am J Vet Res 2007; 68: 1287–1293.
155 Thurmon J, Benson G, Tranquilli W, et al. Cardiovascular effects of intravenous
infusion of guaifenesin, ketamine, and xylazine in Holstein calves [Abstract]. Vet
Surg 1986; 15: 463.
156 Lin H-C, Tyler J, Welles E, et al. Effects of anesthesia induced and maintained by
continuous intravenous administration of guaifenesin, ketamine, and xylazine in
spontaneously breathing sheep. Am J Vet Res 1993; 54: 1913–1916.
157 Tracy C, Short C, Clark B. Comparing the effects of intravenous and intramuscu-
lar administration of Telazol®. Vet Med 1988; 83: 104–111.
158 Hubbell J, Bednarski R, Muir W. Xylazine and tiletamine–zolazepam anesthesia in
horses. Am J Vet Res 1989; 50: 737–742.
159 Lin H, Thurmon J, Benson G, et al. The hemodynamic response of calves to
tiletamine-zolazepam anesthesia. Vet Surg 1989; 18: 328–334.
160 Thurmon J, Lin H, Benson G, et al. Combining Telazol® and xylazine for anesthe-
sia in calves. Vet Med 1989; 84: 824–830.
161 Conner G, Coppock R, Beck C. Laboratory use of CI-744, a cataleptoid anesthetic,
in sheep. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 1974; 69: 479–482.
162 Lagutchik M, Januszkiewicz A, Dodd K, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of a
tiletamine–zolazepam combination in sheep. Am J Vet Res 1991; 52: 1441–1447.
163 Lin H, Tyler J, Wallace S, et al. Telazol® and xylazine anesthesia in sheep. Cornell
Vet 1993; 83: 117–124.
164 Howard B, Lagutchik M, Januszkiewicz A, et al. The cardiovascular response of
sheep to tiletamine–zolazepam and butorphanol tartrate anesthesia. Vet Surg
1990; 19: 461–467.
165 Klein L, Tomasic M, Olson K. Evaluation of Telazol® in llamas [Abstract]. Vet Surg
1990; 19: 316–317.
166 Seddighi R, Elliot SB, Whitlock BK, et al. Antinociceptive and selected physiologi-
cal effects of morphine and xylazine on tiletamine–zolazepam anesthesia in lla-
mas. Vet Anaesth Analg 2014; 41: 365–371.
167 Waterman A. Use of propofol in sheep. Vet Rec 1988; 122: 260.
168 Handel I, Weaver B, Staddon G, et al. Observations on the pharmacokinetics of
propofol in sheep. In: Proceedings of the 4th International Congress of Veterinary
Anesthesia, Utrecht, NL, 1991: 143–154.
169 Reid J, Nolan A, Welsh E. Propofol as an induction agent in the goat: a pharma-
cokinetic study. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1993; 16: 488–493.
170 Correia D, Nolan A, Reid J. Pharmacokinetics of propofol infusions, either alone
or with ketamine, in sheep premedicated with acepromazine and papaveretum.
Res Vet Sci 1996; 60: 213–217.
171 Duke T, Egger C, Ferguson J, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of propofol infusion
in llamas. Am J Vet Res 1997; 58: 153–156.
172 Andaluz A, Felez-Ocana N, Santos L, et al. The effects on cardio-respiratory and
acid–base variables of the anaesthetic alfaxalone in a 2-hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin
(HPCD) formulation in sheep. Vet J 2012; 191: 389–392.
173 Walsh V, Gieseg M, Singh P, et al. A comparison of two different ketamine and
diazepam combinations with an alphaxalone and medetomidine combination for
induction of anaesthesia in sheep. N Z Vet J 2012; 60: 136–141.
174 del Álamo AM, Mandsager RE, Riebold TW, et al. Evaluation of intravenous
administration of alfaxalone, propofol, and ketamine-diazepam for anesthesia in
alpacas. Vet Anaesth Analg 2015; 42: 72–82.
175 Hubbell JA, Hull BL, Muir WW. Perianesthetic considerations in cattle. Compend
Contin Educ Pract Vet 1986; 8: F92–F102.
176 Kinyon GE. A new device for topical anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1982; 56:
154–155.
177 Lagutchik M, Mundie T, Martin D. Methemoglobinemia induced by a benzocaine-
based topically administered anesthetic in eight sheep. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992;
201: 1407–1410.
178 Hall LW, Clarke KW. Veterinary Anaesthesia, 8th edn. London, UK: Bailliere
Tindall, 1983.
179 Riebold T, Engel H, Grubb T, et al. Orotracheal and nasotracheal intubation in
llamas. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1994; 204: 779–783.
180 Byers SR, Cary JA, Farnsworth KD. Comparison of endotracheal intubation
techniques in llamas. Can Vet J 2009; 50: 745–749.
181 Yakan S, Aksoy O. Comparison of the effects of isoflurane and sevoflurane general
anaesthesia after induction by propofol on clinical and physiological measure-
ments in calves. Acta Sci Vet 2019; 47.
182 Deschk M, Wagatsuma JT, Araújo MA, et al. Continuous infusion of propofol
in calves: bispectral index and hemodynamic effects. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43:
309–315.
183 Lima PPA, Narciso LG, Alcindo JF, et al. Evaluation of hematological, biochemical
and oxidative stress profile in calves under propofol anesthesia. Vet Res Commun
2022; 46: 27–35.
184 Larenza MP, Bergadano A, Iff I, et al. Comparison of the cardiopulmonary effects
of anesthesia maintained by continuous infusion of ketamine and propofol with
anesthesia maintained by inhalation of sevoflurane in goats undergoing magnetic
resonance imaging. Am J Vet Res 2005; 66: 2135–2141.

-- 1298 of 1450 --

Chapter 64: Ruminants 	1283
185 Moll X, Santos L, García F, et al. The effects on cardio-respiratory and acid–base
variables of a constant rate infusion of alfaxalone-HPCD in sheep. Vet J 2013;
196: 209–212.
186 del Mar Granados M, Domínguez JM, Fernández-Sarmiento A, et al. Anaesthetic
and cardiorespiratory effects of a constant-rate infusion of alfaxalone in
desflurane-anaesthetised sheep. Vet Rec 2012; 171: 125.
187 O’Brien T, Raffe M, Cox V, et al. Hepatic necrosis following halothane anesthesia
in goats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1986; 189: 1591–1595.
188 McEwen MM, Gleed RD, Ludders JW, et al. Hepatic effects of halothane and iso-
flurane anesthesia in goats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000; 217: 1697–1700.
189 Mathews KA, Doherty T, Dyson DH, et al. Nephrotoxicity in dogs associated
with methoxyflurane anesthesia and flunixin meglumine analgesia. Can Vet J
1990; 31: 766.
190 Redua M, Doherty T, Castro-Queiroz P, et al. Effect of intravenous lidocaine and
ketamine on isoflurane minimum alveolar concentration in goats. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2005; 32: 6–7.
191 Dzikiti TB, Stegmann GF, Dzikiti LN, et al. Effects of midazolam on isoflurane
minimum alveolar concentration in goats. Small Rumin Res 2011; 97: 104–109.
192 Queiroz-Castro P, Egger C, Redua MA, et al. Effects of ketamine and magnesium
on the minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in goats. Am J Vet Res 2006;
67: 1962–1966.
193 Bernards CM, Kern C, Cullen BF. Chronic cocaine administration reversibly
increases isoflurane minimum alveolar concentration in sheep. Anesthesiology
1996; 85: 91–95.
194 Brett CM, Teitel DF, Heymann MA, et al. The cardiovascular effects of isoflurane
in lambs. Anesthesiology 1987; 67: 60–65.
195 Cantalapiedra A, Villanueva B, Pereira J. Anaesthetic potency of isoflurane in cat-
tle: determination of the minimum alveolar concentration. Vet Anaesth Analg
2000; 27: 22–26.
196 Mama KR, Wagner AE, Parker DA, et al. Determination of the minimum alveolar
concentration of isoflurane in llamas. Vet Surg 1999; 28: 121–125.
197 Grubb TL, Schlipf JW, Riebold TW, et al. Minimum alveolar concentration of
sevoflurane in spontaneously breathing llamas and alpacas. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2003; 223: 1167–1169.
198 Hikasa Y, Okuyama K, Kakuta T, et al. Anesthetic potency and cardiopulmonary
effects of evoflurane in goats: comparison with isoflurane and halothane. Can J Vet
Res 1998; 62: 299–306.
199 Lukasik V, Nogami W, Morgan S. Minimum alveolar concentration and cardiovas-
cular effects of sevoflurane in sheep. Vet Surg 1998; 27: 168.
200 Grubb TL, Schlipf JW, Riebold TW, et al. Minimum alveolar concentration of
desflurane in llamas and alpacas. Vet Anaesth Analg 2006; 33: 351–355.
201 Columbano N, Duffee LR, Melosu V, et al. Determination of minimum alveolar
concentration and cardiovascular effects of desflurane in positive-pressure
ventilated sheep. Am J Vet Res 2018; 79: 727–732.
202 Sayre RS, Lepiz MA, Horsley KT, et al. Effects of oxymorphone hydrochloride or
hydromorphone hydrochloride on minimal alveolar concentration of desflurane
in sheep. Am J Vet Res 2015; 76: 583–590.
203 Yakan S, Aksoy O, Ermutlu CS. Comparison of use of isoflurane or sevoflurane for
anaesthesia induced by mask in calves. Acta Sci Vet 2020: 48.
204 Duffee L, Columbano N, Scanu A, et al. MAC-sparing effect of nitrous oxide in
sevoflurane anesthetized sheep and its reversal with systemic atipamezole admin-
istration. PLoS ONE 2018; 13: e0190167.
205 Wagner AE, Walton JA, Hellyer PW, et al. Use of low doses of ketamine adminis-
tered by constant rate infusion as an adjunct for postoperative analgesia in dogs.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2002; 221: 72–75.
206 Matthews N, Fielding C, Swinebroad E. How to use a ketamine constant rate
infusion in horses for analgesia. In: Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of
the American Association of Equine Practitioners, Denver, CO, 2004: 227–228.
207 Schlipf J Jr., Eaton K, Fulkerson P, et al. Constant rate infusion of ketamine reduces
minimal alveolar concentration of isoflurane in alpacas. Vet Anaesth Analg 2005;
32: 7–8.
208 Funes FJ, del Mar Granados M, Morgaz J, et al. Anaesthetic and cardiorespiratory
effects of a constant rate infusion of fentanyl in isoflurane-anaesthetized sheep.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2015; 42: 157–164.
209 Lauren D, Eraldo PS, Antonio S, et al. MAC-sparing effect of transdermal fentanyl
in sevoflurane-anesthetized sheep. Acta Vet 2018; 68: 211–216.
210 Doherty T, Frazier DL. Effect of intravenous lidocaine on halothane minimum
alveolar concentration in ponies. Equine Vet J 1998; 30: 300–303.
211 Valverde A, Doherty TJ, Hernández J, et al. Effect of lidocaine on the minimum
alveolar concentration of isoflurane in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2004; 31:
264–271.
212 Araújo MA, Dias BP, Bovino F, et al. Cardiovascular effects of a continuous rate
infusion of lidocaine in calves anesthetized with xylazine, midazolam, ketamine
and isoflurane. Vet Anaesth Analg 2014; 41: 145–152.
213 Hartnack AK, Niehaus AJ, Lakritz J, et al. Analgesic efficacy of an intravenous
constant rate infusion of a morphine-lidocaine- ketamine combination in Holstein
calves undergoing umbilical herniorrhaphy. Am J Vet Res 2020; 81: 25–32.
214 Beier SL, da Rosa AC, Oleskovicz N, et al. Effects of the morphine-lidocaine-
ketamine combination on cardiopulmonary function and isoflurane sparing in
sheep. Rev Bras Ciênc Agrár 2014; 35: 2527–2538.
215 White N. Postanesthetic recumbency myopathy in horses. Compend Contin Educ
Pract Vet 1982; 4(Suppl): S44–S52.
216 Smith JS, Viall AK, Breuer RM, et al. Preliminary investigation of bovine whole
blood xenotransfusion as a therapeutic modality for the treatment of anemia in
goats. Front Vet Sci 2021; 8: 637988.
217 Buck RK, Stegmann GF, Poore LA, et al. Xenotransfusion with packed bovine red
blood cells to a wildebeest calf (Connochaetes taurinus). J S Afr Vet Assoc 2018;
89: 1–6.
218 Riebold T, Evans A, Robinson N. Evaluation of the demand valve for resuscitation
of horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1980; 176: 623–626.
219 Gabel A, Heath R, Ross J, et al. Hypoxia – its prevention in inhalation anesthesia
in horses. In: Proceedings of the 12th Annual Meeting of the American Association
of Equine Practitioners, Los Angeles, CA, 1966: 179–196.
220 Grandy J, Steffey E, Hodgson D, et al. Arterial hypotension and the development
of postanesthetic myopathy in halothane-anesthetized horses. Am J Vet Res 1987;
48: 192–197.
221 Grandy J, Hodgson D, Dunlop C, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of ephedrine in
halothane-anesthetized horses. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1989; 12: 389–396.
222 Daunt DA. Supportive therapy in the anesthetized horse. Vet Clin North Am
Equine Pract 1990; 6: 557–574.
223 Tranquilli W, Greene S. Cardiovascular medications and the autonomic nervous
system. In: Short CS, ed. Principles and Practice of Veterinary Anesthesia.
Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins, 1987: 426–454.
224 Aarnes TK, Hubbell JA, Lerche P, et al. Comparison of invasive and oscillometric
blood pressure measurement techniques in anesthetized sheep, goats, and cattle.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2014; 41: 174–185.
225 Aarnes TK, Hubbell JA, Lerche P, et al. Comparison of invasive and oscillometric
blood pressure measurement techniques in anesthetized camelids. Can Vet J 2012;
53: 881–885.
226 Manley SV. Monitoring the anesthetized horse. Vet Clin North Am Large Anim
Pract 1981; 3: 111–133.
227 Gallivan G, McDonell W, Forrest J. Comparative ventilation and gas exchange in
the horse and the cow. Res Vet Sci 1989; 46: 331–336.
228 Thurmon J, Romack F, Garner H. Excursions of the bovine eyeball during gaseous
anesthesia. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 1968; 63: 967–972.
229 Trefz FM, Lorenz I, Constable PD. Electrocardiographic findings in 130 hospital-
ized neonatal calves with diarrhea and associated potassium balance disorders.
J Vet Intern Med 2018; 32: 1447–1461.
230 Antzelevitch C, Shimizu W, Yan G, et al. The M cell: its contribution to the ECG
and to normal and abnormal electrical function of the heart. J Cardiovasc
Electrophysiol 1999; 10: 1124–1152.
231 American College of Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia (ACVAA) Small
Animal 	Monitoring 	Guidelines. 	www.acvaa.org/veterinarians/guidelines
(accessed March 2023).
232 Quinn CT, Raisis AL, Musk GC. Evaluation of Masimo Signal Extraction
Technology pulse oximetry in anaesthetized pregnant sheep. Vet Anaesth Analg
2013; 40: 149–156.
233 Cribb PH. The effects of prolonged hypotensive isoflurane anesthesia in horses –
post- anesthetic myopathy [Abstract]. Vet Surg 1988; 17: 164–165.
234 Matthews N, Gleed R, Short C. Cardiopulmonary effects of general anesthesia in
adult cattle. Mod Vet Pract 1986; 67: 618–620.
235 Grandy JL, Hodgson DS. Anesthetic considerations for emergency equine abdom-
inal surgery. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 1988; 4: 63–78.
236 Riebold TW, Evans AT. Comparison of simultaneous blood-pressure determina-
tions by four methods in the anesthetized horse. Vet Surg 1985; 14: 332–337.
237 Riebold T, Brunson D, Lott R, et al. Percutaneous arterial catheterization in the
horse. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 1980; 75: 1736–1742.
238 Casoni D, Mirra A, Goepfert C, et al. Iatrogenic cerebral arterial gas embolism
from flushing of the arterial line in two calves. Acta Vet Scand 2018; 60: 1–6.
239 Moens Y, Gootjes P, Lagerweij E. The influence of methane on the infrared
measurement of halothane in the horse. J Vet Anaesth 1991; 18: 4–7.
240 Gootjes P, Moens Y. A simple method to correct infrared measurement of
anaesthetic vapour concentration in the presence of methane. J Vet Anaesth 1997;
24: 24–25.
241 Kruse- Elliott K, Riebold T, Swanson C. Reversal of xylazine–ketamine anesthesia
in goats. [Abstract]. Vet Surg 1987; 16: 321.
242 Riebold TW, Engel HN, Grubb TL, et al. Orotracheal and nasotracheal intubation
in llamas. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1994; 204: 779–783.

-- 1299 of 1450 --

1284 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
243 Skelding A, Valverde A. Intra-operative hyperthermia in a young Angus bull with
a fatal outcome. Can Vet J 2017; 58: 614–616.
244 Musewe V, Gillespie J, Berry J. Influence of ruminal insufflation on pulmonary
function and diaphragmatic electromyography in cattle. Am J Vet Res 1979;
40: 26–31.
245 Lumb WV, Jones EW. The inhalational anesthetics. In: Veterinary Anesthesia,
2nd edn. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger, 1984: 213–239.
246 Heath R. General anesthesia in ruminants. In: Jennings PB, ed. The Practice of
Large Animal Surgery. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 1984: 202–204.
247 Tayari H, Cuypers C, Schäffler L, et al. Fatal cardiac arrest in a calf with uroperito-
neum. Vet Rec Case Rep 2019; 7: e000730.
248 Muir W, Bednarski R. Equine cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Part 1. Compend
Contin Educ Pract Vet 1983; 5(Suppl): S228–S234.
249 Muir W, Bednarski R. Equine cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Part 2. Compend
Contin Educ Pract Vet 1983; 5(Suppl): S287–S295.
250 Hubbell J, Muir W, Gaynor J. Cardiovascular effects of thoracic compression in
horses subjected to euthanasia. Equine Vet J 1993; 25: 282–284.
251 Hildebrand S. Neuromuscular blocking agents in equine anesthesia. Vet Clin
North Am Equine Pract 1990; 6: 587–606.
252 Corley KTT. Fluid therapy for horses with gastrointestinal disease. In: Smith BP, ed.
Large Animal Internal Medicine, 3rd edn. St Louis, MO: Mosby, 2002: 682–694.
253 Ames T, Baker J, Wikse S. The bronchopneumonias (respiratory disease complex
of cattle, sheep, and goats). In: Smith BP, ed. Large Animal Internal Medicine,
3rd edn. St Louis, MO: Mosby, 2002: 551–570.
254 Skarda RT. Local and regional anesthesia in ruminants and swine. Vet Clin North
Am Food Anim Pract 1996; 12: 579–626.
255 George L. Pain control in food animals. In: Steffey EP, ed. Recent Advances in
Anesthetic Management of Large Domestic Animals. Ithaca, NY: International
Veterinary Information Service, 2003: A0615.1103.
256 Schulze I, Poos E, Meyer H, et al. Effects of preoperative carprofen on cardio-
respiratory, hormonal and metabolic stress response in calves during umbilical
surgery under isoflurane inhalation anaesthesia. Vet J 2016; 216: 18–24.
257 Smith GW, Davis JL, Tell LA, et al. Extralabel use of nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs in cattle. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008; 232: 697–701.
258 Plummer PJ, Schleining JA. Assessment and management of pain in small rumi-
nants and camelids. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 2013; 29: 185–208.
259 Smith JS, Schleining JA, Plummer P. Pain management in small ruminants and
camelids – Applications and strategies. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 2021;
37: 17–31.
260 Smith JS, Schleining JA, Plummer P. Pain management in small ruminants and
camelids – Analgesic agents. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 2021; 37: 1–16.
261 Navarre C, Ravis W, Nagilla R, et al. Pharmacokinetics of flunixin meglumine in lla-
mas following a single intravenous dose. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2001; 24: 361–364.
262 Navarre C, Ravis W, Nagilla R, et al. Pharmacokinetics of phenylbutazone in lla-
mas following single intravenous and oral doses. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2001; 24:
227–231.
263 Navarre C, Ravis W, Campbell J, et al. Stereoselective pharmacokinetics of keto-
profen in llamas following intravenous administration. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2001;
24: 223–226.
264 Machado Filho L, Hurnik J, Ewing K. A thermal threshold assay to measure the noci-
ceptive response to morphine sulphate in cattle. Can J Vet Res 1998; 62: 218–223.
265 Wagner AE. Opioids. In: Muir WW, Gaynor JS, eds. Handbook of Veterinary Pain
Management. St Louis, MO: Mosby, 2002: 164–183.
266 Pascoe PJ. Opioid analgesics. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2000; 30:
757–772.
267 Bennett RC, Steffey EP. Use of opioids for pain and anesthetic management in
horses. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 2002; 18: 47–60.
268 Grubb TL, Gold JR, Schlipf JW, et al. Assessment of serum concentrations and
sedative effects of fentanyl after transdermal administration at three dosages in
healthy llamas. Am J Vet Res 2005; 66: 907–909.
269 Burke MJ, Soma LR, Boston RC, et al. Evaluation of the analgesic and pharma-
cokinetic properties of transdermally administered fentanyl in goats. J Vet Emerg
Crit Care (San Antonio) 2017; 27: 539–547.
270 Buchholz T, Hildebrand M, Heider A, et al. Transdermal fentanyl uptake at two dif-
ferent patch locations in Swiss White Alpine sheep. Animals (Basel) 2020; 10: 1675.
271 Torske KE, Dyson DH. Epidural analgesia and anesthesia. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 2000; 30: 859–874.
272 Gaynor JS, Mama KR. Local and regional anesthetic techniques for alleviation of
perioperative pain. In Gaynor JS, Muir WW, eds. Handbook of Veterinary Pain
Management, 2nd edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2009: 277–300.
273 Robinson EP, Natalini CC. Epidural anesthesia and analgesia in horses. Vet Clin
North Am Equine Pract 2002; 18: 61–82.

-- 1300 of 1450 --

1285
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: T he Sixth E dition of L umb and J ones	. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
Pigs are anesthetized for a variety of reasons, including diagnostic,
surgical, and experimental procedures. The general approach to
anesthesia of the pig is similar whether the patient is a pet, a research
animal, or an eventual food source, though the physical and regula-
tory environments may be quite different. Veterinary surgical pro-
cedures performed in pigs under field conditions are usually limited
to minor operations such as hernia repair and castration [1]. In
contrast, when used in biomedical research, the animal may be
subjected to complicated and invasive surgical procedures that
require more advanced analgesic and anesthetic techniques. When
managing animal species that are commonly used as a food source,
withdrawal times for sedatives and anesthetics should be discussed
with the owner since even pet pigs occasionally end up in the
food chain [2].
Preanesthetic considerations
Fasting
Presurgical fasting time for pigs should be at least 12 h, though the
stomach may still contain food due to the torus pyloricus, which
is well developed in pigs. A full stomach may increase the risk
of gastric dilation, nausea, vomiting, regurgitation, and aspiration.
An overloaded stomach can produce significant pressure on the
diaphragm, decreasing pulmonary functional residual capacity and
alveolar ventilation [3]. When the surgical objective is to manipulate
gastrointestinal or abdominal organs, the fasting time should be
increased to 24–48 h to empty the large bowel. Neonates should
be deprived of food for no more than 3 h in order to prevent hypo-
glycemia. All edible bedding must be removed from the cage in the
fasting period, because pigs will readily consume it otherwise [4].
Water consumption is allowed until premedication is imminent
although 4–6 h of complete nil per os may be warranted if the pig is
going to undergo gastric or upper small bowel surgery [5].
Handling and restraint
Pigs can be difficult to restrain because of their body shape and lack
of appendages that can be readily grasped by handlers [3].
Aggressive and/or fearful pigs pose several challenges from being
difficult to fully evaluate to presenting a safety hazard to the staff
and owners. Restraint can be facilitated by adapting the pig to the
presence of humans and manipulation, resulting in a less stressful
environment. In research environments, animals should be accli-
matized at the institution for 2–3 weeks prior to experimental pro-
cedures [6]. During this time, the pigs should be spoken to and
handled in a calm manner. However, in situations where time is
limited and the animal is not trained, a partition known as a “crowd
panel” or “hog board” can be used to isolate the pig in a corner or
against a wall. This partition may be constructed of wood, plastic,
or metal and should be the same height as the animal and
65 Swine
Lais M. Malavasi
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Washington State University, Pullman, Washington, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 1285
Preanesthetic considerations, 1285
Fasting, 1285
Handling and restraint, 1285
Drug administration, 1286
Premedication, 1286
Parasympatholytic drugs, 1287
Sedation and chemical restraint, 1287
Induction of anesthesia, 1288
Orotracheal intubation, 1290
Maintenance of anesthesia, 1291
Monitoring, 1293
Supportive therapies, 1294
Recovery considerations, 1295
Malignant hyperthermia, 1295
Analgesia, 1295
References, 1297

-- 1301 of 1450 --

1286 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
two-thirds to the full length of the pig. The hog board is used to
protect the handler during examination or intramuscular (IM)
injection.
Pigs can be restrained using other methods as well. For small
pigs, the animal’s hind legs can be lifted by one hand, while the
other is placed under the chest to provide support. However, pigs
weighing more than 10 kg can be very strong and difficult to lift.
These swine can be guided into a transport cart or coaxed out of
the pen and into the cart with small amounts of food or treats.
Another method of immobilization is the sling, where the pig is
placed in a hammock with four holes for the limbs. This hammock
is supported by a metal frame to which its limbs are loosely tied.
One disadvantage is that the pig must be trained to use of the sling.
A pig flipping technique has been described for either routine care
in unsedated animals or to restrain sedated pigs for catheter place-
ment or face-mask induction [7,8]. Finally, the use of a back
scratcher or “pig fork” has been promoted as a method of relaxation
and distraction for pigs undergoing medical care.
For owned pigs, prehospital sedation can dramatically improve
the response to handling and restraint in hospital. Oral (PO) trazo-
done (8–10 mg/kg PO) and gabapentin (20 mg/kg PO) may be
helpful when administered together the night before and again 2 h
prior to the veterinary visit [8].
Drug administration
Intranasal delivery can be used as a needleless route of drug admin-
istration in pigs. For example, Axiak et al. described intranasal
administration of a mixture of ketamine 15 mg/kg, climazolam
1.5 mg/kg, and azaperone 1.0 mg/kg prior to castration. Drug
administration is achieved using a catheter without the stylet and
injected during inspiration in small volumes. Intranasal adminis-
tration resulted in less effective anesthesia than IM injection, but
with the advantages of minor temperature loss and shorter recovery
time [9]. Lacoste et al. reported that the optimal intranasal mida-
zolam dose in piglets was 0.2 mg/kg, producing rapid and reliable
sedation [10].
Anesthetic induction of pigs can be complicated due to their
behavior when physically restrained and the small number of
vessels available for intravenous (IV) injections. Thus, IM adminis-
tration of drugs is often preferred for initial immobilization and, in
some situations, for induction of anesthesia in pigs. Intraperitoneal
injection is described but requires specific training. Also, the conse-
quences of improper administration can be severe if injection into
the urinary bladder, intestines, or other organs occurs [11]. For IM
injection in pigs, the muscles of the thigh are commonly used as the
site of injection in piglets, but this is not recommended in growers/
finishers because of the possibility of causing an abscess or needle
breakage in edible tissue. Appropriate IM administration in adult
pigs is behind the base of the ear where the layer of fat is thinner and
the tissues have good perfusion [12]. Adequate needle size varies
with the size of the animal, from a 20 gauge needle for a piglet up
to a 14 gauge needle for a grower/finisher pig. Needles that are too
short may result in injection of the drug into the fatty tissue,
delaying the absorption, distribution, and ultimately the action of
the anesthetic agent [3]. The use of a Luer-lock needle and a low-
flow extension set connected to a syringe may reduce stress during
the IM injection, allowing the administration of drugs from a rela-
tive distance from the animal. Alternately, a butterfly catheter can
be used for IM injections in smaller animals [13]. Subcutaneous (SC)
injection can be used in smaller or miniature pigs (e.g., Yorkshire
and Yucatan). As pigs have very tight connective tissue, there are
limited areas for SC injection such as the loose flap on the lateral
cervical region [6,14], the axillary area caudal to the elbow, or in the
inguinal region in the flank area [8].
Pigs have limited superficial veins that can be accessed easily to
inject drugs. The marginal ear veins (i.e., auricular veins) are the
only veins that are easily visible on pigs of any size (Fig. 65.1). In
larger animals, the lateral and medial veins on the outer surface of
the ears are preferable because of their increased size. A rubber
band can be placed around the base of the ear to facilitate distention
of the auricular veins [15]. The central auricular vessels are usually
arteries (as in the rabbit) and should not be used for drug adminis-
tration. Note that ear notching to identify pigs can damage some of
these vessels.
Another option for venous access is the cephalic vein located
along the craniomedial surface of the leg. This vein usually cannot
be visualized but may be entered using blind venipuncture after
applying a tourniquet [16]. In small pigs, it may be visualized con-
tinuing across the ventral surface of the neck after applying digital
pressure at the thoracic inlet. The saphenous vein, on the lateral
surface of the rear leg, is usually not a reliable injection site. Larger
vessels such as the external or internal jugular vein or anterior vena
cava can be catheterized but are usually reserved for blood sample
collection or in research settings [5]. The subcutaneous abdominal
vein (cranial superficial epigastric vein) is an alternative to the
auricular vein for blood collection and IV administration of fluids
and medication. This vein courses along the ventral portion of the
abdomen and lies dorsolateral to the mammary chain. Firm digital
pressure applied directly behind the elbow joint, along the thorax,
will assist in visualization and/or palpation of this vein [17]. The
subcutaneous abdominal vein can be useful for administration of
large volumes of fluids, whereas auricular vessels are fragile and
catheters may fail.
Premedication
Anesthesia and analgesia may produce nausea and vomiting in
some animals, including pigs. Antiemetics such as maropitant
(0.5–1 mg/kg PO/SC q24 h) can be considered at least 1 h prior to
premedication of the pig [15,18]. Maropitant is a potent, selective
neurokinin-1 receptor antagonist that blocks the binding of the
neurotransmitter substance P. This substance is found in high
concentrations in both the chemoreceptor trigger zone and the
Figure 65.1 Catheterization of the auricular vein of a Landrace sow with a
16 gauge catheter. A tourniquet has been placed at the base of the ear to
distend the veins.

-- 1302 of 1450 --

Chapter 65: Swine 	1287
vomiting center and is a key neurotransmitter involved in vomiting
in dogs and cats [19].
Parasympatholytic drugs
Atropine and glycopyrrolate are the two principal parasympatholy-
tic drugs used in pigs. The use of these anticholinergic agents
together with sedative/analgesic premedications may decrease the
possibility of bradycardia caused by such agents as morphine,
thiopental, and xylazine [20–23]. Anticholinergic agents also reduce
bronchoconstriction, diminish airway secretion volume, and
inhibit salivation, possibly improving conditions for orotracheal
intubation. However, neither anticholinergic agent is routinely
required, and it should be noted that an increased heart rate results
in increased myocardial work and oxygen consumption.
In emergent situations in pigs without an IV catheter, atropine
(and other resuscitation drugs, including epinephrine) can be
administered via the endotracheal tube. Hörnchen et al. [24]
concluded that 2 mg of atropine diluted in 5–10 mL of saline
and instilled in the endotracheal tube was rapidly absorbed by the
pulmonary circulation and increased heart rate within 1 min after
administration. Compared to baseline, significant increases in
heart rate were documented between 9 and 30 min after endotra-
cheal instillation and between 12 and 15 min after IV injection.
Sedation and chemical restraint
The major sedatives that are commonly used in pigs are butyrophe-
nones, phenothiazines, benzodiazepines, and α2
-adrenergic receptor
agonists [25]. As azaperone, acepromazine, and the benzodiaz-
epines offer minimal analgesia, these drugs should be given in
combination with other agents for invasive surgical procedures.
Any full μ-opioid receptor agonist can be administered to pigs,
typically at doses similar to those used in dogs. In many situations, a
lack of cooperativity on the part of the pig may make chemical
restraint or IM induction of anesthesia an attractive approach.
Azaperone (Stresnil®) is one of the most widely used sedatives
in pigs where it is available [16]. This drug is classified as a
short-acting butyrophenone neuroleptic agent and is relatively safe
compared to other drugs in this same category, such as haloperidol,
when given intramuscularly [21]. IV injection of azaperone is con-
traindicated because it may cause excitation [20]. Azaperone may
be used as a sedative in combination with local anesthetics for minor
surgical procedures, as a premedicant with anxiolytic properties, as
an anxiolytic in weanlings when they are mixed for the first time,
and in maiden sows after their first litter to reduce the rejection of
piglets [16]. The effects of azaperone are dose-dependent wherein
doses of 0.25 mg/kg produce mild sedation without ataxia in
domestic pigs, 0.5–2 mg/kg will produce greater sedation but with
mild ataxia, and doses of 2–4 mg/kg produce significant sedation
and possible recumbency in adult pigs [21,26]. In younger pigs, it
may be necessary to use a much higher dose of azaperone, such as
8 mg/kg, for appropriate sedation [3]. Vietnamese Pot-bellied pigs
require a dose of 0.25–2 mg/kg for sedation and a higher dose of
2–8 mg/kg for induction of anesthesia. However, doses exceeding
2 mg/kg are also more likely to cause adverse effects such as hypo-
tension, bradycardia, and decreased cardiac output and contractil-
ity [21]. Note that in large boars, it has been suggested that
azaperone doses should not exceed 1 mg/kg in order to reduce the
risk of priapism [20].
Azaperone can be combined with other drugs to improve seda-
tion and reduce its dosage, decreasing negative effects. Flores et al.
suggested that azaperone (2 mg/kg) and xylazine (2 mg/kg) given
intramuscularly produced good sedation and muscular relaxation
[27]. Others have reported that animals pretreated with azaperone
(2 mg/kg) and anesthetized with ketamine (15 mg/kg IM) and
midazolam (0.3 mg/kg IM) demonstrated a good anesthetic induc-
tion and analgesia [28]. A combination of azaperone (4 mg/kg) and
midazolam (1 mg/kg) provides sedation in Göttingen minipigs [4].
Acepromazine is a phenothiazine that can be used as part of a
sedative combination in pigs, although by itself its sedative effects
are often considered inadequate. Acepromazine is contraindicated
in debilitated animals due to its potential adverse effects such as
hypotension, bradycardia, hypothermia, and decreased respiratory
rate [20,21]. The recommended IM dose of acepromazine is
0.03–0.1 mg/kg; however, in Göttingen minipigs, higher doses of
0.1–0.45 mg/kg have been suggested [4].
α2
- Adrenergic receptor agonists, such as xylazine, romifidine,
medetomidine, and dexmedetomidine, are widely used in pigs, usu-
ally in combination with a dissociative agent. Note that pigs require
higher doses of α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists than ruminants.
Ketamine at a dose of 10–12 mg/kg IM with a dose of 1–2 mg/kg of
xylazine will immobilize a pig in approximately 5 min [29].
However, this combination decreases cardiac output significantly
for 30 min after administration and the arterial partial pressure of
oxygen (PaO 2
) may decrease, whereas total vascular resistance
increases [30]. Sakaguchi et al. demonstrated that ketamine
(10 mg/kg) and medetomidine (80 μg/kg) IM induced chemical
restraint for 49.4 min on average, which was 14.8 min longer than a
xylazine (2 mg/kg) and ketamine (10 mg/kg) combination [31]. In
addition, the duration of muscle relaxation in pigs is twice as long
with dexmedetomidine–ketamine as with the xylazine–ketamine
mixture. In another study, Sakaguchi et al. studied ketamine and
medetomidine combined with 25 μg/kg of atropine and concluded
that the cardiovascular effects were limited in healthy pigs [32].
A combination of ketamine (8 mg/kg), romifidine (0.12 mg/kg),
and butorphanol (0.1 mg/kg) given IM provides reliable anesthesia
for 20–30 min after a single injection [33].
All of the combinations containing α2
- adrenergic receptor
agonists offer the advantage of being reversible by yohimbine
(0.1–0.2 mg/kg IM, IV), atipamezole (0.12–1 mg/kg IM, IV, SC),
or tolazoline (1–2 mg/kg IV, IM) [34–36]. The reversal of the
α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist is independent of the metabolism
and clearance of ketamine. Therefore, when the α2 - adrenergic
receptor agonist is reversed before the effect of the ketamine has
waned, an undesirable recovery may result (e.g., hyperkinesia of
limbs, severe and prolonged ataxia, and vocalization) [21].
Adding another muscle relaxant drug to anesthetic combinations
should provide a better recovery following reversal of α2 - adrenergic
receptor agonists. Ajadi et al. reported using ketamine at 20 mg/kg
IM with xylazine (2 mg/kg IM) and midazolam (0.25 mg/kg IM).
This combination appeared to almost double the duration of
anesthesia with adequate analgesia for at least 30 min, compared to
a lower dose of ketamine (10 mg/kg IM) added to this same combi-
nation of drugs [23]. However, recoveries after benzodiazepine–
ketamine combinations are longer than xylazine–ketamine sedation.
The administration of one part flumazenil (benzodiazepine antago-
nist) to 13 parts of a benzodiazepine agonist should reduce the recov-
ery time in pigs. However, if flumazenil is given before ketamine
effects are diminishing, the recovery will be similar to that with
ketamine alone [3,21].
Opioids can be used in anesthetic combinations in swine.
Ketamine (10 mg/kg), medetomidine (80 μg/kg), and butorphanol
(0.2 mg/kg) given intramuscularly prolonged the duration of the

-- 1303 of 1450 --

1288 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
loss of protective reflexes in pigs and permitted surgical procedures
to be performed for at least 30 min [32]. Another option is to use
tramadol, where available, instead of butorphanol. Tramadol appears
to cause less respiratory depression compared with morphine or
other μ-opioid receptor agonists [37]. Pigs that received tramadol
(5 mg/kg IM) prior to sedation with ketamine (25 mg/kg), xylazine
(2.5 mg/kg), and atropine (0.04 mg/kg) intramuscularly had better
quality of sedation that facilitated endotracheal intubation com-
pared to the saline, ketamine, and xylazine treated animals. Also,
this combination increased the duration of analgesia compared to
ketamine–xylazine sedation [38]. At present, tramadol is not avail-
able in an injectable form in a number of countries including the
United States. Morphine and fentanyl are widely used as analgesics
for pet and research pigs, though this species may be relatively
resistant to the minimum alveolar concentration (MAC)-reducing
effects [39–41]. Pigs appear to require higher doses of buprenor-
phine than dogs [42].
If chemical restraint or IM induction to anesthesia is desired, an
actual anesthetic agent must be included in the drug protocol.
Ketamine is the most commonly used dissociative anesthetic in
humans, non-human primates, cats, laboratory animals, and pigs.
Ketamine has a wide safety margin as it generally stimulates cardio-
vascular function via its sympathomimetic effect [23,43]. Another
advantage is that it can be given intramuscularly as well as intrave-
nously. However, dissociative agents given alone can cause analgesia
with no muscle relaxation, referred to as a “cataleptoid state,” as well
as excessive salivation and hyperresponsiveness during recovery
[3,16]. To minimize these negative effects, ketamine is combined
with adjunctive agents to improve muscle relaxation, decreasing the
ketamine dose required to achieve effective immobilization
(Table 65.1). Yucatan and Yorkshire pigs may require a higher dose
of ketamine and midazolam to be fully sedated compared to other
breeds. For 5–10 min of sedation in Yucatan pigs, a combination of
ketamine (25 mg/kg) and midazolam (0.6 mg/kg) can be used.
For Yorkshire pigs, ketamine (5 mg/kg) combined with midazolam
(0.5 mg/kg) is usually sufficient [14]. It should be noted that in this
study, the combination of drugs was given subcutaneously in the
lateral cervical region, which may have contributed to the relatively
greater dosages needed.
Recently, several reports involving alfaxalone as part of sedation/
anesthesia protocols have been published. Alfaxalone is a synthetic
neuroactive steroid, which activates the GABAA receptor [44], pro-
ducing anesthesia and some muscular relaxation but no analgesia.
The new formulation of alfaxalone-2-hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin,
(Alfaxan®) has been used IV at a dose of 0.7–0.9 mg/kg in pigs
premedicated with azaperone [45]. This formulation of alfaxalone
has been administered successfully IM in pigs alone or in combina-
tion with other agents. IM injection of 5 mg/kg of alfaxalone with
0.5 mg/kg of diazepam produced a rapid onset of recumbency and
deep sedation with minimal side effects in pigs [46]. Alfaxalone
(5 mg/kg) and dexmedetomidine (10 μg/kg) IM also induced mod-
erate to deep sedation with fair to smooth quality in pigs [47]. The
main limitation for using alfaxalone in pigs is the large volume of
injection required with the currently available 10 mg/mL alfaxalone
solution, easily 10–20 mL depending on the size of the pig [45].
Induction of anesthesia
Induction to anesthesia can be accomplished by IM, inhalant, or IV
routes, or a combination thereof (Table 65.2). When anesthesia
is being induced with an inhalant agent (e.g., 3–5% isoflurane or
Table 65.1 Drugs and drug combinations used as premedication in pigs.
Drug 	Dose (mg/kg) 	Route 	Primary references
Parasympatholytic agents
Atropine 	0.02–0.05 	IM, IV, SC 	[3]
Glycopyrrolate 	0.004–0.01 	IM, IV, SC
Sedatives and tranquilizers (alone or in combination)
Acepromazine 	0.2–0.5 	IM 	[36]
Azaperone 	0.5–2 	IM 	[36]
Diazepam 	0.1–0.5
0.5–2
PO
IM
[36]
Ketamine 	0.5–20 	IM 	[36]
Medetomidine 	0.04–0.08 	IM 	[36]
Midazolam 	0.2–5 	IM 	[36]
Xylazine 	0.5–2.2 	IM 	[36]
Tiletamine–zolazepam 	3–6 	IM 	[36]
Alfaxalone plus
dexmedetomidine
5
0.01
IM 	[47]
Alfaxalone plus
diazepam
5
0.5
IM 	[46]
Azaperone plus
midazolam
4
1
IM 	[4]
Azaperone plus
xylazine
2
2
IM 	[27]
Azaperone plus
ketamine plus
midazolam
2
15
0.3
IM 	[28]
Ketamine plus
xylazine
10–20
1–2
IM 	[48]
Ketamine plus
acepromazine
10–20
1.1
IM 	[49]
Ketamine plus
xylazine plus
butorphanol
5
1–3
0.1–0.2
IM 	[50]
Ketamine plus
xylazine plus
midazolam
20
2
0.25
IM 	[23]
Ketamine plus
detomidine plus
butorphanol
5–10
0.05–0.1
0.1–0.2
IM 	[50]
Ketamine plus
dexmedetomidine plus
midazolam
5–20
0.01–0.02
0.2
IM 	[15]
Ketamine plus
xylazine plus
tramadol
25
2.5
5
IM 	[44]
Xylazine plus
midazolam plus
butorphanol
1
0.2
0.2–0.4
IM 	[8]
Xylazine–ketamine–Telazol ®a 0.006–0.012 mL/kg IM 	[36]
IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; SC, subcutaneous; PO, oral.
a Reconstitute 500 mg Telazol® powder with 2.5 mL of 100 mg/mL xylazine and
2.5 mL of 100 mg/mL ketamine; dose expressed as mL/kg.
4–6% sevoflurane) in a mixture with oxygen (4–8 L/min) through a
face mask, there is a minimal amount of time to complete intubation
once the face mask is removed. When the face mask is applied against
the nose of the pig, the anesthetist should observe the breathing
pattern (which should be regular) and determine the anesthetic
stage the patient is in. Once relaxation is adequate, the face mask is
removed and quickly the mouth of the pig is opened and the laryn-
geal opening is sprayed with lidocaine prior to endotracheal

-- 1304 of 1450 --

Chapter 65: Swine 	1289
intubation [3,6]. Although induction of anesthesia by administra-
tion of inhalant anesthetic agents through a mask is possible, it
requires effective manual restraint. Pigs that are not trained will
often resent handling and placement of the face mask [51]. Thus, to
avoid stress, it is appropriate to have a well-sedated animal before
the induction of anesthesia, either with oral or injectable agents [52].
Induction to anesthesia is often accomplished by IV injection of
an anesthetic agent into an auricular vein. Placement of an
indwelling IV catheter facilitates this process. Ketamine combined
with midazolam, propofol alone, or propofol with co-induction
agents are the drugs most commonly used for inducing anesthesia
in pigs, due to their fast-acting effects and short recovery time. In
pigs that have been sedated with an IM combination of ketamine and
xylazine, anesthesia can be induced using an additional 4–6 mg/kg
of ketamine IV [3,16]. IV administration of induction agents should
be slow and titrated to effect in order to avoid apnea, since endotra-
cheal intubation can be somewhat challenging.
Though no longer available in many countries, thiopental and
thiamylal are thiobarbiturates that have been extensively used for
induction prior to inhalation maintenance. Like most injectable
anesthetics, thiobarbiturates can cause apnea, so a means of
intubation and positive-pressure ventilation should be available.
A self-reinflating bag (i.e., Ambu-bag®) can be used for this purpose.
To avoid tissue necrosis, the thiobarbiturates must be given IV, with
induction doses for thiopental and thiamylal ranging from 10–20
and 6–18 mg/kg, respectively. The higher dose is indicated for
unpremedicated young pigs, and the lower dose should be adequate
for sedated animals. Prior to administration of a thiobarbiturate,
adjunctive drugs such as xylazine (1–2 mg/kg IV), ketamine
(2–4 mg/kg IV), or diazepam (2–4 mg/kg IV) may be given.
Another use for thiopental is to abolish laryngeal reflexes with a
small dose (4–6 mg/kg, IV) after administration of a dissociative
anesthetic (i.e., ketamine) [3]. Thiopental and thiamylal may produce
prolonged recovery if an infusion or repeated doses are used to
extend anesthesia [21].
Propofol (2–5 mg/kg IV) is an induction agent that must be
administered intravenously [16, 56]. Unlike the thiobarbiturates,
however, extravascular injection of propofol does not cause tissue
injury (an advantage in unpremedicated swine), and it can be given
through the auricular vein without concern about phlebitis [21].
Propofol is a hypnotic that has minimal analgesic effects, so it is fre-
quently combined with analgesic drugs (i.e., opioids or α2
-adrenergic
receptor agonists). Induction of anesthesia in pigs with an IV bolus
of fentanyl (5 μg/kg) followed by the administration of propofol
(2 mg/kg IV) allows tracheal intubation [6]. Alternatively, dexme-
detomidine (20–40 μg/kg IV) followed by propofol (2–4 mg/kg IV)
may be used for induction in pigs weighing 30–60 kg. The use of
remifentanil combined with propofol for the purpose of induction
of anesthesia in swine has been reported [60].
Remifentanil by itself will allow intubation in pigs premedicated
with a combination of ketamine (30 mg/kg), midazolam (0.75 mg/kg),
and atropine (0.05 mg/kg) IM. A dose of 4–5 μg/kg of remifentanil
IV resulted in better vocal cord position, better response to intu-
bation, shorter time required for intubation, and a decreased
requirement for additional administration of midazolam postintu-
bation compared to animals receiving just ketamine and midazolam.
This protocol was not associated with serious side effects other than
a light level of muscle relaxation and sedation, which require a
skilled anesthetist to intubate these animals [57].
Other agents that can be used for induction of anesthesia in pigs
include etomidate, alfaxalone, and α-chloralose. Available formula-
tions of etomidate contain high concentrations of propylene glycol
and are hypertonic, potentially causing hemolysis following high
cumulative doses. Etomidate does not significantly affect the
cardiovascular system, maintaining stability in critical patients,
although it is reported to suppress adrenocortical activity in humans
and dogs for 24 h after administration [61,62]. In addition, etomidate
may cause pain during IV administration, spontaneous involuntary
muscle movement, tremor, and hypertonus when given alone [59].
Also, while etomidate produces adequate sedation/hypnosis at doses
of 2–4 mg/kg, it is associated with relatively poor analgesia and
muscle relaxation. Therefore, it is recommended to administer other
adjunctive drugs (e.g., α2 -adrenergic receptor agonists, benzodi-
azepines, or opioids) concomitantly. Etomidate has been used in an
experimental setting for induction of anesthesia at a dose of
0.6 mg/kg IV and then followed by a ketamine infusion rate
of 10 mg/kg/h IV to maintain anesthesia [63]. Etomidate does not
trigger malignant hyperthermia in susceptible pigs [64].
Alfaxalone at doses of 5–6 mg/kg IV provides anesthesia in pigs
for 10–15 min. This dose can be decreased if xylazine (1–2 mg/kg IM)
or azaperone (4 mg/kg IM) is given previously. The anesthesia pro-
duced by alfaxalone can be maintained by repeated IV injection of
doses of 2–4 mg/kg [3]. Alfaxalone can also be given intramuscu-
larly, but the maximum dose of 6 mg/kg should be observed due to
excessive volume for this administration route. Anesthesia lasts for
Table 65.2 Drugs and drug combinations used for induction of anesthesia in pigs.
Drug 	Dose (mg/kg) 	Route 	Primary references
Inhalant agents
Isoflurane 	3–5% 	Inhalation 	[49]
Sevoflurane 	3–5% 	Inhalation 	[53]
Injectable agents and combinations
Alfaxalone 	4–6
0.9
IM
IV
[3,16,54]
[45,54]
α-Chloralose 	40 	IV 	[55]
Ketamine 	4–6 	IV 	[3,16]
Propofol 	2–5 	IV 	[16,56]
Remifentanil 	0.004–0.005 	IV 	[57]
Thiopentala 	10–20 	IV 	[3]
Thiamylala 	6–18 	IV 	[3,20]
α- Chloralose plus
morphine
55–86
0.3–0.9
IV
IM
[3]
Etomidate plus
xylazine or
azaperone
2–4
1–2
2–4
IV
IM, IV
IM, IV
[3]
Ketamine plus
xylazine plus
acepromazine
10–15
2
0.2
IM, SC 	[58]
Propofol plus
fentanyl
2
0.005
IV 	[6]
Propofol plus
medetomidine or
xylazine
2–4
0.02–0.04
1–2
IV 	[3]
Tiletamine–zolazepam plus
xylazine
2–8
1.3
IM 	[13]
Tiletamine–zolazepam plus
medetomidine
5
0.05
IM 	[52]
Metomidate plus
azaperone
4
2–4
IV 	[59]
Metomidate plus
azaperone
10
2
IP
IM
[11]
IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; IP, intraperitoneal, SC, subcutaneous.
a No longer available in many countries.

-- 1305 of 1450 --

1290 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
around 15 min, and it may be rather unpredictable [16]. In 2017,
Bigby et al. reported that the dose of alfaxalone to induce anesthesia
in pigs can be as little as 0.9 mg/kg IV after alfaxalone (4 mg/kg),
medetomidine (40 μg/kg), and butorphanol (0.4 mg/kg) IM
premedication [54].
α-Chloralose is an injectable anesthetic that induces a range of
dose-dependent central nervous system effects, both excitatory and
inhibitory. It is exclusively used for non-survival experiments that
require prolonged anesthesia with minimal surgical intervention
since it provides poor analgesia when used alone. In particular,
this agent may be selected when cardiovascular stability and lack
of baroreceptor depression are desired [65]. However, its negative
properties include poor solubility, slow onset of action (15–20 min),
development of metabolic acidosis, hyper-reactivity to auditory
stimulation, peritonitis, and ileus [66]. To anesthetize pigs with
α-chloralose, a loading dose of 40 mg/kg IV is required, while a
surgical depth of anesthesia can be maintained with a constant infu-
sion rate of 10 mg/kg/h IV [67]. Also, α-chloralose at a dose of
55–86 mg/kg IV can be combined with morphine (0.3–0.9 mg/kg IM)
or the combination of ketamine (5–10 mg/kg IV or IM) and butor-
phanol (0.5 mg/kg IV or IM) to improve analgesia and anesthesia.
Mechanical ventilation is recommended to prevent hypercapnia
and respiratory acidosis [4].
Orotracheal intubation
Orotracheal intubation for maintenance of general anesthesia is
important in pigs undergoing procedures lasting longer than a
few minutes, or when unconscious animals are placed in dorsal
recumbency, which can otherwise result in hypoxemia, hypercap-
nia, or airway obstruction. Most sedatives, tranquilizers, and gen-
eral anesthetic agents cause respiratory depression that can be
severe in pigs due to the need for heavy sedation to decrease stress,
and also because of the increased work of breathing imposed by the
narrow upper airway in this species. In addition, pigs are very prone
to laryngospasm, and fluid tends to accumulate in the pharyngeal
region under anesthesia. While intubation of swine may be chal-
lenging, after some training, it can be successfully accomplished
quickly and efficiently.
The major difficulty during orotracheal intubation is limited
visualization of the larynx due to the pig’s unique anatomy. They
have a thick tongue, a long, narrow oropharyngeal space, and
the elongated soft palate often obstructs the epiglottis. Swine
also have a long pharyngeal diverticulum (3–4 cm in adults, 1 cm in
piglets), which protrudes from the wall of the pharynx, above the
esophagus. The angle between the floor of the lateral ventricles and
the trachea, caudal to the opening of the larynx, is obtuse and can
make intubation difficult (Fig. 65.2) [55,68]. If an endotracheal
tube is inserted too deeply beyond the level of the thoracic inlet,
it may block the right cranial bronchus (tracheal bronchus),
thus compromising ventilation of that lung lobe and leading to
poor gas exchange or difficulty maintaining inhalant anesthetic
depth [21,69,70]. If the endotracheal tube diameter is too large, it
can traumatize the delicate laryngeal mucosa, resulting in serious
consequences. Formation of a hematoma or generalized laryngeal
edema may go unnoticed during anesthesia but may result in
respiratory distress at extubation [3,16].
When intubating a pig, the size of cuffed endotracheal tube
should be selected according to the animal’s weight. Endotracheal
tube sizes can range from 3–4 mm internal diameter (ID) in piglets
up to up to 16–18 mm ID in large boars or sows. Most pigs used in
surgical research weigh 10–25 kg, and for these, a 6–7 mm ID
endotracheal tube is appropriate [11]. The endotracheal tube should
be measured and if necessary cut to a length equal to the distance
from the tip of the animal’s nostrils to the level of its shoulder [55].
Once selected, it is practical to have at hand three different sizes of
endotracheal tube: the one thought to be correct, one size larger,
and one size smaller [3].
Preoxygenation is always prudent but especially if orotracheal
intubation may be challenging (e.g., space-occupying mass in the
larynx) or when the anesthetist has little experience with swine
intubation. It is recommended that the animal is preoxygenated
with 100% oxygen through a face mask for 5–10 min unless the
stress of restraint makes preoxygenation unreasonable [55].
Pigs can be intubated in dorsal or ventral recumbency, though
ventral (sternal) recumbency is easier and faster for less experi-
enced personnel [68]. Gauze strips are placed behind the upper and
lower canine teeth to assist in opening of the pig’s mouth. Ideally,
the animal’s head should not be overly extended as this will make
the arytenoid cartilages more difficult to identify and, in some
cases, may even occlude the airway. To improve the visualization of
the larynx, use of a laryngoscope with a long, straight (Miller) blade
with a curved tip of at least 195 mm long for pigs up to 50 kg is
helpful. For animals weighing more than 50 kg, a blade of 205 mm
with an extension (4–8 cm) is more appropriate. Once the larynx is
visualized, the arytenoids should be sprayed with 2% lidocaine to
decrease 	laryngospasm 	and 	coughing. 	Succinylcholine
(1–2 mg/kg IV) has been suggested for abolishing the laryngo-
spasm; however, this drug causes transient muscle paralysis
Ventral
cricoid
cartilage
Thyroid
cartilage
Entrance
into
lateral
laryngeal
ventricle
Posterior
floor of
larynx
Thyroid
cartilage
Middle
laryngeal
ventricle
Epiglottis
Arytenoid
cartilage
Endotracheal
tube
Dorsal
cricoid
cartilage
Tracheal
opening
Figure 65.2 A sagittal view of a pig’s larynx and trachea. Note the acute
angle between the posterior portion of the larynx and the tracheal opening.
Passage of the endotracheal tube is often difficult because of the
entrapment of its tip in the floor of the larynx. Prior placement of a stylet
through the tracheal opening will prevent entrapment of the endotracheal
tube in the laryngeal ventricle just anterior to the thyroid cartilage and the
posterior floor of the larynx anterior to the cricoid cartilage when the tube
is passed into the trachea.

-- 1306 of 1450 --

Chapter 65: Swine 	1291
needing immediate ventilatory support and can trigger malignant
hyperthermia in susceptible pigs. The laryngoscope should be
inserted into the mouth of the pig and the tip gently pressed ven-
trally at the base of the tongue until the vocal cords can be visual-
ized. A plastic guide stylet (such as an airway exchange catheter or
a polypropylene urinary catheter) can be used to assist intubation.
This stylet should be made of malleable atraumatic material and
should be three times the length of the endotracheal tube chosen.
The stylet can be first placed into the larynx and the endotracheal
tube subsequently threaded over it. If the tube encounters resistance
at the laryngeal ventricle and cannot be inserted further, it should
be gently rotated 180° so that it continues into the trachea. Note that
when using a stiff guide stylet, it must be held in place while the
endotracheal tube is being inserted in order to avoid deep advance-
ment of the stylet, resulting in bronchial and peribronchial injuries.
The guide stylet should then be carefully removed, leaving the
endotracheal tube in place, which can be secured with a gauze tie
over the animal’s snout or behind its ears. Correct placement of the
endotracheal tube can be confirmed by noticing expired air moving
through the tube, by visual confirmation via laryngoscopy, through
bilateral chest auscultation, radiography, or, ideally, capnography.
The endotracheal tube cuff should be inflated to a pressure that pre-
vents air escape around the tube when manual ventilation is applied
to a pressure of 20–30 cmH2
O [3,21,55].
If orotracheal intubation is not possible or desired, alternatives
for providing oxygen should be implemented. At a minimum, an
oxygen mask can be employed and suction should be available in
case of regurgitation or vomiting. Laryngeal mask airways (LMAs)
and laryngeal tube airways have been evaluated for swine anesthe-
sia. The researchers who first described the use of a standard LMA,
which was designed for humans, noted that airway management
was greatly simplified compared to orotracheal intubation, but it
was also reported that gastric insufflation occurred in pigs during
mechanical ventilation [3,71]. Use of an LMA allows a pig to be
mechanically ventilated during general anesthesia with isoflurane
with similar tidal volume and minute volume compared to endotra-
cheally intubated animals [72]. One major limitation of the stand-
ard LMA is the potential risk of aspiration, as pigs can never be
considered starved and the LMA does not seal the trachea, as does
a cuffed endotracheal tube. The LMA-ProSeal™ is a modified
double-cuff tube with an esophageal drainage tube that forms a
more effective seal than the standard LMA and facilitates gastric
tube placement, improving protection against aspiration pneumo-
nia [73–76]. The LMA-ProSeal™ has been reported to provide quick
and reliable airway security within one or two attempts at place-
ment without any major complications. The use of this newer LMA
requires further investigation regarding appropriate size selection
in the pig [77].
Maintenance of anesthesia
Both inhaled and injectable anesthetics can be used for maintaining
anesthesia in pigs. Inhalation anesthesia is preferred for prolonged
anesthesia and for specific experimental studies because it provides
smoother transitions, a more controlled plane of anesthesia, and a
more rapid recovery than do many injectable combinations. All the
current inhalant anesthetics have been used safely and effectively in
pigs. Regardless of which anesthetic is chosen, oxygen should be
supplemented via an appropriate anesthetic circuit. Various recom-
mendations have been made concerning weight limitations of anes-
thetic machines and delivery systems designed for humans or small
animals, and the following should be taken into account: the
patient’s estimated tidal volume, the available reservoir bag sizes,
the capacity of the CO 2 absorbent canister, and the diameter of the
available breathing circuit relative to the endotracheal tube. The use
of a machine designed for large animals should be considered for
animals weighing more than about 150–200 kg. Adult pigs are nor-
mally maintained with an oxygen flow of 10–20 mL/kg/min [3,16].
The injection of liquid volatile anesthetic into a vaporization
chamber applied to the snout of piglets has been reported. The
apparatus is filled with a calculated amount of the volatile anes-
thetic agent, and induction can be accomplished in less than 1 min.
Recovery time is reported to be an average of 2 min after removal of
the chamber from the animal. Hodgson compared the use of isoflu-
rane and sevoflurane for short-term anesthesia in piglets and found
that both agents can be used for castration without complications
but isoflurane costs less [78].
Nitrous oxide (N 2 O) is only used to supplement other anesthet-
ics because it is not potent enough to provide anesthesia alone.
N 2 O reduces the dose requirement of more potent anesthetics (i.e.,
MAC values are additive), thus minimizing the cardiopulmonary
depression produced by the primary inhalant and maintaining a
more physiologically stable state [13]. To avoid hypoxia, the maxi-
mum concentration of N 2 O for safe anesthesia in pigs is 75% N 2 O
with 25% O 2 ; however, 50–66% N 2 O is more common in research
laboratories. Rapid movement of N 2 O from the blood to the alveoli
at the end of anesthesia can result in diffusion hypoxia once oxy-
gen supplementation ceases and the pig breathes ambient air.
Therefore, it is indicated to provide 100% oxygen to the animal
during the 5–10 min immediately after discontinuing N 2 O
delivery [3].
Other agents have been recently employed for maintenance of
anesthesia in pigs, especially for research (i.e., xenon). Xenon is an
inert gas with many of the characteristics considered ideal for an
anesthetic agent. One characteristic in particular is the fact that it is
not harmful to the environment, since it is derived from a fractional
distillation of the atmospheric air. Xenon has also been recently
recognized for its systemic hemodynamic stability and analgesia.
The MAC value of xenon has been established to be 119% in
intubated pigs, and it has been reported to not trigger malignant
hyperthermia [79,80]. The production cost of xenon is prohibitive
at this point, and it requires low fresh gas flow rates with a xenon-
recycling system [81].
Injectable maintenance of anesthesia is a suitable alternative to
the use of inhalants in pigs. In field situations, it is a useful method
of anesthesia because it does not require specialized equipment
(i.e., anesthetic machine with ventilator) or an oxygen delivery
system, although intubation and oxygen delivery may be advisable
in some situations. Drugs used for injectable anesthesia should
achieve amnesia, unconsciousness, analgesia, immobility, and muscle
relaxation. Although total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) requires
an IV catheter (usually placed in an auricular vein), some injectable
anesthetic combinations such as ketamine or tiletamine–zolazepam
(TZ) with xylazine can be given IM. There are disadvantages associ-
ated with injectable anesthesia compared to inhalant anesthesia,
including slower recovery, hypoventilation, and hypoxemia if
oxygen is not supplemented.
Common combinations of injectable anesthetics that have been
used in pigs for field anesthesia are listed in Table 65.3. TZ is effective
and provides reliable immobilization in pigs (due to the tiletamine)
and some muscle relaxation and sedation (due to the zolazepam).
When given intramuscularly, TZ has the advantage over ketamine

-- 1307 of 1450 --

1292 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
of requiring a smaller volume to be injected and provides 20 min of
immobilization suitable for minor surgery [82]. However, TZ alone
may not provide enough CNS depression and visceral analgesia for
most surgical procedures and may require combination with an
α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist (e.g., medetomidine, dexmedetomi-
dine, or xylazine) to provide effective anesthesia. Another reason to
include an α2 - adrenergic receptor agonist with TZ or ketamine is
to smooth out the recovery experience. During recovery from
dissociatives, pigs may display excessive paddling, multiple failed
attempts to return to sternal recumbency, hypersalivation, frequent
vocalization, and hyperthermia [21]. Note that repeated doses of
TZ result in prolonged recovery, which appears to be caused in large
part by zolazepam’s lingering effects. Zolazepam is also responsible
for the posterior weakness observed in mature pigs during recovery.
To decrease this effect, ketamine can be included in the TZ mixture
(e.g., swine TXK). In an unused vial of TZ, 2.5 mL of ketamine
(100 mg/mL) and 2.5 mL of xylazine (100 mg/mL) are added to
the powder, thus producing 100 mg of dissociative agents/mL
(tiletamine and ketamine) and 50 mg/mL each of xylazine and
zolazepam. The recommended dose for commercial pigs is 1 mL
per 35–75 kg IM, depending on the depth of anesthesia required.
It is suggested that the positive chronotropic effects of TZ and
ketamine are partially counterbalanced by the enhanced vagal tone
associated with xylazine [83].
For pot-bellied pigs, the dose of TZ combinations is one-half
that of other pig types. Also, the dose of TZ should be lower when
given to miniature pigs compared to domestic pigs [83]. In a study
by Ko et al., other drug combinations were evaluated in pigs. The
combination of TZ (4.4 mg/kg), ketamine (2.2 mg/kg), and
xylazine (2.2 mg/kg) was compared against TZ (4.4 mg/kg)
and xylazine (2.2 mg/kg), TZ (4.4 mg/kg) and xylazine (4.4 mg/
kg), and ketamine (2.2 mg/kg) with xylazine (2.2 mg/kg) [89].
After observing the quality of restraint and induction of surgical
anesthesia, TZ with either dose of xylazine was preferred. All drug
mixtures were mixed in a single syringe and given as a single IM
injection. All the combinations were considered safe and satisfac-
tory for anesthesia induction in pigs aged 6–8 months [89]. For a
greater depth and prolonged period of anesthesia in miniature
pigs, TZ (3.5 mg/kg) has been combined with xylazine (1.32 mg/
kg) and tramadol (1.8 mg/kg) and administered IM. Animals
became laterally recumbent within 3 min and were calmer during
recovery compared with animals that received only TZ and xyla-
zine. The time between administration of drugs and recovery to
standing was an average of 25 min. The inclusion of tramadol pro-
duced less pronounced cardiovascular depression and did not
cause additional respiratory depressant effects in miniature
pigs [83]. Note that the combination of TZ, xylazine, and trama-
dol can be effectively antagonized, when necessary, with atipam-
ezole (0.12 mg/kg IM), flumazenil (0.1 mg/kg IM), and naloxone
(0.03 mg/kg IM) [90].
Anesthesia can be maintained with a combination known as a
“Swine triple drip” which is a 5% solution of dextrose in water con-
taining 50 mg/mL guaifenesin, 1–2 mg/mL ketamine, and 1 mg/mL
xylazine (GKX) infused IV at a rate of approximately 2.2 mL/kg/h.
It is a satisfactory combination of drugs for induction and mainte-
nance of surgical anesthesia in healthy swine for a period of up to
2 h [11,91]. Anesthesia can be induced using this same GKX
combination at dose of 0.67–1.1 mL/kg after adequate sedation and
IV access are obtained. Recovery occurs within 30–45 min of
discontinuation of the IV infusion and can be accelerated by
administration of yohimbine (0.06–0.1 mg/kg IV) or tolazoline
(2–4 mg/kg IV). Note that when an α2
- adrenergic receptor antago-
nist is used, postoperative analgesia will diminish, and other anal-
gesic techniques such as epidural administration of opioids and
local anesthetics should be employed [36].
The combination of medetomidine 80 μg/kg, butorphanol
0.2 mg/kg, and ketamine 10 mg/kg (MBK) administered IM provides
appropriate anesthesia and analgesia in pigs for 30–45 min. Atropine
(0.025 mg/kg) may also be given if desired. Anesthesia induction is
rapid, and the recovery is generally uneventful. Anesthesia can be
rapidly antagonized with atipamezole (0.24 mg/kg IM) if neces-
sary [32]. IM administration of xylazine, butorphanol, and ketamine
(XBK) has been reported for anesthetizing Göttingen miniature
pigs and pot-bellied pigs [3,4]. Yohimbine (0.05 mg/kg IM) has been
used to reverse XBK anesthesia in Göttingen minipigs [4]. Another
group of researchers have reported that the combination of romifi-
dine (0.12 mg/kg), butorphanol (0.1 mg/kg), and ketamine (8 mg/kg)
administered IM to pigs provides adequate anesthesia under
field conditions. Immobilization was observed within 2–5 min
after IM administration, and reliable anesthesia was maintained for
20–30 min. All recoveries were smooth and smaller pigs were able
to stand up 50–60 min after the injection, while larger animals
needed more time (70–90 min).
Table 65.3 Injectable drugs and combinations used for maintenance of anesthesia
in pigs.
Drug 	Dose 	Route Primary references
Alfaxalone 	0.07–0.27 mg/kg/min IV 	[54]
Guaifenesin–ketamine–
xylazinea
0.67–1.1 mL/kg (ind)
2.2 mL/kg/h (maint)
IV 	[11,29,43]
Medetomidine plus
butorphanol plus
ketamine
0.08 mg/kg
0.2 mg/kg
10 mg/kg
IM 	[32]
Pentobarbital plus
ketamine or
fentanyl
8–10 mg/kg/h
5 mg/kg/h
0.02 mg/kg/h
IV 	[84]
Pentobarbital plus
ketamine plus
midazolam
6–8 mg/kg/h
3–5 mg/kg/h
0.1–0.2 mg/kg/h
IV 	[85]
Propofol 	8–12 mg/kg 	IV 	[86]
Propofol plus
fentanyl
11 mg/kg/h
0.0025–0.02 mg/kg/h
IV 	[49]
Romifidine plus
butorphanol plus
ketamineb
0.12 mg/kg
0.1 mg/kg
5 mg/kg
2 mL/kg/h (maint)
IV 	[33]
Tiletamine–zolazepam plus
xylazine plus
ketamine
4.4 mg/kg
4.4 mg/kg
2.2 mg/kg
IM 	[49]
Tiletamine–zolazepam plus
xylazine plus
tramadol
3.5 mg/kg
1.32 mg/kg
1.8 mg/kg
IM 	[87]
Xylazine plus
ketamine plus
midazolam
2 mg/kg
Up to 20 mg/kg
0.25 mg/kg
IM 	[49]
Xylazine plus
butorphanol plus
ketamine
2 mg/kg
0.2–0.22 mg/kg
5–11 mg/kg
IM 	[49,69,88]
IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; ind, induction; maint, maintenance.
a Often referred to as “GKX” or “swine triple drip.” Combine 1–2 g of ketamine and
1 g of xylazine with 1 L of 5% guaifenesin; creating a solution that is ~50 mg/mL
guaifenesin, 1–2 mg/mL ketamine, and 1 mg/mL xylazine.
b For infusion, combine 5 mg of romifidine, 5.6 mg of butorphanol, and 200 mg of
ketamine in 100 mL saline.

-- 1308 of 1450 --

Chapter 65: Swine 	1293
Historically, the barbiturates were used extensively for main-
taining anesthesia in laboratory animals. Currently, due to lack
of availability, use of barbiturates for general anesthesia has dra-
matically decreased. Dosage recommendations (e.g., pentobarbital
20–40 mg/kg, and thiopental or thiamylal 6.6–30 mg/kg) should be
interpreted as guidelines since barbiturates are administered IV to
effect. The dose should be reduced by one-half to two-thirds when
barbiturates are combined with other agents [11,82]. Note that the
use of a single injectable anesthetic is usually not adequate to
fulfill all the criteria of general anesthesia. Ketamine (5 mg/kg IV)
or fentanyl (20 μg/kg IV) can be administered concomitantly
with pentobarbital (20 mg/kg IV) for induction of anesthesia
after premedication with atropine (0.04 mg/kg IM) and diazepam
(0.5 mg/kg IM). Maintenance of anesthesia using a constant
infusion of ketamine (5 mg/kg/h) or fentanyl (20 μg/kg/h) in com-
bination with a pentobarbital infusion of 8–10 mg/kg/h has been
reported. Both ketamine and fentanyl result in stable hemodynamics
during induction and maintenance of anesthesia for pigs subjected
to open-heart surgery [92]. Miniature pigs may also be anesthe-
tized with an infusion of low-dose ketamine combined with pento-
barbital. After premedication with atropine (0.04 mg/kg IM) and
diazepam (0.4 mg/kg IM), induction of anesthesia is achieved with
IV ketamine (5 mg/kg) and pentobarbital (20 mg/kg). General
anesthesia maintained with a constant IV infusion of ketamine
(3–5 mg/kg/h) and pentobarbital (6–8 mg/kg/h) with intermittent
midazolam injection hourly at 0.1–0.2 mg/kg demonstrated supe-
rior hemodynamic and respiratory indices in comparison with
pentobarbital alone. Thus, this protocol resulted in both hypnosis
and analgesia with stable circulatory parameters during a cardiopul-
monary bypass procedure [93].
Propofol is rapidly cleared from plasma after infusion, and
therefore, consciousness returns more quickly than with most
other injectable anesthetic agents. Propofol is typically combined
with a potent analgesic drug, such as fentanyl, for maintenance of
anesthesia in pigs. Schöffmann et al. reported that hemodynamic
changes and stress responses in piglets subjected to superficial soft
tissue surgery can be suppressed by TIVA with propofol and fenta-
nyl [94]. After premedication with midazolam (0.5 mg/kg), keta-
mine (10 mg/kg), and butorphanol (0.5 mg/kg) administered IM,
five piglets were induced with propofol at 1 mg/kg IV. Anesthesia
was maintained with IV propofol (8 mg/kg/h) and fentanyl (35 μg/
kg/h) during catheterization of blood vessels. There were no deaths
or adverse events during anesthesia, and heart rate, mean arterial
blood pressure, and lactate concentrations remained unaffected
throughout the surgical procedure. Cortisol levels were suppressed
by the combination, although fentanyl alone effectively suppresses
the 	cortisol 	response 	to 	abdominal 	surgery 	in 	human
patients [94,95].
In a 2017 study, it was observed that alfaxalone can be used for
maintenance of general anesthesia in pigs following premedication
with alfaxalone (4 mg/kg), butorphanol (0.4 mg/kg), and medetomi-
dine (40 μg/kg) administered IM. There were minimal changes in
cardiovascular variables evaluated, and no pigs in this study devel-
oped hypotension (defined as mean arterial blood pressure <
60 mmHg) [54]. This finding is consistent with previous studies
evaluating alfaxalone for TIVA in other species [96,97]. Apnea was
not observed at any time in this study but some pigs hypoventi-
lated during anesthesia, with end-tidal carbon dioxide (PET
CO2
)
values > 55 mmHg. Respiratory depression resulting from alfax-
alone TIVA has been reported in dogs [96] but not in other spe-
cies [97]. A limitation of this study was the lack of invasive
monitoring during anesthesia; therefore, definitive interpretation
of the respiratory and cardiovascular effects of alfaxalone is not
possible [54].
Monitoring
Various parameters can be monitored during anesthesia of pigs,
and it is possible to employ the same monitors and equipment
used during anesthesia of other domestic species. In general, anes-
thetic depth, the cardiovascular system, the respiratory system, and
body temperature should be carefully monitored until the animal is
stable and fully recovered from the effects of the anesthetic agents.
The intensity of perioperative and postoperative monitoring depends
on the type of surgical procedure and environment. Continuous
monitoring should be performed, with recording of vital signs at
5-min intervals. Recording of intraoperative physiologic parame-
ters will provide useful physiologic trends and may be required by
regulatory agencies in laboratory settings [6,98]. These parameters
should include, at a minimum, heart or pulse rate, mucous mem-
brane color, respiratory rate, rectal or esophageal temperature, and
absence of muscle reflexes. Advanced monitoring should include
electrocardiography (ECG), arterial blood pressure measurement,
capnography, and pulse oximetry.
The pulse rate in pigs can be monitored at different sites includ-
ing the auricular arteries, the brachial artery on the medial aspect of
the humeroradial joint, the saphenous artery over the medial aspect
of the distal femur, or the sublingual artery on the ventral surface of
the tongue. Other locations that are considered less reliable, espe-
cially in larger animals with thick SC and muscular tissue, include
the femoral, carotid, or facial arteries [98]. Mucous membrane
color can be observed in pigs by examination of the oral cavity, the
snout, or the ears, especially on unpigmented animals.
ECG monitoring is straightforward in pigs, although alligator
clips may not hold well due to the animal’s thick skin and SC fat.
Alternatives include 25 gauge needle electrodes inserted SC or
patch electrodes held on the skin by adhesive. Esophageal ECG
leads are also available for use in pigs [6,20]. Monitoring of the
ECG is recommended for detecting dysrhythmias, noting that nor-
mal pigs have a prolonged Q-T interval compared to other
species [99].
Non-invasive (indirect) blood pressure measurement is relatively
straightforward in pigs but is less accurate than invasive (direct)
techniques. Either oscillometric or Doppler flow monitors can be
used for non-invasive blood pressure measurement. The cuff can
be placed either immediately above or below the carpus or tarsus of
the pig, and cuff width should be between 40% and 60% of the
circumference of the limb at that location. The values obtained
through non-invasive blood pressure methods should be assessed for
trends rather than analysis of absolute numbers. Also, blood pres-
sures vary widely with anesthetic agents used and the breed and size
of the pig [20,98]. Arterial catheterization can be performed in all
sizes of pigs. The auricular artery runs down the center of the pinna
and can be catheterized with a 24–22 gauge catheter and then con-
nected to a direct blood pressure transducer and monitor. In larger
pigs, the medial saphenous, carotid, or femoral arteries can also be
catheterized with a 5 cm (2 inch) or longer catheter, although a sur-
gical cut-down may be required [13]. Auricular arterial blood pres-
sures were similar to femoral arterial values in pigs under general
anesthesia with isoflurane [100].
Rate, rhythm, and depth of respiration of the anesthetized
animal can be assessed by observing thoracic cage movement,

-- 1309 of 1450 --

1294 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
although capnography is a more sensitive and accurate measure
of respiration. PET
CO2 can be measured though a sampling
line located between the end of the endotracheal tube and the
anesthetic circuit. The normal physiologic range of PET
CO2 is
35–45 mmHg, and higher values indicate that the animal may need
to have ventilation assisted or controlled. A sudden rapid increase
in PET
CO2 values might be related to the onset of malignant hyper-
thermia [20]. An increase in respiratory depth, a regular respiratory
rhythm, and a decrease in respiratory rate accompany a surgical
anesthetic plane.
Adequacy of oxygenation can be assessed by arterial blood gas
analysis or by using a pulse oximeter [99]. Pulse oximetry is very
practical to use in pigs and measures both pulse rate and the per-
centage of oxygenated hemoglobin. A transmittance probe can be
placed on the animal’s tongue, eyelid, tip of the tail, or interdigital
space in unpigmented animals, or a rectal reflectance probe can be
placed intrarectally [6,20]. Reflectance probes designed for the
human forehead can work well when applied to unpigmented areas
of the pig such as the metatarsus or base of the tail.
A rectal or esophageal thermistor allows determination of the
animal’s temperature during an anesthetic event. Pigs are prone to
hypothermia, because they are relatively hairless [11], and several
techniques can be employed to minimize heat loss. Caution is war-
ranted because the skin of pigs is very sensitive to thermal damage.
Passive insulation and safe external active warming techniques,
including forced warm air, may be used. Placement of circulating
warm water blankets under the animal, heat lamps over the animal,
insulating material (e.g., rubber) between the animal and the cold
surgical tabletop, and wrapping the extremities in bubble sheeting
minimize loss of heat [3,6,99]. Electrical conductive fabric pads
specifically designed for anesthetized patients (e.g., HotDog Patient
Warming System) are available.
A simple, yet reliable method for assessing depth of anesthesia
is by evaluation of muscle relaxation. A surgical depth of anesthesia is
usually characterized by laxity of the mandibular muscles (jaw tone)
or absence of gross movement of the leg in response to a pinch or
similar stimulus to the coronary band of the hoof. Palpebral reflexes
should be assessed during anesthesia as their presence may indicate
a lighter plane of anesthesia [4,6,98].
The Bispectral Index™ (BIS™) is a parameter derived from
processing the electroencephalogram. It has been associated with
the hypnotic component of the anesthetic state and has been
used in humans and animals as a tool to assess anesthetic depth.
Evaluation of BIS monitoring in the pig has been accomplished
using various combinations of sevoflurane, isoflurane, propofol,
fentanyl, and atracurium [87,101,102]. However, BIS values in pigs
may have a poor correlation with anesthetic depth and may not
predict changes in arterial blood pressure or heart rate during
surgery [102].
Supportive therapies
Depending on the nature and duration of the surgical procedure, a
balanced electrolyte solution such as Lactated Ringer’s should be
administered intravenously at a starting rate of 5–15 mL/kg/h,
although allometric adjustments may be useful due to the range of
body weights encountered [103]. During longer procedures, the
fluid rate should be adjusted accordingly to the patients cardiovas-
cular and intravascular volume status. Insufficient urine produc-
tion, extensive blood loss, and hypotension are indications for a
higher fluid infusion rate. Excessively high fluid rates may increase
the likelihood of pulmonary edema [4]. In piglets, it is advisable to
use warmed fluids to assist in the maintenance of body temperature
[4,16,98]. In pigs that are hypovolemic or presenting with other
signs of shock, fluid therapy should be initiated prior to anesthesia
if reasonable. The intraosseous route for crystalloid and blood infu-
sion in pigs can be used when necessary [84]. This route is a reason-
able initial step for emergency fluid therapy until more conventional
vascular access has been established. Note that IV access is a more
efficient method of acute volume replacement than the intraosse-
ous route [85]. Piglets and calves with mild dehydration will usually
voluntarily drink oral rehydration solutions, and this constitutes a
more cost-effective treatment [99].
Although currently controversial, hypotension due to severe
hemorrhage can be minimized by adding an artificial colloid solu-
tion to crystalloid fluid therapy. A slow (i.e., 5 min) administra-
tion of 1–2 mL/kg of 7.5% saline in 6% dextran 70 (HSD)
decreased mortality by 30% in pigs with hemorrhagic hypov-
olemia. Colloid solutions (i.e., hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.4) mark-
edly increase microcirculatory blood flow and tissue oxygen
tension in the small intestinal mucosa, improve intestinal cellular
substrate levels (e.g., lactate and glucose), and significantly
enhance mixed venous saturation with less volume of fluid admin-
istration compared with crystalloid solutions [104,105]. A colloid/
crystalloid solution ratio greater than 2:1 seems to promote
coagulopathies [106,107].
Hypertonic saline can also be used to restore normovolemia in
pigs [20]. The administration of 7.2% NaCl in 6% hydroxyethyl
starch 200/0.5 at a dose of 5 mL/kg given IV demonstrated a posi-
tive inotropic effect with a significant increase in right ventricular
contractility and cardiac output in pigs. Blood transfusions may
be performed when necessary and blood donors are often litter-
mates or close relatives. The risk of transfusion reaction from a
non-crossmatched blood transfusion in pigs is relatively high since
there are 16 recognized porcine blood groups that are not easily
detectable [20,108].
During anesthesia, additional cardiovascular support using
inotropes may be indicated. Oung et al. studied the effects of hypo-
thermia on hemodynamic responses to inotropic agents in pigs
and found that significant hemodynamic depression induced by
profound hypothermia (30 °C) could be managed with either dopa-
mine or dobutamine [109]. The optimal dosage of either agent
for improving cardiac output in pigs was 10–20 μg/kg/min with
minimal risk of inducing arrhythmias. Other investigators have
reported that dopamine is the more effective inotropic agent in
pigs. Dopamine administered at 15 μg/kg/min increased cardiac
index by 18% and improved blood flow to the gastrointestinal
tract by 33% in septic pigs [110]. Similarly, in piglets, dopamine
(15 μg/kg/min) improved blood flow to the heart and small intestine
compared to dobutamine [111,112]. Ephedrine at 0.05–0.1 mg/kg
IV has been suggested to improve blood pressure in pigs. Ephedrine
has both α- and β-adrenergic receptor effects and will increase
cardiac output and heart rate for 10–20 min [13].
Mechanical ventilation is used to provide respiratory support in
anesthetized pigs. The recommended peak inspiratory pressure is
20 cmH2
O, and the respiratory rate should range between 8 and 18
breaths per min depending on the age and size of the animal [113].
The arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide is normally 40 ±
5 mmHg, which would correspond to a PET
CO2 of 35–40 mmHg
[114]. Pulmonary shunt fraction in pigs will depend on the inspired
fraction of oxygen (F I
O2
). Gianotti et al. described that in pigs
undergoing 2 h of general anesthesia with mechanical ventilation,

-- 1310 of 1450 --

Chapter 65: Swine 	1295
there was a lower pulmonary shunt fraction when using a F I
O2
of 0.4 (4.3 ± 1.5%) compared to F I
O2 of 0.6 (6.9 ± 0.5%) and 0.8
(9.5 ± 2.5%) [115].
Recovery considerations
During recovery from anesthesia, it is important to continue moni-
toring, to provide a smooth recovery, and to maintain homeostasis
of the animal. Recovery should take place in a pen or cage lined
with soft pads to preclude injury. The recovering animal should not
be placed in a pen with other pigs due to the risk of injury and can-
nibalization. Room temperature should be 20–25 °C to minimize
hypothermia or a thermal blanket or lamp may be placed over the
animal. The endotracheal tube should be maintained until the pig
is spontaneously moving its head or will no longer tolerate the
presence of the tube. Extubation should be performed when a strong
laryngeal reflex is present. If extubation is performed too early,
there is a risk for hypoxemia due to laryngospasm and hypoventi-
lation. If intubation was difficult, corticosteroids or diuretics
(i.e., furosemide) can be given prophylactically prior to extubation.
Some clinicians advocate spraying phenylephrine on the larynx to
decrease vascular congestion and laryngeal edema. Severe upper
airway obstruction is difficult to treat in pigs because it is difficult
to restrain and reintubate the animal. If reintubation is required, it
may be more effective in some instances to perform a tracheostomy.
Pigs with surgical incisions should not be housed with other
animals because of their tendency to cannibalize wounds [16,98].
A postoperative analgesic plan should be in place before the animal
completely recovers from anesthesia. To assess postoperative pain
in pigs, physiologic parameters (e.g., heart rate and respiratory rate),
behavior parameters such as agitation, running, rooting, and
evaluation of the animal’s reaction during wound palpation can be
used [116]. Caution should be used when pigs are recovering in
areas with straw, shavings, or blankets due to the risk of swallowing
these materials. Ingestion of foreign material has been reported in
miniature companion pigs [117,118].
Malignant hyperthermia
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a genetic hypermetabolic syn-
drome in humans and pigs, that has also been reported in other
species, including dogs, horses, cats, birds, deer, and other wild ani-
mals. Pigs predisposed to MH have a high ratio of muscle to total
body mass and experience rapid growth. Therefore, breeds with a
high incidence of this syndrome include Pietran, Landrace, Spotted,
Large White, Hampshire, and Poland-China. Breeds that tend to be
less susceptible to MH include Duroc and pot-bellied pigs [3,20,119].
In a susceptible animal, MH can be triggered by any type of stress,
including environmental extremes (i.e., warm temperatures) and
pharmacologic agents (i.e., inhalant anesthetics). Even commonly
performed minor procedures like restraint for blood sampling and
castration can trigger MH in a highly susceptible pig. All volatile
inhalation agents (i.e., halothane, isoflurane, enflurane, desflurane,
and sevoflurane) as well as depolarizing neuromuscular blocking
agents (i.e., succinylcholine) will initiate MH in animals with the
gene responsible for this syndrome.
Malignant hyperthermia is caused by an inherited autosomal
recessive disorder that results in a single amino acid mutation in the
ryanodine receptor type 1 (RyR1) associated with calcium channels
in skeletal muscle. When MH is triggered, the muscle is not able
to control calcium efflux from inside the sarcoplasmic reticulum,
allowing calcium activation of myosin ATPase that causes muscle
contracture and release of heat. Aerobic and anaerobic cellular
metabolism are increased significantly, leading to an elevation in
carbon dioxide, hydrogen ion, and lactic acid concentrations, and
decreased venous oxygen content [20,120]. Episodes of MH may
present with increased core body temperature (up to 42 °C), muscle
rigidity, tachycardia, tachypnea, extreme hypercapnia (PET
CO2 as
high as 70 mmHg), hypoxemia, metabolic acidosis, sympathetic
activation with elevated plasma catecholamine concentrations,
and high values of serum magnesium, calcium, phosphorus, and
potassium ion concentrations. As this condition progresses,
cell metabolism fails and membrane integrity is compromised,
resulting in increased permeability (i.e., edema). Myocardial ischemia
occurs, since coronary perfusion is diminished while muscle
metabolism is increased. Tachycardia may be followed by arrhyth-
mias (e.g., ventricular tachycardia and fibrillation) that cause
decreased cardiac output and, ultimately, cardiovascular collapse.
Myoglobinuria may also be observed if the patient lives long
enough [3,20]. Since genetic testing has become available for deter-
mination of this RyR1 gene in pigs, the incidence of MH has been
reduced drastically, although it is still present in some swine
populations [3].
Once MH has been diagnosed, the volatile anesthetic should be
discontinued, and the pig should be ventilated with 100% oxygen,
preferably using a different anesthetic machine or after changing
the machine’s rubber components (i.e., hoses and rebreathing
bag). Hypercapnia can be resolved by hyperventilating the animal.
Body cooling can be achieved with alcohol baths, ice packs around
large vessels (jugular and femoral veins), fans, and rectal lavage
with ice water. When body temperature decreases to 38 °C, the
cooling methods should be terminated to avoid iatrogenic hypo-
thermia. Dantrolene sodium is a skeletal muscle relaxant that
inhibits excessive leak of calcium by RyR1 and can be employed
both to prevent and to treat MH. This drug can be given orally
(2–5 mg/kg) 6–10 h before induction of anesthesia, or it may be
administered intravenously (1–5 mg/kg) immediately after MH
symptoms are observed [3,16,20]. Despite the potency of dant-
rolene, this agent is highly lipophilic and poorly water soluble,
making its preparation difficult for clinical use. The dantrolene
analogue, azumolene, has similar potency to dantrolene in relax-
ing skeletal muscle in MH-susceptible pigs. Azumolene (2 mg/kg
IV) is 30 times more soluble than dantrolene and reverses the
muscular contracture in pigs by reducing the opening rate of
RyR1, without altering calcium uptake into the sarcoplasmic
reticulum [120]. It has been reported in some patients that devel-
opment of hyperthermia may be delayed, and the fulminant epi-
sode may occur during recovery [121].
Analgesia
For any surgical procedure, it is good practice to administer an
analgesic drug preemptively (i.e., prior to surgery). There are three
major classes of drugs that are used for analgesia in pigs: opioids,
local anesthetics, and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs). In general, opioids have more pronounced analgesic
and sedative effects than NSAIDs and have to be administered
more frequently. The use of opioids may be required for humane
care during the first 48–72 h after major surgery, although effec-
tiveness may diminish as inflammation becomes a major compo-
nent of the discomfort. Butorphanol (0.1–0.3 mg/kg IM) has an
analgesic effect of 4–6 h and produces few adverse effects in pigs

-- 1311 of 1450 --

1296 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
compared to full μ-opioid receptor agonists like morphine [82].
Also, when given as part of premedication, it will enhance depth of
sedation and decrease the dose required for induction of anesthe-
sia [94]. Buprenorphine (0.01–0.1 mg/kg IM) can be given every
12 h, and its onset of action is approximately 30–60 min after
administration [122]. The analgesic effect of buprenorphine is
reported to last 7–24 h in pigs when given in high doses [52,123].
Intermittent bolus administration of injectable drugs can result in
increased animal stress and possible periods of inadequate analge-
sia when plasma concentrations are at their lowest prior to the next
injection. The pharmacokinetics of two extended-release formula-
tions of buprenorphine, sustained-release buprenorphine (SRB)
and the transdermal buprenorphine (TDB) patch, have been eval-
uated in female Göttingen minipigs. At a hypothesized plasma
buprenorphine therapeutic threshold of 0.1 ng/mL, therapeutic
plasma buprenorphine concentrations lasted 8.0 ± 1.3 h after a sin-
gle IV injection of 0.02 mg/kg traditional buprenorphine, 264.0 ±
32.2 h after a single SC injection of 0.18 mg/kg SRB, and 72 h after
application of a 30 μg/h TDB patch. These findings support the use
of SRB and TDB as long-acting formulations of buprenorphine in
Göttingen minipigs, which would ease the administration of these
analgesics, simplify postoperative pain management in laboratory
swine, and improve animal welfare. Therapeutic plasma concen-
trations are achieved within min after the injection of SRB rather
than in 12–24 h as with the TDB patch. In addition, a single injec-
tion of SRB eliminates the chance of premature discontinuation of
analgesia, which might occur if a transdermal patch detaches from
the skin. In contrast, TDB does not require injection, and the
patches can easily be removed to discontinue drug administration
if adverse reactions occur. Both SRB and TDB resulted in localized
skin reactions, which were more frequent with SRB than
TDB [124].
Short-acting opioids such as fentanyl can be used as a constant
IV infusion at a rate varying from 10 to 100 μg/kg/h in pigs without
major side effects [3,14,82]. It has been shown that a fentanyl infu-
sion rate of 35 μg/kg/h in piglets produces adequate analgesia for
surgical procedures without affecting heart rate, mean arterial
blood pressure, or lactate concentrations during 5 h of anesthesia
when maintained with a propofol infusion at 8 mg/kg/h [94]. This
is desirable for cardiovascular research where cardiovascular side
effects of administered anesthetic and analgesic agents must be
minimal. In addition, fentanyl can be administered to pigs through
a transdermal patch that can be secured to the skin behind the ear.
With this route, fentanyl is continuously administered for up to
72 h per patch application, and the discomfort and inconvenience
of repeated parenteral injections are avoided [123–126]. Fentanyl
patches come in different sizes: 12, 25, 50, 75, and 100 μg/h. For a
20 kg pig, the appropriate fentanyl patch will be a 50 μg/h patch
applied at least 24 h prior to the surgery. Other short-acting opioids
that have been used in pigs include sufentanil (5–10 μg/kg IM every
2 h; 15–30 μg/kg/h IV), meperidine (2–10 mg/kg IM every 4 h), and
oxymorphone (0.15 mg/kg IM every 4 h).
Morphine given systemically to non-painful pigs has been
reported to cause excitement in a manner similar to that observed
in cats and horses [82]. When administered intravenously to pigs,
morphine produces not only analgesia but also respiratory depres-
sion [127]. Systemic morphine is also reported to produce other
side effects, such as decreased gastrointestinal motility, nausea
and vomiting, pupillary constriction, bradycardia, euphoria, and
histamine release in many species (e.g., dogs, cats, and
horses) [125,128]. To avoid many of the systemic physiologic side
effects, morphine can be administered epidurally [129,130]. In
addition, because morphine has low lipid solubility, it persists for
a long period in the cerebrospinal fluid, prolonging the analgesic
effect up to 33 h in pigs [130]. In many species, such as dogs, cats,
horses, and cattle, this analgesic effect does not produce major
motor impairment, in contrast to epidural administration of other
drugs, such as lidocaine [123,128]. Epidural morphine can be
given at a dosage of 0.1–0.12 mg/kg diluted in saline [131]. For
maximal distribution of the drug into the spinal canal, morphine
is diluted with saline to a final volume of 1 mL of solution for pigs
with a vertebral length of up to 40 cm. Then, an additional 1.5 mL
of saline is added for every additional 10 cm of vertebral
length [131]. This final volume is delivered slowly over 1–2 min.
Epidural morphine produced adequate analgesia without hemo-
dynamic or respiratory effects in pigs during abdominal sur-
gery [132]. Epidural anesthesia is helpful when performing
obstetric and perineal surgery in pigs; however, in larger animals,
the landmarks can be difficult to locate. Local anesthetics can be
included, such as lidocaine at 1 mL per 7.5 kg for pigs up to 50 kg,
and then 1 mL per 10 kg above 50 kg [16]. This causes recum-
bency for 1–2 h. Also, there have been reports of bupivacaine
(0.8 mg/kg) and ropivacaine (1.5 mg/kg) being administered epi-
durally in pigs [133,134]. Intratesticular analgesia is suitable for
castration in young pigs up to 6 months old. For 1-week old pig-
lets, a total of 0.5 mL of 2% lidocaine is injected into the stroma of
each testicle, with a small amount being injected subcutaneously
beneath the scrotal skin. At least 5 min should be allowed for the
anesthetic to take effect, and it will reduce pain responses during
surgical castration [135].
Tramadol is an analgesic with mixed-opioid and non-opioid
activities 	where 	the 	non-opioid 	activity 	is 	mediated 	via
α2 -adrenergic and serotonergic activity [136]. This analgesic agent
has been reported to cause less respiratory depression compared
with morphine or other opioid analgesics because it exhibits weak
binding 	to 	μ-opioid 	receptors 	responsible 	for 	this 	side
effect [37,137]. While historically tramadol has not been a con-
trolled substance in many countries [138], more recently, this has
changed as its human abuse potential has been recognized and the
regulatory requirements surrounding its use are similar to that of
other opioids in many jurisdictions. It was shown that in pigs
administered 5 mg/kg tramadol IM 5 min prior to anesthesia with
xylazine (2.5 mg/kg), ketamine (25 mg/kg), and atropine (0.04 mg/
kg) administered IM, the quality of anesthetic induction and
endotracheal intubation were improved. Also, tramadol given
prior to this sedation protocol increased the duration of analgesia,
without cardiopulmonary side effects or adverse effects on recov-
ery characteristics [139].
Liposomal bupivacaine (Nocita®) is a relatively new veterinary
product containing bupivacaine particles encapsulated in multi-
vesicular liposomes, allowing for slow release of the local anesthetic
and providing up to 72 h of local anesthesia. This preparation
is currently approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for canine cranial cruciate ligament surgery and
feline peripheral nerve blocks [140]. Injection of liposomal bupiv-
acaine suspension has been used extra-label in other animal species
for soft tissue infiltration with a low rate of adverse events. Studies
to date have not demonstrated neurotoxicity of liposomal bupiv-
acaine in rabbit and dog models of brachial plexus blocks [141].
Intraneural injections (sciatic nerve) of liposomal bupivacaine or
bupivacaine HCl in a porcine model did not result in evidence
of neurotoxicity. Compared with bupivacaine HCl, the liposomal

-- 1312 of 1450 --

Chapter 65: Swine 	1297
bupivacaine 	injectable 	suspension 	provided 	longer 	sensory
(11.2 ± 1.8 h versus 3.2 ± 1.1 h, respectively) and motor (10.0 ± 2.0 h
versus 4.0 ± 1.4 h, respectively) blockade [142]. Further studies
should be performed to evaluate the clinical effects of this newer
formulation of bupivacaine in pigs.
The NSAIDs are a group of analgesics derived from the organic
acids, carboxylic acid (e.g., aspirin, flunixin, and carprofen) and
enolic acid (e.g., phenylbutazone and meloxicam) [128]. In addition
to analgesia, NSAIDs have anti-inflammatory and antipyretic
properties [82,128,135]. Compared with opioids, NSAIDs are
only effective against moderate pain but may be combined with
opioids for treatment of more severe pain [4]. Aspirin (10 mg/kg
PO every 4–6 h) has been used in pigs; enteric-coated products are
recommended due to the pig’s predisposition for gastric ulcers [82].
Flunixin (2 mg/kg IV; 1–4 mg/kg SC or IM) has a prolonged effect
of 12–24 h in pigs, but should not be administered for more than
3 days to minimize its adverse effects [143,144]. Carprofen (2 mg/kg
SC or IM) has a longer effect (12–24 h) in pigs and provides
adequate analgesia for soft tissue and orthopedic pain. Ketorolac
(1 mg/kg IM or IV every 12 h), meloxicam (0.4 mg/kg SC or IM
every 24 h), and ketoprofen (1–3 mg/kg IM, SC or PO every 12 h)
have been reported to be effective as part of a balanced anesthetic
regimen for postoperative and chronic pain. Piglets treated with
0.4 mg/kg meloxicam IM 10–30 min before castration demonstrated
fewer behavioral alterations compared to a placebo group. [145].
Phenylbutazone (10–20 mg/kg PO every 12 h) may be administered
for the treatment of musculoskeletal pain. Regulatory restrictions
on the use of various NSAIDs in animals which could reach the
human food chain must be strictly followed. Oral medications are
readily accepted by pigs when hidden in canned dog food or in
chocolate syrup [16,143]. A pharmacokinetic profile of oral meloxi-
cam (0.5 mg/kg) in mature pigs demonstrates a high relative bioa-
vailability of this drug supporting the clinical use of meloxicam for
pain management in sows [146].
Pig-specific pain assessment tools are available to assist in
determining the requirement for and efficiency of analgesic treat-
ments. Facial expression analysis, known as the “grimace scale,” is
widely used for assessing pain in rats, rabbits, horses, sheep,
lambs, and cats [147–153]. Viscardi et al. have established a piglet
grimace scale that is strongly correlated with behavioral activity.
The proportion of low pain scores after castration had a signifi-
cant positive correlation with active behavior and a significant
negative correlation with inactive behaviors [154]. A second piglet
grimace scale has been published by Di Giminiani et al., but it
includes a complex point system. Both grimace scales have limita-
tions, such as moderate interobserver agreement, and both need
further validation [155]. Luna et al. have validated the UNESP-
Botucatu pig composite acute pain scale for assessing postopera-
tive pain. This pain assessment tool for pigs is a valid, reliable,
responsive, specific, and sensitive tool, with excellent internal
consistency and discriminatory ability, and may be used as an
instrument to assess acute pain in pigs undergoing surgeries such
as castration [156].
References
1 Heinonen ML, Raekallio MR, Oliviero C, et al. Comparison azaperone-detomidine-
butorphanol-ketamine and azaperone-tiletamine-zolazepam for anaesthesia in
piglets. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36: 151–157.
2 Lord LK, Wittum TE. Survey of humane organizations and slaughter plants regard-
ing experiences with Vietnamese potbellied pigs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1997; 211(5):
562–565.
3 Thurmon JC, Smith GW. Swine. In: Tranquili WJ, Thurmon JC, Grimm KA, eds.
Lumb and Jones’ Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia, 4th edn. Ames, IA: Blackwell
Publishing, 2007: 747–764.
4 Alstrup AKO. Anaesthesia and Analgesia in Ellegaard Göttingen Minipigs. Arhus,
Denmark: PET Centre, Aarhus University Hospital, 2010.
5 Swindle MM. Anesthesia and Analgesia in Swine: Technical Bulletin. Sinclair
Research Center, 2002. www.info.sinclairresearch.com/anesthesia-and- analgesia-
in- swine (accessed October 2014).
6 Kaiser GM, Heuer MM, Frühauf NR, et al. General handling and anesthesia for
experimental surgery in pigs. J Surg Res 2006; 130: 73–79.
7 Wilbers AM. Handling pet pigs as patients. Proceedings of the North American
Veterinary Conference, 2013 Large Animal. www.vetfolio.com/learn/article/
handling-pet-pigs-as-patients
8 Mozzachio K, Pollock C. Basic Information Sheet: Miniature Pig. LafeberVet
Website. www.lafeber.com/vet/basic-information-sheet-miniature- pig/ (accessed
July 2019).
9 Axiak SM, Jäggin N, Wenger S, et al. Anaesthesia for castration of piglets: compari-
son between intranasal and intramuscular application of ketamine, climazolam and
azaperone. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd 2007; 149(9): 395–402.
10 Lacoste L, Bouquee S, Ingrand P, et al. Intranasal midazolam in piglets: pharmaco-
dynamics (0.2 vs 0.4 mg/kg) and pharmacokinetics (0.4 mg/kg) with bioavailability
determination. Lab Anim 2000; 34; 29–35.
11 Henrikson H, Jensen-Waern M, Nyman G. Anaesthetics for general anaesthesia in
growing pigs. Acta Vet Scand 1995; 36(3): 401–411.
12 Riviere JE, Papich MG. Potential and problems of developing transdermal patches
for veterinary applications. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2001; 50: 175–203.
13 Smith JS, Seddighi R. Miniature companion pig sedation and anesthesia. Vet Clin
Exot Animal 2022; 25: 297–319.
14 Linkenhoker JR, Burkholder TH, Linton CGG, et al. Effective and safe anesthesia
for Yorkshire and Yucatan Swine with and without cardiovascular injury and inter-
vention. J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2010; 49(3): 344–351.
15 Mitek A. Pot-bellied pig sedation. In: Proceedings of the Illinois Fall Conference for
Veterinarians, Champaign, IL, September 22–23, 2016.
16 Hodgkinson O. Practical sedation and anaesthesia in pigs. Farm Anim Pract 2007;
29: 34–39.
17 Snook CS. Use of the subcutaneous abdominal vein for blood sampling and intra-
venous catheterization in potbellied pigs . Scientific Reports: descriptive report.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2001; 219(6): 809–810.
18 Wheeler EP, Abelson AL, Wetmore LA. Anesthesia case of the month. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2020; 257(8): 809–812.
19 Hay Kraus BL. Spotlight on the perioperative use of maropitant citrate. Vet Med Res
Rep 2017; 8: 41–51.
20 Moon PF, Smith LJ. General anesthetic techniques in swine. Vet Clin North Am
Food Anim Pract 1996; 12(3): 663–691.
21 Padilha LR, Ko JCH. Non-domestic suids. In: West G, Heard D, Caulkett N, eds.
Zoo Animal and Wildlife Immobilization and Anesthesia, 2nd edn. Ames, IA:
Blackwell Publishing, 2014: 773–785.
22 Gomez de Segura IA, Tendillo FJ, Mascias A, et al. Actions of xylazine in young
swine. Am J Vet Res 1997; 58(1): 99–102.
23 Ajadi RA, Smith OF, Makinde AFM, et al. Increasing ketamine dose enhances the
anaesthetic properties of ketamine-xylazine-midazolam combination in growing
pigs. J S Afr Vet Assoc 2008; 79(4): 205–207.
24 Hörnchen U, Schüttler J, Stoeckel H, et al. Comparison of intravenous and endo-
bronchial atropine: a pharmacokinetic and dynamic study in pigs. Eur J Anaesthesiol
1989; 6: 95–102.
25 Lee JY, Jee HC, Jeong SM, et al. Comparison of anaesthetic and cardiorespiratory
effects of xylazine or medetomidine in combination with tiletamine/zolazepam in
pigs. Vet Rec 2010; 167: 245–249.
26 Braun W. Anesthestics and surgical techniques useful in the potbellied pig. Vet Med
1993; 88: 441–447.
27 Flores FN, Tavares SG, Moraes AN, et al. Azaperone and its association with
xylazine or dexmedetomidine in swine. Ciência Rural 2009; 39(4): 1101–1107.
28 Rego Oliveira LC, Marques JA, Santos DAS, et al. Effects of ketamine and mida-
zolam in pigs (Sus scrofa) pre-treated which acepromazine or azaperone. Ars Vet
2003; 19(3): 235–240.
29 Thurmon JC, Benson GJ. Anesthesia in ruminants and swine. In: Howard J, ed.
Current Veterinary Therapy, 3rd edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 1993:
58–76.
30 Trim CM, Gilroy BA. The cardiopulmonary effects of a xylazine and ketamine
combination in pigs. Res Vet Sci 1985; 38: 30–34.
31 Sakaguchi M, Nishimura R, Sasaki N, et al. Chemical restraint by medetomidine-
ketamine and its cardiopulmonary effects in pigs. J Vet Med 1995; 42: 293–299.
32 Sakaguchi M, Nishimura R, Sasaki N, et al. Anesthesia induced in pigs by use of a
combination of medetomidine, butorphanol, and ketamine and its reversal by
administration of atipamezole. Am J Vet Res 1996; 57: 529–534.

-- 1313 of 1450 --

1298 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
33 Nussbaumer I, Zimmermann W, Peterbauer C. Anaesthesia of pigs with a combina-
tion of romifidine, butorphanol and ketamine. Vet Rec 2008; 163: 720–721.
34 Lu DZ, Fan HG, Kun M, et al. Antagonistic effect of atipamezole, flumazenil and
naloxone following anaesthesia with xylazine, tramadol and tiletamine/zolazepam
combinations in pigs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38: 301–309.
35 Kim MJ, Park CS, Jun MH, et al. Antagonist effects of yohimbine in pigs anaesthe-
tized with tiletamine/zolazepam and xylazine. Vet Rec 2007; 161: 620–624.
36 Lin H. Injectable anesthetics and field anesthesia. In: Lin H, Walz P, eds.
Farm Animal Anesthesia, 1st edn. Ames, IA: John Wiley & Sons, 2014: 60–94.
37 Natalini CC, Polydoro A, Crosignani N. Effects of morphine or tramadol on
thiopental anaesthetic induction dosage and physiologic variables in halothane
anaesthetized dogs. Acta Sci Vet 2007; 35: 161–166.
38 Ajadi AR, Olusa TA, Smith OF, et al. Tramadol improved the efficacy of ketaminex-
ylazine anaesthesia in young pigs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36: 562–566.
39 Steffey EP, Baggot JD, Eisele JH, et al. Morphine-isoflurane interaction in dogs,
swine and rhesus monkeys. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1994; 17(3): 202–210.
40 Moon PF, Scarlett JM, Ludders JW, et al. Effect of fentanyl on the minimum alveolar
concentration of isoflurane in swine. Anesthesiology 1995; 83(3): 535–542.
41 Re M, Canfrán S, Largo C, et al. Effect of lidocaine-ketamine infusions combined
with morphine or fentanyl in sevoflurane-anesthetized pigs. J Am Assoc Lab Anim
Sci 2016; 55(3): 317–320.
42 Malavasi LM, Jensen-Waern M, Augustsson H, et al. Changes in minimal alveolar
concentration of isoflurane following treatment with medetomidine and tiletamine/
zolazepam, epidural morphine or systemic buprenorphine in pigs. Lab Anim 2008;
42(1): 62–70.
43 Wagner AE, Hellyer PW. Survey of anesthetic techniques and concerns in private
veterinary practice. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000; 217: 1652–1657.
44 Lan NC, Gee KW. Neuroactive steroid actions at the GABAA receptor. Horm Behav
1994; 28: 537–544.
45 Keates H. Induction of anaesthesia in pigs using a new alphaxalone formulation.
Vet Rec 2003; 153: 627–628.
46 Santos Gonzalez M, Bertran de Lis BT, Tendillo Cortijo FJ. Effects of intramuscular
alfaxalone alone or in combination with diazepam in swine. Vet Anaesth Analg
2013; 40: 399–402.
47 Blanca MS, Betran de Lis BT, Tendillo Cortijo FJ. Effects of intramuscular dexme-
detomidine in combination with ketamine or alfaxalone in swine. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2016; 43(1): 81–85.
48 National Institutes of Health, Office of Laboratory Animal Welfare. Use of Non-
Pharmaceutical-Grade Chemicals and Other Substances in Research with Animals.
OLAW Online Seminars: OLAW; 2012. www.olaw.nih.gov/sites/default/files/
120301_seminar_transcript.pdf
49 Anderson DE, Mulon PY. Anesthesia and surgical procedures in swine. Dis Swine
2019: 171–196.
50 Kelley E, Fernandez LG, Potter J, et al. A practical approach to simple procedures in
pet pigs. Vet Irel J 2020; 10(9): 472–473.
51 Ugarte CE, O’Flaherty KO. The use of a medetomidine, butorphanol and atropine
combination to enable blood sampling in young pigs. N Z Vet J 2005; 53(4): 249–252.
52 Malavasi LM, Jensen-Waern M, Augustsson H, et al. Changes in minimal alveolar
concentration of isoflurane following treatment with medetomidine and tiletamine/
zolazepam, epidural morphine or systemic buprenorphine in pigs. Lab Anim 2008;
42: 62–70.
53 Carpenter JW. Exotic Animal Formulary, 5th edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, 2016.
54 Bigby SE, Carter JE, Bauquier S, et al. The use of alfaxalone for premedication,
induction and maintenance of anaesthesia in pigs: a pilot study. Vet Anaesth Analg
2017; 44(4): 905–909.
55 Chum H, Pacharinsak C. Endotracheal intubation in swine. Lab Anim 2012; 41:
309–311.
56 Mascoas A, Pera AM, Santos M, et al. Total intravenous anesthesia with propofol in
pigs. J Vet Anaesth 1993; 20: 53–54.
57 Zacharioudaki A, Lelovas P, Sergentanis TN, et al. Induction of anaesthesia with
remifentanil after bolus midazolam administration in Landrace/Large White
swine. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44: 1353–1362.
58 University of Colorado, Denver Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
(IACUC). Veterinary Anesthetic and Analgesic Formulary, 2nd edn. University of
Colorado Denver, 2006.
59 Clutton RE, Blissitt KJ, Bradley AA, et al. Comparison of three injectable anaes-
thetic techniques in pigs. Vet Rec 1997; 141: 140–146.
60 Desmetiha TD, Pantazopoulos IN, Dontas I, et al. Refined induction of anesthesia
with remifentanil after bolus propofol administration in Landrace/Large White
swine. Lab Anim 2010; 39: 319–324.
61 Archambault P, Dionne CE, Lortie G, et al. Adrenal inhibition following a single
dose of etomidate in intubated traumatic brain injury victims. Can Assoc Emerg
Phys 2012; 14(5): 270–282.
62 Hirschman LJ. The cardiopulmonary and metabolic effects of hypoxia during acute
adrenocortical suppression by etomidate in the dog. AANA J 1991; 59(3): 281–287.
63 Worek FS, Blumel G, Zaravik J, et al. Comparison of ketamine and pentobarbital
anesthesia with the conscious state in a porcine model of Pseudomonas aeruginosa
septicemia. Acta Anaesth Scand 1988; 32: 509–515.
64 Suresh MS, Nelson TE. Malignant hyperthermia: is etomidate safe? Anesth Analg
1985; 64: 420–424.
65 Cunha DNQ, Buccellato M, Keene BW, et al. Electrocardiographic, hematologic,
histopathologic, and recovery characteristics from repeated morphine-chloralose
anesthesia in dogs. Int J Appl Res Vet Med 2008; 6(3): 191–199.
66 Sommers MG, van Egmond J, Booji LHDJ, et al. Isoflurane anesthesia is a valuable
alternative for α-chloralose anesthesia in the forepaw stimulation model in rats.
NMR Biomed 2009; 22: 414–418.
67 Seaberg DC, Menegazzi JJ, Check B, et al. Use of a cardiocerebral-protective drug
cocktail prior to countershock in a porcine model of prolonged ventricular fibrilla-
tion. Resuscitation 2001; 51: 301–308.
68 Theisen MM, Maas M, Grosse Hartlage MA, et al. Ventral recumbency is crucial for
fast and safe orotracheal intubation in laboratory swine. Lab Anim 2009; 43: 96–101.
69 Bollen PJ, Hansen AK, Alstrup AKO. The Laboratory Swine, 2nd edn. New York,
NY: CRC Press, 2010.
70 Tonge M, Robson K. Hypoxaemia following suspected intubation of the tracheal
bronchus of a pig. Vet Rec 2021; 9(1): 1–6.
71 Patil VU, Fairbrother CR, Dunham BM. Use of laryngeal mask airway for emer-
gency or elective airway management situations in pigs. Contemp Top Lab Anim Sci
1997; 36: 47–49.
72 Fulkerson PJ, Gustafon SB. Use of laryngeal mask airway compared to endotracheal
tube with positive-pressure ventilation in anesthetized swine. Vet Anaesth Analg
2007; 34(4): 284–288.
73 Brain AIJ, Verghese C, STrube PJ. The LMA ‘ProSeal’ – a laryngeal mask with an
oesophageal vent. Br J Anaesth 2002; 84: 650–654.
74 Keller C, Brimacombe J, Kleinsasser A, et al. Does the ProSeal laryngeal mask airway
prevent aspiration of regurgitated fluid? Anesth Analg 2000; 91(4): 1017–1020.
75 Evans NR, Llewellyn RL, Gardener SV, et al. Aspiration prevented by the ProSeal™
laryngeal mask airway: a case report. Can J Anesth 2002; 49: 413–416.
76 Mark DA. Protection from aspiration with the LMA-ProSeal™ after vomiting: a case
report. Can J Anaesth 2003; 50: 78–80.
77 Goldman k, Kalinowski M, Kraft S. Airway management under general anaes-
thesia in pigs using the LMA-ProSeal™: a pilot study. Vet Anaesth Analg 2005; 32:
308–313.
78 Hodgson DS. Comparison of isoflurane and sevoflurane for short-term anesthesia
in piglets. Vet Anaesth Analg 2007; 34: 117–124.
79 Hecker KE, Horn N, Baumert JH, et al. Minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) of
xenon in intubated swine. Br J Anaesth 2004; 92(3): 421–424.
80 Froeba G, Marx T, Pazhur J, et al. Xenon does not trigger malignant hyperthermia
in susceptible swine. Anesthesiology 1999; 91: 1047–1052.
81 Iber T, Hecker K, Vagts DA, et al. Xenon anesthesia inpairs hepatic oxygenation and
perfusion in healthy pigs. Minerva Anestesiol 2008; 74: 511–519.
82 Smith AC, Ehler WJ, Swindle MM. Anesthesia and analgesia in swine. In: Kohn DF,
Winson SK, White WJ, Benson GJ, eds. Anesthesia and Analgesia in Laboratory
Animals. San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 1997: 313–336.
83 Lu DZ, Fan HG, Wang HB, et al. Effect of the addition of tramadol to a combination
of tiletamine-zolazepam and xylazine for anaesthesia of miniature pigs. Vet Rec
2010; 167: 489–492.
84 Schoffstall JM, Spivey WH, Davidheiser S, et al. Intraosseous crystalloid and blood
infusion in a swine model. J Trauma 1989; 29(3): 384–387.
85 Warren DW, Kissoon N, Sommerauer JF, et al. Comparison of fluid rates among
peripheral intravenous and humerus, femur, malleolus, and tibial intraosseous
sites in normovolemic and hypovolemic piglets. Ann Emerg Med 1993; 22(2):
183–186.
86 Lagerkranser M, Stånge K, Sollevi A. Effects of propofol on cerebral blood flow,
metabolism, and cerebral autoregulation in the anesthetized pig. J Neurosurg
Anesthesiol 1997; 9(2): 188–193.
87 Greene SA, Benson GJ, Tranquili WJ, et al. Effect of isoflurane, atracurium, fenta-
nyl, and noxious stimulation on bispectral index in pigs. Compar Med 2004; 54(4):
397–403.
88 Calle P, Morris P. Anesthesia for nondomestic suids. Zoo Wild Anim Med Curr Ther
1999; 4: 639–646.
89 Ko JC, Williams BL, Rogers ER, et al. Increased xylazine dose-enhanced anesthetic
properties of telazol-xylazine combination in swine. Lab Anim Sci 1995; 45:
290–294.
90 Lu DZ, Fan HG, Kun M, et al. Antagonistic effect of atipamezole, flumazenil and
naloxone following anaesthesia with xylazine, tramadol and tiletamine/zolazepam
combinations in pigs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 4: 301–309.

-- 1314 of 1450 --

Chapter 65: Swine 	1299
91 Thurmon JC, Tranquili WJ, Benson GJ. Cardiopulmonary responses of swine to
intravenous infusion of guaifenesin, ketamine, and xylazine. Am J Vet Res 1986;
47(10): 2138–2140.
92 Liu D, Shao YS, Luan X, et al. Comparison of ketamine-pentobarbital anesthesia
and fentanyl-pentobarbital anesthesia for open-heart surgery in minipigs. Lab
Anim 2009; 38(7): 234–240.
93 Liu D, Hu J, Zhang M, et al. Low-dose ketamine combined with pentobarbital in a
miniature porcine model for a cardiopulmonary bypass procedure: a randomized
controlled study. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2009; 26: 389–395.
94 Schöffmann G, Winter P, Palme R, et al. Haemodynamic changes and stress
responses of piglets to surgery during total intravenous anaesthesia with propofol
and fentanyl. Lab Anim 2009; 43: 243–248.
95 Lacoumenta S, Yeo TH, Burrin JM, et al. Fentanyl and the beta-endorphin, ACTH
and glycoregulatory hormonal response to surgery. Br J Anaesth 1987; 59:
713–720.
96 Suarez MA, Dzikiti BT, Stegmann FG, et al. Comparison of alfaxalone and propo-
fol administered as total intravenous anaesthesia for ovariohysterectomy in dogs.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39: 236–244.
97 Ndawana PS, Dzikiti BT, Zeiler G, et al. Determination of the minimum infusion
rate (MIR) of alfaxalone required to prevent purposeful movement of the extremi-
ties in response to a standardized noxius stimulus in goats. Vet Anaesth Analg
2015; 42: 65–71.
98 Swindle MM. Perioperative Care of Swine: Technical Bulletin. Sinclair Research
Center, 	2002. 	www.info.sinclairresearch.com/perioperative-care-of-swine
(accessed October 2014).
99 Smith AC, Swindle MM. Anesthesia and analgesia in swine. In: Fish RE, Brown
MJ, Danneman PJ, et al., eds. Anesthesia and Analgesia in Laboratory Animals, 2nd
edn. San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 2008: 413–440.
100 Bass LME, Yu D, Cullen LK. Comparison of femoral and auricular arterial blood
pressure monitoring in pigs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36(5): 457–463.
101 Martin-Cancho MF, Lima JR, Luis L, et al. Bispectral index, spectral edge fre-
quency 95%, and median frequency recorded for various concentrations of isoflu-
rane and sevoflurane in pigs. Am J Vet Res 2003; 64(7): 866–873.
102 Martin-Cancho MF, Carrasco-Jimenez MS, Lima JR, et al. Assessment of the rela-
tionship of bispectral index values, hemodynamic changes, and recovery times
associated with sevoflurane or propofol anesthesia in pigs. Am J Vet Res 2004;
65(4): 409–416.
103 Hahn RG. Volume kinetics of infusion fluids (review). Anesthesiology 2010; 113:
470–481.
104 Rainger JE, Dart AJ. Enteral fluid therapy in large animals. Aust Vet J 2006; 84(12):
447–451.
105 Hiltebrand LB, Kimberger O, Arnberger M, et al. Crystalloids versus colloids for
goal-directed fluid therapy in major surgery. Crit Care 2009; 13: 1–13.
106 Wafaisade A, Wutzler S, Lefering R, et al. Drivers of acute coagulopathy after
severe trauma: a multivariate analysis of 1987 patients. Emerg Med J 2010; 22:
934–939.
107 Hahn RG. Fluid therapy in uncontrolled hemorrhage – what experimental models
have taught us. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2013; 57: 16–28.
108 Smith DM, Newhouse M, Naziruddin B, et al. Blood group and transfusion in
pigs. Xenotransplantation 2006; 13: 186–194.
109 Oung CM, English M, Chiu RCJ, et al. Effects of hypothermia on hemodynamic
responses to dopamine and dobutamine. J Trauma 1992; 33(5): 671–678.
110 Hiltebrand LB, Krejci V, Sigurdsson GH. Effects of dopamine, dobutamine, and
dopexamine on microcirculatory blood flow in the gastrointestinal tract during
sepsis and anesthesia. Anesthesiology 2004; 100: 1188–1197.
111 Ferrara JJ, Dyess DL, Peeples GL, et al. Effects of dopamine and dobutamine on
regional blood flow distribution in the neonatal piglet. Ann Surg 1995; 221(5):
531–542.
112 Priebe HJ, Nöldge GFE, Armbruster K, et al. Differential effects of dobutamine,
dopamine, and noradrenaline on splanchnic haemodynamics and oxygenation I
the pig. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1995; 39: 1088–1096.
113 Massone F. Anestesiologia Veterinaria: Farmacologia e Tecnicas, 5th edn. Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil: Guanabara Koogan, 2008.
114 Haskins SC. Monitoring anesthetized patients. In: Short CE, ed. Principles and
Practice of Veterinary Anesthesia. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins, 1987.
115 Gianotti GC, Beheregaray WK, Meyer FS, et al. Cardiorespiratory dynamics of
sedated pigs submitted to different inspired oxygen fractions under controlled
mechanical ventilation. Acta Sci Vet 2014; 42: 1–8.
116 Dobromylsky P, Flecknell PA, Lascelles BD, et al. Pain Management in Animals.
London, UK: WB Saunders, 2001.
117 Sipos W, Schmoll F, Stumpf I. Minipigs and potbellied pigs as pets in the veteri-
nary practice: a retrospective study. J Vet Med A, Physiol Pathol Clin Med 2007; 54:
504–511.
118 Ludwig EK, Byron CR. Evaluation of the reason for and outcomes of gastrointes-
tinal tract surgery in pet pigs: 11 cases (2004–2015). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2017;
251: 714–721.
119 Claxton-Gill MS, Cornick-Seahorn JL, Gamboa JC, et al. Suspected malignant
hyperthermia syndrome in a miniature pot-bellied pig anesthetized with isoflu-
rane. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993; 203(10): 1434–1436.
120 Do Carmo PL, Zapata-Sudo MM, Trachez F, et al. Intravenous administration of
azumolene to reverse malignant hyperthermia in swine. J Vet Intern Med 2010; 24:
1224–1228.
121 Iaizzo PA, Kehler CH, Richard JC, et al. Prior hypothermia attenuates malignant
hypothermia in susceptible swine. Anesth Analg 1996; 82: 803–809.
122 Hermansen K, Pedersen LE, Olesen HO. The analgesic effect of buprenorphine,
etorphine and pethidine in the pig: a randomized double blind cross-over study.
Acta Pharmacol Toxicol 1986; 59: 27–35.
123 Harvey- Clark CJ, Gillespie K, Riggs KW. Transdermal fentanyl compared with
parenteral buprenorphine in post-surgical pain in swine: a case study. Lab Anim
2000; 34: 386–398.
124 Thiede AJ, Garcia KD, Stolarik DF, et al. Pharmacokinetics of sustained-released
and transdermal buprenorphine in Göttingen minipigs. J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci
2014; 53(6): 692–699.
125 Branson KR, Gross ME. Opioid agonists and antagonists. In: Veterinary Pharmacology
and Therapeutics, 8th edn. Ames, IA: Iowa State University Press, 2001.
126 Wilkinson AC, Thomas III ML, Morse BC. Evaluation of a transdermal fentanyl
system in Yucatan miniature pigs. Contemp Top Lab Anim Sci 2001; 40(3): 12–16.
127 Steffey EP, Baggot JD, Eisele JH, et al. Morphine-isoflurane interaction in dogs,
swine and Rhesus monkeys. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1994; 17: 202–210.
128 Nolan AM. Pain Management in Animals. London, UK: WB Saunders, 2001.
129 Rang HP, Dale MM, Ritter JM. Pharmacology, 3rd edn. London, UK: Churchill
Livingstone, 1996.
130 Ummenhofer WC, Arends R, Shen DD, et al. Comparative spinal distribution and
clearance kinetics of intrathecally administered morphine, fentanyl, alfentanil,
and sufentanil. Anesthesiology 2000; 92: 739–753.
131 Strande A. Epidural anaesthesia in young pigs, dosage in relation to the length of
the vertebral column. Acta Vet Scand 1968: 9(1): 41–49.
132 Malavasi LM, Nyman G, Augustsson H, et al. Effects of epidural morphine and
transdermal fentanyl analgesia on physiology and behavior after abdominal sur-
gery in pigs. Lab Anim 2006; 40: 16–27.
133 Stegmann GF. Cardiovascular effects of epidural morphine or ropivacaine in
isoflurane-anaesthetised pigs during surgical devascularisation of the liver.
J S Afr Vet Assoc 2010; 81(3): 143–147.
134 Mergner GW, Stolte AL, Frame WB, et al. Combined epidural analgesia and
general anesthesia induce ischemia distal to a severe coronary artery stenosis in
swine. Anesth Analg 1994; 78: 37–45.
135 Boothe DM. Drugs affecting animal behavior. In: Veterinary Pharmacology and
Therapeutics, 8th edn. Ames, IA: Iowa State University Press, 2001.
136 Garrido MJ, Valle M, Campanero MA, et al. Modelling of the in vivo antinocicep-
tive interaction between an opioid agonist, (+) O-desmethyltramadol in rats.
J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2000; 295: 352–359.
137 Bhattachary MD, Mandal MC, Ghosh S, et al. Comparison of two premedication
regimes to facilitate laryngeal mask insertion during thiopental anaesthesia.
J Anaesth Clin Pharmacol 2005; 21: 275–278.
138 Lewis KS, Han NH. Tramadol: a centrally acting analgesic. Am J Health Syst
Pharm 1996; 54: 643–652.
139 Ajadi AR, Olusa TA, Smith OF, et al. Tramadol improved the efficacy of ketamine-
xylazine anaesthesia in young pigs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36: 562–566.
140 Aratana Website. NOCITA® Technical Monograph. www.nocita.aratana.com/
wp-content/uploads/2019/05/NOCITA-Technical-Monograph.pdf 	(accessed
September 2020).
141 Richard BM, Newton P, Ott LR, et al. The safety of EXPAREL® (bupivacaine lipo-
some injectable suspension) administered by peripheral nerve block in rabbits
and dogs. J Drug Deliv 2012: 962101.
142 Damjanovka M, Cvetko E, Kuroda MM, et al. Neurotoxicity of intraeural injection
of bupivacaine liposome injectable suspension versus bupivacaine hydrochloride
in a porcine model. Vet Anaesth Analg 2019; 46(2): 236–245.
143 Swindle MM. Swine in the Laboratory: Surgery, Anesthesia, Imaging, and
Experimental Techniques, 2nd edn. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2007.
144 Buur JL, Baynes RE, Smith G, et al. Pharmacokinetics of flunixin meglumine in
swine after intravenous dosing. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2006; 29: 437–440.
145 Keita A, Pagot E, Pruiner A, et al. Pre-emptive meloxicam for postoperative analgesia
in piglets undergoing surgical castration. Vet Anaesth Analg 2010; 37(4): 3673–3674.
146 Pairis-Garcia MD, Johnson AK, Kukanich B, et al. Pharmacokinetics of meloxi-
cam in mature swine after intravenous and oral administration. J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 2015; 38(3): 265–270.

-- 1315 of 1450 --

1300 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
147 Langford DJ, Bailey AL, Chanda ML, et al. Coding of facial expression of pain in
the laboratory mouse. Nat Methods 2010; 7: 447–449.
148 Sotocinal SG, Sorge RE, Zaloum A, et al. The Rat Grimace Scale: a partially
automated method for quantifying pain in the laboratory rat via facial expression.
Mol Pain 2011; 7: 55.
149 Keating SCJ, Thomas AA, Flecknell PA, et al. Evaluation of EMLA cream for
preventing pain during tattooing of rabbits: changes in physiological, behavioural
and facial expression responses. PLoS ONE 2012; 7(9): e44437.
150 Costa ED, Minero M, Lebelt D, et al. Development of the horse grimace scale
(HGS) as a pain assessment tool in horses undergoing routine castration.
PLoS ONE 2014; 9(3): e92281.
151 Guesgen MJ, Beausoleil NJ, Leach M, et al. Coding and quantification of a facial
expression for pain in lambs. Behav Processes 2016; 132: 49–56.
152 McLennan KM, Rebelo CJB, Corke MJ, et al. Development of a facial expression
scale using footrot and mastitis as models of pain in sheep. Appl Anim Behav Sci
2016; 176: 19–26.
153 Evangelista MC, Watanabe R, Leung VSY, et al. Facial expressions of pain in cats:
the development and validation of a Feline Grimace Scale. Sci Rep 2019; 9: 19128.
154 Viscardi AV, Hunniford M, Lawlis P, et al. Development of a piglet grimace scale
to evaluate piglet pain using facial expressions following castration and tail dock-
ing: a pilot study. Front Vet Sci 2017; 4: 51.
155 Di Giminiani P, Brierley VLMH, Scollo A, et al. The assessment of facial expres-
sions in piglets undergoing tail docking and castration: toward the development of
the piglet grimace scale. Front Vet Sci 2016; 3: 100.
156 Luna SPL, Araujo AL, Neto PIN, et al. Validation of the UNESP-Botucatu pig
composite acute pain scale (UPAPS). PLoS ONE 2020; 15(6): e0233552.

-- 1316 of 1450 --

1301
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of Lumb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
In ruminant and swine practice, it is common to combine local
anesthetics with chemical and/or physical restraint methods to pro-
vide a cost-effective and humane alternative to general anesthesia.
The choice of technique for a procedure and level of sedation
required will depend on the species and breed of animal (e.g., dairy
or beef cow, ovine, or porcine), temperament, facilities available
(farm or clinic location), and skills of the veterinarian. The eco-
nomics of ruminant and swine practice may not allow for general
anesthesia in most situations and local and regional anesthetic tech-
niques are often the basis of appropriate analgesia. Local anesthetic
techniques do not require specialized equipment and avoid the
potential complications of general anesthesia and recumbency.
Most ruminants or swine are tolerant of humane restraint, but
appropriate sedation and facilities are necessary for successful
application of these techniques. Many field surgeries are performed
in standing adult cattle to minimize the risks associated with
recumbency (e.g., bloat, regurgitation, hypoxemia, myopathy, or
neuropathy). Small ruminants or swine may be restrained in lateral
or dorsal recumbency.
Local anesthetics can be administered in a number of ways,
including perineural injection, infiltration at nerve endings in the
skin or tissues, injection into the epidural or intrathecal space, and
by injection into a peripheral vessel in combination with a tourni-
quet that prevents leakage into the systemic circulation. In general,
a local anesthetic infiltrated near a major nerve or the spinal cord
will have a longer duration of action than when infiltrated more
peripherally (e.g., smaller nerve or nerve endings) or in a diffuse
fashion (e.g., ring block). In cattle and small ruminants, the most
commonly used techniques are local anesthesia of the paralumbar
fossa, caudal or lumbosacral epidural analgesia, horn blocks, and
intravenous regional anesthesia of the foot. In swine, infiltrative
local anesthesia, caudal or lumbosacral epidural anesthesia, and
intratesticular anesthesia are common.
Local anesthetics
Local anesthetics block sodium channels and prevent depolariza-
tion of nerves. Lidocaine, bupivacaine, and mepivacaine are the
most commonly used local anesthetics in ruminants, and a specific
66 Ruminant and Swine Local Anesthetic
and Analgesic Techniques
Alexander Valverde
Department of Clinical Studies, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada
Chapter contents
Introduction, 1301
Local anesthetics, 1301
Blocks for regional anesthesia of the head, 1303
Horn blocks, 1303
Eye and adnexa block, 1304
Nasal passages and nasal block, 1306
Blocks for regional anesthesia of the flank or paralumbar fossa, 1307
Line infiltration block, 1307
Inverted “L” or “7” block, 1307
Proximal paravertebral block, 1307
Distal paravertebral block, 1309
Segmental dorsolumbar epidural block, 1309
Segmental thoracolumbar subarachnoid block, 1310
Blocks for regional anesthesia of the linea alba and paramedian region, 1310
Line infiltration block, 1311
Lumbosacral, sacrococcygeal, or intercoccygeal epidural (cranial epidural)
block, 1311
Blocks for regional anesthesia of the pelvic area and related tissues, 1312
Sacrococcygeal or intercoccygeal epidural (caudal epidural) block, 1312
Sacral paravertebral block, 1313
Pudendal block, 1314
Dorsal nerve of the penis block, 1314
Blocks for regional anesthesia of the teats and udder, 1314
Ring block, 1316
Inverted “V” block, 1316
Teat sinus infusion block, 1316
Intravenous regional teat block, 1317
Blocks for castration, 1317
Blocks for regional anesthesia of the limbs and feet, 1317
Thoracic limb blocks, 1317
Pelvic limb blocks, 1319
Ultrasound-guided regional anesthesia, 1321
References, 1322

-- 1317 of 1450 --

1302 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
drug is often chosen based on its onset and duration of action.
Lidocaine and mepivacaine are shorter acting than bupivacaine due
to their lower protein binding at the receptor, but faster in onset
because their dissociation constant (pKa
) is closer to plasma pH
(7.4), which facilitates passage through cell membranes.
Toxicity of local anesthetics is related to their plasma concentra-
tions. Reported toxic doses are based on continuous intravenous
(IV) infusion of the local anesthetic, which contrasts from clinical
situations where the local anesthetic drug is administered most
commonly by extravascular infiltration; therefore, a more gradual
absorption from the injection site into the systemic circulation off-
sets the achievement of toxic doses.
Toxicity is dependent on multiple factors. In addition to dose,
plasma concentrations are dependent on the site of injection, vascu-
lar supply and degree of absorption from the site, co-administration
of other drugs (e.g., epinephrine), conscious versus anesthetized
state, health status, and individual variation. In humans, peak
plasma concentrations for non-IV routes may be variable according
to administration site and are as follows: intercostal > epidural >
brachial plexus > subcutaneous [1].
In ruminants, toxic doses of local anesthetics have mostly been
determined for sheep which are often used as a model for humans
(Table 66.1). The progressive manifestation of systemic toxicity in
conscious sheep usually consists of sedation, ataxia, mild cardiovas-
cular depression, seizure activity, or convulsions accompanied by
cardiovascular stimulation, followed by hypotension, apnea, and
finally circulatory collapse and death [2–4]. For bupivacaine, with
its known cardiotoxic effects, seizure activity may be preceded by
cardiovascular collapse; similar effects have also been reported for
ropivacaine [3]. In conscious goat kids given lidocaine to trigger
seizures, toxicity signs progressed from sedation to ataxia and then
tonic-clonic seizures [5]. Toxic doses that cause seizure activity do
not necessarily result in cardiovascular signs, which typically
require higher doses of local anesthetics [2–7]. In sheep anesthe-
tized with volatile anesthetic agents, no signs of central nervous
system (CNS) impairment (i.e., seizure activity) are observed even
when blood concentrations are two-fold higher than in conscious
sheep exhibiting toxicity and, although cardiovascular depression
occurs, anesthesia has been shown to have a protective effect against
arrhythmias and cardiovascular collapse [2].
Pregnancy may influence the toxic dosage of local anesthetic.
There are a number of reports in the literature citing differences in
sensitivity between pregnant and non-pregnant patients ranging
from minimal to a 15% or more increase in sensitivity to bupiv-
acaine and ropivacaine dosage in pregnant patients, particularly
to the CNS effects [3,8]. These differences are more statistically
rather than clinically relevant. No differences between pregnant
and non-pregnant sheep were detected for lidocaine or mepiv-
acaine [6,9]. Signs of hypotension (a sudden 40% or greater drop
in mean arterial blood pressure), apnea (>15 s), and circulatory
collapse (loss of the peripheral pulse) occurred at approximately
twice the convulsive dose when administered IV under experi-
mental conditions.
Conscious non-pregnant adult sheep given IV lidocaine at 2 mg/
kg/min showed tonic-clonic seizure activity after 5.8 mg/kg had
been administered, whereas newborn lambs 1–5 days of age were
more resistant and did not exhibit seizure activity until dosages of
18 mg/kg were given [4]. Similarly, signs of hypotension (defined as
a 20% drop in mean arterial blood pressure), apnea, and circulatory
collapse occurred at 5–6 times (i.e., 31–37 mg/kg) the convulsive
dose for adult sheep and at 3.5 times (i.e., 57–67 mg/kg) the
convulsive dose for newborn lambs [4]. For mepivacaine, IV
infusions of 2 mg/kg/min in conscious sheep resulted in seizure
activity at dosages of 7.5–7.8 mg/kg and signs of hypotension,
apnea, and circulatory collapse at 6–9 times (i.e., 49–69 mg/kg) the
convulsive dose [6].
Pigs have been used as a model for the study of local anesthetic
toxicity in human pediatric patients. Bupivacaine administered IV
at 1 mg/kg/min in sevoflurane-anesthetized piglets (19–43 days
of age) induced hypotension (defined as a 50% drop in mean
arterial blood pressure) at median dosages of 4.6–5.2 mg/kg [10].
Older pigs administered 4 mg/kg of bupivacaine, levobupivacaine,
or ropivacaine IV over 30 s under thiopental anesthesia showed
immediate decreases in mean arterial blood pressure, cardiac
index, and heart rate, followed by a gradual recovery to baseline
over 30 min. These changes were more drastic with bupivacaine
Table 66.1 Approximate intravenous toxic doses (mg/kg) and associated plasma concentrations (μg/mL in parentheses) of local anesthetics reported in conscious sheep, lambs,
goat kids, and anesthetized pigs.
Local anesthetic 	Adverse effect 	Sheep 	Lambs
(1–5 days old)
Goat kids
(7–10 days old)
Newborn pigs
(< 3 days old)
Pigs
(8–10 weeks old)
Lidocaine 	Seizure activity
Hypotension, cardiovascular
collapse
5.8
(11.7)
31–37
(27.6–41.2)
18
57–67
(35.6–53.4)
9–12
(13.6)
ND
12–60
(40.6)
ND
ND
ND
Mepivacaine 	Seizure activity
Hypotension, cardiovascular
collapse
7.5–7.8
(17.4–19.5)
49–69
(36.4–45.6)
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
Bupivacaine 	Seizure activity
Hypotension, cardiovascular
collapse
4.2–6.2
(2.5–5.6)
5.2–10.3
(3.0–7.4)
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
4
Ropivacaine 	Seizure activity
Hypotension, cardiovascular
collapse
6.1–6.9
(4.7–5.6)
11.3–12.5
(6.6–9.1)
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
4
ND, not determined.
Source: Compiled from Copeland et al. [2] (sheep); Santos and DeArmas [3] (sheep); Morishima et al. [4,8] (sheep, lambs); Ventkatachalam et al. [5] (goat kids); Satas et al. [7]
(newborn pigs); Udelsmann et al. [11,12] (pigs).

-- 1318 of 1450 --

Chapter 66: Ruminant and Swine Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1303
and levobupivacaine than with ropivacaine, with a 24–41%
decrease in mean arterial blood pressure versus 11%; 38–53%
decrease in cardiac index versus 22%; and 9–14% decrease in heart
rate versus 7% [11,12].
In conscious piglets (12–60 h old), lidocaine induced seizures at
a total dosage of 42 mg/kg IV administered as a 2 mg/kg bolus fol-
lowed by an infusion at 2 mg/kg/min. Administration of 15 mg/kg
every 4 min resulted in seizures at cumulative doses of 30–60 mg [7].
In both groups, there were no detectable changes in heart rate or
mean arterial blood pressure before the onset of seizures [7].
Lidocaine hydrochloride (2%) is approved in Canada and the
United States for use in cattle as a local anesthetic, but not for
small ruminants or swine. However, it is labeled in cattle without
established withdrawal times for meat and milk. General recom-
mendations based on pharmacokinetic studies are a 4-day with-
drawal for meat and 3-day withdrawal for milk after local
infiltration techniques due to the large volumes of infiltration (up
to 100 mL) [13]. For caudal epidural anesthesia using volumes of
up to 15 mL, recommended meat and milk withdrawal times of 24
h are listed [14,15]. These withdrawal times are recommended by
the Food Animal Residue Avoidance Databank (FARAD) for the
US (www.farad.org) and Canada (www.cgfarad.usask.ca) and vet-
erinarians are referred to these sites for withdrawal guidance and
the Animal Medicinal Drug Use Clarification Act (AMDUCA)
(www.farad.org/amduca-law.html) for regulatory considerations.
Recommendations from FARAD for small ruminants refer to the
use of lidocaine with epinephrine for infiltration or epidural admin-
istration and include 24-h withdrawal times for meat and milk in
sheep and goats. These same withdrawal times are recommended in
cattle for lidocaine with epinephrine.
There are no current recommendations for mepivacaine, bupiv-
acaine, or ropivacaine withdrawal times.
Blocks for regional anesthesia of the head
Horn blocks
There are similarities in desensitizing the nerve supply to the horn
in cattle, goats, and sheep. In cattle, the main sensory nerve supply
to the horn arises from the cornual branch as well as the supraorbi-
tal and infratrochlear nerves, all of which originate from the oph-
thalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve (Fig. 66.1A). The ophthalmic
branch divides into three nerves while still within the foramen
orbitorotundum: the lacrimal, nasociliary, and frontal nerves. The
lacrimal nerve consists of two strands located along the lateral
surface of the lateral rectus muscle that later join between them and
with the communicating ramus of the zygomatic nerve to form
the zygomaticotemporal branch, which is located at the level of the
dorsal and caudal aspect of the orbit and exits along the ventral
aspect of the zygomatic process (supraorbital) of the frontal bone.
The zygomaticotemporal branch continues as the cornual branch as
it travels caudally toward the base of the horn along the temporal
ridge, between the supraorbital process and the lateral edge of the
base of the horn [16].
In adult cattle, the site of injection for the cornual branch is
3–5 cm in front of the base of the horn, where the nerve courses
from ventral to dorsal from the temporal fossa to the frontal bone
and branches into endings along the base of the horn (Fig. 66.1B).
A 2.5–3.8 cm, 20 gauge needle is inserted along the area of the tem-
poral line and frontal bone and 10 mL of 2% lidocaine is injected
after negative aspiration of blood has been verified to avoid injec-
tion into the cornual artery or vein in the surrounding area.
The nasociliary nerve branches into the infratrochlear nerve as it
enters the orbit, which ascends to the dorsal margin of the orbit to
the level of the lacrimal bone, dorsal to the medial canthus, where it
curves around the frontal bony margin of the orbit to travel cau-
dally and along the frontal bone and may reach the base of the
horn [16]. The site of injection for the infratrochlear nerve is
2–3 cm medial from the mid-dorsal aspect of the rim of the orbit; a
2.5 cm, 20 gauge needle and 5 mL of 2% lidocaine are used
(Fig. 66.1B). If the needle is directed an additional 2–3 cm caudo-
medially, then the supraorbital nerve to the horn can also be
blocked from this approach. Alternatively, the infratrochlear nerve
branches that reach the horn can be blocked with the supraorbital
nerve as described below.
9
10
11
7
14 6
13
12
11
7
9
(A)
(B)
8
12
3	4
5
Figure 66.1 A. Innervation to the horn and surrounding tissue. Arrows
indicate injection sites required for complete desensitization of the horn
which includes the cornual branch (7), the infratrochlear nerve (9), the
supraorbital nerve (11), and branches of the second cervical nerve (not
shown but injected at the caudal base of the horn). The branches of the
ophthalmic nerve that give origin to these nerves (except the second
cervical nerve) are illustrated in color. (1) maxillary nerve (black); (2)
zygomaticofacial branch; (3) zygomatic nerve; (4) communicating branch
of zygomatic nerve to lacrimal nerve; (5) lacrimal nerve (purple); (6)
zygomaticotemporal branch; (7) cornual branch; (8) nasociliary nerve
(green); (9) infratrochlear nerve; (10) frontal nerve (red); (11) supraorbital
nerve. The auriculopalpebral nerve (12) and its branches, the rostral
auricular branch (13), and zygomatic branch (14) are also depicted. B.
Dehorning nerve block in adult cattle with position of the needles at the
cornual branch (7), infratrochlear nerve (9), and supraorbital nerve (11).

-- 1319 of 1450 --

1304 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
The frontal nerve travels from the foramen orbitorotundum to
the orbital opening of the supraorbital canal, on the caudal and dor-
sal aspect of the orbit, to emerge as the supraorbital nerve at the
supraorbital foramen of the frontal bone. The supraorbital foramen
can be located about 3–4 cm from the temporal ridge and halfway
along the distance between the supraorbital process and the medial
edge of the base of the horn [16]. The site of injection for the
supraorbital nerve is at the level of the supraorbital foramen using a
2.5 cm, 20 gauge needle and 5 mL of 2% lidocaine and taking care
to avoid the supraorbital vein (Fig. 66.1B). Because most of the cor-
nual branches of the infratrochlear nerve travel to the horn lateral
to the supraorbital nerve at this same location, they can be blocked
with this approach by directing the needle lateral toward the orbit,
2–3 cm from the rim of the orbit.
It is important to note that the proximity of the rostral auricular
and zygomatic branches of the auriculopalpebral nerve to the sites
of injection of the cornual, nasociliary, and supraorbital nerves
often results in their blockade, producing relaxation of the ear and
inability to close the eyelids [16].
In addition to these three main nerves, the caudal aspect of the base
of the horn may be supplied by cutaneous branches of the second cer-
vical nerve and these can be blocked by injecting local anesthetic close
to the dorsal midline of the neck at a point level with the base of the ear.
In calves, nerve block for disbudding or dehorning can be per-
formed as in adult cattle or simplified to two injection sites in
younger calves (Fig. 66.2). For the simplified form of the block, a
1.5–2.5 cm, 20 gauge needle is inserted at the same site as for the
cornual branch in adult cattle (i.e., where the nerve courses from
ventral to dorsal from the temporal fossa to the frontal bone) and
5 mL of 2% lidocaine is injected above this ridge and 2 mL below
the ridge. The dorsal volume of 5 mL is further divided to block the
infratrochlear and supraorbital nerves as they travel toward the
horn by directing the needle 2–3 cm from the ridge toward midline,
and then blocking the cornual nerve along the ridge itself. The sec-
ond injection is completed by redirecting the needle ventral to the
ridge toward the temporal fossa, where 2 mL are injected to further
block the cornual branch.
The use of a ring block can also be used in calves of less than
2 months of age, using a 2.5 cm, 20 gauge needle and injecting 6 mL
of 2% lidocaine through four to five injection sites under the skin
around the base of the horn [17]. However, as this block acts mostly
on distal nerve endings from the major nerves to the horn, it has a
shorter duration of action than the blocks described above.
Following surgery on the horns, anesthesia and analgesia are pro-
vided for as long as the duration of action of the local anesthetic.
Due to the invasive nature of dehorning surgery, a non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drug (e.g., flunixin meglumine 2 mg/kg, IV or
IM) is suggested for postoperative analgesia to supplement the
anesthetic effect as it diminishes.
The cornual nerves of sheep and goats are very similar to those of
cattle, although the cutaneous branches of the second cervical nerve
are less likely to innervate the horn. The cornual branch of the lac-
rimal nerve (zygomaticotemporal) is blocked behind the root of
the supraorbital process (Fig. 66.3). A 2.5 cm, 22 gauge needle
is inserted to a depth of 1–1.5 cm, and 2–3 mL of 2% lidocaine is
injected, halfway between the lateral canthus and the lateral edge of
the base of the horn. The cornual branches of the infratrochlear
nerve are blocked close to the dorsal rim of the orbit, halfway
between the medial canthus and the medial edge of the base of the
horn, by inserting a 2.5 cm, 22 gauge needle to a depth of about
0.5 cm and injecting 1–2 mL of 2% lidocaine [18].
Eye and adnexa block
The orbit has a rich presence of nerves behind the globe that are not
exclusive to the eye. These nerves emerge from the cranial cavity
through various foramina (e.g., the foramen orbitorotundum and
optic foramen) to supply the eye and adnexa in addition to other
extraocular structures. Nerves present in this location include
the optic nerve as it emerges from the optic foramen as well as the
nerves emerging from the foramen orbitorotundum, including
the ophthalmic branches of the trigeminal nerve or extensions of
these branches that eventually give rise to nerves supplying the
horn (lacrimal nerve, infratrochlear nerve, and frontal nerve),
the oculomotor nerve, the trochlear nerve, the abducens nerve, and
(A)
(B)
7
11
9
7
11
9
d
v
Figure 66.2 A. Nerve block for disbudding or dehorning in calves using
the same approach as in adult cattle with position of the needles at the
cornual branch (7), infratrochlear nerve (9), and supraorbital nerve (11).
B. Simplified two-injection site with the needle directed dorsally (d) for the
cornual branch (7), infratrochlear nerve (9), and supraorbital nerve (11),
and ventrally (v) for further block of the cornual branch (7).

-- 1320 of 1450 --

Chapter 66: Ruminant and Swine Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1305
the zygomaticofacial branch of the maxillary nerve (part of the
trigeminal nerve) [16]. Therefore, injection of local anesthetic
in this area can result in sensory or motor blockade of the nerves
and the structures they serve, and not just of the eye.
The structures potentially anesthetized or paralyzed by local anes-
thetic effects on the oculomotor nerve include the dorsal, ventral,
and medial rectus muscles, the superior levator palpebrae muscle,
the retractor bulbi muscle, and the ventral oblique muscle. Local
anesthesia of the trochlear nerve affects the dorsal oblique muscle
while local anesthesia of the ophthalmic branches of the trigeminal
nerve affects the upper eyelid, lacrimal gland, conjunctiva, third eye-
lid, skin of medial and lateral angle of the eye, iris, cornea, horn, and
sections of skin over the frontal bone. Local anesthesia of the zygo-
maticofacial branch of the maxillary nerve affects the lower eyelid,
and local anesthesia of the abducens nerve affects the lateral rectus
muscle and the lateral part of the retractor bulbi muscle [16].
Anesthesia of the eye is most commonly performed for enuclea-
tion surgery. It is possible to perform an enucleation in adult cattle
with the animal standing, using either a four-point injection (ret-
robulbar block) to block the deep orbital nerves or a Peterson block
to exclusively anesthetize the nerves as they exit the skull through
the foramen orbitorotundum and optic foramen. Ocular surgery in
small ruminants or young cattle is generally performed under gen-
eral anesthesia but the use of an eye block is also recommended to
decrease volatile anesthetic requirements, decrease the likelihood of
eliciting the oculocardiac reflex (trigeminovagal), and provide
postoperative analgesia.
Four-point block (retrobulbar)
In the awake, adult bovine, the animal can be restrained in a chute
with the head secured. A 9 cm, 18 or 20 gauge needle, bent into a
curved shape, is inserted into the orbit (i.e., the bony fossa
surrounding the globe) at 12, 3, 6, and 9 o’clock positions to a depth
of 7–9 cm (in the adult bovine). In adult cattle, 5–10 mL of 2% lido-
caine is injected at each site and through the different tissue planes
to provide good anesthetic spread and desensitize all nerves present
in the orbit that supply the eye and adnexa [19]. The injections can
be made through the eyelids, if preferred. The operator uses an
index finger to deflect the globe away from the needle as it is
inserted. The orbital septum must be penetrated; otherwise, the
local anesthetic may be deposited as a subconjunctival injection.
The operator can generally perceive the point when the needle pen-
etrates the septum. Exophthalmos indicates a successful block.
In small ruminants and calves, the procedure can be done to
enhance antinociception of the eye during general anesthesia. A
3.8 cm, 20 or 22 gauge needle, bent into a curved shape, is inserted as
described above for cattle. It is possible to obtain good blockade by
doing a two-point block, usually using two opposite locations (e.g.,
the 6 and 12 or 3 and 9 o’clock positions). Volumes of 2–3 mL of 2%
lidocaine are injected at each site in adult small ruminants or calves.
A disadvantage of this technique is that the injection and place-
ment of the needle could damage the optic nerve; as such, it is often
not used for procedures other than enucleation. There is also the
possibility that the anesthetic could enter the cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF), as the meninges extend around the optic nerve. This can
result in acute CNS toxicity and, potentially, death. Other complica-
tions include penetration of the globe, retrobulbar hemorrhage, and
initiation of the oculocardiac reflex from pressure generated during
injection. Careful technique, including aspiration prior to injection
and cautious injection, especially if resistance is encountered, may
attenuate these risks.
Peterson block
This is technically more difficult than the four-point block and
requires careful needle positioning, making it less reliable. Its effi-
cacy depends on accurate placement of the injected anesthetic at the
site of emergence of the nerves from the foramen orbitorotundum
since there is minimal distribution along tissue planes [19]. Due to
the ventral location of the foramen orbitorotundum with respect to
the optic foramen (about 1 cm ventral), direct blockade of the optic
nerve may not result; however, increasing the volume of injection
may facilitate reaching and therefore blocking the optic nerve
(Fig. 66.4). In addition to the nerves emerging from the foramen
orbitorotundum described for the retrobulbar block, the maxillary
nerve (branch of the trigeminal nerve) is also involved, resulting in
block of the zygomatic nerve and its zygomaticofacial branch (lower
eyelid innervation); blockade of the pterygopalatine and infraorbital
nerve provides anesthesia of the nasal passages and nose as described
below [16]. The mandibular nerve (a branch of the trigeminal) is less
likely to be affected because it exits the skull through the oval fora-
men, which is more ventrally located and separated from the fora-
men orbitorotundum by the pterygoid crest (Fig. 66.4) [16].
To perform this block, the animal is restrained with its nasal
bones parallel to the ground. A 10 or 12 cm, 20 gauge needle is
passed just in front of the rostral border of the coronoid process of
the mandible, caudal to the notch formed by the zygomatic arch
and supraorbital process and directed slightly ventrally and posteri-
orly for the length of the needle or until it strikes bone. The local
anesthetic (15–20 mL, 2% lidocaine) is injected once the needle
strikes bone in the area where the nerves travel toward the
orbit [18,20] (Figs. 66.4b and 66.5A). Alternatively, the needle can
be introduced below the zygomatic arch at the same horizontal
position caudal to the notch of the zygomatic arch and supraorbital
1
2
Figure 66.3 Locations for nerve block for dehorning an adult goat.
The cornual branch of the lacrimal nerve (zygomaticotemporal) is blocked
behind the root of the supraorbital process (1) and the cornual branch of
the infratrochlear nerve is blocked at the dorsomedial margin of the orbit
(2). Source: Valverde and Doherty [18], with permission.

-- 1321 of 1450 --

1306 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
process, but in this case the needle is directed slightly dorsally and
posteriorly to reach the same position as the previous dorsal
approach (Fig. 66.5B). The same technique can be performed in
small ruminants and calves using a 6.3 cm, 20 gauge needle and
injecting 3–4 mL of 2% lidocaine, with the approach dorsal or ven-
tral to the zygomatic arch.
Auriculopalpebral block
Eyelid akinesia (paralysis) can be produced by blocking the auricu-
lopalpebral nerve (arising from the facial nerve), which provides
innervation to the ear (rostral auricular branches) and to the eyelids
(zygomatic branches). The zygomatic branches block the motor
function of the orbicularis oculi muscle and elevator of the medial
oculi angle muscle [16]. This type of anesthesia facilitates examina-
tion of the eye by preventing blinking but does not provide sensory
blockade.
The auriculopalpebral nerve is blocked by inserting a
2.5–3.8 cm, 22 gauge needle through the skin at the end of the
zygomatic arch on the zygomatic process of the temporal bone
and injecting 5–10 mL of 2% lidocaine, subcutaneously, at the
dorsal border of the arch [18]. By injecting at this site, both zygo-
matic and rostral auricular branches are blocked (Fig. 66.4a).
Attempting to inject the zygomatic branch exclusively is more dif-
ficult due to the variable locations at which it branches from the
auriculopalpebral nerve following emergence dorsally from the
zygomatic arch.
Nasal passages and nasal block
Anesthesia of the nasal passages and nostrils can be achieved by
blockade of the maxillary nerve at the foramen orbitorotundum as
described for the Peterson eye block. This block will include the
divisions of the maxillary nerve that enter the maxillary foramen,
the pterygopalatine nerve, and infraorbital nerve. The pterygopala-
tine nerve supplies the soft palate (minor palatine nerve), hard pal-
ate (major palatine nerve), and ventral aspects of the nasal cavity
and palate (caudal nasal nerve). The infraorbital nerve travels
within the infraorbital canal from the maxillary foramen to the
infraorbital foramen, where it emerges and continues to the nose
and surrounding tissue, to supply the skin of the dorsal nasal area,
nares, and upper lip [16]. To avoid including the innervation to the
eye and adnexa, it is more common to only block the infraorbital
nerve as it emerges from the infraorbital foramen, resulting in
incomplete block of the nasal passages.
The infraorbital foramen can be readily localized by palpation,
by extending a line from the nasoincisive notch to the first palpable
cheek tooth (second premolar since the first premolar is absent),
approximately 5 cm above the tooth (Fig. 66.6). A volume of
4
3
2	1
5
c
a
b
Figure 66.4 Location for needle placement for the auriculopalpebral block (a), the Peterson eye block (b), and the infraorbital block (c). (1) oval foramen;
(2) foramen orbitorotundum; (3) optic foramen; (4) supraorbital foramen; (5) infraorbital foramen.
(A)
(B)
Figure 66.5 Location for needle placement for the Peterson eye block. The
diagrammatic overlay shows the position of the zygomatic arch and the
supraorbital process. A. Needle introduced above the zygomatic arch. B.
Needle introduced below the zygomatic arch.

-- 1322 of 1450 --

Chapter 66: Ruminant and Swine Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1307
5–10 mL in adult cattle or 2–4 mL in calves of 2% lidocaine can be
injected into the infraorbital canal using a 3.8 cm, 20 gauge needle
introduced through the infraorbital foramen.
Blocks for regional anesthesia of the flank or
paralumbar fossa
Blocks to anesthetize the flank are commonly performed in rumi-
nants to permit intra-abdominal surgery (e.g., cesarean section,
abomasal, and ruminal procedures). They can be performed in the
standing adult bovine and the recumbent calf or small ruminant,
using one of several described techniques, including line infiltra-
tion, inverted “L” or “7,” proximal paravertebral, distal paraverte-
bral, segmental dorsolumbar epidural, and segmental thoracolumbar
subarachnoid anesthesia. Generally, the dermatomes intended to be
blocked are those supplied by branches of thoracic nerve 13 (T13)
and lumbar nerves 1–3 (L1–3). The inclusion of L3 provides supe-
rior anesthesia since it supplies the caudal third of the abdominal
flank and projects to more cranial aspects of the flank via small
anastomotic branches with L2.
Anesthesia of the body wall for abdominal surgery requires anes-
thesia of all layers, including the peritoneum. If the spread of anes-
thetic does not reach all layers, especially likely with line infiltration
techniques, coverage will be incomplete. Many of these techniques
are not suitable for surgery of the ventral abdomen since not all
spinal nerves involved in the sensory innervation of this area are
blocked.
Line infiltration block
In adult cattle, this is the simplest block to perform and involves
multiple injections of small volumes (5–8 mL) of 2% lidocaine per
site with a 3.8 cm, 18 gauge needle along the previously clipped and
aseptically prepared predicted incision line; the anesthetic spreads
in different directions and depths from the point of entry. Therefore,
this block mostly affects the nerve endings immediately proximal to
the incision site. It is best to start from the most dorsal aspect of the
flank and insert the needle in a dorsal to ventral direction and work
toward the ventral end of the incision, as each injection provides
progressive desensitization before the subsequent injection. A
longer needle (8.9 cm) may be used instead of the shorter needle to
reach the parietal peritoneum and improve the quality of the block.
With lidocaine, this block is usually only effective for 60–90 min
due to the rapid systemic uptake of anesthetic from the vascular
abdominal wall. Based on toxic doses for sheep, the total dose
should not exceed 5–6 mg/kg since absorption from the muscle lay-
ers is probably rapid. This dose represents a volume of 125–150 mL
of 2% lidocaine for a 500 kg cow.
In small ruminants or calves, the technique is the same but a
2.5–3.8 cm, 20 gauge needle and volumes of 1–2 mL 2% lidocaine
per site are used, based on weight and a 5–6 mg/kg dosage (e.g., a
volume of 10–12 mL of 2% lidocaine may be used in a 40 kg patient).
Inverted “L” or “7” block
The injection of local anesthetic following an inverted “L” or “7”
shape along the caudal aspect of the last rib and the ventral aspect
of the lumbar vertebrae transverse processes blocks the transmis-
sion of pain from the periphery (flank area) to the spinal cord. For
correct nomenclature, the left flank is blocked with spread of local
anesthetic in an inverted “L” or reversed “7” shape, whereas the
right flank is blocked with a “7” shape.
The block is similar to the infiltration technique in that it requires
similar volumes (5–8 mL per injection in adult cattle) of 2% lido-
caine and a 3.8 or 8.9 cm, 18 gauge needle for injection of anesthetic
along the shape of the block. To allow progressive desensitization
before the subsequent injection (similar to line infiltration tech-
niques) it is best to start from the angle of the “L” or “7” and spread
the anesthetic to the caudal aspect for the horizontal plane and to
the ventral aspect for the vertical plane. It is also important to
remember that nerves will lie in different planes between muscle
and fascial layers so several different depths of injection may be
required for complete block of deeper layers.
This block provides more spread of the local anesthetic than the
line block; however, because it is done on two axes, it is important
to distribute the amount of local anesthetic evenly to avoid an
incomplete block. Similar to the line block, the duration of action is
approximately 60–90 min when 2% lidocaine is used.
In small ruminants or calves the block follows the same tech-
nique using a 2.5–3.8 cm, 20 gauge needle and volumes of 1–2 mL
2% lidocaine per site.
Proximal paravertebral block
This block is also known as the “Farquharson,” “Hall,” or
“Cambridge” technique, and the term “proximal” refers to the prox-
imity to the spine. Generally, nerves T13, L1, L2, and L3 are blocked.
The inclusion of nerve L3 provides better anesthesia of the caudal
third of the abdominal flank [21]. Branches of L3 occasionally con-
tribute to the femoral nerve and blockade may potentially result in
hindlimb weakness. However, the femoral nerve is mostly derived
from L4, L5, and L6 [22], which makes ataxia very unlikely; there-
fore, the inclusion of L3 is recommended.
Dorsal and ventral branches from nerves T13 and L1 travel
superimposed routes dorsoventrally for approximately 10 cm as the
respective nerve emerges from the intervertebral foramen [23]. For
nerves L2 and L3, the superimposition is less exact and a branch
from the ventral branch of L2 joins the ventral branch from L3 at
approximately 9–12 cm from midline (Fig. 66.7). The ventral
branch from L3 is the only one of the four nerves involved that trav-
els rostral to the dorsal branch [23].
Figure 66.6 Location for needle placement for the infraorbital block in an
adult cow (upper image) and a calf (lower image).

-- 1323 of 1450 --

1308 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
In adult cattle, the proximal paravertebral technique involves the
perineural injection of local anesthetic in proximity to the spinal
nerves as they emerge from the vertebral canal. The dorsal and ven-
tral branches of each nerve must be blocked if complete anesthesia
of the flank is desired.
To locate the site of injection, it is best to identify the lumbar
transverse processes by counting back from a caudal location as
lumber transverse process 1 is not always palpable, depending on
the degree of obesity of the animal, and may be confused with the
lumbar transverse process 2. While cattle have six lumbar verte-
brae, transverse process 6 is significantly smaller than that of 5 and
is hidden by the iliac wing. Consequently, counting should begin at
lumbar transverse process 5, which is the most proximal and cra-
nial to the tuber coxae, and then move cranially. Each spinal nerve
divides into a dorsal and ventral branch as it emerges and travels
between lumbar transverse processes. Because the lumbar trans-
verse processes are curved cranially, it is important to note that
once a perpendicular line is traced from the middle of the width of
the transverse process toward the spine, the nerve located in this
area corresponds to the preceding process (e.g., for lumbar trans-
verse process 4, the nerve located using this method is L3, and so
on). Therefore, to block nerves T13, L1, L2, and L3, it is necessary
to locate lumbar transverse processes 1 through 4 (see Figs. 66.7
and 66.8).
The epaxial area should be clipped and aseptically prepared
from the last rib to lumbar transverse process 4, and from the lat-
eral tip of the transverse processes to 3–4 cm from the dorsal
spinous processes on midline. In adult cattle, the distal end of lum-
bar transverse process 4 is identified by placing the thumb and
index finger on the width of the process. From here, a perpendicu-
lar line is traced from the middle of this width toward the spine
and a 3.8 cm, 16 gauge needle is inserted full length approximately
5–6 cm laterally from midline. This will act as a cannula for the
subsequent insertion of an 8.9 cm, 20 gauge spinal needle and pre-
vent it from bending. Then, the spinal needle is directed toward
lumbar transverse process 4 and, once in contact with it, is walked-
off the cranial edge until it advances through the intertransverse
ligament and then situated ventrally for blockade of the ventral
branch of nerve L3.
Avoid walking the needle off the caudal edge of lumbar trans-
verse process 3 (or any of the subsequent transverse processes
included in this block) because blockade at this location is less
effective due to the routing of the nerves from the vertebral fora-
men along the transverse process. Aspiration to confirm negative
pressure is important to avoid placement of the needle in the
abdominal cavity. Following aspiration, 20 mL of 2% lidocaine is
injected. The needle is then retracted to the point of no friction,
which indicates placement above the intertransverse ligament,
and the dorsal branch is blocked with 5 mL of 2% lidocaine and
the needles withdrawn. This method is repeated for nerves L2 and
L1 by identifying lumbar transverse processes 3 and 2, respec-
tively. If palpation of lumbar transverse process 1 is not feasible,
the distances between the previous injection sites should be sym-
metric, which will allow the distance between thoracic transverse
process 13 and lumbar transverse process 1 to be estimated.
The method described above can then be repeated to complete the
block. Blockade of the four nerves as described requires approxi-
mately 100 mL of 2% lidocaine in a 500 kg cow, similar to the
volume used for the infiltration block; however, paravertebral
block provides a more precise but extensive block of the flank and
is usually recommended over infiltration techniques. The dura-
tion of action tends to exceed that of the line infiltration and
inverted “L” or “7” blocks since the administration of anesthetic is
more circumscribed to the main nerves; with 2% lidocaine, blocks
of 90–120 min are produced.
In addition to sensory blockade, motor and sympathetic fibers
are also affected, which results in relaxation of the epaxial lumbar
muscles and vasodilation, respectively. Therefore, the spine curves
(scoliosis) toward the blocked site and the skin temperature over
the flank increases. From the surgeon’s perspective, this means
that tissues become tense due to the convexity that results on the
surgical site, which tends to spread the tissues when surgically
approaching the abdominal cavity. This combined with vasodila-
tion of blood vessels, can result in increased bleeding if surgical
hemostasis is poor.
In small ruminants and calves, the block follows the same tech-
nique for adult cattle and should include the same nerves (T13–L3).
Anatomical studies in sheep have identified nerve branches from
T13 that run obliquely and overlap with segments from L1 and L2
on the flank area as they spread toward midline [24–26], which is
similar to cattle but occurs less commonly in goats [27,28]. Sheep
have six (more common) or seven lumbar vertebrae, whereas goats
L6 	L5 	L4 	L3
D
D 	D
P	P	P	P
L2 	L1 	T13
Figure 66.7 Proximal (P) and distal (D) paravertebral block of T13, L1, L2, and L3 nerves. The colored thin lines depict the dorsal branch, and the colored
thick lines depict the ventral branch of each nerve. Note the communication between ventral branches of L2 and L3 nerves near the intertransverse space
between L3 and L4 (shaded circle). The black arrows indicate the dorsal and ventral positioning of the needle for a distal paravertebral block.

-- 1324 of 1450 --

Chapter 66: Ruminant and Swine Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1309
have six but sometimes only five lumbar vertebrae, which can com-
plicate the identification of vertebrae if counting backward as
described for cattle. However, it is simpler in these species to iden-
tify lumbar transverse process 1 and count from there to verify the
proper sites for needle insertion. In these species, the block is com-
pleted using a 2.5–3.8 cm, 20 gauge needle with volumes of 0.5–
1.5 mL for the dorsal branch and 2–3 mL for the ventral branch of
2% lidocaine. It is important to accurately note body weight and not
exceed the 5–6 mg/kg toxic dosage threshold [24,29,30].
For a longer-lasting block, ropivacaine, bupivacaine, or lido-
caine with epinephrine have also been used for the proximal
paravertebral block in cattle and small ruminants. In one study of
mixed-breed sheep (44–49 kg) injected with 4 mL of local anes-
thetic (1.5 mL for the dorsal branch and 2.5 mL for the ventral
branch), the duration of anesthesia as assessed with needle pin-
pricks, pinching with a hemostat, and ruminal fistulation surgery
was 649 min for 0.5% levobupivacaine, and 569 min for 0.5% ropi-
vacaine [30]. In another study with fat-tailed lambs (23 kg) injected
with 3 mL of local anesthetic (1 mL for the dorsal branch and 2 mL
for the ventral branch), the duration of anesthesia as assessed with
needle pinpricks and pinching with a hemostat was 65 min for 2%
lidocaine, 95 min for 2% lidocaine with epinephrine (5 μg/mL), and
303 min for 0.5% bupivacaine [29].
Distal paravertebral block
This block is also known as the “Magda,” “Cakala,” or “Cornell”
technique and the term “distal” refers to the distance from the spine.
This distal approach is used to block the dorsal and ventral branches
of the same nerves as for the proximal paravertebral block (T13, L1,
L2, and L3) as they cross over and under, respectively, the transverse
processes (Fig. 66.7).
For this block, a lateral approach with regards to the location of
the lumbar transverse process is used and the area around the tip of
each process is clipped and aseptically prepared. The transverse
processes are located as described for the proximal paravertebral
block; the L2 and L3 nerves are blocked from the location of lumbar
transverse process 4, the L1 nerve is blocked from the location of
lumbar transverse process 2, and the T13 nerve is blocked from the
location of lumbar transverse process 1 (Fig. 66.7).
In adult cattle, approximately 5 mL of 2% lidocaine is injected
above and 10–20 mL below the transverse process using a 6.4–
8.9 cm, 18 gauge needle. The injection is started at the tip of the
distal end of the transverse process and the local anesthetic is
deposited along the process, as the needle is advanced toward the
spine. It is important to keep the needle close to the transverse pro-
cess as anesthetic deposited in the surrounding soft tissue rather
than around the nerve may result in block failure. The duration of
action is similar to the proximal paravertebral block.
Segmental dorsolumbar epidural block
In cattle, the dermatomes innervated by nerves T13 and L1–L3 can
be blocked bilaterally or unilaterally by performing an epidural
injection at the thoracolumbar (T13–L1) or first lumbar interverte-
bral (L1–L2) space [31–34].
An epidural injection refers to depositing the anesthetic drug in
the space between the dura mater and the vertebral column.
Technically, it is an intradural injection between two dural laminae
since the dura mater only closely adheres as a fused double layer
within the skull. In the vertebral column, it is separated and only the
internal lamina, made of fibrous tissue, surrounds the spinal cord,
and provides rigidity to help support the blood vessels that supply
the spinal cord [35].
The injection of a reduced volume of local anesthetic or xylazine
into the epidural space at T13–L1 or L1–L2 allows these drugs to
affect only those segments of the spinal cord that innervate the
flank without interfering with motor function of the pelvic limbs;
this allows the animal to remain standing and prevents ataxia. This
technique can be used for surgery on or performed via the flank and
needle tip placement in the epidural space can be directed toward
one side of the spinal cord to emphasize the block on the corre-
sponding ipsilateral flank or the needle kept on the median plane
with respect to the spinal cord to block both sides. The block is
more technically challenging than any of the other techniques
(A)
(B)
L3
L3
L2
L2
L1
L1
T13
T13
Figure 66.8 Positioning of large gauge needles to act as cannulas for spinal
needles for proximal paravertebral blockade in an adult cow. A. Dorsal
view of the cannulas from the right side. B. Dorsal view of the cannulas
from behind. Needle cannulas are inserted at the depth of the ventral
branch for blockade of T13, L1, L2, and L3 nerves.

-- 1325 of 1450 --

1310 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
previously described for flank anesthesia; however, it can be readily
learned and effectively used by practitioners [34,36].
Adequate restraint and sedation of the animal are necessary to
facilitate the placement of the needle in the epidural space. The skin
caudal to the T13 or L1 spinous process and contralateral to the flank
region to be desensitized is aseptically prepared and injected subcuta-
neously with 2–4 mL of 2% lidocaine adjacent to the interspinous
ligaments between T13–L1 or L1–L2 to facilitate the insertion of
a short 2.5 cm, 14 gauge needle that serves as a cannula for the
subsequent insertion of an 11.4 cm, 18 gauge spinal needle [32].
Alternatively, a 12 cm, 16 gauge Tuohy needle can be used by
itself [37]. The mean distance from skin to the epidural space at this
level is 8.1 cm in cows between 337 and 742 kg [38], but it is recom-
mended to use needles that are slightly longer because if the needle
does not reach the deeper planes of the epidural space, the injected
anesthetic will remain between periosteum and epidural fat, rather
than distribute between epidural fat and dura mater [37]. Fat is con-
sidered a barrier because it is present in a semifluid state that impedes
spread and potentially prevents the actions of the anesthetic drug;
the amount of fat in the thoracolumbar epidural space is greater in
the dorsal aspect compared to the ventral aspect of the space [37].
The L1–L2 intervertebral space is localized on the path of an
imaginary line drawn from side to side, 1–2 cm caudal to the tips of
the two cranial edges of the second lumbar transverse process. The
operator can then decide to insert the needles at the depression
between L1 and L2 or move to the next cranial depression between
T13 and L1. The spinal needle is advanced gradually through the
interspinous ligament until it reaches and then penetrates the liga-
mentum flavum to enter the epidural space. Correct placement can
be verified by use of the hanging drop technique in which the hub
of the needle is filled with saline or local anesthetic after the stylet is
removed. If the needle is correctly placed, the fluid is aspirated into
the needle shaft and epidural space due to the subatmospheric epi-
dural pressure. The stylet can also be removed before the needle
penetrates the ligamentum flavum and the operator can detect the
aspiration of the fluid once the needle enters the epidural space. The
initial pressure of the epidural space is on average –21 mmHg
(range of –17 to –23 mmHg), but within 1 min of needle insertion,
this stabilizes at –14 mmHg (range of –9 to –17 mmHg) [38]. For
this reason, it has been recommended to allow air to enter freely
into the epidural space for approximately 1 min to decrease the
effects of varying pressures on the distribution of anesthetic
drug [33]. Additional verification of correct placement should
include ease of injection into the epidural space and the absence of
CSF prior to injection, which indicates that the dura and arachnoid
membrane have not been pierced. Avoiding subarachnoid injection
is important since epidural doses are significantly higher than those
recommended for subarachnoid administration. An alternative
modified technique involves introducing the needle an additional
0.7–1.0 cm or until the cow shows signs of discomfort, such as sud-
den movement or dipping of the back, to bypass the epidural fat and
enhance the spread of the anesthetic drug [33]. Caution is advised
with this modified technique. The needle should be removed
immediately after injection to avoid damage to the spinal cord.
Studies using new methylene blue have shown that 5 mL injected
at the L1–L2 epidural space of adult Holstein cows spread to the
T12–L3 spinal dermatomes, whereas 10 mL spread to the T11–L5
spinal dermatomes [37]. Volumes of 6–8 mL of 2% lidocaine
(0.24–0.32 mg/kg) or 5% procaine (0.6–0.8 mg/kg) are recommended
in a 500 kg cow to desensitize the dermatomes of T13–L3. Xylazine
(2%, 0.05 mg/kg) is also effective but the combination of xylazine
(0.025 mg/kg) and lidocaine (0.1 mg/kg) diluted to a volume of 5 mL
with 0.9% saline resulted in more consistent anesthesia than either
drug alone diluted to the same volume [33]. Onset of anesthesia is
approximately 10–15 min with a duration of 45–120 min [33,34].
For prolonged regional anesthesia or analgesia, an epidural cath-
eter can be placed in the T13–L1 space to allow repeated injections
of anesthetic drugs and prolonged duration of action. A 10.2 cm,
17 gauge Tuohy needle is placed in the epidural space as described
above and the tip of the epidural catheter is advanced through the
needle to the L1–L2 space for injection of the anesthetic drugs [39].
Because of the possibility of the catheter tip pointing to one side of
the spinal cord, a unilateral block may be more likely with this
technique.
Segmental thoracolumbar subarachnoid block
The insertion of needles into the T13–L1 or L1–L2 intervertebral
spaces for subarachnoid injection of anesthetic is discouraged due to
the high risk of trauma to the spinal cord when piercing of the dura
mater and arachnoid membranes is attempted at these locations.
Therefore, a catheter should be advanced from the lumbosacral (L6–
S1) subarachnoid space to the T13–L1 space for the injection of local
anesthetic (lidocaine or procaine) [39]. The distance from L6–S1 to
T13–L1 is approximately 45 cm in adult cattle and care must be
taken while advancing the catheter rostrally within the subarach-
noid space to avoid kinking or curling it, which results in patient
discomfort and potential damage to the spinal cord. Due to greater
complexity and the need for a more sterile environment, this tech-
nique is less likely to be performed under field conditions.
The L6–S1 intervertebral space is localized 1–4 cm caudal to an
imaginary line traced between the cranial edges of the tuber coxae.
Following aseptic skin preparation, the subcutaneous and deep
interspinous ligaments are desensitized with 5 mL of 2% lidocaine
using a 15 cm, 18 gauge needle. A 15 cm, 17 gauge Tuohy needle is
inserted at the L6–S1 intervertebral space with the bevel pointing
cranially and slowly advanced into the epidural space, continuing
until the dura and arachnoid mater are pierced and the subarach-
noid space is entered. Correct placement is verified by aspiration of
2 mL of CSF. An 80–100 cm epidural catheter with a spring guide is
advanced into the subarachnoid space for the estimated distance
required to reach the T13–L1 space, which is usually approximately
60 cm due to the length and angle of the needle. The Tuohy needle
and spring guide are removed, and the catheter distance is adjusted
to the correct location and secured in place. Doses of 1.5–2 mL of
2% lidocaine or 5% procaine have been injected at a rate of 0.5 mL/
min to induce unilateral or bilateral anesthesia from T10–L3 in
5–10 min for a duration of 54 min [39].
One disadvantage of this technique is the uncertainty of whether
the resulting block will be on the intended side of the animal. The
variation in block has been suggested to result from trapping of the
catheter ventral to the spinal cord, which may impede adequate dis-
tribution of the injected anesthetic around the circumference of the
pia mater due to the presence of the dorsal and ventral longitudinal
ligaments [39].
Blocks for regional anesthesia of the linea
alba and paramedian region
Regional anesthetic techniques for the flank are often inadequate
for coverage of the ventral abdomen. Alternate or additional tech-
niques may be required for surgical procedures that require ventral
midline or paramedian approaches. These include local infiltrative

-- 1326 of 1450 --

Chapter 66: Ruminant and Swine Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1311
techniques and epidural analgesia and anesthesia. Ultrasound-
guided fascial plane blocks such as a transversus abdominis plane
block or rectus sheath block may be used as part of a multimodal
analgesic technique and is discussed later (see the section titled
“Ultrasound-guided regional anesthesia”).
Line infiltration block
The abdomen, subcutaneous tissues, and skin of the abdomen can
be desensitized by infiltration of local anesthetic to allow proce-
dures such as correction of umbilical and abdominal wall hernias
and right paramedian abomasopexy to be performed. For these
blocks, the technique and volumes described for the flank line infil-
tration block are used along the anatomic area selected for the sur-
gery. Often a “V” shape block can be used with the angle of the “V”
located at the cranial aspect of the incision and the wings along
either side of the incision to block more proximal sensory nerves.
Lumbosacral, sacrococcygeal, or intercoccygeal
epidural (cranial epidural) block
This technique is often referred to as a “cranial (anterior) epidural”
and can be performed at any of the three sites (Fig. 66.9). Injections
at the sacrococcygeal or first intercoccygeal epidural space require
that the injectate volume of anesthetic drug is sufficient to facilitate
its rostral spread from this site to the thoracolumbar area so that it
can affect structures cranial to the pelvis (periumbilical region and
flank). For lumbosacral epidurals, less volume is required.
The same principles discussed for the segmental dorsolumbar
epidural technique apply here. This technique is used commonly in
small ruminants for abdominal or pelvic surgery, most often to sup-
plement general anesthesia or sedation. Despite their popularity,
epidural injections often fail in providing complete analgesia/anes-
thesia for multiple reasons, including those listed in Box 66.1.
In adult cattle, volumes of local anesthetic of up to 150 mL (0.2–
0.3 mL/kg), injected in the sacrococcygeal or intercoccygeal epi-
dural space, have been recommended to desensitize the flank and
umbilical region but these volumes also result in motor block of the
pelvic limbs and the animal unable to remain standing. For this
reason, cranial epidural blocks are not commonly practiced in adult
cattle as they may injure themselves when motor control is lost or
when attempting to stand. Another concern is that a high (cranial)
epidural may result in hypotension secondary to blockade of sym-
pathetic nerves, which results in vasodilation. Hypotension is more
likely to develop in animals with pre-existing hypovolemia.
Calves and small ruminants may require larger volumes on a mL
per kg basis than adult cattle to achieve the same degree of cranial
spread from the sacrococcygeal or intercoccygeal epidural space.
Volumes of 0.4–0.6 mL/kg of local anesthetic are recommended to
achieve analgesia of the umbilical region [40].
A lumbosacral epidural requires a smaller volume. In goats given
0.1, 0.2, or 0.3 mL/kg of new methylene blue at the lumbosacral
space immediately after euthanasia, the average rostral spread was
to L3–L4, T13–L1, and T10–T11, respectively [41]. A similar study
in sheep demonstrated rostral spread to the first lumbar segment
with a volume of 0.2 mL/kg [42]. To obtain sufficient anesthesia
of the cranial abdomen and abdominal wall, it is often necessary for
the anesthetic to reach the T10 dermatomal segment but, due to the
possible variation in further rostral spread, there is also an increased
risk of impairing pulmonary function. Volumes of 0.2 mL/kg or
1 mL/5 kg of the local anesthetic of choice (2% lidocaine, 0.5%
bupivacaine, and 0.5% ropivacaine) are commonly used.
In goats and young calves, the lumbosacral space is easily palpable
but may be less obvious in large, well-nourished sheep. A lumbosacral
epidural injection can be made with the animal in sternal or lateral
recumbency. Spread of anesthetic is more likely to be even, and to pro-
duce bilateral blockade, when the animal is placed in a sternal posi-
tion. Otherwise, the side to be approached should be the dependent
side when performed in a lateral position; this facilitates contact of the
local anesthetic with the desired nerve roots. The animal should be
maintained in that position for at least 5–10 min to allow the block to
take effect before moving it to the required position for surgery.
Strict aseptic technique and use of sterile gloves are indicated for
epidural injections at the lumbosacral space, due to the close prox-
imity of the spinal cord within the spinal canal. For most small
ruminants and calves, a 3.8 or 7.5 cm, 20 or 22 gauge spinal needle
is suitable. The landmarks consist of the distinct dorsal spinous
processes of the lumbar vertebrae, which are readily distinguished
from sacral vertebrae. Calves and small ruminants have six lumbar
vertebrae, goats may only have five, and sheep can have as many as	a 	b
Sacrum 	L6 L5	Co1
Co2
Figure 66.9 Locations for epidural injection in cattle. Caudal epidural
injection sites at the sacrococcygeal or intercoccygeal spaces (a). Cranial
epidural injection site at the lumbosacral space (b). A caudal epidural
approach can be used for a cranial epidural injection if sufficient volume is
injected to spread the anesthetic rostrally.
Box 66.1 Reasons for failure of epidural injections.
Technique
Subcutaneous injection
Intravascular injection
Incomplete injection into epidural space
Drug
Inadequate drug for purpose of epidural
Inadequate volume and fewer dermatomes blocked
Inadequate dose
Timing
Insufficient time for onset of action
Insufficient allowed duration of action
Anatomy
Malformations
Trauma and distorted anatomy
Fibrosis in epidural space from previous trauma/irritation
Leakage from epidural space through intervertebral foramen into
surrounding tissue
Position of animal and asymmetric block due to deposition of anesthetic
on one side or drainage into coccygeal epidural space
Uptake into fat and/or vessels in epidural space

-- 1327 of 1450 --

1312 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
seven lumbar vertebrae. Therefore, it is advisable to palpate the
anterior surfaces of both tuber coxae and draw an imaginary line
between them; this borders the spinous process of the last lumbar
vertebra. At this site, the index finger can palpate the space between
the last lumbar vertebra and first sacral vertebra. At this point, the
spinal needle enters the skin perpendicularly and is advanced into
the epidural space. Correct placement is confirmed by a popping
sensation as the needle penetrates the ligamentum flavum and a
loss of resistance upon injection (the “hanging drop” technique, as
described previously, may also be used). This distance is relatively
short, especially in goats. Inadvertent advancement into the suba-
rachnoid space often occurs since the spinal cord is present at this
location. If the animal is in lateral recumbency and the subarach-
noid space is penetrated, CSF drips from the hub following removal
of the stylet; however, this is less obvious if the animal is in sternal
recumbency. If CSF is encountered, the spinal needle can be with-
drawn slightly to reposition it in the epidural space and avoid a
subarachnoid injection.
In 1-month-old xylazine-sedated calves, one study compared epi-
dural and subarachnoid injections of xylazine (0.025 mg/kg) com-
bined with lidocaine (0.1 mg/kg; 0.05 mL/kg) diluted in 5 mL of sterile
saline. Injections were made at the lumbosacral space with the calves
in lateral recumbency for the subarachnoid injection and in sternal
recumbency for the epidural injection. The subarachnoid injection
was more effective and longer acting for providing complete antinoci-
ception to pinprick stimulation in the cranial abdomen, umbilicus,
and caudal abdomen, compared to the epidural injection [43].
In pigs, lumbosacral epidural anesthesia can be used for cesarean
section, repair of rectal, uterine, or vaginal prolapse, repair of
umbilical, inguinal, or scrotal hernias, surgery of scirrhous cord,
and surgery of the prepuce, penis, or rear limbs. Pigs have six or
seven lumbar vertebrae, and the location of the lumbosacral space
can be located as described for ruminants. An imaginary line
between the tuber coxae marks the level of the spinous process of
the last lumbar vertebra. The depression located on midline approx-
imately 0.5–2.5 cm caudal to this (depending on the size of the pig)
corresponds to the space between the last lumbar vertebra and the
sacrum. Alternatively, in the standing pig, a line from the patella to
the spine is usually 2–3 cm cranial to the lumbosacral space [44–
46]. A 3.8 to 6.4 cm, 20 gauge spinal needle can be used in piglets
less than 20 kg; an 8.9 to 15.2 cm, 20 gauge spinal needle is typically
required in larger pigs, especially adult boars and sows. Following
aseptic preparation of the area and subcutaneous infiltration of
3–5 mL of lidocaine in larger pigs, a short 2.5 or 3.8 cm, 16 gauge
needle can be introduced first in the depression of the lumbosacral
space to act as a cannula and prevent bending of long spinal nee-
dles. The spinal needle is then advanced between the vertebrae at a
0–20° angle perpendicular to the skin, until it perforates the liga-
mentum flavum, which can be felt as a pop. The spinal cord termi-
nates with the conus medullaris between sacral vertebrae 2 and
3 [47]. The subarachnoid space is not easily penetrated due to its
small size compared to the epidural space as well as abundant adi-
pose tissue that causes anterior bulging of the dura mater with a
consequent reduction in the subarachnoid space on the midline.
The subarachnoid space is more readily accessed from a lateral
position [47]. It is possible to be in the subarachnoid space with the
needle position exactly on the midline and not detect the presence
of CSF; therefore, proper verification of the epidural space via care-
ful aspiration is recommended before injection to avoid inadvertent
subarachnoid injection of an epidural dose, since the latter can
be up to 10 times that required for subarachnoid injection [35].
An epidural injection can also be performed at the first intersacral
(S1–S2) space in pigs, due to the presence of a significant dorsal
foramen at this location, which is about 75% the size (diameter) of
the lumbosacral space [48].
In 6–10-week- old pigs (18 kg) given new methylene blue at the
lumbosacral space immediately after euthanasia, cranial spread of
injectate was approximately eight spaces (range of L3–L4 to T10–T11)
for a dose of 0.05 mL/kg; eight spaces (range of L2–L3 to T8–T9)
for a dose of 0.1 mL/kg; 10 spaces (range of T13–L1 to T5–T6) for
a dose of 0.2 mL/kg; and 18 spaces (range of T8–T9 to the brain)
for a dose of 0.3 mL/kg [49]. Therefore, volumes of 0.05–0.1 mL/kg
at the lumbosacral space seem appropriate to desensitize structures
caudal to the diaphragm and are less likely to result in adverse
effects. However, epidural spread may be different in adult patients.
Clinically, doses of local anesthetics used in pigs at the lumbosacral
space are similar to those of small ruminants, i.e., 0.13–0.22 mL/kg
or 1 mL/4.5–7.5 kg, for pigs that are less than 50 kg; however,
reduced volume ranges (on a mL/kg basis) are suggested in larger
pigs [44]. If the procedure involves the abdomen, such as in cesar-
ean sections, maximum doses of 10 mL/100 kg, 15 mL/200 kg, and
20 mL/300 kg are used; whereas for standing castrations, doses of
4 mL/100 kg, 6 mL/200 kg, and 8 mL/300 kg are recommended.
Xylazine has also been used for lumbosacral epidural injection
in pigs; a dose of 2 mg/kg induced analgesia to electrical stimula-
tion and skin-deep needle pricks to the perianal, flank, and
umbilical area [50] of similar duration (approximately 2 h) to
lidocaine (0.13 mL/kg) [51].
Doses in pigs can also be calculated based on the length of the
spinal canal. Pigs can show variations in the number of thoracic and
lumbar vertebrae. In one study, 67% of pigs had a combined num-
ber of 22 thoracic and lumbar vertebrae, 14% had 21 vertebrae, and
19% had 23 vertebrae [48]. In addition, the combined number var-
ies within each group, e.g., of those with 22 thoracic and lumbar
vertebrae, 23% had 15 thoracic and seven lumbar vertebrae, whereas
the remaining 77% had 16 thoracic and six lumbar vertebrae [48].
Therefore, measuring the distance from the external occipital pro-
tuberance to the first coccygeal vertebra may allow more precise
dosing for epidural injections. For pigs weighing up to 65 kg, the
distance from the external occipital protuberance to the first coc-
cygeal vertebra varied between 40 and 99 cm. The estimated vol-
umes required to spread contrast medium to the T10 vertebra were
0.8 mL/10 cm for pigs with distances between 40 and 69 cm,
0.9 mL/10 cm for pigs with distances between 70 and 79 cm, and
1.0 mL/10 cm for pigs with distances between 80 and 99 cm [48].
Blocks for regional anesthesia of the pelvic
area and related tissues
Sacrococcygeal or intercoccygeal epidural (caudal
epidural) block
The anatomic structures present in the pelvis and surrounding tis-
sue can be blocked by injection of anesthetic drugs into the sacro-
coccygeal (S5–Co1 in cattle, S4–Co1 in small ruminants), or first
intercoccygeal (Co1–Co2) spaces.
Maintaining motor control of the pelvic limbs and ensuring that
the animal remains standing are possible by injecting lower vol-
umes of anesthetic that selectively produce nociceptive blockade
while sparing motor nerves, which are more cranially located (e.g.,
femoral and sciatic nerves). This technique, referred to as “caudal
epidural block,” is most commonly used to perform procedures on
the perineum or tail in standing cattle. This may include obstetric

-- 1328 of 1450 --

Chapter 66: Ruminant and Swine Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1313
procedures that involve the vulva and vagina, andrological proce-
dures of the prepuce and scrotum, and procedures that involve the
tail, perineum, anus, and rectum. This technique does not desensi-
tize the udder. It is also less commonly used in small ruminants
because epidural or subarachnoid injection at the lumbosacral
space is easy to perform and, for ease of handling, recumbency is
often desired in association with the sensory block.
The epidural space at the sacrococcygeal or intercoccygeal
intervertebral spaces does not include the spinal cord since the
caudal tip of the spinal cord (conus medullaris) extends only to
sacral vertebrae 2–3 in young calves and to sacral vertebra 1 in the
adult [52]. Only the last sacral nerve (S5) and caudal nerves are
present at the level of S5–Co1 and only the caudal nerves at the level
of Co1–Co2 in the form of the cauda equina. Therefore, compared
to the L6–S1 epidural, all injections at the sacrococcygeal or first
intercoccygeal space are strictly epidural and there is no risk of
subarachnoid injection.
In cattle, the S5–Co1 or Co1–Co2 space is located by elevating
and lowering the tail while palpating the area and identifying the
space at which the tail hinges (Fig. 66.9a). In younger cattle, move-
ment of the tail is usually evident at the sacrococcygeal space but in
older cattle, the S5–Co1 space may be ossified, and the preferred
site of injection is the Co1–Co2 space.
A 3.8 cm, 20 or 18 gauge needle is inserted on midline between
the vertebrae at a 0–15° angle to perpendicular. The needle is
inserted to a depth of 1–2 cm, depending on the animal’s size, and
the hub of the needle is filled with saline or the local anesthetic. The
needle is then advanced until the fluid is aspirated as it enters the
epidural space, due to the subatmospheric epidural pressure. On
occasion, blood will flow from the hub and, in this case, the needle
should be withdrawn slightly. If the needle is correctly placed, there
is minimal resistance to injection.
In neonatal calves, 0.05, 0.1, or 0.15 mL/kg of new methylene blue
given at the S5–Co1 epidural space immediately after euthanasia
spread cranially over five spaces (range of L7–S1 to L5–L6) for the
low dose; eight spaces (range of L7–S1 to L2–L3) for the intermedi-
ate dose; and eight spaces (range of L6–L7 to L2–L3) for the high
dose [49]. The injection of 0.4 mL/kg of contrast medium in the same
epidural space to calves weighing 50–60 kg resulted in cranial spread
to the T12 vertebra [40]. In adult cattle (approximately 525 kg), epi-
dural injection of new methylene blue at the Co1–Co2 space 20 min
before euthanasia spread rostrally on average to L6–S1 with 5 mL
(0.01 mL/kg), to L5–L6 with 10 mL (0.02 mL/kg) and to L3–L4 with
20 mL (0.04 mL/kg) [53]. This indicates that to avoid motor blockade
and ataxia, significantly less volume (on a weight basis) is necessary
for caudal epidural in adult cattle compared to younger animals.
Clinically, 0.015 mL/kg of 0.75% ropivacaine at the S5–Co1 space in
adult cattle resulted in analgesia of the dermatomes corresponding to
the coccyx to S3 spinal cord segments without ataxia [54].
The usual volume of local anesthetic (2% lidocaine, 0.5%
bupivacaine, and 0.5–0.75% ropivacaine) for a caudal epidural
in adult cattle is recommended to be 5–6 mL (approximately
1 mL/100 kg) [18,54]. Volumes greater than 10 mL may cause weak-
ness of the pelvic limbs and recumbency due to involvement of the
L4–L6 nerves, which are main contributors to the femoral nerve,
and L5–S2, the main contributors to the sciatic nerve [22]. Onset
of anesthesia is usually 10–20 min, although tail flaccidity is obvious
in less than 1–2 min with 2% lidocaine. The duration of anesthesia
depends on the local anesthetic used, but usually is 0.5–1.5 h for
lidocaine or mepivacaine and 1.5–3 h for bupivacaine or ropiv-
acaine. Analgesic effects will last longer than anesthetic effects [54].
Anatomic structures blocked by a caudal epidural using the
aforementioned doses include structures innervated by sacral and
caudal segments including: (1) structures innervated by the puden-
dal nerve (S2–S4) (i.e., skin of the perineum, skin over the semiten-
dinosus and semimembranosus muscles, scrotum, labia, skin of the
caudal surface of the udder, perineal muscles, vagina, vulva, pre-
puce, penis, and clitoris); (2) the coccygeus and levator ani muscles
innervated by the corresponding sacral nerves (S3, S4); (3) struc-
tures innervated by the caudal rectal nerves (S4, S5) (i.e., the caudal
part of the rectum, coccygeus, levator ani, external anal sphincter,
retractor penis (clitoridis), constrictor vestibuli, labium, and skin of
anal region); and (4) the tail innervated by the caudal nerves from
the cauda equina in the vertebral canal [22,55].
Analgesia or anesthesia appears more rapidly in the dermatomes
proximal to the site of injection (tail) than at distant areas (perineal)
and tends to disappear more quickly in distant compared to proxi-
mal areas. For adult cattle administered ropivacaine, time to onset
of analgesia as assessed by needle pinprick and hemostat clamping
was approximately 10 min on the tail (caudal nerve) and 15 min in
the perineal area (pudendal nerve and its branches), whereas mean
duration of analgesia was 368 min for the tail and 359 min for the
perineal area, respectively [54].
Other drugs used for caudal epidural injection have included
the α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists. Xylazine is the most effective
for inducing analgesia and anesthesia, but the dose used is similar
to systemic doses and absorption from the epidural space results
in the known adverse effects of α2 - adrenergic receptor agonists,
including sedation, ataxia, bradycardia, hypotension, respiratory
acidosis, hypoxemia, increased uterine tone, and ruminal atony
[40,56,57]. The increased uterine motility may interfere with fetot-
omy procedures [57]. Xylazine at 0.05–0.06 mg/kg diluted in 5 mL
of saline induced more prolonged analgesia (four times) than 5 mL
of lidocaine 2% (0.01 mL/kg; 0.2 mg/kg) in adult cows administered
the drugs at the Co1–Co2 epidural space [56,57]. The co-
administration of lidocaine and xylazine often results in a more
rapid onset and prolonged duration of analgesia than either drug
alone [58]. Other α2 - adrenergic receptor agonists, such as detomi-
dine and medetomidine, have been described but appear to offer
little advantage over xylazine [59,60].
The same technique can be used in small ruminants, calves, and
South American camelids for castration and obstetric procedures, and
for tail docking in lambs. A 2.5 or 3.8 cm, 20 gauge needle is intro-
duced at the S4–Co1 or Co1–Co2 space for injection of 0.02–0.03 mL/
kg of 2% lidocaine (1–1.5 mL/50 kg; 0.4–0.6 mg/kg) in small rumi-
nants and calves [18,61]. In llamas, a dose of 0.01 mL/kg of 2% lidocaine
(1 mL/100 kg; 0.22 mg/kg) or xylazine (0.17 mg/kg diluted with 2 mL
of saline), or their combination at the same doses have been effective
after S5–Co1 administration and, as for other species, the duration of
analgesia was significantly longer for the combination (over 5.5 h)
than for lidocaine (over 1 h) or xylazine (3 h) alone [62].
Sacral paravertebral block
This technique can produce effects similar to a caudal epidural,
with the exception of the caudal nerves supplying the tail; therefore,
tail tone is maintained. The block is specific to nerves S3, S4, and
S5, so the animal does not become ataxic.
The blockade of nerves S3–S5 results in desensitization of struc-
tures innervated by the following branches: the levator ani nerve
(S3, S4, and fibers from the pudendal nerve or caudal rectal nerve),
the caudal rectal nerve (S4, S5), and the majority of fibers from the
pudendal nerve (S2–S4) [22].

-- 1329 of 1450 --

1314 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
The block is performed with the animal in a standing position;
the area from the midsacrum to the base of the tail is clipped and
aseptically prepared at the specific points where the needle is
inserted on both sides of midline (Fig. 66.10). The easiest site to
locate is the S5–Co1 space. A 5 or 7.5 cm, 20 gauge spinal needle is
inserted 1.0 cm lateral to the dorsal midline of the vertebral crest at
the S5–Co1 space and advanced to the level of the transverse pro-
cesses of those vertebrae; at the caudal border of S5, 5 mL of 2%
lidocaine is injected to desensitize the dorsal and ventral branch
and the procedure repeated on the contralateral side. Nerves S4 and
S3 are approximately 3 and 6 cm cranial to the location of nerve S5,
1.0–1.5 cm lateral to the dorsal midline. At these two locations, the
spinal needle penetrates the respective foramina and 5 mL of 2%
lidocaine is injected per nerve on each side of the dorsal midline.
Injection of alcohol for the alleviation of chronic rectal tenesmus
for up to 5 weeks without affecting urination and defecation has
been described; however, this treatment is not recommended in
males because the pudendal nerve and caudal rectal nerve inner-
vate the penis and preputial prolapse is likely to occur [63].
This block can also be performed in sheep and goats. The main
differences are that sheep and goats only have four sacral vertebrae;
as such, the block is completed at the S4–Co1 space for nerve S4,
and at the S3–S4 space for nerve S3.
Pudendal block
The pudendal block involves injection around the pudendal and
caudal rectal nerves through an ischiorectal fossa approach or a lat-
eral approach and has similar effects as a sacral paravertebral block.
In standing males, it is generally used for penile analgesia and to
produce relaxation distal to the sigmoid flexure, which allows
examination of the prolapsed penis [64,65]. In standing females,
this block relieves rectal and anal straining caused by uterine pro-
lapse or chronic vaginal discharge and can be used for surgical abla-
tion of masses in the rectum and anus and manipulation of urethral
calculi [65].
The pudendal nerve originates from sacral segments S2–S4 and
travels downward, partly embedded in the sacrosciatic ligament
along the floor of the pelvis with the internal pudendal artery and
vein and toward the ischial arch. It supplies several branches that
innervate the whole perineal area. These branches include a proxi-
mal cutaneous branch to the skin of the semitendinosus area and a
distal cutaneous branch to the skin of the semimembranosus area.
This latter branch further extends to a superficial perineal branch
that supplies the skin of the perineum and a dorsal scrotal (male) or
dorsal labial (female) branch to supply the scrotum or labia and
skin of the caudal surface of the udder, respectively. Another major
branch is the deep perineal nerve, which innervates the perineal
muscles, vagina, vulva, major vestibular gland, and skin of the peri-
neum; this nerve also has a communication with the caudal rectal
nerve (S4, S5). In the bull, the last segment of the pudendal nerve
gives off the preputial and scrotal branch to innervate the prepuce
and scrotum and continues as the dorsal nerve of the penis to
innervate the penis. In the female, the pudendal nerve supplies a
mammary branch to the udder and the dorsal nerve of the clitoris
to innervate the clitoris [22,55].
The caudal rectal nerve (S4, S5) travels downward above the
pudendal nerve and anastomoses with it. As mentioned above, it
supplies the caudal part of the rectum, external anal sphincter, and
surrounding skin.
For the ischiorectal fossa approach, the block is performed with
the animal standing, preferably under sedation. The skin over both
ischiorectal fossae is clipped and aseptically prepared at the specific
points where the needles are to be inserted and desensitized with
2–3 mL of 2% lidocaine (Fig. 66.10). A hand is placed into the rec-
tum to palpate the lesser sciatic notch of the ischium and the lesser
sciatic foramen, the latter formed by the absence of attachment of
the sacrosciatic ligament along the notch. The notch is located
immediately after the hand enters the anus and descends from the
ischial tuberosity. At the foramen, the caudal gluteal artery can be
palpated as it leaves the pelvis to supply the muscles of the thigh;
medial to it and within the pelvic area, the internal pudendal artery
can be palpated, which runs along with the pudendal nerve in a
caudoventral direction on the internal surface of the sacrosciatic
ligament [66]. A 2.5 cm, 16 gauge needle is inserted in the ischiorec-
tal fossa to help direct an 8.9 cm, 20 gauge spinal needle, as the hand
inside the rectum palpates the internal pudendal artery and helps
direct the needle slightly dorsal toward the pudendal nerve. Up to
25 mL of 2% lidocaine is injected into the area. The needle is then
redirected more dorsally (2–3 cm) to include the caudal rectal
nerve, which is blocked with an additional 10 mL of anesthetic. To
block the nerves on the contralateral side of the pelvis, the hands are
reversed, and the procedure is repeated. Onset of the block may
require from 5 to 30 min and will last 2–4 h with 2% lidocaine.
The pudendal block can also be performed via a lateral approach,
described elsewhere (Fig. 66.10) [67]. The volumes used can be the
same as for the ischiorectal approach, although, due to better accu-
racy, less anesthetic may be required (10 mL for the pudendal nerve
and 5 mL for the caudal rectal nerve) [67].
In sheep, the lateral approach is performed by placing a finger into
the rectum to locate the lesser sciatic foramen, usually at finger depth.
The corresponding skin site is aseptically prepared and 3–7 mL of 2%
lidocaine is injected using a 3.8 cm, 20 gauge needle directed toward
the finger until it can be felt lying alongside the nerve. Immediately
after injection, the rectum is massaged to spread the anesthetic, and
the procedure is repeated on the opposite side [67].
Dorsal nerve of the penis block
The dorsal nerve of the penis originates from the pudendal nerve, as
the latter travels around the ischial arch [55]. This nerve is blocked
to desensitize and relax the penis and areas of the prepuce and scro-
tum, without affecting other anatomic structures innervated by the
pudendal nerve. The location of the block is approximately 10 cm
ventral to the anus and 2.5 cm from the midline on both sides, where
a 6.4 to 8.9 cm, 20 gauge spinal needle is directed along the border of
the ischial arch to contact the pelvic floor, next to the penis at the 8
and 4 o’clock positions. The nerves are in a ventral position at the
pelvic outlet as the penis has not veered around the ischial arch and
are injected with 10–20 mL of 2% lidocaine on each side. Aspirate to
verify absence of blood before injecting. The onset time of the block
is 10–20 min with a duration of 1–2 h.
Blocks for regional anesthesia of the teats
and udder
The skin and teats of the forequarters and the cranial part of the
base of the udder are innervated by the iliohypogastric nerve (ven-
tral branch of L1), the ilioinguinal nerve (ventral branches of L2
and L3), and the cranial branch of the genitofemoral nerve (ventral
branches of L2–L4). The skin and teats of the hindquarters are
innervated by the caudal branch of the genitofemoral nerve and the
mammary branch of the pudendal nerve (S2–S4) (Fig. 66.11) [68].
Due to this innervation, a proximal or distal paravertebral block

-- 1330 of 1450 --

Chapter 66: Ruminant and Swine Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1315
Figure 66.10 Anatomy and injection sites for sacral paravertebral block and pudendal and caudal rectal nerve block. The sacral paravertebral block
includes nerves S3, S4, and S5 that are blocked bilaterally at their respective foramina. The pudendal (S2–S4; orange) and caudal rectal (S4 and S5; blue)
nerve block is performed bilaterally on the medial surface of the sacrosciatic ligament. A. Dorsal view of the sacral spine and pelvis. (a) indicates
location of S3, S4, and S5 foramina on the right side for sacral paravertebral block. (b) indicates a left ischiorectal fossa approach to the pudendal
(orange) and caudal rectal (blue) nerves. B. Lateral view of the sacral spine and pelvis from the right side. (a) indicates location of S3, S4, and S5
foramina on the right side for sacral paravertebral block. (b) indicates an alternate lateral approach from the right side to the pudendal (orange) and
caudal rectal (blue) nerves. The red arrows indicate the location of needle placement for the lateral approach; the distance from the anterior and dorsal
border of the ischial tuber to the caudal part of the sacrotuberous ligament corresponds to the point of needle insertion when this distance is applied to
a line parallel to the midline and originating from the anterior border of the ischial tuber to reach the pudendal nerve; whereas the caudal rectal nerve is
blocked 2–3 cm more dorsally. C. Dorsal view showing bilateral needle placement for sacral paravertebral block.
S2 	a
b
S3
S4
S5
(A)
Co1 S5 	S4 S3 S2 	S1 L6 	L5
a
b
(B)
S3 	S3
S4 	S4
S5 	S5
(C)

-- 1331 of 1450 --

1316 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
that includes T13–L3 nerves can provide significant anesthesia of
the forequarters of the udder, but the block is incomplete because
the genitofemoral nerve (L4 roots) is not included. A pudendal
block (S2–S4) can provide anesthesia of the caudal area of the
hindquarters, but not their cranial area, which is innervated by the
genitofemoral nerve. Therefore, a more simple and effective method
is to desensitize the affected area locally using a ring block, inverted
“V” block, teat sinus infusion, or intravenous regional anesthesia of
the teat, in combination with chemical and/or physical restraint
(Fig. 66.12). The surgical procedure and block can be performed
with the animal standing or recumbent, often dictated by the pref-
erence of the operator.
These blocks can be used for repair of lacerations and fistulas,
release of cistern obstructions, wart removal, supernumerary teat
removal, and teat removal.
Ring block
An elastic band or Doyen clamp is used as a tourniquet and applied
to the base of the teat, to prolong the duration of action of the
injected local anesthetic and to prevent blood and milk from enter-
ing the teat sinus and interfering with the surgical repair. Following
aseptic preparation, 4–6 mL of 2% lidocaine is injected subcutane-
ously with a 1.6 cm, 25 gauge needle, distal to the tourniquet, around
the circumference of the teat and massaged to facilitate blockade of
all layers, including the skin, subcutaneous layer, and muscularis
(Fig. 66.12a).
Inverted “V” block
Following placement of a tourniquet to the base of the teat and
aseptic preparation, 4–6 mL of 2% lidocaine is injected subcutane-
ously with a 1.6 cm, 25 gauge needle with the angle of the “V”
located at the proximal aspect of the incision and the wings oriented
in a diagonal pattern (inverted “V”) along the incision to block sen-
sory input toward the incision (Fig. 66.12b).
Teat sinus infusion block
This block provides anesthesia of the mucous membranes lining the
sinus of the teat without affecting the muscularis, subcutaneous
layer, and skin. The block can be used to remove polyps within the
mucosa, opening of contracted sphincters, and opening of spider
teats. A tourniquet is placed as described above and a teat cannula
1
2
3
4 	5
G.J.
Figure 66.11 Innervation to skin and teats of the
forequarters and hindquarters. (1) iliohypogastric
nerve; (2) ilioinguinal nerve; (3) cranial branch of
the genitofemoral nerve; (4) caudal branch of the
genitofemoral nerve; and (5) mammary branch of
the pudendal nerve. Source: Bragulla et al. [68],
with permission of John Wiley & Sons.
d
d
b
c
b
a
a
c
Figure 66.12 Needle placement for bovine ring block (a); inverted “V”
block (b); teat sinus infusion block (c); and intravenous regional teat block
(d).

-- 1332 of 1450 --

Chapter 66: Ruminant and Swine Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1317
is introduced into the sinus; 10 mL of 2% lidocaine is injected and
held in place by blocking the cannula for 5–10 min to allow for
absorption of the anesthetic by the mucosa; thereafter, the anes-
thetic is drained, and the tourniquet removed (Fig. 66.12c).
Intravenous regional teat block
Following placement of a tourniquet, as described above, a superfi-
cial teat vein distal to a tourniquet is injected with 5–7 mL of 2%
lidocaine using a 2.5 cm, 25 gauge needle (Fig. 66.12d). After injec-
tion, the needle is removed, and pressure is applied over the inser-
tion site, which should also be massaged to prevent hematoma
formation. Analgesia occurs within 3–5 min and remains for as long
as the tourniquet is left in place, which is usually for less than 2 h.
Blocks for castration
Castration of ruminants is routinely practiced and is usually per-
formed in young animals. The procedure is usually performed
under local anesthesia in cattle; however, smaller animals, espe-
cially young sheep and goats, may require heavy sedation or general
anesthesia. Castration of adult sheep and goats must be performed
carefully to prevent postoperative hemorrhage. In such cases, seda-
tion (e.g., xylazine 0.05–0.1 mg/kg, IM) will allow the animal to be
restrained on a surgery table and improve surgical conditions.
For complete anesthesia of the surgical site, the scrotal skin and
spermatic cord must be blocked or, alternatively, an epidural (lum-
bosacral or sacrococcygeal) as previously described can be per-
formed. Local anesthetic can be injected directly into the center of
each testicle until the testicle feels firm, which will result in local
anesthetic migrating up to the spermatic cord. Alternatively, the
testicle can be grasped and pulled down and local anesthetic
injected proximally into the surrounding subcutaneous tissues at
the level of the spermatic cord. Complete desensitization occurs
within 5–10 min. Using a small-bore needle (20–22 gauge) will
reduce the likelihood of hematoma formation. When injected into
the testicle, the local anesthetic passes out of the testicle along the
lymph vessels and diffuses to block the nerve fibers in the spermatic
cord. With either injection site, the bulk of the injected local anes-
thetic is systemically absorbed so it is important to be aware of the
risk of toxicity. In small lambs and kids, 1 mL of 2% lidocaine
injected into each cord will be adequate with dosing and volume
modifications according to size, as needed. The scrotal skin is anes-
thetized by local infiltration of lidocaine along the proposed line of
incision.
As in the case of dehorning or disbudding, a non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory (e.g., flunixin meglumine 2 mg/kg, IV or IM) is sug-
gested for postoperative analgesia.
Blocks for regional anesthesia of the limbs
and feet
Most surgical procedures of the digit are performed in cattle using
intravenous regional anesthesia (IVRA), a specific nerve block, or
simple infiltration of local anesthetic (ring block). IVRA is the
method of choice for most surgical procedures of the foot or distal
limb in ruminants and swine, but digital nerve blocks can be a very
useful diagnostic tool for localizing lameness in cattle. Additional
regional anesthesia of the thoracic limb in cattle can be achieved
with a brachial plexus nerve block or with digital nerve blocks distal
to the carpus. Analgesia of the pelvic limb distal to the tarsus can be
achieved by desensitizing the common peroneal and tibial nerves.
More complete proximal analgesia of the pelvic limb may require
epidural techniques that include lumbosacral segments to include
the femoral nerve (L4–L6) and sciatic nerve (L5–S2). Intra-articular
injections of appropriate local anesthetics or other medications can
also be used.
Thoracic limb blocks
Brachial plexus block
A brachial plexus block has been described in cattle [69] and, more
extensively, in sheep [70–72] to provide analgesia of the thoracic
limb distal to and including the elbow. This block is likely to be
most useful in calves, sheep, or goats in a clinical or research setting
for procedures on the thoracic limb under general anesthesia. In
swine, palpation of landmarks may be difficult, especially in pot-
bellied pigs. The block can be performed blindly or with the guid-
ance of ultrasound and/or nerve stimulation as described in small
animals (see Chapter 60).
The brachial plexus block involves desensitization of the ventral
roots of the sixth, seventh, and eighth cervical nerves (C6, C7, and
C8), as well as the first and second thoracic nerves (T1 and T2) as
they pass together over the lateral aspect of the middle third of the
first rib [73]. The position and angle of the scapula can be used as a
landmark by palpating the cranial and caudal angles and spine. The
dorsal border of the scapula lies opposite the second to the seventh
thoracic vertebrae but will only be palpable in thin animals. The
shoulder joint is just lateral to the middle of the first and second
thoracic vertebrae. The spine of the scapula is prominent in rumi-
nants and juts out ventrally to form the acromion process. The
point of needle insertion is 12–14 cm (adult cattle) or 6–10 cm
(small ruminants) cranial to the palpable acromion of the scapula at
the outer border of the scalenus ventralis muscle. The needle is then
advanced caudally and slightly ventrally, lateral to the thorax, and
parallel to the long axis of the animal’s neck. In small ruminants and
calves, a 6.3–8.9 cm, 22–20 gauge spinal needle with stylet can be
used to reach the brachial plexus region, medial to the scapula.
Alternatively, a 50 or 100 mm insulated needle may be used for
techniques guided by nerve stimulation and/or ultrasound. In cat-
tle, an 8.9–16 cm, 18 gauge spinal needle is necessary. For blind
techniques, the needle is typically advanced until it hits the edge of
the first rib. An initial volume of local anesthetic is injected at this
site after aspiration and then the needle is redirected distally, super-
ficial to the rib, where additional local anesthetic is injected.
Lidocaine is the typical local anesthetic used in ruminants with
total volumes of 20–25 mL described for adult cattle; however, bupi-
vacaine has been investigated in sheep [70,72]. The dosage of bupi-
vacaine ranged from 0.5–4 mg/kg with a dose of 2 mg/kg resulting
in the most effective brachial plexus block. No signs of toxicity were
reported in the sheep [70].
In ruminants the phrenic nerve is innervated by the C5–7
cervical nerves [22], so bilateral brachial plexus blockade should
be avoided to minimize the risk of complete diaphragmatic motor
block.
Digital nerve blocks for the thoracic limbs and feet
Cattle have four digits; the third and fourth digits correspond to the
fully developed medial and lateral digits, respectively. The second
and fifth digits correspond to the medial and lateral dewclaws,
respectively, which are positioned behind the fetlock and do not
articulate with the limb.
Digital nerve blocks may be useful to localize lameness or to
desensitize the foot for surgery. However, as compared to horses,

-- 1333 of 1450 --

1318 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
digital nerve blocks are more difficult because the skin below the
tarsus and carpus is thick and the subcutaneous tissue is firm and
fibrous, limiting palpation of the nerves and ease of needle inser-
tion. The size of the needle used and total volume of local anesthetic
to be injected are related to the size of the animal.
Innervation to the thoracic limb is supplied on the palmar aspect
predominantly by the median nerve but also by the palmar branch
of the ulnar nerve; the dorsal aspect is supplied by the radial nerve
as well as the dorsal branch of the ulnar nerve (Fig. 66.13) [73].
The median nerve passes through the carpal canal and divides
halfway up the metacarpus into the palmar common digital nerves
II and III. The palmar common digital nerve II runs medially and
divides at the level of the fetlock joint into the axial palmar digital
nerve II, which ends near the dewclaw, and the abaxial palmar digi-
tal nerve III, which travels deep as far as the apex of the hoof. The
palmar common digital nerve III branches and travels lateral to the
interdigital space and gives rise to the axial palmar digital nerves III
and IV (Fig. 66.13) [73].
The ulnar nerve divides above the accessory carpal bone into dor-
sal and palmar branches. The palmar ulnar branch divides distal to
the carpus into a deep branch that innervates the surrounding area
of the third and fourth metacarpal bone, and a superficial branch
that travels distally on the lateral aspect to become the palmar com-
mon digital nerve IV, which anastomoses at the midway point of the
metacarpus with the median nerve via the communicating branch of
the latter. Proximal to the fetlock joint of the fourth digit, the palmar
common digital nerve IV divides into the axial palmar digital nerve
V and abaxial palmar digital nerve IV (Fig. 66.13) [73].
The dorsal branch of the ulnar nerve is located approximately
2 cm proximal to the accessory carpal bone and travels distally on
the lateral surface between the third and fourth metacarpal bone as
the dorsal common digital nerve, which divides on the dorsolateral
aspect of the fetlock into the axial dorsal digital nerve V for the
dewclaw and the abaxial dorsal digital nerve IV for the dorsolateral
coronary region of the fourth digit (Fig. 66.13) [73].
The dorsomedial aspect of the thoracic limb is supplied by the
superficial branch of the radial nerve, which travels on the dorso-
medial aspect of the forelimb to cross to the dorsal aspect below the
carpus and divides midway on the metacarpus into the dorsal com-
mon digital nerve III (dorsal aspect) and dorsal common digital
nerve II (medial aspect). The latter divides at the level of the medial
aspect of the fetlock into the axial dorsal digital nerve II to the dew-
claw and the abaxial dorsal digital nerve III to the dorsomedial
coronary region of the third digit. Dorsal common digital nerve III
continues to travel dorsally and divides at the interdigital space into
the axial dorsal digital nerves III and IV (Fig. 66.13) [73].
The distribution of nerve supply to the palmar surface of the dig-
its of the forelimb is not always constant, making digital nerve
blocks of the forelimb less reliable for complete digital analgesia and
anesthesia which is necessary for surgery.
To block the digits in the thoracic limb, it is necessary to block
axial dorsal digital nerves III and IV, which arise from the radial
nerve. This block can be performed on the dorsal aspect proximal
to the interdigital space, close to the metacarpal-phalangeal joint
with a 3.8 cm, 20 or 18 gauge needle (Fig. 66.13, A1). It is possible
to encounter the axial dorsal digital artery and vein in this location
so aspiration prior to injection is important. Injection of 10 mL of
2% lidocaine is required in adult cattle to desensitize the radial
nerve at this location. The axial palmar digital nerves III and IV,
originating from the median nerve, provide sensation to the medial
aspect of the third and fourth digit and are blocked lower than on
the dorsal site to avoid the cartilaginous palmar ligament. For these
nerves, a 2.5 cm, 20 or 18 gauge needle is used to inject 5–10 mL of
2% lidocaine distal to the dewclaws on the palmar surface
(Fig. 66.13, A2). Desensitizing the lateral aspect of the fourth digit
involves blocking the abaxial palmar digital nerve IV and the abax-
ial dorsal digital nerve IV, both originating from the ulnar nerve,
using 3–5 mL of 2% lidocaine with a 3.8 cm, 20 or 18 gauge needle
midway between the palmar lateral aspect of the dewclaw and the
coronary band for the axial branch, and at the same level but on the
dorsolateral aspect for the abaxial branch (Fig. 66.13, A3). A similar
block to the one described for the fourth digit is used for the third
digit and includes abaxial dorsal digital nerve III, originating from
Medial 	Lateral
T2
27
1 	1
9
2
3 4
7
8 	19
16
15
14
A3
17
12
18 	B1
A1
10
9
10
11
12
13
14
A2
B2
A4
24
25
26
23	6
5
21
3
	4
2
20
T1 C8 C7 C6
22
Figure 66.13 Innervation of the thoracic limb. (1) radial nerve;
(2) superficial branch of the radial nerve; (3) dorsal common digital nerve
III; (4) dorsal common digital nerve II; (5) axial dorsal digital nerve II;
(6) abaxial dorsal digital nerve III; (7) axial dorsal digital nerve III; (8) axial
dorsal digital nerve IV; (9) ulnar nerve; (10) dorsal ulnar branch;
(11) palmar ulnar branch; (12) superficial ulnar branch; (13) communicating
branch of the median nerve; (14) palmar common digital nerve IV; (15) axial
palmar digital nerve V; (16) abaxial palmar digital nerve IV; (17) dorsal
common digital nerve; (18) axial dorsal digital nerve V; (19) abaxial dorsal
digital nerve IV; (20) median nerve; (21) palmar common digital nerve II;
(22) axial palmar digital nerve II; (23) abaxial palmar digital nerve III;
(24) palmar common digital nerve III; (25) axial palmar digital nerve III;
(26) axial palmar digital nerve IV; (27) musculocutaneous nerve. (A) Block
to the digit; (A1) block to nerves numbered 7 and 8; (A2) block to nerves
numbered 25 and 26; (A3) block to nerves numbered 16 and 19; (A4) block
to nerves numbered 6 and 23. (B) Block to the dewclaws; (B1) block to
nerves numbered 15 and 18; (B2) block to nerves numbered 5 and 22.
Source: Modified from Wünsche et al. [73].

-- 1334 of 1450 --

Chapter 66: Ruminant and Swine Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1319
the radial nerve, and the abaxial palmar digital nerve III, originat-
ing from the median nerve (Fig. 66.13, A4).
The dewclaws (second and fifth digits) can be blocked by inject-
ing each with 5–10 mL of 2% lidocaine using a 3.8–5 cm, 20 or
18 gauge needle inserted in a horizontal direction above them. This
blocks axial palmar and axial dorsal digital nerves V, originating
from the ulnar nerve, which supply the lateral dewclaw (Fig. 66.13,
B1) and axial palmar digital nerve II, originating from the median
nerve, and the axial dorsal digital nerve II, originating from the
radial nerve, that supply the medial dewclaw (Fig. 66.13, B2).
Pelvic limb blocks
The pelvic limb can be desensitized below the tarsus by blocking the
peroneal and tibial nerves. These blocks are not commonly per-
formed in clinical practice due to the ease and effectiveness of
IVRA and caudal epidural anesthesia in ruminants.
The common peroneal nerve can be palpated at the caudal edge
of the bony prominence of the lateral condyle of the tibia. At this
level, the nerve is superficial and has not yet divided into superficial
and deep branches. A 2.5–3.8 cm, 18 or 20 gauge needle is inserted
at the caudal edge of the lateral condyle of the tibia, over the fibula
until it touches the bony landmark. In adult cattle, 20 mL of 2%
lidocaine is required while 6–10 mL is sufficient in small rumi-
nants, with an onset time of approximately 15–20 min (Fig. 66.14).
Digital nerve blocks for the pelvic limbs and feet
Innervation to the pelvic limb is supplied on the plantar aspect by
the tibial nerve and on the dorsal aspect by the superficial and deep
peroneal nerves [74].
The tibial nerve divides into the medial and lateral plantar nerves
at the distal third of the tibia, just above the calcaneus bone to
innervate the plantar aspect of the pelvic limb. The medial plantar
nerve runs in the groove between the interosseus and the deep
flexor tendon and divides at the distal third of the metatarsus into
the plantar common digital nerve II and III (Fig. 66.14). Both
nerves travel down the fetlock where they divide into axial and
abaxial plantar digital nerves. From the plantar common digital
nerve II, the axial plantar digital nerve II supplies the medial dew-
claw and the abaxial plantar digital nerve III continues to the third
digit on the medial plantar aspect. From the plantar common digi-
tal nerve III, the axial plantar digital nerve III and axial plantar digi-
tal nerve IV supply the axial bulb and hoof regions of the third and
fourth digits (Fig. 66.14) [74].
The lateral plantar nerve reaches below the tarsus and the lateral
border of the deep flexor tendon and continues as the plantar com-
mon digital nerve IV to divide at the level of the fetlock into the
axial plantar digital nerve V, to supply the lateral dewclaw, and the
abaxial plantar digital nerve IV, which continues to the fourth digit
on the lateral plantar aspect (Fig. 66.14) [74].
The common peroneal nerve divides on the lateral aspect of the
proximal third of the tibia into the superficial and deep peroneal
nerves to innervate the dorsal aspect of the pelvic limb. The super-
ficial peroneal nerve crosses to the dorsal aspect of the proximal
metatarsus and divides at the proximal third into three branches:
the dorsal common digital nerve II that travels medial, the dorsal
common digital nerve III that continues on the dorsal aspect, and
the dorsal common digital nerve IV that travels dorsolateral. The
dorsal common digital nerve II travels dorsomedial along the meta-
tarsus to the fetlock and divides into the axial dorsal digital nerve II,
supplying the medial dewclaw, and the abaxial dorsal digital nerve
III, which continues to the third digit on the medial plantar aspect.
Dorsal common digital nerve III travels dorsally to the distal fet-
lock, where it divides into the axial dorsal digital nerves III and IV
to supply the dorsal coronary aspect of the third and fourth digits.
Dorsal common digital nerve IV reaches the fetlock on the dorso-
lateral aspect and divides into the axial dorsal digital nerve V, sup-
plying the lateral dewclaw, and the abaxial dorsal digital nerve IV
that continues to the dorsolateral coronary and bulbar regions of
the fourth digit (Fig. 66.14) [74].
The deep peroneal nerve runs from its lateral position at the tibia
to a dorsal position at the metatarsus to become the dorsal metatar-
sal nerve III, which runs lateral to the metatarsal bone, reaching the
interdigital space and establishing communicating branches with
the dorsal common digital nerve III, just before the latter divides
into axial dorsal digital nerves III and IV. The new trunk then has
communicating branches to the axial plantar digital nerves III and
IV from the tibial nerve (Fig. 66.14) [74].
Caudolateral
Craniomedial
14
1
26
14
1
26
15
16
2
3
15
16
6
23
24
17 18
12
19
20
13
21
22
25
8
5 	7
9
2
3
4
7
12
11
13	9
10
8
6
5
Figure 66.14 Innervation of the pelvic limb. (1) peroneal nerve; (2) deep
peroneal nerve; (3) superficial peroneal nerve; (4) dorsal metatarsal III
nerve; (5) dorsal common digital nerve IV; (6) dorsal common digital
nerve III; (7) dorsal common digital nerve II; (8) axial dorsal digital nerve
V; (9) abaxial dorsal digital nerve IV; (10) axial dorsal digital nerve IV;
(11) axial dorsal digital nerve III; (12) axial dorsal digital nerve II; (13) abaxial
dorsal digital nerve III; (14) tibial nerve; (15) lateral plantar nerve;
(16) medial plantar nerve; (17) plantar common digital nerve II;
(18) plantar common digital nerve III; (19) axial plantar digital nerve II;
(20) abaxial plantar digital nerve III; (21) axial plantar digital nerve III;
(22) axial plantar digital nerve IV; (23) plantar common digital nerve IV;
(24) axial plantar digital nerve V; (25) abaxial plantar digital nerve IV;
(26) saphenous nerve. Source: Modified from Wünsche et al. [74].

-- 1335 of 1450 --

1320 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
To block the entire distal digit of the pelvic limb, the technique,
equipment, and location of the nerves resemble the anatomy of the
thoracic limb and can be completed in the same fashion as described
above.
Ring block
Ring block of the foot or distal limb is the simplest method for pro-
ducing anesthesia but is less precise than IVRA or digital nerve
blocks. Advantages are its simplicity without the need for anatomic
knowledge, and the minimal equipment requirement. However, it
may not be fully efficacious and requires multiple injections,
increasing the risk of infection and inflammation.
The technique involves injection of the local anesthetic superfi-
cially at the level of the junction of the middle and proximal meta-
tarsus or metacarpus, creating a “ring” of local anesthetic around
the limb. It consists of multiple injections of local anesthetic solu-
tion into the subcutaneous tissue with aspiration after every move-
ment to ensure the needle has not entered a blood vessel. The size of
needle depends on the size of animal (2.5–3.8 cm, 25 to 20 gauge
needle). The drug diffuses into the surrounding tissue from the
sites of injection to anesthetize nerve fibers and endings. Relatively
large volumes (e.g., 10–15 mL in adult cattle) of 2% lidocaine
(1.5–2 mg/kg) are typically used in cattle, small ruminants, and
swine. The amount of local anesthetic used will typically be dictated
by the size of the area to be infused. Epinephrine may be used in
combination with infiltration of local anesthetic to reduce the sys-
temic absorption and prolong the anesthetic effect but the effects of
vasoconstriction on regional blood flow should be considered.
Intravenous regional anesthesia
Intravenous regional anesthesia (IVRA), also known as a “Bier
block,” is a method suited to providing anesthesia of the distal limb
for invasive hoof trimming of sole ulcers, draining of abscesses,
claw amputation, or other surgeries of the digits. The advantages of
IVRA are that it is a relatively simple technique to perform, with
minimal need for specialized equipment. Following injection at a
single site, the technique provides rapid onset of effective analgesia
and muscle relaxation with a rapid recovery. Due to the application
of a tourniquet, bleeding at the surgical site is minimized, and local-
ized and targeted antibiotic administration may be provided simul-
taneously. Disadvantages include the need to position and restrain
the animal in lateral recumbency, especially associated with poten-
tial adverse effects in adult ruminants, hematoma formation at the
site of needle insertion, failure of the block, short duration of anal-
gesia, which is limited by the time the tourniquet can be left in
place, tourniquet discomfort, potential damage to nerves in the area
under the tourniquet, and the possibility of local anesthetic toxicity
when the tourniquet is released.
The procedure is generally performed after manually casting the
animal and restraining it in lateral recumbency or by using a tilting
hoof-trimming table with the affected limb up. Attempts to per-
form IVRA in the standing bovine with the leg restrained tend to be
unsuccessful as the animal typically becomes recumbent when the
tourniquet is applied. Sedation is recommended for IVRA as dis-
comfort from tourniquet application is common, especially when
the procedure is prolonged. It is important to assess the degree of
bloat in the laterally recumbent ruminant especially when abdomi-
nal bellybands are applied for restraint.
IVRA involves injection of local anesthetic into a superficial vein
on the thoracic or pelvic limb after proximal application of a tour-
niquet to occlude arterial blood flow. The tourniquet is placed
proximal to the region being desensitized and interrupts arterial
blood flow and venous removal of the local anesthetic from the sur-
gical area. The local anesthetic is injected distal to the tourniquet
and diffuses into the superficial vascular space and then into the
deeper vasculature and venules. It passes out of the vasculature and
into the small veins surrounding the nerves. From there it diffuses
into the capillary plexuses of the endoneurium and the vasa nervo-
rum capillary plexuses that extend intraneurally, thereby blocking
nerve conduction [75].
Minimal equipment is required, consisting mainly of a tourni-
quet and standard needles (2.5–3.8 cm, 20 or 18 gauge), IV catheter
(4.8 cm, 20 to 16 gauge), or simply a butterfly needle (20 to
16 gauge). IV catheters or butterfly needles can be fixed in place
with adhesive tape to be used at the end of the procedure for antibi-
otic infusion. Tourniquet application can be manually applied using
rubber tubing or a pneumatic cuff. The tourniquet used to occlude
arterial flow manually can be round stout rubber tubing, a length of
bicycle tire inner tube, an Esmarch tourniquet, or a wide flat rubber
band. A length of 40–80 cm is usually necessary in adult cattle to
allow the tourniquet to be wrapped around the limb and tied. The
wide flat rubber band style tourniquet is generally preferable and
minimizes discomfort to the animal. When the tourniquet is to be
placed on the hindlimb above the hock, rolls of soft bandage should
be applied on either side of the gastrocnemius tendon to minimize
damage to this tendon and allow full occlusion of vasculature.
With either tourniquet method, the tourniquet needs to be
inflated or secured sufficiently to occlude arterial blood flow. A cuff
pressure of approximately 420 mmHg is used in equine patients
successfully [76]. Without a pneumatic cuff, the rubber-style tour-
niquet is gradually wrapped around the animal’s limb and tied or
taped to maintain the tourniquet’s pressure. A more effective
method is to exsanguinate the extremity using an Esmarch band-
age. The limb is tightly wrapped, from distal to proximal, before
applying the tourniquet. A wide flat rubber band works best for this
method. With use of an Esmarch technique, the vein may be ini-
tially difficult to visualize.
The common dorsal metacarpal vein, palmar metacarpal vein, or
radial vein can be used in the thoracic limb (Fig. 66.15A) [73]. In the
pelvic limb, the cranial branch of the lateral saphenous vein or the
lateral plantar digital vein is most easily accessed in the laterally
recumbent animal (Fig. 66.15B) [74]. Once isolated, the area over
the vein can be clipped and disinfected prior to needle insertion. The
direction of needle insertion into the isolated vein is not crucial and
depends on practitioner preference. However, it is important to
inject the local anesthetic as close to the surgical site as possible.
After injection of the local anesthetic, the needle may be removed,
and pressure and massage applied over the insertion site to prevent
hematoma formation.
The duration of analgesia is related to the time the tourniquet can
safely be left in place. Complete desensitization of the area dissi-
pates after tourniquet removal but some analgesia may persist for
up to 30 min. The tourniquet can be left in place for 60–90 min;
however, without sedation, the animal will usually become restless
and uncomfortable after 60 min of tourniquet application. The
tourniquet should not be released earlier than 10 min after injection
to minimize the potential for adverse effects associated with sys-
temic local anesthetic. Other systemic analgesics, such as non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, should be administered for
long-term pain control whenever possible.
Lidocaine is the most commonly used local anesthetic for IVRA
in ruminants and swine. It is important that epinephrine-containing

-- 1336 of 1450 --

Chapter 66: Ruminant and Swine Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1321
solutions or cardiotoxic local anesthetics (e.g., bupivacaine) are not
used. Serious complications are uncommon with IVRA, but sei-
zures, convulsions, and cardiac arrest have been reported in humans
undergoing IVRA with doses of lidocaine from 1.5–3 mg/kg [77].
Evidence of toxicity in cattle is rarely reported when the tourniquet
is left in place for more than 20 min [78]. It may also help if the
tourniquet is slowly released for 10–15 s and then reinflated for sev-
eral minutes with this process being repeated several times prior to
complete removal, so that the local anesthetic solution is released in
stages, minimizing the potential for signs of toxicity.
The volume of injectate will be influenced by the size of the limb
and the location of the tourniquet. The presence of cellulitis in the
limb will affect diffusion of anesthetic and a larger volume is required
in such cases. A typical dose range for IVRA is 0.5–1.5 mg/kg. In
adult cattle, this equates to 30–40 mL of 2% lidocaine. In sheep and
goats, 3–10 mL of lidocaine will suffice. The local anesthetic is
injected slowly, and anesthesia develops in approximately 5 min.
Pressure builds up in the venous system as the injection progresses,
and to prevent leakage and hematoma formation around the site of
venipuncture, gentle pressure should be applied over the site.
Injection of saline (5–10 mL) after the local anesthetic to encourage
spread of the local anesthetic through the limb has not been investi-
gated for efficacy, although this technique is used by some bovine
practitioners. Occasionally, IVRA does not provide analgesia to the
skin of the interdigital area. If necessary, this area can be desensitized
by direct infiltration of local anesthetic (5–15 mL in the adult bovine;
2–5 mL in small ruminants, calves, or swine).
Regional IV antibiotic perfusion may be useful in cases where the
infected tissues or bone of the digital limb are unlikely to respond to
topical or systemic antibiotic treatment. Antibiotics can be admin-
istered concurrently with IVRA or on their own with similar tech-
niques. The tourniquet should be left in place for a minimum of
20–30 min after antibiotic infusions.
Ultrasound- guided regional anesthesia
While ultrasound-guided regional anesthetic techniques have expe-
rienced exponential growth in human medicine and small animal
veterinary medicine, descriptions of these techniques have lagged
somewhat in large animal species. This may be due, in part, to the
fact that blind techniques in these species have historically been
successful and larger patient sizes allow for higher volumes of
injectate to more successfully diffuse to nervous structures.
Previously, ultrasound technology beyond reproductive use in
ruminants and swine may have been more limited in availability or
portability; however, the continuing evolution of portable ultra-
sound technology may allow a greater application of ultrasound-
guided techniques in the field, as well as in hospital settings.
Ultrasound-guided regional anesthesia allows for more precise
location of nervous structures as well as adjacent structures while
potentially decreasing the volume of injectate and increasing patient
safety. This may be particularly advantageous in smaller patients,
such as smaller sheep and goats, or in patients in which landmarks
are not easily palpated, such as pigs.
General principles of ultrasound-guided regional techniques are
discussed elsewhere (see Chapter 60). In short, peripheral nerves or
appropriate fascial planes containing nerves may be located as
described for each individual technique [69,79–89]. Needle insertion
is generally via an in-plane approach in which the needle is aligned
with the ultrasound beam and visualized in its full length approach-
ing the nerve; out-of-plane approaches may be utilized, in which only
the tip of the needle is visualized as it approaches the nerve. Following
aspiration to verify absence of blood, an appropriate volume of local
anesthetic, as described for each technique, may be administered.
A number of ultrasound-guided regional anesthetic techniques
have been described in cattle [69,79–84,88] with additional descrip-
tions, either novel or extrapolated from small animal or human
techniques, continuing to emerge. There is a paucity of descriptions
in the literature of these techniques in small ruminants; however,
extrapolation from bovine and canine descriptions allows for rela-
tively easy application of techniques. Abdominal fascial plane
blocks, such as the transversus abdominis plane block and rectus
sheath block, have been evaluated in pigs and may hold promise for
providing analgesia for pet pigs undergoing laparotomy [85,87].
Peripheral nerve blocks for pigs have also been assessed and may be
utilized in a similar manner to small animal patients [86,89].
While applications of ultrasound-guided techniques continue to
emerge, practitioners of ruminant and swine anesthesia may utilize
both blind and/or ultrasound-guided regional anesthetic tech-
niques as dictated by patient size, surgical location, and personal
preference. Local and regional anesthetic techniques are a crucial
element in providing multimodal analgesia, ensuring the safety and
well-being of large animal patients.
a 	b 	c d
e
(A) 	(B)
Figure 66.15 Tourniquet and needle placement for intravenous
regional anesthesia (IVRA) in cattle. A. Thoracic limb IVRA. B.
Pelvic limb IVRA. (a) dorsal metacarpal vein (dorsal view); (b)
radial vein (medial view); (c) plantar metacarpal vein (palmar
view); (d) cranial branch of the lateral saphenous vein; and (e)
lateral plantar digital vein.

-- 1337 of 1450 --

1322 	Section 8: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Domestic Species
References
1 Rosenberg PH, Veering BT, Urmey WF. Maximum recommended doses of local
anesthetics: a multifactorial concept. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2004; 29: 564–575.
2 Copeland SE, Ladd LA, Gu XO, et al. The effects of general anesthesia on the central
nervous and cardiovascular system toxicity of local anesthetics. Anesth Analg 2008;
106: 1429–1439.
3 Santos AC, DeArmas PI. Systemic toxicity of levobupivacaine, bupivacaine, and
ropivacaine during continuous intravenous infusion to nonpregnant and pregnant
ewes. Anesthesiology 2001; 95: 1256–1264.
4 Morishima HO, Pederson H, Finster M, et al. Toxicity of lidocaine in adult, new-
born, and fetal sheep. Anesthesiology 1981; 55: 57–61.
5 Ventkatachalam D, Chambers P, Kongara K, et al. Toxicity and pharmacokinetic
studies of lidocaine and its active metabolite, monoethylglycinexylidide, in goat
kids. Animals 2018; 8: 142.
6 Santos AC, Pedersen H, Harmon TW, et al. Does pregnancy alter the systemic tox-
icity of local anesthetics? Anesthesiology 1989; 70: 991–995.
7 Satas S, Johannessen SI, Hoem NO, et al. Lidocaine pharmacokinetics and toxicity
in newborn pigs. Anesth Analg 1997; 85: 306–312.
8 Morishima HO, Pedersen H, Finster M, et al. Bupivacaine toxicity in pregnant and
nonpregnant ewes. Anesthesiology 1985; 63: 134–139.
9 Morishima HO, Finster M, Arthur GR, et al. Pregnancy does not alter lidocaine
toxicity. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990; 162: 1320–1324.
10 Mauch J, Martin Jurado O, Spielmann N, et al. Comparison of epinephrine vs lipid
rescue to treat severe local anesthetic toxicity – an experimental study in piglets.
Pediatric Anesth 2011; 21: 1103–1108.
11 Udelsmann A, Lorena SE, Girioli SU, et al. Hemodynamic effects of local anes-
thetics intoxication. Experimental study in swine with levobupivacaine and
bupivacaine. Acta Cir Bras 2008; 23: 55–64.
12 Udelsmann A, Silva WA, de Moraes AC, et al. Hemodynamic effects of ropivacaine
and levobupivacaine intravenous injection in swine. Acta Cir Bras 2009; 24: 196–302.
13 Sellers G, Lin HC, Riddell MG, et al. Pharmacokinetics of lidocaine in serum and
milk of mature Holstein cows. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2009; 32: 446–450.
14 Craigmill AL, Rangel-Lugo M, Damain P, et al. Extra-label use of tranquilizers and
general anesthetics. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1997; 211: 302–304.
15 Smith G. Extra-label drug use of anesthetics and analgesic compounds in cattle. Vet
Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 2013; 29: 29–45.
16 Habel R, Budras KD. Central nervous system and cranial nerves. In: Budras KD,
Habel R, eds. Bovine Anatomy, 2nd edn. Hannover, Germany: Schlutersche, 2011:
30–49.
17 Fierheller EE, Caulkett NA, Haley NA, et al. Onset, duration and efficacy of four
methods of local anesthesia of the horn bud in calves. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39:
431–435.
18 Valverde A, Doherty T. Anesthesia and analgesia of ruminants. In: Fish R,
Danneman PJ, Brown M, Karas A, eds. Anesthesia and Analgesia in Laboratory
Animals, 2nd edn. San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 2008: 385–412.
19 Pearce SG, Kerr CL, Boure LP, et al. Comparison of the retrobulbar and Peterson
nerve block techniques via magnetic resonance imaging in bovine cadavers. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 2003; 223: 852–855.
20 Peterson DR. Nerve block of the eye and associated structures. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1951; 118: 145–148.
21 Arnold JP, Kitchell RL. Experimental studies of the innervation of the abdominal
wall of cattle. Am J Vet Res 1957; 18: 229–240.
22 Budras KD, Habel R. Special anatomy, tabular part. In: Budras KD, Habel R, eds.
Bovine Anatomy, 2nd edn. Hannover, Germany: Schlutersche, 2011: 119, 123, 125.
23 Roe JM. Bovine paravertebral analgesia: radiographic analysis and suggested
method for improvement. Vet Rec 1986; 119: 236–238.
24 Velazquez-Delgado P, Gutierrez-Blanco E, Ortega-Pacheco A, et al. Anatomical
landmarks for a proximal paravertebral thoracolumbar block in sheep: cadaver and
in vivo study. Can J Vet Res 2022; 86: 294–299.
25 Sikder S, Ahmed S, Kibria A, et al. Anatomical measurements for the blocking sites
of paravertebral regional anaesthesia in black Bengal doe. Bangl J Vet Med 2010; 8:
81–86.
26 Nev TO, Byanet O, Elsa TA. Investigation of anatomical landmarks for paraverte-
bral anaesthesia in West African dwarf goats (Capra hircus). Sokoto J Vet Sci 2017;
15: 88–93.
27 Linzell JL. The innervation of the mammary glands in the sheep and goat with
some observations on the lumbosacral autonomic nerves. Q J Exp Physiol Cogn
Med Sci 1959; 44: 160–176.
28 Kirk EJ. The dermatomes of the sheep. J Comp Neurol 1968; 134: 353–369.
29 Rostami M, Vesal N. Comparison of lidocaine, lidocaine/epinephrine or bupiv-
acaine for thoracolumbar paravertebral anesthesia in fat-tailed sheep. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2011; 38: 598–602.
30 Oliveira AR, Araújo MA, Jardim PH, et al. Comparison of lidocaine, levobupiv-
acaine or ropivacaine for distal paravertebral thoracolumbar anesthesia in ewes. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2016; 43: 670–674.
31 Arthur GH. Some notes on a preliminary trial of segmental epidural anesthesia of
cattle. Vet Rec 1956; 68: 254–256.
32 Skarda RT, Muir WW. Segmental lumbar epidural analgesia in cattle. Am J Vet Res
1979; 40: 52–57.
33 Lee I, Yamagishi N, Oboshi K, et al. Comparison of xylazine, lidocaine and the two
drugs combined for modified dorsolumbar epidural anaesthesia in cattle. Vet Rec
2004; 155: 797–799.
34 Hiraoka M, Miyagawa T, Kobayashi H, et al. Successful introduction of modified dor-
solumbar epidural anesthesia in a bovine referral center. J Vet Sci 2007; 8: 181–184.
35 Valverde A. Epidural analgesia and anesthesia. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
2008; 38: 1205–1230.
36 Lee I, Yamagishi N, Oboshi K, et al. Practical tips for the modified dorsolumbar
epidural anesthesia in cattle. J Vet Sci 2006; 7: 69–72.
37 Lee I, Soehartono RH, Yamagishi N, et al. Distribution of new methylene blue
injected into the dorsolumbar epidural space in cows. Vet Anaesth Analg 2001; 28:
140–145.
38 Lee I, Yamagishi N, Oboshi K, et al. Multivariate regression analysis of epidural
pressure in cattle. Am J Vet Res 2002; 63: 954–957.
39 Skarda RT, Muir WW, Hubbell JA. Comparative study of continuous lumbar seg-
mental epidural and subarachnoid analgesia in Holstein cows. Am J Vet Res 1989;
50: 39–44.
40 Meyer H, Starke A, Kehler W, et al. High caudal epidural anaesthesia with local
anaesthetics or alpha(2)-agonists in calves. J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med
2007; 54: 384–389.
41 Johnson RA, Lopes MJ, Hendrickson DA, et al. Cephalad distribution of three dif-
ferent volumes of new methylene blue injected into the epidural space in adult
goats. Vet Surg 1996; 25: 448–451.
42 Moll X, Garcia G, Ferrer RI, et al. Distribution of methylene blue after injection into
the epidural space of anaesthetized pregnant and non-pregnant sheep. PLoS ONE
2014; 9: e92860.
43 Condino MP, Suzuki K, Taguchi K. Antinociceptive, sedative and cardiopulmonary
effects of subarachnoid and epidural xylazine-lidocaine in xylazine-sedated calves.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2010; 37: 70–78.
44 Benson GJ, Thurmon JC. Anesthesia of swine under field conditions. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 1976; 174: 594–596.
45 Trim CM. Epidural analgesia in swine. Vet Anesth 1980; 8: 23–25.
46 Skarda RT. Techniques of local analgesia in ruminants and swine. Vet Clin North
Am Food Anim Pract 1996; 12: 579–626.
47 Pleticha J, Maus TP, Jeng-Singh C, et al. Pig lumbar spine anatomy and imaging
guided lateral lumbar puncture: a new large animal model for intrathecal drug
delivery. J Neurosci Methods 2013; 216: 10–15.
48 Strande A. Epidural anaesthesia in young pigs, dosage in relation to the length of
the vertebral column. Acta Vet Scand 1968; 9: 41–49.
49 Lopez MJ, Johnson R, Hendrickson DA, et al. Craniad migration of differing doses
of new methylene blue injected into the epidural space after death of calves and
juvenile pigs. Am J Vet Res 1997; 58: 786–790.
50 Ko JCH, Thurmon JC, Benson GJ. Evaluation of analgesia induced by epidural
injection of detomidine or xylazine in swine. J Vet Anesth 1992; 19: 56–60.
51 Adetunji A, Ajao AO. Comparison of extradural injections of lignocaine and xyla-
zine in azaperone-sedated pigs. Vet J 2001; 161: 98–99.
52 Habel R, Budras KD. Head. In: Budras KD, Habel R, eds. Bovine Anatomy, 2nd edn.
Hannover: Schlutersche, 2011: 50–57.
53 Lee I, Yamagishi N, Oboshi K, et al. Distribution of new methylene blue injected
into the caudal epidural space in cattle. Vet J 2005; 169: 257–261.
54 Araújo MA, Albuquerque VB, Deschk M, et al. Cardiopulmonary and analgesic
effects of caudal epidurally administered ropivacaine in cattle. Vet Anaesth Analg
2012; 39: 409–413.
55 Habel R, Budras KD. Perineum, pelvic diaphragm, ischiorectal fossa, and tail.
In: Budras KD, Habel R, eds. Bovine Anatomy, 2nd edn. Hannover: Schlutersche,
2011: 94–95.
56 Caron JP, LeBlanc PH. Caudal epidural analgesia in cattle using xylazine. Can J Vet
Res 1989; 53: 486–489.
57 Ko JCH, Althouse GC, Hopkins SM, et al. Effects of epidural administration
of xylazine or lidocaine on bovine uterine motility and perineal analgesia.
Theriogenology 1989; 32: 779–786.
58 Grubb TL, Riebold TW, Crisman RO, et al. Comparison of lidocaine, xylazine, and
lidocaine-xylazine for caudal epidural analgesia in cattle. Vet Anaesth Analg 2002;
29: 64–68.
59 Lin HC, Trachte EA, DeGraves FJ. Evaluation of analgesia induced by epidural
administration of medetomidine to cows. Am J Vet Res 1998; 59: 162–167.
60 Prado ME, Streeter RN, Mandsager RE, et al. Pharmacologic effects of epidural
versus intramuscular administration of detomidine in cattle. Am J Vet Res 1999; 60:
1242–1247.
61 Currah JM, Hendrick SH, Stookey JM. The behavioral assessment and alleviation
of pain associated with castration in beef calves treated with flunixin meglumine

-- 1338 of 1450 --

Chapter 66: Ruminant and Swine Local Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques 	1323
and caudal lidocaine epidural anesthesia with epinephrine. Can Vet J 2009; 50:
375–382.
62 Grubb TL, Riebold TW, Hubber MJ. Evaluation of lidocaine, xylazine, and a com-
bination of lidocaine and xylazine for epidural analgesia in llamas. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 1993; 203: 1441–1444.
63 Noordsy JL. Sacral paravertebral alcohol nerve block as an aid in controlling
chronic rectal tenesmus in cattle. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 1982; 77: 797–801.
64 Larson LL. The internal pudendal (pudic) nerve block for anesthesia of the penis
and relaxation of the retractor penis muscle. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1953; 123:
18–27.
65 Misra SS. Studies on clinical use of pudic-nerve block in bovine. Proceedings of the
Fourth International Congress of Veterinary Anaesthesia, Utrecht. 1991: 108.
66 Wünsche A, Budras KD. Arteries, veins, and nerves of the pelvic cavity. In: Budras
KD, Habel R, eds. Bovine Anatomy, 2nd edn. Hannover, Germany: Schlutersche,
2011: 84–85.
67 McFarlane IS. The lateral approach to the pudendal nerve block in the bovine and
ovine. J S Afr Vet Assoc 1963; 34: 73–76.
68 Bragulla H, König H, Budras KD. The udder with blood vessels, lymphatic system,
nerves, and development. In: Budras KD, Habel R, eds. Bovine Anatomy, 2nd edn.
Hannover, Germany: Schlutersche, 2011: 90–91.
69 Iwamoto J, Yamagishi N, Sasaki K, et al. A novel technique of ultrasound-guided
brachial plexus block in calves. Res Vet Sci 2012; 93: 1467–1471.
70 Estebe JP, Le Corre P, du Plessis L, et al. The pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
namics of bupivacaine-loaded microspheres on a brachial plexus block model in
sheep. Anesth Analg 2001; 93: 447–455.
71 Ghadirian S, Vesal N. Brachial plexus block using lidocaine/epinephrine or
lidocaine/xylazine in fat-tailed sheep. Vet Res Forum 2013; 4: 161–167.
72 Ghadirian S, Vesal N, Maghsoudi B, et al. Comparison of lidocaine, lidocaine-
morphine, lidocaine-tramadol or bupivacaine for neural blockade of the brachial
plexus in fat-tailed lambs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2016; 43: 109–116.
73 Wünsche A, Habel R, Budras KD. Thoracic limb. In: Budras KD, Habel R, eds.
Bovine Anatomy, 2nd edn. Hannover, Germany: Schlutersche, 2011: 2–13.
74 Wünsche A, Habel R, Budras KD. Pelvic limb. In: Budras KD, Habel R, eds. Bovine
Anatomy, 2nd edn. Hannover, Germany: Schlutersche, 2011: 14–29.
75 Ennevor SJ, Bobart V, Swamidoss CP. Intravenous regional anesthesia: a review.
Sem Anesth Perio M 1998; 17: 2–9.
76 Levine DG, Epstein KL, Ahern BJ, et al. Efficacy of three tourniquet types for
intravenous antimicrobial regional limb perfusion in standing horses. Vet Surg
2010; 39: 1021–1024.
77 Guay J. Adverse effects associated with intravenous regional anesthesia (Bier
Block): a systematic review of complications. J Clin Anesth 2009; 21: 585–594.
78 Elmore RG. Food animal regional anesthesia: bovine blocks-intravenous limb
block. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 1980; 75: 1835–1836.
79 Re M, Blanco J, Gómez de Segura IA. Ultrasound-guided nerve block anesthesia.
Vet Clin Food Anim 2016; 32: 133–147.
80 Kramer AH, Doherr MG, Stoffel MH, et al. Ultrasound-guided proximal paraver-
tebral anaesthesia in cattle. Vet Anaesth Analg 2014; 41: 534–542.
81 Re M, Blanco-Murcia J, Villaescusa A, et al. Comparison of paravertebral blockade
techniques with and without ultrasound guidance in calves. Am J Vet Res 2016; 77:
1187–1193.
82 Re M, Blanco-Murcia J, Villaescusa A, et al. Ultrasound-guided anaesthetic block-
ade of the pelvic limb in calves. Vet J 2014; 200: 434–439.
83 De Vlamynck CA, Pille F, Hauspie S, et al. Evaluation of three approaches for
performing ultrasonography-guided anesthetic blockade of the femoral nerve in
calves. Am J Vet Res 2013; 74: 750–756.
84 Mirra A, von Rotz A, Schmidhalter M, et al. Ultrasound-guided lateral and
subcostal transversus abdominis plane block in calves: a cadaveric study. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2018; 45: 384–391.
85 Michielsen AJHC, Rodrigo-Mocholi D, Cornillie P, et al. Description of different
ultrasound guided transversus abdominis plane block in pig cadavers – a pilot
study. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48: 470–477.
86 Trujanovic R, Otero PE, Marhofer P, et al. Proximal perineural femoral nerve
injection in pigs using an ultrasound-guided lateral subiliac approach – a cadaveric
study. Animals 2021; 11: 1759.
87 Ienello L, Kennedy M, Wendt-Hornickle E, et al. Ultrasound- guided rectus sheath
block injections in miniature swine cadavers: technique description and distribu-
tion of two injectate volumes. Vet Anaesth Analg 2022; 49: 210–218.
88 Ferreira TH, Schroeder CA, St James M, et al. Description of an ultrasound-guided
rectus sheath block injection technique and the spread of dye in calf cadavers. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2022; 49: 203–209.
89 Trujanovic R, Verdier N, Calice I, et al. Axillary ultrasound-guided approach for the
brachial plexus in pig cadavers: a descriptive study. Lab Anim 2022; 56: 165–171.

-- 1339 of 1450 --



-- 1340 of 1450 --

SECTION 9
Anesthesia and Analgesia
for Selected Patients

-- 1341 of 1450 --



-- 1342 of 1450 --

1327
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of L umb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
Patients with ophthalmic diseases or injuries often need general
anesthesia for surgery or diagnosis. The anesthetic goals for oph-
thalmic patients to ensure favorable outcomes should focus on: (1)
regulating intraocular dynamics; (2) preventing and treating the
oculocardiac reflex; (3) providing adequate analgesia; (4) managing
systemic effects of ophthalmic medications; and (5) anticipating
surgical outcomes that can influence anesthetic care (e.g., hemor-
rhage). Detailed knowledge of ocular anatomy and physiology is
also important for improving patient outcomes.
Ocular anatomy
Knowledge of ocular anatomy (Figs. 67.1 and 67.2) enables an anes-
thesiologist to understand the array of ocular surgeries, as well as gain
mastery of local and regional anesthesia performed for these cases.
Orbit
The orbit is a bony fossa that encompasses the eye, associated muscles,
nerves, and vasculature. It protects the eye as well as separates it
from the cranial cavity. All vertebrate orbits are of two types: (1) the
enclosed orbit, which is completely surrounded by bone (e.g., horses,
sheep, cattle, and goats), or (2) the open or incomplete orbit, which
is only partially surrounded by bone (e.g., dogs, cats, and pigs) [1,2].
The bones that form the orbit in dogs, cats, cattle, and sheep are
the lacrimal, zygomatic, frontal, sphenoid, palatine, and maxillary.
In horses, goats, and pigs, there is no involvement of the maxillary
bone. Instead, the temporal bone and the ethmoid bone contribute
to the orbit in horses and pigs, respectively. The orbital foramen is
differently structured in the horse and is therefore referred to as the
“orbital fissure” in this species. In cattle and pigs, the orbital fissure
and foramen rotundum are typically fused to form the foramen
orbitorotundum [1,2].
Ocular adnexa
The orbital fascia is a thin, tough connective tissue layer that lines all
the structures within the orbit. This fascia encompasses three ana-
tomic structures: the periorbita, Tenon’s capsule, and the extraocular
muscles (EOM). The orbital fat fills up the spaces between these
structures and acts as a protective cushion for the eye. The EOMs
suspend the globe in the orbit and provide ocular mobility. The
seven orbital muscles that control the movement of the globe are the
dorsal rectus, ventral rectus, medial rectus, lateral rectus, dorsal
67 Ophthalmic Patients
Vaidehi V. Paranjape1 and Luisito S. Pablo2
1 Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences, Virginia-Maryland College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Tech University,
Blacksburg, Virginia, USA
2 Department of Comparative, Diagnostic, and Population Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 1327
Ocular anatomy, 1327
Orbit, 1327
Ocular adnexa, 1327
Globe, 1328
Ocular circulation, 1329
Ocular innervation, 1329
Ocular physiology, 1329
Aqueous humor, 1329
Vitreous humor, 1330
Intraocular pressure, 1330
Pupil size, 1331
Tear production and drainage, 1331
Ocular barriers, 1332
Oculocardiac reflex, 1332
Systemic effects of ophthalmic medications, 1333
Effects of anesthetic drugs and adjuvants on ocular physiology, 1333
Sedatives, 1334
Injectable anesthetics, 1334
Inhalant anesthetics, 1335
Anesthetic adjuvants, 1335
Ocular pain and its management, 1336
Origin of ocular pain, 1336
Analgesics, 1337
Impact of anesthesia on the electroretinogram, 1338
General anesthesia for ophthalmic surgery, 1338
Preoperative assessment, 1338
Anesthesia set up and patient positioning, 1338
Physical restraint, premedication, and anesthetic induction, 1339
Endotracheal intubation, 1339
Protection of the contralateral eye, 1340
Neuromuscular blockade and anesthetic monitoring, 1340
Recovery, extubation, and emergence, 1340
Anesthesia-related ocular complications, 1340
Special considerations for equine ophthalmic patients, 1340
References, 1342

-- 1343 of 1450 --

1328 	Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Selected Patients
oblique, ventral oblique, and retractor oculi (Table 67.1) [1,2]. The
retractor oculi muscle is absent in birds and snakes [3]. The eyelids
are two musculo-fibrous folds of the skin. The space between the
upper and lower eyelids is called the “palpebral fissure.” Closure of
the palpebral fissure is achieved by contraction of the orbicularis
oculi muscle. Opening of the eyelids is mediated by the relaxation of
the orbicularis oculi muscle as well as contraction of the levator pal-
pebrae superioris muscle (Table 67.1) [2,4].
The conjunctiva is the clear thin mucous membrane that lines
the inner aspect of the eyelids, the nictitating membrane, and the
exposed sclera. The nictitating membrane is a thin translucent
sheet of ocular tissue situated ventromedial to the globe, which is
actively retracted across the cornea to provide protection and lubri-
cation. It is well developed in domestic animals, while in higher
primates, it is a vestigial structure. In most domestic animals, the
movement of the nictitating membrane occurs due to contraction
of the retractor oculi muscle. However, in cats, since the retractor
oculi muscle is less developed, adjacent smooth muscle bundles
may contribute to its movements [2].
Globe
The globe is made of three tunics that surround the transparent
ocular media, which are the aqueous humor, the lens, and the vitre-
ous humor. The outermost fibrous tunic is further divided into the
cornea and sclera. The avascular cornea protects the internal struc-
tures of the eye, contributes to the refractive power of the eye, and
forms a retinal image via focusing of light rays. The sclera is a tough,
opaque layer filled with a dense network of collagen and elastic
fibers. There is also a cartilaginous component seen in fish, lizards,
Lacrimal gland
Nictitating
membrane
Nasolacrimal
duct
Figure 67.2 The nasolacrimal system. Source: Dr. Vaidehi Paranjape, with
permission.
Lacrimal gland
Conjunctiva
Limbus
Posterior chamber
(aqueous humor)
Cornea 	Pupil Lens
Ventral rectus m.
Vitreous chamber
(vitreous humor)
Retina
Choroid
Sclera
Dorsal rectus m.
Anterior chamber
(aqueous humor)
Iris
Ciliary body
Nictitating
membrane
Figure 67.1 Ocular anatomy. Source:
Dr. Vaidehi Paranjape, with permission.
Table 67.1 Function and innervation of eyelid muscles and extraocular muscles.
Muscle name 	Function 	Innervation
Dorsal rectus 	Moves globe upward 	Oculomotor (CN III)
Ventral rectus 	Moves globe downward 	Oculomotor (CN III)
Medial rectus 	Moves globe medially 	Oculomotor (CN III)
Lateral rectus 	Moves globe laterally 	Abducens (CN VI)
Dorsal oblique 	Pulls dorsal part of globe
medially and ventrally
Trochlear (CN IV)
Ventral oblique 	Pulls ventral part of globe
medially and dorsally
Oculomotor (CN III)
Retractor oculi 	Retraction of globe 	Abducens (CN VI)
Levator palpebrae superioris 	Elevates upper eyelid 	Oculomotor (CN III)
Orbicularis oculi 	Closure of palpebrae 	Facial (CN VII)
Retractor anguli oculi 	Lengthens palpebral fissure 	Facial (CN VII)
CN, cranial nerve.
Source: Adapted from Meekins et al. [2].

-- 1344 of 1450 --

Chapter 67: Ophthalmic Patients 	1329
chelonians, certain amphibians, and birds [3]. It is the supporting
wall of the globe and helps maintain the structure of the eyeball and
protects it from injury.
The thick middle layer is the vascular tunic, commonly referred
to as the “uvea” or “uveal tract.” It is interposed between the retina
and the sclera and is heavily pigmented and vascularized. The iris,
ciliary body, and choroid are three subparts of the uvea. The pig-
mented iris controls the quantity of light entering the eye through
the pupil, as well as influences the pupil size. The heavily pigmented
ciliary body provides nourishment and removes waste from the
cornea and lens and participates in lens accommodation. The cho-
roid is composed of blood vessels and pigmented support tissues,
and it nourishes the outer retinal layers.
The innermost layer is the nervous tunic, consisting of the retina
and optic nerve. The ten-layered neurosensory retina is connected
to the brain by the optic nerve and the optic tracts. The rods and
cones (i.e., retinal photoreceptors) transform light stimuli from the
external environment into nerve impulses and transmit these sig-
nals to the brain where they are converted to visual images. The
optic nerve extends from the globe to the optic chiasm, and forms
optic tracts. The transparent, avascular, and crystalline lens focuses
light rays on the sensory retina, providing optimal focusing power
for visual clarity.
Ocular circulation
In domestic animals, branches of the external carotid artery (i.e.,
the internal maxillary and external ophthalmic arteries) form the
primary blood supply to the eye and its adnexa. The internal oph-
thalmic artery is a smaller artery that arises from the rostral cere-
bral artery at the level of the optic chiasm, providing blood supply
for the optic nerve. The long and short posterior ciliary arteries are
derived from the external ophthalmic artery, and they supply most
of the blood to the anterior segment of the eye, including the retina
and the choroid. The retinal arteries are derived from the short pos-
terior ciliary arteries as they pass through the sclera at the periphery
of the optic nerve [2,4].
There is significant variation within domestic animals with
respect to the venous drainage of the eye. In dogs, the two main
venous channels are the supraorbital and the inferior orbital veins.
The supraorbital vein further unloads into two prominent veins,
the orbital vein entering intracranially, and the internal maxillary
vein connecting with the external jugular vein. The cat has an exter-
nal rete, which is drained by a large ophthalmic vein connecting to
the external jugular vein. Also, the supraorbital vein drains into the
facial vein, finally emptying into the internal jugular vein. In horses,
the principal ocular venous channels are the ophthalmic, orbital,
supraorbital, and reflex veins [2,4].
Ocular innervation
The eye and its adnexa are innervated by the optic, oculomotor, troch-
lear, trigeminal, abducens, and facial nerves (Table 67.2, Fig. 67.3).
Assessment of palpebral and the corneal reflexes is considered
standard monitoring during general anesthesia in animals to
characterize the anesthetic depth. The palpebral reflex is tested
by lightly touching the lateral and medial canthi, which results in
eyelid closure. The afferent pathway is via the ophthalmic and
maxillary branches of the trigeminal nerve, for medial and lateral
stimulation, respectively. The efferent arm is the facial nerve. The
corneal reflex is assessed by touching the cornea with a wisp of cot-
ton wool or a swab tip or a drop of sterile water, which should result
in retraction of the globe and eyelid closure. The afferent arm of the
corneal reflex is mediated by the ophthalmic branch of the trigemi-
nal nerve, and the efferent arm is mediated by the abducens nerve
(globe retraction) and facial nerve (eyelid closure) [9].
Ocular physiology
There are intricate ocular physiologic processes, which can be
impacted during the perioperative period.
Aqueous humor
Aqueous humor (AH) is a transparent, colorless liquid that fills the
anterior and posterior chambers including the pupil. It nourishes
the cornea and the lens, removes waste products, and maintains the
intraocular pressure and globe shape. The mean AH turnover rate
among several species is approximately 1–2% of the anterior cham-
ber volume per minute, with cats having a lower turnover rate
(0.7%/min) when compared to dogs and humans [10]. Two-thirds
of AH is produced in the posterior segment of the ciliary body via
Table 67.2 Cranial nerves innervating the eye and its adnexa.
Cranial nerve 	Principal ocular functions
Optic (CN II) 	Carries vision fibers from the retina and pupillomotor
axons; responsible for the pupillary light reflex, dazzle
reflex, and accommodation reflex
Oculomotor (CN III) 	Provides primary general somatic efferent innervation to
the eye muscles, and motor innervation to the upper
eyelid, pupil, and lens
Supplies motor innervation to the dorsal rectus, medial
rectus, ventral rectus, ventral oblique, and levator
palpebrae superioris muscles
Contains parasympathetic preganglionic general visceral
efferent axons that synapse in the ciliary ganglion;
postganglionic fibers from the ciliary ganglion innervate
the iris sphincter and the ciliary muscles
Trochlear (CN IV) 	Innervates the dorsal oblique muscle, thus controlling
abduction and intorsion of the eye
Trigeminal (CN V) 	Trigeminal ganglion contains cell bodies of the general
somatic afferent neurons of this nerve; distal to the
ganglion, it divides into its three main branches:
• Ophthalmic nerve – contributes to the sensory
innervation of the eye and orbit, its frontal branch
innervates the upper eyelid and the nasociliary branch
supplies the medial canthus, lacrimal sac, and ciliary
ganglion; the ciliary ganglion mediates sensory
innervation to the cornea, iris, and ciliary body
• Maxillary nerve – innervates superficial structures
of the eyelids
• Mandibular nerve – innervates the ventral face
Facilitates the oculorespiratory cardiac reflex in response
to manual pressure on the eyeball
Plays a vital role in the ocular pain pathways
Abducens (CN VI) 	Responsible for the extraocular motor functions of the
eye
Supplies motor innervation to the lateral rectus and
retractor bulbi muscles
Facial (CN VII) 	Supplies somatic efferent innervation to the muscles of
the eyelids and parasympathetic innervation to the
lacrimal gland
At level of the external acoustic meatus, the facial nerve
continues as the auriculopalpebral nerve, originating near
the zygomatic process of the temporal bone; branches of
the auriculopalpebral nerve innervate the dorsal and
ventral portions of the orbicularis oculi, retractor anguli
oculi lateralis, and levator anguli oculi medialis
The zygomatic branch of the facial nerve further divides
into the upper branch supplying the frontalis and upper
eyelid orbicularis, whereas the lower branch supplies the
lower eyelid orbicularis
CN, cranial nerve.
Source: Compiled from Murphy et al. [4]; Herrera et al. [6]; Shin et al. [7]; Joffe and Gay [8].

-- 1345 of 1450 --

1330 	Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Selected Patients
active mechanisms such as the sodium pump, carbonic anhydrase-
catalyzed reaction of CO 2 hydration, and the cytochrome oxidase
systems. These active processes lead to a higher AH osmotic pres-
sure than the plasma, and this disparity promotes a continuous pro-
duction of AH. The remaining one-third is passively formed at the
iris capillaries by diffusion of lipid-soluble substances moving down
a concentration gradient, as well as ultrafiltration from plasma in
response to an osmotic gradient or hydrostatic pressure.
The AH exits the eye through two pathways. In the conventional
or trabecular route, aqueous fluid passes from the posterior cham-
ber, through the pupillary aperture into the anterior chamber. From
there it flows through the trabecular meshwork into the angular
aqueous plexus, finally draining into the episcleral veins, conjuncti-
val veins, and vortex venous system that join the systemic venous
circulation. The majority of the AH (i.e., ~50% in horses, 85% in
dogs, and 97% in cats) leaves the eye via this route [11]. The uncon-
ventional or uveoscleral pathway excludes the trabecular mesh-
work. The AH bathes the iris and the ciliary muscle to reach the
supraciliary space or the suprachoroidal space. From here, it seeps
through the sclera and is absorbed into the orbital vasculature.
Uveoscleral outflow drains the remainder of the AH (i.e., ~15% in
dogs [12] and 3% in cats [13]). Horses appear to have a higher
dependency on this pathway [14].
Vitreous humor
The vitreous humor (VH) is a transparent elastic hydrogel that com-
prises a portion of the clear ocular media, and accounts for up to
two-thirds of globe volume. It occupies the space between the lens
and sensory retina and maintains structural integrity of the posterior
portion of the globe. It is part of the optical pathway through which
light passes as it travels to the retina. The VH is 99% water, and the
remaining 1% is a network of polygonal, hydrated fibrils consisting of
type II collagen and hyaluronic acid [11]. The collagen provides plas-
ticity and hyaluronic acid contributes to the viscoelasticity of the VH.
Intraocular pressure
The pressure exerted by ocular contents against the globe is termed
“intraocular pressure” (IOP). In the healthy eye, IOP is generated by
a delicate balance between rates of AH inflow and outflow, keeping
it at a steady state when the rates are equivalent. The most impor-
tant influence on AH formation is the difference in osmotic pres-
sure between AH and plasma [15]. The relationship is illustrated as:
IOP 	aq 	pl	K 	OP 	OP 	CP
where K is coefficient of outflow, OPaq is osmotic pressure of AH,
OPpl is osmotic pressure of plasma, and CP is capillary pressure. This
equation explains why mannitol, due to its hypertonicity, can lower
IOP by influencing AH production. The normal IOP range in dogs,
cats, and rabbits is 15–20 mmHg, while in cows and horses, IOP
ranges from 20–30 mmHg and 17–28 mmHg, respectively [11]. The
IOP can be theoretically determined by the Goldmann equation:
IOP Q U
C EVP
where Q represents the aqueous inflow (in μL/min), U represents
the uveoscleral outflow (in μL/min), C represents conventional
aqueous outflow facility through the trabecular meshwork
(μL/min/mmHg), and EVP is the episcleral venous pressure [11].
The primary factors impacting IOP are: (1) pressure on the eyeball;
(2) muscle tone of EOM and orbicularis oculi muscle; (3) AH pro-
duction and drainage, (4) corneal and scleral rigidity; (5) volume of
intraocular contents; and (6) episcleral venous pressure (Table 67.3).
Pressure on the eyeball
Direct pressure applied on the globe during physical restraint,
ocular examinations, opening of mouth for intubation, passing of
an Elizabethan collar over the head, and globe manipulation during
surgery can dramatically elevate IOP.
Optic nerve (sensory)
Optic foramen
(fissure)
Retina
Levator palpebra and dorsal rectus muscle
Medial ventral rectus muscle
Ventral oblique muscle
Dorsal oblique muscle
Skin of upper lid and forehead
Medial canthus and third eyelid
Lacrimal gland
Nasal mucosa via ethmoid foramen
Cornea, iris, and ciliary body
Extraocular muscles
Lateral rectus muscle
Retractor bulbi muscle
Upper eyelid
Lower eyelid
Facial area
Lacrimal gland
Orbicularis oculi muscle
1. Round and orbital foramina fuse in the pig and
ruminants, forming the foramen orbitorotundum
Only orbital branches shown here
Stylomastoid foramen
Round foramen
1. 2.
2.
Auriculo
p
a
l
p
e
b
r
a
l
n
e
r
v
e
	F
a
c i a l n e r v e
(
m
o
t
o
r )
V
I I
M
a x i l a r y n e r v e ( s e n s o r y ) 	Zy g o m
a
t
i
s
n
e r v e
Abduce
n
s
n
e
r
v
e
(
m
o
t
o
r
)
O
p
h
t
h
al
micnerve(sensory)
T r ochlernerve(motor)
O
c
u
l
o
m
otor(motordorsaldivision
C
i l i a r y
g a n g l i o
n
	V
e
n t r a l d i v i s i o
n
S
u 	p r a o r b i t a l n e r v e
I
n
f r a o r b i t a l n e r v e
	L 	a c r i m a l n e r v e
	E
t 	h 	m 	o i d a l n e r v e
	C 	i l i a
r
y
g
a
n
g l i o
n
Figure 67.3 Innervation to the eye. Source: Miller [5].

-- 1346 of 1450 --

Chapter 67: Ophthalmic Patients 	1331
Muscle tone of extraocular and orbicularis oculi muscles
The central nervous system (CNS) impacts IOP directly through neu-
rogenic control of extraocular muscle tone by central diencephalic
centers, and indirectly via hormonal and hemodynamic effects.
Increased tone or contracture of EOM and the orbicularis oculi mus-
cle can markedly increase IOP, which is observed during rapid blink-
ing, forced eyelid closure, inadequate plane of anesthesia, and with
drugs like ketamine and succinylcholine. In contrast, general anesthe-
sia lowers IOP partly by depressing the central control centers.
Aqueous humor production and drainage
The rate of AH formation by the ciliary epithelium is influenced by
sympathetic and parasympathetic innervation, as well as humoral
mechanisms. Topical β-adrenergic receptor antagonists (e.g., timolol)
and α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists (e.g., brimonidine) may lower
IOP by decreasing AH production. During sleep, AH formation
decreases by about 50%. Further, depending on whether animals are
nocturnal or diurnal, variations in AH production and IOP may fol-
low a circadian rhythm [16]. Acute break down of the blood–aqueous
barrier during ocular trauma can lead to plasma leakage into the ante-
rior chamber, thus mimicking AH overproduction and increasing IOP.
Outflow of AH can be impacted by increases in jugular venous
pressure and central venous pressure (CVP). Collection of debris or
blood in the anterior chamber and abnormalities of the iridoc-
orneal angle can cause impeded AH outflow and glaucoma. The
most significant factor controlling AH outflow is the diameter of
Fontana spaces (i.e., spaces within the trabecular meshwork), as
explained by the Hagen–Poiseuille law [17]:
A r 	P 	P
L
4
8
iop 	v
where A is the volume of AH outflow per unit of time, r is the radius
of Fontana spaces, Piop is the IOP, Pv is the venous pressure, η is the
viscosity, and L is the length of Fontana spaces. During pupillary
dilation, the Fontana space narrows, resistance to flow increases,
and a marked rise in IOP is seen. Hence, during glaucoma, patients
are treated with topical miotics.
Ocular rigidity
Resistance offered by the sclera and cornea to a change in intraocu-
lar volume is termed “ocular rigidity.” Changes in intraocular vol-
ume will affect ocular rigidity. Also, scleral and corneal compliance
decreases with age, increasing IOP in older animals.
Volume of the intraocular contents
When ocular tumors or systemic malignancies that spread to the
eye occur, IOP can escalate. Ocular circulation autoregulates in
response to changes in the ocular perfusion pressure via metabolic
and myogenic mechanisms. Hyperoxia, hypocapnia, and alkalosis
induce vasoconstriction in the retinal and choroidal arterioles, thus
reducing IOP. The opposite effect on IOP occurs with hypoxia,
hypercapnia, and acidosis [17]. Disorders associated with substan-
tially decreased blood flow to the eye (e.g., dehydration, hypov-
olemic shock, and cardiogenic shock) can result in lower mean
ocular perfusion pressure, retinal ischemia, and decreased IOP.
During chronic arterial hypertension, IOP returns to normal due to
adaptive mechanisms triggered by compression of choroidal ves-
sels. This feedback mechanism reduces the total ocular blood vol-
ume, with IOP staying fairly constant. However, acute increases in
blood pressure may lead to transient elevations in IOP.
Episcleral venous pressure
Episcleral venous pressure (EVP) is the “backpressure” created by the
episcleral veins of the conventional pathway near the angular aque-
ous plexus. The pressure gradient between the anterior chamber and
the episcleral veins has a significant effect on the rate of aqueous
flow through this route and constitutes approximately 50–75% of
the resistance that determines IOP. Increases in jugular venous pres-
sure and CVP can augment EVP and IOP. This can happen during
jugular compression, the Trendelenburg position [18], and other
postural changes as seen in dogs [19], cats [20], and horses [21–24].
Pupil size
Variation in the pupil size is regulated by a balance between the iris
sphincter (constrictor) and iris dilator muscle groups. The iris
sphincter is a ring of smooth muscle cells connected by gap junc-
tions and is located within the pupillary border. The oculomotor
nerve provides parasympathetic innervation to the sphincter mus-
cle, thus causing miosis. In contrast, the iris dilator is a myoepithelial
layer extending from the iris root, where muscle fibers are also
interconnected with gap junctions. The dilator muscle is innervated
by sympathetic nerves and is responsible for mydriasis. This sympa-
thetic activity in the dilator muscle is mediated by a combination of
α- and β- adrenergic receptors [11]. Prostaglandins are involved in
maintaining the muscle tone of iris sphincter muscles and can cause
miosis. Thus, prostaglandin analogs like latanoprost possess IOP-
lowering activity and are used for glaucoma treatment in dogs [26].
Pupillary diameter is a primary factor affecting the success of cata-
ract surgery and the likelihood of complications. Hence, sympatho-
mimetics and anticholinergics can be useful mydriatics during
cataract surgeries. The exception is the avian eye, where the con-
strictor and dilator muscles are mainly striated and, as such, the
pupil is not affected by traditional mydriatics [27].
Tear production and drainage
The precorneal tear film (PTF) is a complex blended three-layered
structure comprised of an outer lipid layer, middle aqueous layer,
and deep mucin layer. The PTF serves multiple functions such as:
Table 67.3 Factors impacting intraocular pressure.
Increase IOP 	Decrease IOP 	Increase or
decrease IOP
Decreased or obstructed AH outflow
Increased AH production
Acute increase in BP
Hypercapnia
Hypoxemia
Acidosis
Laryngoscopy, endotracheal
intubation
Direct pressure on the globe
Retrobulbar block
Jugular compression
Increase in CVP
Coughing, gagging, vomiting,
sneezing, straining
Inadequate anesthetic depth
Head position lower than the body,
Trendelenburg position, other
postural changes
Succinylcholine
Atropine
Increased AH drainage
Decreased AH production
Hypocapnia
Hyperoxia
Alkalosis
Hypotension
Hypothermia
Barbiturates
α2
- Adrenergic agonists
β- Adrenergic antagonists
Cholinergic agonists
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
Benzodiazepines
Acepromazine
Opioids
Nondepolarizing NMBAs
Inhalant anesthetics
Osmotic agents
Diurnal effect
Seasonal effect
Propofola
Alfaxalonea
Ketamineb
Etomidateb
Phenylephrinec
Epinephrinec
aExpected to decrease IOP but conflicting data available in the literature
bExpected to increase IOP but conflicting data available in the literature
cResponse is dosage dependent
IOP, intraocular pressure; BP, blood pressure; CVP, central venous pressure; AH, aqueous
humor; NMBA, neuromuscular blocking agent.
Source: Compiled from Hendrix et al. [11]; Cunningham and Barry [17]; Komaromy
et al. [24]; Kelly and Farrell [25].

-- 1347 of 1450 --

1332 	Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Selected Patients
(1) maintaining an optically uniform cornea; (2) removing debris
and foreign material from the ocular surface; (3) lubricating the
conjunctiva and cornea; (4) providing nutrients and oxygen to the
avascular cornea; (5) controlling local bacterial flora; and (6) pre-
serving ocular immunity. Fibers from the ophthalmic division of
the trigeminal nerve (i.e., lacrimal nerve), facial nerve, pterygopala-
tine ganglion, and sympathetic fibers from the carotid plexus pro-
vide innervation to the lacrimal gland. Parasympathetic innervation
of the lacrimal gland results in reflex tearing [28].
In animals, the aqueous portion of the tear film is routinely
measured by the Schirmer tear test. Schirmer I does not need topi-
cal anesthesia and evaluates both basal and reflex tearing. Schirmer
II is carried out with topical anesthesia and measures only basal
tearing. Results of studies in humans [29], dogs [30–32], cats [33],
and horses [34] report significant reductions in tear flow during
general anesthesia. Dryness in the corneal epithelium predisposes
patients to painful postanesthetic abrasions or corneal ulcers. These
sequelae can be prevented with periodic ocular lubrication during
the anesthetic period. Larger dogs demonstrate greater wetting per
minute than smaller dogs [35]. Additionally, canine neonates have
lower tear production than adults [36]. Hence, special care needs to
be taken in these patients presented for anesthesia.
Ocular barriers
There are two primary ocular barriers, the blood–aqueous barrier
(BAB) and the blood–retinal barrier (BRB). In combination, these
maintain homeostasis by protecting the eye and preventing entry of
lethal substances into internal ocular components. The BAB is the
anterior barrier of the eye and is composed of capillary endothelial
cells of the iris and non-pigmented epithelial cells of the ciliary
body. This barrier can be altered during ocular inflammation,
intraocular surgery, trauma, or vascular diseases. The BRB is the
posterior barrier comprised of retinal pigment epithelium and reti-
nal vascular endothelium equipped with non-leaky tight junctions.
This restricts intercellular permeation of drugs after systemic and
periocular application to the retina. Although these barriers offer
protective functions, they can also impede entrance of many drugs
into the eye, diminishing therapeutic efficacy [37]. Variations in the
BRB may lead to the development of retinal diseases such as dia-
betic retinopathy and age-related macular degeneration.
Oculocardiac reflex
The oculocardiac reflex (OCR) (i.e., Aschner reflex or trigeminova-
gal reflex) induces reflexive slowing of the heart rate and cardiac
dysrhythmias such as atrioventricular blockade, ectopic atrial
rhythm, junctional rhythm, multifocal ventricular premature con-
tractions, ventricular bigeminy, ventricular ectopy, asystole, and
ventricular fibrillation [38]. This reflex is more commonly encoun-
tered in pediatric human patients during strabismus surgery [39] as
compared to adults. The OCR has been reported in dogs [40],
cats [41], horses [42], rabbits [40], and birds [43]. The incidence of
the OCR may be increased by hypercapnia [44], hypoxemia [38], a
light plane of anesthesia [39], and drugs such as short-acting opioids
(e.g., sufentanil and remifentanil) [45] and dexmedetomidine [46].
The triggers for the OCR include external pressure on the eye-
ball, ocular manipulation, traction on the EOM, conjunctiva and
orbital structures, orbital injections, retrobulbar block, ocular
trauma, ocular pain, ocular hematomas, and facial trauma [7,8,47].
As a fatigable reflex, the intensity of the OCR may diminish with
repeated stimulation. Upon activation of stretch receptors in the
eye, short and long ciliary nerves conduct sensory impulses to
the ciliary ganglion. From there, the impulses are transported via
the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve to the Gasserian
ganglion and trigeminal nucleus. This afferent pathway continues
along short internuncial fibers in the reticular formation to connect
with the efferent limb. Signals are returned via the visceral motor
nucleus of the vagus nerve to the sinoatrial node in the heart [38]
(Fig. 67.4). There are also oculo-respiratory [7] and oculo-emetic
[48] reflexes characterized by a similar afferent pathway, but which
carry different efferent signals.
Immediate management of the OCR includes (1) communication
with the surgeon and temporary cessation of surgical manipulation
Ocular
muscle
STIMULATION
Long ciliary nerve
Short ciliary nerve
Ophthalmic
branch cranial nerve V
Afferent pathway
Ciliary
ganglion
Gasserian
(trigeminal ganglion)
Cranial nerve X
Motor nucleus
of vagus nerve
Main sensory
nucleus of
trigeminal nerve
Cardiac depressor nerve
Efferent pathway
Figure 67.4 The oculocardiac reflex pathway.
Source: Tobin and Weaver [49].

-- 1348 of 1450 --

Chapter 67: Ophthalmic Patients 	1333
until heart rate and rhythm normalize; (2) confirmation of optimum
ventilation, oxygenation, and anesthetic depth; (3) administration of
a systemic anticholinergic, if warranted, due to significant or persis-
tent bradycardia; (4) possible infiltration of local anesthetic around
the ocular muscles (e.g., rectus muscles), which may abolish the
afferent pathway; and (5) initiation of cardiopulmonary resuscita-
tion in the event of asystole. Various maneuvers to abolish or obtund
the OCR have been suggested but warrant further investigation. In
dogs undergoing enucleation, preoperative administration of an
anticholinergic drug was not associated with a lower prevalence of
the OCR [50]; thus preemptive anticholinerigc use should be deter-
mined on a case-by-case basis depending on patient needs.
Preoperative retrobulbar anesthesia can blunt the afferent pathway
and help reduce incidence of OCR in dogs [50] and horses [51]. Use
of a nondepolarizing muscle relaxant may also attenuate this reflex
by reducing extraocular muscle tone [52].
Systemic effects of ophthalmic medications
Ophthalmic medications (Table 67.4) are routinely administered
either topically or systemically for ocular procedures. Topical drugs
have the potential for systemic absorption. This creates possibilities
for drug interactions and anesthetic complications. Smaller patients,
neonates, and pediatrics may be at a higher risk. Systemic absorp-
tion occurs either via conjunctival vasculature or from nasal mucosa
after draining through the nasolacrimal duct [53]. Effective com-
munication with the ophthalmologist prior to the anesthetic event
regarding frequency of drug administration or need for additional
diagnostics to identify existing systemic effects (e.g., hypokalemia
seen with acetazolamide) can prevent related adverse effects during
the perioperative period.
Effects of anesthetic drugs and adjuvants
on ocular physiology
Patients undergoing eye surgery benefit from sedatives and
anxiolytics to provide comfort and anxiolysis during examination,
restraint, intravenous (IV) catheter placement, anesthetic recovery,
and hospital stays. An ideal induction agent provides a rapid onset
of action, avoiding the risk of regurgitation and IOP fluctuations.
The proposed mechanism of action of anesthetics in reducing IOP
may involve a direct effect on central diencephalic control centers,
lowered arterial blood pressure (e.g., inhalant anesthetics), reduc-
tion of aqueous production, facilitation of aqueous drainage, or
relaxation of extraocular muscle tone [17].
Table 67.4 Ophthalmic medications used in patients.
Drugs 	Route 	Mechanism of action 	Use 	Systemic effects
Tropicamide, atropine,
homatropine, cyclopentolate,
scopalamine
Topical 	Cholinergic receptor antagonist 	Cause mydriasis and
cycloplegia
Atropine: profuse salivation and occasional vomiting in
dogs [54] and cats [55]; decreased intestinal motility, and
abdominal pain in horses [56,57]
Phenylephrine, epinephrine 	Topical 	Direct acting sympathomimetic 	Cause mydriasis and
ocular vasoconstriction
Phenylephrine: hypertension and reflex bradycardia in
dogs [58,59] and cats [60]
Epinephrine: hypertension, tachycardia, and dysrhythmias
in humans [61]
Pilocarpine 	Topical, oral 	Cholinergic receptor agonist 	Causes miosis 	Vomiting, regurgitation, diarrhea, drooling, bradycardia,
and weakness in dogs and cats [62]
Demecarium bromide 	Topical 	Carbamate parasympathomimetic
(acetylcholinesterase inhibitor)
Causes miosis 	Suppression of systemic acetylcholinesterase levels,
gastrointestinal disturbances in dogs [63]
Echothiophate iodide 	Topical 	Organophosphate
parasympathomimetic
(acetylcholinesterase inhibitor)
Causes miosis 	Suppression of systemic acetylcholinesterase levels and
possibility for organophosphate toxicity in dogs [63];
prolonged muscle paralysis from neuromuscular blockers,
and bradycardia reported in humans [64]
Apraclonidine, brimonidine
tartrate
Topical 	α2
- Adrenergic receptor agonist 	Reduce IOP 	Apraclonidine: reduces heart rate, salivation, vomiting in
cats and dogs [65,66]
Brimonidine tartrate: sedation, hypotension, bradycardia
in dogs and cats [67,68]
Timolol, levobunolol,
betaxolol, metipranolol,
carteolol, nipradilol
Topical 	β-Adrenergic receptor antagonist 	Reduce IOP 	Timolol: reduces heart rate in dogs [69] and cats [70];
bronchoconstriction, and congestive heart failure in
humans [71,72]
Levobunolol: decreases pulse rate in dogs [73]
Acetazolamide,
methazolamide, dorzolamide,
brinzolamide
Oral, topical 	Carbonic anhydrase inhibitor 	Reduce IOP 	Acetazolamide: increased diuresis, gastrointestinal
disturbances (anorexia, vomiting, and diarrhea),
hypokalemia, and increased respiratory rate secondary to
metabolic acidosis in small animals [74,75]
Mannitol
Glycerol
Hypertonic saline–hydroxyethyl
starch
IV
Oral
IV
Hyperosmotic agent
Hyperosmotic agent
Hyperosmotic agent
Reduces IOP during
acute crisis
Reduces IOP during
acute crisis
Reduces IOP during
acute crisis
Diuresis, increased CVP, increased serum osmolality,
decreased urine specific gravity, and pulmonary edema in
small animals [76,77]
Nausea, vomiting, hyperglycemia, glycosuria, diuresis,
weight gain in dogs [76,78]
Volume expansion, changes in electrolytes in dogs [79]
Prednisolone, dexamethasone,
hydrocortisone
Topical,
systemic
Inhibition of cyclo-oxygenase and
lipoxygenase pathways
Resolve ocular
inflammation
Exacerbate ocular infections, delay corneal healing,
cataract formation, ocular hypertension, adrenal
suppression, hyperglycemia, lipid keratopathy,
exophthalmos [80,81]
IOP, intraocular pressure; IV, intravenous.

-- 1349 of 1450 --

1334 	Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Selected Patients
Sedatives
Phenothiazines
Acepromazine causes miosis in dogs when given alone or in
combination with hydromorphone [82,83]. A significant decrease
in tear production with acepromazine has also been reported in
dogs [84,85], rabbits [86], and cats [87]. A 20% decline in IOP
values was seen in horses following intravenous administra-
tion [88]. Similar findings were reported in dogs [82,83]. Due to
its antiemetic properties, vomiting or gagging may be prevented
in patients that are at risk of globe rupture or vitreous prolapse.
Since rough and abrupt anesthetic recoveries have a potential for
causing postoperative eye trauma and bleeding, acepromazine
may promote smooth, slow, and quiet recoveries that can benefit
ophthalmic patients.
Benzodiazepines
Benzodiazepines either maintain or decrease IOP in dogs [89,90]
and cats [91], as well as blunt the increase in IOP induced by keta-
mine [92]. However, contradictory findings have also suggested
that diazepam alone or with ketamine can increase IOP in healthy
dogs [93,94]. Midazolam reduces etomidate dose requirements and
improves intubation conditions; however, this combination does
not affect IOP in dogs [95]. Propofol–atracurium anesthesia in dogs
elevates IOP, but this effect is dampened by diazepam. Endotracheal
intubation-induced increases in IOP are not prevented by diaze-
pam [96]. Intramuscular diazepam is observed to cause no signifi-
cant change in tear production in rabbits [86]. The combination of
tiletamine–zolazepam (Telazol®) up to 20 mg/kg IV induced no
clinically significant changes in IOP in healthy dogs [97]. Similarly,
in clinically normal cats, 10 mg/kg Telazol® intranasally or intra-
muscularly (IM) produced no change in IOP [98]. In glaucomatous
cat eyes, there was no effect on IOP with 2 mg/kg IM Telazol®; how-
ever, 4 mg/kg IM increased IOP by 8%. Zolazepam alone up to
2 mg/kg IM reduced IOP in normal and glaucomatous cat eyes [99].
An increase in IOP values post Telazol® was also detected in capu-
chin monkeys [100].
α2- Adrenergic receptor agonists
Xylazine induces mydriasis in cats and rats, possibly due to central
inhibition of parasympathetic tone or stimulation of α2
-adrenergic
mechanisms in the iris [101]. Moreover, xylazine decreases IOP in
rabbits, cats, and monkeys by suppressing sympathetic neuronal
function and reducing aqueous flow [102]. In dogs treated with
8 mg/kg IM xylazine, significant reductions in IOP were observed,
but no change in pupil size was seen [103]. In rabbits, subcutaneous
ketamine–xylazine decreased IOP by nearly 5 mmHg and blunted
the isoflurane-associated increase in IOP seen in this study [104].
In healthy horses, IV xylazine caused a dose-dependent decline in
IOP [88,105,106]. Use of xylazine in rats and mice has been associ-
ated with acute reversible lens opacity [107]. Xylazine has also been
shown to decrease tear flow in cats [87,108] and dogs [109,110], but
not in horses [34].
Topical medetomidine lowered IOP in cats and rabbits and
produced concurrent mydriasis [111]. This finding suggests distri-
bution of α2
-adrenergic receptors in the eye that may regulate IOP. In
contradiction, however, miosis was noted with IV medetomidine
administration in non-glaucomatous dogs, without any influence on
the IOP [112]. Medetomidine at 80 μg/kg IM caused a significant
decline in IOP in healthy dogs [103], while a 100 μg/kg IM dose did
not change IOP in healthy cats [113]. Medetomidine–butorphanol
IV increased IOP for about 20 min in dogs [114]. Systemic
medetomidine has consistently been shown to decrease tear flow in
dogs [115,116], cats [117], pigs [118], and chimpanzees [119].
In healthy horses, IV detomidine at 10 and 20 μg/kg decreased
IOP, suggesting this drug is a safe sedative when performing ocu-
lar procedures in this species [105,120]. Similar findings were
reported with IV romifidine in horses [121,122] and buffa-
loes [123]. Dexmedetomidine IV significantly lowered IOP and
caused miosis in dogs [82,124]. Another canine study recom-
mended that dogs sedated with dexmedetomidine–butorphanol
receive a tear substitute [125]. Intrathecal dexmedetomidine led
to dose-dependent antinociception and mydriasis in conscious
rats [126]. Dexmedetomidine alone or in combination with butor-
phanol, meperidine, methadone, nalbuphine, or tramadol resulted
in decreased IOP for 120 min in dogs [127]. After topical applica-
tion, dexmedetomidine lowered IOP in normal as well as glauco-
matous rabbit eyes [128]. The potential for α2 -adrenergic receptor
agonists to cause nausea and vomiting in small animals must be
considered when planning sedation or anesthesia in patients that
may be adversely affected by IOP fluctuations.
Injectable anesthetics
Barbiturates
There have been few studies across species investigating the
influence of pentobarbital and thiopental on ocular dynamics.
Pentobarbital significantly lowered IOP as compared to urethane,
chloralose–urethane, and halothane, and depressed the formation
of AH via its direct effect on AH outflow facility in cats [129]. A
dose-dependent decline in IOP by 20–50% was reported in both
normal and glaucomatous eyes in cats administered pentobarbital
[99]. A similar IOP-lowering effect with thiopental is observed in
dogs [130]. In horses, thiopental significantly lowered IOP as com-
pared to guaifenesin–ketamine and propofol [131]. While in
humans, thiopental not only decreased IOP, but also helped negate
the increase in IOP induced by succinylcholine [132].
Propofol and alfaxalone
Propofol attenuates an increase in IOP in anesthetized humans and
lowers IOP as compared to inhalants [133]. The effects of propofol
on IOP and end- tidal carbon dioxide (PET
CO2
) have been studied in
dogs and no decrease in IOP was observed, likely due to the oppos-
ing effects of increased PET
CO2 on IOP [134]. In several canine
studies, propofol-associated increases in IOP are reported similar to
horses [131], sometimes even abolishing the IOP-lowering effect of
premedication [94,135,136]. Mean IOP was elevated after propofol
administration in non-premedicated dogs without glaucoma and
remained steady in non-premedicated dogs with glaucoma. In
glaucoma-affected eyes of premedicated dogs, IOP declined after
premedication and propofol administration [137]. A limited num-
ber of canine studies have compared the ocular effects of propofol
and alfaxalone, with no differences in IOP observed between the
two groups [135,138]. However, alfaxalone, but not propofol, sig-
nificantly lowered tear production [138]. In sheep, alfaxalone does
not alter IOP but causes marked miosis [139].
Dissociatives
Associated myoclonus, intact ocular reflexes, nystagmus, blepharos-
pasm, and open palpebrae have traditionally made ketamine a less
desirable choice for ophthalmic patients [17]. Previous work has sug-
gested that ketamine may increase IOP. Postulated reasons for this
include increases in EOM tone or changes in AH production and
outflow, or an increase in CVP. Since an increase in IOP could be

-- 1350 of 1450 --

Chapter 67: Ophthalmic Patients 	1335
detrimental during glaucoma or open globe injury, ketamine’s use for
ocular surgeries remains controversial [17,25]. In cats, IM ketamine
(12.5 mg/kg and 25 mg/kg) caused dose-dependent increases in IOP
in glaucomatous eyes, while a 10% rise was seen over awake IOP val-
ues in normal eyes [99]. Ketamine alone or in combination with diaz-
epam in dogs and horses caused clinically significant increases in
IOP [90,93,94,131]. Similarly, in rabbits, IM ketamine–diazepam or
ketamine–acepromazine combinations elevated IOP [140]. Other
studies have called into question the assertion that ketamine is not
appropriate in ophthalmic patients due to its effects on IOP. In dogs,
15 mg/kg ketamine with 0.2 mg/kg midazolam IV resulted in no
change in IOP [92]. Also, ketamine–xylazine IM and ketamine–
diazepam IV for induction maintained IOP in dogs [141]. In rabbits,
monkeys, and sheep, IOP declined significantly with ketamine used
alone or combined with xylazine or diazepam [104,142–145]. Even
Telazol® has been reported to maintain steady IOP in cats, dogs, and
monkeys [97,98,143].
Etomidate
Etomidate causes a significant decrease in IOP in humans which, to
some extent, is unexpected in light of the associated myoclonus and
arterial blood pressure stability that are characteristic of this drug.
A fall in IOP by 61% was seen along with mydriasis followed by
miosis and low frequency pendular nystagmus in human
patients [146–148]. In dogs premedicated with IV butorphanol and
induced with etomidate–midazolam or etomidate–lidocaine, no
change in IOP or evidence of myoclonus was observed [95].
Etomidate–midazolam in another canine study produced clinically
important miosis and increases in IOP [149]. Interestingly, in rab-
bits, topical etomidate produced no change in pupillary diameter
and light reflex, but did cause decreases in IOP, conjunctival chem-
osis, and corneal epithelial edema [147].
Inhalant anesthetics
In the 1960s, methoxyflurane became a popular choice over halo-
thane for ophthalmic anesthesia due to: (1) better cardiovascular
stability; (2) centrally fixed eyes during light surgical anesthesia and
ocular hypotonia; (3) lower incidence of bleeding; (4) smooth and
slow emergence; and (5) reduced need for postoperative analgesia
and sedation. However, the average decrease in IOP was greater for
halothane (18%) as compared to methoxyflurane (6%) [150]. The
introduction of isoflurane provided comparable decreases in IOP to
halothane, but with lower arrhythmogenicity, better cardiac index,
and significantly lower incidence of postoperative nausea and vom-
iting [151–153]. Currently, isoflurane, sevoflurane, and desflurane
are the volatile anesthetics used in veterinary species. All three
agents provide comparable reductions in IOP during ocular surger-
ies [154,155]. Since these modern inhalants possess lower blood
solubility, they cause rapid induction and recovery in animals.
This may warrant use of postoperative sedatives to decrease the
risk of iatrogenic trauma or intraocular bleeding resulting from
emergence delirium.
In rabbits, a dose-dependent decrease in intraocular compliance
and IOP was reported with sevoflurane and halothane [156].
Halothane decreased IOP and AH flow in normal rabbits and
monkeys, while nitrous oxide showed no effect [157]. During
hypercapnia, IOP remained unchanged in halothane-anesthetized
horses [158]. In normocapnic dogs, IOP was maintained at a nor-
mal steady state during desflurane and sevoflurane anesthesia [159].
Isoflurane also induced significant decreases in IOP in pigs and
mice [160–162]. In dogs, nitrous oxide with desflurane resulted
in maintenance of steady IOP without changes in pupillary diame-
ter [163]. Dogs anesthetized with isoflurane and desflurane had
decreased intra-anesthetic tear production which returned to nor-
mal post recovery. It was suggested that decreased lacrimation was
due to the vagolytic or sympathomimetic effects of inhalant anes-
thesia. Also, no difference in tear flow was found between short and
long anesthetic events [31]. Sevoflurane has also been associated
with a decline in tear production in dogs [164,165]. Nitrous oxide is
contraindicated in vitreoretinal surgery involving gas tamponade. It
can lead to drastic increases in IOP by diffusion into the air bubble
injected into the posterior chamber, amplifying the expansion of
the bubble, which could be detrimental once the eye is closed [25].
Anesthetic adjuvants
Neuromuscular blocking agents
Changes in globe position and periodic globe motion occur under
general anesthesia, but there is variation across species relative to the
anesthetic depth. Following induction of anesthesia, the globe
rotates ventromedially, sometimes even protracting the nictitating
membrane to cover the cornea. Full exposure of the cornea, anterior
segment, and globe is needed for corneal and intraocular surger-
ies [166]. In some cases, a central globe can be achieved using stay
sutures in the anterior sclera or rectus muscle, or via a retrobulbar
injection, however, these methods may precipitate an OCR [167,168].
Routine use of short-acting nondepolarizing neuromuscular
blocking agents (NMBAs) such as atracurium, cisatracurium, vecu-
ronium, and rocuronium is standard of care for small and large
animals undergoing corneal and intraocular surgeries. Along with a
centralized motionless globe (Fig. 67.5), they prevent an increase in
IOP and the OCR associated with EOM contraction [17,38].
Figure 67.5 Centralization of the globe using intravenous injection of a
neuromuscular blocking agent (rocuronium). Source: Dr. Vaidehi
Paranjape, with permission.

-- 1351 of 1450 --

1336 	Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Selected Patients
Paralysis with an NMBA also eliminates ocular reflexes interfering
with ocular microsurgery. They cause dose-dependent paralysis of
the respiratory muscles, and therefore the patient must be manually
or preferably mechanically ventilated. Positive-pressure ventilation
is also helpful to counteract hypercapnia and respiratory acidosis
which would precipitate increases in IOP. During controlled venti-
lation, conservative tidal volumes and peak inspiratory pressure
should be used to prevent increases in CVP, further augmenting
IOP [17]. Accessible drugs to reverse the effects of nondepolarizing
NMBAs are edrophonium and neostigmine, classified as acetylcho-
linesterase inhibitors. Since these drugs have significant muscarinic
effects, it is advisable to administer an anticholinergic before the
reversal agent [169]. Additional information on NMBAs and neuro-
muscular blockade is available in Chapter 26.
In anesthetized dogs, vecuronium and atracurium were
observed to cause the least effect on IOP and cardiovascular varia-
bles [170,171]. Horses receiving 0.1 mg/kg IV atracurium required
less desflurane and demonstrated better surgery and recovery
scores than horses receiving a lidocaine constant rate infusion
(CRI) during ocular surgeries. A single atracurium injection was
enough to create optimal surgical conditions [172]. Another equine
study detected better scores for globe position, cardiovascular
parameters, and recovery for horses receiving atracurium com-
pared to the isoflurane alone group during vitrectomies [173]. Low
doses of rocuronium (i.e., 0.075, 0.05, and 0.03 mg/kg) produced a
central globe with transient respiratory depression only observed
with the 0.075 mg/kg dose in dogs [174]. When the rocuronium
dose was raised to 0.1 mg/kg IV, the globe rotated centrally without
a reduction in ventilation parameters [175]. A single 0.3 mg/kg IV
rocuronium bolus successfully produced 100% neuromuscular
block, with a centralized globe and full iris exposure in horses [176].
Succinylcholine is a depolarizing muscle relaxant, and its use
during ocular surgeries remains controversial in human patients.
Elevations in IOP have been reported with this drug in humans
and animals [177,178]. This increase in IOP is probably due to
tonic contraction of EOM, choroidal vascular dilation, relaxation of
orbital smooth muscles, and induced cycloplegia hindering AH
outflow [179]. Retraction of the eyeball with simultaneous lateral
movement of the nictitating membrane and axial shortening of the
globe has been reported in cats [180,181].
In birds, the constrictor and dilator muscles in the ciliary body
and iris are mainly striated, and hence the pupil is not affected by
traditional mydriatics (e.g., tropicamide) [27]. Instead, mydriasis
may be achieved by topical NMBA application. Intracameral atra-
curium or d-tubocurarine led to successful pupillary dilation in
birds, but not topical d-tubocurarine [182]. Topical vecuronium
and rocuronium were viable topical mydriatics for retinal and
fundic examination, without exhibiting any side effects in rap-
tors [183,184]. Topical vecuronium (4 mg/mL), 2 drops every
15 min for two instillations, achieved full mydriasis within 30 min,
and was maintained for 4 h in kestrels [184]. A single topical rocu-
ronium dose (0.35 mg) caused full mydriasis within 80 min and
lasted for 4 h in tawny owls [183]. Overdosing of topical NMBAs
in birds can cause eyelid, neck, hindlimb, and respiratory muscle
paralysis [184].
Anticholinergics
Atropine or glycopyrrolate may be given to ophthalmic patients for
prophylaxis or treatment of bradycardia originating from vagal effects
of opioids, the OCR, and prior to reversal of neuromuscular blockade.
They are beneficial in patients with pre-existing bradycardia or for
improving heart rate and hemodynamics in neonates and pediatrics.
In the eye, atropine blocks the actions of the short ciliary nerve and
relaxes the sphincter muscle of the iris, thus producing mydria-
sis [185]. The mydriatic–cycloplegic effects are useful in the treatment
of acute iritis, iridocyclitis, and keratouveitis [186]. There is sparse
data evaluating the mydriatic and cyclopegic effects of systemic versus
topical atropine administration. In conscious dogs with normal eyes,
0.06 mg/kg IM demonstrated significant increases in IOP (approxi-
mately 21%) and pupillary diameter, and the effect persisted for 60
min following treatment. The authors recommended that atropine be
used cautiously via topical or systemic routes in dogs suffering from
glaucoma [187]. Conversely, there was no effect of glycopyrrolate
0.004 mg/kg IM on IOP or pupil size in awake human volunteers [188].
The mydriatic effect of topical glycopyrrolate was more intense, swift,
and long-lasting than atropine in rabbits [189].
Maximal pupillary dilation was obtained 30–60 min after topical
atropine in dogs, cats, and cattle, and retained even after 10 h in
horses [190]. In adult cats, 1% atropine topically resulted in signifi-
cant increases in IOP and mydriasis, while no ocular effect was
noted after 10% phenylephrine drops [191]. Topical 1% atropine
induced minimal ocular effects in horses [192,193]; however, in
another equine study where vertical pupil diameter was measured
every 24 h, atropine drops induced significant long-lasting mydriasis
(> 14 days) [194]. Reduced tear production has been reported with
systemic and topical anticholinergic administration in dogs and
with systemic administration in cats [195–198]. Maximal reduc-
tions in tear production occurred at 120 min after instillation and
returned to baseline values by 300 min [196].
In monkeys and horses, atropine had substantial effects on
uveoscleral outflow and caused a reduction in IOP [199,200]. After
topical administration of 1 mg atropine per hour into the conjunc-
tival sac, intestinal motility decreased, and clinical signs of abdomi-
nal pain developed in 4 of 6 horses. The onset of these adverse
effects was between 11 and 22 h after the first dose [57]. But when
the dosing interval was increased to 1 mg of topical atropine per 6 h,
systemic concentrations were not detected, and ileus or clinical
signs of colic were not observed [201]. A recent pharmacokinetic
study found that the bioavailability after atropine eye drops or topi-
cal infusion was 69% and 68%, respectively, with a short terminal
half-life (0.8 h) in horses. A significant reduction in intestinal
motility was observed after administration of 1 mg topical atropine
every 3 h but not after every 6 h. Clinical signs of colic were not
observed in any horses. A topical infusion at 5 μg/kg/24 h was rec-
ommended as a safe therapeutic option [56].
Ocular pain and its management
Origin of ocular pain
Pain sensations within the cornea, sclera, uveal tract, conjunctiva,
eyelids, orbital tissues, EOM, lacrimal gland, and periocular skin
are transmitted to the brain via the ophthalmic division of the
trigeminal nerve [4]. Since the cornea contains the richest nerve
density, stimulation of this tissue triggers the blink reflex and reflex
tearing [202]. Blepharospasm is noted during extreme pain (e.g.,
corneal ulcer) due to an exaggerated corneal reflex, such that the
eyelids are unable to open voluntarily [203]. Corneal sensitivity not
only varies across species but is greater for the central cornea com-
pared with peripheral regions [204]. In fact, brachycephalic breeds
have significantly lower corneal sensitivity as compared to mesoce-
phalic or dolichocephalic breeds [205,206]. The sensory corneal nerve
fibers are polymodal in nature, and are activated by mechanical,

-- 1352 of 1450 --

Chapter 67: Ophthalmic Patients 	1337
chemical, and thermal stimuli, along with endogenous factors
released during tissue injury. The deeper corneal stroma is com-
prised of mechano-nociceptors and cold thermal receptors that
respond to mechanical pressure (e.g., glaucoma and uveitis) or tem-
perature changes, respectively [207].
Ocular inflammatory responses are generated in response to
mechanical and chemical stimuli, and are mediated by prostaglandins,
neuropeptides, leukotrienes, platelet-activating factor, interleukins,
and bradykinin. Even though the retina lacks nociceptors, retinal
inflammation can elicit pain due to activation of uveal nociceptors
by inflammatory mediators [208]. Endogenous prostaglandins play a
vital role in initiation and maintenance of the inflammatory process.
They cause miosis, altered IOP, disruption of the blood–aqueous
barrier, spasms of the iris and ciliary body, vasodilation, and neovas-
cularization [209]. Stimulation of polymodal receptors and pre-
existing silent receptors activated by inflammation will result in
ocular pain. Photophobia is a feature of ocular inflammation and its
relationship with pain sensation involves the inflammatory cascade
triggering uveal nociceptors [210].
Analgesics
Opioids
The selection of a particular opioid is made based on the level of
analgesia required, procedure length, drug duration of action, and
patient needs. Intrinsically, opioids possess high vagal efferent activ-
ity, which predisposes patients to a higher incidence of the OCR
during ocular surgeries [38,45]. Anticholinergics can successfully
treat bradycardia secondary to opioid administration. An emesis-
related rise in IOP is a key concern with systemic opioids and delay-
ing their administration until after induction of anesthesia and
adding antiemetics to the anesthetic plan may be advantageous.
The μ- opioid receptor was identified as a target to alleviate
corneal allodynia and corneal nerve sensitization in mice [211].
Morphine eye drops act on μ- and δ-opioid receptors in the rat cor-
nea to diminish inflammation and hyperalgesia [212]. In rabbits
with corneal abrasion, topical morphine produced analgesic effects,
but this effect was absent in animals with intact corneas. No adverse
effect on corneal wound healing was detected [213]. Topical 1%
morphine did not produce clinically significant analgesia in healthy
equine corneas [214]. However, morphine was measurable in AH
and VH of treated eyes and was systemically absorbed in another
equine study [215]. Morphine eye drops applied for corneal ulcera-
tion in dogs and cats provided no analgesia but instead increased
blepharospasm, conjunctival hyperemia, and blink rate [216].
Topical and subconjunctival 0.1% preservative-free morphine dis-
played no analgesic or adverse effects in diabetic and non-diabetic
dogs [217]. In contrast, another study has reported beneficial anal-
gesic effects of morphine eye drops in dogs with corneal ulcers [218].
In human patients undergoing ocular surgeries, remifentanil,
alfentanil, or fentanyl, as a bolus or CRI, with or without propofol,
was effective in decreasing or maintaining IOP during intubation,
laryngeal mask airway insertion, succinylcholine administration,
and postural changes [219–222]. Similarly, systemic opioids given
alone or in combination with acepromazine or α2
-adrenergic recep-
tor agonists have been shown to lower IOP in dogs [83,94,127],
horses [105], and rabbits [223,224]. Butorphanol at 0.2 mg/kg IM
provided an acceptable degree of sedation to allow eye examinations
in dogs and significantly increased IOP, although values remained
within normal limits [225]. In sheep premedicated with sustained-
release buprenorphine at 0.01 mg/kg subcutaneously, IOP was
significantly higher than in unpremedicated sheep [145]. Opioids
including meperidine, fentanyl, butorphanol, and oxymorphone
have also been found to significantly reduce tear production in dogs,
and use of ocular lubricants or tear replacement solutions is indi-
cated [110,164,226]. Moreover, opioids produce miosis in dogs [227]
and rabbits [228] versus mydriasis in cats [229]. There is strong
evidence in human patients that opioid-inclusive anesthesia does
not reduce postoperative pain, and instead causes postoperative
nausea and vomiting, ileus, and urinary retention when compared
with opioid-free anesthesia. These findings have encouraged anes-
thesiologists to avoid high intraoperative opioid doses and consider
opioid-sparing techniques [230,231].
Local anesthetics
The therapeutic applications of local anesthetics in ophthalmic
patients are numerous. Pertinent routes of administration include
topical and intracameral application, IV injection, and regional depo-
sition. Proparacaine, tetracaine, and oxybuprocaine are examples of
topical anesthetics used in domestic animals. Topical ophthalmic
anesthetics facilitate ocular diagnostic and therapeutic procedures
and, if used intraoperatively, can produce corneal analgesia. Repeated
application of these agents, however, may cause toxicity to the corneal
epithelium [232]. During cataract surgeries, intracameral lidocaine
can increase analgesia in dogs [233] and humans [234].
Intravenous lidocaine at a loading dose of 1 mg/kg followed by 1.5
or 3 mg/kg/h is a successful analgesic adjunct to general anesthesia
during 	intraocular 	surgeries 	in 	dogs 	and 	horses, 	respec-
tively [172,235]. The mechanism by which IV lidocaine produces
analgesic, anti-inflammatory, and antihyperalgesic effects is not fully
understood but appears to involve actions at multiple molecular tar-
gets as well as attenuation of neuroinflammatory responses [236]. A
single IV lidocaine bolus at 2 mg/kg given after butorphanol predica-
tion and before etomidate induction did not affect IOP in dogs [95].
Local and regional anesthetic techniques are part of a multi-
modal analgesic approach for ocular procedures. They also decrease
intraoperative anesthetic and perioperative opioid requirements [237].
The retrobulbar block (RBB) is a well-documented and commonly
used regional anesthesia technique in dogs [237–239], cats [237,
240,241], horses [51,242,243], and cattle [244,245]. It involves intro-
ducing the needle into the EOM cone behind the eyeball and inject-
ing a small volume of local anesthetic. Indications for an RBB
include intraocular surgeries, enucleation, and need for globe
centralization. It also eliminates the need for general anesthesia in
horses and facilitates standing eyelid and corneal surgeries [246].
The RBB temporarily blocks the optic, oculomotor, abducens, and
trochlear nerves, as well as the maxillary and ophthalmic branches
of the trigeminal nerve. Blockade of these nerves causes desensitiza-
tion of the globe and palpebrae, akinesia of the globe, transient
vision loss, pupillary dilation, and decreased IOP. Even though the
OCR can be triggered by a retrobulbar injection, preoperative RBB
is associated with a lower prevalence of OCR in dogs undergoing
enucleation [50]. While performing RBB is not without risk [237],
the overall complication rate reported is low in dogs and
humans [247,248]. As an alternative to RBB, peribulbar block, sub-
tenons block, orbital splash blocks, and placement of anesthetic-
infused hemostatic sponges in the orbit can also be performed [237].
Blinking, either spontaneously or in response to a stimulus, is due
to motor innervation of orbicularis oculi muscle by the facial nerve.
Akinesia of the eyelid can be achieved by blockade of the auriculo-
palpebral branch of the facial nerve [249,250]. The Peterson eye
block is another alternative to an RBB and is often combined with an
auriculopalpebral block during enucleation in large animals. The

-- 1353 of 1450 --

1338 	Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Selected Patients
Peterson eye block requires more skill to perform than the RBB, and
potential risks include penetration of the nasopharynx and turbinates,
ventral maxillary artery injection, and intrameningeal injec-
tion [245,250]. Care and lubrication of the cornea is mandatory fol-
lowing all of these ocular blocks.
Non- steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) suppress the
inflammation cascade through inhibition of the enzymatic conver-
sion of arachidonic acid to prostaglandins and thromboxane. The
use of NSAIDs in veterinary ophthalmology is common for treating
uveitic pathology where corticosteroids are contraindicated (e.g.,
diabetes mellitus), for maintaining mydriasis, and for treating peri-
operative pain. Ocular inflammation can lead to uveitic glaucoma,
which can be prevented with NSAIDs. Topical NSAIDs have been
developed to improve the ocular bioavailability of these compounds
and to decrease their systemic side effects. Examples of ophthalmic
NSAIDs are bromfenac, flurbiprofen, diclofenac, ketorolac, and
nepafenac. The ocular side effects of NSAIDs include local irrita-
tion, worsening of an existing eye infection, inhibition of corneal
re-epithelialization, and an increase in IOP possibly from reduction
of AH outflow. Caution must be exercised with systemic NSAIDs in
clinical scenarios of coagulopathy, hypovolemia, hypotension, renal
disease, and gastrointestinal disease [251,252]. Use of corticoster-
oids or topical NSAIDs with systemic NSAIDs needs to be coordi-
nated vigilantly between the anesthesiologist and ophthalmologist.
Miscellaneous analgesic drugs
Gabapentin is a structural analog of γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)
and is used to provide pain relief in glaucomatous patients [253].
It may also be effective in patients suffering from neuropathic
ocular pain, who have systemic comorbidity and a refractory
response to other topical treatments [254]. Oral gabapentin has
been used as an adjuvant to prevent an increase in IOP associated
with laryngoscopy and tracheal intubation in human patients [255].
Dogs receiving preanesthetic oral gabapentin displayed similar
results [256]. In healthy dogs, oral gabapentin decreased mean
IOP values but without concurrent changes in tear production
and pupillary diameter [257]. Topical treatment with gabapentin
significantly reduced clinical signs and biomarkers of inflam-
mation and displayed analgesic and secretagogue properties in
rabbits [258,259].
Non-opioid CRIs provide multimodal analgesia along with inhalant-
and opioid-sparing effects. Despite conflicting data regarding the
effect of ketamine on IOP, this drug may be used at sub-anesthetic
doses (i.e., 0.1–0.5 mg/kg/h) as a CRI for perioperative pain manage-
ment for ocular surgeries. Ketamine’s non-competitive antagonism
at N- methyl- D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors may attenuate neuro-
pathic ocular pain and hyperalgesia [260]. Dexmedetomidine is a
highly selective α2
-adrenergic receptor agonist with sedative, muscle
relaxant, and analgesic properties. Addition of a dexmedetomidine
infusion to isoflurane anesthesia maintained hemodynamics and
reduced IOP in patients undergoing vitreoretinal surgery [261].
However, its effect on OCR augmentation and the gastrointestinal
system must be recognized [46,262].
Impact of anesthesia on the
electroretinogram
When light enters the eye and strikes the retina, it stimulates
retinal photoreceptors which trigger alteration of electrical poten-
tials propagating throughout the neuroretina and visual pathways.
These electrical responses can be recorded and analyzed using
electrodes placed around the eye during an electroretinogram
(ERG) [263]. In animals, the ERG may be performed under general
anesthesia or with deep sedation combined with an auriculopalpe-
bral nerve block and topical anesthesia to minimize involuntary
periocular muscle movements [264–266]. It is important to know
if anesthetic agents used during ERG may influence the results.
Hence, it is recommended to compare ERG results of clinical
patients to normal values obtained using the same drug combina-
tions used for sedation or anesthesia [264].
General anesthesia with medetomidine–ketamine–vecuronium
caused minimal depression of the amplitude of the waves during
short-term ERG in dogs [267]. Clinically, IV medetomidine admin-
istered alone minimally affected retinal responses in another canine
study [268]. Xylazine–ketamine or medetomidine–ketamine com-
binations were preferred for ERGs in dogs as compared to thiopental–
isoflurane or thiopental–halothane–nitrous oxide combinations
[269,270]. In healthy dogs, Telazol® caused less depression of ERG
signals compared to medetomidine and isoflurane groups [271].
With sevoflurane and halothane, ERG readings were significantly
affected in dogs and severe depression of the scotopic threshold
response occurred [272]. Recently, it was observed that anesthetics
resulted in significant attenuation and delay of ERG responses in
dogs, but there was no effect on the quality of recorded signals
when compared to fully conscious dogs [273]. In cats, IM xylazine–
ketamine or dexmedetomidine–ketamine were viable options for
chemical restraint as they both minimally affected ERG varia-
bles [274]. Dose-related changes in ERG recordings have been
observed with thiopental in sheep [275]. In standing horses, ERG
was performed safely with detomidine sedation and auriculopalpe-
bral nerve block [265,276]. Since hypoxemia, hypocapnia, and
hypercapnia can alter ERG recordings, options like supplemental
oxygen and assisted or manual ventilation must be considered in
sedated or anesthetized patients undergoing an ERG [277,278].
General anesthesia for ophthalmic surgery
Preoperative assessment
Patients undergoing ophthalmic procedures can be a high-risk
group, including geriatrics with other comorbidities (e.g., endo-
crinopathies, systemic hypertension, cardiac disease, renal disease,
etc.), neonates, and pediatrics. Hence, an anesthesiologist must
have a detailed patient history, thorough physical examination,
pertinent blood work, and other appropriate diagnostics to identify
and determine the impacts of co-existing disease. Prior to general
anesthesia, discussion with the ophthalmologist regarding special
requirements for patient positioning, and ongoing topical and sys-
temic medications is advisable. Animals that are blind or nervous
by nature are more likely to be stressed and fearful in a hospital
environment and incorporating anxiolytics for in-hospital patients
is beneficial. If the animal is painful, adequate pain control must be
instituted.
Anesthesia set up and patient positioning
All drugs and required equipment (e.g., ventilator and peripheral
nerve stimulator) needed for general anesthesia should be assem-
bled and checked before use. In the ophthalmology theater, setup is
arranged with the patient’s head facing away from the anesthetist and
anesthesia machine (Fig. 67.6). This restricts the anesthetist’s access
to the cranial region of the patient which directly impacts IV access
and the ability to monitor eye reflexes and jaw tone to assess

-- 1354 of 1450 --

Chapter 67: Ophthalmic Patients 	1339
anesthetic depth. Long tubes for the breathing system may be
required along with special elbow connectors (Fig. 67.6) to reduce
traction on endotracheal tube (ETT). Before placement of surgical
drapes, ETT tube security and patient-end connections must be
verified to avoid accidental extubation or disconnections during the
procedure. Some ocular surgeries require patient positioning in
dorsal recumbency with the neck flexed (Fig. 67.7). This position
can cause ETT kinking or caudal movement of the tube into a bron-
chus. Use of a wire-reinforced ETT and premeasuring tube length
prior to intubation can prevent these complications. Vigilant moni-
toring of respiratory rate and effort, capnography, and pulse oxime-
try can aid in immediate detection of increased expiratory resistance
related to ETT kinking or obstruction.
Physical restraint, premedication,
and anesthetic induction
Forceful and rough restraint may increase IOP due to inadvertent
pressure on the jugular veins and elevation in CVP. Using a harness
rather than a collar is preferred. Vomiting, straining, and coughing
must be avoided. Incorporating antiemetics, gastric protectants,
and prokinetics preoperatively may help reduce the incidence of
anesthesia-associated gastrointestinal disturbances. Taking these
preventive measures is imperative to ensure a positive outcome,
especially when there is a high risk of globe rupture. It is advanta-
geous to place an IV catheter in the pelvic limb (e.g., lateral or
medial saphenous vein) to provide easy catheter access during the
intraoperative period.
Endotracheal intubation
During preoxygenation, a tight-fitting face mask is avoided to pre-
vent external pressure on the eye. Anesthetic induction should be
smooth. Coughing or gagging during intubation can be prevented
by administration of IV or topical lidocaine, and by ensuring
adequate anesthetic depth before attempting intubation. The ETT
should be well secured.
(A) 	(B)
Figure 67.6 A. Use of an elbow adapter to connect the patient to the breathing system and prevent disconnection or kinking of the endotracheal tube.
B. Placement of the anesthesia workstation, monitoring equipment, and intravenous fluids away from the patient during ophthalmic surgery.
Source: Dr. Vaidehi Paranjape, with permission.
Figure 67.7 Patient positioning in dorsal recumbency with neck flexed for
an intraocular surgery. Source: Dr. Vaidehi Paranjape, with permission.

-- 1355 of 1450 --

1340 	Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Selected Patients
Protection of the contralateral eye
For unilateral procedures, the dependent eye is padded to protect
against physical injury. Prior to surgery, lubrication of the non-
surgical eye must be performed periodically to avoid corneal desic-
cation and ulceration. Other methods for preventing corneal drying
and exposure include temporarily taping the eyelids closed or tem-
porary tarsorrhaphy.
Neuromuscular blockade and anesthetic
monitoring
The nondepolarizing NMBA should be administered immediately
before corneal or intraocular surgery is started and mechanical ven-
tilation is recommended throughout surgery. In addition to routine
anesthetic monitoring, the degree of paralysis can be closely moni-
tored using a peripheral nerve stimulator or acceleromyography
(see Chapter 26). These drugs cause a centralized globe (Fig. 67.5)
independent of anesthetic depth, which makes anesthetic monitor-
ing more challenging. Anesthetists must focus on changes in heart
rate and blood pressure to assess the anesthetic depth and adequacy
of analgesia. Measurement of expired volatile agent concentrations
can also be useful when available. In diabetic patients, serial blood
glucose monitoring should be performed perioperatively to deter-
mine glucose trends, diagnose extreme abnormalities, and assess
response to any administered treatments (see Chapter 42).
Recovery, extubation, and emergence
Recovery is initiated only after neuromuscular function has been
completely restored, either by reversal of the NMBA or by sponta-
neous recovery, based on neuromuscular monitoring. Once muscu-
lar function resumes, non-essential monitoring can be removed
and the patient should be moved to a comfortable position before
the anesthetic is discontinued. Gagging or coughing should be pre-
vented during tracheal extubation. Recovery needs to be smooth
and should occur in a quiet environment. Emergence delirium, dys-
phoria, and excitement should be controlled using sedatives to pre-
vent sudden changes in IOP with ocular hemorrhage or trauma. An
Elizabethan collar must be carefully placed to prevent the patient
from scratching or rubbing the operated eye. Additional analgesia
should be provided if required.
Anesthesia-related ocular complications
In humans, dogs, and horses, the most common ocular complica-
tion of general anesthesia is corneal abrasion [279–281]. Causal
factors include damage caused by face masks, surgical drapes, spill-
age of solutions, ocular injury from loss of protective reflexes and
lack of pain sensation, and dry eye from reduced tear produc-
tion [281]. Therefore, during anesthesia, it is prudent to tape the
eyelids closed, apply protective goggles, and lubricate eyes with
petroleum-based ointments or aqueous-based solutions. Other
ocular complications reported in humans are chemical injury,
photic injury, visual disturbances, retinal ischemia, hemorrhagic
retinopathy, acute glaucoma, cortical blindness, and ischemic optic
neuropathy [282]. Postanesthetic blindness in cats has been associ-
ated with the use of spring-held mouth gags and consequent com-
pression of the maxillary artery during non-ocular procedures [283].
Out of the 20 feline cases, a mouth gag was used in 16 cats.
Neurological deficits were seen in 17 cats in addition to blindness,
and 3 cats suffered from cardiac arrest during anesthesia. Moreover,
maximal opening of the mouth interrupts maxillary artery blood
flow as evaluated with magnetic resonance angiography and
dynamic computer tomography [284]. The use of a smaller mouth
gag was recommended in cats as it produced minimal alterations in
the maxillary artery blood flow [285].
Special considerations for equine ophthalmic
patients
Ophthalmic procedures that require equine patients to be com-
pletely immobilized are performed under general anesthesia.
However, there are surgical procedures of the eye that can be per-
formed on a standing horse using sedatives and analgesics com-
bined with local anesthetic techniques. The decision largely
depends on the ophthalmologist’s personal preference, cost, dispo-
sition and medical condition of the horse, and available facilities.
Some surgeons prefer a standing sedation technique for selected
procedures to reduce the risk associated with general anesthe-
sia [246]. Detomidine can be given in intermittent boluses as
needed, or as a CRI. For detomidine infusion, a 7.5 μg/kg IV load-
ing dose is administered followed by a 0.6 μg/kg/min CRI. This
rate is halved every 15 min until the rate of 0.15 μg/kg/min is
reached. The horse is given IV boluses of detomidine (1–2 μg/kg)
as needed [286]. This is accompanied by an effective locoregional
anesthetic technique as described elsewhere in this chapter.
Horses with a non-visual eye should be approached from the
visual side. If approach from the non-visual side is necessary, it
should be accompanied by words of reassurance and gentle hand
contact. If an increase in IOP will jeopardize the primary ocular
problem of the horse, steps should be taken to minimize factors that
can potentially increase IOP during the physical examination.
Horses that are excited or stressed are more difficult to handle and
tend to have more fluctuations in IOP, which may be deleterious to
an eye with pre-existing intraocular hypertension [287]. Hence, it is
better to sedate such horses with xylazine or detomidine during the
ophthalmic examination to prevent sudden increases in IOP. When
examining a sedated horse, an effort should be made to raise the
head above the level of the heart as a lowered head results in an
increase in IOP [24]. Prior to anesthesia, it is advisable to administer
sedation before flushing the horse’s mouth out to prevent excitement-
associated increases in IOP.
Effective premedication is important in ensuring a smooth anes-
thetic induction. An α2
-adrenergic receptor agonist administered IV
will provide profound sedation, as well as analgesia and muscle relax-
ation. Some horses may need a supplemental dose of α2
- adrenergic
receptor agonist to achieve adequate sedation. Administration of an
opioid following an α2
-adrenergic receptor agonist will provide addi-
tional sedation and analgesia. To prevent excitement, it is good prac-
tice to give the opioid after signs of sedation from the α2
-adrenergic
receptor agonist are observed, which generally occur about 2–3 min
after its administration. Butorphanol is the most commonly used
opioid in equine practice. The IV dose for butorphanol ranges from
0.02–0.05 mg/kg. Morphine may be used in place of butorphanol,
given IV at 0.2–0.6 mg/kg. Hydromorphone and methadone are also
excellent alternatives [288,289]. Recommended IV doses for the α2
-
adrenergic receptor agonists and opioids are shown in Table 67.5. The
tranquilizer acepromazine can be incorporated into the premedica-
tion. It has been shown that acepromazine is associated with lower
mortality in equine elective cases when used as part of the anesthetic
plan [290]. It is given IV at 0.02 mg/kg 30 min before, or at the same
time as, the α2
-adrenergic receptor agonist. Acepromazine can also be
administered IM before or during anesthesia. Since acepromazine
has a long duration of action, its effect will last until the recovery
period, which may contribute to a better recovery.

-- 1356 of 1450 --

Chapter 67: Ophthalmic Patients 	1341
The choice of anesthetic induction agents for equine patients
depends largely on the quality of induction associated with the
injectable agents and the effect of the induction agents on IOP.
Presently in the United States, induction of anesthesia in equine
patients has been limited to ketamine combined with a benzodi-
azepine, propofol or guaifenesin, and Telazol®. When an α2 -
adrenergic receptor agonist is used as premedication, propofol
may be an acceptable induction agent in foals. Telazol® can also be
used for induction like a ketamine–benzodiazepine combination.
It is imperative that profound sedation from an α2 -adrenergic
receptor agonist be observed before inducing anesthesia with
either of these induction protocols to ensure smooth induction
and minimize the effect on IOP.
When a nursing foal needs general anesthesia, the mare should
be present during the induction of anesthesia to minimize stress on
the foal. Conversely, if the mare is undergoing anesthesia, it is
important that the foal be near to facilitate sedation of the mare and
ensure a smooth induction. Mask induction for foals may not be an
option if the mask rubs or presses on the eyes, and struggling of the
patient during induction with a face mask may increase IOP or
potentiate eye rupture. Nasotracheal intubation in a conscious foal
requires physical restraint and may be accompanied by coughing
and gagging, which may increase IOP and further compromise the
globe. Appropriate sedation may help calm the foal and decrease
the amount of physical restraint that is needed, as well as decrease
the potential for additional eye trauma or increases in IOP.
Endotracheal intubation should be accomplished quickly once
the horse is in lateral recumbency. Adult horses rarely gag or cough
during endotracheal intubation, making a sudden increase in IOP
less likely. Movement of equine patients to lateral recumbency after
induction should include careful control of the head to prevent
additional trauma to the eyes. In addition, lower positioning of the
head relative to the body during hoist transport could result in
increased IOP and may be responsible for intraocular hemorrhage
observed shortly after induction in horses with traumatized
eyes [21,22]. Supporting the head to keep it level with the heart dur-
ing transport is recommended to avoid such an occurrence. The
normal eye can be lubricated with eye ointment during hoisting.
Complex ophthalmic procedures such as penetrating kerato-
plasty in horses may require extended anesthesia time. Partial intra-
venous anesthesia (PIVA) is a technique that may be implemented
to reduce the amount of inhalation agent needed to maintain anes-
thesia, provide intraoperative analgesia, and minimize the cardio-
pulmonary depressant effects of inhalation agents. This technique
utilizes injectable agents that are administered as single-drug or
multi-drug CRIs, thereby permitting reduction of the vaporizer
setting over time while still maintaining an adequate plane of
anesthesia. Injectable agents commonly utilized for this technique
include ketamine, lidocaine, butorphanol, and α2
- adrenergic recep-
tor agonists. Administration of CRIs requires close attention to
detail especially when multiple drugs are utilized. The PIVA tech-
nique has been associated with better recoveries and fewer attempts
to stand in horses [291,292].
Analgesics administered during anesthesia may reduce inhalant
requirements and improve recovery as the horse regains conscious-
ness without the stimulus of postoperative pain. Analgesic options
in equine ophthalmic patients include NSAIDs, opioids, lidocaine,
ketamine, and appropriate nerve blocks. One commonly adminis-
tered NSAID for horses with ocular inflammation related to the
primary disease or because of surgery is flunixin meglumine. It is
administered at 1.1 mg/kg IV preoperatively. It is repeated postop-
eratively using the same dose every 12–24 h, with frequency of
administration dependent on the ocular problem. Butorphanol,
morphine, hydromorphone, and methadone are opioids available
for use in horses. They can be administered as part of the premedi-
cation and may be re-dosed postoperatively. Lidocaine CRI has
been used for intraoperative pain management in horses. A bolus
dose of 2 mg/kg can be administered over 15 min, followed by a
CRI of 3 mg/kg/h. The CRI should be discontinued 30 min before
recovery to minimize incoordination associated with lido-
caine [293]. Infusion of an α2 - adrenergic receptor agonist or keta-
mine can be used as PIVA to enhance analgesia, and the analgesic
effect may extend into the postoperative period. Nerve blockade
from local anesthetic injection may provide analgesia both during
surgery and postoperatively.
The main goal of recovering anesthetized horses that have under-
gone an ophthalmic procedure is to have smooth and injury-free
recoveries similar to other equine cases. This becomes more impor-
tant after intraocular procedures or corneal transplants. Recovery
efforts should include preventing trauma to the eyes as the horse
attempts to stand. Duration of anesthesia should be minimized to
decrease the risk of postanesthetic complications as the possibility
of rough recoveries is higher in horses with ocular problems [294].
Many suggestions have been made to achieve quiet, predictable,
and smooth recoveries in horses but there is not any one single rec-
ommendation that will ensure this outcome. Administration of
sedatives in recovery has been advocated to improve recovery.
α2
- Adrenergic receptor agonists may be administered before the
horse is moved to the recovery stall or when the horse reaches the
recovery area. The recovery dosages for these drugs are listed in
Table 67.6. Note that these dosages are lower than those used for
premedication. Acepromazine has also been given with or without
the α2
- adrenergic receptor agonist. It should be given intravenously
at 0.01–0.02 mg/kg at least 30 min before recovery because of its
delayed onset of action compared with the α2
- adrenergic receptor
agonists.
As discussed previously, effective analgesia will help improve
the quality of recovery, and ideally, should be administered before
the horse regains full consciousness. Passing a urinary catheter in
Table 67.5 Recommended intravenous (IV) dosages of α2
- adrenergic receptor agonists
and opioids for premedication in equine ophthalmic patients.
Agents 	Dosage
Xylazine 	0.5–1 mg/kg
Detomidine 	5–20 μg/kg
Medetomidine 	2.5–5 μg/kg
Dexmedetomidine 	1.25–2.5 μg/kg
Romifidine 	0.05–0.1 mg/kg
Butorphanol 	0.02–0.05 mg/kg
Morphine 	0.1–0.3 mg/kg
Hydromorphone 	0.03–0.04 mg/kg
Methadone 	0.1–0.2 mg/kg
Table 67.6 Recommended intravenous (IV) dosages of α2 - adrenergic receptor agonists
for recovery of equine ophthalmic patients.
Agent 	Dosage
Xylazine 	0.2 mg/kg
Detomidine 	2 μg/kg
Medetomidine 	2 μg/kg
Dexmedetomidine 	1 μg/kg
Romifidine 	0.01–0.02 mg/kg

-- 1357 of 1450 --

1342 	Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Selected Patients
the recovery stall to empty the urinary bladder will also help
improve recovery quality. Horses that received an NMBA during
general anesthesia should be evaluated closely for muscle strength.
Return of neuromuscular function as determined by the nerve
stimulator does not rule out muscle weakness due to persistent
low-level neuromuscular blockade. Horses with muscle weakness
that attempt to stand are more prone to limb injuries. Muscle
strength can be judged by determining the negative pressure that
the horse can generate during inspiration when the connection to
the rebreathing bag is occluded. A negative pressure of at least
15 cmH2
O indicates acceptable muscle strength. Conversely, signs
of muscle weakness may include muscle fasciculations when the
horse attempts to stand, inability to keep its head up, and failure to
close its eyelids tightly. When signs of muscle weakness are evident,
and the reversal agent was not administered because the nerve
stimulator indicated return to normal neuromuscular function,
neostigmine should be administered. One way to avoid administer-
ing atropine or glycopyrrolate before administering neostigmine is
to give it very slowly.
To protect the eye during recovery, a padded hood may be placed
on the head, with a halter secured over the hood to keep it in place.
However, a hood may not be tolerated by some horses, and may
lead to premature attempts to rise. Weak attempts to rise may be
controlled by kneeling on the horse’s neck and lifting its muzzle up.
Additional sedation may prevent horses with active nystagmus
from attempting to rise. A head-and-tail rope technique assists
horses that are making strong attempts to rise and helps them
remain standing in recovery. Ideally, there should be three individ-
uals to execute this recovery technique. Ropes are tied to the tail
and to a strong, reliable halter, and then passed through metal rings
on the walls of the recovery stall. When the horse makes a strong
attempt to rise, the person on the tail will forcefully pull the rope to
assist the horse to rise. The person on the head rope will simply
guide the head of the horse, rather than pulling forcefully on the
rope and disorienting the horse. Once the horse stands, the third
person will push the horse against the wall of the recovery stall for
support. If this technique is to be used, recovery stalls should be
constructed so that there are readily accessible exit routes, and the
personnel handling the ropes will be outside the stall to avoid the
hazards of an uncoordinated horse attempting to stand. Quiet sur-
roundings and a darkened recovery stall may minimize any stimu-
lus that may excite a horse recovering from anesthesia. When the
horse is standing and steady on its feet, a hard cup hood may be
placed over the affected eye for additional ocular protection. A
higher incidence of colic has been reported in horses with ocular
disease [295] and such patients should be observed very closely
postoperatively for signs of abdominal pain.
References
1 Prince JH. Comparative Anatomy of the Eye. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas,
1956.
2 Meekins JM, Rankin AJ, Samuelson DA. Ophthalmic anatomy. In: Gelatt KN, ed.
Veterinary Ophthalmology, 6th edn. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley Blackwell, 2021: 41–259.
3 Holmberg B. Ophthalmology of exotic pets. In: Maggs DJ, Miller PE, Ofri R, eds.
Slatter’s Fundamentals of Veterinary Ophthalmology, 4th edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier
Saunders, 2008: 427–441.
4 Murphy CJ, Samuelson DA, Pollock VH. The eye. In: Evans HE, de Lahunta A,
eds. Miller’s Anatomy of the Dog, 4th edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders, 2013:
746–785.
5 Structure and function of eye. In: Maggs D, Miller P, Ofri R, eds. Slatter’s Fundamentals
of Veterinary Ophthalmology, 4th edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders, 2008.
6 Herrera E, Agudo-Barriuso M, Murcia-Belmonte V. Cranial Pair II: the optic nerves.
Anat Rec (Hoboken) 2019; 302(3): 428–445.
7 Shin SY, Kim MJ, Joo J. Oculocardiac reflex and oculorespiratory reflex during stra-
bismus surgery under general anesthesia using the laryngeal mask airway with
maintenance of spontaneous respiration: a retrospective study. J Int Med Res 2020;
48(8): 300060520945158.
8 Joffe WS, Gay AJ. The oculorespiratory cardiac reflex in the dog. Invest Ophthalmol
1966; 5(6): 550–554.
9 Reshef ER, Schiff ND, Brown EN. A neurologic examination for anesthesiologists:
assessing arousal level during induction, maintenance, and emergence. Anesthesiology
2019; 130(3): 462–471.
10 Crumley WR, Rankin AJ, Allbaugh RA. Evaluation of the aqueous humor flow rate
in the eyes of clinically normal cats by use of fluorophotometry. Am J Vet Res 2012;
73(5): 704–708.
11 Hendrix DV, Thomsay SM, Gum GG. Ophthalmic physiology. In: Gelatt KN, ed.
Veterinary Ophthalmology, 6th edn. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley Blackwell, 2021: 124–155.
12 Barrie KP, Gum GG, Samuelson DA, et al. Quantitation of uveoscleral outflow in
normotensive and glaucomatous Beagles by 3H-labeled dextran. Am J Vet Res 1985;
46(1): 84–88.
13 Bill A. Uveoscleral drainage of aqueous humor: physiology and pharmacology.
Prog Clin Biol Res 1989; 312: 417–427.
14 Samuelson D, Smith P, Brooks D. Morphologic features of the aqueous humor
drainage pathways in horses. Am J Vet Res 1989; 50(5): 720–727.
15 Acott TS, Kelley MJ, Keller KE, et al. Intraocular pressure homeostasis: maintaining
balance in a high-pressure environment. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther 2014; 30(2–3):
94–101.
16 Del Sole MJ, Sande PH, Bernades JM, et al. Circadian rhythm of intraocular pres-
sure in cats. Vet Ophthalmol 2007; 10(3): 155–161.
17 Cunningham AJ, Barry P. Intraocular pressure-physiology and implications for
anaesthetic management. Can Anaesth Soc J 1986; 33(2): 195–208.
18 Liu JH, Weinreb RN. Posture, intraocular pressure and visual function. Br J
Ophthalmol 2014; 98(3): 288–289.
19 Broadwater JJ, Schorling JJ, Herring IP, et al. Effect of body position on intraocular
pressure in dogs without glaucoma. Am J Vet Res 2008; 69(4): 527–530.
20 Rajaei SM, Asadi F, Rajabian MR, et al. Effect of body position, eyelid manipula-
tion, and manual jugular compression on intraocular pressure in clinically normal
cats. Vet Ophthalmol 2018; 21(2): 140–143.
21 Alling CR, Cremer J, Liu CC, et al. Effect of multiple head positions on intraocular
pressure in healthy, anesthetized horses during hoisting. Vet Ophthalmol 2021;
24(1): 71–79.
22 Monk CS, Brooks DE, Granone T, et al. Measurement of intraocular pressure
in healthy anesthetized horses during hoisting. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017; 44(3):
502–508.
23 Meekins JM, McMurphy RM, Roush JK. The effect of body position on intraocular
pressure in anesthetized horses. Vet Ophthalmol 2020; 23(4): 668–673.
24 Komaromy AM, Garg CD, Ying GS, et al. Effect of head position on intraocular
pressure in horses. Am J Vet Res 2006; 67(7): 1232–1235.
25 Kelly DJ, Farrell SM. Physiology and role of intraocular pressure in contemporary
anesthesia. Anesth Analg 2018; 126(5): 1551–1562.
26 Kahane N, Raskansky H, Bdolah-Abram T, et al. The effects of topical parasympa-
tholytic drugs on pupil diameter and intraocular pressure in healthy dogs treated
with 0.005% latanoprost. Vet Ophthalmol 2016; 19(6): 464–472.
27 Keller CB. Bilateral extraction of cataracts in a crow. Can Vet J 1992; 33(4):
273–274.
28 Powell CC, Martin CL. Distribution of cholinergic and adrenergic nerve fibers in
the lacrimal glands of dogs. Am J Vet Res 1989; 50(12): 2084–2088.
29 Krupin T, Cross DA, Becker B. Decreased basal tear production associated with
general anesthesia. Arch Ophthalmol 1977; 95(1): 107–108.
30 Vestre WA, Brightman AH II, Helper LC, et al. Decreased tear production
associated with general anesthesia in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1979; 174(9):
1006–1007.
31 Shepard MK, Accola PJ, Lopez LA, et al. Effect of duration and type of anesthetic on
tear production in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2011; 72(5): 608–612.
32 Herring IP, Pickett JP, Champagne ES, et al. Evaluation of aqueous tear production
in dogs following general anesthesia. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2000; 36(5): 427–430.
33 Peche N, Kostlin R, Reese S, et al. Postanaesthetic tear production and ocular irrita-
tion in cats. Tierarztl Prax Ausg K Kleintiere Heimtiere 2015; 43(2): 75–82.
34 Brightman AH II, Manning JP, Benson GJ, et al. Decreased tear production associated
with general anesthesia in the horse. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1983; 182(3): 243–244.
35 Berger SL, King VL. The fluctuation of tear production in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 1998; 34(1): 79–83.
36 da Silva EG, Sandmeyer LS, Gionfriddo JR, et al. Tear production in canine
neonates-evaluation using a modified Schirmer tear test. Vet Ophthalmol 2013;
16(3): 175–179.
37 Gaudana R, Ananthula HK, Parenky A, et al. Ocular drug delivery. AAPS J 2010;
12(3): 348–360.

-- 1358 of 1450 --

Chapter 67: Ophthalmic Patients 	1343
38 Arnold RW. The oculocardiac reflex: a review. Clin Ophthalmol 2021; 15:
2693–2725.
39 Karaman T, Demir S, Dogru S, et al. The effect of anesthesia depth on the oculo-
cardiac reflex in strabismus surgery. J Clin Monit Comput 2016; 30(6): 889–893.
40 Turner Giannico A, de Sampaio MO, Lima L, et al. Characterization of the
oculocardiac reflex during compression of the globe in Beagle dogs and rabbits.
Vet Ophthalmol 2014; 17(5): 321–327.
41 Panneton WM, Burton H. Projections from the paratrigeminal nucleus and the
medullary and spinal dorsal horns to the peribrachial area in the cat. Neuroscience
1985; 15(3): 779–797.
42 Short CE, Rebhun WC. Complications caused by the oculocardiac reflex during
anesthesia in a foal. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1980; 176(7): 630–631.
43 Miller PE, Paul-Murphy J, Sullivan R, et al. Orbital lymphosarcoma associated
with reticuloendotheliosis virus in a peafowl. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1998; 213(3):
377–380.
44 Kil HK. Hypercapnea is an important adjuvant factor of oculocardiac reflex during
strabismus surgery. Anesth Analg 2000; 91(4): 1044.
45 Arnold RW, Jensen PA, Kovtoun TA, et al. The profound augmentation of the
oculocardiac reflex by fast acting opioids. Binocul Vis Strabismus Q 2004; 19(4):
215–222.
46 Sinha R, Kumar KR. Intravenous dexmedetomidine augments the oculocardiac
reflex. J AAPOS 2019; 23(1): 62.
47 Basagaoglu B, Steinberg A, Tung IT, et al. Oculocardiac reflex as a late presentation
of orbital floor fracture. J Craniofac Surg 2018; 29(7): e720–e722.
48 van den Berg AA, Lambourne A, Clyburn PA. The oculo-emetic reflex. A rationali-
sation of postophthalmic anaesthesia vomiting. Anaesthesia 1989; 44(2): 110–117.
49 Tobin JR, Weaver G. Ophthalmology. In: Coté CJ, Lerman J, Anderson BJ, eds.
A Practice of Anesthesia for Infants and Children, 6th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier,
2019: 790–803.
50 Vezina-Audette R, Steagall PVM, Gianotti G. Prevalence of and covariates associ-
ated with the oculocardiac reflex occurring in dogs during enucleation. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2019; 255(4): 454–458.
51 Oel C, Gerhards H, Gehlen H. Effect of retrobulbar nerve block on heart rate vari-
ability during enucleation in horses under general anesthesia. Vet Ophthalmol 2014;
17(3): 170–174.
52 Karanovic N, Jukic M, Carev M, et al. Rocuronium attenuates oculocardiac reflex
during squint surgery in children anesthetized with halothane and nitrous oxide.
Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2004; 48(10): 1301–1305.
53 Agrahari V, Mandal A, Agrahari V, et al. A comprehensive insight on ocular phar-
macokinetics. Drug Deliv Transl Res 2016; 6(6): 735–754.
54 Rubin LF, Wolfes RL. Mydriatics for canine ophthalmoscopy. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1962; 140: 137–141.
55 Gelatt KN, Boggess TS, Cure TH. Evaluation of mydriatics in the cat. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 1973; 9: 283–287.
56 Strom L, Dalin F, Domberg M, et al. Topical ophthalmic atropine in horses, phar-
macokinetics and effect on intestinal motility. BMC Vet Res 2021; 17(1): 149.
57 Williams MM, Spiess BM, Pascoe PJ, et al. Systemic effects of topical and subcon-
junctival ophthalmic atropine in the horse. Vet Ophthalmol 2000; 3(2–3): 193–199.
58 Herring IP, Jacobson JD, Pickett JP. Cardiovascular effects of topical ophthalmic
10% phenylephrine in dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 2004; 7(1): 41–46.
59 Pascoe PJ, Ilkiw JE, Stiles J, et al. Arterial hypertension associated with topical ocu-
lar use of phenylephrine in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1994; 205(11): 1562–1564.
60 Franci P, Leece EA, McConnell JF. Arrhythmias and transient changes in cardiac
function after topical administration of one drop of phenylephrine 10% in an adult
cat undergoing conjunctival graft. Vet Anaesth Analg 2011; 38(3): 208–212.
61 Lansche RK. Systemic reactions to topical epinephrine and phenylephrine. Am J
Ophthalmol 1966; 61(1): 95–98.
62 Wegg ML. A retrospective evaluation of systemic and/or topical pilocarpine
treatment for canine neurogenic dry eye: 11 cases. Vet Ophthalmol 2020; 23(2):
341–346.
63 Gum GG, Gelatt KN, Gelatt JK, et al. Effect of topically applied demecarium bro-
mide and echothiophate iodide on intraocular pressure and pupil size in Beagles
with normotensive eyes and Beagles with inherited glaucoma. Am J Vet Res 1993;
54(2): 287–293.
64 Humphreys JA, Holmes JH. Systemic effects produced by echothiophate iodide in
treatment of glaucoma. Arch Ophthalmol 1963; 69: 737–743.
65 Miller PE, Nelson MJ, Rhaesa SL. Effects of topical administration of 0.5% apraclo-
nidine on intraocular pressure, pupil size, and heart rate in clinically normal dogs.
Am J Vet Res 1996; 57(1): 79–82.
66 Miller PE, Rhaesa SL. Effects of topical administration of 0.5% apraclonidine on
intraocular pressure, pupil size, and heart rate in clinically normal cats. Am J Vet Res
1996; 57(1): 83–86.
67 Welch SL, Richardson JA. Clinical effects of brimonidine ophthalmic drops
ingestion in 52 dogs. Vet Hum Toxicol 2002; 44(1): 34–35.
68 Ogata N, Kanda T, Kawahata M, et al. Sedative and physiological effects of
brimonidine tartrate ophthalmic solution in healthy cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2017;
44(5): 1091–1100.
69 Smith LN, Miller PE, Felchle LM. Effects of topical administration of latanoprost,
timolol, or a combination of latanoprost and timolol on intraocular pressure, pupil size,
and heart rate in clinically normal dogs. Am J Vet Res 2010; 71(9): 1055–1061.
70 Slenter IJM, Djajadiningrat-Laanen SC, Elders DJ, et al. The effects of topical
dorzolamide 2% and brinzolamide 1%, either alone or combined with timolol
0.5%, on intraocular pressure, pupil diameter, and heart rate in healthy cats.
Vet Ophthalmol 2020; 23(1): 16–24.
71 Hepsen IF, Yildirim Z, Yilmaz H, et al. Preventive effect of lacrimal occlusion on
topical timolol-induced bronchoconstriction in asthmatics. Clin Exp Ophthalmol
2004; 32(6): 597–602.
72 Linkewich JA, Herling IM. Bradycardia and congestive heart failure associated with
ocular timolol maleate. Am J Hosp Pharm 1981; 38(5): 699–701.
73 Scardillo A, Pugliese M, De Majo M, et al. Effects of topical 0.5% levobunolol alone
or in association with 2% dorzolamide compared with a fixed combination of 0.5%
timolol and 2% dorzolamide on intraocular pressure and heart rate in dogs without
glaucoma. Vet Ther 2010; 11(3): E1–E6.
74 Haskins SC, Munger RJ, Helphrey MG, et al. Effect of acetazolamide in blood acid-
base and electrolyte values in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1981; 179(8): 792–796.
75 Thiessen CE, Tofflemire KL, Makielski KM, et al. Hypokalemia and suspected renal
tubular acidosis associated with topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitor therapy in a
cat. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2016; 26(6): 870–874.
76 Dugan SJ, Roberts SM, Severin GA. Systemic osmotherapy for ophthalmic disease
in dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1989; 194(1): 115–118.
77 Brock KA, Thurmon JC. Pulmonary edema associated with mannitol administra-
tion. Canine Pract 1979; 6: 31–34.
78 Wasserman NT, Kennard G, Cochrane ZN, et al. Effects of oral isosorbide and glyc-
erol on intraocular pressure, serum osmolality, and blood glucose in normal dogs.
Vet Ophthalmol 2013; 16(1): 20–24.
79 Volopich S, Mosing M, Auer U, et al. Comparison of the effect of hypertonic
hydroxyethyl starch and mannitol on the intraocular pressure in healthy normoten-
sive dogs and the effect of hypertonic hydroxyethyl starch on the intraocular pres-
sure in dogs with primary glaucoma. Vet Ophthalmol 2006; 9(4): 239–244.
80 Glaze MB, Crawford MA, Nachreiner RF, et al. Ophthalmic corticosteroid therapy:
systemic effects in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1988; 192(1): 73–75.
81 Rice JB, White AG, Scarpati LM, et al. Long-term systemic corticosteroid exposure:
a systematic literature review. Clin Ther 2017; 39(11): 2216–2229.
82 Micieli F, Chiavaccini L, Lamagna B, et al. Comparison of intraocular pressure and
pupil diameter after sedation with either acepromazine or dexmedetomidine in
healthy dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45(5): 667–672.
83 Stephan DD, Vestre WA, Stiles J, et al. Changes in intraocular pressure and pupil
size following intramuscular administration of hydromorphone hydrochloride and
acepromazine in clinically normal dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 2003; 6(1): 73–76.
84 Volk HA, West E, Linn-Pearl RN, et al. Effect of methadone and acepromazine
premedication on tear production in dogs. Vet Rec Open 2018; 5(1): e000298.
85 Giannetto C, Macri F, Falcone A, et al. Evaluation of tear production as measured
by Schirmer test I in dogs after acepromazine and acepromazine-methadone pre-
medication. Animals (Basel) 2021; 11(11): 3015.
86 Ghaffari MS, Moghaddassi AP, Bokaie S. Effects of intramuscular acepromazine
and diazepam on tear production in rabbits. Vet Rec 2009; 164(5): 147–148.
87 Ghaffari MS, Malmasi A, Bokaie S. Effect of acepromazine or xylazine on tear pro-
duction as measured by Schirmer tear test in normal cats. Vet Ophthalmol 2010;
13(1): 1–3.
88 McClure JR Jr., Gelatt KN, Gum GG, et al. The effect of parenteral acepromazine
and xylazine on intraocular pressure in the horse. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 1976;
71(12): 1727–1730.
89 Artru AA. Intraocular pressure in anaesthetized dogs given flumazenil with and
without prior administration of midazolam. Can J Anaesth 1991; 38(3): 408–414.
90 Hofmeister EH, Mosunic CB, Torres BT, et al. Effects of ketamine, diazepam, and
their combination on intraocular pressures in clinically normal dogs. Am J Vet Res
2006; 67(7): 1136–1139.
91 Pino Capote JA. Decrease in intraocular pressure produced by I.V. or conjunctival
diazepam. Br J Anaesth 1978; 50(8): 865.
92 Ghaffari MS, Rezaei MA, Mirani AH, et al. The effects of ketamine-midazolam
anesthesia on intraocular pressure in clinically normal dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 2010;
13(2): 91–93.
93 Kovalcuka L, Birgele E, Bandere D, et al. The effects of ketamine hydrochloride and
diazepam on the intraocular pressure and pupil diameter of the dog’s eye. Vet
Ophthalmol 2013; 16(1): 29–34.
94 Smith MD, Barletta M, Diehl KA, et al. Effect of propofol and ketamine–diazepam
on intraocular pressure in healthy premedicated dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2019;
46(1): 36–42.

-- 1359 of 1450 --

1344 	Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Selected Patients
95 Keating SC, Sage AM, Ambrisko TD, et al. The effect of midazolam or lidocaine
administration prior to etomidate induction of anesthesia on heart rate, arterial
pressure, intraocular pressure and serum cortisol concentration in healthy dogs.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(2): 160–167.
96 Hofmeister EH, Williams CO, Braun C, et al. Influence of lidocaine and diazepam
on peri-induction intraocular pressures in dogs anesthetized with propofol–
atracurium. Can J Vet Res 2006; 70(4): 251–256.
97 Jang M, Park S, Son WG, et al. Effect of tiletamine–zolazepam on the intraocular
pressure of the dog. Vet Ophthalmol 2015; 18(6): 481–484.
98 Yanmaz LE, Dogan E, Okur S, et al. Comparison of the effects of intranasal and
intramuscular administrations of zolazepam-tiletamine combination on intraoc-
ular pressure in cats. Vet Ophthalmol 2016; 19(Suppl 1): 115–118.
99 Hahnenberger RW. Influence of various anesthetic drugs on the intraocular
pressure of cats. Albrecht Von Graefes Arch Klin Exp Ophthalmol 1976; 199(2):
179–186.
100 Raposo AC, Ofri R, Schaffer DP, et al. Evaluation of ophthalmic and hemody-
namic parameters in capuchin monkeys (Sapajus sp.) submitted to dissociative
anesthetic protocols. J Med Primatol 2015; 44(6): 381–389.
101 Hsu WH, Betts DM, Lee P. Xylazine-induced mydriasis: possible involvement of a
central postsynaptic regulation of parasympathetic tone. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
1981; 4(3): 209–214.
102 Burke JA, Potter DE. The ocular effects of xylazine in rabbits, cats, and monkeys.
J Ocul Pharmacol 1986; 2(1): 9–21.
103 Kanda T, Iguchi A, Yoshioka C, et al. Effects of medetomidine and xylazine on
intraocular pressure and pupil size in healthy Beagle dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg
2015; 42(6): 623–628.
104 Chae JJ, Prausnitz MR, Ethier CR. Effects of general anesthesia on intraocular
pressure in rabbits. J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2021; 60(1): 91–95.
105 Joyner RL, Liu CC, Cremer J, et al. Intraocular pressure following four different intra-
venous sedation protocols in normal horses. Equine Vet J 2021; 53(3): 612–617.
106 van der Woerdt A, Gilger BC, Wilkie DA, et al. Effect of auriculopalpebral nerve
block and intravenous administration of xylazine on intraocular pressure and cor-
neal thickness in horses. Am J Vet Res 1995; 56(2): 155–158.
107 Calderone L, Grimes P, Shalev M. Acute reversible cataract induced by xylazine
and by ketamine–xylazine anesthesia in rats and mice. Exp Eye Res 1986; 42(4):
331–337.
108 Kanda T, Shimizu Y, Hanazono C, et al. Effect of intramuscular administration of
medetomidine and xylazine on tear flow measured by the Schirmer tear test I in
healthy cats. J Feline Med Surg 2019; 21(8): 788–792.
109 Kanda T, Ishihara S, Oka M, et al. Temporal effects of intramuscular administration
of medetomidine hydrochloride or xylazine hydrochloride to healthy dogs on tear
flow measured by use of a Schirmer tear test I. Am J Vet Res 2016; 77(4): 346–350.
110 Dodam JR, Branson KR, Martin DD. Effects of intramuscular sedative and opioid
combinations on tear production in dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 1998; 1(1): 57–59.
111 Jin Y, Wilson S, Elko EE, et al. Ocular hypotensive effects of medetomidine and its
analogs. J Ocul Pharmacol 1991; 7(4): 285–296.
112 Verbruggen AM, Akkerdaas LC, Hellebrekers LJ, et al. The effect of intravenous
medetomidine on pupil size and intraocular pressure in normotensive dogs. Vet Q
2000; 22(3): 179–180.
113 Malmasi A, Selk Ghaffari M. Lack of effects of intramuscular medetomidine on
intraocular pressure in clinically normal cats. J Feline Med Surg 2016; 18(4):
315–317.
114 Rauser P, Pfeifr J, Proks P, et al. Effect of medetomidine–butorphanol and
dexmedetomidine–butorphanol combinations on intraocular pressure in healthy
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39(3): 301–305.
115 Sanchez RF, Mellor D, Mould J. Effects of medetomidine and medetomidine–
butorphanol combination on Schirmer tear test 1 readings in dogs. Vet Ophthalmol
2006; 9(1): 33–37.
116 Aghababaei A, Ronagh A, Mosallanejad B, et al. Effects of medetomidine,
dexmedetomidine and their combination with acepromazine on the intraocular
pressure (IOP), tear secretion and pupil diameter in dogs. Vet Med Sci 2021; 7(4):
1090–1095.
117 Di Pietro S, Macri F, Bonarrigo T, et al. Effects of a medetomidine-ketamine com-
bination on Schirmer tear test I results of clinically normal cats. Am J Vet Res 2016;
77(3): 310–314.
118 Kanda T, Kajiyama A, Morimitsu W, et al. Effect of medetomidine on tear flow
measured by Schirmer tear test I in normal pigs. J Vet Med Sci 2019; 81(4):
538–540.
119 Milnes EL, Calvi T, Feltrer Y, et al. Factors affecting tear production and intraocu-
lar pressure in anesthetized chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes). J Zoo Wildl Med 2020;
51(3): 687–690.
120 Holve DL. Effect of sedation with detomidine on intraocular pressure with and
without topical anesthesia in clinically normal horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2012;
240(3): 308–311.
121 Stine JM, Michau TM, Williams MK, et al. The effects of intravenous romifidine
on intraocular pressure in clinically normal horses and horses with incidental
ophthalmic findings. Vet Ophthalmol 2014; 17(Suppl 1): 134–139.
122 Marzok MA, El-Khodery SA, Oheida AH. Effect of intravenous administration of
romifidine on intraocular pressure in clinically normal horses. Vet Ophthalmol
2014; 17(Suppl 1): 149–153.
123 Rizk A, Nocera I, Briganti A, et al. Dose-dependent effect of romifidine on
intraocular pressure in clinically healthy buffalo (Bubalus bubalis). Heliyon 2019;
5(12): e02930.
124 Artigas C, Redondo JI, Lopez-Murcia MM. Effects of intravenous administration
of dexmedetomidine on intraocular pressure and pupil size in clinically normal
dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 2012; 15(Suppl 1): 79–82.
125 Leonardi F, Costa GL, Stagnoli A, et al. The effect of intramuscular
dexmedetomidine–butorphanol combination on tear production in dogs. Can Vet J
2019; 60(1): 55–59.
126 Horvath G, Kovacs M, Szikszay M, et al. Mydriatic and antinociceptive effects of
intrathecal dexmedetomidine in conscious rats. Eur J Pharmacol 1994; 253(1–2):
61–66.
127 Mattos-Junior E, Pypendop BH, Cabrini TM, et al. Effects of dexmedetomidine
alone or in combination with opioids on intraocular pressure in healthy Beagle
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(4): 541–544.
128 Vartiainen J, MacDonald E, Urtti A, et al. Dexmedetomidine-induced ocular
hypotension in rabbits with normal or elevated intraocular pressures. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1992; 33(6): 2019–2023.
129 Eakins KE. A comparative study of intraocular pressure and gross outflow facility
in the cat eye during anesthesia. Exp Eye Res 1969; 8(2): 106–115.
130 Hofmeister EH, Williams CO, Braun C, et al. Propofol versus thiopental: effects
on peri-induction intraocular pressures in normal dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008;
35(4): 275–281.
131 Ferreira TH, Brosnan RJ, Shilo-Benjamini Y, et al. Effects of ketamine, propofol,
or thiopental administration on intraocular pressure and qualities of induction
of and recovery from anesthesia in horses. Am J Vet Res 2013; 74(8):
1070–1077.
132 Joshi C, Bruce DL. Thiopental and succinylcholine: action on intraocular pressure.
Anesth Analg 1975; 54(4): 471–475.
133 Chang CY, Chien YJ, Wu MY. Attenuation of increased intraocular pressure with
propofol anesthesia: a systematic review with meta-analysis and trial sequential
analysis. J Adv Res 2020; 24: 223–238.
134 Batista CM, Laus JL, Nunes N, et al. Evaluation of intraocular and partial CO2
pressure in dogs anesthetized with propofol. Vet Ophthalmol 2000; 3(1): 17–19.
135 Hasiuk MM, Forde N, Cooke A, et al. A comparison of alfaxalone and propofol on
intraocular pressure in healthy dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 2014; 17(6): 411–416.
136 Hofmeister EH, Weinstein WL, Burger D, et al. Effects of graded doses of propofol
for anesthesia induction on cardiovascular parameters and intraocular pressures
in normal dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36(5): 442–448.
137 Webb TR, Wyman M, Smith JA, et al. Effects of propofol on intraocular pressure
in premedicated and nonpremedicated dogs with and without glaucoma. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2018; 252(7): 823–829.
138 Costa D, Leiva M, Moll X, et al. Alfaxalone versus propofol in dogs: a randomised
trial to assess effects on peri-induction tear production, intraocular pressure and
globe position. Vet Rec 2015; 176(3): 73.
139 Torres MD, Andaluz A, Garcia F, et al. Effects of an intravenous bolus of alfaxalone
versus propofol on intraocular pressure in sheep. Vet Rec 2012; 170(9): 226.
140 Ghaffari MS, Moghaddassi AP. Effects of ketamine–diazepam and ketamine–
acepromazine combinations on intraocular pressure in rabbits. Vet Anaesth Analg
2010; 37(3): 269–272.
141 Hazra S, De D, Roy B, et al. Use of ketamine, xylazine, and diazepam anesthesia
with retrobulbar block for phacoemulsification in dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 2008;
11(4): 255–259.
142 Holve DL, Gum GG, Pritt SL. Effect of sedation with xylazine and ketamine on
intraocular pressure in New Zealand white rabbits. J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 2013;
52(4): 488–490.
143 Lee HS, Kim DH, Kim SH, et al. A comparative study on intraocular pressure
under various anesthetics in cynomolgus monkeys (Macaca fascicularis). Lab
Anim Res 2021; 37(1): 15.
144 Bunch TJ, Tian B, Seeman JL, et al. Effect of daily prolonged ketamine anesthesia
on intraocular pressure in monkeys. Curr Eye Res 2008; 33(11): 946–953.
145 Gatson BJ, Pablo L, Plummer CE, et al. Effects of premedication with sustained-
release buprenorphine hydrochloride and anesthetic induction with ketamine
hydrochloride or propofol in combination with diazepam on intraocular pressure
in healthy sheep. Am J Vet Res 2015; 76(9): 771–779.
146 Thomson MF, Brock-Utne JG, Bean P, et al. Anaesthesia and intra-ocular pressure:
a comparative of total intravenous anaesthesia using etomidate with conventional
inhalation anaesthesia. Anaesthesia 1982; 37(7): 758–761.

-- 1360 of 1450 --

Chapter 67: Ophthalmic Patients 	1345
147 Oji EO, Holdcroft A. The ocular effects of etomidate. Anaesthesia 1979; 34(3):
245–249.
148 Famewo CE, Odugbesan CO, Osuntokun OO. Effect of etomidate on intra-ocular
pressure. Can Anaesth Soc J 1977; 24(6): 712–716.
149 Gunderson EG, Lukasik VM, Ashton MM, et al. Effects of anesthetic induction
with midazolam-propofol and midazolam- etomidate on selected ocular and
cardiorespiratory variables in clinically normal dogs. Am J Vet Res 2013; 74(4):
629–635.
150 Tammisto T, Hamalainen L, Tarkkanen L. Halothane and methoxyflurane in oph-
thalmic anaesthesia. A comparative study. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1965; 9(3):
173–177.
151 van den Berg AA, Honjol NM, Mphanza T, et al. Vomiting, retching, headache and
restlessness after halothane-, isoflurane- and enflurane-based anaesthesia. An anal-
ysis of pooled data following ear, nose, throat and eye surgery. Acta Anaesthesiol
Scand 1998; 42(6): 658–663.
152 Craig JF, Cook JH. A comparison of isoflurane and halothane in anaesthesia for
intra-ocular surgery. Anaesthesia 1988; 43(6): 454–458.
153 Mirakhur RK, Elliott P, Shepherd WF, et al. Comparison of the effects of isoflurane
and halothane on intraocular pressure. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1990; 34(4):
282–285.
154 Park JT, Lim HK, Jang KY, et al. The effects of desflurane and sevoflurane on
the intraocular pressure associated with endotracheal intubation in pediatric
ophthalmic surgery. Korean J Anesthesiol 2013; 64(2): 117–121.
155 Sator S, Wildling E, Schabernig C, et al. Desflurane maintains intraocular pres-
sure at an equivalent level to isoflurane and propofol during unstressed non-
ophthalmic surgery. Br J Anaesth 1998; 80(2): 243–244.
156 Artru AA, Momota Y. Trabecular outflow facility and formation rate of aqueous
humor during anesthesia with sevoflurane-nitrous oxide or sevoflurane-
remifentanil in rabbits. Anesth Analg 1999; 88(4): 781–786.
157 Krupin T, Feitl M, Roshe R, et al. Halothane anesthesia and aqueous humor
dynamics in laboratory animals. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1980; 19(5): 518–521.
158 Cullen LK, Steffey EP, Bailey CS, et al. Effect of high PaCO2 and time on cerebro-
spinal fluid and intraocular pressure in halothane-anesthetized horses. Am J Vet
Res 1990; 51(2): 300–304.
159 Almeida DE, Rezende ML, Nunes N, et al. Evaluation of intraocular pressure in
association with cardiovascular parameters in normocapnic dogs anesthetized
with sevoflurane and desflurane. Vet Ophthalmol 2004; 7(4): 265–269.
160 Buehner E, Pietsch UC, Bringmann A, et al. Effects of propofol and isoflurane
anesthesia on the intraocular pressure and hemodynamics of pigs. Ophthalmic Res
2011; 45(1): 42–46.
161 Tsuchiya S, Higashide T, Hatake S, et al. Effect of inhalation anesthesia with isoflurane
on circadian rhythm of murine intraocular pressure. Exp Eye Res 2021; 203: 108420.
162 Ding C, Wang P, Tian N. Effect of general anesthetics on IOP in elevated IOP
mouse model. Exp Eye Res 2011; 92(6): 512–520.
163 Almeida DE, Nishimori CT, Oria AP, et al. Effects of nitrous oxide on IOP and
pupillary diameter in dogs anesthetized with varying concentrations of desflu-
rane. Vet Ophthalmol 2008; 11(3): 170–176.
164 Mouney MC, Accola PJ, Cremer J, et al. Effects of acepromazine maleate or mor-
phine on tear production before, during, and after sevoflurane anesthesia in dogs.
Am J Vet Res 2011; 72(11): 1427–1430.
165 Mayordomo-Febrer A, Rubio M, Martinez-Gassent M, et al. Effects of morphine-
alfaxalone-midazolam premedication, alfaxalone induction and sevoflurane
maintenance on intraocular pressure and tear production in dogs. Vet Rec 2017;
180(19): 474.
166 Young SS, Barnett K, Taylor PM. Anaesthetic regimes for cataract removal in the
dog. J Small Anim Pract 1991; 32: 236–241.
167 Nasisse MP. Principles of microsurgery. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 1997;
27(5): 987–1010.
168 Wilkie DA, Whittaker C. Surgery of the cornea. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 1997; 27(5): 1067–1107.
169 Jones RS, Auer U, Mosing M. Reversal of neuromuscular block in companion
animals. Vet Anaesth Analg 2015; 42(5): 455–471.
170 Jantzen JP, Earnshaw G, Hackett GH, et al. Comparative study of the effect of mus-
cle relaxants on the intraocular pressure. Anaesthesist 1987; 36(5): 223–227.
171 McMurphy RM, Davidson HJ, Hodgson DS. Effects of atracurium on intraocular
pressure, eye position, and blood pressure in eucapnic and hypocapnic isoflurane-
anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 2004; 65(2): 179–182.
172 Scherrer NM, Hopster K. Neuromuscular blockade with atracurium for
ophthalmic surgery in horses-Effects on surgical and anesthetic characteristics
and recovery quality. Vet Ophthalmol 2021; 24(5): 442–446.
173 Hopster K, Ohnesorge B, von Borstel M, et al. Influence of atracurium on cardio-
vascular parameters in horses undergoing vitrectomy during general anaesthesia,
and on recovery duration and quality. Tierarztl Prax Ausg G Grosstiere Nutztiere
2013; 41(6): 371–377.
174 Briganti A, Barsotti G, Portela DA, et al. Effects of rocuronium bromide on globe
position and respiratory function in isoflurane-anesthetized dogs: a comparison
between three different dosages. Vet Ophthalmol 2015; 18(2): 89–94.
175 Auer U, Mosing M, Moens YP. The effect of low dose rocuronium on globe posi-
tion, muscle relaxation and ventilation in dogs: a clinical study. Vet Ophthalmol
2007; 10(5): 295–298.
176 Auer U, Moens Y. Neuromuscular blockade with rocuronium bromide for
ophthalmic surgery in horses. Vet Ophthalmol 2011; 14(4): 244–247.
177 Collins CC, Bach-y- Rita P. Succinylcholine, ocular pressure, and extraocular
muscle tension in cats and rabbits. J Appl Physiol 1972; 33(6): 788–791.
178 Chiu CL, Jaais F, Wang CY. Effect of rocuronium compared with succinylcholine
on intraocular pressure during rapid sequence induction of anaesthesia. Br J
Anaesth 1999; 82(5): 757–760.
179 Katz RL, Eakins KE. Mode of action of succinylcholine on intraocular pressure.
J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1968; 162(1): 1–9.
180 Wretlind A, Wahlin A. The effect of succinylcholine on the orbital musculature of
the cat. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1959; 3: 101–110.
181 Bach-y- Rita P, Collins C, Tengroth B. Effect of succinylcholine on length and
refraction of eyes. Proc West Pharmacol Soc 1968; 11: 21–22.
182 Verschueren CP, Lumeij JT. Mydriasis in pigeons (Columbia livia domestica) with
d- tubocurarine: topical instillation versus intracameral injection. J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 1991; 14(2): 206–208.
183 Barsotti G, Briganti A, Spratte JR, et al. Mydriatic effect of topically applied rocu-
ronium bromide in tawny owls (Strix aluco): comparison between two protocols.
Vet Ophthalmol 2010; 13(Suppl): 9–13.
184 Mikaelian I, Paillet I, Williams D. Comparative use of various mydriatic drugs in
kestrels (Falco tinnunculus). Am J Vet Res 1994; 55(2): 270–272.
185 Upadhyay A, Beuerman RW. Biological mechanisms of atropine control of myo-
pia. Eye Contact Lens 2020; 46(3): 129–135.
186 Garcia Del Valle I, Alvarez-Lorenzo C. Atropine in topical formulations for the
management of anterior and posterior segment ocular diseases. Expert Opin Drug
Deliv 2021; 18(9): 1245–1260.
187 Kovalcuka L, Birgele E, Bandere D, et al. Comparison of the effects of topical and
systemic atropine sulfate on intraocular pressure and pupil diameter in the normal
canine eye. Vet Ophthalmol 2015; 18(1): 43–49.
188 Cozanitis DA, Dundee JW, Buchanan TA, et al. Atropine versus glycopyrrolate.
A study of intraocular pressure and pupil size in man. Anaesthesia 1979; 34(3):
236–238.
189 Varssano D, Rothman S, Haas K, et al. The mydriatic effect of topical glycopyrro-
late. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 1996; 234(3): 205–207.
190 Gelatt KN, Gum GG, MacKay EO. Evaluation of mydriatics in horses. Vet Compar
Ophthalmol 1995; 5(2): 104–108.
191 Stadtbaumer K, Frommlet F, Nell B. Effects of mydriatics on intraocular pressure
and pupil size in the normal feline eye. Vet Ophthalmol 2006; 9(4): 233–237.
192 Mughannam AJ, Buyukmihci NC, Kass PH. Effect of topical atropine on intraocu-
lar pressure and pupil diameter in the normal horse eye. Vet Ophthalmol 1999;
2(4): 213–215.
193 Herring IP, Pickett JP, Champagne ES, et al. Effect of topical 1% atropine sulfate on
intraocular pressure in normal horses. Vet Ophthalmol 2000; 3(2–3): 139–143.
194 Davis JL, Stewart T, Brazik E, et al. The effect of topical administration of atropine
sulfate on the normal equine pupil: influence of age, breed and gender. Vet
Ophthalmol 2003; 6(4): 329–332.
195 Arnett BD, Brightman AH II, Musselman EE. Effect of atropine sulfate on tear
production in the cat when used with ketamine hydrochloride and acetylproma-
zine maleate. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1984; 185(2): 214–215.
196 Hollingsworth SR, Canton DD, Buyukmihci NC, et al. Effect of topically adminis-
tered atropine on tear production in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992; 200(10):
1481–1484.
197 Ludders JW, Heavner JE. Effect of atropine on tear formation in anesthetized dogs.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1979; 175(6): 585–586.
198 Doering CJ, Lukasik VM, Merideth RE. Effects of intramuscular injection of gly-
copyrrolate on Schirmer tear test I results in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2016;
248(11): 1262–1266.
199 Bill A. Effects of atropine on aqueous humor dynamics in the vervet monkey
(Cercopithecus ethiops). Exp Eye Res 1969; 8(3): 284–291.
200 Smith PJ, Samuelson DA, Brooks DE, et al. Unconventional aqueous humor outflow of
microspheres perfused into the equine eye. Am J Vet Res 1986; 47(11): 2445–2453.
201 Wehrman RF, Gemensky-Metzler AJ, Zibura AE, et al. Objective evaluation of the
systemic effects of topical application of 1% atropine sulfate ophthalmic solution
in healthy horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2017; 251(11): 1324–1330.
202 Stern ME, Beuerman RW, Fox RI, et al. The pathology of dry eye: the interaction
between the ocular surface and lacrimal glands. Cornea 1998; 17(6): 584–589.
203 Guerreiro CE, Appelboam H, Lowe RC. Successful medical treatment for globe pen-
etration following tooth extraction in a dog. Vet Ophthalmol 2014; 17(2): 146–149.

-- 1361 of 1450 --

1346 	Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Selected Patients
204 Wieser B, Tichy A, Nell B. Correlation between corneal sensitivity and quantity of
reflex tearing in cows, horses, goats, sheep, dogs, cats, rabbits, and guinea pigs.
Vet Ophthalmol 2013; 16(4): 251–262.
205 Blocker T, Van Der Woerdt A. A comparison of corneal sensitivity between brach-
ycephalic and domestic short-haired cats. Vet Ophthalmol 2001; 4(2): 127–130.
206 Kafarnik C, Fritsche J, Reese S. Corneal innervation in mesocephalic and
brachycephalic dogs and cats: assessment using in vivo confocal microscopy.
Vet Ophthalmol 2008; 11(6): 363–367.
207 Gallar J, Pozo MA, Tuckett RP, et al. Response of sensory units with unmyelinated
fibres to mechanical, thermal and chemical stimulation of the cat’s cornea.
J Physiol 1993; 468: 609–622.
208 Mantelli F, Micera A, Sacchetti M, et al. Neurogenic inflammation of the ocular
surface. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2010; 10(5): 498–504.
209 Bhattacherjee P. Prostaglandins and inflammatory reactions in the eye. Methods
Find Exp Clin Pharmacol 1980; 2(1): 17–31.
210 Townsend WM. Canine and feline uveitis. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
2008; 38(2): 323–346, vii.
211 Joubert F, Guerrero-Moreno A, Fakih D, et al. Topical treatment with a mu opioid
receptor agonist alleviates corneal allodynia and corneal nerve sensitization in
mice. Biomed Pharmacother 2020; 132: 110794.
212 Wenk NH, Nannenga NM, Honda NC. Effect of morphine sulphate eye drops on
hyperalgesia in the rat cornea. Pain 2003; 105(3): 455–465.
213 Peyman GA, Rahimy MH, Fernandes ML. Effects of morphine on corneal sensi-
tivity and epithelial wound healing: implications for topical ophthalmic analgesia.
Br J Ophthalmol 1994; 78(2): 138–141.
214 Gordon E, Sandquist C, Cebra CK, et al. Esthesiometric evaluation of corneal
analgesia after topical application of 1% morphine sulfate in normal horses.
Vet Ophthalmol 2018; 21(3): 218–223.
215 Gordon E, Stang BV, Heidel J, et al. Pharmacokinetic evaluation and safety of
topical 1% morphine sulfate application on the healthy equine eye. Vet Ophthalmol
2018; 21(5): 516–523.
216 Thomson SM, Oliver JA, Gould DJ, et al. Preliminary investigations into the anal-
gesic effects of topical ocular 1% morphine solution in dogs and cats. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2013; 40(6): 632–640.
217 Spertus CB, Espinheira Gomes F, Martin-Flores M, et al. Analgesic effect of topical
and subconjunctival morphine in dogs after phacoemulsification: a pilot study.
Vet Ophthalmol 2020; 23(4): 674–681.
218 Stiles J, Honda CN, Krohne SG, et al. Effect of topical administration of 1% mor-
phine sulfate solution on signs of pain and corneal wound healing in dogs. Am J
Vet Res 2003; 64(7): 813–818.
219 Akhavanakbari G, Entezariasl M, Ojagi H, et al. Comparison of the effects of
remifentanil and alfentanil on intraocular pressure in cataract surgery. Saudi J
Anaesth 2013; 7(2): 160–164.
220 Ng HP, Chen FG, Yeong SM, et al. Effect of remifentanil compared with fentanyl
on intraocular pressure after succinylcholine and tracheal intubation. Br J Anaesth
2000; 85(5): 785–787.
221 Ziyaeifard M, Azarfarin R, Massoumi G. A comparison of intraocular pressure
and hemodynamic responses to insertion of laryngeal mask airway or endotra-
cheal tube using anesthesia with propofol and remifentanil in cataract surgery.
J Res Med Sci 2012; 17(6): 503–507.
222 Yoo YC, Shin S, Choi EK, et al. Increase in intraocular pressure is less with propo-
fol than with sevoflurane during laparoscopic surgery in the steep Trendelenburg
position. Can J Anaesth 2014; 61(4): 322–329.
223 Drago F, Panissidi G, Bellomio F, et al. Effects of opiates and opioids on intraocu-
lar pressure of rabbits and humans. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 1985; 12(2):
107–113.
224 el Messiry S, Chiou GC. Interaction between nalbuphine and alfentanil on
intraocular pressure and pupil size of conscious rabbits. Ophthalmic Res 1989;
21(2): 134–140.
225 Douet JY, Regnier A, Dongay A, et al. Effect of sedation with butorphanol on vari-
ables pertaining to the ophthalmic examination in dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 2018;
21(5): 452–458.
226 Biricik HS, Ceylan C, Sakar M. Effects of pethidine and fentanyl on tear produc-
tion in dogs. Vet Rec 2004; 155(18): 564–565.
227 Lee HK, Wang SC. Mechanism of morphine-induced miosis in the dog.
J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1975; 192(2): 415–431.
228 Tallarida RJ, Kramer MS, Roy JW, et al. Miosis and fluctuation in the rabbit
pupil: effects of morphine and naloxone. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1977; 201(3):
587–592.
229 Wallenstein MC, Wang SC. Mechanism of morphine-induced mydriasis in the cat.
Am J Physiol 1979; 236(5): R292–R296.
230 de Boer HD, Detriche O, Forget P. Opioid-related side effects: postoperative ileus,
urinary retention, nausea and vomiting, and shivering. A review of the literature.
Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2017; 31(4): 499–504.
231 Frauenknecht J, Kirkham KR, Jacot-Guillarmod A, et al. Analgesic impact of
intra- operative opioids vs. opioid-free anaesthesia: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Anaesthesia 2019; 74(5): 651–662.
232 Behrendt T. Experimental study of corneal lesions produced by topical anesthesia.
Am J Ophthalmol 1956; 41(1): 99–105.
233 Park SA, Park YW, Son WG, et al. Evaluation of the analgesic effect of intracam-
eral lidocaine hydrochloride injection on intraoperative and postoperative pain in
healthy dogs undergoing phacoemulsification. Am J Vet Res 2010; 71(2):
216–222.
234 Nebbioso M, Livani ML, Santamaria V, et al. Intracameral lidocaine as supplement
to classic topical anesthesia for relieving ocular pain in cataract surgery. Int J
Ophthalmol 2018; 11(12): 1932–1935.
235 Smith LJ, Bentley E, Shih A, et al. Systemic lidocaine infusion as an analgesic for
intraocular surgery in dogs: a pilot study. Vet Anaesth Analg 2004; 31(1): 53–63.
236 Hermanns H, Hollmann MW, Stevens MF, et al. Molecular mechanisms of action
of systemic lidocaine in acute and chronic pain: a narrative review. Br J Anaesth
2019; 123(3): 335–349.
237 Shilo-Benjamini Y. A review of ophthalmic local and regional anesthesia in dogs
and cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2019; 46(1): 14–27.
238 Zibura AE, Posner LP, Ru H, et al. A preoperative bupivacaine retrobulbar block
offers superior antinociception compared with an intraoperative splash block in
dogs undergoing enucleation. Vet Ophthalmol 2020; 23(2): 225–233.
239 Scott EM, Vallone LV, Olson NL, et al. Analgesic effects of a retrobulbar block with
0.75% ropivacaine in dogs undergoing enucleation. Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(5):
749–758.
240 Hernandez EZ, Redondo JI, Gutierrez-Bautista AJ, et al. A modified retrobulbar
block for microphthalmia using ultrasound guidance in a cat. Vet Anaesth Analg
2020; 47(6): 846–847.
241 Shilo- Benjamini Y, Pascoe PJ, Maggs DJ, et al. Comparison of peribulbar and ret-
robulbar regional anesthesia with bupivacaine in cats. Am J Vet Res 2014; 75(12):
1029–1039.
242 Hefner EM, Lin HC, Cole RC, et al. Comparison of image quality of corneal and
retinal optical coherence tomography using sedation and general anesthesia pro-
tocols with or without retrobulbar anesthesia in horses. Am J Vet Res 2021; 83(1):
72–79.
243 Yang VY, Eaton JS, Harmelink K, et al. Retrobulbar lidocaine injection via
the supraorbital fossa is safe in adult horses but produces regionally variable
periocular anaesthesia. Equine Vet J 2022; 54(4): 807–819.
244 Pearce SG, Kerr CL, Boure LP, et al. Comparison of the retrobulbar and Peterson
nerve block techniques via magnetic resonance imaging in bovine cadavers. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 2003; 223(6): 852–855.
245 Edmondson MA. Local, regional, and spinal anesthesia in ruminants. Vet Clin
North Am Food Anim Pract 2016; 32(3): 535–552.
246 Pollock PJ, Russell T, Hughes TK, et al. Transpalpebral eye enucleation in 40
standing horses. Vet Surg 2008; 37(3): 306–309.
247 Bartholomew KJ, Smith LJ, Bentley E, et al. Retrospective analysis of complica-
tions associated with retrobulbar bupivacaine in dogs undergoing enucleation
surgery. Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(5): 588–594.
248 Riad W, Akbar F. Ophthalmic regional blockade complication rate: a single center
audit of 33,363 ophthalmic operations. J Clin Anesth 2012; 24(3): 193–195.
249 Park SA, Lee I, Lee YL, et al. Combination auriculopalpebral nerve block and local
anesthesia for placement of a nictitating membrane-to- superotemporal bulbar
conjunctiva flap in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2009; 45(4): 164–167.
250 Labelle AL, Clark-Price SC. Anesthesia for ophthalmic procedures in the standing
horse. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 2013; 29(1): 179–191.
251 Giuliano EA. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in veterinary ophthalmology.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2004; 34(3): 707–723.
252 Knych HK. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug use in horses. Vet Clin North
Am Equine Pract 2017; 33(1): 1–15.
253 Kavitha J, Parida S, Kundra P, et al. Oral gabapentin premedication for elderly
patients undergoing intraocular surgery. Br J Ophthalmol 2013; 97(7): 900–904.
254 Yoon HJ, Kim J, Yoon KC. Treatment response to gabapentin in neuropathic ocu-
lar pain associated with dry eye. J Clin Med 2020; 9(11): 3765.
255 Kaya FN, Yavascaoglu B, Baykara M, et al. Effect of oral gabapentin on the intraoc-
ular pressure and haemodynamic responses induced by tracheal intubation. Acta
Anaesthesiol Scand 2008; 52(8): 1076–1080.
256 Trbolova A, Ghaffari MS, Capik I. Effects of premedication with oral gabapentin
on intraocular pressure changes following tracheal intubation in clinically normal
dogs. BMC Vet Res 2017; 13(1): 288.
257 Shukla AK, Pinard CL, Flynn BL, et al. Effects of orally administered gabapentin,
tramadol, and meloxicam on ocular variables in healthy dogs. Am J Vet Res 2020;
81(12): 973–984.
258 Cammalleri M, Amato R, Olivieri M, et al. Effects of topical gabapentin on ocular
pain and tear secretion. Front Pharmacol 2021; 12: 671238.

-- 1362 of 1450 --

Chapter 67: Ophthalmic Patients 	1347
259 Anfuso CD, Olivieri M, Fidilio A, et al. Gabapentin attenuates ocular inflamma-
tion: in vitro and in vivo studies. Front Pharmacol 2017; 8: 173.
260 Ali HM, Elbadawy AM. Comparative study of retrobulbar block versus ketamine
infusion during eye enucleation/evisceration (randomized controlled trial).
Anesth Essays Res 2020; 14(1): 92–99.
261 Lee YY, Wong SM, Hung CT. Dexmedetomidine infusion as a supplement to iso-
flurane anaesthesia for vitreoretinal surgery. Br J Anaesth 2007; 98(4): 477–483.
262 Arnold RW, Biggs RE, Beerle BJ. Intravenous dexmedetomidine augments the
oculocardiac reflex. J AAPOS 2018; 22(3): 211–213.e1.
263 Robson AG, Nilsson J, Li S, et al. ISCEV guide to visual electrodiagnostic proce-
dures. Doc Ophthalmol 2018; 136(1): 1–26.
264 Ekesten B, Komaromy AM, Ofri R, et al. Guidelines for clinical electroretinogra-
phy in the dog: 2012 update. Doc Ophthalmol 2013; 127(2): 79–87.
265 Allbaugh RA, Ben-Shlomo G, Whitley RD. Electroretinogram evaluation of
equine eyes with extensive ’bullet-hole’ fundic lesions. Vet Ophthalmol 2014;
17(Suppl 1): 129–133.
266 Vaegan, Anderton PJ, Millar TJ. Multifocal, pattern and full field electroretino-
grams in cats with unilateral optic nerve section. Doc Ophthalmol 2000; 100(2–3):
207–229.
267 Kommonen B. The DC-recorded dog electroretinogram in ketamine-
medetomidine anaesthesia. Acta Vet Scand 1988; 29(1): 35–41.
268 Norman JC, Narfstrom K, Barrett PM. The effects of medetomidine hydrochlo-
ride on the electroretinogram of normal dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 2008; 11(5):
299–305.
269 Jeong MB, Narfstrom K, Park SA, et al. Comparison of the effects of three differ-
ent combinations of general anesthetics on the electroretinogram of dogs. Doc
Ophthalmol 2009; 119(2): 79–88.
270 Kommonen B, Karhunen U, Raitta C. Effects of thiopentone halothane-nitrous
oxide anaesthesia compared to ketamine–xylazine anaesthesia on the DC
recorded dog electroretinogram. Acta Vet Scand 1988; 29(1): 23–33.
271 Lin SL, Shiu WC, Liu PC, et al. The effects of different anesthetic agents on short
electroretinography protocol in dogs. J Vet Med Sci 2009; 71(6): 763–768.
272 Yanase J, Ogawa H. Effects of halothane and sevoflurane on the electroretinogram
of dogs. Am J Vet Res 1997; 58(8): 904–909.
273 Freeman KS, Good KL, Kass PH, et al. Effects of chemical restraint on electroreti-
nograms recorded sequentially in awake, sedated, and anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet
Res 2013; 74(7): 1036–1042.
274 Del Sole MJ, Nejamkin P, Cavilla V, et al. Comparison of two sedation protocols
for short electroretinography in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2018; 20(2): 172–178.
275 Knave B, Persson HE, Nilsson SE. A comparative study on the effects of barbitu-
rate and ethyl alcohol on retinal functions with special reference to the C-wave of
the electroretinogram and the standing potential of the sheep eye. Acta Ophthalmol
(Copenh) 1974; 52(2): 254–259.
276 Church ML, Norman JC. Electroretinogram responses of the normal
Thoroughbred horse sedated with detomidine hydrochloride. Vet Ophthalmol
2012; 15(Suppl 2): 77–83.
277 Niemeyer G, Nagahara K, Demant E. Effects of changes in arterial PO2 and
PCO2 on the electroretinogram in the cat. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1982; 23(5):
678–683.
278 Varela Lopez O, Alvarez Vazquez JC, Gonzalez Cantalapiedra A, et al. Effects of
hypercapnia on the electroretinogram in sevoflurane and isoflurane anaesthetized
dogs. Doc Ophthalmol 2010; 121(1): 9–20.
279 Scarabelli S, Timofte D, Malalana F, et al. Corneal abrasion and microbial
contamination in horses following general anaesthesia for non-ocular surgery.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45(3): 278–284.
280 Papp AM, Justin GA, Vernau CT, et al. Perioperative corneal abrasions after
nonocular surgery: a systematic review. Cornea 2019; 38(7): 927–932.
281 Dawson C, Sanchez RF. A prospective study of the prevalence of corneal surface
disease in dogs receiving prophylactic topical lubrication under general anesthe-
sia. Vet Ophthalmol 2016; 19(2): 124–129.
282 Roth S, Thisted RA, Erickson JP, et al. Eye injuries after nonocular surgery. A study
of 60,965 anesthetics from 1988 to 1992. Anesthesiology 1996; 85(5): 1020–1027.
283 Stiles J, Weil AB, Packer RA, et al. Post- anesthetic cortical blindness in cats: twenty
cases. Vet J 2012; 193(2): 367–373.
284 Barton- Lamb AL, Martin-Flores M, Scrivani PV, et al. Evaluation of maxillary
arterial blood flow in anesthetized cats with the mouth closed and open. Vet J
2013; 196(3): 325–331.
285 Martin- Flores M, Scrivani PV, Loew E, et al. Maximal and submaximal mouth
opening with mouth gags in cats: implications for maxillary artery blood flow. Vet
J 2014; 200(1): 60–64.
286 Wilson DV, Bohart GV, Evans AT, et al. Retrospective analysis of detomidine infusion
for standing chemical restraint in 51 horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2002; 29(1): 54–57.
287 Miller PE, Pickett JP, Majors LJ. Evaluation of two applanation tonometers in
horses. Am J Vet Res 1990; 51(6): 935–937.
288 Carregaro AB, Ueda GI, Censoni JB, et al. Effect of methadone combined with
acepromazine or detomidine on sedation and dissociative anesthesia in healthy
horses. J Equine Vet Sci 2020; 86: 102908.
289 Reed RA, Knych HK, Barletta M, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
of hydromorphone after intravenous and intramuscular administration in horses.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2020; 47(2): 210–218.
290 Johnston GM, Eastment JK, Wood J, et al. The Confidential Enquiry into
Perioperative Equine Fatalities (CEPEF): mortality results of Phases 1 and 2. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2002; 29(4): 159–170.
291 Bettschart-Wolfensberger R, Jaggin-Schmucker N, Lendl C, et al. Minimal alveo-
lar concentration of desflurane in combination with an infusion of medetomidine
for the anaesthesia of ponies. Vet Rec 2001; 148(9): 264–267.
292 Ringer SK, Kalchofner K, Boller J, et al. A clinical comparison of two anaesthetic
protocols using lidocaine or medetomidine in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2007;
34(4): 257–268.
293 Valverde A, Gunkel C, Doherty TJ, et al. Effect of a constant rate infusion of lido-
caine on the quality of recovery from sevoflurane or isoflurane general anaesthesia
in horses. Equine Vet J 2005; 37(6): 559–564.
294 Curto EM, Griffith EH, Posner LP, et al. Factors associated with postoperative
complications in healthy horses after general anesthesia for ophthalmic versus
non-ophthalmic procedures: 556 cases (2012–2014). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2018;
252(9): 1113–1119.
295 Patipa LA, Sherlock CE, Witte SH, et al. Risk factors for colic in equids hospital-
ized for ocular disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2012; 240(12): 1488–1493.

-- 1363 of 1450 --

1348
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth E dition of L umb and J ones	. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
Young animals have physiologic and anatomic characteristics that
can make them challenging to anesthetize. In addition to their small
size, these patients tend to have limited body system reserves, can be
more sensitive to the sedative effects of some agents, such as opioids,
and are vulnerable to anesthetic complications, such as hypothermia.
Fortunately, with careful attention to these considerations, most
pediatric patients can be anesthetized safely and successfully.
Definition of pediatric and neonatal periods
In cats and dogs, the neonatal period extends from birth to weaning
(4 to 6 weeks of age) and the pediatric period can be defined as the
period between 6 weeks (which marks the end of the neonatal
period) and 12 weeks of age [1,2]. Puppies and kittens can be
defined as dogs and cats less than 6 months of age. The most impor-
tant physiologic differences for foals exist between 48 and 72 h after
birth, but they are considered physiologically mature by 4 to 6 weeks
of age [3]. Ruminants (cattle, sheep, and goats) and camelids are
considered neonatal until 4 weeks of age and physiologically mature
by 4 to 6 weeks of age.
Anesthetic risk for young patients
Because of their relatively small size, lack of physiologic reserves,
incomplete immunity, and susceptibility to the stress of handling
and separation from their dam, all puppies and kittens should be
considered a special category of anesthesia patient until at least
3 months of age. The risks of anesthesia are not increased in young
healthy animals undergoing elective procedures which are per-
formed rapidly and efficiently [4]. In contrast, a large study in
general veterinary practices found that the risk of anesthetic death
in cats weighing less than 2 kg was over 15 times greater than that of
cats between 2 and 6 kg [5]. In addition, the risk of anesthetic death
was higher in dogs weighing < 5 kg compared to dogs weighing
5–15 kg suggesting size is a risk factor that is independent of age [6].
Foals less than 1 month of age have increased risk of mortality
during anesthesia [7,8].
Circumstances warranting anesthesia
Early spay-neuter is an accepted practice for population control and
is endorsed by the American Veterinary Medical Association [9]
and the Association of Shelter Veterinarians [10,11]. The rationale
68 Neonatal and Pediatric Patients
Emily McCobb1 and Sheilah A. Robertson2
1 Department of Clinical Sciences, Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine, Tufts University, North Grafton, Massachusetts, USA
2 Lap of Love Veterinary Hospice Inc., Lutz, Florida, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 1348
Definition of pediatric and neonatal periods, 1348
Anesthetic risk for young patients, 1348
Circumstances warranting anesthesia, 1348
Patient characteristics, 1349
Cardiovascular system, 1349
Respiratory system, 1349
Renal and hepatic systems, 1349
Central nervous system, 1349
Hematologic system, 1350
Anesthetic management, 1350
Patient preparation, 1350
Monitoring, 1350
Supportive care, 1350
Thermoregulatory support, 1350
Recovery, 1350
Summary of pediatric drug metabolism and pharmacokinetics, 1351
Drugs, 1351
Suggested protocols for puppies and kittens, 1351
Pain management, 1351
References, 1352

-- 1364 of 1450 --

Chapter 68: Neonatal and Pediatric Patients 	1349
for early spay-neuter has been reviewed elsewhere [12–15] but, in
addition to the benefits for population management, surgery in
young, healthy animals is generally associated with good outcomes
and, at least in cats, may be less painful [16]. For elective procedures
(sterilization), it is preferred that puppies and kittens are ≥ 1 kg.
However, puppies and kittens may present at a very early age and
under 1 kg for emergency procedures such as abdominal surgery,
diaphragmatic hernia, fractures, and other accidental injuries, and
good outcomes can be achieved with careful anesthetic and analge-
sic management.
Foals and young ruminants are not commonly anesthetized for
castration during the pediatric period, but ruminants may present
for routine husbandry procedures such as disbudding. Emergency
surgeries in foals such as patent urachus surgery or septic joints are
common. These species may present at a young age for the correc-
tion of congenital abnormalities (e.g., limb malformations) or with
traumatic injuries such as fractures.
Patient characteristics
The unique physiologic features of pediatric cats and dogs have
been reviewed [17,18]. Pediatric patients of all species have limited
reserves of all body systems and a limited ability to respond to
events that challenge homeostasis. The role of a high resting basal
metabolic rate in determining the pediatric patient’s response
to anesthesia should not be underestimated and can lead to fast
metabolism of drugs and the need for redosing. Anatomic charac-
teristics that are relevant to anesthesia include a high body surface
area-to-mass ratio and a high lean body mass compared to body fat.
These features can predispose the pediatric patient to hypothermia,
which is perhaps the most devastating complication of anesthesia
for young animals. In addition, the tissues are delicate requiring
gentle handling.
Cardiovascular system
The pediatric heart is relatively small for the size of the patient,
ventricular compliance is low, and stroke volume is relatively fixed.
Low cardiac reserves are accompanied by a high cardiac index
(volume of blood pumped per minute indexed to body size:
L/min/m2
) leading to an overall decreased ability to compensate for
or respond to fluid losses and hypotension. Because the stroke
volume of a pediatric patient is relatively fixed, these patients are
particularly dependent on heart rate for the maintenance of cardiac
output (heart rate × stroke volume) and organ perfusion [17,19].
The neonate is unable to increase cardiac contractility in response
to increased demand, unlike the adult [20]. Because cardiac output
is determined by heart rate, any decrease in heart rate in a pediatric
patient can have serious consequences, and it should be noted that
one of the most common causes of bradycardia is hypothermia. In
addition to the lack of reserves, the autonomic nervous system,
especially sympathetic control, is thought to be poorly developed in
pediatric patients leading to poor vasomotor control and responses.
Baroreceptors are immature until 12 weeks of age leading to an
inadequate response to a fall in blood pressure [17]. Lastly, persis-
tent fetal circulation may be present in some pediatric patients lead-
ing to right to left anatomical shunting and hypoxemia, especially if
systemic hypotension develops.
Respiratory system
Like the pediatric cardiovascular system, the pediatric respiratory
system is also characterized by a lack of reserve capacity. While tidal
volumes are similar to those of the adult animal (10–15 mL/kg), the
pediatric respiratory rate is two to three times higher in order to
provide an appropriate minute ventilation (tidal volume × respira-
tory rate) [21]. An important clinical consequence of a faster res-
piratory rate is a shorter induction time in neonates when inhalant
agents are used, although this effect may be counteracted by their
high cardiac output and may be less obvious when using today’s less
soluble inhalant agents such as isoflurane and sevoflurane. With a
high resting metabolic rate, a high oxygen demand, and high base-
line minute ventilation, pediatric patients are at increased risk of
developing hypoxemia and have limited ability to adapt to decreases
in oxygen delivery. The heart is entirely dependent on aerobic
metabolism; therefore, any decrease in oxygen supply results in
rapid decompensation. The nares and tracheas of pediatric patients
are small and susceptible to obstruction; the small airways and
alveoli are also prone to collapse [17]. The extremely pliant rib cage
increases the work of breathing in pediatric patients which can
predispose to ventilation fatigue and further increase the risk of
hypoxemia. Ventilation of pediatric patients should be monitored
and supported when necessary.
Airway anatomy can pose a challenge. The pediatric patient has
small nares and the tongue is proportionally large for the size of
the mouth. Intubation can be difficult, and when performed, great
care must be taken to avoid airway trauma resulting in postopera-
tive swelling and obstruction. However, the small trachea creates
increased resistance to airflow, and intubation and ventilatory sup-
port may be necessary.
Renal and hepatic systems
By 8 weeks of age most physiologic processes related to renal and
hepatic function should be relatively normal, although organ
reserves may still be limited. The cytochrome P450 enzyme system
is immature after birth but develops during the neonatal period
[22–24]. After the age of 6 weeks, there is no rationale for altering
drug doses in animals to account for hepatic clearance [25].
Herbivores have better-developed drug metabolism and excretion
at younger ages than do dogs and cats. Hepatic development is
largely mature in foals by 2 weeks of age. However, hepatic glycogen
stores are low and gluconeogenesis is decreased, factors which
increase the risk for hypoglycemia, especially if the patient is fasted
for more than a short period. Pediatric dogs and cats and very
young foals (under 4 days of age) have immature renal function,
which can result in delayed clearance of renally metabolized
drugs, potentially increasing their duration of action. Young ani-
mals have decreased glomerular filtration rates, decreased renal
blood flow, and decreased concentrating ability. Decreased renal
clearance rates may also increase the risk of fluid overload in the
young patient [24].
Central nervous system
The blood–brain barrier is immature in young animals and there-
fore profound sedative effects may be noted with drugs such as opi-
oids and benzodiazepines. In foals under 3 weeks of age, diazepam
is profoundly sedating, and this may in part be due to the increased
permeability of the blood–brain barrier. In this age group, benzodi-
azepines will induce deep sedation and muscle relaxation, with
patients often becoming recumbent [26]. In contrast, when used in
older foals and adults, benzodiazepines often result in excitement
and ataxia but not recumbency.
Pain management in young animals is very important in order to
prevent permanent changes to the central nervous system [27,28].

-- 1365 of 1450 --

1350 	Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Selected Patients
The decreased function of the thermoregulatory center contributes
to the risk of hypothermia.
Hematologic system
Young patients have less capacity for hematopoiesis [29]. In addi-
tion, they have lower levels of erythropoietin, lower packed cell vol-
ume, and fewer circulating red blood cells. This resulting anemia
means they are less able to compensate for hemorrhage. Moreover,
hematopoiesis does not commence until after 15 weeks of age [30].
Other hematologic variabilities include decreased albumin, blood
urea nitrogen, and creatinine, as well as increased phosphorus.
Anesthetic management
Patient preparation
Pediatric patients are likely more susceptible to the effects of stress
than adults. Studies in neonatal rat pups demonstrate that the
increased plasticity of the neonatal brain may increase vulnerability
to stress and anxiety disorders later in life [27]. Pediatric animals
may be presented for surgery during their critical socialization
period. It is essential to protect these patients from the risk of fear
imprinting when a bad experience could translate into a lifetime of
fearful or fractious behavior during veterinary visits. Puppies and
kittens should be gently handled. Littermates should be housed
together during transport if possible and should be kept together in
the cage until the time of premedication. If still with their dam, they
should not be separated from her.
Fasting times for younger animals should be short (under 2 h) to
account for their decreased glycogen stores.
As with all surgery patients, a thorough presurgical physical
exam should be conducted prior to sedation or anesthesia. It is
especially important to perform a thorough auscultation in case
cardiac murmurs have gone undetected. The animal should also be
checked carefully for other congenital abnormalities that might
affect anesthesia or surgery such as pectus excavatum, hernias
(inguinal or umbilical), and undescended testicles. Lastly, an accu-
rate weight is very important as all drugs should be dosed on a mg/kg
or mg/m 2 basis; “guesstimates” of weight that are off by a small
amount with respect to grams can represent a large percentage of a
very small patient’s body weight, resulting in drug overdose and an
adverse response and outcome.
Monitoring
Pediatric patients should be monitored while sedated and anesthe-
tized in a similar fashion to adult patients [11]. Doppler ultrasound
equipment is versatile and can be used on even the smallest of
patients. A Doppler unit can be used to monitor heart rate (placed
directly on a shaved area over the heart), pulse rate (placed on the
caudal aspect of the carpus), and blood pressure can be measured
when the probe is placed on a limb and a blood pressure cuff applied
proximally.
Pulse oximeters should be used, and their use decreases the risk
of anesthetic-related fatalities in cats [5]. In dogs and cats, the pre-
ferred placement site is the hind paw [31] and a toe can be shaved to
help improve contact. The tongue is also commonly used but may
increase the risk of spreading infection between patients, so if this
site is used the probe must be cleaned and disinfected thoroughly
between cases. Surgery and fluorescent lighting can interfere with
the functioning of pulse oximeters so the light-emitting diode
(LED) and the sensor should be covered.
If “alligator clips” are utilized to apply electrocardiogram leads,
they should have their sharp edges filed down, the spring loosened,
and a small square of gauze placed between the clips and the skin to
avoid damage to delicate skin. Alternatives include “duckbill clips”
without teeth and electrode patches placed on the paw pads. The
patient’s mucous membrane color, capillary refill time, anesthetic
depth, and temperature should also be assessed at 5-min intervals
as outlined in the American College of Veterinary Anesthesia and
Analgesia Guidelines [32], though continuous physical monitoring
may allow for early detection of physiologic abnormalities.
Guidelines for monitoring are also available from the American
Animal Hospital Association [33].
Supportive care
Intravenous catheter placement can be greatly facilitated if topical
local anesthetics are applied over the catheter site and covered with
an occlusive dressing (plastic plus a flexible wrapping) during the
time between sedation and catheter placement. A eutectic mixture
of lidocaine and prilocaine or lidocaine (4%) topical can be used
and, though systemic absorption is minimal, the time to onset can
be up to 1 h [34]. In children, liposomal lidocaine 4% cream resulted
in a higher success rate for intravenous cannulation compared to
placebo and was effective after a contact time of 30 min [35].
When IV fluids are given, crystalloids are used and administered
at a rate of 3 mL/kg/h in cats and 5 mL/kg/h in dogs in accordance
with the American Animal Hospital Association’s fluid therapy
guidelines, though attention should be paid to total fluid dose
delivered (e.g., a young cat that receives 3 mL/kg/h for 15 min may
benefit from continued IV fluids or subcutaneous fluids in recovery).
Monitoring glucose levels in neonatal and pediatric patients of all
species is recommended, particularly for sick patients or for longer
procedures. Routine administration of dextrose without monitor-
ing may lead to hyperglycemia [36].
Thermoregulatory support
The single most important thing the anesthetist can do for a pediat-
ric patient is to avoid hypothermia. Hypothermia will decrease the
minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) and therefore increase
the risk of inhalant anesthetic overdose. Hypothermic patients
will become bradycardic, leading to decreased cardiac output and
hypotension. Decreasing core temperature also increases the risk of
myocardial irritability and arrhythmias. Clot formation is slower at
low temperatures, potentially increasing the risk of bleeding [37].
Hypothermic patients have an increased surgical infection rate as
well as decreased immune response [38]. Drug elimination will be
prolonged and recovery may be delayed. Postoperative shivering
increases oxygen demand and myocardial oxygen consumption
which is particularly detrimental in pediatric patients due to their
higher oxygen requirements.
Patient warming devices such as a forced air heating system,
warming blankets, and circulating warm water blankets can be
used. Kittens and puppies should never be placed on a cold surface
and should be covered whenever possible; a good technique is to
use one fleece blanket which travels from start to finish with the
patient. Electric blankets, warm fluid bags, heated disks, and rice
bags can burn patients and should not be placed in direct contact
with patients. Perioperative thermoregulation and heat balance are
discussed in detail in Chapter 17.
Recovery
Recovery should take place in a warm, quiet, and safe environment.
As soon as possible the patient should be returned to his litter or
herd mates and/or dam as appropriate. In addition, the animals

-- 1366 of 1450 --

Chapter 68: Neonatal and Pediatric Patients 	1351
should be offered a small amount of soft food as soon as they can
swallow. If recovery is slow or prolonged (> 30 min), hypothermia
should be investigated, and if temperature is low more aggressive
warming strategies should be applied. Dextrose 50% or high-fructose
corn syrup can be applied to the gums or placed under the tongue
and anecdotally will often arouse puppies and kittens. However,
recent research indicates corn syrup is ineffective at raising kitten
blood sugar levels and moreover kittens were not hypoglycemic
after anesthesia that included dexmedetomidine, so routine appli-
cation of corn syrup for kittens is not necessary [39]. Nursing
animals should be returned to their dam as soon as they are able
to swallow.
Summary of pediatric drug metabolism
and pharmacokinetics
Drug metabolism and excretion are somewhat less of a concern in
herbivores because metabolism is more well developed at an early
age. Older foals will have faster clearance of both injectable and
inhaled anesthetics because they have higher extracellular fluid vol-
umes than adult horses (43% of body weight versus 22% in adult
horses) [40]. Highly protein-bound molecules such as NSAIDs are
more extensively distributed in young animals and adult levels of
cytochrome P450 are not reached in small animal species until
5 months of age [23]. The increased body water content of young
animals leads to an increased initial volume of distribution for water-
soluble drugs and conversely, their decreased percentage of body fat
leads to a decreased volume of distribution for lipid-soluble drugs.
Drugs
Sedatives and tranquilizers
Most sedatives provide good sedation in young patients, particu-
larly in neonates. Low doses are recommended. It has often been
stated that α2
-adrenergic receptor agonists should be used with cau-
tion due to cardiovascular effects, but this class of drugs is commonly
used in combination protocols for pediatric patients in high-quality,
high- volume spay-neuter (HQHVSN) programs [11,15].
The cardiopulmonary effects of xylazine (1.1 mg/kg IV) have
been studied in foals at 10 and 28 days of age [41]. Marked brady-
cardia (a 19–27% drop) was reported. Short-lived increases in
blood pressure were followed by a decrease below baseline values
(a 23–28% drop). One of the most striking respiratory effects in this
group of foals was marked changes in airway flow and intermittent
upper airway obstruction creating loud respiratory noise for 20 min
after administration. However arterial blood gases did not change
in the 2 h after administration. It is hypothesized that the airway
obstruction is due to profound pharyngeal muscle relaxation. All
foals were sedate and ataxic and some became recumbent. There
were no significant differences in the results obtained at 10 and
28 days of age.
Acepromazine is often avoided in the very young due to lack of
reversibility and since it may promote hypothermia due to its vaso-
dilatory actions. Benzodiazepine effects are discussed in the central
nervous system section above.
Opioids
Opioid medications are reversible, have minimal cardiovascular
effects (mostly limited to bradycardia), and are generally well toler-
ated by healthy pediatric patients. As previously mentioned, and
discussed further below, adequate analgesia is central to humane
and effective perioperative care of young animals.
Induction drugs and techniques
Care should be taken with mask induction with an inhalant agent as
it tends to increase the risk of anesthetic death in dogs and foals [6,8].
In addition, environmental contamination will occur, and person-
nel may be exposed to waste anesthetic gases. Mask induction can
be considered for very young animals if intravenous access cannot
be achieved but they should be sedated to decrease stress and reduce
inhalant anesthetic requirements. If induction with an inhalant
agent is chosen, sevoflurane is the preferred agent as, compared to
isoflurane, induction time is shorter in dogs and cats [42,43].
Intravenous techniques titrated to effect are preferable, especially
in compromised patients. Acceptable agents for induction include
propofol, alfaxalone, and ketamine–benzodiazepine combinations.
Anesthetic maintenance
Some procedures (e.g., castration and ovariohysterectomy in
puppies and kittens) can be completed under injectable anesthesia
(with oxygen supplementation and possibly intubation). If additional
time is required to complete a procedure, anesthesia is generally
maintained with inhalant agents administered to effect.
Suggested protocols for puppies and kittens
There are numerous anesthetic protocols for kittens and puppies
and the reader is referred to other resources for details [44].
The “kitten quad” comprises a mixture of medetomidine or dex-
medetomidine, ketamine, buprenorphine, and midazolam and is
used widely in shelter neutering programs [45,46]. Recovery time
can be reduced by administering atipamezole and kittens recover
faster than adult cats [45]. Cats under 6 months of age that received
“quad” with dexmedetomidine and then atipamezole 40 min after the
initial injection attained sternal recumbency at 51 ± 5 (mean ± SD)
min and were standing at 62 ± 19 min after the initial injection [45].
Pain management
Contrary to earlier beliefs, young patients do experience pain and
its effects may have far-reaching adverse consequences [47]. Pain
experienced at a young age may lead to dynamic changes in the
nociceptive pathway and result in altered responses to noxious
stimuli and chronic pain later in life [27,28,48]. In addition to these
negative effects, pain has adverse physiologic effects resulting in
tachycardia, hypertension, ileus, and immunosuppression.
A balanced anesthetic protocol, including multimodal analgesia
should be used in pediatric patients. The most practical and com-
monly used combinations are opioids and NSAIDs, and the con-
comitant use of these does have benefits over using either group of
drugs alone [49]. Opioids are generally very well tolerated in pedi-
atric patients, although an opioid-free protocol has been found to
provide adequate analgesia in kittens (not adult cats) [50]. As dis-
cussed earlier, the use of NSAIDs in very young puppies and kittens
is controversial [51]. Moreover, label indications for available
NSAIDs vary and some are not labeled for dogs and cats less than 4
to 6 months of age. Meloxicam is approved for use in cattle and is
commonly used in calves for dehorning and castration.
The use of local anesthetics is encouraged; these can be injected
into the testicles [52–54] or via incisional blocks. In dogs, intrates-
ticular lidocaine decreased the cardiovascular responses to castration
[53] but did not have an impact on postsurgery pain scores [54].
Intraperitoneal bupivacaine (2 mg/kg) was minimally absorbed
into the systemic circulation and was beneficial in cats undergoing
ovariohysterectomy [55,56].

-- 1367 of 1450 --

1352 	Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Selected Patients
There are several non-pharmacologic methods that can be used
to address pain [47], for example, oral sweet solutions are analgesic
in pediatric humans and so human infants are often given some-
thing sugary at the time of procedures involving noxious stimuli.
It is not known if this effect occurs in dogs and cats, and cats
are thought not to be able to taste sweet flavors. Other non-
pharmacologic strategies can be applied to veterinary patients such
as cuddling or swaddling. Swaddling and contact with the mother
(“kangaroo care”) can diminish pain [57]. Warmth has also been
shown to be analgesic in human infants [58]. Pain is driven by
inflammation, therefore minimizing surgical trauma and using the
smallest possible incisions will decrease pain in the postoperative
period [59].
References
1 Robinson EP. Anaesthesia of pediatric patients. Compend Contin Educ Vet 1983; 5:
1004–1011.
2 Breazile JE. Neurologic and behavioral development in the puppy. Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 1978; 8: 31–45.
3 Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC. Management of anesthesia in the foal. Vet Clin North
Am Equine Pract 1990; 6: 651–663.
4 Levy JK, Bard KM, Tucker SJ, et al. Perioperative mortality in cats and dogs under-
going spay or castration at a high-volume clinic. Vet J 2017; 224: 11–15.
5 Brodbelt DC, Pfeiffer DU, Young LE, et al. Risk factors for anaesthetic-related death
in cats: results from the Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Small Animal
Fatalities (CEPSAF). Br J Anaesth 2007; 99(5): 617–623.
6 Brodbelt DC, Pfeiffer DU, Young LE, et al. Results of the Confidential Enquiry into
Perioperative Small Animal Fatalities regarding risk factors for anesthetic-related
death in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008; 233(7): 1096–1104.
7 Johnston GM, Taylor PM, Holmes MA, et al. Confidential Enquiry of Perioperative
Equine Fatalities (CEPEF-1): preliminary results. Equine Vet J 1995; 27(3): 193–200.
8 Johnston GM, Eastment JK, Wood J, et al. The Confidential Enquiry into
Perioperative Equine Fatalities (CEPEF): mortality results of Phases 1 and 2. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2002; 29(4): 159–170.
9 American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA), Resources for Pet Owners.
Spaying and neutering. Available at: www.avma.org/resources/pet-owners/petcare/
spaying-and-neutering (accessed July 2023).
10 Association of Shelter Veterinarians. Position statement: early age spay neuter
(updated May 2020). Available at:https://higherlogicdownload.s3.amazonaws.com/
ASV/fa11b6a5-ea22-45cc-9b33-416a24d44499/UploadedImages/Policy_Stmts/
Early_Age_Spay_Neuter.pdf (accessed July 2023).
11 Griffin B, Bushby PA, McCobb E, et al. Association of Shelter Veterinarians’ 2016
Veterinary Medical Care Guidelines for spay-neuter programs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2016; 249(2): 165–188.
12 Howe LM. Short-term results and complications of prepubertal gonadectomy in
cats and dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1997; 211(1): 57–62.
13 Root Kustritz MV. Early spay-neuter: clinical considerations. Clin Tech Small
Animal Pract 2002; 17(3): 124–128.
14 Root Kustritz MV. Pros, cons, and techniques of pediatric neutering. Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 2014; 44(2): 221–233.
15 Bushby PA, Griffin B. An overview of pediatric spay and neuter benefits and tech-
niques. DVM360, 2011. Available at: www.dvm360.com/view/overview-pediatric-
spay-and-neuter-benefits-and-techniques (accessed July 2023).
16 Polson S, Taylor PM, Yates D. Effects of age and reproductive status on postopera-
tive pain after routine ovariohysterectomy in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2014; 16(2):
170–176.
17 Grandy JL, Dunlop CI. Anesthesia of pups and kittens. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1991;
198(7): 1244–1249.
18 Grubb TL, Perez Jiminez TE, Pettifer GR. Neonatal and pediatric patients. In:
Grimm KA, Lamont LA, Tranquilli WJ, et al., eds. Veterinary Anesthesia and
Analgesia, The Fifth Edition of Lumb and Jones. Ames, IA: John Wiley & Sons, 2015:
983–987.
19 Friedman WF. The intrinsic physiologic properties of the developing heart.
Prog Cardiovasc Dis 1972; 15(1): 87–111.
20 Shaddy RE, Tyndall MR, Teitel DF, et al. Regulation of cardiac output with con-
trolled heart rate in newborn lambs. Pediatr Res 1988; 24(5): 577–582.
21 Parot S, Bonora M, Gautier H, et al. Developmental changes in ventilation and
breathing pattern in unanesthetized kittens. Respir Physiol 1984; 58(3): 253–262.
22 Baggot JD, Short CR. Drug disposition in the neonatal animal, with particular ref-
erence to the foal. Equine Vet J 1987; 19: 169–171.
23 Baggot JD. Drug therapy in the neonatal animal. In: Baggot JD, ed. Principles of
Drug Disposition in Domestic Animals: the Basis of Veterinary Clinical Pharmacology.
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 1992: 21–36.
24 Boothe DM, Tannert K. Special considerations for drug and fluid therapy in the
pediatric patient. Compend Contin Educ Vet 1992; 14: 313–329.
25 Papich MG. Treating animals in special situations: the old and the young: the sick
and debilitated. In: Proceedings of the Western Veterinary Conference, February 2013,
Las Vegas, NV.
26 Norman WM, Court MH, Greenblatt DJ. Age-related changes in the pharmacoki-
netic disposition of diazepam in foals. Am J Vet Res 1997; 58(8): 878–880.
27 Anand KJ, Coskun V, Thrivikraman KV, et al. Long-term behavioral effects of
repetitive pain in neonatal rat pups. Physiol Behav 1999; 66(4): 627–637.
28 Buskila D, Neumann L, Zmora E, et al. Pain sensitivity in prematurely born adoles-
cents. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2003; 157(11): 1079–1082.
29 Earl FL, Melveger BE, Wilson RL. The hemogram and bone marrow profile of
normal neonatal and weanling beagle dogs. Lab Anim Sci 1973; 23(5): 690–695.
30 Mueggler PA, Black JA, Carpenter S, et al. Postnatal regulation of oxygen
delivery: control of erythropoiesis following birth in dogs. Respir Physiol 1981;
43(3): 189–196.
31 Matthews NS, Hartke S, Allen JC Jr. An evaluation of pulse oximeters in dogs, cats
and horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 2003; 30(1): 3–14.
32 American College of Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia (ACVAA).
Recommendations for monitoring anesthetized veterinary patients. Available at:
www.acvaa.org/wp- content/uploads/2019/05/Small- Animal- Monitoring-
Guidlines.pdf (accessed July 2023).
33 American Animal Hospital Association (AAHA). 2020 AAHA Anesthesia and
monitoring guidelines for dogs and cats. Available at: www.aaha.org/aaha-
guidelines/2020-aaha-anesthesia-and-monitoring-guidelines-for-dogs-and-cats/
anesthesia-and-monitoring-home (accessed July 2023).
34 Wagner KA, Gibbon KJ, Strom TL, et al. Adverse effects of EMLA (lidocaine/
prilocaine) cream and efficacy for the placement of jugular catheters in hospitalized
cats. J Feline Med Surg 2006; 8(2): 141–144.
35 Taddio A, Spin HK, Schuh S, et al. Liposomal lidocaine to improve procedural suc-
cess rates and reduce procedural pain among children: a randomized controlled
trial. CMAJ 2005; 172(13): 1691–1695.
36 Doherty T, Valverde A. Management of sedation and anesthesia. In: Doherty T,
Valverde A, eds. Manual of Equine Anesthesa and Analgesia. Oxford, UK: Blackwell
Publishing Ltd, 2006: 206–259.
37 Taggart R, Austin B, Hans E, et al. In vitro evaluation of the effect of hypothermia
on coagulation in dogs via thromboelastography. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio)
2012; 22(2): 219–224.
38 Doufas AG. Consequences of inadvertent perioperative hypothermia. Best Pract
Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2003; 17(4): 535–549.
39 Cornell HN, Shaver SL, Semick DN, et al. Effect of transmucosal corn syrup appli-
cation on postoperative blood glucose concentrations in kittens. J Feline Med Surg
2018; 20(4): 289–294.
40 Webb AI, Weaver BM. Body composition of the horse. Equine Vet J 1979; 11(1):
39–47.
41 Carter SW, Robertson SA, Steel CJ, et al. Cardiopulmonary effects of xylazine seda-
tion in the foal. Equine Vet J 1990; 22(6): 384–388.
42 Mutoh T, Kojima K, Takao K, et al. Comparison of sevoflurane with isoflurane for
rapid mask induction in midazolam and butorphanol-sedated dogs. J Vet Med A
Physiol Pathol Clin Med 2001; 48(4): 223–230.
43 Lerche P, Muir WW, Grubb TL. Mask induction of anaesthesia with isoflurane or
sevoflurane in premedicated cats. J Small Anim Pract 2002; 43(1): 12–15.
44 McCobb E, Robertson S. Special considerations for anesthesia of pediatric patients.
In: White S, ed. High-Quality, High-Volume Spay and Neuter and Other Shelter
Surgeries. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell, 2020: 193–208.
45 Bruniges N, Taylor PM, Yates D. Injectable anaesthesia for adult cat and kitten cas-
tration: effects of medetomidine, dexmedetomidine and atipamezole on recovery.
J Feline Med Surg 2016; 18(11): 860–867.
46 Welsh P. Neutering pet cats at four months of age (or less). Feline update online.
Available at: www.langfordvets.co.uk/media/1248/neutering-cats-at-4-months-of-
age-or-less.pdf (accessed July 2023).
47 Johnston CC, Fernandes AM, Campbell-Yeo M. Pain in neonates is different. Pain
2011; 152(3 Suppl): S65–S73.
48 Allegaert K, Tibboel D, van den Anker J. Pharmacological treatment of neonatal
pain: in search of a new equipoise. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med 2013; 18(1): 42–47.
49 Steagall PV, Taylor PM, Rodrigues LC, et al. Analgesia for cats after ovariohysterec-
tomy with either buprenorphine or carprofen alone or in combination. Vet Rec
2009; 164(12): 359–363.
50 Malo A, Cheng AJ, Ruel HL, et al. Randomised, prospective, blinded, clinical trial of
opioid-free injectable anaesthesia with or without multimodal analgesia in kittens
undergoing ovariohysterectomy. J Feline Med Surg 2023; 25(3): 1098612X231158582.

-- 1368 of 1450 --

Chapter 68: Neonatal and Pediatric Patients 	1353
51 Morris JL, Rosen DA, Rosen KR. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents in
neonates. Paediatr Drugs 2003; 5(6): 385–405.
52 Moldal ER, Eriksen T, Kirpensteijn J, et al. Intratesticular and subcutaneous lido-
caine alters the intraoperative haemodynamic responses and heart rate variability
in male cats undergoing castration. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40(1): 63–73.
53 Huuskonen V, Hughes JM, Estaca Bañon E, et al. Intratesticular lidocaine reduces
the response to surgical castration in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40(1): 74–82.
54 Stevens BJ, Posner LP, Jones CA, et al. Comparison of the effect of intratesticular
lidocaine/bupivacaine vs. saline placebo on pain scores and incision site reactions
in dogs undergoing routine castration. Vet J 2013; 196(3): 499–503.
55 Benito J, Monteiro B, Lavoie AM, et al. Analgesic efficacy of intraperitoneal admin-
istration of bupivacaine in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2016; 18(11): 906–912.
56 Benito J, Monteiro B, Beaudry F, et al. Efficacy and pharmacokinetics of bupiv-
acaine with epinephrine or dexmedetomidine after intraperitoneal administration
in cats undergoing ovariohysterectomy. Can J Vet Res 2018; 82(2): 124–130.
57 Campbell-Yeo M, Fernandes A, Johnston C. Procedural pain management for neo-
nates using nonpharmacological strategies: Part 2: mother-driven interventions.
Adv Neonatal Care 2011; 11(5): 312–318.
58 Gray L, Lang CW, Porges SW. Warmth is analgesic in healthy newborns. Pain 2012;
153(5): 960–966.
59 Kristiansson M, Saraste L, Soop M, et al. Diminished interleukin-6 and C- reactive
protein responses to laparoscopic versus open cholecystectomy. Acta Anaesthesiol
Scand 1999; 43(2): 146–152.

-- 1369 of 1450 --

1354
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth Edition of L umb and J ones. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
A large study that included 8.9 million dogs and 2.4 million cats
reported that life expectancy for both species increased between
2013 and 2019 [1]. Clinicians are anesthetizing more older pets and
it is important to understand the specific changes that occur with
age, and how these impact perioperative care and clinical outcomes.
Biological aging can be defined as “the progressive accumulation of
changes with time associated with or responsible for the ever-
increasing susceptibility to disease and death” [2,3]. The American
Animal Hospital Association (AAHA) has proposed the following
life stages in dogs: puppy, young adult, mature adult, senior, and
end of life [4]. The Association of American Feline Practitioners
(AAFP) and AAHA, place cats into five life stages: kitten, young
adult, mature adult, senior, and end of life [5]. These stages are
somewhat arbitrary, especially in dogs, because they are based on
chronological age and not biological age. Both organizations have
recently published senior care guidelines, which delve deeper into
defining senior and geriatric patients [6,7]; details are shown in
Table 69.1. In dogs, the term senior is used to describe the last 25%
of estimated lifespan through to the end of life [4]. Because the
lifespan of dogs varies greatly based on breed and size, it has
been difficult to accurately allocate dogs into this life stage [8].
Life expectancy tables based on size, sex, and body condition
confirm that life expectancy is decreased for the largest sizes of dogs
compared to the smallest and provide life expectancy data for toy,
small, medium, large, and giant dogs [1]. These life expectancy
tables allow for the correct allocation of any size of dog to the life
stage of “senior.” The term geriatric is a statement of health status
and not a specific age [3,6]. McKenzie et al. have proposed the
concept of the canine geriatric syndrome, which includes physical,
behavioral, metabolic, and functional changes, frailty, clinical
disease, and quality of life to facilitate the recognition of aging as a
risk factor for negative health outcomes [3].
Anesthetic management encompasses the pre-, intra-, and
postoperative period. Successful anesthetic management of older
patients requires careful planning and includes an evaluation of
comorbidities, functional status, frailty, nutrition, and a review
of current medications. Older dogs and cats may have a variety of
overt diseases (single or multiple) such as cardiac, renal, and hepatic
disease. These disease processes require specific anesthetic manage-
ment, which is covered elsewhere in this book. Access to a drug
interaction checker (e.g., Plumb’s drug interaction checker: https://
plumbs.com/features/drug-interaction-checker/) is extremely helpful
due to the number of drugs some older patients may have been pre-
scribed. Patient care does not stop in the immediate recovery period;
arrangements must be in place for postoperative care, which includes
69 Aging Patients
Sheilah A. Robertson1 and Kirk A. Muñoz2
1 Lap of Love Veterinary Hospice Inc., Lutz, Florida, USA
2 Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 1354
Physiologic changes related to age, 1355
Cardiovascular changes, 1355
Pulmonary changes, 1356
Neurocognitive and behavioral assessment, postoperative delirium,
and cognitive impairment, 1356
Renal changes, 1356
Hepatic changes, 1357
Immune function, 1357
Changes in body composition, 1357
Thermoregulation, 1357
Frailty, 1357
Risk of anesthesia related to age, 1358
Preanesthetic testing, 1358
Age- related changes in response to drugs, 1359
Opioids, 1359
Propofol, 1359
Alfaxalone, 1359
Ketamine, 1359
Inhalant agents, 1359
Neuromuscular blocking agents, 1360
Anesthetic case management, 1360
Analgesic considerations, 1360
Supportive care, 1360
Nutrition, 1360
Environmental stressors, 1360
References, 1360

-- 1370 of 1450 --

Chapter 69: Aging Patients 	1355
a period of time after discharge. The ideal approach to the older
patient involves a multidisciplinary team comprised of anesthesiolo-
gists, surgeons, rehabilitation clinicians, internists, and nutritionists.
Physiologic changes related to age
The physical and functional changes associated with aging in dogs
and cats are well described [8–14]. Veterinary geroscience is an active
area of research with a goal of developing therapies to mitigate age-
related dysfunction [3,15–17]. With respect to anesthesia in older
animals, the key factor is understanding the impact of decreased
functional or physiologic reserve in major body systems. In people,
functional reserve in vital organs is reported to decrease by 1%
every year after the age of 40 [18]. “Robustness” and “resilience” are
terms that enhance the understanding of the aging process [19].
McKenzie encourages the use of “robustness” (the ability to resist
deviation from an original or optimal state) and “resilience” (the
ability to return to this state after deviations induced by external
stressors) when assessing aging dogs [3,15]. These terms are easy to
understand, and most clinicians know when they see an animal that
is neither robust nor resilient and this may prompt a change in the
anesthetic plan for these patients.
The following section and Table 69.2, describe and summarize the
age-related changes in major body systems and their potential impact
on anesthetic management; many detailed studies are available
in humans, and it is assumed that similar changes occur in all
mammalian species. The reader is referred to an excellent open-
access clinical review by Lim and Lee [20].
Cardiovascular changes
Similar to humans, cardiac reserve is decreased with increasing age
in dogs. Cardiac output (CO) is decreased by up to 30% in older
dogs, maximum heart rate and oxygen consumption in response to
exercise are reduced, ventricular contraction is reduced, and myo-
cardial stiffness is increased [21–23].
In aging humans, blood pressure is higher and CO lower than in
young populations due to changes in connective tissues resulting in
stiffness of blood vessels and the myocardium [24]. Age-related
changes in blood pressure have been reported in both dogs and
cats [8,10,13,14,25].
Clinical implications
Preanesthetic measurement of blood pressure is recommended as a
reasonable step in older dogs and cats [26] so that changes from
normal values can be detected and managed appropriately during
anesthesia. Cats may have anxiety and stress-related elevations in
blood pressure but these can be partially mitigated by using feline-
friendly handling techniques [27].
Table 69.1 Proposed life stages and definitions in dogs and cats derived from the AAHA and AAFP life stages and senior care guidelines [4–7].
Life stage 	Definition
Dog 	Puppy 	Birth to cessation of rapid growth (approximately 6 to 9 months, varying with breed and size)
Young adult 	Cessation of rapid growth to completion of physical and social maturation; 3 to 4 years in most dogs
Mature adult 	Completion of physical and social maturation until the last 25% of estimated lifespan (breed and size dependent)
Senior 	The last 25% of estimated lifespan through end of life
The term “senior” is used to describe the older, aging pet. Because of the variability in aging based on breed and size, the chronological
age of a senior will vary. Additional descriptive terms such as “frailty” are used to describe individuals
End of life 	Terminal stage (depends on specific pathologies)
Cat 	Kitten 	Birth to 1 year
Young adult 	1–6 years
Mature adult 	7–10 years
Senior 	> 10 years; some cats of specific breeds and genetic predispositions may be considered senior at an earlier chronological age
End of life 	Variable
Geriatric 	The term geriatric is a statement of health status and not a specific age
Table 69.2 A quick reference guide to age-related physiologic changes and their impact on anesthesia.
System 	Age- related changes 	Impact on anesthesia
Cardiovascular 	Reduced cardiac reserve, blood volume, blood pressure, and
cardiac output
Reduced ability to compensate for cardiovascular changes
Slower onset of intravenous general anesthesia, resulting in
increased risk of anesthetic overdose
Inotropic and blood pressure support may be needed
Pulmonary/respiratory 	Loss of lung elasticity and decrease in chest wall compliance
Increase in functional residual capacity, with closing capacity
increasing at a comparatively faster rate
Increased ventilation–perfusion mismatching
Risk of hypoxemia and hypercapnia
Respiratory support may be required
Neurologic 	Reduction in brain mass and decreased neurotransmitters
Reduced cerebral blood flow
Altered central thermoregulation
Decreased anesthetic requirements
Increased risk of hypothermia
Renal 	Decreased renal function secondary to a reduction in GFR, RBF,
and renal mass
Less tolerant of fluid losses, allow water to be consumed until
the time of premedication
Hepatic/metabolic 	Reduced hepatic mass and perfusion 	Variable and unpredictable effects on drugs that undergo
hepatic metabolism
Immunologic 	Immunosenescence 	May be more prone to infection
Adhere to aseptic techniques
GFR, glomerular filtration rate; RBF, renal blood flow.

-- 1371 of 1450 --

1356 	Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Selected Patients
A decrease in CO will result in an increase in the injection site to
brain circulation time; therefore, it is essential that intravenous
anesthetic drugs are given slowly, allowing sufficient time for drugs
to reach the brain and exert an effect before additional drugs are
administered. Reduced cardiac reserve leaves older patients less
able to respond to acute changes in blood volume (loss or overload)
and hypotension compared to younger animals. Intravenous fluids
should be administered to meet pre-existing needs and ongoing
losses. Close cardiovascular monitoring is required, and inotropes
and vasopressors should be available. Animals with a rightward shift
in autoregulation due to chronic hypertension should be maintained
within ~30% of their presenting blood pressure to ensure that perfu-
sion to vital organs is maintained throughout the anesthetic event.
Pulmonary changes
Chest wall compliance decreases with age while lung compliance
increases, increasing functional residual capacity (FRC) and the
work of breathing [28]. Closing capacity also increases but faster
than FRC and may eventually equal FRC, such that at normal tidal
volume, areas of low or zero ventilation to perfusion ratios may
exist. The surface area for gas exchange decreases; there is a reduc-
tion in diffusion capacity across the capillary–alveolar membrane;
and respiratory muscle strength weakens [28]. Elderly humans
(aged 65–79 years) have an approximately 50% reduction in venti-
latory response to hypoxia and hypercapnia compared to young
subjects [29]. Older humans have decreased pharyngeal muscle
tone and less effective upper airway reflexes. This is likely true in
dogs based on their incidence of aspiration pneumonia (see later).
Laryngeal paralysis (a component of geriatric onset laryngeal paral-
ysis and polyneuropathy [GOLPP]), a disease of older dogs, puts
them at risk of aspiration and airway obstruction. Low-grade chronic
inflammation (“inflamm-aging”) has been reported in humans
and is associated with an increased incidence of morbidity and
mortality [30]. This is also likely to affect our aging veterinary
patients. Using sterile endotracheal tubes, appropriate inflation of
the endotracheal tube cuff, and suctioning of the oral cavity prior to
extubation are some measures that can be used to help protect
these animals.
In awake elderly patients, PaCO 2 and PaO 2 are usually well
maintained, but when challenged by sedation and anesthesia
involving respiratory depressant drugs, the lack of pulmonary
reserve, decreased respiratory drive, and poor muscle strength ren-
der these patients at risk of hypoxemia and hypercapnia [31].
Clinical implications
Older dogs and cats should be closely monitored perioperatively
using a pulse oximeter, and capnography intraoperatively to
determine if ventilation is appropriate. Respiratory support using
manual or mechanical ventilation may be needed, especially when
patients are in dorsal recumbency. Preanesthetic administration of
antinausea and antiemetic medications is advised [32]. Oxygen
supplementation prior to induction of general anesthesia and in the
postoperative period until the animal is able to maintain normal
oxyhemoglobin saturation on room air is recommended [33].
Neurocognitive and behavioral assessment,
postoperative delirium, and cognitive impairment
There are three distinct clinical problems associated with cognition
in the postoperative period. Emergence delirium refers to restlessness
in the immediate postoperative period and can occur in any age
group, is usually short-lived, can be managed with sedation, and
has no long-term effects. Postoperative delirium is defined as a
“short-term and transient” issue and is characterized by changes
in consciousness and cognition, disorientation, anxiety, and fear
which may fluctuate [34]. A diagnosis of frailty before surgery is
associated with an increased risk of postoperative delirium in human
patients [35]. Postoperative delirium can occur in any age group,
but elderly patients are at the highest risk. It appears between the
second and seventh day following anesthesia, and the pathophysi-
ology is poorly understood [34]. This syndrome likely occurs in
animals but may go undetected because animals do not need to
function at a high level of cognition, and we are unlikely to monitor
for this in the extended postoperative period. However, there are
enough reports by owners of their pets being “different” after
anesthesia that this warrants further investigation. Interventions
including frequent orientation, noise reduction, early mobilization,
and attention to hydration are effective at reducing postoperative
delirium in humans, all of which can be applied in veterinary
medicine [34].
Postoperative cognitive dysfunction (POCD) refers to longer-term
changes in cognition after surgery. It occurs in up to 12% of all
patients and is usually self-limiting [34,36]. The elderly and patients
with pre-existing cognitive impairment before surgery may show a
dramatic decline after surgery [36]. No specific anesthetic drug or
technique has been shown to cause or prevent POCD and the
mechanism that triggers it is unknown [36]; however, some authors
suggest that benzodiazepines should be avoided in elderly patients
at high risk of developing POCD [20]. The majority of studies
comparing POCD after general versus regional anesthesia fail to
show a difference, suggesting that its etiology is complex and
multifactorial [37].
Cognitive dysfunction (CD) is documented in dogs and cats and
may affect up to 35% of aging dogs and more than 50% of cats over
the age of fifteen [38–42]. Canine and feline CD are analogs of
human Alzheimer’s disease; therefore, postoperative delirium and
worsening of cognition are likely to occur. Reports of cognitive
decline after anesthesia in older dogs and cats are anecdotal but
some clinicians state that owners should be informed of this possi-
bility and that it is more evident in animals that have cognitive
impairment prior to anesthesia [43]. Confusion, anxiety, disturbed
sleep/wake cycle, and decreased interaction with owners are all
common clinical signs of canine CD and these can be exacerbated
by a hospital stay. Diagnosis of CD is not straightforward but older
animals should at least be screened for CD prior to anesthesia so
that clinicians can prepare for the recovery period; assessment tools
are available for dogs and cats [6,44].
Failing vision and hearing in older patients may add to confusion
in the postoperative period. Changes in environment are poorly
tolerated by older animals, especially those with CD. Whenever
possible these patients should be scheduled as outpatients; when
creating the day’s operating list, assign them the first slot so they can
be cared for when the hospital is fully staffed and discharged at the
end of the day.
Renal changes
There is a gradual decline in renal function with increasing age;
however, a significant loss of functional nephrons must occur
before this is detectable with routine testing. The dangers of reduced
renal reserve related to anesthesia are real. Perioperative dehydra-
tion, hypovolemia, and hypotension are not well tolerated in older
patients, and animals with reduced renal reserve may suffer acute
kidney injury. Many older dogs and cats are prescribed non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for maladaptive pain
states putting them at a higher risk of renal insult. Cyclo-oxygenase- 1

-- 1372 of 1450 --

Chapter 69: Aging Patients 	1357
and 2 are constitutively expressed in the kidneys and the products
of these pathways include prostaglandins (PGs) and thromboxanes,
which are involved in the regulation of glomerular filtration rate
(GFR) [45]. In the face of decreased renal perfusion (e.g., decreased
circulating volume), renal PGs play a vital compensatory role,
including vasodilation to enhance renal blood flow and GFR [46].
NSAIDs block the ability of the kidney to autoregulate.
Measurement of GFR is not a routine clinical test, though it may
be reduced in patients with normal serum creatinine values [47].
Not knowing the GFR in older animals makes dosage adjustments
of renally excreted drugs difficult. Gabapentin is a renally excreted
drug and marked differences in serum concentrations were reported
in normal cats compared to those with IRIS stage 2 and 3 chronic
kidney disease (CKD) [48]. In the same study, serum gabapentin
concentrations were correlated with serum creatinine and symmetric
dimethylarginine, but it is not known if serum drug concentrations
are correlated with GFR.
CKD is common in older pets, especially cats [6]. Perioperative
management of patients with CKD is discussed in Chapter 43.
Clinical implications
Maintaining euvolemia and renal perfusion pressure during anes-
thesia is essential when renal reserves are reduced, therefore fluid
therapy, blood pressure monitoring, and treatment of hypotension
are primary considerations in this population. Renally excreted
drugs should be used with caution in older patients.
Hepatic changes
In humans, liver mass and blood flow decrease with age [49,50].
Drugs that are processed via phase I reactions (involving the
cytochrome P450 system) are “flow limited” and are likely to be
cleared more slowly in older patients. Phase II elimination involves
conjugation and drugs dependent on this pathway are less affected
by age [50]. This is a simplistic approach and drug elimination is
dependent on multiple factors; further details are available in
Chapter 19. Liver enzymes do not reflect hepatic function, and
hepatic function tests may be normal in older animals, yet their
ability to clear drugs may be compromised.
Clinical implications
Due to the difficulty in predicting how an aging patient will process
a specific drug, it is recommended that the anesthetist uses drugs
that can be titrated to effect, have a high therapeutic index, and are
reversible.
Immune function
Immunosenescence, which is defined as changes in the immune sys-
tem associated with age, has received a lot of attention in humans,
with increased vulnerability to infection and decreased immune
response to vaccinations being recognized as contributing to mor-
tality [51]. There is some, albeit limited, evidence that age-related
changes in immune function occur in dogs and cats [15].
Age-related changes in the canine immune system are summarized
by Bellows [10].
Clinical implications
Older animals should be considered at higher risk than young
patients for developing perioperative infections. Urinary retention
is a risk factor for infection in older humans but the use of indwell-
ing urinary catheters, which are not without risk, must not be used
as a substitute for good nursing care [20]. Animals should have
their bladders expressed at the end of the procedure and provided
opportunities to void voluntarily in the postoperative period – this
requires assisting large dogs to stand and providing suitable litter-
boxes to cats. If urinary catheters are used, they must be placed in a
sterile fashion and properly maintained.
Changes in body composition
With increasing age, there is loss of muscle mass and an increase in
adipose tissue in humans, dogs, and cats [15,50,52]. In dogs, these
changes vary among different breeds and sizes [52]. Changes in the
mass, structure, and function (increasing weakness) of skeletal
muscle result in the clinical condition termed “sarcopenia,” which is
seen in all mammalian species as they age [15]. The loss of muscle
mass decreases the ability of older patients to generate heat, leaving
them vulnerable to hypothermia. Muscle also acts as an important
“sink” for drugs prior to metabolism or excretion; therefore,
older animals may maintain higher plasma concentrations of drugs
for longer periods. Total body water, plasma, and intracellular
volume are reduced in older patients. The consequence of these
changes is a decrease in the central compartment and central
volume of distribution. After a bolus of intravenous drugs, plasma
concentrations are higher and can lead to more profound central
nervous system effects.
Clinical implications
Muscle weakness must be addressed in the perioperative period;
patients with sarcopenia may need help getting up and are more
likely to slip and fall, resulting in injury. Due to pharmacokinetic
changes induced by body composition differences, induction doses
of anesthetics should be reduced to prevent deep levels of anesthesia
and hypotension.
Thermoregulation
A decrease in metabolic rate occurs as dogs age [52] and this,
combined with a decrease in muscle mass, makes aging patients
vulnerable to hypothermia. Perioperative hypothermia is common
in all dogs and cats irrespective of age, resulting in delayed recovery,
altered coagulation, bradycardia, and decreased CO, and may be
linked to postoperative wound infection [53–55]. Hypothermia
decreases inhalant anesthetic requirements [56,57]. During recov-
ery, hypothermic animals will shiver to generate heat, but this
capacity is limited in older animals. Shivering during recovery can
significantly increase oxygen consumption [33] and may lead to
hypoxemia, lactic acidosis, and catecholamine release, all of which
would be detrimental in patients with limited organ reserves [58,59].
People describe postoperative shivering as a highly unpleasant
experience and we can assume this is the same in veterinary
patients [60,61].
Clinical implications
Every effort should be made to prevent perioperative hypothermia
(see Chapter 17). Oxygen supplementation should be in place until
patients are normothermic.
Frailty
In humans, frailty is a predictor of postoperative outcomes, includ-
ing morbidity, length of hospital stay, and mortality [35,62–66].
McIsaac et al. stated that the use of frailty instruments provides
meaningful increases in accuracy when predicting postoperative
outcomes for older people [67]. Frailty is distinct from comorbidity
and disability, is not synonymous with aging, and is an important

-- 1373 of 1450 --

1358 	Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Selected Patients
concept because there can be significant differences in health status
between individuals of the same chronological age [68]. Diagnosing
frailty allows the clinician to identify patients who are significantly
more vulnerable compared to other individuals of the same age [64].
When anesthesiologists understand the concept of frailty, they can
play a key role in improving clinical outcomes in this vulnerable
patient population [69]. Frailty can be described as a multidimen-
sional syndrome characterized by decreased physiologic reserve,
a diminished resistance to stressors, a state of vulnerability, or a
“deficit of homeostatic capabilities” [64,70]. In older patients, frailty
should be assessed in addition to comorbidities when developing a
perioperative plan. Frailty is a relatively new concept in human
medicine with the frailty phenotype first being described by Fried
et al. in 2001 [71]. In human medicine, many instruments have
been developed to assess levels of frailty and work is being done to
assess which tools are most relevant in patients scheduled for
surgery [35,65,67]. The frailty phenotype model assesses fatigue,
and measures muscle strength and walking speed. The frailty
index counts the number of deficits in multiple domains, including
physiological, psychological, and cognitive [64,68]. Assessments
can alert the care team to the special needs of an individual and if
surgery is elective, prehabilitation can be used to improve a patient’s
functional reserve and reduce risk [66,69].
Frailty and its impact on healthspan and mortality risk in com-
panion animals is an area of active research in dogs [3,72–74] and is
receiving attention in cats [6]. A five-component frailty phenotype
(chronic undernutrition, poor mobility, exhaustion, low physical
activity level, and weakness) has been described in dogs and con-
firms that frailty is a risk factor for death and that the number of
components present is predictive of increased risk [72]. A clinically
based frailty index tool has been developed for dogs and a question-
naire is included in the publication by Banzato et al. [73]. Chen
et al. demonstrated validity of this tool; frailty scores increased with
age and were correlated with a decrease in health-related quality of
life [74]. The AAFP has developed a phenotype frailty scale and an
index frailty scale that are easy to use in cats [6]. In human medi-
cine, many groups including the American Society of Surgeons and
the Association of Anesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland recom-
mend frailty assessment before surgery; however, these are not yet
performed routinely [35]. In addition to assigning an ASA score,
veterinarians are encouraged to assess frailty in patients scheduled
for surgery.
Risk of anesthesia related to age
Morbidity and mortality risks associated with anesthesia are covered
in detail in Chapter 2. Morbidity and mortality specifically related to
age will be discussed here. An increased risk of anesthetic-related
death with increasing age, and independent of patient physical sta-
tus, has been reported in dogs and cats [75–79]. Although analyzing
data based on chronological age alone is problematic in dogs,
increasing age is consistently flagged as a risk factor. In a study of
mortality related to general anesthesia and sedation in dogs in pri-
mary practice in the United Kingdom, dogs over nine years of age
were 12 times more likely to die than those between six months
and 1.5 years [79]. Brodbelt et al. reported that cats over the age of
12 were 2.1 times more likely to die than cats aged six months to five
years [76]. In a more recent study in primary care veterinary hospi-
tals in the United States, Matthews et al. reported that the odds of
death in a cat aged nine years were more than twice that of one four
years of age [78].
The key question for clinicians is “can the risks associated with
anesthesia in older animals be mitigated and what interventions are
effective?” Risk factors related to increasing age include gastroe-
sophageal reflux (GER) and aspiration pneumonia, and these risks
can be mitigated.
GER, regurgitation, aspiration pneumonia, and vomiting are
common adverse events associated with anesthesia in dogs and can
result in devastating outcomes; mortality from aspiration pneumo-
nia can be as high as 25% with increasing patient age correlated
with non-survival [32]. GER during anesthesia is significantly asso-
ciated with age [80]. Postoperative regurgitation and vomiting
(PORV) were reported in 12.3% of all dogs undergoing non-elective
surgery [81]. The risk of developing aspiration pneumonia was
higher in dogs over the age of eight and those with laryngeal disease
(e.g., GOLPP) [82,83]. Galatos and Raptopoulos reported an overall
incidence of GER of 17.4 % of dogs in their study, with increased age
being associated with an increased incidence of gastric acidity [84].
In people, the Enhanced Recovery After Surgery [ERAS®]
(www.erassociety.org) program permits patients to consume solid
food for up to 6 h and a carbohydrate supplement drink for up to
2 h prior to surgery. The ERAS program demonstrated that this
guideline reduces the risk of complications caused by aspiration
during the induction of anesthesia, significantly improves discom-
fort (from hunger and thirst), and maintains lean body mass after
surgery [85].
There are conflicting reports on the effect of preoperative fasting
times on gastric acidity and GER in dogs, likely due to the multiple
different anesthetic protocols used [84,86,87]. There is some evi-
dence to support shorter fasting times (under 5 h) with one study
reporting the incidence of GER to be significantly lower if dogs
were fed half their daily ration of canned food 3 h before anesthesia
compared to 10 h [87]. However, another clinical study reported
that 61% of dogs fed a partial daily ration of canned food 3 h prior
to anesthesia had GER compared to 43.9% of dogs fasted for
18 h [80]. Since no fasting strategy can prevent GER, other meas-
ures should be implemented.
Maropitant and famotidine appear to be effective at mitigating
some of these adverse events; of 105 dogs over the age of eight
premedicated with maropitant and famotidine, none vomited,
two regurgitated (1.9%), and one (1%) developed aspiration pneu-
monia [32]. Other studies strongly support that changes to anesthetic
protocols [88], the use of higher doses of metoclopramide [89], or
the use of esomeprazole and cisapride [90] can reduce the risk of
aspiration pneumonia. It should be noted that GER is “silent” and
often goes unnoticed; therefore, it is advised that the esophagus be
suctioned and flushed after induction and before recovery [91].
Preanesthetic testing
Preanesthetic blood screening is not required for every patient
(Chapter 2). It should be noted that reference ranges for many labo-
ratory tests only incorporate approximately 95% of the population;
therefore, 1 in 20 animals will show results outside a “normal”
range, yet these may be of no clinical significance. Blood work in
one hundred “apparently healthy senior and geriatric dogs” revealed
increased serum creatinine, hypophosphatemia, increased ALP,
increased ALT, and leukopenia in 32, 29, 27, 25, and 23 dogs,
respectively [8]. Results of serum biochemistry and hematologic
tests in older dogs and cats should be compared to age-dependent
laboratory reference ranges to differentiate healthy aging from
disease [8,9,12,14].

-- 1374 of 1450 --

Chapter 69: Aging Patients 	1359
Joubert recruited 101 dogs over the age of seven that were to be
anesthetized to assess whether hematologic and biochemical analy-
ses were of value in this population [92]. In 30 dogs, a new diagnosis
was made (e.g., neoplasia and hyperadrenocorticism) as a result of
blood work, and 13 of these had their procedure canceled. However,
Joubert suggested that there was little evidence to show that blood
results impacted the anesthetic management of dogs that did pro-
ceed to surgery. In another study, the results of routine non-targeted
blood testing in dogs and cats over the age of eight were predicted
by anesthetists in most cases and did not result in major changes in
anesthetic management [93]. In a United Kingdom study of prean-
esthetic blood testing in dogs and cats (mean age 9.6 and 11.6 years
respectively), abnormal blood results raised concerns by clinicians
in approximately 8% and 16% of dogs and cats, respectively,
although only 1% of these results were unexpected based on the
animal’s history and physical examination [94]. Abnormal blood
results led to postponement of some cases and adjustments to the
anesthetic management in 4% of dogs and 9% of cats [94].
Clinical implications
Blood work results should be compared with animals within the
same age group and considered in conjunction with the patient’s
history and clinical examination.
Age-related changes in response to drugs
The pharmacologic concerns related to anesthesia drug use in older
humans are similar to those in the aging veterinary population and
focus on the increased sensitivity to drugs in this population [95].
Opioids
Elderly humans are at greater risk than younger patients of adverse
events and unpredictable responses related to opioid administra-
tion [96]. The reasons are multifactorial but include altered
pharmacokinetics due to changes in body composition and organ
function, and altered pharmacodynamics secondary to impaired
neurotransmitter production and altered receptor affinity [95,96].
Senior and geriatric patients require perioperative analgesics and
may be at risk of inadequate treatment because of the fear of adverse
effects and because many in this population already suffer from
maladaptive pain (e.g., osteoarthritis).
Age-related changes in the pharmacokinetics of pethidine
administered postoperatively have been reported in dogs [97].
Compared to young dogs, the rate of absorption of pethidine from
intramuscular sites was slower (Tmax delayed), Cmax was lower, and
elimination half-life was significantly longer in dogs over the age
of 10 [97,98]. Plasma clearance was not different between the
two age groups, suggesting that the distribution of the drug is
altered in the older population [97].
Propofol
The induction and infusion doses of propofol in humans show
age-related changes [99]. At the same plasma concentration, the
reduction in blood pressure is greater, whereas the time to reach a
specific depth of anesthesia and the time to recovery are longer in
older versus young patients [95,100]. A failure to age-adjust dosages
may contribute to hypotensive episodes, which can have serious
consequences in a population with reduced reserves [95].
The pharmacokinetics of propofol have been studied in dogs 8.5
to 10.5 years of age and, as these dogs weighed 29 ± 7.4 kg (mean ±
SD), they could be classified as senior [101]. Despite a lower
induction dosage (5 mg/kg), apnea occurred in four out of six (66%)
dogs after induction, which is higher than the reported 25% in
younger dogs given 6.5 mg/kg, by the same investigators [102]. The
blood levels of propofol were higher despite the lower dosage, and
the clearance was slower in older dogs compared to young
dogs [101,102].
Alfaxalone
Alfaxalone has a high therapeutic index compared to propofol
[103–105] but is not devoid of cardiopulmonary depressant effects
and should be given slowly and titrated to effect.
Ketamine
Ketamine has a high therapeutic index as well as anesthetic-sparing,
antinociceptive, and antihyperalgesic properties, which may make
it a good choice for older patients, especially those with chronic
pain [106,107]. It also mitigates postanesthetic hypothermia [108].
Constant rate infusions preceded by a subanesthetic loading dose
may be especially beneficial as these are associated with fewer
cardiovascular changes (tachycardia and increased blood pressure)
than anesthetic doses [109].
Inhalant agents
The influence of age on the minimum alveolar concentration (MAC)
of inhalant agents is well documented in humans, decreasing by
approximately 6% per decade after the age of 40 [57,110]. The
increased sensitivity to inhalant agents is thought to be caused by age-
related changes in the brain, including changes in receptor numbers
or function. The MAC of isoflurane in 2- to 3-year-old and
11-year-old Beagles was reported as 1.82 ± 0.8% (mean ± SEM) and
1.45 ± 0.6%, respectively; when adjusted for altitude, the mean MAC
values at sea level were 1.53% and 1.22% in young and older dogs,
respectively [111]. Binding of glutamate to the excitatory receptor N-
methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) in multiple brain regions was decreased
in older dogs, and the change in NMDA receptors was associated
with an increased sensitivity to isoflurane [111]. This study could not
determine if the changes in binding were due to changes in affinity or
a decrease in binding sites. Another study using Beagles determined
the MAC of sevoflurane to be 2.25 ± 0.15% (mean ± SD) at age two
and 1.86 ± 0.9% at eight to ten years of age [112]. Dogs in the older
age group showed mild to moderate cardiorespiratory depression
(lower heart rate, indirect blood pressure, and SpO2
) than younger
dogs at an equipotent dose of sevoflurane, indicating that close moni-
toring is essential in older patients [112].
Body temperature also influences MAC, with hypothermia
decreasing anesthetic requirements; an approximately 4–5% decrease
in MAC occurs for each 1 °C fall in temperature [57]. Older animals
are susceptible to hypothermia; therefore, a combination of age-
related changes and hypothermia puts them at risk for anesthetic
overdose. Vaporizer settings or inspired concentrations of inhalant
agents should be adjusted based on a critical evaluation of the
patient’s depth of anesthesia (see Chapters 10 and 16).
Clinical implications
The extent of increased sensitivity to anesthetics in aging patients is
underappreciated by many practitioners but is also unpredictable.
Preference should be given to drugs that are reversible and those
that can be titrated to effect. Vaporizer settings or inspired concen-
trations of inhalant agents should be adjusted based on a critical
evaluation of the patient’s depth of anesthesia.

-- 1375 of 1450 --

1360 	Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Selected Patients
Neuromuscular blocking agents
The pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of neuromuscular
blockade are altered in elderly human patients with postoperative
residual curarization (PORC) predisposing to hypoxemia and upper
airway obstruction in this population [113–115]. The differences in
response to neuromuscular blocking agents (NMBAs) in elderly
humans appear to be related to altered pharmacokinetics (e.g., age-
related alterations in distribution, metabolism, and excretion) rather
than pharmacodynamics because the physiology of the neuro-
muscular junction is not significantly altered by age [113,114].
Some authors however suggest that the variability in recovery from
neuromuscular blockade in the elderly may also be related to
neuromuscular junction dysfunction [95]. Although there are no
similar studies in dogs and cats, the risks of PORC in the aging dogs
and cat populations should be taken seriously.
Clinical implications
Close neuromuscular monitoring and pharmacologic reversal are
key components to prevent PORC and are discussed in Chapter 26.
Anesthetic case management
An appropriate anesthetic and analgesic protocol for aging animals
should be based on an assessment of the animal’s physical and
health status and utilize drugs that best fit the needs of the animal,
as described above. There is no one protocol that should be used
for all older animals, however, it is recommended to use drugs
that are reversible, have a high therapeutic index, and are titratable
to effect.
Care with positioning of these patients is important to prevent
postoperative discomfort. In humans, one of the risks for position-
related pain after surgery is the presence of preoperative pain [116].
Many older veterinary patients will have osteoarthritis-related pain
and care should be taken to place them in neutral positions to pre-
vent exacerbation of joint and muscle pain postoperatively.
Analgesic considerations
As with all patients, providing perioperative analgesia is an impor-
tant component of an anesthetic plan. The analgesic drugs and
techniques covered in other chapters are all applicable to aging
patients.
Supportive care
Nutrition
In people, nutritional support can have a large impact on postop-
erative outcomes, including decreasing the length of hospital stay,
shortening the “time to eat,” less weight loss, and fewer medical
complications [117]. Nutritional care is a key component of the
ERAS® global initiative (www.erassociety.org). The role of periop-
erative nutritional care is likely underestimated in older dogs
and cats and deserves investigation. Short fasting times, the use of
antiemetic and antinausea medication, appetite stimulants, and
provision of palatable and easily digestible food should all be con-
sidered in a comprehensive plan for aging pets. Administration of
maropitant in dogs given morphine resulted in an earlier return to
feeding and increased calorie intake after surgery but this effect
was not reported when non-emetic opioids such as buprenorphine
were used [118].
Environmental stressors
Older patients may have a degree of cognitive decline and impaired
hearing and vision, which can lead to confusion during a hospital
stay. Limiting external stimuli (noise, light) may aid in a more rest-
ful environment, and limiting the number of people interacting
with the patient may decrease confusion and allow the pet to bond
with one or two team members. Owners should be encouraged to
bring familiar objects from home to leave with their pets. The use of
low-stress techniques such as feline-friendly nursing [119] will
enhance recovery. As previously stated, early return to a familiar
environment should be prioritized and it is advisable to schedule
this population as outpatients whenever possible.
References
1 Montoya M, Morrison JA, Arrignon F, et al. Life expectancy tables for dogs and cats
derived from clinical data. Front Vet Sci 2023; 10: 1082102.
2 Harman D. The aging process. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1981; 78(11): 7124–7128.
3 McKenzie BA, Chen FL, Gruen ME, et al. Canine geriatric syndrome: a framework
for advancing research in veterinary geroscience. Front Vet Sci 2022; 9: 853743.
4 Creevy KE, Grady J, Little SE, et al. 2019 AAHA canine life stage guidelines.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2019; 55(6): 267–290.
5 Quimby J, Gowland S, Carney HC, et al. 2021 AAHA/AAFP feline life stage
guidelines. J Feline Med Surg 2021; 23(3): 211–233.
6 Ray M, Carney HC, Boynton B, et al. 2021 AAFP feline senior care guidelines.
J Feline Med Surg 2021; 23(7): 613–638.
7 Dhaliwal R, Boynton E, Carrera-Justiz S, et al. 2023 AAHA senior care guidelines
for dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2023; 59(1): 1–21.
8 Willems A, Paepe D, Marynissen S, et al. Results of screening of apparently healthy
senior and geriatric dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2017; 31(1): 81–92.
9 Bellows J, Colitz CM, Daristotle L, et al. Defining healthy aging in older dogs and
differentiating healthy aging from disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2015; 246(1): 77–89.
10 Bellows J, Colitz CM, Daristotle L, et al. Common physical and functional changes
associated with aging in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2015; 246(1): 67–75.
11 Bellows J, Center S, Daristotle L, et al. Aging in cats: common physical and
functional changes. J Feline Med Surg 2016; 18(7): 533–550.
12 Bellows J, Center S, Daristotle L, et al. Evaluating aging in cats: how to determine
what is healthy and what is disease. J Feline Med Surg 2016; 18(7): 551–570.
13 Dowgray N, Pinchbeck G, Eyre K, et al. Aging in cats: owner observations and clini-
cal finding in 206 mature cats at enrolment to the cat prospective aging and welfare
study. Front Vet Sci 2022; 9: 859041.
14 Paepe D, Verjans G, Duchateau L, et al. Routine health screening: findings in appar-
ently healthy middle-aged and old cats. J Feline Med Surg 2013; 15(1): 8–19.
15 McKenzie BA. Comparative veterinary geroscience: mechanism of molecular,
cellular, and tissue aging in humans, laboratory animal models, and companion
dogs and cats. Am J Vet Res 2022; 83(6): ajvr.22.02.0027.
16 McKenzie BA, Chen F, LaCroix-Fralish ML. The phenotype of aging in the dog:
how aging impacts the health and well-being of dogs and their caregivers. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2022; 260(9): 963–970.
17 McKenzie BA, Chen FL. Assessment and management of declining physical
function in aging dogs. Top Companion Anim Med 2022; 51: 100732.
18 Evers BM, Townsend CM Jr., Thompson JC. Organ physiology of aging. Surg Clin
North Am 1994; 74(1): 23–39.
19 Ukraintseva S, Yashin AI, Arbeev KG. Resilience versus robustness in aging.
J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2016; 71(11): 1533–1534.
20 Lim BG, Lee IO. Anesthetic management of geriatric patients. Korean J Anesthesiol
2020; 73(1): 8–29.
21 Bright JM, Mears E. Chronic heart disease and its management. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 1997; 27(6): 1305–1329.
22 Strasser A, Simunek M, Seiser M, et al. Age-dependent changes in cardiovascular
and metabolic responses to exercise in beagle dogs. Zentralbl Veterinarmed A 1997;
44(8): 449–460.
23 Templeton GH, Platt MR, Willerson JT, et al. Influence of aging on left ventricular
hemodynamics and stiffness in Beagles. Circ Res 1979; 44(2): 189–194.
24 Alvis BD, Hughes CG. Physiology considerations in geriatric patients. Anesthesiol
Clin 2015; 33(3): 447–456.
25 Bijsmans ES, Jepson RE, Chang YM, et al. Changes in systolic blood pressure over
time in healthy cats and cats with chronic kidney disease. J Vet Intern Med 2015;
29(3): 855–861.
26 Acierno MJ, Brown S, Coleman AE, et al. ACVIM consensus statement: guidelines
for the identification, evaluation, and management of systemic hypertension in
dogs and cats. J Vet Intern Med 2018; 32(6): 1803–1822.

-- 1376 of 1450 --

Chapter 69: Aging Patients 	1361
27 Rodan I, Dowgray N, Carney HC, et al. 2022 AAFP/ISFM cat friendly veterinary
interaction guidelines: approach and handling techniques. J Feline Med Surg 2022;
24(11): 1093–1132.
28 Janssens JP, Pache JC, Nicod LP. Physiological changes in respiratory function
associated with ageing. Eur Respir J 1999; 13(1): 197–205.
29 Peterson DD, Pack AI, Silage DA, et al. Effects of aging on ventilatory and occlusion
pressure responses to hypoxia and hypercapnia. Am Rev Respir Dis 1981; 124(4):
387–391.
30 Boe DM, Boule LA, Kovacs EJ. Innate immune responses in the aging lung.
Clin Exp Immunol 2017; 187(1): 16–25.
31 Hedenstierna G, Tokics L, Scaramuzzo G, et al. Oxygenation impairment
during anesthesia: influence of age and body weight. Anesthesiology 2019; 131(1):
46–57.
32 Moyer AL, McKee TS, Bergman PJ, et al. Low incidence of postoperative nausea,
vomiting, regurgitation, and aspiration pneumonia in geriatric dogs receiving
maropitant, famotidine, and fentanyl as part of an anesthesia protocol. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2021; 260(S1): S46–S51.
33 Hughes J. Anaesthesia for the geriatric dog and cat. Ir Vet J 2008; 61(6): 380–387.
34 Bekker AY, Weeks EJ. Cognitive function after anaesthesia in the elderly. Best Pract
Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2003; 17(2): 259–272.
35 Aucoin SD, Hao M, Sohi R, et al. Accuracy and feasibility of clinically applied frailty
instruments before surgery: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Anesthesiology
2020; 133(1): 78–95.
36 Needham MJ, Webb CE, Bryden DC. Postoperative cognitive dysfunction and
dementia: what we need to know and do. Br J Anaesth 2017; 119(suppl 1): i115–i125.
37 Davis N, Lee M, Lin AY, et al. Postoperative cognitive function following general
versus regional anesthesia: a systematic review. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol 2014; 26(4):
369–376.
38 MacQuiddy B, Moreno JA, Kusick B, et al. Assessment of risk factors in dogs with
presumptive advanced canine cognitive dysfunction. Front Vet Sci 2022; 9: 958488.
39 Dewey CW, Davies ES, Xie H, et al. Canine cognitive dysfunction: pathophysiology,
diagnosis, and treatment. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2019; 49(3):
477–499.
40 Chapagain D, Range F, Huber L, et al. Cognitive aging in dogs. Gerontology 2018;
64(2): 165–171.
41 Sordo L, Gunn-Moore DA. Cognitive dysfunction in cats: update on neuropatho-
logical and behavioural changes plus clinical management. Vet Rec 2021; 188(1): e3.
42 Gunn- Moore D, Moffat K, Christie LA, et al. Cognitive dysfunction and the neuro-
biology of aging in cats. J Small Anim Pract 2007; 48(10): 546–553.
43 Rigotti CF, Brearley JC. Anaesthesia for paediatric and geriatric patients. In:
Duke-Novakovski T, deVries M, Seymour C, eds. BSAVA Manual of Canine and
Feline Anaesthesia and Analgesia, 3rd edn. Quedgeley, UK: British Small Animal
Association, 2016: 418–427.
44 Le Brech S, Amat M, Temple D, et al. Evaluation of two practical tools to assess
cognitive impairment in aged dogs. Animals (Basel) 2022; 12(24): 3538.
45 Kim GH. Renal effects of prostaglandins and cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors.
Electrolyte Blood Press 2008; 6(1): 35–41.
46 Harris RC Jr. Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibition and renal physiology. Am J Cardiol 2002;
89(6a): 10D–17D.
47 Kannapiran M, Nisha D, Madhusudhana Rao A. Underestimation of impaired kid-
ney function with serum creatinine. Indian J Clin Biochem 2010; 25(4): 380–384.
48 Quimby JM, Lorbach SK, Saffire A, et al. Serum concentrations of gabapentin in
cats with chronic kidney disease. J Feline Med Surg 2022; 24(12): 1260–1266.
49 McLean AJ, Le Couteur DG. Aging biology and geriatric clinical pharmacology.
Pharmacol Rev 2004; 56(2): 163–184.
50 Rana MV, Bonasera LK, Bordelon GJ. Pharmacologic considerations of anesthetic
agents in geriatric patients. Anesthesiol Clin 2017; 35(2): 259–271.
51 Danielle Aw, Silva AB, Palmer DB. Immunosenescence: emerging challenges for an
aging population. Immunology 2007; 120(4): 435–446.
52 Speakman JR, van Acker A, Harper EJ. Age-related changes in the metabolism and
body composition of three dog breeds and their relationship to life expectancy.
Aging Cell 2003; 2(5): 265–275.
53 Pottie RG, Dart CM, Perkins NR, et al. Effect of hypothermia on recovery from
general anaesthesia in the dog. Aust Vet J 2007; 85(4): 158–162.
54 Redondo JI, Suesta P, Gil L, et al. Retrospective study of the prevalence of postan-
aesthetic hypothermia in cats. Vet Rec 2012; 170(8): 206.
55 Clark-Price S. Inadvertent perianesthetic hypothermia in small animal patients.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2015; 45(5): 983–994.
56 Regan MJ, Eger EI II. Effect of hypothermia in dogs on anesthetizing and apneic
doses of inhalation agents. Determination of the anesthetic index (Apnea/MAC).
Anesthesiology 1967; 28(4): 689–700.
57 Eger EI II. Age, minimum alveolar anesthetic concentration, and minimum alveo-
lar anesthetic concentration-awake. Anesth Analg 2001; 93(4): 947–953.
58 Lopez MB. Postanaesthetic shivering – from pathophysiology to prevention.
Rom J Anaesth Intensive Care 2018; 25(1): 73–81.
59 Frank SM, Fleisher LA, Olson KF, et al. Multivariate determinants of early postop-
erative oxygen consumption in elderly patients. Effects of shivering, body tempera-
ture, and gender. Anesthesiology 1995; 83(2): 241–249.
60 Matsota PK, Koliantzaki IK, Kostopanagiotou GG. Pharmacological approach for
the prevention of postoperative shivering: a systematic review of prospective rand-
omized controlled trials. Asian J Anesthesiol 2019; 57(3): 66–84.
61 Díaz M, Becker DE. Thermoregulation: physiological and clinical considerations
during sedation and general anesthesia. Anesth Prog 2010; 57(1): 25–32.
62 Lin HS, Watts JN, Peel NM, et al. Frailty and post-operative outcomes in older
surgical patients: a systematic review. BMC Geriatr 2016; 16(1): 157.
63 Hewitt J, Long S, Carter B, et al. The prevalence of frailty and its association with
clinical outcomes in general surgery: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Age Aging 2018; 47(6): 793–800.
64 McIsaac DI, MacDonald DB, Aucoin SD. Frailty for Perioperative clinicians:
a narrative review. Anesth Analg 2020; 130(6): 1450–1460.
65 Alkadri J, Hage D, Nickerson LH, et al. A systematic review and meta-analysis of
preoperative frailty instruments derived from electronic health data. Anesth Analg
2021; 133(5): 1094–1106.
66 Olotu C, Weimann A, Bahrs C, et al. The perioperative care of older patients.
Dtsch Arztebl Int 2019; 116(5): 63–69.
67 McIsaac DI, Harris EP, Hladkowicz E, et al. Prospective comparison of preoperative
predictive performance between 3 leading frailty instruments. Anesth Analg 2020;
131(1): 263–272.
68 Mitnitski AB, Mogilner AJ, Rockwood K. Accumulation of deficits as a proxy
measure of aging. Sci World J 2001; 1: 323–336.
69 Whitlock EL, Whittington RA. The frailty syndrome: anesthesiologists must
understand more and fear less. Anesth Analg 2020; 130(6): 1445–1448.
70 Whitlock EL. Frailty: more than the sum of its parts? Anesth Analg 2021; 133(5):
1090–1093.
71 Fried LP, Tangen CM, Walston J, et al. Frailty in older adults: evidence for a pheno-
type. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2001; 56(3): M146–M156.
72 Hua J, Hoummady S, Muller C, et al. Assessment of frailty in aged dogs. Am J Vet
Res 2016; 77(12): 1357–1365.
73 Banzato T, Franzo G, Di Maggio R, et al. A Frailty Index based on clinical data to
quantify mortality risk in dogs. Sci Rep 2019; 9(1): 16749.
74 Chen FL, Ullal TV, Graves JL, et al. Evaluating instruments for assessing healthspan:
a multi-center cross-sectional study on Health-Related Quality of Life (HRQL) and
frailty in the companion dog. Geroscience 2023; 45(4): 2089–2108.
75 Hosgood G, Scholl D. Evalution of age as a risk factor for perianesthetic morbidity
and mortality in the dog. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 1998; 8(3): 222–236.
76 Brodbelt DC, Pfeiffer DU, Young LE, et al. Risk factors for anaesthetic-related death
in cats: results from the Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Small Animal
Fatalities (CEPSAF). Br J Anaesth 2007; 99(5): 617–623.
77 Brodbelt DC, Pfeiffer DU, Young LE, et al. Results of the Confidential Enquiry into
Perioperative Small Animal Fatalities regarding risk factors for anesthetic-related
death in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008; 233(7): 1096–1104.
78 Matthews NS, Mohn TJ, Yang M, et al. Factors associated with anesthetic-related
death in dogs and cats in primary care veterinary hospitals. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2017; 250(6): 655–665.
79 Shoop-Worrall SJ, O’Neill DG, Viscasillas J, et al. Mortality related to general anaes-
thesia and sedation in dogs under UK primary veterinary care. Vet Anaesth Analg
2022; 49(5): 433–442.
80 Viskjer S, Sjöström L. Effect of the duration of food withholding prior to anesthesia
on gastroesophageal reflux and regurgitation in healthy dogs undergoing elective
orthopedic surgery. Am J Vet Res 2017; 78(2): 144–150.
81 Davies JA, Fransson BA, Davis AM, et al. Incidence of and risk factors for postop-
erative regurgitation and vomiting in dogs: 244 cases (2000–2012). J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2015; 246(3): 327–335.
82 Kogan DA, Johnson LR, Jandrey KE, et al. Clinical, clinicopathologic, and
radiographic findings in dogs with aspiration pneumonia: 88 cases (2004–2006).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008; 233(11): 1742–1747.
83 Kogan DA, Johnson LR, Sturges BK, et al. Etiology and clinical outcome in dogs
with aspiration pneumonia: 88 cases (2004–2006). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008;
233(11): 1748–1755.
84 Galatos AD, Raptopoulos D. Gastro-oesophageal reflux during anaesthesia in the
dog: the effect of age, positioning and type of surgical procedure. Vet Rec 1995;
137(20): 513–516.
85 Lassen K, Soop M, Nygren J, et al. Consensus review of optimal perioperative care
in colorectal surgery: Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) Group recommen-
dations. Arch Surg 2009; 144(10): 961–969.
86 Savvas I, Pavlidou K, Anagnostou T, et al. Factors affecting intraoperative gastro-
oesophageal reflux in dogs and cats. Animals (Basel) 2022; 12(3): 247.
87 Savvas I, Raptopoulos D, Rallis T. A “light meal” three hours preoperatively
decreases the incidence of gastro-esophageal reflux in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
2016; 52(6): 357–363.

-- 1377 of 1450 --

1362 	Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Selected Patients
88 Baetge C, Cummings KJ, Deveau M. Reduced risk of pneumonia after changes in
anesthetic procedures for dogs receiving repeated anesthesia for radiation treat-
ment. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2019; 60(2): 241–245.
89 Wilson DV, Evans AT, Mauer WA. Influence of metoclopramide on gastroesopha-
geal reflux in anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 2006; 67(1): 26–31.
90 Zacuto AC, Marks SL, Osborn J, et al. The influence of esomeprazole and cisapride
on gastroesophageal reflux during anesthesia in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2012;
26(3): 518–525.
91 Allison A, Italiano M, Robinson R. Comparison of two topical treatments of
gastro-oesophageal regurgitation in dogs during general anaesthesia. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2020; 47(5): 672–675.
92 Joubert KE. Pre-anaesthetic screening of geriatric dogs. J S Afr Vet Assoc 2007;
78(1): 31–35.
93 Díaz MDM, Kaartinen J, Allison A. Preanaesthetic blood tests in cats and dogs
older than 8 years: anaesthetists’ prediction and peri-anaesthetic changes.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2021; 48(6): 854–860.
94 Davies M, Kawaguchi S. Pregeneral anaesthetic blood screening of dogs and cats
attending a UK practice. Vet Rec 2014; 174(20): 506.
95 Akhtar S. Pharmacological considerations in the elderly. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol
2018; 31(1): 11–18.
96 Wilder-Smith OH. Opioid use in the elderly. Eur J Pain 2005; 9(2): 137–140.
97 Waterman AE, Kalthum W. Pharmacokinetics of pethidine administered intra-
muscularly and intravenously to dogs over 10 years old. Res Vet Sci 1990; 48(2):
245–248.
98 Waterman AE, Kalthum W. Pharmacokinetics of intramuscularly administered
pethidine in dogs and the influence of anaesthesia and surgery. Vet Rec 1989;
124(12): 293–296.
99 Schnider TW, Minto CF, Shafer SL, et al. The influence of age on propofol phar-
macodynamics. Anesthesiology 1999; 90(6): 1502–1516.
100 Schultz A, Grouven U, Zander I, et al. Age-related effects in the EEG during
propofol anaesthesia. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2004; 48(1): 27–34.
101 Reid J, Nolan AM. Pharmacokinetics of propofol as an induction agent in geriatric
dogs. Res Vet Sci 1996; 61(2): 169–171.
102 Nolan AM, Reid J, Grant S. The effects of halothane and nitrous oxide on the phar-
macokinetics of propofol in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 1993; 16(3): 335–342.
103 Muir W, Lerche P, Wiese A, et al. The cardiorespiratory and anesthetic effects of
clinical and supraclinical doses of alfaxalone in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009;
36(1): 42–54.
104 Muir W, Lerche P, Wiese A, et al. Cardiorespiratory and anesthetic effects of clini-
cal and supraclinical doses of alfaxalone in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2008; 35(6):
451–462.
105 Bayldon W, Carter JE, Beths T, et al. Accidental alfaxalone overdose in a mature
cat undergoing anaesthesia for magnetic resonance imaging. JFMS Open Rep
2016; 2(1): 2055116916647740.
106 Kaka U, Saifullah B, Abubakar AA, et al. Serum concentration of ketamine and
antinociceptive effects of ketamine and ketamine-lidocaine infusions in conscious
dogs. BMC Vet Res 2016; 12(1): 198.
107 Muir WW III, Wiese AJ, March PA. Effects of morphine, lidocaine, ketamine,
and morphine-lidocaine- ketamine drug combination on minimum alveolar
concentration in dogs anesthetized with isoflurane. Am J Vet Res 2003; 64(9):
1155–1160.
108 Bornkamp JL, Robertson S, Isaza NM, et al. Effects of anesthetic induction with a
benzodiazepine plus ketamine hydrochloride or propofol on hypothermia in dogs
undergoing ovariohysterectomy. Am J Vet Res 2016; 77(4): 351–357.
109 Franco LG, Wilges CHM, Junior DP, et al. Effects of ketamine constant rate infu-
sions on cardiac biomarkers and cardiac function in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018;
45(3): 250–259.
110 Cooter M, Ni K, Thomas J, et al. Age-dependent decrease in minimum alveolar
concentration of inhaled anaesthetics: a systematic search of published studies and
meta-regression analysis. Br J Anaesth 2020; 124(1): e4–e7.
111 Magnusson KR, Scanga C, Wagner AE, et al. Changes in anesthetic sensitivity and
glutamate receptors in the aging canine brain. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2000;
55(9): B448–B454.
112 Yamashita K, Iwasaki Y, Umar MA, et al. Effect of age on minimum alveolar con-
centration (MAC) of sevoflurane in dogs. J Vet Med Sci 2009; 71(11): 1509–1512.
113 Stankiewicz-Rudnicki M. Neuromuscular blockade in the elderly. Anaesthesiol
Intensive Ther 2016; 48(4): 257–260.
114 Lee LA, Athanassoglou V, Pandit JJ. Neuromuscular blockade in the elderly
patient. J Pain Res 2016; 9: 437–444.
115 Schmartz D, Sghaier R, Bernard P, et al. Neuromuscular block in patients 80 years
and older: a prospective, controlled study. BMC Anesthesiol 2021; 21(1): 225.
116 Nilsson UG. Intraoperative positioning of patients under general anesthesia and
the risk of postoperative pain and pressure ulcers. J Perianesth Nurs 2013; 28(3):
137–143.
117 Chen C, Hsieh H. The introduction of ERAS nutritional care can improve the
quality of postoperative care. Curr Dev Nutr 2022; 6: 738.
118 Hay Kraus BL. Spotlight on the perioperative use of maropitant citrate. Vet Med
(Auckl) 2017; 8:41–51.
119 Carney HC, Little S, Brownlee-Tomasso, et al. AAFP and ISFM feline-friendly
nursing care guidelines. J Feline Med Surg 2012; 14(5): 337–349.

-- 1378 of 1450 --

1363
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The Sixth E dition of L umb and J ones	. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Prevalence of cancer pain
The true prevalence of cancer pain in dogs and cats is unknown;
however, given the conserved biology and malignant transforma-
tion processes shared between companion animals and people, it is
plausible that the occurrence of cancer pain is comparable across
these species. Pain is a common ailment in human cancer patients;
the incidence of cancer pain at initial diagnosis approaches 30%
and, upon disease progression, up to 65–85% of human cancer
patients will experience pain at some point [1]. Importantly, the
clinical impact of cancer pain is significant with moderate to severe
pain reported in 38% of all patients undergoing cancer treat-
ment [2], and pain being the most common physical symptom
reported in people diagnosed with terminal cancer [3].
Cancer pain negatively affects quality of life as well as many
important physiological functions and pain alleviation in patients
should be an utmost clinical and humane priority. No cures exist for
many patients suffering from advanced cancer; however, effective
analgesic strategies can ameliorate the discomfort and suffering
associated with terminal disease. Estimates indicate that more than
70% of human cancer patients suffering from pain can find relief
with opioid-based regimens [4]. It is justifiable to believe that equally
effective cancer pain management may be achievable for compan-
ion animals too; however, alternative analgesic strategies must be
employed due to pharmacokinetic differences and decreased anal-
gesic efficacy of oral opioids in companion animals compared with
humans [5]. In order for cancer pain to be adequately managed, it
must be recognized early and frequently reassessed by veterinary
caregivers and pet owners. Many barriers obstruct the optimal
management of cancer-related pain in animals, including poor
recognition associated with many cancers, difficulty in response
assessment, limited knowledge regarding the efficacy and usage of
analgesics in veterinary outpatients, and suboptimal communication
between veterinary caregivers and pet owners [6].
Recognition and assessment of cancer pain
One essential component of pain recognition is adequate commu-
nication with the pet owner [6]. Observant pet owners know their
pet’s personality well and can recognize subtle changes in behavior
that might represent pain or discomfort [7,8]. As such, it is impera-
tive that veterinary caregivers make conscious efforts to believe the
perceptions of pet owners who think their pet is experiencing
pain. Common behaviors noted by pet owners that might represent
pain include changes in movement, posture, grooming, appetite
and thirst, respiration rate, or defecation and urination patterns.
Development of new behaviors such as focal licking, drooling, dys-
phagia, or vocalization, as well as changes in their interactions with
people, other animals, or the environment may also be noted [9].
To facilitate the recognition of pain and its assessment through
behavioral observations, several validated observer pain scales have
70 Cancer Patients
Timothy M. Fan and Stephanie Keating
Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, USA
Chapter contents
Prevalence of cancer pain, 1363
Recognition and assessment of cancer pain, 1363
Types of pain associated with cancer, 1364
Specific underlying causes of cancer pain, 1364
Bone cancer pain, 1364
Radiotherapy-induced pain, 1365
Chemotherapy-induced pain, 1365
Surgery-induced pain, 1366
Pharmacologic treatment strategies, 1366
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, 1367
Opioids, 1367
N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonists, 1367
Combination analgesics, 1367
Anticonvulsants, 1368
Antidepressants, 1368
Cannabinoids, 1368
Cancer- specific pain treatment options, 1368
General therapeutic strategies for bone cancer pain, 1368
Radiation burns – acute side effects, 1370
Promising innovative treatments, 1370
Anesthesia and cancer outcomes, 1371
Cancer recurrence, 1371
Pain and analgesic techniques, 1372
References, 1373

-- 1379 of 1450 --

1364 	Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Selected Patients
been developed [10–13]. However, the majority of conventional pain
scales have been validated in the context of acute, postoperative
pain, or chronic osteoarthritic pain, and hence their suitability for
cancer pain assessment might be limited and they may require inter-
pretative modifications to maximize their utility in assessing pain in
cancer patients. Unidimensional pain scales are conceptually sim-
plistic, and hence user-friendly, and include the visual analog scale
(VAS), the numerical rating scale (NRS), and the simple descriptive
scale (SDS). These scales involve subjective, unguided assessment by
the observer, where pain is (1) assigned an integer score from 0
(absent) to 10 (worst possible pain) (NRS); (2) indicated on a con-
tinuous 10-cm line to indicate the severity of pain (VAS); or (3)
assigned a designation such as absent, mild, moderate, severe, very
severe, or worst possible pain (SDS). There are many weaknesses
with these assessment tools, including interobserver variability,
number bias, and baseline drift, among others; however, these scales
may be helpful when used consistently by the same observer in con-
junction with more objective and quantifiable metrics.
Species-specific multidimensional composite pain scales have
been developed to reduce the subjective nature of pain assessment
and attempt to capture the sensory-discriminative as well as affective
and cognitive components of pain [13,14]. These scales have been
validated and some offer analgesic intervention points in postopera-
tive veterinary patients. Despite the simplicity of unidimensional
scales and validity of postoperative multidimensional pain scales,
their utilization by pet owners and veterinary caregivers might not
be completely applicable to the assessment of tumor-bearing ani-
mals, given the distinct pathophysiology of cancer pain. To address
these limitations, alternative assessment schemes have been vali-
dated for pets that include either behavioral scales or health-related
quality-of-life questionnaires specific to cancer pain [15–20].
Through the use of cancer-pain-specific behavior scales or question-
naires, the objective assessment of pain and its alleviation can be
more uniformly standardized in tumor-bearing pets.
In addition to cancer-pain-specific scales, it would be ideal to
have complementary and orthogonal methodologies for objectively
characterizing cancer pain. Some objective and subjective veteri-
nary cancer pain assessment tools have been developed, which cor-
relate well with behavioral changes and perceived pain reported by
pet owners [21]. Additionally, some methodologies for quantifying
cancer pain that directly affects bodily movement or ambulation
can be objectively quantified by activity monitors or computerized
force plate and gait analysis systems [22,23].
Types of pain associated with cancer
Cancer pain arises from the direct invasion of tumor cells into
nerves, bones, soft tissue, ligaments, and fascia. Pain also can be
elicited through the distention and obstruction of internal organs
secondary to tumor infiltration. Erosive or inflammatory processes
induced by cancer cells within the microenvironment can generate
pain too. Mechanistically, cancer pain can be categorized as nocic-
eptive (somatic and visceral) or neuropathic in origin.
Nociceptive pain is associated with direct tissue injury from tumor
infiltration and peritumoral inflammation. Perception of pain is
caused by the stimulation of peripheral nociceptors residing in
cutaneous and deeper musculoskeletal structures.
• Somatic pain arises from direct injury due to cancer cell invasion
into the skeleton, soft tissues, or tendons/ligaments; often mani-
fests as focal and stabbing in nature.
• Visceral pain arises from cancer cell infiltration, compression,
or distortion of internal organs within the abdominal, thoracic, or
pelvic cavities; often manifests as diffuse and squeezing in
character.
Neuropathic pain is directly related to cancer cell infiltration of
peripheral nerves, nerve plexi and roots, or spinal cord; often asso-
ciated with paresthesia or numbness and described as burning or
shooting in nature.
Although cancer-associated pain can be discretely categorized
as either nociceptive or neuropathic, a single tumor type can
elicit pain that has blended characteristics of both nociceptive
and neuropathic origins. Notably, pain characteristics can be
dynamic and change over the course of disease progression. This
is a result of surrounding structures becoming increasingly
affected, and from structural and neurochemical changes in the
peripheral and central nervous systems leading to ongoing pain
signals and release of molecular mediators from neoplastic cells.
The evolving nature of pain generation has important implica-
tions for pain management, and often requires a multimodal
analgesic approach. A non-exhaustive list of common cancers
arising in companion animals and the type of pain that they
might elicit is summarized in Table 70.1.
Specific underlying causes of cancer pain
Bone cancer pain
Bone is a living organ, rich in blood supply and nerves. Painful sen-
sations arising from the skeleton can decrease quality-of-life scores
in pets. Given its principal anatomic function for bearing weight
and withstanding cyclic compressive forces, compromise of the
structural integrity of bone poses risk for pain and pathologic frac-
ture. Neoplasms involving the skeleton can arise primarily from the
Table 70.1 Common painful cancers in companion animals.
Type of
cancer pain
Example
Nociceptive
Somatic 	Primary bone sarcomas (e.g., osteosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, and
chondrosarcoma)
Joint sarcomas (e.g., histiocytic and synovial cell)
Skeletal metastases (e.g., carcinoma of mammary, prostate,
anal sac apocrine gland, lung, and transitional cell)
Multiple myeloma or solitary osseous plasmacytoma
Oral cavity tumors (e.g., melanoma, fibrosarcoma, and squamous
cell carcinoma)
Nasal cavity tumors (e.g., adenocarcinoma, chondrosarcoma,
and squamous cell carcinoma)
Skull and orbital tumors (e.g., multilobular osteochondrosarcoma)
Ear tumors (e.g., ceruminous gland carcinoma)
Cutaneous and subcutaneous tumors (e.g., mast cell tumor,
basal cell carcinoma, apocrine gland carcinoma, and injection-site
sarcoma)
Mammary tumors (e.g., inflammatory mammary carcinoma)
Visceral 	Urogenital tumors (e.g., transitional cell carcinoma, prostate
carcinoma, and renal carcinoma)
Reproductive tumors (e.g., uterine leiomyosarcoma)
Carcinomatosis (e.g., serosal surface-involving malignancy)
Liver and splenic tumors (e.g., hepatocellular carcinoma and
hemangiosarcoma)
Pancreatic carcinoma
Neuropathic 	Central nervous system (e.g., meningioma and astrocytoma)
Brachial plexus tumor
Vertebral body tumor with compression of spinal cord (e.g.,
osteosarcoma or other axillary bone sarcoma)

-- 1380 of 1450 --

Chapter 70: Cancer Patients 	1365
bone, or secondarily invade or metastasize to involve the skeleton.
In dogs, osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common cancer to cause
focal skeletal pain. However, other frequently diagnosed tumor
types can involve bone too, including metastatic carcinoma and
hematopoietic neoplasms such as multiple myeloma. In cats, pri-
mary bone tumors occur less frequently than in dogs; however,
involvement of bone from local invasion is common for oral squa-
mous cell carcinoma [24]. Despite the diverse tumor histologies
that can affect bone, the mechanisms for how tumor cells invade
and generate skeletal pain are likely conserved across companion
animals.
Mechanisms of bone cancer pain
Bone cancer pain is attributed to specific host responses occurring
within the bone microenvironment. First, the presence of cancer
cells results in the release of chemical mediators by neoplastic and
non-neoplastic stromal cells, which in turn stimulate sensory
afferent nociceptors and cause painful sensations [25]. Specific
ligands secreted by both cancer and stromal cells capable of nocic-
eptor activation include endothelin-1, nerve growth factor (NGF),
and prostaglandin-E 2 [26]. Additionally, trafficking immune cells
within the tumor microenvironment secrete proinflammatory
cytokines, including IL-1β, TNFα, and bradykinin that also stimu-
late nociceptors [26]. Second, preclinical evidence indicates that
the generation and maintenance of bone cancer pain is directly
attributed to pathologic osteoclastic bone resorption [27,28].
Mechanistically, osteoclastic bone resorption is mediated by the
coordinated secretion of protons and cathepsin K, a cysteine pro-
tease. The localized acidic environment created by osteoclasts
stimulates afferent nociceptors through transient receptor poten-
tial vanilloid receptor 1 (TRPV1) and acid-sensing ion channels
2/3 (ASIC 2/3) [26,29]. Third, bone cancer pain can be generated
as a consequence of bone erosion and subsequent mechanical
instability, which allows for distortion of putative mechanotrans-
ducers belonging to the TRPV receptor family [30].
Neuroplastic changes are central to the propagation of nocicep-
tive signals and the development of neuropathic and chronic pain
states with bone cancer. The destruction, compression, or stretch-
ing of peripheral sensory fibers from the neoplastic process can
directly generate aberrant nerve impulses and result in neuropathic
pain. Additionally, chemical mediators within the tumor microen-
vironment, notably NGF, promote ongoing disorganized sprouting
of both sensory and sympathetic nerve fibers as has been described
in canine OS [31]. These fibers form neuroma-like structures and
have been linked to background, breakthrough, and movement-
induced bone cancer pain, as well as sympathetically mediated
pain, all of which contribute to central sensitization and the devel-
opment of chronic pain states [32,33]. Based on these unifying
pathologic mechanisms, effective management of bone cancer pain
requires a multi-pronged therapeutic approach, which addresses
the fundamental drivers that contribute to pain generation.
Radiotherapy- induced pain
Ionizing radiation is effective for managing localized forms of can-
cer. Mechanistically, ionizing radiation exerts cytotoxic effects by
damaging deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), either directly or indi-
rectly. Following irreparable DNA damage, cancer cells undergo
apoptosis. When applied therapeutically, ionizing radiation can be
focally conformed to the shape of tumor masses through the use of
linear accelerators equipped with three-dimensional planning soft-
ware and sophisticated, multi-leaf collimators. However, even with
advanced equipment, small volumes of normal tissue might be irra-
diated, potentially resulting in painful radiation-induced toxicity.
Although the majority of caregivers who pursue radiation therapy
for their pets consider the side effects acceptable [34], some animals
might experience considerable morbidity secondary to acute radia-
tion burns. Depending upon the radiation field, acute moist der-
matitis, mucositis, and colitis can be early radiation side effects
encountered with curative protocols (Fig. 70.1) [35]. Common ana-
tomic sites for the development of painful radiation-induced
mucositis are the mouth when oral or nasal tumors are irradiated,
and the large colon/rectum (colitis and proctitis) when pelvic irra-
diation is performed [36]. Infrequently, late radiation side effects
might result in painful and unacceptable toxicity, including the
development of osteoradionecrosis (Fig. 70.2), anatomic stricture,
and peripheral neuropathies [37].
Chemotherapy-induced pain
The administration of systemic chemotherapy is not typically
uncomfortable; however, it can infrequently result in painful local
and systemic side effects. Perivascular extravasation of certain
chemotherapeutics, including vincristine, doxorubicin, vinblas-
tine, mechlorethamine, dactinomycin, and pamidronate might
result in painful tissue irritation (Fig. 70.3), at times severe enough
Figure 70.1 Resolving painful acute moist dermatitis in two different
canine patients undergoing palliative or curative-intent radiation therapy
for the treatment of cancer involving the oral or nasal cavities, respectively.
Figure 70.2 Irreparable late radiation toxicity in the form of
osteoradionecrosis in a dog with nasal squamous cell carcinoma treated
with high cumulative doses of radiation therapy.

-- 1381 of 1450 --

1366 	Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Selected Patients
to necessitate surgical debridement [38]. Additionally, some
chemotherapeutic agents have greater tendencies to perturb intes-
tinal transit times and resident microflora, resulting in colitis
(e.g., doxorubicin) or constipation (e.g., vinca alkaloids), which
have the potential to generate visceral pain [39]. Bioconversion of
some chemotherapeutic agents, such as cyclophosphamide, can
lead to the production of irritating metabolites (e.g., acrolein) and
the subsequent development of painful syndromes, including
sterile hemorrhagic cystitis [40]. Certain chemotherapeutic
agents, such as dacarbazine, which have low pH (~3) can elicit
burning sensations at the catheter site during intravenous infu-
sion. Other chemotherapeutic agents, such as paclitaxel and
docetaxel, require Cremophor EL and polysorbate 80, respec-
tively, for solubilization and these solvents can directly activate
complement and elicit systemic inflammatory cytokine release,
resulting in diffuse pain sensations and systemic hypersensitivity
reactions [41,42]. Finally, painful peripheral neuropathies can be
associated with the administration of certain drugs such as vin-
cristine, cisplatin, and the taxanes in people [43], and similar side
effects have been infrequently documented in companion
animals [44,45].
Surgery-induced pain
Invasive diagnostic or therapeutic procedures can cause acute noci-
ceptive and possibly neuropathic pain in veterinary cancer patients.
Staging procedures such as tissue biopsies, bone marrow aspiration,
and bone biopsies should be expected to cause mild to moderate
pain that can be preemptively treated with analgesics. More aggres-
sive surgeries such as amputation, hemipelvectomy, thoracotomy,
radical mastectomy, and large en bloc tumor resection, including
orbitectomy, mandibulectomy, or maxillectomy, will generate
severe postoperative pain and should be treated with a preventive
analgesic strategy, including regional blocks such as epidural or
interpleural analgesia or specific peripheral nerve blocks. Longer-
lasting local anesthetic formulations, such as liposomal bupiv-
acaine, can also be administered peri-incisionally to extend the
duration of local analgesia further into the postoperative period.
The use of postoperative full μ-opioid receptor agonists should be a
standard analgesic regimen for companion animals undergoing
removal of painful invasive tumors through radical surgeries.
Opioid analgesics should be combined with an anti-inflammatory
agent whenever possible, as well as adjunctive analgesics as needed,
such as lidocaine and ketamine infusions, to address sensitization
and prevent the development of persistent postoperative pain states.
Pharmacologic treatment strategies
For most pets diagnosed with cancer, pain becomes established
early in the course of disease and rapidly intensifies during cancer
progression. As such, pharmacologic strategies are often used in
the setting of chronic pain management, where the primary intent
of intervention is to minimize the clinical consequences of periph-
eral and central sensitization, as well as maintain quality of life.
Tables 70.2 and 70.3 provide general guidelines for common
analgesics that are easily administered by pet owners for the man-
agement of cancer pain in companion animals. For more detailed
pharmacology and dosing regimens, please refer to Chapters 23,
24, and 25.
Figure 70.3 Painful soft tissue inflammation and
dermal ulceration secondary to extravasation of
vinblastine in a cat (left) and vincristine in a dog
(right).
Table 70.2 Analgesic drug and oral dosages for dogs.
Class 	Drug 	Dosage
NSAIDs 	Robenacoxib 	1–2 mg/kg PO q24 h
Deracoxib 	1–2 mg/kg PO q24 h
Carprofen 	2 mg/kg PO q12 h or
4 mg/kg PO q24 h
Etodolac 	5–15 mg/kg PO q24 h
Meloxicam 	0.1 mg/kg PO q24 h
Tepoxalin 	10 mg/kg PO q24 h
Piroxicam 	0.3 mg/kg PO q24 h
Ketoprofen 	1 mg/kg PO q24 h
Aspirin 	10–30 mg/kg PO q12 h
Acetaminophen 	10–33 mg/kg PO q8 h
Grapiprant 	2 mg/kg PO q24 h
Opioid 	Fentanyl patch 	2–5 μg/kg/h transdermally
NMDA antagonist 	Amantadine 	3–5 mg/kg PO q24 h
Combination analgesic 	Tramadol 	4–5 mg/kg PO q6–12 h
Anticonvulsants 	Gabapentin 	10–20 mg/kg PO q8 h
Pregabalin 	3–4 mg/kg PO q8–12 h
Tricyclic antidepressants 	Amitriptyline 	1–2 mg/kg PO q12–24 h
Clomipramine 	1–2 mg/kg PO q12 h
Corticosteroids 	Prednisone 	0.25–1.0 mg/kg PO q24 h
Dexamethasone 	0.1–0.2 mg/kg PO q24 h

-- 1382 of 1450 --

Chapter 70: Cancer Patients 	1367
Non- steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Non- steroidal anti- inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are used to con-
trol nociceptive and inflammatory pain in companion animals. The
mechanism of action of most NSAIDs is the inhibition of cyclo-
oxygenases (COXs). For cancer pain, prostaglandin synthase-2
(COX-2) is the preferential target of inhibition given its role in
inflammatory pain arising as a consequence of prostaglandin-E2
production. Prostaglandins play an important role in peripheral
sensitization leading to hyperalgesia and allodynia. Specifically,
prostaglandins regulate the sensitivity of polymodal nociceptors,
which typically cannot be easily activated by physiological stimuli.
However, following tissue injury and inflammation, the release of
prostaglandins facilitates responsiveness of “silent” polymodal
nociceptors [46]. Prostaglandins can also activate sodium channels
in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, resulting in central sensitiza-
tion and the establishment of chronic cancer pain [47]. The NSAID,
grapiprant, does not inhibit the production of prostaglandin-E 2 but
antagonizes the EP4 receptor, preventing PGE2 from binding, and
reducing pain and inflammation without preventing the produc-
tion of constitutive prostaglandins [48]. The use of NSAIDs for
managing cancer pain might be particularly relevant in companion
animals given the multiple tumor histologies which overexpress
COX-2 [49], and therefore have the potential for nociceptive
sensitization through tumor-derived prostaglandin generation.
Additionally, the anticancer effects of some NSAIDs, notably pirox-
icam, may have indirect analgesic benefits secondary to possible
reductions in tumor burden [50,51].
Opioids
Three conventional opioid receptor subtypes have been cloned and
isolated, known as μ-, κ-, and δ-opioid receptors. Opioid receptors
are distributed widely, being located in peripheral tissues, immune
cells, sensory nerve terminals, and within the central nervous sys-
tem at spinal and supraspinal sites. Spinally, they are localized pri-
marily in the superficial dorsal horn within laminae I, II, and V.
Within the dorsal horn, most opioid receptors are located on pre-
synaptic terminals of afferent fibers; however, lower densities of
opioid receptors are also found on postsynaptic sites and interneu-
rons. The mechanism of analgesia is through reduced neurotrans-
mitter release from nociceptive C fibers and postsynaptic inhibition
of neurons conveying information from the spinal cord to higher
centers of the brain. Binding of opioids to their presynaptic inhibi-
tory receptor blocks the release of glutamate, substance P, and other
neurotransmitters, while binding to the postsynaptic receptor fur-
ther inhibits neuronal depolarization. Opioids further suppress
nociception by enhancing activity in descending inhibitory pain
pathways, which project down from supraspinal sites to modulate
signals in the dorsal horn. Opioids are readily available, can be
titrated easily to the desired effect, and demonstrate predictable
adverse effects that can be minimized with preventive interven-
tions. Side effects in companion animals include diarrhea, vomit-
ing, constipation, and excessive sedation.
Parenteral opioid administration is highly effective for treating
pain in companion animals. Unfortunately, there is considerable
evidence that orally administered opioids are unlikely to offer the
same analgesic benefits in these species. Many orally administered
opioids demonstrate very low oral bioavailability, highly variable
absorption, and absent to low plasma concentrations of the parent
compound or active metabolite, with short elimination half-
lives [52–56]. These findings, combined with the lack of positive
antinociceptive and clinical studies, along with the risk of misuse
and drug diversion, do not currently support the routine prescrip-
tion of orally administered opioids to treat pain in companion ani-
mals. However, there is evidence to support alternative routes of
opioid administration for outpatients. Analgesic plasma concentra-
tions and evidence of analgesic efficacy have been demonstrated
with transmucosal administration of buprenorphine and transder-
mal patch administration of fentanyl in cats and dogs [57–62].
N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonists
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors play a key role in central
sensitization within the dorsal horn of the spinal cord following the
release of excitatory neurotransmitters from nociceptor terminals.
Sustained glutamate release leads to perturbations in synaptic
receptor density, threshold, kinetics, and activation, with subse-
quent increases in pain transmission. During central sensitization,
glutamate-activated NMDA receptors undergo post-translational
phosphorylation, increasing their synaptic distribution and respon-
siveness to glutamate, with resultant hyperexcitability to normally
subthreshold noxious stimuli. As such, NMDA antagonists includ-
ing ketamine, tiletamine, amantadine, and dextromethorphan have
a role in the management of chronic cancer pain when central sen-
sitization has been established.
Combination analgesics
Tramadol is a centrally acting analgesic, classified as an opioidergic/
monoaminergic drug based on its shared properties with both
opioids and tricyclic antidepressants. Tramadol weakly binds to the
μ- opioid receptor, inhibits the reuptake of serotonin and norepi-
nephrine, and promotes neuronal serotonin release. An active
metabolite of tramadol, O-desmethyltramadol, has greater affinity
for the μ-opioid receptor than the parent molecule and is responsi-
ble for much of the opioid-induced analgesia. Based on these
properties, tramadol is theoretically a suitable analgesic for the
management 	of 	both 	nociceptive 	and 	neuropathic 	pain.
Unfortunately, oral administration in dogs has failed to demon-
strate any significant analgesia for either postoperative or osteoar-
thritis pain [63,64]; however, studies in cats have yielded more
promising results, likely due to pharmacokinetic and possibly
Table 70.3 Analgesic drug and oral dosages for cats.
Class 	Drug 	Dosage
NSAIDsa 	Robenacoxib 	1 mg/kg PO q24 h
maximum 3 days (US), 6 days (EU)
Ketoprofen 	1 mg/kg PO q24 h
maximum 5 days
Meloxicam 	0.05 mg/kg PO q24 h
Tolfenamic acid 	4 mg/kg PO q24 h
maximum 3 days
Piroxicam 	0.3 mg/kg PO q48 h
Opioids 	Buprenorphine 	0.02 mg/kg PO sublingual q6–8 h
Fentanyl patch 	2–5 μg/kg/h transdermally
NMDA antagonist 	Amantadine 	3 mg/kg PO q24 h
Combination analgesic 	Tramadol 	1–2 mg/kg PO q12–24 h
Anticonvulsants 	Gabapentin 	5–10 mg/kg PO q8–12 h
Pregabalin 	1–2 mg/kg PO q12 h
Tricyclic antidepressants 	Amitriptyline 	1–2 mg/kg PO q24 h
Clomipramine 	0.5–1 mg/kg PO q24 h
Corticosteroidsa 	Prednisone 	1–1.5 mg/kg PO q24 h
Dexamethasone 	0.1–0.2 mg/kg PO q24 h
a Long-term NSAID or corticosteroid administration should be undertaken following
informed client consent with regular patient monitoring and administration of the
lowest effective dose.

-- 1383 of 1450 --

1368 	Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Selected Patients
pharmacodynamic differences [65,66]. Additionally, tramadol
exerts antihyperalgesic effects, possibly due to the monoaminergic
properties of the drug [65] and may offer antinociceptive effects
and improve comfort in animals with central sensitization from
cancer when used as an adjunctive analgesic. Specifically, tramadol
administered in combination with metamizole (dipyrone), with or
without NSAIDs, demonstrated clinical efficacy for management of
moderate to severe cancer pain in dogs and improved quality-of-life
scores [16].
Anticonvulsants
Anticonvulsants are useful adjuvant analgesics in patients with
neuropathic pain, as well as chronic pain with central sensitization.
In companion animals, gabapentin, a structural analog of γ-
aminobutyric acid (GABA), acts on presynaptic axonal terminal
voltage-gated calcium channels to reduce neurotransmitter release.
Additionally, gabapentin also induces postsynaptic inhibition by
evoking hyperpolarization inhibitory potentials in dorsal horn
neurons through the opening of potassium or chloride channels.
Gabapentin is well-tolerated, highly bioavailable, and rapidly
metabolized in dogs [67]. Recent studies suggest the adjuvant use
of gabapentin does not improve analgesia for the management of
acute nociceptive pain in dogs [68,69]; however, other studies
suggest gabapentin is effective in the management of neuropathic
pain [70]. Pregabalin is a gabapentinoid with similarities to
gabapentin; however, the longer elimination half-life creates a more
favorable dosing interval while still demonstrating analgesic
efficacy [71,72].
Antidepressants
Antidepressants, such as tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), and selective serotonin–
noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), are often used as
co-analgesic therapies for chronic cancer pain, especially of neuro-
pathic origin. Chronic neuropathic pain can result from local
nerve compression by expanding cancer cells, neuroma formation
from tumor NGF production or following surgical transection,
radiation-induced fibrosis or neuritis, and systemic peripheral
nerve damage from specific chemotherapeutic agents (vinca alka-
loids). Mechanistically, the analgesia produced by antidepressants
such as amitriptyline, clomipramine, fluoxetine, duloxetine, and
imipramine is attributable to their actions on endogenous mono-
aminergic pain-modulating systems. These drugs inhibit the reup-
take of various monoamines such as serotonin and noradrenaline,
allowing these biomolecules to remain present and act centrally on
descending inhibitory serotonergic and noradrenergic pathways
that modulate pain transmission at the level of the spinal cord.
While clinical proof of the analgesic efficacy of antidepressants in
veterinary cancer patients is lacking, there is some evidence that
TCAs are beneficial for neuropathic pain states in dogs [70,73].
Cannabinoids
Cannabinoids are a large class of natural and synthetic compounds
originally identified within the cannabis plant. These molecules
exert a wide range of physiologic effects, including analgesia, pro-
duced through their interactions with the endocannabinoid system.
This system is comprised of the established CB 1 and CB 2 receptors,
as well as endogenous ligands and the mechanisms responsible for
their production, reuptake, and metabolism. Analgesia results from
cannabinoid binding at presynaptic CB receptors, which decreases
intracellular calcium in the primary afferent neuron and subse-
quently decreases nociceptive neurotransmitter release. Activity of
the descending inhibitory pain pathway is also enhanced, reducing
postsynaptic neuronal excitability, and suppressing the projection
of nociceptive signals. Cannabinoids also modulate nociception
through their activity at multiple other receptor types, including
directly acting on TRPV1 receptors, and indirectly modulating the
effects of a diverse range of G-protein- coupled receptors, including
opioid receptors, which can dimerize with CB 1 and CB2 receptors.
Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and cannabidiol (CBD) are the
most abundant cannabinoids in the cannabis plant and have been
evaluated for their analgesic effects in preclinical rodent studies and
human clinical trials. There is notable heterogeneity in both the
cannabinoid preparations (THC and CBD dosages and ratios) and
conditions that have been studied, producing variable therapeutic
results; however, cannabinoids may offer an analgesic benefit in
neuropathic and chronic pain states, including cancer pain. CBD
has been isolated and administered to dogs as both a sole and
adjunctive analgesic agent for the treatment of osteoarthritis pain,
producing mixed results of analgesic efficacy as determined by
behavioral observations and objective measurements, such as force
plate analysis [74–77]. The efficacy of cannabinoids for treating
pain in companion animals with cancer has yet to be critically
evaluated.
Cancer- specific pain treatment options
General therapeutic strategies for bone
cancer pain
The most common and striking presenting sign of dogs with OS
is lameness associated with severe pain in the affected bone. The
mechanisms of bone cancer pain have been characterized using
murine preclinical models. Given the evolutionary importance of
adaptive pain, it is plausible that the same mechanisms responsi-
ble for pain generation in mouse models are also operative in
spontaneously arising bone tumors in companion animals, such
as canine OS. Since tumor cells and osteoclasts appear to play
preponderant roles in the genesis of bone pain associated with
malignant osteolysis, effective therapies should focus on (1)
eradication of viable tumor cells; (2) reduction of cancer-induced
bone resorption; (3) surgical stabilization of mechanically com-
promised bone; and (4) administration of potent pharmacologic
agents to address both the inflammatory and neuropathic com-
ponents of pain.
Viable cancer cells directly promote the generation of bone pain
through the secretion of nociceptor-activating ligands, attraction
of trafficking immune cells, and subversion of osteoclastic activi-
ties. As such, eradication of cancer cells remains a cornerstone for
successful bone pain control. Reducing bone cancer burden is
effectively achieved by cytotoxic therapies, including systemic
chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Systemic chemotherapy can be
effective in reducing tumor cell burdens within the bone microen-
vironment, but is contingent on the tumor histology (i.e., chemo-
sensitive hematopoietic neoplasms) and favorable intratumoral
biodistribution kinetics. Ionizing radiation is the most effective
treatment for alleviating bone cancer pain. The exact mechanisms
of radiation-induced pain relief are incompletely understood
but are likely related to cytotoxic effects on tumor cells and
osteoclasts [28].
Osteoclasts, cells of the monocyte-macrophage cell lineage, are
characterized by their high expressions of tartrate-resistant acid
phosphatase and cathepsin K. Under homeostatic conditions, oste-
oclasts resorb bone in balance with new bone formation by osteo-
blasts. However, bone cancers of either primary (sarcomas) or

-- 1384 of 1450 --

Chapter 70: Cancer Patients 	1369
metastatic (carcinomas) origin dysregulate osteoclastic activities in
part through subversion of the receptor activator of nuclear factor-
κB/receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB ligand/osteoprotegerin
(RANK/RANKL/OPG) axis [78].
Given the role of osteoclasts in the generation of bone cancer
pain through the secretion of protons and distortion of mecha-
notransducers, therapies that reduce osteoclast viability are useful
in reducing the severity of bone cancer pain. Aminobisphosphonates
induce osteoclast apoptosis through inhibition of the mevalonate
pathway and are first-line agents for the management of malig-
nant skeletal events in human cancer patients [79]. Although
aminobisphosphonates exert antiresorptive effects and can pro-
vide analgesia as single agents, based upon preclinical studies, the
alleviation of focal bone cancer pain might be augmented by co-
administering site-specific ionizing radiation therapy, which fur-
ther drives apoptotic cell death of malignantly subverted
osteoclasts [80,81]. However, clinical studies conducted in dogs
with 	OS 	have 	not 	uniformly 	supported 	the 	benefit 	of
such combination strategies for improving bone cancer pain
alleviation [22,82–84].
When anatomically feasible, surgical stabilization of compro-
mised bone integrity secondary to cancer infiltration can reduce
excessive compression of mechanotransducers that stimulate affer-
ent nociceptors. Diligence in patient selection for surgical stabiliza-
tion procedures is required as successful outcomes require solid
anchorage of stabilizing hardware into neighboring healthy
bone [85]. As such, large or expansive areas of cancer-infiltrated
bone will be prone to surgical failure [86], and alternative non-
surgical treatment options should be considered first-line therapies
for these types of patients.
For the majority of cancer patients experiencing pain, pharmaco-
logic agents remain the cornerstone of successful pain manage-
ment. Patients with bone cancer are prone to experiencing
debilitating episodes of incident or breakthrough pain, and the
medical armament necessary to manage bone cancer pain requires
potent opioid-based regimens with adjuvant analgesic agents as
described on the highest level of the World Health Organization
three-step analgesic ladder (Fig. 70.4).
Aminobisphosphonates
Bisphosphonates are synthetic analogs of inorganic pyrophosphate
(PPi ) initially utilized in the detergent industry as demineralizing
agents, and then for diagnostic purposes in bone scanning, based
on their ability to adsorb to bone minerals. The effective treatment
of bone disorders with bisphosphonates is attributed to their dif-
ferential effects on bone resorption and bone mineralization.
Importantly, bisphosphonates impede osteoclast activity and induce
osteoclast apoptosis, selectively reducing the cell population
responsible for bone resorption [87]. Although several bisphospho-
nates prevent bone loss, nitrogen-containing bisphosphonates
(NBPs), also known as “aminobisphosphonates,” possess the great-
est relative antiresorptive potency. Pamidronate and zoledronate
are the two most commonly utilized intravenous NBP formulations
in human oncology for their ability to decrease bone pain, improve
quality of life, delay progression of the bone lesions, and decrease
the frequency of malignant skeletal events.
Intravenous pamidronate (1–2 mg/kg) administered as a 2-h
constant rate infusion (CRI) every 28 days was well-tolerated and
exerted bone biologic and clinically relevant analgesic effects in
dogs diagnosed with appendicular OS [88,89]. Zoledronate pos-
sesses 100-fold greater antiresorptive potency compared with
pamidronate and has the advantage of being safely administered
over a shorter period of time than other NBPs. The bone biologic
effects of single-agent intravenous zoledronate have been evaluated
in dogs diagnosed with primary and secondary skeletal tumors [90].
In 10 dogs with appendicular OS, zoledronate (0.25 mg/kg) was
administered as a 15-min infusion every 28 days. Clinically relevant
analgesia from bone cancer pain was achieved in 50% of dogs for
greater than 4 months. While intravenous pamidronate and zole-
dronate are considered safe for use in companions suffering from
malignant osteolysis, some studies suggest a low risk for renal toxic-
ity or other rare complications, including electrolyte imbalances
and osteonecrosis of the jaw [91–93].
Radiotherapy
Radiation therapy is considered the most effective treatment
modality in human cancer patients for the management of osteo-
lytic bone pain. Mechanistically, the analgesic effects of ionizing
radiation can be attributed to the induction of apoptosis in both
cancer cells and resorbing osteoclasts [28]. Multiple palliative radia-
tion protocols have been reported in the veterinary literature, with
the majority of dosing schemes utilizing two to four individual
treatments of 6–10 Gy fractions. Although variably and subjectively
reported, the alleviation of bone cancer pain was achieved in the
majority of OS dogs treated, and ranged from 74–93%. Despite
symptomatic improvement following palliative radiation therapy,
the median time interval of subjective pain alleviation was not
durable, and ranged from 53–130 days [94–98]. More recently,
definitive treatment protocols delivered by stereotactic radiosur-
gery regimens (typically, 8–12 Gy per fraction delivered over three
consecutive days) have gained mainstream acceptance as the
preferred 	radiotherapeutic 	intervention 	[84]; 	however, 	the
Strong opioids
± Non-opioids
± Adjuvant analgesics	Weak opioids
± Non-opioids
± Adjuvant analgesics	Non-opioids
± Adjuvant analgesics
Step 1
Mild to moderate pain
Step 2
Moderate to severe pain
Step 3
Severe pain
Figure 70.4 World Health Organization (WHO) analgesic
ladder with indicated three-step approach to pain
management. Companion animals diagnosed with bone
cancer pain should be preemptively categorized into the
highest tier and treated aggressively with potent opioid-
based regimens.

-- 1385 of 1450 --

1370 	Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Selected Patients
development of pathologic fracture subsequent to irradiation
remains a significant adverse event for both palliative and definitive
radiation strategies [99,100].
Experimental therapeutics – intrathecal resiniferatoxin
Vanilloids belong to a family of small organic compounds that stim-
ulate afferent sensory neurons through the binding of TRPV1, a
non-selective cation ionophore [101]. Upon binding by natural ago-
nists such as capsaicin, a chili pepper extract, TRPV1 activation
leads to nociceptive responses [102].
Resiniferatoxin (RTX) is an ultrapotent analog of capsaicin
derived from the latex of a cactus-like plant (Euphorbia resinifera).
Upon binding to TRPV1, RTX causes a large and prolonged increase
in the free intracellular calcium concentration, resulting in lethal
calcium cytotoxicity with subsequent apoptosis and depletion of
TRPV1 expressing neurons, and hence reducing the sensitivity to
nociceptive inputs [103]. Importantly, RTX appears selective for
TRPV1-expressing neurons, which are unmyelinated C fibers,
while leaving large, myelinated neurons responsible for propriocep-
tion and mechanosensation intact.
Intrathecal RTX has been evaluated in pet dogs as an experi-
mental therapy for the management of pain associated with osteo-
arthritis and bone cancer [104–107]. In the setting of bone cancer
pain, pet dogs receiving intrathecal RTX achieved dramatic anal-
gesia based upon caregiver-based visual analog scores and blinded
veterinary lameness assessments within 14 days of therapy [104].
While promising, barriers currently preventing adoption as rou-
tine therapy include the lack of a commercial preparation, and the
requirement for general anesthesia to facilitate injection and pre-
vent awareness during the noxious excitation phase, which is
accompanied by physiologic changes, including increases in heart
rate and blood pressure, panting, and hypothermia. RTX has also
induced clinically meaningful analgesia following intra-articular
administration to sedated dogs with naturally occurring osteoar-
thritis [107] and may represent a future analgesic modality for ani-
mals with cancers affecting the joint, including histiocytic and
synovial cell sarcomas.
Radiation burns – acute side effects
Ionizing radiation exerts its therapeutic effects by damaging cellu-
lar DNA through the generation of free radicals. As radiation ther-
apy preferentially induces apoptosis in mitotically active cells,
acute adverse effects tend to occur more commonly in normal cells
with rapid division rates, including those of mucosal surfaces,
intestine, and skin, resulting in mucositis, colitis, and dermatitis,
respectively.
The morbidity associated with mucositis, colitis, and dermatitis
can be significant in companion animals given the inflammatory
and ulcerative pathology, and the tendency for unrestrained self-
mutilation caused by excessive licking, rubbing, or scratching. In
particular, oral mucositis pain can negatively affect oral intake of
fluids, food, and medications, with subsequent reduced quality of
life (Fig. 70.5). The level of evidence-based medicine for the effec-
tive management of radiation-induced mucositis, colitis, and der-
matitis is limited even for human cancer patients, and remains
primarily anecdotal in companion animals; however, experimental
treatments are beginning to emerge [108].
Oral mucositis can be symptomatically treated with oral rinse
solutions (weak tea solution, chlorhexidine rinse, or a mixture of
viscous lidocaine, liquid diphenhydramine, and magnesium
hydroxide), and the systemic use of NSAIDs or corticosteroids with
a weak opioid as needed. Symptoms of colitis might be effectively
relieved with the use of a corticosteroid enema and systemic medi-
cations consistent with step 2 of the WHO analgesic ladder
(Fig. 70.4). Acute moist dermatitis may benefit from topical appli-
cation of colloidal oatmeal, wheat extracts, or aloe gel extract. As
needed, the administration of broad-spectrum antibiotics or anti-
fungals might prevent the establishment of opportunistic bacterial
or fungal infections. Fortunately, the morbidity associated with
acute radiation side effects is temporally limited to the first
4–6 weeks of therapy, and most clinical symptoms are self-resolving
following supportive management.
Promising innovative treatments
Recent advancements have been made in clarifying the fundamen-
tal underpinnings that drive different forms of pain, especially bone
cancer pain, through the use of murine preclinical models [25,109].
With a greater understanding of the tumor microenvironmental
ligands responsible for peripheral afferent nociceptor stimulation, it
has recently become possible to rationally identify and design
molecularly targeted therapeutics expected to provide analgesia in
companion animals.
Nerve growth factor (NGF) plays an important role in initiating
nerve sprouting and bone cancer pain via binding to its cognate
receptor, tropomyosin-related kinase A (TrkA) and is upregulated
in chronic pain states. In murine preclinical models, blockade of
NGF signaling dramatically reduces bone cancer pain [33,110,111].
Additionally, TrkA signaling appears to be involved in canine OS
cell survival, thereby incriminating NGF as a putative ligand that
drives OS local tumor progression [112]. Of clinical significance,
species-specific anti-NGF monoclonal antibodies have also been
developed and evaluated in preclinical and clinical trials for the
treatment of neuropathic, osteoarthritis, and cancer pain. Blocking
antibodies such as frunevetmab and bedinvetmab, have been
developed for the treatment of osteoarthritis pain in cats and dogs,
respectively, and demonstrate promising analgesic effects and
safety profiles [113–116]. Given the global role of NGF in nocicep-
tion, therapeutic strategies that block TrkA signaling are expected
to provide analgesia in the setting of cancer pain in companion
animals.
Figure 70.5 Severe and painful oral mucositis manifesting as erythema and
coalescing mucosal blisters in a dog treated with curative-intent radiation
therapy for perioral hamartoma.

-- 1386 of 1450 --

Chapter 70: Cancer Patients 	1371
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is a ubiquitous intracellular mol-
ecule and plays a key role in nociception and sensitization when
released from damaged tissues, sympathetic efferent neurons, or
presynaptic vesicles in dorsal horn neurons. The P2X3 purinergic
receptors are expressed on nociceptive neurons and are responsible
for ATP-mediated pain mechanisms, with particular relevance in
chronic pain states. Importantly, purinergic receptors are also
located on neoplastic and immune cells, with activation playing an
important role in cancer progression. Experimental P2X3 antago-
nists have been evaluated in rodent models of cancer-induced bone
pain and demonstrated analgesic effects in different nociceptive
assays and reduced spontaneous pain behaviors [117–120]. Given
their role in both pain and cancer pathogenesis, P2X3 antagonists
may be a valuable future therapeutic target for cancer pain.
Finally, the neurokinin-1 receptor (NK1
R) and its endogenous
peptide ligand, substance P, are widely distributed throughout the
body, including the central and peripheral nervous systems where
they have an established role in nociceptive signaling, sensitization,
and neurogenic inflammation. Experimental NK1 R antagonists
have been evaluated in rodent models of inflammatory pain and have
demonstrated analgesic and anti-inflammatory effects [121–123],
thus the substance P–NK1
R axis may be a putative analgesic target
for treating cancer pain in companion animals. Maropitant, a
synthetic nonpeptidic NK 1
R antagonist, is licensed for use as an
antiemetic in dogs and cats and has been evaluated for analgesic
properties in these species. Parenterally administered maropitant
may provide perioperative analgesia based on composite pain scale
assessment in cats and dogs undergoing ovariohysterectomy and
mastectomy, supporting its use as part of a multimodal analgesic
strategy; however, current veterinary data are not robust enough to
support recommended administration as a sole analgesic [124–128].
Furthermore, substance P and NK1
R signaling play a role in the
pathogenesis of OS and other cancer types, and the administration
of nonpeptidic NK 1 antagonists imparts antitumor effects through
the induction of apoptosis in neoplastic cells [129,130]. While the
influence of maropitant on clinical cancer outcomes has not yet
been reported, in vitro work suggests that maropitant inhibits can-
cer cell proliferation and enhances apoptosis in canine melanoma cell
lines [131]. Further work is needed to determine if maropitant
directly supports other cancer therapeutic interventions while offer-
ing analgesic and antiemetic benefits.
Anesthesia and cancer outcomes
Cancer recurrence
Surgery is an important treatment option for many solid cancers in
veterinary patients. Unfortunately, recurrence is not uncommon
following surgical intervention with curative intent. While the
mechanisms of recurrence are not fully elucidated, causal factors
include incomplete surgical margins with residual local disease, as
well as intraoperative dissemination of neoplastic cells into the
bloodstream, lymphatic circulation, or body cavity with subse-
quent establishment of metastases. While surgical technique and
pre-existing microscopic disease are known to influence recur-
rence rates, anesthetic and analgesic protocols are increasingly
being evaluated as factors that may promote or suppress cancer
recurrence. A range of in vitro experiments, preclinical models,
and retrospective human studies provide compelling evidence
that this may be the case, as anesthetic and analgesic drugs have
been shown to influence many factors responsible for cancer
progression including (1) modulation of the stress response;
(2) angiogenesis; (3) inflammation, cytotoxicity, and other aspects
of immune function; and (4) tumor cell migration, proliferation,
and chemosensitivity. While there are intriguing preliminary find-
ings, data are still mixed, and large prospective randomized clini-
cal trials are needed to establish causality and form evidence-based
recommendations in both human and veterinary medicine.
Volatile anesthetics
Isoflurane and sevoflurane are the most commonly used agents to
maintain anesthesia in veterinary patients undergoing oncologic
surgery. Inhalant anesthetics may affect cancer processes through
several direct and indirect mechanisms. The direct effect of inhala-
tional agents on tumor cell survival is variable. Many in vitro studies
report that clinical concentrations of sevoflurane and isoflurane
enhance cancer cell survival, proliferation, metastatic gene expres-
sion, and development of chemoresistance [132,133], while others
report a reduction in tumor cell viability [134,135]. This may be due
to differences in gene expression in disparate cancer types as the
effects of the same inhalational agent vary depending on the cancer
cell line evaluated [135].
Volatile anesthetics also exert direct effects on immune cells
through interactions with a range of targets, including GABAA
, gly-
cine, nicotinic cholinergic, serotonergic, and NMDA recep-
tors [136]. These interactions can suppress the migration and
activation of many cells involved in immunological surveillance,
including natural killer cells. The clinical significance of these inter-
actions, and whether there is a net detrimental effect compared
with the clinical alternative of injectable anesthetics, has yet to be
conclusively determined. Studies comparing immune function in
patients undergoing inhalational or total intravenous anesthesia
have yielded mixed results, with some studies reporting less natural
killer cell cytotoxicity and greater tumor cell viability in patients
receiving inhalational anesthesia, and others reporting no mean-
ingful difference [137,138].
Volatile anesthetics are known to induce ischemic precondition-
ing and attenuate reperfusion injury. These effects are mediated by
the induction of the transcription factor, hypoxia-inducible factor 1
(HIF-1), which regulates the expression of numerous genes that aid
in cell survival following ischemic injury. These same effects also
support the vascularization of hypoxic tumor environments, and
promote the survival, proliferation, and migration of neoplastic
cells, which may favor the successful colonization and outgrowth of
residual tumor cells leading to cancer recurrence following anesthe-
sia and surgery.
In vitro data largely suggest that the administration of inhala-
tional anesthetics may be associated with compromised postopera-
tive outcomes. Similarly, most retrospective clinical studies
comparing inhalational versus injectable anesthetic protocols
report that volatile agents may be associated with increased cancer
recurrence rates and decreased postoperative survival time; how-
ever, results are mixed, and more robust randomized clinical trials
are needed [139,140].
Injectable anesthetics
Propofol is the injectable anesthetic that has been most widely
studied for its effects on cancer outcomes. While there are some
conflicting findings, the majority of in vitro studies report a
reduction in cancer cell viability and malignant characteristics
following propofol exposure, which are mediated through several
different mechanisms. Specifically, propofol alters the expression
of certain long noncoding and microRNAs which regulate gene

-- 1387 of 1450 --

1372 	Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Selected Patients
function to inhibit proliferation, invasion, and migration, and
promote apoptosis in a range of different neoplastic cell lines
[141–143]. Propofol also has been shown to enhance chemosensi-
tivity and promote apoptosis through several signaling pathways
when cancer cells are exposed to both propofol and different
chemotherapeutic agents [144,145].
Rodent models also demonstrate an antitumor effect with
propofol. In xenograft models using various tumor types, treating
the inoculated cells or the animals themselves with propofol
resulted in reduced tumor growth and increased survival time
compared with control groups [146,147]. In a more clinically com-
parable study using a breast cancer model, mice undergoing tumor
excision under propofol anesthesia developed fewer pulmonary
metastases compared with those undergoing anesthesia with sevo-
flurane [148]. Findings from these controlled experimental studies
corroborate the observed trend of favorable outcomes in surgical
cancer patients undergoing total intravenous anesthesia in retro-
spective human studies [139,140]. This encouraging in vitro,
in vivo, and retrospective data support creation of large rand-
omized controlled trials to better understand the effect of anes-
thetic selection on cancer outcomes.
Pain and analgesic techniques
Pain
The nociceptive input from surgery creates inflammation and
numerous physiologic changes, including stimulation of the sympa-
thetic nervous system and activation of the hypothalamic–pituitary–
adrenal axis. The resulting increase in circulating cytokines,
catecholamines, and glucocorticoids promotes angiogenesis, reduces
the number and activity of natural killer cells and cytotoxic
T cells, and upregulates regulatory T cells, which dampens the
immune response, creating a microenvironment that supports
the establishment and survival of residual cancer cells [149].
Consequently, the provision of adequate analgesia is important for
both patient welfare and potentially improving long-term cancer
treatment prognosis.
Opioids
Opioid analgesics are often used as the primary modality for man-
aging surgical pain and can effectively attenuate the perioperative
stress response [150]. Despite this benefit, the effect of opioid
administration on cancer recurrence remains unclear and contro-
versial. Opioid receptors are expressed within the nervous system,
peripheral tissues, endothelial cells, immune cells, and cancer cells,
and participate in different receptor interactions with a range of
exogenous opioids. This has resulted in notable variability when
evaluating the effects of opioid administration on angiogenesis,
immune function, and more holistic outcome measures such as
tumor growth and metastasis.
The angiogenic properties of morphine and other full μ-opioid
receptor agonists have been established; however, this effect does
not seem to be induced through opioid receptor binding. The
mechanisms are not fully elucidated or universal, with the
angiogenic effects of different full μ-opioid receptor agonists
mediated via divergent pathways [151,152]. In contrast, κ-opioid
receptor agonists inhibit angiogenesis through opioid receptor-
mediated downregulation of the vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor [153].
The immunomodulating properties of opioids vary among
different agents and are induced by direct interactions with
immune cells as well as indirectly through modulation of the
neuroendocrine system. Opioids are generally considered to have
immunosuppressive properties, however, drug selection, dosing,
various host factors, and duration of exposure all influence their
effects, yielding highly variable results in the literature [154].
Morphine has been documented to suppress the activity of phago-
cytic cells, natural killer cells, as well as T and B lymphocytes [155],
but conversely has no significant effect on natural killer cell activity
in patients undergoing cancer surgery [156]. Similarly, fentanyl has
been shown to increase natural killer cell number and preserve
cytotoxicity in humans while reducing natural killer cell cytotoxic-
ity and other measures of immune function in rats, suggesting spe-
cies differences may exist [157,158]. In contrast, buprenorphine
demonstrated neutral or even stimulatory effects on different meas-
ures of immune function in rodent models [158].
Rodent models reporting cancer outcomes exhibit the same vari-
able results as in vitro studies. The different study designs utilized
are confounded by numerous factors that have the potential to
influence measured outcomes, including mouse strain, cancer type
and location, pain, presence of surgical stimulation, as well as opi-
oid selection, dosing, and route of administration. Rodent studies
evaluating morphine alone have reported conflicting results includ-
ing that morphine promotes tumor growth and increases metasta-
ses formation, reduces tumor burden and decreases metastasis, or
has no effect on cancer outcomes [159]. Human clinical trials share
similar heterogeneity, and while there is some suggestion that
patients receiving opioids have increased cancer recurrence rates
compared with regional anesthesia, the data are still mixed [160].
Variable study designs and confounding factors prevent the ability
to perform quantitative meta-analysis, and large randomized trials
in specific patient populations are required to draw conclusions
about the effect of opioids on cancer outcomes.
Local anesthetics and locoregional techniques
The interruption of afferent input from locoregional anesthetic
techniques can completely prevent nociceptive signals from reach-
ing the spinal cord and blunt sympathetic and neuroendocrine
responses during surgery. Systemically administered lidocaine also
provides analgesia through hyperpolarizing postsynaptic neurons
in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. It has been postulated that
local anesthetics and regional anesthetic techniques may confer
favorable postoperative cancer outcomes given their opioid- and
anesthetic- sparing effects which would attenuate the potentially
detrimental effects of these agents. Additionally, local anesthetics
directly inhibit tumor proliferation and invasion, induce apoptosis,
and enhance chemosensitivity in different types of cancer
cells [161–163]. Local anesthetics also exert antineoplastic effects
indirectly by favorably modulating the immune system and sup-
pressing angiogenesis [164,165].
Rodent studies largely support in vitro findings, with both sys-
temically administered lidocaine and regional anesthesia reducing
tumor size and metastatic burden [166–168]. Numerous retrospec-
tive studies and clinical trials have been performed evaluating out-
comes following a range of anesthetic techniques for resection of
different types of cancer. Several meta-analyses have been per-
formed and concluded that locoregional anesthesia offers a benefit
in patients undergoing surgical tumor resection. Specifically, one
report concluded that patients receiving paravertebral blocks for
breast cancer surgery had lower postoperative opioid requirements
and cancer recurrence rates [169], while others conclude that
regional anesthesia improves overall survival in operable cancers
but does not affect recurrence rates [170,171]. In contrast, another

-- 1388 of 1450 --

Chapter 70: Cancer Patients 	1373
meta-analysis did not detect a difference in recurrence or survival
between patients undergoing general anesthesia with or without
regional anesthesia but noted that these findings should be inter-
preted carefully given the risk of bias, variable study populations,
and a low level of evidence in the studies analyzed [172]. As with
other anesthetic agents, large randomized controlled trials are
required to further understand the effect of local anesthetic admin-
istration and anesthetic protocol on cancer outcomes.
References
1 Cleeland CS, Gonin R, Hatfield AK, et al. Pain and its treatment in outpatients with
metastatic cancer. N Eng J Med 1994; 330(9): 592–596.
2 van den Beuken-van Everdingen MH, Hochstenbach LM, Joosten EA, et al. Update
on prevalence of pain in patients with cancer: systematic review and meta-analysis.
J Pain Symptom Manage 2016; 51(6): 1070–1090.e9.
3 Coyle N, Adelhardt J, Foley KM, et al. Character of terminal illness in the advanced
cancer patient: pain and other symptoms during the last four weeks of life. J Pain
Symptom Manage 1990; 5(2): 83–93.
4 Lussier D, Huskey AG, Portenoy RK. Adjuvant analgesics in cancer pain manage-
ment. Oncologist 2004; 9(5): 571–591.
5 KuKanich B. Outpatient oral analgesics in dogs and cats beyond nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs: an evidence-based approach. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 2013; 43(5): 1109–1125.
6 Lester P, Gaynor JS. Management of cancer pain. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 2000; 30(4): 951–966, ix.
7 Bennett D, Morton C. A study of owner observed behavioural and lifestyle changes
in cats with musculoskeletal disease before and after analgesic therapy. J Fel Med
Surg 2009; 11(12): 997–1004.
8 Lascelles BD, Hansen BD, Roe S, et al. Evaluation of client-specific outcome meas-
ures and activity monitoring to measure pain relief in cats with osteoarthritis. J Vet
Intern Med 2007; 21(3): 410–416.
9 Mathews K, Kronen PW, Lascelles D, et al. Guidelines for recognition, assessment
and treatment of pain: WSAVA Global Pain Council members and co-authors of
this document. J Small Anim Pract 2014; 55(6): E10–E68.
10 Hudson JT, Slater MR, Taylor L, et al. Assessing repeatability and validity of a visual
analogue scale questionnaire for use in assessing pain and lameness in dogs. Am J
Vet Res 2004; 65(12): 1634–1643.
11 Holton LL, Scott EM, Nolan AM, et al. Comparison of three methods used for
assessment of pain in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1998; 212(1): 61–66.
12 Morton CM, Reid J, Scott EM, et al. Application of a scaling model to establish and
validate an interval level pain scale for assessment of acute pain in dogs. Am J Vet
Res 2005; 66(12): 2154–2166.
13 Firth AM, Haldane SL. Development of a scale to evaluate postoperative pain in
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1999; 214(5): 651–659.
14 Reid J, Nolan AM, Hughes JML, et al. Development of the short-form Glasgow
Composite Measure Pain Scale (CMPS-SF) and derivation of an analgesic inter-
vention score. Anim Welf 2007; 16: 97–104.
15 Carsten RE, Hellyer PW, Bachand AM, et al. Correlations between acute radiation
scores and pain scores in canine radiation patients with cancer of the forelimb. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2008; 35(4): 355–362.
16 Flor PB, Yazbek KV, Ida KK, et al. Tramadol plus metamizole combined or not with
anti-inflammatory drugs is clinically effective for moderate to severe chronic pain
treatment in cancer patients. Vet Anaesth Analg 2013; 40(3): 316–327.
17 Yazbek KV, Fantoni DT. Validity of a health-related quality-of-life scale for
dogs with signs of pain secondary to cancer. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2005; 226(8):
1354–1358.
18 Lynch S, Savary-Bataille K, Leeuw B, et al. Development of a questionnaire
assessing health-related quality-of-life in dogs and cats with cancer. Vet Comp
Oncol 2011; 9(3): 172–182.
19 Tzannes S, Hammond MF, Murphy S, et al. Owners ‘perception of their cats’ quality of
life during COP chemotherapy for lymphoma. J Feline Med Surg 2008; 10(1): 73–81.
20 Giuffrida MA, Farrar JT, Brown DC. Psychometric properties of the Canine
Symptom Assessment Scale, a multidimensional owner-reported questionnaire
instrument for assessment of physical symptoms in dogs with solid tumors. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 2017; 251(12): 1405–1414.
21 Lai YE, Lascelles BDX, Nolan MW. Behavioral phenotyping of cancer pain in
domesticated cats with naturally occurring squamous cell carcinoma of the
tongue: initial validation studies provide evidence for regional and widespread
algoplasticity. Peer J 2021; 9: e11984.
22 Fan TM, Charney SC, de Lorimier LP, et al. Double-blind placebo-controlled
trial of adjuvant pamidronate with palliative radiotherapy and intravenous
doxorubicin for canine appendicular osteosarcoma bone pain. J Vet Intern Med
2009; 23(1): 152–160.
23 Weinstein JI, Payne S, Poulson JM, et al. Use of force plate analysis to evaluate the
efficacy of external beam radiation to alleviate osteosarcoma pain. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 2009; 50(6): 673–678.
24 Martin CK, Tannehill-Gregg SH, Wolfe TD, et al. Bone- invasive oral squamous cell
carcinoma in cats: pathology and expression of parathyroid hormone-related pro-
tein. Vet Pathol 2011; 48(1): 302–312.
25 Mantyh PW, Clohisy DR, Koltzenburg M, et al. Molecular mechanisms of cancer
pain. Nat Rev Cancer 2002; 2(3): 201–209.
26 Jimenez-Andrade JM, Mantyh WG, Bloom AP, et al. Bone cancer pain. Ann N Y
Acad Sci 2010; 1198: 173–181.
27 Clohisy DR, Mantyh PW. Bone cancer pain and the role of RANKL/OPG.
J Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact 2004; 4(3): 293–300.
28 Goblirsch M, Mathews W, Lynch C, et al. Radiation treatment decreases bone
cancer pain, osteolysis and tumor size. Radiat Res 2004; 161(2): 228–234.
29 Yoneda T, Hata K, Nakanishi M, et al. Involvement of acidic microenviron-
ment in the pathophysiology of cancer-associated bone pain. Bone 2011; 48(1):
100–105.
30 Mizoguchi F, Mizuno A, Hayata T, et al. Transient receptor potential vanilloid
4 deficiency suppresses unloading-induced bone loss. J Cell Physiol 2008; 216(1):
47–53.
31 Shor S, Fadl-Alla BA, Pondenis HC, et al. Expression of nociceptive ligands in
canine osteosarcoma. J Vet Intern Med 2015; 29(1): 268–275.
32 Mantyh WG, Jimenez-Andrade JM, Stake JI, et al. Blockade of nerve sprouting and
neuroma formation markedly attenuates the development of late stage cancer pain.
Neuroscience 2010; 171(2): 588–598.
33 Jimenez-Andrade JM, Ghilardi JR, Castaneda-Corral G, et al. Preventive or late
administration of anti-NGF therapy attenuates tumor-induced nerve sprouting,
neuroma formation, and cancer pain. Pain 2011; 152(11): 2564–2574.
34 Denneberg NA, Egenvall A. Evaluation of dog owners’ perceptions concerning
radiation therapy. Acta Vet Scand 2009; 51: 19.
35 Collen EB, Mayer MN. Acute effects of radiation treatment: skin reactions.
Can Vet J 2006; 47(9): 931–932, 934–935.
36 Anderson CR, McNiel EA, Gillette EL, et al. Late complications of pelvic irradiation
in 16 dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2002; 43(2): 187–192.
37 Harris D, King GK, Bergman PJ. Radiation therapy toxicities. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 1997; 27(1): 37–46.
38 Venable RO, Saba CF, Endicott MM, et al. Dexrazoxane treatment of doxorubicin
extravasation injury in four dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2012; 240(3): 304–307.
39 Ogilvie GK, Richardson RC, Curtis CR, et al. Acute and short-term toxicoses
associated with the administration of doxorubicin to dogs with malignant tumors.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1989; 195(11): 1584–1587.
40 Gaeta R, Brown D, Cohen R, et al. Risk factors for development of sterile haemor-
rhagic cystitis in canine lymphoma patients receiving oral cyclophosphamide: a
case-control study. Vet Comp Oncol 2014; 12(4): 277–286.
41 Poirier VJ, Hershey AE, Burgess KE, et al. Efficacy and toxicity of paclitaxel
(Taxol) for the treatment of canine malignant tumors. J Vet Intern Med 2004; 18(2):
219–222.
42 McEntee MC, Rassnick KM, Bailey DB, et al. Phase I and pharmacokinetic
evaluation of the combination of orally administered docetaxel and cyclosporin A
in tumor-bearing cats. J Vet Intern Med 2006; 20(6): 1370–1375.
43 Carlson K, Ocean AJ. Peripheral neuropathy with microtubule-targeting agents:
occurrence and management approach. Clin Breast Cancer 2011; 11(2): 73–81.
44 Hamilton TA, Cook JR Jr., Braund KG, et al. Vincristine-induced peripheral neu-
ropathy in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1991; 198(4): 635–638.
45 Martins BD, Martins GD, Horta RD, et al. Sensory-motor neuropathy due to vin-
cristine treatment in a dog. Acta Sci Vet 2014; 42(Suppl 1): 59.
46 Neugebauer V, Geisslinger G, Rumenapp P, et al. Antinociceptive effects of R(–)-
and S(+)-flurbiprofen on rat spinal dorsal horn neurons rendered hyperexcitable by
an acute knee joint inflammation. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1995; 275(2): 618–628.
47 Gold MS, Reichling DB, Shuster MJ, et al. Hyperalgesic agents increase a
tetrodotoxin-resistant Na+ current in nociceptors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996;
93(3): 1108–1112.
48 Kirkby Shaw K, Rausch-Derra LC, Rhodes L. Grapiprant: an EP4 prostaglandin
receptor antagonist and novel therapy for pain and inflammation. Vet Med Sci 2016;
2(1): 3–9.
49 Gregorio H, Magalhaes TR, Pires I, et al. The role of COX expression in the
prognostication of overall survival of canine and feline cancer: a systematic review.
Vet Med Sci 2021; 7(4): 1107–1119.
50 Saito T, Tamura D, Asano R. Usefulness of selective COX-2 inhibitors as therapeutic
agents against canine mammary tumors. Oncol Rep 2014; 31(4): 1637–1644.
51 Knapp DW, Richardson RC, Chan TC, et al. Piroxicam therapy in 34 dogs with
transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder. J Vet Intern Med 1994; 8(4):
273–278.

-- 1389 of 1450 --

1374 	Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Selected Patients
52 Weinstein SH, Gaylord JC. Determination of oxycodone in plasma and identifica-
tion of a major metabolite. J Pharm Sci 1979; 68(4): 527–528.
53 Dohoo SE, Tasker RA. Pharmacokinetics of oral morphine sulfate in dogs: a com-
parison of sustained release and conventional formulations. Can J Vet Res 1997;
61(4): 251–255.
54 KuKanich B, Lascelles BD, Papich MG. Pharmacokinetics of morphine and plasma
concentrations of morphine-6- glucuronide following morphine administration to
dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2005; 28(4): 371–376.
55 Kukanich B, Lascelles BD, Aman AM, et al. The effects of inhibiting cytochrome
P450 3A, p-glycoprotein, and gastric acid secretion on the oral bioavailability of
methadone in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2005; 28(5): 461–466.
56 Aragon CL, Read MR, Gaynor JS, et al. Pharmacokinetics of an immediate and
extended release oral morphine formulation utilizing the spheroidal oral drug
absorption system in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2009; 32(2): 129–136.
57 Franks JN, Boothe HW, Taylor L, et al. Evaluation of transdermal fentanyl patches
for analgesia in cats undergoing onychectomy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000; 217(7):
1013–1020.
58 Robertson SA, Lascelles BD, Taylor PM, et al. PK- PD modeling of buprenorphine
in cats: intravenous and oral transmucosal administration. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
2005; 28(5): 453–460.
59 Bellei E, Roncada P, Pisoni L, et al. The use of fentanyl-patch in dogs undergoing
spinal surgery: plasma concentration and analgesic efficacy. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
2011; 34(5): 437–441.
60 Abbo LA, Ko JC, Maxwell LK, et al. Pharmacokinetics of buprenorphine following
intravenous and oral transmucosal administration in dogs. Vet Ther 2008; 9(2):
83–93.
61 Ko JC, Freeman LJ, Barletta M, et al. Efficacy of oral transmucosal and intravenous
administration of buprenorphine before surgery for postoperative analgesia in dogs
undergoing ovariohysterectomy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2011; 238(3): 318–328.
62 Enomoto H, Love L, Madsen M, et al. Pharmacokinetics of intravenous, oral trans-
mucosal, and intranasal buprenorphine in healthy male dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
2022; 45(4): 358–365.
63 Davila D, Keeshen TP, Evans RB, et al. Comparison of the analgesic efficacy of
perioperative firocoxib and tramadol administration in dogs undergoing tibial pla-
teau leveling osteotomy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2013; 243(2): 225–231.
64 Budsberg SC, Torres BT, Kleine SA, et al. Lack of effectiveness of tramadol hydro-
chloride for the treatment of pain and joint dysfunction in dogs with chronic osteo-
arthritis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2018; 252(4): 427–432.
65 Monteiro BP, Klinck MP, Moreau M, et al. Analgesic efficacy of tramadol in cats
with naturally occurring osteoarthritis. PLoS ONE 2017; 12(4): e0175565.
66 Guedes AGP, Meadows JM, Pypendop BH, et al. Evaluation of tramadol for
treatment of osteoarthritis in geriatric cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2018; 252(5):
565–571.
67 Radulovic LL, Turck D, von Hodenberg A, et al. Disposition of gabapentin (neuron-
tin) in mice, rats, dogs, and monkeys. Drug Metab Dispos 1995; 23(4): 441–448.
68 Aghighi SA, Tipold A, Piechotta M, et al. Assessment of the effects of adjunctive
gabapentin on postoperative pain after intervertebral disc surgery in dogs. Vet
Anaesth Analg 2012; 39(6): 636–646.
69 Wagner AE, Mich PM, Uhrig SR, et al. Clinical evaluation of perioperative admin-
istration of gabapentin as an adjunct for postoperative analgesia in dogs undergo-
ing amputation of a forelimb. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2010; 236(7): 751–756.
70 Cashmore RG, Harcourt-Brown TR, Freeman PM, et al. Clinical diagnosis and
treatment of suspected neuropathic pain in three dogs. Aust Vet J 2009; 87(1):
45–50.
71 Salazar V, Dewey CW, Schwark W, et al. Pharmacokinetics of single-dose oral pre-
gabalin administration in normal dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2009; 36(6): 574–580.
72 Sanchis-Mora S, Chang YM, Abeyesinghe SM, et al. Pregabalin for the treatment of
syringomyelia-associated neuropathic pain in dogs: a randomised, placebo-
controlled, double-masked clinical trial. Vet J 2019; 250: 55–62.
73 Monteiro BP, de Lorimier LP, Moreau M, et al. Pain characterization and response
to palliative care in dogs with naturally-occurring appendicular osteosarcoma: an
open label clinical trial. PLoS ONE 2018; 13(12): e0207200.
74 Gamble LJ, Boesch JM, Frye CW, et al. Pharmacokinetics, safety, and clinical effi-
cacy of cannabidiol treatment in osteoarthritic dogs. Front Vet Sci 2018; 5: 165.
75 Verrico CD, Wesson S, Konduri V, et al. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled study of daily cannabidiol for the treatment of canine osteoarthritis pain.
Pain 2020; 161(9): 2191–2202.
76 Brioschi FA, Di Cesare F, Gioeni D, et al. Oral transmucosal cannabidiol oil formu-
lation as part of a multimodal analgesic regimen: effects on pain relief and quality
of life improvement in dogs affected by spontaneous osteoarthritis. Animals (Basel)
2020; 10(9): 1505.
77 Mejia S, Duerr FM, Griffenhagen G, et al. Evaluation of the effect of cannabidiol on
naturally occurring osteoarthritis-associated pain: a pilot study in dogs. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 2021; 57(2): 81–90.
78 Lacey DL, Timms E, Tan HL, et al. Osteoprotegerin ligand is a cytokine that regu-
lates osteoclast differentiation and activation. Cell 1998; 93(2): 165–176.
79 Body JJ. Bisphosphonates for malignancy-related bone disease: current status,
future developments. Support Care Cancer 2006; 14(5): 408–418.
80 Arrington SA, Damron TA, Mann KA, et al. Concurrent administration of
zoledronic acid and irradiation leads to improved bone density, biomechanical
strength, and microarchitecture in a mouse model of tumor-induced osteolysis.
J Surg Oncol 2008; 97(3): 284–290.
81 Curtis RC, Custis JT, Ehrhart NP, et al. Combination therapy with zoledronic acid
and parathyroid hormone improves bone architecture and strength following a
clinically-relevant dose of stereotactic radiation therapy for the local treatment of
canine osteosarcoma in athymic rats. PLoS ONE 2016; 11(6): e0158005.
82 Flesner BK, Torres BT, Hutcheson KD, et al. A pilot study of cancer-induced bone
pain using validated owner questionnaires, serum N-telopeptide concentration,
kinetic analysis, and PET/CT. Front Vet Sci 2021; 8: 637195.
83 Ringdahl-Mayland B, Thamm DH, Martin TW. Retrospective evaluation of
outcome in dogs with appendicular osteosarcoma following hypofractionated pal-
liative radiation therapy with or without bisphosphonates: 165 cases (2010–2019).
Front Vet Sci 2022; 9: 892297.
84 Martin TW, Griffin L, Custis J, et al. Outcome and prognosis for canine
appendicular osteosarcoma treated with stereotactic body radiation therapy in
123 dogs. Vet Comp Oncol 2021; 19(2): 284–294.
85 Boston SE, Bacon NJ, Culp WT, et al. Outcome after repair of a sarcoma-related
pathologic fracture in dogs: a Veterinary Society of Surgical Oncology
Retrospective Study. Vet Surg 2011; 40(4): 431–437.
86 Boston SE, Vinayak A, Lu X, et al. Outcome and complications in dogs with
appendicular primary bone tumors treated with stereotactic radiotherapy and
concurrent surgical stabilization. Vet Surg 2017; 46(6): 829–837.
87 Keller RK, Fliesler SJ. Mechanism of aminobisphosphonate action: characteriza-
tion of alendronate inhibition of the isoprenoid pathway. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 1999; 266(2): 560–563.
88 Fan TM, de Lorimier LP, Charney SC, et al. Evaluation of intravenous pamidronate
administration in 33 cancer-bearing dogs with primary or secondary bone
involvement. J Vet Intern Med 2005; 19(1): 74–80.
89 Fan TM, de Lorimier LP, O’Dell-Anderson K, et al. Single-agent pamidronate for
palliative therapy of canine appendicular osteosarcoma bone pain. J Vet Intern
Med 2007; 21(3): 431–439.
90 Fan TM, de Lorimier LP, Garrett LD, et al. The bone biologic effects of zoledronate
in healthy dogs and dogs with malignant osteolysis. J Vet Intern Med 2008; 22(2):
380–387.
91 Brewer DJ, Macfarlane M, O’Connell E, et al. Toxicity of zoledronic acid after
intravenous administration: a retrospective study of 95 dogs. J Vet Intern Med
2022; 36(1): 253–258.
92 Smith AA, Lindley SES, Almond GT, et al. Evaluation of zoledronate for the treatment
of canine stage III osteosarcoma: a phase II study. Vet Med Sci 2023; 9(1): 59–67.
93 Lundberg AP, Roady PJ, Somrak AJ, et al. Zoledronate-associated osteonecrosis of
the jaw in a dog with appendicular osteosarcoma. J Vet Intern Med 2016; 30(4):
1235–1240.
94 Bateman KE, Catton PA, Pennock PW, et al. 0-7- 21 radiation therapy for the
palliation of advanced cancer in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 1994; 8(6): 394–399.
95 Green EM, Adams WM, Forrest LJ. Four fraction palliative radiotherapy for oste-
osarcoma in 24 dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2002; 38(5): 445–451.
96 Mueller F, Poirier V, Melzer K, et al. Palliative radiotherapy with electrons of
appendicular osteosarcoma in 54 dogs. In Vivo 2005; 19(4): 713–716.
97 Ramirez O III, Dodge RK, Page RL, et al. Palliative radiotherapy of appendicular
osteosarcoma in 95 dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1999; 40(5): 517–522.
98 Knapp- Hoch HM, Fidel JL, Sellon RK, et al. An expedited palliative radiation pro-
tocol for lytic or proliferative lesions of appendicular bone in dogs. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 2009; 45(1): 24–32.
99 Norquest CJ, Maitz CA, Keys DA, et al. Fracture rate and time to fracture in
dogs with appendicular osteosarcoma receiving finely fractionated compared
to coarsely fractionated radiation therapy: a single institution study. Vet Med Sci
2022; 8(3): 1013–1024.
100 Martin TW, LaRue SM, Griffin L. CT characteristics and proposed scoring
scheme are predictive of pathologic fracture in dogs with appendicular osteosar-
coma treated with stereotactic body radiation therapy. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
2022; 63(1): 82–90.
101 Caterina MJ, Schumacher MA, Tominaga M, et al. The capsaicin receptor: a heat-
activated ion channel in the pain pathway. Nature 1997; 389(6653): 816–824.
102 Caterina MJ, Leffler A, Malmberg AB, et al. Impaired nociception and pain sensa-
tion in mice lacking the capsaicin receptor. Science 2000; 288(5464): 306–313.
103 Olah Z, Szabo T, Karai L, et al. Ligand-induced dynamic membrane changes
and cell deletion conferred by vanilloid receptor 1. J Biol Chem 2001; 276(14):
11021–11030.

-- 1390 of 1450 --

Chapter 70: Cancer Patients 	1375
104 Brown DC, Iadarola MJ, Perkowski SZ, et al. Physiologic and antinociceptive
effects of intrathecal resiniferatoxin in a canine bone cancer model. Anesthesiology
2005; 103(5): 1052–1059.
105 Karai L, Brown DC, Mannes AJ, et al. Deletion of vanilloid receptor 1-expressing
primary afferent neurons for pain control. J Clin Invest 2004; 113(9): 1344–1352.
106 Brown DC, Agnello K, Iadarola MJ. Intrathecal resiniferatoxin in a dog model:
efficacy in bone cancer pain. Pain 2015; 156(6): 1018–1024.
107 Iadarola MJ, Sapio MR, Raithel SJ, et al. Long-term pain relief in canine osteoar-
thritis by a single intra-articular injection of resiniferatoxin, a potent TRPV1 ago-
nist. Pain 2018; 159(10): 2105–2114.
108 Boss MK, Ke Y, Bian L, et al. Therapeutic intervention using a Smad7-based Tat
protein to treat radiation-induced oral mucositis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
2022; 112(3): 759–770.
109 Clohisy DR, Mantyh PW. Bone cancer pain. Cancer 2003; 97(3 Suppl): 866–873.
110 Halvorson KG, Kubota K, Sevcik MA, et al. A blocking antibody to nerve growth
factor attenuates skeletal pain induced by prostate tumor cells growing in bone.
Cancer Res 2005; 65(20): 9426–9435.
111 Sevcik MA, Ghilardi JR, Peters CM, et al. Anti-NGF therapy profoundly reduces
bone cancer pain and the accompanying increase in markers of peripheral and
central sensitization. Pain 2005; 115(1–2): 128–141.
112 Fan TM, Barger AM, Sprandel IT, et al. Investigating TrkA expression in canine
appendicular osteosarcoma. J Vet Intern Med 2008; 22(5): 1181–1188.
113 Webster RP, Anderson GI, Gearing DP. Canine Brief Pain Inventory scores for
dogs with osteoarthritis before and after administration of a monoclonal antibody
against nerve growth factor. Am J Vet Res 2014; 75(6): 532–535.
114 Corral MJ, Moyaert H, Fernandes T, et al. A prospective, randomized, blinded,
placebo-controlled multisite clinical study of bedinvetmab, a canine monoclonal
antibody targeting nerve growth factor, in dogs with osteoarthritis. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2021; 48(6): 943–955.
115 Gruen ME, Thomson AE, Griffith EH, et al. A feline-specific anti-nerve growth fac-
tor antibody improves mobility in cats with degenerative joint disease-associated
pain: a pilot proof of concept study. J Vet Intern Med 2016; 30(4): 1138–1148.
116 Gruen ME, Griffith EH, Thomson AE, et al. Criterion validation testing of clinical
metrology instruments for measuring degenerative joint disease associated mobil-
ity impairment in cats. PLoS ONE 2015; 10(7): e0131839.
117 Gonzalez-Rodriguez S, Pevida M, Roques BP, et al. Involvement of enkephalins in
the inhibition of osteosarcoma-induced thermal hyperalgesia evoked by the
blockade of peripheral P2X3 receptors. Neurosci Lett 2009; 465(3): 285–289.
118 Kaan TK, Yip PK, Patel S, et al. Systemic blockade of P2X3 and P2X2/3 receptors
attenuates bone cancer pain behaviour in rats. Brain 2010; 133(9): 2549–2564.
119 Wu JX, Xu MY, Miao XR, et al. Functional up-regulation of P2X3 receptors in
dorsal root ganglion in a rat model of bone cancer pain. Eur J Pain 2012; 16(10):
1378–1388.
120 Hansen RR, Nasser A, Falk S, et al. Chronic administration of the selective P2X3,
P2X2/3 receptor antagonist, A-317491, transiently attenuates cancer-induced
bone pain in mice. Eur J Pharmacol 2012; 688(1–3): 27–34.
121 Yamamoto T, Yaksh TL. Stereospecific effects of a nonpeptidic NK1 selective
antagonist, CP-96,345: antinociception in the absence of motor dysfunction. Life
Sci 1991; 49(26): 1955–1963.
122 Wick EC, Hoge SG, Grahn SW, et al. Transient receptor potential vanilloid 1, cal-
citonin gene-related peptide, and substance P mediate nociception in acute pan-
creatitis. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2006; 290(5): G959–G969.
123 Gautam M, Prasoon P, Kumar R, et al. Role of neurokinin type 1 receptor in
nociception at the periphery and the spinal level in the rat. Spinal Cord 2016;
54(3): 172–182.
124 Marquez M, Boscan P, Weir H, et al. Comparison of NK-1 receptor antagonist
(maropitant) to morphine as a pre-anaesthetic agent for canine ovariohysterec-
tomy. PLoS ONE 2015; 10(10): e0140734.
125 Correa JMX, Soares P, Niella RV, et al. Evaluation of the antinociceptive effect of
maropitant, a neurokinin-1 receptor antagonist, in cats undergoing ovariohyster-
ectomy. Vet Med Int 2019; 2019: 9352528.
126 Soares P, Correa JMX, Niella RV, et al. Continuous infusion of ketamine and lido-
caine either with or without maropitant as an adjuvant agent for analgesia in
female dogs undergoing mastectomy. Vet Med Int 2021; 2021: 4747301.
127 Correa JMX, Niella RV, Oliveira JNS, et al. Antinociceptive and analgesic effect of
continuous intravenous infusion of maropitant, lidocaine and ketamine alone or
in combination in cats undergoing ovariohysterectomy. Acta Vet Scand 2021;
63(1): 49.
128 Karna SR, Chambers P, Singh P, et al. Evaluation of analgesic interaction between
morphine, maropitant and dexmedetomidine in dogs undergoing ovariohysterec-
tomy. N Z Vet J 2022; 70(1): 10–21.
129 Munoz M, Berger M, Rosso M, et al. Antitumor activity of neurokinin-1 receptor
antagonists in MG-63 human osteosarcoma xenografts. Int J Oncol 2014; 44(1):
137–146.
130 Munoz M, Gonzalez-Ortega A, Covenas R. The NK-1 receptor is expressed in
human leukemia and is involved in the antitumor action of aprepitant and other
NK-1 receptor antagonists on acute lymphoblastic leukemia cell lines. Invest New
Drugs 2012; 30(2): 529–540.
131 Borrego JF, Huelsmeyer MK, Pinkerton ME, et al. Neurokinin-1 receptor expres-
sion and antagonism by the NK-1R antagonist maropitant in canine melanoma
cell lines and primary tumour tissues. Vet Comp Oncol 2016; 14(2): 210–224.
132 Deng X, Vipani M, Liang G, et al. Sevoflurane modulates breast cancer cell sur-
vival via modulation of intracellular calcium homeostasis. BMC Anesthesiol 2020;
20(1): 253.
133 Tiron CE, Patrascanu E, Postu PA, et al. Sevoflurane modulates AKT isoforms in
triple negative breast cancer cells. An experimental study. Curr Issues Mol Biol
2021; 43(1): 264–275.
134 Kvolik S, Glavas-Obrovac L, Bares V, et al. Effects of inhalation anesthetics halothane,
sevoflurane, and isoflurane on human cell lines. Life Sci 2005; 77(19): 2369–2383.
135 Hirai T, Konishi Y, Mizuno S, et al. Differential effects of sevoflurane on the
growth and apoptosis of human cancer cell lines. J Anesth 2020; 34(1): 47–57.
136 Yuki K, Eckenhoff RG. Mechanisms of the immunological effects of volatile
anesthetics: a review. Anesth Analg 2016; 123(2): 326–335.
137 Zhang T, Fan Y, Liu K, et al. Effects of different general anaesthetic techniques on
immune responses in patients undergoing surgery for tongue cancer. Anaesth
Intensive Care 2014; 42(2): 220–227.
138 Lim JA, Oh CS, Yoon TG, et al. The effect of propofol and sevoflurane on cancer
cell, natural killer cell, and cytotoxic T lymphocyte function in patients undergo-
ing breast cancer surgery: an in vitro analysis. BMC Cancer 2018; 18(1): 159.
139 Jin Z, Li R, Liu J, et al. Long-term prognosis after cancer surgery with inhalational
anesthesia and total intravenous anesthesia: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Int J Physiol Pathophysiol Pharmacol 2019; 11(3): 83–94.
140 Yap A, Lopez-Olivo MA, Dubowitz J, et al. Anesthetic technique and cancer
outcomes: a meta-analysis of total intravenous versus volatile anesthesia.
Can J Anaesth 2019; 66(5): 546–561.
141 Zhang J, Shan WF, Jin TT, et al. Propofol exerts anti-hepatocellular carcinoma by
microvesicle-mediated transfer of miR-142-3p from macrophage to cancer cells.
J Transl Med 2014; 12: 279.
142 Buschmann D, Brandes F, Lindemann A, et al. Propofol and sevoflurane differen-
tially impact microRNAs in circulating extracellular vesicles during colorectal
cancer resection: a pilot study. Anesthesiology 2020; 132(1): 107–120.
143 Ren YL, Zhang W. Propofol promotes apoptosis of colorectal cancer cells via alle-
viating the suppression of lncRNA HOXA11-AS on miRNA let-7i. Biochem Cell
Biol 2020; 98(2): 90–98.
144 Du QH, Xu YB, Zhang MY, et al. Propofol induces apoptosis and increases gem-
citabine sensitivity in pancreatic cancer cells in vitro by inhibition of nuclear
factor-kappaB activity. World J Gastroenterol 2013; 19(33): 5485–5492.
145 Li H, Lu Y, Pang Y, et al. Propofol enhances the cisplatin-induced apoptosis on
cervical cancer cells via EGFR/JAK2/STAT3 pathway. Biomed Pharmacother 2017;
86: 324–333.
146 Cui WY, Liu Y, Zhu YQ, et al. Propofol induces endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
and apoptosis in lung cancer cell H460. Tumour Biol 2014; 35(6): 5213–5217.
147 Gao Y, Yu X, Zhang F, et al. Propofol inhibits pancreatic cancer progress under
hypoxia via ADAM8. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Sci 2019; 26(6): 219–226.
148 Li R, Huang Y, Lin J. Distinct effects of general anesthetics on lung metastasis
mediated by IL-6/JAK/STAT3 pathway in mouse models. Nat Commun 2020;
11(1): 642.
149 Eddy JL, Krukowski K, Janusek L, et al. Glucocorticoids regulate natural killer cell
function epigenetically. Cell Immunol 2014; 290(1): 120–130.
150 Naguib AN, Tobias JD, Hall MW, et al. The role of different anesthetic techniques
in altering the stress response during cardiac surgery in children: a prospective,
double-blinded, and randomized study. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2013; 14(5):
481–490.
151 Ondrovics M, Hoelbl-Kovacic A, Fux DA. Opioids: modulators of angiogenesis in
wound healing and cancer. Oncotarget 2017; 8(15): 25783–25796.
152 Feng T, Zeng S, Ding J, et al. Comparative analysis of the effects of opioids in
angiogenesis. BMC Anesthesiol 2021; 21(1): 257.
153 Yamamizu K, Furuta S, Hamada Y, et al. κ Opioids inhibit tumor angiogenesis by
suppressing VEGF signaling. Sci Rep 2013; 3: 3213.
154 Sacerdote P. Opioids and the immune system. Palliat Med 2006; 20(Suppl 1):
S9–S15.
155 Eisenstein TK. Opioids and the immune system: what is their mechanism of
action? Br J Pharmacol 2011; 164(7): 1826–1828.
156 Sacerdote P, Bianchi M, Gaspani L, et al. The effects of tramadol and morphine on
immune responses and pain after surgery in cancer patients. Anesth Analg 2000;
90(6): 1411–1414.
157 Jacobs R, Karst M, Scheinichen D, et al. Effects of fentanyl on cellular immune
functions in man. Int J Immunopharmacol 1999; 21(7): 445–454.

-- 1391 of 1450 --

1376 	Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Selected Patients
158 Martucci C, Panerai AE, Sacerdote P. Chronic fentanyl or buprenorphine infusion
in the mouse: similar analgesic profile but different effects on immune responses.
Pain 2004; 110(1–2): 385–392.
159 Afsharimani B, Doornebal CW, Cabot PJ, et al. Comparison and analysis of the
animal models used to study the effect of morphine on tumour growth and metas-
tasis. Br J Pharmacol 2015; 172(2): 251–259.
160 Bovill JG. Surgery for cancer: does anesthesia matter? Anesth Analg 2010; 110(6):
1524–1526.
161 Sun H, Sun Y. Lidocaine inhibits proliferation and metastasis of lung cancer cell
via regulation of miR-539/EGFR axis. Artif Cells Nanomed Biotechnol 2019; 47(1):
2866–2874.
162 Zhang Y, Jia J, Jin W, et al. Lidocaine inhibits the proliferation and invasion of
hepatocellular carcinoma by downregulating USP14 induced PI3K/Akt pathway.
Pathol Res Pract 2020; 216(8): 152963.
163 Zhu G, Zhang L, Dan J, et al. Differential effects and mechanisms of local anes-
thetics on esophageal carcinoma cell migration, growth, survival and chemosensi-
tivity. BMC Anesthesiol 2020; 20(1): 126.
164 Ramirez MF, Tran P, Cata JP. The effect of clinically therapeutic plasma concentra-
tions of lidocaine on natural killer cell cytotoxicity. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2015;
40(1): 43–48.
165 Gao J, Hu H, Wang X. Clinically relevant concentrations of lidocaine inhibit
tumor angiogenesis through suppressing VEGF/VEGFR2 signaling. Cancer
Chemother Pharmacol 2019; 83(6): 1007–1015.
166 Bar-Yosef S, Melamed R, Page GG, et al. Attenuation of the tumor-promoting effect
of surgery by spinal blockade in rats. Anesthesiology 2001; 94(6): 1066–1073.
167 Xing W, Chen DT, Pan JH, et al. Lidocaine induces apoptosis and suppresses
tumor growth in human hepatocellular carcinoma cells in vitro and in a xenograft
model in vivo. Anesthesiology 2017; 126(5): 868–881.
168 Johnson MZ, Crowley PD, Foley AG, et al. Effect of perioperative lidocaine on
metastasis after sevoflurane or ketamine-xylazine anaesthesia for breast tumour
resection in a murine model. Br J Anaesth 2018; 121(1): 76–85.
169 Schnabel A, Reichl SU, Kranke P, et al. Efficacy and safety of paravertebral blocks
in breast surgery: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Br J Anaesth
2010; 105(6): 842–852.
170 Chen WK, Miao CH. The effect of anesthetic technique on survival in human
cancers: a meta-analysis of retrospective and prospective studies. PLoS ONE 2013;
8(2): e56540.
171 Sun Y, Li T, Gan TJ. The effects of perioperative regional anesthesia and analgesia
on cancer recurrence and survival after oncology surgery: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2015; 40(5): 589–598.
172 Lee ZX, Ng KT, Ang E, et al. Effect of perioperative regional anesthesia on cancer
recurrence: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Int J Surg 2020; 82:
192–199.

-- 1392 of 1450 --

1377
Veterinary A nesthesia and A nalgesia: The S ixth Edition of L umb and J ones	. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Introduction
As small animal clinicians attempt to treat chronic pain and the
associated dysfunction in their patients with osteoarthritis (OA),
they face several challenges. First, pain is a complex experience
involving not only transduction and transmission of noxious stim-
uli from the periphery to the central nervous system (CNS), but
also processing of stimuli by higher centers in the brain [1,2]. Pain
is the most clinically profound but least well-studied component of
OA [3,4]. Articular cartilage degeneration, inflammation, synovitis,
and subchondral bone, and periarticular tissue changes are believed
to be sources of pain associated with OA in companion animal
patients [5–9]. OA is the most common joint disorder leading to
significant disability and dysfunction encountered by clinicians.
While considered a common problem in small animal medicine,
OA is likely the most underdiagnosed and misunderstood rheu-
matic disease in dogs and cats. OA is a slow, progressive, and often
insidious problem, and the wide range of clinical signs makes it a
frequently misdiagnosed condition. In the dog, primary OA is
uncommon, and the condition mainly develops secondary to
another joint pathology (such as hip or stifle instability). OA has
been estimated to affect 20% of the United States (US) canine popu-
lation [10]. This widely referenced estimate, in practical terms,
translates to over 15.6 million dogs based on an estimated US
canine population of 78 million [11–13]. Estimates of cats affected
with OA are between 60% and 90%, and with an estimated number
of cats in the US of about 86 million, the number affected with OA
is between 51 and 77 million [14–18]. Therefore, the identification
and management of this disease is of utmost importance to the
small animal clinician.
While the terms “osteoarthritis” and “degenerative joint disease”
(DJD) are considered nearly synonymous in dogs, this may not be
the case in cats. Joint pathology in cats may differ in etiology, onset,
clinical signs, and pathophysiology compared to dogs [19–21]. For
the purposes of this chapter, when discussing the cat, the term
“DJD/OA” will be used to highlight this potential difference [22].
The American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons has proposed
the following definition of osteoarthritis: “Osteoarthritic diseases
are a result of both mechanical and biological events that destabilize
the normal coupling of degradation and synthesis of articular carti-
lage, extracellular matrix (primarily collagen and aggrecan), and
subchondral bone. Although they may be initiated by multiple fac-
tors, including genetic, developmental, metabolic, and traumatic
factors, osteoarthritic diseases involve all of the tissues of the diar-
throdial joint” [23]. Ultimately, osteoarthritic diseases are mani-
fested by morphologic, biochemical, molecular, and biomechanical
changes of both cells and matrix, which lead to softening, fibrilla-
tion, ulceration, articular cartilage loss, sclerosis and subchondral
bone eburnation, and osteophyte production [4–7,9]. When clini-
cally evident, osteoarthritic diseases are characterized by joint pain,
tenderness, limitation of mobility, crepitus, occasional effusion, and
variable degrees of inflammation without systemic effects.
From a pathophysiologic view, OA is characterized by articular
cartilage degeneration and changes in the periarticular soft tissues
(synovium and joint capsule) and subchondral bone. In essence,
OA can be considered the end stage of organ failure of a joint [9,24].
Specifically, the pathologic changes of OA encompass articular car-
tilage degeneration, which includes matrix fibrillation, fissure
appearance, gross ulceration, and full-thickness loss of the cartilage
71 Osteoarthritis Patients
Steven C. Budsberg and Whitney D. Hinson
Department of Small Animal Medicine and Surgery, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
Chapter contents
Introduction, 1377
Diagnosis of osteoarthritis, 1378
Treatment strategies for managing chronic osteoarthritis pain, 1378
Weight reduction and management, 1379
Exercise modification and physical therapy, 1379
Nutritional support and high omega-3 diets, 1379
Pharmacologic management, 1379
Dealing with non-responders to standard treatment approaches, 1384
References, 1385

-- 1393 of 1450 --

1378 	Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Selected Patients
matrix. This pathology is accompanied by hypertrophic bone
changes with osteophyte formation and subchondral bone plate
thickening. Failure to repair the damage affecting the surface carti-
lage and the inability of chondrocytes in injured articular cartilage
to restore a functional matrix despite high metabolic activity
remains a complex and challenging problem [4–7,9,24].
Clinical signs of OA occur with varying degrees of severity, rang-
ing from a mild, intermittent condition that causes mild discomfort
and minimal disability, to a disease state characterized by constant
pain along with severe functional disability. Painful mechanical
stimuli are detected by nociceptors (Type III or Aδ and Type IV or
C fibers), which are afferent nerve fibers located in the joint cap-
sule, associated ligaments, periosteum, and subchondral bone. Joint
movement induces mechano-gated ion channels to open resulting
in nerve firing [1–3,8]. When joint movement exceeds normal lim-
its, nerve firing dramatically increases and the CNS interprets these
signals as pain. Data from experimental models of OA suggest that
peripheral mechanosensory fibers become sensitized resulting in
increased afferent firing even in response to normal physiological
joint motion [25]. Furthermore, sensitization via neuropathic and
central pain mechanisms also contributes significantly to pain in a
large portion of patients with OA [26–28]. In chronic pain states,
these pathophysiologic changes profoundly alter nociceptive pro-
cessing in both the periphery, by increasing excitability of nocicep-
tors, and centrally, through upregulation in the dorsal root ganglia,
spinal cord, and glial cells of the brain. Additionally, modifications
and alterations of inhibitory pathways and descending modulation
of pain perception can occur [27,28]. Regardless of the type of pain
(nociceptive or neuropathic), the role of inflammation in both has
been clearly demonstrated [26–28]. Currently, there are no proven
methodologies to reverse the changes seen in the joint with OA.
Diagnosis of osteoarthritis
As stated earlier, the clinical signs of OA can vary from mild to
severe and from vague to obvious, with pain as a hallmark.
However, accurate assessment of pain and dysfunction can be very
difficult in dogs and cats. Typically, the diagnosis of OA is based on
history, clinical signs, physical examination, and radiographs of
the affected joint(s). The goal in assessing a dog or cat with sus-
pected OA is to identify the site of pain and discomfort and attempt
to diagnose any initiating causes. While diagnosis of the inciting
cause may be more important in younger patients, it is never too
late to address conditions such as stifle instability. When dealing
with a chronic end-stage OA joint, initiating factors may be less
relevant and management of associated pain may become the sole
focus of therapy.
Owner assessment of pain severity is an interesting paradox.
While owners are most aware of a patient’s daily routine, they are
not always aware of what pain looks like. Owners often need to see
their pet on a successful pain management plan to better recognize
pain and dysfunction. This is the rationale for using owner assess-
ments in addition to veterinary examinations. Owner assessments
should begin at the start of treatment to define the degree of disabil-
ity, and thus help decide the level of treatment required. Going for-
ward, they should be used to monitor treatment efficacy. The owner
sees the patient daily and can assess multidimensional aspects of
pain and associated functional disability. Using metrics like owner
questionnaires is advantageous to combat bias associated with sub-
jective evaluation of the patient. In one study, caregiver placebo
effect was common when response to treatment was evaluated by
both the owner (40% improvement noted on placebo) and the vet-
erinarian (between 40% and 45%) [29]. While another study sug-
gests a lower placebo effect, the potential for bias is significant and
may impact assessment of the success or failure of a product or
procedure [30].
To increase client awareness and involvement, and to begin to
quantify the clinical signs, the use of client questionnaires or clini-
cal metrology instruments is recommended. These instruments are
discussed in more detail in Chapter 47. In brief, questionnaires that
have been designed and validated in the dog include the Canine
Brief Pain Inventory (CBPI), the Liverpool Osteoarthritis in Dogs
(LOAD) scale, and the Helsinki Chronic Pain Index (HCPI)
[31–36]. Use of a validated questionnaire may lead to improved out-
comes as less biased and more accurate assessments will be available
to the owner and the clinician. For cats, clinical manifestations of
disease and pain are very different from dogs. Several validated
instruments for cats are now available including the Feline
Musculoskeletal Pain Index (FMPI) and the Montreal Instrument
for Cat Arthritis Testing [37–41], and additional information is
available in Chapter 47.
Treatment strategies for managing chronic
osteoarthritis pain
Current therapy for OA focuses on palliative care with the goal of
reducing pain and inflammation and maintaining or improving
joint function without altering the pathologic process in the joint.
As most OA in the dog, and perhaps in the cat, is secondary to some
other pathologic state, the underlying cause must be identified to
minimize the long-term effects. While efforts to develop treatments
that alter the course of the disease are ongoing, these therapies are
still largely unproven.
Management of OA involves a multimodal approach with four to
five important components for both dogs and cats [19–21,42–47].
Relying on pharmacologic management alone (i.e., drugs adminis-
tered singularly or in combination) is usually associated with lim-
ited success. Managing OA should be based on a well-thought-out
comprehensive plan, which can be presented as “WEDDS”: Weight
reduction and control; an Exercise and physical therapy program;
Dietary modification; a Drug (pharmacologic) plan that may
include biological therapy; and a discussion of potential Surgical
interventions (Box 71.1). Thus, initiating a treatment plan for a
patient with OA requires a lengthy discussion of all aspects of man-
agement with the client that addresses common false assumptions.
Three of the most common misconceptions are presented in
Box 71.2 and emphasize the need for a realistic and scientifically
sound approach to pain management.
Each case must be examined individually, assessing the age, nor-
mal activity levels, and, most importantly, the owner’s expectations
for performance of their animal. Success largely depends on the
accurate assessment of client expectations. During the discussion of
Box 71.1 Components of a WEDDS management plan for managing
osteoarthritis.
• Weight management
• Exercise and physical therapy plan
• Diet modification
• Drugs and biologics
• Surgery

-- 1394 of 1450 --

Chapter 71: Osteoarthritis Patients 	1379
each potential treatment modality, the justification and recommen-
dation for a given therapy should be evidence-based.
Weight reduction and management
Weight control is essential when dealing with OA. Most patients
with clinical manifestations of OA are overweight or obese. While
clinicians often recommend weight loss programs, success is not
common. Several articles are available which discuss strategies for
increasing the success of weight loss recommendations [48–52].
Available evidence supports weight loss in canine OA patients and,
while little data are available to guide management of cats, it is rea-
sonable to extend these recommendations to feline patients. Owner
education and proper dietary management should be considered in
every case. Several studies support improved quality of life and
lameness in dogs with OA that undergo weight reduction [53–59].
On reviewing the available clinical data, the strength of evidence
supports a moderate degree of confidence that weight loss posi-
tively impacts dogs with OA.
Exercise modification and physical therapy
There is significant interest in the use of exercise modification and
physical therapy in dogs and cats suffering with OA/DJD. There are
several programs providing extensive education (including various
certifications) in this area, although the description of these is
beyond the scope of this chapter. A recent review provides an excel-
lent starting point [60]. There are also textbooks available to help
guide the clinician [61]. While it is generally accepted that con-
trolled exercise and physical therapy are helpful in OA patients,
peer-reviewed data to support specific programs for canine and
feline patients are unfortunately limited. It is beyond the scope of
this chapter to discuss the many recommendations about the use of
exercise and physical therapy, though any interventions considered
should be practical and pragmatic.
While data to support physical therapy modalities are sparse,
some reports are available, and more information on these thera-
pies is available in Chapter 49. Treatment of OA with extracorpor-
eal shockwave therapy has shown mixed results [62–64]. Two
studies had mixed positive results and one study demonstrated
minimal effects. Another prospective study found that a combina-
tion of caloric restriction and intense physiotherapy improved
both weight loss and force plate kinetic data in overweight dogs
with OA [54]. Finally, there are limited data to support the use of
photobiomodulation (e.g., low-level laser therapy) in the treat-
ment of OA [65,66]. Overall, the strength and quality of the evi-
dence from these published studies is consistent with a low to
moderate degree of confidence that these therapies positively
impact OA patients. Consequently, it is incumbent on those pro-
moting, practicing, and financially benefiting from physical ther-
apy and rehabilitation to perform clinical trials to critically
evaluate these interventions.
Nutritional support and high omega-3 diets
The introduction of diets formulated with high omega-3 polyun-
saturated fatty acids (PUFAs), specifically eicosopentanoic acid
(EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), has introduced a new
dimension in the management of OA [67–69]. The omega-3 (n-3)
family of PUFAs includes α-linolenic acid (ALA), EPA, and DHA,
while the omega-6 (n-6) family includes linoleic acid (LA) and
arachidonic acid (AA) [70]. EPA and DHA are precursors for
anti-inflammatory lipid mediators, while AA is a precursor for pro-
inflammatory lipid mediators. The current understanding of the
mechanism of action of dietary omega-3 PUFAs in OA is twofold.
The first effect is indirect, whereby consumption dose-dependently
increases concentrations of EPA and DHA, which are less potent
mediators of inflammation, and these increased proportions occur
at the expense of AA concentrations [71–73]. In addition to form-
ing more anti-inflammatory lipid mediators, less substrate is also
available for the formation of AA-derived proinflammatory eicosa-
noids. The second effect results from direct actions of omega-3
PUFAs on cartilage. Cartilage cell cultures treated with omega-3
PUFAs inhibit the transcription of major enzymes and cytokines
tied to matrix degradation [74].
Several clinical trials have looked at the effects of diets high in
omega-3 PUFAs on pain and dysfunction associated with OA in
dogs [75–80]. All studies were prospective and randomized and
adequately addressed issues of scientific quality relating to data col-
lection, analysis, bias, and generalizability. While outcome meas-
ures varied between studies creating some challenges in assessing
the overall strength of evidence, they uniformly identified positive
effects. Thus, the strength and quality of the evidence is consistent
with a high degree of confidence that diets high in omega-3 PUFAs
positively impact dogs with OA. Given this, it is recommended to
switch patients with OA to one of these diets. The data are less clear
on the effects of supplementing a diet with omega-3 fatty acid prod-
ucts (e.g., fish oil capsules). In cats, one study has evaluated the
effects of elevated omega-3 PUFA diets, with largely inconclusive
results. Thus, there are very little data to support or reject the use of
these types of diets in cats [81].
Pharmacologic management
Analgesic and anti-inflammatory agents are the most common
components in the management of OA. The efficacy of non-
steroidal anti- inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in treating chronic
pain associated with OA has been well documented in several sys-
tematic reviews in small animal medicine [47,82–84]. The strength
and quality of the evidence is consistent with a high degree of con-
fidence supporting the use of NSAIDs in the management of OA in
dogs. There are growing data available in cats showing positive
clinical effects, and this supports a moderate degree of confidence
in the use of NSAIDs in the management of DJD/OA in cats [39,85].
It is not surprising that, as a class of drugs, NSAIDs are among
the most prescribed in small animal medicine. There are more data
on NSAID efficacy and potential complications than there are for
any other aspect of the multimodal OA management plan.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
As stated previously, NSAIDs are one of the most common classes of
drugs used to manage chronic pain in small animals. There are sev-
eral reasons for the dramatic increase in NSAID use in companion
animals, including the availability of NSAIDs with improved safety
and efficacy that are approved specifically for small animals (pri-
marily dogs) [83,86,87]. Generally, currently prescribed NSAIDs are
Box 71.2 Common misconceptions to address with clients prior to
initiating an osteoarthritis management plan.
1 Treatment of pain is an “all or none” phenomenon – False
2 One drug at one dose (i.e., approved label dose) will work for all
patients – False
3 If a treatment seems to be effective in people, it will be effective in
small animal patients – False

-- 1395 of 1450 --

1380 	Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Selected Patients
very safe drugs, with only a small percentage of patients experienc-
ing serious complications [86]. Detailed information regarding the
pharmacology of NSAIDs is available in Chapter 24.
Efficacy of NSAIDs is comparable to opioids in many instances
of mild to moderate musculoskeletal and visceral pain. However,
for severe pain associated with some fractures, data are not available
to substantiate that claim [88]. NSAIDs can be used to alleviate
acute pain, either traumatically or surgically induced, and for
chronic pain such as OA. Efficacy and toxicity may vary among
individuals, and monitoring of each patient is mandatory [86].
Selecting an efficacious NSAID and monitoring its usage is impor-
tant, but definitive evidence-based guidelines for this are not avail-
able. First, it is wise to use products with a history of extensive
clinical use. Use only one NSAID at a time and ensure correct dos-
ing. Review the treatment plan frequently and change to an alterna-
tive NSAID if there is a poor response to therapy. Observe for signs
of potential toxicity as soon as administration begins with increased
vigilance and monitoring of high-risk patients. If indicated, estab-
lish the patient’s baseline renal and hepatic function prior to NSAID
administration.
Contraindications for NSAID use
Therapy should be adapted to suit the patient’s needs. In patients
with chronic disease, begin with the recommended dose and, if effi-
cacious, attempt to reduce the dose at regular intervals (e.g., weekly)
until the lowest dose providing the maximum benefit is reached.
Determining the lowest effective dose is challenging, and one study
suggested that it is difficult to decrease by more than 50% of recom-
mended (label) dose for most dogs [89]. Avoid NSAIDs in patients
with known contraindications to their use. Contraindications for
NSAID use can range from fairly obvious to quite subtle reasons.
The following is a list of general guidelines on potential contraindi-
cations for NSAID usage. These recommendations may change
with generation of more clinical data [90].
• Patients receiving any type of systemic corticosteroids
• Patients already receiving an NSAID
• Patients with documented renal or hepatic insufficiency or
dysfunction
• Patients with any clinical syndrome that creates a decrease in
circulating blood volume (e.g., shock, dehydration, hypotension,
or ascites)
• Patients with active gastrointestinal disease
• Trauma patients with known or suspected significant active hem-
orrhage or blood loss
• Pregnant patients or females intended for breeding
• Patients with significant pulmonary disease (this may be less
important with COX-2-specific drugs)
• Patients with any type of confirmed or suspected coagulopathy
(this may be less important with COX-2-specific drugs)
Adverse events associated with NSAID use
The most common problems associated with NSAID administra-
tion to dogs and cats involve the gastrointestinal (GI) tract [86].
Signs may range from vomiting and diarrhea, including hematem-
esis and melena, to a silent ulcer which results in perforation. The
overall incidence of GI toxicity in dogs or cats treated with NSAIDS
is unknown. Concurrent administration of other medications
(especially other NSAIDs or corticosteroids), previous GI bleeding,
or the presence of other systemic diseases may contribute to adverse
reactions. The effect that aging has on an individual patient’s ability
to metabolize NSAIDs is likely to be quite variable. Hepatotoxicosis
caused by NSAIDs is generally considered to be idiosyn-
cratic [86,90]. Most dogs recover with cessation of treatment and
supportive care. Renal dysfunction may occur with NSAID admin-
istration as a consequence of prostaglandin inhibition [91]. While
renal prostaglandin synthesis is low under normovolemic condi-
tions, this increases in the face of hypovolemia and prostaglandin
synthesis becomes important for maintaining renal perfu-
sion [92,93]. The use of NSAIDs must be considered very carefully
in hypovolemic or hypotensive animals, and it is important to
remember this in the context of perioperative NSAID administra-
tion where patients will be undergoing general anesthesia.
Washout period between NSAIDs
A common clinical management question is whether a washout
period is needed when switching from one NSAID to another.
Several sources, including crowd sourcing websites, conference
proceedings, pharmaceutical company promotional materials, and
journal articles, have advocated a washout period of varying
lengths (1–7 days) when changing NSAIDs due to presumed lack
of efficacy [90,94–96]. These recommendations are not based on
clinical data but rather are derived from extrapolations of pharma-
cokinetic data and conservative speculation. There are several dif-
ferent scenarios to consider when switching from one NSAID to
another in a clinical patient. The first involves a switch after a sin-
gle dose of a perioperative parenteral NSAID (e.g., meloxicam) to
an oral NSAID the next day. The only data available in this situa-
tion are from a study involving normal healthy dogs that were
given parenteral (subcutaneous) carprofen followed by deracoxib
orally 24 h later and repeated for 4 days. This portion of the study
compared subcutaneous carprofen/oral deracoxib, subcutaneous
carprofen/oral carprofen, and placebo and found no differences in
clinical findings or gastric lesions. Thus, these limited data appear
to suggest that it may be safe to switch from a single injection of
one drug to an oral formula the next day if using another prod-
uct [94]. However, without testing all the possible combinations of
injectable and oral NSAIDs, it is not possible to make definitive
treatment recommendations.
The second situation involves switching NSAIDs for perceived
lack of a response by the patient. This is a difficult question for cli-
nicians, and there is significant variation in recommendations.
Many authors suggest waiting five half-lives from administration of
the first drug before initiating the second drug to reduce the plasma
concentration of the first drug to near zero. The only clinical data
that may shed light on this situation are from a report that described
switching to firocoxib from another NSAID. This study showed no
increase in documented side effects whether firocoxib was started
the next day or up to 7 days after stopping the original drug [97].
These data would seem to suggest that a washout period is not nec-
essary, but most clinicians follow the recommendation of discon-
tinuing an NSAID for 1–7 days before initiating another drug.
The final situation involves transitioning to or from aspirin. If
aspirin is the initial drug, it has been recommended that a mini-
mum 7-day washout period be followed before starting another
NSAID. The basis for this recommendation is to provide time for
platelet regeneration due to aspirin’s irreversible effects on plate-
lets [90,98]. However, there are limited clinical data to support this
recommendation.
If a dog is receiving a product that is COX-1 sparing (i.e., a pri-
mary COX-2 inhibitor) and is then changed to aspirin, a 7-day
washout period is recommended due to the gastric adaptation and
production of aspirin-triggered lipoxins (ATLs) [90,98]. Patients

-- 1396 of 1450 --

Chapter 71: Osteoarthritis Patients 	1381
receiving aspirin produce ATLs, which have been shown to exert
protective effects in the stomach by diminishing gastric injury, most
likely via release of nitric oxide (NO) from the vascular endothe-
lium. However, concurrent administration of COX-1- sparing drugs
with aspirin results in the complete inhibition of ATLs and can
potentially cause significant exacerbation of gastric mucosal injury.
It is important to remember that the formation of ATLs has yet to
be proven in the dog.
Specific NSAIDs
The approved NSAIDs available to clinicians vary considerably
around the world. It is very important for practitioners to remem-
ber that the clinical response of an individual to a particular drug is
quite variable. Patients may respond favorably to one product and
not another, so if a NSAID is indicated in a case and the first prod-
uct used does not achieve a positive clinical response, NSAIDs
should not be abandoned altogether but a different product tried.
Carprofen
Carprofen is a member of the arylpropionic acid class of NSAIDs.
In the US, it is approved, both in oral and injectable formulations,
to treat pain and inflammation associated with OA in dogs.
Carprofen improved limb function in clinical trials of dogs with
naturally occurring OA [99–105]. Three long-term studies (84
and 120 days) found that carprofen was well tolerated, and based
on subjective assessments, dogs appeared to improve over the
treatment period. The strength and quality of evidence supports a
high degree of confidence in the use of carprofen to treat OA pain
in dogs.
Cimicoxib
Cimicoxib is a member of the coxib class of NSAIDs. It is approved
by the European Union as an oral formulation in dogs for the treat-
ment of postoperative pain and pain and inflammation associated
with OA [106–108]. There is one study evaluating its use in OA and
two studies evaluating perioperative pain treatment in comparison
to other products, and the results were favorable [109–111]. One
final study evaluated its use for palliative pain management in
patients with osteosarcoma [112]. At the time of writing, the
strength of evidence supports a low to moderate degree of confi-
dence in the use of cimicoxib to treat OA pain in dogs.
Deracoxib
Deracoxib is a member of the coxib class of NSAIDs. It is approved
for use in dogs as an oral formulation for the treatment of pain and
inflammation associated with OA and postoperative pain associated
with orthopedic surgery. It has been demonstrated to provide effec-
tive relief of pain in clinical OA trials in dogs in a study that has not
been published in a peer-reviewed journal but has been presented in
abstract form [113]. As with OA, data regarding its efficacy for pain
relief following orthopedic surgery are only available in abstract
form [114]. There are two additional studies that evaluated postop-
erative pain in dental and soft tissue procedures [115,116]. Due to
lack of information, it is not possible to rate confidence in the use of
deracoxib to treat OA pain in dogs.
Enflicoxib
Enflicoxib is a member of the coxib class of NSAIDs [117–119]. It is
approved in the United Kingdom (UK) and Europe for the manage-
ment of pain and inflammation associated with OA in dogs as a
once-a-week therapy. Clinically, it has been shown to improve limb
function in dogs with OA in one well-controlled study [120].
Additionally, a second study showed noninferiority with mava-
coxib [121]. The strength and quality of the evidence supports a
moderate to high degree of confidence in the use of enflicoxib to
treat OA pain in dogs.
Firocoxib
Firocoxib is a member of the coxib class of NSAIDs. It is approved
as an oral formulation for the management of pain and inflamma-
tion associated with OA in dogs. Clinically, several studies have
demonstrated improved limb function in dogs with OA [122–126].
Long-term dosing of firocoxib showed continued improvements
over the year of treatment. The strength and quality of evidence
supports a high degree of confidence in the use of firocoxib to treat
OA pain in dogs.
Grapiprant
Grapiprant is a member of the piprant class of drugs. It is a highly
selective antagonist of the prostaglandin-E 2 receptor 4 (EP4) and is
considered a novel NSAID due to its unique mechanism of
action [127–129]. One well-controlled study provides data showing
clinical improvement in dogs with chronic OA [130]. Interestingly,
there are conflicting data in grapiprant’s ability to modulate acute
pain. One study found noninferiority of grapiprant compared to
carprofen for perioperative analgesia in dogs undergoing ovario-
hysterectomy [127], while two canine acute experimental pain
models found that grapiprant was not different than control treat-
ment and was significantly less effective than firocoxib and carpro-
fen, respectively [131,132]. At this time, the strength of evidence
supports a moderate degree of confidence in the use of grapiprant
to treat OA pain in dogs.
Ketoprofen
Ketoprofen is a member of the arylpropionic acid class of NSAIDs.
One limited study compared dosages of ketoprofen and the combi-
nation of ketoprofen with tramadol in a small group of dogs with
OA [133]. Most data regarding clinical use of this product involve
acute pain models or short-term (mostly perioperative) pain man-
agement in both dogs and cats [134–137]. Due to lack of informa-
tion, it is not possible to rate confidence in the use of ketoprofen to
treat chronic OA pain.
Mavacoxib
Mavacoxib is a member of the coxib class of NSAIDs. It is approved
by the European Union as an oral formulation for the treatment of
pain and inflammation associated with OA in dogs. Mavacoxib
has published pharmacological data and four noninferiority
studies showing clinical improvements in dogs with chronic
OA [120,121,138–142]. Mavacoxib is a long-acting agent with an
approved dosing regimen consisting of a loading dose repeated at
14 days and thereafter at dosing intervals of 1 month. The strength
and quality of evidence supports a high degree of confidence in
the use of mavacoxib to treat OA pain in dogs.
Meloxicam
Meloxicam is a member of the oxicam family of NSAIDs. It is
approved for use in dogs for the control of pain and inflammation
associated with OA and is available in oral, transmucosal oral mist,
and parenteral formulations. There are robust data evaluating
meloxicam safety and efficacy for chronic OA pain management in
dogs [141,143–145]. The strength and quality of evidence supports

-- 1397 of 1450 --

1382 	Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Selected Patients
a high degree of confidence in the use of meloxicam to treat OA
pain in dogs.
Meloxicam is approved for use in cats but, in the US, that approval
is limited to a single dose to control pain and inflammation associ-
ated with orthopedic surgery, ovariohysterectomy, and castration.
In other countries, however, meloxicam is approved for long-term
management of musculoskeletal pain in cats. Administration to cats
ranging from 5 days to indefinite dosing to manage pain for loco-
motor disorders including OA has been described with a range of
dosing recommendations (0.01–0.05 PO mg/kg once daily) [146–
151]. Clinical efficacy is primarily supported by data generated
from studies using the 0.05 mg/kg dose PO every 24 h. At lower
dosing regimens (0.01–0.03 mg/kg PO every 24 h), meloxicam has
been shown to be well tolerated and safe in cats, including cats with
chronic renal dysfunction [148–150,152]. The strength and quality
of evidence supports a high degree of confidence in the use of
meloxicam to treat DJD/OA pain in cats.
Robenacoxib
Robenacoxib is a member of the coxib class of NSAIDs. Depending
on the country, approval may be for dogs only, or for both dogs and
cats. Indications in the dog are for the treatment of pain and inflam-
mation associated with orthopedic or soft tissue surgery as well as
the treatment of pain and inflammation associated with chronic
OA [153–158]. The strength and quality of evidence supports a
high degree of confidence in the use of robenacoxib to treat OA
pain in dogs.
In the cat, approved indications vary by country and include
treatment of postoperative pain and inflammation associated with
surgery as well as acute and chronic administration for pain and
inflammation associated with musculoskeletal disorders [157–
165]. The strength and quality of evidence supports a moderate to
high degree of confidence in the use of robenacoxib to treat DJD/
OA pain in cats.
Tolfenamic acid
Tolfenamic acid is an anthranilic acid derivative and a member of
the fenamates class of NSAIDs. It is approved in Canada and Europe
in both oral and parenteral formulations for dogs and cats. While
some clinical data are available to support use of tolfenamic acid in
dogs and cats, all studies involve short-term administration
(3–7 days) only [166–168]. Given the lack of long-term data, the
strength of evidence supports a low degree of confidence in the use
of tolfenamic acid to treat OA pain in dogs or cats.
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonists
A significant breakthrough in the understanding of nociceptive
processing came with the recognition that the nervous system was
plastic, which is to say, inputs from the periphery could, via activa-
tion of a variety of receptors (principally the NMDA receptor),
produce changes in processing of nociceptive signals in the spinal
cord. The characteristics of the NMDA receptor are such that with
repeated stimulation, a state of prolonged depolarization in dorsal
horn neurons is produced. This long-term potentiation is thought
to produce the state known as “central sensitization” via activation
of a variety of second messenger systems, and the production of
NO, eicosanoids, and induction of immediate early genes. Central
sensitization is thought to contribute to injury- or disease-induced
pain by causing amplification of afferent signals, and by altering
processing of sensory information such that previously non-
noxious signals are now encoded as noxious. The NMDA receptor
appears to be central to the induction and maintenance of central
sensitization, and the use of NMDA receptor antagonists would
appear to offer benefit in the treatment of pain where central sen-
sitization has become established (especially chronic pain).
Ketamine, tiletamine, dextromethorphan, and amantadine possess
NMDA antagonist properties, among other actions [169–173].
Additional information about these drugs in available in
Chapters 25 and 27.
Amantadine
There is one publication evaluating amantadine combined with an
NSAID that demonstrated improvements in the canine OA patients
compared to the NSAID alone [174]. This study was a randomized,
blinded, placebo-controlled trial. The study indicated efficacy
based on both objective and subjective outcome measures, and the
evidence supports a moderate degree of confidence in the use of
amantadine to impact the outcomes reported.
Opioids
The descending opioidergic system is one of the best described
endogenous analgesic mechanisms [88]. For both pharmacologic
and regulatory reasons, long-term classic oral opioid therapy has
not been a viable treatment methodology in veterinary patients.
However, the use of tramadol (a synthetic derivative of codeine
classified as an opioidergic/monoaminergic drug), which has
actions at both μ-opioid receptors and facilitates activity in the
descending serotonergic system, has become commonplace in
small animal practice. Tramadol use grew despite a lack of sup-
porting clinical data and unfavorable pharmacologic data [175–
177]. In a well-controlled clinical trial, tramadol was found to be
ineffective alone in treating chronic OA in dogs [178]. A second
prospective clinical trial provides data showing limited improve-
ments in both objective and subjective outcome measures in canine
OA patients receiving tramadol [41]. Mixed results were found in
two studies examining postoperative analgesia after tibial plateau
leveling osteotomy (TPLO) surgery [179,180]. Additionally, a
recent systematic review and meta-analysis of tramadol for post-
operative pain management in dogs found the certainty of evi-
dence to be low to very low that the drug had any efficacy [181].
Thus, the strength and quality of evidence supports a very low level
of confidence in the use of tramadol for chronic pain management
in dogs. Interestingly, in cats, tramadol has very different pharma-
cokinetics, which may provide better analgesia when compared to
dogs [182,183]. Two small well-controlled studies found increased
mobility and improved owner assessments of impairment in cats
receiving tramadol [184,185]. Given these data, the evidence sup-
ports a moderate level of confidence in the use of tramadol for
treatment of DJD/OA pain in cats. Further information on trama-
dol is available in Chapter 25.
Gabapentin
Gabapentin, a gabapentinoid, binds to the α2δ subunit of voltage-
gated calcium channels, causing a decrease in the release of neu-
rotransmitters and reducing neuronal excitability [38,186]. Single
small well-controlled reports in both dogs (treating neuropathic
pain) and cats (treating OA) documented improvement in out-
come measurements when treated with gabapentin [187,188].
Given the limited data, the strength of evidence supports a low
degree of confidence in the use of gabapentin for chronic DJD/OA
pain in dogs and cats. Further information on gabapentin is avail-
able in Chapter 25.

-- 1398 of 1450 --

Chapter 71: Osteoarthritis Patients 	1383
Other pharmaceuticals
A variety of other drugs have been suggested for use in chronic pain
in dogs and cats with no pharmacological information or clinical
trials. As examples, there have been no clinical trials assessing pre-
gabalin, venlafaxine, duloxetine, ketamine, intra-articular steroids,
or amitriptyline for the relief of painful symptoms associated with
any type of chronic pain (such as OA) in dogs or cats. Thus, due to
lack of information, it is not possible to rate confidence in the use of
any of these drugs for treatment of chronic DJD/OA pain.
Alternative, complementary, and homeopathic compounds
The lack of high-quality, peer-reviewed literature makes it difficult
to draw conclusions about any of these therapies. Studies commonly
have limitations related to methods of participant recruitment and
randomization, baseline characteristic data reporting, intervention
standardization and concealment, blinding, participant retention,
follow-up procedures, and overall protocol. The following is a lim-
ited exploration of some of the data available to date.
Compounds based on chondroitin sulfate
and glucosamine hydrochloride
A recent systematic review and meta-analysis of enriched diets and
nutraceuticals concluded in part “a very marked non-effect of
chondroitin–glucosamine nutraceuticals, which leads us to recom-
mend that the latter products should no longer be recommended
for pain management in canine and feline OA” [189]. This conclu-
sion was based in part on the evaluation of three trials [101,189,190].
One study subjectively (via a non-validated tool) showed a limited
positive effect at only one of three time points [190]. The other two
studies showed no positive effects measured by force plate analy-
sis [101,191]. The strength and quality of evidence supports a very
low degree of confidence in the use of these products for the treat-
ment of OA pain in dogs.
Polysulfated glycosaminoglycan
Two studies have evaluated polysulfated glycosaminoglycan
(PSGAG) efficacy on lameness due to OA. Both studies were limited
by study design deficiencies (small sample size and non-validated
subjective scoring systems). One study was blinded, with a placebo
control, and found no significant improvement in lameness scores
between groups (three PSGAG doses and placebo) [192]. There
was a trend toward improvements that may have been confirmed
with a larger sample size. The second study demonstrated lameness
improvement but was neither randomized nor blinded [193].
Interestingly, the product tested in both studies did gain approval by
the US Food and Drug Administration for use. The strength and
quality of evidence supports a low degree of confidence in the use of
these compounds for treatment of OA pain in dogs.
Green-lipped mussel preparation
Four trials were identified using a compound whose main ingredi-
ent was green-lipped mussel (Perna canaliculus) for the treatment
of OA in dogs. The studies were prospective and randomized in
design [194–197]. While all showed positive effects (subjectively
and objectively), they all had small sample sizes. Additionally, there
are some questions regarding the scientific quality in two of these
studies. There was moderate consistency across the studies, and
their conclusions suggest that the observed effect will be physiolog-
ically meaningful and achievable. Based on these data, the strength
and quality of evidence supports a moderate degree of confidence
in the use of these compounds for the treatment of OA pain in dogs.
Zeel® homeopathic preparation
Two trials were identified using Zeel® for the treatment of OA in
dogs. While both were prospective, only one was randomized and
blinded [198,199]. Both studies showed subjective positive effects
associated with the product; however, in one study, effects were less
than those produced by carprofen. Given the small sample sizes and
the study limitations, there are some questions regarding the scien-
tific quality of the studies. There was a moderate level of consist-
ency between the studies, and the overall strength and quality of
evidence supports a low to moderate degree of confidence in the
use of these compounds for the treatment of OA pain in dogs.
Type II collagen
Six studies including three randomized, blinded, placebo-controlled
clinical trials using type II collagen as a treatment for OA in dogs
have been performed [109,200–204]. The more recent studies boost
earlier positive findings that support the use of this compound.
Given the study design limitations (small sample size, non-validated
subjective tools, limited follow-up data points, etc.), there are still
some questions regarding the scientific quality of these stud-
ies [189]. Based on these data, the strength and quality of evidence
supports a moderate degree of confidence in the use of this com-
pound for the treatment of OA pain in dogs.
Cannabidiol products
There are several single-center clinical trials involving a variety of
cannabidiol (CBD) products showing limited to no positive effects
for the treatment of OA pain and dysfunction. Though difficult to
evaluate, these products may have a place in OA therapy if addi-
tional studies show a positive effect with larger sample sizes and/
or different study designs. Two recent reviews emphasized the
limitations (low sample size) and conflicting data available to
date [84,189]. Two studies comparing CBD oil treatment to pla-
cebo found a reduction of clinical signs by subjective measure-
ments, while another randomized, blinded crossover study found
no significant difference between CBD oil treatment and placebo
over the course of 6 weeks based on clinical metrology instrument
outcomes and objective pressure gait analysis [205–207]. Based on
these data, the strength and quality of evidence supports a low
degree of confidence in the use of these compounds for the treat-
ment of OA pain in dogs.
Anti-nerve growth factor monoclonal antibodies
Nerve growth factor (NGF) has been shown to be an important
driver of pain in OA due to its ability to facilitate peripheral and
central sensitization in mature patients [208–211]. In dogs, two
studies found significant pain relief with anti-NGF monoclonal
antibodies [212,213]. More recently, a large well-controlled clinical
trial evaluating the monoclonal antibody bedinvetmab found it to
be efficacious in dogs with OA [214]. This product is now approved
for dogs in the US, Canada, the UK, and the European Union. The
strength and quality of evidence supports a high degree of confi-
dence in the use of bedinvetmab to treat OA pain in dogs.
A feline-specific monoclonal antibody has also gone through a
similar pathway of clinical testing. Initially, two small well-
controlled studies suggested efficacy in cats [215,216]. These find-
ings were confirmed with two large well-controlled clinical trials
with the monoclonal antibody frunevetmab [217,218]. This prod-
uct has been approved for cats in the US, Canada, the UK, the
European Union, and several other countries. The strength and
quality of evidence supports a high degree of confidence in the use

-- 1399 of 1450 --

1384 	Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Selected Patients
of frunevetmab to treat OA pain in cats. Further information on
anti-NGF monoclonal antibodies is available in Chapter 48.
Cell- based therapies
Cell-based therapies include many products, and it can be con-
fusing to differentiate these therapies from each other. Blood-
derived products are often lumped together but include a range
of varied therapies including autologous conditioned serum,
autologous protein solution, platelet-rich plasma, and certain
preparations containing medicinal (or messenger or mesenchy-
mal) stem cells [84,219–223]. Other stem cell-based therapies are
adipose-derived stromal fraction and autologous, allogenic, or
xenogeneic stem cells of varying origins (e.g., adipose, bone mar-
row, or umbilical tissue). To complicate things further, there is no
uniformity in production of these products or methods to test for
efficacy [221,224]. These factors make it difficult to assess effi-
cacy in dogs and cats. The following is a limited discussion of the
different products available at the time of writing.
Autologous protein solution
One pilot study and two small clinical trials evaluate intra-
articular autologous protein solution (APS) in dogs with OA [225–
227]. While there are some data to support use in dogs, the small
sample sizes and lack of a control group in one study limit the
conclusions that can be drawn. No data are available in using APS
for the treatment of OA/DJD in cats. Thus, the strength and qual-
ity of evidence supports a low degree of confidence in the use of
this therapy in dogs.
Platelet-rich plasma
Limited clinical data are available to assess the efficacy of platelet-
rich plasma (PRP) in chronic OA pain. Again, the clinical studies
suffer from limitations associated with study design (small num-
bers of patients, and lack of controls and standardization of prod-
uct) [228–232]. No data are available for the treatment of OA/DJD
in cats with PRP. While there is evidence of some positive efficacy
in each study, the strength and quality of evidence supports a low
degree of confidence in the use of this therapy.
Medicinal (messenger or mesenchymal) stem cells
Medicinal stem cells (MSCs) can be autologous, allogenic, or xen-
ogeneic [84,220,221,223]. The exact mechanism of how MSCs
exert their effects is not completely understood. Current data
suggest that MSCs are active primarily through their secretory
factors [84,220,223,233]. These paracrine factors may produce
immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory effects as well as
other effects such as angiogenesis. Autologous and allogenic
MSCs can be clinically delivered intra-articularly. Additionally,
allogenic and xenogeneic MSCs can be given intravenously. One
xenogeneic product of equine umbilical cord MSC is approved for
use in the UK and the European Union for the treatment of OA in
dogs [234]. Clinical studies involving MSCs have been extensively
reviewed [84,220,223,233,235]. The majority have limitations
associated with study design (small numbers, lack of controls or
blinding, non-validated subjective outcome measures, and few
measurement time points). While most studies show positive
results, the strength and quality of evidence supports a moderate
degree of confidence in the use of MSCs in dogs; however, this has
the potential to improve with additional clinical data. There are
currently no clinical data available evaluating the use of MSCs for
the treatment of DJD/OA in cats.
Dealing with non-responders to standard
treatment approaches
There is a continued desire to identify additional drugs and com-
pounds to alleviate chronic pain in small animal patients. This is
based upon the fact that current products are not always effec-
tive, and some result in more adverse events than some clinicians
and clients are willing to accept. Given this set of circumstances,
a discussion about non-responders to current treatments is
appropriate.
After initiation of treatment, the veterinarian and client must
decide whether the animal is responding to the prescribed pain
management plan. Clinicians need to ask this question every
time a product or therapy is prescribed. Without verbal patient
communication, veterinarians are hampered in all phases of
treating pain, including the diagnosis, accurate characterization
and localization, and evaluation of therapeutic efficacy. While
veterinary patients possess many of the same nociceptive path-
ways (including neurotransmitter receptors) and perhaps even
similar perceptions of painful stimuli as other species (including
humans), one cannot assume that the evaluation of responses
should be similar for all patients. One needs to go no further than
comparing cats, dogs, and pet birds to find striking examples of
this conundrum. In recent years, strides have been made in eval-
uating the effects of different pain therapies in veterinary patients,
but it is important to remember current limitations and proceed
with caution when making claims about new treatments or thera-
peutic agents.
In addition, the criteria for defining a “responder” as well as the
outcome measures used to define the response require clarification.
In the human literature, the Initiative on Methods, Measurement,
and Pain Assessment in Clinical Trials (IMMPACT) consortium
defines outcome responses in clinical trials for human chronic pain,
and these are summarized in Box 71.3. Given these guidelines, in
many human studies, a 30% improvement in a patient makes that
case a positive responder.
In veterinary medicine, clinical trials to demonstrate efficacy for
pain control are usually performed for regulatory purposes and
outcomes are typically reported as statistical comparisons between
treatment group population means. Thus, the results represent the
“average” patient. These data are difficult to apply clinically because
individual patients are being treated [238]. In human medicine,
managing the pain and dysfunction of OA has been often described
as the 80/20 rule [236]. That is, 80% of patients experience 20% pain
relief, while only 20% of patients experience 80% pain relief. About
50% have their pain halved. An extensive review of data available in
human medicine yields interesting and sobering results. Data
clearly show that different NSAIDs show a range of responses for
pain relief. This is compounded by the fact that the same NSAID, at
different doses, shows the same gradation of responses. Generally,
Box 71.3 Outcome responses for human chronic pain as defined by the
Initiative on Methods, Measurement, and Pain Assessment in Clinical Trials
(IMMPACT) consortium.
• 10–20% decrease in pain intensity is considered minimally important
• 30% decrease in pain intensity is considered moderately important
• 50% decrease in pain intensity is considered substantially important
• 70% decrease in pain intensity is considered extremely important
Source: Dworkin et al. [236]; Dworkin et al. [237].

-- 1400 of 1450 --

Chapter 71: Osteoarthritis Patients 	1385
only about 15–30% of patients actually show extensive improve-
ment, while over 60–70% show minimal improvement (i.e., a ben-
efit) [239,240]. In veterinary medicine, outcome testing instruments
cannot reliably differentiate this range of clinical responses, so there
are no data supporting different doses of a given NSAID even
though it has been observed that NSAID effects are dose depend-
ent. Despite these limitations to detect clinical improvements, many
(including the Food and Drug Administration Center for Veterinary
Medicine) suggest that clinicians titrate the dose of NSAIDs to the
lowest effective dose.
References
1 Malfait AM, Schnitzer TJ. Towards a mechanism-based approach to pain manage-
ment in osteoarthritis. Nat Rev Rheumatol 2013; 9: 654–664.
2 Dray A, Read SJ. Arthritis and pain. Future targets to control osteoarthritis pain.
Arthritis Res Ther 2007; 9: 212–215.
3 Schaible HG. Mechanisms of chronic pain in osteoarthritis. Curr Rheumatol Rep
2012; 14: 549–556.
4 Lee AS, Ellman MB, Yan D, et al. A current review of molecular mechanisms
regarding osteoarthritis and pain. Gene 2013; 527: 440–447.
5 Krasnokutsky S, Attur M, Palmer G, et al. Current concepts in the pathogenesis of
osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 2008; 16(Suppl 3): S1–S3.
6 Pelletier JP, Martel-Pelletier J, Abramson SB. Osteoarthritis, an inflammatory dis-
ease: potential implication for the selection of new therapeutic targets. Arthritis
Rheum 2001; 44: 1237–1247.
7 Goldring MB, Goldring SR. Osteoarthritis. J Cell Physiol 2007; 213: 626–634.
8 Zhang RX, Ren K, Dubner R. Osteoarthritis pain mechanisms: basic studies in ani-
mal models. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 2013; 21: 1308–1315.
9 Loeser RF, Goldring SR, Scanzello CR, et al. Osteoarthritis: a disease of the joint as
an organ. Arthritis Rheum 2012; 64: 1697–1707.
10 Johnston SA. Osteoarthritis joint anatomy, physiology, and pathobiology. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 1997; 27: 699–723.
11 Shepherd AJ. Results of the 2006 AVMA survey of companion animal ownership in
US pet- owning households. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008; 232: 695–696.
12 United States Pet Ownership & Demographics Sourcebook 2012. www.avma.org/
KB/Resources/Statistics/Pages/Market-research-statistics-US-pet-ownershipaspx
(accessed October 2014).
13 Murray JK, Browne WJ, Roberts MA, et al. Number and ownership profiles of cats
and dogs in the UK. Vet Rec 2010; 166: 163–168.
14 Lascelles BDX, Court MH, Hardie EM, et al. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
in cats: a review. Vet Anaesth and Analgesia 2007; 34: 228–250.
15 Lascelles BDX, Henry JB, Brown J, et al. Cross-sectional study of the prevalence of
radiographic degenerative joint disease in domesticated cats. Vet Surg 2010; 39:
535–544.
16 Clarke SP, Mellor D, Clements DN, et al. Prevalence of radiographic signs of degen-
erative joint disease in a hospital population of cats. Vet Rec 2005; 157: 793–799.
17 Clarke SP, Bennett D. Feline osteoarthritis: a prospective study of 28 cases. J Small
Anim Pract 2006; 47: 439–445.
18 Bennett D, Zainal Ariffin SM, Johnston P. Osteoarthritis in the cat: how common is
it and how easy to recognise? J Feline Med Surg 2012; 14: 65–75.
19 Lascelles BD, Robertson SA. DJD-associated pain in cats: what can we do to pro-
mote patient comfort? J Feline Med Surg 2010; 12: 200–212.
20 Bennett D, Zainal Ariffin SM, Johnston P. Osteoarthritis in the cat: how should it be
managed and treated? J Feline Med Surg 2012; 14: 76–84.
21 Taylor PM, Robertson SA. Pain management in cats – past, present and future Part
1. The cat is unique. J Feline Med Surg 2004; 6: 313–320.
22 Lascelles BD. Feline degenerative joint disease. Vet Surg 2010; 39: 2–13.
23 Kuettner K, Goldberg VM. Osteoarthritis Disorders. Rosemont, IL: American
Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons, 1995.
24 Heinegård D, Saxne T. The role of the cartilage matrix in osteoarthritis. Nat Rev
Rheumatol 2011; 7: 50–56.
25 Schuelert N, McDougall JJ. Electrophysiological evidence that the vasoactive intes-
tinal peptide receptor antagonist VIP6-28 reduces nociception in an animal model
of osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 2006; 14: 1155–1162.
26 Mobasheri A, Batt M. An update on the pathophysiology of osteoarthritis. Ann
Phys Rehabil Med 2016; 59: 333–339.
27 Conaghan PG, Cook AD, Hamilton JA, et al. Therapeutic options for targeting
inflammatory osteoarthritis pain. Nat Rev Rheumatol 2019; 15: 355–363.
28 Latourte A, Kloppenburg M, Richette P. Emerging pharmaceutical therapies for
osteoarthritis. Nat Rev Rheumatol 2020; 16: 673–688.
29 Conzemius MG, Evans RB. Caregiver placebo effect for dogs with lameness from
osteoarthritis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2012; 241: 1314–1319.
30 Malek S, Sample SJ, Schwartz Z, et al. Effect of analgesic therapy on clinical out-
come measures in a randomized controlled trial using client-owned dogs with hip
osteoarthritis. BMC Vet Res 2012; 8: 185.
31 Walton MB, Cowderoy E, Lascelles D. Evaluation of construct and criterion validity
for the ‘Liverpool Osteoarthritis in Dogs’ (LOAD) clinical metrology instrument
and comparison to two other instruments. PLoS ONE 2013; 8: e58125.
32 Brown DC, Boston RC, Coyne JC, et al. Ability of the Canine Brief Pain Inventory
to detect response to treatment in dogs with osteoarthritis. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2008; 233: 1278–1283.
33 Brown DC, Boston RC, Farrar JT. Comparison of force plate gait analysis and
owner assessment of pain using the Canine Brief Pain Inventory in dogs with osteo-
arthritis. J Vet Intern Med 2013; 27: 22–30.
34 Hercock CA, Pinchbeck G, Giejda A, et al. Validation of a client-based clinical
metrology instrument for the evaluation of canine elbow osteoarthritis. J Small
Anim Pract 2009; 50: 266–271.
35 Hielm-Björkman AK, Rita H, Tulamo RM. Psychometric testing of the Helsinki
chronic pain index by completion of a questionnaire in Finnish by owners of dogs
with chronic signs of pain caused by osteoarthritis. Am J Vet Res 2009; 70:
727–734.
36 Hielm-Björkman AK, Kuusela E, Liman A, et al. Evaluation of methods for assess-
ment of pain associated with chronic osteoarthritis in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2003; 222: 1552–1558.
37 Lascelles BD, Hansen BD, Roe S, et al. Evaluation of client-specific outcome meas-
ures and activity monitoring to measure pain relief in cats with osteoarthritis. J Vet
Intern Med 2007; 21: 410–416.
38 Benito J, Hansen B, Depuy V, et al. Feline musculoskeletal pain index: responsive-
ness and testing of criterion validity. J Vet Intern Med 2013; 27: 474–482.
39 Benito J, Depuy V, Hardie E, et al. Reliability and discriminatory testing of a client-
based metrology instrument, feline musculoskeletal pain index (FMPI) for the
evaluation of degenerative joint disease-associated pain in cats. Vet J 2013; 196:
368–373.
40 Monteiro BP. Feline chronic pain and osteoarthritis. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 2020; 50: 769–788.
41 Monteiro BP, Steagall PV. Chronic pain in cats: recent advances in clinical assess-
ment. J Feline Med Surg 2019; 21: 601–614.
42 Johnston SA, McLaughlin RM, Budsberg SC. Nonsurgical management of osteoar-
thritis in dogs. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2008; 38: 1449–1470.
43 Innes JF, Walton MB. Update on the diagnosis and management of canine osteoar-
thritis. CVL – Companion Animals 2013; 2: 113–122.
44 Fox SM. Multimodal management of canine osteoarthritis. In: Fox SM, ed. Chronic
Pain in Small Animals. London, UK: Manson Publishing, 2010: 189–201.
45 Rychel JK. Diagnosis and treatment of osteoarthritis. Top Companion Anim Med
2010; 25: 20–25.
46 Fox SM. Painful decisions for senior pets. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
2012; 42: 727–748.
47 Sanderson RO, Beata C, Flipo JP, et al. Systematic review of the management of
canine osteoarthritis. Vet Rec 2009; 164: 418–424.
48 Laflamme DP. Understanding and managing obesity in dogs and cats. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 2006; 36: 1283–1295.
49 Laflamme DP. Nutritional care for aging cats and dogs. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 2012; 42: 769–791.
50 Churchill J. Increase the success of weight loss programs by creating an environ-
ment for change. Compend Contin Educ Vet 2010; 32: E1.
51 Michel K, Scherk M. From problems to success: feline weight loss programs that
work. J Feline Med Surg 2012; 14: 327–336.
52 Brooks D, Churchill J, Fein K, et al. 2014 AAHA weight management guidelines for
dogs and cats. Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2014; 50: 1–11.
53 Impellizeri JA, Tetrick MA, Muir P. Effect of weight reduction on clinical signs of
lameness in dogs with hip osteoarthritis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000; 216:
1089–1091.
54 Mlacnik E, Bockstahler BA, Müller M, et al. Effects of caloric restriction and a mod-
erate or intense physiotherapy program for treatment of lameness in overweight
dogs with osteoarthritis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2006; 229: 1756–1760.
55 Farrell M, Clements DN, Mellor D, et al. Retrospective evaluation of the long-term
outcome of non-surgical management of 74 dogs with clinical hip dysplasia. Vet Rec
2007; 160: 506–511.
56 Kealy RD, Lawler DF, Ballam JM, et al. Evaluation of the effect of limited food
consumption on radiographic evidence of osteoarthritis in dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 2000; 217: 1678–1680.
57 Smith GK, Paster ER, Powers MY, et al. Lifelong diet restriction and radiographic
evidence of osteoarthritis of the hip joint in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2006; 229:
690–693.

-- 1401 of 1450 --

1386 	Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Selected Patients
58 Kirkby KA, Lewis DD. Canine hip dysplasia: reviewing the evidence for nonsurgi-
cal management. Vet Surg 2012; 41: 2–9.
59 Marshall W, Bockstahler B, Hulse D, et al. A review of osteoarthritis and obesity:
current understanding of the relationship and benefit of obesity treatment and pre-
vention in the dog. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2009; 22: 339–345.
60 Mille MA, McClement J, Lauer S. Physiotherapeutic strategies and their current
evidence for canine osteoarthritis. Vet Sci 2022; 10: 2.
61 Millis DL, Levine D, Taylor RA. Canine Rehabilitation and Physical Therapy.
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 2004.
62 Mueller M, Bockstahler B, Skalicky M, et al. Effects of radial shockwave therapy on
the limb function of dogs with hip osteoarthritis. Vet Rec 2007; 160: 762–765.
63 Sullivan MO, Gordon-Evans WJ, Knap KE, et al. Randomized, controlled clinical
trial evaluating the efficacy of pulsed signal therapy in dogs with osteoarthritis. Vet
Surg 2013; 42: 250–254.
64 Dahlberg J, Fitch G, Evans RB, et al. The evaluation of extracorporeal shockwave
therapy in naturally occurring osteoarthritis of the stifle joint in dogs. Vet Comp
Orthop Traumatol 2005; 18: 147–152.
65 Alves JC, Santos A, Jorge P, et al. A randomized double-blinded controlled trial on
the effects of photobiomodulation therapy in dogs with osteoarthritis. Am J Vet Res
2022; 83: ajvr22.03.0036.
66 Looney AL, Huntingford JL, Blaeser LL, et al. A randomized blind placebo-
controlled trial investigating the effects of photobiomodulation therapy (PBMT) on
canine elbow osteoarthritis. Can Vet J 2018; 59: 959–966.
67 Lenox CE, Bauer JE. Potential adverse effects of omega-3 Fatty acids in dogs and
cats. J Vet Intern Med 2013; 27: 217–226.
68 Budsberg SC, Bartges JW. Nutrition and osteoarthritis in dogs: does it help? Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 2006; 36: 1307–1323.
69 Perea S. Nutritional management of osteoarthritis. Compend Contin Educ Vet 2012;
34: E4.
70 Schuchardt JP, Hahn A. Bioavailability of long-chain omega-3 fatty acids.
Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 2013; 89: 1–8.
71 Healy DA, Wallace FA, Miles EA, et al. Effect of low-to-moderate amounts of
dietary fish oil on neutrophil lipid composition and function. Lipids 2000; 35:
763–768.
72 Yaqoob P, Pala HS, Cortina-Borja M, et al. Encapsulated fish oil enriched in alpha-
tocopherol alters plasma phospholipid and mononuclear cell fatty acid composi-
tions but not mononuclear cell functions. Eur J Clin Invest 2000; 30: 260–274.
73 Baker KR, Matthan NR, Lichtenstein A, et al. Association of plasma n-6 and n-3
polyunsaturated fatty acids with synovitis in the knee: the MOST study.
Osteoarthritis Cartilage 2012; 20: 382–387.
74 Zainal Z, Longman AJ, Hurst S, et al. Relative efficacies of omega-3 polyunsaturated
fatty acids in reducing expression of key proteins in a model system for studying
osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 2009; 17: 896–905.
75 Fritsch D, Allen TA, Dodd CE, et al. Dose-titration effects of fish oil in osteoarthri-
tis dogs. J Vet Intern Med 2010; 24: 1020–1026.
76 Fritsch DA, Allen TA, Dodd CE, et al. A multicenter study of the effects of dietary
supplementation with fish oil omega-3 fatty acids on carprofen dosage in dogs with
osteoarthritis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2010; 236: 535–539.
77 Roush JK, Dodd CE, Fritsch DA, et al. Multicenter veterinary practice assessment
of the effects of omega-3 fatty acids on osteoarthritis in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2010; 236: 59–66.
78 Roush JK, Cross AR, Renberg WC, et al. Evaluation of the effects of dietary sup-
plementation with fish oil omega-3 fatty acids on weight bearing in dogs with
osteoarthritis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2010; 236: 67–73.
79 Moreau M, Troncy E, Del Castillo JR, et al. Effects of feeding a high omega-3 fatty
acids diet in dogs with naturally occurring osteoarthritis. J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr
(Berl) 2013; 97; 830–837.
80 Hielm- Björkman A, Roine J, Elo K, et al. An un-commissioned randomized,
placebo-controlled double-blind study to test the effect of deep sea fish oil as a pain
reliever for dogs suffering from canine OA. BMC Vet Res 2012; 8: 157.
81 Lascelles BD, DePuy V, Thomson A, et al. Evaluation of a therapeutic diet for feline
degenerative joint disease. J Vet Intern Med 2010; 24: 487–495.
82 Aragon CL, Hofmeister EH, Budsberg SC. Systematic review of clinical trials of
treatments for osteoarthritis in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2007; 230: 514–521.
83 Innes JF, Clayton J, Lascelles BDX. Review of the safety and efficacy of long-term
NSAID use in the treatment of canine osteoarthritis. Vet Rec 2010; 166: 226–230.
84 Pye C, Bruniges N, Peffers M, et al. Advances in the pharmaceutical treatment
options for canine osteoarthritis. J Small Anim Pract 2022; 63(10): 721–738.
85 Sparkes AH, Heiene R, Lascelles BDX, et al. ISFM and AAFP consensus guidelines:
long-term use of NSAIDs in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2010; 12: 521–538.
86 Monteiro-Steagall BP, Steagall PVM, Lascelles BDX. Systematic review of non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drug induced adverse effects in dogs. J Vet Intern Med
2013; 27: 1011–1019.
87 Carmicheal S. Clinical use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs);
the current position. Eur J Comp Anim Prac 2011; 21: 171–177.
88 Freye E. Opioids in Medicine – A Comprehensive Review on the Mode of Action and
the Use of Analgesics in Different Clinical Pain States. Dordrecht, Netherlands:
Springer, 2008: 256–266.
89 Wernham BG, Trumpatori B, Hash J, et al. Dose reduction of meloxicam in dogs
with osteoarthritis-associated pain and impaired mobility. J Vet Intern Med 2011;
25: 1298–1305.
90 KuKanich B, Bidgood T, Knesl O. Clinical pharmacology of nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2012; 39: 69–90.
91 Surdyk KK, Brown CA, Brown SA. Evaluation of glomerular filtration rate in cats
with reduced renal mass and administered meloxicam and acetylsalicylic acid. Am
J Vet Res 2013; 74: 648–651.
92 Surdyk KK, Sloan DL, Brown SA. Renal effects of carprofen and etodolac in euv-
olemic and volume-depleted dogs. Am J Vet Res 2012; 73: 1485–1489.
93 Surdyk KK, Sloan DL, Brown SA. Evaluation of the renal effects of ibuprofen and
carprofen in euvolemic and volume-depleted dogs. Intern J Appl Res Vet Med
2011; 9: 129–136.
94 Dowers KL, Uhrig SR, Mama KR, et al. Effect of short-term sequential adminis-
tration of nonsteriodal anti-inflammatory drugs on the stomach and proximal
portion of the duodenum in healthy dogs. Am J Vet Res 2006; 67: 1794–1801.
95 Lascelles BD, McFarland JM, Swann H. Guidelines for safe and effective use of
NSAIDs in dogs. Vet Ther 2005; 6: 237–251.
96 Sharkey M, Brown M, Wilmot L. What Veterinarians Should Tell Clients About
Pain Control and Their Pets FDA Veterinarian Newsletter 2006 Volume XXI, No I.
www.valheart.com/blog/what- veterinarians- should- tell- clients- about- pain-
control- and-their-pets (accessed October 2014).
97 Ryan WG, Moldave K, Carithers D. Switching NSAIDs in practice: insights from
the Previcox (firocoxib) experience trial. Vet Ther 2007; 8: 263–271.
98 Papich MG. An update on nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in
small animals. Vet Clin Small Anim 2008; 38: 1243–1266.
99 Vasseur PB, Johnson AL, Budsberg SC, et al. Randomized, controlled trial of the
efficacy of carprofen, a nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug, in the treatment of
osteoarthritis in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1995; 206: 807–811.
100 Holtsinger RH, Parker RB, Beale BS, et al. The therapeutic efficacy of carprofen in
209 clinical cases of canine degenerative joint disease. Vet Comp Orthop Traumat
1992; 5: 140–144.
101 Moreau M, Dubuis J, Bonneau NH, et al. Clinical evaluation of a nutraceutical,
carprofen and meloxicam for the treatment of dogs with osteoarthritis. Vet Rec
2003; 152: 323–329.
102 Pollmeier M, Toulemonde C, Fleishman C, et al. Clinical evaluation of firocoxib
and carprofen for the treatment of dogs with osteoarthritis. Vet Rec 2006; 159:
547–555.
103 Autefage A, Gossellin J. Efficacy and safety of the long-term oral administration of
carprofen in the treatment of osteoarthritis in dogs. Rev Med Vet 2007; 158:
119–127.
104 Mansa S, Palmér E, Grøndahl C, et al. Long-term treatment with carprofen of 805
dogs with osteoarthritis. Vet Rec 2007; 160: 427–430.
105 Reymond N, Speranza C, Gruet P, et al. Robenacoxib vs. carprofen for the treat-
ment of canine osteoarthritis; a randomized, noninferiority clinical trial. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2012; 35: 175–183.
106 EMA. Cimalgex® - Cimicoxib: Summary to the public. EMA/532732/2010. www.
ema.europa.eu/en/documents/overview/cimalgex-epar-summary-public_en.pdf
(accessed June 2023).
107 EMA. Cimalgex® - Scientific discussion. EMA/CVMP/513842/2011. www.ema.
europa.eu/en/documents/assessment-report/cimalgex-epar-public-assessment-
report_en.pdf (accessed June 2023).
108 KimTW, Lebkowska-Wieruszewska, Owen B, et al. Pharmacokinetic profiles of
the novel COX-2 selective inhibitor cimicoxib in dogs. Vet J 2014; 200: 77–81.
109 Stabile M, Lacitignola L, Samarelli R, et al. Evaluation of clinical efficacy of unde-
natured type II collagen supplementation compared to cimicoxib and their asso-
ciation in dogs affected by natural occurring osteoarthritis. Res Vet Sci 2022; 151:
27–35.
110 Grandemange E, Fournel S, Woehrlé F. Efficacy and safety of cimicoxib in the
control of perioperative pain in dogs. J Small Anim Pract 2013; 54: 304–312.
111 Bustamante R, Daza MA, Canfrán S, et al. Comparison of the postoperative anal-
gesic effects of cimicoxib, buprenorphine and their combination in healthy dogs
undergoing ovariohysterectomy. Vet Anaesth Analg 2018; 45: 545–556.
112 Monteiro BP, de Lorimier LP, Moreau M, et al. Pain characterization and response
to palliative care in dogs with naturally-occurring appendicular osteosarcoma: an
open label clinical trial. PLoS ONE 2018; 13: e0207200.
113 Johnston SA, Conzemius MG, Cross AR, et al. A multi-center clinical study of the
effects of Deracoxib, a COX-2 selective drug on chronic pain in dogs with osteo-
arthritis. Vet Surg 2001; 30: 497.
114 Millis DL, Conzemius MG, Wells KL, et al. A multi-center clinical study on the
effects of Dearcoxicb, a COX-2 selective drug on post-operative analgesia associ-
ated with cranial cruciate ligament stabilization in dogs. Vet Surg 2001; 30: 502.

-- 1402 of 1450 --

Chapter 71: Osteoarthritis Patients 	1387
115 Bienhoff SE, Smith ES, Roycroft LM, et al. Efficacy and safety of deracoxib for the
control of postoperative pain and inflammation associated with dental surgery in
dogs. ISRN Vet Sci 2012; 2011: 593015.
116 Bienhoff SE, Smith ES, Roycroft LM, et al. Efficacy and safety of deracoxib for
control of postoperative pain and inflammation associated with soft tissue surgery
in dogs. Vet Surg 2012; 41: 336–344.
117 Cendrós JM, Salichs M, Encina G, et al. Pharmacology of enflicoxib, a new coxib
drug: efficacy and dose determination by clinical and pharmacokinetic-guided
approach for the treatment of osteoarthritis in dogs based on an acute arthritis
induction model. Vet Med Sci 2022; 8: 31–45.
118 Homedes J, Salichs M, Solà J, et al. Pharmacokinetics of enflicoxib in dogs: effects
of prandial state and repeated administration. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2021; 44:
888–901.
119 Homedes J, Salichs M, Guzman A. Long-term safety evaluation of Daxocox® tab-
lets (enflicoxib) in dogs after weekly oral administrations for seven months. BMC
Vet Res 2021; 17: 205.
120 Salichs M, Badiella L, Sarasola P, et al. Efficacy and safety of enflicoxib for treat-
ment of canine osteoarthritis: a 6-week randomised, controlled, blind, multicentre
clinical trial. Vet Rec 2022; 191: e949.
121 Salichs M, Badiella L, Sarasola P, et al. Enflicoxib for canine osteoarthritis: a rand-
omized, blind, multicentre, non-inferiority clinical trial compared to mavacoxib.
PLoS ONE 2022; 17: e0274800.
122 Pollmeier M, Toulemonde C, Fleishman C, et al. Clinical evaluation of firocoxib
and carprofen for the treatment of dogs with osteoarthritis. Vet Rec 2006; 159:
547–551.
123 Gordon WJ, Conzemius MG, Drag M, et al. Assessment of the efficacy of firocoxib
and etodolac for the treatment of osteoarthritis in dogs. Vet Surg 2004; 33: E9.
124 Hanson PD, Brooks KC, Case J, et al. Efficacy and safety of firocoxib in the
management of canine osteoarthritis under field conditions. Vet Ther 2006; 7:
127–140.
125 Autefage A, Palissier FM, Asimus E, et al. Long-term efficacy and safety of firo-
coxib in the treatment of dogs with osteoarthritis. Vet Rec 2011; 168: 617–623.
126 Ryan WG, Moldave K, Carithers D. Clinical effectiveness and safety of a new
NSAID, firocoxib: a 1000 dog study. Vet Ther 2006; 7: 119–126.
127 Ross JM, Kleine SA, Smith CK, et al. Evaluation of the perioperative analgesic
effects of grapiprant compared with carprofen in dogs undergoing elective ovario-
hysterectomy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2022; 261: 118–125.
128 Sartini I, Giorgi M. Grapiprant: a snapshot of the current knowledge. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2021; 44: 679–688.
129 Kirkby Shaw K, Rausch-Derra LC, Rhodes L. Grapiprant: an EP4 prostaglandin
receptor antagonist and novel therapy for pain and inflammation. Vet Med Sci
2015; 2: 3–9.
130 Rausch-Derra L, Huebner M, Wofford J, et al. A Prospective, randomized,
masked, placebo-controlled multisite clinical study of grapiprant, an EP4 prosta-
glandin receptor antagonist (PRA), in dogs with osteoarthritis. J Vet Intern Med
2016; 30: 756–763.
131 de Salazar Alcalá AG, Gioda L, Dehman A, et al. Assessment of the efficacy of
firocoxib (Previcox®) and grapiprant (Galliprant®) in an induced model of acute
arthritis in dogs. BMC Vet Res 2019; 15: 309.
132 Budsberg SC, Kleine SA, Norton MM, et al. Comparison of two inhibitors of
E-type prostanoid receptor four and carprofen in dogs with experimentally
induced acute synovitis. Am J Vet Res 2019; 80: 1001–1006.
133 Monteiro BP, Lambert C, Bianchi E, et al. Safety and efficacy of reduced dosage
ketoprofen with or without tramadol for long-term treatment of osteoarthritis in
dogs: a randomized clinical trial. BMC Vet Res 2019; 15: 213.
134 Grisneaux E, Pibarot P, Dupuis J, et al. Comparison of ketoprofen and carprofen
administered prior to orthopedic surgery for control of postoperative pain in
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1999; 215: 1105–1110.
135 Hazewinkel HA, van den Brom WE, Pollmeier M, et al. Reduced dosage of keto-
profen for the short-term and long-term treatment of joint pain in dogs. Vet Rec
2003; 152: 11–14.
136 Morton CM, Grant D, Johnston L, et al. Clinical evaluation of meloxicam versus
ketoprofen in cats suffering from painful acute locomotor disorders. J Feline Med
Surg 2011; 13: 237–243.
137 Sano T, King JN, Seewald W, et al. Comparison of oral robenacoxib and ketopro-
fen for the treatment of acute pain and inflammation associated with musculo-
skeletal disorders in cats: a randomised clinical trial. Vet J 2012; 93: 397–403.
138 Cox SR, Liao S, Payne-Johnson M, et al. Population pharmacokinetics of mava-
coxib in osteoarthritic dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2011; 34: 1–11.
139 Cox SR, Lesman SP, Boucher JF, et al. The pharmacokinetics of mavacoxib, a long-
acting COX-2 inhibitor, in young adult laboratory dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
2010; 33: 461–470.
140 Lees P, Pelligand L, Elliott J, et al. Pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, toxicol-
ogy and therapeutics of mavacoxib in the dog: a review. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
2015; 38: 1–14.
141 Walton MB, Cowderoy EC, Wustefeld-Janssens B, et al. Mavacoxib and meloxi-
cam for canine osteoarthritis: a randomised clinical comparator trial. Vet Rec
2014; 175: 280.
142 Payne-Johnson M, Becskei C, Chaudhry Y, et al. Comparative efficacy and safety
of mavacoxib and carprofen in the treatment of canine osteoarthritis. Vet Rec
2015; 176: 284.
143 Doig PA, Purbrick KA, Hare JE, et al. Clinical efficacy and tolerance of meloxicam
in dogs with chronic osteoarthritis. Can Vet J 2000; 41: 296–300.
144 Nell T, Bergman J, Hoeijmakers M, et al. Comparison of vedaprofen and meloxi-
cam in dogs with musculoskeletal pain and inflammation. J Small Anim Pract
2002; 43: 208–212.
145 Peterson KD, Keefe TJ. Effects of meloxicam on severity of lameness and other
clinical signs of osteoarthritis in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2004; 225: 1056–1060.
146 Lascelles BD, Henderson AJ, Hackett IJ. Evaluation of the clinical efficacy of
meloxicam in cats with painful locomotor disorders. J Small Anim Pract 2001; 42:
587–593.
147 Charlton AN, Benito J, Simpson W, et al. Evaluation of the clinical use of tepoxalin
and meloxicam in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2013; 15: 678–690.
148 Gunew MN, Menrath VH, Marshall RD. Long-term safety, efficacy and palatabil-
ity of oral meloxicam at 0.01–0.03 mg/kg for treatment of osteoarthritic pain in
cats. J Feline Med Surg 2008; 10: 235–241.
149 Guillot M, Moreau M, Heit M, et al. Characterization of osteoarthritis in cats and
meloxicam efficacy using objective chronic pain evaluation tools. Vet J 2013; 196:
360–367.
150 Gowan RA, Lingard AE, Johnston L, et al. Retrospective case-control study of the
effects of long-term dosing with meloxicam on renal function in aged cats with
degenerative joint disease. J Feline Med Surg 2012; 13: 752–761.
151 Sul RM, Chase D, Parkin T, et al. Comparison of meloxicam and a glucosamine-
chondroitin supplement in management of feline osteoarthritis. A double-blind
randomised, placebo-controlled, prospective trial. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol
2014; 27: 20–26.
152 KuKanich K, George C, Roush JK, et al. Effects of low-dose meloxicam in cats with
chronic kidney disease. J Feline Med Surg 2021; 23: 138–148.
153 Reymond N, Speranza C, Gruet P, et al. Robenacoxib vs. carprofen for the treat-
ment of canine osteoarthritis; a randomized, noninferiority clinical trial. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2012; 35: 175–183.
154 Gruet P, Seewald W, King JN. Evaluation of subcutaneous and oral administration
of robenacoxib and meloxicam for the treatment of acute pain and inflammation
associated with orthopedic surgery in dogs. Am J Vet Res 2011; 72: 184–193.
155 Edamura K, King JN, Seewald W, et al. Comparison of oral robenacoxib and
carprofen for the treatment of osteoarthritis in dogs: a randomized clinical trial.
J Vet Med Sci 2012; 74: 1121–1131.
156 Toutain CE, Brossard P, King SB, et al. Six-month safety evaluation of robena-
coxib tablets (Onsior™) in dogs after daily oral administrations. BMC Vet Res
2018; 14: 242.
157 Lees P, Toutain PL, Elliott J, et al. Pharmacology, safety, efficacy and clinical uses
of the COX-2 inhibitor robenacoxib. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2022; 45: 325–351.
158 Kongara K, Chambers JP. Robenacoxib in the treatment of pain in cats and dogs:
safety, efficacy, and place in therapy. Vet Med (Auckl) 2018; 9: 53–61.
159 Kamata M, King JN, Seewald W, et al. Comparison of injectable robenacoxib
versus meloxicam for peri-operative use in cats: results of a randomised clinical
trial. Vet J 2012; 193: 114–118.
160 Giraudel JM, Gruet P, Alexander DG, et al. Evaluation of orally administered
robenacoxib versus ketoprofen for treatment of acute pain and inflammation
associated with musculoskeletal disorders in cats. Am J Vet Res 2010; 71:
710–719.
161 King S, Roberts ES, Roycroft LM, et al. Evaluation of oral robenacoxib for the
treatment of postoperative pain and inflammation in cats: results of a randomized
clinical trial. ISRN Vet Sci 2012; 79: 41–48.
162 King JN, Hotz R, Reagan EL, et al. Safety of oral robenacoxib in the cat. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 2011; 35: 290–300.
163 King JN, King S, Budsberg SC, et al. Clinical safety of robenacoxib in feline
osteoarthritis: results of a randomized, blinded, placebo-controlled clinical trial.
J Feline Med Surg 2016; 18: 632–642.
164 Adrian D, King JN, Parrish RS, et al. Robenacoxib shows efficacy for the treatment
of chronic degenerative joint disease-associated pain in cats: a randomized and
blinded pilot clinical trial. Sci Rep 2021; 11: 7721.
165 C King JN, Seewald W, Forster S, et al. Clinical safety of robenacoxib in cats with
chronic musculoskeletal disease. J Vet Intern Med 2021; 35: 2384–2394.
166 Charette B, Dupuis J, Moreau M, et al. Assessing the efficacy of long-term admin-
istration of tolfenamic acid in dogs undergoing femoral head and neck excision.
Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2003; 16: 232–237.
167 Murison PJ, Tacke S, Wondratschek C, et al. Postoperative analgesic efficacy of
meloxicam compared to tolfenamic acid in cats undergoing orthopaedic surgery.
J Small Anim Pract 2010; 51: 526–532.

-- 1403 of 1450 --

1388 	Section 9: Anesthesia and Analgesia for Selected Patients
168 Sattasathuchana P, Phuwapattanachart P, Thengchaisri N. Comparison of post-
operative analgesic efficacy of tolfenamic acid and robenacoxib in ovariohysterec-
tomized cats. J Vet Med Sci 2018; 80: 989–996.
169 Gonda X. Basic pharmacology of NMDA receptors. Curr Pharm Des 2012; 18:
1558–1567.
170 Pozzi A, Muir WW, Traverso F. Prevention of central sensitization and pain
by N-methyl-D- aspartate receptor antagonists. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2006; 228:
53–60.
171 Zhou HY, Chen SR, Pan HL. Targeting N-methyl-D- aspartate receptors for treat-
ment of neuropathic pain. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol 2011; 4: 379–388.
172 Kreutzwiser D, Tawfic QA. Expanding role of NMDA receptor antagonists in the
management of pain. CNS Drugs 2019; 33: 347–374.
173 Ugale V, Dhote A, Narwade R, et al. GluN2B/N-methyl-D- aspartate receptor
antagonists: advances in design, synthesis, and pharmacological evaluation
studies. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets 2021; 20: 822–862.
174 Lascelles BD, Gaynor JS, Smith ES, et al. Amantadine in a multimodal analgesic
regimen for alleviation of refractory osteoarthritis pain in dogs. J Vet Intern Med
2008; 22: 53–59.
175 KuKanich B. Outpatient oral analgesics in dogs and cats beyond nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs: an evidence-based approach. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 2013; 43: 1109–1125.
176 KuKanich B, Papich MG. Pharmacokinetics and antinociceptive effects of oral
tramadol hydrochloride administration in greyhounds. Am J Vet Res 2011; 72:
256–262.
177 Itami T, Saito Y, Ishizuka T, et al. Comparison of pharmacokinetics of tramadol
between young and middle-aged dogs. J Vet Med Sci 2016; 78: 1031–1034.
178 Budsberg SC, Torres BT, Kleine SA, et al. Lack of treatment efficacy of tramadol
on pain and dysfunction of chronic osteoarthritic (OA) joints in dogs. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2018; 252: 427–432.
179 Davila D, Keeshen TP, Evans RB, et al. Comparison of the analgesic efficacy of
perioperative firocoxib and tramadol administration in dogs undergoing tibial
plateau leveling osteotomy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2013; 243: 225–231.
180 Piras LA, Mancusi D, Olimpo M, et al. Post-operative analgesia following TPLO
surgery: a comparison between cimicoxib and tramadol. Res Vet Sci 2021; 136:
351–359.
181 Donati PA, Tarragona L, Franco JVA, et al. Efficacy of tramadol for postoperative
pain management in dogs: systematic review and meta-analysis. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2021; 48: 283–296.
182 Pypendop BH, Ilkiw JE. Pharmacokinetics of tramadol and its metabolite
O- desmethyl-tramadol, in cats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2008; 10: 24–31.
183 Dominguez-Oliva A, Casas-Alvarado A, Miranda-Cortes AE, et al. Clinical phar-
macology of tramadol and tapentadol, and their therapeutic efficacy in different
models of acute and chronic pain in dogs and cats. J Adv Vet Anim Res 2021; 8:
404–422.
184 Monteior BP, Klinck MP, Moreau M, et al. Analgesic efficacy of tramadol in cats
with naturally occurring osteoarthritis. PLoS ONE 2017; 12: e0175565.
185 Guedes AGP, Meadows JM, Pypendop BH, et al. Evaluation of tramadol for treat-
ment of osteoarthritis in geriatric cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2018; 253: 565–571.
186 Erickson A, Harbin K, MacPherson J, et al. Review of pre-appointment medica-
tions to reduce fear and anxiety in dogs and cats at veterinary visits. Can Vet J
2021; 62: 952–960.
187 Guedes AGP, Meadows JM, Pypendop BH, et al. Assessment of the effects of
gabapentin on activity levels and owner-perceived mobility impairment and
quality of life in osteoarthritic geriatric cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2018; 253:
579–585.
188 Ruel HLM, Watanabe R, Evangelista MC, et al. Pain burden, sensory profile and
inflammatory cytokines of dogs with naturally-occurring neuropathic pain
treated with gabapentin alone or with meloxicam. PLoS ONE 2020; 15: e0237121.
189 Barbeau-Grégoire M, Otis C, Cournoyer A, et al. A 2022 systematic review and
meta-analysis of enriched therapeutic diets and nutraceuticals in canine and feline
osteoarthritis. Int J Mol Sci 2022; 23: 10384.
190 McCarthy G, O’Donovan J, Jones B, et al. Randomised double-blind, positive-
controlled trial to assess the efficacy of glucosamine/chondroitin sulfate for the
treatment of dogs with osteoarthritis. Vet J 2007; 174: 54–61.
191 Scott PM, Evans R, Conzemius MG. Efficacy of an oral nutraceutical for the treat-
ment of osteoarthritis. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 2017; 30: 318–323.
192 de Haan JJ, Goring RL, Beale BS. Evaluation of polysulfated glycosaminoglycan
for the treatment of hip dysplasia in dogs. Vet Surg 1994; 23: 177–181.
193 Fujiki M, Shineha J, Yamanokuchi K, et al. Effects of treatment with polysulfated
glycosaminoglycan on serum cartilage oligomeric matrix protein and C-reactive
protein concentrations, serum matrix metalloproteinase-2 and -9 activities, and
lameness in dogs with osteoarthritis. Am J Vet Res 2007; 68: 827–833.
194 Bui LM, Bierer TL. Influence of green lipped mussels (Perna canaliculus) in allevi-
ating signs of arthritis in dogs. Vet Therapu 2001; 2: 101–111.
195 Bierer TL, Bui LM. Improvement of arthritic signs in dogs fed green-lipped mus-
sel (Perna canaliculus). Am Soc Nutr Sci 2002; 132: 1634S–1636S.
196 Pollard B, Guilford WG, Ankenbauer-Perkins KL, et al. Clinical efficacy and toler-
ance of an extract of green-lipped mussel (Perna canaliculus) in dogs presump-
tively diagnosed with degenerative joint disease. N Z Vet J 2006; 54: 114–118.
197 Rialland P, Bichot S, Lussier B, et al. Effect of a diet enriched with green-lipped
mussel on pain behavior and functioning in dogs with clinical osteoarthritis. Can
J Vet Res 2013; 77: 66–74.
198 Hielm-Björkman A, Tulamo RM, Salonen H, et al. Evaluating complementary
therapies for canine osteoarthritis – Part II: a homeopathic combination prepara-
tion (Zeel). Evid Based Complement Alternat Med 2009; 6: 465–471.
199 Neumann S, Stolt P, Braun G, et al. Effectiveness of the homeopathic preparation
Zeel compared with carprofen in dogs with osteoarthritis. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
2011; 47: 12–20.
200 Deparle LA, Gupta RC, Canerdy TD, et al. Efficacy and safety of glycosylated
undenatured type-II collagen (UC-II) in therapy of arthritic dogs. J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 2005; 28: 385–390.
201 Peal A, D’Altilio M, Simms C, et al. Therapeutic efficacy and safety of undenatured
type-II collagen (UC-II) alone or in combination with (- )-hydroxycitric acid and
chromemate in arthritic dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2007; 30: 275–278.
202 D’Altilio M, Peal A, Alvey M, et al. Therapeutic efficacy and safety of undenatured
type II collagen singly or in combination with glucosamine and chondroitin in
arthritic dogs. Toxicol Mech Methods 2007; 17: 189–196.
203 Gupta RC, Canerdy TD, Lindley J, et al. Comparative therapeutic efficacy and
safety of type-II collagen (UC- II), glucosamine and chondroitin in arthritic dogs:
pain evaluation by ground force plate. J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr (Berl) 2012; 96:
770–777.
204 Stabile M, Samarelli R, Trerotoli P, et al. Evaluation of the effects of undenatured
type II collagen (UC-II) as compared to robenacoxib on the mobility impairment
induced by osteoarthritis in dogs. Vet Sci 2019; 6: 72.
205 Gamble LJ, Boesch JM, Frye CW, et al. Pharmacokinetics, safety, and clinical effi-
cacy of cannabidiol treatment in osteoarthritic dogs. Front Vet Sci 2018; 5: 165.
206 Verrico CD, Wesson S, Konduri V, et al. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled study of daily cannabidiol for the treatment of canine osteoarthritis
pain. Pain 2020; 161: 2191–2202.
207 Mejia S, Duerr FM, Griffenhagen G, et al. Evaluation of the effect of cannabidiol
on naturally occurring osteoarthritis-associated pain: a pilot study in dogs. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 2021; 57: 81–90.
208 Malfait AM, Miller RE, Block JA. Targeting neurotrophic factors: novel approaches
to musculoskeletal pain. Pharmacol Ther 2020; 211: 107553.
209 Malfait AM, Miller RE, Block JA. Basic mechanisms of pain in osteoarthritis.
Rheum Dis Clin North Am 2021; 47: 165–180.
210 Minnone G, De Benedetti F, Bracci-Laudiero L. NGF and its receptors in the regu-
lation of inflmmatory response. Int J Mol Sci 2017; 18: 1028.
211 Enomoto E, Mantyh P, Murrell J, et al. Anti-nerve growth factor monoclonal anti-
bodies for the control of pain in dogs and cats. Vet Rec 2019; 184: 23.
212 Webster RP, Anderson GI, Gearing DP. Canine Brief Pain Inventory scores for
dogs with osteoarthritis before and after administration of a monocolonal anti-
body against nerve growth factor. Am J Vet Res 2014; 75: 532–537.
213 Lascelles BDX, Knazovicky D, Case B, et al. A canine-specific anti-nerve growth
factor antibody alleviates pain and improves mobility and function in dogs with
degenerative joint disease-associated pain. BMC Vet Res 2015; 11: 101.
214 Corral MJ, Moyaert H, Fernades T, et al. A prospective, randomized, blinded,
placebo-controlled multisite clinical study of bedinvetmab, a canine monoclonal
antibody targeting nerve growth factor in dogs with osteoarthritis. Vet Anaesth
Analg 2021; 48: 943–955.
215 Gearing DP, Huebner M, Virtue ER, et al. In vitro and in vivo characterization of
a fully felinized therapeutic anti-nerve growth factor monoclonal antibody for the
treatment of pain in cats. J Vet Intern Med 2016; 30: 1129–1137.
216 Gruen ME, Thomson AE, Griffith EH, et al. A feline-specific anti-nerve
growth factor antibody improves mobility in cats with degenerative joint
disease-associated pain: a pilot proof of concept study. J Vet Intern Med 2016;
30: 1138–1148.
217 Gruen ME, Myers JAE, Tena JS, et al. Frunevetmab, a felinized anti-nerve growth
factor monoclonal antibody, for the treatment of pain from osteoarthritis in cats.
J Vet Intern Med 2021; 35: 2752–2762.
218 Gruen ME, Myers JAE, Lascelles BDX. Efficacy and safety of an anti-nerve growth
factor antibody (frunevetmab) for the treatment of degenerative joint disease-
associated chronic pain in cats: a multisite pilot field study. Front Vet Sci 2021; 8:
610028.
219 Caplan AI. Mesenchymal stem cells: time to change the name. Stem Cell Trans
Med 2017; 6: 1445–1451.
220 Bogers SH. Cell-based therapies for joint disease in veterinary medicine: what we
have learned and want we need to know. Front Vet Sci 2018; 5: 70.

-- 1404 of 1450 --

Chapter 71: Osteoarthritis Patients 	1389
221 Kang MH, Park HM. Challenges of stem cell therapies in companion animal prac-
tice. J Vet Sci 2020; 21: e42.
222 Ivanovska A, Wang M, Arshaghi TE, et al. Manufacturing mesenchymal stromal
cells for the treatment of osteoarthritis in canine patients: challenges and recom-
mendations. Front Vet Sci 2022; 9: 897150.
223 Brondeel C, Pauwelyn G, de Bakker E, et al. Review: mesenchymal stem cell ther-
apy in canine osteoarthritis research: “Experientia Docet” (Experience Will Teach
Us). Front Vet Sci 2021; 8: 668881.
224 Franklin SP, Garner BC, Cook JL. Characteristics of canine platelet-rich plasma pre-
pared with five commercially available systems. Am J Vet Res 2015; 76: 822–827.
225 Franklin SP. A pilot clinical study assessing treatment of canine hip dysplasia
using autologous protein solution. Front Vet Sci 2019; 6: 243.
226 Franklin SP, Franklin AL. Randomized controlled trial comparing autologous
protein solution to hyaluronic acid plus triamcinolone for treating hip osteoar-
thritis in dogs. Front Vet Sci 2021; 8: 713768.
227 Wanstrath AW, Hettlich BF, Su L, et al. Evaluation of a single intra-articular injec-
tion of autologous protein solution for treatment of osteoarthritis in a canine
population. Vet Surg 2016; 45: 764–774.
228 Carr BJ, Canapp SO, Mason DR, et al. Canine platelet-rich plasma systems. Front
Vet Sci 2015; 2: 73.
229 Cuervo B, Rubio M, Chicharro D, et al. Objective comparison between platelet
rich plasma alone and in combination with physical therapy in dogs with osteoar-
thritis caused by hip dysplasia. Animals (Basel) 2020; 10: 175.
230 Catarino J, Carvalho P, Santos S, et al. Treatment of canine osteoarthritis with allo-
geneic platelet-rich plasma: review of five cases. Open Vet J 2020; 10: 226–231.
231 Venator KP, Pye CW, Gamble LJ, et al. Assessment of a single intra-articular stifle
injection of pure platelet rich plasma on symmetry indices in dogs with unilateral
or bilateral stifle osteoarthritis from long-term medically managed cranial cruci-
ate ligament disease. Vet Med (Auckland) 2020; 11: 31–38.
232 Alves JC, Santos A, Jorge P. Platelet-rich plasma therapy in dogs with bilateral hip
osteoarthritis. BMC Vet Res 2012; 17: 207.
233 Voga M, Adamic N, Vengust M, et al. Stem cells in veterinary medicine – current
state and treatment options. Front Vet Sci 2020; 7: 278.
234 Punzon E, Salguero R, Totusaus X, et al. Equine umbilical cord mesenchymal stem
cells demonstrate safety and efficacy in the treatment of canine osteoarthritis: a
randomized placebo-controlled trial. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2022; 260: 1947–1955.
235 Olsson DC, Texieria BL, Da Silva Jeremias T, et al. Administration of mesenchy-
mal stem cells from adipose tissue at the hip joint of dogs with osteoarthritis: a
systematic review. Res Vet Sci 2021; 135: 495–503.
236 Dworkin RH, Turk DC, Peirce-Sandner S, et al. Considerations for improving
assay sensitivity in chronic pain clinical trials: IMMPACT recommendations. Pain
2012; 153: 1148–1158.
237 Dworkin RH, Turk DC, Peirce-Sandner S, et al. Research design considerations
for confirmatory chronic pain clinical trials: IMMPACT recommendations. Pain
2010; 149: 177–193.
238 Moore RA, Moore OA, Derry S, et al. Numbers needed to treat calculated from
responder rates give a better indication of efficacy in osteoarthritis trials than
mean pain scores. Arthritis Res Ther 2008; 10: R39.
239 Moore RA, Moore OA, Derry S, et al. Responder analysis for pain relief and num-
bers needed to treat in a meta-analysis of etoricoxib osteoarthritis trials: bridging a
gap between clinical trials and clinical practice. Ann Rheum Dis 2010; 69: 374–379.
240 Moore RA, Derry S, McQuay HJ, et al. Clinical effectiveness: an approach to clini-
cal trial design more relevant to clinical practice, acknowledging the importance
of individual differences. Pain 2010; 149: 173–176.

-- 1405 of 1450 --

1390
Veterinary A nesthesia a nd A nalgesia: T h e S i xth E dition o f	 L u m b a nd J o nes. Edited by Leigh Lamont, Kurt Grimm, Sheilah Robertson, Lydia Love and Carrie Schroeder.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/lamont/anesthesia
Page references to Tables are followed by ‘t’; those to Figures by the letter ‘f ’
AAALAC see Assessment and Accreditation of
Laboratory Animal Care (AAALAC)
AAGBI see Association of Anesthetists of Great
Britain and Ireland (AAGBI)
AAHA see American Animal Hospital
Association (AAHA)
abaxial sesamoid (basisesamoid) block 1241
ABCB‐1 gene mutation/polymorphism 335,
362, 851, 1031, 1158
abdominal curtain sign (ACS) 257, 258f, 260–1,
262f, 263f, 264
abdominal hemorrhage 876
abdominal muscle contraction 990
abdominal point‐of‐care ultrasound (APOCUS)
gastric volume 269, 270t, 271
urinary bladder volume 271
abdominocardiac reflex 655
absorption
atelectasis 707, 726, 727, 735, 736, 1220
cannabinoids 433
carbon dioxide 109–11, 172
constant rate therapy 299
delayed 299, 406
drug 294, 309, 316, 339, 381, 382, 407, 540,
541, 1359
efficiency of 110
fluid 636, 637
gas 771
gastrointestinal 381, 406, 423
infrared/infrared bands 223, 224, 242, 243
light 235, 237
local anesthetics 327, 531–2
molecular absorption coefficient 223
mucosal 337
nonlinear 299
oral 406
osmotic 581
peak 242, 243
specific absorption rate 49
systemic 305, 531, 532, 535, 536, 1167, 1168,
1169, 1333, 1350
topical 540
transmucosal 432
tubular 534
variable 374, 1367
water vapor bands 224
absorption, distribution, metabolism, and
elimination (ADME) 290
AC see adenylate cyclase (AC) enzyme system
accident causation models 30, 31f
accidental extubation 63–4
ACE inhibitors 810, 811, 896, 897, 911, 933
see also angiotensin‐converting enzyme (ACE)
acepromazine 69, 1033, 1084, 1264
anesthetic mortality, risk of 16
clinical considerations 335
drug dose 1065, 1066t
indications for 334–5
mechanism of action 334–5
pharmacodynamics 334–5
pharmacokinetics 334
premedication 20, 160, 334, 422, 427, 472
acetaminophen (paracetamol) 407–8, 1015
acetylcholine (ACh) 957, 1023, 1135
and cardiovascular system 1134
cerebral circulation 659
neurohormonal and local control
mechanisms 654
neuromuscular junction transmission 827
photobiomodulation therapy 1025
receptors 795, 1068
muscarinic 314
nicotinic 314, 449, 506
release of 315, 316, 371
role in neuromuscular transmission 448
acetylcholinesterase inhibitors 456–7
ACh see acetylcholine (ACh)
acid–base balance 555–73
acids and bases 555–8
pH 556–7
pKa and the Henderson–Hasselbalch
equation 557
clinical disturbances 568–71
evaluation approaches 559–68, 571
anion gap and
cNa +
–cCl− difference 565, 567
base excess (buffer‐centric) 553–4
bicarbonate distribution space 563–4
physiochemical 564
simplified strong ion 564
strong anion gap 567–8
traditional (bicarbonate‐centric) 559–63
temperature effects on 557–8
acid–base disturbances
combined disorders in SID and ATOT 571
disorders in ATOT 571
disorders in strong ion difference 569–70
disorders of PCO 2 568
free‐water abnormalities 571
isonatremic chloride abnormalities 569–70
isonatremic organic acid abnormalities 570
acid‐base homeostasis 221, 555, 556f
acidemia
acid–base derangements 225
bicarbonate distribution space 564
carbon dioxide and acid–base
implications 221
diabetes mellitus 902
evaluation of acid–base balance 559, 561
excessive arterial carbon dioxide 936
in fish 1122
and hypercalcemia 593
hypercapnic 221
and hyperkalemia 926, 938, 950
and hypothermia 876
metabolic 221, 225, 226
in pregnancy 958
reduced adrenergic agent efficacy 1220
respiratory 1088
severe 721, 777
acidosis
acute mineral 593
dilutional 570, 571, 583
hyperalbuminemic 571
hyperchloremic 567, 570, 583
hyperchloremic metabolic 585, 587, 693, 1222
hyperphosphatemic 571
lactic 62, 567, 1357
local anesthesia 543
metabolic 68, 250, 320, 414, 429, 503, 564,
567, 583, 702, 721, 1223, 1295
severe 58, 559, 949, 1274
Index

-- 1406 of 1450 --

Index 	1391
non‐bicarbonate buffer ion 571
non‐respiratory 558, 563, 564, 565, 569, 570,
571, 572
normal AG 567
ophthalmic patients 1331
organic 570
paradoxical cerebral 58
paradoxical cerebrospinal 594
respiratory 367, 422, 563, 568, 571, 572, 656,
688, 725, 1290, 1313, 1336
acute 563
primary 562
strong ion 569, 571
subclinical acute ruminal 1263
acids
and bases 556–8
acid–base derangements 225
blood pH, mechanisms to minimize
changes in 558–9
evaluation approaches 559–68
Henderson‐Hasselbalch equation 557
pH 556–7
pKa 557
temperature effects on 557–8
carbon dioxide and acid–base
implications 221
acid‐sensing ion channels (ASIC), and
euthanasia 159
ACRM see Anesthesia Crisis Resource
Management (ACRM)
actin‐activated myosin chemomechanical
ATPase cycle 629, 630f, 631, 631f
action potential
cardiac 187, 328, 428, 429, 594, 621
cardiovascular toxicity 542
compound 453
conduction 529, 623f
duration 364, 621f
generation of 594, 937f
initiation of 973
neuromuscular junction (NMJ) 449, 827
normal 621f
and peripheral nerve stimulators 1172
prolonging 367
propagation 628f
and sodium ion channels 285
transmission 973
acupuncture 4, 1024
acute hypercapnia 155
acute kidney injury (AKI)/acute renal failure
11, 52, 198, 411, 694, 874, 929–31, 934
in advancing age 1356
clinical features and diagnosis 931
etiology and pathogenesis 929–31
and postanesthesia oliguria 939
short‐term renal ischemia leading to 924
solutions causing 587, 597, 692, 693
synthetic colloids associated with 692,
875, 881
see also renal clearance; renal disease; renal
function; renal replacement therapy;
renal system
acute normovolemic hemodilution (ANH) 602
acute pain
accelerometry and step‐counts 1000
changes in behavior 996, 997f, 998
electroencephalogram 999
factors confounding behavioral
assessment 998
first‐tier 1011
frequency of assessment 1003, 1005
functional magnetic resonance imaging 999
infrared thermography 1000
non‐steroidal anti‐inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) 1011
physiological parameters 998–9
quantification 1001–2
recognition of 996, 997f, 998
validity 1002
see also chronic pain; pain; pain faces; pain
management
Acute Physiology and Chronic Health
Evaluation (APACHE) 10
acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) 269
acute spinal cord injury (SCI) 370
ACVA see American College of Veterinary
Anesthesiologists (ACVA)
ACVAA see American College of Veterinary
Anesthesia and Analgesia (ACVAA)
ACVIM see American College of Veterinary
Internal Medicine (ACVIM)
adenosine 160
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) 238
adenosine‐5′‐ triphosphate (ATP) binding
cassette (ABC) family of proteins 1031
adenylate cyclase (AC) enzyme system 287
adjunctive drugs 420–47
analgesic 431–8
birds 1143
horses 1225–7
non‐analgesic 420–31
ophthalmic patients 1335–6
renal disease 936–7
adjustable pressure‐limiting (APL) valve 25, 34,
108–9
closure or malfunction 27, 32f, 59, 66
open at all times, requirement for 104
as “overflow” 108
administration techniques, inhalational
anaesthetics
boiling point 494
gas versus vapor 491–2
general principles 491
methods of description 492–4
vapor pressure 493–4
adrenal glands 893–900
hyperadrenocorticism 895–8
hypoadrenocorticism 893–5
pheochromocytoma 898–900
adrenaline see epinephrine
adrenergic agents 319–32
adrenergic receptor antagonists see adrenergic
receptor antagonists
catecholamines see catecholamines
classification 319
epinephrine see epinephrine
mechanism of action 319
adrenergic receptor agonists
α1 type 324–5
α2 type
catecholamines 325
emergencies and resuscitation 69, 1208–10
local anesthesia 537
sedation/chemical restraint 338–44, 1083,
1266–7
β2 type 325–6
mixed α‐and β type 326
adrenergic receptor antagonists
α1 type 326–7
a 2 type 327 344–7, 1083, 1266–7
β1 type 328–9
local anesthetic additives 1169
non‐selective α 327–8
non‐selective β 329
β‐adrenergic receptors 287
ADRs see adverse drug reactions (ADRs)
Advanced Cardiovascular Life Support
protocols 34
advanced life support (ALS), cardiopulmonary
arrest 55, 58–9
adverse drug events (ADEs) 307
see also adverse drug reactions (ADRs); drug‐
related complications
adverse drug reactions (ADRs) 7, 307
local anesthesia
allergic reactions 545
local toxicity 544
methemoglobinemia 544–5
systemic toxicity 531, 532, 535, 536, 538,
539, 541–4
toxicosis (oral ingestion) 545
NSAIDs
blood coagulation 412
cartilage injury 412
gastrointestinal injury 408–10
kidney injury 410–11
liver, effects on 411–12
platelet inhibition abnormalities 412
thrombotic abnormalities 412
see also adverse events; drug‐related
complications; individual drugs
adverse effects, transfusion therapy 600–2
adverse events
categorizing 54–5
consequences 54
defining 54
NSAIDs 1380
rates of 54
AEMR see anesthesia electronic medical record
(AEMR)
aepEXplus™ device 183
AEPs see auditory evoked potentials (AEPs)
aerobic respiration, physiology 220–1
Aerrane® see isoflurane
African Gray Parrot (Psittacus erithacus) 227
afterload 206, 275, 322, 647, 809
LV 206, 778, 811
RV 206, 773, 774, 777, 809, 810
ventricular 57, 475
agent purity, and euthanasia 161–2
age‐related changes 1354–62
anesthesia risk 1358

-- 1407 of 1450 --

1392 	Index
anesthetic case management 1360
cardiovascular changes 1355–6
clinical implications
cardiovascular changes 1355–6
hepatic changes 1357
immune function 1357
preanesthetic evaluation 1359
pulmonary changes 1356
renal changes 1357
thermoregulation 1357
cognitive dysfunction 1356
cognitive impairment 1356
drug responses 1359–60
emergence delirium 1356
environmental stressors 1360
frailty 1357–8
life stages 1355t
neurocognitive and behavoral
assessment 1356
neuromuscular blocking agents 1360
nutrition 1360
opioids 1359
physiologic changes related to 1354–7
postoperative cognitive dysfunction 1356
postoperative delirium 1356
preanesthetic testing 1358–9
pulmonary changes 1356
renal changes 1356–7
supportive care 1360
air bronchograms 269
air sacs of birds 1129
airway assessment, point‐of‐care ultrasound 256
airway fire 65
airway management
birds 1144
endotracheal intubation 1070
laboratory animals 1070–1
marine mammals 1102–5
during recovery 1061–2
airway obstruction
anesthetic emergencies 62–3
induction of anesthesia 62–3
maintenance 63
recovery 63
airway pressure release ventilation
(APRV) 1094–5
Akaike’s Information Criterion (AIC) 297
alarms, ventilators 122
albumin products
canine serum albumin 597–8
human serum albumin 597
albuterol 325–6
alcuronium 1066t
alfaxalone 1097
age‐related responses to 1359
birds 1141
chemical structure 477
clinical effects
cardiovascular 478
central nervous system 478
gastrointestinal 478–9
hepatic 478–9
renal 478–9
respiratory 478
species‐specific 478–81
clinical use 481
dogs and cats 1161
drug dose 1065, 1066t, 1288
injectable 1068
laser procedures 44
mechanism of action 477
neurologic disease 834
ophthalmic patients 1334
pharmacodynamics 478–9
pharmacokinetics 478
pigs 1288, 1289–90
ruminants 1267, 1270
species‐specific effects 479–81
alfaxalone‐dexmedetomidine 1066t
alfentanil 380–1
premedication 430
A‐line autoregressive index (AAI) 183
allergic reactions, local anesthesia 545
alleviation of pain 1011
allogenic blood transfusions
autologous 602–3
blood substitutes 603
allometric scaling, birds 1136
allosteric modulators 286
alpha‐linolenic acid (ALA) 1013
α‐chloralose 481, 1290
injectable 1068
ALS see advanced life support (ALS)
alveolar dead space fraction 705
alveolar gas equation 231–2, 720
alveolar interstitial syndrome (AIS) 256, 266
amantadine 431–2, 1382
American Academy of Orthopedic
Surgeons 1377
American Animal Hospital Association
(AAHA) 143, 1354
and blood pressure monitoring 197
fluid therapy guidelines 1350
American Association for Medical
Instruments 203
American Association of Feline
Practitioners 1033
American Board of Veterinary Practitioners 1041
American College of Veterinary Anesthesia and
Analgesia (ACVAA) 6, 7
and blood pressure monitoring 197
Monitoring Guidelines 251
American College of Veterinary
Anesthesiologists (ACVA) 6, 174
American College of Veterinary Emergency and
Critical Care (ACVECC) 55
American College of Veterinary Internal
Medicine (ACVIM) 198, 203, 204
American Medical Association (AMA) 174
American National Standards Institute, laser
advice 40
American Society for Testing and Materials 49
American Society of Anesthesiologists
(ASA) 176, 251, 1158, 1159
hypo‐or hyperthermia 68
infection prevention and control 147
patient health assessment 10, 12
POCUS certification program 255
preanesthetic blood testing 13
American Society of Echocardiography 271
American Society of Veterinary Anesthesia
(ASVA) 6
American Veterinary Medical Association
(AVMA) 6, 8, 161, 162
Guidelines on Euthanasia (2020) 153, 156, 158
Humane Slaughter guidelines (2016) 160
AMIC see anesthesia multimodal index of
consciousness (AMIC)
aminoamides 539–40
amino bisphosphonates 1369
aminoesters 538–9
aminosteroids 451
amiodarone 58
amitriptyline 432–3, 1015
amnesia 155
amphibians
American bullfrogs 1119
anatomy and physiology 1117–18
anesthesia 1116–19
anesthetic agents 1118–19
anurans 1117
cardiovascular system 1117
chelonians 1112
clinical anesthesia 1118
cutaneous system 1118
fasting 1118
fluid regulation 1118
lungs 1117–18
lymphatic system 1117
metabolism 1117
metamorphosis 1117
monitoring 1119
pain and consciousness 155
physical examination and restraint 1118
recovery 1119–20
respiratory system 1117–18
salamanders 1117
amygdala 159
anabolic steroids 1032
Anesthetists’ Non‐Technical Skills (ANTS) 27, 28t
analgesia, veterinary
amphibians 1119
birds 1137–44
current issues 7–9
defining 3, 4
drug effects
adjunctive drugs 431–8
barbiturates 465
dissociative anesthetics 470, 471
etomidate 476
opioids 364–6
propofol 467
intraoperative 1273
miscellaneous drugs 1338
ocular pain 1337–8
opioids 1337
pigs 1295–7
reptiles 1114–16
wildlife capture 1081
see also acute pain; chronic pain; pain; pain
management
age‐related changes (cont’d)

-- 1408 of 1450 --

Index 	1393
anaphylaxis 58, 61
anatomic shunt 720
anemia
blood loss 596
blood substitutes 603
chronic 595, 739
dilutional physiologic 956
extent of 595
Heinz body 545
and hypothermia 252
hypoxia 231
iatrogenic 233
immune‐mediated hemolytic anemia
(IMHA) 575
mild 602
mild‐to‐moderate 908
moderate 11t, 503
normocytic normochromic 908
oxygen extraction ratio 232
oxygen content, decreased in 831
and packed red blood cells 596
patient health assessment 10
perioperative 602
preanesthetic blood testing 11
severe 11t, 568, 936
tolerance to 654
treatment 879, 1274
unfractionated heparin (UFH) 576
young patients 1350
anesthesia, veterinary
birds 1137–44
and cancer outcomes 1371–3
for cardiopulmonary bypass 667–73
clinical 1114
current issues 7–9
defining 3–4
depth of see depth of anesthesia
in dogs and cats see cats; dogs; locoregional
anesthesia
effect on ECG 195
elimination 500–2
environmental impact 7–8
equipment see equipment
factors determining the PA of
anesthetic 497–500
history 4–7
in horses see horses
impact of opioid epidemic on 8
light 179
locoregional 148–9, 1166
models and simulators 174
monitoring of see monitoring of anesthesia/
surgery
neuraxial 148–9
ophthalmic patients
anesthetic adjuvants 1335–6
auriculopalpebral nerve block 1237
contralateral eye, protecting 1340
electroretinogram, impact on 1338
endotracheal intubation 1339–40
general 1338–40
inhalational 1335
injectable 1334–5
monitoring of anesthesia 1340
neuromuscular blockade 1340
ocular complications related to 1340
physical restraint, premedication, and
anesthetic induction 1339
preoperative assessment 1338
recovery, extubation and emergence 1340
sensory nerve blocks 1237–9
set up and patient positioning 1338–9
topical 1237
otariid 1098–9
patient safety evidence 30–3
phocid 1098
point‐of‐care ultrasound in 254–80
process of 26–7
risk assessment 10–23
short‐term 1159–62
technology, emerging role of 8–10
total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) 4, 44, 50,
177, 1162, 1291
uses of 3
volatile 148, 1371
see also premedication
Anesthesia Crisis Resource Management
(ACRM) 27, 36
anesthesia electronic medical record (AEMR) 8
Anesthesia Information Management Systems 8
anesthesia multimodal index of consciousness
(AMIC) 184
anesthesia ventilators see ventilators
anesthesiologists, veterinary, defining 3, 7
Anesthetic Conserving Device
(AnaConDa®) 172
anesthetic death see mortality, anesthetic
anesthetic depth monitoring see depth of anesthesia;
monitoring of anesthesia/surgery
anesthetic emergencies
cardiopulmonary arrest 55–60, 56f
complications
anesthetic drug‐related 65–6
cardiovascular 60–1
cerebral herniation 67–8
equipment‐related 66–7
gastroesophageal reflux and
regurgitation 67
hyperkalemia 68
hypo‐or hyperthermia 68
myoclonus 68
personnel injury 70
postanesthetic 68–70
respiratory 61–5
ruminal tympany 67
magnetic resonance imaging 52
post‐critical event debriefing 70
anesthetic gas monitoring
gas sampling systems 241
infrared analysis 242–3
minimum alveolar concentration 240
monitors 241
partial pressure 240
respiratory gas analysis
historical techniques used 243–4
mass spectrometry 224, 241, 243
Raman spectroscopy 224, 237, 243–4
technologies used 241–3
units of measurement 240–1
volatile agent monitoring, applications 244
volume percent (vol %) 240–1
anesthetic machines
“all‐purpose Alfo‐Blease” 172
common gas outlet 104–5
flowmeters 96, 97f
gas flow within 94–6
introduction 91
modern 94–105
oxygen flush valve 104
routine checkout procedure 113
vaporizers see vaporizers
anesthetic mortality see mortality, anesthetic
anesthetic ventilators see ventilators
anesthetist, defining 7
angiotensin‐converting enzyme (ACE) 287
angiotensin‐converting enzyme 2 (ACE2)
receptor 285
inhibitors see ACE inhibitors
animal distress, evaluating 156–7
anion gap
and cNa +
–cCl− difference 567
strong 567–8
antagonists see adrenergic receptor antagonists
antibacterial agents 148
anticholinergics
blood–brain barrier, crossing 315–16
cesarean section 959
drug combinations 317
general pharmacology 314–16
heart rate increase 315
history 314
ruminants 1264
specific drugs
atropine 316–17
combinations 317
glycopyrrolate 317
topical application to the eye 315
uses of 314
anticoagulant therapy 575–7
antiemetics, in pregnancy 961
anti‐inflammatory drugs 1069
antimicrobials 149
antimuscarinics 6, 314
anti‐nerve growth factor (NGF) 1383–4
antiplatelet drugs 575–6
antitussive effects of opioids 371
anxiolytic drugs, defining 4
see also sedation
APACHE see Acute Physiology and Chronic
Health Evaluation (APACHE)
APL see adjustable pressure‐limiting (APL) valve
apnea 44, 61–2, 158
monitors 222
apneustic anesthesia ventilation (AAV)
1095, 1098
APOCUS see abdominal point‐of‐care
ultrasound (APOCUS)
apparent volume of distribution 291–2
approach‐avoidance testing 159
APRV see airway pressure release ventilation
(APRV)
aquatic mammals see marine mammals

-- 1409 of 1450 --

1394 	Index
aqueous humor (AH) 1328–30
production and drainage 1331
ARAS see ascending reticular activating system
(ARAS)
arginine vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone)
370, 380, 426, 430–1, 657, 658
argon 156, 159, 243
laser procedures 40, 224
Argon lasers 40
Arndt Endobronchial Blocker™ 81
arrhythmias/dysrhythmias 191, 690
α1
‐adrenergic receptor antagonists 328
aerobic respiration, physiology 221
arrhythmogenic diseases resulting in
tachycardia 691
artifacts and filters 195
associated diseases 691–2
benzodiazepine antagonists 338
and blood administration 602
cardiac 13, 16, 61, 178, 179, 192, 204, 205,
226, 317, 323, 326, 328, 338, 422, 491,
513, 543, 545, 585, 591, 622, 628, 659,
680, 686, 865, 875, 877, 1266, 1278
cardiac output measurement 213
cardiopulmonary arrest 55
cardiopulmonary bypass 671
catecholamine‐induced 18, 319, 320, 339,
871, 911
cervical spondylomyelopathy 839
depth of anesthesia 179
electrocardiography (ECG) 187, 680, 681
epinephrine‐induced 464, 467, 536
evaluating an ECG 190
fatal 68
hypothermia 251
hypoxemia 62
life‐threatening 595
local anesthesia 542
pacemakers 678
pharmacology 429, 430
postoperative 195
refractory 543
respiratory sinus arrhythmia 655
severe 678
spontaneous 187
supraventricular 191, 691
ventricular 191, 329, 341, 428, 433, 464, 466,
526, 543, 597, 623, 624, 678, 681, 686,
688, 689, 691, 899, 908
arterial blood gases
analysis 173, 232–3
cervical spondylomyelopathy 839
in dogs 725
in ducks 1146
malignant hyperthermia 512
median artery 1101
myasthenia gravis 840
neurologic disease 831, 837
in pregnancy 962
respiratory system 334
sedatives and hypnotics 723, 1351
temperature‐corrected 781f
and ventilators 761
arterial blood pressure 510, 1105
adjunctive drugs 421
a 2
-adrenergic receptor agonists 317
cardiac dysrhythmias 61
cerebral herniation 67
changes in 590
curve 199f
decrease in 334, 346, 427, 464, 467, 479,
510, 655
diastolic see diastolic arterial pressure (DAP)
drug combinations 317
increase in 317, 322, 340, 346, 422, 513
inotropic support 346
low 317
mean arterial pressure (MAP) 59
monitoring, invasive and non‐invasive 52
phenothiazines 334
post resuscitation care 59
systolic see systolic arterial pressure (SAP)
variables affecting 644
see also mean arterial pressure (MAP)
arterial carbon dioxide
content 212
excessive 936
tension 508–9
arterial catheter placement and
maintenance 202
arterial waveform analysis 215
arteriovenous difference in oxygen
(AVDO 2
) 234
ASA see American Society of Anesthesiologists
(ASA)
ascending reticular activating system
(ARAS) 179
Aschner’s reflex 655
aspartate 286–7
aspiration, gastrointestinal disease 868–9
aspiration pneumonia 64, 1279
Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory
Animal Care (AAALAC) 161
assisted and assisted‐controlled
ventilation 768–70
Association of American Feline Practitioners
(AAFP) 1354
Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and
Ireland (AAGBI) 11–12
Association of Shelter Veterinarians (ASV) 1041
Association of Veterinary Anaesthetists of Great
Britain and Ireland (AVA) 6, 7, 174
Anaesthetic Safety Checklist 34
ASVA see American Society of Veterinary
Anesthesia (ASVA)
atelectasis 268
strategies for reducing 773–4, 775f, 776–7
atenolol 329
atipamezole 69, 347, 1266–7
clinical considerations 347
indications for 344–5
mechanism of action 344–5
pharmacodynamics 345–7
pharmacokinetics 345
atlanto‐occipital joint 63
ATP‐binding cassette (ABC) transporters 308–9
atracurium 1066t
atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) 657
atrial premature complexes (APCs) 1221
atrial stretch‐receptor reflex 655
atrioventricular (AV) block 1221
atropine 284
and anticholinergics 314–15
cardiopulmonary arrest 58
clinical use 316–17
drug dose 1065, 1066t
pharmacology 316
auditory evoked potentials (AEPs) 157,
183–4
auricular techniques, head blocks 1178
auriculopalpebral nerve block 1237
Australian Incident Monitoring System
(AIMS) 29, 32, 33t, 35
autologous transfusion 602–3
autonomic nervous system (ANS) 827–9
autoregressive integrated moving average
(ARIMA) models 171
AV see atrioventricular (AV) block
AVMA see American Veterinary Medical
Association (AVMA)
axillary brachial plexus block 1186–7
azaperone 335–6, 1084, 1264
back‐pressure compensation 97
“BAG” (butorphanol, acepromazine, and
glycopyrrolate) 317
Bainbridge reflex 655
balanced anesthesia 4
BAM see butorphanol‐azaperone‐medetomidine
(BAM)
bandages and dressings 147–8
barbiturates 1293
administration of 159, 464
alternatives to, for euthanasia 162
and benzodiazepines 336, 338
chemical structure 463
classification 463
clinical effects
analgesic 465
CNS depression, producing 336, 463, 464
fetal/neonatal 465
microsomal enzymes, stimulating increase
in 465
species‐specific 465
clinical use 465–6
discovery of 5
distribution of 463
euthanasia 158, 162
and GABA A receptors 286, 463
mechanism of action 463
non‐intravenous administration 158
ophthalmic patients 1334
pharmacodynamics 464–5
pharmacokinetics 463–4
ruminants 1268
Barcroft–Edholm reflex 655
baroceptor reflex 655
barotrauma 65
basic life support (BLS)
cardiopulmonary arrest 55–7
chest compressions 55, 57
BAT sign 257–8, 259f

-- 1410 of 1450 --

Index 	1395
Bayliss effect 655
bedinvetmab 1013
Beer–Lambert law 240, 242
behavior
acute pain, behavioral changes in 996,
997f, 998
assessing 157, 159
cats 1033–4
chronic pain, behavioral changes in 1000
fear 159
pain 979, 985–990
benzocaine 538
benzodiazepine antagonists 338
benzodiazepines 336–8, 344, 639, 1097
cats 1033
combinations 722
dose requirements 1061
endocrine disease 903, 905
horses 1209–10
injectable 960, 1067
marine mammals 1097, 1098
myoclonus 68, 476, 834
neurologic disease 833, 836
phocid anesthesia 1098
preanesthetic sedation 1098
premedication 476
prolonged anesthetic recovery 69
renal disease 934
ruminants 1267
ultrasound‐guided biopsy 857
see also sedation
beta‐blockers 328
Bezold–Jarisch reflex 655
bioanotechnology 170
bioavailability 294
biochemical testing 926–7
bioimpedance, thoracic 216
bioinformatics 170
bioinstrumentation 170
biomechanics 170
biomechatronics 170
biomedical engineering 169–75
Anesthetic Conserving Device
(AnaConDa®) 172
contemporary applications in anesthesia
173–4
data 171–2
Drexel‐Presbyterian Hospital Program,
University of Pennsylvania 169
drug delivery systems 173
endotracheal tubes 172
evolution of monitoring equipment and
guidelines 173
Greville Chester toe, discovery of (1800) 169
history 169–70
inhalant anesthetic delivery 172
instrumentation systems 170–2
interdisciplinary nature of 170
laryngoscopes 172
milestones in anesthesia 172–3
models and simulators 174
nonlinear systems 171
performance measures 171–2
pulse oximetry 172–3
scientists, contributions of 169
stethoscopes 172
subdisciplines 170
time series analysis 171–2
ultrasound‐guided nerve blocks 173–4
in veterinary medicine 174
biomedical instrumentation system (BIS)
170–2, 182, 184
biomimetics 170
bioprocess 170
biopsy, renal 928
bioreactance, thoracic 216
biotransformation, drug metabolism
Phase I 308
Phase II 308
Phase III 308–9
Bird Mark series ventilators 118, 119
Bird Mark 7 137–9
birds 1127–54
adjunctive drugs 1143
air capillaries 1129–30, 1131f, 1132f
air sacs 1129
airway management 1144
allometric scaling 1136
anesthetic management 1144–8
anesthetic‐related death 1127
body temperature 1148
breathing circuits 1144
cardiovascular system 1134–5, 1147–8
central nervous system 1145
drug administration 1135–6
drugs of historical interest 1143
drugs used for analgesia and
anesthesia 1137–44
fasting 1135
as food source for humans 1127
gas exchange
components 1129–34
cross‐current model 1131, 1134f
fresh gas flow 1144
gas flow direction 1130–1
intertwined systems 1134f
schematic representation of flow 1133f
general pharmacologic considerations 1135–6
induction methods 1144–9
inhalational anesthesia 1142–3
injectable induction drugs 1141–2
intrapulmonary chemoreceptors 1134
larynx 1128
law of Laplace 1130
local anesthesia 1141
low atmospheric pressure stunning 161
lung volumes 1130–1
monitoring and supportive care 1145–8
muscles of respiration and thoracic
skeleton 1129
necks 1128
non‐steroidal anti‐inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) 1139–41
opioids 1137–9
parabronchi, paleopulmonic and
neopulmonic 1130–1, 1132f
physical examination 1135
physical restraint 1135
preanesthetic patient evaluation and
preparation 1135
primary and secondary bronchi 1129–30, 1130f
pulmonary system 1129, 1130, 1133f, 1146,
1147
Purkinje fibers 1134
recovery 1148
renal portal system 1134–5
respiratory system 1127–34, 1145–7
syrinx 1128
tertiary branch (parabronchi) 1129–30,
1131f, 1132f
trachea 1128
types
Amazon parrots 1129, 1135, 1137
barred owls 1135
budgerigars 1129
chickens 1129
cockatiels 1129
cockatoos 1129, 1137
conures 1129
ducks 1130, 1146
emperor penguins 1127
grey parrots 1137
macaws 1129
ostrich 1132f
penguins 1128, 1130
peregrine falcon 1137
petrels 1128
pigeons 1130
Ruppell’s griffon 1127
snowy owl 1137
Timneh parrots 1137
ventilation components 1128–9
ventilation control 1134
ventilation monitoring 227
BIS see biomedical instrumentation system (BIS)
bispectral analysis (BIS) 157
Bispectral Index™ 180–3
bisphosphonate zoledronic acid 1015
bisphosphonates 1015
blame and non‐blame cultures 28
blocks
distal paravertebral block 1309
failure 1181, 1190, 1236, 1309
of flank and paralumbar fossa 1307–10
of head 1174–8
inverted “l” or “7” block 1307
line infiltration 1307, 1311
linea alba and paramedian, regional
anesthesia 1310–12
lumbosacral, sacrococcygeal, or
intercoccygeal epidural (cranial
epidural) 1311–12
of pelvic limb 1188–92
peripheral nerve blocks 1168, 1227
physiology of nerve blockade 1168–9
proximal paravertebral block 1307–9
regional anesthesia
for flank and paralumbar fossa 1307–10
for head 1303–7
for linea alba and paramedian 1310–12
for pelvic area 1312–14
for teats and udder 1314–17, 1316f

-- 1411 of 1450 --

1396 	Index
segmental dorsolumbar epidural
block 1309–10
segmental thoracolumbar subarachnoid
block 1310
of thoracic limb 1185–8
axillary brachial plexus block 1186–7
cervical paravertebral block 1186
distal brachial plexus block 1188
distal radial, ulnar, median, and
musculocutaneous nerve block 1188
proximal radial, ulnar, median, and
musculocutaneous nerve block 1188
radial, ulnar, and median nerve block 1188
ring block 1188
sensory innervation, anatomy of 1185–6
subscalenic brachial plexus block 1186
of thorax and abdomen 1178–85
fascial plane block techniques 1182–5
intercostal nerve 1179, 1180f
interpleural regional analgesia 1181–2
thoracic paravertebral 1179
trigeminal nerve 1178
see also local anesthesia; locoregional
anesthesia; neuromuscular blockade;
regional anesthesia
blood
acute loss 60
administration 600
arterial gas analysis 232–3
carbon dioxide content 740–2
cardiac markers, blood‐based 682
cardiovascular physiology 640–1
complete blood count 12, 1219
component therapy 595–8
cross‐matching 599–600
deoxygenated 232
fresh whole blood (FWB) 596
massive loss of 600
measuring hemoglobin saturation with
oxygen 233–6
myocardial flow 57
packed red blood cells 596
perioperative loss 603
pH, mechanisms to minimize changes in 558–9
platelet products 598
preanesthetic testing 11–13
red blood cell (RBC) products 595–6
regional flow 510
sampling 12
stored whole blood 596
substitutes 603
transcutaneous measurement of gases 233
typing 599
uptake of inhalation anesthetics 499–500
see also arterial blood gases; transfusion therapy
blood coagulation see coagulation, blood
blood flow
cardiovascular physiology 642–4
cerebral see cerebral blood flow
hepatic see hepatic blood flow (HBF)
microcirculatory 588, 592, 646, 1294
pulmonary see pulmonary blood flow
regional 510
renal see renal blood flow (RBF)
spinal cord blood flow (SCBF) 369
to thoracolumbar spinal cord 508
uterine 957
blood gas analysis 223
blood groups
in cats 1036
in horses 599
in pigs 599, 1294
and typing 599
blood oxygen level‐dependent (BOLD)
MRI 157, 999
blood pressure monitoring 197–209
arterial blood pressure 510
autoregulation of 198–9
central venous pressure measurement 204–5
continued measurement challenges 207
determinants and definitions 197–8
diastolic arterial pressure 197
Doppler ultrasonographic blood pressure
measurement 202–3
fluid responsiveness, indices 205–7
hemodynamics and cardiac function 644–6
high‐definition oscillometric
measurement 204
invasive measurement 52, 202–4
arterial catheter placement and
maintenance 202
components 200–1
dynamic response testing and
damping 201–2
leveling the transducer 200–1
natural frequency and resonance 201
physics of monitoring systems 201–2
transducer setup and priming of pressure
tubing 200
zeroing the transducer 201
mean arterial pressure 197–8
non‐invasive measurement 52, 202–4
normal ranges 198
oscillometric measurement 203–4
plethysmography variability index 207
pulse pressure and systolic pressure
variation 205–7
systolic arterial pressure 197
see also arterial blood pressure
blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 802, 851, 905, 926,
945, 957, 1350
blood volume, in cats 1036
blood–aqueous barrier (BAB) 1332
blood–brain barrier (BBB)
and α2
‐adrenergic receptors/agonists 346,
347, 736–7
and anticholinergics 315–16
and capillaries 635
in cats 346
chemoreceptor trigger zone (CTZ)
outside 368
and dissociatives 469
and methylnaltrexone 384
midazolam crossing 336–7
and neural control of ventilation 701
and nondepolarizing NMBAs 450
and opioids 362, 368
in sheep 362
and vatinoxan 345, 346
blood–retinal barrier (BRB) 1332
BLS see basic life support (BLS)
boarded anesthesiologist, defining 7
BOAS see brachycephalic obstructive airway
syndrome (BOAS)
body composition, changes in 1357
body fluids
compartments
extracellular and intracellular, movement of
water between 581
interstitial fluid 581–2
solute composition 581
crystalloids 582–8
endothelial glycocalyx model of transvascular
fluid exchange 582
fluid shifts between intravascular (plasma)
and interstitial fluid
compartments 581–2
monitoring fluid balance 589
perioperative fluid therapy
improving the utility of dynamic indices of
preload responsiveness 591
Individualized goal‐directed 589–91
liberal versus restrictive approach 588–9
and microvasculature 591–2
monitoring fluid balance 589
physiology 580–2
Starling’s equation, modification 582
total body water 580
types used in clinical practice 582–8
body surface area (BSA) 1029, 1158
body temperature 173, 200, 251, 1148
acid–base physiology 555, 557, 558, 571
blood 213, 640
cattle 1060
changes 246, 247, 371, 669
core temperature 68, 145, 246, 247, 249, 945,
946, 947, 949, 957
decrease in 4, 101, 180, 247, 249, 251, 252,
557, 589, 603, 669, 725, 1142
and drug‐related complications 66
elevated 792
hyperthermia
malignant 68, 1060
severe 1034
hypothermia 52, 251, 670, 1060
increase in 321, 557, 597, 725, 1034,
1121, 1145
and local anesthesia 535, 537
low 792
maintaining 784, 1072
monitoring 342, 377, 800, 837, 858
normal 247, 251, 496
and opioids 371, 377
and oxymorphone 378
and physical restraint 1135
post resuscitation care 59
preferred body temperature 1114
radiofrequency fields 49
raising 252
rebreathing system 106
small animal anesthesia morbidity 13
blocks (cont’d)

-- 1412 of 1450 --

Index 	1397
thermoregulation see thermoregulation
variation in 505
body weight 1026
Bohr effect 738–9
“boiling liquid expanding vapor explosion”
(BLEVE) 49
boiling point 494
BOLD see blood oxygen level‐dependent
(BOLD) MRI
Bordetella bronchiseptica 145
Botucatu Multidimensional pain scale 1005
Bötzinger complex (BötC) 1092
brachial vein 1101
brachycephalic dog breeds 1032
brachycephalic obstructive airway syndrome
(BOAS) 1032
bradyarrhythmias 191
bradycardia
α1
‐adrenergic receptor agonists 324
α2
‐adrenergic receptor agonists 324, 1049
b 1
‐adrenergic receptor antagonists 328
anticholinergic administration, following 317
anticholinergics, induced by 315,
1336, 1337
arrhythmogenic diseases resulting in 691–2
dexmedetomidine‐induced 346
in dogs and cats 1031
drug‐induced 315
endocrine disease 915
and euthanasia 158
gadolinium‐based contrast agents 52
hyperkalemia 68, 190
and hypotension 909, 912
hypothermia 1349
hypoxemia 1086
intraoperative 316
intrathecal (spinal) anesthesia 1197
intravenous high‐dose opioid induction 1163
morbidity and mortality 13
neonatal 965
opioids 1351
and pain 990, 1015
persistent 341
pharmacology 58
preanesthetic 314
preventing in perioperative period 317
progressive 179
in rabbits 158
reflex 67
baroreceptor‐mediated reflex 340
sedatives and tranquilizers 1351
sinus 191, 192, 909
terminal 1106
transient 179, 316, 1266
vagally mediated 367, 685
brain 822–5
amygdala 159
anesthetic partial pressure in 618
anesthetic reaching 177
autoregulation of 198
biomedical engineering 169
blood pressure monitoring 199
bovine 344
cerebral cortex 154
consciousness 176
context‐sensitive half‐time 304
deep brain stimulation 170
effect‐site concentration 176–7
electrical activity 155, 157
electrophysiologic monitoring 179
and etomidate 474
fetal 160
fluid therapy 593
forebrain 155, 367
functional analysis 237
generalized 234
and guaifenesin 424
herniation 225
human 180, 237
ischemia 234
maturation 180
measures of activity 155
in mice 160
midbrain 155, 363, 824
and NSAIDs 407
oxygenation 234
Parabrachial Nucleus/Kolliker‐Fuse
Complex 367
physiology 829–30
prostaglandin inhibition 404
reptiles 1116
subcortical structures 154
traumatic injury 238, 369, 431
unconsciousness 155
visceral receptors 247
see also blood–brain barrier (BBB)
brain death 157, 162
brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) 657
brainstem 59, 154, 157, 159, 180, 225, 367
emetic center 428
nuclei 425
Branham’s sign 655
breathing
cardiopulmonary resuscitation 57
circuits see breathing circuits
spontaneous 212, 304, 722, 734f, 756, 768,
770, 771f, 777, 798, 1213, 1272
anesthesia equipment 117, 118
versus controlled ventilation 1211
ketamine affecting 1092
neonatal 960
respiratory physiology and
pathophysiology 707, 708
strong 724
systems see breathing systems
see also respiratory disease; respiratory
physiology and pathophysiology
breathing circuits
anesthetic machines 91
birds 1144
breathing circuit tubing, 107, 108f
infection prevention and control 146
breathing systems 95f, 105–12, 126, 1071–2
circle 130, 134
closed 1163f
coaxial 67, 107, 112, 113f
laboratory animals 1071–2
malfunction 67
marine mammals 1092–3
non‐rebreathing 111–12
rebreathing (circle) 105, 106–11
Universal F‐circuit 107
briefings, patient safety 35–6
bromine 7
bronchial blockers 80–2
bronchodilation 315, 323, 325, 326
carbon dioxide elimination, kinetics 707
colic, in horses 1221
dose‐dependent 728
and epinephrine 321
isoflurane‐induced 803, 804
ketamine‐induced 470, 804
sevoflurane‐induced 803, 804
and SNS 828
sympathetically mediated 328
ventilation and deadspace 727
bronchodilators 63
bronchoscopy, anesthesia for 782–3
bronchospasm, anesthetic emergencies 63
BSA see body surface area (BSA)
bulldogs 18
BUN see blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
bupivacaine
cardiotoxicity 543
dual‐acting bupivacaine‐meloxicam
extended‐release polymer 541
lidocaine/bupivacaine gel (Tri‐Solfen) 541
liposome‐encapsulated (Nocita®) 541
pain management 1014
toxicity 786, 1296–7
buprenorphine 284, 1031, 1035
dosage
birds 1138
cats 381–2
dogs 381–2
horses 382
laboratory animals 1068, 1073t
injectable 1067
laboratory animals 1069
and local anesthesia 539
partial opioid agonist 381–2
butorphanol 284
dosage
birds 1137
cats 382–3
dogs 382–3
horses 383
interactions with full opioid agonists 383
non‐human primates 1073t
premedication 382, 478
ruminants 1267
wildlife capture 1081–2
butorphanol‐azaperone‐medetomidine
(BAM) 1082, 1084
butyrophenones 335–8
cages, oxygen 90–1
calcium 58, 593
calves, cardiovascular system 1056–7
camelids
airway management 1061
auricular artery 1057

-- 1413 of 1450 --

1398 	Index
blood groups 599
dose requirements 1061
drug administration 1054–5
endotracheal intubation 1058–9
hypothermia 1060
induction of anesthesia 62
intubation 1058, 1059
oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve 739
physical restraint 1052
positioning during anesthesia 1056
regurgitation 1057
salivation 1058
sedating 1055
South American 739
venous blood 1054
Canadian Council on Animal Care
(CCAC) 153, 160
cancer pain 1363–76
aminobisphosphonates 1369
anticonvulsants 1368
antidepressants 1368
bone 1365, 1368–70
cannabinoids 1368
chemotherapy‐induced 1365–6
combination analgesics 1367–8
experimental therapeutics 1370
general therapeutic strategies 1368–70
NMDA antagonists 1367
non‐steroidal anti‐inflammatory drugs 1367
opioids 1367, 1372
pharmacologic treatment strategies 1366–8
prevalence 1363
promising innovative treatments 1370–1
radiation burns 1370
radiotherapy‐induced 1365, 1369–70
recognition and assessment 1363–4
specific underlying causes 1364–6
surgery‐induced 1366
types associated with cancer 1364
see also tumors
canine brachycephalic obstructive
syndrome 788–3
characteristics and pathophysiology 788–90
management of anesthesia 790–3
Canine Brief Pain Index 1013
Canine Brief Pain Inventory (CBPI) 1005, 1006
canine ECG 192
canine laryngeal paralysis 794–7
characteristics and pathophysiology 794–5
management of anesthesia 795–7
canine lung lobe torsion
characteristics and pathophysiology 806–7
management of anesthesia 807
canine tracheal collapse
characteristics and pathophysiology 797
management of anesthesia 797–9
cannabidiol products 1383
cannabinoids 433–4
capillaries 634–5
capillary refill time (CRT) 1218
capnography/capnometry 160
abnormal capnogram 225
anesthetic mortality, risk of 18
bronchospasm 63
colic, in horses 1227
mainstream 224
normal capnogram 224–5, 226f
sidestream 224
with sidestream sampling technology 51
species considerations 227
volumetric 228
capture of wildlife see wildlife capture
capuchins 1073
carbon dioxide
absorber/absorbents 109–11, 1043
and acid–base implications 221
arterial carbon dioxide content (CaCO 2
) 212
blood gas analysis 223
chemical detection 223
content in blood 740–2
elimination 704–7
end‐tidal 13, 59, 61, 106, 112, 222, 480, 670,
936, 1060, 1146, 1227, 1293, 1334
biomedical engineering 170, 173
cardiac output measurement 212, 217
endocrine disease 897, 906
neurologic disease 838, 840
respiratory disease 761, 785, 801
ruminants 1274, 1276
and euthanasia 159
Fick principle and cardiac output
measurement 211, 212, 227
Haldane effect 740–2
hypercapnia 742–3
hypocapnia 742–3
inhaling 155–6
and local anesthesia 537
mainstream capnometry/capnography 224
measurement methods 223–4
mixed with nitrous oxide 5
problems with infrared spectroscopy 224
quantitative monitoring 222–4
response variability 159
sidestream capnometry/capnography 224
transport 740–3
see also partial pressure of carbon dioxide
(PCO 2
)
carbon monoxide 156, 159
carboxyhemoglobin (COHb) 233
cardiac arrest
advanced life support 58, 59
airway management 1061
airway obstruction 62
anesthesia‐related ocular complications 1340
anesthetic risk 15, 16, 17, 19, 1048
anticholinergics 316–17
basic life support 57
biomedical engineering 172
capnography/capnometry 217
cardiac POCUS (CPOCUS) 271, 276
cerebral blood flow, regulation of 830
esophagitis 868
gastric dilation‐volvulus 874
guaifenesin 425
hypercalcemia 915
hypothermia 251
hypoxemia 62, 863
induction and intubation 1225
intraoperative complications 1278
intrathecal (spinal) anesthesia 1197
local anesthesia 1141, 1198
nitrous oxide 156
pneumothorax and/or pleural effusion 805
postanesthetic blindness 69
post‐cardiac arrest care algorithm 34
post‐cardiac arrest syndrome 59
refractory 543
sodium nitroprusside (SNP) 429
see also cardiopulmonary arrest (CPA)
cardiac cycle 189, 190, 647–50, 651f
cardiac function, assessing 650–3
cardiac markers, blood‐based 682
cardiac output (CO), monitoring 210–19
absolute values 210–11
advantages of 210
arterial waveform analysis 215
basic monitoring principles 211
and blood pressure monitoring 60, 197
choice of monitoring system 211
cross‐sectional area (CSA),
echocardiography 215
dye dilution technique 211
echocardiography and echo‐Doppler 215–16
Fick principle 211, 212, 227
functional monitoring 210
history 211–12
hypotension 60
ideal monitoring technique 211
inhalational anesthesia 499–500, 509–10
left ventricular outflow tract,
echocardiography 215, 216
lithium dilution 214–15
partial rebreathing technique 212
pulmonary artery catheter
thermodilution 212–14
standard capnography as indicator 217
techniques 212–17
thermodilution 211–12
thoracic bioimpedance and bioreactance 216
time‐based capnograph 227
transpulmonary thermodilution and
ultrasound indicator dilution 214
typical indices 210, 211t
cardiac POCUS (CPOCUS) 271–6, 272t
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation 275–6
caudal vena cava assessment at subxiphoid
window 275, 276f
caudal vena cava (CVC) 273
interpretation and integration of
findings 273, 275
left atrial to aortic root ration (LA:Ao) 273
left ventricular lumen size and function
273, 275
right parasternal long‐axis views 273
right parasternal short‐axis views 272
subxiphoid view 273
windows and views 272–3, 274f
see also point‐of‐care ultrasound (POCUS)
cardiac toxicity 531, 541, 542, 594
cardiopulmonary arrest (CPA)
advanced life support 58–9
camelids (cont’d)

-- 1414 of 1450 --

Index 	1399
anesthesia‐related 59
basic life support 55–7
breathing 57
cardiac arrhythmias causing 16
fluid therapy 58
identifying 59
monitoring 59–60
pharmacologic therapy 58
time‐based capnograph 227
cardiopulmonary bypass 667–73
anesthesia setup 670
antibiotics 669
anticoagulation and reversal 669
antifibrinolytics 669
cannulation 668–9
complexity 672
drugs and interventions used during
669–70
external circuit 667–8
hypothermia 669–70
medications 670, 671t
patient evaluation for 670
preanesthetic preparation 670, 671t
sequence of events and terminology
671–2
steroids 669
systemic responses 669
cardiopulmonary depression 10
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
adjunctive techniques and devices 59
advanced life support, cardiopulmonary
arrest 55, 58–9
algorithms 34
anesthesia‐related 59
basic life support, cardiopulmonary
arrest 55–7
breathing 57
cardiac point‐of‐care ultrasound 275–6
closed‐chest 57
corticosteroids 58, 59–60
in horses 1049
monitoring during 59
open‐chest 57, 59
POCUS in 275–6
post resuscitation care 55, 59–60
cardiopulmonary‐cerebral resuscitation
(CPCR) 316
cardiotoxicity 539, 540, 543
bupivacaine‐induced 543
cardiovascular complications, anesthesia‐related
anaphylaxis 61
cardiac dysrhythmias 61
hemorrhage 60–1
hypotension 60
small animal anesthesia morbidity 13
cardiovascular disease
anesthesia for specific conditions 683–94
arrhythmias, associated diseases 691–2
arrhythmogenic diseases 691–2
dilated cardiomyopathy 686
dysfunction‐associated diseases,
diastolic 689–90
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 689–90
hypotension 692–3
left‐to‐right shunting 687
mitral valve insufficiency/
regurgitation 684–6
pericardial effusion 690
pressure overload, associated
conditions 688–9
pulmonic stenosis 688–9
restrictive cardiomyopathy 689–90
right‐to‐left shunting 687–8
shock 693–4
subaortic stenosis 688–9
volume overload, associated
conditions 683–6
blood‐based cardiac markers 682
cooperation between cardiologist and
anesthesiologist 682–3
echocardiography 682
electrocardiography 680–1
hypotension, pharmacological support 692–3
pathophysiology and anesthetic
management 680–96
preanesthetic evaluation 680–3
thoracic radiography 681–2
cardiovascular physiology 615–66
actin‐activated myosin chemomechanical
ATPase cycle 629, 630f, 631, 631f
cardiac cycle and pressure‐volume loop
647–50, 651f
cardiac function, assessing 650–3
comparative cardiovascular morphology and
shunting 617–19
electrophysiology and
electrocardiogram 620–6
excitation–contraction coupling 626–8
hemodynamics and cardiac function
blood flow 642–4
blood pressure 644–6
preload and afterload 647
resistance 646–7
local control mechanisms 656–8
lymphatic system 641–2
mammalian cardiovascular system
619–26
anatomy 619
metabolism 620
myocardial contraction and relaxation
629, 631
neurohumoral and local control
mechanisms 654–8
oxygen delivery and oxygen
consumption 653–4
smooth muscle
contraction and relaxation 638–40
metabolism 638
special circulations
cerebral 659
coronary 658–9
pulmonary 659–60
renal 660
splanchnic 660
vascular system 631–8
capillaries 634–5
large arteries and veins 633
resistance vessels 633–4
small arteries 633
transcapillary fluid exchange 635–8
veins, venules and venous capacitance 638
cardiovascular system
acepromazine 334
age‐related changes 1355–6
amphibians 1117
birds 1134–5, 1147–8
dobutamine 322–3
dopamine 321–2
dopexamine 323
drug effects
acepromazine 334
alfaxalone 478
atipamezole 345–6
barbiturates 464
detomidine 340–1
dexmedetomidine 340–1
diazepam 337
dissociative anesthetics 470
etomidate 474–5
inhalational anesthetics 509–11
medetomidine 340–1
midazolam 337
opioids 367
propofol 467
romifidine 340–1
vatinoxan 345–6
xylazine 340–1
yohimbine 345–6
zolazepam 337
ephedrine 326
epinephrine 320–1
farm animals 1056–7
fish 1121
inhalational anesthesia
arterial blood pressure 510
cardiac rhythm 510
catecholamines 510
concurrent drugs 511
duration of anesthesia 511
factors influencing circulatory
effects 510–11
mode of ventilation 510–11
noxious stimulation 511
PaCO2 510–11
regional blood flow 510
isoproterenol 323–4
neonatal/pediatric patients 1349
norepinephrine 321
phenylephrine 324
prazosin 327
pregnancy‐associated changes 955–6
reptiles 1111–12
cardiovascular toxicity 542–3
carfentanil 380–1
wildlife capture 1081
carprofen 1073t, 1140, 1381
cartilage injury 412
catecholamines
α1
‐adrenergic receptor agonists 324–5
α2
‐adrenergic receptor agonists 325
β2
‐adrenergic receptor agonists 325–6
inhalational anesthesia 510

-- 1415 of 1450 --

1400 	Index
mixed α‐and β‐adrenergic receptor
agonists 326
naturally occurring 319–22
synthetic 322–4
catechol‐O‐ methyltransferase 323
catheters
arterial placement and maintenance 202
and camelids 1054
forelimb intravenous 58
intraosseous 58
intravenous 146, 200
locoregional anesthesia 1171–2
nasal 227
peripheral intravenous 58
peripherally inserted central 1100, 1101
size 202
Swan‐Ganz 212
cats
aging 1354
anesthesia
anesthetic and analgesic plan 1159–62
anesthetic mortality, risk of 14–17
chamber or mask inhalant induction 1163
comparative anesthesia and analgesia 1033–6
delayed anesthetic recovery 1164–5
general anesthesia 962, 964–965
induction of 62, 1162–3
inhalant anesthetic MAC 372–3
inhalational 1034
injectable anesthetics 1161t
intermediate‐term 1162
intravenous high‐dose opioid induction 1163
intravenous regional 1167–8
local infiltration 1166
locoregional 1167–8
long‐term 1162
maintenance 1163
neuraxial 1168
patient preparation 1159–62
peripheral nerve blocks 1168
plan 1159–62
preanesthetic considerations 1158–9
premedication 1162
records 1163
recovery 1164
regional 964–5
return of spontaneous circulation 55
sensitivity to 1158
short‐term 1159–62
topical 1166
blood typing 599
body weight 1159
cardiopulmonary measures 1159
central nervous system 1159
chest compressions 57
cortical blindness 1035
dobutamine dose rates 323
dopamine, effects on 322
Doppler ultrasonographic blood pressure
measurement 203
drug dose
buprenorphine 382
butorphanol 382–3
fentanyl 378–9
hydromorphone 377
methadone 377
morphine 376
drug effects
acepromazine 335
alfaxalone 479–80
detomidine 343
dexmedetomidine 343
diazepam 337
dissociative anesthetics 471
etomidate 476
medetomidine 343
midazolam 337
NSAIDs 414
propofol 467–8
romifidine 343
xylazine 343
zolazepam 337
drug metabolism 1034
electrocardiography 192
endotracheal intubation in 17, 18, 803, 1035
euthanasia 158
feline asthma 802–3
feline brachycephalic obstructive airway
syndrome 793–4
feline onychectomy 1014
fluid therapy in 18, 1036
halothane‐anesthetized 321
handling and behavior 1033–4
hunched or “tucked up” posture 997f
hyperkalemia 68
hypo‐or hyperthermia 68
locoregional anesthesia 1166–204
classification 1167–8
equipment 1170–4
physiology of nerve blockade 1168–9
preparation 1169–70
see also locoregional anesthesia
malignant hyperthermia 68
near‐infrared and Raman spectroscopy 237
non‐steroidal anti‐inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) 1035
opioids 1034–5
osteoarthritic pain 1013
pneumothorax 262
postoperative infections 142
preanesthetic blood testing 12
pregnancy, general anesthesia in 962, 964
renal function, testing and monitoring 926–8
UNESP‐Botucatu multidimensional pain
scale 1003
ventilation, monitoring 227
cattle
drug effects
adrenergic receptor agonists 333
atropine 1336
azaperone 335
clenbuterol 325
detomidine 343–4
dexmedetomidine 343–4
medetomidine 343–4
romifidine 343–4
xylazine 343–4
local infiltration 5
meloxicam approved for 1351
neonatal 1348
neuroendocrine stress response 342
ocular anatomy 1327
pain and consciousness 155
patient positioning 1273
pregnancy‐associated changes 342
regional anesthesia 965
sedation 343
subarachnoid anesthesia 5
caudal epidural anesthesia/analgesia 1254, 1255f
Caudal Intercostal Block for Abdominal Surgery
(CIBAS) 1227
caudal vena cava collapsibility index (CVCCI) 275
caudal vena cava (CVC)
assessment at the subxiphoid window 275,
276f
CVC diameter (CVCd) 275
CBPI see Canine Brief Pain Inventory (CBPI)
cell salvage, autologous transfusion 602–3
central nervous system (CNS) 3, 505–7
anatomy 822–5
birds 1145
brain 822–5
physiology 829–30
catecholamines 321
cerebral circulation 659
depression see central nervous system depression
in dogs and cats 1159
drug effects
acepromazine 334–5
alfaxalone 478
atipamezole 346–7
barbiturates 464
detomidine 341–2
dexmedetomidine 341–2
diazepam 337
dissociative anesthetics 470
etomidate 474
inhalational anesthetics 505–8
medetomidine 341–2
midazolam 337
propofol 467
romifidine 341–2
vatinoxan 346–7
xylazine 341–2
yohimbine 346–7
zolazepam 337
edema 1074
general anesthesia 176, 177f
inhalational anesthetics see below
inhalational anesthesia
anatomic sites of action 506–7
cerebral blood flow and cerebral perfusion
pressure 507–8
cerebral metabolism 507
electroencephalographic effects 507
mechanism of action 505–7
molecular sites and mechanic of
action 505–6
injectable anesthetics 1068
intracranial hypertension 835–7
level of central nervous system effect 1081
catecholamines (cont’d)

-- 1416 of 1450 --

Index 	1401
local anesthetic systemic toxicity 1167, 1171,
1181, 1198
neonatal/pediatric patients 1349–50
neurologic disease 822–5
peripheral nervous system 825–39
physiology 829–32
brain 829–30
spinal cord 832
seizures 837–8
and SNS 470
spinal cord physiology 832
and temperature 247
toxicity 534, 541–2, 1305
central nervous system depression 153,
179, 182
auditory evoked potentials 183
barbiturates producing 336, 463, 464
dose‐dependent 339
extreme 179
and opioids 381
progressive 178
and thermoregulation 342
xylazine‐induced excessive 338
central neuromodulation 1025
central state monitor (CSM) 183
central venous line 58
central venous pressure (CVP),
measuring 204–5
CEPEF see Confidential Enquiry into
Perioperative Equine Fatalities (CEPEF)
CEPSAF see Confidential Enquiry into
Perioperative Small Animal Fatalities
(CEPSAF)
cerebral blood flow 830–2
and cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) 507–8
chemical regulation 830–1
luxury perfusion 832
myogenic regulation 831
neurogenic regulation 831
cerebral circulation 659
cerebral herniation 67–8
cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) 198, 507–8
neurologic disease 829–30
cerebral state index (CSI) 183
cerebral state monitor (CSM) 183
certified Good Manufacturing Practices
(cGMP) 162
cervical paravertebral block 1186
cervical spondylomyelopathy 839
cesarean section 959–61
anticholinergics 959
dissociative anesthetics 960
elective and emergency anesthesia 962,
963–4t
general anesthesia 961–4
guaifenesin 961
inhalational anesthesia 960–1
injectable anesthetics 960
local anesthesia 961, 965
neuroleptanalgesia 960
neuromuscular blocking agents 961
opioids 959–60
sedation 959
tranquilization 959
see also neonatal/pediatric patients;
pregnancy‐associated changes
Cetacaine® 1271
cetaceans
anesthesia 1098
breathing 1092
intubation 1103–4
vascular access 1099–101
see also marine mammals
cetirizine 1031
CFD see computational fluid dynamic (CFD)
modeling
checklists 33–4
chelonians 1112
chemical buffers 558–9
chemoreceptor reflex 655
chemotherapy 1365–6
chest compressions 55, 57
chest wall rigidity (wooden chest
syndrome) 65
Chiari‐like malformation 434, 1000
chloral hydrate 5, 481
injectable 1068
chlorhexidine gluconate, soaking in 145
chloride shift 739
chlorine 7
chloroform 5
chloroprocaine 539
chondroitin 1016
chondroitin sulfate 1383
chondrotoxicity 544, 1239
chronic kidney disease (CKD) 52, 931–3, 1357
clinical features and diagnosis 932
etiology and pathogenesis 931–2
further diagnostics and treatment 932–3
staging 932
see also renal replacement therapy
chronic pain
accelerometry 1001
behavioral changes 1000
first‐tier 1013–15
gait
force plate analysis 1001
kinematic 1001
visual observation of 1001
non‐steroidal anti‐inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) 1013
osteoarthritis 1378–84
physiological parameters 1000–1
quantification 1005–6, 1007t
recognition of 1000–1
validity 1002
see also acute pain; pain; pain faces; pain
management
chronotropy 198
cimicoxib 1381
circle rebreathing systems 106–11
APL valve see adjustable pressure‐limiting
(APL) valve
Bain system 112
breathing circuit tubing 107, 108f
carbon dioxide absorbents 110–11
carbon dioxide absorber 109–10
expiratory one‐way valve 108
fresh gas inlet 106
full (complete) 106
inspiratory one‐way valve 107
Mapleson 111, 113f, 119
Modified Jackson‐Rees 112
and non‐rebreathing system 106, 107f
partial 106
pop‐off APL valve 135
reservoir bag 108
circulation
cerebral 659
coronary 658–9
factors influencing circulatory effects 510–11
pulmonary 659–60
renal 660
splanchnic 660
citrate‐phosphate‐dextrose‐adenine
(CPDA‐1) 1033
CKD see chronic kidney disease (CKD)
classical receptor theory 283–5
affinity and activity of a ligand 284
assessment of ligand–receptor interaction 284
lag‐time 284
receptor agonists and antagonists 284–5
selectivity and specificity of a ligand 284
clenbuterol
cardiovascular system effects 325
other effects 325–6
Client‐Specific Outcome Measures (CSOM)
scale 1006
clinical audits 37
clinical engineering 170
clinical utility 1002
clove oil 1118, 1119
CMV see continuous mandatory ventilation
(CMV)
CO see cardiac output (CO), monitoring
coagulation, blood
anticoagulant therapy 575–7
assessment 852
drugs supporting 578
fibrinolytic drugs 577
inhibitors 576–7
NSAIDs, effects of 411–12
and platelet function testing 575
pregnancy‐associated changes 956
procoagulant therapies 577–8
testing 575
see also blood; plasma; platelets
coaxial breathing systems 67, 107, 112, 113f
cocaine 5
codeine 381
cognitive dysfunction (CD) 1356
cold therapy 1024
colic, in horses 148, 1217–34
anesthetic protocol 1224–5
anesthetic risks and anticipated complications
arrhythmias 1221
hypotension 1219–20
impaired V/Q matching 1220–1
postanesthetic myopathy and
neuropathy 1221
clinical history 1218
defining 1217

-- 1417 of 1450 --

1402 	Index
diagnostics 1219
endotoxemia 1217–18
induction and intubation 1224–5
physical examination 1219
preanesthetic considerations 1218–19
premedication 1224
stabilization and fluid resuscitation 1222–4
surgical area, preparation of 1221
systemic inflammatory response
syndrome 1217–18
collision broadening, infrared spectroscopy 224
colloids 585–6
clinical implications of synthetic use in
veterinary medicine 588
synthetic 586–8
colorimetry, carbon dioxide measurement 223
communication tools, patient safety 35–6
Companion Animal Pain Management
Consortium 7
companion animals
biologic agents, evidence for 1017
osteoarthritis, evidence for agents
modifying 1016
comparative anesthesia and analgesia
amphibians 1116–19
birds 1127–54
cats 1033–6
dogs 1029–33
farm animals 1052–64
fish 1120–3
horses 1048–51
laboratory animals 1065–76
reptiles 1110–14
shelter animals 1041–7
wildlife 1077–90
complete blood count (CBC) 12, 1219
complexity
of agents 45
assessing 18
biomedical data 170, 171
cardiopulmonary bypass 672
case 30
ECG machines 194f
equipment 91, 92
infection prevention and control 147
intrinsic 26
locoregional anesthetic techniques 1166
near‐infrared and Raman spectroscopy 237
nest building 991, 998
neuropathic pain 432
pharmacology 299
pheochromocytoma (PHEO) 898
process of anesthesia 26
proliferation 27
segmental thoracolumbar subarachnoid
block 1310
software and data analysis 1001
spectral entropy 182
uncertainty 26
computational fluid dynamic (CFD) modeling 156
computed tomography (CT)
canine lung lobe torsion 807
cross‐sectional 44
intrathoracic procedures 784
laser procedures 42, 43
leads and wires 44
mechanical ventilation 782
protocols 262
thoracic imaging 44, 802
ventilation and lung volumes 726
ventilation–perfusion relationships 736
computer‐aided design (CAD) 156
computerized tomography (CT) scanning 1029
concurrent drugs
corticosteroids 799
fluid therapy 587
inhalational anesthesia
cardiovascular system 511
respiratory system 509
conduction 248
Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative
Deaths 32
Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Equine
Fatalities (CEPEF) 14, 19, 20
Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Small
Animal Fatalities (CEPSAF) 12, 15–17,
1035, 1036
congenital defects
patent ductus arteriosus 686–7
right‐to‐ left shunting 687–8
ventricular septal defect 686–7
conjugation (phase II biotransformation) 308
consciousness
defining 176
index of 183
and pain 154–5
prolonged return to 13
see also unconsciousness
constant rate therapy 299–305
construct validity 1002
content validity 1002
context‐sensitive half‐time (CSHT) 304–5
continuous positive airway pressure
(CPAP) 1094, 1095
continuous caudal epidural anesthesia/
analgesia 1254, 1255f
continuous laser Doppler flowmetry 238
continuous mandatory ventilation
(CMV) 764–8
dual‐controlled 767–8
pressure‐controlled 767
volume‐controlled 765–7
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP)
81, 1032
continuous rate infusion (CRI) 299–305, 1014
BET infusion scheme 303
constant rate intravenous infusions 294
context‐sensitive half‐time 304–5
divergence index 304
dopamine 322
infusion pumps 300
infusion rate 299
median prediction error (MDPE) 303 304
non‐pharmacokinetic‐dependent infusion
systems 300, 301f
pharmacokinetic‐dependent infusion
systems 301–4
and rate‐controlled infusion 300
syringe drivers 300
target‐controlled infusion 173, 177, 301, 303f,
304f, 346
wobble index 304
controlled atmosphere stunning (CAS) 159
controlled mechanical ventilation (CMV)
1094, 1098
conus arteriosus, fish 1121
CO‐oximetry 233–4
Masimo pulse CO‐oximetry 236
core‐to‐periphery gradient,
thermoregulation 247, 248f
coronary circulation 658–9
coronary perfusion pressure (C o
PP) 57
cortical blindness 69, 1035
corticosteroids 58
airway surgery 792
coagulation, assessment 852
concurrent 799
in CPR 58, 59–60
diabetes mellitus 903
intra‐articular injections of 1015
locally administered 1013
and NSAIDs 410, 907, 1338, 1380
post resuscitation care 59–60
prolonged anesthetic recovery 69
radiation burns 1370
septic peritonitis 881
systemic 792, 1380
thyroid disease 908, 911
see also steroids
corticosterone 161
COstatus® monitor, thermodilution 214
cough reflex 655, 833, 836
coupling of systems 27
COX‐1
colic, in horses 1218
versus COX‐2 inhibition 412–13, 1069
pain management 1015
COX‐2
colic, in horses 1218
versus COX‐1 inhibition 404–5, 1069
inhibition as selection criterion 412–13
COX‐3, pain management 1015
coxofemoral joint technique 1192
CPA see cardiopulmonary arrest (CPA)
CPAP see continuous positive airway pressure
(CPAP)
CPCR see cardiopulmonary‐cerebral
resuscitation (CPCR)
CPP see cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP)
CPR see cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
cranial nerves 823
craniocardiac reflex 655
CRI see continuous rate infusion (CRI)
crisis manuals 35
criterion validity 1002
critical incident technique, anesthetic
mishaps 32f
cross‐matching 599–600
cryogens 49–50
cryoprecipitate (cryo) 596–7
cryptorchidectomy, in horses 12
colic, in horses (cont’d)

-- 1418 of 1450 --

Index 	1403
crystalloids 582–8
hypertonic 584–5
hypotonic 585
isotonic 582–4
CT see computed tomography (CT)
Cushing reflex 67, 655
cutaneous system, amphibians 1118
cyanosis 232
cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)
287, 639
cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) 639
cyclohexamines 1082–3
CYP2B11 cytochrome gene 1030, 1031
cytochrome P450 isoenzymes (CYPs)
306, 308
cytotoxicity 544, 1100
natural killer cell 1371, 1372
opioids 1372
damping 201–2
dantrolene 420–1
DAP see diastolic arterial pressure (DAP)
darts
air‐activated mechanisms 1079
delivery equipment 1079
explosive discharge mechanisms 1080
induction of anesthesia 1085
see also capture of wildlife; wildlife capture
data analysis, compartmental models 296–8
data collection techniques and patient
safety 28–30
incident reporting systems 29
interviews 29
morbidity and mortality conferences 29–30
deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna) 314, 315f
debriefings, patient safety 35–6
DECVAA see Diplomate of the European
College of Veterinary Anaesthesia and
Analgesia (DECVAA)
deep brain stimulation (DBS) 170
defibrillation 58
Delphi method checklist 34
demand valves 139
dental blocks, local tissue 1177
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) 1365
depolarization
atrial 189, 189f, 191, 675
axis of 194, 1105
cardiac 188, 190
cellular 627, 906
cumulative 972
delayed 367
diastolic 622, 623, 623f, 624f
direct muscle 677
ECG complex 188, 190
electrical 190, 623
electrical potentials and lead system 187, 188
of endplate terminal 449
frequency of 702
gradual 621f
and hyperkalemia 594
maximal 449
mean electrical axis 192
membrane 527, 528, 594, 973
myocardial, 191, 193f
myocardial contraction and relaxation 631
nerve 1172, 1254, 1301
neuromuscular blocking agents 452–3
neuromuscular junction transmission 827
neuronal 286, 449, 1367
NMDA receptors 286
and novel nondepolarizing agents 453–6
opioid receptor regulation 359
phase 4 623, 623f
postsynaptic 450, 530
prolonged 1382
rapid 621, 622
spontaneous 675
synchronized 626
vascular smooth muscle 831
vectors of 192
ventricular 189f, 190, 191, 192, 625, 626, 678,
692, 1121
ventricular early depolarizations (VPCs)
678, 686
wave of 189–90, 623–4, 626
“slow waves” 863
depopulation 154
foam 161
depth of anesthesia
conceptualizing 5–6
devices
auditory evoked potentials 183–4
Bispectral Index™ 180–3
cerebral state monitor 183
clinical utility of 184
index of consciousness 183
Narcotrend® index, 183
patient state index 183
spectral entropy 182–3
electrophysiologic monitoring 179–80
minimum alveolar concentration 176–7
monitoring 176–86
physical signs 177–9
Stage 1 178
Stage 2 178–9
Stage 3 179
Stage 4 179
deracoxib 1381
dermorphin 1120
desflurane
environmental impact 7
flash stimulation under 157
ophthalmic patients 1335
desmopressin 430–1
detamine‐dexmedetomidine 1065
detomidine 8, 325, 338–44, 1083, 1265–6
anesthetic mortality, risk of 16, 17
clinical considerations 343–4
indications for 338–9
mechanism of action 338–9
pharmacodynamics 340–3
pharmacokinetics 339–40
premedication 383
dexmedetomidine 325, 338–44, 347, 1033, 1083,
1097, 1266, 1338
clinical considerations 343–4
dosage 1029
drug dose 1065, 1066t
indications for 338–9
mechanism of action 338–9
pharmacodynamics 340–3
pharmacokinetics 339–40
dextrans 588
diabetes insipidus
anesthetic considerations 905–6
clinical pathology 905
clinical presentation 905
diagnosis and treatment 905
fluid therapy 905
diabetes mellitus 10, 901–4
acidemia 902
anesthetic management of patients
with 902–4
clinical pathology 901–2
clinical presentation 901
corticosteroids 903
diagnosis and treatment 902
fluid therapy 902
see also endocrine disease
dialkylcarbamoylchloride (DACC)‐coated
postoperative dressings 148
dialysis, pharmacologic agent clearance
951–2
diaphragmatic hernia 805–6
diastolic arterial pressure (DAP) 197, 199, 203,
204, 421
diastolic dysfunction‐associated
diseases 689–90
diazepam 1033
clinical considerations 337–8
drug dose 1065, 1066t
indications for 336
mechanism of action 336
pharmacodynamics 337
pharmacokinetics 336–7
ruminants 1269
diethyl ether 5
diffusion hypoxia 513–14
diffusion limitation, hypoxemia 739
dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), anesthetic
considerations 686
dilution, in cardiac output monitoring
dye dilution technique 211
indicator dilution and transpulmonary
thermodilution 214
lithium 214–15
pulmonary artery catheter (PAC)
thermodilution 212–14
transpulmonary thermodilution and
ultrasound indicator dilution 214
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) 598
diphenhydramine 421
Diploma of Veterinary Anaesthesia, UK 6, 21
Diplomate of the American College of
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia
(DACVAA] 21, 55
Diplomate of the European College of
Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia
(DECVAA) 21
diprenorphine 1082
dipyrone (metamizole) 408

-- 1419 of 1450 --

1404 	Index
disseminated intravascular coagulation
(DIC) 1218
dissociative anesthetics 4, 6, 469–72
cesarean section 960
chemical structure 469
clinical effects
analgesic 470
cardiovascular 470
central nervous system 470
hepatic system 470
muscle 471
renal 470
respiratory 470
species‐specific 471–2
clinical use 472
fetal/neonatal effects 471
mechanism of action 469
ophthalmic patients 1334–5
pharmacodynamics 470–1
pharmacokinetics 469–70
distal brachial plexus block 1187, 1188
distal paravertebral block 1309
distal radial, ulnar, median, and musculocutaneous
nerve block 1188
distribution
apparent volume of 291–2
barbiturates 463
bicarbonate distribution space 563–4
local anesthesia 532–3
opioids 362
pulmonary perfusion 713–15
see also absorption, distribution, metabolism,
and elimination (ADME)
dive reflex 1106
divergence index 304
diving reflex 655
DMSO see dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)
dobutamine 284
cardiovascular system effects 322–3
in isoflurane‐anesthetized dogs 323
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) 1013
dogs 1157–65
aging 1354
anesthesia
anesthetic and analgesic plan 1159–62
breed sensitivities to 1031
chamber or mask inhalant induction 1163
comparative anesthesia and
analgesia 1029–40
delayed anesthetic recovery 1164–5
epidural anesthesia 5, 148
general anesthesia 962, 965, 1157
induction 1162–3
injectable anesthetics 1161t
intermediate‐term 1162
intermittent positive‐pressure
ventilation 205
intravenous high‐dose opioid
induction 1163
intravenous regional 1167–8
local infiltration 1166
locoregional 1167–8
long‐term 1162
maintenance 1163
mortality, risk of 14–17, 18
neuraxial 1168
patient preparation 1159–62
peripheral nerve blocks 1168
plan 1159–62
preanesthetic considerations 12, 1158–9
premedication 1162
records 1163
recovery 1164
sensitivity to 1158
short‐term 1159–62
topical 1166
auditory evoked potentials 183
biomedical instrumentation system 182
blood typing 599
body surface area 1029
body weight 1159
brachycephalic breeds 1032, 1158
canine brachycephalic obstructive
syndrome 788–3
canine laryngeal paralysis 794–7
canine lung lobe torsion 806–7
canine tracheal collapse 797–9
cardiopulmonary arrest 58
cardiopulmonary measures 1159
central nervous system 1159
chest compressions 57
cocaine use 5
drug dose
buprenorphine 381–2
butorphanol 382–3
fentanyl 378–9
hydromorphone 377
methadone 377
morphine 375
drug effects
acepromazine 335
alfaxalone 479
barbiturates 465
detomidine 343
dexmedetomidine 343
diazepam 337
dissociative anesthetics 471
etomidate 476
medetomidine 343
midazolam 337
morphine 363
NSAIDs 413–14
propofol 467
romifidine 343
xylazine 343
zolazepam 337
electrocardiography 192
fasting 1159
gastroesophageal reflux 67
hemorrhage 60
high‐definition oscillometry 204
histamine release 1031–2
history 1158
hyperkalemia 68
hypo‐or hyperthermia 68
inhalant anesthetic MAC 372–3
laboratory evaluation 1158
locoregional anesthesia 1166–204
classification 1167–8
equipment 1170–4
physiology of nerve blockade 1168–9
preparation 1169–70
see also locoregional anesthesia
malignant hyperthermia 68
morphine
administration 374, 375
analgesia 375
dosage 375
effects 375–6
infusion rates 374
intravenous 375
oral 374–5
opioid‐induced tolerance 363
osteoarthritic pain 1013
P450 CYB2B11 enzyme expression 1158
physical examination 1158, 1159
physical status 1159
pneumothorax 262
postoperative infections 142
“praying posture” 997f
pregnancy, general anesthesia in 962, 965
preparation for surgery 1159–62
range of sizes 1029–30
red blood cell potassium 1033
regional anesthesia 964–5
renal function, testing and monitoring 926–8
return of spontaneous circulation 55
sighthounds 1030–1
signalment 1158
specific breeds 16, 18, 1029
Australian Terriers 901
Bichon Frise 901
Boston Terriers 788, 791
Boxers 1031
Brittany Spaniels 795
Bulldogs 788, 791
Cairn Terriers 901
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel 434, 1000
Cocker 686
Doberman Pinschers 908
Finnish Spitz 901
Fox Terriers 895
German Shepherds 905
Golden Retrievers 795, 908
Great Danes 908
Greyhounds 1030
Irish Setters 908
Keeshond 901
Labrador Retrievers 359, 408, 412, 691,
795, 855
Miniature Poodles 901
Miniature Schnauzers 901
Pugs 788, 791
Rottweilers 18
Samoyed 901
Siberian huskies 905
Staffordshire Terriers 877
Standard Poodles 893
Standard Schnauzers 895
Toy Poodles 901
West Highland White terriers 18
Yorkshire Terriers 797, 799f, 1032

-- 1420 of 1450 --

Index 	1405
stabilization 1159–62
subarachnoid anesthesia 5
toy breeds 1158
tracheal collapse 1032–3
transcranial magnetic stimulation
182, 184
ventilation, monitoring 227
dolasetron 428
dolphins 1093, 1094, 1095, 1098
bottlenose 1091, 1100f
endotracheal intubation 1103f
median artery 1101
small 1104
vascular access 1099
venous access 1100
dopamine 284
cardiovascular system effects 321–2
extravasation of 322
pharmacokinetics 322
pharmacology of descending controls 976
receptors 1036
dopexamine
cardiovascular system effects 323
other effects 323
pharmacokinetics 323
Doppler device, preplaced 59
Doppler flow probes 1101, 1102
Doppler ultrasonography 1173
Doppler ultrasonographic blood pressure
measurement 202–3
dorsal horn
anatomy of 973–5
spinal cord 339, 341, 364, 372, 507, 530, 535,
1367, 1372
double‐lumen tube (DLT) 78–81
doxapram 69, 421–3, 1267
Dräger AV‐E ventilator 134
Dräger small animal ventilator 123
dromotropy 198
droperidol 1084
drug administration 147–9
birds 1135–6
camelids 1054
farm animals 1054–5
infection prevention and control 147–9
intranasal route 1136
laboratory animals 1070
pigs 1055, 1286
reptiles 1114
routes 58
ruminants 1054
drug delivery systems 173
drug dose see individual drugs and species
drug effects
reducing medication error, methods 36–7
see also adverse drug reactions (ADRs)
drug interactions
additive interaction 306
drug–drug interactions 306
isobolographic studies 306
line of additivity 306
pharmacodynamic 306–7
pharmacokinetic 305–6
physicochemical 305
response surface analyses 306–7
in vitro/in vivo 306
drug metabolism 307–9
arachidonic acid 398, 403–4
cats 1034
epinephrine, effects of 321
formulation effect 309
isomers 309
ketamine 308
local anesthesia 533–4
opioids 362–3
Phase I biotransformation 308
Phase II biotransformation or
conjugation 308
Phase III biotransformation 308–9
propofol 309
renal clearance 307
stereoisomers 309
transport of metabolites 308–9
see also absorption, distribution, metabolism,
and elimination (ADME)
drug spillage 7
drug‐related complications
medical error resulting in overdose 65–6
patient arousal 66
dual‐circuit ventilators 115, 117, 119–22
bellows configuration 119–20
bellows housing 120
exhaust valve 120–1
spill valve 121
ventilator hose connection 121–2
Dumeril’s monitors (Varanus dumerili) 1113
duration of anesthesia
cardiovascular system 511
respiratory system 509
sympathetic nervous system 511
dye dilution technique 211
dynamic pressure response test 201
dysphoria 336, 375, 376, 378
acute pain 998
anesthetic recovery 1106
buprenorphine, formulation of 1035
butorphanol causing 366
cetacean anesthesia 1098
fentanyl CRI developed 378
ketamine‐induced 1268
ketamine–midazolam 1161
opioid effects 366–7
opioid‐induced 359, 873, 1034, 1164, 1267
dysrhythmias see arrhythmias/dysrhythmias
ECG see electrocardiography (ECG)
echocardiography
and Echo‐doppler 215–16
preanesthetic evaluation 680–1, 682
Simpson’s rule 215
Echo‐doppler, and echocardiography 215–16
EEG see electroencephalogram (EEG)
effect‐site concentration 176–7
Efficacy of Volume Substitution and Insulin
Therapy in Severe Sepsis (VISEP)
study 694
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) 1013
Einthoven’s triangle 188
electrical potentials, electrocardiography 187–9
electrical silence 180
electroanesthesia 4
electrocardiogram 620–6
electrocardiography (ECG) 57, 145, 187–96, 1276
artifacts and filters 194–5
atria, depolarization of 189
atrioventricular (AV) node 189
base‐apex lead 189
baseline 190
bipolar leads 188
cables 49
carbon graphite electrodes 51
cardiac cycle 189
complex 189–90
depolarization 190
Einthoven’s triangle 188
electrical potentials and lead system 187–9
equipment 194–5
evaluating 190–2
heart rate calculation 190–1
isoelectric line 190
leads I, II, and III 188
mean electrical axis (MEA) 191–2
monitoring 1293
multilead ECG 189
preanesthetic 12
precordial system 189
QRS complex 189, 190, 191
rhythm evaluation 191
species‐specific variations 192, 193, 193f, 194
unipolar leads 188–9
wave, segment and interval 189, 190
Wilson’s central terminal 188
electroencephalogram (EEG) 157, 999
frequency bands 179–80
electrolocation, epidural technique 1196
electrolytes
calcium 592–3
potassium 593–5
sodium 592–3
electromagnetic therapies 1025
electromyography (EMG) 182–3
electronarcosis 4
electrophysiology 620–6
electrophysiologic monitoring 179–80
electroretinogram, impact of anesthesia on 1338
electrosleep 4
electrosurgery units 195
elimination
carbon dioxide 704–7
half‐life of 291
inhalational anesthesia 500–2
and uptake 497–501
by blood 499–500
see also absorption, distribution, metabolism,
and elimination (ADME)
endobronchial intubation, inadvertent 63
endobronchial tube placement 261, 263f
endocannabinoids 977
endocrine disease 891–921
adrenal glands 893–900
anatomy and physiology 891, 893
anesthetic management of patients with

-- 1421 of 1450 --

1406 	Index
diabetes insipidus 905–6
diabetes mellitus 902–4
hyperadrenocorticism 897–8
hypoadrenocorticism 894–5
insulinoma 907–8
pheochromocytoma 898–900
diabetes insipidus 904–6
diabetes mellitus 10, 901–4
hyperparathyroidism 914–15
hyperthyroidism 909–12
hypothyroidism 908–9
important hormones 892f
insulinoma 906–8
pancreatitis 908
parathyroid gland 913–15
thyroid gland 908–13
thyroid neoplasia 912–13
endocrine system 475–6, 891
neuroimmune–endocrine system 1026
pregnancy‐associated changes 957
endoscope‐guided technique 85–6
endotoxemia, in horses 1217–18
endotracheal intubation 174, 465, 468, 866
airway evaluation prior to 913
airway management 1070
anesthetic mortality, risk of 16
associated ICP 833
blind intubation 1058, 1104
bronchospasm 63
capnography/capnometry required for 222
in cats 17, 18, 803, 1035
cetacean anesthesia 1098
correct 84, 85f
cough reflex 833, 836
detection of 223
difficult airway and lower airway disease 226
difficult or impossible 84, 723
farm animals 1058–61
and Fick principle 212
guided 85f
in horses 338, 1341
induction of anesthesia 62, 1208, 1289, 1296
injectable anesthetics 468, 476
intermediate‐term anesthesia 1162
isobolographic analyses 306
ketamine requirements 1269
laboratory rodents and lagomorphs 1070
“MAC for endotracheal intubation”
(MAC‐EI) 177
myasthenia gravis (MG) 840
non‐human primates 1073
in pigs 1059–60, 1073
in pregnancy 1050
pulmonary aspiration 65
in rabbits 480
recovery 1278
reducing aspiration risk following 808
reptiles 1114
respiratory depression 61, 1088
retrograde intubation as alternative to 86
ruminants 1271
sedation and chemical restraint 1288
stick intubation 1059
supraglottic airway devices (SGADs) as an
alternative to 83
endotracheal tubes (ETTs) 75–8, 1059f
adapters 77, 224
biomedical engineering 172
bronchial blockers 80–2
Cole tubes 76
commercially available stainless steel/
insulated 41–2
commonly used 41, 44, 76
cuff and pilot tubing 42, 51, 77, 145
dogs 1032
double‐lumen tube (DLT) 78–81
exchangers 86
infection prevention and control 145
isolation of one lung 78–82
materials 41–2, 58
metal, cooper‐shielded and insulated 41
minimum occlusive volume (MOV)
77–8
Murphy‐type 77
placement 256
radiocontrast agents 45
size, choice of 75
stimulating laryngospasm 179
uncuffed self‐sealing 78
veterinary‐specific 75
enflurane 489–90
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society
(EMBS) 170
engineering solutions, patient safety 36
environmental impact of anesthesia 7–8
ephedrine
cardiovascular system effects 326
other effects 326
pharmacokinetics 326
epidural technique 148
cranial epidural blocks 1311–12
drugs for continuous epidural anesthesia and
analgesia 1197
electrolocation 1196
hanging drop 1196
history 5
loss of resistance 1196
neuraxial anesthesia 1194, 1195f
running‐drip 1196
sacrococcygeal or intercoccygeal epidural
(caudal epidural) block 1312–13
segmental dorsolumbar epidural
block 1309–10
ultrasound‐guided 1196–7
epinephrine 319–21
β‐adrenergic receptors 287
arrhythmias induced by 464, 467, 536
cardiopulmonary arrest 58
cardiovascular system effects 320–1
half‐life 321
and horses 320–1
and local anesthesia 535–6
metabolism, effects on 321
pharmacokinetics 321
β‐adrenergic effects 58
episcleral venous pressure (EVP) 1331
equine ECG 192, 194
Equine Facial Action Coding System 1003
equine guttural pouch disease 799–801
equine guttural pouch mycosis
characteristics and pathophysiology 800–1
management of sedation and/or general
anesthesia 801
equine guttural pouch tympany
characteristics and pathophysiology 800
management of sedation and/or general
anesthesia 800
equine laryngeal paralysis
characteristics and pathophysiology
801–2
management of anesthesia and/or
sedation 802
equipment
anesthesia ventilators see ventilators
anesthetic and surgical, reprocessing
of 144–5
anesthetic complications
adjustable pressure‐limiting valve closure
or malfunction 66
breathing system malfunction 67
oxygen supply failure 67
vaporizer‐related 67
breathing systems 105–12
catheters see catheters
electrocardiography 194–5
endoscope‐guided technique 85
endotracheal tubes see endotracheal tubes
(ETTs)
field anesthesia 1078
high‐quality high‐volume spay‐neuter
(HQHVSN) practice 1042–3
injection pressure monitors 1172
intubation aids and techniques 84
laryngoscopes see laryngoscopes
lateral pharyngotomy 87
locoregional anesthesia 1170–4
machines see anesthetic machines
medical gases 91–4
monitoring 145
nasotracheal intubation 84
non‐human primates 1073
oxygen administration 87–91
peripheral nerve stimulators 1172–3
point‐of‐care ultrasound (POCUS) 256
remote drug delivery 1079–80
respiratory assist devices 139
retrograde intubation 86
safety and design 75
supraglottic airway devices 82–3
tracheostomy 86–7
ultrasound 1173–4
waste gas scavenge system 112–13
wildlife capture 1079–80
wire‐ or tube‐guided techniques 84–5
equivalent dipole theory 187
EQUUS‐COMPASS pain scale 1003
erector spinae plane block 1184–5
ergonomics 27
ERV see expiratory reserve volume (ERV)
Escherichia coli (E. coli) 142, 145
esmolol 329
endocrine disease (cont’d)

-- 1422 of 1450 --

Index 	1407
esophagitis and esophageal stricture 868
ESWT see extracorporeal shockwave therapies
(ESWT)
etherization 5, 16
etomidate
analogs 477
chemical structure 474
clinical effects
analgesic 476
cardiovascular 474–5
central nervous system 474
gastrointestinal 475
hepatic 475
muscle 476
pain on injection 476
renal 475
respiratory 475
species‐specific 476
clinical use 476
mechanism of action 474
neurologic disease 834
ophthalmic patients 1335
pain on injection 476
pharmacodynamics 474–6
pharmacokinetics 474
etorphine 380–1
wildlife capture 1081, 1084
ETTs see endotracheal tubes (ETTs)
euphoria, opioid effects 366–7
European College of Veterinary
Anaesthesiologists (ECVA) 6, 7
euthanasia 152–66
agent purity 161–2
animal distress, evaluating 156–7
carcass disposal 162
choice of killing method 158–60
in clinical setting 162
defining 153
depopulation 154
and fetal sentience 160
foam depopulation 161
humane slaughter 152, 153–4
inhalational anesthesia 158
inhaled methods 157
IV access 162
low atmospheric pressure stunning 160–1
mechanisms of action 155–6
onset of unconsciousness 158–60
opposed goals 152
pain and consciousness 154–5
EVLW see extravascular lung water (EVLW)
excitation–contraction coupling 626–8
excretion
local anesthetics 534
nitrogen 1121
opioids 363
exertional myopathy 1088
expiratory reserve volume (ERV) 698
extracorporeal shockwave therapies
(ESWT) 1025
extraocular muscles (EOM) 1327, 1331
extravascular lung water (EVLW) 268
eye and adnexa block 1304–6
eye protection 41
face masks 144, 489
airway obstruction 62
carbon dioxide elimination, kinetics 706
chest compressions 57
commercial 89f
delivery 87–8
halothane administration 1060
hyperadrenocorticism (HAC) 897
induction of anesthesia 62
isoflurane or sevoflurane delivered
by 1268
ketamine combinations 1269
and laboratory rodents 1071
laser procedures 41, 42
mechanical ventilation 782
non‐sealed 752
oxygen supplementation 89, 752, 753
positive‐pressure ventilation 957
preanesthetic considerations 1286
precapillary pulmonary hypertension 810
pulmonary mechanics 708
and rabbits 1067, 1070
sealed 740
snug‐fitting 88, 89, 699f, 752, 753, 909
surgical 42
and swine 1288
urethral or bilateral ureteral obstruction 938
β2
‐adrenergic receptor agonists 326
Facial Action Coding Systems (FACS) 1003
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Calgary, pre‐induction checklist 35f
famotidine 423–4
farm animals 1052–64
cardiovascular system 1056–7
drug administration 1054–5
endotracheal intubation 1058–61
gastrointestinal tract 1057–8
hypertension 1057
malignant hyperthermia 1060–1
positioning during anesthesia 1055–6
respiratory system 1057
ruminants, recommended withdrawal interval
for 1052, 1053–4t
salivation 1058
species differences in anesthetic dose
requirements 1061
thermoregulation 1060–1
see also camelids; cattle; pigs; ruminants
fascial plane block techniques 1182–5
erector spinae plane block 1184–5
quadratus lumborum 1182–3
serratus plane block 1182
transversus abdominis plane (TAP)
block 1015, 1183–4, 1227, 1258
fast flush test 201
fasting
amphibians 1118
birds 1135
dogs 1159
horses 1205–6
pigs 1285
febrile non‐hemolytic transfusion reactions
(FNHTRS) 600–1
feline asthma 802–3
characteristics and pathophysiology 802
management of anesthesia 802–3
feline brachycephalic obstructive airway
syndrome 793–4
characteristics and pathophysiology 793–4
management of anesthesia 794
feline ECG 192
Feline Grimace Scale (FGS) 1003, 1005, 1034
feline musculoskeletal pain index (FMPI) 1006
feline onychectomy 1014
femoral/saphenous nerve block 1189–90
fentanyl 378–9, 1067
dosage
birds 1138
cats 378–9
dogs 378–9
food animals 379
horses 379
pigs 1288
illicit 8
intraoperative analgesia 1273
patches 1069
selected primate species 1066t
wooden chest syndrome 65
fetal distress 160
fetal sentience 160
FFP see fresh frozen plasma (FFP)
FGS see Feline Grimace Scale (FGS)
fibrinolytic drugs 577
Fick principle, cardiac output monitoring
211, 212, 227
field anesthesia
capture technique 1078–9
equipment 1078
general considerations 1077–8
hazards 1079
horses 1210
weather 1078
see also wildlife capture
firocoxib 1381
first‐order rate equation 297
“first‐pass effect,” hepatic clearance 293
fish
anatomy and physiology 1120–1
cardiovascular system 1121
clinical anesthesia 1122–3
considerations for anesthesia 1122
gills 1120
jawed 1120
nervous system 1121
nociception 1121
preanesthetic evaluation 1122–3
respiratory system 1120–1
thermoregulation 1121
“fish mouth view,” right parasternal short‐axis
views 272
flank/paralumbar fossa, blocks for regional
anesthesia of
distal paravertebral 1309
inverted “l” or “7” 1307
line infiltration 1307
proximal paravertebral 1307–9
segmental dorsolumbar epidural 1309–10
segmental thoracolumbar subarachnoid 1310

-- 1423 of 1450 --

1408 	Index
Florida manatee (Trichechus manatus
latirostris) 1099
flow rate compensation 97
flowmeters 36, 135
activation 101
air 667, 752
anesthetic machines and breathing circuits 91
assembly 95
calibration 96
continuous laser Doppler flowmetry 238
designs 96, 97f
field anesthesia 1078
fresh gas flow delivered by 756
function 96
gas flow within machine 94–6
indicators 67
nasal insufflation 89, 90
oxygen 67, 96f, 97f, 103, 133, 134, 138, 172,
667, 752, 794
pin index safety system 93, 94f
rodent 1067
supportive therapy 1275
vaporizer‐related complications 67
see also fresh gas flow (FGF); vaporizers
fluid regulation, amphibians 1118
fluid therapy
AAHA guidelines 1350
aggressive 58, 277, 905, 1223
anesthetic management 909
anesthetic risk 17
blood pressure monitoring 207
bolus 592
cardiopulmonary arrest 58
in cats 18, 1036
colic, in horses 1222–4
colloid 909
concurrent 587
conventional 589
crystalloid 1294
diabetes insipidus 905
diabetes mellitus 902
emergency 1294
and gastrointestinal function 863, 872
goal‐directed 207, 210, 583, 589, 856, 904
individualized 589–91
hemoabdomen 877
in horses 929, 1050, 1223
in humans 589
hyperthermia 911
in hypotensive patients 856
in hypovolemic patients 801
inadequate 930
and interventional radiology 858
intestinal neoplasia 877, 878
intraoperative 589, 595
intravenous 249, 277, 511, 875, 894, 936, 938
isotonic crystalloids 582
laboratory animals 1072
liberal 589, 881
megaesophagus 874
and microvasculature 591–2
monitoring 277
and NSAIDs 415
older patients 1357
perianesthetic 897
perioperative 249, 585, 588–92
preoperative 784, 899
protocols 800, 881
rates of 938, 1223
renal disease 936
resistance 646
restrictive 589, 592, 717, 881
ruminants 1273–4
and sedation 802
small animals 1223
spinal cord injury and spine surgery 839
standard 590
and supportive therapies 1294
urine output measurement 928
flumazenil 69, 285, 338
flunixin 1279
fluorocarbons 1067
FMPI see feline musculoskeletal pain index
(FMPI)
fMRI see functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI)
foals, equine neonate versus foal 1049–50
foam depopulation methods 161
Food and Drug Administration (FSA), United
States 49, 75
Center for Devices and Radiological
Health 113
food animals
drug dose
fentanyl 379
morphine 376–7
drug effects, NSAIDs 415
force plate analysis 1001
foreign body removal/other abdominal
procedures 882
forelimb intravenous catheter 58
formulation effect, drug metabolism 309
fospropofol 468–9
Frank–Starling curve 204
FRC see functional residual capacity (FRC)
“free hormone hypothesis” 290
free‐ranging terrestrial mammals see wildlife
capture
free‐water abnormalities 571
fresh frozen plasma (FFP) 596
fresh gas flow (FGF) 96, 98, 101–3, 116, 119,
120, 122–6, 132, 756–8, 761–3
birds 1144
breathing systems 105, 106, 110–12
laboratory animals 1071
flow rate 104, 105, 106, 111
mechanical ventilation 756
see also flowmeters
fresh whole blood (FWB) 596
frozen plasma (FP) 596
functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) 155, 999
functional residual capacity (FRC) 698, 1095
GABA receptors 162, 336, 338, 469, 507,
1068, 1141
fast response 286
GABAA 286, 336
GABA A
R 1092
marine mammals 1092
slow response 286
see also gamma‐aminobutyric acid (GABA)
gabapentin 434–6, 1015, 1070, 1338, 1382
gadolinium‐based contrast agents (GBCAs) 52
gait
force plate analysis 1001
kinematic 1001
visual observation of 1001
gallbladder, and extrahepatic biliary tract
pathology 857
galvanometer 187
gamma‐aminobutyric acid (GABA)
endogenous 336
GABA‐mediated inhibitory transmission 336
and glycine 977
increased activation of adenylate cyclase in 363
marine mammals 1092
receptors see GABA receptors
gamma‐glutamyl transferase (GGT):creatinine
ratio 1218
gas sampling systems 241
gas supply see medical gases
gastric dilation‐volvulus 874–6
gastroesophageal reflux 865–7
gastroesophageal reflux (GER)
esophageal stricture 54
and regurgitation 13, 65, 67
gastrointestinal disease 862–90
anatomy of the gastrointestinal tract 862–71
aspiration 868–9
effects of anesthetic agents on gastrointestinal
function 863–71
esophagitis and esophageal stricture 868
foreign body removal/other abdominal
procedures 882
gastric dilation‐volvulus 874–6
gastroesophageal reflux 865–7
gastrointestinal conditions requiring
anesthesia 871–82
gastrointestinal motility/postoperative
ileus 869–71
hemoabdomen 876–7
intestinal neoplasia 877–9
laparotomy 871–3
megaesophagus 873–4
nausea and vomiting 864–5
septic peritonitis 879–82
gastrointestinal function, effects of anesthetic
agents on 863–71
gastrointestinal motility 869–71
gastrointestinal system
in dogs and cats 1159
drug effects
alfaxalone 478–9
barbiturates 465
detomidine 342
dexmedetomidine 342
dissociative anesthetics 470
etomidate 475
medetomidine 342
NSAIDs 408–10
opioids 367–8

-- 1424 of 1450 --

Index 	1409
propofol 467
romifidine 342
xylazine 342
pregnancy‐associated changes 957
gastrointestinal tract
anatomy of 862–71
and parasympathetic nervous system 862
regurgitation 1057–8
ruminal tympany 1057
gator sign see BAT sign
GE Healthcare Entropy™ Module 182–3
gelatins 588
general anesthesia
cesarean section 961–4
defining 3, 4, 153, 176
dogs 962, 965, 1157
laser procedures 44
magnetic resonance imaging 50–1
ophthalmic patients 1338–40
versus sedation 50–1
stages 178f
genetic factors, response variability 159
genitourinary system
drug effects
detomidine 342
dexmedetomidine 342
medetomidine 342
romifidine 342
xylazine 342
GFR see glomerular filtration rate (GFR)
Glasgow Composite Pain Scale‐Feline
1003, 1034
glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) 285
global warming 7
Global Warming Protocol (GWP) 1067
glomerular filtration rate (GFR) 294, 1357
and renal clearance 927–8
glucocorticoid receptor–drug complex 284
glucuronidation 308
glutamate 286–7
glutathione 308
glutathione S‐transferases (GST) 308
glycine 286–7
glycopyrrolate
and anticholinergics 314–15
clinical use 317
drug dose 1065, 1066t
pharmacology 317
goats, regional anesthesia 965
G‐protein receptors 285, 287
gradient magnetic fields 49, 51
grapiprant 406–7, 1140–1, 1381
greenhouse gases 7, 1067
green‐lipped mussels 1383
grimace scales 1003, 1004t, 1005f, 1034
guaifenesin
cesarean section 961
horses 1209–10
ruminants 1269
guaifenesin (glyceryl guaiacolate ether)
424–5
guanosine diphosphate (GDP) 287
guanosine triphosphate (GTP) 287
guinea pigs 433
anatomic and physiologic
considerations 1070
injectable anesthetics 480
midazolam 338
neurologically mature at birth 160
osteoarthritis (OA) 985
withholding foods from 1070
Hagen–Poiseuille equation 198
Haldane effect 740–2
Hallowell Anesthesia WorkStation (AWS) 121f
Hallowell EMC 2000, 2002/2002 PRO
ventilator 126–7
Hallowell Tafonius/Tafonius Junior
ventilator 136, 137f
halothane 320, 321, 323, 1272
agent‐specific vaporizers 103
causes of anesthetic death 16
environmental impact 6
euthanasia 158
face mask administration 1060
and infection control 148–9
Hamburger effect 739
hand hygiene 144
handling and restraint
amphibians 1118
birds 1135
cats 1033–4
laboratory animals 1070
hand‐offs, patient safety 35–6
hanging drop epidural technique 1196
harbor porpoise 1099
harm, risk of from healthcare 24–5
HBF see hepatic blood flow (HBF)
HCM see hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM)
HCPI see Helsinki Chronic Pain Index (HCPI)
head blocks 1174–8
auricular techniques 1178
eye and adnexa block 1304–6
horn blocks 1303–4
infraorbital 1235
local tissue dental 1177
mandibular 1175–7, 1236
maxillary 1174–5, 1236–7
mental 1236
nasal passages and block 1306–7
ophthalmic patients 1177–8
regional anesthesia 1303–7
trigeminal nerve 1178
Health‐Related Quality of Life (HRQoL) 1005
hearing protection, MRI 49
heart
anticholinergic effects 315
normal 189, 190, 191, 650f
see also cardiac arrest; cardiac output (CO),
monitoring; cardiopulmonary arrest (CPA);
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR);
cardiovascular complications, anesthesia‐
related; electrocardiography (ECG)
heart rate 909, 1049
alterations in 178
amphibians 1119
calculation 190–1
cardiac dysrhythmias 61
decrease in 1138, 1143, 1273, 1275, 1349
evaluation an ECG 190
high 192, 1134
in horses 1049
improving 1336
increase in 315, 1082, 1163, 1269, 1287
instantaneous 190
irregular 1087
maximum 1355
monitoring 1350
normal 192, 648t, 1048, 1275
slowing of 1332
wildlife capture 1086
heat therapy 1024
heat transfer mechanisms, thermoregulation 247–9
emissivity 247
Helsinki Chronic Pain Index (HCPI) 1005, 1006
hematocrit 1158
hemoabdomen 876–7
hemodialysis
and continuous renal replacement
therapy 950–2
drug characteristics 951–2
intermittent 950–2
membrane properties 951
patient factors 952
patient monitoring 951
pharmacologic agent clearance 951–2
procedures and equipment 950–1
hemodynamics and cardiac function
blood flow 642–4
blood pressure 644–6
preload and afterload 647
resistance 646–7
hemoglobin
arterial saturation 234
deoxygenated 232
laboratory evaluation 1158
mixed venous saturation (SvO2) 234
oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve 739
saturation with oxygen, measuring 233–6
hemorrhage, cardiovascular complications 60–1
hemostasis
cell‐based 574–5
primary 575
secondary 575
hemoximetry see CO‐oximetry
henbane (Hyoscyamus niger) 314
Henderson‐Hasselbalch equation 557
hepatic blood flow (HBF)
alfaxalone–alfadolon decreasing 478
compromised 1208
and hepatic clearance 292–3
and inhalation anesthetics 478, 512
and injectable anesthetics 465, 467
and liver disease 847, 848, 849f, 850
and local anesthesia 534
and maintenance of general anesthesia 1208
and propofol 466, 467
hepatic clearance 292–3
hepatic functions 847–51
hepatic lobe torsion 857
hepatic system
age‐related changes 1357

-- 1425 of 1450 --

1410 	Index
in dogs and cats 1159
drug effects
alfaxalone 478–9
barbiturates 465
dissociative anesthetics 470
etomidate 475
inhalational anesthetics 512
propofol 467
functional anatomy and physiology 847–51
neonatal/pediatric patients 1349
pregnancy‐associated changes 957
reptiles 1113–14
structural organization of the liver 847–8, 849f
see also liver disease
hepatitis 855–6
“hepatization,” translobar lung
consolidation 269
hepatobiliary diseases, pain management in 858
hepatotoxicity 412, 430, 512
type 1 854, 855
type 2 855
Hering–Breuer reflex 655
heroin 8
HFACS see Human Factors Analysis and
Classification System (HFACS)
high‐definition oscillometry (HDO) 204
high‐quality high‐volume spay‐neuter (HQHVSN)
practice 1041, 1042f, 1043–5
analgesia for spay‐neuter programs 1044–5
drug protocols 1042
equipment 1042–3
monitoring and patient support 1043–4
preoperative considerations 1042
recovery 1044
high‐threshold (HT) pain‐sensing nerve
types 1024
histamine release 1031–2
history of veterinary anesthesia
depth of anesthesia, conceptualizing 5–6
early milestones 5
evolution as a specialty 6–7
homeostasis
acid‐base 221, 555, 556f
protein 850
horn blocks 1303–4
Horner’s syndrome 1015
Horowitz index 233
horses 1205–16
abdominal pain, pawing in response to, 998f
a2
-adrenergic receptor agonists 1208–10
anesthesia
additional sedation and analgesia 1212–13
adequate cardiovascular function and tissue
oxygenation 1210–11
comparative anesthesia and
analgesia 1048–51
environmental considerations 1211–12
fasting 1205–6
field anesthesia 1210
general 44, 962
induction of anesthesia 1206, 1207t, 1208
inhalant anesthetic MAC 373
maintenance 1208
monitoring 1210
morbidity 14
mortality, risk of 18
preanesthetic considerations 1205–6,
1218–19
in pregnancy 962
recovery 1211–13
risks 18, 1048, 1219–21
standing sedation 44, 1206, 1207t
subarachnoid anesthesia 5
timing of recovery 1212
biomedical instrumentation system 182
blood typing 599
cardiopulmonary arrest 55
cardiopulmonary resuscitation 1049
cervical spondylomyelopathy 839
clinical history 1218
colic in 148
Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative
Equine Fatalities (CEPEF) 14, 19, 20
cryptorchidectomy 12
diagnostics 1219
dopamine, effects on 322
drug dose
buprenorphine 382
butorphanol 383
fentanyl 379
hydromorphone 377
methadone 377–8
morphine 376
drug effects
acepromazine 335
alfaxalone 480
barbiturates 465
detomidine 343
dexmedetomidine 343
diazepam 337–8
dissociative anesthetics 472
etomidate 476
medetomidine 343
midazolam 337–8
NSAIDs 414–15
propofol 468
romifidine 343
xylazine 343
zolazepam 337–8
electrocardiography 192, 194
endotracheal intubation in 338, 1341
epinephrine dose 320–1
equine asthma 803–4
equine guttural pouch disease 799–801
equine guttural pouch mycosis 800–1
equine guttural pouch tympany 800
equine induction considerations 1049
equine laryngeal paralysis 801–2
equine neonate versus foal 1049–50
fluid therapy in 929, 1050, 1223
fractures 69
heart rate 1049
ketamine 1209
laser procedures 44
lidocaine 1209
local anesthetic and analgesic
techniques 1235–61
choice of agent 1235
epidural medications 1254–7
head, anesthesia of 1236–7
laparotomy/laparoscopy 1250–1
limbs, anesthesia of 1239–50
neuraxial anesthesia 1253–8
novel regional analgesic techniques 1258
ocular procedures, anesthesia of 1237–9
urogenital procedures 1251–3
malignant hyperthermia 68
methicillin‐resistant S. aureus (MRSA)
postsurgical infection 142
muscle relaxants 1209–10
opioids 1209
osteoarthritis in 1016
physical examination 1219
postanesthetic neuropathy 70
pregnant mare 962, 1050
premedication 383
recovery 1050
recumbency, effect of 1049
renal function, testing and monitoring
928–9
risks of anesthesia 18, 1048, 1219–21
hypotension 1219–20
impaired ventilation–perfusion
matching 1220–1
postanesthetic myopathy and
neuropathy 1221
standing equine MRI 52
variation in size 1048–9
ventilation, monitoring 227
HRQoL see Health‐Related Quality of Life
(HRQoL)
human error
Reason’s taxonomy 26f
and the system 25–7
human factors, analysis techniques 31f
Human Factors Analysis and Classification
System (HFACS) 30, 31f, 32, 33t
Human Factors (HF) 27
analysis techniques 30, 31f
Humane Slaughter (HS) Act (1958), US 154
humans
birds as food source for 1127
brain 180, 237
mechanical ventilation during
anesthesia 780–2
NSAID risks 412
hyaluronic acid (HA) 1016, 1017
hyaluronidase 536
hydrocodone 381
hydrogen peroxide solutions 145
hydromorphone 377, 1137
premedication 335, 428
hydroxyethyl starches 586–8
hyoscine 314
hyperadrenocorticism
anesthetic considerations 896–7
anesthetic management 897–8
clinical pathology 895
clinical presentation 895
diagnosis and treatment 895–6
hyperadrenocorticism (HAC) 895
hepatic system (cont’d)

-- 1426 of 1450 --

Index 	1411
hypercapnia 13
carbon dioxide transport 742–3
permissive or intentional 1095
respiratory depression 61
hyperkalemia 68, 225–6
hyperparathyroidism
anesthetic considerations and
management 915
clinical pathology 914
clinical presentation 914
diagnosis and treatment 914–15
hypertension
farm animals 1057
intracranial 835–7
postcapillary pulmonary hypertension 811
precapillary pulmonary hypertension 809–11
pulmonary 716–17
pulmonary blood flow 809
hyperthermia 68, 246, 1034
anesthesia‐related 251
causes 250
clinical significance 251
mild 251
perianesthetic management 251–2
severe 1034
wildlife capture 1078, 1086, 1087
hyperthyroidism
anesthetic considerations 911
anesthetic management of patients
with 911–12
clinical pathology 910
clinical presentation 910
diagnosis and treatment 910–11
hypertonic crystalloids 584–5
hypertonic saline 69
hypertonic saline solution (HSS) 1222, 1294
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM)
689–90
hypnosis 4
and central state monitor 183
hypoadrenocorticism
anesthetic considerations and
management 894–5
clinical pathology 894
clinical presentation 893–4
diagnosis and treatment 894
hypocapnia, carbon dioxide transport 742–3
hypokalemia 225–6
hypoproteinemia 10
hypotension
amiodarone effects 58
anesthesia considerations 692–3
anesthetic risk 1219–20
cardiovascular complications 60
perianesthetic 197, 198t
pharmacological support 692–3
hypothalamic vasopressin‐containing
neurons 157
hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis
(HPAA) 157, 1218
hypothermia 4, 68, 246
clinical significance 251
colic, in horses 1227–8
farm animals 1060
small animal anesthesia morbidity 13
wildlife capture 1078, 1087, 1088
hypothyroidism
anesthetic considerations 908–9
anesthetic management of patients with 909
clinical pathology 908
clinical presentation 908
diagnosis and treatment 908
hypotonic crystalloids 585
hypoventilation 13
hypovolemia 206
hypoxemia 62
differential diagnosis 225
and euthanasia 156
versus hypoxia 231–2
and MRI 52
oxygen transport 739–40
respiratory depression and apnea 61
small animal anesthesia morbidity 13
wildlife capture 1078, 1086, 1088
hypoxia 10
and euthanasia 156
versus hypoxemia 231–2
hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction 728–31
postanesthetic blindness 69
IASP see International Association for the Study
of Pain (IASP)
iatrogenic cardiovascular depression 1219
iatrogenic tracheal injury 64
IBP see invasive blood pressure (IBP)
IC see inspiratory capacity (IC)
ICP see intracranial pressure (ICP)
ICU Medical (formerly Smith Medical/Surgivet)
SAV 2500 ventilator 130–1
ICU Medical (formerly Surgivet) DHV1000 large
animal ventilator 136–7
idazoxan 1266
immune system
age‐related changes 1357
hepatic functions 851
immune‐mediated toxicity 512
opioid effects 371–2
immune‐mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA) 575
incident reporting systems 29
increased intracranial pressure (ICP) 205
index of consciousness (IoC) 183
induction of anesthesia 1268–70
airway obstruction 62–3
anesthetic mortality, risk of 17
birds 1144–9
cardiac arrest 1225
chamber 1163
endotracheal intubation 62, 1208, 1289, 1296
face masks 62
in horses 1049, 1206, 1207t, 1208, 1224–5
intravenous high‐dose opioid induction 1163
IV method 1162
pigs 1288–90
pre‐induction checklist 35f
ruminants 1268–70
in wildlife 1077
infection prevention and control
anesthetics and analgesics 148–9
antibacterial agents 148
antimicrobials 149
antiseptic solutions 146
attire 144
bandages and dressings 147–8
breathing circuits 146
chemical indicator tests 145
cleaning 144
colony‐forming units (CFUs) 146
dialkylcarbamoylchloride (DACC)‐coated
postoperative dressings 148
disinfection 144, 145
endotracheal tubes 145
hand hygiene 144
intravenous catheters 146
laryngoscopes 145
lubricants 148
manufacturer’s instructions for use
(MIFU). 145
monitoring equipment 145
mouth rinse plungers 145
patient care and drug administration 147–9
perianesthetic 143–6
perioperative checklists 143–4
postoperative infections 142, 146–7
reprocessing of anesthetic and surgical
equipment 144–5
risk factors, postoperative
environmental 147
iatrogenic 147
patient‐specific 146–7
silver‐based dressings 148
sterile field, maintenance 146
sterility assurance monitoring (SAM) 145
sterilization 144, 145
surgical site, preparation 146
ventilators 146
wound classification systems 143t
see also safety considerations
inferior vena cava (IVC) 275
inflammation
anti‐inflammatory drugs 1069
see also non‐steroidal anti‐inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs)
hepatic functions 851
inflammatory pain 985, 986–7t
informed consent 20–1
infraorbital nerve block 1235
infrared (IR) analysis 240
advantages of 242
basic components 242
blackbody radiator 242
collision broadening 243
disadvantages 243
dispersive/non‐dispersive analyzers 242
infrared spectroscopy
infrared radiation source 223–4
problems with 224
infrared thermography 1000
inhalational anesthesia 6, 489–525
actions and toxicity effects 504–12
cardiovascular system 509–11
central nervous system 505–8
hepatic system 512

-- 1427 of 1450 --

1412 	Index
renal system 511–12
respiratory system 508–9
skeletal muscle 512
administration techniques, properties
determining
boiling point 494
gas versus vapor 491–2
general principles 491
methods of description 492–4
vapor pressure 493–4
adverse drug reactions 7
agent purity and euthanasia 161–2
age‐related responses to 1359
alveolar ventilation 498–9
birds 1142–3
cardiac output 509–10
cardiovascular system
arterial blood pressure 510
cardiac rhythm 510
catecholamines 510
concurrent drugs 511
duration of anesthesia 511
factors influencing circulatory
effects 510–11
mode of ventilation 510–11
noxious stimulation 511
PaCO2 510–11
regional blood flow 510
cats 1034
central nervous system, effects on
anatomic sites of action 506–7
cerebral blood flow and cerebral perfusion
pressure 507–8
cerebral metabolism 507
electroencephalographic 507
molecular mechanism of action and
molecular sites 505–6
cesarean section 960–1
chemical characteristics 490–1
concurrent drugs 509
defining 4
delivery to the alveoli 497–9
dose 502–3
elimination 500–2
end‐tidal inhalant partial pressure 244
environmental impact 7
euthanasia 158
factors determining the PA of anesthetic 497–500
FGF rates 106
inspired concentration 497–8
laboratory animals 1065–7
magnetic resonance imaging 51
malignant hyperthermia 512
marine mammals 1092, 1098
mechanism of action within the CNS
anatomic 506–7
molecular 505–6
minimum alveolar concentration 502–3
and minimum alveolar concentration
concept 177
molecular mechanism of action and sites
within CNS
background 505–6
lipid and aqueous theories 506
protein 506
neural control of ventilation 721–3
neurologic disease 835
nitrous oxide
diffusion hypoxia 513–14
dose 512–13
interaction with respiratory gas
monitoring 514–15
pharmacodynamics 513
pharmacokinetics 513
transfer of N2
O to closed gas spaces 513
noxious stimulation 509, 511
ophthalmic patients 1335
pharmacodynamics 504–12
pharmacokinetics 294–5, 497–501
physical characteristics 491–7
properties determining methods of
administration 491–4
properties influencing drug kinetics 494–7
physicochemical characteristics 490–7
respiratory depression and apnea 61–2
respiratory system
arterial carbon dioxide tension 508–9
concurrent drugs 509
duration of 509
factors influencing respiratory effects 509
mode of ventilation 509
surgery/other noxious stimulation 509
trace concentrations 514–15
uptake and elimination of inhalation
anesthetics 497–501
waste inhalation anesthetics 514–15
injectable anesthetics 462–88
adverse drug reactions 7
alfaxalone see alfaxalone
barbiturates see barbiturates
birds 1141–2
buprenorphine 1067
cancer surgery 1371–2
cesarean section 960
chloral hydrate 5, 481, 1068
defining 4
dissociative anesthetics see dissociative
anesthetics
endotracheal intubation 476
etomidate see etomidate
hepatic blood flow 465, 467
ketamine 1067
ketamine‐propofol (ketofol) 472–4
laboratory animals 1067–8
magnesium sulfate 481
metomidate 481
naloxone 1067
neural control of ventilation 721–3
non‐human primates 1067
ophthalmic patients 1334–5
in pregnancy 960
propofol see propofol
ruminants 1271–2
urethane 1068
vasopressin 431
injection pressure monitors 1172
inotropes 961
inspiratory capacity (IC) 698
inspiratory reserve volume (IRV) 698
inspiratory‐to‐expiratory ratio (I:E),
ventilators 122, 131, 132, 134
Institutional Animal Care Committee 161
insulinoma
anesthetic considerations 906–7
anesthetic management 907–8
clinical pathology 906
clinical presentation 906
intercostal nerve block 1179, 1180f
interleukin‐1 (IL‐1) 1218
interleukin‐1 receptor antagonist (IRAP) 1017
intermittent boluses 299
intermittent positive‐pressure ventilation
(IPPV) 79, 97, 109, 123, 205, 1219
International Association for the Study of Pain
(IASP) 154, 1010
International Congress of Veterinary
Anesthesiology 6
International Organization for Standards
(ISO) 75
International Society of Feline Medicine 1033
International Veterinary Academy of Pain
Management (IVAPM) 7
interpleural regional analgesia 1181–2
interposed
abdominal compression (IAC)‐CPR 57
interventions, patient safety 33–7
assessment 37
checklists 33–4
cognitive aids 34–5
communication tools 35–6
engineering solutions 36
medication error, methods for reducing 36–7
simulation‐based training 36
see also safety considerations
interviews 29
intestinal neoplasia 877–9
intra‐articular block
coxofemoral joint technique 1192
stifle technique 1191–2
intracranial disease 225
intracranial hypertension 835–7
intracranial pressure (ICP) 57, 198
cerebral herniation 67
inhalational anesthesia 508
neurologic disease 829–30
intramuscular (IM) injection 1067
intraocular pressure (IOP) 315
on eyeball 1330
factors affecting 1331t
ocular physiology 1330–1, 1331t
intraosseous catheter 58
intrapulmonary masses 806
intrapulmonary shunt 720
intrathecal (spinal) anesthesia 1197
intrathoracic pressure (IttP) 57
intrathoracic procedures
anesthesia for 783–8
separation of lungs and one‐lung
ventilation 786–8
intratracheal delivery 58
intravenous (IV) access
inhalational anesthesia (cont’d)

-- 1428 of 1450 --

Index 	1413
anesthetic recovery 1107
avian anesthesia 1145
clinical situations 1043, 1044
and euthanasia 158, 162
history 5
magnetic resonance imaging 50, 52
ophthalmic surgery 1338
shelter animals 1043–4
in swine 465, 1292, 1294
intravenous catheter 146
intravenous regional anesthesia 1167–8
intrinsic complexity 26
intubation
aids and techniques 84
blind 1058, 1104
blind oral 1271
blowhole 1104
cetaceans 1103–4
endotracheal 16
horses 1224–5
manatees 1105–6
nasotracheal 84, 1271
orotracheal 1290–1
pinnipeds 1104
retrograde 86
ruminants 1270–1
see also endotracheal intubation
invasive blood pressure (IBP)
dynamic response testing and damping
201–2
measurement 199–202
inverted “l” or “7” block 1307
ion channels 285
ionizing radiation hazards 42–3
IPASS technique, postanesthetic hand‐offs
35–6
IPPV see intermittent positive‐pressure
ventilation (IPPV)
IRAP see interleukin‐1 receptor antagonist
(IRAP)
IRV see inspiratory reserve volume (IRV)
isobolographic studies 306
isoelectricity 180
isoflurane
agent‐specific vaporizers 103
amphibians 1119
bronchodilation induced by 803, 804
dogs anesthetized with 323
environmental impact 7
euthanasia 158, 160
face mask, delivered by 1268
laboratory animals 1065, 1067
malignant hyperthermia 68
ophthalmic patients 1335
ruminants 1272
volume percent (vol %) 240–1
isomers 309
isoproterenol (isoprenaline)
cardiovascular system effects 323–4
other effects 324
pharmacokinetics 324
protecting renal blood flow 324
ventilation–perfusion mismatching 324
isoshunt diagram 720
isotonic crystalloids 582–4
IVAPM see International Veterinary Academy
of Pain Management (IVAPM)
JD Medical LAV‐3000 ventilator 138
Journal of Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia 7
just culture 28
ketamine
α2
‐adrenergic receptor agonist combined
with 162
adverse drug reactions 307
and AEPs 183
age‐related responses to 1359
amphibians 1119
birds 1136
and Bispectral Index™ 180
bronchodilation induced by 470, 804
constant rate infusion (CRI) 300, 1014
dissociative anesthesia 4
dogs and cats 1161, 1162
drug dose 1065, 1066t
horses 1209
impact of opioid epidemic on veterinary
anesthesia 8
injectable 1067
laboratory animals 1066t, 1067
marine mammals 1092–3
metabolism 308
morphine–lidocaine–ketamine 182
myoclonus 68
neurologic disease 834–5
and nitrous oxide 184
pigs 1288
postanesthetic hyperthermia 68
rate‐controlled infusion (RCI) 300
risk factors 18
ruminants 1268–9
second‐tier pain management 1014
and stages of anesthesia 178
wildlife capture 1082
ketamine‐acepromazine 1065, 1066t
ketamine‐dexmedetomidine 1066t
ketamine‐propofol (ketofol) 472–4
ketamine‐xylazine 1066t
ketoprofen 1381
Keystone Intensive Care Unit (ICU) Project 33
kidney donor management 946
kidney injury
acute see acute kidney injury (AKI)/acute
renal failure
NSAIDs, adverse effects 410–11
see also renal clearance; renal disease; renal
function; renal system
kidney recipient management 946–8
kinematic gait 1001
Klebsiella pneumoniae 142
Korotkoff sounds 203
Kussmaul’s sign 205
laboratory animals
airway management 1070–1
anatomic and physiologic
considerations 1070
anesthetics and analgesics 1065–70
commonly used 1066t
local and regional 1069–70
anti‐inflammatory drugs 1069
body temperature 1072
body temperature maintenance 1072
breathing systems 1071–2
drug administration 1070
fluid therapy 1072
gabapentin 1070
handling and restraint 1070
inhalational anesthesia 1065–7
injectable anesthetics 1067–8
neuromuscular blocking agents 1066t
nociception 978
non‐human primates 1073–4
opioids 1068–9
pain management 1069
postoperative care 1072, 1073t
pregabalin 1070
rodents and lagomorphs 1070–2
selected primate species 1066t
small mammals 1066t
lactated Ringer’s solution (LRS) 1218
lagomorphs 1070–2
laparotomy, anesthesia for 871–3
in horses 1250–1
infiltration anesthesia 1251
paravertebral thoracolumbar anesthesia 1251
LAPS see low atmospheric pressure stunning
(LAPS)
large animals
anesthetic morbidity 14
anesthetic mortality 18–20
causes of 19
risk factors 20
risk of 18–19
timing of death 19–20
history of veterinary anesthesia 5
ICU Medical (formerly Surgivet)
DHV1000 large animal ventilator 136–7
Narkovet‐E Large Animal Anesthesia Control
Center 133, 134
laryngeal mask airways (LMAs) see supraglottic
airway devices (SGADs)
laryngoscopes 83–4, 1104
biomedical engineering 172
infection prevention and control 145
veterinary‐specific 83, 84
laryngospasm 62
laser procedures
ALARA (“as low as reasonably achievable”)
principle 43
anesthetic considerations 41–2
Argon lasers 40
backscattering 40
classification 40
continuous laser Doppler flowmetry 238
laser beam hazard and safety 40–1
laser fire hazard and safety 41, 42f
laser–tissue interactions 42
Nd:YAG lasers 40, 42
non‐beam hazards and safety 42
ocular damage, risk of 40–1

-- 1429 of 1450 --

1414 	Index
personnel occupational exposure 43
radiation, protection from 43
surgery, anesthetic considerations 41–2
LAST see local anesthetic systemic toxicity
(LAST)
lateral caudal subcutaneous vein (LCSV) 1098,
1100–1, 1100f
lateral pharyngotomy 87
lead system, electrocardiography 187–9
learning culture 28
left atrial (LA) enlargement 272
left ventricular (LV) pressure 205
levobupivaine, and local anesthesia 540
LiDCO™ system, cardiac output monitoring
214, 215
lidocaine
cardiopulmonary arrest 58
dermal patches and eutectic creams 540–1
dogs and cats 1162
horses 1209
and infection control 148
intrathecal 162
and local anesthesia 539, 540–1
neurologic disease 833–4
pain management 1015
toxicity 466
lidocaine/bupivacaine gel (Tri‐Solfen) 541
life support see cardiopulmonary resuscitation
(CPR)
ligands
affinity and activity of 284
agonist 285
classical receptor theory 283
classified as a neutral antagonist 284
endogenous 285
selectivity and specificity of 284
Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of
Radiation see laser procedures
limbs, equine: anesthesia of 1239–50
continuous delivery of local anesthetics for
lower limb analgesia 1258
intra‐articular and intrabursal 1245–50
perineural 1240–4
line infiltration block 1307
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) 1217
liposome‐encapsulated bupivacaine
(Nocita®) 541
lithium dilution 214–15
live animals, reducing use of in teaching 174
liver disease
blood flow 848, 849f, 850
diagnostic or minimally invasive procedures,
anesthetic considerations 857–8
gallbladder and extrahepatic biliary tract
pathology 857
hepatic lobe torsion 857
hepatic pathophysiology and anesthetic
management 855–7
hepatitis 855–6
interventional radiology 858
laparoscopic procedures 857–8
laparotomy 858
neoplasia 856–7
NSAIDs, effects of 411–12
pain management in hepatobiliary
diseases 858
patient health assessment 10
portosystemic shunt 856
ultrasound‐guided biopsy 857
see also hepatic blood flow (HBF); hepatic
clearance; hepatic functions; hepatic lobe
torsion; hepatic system
Liverpool Osteoarthritis in Dogs (LOAD)
scale 1005, 1006
llamas 1272
doxapram 423
endotracheal intubation 1059f
genetically coded changes 739
opioids 377
pregnancy‐associated changes 965
tiletamine–zolazepam 1015
tramadol 437
see also camelids
LOAD see Liverpool Osteoarthritis in Dogs
(LOAD) scale
local anesthesia 526–52
additives 1169
adverse effects
allergic reactions 545
local toxicity 544
methemoglobinemia 544–5
systemic toxicity 541–4
toxicosis (oral ingestion) 545
aminoamides 539–40
aminoesters 538–9
birds 1141
cancer pain 1372–3
cesarean section 961, 965
clinical pharmacology 531–8
mixtures of local anesthetics 537–8
pharmacokinetics 531–7
tachyphylaxis 538
defining 4
equine 1235–61
history 5
and infection control 148–9
laboratory animals 1069–70
mixtures of local anesthetics 537–8
ophthalmic patients 1337–8
pharmacokinetics
absorption 531–2
additives 535–7
distribution 532–3
excretion 534
factors affecting 534–5
metabolism 533–4
pharmacology 526–31, 1166
blockade of neural tissue,
mechanism 528–30
chemical structure 530
clinical 531–8
molecular mechanism of action
526–8
physicochemical properties 530–1
specific drugs and clinical uses 538–41
ruminant and pig local anesthetic and
analgesic techniques 1301–3
special formulations 540–1
toxicity 66
local anesthetic systemic toxicity (LAST) 1167,
1171, 1181, 1198
locoregional anesthesia
blocks
failure 1181, 1190, 1236, 1309
head 1174–8
nerve 1168–9
of pelvic limb 1188–92
of thoracic limb 1185–8
thoracic paravertebral 1179
of thorax and abdomen 1178–85
cancer pain 1372–3
catheters 1171–2
classification 1167–8
complexity 1166–7
complications 1197–8
in dogs and cats 1166–204
equipment 1170–4
in horses 1227
injection pressure monitors 1172
intravenous regional 1167–8
local anesthetic systemic toxicity 1167,
1181, 1198
local infiltration 1167
needles 1170–1
neuraxial techniques 1168, 1192–7
neuronal damage 1198
peripheral nerve blocks 1168
peripheral nerve stimulators 1172–3
physiology of nerve blockade 1168–9
preparation 1169–70
topical 1167
ultrasound 1173–4
see also local anesthesia; regional anesthesia
London Protocol model, incident evolution 30
LOP see loss of position (LOP)
LORR see loss of the righting reflex (LORR)
loss of position (LOP) 155, 156, 158, 159
loss of the righting reflex (LORR) 155, 156
low atmospheric pressure stunning (LAPS)
156, 160–1
lower airway disease, and anesthesia 802–3
lower limit of quantification (LLOQ) 295
low‐pressure baroreceptor reflex 655
low‐threshold mechanoreceptors (LTMRs) 1024
LTMRs see low‐threshold mechanoreceptors
(LTMRs)
lubricants 148
lumbar plexus block 1188–9
lung consolidation 268–9
lung pulse 259–60
lung sliding (glide sign) 259
lung volumes 698, 699f, 699t
birds 1130–1
and pulmonary ventilation 725–7
lungs
endotracheal tubes for isolation of one 78–82
mechanics 727–8
one‐lung ventilation 786–8
reptiles 1112
separation of 786–8
ventilator‐induced injury 778, 780
laser procedures (cont’d)

-- 1430 of 1450 --

Index 	1415
lusitropy 198
lymphatic endothelial cells (LECs) 642
lymphatic system 582, 616, 642, 880
amphibians 1117
cardiovascular physiology 641–2
mechanotransduction 1025
reptiles 618
lyophilized platelets (LYO) 598
M&MCs see morbidity and mortality
conferences (M&MCs)
machines see equipment
MacIntosh blade, laryngoscopes 83, 84f
Magellan robotic‐assisted ultrasound‐guided
system 174
magnesium sulfate 481
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 46–52
anesthetic management considerations 50
blood oxygen level‐dependent (BOLD) MRI 157
“breath‐hold/ apnea” technique 50
burns 49
classification 49
cryogens 49–50
ear plugs 49
emergency procedures 52
gadolinium‐based contrast agents 52
gradient magnetic fields 49, 51
hazards for staff and patients 46–8
helium vapor 50
hypothermia risk 52
Magnetic Resonance Safety Officer 49
noise reduction rating 49
patient monitoring 51–2
personnel considerations 52
positioning devices 50
radiofrequency 46, 49, 51
receiver coils 46f, 51
routine scan 50
safety screening guidelines 48
sedation versus general anesthesia 50–1
small animals 50
standing equine MRI 52
strong static magnetic field 46–9, 48f, 49
superconducting high‐field‐strength
magnets 49
T2‐weighted 824
transdermal patches 49
ventilators 51
see also functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI)
mainstream monitors, gas sampling 241
maintenance of anesthesia
in cats 1163
in dogs 1163
hepatic blood flow 1208
in horses
adjunct agents 1225–7
hepatic blood flow 1208
locoregional anesthesia 1227
monitoring 1227–8
ventilation strategies 1228
in pigs 1291–3
in ruminants 1271–3
malignant hyperthermia (MH)
in farm animals 1060–1
inhalational anesthesia 512
in pigs 1060–1, 1295
Mallard Medical Model 2400V ventilator 127–8
Mallard Medical Rachel Model 2800 series
ventilator 134–6
manatees
intubation 1104–5
vascular access 1102
mandibular techniques, head blocks 1236
anatomy 1175–6
indications for 1176
technique 1176–7
mandrake (Mandragora officinalis) 314
mannitol
cerebral herniation 67
post resuscitation care 60
prolonged anesthetic recovery 69
manual resuscitators 139
manufacturer’s instructions for use (MIFU). 145
MAP see mean arterial pressure (MAP)
marine mammals 1091–109
airway management 1102–5
anesthetic recovery 1106–7
Antillean manatee 1093
Bötzinger complex (BötC) 1092
breathing 1092–3
caudal veins 1102
cephalic veins 1102
cetaceans 1092, 1098, 1099–101
classification 1091
dive reflex 1106
dolphins see dolphins
fissipeds 1091
flukes 1099, 1102
harbor seal 1091
inhalational anesthesia 1092, 1098
lateral caudal subcutaneous vein
(LCSV) 1098, 1100–1
median artery 1101
monitoring and supportive care 1105–6
odobenid anesthesia 1099
otariid anesthesia 1098–9
periarterial vascular rete (PAVR) 1099–101
permissive/intentional hypercapnia 1095
phocid anesthesia 1098
pinnipeds 1091, 1092, 1093, 1098–9,
1101–2
preanesthetic assessment and
planning 1095–7
protocols 1097–9
sea lions 1091
sedation and anesthesia 1097–8
sirenians 1091–2, 1099
sleep 1093
symmetrical slow‐wave sleep (BSWS) 1093
vascular access
cetacean 1099–101
manatee 1102
pinnipeds 1101–2
ventilation 1093–5
see also marine mammals
marmosets 1073
maropitant 425–7, 1016
mask delivery 87–9
mass spectrometry 224, 241, 243
massive transfusion (MT) 600
mast cell tumors (MCT) 877, 878, 879, 1032
matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) 1218
Matrx/Midmark 3000/3002 PRO ventilator 126–7
mavacoxib 1381
maxillary techniques, head blocks 1236–7
anatomy 1174–5
indications for 1175
technique 1175
see also head blocks
maximum working pressure limit
(MOPL) 126–7
MEA see mean electrical axis (MEA)
mean absolute error (MAE) 171–2
mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) 172
mean arterial pressure (MAP) 13, 57, 59, 60,
197–8, 199, 203, 204, 1148
mean electrical axis (MEA) 191–2
mean squared error (MSE) 172
mechanical ventilation during
anesthesia 755–82
airway resistance compliance 772–3, 775f
assisted and assisted‐controlled 768–70
atelectasis, strategies for reducing 773–4,
775f, 776–7
continuous mandatory ventilation 764–8
dual‐controlled 767–8
effects on cardiovascular function 777–8, 777f
evolution of mechanical ventilators 756–64
in humans and veterinary species 780–2
modes of 764–70
monitoring pulmonary mechanics during
770–3
pressure support 768–70
pressure‐controlled 767
pressure‐volume (P–V) loops 770–2, 773f
respiratory system compliance 772–3, 775f
spontaneous intermittent mandatory 770
ventilator‐induced lung injury 778, 780
volume‐controlled 765–7
see also ventilation
mechanotransduction 1025
medetomidine 325, 338–44, 1083, 1097, 1266
clinical considerations 343–4
drug dose 1065, 1066t
indications for 338–9
mechanism of action 338–9
medetomidine–vatinoxan combination
(Zenalpha®) 347, 1015
pharmacodynamics 340–3
pharmacokinetics 339–40
premedication 473
medetomidine‐midazolam 1066t
medetomidine‐midazolam‐fentanyl 1066t
median prediction error (MDPE) 303
medical devices, Spaulding’s classification
of 144–5
medical gases
anesthetic monitoring see anesthetic gas
monitoring
arterial blood gas analysis 173, 232–3
color coding 92–3

-- 1431 of 1450 --

1416 	Index
common outlet 104
control of ventilator driving gas 122
diameter index safety system (DISS) 92, 93
gas flow within machine 94–6
gas versus vapor 491–2
pin index safety system (PISS) 92, 93, 94f
pressure gauges 94
pressure‐reducing valve (regulator) 94
safety 92–3
supply 91–4
waste anesthetic gases 7
medication error, methods for reducing 36–7
medicinal stem cells (MSCs) 1384
megaesophagus 873–4
melatonin 1034
meloxicam 541, 1073t, 1381–2
memantine 431–2
mental nerve block 1236
meperidine (pethidine) 380, 1031
mepivacaine 539
“Mercedes and the whale view,” right parasternal
short‐axis views 272
metabolic acidosis 68, 250, 320, 414, 429, 503,
564, 567, 583, 702, 721, 1223, 1295
severe 58, 559, 949, 1274
metabolism
amphibians 1117
cerebral 507
mammalian cardiovascular system 620
pain management 1026
reptiles 1111
smooth muscle 638
metabolites, transport of (Phase III
biotransformation) 308–9
metamizole 408
metaraminol 326
methadone 377–8
dosage
cats 377
dogs 377
horses 377–8
laboratory animals 1069
ruminants 377–8
methane 243
methemoglobin (MetHb) 233
methemoglobinemia 544–5
methicillin‐resistant S. aureus (MRSA)
postsurgical infection 142, 149
methicillin‐resistant S. pseudintermedius
(MRSP) 147
methocarbamol 427
methohexital, pharmacokinetics 464
methoxamine, and local anesthesia 536
methoxyflurane 489, 511
methylnaltrexone 384
metoclopramide 427–8
metomidate 481
metoprolol 329
MG see myasthenia gravis (MG)
MGCS see modified Glasgow coma scale (MGCS)
MH see malignant hyperthermia (MH)
mice
brain 160
euthanasia 159, 161
osteoarthritis (OA) 985
Michaelis‐Menton kinetics 290
midazolam 1033
birds 1136
and blood–brain–barrier 336–7
clinical considerations 337–8
dogs and cats 1161
drug dose 1065, 1066t
indications for 336
marine mammals 1097, 1098
mechanism of action 336
pharmacodynamics 337
pharmacokinetics 336–7
middle latency auditory evoked potential
(MLAEP) 183
Miller blade, laryngoscopes 83, 84f
minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) 156,
176–7
anesthetic gas monitoring 240, 244
birds 1137, 1142–3
cats 1033, 1034, 1035
drug interactions 306
and epinephrine 321
inhalational anesthetics 502–3
laboratory animals 1067, 1070
opioid effects 372–3
ruminants 1272, 1273
mink 159
minute ventilation (V 1
) 698
mitochondrial redox state 238
mitral valve insufficiency/regurgitation 683–6
mixed venous oxygen partial pressure 233
MLAAEP see middle latency auditory evoked
potential (MLAEP)
model‐independent analysis 297
modified Glasgow coma scale (MGCS) 182
molecular mechanism of action
inhalational anesthesia and CNS
background 505–6
lipid and aqueous theories 506
protein 506
local anesthesia 526–8
monitoring of anesthesia/surgery
amphibians 1119
anesthetic depth 176–86
birds 1145–8
cardiopulmonary arrest 59–60
electrophysiologic 179–80
equipment 145
evolution of monitoring equipment and
guidelines 173
horses 1210, 1227–8
infection prevention and control 145
magnetic resonance imaging 51–2
marine mammals 1105–6
mechanical ventilation, pulmonary
mechanics 770–3
medical gases see anesthetic gas monitoring
neonatal/pediatric patients 1350
non‐human primates 1073
pigs 1293–4
respiratory gas, interaction with nitrous
oxide 514–15
ruminants 1275–7
shelter animals 1043–4
ventilators 123
wildlife capture 1085–7
monoclonal antibodies 1013
Monte Carlo approaches 298
MOPL see maximum working pressure limit
(MOPL)
morbidity, anesthetic
large animals 14
morbidity and mortality conferences
(M&MCs) 29–30
small animals 13–14
morbidity and mortality conferences
(M&MCs) 29–30
morphine 373–7
dosage
birds 1138
cats 376
dogs 374–6
horses 376
pigs 1288
effects on opioid‐induced tolerance 363
food and fiber animals 376–7
intraoperative analgesia 1273
premedication 369, 426, 480
mortality
anesthetic see mortality, anesthetic
capture‐associated 1088
see also morbidity and mortality conferences
(M&MCs)
mortality, anesthetic
birds 1127
causes 15–16
defining anesthetic deaths 15
large animals 14, 18–20
perioperative deaths 32t
risk factors 16–18
risk of 14–15
small animals 14–18
timing of death 16
mouth rinse plungers 145
MRI see magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
MS‐222 see tricaine methanesulfonate
(MS‐222)
MT see massive transfusion (MT)
multidrug resistance (MDR)‐1 gene 306, 1031
multidrug resistance‐associated protein (MRP) 308
multigas analyzers, mainstream 241
muscarinic receptors 314, 315t
muscle
drug effects
dissociative anesthetics 471
etomidate 476
propofol 467
skeletal 512
muscle relaxants 1209–10
“mushroom view,” right parasternal short‐axis
views 272
myasthenia gravis (MG) 839–40
myelinated somatic sensory fibers 1024
myelography 44, 45
myelomalacia 69–70
myocardial oxygenation 237
medical gases (cont’d)

-- 1432 of 1450 --

Index 	1417
myoclonus 54
benzodiazepines 68, 476, 834
myopathy 1055
myotoxicity 544
nalbuphine 383–4, 1137
naloxone 69, 285, 384
injectable 1067
naltrexone 384
NARCO see Neurological, Airway, Respiratory,
Cardiovascular and Other (NARCO) score,
narcosis 4
Narcotrend® index 183
Narkovet E‐2 Large Animal Anesthesia
System 134
Narkovet‐E Electronic Large Animal Control
Center 134
Narkovet‐E Large Animal Anesthesia Control
Center 133, 134
nasal catheter 227, 1086
nasal insufflation 89–90
nasal passages and block 1306–7
nasogastric tube 1228
nasotracheal intubation 84
National Curriculum for Canadian Anesthesia
Residency 255
National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence (NICE) 11
nausea and vomiting 864–5
NAVAS see North American Veterinary
Anesthesia Society (NAVAS)
Nd:YAG lasers 40, 42
near‐infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) 237
needles
accidental penetration 7
locoregional anesthesia 1170–1
peripheral nerve stimulators 1173
spinal 1171
Tuohy needle 1101
visualization of 1171
negative‐pressure scavenge systems 112–13
neonatal/pediatric patients 1348–53
anesthesia
circumstances warranting 1348–9
considerations 955–68
dissociative anesthetics 471
management 1350–1
monitoring of anesthesia 1350
patient preparation 1350
risk assessment 1348
barbiturates 465
bradycardia 965
cardiovascular system 1349
care of the newborn 965–966
central nervous system 1349–50
characteristics 1349–50
hematologic system 1350
hepatic system 1349
pediatric and neonatal periods, defining 1348
recovery 1350–1
renal system 1349
respiratory system 1349
supportive care 1350
thermoregulation 1350
neoplasia, hepatic 856–7
nephrotoxicity 502, 511, 512, 618, 1045
melamine‐associated 931
nerve growth factor (NGF) 1013
nervous system
fish 1121
opioids 369–70
somatic 827
see also autonomic nervous system (ANS);
central nervous system (CNS);
neurologic disease; parasympathetic
nervous system (PNS); sympathetic
nervous system (SNS)
neural control of ventilation 700–2
influence of anesthetic drugs on 721–5
inhalant and injectable 721–3
opioids 724–5
sedatives and hypnotics 723–4
neuraxial anesthesia/analgesia 148–9, 1168,
1192–7, 1253–8
anatomy 1192, 1193f, 1194
catheter placement 1197
contraindications 1192, 1193t
epidural technique 1194, 1195f
caudal epidural 1254
complications 1257–8
continuous caudal epidural
1254, 1255f
medications 1254–7
indications and contraindications 1253–4
intrathecal (spinal) anesthesia 1197
novel regional techniques
caudal intercostal block, abdominal
surgery 1258
continuous delivery of local anesthetics for
lower limb analgesia 1258
transversus abdominis plane (TAP)
block 1015, 1183–4, 1227, 1258
neuroengineering 170
neurohormonal mechanisms, cardiovascular
physiology 656–8
neuroleptanalgesia, cesarean section 960
neuroleptic drugs 1084
neurologic disease 10, 822–46
a2
-adrenergic receptor agonists 833
alfaxalone 834
anatomy of the nervous system 822–9
benzodiazepines 833
central nervous system 822–5
anatomy 822–5
brain physiology 829–30
specific conditions, pathophysiology and
anesthetic management 835–9
spinal cord physiology 832
cervical spondylomyelopathy, in horses 839
effects of vasoactive drugs, sedatives and
anesthetics 832–5
etomidate 834
inhalational anesthesia 835
intracranial hypertension 835–7
ketamine 834–5
lidocaine 833–4
neuromuscular blocking agents 835
opioids 832–3
peripheral nervous system 825–9, 839–40
phenothaizines 334–5, 833
propofol 834
seizures 837–8
specific conditions, pathophysiology and
anesthetic management 835–40
spinal cord injury and spine surgery 838–9
see also central nervous system (CNS);
nervous system
Neurological, Airway, Respiratory,
Cardiovascular and Other (NARCO)
score, 11
neuromuscular blockade
differential 1169
factors affecting duration and recovery
from 456
local anesthesia 528–30
monitoring neuromuscular
transmission 453–6
muscle selection 455–6
pharmacology and nomenclature 450–2
residual, risk minimization 458
reversal of 456–8
acetylcholinesterase inhibitors 456–7
reversal of succinylcholine 457–8
selective relaxant binding agents 457
see also blocks; neuromuscular blocking
agents (NMBAs)
neuromuscular blocking agents (NMBAs)
age‐related responses to 1360
birds 1143
cesarean section 961
depolarizing 452–6
history 452–3
laboratory animals 1066t
neurologic disease 835
novel nondepolarizing agents 453–6
ophthalmic patients 1335–6
in veterinary anesthesia 448
neuromuscular junction (NMJ)
anatomy and physiology 449
depolarization 827
neuromyopathy 1055
neuropathic pain 985, 988–9t
neuroscience, non‐human primates in 1074
neurosteroids 1084
neurotoxicity 431, 544, 1169, 1171
New World monkeys 1073
NHPs see non‐human primates (NHPs)
NIBP see non‐invasive method of measuring BP
(NIBP)
NICE see National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence (NICE)
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) 238
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) 314
neuronal 506
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors 314
nitrogen 92, 126, 156, 1221
alveolar 726
blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 802, 851, 905,
926, 945, 957, 1350
and carbon dioxide elimination 705
excretion 1121
expired concentration 727

-- 1433 of 1450 --

1418 	Index
high‐expansion foams containing 159, 161
impaired ventilation–perfusion
matching 1220
and infrared radiation 223, 243
inhaled anesthetics 506, 511, 513
nitrogen‐containing bisphosphonates
(NBPs) 1369
and norepinephrine 321
open‐circuit washout 726
and oxygen therapy 752
partial pressure of 705
physiology of body fluids 581
piezoelectric analysis 244
pulmonary ventilation 702, 703, 705,
706, 726
and remifentanil 380
serum urea 511
single‐breath washout 705, 706, 727, 781
wasting 910
nitrous oxide
avoiding 42
birds 1143
diffusion hypoxia 513–14
dose 512–13
environmental impact 7
and history of anesthesia 5
inappropriate for euthanasia 156
interaction with respiratory gas
monitoring 514–15
pharmacodynamics 513
pharmacokinetics 513
pigs 1291
and SNS 513
toxicity 512
transfer of N 2
O to closed gas spaces 513
NLME see nonlinear mixed effects (NLME)
modeling
NMBA see neuromuscular blocking agents
(NMBAs)
NMDA see N‐methyl‐D‐aspartate (NMDA)
N‐methyl‐D‐aspartate (NMDA) 155–6
cancer pain 1367
colic, in horses 1226
marine mammals 1092
osteoarthritis 1382
receptors 162, 286–7, 1014
nociception 4
biomarkers 978
experimental animal 978
fish 1121
limitations of current animal models 978
models 977–9
nociceptive and pain assays 978–9
nocifensive responses 1116
pathways 154–5
phasic pain tests 978–9
receipt, encoding, and transmission of
nociceptive information 972
receptors 1116
reptiles 1114–16
site of stimulus application 979
stimulus modalities 979, 980–3t
structures, nociceptive 1116
translational pain models 978
see also pain
nociceptive withdrawal reflexes (NWRs) 979
“nodule” sign, partial lung consolidation 268–9
noise reduction rating (NRR), MRI 49
non‐human primates (NHPs) 1073–4
anesthetic considerations 1073
endotracheal intubation 1073
equipment 1073
equipment and monitoring 1073
injectable anesthetics 1067
methadone 1069
monitoring of anesthesia 1073
in neuroscience 1074
neuroscience, non‐human primates in 1074
pain assessment and management 1074
postoperative care 1073t
preanesthetic considerations 1073
recovery 1073–4
see also non‐human primates (NHPs)
non‐invasive method of measuring BP
(NIBP) 202, 203, 204
nonlinear mixed effects (NLME) modeling 295
non‐steroidal anti‐inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
acetaminophen (paracetamol) 407–8
acute pain 1011
adverse effects 408–12
animal versus human risks 412
blood coagulation 412
cartilage, injury to 412
gastrointestinal injury 408–10
kidney injury 410–11
platelet inhibition abnormalities 412
thrombotic 412
adverse events 1380
and allometric scaling 1136
birds 1139–41
cancer pain 1367
cats 1035
chronic pain 1013
colic, in horses 1218
contraindications 1380
data analysis 299
dipyrone (metamizole) 408
drug selection
for cats 414
classification and pharmacological
parameters 399–402t
COX‐2 inhibition as selection
criterion 412–13
for dogs 413–14
for food animals 415
for horses 414–15
fluid therapy 415
grapiprant 406–7
laboratory animals 1069
mechanism of action 398, 403–5
COX‐1 versus COX‐2 inhibitors 404–5
mechanisms possible 404
metabolism of arachidonic acid 398, 403–4
non‐traditional, unique features 406–8
ophthalmic patients 1338
osteoarthritis 1379–82
overdose 66
pharmacokinetic properties 405–6
pharmacokinetic‐pharmacodynamic
properties 406
ruminants 1268
spay‐neuter programs 1044, 1045
specific 1381
stereoisomerism 406
toxicity 939, 1139, 1380
in vivo assessment of PK‐PD models 406
washout period between 1380–1
norbuprenorphine 1031
norepinephrine 287, 321
cardiovascular system effects 321
pharmacokinetics 321
pharmacology of descending controls 976
Normal Accident Theory 26
normothermia 246
North American Veterinary Anesthesia Society
(NAVAS) 7
nortriptyline 432–3
pain management 1015
Nottingham Veterinary Safety Culture
Survey 28
noxious stimulation, inhalational
anesthesia 509, 511
NRR see noise reduction rating (NRR), MRI
NSAIDs see non‐steroidal anti‐inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs)
numerical rating scales 1002
obesity 1023, 1026, 1030
occular damage, risk from laser treatment 40–1
occupational exposure
laser procedures 43
risk assessment 7
waste inhalation anesthetics 514–15
Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA), United States 41, 49
ocular adnexa 1327–8
ocular pain
analgesics 1337–8
management 1336–8
origin 1336–7
oculocardiac reflex 655, 1332–3
odobenid anesthesia 1099
Office for Laboratory Animal Welfare
(OLAW) 161
Ohio V5A ventilator 128–9
Ohmeda 7000 and 7800 series electronic
anesthesia ventilators 129–30
Ohmeda Rascal II 243
OLAW see Office for Laboratory Animal Welfare
(OLAW)
omega‐3‐ fatty acids 1013, 1023, 1379
omeprazole 423–4
ondansetron 428
ophthalmic patients 1327–47
anatomy 1177
anesthesia
anesthetic adjuvants 1335–6
auriculopalpebral nerve block 1237
contralateral eye, protecting 1340
electroretinogram, impact on 1338
endotracheal intubation 1339–40
nitrogen (cont’d)

-- 1434 of 1450 --

Index 	1419
general 1338–40
inhalational 1335
injectable 1334–5
monitoring of anesthesia 1340
neuromuscular blockade 1340
ocular complications related to 1340
physical restraint, premedication, and
anesthetic induction 1339
preoperative assessment 1338
recovery, extubation and emergence 1340
sensory nerve blocks 1237–9
set up and patient positioning 1338–9
topical 1237
aqueous humor (AH) 1328–30
production and drainage 1331
episcleral venous pressure (EVP) 1331
equine 1237–9, 1340–2
head blocks 1177–8
intraocular contents, volume 1331
local anesthesia 1337–8
non‐steroidal anti‐inflammatory drugs 1338
ocular anatomy 1327–9
globe 1328–9
ocular adnexa 1327–8
ocular circulation 1329
ocular innervation 1329
orbit 1327
ocular barriers 1332
ocular pain
analgesics 1337–8
management 1336–8
origin 1336–7
ocular physiology 1329–33
aqueous humor 1328, 1329–30, 1331
cranial nerves 1329t
effects of anesthetic drugs and adjuvants
on 1333–6
intraocular pressure 1330, 1331t
lens 1328
ocular barriers 1322
oculocardiac reflex 1332–3
pupil size 1331
tear production and drainage 1331–2
uvea 1329
vitreous humor 1328, 1330
ocular rigidity 1331
oculocardiac reflex 655, 1332–3
ophthalmic medications, systemic effects 1333
opioid‐induced effects 371
sedatives 1334
techniques 1178
opioid agonist–antagonists, mixed
butorphanol 382–3
nalbuphine 383–4
opioid agonists
full
alfentanil 380–1
butorphanol, interactions with 383
carfentanil 380–1
etorphine 380–1
fentanyl see fentanyl
hydrocodone 381
hydromorphone 377
meperidine 380
methadone 377–8
morphine 373–7
oxycodone 381
oxymorphone 378
remifentalanil 380
sufentanil 380
thiafentanil 380–1
partial 381–2
opioid antagonists 384
wildlife capture 1082
opioid receptors
localization 359–60
opioid receptor–opioid drug interactions 360
regulation 359
opioids 355–97
age‐related changes 1359
amphibians 1120
analgesia 1337
antagonists 384
cancer pain 1367, 1372
cats, 382, 1034–5 1160t, 1163
cesarean section 959–60
clinical effects
analgesia 364–6
antitussive 371
cancer metastasis 371–2
cardiovascular 367
dysphoria 366–7
euphoria 366–7
gastrointestinal 367–8
immune system 371–2
minimum alveolar concentration 372–3
nervous system 369–70
ophthalmic 371
renal 370–1
respiratory 367
sedation 366–7
thermoregulatory 371
crisis in North America 356–8
dependence 363
diversion 356–8
dogs 381–2, 1160t, 1163
drug dose 1068
epidural 1279
full agonists see opioid agonists
history of use in veterinary practice 355–6
horses 1209
impact on veterinary anesthesia 8
and infection control 148
intravenous high‐dose induction 1163
laboratory animals 1068–9
local anesthetic additives 1169
misuse and abuse in veterinary
practice 356–8
mixed opioid agonist–antagonists 382–4
multitargeting molecules 384–5
neural control of ventilation 724–5
neurologic disease 832–3
“opioid‐induced hyperalgesia” (OIH) 364
osteoarthritis 1382
overdose deaths 8
partial agonists see opioid agonists
pharmacokinetics
absorption 360, 362
distribution 362
excretion 363
metabolism 362–3
pharmacology 358–63
clinical 364–73
of descending controls 976–7
premedication 425
prolonged anesthetic recovery 69
receptors 358–60
ruminants 1267
scheduling 356
selected pharmacokinetic parameters of some
clinically relevant opioids 360–1t
short‐acting 1068
tolerance 363
traditional administration routes 373
tramadol see tramadol
veterinary shopping 356–8
wildlife capture 1081–2
withdrawal 363–4
optic nerve sheath diameter (ONSD) 256
optical density (OD) 41f
oral administration 4
orbicularis oculi muscles, muscle one 1331
orbital fissure 1327
organic anion transporting polypeptide 2
(OATP2) 308
organizational safety culture 27–8
oscillometric blood pressure
measurement 203–4
OSHA see Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA), United States
osteoarthritis (OA) 1000, 1010, 1377–89
alleviation of pain 1011
autologous protein solution 1384
cell‐based therapies 1384
chronic pain, treatment strategies 1378–84
complementary treatments 1383
diagnosis 1378
in dogs and cats 1013
evidence for agents modifying in companion
animals 1016
exercise modification 1379
in horses 1016
non‐response to standard treatment
1384–5
non‐steroidal anti‐inflammatory
drugs 1379–82
nutritional support 1379
omega‐3‐ fatty acids 1379
pharmacology 1379–84
physical therapy 1379
terminology 1377
weight reduction/management 1379
Overall Quality of Life Score 1006
oxybuprocaine 538
oxycodone 381
oxygen
administration techniques
cages 90–1
mask delivery 87–9
nasal insufflation 89–90
toxicity 91
tracheal insufflation 90

-- 1435 of 1450 --

1420 	Index
arterial content 737–40
concentrators 1078
consumption 232, 653–4
content 232
delivery 232, 653–4
extraction ratio 232
inspired and expired concentrations 236–7
measuring hemoglobin saturation with
233–6
measuring partial pressure 232–3
medical gas supply 92
oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve and Bohr
effect 738–9
polarographic analysis 236
supplementation 89, 752–5, 1043
high‐flow systems 754–5
low‐flow systems 752–3, 754f
modern ventilators 761–4
supply failure 67
toxicity 91, 753, 755, 1073
transport 737–40
oxygen flush valve 104
oxygen therapy
physiologic effects 751–2
supplementation strategies 752–5
toxicity 755
see also oxygen
oxygenation
alveolar gas equation 231–2
arterial blood gas analysis 232–3
continuous laser Doppler flowmetry 238
CO‐oximetry 234
hypoxia versus hypoxemia 231–2
inspired and expired oxygen
concentrations 236–7
measuring hemoglobin saturation with
oxygen 233–6
mitochondrial redox state 238
monitoring 231–9
near‐infrared and Raman spectroscopy 237
oxygen consumption 232
oxygen content 232
oxygen delivery 232
oxygen extraction ratio 232
pulse oximetry 234–6
transcutaneous measurement of blood
gases 233
visual assessment 232
see also oxygen; oxygen flush valve
oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve 738–9
oxymorphone 378, 472
pacemakers
and anesthesia 674–9
anesthetic management 676–8
artificial 674–5
complications 678
considerations for anesthesia 677–8
modalities 675–6
patient evaluation for 676–7
patients undergoing non‐cardiac
procedures 678
permanent implantation 677
temporary implantation 677
packed cell volume (PCV) 320, 1219
packed red blood cells 596
PaCO2
, and mode of ventilation 510–11
pain
abdominal muscle contraction 990
action potential, transmission 973
acute see acute pain
alleviation of 1011
anticipation of 1010–11
assays 978–9
assessment of 1011, 1074
assessment scales see pain assessment scales
behavior 979, 985–990
acute pain 995, 997f, 998
assessment of spontaneous behaviors 991
chronic pain 1000
biology of sensory transduction 972, 973t
cancer‐related see cancer pain
chronic see chronic pain
clinical management and pharmacological
treatment of 1010–22
and consciousness 154–5
decision‐making tools 1011, 1013–16
defining 4, 154, 971, 1114
dorsal horn, anatomy of 973–5
endocannabinoids 977
ethical considerations 983–4
evaluation in rodents, recent trends 990–1
fast 1116
generator potential, initiation of 973
inflammatory 985, 986–7t
injection site 476
maximum stimulus intensity 984
naturally occurring disease models 990
neuronal activity 990
neuropathic 985, 988–9t
neurophysiologic endpoints 979
nociception
biomarkers 978
experimental animal 978
limitations of current animal models 978
measurement of nociceptive withdrawal
thresholds in companion animals
984–5
models 977–9
nociceptive and pain assays 978–9
pathways 154–5
phasic pain tests 978–9
receipt, encoding, and transmission of
nociceptive information 972
site of stimulus application 979
stimulus modalities 979, 980–3t
translational pain models 978
novel concept drugs 1017
ocular 1336–8
operant response paradigms, rodents 990
osteoarthritis (OA) see osteoarthritis (OA)
outcome measures 979
perception of see pain perception
pharmacology of descending controls 976–7
phasic tests 978
physiologic responses 990
physiology and pathophysiology 971–95
place preference paradigm, rodents 990–1
receipt, encoding, and transmission of
nociceptive information 972
sensitization 972
slow 1116
spino‐bulbo‐spinal loop 977
tiers of decision‐making tree 1011, 1013–16
first‐tier, acute pain 1011
first‐tier, chronic pain 1013–15
second tier 1014–15
third tier 1016
tonic control 977
visceral 985, 989t
see also analgesia, veterinary; International
Association for the Study of Pain (IASP);
neuropathic pain; pain faces; pain
management; visceral pain
pain assessment scales
factors confounding use of 1005
grimace scales 1003, 1004t, 1005f
multidimensional 1003, 1004t
numerical rating scales 1002
simple descriptive scales 1002
unidimensional 1002
visual analog scales 1002
pain faces 991
grimace scales 1003, 1004t, 1005f, 1034
Pain Interference Score 1006
pain management
acupuncture 4, 1024
central neuromodulation 1025
electromagnetic therapies 1025
extracorporeal shockwave therapies 1025
in hepatobiliary diseases 858
massage, touch, stretching and exercise 1024
mechanotransduction 1025
metabolism 1026
non‐human primates 1074
non‐pharmacologic 1023–6
physiology 1023
peripheral cutaneous sensory receptors 1024
peripheral neuromodulation 1024
photobiomodulation therapy 1025
postoperative 966
spinal and supraspinal locations 1025
temperature‐related modalities 1024
pain models
induced 985
tonic tests 985
translational 978–9
pain perception 154–5
Pain Severity Score 1006
palpebral fissure 1328
pancreas and kidney 900–8
pancreatitis 908
pancuronium 1066t
pantoprazole 423–4
Parabrachial Nucleus/Kolliker‐Fuse
Complex 367
paracetamol see acetaminophen (paracetamol)
paralumbar anesthesia 5
oxygen (cont’d)

-- 1436 of 1450 --

Index 	1421
parasympathetic nervous system (PNS)
828–9, 829f
and anticholinergics 314
antiemetic therapy 865
balance with sympathetic 999
ECG complex 192
function 828–9
and gastrointestinal tract 862
and hypothalamus 827
transmission, selected effects 827, 828t
parathyroid gland 913–15
paravertebral thoracolumbar anesthesia 1251
partial intravenous anesthesia (PIVA) 4, 1208
partial pressure
alveolar to venous difference 500
of carbon dioxide see partial pressure of
carbon dioxide (PCO 2
)
Dalton’s law of 240
of oxygen see partial pressure of oxygen (PO 2
)
partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PCO 2 ) 13,
222, 225, 231–2, 236, 559, 560f, 640,
738f, 1113
arterial 334, 472, 478, 659, 830, 1294
end‐tidal 761
expired 704f, 706f
partial pressure of oxygen (PO2
) 232, 595,
640f, 1277
alveolar gas equation 231
arterial 87, 232, 233, 478, 830, 1287
inspired 160, 703f
measuring 232–3
mixed venous oxygen partial pressure 233
patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) 686–7
pathologic anatomic shunt 720
patient hand‐offs 35–6
patient health assessment 10–11
patient safety see safety considerations
patient safety evidence, in anesthesia 30–3
Patient Safety Medical Team Training Program,
simulation‐based training 36
patient state index (PSI) 183
PCO 2
, disorders of 568
PCV see pressure‐controlled ventilation (PCV)
PD see peritoneal dialysis (PD)
PDA see patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)
PDMPs see prescription drug monitoring
programs (PDMPs)
peak inspiratory pressure (PIP) 1221
PEEP see positive end‐expiratory pressure
(PEEP)
pelvic area, blocks for regional anesthesia
of 1312–14
penis block, dorsal nerve 1314
pudendal 1314, 1315f
sacral paravertebral 1313–14
sacrococcygeal or intercoccygeal epidural
(caudal epidural) 1312–13
pelvic limb blocks 1188–92
anatomy 1188
femoral/saphenous nerve block 1189–90
intra‐articular 1191–2
lumbar plexus block 1188–9
sciatic nerve 1190–1
Penlon AV‐S ventilator 131–2
pentobarbital 5
euthanasia 158, 162
pharmacokinetics 464
pentoxifylline 1218
percutaneous arterial catheterization 1277
percutaneous electrical nerve stimulation
(PENS) 1025
periaqueductal gray (PAG) 363
periarterial vascular rete (PAVR) 1099–101
pericardial effusion 690
perioperative checklists 143–4
perioperative fluid therapy 588–92
improving the utility of dynamic indices of
preload responsiveness 591
Individualized goal‐directed 589–91
liberal versus restrictive approach 588–9
and microvasculature 591–2
monitoring fluid balance 589
perioperative thermoregulation see
thermoregulation
peripheral intravenous catheter 58
peripheral nerve anatomy 1168–9
peripheral nerve blocks 1168
peripheral nerve stimulators 1172–3
peripheral nervous system 825–9, 839–40
peripheral neuromodulation 1024
peripheral vasoconstriction, drug‐induced 232
peripherally inserted central catheters
(PICCs) 1100, 1101
peritoneal dialysis (PD)
case selection 948–9
procedures and equipment 949–50
perphenazine enanthate 1084
personal protective equipment (PPE).
143, 144
personnel
injury to 70
laser exposure 43
magnetic resonance imaging 52
pethidine see meperidine (pethidine)
P‐glycoprotein (P‐gp) 308, 1031
pH
acid–base physiology 556–9
blood, mechanisms to minimize changes
in 558–9
chemical buffers 558–9
renal system 559
respiratory system 559
pharmacodynamics
dissociative anesthesia 470–1
fundamentals 290
inhalational anesthesia 504–12
interactions 306–7
nitrous oxide 513
specific drugs
acepromazine 334–5
alfaxalone 478–9
barbiturates 464–5
detomidine 340–3
dexmedetomidine 340–3
diazepam 337
etomidate 474–6
medetomidine 340–3
midazolam 337
propofol 467
romifidine 340–3
tolazoline 345–7
xylazine 340–3
yohimbine 345–7
zolazepam 337
in vitro assessment of PK‐PD models 406
pharmacokinetics
birds 1136
data analysis
compartmental models 296–8
complex models 299
noncompartmental models 298–9
physiologically based pharmacokinetic
models (PBPK) 299
dissociative anesthesia 469–70
drug interactions 305–6
experiments in 295–9
data analysis 296–9
experimental design and conduct 296
pharmacokinetic‐pharmacodynamic
(PK‐PD) study 296
POP‐PK approach 296, 299, 307
preparation for the study 295–6
standard two‐stage (STS) approach 296
first‐order rate equation 297
fundamentals 290
of inhalant anesthetic agents 294–5
inhalational anesthesia 294–5, 497–501
linear and nonlinear 295
local anesthesia 531–7
absorption 531–2
additives 535–7
distribution 532–3
excretion 534
factors affecting 534–5
metabolism 533–4
model‐independent analysis 297
nitrous oxide 513
non‐stochastic 295
norepinephrine 321
opioids
absorption 360, 362
distribution 362
excretion 363
metabolism 362–3
pharmacokinetic interactions 305–6
specific drugs
acepromazine 334
alfaxalone 478
barbiturates 463–4
detomidine 339–40
dexmedetomidine 339–40
diazepam 336–7
dopamine 322
dopexamine 323
ephedrine 326
epinephrine 321
etomidate 474
isoproterenol (isoprenaline) 324
medetomidine 339–40

-- 1437 of 1450 --

1422 	Index
methohexital 464
midazolam 336–7
NSAIDs 405–6
opioids see above
pentobarbital 464
phenylephrine 325
propofol 466–7
romifidine 339–40
thiamylal 464
thiopental 464
tolazoline 345
zolazepam 336–7
squares of the errors (SSE) 297
in vitro assessment of PK‐PD models 406
xylazine 339–40
yohimbine 345
zero‐order delivery/zero‐order processes
290, 291
pharmacology 283–313
absorption 294
anticholinergics 314–16
apparent volume of distribution 291–2
bioavailability 294
birds 1135–6
cancer pain 1366–8
cardiopulmonary arrest 58
classical receptor theory 283–5
clinical evaluation of drug effects 287–90
concentration–response relationship
288, 289f
effective dose 288, 289f
efficacy 288
lethal dose 288, 289f
potency 288
therapeutic index 288, 289f
toxic dose 288, 289f
constant rate delivery 290
constant rate therapy 299
continuous rate therapy 299–305
dialysis, pharmacologic agent
clearance 951–2
drug administration routes see drug
administration
drug combinations 317, 1080–1, 1084, 1269
butorphanol‐azaperone‐medetomidine
(BAM) 1082, 1084
ketamine‐acepromazine 1065, 1066t
ketamine‐dexmedetomidine 1066t
ketamine‐propofol (ketofol) 472–4
ketamine‐xylazine 1066t
medetomidine‐ketamine 1084
medetomidine‐vatinoxan 347, 1015
tiletamine‐zolazepam 1082–3, 1087
tramadol‐meloxicam 384
xylazine‐ketamine 1087
xylazine–ketamine– guaifenesin 1271
xylazine‐tiletamine‐zolazepam 1084
epidural medications 1254–7
half‐life of elimination 291
hepatic clearance 292–3
intermittent boluses 299
local anesthesia 526–31
blockade of neural tissue,
mechanism 528–30
chemical structure 530
clinical pharmacology 531–8
molecular mechanism of action 526–8
physicochemical properties 530–1
neuromuscular blockade 450–2
ophthalmic medications 1333
opioids 358–63
osteoarthritis 1379–84
pharmacodynamics, fundamentals 290
pharmacokinetics see pharmacokinetics
pharmacologic alterations induced by
pregnancy 967–8
protocols 1097–9
computed tomography (CT) 262
fluid therapy 800, 881
Global Warming Protocol (GWP) 1067
HQHVSN practice 1042
London Protocol model, incident
evolution 30
marine mammals 1097–9
TFAST 262
wildlife capture 1088
receptor state theory 285
receptor structure 285–7
renal clearance 294
total body clearance 292
wildlife capture 1080–4
see also wildlife capture
phasic pain tests 978
phenothiazines 334–5, 833
phenoxybenzamine 327–8
phentolamine 327
and local anesthesia 536
phenylbutazone 295
phenylephrine
cardiovascular system effects 324
and local anesthesia 536
other effects 324
pharmacokinetics 325
PHEO see pheochromocytoma (PHEO)
pheochromocytoma (PHEO)
anesthetic considerations 898–9
anesthetic management 899–900
clinical pathology 898
clinical presentation 898
diagnosis and treatment 898
photoacoustic spectrometry 244
photobiomodulation therapy 1025
photoplethysmography (PPG) 207
physicochemical interactions 305
physiologic anatomic shunt 720
Physiological and Operative Severity Score for
the enUmeration of Mortality and
morbidity (POSSUM) 11
physiologically based pharmacokinetic models
(PBPK) 299
physostigmine 69
PiCCO® (Pulsion Medical Systems), cardiac
output monitoring 214, 215
PICCs see peripherally inserted central catheters
(PICCs)
piezoelectric analysis 244
pigs 1285–300
analgesia 1295–7
anesthesia
endotracheal intubation 1059–60, 1073
fasting prior to 1285
induction of 1288–90
maintenance of 1291–3
preanesthetic evaluation 1285–6
recovery 1295
regional 965
blood typing 599
carbon dioxide stunning 161
drug administration 1055, 1286
drug effects
acepromazine 335
alfaxalone 480
barbiturates 465
detomidine 344
dexmedetomidine 344
dissociative anesthetics 472
etomidate 476
medetomidine 344
parasympatholytic drugs 1287
propofol 468
romifidine 344
xylazine 344
evaluation of distress 156–7
handling and restraint 1285–6
local anesthetic and analgesic
techniques 1301–23
castration, blocks for 1317
flank/paralumbar fossa, blocks for regional
anesthesia of 1307–10
head, blocks for regional anesthesia
of 1303–7
limbs and feet, blocks for regional
anesthesia of 1317–21
linea alba and paramedian, blocks for
regional anesthesia 1310–12
pelvic area, blocks for regional anesthesia
of 1312–14
teats and udder, blocks for regional
anesthesia of 1314–17, 1316f
malignant hyperthermia 1060–1,
1295
monitoring of anesthesia 1293–4
orotracheal intubation 1290–1
pain and consciousness 155
premedication 1286–9
regurgitation 1057–8
sedation and chemical restraint 1287–9
supportive therapy 1294–5
Yorkshire 1288
Yucatan 1288
pindolol 329
pinnipeds
anesthesia 1098–9
breathing 1092
features 1091
intubation 1104
large 1104
sleep 1093
pharmacokinetics (cont’d)

-- 1438 of 1450 --

Index 	1423
vascular access 1101–2
see also marine mammals
PIVA see partial intravenous anesthesia (PIVA)
pKa, and Henderson–Hasselbalch
equation 556–7
plasma
cryoprecipitate (cryo) 596–7
fluid shifts with interstitial fluid
compartments 581–2
fresh frozen plasma (FFP) 596
frozen plasma (FP) 596
products 596–7
simulated concentration 304f
vasopressin 934
see also blood
platelet concentrate (PC) 598
platelet‐rich plasma (PRP) 598, 1384
platelets
frozen concentrate 598
function testing 575
inhibition abnormalities 412
lyophilized platelets (LYO) 598
plethysmography 207
plethysmography variability index (PVI) 207
pleural line (P‐line) 258–9
pleural space and lung ultrasound
(PLUS) 256–9
abdominal curtain sign 257, 258f, 260–1,
262f, 263f, 264
abnormal findings 257, 261–9
A‐lines 260
BAT sign 257–8, 259f
B‐lines 260
endobronchial tube placement 261, 263f
lung pulse 259–60
lung sliding (glide sign) 259
machine settings 257
normal findings 257–61
pleural line (P‐line) 258–9
ultrasound beams 257–8
pleural space disease, and anesthesia 804–5
PLUS see pleural space and lung ultrasound
(PLUS)
pneumonia, management of anesthesia
807–8
pneumothorax
abdominal curtain sign 261, 263f, 264
acute or undiagnosed 64
asynchronous sign 264
barotrauma 65
and bronchospasm 63
in dogs and cats 262
double curtain sign 264
endobronchial tube placement 261, 263f
iatrogenic tracheal injury 64
A‐lines 260
lung pulse 259–60
lung sliding (glide sign) 259, 262
monitoring of anesthesia 262, 264
pleural line 258
pleural space and lung ultrasound
(PLUS) 256
point‐of‐care ultrasound (POCUS) 254
retrograde intubation 86
tension 64
tracheal rupture/disruption 77
volutrauma 65
POCUS see point‐of‐care ultrasound (POCUS)
point‐of‐care ultrasound (POCUS) 254–80
abdominal 269, 270t, 271
airway assessment 256
cardiac 264f, 271–6, 272t
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation 275–6
common applications 254, 255t
compared with formal ultrasound
254, 255t
endotracheal tube placement 256
equipment 256
general applications 255–6
increased B‐lines 266, 267f
limitations 277
lung consolidation 268–9
and monitoring fluid therapy 277
patient preparation 256
perioperative (P‐POCUS) 254–5
application of 255–6
pleural effusion 264, 266f, 267f
pleural space and lung ultrasound (PLUS) see
pleural space and lung ultrasound
(PLUS)
polarographic Clark electrode 232
polysulfated glycosaminoglycan (PSGAG)
1016, 1383
population pharmacokinetics (POP‐PK) 296,
299, 307
positive end‐expiratory pressure (PEEP) 44, 65,
132, 1032, 1072, 1094, 1221
ventilators 118, 119, 132
positron emission tomography (PET) 157
POSSUM see Physiological and Operative
Severity Score for the enUmeration of
Mortality and morbidity (POSSUM)
postanesthetic complications
blindness 69
hyperthermia 68
myelomalacia 69–70
neuropathy 69–70
oliguria and acute kidney injury 939
patient injury during recovery 69
prolonged recovery 69
rhabdomyolysis 68–70
postcapillary pulmonary hypertension 811
postcardiac arrest syndrome 59
post‐critical event debriefing 70–1
postoperative care
arrhythmias/dysrhythmias 195
dialkylcarbamoylchloride (DACC)‐coated
postoperative dressings 148
dogs and cats 142
gastrointestinal disease 869–71
ileus 869
infection prevention and control 142, 146–7
laboratory animals 1072, 1073t
non‐human primates 1073t
pain management 965
ruminants 1278–9
see also infection prevention and control;
postanesthetic complications
postoperative cognitive dysfunction (POCD) 1356
postsynaptic potentials (PSPs) 179
potassium 593–5
PPE see personal protective equipment (PPE).
PPG see photoplethysmography (PPG)
PPV see pulse pressure variation (PPV)
prazosin 326–7
cardiovascular system effects 327
pharmacokinetics 327
preanesthetic evaluation
age‐related changes 1358–9
birds 1135
blood testing 11–13
bradycardia 314
cardiopulmonary bypass 670, 671t
cardiovascular disease 680–3
echocardiography 680–1, 682
electrocardiography 12
face masks 1286
horses 1205–6, 1218–19
marine mammals 1095–7
ruminants 1262–4
precapillary pulmonary hypertension 809–11
preference testing 159
preferred body temperature (PBT) 1114
preferred optimal temperature zone
(POTZ) 1111
pregabalin 434–6, 1015, 1070
pregnancy‐associated changes
acidemia 958
anesthetic considerations 955–68
anesthetic drugs and cesarean
section 959–61
anticholinergics 959
dissociatives 960
guaifenesin 961
inhalational anesthesia 960–1
injectable anesthetics 960
local anesthesia 961
neuroleptanalgesia 960
neuromuscular blocking agents 961
opioids 959–60
supplemental agents 961
tranquilizers and sedatives 959
cardiovascular 955–6
cesarean section 961–5
general anesthesia 961–4
local anesthesia 965
regional anesthesia 964–5
coagulation 956
endotracheal intubation 1050
fetal brain 160
gastrointestinal 957
in horses 962, 1050
liver and kidney 957
in maternal physiology 955–7
neuroendocrine 957
pharmacologic alterations 957–8
postoperative pain management 966
pulmonary 956
renal blood flow 956

-- 1439 of 1450 --

1424 	Index
toxicity 958
uterine blood flow 957
see also neonatal/pediatric patients
preload 647
premedication 17, 18
acepromazine 20, 160, 334, 422, 427, 472
alfentanil 430
analgesia failure 383
benzodiazepines 476
buprenorphine 381
butorphanol 382, 478
detomidine 378, 383
in dogs 183, 478, 798, 1162, 1334
and drug dosage 472
in horses 383, 1224
hydromorphone 335, 428
inhalational anesthesia 61
medetomidine 473
methadone 378
morphine 369, 426, 480
mortality risk 20
opioids 425
oxymorphone 472
in pigs 480, 1286–9
tramadol 384
xylazine 182
preoperative autologous blood donation
(PABD) 602
preoperative patient, risk assessment 10–13
prescription drug monitoring programs
(PDMPs) 8
pressure overload, associated conditions 688–9
pressure support ventilation (PSV) 768–70
pressure‐controlled ventilation (PCV) 767
pressure‐volume (P–V) loops 647–50, 770–2, 773f
primates
New World monkeys 1073
non‐human see non‐human primates (NHPs)
social nature of 1073
procainamide 428–9
procaine 538
professional organizations, anesthesia 7
proliferation complexity 27
proparacaine 538
propofol
birds 1141
chemical structure 466
clinical effects
cardiovascular 467
central nervous system 467
fetal/neonatal 467
gastrointestinal 467
hepatic system 467
muscle 467
renal 467
respiratory 467
species‐specific 467–8
clinical use 468
dogs and cats 1161, 1162
environmental impact 7
formulation effect, drug metabolism 309
and infection control 148
laser procedures 44
marine mammals 1098
mechanism of action 466
neurologic disease 834
ophthalmic patients 1334
pharmacodynamics 467
pharmacokinetics 466–7
pigs 1289
prodrugs 468–9
ruminants 1270, 1272
simulated plasma concentration 304f
propranolol 329
prostaglandin‐E2 (PGE2
), IL‐6 1025
protein
adenosine‐5′‐ triphosphate (ATP) binding
cassette (ABC) family of 1031
autologous solution 1384
glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) 285
G‐protein receptors 285, 287
homeostasis 850
hypoproteinemia 10
molecular mechanism of action and CNS
protein 506
multidrug resistance‐associated protein
(MRP) 308
P‐glycoprotein (P‐gp) 308
Phox2B structure, in marine mammals 1092
proximal paravertebral block 1307–9
proximal radial, ulnar, median, and
musculocutaneous nerve block 1188
PSGAGs see polysulfated glycosaminoglycans
(PSGAGs)
PSPs see postsynaptic potentials (PSPs)
PSV see pressure support ventilation (PSV)
pulmonary artery catheter (PAC)
thermodilution 212–14
area under the curve 213
limited experience in veterinary patients 214
“PAC Man” study 213
pulmonary aspiration 64–5
pulmonary blood flow
alveolar collapse 776
anesthesia and pulmonary hypertension 809
carbon dioxide transport 740
decreased 732, 733f, 734
distribution of 713–14, 1147
diverting 731, 809
left‐to‐right shunting 687
and mechanical ventilation 660
and pulmonary perfusion 713
redistribution of 1265
regional redistribution 659
and respiratory system 1057
restricted 618
total 716, 732
pulmonary capacities 698
pulmonary chemoreflex 655
pulmonary circulation 659–60
pulmonary edema
hydrostatic 717
increased permeability 718
negative‐pressure 62
and pulmonary perfusion 717–18
pulmonary hypertension, and anesthesia 809–11
pulmonary intravascular macrophages (PIMs) 736
pulmonary parenchymal disease, and
anesthesia 805–8
pulmonary perfusion 713–18
distribution 713–15
hydrostatic pulmonary edema 717
hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction 715–16
increased permeability pulmonary edema 718
pulmonary edema 717–18
pulmonary hypertension 716–17
reptiles 1113
pulmonary system
age‐related changes 1356
avian 1129, 1130, 1133f, 1146, 1147
cardiopulmonary 214
comparative cardiovascular morphology and
shunting 617
reptiles 1112–13
respiration control 1113
pulmonary vascular resistance 321
pulmonary ventilation 702–12, 713f, 721–37
altered alveolar ventilation, effects of 707
alveolar dead space fraction 705
alveolar gas equation 702–4
anesthesia, effects on
and hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction
728–31
and sedation 725–8
and deadspace 727
kinetics of carbon dioxide elimination 704–7
and lung mechanics 727–8
and lung volumes 725–7
physics of respiratory gases 702–4
pulmonary mechanics 707–12
sedation and anesthesia, effects on 725–8
pulmonic stenosis (PS) 688–9
pulse oximetry
anesthetic mortality, risk of 18
biomedical engineering 172–3
colic, in horses 1227
fiber‐optic 51
oxygenation 234–6
pulse pressure 1275
pulse pressure variation (PPV) 205–7
pulsed electromagnetic field (PEMF) 1025
Purkinje system
birds 1134
branching of 189
bundle branches 625
cells 189f, 190, 622, 623, 625
fibers/fiber network 621f, 623, 625, 626, 627f,
1105, 1134, 1276
electrocardiography, 190, 192, 193f
His–Purkinje system 191, 627f
PVI see plethysmography variability index (PVI)
quadratus lumborum block 1182–3
Quality of Life (QoL) 1005
RAAS see renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system
(RAAS)
rabbits
pregnancy‐associated changes (cont’d)

-- 1440 of 1450 --

Index 	1425
anatomic and physiologic
considerations 1070
anesthetic mortality, risk of 15, 16
endotracheal intubation in 480
euthanasia 158
inhalational anesthesia 1335
withholding foods from 1070
radial, ulnar, and median nerve block 1188
radiation burns 1370
radiation therapy (RT), laser procedures 42, 43, 44
radiofrequency (RF) 46, 51
fields 49
radiography
anesthetic considerations 43–5
ionizing radiation hazards and safety 42–3
radiocontrast agents 45
radiographic myelography of equids 44
remote facilities 45
radiotherapy 1365, 1369–70
Raman spectroscopy 224, 243–4
ranevetmab 1013
RAP see right atrial pressure (RAP)
rapid eye movement (REM) sleep 366, 1093
RAS see reticular activating system (RAS)
rate‐controlled infusion (RCI) 300
rats
anatomic and physiologic
considerations 1070
and euthanasia 159
evaluation of distress 156
gabapentin 1070
Sprague–Dawley 156
RBF see renal blood flow (RBF)
RCA see root cause analysis (RCA)
Reassessment Campaign on Veterinary
Resuscitation (RECOVER) 34, 35, 55, 56f
anticholinergics 316–17
rebreathing systems
circle see circle rebreathing systems
non‐rebreathing 111–12
partial technique 212
receptor agonists and antagonists 284–5
receptor state theory 285
receptor structure
β‐adrenergic receptors 287
AMPA and NMDA receptors 286–7
confusion between neutral antagonist and
reverse agonist 285
GABA receptors 286
G‐protein receptors (as second
messengers) 285, 287
SARS‐CoV‐ 2 receptors 287
sodium ion channels 285–6
tachyphylaxis 290
RECOVER see Reassessment Campaign on
Veterinary Resuscitation (RECOVER)
recovery
airway management 1061–2
airway obstruction 63
amphibians 1119–20
benzodiazepines 69
birds 1148
corticosteroids 69
dysphoria 1106
endotracheal intubation 1278
horses 1050, 1211–13
intravenous (IV) access 1107
mannitol 69
marine mammals 1106–7
neonatal/pediatric patients 1350–1
neuromuscular blockade 456
non‐human primates 1073–4
opioids 69
patient injury during 69
pigs 1295
prolonged 69
renal transplantation 948
ruminants 1278
spay‐neuter programs 1044
and temperature 69
rectal administration 4
red blood cell potassium 1033
red blood cell (RBC) products 595–6
reflexes
abdominocardiac 655
Aschner’s 655
atrial stretch‐receptor 655
Bainbridge 655
Barcroft–Edholm 655
baroceptor 655
Bezold–Jarisch 655
cough 655, 833, 836
craniocardiac 655
Cushing 67, 655
dive 1106
loss of the righting reflex (LORR)
155, 156
low‐pressure baroreceptor reflex 655
nociceptive withdrawal reflexes (NWRs) 979
ocular 1276
oculocardiac 655, 1332–3
pulmonary chemoreflex 655
reverse Bainbridge reflex 655
tachycardia 327, 328, 334, 429
vagovagal 655
venorespiratory 655
refractometry 244
regional anesthesia
blocks
for flank and paralumbar fossa 1307–10
for head 1303–7
limbs and feet 1317–21
for linea alba and paramedian 1310–12
for pelvic area 1312–14
pelvic limb blocks 1319–21
for teats and udder 1314–17, 1316f
thoracic limb blocks 1317–19
cesarean section 964–5
defining 4
history 5
laboratory animals 1069–70
linea alba and paramedian, blocks for 1310–12
novel techniques, horses 1258
transversus abdominis plane (TAP)
block 1015, 1183–4, 1227, 1258
ultrasound‐guided 1321
regurgitation
and gastroesophageal reflux 13,
65, 67
small animal anesthesia morbidity 13
rehabilitation engineering 170
reliability 1002
REM see rapid eye movement (REM) sleep
remifentanil 380, 1289
renal blood flow (RBF) 27, 45, 199, 322
and a1
‐adrenergic receptor agonists 324
acepromazine vasodilation increasing 853
alterations in 913
constant 199
in dogs 937
dopexamine protecting 323
ephedrine reducing 326
generalized effects of anesthetics on 933
and glomerular filtration 958
impaired 894
increasing in acute renal failure 1036
and inhalation anesthetics 511
and injectable anesthetics 475, 476, 478
isoproterenol protecting 324
kidney injury 410
kidney recipient management 946
lower blood pressure decreasing 911
modulating 660
myogenic tone and tubuloglomerular
feedback, determined by 658
pregnancy‐associated changes 956
regulation of 410
renal and hepatic systems 1349
renal changes 1357
and renal circulation 660
renal clearance 292, 294, 534
of creatinine 927
decreased rates 1349
drug metabolism 307
and glomerular filtration rate 927–8
measuring 927
studies 928
see also renal replacement therapy
renal disease
and anesthetic drugs 933–6
anesthetic management
adjunctive treatments 936–7
urethral or bilateral ureteral
obstruction, 937–8
urinary bladder rupture and
uroabdomen 938–9
chronic (CKD) 52, 931–3
fluid therapy 936
kidney injury
acute see acute kidney injury (AKI)/acute
renal failure
NSAIDs, adverse effects 410–11
postanesthesia oliguria and acute kidney
injury 939
see also acute kidney injury (AKI)/acute renal
failure; chronic kidney disease (CKD);
kidney injury; renal clearance; renal
function; renal replacement therapy;
renal system

-- 1441 of 1450 --

1426 	Index
renal function
normal anatomy and physiology 922–6
physiologic 924–6
testing and monitoring 926–9
biochemical testing 926–7
in dogs and cats 926–8
in horses 928–9
renal biopsy 928
renal clearance and glomerular filtration
rate 927–8
in ruminants 929
urine output measurement 928
urinary tract, anatomy of 923–4
renal perfusion pressure (RPP) 199
renal replacement therapy
anesthetic considerations 944–54
continuous 950–2
extracorporeal techniques 950–2
intracorporeal techniques 944–50
peritoneal dialysis 949–50
renal transplantation 944–8
renal system
age‐related changes 1356–7
blood pH, mechanisms to minimize changes
in 559
circulation 660
in dogs and cats 1159
drug effects
alfaxalone 478–9
barbiturates 465
dissociative anesthetics 470
etomidate 475
inhalational anesthetics 511–12
NSAIDs 411–12
opioids 370–1
propofol 467
neonatal/pediatric patients 1349
pregnancy‐associated changes 957
renal portal system, birds 1134–5
reptiles 1113
see also renal replacement therapy
renal toxicity 512, 1369
renal transplantation 944–8
anesthetic management of patients
with 945–8
ethical considerations 945
kidney donor management 946
kidney recipient management 946–8
preoperative considerations 945
surgical recovery and complications 948
renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system
(RAAS) 287
reporting systems, incident 29
reptiles
anatomy and physiology 1110–11
anesthesia 1110–14
ascending transmission pathways 1116
avoidance learning 1116
blood pressure 1112
brain structures 1116
cardiac shunting 1111
cardiovascular system 1111–12
chelonians 1115
clinical anesthesia 1114
drug administration routes 1114
effects of inspired CO 2 and O2 1113
endotracheal intubation 1114
evidence for pain in 1115–16
hepatic system 1113–14
intracardiac shunting 227
known analgesic actions on nociceptive or
nocifensive behaviors 1116
lizards 1115
lymphatic system 618
metabolism 1111
“Muskelleiste”/“muscular ridge” 1111
nociception 1114–16
presence of nociceptors 1115–16
pain and consciousness 155, 1114–16
patient presentation/assessment 1114
preferred optimal temperature zone
(POTZ) 1111
pulmonary system 1112–13
renal system 1113
respiration, control of 1113
snakes 1115
squamates 1115
structures, nociceptive 1116
suspension of normal behavior 1116
thermoregulation 1111
tortoises 1115
turtles 1113, 1115
ventilation, monitoring 227
see also amphibians; fish
residual volume (RV) 698
respiration, defining 697–8
respiratory assist devices 139
respiratory complications, anesthesia‐related
accidental extubation 63–4
acute or undiagnosed pneumothorax 64
airway fire 65
airway obstruction 62–3
bronchospasm 63
hypoxemia 62
iatrogenic tracheal injury 64
pulmonary aspiration 64–5
respiratory depression and apnea 61–2
small animals 13, 16
volutrauma and barotrauma 65
wooden chest syndrome 65
respiratory depression 61–2, 1088
respiratory disease
anesthetic management of patients
with 788–811
canine brachycephalic obstructive
syndrome 790–3
canine laryngeal paralysis 795–7
canine tracheal collapse 797–9
diaphragmatic hernia 805–6
equine guttural pouch mycosis 801
equine guttural pouch tympany 800
equine laryngeal paralysis 802
feline brachycephalic obstructive airway
syndrome 793–4
lower airway disease 802–3
pleural space disease 804–5
pneumothorax and/or pleural effusion 805
postcapillary pulmonary hypertension 811
precapillary pulmonary
hypertension 809–11
pulmonary hypertension 809–11
pulmonary parenchymal disease 806–8
upper respiratory disease 788–802
asthma
equine 803–4
feline 802–3
atelectasis 773–4, 775f, 776–7
diaphragmatic hernia 805–6
general approach to management of animals
with a difficult airway 788
lower airway 226, 802–3
pneumothorax and/or pleural effusion 804–5
pulmonary parenchymal disease,
intrapulmonary masses 806
sedation 788–811
upper airway 788–802
respiratory function, physiology of aerobic
respiration 220–1
respiratory gas analysis
historical techniques used 243–4
mass spectrometry 224, 241, 243
monitoring 514–15
Raman spectroscopy 224, 237, 243–4
respiratory physiology and pathophysiology
697–749
breathing frequency 699f
expiratory reserve volume 698
functional residual capacity 698
inspiratory capacity 698
inspiratory reserve volume 698
key concepts and lung volumes 697–8, 699t
lung volumes 698, 699f, 699t
minute ventilation 698
pregnancy‐associated changes 956
pulmonary perfusion 713–18
effects of anesthesia on 721–37
residual volume 698
respiration 697–8
respiratory function in conscious and
anesthetized animals 700–43
effects of anesthesia 721–37
neural control of ventilation 700–2, 721–5
oxygen transport 737–40
pulmonary perfusion 713–18
pulmonary ventilation 702–12, 713f,
721–37
ventilation–perfusion relationships 718–21,
719f, 721–37
total lung capacity 698
ventilation
effects of anesthesia on 721–37
neural control 700–2, 721–5
pulmonary 702–12, 713f
ventilation–perfusion relationships 718–21, 719f
effects of anesthesia on 721–37
vital capacity 698
respiratory sinus arrhythmia 655
respiratory system
amphibians 1117–18

-- 1442 of 1450 --

Index 	1427
arterial carbon dioxide tension 508–9
birds 1127–34, 1145–7
blood pH, mechanisms to minimize
changes in 559
drug effects
acepromazine 334
alfaxalone 478
atipamezole 346
barbiturates 464–5
detomidine 341
dexmedetomidine 341
diazepam 337
dissociative anesthetics 470
etomidate 475
inhalational anesthetics 508–9
medetomidine 341
midazolam 337
opioids 367
propofol 467
romifidine 341
vatinoxan 346
xylazine 341
yohimbine 346
zolazepam 337
farm animals 1057
fish 1120–1
inhalational anesthesia
arterial carbon dioxide tension 508–9
concurrent drugs 509
duration of 509
factors influencing respiratory effects 509
mode of ventilation 509
surgery/other noxious stimulation 509
neonatal/pediatric patients 1349
pulmonary circulation 659–60
Response Entropy (RE) index 183
response surface analyses 306–7
responsiveness 1002
restraint see handling and restraint
restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM) 689–90
restrictive polymer electric heating systems 250
reticular activating system (RAS) 180
retrograde intubation 86
retrotrapezoid nucleus (RTN) 1092
return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) 55, 57
reverse Bainbridge reflex 655
reverse patent ductus arteriosus (rPDA) 688
rhabdomyolysis 69–70
rhythm evaluation 191
right atrial pressure (RAP) 204, 205
right ventricular (RV) pressure 204, 205
ring block 1188
rise time, gas sampling 241
risk assessment 10–23
assessing anesthetic risk 10–13
horses 1048
morbidity and mortality 13–20
neonatal/pediatric patients 1348
occupational exposure and anesthesia care
providers 7
patient health assessment 10–11
postoperative infections, associated risk
factors
environmental 147
iatrogenic 147
patient‐specific 146–7
preoperative patient 10–13
Ro 19‐4063 285
robenacoxib 1382
Robertshaw double‐lumen endotracheal tube 79
rodenticide toxicity 596, 597, 876
rodents 1070–2
pain evaluation 990–1
see also laboratory animals; mice; rats
romifidine 325, 1266
clinical considerations 343–4
indications for 338–9
mechanism of action 338–9
pharmacodynamics 340–3
pharmacokinetics 339–40
root cause analysis (RCA) 30
root mean squared error (RMSE) 172
ropivacaine, and local anesthesia 540
ROSC see return of spontaneous circulation
(ROSC)
Rottweilers, anesthetic mortality, risk of 18
Royal Veterinary College, UK 16
rPDA see reverse patent ductus arteriosus
(rPDA)
RPP see renal perfusion pressure (RPP)
RTN see retrotrapezoid nucleus (RTN)
ruminal tympany 67
ruminants 1262–83
anesthesia
endotracheal intubation 1058–9
inhalational anesthesia 1272–3
injectable anesthetics 1271–2
maintenance of 1271–3
monitoring of 1275–7
preanesthetic evaluation 1262–4
recovery 1278
blood typing 599
cardiovascular supportive therapy 1275
dose requirements 1061
drug administration 1054
drug dose 377–8
drug effects
alfaxalone 480
barbiturates 465
dissociative anesthetics 472
etomidate 476
propofol 468
fluid administration 1273–4
intraoperative analgesia 1273
intraoperative complications 1278
local anesthetic and analgesic
techniques 1301–23
castration, blocks for 1317
flank/paralumbar fossa, blocks for regional
anesthesia of 1307–10
head, blocks for regional anesthesia
of 1303–7
limbs and feet, blocks for regional
anesthesia of 1317–21
linea alba and paramedian, blocks for
regional anesthesia 1310–12
pelvic area, blocks for regional anesthesia
of 1312–14
teats and udder, blocks for regional
anesthesia of 1314–17, 1316f
patient positioning 1273
postoperative complications 1278–9
recommended withdrawal interval for 1052,
1053–4t
regurgitation 1057–8
renal function, testing and monitoring 929
respiratory supportive therapy 1274–5
ruminal tympany 67, 1057, 1078
salivation 1058
sedation/chemical restraint
acepromazine 1264
a2
‐adrenergic receptor agonists 1265–6
a 2
-adrenergic receptor antagonists 1266–7
alfaxalone 1267
anticholinergics 1264
azaperone 1264
benzodiazepines 1267
common combinations 1267–8
doxapram 1267
opioids 1267
sternal recumbency 1086
supportive therapy 1273–7
RUMM (radial, ulnar, median, and
musculocutaneous) nerves 1187, 1188
running‐drip epidural technique 1196
Rüsch® EZ‐Blocker ® 82–3
RV see right ventricular (RV) pressure
sacrococcygeal or intercoccygeal epidural
(caudal epidural) block 1312–13
Safety Attitudes Questionnaire 28
safety considerations
analysis techniques 30, 31f
assessing organizational safety culture 28
data collection techniques 28–30
equipment 75
hand hygiene 144
harm, risk of from healthcare 24–5
human error and the system 25–7
human factors 27
incident reporting systems 29
interventions 33–7
laser procedures
laser beam hazard 40–1
laser fire hazard 41, 42f
non‐beam hazards 42
“leading indicator,” safety culture as 28
magnetic resonance imaging 48
medical gases 92–3
nomenclature 24
non‐technical skills 27, 28t
organizational culture 27–8
patient safety evidence in anesthesia 30–3
and process of anesthesia 26–7
radiography 42–3
Safety I versus Safety II 28
staff training 7
Swiss cheese model 27
terminology 24

-- 1443 of 1450 --

1428 	Index
WHO definition of patient safety
24, 25
see also infection prevention and control
safety culture 28
salbutamol see albuterol
salivation 1058
SAP see systolic arterial pressure (SAP)
sciatic nerve block 1190–1
sea cows see sirenians
seasonal autoregressive integrated moving
average (SARIMA) models 171
secobarbital, euthanasia 158
sedation 333–54
cesarean section 959
death related to 15
defining 4, 153
effects on pulmonary ventilation and
mechanics 725–8
equine guttural pouch mycosis 801
equine guttural pouch tympany 800
versus general anesthesia 50–1
magnetic resonance imaging 50–1
marine mammals 1097–8
neural control of ventilation 723–4
neurologic disease 832–5
ocular physiology 1334
opioid effects 366–7
pigs 1287–9
ruminants
acepromazine 1264
a2
‐adrenergic receptor agonists 1265–6
a 2
‐adrenergic receptor antagonists
1266–7
alfaxalone 1267
anticholinergics 1264
azaperone 1264
benzodiazepines 1267
common combinations 1267–8
doxapram 1267
opioids 1267
standing sedated equine CT 44, 1206
see also premedication
segmental dorsolumbar epidural block 1309–10
segmental thoracolumbar subarachnoid
block 1310
seizures 837–8
Seldinger technique, modified 205
sensory innervation, anatomy of 1185–6
sensory nerve blocks 1237–9
sensory transduction, biology of 972, 973t
septic peritonitis 879–82
serotonin (5‐HT) 976
serratus plane block 1182
sevoflurane
amphibians 1119
bronchodilation induced by 803, 804
face mask, delivered by 1268
malignant hyperthermia 68
ophthalmic patients 1335
SGADs see supraglottic airway devices
(SGADs)
sheep
drug effects
detomidine 344
dexmedetomidine 344
medetomidine 344
romifidine 344
xylazine 344
pain and consciousness 155
regional anesthesia 965
shelter animals
anesthesia for non‐spay‐neuter procedures in
shelters 1045–6
clinical situations requiring
anesthesia 1041–6
comparative anesthesia and analgesia
1041–7
high‐quality high‐volume spay‐neuter
(HQHVSN) practice 1041, 1042f,
1043–5
spay‐neuter for higher risk patients 1045
shock
anesthesia considerations 693–4
extracorporeal shockwave therapies
(ESWT) 1025
vasopressin for 693, 877
Short Form of the Glasgow Composite Pain
Scale‐Canine 1003
“shred” sign, partial lung consolidation 268
shunting/shunts
anatomic 720
comparative cardiovascular morphology and
shunting 617–19
intracardiac shunting 227
intrapulmonary 720
isoshunt diagram 720
left‐to‐right shunting 687
pathologic anatomic 720
physiologic anatomic 720
reptiles 1111
right‐to‐left shunting 687–8, 1112
shunt fraction 720
sidestream monitors, gas sampling 241
sighthounds 1030–1
signalment, in dogs 1158
simulation‐based training 9, 36, 174
SIMV see spontaneous intermittent mandatory
ventilation (SIMV)
Single‐Circuit Compressed Gas‐Powered
Ventilators 117
single‐circuit ventilators 115
compressed gas‐powered 117, 118–19
piston‐driven 117–18
sinus tachycardia 191, 626, 681, 875, 1221
sirenians
anesthesia 1099
breathing 1092
features 1091–2
Florida manatee (Trichechus manatus
latirostris) 1099
see also marine mammals
SIRS see systemic inflammatory response
syndrome (SIRS)
Situation, Background, Assessment,
Recommendation (SBAR) 30, 36
skeletal muscle, drug effects, inhalational
anesthetics 512
slaughter, humane 153–4
see also euthanasia
sleep 1093
small animals
anesthetic morbidity 13–14
anesthetic mortality 14–18
causes 15–16
Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative
Small Animal Fatalities (CEPSAF) 12,
15–17
risk factors 16–18
risk of 14–15
timing of death 16
cardiopulmonary arrest 55
Dräger Small Animal Ventilator 123
fluid therapy 1223
magnetic resonance imaging 50
multilead ECG 189
Vetronics Merlin ventilator 132–3
Vetronics SAV03 and SAV04 ventilators
124–6
SmartFlow® Patient Workflow Anesthetic Sheet
(IDEXX Laboratories) 8
smooth muscle
contraction and relaxation 638–40
metabolism 638
sodium 592–3
sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO 3
) 58, 560f, 1223
Addisonian crisis 894
anesthetic agents 1118
and barbiturates 463
and capnography 217
disorders in ATOT 571
distribution space 563, 564
and fentanyl 378
gastroesophageal reflux (GER) 67
gastrointestinal reflux 867
hyperkalemia 68
hyperparathyroidism 914
hypertonic 564
intravenous administration 594
isonatremic organic acid abnormalities 570
local anesthesia 536, 537, 1254
locoregional anesthesia 1167
PCO 2 disorders 568
routine use of 58
ultrasound 1244
urethral or bilateral ureteral
obstruction 937
sodium ion channels 285–6
sodium nitroprusside (SNP) 429
solubility
blood/gas coefficient 496
of gas 494–7
oil/gas partition coefficient 496
other partition coefficients 496–7
uptake of inhalation anesthetics 499
somatosensory‐evoked potentials (SEPs) 979
sotalol 329
spay‐neuter programs
analgesia for 1045–6
safety considerations (cont’d)

-- 1444 of 1450 --

Index 	1429
“beach style” for recovery 1044
see also high‐quality high‐volume spay‐neuter
(HQHVSN) practice
specific absorption rate (SAR),
radiofrequency 49
spectral entropy 182–3
spectrometry see mass spectrometry;
photoacoustic spectrometry
spectroscopy
infrared 223–4
mass 224, 243
near‐infrared 237
Raman 224, 237, 243–4
sphygmomanometer 203
spinal cord 347, 825, 1307, 1309, 1310, 1311,
1312, 1313
analgesia 364, 530
anesthesia 5
and antidepressants 1368
cervical 76
and consciousness 176
damage/injury 45, 69, 838–9, 1310
acute spinal cord injury (SCI) 370
division into segments 825
dorsal horn 339, 341, 364, 372, 507, 530, 535,
1367, 1372
endothelial cells 635
inhalational anesthesia 497, 507
interneurons 342
ischemia 535
and isobaric solutions 535
locoregional and neuraxial anesthesia
148–9
malacia 19
myelomalacia 70
nervous system anatomy 822
neurotoxicity 544
nociceptive signals in 1382
opioid receptor localization 359, 365
and opioids 1367
and osteoarthritis 1378
pain perception 154
and remifentalanil 380
segments 825
spinal surgery 838–9
thoracolumbar 508
transection 538
traverse ascending tracts of 247
spinal cord blood flow (SCBF) 369, 544
spino‐bulbo‐spinal loop 977
splanchnic circulation 660
spontaneous intermittent mandatory ventilation
(SIMV) 770
squares of the errors (SSE) 297
standing equine MRI 52
standing sedated equine CT 44, 1206
Staphylococcus aureus 142
Staphylococcus pseudintermedius 142
Staphylococcus spp. 149
Starling’s equation 582
State Entropy (SE) index 183
step‐counts 999
stereoisomerism 406
stereoisomers 309
sterility assurance monitoring (SAM) 145
steroids
anabolic 1032
and anti‐inflammatories 1069
cardiopulmonary bypass 669
cerebral edema 1074
cervical spondylomyelopathy 839
circuitry 668
concomitant use of 1017
corticosteroids see corticosteroids
intra‐articular 1383
myasthenia gravis (MG) 839–40
neurosteroids 160, 477, 1084
and sedation 432
traumatic brain injury 837
see also corticosteroids
stethoscopes, biomedical engineering 172
stored whole blood 596
Streptococcus zooepidemicus 145
stroke volume index (SVI) 320
subaortic stenosis (SAS) 688–9
subarachnoid anesthesia, history 5
subcutaneous (SC) injection 1067
subscalenic brachial plexus block 1186
succinylcholine, reversal of 457–8
sufentanil 380
sulfhemoglobin (SulfHb) 233
sulfotransferases (SULT) 308
“superBAG” (buprenorphine, acepromazine,
and glycopyrrolate) 317
superficial palmar vein 1101
supraglottic airway devices (SGADs) 75,
82–3
veterinary‐specific 83
supraventricular tachycardia 191, 329, 681
surgical general anesthesia 4
Surgical Safety Checklist (SSC) 33, 34t, 35
SurgiVet™ Advisor® Veterinary Data Logger
(Smiths Medical) 8
Surviving Sepsis Campaign (SSC) 1222
SVR see systemic vascular resistance (SVR)
Swan‐Ganz catheter 212
swine see pigs
Swine triple drip 1292
Swiss cheese model (Reason) 27
symmetrical slow‐wave sleep (BSWS) 1093
sympathetic nervous system (SNS) 828, 829f
and adrenergic agents 319
and anticholinergics 317
balance with parasympathetic 999
blockade 947
blood pressure monitoring 645
circulatory system stimulation 511
and CNS 470
compensatory mechanism 470
decreased activity 690
depth‐of‐anesthesia devices 184
and dissociatives 469
and drug selection 678
duration of anesthesia 511
and etomidate 475
evaluation of distress 157
function 828
gastrointestinal motility/postoperative
ileus 869
hyperthyroidism 912
and hypothalamus 827
ketamine, stimulated by 1209
maximally stimulated 678
neurogenic regulation of cerebral blood
flow 831
and neurohumoral and local control
mechanisms 654, 656
and nitrous oxide 513
noxious stimulation 511
and pain 1372
physiological parameters, stimulation of 998
postganglionic synapses 827
and resistance vessels 633
transmission, selected effects 827, 828t
synthetic colloids 584–8, 1222
and acute kidney injury 692, 875, 881
clinical implications of synthetic use in
veterinary medicine 588
dextrans 588
gelatins 588
hydroxyethyl starches 586–8
syringomyelia 1000
systemic inflammatory response syndrome
(SIRS) 1217–18
systemic toxicity 1167, 1168, 1171, 1302
local anesthesia 526, 531, 532, 535, 536, 538,
539, 541–4
cardiovascular system 542–3
central nervous system 541–2
treatment 543–4
systemic vascular resistance (SVR)
58, 479
and blood pressure monitoring 197, 198
systolic arterial pressure (SAP) 60, 197, 204,
326, 422
invasive measurement 199–202
systolic pressure variation (SPV) 206
T‐61, for euthanasia 162
tachyarrhythmias 191
tachycardia
adrenergic agents 321, 329
α‐adrenergic receptor antagonists 328
β1
‐adrenergic receptors 325
anticholinergics 316
arrhythmogenic diseases resulting in 691
atrial 428, 899
and dopamine 321
dose‐dependent 316
excess 316
heart rate increase 315
and hypotension 61
pacemaker‐derived 678
pharmacology 317
radiocontrast agents 45
reflex 327, 328, 334, 429
sinus 191, 626, 681, 875, 1221
supraventricular 191, 329, 681
transient 179, 316, 433

-- 1445 of 1450 --

1430 	Index
ventricular 13, 58, 191, 192, 195, 428, 542,
543, 620, 626, 678, 681, 804, 875, 876f,
877, 899, 1147f, 1198
TAP see transversus abdominis plane (TAP) block
tapentadol 436
multitargeting molecules 385
target‐controlled infusion (TCI) 173, 177, 301,
303f, 304f
dexmedetomidine 346
TBI see traumatic brain injury (TBI)
TCI see target‐controlled infusion (TCI)
Team Strategies and Tools to Enhance Performance
and Patient Safety (TeamSTEPPS®) 36
teats and udder, blocks for regional anesthesia
of 1314–17
intravenous regional teat 1317
inverted “V” block 1316
ring block 1316
teat sinus infusion 1316–17
technology, role of 8–10
temperature
acid–base balance, effects on 557–8
birds 1148
Bispectral Index™ 180
body temperature maintenance in laboratory
animals 1072
and capnography 217
change 213, 214
compensation 97, 101, 102, 103, 172
in containers 156
curve 213
esophageal temperature probe 52
excessively high 68
fiber‐optic probe 52
of helium 49
hypothermia 13
liquid 103
operating rooms 147
oxygen cages 90
and pain management 1024
preferred optimal temperature zone
(POTZ) 1111
probes 52, 145
prolonged anesthetic recovery 69
pulmonary artery catheter
thermodilution 212
radiofrequency fields 49
rectal 1086, 1087
room 101, 102, 212, 213
sensor 213
skin surface 52
vaporizers 97, 99, 100, 102
see also body temperature
terbutaline
cardiovascular system effects 325
other effects 325–6
tetracaine 539
Tetralogy of Fallot (TF) 687–8
TFAST protocols 262
thermodilution, cardiac output measurement
211–12
thermodynamics 246
thermoregulation
active patient warming 249–50
age‐related changes 1357
amphibians 1117
circulating warm water systems 250
conduction 248
convection 248
core‐to‐periphery gradient 247, 248f
decreased core body temperature 249
farm animals 1060–1
fish 1121
forced warm air units 250
heat transfer mechanisms 247–9
hyperthermia 250–2
neonatal/pediatric patients 1350
opioid effects 371
perioperative 246–53
reptiles 1111
resistive polymer electric heating 250
thermodynamics 246
thiafentanil 380–1
wildlife capture 1081
thiamylal, pharmacokinetics 464
thiobarbiturate anesthesia 16
thiobarbiturates, ruminants 1268
thiopental
dogs and cats 1162
pharmacokinetics 464
thoracic bioimpedance and bioreactance 216
thoracic limb, blocks of 1185–8
axillary brachial plexus block 1186–7
cervical paravertebral block 1186
distal brachial plexus block 1188
distal radial, ulnar, median, and
musculocutaneous nerve block 1188
proximal radial, ulnar, median, and
musculocutaneous nerve block 1188
radial, ulnar, and median nerve block 1188
ring block 1188
sensory innervation, anatomy of 1185–6
subscalenic brachial plexus block 1186
thoracic paravertebral block 1179
thoracic radiography 681–2
thorax and abdomen, blocks of 1178–85
fascial plane block techniques 1182–5
intercostal nerve 1179, 1180f
interpleural regional analgesia 1181–2
thoracic paravertebral 1179
thrombotic abnormalities 412
thrombophlebitis 1278
thyroid disease 908–13
hyperthyroidism 909–12
hypothyroidism 908–9
thyroid neoplasia 912–13
thyroid neoplasia, anesthetic considerations and
management 912–13
tibial plateau leveling osteotomy (TPLO) 148, 149
tidal volume
defining 698
delivered, factors affecting 122
determinants of 122
tiletamine‐zolazepam (TZ) 1269–70, 1291, 1292
time series analysis 171–2
time‐based capnography 224–7
acid–base derangements 225
cardiac output measurement 227
cardiopulmonary arrest 227
difficult airway and lower airway disease 226
hyper‐ and hypokalemia 225–6
hypoxemia, differential diagnosis 225
intracranial disease 225
nasal catheter 227
specific clinical indications/uses 225–7
tissue engineering 170
TIVA see total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA)
TLC see total lung capacity (TLC)
TNR see Trap Neuter Return (TNR) programs
tolazoline 69, 1266
clinical considerations 347
indications for 344–5
mechanism of action 344–5
pharmacodynamics 345–7
pharmacokinetics 345
tolfenamic acid 1382
tonic control 977
topical anesthesia 1167, 1237
total body clearance 292
total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) 4, 44, 50,
177, 1162, 1291
total lung capacity (TLC) 698
total peripheral resistance see systemic vascular
resistance (SVR)
total response time, gas sampling 241
toxicity 7, 296
adverse drug reactions 307
agent purity and euthanasia 161
amantadine and memantine 431
amitriptyline 433
antibiotics 939
bone marrow 408
bupivacaine‐induced 786, 1296–7
calcium 1370
cannabinoids 434
cardiac 531, 541, 542, 594
cardiovascular 542–3
of carnivores and scavengers 162
and castration 1317
in cattle 1321
chloral hydrate 481
clinical, from drug interactions 305
CNS 534, 541–2, 1305
diuretics 939
dose‐dependent 409
drug interactions 306
ethylene glycol 593
gastrointestinal 409
grape 931
halothane 854–5
hepatic 412, 430
of high‐potency drugs 294
immune‐mediated 512
increased risk of 533
inhalational anesthesia
cardiovascular system 509–11
central nervous system 505–8
hepatic system 512
tachycardia (cont’d)

-- 1446 of 1450 --

Index 	1431
renal system 511–12
respiratory system 508–9
skeletal muscle 512
isomers and stereoisomers 309
kidney injury 410
lethal 1079
lidocaine 466, 534, 542, 1251
lily 931
local anesthesia 66, 538, 542–4, 1174, 1186,
1302, 1320, 1337
local anesthetic systemic toxicity
(LAST) 1167, 1171, 1181, 1198
local toxicity 544
systemic toxicity 541–4
megakaryocyte 852
mepivacaine 539
methocarbamol 427
moderate 539
nitrous oxide 512
N‐methyl‐ D‐ aspartate (NMDA) receptor‐
mediated 370
NSAIDs 939, 1139, 1380
organ 468
oxygen 91, 753, 755, 1073
paracetamol 407, 1034
paracetamol and aspirin 411
phase II biotransformation or conjugation 308
in pregnancy 958
procainamide 428
propofol 468
pyrethrin/permethrin 427
radiation 1365f
raisin 931
renal 512, 1369
rodenticide 596, 597, 876
serotonin 438
sodium nitroprusside 429
systemic 1167, 1168, 1171, 1302
cardiovascular 542–3
central nervous system 541–2
local anesthesia 526, 531, 532, 535, 536,
538, 539, 541–4
treatment 543–4
tissue 75
toxic dose 288
volatile inhalation anesthetics 504
toxicosis (oral ingestion) 545
TPLO see tibial plateau leveling osteotomy (TPLO)
trachea, iatrogenic tracheal injury 64
tracheal collapse, in dogs 1032–3
tracheal insufflation 90
tracheostomy 86–7
tramadol
adjunctive drug 436–8
birds 1138–9
laboratory animals 1073t
multitargeting molecules 384–5
pigs 1288
premedication 384
tranquilization
cesarean section 959
defining 4
see also sedation
transcapillary fluid exchange 635–8
transcranial magnetic stimulation, in dogs
182, 184
transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation
(TENS) 1025
transcutaneous measurement of blood
gases 233
transfusion therapy 595–602
adverse effects 600–2
allogenic, alternatives to 602–3
blood administration 600
blood component 595–8
compatibility testing 599–600
massive blood loss, considerations for 600
see also blood
transient receptor potential (TRP) 247, 1024
transit time, gas sampling 241
transport
carbon dioxide 740–3
oxygen 737–40
transpulmonary thermodilution and ultrasound
indicator dilution 214
transversus abdominis plane (TAP) block 1015,
1183–4, 1227, 1258
Trap Neuter Return (TNR) programs 1041
trauma, physical 1087
traumatic brain injury (TBI) 238, 369, 431
trazodone 429–30
tribromoethanol 1068
Tributame, for euthanasia 162
tricaine methanesulfonate (MS‐222)
1118, 1119
tropomyosin‐receptor kinase A (TrkA)
receptors 1013
tumor necrosis factor‐α (TNFα) 1025, 1218
tumors 421, 690, 711
adrenal 896, 898
adrenocortical 896
bone 1365, 1368
brain 905–6
decarboxylation 877
esophageal 878, 879
functional 879
gastrointestinal stromal 877, 878
hepatic 878
insulinoma 906
intracranial 835, 836, 837
large 878, 915
lung 806
mast cell 877, 878, 879, 1032
nasal 1365
necrotic 879
neuroendocrine 877–8
ocular 1331
opioid effects 371–2
oral 1365
painful invasive 1366
parathyroid 914, 915
partially resected primary tumors 907
pituitary 895
primary and secondary 1369
recurrence 1371
renal 878
small non‐invasive 911
spinal 838
surgical resection 896
thyroid 911, 912
unresectable 912
vascularized 911
well‐differentiated 912
see also cancer pain
Tuohy needle 1101
twilight anesthesia 4
type II collagen 1383
UDP‐glucuronosyltransferases (UGT) 308
ultrasound
Doppler ultrasonography 1173
Doppler ultrasonographic blood pressure
measurement 202–3
indicator dilution and transpulmonary
thermodilution 214
point‐of‐care see point‐of‐care ultrasound
(POCUS)
three‐dimensional 174
transducers 1173
ultrasound‐guided epidural
technique 1196–7
ultrasound‐guided nerve blocks 173–4,
1173–4
uncertainty complexity 26
unconsciousness
anesthetic‐induced 155
defining 154–5
delayed 158
onset of 158–60
UNESP‐Botucatu multidimensional pain scale,
cats 1003, 1034
unfractionated heparin (UFH) 576
ungulates 1077–8
unidimensional pain assessment scales 1002
United Kingdom
Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain
and Ireland 11–12
Association of Veterinary Anaesthetists of
Great Britain and Ireland 6, 7
Department of Health 49
Diploma of Veterinary Anaesthesia 6, 21
National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence 11
Royal Veterinary College 16
United States
American Animal Hospital Association
143, 197
American Association for Medical
Instruments 203
American College of Veterinary Anesthesia
and Analgesia 6, 7, 174, 197, 251
American College of Veterinary
Anesthesiologists 6
American College of Veterinary Emergency
and Critical Care 55
American College of Veterinary Internal
Medicine 198, 203, 204
American Medical Association 174
American National Standards Institute 40

-- 1447 of 1450 --

1432 	Index
American Society for Testing and
Materials 49
American Society of Anesthesiologists 10, 12,
147, 176, 251, 255
hypo‐or hyperthermia 68
infection prevention and control 147
patient health assessment 10, 12
POCUS certification program 255
preanesthetic blood testing 13
American Society of Echocardiography 271
American Society of Veterinary Anesthesia 6
American Veterinary Medical Association
6, 8, 161, 162
Guidelines on Euthanasia (2020) 153,
156, 158
Humane Slaughter guidelines (2016) 160
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention 8, 148
Diplomate of the American College of
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia 21
Food and Drug Administration 49
Occupational Safety and Health
Administration 41, 49
risk of anesthetic death, in small animals 14
United States Department of Agriculture Animal
and Plant Health Service (USDA
APHIS). 161
United States Government Principles for the
Utilization and Care of Vertebrate
Animals Used in Testing, Research, and
Training 158
United States Pharmacopeia/ National
Formulary (USP/NF) 162
upper respiratory disease, and
anesthesia 788–802
urethane 1065, 1066t
injectable 1068
urethral or bilateral ureteral obstruction 937–8
uric acid 1113
urinary bladder rupture and
uroabdomen 938–9
urinary bladder volume 271
urinary system 923, 935
urinary tract, anatomy of 923–4
urine
abdominocentesis removing 939
atenolol excreted in 329
collection systems 48
conjugation products 308
dilute 342, 1113
dobutamine excreted in 322
dopamine excreted in 322
drug concentration 290, 294
epinephrine excreted in 321
glycopyrrolate excreted in 317
isoproterenol excreted in 324
leakage/spillage 50
metabolism 362
metoprolol excreted in 329
normal flow 327
and opioids 363
output 322, 323, 339, 347
phenoxybenzamine excreted in 328
production 271
renal tubular epithelial cells in sediment 411
reptiles 1113
restrictive polymer electric heating systems 250
safety considerations 48, 50
secretion of drugs into 309
urine output measurement 928
urogenital system 1113
anesthesia in horses 1251–3
for castration 1252–3
for ovariectomy 1253
of penis/vulva 1253
of the perineum 1253
vagovagal reflex 655
valves
adjustable pressure‐limiting see adjustable
pressure‐limiting (APL) valve
demand 139
oxygen flush 104
PEEP 44, 65
pressure‐reducing 94
rebreathing 212
vapor
versus gas 491–2
pressure 493–4
vaporizers 97–9
agent‐specific 103
“back bar” 98
back‐pressure compensation 97
bracket systems 98–9
common in veterinary medicine 99–103
complications 67
Copper Kettles 102, 103
Dräger vapor vaporizers (Vapor 19.1) 101–2
electronic 98
flow rate compensation 97
flowmeter‐controlled 102, 103
Fluotec Mark 3 99
Isotec 3 99
maintenance 103
measured‐flow 102–3
Ohio calibrated 102
Ohmeda/Datex‐Ohmeda/ GE Healthcare Tec
vaporizers 99–100
operational considerations 97–8
Penlon Sigma Delta 102
Tec series 99–101
Tec 3 type 100, 101
Tec 4 and 5 100–1
Tec 6 101
temperature compensation 97
types 97
use of wrong anesthetic 103
Verni‐Trol 102
see also flowmeters
vascular access
marine mammals
cetacean 1099–101
manatee 1102
pinnipeds 1101–2
vascular system 631–8
capillaries 634–5
large arteries and veins 633
resistance vessels 633–4
small arteries 633
transcapillary fluid exchange 635–8
veins, venules and venous capacitance 638
vasoactive drugs 832–5
vasopressin
administration of 430
antiemetic therapy 864
arginine vasopressin (antidiuretic
hormone) 370, 380, 426, 430–1, 657, 658
cardiopulmonary arrest 58
cardiovascular physiology 657
euthanasia 157
indications for 430
injectable 431
nausea and vomiting caused by 864
and opioids 367
perioperative fluid therapy 588
plasma 934
septic peritonitis 880, 881
shock 693, 877
toxicity 543
unresponsiveness to 511
in vitro studies 810
vasopressors 324, 961
vatinoxan 322, 344–7, 1083, 1267
clinical considerations 347
indications for 344–5
mechanism of action 344–5
medetomidine–vatinoxan combination
(Zenalpha®) 347
pharmacodynamics 345–7
pharmacokinetics 345
VC see vital capacity (VC)
VCV see volume‐controlled ventilation (VCV)
vector autoregression (VAR) models, 171
vecuronium 1066t
veins 638
auricular 1055
and large arteries 633
velocity time integral (VTI) 215–16
venipuncture 1054, 1100
venorespiratory reflex 655
venous capacitance 638
venous oxygen saturation (SvO2
) 236
ventilation
airway pressure release ventilation 1094–5
alveolar 498–9
apneustic anesthesia ventilation 1095, 1098
continuous positive airway pressure
1094, 1095
controlled mechanical ventilation 1094, 1098
defining 698
effects of anesthesia on 721–37
inhalational anesthesia 509
lung protective 1095
maintenance of anesthesia 1228
marine mammals see marine mammals
mechanical 755–82
assisted and assisted‐controlled 768–70
continuous mandatory ventilation 764–8
United States (cont’d)

-- 1448 of 1450 --

Index 	1433
dual‐controlled 767–8
pressure‐controlled 767
volume‐controlled 765–7
minute ventilation (V 1
) 698
mode of 509, 510–11
monitoring see ventilation monitoring
neural control 700–2, 721–5
positive‐pressure 63, 65, 957
pressure support 768–70
pulmonary 702–12, 713f
spontaneous 84
spontaneous intermittent mandatory 770
ventilation–perfusion relationships 718–37
ventilation monitoring
aerobic respiration, physiology 220–1
apnea monitors 222
capnography, time‐based 224–7
carbon dioxide
and acid–base implications 221
measurement methods 223–4
quantitative monitoring 222–4
continued monitoring of parameters 59
during CPR 57
importance 221–2
physical methods 222
quantitative monitoring of carbon
dioxide 222–4
standards 221–2
see also ventilators
“Ventilation Shutdown Plus” 154
ventilation–perfusion (V/Q) matching
718–21, 719f
computed tomography 227
effects of anesthesia on 721–37, 733f
and gas exchange 718, 719f
impaired 1220–1
marine mammals 1095
mismatch in clinical practice 1220
measuring 718, 720–1
ventilation monitoring 227
V/Q ratio 1220
ventilators 113–39
airway pressure alarms 122
alarms 122
bellows 117, 119–20
Bird Mark series 118, 119
Bird Mark 7 137–9
classification 114–17
compliance and compression volumes 122
control of ventilator driving gas 122
cycling mechanism 116–17
delivered tidal volume, factors affecting 122
determinants of tidal volume 122
Dräger large animal 133
Dräger small animal 123
drive mechanism/circuit 115–16
dual‐circuit 115, 117, 119–22
Engler ADS 1000 and 2000 veterinary delivery
system and critical care ventilator 123–4
exotic animal (SAV03 and SAV04) 124–5
fresh gas flow (FGF) 122–6
Hallowell EMC 2000, 2002/2002 PRO
ventilator 126–7
Hallowell Tafonius/Tafonius Junior 136, 137f
ICU Medical (formerly Smith Medical/
Surgivet) SAV 2500 130–1
ICU Medical (formerly Surgivet)
DHV1000 large animal ventilator 136–7
infection prevention and control 146
inspiratory‐to‐expiratory ratio (I:E) 122, 131,
132, 134
intensive care unit (ICU) 113–14
JD Medical LAV‐3000 138
leaks 122
low driving gas pressure alarm 122
magnetic resonance imaging 51
major control variable 114–15
Mallard Medical Model 2400V 127–8
Mallard Medical Rachel Model 2800
series 134–6
maximum working pressure limit
(MOPL) 126–7
Ohio V5A 128–9
Ohmeda 7000 and 7800 series 129–30
Penlon AV‐S 131–2
Penlon Nuffield 200 115, 118, 119
power source 115
proper setup and monitoring 123
selected models 123–39
single‐ and dual‐circuit 117
single‐circuit 115
single‐circuit compressed gas‐powered
117, 118–19
single‐circuit piston‐driven 117–18
Tafonius 117–18
Vetronics Merlin small animal 132–3
Vetronics SAV03 and SAV04 small
animal 124–6
ventricular fibrillation (VF) 58
ventricular premature complexes (VPCs) 1221
ventricular septal defect (VSD) 686–7
ventricular tachycardia 13, 58, 428, 542, 543,
620, 626, 678, 681, 804, 875, 876f, 877,
899, 1147f, 1198
electrocardiography 191, 192, 195
ventricular tachycardia (VT) 58
venules 638
VEPs see visual evoked potentials (VEPs)
vessels, resistance 633–4
“vet shopping” 8
VetDAR® (Dimple Hill Software) 8
Veterinary Anesthesia and Surgery Association,
Japan 6
veterinary bedside lung ultrasound exam
(VetBLUE) 262
Veterinary Digital Anesthesia Record 8
Veterinary Midwest Anesthesia and Analgesia
Conference Scientific Meeting 7
Vetronics Merlin small animal ventilator 132–3
Vetronics SAV03 and SAV04 small animal
ventilator 124–5
visceral pain 985, 989t
visual analog scales 1002, 1364
visual cortex neurons 157
visual evoked potentials (VEPs) 157
vital capacity (VC) 698
volatile agent monitoring 244
voltage sensors 285
volume overload, associated conditions 683–6
dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) 686
mitral valve insufficiency/
regurgitation 683–6
volume‐controlled ventilation (VCV) 765–7
volumetric capnography (VCap) 228
volutrauma 65
vomiting see nausea and vomiting
VPCs see ventricular premature complexes
(VPCs)
V/Q ratio see ventilation–perfusion (V/Q)
matching
VSD see ventricular septal defect (VSD)
waste gas scavenge system 112–13
waste inhalation anesthetics
environmental implications 515
occupational exposure 514–15
“wedge” sign, lung consolidation 269
“wet lung” 268
whole blood (WB) 595
wildlife, capture of
hyperthermia 1087
level of central nervous system effect 1081
species versatility 1081
wildlife capture
ability to antagonize immobilization 1081
analgesia 1081
capture event 1084–7
complications 1087–8
darts 1079, 1080
exertional myopathy 1088
field anesthesia 1077–9
free‐ranging terrestrial mammals 1077–90
handler safety 1081
hyperthermia 1078, 1086, 1087
hypothermia 1078, 1087, 1088
hypoxemia 1086, 1088
immobilization 1079, 1081, 1086
management purposes 1078
monitoring and supportive care 1085–7
mortality 1088
pharmacology 1080–4
acepromazine 1084
α2
‐adrenergic receptor agonists 1083
α2
‐adrenergic receptor antagonists 1083
alfaxalone 1084
azaperone 1084
butorphanol 1081–2
carfentanil 1081
cyclohexamines 1082–3
detomidine 1083
dexmedetomidine 1083
diprenorphine 1082
droperidol 1084
drug combinations 1084
drug stability 1081
etorphine 1081, 1084
high margin of safety 1080–1
ideal drug combinations 1080–1
ketamine 1082

-- 1449 of 1450 --

1434 	Index
medetomidine 1083
naloxone 1082
naltrexone 1082
neuroleptic drugs 1084
neurosteroids 1084
opioid antagonists 1082
opioids 1081–2
perphenazine enanthate 1084
protocols and doses 1088
rapid onset of activity 1080
remote drug delivery equipment 1079–80
thiafentanil 1081
tiletamine‐zolazepam 1082–3
vatinoxan 1083
zuclopenthixol acetate 1084
precapture planning 1077, 1084–5
recovery 1087
respiratory depression 1088
small delivery volume 1081
technique 1078–9
see also capture of wildlife
wire‐ or tube‐guided techniques 84–5
wobble index 304
wobbler syndrome 839
wooden chest syndrome 65
World Health Organization (WHO)
defining patient safety 24
International Classification for Patient
Safety 24, 25
Surgical Safety Checklist (SSC) 33, 34t, 35
World Organisation for Animal Health
(WOAH) 153
wound classification systems 143t
xenobiotics, biotransformation and elimination
of 850–1
xylazine 8, 325, 338–44, 1061, 1136, 1265
anesthetic mortality, risk of 16, 17
clinical considerations 343–4
dogs and cats 1162
drug dose 1065, 1066t
and epinephrine 320–1
indications for 338–9
mechanism of action 338–9
pharmacodynamics 340–3
pharmacokinetics 339–40
premedication 182
ruminants 1269
yohimbine 69, 1266
clinical considerations 347
indications for 344–5
mechanism of action 344–5
pharmacodynamics 345–7
pharmacokinetics 345
Zeel® homeopathic preparation 1383
Zenalpha® 347
zolazepam
clinical considerations 337–8
indications for 336
mechanism of action 336
pharmacodynamics 337
pharmacokinetics 336–7
zuclopenthixol acetate 1084
wildlife capture (cont’d)

-- 1450 of 1450 --

