
===== PDF PAGE 13 =====
Chapter 1 Introduction: cancer in cats and dogs
4
•	 Osteosarcoma in large-breed dogs: with 
amputation alone, average survival time is 3–6 
months; ‘failure’ is due to development of 
pulmonary metastatic disease in 90% of patients
•	 Oral malignant melanoma, an aggressive and 
highly metastatic disease: the primary tumour 
may be controlled by surgery/radiotherapy, giving 
average survival times in the order of 6 months, 
with failure due to metastasis
•	 Splenic haemangiosarcoma: following 
splenectomy, average survival times are less than 
6 months, due to development of metastases.
In cats the majority of oral and pharyngeal 
tumours are squamous cell carcinoma and similar to 
human head-and-neck cancers. These tumours 
respond poorly to conventional therapy (especially 
when lingual) and in the absence of an effective 
means of therapy these feline patients would be 
ideal candidates for new approaches.
Breed predilections
In dogs it is well recognized that differences exist 
between different breeds regarding their risk of 
developing certain types of cancer, but there are few 
large-scale epidemiological studies on the incidence 
of different types of cancer in the canine population 
and its variation between breeds. In a study of rates 
and causes of death in insured dogs in Sweden, 
Bonnett et al. (1997) found that the Bernese 
Mountain Dog, Irish Wolfhound, Flat-coated 
Retriever, Boxer and St Bernard were the five breeds 
with the highest mortality from tumour-related death. 
In Denmark, Bernese Mountain Dog, Flat-coated 
Retriever, Golden Retriever and Rottweiler were the 
top four breeds, with over 20% of deaths due to can-
cer (Proschowsky et al., 2003).
These population-based studies provide useful 
indicators to breeds at risk of cancer, but should not 
be regarded as completely definitive. The outcome 
often depends on the structure of the population at 
risk with respect to breed, which explains the differ-
ences found in studies from different countries. 
However, the fact that there are undoubtedly breed-
related predispositions to development of cancer 
has important implications in understanding the aeti-
ology of cancer, as it suggests a possible genetic, 
heritable component.
Some breeds of dog have been associated with 
specific types of tumour, such as Bernese Mountain 
Dog (systemic and malignant histiocytosis) and Irish 
Wolfhound (osteosarcoma); others, such as Boxer, 
Golden Retriever and Rottweiler, are associated with 
a higher risk of tumours in general. This observation 
also has important genetic implications, suggesting 
that the situation in some breeds may be like the 
rare human Li-Fraumeni syndrome where a germ 
line mutation in a tumour suppressor gene (p53) 
results in a hereditary predisposition to certain forms 
of cancer (Tabori and Malkin, 2008); whereas other 
breeds may have a more specific genetic abnormal-
ity leading to a particular type of tumour.
Far less is published about breed predilections in 
cats. Siamese cats appear to have a predilection for 
lymphoma. Early-onset mediastinal lymphoma has 
been reported in FeLV-negative Siamese-type 
breeds, suggesting a possible genetic predisposition 
to this condition. Siamese cats have been reported 
to respond more favourably than other breeds to 
chemotherapeutic treatment of lymphoma (Teske et 
al., 2002).
Treatment of cancer
The last 20 years have seen many changes in the 
attitude and approach of the pet-owning public and 
of the veterinary profession to the diagnosis and 
treatment of cancer in cats and dogs, with the result 
that the demand for both basic and specialist treat-
ment of animals with cancer has continually 
increased. However, while knowledge of the basic 
disease process has advanced hugely in the past 
two decades, this has yet to make a major impact on 
the clinical management of cancer in pet animals. 
Thus surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy 
remain for the time being the main weapons in the 
fight against cancer.
Surgery is and remains the most effective 
method of treatment for many ‘solid’ tumours such as 
mast cell tumours, low-grade sarcomas and low-
grade carcinomas. The development of surgical 
techniques to allow adequate margins of excision for 
such tumours can frequently result in surgical cure.
The increasing availability of radiotherapy facili-
ties, firstly in North America and then in the UK and 
Europe, has led to an increasing application of radi-
ation, either as a primary treatment for brain and 
nasal tumours, for example, or in conjunction with 
surgery for the more invasive mast cell tumours  
and sarcomas.
Chemotherapy remains the treatment of choice 
for systemic diseases, particularly lymphoma, and is 
increasingly used as an adjunct to surgery for those 
tumours with a high risk of metastasis. With the 
exception of osteosarcoma, however, the latter indi-
cation has yet to be validated by clear demonstration 
of efficacy in controlled clinical trials.
Future directions
New technology is having an impact on the veteri-
nary approach to the cancer patient. In terms of 
diagnostics, the use of monoclonal antibodies to 
immunophenotype tumours such as lymphoma and 
leukaemia has been shown to be of prognostic 
value, and immunocytochemistry has become more 
widely used in the diagnosis and classification of this 
and other forms of cancer. Increased availability of 
advanced imaging techniques such as advanced 
ultrasonography, computed tomography and mag-
netic resonance imaging is starting to revolutionize 
the ability to detect and determine the true extent of 
some tumours, allowing better planning for surgical 
approaches and radiotherapy.
Ch01 Oncology.indd   4 11/10/2010   11:35
VetBooks.ir

===== PDF PAGE 14 =====
Chapter 1 Introduction: cancer in cats and dogs
5
Some novel methods of treatment have become 
available. For example, photodynamic therapy is 
being used for the treatment of superficial squamous 
cell carcinomas and other head and neck tumours. A 
novel immune system modulator, imiquimod, which 
possesses both antiviral and anti-tumour activity, has 
been used with variable degrees of success in 
human patients with cutaneous tumours, including 
basal and squamous cell carcinoma and epithelio-
trophic lymphoma, and has also been used in veteri-
nary practice.
In recent years much more targeted methods of 
cancer therapy have met with success in human 
medicine, such as the small molecule tyrosine 
kinase inhibitor imatinib (Gleevec, Novartis), which 
targets cells with activating mutations in KIT for treat-
ment of chronic myeloid leukaemia and gastrointesti-
nal stromal tumours (GISTs). It has been shown that 
20–30% of canine mast cell tumours have mutations 
in the juxtamembrane region of c-kit, implicating KIT 
tyrosine kinase in the pathogenesis of these 
tumours. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors have been shown 
to have some efficacy in the treatment of non-resect-
able mast cell tumours in dogs (London et al., 2003; 
Hahn et al., 2008) and two such agents – masitinib 
(Masivet, AB Science) and toceranib phosphate 
(Palladia, Pfizer) – have recently been authorized for 
treatment of canine mast cell tumours.
Specific growth factor receptors are another 
potential target for newer therapeutic approaches. 
The antibody targeting the human epidermal growth 
factor receptor (HER-2), ‘Herceptin’, has proven to 
be effective in the treatment of HER-2-positive 
breast cancer. Antibodies have also been developed 
to target other receptors involved with cell signalling: 
CD20 is a transmembrane protein that regulates 
early steps in the activation of cell cycle initiation and 
differentiation. The antigen is expressed on most 
B-cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas but is not found on 
stem cells, pro-B cells, normal plasma cells or other 
normal tissues. Rituximab, an anti-human CD20 anti-
body, is approved for treatment of B-cell lymphoma 
in adults. Further humanized anti-CD20 antibodies, 
some carrying radiopharmaceuticals, are in develop-
ment for treatment of B-cell lymphoma.
Whilst there is much to be learnt from compara-
tive oncology, these advances cannot be directly 
translated into veterinary medicine. For rational 
application of such targeted cytostatic treatments in 
veterinary cancer medicine the targets need to be 
defined, and so research is required to determine 
which cell surface receptors are expressed in differ-
ent tumours and what signalling pathways are func-
tional or dysfunctional in the neoplastic cells. Work 
already in progress in these areas offers a promising 
start to an exciting future.
References and further reading
Bonnett BN, Egenvall A, Olson P and Hedhammar A (1997) Mortality in 
insured Swedish dogs: rates and causes of death in various 
breeds. Veterinary Record 141, 40–44
Dobson JM, Samuel S,
 
Milstein H, Rogers K and Wood JLN (2002) 
Canine neoplasia in the UK: estimates of incidence rates from a 
population of insured dogs. Journal of Small Animal Practice 43, 
240–246
Dorn CR, Taylor DO, Schneider R, Hibbard HH and Klauber MR (1968) 
Survey of animal neoplasms in Alameda and Contra Costa 
counties, California. II. Cancer morbidity in dogs and cats from 
Alameda County. Journal of the National Cancer Institute 40, 307–
318
Hanahan D and Weinberg RA (2000) The hallmarks of cancer. Cell 100, 
57–70
Hahn KA, Oglivie G, Devauchelle P et al. (2008) Masitinib is safe and 
effective for the treatment of canine mast cell tumours. Journal of 
Veterinary Internal Medicine 22, 1301–1309
London C, Hannah AL, Zadovoskaya R et al. (2003) Phase I dose 
escalating study of SU11654, a small molecule receptor tyrosine 
kinase inhibitor, in dogs with spontaneous malignancies. Clinical 
Cancer Research 9, 2755–2768
Michell AR (1999) Longevity of British breeds of dog and its 
relationships with sex, size, cardiovascular variables and disease. 
Veterinary Record 145, 625–629
Proschowsky HF , Rugbjerg H and Ersboll AK (2003) Morbidity of 
purebred dogs in Denmark. Preventive Veterinary Medicine 58, 53–
62
Tabori U and Malkin D (2008) Risk stratiﬁcation in cancer predisposition 
syndromes: lessons learned from novel molecular developments in 
Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Cancer Research 68, 2053–2057
Teske E, van Straten G, van Noort R and Rutteman GR (2002) 
Chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide, vincristine and 
prednisolone (COP) in cats with malignant lymphoma: new results 
with an old protocol. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 16, 
179–186
Ch01 Oncology.indd   5 11/10/2010   11:35
VetBooks.ir

===== PDF PAGE 15 =====
Chapter 2 How to make a diagnosis
6
2
How to make a diagnosis
Timothy J. Scase and Jane M. Dobson
Introduction
Obtaining an accurate pathological diagnosis is an 
essential requirement for optimizing the treatment  
of the individual cancer patient and for providing the 
client with an assessment of likely cancer behaviour 
and likely prognosis. An accurate diagnosis provides 
a rational starting point for selecting the best treat-
ment for the cancer patient. Without an accurate 
pathological diagnosis, the clinician can only rely on 
empirical evidence to decide how best to treat the 
patient. At the most basic level, differentiation of neo-
plasia from non-neoplastic disease is likely to greatly 
increase the chance of therapy success.
With the increasing sophistication of techniques 
available to the diagnostic pathologist, there is much 
greater potential for obtaining an accurate diagnosis 
from submitted tissue samples. It is also expected that, 
with the refinement of diagnostic techniques, method-
ologies and classification schemes, the requirement to 
obtain an accurate and highly specific diagnosis for 
treatment and prognosis will increase in the future.
This chapter discusses the optimum strategies 
for achieving a pathological diagnosis, how to inter-
pret a pathology report and what to expect from the 
pathologist in terms of diagnostic quality, margin 
examination and special stains. All of these factors 
can increase or decrease the likelihood of achieving 
the true pathological diagnosis, and from there the 
more likely it is that rational therapies can be chosen.
Choosing the correct biopsy modality for any par-
ticular tumour type can present a challenge to the 
clinician when trying to optimize the cost/benefit ratio 
of the extent of any investigations into the tumour 
prior to treatment. In some cases, if an excisional 
biopsy is chosen as the primary diagnostic modality 
and if a benign tumour has been excised with com-
plete tumour-free surgical margins, the diagnostic 
and treatment modality have been the same and no 
money will have been used in the diagnostic work-up 
of the case. However, if histopathology shows a mast 
cell tumour (MCT) or soft tissue sarcoma that has 
been incompletely removed, the best chance of  
surgical cure has been lost. Thus in many cases the 
clinician will wish to have some idea as to what 
tumour type they are dealing with prior to further 
biopsy or treatment. In many cases, choosing an 
aspirate or smear as the first diagnostic procedure 
will enable rational decision making for choosing the 
subsequent diagnostic modality.
Cytology
Cytological examination of tissue samples is a quick 
and simple technique, requiring a minimum of equip-
ment, that can easily be performed in the general 
practice setting. Many commercial clinical pathology 
laboratories will report on cytological samples and, 
with practice, most veterinary surgeons should be 
able to use cytology to discriminate between reactive 
and neoplastic lesions and even to diagnose some 
particularly characteristic tumours, such as MCTs.
Fine-needle aspirates or impression smears from 
solid tumours and the cytological examination of the 
cellular content of fluids collected from organs or body 
cavities can provide a great deal of information about 
the lesion and in most cases will enable differentiation 
between inflammatory and neoplastic processes. In 
the hands of an experienced clinical pathologist, it can 
be a highly rewarding diagnostic technique that can 
greatly assist in choosing the most appropriate sub-
sequent diagnostic or therapeutic decision (Figure 
2.1). In inexperienced hands, however, or if the sam-
ples are taken using poor technique or handled in-
appropriately, cytology can be either unrewarding or, 
at worst, misleading and result in the wrong diagnos-
tic or therapeutic choices being made.
Decision tree for cytological diagnosis.2.1
Cell population
Round
cells
Apply criteria for malignancy
EpithelialSpindle
cells
Inflammatory or
reactive tissue
One cell type
predominates
Multiple cell
types present
Ch02 Oncology.indd   6 11/10/2010   11:34
VetBooks.ir

===== PDF PAGE 16 =====
Chapter 2 How to make a diagnosis
7
The morphology of neoplastic cells will also often 
provide an indication of the likely nature of a tumour 
and its degree of malignancy (Figures 2.2 and 2.3).
•	 Cytology cannot be used to ‘grade’ most tumours, 
as grading is largely dependent on consideration 
of the relationship of the neoplastic cells with the 
surrounding normal tissues, and other factors such 
as the mitotic rate, the degree of inflammation and 
necrosis, all of which can be difficult or impossible 
to assess on cytological examination alone
•	 Some tumours, such as mammary tumours, have 
a very complex architecture and examination of 
histological tissue sections is required to make a 
diagnosis. In these cases, cytology is much less 
useful, as it may not be able to distinguish 
between different mammary tumour types 
(Figures 2.4 and 2.5).
Cytological and histological features of 
malignancy. (Adapted from Morris and Dobson, 
2001, with permission of the publisher)
2.2
Cytological features
Cell population Pleomorphism
Presence of mitoses, especially abnormal or 
bizarre forms
Cellular features Large cell size/giant cells (anisocytosis)
Poorly differentiated, anaplastic cells
High nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio
Nuclear features Large nuclear size, nuclear pleomorphism 
(anisokaryosis)
Multiple nuclei (often of variable size)
Hyperchromatic nuclei with clumping or 
stippling of chromatin
Prominent and often multiple nucleoli of 
variable size and shape
Histological features
Cellular features As above
Tumour architecture Lack of structural organization of cells into 
recognizable form
Relationship with 
adjacent tissues
Invasion of cells into adjacent normal tissues
Evidence of 
metastatic behaviour
Tumour cells invading or present within 
lymphatics or venules
Criteria for malignancy: a cluster of cells from 
an aspirate of a prostatic carcinoma. The cells 
are displaying marked anisocytosis and anisokaryosis. In 
some cells the nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio is increased. 
There are bi- and even multinucleated cells. The nuclei 
contain prominent, often multiple, nucleoli. (Modiﬁ  ed 
Wright’s stain, original magniﬁ  cation X1000)
2.3
In contrast to Figure 2.4, this histological section 
from a mixed mammary tumour shows the 
architectural arrangement of the cells, forming lobules and 
ducts. This is an important aspect of diagnosis and cannot 
be represented cytologically. (Giemsa, X20 objective)
2.5
Mast cell tumour. (a) Histological section from a 
well differentiated MCT, showing homogenous 
sheets of mast cells; tumour architecture is not important 
in diagnosis. (H&E, X20 objective) (b) A ﬁ  ne-needle 
aspirate from such a tumour is likely to yield a similar 
population of tumour cells. (Giemsa, X40 objective)
2.4
(a)
(b)
Cytology is undoubtedly a useful diagnostic 
technique in the investigation of neoplasia, but it is 
important to be aware of its limitations:
•	 Cytology often will not provide a definitive tumour 
diagnosis. For instance, in some solid tumours, 
neoplastic cells may not exfoliate sufficiently to 
provide enough cells for diagnosis. This may 
occur with any tumours that produce 
considerable stromal components, such as a 
fibroma or osteoma
Ch02 Oncology.indd   7 11/10/2010   11:34
VetBooks.ir

===== PDF PAGE 17 =====
Chapter 2 How to make a diagnosis
8
Cytology techniques
Impression smears
Impression smears can be performed with the mass 
in situ, or using biopsy specimens from the mass.
1. Pat the cleanly incised surface dry with gauze 
(sterility dependent on whether the impression 
smear is taken in situ or not) to remove excess 
blood that would otherwise swamp the cytology 
preparation.
2. Dab a clean glass slide on to the cut surface if the 
mass is in situ, or dab the cut face of a sample on 
to a slide (Figure 2.6), and allow to air dry.
This might be particularly important where the 
fluid-filled structure is close to a joint or body 
cavity (for instance, aspiration of a perineal mass 
that could represent a perineal hernia), where 
there is a possibility of communication between 
the mass and a body cavity.
2. Prepare a needle (20–25 G, starting with 1-inch 
23 G) and syringe (5–10 ml). Insert the needle 
into the mass and reposition using a stabbing 
action three to five times. This can be done either 
with negative pressure generated by pulling back 
on the syringe plunger, or with no negative 
pressure. In some cases, excessive negative 
pressure on the aspirated cells can result in cell 
damage and thereby reduce the diagnostic utility 
of the sample.
FNA technique for a subcutaneous nodule.  
(a) The lesion is located and held ﬁrmly while 
the needle is inserted. (b) An air-ﬁlled syringe is 
connected to the hub of the needle and the contents 
blown on to a clean glass slide. (c) A second clean glass 
slide is placed gently on top of the sample, allowing the 
ﬁlm to spread between the slides, which are then gently 
drawn apart. See text for full details.
2.7
(a)
(b)
(c)
Making an impression smear.2.6
To increase the likelihood of a diagnostic prepa-
ration being achieved, multiple slides should be pre-
pared. Multiple impressions can be placed on a 
single slide if the surface area of the tissue is small.
Performing impression smears from the tissue in-
house prior to submission of a biopsy for histological 
examination can be rewarding for the practitioner, as 
it enables direct correlation of the in-house cytologi-
cal diagnosis with the final histological diagnosis and 
allows the practitioner to pit themselves against the 
pathologist.
Fine-needle aspiration
Fine-needle aspiration (FNA; Figure 2.7) is the cyto-
logical technique of choice for those situations where 
a provisional diagnosis is required prior to incisional/
excisional biopsy or where an aspirate can be 
obtained via imaging-guided techniques rather than 
requiring surgical intervention, such as when sam-
pling an intra-abdominal mass using ultrasound 
guidance. FNA is frequently used for diagnosis and 
staging of lymphoma, as the neoplastic cells exfoli-
ate well and it is usually diagnostic without resorting 
to more invasive surgical biopsy techniques.
1. Prepare the skin. In most cases, the skin does not 
need clipping or preparing other than wetting the 
fur with alcohol. In those cases where the FNA 
sample might be cultured, it is good practice to 
clip and prepare the skin as for a surgical biopsy, 
in order to reduce the possibility of contaminating 
the sample with cutaneous microorganisms. In 
some cases, where a fluctuant mass is being 
aspirated, it is similarly prudent to prepare the 
skin further in order to reduce the chance of 
contamination of the fluid within the mass/cavity. 
Ch02 Oncology.indd   8 11/10/2010   11:34
VetBooks.ir

===== PDF PAGE 18 =====
Chapter 2 How to make a diagnosis
9
3. Release any pressure on the syringe plunger and 
withdraw the needle and attached syringe from 
the patient. Detach the syringe from the needle 
hub (any aspirated cells will be in the hub/
needle). Air is drawn into the syringe. Reattach 
the syringe to the needle hub.
4. Place a clean slide on a horizontal surface, and 
press the plunger down firmly to expel the 
needle/needle-hub contents on to the slide. A 
single FNA may be enough to make two or three 
slide preparations.
5. To make the smears, and to prevent the 
preparation being too thick to examine 
microscopically, place a second clean slide at 
right angles on top of the first and smoothly and 
gently smear out to the edge. No extra pressure 
should be exerted on the slide beyond that 
required to move it over the slide beneath. 
Excessive pressure will result in extensive 
rupture of the aspirated cells and render the 
preparation impossible to interpret (Figure 2.8).
6. The smears are then air dried prior to submission 
or in-house staining.
Bone marrow sampling
Aspiration: Specialized needles with stylets to pre-
vent cortical bone blocking the end of the needle are 
required for bone marrow aspiration. The ‘Klima’  
needle (Figure 2.10) is one example but other types 
(e.g. Jamshidi; see Figure 2.13) and disposable ver-
sions are available.
Poor smearing technique: the stringy blue 
streaks reﬂect DNA material from ruptured cells. 
(Modiﬁed Wright’s stain, original magniﬁcation X400) 
(Courtesy of Clinical Pathology Laboratory, Department of 
Veterinary Medicine, University of Cambridge)
2.8
Cytospin preparation of pleural ﬂuid from a cat 
with a mediastinal mass. (Giemsa, X100 
objective)
2.9
Klima needle for bone marrow aspiration.2.10
Cytospins of body ﬂuids/effusions
For any body cavity, or indeed any fluid-filled mass, 
cytological examination of cells exfoliating into the 
fluid may enable a diagnosis to be made and in par-
ticular may provide evidence for the presence or 
absence of a neoplastic process. As the cells are 
often present at low density within the fluid, a con-
centrating technique is usually required in order to 
provide enough cells on a slide to make a confident 
diagnosis. This is most easily achieved by using a 
cytospin machine – a specialized centrifuge where 
one or more drops of the fluid are placed in a holder 
attached to a glass slide, and the cells are precipi-
tated on to the slide by the spinning of the centrifuge 
arm. Once the arm has stopped spinning, the slide is 
detached and left to air dry and the cytospin prepar-
ation is stained routinely (Figure 2.9). In most cases 
cytospin preparations will be performed at a diag-
nostic laboratory rather than in a practice laboratory.
In the dog, bone marrow can be collected from 
any of the larger long bones, the pelvis or the ribs. 
Different clinicians have their preferred approaches: 
the dorsal wing of the ileum is an easy site to sample 
provided the patient is not overweight (Figure 2.11); 
other people prefer the cranial aspect of the proximal 
humerus. In the cat the femur is usually the preferred 
site and the procedure is often performed under 
general anaesthetic.
1. In the dog: with the patient sedated and local 
anaesthetic infiltrated into the surrounding skin, 
muscle and periosteum, insert the Klima needle 
(with stylet in place) into the dorsal wing of the 
iliac crest using a twisting action (Figure 2.12.a).
2. Once the needle is deeply seated within the 
bone, remove the stylet, connect a 10 ml syringe 
and apply suction, resulting in a sample of bone 
marrow bubbling into the syringe (Figure 2.12b) .
3. Withdraw the syringe and needle from the bone as 
one unit and apply drops of bone marrow to 5–10 
clean glass slides positioned at about 45 degrees 
Ch02 Oncology.indd   9 11/10/2010   11:34
VetBooks.ir

===== PDF PAGE 19 =====
Chapter 2 How to make a diagnosis
10
to vertical. This allows the excess blood to run 
down the slide, thus reducing the haemodilution of 
the sample. In a good sample of bone marrow, it 
should be possible to see globules of fat and 
flecks of marrow (Figure 2.12c).
4. Use a second clean glass slide, drawn 
perpendicularly across the first, to make the 
smear (Figure 2.12 d). Speed is important here to 
prevent the marrow from clotting before the 
smear is made (some people advocate use of 
anticoagulants, e.g. ACD, in the syringe prior to 
suction, but in the authors’ experience tilting the 
slides allows excess blood to run off, thus 
preventing haemodilution of the sample, and 
prompt and adept smearing gives good results). 
The sample is then air dried and sent to the 
laboratory for fixation and staining.
Biopsy: The same approach and positioning may 
be used with a Jamshidi needle (Figure 2.13) to 
collect a core of bone marrow. This will require fixa-
tion in formalin and processing by standard histo-
logical methods.
Bone marrow sampling sites. (1) The dorsal 
wing of the iliac crest is one of the most 
common sites used in medium to large dogs. (2) The 
femur may be sampled via the trochanteric fossa (dog 
and cat, anaesthesia required). (3) The caudal ischium 
may be more easily located in overweight dogs.
2.11
1
2
3
Bone marrow aspiration technique. (a) The 
needle is inserted, using a twisting action.  
(b) Bone marrow bubbles into the syringe. (c) Globules of 
fat and ﬂecks of marrow are visible in the sample.  
(d) Making the smear. See text for full details.
2.12
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
(d)
Jamshidi biopsy needle.2.13
Submission of cytological specimens
It is imperative that cytological specimens, in particu-
lar smears, do not come into contact with formalin 
fumes. Exposure to formalin markedly decreases the 
intensity and microscopic appearance of standard 
cytological stains, rendering examination of the 
smears almost impossible. This is mostly a problem 
when cytological preparations and histological speci-
mens are submitted in the same packaging to a 
diagnostic pathology laboratory. If at all possible, the 
cytological preparations should be sent to the labo-
ratory in separate packaging to prevent formalin 
exposure, as even tightly closed specimen contain-
ers containing formalin can emit small amounts of 
formalin fumes, sufficient to destroy the cytological 
detail on the smears.
Surgical biopsy techniques
Histological examination of a biopsy sample is the 
most accurate method of cancer diagnosis and is 
likely to lead to a more definitive diagnosis than sam-
pling for cytological diagnosis alone. In general, 
larger tissue specimens will be obtained, enabling 
the neoplastic cells to be observed with the sur-
rounding tissue architecture. This also has the 
advantage that histological examination of the 
tumour may allow identification of invasive features, 
such as invasion of blood vessels or lymphatics, and 
may allow grading of the tumour. In many cases, the 
smaller the sample of tissue submitted for examina-
tion, the greater the chance of the tissue sections 
Ch02 Oncology.indd   10 11/10/2010   11:34
VetBooks.ir

===== PDF PAGE 20 =====
Chapter 2 How to make a diagnosis
11
being non-representative, or of the pathologist being 
unable to make an accurate diagnosis. This is one 
reason why post-mortem examination is the ultimate 
diagnostic modality.
Excisional versus incisional biopsy
In the majority of cases it is useful to determine the 
likely type and grade of tumour prior to definitive sur-
gery, so that the definitive surgical approach can be 
optimized. An incisional biopsy is therefore most 
appropriate in many cases, such as when approach-
ing a large cutaneous or subcutaneous mass, or a 
mass in a surgically challenging location. However, 
biopsy prior to surgery is not necessary if prior 
knowledge of tumour type and grade will not affect 
the surgical approach, e.g. with splenic, renal or 
canine mammary tumours.
The variety of biopsy techniques that may be 
used to collect tumour samples includes:
•	 Punch
•	 Needle core
 o Tru-cut (soft tissue)
 o Jamshidi (bone)
•	 Grab
•	 Incisional
•	 Excisional.
Selection of technique will depend upon the size, 
site and nature of the suspected tumour. Careful 
thought should be given to the biopsy procedure in 
order to ensure that a representative sample of tis-
sue is collected, without predisposing to local tumour 
dissemination or compromising future therapy 
(Figure 2.14).
2. Press the circular blade of the punch (Figure 
2.15) on to the surface of the lesion and rotate 
under gentle pressure to the required depth to 
collect a cylindrical specimen within the punch. 
One or more sutures may be required to close 
the wound.
Biopsy considerations. (Adapted from Morris and 
Dobson, 2001, with permission of the publisher)2.14
Objective Considerations
Procure a 
representative 
sample of the 
tumour
Avoid superﬁcal ulceration, areas of 
inﬂammation or necrosis
Ensure adequate depth of biopsy, particularly 
for oral tumours
Try to include tumour/normal tissue boundary 
in the biopsy sample
Procedure should 
not predispose to 
local tumour 
recurrence or local 
dissemination
Minimize handling of tumour by adequate 
surgical exposure
Ensure adequate haemostasis
Minimize trauma to tumour and normal tissues
Avoid contamination of normal tissue by 
surgical instruments
Do not 
compromise 
subsequent 
therapy
Any biopsy procedure should be sited well 
within the margins of future excision, as the 
biopsy tract will potentially be contaminated 
with tumour cells
Skin biopsy punch.2.15
Punch biopsy
Punch biopsy is suitable for collecting samples from 
superficial lesions (e.g. skin or any external relatively 
superficial tumour). It can also be used at lapar-
otomy for organs such as liver or spleen.
1. Clip and surgically prepare the site and infiltrate 
local anaesthetic into the area to be sampled.
The punch does not penetrate deeply into the 
lesion and so care should be taken to collect  
representative tissue in cases where there is necro-
sis or inflammatory tissue (e.g. oral tumours). 
Additionally, if going through the skin to retrieve a 
sample from a subcutaneous mass, care must be 
taken to ensure that the punch biopsy instrument 
does not just fill with skin. In this scenario, it is best 
to make a small incision to allow the instrument to 
reach the mass.
Needle core biopsy
Needle core biopsy is suitable for collecting small 
cores of tissue from solid soft tissue lesions that can 
be located and fixed for sampling. This technique 
can be used with ultrasound guidance for sampling 
intra-abdominal (and certain intrathoracic) lesions.
1. Clip and surgically prepare the skin over the 
lesion. The patient should be sedated and local 
anaesthetic infiltrated into the skin and soft tissue 
in the region of the lesion.
2. The ‘Tru-cut’ biopsy needle (Figure 2.16) is most 
commonly used. Some types are manually 
operated: following introduction of the needle into 
the lesion, the central core is advanced further 
into the lesion and rotated to collect tissue in the 
specimen notch. The outer sleeve is then 
advanced, trapping the tissue in the notch. The 
needle is withdrawn and opened for collection of 
the biopsy sample. Spring-loaded versions of the 
‘Tru-cut’ needle perform this procedure 
automatically and are particularly useful, as they 
allow the operator to have one hand free to 
stabilize the lesion.
The Tru-cut needle is not usually sufficiently 
robust to sample bony lesions. Specialized needles 
(e.g. Jamshidi, see Figure 2.13) are available for this 
purpose, as described in Chapter 13.
Ch02 Oncology.indd   11 11/10/2010   11:34
VetBooks.ir

===== PDF PAGE 21 =====
Chapter 2 How to make a diagnosis
12
Grab or pinch biopsy
Grab or pinch biopsy is suitable for collecting sam-
ples from mucosal surfaces (e.g. respiratory, alimen-
tary and urogenital systems). This technique is often 
used in conjunction with endoscopy, allowing visual-
ization of the surface to be sampled. Most endo-
scopes are equipped with biopsy cups (Figure 2.17), 
which collect mucosal samples through a biting 
action. General anaesthesia is usually required.
Whilst allowing access to hollow organ systems 
in a relatively non-invasive manner, the disadvantage 
of the grab or pinch biopsy technique lies in the 
superficial nature of the samples collected, which 
may not be truly representative of the pathology 
affecting the organ. Indeed, due to the nature of the 
biopsy technique and the size of the biopsy cup that 
may need to be used in a restricted space (for 
instance, when biopsying the urethra), the samples 
obtained may be extremely small. This may make a 
meaningful histopathological diagnosis very difficult 
to achieve.
Submission of histological samples
The whole sample should be sent in formalin wher-
ever possible, as this allows the assessment of the 
entire tumour specimen, including surgical margins. 
For complex specimens, the tissue orientation 
should be marked if important. If it is necessary to 
send part of a large tissue mass (e.g. spleen), a 
number of representative portions from the periphery 
of the mass should be sent, avoiding areas of haem-
orrhage or necrosis. It is important to ensure a high 
ratio of formalin volume to tissue volume (e.g. 10:1) 
and not to force big samples into small containers.
If only part of the tumour is being submitted, 
necrotic or haemorrhagic areas (e.g. the centre of an 
ulcerated mammary gland mass or the centre of a 
suspected splenic haemangiosarcoma) should be 
avoided, as these areas often lack sufficient cellular 
detail for a diagnosis to be made.
If very small samples are to be submitted (e.g. 
endoscopic biopsies), it is imperative to avoid 
artefacts that are introduced during collection of the 
specimens. For instance, crush artefacts obscure 
cellular detail within the sections, as all the nuclei 
and cytoplasm are squeezed out of the damaged 
Needle core biopsy. (a) Tru-cut needle.  
(b) With the stylet retracted, the needle is 
advanced into the lesion. (c) The stylet is advanced to 
expose the specimen notch, which is then rotated to 
collect tissue. (d) The outer sleeve is advanced to cover 
the sample. (e) The sample is removed from the notch. 
(b–d reproduced from the BSAVA Guide to Procedures in 
Small Animal Practice).
2.16
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Grab biopsy equipment.2.17
Ch02 Oncology.indd   12 11/10/2010   11:34
VetBooks.ir

===== PDF PAGE 22 =====
Chapter 2 How to make a diagnosis
13
cells. Other artefacts to be avoided are those caused 
by cautery, especially at important tumour margins.
The accuracy of the diagnosis will be much 
greater where the clinician provides further informa-
tion about the case, including signalment, lesion 
location and orientation (where appropriate) and any 
important clinical details such as evidence of meta-
stasis, presence of invasion based on imaging stud-
ies, etc. The pathologist should then be able to 
provide an accurate diagnosis and prognostically 
useful information such as tumour grade, presence 
of vascular/lymphatic invasion, and extent of surgical 
excision. Where there is uncertainty in the diagnosis, 
it is useful for the pathologist to provide details of the 
degree of uncertainty and the likely differential diag-
nosis. The pathologist may recommend further diag-
nostic or prognostic assays, such as undertaking 
different histochemical stains or through the use of 
immunohistochemical staining.
Surgical margins
The evaluation of surgical margins as an indicator of 
the effectiveness of surgical excision can often pre-
sent a challenge to clinicians, pathologists and his-
tology technicians. Because the entire tissue cannot 
be easily examined, the evaluation represents a 
trade-off between what is most practical and what is 
most cost-effective for an individual case. For 
instance, if the entire specimen of an elliptical piece 
of skin measuring 3 × 2 × 1 cm was cut into 5 micro-
metre sections, it would take approximately 4000 
histological sections to examine the entire tissue 
(Figure 2.18). Consequently any practical evaluation 
of surgical margins involves some pragmatism and 
degree of judgement as to which of the many orien-
tations or planes of sections are the most likely to 
provide the information.
In human medicine, it has been recognized that it 
is very important to have a pathologist involved in 
the evaluation and dissection of a gross specimen 
right from its initial receipt into the laboratory. This 
should enable the most appropriate sections to be 
taken for subsequent microscopic evaluation.
There are set guidelines for how tissue speci-
mens should be examined and processed in human 
medicine, provided by, for instance, the Royal 
College of Pathologists in the UK and the College of 
American Pathologists in the US. Y et even in human 
medicine there is a degree of controversy about how 
best to take the margins from any given tissue or 
tumour type, and indeed for some tissues the guide-
lines are much less stringent than for others.
The meaningful interpretation of the surgical mar-
gins of a tumour mass by the histopathologist is 
unfortunately not quite as straightforward as might 
be imagined. The most reliable way for the submit-
ting clinician to be assured that the pathologist is 
examining the ‘true’ surgical margins of a specimen 
is for those margins to be marked. There are a num-
ber of different ways that this can be done.
Ink
The cut surgical margins of the unfixed specimen 
can be painted using one or more different inks. 
Drawing a diagram on the submission form with the 
coloured margins indicated will also help the labora-
tory technician trimming the specimen. Painting the 
specimen is the most reliable method of margin 
identification and the use of different colours to paint 
different surgical margins can enable specific mar-
gins to be identified and individually assessed.
There are many different types and colours of 
commercially available surgical inks, but the cheap-
est and easiest method is to use one or more  
Options for the evaluation of surgical margins.2.18
Embed the entire tissue in wax and cut at 5 µm sections:  
e.g. 2 cm would yield about 4000 sections.
The choice in some veterinary laboratories: cruciate  
sections.
A pragmatic choice between the two extremes.
The other extreme: a single section through the mass.
Alternative for skin ellipses – includes shave margins.
Ch02 Oncology.indd   13 11/10/2010   11:34
VetBooks.ir

===== PDF PAGE 23 =====
Chapter 2 How to make a diagnosis
14
different colours of Indian ink. In order to ink the mar-
gins (Figure 2.19):
1. Pat the tissue dry with paper towels to remove 
the surface blood.
2. Paint the tissue with undiluted Indian ink over the 
margin surfaces as appropriate (for instance, 
over the subcutaneous fat over the deep border 
of a skin tumour). The tissue should be painted 
(a) A typical ellipse of skin from an excisional 
biopsy of a subcutaneous mass. (b) The 
subcutaneous tissues are dried with paper towels and 
painted with indian ink. (c) The tissues are then dipped in 
acetic acid (white vinegar) to precipitate the ink on to the 
tissue surface.
2.19
(a)
(b)
(c)
with a soft brush or cotton-buds, rather than 
being immersed in the ink, as otherwise ink can 
percolate through small fissures in the tissue and 
result in ink accumulating on the tissue that is not 
actually the margin.
3. Immerse the painted tissue in 10% acetic acid 
(e.g. white vinegar) to stop it being washed away 
in the formalin.
4. Pat the tissue with a paper towel to remove the 
excess ink/acetic acid and then place it into 
formalin for submission to the laboratory.
For the pathologists at the microscope, prior 
inking of the tissues can make a huge difference to 
how easy it is identify the ‘real’ surgical margins from 
false margins.
Suture-tagging
Sutures can be placed at the appropriate margins 
that are of particular importance (e.g. a margin that 
grossly is close to normal tissue, or at an anatomi-
cally important site). This method works less well for 
broad tumour fronts or very large specimens, or 
where multiple surgical margins are being assessed. 
Because the sutures have to be removed prior to 
processing, it is often impossible to identify the spe-
cific margins again on the wet tissue should further 
sections be requested.
Separate surgical margins
Marginal tissue is taken from the tissue bed that is 
left behind in the animal and this tissue is submitted 
separately as representing the tissue margins. 
Particularly for large samples, this is a very good 
way of submitting margins. It reduces the chances of 
processing/trimming errors, allows the surgeon to 
submit the most anatomically relevant margins and 
may also be cheaper, as fewer blocks may need to 
be processed. In addition, when done in combina-
tion with the standard ‘cruciate’ sections through  
the main tumour mass, useful measurements can 
still be obtained for the tissue margin/tumour  
margin distance.
At the diagnostic laboratory, the tissue will be 
removed from the fixative and appropriate samples 
taken for processing and subsequent histological 
examination. In most veterinary diagnostic laborato-
ries examination of margins may not be as thorough 
as it is in human medicine. Indeed, in the majority of 
commercial diagnostic practices, trimming of gross 
tissues will be performed by a technician rather than 
a pathologist. The ‘standard’ method for tissues, 
where it can be done, is to take ‘cruciate’ sections 
(north, east, south, west) (Figure 2.20) such that 
margins can be assessed around the tissue. 
However, this process does not work particularly well 
in all cases. Therefore, peripheral or tangential 
‘shave’ sections may be more representative of the 
tissue margins in these cases, aided by pre-fixation 
inking. This is particularly appropriate where there 
are large specimens, specimens from anatomically 
complex sites (head/neck), tissues from an extremity 
(for instance, the ear pinna or tail) or tissue from a 
tubular organ (for instance the intestine).
Ch02 Oncology.indd   14 11/10/2010   11:34
VetBooks.ir

===== PDF PAGE 24 =====
Chapter 2 How to make a diagnosis
15
Gross tumour specimen showing cruciate 
sections for margins. Typical full-thickness 
cruciate sections are taken, and the tissue samples are 
placed into cassettes prior to processing into parafﬁn 
blocks.
2.20
Standardized pathology report format.2.21
Line Description Signiﬁcance
Line 1: Subgross 
description
Includes: subgross tissue location; size; shape; cell 
density; expansile or inﬁltrative; encapsulated or 
non-encapsulated; well demarcated or poorly 
demarcated; fully excised or not fully excised
The most important line of the description, giving some of the 
most clinically relevant information. For instance, is it inﬁltrating 
(carcinoma) versus expanding (adenoma); are the surgical 
margins tumour-free? 
Line 2: Patterns of 
cells and types of 
stroma
The patterns in which the tumour cells are arranged, e.g. 
nests, packets, lobules, cords (carcinoma); acini, tubules 
(adenocarcinoma); streams, bundles, fascicles, storiform 
patterns (sarcoma); sheets, cords (round cell tumour). 
The amount and type of stroma are also assessed
Describes whether the tumour is of epithelial, mesenchymal or 
round cell origin. Provides a large amount of potentially useful 
prognostic and therapeutic information
Line 3: Cytological 
features 
Individual cellular features, including cell size, shape, 
cytoplasm features
This line and the following lines give some indication as to the 
degree of differentiation of the neoplastic cells. In many cases, 
the less well the tumour is differentiated, the worse the prognosis
Line 4: Nuclear 
features
Details of nuclear shape, size, chromatin patterns, 
nucleoli features
Large, irregular nuclei with very prominent nucleoli are often a 
feature of aggressive tumours
Line 5: Unique 
features 
Examples: presence of multinucleated cells; degree of 
anisokaryosis (variation in nuclear size) or anisocytosis 
(variation in cell size)
In general, the higher the degree of cellular and nuclear 
pleomorphism, the less well differentiated the tumour
Line 6: Mitotic 
activity
Usually expressed as numbers of mitotic ﬁgures per high 
power ﬁeld (HPF) or per 3, 5 or 10 HPFs
The higher the mitotic rate, the more quickly the neoplastic cells 
are proliferating. A high mitotic rate is often associated with more 
aggressive tumour behaviour
Line 7: Evidence of 
malignancy
Evidence of capsular invasion, vascular invasion, 
lymphatic invasion, necrosis, haemorrhage 
In general, the more invasive and inﬁltrative the tumour, the more 
likely it is that the tumour has already metastasized or will recur 
locally
Line 8: Anything 
else 
Any other pathological feature related to, or unrelated to, 
the neoplastic process, e.g. ulceration or peritumoral 
inﬂammation
Many tumours will result in pathological changes within the 
adjacent tissues, e.g. inﬂammation in adjacent tissue, atrophy of 
adjacent skeletal muscle
Interpretation of tumour 
descriptions
As with any other diagnostic modality‚ the clinician 
should read the pathology report critically, i.e. does 
the histological diagnosis fit the clinical picture?
There are two main types of technique that patho-
logists use to describe tumours. The first, which is 
most widely used in the UK, is a free-form description. 
This method, although often more flowing, does not 
always provide sufficient information for a clinician to 
be able to assess the degree of differentiation, ade-
quacy of margins, etc. It is one of the main reasons 
that oncologists might request a second opinion.
Many pathologists are now using a more stand-
ardized format that has been promoted by the Armed 
Forces Institute of Pathologists and the American and 
European Colleges of Veterinary Pathology. This 
descriptive technique mirrors the diagnostic process 
that a pathologist will go through. More importantly, it 
provides large amounts of information on the tumour 
specimen in a relatively concise form, with the major-
ity of the most clinically relevant information being 
presented at the beginning (Figure 2.21). The aim of 
the approach is both to convey the descriptive infor-
mation that enables a definitive histological diagnosis 
to be made (e.g. peripheral nerve sheath tumour) and 
to convey clinically important information (e.g. degree 
of differentiation).
By reading the histological description, the 
clinician can form a mental picture of the lesion. In 
particular, a good description should include both 
qualitative and quantitative detail that should enable 
diagnostically and prognostically useful information 
to be gleaned from it. For instance, enumeration of 
the mitotic index is prognostically relevant in canine 
cutaneous MCTs; where terms such as ‘brisk mitotic 
activity’ or ‘small numbers of mitoses’ are used, it can 
be impossible to obtain this information.
In some cases, if there is insufficient tissue 
available for examination it can be very difficult for a 
pathologist to reach a definitive diagnosis about the 
tissue. Other problems facing the pathologist include 
orientation of the tissue sample, artefacts introduced 
by crushing of small samples, and thermocautery of 
the tissue edges.
Ch02 Oncology.indd   15 11/10/2010   11:34
VetBooks.ir

===== PDF PAGE 25 =====
Chapter 2 How to make a diagnosis
16
The basic principle of immunohistochemistry.2.22
Tissue section
Chromogen
and enzyme
Secondary antibody
Primary antibody
Antigen
Slide
Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) can enable the patholo-
gist to confirm a histological diagnosis made from a 
standard stained section and to determine the cell of 
origin of poorly differentiated tumours. In addition, it 
can be used to aid in tumour prognostication. This 
can provide the clinician with useful information for 
deciding on the best treatment for the tumour and for 
helping to predict how the tumour is likely to behave. 
As the number of antibodies that can be successfully 
employed in veterinary diagnostic pathology is grow-
ing, IHC is increasingly being seen as an essential 
part of the pathologist’s and clinician’s armoury.
The technique involves the detection of antigen-
specific antibodies binding to their antigen targets in 
a tissue section. An insoluble coloured precipitate 
forms at the antigen–antibody binding site and is vis-
ualized using a microscope. Positive and negative 
controls are used to aid interpretation and for quality 
control purposes. The extremely selective nature of 
antibody binding to its ligand is utilized to identify the 
extent and cellular localization of expression of the 
antibody, and its target antigen within a tissue 
(Figure 2.22).
In practice there are many factors that can affect 
the quality and quantity of IHC staining. For instance, 
tissues that are inadequately fixed in formalin will 
often show very high levels of background staining, 
which can make it very difficult to assess the true 
staining characteristics and raises the possibility of 
false positive results. Conversely, tissues that have 
been exposed to formalin for extended periods of 
time may lose their ability to bind some antibodies, 
thereby creating false negative results. Fixation arte-
facts are some of the reasons that controls are so 
essential for the interpretation of IHC staining results.
Figure 2.23 lists some of the tumour markers 
that are commonly identified using IHC. In cancer 
diagnostics, the main use of IHC has been to aid the 
pathologist in determining the cell or tissue of origin 
of the neoplastic cell population. This has significant 
practical application: it can be very difficult to  
determine the exact cell of origin for some poorly 
Tumour markers commonly identiﬁed using 
immunohistochemistry.2.23
Marker 
(antigen)
Signiﬁcance and usage
Vimentin Identiﬁes all mesenchymal cells. Often used to 
help conﬁrm diagnosis of a tumour of 
mesenchymal origin, e.g. all sarcomas are positive 
for vimentin whereas most carcinomas are 
negative
Cytokeratin Identiﬁes most epithelial cells. Often used to help 
conﬁrm diagnosis of a tumour of epithelial origin, 
e.g. most carcinomas are positive for cytokeratin 
whereas sarcomas are almost always negative
CD3 A marker of T -cell origin. Together with CD79a, 
used to help distinguish between T - and B-cell 
lymphomas, and essential in helping to apply the 
WHO–REAL lymphoma classiﬁcation system
CD79a A marker of B-cell origin. Used in a similar manner 
to CD3. Most plasma cells do not express CD79a, 
making it of less use in diagnosing plasmacytomas
CD18 A marker of leucocytes. Very useful in helping to 
diagnose tumours of monocyte/macrophage 
origin, such as histiocytic sarcomas
Desmin A marker of muscle origin. Is expressed in most 
tumours of smooth muscle or striated muscle 
origin
S100 A marker of neuroectoderm origin. Is expressed in 
a number of different tumours, including peripheral 
nerve sheath tumours, melanomas, 
chondrosarcomas
Glial ﬁbrillary 
acid protein 
(GFAP)
A marker of glial origin. Used for conﬁrming the 
diagnosis of gliomas
CD117 (KIT) A marker of mast cell origin or interstitial cells of 
Cajal
Mac387 A marker of macrophages. Can be used to help 
distinguish histiocytic tumours from granulomatous 
inﬂammation
Synaptophysin A marker of neuroendocrine cells
Melan A A speciﬁc marker of melanocyte differentiation. 
Can be used to help conﬁrm a diagnosis of 
amelanotic melanoma
The main steps in performing IHC are as follows:
1. A tissue section is incubated with a specific 
dilution of a primary antibody that has been 
developed to bind to a single tissue antigen (such 
as a particular protein, or part thereof).
2. A secondary antibody that is linked to a marker 
enzyme (usually horseradish peroxidase) is 
incubated with the tissue and the primary 
antibody. This secondary antibody will bind to the 
non-antigen-binding end of the primary antibody 
molecule (for example, it might be a rabbit 
antibody that will bind specifically to all mouse 
antibodies).
3. A substrate is added to the final mixture, which 
undergoes a colour change and precipitates on 
to the tissue section when it is activated by the 
enzyme bound to the secondary antibody.
4. The sections are then counterstained with 
haematoxylin, coverslipped and examined under 
a microscope. Specific positive staining is 
identified where there is staining of the cells by 
the coloured enzyme substrate.
Ch02 Oncology.indd   16 11/10/2010   11:34
VetBooks.ir

===== PDF PAGE 26 =====
Chapter 2 How to make a diagnosis
17
Examples of use of immunohistochemistry in distinguishing certain tumours.2.24
Histological differential diagnosis Response to antibodies 
Amelanotic melanoma versus ﬁ  brosarcoma in 
oral cavity
Amelanotic melanoma:
S100 
+, Melan A +
Fibrosarcoma:
S100 
–, Melan A –
Osteosarcoma versus ﬁ  brosarcoma Osteosarcoma:
osteocalcin 
+
Fibrosarcoma:
osteocalcin 
–
Synovial sarcoma versus histiocytic sarcoma Synovial sarcoma:
vimentin 
+, cytokeratin +, CD18 –
Histiocytic sarcoma:
vimentin 
+, cytokeratin –, CD18 +
Nasal carcinoma versus lymphoma Carcinoma:
cytokeratin 
+, CD18 –, CD79a –, CD3 –
Lymphoma:
cytokeratin 
–, CD18 +, CD79a/CD3 ±
differentiated tumours based on routine light micro-
scopy alone, and without IHC the amount of infor-
mation that can be gleaned from examination of the 
specimens may be greatly limited.
Using a panel of antibodies against a range of 
intermediate filament proteins, the general tissue of 
origin can usually be identified and the tumour class-
ified into the broad categories of epithelial/glandular 
versus mesenchymal. In general, the former tumour 
types often metastasize via lymphatics and fre-
quently early in the course of disease, whilst the lat-
ter type often metastasizes haematogenously and 
later on in the disease course. Antibody panels can 
also help to distinguish mesenchymal tumours from 
the general category of ‘round cell tumours’, which 
are likely to have a different biological behaviour and 
to be sensitive to different treatment protocols. Inter-
mediate filaments of a variety of different specific 
tissue types are found in all cells and range from 8 to 
10 nm in diameter. For instance, cytokeratins are 
expressed by cells of epithelial origin and vimentin is 
expressed by mesenchymal cells, with only some 
cell types (e.g. mesothelium) expressing both. 
Vimentin is particularly useful because, as all mes-
enchymal cells express it, all tissues would be 
expected to contain some vimentin-positive cells 
within them. It therefore acts as a useful control to 
assess fixation artefacts: if no vimentin staining is 
identified, it is likely that the tissue is over-fixed, and 
Histological sections showing 
IHC staining of a histiocytic 
sarcoma for: (a) vimentin; 
(b) cytokeratin; (c) lysosyme; 
(d) CD18. Note that the tumour is 
negative for cytokeratin.
2.25
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
that the absence of positive staining using other IHC 
markers cannot be interpreted.
In order to classify tumours further, a range of 
tissue-specific proteins can be targeted using spe-
cific antisera raised against them. For instance, the 
intermediate filament protein desmin can be used to 
confirm a muscle origin of the tumour tissue. Then, 
using antibodies against a range of different actins 
and myoglobin, it is possible to characterize the 
cell of origin as smooth muscle, skeletal muscle or 
cardiac muscle.
In general, the most useful information for the 
clin ician treating a cancer patient is likely to be 
provided by panels of antibodies that enable distinc-
tion between two tumours that, although they 
appear grossly and microscopically similar, are likely 
to have very different biological behaviours or 
responses to therapies.
However, it should be noted that in general when 
a tumour appears very poorly differentiated 
microscopically, it is likely that, whatever the cell of 
origin, the response to therapy and prognosis will be 
poor. Indeed, when neoplastic cells are very poorly 
differentiated, they can often exhibit aberrant 
expression of cellular proteins, such that it becomes 
very difficult to identify the cell of origin with certainty.
Some examples where IHC would be very useful 
to help to distinguish tumours of different prognosis/
treatment options are given in Figures 2.24 and 2.25.
Ch02 Oncology.indd   17 11/10/2010   11:34
VetBooks.ir

===== PDF PAGE 27 =====
Chapter 2 How to make a diagnosis
18
Tumour markers and targeted treatment
The Holy Grail of cancer therapy is to identify 
tumour-specific targets that will allow tumour cells to 
be targeted and killed, leaving normal, non-neoplas-
tic cells unharmed. IHC plays a vital role in a 
research setting to aid identification of novel targets; 
and in a diagnostic setting it is often the tool of 
choice to determine whether the individual case is 
likely to benefit from such targeted therapy. It is rou-
tinely used in human surgical pathology to determine 
the extent of HER-2/Neu expression in breast cancer 
to identify those women who would benefit from anti-
HER-2/Neu antibody therapy (i.e. Herceptin). This 
protein is similarly expressed in some canine and 
feline mammary tumours and it is possible that, 
should the drug ever become affordable, it might be 
of potential use in a veterinary setting. Similarly, 
detection of oestrogen receptor expression in mam-
mary tumours can be used to predict whether the 
patient will benefit from anti-oestrogen therapy.
In canine MCTs, the expression of the receptor 
tyrosine kinase KIT (CD117) may help to predict 
response to a new class of small-molecule tyrosine 
kinase inhibitors. KIT is expressed by normal mast 
cells, but is variably expressed in neoplastic mast 
cells. Those individual MCTs that express minimal or 
undetectable levels of KIT and other similar receptor 
tyrosine kinases would be predicted to respond less 
favourably to this class of drugs, compared with those 
that express high levels of the drug target. Although 
relative KIT expression levels can be determined by 
IHC, IHC cannot be used to identify whether KIT 
mutations are present. Rather, molecular methods 
such as PCR and nucleotide sequencing are required 
to identify the presence or absence of mutations.
Tumour grading
The specific histological/immunohistochemical diag-
nosis itself is likely to give the most important prog-
nostic information for the clinician. For instance, a 
diagnosis of lymphoma versus soft tissue sarcoma is 
likely to result in very different treatments and a dif-
ferent prognosis. However, identifying various fea-
tures of different subtypes of the same tumour (e.g. 
low-grade versus high-grade soft tissue sarcomas; 
grade I versus grade III MCTs) can also be used to 
direct therapy and to predict prognosis. Tumour grad-
ing can be further augmented by assessment of a 
variety of other markers of potential prognostic bene-
fit, such as by measurement of proliferation markers.
Proliferation markers
One of the hallmarks of a neoplastic mass is un-
controlled growth. Several different techniques of 
measuring cell proliferation have been developed, 
the most robust and reliable of which are based on 
histochemical stains (AgNORs) and immunohisto-
chemical stains (PCNA, Ki67).
AgNORs
Argyrophilic nucleolar organizing regions (AgNORs) 
are loops of DNA that contain ribosomal genes, and it 
is the NOR-associated proteins that bind the silver 
molecules of the stain. An increase in the number of 
AgNOR proteins indicates an increased demand for 
ribosomal biogenesis and therefore a higher meta-
bolic activity. High AgNOR counts are associated with 
a shorter cell cycle and therefore a higher rate of cell 
proliferation. AgNOR counts are independent prog-
nostic factors in many human tumours. In companion 
animal species, they are predictive of survival times 
in canine lymphoma and canine MCTs. However, 
only recently have the techniques for AgNOR staining 
and quantification been standardized, making com-
parisons between different studies difficult.
Ki67
This is an unidentified antigen to which the monoclo-
nal antibody MIB-1 binds. Ki67 is a very large 
nuclear protein that is expressed exclusively by cells 
during the cell cycle; therefore, if a cell is expressing 
Ki67, it is actively replicating. Ki67 provides a meas-
ure of the growth fraction of a cell population. It is an 
independent prognostic factor in many human 
tumours and it has been shown to be an independ-
ent prognostic factor in canine MCTs. In general, the 
greater the proliferation index of a mast cell tumour, 
the more likely it is to recur locally and to metasta-
size, and hence the worse the prognosis.
PCNA
Proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) is the delta 
subunit of DNA polymerase I. PCNA expression is 
determined by immunohistochemistry. PCNA counts 
are expressed as the number of positively staining 
nuclei as a percentage of all neoplastic nuclei 
counted. It is an independent prognostic factor in a 
number of human tumours, but the role for it as a 
prognostic marker in canine and feline tumours is 
still unclear.
Summary
With the increased sophistication of clinical oncology 
in cats and dogs, obtaining an accurate diagnosis 
prior to embarking on therapy is becoming of ever 
greater importance. In most cases this will entail 
obtaining a tissue biopsy or cytology sample and 
submitting it to a qualified veterinary pathologist. The 
manner in which these samples are taken, and the 
associated information that the clinician provides to 
the pathologist, can greatly enhance or potentially 
detract from the diagnosis that can be made based 
on those samples. Therefore it is of utmost impor-
tance (if valuable resources, time and expense are 
not to be wasted) that thought is put into deciding 
what sampling modality will provide the best cost/
benefit balance for the patient and the client.
It is incumbent on the pathologist to examine the 
samples in such a way as to provide the clinician 
with the most accurate and prognostically relevant 
information. In this way, a highly fruitful relationship 
can be developed between clinician and pathologist, 
such that patient care is optimized and the tissue 
samples obtained can be utilized and analysed to 
their full potential.
Ch02 Oncology.indd   18 11/10/2010   11:34
VetBooks.ir

===== PDF PAGE 50 =====
Chapter 5 When to treat animals with cancer
41
•	 In the first place, in the US more than half of 
marriages end in divorce. The UK has the highest 
divorce rate in Europe. Many divorced 
professionals with children live in urban 
environments, where the best jobs are to be 
found, where they are separated from extended 
family and making friends is notoriously difficult. 
Thus the animal assumes greater prominence in 
people’s emotional lives, with upwards of 85% of 
the US public affirming that their animals are 
‘members of the family’ (Harris Interactive, 2007). 
This strong emotional bond was well illustrated 
during Hurricane Katrina, where people refused 
rescue when told they could not bring their pets.
•	 There has been an explosion in veterinary 
specialty practices offering high-level complicated 
and aggressive treatment.
•	 At the same time, many companion animal 
owners will fight their animal’s cancer as 
aggressively as they would fight their own. For 
such people, euthanasia is a last-resort option.
In some senses, these factors are salubrious. For 
example, the cost of treatment is far less of a deter-
rent to treating animal disease than it once was; 
therefore many animals who would historically have 
been euthanized now regain extended and good 
quality lives. It is in the field of oncology that this is 
most apparent.
But there is an offsetting negative side, again 
produced by converging factors. First of all, many 
academic oncologists are also researchers, who 
admirably utilize sick companion animals in their 
research, rather than creating disease in healthy 
animals. While this approach is inherently laudable, 
it also engenders some untoward effects, mainly  
the tendency to prolong treatment for reasons serv-
ing the science, not the individual animal. This  
obviously plays into natural owner reluctance  
to euthanize, sometimes resulting in extended 
unnecessary suffering.
Secondly, some clients simply cannot accept the 
need to euthanize their ‘best friend’ or ‘family mem-
ber’. The result is a willingness to ‘try anything’ to save 
the animal, however far gone or suffering it may be. A 
particularly pernicious consequence of this is the pro-
liferation of evidentially baseless, unproven ‘comple-
mentary’ and ‘alternative’ therapies. Such modalities 
range from ‘Bach flower essences’ to homeopathy 
which, if true, invalidates basic principles of modern 
chemistry. Whether practitioners of alternative medi-
cine are true believers or are simply bilking the gull-
ible, access to the Internet assures that desperate 
clients can find an inexhaustible number of allegedly 
therapeutic modalities that they wish to pursue.
A particularly dangerous corollary to such an  
attitude can be represented by hospices for dying  
animals. In some cases, where an owner wishes to 
pursue palliative care and legitimate treatment for the 
cancer animal and has money but no time to provide 
care, the pet hospice can fulfil a valuable function. But 
just as often, the hospice can allow the owner to 
dodge the issue of euthanasia for untreated or 
untreatable suffering while endless new unproven and 
likely ineffective treatments are pursued. Of course, 
the same catering to an owner’s unwillingness to let 
go can occur in general veterinary practice.
Thus, paradoxically, the rise of love for compan-
ion animals can result in new sources of uncon-
trolled suffering, buttressing the dictum that loving 
something is not sufficient in its own right to assure 
that one provides the beloved with good care.
Role of the veterinary surgeon
In the author’s experience, the vast majority of veteri-
nary surgeons, particularly companion animal practi-
tioners, embrace the view of the veterinary surgeon 
as ideally analogous to a paediatrician rather than a 
garage mechanic. That is, in the case of competing 
obligations such as the owner electing to prolong 
suffering by pursuing useless therapies, the veteri-
nary surgeon’s primary obligation is to the animal 
and its wellbeing, not to the owner.
Plato sagely made this point with regard to the 
shepherd: in one’s capacity as shepherd, one’s 
primary role is to care for the sheep. What one 
earns doing this occurs in one’s capacity as wage-
earner, which is connected but subordinate to the 
shepherd role.
Obviously, given that animals are the property of 
owners, veterinary surgeons are not in a position to 
dictate treatments or, more relevant to this discus-
sion, euthanasia to end suffering. Furthermore, we 
live in a society in which medical paternalism is a 
dirty word, and patient or client autonomy is a trendy 
slogan. Nonetheless, a powerful element of paternal-
ism is alive and thriving, and can be deployed to 
good effect by veterinary surgeons.
That element is a practitioner’s Aesculapian 
authority, the singular authority possessed by physi-
cians and veterinary surgeons by virtue of being 
medical professionals (Rollin, 2002). To deploy such 
authority on behalf of the animal to end suffering is, 
in the author’s view, not only permissible but obliga-
tory under certain circumstances. When clients ask, 
‘What would you do if it were your dog, Doctor?’, 
they are appealing to the practitioner’s Aesculapian 
authority. Thus the dictum (sometimes pronounced in 
veterinary circles) that a practitioner should never 
suggest or advocate euthanasia, lest the client later 
blame the veterinary surgeon for ‘killing’ their beloved 
animal, should categorically be rejected.
Mental life of the animal
Inextricably bound up with successful deployment of 
such authority regarding the need for euthanasia to 
alleviate untreated or untreatable suffering is the 
issue of explaining to clients some fundamental dif-
ferences between human and animal mental life  
that have major and radically distinct implications  
for quality of life in people versus companion ani-
mals. Human thought is irreducibly tied to language, 
which allows ingression into modes of thought 
closed to animals. Humans can think in very 
abstract terms (e.g. mathematics and logic); in  
negative terms (‘there are no dragons in the library’); 
in conditional terms (‘if it does rain, we will hold 
graduation indoors’); in future terms (‘I wish to retire 
Ch05 Oncology.indd   41 11/10/2010   11:18
VetBooks.ir

===== PDF PAGE 51 =====
Chapter 5 When to treat animals with cancer
42
in Iceland someday’); in universal terms (‘all trian-
gles have three sides’); in fictional terms (writing 
novels); in counter- factual terms (‘if Darwin had not 
discovered natural selection, someone else would 
have’). These are all made possible by being able to 
structure thought linguistically, which in turn allows 
linguistic syntax to transcend thought rooted in 
immediate experience.
The richness and moral relevance of animal men-
tal life should not be denied. There is, however, a 
striking dissimilarity between humans and animals 
facing life-threatening illnesses, even as the tools of 
medicine dealing with such crises converge in the 
two areas. Human cognition is such that it can value 
long-term future goals and endure short-run nega-
tive experiences for the sake of achieving them. 
Examples are plentiful. Many people undergo volun-
tary food restriction, and the unpleasant experience 
attendant in its wake, for the sake of lowering blood 
pressure, or looking good in a bikini as summer 
approaches. They memorize volumes of boring 
material for the sake of gaining admission to veteri-
nary or medical school. They endure the excruciating 
pain of cosmetic surgery in order to look better. And 
they similarly endure chemotherapy, radiation, dialy-
sis, physical therapy and transplants to achieve 
longer life and a better quality of life than they would 
have without it, or, in some cases, merely to prolong 
the length of life to see their children graduate, or to 
complete an opus, or fulfil some other goal.
However, there is no evidence, either empirical or 
conceptual, that animals have the capability to weigh 
future benefits or possibilities against current misery.
To treat companion animals morally and with 
respect, their mentational limits need to be kept in 
mind. Paramount in importance is the extreme 
unlikelihood that they can understand the concepts 
of ‘life’ and ‘death’ in themselves, rather than the 
pains and pleasure associated with life or death. To 
the animal mind, in a real sense there is only quality 
of life, i.e. whether its experiential content is pleasant 
or unpleasant in all of the modes it is capable of – 
bored or occupied, fearful or not fearful, lonely or 
enjoying companionship, painful or not, hungry or 
not, thirsty or not, etc. There is no reason to believe 
that an animal can grasp the notion of extended life, 
let alone choose to trade current suffering for it.
This in turn demands a realistic assessment, as 
far as possible, of what animals are experiencing. An 
animal cannot weigh being treated for cancer against 
the suffering that this entails. An animal cannot 
affirm or even conceive of a desire to endure current 
suffering for the sake of future life; cannot choose to 
lose a leg to preclude metastasis. It must be remem-
bered that an animal is its pain, for it is incapable of 
anticipating or even hoping for cessation of that pain. 
Thus when life-threatening illnesses afflict compan-
ion animals, it is not axiomatic that they be treated at 
whatever qualitative, experiential cost that may 
involve. The owner may consider the suffering that a 
treatment modality entails to be a small price for 
extra life, but the animal neither values nor compre-
hends ‘extra life’, let alone the trade-off this requires. 
The owner, in turn, may ignore the difference 
between the human and animal mind and choose 
the possibility of life prolongation at any qualitative 
cost. It is at this point that the morally responsible 
veterinary surgeon is thrust into their role as animal 
advocate, speaking for what matters to the animal.
Quality of life
The best way to accomplish this sort of advocacy is 
to set up the type of relationship with a client from 
the outset that has both parties agreeing to keep the 
best interests of the animal in view as the paramount 
goal of treatment. In this way, the clinician can 
educate the client on the nature of animal mentation, 
suffering, and what matters to the animal. Such 
education should begin along with treatment, as 
should the veterinary surgeon’s claim for advocacy 
for the animal’s quality of life. Quality of life 
considerations should be introduced at the beginning 
of a relationship with the client, not suddenly sprung 
on them when treatment is over. The client (who, 
after all, knows the animal better than the veterinary 
surgeon) should be encouraged from the beginning 
to help to define quality of life for that animal.
Beginning with the onset of treatment for cancer, 
the veterinary surgeon should obtain from the client 
a list, as long as possible, of what makes the animal 
happy or unhappy, and how they know. This list, 
written down as part of the medical record, can 
serve to remind owners of their own criteria for 
quality of life at the point where treatment is failing, 
when wishful thinking and essentially selfish desires 
may replace objectivity. I used this method with a 
friend who asked me how to judge when it was time 
for euthanasia and how to avoid compromising his 
animal’s quality of life by overly prolonging treatment. 
He later thanked me and told me that, was it not for 
his own encoded notes defining the animal’s quality 
of life while the animal was still well, he would have 
rationalized trying a variety of modalities that would 
have greatly impaired the animal’s quality of life. 
Unquestionably, he said, denial would have distorted 
his perception but for his own reflective, codified 
deliberations on that animal’s quality of life which, 
even in extremis, was impossible to ignore.
The British Veterinary Association, in conjunction 
with the Universities Federation for Animal Welfare, 
held a groundbreaking seminar in 2006 on quality of 
life in animals. In the end, it is essential that veterinary 
medicine should learn from the mistakes of human 
medicine and not sacrifice quality of life for quantity.
This chapter is designed to assist veterinary sur-
geons in optimizing quality of life for cancer patients, 
through treatment and support. In treating and sup-
porting their cancer patients, veterinary surgeons 
have a duty to be an advocate for the animal, and to 
assess the current situation from the perspective of 
the animal.
References and further reading
Ferrell BR and Rhiner M (1991) High-tech comfort: ethereal issues in 
cancer pain management for the 1990s. Journal of Clinical Ethics 
2, 108–115
Ch05 Oncology.indd   42 11/10/2010   11:18
VetBooks.ir

===== PDF PAGE 52 =====
Chapter 5 When to treat animals with cancer
43
Flexner A (1910) Medical Education in the United States and Canada. 
Carnegie Foundation for Higher Education, Princeton, New Jersey
Harris Interactive Inc. (2007) Pets are ‘Members of the Family’ and Two-
Thirds of Pet Owners Buy Their Pets Holiday Presents. Harris Poll 
#120, December 4, 2007, www.harrisinteractive.com/harris–_poll/
index.asp?PID=840
Marks RM and Sacher EJ (1973) Undertreatment of medical patients 
with narcotic analgesia. Annals of Internal Medicine 78, 173–181
Polton G (2010) Patients with neoplastic disease. In: BSAVA Manual of 
Canine and Feline Rehabilitation, Supportive and Palliative Care: 
Case Studies in Patient Management, ed. S Lindley and P Watson, 
pp. 232–267. BSAVA Publications, Gloucester
Ramey DW and Rollin BE (2004) Complementary and Alternative 
Medicine Considered. Blackwell, Ames, Iowa
Rollin BE (1987) The rights of the dying person. In: Principles of 
Thanatology, ed. AH Kutscher, AG Carr and LG Kutscher, pp. 109–
133. Columbia University Press, New Y ork
Rollin BE (2002) The use and abuse of Aesculapian authority in 
veterinary medicine. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical 
Association 220, 1144–1149
Ch05 Oncology.indd   43 11/10/2010   11:18
VetBooks.ir

===== PDF PAGE 53 =====
Chapter 6 Principles of oncological surgery
44
6
Principles of oncological 
surgery
Kieri Jermyn and B. Duncan X. Lascelles
Introduction
Oncological surgery is probably the most interesting 
and multifaceted surgery a veterinary surgeon can 
carry out. It encompasses aspects of soft tissue, 
orthopaedic and neurological surgery, and demands 
a comprehensive knowledge of anatomy and recon-
structive procedures for resultant deficits. Boundaries 
are continually being pushed forward on the surgical 
procedures that can be employed to treat localized 
cancer in small animals. However, if oncological sur-
gery is to be effective and successful, there are cer-
tain principles that must be adhered to, and these are 
outlined in this chapter.
Compared with other treatment modalities, surgery 
of localized tumours provides the possibility for an 
immediate cure, is not carcinogenic, is not immuno -
suppressive and does not have local toxic effects. 
With sensible and appropriate anaesthetic and an -
algesic protocols and adherence to the principles of 
oncological surgery, any morbidity associated with 
anaesthesia and surgery can be minimized and a 
successful outcome realized.
In order to carry out successful oncological sur-
gery, surgeons require more than a comprehensive 
knowledge of anatomy, physiology and resection and 
reconstruction techniques for the specific area or 
organ involved. A thorough understanding of general 
tumour biology, the specific characteristics of the 
neoplasm involved, the stage of disease, and thus 
prognosis and the adjunctive therapies that may be 
appropriate, is essential in each case.
The decision to use surgery
Surgery in oncology is mainly used to facilitate diag-
nosis and for treatment of localized neoplasia. Prior 
to contemplating surgical management of a cancer, 
the patient and treatment options must be fully 
appraised to determine the most effective approach.
•	 The cancer must be characterized (type and 
grade). A surgical procedure (biopsy) may be 
involved in this process (see Chapters 2 and 3).
•	 The locoregional and systemic extent of the 
disease (stage) must be assessed using 
appropriate investigations, such as physical 
examination, blood evaluations, radiography, 
ultrasonography, or advanced imaging modalities 
(see Chapter 3).
•	 Complete patient evaluation is necessary to 
determine the options for surgical intervention. 
When indicated, the aim of surgery must be 
clearly recognized, i.e. curative intent, 
cytoreductive or palliative.
•	 Alternative treatment options, or a decision not to 
treat (see Chapter 5), must be fully assessed 
from a practical and prognostic standpoint, both 
individually and in combination with surgery.
•	 The owner must be fully informed of the intent of 
surgery, the adjunctive therapies available and 
the likely prognosis.
Primary surgery
The opportunity for the most favourable outcome 
exists when employing surgery for the first time; revi-
sion surgeries are less successful. The greatest 
chance of a cure lies with the primary surgery for a 
number of reasons:
•	 Untreated tumours tend to have more normal 
surrounding anatomy, which facilitates surgical 
removal
•	 Recurrent tumours may have seeded to 
previously non-involved tissue planes, hence 
increasing the required resection
•	 The most active and invasive parts of the tumour 
are at the periphery, where the blood supply is 
greatest, and subtotal resection may thus leave 
behind the most aggressive components of the 
tumour
•	 Patients with recurrence often have significant 
anatomical disruption and less normal tissue 
available for closure.
Preoperative planning
To optimize the likelihood of successful surgery, it is 
necessary to define precisely the role of the proce-
dure whilst giving due consideration to the recon-
structive aspects. Many tumour resections result in 
substantial tissue deficits. Apprehension about not 
being able to close the subsequent defect is a 
potent deterrent to following excision guidelines rig-
orously (Figure 6.1). Ideally, one individual should 
remove the tumour, adhering to the oncological prin-
ciples on the margins required, and a second indi-
vidual should then perform the reconstruction. This 
is rarely feasible and hence the surgeon must give 
full consideration to the reconstruction prior to 
embarking on the excision.
Ch06 Oncology.indd   44 11/10/2010   12:07
VetBooks.ir

===== PDF PAGE 54 =====
Chapter 6 Principles of oncological surgery
45
Preoperative planning of the anaesthetic and 
analgesic regimen and the postoperative care will 
minimize perioperative morbidity.
Revision surgery
As previously stated, the first surgery has the best 
chance of a successful outcome. Excised tissue 
margins are examined histologically and further sur-
gery may be indicated if the margins are positive for 
tumour cells or narrow (presence of tumour cells 
very close to the margin). Management of incom-
pletely or closely excised tumours requires that the 
entire existing surgical scar and any drainage sites 
are considered ‘contaminated’. The surgical margins 
indicated are then the same as for the initial surgery. 
Usually this results in a much wider resection than 
the original surgery (Figure 6.2).
The role of oncological surgery
Oncological surgery may have the following purposes:
•	 Prophylactic surgery
•	 Diagnosis and staging of neoplastic disease
•	 Definitive excision
•	 Cytoreduction of the tumour mass
•	 Palliative surgery
•	 Dealing with emergencies
•	 Support surgery
•	 Surgical treatment of metastatic disease.
Prophylactic surgery
Prophylactic oncological surgery can be defined as 
surgery that results in a reduction of either the antici-
pated incidence rate of a particular tumour type, or 
the rate of recurrence of a neoplastic disease after 
therapy. There are several common examples of pro-
phylactic surgery in small animal surgery.
Mammary tumours in the bitch
Ovariohysterectomy performed prior to the first sea-
son is known to reduce the incidence of malignant 
mammary tumours to 0.05% of that which might be 
expected in entire bitches (Schneider et al., 1969). 
This relative risk rises quickly beyond the first oes-
trus. The incidence is 25% of that which might be 
expected in intact bitches for bitches spayed after the 
second season. The relative risk for queens is 9% 
and 14%, respectively. By the age of 2 years, little or 
no cancer-sparing effect can be expected in bitches.
The sarcoma in this 
cat required wide 
resection margins, including 
full-thickness resection of the 
body wall. Apprehension about 
closing the resulting defect 
(almost complete resection of 
the ventral body wall) could 
result in the surgeon’s 
compromising the resection 
margins in favour of being able 
to close the defect more easily.
6.1
Management of an incompletely excised grade II 
mast cell tumour. (a) The entire surgical scar 
and any adherent tissue must be considered contaminated. 
(b) The surgical margins indicated for revision surgery on 
this tumour resulted in a much wider resection and 
subsequent tissue deﬁ  cit than the original surgery.
6.2
(a)
(b)
Ch06 Oncology.indd   45 11/10/2010   12:07
VetBooks.ir

===== PDF PAGE 55 =====
Chapter 6 Principles of oncological surgery
46
Oestrogen receptor and/or progesterone receptor 
expression has been demonstrated in both benign 
(70%) and malignant (50%) mammary tumours. 
Expression of progesterone receptors appears to 
occur more frequently in benign tumours and may be 
of positive prognostic significance. Even late-stage 
ovariectomy can reduce the risk for benign tumours. 
There also appears to be a histological continuum in 
the progression of canine mammary tumours from 
benign to malignant, which would argue for prophy-
lactic removal of benign neoplasms (see Chapter 16 
for more information).
Benign vaginal tumours in the bitch
Ovariectomy is an effective means of preventing 
both the development and the recurrence of benign 
and possibly malignant vaginal tumours in the bitch, 
and this procedure should be considered an integral 
part of the surgical management of this disease 
along with local excision (Figure 6.3). Malignant vagi-
nal tumours are not as hormonally influenced as 
benign tumours (see also Chapter 17).
Dermal squamous cell carcinoma in the cat
Exposure of unpigmented skin to ultraviolet radiation 
can result in the development of squamous cell carc-
inoma (SCC). Often this is preceded by the develop-
ment of a crusting erythematous pigmented 
premalignant lesion. The removal of this, together 
with any susceptible unpigmented area (e.g. resec-
tion of the complete pinna and vertical aural canal; 
nasal planum amputation) is highly successful in pre-
venting the development of SCC (see also Chapters 
12 and 18).
Colorectal tumours in the dog
Up to 18% of benign polypoid lesions and carcinoma 
in situ of the colon and rectum have demonstrated 
potential to undergo malignant transformation into 
carcinoma. Early wide local resection of these lesions 
is able to prevent some forms of rectal cancer.
Trauma/chronic inﬂammation
Chronic inflammation can lead to mutations that 
result in tissues undergoing neoplastic transforma-
tion. This process may play a role in development of 
digital SCC following chronic subungual infection/
inflammation, aural sebaceous cell adenocarcinoma 
and feline injection site sarcomas, to name a few. 
The current recommendation from the Vaccine-
Associated Feline Sarcoma Task Force is that 
masses that occur at sites following vaccination 
should be treated by surgical excision if the lesion is 
still evident more than 3 months after vaccination, if 
it is >2 cm or if it is increasing in size more than 4 
weeks following vaccine administration.
Diagnosis and staging
Obtaining a diagnosis and clinical staging of sus-
pected neoplasia are of paramount importance before 
determining treatment options. The histopathological 
diagnosis will influence prognosis and help to estab-
lish the most appropriate recommendations for surgi-
cal and adjunctive therapy (Figure 6.4). This will assist 
the veterinary surgeon and owner in making decisions 
about how to progress. With the exception of truly 
emergent cases, treatment without diagnosis will at 
best be speculative and can rarely be justified, even in 
the hands of an experienced oncologist.
Biopsy technique
There is a variety of biopsy techniques (see also 
Chapter 2):
•	 Cytology (fluid and exfoliative cell recovery, fine 
needle aspiration (FNA), impression smears)
•	 Needle core biopsy (Tru-cut, Menghini or 
Jamshidi type needles)
•	 Incisional biopsy (surgically removed pinch, 
punch or wedge samples)
•	 Excisional biopsy (‘complete’ postsurgical 
specimen).
The type of biopsy procedure chosen will depend 
on the information that the clinician requires. If the 
detection of individual neoplastic cells is sufficient, 
cytological techniques will suffice (e.g. for mast cell 
 
 
Local resection of 
a vaginal 
leiomyoma 
following an 
episiotomy 
approach. 
Ovariectomy is an 
important part of 
the approach to 
these tumours to 
prevent 
recurrence.
6.3
Testicular tumours in the dog
The incidence of testicular neoplasia is significantly 
greater (by about 14 times) in an undescended tes-
ticle over the incidence in a normal dog. This 
means that about 50% of cryptorchid testicles will 
develop neoplastic lesions. Neoplasia is also more 
common than expected in the descended testicle of 
crypt orchid dogs, probably due to genetic factors 
that predispose to the development of neoplasia. 
Sertoli cell tumours (60% of cryptorchid tumours) 
and seminomas are the most frequent tumour types 
associated with cryptorchidism. Bilateral elective 
orchidectomy prevents the development of such 
tumours in at- risk patients.
Castration of the non-cryptorchid male dog will 
also help to prevent perianal adenomas and testicu-
lar cancer. Although castration does not appear to 
precipitate development of prostatic neoplasia in 
dogs, it may favour tumour progression.
Ch06 Oncology.indd   46 11/10/2010   12:07
VetBooks.ir

===== PDF PAGE 56 =====
Chapter 6 Principles of oncological surgery
47
tumours (MCTs)). However, if a stromal tumour is 
suspected (e.g. a sarcoma), the tissue architecture 
will need to be examined and needle core or inci-
sional biopsy techniques will be the minimum 
requirement. Also, if tumours are to be graded, 
needle core or incisional techniques are generally 
indicated. Tumour type and grade are usually 
required to help to direct the surgeon towards the 
requisite or recommended resection margins. Often 
a relatively non-invasive or simple procedure is used 
initially (e.g. FNA) followed by sequential employ-
ment of other techniques until sufficient is known 
about the neoplasm to allow formulation of the most 
effective surgical and adjunctive therapy protocol.
To avoid compromising future treatment, a few 
general principles of biopsy should be observed.
•	 The biopsy site should be positioned within the 
probable surgical or radiation field.
•	 The biopsy incision should be as small as is 
required, and oriented so as not to increase the 
size of the subsequent treatment area 
unnecessarily (usually along skin tension lines). 
For example, biopsy incisions on limbs should be 
oriented parallel to the long axis of the limb.
•	 Specimens should be handled carefully. Use of 
electrocautery to obtain the sample will distort 
tissue architecture and make it unreadable by the 
pathologist. Electrocautery may be used 
afterwards for haemostasis.
•	 Multiple samples should be obtained if possible 
and from different areas of the lesion. The tumour 
should be carefully examined prior to biopsy, and 
areas of inflammation and necrosis avoided, as 
the underlying neoplastic process may be 
masked by secondary tissue changes. Often the 
best area for biopsy is the junction of normal and 
abnormal tissue. Important exceptions to this are 
primary bone tumours; as they often have an 
extensive reactive process surrounding the 
primary lesion, samples should be obtained from 
the centre.
•	 The biopsy should result in minimal risk of local 
dissemination of the neoplastic disease. 
Uninvolved anatomical planes and compartments 
should not be breached and fresh 
instrumentation should be used for each site 
sampled.
•	 Adequate exposure is necessary for both 
incisional and excision biopsies to ensure 
minimal disruption of the tumour and adjacent 
tissues.
Use of biopsy
In the majority of instances, preoperative biopsy is 
indicated because the kind or extent of treatment will 
be altered by knowledge of the tumour type (Figure 
6.4). The biopsy report will provide information on 
diagnosis and, where appropriate, grades that are 
major prognostic determinants and this provides the 
cornerstone for subsequent surgical planning. For 
example, soft tissue sarcomas, oral fibrosarcomas 
and MCTs (intermediate to high grade) have a high 
rate of local recurrence after conservative resection 
and thus require removal with much wider margins 
than benign or other low- grade tumours. Permanent 
local tumour control and survival are positively corre-
lated, and preoperative knowledge of the tumour type 
will help in planning the correct definitive surgery and 
thus achieving a local cure.
In some instances, however, prior knowledge of 
the tumour type will not alter the surgical treatment 
plan. Examples of this include lobectomy for a soli-
tary lung mass and splenectomy for localized splenic 
neoplasia. In many instances of aggressively destruc-
tive bony lesions the treatment plan will include 
amputation, regardless of the diagnosis. Conversely, 
the ability to obtain a diagnostic cytology with the 
assistance of imaging (such as ultrasonography  
and computed tomography) in a minimally invasive 
fashion is improving. For example, imaging- guided 
FNA can make a positive diagnosis in 89% of  
osteosarcomas (Britt et al., 2007) and 65% of intra-
thoracic lesions (Zekas et al., 2005). If the biopsy is 
as difficult as the postulated curative surgery, such  
as is true for the removal of brain tumours, informa-
tion about the tumour type should be obtained after 
surgical removal.
In some instances, usually driven by owners and 
often on financial grounds, masses are removed 
without any preoperative knowledge of what the 
mass is. Examples include old dogs bothered by 
ulcerated cutaneous masses. Communication is of 
paramount importance in these cases: the owner 
must understand that the surgery being carried  
out may not be appropriate for this mass, could 
Some examples of when biopsy should be performed prior to surgery.6.4
Tumour presentation Reason for performing biopsy prior to surgery
Subcutaneous mass on the 
lateral thorax/abdomen of a 
dog
Two possible diagnoses are a lipoma and a peripheral nerve sheath tumour (spindle cell sarcoma). The surgeries 
required to gain a cure are vastly different. The prognosis for the two tumours is very different, and the prognosis for 
differing grades of nerve sheath tumours is also very different. Grade I tumours can be cured by wide surgical 
resection. About 40% of grade III tumours will metastasize. This knowledge may well affect the owner’s decision on 
treatment strategy. Removal of the whole mass to obtain a diagnosis may well result in a more difﬁcult surgery being 
required later, with less chance of complete resection
A large cranial mediastinal 
mass
The distinction between lymphoma and thymoma is important. Lymphoma is best treated by chemotherapy, and 
thymoma best treated by surgery
A 2 cm diameter mass on 
the rostral mandible of a dog
The distinction between peripheral odontogenic ﬁbroma (an epulis) and osteosarcoma is important. The epulis requires 
only narrow margins of resection; the osteosarcoma requires wide resection and carries a signiﬁcantly worse 
prognosis. However, the prognosis for a mandibular osteosarcoma is much better than for an amelanotic melanoma
Ch06 Oncology.indd   47 11/10/2010   12:07
VetBooks.ir

===== PDF PAGE 57 =====
Chapter 6 Principles of oncological surgery
48
impact future treatment options and may not effect  
a local cure.
It is important to remember that tumour tissue 
itself often has a poor or absent nerve supply and so 
biopsy samples representative of the neoplastic 
process can be obtained using only the minimum of 
sedation and local analgesia; general anaesthesia is 
not necessarily required. The argument that ‘it is just 
as much hassle to get the biopsy as to chop it off’ is 
sometimes used against procuring a biopsy. This is 
not true.
Deﬁnitive excision
This refers to the use of surgery as the sole treat-
ment, without adjunctive radiotherapy or chemo-
therapy, to achieve an outright cure – ‘curative 
intent’. Surgical excision remains the dominant 
modality of curative therapy. This is possible with 
localized and occasionally with regionally confined 
neoplastic disease. The goal is complete removal of 
all neoplastic tissue, with clear negative margins 
and maximum preservation of function, in one sur-
gery. Realistically, the definitive surgery probably 
does not remove every last tumour cell; instead, the 
anim al’s own local immune defence mechanism 
may well ‘mop up’ the remaining neoplastic cells. 
However, this process should not be relied on to 
correct compromised surgical technique. The  inci-
sion, the surgical exposure and the surgical margin 
are the most important aspects of a definitive 
surgery.
The incision and surgical exposure
The placing of the incision should take into account 
the need to resect any scars that are a result of 
previous surgery or sites of biopsy. Such scars 
should be afforded the same margins as the bulk of 
the tumour due to contamination from the primary 
mass. These margins will have been decided on 
prior to surgery on the basis of the biopsy 
information. The incision should also allow adequate 
access to the tumour to avoid rough handling and 
fragmentation of the neoplastic tissue.
The surgical margin
The choice of the margin at surgery will profoundly 
affect the success of the surgery as a curative proce-
dure. The apparently normal tissue surrounding 
malignant tumours is frequently infiltrated by neo-
plastic cells. Generally, the greater the likelihood of 
local infiltration, the wider the surgical margin must 
be because of the propensity for local, unappreci-
ated spread (Figure 6.5). The magnitude of grossly 
normal tissue taken with the obvious ‘primary’ mass 
will depend on the histological type and grade of 
tumour, again emphasizing the need for establishing 
this information by biopsy preoperatively. The tumour 
and adjacent tissues need to be considered three-
dimensionally with respect to margin determination, 
peripheral/circumferential and deep, all of which are 
equally important.
Although margins are usually described in terms 
of a specified measurable distance, consideration 
should also be given to the biological behaviour of 
the tumour in question. The most effective natural 
barriers to the spread of cancer are collagen-rich 
relatively avascular tissues, including fascia, 
tendons, ligaments and cartilage. Fat, subcutaneous 
tissue, muscle and other parenchymatous organs 
offer relatively little resistance to invading neoplastic 
cells. Peripheral margins are frequently referred to in 
terms of metric measurements and deep margins in 
terms of metric measurements or fascial planes. 
Fixation of the tumour to adjacent structures or 
fascial planes mandates removal of the adherent 
area in continuity with the tumour.
Guideline resection margins required for a range of tumours. These are guidelines only and do not guarantee 
complete resection.6.5
Tumour type and grade Required margins to give ‘good’ 
chance of clean resection
Depth of resection needed
Peripheral odontogenic ﬁbroma (POF) and 
ameloblastoma (epulides)
0.5 cm Through tissue in all directions. Some surgeons will 
‘scrape’ the POF from bone (they do not invade 
bone), but this can be associated with recurrence
Oral basal cell carcinoma (epulis) 1 cm Through tissue in all directions
Grade I (low grade) MCT 1 cm Down to and including the muscle or fascial plane 
below the tumour
Grade I soft tissue sarcomas (spindle cell sarcomas)
Osteosarcomas that have not invaded soft tissues
Well differentiated dermal SCC
Grade II (intermediate grade) MCTs 2 cm Down to and including the muscle or fascial plane 
below the tumour; or tissue in all directions (for oral 
tumours)Most malignant oral tumours (ﬁbrosarcoma, 
osteosarcoma, squamous cell sarcoma)
Intermediate or poorly differentiated dermal SCC
Ch06 Oncology.indd   48 11/10/2010   12:07
VetBooks.ir

===== PDF PAGE 58 =====
Chapter 6 Principles of oncological surgery
49
Figure 6.6 outlines some natural barriers to 
tumour spread at different locations in the body. 
These are taken into consideration when deciding on 
the appropriate extent of resection.
There is substantial evidence to support the 
theo ry that a ‘positive surgical margin’ (presence of 
tumour cells at the edge of the excised tissue) has a 
negative impact on local recurrence rates, risk of 
metastatic disease, length of disease-free interval 
and disease-related death. Equally, margins exces-
sively wide or too narrow may adversely affect qual-
ity of life. Significant debate remains as to the 
optimal excision margins. Excessively wide margins 
contribute to increased duration of hospitalization, 
cost, increased cosmetic disfigurement and wound 
complications. If margins are too narrow there will be 
increased incidence of recurrence, metastasis and 
mortality. Surgeons aim for a margin that is wide 
enough to remove the tumour completely for an 
acceptable percentage of time and narrow enough to 
minimize removal of excessive normal tissue.
One study in MCTs evaluated the presence of 
tumour cells in excised tissue at locations of 1, 2 and 
3 cm from the primary mass (Simpson et al., 2004). 
For low-grade lesions, all were completely excised at 
a distance of 1 cm; intermediate grades achieved 
75% complete excision at 1 cm and 100% at 2 cm. 
Another study demonstrated 91% complete excision 
of low- and intermediate-grade MCTs at a distance 
of 2 cm with no local recurrence during the follow-up 
period (Fulcher et al., 2006). Even with histologically 
complete excision, local recurrence is still possible 
(Weisse et al., 2002). The likelihood of recurrence 
following marginal excision varies with tumour type 
and histological grade.
It is also well recognized that the prognosis for 
certain tumours is impacted by tumour size and ana-
tomical location, for example with MCTs and SCCs. 
Intuitively this could be expected to influence the 
size of appropriate margins and, indeed, has been 
demonstrated to be correct for melanoma in human 
patients, where anatomical site and thickness are 
independent predictors of outcome. Current margin 
recommendations for melanoma are site- and size-
dependent and vary from 1 to 2 cm to reflect this 
(Zitelli et al., 1997).
The ability to appreciate accurately the extent of 
the gross disease (particularly where it is not possi-
ble to palpate the entire tumour externally) and 
hence obtain adequate surgical margins is substan-
tially improved by use of advanced imaging modal -
ities (Wallack et al., 2002). Attempting to achieve a 
negative surgical margin in the case of metastatec-
tomy still appears to be important, as some studies 
have demonstrated an impact on risk of disease 
recurrence and survival times.
The extent of the surgical margin can be 
categorized anatomically as:
•	 Local excision
•	 Wide local excision
•	 Radical local excision.
Local excision: This is the removal of the gross 
tumour with the minimal amount of surrounding nor-
mal tissue. This often means removal of the tumour 
through its natural capsule or immediate boundaries, 
usually leaving residual microscopic disease. 
Although an additional margin of normal tissue is 
usually removed, there are some instances when it 
is desirable not to exceed the boundary of the 
tumour, so as to preserve vital surrounding tissue 
(e.g. removal of feline thyroid tumours with preserva-
tion of the parathyroid tissue, or removal of central 
nervous system tumours with preservation of sur-
rounding neuronal tissue).
Examples of natural barriers to tumour spread. a If the tumour has inﬁltrated through this layer, it no longer acts as 
a barrier and the resection must go to below the next uninvolved fascial/muscle layer.6.6
Area of the body Fascial or muscle structure that can be removed and may act as a ventral barrier to tumour spread a
Antebrachium Antebrachial fascia covering the antebrachial muscles
Head Fascia covering the temporalis muscles 
Lateral thorax Latissimus dorsi muscle. Although the muscle does not need to be sutured back together, dead space should be carefully closed 
to prevent seroma formation
Lateral abdomen Abdominal muscles (e.g. external abdominal oblique). Once two of the three main abdominal muscles have been resected, the 
deﬁcit should be closed or reinforced
Ventral abdomen Rectus sheath. Deﬁcits in the rectus sheath should be closed; if they cannot be closed, further deep muscle should be resected 
to allow apposition of the edges of the rectus sheath
Dorsum Fascia over the dorsal spinal and paralumbar muscles. If tumours are attached to fascia that is in turn attached to spinous 
processes of vertebrae, these spinous processes should be removed
Crural region There is no fascial sheath comparable to that in the forelimb. Although locally the fascia over muscles such as the cranial tibial 
muscle can be resected, and periosteum used as a deep margin, tumours in this area often can only be cytoreduced without 
amputation
Lateral thigh Fascia over the biceps femoris. This is intimately associated with the biceps femoris muscle, and usually margins are gained by 
partial resection of the biceps femoris muscle
Ch06 Oncology.indd   49 11/10/2010   12:07
VetBooks.ir

===== PDF PAGE 59 =====
Chapter 6 Principles of oncological surgery
50
Tumour types suitable for local excision are:
•	 Lipoma
•	 Histiocytoma
•	 Sebaceous adenoma
•	 Thyroid adenoma.
Wide local excision: When a significant predeter-
mined margin of surrounding tissue is removed 
together with the primary mass, the excision is 
termed ‘wide local excision’. Again, preoperative 
knowledge of the tumour type and grade is essential 
for deciding on that appropriate margin. Figure 6.5 
gives some guidelines as to the resection margins 
required, and how they differ for various tumour 
types and grades.
Anatomical considerations may dictate whether it 
is possible to resect the mass with the appropriate 
margin; if not possible, consideration should be given 
to the use of suitable adjunctive therapy. Very often, 
especially on the limbs, the appropriate depth of sur-
gical margin cannot be obtained without significant 
functional consequence. In these circumstances use 
is made of the known biology of tumours. A collagen-
rich fascial plane (e.g. a muscle sheath or aponeuro-
sis) may act as a natural boundary to tumour spread. 
Figure 6.7 shows how grade and fascial plane 
involvement alter the resection required. This form of 
surgery (wide local resection) is probably the most 
difficult because it is so tempting to take less tissue 
than may be required in order to preserve tissue for 
closure. The required margins, when measured out in 
the patient, can often appear very large (Figure 6.8). 
Preoperative planning is essential in these cases.
For example, for a grade II MCT, the suggested 
margin of excision is 2 cm. On the antebrachium of a 
dog, 2 cm deep would take the surgeon down to 
bone, or even into bone. However, the thick antebra-
chial fascial sheath acts as a barrier to the ventral 
spread of tumour cells; this is removed with the 
tumour and acts as the ‘deep margin’. The fascia is 
removed over the same area as the skin resection. If 
there is any adhesion of the fascia to the underlying 
muscle or tissue, the next layer down should be 
removed also. Preoperative evaluation is therefore 
essential to plan for such findings. Other examples of 
natural barriers to spread of tumours are indicated in 
Figure 6.6; removal of indicated structures does not 
compromise function.
Radical local excision, supraradical excision, 
compartmental excision and amputation: 
Removal of the tumour with anatomically extensive 
margins of tissue, including fascial planes that are 
undisturbed by the primary growth of the tumour, is 
termed radical local, supraradical or compartmental 
excision. Sarcomas, in particular, extend along fas-
cial planes rather than through them and this pattern 
of growth dictates removal of the entire anatomical 
Required resection margins often seem very 
large. This skin tumour has 3 cm margins 
marked out.
6.8
The degree of local tissue 
inﬁ  ltration varies with the 
tumour grade. The central tumour 
mass is the grossly visible and 
palpable part. Invisible to the naked 
eye are strands, or tentacles, of 
neoplastic tissue penetrating out 
into normal tissue. It is this inﬁ  ltration 
that determines the required 
margins of resection, and the 
degree of inﬁ  ltration varies with 
tumour type and grade. Tumour 
grade is generally designated as I,II 
or III, with III usually being the most 
aggressive. Other terms used are 
low, intermediate and high grade 
and well differentiated through to 
poorly differentiated. x indicates the 
necessary peripheral or 
circumferential margin (usually a 
metric measurement) and y the 
deep margin (usually measured in 
terms of fascial planes, also can be 
measured metrically).
6.7
x
y
x
y
Skin
Fascial
planes
Involved
fascial
planes
Uninvolved
fascial
planes
x
y
x
y
Skin
Fascial
planes
Involved
fascial
plane
Uninvolved
fascial
plane
Grade I
Grade III
Gross disease Microscopic disease Surgical incision
Ch06 Oncology.indd   50 11/10/2010   12:07
VetBooks.ir

===== PDF PAGE 60 =====
Chapter 6 Principles of oncological surgery
51
compartment rather than simply wide margins of tis-
sue. One example of this is the resection of a single 
muscle group for small tumours involving muscle 
bellies where the outer fascial planes have not been 
breached. Resection to clean fascial planes on all 
sides necessitates removal of all blood vessels, 
nerves and lymphatics that lie within the affected 
compartment. In the limbs, muscles with their associ-
ated fascial capsules comprise individual compart-
ments. Other examples of compartmental or 
supraradical resections include:
•	 Removal of the whole pinna and vertical ear 
canal for resection of SCC of the pinna
•	 Resection of the complete mandible and its 
muscle attachments for treatment of mandibular 
chondro- or osteosarcomas (OSAs)
•	 Amputation of a limb for appendicular OSA
•	 Hemipelvectomy for high hindlimb tumours
•	 Removal of the scapula and associated muscles 
for scapular tumours.
Examples of radical resections include:
•	 Excision of the eyelids and orbital contents for 
removal of invasive SCCs of the eyelid
•	 Total or partial orbitectomy for the treatment of 
periorbital tumours
•	 Radical chest wall resection or abdominal wall 
resection for the removal of sarcomas
•	 Radical resections of the nasal planum and 
rostral maxilla.
For margins equalling or exceeding 3 cm, surgery 
often involves resection of large compartments of tis-
sue such as amputation, hemipelvectomy, extensive 
maxillofacial surgery, or abdominal and chest wall 
resections. Higher-grade tumours often travel exten-
sively along fascial planes; hence surgeries such as 
amputation are indicated rather than local resection.
Examples of tumours that require radical excision 
(3 cm, down to and including an uninvolved muscle 
or fascial plane below the tumour) include the 
following, but these are only guidelines and 
unfortunately do not guarantee complete resection of 
the tumour:
•	 Grade III (high grade) MCTs
•	 Grade II and III soft tissue sarcomas (spindle cell 
sarcomas)
•	 OSAs that have invaded soft tissues
•	 Feline vaccine-associated sarcomas.
In summary, in order to formulate a surgical plan 
the surgeon must establish:
1. The local, regional and systemic extent of the 
tumour in the patient
2. The margins required for attempted definitive 
excision
3. How those margins will translate anatomically on 
to the patient in the area of the tumour
4. The impact on the patient and the anticipated 
postoperative care
5. Whether the surgeon has the requisite skill, 
facilities and comfort level to perform the 
procedure or will offer referral
6. What the owners’ expectations are and whether 
they can be met or modified.
Dissection technique
A scalpel offers or provides the least traumatic form 
of tissue separation and is recommended for the skin 
incision and incisions into hollow viscera. Scissors 
and swabs should be used for the separation of fas-
cial planes, the separation of adhesions and in body 
cavities where use of a scalpel may be dangerous. 
Blood vessels should be identified and ligated or 
cauterized prior to transection, and tissues should be 
placed under moderate tension as the dissection is 
carried out to facilitate the identification of fascial 
planes and tumour margins.
Reduction of tumour cell contamination within 
surgical ﬁeld
There are many reports of tumour seeding after 
biopsy or surgical procedures in human patients, and 
veterinary cases of surgically induced tumour seed-
ing have also been identified. The pseudocapsule 
around many tumours, especially sarcomas, has via-
ble tumour cells on its surface. Manipulation and  
surgical exposure of the pseudocapsule promote 
tumour spread via exfoliated cells.
Although it is tempting to grasp a tumour using 
traumatic tissue forceps, this may lead to tissue frag-
mentation and dissemination of neoplastic cells; stay 
sutures, placed in normal surrounding tissue being 
resected, are the best way to manipulate a tumour. 
In body cavities, neoplasms should be isolated from 
surrounding viscera by large laparotomy pads to 
minimize contamination of normal tissue by exfoli-
ated tumour cells.
It is often helpful to approach tumours as if they 
were abscesses or infected tissue, and the tech-
niques and precautions used to prevent spread of 
bacteria will also help to minimize the spread of neo-
plastic cells through inadvertent tumour violation. 
However, there are some differences. With respect to 
adhesions between neoplastic tissue and adjacent 
structures, these adhesions represent direct tumour 
invasion in up to 57% of cases, and the tumour and 
the adhesions should be removed en bloc whenever 
possible. Seeded tumour cells appear to adhere to 
normal tissue via specific cell surface receptors, and 
routine wound or cavity lavage following removal is 
of little benefit in terms of ‘washing out’ remaining 
tumour cells. However, remaining tumour cells are 
not likely to be spread by lavage; thus, lavage is rec-
ommended to effect removal of blood clots, foreign 
material, necrotic tissue fragments and any unat-
tached tumour cells. In human patients with inadvert-
ent contamination of the surgical site following soft 
tissue sarcoma resection, it is possible to achieve 
similar outcomes when compared with those without 
contamination, but re-excision and wound irrigation 
is necessary (Virkus et al., 2002). Gloves, instru-
ments and drapes should be changed after tumour 
excision and lavage, as tumour cells will adhere to 
Ch06 Oncology.indd   51 11/10/2010   12:07
VetBooks.ir

===== PDF PAGE 61 =====
Chapter 6 Principles of oncological surgery
52
these inanimate objects and potentially be seeded to 
tissues as closure is carried out. Gloves and equip-
ment should also be changed when performing mul-
tiple procedures in the same patient, to avoid 
mechanical contamination.
Avoidance of wound complications
Local cellular defence mechanisms and immuno -
modulation may well be very important in the 
removal of residual tumour cells. The development of 
haematomas, seromas or sepsis will interfere with 
this function and these should be avoided by meticu-
lous haemostasis, effective closure of dead space 
and appropriate use of drains and perioperative anti-
biotics. The use of drains is somewhat controversial 
amongst veterinary oncological surgeons, especially 
if the resection has been incomplete. There is poten-
tial for seeding of tumour cells along the tissues 
where the drain is placed (this may be decreased 
with the use of active versus passive drains), making 
further surgery or adjunctive therapy very much 
more difficult if there is recurrence. The author [KJ] 
does use drains, but positions their exits close to the 
incision so as not to compromise further adjunctive 
therapy that may be needed.
Vascular occlusion techniques
Vascular supply to the tumour, and venous and lym-
phatic drainage from it, should be ligated as early  
as possible during surgery. The predominant reason 
for vascular occlusion is improved intraoperative 
haemostasis and visualization but it is of notable 
importance where the probability of cell exfoliation is 
high, such as for tumours of ectodermal origin (e.g. 
SCCs, MCTs).
Management of local lymph nodes
The flow of lymph is directional; lymph nodes that 
are the first to receive drainage from any given loca-
tion are called ‘sentinel’ lymph nodes. Sentinel lymph 
nodes have been mapped in humans using contrast, 
dyes and radioactive tracers; in human patients it is 
the ‘sentinel’ lymph nodes that are targeted for 
biopsy to stage disease, or for removal in the treat-
ment of disease (Krag, 2000). Once the marker is 
injected, the first sentinel lymph node is identified 
and biopsy is performed. If that node is negative for 
the cancer, further dissection is avoided; if the senti-
nel node is positive, further dissection is performed.
In veterinary medicine such studies are limited 
and oncologists usually refer to the ‘regional’ lymph 
nodes. These nodes should be sampled (usually via 
FNA) as a component of routine oncological staging, 
as it is not possible to determine the presence, or 
absence, of micrometastasis through mere palp-
ation. This is especially important if the decision 
regarding the use of adjunctive therapy is dependent 
on whether or not there is disease in the lymph 
nodes. Tumour grade and survival have been linked 
with the presence of micrometastasis in the lymph 
nodes, as detected by cytological assessment 
(Withrow and Vail, 2007; Krick et al., 2009). Further 
studies, using contrast-enhanced imaging modali-
ties, are starting to chart these lymph nodes and this 
practice is likely to become more commonplace 
(Pereira et al., 2008; Tang et al., 2009).
Lymph nodes are only minimally effective barriers 
to the passage of tumour cells and their function is 
probably one of immunological surveillance and 
immune editing, rather than filtration of tumour cells. 
The immunological response of regional lymph 
nodes appears to be more effective early on in the 
course of disease. Local lymph node metastasis 
is common for malignant melanomas and most 
carcinomas, of intermediate frequency for sarcomas, 
respiratory tumours, cutaneous carcinomas and 
MCTs, and rare for nervous system tumours, skeletal 
tumours, nasal tumours and most endocrine tumours 
(e.g. thyroid carcinoma). Removing lymph nodes 
may interfere with local immune defence mecha-
nisms in the postoperative period. There is also a 
potential increase in surgical morbidity related to the 
more extensive surgical procedure.
The practice of routinely removing the ‘sentinel’ 
or regional lymph nodes in both humans and anim-
als prophylactically is a matter of continued contro-
versy but is generally no longer recommended 
(Krag, 2000).
In general, although decisions must be made on 
a case-by-case basis, current recommendations are 
the non-destructive biopsy (FNA) of grossly normal 
local nodes, and removal of the node in the following 
situations:
•	 The node is histologically proven to contain 
tumour cells
•	 The node appears grossly abnormal at surgery
•	 The node is intimately associated with the tissue 
being removed and surgical margins dictate its 
removal (e.g. as part of a compartmental 
resection such as the inguinal lymph node during 
mastectomy)
•	 The node is sufficiently large and/or located in 
such an area as to cause some degree of 
functional impairment associated with space 
occupation.
One case where local lymph node removal is 
probably beneficial is the removal of the medial iliac 
lymph nodes (often erroneously referred to as the 
sublumbar lymph nodes) in patients with metastatic 
apocrine or anal sac gland adenocarcinomas of the 
perineum. Removal of these positive lymph nodes 
does not result in a cure, but can help to alleviate the 
paraneoplastic syndrome of hypercalcaemia and may 
help to prevent large bowel obstruction. It is recom-
mended that, in critical areas (retropharyngeal, hilar, 
mesenteric), lymph nodes that have eroded through 
the capsule and become adherent to surrounding tis-
sues are not removed, because attempting to do this 
would cause significant harm to the patient.
Reconstruction of the resulting deﬁcit
There is often a great temptation to compromise 
excision margins through a lack of confidence in 
one’s ability to reconstruct the resulting deficit. This 
compromise may result in failure of a single surgical 
procedure that could have produced a cure. It may 
Ch06 Oncology.indd   52 11/10/2010   12:07
VetBooks.ir

===== PDF PAGE 62 =====
Chapter 6 Principles of oncological surgery
53
also result in death of an animal that should have 
been cured. It is the resection of tumours involving 
the skin and associated structures that often results 
in substantial deficits, and a variety of techniques 
are available to deal with these deficits (see BSAVA 
Manual of Canine and Feline Wound Management 
and Reconstruction).
Primary skin closure: This is the coaptation of the 
wound edges at the time of the initial surgery without 
the need for extensive skin-releasing techniques. It is 
used mainly in the closure of smaller deficits or 
where there is a lot of loose skin. Towel clamps may 
be used temporarily to help to align skin edges and 
stretch skin, and ‘walking’ sutures should be used to 
bring skin edges together gradually. There are many 
other tension-releasing techniques that can be used 
to facilitate primary skin closure and in oncological 
surgery full consideration should be given to these 
prior to planning extensive flap techniques.
Secondary skin healing: This is the closure of the 
wound by the natural processes of wound contracture 
and epithelialization. It is particularly suited to contam-
inated wounds or where the reconstruction of the 
wound is prohibited by the lack of surrounding skin.
Pedicle flap closure of the skin: This is closure of 
wounds using sliding flaps of skin, e.g. local plasty 
techniques, skin meshing, advancement flaps, rota-
tion flaps and transposition flaps. It also includes  
the use of axial (Figure 6.9) or island flaps. Such 
techniques can be used immediately after the exci-
sional surgery.
dead space. Gastro-omental pedicle flaps can also 
be used to provide a source of extra tissue in the 
reconstruction of hollow viscera such as the bladder. 
Skin expanders can potentially be used to augment 
skin in the area of a tumour prior to resection.
Myocutaneous flaps: These may be harvested  
as muscle flaps or combined muscle and skin flaps 
for closure and support of larger structural defects 
such as those involving thoracic wall (Halfacree et 
al., 2007).
Mesh implants: These can be used on their own, or 
combined with omental transfer techniques, to pro-
vide a scaffold for reconstruction of the thoracic and 
abdominal wall (Matthiesen et al., 1992; Liptak et al., 
2008) (Figure 6.10). Cutaneous reconstruction tech-
niques are then used to close the skin. As an alter-
native to the use of mesh to reconstruct the thoracic 
wall after resections, diaphragmatic advancement 
with or without caudal lung lobectomy can be used 
to obviate the necessity to reconstruct a thoracic wall 
(Matthiesen et al., 1992).
Completed caudal superﬁcial epigastric axial 
pattern ﬂap being used in a dog to close a skin 
deﬁcit resulting from tumour resection.
6.9
Mesh being used to reconstruct the body wall 
defect created in Figure 6.2.
6.10
Free skin grafts: This is particularly suited to the 
clos   ure of skin deficits over the distal limbs where 
there is a lack of adjacent skin and axial or island 
flaps are not possible. These techniques will be 
delayed until after the excisional surgery to allow for 
the establishment of a good recipient granulation bed.
Local tissue augmentation: Omentum can be 
tunnelled, after appropriate extension, to most areas 
of the body to provide extra tissue to allow closure of 
Closure considerations
The oncological surgeon should be familiar with all of 
the above techniques. A suitable closure technique 
should be planned prior to resection of the tumour. 
Appropriate alternatives for closure must also be 
considered in the event the resection has to be more 
radical than originally planned. Most often primary 
closure techniques are used in veterinary oncology 
due to the fact that if elaborate cutaneous recon-
structive techniques are used, there is potential for 
very wide tumour recurrence with incomplete resec-
tion. To minimize this potential for seeding, separate 
instruments should be used for the reconstructive 
part of the procedure.
Ch06 Oncology.indd   53 11/10/2010   12:07
VetBooks.ir