PDF PAGE 420
390  P ART III  Digestive System Disorders
Halitosis often accompanies dysphagia, in which case it is 
usually more productive to determine the cause of the dys -
phagia. If halitosis occurs without dysphagia, the clinician 
should first be sure that the odor is abnormal and then check 
for the ingestion of odoriferous substances (e.g., feces). A 
thorough oral examination is still the most important test. 
Halitosis not attributable to an oropharyngeal lesion may be 
If oral examination findings are not helpful, plain oral and 
laryngeal radiographs are usually the best next steps. Oral 
cultures are rarely helpful because normal oral flora makes 
interpretation of results difficult. Even animals with severe 
halitosis or stomatitis secondary to bacterial infection rarely 
benefit from bacterial culture, unless there is a draining tract 
or abscess.
Oral Pain
Fractured bones or teeth
Trauma
Periodontitis or caries (especially cats)
Mandibular or maxillary osteomyelitis
Other causes
Retrobulbar abscess/inflammation
Various other abscesses or granulomas of the oral 
cavity
Temporal-masseter myositis
Stomatitis, glossitis, pharyngitis, gingivitis, tonsillitis, or 
sialoadenitis
Immune-mediated disease
Feline viral rhinotracheitis, calicivirus, leukemia virus, or 
immunodeficiency virus
Lingual foreign objects, other foreign objects, or 
granulomas
Tooth root abscess
Uremia
Electrical cord burn
Miscellaneous causes
• Thallium
• Caustics
Pain associated with swallowing: esophageal stricture or 
esophagitis
Oral Mass
Tumor (malignant or benign)
Eosinophilic granuloma
Foreign object (oral, pharyngeal, or laryngeal)
Retropharyngeal lymphadenomegaly
Inflammatory polyp of middle ear (primarily cats)
Sialocele
Oral Trauma
Fractured bones (e.g., mandible, maxilla)
Soft tissue laceration
Hematoma
Neuromuscular Disease
Localized myasthenia
Temporal-masseter myositis
Temporomandibular joint disease
Oral, pharyngeal, or cricopharyngeal dysfunction
Cricopharyngeal achalasia
Tick paralysis
Rabies
Tetanus
Botulism
Various cranial nerve dysfunctions/central nervous system 
disease
 BOX 26.1
Causes of Dysphagia
Bacterial Causes
Food retained in the mouth
Anatomic defect allowing retention (exposed tooth 
roots, tumor, large ulcer)
Neuromuscular defect allowing retention (pharyngeal 
dysphagia)
Food retained in the esophagus
Tartar or periodontitis
Damaged oral tissue
Neoplasia/granuloma of mouth or esophagus
Severe stomatitis/glossitis
Eating Noxious Substances
Necrotic or odoriferous food
Feces
 BOX 26.2
Causes of Halitosis
Ptyalism
Nausea
Hepatic encephalopathy (especially feline)
Seizure activity
Chemical or toxic stimulation of salivation 
(organophosphates, caustics, bitter drugs [e.g., 
atropine, metronidazole])
Behavior
Hyperthermia
Salivary gland hypersecretion
Pseudoptyalism
Oral pain, especially stomatitis, glossitis, gingivitis, 
pharyngitis, tonsillitis, or sialoadenitis (see Box 26.1)
Oral or pharyngeal dysphagia (see Box 26.1)
Facial nerve paralysis
 BOX 26.3
Major Causes of Drooling
VetBooks.ir
PDF PAGE 477
447
CHAPTER  29 
Disorders of the Oral 
Cavity, Pharynx,  
and Esophagus
MASSES, PROLIFERATIONS, AND 
INFLAMMATION OF THE OROPHARYNX
SIALOCELE
Etiology
Sialoceles are accumulations of saliva in subcutaneous tissues 
caused by salivary duct obstruction and/or rupture, and 
subsequent leakage of secretions into subcutaneous tissues. 
Most cases are probably traumatic, but some are idiopathic.
Clinical Features
A large swelling is found under the jaw or tongue or occa -
sionally in the pharynx. Acutely the swelling may be painful, 
but most are nonpainful. Oral cavity sialoceles may cause 
dysphagia, whereas those located in the pharynx often 
produce gagging or dyspnea. If traumatized, sialoceles may 
bleed or cause anorexia due to discomfort. Classically found 
in 2- to 4-year-old dogs; German Shepherds and Miniature 
Poodles seem to be predisposed.
Diagnosis
Aspiration with a large-bore needle reveals thick fluid with 
some neutrophils. The fluid usually resembles mucus, 
strongly suggesting its salivary gland origin. Contrast sialo -
grams and/or contrast computed tomography (CT) some -
times define which gland is involved.
Treatment
The mass is opened and drained. The salivary gland respon-
sible for the secretions must be excised.
Prognosis
The prognosis is excellent if the correct gland is removed.
SIALOADENITIS/SIALOADENOSIS/
SALIVARY GLAND NECROSIS
Etiology
The etiology is unknown, but the condition apparently has 
occurred as an idiopathic event as well as secondary to 
chronic vomiting/regurgitation.
Clinical Features
The condition may cause a painless enlargement of one or 
more salivary glands (usually the submandibular). If there 
is substantial inflammation, animals may be dysphagic. A 
syndrome has been reported in which noninflammatory 
swelling (sialoadenosis) is associated with vomiting only 
responsive to phenobarbital therapy. Cause and effect are 
unclear, but it is clear that chronic vomiting will cause sialo-
adenitis and even necrosis in some dogs.
Diagnosis
Cytology or histopathology confirms that the mass is sali -
vary tissue and determines whether inflammation or necro -
sis is present.
Treatment
If there is substantial inflammation and pain, surgical 
removal seems most efficacious. If the patient is vomiting, a 
search should be made for an underlying cause. If a cause is 
found, it should be treated and the size of the salivary glands 
monitored. If no other cause for vomiting can be found, 
phenobarbital may be administered at anticonvulsant doses 
(see Chapter 62).
Prognosis
The prognosis is usually excellent.
NEOPLASMS OF THE ORAL CAVITY  
IN DOGS
Etiology
Most soft tissue masses of the oral cavity are neoplasms, and 
most of these are malignant (i.e., melanoma, squamous cell 
carcinoma, fibrosarcoma). However, acanthomatous amelo-
blastomas (previously called epulides), fibromatous epulides 
(classically in Boxers), oral papillomatosis, and eosinophilic 
granulomas (e.g., in Siberian Huskies and Cavalier King 
Charles Spaniels) also occur.
Clinical Features
The most common signs of tumors of the oral cavity  
are halitosis, dysphagia, bleeding, salivation, or a growth 
VetBooks.ir
PDF PAGE 478
448  P ART III  Digestive System Disorders
cytologic or histopathologic analysis, although papillomato-
sis and melanomas may be strongly suspected based upon 
their gross appearance. The preferred diagnostic approach in 
a dog with a mass of the oral cavity is to image the area (e.g., 
CT) and perform a relatively deep incisional biopsy. A deep 
biopsy is necessary to avoid misdiagnosis that often occurs 
if only the superficial, ulcerated, necrotic surface is obtained. 
If malignancy is possible, thoracic radiographs or CT should 
be obtained to evaluate for metastases (uncommon but a 
very poor prognostic sign if present). Fine-needle aspiration 
of regional lymph nodes, even if they appear normal, is indi-
cated to detect metastases. Melanomas may be amelanotic 
protruding from the mouth. Papillomatosis and fibromatous 
periodontal hyperplasia are benign growths that may cause 
discomfort when eating and occasionally cause bleeding, 
mild halitosis, or tissue protrusion from the mouth. The 
biologic behaviors of the different tumors are presented in  
Table 29.1.
Diagnosis
A thorough examination of the oral cavity (which may 
require that the animal be under anesthesia) usually reveals 
a mass involving the gingiva, although the tonsillar area, 
hard palate, and tongue may be affected. Diagnosis requires 
 TABLE 29.1
Some Characteristics of Selected Oral Tumors
TUMOR
TYPICAL 
APPEARANCE/
LOCATION
BIOLOGIC 
BEHAVIOR PREFERRED THERAPY
Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Gingiva Fleshy or ulcerated/on 
rostral gingiva
Malignant, locally 
invasive
Wide surgical resection on rostral gingiva ± 
radiation; piroxicam may help palliate.
Tonsil Fleshy or ulcerated/on 
one or rarely both 
tonsils
Malignant, commonly 
spreads to regional 
lymph nodes
None (chemotherapy may be of some benefit); 
piroxicam may be helpful for palliation.
Tongue margin 
(dog)
Ulcerated/on margin of 
tongue
Malignant, locally 
invasive
Surgical resection of tongue/radiotherapy; piroxicam 
may be helpful for palliation.
Base of tongue 
(cat)
Ulcerated/at base of 
tongue
Malignant, locally 
invasive
None (radiotherapy of tongue may be used 
palliatively).
Malignant 
Melanoma
Gray, black, or pink; 
can be smooth, 
usually fleshy/on 
gum, tongue, or 
palate
Very malignant, early 
metastases to lungs
Surgery and/or radiation therapy for local control. 
For systemic control, carboplatin chemotherapy has 
been used with limited success.
Fibrosarcoma Pink and fleshy/on 
palate or gums
Malignant, very 
invasive locally
Wide surgical resection (radiation may be of some 
value in selected cases after surgical excision). 
Biologically high-grade, histologically low-grade 
tumors in young Labradors, Golden Retrievers, and 
German Shepherd Dogs may have higher 
metastatic potential).
Acanthomatous 
Ameloblastoma 
(Epulis)
Pink and fleshy/on 
gum or rostral 
mandible
Benign, locally 
invasive into bone
Surgical resection ± radiation for gross or 
microscopic disease. Must remove associated tooth 
and dental ligament.
Fibromatous 
Epulis
Pink, fleshy, solitary or 
multiple/on gums
Benign Surgical resection, must remove associated tooth and 
dental ligament
Ossifying Epulis Pink, fleshy, solitary or 
multiple/on gums
Benign Surgical resection, must remove associated tooth and 
dental ligament
Papillomatosis Pink or white, 
cauliflower-like, 
multiple/seen 
anywhere
Benign; malignant 
transformation to 
squamous cell 
carcinoma may 
occur rarely.
Nothing, surgical resection or cryotherapy
Plasmacytoma Fleshy or ulcerated 
growth on gingiva
Malignant, locally 
invasive, rarely 
metastasizes
Surgical resection and/or radiation or melphalan 
chemotherapy
VetBooks.ir
PDF PAGE 479
 CHAPTER 29  Disorders of the Oral Cavity, Pharynx, and Esophagus  449
Clinical Features
Dysphagia, halitosis, anorexia, and/or bleeding are common 
features of these tumors.
Diagnosis
A large, deep biopsy specimen is needed because it is crucial 
to differentiate malignant tumors from eosinophilic granu -
lomas. The superficial aspect of many oral cavity masses is 
ulcerated and necrotic because of proliferation of normal 
oral bacterial flora, making it difficult to accurately diagnose 
a mass when deep tissue samples are not obtained.
Treatment
Surgical excision is desirable, but cats often do not tolerate 
aggressive oral surgery as well as dogs do. Long-term or 
permanent feeding tubes may be required. Radiation therapy 
and/or chemotherapy may benefit cats with incompletely 
excised squamous cell carcinomas not involving the tongue 
or tonsil.
Prognosis
In general, the prognosis for cats with oral squamous cell 
carcinoma is poor (see Chapter 81).
FELINE EOSINOPHILIC GRANULOMA
Etiology
The cause of feline eosinophilic granuloma is uncertain. 
Hypersensitivity reactions are thought to be responsible, and 
a genetic predisposition has been suggested.
Clinical Features
Feline eosinophilic granuloma complex includes indolent 
ulcer, eosinophilic plaque, and linear granuloma, but it has 
not been established that these diseases are related. Indolent 
ulcers are classically found on the lip or oral mucosa (espe-
cially the maxillary canine teeth) of middle-aged cats. Eosin-
ophilic plaque usually occurs on the skin of the medial thighs 
and abdomen. Linear granuloma is typically found on the 
posterior aspect of the rear legs of young cats but may also 
occur on the tongue, palate, and oral mucosa. Severe oral 
involvement of an eosinophilic ulcer or plaque typically pro-
duces dysphagia, halitosis, and/or anorexia. Eosinophilic 
granuloma may affect the chin and paw pads in addition to 
the mouth.
Diagnosis
An ulcerated mass may be found at the base of the tongue 
or on the hard palate, the glossopalatine arches, or anywhere 
else in the mouth. A deep biopsy specimen of the mass is 
necessary for accurate diagnosis. Peripheral eosinophilia is 
inconsistently present.
Treatment
Systemic antibiotics directed against Staphylococcus spp. 
(e.g., amoxicillin plus clavulanic acid, trimethoprim-sulfa 
combinations) are often effective in treating indolent 
and can cytologically resemble fibrosarcomas, carcinomas, 
or undifferentiated round cell tumors. Biopsy and subse -
quent histopathologic analysis may be required for a defini -
tive diagnosis.
Treatment and Prognosis
The preferred therapeutic approach in dogs with confirmed 
malignant neoplasms of the oral cavity and lack of clinically 
detectable metastases is wide, aggressive surgical excision 
of the mass and surrounding tissues (e.g., mandibulectomy, 
maxillectomy) and/or radiation. Enlarged regional lymph 
nodes should be excised and evaluated histopathologically, 
even if they are cytologically negative for neoplasia. Early 
complete excision (especially gingival or hard palate squa -
mous cell carcinomas and acanthomatous epulides) may be 
curative. Sometimes, fibrosarcomas can be cured if diag-
nosed early and resected completely (i.e., 3  cm ma rgins). 
However, young Labrador Retrievers and Golden Retriev -
ers in particular tend to have a histologically low-grade but 
biologically high-grade subtype of fibrosarcoma, which has 
a very high metastatic rate. Melanomas have metastatic rates 
of 60% to 80%, making surgical cure extremely rare. Rostral 
tumors tend to have a better prognosis, probably because they 
are diagnosed earlier than more caudal tumors. Acanthoma-
tous ameloblastomas may respond to radiation therapy alone 
(complete surgical excision is preferred), and squamous cell 
carcinomas or fibrosarcomas with residual postoperative 
disease may benefit from postoperative adjunctive radiation 
therapy. Lingual squamous cell carcinomas affecting the base 
of the tongue and tonsillar carcinomas have a very poor 
prognosis; complete excision or irradiation usually causes 
severe morbidity. Melanomas metastasize early and have a 
very guarded prognosis. Chemotherapy is usually not ben -
eficial in dogs with squamous cell carcinoma, acanthoma -
tous ameloblastomas, or melanoma. Piroxicam can palliate 
some patients with squamous cell carcinoma. Combination 
chemotherapy may palliate some dogs with fibrosarcomas 
(see Chapter 76). Radiotherapy plus hyperthermia has been 
successful in some dogs with oral fibrosarcoma. In all cases, 
an oncologist should be consulted.
Papillomatosis usually resolves spontaneously, although it 
may be necessary to resect some of the masses if they inter -
fere with eating. Rarely there may be malignant transforma-
tion to squamous cell carcinoma. Fibromatous epulides may 
be resected if they cause problems.
NEOPLASMS OF THE ORAL CAVITY  
IN CATS
Etiology
Tumors of the oral cavity are less common in cats than 
in dogs, but they are almost all malignant and are usually 
squamous cell carcinomas that are diagnosed and treated as 
described for dogs. Cats are different from dogs in that they 
also have sublingual squamous cell carcinomas and eosino -
philic granulomas (which mimic carcinoma but have a much 
better prognosis).
VetBooks.ir