
===== PDF PAGE 166 =====
145CHAPTER 7 Diagnostic Cytopathology in Clinical Oncology
Tumor Metastases and Tumors Exfoliating 
into Cavity Effusions
Specific tumor types preferentially metastasize to certain organs 
or sites, depending on location of the primary tumor, vascular or 
lymphatic dissemination, and many other factors. Regional lymph 
nodes, lung, liver, and spleen are common metastatic sites, but 
any tissue or organ can be involved, including skin, bone, bone 
marrow, and the central nervous system. Cytologic identification 
of tumor metastases begins with recognizing an abnormal popu -
lation of cells in the metastatic site followed by determining the 
tissue of origin, if possible, based on cytomorphologic features.
Both primary and metastatic tumors may exfoliate into cavi -
ties, including the thoracic, abdominal, and pericardial cavities, 
or into cerebrospinal or synovial fluid. Although neoplastic cells 
in these abnormal locations may be categorized as epithelial, mes-
enchymal, or discrete round cell tumors, the specific origin of the 
primary tumor is only rarely determined by examining cells in 
the effusion. A major cytologic challenge when examining cells 
in cavity effusions is distinguishing reactive mesothelium, meso -
thelioma, and carcinoma (i.e., carcinomatosis). Mesothelium 
undergoes hyperplasia and exfoliation whenever an effusion forms 
in the thoracic, abdominal, or pericardial cavities, and reactive 
mesothelial cells can adopt all the criteria of malignancy described 
for tumor cells, including marked anisocytosis and anisokaryo -
sis, macrocytosis and macrokaryosis, multinuclearity, variation of 
nuclear size within the same cell, nucleolar pleomorphism, and 
abnormal mitotic figures (Fig. 7.38). Identification of a mass and 
histologic examination often are required for a definitive diagnosis.
References
 1.  Langenbach A , McManus PM, Hendrick MJ, et al.: Sensitivity and 
specificity of methods for assessing the regional lymph nodes for evi-
dence of metastasis in dogs and cats with solid tumors, J Am Vet Med 
Assoc 218:1424–1428, 2001.
 2.  Akhtar M , Ali M A, Huq M , et  al.: Fine-needle biopsy: compari -
son of cellular yield with and without aspiration, Diagn Cytopathol 
5:162–165, 1989.
 3.  Nyland TG, Wallack ST, Wisner ER: Needle-tract implantation fol-
lowing US-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy of transitional cell 
carcinoma of the bladder, urethra, and prostate, Vet Rad Ultrasound 
43:50–53, 2002.
 4.  Barger A , Graca R , Bailey K , et  al.: Use of alkaline phosphatase 
staining to differentiate canine osteosarcoma from other vimentin-
positive tumors, Vet Pathol 42:161–165, 2005.
 5.  Masserdotti C : Architectural patterns in cytology: correlation with 
histology, Vet Clin Pathol 35:388–396, 2006.
 6.  Christopher M M, Hotz CS, Shelly SM, et al.: Interpretation by cli -
nicians of probability expressions in cytology reports and effect on 
clinical decision-making, J Vet Intern Med 24:496–503, 2010.
 7.  Masserdotti C, Drigo M: Retrospective study of cytologic features of 
canine well-differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma, Vet Clin Pathol 
41:382–390, 2012.
 8.  Alleman A R, Choi U S: Endocrine system. In Raskin R E, Meyer 
DJ, editors: Canine and feline cytology: a color atlas and interpretation 
guide, ed 2, St. Louis, 2010, Saunders.
 9.  Barthez PY, Marks SL, Woo J, et al.: Pheochromocytoma in dogs: 61 
cases (1984–1995), J Vet Intern Med 11:272–278, 1997.
 10.  Bertazzolo W , Dell’Orco M, Bonfanti U , et al.: Canine angiosar -
coma: cytologic, histologic, and immunohistochemical correlations, 
Vet Clin Pathol 34:28–34, 2005.
 11.  Craig L E, Julian ME, Ferracone JD: The diagnosis and prognosis of 
synovial tumors in dogs: 35 cases, Vet Pathol 39:66–73, 2002.
 12.  Vail D M, Powers B E, Getzy D M, et al.: Evaluation of prognostic 
factors for dogs with synovial sarcoma: 36 cases (1986-1991), J Am 
Vet Med Assoc 205:1300–1307, 1994.
 13.  Monti P , Barnes D , Adrian A M, et al.: Synovial cell sarcoma in a 
dog: a misnomer-Cytologic and histologic findings and review of the 
literature, Vet Clin Pathol 47:181–185, 2018.
 14.  Camus MS, Priest HL, Koehler JW, et al.: Cytologic criteria for mast 
cell tumor grading in dogs with evaluation of clinical outcome, Vet 
Pathol 53:1117–1123, 2016.
 15.  Flatland B , Fry M M, Newman S J, et  al.: Large anaplastic spinal 
B-cell lymphoma in a cat, Vet Clin Pathol 37:389–396, 2008.
 16.  Affolter V K, Moore PF: Localized and disseminated histiocytic sar -
coma of dendritic cell origin in dogs, Vet Pathol 39:74–83, 2002.
 17.  Moore PF, Affolter VK, Vernau W: Canine hemophagocytic histio-
cytic sarcoma: a proliferative disorder of CD11d + macrophages, Vet 
Pathol 43:632–645, 2006.
• Fig. 7.38  Reactive mesothelial cells in pleural fluid from a cat with chylo-
thorax. These cells may be highly pleomorphic and have criteria of malig -
nancy, but they represented hyperplastic mesothelium in this cat.

===== PDF PAGE 167 =====
146
8
Molecular Diagnostics
ANNE C. AVERY, KARA MAGEE, MELISSA C. PAOLONI, AND CHAND KHANNA
Goals of Molecular Diagnostic Testing in 
Oncology
Molecular diagnostic testing in oncology is performed to achieve 
one of several goals: (1) to determine whether a patient has can -
cer, typically in circumstances in which visual examination of tis-
sue by cytology or histology cannot distinguish a reactive from a 
neoplastic process; (2) to establish a prognosis; and (3) to guide 
treatment. Some of these goals currently are realized in veterinary 
oncology; the polymerase chain reaction for antigen receptor rear-
rangement (PARR) assay is used to confirm hematopoietic malig-
nancy in both canine and feline patients, and the presence of c-kit 
gene mutations can inform the prognosis in canine mast cell dis -
ease. Increasingly, global analysis of oncogenes and gene expres -
sion is being used in human oncology, and advances in technology 
and ongoing veterinary research will make such testing available, 
affordable, and informative in veterinary medicine within the next 
few years.
The presence of a particular mutation or chromosomal abnor-
mality can help subclassify a tumor. For example, in people, leuke-
mia/small cell lymphoma (CLL/SCL) and mantle cell lymphoma 
(MCL) are both neoplasms of mature B cells, with a similar (but 
not identical) immunophenotype. However, MCL almost always 
has a rearrangement between the immunoglobulin heavy chain 
locus (IgH) and the CCND1 gene (encoding cyclinD1), whereas 
this rearrangement is very rare in CLL/SCL. 1 The prognosis for 
and treatment of these two diseases are quite different, so the dis-
tinction is important to make.
Molecular diagnostic testing also can help guide therapy. This 
may be best illustrated by the development of tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors (TKIs). These drugs inhibit signaling through tyro -
sine kinase receptors, such as KIT , platelet-derived growth fac -
tor receptor (PDGFR), and epidermal growth factor receptor 
(EGFR). T umors with mutations in these receptors that result in 
their constitutive activation may respond well to TKIs, whereas 
those without such mutations may require different kinds of 
therapy. Thus testing for mutations in these genes has become 
commonplace in human medicine (e.g., EGFR in small cell lung 
carcinoma, stem cell factor [SCF] receptor [c-kit] in gastrointesti-
nal stromal cell tumors). Similarly, mast cell tumors in dogs that 
harbor a c-kit mutation may respond better to TKIs than those 
without the mutation.2
Oncogenes and chromosomal translocations uniquely distin -
guish neoplastic from normal tissue. As such, sensitive detection 
of mutations can be used to quantify residual disease in patients 
that have been treated. The best example of this is detection of 
the bcr-abl fusion gene, which can allow oncologists to detect 
as few as 1:10 3 neoplastic cells in the peripheral blood of people 
with chronic myelogenous leukemia. 4 T umor-specific primers 
that recognize the unique immunoglobulin genes found in both 
canine and human B-cell lymphomas have been used to quantify 
tumor burden and monitor disease in both dogs and people with 
lymphoma.1,4,5
The previous examples describe testing for single genetic altera-
tions that are known to be shared by most tumors of the same 
type. Increasingly, the field of oncology is moving toward person-
alized, or precision, medicine (PMED). The goal of PMED is to 
identify genetic mutations and activated signaling pathways that 
are found in an individual’s cancer, even when such changes have 
not yet been described in a particular cancer type. (PMED is dis -
cussed at the end of this chapter.)
For the purposes of this chapter, molecular diagnostics refers to 
the analysis of genes and gene expression. The goal of this chapter 
is to review several molecular techniques useful in the diagnosis 
and classification of cancer. Advanced molecular methodologies 
and diagnostics likely will continue to improve, become increas -
ingly inexpensive, simpler to use, and more broadly available to 
veterinarians over the next few years. 
Genomic Dysregulation in Cancer
Most molecular diagnostics target genomic dysregulation that 
may exist in cancer cells. Such dysregulation may occur at the level 
of the copy number of a gene; a point mutation in that gene that 
changes its function; epigenetic modification of deoxyribonucleic 
acid (DNA) that changes the level of expression; or large-scale 
changes to chromosomes that remove genes from their normal 
regulatory environment. Different methods are required for iden-
tifying each of these types of changes.
Methods for Analyzing Genes
DNA represents the genetic code of all species. This code consists 
of a series of continuous nucleic acid sugar strands linked through 
hydrogen bonds. This series of nucleic acids takes on a tertiary 
folded structure through modification by binding proteins called 
histones. The folded and wrapped DNA strand is packaged within 
the chromosomes of the cell. The earliest techniques used to assess 
the genetic changes of cancer defined gains, losses, or structural 
changes in chromosomes, referred to as cytogenetics. Subsequently, 

===== PDF PAGE 168 =====
147CHAPTER 8 Molecular Diagnostics
polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based methods and high-
throughput sequencing have allowed us to detect smaller discrete 
mutations in DNA that do not involve changes in large portions 
of the chromosome. Small deletions and insertions in genes, in 
addition to single-nucleotide changes, are now routinely detected. 
Detection of Chromosomal Abnormalities
Historically these techniques involved the examination of meta -
phase preparations made from chromosomes. The metaphase 
preparations were then stained (banded) to help in the identifi -
cation of distinct chromosome morphologies. These techniques 
allowed detection of gross abnormalities in the chromosome 
number (ploidy) and the presence of chromosomal translocations; 
they also led to the identification of genes associated with tumor 
development and progression. Cytogenetic analysis has been most 
useful in the clinical assessment of leukemias, for which meta -
phase preparations are relatively easy to develop from whole blood 
samples.6 For most human leukemias, cytogenetic descriptors are 
used to define distinct subgroups into prognostic groups and to 
guide treatment decisions.
The use of cytogenetic approaches in the management of com-
panion animals has been limited because of the difficulty involved 
in using conventional chromosomal banding to identify canine 
chromosomes. The development of chromosome-specific “paints” 
that allow the identification of specific canine chromosomes has 
improved the opportunity to apply cytogenetic descriptors to 
canine cancers. Using these techniques, Breen et al have identi -
fied a chromosomal translocation in canine chronic myelogenous 
leukemia and chronic monocytic leukemia that is the equivalent 
of the bcr-abl Philadelphia chromosome found in human chronic 
myelogenous leukemia.3,7
For the most part traditional cytogenetic techniques, including 
the use of chromosome-specific paints, are labor intensive and have 
been replaced by alternative modalities. Comparative genomic 
hybridization (CGH) arrays can define gains and losses in chromo-
some number in tumor specimens rapidly and with highly repro-
ducible results. In CGH analysis the investigator labels genomic 
DNA from a normal individual and from a patient’s tumor cells 
with two different-colored fluorescent probes. The labeled DNA 
then is hybridized to an array of DNA probes that span most of 
the genome. These probes are printed onto a chip or slide, such 
that the location of each individual probe is identified. The degree 
of hybridization to each probe is determined by the level of fluo -
rescence detected by laser excitation. Equal hybridization of the 
DNA from both sources to an individual probe indicates a normal 
copy number, whereas increased binding by the tumor DNA indi-
cates the presence of chromosomal duplication in the area of the 
genome covered by that probe (Fig. 8.1). Similarly, higher binding 
by the DNA from the normal individual indicates chromosomal 
loss in the area.
CGH arrays are useful for localizing chromosomal regions 
where investigators should focus their search for genes impor -
tant to that cancer. Studies of a number of cancers have shown 
widespread gains and losses of genomic regions. Breen et al have 
shown that a subset of T-cell lymphomas (histologically defined 
as peripheral T-cell lymphoma, unspecified) exhibits copy num -
ber gain in regions common to most examples of this histologic 
type, but not present in other T-cell lymphoma subtypes. 8 This 
finding will help identify genes within the duplicated areas that 
might be useful for diagnostics and therapy and for understanding 
the genesis of the neoplasm. A similar study in canine malignant 
histiocytosis (MH) demonstrated that MH frequently exhib -
its loss of chromosomal regions that contain tumor suppressor 
genes,9 and transitional cell carcinomas (TCCs) were found to 
commonly exhibit complete gain of a chromosome. 10 The latter 
discovery led to the development of a diagnostic test for detection 
of canine TCC by enumerating chromosomal copy numbers. 11 
Thus such genetic characterization offers opportunities to develop 
specific diagnostics, therapies, and management strategies.
Whole genome sequencing (WGS, discussed later in the chap-
ter) can also detect chromosomal rearrangements. Because this 
technology rapidly is becoming less expensive and very efficient, 
WGS likely will replace CGH arrays within the next decade. 
PCR-Based Techniques—Detection of 
Mutations and Novel Genes and Assessment 
of Clonality
PCR is the process of amplifying a small specific segment of DNA 
for the purpose of further analysis. T wo small segments of DNA 
(commonly about 20 bases long) that are complementary to the 
DNA sequence surrounding the area to be amplified are synthe -
sized. These primers are then used to amplify the DNA that lies 
between them (typically less than 1000 bases). This amplified 
Tumor DNA Reference DNA
• Fig. 8.1  The principle of array analysis. A chip or slide is printed such that 
each position on the chip (there are thousands) has a single probe, which 
can range in size, depending on the type of array. DNA from a tumor tested 
is labeled with one dye (green), and DNA from the reference sample with 
another (red). Both samples are hybridized to the same chip. The separate 
red and green panels indicate that the tumor DNA exhibits both chro -
mosomal gain (increased green fluorescence) and loss (decreased green 
fluorescence). When the two DNA preparations are cohybridized, a yellow 
signal indicates equal degrees of red and green fluorescence. When a gain 
in copy number occurs in a region of DNA, the signal is green. When a 
loss in copy number occurs, the signal is red. This is one of several ways 
microarrays can be performed.

===== PDF PAGE 169 =====
148
PART II  Diagnostic Procedures for the Cancer Patient
DNA product can be analyzed in a number of ways for mutations 
and to quantify the product for measurement of gene expression; 
or, in the case of lymphoid malignancy, the DNA can be separated 
by size to look for clonal populations of B and T cells. The same 
methods can be applied to the analysis of ribonucleic acid (RNA) 
once the RNA has been transcribed into DNA (reverse transcrip -
tase PCR [RT-PCR]).
For primer synthesis the sequence of the target gene typically 
must be known. The publication of good quality canine 12 and 
feline13 genomes has been invaluable in this regard—it is now pos-
sible simply to use the known sequences, rather than hope for 
sequence similarities with mice and humans.
Detection of Genetic Insertions and Deletions
PCR-based assays commonly are used in human oncology to 
detect insertions or deletions in genes relevant to the prognosis 
or treatment of a neoplasm. In veterinary medicine detection of 
internal tandem duplications in the c-kit gene in canine mast cell 
tumors is now a routine part of the diagnosis for the purpose 
of obtaining prognostic information. The primary mutations 
described are internal tandem duplications (ITDs) in two dif -
ferent exons, exon 8 and exon 11. 14 The mutations involve the 
duplication of a small segment of DNA so that it is repeated, 
resulting in a larger gene ( Fig. 8.2). Approximately 14% to 20% 
of canine mast cell tumors have a duplication in either exon 8 or 
exon 11. 14 Dogs with tumors that carry the ITDs consistently 
have been shown to have a worse outcome than dogs with a wild-
type c-kit gene.15,16
Detection of this type is fairly simple, because the presence of 
a larger (or smaller, in the case of deletions) PCR product is deter-
mined by size separation. As more genes are identified as targets of 
therapy, such assays likely will become more frequent. Suter et al 
identified an internal duplication in the flt3 gene using the same 
methods17 and provided preliminary evidence that the response 
to a small molecule inhibitor is predicted by the presence of this 
mutation in cell lines. Thus we are likely to see routine use of 
mutation detection in the near future. 
Detection of Single-Base Mutations
Some cancers will have predictable, single-base mutations that 
can be detected by standard sequencing. However, sequencing can 
be insensitive; therefore a variety of PCR-based assays have been 
developed for mutation analysis. The best example of this type of 
assay currently in use is detection of a single nucleotide change 
found in the BRAF gene in 80% of cases of canine TCC. 18 The 
mutation found in the canine gene is equivalent to a BRAF muta-
tion common in a variety of human cancers (V600E), and it causes 
constitutive activation of the BRAF protein. BRAF is a  serine/
threonine kinase, which activates a series of downstream signaling 
pathways to drive cellular metabolism and proliferation.19
Breen et al developed a PCR-based assay to detect this muta -
tion (in dogs the mutation is called V595E).20 The purpose of the 
assay is to diagnose TCC in urine samples with suspicious cells, 
which can often be difficult by cytology alone. The method used 
for detection is a technique called droplet digital PCR  (ddPCR). 
ddPCR can detect the V595E mutation when it is present in 
as little as .01% of the DNA. 20 This method was considerably 
more sensitive than standard sequencing, which could not detect 
the mutation when it was present in less than 10% of the DNA. 
ddPCR probably will be used more commonly in the future, 
because it provides a way of quantifying mutations and DNA 
copy number changes with high precision. 
Detection of Fusion Gene Products by PCR
One mechanism by which chromosomal translocation causes 
malignant transformation of cells is to create novel proteins with 
altered function. The best studied of these fusion genes, the Phila-
delphia chromosome, is the bcr-abl fusion gene found in greater 
than 90% of all human chronic myelogenous leukemias (CMLs) 
and occasionally acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and acute 
myelogenous leukemia (AML).21 ABL is a tyrosine kinase that has 
myriad activities in cell growth and differentiation. It is encoded 
on human chromosome 9, and in CML is translocated to chro -
mosome 22. The site of the translocation varies within the bcr 
(breakpoint cluster region) gene, so that a new fusion gene, bcr-
abl, is formed. The new fusion protein allows for the constitutive 
activation of the ABL tyrosine kinase, which in turn promotes the 
development of CML. This novel protein is the product of a novel 
RNA transcript, which can be readily detected by RT-PCR. This 
assay can detect as few as 1:10 3 tumor cells 4 and therefore can 
be used both for diagnosis of CML and for quantifying residual 
disease after treatment.
Assays for a large number of translocations in human cancers 
have been developed over the past 10 years.22 These assays are now 
routinely available for characterization of human tumors, particu-
larly leukemia and sarcoma. The finding that canine leukemia and 
lymphoma can exhibit the same translocations as their human 
counterparts7,23 suggests that detection of novel fusion genes 
will provide inexpensive and sensitive diagnostic testing both for 
detecting cancer and for monitoring disease in the near future. 
Assessment of Clonality in Lymphoma and Leukemia
A clonality assay demonstrates that a group of cells is derived from 
a single clone. The term usually is used to refer to detection of 
the unique genes found in each individual B or T cell—immu -
noglobulin genes in B cells and T-cell receptor (TCR) genes in T 
cells. The portion of these genes that encodes the antigen binding 
region is the portion that varies between cells, both in size and 
sequence. Once a B or T cell is mature and divides in response 
to antigenic stimulation, the immunoglobulin and T-cell receptor 
genes are passed on to the daughter cells.24,25
In the course of a normal immune response to a pathogen, 
B and T cells are activated, expand, and eventually die, leaving 
behind a small number of residual memory cells. On the other 
hand, when a cell becomes neoplastic, it no longer responds to 
growth controls and undergoes unlimited expansion. Therefore if 
it can be established that most of the cells in a particular collection 
of lymphocytes have the same immunoglobulin or T-cell receptor 
gene, these cells most likely are neoplastic rather than reactive.26
When immunoglobulin and T-cell receptor genes rearrange 
during the course of B-cell and T-cell development, respectively, 
the length and sequence of the resultant gene differs from cell 
to cell. This happens for many reasons; for example, nucleotides 
are added between V , D, and J segments as they rearrange into 
a contiguous formation. The clonality assay takes advantage of 
this development. A sample consisting of many different lympho-
cytes, as in a reactive process (e.g., the lymph nodes of a dog with 
chronic pyoderma or poor dental hygiene), will have multiple, 
different-sized, T-cell receptor and immunoglobulin genes. On 
the other hand, in a sample consisting of neoplastic lymphocytes, 
the immunoglobulin gene or the T-cell receptor gene (depending 
on whether it is a B-cell or a T-cell lymphoma) will be a single 
size (Fig. 8.3). (All methods used in veterinary medicine to detect 
clonally rearranged T-cell receptor genes target the TCR gamma 
gene.)

===== PDF PAGE 170 =====
149CHAPTER 8 Molecular Diagnostics
Exons 1–7 12–2181 19–10
Exons 1–7 12–2181 19–10
Exons 1–7 12–2181 19–10
Exons 1–7 12–2181 19–10
Exons 1–7 12–2181 19–10
Exons 1–7 12–2181 19–10
Exons 1–7
12,000
100 110 120 130
132.5
140 150 160 170 180 190 200 210 220 230 240
10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
0
9,000
8,000
7,000
6,000
100 110 120 130
132.6
140 150 160 170 180 190 200 210 220 230 240
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0
/H110021,000
16,000
12,000
14,000
85 90 95 100
91.8
105 110 115 120 125 130 135 140 145
10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
0
18,000
16,000
14,000
12,000
85 90 95 100
91.9
105 110 115 120 125 130 135 140 145
10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
0
/H110022,000
12–2181 19–10
Exons 1–7 12–2181 19–10
A
B
• Fig. 8.2  Detection of c-kit mutations by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). (A) Two different tumor types 
are depicted: one has two copies of a wild-type c-kit gene, and the other has one copy of a c-kit gene 
containing an internal tandem duplication in exon 11. On the right are shown the PCR products detected 
after amplification with primers surrounding the duplication (arrows) for each tumor. (B) Same as in (A), but 
in this case the second tumor has an internal duplication in exon 8, and the PCR products are amplified 
with primers flanking the region of the duplication.

===== PDF PAGE 171 =====
150
PART II  Diagnostic Procedures for the Cancer Patient
Clonality assays are accomplished by isolating DNA from cells 
suspected to be neoplastic. PCR primers directed at the conserved 
regions of T-cell receptor or immunoglobulin genes are used to 
amplify the variable regions, and the PCR products are separated 
by size using a variety of methods. The presence of a single-sized 
PCR product indicates clonality, whereas the presence of multiple 
PCR products supports a reactive process. 27 This assay has been 
reported by a number of laboratories for both dogs and cats27; it is 
termed the PCR for antigen receptor rearrangements  (PARR) assay 
to distinguish it from other types of clonality assays.28 It should be 
noted, however, that the term “PARR” is not used in the human 
literature, where the assay instead is referred to as a clonality assay.
The PARR assay can detect approximately 1:100 neoplastic 
cells. The sensitivity and specificity of the assay differ between 
laboratories; however, because the results are significantly affected 
by the conditions under which the assay is run and the technique 
used to separate the PCR products, clinicians must consult the 
laboratory providing the testing about the sensitivity and specific-
ity of the assay as performed under their conditions.
The main application of the PARR assay is to establish clon -
ality in a sample that is cytologically or histologically ambigu -
ous. Another application is to compare two neoplasms arising at 
different times to determine whether they have the same clonal 
origin.29 The PARR assay increasingly is used to distinguish 
0 0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
7,000
8,000
9,000
10,000
Size Size
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
V region
V1 V2 V3
V1 V2 V3
V3
V4
V4
V79 V80 12
2
2
34
4
4V79
A
BC
4
56 J1 J2
J2
J2
J3
J3
J3
J3
V4 2J 3
V4 2J 3
J4
J4
J5
J5
J5
D region J region
404550556065707580859095100105110115120125130135140 404550556065707580859095100105110115120125130135140
• Fig. 8.3  Rearrangement of immunoglobulin genes. (A) There are approximately 80 V region genes, 6 D 
region genes, and 5 J region genes. Single V, D, and J genes are brought together at random to create 
a single VDJ gene segment, which encodes the antigen-binding portion of an antibody, and the interven-
ing sequence is removed. (B) In the process of bringing together V, D and J genes, a variable number of 
nucleotides (black) are added between V and D, and D and J. As a result, each individual B cell will have a 
VDJ gene segment with a unique length. When DNA from a heterogeneous population of B cells is isolated 
and amplified with primers bracketing the VDJ gene segment (small arrows), the polymerase chain reac-
tion (PCR) products will be different lengths. The lower panel shows the PCR products separated by size 
by capillary gel electrophoresis; it illustrates multiple different-sized PCR products. (C) When a population 
of B cells comprises cells derived from a single clone, all the VDJ gene segments will be identically sized. 
PCR amplification of the VDJ gene segment will yield a single-sized product (see lower panel).  All the 
principles illustrated here apply to T-cell receptor (TCR) genes. For the clonality assay, the T-cell receptor 
γ-chain is amplified, although in theory the TCR β -chain could also be used.

===== PDF PAGE 172 =====
151CHAPTER 8 Molecular Diagnostics
inflammatory bowel disease from gastrointestinal (GI) lymphoma 
in dogs30,31 and cats 32,33 and to aid in the diagnosis of nodular 
splenic lymphoma, which can be difficult to distinguish from 
nodular hyperplasia.34
Clonality assays sometimes can be useful for establishing the 
lineage (B cell vs. T cell) in cytologically unambiguous lympho -
mas if additional case material is not obtainable from the patient. 
However, flow cytometry or immunohistochemistry generally is 
preferable for this purpose, for several reasons: first, aberrant rear-
rangements occasionally can be seen in nonlymphoid tumors, such 
as myelogenous leukemias.35 Second, simply knowing whether a 
neoplasm is derived from a B cell or a T cell may not be clinically 
useful. Both lineages can give rise to markedly different tumor 
types with significantly different outcomes. For example, the 
two most common forms of T-cell lymphoma (peripheral T-cell 
lymphoma and T-zone lymphoma) both have clonally rearranged 
T-cell receptor genes. Peripheral T-cell lymphoma, however, has a 
median survival time of 150 days,36 whereas T-zone lymphoma is 
indolent and may not require treatment at all.37
The principle of the clonality assay also can be used to quan -
tify tumor cells in blood, bone marrow, or node and to monitor 
minimum residual disease. For this type of analysis PCR primers 
specific for the immunoglobulin or T-cell receptor gene carried by 
the tumor are used instead of the broadly reactive primers used 
to screen samples. In this way the investigator is certain that only 
tumor DNA is amplified, and not nonneoplastic lymphocytes. 
The specificity of this reaction permits determination of the num-
ber of tumor cells in a sample of blood, even when those cells are 
as rare as 1:10 4 cells. Yamazaki et al demonstrated that with cur-
rent chemotherapy protocols, all seven dogs they examined had at 
least 1:104 cells in their peripheral blood, even though the dogs 
achieved clinical remission. 5 Although this kind of analysis may 
not be practical for routine diagnostics, it is a powerful research 
tool to compare the efficacy of novel chemotherapy regimens, and 
it also can be used to refine current protocols. Indeed, this method 
subsequently was used by Sato et  al to evaluate the responsive -
ness of B-cell lymphoma to individual components of the cyclo-
phosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin, Oncovin and prednisone or 
prednisolone (CHOP) chemotherapy protocol.38 
Assessment of Clonality in Nonlymphoid Neoplasms
Nonlymphoid cells do not have unique DNA sequences that dif -
fer from cell to cell, so other methods must be used for clonality 
assessment. The question of whether a collection of cells is neo -
plastic arises in a variety of circumstances—eosinophilia in the 
cat, for example, or pleural effusion in a dog, which is dominated 
by cells that could be either reactive or neoplastic mesothelium. 
One way to determine whether the cells in these cases are derived 
from the same clone is to examine the pattern of X chromosome 
inactivation. One copy of the X chromosome in the cells of female 
animals is inactivated by DNA methylation. The purpose of the 
inactivation is to ensure that both male and female animals have 
the same “dosage” of genes found on the X chromosome. Inacti -
vation is thought to be random, so in a nonneoplastic collection 
of cells, any given cell would have an equal chance of either the 
maternal or paternal X chromosome being inactivated. If the cells 
are all derived from the same clone, however, the same X chromo-
some would be inactivated in each cell.
In female animals, X chromosome inactivation can be mea -
sured using the androgen receptor gene. This gene contains 
repeated DNA elements (CAG repeats), the number of which 
varies. If an animal is heterozygous for the number of repeats, 
it is possible to determine whether the same X chromosome is 
inactivated in all the cells in a particular sample. Because not all 
animals will be heterozygous, the assay is useful only in a subset of 
female animals—68% of cats 39 and 50% of dogs.40 The assay has 
been used for canine patients with possible chronic myelogenous 
leukemia40 and for cats with possible myelodysplastic syndrome.39 
In dogs this assay has been named the canine androgen receptor 
assay (CANARA assay).41 
Whole Genome and Whole Exome Sequencing—
Next Generation Sequencing
Next generation sequencing (also known as massively parallel 
sequencing) is a technology that allows investigators to sequence the 
entire genome of an individual (or an individual’s tumor). Sequenc-
ing an entire genome was considered an enormous and expensive 
endeavor not many years ago, but it is now a routine part of inves-
tigating the biology of cancer. Thousands of human cancers have 
been fully sequenced, and the cost and efficiency of this process 
means that individual tumors can be sequenced to aid clinical deci-
sion making. The main types of information that can be obtained 
from whole genome sequencing of a tumor include (1) mutations 
in potential oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes, including single 
nucleotide variants (SNVs) and insertions and deletions (indels); 
(2) structural changes in chromosomes, including fustion genes 
and copy number variations (CNVs) , in which whole genetic 
regions may be duplicated; and (3) the mutational load of a par -
ticular tumor, which may predict responsiveness to checkpoint 
inhibitor therapy and also identify potential neoantigens that may 
be targeted in immunotherapy strategies. The principles of next 
generation sequencing are described in the next section. 
Quantifying Genes and Gene Expression
The complete genetic code, or DNA sequence, is present within 
every cell in the body. The effective genetic information that uniquely 
defines each cell type within the body is defined by the genes 
expressed (transcribed) as messenger RNA (mRNA). The complete 
profile of mRNA expression is more responsible for the phenotype 
of a cancer than the individual genes, although mutations in a gene 
often are individual drivers of a cancer phenotype. T o assess the level 
of expression of one or a few genes, three methods could be used: 
(1) real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR), which has been used 
for many years; (2) ddPCR, which is a more recent development 
that has many advantages over RT-qPCR and which probably will 
replace RT-qPCR for most applications; and (3) non-PCR–based 
gene counting methods, such as Nanostring.
If the goal is to measure expression of all the genes in a tumor, 
microarrays and, more recently, RNA sequencing (RNA seq) 
methods have been used. Assessment of the global level of gene 
expression is called gene expression profiling.
Real-Time PCR and Droplet Digital PCR
RT-qPCR refers to the quantitative (Q) measurement of 
DNA—either genes or, more commonly, RNA that has be 
reversed transcribed to cDNA. 42 The principle of RT-qPCR 
is that DNA is amplified using primers, just as in a routine 
PCR reaction, but at each round of amplification, the amount 
of PCR product is quantified. Unlike endpoint PCR, in which 
the reaction runs to completion and the product is separated by 
size, real-time PCR is quantitative and relies on the change in 
the amount of PCR product, as measured by fluorescence, as 
the reaction progresses.

===== PDF PAGE 173 =====
152
PART II  Diagnostic Procedures for the Cancer Patient
Real-time PCR typically uses fluorescently labeled DNA 
probes. These are short segments of DNA complementary to the 
target sequence between the two primer sites. A fluorescent mol -
ecule attached to the probe is quenched (no fluorescence detect -
able) until the 5′ to 3′ exonuclease activity of the Taq polymerase 
releases the fluorescent molecule. As the amount of PCR product 
increases proportional to the starting material, the amount of fluo-
rescence increases ( Fig. 8.4A). The expression level of a gene of 
interest is normalized to housekeeping genes and can be compared 
between samples.
ddPCR rapidly is replacing RT-qPCR because it has a number 
of distinct advantages.43 In this method, RNA is reverse transcribed 
into cDNA and then the cDNA is dispersed into thousands of oil 
droplets, in such a proportion that the oil droplet will have either 
one copy of the gene of interest or no copies (see Fig. 8.4B). Also 
in the oil droplet is the other material for a PCR reaction (primers, 
fluorescent probes as described previously, and polymerase). An 
endpoint PCR reaction is performed in each droplet (all drop -
lets are amplified simultaneously), and the number of fluorescent 
droplets is counted. This is called “digital” PCR because the level 
of gene expression is correlated with the count of positive droplets. 
By contrast, RT-qPCR measures the level of gene by the cumula-
tive fluorescence of all the cDNA in the sample.
The reason ddPCR is an improvement on RT-qPCR is that for 
the latter, scrupulous attention must be paid to primer efficiency, 
and the range of gene expression over which it is useful is limited. 
PCR in each
droplet
Number of fluorescent
droplets counted
High gene expression Low gene expression
Fluorescence
Fluorescence
PCR cycle
Fluorescence
01 0
B
A
20 30
• Fig. 8.4  Comparison of a real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) assay and a drop-
let digital PCR (ddPCR) assay. (A) An RT-qPCR assay shows different levels of expression of a gene in two 
different tumors. The green lines are from a tumor (performed in triplicate) that expresses high levels of the 
gene being measured; the blue lines are from a tumor that expresses lower levels of the gene being mea-
sured. At the end of the reaction (cycle 40 in this example), the two samples have almost the same level 
of fluorescence. In RT-qPCR, gene expression is assessed by measuring the difference in fluorescence in 
the early cycles. The difference in fluorescence at cycle 22 is significant. The same curves are generated 
for a housekeeping gene (not shown) to normalize the amount of input complementary DNA (cDNA) for 
both samples. (B) In ddPCR, RNA is reverse transcribed into cDNA, and the cDNA (which includes all 
genes) then is partitioned into thousands of oil droplets, using special instrumentation, together with the 
other materials for a PCR reaction (primers, polymerase, fluorescent probes). Many droplets will be empty; 
some will have cDNA but not the gene of interest (black); and some will have the gene of interest. The PCR 
reaction is performed to endpoint (e.g., 30 cycles). The amount of RNA of the gene of interest is reflected 
by the number of fluorescent droplets. As with RT-qPCR, a similar reaction using a housekeeping gene is 
performed to normalize input cDNA levels.

===== PDF PAGE 174 =====
153CHAPTER 8 Molecular Diagnostics
With ddPCR, as long as the PCR reaction produces a fluorescent 
signal, the efficiency with which the reaction achieves that signal 
is not as relevant to the results. The technology is also less limited 
by the amount of sample available. 
Gene Expression Profiling
Gene expression profiling refers to the quantification of thou -
sands of mRNAs simultaneously, to create a picture of global gene 
expression in the cell population. The pattern of gene expression is 
called a gene expression profile. In most cases gene expression profil-
ing is comparative. Investigators can compare expression profiles 
of tumor cells to the normal cellular counterpart, to similar tumors 
with different clinical outcomes, to tumor cells from the same 
patient before and after therapy, or between primary and meta -
static lesions, to determine how different pathways have changed. 
Such information has proven invaluable in a variety of settings. 
For example, in a study of cervical cancer in people, investiga -
tors analyzed gene expression profiles of tumors that responded 
to chemotherapy and radiation and compared those with tumors 
that did not. Their study revealed that activation of the PI3K/Akt 
signaling pathway was associated with a poor response, suggesting 
one potential therapeutic target.44 It is important to note that the 
collective signature of an expression profile can be an informa -
tive predictor of disease biology or response to therapy; however, 
alterations in the expression of a single gene are rarely informative 
and require extensive post hoc validation.
Another example of how gene expression profiling has advanced 
oncology is the studies of B-cell lymphoma by Staudt and col -
leagues. Noting that diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) has 
a heterogeneous outcome in people, this group compared the gene 
expression profiles of 96 DLBCLs with B cells derived from dif -
ferent stages of normal B-cell development.45 They found that the 
gene expression profile of DLBCL could be categorized either as 
similar to germinal center B cells or similar to activated B cells. 
Importantly, these two categories had prognostic significance; 
germinal center–like DLBCL patients have a better prognosis. 
The distinction between germinal center DLBCL and activated 
B-cell DLBCL is now well established as a prognostic indicator 
in people. Studies of canine lymphoma have offered conflicting 
data with regard to subclassification of canine DLBCL into germi-
nal center and activated B-cell subtypes based on gene expression 
profiling, so additional study is necessary. 46,47 Staudt et al made 
another important discovery about human B-cell lymphoma, 
using gene expression profiling, that provided insights into immu-
nity to cancer. Expression profiles of lymph nodes from patients 
with follicular B-cell lymphoma demonstrated that the type of 
immune response signature was prognostic in this disease. Patients 
whose lymph node gene expression patterns exhibited evidence of 
T-cell activation had a better overall survival than patients whose 
gene expression patterns resembled activated macrophages.48 The 
expression profile of the tumor cells themselves was not predic -
tive. This finding suggests that the immune response contributes 
to survival in patients with follicular B-cell lymphoma, a result 
corroborated in other types of B-cell lymphoma.49,50
Microarrays
Microarrays are solid chips on which DNA probes that are com -
plementary to thousands of different genes are imprinted. 51 Such 
platforms expand the study of expression of single genes to a larger 
scale needed for an expression signature to be defined. RNA from 
a tumor is transcribed into cDNA and labeled with a fluorescent 
molecule. The labeled cDNA is then hybridized with the probes 
on the chip, and the level of fluorescence is proportional to the 
number of copies of RNA molecules in the sample ( Fig. 8.5). A 
microarray experiment can be performed in a large variety of ways, 
but ultimately the goal is to measure expression of all the genes in 
the sample. 
mRNA labeled with a green fluorescent molecule
Low gene
expression
(few mRNAs)
MICROARRAYSR NA SEQ
High gene
expression
(many
 mRNAs)
High gene
expression
(many
 mRNAs)
Low gene
expression
(few mRNAs)
9 copies
Level of fluorescence
27 copies
• Fig. 8.5  Comparison of the measurement of gene expression using microarrays and RNA seq. Micro -
arrays are carried out by labeling all the messenger RNAs (mRNAs) (reverse transcribed into cDNAs) in 
a sample with a fluorescent molecule, and then allowing that molecule to anneal to a chip coated with 
thousands of DNA probes complementary to each cDNA. The level of fluorescence at each position on 
the chip (corresponding to an individual gene) reflects the total number of mRNA molecules in the sample, 
but the number of mRNA molecules is not counted. RNA seq, on the other hand, uses technology that 
allows every single expressed gene to be sequenced. Because the sequence of every gene is known, the 
absolute number of mRNAs for each gene in the sample can be counted.

===== PDF PAGE 175 =====
154
PART II  Diagnostic Procedures for the Cancer Patient
RNA seq
As does a microarray, RNA seq measures global gene expression.52 
In microarrays the amount of mRNA from an individual gene is 
measured by the cumulative fluorescence contributed by all cop -
ies of the mRNA transcribed from a given gene (see Fig. 8.5). 
RNA seq, however, uses massively parallel sequencing, also known 
as Next Gen sequencing, to sequence every mRNA in a sample. 
The sequence allows for identification of the gene from which it 
was derived. Because all mRNAs are sequenced, this methodol -
ogy allows the investigator to count the number of individual 
mRNAs. Genes that are highly expressed will have high numbers 
of mRNAs.
Although RNA seq experiments involve a great deal more 
bioinformatic complexity, they also can provide information not 
obtainable using microarrays. This includes the ability to identify 
potential mutations in coding regions because sequence informa -
tion is being obtained, and the ability to identify some fusion 
genes that create fusion transcripts. 
Personalized Medicine in Cancer
Foundations of Precision Medicine: the Genetic 
Basis of Cancer
Cancer is a genetic disease that arises as a consequence of the step-
wise accumulation of disruptive mutations in genes that regulate 
cell life and death. Clonal expansion of cell populations bearing 
cancer gene mutations fuels the formation of malignant tumors. 
This genetic model of cancer emerged in the latter 20th century 
as a product of advances in genetics, evolution, and cancer medi -
cine. Through this mutational process, cancers acquire specific key 
properties, including self-sufficient growth signaling, resistance to 
growth inhibitory signaling, invasion and metastasis, unlimited 
replication potential, angiogenic signaling, immune modulation, 
DNA instability, metabolic dysregulation, and immune evasion.53
The genetic model and its downstream phenotypes have since 
been validated in many cancer types and provide a framework 
for our growing genomic understanding of cancer. The concept 
of personalized or precision medicine stems from the previously 
described genomic underpinning of cancer and its nascent and 
emerging complexity. Indeed, truly personalized and genomic 
medicine now seeks to define the genomic drivers of a particular 
patient’s cancer and match these alterations to specific therapeu -
tics. PMED is ushering in a new era in cancer therapy in which 
clinical and translational value are applied to advances in the 
genomic analysis of cancer. The discoveries and tools described 
previously have provided new opportunities to tailor cancer ther -
apy to the individual molecular characteristics of a specific cancer, 
in a specific patient, to guide diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment 
selection. In many cases these genetic alterations can be matched 
to specific therapeutic agents as a means to uniquely improve 
outcomes for patients. T umor samples and matched germline 
samples (from peripheral blood or cheek swabs) may be collected, 
preserved, and then analyzed for genetic alterations in a core set of 
cancer genes, which ultimately are matched to an individualized 
therapeutic prescription. 
How Precision Medicine Differs from the Current 
Practice of Oncology
The use of patient-specific information as a means to deliver 
PMED is not new to the treatment of cancer patients. Through 
the history of cancer medicine, treatments have been administered 
in a patient-specific and personalized manner. Even in the modern 
era, the use of molecular data to guide the therapy of specific indi-
viduals with cancer is not entirely novel. The use of specific immu-
nohistochemical or cytogenetic markers to guide the diagnosis 
and prognosis has been a critical and routine practice in pathol -
ogy laboratories for many decades. Furthermore, in some cancers 
molecular markers have been used to guide treatment selection. 
For example, in human breast cancer a long-standing practice has 
been to define the expression of hormone receptors as a means to 
deliver specific therapeutics that alter downstream signaling path-
ways.54 C-kit mutation status has been used in veterinary medi -
cine to direct therapy for mast cell tumors,2,55 but conflicting data 
in the literature raise questions about this approach, and more 
investigation is needed.16
Although genomic data is expected to affect patient outcomes 
dramatically, genomic data has been slow to enter the clinic. One 
of the first pilot studies incorporating molecular profiling to guide 
therapy in advanced cancers was published in 2010. 56 This study 
faced considerable challenges, but the researchers found that 27% 
of 68 patients treated according to molecular profiling recom -
mendations (i.e., PMED) experienced a longer progression-free 
survival than during the most recent treatment on which they had 
progressed. Although it is perhaps intuitively beneficial to incor -
porate precise target identification into patient treatment, this 
approach still faces significant hurdles, and it remains to be proven 
through prospective trials that treatment based on PMED out -
performs a physician’s choice of treatment. Now, multiple clinical 
trials incorporating genomics-guided therapy selection are under-
way to test this very hypothesis. In one such trial, the Stand Up T o 
Cancer and Melanoma Research Alliance Dream T eam Clinical 
T rial, molecularly guided therapy in non-V600E mutant BRAF 
metastatic melanoma is being assessed. This is now an ongoing 
randomized clinical trial.
Returning clinically relevant and actionable information based 
on genomic analysis within a window that enables effective treat -
ment selection is a substantial challenge. Notable hurdles include 
those associated with tumor biopsy; sample preservation and 
transport; nucleic acid extraction and quality control; genomic 
sequencing infrastructure and platform; data analysis and integra-
tion; generation of digestible genomic reports for physicians, vet -
erinarians, and scientists alike; and performance of tumor board 
reviews to provide a treatment recommendation. Additional 
hurdles involve the implementation of precision medicine in the 
clinic.
In the broadest sense, the clinician seeking a PMED approach 
for a patient must first ask what data would be most helpful.
“I need new treatment options.” In the setting of a rare tumor or 
a patient with unusual tumor biology, new ideas for therapy may 
be needed. In this setting an optimal PMED platform will identify 
specific drivers of this patient’s cancer biology and propose new 
treatments. For such a clinical question, an optimal PMED plat -
form likely will include an analysis of mutations in cancer-associ-
ated genes, with drug matching to target the presumed aberrant 
mutational targets of the individual cancer. The validation of the 
value of this approach has been difficult using conventional clini-
cal trial designs and may demand novel perspectives on evidence 
for clinical validation. Because many solid tumors are clinical 
problems as a result of metastatic progression (e.g., canine osteo -
sarcoma), the optimal PMED platform will derive a list of “shed” 
mutational targets from circulating biofluids (i.e., so-called liquid 
biopsy) alone or in combination with tumor analysis.

===== PDF PAGE 176 =====
155CHAPTER 8 Molecular Diagnostics
“I have some idea on treatments but want to prioritize the best 
therapy.” It is not uncommon that the selection of the best treat -
ment for a cancer histology is unclear and often defaults to the 
clinician’s preference (e.g., selection of a specific cytotoxic che -
motherapy for canine bladder carcinoma). A distinct PMED 
approach may provide assistance in known drug selection. The 
theoretical value of selecting the best drug, based on intrinsic 
resistance and sensitivity signatures, may be effectively provided 
through transcriptomic, proteomic, and cell-based PMED plat -
forms. The validation of these drug selection strategies will require 
prospective validation in specific cancers in which cohorts of indi-
viduals may receive a PMED-described medication compared 
with clinician’s best choice. Such transcriptomic, proteomic, and 
cell-based PMED platforms are less likely to identify specific driv-
ers of cancer biology and generate new options for therapy.
An ever-growing array of tests designed to inform diagnostic 
and treatment decisions in the human clinic is available from 
more than 100 academic and 50 commercial laboratories. These 
tests range in scope from single genes to gene panels, exomes, and 
even whole genomes. Indeed, the multiomic analysis of cancer 
(multiple modalities used in a single cancer) is now common and 
has reulted in a need to display and share such multiomic data. 
In everyday clinical practice the cost is still prohibitive, and the 
expertise and infrastructure required to bring them to bear on 
patient care are also largely lacking. Finally, more comprehensive 
data showing improvements in genomics-correlated clinical out -
comes is needed to support the use of these tests. 
The Path to PMED for Veterinary Cancer Patients
Although much work remains to be done to chart the genomic 
landscapes of companion animal cancers, the PMED approach 
nonetheless is poised to have a dramatic effect on the care of 
canine cancer patients. Indeed, we have published on the clinical 
feasibility of this approach in dogs. 57 PMED now represents a 
cutting edge opportunity in veterinary cancer care and is the sub-
ject of ongoing prospective clinical trials. In fact, not only would 
this approach make great headway in the care of canine cancer 
patients, but also, given the unique aspects of naturally occur -
ring cancer in pet dogs and the forward-thinking perspectives of 
the veterinary profession on the whole, veterinary oncology may 
be able to provide key data validating this model and refining its 
implementation for human medicine. As a means to change the 
biology of an important canine cancer problem, we have initiated 
a research agenda that will deliver personalized medicine for the 
canine cancer hemangiosarcoma through clinical trials that have 
recently launched. 
Using Molecular Diagnostics as a Clinician
It has been historically acceptable for one laboratory to describe 
the performance of a specific assay in their hands and for clini -
cians to expect similar if not identical results from the same analysis 
performed by a distinct laboratory. Indeed, based on this expected 
consistency of analysis among laboratories, there was little need 
for distinct laboratories performing the same assay to publish their 
own independent results and experiences. Standardization has yet 
to come to the field of molecular diagnostics, and clinicians should 
expect the publication of a laboratory experience with a given 
assay and should not expect the performance of the assay to be the 
same across laboratories. Further complicating the issue of assay 
performance, characterized by sensitivity, specificity, and positive 
and negative predictive values, is the need to understand carefully 
the relevance of the patient populations used in manuscripts that 
describe assay performance. Assay performance is closely regulated 
in the human molecular diagnostics field (e.g., Clinical Laboratory 
Improvement Amendments [CLIA] laboratory certification), but 
such regulation is absent in the veterinary reference laboratory diag-
nostic model. Therefore rigor and the requirement of transparency 
appropriately become the responsibility of the diagnostic scientist 
and must be demanded and understood by the attending clinician. 
Summary
Molecular diagnostics is becoming more integrated into veteri -
nary medicine and at the same time becoming more affordable. 
One important feature of such advanced diagnostics is that many 
of these techniques save money for owners and eliminate the need 
for invasive procedures for their pets. For example, sensitive meth-
ods for detecting lymphoma through a combination of cytology, 
flow cytometry, and PARR assays can mean that a diagnosis of 
splenic lymphoma can be made without splenectomy. Detection 
of the c-kit mutation can guide therapy so that the most effica -
cious (and therefore cost-effective) drugs are used. More expensive 
exploratory techniques, such as whole genome sequencing and 
proteomic analysis of tumors, will almost certainly lead to discov-
ery of new testing that can further simplify diagnoses. Veterinar -
ians are encouraged to participate in these developmental studies 
when they can, by providing biologic materials and clinical data 
to researchers, because ultimately patients and their owners will 
derive great benefit from current research.
References
 1.  Jevremovic D , Viswanatha D S: Molecular diagnosis of hemato -
poietic and lymphoid neoplasms, Hematol Oncol Clin North Am  
23:903–933, 2009.
 2.  London C A, Malpas P B, Wood-Follis S L, et  al.: Multi-center,  
placebo-controlled, double-blind, randomized study of oral tocera -
nib phosphate (SU11654), a receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, for 
the treatment of dogs with recurrent (either local or distant) mast 
cell tumor following surgical excision, Clin Cancer Res  15:3856–
3865, 2009.
 3.  Cruz Cardona J A, Milner R , Alleman A R, et al.: BCR-ABL trans-
location in a dog with chronic monocytic leukemia, Vet Clin Pathol 
40:40–47, 2011.
 4.  Morley A: Quantifying leukemia, N Engl J Med 339:627–629, 1998.
 5.  Yamazaki J, Baba K, Goto-Koshino Y, et al.: Quantitative assessment 
of minimal residual disease (MRD) in canine lymphoma by using 
real-time polymerase chain reaction, Vet Immunol Immunopathol  
126:321–331, 2008.
 6.  Knuutila S : Cytogenetics and molecular pathology in cancer diag -
nostics, Ann Med 36:162–171, 2004.
 7.  Breen M , Modiano J F: Evolutionarily conserved cytogenetic 
changes in hematological malignancies of dogs and humans—man 
and his best friend share more than companionship, Chromosome Res 
16:145–154, 2008.
 8.  Thomas R, Seiser EL, Motsinger-Reif A, et al.: Refining tumor-asso-
ciated aneuploidy through ‘genomic recoding’ of recurrent DNA 
copy number aberrations in 150 canine non-Hodgkin lymphomas, 
Leuk Lymphoma 52:1321–1335, 2011.
 9.  Hedan B, Thomas R, Motsinger-Reif A, et al.: Molecular cytogenetic 
characterization of canine histiocytic sarcoma: a spontaneous model 
for human histiocytic cancer identifies deletion of tumor suppres -
sor genes and highlights influence of genetic background on tumor 
behavior, BMC Cancer 11:201–215, 2011.

===== PDF PAGE 177 =====
156
PART II  Diagnostic Procedures for the Cancer Patient
 10.  Shapiro SG, Raghunath S, Williams C, et al.: Canine urothelial car-
cinoma: genomically aberrant and comparatively relevant, Chromo-
some Res 23:311–331, 2015.
 11.  Mochizuki H , Shapiro S G, Breen M : Detection of copy number 
imbalance in canine urothelial carcinoma with droplet digital poly -
merase chain reaction, Vet Pathol 53:764–772, 2016.
 12.  Hoeppner M P, Lundquist A, Pirun M, et al.: An improved canine 
genome and a comprehensive catalogue of coding genes and non-
coding transcripts, PLoS One 9:e91172, 2014.
 13.  Montague M J, Li G , Gandolfi B , et  al.: Comparative analysis of 
the domestic cat genome reveals genetic signatures underlying feline 
biology and domestication, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A  111:17230–
17235, 2014.
 14.  Letard S , Yang Y , Hanssens K , et al.: Gain-of-function mutations 
in the extracellular domain of KIT are common in canine mast cell 
tumors, Mol Cancer Res 6:1137–1145, 2008.
 15.  Takeuchi Y, Fujino Y, Watanabe M, et al.: Validation of the prog-
nostic value of histopathological grading or c-kit mutation in canine 
cutaneous mast cell tumours: a retrospective cohort study, Vet J 
196:492–498, 2013.
 16.  Weishaar K M, Ehrhart E J, Avery A C, et  al.: c-Kit mutation and 
localization status as response predictors in mast cell tumors in dogs 
treated with prednisone and toceranib or vinblastine, J Vet Intern 
Med 32:394–405, 2018.
 17.  Suter S E, Small G W, Seiser E L, et al.: FLT3 mutations in canine 
acute lymphocytic leukemia, BMC Cancer 11:38, 2011.
 18.  Decker B , Parker H G, Dhawan D , et  al.: Homologous mutation 
to human BRAF V600E is common in naturally occurring canine 
bladder cancer - evidence for a relevant model system and urine-
based diagnostic test, Mol Cancer Res 13:993–1002, 2015.
 19.  Holderfield M , Deuker MM, McCormick F, et al.: Targeting RAF 
kinases for cancer therapy: BRAF-mutated melanoma and beyond, 
Nat Rev Cancer 14:455–467, 2014.
 20.  Mochizuki H , Shapiro SG, Breen M: Detection of BRAF mutation 
in uring DNA as a molecular diagnostic for canine urothelial and 
prostatic carcinoma, PLoS One 10:e0144170, 2015.
 21.  Wong S , Witte O N: The BCR-ABL story: bench to bedside and 
back, Annu Rev Immunol 22:247–306, 2004.
 22.  Osumi K , Fukui T , Kiyoi H , et  al.: Rapid screening of leukemia 
fusion transcripts in acute leukemia by real-time PCR, Leuk Lym-
phoma 43:2291–2299, 2002.
 23.  Ulve R , Rault M, Bahin M, et al.: Discovery of human-similar gene 
fusions in canine cancers, Cancer Res 77:5721–5727, 2017.
 24.  Blom B, Spits H: Development of human lymphoid cells, Annu Rev 
Immunol 24:287–320, 2006.
 25.  Delves PJ, Roitt IM: The immune system. First of two parts, N Engl 
J Med 343:37–49, 2000.
 26.  Swerdlow SH: Genetic and molecular genetic studies in the diagno-
sis of atypical lymphoid hyperplasias versus lymphoma, Hum Pathol 
34:346–351, 2003.
 27.  Keller S M, Vernau W , Moore P F: Clonality testing in veterinary 
medicine: a review with diagnostic guidelines, Vet Pathol 53:711–
725, 2016.
 28.  Burnett R C, Vernau W , Modiano J F, et  al.: Diagnosis of canine 
lymphoid neoplasia using clonal rearrangements of antigen receptor 
genes, Vet Pathol 40:32–41, 2003.
 29.  Burnett R C, Blake MK, Thompson LJ, et al.: Evolution of a B-cell 
lymphoma to multiple myeloma after chemotherapy, J Vet Intern 
Med 18:768–771, 2004.
 30.  Lane J, Price J, Moore A, et al.: Low-grade gastrointestinal lymphoma in 
dogs: 20 cases (2010 to 2016), J Small Anim Pract 59:147–153, 2018.
 31.  Ohmura S, Leipig M, Schopper I, et al.: Detection of monoclonality 
in intestinal lymphoma with polymerase chain reaction for antigen 
receptor gene rearrangement analysis to differentiate from enteritis 
in dogs, Vet Comp Oncol 15:194–207, 2017.
 32.  Gress V, Wolfesberger B, Fuchs-Baumgartinger A, et al.: Character-
ization of the T-cell receptor gamma chain gene rearrangements as 
an adjunct tool in the diagnosis of T-cell lymphomas in the gastroin-
testinal tract of cats, Res Vet Sci 107:261–266, 2016.
 33.  Moore P F, Rodriguez-Bertos A , Kass P H: Feline gastrointestinal 
lymphoma: mucosal architecture, immunophenotype, and molecu -
lar clonality, Vet Pathol 49:658–668, 2012.
 34.  Sabattini S, Lopparelli RM, Rigillo A, et al.: Canine splenic nodular 
lymphoid lesions: immunophenotyping, proliferative activity and 
clonality assessment, Vet Pathol 55:645–653, 2018.
 35.  Stokol T, Nickerson GA, Shuman M, et al.: Dogs with acute myeloid 
leukemia have clonal rearrangements in T and B cell receptors, Front 
Vet Sci 4:76, 2017.
 36.  Avery P R, Burton J, Bromberek JL, et al.: Flow cytometric charac-
terization and clinical outcome of CD4+ T-cell lymphoma in dogs: 
67 cases, J Vet Intern Med 28:538–546, 2014.
 37.  Flood-Knapik K E, Durham AC, Gregor TP, et al.: Clinical, histo-
pathological and immunohistochemical characterization of canine 
indolent lymphoma, Vet Comp Oncol 11:272–286, 2013.
 38.  Sato M , Yamazaki J , Goto-Koshino Y , et  al.: Evaluation of cyto -
reductive efficacy of vincristine, cyclophosphamide, and doxorubi -
cin in dogs with lymphoma by measuring the number of neoplastic 
lymphoid cells with real-time polymerase chain reaction, J Vet Intern 
Med 25:285–291, 2011.
 39.  Mochizuki H, Goto-Koshino Y, Takahashi M, et al.: X-chromosome 
inactivation pattern analysis for the assessment of cell clonality in 
cats, Vet Pathol 49:963–970, 2012.
 40.  Mochizuki H, Goto-Koshino Y, Takahashi M, et al.: Demonstration 
of the cell clonality in canine hematopoietic tumors by X-chromo -
some inactivation pattern analysis, Vet Pathol 52:61–69, 2015.
 41.  Delcour N M, Klopfleisch R, Gruber AD, et al.: Canine cutaneous 
histiocytomas are clonal lesions as defined by X-linked clonality test-
ing, J Comp Pathol 149:192–198, 2013.
 42.  Wong M L, Medrano J F: Real-time PCR for mRNA quantitation, 
Biotechniques 39:75–85, 2005.
 43.  Quan P L, Sauzade M, Brouzes E: dPCR: a technology review, Sen-
sors (Basel) 18:E1271, 2018.
 44.  Schwarz J K, Payton JE, Rashmi R , et al.: Pathway-specific analysis 
of gene expression data identifies the PI3K/Akt pathway as a novel 
therapeutic target in cervical cancer, Clin Cancer Res 18:1464–1471, 
2012.
 45.  Alizadeh A A, Eisen M B, Davis R E, et  al.: Distinct types of dif -
fuse large B-cell lymphoma identified by gene expression profiling, 
Nature 403:503–511, 2000.
 46.  Aresu L , Ferraresso S , Marconato L , et  al.: New molecular and 
therapeutic insights into canine diffuse large B cell lymphoma 
elucidates the role of the dog as a model for human disease, Hae-
matologica, 2018; epub ahead of print. https://doi.org/10.3324/hae-
matol.2018.207027.
 47.  Richards K L, Motsinger-Reif AA, Chen HW, et al.: Gene profiling 
of canine B-cell lymphoma reveals germinal center and postgermi -
nal center subtypes with different survival times, modeling human 
DLBCL, Cancer Res 73:5029–5039, 2013.
 48.  Dave S S, Wright G, Tan B, et al.: Prediction of survival in follicu -
lar lymphoma based on molecular features of tumor-infiltrating 
immune cells, N Engl J Med 351:2159–2169, 2004.
 49.  Lenz G , Wright G, Dave SS, et al.: Stromal gene signatures in large-
B-cell lymphomas, N Engl J Med 359:2313–2323, 2008.
 50.  Rimsza L M, Roberts R A, Miller T P, et al.: Loss of MHC class II 
gene and protein expression in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma is 
related to decreased tumor immunosurveillance and poor patient 
survival regardless of other prognostic factors: a follow-up study 
from the Leukemia and Lymphoma Molecular Profiling Project, 
Blood 103:4251–4258, 2004.
 51.  Bumgarner R : Overview of DNA microarrays: types, applications, 
and their future, Curr Protoc Mol Biol Chapter 22, 2013. Unit 22 21.
 52.  Wang Z, Gerstein M, Snyder M: RNA-Seq: a revolutionary tool for 
transcriptomics, Nat Rev Genet 10:57–63, 2009.
 53.  Hanahan D , Weinberg RA: Hallmarks of cancer: the next genera -
tion, Cell 144:646–674, 2011.
 54.  Zhang M H, Man H T, Zhao X D, et  al.: Estrogen receptor-posi -
tive breast cancer molecular signatures and therapeutic potentials 
(Review), Biomed Rep 2:41–52, 2014.

===== PDF PAGE 178 =====
157CHAPTER 8 Molecular Diagnostics
 55.  London C A, AL Hannah, Zadovoskaya R, et al.: Phase I dose-esca-
lating study of SU11654, a small molecule receptor tyrosine kinase 
inhibitor, in dogs with spontaneous malignancies, Clin Cancer Res  
9:2755–2768, 2003.
 56.  Von Hoff D D, Stephenson Jr JJ, Rosen P, et al.: Pilot study using 
molecular profiling of patients’ tumors to find potential targets and 
select treatments for their refractory cancers, J Clin Oncol 28:4877–
4883, 2010.
 57.  Paoloni M , Webb C, Mazcko C, et al.: Prospective molecular pro-
filing of canine cancers provides a clinically relevant comparative 
model for evaluating personalized medicine (PMed) trials, PLoS One 
9:e90028, 2014.

===== PDF PAGE 179 =====
158
9
Biopsy and Sentinel Lymph Node 
Mapping Principles
NICOLE P. EHRHART
A biopsy refers to a procedure that involves obtaining a tissue 
specimen for microscopic (i.e., histopathologic) analysis to estab -
lish a precise diagnosis. Histopathologic interpretation of tissue 
removed from a tumor is not foolproof and is highly dependent 
on the quality of the biopsy sample submitted. Therefore it is 
important to understand basic principles of biopsy procurement 
and submission to obtain an accurate diagnosis. If the tissue diag-
nosis is incorrect, every subsequent step in the treatment of the 
patient may also be incorrect.
Fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) is a simple and rapid 
way to obtain information about a tumor and is often the first 
step in the diagnostic workup. Results of FNAC help guide the 
diagnostic tests for staging. Studies have shown that FNAC is a 
reliable and useful method to guide further workup when neo -
plasia is suspected or to rule out neoplasia.1,2 Nonetheless, FNAC 
gives limited information and may be nondiagnostic or equivocal. 
Inflammation, necrosis, and hemorrhage may result in cytopa -
thologic changes that do not accurately represent the underlying 
disease process. Histologic confirmation may be necessary for 
definitive diagnosis of neoplasia.
There are many available techniques for obtaining tissue speci-
mens, ranging from needle-core techniques to complete surgi -
cal excision. The choice of technique depends on the anatomic 
location of the tumor, the overall health of the patient, suspected 
tumor type, and clinician preference. Biopsy techniques can be 
grouped under one of two major categories: pretreatment biopsy 
(e.g., needle-core biopsy, punch biopsy, wedge biopsy, etc.) or 
excisional biopsy. Pretreatment biopsy is performed to obtain 
additional information about the tumor before definitive treat -
ment. Posttreatment (i.e., excisional) biopsy refers to the process 
of obtaining histopathologic information after surgical removal 
of the tumor. Excisional biopsy is best used to obtain a more 
complete picture of the disease process (e.g., histologic grade, 
histologic subtype, degree of invasion into regional vasculature 
and lymphatics, etc.) and provides an opportunity to evaluate 
completeness of excision. It is rarely ever the best first step in 
obtaining a tissue diagnosis. Although excisional biopsy is attrac -
tive to many clinicians because it allows for definitive treatment 
and diagnosis in one step, it is often used inappropriately in the 
management of a cancer patient, resulting in incomplete surgical 
margins. Incomplete surgical margins can result in local tumor 
recurrence and the need for radiation therapy or a wider, more 
extensive surgery. All of these sequelae compromise the optimum 
treatment pathway for the patient and will involve more morbid-
ity and expense than a properly performed first excision. The issue 
to be determined before surgery then is: how aggressive should the 
surgery to remove the tumor be? It is intuitive that wide, ablative 
surgery (e.g., body wall resection) would be inappropriate for a 
simple lipoma. It also follows that marginal excision (shell out) is 
inappropriate for definitive treatment of an aggressive infiltrative 
tumor such as a soft tissue sarcoma. Thus thorough knowledge of 
the tumor type is imperative before attempting surgical excision. 
The best way to obtain this information is often via biopsy.
Specific indications for pretreatment biopsy are as follows:
 1.  When FNAC is nondiagnostic or equivocal
 2.  When the type of recommended treatment (radiation, chemo-
therapy, surgery) would be altered by knowledge of the tumor 
type or grade
 3.  When the extent of recommended treatment (ablative surgery, 
wide excision, marginal excision) would be altered by knowl -
edge of the tumor type or grade
 4.  When the tumor is in a difficult area to reconstruct (maxillec -
tomy, locations requiring extensive flaps, head and neck, etc.) 
and planning is needed to prepare the patient and client appro-
priately
 5.  When knowledge of the tumor type or histologic grade would 
change the willingness of the client to proceed with curative-
intent treatment
If any one of the listed criteria is met, a pretreatment biopsy 
should be pursued.
There are occasions when pretreatment biopsy would be con -
traindicated. These include cases when the type of treatment or 
extent of surgery would not be changed by knowing the tumor 
type (e.g., testicular mass, solitary splenic mass) or when the surgi-
cal procedure to obtain the biopsy is as risky as definitive removal 
(e.g., spinal cord biopsy). In these cases, the patient would best be 
served by excisional biopsy of the tumor if staging results support 
this choice.
Biopsy Methods
The more commonly used methods of tissue procurement are 
needle-core biopsy, punch biopsy, incisional (wedge) biopsy, and 
excisional biopsy.

===== PDF PAGE 180 =====
159CHAPTER 9 Biopsy and Sentinel Lymph Node Mapping Principles
Needle-Core Biopsy
Needle-core biopsy utilizes various types of needle core instru -
ments (T ru-Cut, etc.) to obtain soft tissue (Fig. 9.1). Most of these 
needles use spring or pneumatically powered needles, although 
manually operated devices are still available as well. Specialized 
core instruments are used for bone biopsies and will be covered in 
Chapter 25. These instruments are generally 14-gauge in diameter 
and procure a piece of tissue that is about 1 mm wide and 1.0 
to 1.5 cm long. In spite of this small sample size, the structural 
relationship of the tissue and tumor cells can usually be visualized 
by the pathologist. Virtually any accessible mass can be sampled 
by this method. It may be used for externally located lesions or 
for deeply seated lesions (kidney, liver, prostate, etc.) with image-
guidance via closed methods or at the time of open surgery.
The most common use of the needle-core biopsy is for exter -
nally palpable masses. Except for highly inflamed and necrotic 
cancers (especially in the oral cavity), where incisional biopsy 
is preferred, needle-core biopsies can be done on an outpatient 
basis with local anesthesia and sedation. The area to be biopsied is 
clipped and cleaned. The skin or overlying tissue is aseptically pre-
pared as for minor surgery. If the overlying tissue (usually skin and 
muscle) is intact, it is blocked with local anesthetic in the region 
that the biopsy needle will penetrate. T umor tissue itself is very 
poorly innervated and generally does not require local anesthesia. 
The mass is then fixed in place with one hand or by an assistant. 
A small 1- to 2-mm stab incision is made in the overlying skin 
with a scalpel blade to allow insertion of the biopsy instrument. 
The stab incision is necessary to prevent dulling of the needle tip 
and allow better penetration into the underlying tissue. Through 
the same skin incision, several needle cores are removed from dif-
ferent sites to get a “cross section” of tissue types within the mass. 
The stab incision can be sutured with a single interrupted suture. 
The tissue is gently removed from the instrument with a scalpel 
blade or hypodermic needle and placed in formalin and/or alter -
native media (e.g., culture media) or snap frozen as necessary. For 
smaller-gauge needle-core biopsy instruments, the tissue may be 
flushed off the needle with saline. Samples may be gently rolled on 
a glass slide for cytologic preparations before fixation. With expe-
rience, the operator can generally tell from the appearance of the 
core sample whether diagnostic material has been attained. Small, 
discontinuous segments of tissue and fluid within the trough will 
only rarely be diagnostic and usually imply the need for incisional 
biopsy. Soft tissue sarcomas in particular may not yield good tissue 
cores because of necrosis and fibrous septa that often permeate the 
mass. Cystic masses are also problematic.
Needle biopsy tracts are probably a minimal risk for local 
tumor seeding but should be removed en bloc with the tumor at 
subsequent resection. Therefore it is important to plan where the 
stab incision and needle biopsy tract should be placed to make 
subsequent excision simpler. Avoid excessive tunneling through 
uninvolved tissues by choosing the most direct path from the skin 
to the tumor to obtain a representative sample.
Many of these needles are “disposable” with plastic casings and 
therefore cannot be steam sterilized. It is not uncommon, how -
ever, for veterinary practices to resterilize these instruments (using 
ethylene oxide or hydrogen peroxide gas) and use them repeatedly 
until they become dull.
Needle-core biopsy instruments are inexpensive, easy to use, 
and needle-core biopsy procedures can be performed as outpatient 
procedures. They are generally more accurate than cytology but 
likely have lower accuracy than incisional or excisional biopsies, 
especially when a tumor is heterogeneous, inflamed, cystic, or 
contains a large amount of necrosis. It is important to understand 
that for a 5-cm diameter mass, one needle-core biopsy sample rep-
resents less than 1% of the tumor tissue. The smaller the biopsy 
specimen, the less representative it may be for the entire tumor.
Needle-core biopsy can be performed with the aid of image-
guidance. Utilization of image-guidance for needle-core biopsy is 
very helpful for obtaining tissue from deeply seated lesions. Ultra-
sound-, fluoroscopic-, and computed tomographic-assistance may 
be used to obtain samples from tumors located in areas where per-
cutaneous biopsy would be risky or unlikely to yield a representa-
tive sample. In situations in which the lesion is located within a 
body cavity, the risk of tumor seeding from uncontrolled hemor -
rhage or fluid leakage as a result of image-guided biopsy must be 
taken into account before deciding if image-guided needle-core 
biopsy techniques will hold an advantage over more direct access 
in a given patient. 
Punch Biopsy
Punch biopsy tools were originally designed for biopsy of the skin 
(Fig. 9.2). They deliver a shorter and wider (2–8 mm) biopsy than 
does a needle core. They can be used on any external tumor (skin, 
oral, perianal) or tumors where there is direct access (e.g., liver 
biopsy during laparotomy). They do not work as well for tumors 
located under intact skin unless the skin is incised first. Prepara -
tion of the site is the same as for needle-core biopsy. If the lesion is 
cutaneous, the punch biopsy instrument is placed on the surface 
of the area of interest and rotated back and forth using pressure to 
penetrate the involved tissue. If the skin is intact over the tumor, 
the skin is first incised using a scalpel. The punch is then intro -
duced through the skin incision to the surface of the tumor. Once 
• Fig. 9.1  Mechanism of action of needle-core biopsy for typical solid tumor. 
(A) A small stab incision is made with a scalpel blade to allow for insertion 
of the instrument. With the instrument closed, the needle is advanced into 
the tumor, taking care to ensure the capsule is penetrated. (B) The outer 
canula is fixed in place while the inner canula with the specimen notch is 
advanced into the mass. This allows the tumor tissue to protrude into the 
specimen notch. (C) The inner canula is held steady while the outer canula 
is advanced. This traps the tumor specimen in the notch. (D) The instru -
ment is removed. (E) The inner canula is advanced again to allow access 
to the tissue within the specimen notch.

===== PDF PAGE 181 =====
160
PART II  Diagnostic Procedures for the Cancer Patient
the punch has cut into the tumor, the core is gently lifted, and the 
base of the core is cut off with scissors. One or two sutures may be 
placed to close the incision and tamponade bleeding. 
Incisional Biopsy
Incisional biopsy is utilized when neither cytology nor needle-core 
biopsy has yielded diagnostic material (Fig. 9.3). Incisional biopsy 
is also preferred for ulcerated and necrotic lesions because larger 
samples can be obtained, making it more likely for the surgeon to 
sample representative areas. Most tumors are very poorly inner -
vated and may be biopsied without the need for local anesthesia 
or sedation as long as the overlying normal skin and tissue has 
been anesthetized. Preparation involves clipping the hair over the 
incision site. After an aseptic preparation is made, surgical drapes 
are used to protect the field from the surrounding environment. 
Under aseptic conditions, the skin, if intact over the tumor, is 
incised and a wedge of tumor tissue is removed from the mass. 
It is not necessary to remove a wedge of intact skin overlying the 
tumor if it appears to be normal and not fixed to the underlying 
tumor. It is important for the surgeon to confirm at the time of 
the biopsy that he or she has not simply removed a small section 
of the reactive tissue surrounding the tumor. This can be difficult 
in some cases; however, most tumors have coloration and texture 
that is distinct from that of the surrounding normal and reactive 
tissue. If needed, cytologic assessment of touch impressions can be 
made using the resected tissue to confirm that neoplastic cells are 
present in the removed tissue.
Many authors have recommended that the surgeon acquire 
a composite biopsy of normal and abnormal tissue to assure 
accuracy in diagnosis on histopathologic examination. Although 
this may be helpful to the pathologist in benign skin disease and 
subtle lesions, it is not recommended in cases in which neopla -
sia is suspected, as this may result in extending the biopsy inci -
sion into previously uninvolved tissues. This can compromise 
the surgical margins needed to remove the mass entirely at the 
time of definitive surgery and exposes previously uninvolved tis -
sues to freshly incised tumor. Instead, a representative sample of 
the tumor itself should be submitted. This may require obtaining 
multiple samples via the same incision to ensure that a representa-
tive sample has been achieved. Care must be taken to ensure that 
any biopsy tract (incisional or other) will not compromise sub -
sequent curative-intent resection, contaminate uninvolved tissue 
needed for reconstruction, or compromise subsequent radiation 
therapy. The surgeon should avoid widely opening uninvolved tis-
sue planes that could become contaminated with released tumor 
cells. Small incisions, even through expendable muscle bellies, are 
preferred to contaminating an entire intramuscular compartment. 
The incisional biopsy tract is always removed in continuity with 
the tumor at the time of curative-intent resection. 
Specialized Biopsy Techniques
Specialized biopsy techniques will generally be covered under spe-
cific individual tumors. However, some general comments follow.
Endoscopic Biopsies
These techniques use flexible or occasionally rigid scopes that 
allow visualized or blind biopsy of hollow lumens, especially gas -
trointestinal, respiratory, and urogenital systems. Although these 
• Fig. 9.2  Mechanism of action of punch biopsy. (A) The instrument is applied with pressure and back and 
forth rotation to allow the instrument to penetrate the mass. (B) The punch is removed or angled across 
the base to sever the deep attachment. (C) If needed, the specimen can be gently grasped with forceps 
and cut at the base with metzenbaum scissors.

===== PDF PAGE 182 =====
161CHAPTER 9 Biopsy and Sentinel Lymph Node Mapping Principles
techniques are convenient, cost effective, and generally safe, they 
may suffer from inadequate visualization and limited biopsy sam-
ple size compared with other techniques. For example, an endo -
scopic biopsy result of ulcerative gastritis in a dog with a firm, 
infiltrative mass of the lesser curvature of the stomach does not 
rule out gastric adenocarcinoma. 
Laparoscopy and Thoracoscopy
Evaluation of the abdomen and thorax via minimally invasive 
techniques, when performed by an experienced operator, can yield 
important information regarding stage of disease and can procure 
tissue for biopsy. In addition, laparoscopic- and thoracoscopic- 
assisted removal results in smaller incisions and more rapid recov-
ery times compared with open procedures. The option to convert 
to an open procedure should be available if problems are encoun-
tered that cannot be adequately addressed using minimally invasive 
methods. As specialists become more proficient at these techniques, 
more and more options are becoming available for tumor removal. 
Image-Guided Biopsy
Diagnostic imaging has greatly expanded the ability to stage 
various neoplasias. The use of positron emission tomography–  
computed tomography (PET–CT) in veterinary medicine has also 
led to significant advances in sentinel node mapping, novel staging 
methods, and the ability to assess response to treatment. In addi -
tion, the use of radiographic-, fluoroscopic-, ultrasonographic-, 
CT-, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-guided needle 
aspirates or core biopsies can prevent the need for more invasive 
diagnostic procedures. Commonly biopsied tissue includes lung, 
kidney, liver, spleen, prostate, and, more recently, brain. 
Excisional Biopsy
This method is utilized when the treatment would not be altered 
by knowledge of tumor type (e.g., “benign” skin tumors, solitary 
splenic mass, testicular tumor, etc.). It is more frequently per -
formed than indicated but when used on properly selected cases, 
it can be both diagnostic and therapeutic as well as cost effective. 
Sentinel Lymph Node Mapping and Biopsy
In veterinary medicine, assessment of nodal metastasis has been 
largely predicated on palpation or imaging of nodal size and archi-
tecture with cytologic sampling when abnormal. Sentinel lymph 
node (SLN) mapping and subsequent biopsy are performed to 
identify the first lymph node (LN) to which a cancer is likely to 
spread from a primary tumor and to sample that LN for evidence 
of metastasis. If the SLN is free of metastasis, subsequent LNs in 
the drainage pattern are also likely to be negative. This method 
was initially studied in human cutaneous melanoma to detect 
lymphatic drainage patterns before surgery. It is now a widely uti-
lized staging procedure in many human cancers, but the evidence 
for its usefulness in staging has been primarily from the applica -
tion of this technique in human breast cancer patients. The SLN 
has been classically defined as the first node detectable after peri -
tumoral injection of a radioactive marker and subsequent scintig-
raphy. Visual identification in surgery is typically aided by the use 
of vital dye injection (e.g., methylene blue) in conjunction with 
use of a portable gamma probe in the operating room to detect 
the LN with the greatest radioactivity. In one study of 19 dogs 
with cutaneous mast cell tumors,3 the SLN was different from the 
regional anatomic LN in eight (42%) of these dogs. SLN map -
ping and biopsy identified LN metastasis in these eight dogs  and 
clients were offered adjunctive therapy that otherwise would not 
have been considered.3
Indirect lymphography is an alternative to scintigraphic SLN 
mapping. This procedure involves injection of a contrast agent in 
the periphery of the tumor and serial or real-time imaging to fol -
low contrast uptake in the draining lymphatic basin. This method 
uses contrast enhancement of nearby LNs and lymphatic channels 
• Fig. 9.3  Excisional (top) contrasted with incisional (bottom) biopsy. The top tumor should be small 
enough that excisional biopsy will not negatively influence other possible treatments. The bottom tumor, 
however, requires knowledge of the tumor type before excision to ensure appropriate surgical “dose” is 
used at the time of definitive removal. Note that the biopsy incision is oriented in such a way to make it 
easiest to include during wide excision and minimize difficulty with closure.

===== PDF PAGE 183 =====
162
PART II  Diagnostic Procedures for the Cancer Patient
to identify the SLN. In this technique, the contrast medium is 
injected in four quadrants around or within the tumor. The first 
contrasting node(s) is identified via imaging providing a surgical 
target (as opposed to extensive dissection within the lymphatic 
basin to find a lymph node with vital dye). A vital dye, such as 
methylene blue, is injected intraoperatively in the same locations 
as the contrast agent. The use of the vital dye provides the sur -
geon with visual confirmation of the SLN. Some authors have 
advocated using lipid-based contrast medium because it slows 
clearance and therefore may permit imaging for longer periods 
compared with water-soluble contrast agents. In a recent study, 
this method was successful at identifying the sentinel lymph 
node in 96.6% of veterinary patients with solid tumors of various 
histologies.4 
General Guidelines for Tissue Procurement 
and Fixation
 1.  When properly performed, a pretreatment biopsy will not 
negatively influence survival. The metastatic cascade involves 
a series of complex events that are not dependent on the num-
ber of neoplastic cells in circulation (see Chapter 2). On the 
other hand, neoplastic cells contaminate the local tissues sur-
rounding the mass and, in some cases, successfully attach and 
grow within these normal tissues. Careful hemostasis, obliter-
ation of dead space, and avoidance of seromas or hematomas 
will minimize local contamination of the incisional biopsy 
site. Definitive surgery to remove the tumor along with the 
associated biopsy tract should take place as soon as possible 
after the biopsy procedure. Surgical drains should not be 
placed in biopsy sites, if possible, because the drain tract can 
become contaminated with tumor cells and seed tumor cells 
through uninvolved tissue planes. In particular, care should 
be taken during biopsy not to “spill” cancer cells within the 
thoracic or abdominal cavities, where they may seed pleural 
or peritoneal surfaces.
 2.  When biopsies are performed on the limbs or the tail, the 
incision should be made along the long axis of the limb or tail 
rather than transversely. T ransverse incisions are much more 
difficult to resect completely. If a biopsy is near the midline, 
the incision should be oriented parallel to the midline.
 3.  Avoid taking the junction of normal and abnormal tissue for 
pretreatment biopsy. Care should be taken not to incise nor-
mal tissue that cannot be resected or would be used in recon-
structing the surgical defect. Avoid biopsies that contain only 
ulcerated or inflamed tissues.
 4.  The larger the sample, the more likely it is to be diagnostic. 
T umors are not homogeneous and usually contain areas of 
necrosis, inflammation, and reactive tissue. Several samples 
from one mass are more likely to yield an accurate diagnosis 
than a single sample.
 5.  Biopsies should not be obtained with electrocautery or laser, 
as it can deform (autolysis or polarization) the cellular archi-
tecture of the tissue sample. Electrocautery is better utilized 
for hemostasis after blade removal of a diagnostic specimen.
 6.  Care should be taken not to unduly deform the specimen 
with forceps, suction, or other handling methods before 
fixation.
 7.  Intraoperative diagnosis of disease by frozen sections, 
although not routinely available in veterinary medicine, 
is used widely in human hospitals. Special equipment and 
training are required for this technique to be fully utilized. 
One study in veterinary medicine revealed an accurate and 
specific diagnosis rate of 83%.5
 8.  If evaluation of margins of excision is desired, it is best if the 
surgeon indicates the surgical margin on the specimen using 
tissue ink. Several commercial inking systems are available for 
this use. The resected tissue should be blotted with a paper 
towel, as the dyes will adhere better to the tissue when the tis-
sue is slightly tacky. The tissue ink is “painted” on the surgical 
margins using a cotton swab. The dye should then be allowed 
to dry for up to 20 minutes before the tissue is placed in 
formalin. Tissue already fixed in formalin can be marked, but 
the dyes may not adhere as well and drying time is extended. 
When the pathologist reads the slides and sees tumor cells 
at the inked edge, you can be certain tumor cells have been 
left in the patient. Different colored ink can also be used to 
denote different sites on the tumor, such as proximal margin 
or deep margin. Even with inking, proper fixation, and pro -
cessing, the clinician must realize the entire margin will not 
be examined by the pathologist. Rather, representative sec -
tions will be obtained from the inked margin. Therefore any 
guidance that the clinician can give to the pathologist as to 
the most important sections to assess for tumor cells will help 
the pathologist pay particular attention to such areas. It is 
essential that both the pathologist and the clinician commu-
nicate if the pathology report is confusing or does not match 
the clinical picture. Of course, margin evaluation is necessary 
only for excisional biopsy or after curative-intent surgery and 
does not apply to needle-core or incisional biopsies, which by 
definition will have inadequate margins.
 9.  Stainless steel vascular clips or staples in the resected speci -
men will damage the microtomes used by the pathology labo-
ratory. Remove them before the tissue is submitted.
 10.  Proper fixation is essential. Tissue is generally fixed in 10% 
buffered neutral formalin with 1 part tissue to 10 parts fixa -
tive. If more than one lesion has been biopsied, they should 
each be placed in a separate well identified container. Cer -
tain tissues such as eye, nerve, and muscle may require special 
fixation techniques. The clinician may want to call and con -
sult with the pathologist on how to submit tissue for special 
circumstances.
 11.  Tissue should not be thicker than 1 cm or it will not fix prop-
erly. Masses greater than 1 cm in diameter can be sliced like a 
loaf of bread, leaving the deep inked margin intact, to allow 
fixation. Extremely large masses can be incompletely sliced 
as described earlier, fixed in a large bucket of formalin for 2 
to 3 days, and then shipped in a container with 1 part tissue 
to 1 part formalin. A less ideal but alternative approach is to 
have the surgeon take representative smaller samples from the 
mass (e.g., soft and hard pieces, red and pale pieces, deep and 
superficial pieces, etc.) and the lateral and deep margins in 
the hope that they are representative. The rest of the mass can 
be saved in the clinic in formalin in case more tissue needs to 
be evaluated. This extra tissue should never be frozen. Freez-
ing causes severe artifact in the tissue.
 12.  A detailed history should accompany all biopsy requests. 
Interpretation of surgical biopsies is a combination of art and 
science. Without all of the essential diagnostic information 
(e.g., signalment, history of recurrences, invasion into bone, 
rate of growth, etc.), the pathologist will be significantly com-
promised in his or her ability to deliver accurate and clinically 
useful information.

===== PDF PAGE 184 =====
163CHAPTER 9 Biopsy and Sentinel Lymph Node Mapping Principles
 13.  A veterinary-trained pathologist is preferred over a patholo -
gist trained in human diseases. Although many cancers are 
histologically similar across species lines, enough differences 
exist to result in interpretive errors.
In 2011 the American College of Veterinary Pathologists, 
along with several medical and surgical oncologists, published a 
comprehensive set of recommendations and guidelines for sub -
mission, trimming, margin evaluation, and reporting of tumor 
biopsy specimens.6 This landmark paper was the first collaborative 
attempt to standardize pathology reporting in veterinary oncol -
ogy and has been endorsed by a large international group of vet -
erinary pathologists and oncology specialists. It is recommended 
that clinicians utilize diagnostic laboratories that adhere to these 
guidelines so that results are standardized and easier to interpret. 
Interpretation of Results
The job of the pathologist is to determine (1) tumor versus no 
tumor, (2) benign versus malignant, (3) histologic type, (4) his -
tologic grade (if available clinically), and to (5) assess surgical 
margins (if excisional biopsy). Making an accurate diagnosis is 
not as simple as putting a piece of tissue in formalin and wait -
ing for results. Many pitfalls can occur to render the end result 
inaccurate. Potential errors can take place at any level of diagnosis 
and it is up to the clinician in charge of the case to interpret the 
full meaning of the biopsy result. In cases in which the biopsy 
result does not correlate with the clinical behavior of the tumor, a 
second opinion should be requested. A study published in 2009 
reviewed first- and second-opinion histopathology reports.7 There 
was diagnostic agreement between first and second opinions in 
70% of cases. In 20% of cases, there was partial agreement, where 
the diagnosis did not change but information such as grade or 
presence of lymphatic or vascular invasion was disparate. In 10% 
of cases, there was complete diagnostic disagreement. Of these, 
7% were a disagreement between malignant versus nonmalignant 
disease and 3% were disagreements about the cell of origin of the 
tumor. If the biopsy result does not correlate with the biologic 
behavior of the tumor, several options are possible:
 1.  Call the pathologist and express your concern over the biopsy 
result. This exchange of information should be helpful for both 
parties and not looked upon as an affront to the pathologist’s 
authority or expertise. It may lead to
 a.  Resectioning of available tissue or paraffin blocks
 b.  Special stains for certain possible tumor types (e.g., tolu -
idine blue for mast cells)
 c.  A second opinion by another pathologist
 2.  If the tumor is still present in the patient, and particularly 
if widely varied options exist for therapy, a second (or third) 
biopsy should be performed.
A carefully performed, submitted, and interpreted biopsy is the 
most important step in management and subsequent prognosis 
of the patient with cancer. The biopsy report is key in decision 
making regarding therapeutic options, prognosis, and overall case 
management. All too often tumors are not submitted for histo -
logic evaluation after removal because “the owner didn’t want to 
pay for it.” Histopathology interpretation should not be an elec -
tive decision. Instead, it should be as automatic as closing the skin 
after surgery. The charge for submission and interpretation of the 
biopsy should be included in the surgery fee, but histopathology 
interpretation is not optional. Because of increasing medicolegal 
concerns, it is not medical curiosity alone that mandates knowl -
edge of tumor type. Understanding how and when to perform 
a biopsy, how to submit a biopsy specimen for histopathologic 
interpretation, and how to interpret the report are of paramount 
importance in the treatment of veterinary cancer patients.
References
 1.  Ghisleni G , Roccabianca P , Ceruti R , et  al.: Correlation between 
fine-needle aspiration cytology and histopathology in the evaluation 
of cutaneous and subcutaneous masses from dogs and cats, Vet Clin 
Pathol 35:24–30, 2006.
 2.  Sharkey L C, Wellman ML: Diagnostic cytology in veterinary medi -
cine: a comparative and evidence-based approach, Clinics Lab Med  
31:1–19, 2011.
 3.  Worley DR: Incorporation of sentinel lymph node mapping in dogs 
with mast cell tumours: 20 consecutive procedures, Vet Comp Oncol 
12:215–226, 2014.
 4.  Brissot H N, Edery E G: Use of indirect lymphography to identify 
sentinel lymph node in dogs: a pilot study in 30 tumours, Vet Comp 
Oncol 15:740–753, 2017.
 5.  Whitehair J G, Griffey S M, Olander H J, et  al.: The accuracy of 
intraoperative diagnoses based on examination of frozen sections. A 
prospective comparison with paraffin-embedded sections, Vet Surg 
22:255–259, 1993.
 6.  Kamstock D A, Ehrhart EJ, Getzy DM, et al.: Recommended guide-
lines for submission, trimming, margin evaluation, and reporting of 
tumor biopsy specimens in veterinary surgical pathology, Vet Pathol 
48:19–31, 2011.
 7.  Regan RC, Rassnick KM, Balkman CE, Bailey DB, McDonough SP:  
Comparison of first-opinion and second-opinion histopathology from 
dogs and cats with cancer: 430 cases (2001-2008), Vet Comp Oncol 
8:1–10, 2010.

===== PDF PAGE 185 =====
PART III  Therapeutic Modalities for the Cancer Patient
164
10
Surgical Oncology
JAMES P. FARESE, JULIUS M. LIPTAK, AND STEPHEN J. WITHROW
Complete surgical removal of localized cancer cures more can -
cer patients than any other form of treatment, 1 in part because 
this modality is generally applied as the sole treatment for local 
disease, early stage disease, and tumors with limited potential to 
metastasize. In humans, 60% of patients who are cured of can -
cer are cured by surgery alone. 2 Before this hope for cure can be 
realized in veterinary medicine, surgeons must have a thorough 
understanding of anatomy, physiology, resection, and reconstruc-
tion options for all organs; expected tumor behavior; and the 
various alternatives or adjuvants to surgery. Surgical oncologists 
should not only be good technical surgeons, but also dedicated 
tumor biologists. Surgery will likely play a role at one point or 
another in the management of most cancer patients.
Surgical procedures may include any of the following: diagno-
sis (biopsy), resection for cure, resection for palliation of symp -
toms, and a wide variety of ancillary procedures to enhance and 
complement other forms of treatment.
Surgical resection of cancer was introduced in the 16th century 
BC and remained relatively underutilized until the development 
of general anesthesia (1840s), antisepsis (1860s), and effective 
analgesia, which made aggressive resection safer and more toler -
able for the patient. Dr. William Halstead developed the basic 
principles of surgical oncology in the 1890s. In the 21st century, 
radical resection has increasingly been customized to meet the 
needs of the patient . Further refinements in surgery have been 
made possible with newer equipment, advanced imaging, modifi-
cations in analgesic drugs and techniques, use of blood products, 
and advancements in critical care medicine.
Most dogs and cats with cancerous conditions are geriatric; 
however, with normal major organ function, dogs and cats at an 
advanced age can still be good candidates for surgery, and age has 
not been shown to affect the tumor-related prognosis for tumor 
types. In fact, dogs with osteosarcoma that are younger than 2 
years of age have a worse prognosis than dogs that are older than 
2 years of age after amputation alone. 3 In most instances older 
animals will tolerate aggressive surgical intervention as well as 
younger patients do. Screening for comorbidities (e.g., thoracic 
radiographs and abdominal ultrasound) is recommended before 
major surgical procedures, especially in older dogs and cats.
Surgery for Diagnosis
Although biopsy principles are covered in Chapter 9, it is worth 
emphasizing that properly timed, performed, and interpreted 
biopsies are one of the most crucial steps in the management of 
the cancer patient. Not only does the surgeon need to procure 
adequate and representative tissue to establish a diagnosis, but 
also the biopsy must not compromise subsequent curative surgi -
cal resection or radiation field planning.
Levels of Tumor Excision
The aggressiveness of surgical resection, or surgical dose, is catego-
rized as intralesional (or debulking), marginal, wide, and radical 
(Fig. 10.1). These categories were first proposed for musculoskeletal 
tumors by Dr. William Enneking, but they have since gained wide 
acceptance for all solid tumors.4 The most common mistake in sur-
gical oncology is to use too low a surgical dose, particularly because 
of the fear of being unable to close the resultant defect. In human 
medicine, two surgical teams are sometimes involved in the excision 
of tumors, one team for surgical resection and another team for 
subsequent reconstruction, to avoid this situation. Because this is 
unrealistic in veterinary medicine, the use of sterile surgical markers 
to delineate margins before incision assists in orientating the sur-
geon and overcoming the subconscious concerns of wound closure. 
Surgery for Cure
Before a surgeon can provide the optimal operation for the patient 
with cancer, the following questions need to be considered:
 1.  What is the histologic type, histologic grade, and clinical stage 
of the cancer to be treated?
 2.  What are the expected local and systemic effects of this tumor?
 3.  Is a cure possible and at what price in terms of function and 
cosmetics?
 4.  Is an operation indicated at all?
 5.  Are there alternative options to surgery, or does surgery need 
to be combined with other modalities?
A recurring theme in surgical management of cancer is that 
the first surgery has the best chance of cure. Several reasons for 
this improvement in survival have been proposed. Untreated 
tumors often have had less chronologic time to metastasize and 
acquire more biologically aggressive phenotypes than recurrent 
cancers. Untreated tumors and adjacent normal tissues have near 
normal anatomy, which facilitates surgical dissection and resec -
tion. Recurrent tumors may contaminate previously uninvolved 
tissue planes, thereby requiring wider resection than otherwise 
would have been needed on the initial tumor excision.