pages=33

--- PAGE 1 ---
2024 AAHA Fluid Therapy Guidelines for Dogs
and Cats
Mariana Pardo, BVSc, MV, DACVECC✝, Erin Spencer, MEd, CVT, VTS (ECC)✝,
Adesola Odunayo, DVM, MS, DACVECC, Mary L. Ramirez, DVM, DABVP (Canine and Feline),Elke Rudloff, DVM, DACVECC, cVMA, Heidi Shafford, DVM, PhD, DACVAA, Ann Weil, DVM, MS, DACVAA,Ewan Wolff, DVM, PhD, DACVIM (Small Animal Internal Medicine)
ABSTRACT
Fluids are drugs used in veterinary patients capable of producing bene ﬁcial therapeutic or inadvertent harmful effects within
the body ’s intravascular, interstitial, and intracellular ﬂuid spaces. The individualized design of a ﬂuid therapy plan requires
careful patient assessment and targeted selection of proper ﬂuid types, administration routes, and rates, along with adjust-
ments during therapy tailored speci ﬁcally as per the individual patient ’sﬂuid requirement and therapeutic response. Personal-
ized ﬂuid prescriptions and vigilant patient monitoring help avoid patient morbidity from body ﬂuid de ﬁciencies, ﬂuid excess,
and electrolyte derangements and support better patient outcomes. These guidelines provide an overview of ﬂuid dynamics
within the ﬂuid spaces of the body, describe various types of ﬂuids and their uses, and outline recommendations for ﬂuid
administration for resuscitation, rehydration, and maintenance purposes. The guidelines also outline approaches to ﬂuid ther-
apy for anesthetized patients and reiterate the recommendations of reduced ﬂuid rates in this population of patients. Addi-
tionally, the guidelines include practical ﬂuid therapy strategies for patients with various common disorders. The goal of
these guidelines is to help veterinary professionals safely and effectively prescribe and administer ﬂuid therapy for canine
and feline patients. (JA mA n i mH o s pA s s o c 2024; 60:131 –163. DOI 10.5326/JAAHA-MS-7444)
AFFILIATIONS
Critical Care Veterinarian Consulting, Pleasantville, New York (M.P.);
Veterinary Emergency Group, Derry, New Hampshire (E.S.); University ofFlorida, Gainesville, Florida (A.O.); North Dallas Veterinary Emergency andSpecialty Hospital, Frisco, Texas (M.L.R.); Blue Pearl Pet Hospice,Milwaukee, Wisconsin (E.R.); Veterinary Anesthesia Specialists, Gladstone,Oregon (H.S.); Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana (A.W.); Blue
Pearl NE Portland, Portland, Oregon (E.W.)
CONTRIBUTING REVIEWERS
Elisa Mazzaferro, MS, DVM, PhD, DACVECC, Cornell University
Veterinary Specialists, Department of Emergency and Critical Care
Vaidehi Paranjape, BVSc, MVSc, MS, DACVAA, Virginia Polytechnic
Institute and State University, Virginia-Maryland College of VeterinaryMedicine, Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Correspondence: guidelines@aaha.org
✝M. Pardo and E. Spencer are the cochairs of the AAHA Fluid
Therapy Guidelines Task Force.
These guidelines were prepared by a task force of experts convened by
the American Animal Hospital Association. This document is intended asa guideline only, not an AAHA standard of care. These guidelines andrecommendations should not be construed as dictating an exclusiveprotocol, course of treatment, or procedure. Variations in practice maybe warranted based on the needs of the individual patient, resources,
and limitations unique to each individual practice setting. Evidence-guided support for speci ﬁc recommendations has been cited whenever
possible and appropriate. Other recommendations are based on
practical clinical experience and a consensus of expert opinion. Furtherresearch is needed to document some of these recommendations. Drugapprovals and labeling are current at the time of writing but may changeover time. Because each case is different, veterinarians must base theirdecisions on the best available scienti ﬁc evidence in conjunction with
their own knowledge and experience.
AAHA gratefully acknowledges the task force facilitator, Mia Cary,
DVM (she/her), of Cary Consulting, and Theresa Entriken, DVM, fordevelopmental editing assistance.
AAHA welcomes endorsement of these Guidelines by the American
Association of Feline Practitioners (AAFP).
AKI (acute kidney injury); CPP (cryoprecipitate-poor plasma); CPR
(cardiopulmonary resuscitation); CRI (continuous rate infusion); CRT(capillary re ﬁll time); CSA (canine-speci ﬁc albumin); FWD (free water
deﬁcit); GFR (glomerular ﬁltration rate); IO (intraosseous); KCl
(potassium chloride); SC (subcutaneous); TBI (traumatic brain injury);TVI (total volume infused); VTBI (volume to be infused)
Copyright © American Animal Hospital Association
Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association (JAAHA VR)using the CC BY-NC-ND license
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ may be shared according to the license with appropriate credit.JAAHA.ORG 131VETERINARY PRACTICE GUIDELINESDownloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Guidelines Table of Contents
Section
3 Section 1: Introduction
3 Section 2: General Fluid Therapy Principles8 Section 3: Fluids for Replacement and Maintenance13 Section 4: Fluid Therapy and Anesthesia15 Section 5: Fluid Therapy in Ill Patients22 Section 6: Fluid Overload
25 Section 7: Questions and Controversies in Fluid Therapy
27 Section 8: Fluid Administration and Monitoring30 Section 9: Conclusion
Figures
4 Figure 1: Normal Distribution of Body Water5 Figure 2: Modified Starling Hypothesis9 Figure 3: Hypovolemia9 Figure 4: Treatment of Hypovolemia
9 Figure 5: Dehydration and Euvolemia
9 Figure 6: Treatment of Dehydration9 Figure 7: Severe Dehydration and Hypovolemia9 Figure 8: Treatment of Severe Dehydration and Hypovolemia14 Figure 9: Fluid Therapy During Anesthesia18 Figure 10: Approach to Fluid Therapy for Dogs and Cats with
Traumatic Brain Injury
23 Figure 11: Impact of Fluid Overload on Organ Function
25 Figure 12: Fluid Overload Therapy AlgorithmTables
6 Table 1: Intravascular Volume Assessment
6 Table 2: Stages and Clinical Signs of Hypovolemic Shock7 Table 3: Estimated Interstitial Dehydration (%) Based on
Physical Examination Findings
7 Table 4: Extracellular Hydration Status Assessment
Parameters and Expected Changes from Baseline in PatientsReceiving Hypo-or Over-Hydration
7 Table 5: Additional Clinical and Diagnostic Findings That
Indicate Overhydration/Fluid Overload
7 Table 6: Conditions that Pose Challenges When Addressing
Individual Fluid Compartment Needs
10 Table 7: Endpoints to Monitor for Hypovolemia and
Dehydration
11 Table 8: Composition of Commonly Used Crystalloids12 Table 9: Fluid Therapy Dosing According to Stage of Fluid
Requirements
12 Table 10: Empirical Subcutaneous Fluid Therapy
Recommendations
19 Table 11: Guidelines for Potassium Supplementation in Fluids19 Table 12A: Approach to Fluid Therapy in
Hyponatremic Patients
20 Table 12B: Common Causes of Acute and Chronic
Hyponatremia in Dogs and Cats
20 Table 12C: Sodium Concentration of Isotonic Crystalloids
20 Table 12D: Calculating Expected Changes in Sodium
Concentration
21 Table 13A: Approach to Fluid Therapy in
Hypernatremic Patients
21 Table 13B: Common Causes of Acute and Chronic
Hypernatremia in Dogs and Cats
22 Table 14: How to Formulate Dextrose-Containing Fluids24 Table 15: Clinical, Radiographic, and Ultrasonographic
Findings Associated with Fluid Overload
28 Table 16: Intravenous Fluid Delivery Modes28 Table 17: Peripheral Intravenous Catheter Placement and
Care Checklist
29 Table 18: Monitoring Fluid Delivery29 Table 19: Evaluation and Monitoring Parameters That May Be
Used for Patients Receiving Fluid Therapy
29 Table 20: Methods to Monitor Fluid Outputs and Inputs
132 JAAHA | 60:4 Jul/Aug 2024Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Section 1: Introduction
Fluid therapy is a common aspect of veterinary patient care, required
for a wide range of clinical conditions spanning from relatively mild
cases (e.g., short-term inadequate voluntary intake from acute gastri-
tis) to more moderate conditions (e.g., chronic kidney disease) tolife-threatening emergencies (e.g., substantial volume loss andshock). When prescribed and administered correctly, ﬂuid therapy
can be one of the most bene ﬁcial treatments available in veterinary
medicine. However, achieving desired therapeutic outcomes, rather
than administering ﬂuids with no effect or that worsen the problem,
requires an understanding of the physiologic factors that in ﬂuence
body ﬂuid movement and electrolyte balance. Re ﬁning this knowl-
edge to create tailored therapeutic plans for each patient can be chal-lenging, yet it proves to be a satisfying endeavor in enhancing patientrecovery.
These guidelines offer an overview of the body ’sﬂuid dynamics
and provide practical recommendations for selecting ﬂuids, calculat-
ing administration rates, and choosing administration routes in dogsand cats for the purposes of resuscitation, rehydration, and mainte-nance. The guidelines also cover ﬂuid therapy recommendations for
anesthetized patients, patients with common conditions, and thosewith disorders presenting special ﬂuid therapy challenges. Addition-
ally, these guidelines detail patient monitoring parameters, highlight
methods to prevent ﬂuid overload, describe ﬂuid delivery options,and address controversies and misconceptions in ﬂuid therapy.
Online resources include case examples and answers to frequently
asked questions.
Section 2: General Fluid Therapy Principles
Top Three Takeaways
1. Fluids are drugs and must be prescribed accordingly to achieve the
desired therapeutic goals promptly and minimize complications.
2. Each body ﬂuid compartment —intracellular, interstitial, and
intravascular —may require a different ﬂuid prescription tailored to
a patient ’s individual needs.
3. Arbitrarily assigning a ﬂuid rate or dose can contribute to patient
morbidity and mortality and lead to missed ﬂuid therapy goals.
Overview
Fluid therapy involves administering prescribed ﬂuids to restore a
patient ’sb o d y ﬂuid homeostasis. As with any medication, the
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of each ﬂuid must be con-
sidered to attain therapeutic goals and minimize complications.
However, ﬂuid therapy alone cannot ﬁx every abnormality, and using
a standardized ﬂuid rate for all patients can result in patient morbid-
ity (see Box 1). To prescribe effective ﬂuid therapy, veterinarians
must have a basic understanding of the body ’sﬂuid compartments
and how water is distributed among them.Definitions
Dehydration —A condition in which the body loses more fluids than it takes in, resulting in an imbalance of water and
electrolytes.
Euvolemia/euvolemic —Normal balance and distribution of total body water.
Fluid overload/fluid intolerance —A clinical spectrum that spans from hypervolemia to life-threatening edema and cavitary effu-
sions. The guidelines task force has proposed that fluid intolerance may be the more appropriate term for this condition, as thisterm more accurately describes how the amount of fluid needed to overload a patient is dependent on their tolerance for a givenamount of fluids. “Fluid intolerance ”thus encompasses both iatrogenic overload and overload due to underlying comorbidities.
However, given that “fluid overload ”is still widely used and recognized within the veterinary medical profession, it will be the pri-
mary term used in these guidelines to refer to this condition.
Hypervolemia/hypervolemic —Increased fluid volume within the vascular space. Hypertension is not usually an indication of
hypervolemia (except when renal disease is present).
Hypovolemia/hypovolemic —Decreased fluid volume within the vascular space.
Maintenance fluids —Crystalloid solutions formulated with electrolyte concentrations to meet a patient ’s daily requirements.
Replacement fluids —Crystalloid fluids intended to replace lost body fluids and electrolytes.
Total body water —The total amount of water contained in three mammalian body compartments: intracellular (67%) and extra-
cellular (33%), which is further divided into interstitial (25%) and vascular (or intravascular) (8%) spaces.Veterinary Practice Guidelines
JAAHA.ORG 133Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Fluid Distribution and Flow Among the Three Primary
Fluid Compartments
The three main body compartments in mammals contain water. The
intracellular and extracellular ﬂuid compartments contain 67% and
33% total body water, respectively (Figure 1), and these sections areseparated by cell membranes. The extracellular ﬂuid compartment is
further divided into interstitial (25% of the total body water, or 75%of the extracellular body water) and vascular (8% of the total bodywater, or 25% of the extracellular body water) compartments, andcapillary walls separate these spaces (Figure 1).
Fluid intake by any route can affect the body ﬂuid compart-
ments. Administered ﬂuids move between compartments based on:
/C15Tonicity of the ﬂuid
/C15Tonicity of the patient ’s extracellular compartment
/C15Size of any macromolecules in the administered ﬂuid
Sodium is the most abundant cation in the extracellular ﬂuid
compartment and is the most important molecule that supportsextracellular tonicity. A ﬂuid given IV that contains a sodiumconcentration similar to that of the extracellular ﬂuid compartment
will redistribute within 45 min based on a compartment ’s percent
total body water; i.e., in a normal animal, 25% of the administeredﬂuid will remain in the intravascular space and 75% will move into
the interstitial space. Fluid movement across the endothelial mem-brane depends on the contents of the administered ﬂuid and the
condition of the patient ’s capillary membrane. The modi ﬁed Star-
ling hypothesis describes how ﬂuid moves across the capillary
membrane (Figure 2). Hydrostatic pressure, colloid osmotic pres-sure, and vascular permeability in ﬂuence ﬂuid movement.
1,2
When increased capillary membrane permeability, elevated intra-
vascular hydrostatic pressure, or decreased plasma colloid osmoticpressure occurs, more isotonic ﬂuid can pass into the interstitium or
body cavity and cause tissue edema, effusion, or both.
Administering a hypertonic ﬂuid IV will cause water to move
from the interstitial and intracellular spaces into the intravascularspace. This can be desirable for rapid intravascular volume resuscita-tion. However, for this strategy to succeed, the interstitial andintracellular spaces must already be adequately hydrated. Whenadministered IV, a hypotonic ﬂuid will cause water to move from
the extracellular space into the intracellular space, which is a suitableapproach when treating a solute-free water de ﬁcit.
Goal-Directed Fluid Therapy
Goal-directed ﬂuid therapy requires creating a ﬂu i dp r e s c r i p t i o nt h a t
replaces ﬂuid de ﬁcits that may exist in each ﬂuid compartment, using
the following steps:
1. Recognize which ﬂuid compartment de ﬁcit(s) exists.
2. Understand which ﬂuid type and administration route will best
replace each de ﬁcit.
3. Calculate the ﬂuid dose and administration rate.
4. Monitor patients for response to therapy and signs of complications.3–5Box 1: One Fluid Rate Does Not Fit All
A common misconception is that administering fluids at
twice the maintenance rate will adequately treat most veteri-nary patients in need of fluid therapy. However, this
approach may be inappropriate or inadequate in several sce-
narios, as shown in the following examples:
Interstitial dehydration. Using a twice maintenance fluid
administration rate would take approximately 33 hr torehydrate a patient who has 5% interstitial dehydration,far longer than the recommended 12 –24 hr.
Uremia due to acute kidney injury (AKI). The primary goal in
treating AKI is to ensure adequate renal perfusion and matchthe kidney ’s ability to handle fluid volumes. The fluid input rate
for normovolemic patients should be determined based on fluido u t p u t( s e eS e c t i o n5 ,F l u i dT h e r a p yi nI l lP a t i e n t s ) .
Intoxications. Administering an increased hourly fluid
volume to force diuresis and urine output may not
increase toxin excretion and can result in fluid overload.
For example, although some animals with nonsteroidalanti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) toxicity may benefitfrom fluid therapy to treat dehydration or hypovolemia,high fluid rates (also known as forced diuresis) do notaccelerate elimination of NSAIDs because most NSAIDsare highly protein-bound.
67% 25% 8%Intracellular
Interstitial
VascularIntracellular FluidExtracellular Fluid
Total Body Water
FIGURE 1
Normal distribution of body water
134 JAAHA | 60:4 Jul/Aug 2024Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Assessing Patients: General Principles Before and
During Fluid Therapy
The extracellular ﬂuid compartment (i.e., the vascular and interstitial
s p a c e s )m u s th a v ea d e q u a t ev o l u m eb e f o r ei n t r a c e l l u l a r ﬂuid com-
partment de ﬁcits can be addressed. Therefore, assess and address
alterations in volume homeostasis in the following order:
1. Assess the intravascular ﬂuid space by evaluating:
/C15Patient history
/C15Perfusion parameters (mentation, heart rate, capillary re ﬁll time,
mucous membrane color, extremity temperature, skin turgor,
and pulse quality)
/C15Monitored parameters (blood pressure, electrocardiogram
ﬁndings)
/C15Laboratory test results (Table 1)
/C15Diagnostic imaging ﬁndings (Tables 1, 2)
2. Assess the interstitial space by evaluating:
/C15Patient hydration parameters (Tables 3 –5)
3. Assess the intracellular space by evaluating:/C15Patient sodium concentration
/C15Solute-free water de ﬁcit (FWD) (Box 2)
Replace deficits and monitor response
To replace extracellular ﬂuid space de ﬁcits (i.e., vascular and intersti-
tialﬂuid space de ﬁcits):
/C15Administer a buffered isotonic crystalloid ﬂuid that contains a
sodium concentration similar to the patient ’s.
/C15For rapid intravascular volume replacement, a hypertonic crystal-
loid, a colloid solution, or both can also be used.4
/C15Closely monitor patient parameters until ﬂuid homeostasis is
achieved and maintained (Tables 1, 3 –5).
/C15Monitoring may also be achieved by assessing the relative variation
in the caudal vena cava during one respiratory cycle using ultraso-
nography and calculating the Caudal Vena Cava CollapsibilityIndex.
6,7See Table 6 for some conditions that pose additional chal-
lenges in addressing individual ﬂuid compartment needs. For more
information on addressing ﬂuid therapy challenges, see Section 5,
Fluid Therapy in Ill Patients.Plasma
EndothellumIntercellular  cleft
InterstitiumPi
ic Pc
gSubglycocalyx  spaceGlycocalyx
FIGURE 2
Modi ﬁed Starling hypothesisa
Modi ﬁed Starting hypothesis of ﬂuidﬂux across the capillary membrane. Filtration force 5([Pc-Pi]-s[pp-pg]). Pc, Capillary hydrostatic pressure;
Pi, Interstitial hydrostatic pressure; pp, plasma oncotic pressure; pi, interstitial oncotic pressure; pg, glycocalyx oncotic pressure
aReprinted from Silverstein DC and Hopper K, eds., Small Animal Critical Care Medicine , 3rd ed., Waddell L., Colloid osmotic pressure
and osmolality, p. 1055, Elsevier (2022), with permission from Elsevier.
Box 2: Calculating Free Water Deficit
Free Water Deficit (FWD) in Liters (L) 5[Patient Na/Desired Na) -1] 3(0.63Weight [kg])
Na, SodiumVeterinary Practice Guidelines
JAAHA.ORG 135Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 6 ---
TABLE 1
Intravascular Volume Assessment
/C3Usually occurs in conjunction with signs of overhydration of the interstitial space (see Tables 4 and 5).
TABLE 2
Stages and Clinical Signs of Hypovolemic Shock
CRT, capillary re ﬁll time; MM, mucous membrane
136 JAAHA | 60:4 Jul/Aug 2024Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 7 ---
TABLE 3
Estimated Interstitial Dehydration (%) Based on Physical
Examination Findingsa
Note: There is substantial clinical variation in the correlation between clinical signs
and degree of dehydration, so this is an estimate only.
aReprinted from Silverstein DC and Hopper K, eds., Small Animal Critical Care
Medicine , 3rd ed., Rudloff, E, Assessment of hydration, p. 1054-58, Elsevier (2022),
with permission from Elsevier.
/C3Xerostomia can be present in AKI and CKD patients without dehydration.
/C3/C3Retracted globes may also be present.TABLE 4
Extracellular Hydration Status Assessment Parameters and
Expected Changes from Baseline in Patients Receiving Hypo- orOver-hydration
a
aReprinted from Silverstein DC and Hopper K, eds., Small Animal Critical Care
Medicine , 3rd ed., Rudloff, E, Assessment of hydration, p. 1054-58, Elsevier (2022),
with permission from Elsevier.
TABLE 5
Additional Clinical and Diagnostic Findings That May Indicate
Overhydration/Fluid OverloadTABLE 6
Conditions That Pose Challenges When Addressing IndividualFluid Compartment NeedsVeterinary Practice Guidelines
JAAHA.ORG 137Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Section 3: Fluids for Replacement and
Maintenance
Top Three Takeaways
1. Calculate ﬂuid requirements based on three main phases of ﬂuid
therapy: resuscitation, rehydration, and maintenance. The adminis-tration route depends on the severity of the patient ’sﬂuid de ﬁcit
and their ability to take in ﬂuids orally. When possible, enteral
routes should be used.
2. Use replacement ﬂuids, also called isotonic crystalloids, to treat
hypovolemia and dehydration, keeping in mind that each condition
requires different strategies. Hypovolemic patients require immedi-
ate intravascular volume replacement delivered as one or moresmall IV or intraosseous (IO) ﬂuid boluses over 15 –30 min. Dehy-
drated patients require sustained ﬂuid delivery over 12 –24 hr.
3. Use maintenance ﬂuids, also referred to as hypotonic crystalloids, to
provide daily ﬂuid requirements in patients with inadequate ﬂuid
intake. Using isotonic crystalloids to meet maintenance ﬂuid needs
can lead to electrolyte derangements in patients.
Overview
When developing a replacement or maintenance ﬂuid therapy plan,
tailor the ﬂuid type, volume, administration route, and administra-
tion rate to each patient. Keep in mind that evaluating a patient ’s
ﬂuid balance is not a one-time event. As the patient ’s clinical status
progresses, adjust the ﬂuid prescription to meet ongoing needs,
response to therapy, and the course of the disease.8
Hypovolemia anddehydration are two related medical condi-
tions that involve a de ﬁciency of ﬂuids in the body and require
replacement ﬂuid therapy. Although these conditions share similari-
ties, there are distinct differences between them, and ﬂuid adminis-
tration strategies differ.
Patients with an intravascular volume de ﬁcit, or hypovolemia,
require rapid IV ﬂuid replacement. On the other hand, patients with
ﬂuid de ﬁcits from inadequate ﬂuid intake and ongoing losses, or
dehydration, need slow, sustained ﬂuid de ﬁcit replacement, allowing
the interstitial and intracellular compartments to reabsorb these
ﬂuids. Once patients are adequately hydrated and euvolemic, they
may only require maintenance ﬂu i dt h e r a p yi ft h e ya r eu n a b l et o
maintain ﬂuid homeostasis through oral ingestion.
Managing Hypovolemia
Hypovolemia refers to a decreased volume of circulating blood,
which results in reduced tissue perfusion. It occurs when both ﬂuid
and electrolytes are lost, leading to a decrease in total blood volume
in the circulatory system (Figure 3). Hypovolemia can be caused by
various factors, such as excessive bleeding, severe burns, severe diar-
rhea or vomiting, kidney disease, or inadequate ﬂuid intake. Para-
meters to detect hypovolemia are listed in Table 2.Immediate medical attention is crucial for hypovolemic patients
because untreated hypovolemia can lead to serious complications.Treatment entails administering IV ﬂuids to restore the blood vol-
ume and addressing the underlying cause.
Correct hypovolemia by administering a buffered isotonic ﬂuid
bolus of 5 –10 mL/kg (cats) and 15 –20 mL/kg (dogs) over 15 –30 min.
T h eb o l u s e sc a nb er e p e a t e di ft h ed e s i r e dh e m o d y n a m i ca n dp e r f u -
sion goals have not been achieved and the patient remains hypovole-mic (Figure 4).
Managing Dehydration
Dehydration is a condition in which the body loses more ﬂuids than
it takes in, resulting in an imbalance of water and electrolytes
(Figure 5). Inadequate ﬂuid intake, excessive panting in dogs, vomit-
ing, diarrhea, or medical conditions such as diabetes can cause dehy-
dration. Parameters to detect dehydration are listed in Table 3.
Depending on the degree of dehydration, it can usually be man-
aged by replenishing lost ﬂuids through oral rehydration or subcuta-
neous (SC) ﬂuid administration. IV ﬂuid administration is preferred
in severe cases of dehydration or in patients who cannot tolerate oral
ﬂuid administration.
Dehydration can be corrected by calculating the ﬂuid de ﬁcit
( B o x3 )b a s e do nt h ed e g r e eo fd e h y d r a t i o n( T a b l e3 )a n da d m i n i s -
tering ﬂuid therapy over 12 –24 hr (Figure 6).
Managing Hypovolemia and Dehydration
In cases in which both hypovolemia and dehydration are present
(Figure 7), address hypovolemia ﬁrst, then rehydration (Figure 8).
Both ﬂuid prescriptions should include concrete endpoints to moni-
tor to identify when hypovolemia and dehydration have resolved(Table 7). Additionally, ultrasonographic evaluation of cardiac cham-bers and the caudal vena cava (Caudal Vena Cava CollapsibilityIndex) may be used as valid assessments of ﬂuid responsiveness.
9
Selecting Fluids for IV Administration
To prescribe appropriate IV ﬂuid therapy, many factors must be con-
sidered, including a patient ’s age, current and underlying medical
conditions (e.g., renal or cardiac impairment, hypoproteinemia),
ﬂuid and electrolyte balance, and other speci ﬁc needs (see Section 5,
Fluid Therapy in Ill Patients). These factors in ﬂuence the choice of
IVﬂuid type and whether adjustments are needed in the ﬂuid’s com-
position or administration rate.Box 3: Calculating the Fluid Deficit
Fluid Deficit (L) 5Body Weight (kg) 3% Dehydration
(as a decimal)
138 JAAHA | 60:4 Jul/Aug 2024Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 9 ---
67% 25% <8%Intracellular
Interstitial
VascularHypovolemia
Total Body Water
FIGURE 3
Hypovolemia results in a decreased volume within the vascular
space. Acute hypovolemia primarily affects this compartment. Asthe severity and duration of hypovolemia persist, it can affect othercompartments as well.67% 25% 8%Intracellular
Interstitial
VascularCats: 5-10 mL/kg,
Dogs: 15-20 mL/kgover 15-30 min 
isotonic ﬂuidof a buffered
Volume is 
quickly replaced
and delivered 
into the vascular
space
Total Body WaterTreatment of Hypovolemia
FIGURE 4
Treatment of hypovolemia requires rapidly delivering ﬂuid into the
vascular space to restore the effective circulating volume.
Total Body Water67% <25% 8%Intracellular
Interstitial
VascularDehydration and Euvolemia
FIGURE 5
Dehydration results in a decreased volume within the interstitial space.67% 25% 8%Intracellular
Interstitial
VascularReplacement 
volume over 12–24 hours of a bufferedisotonic ﬂuid
Volume is 
slowly replaced and delivered into the vascular space where it 
interstitial spacediffuses to the
Total Body WaterTreatment of Dehydration
FIGURE 6
Treating dehydration requires slow, sustained delivery of intravas-
cular ﬂuids, which will be slowly absorbed into the interstitial space
over 12-24 hours. Subcutaneous and oral routes are not depicted;however, these routes also correct dehydration.
Total Body Water<67% <25% <8%Intracellular
Interstitial
VascularSevere Dehydration and Hypovolemia
FIGURE 7
Dehydration results in a decreased volume within the interstitial
space. As dehydration worsens, it can affect the vascular and intra-cellular compartments as well, leading to dehydration with concur-rent hypovolemia.67% 25% 8%Intracellular
Interstitial
VascularCats: 5-10 mL/kg,
Dogs: 15-20 mL/kgover 15-30 min
of a buffered
of a bufferedisotonic ﬂuid
Replacement
volume over
12–24 hours
isotonic ﬂuid
Total Body WaterTreatment of Severe
Dehydration and Hypovolemia
FIGURE 8
Treatment of severe dehydration and hypovolemia requires a two-fold
strategy. First, correct hypovolemia by rapidly delivering intravascularﬂuids and restoring the effective circulating volume. Once the hypovole-
mia has resolved, address dehydration with the slow and sustaineddelivery of intravascular ﬂuids administered over 12-24 hours.Veterinary Practice Guidelines
JAAHA.ORG 139Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Crystalloids
Crystalloid solutions are the most common type of ﬂuid used, and
these can be classi ﬁed as replacement or maintenance solutions. The
composition of replacement solutions resembles that of the extracel-
lular ﬂuid (Table 8). Maintenance solutions contain less sodium and
more potassium than replacement ﬂuids (Table 8).10
Maintenance versus replacement fluids
Using the term “maintenance ﬂuids”to refer to a ﬂuid adminis-
tration rate is a common misnomer. Instead, the term refers to a classi-ﬁcation of crystalloid solutions formulated with different electrolyte
concentrations to meet a patient ’s daily requirements. Replacement
ﬂuids (e.g., lactated Ringer ’s solution) are intended to replace lost body
ﬂuids and electrolytes (Table 8). Replacement ﬂuids are frequently
used interchangeably to meet replacement and maintenance needs —
where clinicians supplement replacement ﬂuids with potassium or dex-
trose to approximate maintenance requirements. Using replacement
ﬂuids long term instead of maintenance ﬂuids may predispose patients
to sodium derangements and hypokalemia.
11Although there is no evi-
dence that using replacement ﬂuids as maintenance ﬂuids has short-
term detrimental effects, it is important to refer to these ﬂuids correctly
and ensure that patient maintenance needs (electrolyte composition
and volume administered) are properly met.
Sodium concentration
Always consider a patient ’s sodium concentration. Dogs have a
lower average sodium concentration ( /C24145 mEq/L) compared withthat of cats ( /C24155 mEq/L),12and pediatric patients may have slightly
lower sodium concentrations than adults. Although point-of-care blood
analysis facilitates obtaining quick results, it may not always be available
in cases in which immediate ﬂuid resuscitation is required. In situations
in which sodium concentration is unknown, the best ﬂuid choice is a
buffered isotonic ﬂuid. Once the sodium concentration is obtained,
adjust the ﬂuid choice to better re ﬂect the patient ’sn e e d s( T a b l e8 ) .
Calculating Fluid Requirements
Divide the ﬂuid therapy plan into resuscitation, rehydration, and
maintenance rates (Table 9) as follows:
Total Fluid Requirement 5resuscitation rate
1rehydration rate ðinclude ongoing losses Þ
1maintenance rate :
Several formulas are available to calculate ﬂuid requirements,13and
there is no evidence that one is superior to another.14Regardless of
the formula used, customize the ﬂuid plan to each patient, and adjust
it based on patient monitoring ﬁndings and ongoing losses.
Selecting Fluid Administration Routes
T h ec h o i c eo f ﬂuid administration route depends on the severity of
theﬂuid de ﬁcit and the patient ’s ability to take ﬂuids orally or via a
feeding tube. Hypovolemia always requires IV or IO ﬂuid delivery.
However, dehydration can be corrected through IV, SC, or enteral
ﬂuid administration, or a combination of these routes.TABLE 7
Endpoints to Monitor for Hypovolemia and Dehydration
Fluid Status Hypovolemia Dehydration
Initial parameters (See Table 2) (See Table 3)
Initial treatment 
strategy• 5-10 mL/kg (cat), 15-20 mL/kg (dog) of a 
• Assess perfusion parameters at the end of 
each bolus.• Calculate replacement volume and deliver over 
12–24 hours.
• Assess patient parameters throughout the ﬂuid 
delivery period with the goal of correcting the full dehydration deﬁcit within 12–24 hours.
End points • Improvement in heart rate, CRT, blood 
pressure, and mentation• Improved skin turgor, mucous membranes, and 
urine speciﬁc gravity and increased body weight and urine output
End point 
treatment strategy • If vitals have returned to normal, then assess 
if dehydration needs to be addressed and continue with a rehydration ﬂuid plan. 
• If vitals have improved but not normalized, repeat 
the same or lower-volume bolus and reassess. • If end points have returned to normal, then 
assess if oral ingestion is possible. If not, continue 
with maintenance ﬂuid plan. 
• If dehydration has not completely resolved, 
recalculate ﬂuid requirements and deliver over an additional 12–24 hours. 
CRT, capillary re ﬁll time
140 JAAHA | 60:4 Jul/Aug 2024Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 11 ---
TABLE 8
Composition of Commonly Used Crystalloids1,2–4
1. Rudloff E, Hopper K. 2021. Crystalloid and colloid compositions and their impact. Frontiers in Veterinary Science . 8:639848.
2. Strandvik GF. 2009. Hypertonic saline in critical care: a review of the literature and guidelines for use in hypotensive states and raised intracra nial pressure. Anaesthesia .
64(9):990-10033. Holden D, et al. 2023. Hypertonic saline use in neurocritical care for treating cerebral edema: A review of optimal formulation, dosing, safety, ad ministration and storage.
American Journal of Health-System Pharmacy . 80(6):331-342.
4. Carr CJ, et al. 2021. An audit and comparison of pH, measured concentration, and particulate matter in mannitol and hypertonic saline solutions. Frontiers in Neurology .
12:667842.Veterinary Practice Guidelines
JAAHA.ORG 141Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Selecting IV and IO Routes
The IV and IO administration routes are preferred in patients with
severe ﬂuid de ﬁcits, acute ﬂuid losses, and perfusion de ﬁcits, as well
as in patients with minimal or no oral or enteral ﬂuid intake. These
routes allow for rapid dispersion of ﬂuid and electrolytes, ensuring
precise dosage and safe delivery of large ﬂuid volumes and hyper-
tonic ﬂuids.
The IO route is typically used in patients for whom IV access is
not possible and serves as a bridge for resuscitation until an IV cath-
eter can be placed. However, IO infusion rates are more limited than
IV infusion rates; for example, the humerus and femur sites allow IOcatheter infusion rates of up to 1 mL/kg/min.
15Selecting the SC Route
The SC route is preferred for outpatient ﬂuid therapy or for patients
receiving ﬂuids via multiple routes (e.g., IV ﬂuids during day hospi-
talization and SC ﬂuids during the night). However, evidence-based
information is lacking regarding ideal patient selection for SC ﬂuid
therapy, the optimal SC infusion volume and treatment frequency,and the possible adverse effects of SC ﬂuids.
13Table 10 provides
empirical recommendations for SC ﬂuid therapy.
To estimate the patient ’s percent dehydration and calculate main-
tenance ﬂuid requirements, follow the recommendations outlined
above. It is important to avoid prescribing SC ﬂuids for euhydrated
patients because there is no evidence that such therapy is bene ﬁcial,
TABLE 9
Fluid Therapy Dosing According to Stage of Fluid Requirements
BW, body weight
TABLE 10
Empirical Subcutaneous Fluid Therapy Recommendations
Subcutaneous Fluid Dose Frequency Type of Fluid Comments
20–30 mL/kg Once or 
twice a day• Lactated Ringer’s, Plasma-Lyte, or 
Normosol R
• 0.9% NaCl has a low pH and may 
be painful. Avoid SC use. • Deliver to multiple sites 
depending on volume and skin elasticity. Maximum amount is 
10–20 mL/kg per site. 
SC, subcutaneous
142 JAAHA | 60:4 Jul/Aug 2024Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 13 ---
and it may be detrimental in patients that have challenges in body ﬂuid
homeostasis (e.g., underlying cardiac disease and hypoproteinemia).
Use a new ﬂuid administration set and ﬂuid bag for each individual
patient.
Selecting Enteral Administration
Whenever possible, use the enteral administration route. Enteral
ﬂuids are often underused and should be an integral part of the ﬂuid
therapy plan if patients can tolerate oral liquids. Placement of feeding
tubes can aid in providing enteral ﬂuids in anorexic patients and
should be considered as part of an overall ﬂuid therapy plan.
Enteral ﬂuids can be used exclusively to correct mild dehydration
in patients with inadequate ﬂuid intake or to supplement parenteral
administration routes. First, estimate the patient ’s percent dehydration
and then calculate maintenance ﬂuid requirements as usual. Liquid
diets and oral water can be delivered through voluntary intake orfeeding tubes (e.g., nasogastric and esophagostomy). Enteral adminis-
tration may be particularly useful in dehydrated patients who cannot
tolerate IV ﬂuids (i.e., patients with cardiac disease or hypoproteine-
mia). If a feeding tube is present, deliver enteral ﬂuids as intermittent
b o l u s e so ra sac o n t i n u o u si n f u s i o nw i t ha ﬂuid pump. Take care to
label oral ﬂuids appropriately to avoid connection errors that may
lead to accidental administration of water or a liquid diet into a
patient ’s vascular space.
Section 4: Fluid Therapy and Anesthesia
Top Three Takeaways
1. Most healthy animals undergoing elective surgery do not require
ﬂuids in the postoperative period. Instead, early return to eating
and drinking is recommended.
2. Patients who have not been eating before anesthesia may need post-
operative ﬂuid therapy until they can voluntarily consume enough
to meet their needs. For patients who are not expected to eat wellafter surgery, such as geriatric cats, SC ﬂuids can be considered for
use at home.
3. In patients with renal disease (speci ﬁcally, those in International
Renal Interest Society stage 3 or 4), do not attempt to rectify hypo-
tension by using excessive ﬂuid infusion rates.
Overview
Fluid therapy is recommended in patients undergoing general anes-
thesia primarily to counteract the vasodilation and decreased cardiac
output induced by inhaled anesthetics, as well as to uphold catheter
patency. Before the publication of the 2013 AAHA/AAFP Fluid Ther-
apy Guidelines for Dogs and Cats , the recommended ﬂuid adminis-
tration rate during anesthesia was 10 mL/kg/hr, lacking a foundationof evidence.
16However, excessively high-volume ﬂuid rates predis-
pose anesthetized patients to an increased risk of volume overload
and its associated consequences. The 2013 guidelines recommendedreducing ﬂuid rates in anesthetized patients to 5 mL/kg/hr in dogsand 3 mL/kg/hr in cats.
17Although these reduced administration
rates have not undergone formal study, they have been widely
accepted and implemented in clinical practice.
Goals for Fluid Therapy in Anesthetized Patients
The following section covers important facets of ﬂuid administration
before, during, and after anesthesia, including mechanisms to
address hypotension and avoid ﬂuid overload. (For more informa-
tion on the anesthetized patient, see the 2020 AAHA Anesthesia and
Monitoring Guidelines for Dogs and Cats , available at aaha.org .)
1. Consider potential ﬂuid de ﬁcits (e.g., losses from dehydration, fast-
ing, insensible losses, or anticipated ﬂuid losses during surgery).18
Whenever feasible, aim to correct 80% of a patient ’s dehydration
deﬁcit within the 24 hr before anesthesia.
2. For most patients, it is unnecessary to withhold water before anesthesia.
3. Place IV catheters in all patients undergoing anesthesia.
4. Administer balanced isotonic crystalloid ﬂuids using the following
guidelines:
a. Initial ﬂuid rate of 5 mL/kg/hr in dogs with normal cardiac and
renal function.
b. Initial ﬂuid rate of 3 –5 mL/kg/hr in cats with normal cardiac
and renal function.
5. IV ﬂuids can be bene ﬁcial for maintaining catheter patency and
supporting cardiovascular function. However, euhydrated, euvole-mic patients receiving injectable anesthetics for short periods gener-ally do not require IV ﬂuids. Food and water should be offered as
soon as possible after recovery, but SC ﬂuids can be given to
patients who do not return to eating and drinking immediately. Pri-
oritize the correction of hypovolemia and dehydration before gen-
eral anesthesia whenever possible.
6. To ensure proper tissue perfusion, maintain a minimum mean arte-
rial blood pressure of 60 mm Hg.
Managing Hypotension
Hypotension is a common complication of general anesthesia involv-
ing inhaled anesthetics (Figure 9).19–21Both absolute hypovolemia
(e.g., due to hemorrhage) and relative hypovolemia (e.g., stemming
from trauma, sepsis, or the use of anesthetics and vasodilatory drugs)
can also contribute to hypotension. In cases of hypotension during
anesthesia, begin by adjusting excessive vaporizer settings and judi-
ciously administering crystalloid ﬂuids.
1. Assess every patient ’s anesthetic depth carefully. Small reductions in
inhalant anesthetic administration (i.e., vaporizer settings) can sub-
stantially affect blood pressure and make the difference between
normotension and hypotension.
2. Monitor the patient ’s heart rate. Bradycardia can contribute to hypo-
tension in anesthetized patients. If the heart rate is lower than normal
and the patient is hypotensive, consider anticholinergic therapy.
3. Evaluate body temperature. Decreased body temperature or hypo-
thermia can cause hypotension. Open body cavities and breathingin cold gases from the anesthesia machine can both lead to adecrease in body temperature. Increasing body temperature willhelp improve hypotension.Veterinary Practice Guidelines
JAAHA.ORG 143Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 14 ---
4. Consider the concurrent administration of additional analgesics,
sedatives, or a combination of both to help reduce the requirements
for inhalant anesthetics requirements, as well as the use of regional
or local anesthetics.
5. Administer balanced isotonic crystalloid ﬂuids when using inhalant
anesthetics:
i. 5 mL/kg/hr for dogs
ii. 3 –5 mL/kg/hr for cats
6. If hypotension persists despite adjusting vaporizer settings and pro-
viding crystalloid ﬂuids, then consider sympathomimetic drug ther-
apy with inotropes or vasopressors or colloid ﬂuid therapy.
7. If hypotension is due to severe or ongoing hemorrhage, then trans-
fusion of whole blood or packed red blood cells is necessary to
maintain both blood volume and appropriate red blood cell mass todeliver oxygen to tissues.
8. Keep in mind that not all cases of hypotension can be corrected
with ﬂuid administration, particularly in pediatric patients and
those with cardiac disease, sepsis, etc. (see Section 5, CardiorenalDisorders, Fluid Therapy in Ill Patients).
9. Remember that both hypovolemia and hypervolemia are detrimen-
tal to anesthetized patients.
Monitoring
1. Monitor the duration of anesthesia and total volume of adminis-
tered ﬂuids closely. If ﬂuid rates surpass 20 mL/kg within a single
anesthetic episode, reevaluate both ﬂuid administration rates and
the intravascular volume status of the patient. Typically, mosthealthy animals would not require a maintenance rate of 5 mL/
kg/hr for extended periods, unless signi ﬁcant blood loss occurs.
To determine the total ﬂuid administration during a single
anesthetic event, calculate the daily maintenance rate volume
(Table 9).
2. Monitor anesthetized patients carefully to detect any indications of
excessive ﬂuid administration. Signs of ﬂuid overload include (see
Table 5 for additional clinical and diagnostic signs):
a. Gallop sound or new murmur (especially in cats)
b. Edematous tissues and chemosis
c. Swelling of paws
d. Clear nasal discharge (nasal edema)
e. Pulmonary crackles
f. Low oxygen saturation (SpO
2)
g. No alteration in blood pressure along with other clinical signs
(i.e., patients remain nonhypertensive)
h. Pleural effusion, ascites
3. Stop ﬂuid administration (or use a minimal volume to maintain
catheter patency) if patients have signs of excessive ﬂuid adminis-
tration. Furosemide (1 –2 mg/kg IV) may be needed if patients have
signs of pulmonary edema (i.e., audible pulmonary crackles, imag-ing evidence of pulmonary edema, or low SpO
2) or pleural
effusion.
4. For anesthetized patients subjected to positive-pressure mechanical
ventilation, consider the use of a pulse pressure variability moni-tor
22,23or plethysmographic variability index from advanced pulse
oximetry to assess ﬂuid responsiveness.24,25The monitor is used in
a similar fashion to a pulse oximeter and helps evaluate whethercardiac output increases with volume expansion.
5. Return routine surgical patients to normal eating and drinking as
soon as possible after anesthesia.Start crystalloid 
ﬂuid therapy at  
3–5 mL/kg/hryes
Estimate percent dehydration 
and correct volume deﬁcit  
before anesthesianoIs the patient adequately hydrated despite fasting?
If hypotension persists:
Administer a crystalloid ﬂuid bolus: 
5 mL/kg over 10 minutes
If hypotension is re fractory to crys talloid ﬂu id admin istration:
If hypotension resolves:
Return to the initial 3–5 mL/kg/hr of crystalloid ﬂuid 
therapy, unless there is suspicion of ﬂuid overload.If the patient becomes hypotensive (mean arterial 
pressure <60 mm Hg) during the procedure:
Assess depth of anesthesia and reduce 
vaporizer setting if possible.
1. Administer sympathomimetic therapy if needed:
• Ephedrine 0.05–0.2 mg/kg IV bolus
• Norepinephrine CRI 0.05–1 µg/kg/min
• Dobutamine CRI 1–10 µg/kg/min
• Epinephrine CRI 0.05–1 µg/kg/min
2. Administer a colloid bolus: 2–5 mL/kg over 10 minutes.
3. In patients with severe or ongoing hemorrhage,
address with appropriate blood products such as wholeblood or packed red blood cells.Assess body temperature and provide 
active warming as needed.  
Administer additional analgesics, sedatives, and local 
anesthetics if possible to help reduce vaporizer setting.
FIGURE 9
Fluid Therapy During Anesthesia
CRI, continuous rate infusion
144 JAAHA | 60:4 Jul/Aug 2024Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Patients with Renal Disease
To effectively care for patients with renal disease (speci ﬁcally, those in
International Renal Interest Society stage 3 or 4), it is crucial to correctdehydration before anesthesia, optimize cardiac output by using anappropriate anesthetic protocol that supports cardiovascular function(avoid dexmedetomidine if other alternatives are available), and closelymonitor and manage blood pressure. Attempting to rectify hypoten-
sion by using excessive ﬂuid infusion rates should be avoided.
Section 5: Fluid Therapy in Ill Patients
Top Three Takeaways
1. Do not forget about enteral routes of ﬂuid delivery, including naso-
gastric, nasoesophageal, or esophageal, when treating sick patients.If tolerated by the patient, water can be mixed with food or admin-istered separately.
2. Do not withhold ﬂuids in patients who are dehydrated or hypovole-
mic because of concurrent anemia. Monitor them closely to deter-mine whether a transfusion is also indicated.
3. Mitigate electrolyte derangements carefully. Never administer a bolus
ofﬂuids supplemented with potassium chloride (KCl). Thoroughly
mix the ﬂuids to ensure even dispersion of the KCl before administra-
tion. Intentionally manage sodium derangements to avoid potential
life-threatening ﬂuid shifts in the brain that can occur with rapid reso-
lution of chronic ( .24–48 hr) sodium alterations.
Overview
Fluid therapy in sick patients requires a cautious, balanced approach
and the ability to predict problems before they occur. The veterinary
team faces complex challenges in ﬂuid therapy when treating patients
who present with conditions such as gastrointestinal, renal, or car-
diac disease, anemia, electrolyte imbalances, traumatic brain injury
(TBI), hypovolemic or vasodilatory shock, edema, thermoregulation
disorders, and hypoglycemia.
Nutritional Therapy as a Prompt for Enteral
Fluid Therapy
Nutrition is one of the most neglected patient requirements during hos-
pitalization.26A f t e r7 2h ro fa n o r e x i a ,ap a t i e n t ’sm e t a b o l i s ms h i f t st o
alternate energy sources, such as ketones and fatty acids, instead of gly-
cogen and glucose.27Nasoesophageal, nasogastric, or esophageal feeding
tubes facilitate caloric intake,28and water can be mixed with food or
administered separately.29Use a canned diet to increase water intake.
The stomach ’sc a p a c i t yi s5 –10 mL/kg30at the time of starting
enteral nutrition, and no consensus on canine and feline gastric emp-
tying times exists (although prolonged emptying times have been
reported).31Use conservative calculations of ﬂuid and food require-
ments for enteral nutrition and adjust based on a patient ’s clinical
signs of nausea, regurgitation, and vomiting.
Determine enteral water requirements based on daily maintenance
rates and divide this amount between IV and enteral supplementation.32
It is important to continue to provide free access to water. Given thatenteral nutrition rates typically start at one-third the resting energy
requirement
33to avoid refeeding syndrome, enteral water administra-
tion may also aid in allowing the stomach capacity to accommodate
increased volumes of subsequent enteral nutrition feedings.Box 4: Special Fluid Therapy Needs During
Anesthesia
1.Hypoglycemia
/H17034Add dextrose for pediatric toy dog breeds OR in
response to hypoglycemia in dogs or cats.
Add 50 mL 50% dextrose to 1 L fluid bag to create a2.5% dextrose solution.
2.Acute surgical blood loss
/H17034Increase fluid rate (up to 10 mL/kg/hr) while surgically
correcting the issue (e.g., dropped pedicle).
/H17034Consider that it takes three times as much crystalloidfluid volume to replace one volume of blood lost.
/H17034If blood products are unavailable, and the patient ’sp e r f u -
sion is compromised, consider a colloid to aid perfusion.
3.Hypoproteinemia
/H17034Use canine albumin when total protein is ,2.0 g/dL (a
dose of 450 mg/kg canine albumin will increase theserum albumin by 0.5 g/dL). Start at a rate of 0.5 to 1mL/kg for 30 min and increase the rate if no adverseeffects are noted. Deliver over 3 –4 hr. For more infor-
mation, see Mazzaferro EM, Edwards T. Update onalbumin therapy in critical illness. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 2020;50(6):1289 –305.
/H17034Use a colloid with a crystalloid when total protein is ,4.0
g/dL (hetastarch 1 –5 mL/kg/hr in the anesthetized patient).
/H17034Use fresh frozen or frozen plasma when available.
Consider that it takes /C2420–25 mL/kg to raise the
albumin by 0.5 g/dL, and for large-breed dogs, thiscould be cost prohibitive. For specific doses, see BeerKS, Silverstein DC. Controversies in the use of freshfrozen plasma in critically ill small animal patients. J
Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2015;25(1):101 –6.Use of synthetic colloids in patients is currently
controversial because of safety and efficacy considerations
and lack of evidence-based consensus.
For more information on colloids, see Section 7,
Questions and Controversies in Fluid Therapy.Veterinary Practice Guidelines
JAAHA.ORG 145Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Anemia
Do not withhold ﬂuids in anemic patients. If an anemic patient is
also dehydrated or hypovolemic, provide ﬂuid therapy while recog-
nizing that patients with a low hematocrit may require blood pro-
ducts. In healthy patients, ﬂuid resuscitation has not been shown to
decrease hemoglobin concentrations.34Fluid therapy may result in a
beneﬁcial increase in microvascular ﬂow and perfusion with an overall
increase in oxygen delivery in patients with hypovolemic or distribu-tive shock. However, ﬂu i da d m i n i s t r a t i o ni nn o n –ﬂuid responders or
ﬂuid-overloaded patients can lead to a relative, but not absolute,
r e d u c t i o ni nh e m o g l o b i nc o n c e n t r a t i o n( “dilutional anemia ”), which
can cause a paradoxical decrease in oxygen delivery.
Carefully monitor anemic patients and thoroughly assess them
for shock, hypovolemia, dehydration, and need for maintenance ﬂuids.
These needs should be addressed through an appropriate ﬂuid pre-
scription. These patients may become transfusion dependent when
appropriately resuscitated or rehydrated. Transfusion triggers (e.g.,
heart rate, mucus membrane color, capillary re ﬁll time, respiratory rate
and effort, pulse quality, blood pressure, mentation, and attitude)
should be considered in conjunction with laboratory test results (e.g.,
packed red blood cell count and trends, hematocrit, hemoglobin levels,and blood lactate) to determine the need for a blood transfusion.
35,36
Azotemia
Azotemic patients have varying ﬂuid requirements that depend on fac-
tors such as their hydration status (including both dehydration and
ﬂuid overload), urine production levels, acute versus chronic onset,
acid-base and electrolyte status, the underlying cause of the azotemia,
and the extent of its severity.37These patients present special monitor-
ing challenges as they might experience xerostomia (dry mouth) sec-ondary to uremia,
38prolonged skin tenting due to reduced skin elastic-
ity associated with aging, concentrated retained urine, and inaccurate
relative creatinine levels due to decreased muscle mass.39Additionally,
there may be a lack of a baseline creatinine concentration or previous
body weight for comparison. Anecdotal techniques to assess dehydra-
tion include evaluating skin turgor over the rib cage, analyzing weighttrends and sodium concentrations, ﬂuid and food intake history, and
identifying signs of ﬂuid overload (see Section 6, Fluid Overload).
In cases in which patients are not hypotensive, the ﬂuid prescription
should provide a gradual correction of dehydration, whereas patientswith signi ﬁcant renal compromise should receive ﬂuids at slower rates.
Fluid therapy is not the mainstay of treating azotemic patients. Rather, it
is to support the kidneys by correcting treatable abnormalities associatedwith renal compromise so that the kidneys can heal themselves. Key
aspects entail reducing sodium and chloride load,
40managing blood
pressure, treating anemia41,42and infections, ensuring adequate short-
term nutrition (without protein restriction), and addressing primaryconditions that may trigger secondary AKI (e.g., acute pancreatitis)43or
acute-on-chronic kidney disease presentations. Fluid requirements for
patients with chronic kidney disease vary depending on the severity of
polyuria and polydipsia along with other clinical signs.44
Heart Disease
The most important consideration for ﬂuid therapy in patients with
cardiac disease is to prevent the onset of heart failure.45For cardiac
patients, therapeutic goals include increasing myocardial contractil-
ity, decreasing preload and afterload, counteracting the pathological
effects of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, improving vaso-dilation, and optimizing diastolic ﬁlling.
46,47
Cardiac patients may experience dehydration, relative hypovolemia,
electrolyte disturbances, moderate to severe azotemia, and metabolic
imbalances caused by heart failure and medications. Fluid therapy is fre-
quently avoided in cardiac patients owing to its potential to increase
preload in left-sided heart failure, increase afterload, and decrease
venous return in right-sided heart failure (especially in the presence
of increased intra-abdominal pressure from ascites).48–50Whenever
possible, ﬂu i di n t a k es h o u l db ep r o v i d e de n t e r a l l y ,s u c ha st h r o u g h
water and a canned diet. When ﬂuid therapy is necessary, administer
0.45% NaCl with 2.5% dextrose IV at half to daily maintenance rates
(See Table 9 for maintenance rates), depending on the patient ’s needs
and tolerance of supplemental ﬂuids.51Hypotension in patients with
congestive heart failure should be addressed by considering positiveinotropes.
Cardiorenal Disorders
The cardiorenal axis is an important consideration51because a path-
ological state in either the cardiovascular or renal system has the
potential to affect the other.52Renal disease treatment focuses on
maintaining hydration with enteral water, so less con ﬂict exists with
heart disease treatment; however, the administration of additional
ﬂuid therapy presents challenges. Cardiac medications may poten-
tially lead to mild azotemia through diuresis (e.g., furosemide)53and
decreased glomerular ﬁltration rate (GFR) (e.g., enalapril and telmi-
sartan).54It is crucial to consistently monitor for ﬂuid overload,
severe progressive azotemia, worsening of heart failure, changes in
blood pressure, and other relevant indicators to ensure that these
patients do not decline as a result of ﬂuid therapy. Even with the best
possible therapy, this can be a signi ﬁcant challenge.
Patients with Hypovolemia and Edema
Alterations in Starling ’sf o r c e s( h y d r o s t a t i ca n do n c o t i cp r e s s u r e )
(Figure 2) may contribute to the development of edema in veterinary
patients. Common causes of edema include vasculitis, hypoalbumi-
nemia, heart failure, kidney failure, lymphatic obstruction, and
146 JAAHA | 60:4 Jul/Aug 2024Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 17 ---
thrombosis.55Fluid therapy in hypovolemic, edematous patients pre-
sents a therapeutic challenge, and the underlying cause of the edema
must be taken into consideration in order to safely provide ﬂuids.
When edema results from hypoalbuminemia, intravascular vol-
ume resuscitation and restoration are paramount, and colloids can
be used to raise the colloid oncotic pressure. This can be accom-
plished with rapid administration of synthetic colloids (e.g., hetas-tarch and tetrastarch [although their use is controversial; see Sec-
tion 7, Questions and Controversies in Fluid Therapy]), canine-
speciﬁc albumin (CSA) in dogs, human serum albumin in dogs or
cats (which may predispose patients to allergic reactions or anaphy-
laxis), and veterinary plasma products (e.g., fresh frozen plasma, fro-
zen plasma, and cryoprecipitate-poor plasma [CPP]).
Although plasma products are less prone to induce allergic reactions,
large plasma volumes are needed to signi ﬁcantly change albumin concen-
trations ( /C2422 mL/kg plasma to increase serum albumin by 0.5 g/dL),
which results in higher costs of care and risk of volume overload. In onestudy, there was no difference in mean serum albumin concentrations
before and after transfusion with fresh frozen plasma (median dose of
15–18 mL/kg).
56Thus, although a plasma bolus may be used to treat hypo-
volemia in edematous patients, its use for this purpose is controversial.57
A continuous rate infusion (CRI) of canine CPP, administered
at a rate of 1.1 –2.2 mL/kg/hr, has been described in a case report for
treating hypoalbuminemia.58This may be a more reasonable
approach to treating hypoalbuminemia because CPP has a higher
albumin concentration than other plasma products,59although CPP
is less widely available.58
CSA appears to be a relatively safe alternative to synthetic col-
loids and increases albumin concentrations more ef ﬁciently than
plasma products.60,61In one study, CSA administration improved
the shock index in hypovolemic canine patients.61In another study,
CSA increased arterial blood pressure within 2 hr of administration
in dogs with septic peritonitis.60
Giving colloids to patients with edema due to vasculitis may be
controversial, as colloids may leak into the interstitial space and worsen
interstitial edema. In these patients, judicious colloid use combined with
lower volumes of crystalloids is recommended. Overall, regardless of thecause of edema, use crystalloids judiciously in all affected patients.
Low-dose diuretics may be considered in patients with edema,
but only in normotensive, normovolemic patients.
Traumatic Brain Injury
The primary ﬂuid therapy goal in treating veterinary patients who have
TBI is optimizing cerebral perfusion pressure and mean arterial blood
pressure. The Brain Trauma Foundation guidelines for human patients
recommend maintaining systolic arterial blood pressure between 100and 110 mm Hg to reduce mortality and improve outcomes.
62Studies that evaluate the ideal ﬂuid choice for veterinary patients
with TBI are limited. However, information based on human clinical
studies and swine and rodent research studies supports the use of
packed red blood cells, plasma, and platelets over crystalloid ﬂuids
because of better outcomes in patients with ongoing hemorrhage.63,64
Osmotherapy —using osmotic agents (e.g., hypertonic saline or
mannitol) to reduce intracranial content volume —is common in
treating patients who have TBI (Figure 10). Various studies and a
meta-analysis in human medicine suggest that both mannitol and
hypertonic saline effectively lower intracranial pressure, but there is
no evidence to recommend one over the other.65–67Hypertonic
saline may have the advantage of avoiding diuresis, increasing car-diac preload, and positively impacting cerebral perfusion.
65In dogs
and cats, mannitol is usually dosed at 0.5 –1 g/kg IV given over 15
min with a micro ﬁlter, whereas hypertonic saline (NaCl 7.2%) is
dosed at 1 –6 mL/kg IV given over 15 min. Continuous infusion of
hypertonic saline has been described in human patients, but it is not
thought to signi ﬁcantly affect outcome.68
Electrolyte Disturbances
Electrolyte imbalances are common in ill patients. Proper ﬂuid selec-
tion and, if necessary, supplementation of electrolytes aid in restoring
balance.
Hypokalemia
Dogs and cats in poor health often experience hypokalemia. This
may be due to increased urinary or gastrointestinal loss, prolonged
anorexia, alkalemia, an aldosterone-secreting tumor, or treatment
with potassium-poor replacement ﬂuids.69Clinical signs of hypokale-
mia may include weakness, cardiac arrhythmias, and respiratory
muscle impairment.70
Treat hypokalemia with KCl supplementation in IV ﬂuids
(Table 11). Determine the KCl dosage based on the patient ’ss e r u m
potassium concentration. For IV KCl administration, calculate the
total mEq/kg/hr to be administered, ensuring that the supplementa-
tion rate does not exceed 0.5 mEq/kg/hr, as rapid administration can
be fatal.70Never bolus ﬂuids supplemented with KCl. Before admin-
istration, invert the bag and thoroughly mix the ﬂuids to ensure uni-
form dispersion of the KCl.71Exercise caution with highly supple-
mented ﬂuids or KCl CRIs to prevent inadvertent bolus or over
administration to the patient. Use appropriate ﬂuid pump settings or
syringe pumps as safeguards and educate staff on the risks of over
administration. In cases of persistent hypokalemia even after KCl
supplementation, check magnesium levels to determine whether
magnesium supplementation is needed.72Veterinary Practice Guidelines
JAAHA.ORG 147Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Sodium imbalances
Sodium concentration disturbances are common. These cases should be
managed with deliberate care to prevent potentially life-threatening ﬂuid
shifts in the brain that may occur after rapid correction, faster than0.5 mEq/kg/hr, of chronic (greater than 24 –48 hr) sodium alterations.
Hyponatremia. Patients with acute euvolemic hyponatremia (e.g.,
primary polydipsia) may present with neurologic signs and should be
treated with 2 –6m L / k go f3 –7.5% hypertonic saline over 10 –15
min.
73–75In symptomatic chronic hyponatremia, a similar approach
using hypertonic saline should be taken. Once neurological clinical signs
resolve, treatment should continue similarly to that in asymptomaticchronic hyponatremia patients. In asymptomatic chronic hyponatremiapatients, isotonic crystalloids (Table 12C) that have a sodium content
/C2410 mEq/L higher than the patient ’s sodium should be selected. A rate
of correction should be calculated that does not exceed 0.5 mEq/L/hr ora maximum sodium increase of 10 –12 mEq/L/day to prevent osmotic
demyelination syndrome (Tables 12A, 12D).
76
Patients with hypovolemic hyponatremia should be resuscitated
with a crystalloid that contains a similar sodium content to the patient ’s
current sodium concentration.74,75Depending on the severity of the
hyponatremia, commercial isotonic crystalloids may not be availablewith similar sodium contents. In these cases, custom ﬂuids can be tai-
lored by adding sterile water to an isotonic crystalloid to achieve the
desired sodium content. These ﬂuids should be used exclusively for
bolus administration until hypovolemia is resolved. Hypotonic ﬂuids
should not be used in patients with hyponatremia.
75
Hypernatremia. The strategies to treat hypernatremia are similar
to those taken with hyponatremia regarding the considerations of chro-nicity and rate of correction of 0.5 mEq/L/hr. Sodium concentrationdrops that are faster than this rate in patients with chronic hypernatre-
mia may cause abrupt ﬂuid shifts that lead to cerebral edema.
77How-
ever, patients with acute hypernatremia can undergo rapid sodium con-centration correction without the risk of cerebral edema, by usinghypotonic IV ﬂuids. Calculate the free water de ﬁcit and administer
ﬂuids at an appropriate rate while monitoring sodium concentrations
frequently to allow for a safe resolution of hypernatremia (Table 13A).
Hypochloremia. Relative shifts in chloride usually occur with shifts
in sodium. To assess true chloride disturbances in the face of sodiumderangements, chloride should be corrected using the following equation:
Corrected Cl 5ðnormal Na =measured Na Þ3measured Cl
In patients with true hypochloremia that have developed metabolic
alkalosis, 0.9% NaCl has historically been the ﬂuid of choice because
of its high chloride concentration (154 mEq/L). Recently, concerns
have been raised about the effect of 0.9% NaCl on kidney function
owing to the potential risk of causing hyperchloremia, which hasbeen shown to cause renal vasoconstriction and reduced renal bloodno yesClinical signs of TBI
Analgesia
SAP < 90 mm Hg?
SAP < 90 mm Hg?
Vasopressors Osmotherapy***Deteriorating 
• Close neurologic
monitoring
• Maintain normovolemia
and hydrationsigns?**Fluid resuscitation*
Immediate 
hemorrhage control
yesno
yesno
FIGURE 10
Approach to Fluid Therapy for Dogs and Cats with Traumatic Brain Injury
/C3Fluid resuscitation techniques can be any one of the following
or a combination thereof: (1) 10 –20 mL/kg crystalloids (Plasma
Lyte or Normosol-R) IV rapid infusion up to 60 –90 mL/kg. (2)
5–10 mL/kg 6% HES (tetrastarch) IV rapid infusion up to
40–50 mL/kg. (3) 5 –10 mL/kg plasma rapid infusion IV up to
20–30 mL/kg. (4) 3 –4 mL/kg 7% HTS IV over 10 –15 min. (5)
Whole blood or pRBC, if indicated.
/C3/C3Altered level of consciousness with or without bilateral or uni-
lateral miotic pupils; unresponsive mid range pupil(s) or mydri-asis; loss of the oculocephalic re ﬂex; bradycardia with hyperten-
sion (Cushing re ﬂex); posturing (opisthotonus, decerebellate,
decerebrate); alteration of the respiratory pattern.
/C3/C3/C31 g/kg mannitol IV up to 3 doses q60–90 min OR 3 –4 mL/kg
7% HTS IV.
dReprinted with permission from Pigott A, Rudloff E. Traumatic
brain injury –a review of intravenous ﬂuid therapy. Front Vet Sci .
2021;8:643800.
148 JAAHA | 60:4 Jul/Aug 2024Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 19 ---
TABLE 11
Guidelines for Potassium Supplementation in Fluids
TABLE 12A
Approach to Fluid Therapy in Hyponatremic Patients
1. Is hyponatremia acute or chronic?
ACUTE CHRONIC
A. Raise the serum sodium concentration as quickly as possible. 
B. Administer isotonic crystalloids with a sodium 
concentration greater than the patient’s serum sodium 
concentration.
C. Recheck serum sodium concentrations 2–4 hr after 
starting therapy to assess therapeutic response, then 
recheck them every 6–8 hr afterward.A. It takes 24–48 hr for the brain to compensate for 
hyponatremia.
B. Correct chronic hyponatremia slowly to prevent osmotic 
demyelination syndrome.
C. Increase the serum sodium concentration by no more 
than 0.5 mEq/L/hr for a maximum total correction of 10–12 mEq/L/day.
2. Does the patient have clinical signs of hyponatremia?
A. Clinical signs include vomiting, disorientation, and seizures secondary to cerebral edema. B. If symptomatic, treat with 3, 5, or 7.5% hypertonic saline at a recommended dose of 2–6 mL/kg given over 10–15 min.
1
C. In human patients, serum sodium concentration increases of 4–6 mEq/L are often enough to alleviate clinical signs.1
3. Is the patient hypovolemic?
A. 
solution capable of expanding the intravascular space (Table 12c).1
B. Repeat as needed until perfusion parameters are restored. 
Maintenance or hypotonic ﬂuids (0.45% NaCl, 5% dextrose in water) have low sodium concentrations and are not indicated 
to treat hypovolemia.1
4. Does the patient have chronic hyponatremia without neurologic signs?
A. Slowly correct the sodium concentration at a maximum rate of 0.5 mEq/L/hr or 10-12 mEq/L/day.
B. Treat asymptomatic patients with mild water restriction and monitor their serum sodium concentrations.
C. Use the Adrogue-Madias formula below to calculate the expected change in sodium concentration when 1 L of a speciﬁc 
ﬂuid type is administered (see Table 12c).2
Expected change in serum sodium concentration with 1 L of ﬂuid =
Fluid sodium concentration − serum sodium concentration / (total body water + 1)
Where total body water = body weight in kg × 0.6
1. Adrogue HJ, Tucker BM, Madias NE. Diagnosis and management of hyponatremia: a review. JAMA. 2022;328(3):280-91.
2. Heinz J, Cook A. Evaluation and management of the hyponatremia patient. Today ’sV e t e r i n a r yP r a c t i c e . 2022;12(2). February 10, 2022. Available at https://
todaysveterinarypractice.com/internal-medicine/evaluation-and-management-of-the-hyponatremic-patient/ . Accessed January 4, 2024.Veterinary Practice Guidelines
JAAHA.ORG 149Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 20 ---
TABLE 12D
Calculating Expected Changes in Sodium Concentration
1. Heinz J, Cook A. Evaluation and management of the hyponatremia patient. Today ’sV e t e r i n a r yP r a c t i c e . 2022;12(2). February 10, 2022 Available at https://
todaysveterinarypractice.com/internal-medicine/evaluation-and-management-of-the-hyponatremic-patient/ . Accessed January 4, 2024.TABLE 12B
Common Causes of Acute and Chronic Hyponatremia in Dogs and
CatsTABLE 12C
Sodium Concentration of Isotonic Crystalloids
/C3Evidence in human patients suggests that 0.9% NaCl may be detrimental to kidney
health.1,2
1. Ostermann M, Randolph AG. Resuscitation ﬂuid composition and acute kidney
injury in critical illness. New England Journal of Medicine. 2022;386(9):888-889.
2. Sigmon J, May CC, Bryant A, Humanez J, Singh V. Assessment of acute kidneyinjury in neurologically injured patients receiving hypertonic sodium chloride: doeschloride load matter? Annals of Pharmacotherapy . 2020;54(6):541-546.
150 JAAHA | 60:4 Jul/Aug 2024Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 21 ---
TABLE 13A
Approach to Fluid Therapy in Hypernatremic Patients
1. Is hypernatremia acute or chronic?
ACUTE CHRONIC
• Use hypotonic intravenous ﬂuids to correct. 
• Can undergo rapid sodium concentration correction 
without the risk of cerebral edema.
• Calculate the free water deﬁcit and administer at an 
appropriate rate (see #3 below). 
• Monitor sodium concentrations every 4-6 hours. • It takes 24–48 hours for the brain to compensate for 
hypernatremia. 
• Correct chronic hypernatremia slowly to prevent 
cerebral edema. 
• Decrease serum sodium concentration by no more than 
0.5 mEq/L/hr for a maximum total correction of 10–12 mEq/L/day (see #3 below). 
2. Is the patient hypovolemic?
• 
• Maintenance or hypotonic ﬂuids (0.45% NaCl, 5% dextrose in water) have low sodium concentrations and are not indicated 
to treat hypovolemia. 
• Fluids listed in Table 12c are suitable options to treat hypovolemia (5-10 mL/kg [cat] and 15-20 mL/kg [dog] given over 
15–30 minutes and repeated as needed) until perfusion parameters are restored.
3. Calculations for chronic and acute hypernatremia
Estimate the amount of water lost (free water deﬁcit).Administer ﬂuids that are relatively dilute compared with plasma. 
Free Water Deﬁcit (FWD) in Liters (L) = [(Patient Na/Desired 
Na) -1]  (0.6  Weight [kg])Modify the calculation of the free water deﬁcit according 
to whether hypernatremia is acute or chronic, using the 
subsequent formulas:
FWD replacement time (hr) for acute hypernatremia = 
Patient Na − Target Na
1 
FWD replacement time (hr) for chronic hypernatremia = 
(Patient Na − Target Na) × 21  
In general, replace the free water deﬁcit by administering 
5% dextrose in water.
4. Is the patient dehydrated?
• 
• Correct dehydration over 12–24 hours to minimize shifts in sodium.1 
• Recheck sodium concentrations every 4–6 hours to prevent dramatic changes. 
• Limit drinking water until the patient’s sodium is close to the target concentration.
1. Heinz J, Cook A. Evaluation and management of the hyponatremia patient. Today ’sV e t e r i n a r yP r a c t i c e. 2022;12(2). February 10, 2022. https://todaysveterinarypractice.
com/internal-medicine/evaluation-and-management-of-the-hyponatremic-patient/ . Accessed January 4, 2024.
TABLE 13B
Common Causes of Acute and Chronic Hypernatremia in Dogs and CatsVeterinary Practice Guidelines
JAAHA.ORG 151Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 22 ---
ﬂow.78,79To safely use 0.9% NaCl in hypochloremic renal patients,
recheck chloride concentrations frequently, and once chloride levelshave been corrected, use a buffered isotonic crystalloid (e.g., lactatedRinger ’s solution or Plasma-Lyte) instead.
Hypocalcemia. Use calcium gluconate to treat patients with clin-
ical signs of hypocalcemia (e.g., weakness, tachycardia, and tremors).
Lactated Ringer ’s solution contains a very small amount of calcium,
and it will not resolve hypocalcemia.
Hypercalcemia. Historically, 0.9% NaCl has been recommended
for calciuresis in hypercalcemic patients, but its effects are generallymild. Because of concerns regarding kidney injury with 0.9% NaCl,consider using a balanced isotonic crystalloid instead in patients atrisk of or with current kidney disease.
Vasodilatory States
Patients may exhibit signs of poor perfusion or shock (such as tachy-
cardia, hypotension, weak peripheral pulses, or elevated lactate
concentrations) due to generalized vasodilation, also referred to as
vasodilatory or maldistributive shock. In vasodilatory shock, there isexcessive dilation of blood vessels, leading to a signi ﬁcant decrease in
blood pressure and inadequate perfusion of vital organs.
80,81Com-
mon clinical conditions that can lead to vasodilation include acute
pancreatitis, anaphylaxis, sepsis, trauma, and parvoviral enteritis.
Historically, vasodilatory shock treatment has revolved around rapid
administration of ﬂuids, the administration of broad-spectrum anti-
biotics, establishing source control, and using pharmacologic inter-
ventions to maintain adequate mean arterial blood pressure.80,82
Because distinguishing between hypovolemic and vasodilatory
shock based solely on physical examination ﬁndings is challenging,
and because patients with vasodilatory shock may have some degree
of hypovolemia, a ﬂuid challenge is a reasonable treatment approach
in these situations. Poor or limited response to ﬂuid boluses may
suggest vasodilation. In cases in which there is a poor response toﬂuid therapy, vasopressor therapy should be considered.
82In patients
with suspected anaphylaxis, it is crucial to administer epinephrine, a
vasopressor, as soon as possible.83
Thermoregulation Disturbances
Hypothermia . Whenever possible, use warm ﬂuids for resuscitation
or rehydration in hypothermic patients for active core rewarming.
The task force believes warm ﬂuids will at least mitigate worsening
hypothermia compared with the administration of room temperature
ﬂuids. It has been recommended to warm IV ﬂuids to 40 –42/C14C
(104 –107.6/C14F).84Fluids can be warmed using numerous methods,
including immersion of IV tubing in warm water, microwaving of
theﬂuid bag, in-line ﬂuid warmers, and prewarming of ﬂuids in a
convection oven.85However, the effect of warm ﬂuids in producing
an increase in body temperature is controversial.86–88H y p o t h e r m i ai sc o m m o n l yo b s e r v e di nc a t si ns h o c k .A g g r e s s i v e
ﬂuid resuscitation with the aim of restoring normal blood pressure in
hypotensive, hypothermic cats will often lead to interstitial ﬂuid overload,
pulmonary edema, and pleural effusion. Administering conservative ﬂuid
volumes (e.g., 5 mL/kg IV boluses at a time) concurrent with activerewarming is an essential part of shock resuscitation therapy in cats.
89
Hyperthermia . Fluid therapy is important in treating hyperther-
mia in dogs and cats. Administering room temperature ﬂuids may
assist with cooling and maximize volume expansion.90
Hypoglycemia
Administer dextrose to patients exhibiting clinical signs related to
hypoglycemia, such as lethargy, weakness, ataxia, or seizures. For abolus, use 0.5 –1m L / k g( 0 . 2 5 –0.5 g/kg) of 50% dextrose, which
should be diluted at a ratio of 1:2 –1:4 and administered over 2 –5
min.
91In most cases, the bolus should be followed by a CRI of
1.25–5% dextrose (Table 14) until the patient can maintain normo-
glycemia. The concentration of dextrose instilled in ﬂuids depends
on the severity of the patient ’s hypoglycemia and ﬂuid administra-
tion rate. It is advisable to administer dextrose concentrationsexceeding 5% through a central line to avoid phlebitis.
Note that in patients with insulinoma, dextrose administration
may perpetuate hypoglycemia. Therefore, dextrose should only be
given when patients present with clinical indications of hypoglyce-
mia, and the lowest effective concentration should be used to preventthe manifestation of clinical signs.
92
Section 6: Fluid Overload
Top Three Takeaways
1. First, do no harm. Fluid overload is a potentially life-threatening
complication for which no universally effective therapy exists.
2. Excessive iatrogenic ﬂuid administration is the most common cause
ofﬂuid overload. Prevention and vigilant monitoring are crucial to
mitigate the potential risks associated with ﬂuid therapy.
3. Patients with impaired renal function are at an increased risk of
ﬂuid overload because of their kidneys ’inability to increase urine
output and effectively excrete excess ﬂuid.TABLE 14
How to Formulate Dextrose-Containing Fluids
/C3Remove an equivalent amount of the isotonic crystalloid ﬂuid from the bag before
adding dextrose.
152 JAAHA | 60:4 Jul/Aug 2024Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 23 ---
Overview
Fluid overload, or ﬂuid intolerance, is a clinical spectrum that spans
from hypervolemia to life-threatening edema and cavitary effusions.
The guidelines task force has proposed that ﬂuid intolerance may be
the more appropriate term for this condition, as this term more
accurately describes how the amount of ﬂuid needed to overload a
patient is dependent on their tolerance for a given amount of ﬂuids.
“Fluid intolerance ”also encompasses both iatrogenic overload and
overload due to underlying comorbidities. However, given that “ﬂuid
overload ”is still widely used and recognized within the veterinary
medical profession, it will be the primary term used in these guide-
lines to refer to this condition.
All patients receiving ﬂuid therapy are susceptible to ﬂuid
intolerance/ ﬂuid overload; however, excessive administration is the
most common cause of ﬂuid overload . Hypervolemia might be more
common than perceived, as early signs of increased body weight and
positive ﬂuid balance are dif ﬁcult to assess. Typically, hypervolemia
is recognized when advanced signs such as edema and effusionsoccur.
93It is important to understand the harms of ﬂuid overload
and the need to prevent this complication, given the limited effec-
tiveness of treatments.
Recognizing and Managing Fluid Overload
As discussed earlier, ﬂuid movement is in ﬂuenced by hydrostatic pres-
s u r e ,o n c o t i cp r e s s u r e ,a n dv a s c u l a rp e r m e a b i l i t y .P a t i e n t sw h or e c e i v e
excess ﬂuids during resuscitation, maintenance, or anesthesia ﬁrst
develop hypervolemia, which causes an increase in hydrostatic pres-
sure. A decrease in oncotic pressure can occur with dilution of plasma
proteins associated with excessive ﬂuid administration or protein-
losing disease. Hypervolemia, as well as in ﬂammation and injury, can
damage the glycocalyx and increase vascular permeability. Together,
these changes in ﬂuid dynamics promote movement of ﬂuid out of
vessels into the interstitial space. As the interstitial space expands, it
becomes more compliant, accommodating larger quantities of intersti-
tialﬂuid, further exacerbating the problem of ﬂuid overload.
Changes in ﬂuid dynamics favoring accumulation of interstitial
ﬂu i da r eo f t e ns e e ni nc o m b i n a t i o nw i t ht h eb o d y ’s physiological
response to stress. Hypovolemia, illness, and injury lead to water andsodium retention and increased thirst. This response exacerbates the
risk of ﬂu i do v e r l o a da sr e s u s c i t a t i o n ﬂuids are administered to criti-
cally ill patients when their bodies are primed to retain ﬂuid.
94
By the time clinical edema or effusions are noted, internal edema
will also be present that can negatively impact organ function (Fig-
ure 11).94Once edema has occurred, it is very dif ﬁcult to reverse even
with ultra ﬁltration. Thus, prevention and early recognition are keys to
minimizing the morbidity and mortality associated with ﬂuid overload.Although all patients receiving IV ﬂuids are at risk of ﬂuid overload,
those with impaired renal function, heart disease, or liver disease or thosereceiving large ﬂuid volumes are at highest risk (Box 5). Pets with oligo-
anuric renal failure are particularly susceptible to ﬂuid overload because
they are unable to excrete excess ﬂuid. Yet these patients often receive
aggressive ﬂuid therapy necessitating close monitoring for weight gain,
hypertension (in presence of AKI/CKD), or early signs of edema.
93,94,95
Box 5: Common Fluid Overload Case Scenarios
1.Continued IV fluid therapy in a feline patient with
renal disease . A cat is dehydrated, uremic, and anuric on
presentation. Although IV fluid administration improveshydration status, uremia persists. IV fluids are continuedwith the misguided goal of improving GFR. However, noeffective increase in GFR will occur no matter how muchfluid this patient receives.
2.IV fluid therapy in a patient anesthetized for a lengthy
procedure . A dog receives 10 mL/kg of fluids throughout
a 6 hr procedure and develops respiratory distress duringanesthetic recovery.
3.SC fluid therapy in a cat with occult or fulminant heart
disease . A cat presents for evaluation of vomiting associ-
ated with malaise of congestive heart failure and is givenSC fluids despite no evidence of dehydration.Brain edema
• Altered mental status
Lung edema
Myocardial 
edema• Pulmonary
edema
• Hypoxemia• Pleural effusion
• HypoventilationKidney edema
• Decreased
cardiac output
• ArrhythmiasHypervolemia
• Decreased renal
blood ﬂow
• Decreased GFR
Intestinal edema• Increased body weight
• Dilution of coagulation
factors, risk of bleeding
• Dilution of oncotic factors
Liver edema
• Ileus
• Decreased
absorption
• Increased gut
permeability
• Vomiting, diarrhea• Ascites• Decreased liver
blood ﬂow
• Altered glucose
metabolism
• Decreased drug
metabolism
Peripheral (tissue) edema
• Increased risk of infection• Impaired wound healing• Weakness
FIGURE 11
Impact of Fluid Overload on Organ FunctionVeterinary Practice Guidelines
JAAHA.ORG 153Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 24 ---
TABLE 15
Clinical, Radiographic, and Ultrasonographic Findings Associated with Fluid Overload
Clinical Findings Radiographic Findings Ultrasonographic Findings
• Increased body weight (>10%)
• Tissue edema (intermandibular 
area, limbs, paws, dependent regions, chemosis)
• Serous nasal discharge• Serous discharge from 
endotracheal tube in 
anesthetized patients
• Increased respiratory rate or 
• Reduced SPO2
• Novel murmur, novel gallop 
sound
• Gastrointestinal signs (abdominal 
distention, vomiting, diarrhea, 
inappetence, anorexia)
• No change in blood pressure; 
hypertension rarely associated with ﬂuid overload except in AKI/CKD.
1,2• Body wall edema• 
• Pulmonary edema• Cardiomegaly• Enlarged pulmonary artery• Enlarged caudal vena cava
• Enlarged pulmonary vein
• Loss of serosal detail• Distended intestines• Subcutaneous edema
• 
• B-lines• Enlarged La:Ao• Enlarged caudal vena cava• Decreased caudal vena cava 
collapsibility index
• Ascites• Intestinal wall thickening• Ileus• Hyperechoic mesentery and 
pancreas
• Hepatic congestion• Gallbladder wall edema• Perirenal edema
AKI, acute kidney injury; Ao, aorta; CKD, chronic kidney disease; La, Left atrium; SpO2, oxygen saturation
1. Cole LP, Jepson R, Dawson C, Humm K. Hypertension, retinopathy, and acute kidney injury in dogs: A prospective study [published correction appears inJ Vet Intern Med .
2020 Nov;34(6):3168]. J Vet Intern Med . 2020;34(5):1940-1947.
2. Park S, Lee CJ, Lee M, et al. Differential effects of arterial stiffness and ﬂuid overload on blood pressure according to renal function in patients at risk for cardiovascular
disease. Hypertens Res . 2019;42:341 –353.
Box 6: Common Misconceptions That May Lead to Fluid Overload
Misconception: IV fluids increase GFR in normally hydrated patients.
Correction: IV fluid administration will not increase GFR in a patient that is hydrated and euvolemic.
Misconception: Hypertension can be used to diagnose hypervolemia.
Correction: Hypertension is rarely associated with hypervolemia or edema. Some patients with renal disease may develop hyper-
tension concomitant with hypervolemia.
Misconception: If a patient is hypotensive, keep giving fluid boluses until their blood pressure improves.
Correction: Some hypotensive patients will not respond to IV fluid therapy. If a patient is not responding to fluid therapy, discon-
tinue fluid boluses and correct any electrolyte or glucose disturbances and consider vasopressor treatment.
Misconception: Hemodialysis is always a backup option for treatment of fluid overload if diuretics do not work.
Correction: Hemodialysis has a very limited therapeutic role in treating edema because the movement of edema fluid into the vas-
cular space is limited.
154 JAAHA | 60:4 Jul/Aug 2024Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 25 ---
To reduce the risk of ﬂuid overload:
/C15Use a low-volume strategy for ﬂuid resuscitation.
/C15Tailor ongoing ﬂuid therapy to meet each patient ’s needs.
/C15Include all ﬂuids delivered as medications, infusions, ﬂushes, and
enteral feedings to improve the accuracy of ﬂuid balance calcula-
tions. Cats and small dogs with smaller blood volumes can quicklybecome ﬂuid overloaded if clinicians are not mindful of the volumes
administered.
/C15Limit the total ﬂuid volume delivered in anesthetized patients during
lengthy procedures. As a general rule, patients receiving anestheticﬂuids should receive no more than the daily recommended total of
20 mL/kg/24 hr.
94
/C15Consider enteral water supplementation.
To recognize hypervolemia sooner, weigh patients frequently
(every 6 –12 hr) to identify a 10% increase in body weight compared
with the initial baseline.93,94Regularly document all ﬂuid inputs and
outputs to help identify positive ﬂuid balance. Additional signs of
ﬂuid overload are summarized in Table 15.
Once edema has started, it can become life-threatening and be
very dif ﬁcult to resolve. See Box 6 for common misconceptions that
can lead to ﬂuid overload. There is no de ﬁnitive therapy. General
therapeutic approaches include sodium and water restriction, discon-
tinuing IV ﬂuids, administering diuretics, and increasing patient
mobility (Figure 12). The interventions and success of those inter-ventions are limited. Thus, the best approach is to avoid ﬂuid
overload.
93,94Section 7: Questions and Controversies in
Fluid Therapy
Top Three Takeaways
1. Fluids are drugs with complex interactions in the body and require
an understanding of how and when to prescribe them. Clinicians
must carefully consider hydration and volume status, electrolyte
and acid-base derangements, and underlying comorbidities whenprescribing ﬂuid therapy.
2. Questions concerning the safety of synthetic colloids, the ef ﬁcacy of
plasma to treat hypoalbuminemia, whether potassium-containingﬂuids are safe in treating hyperkalemic patients, and whether IV
ﬂuids are indicated during cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) are
answered here.
3. The RECOVER Advanced Life Support guidelines for veterinary
CPR advocate a careful approach to the ﬂuid prescription in
patients with cardiopulmonary arrest, owing to the possibility of
reducing oxygen delivery to myocardial and cerebral tissues in
patients without hypovolemia or distributive shock.
Overview
The scarcity of large-scale, blinded, prospective studies on ﬂuid
therapy in veterinary medicine gives rise to questions and contro-
versies regarding its application in practice. Clinical decisions often
must be extrapolated from the existing limited data, further contrib-
uting to the ongoing discussions and uncertainties surrounding
ﬂuid therapy.If patient is exhibiting: 
• Increased body weight
• Mild or localized peripheral edema
Active treatment requiredDiscontinuing IV ﬂuids and increasing  
patient mobility may be adequate Patient is overhydrated Patient has ﬂuid overload
• Discontinue ﬂuids
• Provide oxygen support
• Administer a diuretic• Increase patient mobility• Remove pleural ﬂuid via thoracentesis or ascites via abdominocentesis• Refer patient for hemodialysis• Consider discontinuing ACE inhibitors and ARBs to improve GFR• Respiratory distress
• Moderate to severe, multifocal peripheral edema• Renal, hepatic, or gastrointestinal dysfunction
FIGURE 12
Fluid Overload Therapy Algorithm
ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; ARBs, angiotensin receptor blockers; GFR, glomerular ﬁltration rateVeterinary Practice Guidelines
JAAHA.ORG 155Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 26 ---
Are Synthetic Colloids Safe?
Colloids rapidly expand the intravascular space and have a longer
duration of action than crystalloids. Their use has long been consid-
ered “volume-sparing ”as compared with the volume of crystalloids
required to match their effect. Synthetic colloids (e.g., hydroxyethylstarches [most common], gelatins, and dextrans) are more readily
available and less costly than natural colloid alternatives such as
blood products or species-speci ﬁc albumin. Despite their initial
attractiveness as resuscitation ﬂuids, the use of synthetic colloids in
critically ill small animal patients is currently controversial because
of safety and ef ﬁcacy concerns.
96–100Complications associated with
their use in human patients include the development of AKI and
coagulopathy. Colloids are dissolved in NaCl, which delivers a highchloride load to the distal tubule and accounts for some of the renal
effects seen in humans. There is limited evidence that these same
complications may occur in critically ill dogs and cats, although moststudies are retrospective evaluations or small experimental
studies.
101–120A newer understanding of the function of the endo-
thelial surface layer121and revision of the Starling hypothesis122,123
have raised concerns that extravasation of these synthetic macromo-
lecules increases tissue edema and ultimately reduces oxygen delivery
in states of increased vascular permeability, such as occurs with sys-
temic in ﬂammatory response syndrome, sepsis, trauma, and other
damage to the endothelial surface layer.124
There is no evidence-based consensus on the optimal use of syn-
thetic colloids in small animals. Very little evidence exists on whether
one synthetic colloid is safer or more effective than another. Clinicians
must carefully weigh risk versus bene ﬁt for individual patients.
Consider the following before administering synthetic colloids:100
- Avoid synthetic colloids if the patient is responsive to crystalloid or
alternative therapies.
- Synthetic colloids should not be used as a substitute for albumin. In
cases of severe hypoalbuminemia, natural colloids like plasma pro-
ducts or albumin should be considered.
- In complex disease processes, such as sepsis or septic shock, treat-
ment is multimodal and may involve natural colloids and/orvasopressors.
- Current evidence suggests a minimal risk of synthetic colloid-
associated AKI in dogs and cats when administered in small doses
(,20 mL/kg) for short durations.
- Administering synthetic colloids to hemodynamically stable patients
and those with pre-existing azotemia is not advised.
- Synthetic colloids may be considered for short-term need for colloid
osmotic pressure support (e.g., during anesthesia for a portosystemicshunt ligation in a patient with hypoalbuminemia).
Current recommendations for synthetic colloid administration
include minimizing dose and duration while closely monitoring kid-
ney function (up to 90 days after exposure), coagulation parameters,hematocrit, and platelet count.
100Synthetic colloids should be
avoided or used with caution in patients with pre-existing azotemia,coagulopathy, anemia, and thrombocytopenia.100Some veterinary
clinicians also consider systemic hypertension and sepsis to be con-traindications for synthetic colloid use.
99
Can Plasma Be Used to Address Hypoalbuminemia?
A serum albumin concentration of ,2.0 g/dL is a negative prognostic
indicator associated with increased patient morbidity and mortality insmall animals due to development of peripheral edema, impaired tissueperfusion and oxygenation, hypercoagulability, altered protein-bounddrug metabolism, and poor wound healing. In general, natural colloids(e.g., albumin and plasma) are preferred over synthetic colloids toaddress hypoalbuminemia, but they remain controversial because of alack of evidence linking correction of the albumin concentration withimproved outcomes in critically ill veterinary patients
56,125,126Species-
speciﬁc albumin products are the recommended transfusion products
in veterinary patients with severe or worsening hypoalbuminemia.61,125
Because of the limited availability and cost of species-speci ﬁca l b u m i n ,
plasma products (e.g., fresh frozen plasma, frozen plasma, and CPP)are sometimes used to treat hypoalbuminemia in dogs and cats.
127
Although plasma products contain varying amounts of albumin,59
complications of plasma transfusions appear to be less risky than xeno-transfusion with human albumin products.
125,128 –131The volume
requirement and cost of plasma to raise serum albumin concentrationis a serious limitation in its use for treating hypoalbuminemia. Formany patients, nutritional support is more effective, less challenging,less risky, and less costly than attempting to increase serum albumindirectly with natural colloids.
132,133
Are Potassium-Containing “Balanced ”Isotonic Crystal-
loids Harmful in Hyperkalemic Patients?
Hyperkalemia is a common electrolyte disturbance in small animal
patients with conditions such as urethral or bilateral ureteral obstruc-tion, ruptured bladder, hypoadrenocorticism (dogs), anuric or oliguricrenal failure, and others.
134Many of these patients require ﬂuid resus-
citation, and clinicians must choose between administering potassium-freeﬂuid (e.g., 0.9% NaCl) or balanced isotonic electrolyte solution
(e.g., lactated Ringer ’s solution, Normosol-R, and Plasma-Lyte A).
Balanced isotonic electrolyte solutions for resuscitation contain
only a small amount of potassium (4 –5 mEq/L) (Table 8). Several
studies have concluded that potassium-containing isotonic ﬂuids are
not detrimental for ﬂuid resuscitation and rehydration in hyperkale-
mic cats with urethral obstruction.
135,136Balanced isotonic ﬂuids cor-
rect acid-base imbalances faster than an acidifying ﬂuid such as 0.9%
NaCl. Balanced isotonic crystalloids also help prevent excessively
rapid sodium correction in hyponatremic patients who have hyper-
kalemia (e.g., Addisonian crisis).137It is key to identify and treat the
underlying cause of hyperkalemia. Further management of severe
156 JAAHA | 60:4 Jul/Aug 2024Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 27 ---
hyperkalemia is indicated to prevent cardiac conduction disturbances
and other life-threatening complications when serum potassium is
.7 mmol/L.138
Are IV Fluids Indicated During CPR?
Fluid therapy is indicated during CPR if it will help mitigate hypovo-
lemia that led to the cardiopulmonary arrest. IV ﬂuid therapy in the
form of crystalloid boluses increases preload and cardiac input in
small animal patients with hypovolemia or inappropriate vasodila-
tion (e.g., anaphylaxis, sepsis, and systemic in ﬂammatory response
syndrome). Increasing the intravascular volume in euvolemic
patients, however, may ultimately decrease perfusion pressures andreduce oxygen delivery to myocardial and cerebral tissues.
139–142For
this reason, the RECOVER Advanced Life Support guidelines for vet-
erinary CPR advocate a careful approach to the ﬂu i dp r e s c r i p t i o ni n
patients with cardiopulmonary arrest. These guidelines recommend
ﬂuids for speci ﬁc indications only, such as patients with or likely to
have hypovolemia or distributive shock.143,144Experimental studies
in rats and pigs suggest there may be a neuroprotective effect associ-
ated with hypertonic saline administered during CPR,145–147but clin-
ical evidence in dogs and cats with cardiopulmonary arrest is lacking.
Synthetic colloids should be avoided in these patients because of
potential risks and the absence of a survival bene ﬁt to justify the
risks.144Patients with signi ﬁcant hemorrhage may require blood pro-
ducts. Patients with derangements in potassium, calcium, magne-
sium, glucose, or acid-base status may bene ﬁt from directed therapy
to help correct life-threatening abnormalities. Patients with acutelipid-soluble toxicoses may bene ﬁtf r o mI Vl i p i de m u l s i o nt h e r a p y .
Section 8: Fluid Administration
and Monitoring
Top Three Takeaways
1. Using skilled veterinary technicians to administer and monitor ﬂuid
therapy allows the veterinarian to focus on the tasks they alonemust perform (i.e., diagnosing, prescribing —including the ﬂuid
therapy prescription —prognosing, and surgery), leading to increased
efﬁciency and oversight of patients.
2. Monitoring during IV ﬂuid therapy is critical to prevent ﬂuid overload.
When patient monitoring or referral to a hospital that provides moni-toring is not available, consider an alternate route of delivery.
3. Infusion pumps are frequently used; however, they may not always
be the optimal method for ﬂuid administration.
Overview
IVﬂuids can be administered in a variety of ways. The veterinary
nursing care team must be trained in how to use each method to
avoid ﬂuid overload in patients and related potential hazards. These
factors help determine the best mode for IV ﬂuid delivery:/C15Volume to be infused
/C15Total duration of infusion
/C15Level of monitoring available during administration
/C15Type of ﬂuid administered
Fluid Administration
IV infusion pumps are most commonly used but are not always the
ideal mode of administration. For example, a large dog who needs a
rapid crystalloid infusion may need an infusion rate that exceeds the
1–2 L/hr that standard pumps provide. In this case, a pressure bag
would be the preferred method to deliver the large ﬂuid volume in a
short time. For animals receiving a small volume of ﬂuids, a syringe
pump may be more accurate than a standard infusion pump that
does not have micro settings (Table 16).
The IV administration set is another consideration in choosing
equipment. Smaller animals may bene ﬁtf r o mam i c r od r i ps e t
(60 drops/mL), which provides more precise ﬂuid delivery. This can
be especially helpful when using the gravity method to deliver ﬂuids
in small patients. Macro drip sets come in a variety of drip factors;
those most used in veterinary medicine are 10 drops/mL and
15 drops/mL. Fluid pumps are also usually designed for use with a
speciﬁc type or size of tubing, so it is important to match these to
ensure adequate ﬂuid delivery (Table 16).
Use a new IV line and bag for each patient148(see Table 17 for
IV catheter care and placement). Prime IV lines with the ﬂuid to be
infused before use to avoid air embolism. A T-port can ease medica-
tion administration, and a Y-port can be used when administering
more than one compatible infusion.
IVﬂuid bags should not be used for saline ﬂushes because of
the risk of contamination. Commercially pre ﬁlled syringes are pre-
ferred to decrease the chances of introducing bacterial contamination
that could lead to infection.149–151
If IV access is not achievable, consider IO catheters early in
treatment to avoid ﬂuid resuscitation delays. IO devices are able to
quickly drill through the bone but require training. When no device
is available, needles or peripheral IV catheters can be used (see
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=10twNYP1pB0 for instructions
on placing an IO catheter).
Fluid Monitoring
Trained nursing staff should continually monitor IV ﬂuid adminis-
tration (Table 18). Without adequate monitoring, severe conse-
quences can occur and compromise patient care. Use multiparameter
monitoring to gain a broad picture of the patient ’s volume and
hydration status and avoid ﬂuid-related complications (Table 19).
Monitor patients at high risk for ﬂu i do v e r l o a da tl e a s te v e r y
2 hr (see Tables 19 and 20 for methods). Weigh these patients 2 –3
times a day, check their respiratory rate every 1 –2 hr, measure ﬂuidVeterinary Practice Guidelines
JAAHA.ORG 157Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 28 ---
TABLE 16
Intravenous Fluid Delivery Modes
Method of 
DeliveryConsiderations
Fluid pump • Limits of very high and, possibly, very low rates of administration 
• Maximum administration rate can limit ability to rapidly deliver a bolus with large ﬂuid volumes
Syringe  
pump• Limited to small volumes 
• Attach the extension set close to the IV catheter to ensure patient receives the infusion in a timely manner
Gravity 
drip set• Need to calculate drip rate: Fluid rate (mL/h) × Drip factor (gtt/mL)/3600 = gtt/s
• 
• Close monitoring is essential because there are no alarms
Buretrol • Used in conjunction with a ﬂuid pump
• Prevents delivery of large ﬂuid volume to small patients• Allows for smaller volumes of additives, leading to less waste in smaller patients or in cases of frequent 
changes to ﬂuid plans
Syringe • Hand administration of small volumes
• Do not leave attached to a patient while unattended
Pressure bag • Ideal when volume to be infused over given time exceeds the capabilities of a ﬂuid pump and gravity set
gtt, drop; s, second
TABLE 17
Peripheral Intravenous Catheter Placement and Care Checklist
Large bore/
gauge, short cannula• Larger gauge, short catheters provide less resistance to blood ﬂow than longer, smaller gauge catheters.
1 
Ideal to have in place should a need for rapid infusion arise. 
Aseptic 
preparation and care• See the AAHA Infection Control, Prevention and Biosecurity Guidelines  protocol for IV catheters at 
www.aaha.org/resources/2018-aaha-infection-control-prevention-and-biosecurity-guidelines 
Secure 
catheter• Secure the ﬁrst piece of tape to the catheter as an anchor. Use the smallest amount of tape possible 
and tab the tape ends for easy removal. 
• Use additional bandage material as needed. Be careful not to secure too tight or too loose to avoid 
swelling or premature dislodgement.  
Daily 
maintenance• Check catheters at least two times per day. Fully unwrap bandage material covering the tape to 
examine the catheter site for signs of swelling or thrombophlebitis. Remove the catheter and place another one if indicated.
• Evidence in human patients shows that routine catheter replacement does not provide any beneﬁt over 
replacing peripheral catheters when clinically indicated.
2 
Clean ports 
when disconnecting• Wipe ports with isopropyl alcohol.
• Needleless injection and connection ports are preferred.
1. Reddick AD, et al. Intravenous ﬂuid resuscitation: was Poiseuille right? Emerg Med J . 2011;28(3):201-2.
2. Webster J, Osborne S, Rickard CM, Marsh N. Clinically-indicated replacement versus routine replacement of peripheral venous catheters. Cochrane Database Syst Rev .
2019;1(1):CD007798.
158 JAAHA | 60:4 Jul/Aug 2024Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 29 ---
inputs and urine output, and watch for signs of edema. If available,
perform focused ultrasonography for ﬂuid responsiveness, which
includes scanning for cavity effusion and B-lines in the lungs andevaluating the vena cava. For patients at risk of recurrence of hypo-volemic shock, evaluating the inferior vena cava may be a betterindicator of recurrence than other more commonly monitored para-meters such as heart rate and blood pressure.
152
In smaller patients, especially pediatrics, keep in mind that serial
blood draws can decrease blood volume.
Fully utilizing veterinary technicians, who can not only set up
and run ﬂuid therapy but also identify the signs of ﬂuid-related com-
plications, allows the veterinarian to delegate this nursing task afterprescribing ﬂuid therapy orders. The stronger a veterinary techni-
cian’s understanding of the “why”ofﬂuid therapy, something that is
addressed in veterinary technology and nursing programs, the morethey can be optimized to their fullest potential, allowing for higherefﬁciency of the veterinary team.
Many veterinary practices are either unable to provide 24 hr
care or geographically unable to refer patients to a 24 hr facility.When continual patient monitoring is not possible, the task forcerecommends giving IV ﬂuids during the clinic ’s open hours and SC
ﬂuids before leaving for the night. A slightly higher IV ﬂuid rate can
be used during the day unless contraindicated because of thepatient ’s disease state. Patient monitoring must be provided when-
ever administering IV ﬂuids.
TABLE 19
Evaluation and Monitoring Parameters That May Be Used for
Patients Receiving Fluid Therapya
aReprinted from Davis H, Jensen T, Johnson A, et al. 2013 AAHA/AAFP ﬂuid therapy
guidelines for dogs and cats. JA mA n i mH o s pA s s o c . 2013;49(3):149-59.
/C3Including cardiac auscultation to identify new murmursTABLE 20
Methods to Monitor Fluid Outputs and InputsTABLE 18
Monitoring Fluid Delivery
Method of 
Delivery Monitoring
Fluid pump
Buretrol• Set TVI to 0 at start. Document 
every 2–4 hours.
• Set VTBI for time frame between 
checks.
Syringe pump • Set TVI to 0 at start. Document 
every 2–4 hours.
• Set VTBI for time frame between 
checks.
Gravity drip set 
Pressure bag• Mark top of ﬂuids on bag at start 
and document every 1–2 hours.
• Monitor more frequently due 
to a higher risk of changes in volume delivered (e.g., every ﬁve 
minutes for volumes delivered 
over 15-20 minutes). 
Syringe • Use only for bolus administration. 
Do not leave attached to patient.
TVI, total volume infused; VTBI, volume to be infusedVeterinary Practice Guidelines
JAAHA.ORG 159Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 30 ---
Section 9: Conclusion
Fluid administration is a cornerstone of therapy for many canine
and feline patients. Patients who need ﬂuid supplementation require
ap e r s o n a l i z e d ﬂuid therapy plan that ensures administration of the
proper ﬂuid at the appropriate rate and volume. Relying on a “one-
rate-ﬁts-most-patients ”strategy in ﬂuid therapy calculations is not
only impractical but also potentially harmful. Understanding the dif-ferences between ﬂuid types and their effects within the body ’sﬂuid
compartments is crucial, along with thoughtful, comprehensive
patient assessment. Targeted ﬂuid therapy prescriptions address each
patient ’s resuscitation, rehydration, and maintenance requirements.
Fluid therapy also involves anticipating the changes in electrolytesand other biologic parameters that will occur as a result of ﬂuid ther-
apy and supplementing ﬂuids or otherwise altering the treatment
plan to prevent adverse effects. Diligent patient monitoring is essen-tial to gauge therapeutic response, indicating when changes to ﬂuid
therapy plans are needed to optimize patient outcomes.
REFERENCES
1. Waddell L. Colloid osmotic pressure and osmolality. In: Silverstein DC,
Hopper K, eds. S m a l lA n i m a lC r i t i c a lC a r eM e d i c i n e . 3rd ed. St. Louis:
Elsevier; 2022:1054 –58.
2. Woodcock TE, Michel CC. Advances in the Starling principle and
microvascular ﬂuid exchange; consequences and implications for ﬂuid
therapy. Front Vet Sci 2021;8:623671.
3. Boysen SR, Gommeren K. Assessment of volume status and ﬂuid
responsiveness in small animals. Front Vet Sci 2021;8:630643.
4. Rudloff E, Hopper K. Crystalloid and colloid compositions and their
impact. Front Vet Sci 2021;8:639848.
5. Rudloff E. Assessment of hydration. In: Silverstein DC, Hopper K, eds.
Small Animal Critical Care Medicine. 3rd ed. St. Louis: Elsevier; 2022:
373–77.
6. Marshall KA, Thomovsky EJ, Brooks AC, et al. Ultrasound measure-
ments of the caudal vena cava before and after blood donation in 9greyhound dogs. Can Vet J 2018;59(9):973-980.
7. Donati PA, Guevara JM, Ardiles V, et al. Caudal vena cava collapsibility
index as a tool to predict ﬂuid responsiveness in dogs. JV e tE m e r gC r i t
Care (San Antonio) 2020;30(6):677 –86.
8. Tello LH, Pardo MA. Fluid and electrolyte therapy during vomiting
and diarrhea. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2022;52(3):673 –88.
9. Harris BA, Hofmeister EH, Gicking JC. A survey of emergency and
critical care veterinarians regarding IV ﬂuid bolus therapy and moni-
toring practices in small animals. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio)
2021;31(5):564 –73.
10. DiBartola SP, Bateman S. Introduction to ﬂuid therapy. In: DiBartola
SP, ed. Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal
Practice. 4th ed. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:331 –50.
11. Hansen B, Vigani A. Maintenance ﬂuid therapy: isotonic versus hypotonic
solutions. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2017;47(2):383 –95.
12. Wellman ML, DiBartola SP, Kohn CW. Applied physiology of body
ﬂuids in dogs and cats. In: DiBartola SP, ed. Fluid, Electrolyte, and
Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice. 4th ed. St. Louis: Elsevier
Saunders; 2012:15.13. Hopper K, Garcia Rojas A, Barter L. An online survey of small animal
veterinarians regarding current ﬂuid therapy practices in dogs and cats.
JA mV e tM e dA s s o c 2018;252(5):553 –9.
14. Mazzaferro E, Powell LL. Fluid therapy for the emergent small animal
patient: crystalloids, colloids, and albumin products. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 2022;52(3):781 –96.
15. Lange J, Boysen SR, Bentley A, et al. Intraosseous catheter ﬂ
ow rates
and ease of placement at various sites in canine cadavers. Front Vet Sci
2019;(19):6:312.
16. Bednarski, RM. Dogs and cats. In: Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, Grimm
KA, eds. Lumb & Jones Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia. 4th ed.
Hoboken (NJ): Blackwell Publishing; 2007:705 –15.
17. Davis H, Jensen T, Johnson A, et al; American Association of Feline
Practicioners; American Animal Hospital Association. 2013AAHA/AAFP ﬂuid therapy guidelines for dogs and cats. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 2013;49(3):149 –59.
18. Muir WW. A new way to monitor & individualize your ﬂuid therapy
plan. Vet Med 2013;108(2). Available at https://www.dvm360.com/view/
new-way-monitor-and-individualize-your- ﬂuid-therapy-plan .A c c e s s e d
July 13, 2023.
19. Kudnig ST, Mama K. Perioperative ﬂuid therapy. JA mV e tM e dA s s o c
2002;221:1112 –21.
20. Gaynor JS, Dunlop CI, Wagner AE, et al. Complications and mortality
associated with anesthesia in dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
1999;35:13 –7.
21. Redondo JI, Rubio M, Soler G, et al. Normal values and incidence of
cardiorespiratory complications in dogs during general anaesthesia. Areview of 1281 cases. JV e tM e dAP h y s i o lP a t h o lC l i nM e d 2007;54:
470–77.
22. Fantoni DT, Ida KK, Gimenes AM, et al. Pulse pressure variation as a
guide for volume expansion in dogs undergoing orthopedic surgery.Vet Anaesth Analg 2017;44:710 –8.
23. Celeita-Rodriguez N, Teixeira-Neto FJ, Garofalo NA, et al. Comparison
of the diagnostic accuracy of dynamic and static preload indexes to pre-
dictﬂuid responsiveness in mechanically ventilated iso ﬂurane anesthe-
tized dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 2019;46:276 –88.
24. Klein AV, Teixeira-Neto FJ, Garofalo NA, et al. Changes in pulse pres-
sure variation and plethysmographic variability index caused byhypotension-inducing hemorrhage followed by volume replacement in
isoﬂurane-anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 2016;77(3):280 –7.
25. Skouropoulou D, Lacitignola L, Di Bella C, et al. Intraoperative assess-
ment of ﬂuid responsiveness in normotensive dogs under iso ﬂurane
anaesthesia. Vet Sci 2021;8(2):26.
26. Brunetto MA, Gomes MO, Andre MR, et al. Effects of nutritional sup-
port on hospital outcome in dogs and cats. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San
Antonio) 2010;20(2):224 –31.
27. Kraft MD, Btaiche IF, Sacks GS. Review of the refeeding syndrome.
Nutr Clin Pract 2005;20(6):625 –33.
28. Brunet A, Bouzouraa T, Cadore JL, et al. Use of feeding tubes in 112
cats in an internal medicine referral service (2015
–2020). J Feline Med
Surg 2022;24(10):e338 –46.
2 9 .C o o p e rE .R o u t e so f ﬂuid administration. In: Cooper E, Guillaumin J,
Yaxley P, et al. Small Animal Fluid Therapy. CABI; 2023:33 –40.
30. Kathrani A. Enteral feeding tubes. In: Aronson LR, ed. Small Animal
Surgical Emergencies. 2nd ed. Hoboken (NJ): Wiley Blackwell; 2022:
251–61.
31. Tolbert MK, Telles NJ, Simon BT, et al. Gastrointestinal transit time is
faster in Beagle dogs compared to cats. JA mV e tM e dA s s o c . 2022;260(
S3):S8 –14.
160 JAAHA | 60:4 Jul/Aug 2024Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 31 ---
32. Becvarova I. Tube feeding in small animals: diet selection and prepara-
tion. In: Chan DL, ed. Nutritional Management of Hospitalized Small
Animals. Hoboken (NJ): John Wiley & Sons; 2015:80 –91.
33. Chan DL. Nutritional support of the critically ill small animal patient.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2020;50(6):1411 –22.
34. Grathwohl KW, Bruns BJ, LeBrun CJ, et al. Does hemodilution exist?
Effects of saline infusion on hematologic parameters in euvolemic sub-jects. South Med J 1996;89(1):51 –5.
35. Prittie JE. Triggers for use, optimal dosing, and problems associated
with red cell transfusions. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2003;
33(6):1261 –75.
36. Kisielewicz C, Self I, Bell R. Assessment of clinical and laboratory vari-
ables as a guide to packed red blood cell transfusion of euvolemic ane-mic dogs. JV e tI n t e r nM e d 2014;28(2):576 –82.
37. Langston C, Gordon D. Effects of IV ﬂuids in dogs and cats with kid-
ney failure. Front Vet Sci 2021;8:659960.
38. Langston C. Managing ﬂuid and electrolyte disorders in renal failure.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2008;38(3):677 –97, xiii.
39. Harison E, Langston C, Palma D, Lamb K. Acute azotemia as a predic-
tor of mortality in dogs and cats. J Vet Intern Med 2012;26(5):1093 –8.
40. Von Hendy-Willson VE, Pressler BM. An overview of glomerular ﬁltra-
tion rate testing in dogs and cats. Vet J 2011;188(2):156 –65.
41. Fiocchi EH, Cowgill LD, Brown DC, et al. The use of darbepoetin to
stimulate erythropoiesis in the treatment of anemia of chronic kidney
disease in dogs. JV e tI n t e r nM e d 2017;31(2):476 –85.
42. Chalhoub S, Langston CE, Farrelly J. The use of darbepoetin to stimu-
late erythropoiesis in anemia of chronic kidney disease in cats: 25 cases.J Vet Intern Med 2012;26(2):363 –9.
43. Gori E, Lippi I, Guidi G, et al. Acute pancreatitis and acute kidney
injury in dogs. Vet J 2019;245:77 –81.
44. Quimby J. Management of chronic kidney disease. In: Bruyette DS,
Bexﬁeld N, Chretin JD, et al., eds. Clinical Small Animal Internal Medi-
cine. Hoboken (NJ): Wiley Blackwell; 2020:1165 –73.
45. Perkowski SZ, Oyama MA. Pathophysiology and anesthetic manage-
ment of patients with cardiovascular disease. In: Grimm KA, Lamont
LA, Tranquilli WJ, et al., eds. Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia: The
Fifth Edition of Lumb and Jones. Hoboken (NJ): Wiley Blackwell; 2015:
496–510.
46. Keene BW, Atkins CE, Bonagura JD, et al. ACVIM consensus guide-
lines for the diagnosis and treatment of myxomatous mitral valve dis-ease in dogs. JV e tI n t e r nM e d 2019;33(3):1127 –40.
47. Ferasin L, DeFrancesco T. Management of acute heart failure in cats.
J
Vet Cardiol 2015;17 (suppl 1):S173 –89.
48. Boysen SR, Gommeren K. Assessment of volume status and ﬂuid
responsiveness in small animals. Front Vet Sci 2021;8:630643.
49. Luis Fuentes V, Abbott J, Chetboul V, et al. ACVIM consensus state-
ment guidelines for the classi ﬁcation, diagnosis, and management of
cardiomyopathies in cats. J Vet Intern Med 2020;34(3):1062 –77.
50. Nguyen VQ, Gadiraju TV, Patel H, et al. Intra-abdominal hypertension:
an important consideration for diuretic resistance in acute decompen-sated heart failure. Clin Cardiol 2016;39(1):37 –40.
51. Pouchelon JL, Atkins CE, Bussadori C, et al. Cardiovascular-renal axis
disorders in the domestic dog and cat: a veterinary consensus state-ment. J Small Anim Pract 2015;56(9):537 –52.
52. Ronco C, Haapio M, House AA, et al. Cardiorenal syndrome. JA m
Coll Cardiol 2008;52(19):1527 –39.
53. Giorgi ME, Mochel JP, Yuan L, et al. Retrospective evaluation of risk
factors for development of kidney injury after parenteral furosemidetreatment of left-sided congestive heart failure in dogs. JV e tI n t e r n
Med 2022;36(6):2042 –52.
54. Lefebvre HP, Brown SA, Chetboul V, et al. Angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitors in veterinary medicine. Curr Pharm Des 2007;13(13):
1347 –61.
55. Hoorn EJ. Intravenous ﬂuids: balancing solutions [published correction
appears in JN e p h r o l 2020;33(2):387]. JN e p h r o l 2017;30(4):485 –92.
56. Snow SJ, Ari Jutkowitz L, Brown AJ. Trends in plasma transfusion at a
veterinary teaching hospital: 308 patients (1996-1998 and 2006-2008). J
Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2010;20(4):441 –5.
57. Beer KS, Silverstein DC. Controversies in the use of fresh frozen plasma
in critically ill small animal patients. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Anto-
nio)2015;25(1):101 –6.
58. Ropski MK, Guillaumin J, Monnig AA, et al. Use of cryopoor plasma
for albumin replacement and continuous antimicrobial infusion for
treatment of septic peritonitis in a dog. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San
Antonio) 2017;27(3):348 –56.
59. Culler CA, Iazbik C, Guillaumin J. Comparison of albumin, colloid
osmotic pressure, von Willebrand factor, and coagulation factors in
canine cryopoor plasma, cryoprecipitate, and fresh frozen plasma. JV e t
Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2017;27(6):638 –44.
60. Craft EM, Powell LL. The use of canine-speci ﬁc albumin in dogs with
septic peritonitis. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2012;22(6):631 –9.
61. Sahagian MJ, Mastrocco A, Weltman JG, et al. Retrospective analysis of
the use of canine-speci ﬁc albumin in 125 critically ill dogs. J Vet Emerg
Crit Care (San Antonio) 2023;33(2):192 –200.
62. Carney N, Totten AM, O ’Reilly C, et al. Guidelines for the management
of severe traumatic brain injury, fourth edition. Neurosurgery 2017;80(
1):6–15.
63. Leibner E, Andreae M, Galvagno SM, et al. Damage control resuscita-
tion. Clin Exp Emerg Med 2020;7(1):5 –13.
64. Pigott A, Rudloff E. Traumatic brain injury –a review of intravenous
ﬂuid therapy. Front Vet Sci 2021;8:643800.
65. Shi J, Tan L, Ye J, et al. Hypertonic saline and mannitol in patients
with traumatic brain injury: A systematic and meta-analysis. Medicine
(Baltimore) 2020;99(35):e21655.
66. Li M, Chen T, Cai J, et al. Comparison of equimolar doses of mannitol
and hypertonic saline for the treatment of elevated intracranial pressure
after traumatic brain injury: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Medicine (Baltimore) 2015;94(17):e668.
67. Gu J, Huang H, Huang Y, et al. Hypertonic saline or mannitol for
treating elevated intracranial pressure in traumatic brain injury: a
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Neurosurg Rev 2019;42:
499–509.
68. Roquilly A, Moyer JD, Huet O, et al; Atlanrea Study Group and the
Soci/C19et/C19eF r a n c ¸aise d ’Anesth /C19esie R /C19eanimation (SFAR) Research Network.
Effect of continuous infusion of hypertonic saline vs standard care on
6-month neurological outcomes in patients with traumatic brain injury:
the COBI randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2021;325(20):2056 –66.
69. Kogika MM, de Morais HA. A quick reference on hypokalemia. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2017;47(2):229 –34.
70. Schaer M. Disorders of serum potassium, sodium, magnesium and
chloride. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 1999;9(4):209 –17.
71. Hoehne SN, Hopper K, Epstein SE. Accuracy of potassium supplementation
ofﬂuids administered intravenously. JV e tI n t e r nM e d 2015;29(3):834-9.
72. Humphrey S, Kirby R, Rudloff E. Magnesium physiology and clinical
therapy in veterinary critical care. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio)
2015;25(2):210 –25.Veterinary Practice Guidelines
JAAHA.ORG 161Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 32 ---
73. Sterns RH, Silver SM, Hix JK. Treatment of hyponatremia. In: Simon
EE, ed. Hyponatremia: Evaluation and Treatment. New York: Springer;
2013:221 –50.
74. Sahay M, Sahay R. Hyponatremia: A practical approach. Indian J Endo-
crinol Metab 2014;18(6):760 –71.
75. Adrogu /C19e HJ, Tucker BM, Madias NE. Diagnosis and management of
hyponatremia: a review. JAMA 2022;328(3):280 –91.
76. O ’Brien DP, Kroll RA, Johnson GC, et al. Myelinolysis after correction
of hyponatremia in two dogs. JV e tI n t e r nM e d 1994;8(1):40 –8.
77. Muhsin SA, Mount DB. Diagnosis and treatment of hypernatremia.
Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab 2016;30(2):189 –203.
78. Ostermann M, Randolph AG. Resuscitation ﬂuid composition and
acute kidney injury in critical illness. NE n g lJM e d 2022;386(9):888 –9.
79. Sigmon J, May CC, Bryant A, et al. Assessment of acute kidney injury
in neurologically injured patients receiving hypertonic sodium chloride:
does chloride load matter? Ann Pharmacother 2020;54(6):541 –6.
80. Chow JH, Abuelkasem E, Sankova S, et al. Reversal of vasodilatory shock:
current perspectives on conventional, rescue, and emerging vasoactive
agents for the treatment of shock. Anesth Analg 2020;130(1):15 –30.
81. Landry DW, Oliver JA. The pathogenesis of vasodilatory shock. NE n g l
JM e d 2001;345(8):588 –95.
82. Wieruszewski PM, Khanna AK. Vasopressor choice and timing in vaso-
dilatory shock. Crit Care 2022;26(1):76.
83. Brown JC, Simons E, Rudders SA. Epinephrine in the management of
anaphylaxis. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 2020;8(4):1186 –95.
84. Campbell G, Alderson P, Smith AF, et al. Warming of intravenous and
irrigation ﬂuids for preventing inadvertent perioperative hypothermia.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015;2015(4):CD009891.
85. Brodeur A, Wright A, Cortes Y. Hypothermia and targeted temperature
management in cats and dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio)
2017;27(2):151 –63.
86. Jourdan G, Didier C, Chotard E, et al. Heated intravenous ﬂuids alone
fail to prevent hypothermia in cats under general anaesthesia. JF e l i n e
Med Surg 2017;19(12):1249 –53.
87. Chiang V, Hopper K, Mellema MS. In vitro evaluation of the ef ﬁcacy
of a veterinary dry heat ﬂuid warmer. JV e tE m e r gC r i tC a r e( S a nA n t o -
nio)2011;21(6):639 –47.
88. Lee RA, Towle Millard HA, Weil AB, et al. In vitro evaluation of three
intravenous ﬂuid line warmers. JA mV e tM e dA s s o c 2014;244(12):
1423 –8.
89. Oncken AK, Kirby R, Rudloff E. Hypothermia in critically ill dogs and
cats. Compendium 2001;23(6):506 –21.
90. Johnson SI, McMichael M, White G. Heatstroke in small animal medi-
cine: a clinical practice review. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio)
2006;16(2):112 –9.
91. Klein SC, Peterson ME. Canine hypoadrenocorticism: part II. Can Vet J
2010;51(2):179.
92. Goutal CM, Brugmann BL, Ryan KA. Insulinoma in dogs: a review. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2012;48(3):151 –63.
93. Thomovsky E, Brooks A, Johnson P. Fluid overload in small animal
patients. Top Companion Anim Med 2016;31(3):94 –9.
94. Hansen B. Fluid overload. Front Vet Sci 2021;8:668688.
95. Londono L. Fluid therapy in critical care. Todays Vet Pract 2019;9(3).
Available at: https://todaysveterinarypractice.com/internal-medicine/
ﬂuid-therapy-in-critical-care/ . Accessed August 31, 2023.
96. Adamik KN, Yozova ID, Regenscheit N. Controversies in the use of
hydroxyethyl starch solutions in small animal emergency and critical
care. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2015;25(1):20 –47.97. Cazzolli D, Prittie J. The crystalloid-colloid debate: Consequences of
resuscitation ﬂuid selection in veterinary critical care. J Vet Emerg Crit
Care (San Antonio) 2015;25(1):6 –19.
98. Wong C, Koenig A. The colloid controversy: are colloids bad and what
are the options? Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2017;47(2):411 –21.
99. Yozova ID, Howard J, Sigrist NE, et al. Current trends in volume
replacement therapy and the use of synthetic colloids in smallanimals –an internet-based survey (2016). Front Vet Sci 2017;4:140.
100. Adamik KN, Yozova ID. Colloids yes or no? - a “Gretchen question ”
answered. Front Vet Sci 2021;8:624049.
101. Hayes G, Benedicenti L, Mathews K. Retrospective cohort study on the
incidence of acute kidney injury and death following hydroxyethyl
starch (HES 10% 250/0.5/5:1) administration in dogs (2007-2010). JV e t
Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2016;26(1):35 –40.
102. Yozova ID, Howard J, Adamik KN. Retrospective evaluation of the
effects of administration of tetrastarch (hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.4) on
plasma creatinine concentration in dogs (2010-2013): 201 dogs. JV e t
Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2016;26(4):568 –77.
103. Yozova ID, Howard J, Adamik KN. Effect of tetrastarch (hydroxyethyl
starch 130/0.4) on plasma creatinine concentration in cats: a retrospec-tive analysis (2010-2015). J Feline Med Surg 2017;19(10):1073 –9.
104. Sigrist NE, K €alin N, Dreyfus A. Changes in serum creatinine concentra-
tion and acute kidney injury (AKI) grade in dogs treated with hydro-xyethyl starch 130/0.4 from 2013 to 2015. J Vet Intern Med 2017;31(2):
434–41.
105. Sigrist NE, K €alin N, Dreyfus A. Effects of hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.4
on serum Creatinine concentration and development of acute kidneyinjury in nonazotemic cats. JV e tI n t e r nM e d 2017;31(6):1749 –56.
106. Schmid SM, Cianciolo RE, Drobatz KJ, et al. Postmortem evaluation of
renal tubular vacuolization in critically ill dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care
(San Antonio) 2019;29(3):279 –87.
107. Boyd CJ, Claus MA, Raisis AL, et al. Evaluation of biomarkers of kid-
ney injury following 4% succinylated gelatin and 6% hydroxyethylstarch 130/0.4 administration in a canine hemorrhagic shock model. J
Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2019;29(2):132 –42.
108. Boyd CJ, Sharp CR, Claus MA, et al. Prospective randomized con-
trolled blinded clinical trial evaluating biomarkers of acute kidneyinjury following 6% hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.4 or Hartmann ’s solu-
tion in dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2021;31(3):306 –14.
109. Adamik KN, Stoffel MH, Tangermann S, et al. Assessment of hydro-
xyethyl starch (6% HES 130/0.4) kidney storage in critically ill dogs: a
post-mortem prospective study. Front Vet Sci 2022;8:802507.
1 1 0 . C l a s s e nJ ,A d a m i kK N ,W e b e rK ,e ta l .I nv i t r oe f f e c to fh y d r o x y e t h y ls t a r c h
130/0.42 on canine platelet function. Am J Vet Res 2012;73(12):1908 –12.
111. Falco S, Bruno B, Maurella C, et al. In vitro evaluation of canine hemo-
stasis following dilution with hydroxyethyl starch (130/0.4) via throm-boelastometry. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2012;22(6):640 –5.
112. Reuteler A, Axiak-Flammer S, Howard J, et al. Comparison of the
effects of a balanced crystalloid-based and a saline-based tetrastarchsolution on canine whole blood coagulation and platelet function. JV e t
Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2017;27(1):23 –34.
1 1 3 .W u r l o dV A ,H o w a r dJ ,F r a n c e yT ,e ta l .C o m p a r i s o no ft h ei nv i t r o
effects of saline, hypertonic hydroxyethyl starch, hypertonic saline, andtwo forms of hydroxyethyl starch on whole blood coagulation and platelet
function in dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2015;25(4):474 –87.
114. Gauthier V, Holowaychuk MK, Kerr CL, et al. Effect of synthetic col-
loid administration on coagulation in healthy dogs and dogs with sys-
temic in ﬂammation. J Vet Intern Med 2015;29(1):276 –85.
162 JAAHA | 60:4 Jul/Aug 2024Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 

--- PAGE 33 ---
115. Albrecht NA, Howard J, Kovacevic A, et al. In vitro effects of 6%
hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.42 solution on feline whole blood coagula-
tion measured by rotational thromboelastometry. BMC Vet Res 2016;
12(1):155.
116. Diniz MS, Teixeira-Neto FJ, Gonc ¸alves DS, et al. Effects of 6% tetra-
starch or lactated Ringer ’s solution on blood coagulation in hemor-
rhaged dogs [published correction appears in J Vet Intern Med
2019;33(2):1110]. J Vet Intern Med 2018;32(6):1927 –33.
117. McBride D, Hosgood G, Raisis A, et al. Platelet closure time in anesthe-
tized greyhounds with hemorrhagic shock treated with hydroxyethylstarch 130/0.4 or 0.9% sodium chloride infusions. J Vet Emerg Crit
Care (San Antonio) 2016;26(4):509 –15.
118. Boyd CJ, Claus MA, Raisis AL, et al. Hypocoagulability and platelet
dysfunction are exacerbated by synthetic colloids in a canine hemor-rhagic shock model [published correction appears in Front Vet Sci
2020;7:641]. Front Vet Sci 2018;5:279.
119. Iannucci C, Dirkmann D, Howard J, et al. A prospective randomized
open-label trial on the comparative effects of 6% hydroxyethyl starch
130/0.4 versus polyionic isotonic crystalloids on coagulation parameters
in dogs with spontaneous hemoperitoneum. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San
Antonio) 2021;31(1):32 –42.
120. Smart L, Jandrey KE, Kass PH, et al. The effect of Hetastarch (670/
0.75) in vivo on platelet closure time in the dog. J Vet Emerg Crit Care
(San Antonio) 2009;19(5):444 –9.
121. Gaudette S, Hughes D, Boller M. The endothelial glycocalyx: Structure
and function in health and critical illness. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San
Antonio) 2020;30(2):117 –34.
122. Michel CC. Starling: the formulation of his hypothesis of microvascular
ﬂuid exchange and its signi ﬁcance after 100 years. Exp Physiol 1997;82(
1):1–30.
123. Levick JR. Revision of the Starling principle: new views of tissue ﬂuid
balance. JP h y s i o l 2004;557(Pt 3):704.
124. Becker BF, Chappell D, Bruegger D, et al. Therapeutic strategies target-
ing the endothelial glycocalyx: acute de ﬁcits, but great potential. Cardio-
vasc Res 2010;87(2):300 –10.
125. Mazzaferro EM, Edwards T. Update on albumin therapy in critical ill-
ness. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2020;50(6):1289 –305.
126. Montealegre F, Lyons BM. Fluid therapy in dogs and cats with sepsis.
Front Vet Sci 2021;8:622127.
127. Culler CA, Balakrishnan A, Yaxley PE, et al. Clinical use of cryopoor
plasma continuous rate infusion in critically ill, hypoalbuminemic dogs.
J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2019;29(3):314 –20.
128. Francis AH, Martin LG, Haldorson GJ, et al. Adverse reactions sugges-
tive of type III hypersensitivity in six healthy dogs given human albu-
min. JA mV e tM e dA s s o c 2007;230(6):873 –9.
129. Cohn LA, Kerl ME, Lenox CE, et al. Response of healthy dogs to infu-
sions of human serum albumin. Am J Vet Res 2007;68(6):657 –63.
130. Trow AV, Rozanski EA, Delaforcade AM, et al. Evaluation of use of
human albumin in critically ill dogs: 73 cases (2003-2006). JA mV e t
Med Assoc 2008;233(4):607 –12.
131. Horowitz FB, Read RL, Powell LL. A retrospective analysis of 25%
human serum albumin supplementation in hypoalbuminemic dogs
with septic peritonitis. Can Vet J 2015;56(6):591 –7.
132. Liu DT, Brown DC, Silverstein DC. Early nutritional support is associ-
ated with decreased length of hospitalization in dogs with septic perito-
nitis: A retrospective study of 45 cases (2000-2009). J Vet Emerg Crit
Care (San Antonio) 2012;22(4):453 –9.133. Conner BJ. Treating hypoalbuminemia. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 2017;47(2):451 –9.
134. Kogika MM, de Morais HA. A quick reference on hyperkalemia. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2017;47(2):223 –8.
135. Drobatz K, Cole S. The in ﬂuence of crystalloid type on acid-base and
electrolyte status of cats with urethral obstruction. JV e tE m e r gC r i t
Care (San Antonio) 2008;18(4):355 –61.
136. Cunha MG, Freitas GC, Carregaro AB, et al. Renal and cardiorespira-
tory effects of treatment with lactated Ringer ’s solution or physiologic
saline (0.9% NaCl) solution in cats with experimentally induced ure-thral obstruction. Am J Vet Res 2010;71(7):840 –6.
137. Lathan P, Thompson AL. Management of hypoadrenocorticism (Addi-
son’s disease) in dogs. Vet Med (Auckl) 2018;9:1 –10.
138. Jones JM, Burkitt-Creedon JM, Epstein SE. Treatment strategies for
hyperkalemia secondary to urethral obstruction in 50 male cats: 2002-
2017. J Feline Med Surg 2022;24(12):e580-e587.
139. Voorhees WD III, Ralston SH, Kougias C, et al. Fluid loading with
whole blood or Ringer ’s lactate solution during CPR in dogs. Resuscita-
tion1987;15(2):113 –23.
140. Ditchey RV, Lindenfeld J. Potential adverse effects of volume loading
on perfusion of vital organs during closed-chest resuscitation. Circula-
tion1984;69(1):181 –9.
141. Gentile NT, Martin GB, Appleton TJ, et al. Effects of arterial and
venous volume infusion on coronary perfusion pressures during canine
CPR. Resuscitation 1991;22(1):55 –63.
142. Yannopoulos D, Zviman M, Castro V, et al. Intra-cardiopulmonary
resuscitation hypothermia with and without volume loading in anischemic model of cardiac arrest. Circulation 2009;120(14):1426 –35.
143. Fletcher DJ, Boller M, Brainard BM, et al; American College of Veteri-
nary Medicine; Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Society.
RECOVER evidence and knowledge gap analysis on veterinary CPR.
Part 7: Clinical guidelines. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 2012;
22(suppl 1):S102 –31.
144. Fletcher DJ, Boller M. Fluid therapy during cardiopulmonary resuscita-
tion. Front Vet Sci 2021;7:625361.
1 4 5 .F i s c h e rM ,H o s s m a n nK A .V o l u m ee x p a n s i o nd u r i n gc a r d i o p u l m o n a r y
resuscitation reduces cerebral no-re ﬂow.Resuscitation 1996;32(3):227 –40.
146. Zhou X, Liu Y, Huang Y, et al. Hypertonic saline infusion suppresses
apoptosis of hippocampal cells in a rat model of cardiopulmonary
resuscitation. Sci Rep 2017;7(1):5783.
147. Breil M, Krep H, Sinn D, et al. Hypertonic saline improves myocardial
blood ﬂow during CPR, but is not enhanced further by the addition of
hydroxy ethyl starch. Resuscitation 2003;56(3):307 –17.
148. O ’Grady NP, Alexander M, Burns LA, et al; Healthcare Infection Control
Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). Guidelines for the prevention of
intravascular catheter-related infections. Clin Infect Dis 2011;52(9):e162 –93.
149. Sabino CV, Weese JS. Contamination of multiple-dose vials in a veteri-
nary hospital. Can Vet J 2006;47(8):779 –82.
150. Gorski LA, Hadaway L, Hagle ME, et al. Infusion therapy standards of
practice, eighth edition. J Infus Nurs 2021;44(1S suppl 1):S1 –224.
151. Guillaumin J, Olp NM, Magnusson KD, et al. In ﬂuence of hang time
and location on bacterial contamination of intravenous bags in a veteri-
nary emergency and critical care setting. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San
Antonio) 2017;27(5):548 –54.
152. Yanagawa Y, Sakamoto T, Okada Y. Hypovolemic shock evaluated by
sonographic measurement of the inferior vena cava during resuscitationin trauma patients. JT r a u m a 2007;63(6):1245 –8.Veterinary Practice Guidelines
JAAHA.ORG 163Downloaded from https://jaaha.kglmeridian.com at 2026-03-20 via Open Access. Guidelines published open access in the Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 
(JAAHA®) using the CC BY-NC-ND license https://creativecommons.org/licenses... https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 
