
=== PDF PAGE 1308 ===
SECTION XII
•
Respiratory Disease
1156
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
when dogs do not respond to other medical or surgical treatment, 
although many owners consider this an unacceptable option due to 
the high risk of complications (mentioned previously) and degree of 
maintenance required.
LARYNGEAL STENOSIS
Acquired laryngeal stenosis most commonly occurs as a com-
plication from bilateral ventriculocordectomy, although other 
causes include traumatic tracheal intubation and foreign body or 
caustic trauma. e most common clinical sign associated with 
laryngeal stenosis is exercise intolerance, but inspiratory stridor 
and respiratory distress occur as well. Ventriculocordectomy per-
formed through an oral approach can lead to laryngeal webbing 
from formation of scar tissue (cicatrix) as the mucosal defects are 
le to heal by second intention. is procedure is most commonly 
performed for devocalization (debarking). e American Veteri-
nary Medical Association opposes devocalization except as a nal 
alternative to euthanasia aer behavioral modication to correct 
excessive vocalization has failed and aer discussion of potential 
complications from the procedure with the owner.58
Ventriculocordectomy as a treatment for LP is best performed 
through a ventral laryngotomy incision so that the mucosa on 
each side can be closed primarily, decreasing the risk of scar for-
mation; a similar procedure is performed to treat laryngeal steno-
sis.59 A temporary so silicone intraluminal stent (keel stent) can 
be inserted through the thyroid cartilage to separate the healing 
mucosal surfaces but is oen not necessary except in small dogs.60
Regardless, laryngeal web resection with mucosal apposition has 
been reported to have a good to excellent outcome.61
LARYNGEAL MASSES
NEOPLASTIC
ough uncommon, numerous types of tumors of the larynx 
have been reported. In the dog, these include rhabdomyosarcoma 
(oncocytoma), squamous cell carcinoma (Figure 214.4), adeno-
carcinoma, osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, chondroma, myxo-
chondroma, lipoma, brosarcoma, undierentiated carcinoma, 
extramedullary plasmacytoma, and mast cell tumor.62 Squamous 
cell carcinoma and lymphoma are the most common tumors of 
the larynx in the cat, but adenocarcinoma and other poorly dif-
ferentiated round cell tumors have been reported.63
Small lesions may be removed by mucosal resection or partial 
laryngectomy through an oral approach or ventral laryngotomy. 
Excision of cartilaginous tumors (e.g., chondroma or chondrosar-
coma) can be performed with reasonable success. Extensive surgi-
cal intervention involves complete laryngectomy with permanent 
tracheostomy but has been reported only in isolated cases. Radio-
responsive tumors may be treated with radiation therapy. Other-
wise, most treatment is palliative, consisting of airow bypass of 
the laryngeal area through a permanent tracheostomy.
e prognosis for laryngeal tumors is guarded as most cases are 
quite advanced at the time of diagnosis. Treatment of 4 cats with 
laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma with tube tracheostomy alone 
resulted in a median survival of only 3 days, and chemotherapeutic 
treatment of 5 cats with laryngeal masses resulted in a median sur-
vival of 141 days.64 Two cats with laryngeal lymphoma were treated 
with chemotherapy, resulting in survival times of 60 and 1440 
days.63 In this same study, 1 cat with laryngeal squamous cell carci-
noma treated with prednisolone survived 180 days. Permanent tra-
cheostomy in 5 cats with laryngeal carcinoma documented survival 
at home from 2-281 days with 2 cats dying from tracheostomy site 
occlusion and 3 cats euthanized because of disease progression.65
INFLAMMATORY
Inammatory laryngeal disease is an uncommon nonneoplastic 
condition of the arytenoid cartilages reported in both dogs and 
cats. It can be granulomatous, lymphocytic-plasmacytic, or eosino-
philic in nature. Severe cases can result in laryngeal stenosis and 
signicant upper airway obstruction. Biopsy of the laryngeal mass 
is crucial to dierentiate these disorders from neoplasia, although it 
is still possible that inammatory changes may represent a second-
ary response to underlying neoplasia. Treatment of inammatory 
laryngeal disease is palliative and consists of debulking of the mass, 
corticosteroid therapy, or permanent tracheostomy. Permanent tra-
cheostomy has been associated with a higher mortality rate in cats 
with inammatory laryngeal disease than in cats undergoing per-
manent tracheostomy for any other reason.
CYSTIC
Benign laryngeal cysts also have been described in isolated canine 
and feline cases. Cysts are typically epithelial in origin and stem 
from the ventral aspect of the larynx. Surgical removal is usually 
curative. Some cysts are very large and can signicantly obstruct 
airow.
Figure 214.3
Intra-oral view of Stage 2 laryngeal collapse in an 
8-year-old Pug; note complete collapse of cuneiform processes into la-
ryngeal lumen.
Figure 214.4
Intra-oral view of a 10-year-old Labrador Retriever with 
laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma of the right arytenoid cartilage.


=== PDF PAGE 1309 ===
CHAPTER 214
•
Laryngeal Diseases
1157
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
REFERENCES
1. Monnet E, Tobias KM. Larynx. In: Tobias KM, Johnston SA, eds. Veterinary 
Surgery: Small Animal. Elsevier; 2012:1724.
2. Ridyard AE, Corcoran BM, Tasker S, etal. Spontaneous laryngeal paralysis in 
four white-coated German shepherd dogs. J Small Anim Pract. 2000;41:558-561.
3. Venker-van Haagen AJ, Bouw J, Hartman W. Hereditary transmission of 
laryngeal paralysis in bouviers. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 1981;18:75-76.
4. Rasouliha SH, Barrientos L, Anderegg L, etal. A RAPGEF6 variant 
constitutes a major risk factor for laryngeal paralysis in dogs. PLoS Genet. 
2019;15:e1008416.
5. O’Brien JA, Hendriks J. Inherited laryngeal paralysis. Analysis in the husky 
cross. Vet Q. 1986;8:301-302.
6. Polizopoulou ZS, Koutinas AF, Papadopoulos GC, etal. Juvenile laryn-
geal paralysis in three Siberian husky x Alaskan malamute puppies. Vet Rec. 
2003;153:624-627.
7. von Pfeil DJF, Zellner E, Fritz MC, etal. Congenital laryngeal paralysis in 
Alaskan huskies: 25 cases (2009-2014). J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2018;15:1057-1065.
8. Jahns H, Vernau KM, Nolan CM, etal. Polyneuropathy in young Sibe-
rian huskies caused by degenerative and inammatory diseases. Vet Pathol. 
2020;57:666-674.
9. Braund KG, Shores A, Cochrane S, etal. Laryngeal paralysis-polyneuropathy 
complex in young Dalmatians. Am J Vet Res. 1994;55:534-542.
10. Mahony OM, Knowles KE, Braund KG, etal. Laryngeal paralysis-
polyneuropathy complex in young Rottweilers. J Vet Intern Med. 1998;12:330-337.
11. Shelton GD, Podell M, Poncelet L, etal. Inherited polyneuropathy in 
Leonberger dogs: a mixed or intermediate form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease? 
Muscle Nerve. 2003;27:471-477.
12. Gabriel A, Poncelet L, Van Ham L, etal. Laryngeal paralysis-
polyneuropathy complex in young related Pyrenean mountain dogs. J Small Anim 
Pract. 2006;47:144-149.
13. Vendenberghe H, Escriou C, Rosati M, etal. Juvenile-onset polyneuropathy 
in American Staordshire Terriers. J Vet Intern Med. 2018;32:2003-2012.
14. Letko A, Minor KM, Friedenberg SG, etal. A CNTNAP1 missense variant 
is associated with canine laryngeal paralysis and polyneuropathy. Genes (Basel).
2020;11:1426.
15. MacPhail CM, Monnet E. Outcome of and postoperative complications in 
dogs undergoing surgical treatment of laryngeal paralysis: 140 cases (1985-1998). 
J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2001;218:1949-1956.
16. Stanley BJ, Hauptman JG, Fritz MC, etal. Esophageal dysfunction in 
dogs with idiopathic laryngeal paralysis: a controlled cohort study. Vet Surg. 
2010;39:139-149.
17. ieman KM, Krahwinkel DJ, Sims MH, etal. Histopathological conrma-
tion of polyneuropathy in 11 dogs with laryngeal paralysis. J Am Anim Hosp 
Assoc. 2010;46:161-167.
18. Jeery ND, Talbot CE, Smith PM, etal. Acquired idiopathic laryngeal 
paralysis as a prominent feature of generalised neuromuscular disease in 39 dogs. 
Vet Rec. 2006;158:17-21.
19. Shelton GD. Acquired laryngeal paralysis in dogs: evidence accumulating 
for a generalized neuromuscular disease. Vet Surg. 2010;39:137-138.
20. GOLPP Study Group. Michigan State University; Veterinary Medical Center. 
https://cvm.msu.edu/hospital/clinical-research/golpp-study-group
21. Jaggy A, Oliver JE, Ferguson DC, etal. Neurological manifestations of hypo-
thyroidism: a retrospective study of 29 dogs. J Vet Intern Med. 1994;8:328-336.
22. Radlinsky MG, Williams J, Frank PM, etal. Comparison of three clinical tech-
niques for the diagnosis of laryngeal paralysis in dogs. Vet Surg. 2009;38:434-438.
23. Ranniger E, Kantyka M, Bektas RM. e inuence of anaesthetic drugs on 
the laryngeal motion in dogs: a systematic review. Animals (Basel). 2020;10:530.
24. Brown MB, Dugat DR, Lyon SD, etal. Comparison of methohexital and 
propofol as induction agents for evaluation of laryngeal function in healthy dogs. 
Vet Surg. 2019;48:70-78.
25. McKeirnan KL, Gross ME, Rochat M, etal. Comparison of propofol and 
propofol/ketamine anesthesia for evaluation of laryngeal function in healthy 
dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 2014;50:19-26.
26. Maney JK, Shepard MK, Braun C, etal. A comparison of cardiopulmonary 
and anesthetic eects of an induction dose of alfaxalone or propofol in dogs. Vet 
Anaesth Analg. 2013;40:237-244.
27. Amengual M, Flaherty D, Auckburally A, etal. An evaluation of anaesthetic 
induction in healthy dogs using rapid intravenous injection of propofol or alfaxa-
lone. Vet Anaesth Analg. 2013;40:115-123.
28. Radkey DI, Hardie RJ, Smith LJ. Comparison of the eects of alfaxalone and 
propofol with acepromazine, butorphanol and/or doxapram on laryngeal motion 
and quality of examination in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg. 2018;45:241-249.
29. Kapaldo N, McMurphy R, Hodgson D, etal. Laryngeal function in normal 
dogs administered isourane following partial clearance of alfaxalone or propofol. 
Vet Anaesth Analg. 2021;48:493-500.
30. Labuscagne S, Zeileer GE, Dzikiti BT. Eects of chemical and mechani-
cal stimulation on laryngeal motion during alfaxalone, thiopentone or propofol 
anaesthesia in healthy dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg. 2019;46:435-442.
31. Sakai DM, Howard SL, Reed RA, etal. Inuence of doxapram and intermit-
tent 10% carbon dioxide inspiration on cardiovascular and laryngeal functions in 
anesthetized dogs. Vet Surg. 2021;50:1418-1426.
32. Nicholson I, Baines S. Complications associated with temporary tracheos-
tomy tubes in 42 dogs (1998 to 2007). J Small Anim Pract. 2012;53:108-114.
33. Hardie RJ. Translaryngeal percutaneous arytenoid lateralization technique 
in a canine cadaveric study. J Vet Emerg Crit Care. 2016;25:659-663.
34. Sample SH, Hardie RJ, Stein J, etal. Evaluation of translaryngeal percutane-
ous arytenoid lateralization (TPAL) in dogs with experimentally created laryngeal 
paralysis. Res Vet Sci. 2018;117:239-245.
35. Rishniw M, Sammarco J, Glass EN, etal. Eect of doxepin on quality of life 
in Labradors with laryngeal paralysis: a double-blinded, randomized, placebo-
controlled trial. J Vet Intern Med. 2021;35:1943-1949.
36. Ricart MC, Rodriguez SM, Dure RM. Laryngeal stent for acute and chronic 
respiratory distress in seven dogs with laryngeal paralysis. Open Vet J. 2020;10:4-10.
37. Occhipinti LL, Hauptman JG. Long-term outcome of permanent tracheosto-
mies in dogs: 21 cases (2000-2012). Can Vet J. 2014;55:357-360.
38. Grimes JA, Davis AM, Wallace ML, etal. Long-term outcome and risk 
factors associated with death or the need for revision surgery in dogs with perma-
nent tracheostomies. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2019;254:1086-1093.
39. Bookbinder LC, Flanders J, Bookbinder PF, etal. Idiopathic canine laryn-
geal paralysis as one sign of a diuse polyneuropathy: an observational study of 
90 cases (2007-2013). Vet Surg. 2016;45:254-260.
40. Hammel SP, Hottinger HA, Novo RE. Postoperative results of unilateral 
arytenoid lateralization for treatment of idiopathic laryngeal paralysis in dogs: 39 
cases (1996-2002). J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2006;228:1215-1220.
41. Weinstein J, Weisman D. Intraoperative evaluation of the larynx following 
unilateral arytenoid lateralization for acquired idiopathic laryngeal paralysis in 
dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 2010;46:241-248.
42. Wilson D, Monnet E. Risk factors for the development of aspiration pneu-
monia aer unilateral arytenoid lateralization in dogs with laryngeal paralysis: 
232 cases (1987-2012). J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2016;248:188-194.
43. Milovancev M, Townsend K, Spina J, etal. Eect of metoclopramide on 
the incidence of early postoperative aspiration pneumonia in dogs with acquired 
laryngeal paralysis. Vet Surg. 2016;45:577-581.
44. Kempf J, Fraser L, Reusch CE, etal. High-resolution manometric evalua-
tion of the eects of cisapride and metoclopramide hydrochloride administered 
orally on lower esophageal sphincter pressure in awake dogs. Am J Vet Res. 
2014;75:361-366.
45. Sample SJ, Stilin A, Binversie EE, etal. Late-onset laryngeal paralysis: owner 
perception of quality of life and cause of death. Vet Med Sci. 2020;6:306-313.
46. Taylor SS, Harvey AM, Barr FJ, etal. Laryngeal disease in cats: a retrospec-
tive study of 35 cases. J Feline Med Surg. 2009;11:954-962.
47. Hardie RJ, Gunby J, Bjorling DE. Arytenoid lateralization for treatment of 
laryngeal paralysis in 10 cats. Vet Surg. 2009;38:445-451.
48. unberg B, Lantz GC. Evaluation of unilateral arytenoid lateraliza-
tion for the treatment of laryngeal paralysis in 14 cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 
2010;46:418-424.
49. Nelissen P, Corletto F, Aprea F, etal. Eect of three anesthetic induction 
protocols on laryngeal motion during laryngoscopy in normal cats. Vet Surg. 
2012;42:876-883.
50. Rudorf H, Barr F. Echolaryngography in cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound. 
2002;43:353-357.
51. Nelissen P, White RA. Arytenoid lateralization for management of 
combined laryngeal paralysis and laryngeal collapse in small dogs. Vet Surg. 
2012;41:261-265.
52. Johnson LR, Mayhew PD, Steey MA, etal. Upper airway obstruction in 
Norwich Terriers: 16 cases. J Vet Intern Med. 2013;27:1409-1415.
53. Koch DA, Rosaspina M, Wiestner T, etal. Comparative investigations on 
the upper respiratory tract in Norwich terriers, brachycephalic and mesatice-
phalic dogs. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd. 2014;156:119-124.
54. Pink JJ, Doyle RS, Hughes JM, etal. Laryngeal collapse in seven brachyce-
phalic puppies. J Small Anim Pract. 2006;47:131-135.
55. Hughes JR, Kaye BM, Beswick AR, et al. Complications following laryngeal 
sacculectomy in brachycephalic dogs. J Small Anim Pract. 2018;59:16-21.
56. Torrez CV, Hunt GB. Results of surgical correction of abnormalities associ-
ated with brachycephalic airway obstruction syndrome in dogs in Australia. J Sm 
Anim Pract. 2006;47:150-154.
57. White RN. Surgical management of laryngeal collapse associated with 
brachycephalic airway obstruction syndrome in dogs. J Small Anim Pract. 
2012;53:44-50.
58. American Veterinary Medical Association. AVMA Policy on Ca-
nine Devocalization. https://www.avma.org/KB/Policies/Pages/Canine-
Devocalization.aspx
59. Mehl ML, Kyles AE, Pypendop BH, etal. Outcome of laryngeal web resec-
tion with mucosal apposition for treatment of airway obstruction in dogs: 15 
cases (1992-2006). J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2008;233:738-742.
60. Peterson SL, Smith MM. Evaluation of a stented laryngoplasty for correc-
tion of cranial glottis stenosis in four dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1987;191:1582-
1584.
61. Taylor SS, Harvey AM, Barr FJ, etal. Laryngeal disease in cats: a retrospec-
tive study of 35 cases. J Feline Med Surg. 2009;11:954-962.
62. Ramírez GA, Altimira J, Vilafranca M. Cartilaginous tumors of the larynx 
and trachea in the dog: literature review and 10 additional cases (1995-2014). Vet 
Pathol. 2015;52:1019-1026.
63. Jakubiak MJ, Siedlecki CT, Zenger E, etal. Laryngeal, laryngotracheal, and 
tracheal masses in cats: 27 cats (1998-2003). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 2005;41:310-
316.
64. Guenther-Yenke CL, Rozanski EA. Tracheostomy in cats: 23 cases (1998-
2006). J Feline Med Surg. 2007;9:451-457.
65. Stepnik MW, Mehl ML, Hardie EM, etal. Outcome of permanent tracheos-
tomy for treatment of upper airway obstruction in cats: 21 cases (1990-2007). J 
Am Vet Med Assoc. 2009;234:638-643.


=== PDF PAGE 1310 ===
SECTION XII
•
Respiratory Disease
1158
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
Large Airway Diseases
Cecile Clercx
CHAPTER 215
TRACHEAL DISEASES
M
ost tracheal disorders can involve 
both intra- and extrathoracic seg-
ments of the trachea. Noninfec-
tious tracheal diseases are common and 
include dorsal tracheal membrane accidity, 
tracheal collapse, tracheal injury/laceration, 
posttraumatic stenosis, foreign body, intra-
tracheal tumor, and tracheal avulsion (cat).
Tracheitis refers to an inammation of 
the epithelial lining of the trachea, which can 
be infectious or noninfectious. When dogs 
develop tracheitis, it is oen a part of the 
canine infectious respiratory disease com-
plex (CIRDC; ch. 203). Tracheitis can also be 
secondary to prolonged barking, or disease 
of the oropharynx, esophagus, or even the 
stomach (aerodigestive disorders; ch. 221) 
(see Figure 215.4). In cats, tracheitis is most 
oen associated with infectious feline respi-
ratory disease (ch. 205). Tracheitis in cats 
does not always induce a signicant cough, 
as it does in dogs.
Tracheal compromise can also result from 
extratracheal diseases, such as extreme car-
diac enlargement, mediastinal enlargement 
(hematopoietic neoplasia [ch. 322], or mega-
esophagus [ch. 259]), or space-occupying 
masses, which can cause deviation of the tra-
chea and possibly aect the shape or lumen 
of the trachea (Figures 215.1, 215.2).
TRACHEAL COLLAPSE (DOGS)
Tracheal collapse, also referred to as collapsing trachea and canine 
tracheal collapse syndrome, is a very common disorder encoun-
tered in middle-aged to older toy or miniature breeds. e “goose 
honk” sound of the cough is characteristic (Video 215.1).
Etiology and Pathophysiology
e cause of primary tracheal collapse syndrome is complex and 
is best regarded as multifactorial.1 e traditionally considered 
form of dynamic mechanical collapse can be caused by a combi-
nation of progressive malacia of the tracheal cartilages and lax-
ity of the trachealis muscle, resulting primarily in dorsoventral 
collapse, possibly associated with malacic airways (or bronchial 
collapse). In a dierent form, dorsoventral narrowing gives the 
trachea a W-shaped cross-section due to malformation of the tra-
cheal rings. is is referred to as tracheal malformation. It is a 
more static form of narrowing of the tracheal lumen that is dis-
tinct from, or occurs in addition to, dynamic narrowing caused by 
invagination of the trachealis muscle during respiration.
In the traditional form, clinical disease occurs when 2 fac-
tors exist concurrently: a primary cartilage abnormality that 
results in intrinsic weakness of the tracheal rings, and second-
ary factors capable of initiating progression to the point of caus-
ing clinical signs. Soening of cartilage rings seems to be due 
to a reduction of glycosaminoglycan and chondroitin sulfate 
content, which leads to a decreased ability to maintain func-
tional rigidity, further leading to a weakness and attening of 
the tracheal rings.2 3 Potential triggering factors include obe-
sity, cardiomegaly, inhalation of irritants and allergens, peri-
odontal disease, respiratory infections, and recent endotracheal 
intubation.4 e dynamic changes of tracheal collapse may be 
conned to either the cervical or the thoracic region of the tra-
chea, or both can be aected; frequently, the changes are more 
pronounced at the cervicothoracic junction. Dorsoventral at-
tening of the tracheal cartilaginous rings causes a stretch of the 
dorsal tracheal membrane, which becomes inamed and pen-
dulous. us, it can prolapse into the tracheal lumen as soon 
as extraluminal pressure exceeds intraluminal pressure, further 
reducing the diameter of the tracheal lumen.5 Inside the thorax, 
during inspiration, the redundant dorsal membrane is aspirated 
by/subjected to negative intrathoracic pressure during inspira-
tion and may excessively enlarge the tracheal lumen, as seen on 
lateral radiographs (Figure 215.3). e syndrome is perpetuated 
by the cycle of chronic inammation of the tracheal mucosa, 
which exacerbates—and in turn, is exacerbated by—the cough. 
In dogs with tracheal collapse, concurrent bronchomalacia is 
frequently encountered and does not appear to be related to air-
way inammation.6 Pulmonary hypertension (PH) can develop 
in dogs with tracheal collapse and bronchomalacia (ch. 218).7-9
Clinical Presentation
Primary tracheal collapse is commonly seen in middle-aged to 
older miniature, toy, and small breed dogs. Overrepresented 
breeds include the Yorkshire Terrier, Pomeranian, Pug, Poodle, 
Maltese, and Chihuahua.5 9
Clinical signs include chronic cough in all cases (ch. 34), mild 
to severe panting, exercise intolerance, and varying degree of respi-
ratory distress (ch. 37) as well as a varying degree of cyanosis in 
advanced cases (ch. 27). A prolonged clinical history is common.
e cough is harsh, oen followed by a terminal retch; it is 
oen described as “honking/goose honk”10 and is precipitated 
by activity, excitement, tracheal pressure (such as that caused by 
pulling on a leash) or drinking. is characteristic cough can be 
elicited easily by palpation of the trachea. Collapse of the cervi-
cal trachea can sometimes be appreciated as a attening of the 
tracheal rings on cervical palpation. In some cases, a cough is not 
ACRONYMS
AHR airway hyperrespon-
siveness
BALF bronchoalveolar 
lavage fluid
BWBP barometric whole-
body plethysmography
CB chronic bronchitis
CIRDC canine infectious respi-
ratory disease complex
COPD chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease
CT computed tomography
EB eosinophilic bronchitis
EBP eosinophilic broncho-
pneumopathy
EG eosinophilic granuloma
ELD eosinophilic lung disease
FLAD feline lower airway 
disease
GERD gastroesophageal 
reflux disease
GI gastrointestinal
IST inhaled steroid therapy
NK-1 neurokinin-1
NT-proBNP N-terminal pro-
B-type natriuretic peptide
PCD primary ciliary dyski-
nesia
PCR polymerase chain 
reaction
PH pulmonary hypertension
TBFVL tidal breathing flow 
volume loops
This chapter is enhanced with the following electronic assets onElsevier eBooks+: 17 Videos.


=== PDF PAGE 1311 ===
CHAPTER 215
•
Large Airway Diseases
1159
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
audible as such and owners only report inspiratory-expiratory 
stertor, sometimes described as a pig-grunt- or -growl-like sound 
(Video 215.2). In severe cases, the cough or stertor almost never 
stops, leading to muscular fatigue and exhaustion of the animal. 
In rare cases, excitement can lead to cyanosis because of complete 
obstruction, vagally mediated syncope, or PH,7 8 especially when 
concomitant bronchomalacia is present.
During thoracic auscultation, crackles on both inspiration and 
expiration can be appreciated in dogs with small airway collapse, 
and/or concurrent bronchitis. A thorough cardiac auscultation 
is recommended (ch. 38), since a heart murmur associated with 
mitral regurgitation can be heard (ch. 232); indeed, concurrent 
myxomatous/degenerative mitral valve disease is a common nd-
ing in the same population aected by tracheal collapse; i.e. older, 
small-breed dogs. However, the role of cardiomegaly and speci-
cally le atrial enlargement in airway collapse by airway compres-
sion remains unclear, with evidence of airway inammation as the 
likely cause of cough in dogs that had both le atrial enlargement 
and airway collapse in one study.11 Hepatomegaly is common in 
dogs with tracheal collapse and could be a reection of obesity, 
although hepatic dysfunction has been reported in dogs with tra-
cheal collapse.12 Bronchial collapse/bronchomalacia is common 
in dogs with tracheal collapse.13
Diagnosis
e diagnosis of tracheal collapse is strongly suspected based on 
signalment, history of cough, and physical examination ndings.5
Additional diagnostic evaluation (radiography, uoroscopy [ch. 
212], tracheal ultrasound,14 echocardiography [ch. 97], bron-
choscopy [ch. 93] and pulmonary function testing15) can be used 
for conrming the extent and severity of the tracheal collapse, 
and the presence of concomitant or complicating diseases such 
as bronchomalacia, PH, cardiomegaly, or lower airway diseases. 
Imaging is required to obtain adequate measurements prior to 
placement of any tracheal stent (ch. 114).
Radiographic examination of animals with collapsed trachea 
can use both still and motion studies. e most useful radio-
graphic examinations include lateral projections over the thoracic 
inlet, and a tangential (craniocaudal) projection of the thoracic 
inlet (in this skyline projection, the collapsed trachea is seen as 
an oval, “C” or crescent shape). Because of the relationship of col-
lapse to the respiratory cycle, uoroscopic investigation may be 
more sensitive than radiographs (ch. 212).9
On lateral radiographs, a redundant dorsal tracheal mem-
brane that invaginates into the tracheal lumen can be seen 
as a soft-tissue opacity along the dorsal aspect of the caudal 
cervical tracheal lumen. This radiographic appearance can be 
seen in both small- and large-breed dogs as a consequence of 
coughing, and must be differentiated from a superimposed 
esophagus. Therefore, lateral radiographs made during both 
the maximal inspiratory and maximal expiratory phases of the 
respiratory cycle are needed to demonstrate dynamic collapse. 
Indeed, collapse of the cervical tracheal segment occurs in 
inspiration because of the decreased pressure within the tra-
chea whereas the thoracic portion tends to collapse during the 
expiration phase as a consequence of increased intrathoracic 
pressure. These dynamic changes are best viewed in real time 
using image-intensified fluoroscopy (Video 215.3). Radiogra-
phy and fluoroscopy are complementary imaging techniques; 
confirming the presence or absence of tracheal or bronchial 
collapse can require multiple imaging modalities as well as 
bronchoscopy.16 Cervical lung lobe herniation (CLLH), or 
protrusion of lung parenchyma beyond the musculoskeletal 
entrance of the thorax, is a frequent concurrent finding identi-
fied by fluoroscopy (ch. 212; Video 212.2).17-19
Although rarely needed to conrm the diagnosis, trache-
oscopy can reveal a decreased dorsoventral diameter due to 
attening of the cartilaginous rings with a pendulous dorsal 
membrane, potentially leading to complete obstruction of the 
tracheal lumen (Figure 215.4). Tracheobronchoscopy (Videos 
215.4 and 215.5; ch. 93) is advised in all cases since it is very 
helpful in determining the degree of severity of the tracheal and 
especially bronchial collapse, as well as in assessing concomi-
tant airway disease including secondary infection. ose nd-
ings should be properly addressed and taken into account for 
prognostic purposes before stent placement can be considered, 
although the presence of mainstem bronchial collapse at the 
time of stent placement might lack signicant association with 
outcome.20
Management
In animals with marked respiratory diculty, oxygen supplemen-
tation can be delivered (ch. 123), and sedation and antitussive 
agents are needed. Butorphanol (0.05-0.2 mg/kg q4-6h) and/or 
acepromazine (0.01-0.1 mg/kg) can be injected SC, and pred-
nisolone sodium succinate (15-30 mg/kg slow IV bolus) can be 
administered to decrease acute inammation.
Long-term treatment may involve multimodal medical 
therapy or mechanical stenting. Medical therapy is the corner-
stone of treatment for collapsing trachea-associated coughing 
(Video 215.1). Severely-aected dogs with clinical signs caused 
Figure 215.1
Lateral thoracic radiograph of a middle-aged mixed-
breed dog showing the presence of a large mediastinal mass, causing 
marked ventral deviation of the trachea.
Figure 215.2
Endoscopy of the trachea in a dog with severe respirato-
ry distress and cyanosis. Note the extreme reduction and altered shape 
of the tracheal lumen, caused by a huge mediastinal mass.


=== PDF PAGE 1312 ===
SECTION XII
•
Respiratory Disease
1160
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
by dynamic tracheal obstruction (severe inspiratory-expiratory 
tracheal stertor, obstructive dyspnea [Video 215.2]) may benet 
from placement of a stent (ch.114).21 For all, decreasing factors 
that promote cough and tracheal mucosal inammation is key. 
Weight reduction in the obese animal is essential (ch. 150). Like-
wise, neck collars should be replaced by harnesses. Removing 
the dog from respiratory irritants such as noxious gases, smoke 
and dust is common sense. It is also important to detect and treat 
other diseases, like chronic airway disease, cardiac disease, and 
hyperadrenocorticism.
Medical therapy typically includes antitussives, sedative-
antihistamines, low dose corticosteroids, and may also include 
use of bronchodilators or a short course of antimicrobials for 
secondary infection. Oral agents such as hydrocodone (0.22 mg/
kg PO q12h) or butorphanol (0.55 mg/kg PO q12h) can control 
cough. A very low dose of steroids orally (prednisone 0.2 mg/kg 
daily for 1 to 2 weeks, at 3-month intervals, for instance), or by 
inhalation (uticasone, one 120 mcg pu q12h [ch. 90]), oen 
in combination with a sedative-antihistamine, can reduce muco-
sal inammation. Oversedation must be avoided since mobility 
is important to avoid gaining weight and promote clearance of 
tracheal secretions. Bronchodilators (methylxanthines or beta-
agonists) might allow reduction in smaller airway spasm, reduc-
ing intrathoracic pressures and thus reducing the tendency of the 
larger airways to collapse.
Prognosis
Most dogs improve with an individualized treatment plan, but the 
condition is generally progressive. Recent studies suggest improved 
long-term prognosis with the use of tracheal stents, although this 
treatment is certainly susceptible to important complications.21
TRACHEOBRONCHIAL FISTULA
Tracheo- or bronchoesophageal stula is a rare disease in dogs. 
It is discussed in ch. 259
OBSTRUCTIVE AND/OR TRAUMATIC TRACHEAL 
DISEASES
Etiology
Tracheal Obstruction Tracheal obstruction may be caused 
by collapsed or malformed tracheal rings (above), stenosis subse-
quent to injuries, foreign bodies, neoplasia, granulomas, external 
compression, or a complication of tracheostomy.22
Tracheal Injuries Tracheal injuries range from small lacera-
tions to tracheal avulsions and can be caused by intraluminal or 
external trauma. Intraluminal trauma is mostly associated with 
endotracheal intubation, while the most common forms of exter-
nal trauma involve dog bites or automobile accidents.
C
A
B
Figure 215.3
Lateral thoracic radiographs of an 8-year-old Yorkshire Terrier during (A) peak inspiration and (B) peak expiration, showing the 
dramatic change in tracheal diameter that can occur during the respiratory cycle in animals with collapsing trachea. is illustrates the importance of 
obtaining inspiratory and expiratory views. C, Collapsing trachea observed at the thoracic inlet in a dog with moderate rotation of the trachea. As a 
result of the rotation, the trachea appears wide in this lateral projection, rather than collapsed.


=== PDF PAGE 1313 ===
CHAPTER 215
•
Large Airway Diseases
1161
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
In cats, a well-reported problem of intraluminal trauma con-
cerns stenosis aer necrosis/rupture following endotracheal intu-
bation23 (Video 215.6; Figure 215.5). Delayed stenosis can occur 
aer intrathoracic tracheal (or bronchial) rupture caused by blunt 
trauma to the neck or thorax24 (Video 215.7). ese problems 
have been reported rarely in dogs.
Tracheal Foreign Bodies Generally, when a foreign body 
enters the trachea, it is small enough to pass into a bronchus 
(Video 215.8). Once lodged in a bronchus it can cause bacterial 
bronchopneumonia that is responsive to antibiotics but recur-
rent. When the foreign bodies are too large, they usually lodge at 
the carina and cause airway obstruction that can be life threaten-
ing (Figure 215.6). Reported cases of tracheal foreign bodies in 
dogs and cats are rare but have involved mineral oil, hair, bullets, 
bones, plant material, toys, etc.22
Intratracheal Tumors Intratracheal tumors are uncom-
mon in dogs and cats. In young dogs, osteochondroma is more 
likely while in older dogs or in cats, many other tumor types can 
be found (e.g., mast cell tumor, lymphoma, squamous cell car-
cinoma, adenocarcinoma, osteosarcoma, extramedullary plasma-
cytoma, leiomyoma, fibrosarcoma).22 25
Tracheal Granulomas Tracheal granulomas can be a 
complication after intraluminal stent placement in dogs with 
tracheal collapse and can result in a severe reduction of the 
tracheal lumen (ch. 114) Tracheal parasitic granulomas can 
be caused by lungworms (Filaroides [Oslerus] osleri) in dogs 
and tracheal cuterebrosis in cats.
Clinical Presentation
Tracheal obstruction or injury can cause inspiratory stridor with 
a prolonged inspiratory phase followed by a variable expiratory 
phase, coughing, inspiratory stridor, exercise intolerance, gagging, 
exertional distress, fever, change in bark, intermittent cyanosis or 
collapse, and open-mouth breathing in cats.22 Tracheal tears char-
acteristically result in subcutaneous emphysema over the cervi-
cal and thoracic areas due to air escaping from the trachea into 
the subcutaneous tissue. Typically, subcutaneous emphysema is 
palpable as crepitations in the subcutis. Pneumomediastinum can 
occur rarely; in a recent study, endotracheal intubation with posi-
tive pressure ventilation was the most common cause of pneumo-
mediastinum, followed by trauma, and tracheal foreign bodies.26
Aer tracheal avulsion injury, the airway lumen is thought to 
be maintained by either intact tracheal adventitia or by thicken-
ing of mediastinal tissue leading to the development of a pseudo-
airway.24 Stenosis of the lumen then occurs at both ends of the 
injury. erefore, clinical signs such as inspiratory distress and 
tracheal stridor are delayed and are due to tracheal obstruction.24
Tracheal foreign bodies cause an acute onset of clinical signs.
Diagnosis and Management
The diagnosis of tracheal injury or obstruction is usually made 
by thoracic radiography and/or tracheoscopy (Videos 215.6-
215.8). Minor tracheal tears may heal without intervention. 
Figure 215.4
Tracheal abnormalities 
in dogs, endoscopic views. A, Trachei-
tis with prolapsed and irritated dorsal 
membrane; B, tracheal hypoplasia in 
an English Bulldog; grade 1 (C) and 
grade 3 (D) tracheal collapse.
A
B
C
D


=== PDF PAGE 1314 ===
SECTION XII
•
Respiratory Disease
1162
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
Surgical management may be necessary for more substantial 
injury or for tumors, with anastomosis repair if necessary. 
The prognosis can still be good even with substantial tracheal 
injuries.24
INFECTIOUS TRACHEITIS/TRACHEOBRONCHITIS
Canine infectious respiratory disease complex (CIRDC), formerly 
known as “kennel cough,” is commonly seen in young dogs, espe-
cially in boarding kennels or aer time spent in animal shelters. 
is contagious disease is described in detail in ch. 203.
BRONCHIAL DISEASES
BRONCHIAL DISEASES—PRIMARY
Chronic Bronchitis in Dogs
Definition, Overview Chronic bronchitis (CB) is an incur-
able disease of insidious onset, characterized by chronic and per-
sistent cough, and related to chronic inflammation of the airways 
unassociated with any identified specific primary cause. It is a 
syndrome more than a true diagnosis.27 Therefore, in dogs, it is 
also called nonspecific/aspecific chronic bronchitis.
CB in dogs is dened when 3 diagnostic criteria are fullled: 
(1) ≥2 months of coughing; (2) evidence of mucus hypersecretion 
and (3) exclusion of other chronic cardiopulmonary diseases (e.g., 
congestive heart failure, chronic infectious bronchopneumonia, 
pulmonary neoplasia, eosinophilic bronchopneumopathy [EBP]) 
as the sole cause of cough. Such cardiorespiratory diseases (e.g., 
congestive heart failure, airway collapse) may coexist and compli-
cate the diagnosis and treatment of CB. In humans, the functional 
sequela of CB is chronic airway obstruction, referred to as chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and subsequent emphy-
sema. is mechanism appears to be less frequently observed in 
dogs, although the diagnosis of COPD relies on documentation 
of airow obstruction by pulmonary function tests that are not 
widely available in veterinary medicine. Dogs with severe and 
longstanding CB can exhibit either bronchiectasis (dilation and 
destruction of the walls of the bronchi) or bronchomalacia (air-
way collapse during expiration and cough) or both combined.
Etiology, Epidemiology, and Risk Factors By definition, 
primary causes of CB are poorly understood. The major difficulty 
is that the disease is detectable only in its advanced stages, since 
it has an insidious onset and protracted pathogenesis. Therefore, 
the diagnostic work up is based on exclusion of possible spe-
cific causes, which can be frustrating for both the clinician and 
the owner. Clinicopathological findings are variable and incon-
clusive. Nonspecific CB is mostly diagnosed in middle-aged to 
old smaller breeds of dogs, but it can also occur in larger breeds. 
Many dogs with CB are overweight and have periodontitis and 
dental tartar, which could be potential risk factors.
In humans, the most important risk factors include smoke 
exposure, atmospheric pollution, and infection. e same fac-
tors could impact development of CB in dogs. Moreover, in 
dogs, chronic/previous infection with CIRDC pathogens (e.g., 
Bordetella bronchiseptica) or canine distemper virus, with para-
sites leading to eosinophilic CB, or presence of other diseases 
like tracheal collapse or chronic cardiac disease, are all potential 
causes leading to development of CB. Exposure to environmental 
tobacco has not been conrmed as a risk factor.28
In people, gastroesophageal reux disease (GERD) is generally 
considered among the most common etiologies of chronic cough. 
Indeed, cough management guidelines published by numerous 
respiratory societies worldwide recommend evaluation and treat-
ment of GERD as an integral component of the diagnostic/thera-
peutic algorithm for the management of chronic cough. Silent 
aspiration occurs in over half of healthy humans during sleep 
without clinical consequence29 so it is reasonable to suspect that 
healthy dogs could have silent aspiration without clinical respira-
tory disease (ch. 221).30 31 Indeed, GERD has been shown to be 
common in healthy dogs in a study using nuclear scintigraphy 
to document reux32 while GERD and microaspiration of gastric 
juice reux aspiration have been documented in specic breeds 
(such as healthy West Highland White Terriers) using detection 
of bile acids in bronchoalveolar lavage uid (BALF).31 Aerodiges-
tive disorders causing cough in dogs are probably underdiagnosed 
due to poor clinical recognition and diagnostic limitations.33
Figure 215.5
Tracheal rupture following endotracheal intubations in 
a cat, endoscopic view. e rupture has been repaired with suture.
Figure 215.6
Foreign body obstructing a cat’s trachea, endoscopic 
view. e stone was dislodged and withdrawn using an endoscopic for-
ceps.


=== PDF PAGE 1320 ===
SECTION XII
•
Respiratory Disease
1168
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
Treatment and Outcome Treatment is nonspecific and sup-
portive, and should be based on clinical findings in each case. Like 
in dogs with tracheal collapse, long-term therapy mainly aims to 
decrease factors that can promote BM. Measures include strict weight 
control (ch. 150), use of a harness, removing the dog from respiratory 
irritants, and dealing with comorbid conditions such as inflamma-
tion, infection, PH, or concomitant mitral valve disease.
Studies investigating how dogs with BM respond to treatment 
are lacking. In the author’s experience, static and localized BM in 
brachycephalic dogs does not require therapy. Some dogs with more 
diuse dynamic BM respond reasonably well to close monitoring, 
but BM may be associated with a poor prognosis in some dogs with 
intractable cough and/or worsening signs of airway obstruction.
Feline Lower Airway Disease (FLAD)
Cough is an infrequent clinical sign in cats compared to dogs (Videos 
215.16 and 215.17). Furthermore, in cats, cough is fairly specic for 
tracheobronchial disease since cough of cardiac origin is rare. Feline 
lower airway disease is a term encompassing all bronchial diseases, 
including inammatory and noninammatory bronchial diseases. 
Inammatory bronchial diseases are by far more common.
Feline inammatory bronchial disease (feline asthma or CB) 
is characterized by inammation of the lower airways without an 
identiable cause. It is recognized clinically by various combina-
tions of cough, wheeze, abnormal increase in respiratory eort 
with activity, and respiratory distress. ese signs are attributable 
to airway obstruction caused by bronchial inammation.
Many confusing terms are found in the literature, such as CB, 
allergic bronchitis, EB, and bronchial asthma. Dierentiating asth-
matic bronchitis from non-asthmatic bronchitis is still challenging.
Whether feline asthma and CB are truly separate entities or 
two facets of the same disease remains uncertain.92 93 Accord-
ing to some authors, feline asthma and CB should be considered 
two distinct diseases.94 Dierences in etiology, thoracic radio-
graphic ndings, bronchoalveolar eosinophil/neutrophil percent-
ages, serum allergen-specic IgE testing and response to airway 
responsiveness testing have been investigated but no clear-cut 
discriminatory test exists.95-101 Categorization is based on eosino-
phil and neutrophil percentages in BALF. Several articles report 
values for cell types in feline BALF,101 102 but since specic ref-
erence ranges have not been established,98 both eosinophil and 
neutrophil thresholds for dening asthma and CB are arbitrarily 
assigned.96 97 Due to this lack of consensus regarding how feline 
asthma is dened, most published studies fail to discriminate 
between spontaneous feline asthma and feline CB. erefore, 
information on both diseases is presented here in a single section 
titled “Feline Inammatory Bronchial Disease.” is is followed by 
a brief dierential diagnosis for feline bronchial diseases of nonin-
ammatory origin. Dierentiating feline inammatory bronchial 
disease from noninammatory chronic lower airway diseases is 
necessary because of dierences in pathogenesis, treatments, and 
prognosis.99 erefore, dierential diagnosis with feline bronchial 
diseases of noninammatory origin will be addressed.
Feline Inflammatory Bronchial Disease
Pathogenesis and Pathophysiology According to some aut
hors,93 98 99 asthma and CB in cats should be considered two dis-
tinct syndromes. CB is thought to arise due to a previous insult 
that has permanently damaged the airway, leading to clinicopath-
ological features that are similar to those of asthma. Feline asthma 
is thought to be allergic,93 although at present, it is not clear 
whether an allergic form can be differentiated from a chronic dis-
ease of other origin. In humans, asthma is mediated by an allergic 
response after exposure to inhaled allergens. This induces stimu-
lation of a T helper 2 response, leading to the secretion of an array 
of cytokines that drive the immune response that causes patho-
logical changes in the airways. In human asthma, clinical signs are 
related to 3 hallmark features: 1) reversible airway inflammation, 
2) consequent obstruction/airflow limitation, 3) linked to AHR, 
and also to smooth muscle hypertrophy, excessive mucus pro-
duction and accumulation, and bronchial wall edema.103 Those 
changes are sometimes reversible. However, chronic inflamma-
tion can lead to severe lower airway obstruction that causes lung 
hyperinflation, because cats are unable to exhale completely past 
the narrowed airways, resulting in air trapping. Lung hyperinfla-
tion may lead to permanent changes, as evidenced by progres-
sive airway remodelling including bronchiectasis, fibrosis, or 
emphysema.
Clinical Presentation Although middle-aged females (2-8 
years) seem to be more frequently presented, cats of any age 
(usually begins in young or middle age) and either sex can be 
affected.92 104-107 Some studies report an increased frequency in 
Siamese cats,104 106 but this could be affected by regional feline 
breed distributions. Clinical signs vary in severity but include 
cough with or without increased breathing effort.93 98 Clini-
cal signs are often chronic or slowly progressive. In some cats, 
signs go unnoticed by the owner for long periods of time. In oth-
ers, complaints include vomiting or hairballs, driving the clini-
cal examination toward a GI work-up and/or treatment. Mildly 
affected cats may only have occasional, brief episodes of cough 
separated by long periods without clinical signs, while in moder-
ately or severely affected cases, cough occurs daily and cats may 
have a decreased quality of life due to breathing discomfort. Cats 
with severe exacerbations (“asthmatic crisis,” “status asthmati-
cus”) may present acutely with open-mouth breathing, respira-
tory distress, and cyanosis. Exacerbation may occur in association 
with exposure to potential allergens or irritants, such as aerosol 
sprays, cigarette smoke, environmental dust, or after stress or 
exercise, including stress-related visits to the vet!
Diagnosis Cats experiencing an asthmatic crisis should be 
manipulated minimally (ch. 37). Auscultation can reveal decreased 
heart sounds due to extreme lung hyperinflation. Cats should be 
stabilized as soon as possible (below and ch. 123). In less severe or 
chronic cases, physical examination findings are variable. The physi-
cal examination can be normal at rest or may include positive tra-
cheal reflex, presence of tachypnea or obstructive expiratory dyspnea 
while auscultation may be unremarkable or reveal wheezes during 
the expiratory phase, or more rarely crackles. Cardiac function is 
not impaired unless there is a concomitant disease. At this stage, 
additional testing is required. In particular, different species of lung-
worms (Aelurostrongylus abstrusus and Troglostrongylus species) and 
heartworms (specifically heartworm [Dirofilaria immitis]-associated 
respiratory disease; HWD [ch. 237]) can induce overlapping clini-
copathologic features.108 109 In view of the apparent geographical 
expansion of feline lungworms and heartworms,110-112 they are prob-
ably underrecognized and represent a challenging differential diag-
nosis with feline asthma.
Imaging Routine thoracic radiographs can be unremark-
able in some aected cats. e classic pattern includes a bron-
chointerstitial pattern and evidence of bronchial wall thickening 
(doughnuts or railroad tracks); air trapping may also be evident 
(increased lucency and attening of the diaphragm), as well as 
sometimes right middle lung lobe atelectasis.106 113 In many 
cases, radiographic ndings are not specic enough to conrm 
the diagnosis. oracic CT is a more sensitive means of detect-
ing bronchial wall thickening and bronchiectasis114 than are 
plain radiographs. In cats, CT can be performed using a plexi-
glass chamber (the VetMousetrap), allowing acquisition of images 
without chemical restraint.115 is can be of great benet in cats 
that are unable to tolerate any stress.
Blood Testing No nding is specic for FLAD. Approximately 
20% of aected cats have peripheral eosinophilia,104-106 which is not 


=== PDF PAGE 1321 ===
CHAPTER 215
•
Large Airway Diseases
1169
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
correlated with the degree of airway eosinophilia. A stress leuko-
gram can be observed, as well as nonspecic hyperglobulinemia in 
14-50% of cases. A heartworm antibody/antigen test can be used 
to investigate heartworm-associated respiratory disease108; qPCR 
tools can identify dierent species of lungworms (A. abstrusus and 
Troglostrongylus species) and should be used whenever possible.118
Serum specic IgE directed against aeroallergens has been 
found in some cats with eosinophilic airway inammation, but 
the number of aected cats with positive results does not dier 
from controls.119 A strong correlation has been found between 
the identication of allergic-specic IgE and cats with asthma, 
and the majority of these cats were polysensitized. However, large 
numbers of allergens with positive IgE reactivity or magnitude of 
IgE reactivity were not signicantly associated with clinical sever-
ity or airway eosinophilia.100
Fecal Analyses Fecal examination (ch. 80) is recommended 
in an attempt to rule out/detect a parasitic origin for the eosino-
philic inltration (such as A. abstrusus [using a Baermann test] or 
Toxocara cati [by fecal otation]).
Bronchoscopy and Bronchoalveolar Lavage Fluid 
(BALF) Analysis (ch. 93) In cats, bronchoscopy is considered 
less safe than in dogs, mainly due to the small size of the airways 
and the higher airway responsiveness of the cat120 compared to 
the dog. e procedure is more hazardous in a cat with respira-
tory distress. Bronchoscopy is not highly specic; it can reveal the 
presence of moderate to large amount of mucoid or viscous mate-
rial and airway mucosal hyperemia (Video 215.16).
Cytological examination of airway (BAL) or endotracheal wash 
(ETW) samples generally provides evidence of airway inamma-
tion, with increased numbers of eosinophils and/or neutrophils.117
Although up to 15% eosinophils can be found in uids from healthy 
cats, the number of eosinophils and neutrophils in BALF correlates 
with disease severity, both in cats with spontaneous disease102 and 
experimentally. Feline asthmatic disease clearly is primarily charac-
terized by a predominance of eosinophils in the BALF, but denitive 
cutos are lacking. Inammatory inltrates have been described as 
being predominantly eosinophilic when BALF contains >20% eosin-
ophils and neutrophils % within reference limits, or >50% eosino-
phils; as predominantly neutrophilic when BALF contains >7% 
neutrophils with eosinophil % within reference limits or >50% neu-
trophils; and mixed when concurrent increases in both eosinophil 
and neutrophil percentages or absolute numbers are found.123 On 
the other hand, many studies mention that eosinophilic inltration 
relates to the presence of >17% eosinophils while CB relates to the 
presence of >7% neutrophils in the BALF, with cats with >17% eosin-
ophils and >7% neutrophils being grouped with asthmatic cats.98
Such denitions are even less useful as soon as the cat was previously 
treated with any kind of glucocorticoid therapy, which induces a 
decrease in the eosinophilic content. Another study has conrmed 
that a BALF eosinophil percentage of <5% can be expected in healthy 
feline airways, and that there is good correlation between the ndings 
(in particular the relative concentration of eosinophils) in BALF and 
in tissue in feline asthma.123
Although some ndings on bronchoscopic examination (e.g., 
bronchiectasis) can appear more frequently in cats infected with A. 
abstrusus, and although larvae may be observed in the BALF in rare 
cats, bronchial alterations and cytological ndings in aelurostrongy-
losis are not specic and there is an overlap with those of other feline 
airway diseases.109 Troglostrongylus spp. can also cause a similar clini-
cal picture.110 en, samples of BAL and ETW uid may be submit-
ted for culture or PCR testing for parasitic organisms, and also for 
bacterial and mycoplasmal cultures since Mycoplasma infection can 
cause lower respiratory tract infection in cats92 124 125 and might be 
associated with feline bronchial disease.93 125 Mycoplasma spp. can 
also be detected in the BALF of sick cats without respiratory signs 
and might represent commensals of the lower respiratory tract of 
cats.125
Concentrations of several inammatory biomarkers (such as 
cytokines involved in the allergic response, e.g., interleukin-4, 
interferon-gamma and tumor necrosis factor-alpha) have been 
measured in BALF from cats with bronchial disease in an attempt 
to dierentiate asthma and CB, but the study failed to detect any 
dierence, even compared with control cats.95 e concentration 
of endothelin-1 (ET1) in BALF is lower in normal cats compared 
to those with experimentally induced asthma; therefore, BALF-
ET1 might be a potential diagnostic biomarker for asthma.126
Potential biomarkers might also be assessed by a non-invasive 
method of exhaled breath condensate collection127 128 and hydro-
gen peroxide has been suggested as a potential non-invasive 
biomarker.129
Pulmonary Function Tests An important clinical feature 
of asthma is airow limitation that is at least partially reversible 
with bronchodilators. In human medicine, pulmonary func-
tion testing is commonly used in the diagnosis and monitoring 
of therapeutic response in patients with asthma or CB. In cats, 
spirometry is inadequate since it requires patient compliance to 
exhale forcefully through a mouthpiece. However, some noninva-
sive tests have been developed, such as tidal breathing ow volume 
loops (TBFVL) using a tight tting face mask,102 116 barometric 
whole-body plethysmography (BWBP),121 130 or a combination of 
TBFVL and BWBP131 and forced expiratory ow-volume curves 
using a thoracic compression technique.132 BWBP can be used 
for estimating basal functional parameters as well as AHR, usu-
ally quantied by calculating the concentration of bronchocon-
strictor agent that can induce a 300% increase of basal enhanced 
pause. TBFVL and BWBP have been used in clinical case ser
ies97 116 130 132 and in airway responsiveness testing96 97 133 134
During TBFVL, the presence of airow limitation is aected 
by the overall extent of granulocyte inltration while most BWBP 
studies provide evidence of a correlation between airway eosino-
philic inammation and plethysmographic measures of broncho-
constriction and airway responsiveness. is suggests that BWBP 
associated with airway responsiveness testing may oer a new 
method for identifying cats with inammatory lower airway dis-
ease, and possibly for monitoring disease progression or response 
to therapy.
Differential Diagnosis The differential diagnosis for feline 
inflammatory bronchial disease mainly includes feline bronchial 
disease of noninflammatory origin and pulmonary parenchymal 
diseases, including infectious pneumonia/bronchopneumonia 
(bacterial, viral, parasitic, protozoal),122 135-137 which are uncom-
mon but probably underdiagnosed; airway foreign bodies; neo-
plasia (ch. 217); pleural effusion (ch. 220); and rare diseases such 
as “feline pulmonary fibrosis”138 139 and “endogenous lipidic 
pneumonia”140 (ch. 217). The parasitic diseases (A. abstrusus, 
Troglostrongylus brevior, Eucoleus aerophilus, Dirofilaria immitis
with Wolbachia [ch. 237],141 142 Toxocara cati [ch. 262]), can cause 
similar clinical findings including eosinophilic airway inflamma-
tion; therefore, empirical therapy is justified in endemic regions.
Management/Treatment and Monitoring
Acute Respiratory Distress In cats with severe acute respira-
tory distress, stress should be minimized and an oxygen-enriched 
environment should be provided (ch. 123). Parenteral therapy with 
bronchodilators (beta-2 agonists, e.g., terbutaline 0.01 mg /kg IV, 
IM or SC) and rapidly acting corticosteroid (e.g., dexamethasone 
0.25-0.5 mg/kg IV or IM) should be administered promptly.107
Inhaled bronchodilators can be used, although respiratory distress 
limits the amount of drug that reaches the bronchi. ese treat-
ments aim to quickly reduce bronchoconstriction. If a cat fails to 
respond, spontaneous pneumothorax needs to be considered and 
investigated, as emergency thoracocentesis could be life-saving (ch. 
92). Indeed, asthma is the most common cause of spontaneous 


=== PDF PAGE 1322 ===
SECTION XII
•
Respiratory Disease
1170
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
pneumothorax in cats (25%)143 and asthma-associated pneumo-
thorax can carry a good short-term prognosis.143
Chronic Presentations Most retrospective studies in cats 
with lower airway diseases have documented a benecial response 
to oral or parenteral glucocorticoids and/or bronchodila-
tors.102 104 105 Classic therapy for chronic forms of FLAD includes 
the use of long-term, oral corticosteroid (e.g., prednisolone, 1-2 
mg/kg PO q12h for 1-2 weeks, followed by gradual tapering of the 
dose) which remains a consistent, reliable and eective treatment 
to date. It has been suggested that oral propentofylline, a methyl-
xanthine derivative with bronchodilating actions, might carry an 
additive benet when administered with prednisolone compared 
to monotherapy with prednisolone.144
Currently, there are few easy measurable parameters to closely 
monitor response to therapy. erefore, in practice, treatment moni-
toring generally relies on assessing improvement of clinical signs. 
Both airway eosinophilia and AHR are considered hallmarks of the 
disease and are potentially interesting parameters to monitor during 
treatment. However, a study showed that even in cats with a good 
clinical response to therapy and resolution of clinical signs, BALF 
evidence of inammation was persistent. Repeat analysis of BALF for 
resolution of inammation may be a preferred monitoring tool.145
BWBP and pseudo-TBFVL also are noninvasive means of evaluat-
ing lung function in conscious, spontaneously breathing cats; both 
have also been proven useful to monitor the response to treatment in 
experimental models and spontaneous cases.96 97 132 146
e use of inhaled medication using a face mask and spacing 
chamber, rst described by Padrid147 has become commonplace148
(ch. 90). Medications given by inhalation oer the advantage of 
high drug concentrations within the airways while attenuating sys-
temic side-eects. Inhaled corticosteroids (e.g., uticasone propio-
nate), utilized essentially as chronic therapy, and bronchodilators 
(e.g., albuterol), used to palliate an acute exacerbation of clinical 
signs, are the most commonly used. eir use was rst developed 
experimentally.150-152 Several clinical studies have evaluated the 
response to nebulized therapy in feline patients. One of them showed 
that with inhaled budesonide 400 mcg q12h, clinical signs and BWBP 
both improved, and other treatment could be withdrawn in 47% of 
cats.133 e same study showed an absence of corticosteroid-induced 
side-eects but hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis suppression in 
20% of cats.
In another study, one group of cats was treated with inhaled 
uticasone propionate (Flixotide, GlaxoSmithKline, 2 pus, 250 
mcg/pu) q12h.97 Despite a signicant improvement in clinical 
scores, and apparent resolution of clinical signs in some cats, 
BWBP values did not change signicantly by rst recheck; this 
provides further evidence that overt clinical resolution may pre-
cede recovery of normal airway function. is result does not 
appear to be due to insucient dosage of nebulized uticasone. 
Indeed, a study involving a feline asthma model showed that 
inhaled uticasone dosages of 44 mcg and 220 mcg had identi-
cal eects152; therefore, the lower dosage should be considered 
for the management of cats with naturally occurring inamma-
tory bronchial disease. As only oral prednisolone is capable of 
eliminating the late-phase asthmatic reaction,150 a combination 
of both oral and inhaled glucocorticosteroid medication can be 
started, followed by a single inhaled therapy in the follow up 
period.
Bronchodilators, such as inhaled albuterol (salbutamol), are 
very useful to quickly alleviate clinical signs. However, as they 
fail to control airway inammation, they should not be used 
alone (for monotherapy). ey should be used with caution due 
to possible adverse eects, including tachycardia, central ner-
vous system stimulation, tremors and hypokalemia. Chronic 
daily racemic albuterol administration has been associated with 
increased severity of airway inammation in an experimental 
model of feline asthma.153
Cats with FLAD can benet from other treatments. Weight loss 
should be encouraged in obese cats (ch. 150). A recent study com-
pared pulmonary function variables between obese and non-obese 
cats via BWBP.154 Although obesity failed to demonstrate a signi-
cant increase in bronchoconstriction index variable as previously 
reported in humans and dogs, signicant impaired pulmonary 
function was conrmed. Saline nebulization and oral and nebu-
lized mucolytics or phytotherapeutic agents have not been proven 
benecial and should be administered with great caution, if at all. 
In cats, any nebulized substance can potentially trigger a broncho-
spastic reaction and/or bring on extra stress, all having a negative 
impact in the cat with FLAD. In a feline model of chronic aller-
gic asthma, the eects of allogenic, adipose-derived mesenchymal 
stem cells were documented.155 ere were no dierences between 
treatment groups or within groups over time with respect to air-
way eosinophilia, AHR, or immunologic assays; however, airway 
remodeling, as assessed by CT ndings, was signicantly limited in 
stem cell-treated animals compared to placebo-treated ones.
Prognosis Feline bronchial disease is associated with substan-
tial morbidity and even mortality in cats. Although most cats are 
well controlled with oral or nebulized therapy or both, they generally 
required lifelong treatment. Importantly, unchecked airway inflam-
mation can lead to irreversible remodeling resulting in a decline in 
lung function. In chronic cases when remodeling has taken place, 
alleviation of clinical signs can become challenging. Although data 
documenting prognostic factors in feline bronchial disease are lack-
ing, severe clinical signs and failure to respond to glucocorticoid 
treatment would be considered unfavorable characteristics.
REFERENCES
1. Weisse C, Berent A, Violette N, etal. Short-, intermediate-, and long-term 
results for endoluminal stent placement in dogs with tracheal collapse. J Am Vet 
Med Assoc. 2019;254:380-392.
2. Dallman MJ, McClure RC, Brown EM. Normal and collapsed trachea in the 
dog: scanning electron microscopy study. Am J Vet Res. 1985;46:2110-2115.
3. Dallman MJ, McClure RC, Brown EM. Histochemical study of normal and 
collapsed tracheas in dogs. Am J Vet Res. 1988;49:2117-2125.
4. Della Maggiore A. An update on tracheal and airway collapse in dogs. Vet 
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. 2020;50:419-430.
5. Johnson LR, Pollard RE. Tracheal collapse and bronchomalacia in dogs: 58 
cases (7/2001-1/2008). J Vet Intern Med. 2010;24:298-305.
6. Bottero E, Bellino C, De Lorenzi D, etal. Clinical evaluation and endoscopic 
classication of bronchomalacia in dogs. J Vet Intern Med. 2013;27:840-846.
7. Jaey JA, Wiggen K, Leach SB, etal. Pulmonary hypertension secondary to 
respiratory disease and/or hypoxia in dogs: clinical features, diagnostic testing 
and survival. Vet J. 2019;251:105347.
8. Reinero C, Visser LC, Kellihan HB, etal. ACVIM consensus statement guide-
lines for the diagnosis, classication, treatment, and monitoring of pulmonary 
hypertension in dogs. J Vet Intern Med. 2020;34:549-573.
9. Macready DM, Johnson LR, Pollard RE. Fluoroscopic and radiographic 
evaluation of tracheal collapse in dogs: 62 cases (2001-2006). J Am Vet Med Assoc. 
2007;230:1870-1876.
10. Domínguez-Ruiz M, Reinero CR, Vientos-Plotts A, etal. Association be-
tween respiratory clinical signs and respiratory localization in dogs and cats with 
abnormal breathing patterns. Vet J. 2021;277:105761.
11. Singh MK, Johnson LR, Kittleson MD, etal. Bronchomalacia in dogs with 
myxomatous mitral valve degeneration. J Vet Intern Med. 2012;26:312-319.
12. Bauer NB, Schneider MA, Neiger R, etal. Liver disease in dogs with tracheal 
collapse. J Vet Intern Med. 20:845-849.
13. Ibañez-Tallon I, Heintz N, Omran H. To beat or not to beat: roles of cilia in 
development and disease. Hum Mol Genet. 2003;12. Spec No 1:R27-R35.
14. Eom K, Moon K, Seong Y, etal. Ultrasonographic evaluation of tracheal 
collapse in dogs. J Vet Sci. 2008;9:401-405.
15. Pardali D, Adamama-Moraitou KK, Rallis TS, etal. Tidal breathing ow-
volume loop analysis for the diagnosis and staging of tracheal collapse in dogs. J 
Vet Intern Med. 2010;24:832-842.
16. Johnson LR, Singh MK, Pollard RE. Agreement among radiographs, 
uoroscopy and bronchoscopy in documentation of airway collapse in dogs. J Vet 
Intern Med. 2015;29:1619-1626.
17. Guglielmini C, De Simone A, Valbonetti L, etal. Intermittent cranial lung 
herniation in two dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound. 2007;48:227-229.
18. Nafe LA, Robertson ID, Hawkins EC. Cervical lung lobe herniation in dogs 
identied by uoroscopy. Can Vet J. 2013;54:955-959.
19. Lee J, Yun S, Lee I, etal. Fluoroscopic characteristics of tracheal col-
lapse and cervical lung herniation in dogs: 222 cases (2012-2015). J Vet Sci. 
2017;18:499-505.


=== PDF PAGE 1323 ===
CHAPTER 215
•
Large Airway Diseases
1171
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
20. Violette NP, Weisse C, Berent AC, etal. Correlations among tracheal dimen-
sions, tracheal stent dimensions, and major complications aer endoluminal stent-
ing of tracheal collapse syndrome in dogs. J Vet Intern Med. 2019;33:2209-2216.
21. Congiusta M, Weisse C, Berent AC, etal. Comparison of short-, intermedi-
ate-, and long-term results between dogs with tracheal collapse that underwent 
multimodal medical management alone and those that underwent tracheal 
endoluminal stent placement. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2021;258:279-289.
22. Roach W, Krahwinkel DJ. Obstructive lesions and traumatic injuries of the 
canine and feline tracheas. Compend Contin Educ Vet. 2009;31:E6.
23. Mitchell SL, McCarthy R, Rudlo E, etal. Tracheal rupture associated with 
intubation in cats: 20 cases (1996-1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2000;216:1592-1595.
24. White RN, Burton CA. Surgical management of intrathoracic tracheal avul-
sion in cats: long-term results in 9 consecutive cases. Vet Surg. 29:430-435.
25. Brown MR, Rogers KS, Mansell KJ, etal. Primary intratracheal lymphosar-
coma in four cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 2003;39:468-472.
26. omas EK, Syring RS. Pneumomediastinum in cats: 45 cases (2000-2010). 
J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio). 2013;23:429-435.
27. Rozanski E. Canine chronic bronchitis: an update. Vet Clin North Am Small 
Anim Pract. 2020;50:393-404.
28. Hawkins EC, Clay LD, Bradley JM, etal. Demographic and historical nd-
ings, including exposure to environmental tobacco smoke, in dogs with chronic 
cough. J Vet Intern Med. 2010;24:825-831.
29. DiBardino DM, Wunderink RG. Aspiration pneumonia: a review of modern 
trends. J Crit Care. 2015;30:40-48.
30. Nafe LA, Grobman ME, Masseau I, etal. Aspiration-related respiratory 
disorders in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2018;253:292-300.
31. Määttä OLM, Laurila HP, Holopainen S, etal. Reux aspiration in lungs of 
dogs with respiratory disease and in healthy West Highland White Terriers. J Vet 
Intern Med. 2018;32:2074-2081.
32. Grobman ME, Maitz CA, Reinero CR. Detection of silent reux events by 
nuclear scintigraphy in healthy dogs. J Vet Intern Med. 2020;34:1432-1439.
33. Grobman ME, Masseau I, Reinero CR. Aerodigestive disorders in dogs 
evaluated for cough using respiratory uoroscopy and videouoroscopic swallow 
studies. Vet J. 2019;251:105344.
34. Harris RA, Grobman ME, Allen MJ, etal. Standardization of a videouoro-
scopic swallow study protocol to investigate dysphagia in dogs. J Vet Intern Med. 
2017;31:383-393.
35. Ericsson AC, Personett AR, Rindt H, etal. Respiratory dysbiosis and 
population-wide temporal dynamics in canine chronic bronchitis and non-
inammatory respiratory disease. PLoS One. 2020;15:e0228085.
36. Oyama MA, Rush JE, Rozanski EA, etal. Assessment of serum N-terminal 
pro-B-type natriuretic peptide concentration for dierentiation of congestive 
heart failure from primary respiratory tract disease as the cause of respiratory 
signs in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2009;235:1319-1325.
37. Ward JL, Lisciandro GR, Ware WA, etal. Lung ultrasonography ndings in dogs 
with various underlying causes of cough. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2019;255:574-583.
38. Mortier JR, Mesquita L, Ferrandis I, etal. Accuracy of and interobserver 
agreement regarding thoracic computed tomography for the diagnosis of chronic 
bronchitis in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2018;253:757-762.
39. Masseau I, Reinero CR. oracic computed tomographic interpretation for 
clinicians to aid in the diagnosis of dogs and cats with respiratory disease. Vet J. 
2019;253:105388.
40. Mercier E, Bolognin M, Homann AC, etal. Inuence of age on broncho-
scopic ndings in healthy Beagle dogs. Vet J. 2011;187:225-228.
41. Hawkins EC, Rogala AR, Large EE, etal. Cellular composition of bronchial 
brushings obtained from healthy dogs and dogs with chronic cough and cytologic 
composition of bronchoalveolar lavage uid obtained from dogs with chronic 
cough. Am J Vet Res. 2006;67:160-167.
42. Conboy GA. Canine angiostrongylosis: the French heartworm: an emerging 
threat in North America. Vet Parasitol. 2011;176:382-389.
43. Gallagher B, Brennan SF, Zarelli M, etal. Geographical, clinical, clinico-
pathological and radiographic features of canine angiostrongylosis in Irish dogs: a 
retrospective study. Ir Vet J. 2012;65:5.
44. Traversa D, Di Cesare A, Meloni S, etal. Canine angiostrongylosis in Italy: 
occurrence of Angiostrongylus vasorum in dogs with compatible clinical pictures. 
Parasitol Res. 2013;112:2473-2480.
45. Canonne AM, Roels E, Caron Y, etal. Detection of Angiostrongylus vasorum
by quantitative PCR in bronchoalveolar lavage uid in Belgian dogs. J Small Anim 
Pract. 2016;57:130-134.
46. Manens J, Bolognin M, Bernaerts F, etal. Eects of obesity on lung func-
tion and airway reactivity in healthy dogs. Vet J. 2012;193:217-221. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.tvjl.2011.10.013
47. Manens J, Ricci R, Damoiseaux C, etal. Eect of body weight loss on 
cardiopulmonary function assessed by 6-minute walk test and arterial blood gas 
analysis in obese dogs. J Vet Intern Med. 2014;28:371-378.
48. Bexeld NH, Foale RD, Davison LJ, etal. Management of 13 cases of 
canine respiratory disease using inhaled corticosteroids. J Small Anim Pract. 
2006;47:377-382.
49. Hirt RA, Teinfalt M, Dederichs D, etal. e eect of orally administered 
marbooxacin on the pharmacokinetics of theophylline. J Vet Med A Physiol 
Pathol Clin Med. 2003;50:246-250.
50. Ryan NM, Birring SS, Gibson PG. Gabapentin for refractory chronic cough: a 
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2012;380:1583-1589.
51. Grobman M, Reinero C. Investigation of neurokinin-1 receptor antagonism as 
a novel treatment for chronic bronchitis in dogs. J Vet Intern Med. 2016;30:847-852.
52. Casamian-Sorrosal D, Silvestrini P, Blake R, etal. Clinical features and 
long-term follow-up of 70 cases of canine idiopathic eosinophilic lung disease. Vet 
Rec. 2020;187:e65.
53. Johnson LR, Johnson EG, Hulsebosch SE, etal. Eosinophilic bronchitis, 
eosinophilic granuloma, and eosinophilic bronchopneumopathy in 75 dogs 
(2006-2016). J Vet Intern Med. 2019;33:2217-2226.
54. Clercx C, Peeters D. Canine eosinophilic bronchopneumopathy. Vet Clin 
North Am Small Anim Pract. 2007;37:917-935, vi.
55. Canonne AM, Peters I, Roels E, etal. Detection of specic bacterial agents 
by quantitative PCR assays in the bronchoalveolar lavage uid of dogs with 
eosinophilic bronchopneumopathy vs. dogs with chronic bronchitis and healthy 
dogs. Vet J. 2018;232:52-56.
56. Mesquita L, Lam R, Lamb CR, etal. Computed tomographic ndings in 15 
dogs with eosinophilic bronchopneumopathy. Vet Radiol Ultrasound. 2014;56:33-
39.
57. Heikkila HP, Kra E, Jespers P, etal. Procollagen type III amino terminal 
propeptide concentrations in dogs with idiopathic pulmonary brosis com-
pared with chronic bronchitis and eosinophilic bronchopneumopathy. Vet J. 
2013;196:52-56.
58. Chapman PS, Boag AK, Guitian J, etal. Angiostrongylus vasorum infection 
in 23 dogs (1999-2002). J Small Anim Pract. 2004;45:435-440.
59. Schnyder M, Tanner I, Webster P, etal. An ELISA for sensitive and 
specific detection of circulating antigen of Angiostrongylus vasorum in 
serum samples of naturally and experimentally infected dogs. Vet Parasitol. 
2011;179:152-158.
60. Canonne-Guibert M, Roels E, Caron Y, etal. Detection of Angiostrongylus 
vasorum in the bronchoalveolar lavage uid or faeces of coughing and healthy 
dogs in Belgium (abstract). In: Proceedings, 24th European College of Veterinary 
Internal Medicine - Companion Animal Congress, Mainz, Germany; September 
4-6, 2014.
61. Tolnai Z, Széll Z, Sréter T. Environmental determinants of the spatial distri-
bution of Angiostrongylus vasorum, Crenosoma vulpis and Eucoleus aerophilus in 
Hungary. Vet Parasitol. 2015;207:355-358.
62. Canonne AM, Bolen G, Peeters D, etal. Long-term follow-up in dogs 
with idiopathic eosinophilic bronchopneumopathy treated with inhaled steroid 
therapy. J Small Anim Pract. 2016;57:537-542.
63. Clercx C, Peeters D, Beths T, etal. Use of ciliogenesis in the diagnosis of pri-
mary ciliary dyskinesia in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2000;217:1659, 1681-1685.
64. Edwards DF, Patton CS, Kennedy JR. Primary ciliary dyskinesia in the dog. 
Probl Vet Med. 1992;4:291-319.
65. Watson PJ, Herrtage ME, Sargan D. Primary ciliary dyskinesia in New-
foundland dogs. Vet Rec. 1998;143:484.
66. Merveille AC, Davis EE, Becker-Heck A, etal. CCDC39 is required for as-
sembly of inner dynein arms and the dynein regulatory complex and for normal 
ciliary motility in humans and dogs. Nat Genet. 2011;43:72-78.
67. Anderegg L, Im Hof Gut M, Hetzel U, etal. NME5 frameshi vari-
ant in Alaskan Malamutes with primary ciliary dyskinesia. PLoS Genet. 
2019;15:e1008378.
68. Merveille AC, Battaille G, Billen F, etal. Clinical ndings and prevalence 
of the mutation associated with primary ciliary dyskinesia in Old English Sheep-
dogs. J Vet Intern Med. 2014;28:771-778.
69. Clercx C, Reichler I, Peeters D, etal. Rhinitis/bronchopneumonia syndrome 
in Irish Wolounds. J Vet Intern Med. 2003;17:843-849.
70. Talavera J, del Palacio MJ, Bayon A, etal. Broncholithiasis in a cat: clinical 
ndings, long-term evolution and histopathological features. J Feline Med Surg. 
2008;10:95-101.
71. Valls Sanchez F, Stewart J, Bovens C, etal. Broncholithiasis associated with 
lower airway inammation and subsequent pyothorax in a cat. JFMS Open Rep. 
2018;4:2055116917746798.
72. Barker AF. Bronchiectasis. N Engl J Med. 2002;346:1383-1393.
73. Hawkins EC, Basseches J, Berry CR, etal. Demographic, clinical, and radio-
graphic features of bronchiectasis in dogs: 316 cases (1988-2000). J Am Vet Med 
Assoc. 2003;223:1628-1635.
74. Kulendra E, Halfacree Z, Goggs R, etal. Cavitary pulmonary lesion associ-
ated with Aspergillus fumigatus infection in a German Shepherd dog. J Small 
Anim Pract. 2010;51:271-274.
75. Viitanen SJ, Lappalainen AK, Koho NM, etal. Recurrent bacterial pneumo-
nia in Irish Wolounds: clinical ndings and etiological studies. J Vet Intern Med. 
2019;33:846-855.
76. Coia ME, Hammond G, Chan D, etal. Retrospective evaluation of thoracic 
computed tomography ndings in dogs naturally infected by Angiostrongylus 
vasorum. Vet Radiol Ultrasound. 2017;58:524-534.
77. Mortier JR, Fina CJ, Edery E, etal. Computed tomographic ndings in 
three dogs naturally infected with Crenosoma vulpis. Vet Radiol Ultrasound. 
2018;59:27-31.
78. Roels E, Couvreur T, Farnir F, etal. Comparison between sedation and 
general anesthesia for high resolution computed tomographic characterization of 
canine idiopathic pulmonary brosis in West Highland White Terriers. Vet Radiol 
Ultrasound. 2017;58:284-294.
79. Norris CR, Samii VF. Clinical, radiographic, and pathologic features of bron-
chiectasis in cats: 12 cases (1987-1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2000;216:530-534.
80. Le Boedec K, Roady PJ, O’Brien RT. A case of atypical diuse feline brotic 
lung disease. J Feline Med Surg. 2014;16:858-863.
81. McGuinness G, Naidich DP. CT of airways disease and bronchiectasis. 
Radiol Clin North Am. 2002;40:1-19.
82. Cannon MS, Wisner ER, Johnson LR, etal. Computed tomography bronchi-
al lumen to pulmonary artery diameter ratio in dogs without clinical pulmonary 
disease. Vet Radiol Ultrasound. 2009;50:622-624.
83. Johnson LR, Johnson EG, Vernau W, etal. Bronchoscopy, imaging, and concur-
rent diseases in dogs with bronchiectasis: (2003-2014). J Vet Intern Med. 2016;30:247-
254.


=== PDF PAGE 1324 ===
SECTION XII
•
Respiratory Disease
1172
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
84. Adamama-Moraitou KK, Pardali D, Day MJ, etal. Canine bronchoma-
lacia: a clinicopathological study of 18 cases diagnosed by endoscopy. Vet J
2012;191:261-266.
85. De Lorenzi D, Bertoncello D, Drigo M. Bronchial abnormalities found in a 
consecutive series of 40 brachycephalic dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2009;235:835-840.
86. Bottero E, Bellino C, De Lorenzi D, etal. Clinical evaluation and endoscopic 
classication of bronchomalacia in dogs. J Vet Intern Med. 2013;27:840-846.
87. Oh D, Lee S, Kim S, etal. Computed tomographic bronchial collapsibility values 
over 50% may be detected in healthy dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound. 2019;60:28-37.
88. Kim H, Kim YJ, Lee H, etal. Computed tomographic and radiographic 
bronchial collapse may be a normal characteristic of forced expiration in dogs. Vet 
Radiol Ultrasound. 2018;59:551-563.
89. Hara Y, Teshima K, Yamaya Y. Arterial blood gas analysis in dogs with 
bronchomalacia. PLoS One. 2019;14:e0227194.
90. Jaey JA, Leach SB, Kong LR, etal. Clinical ecacy of tadalal compared to 
sildenal in treatment of moderate to severe canine pulmonary hypertension: a 
pilot study. J Vet Cardiol. 2019;24:7-19.
91. Johnson LR, Stern JA. Clinical features and outcome in 25 dogs with 
respiratory-associated pulmonary hypertension treated with sildenal. J Vet 
Intern Med. 2020;34:65-73.
92. Foster SF, Martin P, Braddock JA, etal. A retrospective analysis of feline 
bronchoalveolar lavage cytology and microbiology (1995-2000). J Feline Med 
Surg. 2004;6:189-198.
93. Reinero CR. Advances in the understanding of pathogenesis, and diagnos-
tics and therapeutics for feline allergic asthma. Vet J. 2011;190:28-33.
94. Padrid P. Bronchitis and asthma in cats. In: Bonagura JD, Twedt DC, eds. 
Kirk’s Current Veterinary erapy XIV. 14th ed. Saunders Elsevier; 2009.
95. Nafe LA, DeClue AE, Lee-Fowler TM, etal. Evaluation of biomarkers in 
bronchoalveolar lavage uid for discrimination between asthma and chronic 
bronchitis in cats. Am J Vet Res. 2010;71:583-591.
96. Hirt RA, Galler A, Shibly S, etal. Airway hyperresponsiveness to adenosine 
5’-monophosphate in feline chronic inammatory lower airway disease. Vet J
2011;187:54-59.
97. Allerton FJ, Leemans J, Tual C, etal. Correlation of bronchoalveolar 
eosinophilic percentage with airway responsiveness in cats with chronic bronchial 
disease. J Small Anim Pract. 2013;54:258-264.
98. Trzil JE. Feline asthma: diagnostic and treatment update. Vet Clin North Am 
Small Anim Pract. 2020;50:375-391.
99. Grotheer M, Hirschberger J, Hartmann K, etal. Comparison of signalment, 
clinical, laboratory and radiographic parameters in cats with feline asthma and 
chronic bronchitis. J Feline Med Surg. 2020;22:649-655.
100. van Eeden ME, Vientós-Plotts AI, Cohn LA, etal. Serum allergen-specic 
IgE reactivity: is there an association with clinical severity and airway eosino-
philia in asthmatic cats? J Feline Med Surg. 2020;22:1129-1136.
101. Lecuyer M, Dube PG, DiFruscia R, etal. Bronchoalveolar lavage in normal 
cats. Can Vet J. 1995;36:771-773.
102. Dye JA, McKiernan BC, Rozanski EA, etal. Bronchopulmonary disease in the 
cat: historical, physical, radiographic, clinicopathologic, and pulmonary functional 
evaluation of 24 aected and 15 healthy cats. J Vet Intern Med. 1996;10:385-400.
103. National Asthma Education and Prevention Program. Expert Panel Report 
3 (EPR-3): Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of asthma-summary 
report 2007. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2007;120:s94-s138.
104. Adamama-Moraitou KK, Patsikas MN, Koutinas AF. Feline lower airway 
disease: a retrospective study of 22 naturally occurring cases from Greece. J Feline 
Med Surg. 2004;6:227-233.
105. Corcoran BM, Foster DJ, Fuentes VL. Feline asthma syndrome: a retrospective 
study of the clinical presentation in 29 cats. J Small Anim Pract. 1995;36:481-488.
106. Moise NS, Wiedenkeller D, Yeager AE, etal. Clinical, radiographic, and 
bronchial cytologic features of cats with bronchial disease: 65 cases (1980-1986). J 
Am Vet Med Assoc. 1989;194:1467-1473.
107. Johnson LR. Canine and feline respiratory medicine. Vet Clin North Am 
Small Anim Pract. 2014;44:ix.
108. Garrity S, Lee-Fowler T, Reinero C. Feline asthma and heartworm disease: 
clinical features, diagnostics and therapeutics. J Feline Med Surg. 2019;21:825-834.
109. Crisi PE, Johnson LR, Di Cesare A, etal. Evaluation of bronchoscopy 
and bronchoalveolar lavage ndings in cats with Aelurostrongylus abstrusus in 
comparison to cats with feline bronchial disease. Front Vet Sci. 2019;6:337.
110. Di Cesare A, Di Francesco G, Frangipane di Regalbono A, etal. Retrospec-
tive study on the occurrence of the feline lungworms Aelurostrongylus abstrusus
and Troglostrongylus spp. in endemic areas of Italy. Vet J. 2015;203:233-238.
111. Penagos-Tabares F, Lange MK, Chaparro-Gutiérrez JJ, etal. Angiostron-
gylus vasorum and Aelurostrongylus abstrusus: neglected and underestimated 
parasites in South America. Parasit Vectors. 2018;11:208.
112. Gyӧrke A, Dumitrache MO, Kalmár Z, etal. Molecular survey of meta-
strongyloid lungworms in domestic cats (Felis silvestris catus) from Romania: a 
retrospective study (2008-2011). Pathogens. 2020;9:80.
113. Lee EA, Johnson LR, Johnson EG, etal. Clinical features and radiographic 
ndings in cats with eosinophilic, neutrophilic, and mixed airway inammation 
(2011-2018). J Vet Intern Med. 2020;34:1291-1299.
114. Hahn H, Specchi S, Masseau I, etal. e computed tomographic “tree-in-
bud” pattern: characterization and comparison with radiographic and clinical 
ndings in 36 cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound. 2018;59:32-42.
115. Oliveira CR, Ranallo FN, Pijanowski GJ, etal. e VetMousetrap: a device 
for computed tomographic imaging of the thorax of awake cats. Vet Radiol Ultra-
sound. 2011;52:41-52.
116. McKiernan BC, Dye JA, Rozanski EA. Tidal breathing ow-volume loops 
in healthy and bronchitic cats. J Vet Intern Med. 1993;7:388-393.
117. Foster SF, Allan GS, Martin P, etal. Twenty-ve cases of feline bronchial 
disease (1995-2000). J Feline Med Surg. 2004;6:181-188.
118. Di Cesare A, Veronesi F, Di Regalbono AF, etal. Novel molecular assay for 
simultaneous identication of neglected lungworms and heartworms aecting 
cats. J Clin Microbiol. 2015;53:3009-3013.
119. Buller MC, Johnson LR, Outerbridge CA, etal. Serum immunoglobulin E 
responses to aeroallergens in cats with naturally occurring airway eosinophilia 
compared to unaected control cats. J Vet Intern Med. 2020;34:2671-2676.
120. Kirschvink N, Leemans J, Delvaux F, etal. Bronchodilators in 
bronchoscopy-induced airow limitation in allergen-sensitized cats. J Vet Intern 
Med. 2005;19:161-167.
121. Kirschvink N, Leemans J, Delvaux F, etal. Non-invasive assessment of 
airway responsiveness in healthy and allergen-sensitised cats by use of barometric 
whole body plethysmography. Vet J. 2007;173:343-352.
122. Johnson LR, Vernau W. Bronchoscopic ndings in 48 cats with spontaneous 
lower respiratory tract disease (2002-2009). J Vet Intern Med. 2011;25:236-243.
123. Shibly S, Klang A, Galler A, etal. Architecture and inammatory cell 
composition of the feline lung with special consideration of eosinophil counts. J 
Comp Pathol. 2014;150:408-415.
124. Bart M, Guscetti F, Zurbriggen A, etal. Feline infectious pneumonia: 
a short literature review and a retrospective immunohistological study on the 
involvement of Chlamydia spp. and distemper virus. Vet J. 2000;159:220-230.
125. Schulz BS, Richter P, Weber K, etal. Detection of feline Mycoplasma species in 
cats with feline asthma and chronic bronchitis. J Feline Med Surg. 2014;16:943-949.
126. Sharp CR, Lee-Fowler TM, Reinero CR. Endothelin-1 concentrations in 
bronchoalveolar lavage uid of cats with experimentally induced asthma. J Vet 
Intern Med. 2013;27:982-984.
127. Sparkes AH, Mardell EJ, Deaton C, etal. Exhaled breath condensate (EBC) 
collection in cats—description of a non-invasive technique to investigate airway 
disease. J Feline Med Surg. 2004;6:335-338.
128. Fulcher YG, Fotso M, Chang CH, etal. Noninvasive recognition and 
biomarkers of early allergic asthma in cats using multivariate statistical analysis 
of NMR spectra of exhaled breath condensate. PLoS One. 2016;11:e0164394.
129. Kirschvink N, Marlin D, Delvaux F, etal. Collection of exhaled breath con-
densate and analysis of hydrogen peroxide as a potential marker of lower airway 
inammation in cats. Vet J. 2005;169:385-396.
130. Homan AM, Dhupa N, Cimetti L. Airway reactivity measured by baromet-
ric whole-body plethysmography in healthy cats. Am J Vet Res. 1999;60:1487-1492.
131. Lin CH, Wu HD, Lee JJ, etal. Functional phenotype and its correlation 
with therapeutic response and inammatory type of bronchoalveolar lavage uid 
in feline lower airway disease. J Vet Intern Med. 2015;29:88-96.
132. Bark H, Epstein A, Bar-Yishay E, etal. Non-invasive forced expiratory 
ow-volume curves to measure lung function in cats. Respir Physiol Neurobiol
2007;155:49-54.
133. Galler A, Shibly S, Bilek A, etal. Inhaled budesonide therapy in cats with 
naturally occurring chronic bronchial disease (feline asthma and chronic bron-
chitis). J Small Anim Pract. 2013;54:531-536.
134. Lee-Fowler TM, Guntur V, Dodam J, etal. e tyrosine kinase inhibitor masi-
tinib blunts airway inammation and improves associated lung mechanics in a feline 
model of chronic allergic asthma. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2012;158:369-374.
135. Foster SF, Martin P. Lower respiratory tract infections in cats: reaching 
beyond empirical therapy. J Feline Med Surg. 2011;13:313-332.
136. Foster SF, Martin P, Allan GS, etal. Lower respiratory tract infections in 
cats: 21 cases (1995-2000). J Feline Med Surg. 2004;6:167-180.
137. Macdonald ES, Norris CR, Berghaus RB, etal. Clinicopathologic and radio-
graphic features and etiologic agents in cats with histologically conrmed infectious 
pneumonia: 39 cases (1991-2000). J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2003;223:1142-1150.
138. Cohn LA, Norris CR, Hawkins EC, etal. Identication and characteriza-
tion of an idiopathic pulmonary brosis-like condition in cats. J Vet Intern Med
2004;18:632-641.
139. Evola MG, Edmondson EF, Reichle JK, etal. Radiographic and histopatho-
logic characteristics of pulmonary brosis in nine cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
2014;55:133-140.
140. Jones DJ, Norris CR, Samii VF, etal. Endogenous lipid pneumonia in cats: 
24 cases (1985-1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2000;216:1437-1440.
141. Varcasia A, Brianti E, Tamponi C, etal. Simultaneous infection by four 
feline lungworm species and implications for the diagnosis. Parasitol Res
2015;114:317-321.
142. García-Guasch L, Caro-Vadillo A, Manubens-Grau J, etal. Is Wolbachia
participating in the bronchial reactivity of cats with heartworm associated respi-
ratory disease? Vet Parasitol. 2013;196:130-135.
143. Liu DT, Silverstein DC. Feline secondary spontaneous pneumothorax: a 
retrospective study of 16 cases (2000-2012). J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio)
2014;24:316-325.
144. Stursberg U, Zenker I, Hecht S, etal. Use of propentofylline in feline 
bronchial disease: prospective, randomized, positive-controlled study. J Am Anim 
Hosp Assoc. 2010;46:318-326.
145. Cocayne CG, Reinero CR, Declue AE. Subclinical airway inammation 
despite high-dose oral corticosteroid therapy in cats with lower airway disease. J 
Feline Med Surg. 2011;13:558-563.
146. Lin CH, Lee JJ, Liu CH. Functional assessment of expiratory ow pattern 
in feline lower airway disease. J Feline Med Surg. 2014;16:616-622.
147. Padrid P. Use of inhaled medications to treat respiratory diseases in dogs 
and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 2006;42:165-169.
148. Ettinger SJ. Diseases of the trachea and upper airways. In: Ettinger SJ, 
Feldman EC, eds. Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine. 7th ed. Saunders 
Elsevier; 2010:1066-1088.


=== PDF PAGE 1325 ===
CHAPTER 216
•
Small Airway Diseases
1173
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
149. Reinero CR, Decile KC, Byerly JR, etal. Eects of drug treatment on in-
ammation and hyperreactivity of airways and on immune variables in cats with 
experimentally induced asthma. Am J Vet Res. 2005;66:1121-1127.
150. Leemans J, Kirschvink N, Bernaerts F, etal. Salmeterol or doxycycline 
do not inhibit acute bronchospasm and airway inammation in cats with 
experimentally-induced asthma. Vet J. 2012;192:49-56.
151. Leemans J, Kirschvink N, Clercx C, etal. Eect of short-term oral and 
inhaled corticosteroids on airway inammation and responsiveness in a feline 
acute asthma model. Vet J. 2012;192:41-48.
152. Cohn LA, DeClue AE, Cohen RL, etal. Eects of uticasone propionate dos-
age in an experimental model of feline asthma. J Feline Med Surg. 2010;12:91-96.
153. Reinero CR, Delgado C, Spinka C, etal. Enantiomer-specic eects of 
albuterol on airway inammation in healthy and asthmatic cats. Int Arch Allergy 
Immunol. 2009;150:43-50.
154. García-Guasch L, Caro-Vadillo A, Manubens-Grau J, etal. Pulmonary 
function in obese vs non-obese cats. J Feline Med Surg. 2015;17:494-499.
155. Trzil JE, Masseau I, Webb TL, etal. Long-term evaluation of mesenchymal 
stem cell therapy in a feline model of chronic allergic asthma. Clin Exp Allergy
2014;44:1546-1557.
Small Airway Diseases
Carol Reinero
OVERVIEW
DEFINITION AND CLASSIFICATION
S
mall airway diseases, also called bronchiolar disorders, repre-
sent specic diseases involving pathological changes of small 
airways <2 mm in diameter lacking cartilage. ese unique 
anatomic units are interposed between the upstream larger airways 
(conducting airways) and the downstream pulmonary acini (gas-
exchange units) and can serve as the primary targets for a variety of 
dierent insults. In cats and dogs, there are no pathognomonic clini-
cal signs or cytologic ndings (e.g., from lung ne-needle aspirates 
or airway lavage) for bronchiolar disorders. Due to their small size, 
small airways are not visible on thoracic radiographs or even com-
puted tomographic (CT) scans of healthy individuals. While diseased 
bronchioles can be appreciated on CT scans and while pathologists 
can microscopically visualize disease involvement of the small air-
ways, historically there has been a lack of crosstalk between veteri-
nary clinicians, radiologists and pathologists. Collectively, all these 
factors have contributed to a lack of recognition of small airway dis-
eases as distinct clinical entities.
Recently, a classication scheme was proposed for bronchiolar 
disorders in cats with the caveat that as understanding of small air-
way diseases improved that further renement of the scheme would 
be needed.1 e proposed classication split small airway disorders 
into three categories: (1) primary bronchiolar disorders, (2) second-
ary bronchiolar disorders from extension of large airway disease, and 
(3) secondary bronchiolar disorders as a component of interstitial 
lung diseases (ILDs).1 is classication was modeled aer a human 
scheme2 with the intent to group historical ndings, clinical features, 
CT ndings, and histopathologic ndings into discrete syndromes 
that may have similar etiologies, clinical courses, and treatments.
Unlike in cats, there has been no proposed classication for 
bronchiolar disorders in dogs, with only sporadic case reports 
and small case series suggesting that pet dogs also develop lesions 
associated with their small airways.3-7 Experimentally, bron-
chiolar disease could also be induced in dogs although the clini-
cal syndromes resulting from these exposures were classied as 
parenchymal disease (pneumonia and interstitial lung disease).8 9
ETIOLOGY
Inciting causes of bronchiolar disorders in people vary and include 
environmental exposures, infection, drugs, chronic aspiration, 
neoplasia, or immune-mediated disease. Dogs and cats share the 
environment with humans and are susceptible to many of the same 
triggers, including particulate matter in air pollution. Dogs in pol-
luted outdoor environments have been reported to sustain injury to 
their bronchioles.10 Mineral dust airway disease from inhaled inor-
ganic dusts has been described in a cat.1 Exposure to various envi-
ronmental chemicals, gases, smoke and other inhaled particulates 
as a cause for bronchiolar disorders still needs investigation in vet-
erinary medicine and underscores the need for a thorough history 
from owners about potential exposures. e role of some of the other 
aforementioned causes in inducing small airway disease in cats has 
been reviewed recently1 and many if not all of these are likely to aect 
canine small airways.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Bronchiolar disease can lead to an obstructive or a restrictive pheno-
type. ese disorders can be acute or chronic in nature. Inammatory 
(infectious or noninfectious), brotic and neoplastic processes can 
lead to small airway disorders when bronchioles <2 mm in diameter 
are aected. Fibrosis is considered a sequel to injury and inamma-
tion such that in the end stage of disease, the underlying inam-
matory response may be missed. If histologic evaluation is used for 
characterizing the microscopic features of the lesions, it is critical to 
examine multiple areas of the lung to assess for early lesions, patchy 
lesions, and subtle lesions. e extent of disease (i.e., number of small 
airways involved, severity of airway occlusion or luminal narrow-
ing, and involvement of upstream large airways or downstream gas 
exchange units) contributes to the type and severity of clinical signs.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
It is important to understand that there is/are no pathognomonic 
clinical sign(s) in dogs or cats with small airway disease. Bron-
chiolar disorders must thus remain on the dierential list for 
many respiratory signs. As we are still learning more about these 
syndromes, it will be critical to thoroughly investigate potential 
underlying exposures in the environment by taking a comprehen-
sive history and to combine that with ndings on physical exami-
nation, and ultimately a more sophisticated set of diagnostics.
HISTORY
Historical questions (ch. 2) should start with an understanding of the 
environment of the dog or cat. Does the cat live outdoors, indoors, 
or both? Is the setting rural, suburban, or urban and what is known 
CHAPTER 216
ACRONYM
CT computed tomography


=== PDF PAGE 1326 ===
SECTION XII
•
Respiratory Disease
1174
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
about environmental air quality in those regions? Is there exposure 
to smoke (cigarette, incense, replace, wood-burning stove, wildre 
smoke) or vapor (e.g., e-cigarettes, which may emit nicotine, form-
aldehyde, acetone, heavy metals, and volatile organic compounds)? 
Is there use of plug-in or canned air fresheners or other fragrances 
or essential oils? Is there a possibility the house might have radon 
or mold? Has there been recent construction or renovations in the 
home, including use of paint or solvents? Which cleaning products 
are used? Is there exposure to pesticides, herbicides, or heavy metals? 
For cats, what type of cat litter is used? It will take further study in 
large numbers of dogs and cats to determine if any of these are direct 
triggers of small airway inammation, brosis, or both. Knowledge 
of exposures also plays a role in treatment to promote a healthy respi-
ratory tract whether or not environmental substances directly or 
indirectly promote inammation and tissue injury.
Along with environmental exposures, it would be helpful to ques-
tion owners about any other systemic signs of illness that might point 
toward an underlying infectious, immune-mediated, or neoplastic 
disorder. Other respiratory clinical signs, including an association 
with drinking or eating (that could indicate the potential for repeti-
tive macro- or micro-aspiration; ch. 221) should be identied. Own-
ers should be asked about administration of any drugs (prescribed 
or over-the-counter), nutraceuticals, homeopathic remedies, and any 
other alternative medical therapies. Finally, owners should be ques-
tioned about the onset of signs (subacute, acute, or insidious) and if 
disease is static or progressive over time.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION (CH. 3)
In the author’s experience, dogs and cats with bronchiolar 
disease have been described to have a range of clinical signs 
including cough (ch. 34), wheeze, tachypnea, increased expira-
tory eort, mixed inspiratory/expiratory eort (ch. 37), exer-
cise intolerance, syncope (ch. 40), and cyanosis (ch. 27), and 
the presence of these should be recorded. ere should be an 
attempt to elicit cough with gentle tracheal pressure (Videos 
3.11, 34.5). Evidence of systemic signs of illness, such as poor 
body condition or documented unintentional weight loss (ch. 
18), and fever (ch. 16), should be noted, and a fundic examina-
tion should be performed (ch. 13). Careful attention should be 
paid to cardiopulmonary auscultation (ch. 3). Cardiac murmurs 
(ch. 38) or arrhythmias (ch. 230) may suggest comorbid car-
diac disease. Wheezes, crackles and increased bronchovesicular 
sounds may be heard (ch. 212).
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
e most common disease mimics depend on whether the disease 
process is localized to the small airways alone, or if it involves 
the large airways, pulmonary acini, or all three anatomic regions. 
Many of the disorders isolated to the small airways (especially 
constrictive/obliterative bronchiolitis) present as an obstructive 
airway disorder, including patients having increased expiratory 
eort and air trapping noted on radiography. In cats, asthma 
would be the top dierential. If large and small airways are 
involved in tandem, cough frequently predominates as the main 
clinical sign (ch. 34) and any cause of cough (i.e., respiratory, car-
diac, aerodigestive) should be considered as a dierential until 
a more comprehensive diagnostic evaluation can be performed. 
If small airways and the parenchyma are aected, or if the large 
and small airways and the parenchyma are aected, the disease 
may present as a restrictive lung disease. Top dierentials would 
include infection, neoplasia and interstitial lung diseases. ese 
are only a few general guidelines for determining likely dieren-
tials, but it is important to remember that the small airway dis-
orders are very diverse, and our understanding of them is still in 
its infancy.
DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION
In general, the diagnostic evaluation of a dog or cat with respira-
tory signs should start with localizing disease to the likely anatomic 
regions of the respiratory tract (ch. 212). e clinical signs associ-
ated with small airway disease resemble those causing intrathoracic 
airway and parenchymal disease. While thoracic radiographs are 
oen the initial diagnostic test to be performed, they are incapable 
of detecting bronchiolar disease. is may be one reason why cats 
“diagnosed” with asthma or chronic bronchitis frequently have unre-
markable thoracic radiographs: these cats may instead have primary 
bronchiolar disease. oracic radiographic lung patterns may sug-
gest the predominant region of disease with a bronchial pattern 
reecting large airway disease and interstitial and alveolar patterns 
reecting pulmonary parenchymal disease. Regardless of lung pat-
tern, and even with unremarkable thoracic radiographs, small airway 
disease must always remain a dierential diagnosis.
Ancillary diagnostics including complete blood count, infec-
tious disease testing, pulse oximetry or arterial blood gas (as sole 
diagnostics or in tandem with a 6-minute walk test in dogs), lung 
ultrasound, respiratory uoroscopy, and videouoroscopic swal-
low study (Videos 221.1, 259.2, 259.3) can be considered prior to 
diagnostics requiring anesthesia (ch. 212). Additionally, screen-
ing other regions of the body for infectious disease involvement 
or a primary neoplasm can be performed.
e author strongly advocates anesthetized CT scans in lieu of 
awake or sedated CT scans as the latter are usually compromised by 
motion artifact, variable ination and poor detail of CT lung patterns 
required to better identify and characterize small airway disease. e 
most optimal thoracic CT study would employ ventilator-assisted 
paired inspiratory and expiratory breath-holds to help detect evi-
dence of dynamic changes.11 Patients with small airway disease can 
have direct and indirect CT signs. Direct CT signs of bronchiolar 
disease include tree-in-bud pattern (nodular opacities connected to 
branching linear opacities), bronchiolectasis (dilation; Figure 216.1) 
and peribronchiolar ground-glass opacity or consolidation.1 Indi-
rect CT signs of bronchiolar disease include mosaic attenuation sec-
ondary to air trapping (requiring paired inspiratory and expiratory 
breath-hold series) or, rarely, mosaic perfusion.1 Aside from provid-
ing evidence of small airway disease, thoracic CTs can demonstrate 
abnormalities associated with the upstream larger airways and the 
downstream pulmonary parenchyma. If other regions of the respira-
tory tract demonstrate abnormalities, it might indicate either a sec-
ondary bronchiolar disorder or the presence of unrelated comorbid 
disease.
oracic CT studies are one of two tests to denitively diagnose 
small airway disease, but additional diagnostics are required to deter-
mine the underlying cause. Cytologic evaluation of airway lavage (ch. 
93) or pulmonary ne-needle aspiration are most helpful when iden-
tifying the presence of infectious organisms or neoplastic cells; oth-
erwise, cytologic evidence of inammation is non-specic and can be 
appreciated with many types of large airway, small airway and paren-
chymal disease. e other diagnostic test to denitively diagnose 
small airway disease is histopathologic evaluation of a tissue sample. 
Lack of routine antemortem lung biopsies has hampered our recog-
nition and understanding of small airway disorders. Histopathologic 
evaluation has the potential to most fully characterize the type, extent 
and severity of lesions, but expertise in respiratory pathology is likely 
to be required until these are more commonly understood disorders.
TREATMENT
Currently, there is insucient knowledge of bronchiolar disorders 
to know how to best treat these diseases. In general, treatment can 
be divided into three categories: (1) strategies to promote respiratory 
health, (2) addressing comorbid respiratory and cardiovascular con-
ditions and (3) specic therapy to target the primary disease process.


=== PDF PAGE 1327 ===
CHAPTER 216
•
Small Airway Diseases
1175
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
Strategies to promote respiratory health include providing 
good airway quality, prophylactic measures against respiratory 
pathogens, and achieving/maintaining an ideal body weight (ch. 
72). Improving airway quality includes removal of any identied 
harmful inhaled substance(s) and other irritating triggers of cough. 
Promoting good air quality includes removal of inhaled irritants or 
other damaging inhaled substances, and airway humidication. In 
indoor environments, high eciency particulate air (HEPA) lters 
are eective at removing airborne particulates. Airway humidi-
cation is a general strategy employed to assist mucociliary func-
tion. Mucociliary clearance is the primary clearance mechanism 
for conducting (i.e., larger) airways and if associated with subse-
quent cough, can help with alveolar lling disorders and thus may 
be helpful for secondary bronchiolar disorders. However, as small 
airways lack ciliated epithelial cells, airway humidication is less 
likely to be helpful in primary bronchiolar disorders. Regular che-
moprophylaxis for respiratory parasites (e.g., Dirolaria; ch. 237) 
and vaccination against contagious respiratory pathogens (chs. 185, 
203) should be considered to protect patients against preventable 
disorders in patients with pre-existing bronchiolar disease. As obe-
sity negatively impacts respiratory function, weight loss should be 
considered in overweight animals (ch. 150).
Aer a thorough diagnostic evaluation has identied comor-
bid respiratory (chs. 213-215 and 217) and cardiovascular (chs. 
231-235 and 237) conditions, and the patient has been evaluated 
for pulmonary hypertension (ch. 218), a comprehensive thera-
peutic plan should be developed to address each disorder.
ere are no studies in dogs or cats describing treatment of pri-
mary small airway diseases. Targeted therapy to address the specic 
type of bronchiolar disorder is the ideal approach; however, unless 
infection or neoplasia is identied in the diagnostic evaluation, den-
itive understanding of the type of bronchiolar disorder will rely on 
histopathologic evaluation of the lung. As lung biopsy is an expensive 
and invasive diagnostic, it is uncommonly performed, and a spe-
cic treatment plan cannot be developed. Without knowledge of the 
underlying etiology, it seems reasonable to comprehensively attempt 
to identify an underlying infectious process or neoplasia and treat 
directly. If infection or neoplasia is not identied, if general strate-
gies to promote respiratory health along with addressing comorbid 
conditions do not result in acceptable control of clinical signs, and if 
the owners have declined lung biopsy, an empiric trial of glucocor-
ticoids (0.5-2 mg/kg/day prednisolone [cats] or prednisone [dogs]) 
can be tried. Close attention must be paid to worsening of clinical 
signs, especially when using higher dosages of glucocorticoids. e 
optimal dosage and duration of glucocorticoid therapy is unknown.
PROGNOSIS
ere are insucient studies of small airway disease in dogs and 
cats to be able to provide prognostic information and the follow-
ing statements are based on the author’s experience. Small air-
way disease in association with large airway disease in dogs and 
cats tends to have the best response to glucocorticoids and a good 
overall prognosis. Infectious causes of bronchiolar disease, if 
identied and treated eectively in a timely fashion, may similarly 
have a good prognosis. Small airway disease in association with 
substantial pulmonary parenchymal disease (especially if there 
are thoracic CT changes compatible with brosis, if the patient 
has pulmonary hypertension and if clinical signs are severe), has 
a guarded to grave prognosis. Finally, small airway disease associ-
ated with air trapping that is unresponsive to glucocorticoids, and 
in cats unresponsive to bronchodilators, may indicate constric-
tive/obliterative bronchiolitis, which carries a grave prognosis.
REFERENCES
1. Reinero CR, Masseau I, Grobman M, etal. Perspectives in veterinary medi-
cine: description and classication of bronchiolar disorders in cats. J Vet Intern 
Med. 2019;33:1201-1221.
2. Ryu JH, Myers JL, Swensen SJ. Bronchiolar disorders. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med. 2003;168:1277-1292.
3. Almes KM, Janardhan KS, Anderson J, etal. Fatal canine adenoviral pneu-
monia in two litters of Bulldogs. J Vet Diagn Invest. 2010;22:780-784.
4. Boudreau B, Nelson LL, Carey SA, etal. Spontaneous pneumothorax secondary 
to reactive bronchopneumopathy in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2013;242:658-662.
5. Jaey JA, Wiggen K, Leach SB, etal. Pulmonary hypertension secondary to 
respiratory disease and/or hypoxia in dogs: clinical features, diagnostic testing 
and survival. Vet J (London). 2019;251:105347.
6. Syrjë P, Saari S, Rajamäki M, etal. Pulmonary histopathology in dalma-
tians with familial acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). J Comp Pathol
2009;141:254-259.
7. Wylie SL, Langlois D, Carey S, etal. Constrictive bronchiolitis obliterans in a 
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2019;55:e55201.
8. Li X, Botts S, Morton D, etal. Oleic acid-associated bronchiolitis obliterans-
organizing pneumonia in Beagle dogs. Vet Pathol. 2006;43:183-185.
9. Song D, Kang B, Lee C, etal. Transmission of avian inuenza virus (H3N2) to 
dogs. Emerg Infect Dis. 2008;14:741-746.
10. Calderón-Garcidueñas L, Mora-Tiscareño A, Fordham LA, etal. Canines as 
sentinel species for assessing chronic exposures to air pollutants: part 1. Respira-
tory pathology. Toxicol Sci. 2001;61:342-355.
11. Masseau I, Reinero CR. oracic computed tomographic interpretation for 
clinicians to aid in the diagnosis of dogs and cats with respiratory disease. Vet J 
(London). 2019;253:105388.
A
B
*
C
Figure 216.1
A-C, oracic computed tomographic scans highlighting the dorsal aspect of the right caudal lung from a spayed female Dachshund 
with chronic cough (A) at 13 years of age and (B) with progression of clinical signs at 14 years of age. Note in B how the small airways extend to the 
periphery of the lung (arrows) consistent with bronchiolectasis. e dog was euthanized approximately 2 weeks aer the latter CT and necropsy was 
permitted. In C, an H&E-stained histologic specimen of the lung demonstrates bronchiolectasis (*). (Figure 216.1, C courtesy Dr. Kurt Williams.)


=== PDF PAGE 1328 ===
SECTION XII
•
Respiratory Disease
1176
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
Pulmonary Parenchymal Diseases
Leah A. Cohn
T
he structure of the pulmonary paren-
chyma permits the primary function 
of the lung:gas exchange. e lung 
consists of millions of alveolar airspaces, 
each bathed by a dense network of capillar-
ies. Fine, lacey, supporting interstitial tissues 
are interposed between the epithelial lining 
of the alveoli and the surrounding vascular 
endothelium of the capillary network; these 
interstitial tissues contain the slightly larger 
pulmonary arterioles and veins. Parenchy-
mal disease includes disease focused on the 
alveoli, pulmonary microvasculature, or the 
interstitial tissues while excluding disease of 
the large (ch. 215) and small (ch. 216) air-
ways and the pleural space (ch. 220).
MANIFESTATIONS OF PULMONARY 
PARENCHYMAL DISEASE
Pulmonary parenchymal disorders cause 
a variety of clinical signs related either to 
respiratory dysfunction or to systemic dis-
ease. Clinical signs and physical examination 
abnormalities in animals with pulmonary 
disease are similar to those found in animals 
with airway, mediastinal, or pleural space 
disease (ch. 212). Additionally, nonrespira-
tory diseases (e.g., neuromuscular disease 
[chs. 252, 253], anemia [ch. 57], acidosis 
[ch. 128]) can cause signs that mimic respi-
ratory disease. Recently, we have come to 
understand that pulmonary (and airway) 
disease can be intimately tied to gastrointes-
tinal (GI) disorders, a combination referred 
to as aerodigestive disorders (ch. 221). Com-
mon respiratory manifestations of pulmo-
nary parenchymal disease include cough 
(ch. 34), exercise intolerance, tachypnea 
(ch. 37), excessive panting, and increased 
respiratory eort or respiratory distress 
(ch. 37). Oen, respiratory distress caused 
by pulmonary parenchymal disease results 
in mixed inspiratory and expiratory eort. is contrasts with 
the predominantly inspiratory eort observed in animals with 
upper airway obstruction (Video 37.1) or pleural space disease 
(ch. 220) or the expiratory eort observed in animals with lower 
airway disorders (Video 37.2). Certain interstitial lung diseases 
that limit pulmonary compliance oer exceptions to this general 
rule, in that they are associated with a predominantly inspiratory 
eort. Less common manifestations of pulmonary parenchymal 
disease include hemoptysis (ch. 36), collapse or syncope (ch. 40), 
and cyanosis (ch. 27). Animals with marked respiratory compro-
mise may demonstrate minimal clinical evidence of respiratory 
disease. is is especially true in cats, for whom the rst sign of 
lung disease might be death.
Physical examination of animals with pulmonary disease can 
be unremarkable. Weight loss, fever, lymphadenomegaly, and dis-
tal limb swelling from hypertrophic osteopathy are a few of the 
many potential systemic manifestations of pulmonary diseases. 
Abnormalities in respiratory rate or eort, cyanosis, increased 
or decreased bronchovesicular sounds, and/or adventitial sounds 
(i.e., crackles and wheezes) on auscultation are possible. Exami-
nation of the patient with respiratory disease is described in detail 
in chs. 3, 37, and 212
DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION OF PULMONARY 
PARENCHYMAL DISEASE
Diagnostic testing for pulmonary disease involves a combination 
of modalities. Routine blood, urine, and fecal tests can provide 
diagnostic clues but rarely conrm a specic lung disease (Box 
217.1). Tests to assess oxygenation, conrm suspected infectious 
disease, or assess biomarkers (e.g., natriuretic peptides; ch. 229) 
are oen indicated. Nearly always, diagnostic imaging is neces-
sary both to rule out alternative or complicating diagnosis (e.g., 
cardiomegaly, tracheal collapse, diaphragmatic hernia) and to 
narrow the list of dierential diagnosis for lung disease.
e presence, location, and intensity of abnormal radio-
graphic patterns provide information to guide the dierential 
diagnosis and diagnostic plans (Box 217.2). Lung disease su-
cient to cause respiratory signs occasionally occurs in the absence 
of radiographic change in the pulmonary parenchyma. For exam-
ple, radiographic changes can lag behind acute development of 
respiratory signs in animals with aspiration pneumonia, acute 
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), or pulmonary thrombo-
embolism (PTE; ch. 219). However, when thoracic imaging stud-
ies fail to demonstrate abnormalities, additional consideration 
should be given to conditions that can mimic respiratory disease, 
such as anemia, pain, or acidosis.
Computed tomography (CT) and ultrasound are also used to 
image the lungs of pet animals. CT oers advantages over stan-
dard thoracic radiography, including increased sensitivity for 
the detection of small lesions such as metastasis, a truer three-
dimensional image of the thoracic cavity and its contents, mini-
mization of summation artifact, and the ability to view images in 
axial, coronal, or sagittal planes.1 e best thoracic CT images 
require anesthesia and, ideally, controlled ventilation to allow for 
comparison of images acquired during inspiration and expiration. 
For many years, pulmonary ultrasound was used primarily for 
CHAPTER 217
ACRONYMS
ARDS acute respiratory dis-
tress syndrome
BAL bronchoalveolar 
lavage
CBC complete blood count
CIPF canine idiopathic pul-
monary fibrosis
C/S culture and susceptibility
CT computed tomography
EBP eosinophilic broncho-
pneumopathy
EG eosinophilic granuloma
EnLP endogenous lipid 
pneumonia
EP eosinophilic pneumonia
EPG eosinophilic pulmo-
nary granulomatosis
FIP feline infectious perito-
nitis
FNA fine-needle aspiration
GI gastrointestinal
HES hypereosinophilic syn-
drome
ILDs interstitial lung diseas-
es
IPF idiopathic pulmonary 
fibrosis
ISCAID International 
Society of Companion 
Animal Infectious 
Diseases
LG lymphomatoid granulo-
matosis
LLT lung lobe torsion
NAC N-acetylcysteine
PCR polymerase chain 
reaction
PEEP positive end-
expiratory pressure
PPV positive pressure ven-
tilation
UIP usual interstitial pneu-
monia
This chapter is enhanced with the following electronic assets onElsevier eBooks+: 4 Videos.


=== PDF PAGE 1329 ===
CHAPTER 217
•
Pulmonary Parenchymal Diseases
1177
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
evaluation of consolidated lung tissue or vascular patency (e.g., 
lung lobe torsion [LLT]) or to guide needle aspirates. In recent 
years, point-of-care thoracic ultrasound has become a crucial 
tool for emergent evaluation of animals with respiratory distress. 
It can quickly help dierentiate lung disease from pleural space 
disease or heart failure (chs. 73 and 123)
For many animals with lung disease, diagnosis requires inva-
sive testing (ch. 212). Bronchoscopy plus airway lavage for culture, 
cytologic analysis, or special testing is oen employed (ch. 93). 
Fine-needle lung aspirates are simple to perform and provide good 
to excellent diagnostic yield from consolidated or mass lesions or 
in the presence of heavy cellular inltrates. Lung biopsy, although 
used infrequently, can at times not only provide a diagnosis but 
serve as a treatment modality when a diseased lobe is removed.
SPECIFIC PULMONARY DISORDERS
PULMONARY PARASITES
Parasitic pulmonary disease is caused by both lungworms and 
non-lungworms. Some intestinal worms, especially Toxocara
(roundworms) but also Ancylostoma (hookworms), undergo 
pulmonary migration before reaching their nal destination 
in the intestine (ch. 262). Usually, pulmonary migration causes 
few (if any) respiratory signs. However, massive larval migra-
tion can result in verminous pneumonia. Such profound infec-
tions typically occur in juveniles who may present with cough 
and tachypnea. Oen, a complete blood count (CBC) is omitted 
but eosinophilia would be expected. Fecal otation (ch. 80) can 
be negative because larval migration occurs before the mature 
worms have reached the intestine. Empiric treatment is reason-
able if pulmonary migration is suspected as a cause of cough. An 
anthelmintic (e.g., pyrantel pamoate 5 mg/kg PO; ch. 142) should 
be administered at least twice, 2 weeks apart. Fortunately, most 
animals require no further treatment. A short course of an anti-
inammatory dosage of glucocorticoid can ameliorate severe 
cough but should not be used before ruling out other causes of 
infectious pneumonia.
In contrast to intestinal worms that migrate through the 
lungs, for lungworms the final destination is the respiratory 
tract.2 3 These parasites can reside primarily in the pulmonary 
parenchyma, in the airways, or both. Parasitic lung disease eas-
ily can be confused with other conditions such as broncho-
pneumonia, eosinophilic pneumonia (EP), asthma, pulmonary 
granulomatosis, or even pulmonary neoplasia. Unfortunately, 
intermittent fecal shedding of parasite ova or larvae after 
expectoration means that fecal examination is an insensitive 
diagnostic method. For this reason, therapeutic trials often 
are employed when lungworms are suspected. Fenbendazole 
(50 mg/kg PO q24h for 10-14 days) or ivermectin usually is 
used.2 Ivermectin must be used with caution in Collies and 
other breeds with a high prevalence of the MDR-1 (ABCB1)
mutation.
Implications of Routine Screening Examination in Dogs or 
Cats With Pulmonary Disease
Complete Blood Count
Neutrophilia: consider infectious pneumonia and inflammatory lung 
disease, including acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
Neutropenia: consider sepsis, ARDS
Eosinophilia: consider hypersensitivity disorders, eosinophilic pneu-
monia, or parasitic disease
Monocytosis: consider mycotic lung disease, histiocytic disease
Thrombocytopenia: consider sepsis, pulmonary thromboembolism 
(PTE), vasculitis, pulmonary hemorrhage
Erythrocytosis (“polycythemia”): supports chronic hypoxemia
Serum Chemistry Profile
Hypoalbuminemia: consider PTE resulting from protein-losing 
nephropathy or enteropathy, systemic inflammatory and infec-
tious disease with pulmonary manifestations
Hypercholesterolemia: consider PTE resulting from protein-losing 
nephropathy
Hyperglobulinemia: consider infectious and inflammatory disease
Hypercalcemia: consider neoplasia and granulomatous fungal dis-
ease
Increased alanine aminotransferase activity: supports hypoxemia
Urinalysis
Proteinuria: consider PTE resulting from protein-losing nephropa-
thy, systemic inflammatory disease
Bacteruria: consider sepsis
BOX 217.1
Differential Diagnosis Associated With Common 
Radiographic Patterns
Alveolar Infiltrate
Pneumonia (bacterial, parasitic, protozoal, viral, aspiration, 
interstitial)
Edema (cardiogenic or noncardiogenic)
Hemorrhage/contusion
Primary lung neoplasia
Metastatic neoplasia
Atelectasis
Pulmonary thromboembolism
Drowning
Smoke inhalation
Bronchiolar Infiltrate
Feline asthma
Chronic bronchitis
Eosinophilic bronchitis
Peribronchiolar cuffing (e.g., edema, inflammation)
Bronchial calcification
Interstitial Pattern
Aging change (i.e., “old dog lung”) (U)
Pulmonary fibrosis (U)
Lymphoma (U)
Primary lung neoplasia (S > U)
Pulmonary metastasis (S > U)
Fungal pneumonia/granuloma (S > U)
Eosinophilic pneumonia (S > U)
Foreign body reaction (S > U)
Hematoma (E)
Abscess (S)
Cyst (S)
Vascular Pattern
Heartworm disease
Thromboembolic disease
Pulmonary hypertension
Congestive heart failure
Left-to-right cardiovascular shunt
BOX 217.2
E, Either structured or unstructured pattern; S, structured interstitial lung pattern; 
U, unstructured interstitial lung pattern. Any disease that causes an alveolar pat-
tern can begin with an unstructured interstitial pattern that progressively becomes 
more severe.


=== PDF PAGE 1400 ===
SECTION XIII
•
Comorbidities
1248
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
80. Dandrieux JR, Timm K, Roosje PJ, etal. Unusual systemic signs in a dog 
with sterile neutrophilic-macrophagic lymphadenitis and nodular panniculitis. J 
Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 2011;47:117-121.
81. Tipold A, Schatzberg SJ. An update on steroid responsive meningitis-
arteritis. J Small Anim Pract. 2010;51:150-154.
82. Nafe LA, Leach SB. Treatment of feline asthma with ciclosporin in a 
cat with diabetes mellitus and congestive heart failure. J Feline Med Surg
2014;12:1073-1076.
83. Windsor RC, Johnson LR. Canine chronic inammatory rhinitis. Clin Tech 
Small Anim Pract. 2006;21:76-81.
84. Segev G, Cowgill LD, Heiene R, etal. Consensus recommendations for im-
munosuppressive treatment of dogs with glomerular disease based on established 
pathology. J Vet Intern Med. 2013;27(Suppl 1):S44-S54.
85. Leal RO, Gil S, Brito MT, etal. e use of oral recombinant feline interferon 
omega in two cats with type II diabetes mellitus and concurrent feline chronic 
gingivostomatitis syndrome. Irish Vet J. 2013;66:19.
86. Higginbotham ML, McCaw DL, Roush JK, etal. Intermittent single-agent 
doxorubicin for the treatment of canine B-cell lymphoma. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
2013;49:357-362.
87. Musser ML, Quinn HT, Chretin JD. Low apparent risk of CCNU 
(lomustine)-associated clinical hepatotoxicity in cats. J Feline Med Surg
2012;14:871-875.
Feline Triaditis
Jonathan Andrew Lidbury
INTRODUCTION
F
eline triaditis is the term used for 
describing concurrent inammation of 
the small intestine, pancreas, and liver.1-
3 is syndrome is somewhat ill-dened but 
it encompasses a range of intestinal, pancre-
atic, and hepatobiliary diseases, including inammatory bowel 
disease (IBD), pancreatitis, and cholangitis (Box 225.1). e clini-
cal signs and laboratory ndings for the diseases comprising tria-
ditis overlap and biopsy of all 3 organs is needed for a denitive 
diagnosis. Some cats have involvement of 2 of these organs but not 
the third (e.g., IBD with concurrent pancreatitis). Cats may also 
present with disease of 1 organ dominating the clinical picture but 
with histologically-conrmed inammation of other organs that 
may or may not be clinically relevant.
pREVALENCE
e reported prevalence of triaditis varies greatly depending on 
the population of cats studied.4-7 For example, in a retrospective 
study of 54 cats with cholangitis, 26% had pancreatitis, 46% had 
IBD, and 17% had triaditis.5 e authors found that interstitial 
nephritis was a common comorbidity and suggested that feline 
triaditis is part of a wider multisystemic process that they termed 
“feline inammatory syndrome.” However, it should be noted that 
interstitial nephritis is a common postmortem nding in cats. In 
300 cats with suspected small bowel signs, IBD and gastrointestinal 
(GI) small cell lymphoma were common but concurrent hepatic 
or pancreatic lesions were not.6 In a prospective study, IBD with 
cholangitis was noted to occur in 22% of 27 cats with GI signs, IBD 
with pancreatitis in 4%, and triaditis in 30%. However, some com-
bination of histopathological changes of 2 or more of these organs 
was also found in 55% of 11 overtly healthy cats undergoing ovar-
iohysterectomy. Interestingly, none of the cats in this control group 
had inammation of all 3 organs.7 Some controversy exists as what 
are the “normal” histological features of each of these organs.8 It 
is possible that the misclassication of histological variations as 
being “abnormal” may have increased the apparent prevalence of 
triaditis in the veterinary literature. e only safe conclusion to 
make is that cats can have combinations of intestinal disease, pan-
creatic disease, and inammatory liver disease.
ETIOpATHOGENESIS
IBD is caused by a loss of mucosal immune tolerance due to a 
combination of genetic and environmental (i.e., dietary or micro-
bial) factors.9 is results in cellular inltrates in the intestine 
that are usually lymphoplasmacytic in nature and architectural 
changes such a villous stunting, villous fusion, or brosis (ch. 
262).10
While infectious agents, trauma, certain drugs, and possibly 
autoimmune disease are occasionally recognized as causing pan-
creatitis in cats, an underlying cause is not identied in most cases 
(ch. 278).11 Enteric bacteria were visualized in the pancreata of 
some of cats with pancreatitis.12 However, the clinical signicance 
of this nding is unknown.
Bacteria (most commonly Escherichia coli or other enteric 
bacteria) can often be cultured from the bile of cats with neu-
trophilic cholangitis and these patients usually respond to 
antimicrobial therapy (ch. 272).13 The route by which these 
enteric bacteria reach the liver is controversial. Traditionally, 
it was thought that they ascended the biliary tract. However, 
the location of bacteria in a more recent study suggested that 
they are more likely to reach the liver by translocation across 
the intestinal wall or via the portal circulation.14 Lymphocytic 
cholangitis is caused by a loss of immune tolerance resulting 
in the targeting of bile ducts by the adaptive immune response 
(ch. 271).15 The mechanisms behind this have not been pre-
cisely determined.
CHAPTER 225
ACRONYMS
ALT alanine aminotransfer-
ase
GI gastrointestinal
IBD inflammatory bowel 
disease
This chapter is enhanced with the following electronic asset onElsevier eBooks+: 1 Client Information Sheet.


=== PDF PAGE 1401 ===
CHApTER 225
•
Feline Triaditis
1249
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
Several models that may explain the interplay between pan-
creatitis, IBD, and cholangitis have been proposed.1 In one of 
these, which could explain the development of acute pancreati-
tis and neutrophilic cholangitis, enteritis leads to dysbiosis and 
increased intestinal permeability. is results in hematogenous 
seeding of bacteria to the liver and/or pancreas. e aforemen-
tioned studies that demonstrated enteric bacteria in the livers14
and pancreata12 of cats support this. Alternatively, increased 
intra-abdominal pressure due to vomiting could cause reux 
of duodenal contents into the pancreaticobiliary duct system, 
allowing enteric bacteria to reach the liver and/or pancreas. In 
another model, the development of acute pancreatitis is the ini-
tial event. In turn, this leads to acute enteritis and/or cholangitis, 
possibly due to the close anatomical relationship among these 
3 organs. e enteritis then leads to bacterial translocation to 
the pancreas and/or liver. In an experimentally-induced feline 
acute pancreatitis model, seeding of the pancreas, liver, and gall-
bladder with enterically translocated E. coli was shown to occur, 
supporting this hypothesis.16-18 In a third model, which could 
explain the development of chronic pancreatitis and lympho-
cytic cholangitis, loss of immune tolerance originating in the 
small intestine secondarily aected the liver and/or pancreas.1
One potential mechanism is due to aberrant homing of T lym-
phocytes from the small intestine, as has been shown to occur 
in humans with primary sclerosing cholangitis.19 Alternatively, 
microbiota-derived or host-derived molecules in the portal cir-
culation may stimulate an immune response in the liver and/or 
pancreas.20 IBD could also be associated with the development 
of autoantibodies against hepatic and/or pancreatic proteins, 
possibly due to molecular mimicry between host and microbial 
proteins. Such autoantibodies have been described in humans 
with autoimmune pancreatitis.21 22
CLINICAL FINDINGS
ere is a paucity of data on the clinical presentation of cats with 
triaditis but it is likely that any age, breed, or sex of cat may be 
aected. In a prospective study, cats with triaditis were signi-
cantly older than those with IBD, cholangitis, or the combination 
of IBD and cholangitis.7
As triaditis is a syndrome that encompasses several disease 
processes, it is not surprising that its clinical features are very 
variable (Table 225.1). Common historical observations in cats 
with triaditis include decreased appetite, lethargy, vomiting, diar-
rhea, weight loss, and icterus.2 In a study of 8 cats with triaditis, 
the most common clinical signs were vomiting (88%), anorexia 
(63%), and polyphagia (37%).7
Possible physical examination ndings include poor body 
condition, thickened bowel loops, signs of abdominal pain asso-
ciated with pancreatitis or cholangitis, abdominal distension due 
to ascites, and icterus.2 3
DIAGNOSIS
LABORATORY TESTING
Triaditis and its components cannot be diagnosed with laboratory 
testing alone (Table 225.1). In 8 cats with triaditis, the most com-
mon biochemical abnormalities nding was increased alanine 
aminotransferase (ALT) activity while the most common hema-
tological changes were anemia, neutrophilia, and lymphocytosis.7
DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING
Triaditis (and its components) cannot be denitely diagnosed 
with abdominal imaging but ultrasound ndings may be sugges-
tive (Table 225.1).23-26 e absence of ultrasound ndings does 
not rule these conditions out.
pERCUTANEOUS CHOLECYSTOCENTESIS
Diagnostic percutaneous cholecystocentesis is performed using 
ultrasound guidance in heavily sedated or anesthetized cats 
(ch. 272).27 Cytologically conrmed septic suppurative inam-
mation and bacterial growth are diagnostic for neutrophilic 
cholangitis.28 e most commonly isolated bacteria are E. coli, 
Enterococcus spp., and Streptococcus spp.29-32
HISTOLOGIC ASSESSMENT
A denitive diagnosis of triaditis requires histological documen-
tation of inammation of the small intestine, pancreas, and liver. 
is necessitates laparotomy or laparoscopic liver and pancreatic 
biopsies followed by intestinal biopsy through a small abdominal 
incision. Bleeding risk assessment should be performed prior to 
liver biopsy and in icteric cats vitamin K (0.5-1.5 mg/kg SQ q12h 
for 3 doses) is oen administered to reduce the risk of hemor-
rhage.33 Pancreatitis is oen cited as a concern following pan-
creatic biopsy, but studies have shown that this procedure can 
be performed safely using careful technique.34 Samples of liver 
and bile should be submitted for aerobic and anaerobic bacterial 
culture.
e histological features of IBD include morphological (archi-
tectural) changes and inammatory inltrates (ch. 262). e 
morphological changes are more meaningful and can include 
villous stunting, epithelial injury, crypt distension, lacteal dila-
tion, and mucosal brosis. e inammatory inltrates are most 
commonly lymphoplasmacytic, but eosinophilic, neutrophilic, 
or mixed inltrates can also occur.10 e clinical importance of 
minimal or mild inammatory inltrates, especially when they 
are lymphoplasmacytic, is questionable.8 10 Furthermore, it can be 
dicult to distinguish severe lymphoplasmacytic enteritis from 
GI small cell lymphoma.35
Chronic pancreatitis, characterized by a monocytic inltrate 
and varying degrees of brosis, is the form of pancreatitis that is 
Possible Components of Feline Triaditis Syndrome
Small Intestinal Disease (ch. )
•
Inflammatory bowel disease
•
Diet-responsive enteropathy
•
Small cell lymphoma
•
Cobalamin deficiency
pancreatic Disease
•
Acute pancreatitis (ch. 7)
•
Chronic pancreatitis (ch. 7)
•
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (ch. 7)
•
Diabetes mellitus (ch. 292)
Heatobiliary Disease
•
Neutrophilic cholangitis (ch. 272)
•
Lymphocytic cholangitis (ch. 271)
•
Cholecystitis (ch. 272)
•
Cholelithiasis/choledocholithiasis (ch. 273)
•
Feline hepatic lipidosis (ch. 274)
BOX 225.1


=== PDF PAGE 1402 ===
SECTION XIII
•
Comorbidities
1250
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
most commonly observed in cats with triaditis (ch. 278). How-
ever, acute pancreatitis, characterized by a neutrophilic inltrate, 
pancreatic necrosis, and pancreatic edema, can also occur.3 7 11 36
It is important to note that because of the heterogeneous distribu-
tion of pancreatic lesions, their absence based on evaluation of a 
single biopsy specimen does not rule out pancreatic disease.3 36
Acute neutrophilic cholangitis is characterized by an inl-
trate of neutrophils and edema centered around the bile ducts 
(ch. 272). In chronic neutrophilic cholangitis, the inammatory 
inltrate is mixed with neutrophils, lymphocytes, and plasma 
cells, with biliary hyperplasia, biliary epithelial degeneration, and 
varying degrees of brosis (ch. 272).28 Lymphocytic cholangitis is 
characterized by inltration of lymphocytes in the portal region, 
with bile duct proliferation, bile duct epithelial degeneration, bile 
duct loss, and varying degrees of brosis.28
CHALLENGES IN DIAGNOSING TRIADITIS
ere are several unique challenges when diagnosing feline tri-
aditis syndrome. Financial or patient-related constraints may 
mean that biopsy of all 3 organs is not performed. In this situa-
tion a presumptive diagnosis of triaditis (or its components) may 
have to be made based on clinical ndings, laboratory testing, 
and diagnostic imaging ndings. When this is the case, cats may 
be treated empirically and if they don’t respond, the presumptive 
diagnosis should be re-evaluated. Prior therapy can have a con-
founding eect on subsequent diagnostic tests (e.g., prior anti-
microbial therapy may lead to negative bacterial culture results). 
Even when it is possible to biopsy the pancreas, liver, and intesti-
nal tract, interpretation of histopathological ndings is not always 
straightforward. For example, many veterinary pathologists do 
not recognize triaditis as a distinct disease entity and therefore 
TABLE 225.1
Possible Diagnostic Findings in the Common Components of Feline Triaditis Syndrome
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE
pANCREATITIS
CHOLANGITIS
Historical findings
•Chronic presentation typical
•Weight loss, vomiting, hyporexia, diar-
rhea, polyphagia (less common)
•Acute or chronic presentation
•Lethargy, hyporexia, vomiting,
weight loss, diarrhea
•Neutrophilic cholangitis

•Acute presentation typical

•Vomiting, hyporexia, icterus
•Lymphocytic cholangitis

•Chronic presentation typical

•Weight loss, lethargy,
hyporexia, vomiting
Physical examina-
tion findings
•Poor body condition/cachexia, thickened
intestinal loops
•Dehydration, hypothermia, icterus,
abdominal pain, fever, cranial 
abdominal organomegaly/mass
•Neutrophilic cholangitis

•Icterus, fever, abdominal
pain, hepatomegaly
•Lymphocytic cholangitis

•Icterus, hepatomegaly,
ascites, poor body condition/
cachexia
Hematological find-
ings
•Anemia of chronic disease, inflammatory
leukogram
•Increased hematocrit (hemocon-
centration), inflammatory leuko-
gram, neutropenia
•Inflammatory leukogram (NC >
LC), anemia of chronic disease
Biochemical findings
•Hypoalbuminemia, hyperglobulinemia,
hypophosphatemia
•Increased liver enzyme activities,
azotemia, hypocalcemia; traditional 
amylase and lipase activity mea-
surements have limited utility
•Hyperbilirubinemia (NC > LC),
increased liver enzyme activi-
ties, hyperglobulinemia, mild 
hypoalbuminemia (less com-
mon)
Other laboratory 
findings
•Decreased or low-normal cobalamin or
folate are common but their absence does 
not rule out IBD
•fPLI (good sensitivity and specificity
but false positives and negatives 
may still occur)
•DGGR lipase (substantial but incom-
plete agreement with fPLI)
•fTLI used for diagnosing EPI
•Bile acids are more sensitive for
liver dysfunction than bilirubin
•Prolonged prothrombin and
activated partial thromboplastin 
times are possible
Abdominal ultra-
sound findings
•Increased small intestinal wall thickness
with normal wall layering (normal wall
thickness does not rule out IBD)
•Muscularis thickening is suggestive of gas-
trointestinal small cell lymphoma (may
also be seen in healthy cats or cats with 
IBD)
•Enlarged pancreas, generalized
pancreatic hypoechogenicity, 
hyperechogenicity of the surround-
ing mesentery, hyperechoic areas 
(fibrosis), hypoechoic areas (hem-
orrhage inflammation, or necrosis), 
cavitary lesions, dilation of the pan-
creatic duct
•The absence of these findings does
not rule out pancreatitis
•Increased, decreased, or hetero-
geneous hepatic echotexture, 
hepatomegaly, gallbladder wall 
or common bile duct wall thick-
ening, hyperechoic gallbladder 
contents, choleliths/ choledo-
choliths, dilation of the com-
mon bile duct
•The absence of these findings
does not rule out cholangitis
DGGR, 1,2-o-dilauryl-rac-glycero glutaric acid-(6’-methylresorufin) ester; EPI, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency; fPLI, feline pancreas-specific lipase; fTLI, feline trypsin-like 
immunoreactivity; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; LC, lymphocytic cholangitis; NC, neutrophilic cholangitis.


=== PDF PAGE 1403 ===
CHApTER 225
•
Feline Triaditis
1251
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
this syndrome is uncommonly mentioned in their reports. More 
importantly, the clinical relevance of mild histological changes 
(e.g., mild lymphoplasmacytic enteritis) is uncertain and this 
must be taken into consideration. It is essential to consider all the 
available information as one component disease may dominate 
the clinical picture and if so, this should be prioritized when for-
mulating a therapeutic plan.
MANAGEMENT
SUppORTIVE CARE AND NUTRITION
An individualized uid therapy plan should be made by consid-
ering the cat’s maintenance needs, current decits, ongoing losses, 
and its ability to tolerate intravenous uids (ch. 120).37 Electrolyte 
abnormalities, such as hypokalemia (ch. 68) or hypophosphatemia 
(ch. 69), must also be addressed promptly. Some cats actively vomit 
or show signs of nausea, so antiemetics are frequently indicated. 
Maropitant is a neurokinin-1 (NK1) receptor antagonist that is a 
potent antiemetic that also has analgesic eects38 (1 mg/kg SQ/IV/
PO q24h). Ondansetron (0.2-0.5 mg/kg IV/PO, q24-48h; if given 
PO, doses should be towards the high end of the dosage range and 
shorter end of the interdose interval39) is a serotonin-3 (5HT3) 
receptor antagonist antiemetic drug. Cats with triaditis may experi-
ence abdominal pain (ch. 6). Buprenorphine (0.01-0.03 mg/kg sub-
lingual/IV/SQ q8-12h) is a partial mu opiate receptor agonist that 
can be administered sublingually to cats by owners.
Appetite stimulants, such as mirtazapine (1.875-3.75 mg/cat 
PO q24h or 1.5 inches [∼2 mg] transdermally q24h40), can also 
be used as a short-term measure. Enteral feeding is preferred to 
parenteral feeding and placement of a feeding tube is oen indi-
cated (ch. 81). Withholding food from cats with pancreatitis is no 
longer recommended and early enteral nutrition is believed to be 
benecial (ch. 278).41 e optimal diet to feed cats with pancreati-
tis is not currently known but fat restriction has not been proven 
to be benecial and the author oen feeds a commercial diet mar-
keted for intestinal disease. Up to 50% of cats with chronic enter-
opathy will respond to dietary intervention (ch. 152). erefore, 
a diet trial with a novel protein or hydrolyzed antigen diet should 
ideally be performed in cats with chronic enteropathies.9 42
ere is a rationale behind administering antioxidant medica-
tions, such as S-adenosyl methionine (20 mg/kg PO q24h on an 
empty stomach), silymarin (10 mg/kg of silymarin complexed with 
phosphatidylcholine PO q24h), or vitamin E (alpha-tocopherol, 
15 IU/kg PO q24h), to cats with cholangitis. ese mediations 
have not been proven to improve outcomes in cats with inam-
matory liver disease but are generally well-tolerated.43 44 However, 
essential supportive medications and those that treat the cat’s 
underlying disease process(es) should be prioritized.
TREATING THE COMpONENT DISEASES
Prednisolone is the typical treatment for cats with IBD (1-2 mg/kg 
PO per day, tapered to the lowest eective dose) (ch. 262). Some-
times chlorambucil (2 mg per cat PO q48-72h; several other pro-
tocols have also been described) is used as adjunctive treatment 
in cats that either incompletely respond to prednisolone or don’t 
tolerate eective doses of prednisolone (chs. 144, 169, 224).9
Treatment for pancreatitis in cats (ch. 278) is comprised 
mainly of the supportive and nutritional measures discussed 
above. Antimicrobials are not routinely recommended for the 
treatment of pancreatitis in cats. Antimicrobials are indicated 
when there an infected pancreatic uid accumulation (most are 
sterile), when there is concurrent aspiration pneumonia, or if 
sepsis is suspected.11 In a recent consensus statement on feline 
pancreatitis, several panel members felt that the use of predniso-
lone could help reduce inammation and prevent brosis in cats 
with chronic pancreatitis. Hyperglycemia is a potential side-eect 
and panel members could not reach a consensus on whether an 
anti-inammatory or an immunosuppressive dosage should be 
used initially.11 Cyclosporine or another immunomodulatory 
agent could be considered if prednisolone is not tolerated, but 
evidence of their ecacy for treating this disease is lacking.
Antimicrobial agents are the primary treatment for cats with 
neutrophilic cholangitis (ch. 272). Ideally, these drugs are selected 
based on the results of culture and susceptibility testing of bile 
and/or liver samples. Empirical antimicrobial therapy is usually 
started pending culture results or if there is no bacterial growth 
and neutrophilic cholangitis is conrmed or highly suspected. 
e antimicrobial(s) chosen should be eective against enteric 
bacteria and have good biliary penetration. Reasonable choices 
include potentiated penicillin alone, enrooxacin (5 mg/kg PO 
q24h) with concurrent potentiated penicillin or clindamycin, or 
pradooxacin alone (7.5 mg/kg PO q24h). Treatment is typically 
continued for 4-6 weeks.
Immunomodulation with prednisolone is the primary treat-
ment for cats with lymphocytic cholangitis (ch. 271). In a retro-
spective study, prednisolone-treated cats had a median survival 
time of >800 days.45 In cats that fail to respond completely or 
that have unacceptable glucocorticoid side-eects, the addition 
of chlorambucil may be helpful. It is not known if the addition 
of ursodeoxycholic acid (10-15 mg/kg PO q24h) to prednisolone 
treatment is benecial. However, cats treated with prednisolone 
monotherapy have survived longer than those treated with urso-
deoxycholic acid monotherapy.45
CONSIDERATIONS WHEN MAKING A TREATMENT pLAN
When make a therapeutic plan, possible interactions between 
medications should be considered (e.g., cats receiving mirtazap-
ine and the analgesic agent tramadol are at increased risk of 
serotonin syndrome). e risk of the medication indicated for 
one condition making another condition worse should also be 
carefully thought about. For example, for a cat with IBD that also 
has (or is suspected to have) neutrophilic cholangitis, immuno-
suppressive doses of prednisolone could lead to a worsening 
of signs or even sepsis (ch. 227). In this scenario, it would be 
ideal to treat with an appropriate antimicrobial before starting 
prednisolone. In other cases, the presence of a comorbid condi-
tion does not alter therapy. For example, for a cat with IBD and 
suspected pancreatitis that does not need immediate supportive 
care, therapy for IBD (i.e., prednisolone and an elimination diet) 
takes precedence.
e potential for the presence (or development of) comorbid 
conditions should also be considered when monitoring response 
to treatment. For example, a cat that has recently been treated for 
neutrophilic cholangitis and starts to vomit could be found to 
have an increasing serum ALT activity. In this scenario, it is pos-
sible that the deterioration is due to a recurrence of neutrophilic 
cholangitis but it would also be possible that the patient devel-
oped either acute pancreatitis or a chronic enteropathy.
pROGNOSIS
e prognosis for cats with combinations of IBD, pancreatitis, 
and cholangitis has not been well described. Overall, it should 
be considered to be very variable; some may not survive initial 
hospitalization whereas others respond well to treatment. e 
literature provides some evidence that cats with more than 1 of 
the component diseases have a worse prognosis. For example, cats 


=== PDF PAGE 1404 ===
SECTION XIII
•
Comorbidities
1252
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
with cholangitis that had concurrent conditions, including IBD 
and pancreatitis, had a lower survival rate than those without46
and cats with triaditis had more severe histological inammation 
than those with inammation in only 1 or 2 organs.7
REFERENCES
1. Simpson KW. Pancreatitis and triaditis in cats: causes and treatment. J Sm 
Anim Pract. 2015;56:40-49.
2. Cerna P, Kilpatrick S, Gunn-Moore DA. Feline comorbidities: What do we 
really know about feline triaditis? J Feline Med Surg. 2020;22:1047-1067.
3. Lidbury JA, Mooyottu S, Jergens AE. Triaditis: truth and consequences. Vet 
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. 2020;50:1135-1156.
4. Callahan Clark JE, Haddad JL, Brown DC, etal. Feline cholangitis: a necropsy 
study of 44 cats (1986-2008). J Feline Med Surg. 2011;13:570-576.
5. Weiss DJ, Gagne JM, Armstrong PJ. Relationship between inammatory 
hepatic disease and inammatory bowel disease, pancreatitis, and nephritis in 
cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1996;209:1114-1116.
6. Norsworthy GD, Estep JS, Hollinger C, etal. Prevalence and underlying 
causes of histologic abnormalities in cats suspected to have chronic small bowel 
disease: 300 cases (2008-2013). J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2015;247:629-635.
7. Fragkou FC, Adamama-Moraitou KK, Poutahidis T, etal. Prevalence and 
clinicopathological features of triaditis in a prospective case series of symptomatic 
and asymptomatic cats. J Vet Intern Med. 2016;30:1031-1045.
8. Marsilio S, Ackermann MR, Lidbury JA, etal. Results of histopathology, 
immunohistochemistry, and molecular clonality testing of small intestinal 
biopsy specimens from clinically healthy client-owned cats. J Vet Intern Med. 
2019;33:551-558.
9. Jergens AE. Feline idiopathic inammatory bowel disease: what we know 
and what remains to be unraveled. J Feline Med Surg. 2012;14:445-458.
10. Day MJ, Bilzer T, Mansell J, etal. Histopathological standards for the 
diagnosis of gastrointestinal inammation in endoscopic biopsy samples from 
the dog and cat: a report from the World Small Animal Veterinary Association 
Gastrointestinal Standardization Group. J Comp Pathol. 2008;138(Suppl 1):s1-s43.
11. Forman MA, Steiner JM, Armstrong PJ, etal. ACVIM consensus statement 
on pancreatitis in cats. J Vet Intern Med. 2021;35:703-723.
12. Simpson K, American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine. Culture-
independent detection of bacteria in feline pancreatitis. In: American College of 
Veterinary Internal Medicine Forum. Lakewood, CO; 2011:507-508.
13. Brain PH, Barrs VR, Martin P, etal. Feline cholecystitis and acute neutro-
philic cholangitis: clinical ndings, bacterial isolates and response to treatment in 
six cases. J Feline Med Surg. 2006;8:91-103.
14. Twedt DC, Cullen J, McCord K, etal. Evaluation of uorescence in situ 
hybridization for the detection of bacteria in feline inammatory liver disease. J 
Feline Med Surg. 2014;16:109-117.
15. Boland L, Beatty J. Feline cholangitis. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. 
2017;47:703-724.
16. Widdison AL, Alvarez C, Chang YB, etal. Sources of pancreatic pathogens 
in acute pancreatitis in cats. Pancreas. 1994;9:536-541.
17. Widdison AL, Karanjia ND, Reber HA. Antimicrobial treatment of pancre-
atic infection in cats. Br J Surg. 1994;81:886-889.
18. Widdison AL, Karanjia ND, Reber HA. Routes of spread of pathogens into 
the pancreas in a feline model of acute-pancreatitis. Gut. 1994;35:1306-1310.
19. Eksteen B, Grant AJ, Miles A, etal. Hepatic endothelial CCL25 mediates the 
recruitment of CCR9+ gut-homing lymphocytes to the liver in primary sclerosing 
cholangitis. J Exp Med. 2004;200:1511-1517.
20. O’Hara SP, Splinter PL, Trussoni CE, etal. Cholangiocyte N-Ras protein 
mediates lipopolysaccharide-induced interleukin 6 secretion and proliferation. J 
Biol Chem. 2011;286:30352-30360.
21. Guarneri F, Guarneri C, Benvenga S. Helicobacter pylori and autoimmune 
pancreatitis: role of carbonic anhydrase via molecular mimicry? J Cell Mol Med. 
2005;9:741-744.
22. Zhang L, Smyrk TC. Autoimmune pancreatitis and IgG4-related systemic 
diseases. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2010;3:491-504.
23. Grin S. Feline abdominal ultrasonography: what’s normal? what’s abnor-
mal? e biliary tree. J Feline Med Surg. 2019;21:429-441.
24. Grin S. Feline abdominal ultrasonography: what’s normal? what’s abnor-
mal? e liver. J Feline Med Surg. 2019;21:12-24.
25. Grin S. Feline abdominal ultrasonography: What’s normal? What’s abnor-
mal? e pancreas. J Feline Med Surg. 2020;22:241-259.
26. Grin S. Feline abdominal ultrasonography: What’s normal? What’s abnor-
mal? e diseased gastrointestinal tract. J Feline Med Surg. 2019;21:1047-1060.
27. Webb CB. Evidence-based medicine: ultrasound-guided percutaneous 
cholecystocentesis in the cat. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. 2020;50:1123-
1134.
28. van den Ingh TSGAM, Cullen JM, Twedt DC, etal. Morphological classica-
tion of biliary disorders of the canine and feline liver. In: Rothuizen J, Bunch SE, 
Charles JA, etal., eds. WSAVA Standards for Clinical and Histological Diagnosis of 
Canine and Feline Liver Diseases. WB Saunders; 2006:61-76.
29. Wagner KA, Hartmann FA, Trepanier LA. Bacterial culture results from 
liver, gallbladder, or bile in 248 dogs and cats evaluated for hepatobiliary disease: 
1998-2003. J Vet Intern Med. 2007;21:417-424.
30. Byeld VL, Callahan Clark JE, Turek BJ, etal. Percutaneous cholecys-
tocentesis in cats with suspected hepatobiliary disease. J Feline Med Surg. 
2017;19:1254-1260.
31. Peters LM, Glanemann B, Garden OA, etal. Cytological ndings of 140 bile 
samples from dogs and cats and associated clinical pathological data. J Vet Intern 
Med. 2016;30:123-131.
32. Policelli Smith R, Gookin JL, Smolski W, etal. Association between gall-
bladder ultrasound ndings and bacterial culture of bile in 70 cats and 202 dogs. J 
Vet Intern Med. 2017;31:1451-1458.
33. Webster CR. Hemostatic disorders associated with hepatobiliary disease. 
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. 2017;47:601-615.
34. Cosford KL, Shmon CL, Myers SL, etal. Prospective evaluation of laparo-
scopic pancreatic biopsies in 11 healthy cats. J Vet Intern Med. 2010;24:104-113.
35. Marsilio S. Dierentiating inammatory bowel disease from alimen-
tary lymphoma in cats: Does it matter? Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. 
2021;51:93-109.
36. De Cock HE, Forman MA, Farver TB, etal. Prevalence and histopathologic 
characteristics of pancreatitis in cats. Vet Pathol. 2007;44:39-49.
37. Davis H, Jensen T, Johnson A, etal. 2013 AAHA/AAFP uid therapy guide-
lines for dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 2013;49:149-159.
38. Corrêa JMX, Soares P, Niella RV, etal. Evaluation of the antinociceptive 
eect of maropitant, a neurokinin-1 receptor antagonist, in cats undergoing 
ovariohysterectomy. Vet Med Int. 2019;2019:9352528.
39. Quimby JM, Lake RC, Hansen RJ, etal. Oral, subcutaneous, and intrave-
nous pharmacokinetics of ondansetron in healthy cats. J Vet Pharmacol er. 
2014;37:348-353.
40. Benson KK, Zajic LB, Morgan PK, etal. Drug exposure and clinical eect of 
transdermal mirtazapine in healthy young cats: a pilot study. J Feline Med Surg. 
2017;19:998-1006.
41. Jensen KB, Chan DL. Nutritional management of acute pancreatitis in dogs 
and cats. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio). 2014;24:240-250.
42. Guilford WG, Jones BR, Markwell PJ, etal. Food sensitivity in cats with 
chronic idiopathic gastrointestinal problems. J Vet Intern Med. 2001;15:7-13.
43. Webster CR, Cooper J. erapeutic use of cytoprotective agents in 
canine and feline hepatobiliary disease. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. 
2009;39:631-652.
44. Lidbury JA. General principles in the treatment of liver disease. In: Ettinger 
SJ, Feldman EC, Côté E, eds. Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine. 8th ed. 
Elsevier; 2017:1621-1627.
45. Otte CM, Penning LC, Rothuizen J, etal. Retrospective comparison of 
prednisolone and ursodeoxycholic acid for the treatment of feline lymphocytic 
cholangitis. Vet J. 2013;195:205-209.
46. Gagne JM, Armstrong PJ, Weiss DJ, etal. Clinical features of inammatory 
liver disease in cats: 41 cases (1983-1993). J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1999;214:513-516.


=== PDF PAGE 1405 ===
CHApTER 226
•
Obesity and Immobility
1253
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
Obesity and Immobility
Ross H. Palmer
THE pROBLEM
T
he combination of obesity and immo-
bility robs dogs and cats of their 
quality of life and oen, ultimately, 
leads to agonizing family decisions for pet 
euthanasia. Immobility may result from any 
combination of osteoarthritis (OA), poor t-
ness, pain, muscular weakness, and neuro-
logic dysfunction, all of which are worsened 
by obesity. Immobility itself also reduces an 
obese patient’s ability to lose excess weight through physical exer-
cise. e pairing of immobility and obesity thus creates a manage-
ment quandary that occurs frequently in practice.
Both pet obesity and OA are on the rise in the United States and 
elsewhere.1 2 Unfortunately, obesity contributes to the development 
of OA and its symptoms of pain and immobility. In the Labrador 
lifespan study, caloric intake was inextricably linked to the onset 
and symptoms of OA and it shortened median lifespan.3 is land-
mark study used a “paired-feeding” design in which 6-week-old 
Labrador puppies from each of 7 litters were paired based upon 
body weight (BW) and sex and randomly assigned into either 
“control-fed” or “limited-fed” groups. Control group dogs were 
initially fed ad libitum (later reduced to 62.1 kcal/kg of ideal BW 
at ∼3 years of age) and paired littermates in the study group were 
fed the same ration but limited to 75% of the amount consumed by 
each pair-mate. Housing and all other environmental factors were 
identical; only the quantity of food (caloric intake) diered between 
groups. Not surprisingly, dogs with 25% restricted caloric intake 
weighed less (26% less on average) and had lower body condition 
scores (BCSs) through life. ese same calorie-restricted dogs had 
a decreased incidence, delayed onset, and reduced clinical signs, 
of OA. For instance, multi-joint OA was only present in 10% of 
calorie-restricted dogs at 8 years of age, but was exceedingly com-
mon (77%) in dogs fed the same diet without caloric restriction.4
Additionally, the median lifespan of the control group (no caloric 
restriction) was 1.8 year shorter than the calorie-restricted group; 
the leading cause of death was euthanasia prompted by the inability 
to satisfactorily manage the immobility and pain caused by OA.
While advancing age is the primary causal risk factor for OA in 
cats, a recent study demonstrated that obesity, among other factors, 
may predispose cats to developing owner-reported immobility associ-
ated with degenerative joint disease.5
THE SOLUTION
Effective treatment of patients suffering from comorbid obe-
sity and immobility requires a focus upon correcting the obe-
sity problem. Certainly, there are other aspects of treatment of 
immobility that must be directed toward the primary source of 
pain, reduced muscular strength, and neurologic dysfunction, 
but attaining a lean body conformation is the foundational 
strategy to treatment of comorbid obesity and immobility.
Most veterinarians have the knowledge necessary to eectively 
manage the comorbidities of obesity and immobility; rather, it 
seems more the lack of awareness of the gravity of the obesity 
problem and the relative disbelief that we possess the power to 
eectively prevent and manage this “dreaded duo” that explains 
our profession’s relative impotence to do so.
OBESITY pREVENTION
Development of healthy feeding habits early in a pet’s life is preferable 
to altering established habits that have contributed to obesity and, 
then, to immobility. Additionally, pet owners tend to be more recep-
tive to veterinary counseling directed at helping them to attain their 
lifestyle and life quality goals for their pet than they are to veterinary 
communications that may be perceived as judgment, blaming or 
shaming (ch. 1). Further, pet owner preventative education can focus 
on development of healthy family lifestyle habits in which physical 
activity and playful interaction are the primary means for bonding, 
with a de-emphasis on the role of food and treats for that purpose. 
Awareness of the positive impact of maintaining a lean body con-
formation (BCS 4-5/9) upon pet life quality and lifespan can serve 
as positive motivator for early adherence (compliance) and ongoing 
positive reinforcement from the veterinary team can support long-
term client adherence. Veterinary teams’ communication with their 
clients is complex and can profoundly aect pet owner adherence to 
wellness- and treatment-recommendations,6 7 yet there is surpris-
ingly little peer-reviewed evidence as it relates to eective nutritional 
counseling. us, the above observations are based on the author’s 
private practice and academic clinical experience as well as synthesis 
of other authors’ published recommendations.8 9
OBESITY TREATMENT
In contrast to obesity prevention, several barriers to eective treat-
ment may need to be overcome (ch. 150). Pet owners are oen 
unaware that their pet is overweight and therefore, they can be 
reluctant to accept a treatment plan.8 Additionally, pet owners oen 
need to be educated about the adverse impacts of obesity, but this 
conversation risks the perception of veterinarian judgment if suf-
cient emphasis is not placed on the realistic goal of restoring pet 
health and well-being. Entrenched pet behaviors such as begging 
and pet owner attitudes about food as a source of demonstrating 
love for their pet can also be challenging to overcome.
patient Assessment
Subjective assessment using a 9-point BCS is commonly practiced 
for the purposes of detecting overweight or obese states (ch. 72 and 
textbook’s inside covers). is may be complemented by a subjec-
tive muscle condition score (MCS; textbook’s inside covers). A tar-
get BW can be estimated by assuming that each BCS point above 5 
represents 10% BW excess (ch. 150). For example, a 45 kg dog with 
BCS = 8 is estimated to weigh the target weight × 130%. us, the 
target weight is estimated as follows: 45 kg/130% = 34.6 kg.
CHAPTER 226
ACRONYMS
BCS body condition score
BW body weight
NGF nerve growth factor
NSAID nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drug
OA osteoarthritis
RER resting energy require-
ment
TrkA tropomyosin receptor 
kinase A


=== PDF PAGE 1406 ===
SECTION XIII
•
Comorbidities
1254
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
pet Owner Engagement, Suort and Encouragement
Eective communication with the pet owner about nutritional 
plan rationale, goals and strategy is vital to successful implemen-
tation (ch. 1). Alignment of the plan with owner outcome goals 
that include specic mobility and lifestyle milestones is impor-
tant. For instance, the pet owner may wish for the pet to be able 
to go on neighborhood walks of a dened length or be able to 
regain the ability to ascend stairs; these can be critical milestones 
to engage the pet owner, to measure treatment success and to 
serve as sources of celebration and motivation when attained. 
A non-judgmental approach to obtaining a dietary history will 
help the veterinary team to identify barriers to success that are 
of concern to the pet owner. For example, there are several rea-
sons why a veterinarian’s edict to “eliminate all treats” may not 
be feasible. Instead, incorporating ways to include those treats as 
part of the total daily nutritional account may be more eective. 
Multi-pet household feeding practices may have to be modied 
or require use of microchip-activated feeding systems (example: 
Sure Petcare Surefeed selective automatic pet feeder).10 Eective 
implementation oen requires ongoing pet owner support and 
encouragement along with nutritional plan adaptations as serial 
patient monitoring is performed.
Develoing, Imlementing, and Monitoring a Nutritional 
plan
Ad libitum feeding is not appropriate for management of obesity 
since excessive caloric intake is the root cause. e nutritional 
plan is based upon the patient assessment (ch. 145) and awareness 
of household impediments to weight loss to be addressed. Addi-
tionally, the plan should take into account all of the patient’s con-
ditions including any combination of endocrine, gastrointestinal, 
renal, hepatic, cardiopulmonary and other conditions. Especially 
in such complex scenarios, consultation with a board-certied 
veterinary nutritionist is advised.
Resting energy requirement (RER) is the daily caloric require-
ment for a patient and is typically expressed as kilocalories per 
day. e estimated daily RER for a patient can be calculated as 
70 kcal/kg0.75 (example: RER for a 10 kg dog can be calculated 
as 70 kcal × 100.75 = 394 kcal / day). In order to promote caloric 
restriction, the initial daily energy goal can be calculated as 100% 
of the RER for the target weight in dogs. Some prefer to start at 
80% of RER for the target weight in cats. Regardless of the calcu-
lated initial daily energy goal, serial monitoring at 2- to 4-week 
intervals is required to measure the rate of weight loss and make 
adjustments to the plan as needed. e ideal rate of weight loss 
is 1-2% of BW per week for dogs and 0.5-2% of BW per week in 
cats. It is common when starting a weight loss plan to discover the 
rate of weight loss is less than ideal. In this instance, exploration 
into the home history to identify unaccounted-for calories is war-
ranted. If the nutritional plan is being appropriately administered 
at home but is failing to achieve the desired rate of weight loss, the 
daily caloric consumption is reduced to 80-90% of the original 
recommendation. In the rare event of weight loss that is too rapid, 
the daily caloric consumption is raised to 120% of the original 
recommendation.
Simply reducing the feeding volume of the normal ration is 
seldom appropriate for obese animals, as this practice reduces the 
daily consumption of important macronutrients such as protein, 
fatty acids, vitamins and minerals along with the caloric reduc-
tion. Meeting or exceeding protein requirements is important 
for maintaining lean muscle mass during weight loss. Similarly, 
over-the-counter “weight management” or “light” diets are oen 
insuciently balanced for such strict weight loss programs. Com-
mercially prepared veterinary prescription weight loss diets tend 
to oer the advantage of being appropriately balanced as well as 
being high in insoluble ber (which promotes satiety) and can 
reduce stressful food begging behaviors. ough some pet own-
ers may object to the apparent expense of commercial weight loss 
diets, these foods are oen a cost savings when the cost of moni-
toring and managing the source of patient immobility is consid-
ered. Additional measures to address food begging may include 
increased feeding frequency and use of food puzzles can help 
to address those behaviors (ch. 150). Finally, pet owners can be 
educated that what may be perceived as food begging is actually a 
more general attention begging such that taking time to play with 
their pet may be equally or even more eective that giving a treat 
with regard to serving the pet’s core need.
Total elimination of daily treats is not achievable in many 
households because treats may be used for conveying love for 
the pet, for training purposes, or to administer medications. 
e caloric consumption associated with these treats should be 
accounted for in the nutritional plan and should not exceed 10% 
of the daily caloric consumption. e caloric density of common 
treats such as vegetables, fruits, eggs, etc., has been reported else-
where.9,11 One strategy is to use a pre-determined portion of the 
normal daily ration as treats to avoid nutritional imbalance issues.
Aer an initial challenge to adjust the nutritional plan, the 
desired rate of weight loss is frequently attained. e pet owner 
oen requires encouragement at this stage because improved 
patient mobility is oen not noted until 10% weight loss or more 
has been achieved. At this early stage, pet owners might question 
the value of their eorts, and reminders of the therapeutic goals 
of improved life quality can be a necessary reminder. Pets pre-
dictably show improved mobility, activity, energy and comfort as 
the successful weight loss plan progresses and owners tend to be 
encouraged at this stage. Some owners of very obese pets require 
continued incentive and encouragement as they are satised with 
the improvement seen when BCS drops from 8/9 to 7/9, for exam-
ple. ese owners can be encouraged that the best is yet to come. 
e Labrador Retriever lifespan study suggested that the benet 
of an extended lifespan (presumably related to reduced immo-
bility and pain) was most evident upon attaining a BCS of 5/9. 
Client counseling may also be needed if the initial target weight 
is attained, but the pet still has a BCS >5/9. Once the ideal BW 
and BCS are attained, the daily caloric consumption may need to 
be increased 10-20% to prevent continued weight loss. Contin-
ued serial monitoring of BW and BCS is advised to ensure that 
rebound weight gain does not occur because the pet may main-
tain a lower-than-average daily energy requirement.
Develoing a physical Rehabilitation and Lifestyle plan
Nutritional management combined with an exercise plan is likely 
to be more eective than dietary management alone, especially in 
regard to preserving lean muscle mass.12,13 is program can be 
designed as a progressive training period directed at pet owners’ 
specic mobility and lifestyle goals for their pet. For instance, if 
the goal is to be able to complete neighborhood walks of dened 
length, the plan can focus on identied current impediments (lack 
of cardiovascular tness, muscular weakness, obesity, pain, etc.) 
Much like training for a marathon, the program should include 
progressive steps toward the ultimate goal. Working in collabora-
tion with a certied canine rehabilitation practitioner, when pos-
sible, is oen very helpful in this regard (ch. 256). In-clinic physical 
rehabilitation and therapeutic exercise, combined with training 
the pet owner to be able to perform at-home therapies, is most 
likely to be successful. Some pet owners may be more willing to 
exercise for the health benet of their pets than they are for them-
selves, and this is one subject of various One Health initiatives.14
e veterinary team should champion and support the pet owner 
through the initial stages of the program because it oen takes 3-6
weeks of comprehensive nutritional and physical rehabilitation 
management before discernible improvements in patient activity, 


=== PDF PAGE 2018 ===
SECTION XVIII
•
Pancreatic Disease
1866
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
exocrine pancreatic diseases).2 e presence of permanent his-
topathologic changes (e.g., brosis and acinar atrophy) is con-
sidered suggestive of chronic pancreatitis.1 Acute pancreatitis is 
characterized by absence of permanent histopathologic changes 
and the presence of neutrophils, edema, and necrosis (Figure 
277.6).1 e predominant inammatory inltrate (i.e., neutro-
phils or lymphocytes) is oen used for describing pancreatitis 
as suppurative or lymphocytic, respectively, and a signicant 
degree of necrosis characterizes the pancreatitis as necrotizing. 
However, determining the clinical signicance of histopatho-
logic ndings may be challenging and what constitutes normal 
pancreatic histologic features is still debated. Although the pres-
ence of certain histopathologic ndings conrms pancreatitis, 
exclusion of pancreatitis based on normal histologic ndings is 
dicult because inammatory lesions of the pancreas are oen 
highly localized and can easily be missed.1 erefore, multiple 
sections of the pancreas must be evaluated to increase the likeli-
hood of nding microscopic lesions; this is not always feasible in 
clinical cases. Finally, although pancreatic biopsy per se is con-
sidered a safe procedure, it requires invasive approaches that are 
expensive and potentially detrimental to patients that are hemo-
dynamically unstable.
MANAGEMENT OF PANCREATITIS
MANAGEMENT OF SEVERE ACUTE PANCREATITIS
Treatment of the Cause
e etiology of pancreatitis remains unknown in most cases and 
treatment is almost exclusively supportive and nonspecic. e 
presence of possible risk factors should always be investigated. If 
any of these factors are present, they should be managed where 
possible.
Fluid and Electrolyte Therapy
Early and adequate uid administration is the cornerstone of 
management of acute pancreatitis (ch. 120).36 Dogs with severe 
pancreatitis oen have various degrees of dehydration, hypovole-
mia, or both at the time of presentation, due to ongoing anorexia, 
vomiting, diarrhea, and/or third space losses. Close monitoring is 
required in order not to overhydrate the animal; in humans overly 
aggressive uid therapy may be associated with an increased risk 
of acute kidney injury and/or acute respiratory distress syndrome 
(ARDS).37 Crystalloid uids are usually the preferred choice of 
uid. In humans, lactated Ringer’s solution is preferred over nor-
mal saline.36 Administration of synthetic colloid uids might be 
indicated in cases of severe hypoalbuminemia or hypotension. 
Fresh-frozen plasma (FFP) might also be used in cases with hypo-
albuminemia (it also contains protease inhibitors and coagulation 
factors). However, limited data are available on the usefulness 
of FFP in dogs. Studies in humans show no benet of plasma 
administration in the clinical outcome of patients with acute pan-
creatitis.38 39 In a retrospective study, dogs with pancreatitis that 
received FFP had a worse outcome than dogs that did not receive 
FFP.40 us, the actual value of plasma administration is highly 
questionable in dogs with pancreatitis.
Hypokalemia is oen present as a result of potassium loss due 
to a combination of diarrhea, vomiting, uid therapy, and anorexia. 
erefore, serum potassium concentration should be monitored 
throughout hospitalization, and potassium must be added to intra-
venous (IV) uids where necessary. Other electrolyte and any acid-
base disturbances should also be identied and corrected.
Nutritional Support (ch. )
ere is mounting evidence that most humans and dogs with 
acute pancreatitis benet from early nutritional support.36 Stud-
ies have also shown that enteral nutrition is superior to total par-
enteral nutrition in the treatment of acute pancreatitis in both 
humans and animals.36 41 Lack of enteral nutrition adversely 
aects intestinal motility and GI barrier function, disrupts the 
normal intestinal microbiota, and can cause villus atrophy.
In a pilot study, early enteral nutrition in 5 dogs with naturally 
occurring, severe, acute pancreatitis delivered proximal to the pylo-
rus was well tolerated and resulted in fewer complications than par-
enteral nutrition.42 In another study of 34 dogs with pancreatitis, 
feeding within 48 hours of hospitalization had a positive impact on 
return to voluntary intake and reduced the incidence of GI signs.43
In general, dogs with pancreatitis that do not vomit should be fed 
orally as soon as possible. In dogs that do not vomit but are anorec-
tic, some form of a feeding tube should be used. In dogs with severe 
vomiting, feeding tube placement should be delayed.
ere is currently no evidence to support the use of postpyloric 
feeding in either humans or animals with acute pancreatitis.36 42-44
A nasoesophageal tube is easily placed and does not require general 
anesthesia (ch. 81). Placement of an esophagostomy tube requires a 
short general anesthesia and represents an excellent option for dogs 
with pancreatitis (ch. 81).45 Complications are uncommon. Gastros-
tomy and jejunostomy tube placement require more invasive proce-
dures and might be associated with more complications.
Figure 277.5
Macroscopic appearance of the pancreas from a dog 
with pancreatitis. e pancreas appears hemorrhagic, edematous, and 
granular, and there is some peripancreatic fat necrosis. ese changes 
are highly suggestive of pancreatitis.
Figure 277.6
Microscopic appearance of the pancreas from a dog 
with acute pancreatitis. ere are areas of extensive pancreatic necrosis 
and neutrophilic inltration. No brosis or atrophy are present. Hema-
toxylin and eosin stain; magnication 200×.


=== PDF PAGE 2019 ===
CHAPTER 277
•
Pancreatitis in Dogs: Diagnosis and Management
1867
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
ere is currently no evidence-based information regarding 
the appropriate diet that should be fed to dogs with pancreatitis. 
Traditionally, feeding a low-fat diet is generally recommended, 
although the ideal fat content of the diet has not been determined. 
It is also recommended that feeding be introduced gradually over 
3-4 days until resting energy requirements (RER) are met.
Analgesic Therapy
Although pain is reported to occur in only a fraction of dogs with 
pancreatitis,3,4 it is believed to be present to various degrees in 
virtually all dogs with pancreatitis. Pain induces several physi-
ologic changes, including decreased appetite, decreased GI motility, 
decreased regional blood ow to several abdominal organs (includ-
ing the pancreas), and it may induce a catabolic state (ch. 6). us, 
analgesic therapy should be an important component of the man-
agement of dogs with pancreatitis, even when pain is not clinically 
apparent.
Manifestations of pain in dogs with pancreatitis can range 
from mild to severe. Pain management in dogs with pancreatitis 
is typically achieved by opioid administration. Administration of 
an injectable opioid such as buprenorphine (0.01-0.03 mg/kg, IV, 
IM, or SC q4-8h), fentanyl (0.005-0.01 mg/kg, IV, IM or SC q2h; 
constant rate infusion [CRI] 0.002-0.006 mg/kg/h), or meperidine 
(2-5 mg/kg, IM or SC q2-4h) is eective and provides fast results. 
Butorphanol (0.2-0.4 mg/kg, IV or SC, q4-6h) can be used in cases 
with mild to moderate pain. Fentanyl patches (patch size is based 
on patient size, every 3 to 4 days) are safe and practical, but they 
should be used only aer analgesia has been achieved by use of 
injectable opioids, because it takes longer for transdermal appli-
cation to achieve analgesia. Multimodal analgesic therapy may be 
indicated in some cases with severe pain (ch. 6). e eectiveness 
and safety of nonsteroidal anti-inammatory drugs (NSAIDs) is 
questionable in dogs with acute pancreatitis and this class of drugs 
ideally should be avoided as these patients are oen dehydrated or 
hypovolemic and therefore at risk for GI ulceration or renal injury.
Antiemetic Therapy (ch. )
Antiemetic therapy is indicated in the majority of dogs with acute 
pancreatitis. e need for antiemetic therapy is obvious in cases 
where vomiting is present, but antiemetic therapy may also be 
indicated in patients that are anorectic. Nausea is believed to con-
tribute to anorexia and weight loss and may lead to prolonged 
hospitalization and a worse prognosis.
Maropitant (1 mg/kg, PO or SC q24h), a neurokinin-1 receptor 
antagonist, is a very potent and safe antiemetic that is oen used as 
a rst-line antiemetic in dogs with pancreatitis. ere is also evi-
dence that maropitant has analgesic properties, making this drug 
very attractive for use in pancreatitis patients. Furthermore, recent 
evidence in experimental models of pancreatitis have suggested that 
maropitant may also have anti-inammatory properties.46 Other 
good antiemetic choices include 5-HT3 antagonists such as ondan-
setron (0.1-0.2 mg/kg, slow IV, q6-12h). Dopaminergic antagonists 
(e.g., metoclopramide 0.2-0.5 mg/kg, IV, IM, SQ, or PO, q6-8h) are 
considered less eective in treating nausea and vomiting, but might 
be useful in enhancing upper GI motility; a constant-rate infusion 
of metoclopramide (1-2 mg/kg/day IV) may be more eective than 
intermittent dosing. In cases of intractable vomiting, combinations of 
dierent antiemetics can be used.
Appetite Stimulants
Dogs with acute pancreatitis oen have a reduced appetite. Many of 
these animals have nausea, leading to anorexia (ch. 17). us, treat-
ment with an antiemetic may have a positive impact on appetite, 
but many patients remain hyporexic. ese patients may benet 
from an appetite stimulant. In hospitalized patients, capromorelin 
is likely the most eective treatment option for dogs (3 mg/kg PO 
q24h).47 Mirtazapine (0.5-1.5 mg/kg PO q24h, not to exceed 30 mg/
dog/d) may also be eective and might also have antiemetic prop-
erties but is less commonly used in dogs than in cats.
Antibiotic Therapy
Many veterinarians routinely treat dogs with pancreatitis with 
antibiotics, but there is little scientic evidence for such practice. 
ere is currently very limited information regarding the role of 
bacteria in canine pancreatitis. In rare cases, clinically important 
infectious complications of pancreatitis may occur (e.g., aspira-
tion pneumonia [ch. 217], cystitis [ch. 308], infected pancreatic 
uid accumulation) and can be associated with a poor prognosis. 
erefore, broad-spectrum antibiotics (e.g., cefotaxime, enroox-
acin, marbooxacin) are recommended in cases where infectious 
complications have been identied or are highly suspected.
Glucocorticoids
Glucocorticoids were once believed to cause pancreatitis in both 
humans and dogs.48,49 However, the scientic basis for this hypoth-
esis is weak and in humans, glucocorticoids are no longer consid-
ered a risk factor for pancreatitis.50 A recent, non-controlled study 
in 45 client-owned dogs suggested that 1 mg/kg prednisolone SC 
q24h, given from diagnosis to discharge, decreased hospitalization 
time, time for decrease of serum C-reactive protein concentration, 
and 1-month survival.51 However, further studies are needed before 
routine use of corticosteroids in dogs with severe acute pancreatitis 
can be recommended.
Surgical Treatment
Experience with surgical treatment of pancreatitis in dogs is limited. 
In general, surgical treatment is not indicated in most dogs with pan-
creatitis. Surgery might be indicated in cases where pancreatitis is 
complicated by an infected uid accumulation. In addition, surgical 
treatment may be indicated in some cases with a suspicion for com-
plete EHBDO (ch. 273) due to pancreatitis. However, in one study, 
the majority (94%) of dogs with EHBDO due to pancreatitis survived 
without surgical intervention, suggesting that medical management 
alone may be sucient in most patients.52
Other Management Strategies
No studies have evaluated the benet of gastric acid suppression in 
dogs with pancreatitis. e 2018 American College of Veterinary 
Internal Medicine consensus statement on the use of gastric acid sup-
pressants in dogs and cats states that “ere is no evidence that acid 
suppression treatment is benecial or indicated in the management 
of dogs or cats with pancreatitis, unless the animal has concurrent 
evidence of gastroduodenal ulceration and erosion.”53
Fuzapladib is a leukocyte function-associated antigen 1 antago-
nist that prevents the extravasation of neutrophils from the capil-
laries and thus the formation of neutrophil extracellular traps and 
ARDS. Fuzapladib has received full approval in Japan and condi-
tional approval in the USA for the treatment of acute pancreatitis in 
dogs. In an unpublished proof-of-concept study, fuzapladib dramati-
cally decreased mortality in dogs with experimentally induced pan-
creatitis. Two other randomized clinical trials, also yet unpublished, 
conrmed this benecial eect of fuzapladib in dogs with severe 
pancreatitis. Publication of these studies in the primary literature and 
further randomized clinical trials in both dogs and cats will be crucial 
before fuzapladib can be recommended for standard therapy.
A plethora of other therapeutic agents, including but not lim-
ited to dopamine, H1 histamine receptor antagonists, octreotide, 
NSAIDs, somatostatin, anticholinergics, and antioxidants, could 
potentially be useful for the management of canine pancreatitis. 
However, there is currently no clinical evidence that any of these 
agents are benecial in spontaneous cases of pancreatitis in dogs. 
us, the authors currently do not recommend the use of any of 
these agents until more evidence on their ecacy and safety is 
available.


=== PDF PAGE 2020 ===
SECTION XVIII
•
Pancreatic Disease
1868
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
MANAGEMENT OF MILD CHRONIC PANCREATITIS
Chronic pancreatitis is usually considered to be mild and it can 
be managed on an outpatient basis in most cases. As for severe 
pancreatitis, the presence of possible risk factors, such as hyper-
triglyceridemia or hypercalcemia, should be evaluated and man-
aged accordingly if identied. Many dogs with chronic pancreatitis 
show hyporexia or even anorexia. ese patients may benet from 
an antiemetic, such as a NK1-antagonist (e.g., maropitant) or 
5-HT3 antagonist (e.g., ondansetron). Also, an appetite stimulant, 
such as mirtazapine (0.5-1.5 mg/kg PO q24h, not to exceed 30 mg/
dog/d) or capromorelin (3 mg/kg PO q24h) may be useful.47 Anal-
gesic treatment (e.g., tramadol, buprenorphine, gabapentin) may 
be indicated in patients that appear to have abdominal pain (ch. 6). 
Finally, the use of an ultra-low-fat diet (i.e., a diet containing less 
than 20 g of fat per 1000 kcal) is generally recommended.
Many dogs with chronic pancreatitis have concurrent chronic 
inammatory enteropathy (ch. 262), hepatitis (ch. 270), and/or 
diabetes mellitus (ch. 291), which need to be properly diagnosed 
and managed accordingly.
In dogs, as in humans, there is some evidence that an autoim-
mune mechanism might play a role in patients with chronic pan-
creatitis. One report identied positive IgG4 staining of plasma 
cells in English Cocker Spaniels, but also in some other breeds.54 In 
a case report, a dog with chronic pancreatitis, poorly-regulated dia-
betes mellitus, and atopy showed a swi response to cyclosporine 
treatment.55 erefore, some dogs with chronic pancreatitis may 
benet from immunosuppressive therapy with corticosteroids or 
cyclosporine. However, this approach should probably be reserved 
for patients that do not respond to other management strategies.
PROGNOSIS
The prognosis for dogs with pancreatitis depends on the sever-
ity of the disease. Mild cases usually have a good prognosis, 
and if recurrent episodes of pancreatitis do not occur, these 
animals typically live for long periods of time. In contrast, the 
prognosis for dogs with severe pancreatitis is usually guarded. 
The mortality associated with severe acute pancreatitis is high 
and the development of systemic or pancreatic complications 
(e.g., pancreatic fluid accumulation) or concurrent diseases 
(e.g., diabetes mellitus or kidney disease) further contributes 
to a worse outcome. Mortality rates in patients with more 
severe forms of acute pancreatitis have been reported to be 
20% to 42%.49,56
It is unknown if dogs that have a single episode of pancreatitis 
are at risk for developing chronic or recurrent acute pancreatitis. 
e prognosis for dogs with chronic or recurrent acute pancreati-
tis is dicult to predict and depends on the severity of each acute 
exacerbation of the disease. Unfortunately, no accurate method 
has been reported to date for the prediction of the outcome of 
dogs with spontaneous pancreatitis, and the prognosis should be 
evaluated on an individual basis. Recently, the canine acute pan-
creatitis severity scoring system has shown promise in some stud-
ies in dogs with severe acute pancreatitis.57,58
REFERENCES
1. Newman S, Steiner J, Woosley K, etal. Localization of pancreatic inamma-
tion and necrosis in dogs. J Vet Intern Med. 2004;18:488-493.
2. Xenoulis PG. Diagnosis of pancreatitis in dogs and cats. J Small Anim Pract. 
2015;56:13-26.
3. Hess RS, Saunders HM, Van Winkle TJ, etal. Clinical, clinicopathologic, 
radiographic, and ultrasonographic abnormalities in dogs with fatal acute pancre-
atitis: 70 cases (1986-1995). J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1998;213:665-670.
4. Berman CF, Lobetti RG, Lindquist E. Comparison of clinical ndings in 293 
dogs with suspect acute pancreatitis: dierent clinical presentation with le lobe, 
right lobe or diuse involvement of the pancreas. J S Afr Vet Assoc. 2020;91:e1-
e10.
5. Bostrom BM, Xenoulis PG, Newman SJ, etal. Chronic pancreatitis in dogs: a 
retrospective study of clinical, clinicopathological, and histopathological ndings 
in 61 cases. Vet J. 2013;195:73-79.
6. Xenoulis PG, Cammarata PJ, Walzem RL, etal. Serum triglyceride and cho-
lesterol concentrations and lipoprotein proles in dogs with naturally occurring 
pancreatitis and healthy control dogs. J Vet Intern Med. 2020;34:644-652.
7. Neilson-Carley SC, Robertson JE, Newman SJ, etal. Specicity of a canine 
pancreas-specic lipase assay for diagnosing pancreatitis in dogs without clinical 
or histologic evidence of the disease. Am J Vet Res. 2011;72:302-307.
8. Xenoulis PG, Steiner JM. Canine and feline pancreatic lipase immunoreactiv-
ity. Vet Clin Pathol. 2012;41:312-324.
9. Steiner JM, Teague SR, Williams DA. Development and analytic validation of 
an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for the measurement of canine pancre-
atic lipase immunoreactivity in serum. Can J Vet Res. 2003;67:175-182.
10. Huth SP, Relford R, Steiner JM, etal. Analytical validation of an ELISA for 
measurement of canine pancreas-specic lipase. Vet Clin Pathol. 2010;39:346-353.
11. Beall MJ, Cahill R, Pigeon K, etal. Performance validation and method 
comparison of an in-clinic enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for the detection 
of canine pancreatic lipase. J Vet Diagn Invest. 2011;23:115-119.
12. Höfel E, Rieker T, Suchodolski JS, etal. Measurement of canine and feline 
pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity—analytical comparison of new commer-
cial assays with established assays. Tierarztl Prax Ausg K Kleintiere Heimtiere. 
2015;43:399-408.
13. Aupperle-Lellbach H, Torner K, Staudacher M, etal. Histopathological 
ndings and canine pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity in normal dogs and dogs 
with inammatory and neoplastic diseases of the pancreas. J Vet Intern Med. 
2020;34:1127-1134.
14. Steiner JM, Guadiano P, Gomez RR, etal. Partial analytical validation of the 
VetScan cPL rapid test. Vet Clin Pathol. 2019;48:683-690.
15. Cridge H, Mackin AJ, Lidbury JA, etal. Comparative repeatability of pan-
creatic lipase assays in the commercial and in-house laboratory environments. J 
Vet Intern Med. 2020;34:1150-1156.
16. McCord K, Morley PS, Armstrong J, etal. A multi-institutional study evalu-
ating the diagnostic utility of the Spec cPL™ and SNAP® cPL™ in clinical acute 
pancreatitis in 84 dogs. J Vet Intern Med. 2012;26:888-896.
17. Steiner JM, Newman S, Xenoulis P, etal. Sensitivity of serum markers 
for pancreatitis in dogs with macroscopic evidence of pancreatitis. Vet er. 
2008;9:263-273.
18. Trivedi S, Marks SL, Kass PH, etal. Sensitivity and specicity of canine 
pancreas-specic lipase (cPL) and other markers for pancreatitis in 70 dogs 
with and without histopathologic evidence of pancreatitis. J Vet Intern Med. 
2011;25:1241-1247.
19. Watson PJ, Archer J, Roulois AJ, etal. Observational study of 14 cases of 
chronic pancreatitis in dogs. Vet Rec. 2010;167:968-976.
20. Manseld CS, Anderson GA, O’Hara AJ. Association between canine 
pancreatic-specic lipase and histologic exocrine pancreatic inammation in 
dogs: assessing specicity. J Vet Diagn Invest. 2012;24:312-318.
21. Steiner JM, Finco DR, Williams DA. Serum lipase activity and canine pan-
creatic lipase immunoreactivity (cPLI) concentration in dogs with experimentally 
induced chronic renal failure. Vet Res. 2010;3:58-63.
22. Steiner JM, Teague SR, Lees GE, etal. Stability of canine pancreatic lipase 
immunoreactivity concentration in serum samples and eects of long-term ad-
ministration of prednisone to dogs on serum canine pancreatic lipase immunore-
activity concentrations. Am J Vet Res. 2009;70:1001-1005.
23. Cordner AP, Armstrong PJ, Newman SJ, etal. Eect of pancreatic tissue 
sampling on serum pancreatic enzyme levels in clinically healthy dogs. J Vet 
Diagn Invest. 2010;22:702-707.
24. Keany KM, Fosgate GT, Perry SM, etal. Serum concentrations of canine 
pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity and C-reactive protein for monitoring disease 
progression in dogs with acute pancreatitis. J Vet Intern Med. 2021;35:2187-2195.
25. Cridge H, MacLeod AG, Pachtinger GE, etal. Evaluation of SNAP cPL, Spec 
cPL, VetScan cPL Rapid Test, and Precision PSL assays for the diagnosis of clinical 
pancreatitis in dogs. J Vet Intern Med. 2018;32:658-664.
26. Manseld CS, Jones BR. Plasma and urinary trypsinogen activation peptide 
in healthy dogs, dogs with pancreatitis and dogs with other systemic diseases. 
Aust Vet J. 2000;78:416-422.
27. Strombeck DR, Farver T, Kaneko JJ. Serum amylase and lipase activities in 
the diagnosis of pancreatitis in dogs. Am J Vet Res. 1981;42:1966-1970.
28. Kook PH, Kohler N, Hartnack S, etal. Agreement of serum Spec cPL with 
the 1,2-o-dilauryl-rac-glycero glutaric acid-(6′-methylresorun) ester (DGGR) 
lipase assay and with pancreatic ultrasonography in dogs with suspected pancre-
atitis. J Vet Intern Med. 2014;28:863-870.
29. Lim SY, Xenoulis PG, Stavroulaki EM, etal. e 1,2-o-dilauryl-rac-glycero-
3-glutaric acid-(6′-methylresorun) ester (DGGR) lipase assay in cats and dogs is 
not specic for pancreatic lipase. Vet Clin Pathol. 2020;49:607-613.
30. Cridge H, Sullivant AM, Wills RW, etal. Association between abdominal 
ultrasound ndings, the specic canine pancreatic lipase assay, clinical sever-
ity indices, and clinical diagnosis in dogs with pancreatitis. J Vet Intern Med. 
2020;34:636-643.
31. Puccini Leoni F, Pelligra T, Citi S, etal. Ultrasonographic monitoring in 38 
dogs with clinically suspected acute pancreatitis. Vet Sci. 2020;7:180.
32. Lim SY, Nakamura K, Morishita K, etal. Quantitative contrast-enhanced 
ultrasonographic assessment of naturally occurring pancreatitis in dogs. J Vet 
Intern Med. 2015;29:71-78.
33. Rademacher N, Schur D, Gaschen F, etal. Contrast-enhanced ultrasonog-
raphy of the pancreas in healthy dogs and in dogs with acute pancreatitis. Vet 
Radiol Ultrasound. 2016;57:58-64.


=== PDF PAGE 2021 ===
CHAPTER 278
•
Pancreatitis in Cats
1869
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
34. French JM, Twedt DC, Rao S, etal. CT angiographic changes in dogs with 
acute pancreatitis: a prospective longitudinal study. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
2020;61:33-39.
35. Cordner AP, Sharkey LC, Armstrong PJ, etal. Cytologic ndings and diag-
nostic yield in 92 dogs undergoing ne-needle aspiration of the pancreas. J Vet 
Diagn Invest. 2015;27:236-240.
36. Lee PJ, Papachristou GI. New insights into acute pancreatitis. Nat Rev 
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2019;16:479-496.
37. Gad MM, Simons-Linares CR. Is aggressive intravenous uid resuscitation 
benecial in acute pancreatitis? A meta-analysis of randomized control trials and 
cohort studies. World J Gastroenterol. 2020;26:1098-1106.
38. Leese T, Holliday M, Heath D, etal. Multicentre clinical trial of low volume 
fresh frozen plasma therapy in acute pancreatitis. Br J Surg. 1987;74:907-911.
39. Leese T, Holliday M, Watkins M, etal. A multicentre controlled clinical 
trial of high-volume fresh frozen plasma therapy in prognostically severe acute 
pancreatitis. Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 1991;73:207-214.
40. Weatherton LK, Streeter EM. Evaluation of fresh frozen plasma administra-
tion in dogs with pancreatitis: 77 cases (1995-2005). J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San 
Antonio). 2009;19:617-622.
41. Vaughn VM, Shuster D, Rogers MAM, etal. Early versus delayed feed-
ing in patients with acute pancreatitis: a systematic review. Ann Intern Med
2017;166:883-892.
42. Manseld CS, James FE, Steiner JM, etal. A pilot study to assess tolerability 
of early enteral nutrition via esophagostomy tube feeding in dogs with severe 
acute pancreatitis. J Vet Intern Med. 2011;25:419-425.
43. Harris JP, Parnell NK, Grith EH, etal. Retrospective evaluation of the 
impact of early enteral nutrition on clinical outcomes in dogs with pancreatitis: 
34 cases (2010-2013). J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio). 2017;27:425-433.
44. Kumar A, Singh N, Prakash S, etal. Early enteral nutrition in severe acute 
pancreatitis: a prospective randomized controlled trial comparing nasojejunal 
and nasogastric routes. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2006;40:431-434.
45. Jensen KB, Chan DL. Nutritional management of acute pancreatitis in dogs 
and cats. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio). 2014;24:240-250.
46. Tsukamoto A, Ohgoda M, Haruki N, etal. e anti-inammatory action of 
maropitant in a mouse model of acute pancreatitis. J Vet Med Sci. 2018;80:492-
498.
47. Zollers B, Woord JA, Heinen E, etal. A prospective, randomized, masked, 
placebo-controlled clinical study of capromorelin in dogs with reduced appetite. J 
Vet Intern Med. 2016;30:1851-1857.
48. Hess RS, Kass PH, Shofer FS, etal. Evaluation of risk factors for fatal acute 
pancreatitis in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1999;214:46-51.
49. Cook AK, Breitschwerdt EB, Levine JF, etal. Risk factors associated 
with acute pancreatitis in dogs: 101 cases (1985-1990). J Am Vet Med Assoc
1993;203:673-679.
50. Frick TW, Speiser DE, Bimmler D, etal. Drug-induced acute pancreatitis: 
further criticism. Dig Dis. 1993;11:113-132.
51. Okanishi H, Nagata T, Nakane S, etal. Comparison of initial treatment with 
and without corticosteroids for suspected acute pancreatitis in dogs. J Small Anim 
Pract. 2019;60:298-304.
52. Wilkinson AR, DeMonaco SM, Panciera DL, etal. Bile duct obstruction 
associated with pancreatitis in 46 dogs. J Vet Intern Med. 2020;34(5):1794-1800.
53. Marks SL, Kook PH, Papich MG, etal. ACVIM consensus statement: sup-
port for rational administration of gastrointestinal protectants to dogs and cats. J 
Vet Intern Med. 2018;32:1823-1840.
54. Coddou MF, Constantino-Casas F, Scase T, etal. Chronic inammatory 
disease in the pancreas, kidney and salivary glands of English cocker spaniels and 
dogs of other breeds shows similar histological features to human IgG4-related 
disease. J Comp Pathol. 2020;177:18-33.
55. Steiner JM, Huber BJ. Management of a dog with poorly regulated diabetes 
mellitus, chronic pancreatitis, and suspected atopy with cyclosporine. Case Rep 
Vet Med. 2012; Article ID 510639. https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/510639
56. ompson LJ, Seshadri R, Rae MR. Characteristics and outcomes in surgi-
cal management of severe acute pancreatitis: 37 dogs (2001-2007). J Vet Emerg 
Crit Care (San Antonio). 2009;19:165-173.
57. Kuzi S, Mazaki-Tovi M, Suchodolski JS, etal. Protease inhibitors, inamma-
tory markers, and their association with outcome in dogs with naturally occur-
ring acute pancreatitis. J Vet Intern Med. 2020;34:1801-1812.
58. Fabres V, Dossin O, Reif C, etal. Development and validation of a novel 
clinical scoring system for short-term prediction of death in dogs with acute 
pancreatitis. J Vet Intern Med. 2019;33:499-507.
ACRONYMS
AKI acute kidney injury
CBC complete blood count
CT computed tomography
DGGR 1,2-o-dilauryl-rac
glycero glutaric acid-
(6 -methylresorufin) 
ester
FNA fine-needle aspirate
fPL feline pancreatic lipase
fTLI feline trypsin-like 
immunoreactivity
GI gastrointestinal
MRI magnetic resonance 
imaging
PE physical examination
TLI trypsin-like 
immunoreactivity
UA urinalysis
US ultrasound
PREVALENCE
P
ancreatitis in cats, previously con-
sidered rare (with a prevalence 
<3.5%), is now recognized as a 
moderately frequent condition following 
development of serologic testing, imaging 
modalities, and a necropsy study.1 2 The 
overall prevalence of pancreatitis was 67% 
(chronic 76%, acute 9%, acute and chronic 
15%) among necropsied cats regardless of 
cause of death. Since 45% of the necrop-
sied cats with pancreatitis were apparently 
healthy, using the histopathologic defini-
tion of pancreatitis may have been too 
broad, causing some cats with insignifi-
cant changes to be included.1 Regardless, 
the prevalence is noteworthy.
DEFINITIONS AND DIAGNOSTIC CHALLENGES
Acute pancreatitis, aer resolving the inciting cause (Figure 278.1), is 
an entirely reversible inammatory condition.1 Chronic pancreatitis 
is characterized by irreversible histopathologic changes to exocrine 
pancreatic tissue, such as atrophy or brosis.1 Although both forms 
can range from mild to severe, acute pancreatitis is associated with 
more severe clinical signs, a worse short-term prognosis,3-7 but a 
more favorable long-term prognosis with appropriate management.2
Despite advances in pancreatic biomarker testing, imaging, and 
histology, no single test has excellent sensitivity and specicity, par-
ticularly in cats with lower grade or early pancreatitis. However, com-
bining clinical signs, physical examination (PE) ndings, biomarkers, 
imaging, absence of an alternative disease, cytologic and/or histo-
pathologic ndings increases the ability to make an accurate diag-
nosis. Pancreatitis in cats, however, is oen associated with comorbid 
diseases (ch. 225).2 It may be easier to identify etiopathogenetic fac-
tors not associated with pancreatitis in cats than those which are.
Pancreatitis in Cats
Marnin A. Forman
CHAPTER 278
This chapter is enhanced with the following electronic assets onElsevier eBooks+: 2 Videos.


=== PDF PAGE 2022 ===
SECTION XVIII
•
Pancreatic Disease
1870
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
ETIOPATHOGENESIS
Pancreatitis in cats has no age, sex, or breed predisposition.1
There is no correlation with body condition score, high-fat meals, 
or drugs (including steroids).1 Pancreatic intraoperative manipu-
lation, with or without biopsy or needle aspiration, was suggested 
to increase the risk for pancreatitis but a study has indicated this 
to be unlikely.8 9 Pancreatic cancers have been associated with 
pancreatitis.10 Pancreatic cyto-histopathology may aid in detect-
ing these cases. Gastrointestinal (GI) foreign bodies may be asso-
ciated with pancreatitis; however, whether this is a comorbidity or 
a cause is unknown. Abdominal trauma has been established as a 
cause.11 Hypercalcemia, organophosphate cholinesterase inhibi-
tor intoxication (topical fenthion), and idiosyncratic adverse drug 
reactions can cause acute pancreatitis.12 Pancreatitis in cats has 
been associated, but causality has not been determined, with sev-
eral parasite and viral infections13-15 and non-infectious diseases, 
including diabetes mellitus, inammatory bowel disease, hepatic 
lipidosis, cholangitis, nephritis, and immune-mediated hemolytic 
anemia.16-19 In people, autoimmune pancreatitis is recognized.20
Although initial studies have not conrmed a similar process in 
cats, this mechanism is considered likely and may explain why 
some cats respond to immunosuppression. Currently, >95% of 
acute or chronic pancreatitis cases are idiopathic, a percentage 
likely to decrease with further research.2
CLINICAL SIGNS AND PHYSICAL 
EXAMINATION (PE)
Clinical signs and PE ndings in cats with acute or chronic pancre-
atitis are commonly nonspecic. Abnormal ndings potentially 
due to pancreatitis can also be caused by frequently diagnosed 
comorbid disease(s) or complications. e most common clini-
cal signs include lethargy (incidence: 51-100%) and inappetence 
(62-97%). Vomiting (35-52%) and weight loss (30-47%) are fre-
quent. Diarrhea (11-38%), dyspnea (6-20%), and polydipsia/
polyuria (PU/PD; 20%) are less common and oen caused by 
non-pancreatic conditions. Dehydration (37-92%), hypothermia 
(39-68%), and/or hyperthermia/fever (7-26%) are common. 
Fever is more common with acute pancreatitis or pancreatic com-
plications. Apparent abdominal pain is only reported in 10-30% 
of cases, but identifying pain in cats is challenging.8 21 Resistance 
to direct pancreatic palpation or to transducer pressure during 
ultrasound (US) examination may be indicative of pain. Icterus 
(6-37%) and/or cranial abdominal mass/organomegaly (4-23%) 
in cats with pancreatitis can lead to a non-pancreatic disease 
being prioritized.3 8 12 22-24 e clinical signs of pancreatitis are 
based on retrospective studies in cats with severe forms of acute 
pancreatitis. us, the clinical signs in less severe or more chronic 
pancreatitis are likely even less specic and more obscure.
DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION
COMPLETE BLOOD COUNT (CBC), SERUM BIOCHEMISTRY 
PROFILE, URINALYSIS (UA)
Aer obtaining a medical history, including drug history, and 
performing a PE, results of a CBC, biochemistry prole, and UA 
are valuable for cats with clinical signs consistent with pancre-
atitis. ese test results permit screening for dierential diagno-
ses, pancreatic complications, and comorbidities.2 Abnormalities 
are unpredictable. Hemoconcentration (17% of cats) secondary 
to dehydration and an inammatory leukogram characterized 
by neutrophilia (46%) with a le shi or neutropenia (15%) 
may be present, particularly with severe acute pancreatitis. Non-
regenerative anemia (38%) can be present, particularly with 
chronic pancreatitis. rombocytopenia is rare in cats with severe 
acute pancreatitis associated with disseminated intravascular 
coagulation (DIC).2
Increases in liver enzyme activities (alanine transaminase 
57%; alkaline phosphatase 49%) and hyperbilirubinemia (58%) 
may be present due to cholangitis, extrahepatic bile duct obstruc-
tion (ch. 273), and/or hepatic lipidosis (ch. 274).2 Hyperglycemia 
(45%), associated with relative or absolute insulin deciency, and, 
less frequently, hypoglycemia (associated with a poor outcome),4
can be seen with acute necrotizing pancreatitis.4 12 Increases in 
Stomach
Du
od
e
n
u
m
Biliary pancreatic
reflux, or duodenal
obstruction sending
bile to acinar cells
Bacterial toxemia
Ischemia or hypoxia
Activated
enzymes
Thrombin
Co-localisation of lysosomal
proteases and zymogens due
to apical block, or abnormal
Ca2+ signaling
Activation of trypsinogen
by cathepsin-b
Bi
le
d
u
c
t
Pan
cre
ati
c
du
ct
Ca2+Ca2+
Figure 278.1
Diagram depicting the unique anatomy of the pancreas in cats, with a shared entry of the common bile duct and the pancreatic duct 
into the duodenum. Also shown are the mechanisms that can lead to the development of acute pancreatitis in cats. (Previously published in refer-
ence #2; Kate Patterson at MediPics and Prose in Fairlight, New South Wales, Australia. From Forman MA, Steiner JM, Armstrong PJ, etal. ACVIM 
Consensus Statement on Feline Pancreatitis. J Vet Intern Med. 2021;35:703-723. Courtesy Kate Patterson, MediPics and Prose, Fairlight, New South 
Wales, Australia.)


=== PDF PAGE 2023 ===
CHAPTER 278
•
Pancreatitis in Cats
1871
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, and symmetric dimethylarginine 
can be secondary to dehydration, but when persistent or associ-
ated with inappropriate urine concentration, may indicate acute 
kidney injury (AKI). AKI has been linked to progressive pan-
creatic disease and a poor prognosis.4 Hypoalbuminemia (36%), 
potentially associated with an acute-phase protein decrease, is 
not frequent. Hypercholesterolemia (72%) is common. Associa-
tion between pancreatitis and hypertriglyceridemia, as occurs in 
humans and dogs, has not been identied in cats.2 Electrolyte 
abnormalities, noted more commonly with severe forms of pan-
creatitis, may include hypokalemia, hypochloridemia, hyponatre-
mia, and hypocalcemia.2 Ionized hypocalcemia has inconsistently 
been associated with a poor prognosis.3 25
PANCREAS-ASSOCIATED TESTING
The Ideal Biomarker
Biomarkers should be specic for pancreatitis, synthesized only by 
pancreatic acinar cells, not present in non-pancreatic tissue, sta-
ble, detectable in an easily obtained biologic sample (e.g., blood or 
urine), and cost-eective. Pancreatic acinar cells secrete a variety 
of digestive enzymes (e.g., amylase, lipase, DNAse, and RNAse) 
and inactive pre-forms of digestive enzymes (i.e., zymogens, e.g., 
trypsinogen, chymotrypsinogen, proelastase, and prophospholi-
pase).2 However, only small amounts of these chemicals reach the 
vascular space, are stable, and not scavenged by inhibitors.
Amylase, Trypsin-Like Immunoreactivity (TLI)
Increases in serum amylase activity in cats with acute pancre-
atitis were not common in one study of cats with spontaneous 
pancreatitis,2 with poor diagnostic sensitivity and tissue specic-
ity.2 A species-specic immunoassay for feline TLI (fTLI), which 
measures trypsinogen, trypsin, and likely some trypsin bound 
by protease inhibitors, was developed and analytically validated. 
Although increased serum fTLI concentrations were associated 
with acute pancreatitis in cats, this nding is nonspecic (sensitiv-
ity: 30-86%). Increases in fTLI have been identied with chronic 
enteropathy, GI lymphoma, and decreased glomerular ltration 
rates.2 25 Since trypsinogen is produced by pancreatic acinar cells, 
the primary utility of fTLI is screening for exocrine pancreatic 
insuciency (ch. 279), which can be secondary to chronic pan-
creatitis and subsequent pancreatic insuciency. Results of uri-
nary trypsinogen activation peptide, a byproduct of trypsinogen 
activation, are inconsistent and lack commercial availability.
Pancreatic Lipases
Lipases are present in large quantities, not rapidly cleared, and have 
been evaluated. However, in addition to pancreatic lipase, gas-
tric, hepatic, and lipoprotein lipases, as well as pancreatic lipase-
related protein 2 can be present and inuence results. Despite 
use of various substrates, including 1,2-diglycerides, triolein, 
and 1,2-o-dilauryl-rac-glycero glutaric acid-(6′-methylresorun) 
ester (DGGR; Precision PSL, Antech Laboratories, Fountain Val-
ley, CA), none are specic for pancreatic lipase.26 In a study of 12 
cats with acute pancreatitis, none had increases in serum lipase 
activity when measured using 1,2-diglyceride as a substrate.27
Several species-specic immunoassays for serum feline pan-
creatic lipase (fPL) immunoreactivity have been developed. e 
“Spec fPL” has been validated as specic and sensitive for the 
diagnosis of pancreatitis2 28 with higher sensitivity for moderate 
to severe pancreatitis (100%) than for mild (54%).25 e Spec fPL 
has higher positive predictive values (90%) than negative predic-
tive values (76%).29 At least 2 in-clinic assays are commercially 
available: SNAP fPL (IDEXX Laboratories, Westbrook, ME) and 
VCheck fPL (Bionote, Hwaseong, Korea). e SNAP fPL has been 
shown to correlate well with the Spec fPL, as either “normal” or 
“abnormal.”2 As in dogs, other inammatory conditions (e.g., 
chronic enteropathy, peritonitis) may be associated with pancre-
atic inammation and an increase in serum fPLI concentration.
Studies have compared results of pancreatic biomarkers, US, 
and/or histologic features. Agreement between DGGR-lipase (cut-
o, 26 U/L) and Spec fPL (cuto, >5.3 mcg/L) has a reported kappa 
of 0.681 and 0.7032, “good” for subjective diagnostic modalities but 
considered less than ideal for objective modalities.28 Using the same 
cuto values, there was poor agreement comparing pancreatic his-
tologic ndings and DGGR-based catalytic assay results or Spec fPL 
(kappa = 0.06 and kappa = 0.10, respectively).28 ere was poor 
agreement comparing US “diagnosis” of pancreatitis and DGGR-
lipase (cuto, 26 U/L) or Spec fPL (cuto, >5.4 mcg/L), kappa 
= 0.221 and kappa = 0.264, respectively.28 In that study, the best 
agreement was between increased DGGR-lipase or Spec fPL with 
hypoechoic or heteroechoic pancreatomegaly.28
IMAGING
Abdominal US
US is the most commonly used imaging modality for evaluating 
the pancreas of cats, also allowing visualization of the GI tract, 
liver, and biliary system. A non-pancreatic condition may be 
diagnosed and prioritized for treatment.30 Using high-frequency 
transducers (>7.5 MHz), patient compliance, and ultrasonog-
rapher experience likely inuence imaging results and value 
(Video 278.1). Normal pancreas is similar in echogenicity to the 
liver and isoechoic or hypoechoic to surrounding mesentery, with 
a uniform, homogenous echotexture, and smooth capsular mar-
gin. US ndings in cats with pancreatitis are likely dependent on 
multiple variables, e.g., presence of acute, chronic, or acute-on- 
chronic pancreatitis, duration of disease (i.e., imaging early in the 
onset), distribution of pancreatitis (focal vs. diuse), and com-
plications of pancreatitis (e.g., regional duodenal inammation).
A single or combination of minimal US ndings are not 
sucient for diagnosing pancreatitis. Based on a correlation 
study,28 hypoechoic or heteroechoic pancreatomegaly (>0.6 cm 
right lobe, >1 cm le lobe and body) is associated with increased 
serum lipase activities (i.e., as measured by DGGR-lipase and 
Spec fPL) and is a likely US nding of pancreatitis (Video 
278.1).2 Additionally, hyperechoic peripancreatic mesentery 
and peripancreatic eusion, pancreatic lymph node enlarge-
ment, and duodenal corrugation or distention may be observed 
in cats with acute pancreatitis.2 Some cats with acute pancreati-
tis have a normal pancreatic US; however, US repeated over time 
oen detects abnormalities.
Irregular pancreatic capsular margins, dilation of the pancre-
atic (normal 0.7-2.5 mm) or common bile duct, and/or hyper-
echoic pancreatic echogenicity are observed in cats with chronic 
pancreatitis22 28 34 (Figure 278.2); however, positive or negative 
predictive values for these ndings have not been established and 
such changes may be age-related (i.e., dilation of the pancreatic 
duct occurs in older cats) or secondary to previous disease. US is 
a poor diagnostic tool for assessing chronicity.22 Sterile pancreatic 
uid accumulation (previously termed pancreatic pseudocyst) and 
nodules (from nodular hyperplasia) can be incidental ndings in 
older cats.2 However, they may also be present in cats with infected 
uid accumulations or pancreatic cancer, even though these condi-
tions are considered far less common than pancreatitis. Cytologic 
evaluation of US-guided ne-needle aspirates (FNAs) or histologic 
evaluation of tissue samples are needed to discriminate these con-
ditions.2 Results of US sensitivity in diagnosing pancreatitis in cats 
have ranged between 11-67%, with a specicity of 73%, a negative 
predictive value of 57%, and a positive predictive value of 80%.2
Considering advancements in US technology and training, the 
accuracy is likely higher.


=== PDF PAGE 2024 ===
SECTION XVIII
•
Pancreatic Disease
1872
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
Radiology
Abdominal radiography has low sensitivity and specicity and 
provides limited value in diagnosing cats with pancreatitis.2 Radio-
graphs are commonly used to evaluate cats with acute vomiting 
and suspected of a GI foreign body. Although not specic, loss of 
abdominal detail in the cranial abdomen or a mass eect should 
raise concern for pancreatitis and lead to further diagnostics.2
Computed Tomography (CT), Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging (MRI)
Multiphase contrast-enhanced CT is oen used in people with 
suspected pancreatitis and has been evaluated in normal and 
suspected pancreatitis cats (Video 278.2).2 e normal pancreas 
enhances homogenously on arterial, portal, and delayed-phase 
scans and is hypo- or isoattenuating to the liver and spleen on 
pre-contrast scans.2 e diagnostic accuracy of CT is not supe-
rior to US. MRI scans were evaluated in normal cats and those 
with suspected pancreatitis.2 e normal pancreas is T1 hyper-
intense and T2 isointense to hypointense, while in pancreatitis, 
T1 hypointensity and T2 hyperintensity of the parenchyma, pan-
creatomegaly, pancreatic duct dilation, contrast enhancement, or 
peripancreatic hyperintensity have been reported.2 Neither CT 
nor MRI are commonly used for diagnosing pancreatitis in cats.
CYTOLOGY (CH. 85)
US-guided pancreas FNA is minimally invasive, cost-eective, 
and safe to screen for etiologies of pancreatitis, including cancer 
or complications, e.g., secondarily-infected necrosis. Quick and 
gentle sample smearing is essential since pancreatic acinar cells 
are fragile and deteriorate quickly. In one study, diagnostic sam-
ples were obtained in 67% of cases.31 Cytologic evaluations from a 
cat with acute pancreatitis can reveal pancreatic acinar and ductal 
cells, inammatory cells (predominantly neutrophils with variable 
degrees of degeneration), amorphous necrotic debris, and refractile 
crystalline material.2 Peripancreatic uid accumulation and ascites 
oen reveal a high-protein transudate (modied transudate) or 
exudate. Screening for intracellular organisms is important, and an 
aerobic bacterial culture is benecial for organism identication. 
Cytologic preparations from cats with chronic pancreatitis are oen 
poorly cellular due to pancreatic brosis and may not be diagnostic; 
however, they may reveal lymphoplasmacytic inammation. Limi-
tations of pancreatic cytologic evaluations include limited sample 
size, missing a localized pancreatic lesion or disease process, and 
the challenge of distinguishing dysplastic epithelial cells associated 
with pancreatitis from an inamed pancreatic carcinoma.2
HISTOLOGY
Surgical or laparoscopic pancreatic biopsies are low-risk proce-
dures for obtaining tissue that overcome the diagnostic limitations 
of cytology. Histologic evaluation of tissue is considered the gold 
standard for diagnosing pancreatitis.1 22 Since acute and chronic 
pancreatitis can have a multifocal, patchy distribution1 2 12 and the 
macroscopic appearance of the pancreas does not always correlate 
with histologic ndings, obtaining multiple biopsies is ideal.1 2 If 
only a single biopsy is obtained, the le lobe has provided the 
highest yield for diagnosing pancreatitis.1 A semiquantitative 
histopathologic scoring system for pancreatitis in cats, describing 
inammatory cell inltration, edema, necrosis, brosis, amyloid, 
and/or cystic acinar degeneration/acinar atrophy has been pro-
posed and modied.1 2 However, correlation with clinical ndings 
and prognosis remain unclear,7 especially with mild/low-grade 
histologic ndings.2 With neutrophilic inammation and edema, 
acute pancreatitis has been classied as “acute necrotizing pancre-
atitis” with signicant necrosis and “acute suppurative pancreati-
tis” without necrosis, based on the classication in humans.1 2 12
Chronic pancreatitis is characterized by lymphocytic or lympho-
plasmacytic inammation, mild brosis (Figure 278.3), and aci-
nar atrophy. Potentially, there are retention cysts (i.e., microscopic 
intraparenchymal cysts) or extensive periductal brosis, leading 
to localized stenosis and cyst formation, with squamous metapla-
sia of the ductal epithelium.1 2 As with pancreatic cytology, neo-
plasia or infectious causes can be associated with pancreatitis.10
Despite the apparent benets of obtaining pancreatic histologic 
results, it is rarely performed as a diagnostic test for pancreatitis 
since most cases can be diagnosed in a less invasive manner.
TREATMENT
GENERAL STRATEGIES (CH. 119)
Initial management considerations are oen dependent on the dura-
tion and severity of clinical signs, suspected or known comorbidi-
ties, hydration status, and apparent abdominal pain. Many cats with 
mild to moderate clinical signs can be managed as outpatients, rec-
ognizing that deterioration may occur. Concurrent management of 
comorbidities, if present, is important to avoid treatment failure. For 
idiopathic pancreatitis, management is predominantly supportive 
and nonspecic,2 8 24 32 with recommendations extrapolated from 
humans, dogs, expert opinion, and/or experimentally-induced pan-
creatitis in cats.2 14 33 Hydration, nutritional support, pain manage-
ment, and control of vomiting and apparent nausea are central tenets 
of management.2
FLUID THERAPY (CH. 120)
Dehydration and secondary hypovolemia are common in cats 
with severe acute pancreatitis. e duration of illness before 
presentation to the hospital is directly proportional to odds of 
death, in part due to hypovolemia.4 Subcutaneous or intrave-
nous crystalloid uid therapy reverses dehydration and can be 
used to correct electrolyte imbalances. No ideal crystalloid uid 
or rate of administration is recognized for cats. Early aggres-
sive achievement of hydration with lactated Ringer’s solu-
tion in humans is reported to expedite clinical improvement.2
Establishing normovolemia may limit pancreatic damage by 
Figure 278.2
Longitudinal plane abdominal ultrasound image of the 
right pancreatic lobe (arrows) in a cat with chronic pancreatitis. e ul-
trasound was performed with a high-resolution linear array transducer. 
e pancreas is enlarged (1.1 cm; yellow line), diusely heteroechoic, 
and with an irregular capsular margin, but a relatively normal peripan-
creatic echogenicity.


=== PDF PAGE 2025 ===
CHAPTER 278
•
Pancreatitis in Cats
1873
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
improving perfusion and oxygen delivery. Avoiding overhydra-
tion is prudent, and close monitoring is important (e.g., body 
weight rechecks, thoracic auscultation, thoracic US). Fluid ther-
apies chosen must consider and be adjusted for comorbidities 
(ch. 223).
NUTRITION (CHS. 81 AND 153)
Inappetence is one of the most common clinical signs in cats 
with acute or chronic pancreatitis and can result in dehydra-
tion, malnutrition, an impaired GI barrier, and compromised 
immune function. Prolonged inappetence can lead to hepatic 
lipidosis (ch. 274), further increasing morbidity and mortality. 
Nutritional support plays a central role in managing acute pan-
creatitis in humans and cats.2 In people with severe acute pan-
creatitis, early (within 24 hours of admission) enteral nutrition 
is recommended to reduce risk of infected pancreatic necrosis 
and the incidence of multiple organ failure.2 Prolonged fast-
ing or parenteral nutrition is not routinely recommended in 
people, dogs, or cats.2
Appetite stimulants are often effective in restoring volun-
tary food intake in cats with mild to moderate clinical pan-
creatitis. Mirtazapine (oral, transdermal) and capromorelin 
(oral) are the most commonly prescribed appetite stimulants. 
“Older” therapies, including cyproheptadine, are occasionally 
beneficial.2 Mirtazapine, evaluated in healthy and inappetent 
cats, is generally well-tolerated (particularly the transdermal 
formulation and dosing), efficacious, and may have antiemetic 
activity. However, adverse effects (e.g., vocalization, agitation, 
vomiting, abnormal gait/ataxia, tremors/trembling, hyper-
salivation, tachypnea, tachycardia, and lethargy) have been 
reported with higher dosages. Capromorelin oral solution has 
also been evaluated in healthy and inappetent cats, is generally 
well-tolerated and efficacious, and is approved for cats with 
chronic kidney disease in the USA.2 Reported adverse reac-
tions include vomiting and hypersalivation; both have been 
more frequent in males.
If inappetence persists for >48 hours despite multimodal medi-
cal therapy (including appetite stimulants), enteral nutrition with 
a feeding tube should be instituted (ch. 81).2 6 In people, nasoje-
junal and nasogastric feeding tubes have not changed outcomes; 
however, similar studies have not been performed in cats. Naso-
esophageal, nasogastric, esophageal, less commonly gastric, and 
rarely nasojejunal feeding tubes are utilized in the author’s practice. 
Nasogastric tubes have the added benet of permitting gastric suc-
tioning in cats with gastric ileus and uid accumulation, which is 
oen used and benecial. While there have been no studies in cats, 
suctioning in people with pancreatitis has worsened gastric disten-
sion, gastroesophageal reux, pain, and nausea.
Dietary requirements of cats with acute pancreatitis are 
unknown. e focus is encouraging an inappetent or anorectic cat 
to eat, rather than oering an “ideal” diet. Highly digestible “GI 
diets” are recommended. Diets for cats with pancreatitis should 
contain adequate arginine and methionine to help avoid hepatic 
lipidosis (ch. 148). Diets should provide adequate protein to prevent 
protein-energy malnutrition and lean muscle loss (chs. 151-153).2
PAIN MANAGEMENT (CH. 6)
Cats with pancreatitis may exhibit signs of pain. Inappetent cats 
without clear indicators of pain should undergo pain manage-
ment.2 Opioids are oen rst-line analgesics for cats with pancre-
atitis,2 with oral/transbuccal buprenorphine, gabapentin, and, less 
commonly, tramadol, used for mild to moderate clinical pancre-
atitis and methadone or fentanyl reserved for severe pain.
CONTROLLING VOMITING (CH. 48)
Antiemetics should be given to vomiting cats and inappetent cats 
without clear indicators of apparent nausea to encourage voluntary 
eating before tube feeding. Maropitant citrate is ecacious, com-
monly used, and has additional benets, e.g., potential visceral anal-
gesic and anti-inammatory activities.2 Ondansetron has been used 
as a rst-line antiemetic or combined with maropitant. Despite these 
drugs, some cats with pancreatitis continue to vomit, potentially 
secondary to functional gastroparesis or ileus, but other causes (i.e., 
GI foreign bodies) need to be considered. Prokinetics can improve 
GI motility. Erythromycin and cisapride are ecacious and have a 
gastric prokinetic eect in cats.2 Metoclopramide, particularly given 
as a constant rate infusion, increases gastric emptying and decreases 
gastric atony.34
ANTIBIOTICS
In humans, dogs, and cats, antibiotic therapy is not recommended 
in non-complicated cases of pancreatitis.2 is recommenda-
tion is based on understanding that mild to moderate pancreati-
tis does not have a bacterial etiology in most cats, antibiotic usage 
may be associated with side-eects (i.e., vomiting and inappe-
tence), and the potential for development of multi-drug resistance 
(ch. 7). With infectious comorbidities (i.e., cholangitis, urinary tract 
Normal Pancreas
Severe Pancreatitis
Criteria
Score
Interstitial inflammation
Interstitial fibrosis
Cystic acinar degeneration
total
0
0
0
0
50 µm
Criteria
Score
Interstitial inflammation
Interstitial fibrosis
Cystic acinar degeneration
total
1
3
2
6
50 µm
Figure 278.3
Histopathologic image of normal feline pancreas (le) and that of a feline pancreas with chronic pancreatitis (right). e overlay shows 
scores based on a suggested histologic pancreatic grading system for cats. Scale bar = 50 microns.


=== PDF PAGE 2026 ===
SECTION XVIII
•
Pancreatic Disease
1874
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
infection, and aspiration pneumonia), complications of pancreatitis 
(pancreatic abscess, infected pancreatic necrosis in 35% of cats with 
moderate to severe pancreatitis by uorescence in situ hybridiza-
tion), or CBC ndings suggestive of sepsis, antibiotic therapy, ideally 
guided by bacterial culture and sensitivity testing, should be pro-
vided. 2,8,32,35,36
GLUCOCORTICOIDS, CYCLOSPORINE
Routine corticosteroid therapy is also not recommended in cats 
with non-complicated pancreatitis.2 However, it is indicated in 
treating sterile comorbidities (e.g., chronic inammatory enter-
opathy or cholangitis; ch. 225). Glucocorticoids have been shown 
to improve outcomes in humans and dogs with acute pancreatitis, 
potentially by treating critical illness-related corticosteroid insuf-
ciency.37-39 However, their routine use in cats, considering the risk 
of enhancing peripheral insulin resistance, congestive heart failure, 
and immunosuppression, is not recommended.2 Initial evaluation 
of cyclosporine treatment in cats with chronic pancreatitis was 
associated with a decrease in Spec fPL concentrations; however, 
additional work is needed to determine a clinical benet.40
OTHER THERAPIES
Although beyond the scope of this chapter, in cats with severe 
pancreatitis, management of vascular complications (e.g., uid-
refractory hypotension, electrolyte and acid-base imbalances, 
hypocoagulability, and hypercoagulability), respiratory complica-
tions (e.g., volume overload, congestive heart failure, aspiration 
pneumonia, pulmonary thromboembolism) and in rare cases, 
pancreatic surgery, can be critical to a successful recovery.2,40-46
REFERENCES
1. De Cock HEV, Forman MA, Farver TB, etal. Prevalence and histopathologic 
characteristics of pancreatitis in cats. Vet Pathol. 2007;44:39-49.
2. Forman MA, Steiner JM, Armstrong JP, etal. ACVIM consensus statement 
on feline pancreatitis. J Vet Intern Med. 2021;35:703-723.
3. Kimmel SE, Washabau RJ, Drobatz KJ. Incidence and prognostic value of low 
plasma ionized calcium concentration in cats with acute pancreatitis: 46 cases 
(1996-1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2001;219:1105-1109.
4. Nivy R, Kaplanov A, Kuzi S, etal. A retrospective study of 157 hospitalized cats 
with pancreatitis in a tertiary care center: clinical, imaging and laboratory ndings, 
potential prognostic markers and outcome. J Vet Intern Med. 2018;32:1874-1885.
5. Stockhaus C, Teske E, Schellenberger K, etal. Serial serum feline pancreatic 
lipase immunoreactivity concentrations and prognostic variables in 33 cats with 
pancreatitis. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2013;243:1713-1718.
6. Klaus JA, Rudlo E, Kirby R. Nasogastric tube feeding in cats with suspected 
acute pancreatitis: 55 cases (2001-2006). J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio). 
2009;19:337-346.
7. Watson P. Pancreatitis in dogs and cats: denitions and pathophysiology. J 
Small Anim Pract. 2015;56:3-12.
8. Armstrong PJ, Crain S. Feline acute pancreatitis: current concepts in diagno-
sis & therapy. Todays Vet Pract. 2015;5:22-28.
9. Pratschke KM, Ryan J, McAlinden A, etal. Pancreatic surgical biopsy in 24 
dogs and 19 cats: postoperative complications and clinical relevance of histologi-
cal ndings. J Small Anim Pract. 2015;56:7.
10. Torner K, Aupperle-Lellbach H, Staudacher A, etal. Primary solid and 
cystic tumours of the exocrine pancreas in cats. J Comp Pathol. 2019;169:5-19.
11. Zimmermann E, Hittmair KM, Suchodolski JS, etal. Serum feline-specic 
pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity concentrations and abdominal ultrasonographic 
ndings in cats with trauma resulting from high-rise syndrome. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 
2013;242:1238-1243.
12. Hill RC, Winkle TJ. Acute necrotizing pancreatitis and acute suppurative 
pancreatitis in the cat. J Vet Intern Med. 1993;7:25-33.
13. Xenoulis PG, Steiner JM. Current concepts in feline pancreatitis. Top Com-
panion Anim Med. 2008;23:185-192.
14. Armstrong PJ, Williams DA. Pancreatitis in cats. Top Companion Anim 
Med. 2012;27:140-147.
15. Bayliss DB, Steiner JM, Sucholdolski JS, etal. Serum feline pancreatic 
lipase immunoreactivity concentration and seroprevalences of antibodies against 
Toxoplasma gondii and Bartonella species in client-owned cats. J Feline Med Surg. 
2009;11:663-667.
16. Zoia A, Drigo M. Association between pancreatitis and immune-mediated hae-
molytic anaemia in cats: a cross-sectional study. J Comp Pathol. 2017;156:384-388.
17. Jotha-Mattos L, Vieira AB, Castelo M, etal. Amyloidogenesis of feline amy-
lin and plasma levels in cats with diabetes mellitus or pancreatitis. Domest Anim 
Endocrinol. 2020;74:106532.
18. Černá P, Kilpatrick S, Gunn-Moore DA. Feline comorbidities: what do we 
really know about feline triaditis? J Feline Med Surg. 2020;22:1047-1067.
19. Fragkou FC, Adamama-Moraitou KK, Poutahidis T, etal. Prevalence and 
clinicopathological features of triaditis in a prospective case series of symptomatic 
and asymptomatic cats. J Vet Intern Med. 2016;30:1031-1045.
20. Sugumar A, Chari ST. Autoimmune pancreatitis. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 
2011;26:1368-1373.
21. Forman MA, Shiroma J, Armstrong PJ, etal. Evaluation of feline pancreas-
specic lipase (Spec fPL) for the diagnosis of feline pancreatitis. J Vet Intern Med. 
2009;23:733-734 (abstract).
22. Ferreri JA, Hardam E, Kimmel SE, etal. Clinical dierentiation of acute 
necrotizing from chronic nonsuppurative pancreatitis in cats: 63 cases (1996-
2001). J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2003;223:469-474.
23. Washabau RJ. Necrosis and inammation. In: Washabau RJ, Day MJ, eds. 
Canine and Feline Gastroenterology. Elsevier Saunders; 2013:821-848.
24. Forman MA. Feline exocrine pancreatic disorders. In: Bonagura JD, Twedt 
DC, eds. Kirk’s Current Veterinary erapy XV. 15th ed. Saunders Elsevier; 
2014:565-568.
25. Forman MA, Marks SL, Cock HEV, etal. Evaluation of serum feline 
pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity and helical computed tomography versus 
conventional testing for the diagnosis of feline pancreatitis. J Vet Intern Med. 
2004;18:807-815.
26. Lim SY, Xenoulis PG, Stavroulaki EM, etal. e 1,2-o-dilauryl-rac-glycero-
3-glutaric acid-(6′-methylresorun) ester (DGGR) lipase assay in cats and dogs is 
not specic for pancreatic lipase. Vet Clin Pathol. 2020;49:607-613.
27. Parent C, Washabau RJ, Williams DA, etal. Serum trypsin-like immuno-
reactivity, amylase and lipase in the diagnosis of feline acute pancreatitis. J Vet 
Intern Med. 1995;9:194.
28. Oppliger S, Hartnack S, Reusch CE, etal. Agreement of serum feline 
pancreas-specic lipase and colorimetric lipase assays with pancreatic ultrasono-
graphic ndings in cats with suspicion of pancreatitis: 161 cases (2008-2012). J 
Am Vet Med Assoc. 2014;244:1060-1065.
29. Lee C, Kathrani A, Maddison J. Retrospective study of the diagnostic utility 
of Spec fPLin the assessment of 274 sick cats. J Vet Intern Med. 2020;34:1406-
1412.
30. Freiche V, Faucher MR, German AJ. Can clinical signs, clinicopathologi-
cal ndings and abdominal ultrasonography predict the site of histopathological 
abnormalities of the alimentary tract in cats? J Feline Med Surg. 2016;18:118-128.
31. Crain SK, Sharkey LC, Cordner AP, etal. Safety of ultrasound-guided ne-
needle aspiration of the feline pancreas: a case-control study. J Feline Med Surg. 
2014;17:858-863.
32. Simpson KW. Pancreatitis and triaditis in cats: causes and treatment. J 
Small Anim Pract. 2015;56:40-49.
33. Widdison AL, Karanjia ND, Reber HA. Antimicrobial treatment of pancre-
atic infection in cats. Br J Surg. 1994;81:886-889.
34. Manseld CS, Jones BR. Review of feline pancreatitis part two: clinical 
signs, diagnosis and treatment. J Feline Med Surg. 2001;3:125-132.
35. Husnik R, Gaschen FP, Fletcher JM, etal. Ultrasonographic assessment of 
the eect of metoclopramide, erythromycin, and exenatide on solid‐phase gastric 
emptying in healthy cats. J Vet Intern Med. 2020;34:1440-1446.
36. Twedt DC, Cullen J, McCord K, etal. Evaluation of uorescence in situ 
hybridization for the detection of bacteria in feline inammatory liver disease. J 
Feline Med Surg. 2014;16:109-117.
37. Peng Y-S, Wu C-S, Chen Y-C, etal. Critical illness-related corticosteroid in-
suciency in patients with severe acute biliary pancreatitis: a prospective cohort 
study. Crit Care. 2009;13:R123. https://doi.org/10.1186/cc7978
38. Okanishi H, Nagata T, Nakane S, etal. Comparison of initial treatment with 
and without corticosteroids for suspected acute pancreatitis in dogs. J Small Anim 
Pract. 2019;60:298-304.
39. Dong LH, Liu ZM, Wang SJ, etal. Corticosteroid therapy for severe acute 
pancreatitis: a meta-analysis of randomized, controlled trials. Int J Clin Exp 
Pathol. 2015;8:7654-7660.
40. Hoeyrup N, Spillman T, Toresson. Cyclosporine treatment in cats with pre-
sumed chronic pancreatitis—a retrospective study. Animals (Basel). 2021;11:2993.
41. Son TT, ompson L, Serrano S, etal. Retrospective study: surgical inter-
vention in the management of severe acute pancreatitis in cats: 8 cases (2003-
2007). J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio). 2010;20:426-435.
42. Manseld C. Pathophysiology of acute pancreatitis: potential applica-
tion from experimental models and human medicine to dogs. J Vet Intern Med. 
2012;26:875-887.
43. Hartwig W, Klafs M, Kirschnk M, etal. Interaction of complement and 
leukocytes in severe acute pancreatitis: potential for therapeutic intervention. Am 
J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2006;291:G844-G850.
44. Schermerhorn T, Pembleton-Corbett JR, Kornreich B. Pulmonary thrombo-
embolism in cats. J Vet Intern Med. 2004;18:533-535.
45. Leese T, Holliday M, Heath D, etal. Multicentre clinical trial of low volume 
fresh frozen plasma therapy in acute pancreatitis. Br J Surg. 1987;74:907-911.
46. Leese T, Holliday M, Watkins M, etal. A multicentre controlled clinical 
trial of high-volume fresh frozen plasma therapy in prognostically severe acute 
pancreatitis. Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 1991;73:207-214.
47. Enomoto M, Mantyh PW, Murrell J, etal. Anti-nerve growth factor mono-
clonal antibodies for the control of pain in dogs and cats. Vet Rec. 2019;184:23.


=== PDF PAGE 2027 ===
1875
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com CHAPTER 279
•
Exocrine Pancreatic Insuciency and Rare Conditions of the Exocrine Pancreas
EXOCRINE PANCREATIC 
INSUFFICIENCY
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
E
xocrine pancreatic insuciency (EPI) 
describes a syndrome that is charac-
terized by the insucient synthesis 
and secretion of digestive enzymes by the 
exocrine pancreas. e most common cause 
of EPI is an absolute lack of pancreatic acinar 
cells that is due to destruction of acinar cells 
secondary to chronic pancreatitis (both dogs 
and cats) or depletion of acinar cells due to 
pancreatic acinar atrophy (PAA; likely only 
in dogs). In either case, pancreatic digestive 
enzymes are lacking in patients with EPI. In rare cases, a single 
enzyme may be lacking, but lack of a single enzyme, even if com-
plete, may not lead to any clinical signs as digestion of most mac-
ronutrients is characterized by redundancy and a great functional 
reserve. However, isolated pancreatic lipase deciency has been 
reported as a cause of clinical signs of EPI in humans and in 1 
dog and was highly suspected in a few other dogs.1-3 Another 
infrequent cause of EPI is an obstruction of the pancreatic duct by 
either a tumor, surgical damage, or trauma, which can lead to lack 
of digestive enzymes in the small intestinal lumen, despite nor-
mal acinar production. Exocrine pancreatic aplasia or hypoplasia 
could also lead to clinical signs of EPI. is could be suspected in 
patients diagnosed with EPI at a very young age, but to date no 
case has been described in the literature and the author of this 
chapter has only encountered a single case in a kitten to date.
PHYSIOLOGY
e process of digestion of macronutrients is characterized 
by redundancy and a large functional reserve. Redundancy is 
achieved by each macronutrient being able to be digested by at 
least two and sometimes even more independent processes. For 
example, dietary fat can be broken down by pancreatic lipase 
or pre-duodenal lipase, which in dogs and cats is gastric lipase. 
While in healthy humans and dogs it has been estimated that 
approximately one-third of all dietary fat is digested by gastric 
lipase, this value can vary among individuals.4 is degree of 
redundancy translates into some animals not showing any clinical 
signs of maldigestion even if one digestive pathway is insucient. 
Also, digestion is characterized by a large functional reserve and 
it has been estimated in humans that >90% of exocrine pancreatic 
function has to be lost before clinical signs of maldigestion will 
ensue.5 ese numbers are based on averages and there may be a 
wide interindividual variability, but they do demonstrate the large 
functional reserve of exocrine pancreatic function.
e exocrine pancreas plays a central role in the digestion of 
all macronutrients (Video 279.1). While acinar cells synthesize 
and secrete some enzymes in their active forms, such as amylase, 
lipase, RNase, and DNase, others are synthesized as an inactive 
preform or zymogen, such as trypsinogen, chymotrypsinogen, 
proelastase, prophospholipase, procarboxypeptidase, and others. 
While trypsinogen is activated to trypsin in the small intestine by 
enteropeptidase, the other zymogens are in turn being activated 
by trypsin. However, the impact of pancreatic secretions on diges-
tion reaches far beyond secretion of enzymes and zymogens. Aci-
nar cells also synthesize and secrete colipase, which is necessary 
to overcome the lipase-inhibiting properties of bile salts. Also, the 
pancreatic duct system secretes large amounts of pancreatic juice, 
which has buering capacity and thus is a crucial source of buf-
fer for gastric acid; without it, the gastric acid would irreversibly 
inhibit many of the digestive enzymes and destroy the intestinal 
mucosa and microbiome.
ETIOLOGY
e most common cause of EPI in both dogs and cats is chronic 
pancreatitis, which is suspected to be the cause of EPI in nearly 
100% of cats and in approximately slightly more than 50% of dogs 
with EPI. In dogs, the majority of the remainder of EPI cases are 
caused by PAA, which is almost exclusively seen in German Shep-
herd Dogs, Rough-Coated Collies, and Eurasians.6 7 In addition, 
an increased risk for EPI has been described for Cavalier King 
Charles Spaniels, Shar Peis, and West Highland White Terriers.8
Interestingly, the age of onset is young adult for German Shepherd 
Dogs, Rough-Coated Collies, and Shar Peis, while the age of onset 
in other dog breeds is usually later in life. is suggests that Shar 
Peis also may have PAA, but this has not been studied further as 
of yet.8 9
Several studies have suggested that PAA is inherited as an auto-
somal recessive trait in German Shepherd Dogs and Eurasians.10-12
However, the search for a denitive genetic marker for this dis-
ease has been largely unsuccessful, even though scans of the entire 
canine genome using a set of microsatellite markers and single 
nucleotide polymorphisms revealed several regions that appear 
to be associated with this condition.13 Interestingly, a test breed 
of an aected male and an aected female German Shepherd Dog 
only resulted in 2 of 6 of the ospring being aected through their 
entire life, strongly suggesting against inheritance as a simple 
autosomal recessive trait.14 us, this condition is likely polygenic 
with the major histocompatibility complex on chromosome 12 
Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency and Rare Conditions of the 
Exocrine Pancreas
Jörg M. Steiner
CHAPTER 279
ACRONYMS
CCK cholecystokinin
CT computed tomography
DM diabetes mellitus
EPI exocrine pancreatic 
insufficiency
GI gastrointestinal
MMA methylmalonic acid
PAA pancreatic acinar atro-
phy
PAC pancreatic adenocarci-
noma
PERT pancreatic enzyme 
replacement therapy
TLI trypsin-like immunore-
activity
This chapter is enhanced with the following electronic assets onElsevier eBooks+: 1 Video and 1 Client Information Sheet.
