
=== PDF PAGE 320 ===
290	
PART II    Respiratory System Disorders
identified radiographically by the presence of widened, non­
tapering airways (Fig. 20.4). Bronchiectasis can be cylindri­
cal (tubular) or saccular (cystic). Cylindrical bronchiectasis 
is characterized by fairly uniform dilation of the airway. 
Saccular bronchiectasis additionally has localized dilations 
peripherally that can lead to a honeycomb appearance. All 
major bronchi are usually affected, though localized disease 
can occur.
Alveolar Pattern
Alveoli are not normally visible radiographically. Alveolar 
patterns occur when the alveoli are filled with fluid-dense 
material. The fluid opacity may be caused by edema, inflam­
mation, hemorrhage, or neoplastic infiltrates, which gener­
ally originate from the interstitial tissues (Box 20.4). The 
stenosis may also cause radiographically visible undercircu­
lation in some dogs. Hyperinflation is associated with 
obstructive airway disease, such as allergic or idiopathic 
feline bronchitis.
Bronchial Pattern
Bronchial walls are most easily discernible at the hilus on 
radiographs of normal dogs and cats. They should taper and 
grow thinner as they extend toward the periphery of each 
lung lobe. Bronchial structures are not normally visible 
radiographically in the peripheral regions of the lungs. The 
cartilage may be calcified in older dogs and in chondrodys­
trophic breeds, making the walls more prominent but still 
sharply defined.
Thickening of the bronchial walls or bronchial dilation 
results in a bronchial pattern. Thickened bronchial walls are 
visible as “tram lines” and “doughnuts” in the peripheral 
regions of the lung (Fig. 20.3). Tram lines are produced by 
airways that run transverse to the X-ray beam, causing the 
appearance of parallel thick lines with an air stripe in 
between. Doughnuts are produced by airways that are point­
ing directly toward or away from the beam, causing a thick 
circle to be seen radiographically, with the airway lumen 
creating the “hole.” The walls of the bronchi tend to be indis­
tinct. The finding of thickened walls indicates the presence 
of bronchitis and results from an accumulation of mucus or 
exudate along the walls within the lumens, an infiltration of 
inflammatory cells within the walls, muscular hypertrophy, 
epithelial hyperplasia, or a combination of these changes. 
Potential causes of bronchial disease are listed in Box 20.3.
Chronic bronchial inflammation can result in irreversible 
dilation of the airways, which is termed bronchiectasis. It is 
FIG 20.3
A bronchointerstitial pattern is present in this lateral radiograph from a cat with idiopathic 
bronchitis. The bronchial component results from thickening of the bronchial walls and is 
characterized by “doughnuts” and “tram lines.” In this radiograph, the bronchial changes 
are most apparent in the caudal lung lobes. 
Canine chronic bronchitis
Feline bronchitis (idiopathic)
Allergic bronchitis
Canine infectious respiratory disease complex
Bacterial infection
Mycoplasmal infection
Pulmonary parasites
 BOX 20.3
Differential Diagnoses for Dogs and Cats With Bronchial 
Patterns on Thoracic Radiographs*
*Bronchial disease can occur in conjunction with parenchymal lung 
disease. See Boxes 20.4 to 20.6 for additional differential 
diagnoses if mixed patterns are present.
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 321 ===
	
CHAPTER 20    Diagnostic Tests for the Lower Respiratory Tract	
291
Edema most often results from left-sided heart failure (see 
Chapter 22). In dogs the fluid initially accumulates in the 
perihilar region, and eventually the entire lung is affected. In 
cats patchy areas of edema can be present initially through­
out the lung fields. The finding of enlarged pulmonary veins 
supports the cardiac origin of the infiltrates. Noncardiogenic 
edema is typically most severe in the caudal lung lobes.
fluid-filled alveoli are silhouetted against the walls of the 
airways they surround. The result is a visible stripe of air 
from the airway lumen in the absence of definable airway 
walls. This stripe is an air bronchogram (Fig. 20.5). If fluid 
continues to accumulate, the airway lumen eventually will 
also become filled with fluid, resulting in the formation of 
solid areas of fluid opacity, or consolidation. When fluid-
dense regions are located at the edge of the lung lobe, a lobar 
sign occurs. The curvilinear edge of the affected lung lobe is 
visible in contrast with the adjacent, aerated lobe.
FIG 20.4
Lateral radiograph of a dog with chronic bronchitis and bronchiectasis. The airway 
lumens are greatly enlarged, and normal tapering of the airway walls is not seen. 
Pulmonary Edema
Severe Inflammatory Disease
Bacterial pneumonia
Aspiration pneumonia
Hemorrhage
Pulmonary contusion
Pulmonary thromboembolism
Neoplasia
Fungal pneumonia
Systemic coagulopathy
 BOX 20.4
Differential Diagnoses for Dogs and Cats With Alveolar 
Patterns on Thoracic Radiographs*
*Any of the differential diagnoses for interstitial patterns (see Boxes 
20.5 and 20.6) can cause an alveolar pattern if associated with 
severe inflammation, edema, or hemorrhage.
FIG 20.5
Lateral view of the thorax of a dog with aspiration 
pneumonia. An alveolar pattern is evident by the increased 
soft tissue opacity with air bronchograms. Air bronchograms 
are bronchial air stripes without visible bronchial walls. In 
this radiograph the pattern is most severe in the ventral 
(dependent) regions of the lung, consistent with bacterial or 
aspiration pneumonia. 
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 322 ===
292	
PART II    Respiratory System Disorders
Inflammatory infiltrates can be caused by infectious 
agents, noninfectious inflammatory disease, or neoplasia. 
The location of the infiltrative process can often help estab­
lish a tentative diagnosis. For example, diseases of airway 
origin, such as most bacterial and aspiration pneumonias, 
primarily affect the dependent lung lobes (i.e., the right 
middle and cranial lobes and the left cranial lobe). In con­
trast, diseases of vascular origin, such as dirofilariasis, 
thromboemboli, systemic fungal infection, and bacterial 
infection of hematogenous origin primarily affect the caudal 
lung lobes. Localized processes involving only one lung lobe 
suggest the presence of a foreign body, neoplasia, abscess, 
granuloma, or lung lobe torsion.
Hemorrhage usually results from trauma. Thromboem­
bolism, neoplasia, coagulopathies, and fungal infections can 
also cause hemorrhage into the alveoli.
Interstitial Pattern
The pulmonary interstitial tissues confer a fine, lacy pattern 
to the pulmonary parenchyma of many dogs and cats as they 
age, in the absence of clinically apparent respiratory disease. 
They are not normally visible on inspiratory radiographs in 
young adult animals.
Abnormal interstitial patterns are reticular (unstruc­
tured), nodular, or reticulonodular in appearance. A nodular 
interstitial pattern is characterized by the finding of roughly 
circular, fluid-dense lesions in one or more lung lobes. 
However, the nodules must be nearly 1 cm in diameter to be 
routinely detected. Interstitial nodules may represent active 
or inactive inflammatory lesions or neoplasia (Box 20.5).
Active inflammatory nodules often have poorly defined 
borders. Mycotic infections typically result in the formation 
of multiple, diffuse nodules. The nodules may be small 
(miliary; Fig. 20.6) or large and coalescing. Parasitic granu­
lomas are often multiple, although paragonimiasis can result 
in the formation of a single pulmonary nodule. Abscesses 
Neoplasia
Mycotic Infection
Blastomycosis
Histoplasmosis
Coccidioidomycosis
Pulmonary Parasites
Aelurostrongylus infection
Paragonimus infection
Abscess
Bacterial pneumonia
Foreign body
Eosinophilic Lung Disease
Idiopathic Interstitial Pneumonia
Inactive Lesions
 BOX 20.5
Differential Diagnoses for Dogs and Cats With Nodular 
Interstitial Patterns
FIG 20.6
Lateral view of the thorax in a dog with blastomycosis. A 
miliary, nodular interstitial pattern is present. Increased soft 
tissue opacity above the base of the heart may be the result 
of hilar lymphadenopathy. 
FIG 20.7
Lateral view of the thorax of a dog with malignant 
neoplasia. A well-circumscribed, solid, circular mass is 
present in the caudal lung field. Papillary adenocarcinoma 
was diagnosed after surgical excision. 
can form as a result of foreign bodies or as a sequela to bacte­
rial pneumonia. Nodular patterns may also be seen on the 
radiographs obtained in animals with some eosinophilic 
lung diseases and idiopathic interstitial pneumonias.
Inflammatory nodules can persist as inactive lesions after 
the disease resolves. In contrast to active inflammatory 
nodules, however, the borders of inactive nodules are often 
well demarcated. Nodules may become mineralized in some 
conditions, such as histoplasmosis. Well-defined, small, 
inactive nodules are sometimes seen in healthy older dogs 
without a history of disease. Radiographs taken several 
months later in these animals typically show no change in 
the size of these inactive lesions.
Neoplastic nodules may be singular or multiple (Fig. 
20.7). They are often well defined, although secondary 
inflammation, edema, or hemorrhage can obscure the 
margins. No radiographic pattern is diagnostic for neoplasia. 
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 323 ===
	
CHAPTER 20    Diagnostic Tests for the Lower Respiratory Tract	
293
interstitial nodular patterns can cause a reticular interstitial 
pattern early in the course of disease (see Boxes 20.4 and 
20.5). This pattern is also often seen in older dogs with no 
clinically apparent disease, presumably as a result of pulmo­
nary fibrosis; this further decreases the specificity of the 
finding.
Lung Lobe Consolidation
Lung lobe consolidation is characterized by a lung lobe that 
is entirely of soft tissue opacity (Fig. 20.9, A). Consolidation 
Lesions caused by parasites, fungal infections, and some 
eosinophilic lung diseases or idiopathic interstitial pneumo­
nias may be indistinguishable from neoplastic lesions. In the 
absence of strong clinical evidence, malignant neoplasia 
must be confirmed cytologically or histologically. If this is 
not possible, radiographs can be obtained again 4 weeks later 
to evaluate for progression of disease.
Neoplastic involvement of the pulmonary parenchyma 
cannot be totally excluded on the basis of thoracic radio­
graph findings because malignant cells are present for a 
while before lesions reach a radiographically detectable size. 
The sensitivity of radiography in identifying neoplastic 
nodules can be improved by obtaining left and right lateral 
views of the thorax.
The reticular interstitial pattern is characterized by a 
diffuse, unstructured, lacy increase in the opacity of the pul­
monary interstitium, which partially obscures normal vas­
cular and airway markings. Reticular interstitial patterns 
frequently occur in conjunction with nodular interstitial pat­
terns (also called reticulonodular patterns) and alveolar and 
bronchial patterns (Fig. 20.8).
Increased reticular interstitial opacity can result from 
edema, hemorrhage, inflammatory cells, neoplastic cells, or 
fibrosis within the interstitium (Box 20.6). The interstitial 
space surrounds the airways and vessels, and is normally 
extremely small in dogs and cats. With continued accumula­
tion of fluid or cells, however, the alveoli can become flooded, 
which produces an alveolar pattern. Visible focal interstitial 
accumulations of cells, or nodules, can also develop with 
time. Any of the diseases associated with alveolar and 
FIG 20.8
Lateral radiograph of a dog with pulmonary carcinoma. An unstructured pattern is 
present, as is an increased bronchial pattern. 
Pulmonary Edema (Mild)
Infection
Viral pneumonia
Bacterial pneumonia
Toxoplasmosis
Mycotic pneumonia
Parasitic infection (more often bronchial or nodular 
interstitial pattern)
Neoplasia
Eosinophilic Lung Disease
Idiopathic Interstitial Pneumonia
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Hemorrhage (Mild)
 BOX 20.6
Differential Diagnoses for Dogs and Cats With Reticular 
(Unstructured) Interstitial Patterns
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 324 ===
294	
PART II    Respiratory System Disorders
and/or small airway obstruction, as seen in some cats with 
idiopathic bronchitis; blebs, which are bullae located within 
the pleura; and cysts, which are cavitary lesions lined by 
airway epithelium. Parasitic “cysts” (not lined by epithe­
lium) can form around Paragonimus flukes. Thoracic trauma 
is a common cause of cavitary lesions. Other differential 
diagnoses include neoplasia, lung infarction (from throm­
boembolism), abscess, and granuloma. Cavitary lesions 
may be apparent as localized accumulations of air or fluid, 
often with a partially visible wall (Fig. 20.10). An air-fluid 
interface may be visible when standing horizontal beam 
projections are used. Bullae and blebs are rarely apparent 
radiographically.
Cavitary lesions may be discovered incidentally or on 
thoracic radiographs of dogs and cats with spontaneous 
pneumothorax. If pneumothorax is present, surgical excision 
of the lesion is usually indicated (see Chapter 24). If inflam­
matory or neoplastic disease is suspected, further diagnos­
tic testing is indicated. If the lesion is found incidentally, 
animals can be periodically reevaluated radiographically to 
determine whether the lesion is progressing or resolving. 
If the lesion does not resolve during the course of 1 to 3 
months, surgical removal is considered for diagnostic pur­
poses and to prevent potentially life-threatening spontane­
ous pneumothorax.
Lung Lobe Torsion
Lung lobe torsion can develop spontaneously, particularly in 
deep-chested dogs, or as a complication of pleural effusion 
occurs when an alveolar or interstitial disease process 
progresses to the point at which the entire lobe is filled 
with fluid or cells. Common differential diagnoses for 
lung lobe consolidation are severe bacterial or aspira­
tion pneumonia, neoplasia, lung lobe torsion, and hem­
orrhage. Inhalation of plant material can also result in 
consolidation of the involved lung lobe as a result of the 
inflammatory reaction to foreign material and secondary 
infection. This differential diagnosis should be consid­
ered especially in regions of the country where foxtails are 
prevalent.
Atelectasis
Atelectasis is also characterized by a lobe that is entirely 
of soft tissue opacity. In this instance, the lobe is col­
lapsed as a result of airway obstruction. All the air within 
the lobe has been absorbed and not replaced. It is distin­
guished from consolidation by the small size of the lobe 
(see Fig. 20.9, B). Often the heart is displaced toward the 
atelectatic lobe. Atelectasis is most commonly seen involv­
ing the right middle lobe of cats with bronchitis (see Fig. 
20.9, C). Displacement of the heart may not occur in 
these cats.
Cavitary Lesions
Cavity lesions describe any abnormal air accumulation in 
the lung. They can be congenital, acquired, or idiopathic. 
Specific types of cavitary lesions include bullae, which result 
from ruptured alveoli due to congenital weakness of tissues 
A
B
C
FIG 20.9
Thoracic radiographs from three different patients, ventrodorsal projections. Radiograph A 
shows consolidation of the right middle lung lobe caused by neoplasia. Note that the soft 
tissue density of the lung silhouettes with the shadow of the heart. Radiograph B shows 
atelectasis of the middle region of the right lung and marked hyperinflation of the 
remaining lungs in a cat with idiopathic bronchitis. Note the shift of the heart shadow 
toward the collapsed region. Radiograph C shows atelectasis of the right middle lung 
lobe in another cat with idiopathic bronchitis. In this patient the adjacent lung lobes have 
expanded into the area previously occupied by the right middle lobe, preventing 
displacement of the heart. 
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 325 ===
	
CHAPTER 20    Diagnostic Tests for the Lower Respiratory Tract	
295
ULTRASONOGRAPHY
In the emergency setting, thoracic ultrasonography is used 
for the rapid identification of pleural effusion. Its applica­
tion in the rapid diagnosis of pulmonary edema and other 
parenchymal disease is growing. In this setting the acronyms 
TFAST (Thoracic Focused Assessment with Sonography for 
Trauma) and VetBLUE (Veterinary Bedside Lung Ultra­
sound Examination) are used (Lisciandro, 2011; Lisciandro 
et al., 2014).
In the nonemergent setting, ultrasonography is used to 
evaluate pulmonary mass lesions adjacent to the body wall, 
diaphragm, or heart and also consolidated lung lobes (Fig. 
20.11). Because air interferes with sound waves, aerated 
lungs and structures surrounded by aerated lungs cannot be 
examined. However, some patients with a reticular intersti­
tial pattern on thoracic radiographs have sufficient infiltrates 
to be visualized where they abut the body wall. The consis­
tency of lesions often can be determined to be solid, cystic, 
or vascularized. Some solid masses are hypolucent and 
appear to be cystic on ultrasonograms. Vascular structures 
may be visible, particularly with Doppler ultrasound, and 
this can be helpful in identifying lung lobe torsion. Ultraso­
nography can also be used to guide needles or biopsy instru­
ments into solid masses for specimen collection. It is used in 
evaluating the heart of animals with clinical signs that cannot 
be readily localized to the cardiac or the respiratory system. 
Ultrasonographic evaluation of patients with pleural disor­
ders is discussed in Chapter 23.
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY AND 
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are used rou­
tinely in human medicine for the diagnostic evaluation of 
lung disease. The accessibility of CT in particular has led 
to its increased use in dogs and cats and it is now used 
routinely in the diagnostic evaluation of challenging respi­
ratory cases. The resultant three-dimensional images are 
more sensitive and specific for the identification of certain 
airway, vascular, and parenchymal diseases as compared 
with thoracic radiography. In one study of dogs with meta­
static neoplasia, only 9% of nodules detected by CT were 
identified by thoracic radiography (Nemanic et al., 2006). 
Images are routinely obtained before and after the intrave­
nous injection of a contrast agent, which further enhances 
the characterization of lesions and allows for the identifica­
tion of macrothrombi and emboli. Thoracic CT has also 
become routine for the planning of thoracic surgery. Com­
pared with standard radiography, the extent of mass lesions 
and their relationship to major vessels and other critical 
structures is better defined, and multifocal disease is more 
likely to be identified (e.g., metastatic lesions or multiple 
cavitary lesions). The risks associated with CT scanning are 
minimal except that light, general anesthesia is required to 
eliminate patient motion and to allow for breath-holding 
or pneumonectomy in dogs and cats. The right middle and 
left cranial lobes are most commonly involved. The lobe 
usually twists at the hilus, obstructing the flow of blood 
into and out of the lung lobe. Venous drainage is obstructed 
before arterial flow, causing the lung lobe to become 
congested with blood. Inflammation and necrosis ensue. 
Over time, air is absorbed from the alveoli and atelectasis 
can occur.
Lung lobe torsion is difficult to identify radiographi­
cally. Severe bacterial or aspiration pneumonia resulting in 
consolidation of these same lobes is far more common and 
produces similar radiographic changes. The finding of pul­
monary vessels or bronchi traveling in an abnormal direc­
tion is strongly suggestive of torsion. Unfortunately, pleural 
fluid, if not present initially, often develops and obscures 
the radiographic image of the affected lobe. Ultrasonogra­
phy is often useful in detecting a torsed lung lobe. Bron­
choscopy, bronchography, computed tomography (CT), or 
thoracotomy is necessary to confirm the diagnosis in some 
animals.
FIG 20.10
Ventrodorsal view of the thorax in a cat showing a cystic 
lesion (arrowheads) in the left caudal lung lobe. Differential 
diagnoses included neoplasia and Paragonimus infection. 
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 326 ===
296	
PART II    Respiratory System Disorders
PARASITOLOGY
Parasites involving the lower respiratory tract are identified 
by direct observation, blood tests, cytologic analysis of respi­
ratory tract specimens, or fecal examination. Oslerus osleri 
reside in nodules near the carina, which can be identified 
bronchoscopically. Rarely, other parasites may be seen. Blood 
tests are often used to diagnose heartworm disease (see 
Chapter 10).
Larvae that may be present in fluid from tracheal or bron­
chial washings include O. osleri, Aelurostrongylus abstrusus 
(Fig. 20.12, A), and Crenosoma vulpis (Fig. 20.12, B). Eggs 
that may be present include those of Capillaria (Eucoleus) 
aerophila and Paragonimus kellicotti (Fig. 20.12, C and D). 
Larvated eggs or larvae from Filaroides hirthi or Aelurostron-
gylus milksi can be present but are rarely associated with 
clinical signs. The more common organisms are described in 
Table 20.1.
during image exposure. For unstable patients for which 
results of a noncontrast enhanced CT are considered to 
be critical, heavy sedation and physical restraints can 
be used.
NUCLEAR IMAGING
Mucociliary clearance can be measured by placing a drop 
of technetium-labeled albumin at the carina and observ­
ing its movement with a gamma camera to assist in the 
diagnosis of ciliary dyskinesia. Nuclear imaging can be 
used for the relatively noninvasive measurement of pul­
monary perfusion and ventilation, valuable for the diag­
nosis of pulmonary thromboembolism. Restrictions for 
handling radioisotopes and the need for specialized record­
ing equipment limit the availability of these tools to specialty 
centers.
A
B
C
FIG 20.11
Multiple pulmonary nodules are easily visible on the lateral radiograph (A) from a cat 
with a 1-year history of cough and recent episodes of respiratory distress with wheezing. 
Nodules do not obviously extend to the chest wall as seen on the ventrodorsal 
radiograph. (B) However, a 1-cm mass was found on ultrasonographic examination of the 
right thorax; (C) a red line has been positioned between ultrasound markers to indicate 
site of measurement. An ultrasound-guided aspirate was performed. The presence of 
eosinophils in the aspirate prompted the performance of fecal examinations for pulmonary 
parasites, and a diagnosis of paragonimiasis was made through identification of 
characteristic ova. 
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 327 ===
	
CHAPTER 20    Diagnostic Tests for the Lower Respiratory Tract	
297
A
B
D
C
FIG 20.12
(A) Larva of Aelurostrongylus abstrusus. (B) Larva of Crenosoma vulpis. (C) Double 
operculated ova of Capillaria sp. (D) Single operculated ova of Paragonimus kellicotti. 
 TABLE 20.1
Characteristics of Eggs or Larvae From Respiratory Parasites
PARASITE
HOST
STAGE
SOURCE
DESCRIPTION
Capillaria 
aerophila
Dog and 
cat
Eggs
Routine flotation of feces, 
airway specimens
Barrel-shaped, yellow, with prominent, transparent, 
asymmetric bipolar plugs; slightly smaller than 
Trichuris eggs; 60-80 µm × 30-40 µm
Paragonimus 
kellicotti
Dog and 
cat
Eggs
High-density flotation or 
sedimentation of feces, 
airway specimens
Oval, golden-brown, single, operculated; 
operculum flat with prominent shoulders; 
75-118 µm × 42-67 µm
Aelurostrongylus 
abstrusus
Cat
Larvae
Baermann technique of 
feces, airway specimens
Larvae with S-shaped tail; dorsal spine present; 
350-400 µm × 17 µm; eggs or larvated eggs 
may be seen in airway specimens
Oslerus osleri
Dog
Larvae, 
eggs
Tracheal wash, bronchial 
brushing of nodules, 
zinc-sulfate flotation of 
feces
Larvae have S-shaped tail without dorsal spine; 
rarely found eggs are thin-walled, colorless, and 
larvated; 80 µm × 50 µm
Crenosoma 
vulpis
Dog
Larvae
Baermann technique of 
feces, airway specimens
Larvae have tapered tail without severe kinks or 
spines; 250-300 µm; larvated eggs may be 
seen in airway specimens
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 328 ===
298	
PART II    Respiratory System Disorders
canine influenza are discussed further in Chapter 22. Serum 
antigen tests for Cryptococcus (see Chapter 97) and adult 
heartworms are also available (see Chapter 10). Antibody 
tests for dirofilariasis are available and are used primarily 
to support the diagnosis of feline heartworm disease (see 
Chapter 10).
URINE ANTIGEN TESTS
Urine antigen tests for the detection of Histoplasma and Blas-
tomyces antigens are available. The test for Blastomyces is 
more sensitive than serum antibody testing by agar gel 
immunodiffusion for the diagnosis of blastomycosis (Spector 
et al., 2008). See Chapter 97 for further discussion.
POLYMERASE CHAIN REACTION TESTS
Molecular diagnostic tests are available for identification of 
a wide range of individual respiratory pathogens. Panels of 
tests are commercially available for multiple agents com­
monly involved in acute respiratory tract infection in dogs 
or cats. Specimens that can be tested include swabs from the 
oropharynx, nasal cavity, or conjunctiva; tracheal wash or 
bronchoalveolar lavage specimens; airway brushings; and 
tissue. Best results are obtained when the timing and the site 
of collection are chosen on the basis of the pathophysiology 
of the target organism. For collection of material by swab, 
polyester swabs should be used. Consultation with the diag­
nostic laboratory is recommended for specimen collection 
and handling to maximize results.
TRACHEAL WASH
Indications and Complications
Tracheal wash can yield valuable diagnostic information in 
animals with cough or respiratory distress resulting from 
disease of the airways or pulmonary parenchyma and in 
animals with vague presenting signs and pulmonary abnor­
malities detected on thoracic radiographs (i.e., most animals 
with lower respiratory tract disease). Tracheal wash is gener­
ally performed after results of the history, physical examina­
tion, thoracic radiography, and other routine components of 
the database are known.
Tracheal wash provides fluid and cells that can be used to 
identify diseases involving the major airways while bypass­
ing the normal flora and debris of the oral cavity and pharynx. 
Representative specimens are often obtained from patients 
with disease of the small airways (e.g., bronchitis) or alveoli 
(e.g., bacterial pneumonia or aspiration pneumonia) because 
diagnostic material is carried to the major airways by muco­
ciliary clearance, cough, or the extension of disease (Table 
20.2). The fluid obtained is evaluated cytologically and 
microbiologically and therefore should be collected before 
antibiotic treatment is initiated, whenever possible.
The hosts of lung parasites generally cough up and 
swallow the eggs or larvae, which then are passed in the feces 
to infect the next host or an intermediate host. Fecal exami­
nation for eggs or larvae is a simple, noninvasive tool for the 
diagnosis of such infestations. However, because shedding is 
intermittent, parasitic disease cannot be included solely on 
the basis of negative fecal examination findings. Multiple (at 
least three) examinations should be performed in animals 
that are highly suspected of having parasitic disease. If pos­
sible, several days should be allowed to elapse between col­
lections of feces.
Routine fecal flotation can be used to concentrate eggs 
from C. aerophila. High-density fecal flotation (specific 
gravity [s.g.], 1.30 to 1.35) can be used to concentrate P. 
kellicotti eggs. Sedimentation techniques are preferred for 
concentrating and identifying P. kellicotti eggs, particularly 
if few eggs are present. Larvae are identified through the use 
of the Baermann technique. However, O. osleri larvae are 
insufficiently motile for reliable identification with this tech­
nique, and zinc sulfate (s.g., 1.18) flotation is recommended. 
Even so, false-negative results are common in cases with O. 
osleri.
All of these techniques can be readily performed in-house 
at minimal expense, but the infrequent identification of 
respiratory parasites in small-animal patients makes submis­
sion of feces to an external laboratory with greater experi­
ence in organism identification appealing. However, timing 
should be carefully arranged to ensure that fresh feces are 
available for prompt evaluation by laboratory personnel.
Toxoplasma gondii occasionally causes pneumonia in 
dogs and cats. Dogs do not shed Toxoplasma organisms in 
the feces, but cats may. However, the shedding of eggs is part 
of the direct life cycle of the organisms and does not correlate 
with the presence of systemic disease resulting from the indi­
rect cycle. Infection is therefore diagnosed by the finding of 
tachyzoites in pulmonary specimens or indirectly on the 
basis of serologic findings.
Migrating intestinal parasites can cause transient pulmo­
nary signs in young animals. Migration most often occurs 
before the mature adults develop in the intestine, thus eggs 
may not be found in feces. Migration of Toxocara cati has 
been implicated as a cause of idiopathic feline bronchitis in 
adult cats, but no practical means of diagnosis exists (Dillon 
et al., 2013).
SEROLOGY
Serologic tests can detect a variety of pulmonary pathogens. 
Antibody tests provide only indirect evidence of infection, 
however. In general, they should be used only to confirm a 
suspected diagnosis, not to screen for disease. Whenever pos­
sible, identification of infectious organisms is the preferred 
method of diagnosis. Tests available for common pulmo­
nary pathogens include those for Histoplasma, Blastomyces, 
Coccidiodomyces, Toxoplasma, and feline coronavirus. These 
tests are discussed fully in Chapter 97. Antibody tests for 
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 329 ===
	
CHAPTER 20    Diagnostic Tests for the Lower Respiratory Tract	
299
 TABLE 20.2
Comparisons of Techniques for Collecting Specimens From the Lower Respiratory Tract
TECHNIQUE
SITE OF 
COLLECTION
SPECIMEN 
SIZE
ADVANTAGES
DISADVANTAGES
INDICATIONS
Tracheal wash
Large airways
Small airway 
and alveoli 
(through 
mucociliary 
clearance, 
cough, and 
extension)
Moderate
Simple technique
Minimal expense
No special equipment
Complications rare
Volume adequate for cytology and 
culture
Airways must be involved for specimen to 
represent disease
May induce bronchospasm in patients 
with hyperreactive airways, particularly 
cats
Bronchial and alveolar disease 
(particularly bacterial 
bronchopneumonia and 
aspiration pneumonia)
Because of safety and ease, 
consider for any lung disease
Less likely to be representative of 
interstitial or small focal 
processes
Bronchoalveolar 
lavage
Small airways, 
alveoli, 
sometimes 
interstitium
Large
Nonbronchoscopic technique requires 
no special equipment and minimal 
expense
Bronchoscopic technique allows 
airway evaluation and directed 
sampling
Resultant hypoxemia is transient and 
responsive to oxygen 
supplementation
Safe for animals in stable condition
Large volume of lung sampled
High cytologic quality
Large volume for analysis
General anesthesia required
Special equipment and expertise required 
for bronchoscopic collection
Generally not recommended for animals 
with tachypnea, increased respiratory 
efforts, or respiratory distress
Capability to provide oxygen 
supplementation for an hour or more is 
required
May induce bronchospasm in patients 
with hyperreactive airways, particularly 
cats
Primarily diffuse interstitial 
disease; also small airway and 
alveolar disease.
Routine during bronchoscopy
Lung aspirate
Interstitium, 
alveoli 
when 
flooded
Small
Simple technique
Minimal expense
No special equipment
Solid masses adjacent to body wall: 
excellent representation with 
minimal risk
Potential for complications: pneumothorax, 
hemothorax, pulmonary hemorrhage
Relatively small area of lung sampled
Specimen adequate only for cytology
Specimen blood contaminated
Solid masses adjacent to chest 
wall (for solitary/localized 
disease, see also Thoracotomy 
or Thoracoscopy with Lung 
Biopsy)
Diffuse interstitial disease
Thoracotomy or 
thoracoscopy 
with lung 
biopsy
Small airways, 
alveoli, 
interstitium
Large
Ideal specimen
Allows histologic examination in 
addition to culture
Relatively expensive
Requires expertise
Requires general anesthesia
Major surgical procedure
Localized process where excision 
may be therapeutic as well as 
diagnostic
Any progressive disease not 
diagnosed by less invasive 
methods
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 330 ===
300	
PART II    Respiratory System Disorders
The cricothyroid ligament is identified by palpating the 
trachea in the ventral cervical region and following it dor­
sally toward the larynx to the raised, smooth, narrow band 
of the cricoid cartilage. Immediately above the cricoid carti­
lage is a depression, where the cricothyroid ligament is 
located (see Fig. 20.13, B). If the trachea is entered above the 
cricothyroid ligament, the catheter is passed dorsally into the 
pharynx and a nondiagnostic specimen is obtained. Such 
dorsal passage of the catheter often results in excessive 
gagging and retching but may go unrecognized in sedate 
patients.
Lidocaine is always injected subcutaneously at the site of 
entry. The skin over the cricothyroid ligament is prepared 
surgically, and sterile gloves are worn to pass the catheter. 
The over-the-needle catheter is held with the bevel of the 
needle facing ventrally. The skin over the ligament is then 
tented, and the needle is passed through the skin. The larynx 
is stabilized with the nondominant hand. To properly stabi­
lize it, the clinician should grasp at least 180 degrees of the 
circumference of the airway between the fingers and the 
thumb. Failure to hold the airway firmly is the most common 
technical mistake. Next, the tip of the needle is rested against 
the cricothyroid ligament and inserted through the ligament 
with a quick, short motion. The syringe end of the catheter 
is raised without withdrawing the needle, and the catheter is 
threaded down the trachea. The hand stabilizing the trachea 
is then used to pinch the hub at the skin, with the hand kept 
firmly in contact with the neck, while the needle is removed. 
By keeping the hand holding the hub of the catheter against 
the neck of the animal so that the hand, needle, and neck can 
move as one, the clinician prevents laceration of the larynx 
or trachea and inadvertent removal of the catheter from the 
trachea.
The flushing catheter is then threaded through the over-
the-needle catheter. Threading the catheter provokes cough­
ing. Little or no resistance to passage of the catheter should 
be noted. Elevating the hub of the over-the-needle catheter 
slightly so that the tip points more ventrally facilitates passage 
of the flushing catheter if it is abutting the opposite tracheal 
wall. Once the catheter has been completely threaded into 
the airway, the head can be restrained in a natural position
Note that if the flushing catheter will not pass despite 
adjustments in position of the over-the-needle catheter, the 
over-the-needle catheter must be completely removed and 
the procedure repeated from the beginning. Attempting to 
reinsert the needle into the over-the-needle catheter while it 
is within the patient is dangerous as it can result in a piece 
of the catheter being sheared off and lost deep within the 
airways.
It is convenient to have six to eight 12-mL syringes ready, 
each filled with 3 to 5 mL of 0.9% sterile preservative-free 
sodium chloride solution. The entire bolus of saline in one 
syringe is injected into the flushing catheter. Immediately 
after this, many aspiration attempts are made. After each 
aspiration, the syringe must be disconnected from the cath­
eter and the air evacuated without loss of any of the retrieved 
fluid. Attachment of a three-way stopcock between the 
Tracheal wash is less likely to provide representative 
material from interstitial and focal disease processes. 
However, the procedure is inexpensive and minimally inva­
sive, and this makes it reasonable to perform in most animals 
with lower respiratory tract disease if the risks of other 
methods of specimen collection are deemed too great.
Potential complications are rare and include tracheal lac­
eration, subcutaneous emphysema, and pneumomediasti­
num. Bronchospasm may be induced by the procedure in 
patients with hyperreactive airways, particularly cats with 
bronchitis.
TECHNIQUES
Tracheal wash is performed with the use of transtracheal or 
endotracheal techniques. Transtracheal wash is performed 
by passing a catheter into the trachea to the level of the carina 
through the cricothyroid ligament or between the tracheal 
rings in an awake or sedated animal. Endotracheal wash is 
performed by passing a catheter through an endotracheal 
tube in an anesthetized animal. The endotracheal technique 
is preferred in cats and very small dogs, although either 
technique can be used in any animal. Patients with airways 
that may be hyperreactive, particularly cats, are treated 
with bronchodilators (see the section on endotracheal 
technique).
Transtracheal Technique
Transtracheal wash fluid is collected by inserting a short, 
large bore over-the-needle catheter through the cricothyroid 
ligament or between tracheal rings; removing the needle; 
passing a long, smaller bore, flushing catheter through the 
catheter into the trachea to reach just cranial to the carina; 
then performing the saline wash. Options for catheters 
include a prepackaged kit containing a 14-gauge introduc­
tion catheter and a 10- to 28-inch flushing catheter (Mila 
International, Inc., Florence, Kentucky) or a 14-gauge over-
the-needle catheter and a 3.5F polypropylene male dog 
urinary catheter. For the latter, the ability to pass a specific 
brand of urinary catheter through a specific over-the-needle 
catheter should be tested before use, as the fit may be too 
tight in some instances. Alternatively, a 12-inch-long, 18- to 
22-gauge through-the-needle intravenous catheter can be 
used, but in our area, these catheters are no longer commer­
cially available. The flushing catheter should be long enough 
to reach the carina, which is located at approximately the 
level of the fourth intercostal space.
The dog can sit or lie down, depending on what position 
is more comfortable for the animal and the clinician. The 
dog is restrained with its nose pointing toward the ceiling 
at about 45 degrees from horizontal (Fig. 20.13, A). Overex­
tension of the neck causes the animal to be more resistant. 
Dogs that cannot be restrained should be tranquilized. If 
tranquilization is needed, premedication with atropine or 
glycopyrrolate is considered to minimize contamination of 
the trachea with oral secretions. Narcotics are avoided to 
preserve the cough reflex, which can facilitate the retrieval 
of fluid.
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 331 ===
	
CHAPTER 20    Diagnostic Tests for the Lower Respiratory Tract	
301
Endotracheal Technique
The endotracheal technique is performed by passing a 5F red 
rubber or male dog urinary catheter through a sterilized 
endotracheal tube. The length of the catheter must be suffi­
cient to extend beyond the end of the endotracheal tube by 
several centimeters and to nearly reach the carina.
The animal is anesthetized with a short-acting intrave­
nous agent to a sufficient depth to allow intubation. Propofol 
or, in cats, a combination of ketamine and acepromazine or 
diazepam is effective. Premedication with atropine, particu­
larly in cats, is considered to minimize contamination of the 
trachea with saliva. Cats with lower respiratory tract disease 
may have airway hyperreactivity and generally should be 
administered a bronchodilator before the tracheal wash. Ter­
butaline (0.01 mg/kg) can be given subcutaneously to cats 
not already receiving oral bronchodilators. It is also prudent 
to keep a metered dose inhaler of albuterol at hand to be 
administered through the endotracheal tube or by mask if 
breathing becomes labored or wheezes are auscultated.
A sterilized endotracheal tube should be passed without 
dragging the tip through the oral cavity. The animal’s mouth 
is opened wide with the tongue pulled out, a laryngoscope 
catheter and the syringe can make it easier to connect and 
disconnect the syringe. Aspirations should be forceful and 
should be repeated at least five or six times, so that small 
volumes of airway secretions that have been aspirated into 
the catheter are pulled the entire length of the catheter into 
the syringe.
The procedure is repeated using additional boluses of 
saline until a sufficient amount of fluid is retrieved for analy­
sis. A total of 2 to 3 mL of turbid fluid is adequate in most 
instances. The clinician does not need to be concerned about 
“drowning” the animal with infusion of the modest volumes 
of fluid described because the fluid is rapidly absorbed into 
the circulation. Failure to retrieve adequate volumes of 
visibly turbid fluid can be the result of several technical dif­
ficulties, as outlined in Fig. 20.14.
The catheter is removed after sufficient fluid is collected. 
A sterile gauze sponge with antiseptic ointment is then 
immediately placed over the catheter site, and a light bandage 
is wrapped around the neck. This bandage is left in place for 
several hours while the animal rests quietly in a cage. These 
precautions minimize the likelihood that subcutaneous 
emphysema or pneumomediastinum will develop.
T
CC
TC
A
B
FIG 20.13
(A) When a transtracheal wash is performed, the animal is restrained in a comfortable 
position with the nose pointed toward the ceiling. The ventral neck is clipped and 
scrubbed, and the clinician wears sterile gloves. The cricothyroid ligament is identified as 
described in (B). After an injection of lidocaine, the needle of the catheter (whether a 
through-the-needle catheter as is shown here, or an over-the-needle catheter as described 
in the text) is placed through the skin. The larynx is grasped firmly with the fingers and the 
thumb at least 180 degrees around the airway. The needle can then be inserted through 
the cricothyroid ligament into the airway lumen. (B) The lateral view of this anatomic 
specimen demonstrates the trachea and larynx in a position similar to that of the dog in 
(A). The cricothyroid ligament (arrow) is identified by palpating the trachea (T) from 
ventral to dorsal until the raised cricoid cartilage (CC) is palpated. The cricothyroid 
ligament is the first depression above the cricoid cartilage. The cricothyroid ligament 
attaches cranially to the thyroid cartilage (TC). The palpable depression above the thyroid 
cartilage (not shown) should not be entered. 
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 332 ===
302	
PART II    Respiratory System Disorders
Poor or no return
Position of tip when using stiff
polypropylene urinary catheters: tip
may be bent or curved such that it
cannot rest on ventral surface of airway.
Length of catheter within airway:
-Too far within airway can result in
  catheterization of a bronchus and
  loss of horizontal surface required
  to recover fluid.
-Not far enough within trachea leaves
  catheter tip in extrathoracic trachea,
  where surface is not horizontal.
Measure distance along path of trachea
from cricothyroid ligament (transtracheal
technique) or proximal end of endo-
tracheal tube to fourth intercostal
space for approximate distance to carina
and ensure catheter reaches just proximal
to this position. 
Negative pressure
Catheter is kinked at neck (trans-
tracheal technique).
Holder adjusts position to prevent kinking.
Recovery of only saline
Catheter is not placed far enough
within trachea to exit endotracheal tube
using endotracheal tube technique.
See first remedy (above).
Too few suction attempts are
performed to pull mucus through
entire length of catheter.
Suction many, many times. Mucus that
has only moved partway through catheter
will be pushed back into airways with
subsequent saline infusion.
Oropharyngeal contamination
Insertion of a transtracheal catheter
proximal to the cricothyroid ligament.
Be sure of anatomy prior to procedure.
Prolonged extension of the head and
neck during catheter or endotracheal
tube placement.
Minimize amount of time head and neck
are extended.
Excessive salivation, especially in cats.
Premedication with atropine.
Physically straighten catheter before use.
Once catheter is in position, rotate it along
axis in several different positions until
yield improves.  
Time delay between instillation and
suction is too long.
Suction vigorously immediately after
instillation of saline.
Suction is not sufficiently vigorous.
Use a 12-mL syringe and suction with
enthusiasm.
Catheter tip is flush against airway wall.
Move catheter slightly forward or backward,
or rotate catheter.
Thick mucus is obstructing lumen of
catheter.
Continue vigorous suction to retrieve this
valuable material. If necessary, flush with
more saline. If still unsuccessful, consider
using a larger catheter.
FIG 20.14
Overcoming problems with tracheal wash fluid collection. Green boxes indicate problems, 
blue boxes indicate possible causes, and orange boxes indicate remedies. 
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 333 ===
	
CHAPTER 20    Diagnostic Tests for the Lower Respiratory Tract	
303
is used, and, in cats, sterile topical lidocaine is applied to the 
laryngeal cartilages to ease passage of the tube with minimal 
contamination. The tip of the endotracheal tube should be 
positioned beyond the larynx but sufficiently in front of the 
carina to allow the flushing catheter to rest against the floor 
of the trachea.
The catheter is passed through the endotracheal tube to 
just proximal to the level of the carina (approximately the 
fourth intercostal space), while sterile technique is main­
tained. The wash procedure is performed as described for the 
transtracheal technique. Slightly larger boluses of saline may 
be required, however, because of the larger volume of the 
catheter. Use of a catheter larger than 5F seems to reduce the 
yield of the wash, except when secretions are extremely 
viscous.
SPECIMEN HANDLING
The cells collected in the wash fluid are fragile. The fluid is 
ideally processed within 30 minutes of collection, with 
minimal manipulation. Bacterial culture is performed on at 
least 0.5 to 1 mL of fluid. Fungal cultures can be performed 
if mycotic disease is a differential diagnosis, and Mycoplasma 
culture or polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing is con­
sidered for cats and dogs with signs of bronchitis. Cytologic 
preparations are made both from the fluid and from any 
mucus within the fluid. Both fluid and mucus are examined 
because infectious agents and inflammatory cells can be con­
centrated in the mucus, but the proteinaceous material 
causes cells to clump and interferes with evaluation of the 
cell morphology. Mucus is retrieved with a needle, and 
squash preparations are made. Direct smears of the fluid 
itself can be made, but such specimens are usually hypocel­
lular. Sediment or cytocentrifuge preparations are generally 
necessary to make adequate interpretation possible. Strain­
ing the fluid through gauze to remove the mucus is discour­
aged because infectious agents may be lost in the process. 
Routine cytologic stains are used.
Microscopic examination of slides includes identification 
of cell types, qualitative evaluation of cells, and examination 
for infectious agents. Cells are evaluated qualitatively for 
evidence of macrophage activation, neutrophil degeneration, 
lymphocyte reactivity, and characteristics of malignancy. 
Epithelial hyperplasia secondary to inflammation should not 
be overinterpreted as neoplasia, however. Infectious agents 
such as bacteria, protozoa (Toxoplasma gondii), fungi (His-
toplasma, Blastomyces, and Cryptococcus organisms), and 
parasitic larvae or eggs may be present (see Fig. 20.12, and 
Figs. 20.15 through 20.17). Because only one or two organ­
isms may be present on an entire slide, a thorough evaluation 
of each slide is indicated.
INTERPRETATION OF RESULTS
Normal tracheal wash fluid contains primarily respiratory 
epithelial cells. Few other inflammatory cells are present 
(Fig. 20.18). Occasionally, macrophages are retrieved from 
the small airways and alveoli because the catheter was 
extended into the lungs beyond the carina, or because 
FIG 20.15
Photomicrograph of a Blastomyces organism from the lungs 
of a dog with blastomycosis. The organisms stain deeply 
basophilic, are 5 to 15 µm in diameter, and have a thick 
refractile cell wall. Often, as in this figure, broad-based 
budding forms are seen. The cells present are alveolar 
macrophages and neutrophils. (Bronchoalveolar lavage 
fluid, Wright stain.) 
FIG 20.16
Photomicrograph of Histoplasma organisms from the lungs 
of a dog with histoplasmosis. The organisms are small 
(2-4 µm) and round, with a deeply staining center and a 
lighter-staining halo. They are often found within phagocytic 
cells—in this figure, an alveolar macrophage. 
(Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, Wright stain.) 
relatively large volumes of saline were used. Most macro­
phages are not activated. In these instances the presence of 
macrophages does not indicate disease but rather reflects the 
acquisition of material from the deep lung (see the section 
on nonbronchoscopic bronchoalveolar lavage).
Slides are examined for evidence of overt oral contamina­
tion, which can occur during transtracheal washing if the 
catheter needle was inadvertently inserted proximal to the 
cricothyroid ligament. Rarely, dogs can cough up the cath­
eter into the oropharynx. Oral contamination can also result 
from drainage of saliva into the trachea, which usually occurs 
in cats that hypersalivate or dogs that are heavily sedated, 
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 334 ===
304	
PART II    Respiratory System Disorders
FIG 20.18
Tracheal wash fluid from a healthy dog showing ciliated epithelium and few inflammatory 
cells. 
FIG 20.19
Tracheal wash fluid showing evidence of oropharyngeal 
contamination. The numerous, uniformly stacked basophilic 
rods are Simonsiella organisms—normal inhabitants of the 
oral cavity. These organisms, as well as many other 
bacteria, are adhering to a squamous epithelial cell. 
Squamous epithelium is another indication of contamination 
from the oral cavity. 
FIG 20.17
Photomicrograph of Toxoplasma gondii tachyzoites from the 
lungs of a cat with acute toxoplasmosis. The extracellular 
tachyzoites are crescent shaped with a centrally placed 
nucleus. They are approximately 6 µm in length. 
(Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, Wright stain.) 
particularly if the head and neck are extended more than 
briefly for passage of the endotracheal tube or transtracheal 
catheter. Oral contamination is indicated by the finding of 
numerous squamous epithelial cells, often coated with bac­
teria, and Simonsiella organisms (Fig. 20.19). Simonsiella 
organisms are large basophilic rods that are frequently found 
stacked uniformly on top of one another along their broad 
side. Specimens with overt oral contamination may not 
provide accurate information about the airways, particularly 
with regard to bacterial infection.
Cytologic results of tracheal wash fluid are most useful 
when pathogenic organisms or malignant cells are identified. 
The presence of pathogens such as Toxoplasma gondii, sys­
temic fungal organisms, and parasites provides a definitive 
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 335 ===
	
CHAPTER 20    Diagnostic Tests for the Lower Respiratory Tract	
305
eosinophilia, usually as part of a mixed inflammatory 
response.
Macrophagic (granulomatous) inflammation is charac­
terized by the finding of increased numbers of activated 
macrophages, generally present as a component of mixed 
inflammation, along with increased numbers of other 
inflammatory cells. Activated macrophages are vacuolated 
and have increased amounts of cytoplasm. This response is 
nonspecific unless an etiologic agent can be identified.
Lymphocytic inflammation alone is uncommon. Viral or 
rickettsial infection, idiopathic interstitial pneumonia, and 
lymphoma are considerations.
True hemorrhage can be differentiated from a traumatic 
specimen collection by the presence of erythrophagocytosis 
and hemosiderin-laden macrophages. An inflammatory 
response is also usually present. Hemorrhage can be caused 
by neoplasia, mycotic infection, heartworm disease, throm­
boembolism, foreign body, lung lobe torsion, or coagulopa­
thies. Evidence of hemorrhage is seen occasionally in animals 
with congestive heart failure or severe bacterial pneumonia. 
Of note is that hemosiderosis is found in tracheal wash fluid 
collected from cats with a wide range of diseases, including 
idiopathic bronchitis.
NONBRONCHOSCOPIC 
BRONCHOALVEOLAR LAVAGE
Indications and Complications
Nonbronchoscopic bronchoalveolar lavage (NB-BAL) is 
considered for the diagnostic evaluation of patients with 
lung disease involving the interstitium, small airways, or 
alveoli that are not tachypneic or otherwise showing signs of 
respiratory distress (see Table 20.2). This author prefers tra­
cheal wash for patients with diffuse airway disease, bacterial 
bronchopneumonia, or aspiration pneumonia because tra­
cheal wash carries less risk and can be expected to result in 
a representative specimen in these situations. Further, 
NB-BAL using a catheter for dogs as described in the follow­
ing text will usually sample a caudal lung lobe and could 
bypass the exudate from pneumonia of airway origin. There­
fore NB-BAL is considered primarily for patients with diffuse 
interstitial lung disease. Bronchoscopically guided BAL is 
performed as a routine part of bronchoscopy and is indicated 
when focal disease is present.
A large volume of lung is sampled by BAL (Figs. 20.20 
and 20.21). The collected specimens are of large volume, 
providing more than adequate material for routine cytology, 
cytology involving special stains (e.g., Gram stains, acid-fast 
stains), multiple types of cultures (e.g., bacterial, fungal, 
mycoplasmal), or other specific tests that might be helpful in 
particular patients (e.g., flow cytometry, PCR). Cytologic 
preparations from BAL fluid are of excellent quality and 
consistently provide large numbers of well-stained cells for 
examination.
Although general anesthesia is required, the procedure is 
associated with few complications in stable patients. The 
diagnosis. The finding of intracellular bacterial organisms in 
cytologic preparations without evidence of oral contamina­
tion indicates the presence of infection. The growth of any 
of the systemic mycotic agents in culture is also clinically 
significant, whereas the growth of bacteria in culture may or 
may not be significant because low numbers of bacteria can 
be present in the large airways of healthy animals. In general, 
the cytologic identification of bacteria and their growth in 
culture without multiplication in enrichment broth are sig­
nificant findings.
Bacteria that are not seen cytologically and that grow only 
after incubation in enrichment media can result from several 
situations. For example, the bacteria may be causing infec­
tion without being present in high numbers because of the 
prior administration of antibiotics, or because of the collec­
tion of a nonrepresentative specimen. The bacteria may also 
be clinically insignificant and represent normal tracheal 
inhabitants, or they may result from contamination during 
collection. Other clinical data must therefore be considered 
when such findings are interpreted.
The role of Mycoplasma spp. in respiratory disease of the 
dog and cat is not well understood. These organisms cannot 
be seen on cytologic preparations and are difficult to grow 
in culture. Specific transport media are necessary. Growth of 
Mycoplasma organisms from tracheal wash fluid may indi­
cate primary or secondary infection or may be an insignifi­
cant finding. Testing for Mycoplasma by PCR is also available. 
Treatment is generally recommended if inflammation was 
documented cytologically.
Criteria of malignancy for making a diagnosis of neopla­
sia must be interpreted with extreme caution. Overt charac­
teristics of malignancy must be present in many cells in the 
absence of concurrent inflammation for a definitive diagno­
sis to be made.
The type of inflammatory cells present in tracheal wash 
fluid can assist in narrowing the differential diagnoses, 
although a mixed inflammatory response is common. Neu­
trophilic (suppurative) inflammation is common in bacterial 
infections. Before antibiotic therapy is initiated, the neutro­
phils may be (but are not always) degenerative, and organ­
isms can often be seen. Neutrophilic inflammation may be a 
response to a variety of other diseases. For instance, it can 
be caused by other infectious agents or seen in patients with 
canine chronic bronchitis, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, or 
other idiopathic interstitial pneumonias, or even neoplasia. 
Some cats with idiopathic bronchitis have neutrophilic 
inflammation rather than the more classic eosinophilic 
response (see Chapter 21). The neutrophils in these instances 
are generally nondegenerative.
Eosinophilic inflammation reflects a hypersensitivity 
response, and diseases commonly resulting in eosinophilic 
inflammation include allergic bronchitis, parasitic disease, 
and eosinophilic lung disease. Parasites that affect the lung 
include primary lungworms or flukes, migrating intestinal 
parasites, and heartworms. Over time, mixed inflammation 
can occur in patients with hypersensitivity. It is occasionally 
possible for nonparasitic infection or neoplasia to cause 
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 336 ===
306	
PART II    Respiratory System Disorders
FIG 20.21
The region of the lower respiratory tract presumed to be sampled by nonbronchoscopic 
bronchoalveolar lavage in cats using an endotracheal tube. 
TW
c
b
BAL
FIG 20.20
The region of the lower respiratory tract that is sampled by bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) 
in comparison with the region sampled by tracheal wash (TW). The solid line (b) within 
the airways represents a bronchoscope or a modified feeding tube. The open lines (c) 
represent the tracheal wash catheter. Bronchoalveolar lavage yields fluid representative of 
the deep lung, whereas tracheal wash yields fluid representative of processes involving 
major airways, including diffuse bronchitis, bacterial bronchopneumonia, and aspiration 
pneumonia. 
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 337 ===
	
CHAPTER 20    Diagnostic Tests for the Lower Respiratory Tract	
307
laryngoscope is used, and sterile lidocaine is applied topi­
cally to the laryngeal mucosa. The cuff is then inflated suf­
ficiently to create a seal, but overinflation is avoided to 
prevent tracheal rupture (i.e., use a 3-mL syringe and inflate 
the cuff in 0.5-mL increments only until no leak is audible 
when gentle pressure is placed on the oxygen reservoir bag).
The cat is placed in lateral recumbency with the most 
diseased side, as determined by physical and radiographic 
findings, against the table. Oxygen (100%) is administered 
for several minutes through the endotracheal tube. The anes­
thetic adapter then is removed from the endotracheal tube 
and replaced with a sterile syringe adapter, with caution to 
avoid contamination of the end of the tube or adapter. 
Immediately, a bolus of warmed, sterile 0.9% saline solution 
(5 mL/kg body weight) is infused through the tube over 
approximately 3 seconds. Immediately after infusion, suction 
is applied by syringe. Air is eliminated from the syringe, and 
several aspiration attempts are made until fluid is no longer 
recovered. The procedure is repeated using a total of two or 
three boluses of saline solution. The cat is allowed to expand 
its lungs between infusions of saline solution. After the last 
infusion, the syringe adapter is removed (because it greatly 
interferes with ventilation) and excess fluid is drained from 
the large airways and endotracheal tube by elevating the 
caudal half of the cat a few inches off of the table. At this 
point, the cat is cared for as described in the section on 
recovery of patients after BAL.
TECHNIQUE FOR NB-BAL IN DOGS
An inexpensive 122-cm 16F Levin-type polyvinyl chloride 
stomach tube can be used in dogs to collect lavage fluid. 
The tube must be modified for best results. Sterile tech­
nique is maintained throughout. The distal end of the tube 
is cut off for removal of the side openings. The proximal 
end is cut off for removal of the flange and shortening of 
primary complication of BAL is hypoxemia. Hypoxemia 
generally can be corrected with oxygen supplementation, but 
animals exhibiting increased respiratory efforts or respira­
tory distress in room air are not good candidates for this 
procedure. Patients may have poor lung function without 
overt signs, so the ability to provide oxygen supplementation 
for an hour or longer is necessary to minimize the risk of 
patient decompensation. Patients with hyperreactive airways, 
particularly cats, are treated with bronchodilators, as 
described previously for endotracheal washing.
In addition to the methods described, other techniques 
for NB-BAL have been reported in which a long, thin, sterile 
catheter is passed through a sterile endotracheal tube until 
the catheter is lodged in a distal airway, and relatively small 
volumes of saline are infused and recovered. Foster and 
Martin (2011) used a 6F to 8F dog urinary catheter and two 
5- to 10-mL aliquots of sterile saline. Such methods likely 
result in less hypoxemia than those described here but would 
be expected to sample a smaller portion of lung. Critical 
evaluation of different techniques for BAL in disease states 
has not been performed.
TECHNIQUE FOR NB-BAL IN CATS
A sterile endotracheal tube and a syringe adapter are used in 
cats to collect lavage fluid (Fig. 20.22; see also Fig. 20.21). 
Cats, particularly those with signs of bronchitis, should be 
treated with bronchodilators before the procedure, as 
described previously for tracheal wash (endotracheal tech­
nique), to decrease the risk of bronchospasm. The cat may 
be premedicated with atropine (0.05 mg/kg subcutaneously) 
to minimize oral secretions, and is anesthetized with ket­
amine and acepromazine or diazepam, given intravenously. 
The endotracheal tube is passed as cleanly as possible through 
the larynx to minimize oral contamination. To achieve suf­
ficient cleanliness, the tip of the tongue is pulled out, a 
FIG 20.22
Bronchoalveolar lavage using an endotracheal tube in a cat. The fluid retrieved is grossly 
foamy because of the surfactant present. The procedure is performed quickly because the 
airway is completely occluded during infusion and aspiration of fluid. 
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 650 ===
620	
PART IV    Hepatobiliary and Exocrine Pancreatic Disorders
620
C H A P T E R 37 
The Exocrine Pancreas
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
The pancreas is located in the cranial abdomen, with the left 
limb positioned between the transverse colon and the greater 
curvature of the stomach, and the right limb running next 
to the proximal duodenum. Any or all of these neighboring 
structures can be affected when there is pancreatic inflam-
mation. The exocrine acini make up about 90% of pancreatic 
tissue, and the endocrine islets interspersed among the acini 
make up the remaining 10% (Fig. 37.1). The close anatomic 
association between the acini and islets allows subtle signal-
ing between them to coordinate digestion and metabolism, 
but it also means that there is a complex cause and effect 
relationship between diabetes mellitus (DM) and pancreati-
tis. The major function of the exocrine pancreas is to secrete 
digestive enzymes, bicarbonate, and intrinsic factor (IF) into 
the proximal duodenum. Pancreatic enzymes are responsible 
for the initial digestion of larger food molecules and require 
an alkaline pH to function—hence the concurrent bicarbon-
ate secretion by pancreatic duct cells. The pancreas secretes 
several proteases, phospholipases, ribonucleases, and deoxy-
ribonucleases as inactive precursors (zymogens), and 
α-amylase and lipase as intact molecules. The pancreas is the 
only significant source of lipase, and hence steatorrhea (fatty 
feces) is a prominent sign of exocrine pancreatic insuffi-
ciency (EPI). Trypsin is central to the pathogenesis of pan-
creatitis, as discussed later, and inappropriate early activation 
of the zymogen trypsinogen to trypsin within the pancreatic 
acini is the final common pathway triggering pancreatic 
inflammation. In the normal animal, pancreatic secretion is 
triggered by the thought of food and stomach filling, and 
most potently by the presence of fat and protein in the small 
intestinal lumen. The vagus nerve, local enteric nervous 
system, and hormones secretin and cholecystokinin from the 
small intestine stimulate pancreatic secretion. Trypsinogen 
is activated in the small intestine by the brush border enzyme 
enterokinase, which cleaves a peptide (the trypsin activation 
peptide [TAP]) from trypsinogen. Activated trypsin then 
activates the other zymogens within the intestinal lumen. IF, 
which is necessary for vitamin B12 absorption in the ileum, 
is secreted only by the pancreas in the cat. In the dog the 
pancreas is the main source of IF, but a small amount is also 
secreted by the gastric mucosa.
Diseases of the exocrine pancreas are relatively common 
but often misdiagnosed in dogs and cats because of nonspe-
cific clinical signs, relative difficulty in accessing the organ 
for diagnostic imaging and biopsies, and lack of sensitive and 
specific clinicopathologic tests. Pancreatitis is the most 
common disease of the exocrine pancreas in cats and dogs; 
EPI, although less common, is also recognized frequently. 
Uncommon diseases of the pancreas include pancreatic 
abscess, pseudocyst, and neoplasia.
Recent advances in the understanding of the pathophysi-
ology, prevalence, and potential causes of pancreatitis in 
dogs and cats may provide clues about treatment in the 
future, although treatment of acute pancreatitis remains 
largely nonspecific and supportive in all species.
Important differences in the anatomy of the pancreas and 
associated areas between the dog and cat are outlined in 
Table 37.1.
PANCREATITIS
Pancreatitis may be acute or chronic. As with acute and 
chronic hepatitis, the difference is histologic and not neces-
sarily clinical (Table 37.2; Fig. 37.2), and there is often clini-
cal overlap between the two. Chronic disease may present 
initially as an acute-on-chronic episode; in postmortem 
studies of fatal acute pancreatitis in dogs and cats, up to 
half of the cases were actually acute-on-chronic disease. 
Differentiation of acute disease from an acute flare-up of 
chronic disease is not important for initial management, 
which is the same in all cases, but is important to allow 
recognition of the potential long-term sequelae of chronic 
disease (see later). The causes of acute and chronic pancre-
atitis may be different, but there may also be some overlap 
between them.
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 651 ===
	
CHAPTER 37    The Exocrine Pancreas	
621
without pancreatitis (Furrow et al., 2012). Another study 
identified several mutations of the canine CFTR gene in dogs 
both with and without pancreatitis but no significant asso-
ciation with disease (Spadafora et al., 2010). More studies are 
necessary to elucidate the role of mutations in pancreatitis 
in dogs.
If too much trypsin autoactivates in the pancreas, the pro-
tective mechanisms are overwhelmed and a chain reaction 
occurs whereby activated trypsin activates more trypsin and 
the other enzymes in the pancreas. This results in pancreatic 
autodigestion, inflammation, and peripancreatic fat necrosis, 
which leads to focal or more generalized sterile peritonitis. 
There is an associated systemic inflammatory response (SIR) 
in even the mildest cases of pancreatitis. Many other organs 
may be involved, and in the most severe cases there is mul-
tiorgan failure (MOF) and diffuse intravascular coagulation 
(DIC). The circulating protease inhibitors α1-antitrypsin 
(α1-protease inhibitor) and α-macroglobulin play a role in 
removing trypsin and other proteases from the circulation. 
Saturation of these protease inhibitors by excessive amounts 
of circulating proteases contributes to the systemic inflam-
mation, but generalized neutrophil activation and cytokine 
release are probably the primary cause of SIR.
The previous paragraph has described the final common 
pathway of acute pancreatitis in dogs and cats, but the under-
lying cause of the disease is often unknown (see Table 37.3). 
There appears to be a strong breed relationship for pancreati-
tis in dogs, so hereditary causes are likely to be a factor. Many 
of the previously reported supposed causes in dogs are likely 
triggers for disease in genetically susceptible individuals.
Clinical Features
Acute pancreatitis typically affects middle-aged dogs and 
cats, although very young and very old individuals may also 
be affected. Terrier breeds, Miniature Schnauzers, and 
domestic short-haired cats appear to be at increased risk for 
acute pancreatitis, although any breed or cross-breed can be 
affected. Some dog breeds appear to be underrepresented in 
clinical studies, particularly large and giant breeds, although 
Labrador Retrievers and Husky types (the latter particularly 
in Australia) are often affected. Breed relationships suggest 
an underlying genetic tendency, mirroring the situation in 
humans. It is likely that the disease is multifactorial, with a 
genetic tendency and superimposed triggering factors. For 
example, eating a high-fat meal may be a trigger for a sus-
ceptible terrier. Some studies suggest a slight increase in risk 
in female dogs, whereas others show no gender predisposi-
tion. Obesity has been suggested as a predisposing factor in 
dogs, but it is unclear whether this is a cause or whether it 
is cosegregating with disease (i.e., breeds at high risk for 
acute pancreatitis may coincidentally also be breeds with a 
high risk for obesity). In some cases in cats there is a recog-
nized association with concurrent cholangitis, inflammatory 
bowel disease, and renal disease. Cats with acute pancreatitis 
are also at high risk for hepatic lipidosis.
The history in dogs often includes a trigger such as a high-
fat meal or engorging (see Table 37.3). Recent drug therapy 
ACUTE PANCREATITIS
Etiology and Pathogenesis
Understanding of the pathophysiology of acute pancreatitis 
in humans has increased in recent years with the discovery 
of hereditary mutations of trypsin, which predispose to pan-
creatitis; the pathophysiology of this disease is believed to be 
similar in dogs and cats. The final common pathway in all 
cases is the inappropriate early activation of trypsinogen in 
the pancreas as a result of increased autoactivation of tryp-
sinogen and/or reduced autolysis of prematurely activated 
trypsin. Trypsin is the major protease secreted by the pan-
creas, and inappropriate early activation in the acinar cells 
would obviously cause autodigestion and severe inflamma-
tion. Protective mechanisms therefore exist to prevent early 
activation. Trypsin is stored in zymogen granules in the pan-
creatic acini as the inactive precursor trypsinogen. Up to 
10% of trypsinogen gradually autoactivates normally within 
the granules but is inactivated by the action of other trypsin 
molecules and by the cosegregating protective molecule, 
pancreatic secretory trypsin inhibitor (PSTI; also known as 
serine protease inhibitor Kazal type 1, or SPINK1). Genetic 
mutations of trypsinogen, which make it resistant to hydro-
lysis, and/or of PSTI predispose to pancreatitis in people and 
are also likely to occur in some dogs (Table 37.3). A variety 
of mutations of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conduc-
tance regulator (CFTR) gene also predispose to pancreatitis 
in humans. Studies of mutations predisposing to acute pan-
creatitis in dogs have focused on Miniature Schnauzers. 
Initial studies showed no mutations in the cationic trypsino-
gen gene in individuals with pancreatitis in this breed but 
did find variations in the gene coding SPINK1 (Bishop et al., 
2004, 2010). However, a more recent study questioned the 
significance of this finding because SPINK1 mutations were 
found in Miniature and Standard Schnauzers, both with and 
FIG 37.1
Histopathology of a section of normal canine pancreas 
showing two paler staining islets of Langerhans and 
exocrine acini surrounding them. Note that the islets make 
up only 10% to 20% of the volume of the pancreas. 
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 652 ===
622	
PART IV    Hepatobiliary and Exocrine Pancreatic Disorders
 TABLE 37.1
Differences in Pancreatic Structure, Function, and Diseases in Dogs and Cats
FEATURE
DOGS
CATS
Anatomy (but many 
variations; some dogs are 
like cats, and vice versa)
Usually two pancreatic ducts—large 
accessory duct from right limb to minor 
papilla in duodenum, small pancreatic 
duct from left limb to major duodenal 
papilla in duodenum next to (but not 
joining) bile duct
Sphincter of Oddi unlikely to be of clinical 
significance
Usually single major pancreatic duct joining 
common bile duct before entering 
duodenum at duodenal papilla 3 cm 
distal to pylorus
20% of cats have second, accessory duct; 
occasionally ducts remain separate
Sphincter of Oddi may be as important as 
in humans
Pancreatic function
Intrinsic factor secreted largely by pancreas 
but also some in stomach; vitamin B12 
deficiency common in exocrine 
insufficiency but sometimes normal
Intrinsic factor secreted entirely by pancreas 
so vitamin B12 deficiency very common in 
exocrine insufficiency; vitamin K deficiency 
also common because of concurrent liver 
and intestinal disease further reducing 
absorption
Pancreatitis—disease 
associations
Common association between pancreatitis 
and endocrine disease (see text)
Association with liver and small intestinal 
disease not recognized
Emerging association in some breeds with 
immune-mediated diseases, particularly 
keratoconjunctivitis sicca and 
glomerulonephritis (see text)
Common association with cholangiohepatitis 
and/or inflammatory bowel disease
High risk of concurrent hepatic lipidosis
May also be associated with renal disease
Exocrine pancreas, other 
pathology
Incidental pancreatic nodular hyperplasia 
common
Incidental pancreatic nodular hyperplasia 
common
Pancreatitis
Spectrum of disease
Most cases acute at presentation
Low-grade chronic disease increasingly 
recognized and more common than 
acute on postmortem studies
Most cases low-grade, chronic interstitial 
disease, challenge to diagnose
Acute severe cases also recognized
Diagnosis
(see Chapter 34)
Histology is gold standard
Variety of catalytic and immunoassays 
available
Ultrasonography quite sensitive
Obvious or suggestive clinical signs in 
acute cases
Histology is gold standard
Most catalytic assays no help
Immunoassays more helpful
Ultrasonography less sensitive than in dogs
Clinical signs usually low grade and 
nonspecific, even in acute disease
Causes of exocrine 
pancreatic insufficiency
Often pancreatic acinar atrophy—increased 
prevalence in certain breeds (especially 
German Shepherd Dogs)
End-stage chronic pancreatitis also 
common, underrecognized, particularly 
in middle-aged to older dogs of specific 
breeds (see text)
Most cases end-stage chronic pancreatitis
Pancreatic acinar atrophy rare
Occasionally due to raccoon pancreatic 
fluke (Eurytrema procyonis) in eastern 
United States.
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 653 ===
	
CHAPTER 37    The Exocrine Pancreas	
623
 TABLE 37.2
Differences Between Acute and Chronic Pancreatitis in Dogs and Cats
PARAMETER
ACUTE PANCREATITIS
CHRONIC PANCREATITIS
Histopathology
Varying degrees of acinar necrosis, 
edema, inflammation, with neutrophils 
and peripancreatic fat necrosis
Characterized by lymphocytic 
inflammation and fibrosis, with 
permanent disruption of architecture
Potentially completely reversible, with no 
permanent pancreatic architectural or 
functional changes
Possible to have acute-on-chronic cases 
with concurrent neutrophilic 
inflammation and necrosis
Clinical appearance
Spectrum from severe and fatal (usually 
necrotizing) to mild and subclinical (less 
common)
Spectrum from mild, low-grade intermittent 
gastrointestinal signs (most common) to 
acute-on-chronic episode 
indistinguishable from classic acute 
pancreatitis
Diagnostic challenge
Higher sensitivity of enzyme tests and 
ultrasonography than in chronic disease
Lower sensitivity of enzyme tests and 
ultrasonography than in acute disease: 
diagnosis much more challenging
Mortality and long-term sequelae
High immediate mortality but no long-term 
sequelae
Low mortality except acute-on-chronic 
bouts
High risk of eventual exocrine and 
endocrine insufficiency
 TABLE 37.3
Causes of Acute Pancreatitis in Dogs and Cats
RISK FACTOR
CAUSE
Idiopathic, 90%
Unknown (some may be hereditary or inherited susceptibility to environmental trigger)
Duct obstruction ± hypersecretion 
± bile reflux into pancreatic duct
Experimental; neoplasia; surgery ± cholangitis + role in chronic pancreatitis
Hypertriglyceridemia
Inherent abnormal lipid metabolism (breed-related—e.g., Miniature Schnauzers)
Endocrine—diabetes mellitus, hyperadrenocorticism, hypothyroidism
Breed, gender (?)
Increased risk in terriers ± spayed females—may reflect risk of hypertriglyceridemia 
in some (also Miniature Schnauzers; see above) and potentially other mutations 
(see text)
Diet
Dietary indiscretion, high-fat diet
Malnutrition, obesity (?)
Trauma
Road traffic accident, surgery, high-rise syndrome
Ischemia, reperfusion
Surgery (not just pancreas), gastric dilation, volvulus; shock, severe immune-mediated 
hemolytic anemia (common association if anemia severe)
Hypercalcemia
Experimental (more common in cats than dogs); hypercalcemia of malignancy 
(uncommon association clinically); primary hyperparathyroidism
Drugs, toxins
Organophosphates, azathioprine, asparaginase, thiazides, furosemide, estrogens, 
sulfa drugs, tetracycline, procainamide, potassium bromide, clomipramine
Infections
Toxoplasma, others (uncommon)
Adapted from Villiers E, Blackwood L, editors: BSAVA manual of canine and feline clinical pathology, ed 2, Gloucestershire, Britain, 2005, 
British Small Animal Veterinary Association.
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 654 ===
624	
PART IV    Hepatobiliary and Exocrine Pancreatic Disorders
A
B
C
E
D
FIG 37.2
(A) Gross appearance of acute pancreatitis in a cat at laparotomy demonstrating 
generalized hyperemia. It is also possible for acute pancreatitis to appear normal grossly. 
(B) Histopathologic appearance of acute pancreatitis in a young adult female West 
Highland White Terrier. Note prominent edema and inflammation disrupting the acini. 
This case was fatal, but it would have been potentially completely reversible if the dog 
had survived the acute phase (hematoxylin and eosin [H&E], ×100). (C) Gross 
appearance of chronic pancreatitis in a middle-aged Jack Russell Terrier. Note the nodular 
appearance of pancreas and extensive adhesions to the duodenum obscuring the 
mesentery. It is also possible for chronic pancreatitis to appear normal grossly.  
(D) Histologic appearance of chronic pancreatitis from a 10-year-old male Cavalier King 
Charles Spaniel. Note fibrosis, mononuclear inflammatory cells, and ductular hyperplasia 
(H&E, ×200). (E) Histologic appearance of end-stage chronic pancreatitis in an 11-year-
old neutered female Cavalier King Charles Spaniel with diabetes mellitus and exocrine 
pancreatic insufficiency. Note extensive fibrosis (green) and small islands of remaining 
acini (red) (Masson’s trichrome, ×40). (A and C, From Villiers E, Blackwood L, editors: 
BSAVA manual of canine and feline clinical pathology, ed 2, Gloucestershire, Britain, 
2005, British Small Animal Veterinary Association.)
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 655 ===
	
CHAPTER 37    The Exocrine Pancreas	
625
frequent bowel movements) accompanied by some fresh 
blood because of local peritonitis in the area of the transverse 
colon. Inflammatory bowel disease, low-grade infectious 
enteritis, chronic food intolerance, and chronic hepatitis are 
major differential diagnoses for this presentation in dogs and 
cats. Animals that are still eating may show prominent post-
prandial discomfort.
Cats and dogs with acute pancreatitis can present with 
jaundice at initial examination or often developing a few 
days later, when the initial acute signs are resolving. Most, if 
not all, animals with pancreatitis and jaundice have acute-
on-chronic disease (see later, “Chronic Pancreatitis”).
Careful clinical examination should focus on the identi-
fication of the degree of dehydration and shock, careful 
assessment for any concurrent diseases (particularly endo-
crine disease), and careful abdominal palpation. In severe 
cases, petechiae or ecchymoses suggestive of DIC may be 
identified, and there may be respiratory distress associated 
with acute respiratory distress syndrome. Careful clinical 
and clinicopathologic assessment of the degree of shock and 
concurrent organ damage is important for prognosis and 
treatment decisions (see later). Abdominal palpation should 
identify pancreatic pain and rule out, if possible, any pal-
pable foreign bodies or intussusceptions, although abdomi-
nal imaging may be required to rule these out with confidence. 
In severe cases, generalized peritonitis will result in general-
ized unmistakable abdominal pain in dogs, whereas in 
milder cases careful palpation of the cranial abdomen is 
required to identify a focus of abdominal pain (Fig. 37.4); in 
cats, pain may not be apparent. Occasionally, a cranial 
abdominal mass representing a focus of fat necrosis may be 
palpated, particularly in cats.
Diagnosis
The clinician should be aware that there are many other 
diseases that produce similar clinical presentations to acute 
pancreatitis, and some of these might also be associated with 
elevations in pancreatic enzymes. Some form of diagnostic 
imaging is recommended together with blood sampling to 
rule out more serious primary diseases, such as a perforating 
foreign body.
Routine clinical pathology
Routine laboratory analysis (i.e., complete blood count 
[CBC], serum biochemical profile, and urinalysis) typically 
does not help in arriving at a specific diagnosis, but it is very 
important to perform these in all but the mildest cases 
because they provide important prognostic information and 
aid in effective treatment (see later). Typical clinicopatho-
logic abnormalities in dogs and cats with acute pancreatitis 
are shown in Table 34.3.
Specific pancreatic enzyme assays
More specific tests for the pancreas are the catalytic assays 
for amylase and lipase, the new catalytic assay DGGR lipase 
and the immunoassays for trypsin-like immunoreactivity 
(TLI) and pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity (PLI). More 
may also be a trigger, particularly potassium bromide, aza-
thioprine, or asparaginase in dogs. Concurrent endocrine 
diseases such as hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, or 
DM increase the risk of severe fatal pancreatitis in dogs; 
therefore it is important to identify these in the history. In 
cats the history may include features of concurrent cholan-
giohepatitis, inflammatory bowel disease, hepatic lipidosis, 
or any combination of these.
The clinical signs in dogs vary with the severity of the 
disease, from mild abdominal pain and anorexia to acute 
abdomen and potential MOF and DIC. Dogs with severe 
acute disease usually present with acute onset of vomiting, 
anorexia, marked abdominal pain, and varying degrees of 
dehydration, collapse, and shock. The vomiting is initially 
typical of delayed gastric emptying resulting from peritoni-
tis, with emesis of undigested food a long time after feeding, 
progressing to vomiting only bile. The main differential diag-
noses in these cases are other causes of acute abdomen, 
particularly intestinal foreign body or obstruction; the vom-
iting may be so severe that the dog may undergo an unnec-
essary laparotomy for a suspected obstruction if a careful 
workup was not performed first. Some patients may show 
the classic so-called praying stance, with the forelegs on the 
floor and the hind legs standing (Fig. 37.3), but this is not 
pathognomonic for pancreatitis and can be seen in asso-
ciation with any painful condition in the cranial abdomen, 
including hepatic, gastric, or duodenal pain. By contrast, cats 
with severe, fatal, necrotizing pancreatitis usually have sur-
prisingly mild clinical signs, such as anorexia and lethargy; 
vomiting and abdominal pain occur in fewer than half of the 
cases. Unlike dogs, cats often demonstrate remarkably little 
abdominal pain on examination in spite of severe peritonitis.
At the milder end of the spectrum, dogs and cats may 
present with mild gastrointestinal signs, typically anorexia 
and sometimes some mild vomiting, followed by the passage 
of some colitic-like feces (e.g., tenesmus, hematochezia, 
FIG 37.3
Dog exhibiting evidence of cranial abdominal pain by 
assuming the so-called position of relief. (Courtesy Dr. 
William E. Hornbuckle, Cornell University, College of 
Veterinary Medicine, Ithaca, NY.)
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 656 ===
626	
PART IV    Hepatobiliary and Exocrine Pancreatic Disorders
Diagnostic imaging
The most sensitive and easily accessible way to image the 
canine and feline pancreas noninvasively is by ultrasonogra-
phy. Endoscopic ultrasound may be more sensitive but is 
only available in a small number of centers. Abdominal 
radiographs in patients with pancreatitis usually show mild 
or no changes, even in those with severe disease (Fig. 34.8). 
However, in patients with acute disease, abdominal radiog-
raphy plays an important role in ruling out acute intestinal 
obstruction, which would result in obvious changes, primar-
ily dilated, gas-filled, stacking loops of intestine and the pres-
ence of radiopaque foreign bodies. Typical radiographic 
changes in dogs and cats with acute pancreatitis are described 
in Chapter 34.
The most sensitive imaging modalities in humans with 
pancreatitis are magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), com-
puted tomography (CT), and endoscopic ultrasonography 
(EUS). In addition, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopan-
creatography (ERCP) is performed in humans to image the 
ducts and enable tiny pancreatic biopsies to be taken via a 
small endoscope.
CT has so far proved disappointing in dogs and cats as 
detailed in Chapter 34. EUS is not widely available, although 
a recent study in Beagles indicated that the technique could 
visualize most of the pancreas, except the distal third of the 
right limb, and could be used to obtain fine-needle aspiration 
(FNA) samples (Kook et al., 2012). ERCP has been described 
in normal Beagles and in dogs with chronic gastrointestinal 
disease (Spillmann et al., 2004, 2005) but is technically dif-
ficult in dogs weighing less than 10 kg and carries a risk of 
worsening pancreatitis. Because all these techniques require 
general anesthesia, they may never become widely used in 
small animal patients with severe acute pancreatitis. Trans-
cutaneous ultrasonography has a high specificity for pancre-
atic disease—if a lesion is found, it usually is real—but a 
variable sensitivity, depending on the skill of the operator 
and severity of the disease. Ultrasonography has a higher 
details on these tests including the sensitivity and specificity 
in dogs and cats are found in Chapter 34 and Table 34.2. 
Overall, PLI has the highest sensitivity and likely the highest 
specificity in both species. DGGR lipase is also of diagnostic 
utility in both dogs and cats. Classical lipase has some useful-
ness in dogs but none in cats.
Prognostic indicators
Blood tests can give some prognostic indication in both 
species. TAP, the peptide removed from trypsin in the small 
intestine to activate it, is well conserved among species, so 
human enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) can 
be used for dogs and cats. Elevations in plasma or urine TAP 
levels are no more sensitive or specific than currently avail-
able blood tests for the diagnosis of pancreatitis in dogs and 
cats, but do have some prognostic value. Of the individual 
diagnostic tests, the following were found to be negative 
prognostic indicators in dogs: high urinary TAP-to-creati-
nine ratio, marked increases in serum lipase activity, marked 
increases in serum creatinine and phosphate concentrations, 
and low urine specific gravity. A recent study identified 
hypothermia and metabolic acidosis as negative prognostic 
indicators in dogs with pancreatitis (Pápa et al., 2011), and 
another recent study also identified very marked elevations 
in canine PLI, thrombocytopenia, high urea or creatinine, 
and increased C-reactive protein concentrations on days 3 
and 4 but not days 1 and 2 after admission as negative prog-
nostic indicators in dogs with suspected but not confirmed 
acute pancreatitis (Sato et al., 2017). A clinical severity index 
with prognostic utility in dogs has been published, which 
takes into account renal and hepatic function, presence or 
absence of DM, blood pressure, and other local and systemic 
complications (Mansfield et al., 2008). In cats, the negative 
prognostic indicators found were low ionized calcium levels 
and leukopenia. Urinary or plasma TAP levels do not appear 
to be prognostically useful in cats, and neither does the 
degree of elevation of TLI in cats or dogs.
A
B
FIG 37.4
Carefully palpating a Cocker 
Spaniel for cranial abdominal 
pain. (A) The clinician should 
palpate craniodorsally under the 
rib cage for evidence of focal 
pancreatic pain, as shown in this 
dog by turning of the head. (B) 
With deep-chested dogs it helps 
to ask an assistant to elevate the 
head of the dog to displace the 
pancreas caudally (effectively 
achieving the opposite of the 
dog in Fig. 37.3). 
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 657 ===
	
CHAPTER 37    The Exocrine Pancreas	
627
A
B
FIG 37.5
(A) Typical ultrasonographic appearance of acute pancreatitis in a Miniature Schnauzer 
with a diffusely hypoechoic pancreas (gray arrows) with surrounding hyperechoic 
mesentery. (B) Typical ultrasonographic appearance of chronic pancreatitis in an English 
Cocker Spaniel. There is a mass-like effect displacing the duodenum. Many dogs and cats 
with chronic pancreatitis have an unremarkable abdominal ultrasound. (Courtesy 
Diagnostic Imaging Department, Queen’s Veterinary School Hospital, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, England.)
However, in most cases, a biopsy will not be performed, 
and diagnosis is based on a combination of clinical suspi-
cion, specific enzyme tests, and diagnostic imaging. No one 
noninvasive test is 100% sensitive and specific for pancreati-
tis in dogs and cats; in a few cases of even severe disease, all 
the tests may be negative.
Treatment and Prognosis
The treatment and prognosis of dogs and cats with acute 
pancreatitis depends on the severity of the condition at pre-
sentation. Severe acute pancreatitis is a very serious disease, 
has a very high mortality, and requires intensive manage-
ment, whereas more moderate disease can be managed with 
intravenous (IV) fluids and analgesia, and patients with mild 
disease can sometimes be managed on an outpatient basis.
Cats with severe disease are more difficult to assess because 
of their mild clinical signs. It therefore seems prudent to 
assume that all cats have severe disease unless proved other-
wise and treat them intensively, with the intent of preventing 
hepatic lipidosis and other fatal complications.
The inciting cause of the pancreatitis should be treated or 
removed in the few cases for which it is known (e.g., hyper-
calcemia or drug-induced), and every effort should be made 
during treatment to avoid further potential triggers, as out-
lined in Table 37.3. Most cases of pancreatitis are, however, 
idiopathic, and treatment is largely symptomatic. The one 
exception is chronic pancreatitis in English Cocker Spaniels, 
which may be an immune-mediated disease in which ster-
oids and other immunosuppressive drugs may be indicated 
as a specific treatment (see later, “Chronic Pancreatitis,” for 
more details). Occasionally, Cocker Spaniels with chronic 
pancreatitis present with acute clinical signs, and judicious 
corticosteroid therapy might be considered for them. 
However, there is no evidence that corticosteroid therapy is 
beneficial for other breeds of dogs, including Terriers; the 
sensitivity for typical acute pancreatitis in dogs and cats 
because associated edema and peripancreatic fat necrosis 
result in visible interfaces. The sensitivity is much lower for 
chronic and low-grade acute pancreatitis in cats and dogs 
(Fig. 37.5).
Fluid analysis
Some dogs and cats with pancreatitis have abdominal effu-
sion. Fluid analysis usually reveals serosanguineous sterile 
exudates, although modified transudates and chylous effu-
sions have also been reported in cats. Amylase and lipase 
concentrations in the fluid may be higher than in the serum, 
and high lipase concentrations in the effusion can be diag-
nostically helpful (Guija de Arespacochaga et al., 2006). 
Pleural effusions also occur in a small number of dogs with 
acute pancreatitis as a result of generalized vasculitis. More 
details are found in Chapter 34.
Histopathology
Definitive diagnosis of acute pancreatitis can be achieved 
only via histopathology of a pancreatic biopsy, but this is 
invasive and not indicated in most cases. However, if the 
animal has a laparotomy during the investigation, the clini-
cian should always remember to inspect the pancreas visu-
ally and, preferably, to obtain a small biopsy. The pancreas 
usually appears grossly inflamed and may have a mass-like 
appearance. The latter is usually caused by fat necrosis and/
or fibrosis and not neoplasia; therefore no animal should be 
euthanized on the basis of a tumor-like appearance in the 
pancreas without supportive cytology or pathology because 
large masses in the pancreas are very rarely tumors. Pancre-
atic neoplasia is usually so malignant that it will have metas-
tasized widely and caused the animal’s death before the mass 
becomes large. Indications and techniques for pancreatic 
biopsy are reviewed in Chapter 34.
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 658 ===
628	
PART IV    Hepatobiliary and Exocrine Pancreatic Disorders
because it contributes to necrosis. Replacement fluids (e.g., 
lactated Ringer’s or Plasmalyte) are usually used at rates and 
volumes that depend on the degree of dehydration and 
shock—twice the maintenance rates (100-120 mL/kg/day) 
are adequate for mild to moderately affected animals (grades 
0 and 1), but more severely affected animals may need initial 
shock rates (90 mL/kg/h for 30-60 minutes) followed by syn-
thetic colloids. It is important to measure urine output con-
currently. Rapid crystalloid infusion in severely affected 
animals that have a pathologic increase in vascular perme-
ability carries an increased risk of pulmonary edema, so 
patients should be closely monitored; central venous pres-
sure ideally should be measured in the most severely affected 
dogs and the fluid rate adjusted accordingly to maintain 
normal central venous pressure.
Serum electrolyte concentrations should be carefully 
monitored. Potential electrolyte abnormalities are outlined 
in Table 34.3, but the most clinically relevant is hypokalemia 
caused by vomiting and reduced food intake. Hypokalemia 
can significantly impair recovery and contribute to mortality 
because it causes not only skeletal muscle weakness but also 
gastrointestinal atony, which will contribute to the clinical 
signs of the disease and delay successful feeding. Aggressive 
fluid therapy further increases renal potassium loss, particu-
larly in cats, so it is important to measure serum potassium 
concentrations frequently (at least daily while the patient 
is vomiting) and add supplemental potassium chloride to 
the fluids as necessary. A scaled approach is best, based on 
the degree of hypokalemia. Lactated Ringer’s or Plasmalyte 
contains only 4 mEq/L potassium, and most cases require 
supplementing at least to replacement rates (20 mEq/L). 
Even if the serum potassium concentration cannot be mea-
sured, a vomiting anorexic dog with no evidence of renal 
failure should receive replacement rates of potassium in 
the fluids. More severely hypokalemic dogs should be sup-
plemented more as long as serum concentrations can be 
measured regularly and infusion rates carefully controlled. 
A dog or cat with a serum potassium concentration of 
2.0 mEq/L or less should receive between 40 and 60 mEq/L 
in the fluids at a controlled infusion rate. As a general rule, 
the infusion rate of potassium should still not be increased 
above 0.5 mEq/kg/h.
A plasma transfusion is likely indicated in dogs and cats 
with severe pancreatitis to replace α1-antitrypsin and α2-
macroglobulin. It also supplies clotting factors and may be 
combined with heparin therapy in animals at high risk of 
DIC, although the efficacy of heparin therapy in DIC in 
humans and animals has been questioned, and there are cur-
rently no controlled trials that either support or refute its use 
for pancreatitis in dogs and cats (see Chapter 87).
Analgesia
Pancreatitis is usually a very painful condition. Hospital-
ized patients should be monitored carefully for pain, and 
analgesia should be administered as necessary. In practice, 
analgesia is indicated for almost all patients with pancreati-
tis and should be given routinely to cats with pancreatitis 
use of such drugs in them might actually worsen the prog-
nosis by increasing the risk of gastric ulceration and reduc-
ing the activity of the reticuloendothelial system in the 
removal of circulating α2-macroglobulin–protease com-
plexes. In some cases, a dog or cat might need corticosteroid 
therapy for a concurrent condition, such as immune-
mediated hemolytic anemia or inflammatory bowel disease, 
in which case the benefits of corticosteroids may outweigh 
their potential deleterious effects.
Severe, necrotizing pancreatitis carries a poor to very 
poor prognosis in cats and dogs. These patients have severe 
fluid and electrolyte abnormalities associated with systemic 
inflammatory disease, renal compromise, and a high risk of 
DIC. Intensive management is required, including plasma 
transfusions in many cases and enteral tube feeding or total 
parenteral nutrition (TPN) in some (see next section). These 
patients will likely benefit from referral to a specialist. If 
referral is not an option, intensive therapy can be attempted 
in the practice, but the owner must be warned of the very 
poor prognosis and expense of treatment. Severe acute pan-
creatitis also carries a poor prognosis in humans, but the 
mortality has been reduced in the last 5 years by a combina-
tion of early and aggressive IV fluid therapy and early 
feeding.
At the other end of the spectrum, patients with very mild 
pancreatitis may simply need hospitalization for 12 to 24 
hours of IV fluid therapy if they are vomiting and dehy-
drated; if they are alert and well hydrated, they may be 
managed at home with 24 to 48 hours of pancreatic rest 
(fluids only by mouth) and analgesia, followed by long-term 
feeding of an appropriate diet.
It is important to give consideration to the following 
aspects of treatment in all patients: IV fluid and electrolyte 
replacement; analgesia; nutrition; and other supportive 
therapy, as indicated, such as antiemetics and antibiotics (see 
Box 37.1).
Intravenous fluids and electrolytes
IV fluid therapy is very important in all but the mildest cases 
of pancreatitis to reverse dehydration, address electrolyte 
imbalances associated with vomiting and fluid pooling in the 
hypomotile gastrointestinal tract, maintain adequate pancre-
atic circulation, and maintain effective peripheral circulation 
in the presence of the associated SIR. It is vital to prevent 
pancreatic ischemia associated with reduced perfusion 
 BOX 37.1
Pillars of Treatment in Severe Acute Pancreatitis (see text 
for more details)
•	 Early, aggressive intravenous fluid therapy (monitor 
urine output and electrolytes)
•	 Analgesia (early and effective—assume pain unless 
proven otherwise)
•	 Early enteral feeding (as soon as rehydrated)
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 659 ===
	
CHAPTER 37    The Exocrine Pancreas	
629
 TABLE 37.4
Analgesics Used for Acute Pancreatitis
ANALGESIC
INDICATIONS AND 
CAUTIONS
DOSAGE AND ROUTE
COMMENTS
DOGS
CATS
Buprenorphine
Most generally useful 
analgesic in hospitalized 
patient
May be dosed transmucosally 
at home in both dogs and 
cats but dog dose much 
higher
IV, SC, IM, 0.01-
0.02 mg/kg
Oral transmucosal 
dose 0.12 mg/kg
IV, SC, IM same 
as for dogs
Oral transmucosal 
dose 0.01-
0.03 mg/kg*
Concerns about effects 
on sphincter of Oddi 
largely unfounded
Butorphanol
Author has limited experience 
with its use; other opiates 
preferred in acute 
pancreatitis because of 
butorphanol’s limited 
analgesic effect and 
potentially negative 
cardiovascular effects (see 
notes); however, additional 
antiemetic effect may be 
beneficial
0.05-0.6 mg/kg IM, 
SC, IV, q6-8h; 
0.1-0.2 mg/kg/h 
as CRI
Oral—0.5-1 mg/kg 
q6-12h
Same as for dogs
At analgesic doses in 
humans, increases 
pulmonary artery 
pressure and cardiac 
work, unlike other 
analgesics in the table, 
so other opiates 
preferred
Meperidine 
(Demerol)
Meperidine by injection only, 
hence hospitalized animals
Not for IV administration 
(causes histamine release 
and results in profound 
hypotension)
5 mg/kg SC, IM, 
q2h
3-5 mg/kg SC, 
IM, q2h
Painful on injection
Derived from atropine; 
therefore, in contrast to 
other opioids, is 
spasmolytic agent on 
smooth muscle; might 
be useful for the gut
Morphine
Vomiting common
Useful for severe acute pain, 
can be given by slow IV 
injection to effect
0.1-0.5 mg/kg SC, 
IM, IV, 0.1 mg/
kg/h by constant 
rate infusion
0.1-0.2 mg/kg 
SC, IM, IV
Stimulation of sphincter of 
Oddi reported in 
humans but of dubious 
relevance for dogs and 
cats
Methadone
Little nausea or vomiting, so 
more useful than morphine
0.2-0.4 mg/kg SC, 
IM, q4-6h or as 
required
0.2 mg/kg SC, 
IM, q4-6h or as 
required
Can produce dysphoria
May get increased 
duration of action with 
repeated doses
Hydromorphone
0.05 mg/kg IV q4h; 
0.1-0.4 mg/kg IM
0.1 mg/kg IM 
q7h
Can produce dysphoria
Fentanyl patch
Very useful, but take great 
care if sending home with 
patch
2-4 µg/kg/h patch
25 µg/h patch 
with half 
exposed
24-hour onset and 
72-hour duration in 
dogs; 7-hour onset and 
72-hour duration in 
cats
because their pain is difficult to assess. Morphine agonists 
or partial agonists are often used, particularly buprenorphine 
or butorphanol. Butorphanol also has antiemetic properties. 
These partial opiate agonists are effective for mild to moder-
ate pain, but full opioid agonists are preferred in more severe 
pain. Morphine, methadone, meperidine, and fentanyl (IV or 
patches) can be used (Table 37.4). Concerns that the effects 
of opiates on the sphincter of Oddi might exacerbate disease 
have often been cited with regard to dogs and humans, 
but more recent studies have suggested minimal clinically 
relevant effects, except when high and repeated doses of 
morphine are used. These drugs are regularly used now in 
humans with pancreatitis, with no obvious problems. Fen-
tanyl patches take time to achieve effect (on average, 24 hours 
in dogs and 7 hours in cats), so concurrent use of an opiate 
for the first few hours after application is recommended. 
Continued
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 660 ===
630	
PART IV    Hepatobiliary and Exocrine Pancreatic Disorders
Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors have a lower risk ratio 
than the conventional NSAIDs in this respect, as does acet-
aminophen if used carefully (see Table 37.4). Alternative 
analgesics that could be considered in severe cases include 
a low-dose IV ketamine infusion, which has the advantage 
of minimal effect on gastrointestinal motility (Fass et al., 
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) should be 
avoided, if possible, because of the increased risk of gas-
troduodenal ulceration in patients with pancreatitis and 
the potential of some NSAIDs to precipitate renal failure in 
animals with hypotension and/or shock. In humans, acute 
pancreatitis has been associated with the use of NSAIDs. 
ANALGESIC
INDICATIONS AND 
CAUTIONS
DOSAGE AND ROUTE
COMMENTS
DOGS
CATS
Tramadol
Author has no personal 
experience with this drug 
in acute pancreatitis but 
may be useful drug for 
home use orally for mild to 
moderate pain
Oral—2-5 mg/kg 
q8-12h
Oral—2-4 mg/kg 
q8-12h
Tramadol also decreases 
cardiac contractility; 
should not be used in 
acute phase when 
myocardial depressant 
factor may be released
Published studies on 
pharmacokinetics in 
small animals suggest 
that should be more 
effective in cats than 
dogs due to rapid 
metabolism in dogs to 
inactive metabolites.
Dysphoria more likely in 
cats
Ketamine infusion
Severe refractory pain in 
hospitalized patient
2 µg/kg/min
Same as for dogs
Useful as adjunct, 
probably not suitable 
as sole analgesic; can 
produce dysphoria at 
higher infusion rates
Lidocaine infusion
Excellent analgesic for 
hospitalized patients
Bolus of 1 mg/kg IV 
followed by 
20-µg/kg/min 
infusion
0.1 mg/kg/h
Use with caution in cats 
because of lidocaine 
toxicity
Acetaminophen 
(Paracetamol)
Most widely used NSAID for 
human pancreatitis; often 
neglected in dogs, but 
useful because it does not 
have same deleterious 
effects on GI tract and 
kidneys as other 
nonsteroidals
10 mg/kg PO, IV, 
q12h
Do not use—
toxic in cats
Should not be used if 
significant concurrent 
liver disease
Carprofen and 
other 
nonsteroidal 
antiinflammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs)
Mainly for home use; used 
with great care because of 
potential gut and renal side 
effects in pancreatitis; not 
for use in acute disease or 
in presence of concurrent 
hyperadrenocorticism or 
steroid treatment
Carprofen—4 mg/
kg SC, IV, PO, 
q24h; maintain on 
2 mg/kg q12h
Carprofen— 
2 mg/kg SC, 
IV, PO; maintain 
on 2 mg/kg
Underestimated efficacy
COX 1 : 2 inhibition ratio 
of 65
COX, Cyclooxygenase; CRI, constant rate infusion; GI, gastrointestinal.
With thanks to Dr. Jackie Brearley, Senior Lecturer in Veterinary Anaesthesia, the Queen’s Veterinary School Hospital, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, England.
*Robertson SA et al: Systemic uptake of buprenorphine by cats after oral mucosal administration, Vet Rec 152:675, 2003.
 TABLE 37.4
Analgesics Used for Acute Pancreatitis—cont’d
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 661 ===
	
CHAPTER 37    The Exocrine Pancreas	
631
Nutrition
It is very important to consider appropriate nutritional man-
agement of the patient with pancreatitis. Complete pancre-
atic rest by starvation, avoiding anything by mouth (including 
water or barium), has traditionally been advised for patients 
with acute pancreatitis. Initially, it was believed that early 
enteral nutrition was contraindicated because it was likely to 
result in cholecystokinin and secretin release, with the con-
sequent release of pancreatic enzymes and worsening of pan-
creatitis and associated pain. TPN seemed a more logical 
route early in the disease process, with jejunal tube feeding 
later in the disease aiming to bypass the areas of pancreatic 
enzyme stimulation. However, recent studies in humans and 
also experimental models in dogs have strongly supported 
early enteral nutrition over TPN; early enteral nutrition in 
humans with severe acute pancreatitis has been found to 
reduce the length of hospital stay and decrease mortality.
Current recommendations for feeding veterinary patients 
with acute pancreatitis are outlined in Box 37.2. It is no 
longer appropriate or acceptable to starve the patient for a 
1995), or IV lidocaine. Details of analgesia are given in 
Table 37.4.
Providing analgesia that can be dispensed for the client 
to take home for patients with milder or resolving disease 
can be a challenge. The pain should not be underestimated 
in these patients. However, it is difficult to find effective and 
safe analgesia that can be dispensed for use at home. Admin-
istration of opioids during visits to the clinic is prudent, and 
one of the less ulcerogenic NSAIDs or acetaminophen could 
be used cautiously at home. Cats can be effectively dosed 
with buprenorphine transmucosally (Robertson et al., 2003), 
allowing simple home medication, but the oral route requires 
much larger doses in dogs (Abbo et al., 2008) (see Table 
37.4). Anecdotally, tramadol has been found to be helpful for 
some dogs and cats, but its efficacy is variable. Feeding a 
low-fat diet helps reduce postprandial pain in humans and 
anecdotally helps some dogs. However, administering pan-
creatic enzymes in the food does not seem to reduce pain in 
dogs, and there is little evidence to support their use for pain 
relief in dogs or cats.
 BOX 37.2
Best Practice for Feeding Patients With Acute Pancreatitis
Recent studies and meta-analyses of studies of nutrition in 
human acute pancreatitis have led to changes in advice for 
best-practice feeding in these cases (Al-Omran et al., 2010; 
Quan et al., 2011). Note that early enteral nutrition is par-
ticularly indicated for severe disease, which is perhaps unex-
pected and counter to recent practice in dogs.
When to Feed?
•	 Early enteral nutrition reduces mortality and 
hospitalization time in humans with severe acute 
pancreatitis and is supported by experimental studies in 
dogs and studies in canine parvovirus enteritis (Mohr 
et al., 2003). Start enteral nutrition within 24 to 48 
hours, once the animal is rehydrated.
•	 In mild acute pancreatitis in humans, current best 
practice is to withhold food in many patients for a little 
longer, and this is also recommended in dogs to reduce 
pain and vomiting. Fluids, electrolytes, and analgesics 
are delivered for 2 to 5 days while the patient is 
fasted, and then a diet rich in carbohydrate and 
moderate in fat and protein is initiated with discharge 
on a normal diet within 4 to 7 days.
•	 In cats, current anecdotal recommendations are to feed 
immediately in mild, moderate, and severe pancreatitis 
because of the high risk of hepatic lipidosis.
How to Feed?
•	 Multiple studies show better outcomes with enteral 
compared with parenteral nutrition in humans and 
experimental dogs due to maintenance of gut wall 
barrier and reduced bacterial translocation, so enteral 
is preferred.
•	 Severe, acute cases will likely need tube feeding. 
Nasoesophageal tubes are best in the acute stages to 
avoid the risk of general anesthetic in a dog or cat with 
multiorgan failure. Longer term, most animals will eat 
voluntarily, but if necessary, an esophageal or 
gastrostomy feeding tube can be placed (see Chapter 
35 for more details). Recent studies support prepyloric 
feeding as safe in humans and dogs—jejunostomy  
tube placement is not necessary (Mansfield et al., 
2011).
What to Feed?
•	 Studies show that high dietary fat increases post-
prandial pain but does not worsen the pancreatitis. 
Dogs and cats with severe, acute pancreatitis can be 
fed any appropriate diet provided they are receiving 
sufficient analgesia. Tube feeding may require a 
high-fat convalescence-type diet down a tube, such as 
Hills a/d diet or Royal Canin convalescence support. 
The new Royal Canin GI low-fat liquid diet would be 
particularly appropriate.
•	 Low-fat diets are indicated in milder pancreatitis in 
dogs and for recovery at home, to reduce postprandial 
pain.
•	 There is no convincing evidence for addition of 
immune-modulating ingredients such as glutamine or 
omega-3 fatty acids. Probiotics are best avoided in 
acute disease (one study in humans showed an 
increase in mortality when probiotics were used in 
severe acute pancreatitis [Besselink et al. 2008]).
•	 Addition of pancreatic enzymes during the acute phase 
is wise, as they will not be secreted down the duct.
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 662 ===
632	
PART IV    Hepatobiliary and Exocrine Pancreatic Disorders
feeding, if necessary, in a more stable patient. High-fat 
critical-care diets are potentially associated with increased 
pain but are tolerated in hospitalized animals with adequate 
analgesia. Once the animal is eating voluntarily, it can be 
transitioned on to a lower-fat diet for recovery. A good 
initial choice is baby rice mixed with water, followed by a 
low-fat proprietary veterinary diet (e.g., Eukanuba Intestinal 
Formula, Mars Petcare; Hill’s i/d Low Fat, Hill’s Pet Nutri-
tion, Topeka, KN; Royal Canin Digestive Low Fat, Royal 
Canin USA, St. Charles, MO; Purina EN Gastroenteric 
Canine Formula, Nestlé SA, Vevey, Switzerland) (Fig. 37.6). 
It may not even be necessary to use a low-fat diet. There is no 
evidence that standard diets increase the severity of disease 
in patients with acute pancreatitis, so a liquid critical care 
diet should also be tolerated if given in small amounts and 
often. However, there is evidence in humans that higher-fat 
diets increase pain and prolong hospitalization times for this 
reason, which also appears to be anecdotally true in dogs. 
Addition of pancreatic enzymes to the diet is wise in the 
very acute phases of the disease when the pancreas is not 
secreting enzymes down the duct. Concurrent antiemetics 
are also essential to allow effective feeding in many cases 
(see next section). In patients for which enteral nutrition 
is not possible or when only a small percentage of the daily 
caloric requirements can be given enterally, some form of 
supplemental parenteral nutrition should be considered. 
This is administered most practically as peripheral paren-
teral nutrition (Chandler et al., 2000). However, it is very 
clear that recovery is improved if at least some of the daily 
calorie intake can be given enterally.
Antiemetics
Antiemetics are often necessary to manage acute vomiting 
in dogs and cats with pancreatitis. The neurokinin (NK1) 
receptor antagonist maropitant has central and peripheral 
antiemetic effects, and seems to be the most effective anti-
emetic in dogs and cats with pancreatitis. Maropitant is 
long period while awaiting the resolution of disease. Increas-
ing evidence is accumulating in human medicine about the 
importance of early enteral nutrition in patients with pan-
creatitis; the more severe the pancreatitis, the earlier nutri-
tion support should be instituted. Furthermore, recent 
studies suggest that prepyloric (e.g., nasoesophageal or gas-
trostomy tube) feeding may be as safe as jejunal feeding. 
There is little evidence that immunomodulating nutrients are 
of benefit, and data on probiotics in pancreatitis are conflict-
ing, with one study showing increased mortality in humans 
(Besselink et al., 2008), so these are best avoided. There have 
been no studies evaluating the efficacy of early or late enteral 
or parenteral nutrition in naturally occurring pancreatitis in 
dogs or cats. Therefore the advice currently given is based on 
anecdotal evidence, extrapolation from humans, and experi-
mental studies in dogs. However, a recent pilot study com-
paring early enteral nutrition via esophagostomy tube with 
parenteral nutrition in 10 dogs with severe acute pancreatitis 
found that prepyloric tube feeding of a low-fat canine diet, 
with added pancreatic enzymes and medium-chain triglyc-
erides, was well tolerated by dogs with acute pancreatitis. The 
dogs receiving enteral nutrition did not show obvious post-
prandial pain, and a significantly greater number of dogs in 
the parenteral group showed vomiting and regurgitation 
compared with those in the enteral group (Mansfield et al., 
2011).
Starvation is also contraindicated in cats with acute pan-
creatitis because of the high risk of concurrent hepatic lipi-
dosis. Current advice is therefore to institute some form of 
enteral feeding, whenever possible, within 48 hours in dogs 
and cats. The more severe the disease, the more important 
it is to feed early. In severe cases this is best achieved with 
nasoesophageal tube feeding by slow continuous infusion of 
a critical care diet, although frequent small-volume feeds are 
also well tolerated by many patients. Anesthesia to place an 
esophagostomy or gastrostomy tube is best avoided in the 
acute stages of pancreatitis but is indicated for longer-term 
A
B
FIG 37.6
Baby rice is a good first choice for feeding dogs with moderate acute pancreatitis 
because it contains no fat and protein. It comes as a finely ground rice powder (A) that 
can then be mixed with water and, if desired, a gravy substitute such as Bovril (B) to 
enhance the flavor for feeding. Dogs with severe acute pancreatitis should be tube fed a 
critical-care diet (see text and Box 37.2). 
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 663 ===
	
CHAPTER 37    The Exocrine Pancreas	
633
Treatment of biliary tract obstruction 
associated with pancreatitis
Most cases of extrahepatic biliary obstruction secondary to 
acute-on-chronic pancreatitis resolve with conservative 
management; surgical or needle decompression of the gall-
bladder and stenting of the bile duct are usually unnecessary 
in dogs and cats. In humans it has now been demonstrated 
that there is no advantage to surgical intervention in most 
patients and no difference in the severity and chronicity of 
secondary liver disease between those treated medically and 
those treated surgically, provided that there is no neoplasia 
and the jaundice resolves within a month (Abdallah et al., 
2007). No such study has been undertaken in small animals, 
so treatment advice is empiric; if the feces remain colored 
(not white or acholic, which implies complete biliary obstruc-
tion) and the jaundice gradually resolves over a week to 10 
days, then surgical intervention is not indicated and conser-
vative management with antioxidants and ursodeoxycholic 
acid is advised (see Chapters 35 and 36).
CHRONIC PANCREATITIS
Etiology and Pathogenesis
Chronic pancreatitis is defined as “a continuing inflam-
matory disease characterized by the destruction of pan-
creatic parenchyma leading to progressive or permanent 
impairment of exocrine or endocrine function, or both” 
(Etemad et al., 2001). The gold standard for diagnosis is 
histology (see Fig. 37.2), but this is rarely indicated or per-
formed in dogs or cats. Noninvasive diagnosis is difficult 
with the currently available diagnostic imaging, and clini-
copathologic testing has a lower sensitivity than for acute 
disease.
Chronic pancreatitis has been considered a rare and not 
particularly important disease in dogs, whereas it is recog-
nized as the most common form of pancreatitis in cats. 
However, the early literature published on canine pancreatic 
disease in the 1960s and 1970s recognized it as a common 
disease of clinical significance. It was noted that a high pro-
portion of cases of EPI in dogs were caused by chronic pan-
creatitis, and it might be responsible for 30% of cases of DM 
or more. More recent pathologic and clinical studies in both 
dogs (Bostrom et al., 2013; Newman et al., 2004; Watson 
et al., 2007, 2011) and cats (De Cock et al., 2007) have recon-
firmed it as a common and clinically relevant disease in dogs 
and cats. It is likely to cause intermittent and/or ongoing 
recurrent gastrointestinal signs and epigastric pain in many 
dogs and cats, but it is frequently underrecognized because 
of the difficulty of obtaining a noninvasive diagnosis. In dogs 
the postmortem prevalence of chronic pancreatitis is up to 
34%, particularly in susceptible breeds, and even in studies 
of fatal acute pancreatitis, acute-on-chronic disease accounts 
for 40% of cases. In cats an even higher postmortem preva-
lence of chronic pancreatitis of 60% has been reported. It 
must be noted that postmortem studies tend to overestimate 
the prevalence of chronic diseases, which leave permanent 
available as Cerenia (Zoetis, Madison, NJ) in an injectable 
solution (10 mg/mL) or as tablets (16, 24, 60, and 160 mg). 
The dose of injection is 1 mg/kg (1 mL/10 kg body weight 
q24h for up to 5 days). The dose of the tablets is 2 mg/kg 
q24h for up to 5 days. Maropitant also has potential analgesic 
properties because substance P, which acts on the NK1 
receptor, is involved in pancreatic pain, but no clinical 
studies have demonstrated its efficacy. It would be indicated 
as part of multimodal analgesia in animals with acute pan-
creatitis and would not be sufficient alone.
Metoclopramide has been used successfully in dogs with 
pancreatitis (0.5–1 mg/kg, administered intramuscularly, 
subcutaneously, or orally [PO] q8h, or 1–2 mg/kg, adminis-
tered intravenously over 24 hours as a slow infusion), but its 
effect on stimulating gastric motility may increase pain and 
pancreatic enzyme release in some animals. It is also of 
limited efficacy in cats. Butorphanol, used as an analgesic in 
animals with pancreatitis causing mild to moderate pain, 
also has antiemetic properties. A phenothiazine antiemetic 
such as chlorpromazine may be more effective for some 
patients, but phenothiazines have sedative and hypotensive 
effects, which may be particularly marked if they are used 
together with opioid analgesia, so care should be taken in 
these cases. 5-HT3 receptor antagonists such as ondansetron 
are useful for other types of vomiting in dogs (e.g., 
chemotherapy-induced emesis) but are best avoided in pan-
creatitis because they have occasionally been reported to 
trigger pancreatitis in humans.
Gastroprotectants
Patients with acute pancreatitis have an increased risk of gas-
troduodenal ulceration, probably caused by local peritonitis. 
They should be monitored carefully for evidence of melena 
or hematemesis and treated as necessary with sucralfate and 
acid secretory inhibitors (e.g., H2 blockers such as cimeti-
dine, famotidine, ranitidine, or nizatidine, or the proton 
pump inhibitor omeprazole). Cimetidine should be avoided 
in animals with concurrent liver disease because of its effect 
on the cytochrome P-450 system. Ranitidine can be used 
instead in these animals, but its additional gastric prokinetic 
effect can cause vomiting in some individuals; it should be 
discontinued if this occurs. Famotidine is preferable because 
it does not have these prokinetic effects.
Antibiotics
Infectious complications are reportedly rare in dogs and cats 
with pancreatitis, but when they occur, they can be serious; 
the efficacy of antibiotic therapy in preventing such compli-
cations remains contentious in humans. Nonetheless, most 
veterinary experts advise the use of broad-spectrum antibi-
otics prophylactically in dogs and cats with severe acute pan-
creatitis. IV potentiated amoxicillin is most often used. 
Fluoroquinolones penetrate the pancreas well, but respon-
sible antibiotic use indicates that these should not be used as 
first-line antibiotic treatment unless there is a specific indica-
tion. Animals at the milder end of the disease spectrum do 
not require antibiotic therapy.
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 664 ===
634	
PART IV    Hepatobiliary and Exocrine Pancreatic Disorders
Autoimmune chronic pancreatitis
The particular form of chronic pancreatitis recognized 
in English Cocker Spaniels in Britain is thought to be an 
immune-mediated disorder (Watson et al., 2011; see Fig. 
37.7). As in human autoimmune pancreatitis, it typically 
affects middle-aged to older dogs, with a higher prevalence 
in males, and at least 50% of affected dogs subsequently 
develop DM, EPI, or both. Dogs also often have another 
concurrent autoimmune disease, particularly keratocon-
junctivitis sicca and glomerulonephritis. There may also be 
an association with anal sacculitis and increased risk of anal 
sac carcinoma. There is often a mass-like lesion on ultraso-
nography (see Fig. 37.5, B). Biopsies show a typical peril-
obular, diffuse, fibrotic, and lymphocytic disease centered 
on perilobular ducts and vessels, with loss of large ducts. 
Immunohistochemistry shows a preponderance of duct- and 
vein-centered CD3+ lymphocytes (i.e., T cells). The disease in 
humans is believed to be a duct-centered immune reaction. 
Recent work has identified a strong association with plasma 
cells that secrete one subgroup of immunoglobulin G, IgG4. 
The disease in humans has been redefined as multisystemic 
because of the frequent involvement of other organs. It is 
now defined as IgG4-related disease (Bledsoe et al., 2018), 
and concurrent keratoconjunctivitis sicca, sialoadenitis, 
biliary tract disease, and glomerulonephritis are common. 
Early work in English Cocker Spaniels also shows IgG4-
positive plasma cells in the pancreas and kidney (Watson 
et al., 2012). The disease in humans responds well to steroid 
therapy, including a reduction in insulin requirements in 
some diabetics. This is clearly differentiated from the pro-
posed autoimmunity in young German Shepherd Dogs with 
pancreatic acinar atrophy (PAA), which is acinar-centered 
and does not result in DM (see later). There are not yet any 
controlled trials evaluating the use of immunosuppressive 
drugs in English Cocker Spaniels with chronic pancreatitis, 
but there is now enough circumstantial evidence to justify 
their use in this particular breed, and the author has had 
anecdotal success with both prednisolone and cyclosporine 
therapy in affected dogs. The decision to start immunosup-
pressive therapy is based on clinical severity including the 
presence of recurrent bouts of pancreatitis and/or renal 
involvement with marked proteinuria nonresponsive to 
conventional therapies. As in humans, less severely affected 
cases can be treated symptomatically and with “watchful 
waiting” (Bledsoe et al., 2018). However, the clinician should 
note that many cases of chronic pancreatitis in dogs are 
not autoimmune; most terriers in Britain, for example, have 
a different histopathologic and clinical picture of disease 
that does not appear to be autoimmune. Confirmation of 
autoimmune disease requires histologic confirmation, which 
is rarely available. In the absence of pancreatic histopathol-
ogy, presence of autoimmune disease in other organs (for 
example, keratoconjunctivitis sicca and glomerulonephritis) 
is highly suggestive and justifies the use of immunosup-
pressives. The use of immunosuppressives in dogs that are 
not Cocker Spaniels with isolated chronic pancreatitis is not 
recommended.
architectural changes in the organ, whereas the prevalence 
of acute, totally reversible diseases will be underestimated 
unless the animal dies during the episode. Nevertheless, it is 
clear that there are many more cases of chronic pancreatitis 
in veterinary practice than currently recognized, and a 
number of these are clinically relevant.
Idiopathic chronic pancreatitis
As in acute pancreatitis, the cause of chronic pancreatitis in 
dogs is usually unknown. Any age or breed of dog can be 
affected, but in Britain the most typical is a middle-aged to 
old dog, particularly a Cavalier King Charles Spaniel, Cocker 
Spaniel, Collie, or Boxer (Watson et al., 2007, 2010; Fig. 
37.7). One recent study in the United States suggested that 
breeds defined by the American Kennel Club as toy and non-
sporting breeds have a higher prevalence of chronic pancre-
atitis (Bostrom et al., 2013). An independent large study of 
EPI in Britain found an increased prevalence in older Cava-
lier King Charles Spaniels, supporting a breed association. 
Other parts of the world have also reported a high prevalence 
in Arctic-type breeds such as Siberian Huskies. There is 
likely to be some overlap with acute disease, although some 
cases will have a separate etiology. In humans, both genetic 
and environmental factors determine whether recurrent 
acute pancreatitis becomes more chronic with development 
of fibrosis. One environmental factor predisposing to fibrosis 
is smoking, which may also be relevant in dogs that can be 
passive smokers, but no studies have yet investigated this. 
Some cases are chronic from the outset, with an initial 
mononuclear infiltrate. Genetic causes are likely to be impor-
tant in dogs, which explains the high risk in certain breeds. 
No particular breed prevalence has been reported for cats 
with chronic pancreatitis; domestic shorthairs are most com-
monly affected.
FIG 37.7
Eight-year-old neutered male English Cocker Spaniel with 
chronic pancreatitis. 
VetBooks.ir


=== PDF PAGE 665 ===
	
CHAPTER 37    The Exocrine Pancreas	
635
and dogs and cats with acute-on-chronic pancreatitis fre-
quently develop jaundice.
Diagnosis
Noninvasive diagnosis
In the absence of a biopsy, which is the gold standard, the 
clinician must rely on a combination of clinical history, ultra-
sonography, and clinical pathology. The findings on diag-
nostic imaging and clinical pathology are similar to those 
outlined earlier (see “Acute Pancreatitis” and Tables 34.2 and 
34.3). However, changes tend to be less marked in dogs and 
cats with chronic pancreatitis, and the diagnostic sensitiv-
ity of all tests is lower. Ultrasonography has a lower sensi-
tivity in cats and dogs with chronic disease because there 
is less edema than in those with acute disease. A variety 
of ultrasonographic changes may be seen in patients with 
chronic pancreatitis, including a normal pancreas, mass 
lesion, mixed hyperechoic and hypoechoic appearance to 
the pancreas, and sometimes an appearance resembling 
that of typical acute pancreatitis, with a hypoechoic pan-
creas and a bright surrounding mesentery (Watson et al., 
2011; see Fig. 37.5). In addition, in patients with chronic 
disease, adhesions to the gut may be apparent, and the 
anatomy of the pancreatic and duodenal relationship may 
be changed by these adhesions. Some patients, particularly 
English Cocker Spaniels, have large mass-like lesions associ-
ated with fibrosis and inflammation; some have tortuous and 
dilated, irregular ducts; and many patients have completely 
normal pancreatic ultrasonographic findings in spite of 
severe disease.
Similarly, clinical pathology can be helpful, but the results 
may also be normal. Increases in pancreatic enzyme levels 
are most likely to be seen during an acute-on-chronic bout 
than during a quiescent phase of disease, similar to the 
waxing and waning increases in liver enzyme levels in 
patients with ongoing chronic hepatitis. Again, similar to the 
situation in hepatic cirrhosis, in end-stage chronic pancre-
atitis there may not be enough pancreatic tissue left to cause 
increases in enzyme levels, even in acute flare-ups. On the 
other hand, occasionally the serum TLI level can temporarily 
increase into or above the normal range in dogs with EPI as 
a result of end-stage chronic pancreatitis, confusing the diag-
nosis of EPI in these dogs. cPLI appears to have the highest 
sensitivity for the diagnosis of canine chronic pancreatitis, 
but even this has a lower sensitivity than in acute disease. 
The diagnostic sensitivity of feline PLI for chronic pancre-
atitis in cats is unknown.
It is important to measure serum vitamin B12 concentra-
tions in dogs and cats with chronic pancreatitis. The gradual 
development of EPI, often combined with concurrent ileal 
disease, particularly in cats, predisposes to cobalamin defi-
ciency (see later, “Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency”). If the 
serum vitamin B12 concentration is low, cobalamin should 
be supplemented parenterally (0.02 mg/kg, administered 
intramuscularly or subcutaneously every 2 weeks in dogs 
and cats until the serum concentration is normalized). Oral 
Clinical Features
Dogs with chronic pancreatitis, regardless of the cause, 
usually present with mild intermittent gastrointestinal signs. 
Typically, they have bouts of anorexia, occasional vomiting, 
mild hematochezia, and obvious postprandial pain, which 
often go on for months to years before a veterinarian is con-
sulted. The trigger for finally seeking veterinary attention is 
often an acute-on-chronic bout or the development of DM 
or EPI. The main differential diagnoses in the low-grade 
cases are inflammatory bowel disease and primary gastro-
intestinal motility disorders. Dogs may become more playful 
and less picky with their food when they are switched to a 
low-fat diet, which suggests that they previously had post-
prandial pain. Chronic epigastric pain is a hallmark of the 
human disease and is sometimes severe enough to lead to 
opiate addiction or surgery, so it should not be overlooked 
or underestimated in small animal patients. In more severe, 
acute-on-chronic cases, the dogs are clinically indistinguish-
able from those with classic acute pancreatitis (see earlier), 
with severe vomiting, dehydration, shock, and potential 
MOF. The first clinically severe bout tends to come at the end 
of a long subclinical phase (often years) of quietly progres-
sive and extensive pancreatic destruction in dogs. It is 
important for clinicians to be aware of this because these 
dogs are at much higher risk for developing exocrine and/or 
endocrine dysfunction than those with acute pancreatitis; in 
addition, they usually already have protein-calorie malnutri-
tion at presentation, which makes their management even 
more challenging. It is also relatively common for dogs with 
chronic pancreatitis to present first with signs of DM and a 
concurrent acute-on-chronic bout of pancreatitis resulting 
in a ketoacidotic crisis. In some dogs there are no obvious 
clinical signs until the development of EPI, DM, or both. The 
development of EPI in a middle-aged to older dog of a breed 
not typical for PAA has to increase the index of suspicion for 
underlying chronic pancreatitis. The development of EPI or 
DM in a dog or cat with chronic pancreatitis requires the loss 
of approximately 90% of exocrine or endocrine tissue func-
tion, respectively, which implies considerable tissue destruc-
tion and end-stage disease.
In cats the clinical signs of chronic pancreatitis are 
usually mild and nonspecific. This is not surprising consid-
ering that cats display mild clinical signs, even in associa-
tion with acute necrotizing pancreatitis. One study showed 
that the clinical signs of histologically confirmed chronic 
nonsuppurative pancreatitis in cats were indistinguishable 
from those of acute necrotizing pancreatitis (Ferreri et al., 
2003). However, chronic pancreatitis in cats is significantly 
more often associated with concurrent disease than acute 
pancreatitis, particularly inflammatory bowel disease, chol-
angiohepatitis, hepatic lipidosis, and/or renal disease. The 
clinical signs of these concurrent diseases may predomi-
nate, further confusing diagnosis. Nevertheless, some cats 
will eventually develop end-stage disease, with resultant EPI 
and/or DM.
Chronic pancreatitis is the most common cause of extra-
hepatic biliary obstruction in dogs (see Chapters 33 and 36), 
VetBooks.ir
